Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume III, Vietnam, June–December 1965 (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1996)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1964-68v03).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Vietnam, June–December 1965 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume III)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968

Volume III

Vietnam, June–December 1965

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 30, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Vietnam, June–December 1965 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume III)Contents

Preface

Selection and Editorial Policies

Sources

Abbreviations and Terms

Persons

Vietnam, June-December 1965ASSESSMENT OF THE U.S. ROLE AND THE DECISION TO EXPAND THE U.S. COMMITMENT, JUNE 13-JULY 28 (Documents 1-97)

Discussion on Ending the War and Deployment of Additional U.S. Forces, July 29-November 26, 1965 (Documents 98-207)

The bombing pause and the diplomatic peace intiative, November 27-December 31 (Documents 208-278)

Index

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary editing proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of historical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was established by Public Law 102-138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section 198 of P.L. 102-138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State's Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 USC 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government, including facts that contributed to the formulation of policies and records that provided supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The statute confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded.

The statute also requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major foreign policy decisions and actions of the U.S. Government. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records.

In preparing each volume of the Foreign Relations series, the editors are guided by some general principles for the selection of documents. Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail, in brief, or in summary. Some general decisions are also made regarding issues that cannot be documented in the volume but will be addressed in editorial or bibliographical notes.

The editors of this volume, which was originally compiled in 1984 and 1985 and revised and updated in 1993 and 1994, are convinced that it meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing.

An explanation of the selection policy for the series and of this particular volume and a detailed description of the sources available to the editors of the series as well as a list of specific files consulted for this volume follow this preface.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the 5 years (1964-1968) of the administration of Lyndon B. Johnson. In planning and preparing the 1964-1968 subseries, the editors chose to present the official record of U.S. foreign policy with respect to Vietnam in seven volumes. Volume III (presented here) documents U.S. policy toward Vietnam during the period from June 13, 1965, through December 31, 1965. Volumes I, II, and IV through VII document U.S. policy toward Vietnam during the following periods: I, 1964; II, January 1, 1965, through June 12, 1965; IV, 1966; V, 1967; and VI and VII, 1968.

These seven volumes focus on Vietnam. They do not record activities in the rest of mainland Southeast Asia except as they may relate immediately to the conduct of the war in Vietnam. U.S. relations with Laos are documented in Volume XXVIII.. U.S. relations with Cambodia, Thailand, Burma, and SEATO are documented in Volume XXVII.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and assists with any access and/or clearance problems that arise. Time constraints prevent the Advisory Committee from reviewing all volumes in the series.

This volume has not been reviewed by the Advisory Committee.

Declassification Review

The declassification review of this volume resulted in the decision to withhold .05 percent of the documentation originally selected; no documents were withheld in their entirety. The documentation provides an accurate account of the main lines of U.S. policy toward Vietnam during the June 13-December 31, 1965 period.

The Division of Historical Documents Review of the Office of Freedom of Information, Privacy, and Classification Review, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the Department of State declassification review of the documents published in this volume. The Declassification Coordination Division of the Historian's Office coordinated the interagency and foreign government declassification review. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information and applicable laws.

Under Executive Order 12356, information that concerns one or more of the following categories, and the disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the national security, requires classification: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations;

2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security;

3) foreign government information;

4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods;

5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security;

7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;

8) cryptology; or

9) a confidential source.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security and law. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments.

Acknowledgments

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the Lyndon B. Johnson Library, in particular Regina Greenwell and Charlaine Burgess; the Department of Defense, in particular Sandra Meagher; the National Defense University, in particular Susan Lemke; the Minnesota Historical Society, in particular Dallas Lindgren; the University of Montana; the Library of Congress; and officials at other specialized repositories who assisted in the collection of documents for this volume. The editors also wish to thank senior Foreign Service officer William H. Marsh for reading the manuscript and for his comments and suggestions.

Edward C. Keefer and Louis J. Smith originally compiled this volume, and David C. Humphrey contributed to the collection, selection, and substantive editing of the material presented in this volume. General Editor Glenn W. LaFantasie supervised the final steps in the editorial and publication process. Student intern Shelby Hunt assisted in the preparation of the lists of sources, abbreviations, and persons. The Declassification Coordination Division, David H. Herschler, David C. Geyer, Kerry E. Hite, and Donna C. Hung, coordinated the declassification review. Editors Rita M. Baker and Vicki E. Futscher prepared the book manuscript for publication and performed the editorial review, and Barbara-Ann Bacon of the Publishing Services Division oversaw the production of the volume. Breffni Whelan prepared the index.

William Z. Slany
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

October 1995

Selection and Editorial Policies Selection and Editorial Policies

Principles of Document Selection for the Foreign Relations Series

In preparing each volume of the Foreign Relations series, the editors are guided by some general principles for the selection of documents. Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail, in brief, or in summary. Some general decisions are also made regarding issues that cannot be documented in the volume but will be addressed in editorial or bibliographical notes.

The following general selection criteria are used in preparing volumes in the Foreign Relations series. Individual compiler-editors vary these criteria in accordance with the particular issues and the available documentation. The compiler-editors also tend to apply these selection criteria in accordance with their own interpretation of the generally accepted standards of scholarship. In selecting documentation for publication, the editors gave priority to unpublished classified records, rather than previously published records (which are accounted for in appropriate bibliographical notes).

Selection Criteria (in general order of priority): 1. Major foreign affairs commitments made on behalf of the United States to other governments, including those that define or identify the principal foreign affairs interests of the United States;

2. Major foreign affairs issues, commitments, negotiations, and activities, whether or not major decisions were made, and including dissenting or alternative opinions to the process ultimately adopted;

3. The decisions, discussions, actions, and considerations of the President, as the official constitutionally responsible for the direction of foreign policy;

4. The discussions and actions of the National Security Council, the Cabinet, and special Presidential policy groups, including the policy options brought before these bodies or their individual members;

5. The policy options adopted by or considered by the Secretary of State and the most important actions taken to implement Presidential decisions or policies;

6. Diplomatic negotiations and conferences, official correspondence, and other exchanges between U.S. representatives and those of other governments that demonstrate the main lines of policy implementation on major issues;

7. Important elements of information that attended Presidential decisions and policy recommendations of the Secretary of State;

8. Major foreign affairs decisions, negotiations, and commitments undertaken on behalf of the United States by government officials and representatives in other agencies in the foreign affairs community or other branches of government made without the involvement (or even knowledge) of the White House or the Department of State;

9. The main policy lines of intelligence activities if they constituted major aspects of U.S. foreign policy toward a nation or region or if they provided key information in the formulation of major U.S. policies;

10. The role of the Congress in the preparation and execution of particular foreign policies or foreign affairs actions;

11. Economic aspects of foreign policy;

12. The main policy lines of U.S. military and economic assistance as well as other types of assistance;

13. The political-military recommendations, decisions, and activities of the military establishment and major regional military commands as they bear upon the formulation or execution of major U.S. foreign policies;

14. Documentation that illuminates special decisionmaking processes that accomplished the policies recorded in particular volumes;

15. Diplomatic appointments that reflect major policies or affect policy changes.

Scope and Focus of Documents Researched and Selected for Foreign Relations, 1964-1968, Volume III

The editors developed the following six areas of focus for research and the selection of documents for inclusion in this volume: 1) formulation of policy in Washington, with particular emphasis on the decision to commit major ground forces to Vietnam and its consequences for policy makers; 2) the advisory process, including recommendations from key advisers in Washington, intelligence assessments of the situation in Vietnam, and reporting and advice from U.S. officials in Saigon; 3) efforts to negotiate a settlement to the Vietnam conflict, other key diplomatic contacts, and the issue of bombing pauses; 4) military planning and strategy and non-military programs in Vietnam; 5) the relationship between the United States Government and the South Vietnamese Government, including the issue of political instability in South Vietnam; and 6) the implementation of policy in South Vietnam.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings. Incoming telegrams from U.S. Missions are placed according to time of receipt in the Department of State or other receiving agency, rather than the time of transmission; memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume.

Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. The amount of material omitted from this volume because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated. All ellipses and brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.

The first footnote to each document indicates the document's source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. This footnote also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates if the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and this information has been included in the source footnote.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts have been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record.

Sources Sources

The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major foreign policy decisions and actions of the U.S. Government. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. The editors believe that in terms of access this volume was prepared in accordance with the standards and mandates of this statute, although access to some records was restricted, as noted below.

The editors have had complete access to all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department's Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and memoranda of conversations between the President and Secretary of State and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. Intelligence-related files maintained by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research became available to the Department historians only after this volume was compiled. Arrangements have been made for Department historians to have access to these records for future volumes; if any documentation relevant to this volume is found, it may be included in a subsequent volume.

The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have full access to the papers of President Johnson and other White House foreign policy records. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from other federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the National Security Agency, and the United States Information Agency. All of this documentation has been made available for use in the Foreign Relations series thanks to the consent of these agencies and the cooperation and support of the National Archives and Records Administration.

The Department of State has arranged for access to the audiotapes of President Johnson's telephone conversations that are held at the Johnson Library. The first audiotapes became available to the editors in late 1994, with most audiotapes, including those for the year 1965, to follow during 1995 and 1996. The editors decided not to delay publication of this volume, but if relevant records are found among these telephone conversations, they may be included in a later Foreign Relations volume.

Department of State historians also have access to records of the Department of Defense, particularly the records of the Secretaries of Defense and their major assistants and the records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The editors of this volume also had access to the Papers of General William Westmoreland at the U.S. Army Center of Military History and the Lyndon B. Johnson Library, the Papers of General Maxwell Taylor at the National Defense University, the Papers of General Harold Johnson at the U.S. Military History Institute, and the Files of Assistant Secretary of Defense John T. McNaughton at the Lyndon B. Johnson Library.

Since 1991, the Central Intelligence Agency has provided expanded access to Department historians to high-level intelligence documents from those records still in the custody of that Agency. Department of State historians' access is arranged by the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, pursuant to a May 1992 memorandum of understanding. Department of State and CIA historians continue to work out the procedural and scholarly aspects of the access, and the variety of documentation made available and selected for publication in the volumes has expanded. The editors of this volume made particular use of the files of Deputy Director of Central Intelligence Richard Helms.

The following are the particular files and collections consulted and cited in this volume.

Unpublished Sources

Department of State Subject-Numeric Indexed Central Files. In February 1963, the Department of State changed its decimal central files to a subject-numeric central file system. The subject-numeric system was divided into broad categories: Administration, Consular, Culture and Information, Economic, Political and Defense, Science, and Social. Within each of these divisions were subject subcategories. For example, Political and Defense contained four subtopics: POL (Politics), DEF (Defense), CSM (Communism), and INT (Intelligence). Numerical subdivisions further defined them. The following were the most important files used in this volume: EP 6-1 Hue, emergency and evacuation policy and plans

POL UK-US, political relations, U.S.-United Kingdom

POL 1 US-USSR, general policy, U.S.-Soviet Union

POL 1 VIET S, general policy, Vietnam

POL 1-1 VIET S, contingency planning and coordination re Vietnam

POL 12 VIET S, Vietnamese political parties

POL 15 VIET S, government of Vietnam

POL 15-1 VIET S, Vietnamese head of state/Executive Branch

POL 15-1 US/Johnson, Executive Branch, President Johnson

POL 23-9 VIET S, rebellions and coups in Vietnam

POL 27 VIET S, military operations in Vietnam

POL 27 VIET S/PINTA, peace negotiations during 37-day bombing pause

POL 27-7 VIET, prisoners of war

POL 27-14 VIET S, truce, cease-fire, and armistice

POL 27-14 VIET/XYZ, negotiations through Mai Van Bo

Lot Files. Documents from the Central Files have been supplemented by materials from decentralized office files, the lot files of the Department of State. A list of the major lot files used or consulted follows: Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272 Files of Under Secretary of State George Ball, 1961-1966.

Bohlen Files: Lot 74 D 379 Files of Ambassador to France Charles E. Bohlen, 1961-1968

Bruce Diaries: Lot 64 D 327 Diaries of David K.E. Bruce while Ambassador to the United Kingdom, 1961-1969

Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240 Files of William P. Bundy as Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, 1964-1969.

EA/ACA-Vietnam Negotiation Files: Lots 69 D 277 and 69 D 412 Files on Vietnam peace negotiations, including material on the positions and efforts of Communist and non-Communist countries and groups, international organizations, and individuals, 1964-1968.

EA/VN-Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219 Files of the interagency Vietnam Working Group, 1964-1967.

INR Files: Lot 81 D 343 Consolidated files of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research.

Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192 Files of Secretary of State Dean Rusk, 1961-1969, including texts of speeches, miscellaneous correspondence files, White House correspondence, chronological files, and memoranda of telephone conversations.

S/P Files: Lot 72 D 139 Country Files of the Policy Planning Council and memoranda to the Secretary from the Chairman, 1965-1968.

S/S Files: Lot 66 D 150 Record copies of policy briefing books and reports, including material on the President's Panel of Foreign Affairs Consultants, 1965.

S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316 Master file of National Security Action Memoranda (NSAMs) for the years 1961-1968, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Lyndon B. Johnson Library, Austin, Texas Papers of President Lyndon B. Johnson National Security File Country File, Vietnam

Files of McGeorge Bundy

International Meetings and Travel File

Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy

Name File

National Intelligence Estimates

National Security Action Memoranda

National Security Council Histories

Diaries and Appointment Logs President's Appointment File (Diary Backup)

President's Daily Diary

John McCone Memoranda of Meetings with the President

Meeting Notes File

Office Files of the White House Aides Horace Busby, Jr.

White House Central Files Subject File

Confidential File

George Ball Papers Notes on telephone conversations, 1963-1966

McGeorge Bundy Papers Notes of meetings, 1963-1966

William P. Bundy Papers Unpublished manuscript on U.S. policy in Vietnam, 1961-1965

Walt W. Rostow Papers Southeast Asia file

Dean Rusk Papers Appointment Books, 1961-1969

Paul C. Warnke Papers Files of John T. McNaughton, 1964-1967

William C. Westmoreland Papers History File, History Backup, and COMUSMACV Message Files, 1964-1968

Central Intelligence Agency, Langley, Virginia DCI (McCone) Files Files of John McCone as Director of Central Intelligence, 1961-1965.

DCI (Helms) Files Files of Richard Helms as Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, 1965-1966.

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland Record Group 84, Records of the Foreign Service Posts of the United States Saigon Embassy's Coordinator Files: FRC 68 A 5612 Classified sensitive captioned files of the Coordinator, Embassy in Saigon, 1964-1965.

Record Group 330, Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470 Files of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, 1961-1968.

OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, 70 A 1266, 71 A 6489 Subject files of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, 1965

OSD/General Counsel Files: FRC 75 A 0062 Files on the Pentagon Papers

Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Washington, D.C. Averell Harriman Papers

National Defense University, Fort McNair, Washington, D.C. Maxwell Taylor Papers

U.S. Army Center of Military History, Washington, D.C. William C. Westmoreland Papers History File, History Backup, and COMUSMACV Message Files, 1964-1968.

U.S. Military History Institute, Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania Harold Johnson Papers

John F. Kennedy Library, Boston, Massachusetts James C. Thomson Papers

Minnesota Historical Society, St. Paul, Minnesota Hubert H. Humphrey Papers

Mansfield Library, University of Montana, Missoula, Montana Mike Mansfield Papers

Published Sources

Documentary Collections

The Declassified Documents Quarterly Catalog and microfiche. Woodbridge, Connecticut, 1975 onwards.

Herring, George, ed. The Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War: The Negotiating Volumes of the Pentagon Papers. Austin, Texas, 1983.

Johnson, Walter, ed. The Papers of Adlai E. Stevenson. Boston, 1972.

The Pentagon Papers: The Department of Defense History of United States Decisionmaking on Vietnam, The Senator Gravel Edition. 4 vols. Boston, 1971.

United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967: Study Prepared by the Department of Defense. Washington, 1971.

U.S. Department of State. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965. Washington, 1969.

———. Department of State Bulletin, 1965. Washington, 1966.

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965. Washington, 1968.

Memoirs

The Department takes no responsibility for the accuracy of these memoirs nor endorses their interpretation of the events.

Ball, George. The Past Has Another Pattern: Memoirs. New York, 1982.

Bui Diem, with David Chanoff. In the Jaws of History. Boston, 1987.

Colby, William. Lost Victory: A Firsthand Account of America's Sixteen-Year Involvement in Vietnam. Chicago, 1989.

Cooper, Chester. The Lost Crusade: America in Vietnam. New York, 1970.

Humphrey, Hubert. Education of a Public Man: My Life and Politics. Garden City, N.Y., 1976.

Johnson, Lyndon Baines. The Vantage Point: Perspectives of the Presidency, 1963-1969. New York, 1971.

The Johnson Years: A Vietnam Roundtable. Edited by Ted Gittinger. Austin, Texas, 1993.

Nguyen Cao Ky. Twenty Years and Twenty Days. New York, 1976.

Race, Jeffrey. War Comes to Long An: Revolutionary Conflict in a Vietnamese Province. Berkeley, California, 1972.

Rostow, W.W. The Diffusion of Power: An Essay in Recent History. New York, 1972.

Rusk, Dean, as told to Richard Rusk. As I Saw It. New York, 1990.

Sharp, Ulysses S. Grant. Strategy for Defeat. San Raphael, California, 1978.

Stewart, Michael. Life and Labour: An Autobiography. London, 1980.

Taylor, Maxwell. Swords and Plowshares: A Memoir. New York, 1972.

Thant, U. View from the UN. Garden City, New York, 1978.

Valenti, Jack. A Very Human President. New York, 1975.

Westmoreland, William C. A Soldier Reports. Garden City, New York, 1976.

Wilson, Harold. The Labour Government, 1964-1970: A Personal Record. London, 1971.

Abbreviations and Terms Abbreviations and Terms

AA, anti-aircraft

AAA, anti-aircraft artillery

ADA, Americans for Democratic Action

AFC, Armed Forces Council

AFSC, American Friends Service Committee

AID, Agency for International Development

AIF, Automated Intelligence File

A-1H, Skyraider, single-engine attack aircraft

AKA, attack cargo ship

ammo, ammunition

AP, Associated Press

Arc Light, code name for U.S. B-52 bombing strikes in Southeast Asia

ARVN, Army of the Republic of Vietnam

ASAP, as soon as possible

Barrel Roll, U.S. air operations over northern Laos

BDA, bomb damage assessment

Bks, barracks

bldgs, buildings

BLT, battalion landing team

Blue Springs, code name for U.S. photoreconnaissance drone operations over North Vietnam

Blue Tree, code name for U.S. photoreconnaissance operations over North Vietnam

Bn, battalion

BOQ, Bachelor Officers' Quarters

BTL, battalion

C, Confidential

CAP, series indicator for outgoing White House telegrams

CAS, controlled American source

CBU, cluster bomb unit

CGFMFPAC, Commanding General, Fleet Marine Force Pacific

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

ChiCom, Chinese Communist

CIDG, Civilian Irregular Defense Group

Chieu Hoi, Government of South Vietnam's repatriation program for the Viet Cong

CINC; C-in-C, Commander in Chief

CINCPAC, Commander in Chief, Pacific

CINCPACAF, Commander in Chief, United States Air Force, Pacific

CINCPACFLT, Commander in Chief, Pacific Fleet

CINCRVNAF, Commander in Chief, Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces

CINCUSARPAC, Commander in Chief, United States Army, Pacific

CIP, Commercial Import Program

CJCS, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

CM, Chairman's memorandum

COMUSKOREA, Commander, United States Forces, Korea

COMUSMACV, Commander, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

conf, conference

CPFL, Contingency Planning Facilities List

CPR, Chinese People's Republic

CTZ, corps tactical zone

CVT, Confederation of Vietnamese Trade

DCI, Director of Central Intelligence

DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission

DDP, Deputy Director of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

DEF, series indicator for telegrams from the Department of Defense

Dept, Department

Deptel, Department of State telegram

DeSoto, code name for U.S. Navy destroyer patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin

DF, direction finding

DGNP, Director-General, National Police

DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency

dissem, dissemination

div, division

DJSM, Director of the Joint Staff memorandum

DMZ, Demilitarized Zone

DOD, Department of Defense

DRV, Democratic Republic of (North) Vietnam

DSC, Distinguished Service Cross

DTG, date-time-group

Emb, Embassy

Embtel, Embassy telegram

ELINT, electronic intelligence

EST, Eastern Standard Time

ETA, estimated time of arrival

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/GER, Office of German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

Exdis, exclusive distribution

FBIS, Foreign Broadcast Information Service

FE, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

Flaming Dart, code name for retaliatory air strikes against North Vietnam in February 1965

FNL, Front National de Liberation (National Liberation Front)

ForMin, Foreign Minister

FYI, for your information

G, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

GOB, Government of Burma

govt, government

GVN, Government of (South) Vietnam

H-H, Hanoi and Haiphong

HK, Hong Kong

HMG, Her Majesty's Government

HNC, High National Council

Hop Tac, Government of Vietnam program for pacification of Saigon and surrounding provinces

HQ, headquarters

ICC, International Control Commission

ICRC, International Committee of the Red Cross

IL-28, Soviet-made light bomber based in North Vietnam

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

IO, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IR, infrared

ISA, Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JCSM, Joint Chiefs of Staff memorandum

JGS, Joint General Staff, Vietnamese Armed Forces

KIA, killed in action

KY-9, secure telephone line

L, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

LBJ, Lyndon Baines Johnson

Limdis, limited distribution

LOC, line of communication

log, logistic

LOR, distribution indicator for closely held exchange of telegrams between the President and Ambassador Taylor

LSD, dock landing ship

LSM, landing craft, mechanized

Lucky Dragon, code name for high altitude U.S. reconnaissance operations over Southeast Asia

MAB, Marine Amphibious Battalion; Mobile Air Brigade

MACV, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

MAF, Marine Amphibious Force

MAROPS, Maritime Operations

MATS, Military Air Transport Service

MCC, Military-Civilian Council

MEB, Marine Expeditionary Brigade

MFA, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

MiG, Soviet-built fighter aircraft

MLF, Multilateral Force

MM, millimeter

MP, Military Police; Member of Parliament

MTU 79.3.5, U.S. Marine unit at Danang as of January 1, 1965

Natl Cap, national capacity

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NBC, National Broadcasting Corporation

NIE, National Intelligence Estimate

NLC, National Leadership Council

NLF, National Liberation Front

NM, nautical mile

NMCC, National Military Command Center

Nodis, no distribution

Noforn, no foreign dissemination

NOTAL, indication that a reference telegram was not sent to all addressees

NSAM, National Security Action Memorandum

NSC, National Security Council

NVN, North Vietnam

OCI, Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

ONE, Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency

OPLAN, operation plan

OPLAN 34A, operation plan for covert operations against North Vietnam

OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense

PACOM, Pacific Command

PAO, Public Affairs Officer

para, paragraph

PAVN, People's Army of North Vietnam

Pinta, code name for U.S. peace negotiations during the 37-day bombing pause

PIO, Public Information Officer

PL, Pathet Lao; Public Law

POL, petroleum, oil, lubricants

POLAD, Political Adviser

PolAffs, Political Affairs

PNG, persona non grata

Pres, President

PriMin, Prime Minister

PsyWar, psychological warfare

PT, patrol

PW, prisoners of war

RCT, Regimental Combat Team

recce, reconnaissance

ref, reference

reftel, reference telegram

Rep, Representative

ret, retired

RG, Record Group

RKG, Royal Khmer Government

RLAF, Royal Laotian Air Force

RLG, Royal Laotian Government

ROK, Republic of Korea

Rolling Thunder, code name for long-running program of U.S. air operations in North Vietnam

RR, railroad

RRU, Radio Research Unit

RT, Rolling Thunder

Rupert, code name for Mai Van Bo

RVN, Republic of Vietnam

RVNAF, Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces

S, Office of the Secretary of State

SA-2, Soviet-made surface-to-air missile

SAC, Strategic Air Command

S/AL, Office of the Ambassador at Large

SAM, surface-to-air missile

SAR, search and rescue

SC, United Nations Security Council

SE, Southeast

SEA, Southeast Asia

SEACOORD, Southeast Asia Coordinating Committee

SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization

SecGen, Secretary-General of the United Nations

Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State while away from Washington

septel, separate telegram

SLF, Special Landing Force

SNIE, Special National Intelligence Estimate

SOG, Studies and Observation Group

Sov, Soviet

sqdns, squadrons

S/P, Policy Planning Council or Staff, Department of State

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State

Steel Tiger, code name for air strikes against the Ho Chi Minh trail in Laos

SVN, South Vietnam

SYG, United Nations Secretary-General

TASS, tactical air support squadron; Telegraphnoye Agentstvo Sovyetskovo Soyuza (Telegraphic Agency of the Soviet Union)

Thich, Venerable (title for Buddhist monk)

TOT, Time Over Target

U, Unclassified; Office of the Under Secretary of State

UAR, United Arab Republic

UBA, Unified Buddhist Association

UK, United Kingdom

UN, United Nations

UNMIS, United States Mission to the United Nations

UNSC, United Nations Security Council

UNSYG, United Nations Secretary-General

UPI, United Press International

USAF, United States Air Force

USASCV, U.S. Army Support Command, Vietnam

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIB, United States Intelligence Board

USIS, United States Information Service

USN, United States Navy

USOM, United States Operations Mission

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations

VC, Viet Cong

VM, Viet Minh

VN, Vietnam

VNAF, South Vietnamese Air Force

Westy, General William C. Westmoreland

WH, White House

WNRC, Washington National Records Center

XYZ, code name for unofficial U.S. contacts with the Democratic Republic of Vietnam through Mai Van Bo

Z, Zulu Time (Greenwich Mean Time)

Persons Persons

Acheson, Dean, Secretary of State from 1949 until 1953

Aka, Moise, Ivory Coast Representative to the United Nations General Assembly

Alphand, Herve, French Ambassador to the United States until October 1965

Arends, Leslie C., Republican Representative from Illinois, Republican Whip

Arkas-Duntov, Urah, intermediary in U.S. contacts with Mao Van Bo

Ayub Khan, Field Marshal Muhammad, President of Pakistan

Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State

Bell, David E., Administrator of the Agency for International Development

Black, Eugene R., Special Adviser to the President for Southeast Asia after April 9, 1965

Boggs, Hale, Democratic Representative from Louisiana

Bohlen, Charles E., Ambassador to France

Bowles, Chester A., Ambassador to India

Bowman, Colonel Richard C., Member of the National Security Council Staff

Brezhnev, Leonid I., First Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party

Brown, Harold, Director, Defense Research and Engineering, Department of Defense, until October 1, 1965; thereafter Secretary of the Air Force

Bruce, David K. E., Ambassador to the United Kingdom

Buffum, William B., Director, Office of United Nations Political Affairs, Department of State, until September 11, 1965; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of International Organization Affairs

Bui Diem, Vietnamese Chief of Staff in the Quat government until June 1965; Special Assistant for Planning and Foreign Aid in the Thieu-Ky government from June 1965

Bunce, W. Kenneth, Assistant Director (Far East), United States Information Agency

Bunche, Ralph J., United Nations Under Secretary for Special Political Affairs

Bundy, McGeorge, President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs

Bundy, William P., Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Burchinal, Lieutenant General David A., USAF, Director, Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Busby, Horace, Special Assistant to the President until October 1, 1965

Byroade, Henry A., Ambassador to Burma

Califano, Joseph A., Special Assistant to the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary of Defense until July 1965; thereafter Special Assistant to the President

Cang, see Chung Tan Cang

Cao, see Huynh Van Cao

Cao Van Vien, General, ARVN, Commander of III Corps; Chief of the Vietnamese Joint General Staff from September 1965

Carroll, Lieutenant General Joseph F., USAF, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Carter, Lieutenant General Marshall S., Deputy Director of Central Intelligence until April 28, 1965; thereafter Director of the National Security Agency

Carver, George A., Jr., Member of Vietnamese Affairs Staff, Central Intelligence Agency

Cater, S. Douglass, Special Assistant to the President

Chiang Kai-Shek, Generalissimo, President of the Republic of China

Chancellor, John, Assistant Director of the United States Information Agency after August 27, 1965

Ch'en Yi, Foreign Minister of the People's Republic of China

Chieu, see Pham Xuan Chieu

Chou En-lai, Premier of the People's Republic of China

Chung Tan Cang, Admiral, Vietnamese Navy Commander and Member of the Armed Forces Council until April 1965

Cleveland, J. Harlan, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs until September 8, 1965; thereafter Representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Clifford, Clark, unofficial adviser to President Johnson

Cline, Ray, Deputy Director for Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

Co, see Nguyen Huu Co

Colbert, Evelyn S., Chief, Southeast Asia Division, Office of Research and Analysis for Far East, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

Colby, William E., Chief, Far East Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

Cooper, Chester L., Member of the National Security Council Staff

Corcoran, Thomas J., Director, Vietnam Working Group, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until July 1965; thereafter First Secretary of the Embassy in Vietnam

Cousins, Norman, President and Editor, Saturday Review

Couve de Murville, Maurice, French Foreign Minister

Cutler, Lloyd N., Washington lawyer

De Gaulle, Charles, President of France

De Silva, Peer, Chief of the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon; thereafter Special Assistant for Vietnamese Affairs, Central Intelligence Agency

Dean, David, Mainland China Affairs Officer and then Deputy Director, Office of Asian Communist Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

Dean, Sir Patrick, British Ambassador to the United States after April 13, 1965

Denney, George C., Jr., Deputy Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

DePuy, Major General William E., Assistant Chief of Staff, J-3 (Operations), U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam; thereafter Special Assistant for Vietnamese Affairs, Central Intelligence Agency

Devillers, Philippe, French historian and journalist

Diem, see Ngo Dinh Diem

Dillon, Douglas C., Secretary of the Treasury until April 1, 1965

Dirkson, Everett M., Republican Senator from Illinois; Senate Minority Leader

Do, see Tran Van Do

Dong, see Pham Van Dong

Dobrynin, Anatoliy F., Soviet Ambassador to the United States

Duong Van Minh (“Big Minh”), General, ARVN, former Vietnamese Chief of State

Ehrlich, Thomas, Special Assistant to Under Secretary of State Ball

Eisenhower, Dwight D., President of the United States from 1953 until 1961

Erhard, Ludwig, Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany

Fanfani, Amintore, Italian Foreign Minister after March 5, 1965; President, Twentieth Regular Session, United Nations General Assembly

Fedorenko, Nikolai, Soviet Representative to the United Nations

Firyubin, Nikolai, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister

Flott, Frederick W., First Secretary at the Embassy in Vietnam

Ford, Gerald R., Republican Representative from Michigan; House Minority Leader

Forster, Oliver G., First Secretary of the British Embassy in the United States

Fortas, Abe, unofficial adviser to President Johnson; Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court after October 4, 1965

Fowler, Henry H., Under Secretary of the Treasury until April 1, 1965; thereafter Secretary of the Treasury

Fulbright, J. William., Democratic Senator from Arkansas; Chairman, Senate Foreign Relations Committee

Galbraith, John Kenneth, Professor of Economics, Harvard University

Gard, Richard A., Consul at Hong Kong

Garroway, Dave, television and radio personality and commentator

Gaud, William S., Deputy Administrator, Agency for International Development

Giap, see Vo Nguyen Giap

Givan, Walker, Officer in Charge, Italian Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

Goldberg, Arthur J., Representative to the United Nations after July 28, 1965

Gomulka, Wladyslaw, First Secretary of the Polish Communist Party

Goodell, Charles E., Republican Representative from New York

Goodpaster, Lieutenant General Andrew J., USA, Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Green, Marshall, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs until June 1965; Ambassador to Indonesia after July 26, 1965

Greene, General Wallace M., Jr., USMC, Commandant of the Marine Corps

Greenfield, James L., Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs

Gromyko, Andrei A., Soviet Foreign Minister

Gronouski, John A., Ambassador to Poland after December 7, 1965

Gullion, Edmund S., unofficial U.S. envoy (“X”) in the XYZ negotiations with Mai Van Bo

Hammarskjold, Dag, former Secretary-General of the United Nations

Hand, Lloyd, Chief of Protocol, Department of State, after January 21, 1965

Hannah, Norman B., Political Adviser to the Commander in Chief, Pacific

Harlech, see Ormsby Gore, Sir David

Harriman, W. Averell, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs until March 1965; thereafter Ambassador at Large

Helms, Richard N., Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency, until April 28, 1965; thereafter Deputy Director of Central Intelligence

Herfurt, Jack A., Counselor for Administration at the Embassy in Vietnam

Hertz, Gustav C., Public Administration Adviser, Agency for International Development Mission in Vietnam; captured by the Viet Cong in 1964

Hickenlooper, Bourke B., Republican Senator from Iowa

Ho Chi Minh, President of the Democratic Republic of Vietam

Ho Giac, Buddhist leader

Hughes, Thomas L., Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

Humphrey, Hubert H., Vice President of the United States after January 20, 1965

Huong, see Tran Van Huong

Huynh Van Cao, General, ARVN, Secretary to the Armed Forces Council

Huynh Van Ton, Colonel,ARVN, participant in anti-Khanh coup attempt, February 19-20, 1965

Javits, Jacob K., Republican Senator from New York

Johnson, General Harold, USA, Chief of Staff, United States Army

Johnson, Lyndon B., President of the United States

Johnson, Robert H., Member of the Policy Planning Council, Department of State

Johnson, U. Alexis, Deputy Ambassador to Vietnam until September 1965; Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs after November 1, 1965

Jorgensen, Gordon L., Chief of Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon after Peer De Silva

Katzenbach, Nicolas deB., Attorney General of the United States

Kent, Sherman, Director, Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency

Khang, see Le Nguyen Khang

Khanh, see Nguyen Khanh

Khiem, see Tran Thien Khiem

Killen, James S., Director, Agency for International Development Mission in Vietnam; Senior Evaluation Officer, Office of Administration, Agency for International Development, after October 10, 1965

Klaus, Josef, Chancellor of Austria

Kohler, Foy D., Ambassador to the Soviet Union

Kosygin, Alexei N, Soviet Premier

Kraft, Joseph, j ournalist and syndicated columnist

Kuchel, Thomas H., Republican Senator from California

Ky, see Nguyen Cao Ky

Laird, Melvin R., Republican Representative from Wisconsin

Lam Van Phat, General, ARVN, leader in the anti-Khanh coup attempt of February 19-20, 1965

Lansdale, Edward G., Special Assistant to Ambassador Lodge after August 16, 1965

Lapin, Sergei G., Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister

Le Nguyen Khang, General, Vietnamese Marine Corps Commander

Le Van Hoach, Member of the Quat Cabinet from mid-February 1965

Leddy, John M., Representative to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development until June 15, 1965; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs

Lippmann, Walter S., journalist and author

Lodge, Henry Cabot, Jr., Ambassador to Vietnam after August 25, 1965

Long, Russell B., Democratic Senator from Louisiana; Senate Majority Whip

Lucet, Charles E., Director of Political Affairs, French Foreign Ministry; French Ambassador to the United States after December 15, 1965

Macapagal, Disodado, President of the Philippines

MacArthur, Douglas II, Ambassador to Belgium until February 11, 1965; Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations after March 14, 1965

MacDonald, Malcolm, Leader of British Delegation and Co-Chairman, International Conference on Laos, 1961-1962

Mai Van Bo (code named “Rupert”), Commercial Representative in Paris of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam

Manac'h, Etienne, Director of Asian Affairs, French Foreign Ministry

Manfull, Melvin L., Counselor for Political Affairs at the Embassy in Vietnam

Mann, Thomas C., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs until March 17, 1965; thereafter Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

Mansfield, Mike, Democratic Senator from Montana; Senate Majority Leader

Marks, Leonard H., Director of the United States Information Agency after September 1, 1965

Martin, Graham A., Ambassador to Thailand

McBride, Robert H., Deputy Chief of Mission at the Embassy in France

McCloskey, Robert J., Director, Office of News, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State

McCone, John A., Director of Central Intelligence until April 28, 1965

McConnell, General John P., USAF, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force after February 1, 1965

McCormack, John W., Democratic Representative from Massachusetts; Speaker of the House

McDonald, Admiral David L., USN, Chief of Naval Operations

McLendon, Gordon, Chairman, McLendon Corporation in Texas

McNamara, Robert S., Secretary of Defense

McNaughton, John T., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Meeker, Leonard C., Legal Adviser, Department of State, after May 18, 1965

Meloy, Francis E., Jr., Deputy Chief of Mission at the Embassy in Italy

Menzies, Sir Robert Gordon, Prime Minister of Australia

Michalowski, Jerzy, Director-General, Polish Foreign Ministry

Minh (“Big Minh”), see Duong Van Minh

Minh (“Little Minh”), see Tran Van Minh

Morse, Wayne, Democratic Senator from Oregon

Moyers, Bill D., Special Assistant to the President; Press Secretary to the President after July 8, 1965

Narasimhan, C.V., United Nations Under Secretary for General Assembly Affairs and Chef de Cabinet of the United Nations

Nasser, Gamal Abdel, President of the United Arab Republic

Nehru, Jawaharlal, former Indian Prime Minister

Ngo Dinh Diem, former Vietnamese President

Nguyen Cao Ky, Air Vice Marshal, VNAF, Air Force Commander and Member of the Armed Forces Council; Vietnamese Premier after June 19, 1965

Nguyen Chanh Thi, General,ARVN, Vietnamese Commander of I Corps; Member of the National Leadership Committee

Nguyen Duc Thang, General,ARVN, Assistant Chief of Staff, J-3 (Operations); Minister of Rural Construction after October 1965

Nguyen Duy Trinh, Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam

Nguyen Huu Co, General, ARVN, Commander of II Corps; Chief of the Vietnamese Joint General Staff from May until September 1965; Defense Minister after June 19, 1965; Defense Minister and Vice-Premier after October 1, 1965

Nguyen Khanh, General, ARVN, Chairman of the Armed Forces Council until February 21, 1965; thereafter Ambassador at Large

Nguyen Van Thieu, General,ARVN, Member of the Armed Forces Council; Member of Quat Cabinet after February 16, 1965; Chairman of the National Leadership Committee and Chief of State from mid-June 1965

Nguyen Xuan Oanh, Vietnamese Deputy Premier until January 27, 1965; Acting Premier from January 28 to mid-February 1965

Nitze, Paul H., Secretary of the Navy

Nkrumah, Kwame, President of Ghana

Norodom Sihanouk, Prince, Cambodian Head of State

Oanh, see Nguyen Xuan Oanh

O'Brien, Lawrence F., Special Assistant to the President

Ormsby Gore, David (Lord Harlech), British Ambassador to the United States until April 1965

Paul VI, Pope of the Roman Catholic Church

Peter, Janos, Hungarian Foreign Minister

Pham Ngoc Thao, Colonel, participant in coup attempts against Khanh in February 1965 and Quat in May 1965

Pham Van Dong, Premier of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam

Pham Van Dong, General, ARVN, Commander of the Capital Military District and Member of the Armed Forces Council in early 1965

Pham Xuan Chieu, General,ARVN, Member and Chairman of the National Legislative Council; Member of the National Leadership Committee

Phan Huy Quat, Vietnamese Premier from February 16 until June 11, 1965

Phan Khac Suu, Vietnamese Chief of State until June 11, 1965

Phap Tri, Buddhist leader

Plimpton, Francis T.P., Deputy Representative to the United Nations

Porter, William J., Deputy Ambassador to Vietnam after September 13, 1965

Procter, Carolyn J., Personal Assistant to the Secretary of State

Quaison-Sackey, Alex, Ghanaian Representative to the United Nations; President, Nineteenth Session, United Nations General Assembly

Quang Lien, Buddhist leader

Quat, see Phan Huy Quat

Raborn, William F., Jr., Director of Central Intelligence after April 28, 1965

Radhakrishnan, Sir Sarvepalli, President of India

Radvanyi, Janos, Charge d'Affaires at the Hungarian Legation in Washington

Ramani, Radhakrishna, Malaysian Representative to the United Nations Security Council

Rapacki, Adam, Polish Foreign Minister

Read, Benjamin H., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State and Executive Secretary of the Department

Reedy, George, Press Secretary to the President until July 8, 1965

Resor, Stanley R., Under Secretary of the Army from April 5 until July 5, 1965; thereafter Secretary of the Army

Reston, James B., Associate Editor, New York Times

Ribeiro, Miguel A., Ghanaian Ambassador to the United States

Rifa'i, Abdul Monem, Jordanian Representative to the United Nations Security Council

Rogers, Colonel Jack A., USA, Executive Officer, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Rolz-Bennett, Jose, United Nations Under Secretary for Special Political Affairs

Rosenthal, James D., Political Officer at the Embassy in Vietnam

Rostow, Walt, Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, Department of State

Rowan, Carl, Director of the United States Information Agency until July 10, 1965

Rowen, Henry S., Assistant Director, Bureau of the Budget

Rupert, see Mai Van Bo

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State

Rusk, Howard, physician, founder of the American Southeast Asia Foundation

Salinger, Pierre, Press Secretary to President Kennedy

Schwartz, Abba P., Administrator, Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs, Department of State

Scott-Murga, Guillermo, Bolivian Representative to the United Nations Security Council

Seaborn, J. Blair, Canadian Delegate to the International Control Commission

Sevareid, Eric, author and correspondent, Columbia Broadcasting System

Sharp, Admiral Ulysses S. Grant, USN, Commander in Chief, Pacific

Shastri, Lal Bahadur, Indian Prime Minister

Sisco, Joseph J., Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs after September 10, 1965

Smathers, George A., Democratic Senator from Florida

Smith, Bromley, Executive Secretary of the National Security Council

Sparkman, John J., Democratic Senator from Alabama

Splitt, Orville S., Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs

Springsteen, George S., Jr., Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State

Stanton, Frank, President, Columbia Broadcasting System

Stevenson, Adlai E., Representative to the United Nations until July 14, 1965

Stewart, Michael, British Foreign Secretary after January 22, 1965

Stewart, Michael N.F., Minister of the British Embassy in Washington

Stoneman, Walter G., Deputy Assistant Administrator, Bureau for Far East, Agency for International Development

Sturm, Paul, unofficial U.S. envoy (“Y”) in the XYZ negotiations with Mai Van Bo

Sullivan, William H., Ambassador to Laos

Suu, see Phan Khac Suu

Sylvester, Arthur, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs

Talbot, Phillips, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs until September 1, 1965; Ambassador to Greece after October 11, 1965

Tam Chau, Buddhist leader and head of Vien Hoa Dao, the Institute for the Propagation of the Faith (Buddhist Institute)

Taylor, General Maxwell D., USA, Ret., Ambassador to Vietnam until July 30, 1965; President's Special Consultant after September 17, 1965

Thang, see Nguyen Duc Thang

Thant, U, Secretary-General of the United Nations

Thi, see Nguyen Chanh Thi

Thien Khiet, Buddhist leader

Thien Minh, Buddhist leader

Thieu, see Nguyen Van Thieu

Thompson, Llewellyn E., Jr., Ambassador at Large

Thomsen, Samuel B., Principal Officer at the Consulate in Hue

Thomson, James C., Jr., Member of the National Security Council Staff

Tito, Marshal, President of Yugoslavia

Ton, see Huynh Van Ton

Tran Thien Khiem, General,ARVN, Vietnamese Ambassador to the United States

Tran Van Do, Vietnamese Foreign Minister

Tran Van Don, General, former Vietnamese Defense Minister

Tran Van Huong, Vietnamese Premier until January 27, 1965

Tran Van Minh (“Little Minh”), General, ARVN, Chief of the Joint General Staff until May 1965; Acting Commander in Chief of Vietnamese Armed Forces after February 21, 1965

Tran Van Tuyen, Deputy Premier in the Quat government

Trevelyan, Sir Humphrey, British Ambassador to the Soviet Union

Trinh, see Nguyen Duy Trinh

Tri Quang, Buddhist political leader and Secretary General of the High Council of the United Buddhist Association

Tuyen, see Tran Van Tuyen

Tyler, William R., Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until May 18, 1965; Ambassador to the Netherlands after June 23, 1965

Ufford, Leopold Quarles van, Netherlands Representative to the United Nations Security Council

Unger, Leonard, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs and Chairman of the Vietnam Coordinating Committee

Valenti, Jack, Special Assistant to the President until May 15, 1965

Vance, Cyrus R., Deputy Secretary of Defense

Vaughn, Jack Hood, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Afairs after March 22, 1965

Velazquez, Carlos Maria, Uruguayan Representative to the United Nations Security Council

Vien, see Cao Van Vien

Vo Nguyen Giap, General,PAVN, Minister of National Defense, Democratic Republic of Vietnam

Watson, W. Marvin, Special Assistant to the President after February 1, 1965

Westmoreland, General William C., USA, Commander, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

Wheeler, General Earle G., USA, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Whiting, Allen S., Director, Office of Research and Analysis for Far East, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

Wiggins, James Russell, Editor and Executive Vice President, Washington Post

Williams, G. Mennen, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs

Wilson, Donald M., Deputy Director of the United States Information Agency

Wilson, Harold, British Prime Minister

Winiewicz, Josef, Polish Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs

X, see Gullion, Edmund

Y, see Sturm, Paul

Yost, Charles W., Deputy Representative to the United Nations

Zorthian, Barry, Minister-Counselor for Public Affairs at the Embassy in Vietnam; Minister-Counselor for Information at the Embassy after September 1965

Zuckert, Eugene M., Secretary of the Air Force until September 30, 1965

Vietnam, June-December 1965Vietnam, June-December 1965

Contents

ASSESSMENT OF THE U.S. ROLE AND THE DECISION TO EXPAND THE U.S. COMMITMENT, JUNE 13-JULY 28ASSESSMENT OF THE U.S. ROLE AND THE DECISION TO EXPAND THE U.S. COMMITMENT, JUNE 13-JULY 28

1. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Saigon, June 13, 1965, 7:15 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV, Cables (B). Top Secret; Immediate. Repeated to JCS.

2. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 13, 1965, 10:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, Hue, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Passed to the White House, DOD, and CIA.

3. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, June 14, 1965, 8:50 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Vietnam I. No classification marking. Drafted in Ball's office.

4. Telegram From the White House to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 16, 1965, 5:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET. Top Secret; Exdis.

5. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 17, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. No time of transmission is indicated on the source text; the telegram was received at 10:01 a.m. and passed to the White House. On a copy of this telegram, which was retyped for the President's reading file, there is an indication in the margin that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, NODIS-LOR, Vol. II (A))

6. Editorial Note

7. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to President Johnson

Washington, June 18, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV, Memos (D). Top Secret. For President Johnson's reactions to this memorandum, see Document 11.

8. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, June 19, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. No classification marking. A handwritten notation on the source text indicates that the President saw the memorandum.

9. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 21, 1965, 7:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority. Received at 8:35 a.m. and repeated to Algiers, Bangkok, Bonn, Canberra, Djakarta, Hong Kong, Kuala Lumpur, London, Manila, New Delhi, Paris, Rangoon, Rome, Seoul, Tokyo, Vientiane, Wellington, CINCPAC for POLAD, and Hue. Passed to the White House, DOD, and CIA.

10. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, June 21, 1965, 10 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. No classification marking. Attached is a note, dated June 21, which indicates that the President instructed his secretary to put Senator Wayne Morse's memorandum on his desk the next day, because “I've got to read that memorandum tomorrow.”

11. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and the President's Special Assistant (Moyers)

Washington, June 21, 1965, 3:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Vietnam I. No classification marking. Transcribed by Jacquelyn Taylor in Ball's office.

12. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 22, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 10:51 a.m.

13. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland)

Washington, June 22, 1965, 7:44 p.m.

Source: Center of Military History, Westmoreland Papers, COMUSMACV Message Files. Top Secret. Also sent to Admiral Sharp.

14. Agenda Prepared by the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, undated.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. Secret. Bundy sent this annotated agenda to the President at 4:15 p.m., under cover of a brief memorandum describing it.

15. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, June 23, 1965.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI (Helms) Files, Job 80 BO 1285A, Chrono as DDP and DDCI, 1 Jan-31 Dec 65. Secret. Prepared by Helms on June 24.

16. Editorial Note

17. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Saigon, June 24, 1965, 8:20 p.m.

Source: Center of Military History, Westmoreland Papers,COMUSMACV Message Files. Top Secret. Also sent to Admiral Sharp.

18. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, June 24, 1965, 9:40 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. Confidential.

19. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, June 24, 1965, 1:05 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. No classification marking.

20. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, June 26, 1965, 11:58 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVI. Top Secret; Exdis. A note on the source text indicates that the telegram was received at the LBJ Ranch at 11:25 a.m. and that the President saw it.

21. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, June 26, 1965, 3:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Vietnam I. No classification marking.

22. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, June 26, 1965, 5:56 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVI. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the telegram was received at the LBJ Ranch at 5:22 p.m. and shown to the President.

23. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, June 26, 1965, 3:57 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVI. Confidential. A note on the source text indicates this telegram was sent to the LBJ Ranch at 6:41 p.m.

24. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, June 27, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. Secret.

25. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, June 28, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 41-Point Program in Non-Military Sphere in SVN. Secret.

26. Paper by the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, undated.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 70 D 48, Memos to the President on VN Feb. 1965-Apr. 1966. Top Secret. Sent to Rusk and to McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, William Bundy, McNaughton, and Unger under a June 28 covering memorandum from Ball, which explained that an expanded version of the paper would be circulated to the group prior to the meeting scheduled to discuss the paper on June 29. The text of the expanded paper is ibid. The text printed here, which was prepared in response to President Johnson's June 23 instruction, was drafted by Ball, with support from his staff, William Bundy, and several INR staff members. The final analysis and drafting was done by Ball. (Johnson Library, Papers of William P. Bundy, Ch. 26, p. 23) William Bundy recalls that when Ball's paper was discussed in the Department of State on June 29 by the group to which it was circulated, it was the summary that was the focus of the discussion, and it was criticized as outlining “the worst way to lose if it came to that.” The group felt that it was “absurd to insist on a new perfection just as the going was at its worst; to Asian eyes, it would have been the most cynical exit method possible.” (Ibid., Ch. 27, p. 6) In light of this criticism, Ball modified his proposal in the paper he sent to the President on July 1; see Document 40.

27. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, June 28, 1965, 1:05 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. Confidential. The source text is marked with an indication that the President saw it on June 28.

28. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland)

Washington, June 28, 1965, 6:35 p.m.

Source: Center of Military History, Westmoreland Papers, COMUSMACV Message Files. Top Secret. Also sent to Admiral Sharp.

29. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 29, 1965, 9:15 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Received at 10:18 p.m. on June 28 and repeated to CINCPAC. Passed to the White House, the Department of Defense, and CIA.

30. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper and James C. Thomson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 29, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV. Secret.

31. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Saigon, June 30, 1965, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Center of Military History, Westmoreland Papers,COMUSMACV Message Files. Top Secret. Also sent to Admiral Sharp.

32. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 30, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 6:16 a.m. and passed to the White House. McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this telegram to the President on June 30 with a covering memorandum in which he noted that the important aspects of the message were the “hard military and economic questions” outlined by Taylor. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV, Memos (C))

33. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, June 30, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. Confidential.

34. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, June 30, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, 7/65 SVN Trip and Memos—Misc. Papers. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent to McNamara by Raborn, under cover of a memorandum indicating that the comments were in response to McNamara's request.

35. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, June 30, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, 7/65 SVN Trip and Memos—Misc. Papers. Top Secret.

36. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, June 30, 1965, 7:15 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. Secret.

37. Letter From the Ambassador to Vietnam (Taylor) to Prime Minister Ky

Saigon, July 1, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 VIET S. Secret. Transmitted to the Department of State as Enclosure 1 of airgram A-6 from Saigon, July 2.

38. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

Washington, July 1, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (C). Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the memorandum was drafted on June 26 and revised on July 1. A covering note on a copy circulated to the Joint Chiefs on July 1 by General Wheeler indicates that the memorandum was drafted by McNaughton. (U.S. Military History Institute, Johnson Papers, Miscellaneous)

39. Paper by Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 1, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII. Top Secret. According to William Bundy, Rusk did not circulate this paper before submitting it to the President. (Johnson Library, Papers of William P. Bundy, Ch. 27, p. 11)

40. Paper by the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, undated.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (C). Top Secret. Sent by Ball to McGeorge Bundy on July 1, with a covering note indicating that the paper was “for inclusion in your book for the President.” Also printed in The Pentagon Papers: New York Times Edition, pp. 449-454.

41. Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 1, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (C). Top Secret. Included in memoranda sent to the President by McGeorge Bundy on July 1; see Document 43. William Bundy later recalled that this memorandum was sent to the President at the latter's request. Bundy drafted it after helping Ball prepare his June 28 paper (Document 26) advocating U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam. Bundy could not agree with that conclusion, and was influenced by U. Alexis Johnson, who believed that military reports from Vietnam were too bleak and that the introduction of more than 15 U.S. battalions would cause serious problems for the South Vietnamese Government. Accordingly, Bundy concluded that “there must be a presentation to the President of a military operation looking not to early compromise on the most crucial issue, but to a genuine trial period to see if the South Vietnamese were tough and American forces effective.” The memorandum printed here was a summary of a longer memorandum, dated June 29, entitled “Holding On in South Vietnam,” which was discussed on June 30 by the senior review group that earlier had discussed Ball's June 28 paper. (Johnson Library, Papers of William P. Bundy, Ch. 26, p. 26 and Ch. 27, p. 7) Bundy's June 29 memorandum is ibid., National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV.

42. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 1, 1965, 5:50 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Secret.

43. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 1, 1965, 8:20 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Top Secret.

44. Editorial Note

45. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Helms) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 2, 1965.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency,DCI (Helms) Files, Job 80 B 01285A, Chrono as DDP and DDCI, 1 Jan-31 Dec 65. Secret; Sensitive.

46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 3, 1965, 3:11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Unger and approved by Ball.

47. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 3, 1965, 3:13 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Unger, cleared by William Bundy, and approved by Ball. Repeated to Paris.

48. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 3, 1965, 3:15 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Secret; Exdis. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

49. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, July 4, 1965, 12:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, NODIS-LOR, Vol. II(B). Top Secret; Nodis; Eyes Only.

50. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 5, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 12:39 a.m. on July 5.

51. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 6, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 9:29 a.m.

52. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, July 6, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII. Secret.

53. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 7, 1965, 11 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Top Secret.

54. Telegram From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 7, 1965, 11:52 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, NODIS-LOR, Vol. II(A). Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by McNamara. Repeated to CINCPAC with instructions to pass to General Westmoreland, who was visiting CINCPAC headquarters. The source text contains handwritten revisions by McNamara; see footnotes 2-4 below.

55. Notes of Meeting

Washington, July 8, 1965.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 150, Meeting of Foreign Affairs Consultants. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy on July 10.

56. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 13, 1965, 3:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

57. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, July 14, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 381. Top Secret.

58. Special Memorandum

Washington, July 15, 1965.

Source: Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 277, Communist Positions & Initiatives—Soviet. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Prepared by the Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency. Forwarded to William Bundy by Sherman Kent under a July 15 covering memorandum.

59. Memorandum of Conversation

Moscow, July 15, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 US-USSR. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as enclosure 1 of airgram A-120 from Moscow, July 22. The meeting was held in Premier Kosygin's office in the Kremlin. Harriman sent a summary of this conversation to the President and Secretary Rusk in telegram 138 from Moscow, July 15. McGeorge Bundy forwarded the telegram to the President on July 15, under cover of a memorandum in which he noted that what was striking about the conversation was the routine character of Kosygin's comments, including a standard exchange on Vietnam. A notation on Bundy's covering memorandum indicates that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII)

60. Memorandum of Conversation

Saigon, July 16, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Drafted on July 24 by Manfull. Transmitted as enclosure 1 of airgram A-66 from Saigon, July 27. The meeting was held in the Prime Minister's office. The McNamara party arrived in Saigon on the morning of July 16 and returned to Washington on the afternoon of July 20. Members of the party included McNamara, Lodge, Wheeler, Goodpaster, McNaughton, Sylvester, Unger, Cooper, and Colby. Unger replaced William Bundy, who withdrew from the trip because of illness.

61. Telegram From Acting Secretary of Defense Vance to Secretary of Defense McNamara, in Vietnam

Washington, July 17, 1965, 3:42 p.m.

62. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 18, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 7:16 a.m.

63. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 19, 1965, 8:15 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. No classification marking. The President put a line through the entire memorandum, crossed out the third point, and wrote at the bottom, “Rewrite eliminating 3.” Bundy submitted the rewritten memorandum to President Johnson on July 23 under a covering memorandum stating: “This is a revised version of an earlier paper, but it may clearly be out-of-date.” The revised version was identical to the memorandum printed here except for the omission of the third point. (Ibid.)

64. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 19, 1965, 8:25 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. No classification marking.

65. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 20, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 8:02 a.m. and passed to the White House.

66. Memorandum From the Ambassador-Designate to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson

Saigon, July 20, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (B). Top Secret. Lodge apparently wrote this memorandum in Saigon and sent it to the White House upon his return from Vietnam.

67. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

Washington, July 20, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information. A list of comments on the memorandum, prepared by Lodge in Saigon on July 19, indicates that it was drafted by McNaughton on July 18. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Box 2) U. Alexis Johnson sent his comments on the July 18 draft to McNaughton on July 19. (Ibid.)

68. Editorial Note

69. Memorandum From Richard C. Bowman of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 21, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII. Top Secret.

70. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 21, 1965, 10:20 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. No classification marking.

71. Notes of Meeting

Washington, July 21, 1965, 10:40 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House. The notes were originally handwritten by Valenti and later transcribed. They are quoted extensively in Valenti, A Very Human President, pp. 319-40. For another account of this meeting, see Document 72; more information on attendance is in footnote 1 thereto. For other first-hand accounts of the White House meetings on Vietnam on July 21 and July 22, see Johnson, Vantage Point, pp. 147-148; and Ball, The Past Has Another Pattern, pp. 399-403. William Bundy also wrote an account of the meetings. (Johnson Library, Papers of William P. Bundy, Ch. 27, pp. 30-33)

72. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, July 21, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 2 E, 1965 Troop Decision. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Prepared by Cooper on July 22. Valenti's notes of the July 21 meeting do not list Cooper among those present; see Document 71. An attendance list attached to Cooper's record of the meetings indicates that, in addition to those listed by Valenti, Cooper and Busby of the White House staff and Marks of USIA were present for the morning and afternoon meetings. Clark Clifford was invited and attended the afternoon meeting.

73. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 21, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII. No classification marking.

74. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 21, 1965, 8 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. No classification marking.

75. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Busby) to President Johnson

Washington, July 21, 1965, 10 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Office Files of Horace Busby, Vietnam, Box 3. Secret.

76. Notes of Meeting

Washington, July 22, 1965, noon-2:15 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House. The notes were originally handwritten by Valenti and later transcribed. They are quoted extensively in Valenti, A Very Human President, pp. 340-352. Valenti recalled that before this meeting, President Johnson told him: “All these recommendations seem to be built on a pretty soft bottom. Everything blurs when you get almost to the gate.” (Ibid., p. 341)

77. Meeting Agenda

Washington, undated.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. No classification marking. The source text bears no drafting information, but the agenda was apparently drafted by McGeorge Bundy between the noon and 3 p.m. meetings; see Documents 76 and 78.

78. Notes of Meeting

Washington, July 22, 1965, 3-4:20 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. The notes were originally handwritten by Valenti and later transcribed. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House.

79. Memorandum From John Kenneth Galbraith to President Johnson

Cambridge, Massachusetts, undated.

Source: Johnson Library, Confidential File, ND 19/CO 312. Confidential. Sent to President Johnson by Galbraith under a covering memorandum dated July 22, which states: “This is meant as a sympathetic suggestion on a problem that I know is worrying you.” The covering memorandum is marked with an indication that the President saw Galbraith's memorandum.

80. Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Rowen) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 22, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. No classification marking. McGeorge Bundy forwarded this memorandum to President Johnson at 7:45 p.m. on July 22, noting in his covering memorandum that it was the “quick and dirty report” on calling up the reserves that he had mentioned on the telephone.

81. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, July 23, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates File. Top Secret; Sensitive; Controlled Dissem. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of AEC, NSA, and the Departments of State and Defense participated in the preparation of this estimate. The estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the members of the U.S. Intelligence Board, except for the Assistant to the Director of the FBI, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

82. Memorandum From Justice Arthur J. Goldberg to President Johnson

Washington, July 23, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, Confidential File, ND 19/CO 312. No classification marking. Attached to a note by President Johnson's secretary, dated August 17, that reads: “Fr. his [Johnson's] pocket, he has had it since Camp David, the weekend of July 23, 1965.” Goldberg had agreed by the time he wrote this memorandum to become U.S. Representative to the United Nations, a position to which he was appointed on July 26.

83. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 24, 1965, 8:20 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Secret.

84. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 24, 1965, 7:50 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Bangkok eyes only for Ambassador Johnson. Received at 8:21 a.m. on July 25 and passed to the White House.

85. Notes of Meeting

Camp David, Maryland, July 25, 1965, 5 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. The notes were originally handwritten by Valenti and later transcribed. The meeting was held in Aspen Lodge.

86. Memorandum From Gordon Chase of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 26, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII. Top Secret.

87. Notes of Meeting

Washington, July 26, 1965, 12:30-3:15 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House. The notes were originally handwritten by Valenti and later transcribed. An hour before the meeting, McGeorge Bundy sent the President an agenda that included: the SAM site, taking Vietnam to the United Nations, a general plan for Congressional consultation and a public announcement of the build-up, and further consultation with the South Vietnamese Government. In a covering memorandum, Bundy noted that an additional item on covert negotiations was not listed on the agenda. Only he, Rusk, Ball, and McNamara were aware of it, and all felt that no one else should be informed. Bundy suggested that the President might want to have a small follow-up meeting in his office on the matter. (Ibid., National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII) No record of such a meeting has been found.

88. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 26, 1965, 9:17 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Unger, cleared by McGeorge Bundy and William Bundy, and approved by Unger.

89. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 26, 1965, 9:18 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Drafted by Unger, cleared in substance by William Bundy and McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Unger.

90. Notes of Meeting

Washington, July 26, 1965, 6:10-6:55 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House. The notes were originally handwritten by Valenti and later transcribed.

91. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 27, 1965, 9:05 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Received at 9:45 a.m.

92. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 27, 1965, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Top Secret.

93. Summary Notes of the 553d Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, July 27, 1965, 5:40 p.m.-6:20 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings File, Vol. 3. Top Secret; Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith. According to an attached list, the following attended the meeting: President Johnson, McNamara, Wheeler, McNaughton, Raborn, Helms, Rusk, Ball, Thompson, William Bundy, Lodge, Fowler, Rowan, Marks, McGeorge Bundy, Valenti, Busby, Goodwin, Moyers, Cater, Smith, and Katzenbach. Valenti and McGeorge Bundy also prepared notes of the meeting. (Ibid., Meeting Notes File, Box 1)

94. Memorandum of Meeting With the Joint Congressional Leadership

Washington, July 27, 1965, 6:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. Prepared by McGeorge Bundy in December 1968 based on handwritten notes he took on July 27, 1965. According to a note by Bundy at the top of the source text: “Nothing not clearly stated in the notes is included.” The parenthetical observations in the memorandum are Bundy's, added in 1968 when he transcribed the notes. The original handwritten notes are ibid., Papers of McGeorge Bundy. Valenti also prepared notes of the meeting. (Ibid., Meeting Notes File)

95. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 27, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC History, Deployment of Major U.S. Forces to Vietnam, July 1965. Secret.

96. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to President Johnson

Washington, July 27, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 1266, #14. No classification marking.

97. Editorial Note

1. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 1. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Saigon, June 13, 1965, 7:15 a.m.

MACJOO 20055. Subj: Concept of operations—force requirements and deployments, SVN. Ref: A. MACV 070335Z. B. CINCPAC 112210Z.2

1. There has been an extended exchange of messages regarding the VC/DRV threat, the requirement for US forces, the concept of their employment and the details of their deployment. MACV proposes to treat each of these matters in an effort to bring the picture into closer focus.

2. The threat. State message 2873, 11 June 1965,3 raises questions about MACV's current estimate of the seriousness of the situation in SVN. This message will be answered separately by Embtel reflecting MACV views. Suffice it to say that ARVN has lost five infantry battalions on the battlefield in the last three weeks while rising casualties and high desertion rates have caused a moratorium to be proposed in connection with the formation of new battalions. Thus,ARVN battlefield strength is declining in the face of DRV reinforcements and a VC offensive. It is MACV's considered opinion that RVNAF cannot stand up to this pressure without substantial US combat support on the ground.

3. Force requirements. MACV has asked for added forces in ref A. These consist of two battalions to round out the 3d Marine Division, a ROK division, an airmobile division, the retention of the 173d Airborne Brigade, tactical fighters and a corps headquarters plus combat and logistic support forces. We have also flagged the possibility of additional forces.

4. Concept of employment. A. CINCPAC analysis of the situation and concept of operations is properly focussed upon the population—that is, upon the people. There is no doubt whatsoever that the insurgency in South Vietnam must eventually be defeated among the people in the hamlets and towns. However, in order to defeat the insurgency among the people, they must be provided security of two kinds: (1) Security of the country as a whole from large well organized and equipped forces including those which may come from outside their country.

(2) Security from the guerrilla, the assassin, the terrorist and the informer.

B. MACV is convinced that US troops can contribute heavily in the first category of security as in paragraph 4A(1) above, but that only the Vietnamese can make real progress and succeed in respect to the problem in paragraph 4A(2) above. Unfortunately, the ARVN is being drawn away from the people and their security in order to meet the challenge of the main force VC/DRV offensive. The best illustration of this point is the fact that the II Corps Commander has removed most of the troops from the province of Binh Dinh with its nearly one million people in order to defend the relatively less important province capitals of Kontum and Pleiku. Therefore, the MACV concept is basically to employ US forces together with Vietnamese airborne and marine battalions of the general reserve against the hardcore DRV/VC forces in reaction and search and destroy operations, and thus permit the concentration of Vietnamese troops in the heavily populated areas along the coast, around Saigon and in the Delta.

C. We have tailored logistic support forces to provide for some tactical flexibility so that forces may be shifted in accordance with the strength and movement of the VC. Continuous adjustments and redistributions undoubtedly will be necessary. It is likely that the war will continue to become more fluid and more mobile. We believe that the major bases at Da Nang, Chu Lai, Qui Nhon, Cam Ranh and Saigon-Bien Hoa provide the backbone support on which mobile forces can be supported and from which they can maneuver.

D. It is not our concept that the US would take exclusive control of responsibility for any entire province although, in practice, only token GVN forces might remain. Thus generally, we must match our forces with the territorial organization of the GVN. We must strengthen and support the RVNAF structure to keep it alive and operative. We should generally concentrate US forces away from major population centers and whenever possible do the bulk of our fighting in more remote areas.

5. Deployments. A. MACV recognizes that the in-country location of ground combat forces has a bearing upon the size, nature and location of logistic support forces, ports, airfields and related facilities. For this reason, MACV has indicated from time to time the proposed initial location of the combat forces for which requirements have developed. However, as the number of combat forces requested and required increases and the number of combinations and permutations regarding location correspondingly increases, we rapidly approach a point where everyone will be confused and no useful purpose will be served.

B. The VC are now maneuvering large forces up to reinforce regiments equipped with heavy weapons. Thus, we are approaching the kind of warfare faced by the French in the latter stages of their efforts here. It is entirely possible that the DRV can and will deploy three or more divisions into South Vietnam by infiltration. It is highly likely that one is already here. Therefore, it will be necessary to react to the introduction of DRV forces and to the shift and tactical play of the VC. Thus, tactical dispositions will change and only the major bases will be fixed. In short, we will be conducting mobile warfare from fixed and defended bases. Some of these bases will be major logistics centers at ports and airfields such as Chu Lai and Cam Ranh. Others will be tactical bases such as An Khe or Pleiku, the tactical bases will move as necessary and that may be with some frequency as the battle develops.

C. With these thoughts in mind, a MACV review of the tactical situation corps-by-corps will indicate the probable deployment of required US forces: (1) I Corps. This corps is highly vulnerable to the introduction of DRV forces. It has virtually no reserve and is barely able to hold the major population centers, province and district towns. We believe that the 3d Marine Division augmented by two battalions as recommended can provide adequate reserve reaction forces for I Corps at the present level of VC activity. With a full division, the equivalent of one BLT will be available for employment throughout the corps in a reaction role away from the base area.

(2) II Corps. This corps has a hopelessly large area to cover with the meager forces available. Additionally, the Vietnamese have a fixation on the importance of Kontum and Pleiku, probably derived from the history of the Viet Minh war. Recently, the corps commander has denuded Binh Dinh Province (with nearly a million inhabitants) in order to reinforce Kontum with two marine battalions. The VC control Phu Yen Province except for Tuy Hoa itself and, as reported earlier, the 325th Division may be deployed in Kontum, Pleiku and Phu Bon. The 23d Division is scattered so widely that it cannot react in strength to VC attacks against isolated province capitals and district towns. We are greatly concerned that such towns as Ham Tan in Binh Tuy and Gia Nghia in Quang Duc and even Phan Thiet in Binh Thuan may be attacked. Corps commanders without adequate reserves have shown conclusive evidence that they will move timidly and too late in a piecemeal manner upon the event of a VC heavy attack. This is resulting in the loss of ARVN battalions faster than they can be organized, trained and equipped. II Corps requires heavy reinforcements. We have asked for an infantry brigade, an airmobile division and a ROK division. We would generally employ these forces as follows: (A) The ROKs appear to be sensitive to the possibility of heavy casualties and would be pleased, we believe, to take over the security mission at the major logistic bases of Cam Ranh and Qui Nhon. Although two RCTs are not required for the defense of Qui Nhon, they can profitably be used there to extend the secure area and reinforce the ARVN in that populous and important province. If only one ROK RCT becomes available, we would employ it to relieve the 1st Division Brigade at Qui Nhon and Cam Ranh.

(B) Having been relieved by the ROKs of the security of Qui Nhon and Cam Ranh, we visualize the employment of the 1st Division Brigade in the general area of Highway 19 west of Qui Nhon toward An Khe. The security of Route 19 is important not only in the event of the deployment of major US forces on the high plateau, but is equally essential for the support of the population in that area and for the delivery of POL for current combat operations. The fact is that Highway 19 must be kept open. There is no feasible way into the high plateau from north or south. If the plateau is abandoned, it will form the first significant territory of the NFLSVN and will be recognized and supported by China through Cambodia.

(C) We believe that Route 19 and the Pleiku-Kontum area present a challenge which must be met. We do not believe that the RVNAF can do the job. If the VC elect to fight a major campaign for Route 19 with DRV or VC forces, this is as good terrain as any, and better than most, on which such a battle should take place. It is vastly preferable to the populated lowlands. The problem in Vietnam has always been one of finding, fixing and fighting successfully the elusive VC. If Route [garble—19] becomes a magnet, it tends to solve several of these problems. With the mobility, communication and firepower of the air assault division supported by tactical air, we believe the battle of the road will be won and that the road can be used by the division. The division can be supported over the road for the bulk of its requirements, and can be backed up as necessary by a C-130 squadron on a contingency basis, augmented by C-123 and Caribou, as well as Chinook helicopters which are organic to the division. The air assault division consumes POL, ammunition, food and miscellaneous supplies at a rate which varies from 600 tons at the maximum to 100 tons or less at the minimum. When all aircraft are flying at the maximum rate and ammunition expenditures are the highest conceivable in this kind of war, the division might hit the 600 ton requirement. If on the other hand it is necessary to pull in the belt—defend the hard bases, curtail both flying and shooting—then the consumption comes down dramatically. In short, the division can subsist easily on air resupply while relatively inactive and yet defend itself. We would have a corps force with one US and one ROK division operating in the northern half of II Corps. This would permit the regrouping of the 22d and 23d Divisions so that more ample coverage could be provided in the south and would provide the kind of reaction force required to meet and defeat major VC attacks. The foregoing deployment relates to the situation as we know it now. If that situation changes or additional forces are introduced by the DRV, these forces will be shifted correspondingly.

(3) III Corps. This corps is extremely weak on its northern and eastern flanks and has inadequate reserves to react to heavy VC attacks particularly in isolated areas. The VC attacks in Phuoc Long Province on 10 and 12 June illustrated the dire consequences of a piecemeal commitment of small battalions against a VC regiment in an intelligence vacuum. There are no prospects of additional ARVN forces in the near future. Thus, we foresee the eventual requirement for a full US division northeast of Saigon to meet the VC threat as it is now constituted. In the meanwhile, we wish to retain the 173d Airborne Brigade after the arrival of the brigade of the 101st Airborne Division. If for some reason the airmobile division is not deployed, we would station one of the airborne brigades at Pleiku.

(4) IV Corps. At the moment, this corps is standing on its own two feet. The terrain in IV Corps lends itself to the full use of air mobility and the absence of cover compounds the difficulty of the VC. The units of the 7th and 21st Divisions have attained a high state of morale and certain units have achieved an outstanding record against the VC. We consider that, although the margin is favorable, it is certainly thin. Whether or not US forces will be required in this area cannot now be forecast.

6. The VC are destroying battalions faster than they can be reconstituted and faster than they were planned to be organized under the buildup program. The RVNAF commanders do not believe that they can survive without the active commitment of US ground combat forces. The only possible US response is the aggressive employment of US troops together with Vietnamese general reserve forces to react against strong VC/DRV attacks. To meet this challenge successfully, troops must be maneuvered freely, deployed and redeployed if necessary, and the challenge of Highway 19 and the high plateau must be met.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV, Cables (B). Top Secret; Immediate. Repeated to JCS.

2 Reference A is telegram MACJOO 19118, vol. II, Document 337. Regarding Reference B, see footnote 5 thereto.

3 See ibid., Document 337, footnote 3.

2. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 2. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 13, 1965, 10:20 p.m.

4173. Part I.

Curious calm has settled over Saigon in wake of military's return to power. No one (including military) appears to have clear idea what form new govt will take, and for the moment, Suu, Quat and his Ministers rest in place in caretaker capacity. Key civilian and military leaders did not meet on either Saturday or Sunday2 to discuss policies, governmental structure or personnel thus there have been no significant developments since Friday night. Quat, Do and Tuyen all gave impression they feel they are still very much in picture and in position strongly to influence final outcome. (A very definite element in our ability to obtain information is what Bui Diem frankly expressed to me the other day as the real sense of shame from Quat on down that they have not been able to make a go of civilian government.)

Civilian politicians are beginning to stir somewhat and their activity should increase sharply within next few days as they attempt to sell themselves or their favorites to Generals committee (in first instance Thieu and Ky) as ministerial material.

Within military group there does appear to be some ferment. Some of younger officers apparently feel that Quat's invitation presents them with opportunity to bring about “real” revolution which they feel has been denied people ever since November 2, 1963. This group seems to include VNAF Commander General Nguyen Cao Ky,DGNP Lt. Colonel Pham Van Lieu and perhaps I Corps Commander Nguyen Chanh Thi. They may be reinforced in their thinking by such civilians as Dinh Trinh Chinh (Info Minister), Tran Quang Thuan, Bui Tuong Huan and possibly Bui Diem.

As yet it is not possible to know precisely what form of govt will satisfy needs of “real” revolution, but as outlined roughly to EmbOffs by [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Tran Quang Thuan, it will be lean, simplified and authoritarian, led by younger men with prime purpose of gearing nation for war. Noteworthy to us that such govt appears to have appeal to such disparate types as [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] on one hand and Tri Quang on other (see Hue tel 215 rptd Dept 4162).3

While it remains too early to assess with any precision the extent to which this ferment is widely shared among key individuals, there are certain characteristics to the attitude which might be noted: (a) its proponents are younger men who tend to be from the center or north and to share an intellectual affinity with Thich Tri Quang; (b) the attitude is strongly nationalistic with overtones of xenophobia; (c) it has a sense of disillusion with what is regarded as recent experiment with more democratic way of life, it desires to see concrete results rapidly taken through decisive governmental action; (d) it is, therefore, authoritarian; (e) it tends to oversimplify difficulty of complex questions and ability of antiquated bureaucracy to perform.

In short, this attitude is, as it claims, both revolutionary and ultranationalistic, holding belief common in underdeveloped world that decisive action must be taken by governmental decision without undue concern for counter considerations. Such government likely be hard on local ethnic Chinese and French interests. It would be hard on “Sudistes” particularly French educated “bourgeois”. Catholic attitudes in turn likely be shaped by degree government able effectively prosecute war plus indications of govt attitude towards them. It would probably present some difficulties in its relations with USG and from standpoint US public opinion.

It remains to be seen, however, whether attitude is really dominant, if it is, whether it can remain so, whether it can successfully handle opposition it will tend to create, and whether it can produce results it demands. Most likely prospect is that strong revolutionary flavor will be watered down when government attempts frame realistic goals and policies and galvanize torpid administrative apparatus.

Part II.

Embassy inclined to feel that “revolutionary” label might be useful device for new govt to adopt to help it overcome apathy which many of populace might feel at yet another governmental change. If govt can successfully sell itself as “revolutionary” and get off the mark with a specific program, it might well be in position to move somewhat more effectively toward solving many of nagging problems (e.g., conscription, rice deliveries, irresponsible press situation) which have plagued its predecessors. However, it in turn will continue to be plagued by the deep seated inefficiencies of the administrative structure. To be in position to do this, govt would need some new faces and probably a new chief executive. But it is hard to see who they might be. Although Quat might be retained in some capacity, if revolutionary label is to have currency at all, someone new must head the ticket, but the person has not yet emerged. Possible he does not exist.

As for governmental structure, it seems likely, based on current fragmentary information, that revolutionary govt will have some things in common with Minh-Tho govt that held power from Nov 1963 to Jan 30, 1964. Differences are essentially that this time military committee superimposed over govt will be smaller, presumably more wieldy body, and that govt, on basis experience other govts since Nov 2, 1963, will not be as diffident as Tho govt of technicians. It essential that executive under military committee act without bucking every question to military for decision. For efficiency executive should be single individual rather than executive committee as some have proposed.

As adjunct to this govt, we believe that religious council should be established. (Quat had intended to form such body with representation drawn from all major religious groups.) This consultative body would not act as a legislative body, but would be brought in to handle any incidents of religious friction and would have an advisory voice in the drafting of legislation affecting the religions.

Hopefully it could to some degree develop as a forum in which inter-religious fears and suspicions could have some airing.

(For the moment Catholics and Sudistes can be expected to scrutinize emerging government with wary eye. Catholics will be most unhappy if Thi-Ky-Lieu [Thieu]combination appears clearly to be dominant and consolidating their position, particularly in the security services, and if efforts are not made to appease their suspicions that anti-Catholic actions are in works. Southerners will tend to interpret developments as consolidation of north-center political control, unless there is reasonable regional/religious balance in eventual Cabinet. Same attitudes likely prevail among Cao Dai and Hoa Hao, although these groups will remain split in prevailing factions. In short, groupings opposition to Quat will remain potential opposition, depending on their assessment of strength of Generals' intentions, steps may be taken to appease their interests, and possible momentum shown by new government in prosecuting the war.)

As for any type of legislative body, we feel that decision on this should be deferred. If, after its establishment, govt draws heavy critical fire from “out” politicians, it might prove useful to provide them with forum such as Council of Notables in which they can talk without being able to do much harm. For the future, we feel that govt should go on record promising elections to a constituent assembly in about one year's time in order channel energies of peripatetic politicians.

Unless Dept has some reservations on any of foregoing points in Part II, we would propose to bring what influence we can bring to bear in bringing them about.4

Johnson%

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, Hue, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Passed to the White House, DOD, and CIA.

2 June 12 or 13.

3 Telegram 4162 from Saigon, June 12, repeated telegram 215 from Hue to Saigon, June 11, which reported on a conversation with Tri Quang on June 11. Tri Quang indicated that if Quat could not survive the political crisis without making concessions to the opposition, he felt that the military should take over again. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV)

4 In telegram 2899 to Saigon, June 14, the Department of State agreed with this line: “We have for long time felt need for some forward, progressive look in SVN Govt.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

3. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 3. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, June 14, 1965, 8:50 p.m.

Pres. asked that somebody summarize the paper on the 12 or 13 diplomatic channels we had.2 Mac Bundy had mentioned earlier in the day we were going to ask Bruce to talk to Wilson and bring them up to date. It might be wise to ask Bruce to have a breakfast meeting or some kind of meeting with Menzies to go over it with him. If they want us to get out of Viet-Nam we can get out and they'll be in a fix. Bill had told the President of the lunch today. It is essential we survive the monsoon; we're in a very precarious position.

Ball told the President he would have a memorandum for him in the morning along the lines of his talk with Moyers.3 Bill Bundy had suggested on the thirteen points rather than give them out as a release, or to use as one paper against another, we might incorporate them in a speech during the week. Perhaps the Secretary could do it—a speech that will set forth what we have tried to do in context to have an impact. President mentioned that the Secretary was getting him together a speech for Monday4 but he hasn't got it yet. McNamara wanted to do one, but President told him it should come from either the President or the State Department. Ball mentioned his speech in Pittsburgh at this point. President asked that he be given a draft; if he can make it he will, or … President said he particularly liked what Ball has been doing—raising the red flag and saying we ought to give thought to different approaches, etc. Initiatives are necessary. Anything we can get together, they will be rewarded and not criticized. He mentioned having talked with Fulbright. Ball told him he was seeing Fulbright tomorrow. President asked that he get all of his views. He will talk to him before he sees Dobrynin (the Secretary) and tell him Fulbright's views. Fulbright thinks we should say to the Russians what can you live with? He thinks it will be Tito. He believes if they will call a meeting with the British there is a chance. We should tell him what we would like to do—“The Ball Plan”5 —we will stop bombing if they will stop; we will be willing to meet and work out supervised elections through the UN and let the people have a choice. Fulbright is hypnotized by them now. There will be trouble if we don't take him with us. Ball said he would talk with him. President advised Ball get his plan ahead of time. Tell Mac to send the Tito memorandum of four or five weeks ago.6 President didn't know how we could sell something like this in this country. Dick Russell will back us up, although he is afraid of the ground troop thing. Mansfield is unhappy. President told him he wanted a united front; he does not want to be a dictator. If they will write the policy the President will try to execute it; he will consider their thoughts. They could put in a resolution or whatever they want. If they get the Committee Members together we are willing to explain everything and provide them all the debate they want. President advised Ball to put it to Fulbright hard; he thinks he is ready to go with us; he just wants to have something after the monsoon. President told Ball to get anybody he wanted, either in the Government or outside. Pick up the phone and tell him you will send a plane and get him down here for a talk.

President said he wanted to get off the San Francisco hook.7 He doesn't want to go out there. He doesn't have enough to say to them in this frustrated period. He wants somebody to find a reason why he doesn't have to go. Mentioned again he had asked the Secretary to have a speech for him but he hasn't got it yet. He asked that Ball get this in his teeth and have some recommendations for him tomorrow.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Vietnam I. No classification marking. Drafted in Ball's office.

2 Presumably a reference to the paper prepared by the Department of State on June 10 and entitled “Recent History of United States Negotiating Efforts in Southeast Asia.” (Ibid., National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV)

3 Apparently a reference to Document 7.

4 June 21. Presumably Johnson is referring to a draft of the speech he delivered in San Francisco on June 25; see footnote 3, Document 19.

5 See vol. II, Document 287.

6 Not further identified.

7 See footnote 3, Document 19.

4. Telegram From the White House to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 4. Telegram From the White House to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, June 16, 1965, 5:20 p.m.

CAP 65331. For Ambassador Bruce from McGeorge Bundy. The following message has been passed to Derek Mitchell for the Prime Minister: 1. The President is keenly interested in the Prime Minister's imaginative proposal for a mission of Prime Ministers,2 and has just asked me to make sure the Prime Minister has full information on the President's own thinking about Vietnam at this stage. It is obvious that it is of the highest importance for our two governments to mesh their decisions and statements with great care in order to get the full advantage of our respective actions.

2. I think Bruce has already told you we cannot move up the proposed special bombing operation in South Vietnam without weakening the plans for a prompt follow-up on the ground. A postponement would be manageable, but does not seem to help the Prime Minister. Accordingly, we think it best to proceed on schedule, but we will quite understand if the Prime Minister thinks it wise to conduct his discussions with other Prime Ministers in such a way as to leave them in no doubt of his belief that the Americans are determined to make increasing use of appropriate conventional weapons against concentrations of Viet Cong armed forces. We will also make it clear that this operation and the London proposal are wholly separate and unrelated in their origins.

3. I think Ambassador Dean also knows in a general way of our thinking about additional ground force deployments. McNamara will today be explaining our existing decisions to enlarge our number of ground force battalions to 13, with supporting air and logistic strength such that the overall force strength in South Vietnam will be about 70,000. He will also explain that while no further decisions have been taken, weexpect to do what is necessary in South Vietnam. Within the next week or so the President is likely to face decisions which may lead to further deployments which would bring total U.S. forces there to a level between 90 and 100,000. (This last figure is for the Prime Minister's private guidance only; it is obviously extraordinarily sensitive and could easily be changed upward or downward after further analysis here.)

These deployments again are in response to the overall increase in Viet Cong numbers and activity which has been developing over many months.

4. It is also probable that as the monsoon season continues, General Westmoreland will find it necessary to use his discretionary authority to commit U.S. ground forces to supporting combat action. Such a commitment very nearly occurred in recent days in the area of Dong Xoai and might occur at any time from now onward.

5. The President continues to reject the proposals which are urged by some in this country for radical extension of the bombing operations against North Vietnam. In particular, the operations are still carefully limited to military targets in which danger to civilians is minimized. The President has never believed that bombing would bring Hanoi to the conference table on the run. He believes rather that the real contest is in the south and the purpose of the bombing has been to interfere with supply and support from the north, and to give clear evidence to both sides in the south of American determination and strength. These limited objectives are being met and no unlimited objectives are being substituted for them.

6. The President equally rejects the notion of withdrawal and abandonment. This is not a point which needs to be argued to the Prime Minister.

7. A third course of action is simply to allow the increasing efforts of the Viet Cong in the south to go without effective reply. This course has also been rejected. The increased efforts which we will be making will, however, remain within the framework of our determination to support and assist the Vietnamese themselves.

8. We have made repeated efforts to get this dangerous business into a conference room. The record of intransigence in Hanoi and Peking is clear, and our own judgment is that no different answer can be expected until after the monsoon fighting. Nevertheless, the President welcomes the readiness of the Prime Minister to make another try. The President fully agrees with the view of the Prime Minister and of Sir Robert Menzies that even if the mission fails in its immediate purpose, it should succeed in showing just where the responsibility lies.

9. So far, I have spoken of the President's own thinking. Let me, in closing, report that I talked with Oliver Wright about the cease-fire question which was discussed between the Prime Minister and Bruce. I have not yet had a chance to discuss this with the President, but my guess is that he would strongly prefer to have any explicit discussion in this area start from here. The great difficulty about a cease-fire is that the U.S. can easily stop what it is doing by a single order and the results can be seen immediately. Terror and subversion and infiltration are not so easily monitored. We keep a continuing review of the possibility of actions and proposals in this field, however, and we fully understand the importance which might attach to this question in the light of other events scheduled for June.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET. Top Secret; Exdis.

2 See Document 6.

5. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 5. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 17, 1965.

4220. For the President. My first action upon returning from Washington was to seek out Prime Minister Quat, General Thieu and General Ky to find out the meaning of the action of the Quat government in returning political power to the military. I presume that you have seen the result of this interview reported in Embtel 4190.2 In essence, a ten-man National Leadership Council initially composed entirely of Generals will oversee the affairs of the government. The chairman and head of state will be General Thieu, who was formerly Minister of Defense, and General Ky, former Commander-in-Chief of the Air Force, will become Prime Minister with the long-handled title of “Commissioner in Charge of Directing the Executive Branch”. Ky as de facto Prime Minister will form a Cabinet largely of civilians and present it for approval to the National Leadership Council.

While there are some favorable aspects in this situation, I am disturbed by the selection of General Ky as Prime Minister. While he is a well-motivated, courageous, and patriotic officer who has matured considerably over the past two years, he is completely without the background and experience necessary for an assignment as difficult as this one. The American General officer closest to him describes him as “a proud man and a fine military commander, although a naive, inexperienced politician and civil affairs administrator. I believe he will do his absolute best to succeed in his new position, but he will require a lot of technical assistance, moral support and a normal amount of conscientious understanding.” We will do our best to provide these missing ingredients.3

Second only to the importance of the political situation is the military. As you know, the Viet Cong monsoon offensive is clearly on, marked by another large battle (as Vietnamese battles go) at the district town of Dong Xoai. As in the engagement near Quang Ngai on May 29, the Viet Cong here sought to destroy regular GVN forces and were willing to take heavy losses to accomplish this objective. They succeeded to the extent of about two battalion equivalents of GVN casualties. The performance of the Vietnamese troops in this very hot engagement appears to have been first rate.

It is clear that the primary objective of the Viet Cong is to chew up the regular forces of South Viet-Nam and to cause their attrition to a point where major geographic objectives can be taken and held for considerable periods of time. They are counting upon the habitual reaction of the GVN to come to the aid of remote posts attacked in areas favorable to Viet Cong ambushes. Since GVN forces come by helicopter with limited cargo lift, inevitably they arrive piecemeal on the battlefield and too often suffer heavy casualties upon landing.

As a result, over the past three weeks, the number of GVN ineffective units has risen from two regiments and three battalions to four regiments and nine battalions. Ineffectiveness is caused largely by under-strength conditions resulting from battle losses.

General Westmoreland is thoroughly aware of the problem and is studying new tactics to cope with the Viet Cong. Unfortunately, they are presenting us with two alternatives, both unattractive, either to intervene piecemeal as in the past and take the casualties, or to concede the loss of remote towns difficult to defend. While these towns are not important in terms of population, the effect of abandoning them can have a serious effect on national morale.

It is unfortunate that the present political instability and the Viet Cong offensive coincide with preparations for the Algiers conference which begins on June 29.4 In anticipation of this meeting, there is no doubt that the Viet Cong will take every action possible to undermine GVN prestige and to bolster the appearance of strength and legitimacy of the Liberation Front.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. No time of transmission is indicated on the source text; the telegram was received at 10:01 a.m. and passed to the White House. On a copy of this telegram, which was retyped for the President's reading file, there is an indication in the margin that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, NODIS-LOR, Vol. II (A))

2 Dated June 14. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-5 VIET S)

3 In his diary entry for June 21-27, Ambassador Taylor wrote:

“General Ky seems to be serious about fulfilling his campaign promises to stir up the country and get it on a war footing. Impetuous as some of his actions have been, they seem to have the honest intent of energizing an apathetic people and creating an atmosphere of urgency where day-to-day routine has been the rule. With his hip-shooting tendencies, Ky is likely to continue to take ill-advised actions from time to time such as his breach of relations with France but it is just possible that he will be able to create a new outlook favorable to getting things done.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 52, T-272-69)

4 The second Afro-Asian conference, originally scheduled for March 1965, after having been postponed several times, was scheduled to meet in Algeria on June 29, but it was ultimately postponed; see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 636-643.

6. Editorial Note 6. Editorial Note

On June 17, 1965, the Prime Ministers of the British Commonwealth, meeting in London, issued a statement indicating that a four-member mission, consisting of the Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom, Ghana, Nigeria, and Trinidad and Tobago, would make contact with the governments principally concerned with the problem of Vietnam in an attempt to establish the basis for a conference leading to a negotiated settlement in Vietnam. (Recent Exchanges Concerning Attempts To Promote a Negotiated Settlement of the Conflict in Viet Nam, Cmd. 2756, page 90)

Ambassador to the United Kingdom David Bruce was informed by Prime Minister Wilson of the impending initiative on June 16. Wilson assured Bruce that he would not be a party to any arrangement that was not satisfactory to the United States. (Telegram 6012 from London, June 16; Department of State, Central Files,POL 27-14 VIET) The White House responded on June 16 with a personal cable from McGeorge Bundy to Bruce (Document 4).

The Commonwealth proposal was directed to Saigon, Hanoi, Moscow, Peking, and Washington. On June 22, the United States and the Republic of Vietnam welcomed the proposal for a visit by the Commonwealth mission. (Cmd. 2756, pages 99-100) The Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China rejected the proposal, however, on June 23 and June 25, and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam also rejected it on June 28. (Ibid., pages 92-95, 101, 103-104) In the face of these negative responses, the proposal was ultimately dropped. Documentation on the proposal and the U.S. response to it is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S.

7. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to President Johnson 7. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to President Johnson1

Washington, June 18, 1965.

SUBJECT

Keeping the Power of Decision in the South Viet-Nam Crisis

I.

The Need To Keep Control

Ralph Waldo Emerson once wrote: “Things are in the saddle, and ride mankind.”

Your most difficult continuing problem in South Viet-Nam is to prevent “things” from getting into the saddle—or, in other words, to keep control of policy and prevent the momentum of events from taking command.

The best formula for maintaining freedom of decision is (a) to limit our commitments in time and magnitude and (b) to establish specific time schedules for the selection of optional courses of action on the basis of pre-established criteria.

II.

Outline of Specific Proposals

The North Vietnamese are apparently using the monsoon season as a test period to determine whether they can impose enough local defeats to demoralize the South Vietnamese and discourage the United States.

I propose that we also treat the monsoon season as a test period since we do not yet have enough experience with the direct employment of American combat forces to appraise our chances for military success in the South.

But in launching a vigorous effort to halt the Viet Cong offensive during the monsoon period you should at the same time make it clear to your key advisers that, at the conclusion of that period, we will take a serious look at our accumulated experience and decide whatever long-range course of policy or action is indicated.

For the fact is—and we can no longer avoid it—that, in spite of our intentions to the contrary, we are drifting toward a major war—that nobody wants.

I recommend, therefore, the following program: 1. Decide now to authorize an increase of American forces in South Viet-Nam to an aggregate level of 100,000—but no more—additional forces. These should be deployed as rapidly as possible in order to deal with the Viet Cong offensive during the rainy season.

2. Instruct your top advisers—limited in this case, for security reasons, to the Secretaries of State and Defense (and possibly also the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs): (a) that you are not committing US forces on an open-ended basis to an all-out land war in South Viet-Nam;

(b) that instead you are making a controlled commitment for a trial period of three months;

(c) that on the basis of our experience during that trial period we will then appraise the costs and possibilities of waging a successful land war in South Viet-Nam and chart a clear course of action accordingly;

(d) that, during the test period, in publicly stating American aims and purposes, American spokesmen should emphasize our willingness to stay in South Viet-Nam so long as we are wanted (a qualification that has tended to become submerged in recent months); and

(e) that, in carrying out this limited decision, your advisers should—during the three-months period—press the war on the ground in South Viet-Nam as vigorously as possible, while seeking quietly and effectively to avoid those longer-term actions and commitments that would reduce your freedom of decision at the end of the period.

3. Direct your top advisers to prepare the following plans: (a) A plan for continuing the land war in South Viet-Nam on a stepped-up basis;

(b) A plan for conducting a vigorous diplomatic offensive designed to bring about a political settlement; and

(c) Plans for bringing about a military or political solution—short of the ultimate US objectives—that can be attained without the substantial further commitment of US forces. These last should be regarded as plans for cutting losses and eventually disengaging from an untenable situation.

The reasoning underlying these proposals and the manner in which they might be carried out are elaborated in the balance of this memorandum.

III.

Where We Are Now—On the Threshold of a New War

In raising our commitment from 50,000 to 100,000 or more men and deploying most of the increment in combat roles we are beginning a new war—the United States directly against the Viet Cong.

Perhaps the large-scale introduction of American forces with their concentrated fire power will force Hanoi and the Viet Cong to the decision we are seeking. On the other hand, we may not be able to fight the war successfully enough—even with 500,000 Americans in South Viet-Nam—to achieve this purpose.

Before we commit an endless flow of forces to South Viet-Nam we must have more evidence than we now have that our troops will not bog down in the jungles and rice paddies—while we slowly blow the country to pieces.

A review of the French experience more than a decade ago may be helpful.

The French fought a war in Viet-Nam, and were finally defeated—after seven years of bloody struggle and when they still had 250,000 combat-hardened veterans in the field, supported by an army of 205,000 South Vietnamese.

To be sure, the French were fighting a colonial war while we are fighting to stop aggression. But when we have put enough Americans on the ground in South Viet-Nam to give the appearance of a white man's war, the distinction as to our ultimate purpose will have less and less practical effect.

Nor is our position in Viet-Nam without its historical ambiguities. From 1948-1954 we identified ourselves with the French by providing almost $4 billions of United States aid to help the French in Indochina wage war against the Viet Minh. As soon as our aid contributions began to mount, Ho Chi Minh denounced American “imperialism”.

This campaign of denunciation was continued over the radio and through other propaganda media after the French withdrew and we began to help President Diem.

Today no one can say for certain how many Vietnamese are for us or against us. We have trouble collecting intelligence because few Vietnamese are willing to risk their necks to aid the American effort. And our popularity will diminish even further as we are forced to indulge in more and more area bombing, crop burning, etc.

Ever since 1961—the beginning of our deep involvement in South Viet-Nam—we have met successive disappointments. We have tended to underestimate the strength and staying-power of the enemy. We have tended to overestimate the effectiveness of our sophisticated weapons under jungle conditions. We have watched the progressive loss of territory to Viet Cong control. We have been unable to bring about the creation of a stable political base in Saigon.

This is no one's fault. It is in the nature of the struggle.

The French had much the same experience.

They quoted the same kind of statistics that guide our opinions—statistics as to the number of Viet Minh killed, the number of enemy defectors, the rate of enemy desertions, etc. They fully believed that the Vietnamese people were on their side, and their hopes received intermittent shots of adrenaline from a succession of projects for winning the war—the De Lattre de Tassigny Plan, the Salan Plan, the Navarre Plan, etc.

This does not mean that we cannot succeed where the French did not; we have things running for us that the French did not have. But we cannot yet be sure—and that is the reason for the trial period.

For we have not so far seen enough evidence to be sure that the South Vietnamese forces will stand up under the heightening pressure—or, in fact, that the Vietnamese people really have a strong will to fight after twenty years of struggle. We cannot be sure how far the cancer has infected the whole body politic of South Viet-Nam and whether we can do more than administer a cobalt treatment to a terminal case.

Yet the more forces we deploy in South Viet-Nam—particularly in combat roles—the harder we shall find it to extricate ourselves without unacceptable costs if the war goes badly.

With large forces committed, the failure to turn the tide will generate pressures to escalate. There will be mounting domestic demands that we expand our air attacks on the North so as to destroy Hanoi and Haiphong. Yet if our air attacks threaten the total destruction of the North Vietnamese economy, Red China can hardly help but react. And our best Soviet experts do not believe that the Soviet Union could stand down in the event that we became involved directly with the Chinese.

IV.

Courses of Action To Be Followed Dependingon Results of Test Period

A. Actions if the Fight Goes Well.

If—on a careful appraisal of all the evidence accumulated during the test period—you are satisfied that United States military power can stop and throw back the Viet Cong without unacceptable United States losses, you are then in position to decide on a longer-term aggressive strategy, of which the elements would be: (a) to commit whatever force is needed to do the job in South Viet-Nam as quickly and cheaply as possible;

(b) to continue our air attacks on North Viet-Nam but avoiding the Hanoi-Haiphong complex and keeping well south of the Chinese border;

(c) to renew your assurances to the South Vietnamese and the world of our intention to stay the course; and

(d) to initiate the Acheson plan and increase our diplomatic probes through third parties and a judicious use of pauses—while encouraging efforts of friendly countries to bring the North Vietnamese to the conference table.

All of this is, of course, contingent on the continued maintenance of a minimum level of political stability in Saigon.

B. Actions if the Fight Goes Badly.

If the evidence accumulated during the test period provides no reasonable assurance that the United States can conduct a successful land war in South Viet-Nam without a vast protracted effort, you should seek means of limiting the American commitment and finding a political solution at a level below the total achievement of our declared objectives.

There are several ways of achieving this—none fully satisfactory. But a good general picks his own terrain and is prepared to execute tactical redeployments when events require it. Similarly, it is a part of good statesmanship to cut losses when the pursuit of particular courses of action threaten (a) to lead to a costly and indeterminate result; or (b) to produce an escalation of violence that could result in a major war.

The technique of cutting our losses requires intensive study. No one has yet looked at the problem carefully since we have been unwilling to think in those terms. I would suggest, however, that there are several alternative possibilities which should be carefully examined.

(a) Reducing Our Military Commitment

The first is to devise a plan for limiting the defense perimeter within South Viet-Nam to the cities and major towns—particularly those having access to the sea. This would deny to the Viet Cong the administrative, commercial and industrial heart of the country.

(b) Letting Nature Take Its Course

A second approach is subtly to withdraw moral and political support from the Government in Saigon. In this way the non-Communist and neutralist forces might be encouraged to work out some sort of compromise with the Viet Cong.

Such an operation would require great finesse. However, the Saigon Government is becoming more and more a fiction—in real terms South Viet-Nam has an army but no government.

While putting in train any operation of disengagement we should, of course, simultaneously take steps to strengthen our position in Thailand and to create a diplomatic atmosphere around the world that would minimize the costs of US withdrawal. To do this, we would rely heavily on the qualified nature of our commitment—to help defend the South Vietnamese so long—but only so long—as they wished our help.

(c) Other Possibilities

As a third possibility, we might consider variant means by which there might emerge a South Vietnamese determination to go it alone. One approach might be to encourage our friends to call for elections in South Viet-Nam in order to permit self-determination by a people engaged in civil war. Another might be to let our friends crank up a fourteen-nation conference.

During the past weeks we have concentrated on seeking a political solution that would fully meet our stated objectives in South Viet-Nam. Such a solution will not be feasible so long as the Viet Cong are winning or believe they are winning. Since we cannot yet be sure that we will be able to beat the Viet Cong without unacceptable costs, we would be prudent to undertake an additional study of the political means to achieve less than a satisfactory solution—or, in other words, a solution involving concessions on our side as well as the Viet Cong.

The above suggestions are of the most preliminary kind. I am sure that other possibilities could be developed.

George W. Ball

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV, Memos (D). Top Secret. For President Johnson's reactions to this memorandum, see Document 11.

8. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 8. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, June 19, 1965.

SUBJECT

Pros and Cons of a June Pause

The Case for Such a Move

1. It will dramatize the good faith of our quest for a peaceful solution.

2. It will further shift the onus for continued hostilities to Hanoi and Peking, if they fail to respond with action.

3. It may allow the USSR increased leverage in pressing Hanoi towards negotiations, if any such inclination exists within the Soviet leadership. (Very doubtful, on the evidence of May.)

4. It will permit a more careful testing of Hanoi's interest in negotiations, if any such inclination exists.

5. It will meet one persistent demand of our domestic critics and waverers.

6. It will ease the mounting domestic pressures on our allies (primarily the British and the Japanese, but also the Australians and Canadians) to stop their support of our Vietnam policy.

7. It will meet some persistent objections of unaligned nations and leaders (primarily the Indians and U Thant).

8. It will somewhat de-fuse the Algerian meeting by strengthening our supporters and putting the heat on our adversaries.

The Case Against Such a Move

1. It may cause deep apprehension of US determination in the already weakened Saigon Government.

2. It may allow Hanoi to catch its breath, repair damaged communications, and increase its assistance to the Viet Cong.

3. It may appear to the Communist side to be an admission of the ineffectiveness of the bombings and an indication of US desperation for “negotiations now.”

4. It will arouse strong criticism among domestic hardliners—particularly among Republicans who are looking for a way to make capital out of any signs of our softness in Vietnam.

5. It might make a return to air-strikes difficult in the context of inevitable international pressure to make the suspension permanent.

If US forces were to get hurt during a pause, we would be giving a dangerous opening for Mel Laird;2 people just wouldn't understand it.

McG. B.3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. No classification marking. A handwritten notation on the source text indicates that the President saw the memorandum.

2 Melvin R. Laird, Republican Representative from Wisconsin.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

9. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 9. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 21, 1965, 7:36 p.m.

4312. Prospects for new GVN.

1. The new GVN which was launched on June 19 has made a fresh start with regard to the organization of political institutions, but it faces the same basic divisions of Vietnamese society which have proved the undoing of four previous governments. This message presents the Mission Council views of the assets and liabilities of the new government as well as its immediate prospects.

On the positive side, the GVN begins its tenure with the following assets: (A) In breaking with past, GVN has eliminated not only older political institutions, but also the pressure groups which had grown up around them have been cut adrift, at least for the moment. Conspicuous example of this advantage is removal from scene of Phan Khac Suu and his entourage from a strong position of influence.

(B) Military has accepted full responsibility for government although not excluding civilians from sizeable participation. Army represents country's principal base of power, and its engagement in political control and responsibility responds to reality of situation. Despite numerous changes of membership, organization of top Generals—as an entity—has maintained a high degree of unity and has been body of ultimate decision in Vietnam, providing country with its most important single institution of national cohesion since downfall of Diem regime. At least for the present, top Generals appear to retain this communal unity. Strength which this brings to government will make it somewhat more difficult for opposition groups to successfully attack government.

(C) Desire for “revolutionary” government has been widely expressed especially among younger Generals and junior officers, bureaucrats and university youth. The program of action which GVN has announced should initially elicit support from such individuals and groups. Whether this support is retained will depend upon performance.As noted in septel,2 however, program of action strikes at interests of many powerful special groups, majority of whom will not view happily the prospect of being organized for greater service.

(D) Cabinet is composed for most part of competent technicians, for the most part young, and in many cases dynamic. For example, the economic wing is in our judgment the most capable, experienced and highly motivated group to have served since November 1963 coup. Southerners are more widely represented in this cabinet than they were in the Huong and Quat governments, which may relieve some of sudiste sense of grievance.

(E) Apostolic Delegate Palmas appears ready to play more active role in working to prevent Catholic involvement in civil disorders. This could make major contribution to easing political life for new government.

(F) The new government has indicated its intention to act strongly and this no-nonsense attitude may also smooth its political way. If fears of military dictatorship do not rise above threshold point, reluctance of discontented individuals and groups to tangle with determined military leadership will be factor working to dissuade public disturbances.

3. On negative side, government starts with following liabilities: (A) A potential opposition grouping lies in the recent temporary alliance of Catholics with southern regionalists. This coalition might tend to regard present GVN as being in a sense Quat's spiritual heirs. One of major roots of Catholic enmity towards Quat had been belief that he was in league with leaders of central faction of UBA (Tri Quang-Thien Minh) and was consolidating his power through backing of coalition of Generals and police officials whose hostility towards Catholics they believed was clear. If it now appears to them that after Quat's removal, coalition behind him has moved to forefront of government, their discontent will continue. Some priests have in fact already made this interpretation. As yet, however, there are points that remain unclear about the new GVN, such for example as the precise position and conduct of Police Director Pham Van Lieu, whom Catholics regarded as important member of Thi-Ky coalition and whom they regarded as especially hostile to themselves. Furthermore, more active role by Apostolic Delegate as well as reluctance of such leaders as Father Hoang Quynh to see his people engage in confrontation with army itself are important moderating factors. Nevertheless, state of feeling against Ky personally and against new military government in general is high amongst Catholic extremists at this point.

Attitude of sudistes not yet so clear. They are more prominently represented in present government than they were under Quat, including such key posts as Defense and Interior. This may remove some of edge from their feeling, although many will undoubtedly continue to resent large number of “carpetbaggers” who remain in positions of great power over them. However, still true that sudistes remain poorly organized and lack means (such as Phan Khac Suu as Chief of State) for bringing pressures to focus, although many of “politicians” among them would of course serve to swell ranks of opposition, if leadership were provided from somewhere else (for example, by Catholics). Furthermore political scene is clouded by extent to which Saigon intellectuals continue to enjoy conspicuous—and unmerited—influence. For these men as class, opposition politics is traditional—unless they should happen to find selves on inside of government—and political intrigue and maneuver are more important to them than war.

To existing nucleus of opposition, new GVN may add other key groups if it presses its program of action vigorously. Such groups might include businessmen, some students and other youth, the wealthy, and possibly higher-level civil servants (see septel).

(B) Organization of government especially at echelon involving senior Generals may well bog down in a structure of interlocking committees resulting in a diffusion of authority and responsibility.

(C) If attempt is made to press 26-point program of action vigorously, not only will key groups be alienated, but there is real danger of serious administrative and economic dislocations. There is a finite limit on the number of programs which can be implemented simultaneously.

(D) Although they have possessed the ultimate power of decision in Vietnam since downfall of Diem regime, senior military men have not proven their capacity to govern more effectively than civilians. In facing immediate problems of country, skill and finesse in governing will be at premium.

(E) Abilities of Nguyen Cao Ky at this juncture are in question. He has created image of brash, courageous young officer, who has led squadrons on attack missions and who was apparently willing to employ air force against city of Saigon if necessary to break coup attempts. He will have difficult task in changing this image, which he will have to do if he is to acquire stature which Vietnamese people as whole will desire to see in their national leader. He clearly lacks experience in art of government, and until now has had no opportunity to demonstrate whether or not he possesses the qualities needed to make a good Prime Minister. His rise in the military does suggest that he possesses decisiveness and leadership abilities, both of which qualities are among the pre-requisites for being an effective PM. However, he was considered by his principal MACV advisor as a poor administrator. Furthermore, it should be noted that Ky's role, while obviously very important can still be overstated since it appears likely that Generals will continue to watch and moderate his actions as needed. This control may safeguard but it also may retard, depending on how it is applied.

(F) By very fact of engaging itself so directly in responsibility of government, club of top Generals adds to divisive pressures playing upon it. As noted earlier, unity of this group as an entity has been a major factor in preserving unity of nation. Adding another element to centrifugal forces at work, is fact that grouping of central Buddhists has begun to zero in on General Thieu. Tri Quang as well as Thien Minh apparently intend to hold their fire, at least temporarily, probably because they do not wish to add to problems of government with which they are in sympathy. However, if things should go badly for Ky government, there is excellent chance that they would flex their muscles in center to make clear that they remain force to be reckoned with.

(G) In addition to whole range of other problems, GVN must at same time face major military threat represented by VC monsoon offensive, perhaps supported by PAVN elements.

4. Prospects for new GVN. The range of problems confronting this government are formidable in number as well as in depth and complexity. Most important single factor in its success or failure will be degree of administrative and political skill which new government brings to bear in managing these problems. It is as yet too early to assess this element.

The problems themselves are formidable. Opposition to previous governments has often been based less on what these governments have actually done than on fears (usually ill-founded) of religious and regional groupings as to what that government might do in future. These basic religious and regional antagonisms and divisions remain unchanged and constitute facts of life for this GVN as for any other. At present, as noted in foregoing, this government starts with Catholics predisposed against, UBA in favor (though opposed to Thieu); Sudistes probably against anything but pure Sudiste government, Centristes (following Tri Quang) in favor; Saigon politicians against (as they are against any government that excludes them from power). Because there are numerous uncertainties to present situation, there will probably be at least some period of time during which a wait-and-see attitude is adopted and during which certain of these predispositions may be hardened or possibly modified. If prosecution of war proceeds vigorously and effectively, this would mollify Catholic attitude, and would impress Buddhists also.

Nonetheless, despite the inherent hazards that confront all governments in South Vietnam, and the strengths and weaknesses of this particular government, both of which have just been enumerated above, the present government is likely to be as good as can be reasonably expected at this juncture. At a time of increasing Viet Cong pressures, it also appears probable to us that the Generals are less likely than any purely civilian government to panic and abandon the war effort in favor of negotiations and neutralism. Accordingly, it will serve our best interests to strengthen, support and endorse this government.

Summary: Four factors stand out as probably of determining importance to future of Ky government, apart of course from military operations. These are (1) extent to which the military remain unified and in support of Ky and his Cabinet and policies, (2) whether Ky can erase present image of bravado and shallowness and develop as leader of stature, (3) degree to which GVN can implement selected program having real importance to people, and (4) extent to which government succeeds in handling opposition groupings.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority. Received at 8:35 a.m. and repeated to Algiers, Bangkok, Bonn, Canberra, Djakarta, Hong Kong, Kuala Lumpur, London, Manila, New Delhi, Paris, Rangoon, Rome, Seoul, Tokyo, Vientiane, Wellington, CINCPAC for POLAD, and Hue. Passed to the White House, DOD, and CIA.

2 Presumably a reference to telegram 4311 from Saigon, June 21, in which Taylor analyzed the government's new 26-point program. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

10. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 10. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, June 21, 1965, 10 a.m.

I think Morse's memorandum is tightly argued and complex,2 and if we answer it point by point at this stage, we will be almost sure to trip over ourselves as we make tactical decisions in the coming months. So it seems to me better to give him the soft answer which is suggested in the attached draft.3

And just because his paper is so well argued, I am sending a copy to Harlan Cleveland so that in anything we do we can take account of the possibility of flanking fire from Morse.

McG. B.

Attachment4

SECTION I

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT ON
UNITED STATES POLICIES IN VIETNAM

1. United States policies toward Vietnam should encompass at least the following essentials: (a) They should command widespread support and respect throughout the world and throughout the United States. This is not presently the case.

(b) They must contemplate the cost of “victory” as well as defeat. The cost is already high and we have no sign of victory.

(c) The United States will make a profound error if we do no more than prosecute the war. The longer it continues, the more likely it will escalate, and we cannot escalate it ourselves without China and Russia escalating their participation, too.

It would be a very serious mistake to think the American people would support a stalemated ground war in Vietnam for a period long enough to force the Communists into negotiating. They refused to support that kind of war in Korea. It became a choice between going all out to win, or ending it on almost any terms.

We alone cannot stop the war in Vietnam. But the United Nations could. The United States has more to gain from a U.N.-imposed peace than from a continuation of the fighting, leading we know not where.

It is frequently alleged that the United States has three possible courses of action in Vietnam: to escalate, to get out, or to stalemate the issue until the other side gets tired.

But there is another course of action which is positive in a world framework, even if the short range effects in Vietnam may be difficult, embarrassing, and involve loss of face. This course is for the United States to call on the United Nations to make the Vietnamese war its business. More is involved than suggesting that the Secretary General visit Hanoi and Peking. What is required is a specific application of U.N. procedures.

2. If we have a desire and determination to use the United Nations as prescribed in the Charter, there are many ways in which it can be done. If we desire only to make a gesture to the U.N., there are many ways in which we can make sure our gesture is rejected.

On the record, our unilateral action has served to spread both the war and the degree of Communist control in South Vietnam. It is a real question whether the United Nations could do more poorly than we have done, if it is our objective to keep the peace and to forestall Communism.

3. Because North Vietnam—a non-member of the U.N.—said U.N. action was “inappropriate” in no way affects the jurisdiction of the Security Council or the General Assembly over any situation that threatens the peace.

To give a veto to North Vietnam over this matter is a travesty on the power of the United Nations.

Those of us who were here when President Truman rallied the United Nations in 1950 to throw back aggression in Korea remember that even the opposition of the Soviet Union did not stop us. She walked out of the Security Council and in her absence it took up the breach of the peace in Korea. When Russia came back and used her veto on the implementation of the decision to intervene, the issue was taken to the General Assembly, and it acted.

North Korea was not invited to take part in the discussions, and she did not ask to take part; that did not deter the U.N. from acting. Like North Vietnam, North Korea was not a U.N. member.

North Vietnam, mainland China, and South Vietnam are not members of the United Nations. None should be accorded a veto over prospective United Nations action in Southeast Asia, either by declining to take part in its discussions or by opposing what is proposed.

4. We could request the Vietcong to join us, South Vietnam, and possibly North Vietnam in negotiations. The use of acceptable mediators and conciliators could be discussed.

The terms of the Charter provide certain steps to be taken when breaches of the peace occur. The first is Article 33: “1. The parties to any dispute, the continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security shall, first of all, seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means of their own choice.

“2. The Security Council shall, when it deems necessary, call upon the parties to settle their dispute by such means.”

Our offers to negotiate with North Vietnam and with China have not been accepted. However, the Vietcong is a principal party to the dispute in South Vietnam, and until we offer to negotiate with them or undertake with them any of the other means of settlement above, we have not really explored the possibilities of this Article. Moreover, China could be left out of arrangements under this Article since she is not a party to the dispute.

5. Article 34 describes the jurisdiction of the Security Council: “The Security Council may investigate any dispute, or any situation which might lead to international friction or give rise to a dispute, in order to determine whether the continuance of the dispute or situation is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security.”

Obviously, the war in Vietnam qualifies for at least “investigation” by the Security Council.

Article 35 continues: “1. Any member of the United Nations may bring any dispute, or any situation of the nature referred to in Article 34, to the attention of the Security Council or of the General Assembly.

“2. A state which is not a Member of the United Nations may bring to the attention of the General Assembly any dispute to which it is a party if it accepts in advance, for the purposes of the dispute, the obligations to pacific settlement provided in the present Charter.

“3. The proceedings of the General Assembly in respect of matters brought to its attention under this Article will be subject to the provisions of Articles 11 and 12.”

There is a considerable movement afoot among members of the British Labor Party to induce the British Government to act under this Article to put the Vietnam war before the Security Council. Article 99 of the Charter also empowers the Secretary General to bring before the Security Council a dispute he regards as a potential threat to peace. Since members, non-members, and the Secretary General all have the right to do it, the United States would be in the best position if it acts to seek U.N. jurisdiction before someone else does it and, in effect, makes the United States a defendant in the matter.

6. If we fail to get discussions, we should invite the Vietcong, North and South Vietnam to join us in laying the dispute before the Security Council.

Article 37 is a clear statement of American obligation if we fail to settle the Vietnam problem by peaceful means of our own choosing: “1. Should the parties to a dispute of the nature referred to in Article 33 fail to settle it by the means indicated in that Article, they shall refer it to the Security Council.

“2. If the Security Council deems that the continuance of the dispute in fact is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security it shall decide whether to take action under Article 36 or to recommend such terms of settlement as it may consider appropriate.”

Very likely the Vietcong and North Vietnam will never join us in referring the war to the Security Council. But they are not U.N. members, and we are. They do not claim to stand for the rule of law in the world, and we do. They could not muster anything like the support in the U.N. that we could.

Like North Korea, they probably would not appear at all. But it is their objective to take control of territory they do not now control; and it is our objective to keep them out. A peace-keeping mission of the U.N. could very likely do more to achieve our stated objective than we are doing.

7. Public notice should next be served that we intend to lay the Vietnam war before the Security Council under Articles 35 and 37. Then we should engage in some realistic private talks with the Russians over what kind of U.N. action they would support, making it clear that if we fail to get Security Council action, we will go to the General Assembly.

8. As with many legislative matters, this is one of whether we want “an issue or a bill.” If we want a “bill,” in the form of U.N. action, we would have to deal with the other powerful U.N. members—chiefly Russia and France—to work out a United Nations program which they at least would not veto. After all, the Soviet Union did not veto the Cyprus peace force.

And there is every reason to think Russia is anxious to see the Vietnam war brought under control so she will not continue being forced to come to the support of a sister Communist state. It is worth a great deal to us to find out whether Russia is interested in a U.N. jurisdiction over the war in the form of a peace mission that would stop it, or more interested in her rivalry with China over who does more to aid wars of liberation.

Some say that bringing it up in the U.N. would force Russia to take China's part and drive them closer together. That is an excuse, not a reason. The longer the war continues, the more involved Russia must become simply because of her rivalry with China.

9. If we do find that Russia prefers the war to continue, or if France or Nationalist China poses some insurmountable obstacle, we can still go to the General Assembly. We have done it before, both with Korea and the Congo.

10. There is nothing in such a policy that would be inconsistent with our commitment of support to South Vietnam. Article 51 of the Charter affirms the right of individual or collective self-defense— “until the Security Council has taken the measures necessary to maintain international peace and security. Measures taken by Members in the exercise of this right of self-defense shall be immediately reported to the Security Council and shall not in any way affect the authority and responsibility of the Security Council under the present Charter to take at any time such action as it deems necessary in order to maintain or restore international peace and security.”

We can help South Vietnam until the U.N. acts to restore peace. Moreover, our 1954 commitment was from an American president to a South Vietnamese president. It is not a treaty; but the American commitment to the U.N. Charter is a treaty.

Our commitment to South Vietnam called for U.S. aid, meaning foreign aid, and we extended it “provided your government is prepared to give assurances as to the standards of performance it would be able to maintain in the event such aid were supplied.”

The Government of South Vietnam was unable to fulfill its obligations. Yet we went infinitely beyond our obligation, into co-belligerency. By so doing, we have become involved in a situation that brings us under those provisions of the United Nations Charter to which I have referred.

SECTION II

SUGGESTIONS FOR POSSIBLE WHITE HOUSE POLICY
STATEMENT ON VIETNAM

At the risk of being presumptuous, I respectfully submit the following language for the President to consider using in his address in San Francisco.5

“I stand here today to rededicate the United States of America to the principles and purposes of the United Nations. I propose to do this not by word, but by deed.

“Today there rages in Indochina an undeclared war. Some call it a civil war. Others call it a war of aggression. Others call it a war of liberation.

“I care not what it is called. It is war. It can spread and destroy all man has built. Men and women and children are dying. Passions are rising, uncontrolled.

“The United States is involved in this war. Let there be no mistake, the United States can win it. We believe great and fundamental issues are involved that may affect the future of mankind and the direction in which he grows. We believe that the independence of all small states is involved in Vietnam.

“But we are ready to be judged by the conscience of mankind as represented in the United Nations.

“I am, therefore, calling on the Security Council of the United Nations (Articles 34, 35 and 37) to vest itself of the situation in Vietnam as a ‘dispute or situation … likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security …’

“I also take this occasion to state that my government will abide by such decision as may be taken by the Security Council. I go further and say that if the Security Council should not be able to resolve the war in Vietnam, my government will call for a Special Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations and place the situation before that body of world conscience. We will abide by its recommendations.

“Finally, I have ordered the military forces of the United States to suspend all air and naval attacks north of the 17th parallel for a period of one month while the United Nations considers the threat to the peace implicit in the situation in Vietnam.”

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. No classification marking. Attached is a note, dated June 21, which indicates that the President instructed his secretary to put Senator Wayne Morse's memorandum on his desk the next day, because “I've got to read that memorandum tomorrow.”

2 Attached and printed below.

3 Attached but not printed. The draft response, which an attached note indicates Johnson approved, contains the assurance that “if, at any time, we think there is a real prospect of progress through the United Nations, we will be the first to move.”

4 No classification marking.

5 See footnote 3, Document 19.

11. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and the President's Special Assistant (Moyers) 11. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and the President's Special Assistant (Moyers)1

Washington, June 21, 1965, 3:30 p.m.

Moyers said the Pres had read the V-N memo2 over the weekend at Camp David and they had talked about it at lunch today. The Pres agrees in substance with most of the memo—one or two slight changes possibly.

Following are notes taken by Moyers as stated by the Pres: “I don't think I should go over 100,000 but think I should go to that number and explain it. I want George to work for the next 90 days—to work up what is going to happen after the monsoon season. I am not worried about riding off in the wrong direction. I agree that it might build-up bit by bit. I told McNamara that I would not make a decision on this and not to assume that I am willing to go overboard on this—I ain't. If there is no alternative, the fellow here with the program is the way I will probably go.”

Ball asked Moyers if he had mentioned to the President about his request for a legal memo re V-N.3 Moyers had forgotten to ask the President about it but said he would this afternoon.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Vietnam I. No classification marking. Transcribed by Jacquelyn Taylor in Ball's office.

2 Document 7.

3 See Document 24.

12. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 12. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 22, 1965.

4336. For the President. The new Ky government is now in office following the promulgation of a new charter on June 19,2 which states that, until a permanent Constitution can be established, the sovereignty of Viet-Nam is temporarily vested in its armed forces. On the same day, General Ky announced his Cabinet and an ambitious and “revolutionary” 26-point program of action.3

On the whole, the new Cabinet seems a very good one by Vietnamese standards and potentiality. There are seven holdovers from Quat's team and a better regional balance of Ministers than Quat had, particularly in relation to the number of southerners. There is no particular religious complexion to the Cabinet which is outstanding for its number of young, competent technicians, many of whom in the past have hesitated to serve in a Cabinet. The main question mark remains General Ky himself, who thus far has been very cooperative and approachable in the limited dealings which I have had with him in the past few days. He has a rather disarming way of alluding to his inexperience and need for assistance in an unfamiliar role.

The chief danger appears to be that of trying to go too far and too fast with an extreme reform program. While Ky's motives are of the best, the program of action which he has outlined could easily generate heavy opposition if he goes about it in a heavy-handed manner. I am afraid that he is likely to ignore the administrative weakness of his government and clog the machinery by injecting too many projects at one time.

The charter which has been promulgated is an imperfect, hastily written document obviously designed to keep Ky under the control of his military peers. There is nothing of importance which he can do as Prime Minister without the approval of the directory of ten officers (of which he is a member) presided over by General Thieu. It looks as if this new government will be far more of an oligarchy than an autocracy.

The intensity of military operations dropped off very considerably from the high level of previous weeks. There are a number of factors which could explain this decline. Several of the Viet Cong regiments have suffered heavy losses and are probably licking their wounds while others, not yet committed, are probably awaiting the word to pass to the offensive. On the GVN side, the losses of preceding weeks have caused commanders to prefer to stay on the defensive rather than initiate engagements which may cause additional losses. Little progress has been made in restoring the combat edge of the four regiments and nine battalions (roughly two division equivalents) which I mentioned in my last week's message4 as being ineffective from lack of strength.

The use of B-52s of the Strategic Air Command from Guam in a bombing operation on a Viet Cong base 35 miles northwest of Saigon has aroused much interest and considerable discussion of the effectiveness of zonal bombing. Inevitably the effectiveness of such bombing depends upon the accuracy of intelligence, and good intelligence of conditions deep within a Viet Cong war zone is hard to come by. In this case, while the bombs themselves did little damage, they fell close enough to Viet Cong installations to shake their occupants and to facilitate the penetration of ground patrols which accomplished some damage. In future operations of this sort, I would hope that the exploitation by ground forces could be on a scale large enough to guarantee the destruction of Viet Cong personnel and installations which have escaped the effects of the bombing.

We have been watching with interest the development of the Commonwealth proposal5 for finding ways and means of settling the situation here. I have been somewhat concerned over the readiness of our friends to talk of a cease-fire in connection with these activities. A cease-fire under the conditions existing here would be a very tricky affair requiring very careful definition to avoid the many possible pitfalls. We are sending a cable shortly on this subject which I hope will be called to your attention.6

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 10:51 a.m.

2 For text of this charter, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 880-883.

3 The Embassy analyzed the new 26-point program in telegram 4311 from Saigon, June 21. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 Document 5.

5 See Document 6.

6 Not further identified.

13. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) 13. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland)1

Washington, June 22, 1965, 7:44 p.m.

JCS 2331-65. 1. I urgently need your personal views for upcoming discussions of courses of action available to us in Vietnam. The problem can be phrased as follows. What additional military actions can we take in South Vietnam and in the DRV, short of destroying North Vietnamese economic and population targets, which will apply additional pressures on the VC and on the DRV?

2. Please note the word “additional” because it is key to the problem I must address. In other words, I require your assessment of need for additional U.S. forces, their locations and missions, and an assessment of what they could accomplish in South Vietnam. As to actions against the DRV, I require your views as to targets, modes of delivery (B-52's as opposed to fighter bombers) and collateral actions such as mining Haiphong harbor.

3. The subject is regarded here as one of great sensitivity; therefore, I solicit your personal views and not a staff study. In particular, no one other than U.S. military should be consulted or apprised of my request.

4. As additional background you should know that thought here in some areas is to the effect that introduction of U.S. troop units over 10,000 (some 20,000 fewer than already requested) will convert the war into a second Vietnamese/French war in which we would play the role of the French. That is, Communist propaganda and the inherent xenophobic tendencies of the Vietnamese would surely convert the VNAF and loyal South Vietnamese into our enemies rather than the fact that the VNAF leaders have their necks on the chopping block. In sum, regardless of what happens the United States will survive; South Vietnam and its leaders will not. However, I would like your assessment of this point.

5. As stated earlier I need your views urgently. In the interest of speed you may have to omit rationale, but provide me as much as you can.2 Regards.

1 Source: Center of Military History, Westmoreland Papers, COMUSMACV Message Files. Top Secret. Also sent to Admiral Sharp.

2 For Westmoreland's response, see Document 17.

14. Agenda Prepared by the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 14. Agenda Prepared by the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, undated.

MEETING WITH THE PRESIDENT

Wednesday, June 23, 1965, 5:30 PM

1. VIETNAM

(1) Rolling Thunder 20

(2) Saigon's planned break of relations with France

(3) Future use of B-52's

(4) Soviet attitudes and what we should do about them

(5) Prospects of Prime Minister Wilson's mission

(6) Report on political programs of the Ky government

Present:

State Department

Secretary Rusk

Under Secy. Ball

Amb. Thompson

Asst. Secy. Bundy

Defense Department

Secretary McNamara

Deputy Secy. Vance

Asst. Secy. McNaughton

White House

Mr. Bundy

Mr. Busby

Mr. Cater

Central Intelligence Agency

Admiral Raborn

Mr. Richard Helms

[Here follow agenda items dealing with Berlin and the Dominican Republic.]

Tab 1

VIETNAM

1. Rolling Thunder 20

Bob McNamara will have a chart and I think he and Dean Rusk will have an agreed position. You probably will not wish to discuss targets in detail, even with such a select group as this. Bob needs one good solid target, and I think he will have settled it with Dean before you come in. He already has my proxy.

2. Saigon's Breach of Relations with France

The new military government has apparently decided to break relations with Paris. We all think this is a mistake because of the French power of retaliation. There remains a slight difference of opinion as to whether we should say out loud it is a mistake. You will want to hear Rusk on this point.

3. Future Use of B-52s

Bob McNamara wants to go right on with the B-52s, and in principle, most of us agree. The real problem is not in the military decision but in the public relations handling. I have asked Doug Cater to study this one and he may have ideas.

4. Soviet Attitudes and What We Should Do About Them

This is not an action matter, but I think it would be helpful for us all to hear Tommy Thompson's current thinking. The Soviets have just turned down the Wilson Peace Mission and in rather tough language. At the same time they are floating the notions that Tony Lewis picked up in the Times this morning—even hinting that we can do anything we want as long as we do it in South Vietnam. It is worth a moment's discussion.

5. Prospects of Prime Minister Wilson's Mission

My brother Bill will have the latest on this one. We expect the British to move right ahead even though no Communists give them the time of day.

6. Political Progress of the Ky Government

I have put this one in to keep everybody's attention focussed on the fact that our problem is indeed as much political as military. My brother will be ready to comment.

[Here follow Bundy's comments on the agenda items dealing with Berlin (at Tab 2) and the Dominican Republic (at Tab 3).]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. Secret. Bundy sent this annotated agenda to the President at 4:15 p.m., under cover of a brief memorandum describing it.

15. Memorandum for the Record 15. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, June 23, 1965.

SUBJECT

Meeting in the Cabinet Room on Vietnam and the Dominican Republic, 1730, 23 June 19652

1. Attendance at this meeting is set forth in the attached agenda.3 Item No. 2, Berlin, was not discussed.

2. That part of the meeting devoted to Vietnam was opened by Mr. Bundy who presented to the President a copy of the Javits resolution, herewith attached.4 The President directed that it be permitted to run its normal course in the Congress.

3. Rolling Thunder 20 was approved, Target 43 being chosen instead of 51.12/82.15.

4. Regarding the anticipated South Vietnamese break in diplomatic relations with France, it was agreed that the United States would tell the French Government that we regretted this section on the part of General Ky and that we were not party to the basic decision.

5. There ensued considerable discussion of the B-52 strike which is scheduled for Sunday, 27 June. The President emphasized that the press releases on this strike should be handled in such a way as to convey the straight story to the public. He authorized briefing the press fully both in Washington and Saigon on the reasons for such raids and agreed that on this occasion the news of a raid should first be released in Saigon. There was general agreement that there should be a significant tightening up of security on the planning and execution of such raids.

6. Ambassador Thompson briefed on Soviet attitudes toward Vietnam and emphasized that these attitudes were hardening not only toward the United States but also toward Communist China.

7. There was some discussion of a proposal to place an international force across the 17th parallel in order to put an end to North Vietnamese infiltration of South Vietnam. Secretary McNamara indicatedthat such a proposal was unrealistic and could not be implemented without a vast military force. He pointed out that sea patrols of the Vietnamese coast were not turning up significant amounts of equipment proceeding by sea.

8. The President expressed considerable concern about the Wilson mission and said that he saw no point in having the Prime Minister come to Washington if Washington and Saigon were the only capitals which would receive him. He expressed the view that a Wilson visit could be counterproductive, would achieve little in the interest of peace, and might turn out to be a further embarrassment to the United States foreign policy.

9. The remainder of the discussion on Vietnam is excluded from this Memorandum for the Record since the President made it clear he did not want it talked about outside the compass of the meeting.

[Here follows brief discussion of the Dominican Republic.]

Richard Helms5
Deputy Director

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI (Helms) Files, Job 80 BO 1285A, Chrono as DDP and DDCI, 1 Jan-31 Dec 65. Secret. Prepared by Helms on June 24.

2 The meeting actually began at 5:50 p.m. and ended at 8 p.m. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary) For another record of this discussion, see Document 16.

3 Not attached, but see Document 14. Attending were the President, Rusk, McNamara, Ball, McGeorge Bundy, Vance, William Bundy, McNaughton, Wheeler, Raborn, Helms, Thompson, Busby, Cater, Jack Vaughn, and U. Alexis Johnson. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary)

4 Not printed.

5 Printed from a copy that indicates Helms signed the original.

16. Editorial Note 16. Editorial Note

On June 23, 1965, President Johnson met in the White House at 5:50 p.m. with his senior advisers to discuss Vietnam. See Document 15 for a record of the discussion during the first part of the meeting. According to William Bundy's recollections, based on notes he took at the meeting, the discussion then turned to the question of the policy alternatives that would be open to the administration at the end of the summer. The general feeling, Bundy recorded, was that more forces would be needed. “Alexis Johnson, back from Saigon on consultation, was skeptical: 15 American battalions was a good level-off point, and we must accept that this would be a long war, without shortcuts and with only the grinding proof to the Viet Cong that they could not win. Ball at once chimed in, giving the gist of his argument that we should stop at 100,000 and then think hard—even about plans for cutting our losses and shifting our focus of action in Southeast Asia to Thailand. Rusk and McNamaraobjected to the last idea: Thailand, they thought, could not be held if SVN had given up. Rather, Rusk said, we would end up with the only secure areas Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, and NATO, with even India falling to the Communist Chinese. It was an extreme statement, and my notes show an exclamation point in the margin—and a note to myself to get an estimate of the consequences of withdrawal from SVN.

“After this exchange, McNamara moved in the opposite direction from Ball. His proposal was a combination of a lot more force, in the South and possibly selectively in the North as well, and a much more intensive negotiating effort than he felt had yet been made. At least, he said, let us show the President what might be done on these two lines, coordinated with each other. He had the ideas on additional forces, and Ball had the ideas on moves toward a settlement; perhaps the two meshed with each other, and were less contradictory than some might suppose.

“The result was at least agreement on the next steps. The President, who had for the most part let the discussion rage around him without injecting his own views, directed McNamara and Ball, with one or two staff men each, to produce studies covering military and political moves over the next three months and beyond. These were to come back in a week, although there was of course no assurance that the issue would then be decided.” (Johnson Library, Papers of William P. Bundy, Chapter 26, pages 22-23)

17. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 17. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Saigon, June 24, 1965, 8:20 p.m.

MAC 3240. Ref: A. JCS 2331-65 230144Z. B. MACJOO 070335Z.2

1. Per your request in reference I have following views. Some items are based on studies; others are not.

2. By way of introduction, the premise behind whatever further actions we may undertake, either in SVN or DRV, must be that we are in for the long pull. The struggle has become a war of attrition. Short of decision to introduce nuclear weapons against sources and channels of enemy power, I see no likelihood of achieving a quick, favorable end to the war. The fabric of GVN civil functions and services has been rendered so ineffective and listless by successive coups and changes, and the military arm is in such need of revitalization that we can come to no other conclusion. In this context the following is submitted for your consideration.

3. I am becoming more convinced every day that US forces in appropriate numbers must be deployed to permit the Vietnamese with our help to carry the war to the enemy. Objectives would be to neutralize enemy power, give heart to the war weary ARVN and provide adequate maneuverable fire power to attack the enemy formations wherever they can be found and fixed. With regard to your comment that some in Washington consider that more than a 10,000 man US combat force will invoke visions of the French, I can only comment that force of that number will not give us a chance of winning or assure avoidance of defeat. Although the hazard exists, there is absolutely no logical reason to conclude that we will be cast in the role of the French. It's up to the US leadership in SVN to insure that we do not fall into such a role, by means of indoctrination, discipline, morale, positioning the masses of US combat forces away from population centers and administrative controls, all of which we now stress. I am confident that this one is manageable.

4. As a refinement and supplement to the forces which may be required as set forth in paragraph 10B, Ref B, I believe the following will also be required, sooner or later. A. A minimum of 7 more army helicopter companies than presently deployed or approved, and two more USMC helo squadrons in I Corps. Ratio is 2 companies (sqdns) per separate US brigade, 1 company per 3d country brigade.

B. The 101st Abn Div Brigade and 173d Abn Brigade retained in country and both positioned in Bien Hoa area under a task force HQ to provide the heavy mobile punch to gain the initiative.

C. Possibly at least another US infantry or airborne division to provide an offensive punch and get ARVN troops in the III Corps area on the offensive. VC order of battle in III Corps area, plus other mobile VC units nearby, are approaching the potential for sustained if not successful attack on communication centers.

5. The foregoing are big orders. However, believe it is time all concerned face up to fact that we must be prepared for a long war which will probably involve increasing numbers of US troops. If the Communists have the determination to make it such, they certainly have the capabilities and we have no choice but to match them, with an increment left over in our favor.

6. Actions which we may take against the DRV include several which I think will increase pressure on Hanoi and support our effort in SVN, but which do not involve unacceptable risk of provoking an escalation to the extent of ChiCom involvement. A. Use B-52's on isolated military targets remote from civilian populations. Several ammo and supply depots fit this description. A study could turn up more. B-52's could put massive fire power on such area targets with much more effectiveness and less risk than the equivalent in fighter bombers.

B. Interdict the trans Nanning-Hanoi-Kunming Railroad. There are 5 key bridges whose destruction would be devastating. 10 percent of total import tonnages use this railroad to Hanoi; but we suspect the tonnages have a much higher qualitative value.

C. Interdict Haiphong Harbor with repetitive mining.

D. Accelerate leaflet operations targeted on the DRV population centers.

E. Continue our air interdiction programs of LOC's. It takes a long time for cumulative results to produce a telling effect on primitive DRV LOC system. This is another aspect of the war of attrition which we must be prepared to prosecute in full measure despite mounting costs.

7. To conclude, I will emphasize some general thoughts which seem pertinent. A. It is difficult, if not impossible for me to imagine how we can commit and sustain US forces, air, surface and naval, without backing them up for the long pull by mobilization of manpower, industrial and training resources at least to a limited degree. I face the very practical problem of maintaining morale of people on their second combat tours, with many, many more to come, I suspect, when all the forces we require are committed. I understand almost the entire complement of aviators in the 1st Cav will be on their 2d tour by the time it gets here, while the average US citizen enjoys his butter at no inconvenience.

B. It would seem that we should prepare US and world opinion for the rigors ahead by airing an objective, complete analysis of the problem we face and what we must do about it. The news couldn't be worse overall than it is now made out to be in piece-meal fashion by irresponsible or uninformed reporting and editorializing today. This could well be the most salutary thing we might do. The government would then be in a position to counterattack, in good faith, the distorted reporting of the crepe hangers.

1 Source: Center of Military History, Westmoreland Papers,COMUSMACV Message Files. Top Secret. Also sent to Admiral Sharp.

2 Reference A is Document 13. Reference B is telegram MACJOO 19118; vol. II, Document 337.

18. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 18. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, June 24, 1965, 9:40 a.m.

SUBJECT

Senator Morse, Vietnam, and the UN

1. The Morse memorandum2 makes the tightest case I have seen for taking Vietnam to the UN. He recognizes that the Soviet Union might block action in the Security Council, and in that event he would press on into the General Assembly. He would “abide by” a majority vote in the General Assembly.

2. What he does not say is what kind of resolution he would press for either in the Security Council or in the General Assembly. It is on this point that I think he should be pressed. Does he want the UN to vote ways and means of getting the North Vietnamese out of South Vietnam? Or does he want the General Assembly to validate a Communist takeover? Or does he simply want it to “observe”, as it is doing in the Dominican Republic? The last is about all we could really hope to get, and while it might be worth it, it would certainly not bring peace, in and of itself.

3. As you know, I myself think that we can and should take further initiatives to see what the UN can do about Vietnam. I think this is primarily a tactical matter, designed to show that the Soviet Union is not prepared to desert other “socialist” countries on this issue. The trouble with this tactical approach, of course, is that a man who holds Morse's basic view is likely to denounce it as a fraud unless we take it all the way through and actively work for a resolution which would get us out of there. And if we are going to get out of Vietnam, I do not think it serves any good purpose to blacken the reputation of the UN by trying unsuccessfully to unload this responsibility on it. No one would be fooled, and both the UN and the US would be damaged.

4. So I think the underlying difference between us and Morse is not whether we should take the case to the UN, but what we take it there for. I would take it there to pin the rose of aggression on the Communists. I think Senator Morse would take it there in order to cover a withdrawal and a Communist takeover. But I am not sure, and this is what a talk with him may uncover.3

McG. B.4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. Confidential.

2 See Document 10.

3 At 12:20 p.m. on June 24, McGeorge Bundy telephoned Secretary Rusk and said that President Johnson wanted a draft paragraph prepared for the speech he was going to deliver in San Francisco the following day that would indicate the President intended to instruct Adlai Stevenson to take up the question of Vietnam in the U.N. Security Council. Bundy said the President asked him to find out more of what Rusk and Stevenson thought of raising the issue in the Security Council. Rusk said that he would try to contact Stevenson. He added that it might be possible to raise the issue in the context of a general report on the problem “without ginning up too much expectation that the Security Council will be able to act.” (Memorandum of telephone conversation; Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

19. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 19. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, June 24, 1965, 1:05 p.m.

I have talked with my brother Bill and with Dean Rusk 2 and at their suggestion, also with George Ball. The Secretary is the least negative and Bill the most so.

The basic arguments against going to the Security Council now are three: a. that it would be unsettling in Saigon. This can be controlled, but not prevented.

b. that it would require Moscow to take a harsh public line against us at a time when we still have some hope to engage them more usefully in negotiation.

c. there is a danger that Hanoi would read this appeal as weakness.

Given these difficulties, I am inclined now to back away from this one. I think it would be wiser to take the position that if there should ever be a prospect of effective action in the UN, we would be the first to work for it. Language which might do that sort of thing follows and could be fitted in to the present draft quite easily, I believe.3

If at any time there is a prospect of effective action for peace in Vietnam, through any of the agencies of the United Nations, the United States will be the first to work for UN action.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. No classification marking.

2 See footnote 3, Document 18.

3 In his address to the 20th anniversary commemorative session of the United Nations in San Francisco on June 25, President Johnson reviewed the Vietnam problem, noted that resort to the Security Council had been rejected by North Vietnam, and stated that the United States would support any effective action by the United Nations to promote a negotiated settlement of the conflict. (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book II, pp. 703-706) While in San Francisco, Johnson met on June 25 with U Thant and discussed Vietnam. No record of that conversation has been found except for U Thant's memoirs, View From the UN, pp. 67-69.

20. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas 20. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, June 26, 1965, 11:58 a.m.

CAP 65363. The following message from Max Taylor recommends reprisal action for the execution of Bennett and the restaurant atrocity.2 Rusk, McNamara, and I all disagree with this recommendation. We do not believe that important escalation should be attached to a single episode at this stage. McNamara and I do think, however, that if terror and executions continue, we should substantially increase weight of Rolling Thunder attacks, probably including oil supplies in Haiphong area. Rusk is less certain.

We are considering usefulness of leaflet drops on Hanoi-Haiphong area which would say that if these outrages continue, necessary further action will be taken.

Meanwhile you should know of Taylor's recommendation in case you wish to take his judgment and overrule Washington doves.

Taylor's message follows:

From: Embassy Saigon No. 44023

This is a US Mission message.

Viet Cong execution of Sergeant Bennett closely followed by My Canh restaurant atrocity brings into sharp focus blackmail potential VC and Hanoi possess in numbers of US hostages in their hands and the usefulness of this blackmail to support a stepped-up terrorist campaign. Since they well aware we place higher value on human life than do they, Hanoi/VC prepared use this weapon to own advantage. They have evidently decided that execution of US prisoners will be very sensitive issue for USG, and their experience with Hertz case in which they undoubtedly aware that we have caused GVN to delay execution of Hai, may have led them to believe that we will pay very high price to prevent execution of our personnel. They thus hope to cause political problems between US and GVN, to stir up US public opinion against Viet-Nam policy, to damage US troop morale, and also raise morale their terrorist cadre by showing their ability to retaliate for GVN executions and by possibility of delaying or halting further GVN executions. (We understand 5 or 6 convicted VC terrorists now awaiting carrying out of death sentence.)

Text of announcement, which first made over Radio Hanoi, a fact we should emphasize as evidence of origin of this outrage, makes clear that Hanoi and VC are holding USG responsible for GVN action in executing three named terrorists. In our response to this outrage we should make clear we likewise hold Hanoi responsible. Announcement also makes clear that Sergeant Bennett was executed on orders of Hanoi cloaked as “orders of the NLFSV Central Committee” by the command of the South Viet-Nam Liberation Front, apparently without any pretext of a trial. Announcement also twice mentions policy of NLFSV toward “prisoners of war” as “humane and lenient” and as “correct and humane”. It mentions prisoners of war in three contexts: executed terrorists are referred to as prisoners of war and are equated with US detainees; “rebel soldiers” (RVNAF) are referred to as prisoners of war and in obvious appeal to Vietnamese opinion, offer is made to release those who have “repented”; US detainees are called US “war prisoners” but their lives are said to be dependent on actions of US “aggressors”. This is first use of term “prisoners of war” in any of these three contexts to our knowledge.

We cannot permit ourselves to be placed in position of paying blackmail for lives of US prisoners in form of preventing GVN from executing terrorists who are tried and convicted of violating Vietnamese civil law. If not sternly repressed, terrorism is likely to become a VC tactic of increasing proportions. Even if we were willing to pay blackmail regardless of difficulties which it would cause internally for GVN and for our relations with GVN, we would soon find the price raised to some other even less acceptable level.

The US Mission takes the general position that (a) convicted VC terrorists must be punished in accordance with GVN law regardless of possible reprisal actions against US prisoners in VC hands; (b) must hold Hanoi responsible both for terrorism and for reprisals against our prisoners; and (c) we should obtain maximum propaganda effect in condemning the Bennett and My Canh incidents in combination as international murder (the toll of dead so far—27 Vietnamese, 13 US, 2 French, 1 Swiss, 1 Filipino; wounded—62 Vietnamese, 16 US, 1 Swiss, 2 Germans).

We therefore recommend

(1) The immediate execution of a bombing attack in the Hanoi-Haiphong area with an appropriate statement of the reason for the departure from the Rolling Thunder pattern. This attack to be accompanied by major leaflet drops in NVN and by maximum exploitation by VOA and other media.

(2) A Presidential statement voicing sense of outrage of American people at these wanton acts of murder and announcing that target in preceding paragraph was accordingly being attacked to show USG would not stand for blatant violation of all standards of humanity and international conduct.

(3) A GVN statement similarly denouncing the My Canh atrocity and the wanton murder of Sergeant Bennett, contrasting latter with due process of law followed in trial of Tran Van Dang, who was caught redhanded preparing to blow up building in city of Saigon, charged, tried by competent court, and convicted under accepted standards of justice.

(4) GVN protest to ICC.

We believe and intend that above steps would lead to heavy public denunciation of VC terrorism and execution of US prisoner. If handled properly this should have opposite effect to that intended by VC of stirring American public opinion in support of US policy in Viet-Nam.

We feel that the publicity campaign should get underway at once and the overall USG position should be established in the next few hours. We have asked GVN to make no statement for time being, but we will have difficulty keeping GVN quiet if matter drags. Taylor.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVI. Top Secret; Exdis. A note on the source text indicates that the telegram was received at the LBJ Ranch at 11:25 a.m. and that the President saw it.

2 On June 24, the Viet Cong executed Sergeant Harold G. Bennett, and on June 25, a Viet Cong bomb exploded in the My Canh floating restaurant in Saigon, killing 44 persons, including 13 U.S. citizens.

3 Dated June 26. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVI)

21. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 21. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, June 26, 1965, 3:30 p.m.

Bundy said President agrees with Maxwell Taylor.2 Ball said this was a dreadful decision. Bundy said it was not actually a decision—the President wants to hear the arguments. Ball said we have to recognize the fact that there will be incidents and we are either in a war or we are not—we should work out rational course of action to meet accidental or incidental events. Ball said we have not been prepared to make a decision to drop bombs on Hanoi-Haiphong up to now and he does not know why we make this decision on this basis. Bundy said he had said all of this and that he would like to have a meeting at 4:30.3 Bundy said he has called Secretary but has not reached him yet because he is enroute from the office to his home. Bundy said meeting could be held at State Department and they could then give President their recommendations and choice. Bundy said he had to tell Ball, however, that the President feels strongly about this. Bundy said he thinks what is on the President's mind is that we did react after Pleiku and here is something bigger. President thinks country will feel strongly about this. Bundy asked Ball if he had seen AP 93, which is direct threat to Taylor and South Vietnamese leaders—they will be marked for death. Bundy said his personal judgment runs with Ball's.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Vietnam I. No classification marking.

2 See Document 20.

3 See Document 22.

22. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas 22. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, June 26, 1965, 5:56 p.m.

CAP 65366. 1. Rusk, McNamara, Ball, Wheeler, Bill Bundy, and I have just met for an hour to review all aspects of possible reprisal for restaurant and Bennett outrages.

2. We concluded that if reprisal is ordered, best target is either power plant or POL depot in Hanoi-Haiphong area. No target outside this area is sufficiently important to be a noticeable departure from present Rolling Thunder pattern.

3. In order to strike a target in the Hanoi-Haiphong area with minimum international backlash, we all agree that we must consult major friendly nations. Attack without such consultation could easily drive Wilson and others clear off the reservation, and while they are not as much help to us as they think, we would not look smart if a single act of reprisal gave them an excuse to jump ship.

4. This consultation would probably lead to fairly heavy argument against attack in reprisal form. Allies could point out that repeated executions of prisoners by Nazis in World War II were not used to justify specific reprisals. They could point out also that once we moved to measured air operations in North Vietnam after Pleiku we avoided specific acts of reprisals as in the case of the Embassy bombing.

5. We believe nevertheless that by a strenuous diplomatic effort we could probably keep most allies with us, although not happy. But one condition of this effort would be that we emphasize military need for attacks on these targets and downgrade reprisal aspect. But if we are to use straight military argument with allies, we should use it with our own people too.

6. And that leads to the main argument which seems important to all of us—namely, that major new acts against the north should be undertaken in terms of our whole policy in Vietnam, and not in response to particular outrages. We don't all agree as to when and how it will be necessary to hit targets in Hanoi-Haiphong area. We do all agree that this is a major decision which should be made in a wider context than these atrocities.

7. Secretary Rusk also feels strongly that Gromyko/Kohler conversation forwarded separately2 shows at least a hint of Soviet readiness to work toward serious negotiations. Attack in Hanoi-Haiphong area right after this conversation might easily be misunderstood in Moscow.

8. You should also know that Alexis Johnson is reported by George Ball to oppose reprisal action.

9. Finally, we believe that both public and private statements and messages can be used to make clear to Hanoi that American people are bound to react with great force to continued atrocities. We can and will make this point to allies as well, so that further outrages of this sort can be used to lay a base for such additional military actions as you may wish to authorize on overall grounds.3

10. Next following message contains text of statement as issued by Department of State:

The regime in Hanoi and their puppet liberation front in South Viet-Nam have acknowledged their responsibility for the execution of Sgt. Bennett and for the bombing of the My Canh restaurant in Saigon, in which 44 persons, Vietnamese, American, French, Swiss, Filipino were killed and many more persons injured. They have compounded their brutal conduct by publicly bragging about their action and making threats to carry out even more outrageous acts. We in America and people around the world cannot help but be appalled and revolted by this show of wanton inhumanity. These Communist threats to intimidate, of course, will not succeed. Our determination to help the embattled people of South Viet-Nam to avoid their falling under a regime which is capable of such brutality will only be strengthened.

Hanoi's recent statements have surely also made it clear to anyone who may have had any doubt that it is the power directing the policies and actions of the VC, its instrument in South Viet-Nam, and must bear full responsibility for these acts.4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVI. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the telegram was received at the LBJ Ranch at 5:22 p.m. and shown to the President.

2 See Document 23.

3 In telegram 37 to Saigon, July 3, drafted by Ball, the Department of State informed Taylor that a “high level decision” had been made not to launch the retaliatory strike against the Hanoi-Haiphong area recommended by Taylor. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 The text of this statement was issued by Department of State Spokesman McCloskey on June 26. It is printed also in Department of State Bulletin, July 12, 1965, p. 55.

23. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas 23. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, June 26, 1965, 3:57 p.m.

CAP 65365. The following message is relevant to Taylor's suggestion,2 which we are reviewing at your request, because of what it shows of possible change in the weather in Moscow:

Message from Ambassador Kohler follows:

From Embassy Moscow No. 3863

Foreign Minister Gromyko accompanied by Smirnovsky came to Spaso today for lunch in honor of George Kennan. Stoessel and Toon were only other guests present. I had originally invited Keldysh, MGU Rector Petrovsky and several other historians and academicians but all for various reasons declined. On behalf Gromyko, Foreign Office had initially expressed doubts that Foreign Minister would be able to attend but subsequently called Embassy to advise that after rechecking his calendar Gromyko had found it possible to accept. I suspect that when Gromyko reached this decision word was passed to other invitees they should decline in order permit Foreign Minister engage in private, frank conversation which in fact took place. Conversation ranged over wide spectrum and throughout Gromyko was affable and gave impression of genuine desire to resume dialogue on basic issues which initiated in post-Cuba period. Following are significant points in exchange relating to Vietnam and U.S.-Sov relations.

After general discussion and frank exchange of views with Kennan on national liberation movement thesis—in which Kennan proved to be able and effective advocate our position, Gromyko turned to me and said he wished to convey two basic points. In first place, he said, Soviets are not authorized and cannot negotiate on behalf of North Vietnam.

Vietnamese situation must be discussed with DRV. He would point out that so far as Soviet position is concerned, 4-point statement by DRV would be reasonable basis for negotiations. As he had told Secretary Rusk in Vienna, Gromyko would caution the U.S. that no progress could be made if any future approach to DRV should be cast in “insulting” terms as it had been previously. For us to announce suspension of hostile action against DRV and simultaneously to inform DRV that unless it behaved according to our prescription the punishment would be resumed was bound to lead us nowhere. Secondly, Gromyko stressed that it has been and continues to be fundamental Soviet policy to seek improvement in U.S.-Soviet bilateral relations. He was compelled to observe, however, that Soviet Government had been disappointed by drastic change in U.S. policy since elections, and Soviets could not avoid feeling that policy now pursued by President Johnson in most instances paralleled that endorsed by Goldwater in electoral campaign.

I made following comments on Gromyko's remarks. I said U.S. Government fully recognized difficulties faced by Soviet Government in dealing with Vietnamese situation; obviously Soviet maneuverability was restricted by attitude of Hanoi and to certain extent Peking. On other hand we had hoped that Soviet Government would be prepared to bring its influence to bear on Hanoi in effort to bring about peaceful settlement of Vietnamese problem which neither of us, I felt, wished to see escalated to a dangerous degree. Meanwhile, I thought Gromyko should recognize that current U.S. policy of support for South Vietnam was laid down 10 years ago and had been followed consistently by three administrations. Recently, of course, degree of U.S. support had increased but this had only been in response to step-up in hostile and terroristic activities of forces controlled by North Vietnam rather than change in our basic policy. Equally, there had been no change in U.S. policy with regard to our bilateral relations with Soviet Union. We have consistently taken position that despite current difficulties, particularly in Vietnam, we desire continuing improvement in U.S.-Soviet bilateral relations on which such significant start had been made in 1963. It was our impression from public statements of Soviet leadership and Soviet press comment that it was Soviet attitude that in this respect had undergone a basic change. They had in fact flatly stated both privately to me and then publicly, that U.S. activities in Vietnam were incompatible with continued improvement U.S.-Soviet relations. It was therefore reassuring to me personally to have Gromyko restate in positive terms his government's position in favor of improvement of U.S.-Soviet bilateral relations. I could assure him that we would do our part toward this end.

Comment: It is entirely possible of course that reason for Gromyko's appearance at Spaso was simply to satisfy his curiosity about Kennan whom he had met only briefly shortly after the war to make appropriate official gesture following 1952 persona non grata action, and to attempt to influence views of a prominent representative of American academic community. However, it became obvious that Gromyko had come specifically prepared to make to me statement summarized above. It is obvious from this account that Gromyko was not prepared or authorized go much beyond officially stated Sov position, particularly on Vietnam. I had impression, however, particularly from his positive comment on U.S.-Sov relationship (which does, of course, differ from official position), his affable mood, and his almost wistful recall of 1963 atmosphere that there is perhaps some new flexibility in Sov posture. It seemed to me that he was trying to suggest that Soviet Government finds itself in extremely awkward position, that it genuinely desires to see the heat taken out of Vietnamese situation, that this can be done only by direct approach to Hanoi accompanied by cessation of bombing. He seemed to imply some hope that if this should be done Hanoi's response would be positive and the Sov Gov would then find it possible and desirable to resume the dialogue with U.S. and restore the hopeful relationship which existed in 1963. Kohler.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVI. Confidential. A note on the source text indicates this telegram was sent to the LBJ Ranch at 6:41 p.m.

2 Apparently a reference to Taylor's message in Document 20.

24. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 24. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, June 27, 1965.

SUBJECT

George Ball's paper on US Commitments Regarding the Defense of South Vietnam

1. The attached paper from George Ball was prepared for your use last Wednesday,2 but we did not get it to you before your departure Thursday. George asked me to say that he himself does not think the legal arguments about support for Vietnam are decisive. The commitment is primarily political and any decision to enlarge or reduce it will be political.

2. My own further view is that if and when we wish to shift our course and cut our losses in Vietnam we should do so because of a finding that the Vietnamese themselves are not meeting their obligations to themselves or to us. This is the course we started on with Diem, and if we got a wholly ineffective or anti-American government we could do the same thing again. With a “neutralist” government it would be quite possible to move in this direction.

McG. B.

Attachment

Washington, Washington, June 23, 1965.

Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to President Johnson3

SUBJECT

United States Commitments Regarding the Defense of South Viet-Nam

I.

The Nature of Our Legal Commitment

1. The Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, when read together with its protocol, provides that in the event of “aggression by means of armed attack” against South Viet-Nam each party will “act to meet the common danger in accordance with its constitutional processes.”

2. The United States has determined4 that there has been such aggression against South Viet-Nam, which has brought this Treaty obligation into operation. Although other SEATO powers are providing assistance to South Viet-Nam, the United States, to the best of our knowledge, is the only one that has made this determination. There has been no decision by the SEATO members to act collectively “to meet the common danger” in Viet-Nam.

3. Since South Viet-Nam is not a party to the Southeast Asia Treaty, our obligation under the Treaty does not run directly to South Viet-Nam. Authorities on international law generally agree that only parties (and not “third-party beneficiaries”) acquire rights under a treaty. However, since the United States has determined that there has been “aggression” against South Viet-Nam within the meaning of the Treaty, our assistance to the South Vietnamese Government to meet that aggression is in discharge of our treaty obligation.

4. Our provision of military assistance to South Viet-Nam is consistent with the United Nations Charter. Article 51 of the Charter recognizes the inherent right of individual and collective self-defense—although it does not impose an obligation of collective defense on UN Members.

5. In addition to its treaty responsibilities with respect to South Viet-Nam, the United States has repeatedly promised the Government of South Viet-Nam to assist it in its struggle against aggression. These promises have been embodied in a series of messages and statements, beginning in October 1954 when President Eisenhower promised to aid “the Government of Viet-Nam in developing and maintaining a strong, viable state, capable of resisting attempted subversion and aggression through military means.”5 The implied—and frequently expressed—conditions to the provision of United States assistance have been (a) the continuing request of the South Vietnamese Government for such assistance and (b) its will and ability to use that assistance effectively.

II.

Consequences of Withdrawal

1. The consequences of an abrupt withdrawal of our assistance from South Viet-Nam should be judged not in juridical terms but in terms of its effect on the credibility of our commitments throughout the world. The relevant questions would be: a. To what extent would such withdrawal impair the confidence of other small nations on the periphery of Communist power that the United States had the will and resources to help them prevent a Communist takeover?

b. To what extent would such withdrawal shake the faith of our partners in other security treaties—whether in Latin America, Europe, the Far East or elsewhere—that we would and could meet our treaty obligations?

c. To what extent would such withdrawal reduce the prestige of the United States and hence diminish its power and effectiveness in its dealings with other governments?

2. The answers to these questions would not depend on the differences or similarities in the nature of our legal commitments. Our obligations under the North Atlantic Treaty, for example, are quite different from our responsibilities for Viet-Nam under SEATO, since we have obligations running directly to each of our NATO partners to take action, including the use of armed force, in the event of an armed attack on any NATO power.

Our obligations to West Berlin are covered not only by Articles 5 and 6 of the North Atlantic Treaty but by our status as an occupying power pursuant to the unconditional surrender of Germany at the end of World War II.

We are obliged directly to the other American republics under the Rio Treaty of 1947 to come to their assistance in the event of armed attack.

3. In the longer term, we must judge a decision to withdraw assistance from South Viet-Nam primarily in terms of its effect on the ability of the United States to maintain its role of world leadership. That role is not an easy one. France could withdraw from Indochina or Algeria without wide-ranging consequences since it was not a great power and other nations did not depend on France for their own security. The United States must, however, always act with the consciousness that if it fails to discharge its role of leadership there is no other free world power capable of taking its place.

George W. Ball

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. Secret.

2 June 23.

3 Secret.

4 The determination that North Viet-Nam was committing “aggression by armed attack” was explicitly stated in the so-called “White Paper” entitled “Aggression from the North” issued by the Department of State in February 1965. [Footnote in the source text; see vol. II, Document 171.]

5 See ibid., 1952-1954, vol. XIII, Part 2, p. 2167.

25. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 25. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, June 28, 1965.

SUBJECT

The Status of Non-Military Actions in Vietnam

Several months ago you asked that programs for Vietnam be reviewed to insure that all practical measures were being taken in the non-military sector. This led to numerous new proposals which you approved.2 The Mission Council in Saigon then assigned a scale of priorities to these projects. This is a report on those actions as they relate to broader, overall Mission programming in major areas of activity.

INTERNAL SECURITY

Population and Resources Control

The Viet Cong's continuing ability to move freely among the population led to increased emphasis on police training and counter-subversion operations. A substantial amount of additional instruction has been added to police training and increased emphasis has been placed on control operations. This has shown marked success particularly in the Hop Tac area.

Informant Intelligence Operations

The Special Branch of the National Police has the key responsibility for general information on Viet Cong political activities. [5-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

Bounties for Apprehending Viet Cong Leaders

In April the Mission approved a bounty program aimed at apprehending selected Viet Cong leaders. The program calls for a two-month preparatory period, followed by a four-month operational phase, after which the program will be evaluated to determine future actions.

Arrest and Detention Law

A draft law was prepared last April with U.S. assistance and approved by the Ministry of Interior. In May Quat asked for minor changes to be made, but there is no indication that he signed the law before his government fell.

PROVINCIAL OPERATIONS

The brittle administrative structure of the National Government in Saigon has made it necessary to buttress the authority and responsibility of the province chiefs, while still improving their communications and ties with the Saigon authorities.

Provincial Government

A system of integrated provincial budgets was initiated in April. The position of the Province Chief has been strengthened by according him greater authority for technical services as well as for military and civilian administration. On May 30, provincial and municipal councils were elected to function as links between the people and provincial authorities. At the Mission's urging, Quat and various government ministers began frequent visits to the provinces to demonstrate Saigon's interest in the problems of local governments.

Operations Against the Viet Cong

CIA has considerably expanded its recruitment and training of local teams engaged in Viet Cong harassment, counter-terror and intelligence operations. By the end of this year there is scheduled to be almost 3,000 teams engaged in one or another of these activities.

Improvement of Popular Forces

MACV undertook to improve the equipment, morale and indoctrination of the provincial Popular Forces and to increase their medical support. The GVN has approved a substantial program for the construction and improvement of Popular Forces training centers.

INTERNAL POLITICAL PROBLEMS

Political instability has continued in the absence of a cohesive political infrastructure which could contain and channel the energies of such pressure elements as the students, Montagnards, Buddhists and Catholics. Several of the actions you approved were designed to minimize possibilities of conflict among these groups.

Youth and Students

Vietnamese youth and students remain volatile and restless and are quite capable of making political trouble. To minimize this prospect and to direct their energies along more constructive lines, the Mission has supported a summer youth program designed to place several thousand urban youth into rural areas to participate in small-scale civic action activities. The program has been well received by various political and religious groups. CIA has initiated a supplementary program among student organizations.

Montagnard Grievances

In late April a Montagnard agricultural conference was held at Dalat attended by 100 Montagnard officials and a Saigon delegation. The Minister of Agriculture announced that the Montagnards would be given title to the lands they now farm and be permitted to cut timber from government forests. In May an Office of Ethnic Minority Affairs was established directly subordinate to the Prime Minister to deal with Montagnard and other ethnic minority grievances. CIA gave special attention to the Montagnards in expanding their local Viet Cong harassment and counter-terror teams.

Buddhists and Catholics

You approved an action calling for a revitalization of the Inter-Religious Council, where religious grievances could be aired and adjudicated without resort to political action. Mission contacts with principal religious leaders were expanded and efforts were made to exploit these contacts for the revitalization of the religious council. While the more moderate religious leaders supported this initiative, extreme militants among both Buddhists and Catholics were not forthcoming and the tension between them persists. An initiative with the Holy See in Rome has further encouraged the moderating influence of the Apostolic Delegate in Saigon. The new government is considering the formation of a “National Consultative Council” to include representatives of the religious sects and other important political factions.

Labor

The labor sector is a prime target for Viet Cong subversion. The Vietnamese Workers Confederation (CTV) embraces most unions and generally has a non-Communist orientation. However, its strength and support in aggressive anti-Communist actions have heretofore never been fully committed to any Vietnamese government. AID dispatched two teams of labor consultants to Vietnam and urged the AFL-CIO to directly assist the CTV. A permanent AFL-CIO representative is now in Vietnam. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] move the CTV into more aggressive anti-Communist action. We believe the CTV is now on the verge of fully committing its organizational strength to the GVN.

INTERNAL ECONOMIC PROBLEMS

Implementation of Land Reform

The Mission, with Washington encouragement, has repeatedly urged the GVN to develop a comprehensive program for land reform. An initial, positive result was the establishment of a Secretariat of Land Reform (sub-ministerial but independent) in the Cabinet reshuffle that led to Quat's downfall. Its continuation under the new government is apparently undecided. We have pressed for vigorous action.

Refugees

Severe floods together with increased Viet Cong activity have created an emergency refugee and disaster relief problem involving more than 200,000 Vietnamese. A program was initiated by the GVN with strong AID and voluntary agency assistance, and the problem is now under control. The International Rescue Committee, a registered American voluntary agency, will assume a sizeable part of the refugee relief burden in a private, non-governmental program.

Emergency Quick-Fix Brigades

To cope with other emergencies as they arise in the provinces, the Mission has begun to organize action teams composed of the province chief, the MACV sector advisor and the AID provincial representative, backstopped by their respective Saigon organizations. Flexible procedures will minimize bureaucratic impediments and enable the provincial teams to act immediately with local resources and, if necessary, obtain on a priority basis from Saigon personnel, commodities and funds.

Coastal Water and Other Transportation

Viet Cong interdiction of communications and transportation lines has created severe problems for the movement of foodstuffs, supplies and other commodities. Agreement was reached early in June between the GVN and AID for the urgent development of a national logistics system, with emphasis on expanding port and harbor facilities.

Rural Electrification

A survey team is preparing feasibility reports on three pilot electrification projects. The AID electric power project envisions providing 80 rural locations with small generating units in 1965.

Urban Programs

A recently completed AID study provides for a five-year $150 million low-cost housing and slum clearance project for the Saigon/Cholon area. The need for similar low-cost housing in other urban areas is being determined. A program to improve water supply facilities for 65 cities and towns is being accelerated.

GVN PRESS AND EXTERNAL RELATIONS

A high priority has been given to encouraging the GVN to assume greater responsibility for press briefings in Vietnam and to carry out a more aggressive external information program in order to underscore the predominant role of the GVN in the war against the Viet Cong. The installation for a GVN press center has been ready for use since mid-May, but despite continuous urgings, the GVN has yet to make use of this facility. Nor has the GVN responded to the critical need for an effective external information program.

McGeorge Bundy3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 41-Point Program in Non-Military Sphere in SVN. Secret.

2 See vol. II, Documents 173, 200, 228, 229, and 242.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

26. Paper by the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 26. Paper by the Under Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, undated.

CUTTING OUR LOSSES IN SOUTH VIET-NAM

Summary

This paper, written on the premise that we are losing the war in Viet-Nam, advances and supports the following propositions: 1. We cannot achieve our political objectives by expanding the bombing of North Viet-Nam. On the contrary, extending the geographical scope of our bombing will pose grave dangers of involving both Red China and the Soviet Union while isolating the United States from its friends and allies.

2. There is no assurance that we can achieve our objectives by substantially expanding American forces in South Viet-Nam and committing them to direct combat. On the contrary, we would run grave risks of bogging down an indeterminate number of American troops in a protracted and bloody conflict of uncertain outcome. This risk is so great, in fact, that those who advocate this course must sustain the burden of proof that commitment of American forces to combat will assure our objectives at an acceptable cost.

3. Combining expanded air attacks in the North with increased troop commitments in the South will not achieve the desired objective. The whole is not greater than the sum of its parts.

4. Since the measures discussed in paragraphs 1 and 2 above offer no assurance that we can win the war by substantially greater US commitments, we should undertake either to extricate ourselves or to reduce our defense perimeters in South Viet-Nam to accord with the capabilities of a limited US deployment.

5. This is our last clear chance to make this decision. If we go forward with Phase III combat, even at the present level of troop deployment, a substantial number of Americans will be killed. This will make it much harder and more costly to extricate ourselves or reduce our commitments. We should, therefore, revise current orders to return to Phase II and we should maintain our present levels of deployment while we seek to get out of the quagmire and cut our losses.

6. By pursuing a systematic and careful plan for cutting our losses we should be able to create the conditions under which we can get out of a dangerous situation without excessive loss of American prestige and influence.

How To Think About the Problem

To determine a proper course of action we must balance the risks and costs of a war fought by United States forces against the risks and costs of a carefully organized tactical withdrawal of the United States from South Viet-Nam or a systematic reduction of our territorial commitment to accord with the capabilities of a limited US deployment.

Obviously, if a curtailment of our commitment in South Viet-Nam would place the United States in imminent peril, we would be justified in taking long chances in pouring troops and equipment into that beleaguered country and in running large risks of escalation.

On the other hand, if we could accomplish such curtailment in a manner that would minimize the costs and dangers to the United States, the indicated formula would be quite different.

The ultimate decision, therefore, involves a hard-nosed judgment as to the relative costs and dangers to America—both short-term and long-term—of these two courses of action.

Plan for Cutting Our Losses

Against the background of these propositions, we propose a plan that should either create the conditions for a systematic US extrication or—less likely—establish a sound basis for our continued involvement at present levels of commitment.

This plan consists of the following elements:

Step 1

The President should make the firm decision that he will not commit United States land forces to combat in South Viet-Nam.

Step 2

We should use every occasion to re-emphasize what has been clear ever since the first Eisenhower letter2 but has not been recently stated—that our assistance is being provided on two explicit conditions: (a) that there is a government genuinely representing the people of South Viet-Nam which continues to ask for our support; and

(b) that such government maintains an adequate standard of performance, both in the conduct of the war and the making of necessary political, economic and social reforms.

Step 3

1. Since Americans are dying in South Viet-Nam, the United States has both the right and duty to demand of Saigon that it fashion a stable Government of National Union. We should, therefore, make the following demarche not only on General Ky but on the leaders of all principal groups in Saigon—the Catholics, the Buddhists, the Cao Dai, the military, the Dai Viet: (a) unless, within a month's time, those leaders are able to put together a Government of National Union under civilian leadership, the United States will have to reconsider the extent of its commitment until such a Government is formed;

(b) a Government of National Union must have authentic representation of all key ethnic, religious, and regional groups with a commitment to national elections as soon as hostilities cease;

(c) such a Government must announce and begin to implement a broad program of political, social and economic reforms, including a cancellation of all peasant debts, land reform, seed and fertilizer programs, etc.

(d) the Government must announce the essentials of the Acheson Plan3 —including a major amnesty effort—in order to attract and protect defectors from the Viet Cong so as to provide a sound intelligence base for our military operations and a transition to a post-hostility reconstruction of South Viet-Nam as a national entity.

The ability of the Saigon Government to accomplish these objectives is not dependent on the course of the war. If there is to be genuine unity, it can come about regardless of whether the ARVN is winning or merely holding its own during the rainy season. In fact, the worse the war, the greater the crisis that should instill a willingness to abandon internecine strife and unite against the common enemy. If no such willingness prevails in Saigon, we cannot take over the war ourselves.

Step 4

If the leaders of the various factions in Saigon prove unwilling or unable to put aside petty factional jealousies and comply with the US demarche we must be prepared to follow through. We must be prepared to advise the Ky Government—or whatever government may then be in power—that we cannot maintain even the present level of our assistance.

It is more than likely that a notice of this kind from the United States Government would have the effect of either

(a) inducing the Ky Government to adopt an extreme nationalist position and announce it would go it alone without United States help; or

(b) bring about the fall of the Ky Government in favor of a government prepared to try to find a political solution with the Viet Cong.

In either event, we would not expect that American forces would leave quickly. Rather we would expect a protracted discussion between US representatives and representatives of the various Vietnamese factions.

Should Ky or his successor demand the immediate removal of US forces from South Viet-Nam, he would almost certainly be ousted by more moderate elements. Even if those elements were neutralist, they would still tend to regard our presence for a period of time as essential to prolonged bargaining with the Viet Cong and Hanoi. Our willingness to cooperate in this negotiating phase could permit us to remain in South Viet-Nam for a considerable period and thus avoid any public appearance of a precipitate and undignified withdrawal.

We could use this interval profitably to establish the justice and wisdom of our position with our friends and allies. We could also undertake the necessary diplomatic and economic actions in Thailand and Laos designed to offset so far as possible the immediate shock of the developments in South Viet-Nam.

Defensive and Affirmative Actions

In our anxiety to build up support for the struggle in South Viet-Nam, we have tended to exaggerate the consequences for US power and prestige of a tactical withdrawal from South Viet-Nam. Admittedly, such a withdrawal would create short-term problems, especially in Thailand, but by taking prompt and effective defensive and affirmative measures we should be able to avoid any serious long-term consequences. By and large, the world knows that the government in Saigon is a joke, and if our withdrawal resulted from an effort to face this problem squarely, friendly nations would not interpret it as a US failure to keep its commitments. More likely most nations would consider that we had more than kept our commitments to Viet-Nam—and that our decision to force the issue of stability was a mark of prudence and maturity.

The following memorandum4 contains a discussion of some of the measures which should be taken to avoid damage to our position in specific countries and areas.

Renvoi

The position taken in this memorandum does not suggest that the United States should abdicate leadership in the cold war. But any prudent military commander carefully selects the terrain on which to stand and fight, and no great captain has ever been blamed for a successful tactical withdrawal.

From our point of view, the terrain in South Viet-Nam could not be worse. Jungles and rice paddies are not designed for modern arms and, from a military point of view, this is clearly what General De Gaulle described to me as a “rotten country”.

Politically, South Viet-Nam is a lost cause. The country is bled white from twenty years of war and the people are sick of it. The Viet Cong—as is shown by the Rand Corporation Motivation and Morale Study5 —are deeply committed.

Hanoi has a Government and a purpose and a discipline. The “government” in Saigon is a travesty. In a very real sense, South Viet-Nam is a country with an army and no government.

In my view, a deep commitment of United States forces in a land war in South Viet-Nam would be a catastrophic error. If ever there was an occasion for a tactical withdrawal, this is it.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 70 D 48, Memos to the President on VN Feb. 1965-Apr. 1966. Top Secret. Sent to Rusk and to McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, William Bundy, McNaughton, and Unger under a June 28 covering memorandum from Ball, which explained that an expanded version of the paper would be circulated to the group prior to the meeting scheduled to discuss the paper on June 29. The text of the expanded paper is ibid. The text printed here, which was prepared in response to President Johnson's June 23 instruction, was drafted by Ball, with support from his staff, William Bundy, and several INR staff members. The final analysis and drafting was done by Ball. (Johnson Library, Papers of William P. Bundy, Ch. 26, p. 23) William Bundy recalls that when Ball's paper was discussed in the Department of State on June 29 by the group to which it was circulated, it was the summary that was the focus of the discussion, and it was criticized as outlining “the worst way to lose if it came to that.” The group felt that it was “absurd to insist on a new perfection just as the going was at its worst; to Asian eyes, it would have been the most cynical exit method possible.” (Ibid., Ch. 27, p. 6) In light of this criticism, Ball modified his proposal in the paper he sent to the President on July 1; see Document 40.

2 Sent to President Diem on October 1, 1954. For text, see Foreign Relations, 1952-1954, vol. XIII, Part 2, pp. 2166-2167.

3 See vol. II, Document 287.

4 Presumably a reference to the expanded version of this paper cited in footnote 1 above.

5 See Document 27.

27. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 27. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, June 28, 1965, 1:05 p.m.

SUBJECT

RAND Studies of Viet Cong Motivation and Morale

The RAND Corporation has recently completed studies of Viet Cong motivation and morale based on interviews with Viet Cong PWs and defectors. The studies indicate that while older, hard-core VC have a deep commitment to Communist objectives, the younger, newer recruits have a much more shallow sense of commitment. Morale of the VC armed units has been significantly affected by air attacks within South Vietnam. Indeed, preliminary and unpublished findings based on recent interviews indicate that morale has fallen significantly over the past few months as a result of our air harassment.

MOTIVATION AND MORALE

The Viet Cong movement embraces a mass of Vietnamese, ranging from the casual peasant supporter who occasionally buys supplies for the Viet Cong on a trip to the local market, to the most deeply dedicated cadre in the main forces. The main forces fall into two generations of recruits: the hard-core Viet Cong cadre and Party member who usually is a Southern Vietnamese “returnee” from North Vietnam where he received, after 1954, five to ten years of systematic training and indoctrination; and the younger generation comprising those recruited mainly after 1958.

The Hard Core Cadre

This group fought as Viet Minh against the French. Many of them were regrouped in the North, but some remained underground in the South. These men form the backbone of the revolutionary effort in the South, which they regard as a continuation of the war of independence against the French. The regroupees were bitter at the United States and the GVN for the cancellation of 1956 reunification elections and the consequent prolonged separation from their homes in the South. Although many were antagonized by the harshness of the DRV land reform of that period, they nonetheless appear to have maintained their faith in the wisdom of the leadership in Hanoi.

The Younger Generation

Whereas the older group joined the Viet Cong mainly for nationalist reasons, the younger generation joined for a variety of motives: protest against social injustice at the village level, lack of opportunities on the GVN side for education and employment, avoidance of the GVN draft, fun and games. Intertwined with these as a result of Viet Cong political indoctrination is a desire to protect Vietnam from “the American imperialists and their lackey, the GVN.” Although coercion is used in recruitment by the VC, it is usually combined with persuasion and patriotic appeals.

Both Generations

The Viet Cong claim that they “live splendidly and die gloriously,” even though their living conditions are in fact miserable. Most of those interviewed believed that the war would last a long time and would end as a result of a gradual exhaustion of the enemy, rather than through a dramatic VC victory.

Defections from the Viet Cong have resulted mainly from personal rather than ideological factors. While defectors and some PWs did criticize the Viet Cong, they more frequently expressed embarrassment or guilt over their own inability to stand the rigors of guerrilla life.

The second generation of Viet Cong has a shallower comprehension of Communist doctrine and cites the revolution's goals as simply “peace, independence, democracy and neutralism.”

Both generations regard the revolution as an indigenous Southern movement, albeit with some welcome assistance from Hanoi. The nationalistic idealism of the movement is stressed rather than Socialism or Communism. Many Southerners appear uninformed on the extent of Hanoi's role in the war.

RAND (and we) are convinced that the flow of defectors could be markedly increased by improved GVN treatment of its PWs. The Viet Cong is now able to convince its men that surrender to or capture by the GVN will only bring torture or execution. (As indeed it too often does.) We have a special mission out on this one now.

EFFECT OF US-GVN MILITARY OPERATIONS ON VC BEHAVIOR

On the basis of its interviews of Viet Cong captives and defectors, RAND suggests that air harassment should be a major objective of our operations in Vietnam. The Viet Cong are especially fearful of detection and attack from the air, and intensified and continuous air surveillance and harassing activities by day and night are likely to have a major disruptive effect on Viet Cong living conditions, morale, movement, and operations. Air envelopment operations, because of surprise, have a major effect on Viet Cong morale and inflict heavy losses. Recent interviews, not yet published, indicate a growing belief that the VC can no longer win the war militarily.

Artillery fire is feared by the Viet Cong. Because of good Viet Cong intelligence, however, there seems to be a need for more ARVN artillery and frequent changes in the location of the pieces and concentrations.

The interviews suggest that intensified ground patrolling has had a significant disruptive effect on Viet Cong operations, and that protracted ground sweeps should be assessed primarily in terms of their harassing impact rather than the casualties they inflict on the Viet Cong.

RAND CONCLUSIONS

“Although the interviews indicate that certain weapons, tactics and operations have a significant effect on the Viet Cong, their impact will depend not only on their scale and intensity, but also on the way they are integrated into and supported by a range of political, psychological, economic, and social programs designed to exploit fully their effects on the Viet Cong. For example, Viet Cong morale may significantly decline as a result of intensified aerial surveillance and harassment, but the rate of Viet Cong defections will continue to depend largely on the treatment the GVN accords to its Viet Cong captives and defectors.

Similarly, aerial harassment and attacks may directly lower the scale, intensity and effectiveness of Viet Cong activities, but in the end only the ground forces can transform the Viet Cong from hunters into hunted, defeat them decisively, and establish complete control and security over the population.”

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. Confidential. The source text is marked with an indication that the President saw it on June 28.

28. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) 28. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland)1

Washington, June 28, 1965, 6:35 p.m.

JCS 2400-65. References: A. MAC 3275.2 B. MAC 3283.3

1. As you know from my earlier cables we are considering urgently expanded military actions both in South Vietnam and North Vietnam. Our objective in South Vietnam is to prove to the VC/DRV that they cannot win in South Vietnam. To do this we propose to increase U.S./GVN military strength to the level required to counter current and likely VC ground strength. In North Vietnam our objective is further to curtail by airstrikes their capability and will to continue support to the VC.

2. At the present time you have in-country seven Marine battalions, two Army battalions and one Australian battalion. We have en route to you six U.S. Army battalions and two additional Marine BLTs with support including an F4B squadron and other elements totaling 8,000 Marine personnel. This will provide you by 28 July a total of seventeen U.S. and one Australian battalions. There seems to be good reason to believe that Korea will provide one division; however, the timing is unclear.

3. We are considering deploying to South Vietnam the air mobile division of eight battalions, the remainder of the 1st Infantry Division with six battalions and one MAB of three BLTs, a VFMA squadron and necessary support for a further Marine augmentation of 8,000 personnel. Additionally, we propose to deploy two 105-mm howitzer battalions, one 175-mm artillery battalion and thirteen companies plus two platoons of helicopters (initially five Army and eight Marine Corps), eight platoons of Chinook helicopters and three Hawk battalions. With a field force headquarters, four additional attack fighter squadrons, and additional logistic support, the total U.S. deployment will approximate 175,000 men. The force would comprise thirty-four U.S. maneuver battalions and ten third-country maneuver battalions.

4. In your judgment, is this proposed augmentation of U.S./GVN strength sufficient to give us reasonable assurance of achieving the objective set forth in paragraph 1, assuming the VC strength continues to be of the magnitude of your present estimates? Obviously, if the VC sizably augment their forces the situation will be changed. In other words, do you need now or foresee the need for more forces than those cited in above references and summarized (I hope correctly) in preceding paragraphs.

5. Once more I must ask you to give me your reply ASAP. I must have a paper on the JCS agenda on Wednesday which reflects your views. FYI: In another cable4 the JCS is querying you regarding the need for additional airfields of aluminum matting which would provide you greater in-country fixed-wing air support.

1 Source: Center of Military History, Westmoreland Papers, COMUSMACV Message Files. Top Secret. Also sent to Admiral Sharp.

2 In this telegram to Wheeler, June 26, Westmoreland discussed the disposition of U.S. and South Vietnamese forces in Vietnam and stated that the United States should not make any major change in its policy of supporting the RVNAF. “It is a Vietnamese war,” and “they are the only ones that can win it.” (Ibid.)

3 In this telegram to Wheeler, June 27, Westmoreland discussed plans for augmenting U.S. military forces in Vietnam. (Ibid.)

4 Not further identified.

29. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 29. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 29, 1965, 9:15 a.m.

4422. When I called on General Ky afternoon June 28 to take up several minor matters, I found him with Generals Thieu, Chieu and Co, the latter having just reported to Saigon as new MinDef. They were all sober-faced and depressed, probably in wake of discussion by Co of military situation in II Corps.

Ky went straight to his principal point, need for additional US ground combat forces. He is sensing for first time difficulty which we have anticipated for some time of fielding sufficient combat-ready ARVN units to cope with growing number of VC units during next few months. He is impressed with need for injection of additional US (or other third country) forces to tide over monsoon offensive period and to take off VC pressure while mobilization measures are being taken and, to use his expression, “while rear is being cleaned up”. By latter term, he appears to mean actions needed to stimulate pacification, to energize public opinion, and to establish better security measures against VC terrorists. (With regard to latter, he indulged in some reflections on need for reprisal executions of VC prisoners in retaliation for atrocities like the My Canh bombing.)2

I told him that on US side we have long been conscious of growing shortage of trained military manpower. We had justified to our govt introduction of US combat forces as means to assist in alleviation of shortage. I reminded him of our announced intention to bring in six additional battalions which, I thought, represented our maximum effort between now and August.

What we might consider doing thereafter would depend upon requirements of situation as we might evaluate them. It appeared timely to me for General Co and General Westmoreland to undertake comprehensive review of military manpower requirements between now and end of calendar year, to establish goals for period in terms of year-end position to be sought and of means, particularly of personnel, required to reach it. In general terms, it seemed to me that our objective for period should be to hold population and territory presently under govt control, to blunt and bloody VC monsoon offensive and to make preparations for passage to offensive in early 1966.

Generals agreed to this thumbnail estimate of situation and agreed that Co and Westmoreland should undertake analysis required.

General Ky mentioned that press had questioned him with regard to command relationships in joint US/GVN ground operations. He had answered to effect that we have been accustomed to operating on basis of combat support with US helicopters and aviation and see no particular reason for drastic change. In any specific tactical situation, command would be worked out in accordance with good sense and sound military principles. He is obviously most anxious to play down issue, recognizing it is sensitive to both parties.

I took advantage of discussion of US ground forces to obtain his concurrence for landing of one Marine company at Qui Nhon to add to US defensive strength in this area pending arrival of US brigade next month. This approach was made at General Westmoreland's request.

With regard to current issues facing his govt, Ky said that he had just had satisfactory meeting with newspaper publishers whom he had threatened with closing on July 1. They have agreed to attempt to reduce their number to 20 by consolidations to be worked out among themselves. Those who cooperate will be allowed to continue to publish but recalcitrants will be put out of business. Ky has also given them pep talk on subject of loyalty to govt and its policies. Ky does not propose to apply censorship but those who do not show “self-control” can expect trouble from him.

From subject of press, we passed to that of better communications between govt and people. Ky says he is aware of inefficiency of govt radio operations and agrees to make new efforts to improve them. I told him that we on our side were prepared to talk television if his people can show improvement in radio field. I mentioned that Barry Zorthian is our contact point for TV discussions.

Since Chieu Hoi program is form of communication, I took occasion to plug for better attention to this activity. Ky indicated that it is being temporarily run out of Ministry for Psychological Warfare but eventually will be absorbed into Secretariat for Rural Reconstruction.

With regard to visit to Seventh Fleet carrier, Ky indicated he would like to make trip on Thursday, July 1, following trip to Hue-Danang on Wednesday. Because of involvements with Eugene Black visit on that date,3 I have arranged for General Westmoreland to accompany him to carrier and thereafter bring him back to Saigon in time to meet with Mr. Black and his party.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Received at 10:18 p.m. on June 28 and repeated to CINCPAC. Passed to the White House, the Department of Defense, and CIA.

2 See footnote 2, Document 20.

3 Documentation on Black's visit to Saigon is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S.

30. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper and James C. Thomson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 30. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper and James C. Thomson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, June 29, 1965.

Recognizing that there are already several cooks preparing the soup, but confident that the chef is tolerant, we offer the following.

Notes on a Vietnam Political Track

In this proposal we suggest a three-fold initiative to be undertaken in the next two weeks. It is an initiative designed to probe the intentions of the other side more fully than has previously been attempted, to do so in such a way as to demonstrate our peaceful intent, but yet without undermining our military and political position in Vietnam.

Despite the present unpromising outlook for political discussions, certain factors make the current context more favorable than future conditions might permit. The NLF remains internationally weaker than it will be once it is formally constituted as a government; the US and the USSR have not yet collided militarily in Vietnam—but by design or accident, such a collision will become increasingly likely—and dispassionate Soviet-American discussions less possible—as the conflict escalates; our room for diplomatic maneuver will become narrower as each Viet Cong outrage increases the pressure from the domestic right to retaliate against Hanoi/Haiphong and even Red China.

At worst, the three-fold initiative suggested below will simply further prove the unwillingness of the other side to consider peace terms while their hopes for monsoon victories remain high. As a more favorable result, we may obtain useful new information about the views and calculations of Moscow, Hanoi, and Peking. At best, we might begin the slow process of moving the conflict to a conference table.

The Proposal

We suggest that three separate actions be taken, in a neutral capital (perhaps Algiers or Cairo), in Moscow, and in Washington, within the next fourteen days. The three actions are related, but need not be simultaneous; their timing should be dictated by certain other variables.

1. Neutral Capital Initiative.

Prior to a rescheduled Algiers Conference, the U.S. should make an approach, at the highest level, to three friendly African governments of good international standing (e.g., Ethiopia, Nigeria, and Guinea). We should ask these nations to join together in conveying, on our behalf, a private message to both the DRV and NLF representatives in Algiers or elsewhere.

This message should include: a. a statement of U.S. acceptance of Pham Van Dong's four points as one basis for further discussions;

b. a statement of U.S. acceptance of Tran Van Do's peace proposals as another basis for further discussions;

c. an offer to send U.S. officials to meet with DRV representatives secretly at any place of their choosing for informal discussions of both sets of proposals as possible bases for more formal negotiations;

d. a proposal for a de facto cease-fire to be observed by both sides once these discussions are underway;

e. a proposal that if these discussions show any promise, they should be enlarged to include representatives from the GVN and the NLF;

f. a hope that agreement might be reached that would permit the convening of a Geneva-type conference.

2. Moscow Initiative.

A high-level U.S. official—ideally Averell Harriman—should be sent to Moscow, either without publicity or on some other pretext, in order to talk directly with Kosygin and others about Vietnam.2 (Although the Gromyko channel has not proved promising, our efforts should not stop with him.)

Our emissary should clearly state (a) our determination to do whatever is necessary, regardless of the consequences, to keep South Vietnam from going Communist; (b) our view that our national prestige is inextricably tied to a non-Communist outcome in the South; (c) our concern that the actions of the VC, the DRV, and Peking may permanently damage our relations with the USSR and seriously threaten world peace; (d) our awareness of the considerable stakes that all parties, including the USSR, have in the conflict; (e) our willingness to consider face-saving compromises for a peaceful solution as long as the compromises left South Vietnam intact as a non-Communist state; (f) our interest in seeing the USSR play a peace-maker role—and get the credit—if necessary.

The emissary should tell the Soviets of our initiative with the neutral states. He should ask for Kosygin's personal views on an urgent basis, to be transmitted back to the President.

3. Washington Initiative.

On the basis of the outcome of the Moscow conversation, or perhaps in conjunction with both the Moscow and Neutral initiative, the President should authorize a 7-10 day pause in our air strikes against North Vietnam.

The fact of this pause should be communicated to both the Soviets and the Neutrals. Public announcement by the White House should probably be avoided, however, so that we can retaliate if necessary against unusual spectaculars—and reinstitute the air strikes routinely if the initiatives produce no results.

C

JT

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV. Secret.

2 We recognize that this is already under consideration. [Footnote in the source text.]

31. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 31. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Saigon, June 30, 1965, 11:30 a.m.

MAC 3320. Ref: A. JCS 2400-65, 290035Z. B. Saigon 4422 to State, 29 June.2

1. We have no evidence, to date, that the DRV and/or the Viet Cong have any inclination to modify their objectives with respect to SVN, or their basic methods for attainment of these objectives. While we can only conjecture as to the extent to which US air action against DRV will be expanded, or what international initiatives may be taken over the next few months, we do not believe that developments in either field will significantly alter DRV/VC intentions over the next 6 months.

2. The foregoing said, the direct answer to your basic question is “no.” In other words, a force of 34 US maneuver battalions and 10 3d country maneuver battalions together with appropriate tactical air and balanced ground combat and logistic support will not provide reasonable assurance of attaining the objective you postulate (convincing the DRV/VC they cannot win). The DRV/VC are too deeply committed to be influenced by anything but application of overpowering force. Consequently, while infusion of US/3d country combat strength on the scale contemplated should reestablish the military balance by the end of December, it will not per se cause the enemy to back off.

3. As you fully appreciate, the build up from the 17 maneuver battalions, in position on 1 August, to 40 plus battalions will extend throughout the remainder of the calendar year. Thus, over the next few months, the enemy will retain the capability of overrunning isolated district capitals; of severely interdicting land routes of communications; and of consolidating the rural areas he now dominates. As of January, and providing that the RVNAF has held its own in strength and combat effectiveness, we should be in a position to begin to wrest the military initiative, in selected areas, from the VC/PAVN forces estimated to be in SVN. At that juncture (or before), the enemy may elect to further augment his strength.

4. With the foregoing considerations in mind, I adhere to the 44 battalion package as the proper and necessary scope of deployment authority at this time. (Parenthetically, all should understand that the ROK division is a firm part of the military requirement during the next several months. If the ROK division does not materialize, a US division must be committed in its place in the same time frame.) There are very practical limitations locally in the logistics areas, quite apart from those which will predictably confront the services. We will be hard pressed to receive, and commit to combat forces of the magnitude contemplated over the next 6 months.

5. We cannot now state what additional forces may be required in 1966 to gain and maintain the military initiative. Obviously, many variables are involved—the most important of which is resources DRV may elect to commit. Instinctively, we believe that there may be substantial additional US force requirements. Analytic study of this whole subject is essential, and this we have initiated. We hope to have a fairly solid estimate by early August of the range of additional forces we may require. In this connection, following the Ambassador's conversation with AVM Ky as reported Ref B, I met with General Co yesterday and arranged for follow-on discussions between Depuy and JGS J-3 (Thang) on a closely held basis. Through Thang—and without commitment—we will seek JGS views of the future course of the war, analysis of overall force requirements and estimate of what additional forces, regular and regional, it will be within GVN capability to provide. These inputs will be of considerable value to our essentially unilateral study.

6. As seen from here, the requirement for some form of limited mobilization seems clear and pressing. Parenthetically, the impact of national decision to mobilize, albeit in limited degree, might well have more impact on Hanoi/Peking than the deployment of an army corps.

1 Source: Center of Military History, Westmoreland Papers,COMUSMACV Message Files. Top Secret. Also sent to Admiral Sharp.

2 Documents 28 and 29.

32. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 32. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 30, 1965.

4434. For the President. Whatever one may think of General Ky, he seems to be serious about fulfilling his campaign promises to stir up the country and get it on a war footing. Impetuous as some of his actions have been, they seem to have the honest intent of energizing an apathetic people and creating an atmosphere of urgency where day-to-day routine has been the rule. With his hip-shooting tendencies, Ky is likely to continue to take ill-advised actions from time to time such as his breach of relations with France but it is just possible that he will be able to create a new outlook favorable to getting things done.

The unhappy event of the week was, of course, the execution of Sergeant Bennett on June 24 and the bombing of the My Canh restaurant on the following day. In combination, these two events constitute the bloodiest Viet Cong atrocity which we have suffered and forecast a new technique of further brutalities with the perpetrators shielded by threats of reprisals against U.S. prisoners. It was this prospect which led the U.S. Mission to recommend that Hanoi be held responsible and be made to pay a price for this incident. It seemed to us that the enemy had escalated and by the rules of the game we should respond—otherwise we would seem to accept this kind of thing as an inevitable new way of life. I have not yet received an indication of the countervailing reasons which led to the contrary decision in Washington but hope to receive them in due course.

Military activities picked up during the week with renewed indications of Viet Cong offensive intentions in Kontum Province. Commanders in that area are being faced with the difficult decision of abandoning minor towns under attack or of sending relief forces into areas favoring the ambushes of the enemy. While the former decision is most distasteful to a military commander, there will be cases, I am sure, when the shortage of ARVN units will angle [argue?]strongly for it.

While the number and intensity of Viet Cong incidents were increasing, Viet Cong harassment of communications routes continued to the point that all major routes leading into II Corps are now closed. As a result, we will be obliged to use airlift to assure the delivery of essential military and civilian supplies.

Up to now, General Ky has only been aware of the air war and is now learning the hard facts of the ground campaign. As I reported in Embtel 4422,2 he has appealed to me for additional U.S. ground forces to tide over the monsoon offensive period. I have agreed to have General Westmoreland and the Vietnamese High Command make an estimate to determine where we want to be militarily at the end of the calendar year and what forces will be required to get us there. This should be a useful planning exercise requiring the Vietnamese to face hard facts which they have sometimes preferred to ignore.

As suggested above, the economic situation is becoming difficult in the face of Viet Cong interference with road and river transport. This situation, added to the hoarding activities of rice merchants, has presented the new government with a threat of a serious rice shortage. It appears to have won a short-term victory by threatening the profiteers with shooting and at the same time offering modest price increases, a deal which has obtained the promise of delivery of 50,000 tons for the government stockpile. This action meets the immediate problem but Mr. Killen will wish to discuss the longer term aspects during his consultations in Washington next week.

While the economic outlook for the government is far from clear, we are impressed by the competence and motivation of the economic members of the new Cabinet. If they are kept in place a few months, we think we can make progress with them.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 6:16 a.m. and passed to the White House. McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this telegram to the President on June 30 with a covering memorandum in which he noted that the important aspects of the message were the “hard military and economic questions” outlined by Taylor. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV, Memos (C))

2 Document 29.

33. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 33. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, June 30, 1965.

SUBJECT

France in Vietnam, 1954, and the U.S. in Vietnam, 1965—A Useful Analogy?

It has been suggested in some quarters that the United States today finds itself in a position in Vietnam similar to that of the French in 1954. One implication is that we must expect an outcome to our present policy similar to that which befell the French in their defeat and withdrawal of that year.

The actual content and applicability of this analogy are discussed in the paragraphs that follow.

1. Vietnam in 1954

A. The Political Scene

The central fact of French involvement in Vietnam was the persistent seven-year effort to re-establish French colonial rule. French forces were pitted against a Communist-led revolution for national independence; at no point did France offer Vietnam the alternative of non-Communist independence.

The former Emperor Bao Dai served as the political facade for France's effort to maintain control through a Mandarin elite. Saigon cabinets came and went, while vested interests among Vietnamese and Frenchmen jockeyed for power; but little progress was made toward forming a government capable of rallying Vietnamese nationalist allegiance.

B. The Military Scene

By early 1953, Viet Minh forces comprised seven regular infantry divisions, with independent regiments equal in strength to two additional divisions—a total of nine divisions. In numbers, the Viet Minh had about 125,000 regulars, 75,000 full-time regional and provincial troops, and 150,000 part-time guerrillas—a total of 350,000 men.

To combat these forces, the French had committed 175,000 regulars (54,000 of whom were native Frenchmen, the rest Legionnaires, Africans, etc.) and 55,000 auxiliaries, plus a naval contingent of 5,000, an Air Force contingent of 10,000 and 225,000 local forces of the three Indo-China states—a total of 470,000 men.

By 1952, eight percent of France's national budget was annually allocated to the Indochina war; in 1952-53 nearly 6,000 French and Legionnaire troops were killed, as well as 7,730 of their Vietnamese allies.

These impressive statistics imply heavy conventional engagements. In early 1950 the Viet Minh had shifted from guerrilla to conventional warfare, and for the next four years large-scale assaults—ranging upward to 14-battalion strikes—were not uncommon. In 1952 a three-division assault in one province forced the withdrawal of over 20,000 French troops.

By 1953 the French were generally engaged in a holding action; the brunt of their forces were tied to defensive duties, and the prospects for a military victory were nil. They had largely retreated to the Red River Delta in the North, some key towns in the Center, and the region around Saigon in the South. Only the equivalent of three divisions were actually available for offensive operations.

By 1954 the war's unpopularity at home had brought mounting pressure for negotiation. The Geneva Conference was already under way by the time of France's spectacular tactical defeat at Dien Bien Phu on May 7, 1954.

2. Vietnam in 1965

A. The Political Scene

The two central facts of the South Vietnam situation today are the Viet Cong/Viet Minh struggle for control and the process of non-Communist social and political revolution. U.S. forces are present in rapidly growing numbers to help resist the Communists at the request of successive Saigon governments.

Since Diem's fall, power in the urban South has been passing from the predominantly Catholic and French-educated elite to a more “Vietnamese,” militantly nationalistic and potentially xenophobic group of which the political bonzes, students, and certain young generals are prime examples. While the Communists are seeking to exploit this revolutionary ferment, it remains something quite apart from the Viet Cong insurgency. Those who aspire to lead the revolution claim that, unless it is successful, the Viet Cong insurgency cannot be defeated.

This shift in the alignment of fundamental forces is responsible for much of the political turbulence of the urban scene. It is a process that involves the striking of new power balances in the midst of a war and in the absence of parliamentary traditions or institutions for the channeling of political conflict. Despite their deep antagonisms, neither the Buddhists nor Catholics have acquired political dominance, with the result that each can check but not cancel the power of the other. The same is true of the myriad of other political factions pressing their own interests.

While frequent changes in governments have had a debilitating effect on political and administrative stability, as well as on government efforts to create a national consciousness for support of the war effort, there remains an impressive resiliency among the Vietnamese people and their traditional way of life which is little affected by the cabinet changes in Saigon.

Nevertheless, the most significant element of stability and strength, insofar as the struggle against Communist insurgency is concerned, remains the external factor of U.S. military, economic and political support. Without it, the country would quickly succumb to Communist domination.

B. The Military Scene

The Viet Cong probably controls somewhat more than 3 million Vietnamese in half the total rural area of the country. The GVN continues to control rural areas inhabited by an estimated 4.4 million. The remaining rural inhabitants, some 5.4 million, are subject to various stages of governmental pacification, or else not controlled by either side.

Viet Cong regulars, now estimated at 64,600, are full-time, professional soldiers organized in identified units of up to regimental strength. They are for the most part well trained and equipped. The regulars are distinct from an estimated 80,000 to 100,000 irregular Viet Cong who operate as guerrillas and self-defense militia troops. Another 30,000 armed political personnel staff the Viet Cong's party and administrative apparatus. The military activist figure may therefore be as high as 194,000.

The Viet Cong regular force has the capability of mounting large-scale actions well above present levels of activity. Such actions could theoretically involve as many as nine simultaneous attacks in regimental strength; even a series of coordinated, widespread attacks of lesser magnitude could seriously tax South Vietnamese ability to respond with the limited general reserve battalions available.

But the Viet Cong regular battalions vary widely in their combat effectiveness. Some are battle-tested veterans, while others are known to include relatively poorly trained young recruits or recently infiltrated North Vietnamese draftees with minimal training and little or no combat experience.

It is not clear whether the Viet Cong will sustain their currently stepped-up pace, whether present activity is the forerunner of a major offensive, or whether Viet Cong plans have been set back by increased U.S. air activity and troop support. The concentration of Viet Cong forces in northern South Vietnam suggests Kontum, Pleiku or other GVN interior strongholds as their likely targets for a major victory, possibly accompanied by an attempt to drive to the coast from their own inland strongholds, thereby cutting South Vietnam in two.

Arrayed against the Viet Cong is the South Vietnamese Army, numbering approximately 220,000 out of the total armed forces of roughly 250,000 men.

The ARVN is capable of maintaining internal security in the major population centers, in some outlying areas, and along selected lines of communications. While its combat capabilities are affected by frequent command changes at top echelons, insufficient numbers of aggressive leaders and poor but improving logistics, the ARVN is well supplied with U.S. arms and equipment and has become gradually more effective in guerrilla operations. The ARVN, with continuing U.S. military support, has the capacity to prevent a Viet Cong military victory.

In alliance with the ARVN are the U.S. forces in Vietnam which now approach 70,000—a combined US/GVN total of 320,000.

Remaining in the background throughout the present conflict is the seasoned regular army of North Vietnam, numbering over 300,000 men.

3. France in 1954

Two key aspects of France's relation to the Indochina war in 1954 were the war's acute unpopularity and French political instability.

France was never united or consistent in her prosecution of the war in Indochina. The war was not popular in France itself, was actively opposed by many on the left, and was cynically used by others for domestic political ends.

The Viet Minh paid careful attention to, drew considerable comfort and encouragement from, not infrequently made good use of these French domestic political factors. (Ho Chi Minh's political and negotiating tactics during the 1945-46 period, in fact, were heavily influenced by his belief that the Communists would soon come to power in France.)

For a long time, Paris tried to pretend that the war was not a war but a “police action.” Not until July 1952 was the legal status of “veteran” given to Frenchmen who had served in Indochina, and the National Assembly never did permit conscripts to be posted to the Indochina theater.

The ambiguous legal status of the conflict enabled French Communists to carry their opposition to the point of sabotage without incurring the legal charge of treason. Successive French governments had to contend with concerted and organized domestic opposition; resolutions favoring negotiation and early withdrawal were frequently proposed and occasionally passed by non-Communist parties. Leak and counter leak was an accepted domestic political tactic, and, as a result, even highly classified reports or orders pertaining to the war were often published verbatim in the pages of political journals.

Pressures for negotiation and settlement mounted steadily in 1953, with a number of prominent politicians—especially Pierre Mendes-France—pushing such themes with vigor. The January 1954 Berlin conference gave new impetus to this pressure, and by February 18 it was decided that a conference should be held in Geneva in April to consider both Korea and Indochina.

Dien Bien Phu fell on the day before the opening of the Indochina phase of the Geneva Conference. Had Paris had the will to continue the fight, replacements for that battle's losses could have been sent from France, and the Indochina war might have continued for months if not years.

Paris lacked the will, however, and the defeat at Dien Bien Phu made the French Government anxious to disengage as soon as possible. The fall of the Laniel cabinet on June 12 and the advent of Mendes-France as Premier on June 18 hastened the conclusion of a settlement.

4. The United States in 1965

The central themes of U.S. opinion regarding Vietnam appear to be considerable concern (over U.S. casualties, U.S. involvement, Saigon's political instability, the risks of general war, the use of air strikes and napalm, etc.) but general support for the Administration.

In general, the public appears unenthusiastic but reconciled to our role in this conflict. While there is widespread questioning and uneasiness about the way in which we may be playing that role, the public as a whole seems to realize that the role must be played. Furthermore, open skepticism as to our tactics subsides at times of sharp crisis in the situation.

The most articulate critics of our present policy in Vietnam have been elements within the academic community and church organizations. Although usually a minority within their own groups, they have stimulated extensive worry and inquiry in the nation as a whole. With the end of the academic year, this protest movement has temporarily subsided.

Meanwhile, the Government's negotiatory posture since April 7th, and the apparent intransigence of the Communists, has made it more difficult to advocate persuasive alternatives to Washington's current track. Criticism continues to be focused on the air strikes, however, and on the U.S. Government's apparent refusal to consider negotiations with the NLF.

The latest Harris Poll (June 28) shows that 62% of the public expresses overall approval of the President's handling of the Vietnam crisis. Well over 70% of the people believe that Southeast Asia will go Communist if we do not stand firm in Vietnam, and they approve the President's call for unconditional negotiations. Twenty-three percent are not sure about bombings in the North or the sending of more troops during the monsoon season. However, of those with an opinion, almost 80 percent approve of the bombing and over 60 percent believe we should send more troops. Skepticism as to the future of the conflict and our right to be involved in it are expressed by the fact that 35 percent of the people believe that China has the right to ask us out of an area so close to her borders and 32 percent believe we might get involved in a land war we can't win.

The latest Gallup Poll (June 9) showed that the percentage of people who believed that we should continue our present course of action climbed from 13 to 20 percent in the last month. Those who believe that we should increase military action dropped from 23 to 21 percent and those who believed we should stop military action stayed virtually the same with only a one point rise to 26 percent. The number of those expressing no opinion dropped from 35 to 28 percent.

With some exceptions, most editorialists and columnists support the President in his determination to keep Vietnam independent. This support for the broad objective is tempered by a noticeable strain of criticism over a “lack of frankness” on the part of the Administration in discussing the depth of our commitment. Such criticism was most discernible after the seeming contradiction between the Department of State and the White House over the combat role of U.S. troops and after the Government's handling of the B-52 affair.

Those who oppose the Government in the press also seem to be presently concentrating on the demand that the U.S. negotiate directly with the Viet Cong and, to a lesser extent, that the bombings should be stopped again. In general, however, most newspapers appear convinced that the Administration is sincere in its desire to settle the conflict by negotiations and that the intransigence is on the Communists' side.

The most vocal current comment on the Vietnam situation is coming from the Congress. Senators Morse and Gruening remain convinced that we must pull out. There is another group, somewhat larger, which could be termed “reluctant realists” whose viscera says get out but whose heads tell them the present policy is unavoidable. Senators Mansfield, Church and Fulbright seem to fall in this category. Once again, the problem is one of offering a plausible alternative that would assure the existence of a non-Communist South Vietnam.

The most recent Congressional development is the attack spearheaded by Representative Melvin Laird who states that unless we go for total victory we shouldn't commit U.S. ground troops. He threatens withdrawal of Republican support in the House. It is too early to judge the appeal of this maneuver.

Despite obvious Congressional disquiet, Congressional support has been demonstrated in the 512-2 vote last August on the Southeast Asia Resolution and in the votes approving the President's request for a supplemental Vietnam appropriation (408-7 and 88-3).

5. Conclusion

It would seem clear from the foregoing analysis that despite superficial similarities, the situation faced by France in Vietnam in 1954 is not fundamentally analogous to that faced by the U.S. in Vietnam in 1965.

France in 1954 was a colonial power seeking to reimpose its overseas rule, out of tune with Vietnamese nationalism, deeply divided in terms of French domestic opinion, politically unstable at home, the victim of seven years of warfare—the last four of them marked by military engagements on a scale far greater than anything yet encountered by the U.S. and the GVN.

The U.S. in 1965 is responding to the call of a people under Communist assault, a people undergoing a non-Communist national revolution; neither our power nor that of our adversaries has been fully engaged as yet. At home we remain politically strong and, in general, politically united. Options, both military and political, remain to us that were no longer available to the French.

McGeorge Bundy2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. Confidential.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

34. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency 34. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1

Washington, June 30, 1965.

SUBJECT

Comments on the Secretary of Defense's 26 June 1965 Memorandum, “Program of Expanded Military and Political Moves with Respect to Vietnam”2

(Comments are keyed to the numbered sections in the subject memorandum)

1. We are in general accord with the main thesis of the basic paper that something like his “Course 3” is necessary if US objectives in Indochina are to be achieved or, indeed, if the US and its South Vietnamese allies are to avoid the real risk of a major political-military defeat in the next several months. We have reservations about some of the assumptions on which the argument of the memorandum seems to be based, as well as about certain specific actions advocated therein.

2. (Introduction) US objective as stated in the first sentence of the basic paper Introduction is very limited—“to force the DRV to the conference table.” On its face, this seems to fall far short of US objectives since the holding of a conference itself gives no indication of the settlement that might come out of the conference. We wonder whether it was intended actually to narrow previously stated US objectives, or whether the formulation is simply a foreshortened statement. It is our understanding that US policy in Vietnam has had the three-fold end of (1) inducing, or forcing, the DRV to reduce the level of Hanoi-instigated, supported and directed insurgency in South Vietnam (this will require a combination of suasion, punitive pressure on North Vietnam itself and inflicting defeats on its insurgent forces in the field in the South) and, (2) building up the political and military strength of a non-Communist government in South Vietnam so that, (3) the US can eventually curtail its extraordinary commitment to and involvement in Vietnamese affairs but, when it withdraws, can leave behind a regime capable of coping with the level of politico-military pressures and problems likely to be prevailing at that time. At some point a conference may be a useful step in this process, but it is not an end, in itself, and probably negotiations when and if they take place will only ratify an equilibrium established by military and political power.

We agree the VC may now be winning. They clearly believe they are. We doubt if it will be possible to demonstrate “to the DRV/VC that the odds are against their winning” unless and until they are in fact losing—which, as the memorandum rightly notes, is not now the case. We cannot realistically hope “to prove to the VC that they cannot win in SVN and therefore to turn the tide of the war” except by actually beginning to turn the tide against the VC. Obviously we cannot do this if US/GVN forces sustain a series of shattering setbacks during the next few weeks. To have any hope of turning the tide we must, at a minimum, avoid defeat and, under present conditions, some actions along the lines recommended in the memorandum are patently essential if defeat is to be avoided. If we succeed in not losing the war during this monsoon season (through October, say), what we will have won is a chance to settle down to a protracted struggle to contain Communist pressures from the North and help build a stable, viable independent South Vietnam.

3. (I-A) It appears obviously essential to provide a breathing spell in South Vietnam while the government of South Vietnam and its armed forces can prepare themselves to once again apply the political and military counter-insurgency measures necessary to put the VC on the defensive. It follows, therefore, that the augmentation and deployment of US forces in South Vietnam must be adequate beyond question to prevent an ARVN collapse this year.

The total in-country military effect of this added US force commitment would of course depend largely on the effective use of the 49 ARVN battalions freed for other duties as well as on the use of the additional US and other foreign battalions. If foreign troops are given extensive pacification duties in heavily populated areas, the military results will probably be negligible and the political results adverse. If these troops are used to provide basic strategic defense (hence reassurance against total defeat), to assault fixed and certain concentrations of Communist regulars, and to bail out Vietnamese troops in difficulty, the results should be good. The more directly and effectively US forces can be used in combat against major concentrations and base areas of the Viet Cong, the sooner can it be demonstrated that VC/DRV efforts to win a decisive victory this year are fruitless. It should not be expected, however, that the Viet Cong will necessarily stand and fight against superior forces. Rather they may drop backward a step to smaller-scale harassment and hit-and-run raids in which they do not encounter superior US combat units. Not until they themselves are being hounded, harassed and hurt in many areas without prospect of relief will there be a likelihood of the VC/DRV seeking a respite via the conference table or by any other device.

We would not normally presume to comment on the exact level and composition of forces required but we are inclined to side with MACV's views on the undesirability of tying too many US forces to the static defense of base installations. The added forces proposed would be of obvious value in giving the thinly stretched ARVN a strategic reserve it does not now have, screening the DMZ, and generally boosting Vietnamese morale, capabilities, effectiveness and fighting spirits. The net effect of the proposed B-52 sorties could, in our opinion, have a significant influence if promptly and thoroughly followed up on the ground in the areas attacked.

4. (I-B) The proposed expansion of aerial attacks on North Vietnam is probably broader than necessary, in view of our conviction that the issue must ultimately be settled in the South, and in view of some of the risks involved. The economic effects of mining the approaches to northern ports, in particular, are not in our view sufficient and in any case not likely to be quickly enough felt to warrant the awkward international political complications such action would entail. There is a better argument for choosing targets whose destruction would immediately put domestic political pressure on the Hanoi regime, e.g., dock facilities and harbor dredges, power plants and industrial targets, as well as do economic damage to Hanoi's military effort. Destroying the Haiphong harbor dredges alone would, in a short time, have a constricting effect on operation of the port, and in about six months make it virtually unusable because of silting. Moreover, if we increase the pressure on NVN as visualized, one of the quickest ways to signal our serious intent as well as protect our attacking forces would be to destroy the SAM sites and major airfields. While a major Chinese and/or Soviet response cannot be totally ruled out, the risk will not necessarily be increased by pressing our limited-objective attacks on NVN.

5. (II-A) While we approve of political gestures indicating our willingness to make a reasonable settlement in Vietnam, most of the initiatives mentioned have been tried to no avail. A serious, official high-level approach to the Soviets would almost certainly be rebuffed since it would expose them to such severe Chinese Communist criticism. This kind of approach could not be successful until we have demonstrated we can stop and turn back the VC/DRV attack and are able to face down Chinese Communist threats. Whenever this has been done and the Communist side has had enough in Vietnam, it will find a variety of doors open to a conference room and the Soviets may then assist them to pass through. We stand to gain by keeping the doors open, as we have, but not by over-stressing our anxiety to confer.

6. (II-B) The need for this type of initiative within South Vietnam is well established. The two proposals suggested are good starters but of themselves hardly scratch the surface. We feel far more attention must be devoted to the kind of civil and political programs which will be required not only to bring the insurgency under permanent control (even assuming military success), but also to permit South Vietnam to stand successfully against the Communists in the event that a negotiated settlement could be reached and the bulk of US forces withdrawn. It is certain that, in the wake of any such settlement, the Communists would continue their efforts against the Saigon government, either by political means or through outright violation of agreements. There is little point in spending US lives and treasure to obtain a conference or settlement which, in the absence of a viable non-Communist state, must lead either to US re-intervention or a subsequent Communist takeover.

7. (III) Over the longer term we doubt if the Communists are likely to change their basic strategy in Vietnam (i.e., aggressive and steadily mounting insurgency) unless and until two conditions prevail: (1) they are forced to accept a situation in the war in the South which offers them no prospect of an early victory and no grounds for hope that they can simply outlast the US and (2) North Vietnam itself is under continuing and increasingly damaging punitive attack. So long as the Communists think they scent the possibility of an early victory (which is probably now the case), we believe that they will persevere and accept extremely severe damage to the North. Conversely, if North Vietnam itself is not hurting, Hanoi's doctrinaire leaders will probably be ready to carry on the Southern struggle almost indefinitely. If, however, both of the conditions outlined above should be brought to pass, we believe Hanoi probably would, at least for a period of time, alter its basic strategy and course of action in South Vietnam.

It might do so in several ways. Going for a conference as a political way of gaining a respite from attack would be one. Alternatively Hanoi might reduce the level of insurgent activity in the hopes that this would force the US to stop its punishment of the North but not prevent the US and GVN from remaining subject to wearying harassment in the South. Or, Hanoi might order the VC to suspend operations in the hopes that in a period of temporary tranquillity, domestic and international opinion would force the US to disengage without destroying the VC apparatus or the roots of VC strength. Finally, Hanoi might decide that the US/GVN will to fight could still be broken and the tide of war turned back again in favor of the VC by launching a massive PAVN assault on the South. This is a less likely option in the circumstances we have posited, but still a contingency for which the US must be prepared.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, 7/65 SVN Trip and Memos—Misc. Papers. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent to McNamara by Raborn, under cover of a memorandum indicating that the comments were in response to McNamara's request.

2 McNamara circulated a June 26 draft of his memorandum, prepared by McNaughton, to several senior Presidential advisers for comment. For text of the memorandum, as revised by McNamara and sent to the President on July 1, see Document 38.

35. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 35. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of Defense McNamara1

Washington, June 30, 1965.

This memorandum is designed to raise questions and not to answer them, and I am afraid it may sound unhelpful.

The draft memorandum to the President of June 262 seems to me to have grave limitations.

1. It proposes a doubling of our presently planned strength in South Vietnam, a tripling of air effort in the north, and a new and very important program of naval quarantine. It proposes this new land commitment at a time when our troops are entirely untested in the kind of warfare projected. It proposes greatly extended air action when the value of the air action we have taken is sharply disputed. It proposes naval quarantine by mining at a time when nearly everyone agrees the real question is not in Hanoi, but in South Vietnam. My first reaction is that this program is rash to the point of folly.

2. The memorandum itself points out that the test of the success of any program in the near future will be in South Vietnam. I agree with this view. But I think it far from clear that these drastic changes will have commensurate significance in this decisive field. In particular, I see no reason to suppose that the Viet Cong will accommodate us by fighting the kind of war we desire. Fragmentary evidence so far suggests that they intend to avoid direct contact with major US forces and concentrate their efforts against the Vietnamese Army. I think the odds are that if we put in 40-50 battalions with the missions here proposed, we shall find them only lightly engaged and ineffective in hot pursuit.

3. The paper does not discuss the question of agreements with the Vietnamese Government before we move to a 200 thousand-man level. The apparent basis for doing this is simply the increasing weakness of Vietnamese forces. But this is a slippery slope toward total US responsibility and corresponding fecklessness on the Vietnamese side.

4. The paper also omits examination of the upper limit of US liability. If we need 200 thousand men now for these quite limited missions, may we not need 400 thousand later? Is this a rational course of action? Is there any real prospect that US regular forces can conduct the anti-guerrilla operations which would probably remain the central problem in South Vietnam?

5. The suggestion of a naval quarantine is particularly drastic and highly important. I think it should be separated from the rest of the paper. A blockade by mining would have both greater risks and much greater impact. It needs a kind of study it has not had (as far as I know) before it is seriously proposed.

6. This paper omits certain additional possibilities that should be considered before a specific program of pressure is adopted: (1) It is within our power to give much more drastic warnings to Hanoi than any we have yet given. If General Eisenhower is right in his belief that it was the prospect of nuclear attack which brought an armistice in Korea, we should at least consider what realistic threat of larger action is available to us for communication to Hanoi. A full interdiction of supplies to North Vietnam by air and sea is a possible candidate for such an ultimatum. These are weapons which may be more useful to us if we do not have to use them.

(2) The paper passes by the possibility that stronger interdiction of north-south traffic might be possible by combining land, sea, and air action. I am not persuaded by what I have heard in casual comments of the impossibility of tightening these pressures by combined action. Is there no prospect that special forces could hold critical strong points in Laos along the Ho Chi Minh Trail? Is it impossible to tighten controls along the DMZ? Have we really done all we can in naval patrol?

7. The timing of an expanded effort needs examination. It is not at all clear that we should make these kinds of decisions early in July with the very fragmentary evidence available to us now on a number of critical points: the tactics of the VC, the prospects of the Ky Government, and the effectiveness of US forces in these new roles.

8. Any expanded program needs to have a clear sense of its own internal momentum. The paper does not face this problem. If US casualties go up sharply, what further actions do we propose to take or not to take? More broadly still, what is the real object of the exercise? If it is to get to the conference table, what results do we seek there? Still more brutally, do we want to invest 200 thousand men to cover an eventual retreat? Can we not do that just as well where we are?

McG. B.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, 7/65 SVN Trip and Memos—Misc. Papers. Top Secret.

2 See footnote 2, Document 34.

36. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 36. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, June 30, 1965, 7:15 p.m.

RE

Contingency Planning on Vietnam

We have had two long meetings on the planning of the political and military alternatives that grew out of our meeting with you last week.2 Jack Valenti has given us time at 11:30 on Friday for a meeting with you, and your night reading for tomorrow will have the papers for Friday's discussion.3 Meanwhile, I have one further thought that you may wish to be turning over in your mind between now and then.

During this week I have had a review made of the economic and informational situation in Vietnam and around the world. It is extraordinarily clear that any further action turns on what we can get the Ky government to do.

In this situation, the quality and energy of our team in Saigon becomes decisive. Max Taylor is heavily preoccupied with the military situation, and the rest of his team is not geared to a full-steam operation with the new cabinet.

So I begin to wonder if it would not be wise to settle hard on the plan for a Lodge-Sullivan team, and plan to get them out there together as soon as Lodge is briefed and Sullivan's successor is chosen. I have already told my brother Bill that Sullivan is the generally preferred choice for this job, and that he should accordingly find the right man quickly for Vientiane. But the decision on the timing of the Taylor-Lodge change is obviously one which only you can make. The more I think about it, the more I think the time of Lodge's takeover should be nearer 1 August than 1 September.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XI. Secret.

2 The meeting “last week” was presumably the meeting held at 5:50 p.m. on June 23; see Documents 15 and 16. The two “long meetings” have not been identified with certainty, but one may have been a meeting held at 3:10 p.m. on June 29 in the Department of State, which is described in Secretary Rusk's Appointment Book as “with Sec. McNamara et al. (re Ball-McNamara paper).” (Johnson Library)

3 See Documents 43 and 44.

37. Letter From the Ambassador to Vietnam (Taylor) to Prime Minister Ky 37. Letter From the Ambassador to Vietnam (Taylor) to Prime Minister Ky1

Saigon, July 1, 1965.

Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

We of the United States Mission were very much impressed with the spirit and substance of your twenty-six point statement promulgated on June 19,2 which we assume is to serve as the overall guideline for impending actions by your government. Because we have been involved in many of the past plans and programs of the government which bear upon the objectives stated in this proclamation, I have asked the chiefs of United States agencies to review the twenty-six point statement and indicate their judgment as to which of the on-going plans and programs should be given top priority to accelerate the attainment of the objectives which you seek. This letter records some of their views and my own as to what needs to be done first to get decisive results fastest.

As I see it, the basic problem facing your government in the coming months is to increase the military effectiveness of the Vietnamese Armed Forces in relation to that of the Viet Cong while building the national economy and the national morale. We are deeply impressed that security is the first essential for the political, social and economic progress of your country and that the most praiseworthy efforts to achieve progress in these fields are of marginal utility unless a minimum level of security is established. Hence, we would say that in establishing priorities, number one should go to those measures which will increase the relative military effectiveness in the next few months.

If this point of view is accepted, we would then place at the top of our list measures to remedy the critical lack of trained combat ready units in the RVNAF, particularly in the Army. The objective of the monsoon Viet Cong offensive is clearly to destroy as many ARVN units as possible; the countermeasures should be to punish the Viet Cong, to create new ARVN units and to rehabilitate those depleted in battle as rapidly as possible. Of the latter, there are presently 4 regiments and 9 battalions which are combat ineffective by reason of severe understrength which is the result of a high desertion rate as well as of enemy action. Hence, the great importance of the plans under way to increase the attractiveness of the military service and to bring down the desertion rate. The plans as we know them are well conceived, but the effect will depend upon carefully checked implementation. If the intake of manpower can be increased and desertion losses reduced, it may be possible, as General Thieu thinks, to increase the manpower goals for early 1966.

To one of your military training, I need hardly comment upon the importance of good leadership as a prerequisite to improve military effectiveness. Somehow we need to learn better how to identify and reward the competent leader and identify and replace the incompetent. With regard to the latter, I have heard with regret of instances of officer failure in the presence of the enemy during recent battles. It would seem to me consistent with the state of war which the government has announced to take drastic disciplinary action against the officers who misbehave on the battlefield. The punishment of a few flagrant cases should have a salutary effect throughout the Army.

It is important not only to find competent leadership but to keep it in place when found so that the presence of a strong leader may achieve a lasting effect on the unit which he commands, or on the post which he occupies. Since the fall of the Diem government, there has been a constant turnover of personnel both military and civilian which has had a most adverse effect upon the war effort. I would hope that your government would recognize the self-defeating nature of this practice and resolve to keep competent persons in place.

In closing these comments on increased military effectiveness, let me say that my government will in the future as in the past continue to help with air, advisory and logistic support, with military equipment and with United States combat forces, the latter to assist in meeting the manpower shortage during this coming period.

While recognizing the prime importance, in the short run, of increased military effectiveness, the correlated problems on the economic front bear heavily on both the short-and longer-term prospects for Vietnamese success in the present struggle. Like most countries in time of war, the South Vietnamese government is obliged to face a mounting budgetary deficit. Your experts and ours are in constant contact on this subject and have always worked effectively together. Thus far, they have protected the country from the potentially disastrous results of serious inflation, but I know that they are constantly concerned over its possibilities and will need your support in carrying out the anti-inflation measures which they may recommend from time to time.

As has been illustrated in the recent threatened shortage of rice, there is a serious and growing problem in the distribution of commodities within South Viet-Nam. This difficulty arises both from the operations of the Viet Cong in interrupting land and river communications, and also from the hoarding and profiteering operations which you have vigorously condemned. Thus, the problem requires attention on two fronts; first, in the improvement of sea communications out of reach by the Viet Cong, and second, in the form of legal and police measures to discourage and eventually to break up hoarding and black market practices. The rice procurement and distribution agency which you have in mind is an important measure of such a program which should also include the further development of port capacities as another essential element.

We are of the opinion that a great deal can be done to improve the tax collection system by bringing about a more effective collection of existing taxes and instituting certain additional taxes and customs levies. Such measures would be exactly in line with your announced intention of imposing an austere wartime regime upon the country.

I believe the political value of longer-term economic and social development objectives which your government could espouse and support can be very great indeed. The key people in your economic and social ministries are well aware of the need for realistic but imaginative planning in these fields. Our people would welcome the opportunity to collaborate and assist in all possible ways. The timing of our efforts is most important because we should not attempt too much too fast to the detriment of the immediate war effort. But we should be ready to take action at the appropriate time on such an important matter as land tenure which could provide the theme for a most important reform program. I have been impressed with the complexity of this problem and the requirement for adequate time and careful preparation before embarking upon extensive measures. While most authorities seem to be in agreement that many improvements are possible and necessary, I believe they would also recommend against the diversion of the necessary administrative effort in a nation-wide reform program at this time. However, it is entirely possible to initiate certain pilot operations in a few selected provinces from which much experience could be drawn for future use. Such limited actions appear worthy of inclusion in your priority list in order to keep this idea alive.

Now may I say a few words about the need to maintain the national morale in these critical times? Military and economic successes are not likely to occur or be sufficient in themselves if the national morale should begin to fail. While no one would argue this truism, it is not easy to decide what specific measures should be taken in first priority to maintain morale. Personally, I would be inclined to recommend focussing attention on the public relations field at the start. Most American observers would say that there has long been a basic problem of how to effect better communication between the government on the one hand and the people, the international world and the Viet Cong on the other. Better communication in turn is divisible into two parts, the technical and the substantial. On the technical side, we have and are continued to be prepared to assist in improving the equipment and organization in the radio and press fields. Also, when the time is propitious, we are ready to work with you at the problems incidental to the introduction of television. However, these technical improvements are of little avail unless you find persuasive spokesmen for your government able to communicate persuasive themes effectively to the three audiences which I have mentioned above.

In communicating with the international world, your government has long been suffering from a dearth of official representation. At the present time, I am told that you have only seven Ambassadors in place in overseas posts. Certainly this reduced representation obliges Viet-Nam to labor under serious disadvantages in defending its case before the outside world. I have several times discussed this matter with Foreign Minister Tran Van Do and am sure that he shares my views of the importance of recruiting and placing able Ambassadors as soon as possible.

In speaking to the Viet Cong, a revitalized Chieu Hoi program might accomplish significant results in detaching the increasing number who are becoming uncertain of the outcome of the struggle. The month of May was the most successful in the history of Chieu Hoi, when over 1,000 rallies came over to our side. It is important to act quickly to take advantage of this trend and also to offset any impression that the importance of Chieu Hoi has been downgraded in losing its ministerial status.

Apart from this matter of better communication with the people, there are a number of other areas which you have mentioned in your twenty-six points which will bear importantly on national morale. A nation-wide anti-corruption program is not only possible but most important for purposes of morale. We have some very practical ideas on ways of raising the ethics and conduct of the public service particularly with regard to corruption which we would be happy to put at your disposition.

You have shown a keen awareness of the need to help the war veterans, widows and orphans, a concern which all of us applaud. Justice toward these sufferers of the war will not only raise morale but will also supplement the programs for increasing the Armed Forces and controlling desertion.

The last morale-building act which I should like to mention is one which I have raised before. It is the simple matter of cleaning up Saigon and other principal cities. Cleanliness is a mark of pride and self-respect, qualities which normally go with good morale. Could we not demonstrate these two qualities in a practical way by cleaning up the streets and the alleys of this beautiful capital and of the other principal towns of Viet-Nam?

This has been an overly long letter, Mr. Prime Minister, but I wanted to convey to you some of our serious thoughts on the priorities which are required in the present emergency to meet the goals you have set for your government. We have resources available to support most of the measures suggested herein and are most anxious to be of help in any respect. Please let me know if there is any action which you would like from me or other members of the United States Mission.

Sincerely yours,

Maxwell D. Taylor3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 VIET S. Secret. Transmitted to the Department of State as Enclosure 1 of airgram A-6 from Saigon, July 2.

2 See footnote 3, Document 12.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Taylor signed the original.

38. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 38. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson1

Washington, July 1, 1965.

SUBJECT

Program of expanded military and political moves with respect to Vietnam

Introduction. Our objective is to create conditions for a favorable settlement by demonstrating to the VC/DRV that the odds are against their winning. Under present conditions, however, the chances of achieving this objective are small—and the VC are winning now—largely because the ratio of guerrilla to anti-guerrilla forces is unfavorable to the government. With this in mind, we must choose among three courses of action with respect to South Vietnam: (1) Cut our losses and withdraw under the best conditions that can be arranged; (2) continue at about the present level, with US forces limited to, say, 75,000, holding on and playing for the breaks while recognizing that our position will probably grow weaker; or (3) expand substantially the US military pressure against the Viet Cong in the South and the North Vietnamese in the North and at the same time launch a vigorous effort on the political side to get negotiations started. An outline of the third of these approaches follows.

I. Expanded military moves.

The following military moves should be taken together with the political initiatives in Part II below.

A. Inside South Vietnam. Increase US/GVN military strength in SVN enough to prove to the VC that they cannot win and thus to turn the tide of the war.

1. Increase combined US/GVN ground strength to the level required effectively to counter the current and likely VC ground strength.2 On the assumption that GVN strength holds its own, a decision should be made now to bring the US/3d-country deployments to 44 battalions within the next few months. Their mission would include hounding, harassing and hurting the VC should they elect not to stand and fight. General Westmoreland says that infusion of such forces with such missions on the schedule proposed “should re-establish the military balance by the end of December.”3 He continues that “it will not per se cause the enemy to back off.”4 General Westmoreland's recommendations are shown below:

MACV RECOMMENDED FOR 1965

III MAF 9 bn (2 due 7/5)

173d Abn Bde 2 bn

1st Inf Div 9 bn (3 due 7/15; 6 could arrive 9/1)

101st Abn Div 3 bn (due 7/28)

Air Mob Div 8 bn (due 9/1)

I MAF 3 bn (1 due 7/1; 2 could arrive in 12 days)

Total US 34 bn (175,000)

A/NZ 1 bn

ROK (or US?) 9 bn (could arrive approx. 10/15)

Total 44 bn

2. Deploy 13 additional US helicopter companies and 5 additional Chinook platoons to increase effectiveness of US/GVN forces.a

3. Deploy additional US artillery batteries and engineers to reinforce ARVN divisions and corps.

4. Carry out 800 B-52 sorties a month in strikes against VC havens (followed promptly by entry of ground-forces into the struck areas).

B. Against North Vietnam.5 While avoiding striking population and industrial targets not closely related to the DRV's supply of war material to the VC, we should announce to Hanoi and carry out actions to destroy such supplies and to interdict their flow into and out of North Vietnam.

1. Quarantine the movement of war supplies into North Vietnam—by sea, rail and road.

a. Mine the DRV harbors. Seaborne traffic accounts for 80% of the DRV foreign trade, including practically all POL, the single import most vital to the DRV (the DRV armed forces consume 40% of the POL and transportation most of the remainder). Sixty per cent of the bottoms are Free World under charter mainly to China, but almost all POL is carried by Communist tankers. Practically all of the seaborne traffic moves through four ports. Mining of those ports could be launched on 72 hours notice, and delayed fusing (three days) could be employed to permit ships time to exit after the fields were laid. A full mining effort to plant all fields would require 97 sorties; the fields could be sustained with 38 sorties per month.

b. Destroy rail and highway bridges leading from China to Hanoi. There are 15 highway, 5 railroad and 8 railroad/highway bridges north and east of Hanoi. The railroads now carry between 1600 and 1900 short tons per day. Roads to Hanoi from China can support considerable truck traffic. It would take approximately 1000 sorties to carry out strikes on the 28 bridges, with 85% probability of dropping one span in each case.

c. Conduct intensive armed reconnaissance of the LOCs from China.

2. Destroy the war-making supplies and facilities of North Vietnam wherever they may be located. There are 56 unstruck targets in this category—1 explosive plant, 1 airfield, 5 supply and ordnance depots, 7 ammunition depots, 9 POL storage, 12 military barracks/headquarters, 2 communications facilities, 6 naval base/port facilities, and 13 power plants. Approximately 1650 strike sorties would be required to attack all of these targets. About half of them would be suitable for B-52 attack. Only three are likely to lead to more than 100 civilian casualties under daylight alert conditions.

3. Interdict movement of war supplies within and out of North Vietnam by an expanded strike and armed reconnaissance program against LOCs west and south of Hanoi.

a. Expand strike program against bridges, ferries, railroads and roads. Other than 6 locks-and-dams targets, only 4 bridges and 4 railroad shops and yards remain unstruck in this category. These eight targets would require approximately 266 sorties. Two of them—both railroad yards in Hanoi—would probably result in more than 100 civilian casualties. Three of them—the two Hanoi railroad yards and the Yen Vien railroad yard—would be suitable for B-52 strike.

b. Expand armed reconnaissance against LOCs. These LOCs south and west of Hanoi, together with the LOCs north and east of Hanoi referred to in para 1c above, should be struck by 1000 sorties a week. This would increase the total strike-plus-armed recce sorties against North Vietnam from 1800 to 5000 a month. (Efforts should be continued in Laos to interdict the “trail” there, and at sea preventing infiltration by water.)

4. Be prepared to destroy airfields and SAM sites as necessary to accomplish the objectives of sub-paras 1-3 above.

C. In the United States. Even if US deployments to Vietnam are no more than 100,000 men, we should:

1. Call up selected reserve forces (approximately 100,000 men).

2. Extend tours of duty in all Services.

II. Expanded political moves.

Together with the above military moves, we should take the following political initiatives in order (a) to open a dialogue with Hanoi, Peking, and the VC looking toward a settlement in Vietnam, (b) to keep the Soviet Union from deepening its military involvement and support of North Vietnam until the time when settlement can be achieved, and (c) to cement the support for US policy by the US public, allies and friends, and to keep international opposition at a manageable level. While our approaches may be rebuffed until the tide begins to turn, they nevertheless should be made.

A. Political Initiatives.

1. Moscow. Place a high level US representative in contact with Moscow to discuss frankly and fully with Soviet leaders our intentions and our desire to find common ground to work with them rather than come into conflict. We would reiterate that US objectives are limited but at the same time we have a firm determination to achieve them. We would stress the dangers we see to both of us in Chinese expansion, and we would recognize the Soviet need to follow a course which does not destroy its leadership in the Communist world. We would press the Soviets to avoid any deeper involvement. We would emphasize that continuation of the military phase can only be harmful to the Communist cause and urge the Soviets to step in (perhaps with British Co-Chairman) to move the situation away from war and toward a peaceful settlement.

2. United Nations. As a prelude to expansion of the military effort, we should consider once more putting before the UN the Vietnam question for discussion with the Chicoms and North Vietnamese present. They will almost surely refuse to attend and will provide us with a better position for expanding military action; but if they accept we will have the prospect of negotiations without having stopped our bombing.

3. Other international forums. In all international forums and contacts, public and private, continue to demonstrate to the world who is responsible for the trouble in Vietnam and persuade them that our course of supporting the South, including bombings, must be accepted and if possible supported. Whenever we can provide further demonstrations of Communist intransigence and refusal to treat reasonably on this question, this will strengthen our case.

4. Geneva Conference. US should propose a Geneva Conference of all world powers (including France) with the subject, “Peace in Southeast Asia.”

5. NLF and DRV. GVN—and US after consultation with the GVN—should initiate contacts with the Liberation Front and North Vietnam, making clear a readiness to discuss ways and means of achieving settlement in Vietnam.

6. Chicoms. If there is any sign of Chinese willingness to begin discussions, US should contact the Chinese to set forth US position including our limited objective and the dangers to China of continuation of the war, and should press the Chinese to bring the aggression against the South to an end.

7. UK, Canada, India, France, U Thant. Consult individually with the British, Canadians, U Thant, Indians, French and possibly other neutrals to enlist them in taking peace initiatives bilaterally, multilaterally or through international organizations however best calculated to bring about the participation of Communist Governments.

8. Other initiatives. In connection with paras 1-7 above, US and GVN would make it clear they stand ready to take any reasonable action which does not endanger their military posture which might improve the chances of success of any peace initiatives. This could include a bombing “pause.” It could include an explicit restatement of US intention of withdrawing from South Vietnam at the appropriate time, a South Vietnamese announcement of responsible treatment of NLF-VC personnel who remain in the South, emphasis on implementation of President's April 7 offer for economic development in South East Asia,6 etc.

B. Initiatives inside South Vietnam. Take steps to induce VC defections and to increase support for the Ky government—among other steps, these: 1. Economic program. Sharply expand program of economic aid in South Vietnam—including a major construction program, junk building, increased rice and pig output, improved distribution and marketing procedures.

2. Chieu Hoi program. Improve and expand Chieu Hoi program—with a good man in charge on the US side, and bounties, amnesties, work and educational opportunities, and other inducements.

III. Evaluation of the above program.

A. Domestic US reaction. Even though casualties will increase and the war will continue for some time, the United States public will support this course of action because it is a combined military-political program designed and likely to bring about a favorable solution to the Vietnam problem.

B. Communist reaction to the expanded programs.

1. Soviet. The Soviets can be expected to continue to contribute materiel and advisors to the North Vietnamese. Increased US bombing of Vietnam, including targets in Hanoi and Haiphong, SAM sites and airfields, and mining of North Vietnamese harbors, might oblige the Soviet Union to enter the contest more actively with volunteers and aircraft. This might result in minor encounters between US and Soviet personnel.

2. China. So long as no US or GVN troops invade North Vietnam and so long as no US or GVN aircraft attack Chinese territory, the Chinese probably will not send regular ground forces or aircraft into the war. However, the possibility of a more active Soviet involvement in North Vietnam might precipitate a Chinese introduction of land forces, probably dubbed volunteers, to preclude the Soviets' taking a pre-eminent position in North Vietnam.

3. North Vietnam. North Vietnam will not move towards the negotiating table until the tide begins to turn in the south. When that happens, they may seek to counter it by sending large numbers of men into South Vietnam.

4. Viet Cong. The VC, especially if they continue to take high losses, can be expected to depend increasingly upon the PAVN forces as the war moves into a more conventional phase; but they may find ways of continuing almost indefinitely their present intensive military, guerrilla and terror activities, particularly if reinforced with some regular PAVN units. A key question on the military side is whether POL, ammunition and cadres can be cut off and if they are cut off whether this really renders the Viet Cong impotent. A key question on the political side is whether any arrangement acceptable to us would be acceptable to the VC.

C. Estimate of success.

1. Militarily. The success of the above program from a military point of view turns on whether the increased effort stems the tide in the South; that in turn depends on two things—on whether the South Vietnamese hold their own in terms of numbers and fighting spirit, and on whether the US forces can be effective in a quick-reaction reserve role, a role in which they have not been tested. The number of US troops is too small to make a significant difference in the traditional 10-1 government-guerrilla formula, but it is not too small to make a significant difference in the kind of war which seems to be evolving in Vietnam—a “Third Stage” or conventional war in which it is easier to identify, locate and attack the enemy. (South Vietnam has 141 battalions as compared with an estimated equivalent number of VC battalions. The 44 US/3d country battalions mentioned above are the equivalent of 100 South Vietnamese battalions.)

2. Politically. It is frequently alleged that such a large expansion of US military personnel, their expanded military role (which would put them in close contact and offer some degree of control over South Vietnamese citizens), and the inevitable expansion of US voice in the operation of the GVN economy and facilities, command and government services will be unpopular; it is said that they could lead to the rejection of the government which supported this American presence, to an irresistible pressure for expulsion of the Americans, and to the greatly increased saleability of Communist propaganda. Whether these allegations are true, we do not know.

The political initiatives are likely to be successful in the early stages only to demonstrate US good faith; they will pay off toward an actual settlement only after the tide begins to turn (unless we lower our sights substantially). The tide almost certainly cannot begin to turn in less than a few months, and may not for a year or more; the war is one of attrition and will be a long one. Since troops once committed as a practical matter cannot be removed, since US casualties will rise, since we should take call-up actions to support the additional forces in Vietnam, the test of endurance may be as much in the United States as in Vietnam.

3. Generally (CIA estimate). Over the longer term we doubt if the Communists are likely to change their basic strategy in Vietnam (i.e., aggressive and steadily mounting insurgency) unless and until two conditions prevail: (1) they are forced to accept a situation in the war in the South which offers them no prospect of an early victory and no grounds for hope that they can simply outlast the US and (2) North Vietnam itself is under continuing and increasingly damaging punitive attack. So long as the Communists think they scent the possibility of an early victory (which is probably now the case), we believe that they will persevere and accept extremely severe damage to the North. Conversely, if North Vietnam itself is not hurting, Hanoi's doctrinaire leaders will probably be ready to carry on the Southern struggle almost indefinitely. If, however, both of the conditions outlined above should be brought to pass, we believe Hanoi probably would, at least for a period of time, alter its basic strategy and course of action in South Vietnam.

Hanoi might do so in several ways. Going for a conference as a political way of gaining a respite from attack would be one. Alternatively it might reduce the level of insurgent activity in the hopes that this would force the US to stop its punishment of the North but not prevent the US and GVN from remaining subject to wearying harassment in the South. Or, Hanoi might order the VC to suspend operations in the hopes that in a period of temporary tranquility, domestic and international opinion would force the US to disengage without destroying the VC apparatus or the roots of VC strength. Finally, Hanoi might decide that the US/GVN will to fight could still be broken and the tide of war turned back again in favor of the VC by launching a massive PAVN assault on the South. This is a less likely option in the circumstances we have posited, but still a contingency for which the US must be prepared.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (C). Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the memorandum was drafted on June 26 and revised on July 1. A covering note on a copy circulated to the Joint Chiefs on July 1 by General Wheeler indicates that the memorandum was drafted by McNaughton. (U.S. Military History Institute, Johnson Papers, Miscellaneous)

2 Discuss with Ky his view of the military outlook, his plan for improving the situation and his appraisal of the extent to which an increase in US presence along these lines (a) would arrest the deterioration and/or (b) would have a net counter-productive “French colonial” effect. If he suggests the latter, ask how he can offset the VC strength advantage without using additional US forces. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 See Document 31.

4 Westmoreland reports that he “cannot now state what additional forces may be required in 1966 to gain and maintain the military initiative.” He says that “instinctively, we believe that there may be substantial US force requirements.” He has a study under way, with a fairly solid estimate due soon. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 Because of the short lead-times involved in all of these actions, no decision with respect to them is needed now. Actions to quarantine the ports or to intensify the strike program against the North can on short notice be made a part of an increasing-pressures program. [Footnote in the source text.]

6 See vol. II, Document 245.

39. Paper by Secretary of State Rusk 39. Paper by Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, July 1, 1965.

VIET-NAM

1. U.S. Objective

The central objective of the United States in South Viet-Nam must be to insure that North Viet-Nam not succeed in taking over or determining the future of South Viet-Nam by force. We must accomplish this objective without a general war if possible.

The “war aim” of the United States is not concerned with what the South Vietnamese would do if they were left alone. There are many problems in the country which only the South Vietnamese can solve. U.S. forces are present in South Viet-Nam only because of the aggression of Hanoi in sending men and arms into the South. If this aggression were removed, U.S. forces could be withdrawn. We would not use U.S. forces to settle issues in South Viet-Nam among the Buddhists, Catholics, the sects, the local Chinese and Cambodian communities, the Montagnards, and the genuinely “indigenous” Viet Cong. The sole basis for employing U.S. forces is the aggression from the North.

2. U.S. Commitments

There can be no serious debate about the fact that we have a commitment to assist the South Vietnamese to resist aggression from the North. If the South Vietnamese were to ask us to withdraw our help, we would have to do so. There is no present likelihood that they will do so.

The integrity of the U.S. commitment is the principal pillar of peace throughout the world. If that commitment becomes unreliable, the communist world would draw conclusions that would lead to our ruin and almost certainly to a catastrophic war. So long as the South Vietnamese are prepared to fight for themselves, we cannot abandon them without disaster to peace and to our interests throughout the world.

3. Comment on the present situation

There is no question but that the situation in South Viet-Nam is critical. It is said that we are “losing”; this means that we are not making headway, but rather falling behind, in the effort to stop the infiltration and to pacify the country. But that does not mean that the Viet Cong are “winning”; they have the power to disrupt, but they are not capable of occupying and organizing the country or any major part of it. The Viet Cong can be denied a victory, even if complete pacification will be a long and tortuous prospect.

4. The Risks

There are obvious risks in any engagement between free and communist countries, especially where large communist countries are contiguous to the area of conflict. But these risks are present for the communists as well. If they discover that we are less resolved than they, the prospect for the future is exceedingly dark. Moscow and Peiping do not wish a general war with us over Southeast Asia. Our problem, therefore, is to deny to Hanoi success in South Viet-Nam without taking action on our side which would force the other side to move to higher levels of conflict. If they decide to move to a larger war rather than fail to absorb South Viet-Nam, we could not shrink from that eventuality; but such a decision on their part does not appear likely. It is least likely in relation to what we do in South Viet-Nam.

5. Main Courses of Action

a. Maximum South Vietnamese effort.

We must use the leverage of U.S. presence and assistance to insist that South Vietnamese leaders declare a moratorium on their bickering and knuckle down to the increased effort needed to defeat the Viet Cong. They must be told bluntly that they cannot take us for granted but must earn our help by their own performance.

b. A level of U.S. effort in South Viet-Nam, as a supplement to the best the South Vietnamese can do, to deny a Viet Cong success.

Even present levels of U.S. forces are not yet reflected in corresponding damage to the Viet Cong. Reinforcements now in course should open the way to a war plan to engage concentrations of Viet Cong with punishing effect.

c. Maintenance of present character of air action against North Viet-Nam, both for its practical effects and to establish that there is no sanctuary for participants in the war.

The elimination of the sanctuary is the principal brake upon direct Chinese participation. We should not, for the present, attack targets in the immediate Hanoi-Haiphong area. Priority should be given to any need for air strikes on targets in South Viet-Nam.

d. Intensify the mobilization of “other flags” in support of South Viet-Nam.

e. Pursue our readiness to seek a peaceful solution through any available channel.

f. Initiate as soon as possible the “Acheson Plan” in South Viet-Nam; if not for the entire country, perhaps in the III and IV Corps, or in selected provinces around Saigon.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII. Top Secret. According to William Bundy, Rusk did not circulate this paper before submitting it to the President. (Johnson Library, Papers of William P. Bundy, Ch. 27, p. 11)

40. Paper by the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 40. Paper by the Under Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, undated.

A COMPROMISE SOLUTION FOR SOUTH VIET-NAM

1. A Losing War: The South Vietnamese are losing the war to the Viet Cong. No one can assure you that we can beat the Viet Cong or even force them to the conference table on our terms no matter how many hundred thousand white foreign (US) troops we deploy.

No one has demonstrated that a white ground force of whatever size can win a guerrilla war—which is at the same time a civil war between Asians—in jungle terrain in the midst of a population that refuses cooperation to the white forces (and the SVN) and thus provides a great intelligence advantage to the other side. Three recent incidents vividly illustrate this point: (a) The sneak attack on the Danang Air Base which involved penetration of a defense perimeter guarded by 9,000 Marines. This raid was possible only because of the cooperation of the local inhabitants.

(b) The B-52 raid that failed to hit the Viet Cong who had obviously been tipped off.

(c) The search-and-destroy mission of the 173rd Airborne Brigade which spent three days looking for the Viet Cong, suffered 23 casualties, and never made contact with the enemy who had obviously gotten advance word of their assignment.

2. The Question to Decide: Should we limit our liabilities in South Viet-Nam and try to find a way out with minimal long-term costs?

The alternative—no matter what we may wish it to be—is almost certainly a protracted war involving an open-ended commitment of US forces, mounting US casualties, no assurance of a satisfactory solution, and a serious danger of escalation at the end of the road.

3. Need for a Decision Now: So long as our forces are restricted to advising and assisting the South Vietnamese, the struggle will remain a civil war between Asian peoples. Once we deploy substantial numbers of troops in combat it will become a war between the United States and a large part of the population of South Viet-Nam, organized and directed from North Viet-Nam and backed by the resources of both Moscow and Peiping.

The decision you face now, therefore, is crucial. Once large numbers of US troops are committed to direct combat they will begin to take heavy casualties in a war they are ill-equipped to fight in a non-cooperative if not downright hostile countryside.

Once we suffer large casualties we will have started a well-nigh irreversible process. Our involvement will be so great that we cannot—without national humiliation—stop short of achieving our complete objectives. Of the two possibilities I think humiliation would be more likely than the achievement of our objectives—even after we had paid terrible costs.

4. A Compromise Solution: Should we commit US manpower and prestige to a terrain so unfavorable as to give a very large advantage to the enemy—or should we seek a compromise settlement which achieves less than our stated objectives and thus cut our losses while we still have the freedom of maneuver to do so?

5. Costs of Compromise Solution: The answer involves a judgment as to the costs to the United States of such a compromise settlement in terms of our relations with the countries in the area of South Viet-Nam, the credibility of our commitments and our prestige around the world. In my judgment, if we act before we commit substantial US forces to combat in South Viet-Nam we can, by accepting some short-term costs, avoid what may well be a long-term catastrophe. I believe we have tended greatly to exaggerate the costs involved in a compromise settlement. An appreciation of probable costs is contained in the attached memorandum. (Tab A)

6. With these considerations in mind, I strongly urge the following program: A. Military Program (1) Complete all deployments already announced (15 battalions) but decide not to go beyond the total of 72,000 men represented by this figure.

(2) Restrict the combat role of American forces to the June 9 announcement,2 making it clear to General Westmoreland that this announcement is to be strictly construed.

(3) Continue bombing in the North but avoid the Hanoi-Haiphong area and any targets nearer to the Chinese border than those already struck.

B. Political Program (1) In any political approaches so far, we have been the prisoners of whatever South Vietnamese Government was momentarily in power. If we are ever to move toward a settlement it will probably be because the South Vietnamese Government pulls the rug out from under us and makes its own deal or because we go forward quietly without advance pre-arrangement with Saigon.

(2) So far we have not given the other side a reason to believe that there is any flexibility in our negotiating approach. And the other side has been unwilling to accept what in their terms is complete capitulation.

(3) Now is the time to start some serious diplomatic feelers, looking towards a solution based on some application of the self-determination principle.

(4) I would recommend approaching Hanoi rather than any of the other probable parties (the National Liberation Front, Moscow or Peiping). Hanoi is the only one that has given any signs of interest in discussion. Peiping has been rigidly opposed. Moscow has recommended that we negotiate with Hanoi. The National Liberation Front has been silent.

(5) There are several channels to the North Vietnamese but I think the best one is through their representative in Paris, Mai Van Bo. Initial feelers with Bo should be directed toward a discussion both of the four points we have put forward and the four points put forward by Hanoi as a basis for negotiation. We can accept all but one of Hanoi's four points and hopefully we should be able to agree on some ground rules for serious negotiation—including no pre-conditions.

(6) If the initial feelers lead to further secret exploratory talks we can inject the concept of self-determination that would permit the Viet Cong some hope of achieving some of their political objectives through local elections or some other device.

(7) The contact on our side should be handled through a non-governmental cutout (possibly a reliable newspaperman who can be repudiated.)

(8) If progress can be made at this level the basis can be laid for a multi-national conference. At some point obviously the government of South Viet-Nam will have to be brought on board but I would postpone this step until after a substantial feeling out of Hanoi.

(9) Before moving to any formal conference we should be prepared to agree that once the conference is started (a) the United States will stand down its bombing of the North, (b) the South Vietnamese will initiate no offensive operations in the South, and (c) the DRV will stop terrorism and other aggressive acts in the South.

(10) Negotiations at the conference should aim at incorporating our understanding with Hanoi in the form of a multi-national agreement guaranteed by the United States, the Soviet Union and possibly other parties, and providing for an international mechanism to supervise its execution.

George W. Ball

Attachment A3

PROBABLE REACTIONS TO THE CUTTING OF OUR LOSSES IN SOUTH VIET-NAM

We have tended to exaggerate the losses involved in a compromise settlement in South Viet-Nam. There are three aspects of the problem which should be considered: First, the local effect of our action on nations in or near Southeast Asia.

Second, the effect of our action on the credibility of our commitments around the world.

Third, the effect on our position of world leadership.

A. Effect on Nations in or Near Southeast Asia

Free Asian reactions to a compromise settlement in South Viet-Nam would be highly parochial, with each country interpreting the event primarily in terms of (a) its own immediate interest, (b) its sense of vulnerability to Communist invasion or insurgency, and (c) its confidence in the integrity of our commitment to its own security based on evidence other than that provided by our actions in SVN.

Within this framework, the following groupings emerge: 1. The Republic of China and Thailand, staunch allies whose preference for extreme U.S. actions, including a risk of war with Communist China, sets them apart from all other Asian nations;

2. The Republic of Korea and the Philippines, equally staunch allies whose support for strong U.S. actions short of a war with Communist China would make post-settlement reassurance a pressing U.S. need;

3. Japan, an ally that would prefer wisdom to valor in an area remote from its own interests where escalation could involve its Chinese or Russian neighbors, or both;

4. Laos, a friendly neutral dependent on a strong Thai-US guarantee of support in the face of increased Vietnamese-Pathet Lao pressures;

5. Burma and Cambodia, suspicious neutrals whose fear of antagonizing Communist China would increase their leaning toward Peking in a conviction that the US presence is not long for Southeast Asia; and

6. Indonesia, whose opportunistic marriage of convenience with both Hanoi and Peking would carry it further in its covert aggression against Malaysia, convinced that “foreign imperialism” is a fast fading entity in the region.

Of these varied reactions, the critical importance of Japan and Thailand calls for more detailed examination.

Japan

According to our Embassy, Japanese public opinion is largely unreceptive to our interpretation of the situation in Viet-Nam. Many if not most Japanese consider that the US is endeavoring to prop up a tottering government that lacks adequate indigenous support. Public media stress the civil war aspects of the struggle, portray Hanoi's resistance as determined and justified, and question our judgment as to the dangers of an eventual war with Communist China.

The government as such supports our strong posture in Viet-Nam but stops short at the idea of a war between the US and China. Governmental leadership can—to a considerable extent—influence the public reaction in Japan. Government cooperation would, therefore, be essential in making the following points to the Japanese people: (1) US support was given in full measure, as shown by our casualties, our expenditures, and our risk-taking; and (2) the US record in Korea shows the credibility of our commitment so far as Japan is concerned.

Thailand

Thai commitments to the struggles in Laos and South Viet-Nam are based upon a careful evaluation of the regional threat to Thailand's security. The Thais are confident that they can contain any threats from Indochina alone. They know, however, that they cannot withstand the massive power of Communist China without foreign assistance.

Unfortunately, the Thai view of the war has seriously erred in fundamental respects. They believe American power can do anything, both militarily and in terms of shoring up a Saigon regime. They now assume that we really could take over in Saigon and win the war if we felt we had to. If we should fail to do so the Thais would initially see it as a failure of US will.

Yet time is on our side, provided we employ it effectively. Thailand is an independent nation with a long national history and—unlike South Viet-Nam—an acute national consciousness. It has few domestic Communists and none of the instability that plagues its neighbors, Burma and Malaysia. Its one danger area, in the Northeast, is well in hand so far as preventive measures against insurgency are concerned. Securing the Mekong Valley will be critical in any long-run solution, whether by the partition of Laos, with Thai-US forces occupying the western half, or by some cover arrangement. Provided we are willing to make the effort, Thailand can be a foundation of rock and not a bed of sand on which to base our political-military commitment to Southeast Asia.

South Korea

As for the rest of the Far East, the only serious point of concern might be South Korea. But if we stop pressing the Koreans for more troops to Viet-Nam (the Vietnamese show no desire for additional Asian forces since it affronts their sense of pride) we may be able to cushion Korean reactions to a compromise in South Viet-Nam by the provision of greater military and economic assistance. In this regard, Japan can play a pivotal role now that it has achieved normal relations with South Korea.

B. Effecton the Credibility of Our Commitments Around the World

With the exception of the nations in the Southeast Asian area, a compromise settlement in South Viet-Nam should not have a major impact on the credibility of our commitments around the world. Quite possibly President De Gaulle will make propaganda about perfidious Washington, but even he will be inhibited by his much-heralded disapproval of our activities in South Viet-Nam.

Chancellor Erhard has told us privately that the people of Berlin would be concerned by a compromise settlement in South Viet-Nam. But this was hardly an original thought and I suspect he was telling us what he believed we would like to hear. After all, the confidence of the West Berliners will depend more on what they see on the spot than on news of events half way around the world. They have much to gain by the prevention of a confrontation between East and West elsewhere and by the gradual developments of a spirit of entente that might pave the way for ultimate reunification.

In my observation, the principal anxiety of our NATO allies is that we have become too preoccupied with an area which seems to them an irrelevance and may be tempted to neglect our NATO responsibilities. Moreover, they have a vested interest in an easier relationship between Washington and Moscow.

By and large, therefore, they would be inclined to regard a compromise solution in South Viet-Nam more as new evidence of American maturity and judgment than of American loss of face.

These would be the larger and longer-term reactions of the Europeans. In the short run, of course, we could expect some cat-calls from the sidelines and some vindictive pleasure on the part of Europeans jealous of American power. But that would, in my view, be a transient phenomenon with which we could live without sustained anguish.

Elsewhere around the world, I would see few unhappy implications for the credibility of our commitments. No doubt the Communists will try to gain propaganda value in Africa, but I cannot seriously believe that the Africans care too much about what happens in Southeast Asia.

Australia and New Zealand are, of course, special cases since they feel lonely in the far reaches of the Pacific. Yet even their concern is far greater with Malaysia than with South Viet-Nam, and the degree of their anxiety would be conditioned largely by expressions of our support for Malaysia.

C. Effect on Our Position of World Leadership

On balance I believe we would more seriously undermine the effectiveness of our world leadership by continuing the war and deepening our involvement than by pursuing a carefully plotted course toward a compromise solution. In spite of the number of powers that have—in response to our pleading—given verbal support from feelings of loyalty and dependence, we cannot ignore the fact that the war is vastly unpopular and that our role in it is perceptibly eroding the respect and confidence with which other nations regard us. We have not persuaded either our friends or allies that our further involvement is essential to the defense of freedom in the Cold War. Moreover, the more men we deploy in the jungles of South Viet-Nam, the more we contribute to the growing world anxiety and mistrust.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (C). Top Secret. Sent by Ball to McGeorge Bundy on July 1, with a covering note indicating that the paper was “for inclusion in your book for the President.” Also printed in The Pentagon Papers: New York Times Edition, pp. 449-454.

2 See vol. II, Document 339.

3 Top Secret.

41. Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 41. Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, July 1, 1965.

A “MIDDLE WAY” COURSE OF ACTION IN SOUTH VIETNAM

This memorandum advocates the following military decisions as the basis for US action during the next two months: a. Complete the deployment of the balance of the Marine force at Da Nang (early July), and of the additional six battalions from the 1st and 101st Divisions (July 15 and July 28). This would bring combat strength to 18 battalions, and overall US strength to about 85,000.

b. Revise the current decision on the Air Mobile Division so that this division is alerted and could be sent to South Vietnam three weeks after decision at any time, but not decide now that it will in fact be sent.

c. Start now to weed out and prepare for deployment as many combat units as possible to meet the possible military need for 44 combat battalions by the end of the year, but defer any decision on deploying these units and on calling up major reserve units. (DOD should supply the time factors and indicate whether and to what extent such deferral would prevent our meeting the possible force needs if we later decided to do so.)

d. Continue to avoid the urban areas of Hanoi and Haiphong in our bombing of the DRV, being prepared to attack SAM sites and airfields if but only if they are used to inflict militarily significant losses on us. Hitting these cities would not now lead Hanoi to give in but might on the contrary toughen it. It would almost certainly lose us the support of such key governments as the UK and Japan. Above all, it would inevitably intensify the Soviet commitment and probably remove the chance of the Soviets exerting restraint in the fall.

e. Defer decision on mining North Vietnamese harbors and/or cutting the rail and road lines from China to North Vietnam. The harbor operation would tend to throw North Vietnam into the arms of Communist China and diminish Soviet influence. The rail and road operation could be useful added pressure but should be held in reserve; it would have much more effect if it came after a summer stalemate, and it cannot affect DRV capabilities in the short term or perhaps to any major degree.

f. Maximum air action in the South, including B-52's.

This military program would be accompanied by every effort to galvanize the political and economic programs of the Ky Government, in the direction of “maximum revolution and reform, but minimum repression.” We would be preparing the way for a really major reform and amnesty program to be launched in the fall if the monsoon offensive is blunted so that such action would not have a note of weakness.

The program also involves the possibility of discreet contacts with Hanoi, and cut-out contacts (not identified with the US) with the Liberation Front. These would not be with any serious negotiating expectations, but to open channels and to soften both up by playing on Hanoi's fear of Peiping and the possible Liberation Front fear of being totally under Hanoi's domination.

In essence, this is a program to hold on for the next two months, and to test the military effectiveness of US combat forces and the reaction of the Vietnamese army and people to the increasing US role. Basic to the program is that US combat forces would be employed on a fairly strict interpretation of the June 9 White House statement, used in combat as reserves where a battle has been or can be joined and US military advantages are greatest, not in general countryside operations.

The program rejects withdrawal or negotiating concessions in any form, and equally rejects a present decision to raise our force level above about 85,000. The latter appears unwise because: a. We have not tested whether our forces can really find and hit the VC. This program gives us enough reserves to give a fair test.

b. We simply do not know, and probably cannot now know, whether raising the US force level and combat involvement to the point where we take over much of the combat load would (1) cause the Vietnamese government and especially the army to let up; (2) create adverse popular reactions to our whole presence, on “white men” and “like the French” grounds. So far things have been all right while we were sticking to secure areas and were not in combat; we just don't know what will happen when we start fighting and are in contact with the people in disputed areas. At some point, we could be playing into VC hands, and negating immediate military results, thus getting into a truly disastrous situation. Again, what we need now is to test; perhaps, these fears will be groundless, but we lose little by waiting, compared to the risks. And these risks are affected by pace and timing; we might be readily accepted if we moved gradually, but arouse the world fears and adverse reactions if we moved fast.

c. While military effectiveness is the basic reason for holding at about 85,000, we must also reckon the Congressional and public opinion problems of embarking now on what might appear clearly to be an open-ended ground commitment. The present rationale of meeting the monsoon offensive and balancing DRV regulars has put us on a solid and sober footing for 85,000; any major increases would require a much broader base and explanation.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (C). Top Secret. Included in memoranda sent to the President by McGeorge Bundy on July 1; see Document 43. William Bundy later recalled that this memorandum was sent to the President at the latter's request. Bundy drafted it after helping Ball prepare his June 28 paper (Document 26) advocating U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam. Bundy could not agree with that conclusion, and was influenced by U. Alexis Johnson, who believed that military reports from Vietnam were too bleak and that the introduction of more than 15 U.S. battalions would cause serious problems for the South Vietnamese Government. Accordingly, Bundy concluded that “there must be a presentation to the President of a military operation looking not to early compromise on the most crucial issue, but to a genuine trial period to see if the South Vietnamese were tough and American forces effective.” The memorandum printed here was a summary of a longer memorandum, dated June 29, entitled “Holding On in South Vietnam,” which was discussed on June 30 by the senior review group that earlier had discussed Ball's June 28 paper. (Johnson Library, Papers of William P. Bundy, Ch. 26, p. 26 and Ch. 27, p. 7) Bundy's June 29 memorandum is ibid., National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV.

42. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 42. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 1, 1965, 5:50 p.m.

SUBJECT

Meeting Friday Morning on Vietnam

I have just come from another long session in the State Department on the draft papers2 for discussion tomorrow. These papers will offer two main alternatives: George Ball's preference for a negotiated withdrawal, and Bob McNamara's recommendation of a substantial increase of military strength, with a call-up of reserves during this summer.

I find that both Rusk and McNamara feel strongly that the George Ball paper should not be argued with you in front of any audience larger than yourself, Rusk, McNamara, Ball, and me. They feel that it is exceedingly dangerous to have this possibility reported in a wider circle. Moreover, both of them feel great reticence about expressing their own innermost thoughts to you in front of any larger group. So they both would prefer a meeting limited to the five of us in the morning.

The disadvantage of this is that it cuts you off from a chance to talk freely with some other men who have expert opinions—like Thompson and General Wheeler and Lodge (whom I can easily take care of in another way by having him read the papers and get ready to report separately to you at another time).

In the light of Bob's and Dean's feeling, however, I now recommend we keep this meeting small. After you have had a chance to get your own thinking clear on the broad outlines of the problem, we can bring in Raborn, Wheeler, Thompson, and others in a later meeting for more intense discussion of a specific set of recommendations. My personal, private opinion is that both Rusk and McNamara are too diffident and that it would help you to have a few more people in the meeting. But it is a fact that they feel as they do, and this feeling will govern their effectiveness in a meeting.3

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Secret.

2 Documents 38-41.

3 Two options were typed below Bundy's initials: “OK, Keep the meeting small” and “Speak to me.” The President checked the first.

43. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 43. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 1, 1965, 8:20 p.m.

I attach four documents which are for consideration at the 11:00 o'clock meeting tomorrow.2

At Tab 1 is Dean Rusk's four-page statement of the basic issues.

At Tab 2 is George Ball's paper on a compromise solution.

At Tab 3 is Bob McNamara's recommendation for expanded military action.

At Tab 4 is my brother Bill's program offering a middle course for the next two months.

The positions within the government are roughly as follows: McNamara and Ball honestly believe in their own recommendations, though Bob would readily accept advice to tone down those of his recommendations which move rapidly against Hanoi by bombing and blockade.

Dean Rusk leans toward the McNamara program, adjusted downward in this same way.

The second-level men in both State and Defense are not optimistic about the future prospects in Vietnam and are therefore very reluctant to see us move to a 44 battalion force with a call-up of reserves. So they would tend to cluster around the middle course suggested by my brother. They would like to see what happens this summer before getting much deeper in.

The Joint Chiefs are strongly in favor of going in even further than McNamara. Specifically they want now to take out the SAM site, the IL-28s, and the MIGs in the Hanoi area.

My hunch is that you will want to listen hard to George Ball and then reject his proposal. Discussion could then move to the narrower choice between my brother's course and McNamara's. The decision between them should be made in about ten days, which is the point at which McNamara would like a final go-ahead on the air mobile division. I think you may want to have pretty tight and hard analyses of some disputed questions like the following: 1. What are the chances of our getting into a white man's war with all the brown men against us or apathetic?

2. How much of the McNamara planning would be on a contingency basis with no decision until August or September?

3. What would a really full political and public relations campaign look like in both the Bundy option and the McNamara option?

4. What is the upper limit of our liability if we now go to 44 battalions?

5. Can we frame this program in such a way as to keep very clear our own determination to keep the war limited? (This is another way of stating question 4.)

6. Can we get a cold, hard look at the question whether the current economic and military situation in Vietnam is so very bad that it may come apart even before this program gets into action? (I don't believe that it is that bad, but no one seems to be really sure of the facts today.)

Friday's meeting3 is not, repeat not, for decisions, but for sharpening of the issues that you want studied.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Top Secret.

2 Documents 38-41.

3 July 2; see Document 44.

44. Editorial Note 44. Editorial Note

At 11 a.m. on July 2, 1965, President Johnson met in the Cabinet Room of the White House with Robert McNamara, Dean Rusk, George Ball, and McGeorge Bundy to discuss the four papers submitted to the President the day before dealing with Vietnam policy (Documents 38-41). The meeting lasted 1 hour and 45 minutes. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary) No other contemporary record of the meeting has been found, but William Bundy recalled the decisions made by the President during the meeting:

“Like a Judge, the President expected to mull over the pleadings, and gave no direct indication what his final decision would be. Instead, he plucked ideas from each of the papers, and set them in motion. Averell Harriman should travel at once to Europe and set up the faint ‘cover’ of visiting Moscow on a sightseeing trip. McNamara should go to Saigon in mid-July with General Wheeler and with Cabot Lodge, now picked as Taylor's successor, to look over the situation and evaluate the military plans which Westmoreland was already working to project into 1966. Ball should work intensively to refine the negotiating possibilities, with a particular eye to his latest proposal of direct contact with the North Vietnamese representative in Paris, and a secondary look at how contact with NLF representatives, through private Americans, might be arranged and to what end.” (Ibid., Papers of William P. Bundy, Chapter 27, page 13)

45. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Helms) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 45. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Helms) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, July 2, 1965.

SUBJECT

Possible Contact with the National Liberation Front

1. In response to your memorandum of 1 July,2 we agree that it would be wise to inventory various modes and methods by which contact could be made with or messages discreetly passed to the National Liberation Front (NLF) should we want to decide, now or later, to take any such action. Our suggestions on this score are set forth in the attached annex.3 The matter of passing the particular message proposed in your 1 July memorandum is a bit more complex.

2. As we understand it, that memorandum suggests a contact or contacts designed to do two things: a. Elicit information about the strength of “southern” sentiment in the NLF and “southern” concern over growing Hanoi (i.e., “northern”) domination as the war in the south expands;

b. Execute what we would call a covert action operation to plant a seed (or seeds) of concern over the future fate of southerners in the NLF movement if the war continues and “Hanoi moves in absolutely to the driver's seat”.

3. There would certainly be no harm in trying to exert this kind of covert psychological pressure, but we doubt if the particular operation suggested would be very fruitful. Hanoi—i.e., the leadership of the North Vietnamese Lao Dong (Communist) Party—has been absolutely in the “driver's seat” ever since it directed the NLF's creation in 1960. It is highly unlikely that anyone has been posted abroad as an NLF representative who does not know this and who is not quite willing to accept the fact of Lao Dong control.

4. As for the information elicitation, at best our cut-out(s) would be unlikely to learn much more than the private sentiments of the particular NLF representative(s) contacted. Such information would be interesting, but not necessarily representative. The views of NLF agents abroad could easily be far out of phase with the sentiments of the cadre actually waging war in South Vietnam. Furthermore, the chances of a casual contact's achieving even this much are quite slight; for in selecting the NLF's foreign representatives, the Communist leadership would certainly make every effort to screen out the kind of individual who would harbor dissident sentiments or be prone to bare his innermost political feelings to casual contacts. This information, of course, could best be obtained in South Vietnam itself, either through agent assets or through a manipulated contact.

5. A further point to bear in mind, and an absolutely crucial one, is the extreme delicacy of any such operation. We would, of course, be operating through third country cut-outs not themselves identifiable as acting on behalf of the United States Government. If security broke down in any phase of this operation, however, the results could be damaging. If the Communists become aware of United States sponsorship of these overtures, they themselves could use this fact to our political detriment. If we sounded out the GVN in advance about making any such overtures, the reaction of the GVN's new leadership would almost certainly be adverse and our very suggestions would raise grave doubts in their minds about United States constancy and reliability. If we made such an approach without advising the GVN beforehand and the Communists should learn that these approaches were United States sponsored, the Communists could do us serious political damage with our Vietnamese allies in Saigon by ensuring that the latter were made aware of the fact that the United States was dealing with the NLF behind the GVN's back. At a minimum, if the Communists realized that such overtures were of United States instigation, they would probably discount these overtures' immediate substantive content and construe the fact of the United States initiative in mounting them as a sign that the United States was so anxious to disengage in Vietnam that it was willing to soften its adamant stand on the NLF. This, in our opinion, would be more likely to encourage Hanoi with regard to the wisdom and eventual profit of its present obdurate course than to induce any matching gestures of conciliatory reasonableness.

6. In sum, though we certainly second the idea of canvassing our assets now to determine how we might best be able to arrange discreet contact with the NLF should it ever become desirable to do so, we do not believe that the likely advantages of the particular approach outlined in your 1 July memorandum would be worth the political risks they would unavoidably entail.

Richard Helms4

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency,DCI (Helms) Files, Job 80 B 01285A, Chrono as DDP and DDCI, 1 Jan-31 Dec 65. Secret; Sensitive.

2 Document 41.

3 Entitled “Review of CIA's Capabilities To Contact NLF”; attached but not printed.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 3, 1965, 3:11 p.m.

41. It may be that in coming weeks we will wish to establish some indirect contacts, probably through cutouts, with NLF in order to get better reading than provided by present random reports of Front's state of mind and intentions. We have in mind particularly recurring suggestions that in Front there is significant element of Sudiste thinking which, if properly nurtured, might draw at least part of NLF/VC away from Hanoi domination toward some accommodation with GVN on terms which not too unacceptable.

Realize such contact, no matter how carefully managed and covered, may be leaked in such a way as to reach ears of GVN and raise with them acute worries about our intentions. While we presume there are numbers of avenues by which certain GVN officials themselves maintain more or less clandestine contact with Front, if it was learned that US maintaining such contact there would be immediate assumption we were looking for way out and intended to impose at least coalition government on SVN if not scuttle GVN outright in favor of NLF. Therefore if leaks occur we would deny categorically to GVN officials and also publicly if necessary that we have been in contact and contacts will of course have to be managed in such manner that our denial credible.

Depending on what these contacts reveal and how over-all political situation develops we may later conclude it advisable to bring GVN into picture to some degree. In that case we will first wish to examine with you whether and how this can be done so as to avoid precipitating sharp and perhaps decisive loss in GVN confidence in our intentions.

In order get dialogue underway with NLF and establish basis for efforts to alienate them from Hanoi we would contemplate approaching indirectly those individuals who are accessible and considered less enthusiastic about dependence on Hanoi and receptive to Sudiste appeal. We envisage approach taking following line, being conducted, of course, by someone who disclaims any official connection and whose reference to official US views would be in terms of his impression of thinking in Washington, to which he would claim to have some access: (1) You (NLF/VC) after years of fighting and privation are still getting nowhere and widening daily the gulf between yourselves and your brothers in the South.

(2) Since Hanoi persists in pressing always harder in its effort to take over the South, using you in the process, and rejects all reasonable efforts which US, GVN, many neutrals and Afro-Asians and others have made to come to some peaceful settlement, you face dismal prospect.

(3) Wonder to what extent we all find ourselves in this situation because there may be real misunderstanding of why US in South Viet-Nam and what it is seeking, or because we may not fully understand your true objectives.

(4) Contact welcomed to see if misunderstanding can be reduced or removed for mutual benefit both our countries.

(5) Central aim US is simple: a neutral Viet-Nam which is dominated by no outside power, whether from the North or elsewhere, and which can choose its own government and policies through consultation with all of its people.

(6) US seeks no alliances or bases in South Viet-Nam. Persuaded US means to withdraw its forces the moment it becomes clear that efforts of North Viet-Nam to dominate and dictate to the South are at an end.

(7) Do not believe you any more than we wish or consider it in your interest to make South Viet-Nam more of a bloody battleground than it already is or to be further used by the Northerners against your brothers in the South who also seek peace for your country. Hope therefore our contact can promote fruitful discussion.

Your comments on foregoing plan for approach to NLF urgently requested.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Unger and approved by Ball.

47. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 47. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 3, 1965, 3:13 p.m.

42. Deptel 41.2 In coming weeks or months, in circumstances where it would not signal weakness, we may wish to make quiet effort to establish contact also with DRV in order explore more actively possibilities of some kind of negotiated settlement Vietnam situation. In spite of several rebuffs we and others have received to more formal, official overtures there have been indications that DRV might welcome opportunity to talk. This might be worked out through official but quiet and confidential lower level contact such as Mai Van Bo in Paris. It is possible though far from certain that North Vietnamese might wish and be able in this way to discuss position independent of Chinese. There may also be honest misapprehension on DRV part as to what is precisely our position on certain questions and direct dialogue might serve to dispel such.

We would not be prepared to pay price of formal recognition of DRV which Hanoi may very well demand. This might, however, be a price we would be willing to pay for an acceptable resolution of overall problem of Vietnam, but this would be a possibility to be acknowledged only much later should it ever be possible to get fruitful discussions underway.

As in case our possible contact with NLF, we recognize GVN would be immediately suspicious and most uneasy if it becomes aware of our contact with DRV. Nevertheless we presume that, as Quat once hinted to us, contact with DRV not really so great political problem and we have after all long since declared ourselves prepared to enter into discussions with any government.

Therefore we believe that we should keep GVN informed if any contact established, reassuring them that this being undertaken for purpose of making sure no avenue to settlement left untried and that possibility of settlement not being obstructed by misunderstanding which could be corrected; at same time we have no intention negotiating behind their back any arrangements they could not accept and we will keep in constant consultation with them. Furthermore, they might wish to consider themselves possible utility of their making contact independent of ours, in which case we would of course also expect be kept informed.

For contact with DRV we envisage some appropriate US official, depending upon locality, who could conduct conversations inconspicuously. On initial contact we would envisage he would follow line something like following: 1. US has been deeply disappointed at negative responses from Hanoi to numerous efforts made in recent months to explore peaceful means of settling unhappy Vietnam situation.

2. US position remains unchanged in that we are determined to help South Vietnam as long as this is necessary preserve that country's independence. At same time we are ready without preconditions to discuss ways of moving toward a peaceful settlement and bringing military activity to an end.

3. We have said and we mean without qualification that we seek no bases in South Vietnam and are prepared to withdraw our forces from that country as soon as its continuing independent existence is assured. We favor a neutral Vietnam. We have no designs whatsoever on North Vietnam and no intention of trying to change its kind of government. We believe the question of unification of the two parts of Vietnam is a matter for the North and South to decide when each is in a position to make a free decision; otherwise we take no position on whether Vietnam should be unified or remain at least for some time divided.

4. We have noted the four points put forward by Premier Pham Van Dong on April 83 and frequently pressed since that time. We have also noted the four points put forward by the Government of South Vietnam on June 22.4

We regard all of these and other statements of objectives put forward from other sources as worthy of our attention and suitable subjects for discussion. Naturally we would not enter into discussion on any understanding that the resulting conclusion would be fixed in advance and would presume this would also be the DRV position.

5. There are many elements in Premier Pham Van Dong's four points which appear to be acceptable, assuming that further discussion would confirm our understanding of what is intended. There are others which, if we correctly interpret their purport, would in our view jeopardize the independence of South Vietnam and therefore not be acceptable.

6. Thus we return again to our initial thought that free and open discussion without preconditions might prove to be useful and we hope that the DRV would agree to undertake these.

Your early comments requested on proposal for approach to DRV on lines set forth above.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Unger, cleared by William Bundy, and approved by Ball. Repeated to Paris.

2 Document 46.

3 For text, see vol. II, Document 245.

4 The GVN's four points were announced in an address by Foreign Minister Tran Van Do on July 22; for text of his address, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, p. 883.

48. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 48. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 3, 1965, 3:15 p.m.

Since one of the critical variables in Vietnam is the attitude of the Vietnamese toward U.S. troops, we have asked the Embassy in Saigon for a careful review of the evidence on this point to date. That review is coming next week, but in the meantime the mission has sent us a quick assessment2 whose summary judgment is interesting, as follows: 1. U.S. forces have drawn a variety of local reactions which, overall, are moderate in tone and mildly favorable in content. Criticism expressed so far deals with specific localized incidents rather than broader questions of sovereignty.

2. There is general recognition of the military need for U.S. forces and respect for their effectiveness and fire power. There is some psychological letdown because U.S. forces have not quickly ended the war, and on the other hand where U.S. forces are solidly emplaced, the residents appear to be pleased with their improved physical security. There have been local episodes of friction, but there have also been reports of village opinion that U.S. troop behavior is better than that of Vietnamese. Intensive Viet Cong propaganda against U.S. presence has not been effective in secure areas, nor has there been any incident of a situation which constitutes a significant hazard to U.S.-Vietnamese cooperation or to effective prosecution of U.S. force missions.

3. The respect of one service for another probably makes this summary slightly optimistic, but it remains important and encouraging.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Secret; Exdis. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

2 Not further identified.

49. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas 49. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, July 4, 1965, 12:30 p.m.

CAP 65391. Following two telegrams, to and from Max Taylor, show that we are over the hump on the Lodge transition except for details. Taylor accepts both Lodge appointment and McNamara/Lodge visit in good cheer and his preference for a short turn-around period is in accordance with ours. I think this means that the McNamara trip should be announced Tuesday2 and the Lodge appointment later in the week. We will be sending draft announcements to Taylor with the notation that they are subject to your review and approval after his comment.

To Saigon number 39, July 3, 19653

Top Secret; Nodis; Eyes Only

During this past week the President and his principal advisers have been wrestling hard with the extent to which we should augment ground combat forces between now and the end of the year. Understand Westmoreland is filling you in on his exchanges with Wheeler, which indicate the program under consideration. We are especially concerned with the question whether a 44 battalion force would mean taking over the war to the extent that would diminish GVN and ARVN performance and perhaps at some point stimulate further Vietnamese popular opposition. No attempt was made this week to resolve the issue and we would welcome comment from you and Alex that would help us with our thinking next week.

In view of far reaching decisions the President believes that it would be useful to us all if McNamara could visit Saigon starting about July 15 for five or six days. Wheeler and someone from Department would accompany.

As you know, President is deeply grateful for your willingness to stay on for short period beyond your original commitment of last year but he also feels a personal obligation to that commitment. He plans to name Cabot Lodge as your successor and he could be in position to report for duty about August 15. President is very eager that Lodge should accompany McNamara in order to get fully and locally briefed before meeting Senate committee for confirmation and to take part in decisions which he must largely carry out.

If Lodge should accompany McNamara this again raises question of when public announcement of your retirement and his nomination should be made. In order to avoid slightest speculation that McNamara visit led somehow to your replacement there could be advantage in announcing change in Ambassadorship when party leaves Washington for Saigon.

As you know, President has unlimited regard for the job you have done and the sacrifices it has entailed on your part. I am quite sure that he would wish to have your own reactions to the handling of the changeover before pushing any buttons. Viet Nam situation is sufficiently special to set aside normal practice in which one Ambassador in no way appears until his predecessor has departed. But we also realize that handling of South Vietnamese situation between public announcement and your departure is of considerable importance. Please let me have your comments soonest. Rusk.

From Saigon nr. 38, July 4, 19654

Top Secret; Nodis; Eyes Only

Party most welcome July 15 or sooner since time is pressing for decisions on deployments. Please let us have desires of party with regard to program members wish arranged. We will update US Mission estimate of situation and forward it prior to departure of party.

Agree with desirability of Lodge coming with Secretary McNamara and of Washington announcement of plan for Ambassadorial succession at time of departure from Washington. However, I would not want to stay on for month as “lame duck” Ambassador, and would like to depart Saigon shortly after departure of visiting group.

Suggest announcement of McNamara visit without mention of Lodge soonest since preparatory measures for visit will soon become visible and leak is likely. Lodge announcement would then be made on departure from Washington.5

I would appreciate opportunity to comment on draft text of both announcements. Taylor.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, NODIS-LOR, Vol. II(B). Top Secret; Nodis; Eyes Only.

2 July 6.

3 The Department of State copy is in Department of State, Central Files,POL 27 VIET S.

4 Also ibid.

5 In telegram 61 to Saigon, July 6, the Secretary indicated that the feeling in Washington was that it would be best to combine the announcement of the McNamara visit and the Lodge appointment. (Ibid.) The White House announced the visit and the appointment on July 8. (The New York Times, July 9, 1965) In his July 8 letter to Taylor accepting his resignation, President Johnson stated that he did so “only because I am bound to honor the understanding we had at the time of your initial appointment.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (A))

50. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 50. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 5, 1965.

41. Deptels 41 and 42.2 The following are Alex Johnson's and my comments on plans for approach to NLF and DRV contained in reftels.

In a sentence, we are vigorously opposed to these proposed approaches because (1) they are premature now or in any short term future; (2) they are highly dangerous because of the effect on the GVN of a leak, either fortuitous or deliberate on the part of Communists; and (3) by our overeagerness to negotiate, they will nullify our past and present efforts to convince the VC/DRV that we have the will and determination to turn the tide against them sooner or later—so that they had better come to terms sooner rather than later.

We are convinced that we are on a sound course now and should stay on it without letting ourselves be diverted to untimely actions on either the political or the military front. We are now engaged in the early phases of the ascending military confrontation of the monsoon season. We are taking losses and will take more; the same goes for the VC. At the end of this season, it should be our purpose to have so blunted and bloodied the monsoon offensive and to have so punished the approved targets of our bombing in NVN that the VC/DRV can no longer hope for a military victory and must admit it to themselves. If we can create that picture and in addition one of readiness for a counter-offensive in 1966, we would then think Hanoi might be ready for useful contacts. But it appears highly risky to seek shortcuts such as the reftels propose, as they will encourage and stiffen the resistance of the enemy and, if known, will be disastrous to our relations with the GVN. Apart from all the foregoing considerations, this evidence of overeagerness to negotiate will tend to defeat our purpose of leading Hanoi to the conference table if only because the Communist leaders must necessarily oppose anything that we are seeking.

With regard to specifics within the two proposals, we have further comments which we would like to make if, in spite of the reasons set forth above, it is decided to pursue one or both of these proposals.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 12:39 a.m. on July 5.

2 Documents 46 and 47.

51. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 51. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 6, 1965.

58. For the President. This has been a relatively quiet week of orientation and organization for the new government of Generals Thieu and Ky. We had our first substantive session with its principal members at the joint US/GVN Council meeting on Friday where we had a useful exchange of ideas on such subjects as desertion control, the mobilization of paramilitary forces and the rice situation.

With regard to the latter, the GVN has established a central supply committee with full powers to deal with the urgent logistical problems relating to the distribution of rice and other commodities to population centers, generally to the north of Saigon where shortages exist. In collaboration with our representatives, the committee is developing requirements for commodity transport and then arranging for the most efficient combination of coastal shipping, airlift and escorted truck convoys. The distribution problem is becoming increasingly difficult as the Viet Cong exert mounting pressure on communications by road and inland waterways as a part of the monsoon offensive.

In the course of this offensive, military action moved on at a slightly increased tempo over last week with a high level of losses on both sides. During the week ending July 3, our side lost 264 killed in action as against 881 Viet Cong killed. It is hard to believe that the Viet Cong can stand indefinitely the effect of such losses which, on our side, have made combat ineffective roughly the equivalent of two divisions. Government units in the II Corps have been particularly chewed up and are going to need an injection of new vitality which can only come from U.S. sources. I would expect General Westmoreland to seek early employment of our troops in a strike role now that both the Marines and Airborne Brigade have had time for acclimatization and experience in patrol contacts with the Viet Cong. We shall watch very closely the effect of U.S. forces committed to these first actions, expecting these early experiences to help us form some judgment as to their effectiveness and hence the extent of the requirement for additional U.S. ground forces.

We had a short but pleasant visit from Eugene Black and his party. Although the timing was not ideal because of the newness of the government, nevertheless it allowed him and his colleagues to form some impression of the Viet-Nam situation.

Needless to say, we are looking forward to Bob McNamara's visit and the opportunity to discuss directly with him the important problems which lie ahead.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 9:29 a.m.

52. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 52. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson1

Washington, July 6, 1965.

SUBJECT

Senator Morse's Proposals for UN Action on Viet-Nam

The papers Senator Morse has given you2 raise two basic questions: (a) Whether it makes sense to use the UN to help bring about a conference on Viet-Nam; and

(b) Whether an effort should be made to get a UN peace force into Viet-Nam.

With regard to (b), there has not been, and there is not now, a remote possibility to get a UN peacekeeping force into Viet-Nam except as a part of a settlement with the communists.

With regard to (a), I personally have discussed this further with Senator Morse, Ambassador Dobrynin and Ambassador Stevenson.

Senator Morse seemed personally relaxed during my conversations with him3 and also was unaware of the information which I could give him about the influences which we thought the Russians were trying to exert to bring about some sort of negotiation or discussion of Viet-Nam. He indicated that, at a recent dinner meeting with Drew Pearson and Ambassador Dobrynin, the Ambassador had been asked point-blank what the Soviet Union's attitude would be toward a Security Council call for a conference of the Geneva powers to take up the question of Southeast Asia. He reported that Dobrynin had answered that the Soviet attitude would depend upon prior talks between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. as well as on the manner of presentation to the Security Council. Senator Morse seemed to think that this left some opening.

As you know from my memorandum of conversation with Dobrynin, I explored this with Dobrynin last Saturday.4 He flatly denied having made any such statement and reiterated that the Soviet Union did not think that the Security Council was the proper forum to take up any such proposal. We must anticipate, therefore, that the Soviet Union would not only oppose such a Security Council resolution but would be cast in the position of a harsh advocate of the Hanoi position. There is obvious disadvantage in our forcing the Soviet Union into an even more extreme position than they have taken, since we know there is still some flexibility in the Soviet view of negotiation.

Today I discussed further UN action with Ambassador Stevenson.5 He has the same reservations which we in the Department have about the value of an all-out vindictive debate in the Security Council at this time. However, we agreed to recommend for you the following steps involving the UN: (a) Stevenson will consult with U Thant about the desirability of a Security Council resolution calling for a conference of the Geneva powers; U Thant could then sound out the Soviet Delegation and ascertain directly whether there is any possibility of a Soviet abstention rather than a veto.

(b) We might well now present in writing to the members of the Security Council a periodic report on events since February (the date of our last report).6 In this way we could recapitulate the various efforts which have been made to seek a peaceful settlement, their rejection by the other side, and a summary of the situation as we see it. There could be some value in a document of this sort which would be circulated to all the members of the UN.

(c) We would say to U Thant that if he wished himself, as Secretary General, to call for a meeting of the Geneva powers, at which meeting the question of a cessation of hostilities would be the first order of business, we would indicate our readiness for such a conference. This would be entirely consistent with our basic view that we are prepared for discussions without conditions.

(d) We would also say to U Thant that we could see some advantage in his undertaking any private exploration which he could make with Hanoi, Peiping or Moscow to ascertain whether there are any openings for a peaceful settlement. Such explorations might at least indicate that he had been a possible channel if any of the parties had anything of interest to say.7

On July 8, Stevenson reported, in telegram 31 from Geneva, that in view of U.S. opposition, U Thant would not put forward a negotiating formula that included the Viet Cong as a separate party. In response to the possibilities outlined in telegram 41, Thant said that he would talk with the Soviet delegation concerning a Security Council resolution calling for a conference of the Geneva powers, but he anticipated that the Soviets would insist on including the Viet Cong or would veto the resolution. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

If you approve, we will proceed on points (a), (b), (c) and (d) above. I would recommend that I give the gist of the above to Senator Morse orally,8 unless you believe that he should be provided a written reply to his informal memorandum (Tab A).9

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII. Secret.

2 Presumably reference is to the Attachment to Document 10 and to Morse's June 29 memorandum to President Johnson in which Morse proposed that the United States ask U Thant for a Security Council meeting on Vietnam. (Ibid., Confidential File, ND 19/CO 312)

3 Rusk met alone with Morse at 9:25 a.m. on July 2 for approximately 25 minutes. (Ibid., Rusk Appointment Book)

4 Rusk met with Dobrynin at 11 a.m. on July 3. A memorandum of the conversation, together with McGeorge Bundy's memorandum forwarding it to President Johnson on July 4, is ibid., National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII.

5 Rusk had a luncheon meeting with Stevenson on July 6. (Ibid., Rusk Appointment Book)

6 For text of this report, dated February 7, see Department of State Bulletin, February 22, 1965, pp. 240-241.

7 In telegram 41 to Geneva, July 7, Rusk informed Stevenson (who was in Geneva for the meeting of the U.N. Economic and Social Council) that he had sent these four recommendations to the President for approval. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) During a telephone conversation on July 7, Stevenson told Rusk that he had talked that morning to U Thant, who said that the Soviet Union was “out of the Viet Cong business” and Federenko had instructions not to discuss the matter with him. Thant said that any suggestion for negotiation hinged initially on U.S. acceptance of Viet Cong representation. Thant indicated that he would transmit a message to Hanoi proposing negotiations. Rusk responded to Stevenson that the United States would not support such an initiative. (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

8 My preference. [Footnote in the source text handwritten by Rusk.]

9 Not printed.

53. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 53. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 7, 1965, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

Telegrams on Negotiations with Viet Cong and Hanoi

1. I attach outgoing and incoming telegrams to Saigon2 on the subject of negotiations with the Viet Cong and with Hanoi. The sum of their meaning is that Taylor and Johnson vigorously oppose any informal approach to either the Viet Cong or Hanoi at this time. They believe that such approaches are premature because of the tough summer ahead. They think they are dangerous because of the effect of a leak on the Saigon government. They think that overeagerness to negotiate “will nullify our past and present efforts to convince the Communists that we have the will and determination to turn the tide against them sooner or later.”

2. This reaction was largely predictable, but its strength is somewhat surprising. Moreover, conversations with Lodge indicate to me that he has exactly the same view.

3. But the very same day we have a further message from Saigon reporting a contact made by a southern Catholic [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].3 [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] asserts that there is a whole wing of the Liberation Front that is against Hanoi and in favor of some compromise solution. Since he is an influential and respected Catholic, the Embassy takes his view more seriously than other earlier reports of division in the Viet Cong. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] is exploring these divisions on his own, and the Embassy appears to be quite willing to keep in touch with him. This may mark the bare beginning of contacts among Vietnamese in the South that could be helpful.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Top Secret.

2 Attached were telegrams 41 and 42 to Saigon (Documents 46 and 47) and telegram 41 from Saigon (Document 50).

3 Telegram 44 from Saigon, July 6. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

54. Telegram From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Embassy in Vietnam 54. Telegram From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 7, 1965, 11:52 p.m.

DEF 5319. Exclusive for Ambassador Taylor. From SecDef signed McNamara. The main purpose of our visit will be to receive from you your recommendations for the number of US combat battalions, artillery battalions, engineering battalions, helicopter companies, tactical aircraft, and total military personnel to be assigned to South Vietnam between now and the end of this year; the time schedule on which such forces are required; the results which we can expect to achieve with such force levels compared to those of alternative programs; the probable requirements for additional forces next year; and the program of political contacts which you propose as a complement to your military actions—we will wish to discuss possible additional political initiatives of our own, third party initiatives, our dealings with the Soviets, and the possibility of some form of contact with DRV and/or NLF.2

The two most basic questions we will ask in relation to your recommendations for expanding US forces will be: A. Assuming your proposals are fully accepted, what assurance do we have that with the resulting force level we can3 prove to the Viet Cong they cannot win, and thereby force them to a settlement on our terms?

B. Will large increases in the number and involvement of US combat units and military personnel in South Vietnam cause the Vietnamese Government, and especially the Army, to let up; will it create adverse popular reactions to our presence in the country?

Subsidiary questions will include: 1. How did you determine the number of US and ARVN battalions required to effectively counter the current or prospective Viet Cong forces?

2. Where do you propose to station US combat units and where and how will they be used; what casualties do you expect?

3. How long do you think it will take with your recommended forces (a) to seize the initiative, (b) to prove to the Viet Cong that they cannot win, and (c) thereby to force them to a settlement on our terms?

4. 4 Would it be wise to withdraw GVN military and paramilitary forces from certain outlying or exposed positions in order to concentrate in positions of strength and to reduce the penalties of the serious shortage of Government troops?

5. What reaction to the expansion of US and third-country forces do you expect from the VC and the DRV?

6. Is the currently approved construction program adequate for the expanded force?

7. Is the current MAP program adequate?

8. What command arrangements do you propose for the expanded US force when engaged in combat?

9. What program of military pressure (bombing, mining, etc.) against North Vietnam, in terms of the types of targets, level of effort, etc., do you propose for the next six months as a complement to your plan of action in the South?

10. How effective has been the bombing of the Laotian infiltration routes; what Laotian bombing program do you recommend for the future in terms of specific targets and level of effort?

11. How effective have been the B-52 strikes; assuming 800 B-52 sorties are available each month, what bombing program do you recommend for the future in terms of specific targets and level of effort?

12. Exclusive of B-52 sorties, how many strike sorties and how many reconnaissance sorties per month do you recommend against targets in South Vietnam during the next six months; are all of your current requirements being met; if not, why not; should we be planning on additional airfields for South Vietnam and if so, by what date are they required and where should they be placed?

13. What has been the trend of each of the major indicators (population control, area control, desertions, weapons losses, terror incidents, price level, etc.) of the success or failure of the counterinsurgency campaign over the past year?

14. How does the freedom of movement today over the railroads and the major highways and waterways compare with that of a year ago?

15. What measures do we have of the success or failure of our efforts to prevent infiltration of men and equipment by sea; has the recently expanded program reduced such infiltration; if not, why not; are additional forces required?

16. Outline and appraise the effectiveness of alternative plans (including a barrier across the 17th Parallel) for the use of US troops in Laos for the purpose of preventing infiltration of men and equipment through that country into South Vietnam.

17. If you think it is possible militarily to cut off or very substantially cut down the infiltration of North Vietnamese personnel and materiel from the North to the South, when do you believe it will begin to have an important effect on VC activities and how decisive will that effect be?

18. Has the Hop Tac Program5 succeeded; if, as it appears to us, it has not, review the program in detail to throw light on the causes of its failure?

19. Outline the original plan for the expansion of the GVN military, paramilitary and police forces; the progress to date against that plan; and changes, if any, which you propose for the future.

20. Do you concur in the conclusions of the recent RAND study of the morale of VC forces?6

21. How important is the monsoon to military operations and to the military balance, and how should we expect military prospects to change when the monsoon ends?

22. Would it be possible to implement the Acheson Plan7 in the near future, starting in the 4th Corps; is it feasible to initiate such a plan in a particular area before it has been proven to the Viet Cong that they cannot win?

23. After the deployment of the recommended US forces, how would the GVN react to an extended pause (six or eight weeks) in the bombing of the DRV?

24. Should we consider the imposition of press censorship after the expansion of US forces?

25. What contacts do the South Vietnamese now have with the NLF and the DRV; what additional contacts would you recommend that they or the US have with those parties or the Soviets; how should such US contacts be initiated and with what notice to the GVN?

Assuming our party remains in Vietnam 4 or 5 days, certain members of the party, including myself, probably should visit an aircraft carrier, the major US bases at Bien Hoa, Da Nang, Phu Bai, Qui Nhon, Nha Trang, Chu Lai, and Cam Ranh Bay, the 2d Corps Headquarters in the highlands; and the Hop Tac area.

We hope it will be possible for us to avoid large ceremonial dinners. Instead, we should like to dine with small numbers of Vietnamese, US or third-country nationals in an atmosphere so informal that they will feel free to provide us their personal comments on the Vietnamese scene.

Upon our return, we expect that important policy decisions will be made. These may well require major legislative and executive action (including possibly the declaration of a national emergency, the calling up of reserve forces, large additions to the Budget, etc.) for which we wish to be fully prepared.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, NODIS-LOR, Vol. II(A). Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by McNamara. Repeated to CINCPAC with instructions to pass to General Westmoreland, who was visiting CINCPAC headquarters. The source text contains handwritten revisions by McNamara; see footnotes 2-4 below.

2 Before it was revised by McNamara, the latter part of this sentence read as follows: “we will wish to discuss measures, including possible additional initiatives of our own, third party initiatives, our dealings with the Soviets, and possibility of some form of contact with DRV and/or NLF for psychological warfare and other purposes.”

3 At this point, McNamara deleted the phrase “in a reasonable time.”

4 McNamara deleted the original paragraph 4 and renumbered the subsequent paragraphs. The original paragraph 4 read as follows: “4. How good and timely is our intelligence as to VC locations and activities in SVN and in the corridor, and how can it be improved?”

5 Reference is to a plan developed by General Khanh in 1964 to concentrate military resources in the Saigon area and progressively clear areas radiating outward from the capital.

6 See Document 27.

7 See vol. II, Document 287.

55. Notes of Meeting 55. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, July 8, 1965.

VIETNAM PANEL2

This group consisted of Messrs. Bradley, Gilpatric, Kistiakowsky, Larson, and McCloy. It met with Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, Ambassador Thompson, and Mr. William Bundy. The following are highlights:

1. Stakes and Objectives in South Vietnam.

The group, with the possible exception of Mr. Larson, felt that the stakes were very high indeed. They concurred in the Administration judgment that Thailand could not be held if South Vietnam were taken over, and they thought that the effects in Japan and India could be most serious. They particularly felt that the effect in Europe might also be most serious, and that De Gaulle would find many takers for his argument that the US could not now be counted on to defend Europe.

They also felt that South Vietnam was a crucial test of the ability of the free world and of the US to counter the Communist tactic of “wars of national liberation,” and that a US defeat would necessarily lead to worldwide questioning whether US commitments could be relied on.

It was the feeling of the group that these consequences would be accentuated if the US by its own decision withdrew from South Vietnam, of if the US suffered a military defeat there. On the other hand, the group felt that the consequences would not be much reduced if a Communist takeover took place as a result of a change in government in Saigon, as a result of which the US was asked to leave.

Mr. Larson appeared to dissent from this assessment, in line with his over-all view that we should be seeking UN action or serious negotiations (see para 4 below).

2. Increase of Combat Forces in South Vietnam

In line with their view of the grave stakes, the group generally felt that there should be no question of making whatever combat force increases were required. Several members of the group thought that our actions to date had perhaps been too restrained, and had been misconstrued by Hanoi that we were less than wholly determined.

The group urged that, in connection with any decisions for further increases, there should be a full spelling out of the military situation and the facts making the increases necessary.

One or two members of the group asked whether it was possible to undertake the closing of the South Vietnamese border as a military operation. They appeared, however, to accept Secretary McNamara's statement that this would be a very fast, major operation of uncertain effect, and that the job had to be done within South Vietnam, including the possibility of major forces in the plateau area—although this currently did not seem wise because of the fact that the main operation route (Route 19) was cut in several places and would have to be fully defended before forces could be sustained in the plateau other than by air supply.

3. The Policy on Bombing of the DRV

Secretary Rusk and Secretary McNamara, and Ambassador Thompson, laid out the various factors—particularly the question of Soviet reaction—that had led us not to hit Hanoi and Haiphong. The consultants appeared to accept these points, and none pressed for any early change in this policy. However, General Bradley did raise the question whether we might not conduct individual raids on Hanoi and Haiphong in reprisal for specific outrages in the South. It was noted that this should not be done for outrages confined to Americans—but noted equally that most outrages were not likely to be of this character.

4. Negotiating and International Actions

There was much discussion whether it would be useful to take the South Vietnam issue to the UN. Mr. Larson argued at length for this course, but much of his discussion related to whether it should have been done in 1961 before we went into the advisory build-up. At the present time, Mr. Larson said that his soundings indicated that there would be much support in the United Nations for a simple call for the convening of a Geneva Conference. Others doubted whether there would not be hookers such as a demand for the cessation of bombing. Mr. Larson himself did not see much use in convening the Geneva Conference, and appeared to have in mind that the UN itself might act to introduce forces or police a cease-fire. Others doubted very strongly that either of these was either practical or useful, and Mr. Acheson and Mr. Dean were vehement on the subject in the later plenary session. (Mr. Dean said that this was no time to “turn over our Far East policy to the UN.”)

Mr. Larson's basic underlying view appeared to be grave doubt that we would get a truly viable and democratic Vietnam even by causing Hanoi to pull out, and he repeatedly queried whether what we might get as a “success” would be that much better than what we might get now. Dr. Kistiakowsky suggested that the real difficulty might be the difference between a South Vietnam in which individuals now in the Viet Cong were free to engage in political activity—which would certainly have its difficulties—and a South Vietnam in which the Communist Viet Cong had become a part of a coalition government and were highly likely to take over. The matter was not really developed in detail, but it was clear that the group thought we needed to look hard at just what we did expect to come out in South Vietnam—and equally clear that none of the other members of the group were prepared to buy Mr. Larson's basic thesis.

As to going to the UN, it should be noted that several members of the group, while clearly opposing Mr. Larson's line, thought that it might be useful at some time—perhaps in the context of increased military commitments—to do this, in order to make clear again that we were ready for negotiations. But the general feeling was that such a move at the present time would not be useful and would be a dangerous sign of weakness. (General Bradley particularly stressed this point.)

In the plenary session, Mr. Hoffman (who, like Mr. Larson, had apparently been having extensive personal contacts in the UN corridors) more or less backed Mr. Larson's thesis in favor of an early move in the UN. He thought it was essential to persuade the Afro-Asian countries we were not acting as imperialists, and that many of them did have this view. He specifically suggested a UN call for talks which would include the two Vietnams, the US/USSR/UK/France/Communist China, but also the Liberation Front. The plenary session did not pursue the question of dealing with the Liberation Front, but the matter had been raised in the Panel, and the Panel members appeared to accept Secretary Rusk's statement of the many strong reasons why this would be unwise and unproductive in terms of real negotiations, and seriously damaging to the whole view of the war on which our actions were based.

5. Prognosis of the Situation

Mr. McCloy spoke at some length—both in the Panel and in the later plenary session—on the degree to which he had been impressed during the discussion with the toughness of the situation. He thought that it was most unlikely that merely blunting the monsoon offensive would bring Hanoi to a negotiating mood, and that the situation would probably remain critical for a long time. He was particularly concerned that the Soviets might be brought increasingly to what he called an “annealing” of the Sino-Soviet relationship, i.e., the Soviets competing with the ChiComs and acting on parallel lines, although with no necessary resolution of the basic policy differences between them.

While others did not express themselves at length on this question, it seemed clear that Mr. McCloy's views had many takers both in the Panel and in the plenary session.

In the plenary session, Mr. Dean said that he thought there was a great deal of sentiment in the country for doing whatever it took, if we were going to go on at all. Mr. Lovett made the point that it was not useful to talk about “victory”, that what was really involved was preventing the expansion of Communism by force; in a sense, avoiding defeat. This view seemed to be generally shared.

6. Specific Suggestions

The importance of local intelligence was particularly stressed by General Bradley, including the importance of Americans throughout the countryside.

Mr. McCloy and others stressed the great importance of the closest possible contact with our allies, and wondered if more could not be done particularly with the British, and, he thought, the Germans.

Mr. Larson thought that it would be useful for the government, particularly as it took further decisions, to spell out a number of points that had been bothering the public. He specifically mentioned the legal justification for bombing in the North.

Mr. Cowles thought that government sources had consistently painted too rosy a picture of the situation, and Mr. Lovett joined in this view.

Mr. Cowles thought that one highly popular move in South Vietnam might be for the government to abolish taxes, with the US making up the deficit through increased economic aid.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 150, Meeting of Foreign Affairs Consultants. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy on July 10.

2 The Vietnam panel was a sub-panel of the President's Panel on Foreign Affairs, a senior advisory group of former military leaders and statesmen selected during the 1964 Presidential campaign. The group met for the first time, at the President's request, on July 8 at 11 a.m. in the Department of State to consider a variety of problems confronting the administration. The group was divided for discussion purposes into panels on Vietnam, Europe, and Latin America. The Vietnam panel consisted of General Omar N. Bradley, John J. McCloy, Roswell Gilpatric, Arthur Larson, and Dr. George Kistiakowsky. According to William Bundy, the idea of convening the advisory panel developed in early June, and the President approved the suggestion at the beginning of July. The group received extensive briefing materials on July 7, met in separate panels on the morning of July 8, and met again for a joint discussion after lunch. President Johnson met in the White House at 6:15 p.m. on July 8 with Dean Acheson, Arthur Dean, and Robert Lovett of the Europe panel; John Cowles of the Latin America panel; and General Bradley and McCloy of the Vietnam panel, and received the group's recommendations. (Johnson Library, Papers of William P. Bundy, Ch. 27, p. 15)

56. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 56. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 13, 1965, 3:10 p.m.

123. Crop destruction. Following is evaluation of past crop destruction missions and recommendations for new guidelines.

1. Evaluation. Rand Corporation has prepared preliminary report (being pouched)2 of impressions of interviews with 33 VC captives and defectors who had experienced or observed effects of defoliation and crop destruction. Report states that spray operations have successfully destroyed crops grown by VC production units, further reducing already scarce food supply for VC combat units and forcing VC to seek food elsewhere. On the other hand, report states that spraying of crops belonging to civilians and popular belief that sprays are harmful to humans have had “significant adverse effect” on population's attitude toward GVN and US.

MACV, however, points out that Rand findings are based on comparatively small sampling and that other intelligence sources do not support conclusion that adverse effect of chemical crop destruction has been sufficiently extensive to be described as significant. MACV also points out that Rand findings do not reflect procedures instituted recently to assure that psywar operations planned in connection with herbicide operations are in fact carried out.

MACV has drafted evaluation of crop destruction in three major VC areas since July 1964, which will be pouched as soon as staffing completed. According to MACV evaluation, Binh Thuan operation (summer 1964) destroyed 80 percent of VC crops in area, forcing VC into open to steal or purchase food. Psywar program drew 252 people out of an area in which previous psywar efforts had been singularly unsuccessful. Psywar teams successfully demonstrated to population that VC had failed to live up to their promises of protection.

Phuoc Long and Phuoc Thanh operation (October 1964) destroyed 3085 hectares of VC crops. There was confusion and lowering of morale among VC and supporters following spraying, and reduction in VC ability to conduct operations. Fact that only three hundred people were resettled from a much larger number of potential refugees attributed to lack of more aggressive psywar program.

Binh Dinh operation (April-May 1965) destroyed 3145 hectares of VC crops. Three hundred sixty people have been resettled, and many more are dissatisfied but forcibly detained by VC, creating definite anti-VC feeling in area. This is substantiated by reported murder of two VC cadre by villagers.

Available information, which thus far continues to be scanty, indicates following: 1. Chemical crop destruction has caused hardship to VC.

2. VC have attempted with limited success to turn peasant fear of unknown chemicals and loss of food against GVN. But Rand report found no evidence population has joined VC because of herbicide operations.

3. When VC experience food shortage, initial reaction is to make greater food demands on population, who therefore frequently bear brunt of loss. But even if VC succeed in this objective, it necessitates (a) creating ill will among peasant population through seizing and taxing methods; (b) diversion of increased percentage of VC manpower from military activity to food production; (c) in some cases movement of VC units into open area in search of food, making them more vulnerable to GVN action and decreasing VC offensive capability. Rand and MACV estimate one-third to one-half of VC manpower devoted to food production.

Mission has come to recommendations below based on these findings and following considerations: 1. Conditions of war are hardening. Areas tightly controlled by VC pose dilemma for GVN forces which are faced with alternatives of (a) abandoning area and its population; (b) striking with aerial bombardment and strafing; (c) undertaking ground operations supported by air strikes and artillery; or (d) destroying food and thus starving VC and population out. Viewed in this context, Mission considers chemical crop destruction poses comparatively less risk to civilian population in area.

2. To be truly effective, operations must destroy all food in fairly extensive area.

3. Most effective areas for crop destruction are now northern and central highlands, which are among most critical areas of expected VC summer offensive.

4. There will undoubtedly be some resentment on part of population whose crops are destroyed. It is therefore crucial that this resentment be directed against VC rather than GVN. Rand evidence indicates need still exists for increased psywar/civil affairs program. MACV is actively pursuing this issue. Future operations will be approved here unless increased emphasis on psywar support is planned in each operation.

Mission therefore recommends: 1. Extension of crop destruction operations sufficiently to result in major VC food denial.

2. That Department's guidelines (Deptel 1055, May 7, 1963)3 be amended to permit operations in less remote and more populated areas, provided they are strongly VC dominated and provided each operation offers significant military gain.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Not found.

3 Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. III, pp. 274-275.

57. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 57. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to Secretary of Defense McNamara1

Washington, July 14, 1965.

CM-750-65

SUBJECT

Over-all Appraisal of Air Strikes Against North Vietnam through 30 June 1965 (U)

1. (TS) US/RVN air activity against North Vietnam during June 1965 increased by approximately one-third over that performed during May. During June, 86 strikes were made against JCS-designated and special targets. Of these, 78 strikes were flown by US aircraft and eight jointly flow by US/VNAF aircraft. In addition, 69 armed reconnaissance missions were flown against LOCs, targets of opportunity, and coastal shipping.

2. (TS) During the reporting period, DRV MIGs reacted to the presence of our aircraft over North Vietnam on two occasions, both actions resulting in air combat engagements. The first engagement occurred about 45 nm south of Hanoi on 17 June between two Navy F4B Phantom II jet fighters on barrier cap patrol over Thanh Hoa Bridge and Yen Phu Barracks and four MIGs in loose trail formation. The release of a Sparrow AAM from each F4B exploded two of the four MIGs. VHF intercept indicates a third MIG may have been destroyed. Available data indicates the MIGs were engaged in routine training at time of encounter, however, when visual contact was made the MIGs changed heading to collision course with the US fighters. The fourth MIG was observed making direct landing approach to Phuc Yen. In contrast, the second occurrence on 20 June, supported by sequence of events, indicates a deliberate enemy interception effort by two MIG-17/FRESCOs against four A1H Navy aircraft while providing air cover on SAR operation for a downed USAF F4C earlier involved in air attack against Son La Barracks 100 nm west northwest of Hanoi. During an approximate five minute engagement, the MIGs fired unguided rockets at extreme range which burned out before reaching the A1Hs. One MIG was hit and exploded upon crashing. In other activity, enemy reaction has been limited to frequent, intense antiaircraft fire. US losses for the month were 14 aircraft. No VNAF aircraft were lost in June. As of 30 June 1965, 55 US aircraft were lost in air actions against North Vietnam.

3. (TS/NFD) Our air strikes have increased the time required for traffic movements from Hanoi south and have reduced the capacity and flexibility of the national transport system. Motor transportation and coastal shipping requirements have greatly increased. There are some indications that concentration on internal needs has reduced the level of logistic support to the Pathet Lao. The DRV has demonstrated the capability to infiltrate supplies to SVN from the Haiphong area by sea. Movement of military supplies overland and across water obstacles, especially Route 1A, with the advent of the monsoon season will become increasingly difficult and may block routes into Laos. However, it is felt that the capability of the PAVN to perform its mission of (1) defense of homeland, (2) to provide training for its own forces and for infiltration forces for SVN and Laos, and (3) to provide logistic support for its own forces and the Communist forces of SVN and Laos at the present level of activity has not been effected to any appreciable degree. The reduction of road capacity due to attacks of LOC targets in the southern part of the country has however limited the ability of DRV to support any major offensive beyond its own borders into Laos or SVN.

4. (S) The economic effects of the air strikes have been minor in relation to total economic activity of North Vietnam. The combined effects of transportation difficulties, loss of electric power, and disruption caused by actual or anticipated air strikes have probably reduced the rate of total output of the GNP by only a few percentage points. The volume of freight carried on the Thanh Hoa-Vinh rail lines was on the order of 440 short tons each way per day, or less than five percent of the total tonnage carried by the entire railroad system of North Vietnam. Three electric power plants, comprising about nine percent of total national generating capacity, have been rendered inoperable and will probably require at least 12-18 months for restoration. Viewed from the outside, the economic effects of the air strikes do not seem to amount to much. However, Hanoi probably has a different view. The damaged and destroyed bridges and power plants represent years of construction work which was made possible only with foreign assistance. Costs of reconstruction of the bridges, power plants, and POL storage facilities will represent about four percent of total annual investment. However, the country is barely self-sufficient in food, industrial output is small, and there are ambitious plans for economic expansion. There are strains in all elements of the economy and any disruptions add to the serious problems faced by the regime.

5. (S/LD/NFD) Assessment of the effect of our air activity on the attitudes of the North Vietnamese Government and people is based on reports received by Free World sources and from statements made by DRV officials and citizens. From an analysis of available evidence there is nothing to indicate definitely that the bombings have caused either physical damage or lowered morale to an extent that would compel the DRV to negotiate. The bombings may be factors in some reports that the North Vietnamese Government is perhaps slightly more willing to discuss a settlement. It might be conjectured, however, that a concern for preventing escalation of hostilities is another factor—and a strong one in the case of the Soviet Bloc pressure that is manifested in reported conversations in various parts of the world. Postal intercepts indicate that despite some economic upset, destruction, and suffering, there is a spirit of resistance to the air strikes.

6. (TS/NFD) In summary, the DRV still seems ready to endure further air strikes. DRV logistic support problems in southern North Vietnam have increased and further reduction of an ability to support external overt aggression has taken place. However, the strikes have not yet reduced DRV over-all military capabilities to train and support covert infiltration to South Vietnam. Preoccupation with their own internal defense, however, has affected the level of their logistic support to the Pathet Lao. Similarly, expanded civil defense duties, if prolonged, may prevent achievement of agricultural production goals—a problem of chronic concern in North Vietnam. Nevertheless, the regime at this point appears determined to persevere in its present course of action.

7. (U) At Tabs A through D are more detailed discussion of specific aspects.2

Earle G. Wheeler
Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 381. Top Secret.

2 None printed.

58. Special Memorandum 58. Special Memorandum1

Washington, July 15, 1965.

No. 18-65

SUBJECT

Soviet Tactics Concerning Vietnam

SUMMARY

The new Soviet-DRV economic and military aid agreement implies a stepup in Soviet arms shipments and will have the effect of deepening the Soviet commitment in Vietnam. Partly in order to contain the risks of this commitment, the USSR has of late intensified private approaches to the US, indicating continued interest in a negotiated settlement. At the same time, it has threatened in low key to make trouble in Berlin if the US remains unyielding in Vietnam. We believe that this combination of tactics is intended to deter further US escalation in Vietnam. It is also meant to prepare for the time when negotiations might become feasible, and the USSR can play a larger role in Vietnam.

[Here follows the 6-page estimate.]

1 Source: Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 277, Communist Positions & Initiatives—Soviet. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Prepared by the Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency. Forwarded to William Bundy by Sherman Kent under a July 15 covering memorandum.

59. Memorandum of Conversation 59. Memorandum of Conversation1

Moscow, July 15, 1965.

PARTICIPANTS

USSR Premier Kosygin

M.N. Smirnovsky, Chief, American Section, Foreign Ministry

V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter, Foreign Ministry

US Governor Averell Harriman

Ambassador Foy D. Kohler

Marshall Brement, Second Secretary

[Here follows discussion unrelated to Vietnam.]

Premier Kosygin asked whether the U.S. seriously believed, “speaking in human terms between ourselves,” that there is a real legal government in South Vietnam. He said he could not conceive of this. “You just can't believe this,” he said. “Yet the U.S., for this so-called government, sheds the blood of its own soldiers and kills defenseless Vietnamese.”

Governor Harriman reported that he did not want to dodge that question but that he wished at that point to put another question on the table. Does the Soviet Union really believe, he asked, that without the support and direction of the North Vietnamese there would be a serious situation today in South Vietnam?

Kosygin stated that he would answer Governor Harriman's question. He said he was thoroughly familiar with Vietnam and knew that the South Vietnamese would fight with bamboo sticks, if necessary, against the current regime there. A rotten regime cannot last, he said, and he offered to cite many examples from Russian history to prove his point. This happened in 1905 and 1917 in Russia and is about to happen in Vietnam, he said.

Governor Harriman noted that the Vietnam situation was, of course, a major difference between the USSR and U.S. which see this problem differently. He noted that agreement had been reached on Laos between President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev during their Vienna meeting. He stated that he came here twice in 1963 to try and persuade the Soviet Government that the North Vietnamese were violating the 1962 Geneva Agreement by sending people and arms to Laos. Khrushchev, however, did not want to talk about this and only stated that the Soviets were adhering to the Agreement and that the USSR did not have any other responsibility in the matter. We are regretful, the Governor stated, that the Soviet Union, as co-chairman, did not take a hand in stopping this violation of the Agreement. In Vietnam we are absolutely certain that the NLF is aided, abetted and directed by Hanoi, he said. There is no evidence whatsoever that the NLF movement is really an indigenous uprising, or that the people of South Vietnam want to be taken over by North Vietnam. We have an expression in English, “voting with your feet.” One million people left North Vietnam to go to South Vietnam in 1954, the Governor said. Furthermore, hundreds of thousands of South Vietnamese have left their homes in Viet Cong-dominated areas. It is true that it has been difficult to obtain political agreement in South Vietnam because of internal frictions, largely between the Catholics and the Buddhists. (As this last phrase was being translated into Russian Kosygin laughed and said “this cannot be serious”.) However, the Governor stated, not one of the rival groups in South Vietnam stands for surrender to the North. We believe firmly that the majority of people in South Vietnam want to remain independent and do not wish to be taken over by the Ho Chi Minh clique. The President has stated that we are in favor of elections there once the war is over. The very fact that there have been so many changes of government in Saigon is evidence that we are not imposing our will on the Vietnamese people. It is the people of Vietnam who must decide the future of their own government.

At this point Kosygin laughed again and said directly to Governor Harriman, “You don't believe what you are saying.”

Governor Harriman quickly replied that Premier Kosygin had hit on exactly the reason for his presence in Moscow and that the Premier's reaction had been expressed so naturally that Governor Harriman had to believe that it was a sincere reaction. Governor Harriman stressed that what he had just been saying is the real belief of the President, his advisors, Congress, and the American people. The Eisenhower Administration, he said, had made a commitment to Vietnam in 1954 and all successive U.S. administrations had carried through this commitment. What the U.S. is doing is in response to escalation from North Vietnam. We believe, Governor Harriman said, in strict adherence to the 1954 Geneva Agreement and we had adhered to it scrupulously. But starting in 1959 and 1960 terrorism organized by the North Vietnamese had disrupted a country which had been making great strides forward economically. This terrorist action and guerrilla warfare were in accordance with the theories of Mao Tse-tung. Governor Harriman stated that it is important for Kosygin to understand that we are not mistaken in our assessment of the situation in South Vietnam. During the past 3-1/2 years we have captured many prisoners and interrogated them. The weight of the evidence is overwhelming that on the orders of Hanoi the terrorism in South Vietnam has been started, dormant Communist cells had been reactivated and more and more people had been sent to the South from North Vietnam. Now, regular units of the North Vietnamese army had been dispatched to the South. The North Vietnamese seem to believe that they can win by force. However, President Johnson has stated that the honor of the U.S. is involved in this struggle. We deeply believe that we have proof beyond question that the NLF is not a spontaneous liberation movement and that it would collapse if it were not supported by Hanoi. If the Soviet Union is so sure that we are wrong, the Governor stated, then why not accept President Johnson's proposal and discuss the situation. We could discuss the possibility for future elections in Vietnam, he said. While this was not a proposal, it would certainly be a topic which could be discussed at some possible future conference.

Kosygin stated that he was not authorized to negotiate on the question of Vietnam. However, he said, since Governor Harriman had touched upon this matter, he would speak his mind frankly. He said that he was profoundly convinced that Governor Harriman did not believe what he had just said. The information presented was completely at variance with reality. The U.S. knows that there is no duly constituted government in South Vietnam, he said. There is only a clique of military men paid by the U.S. which kills Catholics and Buddhists alike. Kosygin then cited desertions from the South Vietnamese army as perhaps another example of “voting with one's feet.” Our information is good, he said. If the Vietnamese people were given a real chance to vote, the Saigon clique would be thrown out. He had been to Vietnam, he said, and talked to people there he trusted 100% and he believed them. How can the U.S. say that it is helping the South Vietnamese? he asked. “This is a monstrous statement. You are killing South Vietnamese. History will never forgive the U.S. for this crime. This will always be a blot on the U.S.”

Kosygin stated that he would like to offer for consideration one aspect of the Vietnam situation which he had been thinking about. He stated that, as the U.S. knew, differences exist in the international communist movement on questions of war and peace between the Chinese and the Soviets. The U.S. was now doing all it could to prove the Chinese right and the Soviets wrong on this question. “You follow pro-Chinese policies,” he said. You are responsible for tensions in the area and the peoples of the East are turning against you. You only have your puppets there and by your actions and resistance to national liberation movements you only prove the Chinese point that war is inevitable. This is my personal view, he cautioned, and not for the press. He went on to state that the U.S. was trying to prove that war is inevitable whenever national liberation movements arise. You are thereby, he said, taking the view of those you profess to fight. You are taking a pro-Chinese stand.

Governor Harriman stated that although the Premier's words were harsh, he appreciated his speaking what was on his mind. Governor Harriman said that we have to speak frankly and openly in order to move forward in solving the problems which confront us.

Kosygin replied that he had never said this to anyone else and he hoped Governor Harriman would communicate his thoughts to President Johnson.

Governor Harriman stated that without sincerity we cannot solve the problems that face us and he assured Premier Kosygin that he was utterly convinced that what he had told him was the truth.

Premier Kosygin stated that if he had the time he was sure that he could convince Governor Harriman that his own assessment of the Vietnam situation was the correct one. You may be convinced of what you say, he said. “If so, your convictions are completely erroneous, 100% erroneous. There are many disparate forces in South Vietnam, but by your own cruelty, by your barbarism you are uniting the people of Vietnam against you. If I were a Vietnamese, I myself would grab a stick and start to fight against you. By your actions, he said, you are helping those who favor war in the world.” Indicating another engagement, he then stated he would like to bring the talk to a conclusion and asked Governor Harriman whether he could offer any new hypothesis or proposal (1) to reduce tensions in the world, or (2) to improve relations between the U.S. and USSR. “Or do you have nothing to offer?” he asked.

Governor Harriman stated that Chairman Kosygin had put him in a difficult position by asserting that the President is wrong. Chairman Kosygin had to acknowledge first of all, he stated, that the President is sincere. You say you have been in Vietnam and know the situation there, but you have been deceived, the Governor said. You must accept the President's sincerity, he said, adding that he did not question Chairman Kosygin's sincerity even though he knew him to be wrong.

Kosygin replied that he had not been deceived by anyone. “That is impossible.” There are other sources of information than the U.S. is aware of. Your crude (gruby) actions have not only united the Vietnamese against you but will cause events in Vietnam to be repeated throughout Southeast Asia. Talks such as this, he said, will not solve the question. It will be solved, sooner or later by the people of Vietnam themselves. You cannot win by buying governments. He stated he could buy “these puppets of yours” tomorrow for one million dollars. And it is for these marionettes that you sacrifice the people of Vietnam and your own people as well, Kosygin said.

Governor Harriman stated that he had come here in good faith and not to be abused. He recalled that when he was Ambassador here during the war, Marshal Stalin once told him that he accepted his sincerity because Governor Harriman had come to the Soviet Union in the 20's in order to help the Soviet people. Governor Harriman reminded Chairman Kosygin that he had had long experience with the leaders of the Soviet Union over the years and that nobody until now had questioned his good faith. He stated that he himself was not important. However, he vigorously stated that Kosygin must believe that the President is completely sincere and has no intention of allowing Ho Chi Minh, supported by the Chinese, to take over South Vietnam. We had faced a similar situation in Korea, the Governor stated, and did not flinch there. Our actions in Vietnam are based on what we believe to be incontrovertible evidence. The President is also absolutely sincere, he said, in wanting to go to the conference table. This, however, should not be interpreted as weakness. We must perhaps wait for Hanoi to realize that it cannot succeed in its efforts. Once Hanoi realizes this, the Governor said, perhaps we can then have a conference and come to some arrangement whereby the problem could be settled. In view of the Soviet dispute with Peiping, he said, he would have thought that the USSR would not favor the use of force as a means for the settlement of problems in the Far East. He assured Kosygin that the U.S. will not stand by and see country after country fall under Peiping's heel. He denied that those who supported the U.S. position in the Far East are “puppets”, and asserted that many peoples in the Far East sincerely support us. The U.S. fought a bloody war with Japan in order to stop that country from taking over that area and it will not stand by and let China accomplish what Japan could not. Governor Harriman pointed out that we have great experience in the area and are well acquainted with the forces which are at work there. The way to reduce tension between the U.S. and USSR he said, was perhaps exemplified by India where both countries worked together to strengthen India's capacity to resist Peiping's aggression. But the first step in reducing tension is for the Soviet leaders to accept the sincerity and determination of the President, he said. Without that, there is little left to talk about.

Premier Kosygin said that Governor Harriman was asking him to support President Johnson but that this completely contradicts the Soviet view of the problem and would be impossible for any humanist. Such an action could not be justified, he said. He stated that the Soviet people approve the actions which the Soviet Government has taken to support the Vietnamese and he was convinced that many American people do not support U.S. Government policy in Vietnam. He said that the U.S. pilots who destroy defenseless villages could not be considered heroes. No one could believe this, he said. “It would go against the grain of any humanist, any communist.”

Kosygin stated that when he had expounded his views, Governor Harriman had interpreted them as somewhat insulting. He said that Governor Harriman had referred to the fact that Stalin had valued his personal integrity. He stated that he had given Governor Harriman no cause for personal pique and had not meant to impugn his integrity. He added that he had been Deputy Premier during the war and knew how sharply Stalin could speak. The Soviet Union stands firmly for peaceful coexistence, he said. This view is shared by all Soviet leaders. The Soviets will continue this policy and will not embark on any military adventures. It was for this reason, he stated, that he had asked Governor Harriman whether the U.S. could offer any hypothesis to improve bilateral relations or to settle the Vietnam problem.

Governor Harriman pointed out that discussions of the Vietnam situation were one possibility. Since the Soviet Union was co-chairman, he said, it should be thinking of finding ways to bring about negotiations. He emphatically stressed that President Johnson had the support of his advisors, of Congress and of the American people in pursuing his Vietnam policy. According to the latest public opinion polls in the U.S., 70% of the people supported the President. He added that he had never suggested that the USSR was in any way responsible for the acts of Hanoi and certainly not for those of Peiping.

Kosygin said that the U.S. should not think that a peaceful initiative in Vietnam would be regarded as weakness. The French settlement of the Algerian war had been a sign of strength. Kosygin added that the U.S. would be making a mistake in equating Peking and Hanoi. He himself, he said, had talked to the Vietnamese leaders and knew that they do not rule out a possible political settlement. “You must find a way, an approach, to bring this about.” He said that he had known Ho Chi Minh for more than thirty years and he could assure Governor Harriman that Ho is a heroic representative of the Vietnamese people, who love and admire him. The only way out in Vietnam is for the U.S. to start talks with the Vietnamese themselves and find a solution for this affair. What else is there? Fighting in Vietnam for many years to come will not help that country. He reiterated that a peaceful initiative in Vietnam would never be considered by the Soviet Union to be a sign of weakness and that the prestige of the U.S. would not sink if peaceful initiatives were undertaken.

Governor Harriman replied that President Johnson is ready and anxious for talks but that thus far Hanoi had shown no interest in them. If this was Kosygin's suggestion, he said, then the U.S. will certainly follow it.

Kosygin replied that “waiting is all right, but people with the noise of bombs in their ears are not anxious to negotiate.”

[Here follows discussion unrelated to Vietnam.]

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 US-USSR. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as enclosure 1 of airgram A-120 from Moscow, July 22. The meeting was held in Premier Kosygin's office in the Kremlin. Harriman sent a summary of this conversation to the President and Secretary Rusk in telegram 138 from Moscow, July 15. McGeorge Bundy forwarded the telegram to the President on July 15, under cover of a memorandum in which he noted that what was striking about the conversation was the routine character of Kosygin's comments, including a standard exchange on Vietnam. A notation on Bundy's covering memorandum indicates that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII)

60. Memorandum of Conversation 60. Memorandum of Conversation1

Saigon, July 16, 1965.

PARTICIPANTS

GVN: General Thieu

General Ky

General Chieu

General Co

General Khang

General Thang

Tran Van Do

Truong Tai Ton

Bui Diem

US: Secretary McNamara

Ambassador Taylor

Ambassador-designate Lodge

General Wheeler

General Westmoreland

General Goodpaster

Ambassador Johnson

Mr. McNaughton

Mr. Sylvester

Mr. Unger

Mr. Cooper

Mr. Zorthian

Mr. Herfurt

Mr. Manfull

SUBJECT

Meeting with GVN

Opening Remarks:

General Thieu welcomed Secretary McNamara and his party. Thieu said after three weeks of its existence the GVN has perhaps not succeeded in producing spectacular results; however, by the firm stand the GVN has taken, the religious and political groups appear to endorse the GVN program and are quiescent.2 The GVN had first sought to make clear to the people that the new government would be resolute in prosecuting the war, in winning ultimate victory over the VC, and in bringing peace with freedom to South Viet-Nam. Secondly, the new government is attempting to push forward vigorously with the war effort in the countryside and to organize the people in the rear. In order to generate popular support emphasis has been placed on bringing to the people a greater measure of social justice. The GVN has attempted to do this by “cleaning up” the organization and administration in Saigon and the countryside, by applying an austerity program, and by focusing attention on corruption and taking measures to eliminate corruption. Further, the GVN believes that “it is time to think of North Viet-Nam and to creating a psychological situation there so that the Vietnamese people in the DRV can help themselves to fight communism.”

General Thieu noted that Secretary McNamara and other representatives of the U.S. Government would have an opportunity for fact-finding. For its part, the GVN would like to hear from Secretary McNamara and others an expression of U.S. policies so that the GVN and U.S. could coordinate their policies to better effect and win the war. General Thieu observed that up to now the GVN had tended to present its own point of view and had perhaps not sought an adequate degree of coordination with the Americans. He felt it was necessary to achieve better coordination in the future. To that end in the discussion to follow the GVN spokesman would try to be as honest as possible in presenting the GVN point of view.

General Thieu then called on Truong Tai Ton, Minister of Economy and Finance, to present a review of the economic situation and proposals concerning U.S. aid to Viet-Nam.

Economic:

Mr. Ton made the following presentation:

General Considerations.

1. We are in a total war. The Government of Vietnam endeavors to safeguard a sound and viable economy along with the ever-growing military efforts. It is essential that exertions in the military field do not impede economic stability. Galloping inflation could be as catastrophic as a military disaster.

Our objective is twofold: to win the war and not to lose peace.

2. The Government of Vietnam has already started to implement a series of measures designed to re-establish the national economy and put it on a war-basis: Organization of supply, rice marketing, formation of safety stocks, reorganization of the market, intensification of the tax efforts, budgetary thrift, etc.

Those efforts are nevertheless far from sufficient in view of the increasing burdens we have to face. A substantial increase of American economic aid is therefore necessary to the simultaneous carrying out of the war effort and the maintenance of economic stability.

3. According to reiterated statements of U.S. leaders, American economic aid to Vietnam is unlimited and unconditional.

From the Government of Vietnam point of view this aid must have the following characteristics: a) It has to be proportional to the intensification of the military efforts, that is to approximately match the increase of our budgetary expenditures (from 1960 to 1965, this increase is only due to military burdens).

So our budget has more than trebled between 1960 and 1965, going from 15 to 47 billion whereas commercial aid (CIP-PL 480) has stood at the same level. Consequently, in spite of efforts aimed at increasing our own revenues, our budget which was still in equilibrium in 1961/62 has shown a deficit of 12 billion in 1964 and 23 billion in 1965.

b) It must enable us not only to continue the war somehow or other but also to keep ourselves in a fairly good position to face peace.

As far as we are concerned the war effort must be total. It should not, however, bleed the country dry of all its financial resources so that we are completely unprepared to face the hour of peace.

But the tremendous deficit of our budget, the continuous decrease of our reserves in gold and foreign exchange (U.S. dollars 175 million in January 1964, US dollars 100 million in July 1965) plus difficulties of all sorts generated by the war, are about to jeopardize our economic security. This trend is on the increase and will inevitably lead us to an economic crisis, unless American aid adequately supplements our own efforts.

Proposals.

4. CIP 1965/1966.

a) The Commercial Import Program (CIP) for FY June 1965-June 1966 should be brought up to a minimum of US dollars 200 million. To make its absorption possible, more flexibility and greater eligibility are necessary (to be negotiated between the Ministry of National Economy and USOM).

b) The CIP is primarily aimed at securing piasters for our budget support. One million U.S. dollars generate roughly 80 million VN piasters. Ten billion piasters are needed to compensate entirely for the increase of military expenditures between 1964 and 1965 (from 17 to 27 billion). This would require an additional amount of 125 million US dollars, that is a total CIP of 125-135 (1964/1965 level) = 260 million in FY 1966.

c) The increase of CIP amount will also permit us to establish necessary safety stocks.

5. PL 480.

It is requested a total programmed at about 60 million US dollars, with the permission to buy between 100,000 and 150,000 tons of rice in order to establish a permanent safety stock in Saigon to supply the capital and central provinces with rice.

6. Direct Aid.

We entirely support the policy consisting of buying in-country all goods which can be produced locally. However, in terms of direct aid, we don't agree with the in-country purchase of imported goods under the CIP program because such purchases will decrease the CIP amount.

7. Balance of Payments.

Our export situation has deteriorated because of security conditions. Export earnings decreased from 80 million US dollars in 1963 to 35 million in 1965 due to the suspension of rice exports and the lessening of other exportable surpluses. At the same time we had to spend our own foreign exchange stock in order to get piasters for the budget and not to disturb the market.

The amount of our reserves has lowered in an alarming way (100 million of gold and foreign exchange compared to 175 million in January 1964). At this conjuncture of intensive military effort as well as economic and political tension, a more accentuated decrease will run the risk of destroying confidence in our currency and creating a panic. This will, in a short time, be prejudicial to all military political and economic gains thus far obtained with so much struggle.

It is, therefore, suggested that American aid take emergency steps, put US dollars at our disposal to enable us to restore our reserves to the level of 150 million, a sum which we deem minimal to the protection of our currency.

8. Exchange of US Dollars.

The rush of US military men and their expenditures in US dollars have seriously disturbed our economy. The black market flourishes. Dollars introduced in the black market then feed illegal transactions (illicit trading of foreign exchange, smuggling, flight of assets, and, undoubtedly, even VC financial operations). The value and sovereignty of our currency are at stake.

On the other hand, those expenditures in US dollars are harmful to the American soldiers themselves: due to the absence of coins, they have to pay at the minimum price one US dollar for a glass of beer, a haircut or a taxi drive whereas the real price is only between VN piasters 10 and 30.

American authorities should help us stem the black market of dollars, make the exchange of dollars with piasters at the free market rate and not at the black market rate.3 This could be viewed as an increased contribution of the United States to the war effort and the strengthening of the Vietnamese economy.

9. The Presence of US Military Men and Economic Activities.

The presence of an important number of US military men has brought about a vertiginous rise in the cost of labor (100%) and the prices of some products. It is suggested that a joint-committee strive to study economic problems generated by the above US presence and that US officials agree with the Government of Vietnam about their wage-policy.

Military:

General Co said that the military briefing would be in three parts: (1) Additional GVN force requirements for the remaining months of 1965 and early 1966; (2) a few considerations and recommendations concerning future strategy and conduct of the war; and, (3) a concept for organization of the “home guard” forces. General Co then turned the briefing responsibility to General Thang, who spelled out additional force requirements as follows:

For the ground forces— 3 additional airborne battalions

4 additional Marine battalions

7 Ranger task force headquarters elements

For the Air Force— 1 squadron of jet aircraft

1 squadron of A1H's

For the Navy— 1 AKA

5 LSD's

5 LSM's

In explaining the background of this additional request, General Thang noted that the present general reserve consists of 11 battalions, of which 6 are airborne and 5 are Marine battalions. Six of the 11 have been deployed in I Corps and II Corps to meet the step-up in VC activity in the highlands; 1 airborne battalion suffered over 50 percent casualties in the Dong Xoai battle and is not combat ready. Therefore, only four battalions can be said to be available in the general reserve. In order to meet this critical situation U.S. support for formation of additional battalions as indicated above is urgently requested. The GVN realizes that this additional request is not part of the 85,000 increase previously agreed upon. General Thang believed the additional battalions could be recruited without running into the manpower problem because: (a) operational losses (casualties) are relatively lower with these types of units than in the regular ARVN battalions; (b) the desertion rate is lower; and, (c) recruitment to activate the additional battalions in Saigon and the other urban areas is generally easier for these units and should not prove too difficult. General Thang observed that there has been an evolution in regard to the Rangers, beginning with the formation of Ranger companies, then Ranger battalions, then a reinforcement of the Ranger battalions with heavy weapons, and now there is a need to operate the Rangers as 2-3 battalion task forces. This will require augmentation of the Ranger battalion headquarters elements.

With regard to present and future strategy, General Thang said that the situation in I Corps and IV Corps is relatively good. In IV Corps initiative rests with the GVN because of the aggressive spirit of the troops and a terrain adapted to helicopter and M-113 operations. In I Corps the situation was relatively good and could be improved if the U.S. Marines were committed more actively to search and destroy operations. II Corps he considered as critical because of the introduction of the entirety of the 325th PAVN Division. Thang said that the JGS had now confirmed all regiments of the 325th Division were now in South Vietnam. He therefore requested that the U.S. dispatch a U.S. Assault Division to help meet this critical situation. Thang noted that the situation in III Corps was not good. The 5th Division is low both in morale and effective strength because of the recent series of battles with the VC. The GVN would like to have the 1st U.S. Infantry Division assigned to this area after the U.S. Assault Division is in place in the highlands. Thang foresaw a series of large engagements and VC attacks in the immediate weeks ahead.

General Thang said that in the GVN's view Hanoi had two general courses open to it: (1) To make major effort during the monsoon season but eventually to realize that the VC victory was impossible and to sue for a cease-fire; and

(2) To increase their infiltration and recruitment and make an all-out effort to cut off the highlands from the rest of South Vietnam.

Thang believed that general objectives should be to (a) stop and destroy units coming from DRV into South Vietnam; (b) destroy all major VC main force units in the highlands and Central Vietnam; and (c) protect the Vietnamese manpower in South Vietnam to inhibit VC recruitment and exploitation of the manpower pool. Therefore, the GVN/US should continue bombing attacks against targets in the DRV and increase the tempo and intensity of the air strikes. With respect to (b) above the U.S. should commit an Assault Division to the highlands and other combat troops from third countries should be deployed there. With regard to (c) above GVN/US should think seriously concerning intensified pacification program to protect the manpower resources. The GVN should commit ARVN primarily to this task and deploy Vietnamese units along the coastal lowlands and in the Delta. Under this concept, there would be two general areas—one area, the populous areas where GVN would devote its primary efforts; the other, the relatively unpopulated areas where the US/allied forces would concentrate their efforts, it being understood in the latter case that administration for the large cities and district towns would remain with the GVN. The primary missions of the US/allied forces would be search and destroy operations and the protection of important bases. The primary mission of ARVN would be to engage in pacification programs and to protect the population.

If this concept were approved the GVN would suggest that a US Air Assault Division be deployed to an area comprising Kontum, Pleiku and Phu Bon; another Division to operate against Zones C and D. This would require an additional Division for the Banmethuot-Phuoc Thanh area.

With regard to the organization of a home guard, Thang observed that all were agreed that the war cannot be won by military means alone, and that all Vietnamese must take part in the war. This implies that Vietnamese not on active military service be organized into groups. Thang alluded to efforts under the Diem regime to organize the Republican Youth and Combat Youth and under General Nguyen Khanh to create civil defense organization. The proposed home guard is conceived to be comparable effort and GVN intends to mobilize all males between ages 15-48 and all females between 18-30. Thang said that the chain of command for the home guard would be incorporated in that for the Regional Forces/Popular Forces down to the hamlet level. It is anticipated that the home guard would have special uniforms and insignia and that selected members would be armed. Thang requested the U.S. to assist the GVN in developing a realistic plan for the home guard and the necessary support to get it launched.

Questions:

General Thieu requested the U.S. representatives to study the GVN proposals and inquired whether there were any questions. Secretary McNamara inquired as to the approximate number of U.S. personnel which the GVN desired to have in South Vietnam. Thieu replied that the GVN proposal involved the 44 additional U.S. battalions previously requested plus one more infantry division. Secretary McNamara observed that we have approximately 75,000 U.S. personnel in South Vietnam at present and the GVN request would bring this figure to approximately 200,000 U.S. personnel in-country. Secretary McNamara inquired whether the Vietnamese people would readily accept an American presence of this magnitude. General Ky said he anticipated no real problems and General Thieu added that it would be necessary to explain carefully to the Vietnamese people that U.S. personnel were in South Vietnam only to help fight the war. Thieu believed that most Vietnamese did not consider the U.S. as having any colonialist aspirations but he thought the GVN should embark on an extensive propaganda program to explain U.S. presence. Thieu continued that if U.S. forces were concentrated in separate military zones away from the major population centers and areas of dense population that the impact of American presence could be minimized. He said that this consideration was fundamental in suggesting that U.S. forces operate in the highlands and against Zone C and D. Further, the terrain in these areas is difficult and U.S. availability of helicopter lift and mobility would be additional assets. Thieu observed that up to now the GVN had never had necessary military strength nor the time to conduct a really effective pacification effort in the populated areas. He believed that a concentration of GVN attention to this effort made good sense.

Secretary McNamara said that many Americans asked him whether, if the U.S. were to send up to 200,000 troops, we could count on a stable government in South Vietnam. General Thieu replied that in the past there were two general reasons for political instability: (a) previous governments did not have a clear policy and were not strong enough to carry out their announced policies; and (b) previous governments found that after 3-4 months they have been unable to sustain VC attacks and at the same time to bring social justice to the people. He believed that if U.S. troops were to relieve ARVN to work actively on a pacification program, the current government could demonstrate to the people that it is capable and qualified to govern. He added that he would intend under the new home guard organization to train good political and pacification cadres for the pacification program.

Secretary McNamara inquired as to possible VC actions particularly whether the VC might increase their strength substantially and what the GVN and U.S. should do in this event. General Thieu responded that he felt it was more difficult for the VC to increase its strength now than in the past. While VC ranks can be increased through infiltration, we can inhibit this through stepped up bombing of infiltration routes. However, at the present time, at least half of the manpower of South Vietnam is controlled by the VC. It is therefore essential that the GVN take steps to bring this manpower pool under GVN control.

Secretary McNamara noted his surprise at the elimination of the Chieu Hoi ministry in the current government and inquired whether the GVN had a program comparable to the Chieu Hoi program. Thieu replied that the Chieu Hoi program continues but that the Directory believed that it belonged more properly under the PsyWar Ministry than as a separate ministry. By bringing Chieu Hoi within the PsyWar Ministry, the GVN had not intended in any way to denigrate its importance. General Ky underlined these remarks, stating that all agree on the importance of Chieu Hoi and the need to put more emphasis on this program. However, he believed it was more important to have the Chieu Hoi program as part of a more general program to bring the people back under GVN control. With regard to governmental stability, General Ky stated that the Vietnamese also long for a strong, stable government. He said that the current government would do its best to maintain stability. The GVN desired more U.S. troops not because the Vietnamese were unwilling to continue the fight but that it would relieve ARVN for important pacification tasks. He added that the GVN did not like to lose terrain to the VC, therefore it was suggested that the US/allied forces help hold terrain while the GVN “reorganized the rear”. General Ky said the reason for government instability in the past has been primarily the lack of social justice. At present corruption exists everywhere, the rich get richer while the mass of the poor Vietnamese see little hope for improvement. The mass of Vietnamese are therefore very vulnerable to VC propaganda. In his view previous governments had based their support primarily on the promises of support from minority groups, such as the religious sects and groups of politicians. In contrast, the current government intends to emphasize support of the mass of the Vietnamese, particularly of the poor Vietnamese, and to give them a sense of hope and confidence in the future. Ky said the GVN would ask for more sacrifices from the people and the members of the government were prepared to make their individual sacrifices. The GVN considers the political and religious groups as being merely individual Vietnamese citizens and not as groups which could validly claim a controlling voice in government policies. It was necessary for the Vietnamese to unite on one road to victory. In this connection none of the Ministers in his government represented any particular group or faction and they were deliberately chosen for this reason. Ky said the GVN hoped to satisfy U.S. public opinion concerning governmental stability by making the government strong and stable enough to carry out this announced policy.

In conclusion Secretary McNamara thanked the GVN participants for their frankness. He said that the discussion had been most helpful and that he looked forward to further discussions in the succeeding days.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Drafted on July 24 by Manfull. Transmitted as enclosure 1 of airgram A-66 from Saigon, July 27. The meeting was held in the Prime Minister's office. The McNamara party arrived in Saigon on the morning of July 16 and returned to Washington on the afternoon of July 20. Members of the party included McNamara, Lodge, Wheeler, Goodpaster, McNaughton, Sylvester, Unger, Cooper, and Colby. Unger replaced William Bundy, who withdrew from the trip because of illness.

2 In telegram 164 from Saigon, July 16, the Embassy reported that Buddhist leader Tri Quang had informed the Embassy that he could not support the Ky government and was considering what course of action to take. (Ibid., POL 15 VIET S) The Department responded, in telegram 166 to Saigon, July 17, with concern that Quang's attitude might presage renewed Buddhist unrest, and instructed the Embassy to call on Quang and inform him that additional political turmoil in Saigon could only serve to aid the Viet Cong and undermine the will of the South Vietnamese to resist the Communists. (Ibid.)

3 In a later meeting between McNamara and Ky on July 16, Ky singled out the black market currency question and the supply of rice as the two most important economic problems that his government faced. (Telegram 167 from Saigon, July 17; ibid., FN 17 VIET S) In telegram 168 to Saigon, July 17, a joint State/AID/Treasury/DOD/Agriculture/BOB message, instructions were sent to the Embassy concerning exchange rate negotiations designed to bring the black market problem under control. (Ibid., FN 10 VIET S) After lengthy negotiations, the Embassy reported on August 18, in telegram 521 from Saigon, that tentative agreement had been reached with the South Vietnamese Government on diverting dollars out of the black market into legal channels. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Coordinator Files: FRC 68 A 5612, FN 17)

61. Telegram From Acting Secretary of Defense Vance to Secretary of Defense McNamara, in Vietnam 61. Telegram From Acting Secretary of Defense Vance to Secretary of Defense McNamara, in Vietnam1

Washington, July 17, 1965, 3:42 p.m.

172042Z. Yesterday I met three times with Highest Authority on actions associated with 34 battalion plan. In summary, he stated: 1. It is his current intention to proceed with 34 battalion plan.

2. It is impossible for him to submit supplementary budget request of more than $300-400 million to the Congress before next January.

3. If a larger request is made to the Congress, he believes this will kill domestic legislative program.

4. We should be prepared to explain to the Congress that we have adequate authority and funds, by use of deficit financing, $700 million supplemental and possible small current supplemental, to finance recommended operations until next January, when we will be able to come up with clear and precise figures as to what is required.

I asked Highest Authority whether request for legislation authorizing call-up of reserves and extension of tours of duty would be acceptable in the light of his comments concerning domestic program, and he stated that it would.

I pointed out that we would have great difficulties with Senator Stennis concerning this course of action. He said that he recognized that we would but we would just have to bull it through. He requested that I talk to Senator Russell on Monday,2 and I will do so.

I have talked to Charlie Hitch and Paul Ignatius about this, and the three of us will determine whether we can achieve what Highest Authority desires. I have also talked to McGeorge Bundy but do not plan to mention it to anyone else.

In meantime, planning exercise is proceeding according to schedule and we expect to have plans completed for your review upon return. Also expect to send you draft Presidential message and draft speech by back channel cable3 this weekend. Signed Vance.

1 Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/General Counsel Files: FRC 75 A 62, Box 55, Binder 35, SecDef Cable Files. Top Secret; Literally Eyes Only. Sent to MACV headquarters in Saigon with an instruction to the Duty Officer to deliver it personally to McNamara only. The source text has a stamped indication that Secretary McNamara saw it.

2 July 19.

3 Not found.

62. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 62. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 18, 1965.

182. For Bundies from Cooper and Unger. Summary state of play at the half follows:

Re military situation—briefing on GVN plan for utilization US military forces and disposition provided by General Thieu and ARVN J-3. Briefly, GVN contemplates US force of 200,000 with 3 US divisions to take over responsibility for highlands in II Corps and defense of major US bases and installations throughout country. ARVN would concentrate on pacification primarily in populous sections throughout country. GVN also unveiled Home Guard plan with sketchiest explanation.

MACV and visiting team disinclined to accept GVN concept. MACV concept will be reflected in McNamara team and US Mission recommendations now in preparation.

Team given intensive briefings on MACV strategic and tactical situation and logistic requirements. Biggest bottlenecks appear to be in sea interdiction. McNamara is formulating recommendations to break this and other binds. Thus far little opportunity discuss pacification/rural reconstruction with either GVN or MACV.

Re economic situation—excellent briefings by acting USOM Chief and GVN Minister of Economic Affairs point up danger of incipient inflation, shortages of key commodities (e.g., rice, building materials) labor scarcities, black market and transportation bottlenecks. Recommendations to deal with these and some major policy proposals to cope with over-all GVN weakness will be incorporated in team report (some suggestions will be forwarded to Washington prior to team's departure).

Re political situation—Meeting with Thieu, Ky et al., subsequent informal conversations at dinner, additional sessions yet to come, and intensive series of Unger-Cooper meetings with cross-section political types in and out of government should provide reasonably good feel of political scene. Initial, tentative impressions: Thieu and Ky appear to take pains to present collective front. Both make the right noises about solidarity, stability, revolution, Chieu Hoi, etc. Both convey sense of sincerity and determination, although both (especially Ky) seem to be concentrating on the daily quick-fix and neither seems to have yet harnessed the resources (if indeed they exist) to work out fundamental, solid plans for the longer term. Possibly excluding Co, other members of GVN's first team, especially Econ Minister seem quite impressive.

Visitors have pressed GVN hard for their estimate of reaction to large US forces (no basic problem, but same underlying worries re black market etc.), Chieu Hoi (they say the right things, but see below), government stability (Ky and Thieu stress reliance on support of mass of citizens rather than individual groupings—neat trick if they can do it) and representation abroad (they are working on it, but no immediate progress seems in sight). In short, we want to probe more before coming to any firm conclusions.

Re Chieu Hoi—Ky claims he has given this program increased importance by combining it with rural reconstruction. He also claims that statistics of increased numbers of ralliers have been either inflated by provincial Chieu Hoi officials or are meaningless because the VC itself has used Chieu Hoi centers as “rest camps”.

In session with Chieu Hoi investigation team (Col. Jacobson et al.) Unger and Cooper got impression that program not doing too badly despite apparent massive indifference on part of GVN. Jacobson is preparing tentative conclusions and recommendations for incorporation in McNamara team report (final report of survey will not be available for a month).

Miscellany—Lodge and Cooper went to Cam Ranh Bay this morning and both extremely impressed with pace and scale of construction of logistics base. Unger to Hue to get provincial impressions. Embassy morale high, even inspiring. Hertz case cooking. CAS more optimistic of release (perhaps this week) than any time since February.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 7:16 a.m.

63. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 63. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 19, 1965, 8:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

The Reasons for Avoiding a Billion Dollar Appropriation in Vietnam

1. It would be a belligerent challenge to the Soviets at a time when it is important to do only the things which we have to do (like calling reserves).

2. It would stir talk about controls over the economy and inflation—at a time when controls are not needed and inflation is not that kind of a problem.

3. It would create the false impression that we have to have guns, not butter—and would help the enemies of the President's domestic legislative program.

4. It would play into the hands of the Soviets at Geneva, because they could argue that it was a flagrant breach of the policy of “mutual example” on defense budgets.

5. It is not needed—because there are other ways of financing our full effort in Vietnam for the rest of the calendar year, at least.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. No classification marking. The President put a line through the entire memorandum, crossed out the third point, and wrote at the bottom, “Rewrite eliminating 3.” Bundy submitted the rewritten memorandum to President Johnson on July 23 under a covering memorandum stating: “This is a revised version of an earlier paper, but it may clearly be out-of-date.” The revised version was identical to the memorandum printed here except for the omission of the third point. (Ibid.)

64. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 64. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 19, 1965, 8:25 p.m.

SUBJECT

Vietnam Planning at Close of Business, July 19

We currently expect Bob McNamara back at 8 a.m. Wednesday.2 We assume you will want to see him that morning—or possibly that afternoon after he has had time to take a reading with Rusk and Vance. The attached cable from Cooper and Unger (Tab A)3 shows where they are at half time in Saigon.

Meanwhile, Vance has gone ahead with planning for the reserve call-up, the extension of tours, and the increased draft calls which are foreshadowed in the military planning. A first draft exists of a Presidential message and of the necessary legislation.4 The planned reserve call-up will be one Marine Division and six Army Reserve Brigades (a total of 27 battalions). Beyond this, there would be temporary additions to the active forces of 27 battalions (nine Marine and 18 Army), plus a permanent addition of nine more Army battalions. This makes a total addition of 63 battalions. (At Tab B is a one-page statement of current planning which Cy Vance regards as very tentative and which Bob McNamara has not had a chance to approve.)

In addition, my brother has drawn up an action checklist for Congressional and diplomatic steps.5 We will have appropriate messages for all foreign leaders. Some should go early in the game, as soon as you know your own mind. Others should wait until after public announcement of your plans—presumably in a message to the Congress.

Indeed the timing of the message to the Congress is really the D-Day for the whole operation. If McNamara reports to you Wednesday, you probably do not wish to give an appearance of great haste in reaching a decision, and for that reason I would recommend against going to the Hill before the first of the week. But a delay beyond Monday would seem to me to create too wide a gap between McNamara's return and the point of decision. If you agree, we might tentatively plan that you would see McNamara Wednesday, see him again with a view to decision Friday, and talk with the Congressional Leadership either Friday or Saturday to get ready for a formal message on Monday.

At the same time, it is increasingly urgent that we get ahead with planning for public support. Doug Cater is ready to go ahead with plans to provide speech materials to friendly Senators and Congressmen, and everyone is ready to go ahead with the Citizens Committee as soon as you give the signal. I continue to think that Arthur Dean would be an excellent choice for us, but he is by no means the only possibility.

I have suggested to Jack Valenti that Rusk and Vance and I have lunch with you tomorrow, or come in at any other time at your convenience to review the bidding on all these matters. You have just agreed to this, and I have told Marvin.6

McG. B.

Tab B7

PROPOSED 63 BATTALION PLAN

1. Purpose

A. Reconstitute ASAP by calling up reserves substantially all elements of US ground combat forces introduced into SVN under 34 + 10 Bn Plan.

B. Make certain temporary and permanent additions to active ground combat forces (by draft increases, volunteers and tour extensions).

2. Combat Ground Forces Involved:

A. Call-up of reserves (27 Bns):

4th Marine Div, including air elements (9 Bns): combat ready in 60 days

6 Army reserve brigades (18 Bns): combat ready in 8-12 weeks

B. Temporary additions to the active forces (27 bns):

3 Marine Brigades, w/out air elements (9 Bns): combat ready in 4-6 mos.

3 Army Brigades (9 Bns): combat ready in 6-8 months

1 Army Division (9 Bns): combat ready in 8-10 months

C. Permanent additions to the Army (9 bns):

3 Brigades (9 Bns): combat ready at end of 3d, 4th, and 5th months respectively

3. Options provided:

At end of one year, retain all, part or none of Army and/or Marine reserves on active duty, thereby reducing 63 Bns not at all or by up to 27 Bns (18 Army plus 9 Marine Bns).

4. Service end strength increases:

A. Personnel:

If Reserves deactivated If Reserves retained

Army 250,000 350,000

Navy 56,000 56,000

Marines 86,000 131,000

Air Force *102,000 *102,000

Total 494,000 639,000

* Includes 16,000 civilians for MATS augmentation.

B. Units:

Army—Shown above.

Navy—17 Destroyers plus 24 combat support/supply vessels (plus undetermined number of private charters).

Marines—Shown above.

Air Force—9 TFS (F-100); 6 Recce Sqdn (RF-84).

Note: Above figures and units are tentative and will be reviewed in light of actual decisions reached following Mr. McNamara's report. In addition, these figures have not been scrubbed and are merely rough planning estimates at this time.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. No classification marking.

2 July 21.

3 Document 62.

4 Not further identified.

5 Checklist of Actions, July 17. (Johnson Library, National Security File,NSC History, Deployment of Major U.S. Forces to Vietnam)

6 The final sentence initially read: “I will call in the morning to learn your pleasure.” It was revised in Bundy's hand after his conversation with the President. The Marvin to whom he refers is Marvin Watson, a Special Assistant to the President.

7 Top Secret. The source text bears the date “7/19/65” in the top right corner.

65. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 65. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 20, 1965.

205. For the President. The only report worth your reading this week is the one which Bob McNamara is carrying back on his plane to you tonight.2 We have had a very fruitful five-day period together and the important recommendations which he will present to you have the full concurrence of Johnson, Westmoreland and me.

Two events below the level of importance of the Secretary's report are still worth mentioning. The first is the capture and death of Colonel Pham Ngoc Thao, the inveterate and skillful intriguer whose hand was behind abortive coup attempts of February 19 and May 20 of this year. Since the latter, he has been lying low in the vicinity of Saigon eluding apprehension by the police and thus avoiding the execution of the death sentence leveled on him in absentia by a military court. Although Thao was close to the extremists within the northern Catholic refugee bloc, leading clerics such as Papal Delegate Palmas have been openly expressing the hope that Thao could be removed from the country and his troublemaking activities suppressed. Although his death, presumably from wounds received at the time of his apprehension, may stir resentment in lower Catholic circles, it is doubtful that it will generate any emotional reaction among the substantial members of the church.

The Viet Cong monsoon offensive dropped off rather sharply during the week in which the guerrillas initiated only one battalion size attack.ARVN, on the other hand, executed successfully one of their most complex military operations of the war in opening the road from Qui Nhon to Pleiku for the movement of essential civilian and military cargo. Participants included 12 ARVN battalions and the B-52 SAC bombers from Guam which engaged in a close air support mission to assist Vietnamese Marines. The operation seems to have taken the Viet Cong by surprise who thus far have made no reaction, and convoys are rolling freely back and forth. They were badly needed to relieve the shortage of commodities in the highland area resulting from Viet Cong interdiction of routes.

The main question of the public mind is, “What will the U.S. do next as a result of the McNamara visit?”

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 8:02 a.m. and passed to the White House.

2 Document 67.

66. Memorandum From the Ambassador-Designate to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson 66. Memorandum From the Ambassador-Designate to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson1

Saigon, July 20, 1965.

Following are my present views concerning our future course as regards Viet-Nam: 1. I concur in the specific recommendations contained in Paragraph 5 of Secretary McNamara's Report.2

2. Continue all activities against North Viet-Nam.

3. Make strong points of the great seaports, notably Danang, Cam Ranh, and Saigon and, possibly, some places in the interior which can be readily maintained.

4. From these strong points the Vietnamese, with our advice and help, should conduct their program of pacification by means of a true Revolution for a New Life, on which a start has been attempted in the Hop Tac area. With the ARVN and police providing security, this should be an affirmative, highly political oil spot procedure, never striving for flashy and misleading statistics, always seeking solid and durable gains, however small, however slowly achieved. My intended program of stationing a few carefully selected political coordinators in a few provinces, working directly under the Embassy, attempts to create such a procedure. Once we and the South Vietnamese learn how to do this, the oil spots will connect with each other and the Viet Cong military manpower pool will inevitably shrink. Neither bombing nor conventional ground warfare will reach the terrorist working as an individual and in small groups—and they are the backbone of Viet Cong recruiting.

5. If the opportunity offers, U.S. troops can fight the pitched battle with large units of the Viet Cong—as they attack our strong points, and possibly, in other places where they can be identified and where the circumstances are such that the outlook for destroying them is propitious. There may be good chances to open and secure roads. But U.S. troops should not be committed to prolonged “search sweeps” in the jungle or to being permanently stationed in the jungle.

6. No one can establish schedules or make predictions. As President Johnson has often well said of the American pioneers—from Plymouth Rock to the Far West—we must endure and, as we endure, we will learn and opportunities will come.

7. But our grandchildren will not live to see the day that a united China does not probe in Southeast Asia.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (B). Top Secret. Lodge apparently wrote this memorandum in Saigon and sent it to the White House upon his return from Vietnam.

2 Document 67.

67. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 67. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson1

Washington, July 20, 1965.

SUBJECT

Recommendations of additional deployments to Vietnam

1. Introduction. Our object in Vietnam is to create conditions for a favorable outcome by demonstrating to the VC/DRV that the odds are against their winning. We want to create these conditions, if possible, without causing the war to expand into one with China or the Soviet Union and in a way which preserves support of the American people and, hopefully, of our allies and friends. The following assessments, made following my trip to Vietnam with Ambassador-designate Lodge and General Wheeler, are my own and are addressed to the achievement of that object. My specific recommendations appear in paragraph 5; they are concurred in by Ambassador Taylor, Ambassador-designate Lodge, Ambassador Johnson, General Wheeler, Admiral Sharp and General Westmoreland. I have neither asked for nor obtained their concurrence in other portions of the paper.2

2. Favorable outcome. In my view, a “favorable outcome” for purposes of these assessments and recommendations has nine fundamental elements: (a) VC stop attacks and drastically reduce incidents of terror and sabotage.

(b) DRV reduces infiltration to a trickle, with some reasonably reliable method of our obtaining confirmation of this fact.

(c) US/GVN stop bombing of North Vietnam.

(d) GVN stays independent (hopefully pro-US, but possibly genuinely neutral).

(e) GVN exercises governmental functions over substantially all of South Vietnam.

(f) Communists remain quiescent in Laos and Thailand.

(g) DRV withdraws PAVN forces and other North Vietnamese infiltrators (not regroupees) from South Vietnam.

(h) VC/NLF transform from a military to a purely political organization.

(i) US combat forces (not advisors or AID) withdraw.

A favorable outcome could include also arrangements regarding elections, relations between North and South Vietnam, participation in peace-keeping by international forces, membership for North and South Vietnam in the UN, and so on. The nine fundamental elements can evolve with or without an express agreement and, except for what might be negotiated incidental to a cease-fire, are more likely to evolve without an express agreement than with one. We do not need now to address the question whether ultimately we would settle for something less than the nine fundamentals; because deployment of the forces recommended in paragraph 5 is prerequisite to the achievement of any acceptable settlement, and a decision can be made later, when bargaining becomes a reality, whether to compromise in any particular.

3. Estimate of the situation. The situation in South Vietnam is worse than a year ago (when it was worse than a year before that). After a few months of stalemate, the tempo of the war has quickened. A hard VC push is now on to dismember the nation and to maul the army. The VC main and local forces, reinforced by militia and guerrillas, have the initiative and, with large attacks (some in regimental strength), are hurting ARVN forces badly. The main VC efforts have been in southern I Corps, northern and central II Corps and north of Saigon. The central highlands could well be lost to the National Liberation Front during this monsoon season. Since June 1, the GVN has been forced to abandon six district capitals; only one has been retaken. US combat troop deployments and US/VNAF strikes against the North have put to rest most South Vietnamese fears that the United States will foresake them, and US/VNAF air strikes in-country have probably shaken VC morale somewhat. Yet the government is able to provide security to fewer and fewer people in less and less territory as terrorism increases. Cities and towns are being isolated as fewer and fewer roads and railroads are usable and power and communications lines are cut.

The economy is deteriorating—the war is disrupting rubber production, rice distribution, Dalat vegetable production and the coastal fishing industry, causing the loss of jobs and income, displacement of people and frequent breakdown or suspension of vital means of transportation and communication; foreign exchange earnings have fallen; and severe inflation is threatened.

The odds are less than even that the Ky government will last out the year. Ky is “executive agent” for a directorate of generals. His government is youthful and inexperienced, but dedicated to a “revolutionary” program. His tenure depends upon unity of the armed forces behind him. If the directorate holds together and the downward trend of the war is halted, the religious and regional factions will probably remain quiescent; otherwise there will be political turbulence and possibly uncoordinated efforts to negotiate settlement with the DRV. The Buddhists, Catholics, out-politicians and business community are “wait-and-seeing;” the VC, while unable alone to generate effective unrest in the cities, can “piggy-back” on any anti-government demonstration or cause.

Rural reconstruction (pacification) even in the Hop Tac area around Saigon is making little progress. Gains in IV Corps are being held, but in I and II Corps and adjacent III Corps areas it has lost ground fast since the start of the VC monsoon offensive (300,000 people have been lost to the VC, and tens of thousands of refugees have poured out of these areas).

The Government-to-VC ratio over-all is now only a little better than 3-to-1, and in combat battalions little better than 1.5-to-1. Some ARVN units have been mauled; many are understrength and therefore “conservative.” Desertions are at a high rate, and the force build-up has slipped badly. The VC, who are undoubtedly suffering badly too (their losses are very high), now control a South Vietnamese manpower pool of 500,000 to 1 million fighting-age men and reportedly are trying to double their combat strength, largely by forced draft (down to 15-year-olds) in the increasing areas they control. They seem to be able more than to replace their losses.

There are no signs that we have throttled the inflow of supplies for the VC or can throttle the flow while their materiel needs are as low as they are; indeed more and better weapons have been observed in VC hands, and it is probable that there has been further build-up of North Vietnamese regular units in the I and II Corps areas, with at least three full regiments (all of the 325th Division) there. Nor have our air attacks in North Vietnam produced tangible evidence of willingness on the part of Hanoi to come to the conference table in a reasonable mood. The DRV/VC seem to believe that South Vietnam is on the run and near collapse; they show no signs of settling for less than a complete take-over.

4. Options open to us. We must choose among three courses of action with respect to Vietnam all of which involve different probabilities, outcomes and costs: (a) Cut our losses and withdraw under the best conditions that can be arranged—almost certainly conditions humiliating the United States and very damaging to our future effectiveness on the world scene.

(b) Continue at about the present level, with the US forces limited to say 75,000, holding on and playing for the breaks—a course of action which, because our position would grow weaker, almost certainly would confront us later with a choice between withdrawal and an emergency expansion of forces, perhaps too late to do any good.

(c) Expand promptly and substantially the US military pressure against the Viet Cong in the South and maintain the military pressure against the North Vietnamese in the North while launching a vigorous effort on the political side3 to lay the groundwork for a favorable outcome by clarifying our objectives and establishing channels of communication. This alternative would stave off defeat in the short run and offer a good chance of producing a favorable settlement in the longer run; at the same time it would imply a commitment to see a fighting war clear through at considerable cost in casualties and materiel and would make any later decision to withdraw even more difficult and even more costly than would be the case today.

My recommendations in paragraph 5 below are based on the choice of the third alternative (Option c) as the course of action involving the best odds of the best outcome with the most acceptable cost to the United States.

5. Military recommendations. There are now 15 US (and 1 Australian) combat battalions in Vietnam; they, together with other combat personnel and non-combat personnel, bring the total US personnel in Vietnam to approximately 75,000. a. I recommend that the deployment of US ground troops in Vietnam be increased by October to 34 maneuver battalions (or, if the Koreans fail to provide the expected 9 battalions promptly, to 43 battalions). The battalions—together with increases in helicopter lift, air squadrons, naval units, air defense, combat support and miscellaneous log support and advisory personnel which I also recommend—would bring the total US personnel in Vietnam to approximately 175,000 (200,000 if we must make up for the Korean failure). It should be understood that the deployment of more men (an additional perhaps 100,000) may be necessary in early 1966, and that the deployment of additional forces thereafter is possible but will depend on developments.

b. I recommend that Congress be requested to authorize the call-up of approximately 235,000 men in the Reserve and National Guard. This number—approximately 125,000 Army, 75,000 Marines, 25,000 Air Force and 10,000 Navy—would provide approximately 36 maneuver battalions by the end of this year. The call-up would be for a two-year period; but the intention would be to release them after one year, by which time they could be relieved by regular forces if conditions permitted.

c. I recommend that the regular armed forces be increased by approximately 375,000 men (approximately 250,000 Army, 75,000 Marines, 25,000 Air Force and 25,000 Navy). This would provide approximately 27 additional maneuver battalions by the middle of 1966. The increase would be accomplished by increasing recruitment, increasing the draft and extending tours of duty of men already in the service.

d. I recommend that a supplemental appropriation of approximately $X for FY 1966 be sought from the Congress to cover the first part of the added costs attributable to the build-up in and for the war in Vietnam. A further supplemental appropriation might be required later in the fiscal year.

It should be noted that in mid-1966 the United States would, as a consequence of the above method of handling the build-up, have approximately 600,000 additional men (approximately 63 additional maneuver battalions) as protection against contingencies.

6. Use of forces. The forces will be used however they can be brought to bear most effectively. The US/third-country ground forces will operate in coordination with South Vietnamese forces. They will defend their own bases; they will assist in providing security in neighboring areas; they will augment Vietnamese forces, assuring retention of key logistic areas and population centers. Also, in the initial phase they will maintain a small reserve-reaction force, conducting nuisance raids and spoiling attacks, and opening and securing selected lines of communication; as in-country ground strength increases to a level permitting extended US and third-country offensive action, the forces will be available for more active combat missions when the Vietnamese Government and General Westmoreland agree that such active missions are needed. The strategy for winning this stage of the war will be to take the offensive—to take and hold the initiative. The concept of tactical operations will be to exploit the offensive, with the objects of putting the VC/DRV battalion forces out of operation and of destroying their morale. The South Vietnamese, US and third-country forces, by aggressive exploitation of superior military forces, are to gain and hold the initiative—keeping the enemy at a disadvantage, maintaining a tempo such as to deny them time to recuperate or regain their balance, and pressing the fight against VC/DRV main force units in South Vietnam to run them to ground and destroy them. The operations should combine to compel the VC/DRV to fight at a higher and more sustained intensity with resulting higher logistical consumption and, at the same time, to limit his capability to resupply forces in combat at that scale by attacking his LOC. The concept assumes vigorous prosecution of the air and sea anti-infiltration campaign and includes increased use of air in-country, including B-52s, night and day to harass VC in their havens. Following destruction of the VC main force units, the South Vietnamese must reinstitute the Program of Rural Reconstruction as an antidote to the continuing VC campaign of terror and subversion.

7. Actions against North Vietnam. We should continue the program of bombing military targets in North Vietnam. While avoiding striking population and industrial targets not closely related to the DRV's supply of war materiel to the VC, we should announce to Hanoi and carry out actions to destroy such supplies and to interdict their flow. The number of strike sorties against North Vietnam—against fixed targets and for armed reconnaissance—should increase slowly from the present level of 2,500 a month to 4,000 or more a month. We should be prepared at any time to carry out a severe reprisal should the VC or DRV commit a particularly damaging or horrendous act (e.g., VC interdiction of the Saigon river could call for a quarantine of DRV harbors, or VC assassination of a high-ranking US official could call for destruction of all of the major power plants in North Vietnam); the chances of our reprisal action leading to escalation is not large in such an instance. After the 44 US/third-country battalions have been deployed and after some strong action has been taken in the program of bombing the North (e.g., after the key railroad bridges north of Hanoi have been dropped), we could, as part of a diplomatic initiative, consider introducing a 6-8 week pause in the program of bombing the North.

8. Other actions in South Vietnam. The military program cannot do the job alone. Among others, the following actions should also be taken in South Vietnam. a. Continue doggedly to “strengthen the rear” by pressing forward with the rural reconstruction (pacification) program, realizing both that the program has little chance of meaningful success unless and until security can be provided, and that the program is fundamental to full success once security is provided.

b. Keep working with the government in Saigon to make it more stable. Consider using the deployment of the US troops as the occasion to lay down some terms—e.g., regarding the presence and use of a US-controlled rice reserve, an effective US veto on major GVN military commanders, statements about invading North Vietnam, and so on.

c. Take steps to meet the economic shortages and disruptions. Especially, the recurring threat of rice inflation should be countered by the provision of an in-country US-controlled rice reserve.

d. Take informational actions to undermine VC morale by reference to VC defeats, to GVN/US weapon superiority, to air attacks on their bases, etc., and by encouraging VC to defect either to the government or “back home.” In this connection, the Chieu Hoi program (to induce VC defections) must be revitalized immediately.

9. Expanded political moves.4 Together with the above military moves, we should take political initiatives in order to lay a groundwork for a favorable political settlement by clarifying our objectives and establishing channels of communications. At the same time as we are taking steps to turn the tide in South Vietnam, we should make quiet moves through diplomatic channels (a) to open a dialogue with Moscow and Hanoi, and perhaps the VC, looking first toward disabusing them of any misconceptions as to our goals and second toward laying the groundwork for a settlement when the time is ripe; (b) to keep the Soviet Union from deepening its military involvement and support of North Vietnam and from generating crises elsewhere in the world until the time when settlement can be achieved; and (c) to cement support for US policy by the US public, allies and friends, and to keep international opposition at a manageable level. Our efforts may be unproductive until the tide begins to turn, but nevertheless they should be made.

10. South Vietnamese reaction to expansion of US forces. Three factors dominate the psychological situation in South Vietnam: (a) the military situation (i.e., the security problem), (b) the effectiveness of the government as a vehicle for dynamic leadership, and (c) the implications of the growing American presence. The deployments recommended in paragraph 5 run some risk of causing the Vietnamese to “turn the war over to us” and of generating an “anti-colonial” type resentment toward us. The GVN has requested the additional US forces urgently (indeed, they want 9 battalions more than the 44 recommended here). When Ky was asked about the popular reaction, he said, “We will explain it to our people.” Thieu agreed saying, “They know that you are not here to make us a colony.” Former Prime Minister Quat told me, “The only way to save Vietnam is to send a large number of troops.” He added, “The people of South Vietnam will not object.” The spectres of widespread adverse public reaction have been raised each time we deployed personnel in the past, and, while no deployment has been so massive as this one, no such reaction appeared. Furthermore, the key requirement for continued viability of the Vietnamese spirit in the short run is evidence that RVNAF/US/third-country forces can contain the VC/DRV monsoon offensive and reopen communications; in the longer run the requirement will be evidence of bringing the war to a satisfactory close.

11. Communist reaction to the expanded program. The Soviets can be expected to continue material assistance to North Vietnam and to lodge verbal complaints, but not to intervene otherwise. The Chinese—at least so long as we do not invade North Vietnam, do not sink a Chinese ship and, most important, do not strike China—will probably not send regular ground forces or aircraft into the war. The DRV, on the other hand, may well send up to several divisions of regular forces in South Vietnam to assist the VC if they see the tide turning and victory, once so near, being snatched away. This possible DRV action is the most ominous one, since it would lead to increased pressures on us to “counter-invade” North Vietnam and to extend air strikes to population targets in the North; acceding to these pressures could bring the Soviets and the Chinese in. The Viet Cong, especially if they continue to take high losses, can be expected to depend increasingly upon the PAVN forces as the war moves into a more conventional phase; but they may find ways to continue almost indefinitely their present intensive military, guerrilla and terror activities, particularly if reinforced by some regular PAVN units. A key question on the military side is whether POL, ammunition, and cadres can be cut off and, if they are cut off, whether this really renders the Viet Cong impotent.

12. Evaluation. ARVN overall is not capable of successfully resisting the VC initiatives without more active assistance from more US/third-country ground forces than those thus far committed. Without further outside help, the ARVN is faced with successive tactical reverses, loss of key communication and population centers particularly inn the high-lands, piecemeal destruction of ARVN units, attrition of RVNAF will to fight, and loss of civilian confidence. Early commitment of additional US/third-country forces in sufficient quantity, in general reserve and offensive roles, should stave off GVN defeat.

The success of the program from the military point of view turns on whether the Vietnamese hold their own in terms of numbers and fighting spirit, and on whether the US forces can be effective in a quick-reaction reserve role, a role in which they are only now being tested. The number of US troops is too small to make a significant difference in the traditional 10-1 government-guerrilla formula, but it is not too small to make a significant difference in the kind of war which seems to be evolving in Vietnam—a “Third Stage” or conventional war in which it is easier to identify, locate and attack the enemy.

The plan is such that the risk of escalation into war with China or the Soviet Union can be kept small. US and South Vietnamese casualties will increase—just how much cannot be predicted with confidence, but the US killed-in-action might be in the vicinity of 500 a month by the end of the year. The South Vietnamese under one government or another will probably see the thing through5 and the United States public will support the course of action because it is a sensible and courageous military-political program designed and likely to bring about a success in Vietnam.

It should be recognized, however, that success against the larger, more conventional VC/PAVN forces could merely drive the VC back into the trees and back to their 1960-64 pattern—a pattern against which US troops and aircraft would be of limited value but with which the GVN, with our help, could cope. The questions here would be whether the VC could maintain morale after such a set-back, and whether the South Vietnamese would have the will to hang on through another cycle. It should be recognized also that, even in “success,” it is not obvious how we will be able to disengage our forces from Vietnam. It is unlikely that a formal agreement good enough for the purpose could possibly be negotiated—because the arrangement can reflect little more than the power situation. A fairly large number of US (or perhaps “international”) forces may be required to stay in Vietnam.

The overall evaluation is that the course of action recommended in this memorandum—if the military and political moves are properly integrated and executed with continuing vigor and visible determination—stands a good chance of achieving an acceptable outcome within a reasonable time in Vietnam.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information. A list of comments on the memorandum, prepared by Lodge in Saigon on July 19, indicates that it was drafted by McNaughton on July 18. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Box 2) U. Alexis Johnson sent his comments on the July 18 draft to McNaughton on July 19. (Ibid.)

2 William Bundy discussed the memorandum with the other members of the group that accompanied McNamara to Vietnam, and found that “to a man they shared his estimate.” After reading the report, Bundy noted that he also was forced to agree, “even though it meant accepting the chance that the war would be increasingly Americanized.” (Johnson Library, Papers of William P. Bundy, Ch. 27, p. 26)

3 Ambassador Lodge states “any further initiative by us now [before we are strong] would simply harden the Communist resolve not to stop fighting.” Ambassadors Taylor and Johnson would maintain discreet contacts with the Soviets, but otherwise agree with Ambassador Lodge. [Footnote and brackets in the source text.]

4 Note footnote to paragraph 4 (c). [Footnote in the source text.]

5 Ambassador Lodge points out that we may face a neutralist government at some time in the future and that in those circumstances the US should be prepared to carry on alone. [Footnote in the source text.]

68. Editorial Note 68. Editorial Note

On July 21, 1965, Ambassador at Large W. Averell Harriman met with Soviet Premier Kosygin for a second time during his visit to Moscow. (For a report of Harriman's initial conversation with Kosygin on July 15, see Document 59.) The discussion again covered the full range of major issues affecting U.S.-Soviet relations, and Kosygin stressed that a settlement of the Vietnam conflict was essential to progress on other issues. Harriman noted that President Johnson had authorized him to state that U.S. military action in Vietnam would be limited to whatever was necessary to stop the aggression directed from Hanoi, and the President felt that the Vietnam conflict should not interfere with U.S.-Soviet relations. Harriman added that the United States agreed that it was important to move the Vietnam issue to the conference table as soon as possible, and welcomed any Soviet suggestions to that end.

Kosygin responded that the Soviet Union was not authorized to negotiate concerning Vietnam, but noted that the “Vietnamese comrades would not exclude political settlement, bypassing the Chinese.” He advised the United States to study Pham Van Dong's four points and make counterproposals directly to the North Vietnamese. He added that he felt that such a political settlement would be based on the retention of the 17th parallel as the dividing line between North and South Vietnam. (Telegram 216 from Moscow, July 21; Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 277, USSR Exdis 1965)

On July 23, Harriman stopped in Bonn and cabled his impressions of his conversations with Kosygin to President Johnson and Secretary Rusk. On Vietnam, Harriman reported: “I got nowhere in persuading him that N.L.F. was not the voice of the people, and that Saigon spoke for the majority who don't want communist take-over. It was interesting, however, that he mentioned the retention of the 17th parallel. His biggest concern is the embarrassing position the Soviets are caught in. And he wants a settlement. I doubt that he personally cares too much on what basis, though he will obviously have to support North Vietnam demands at any conference. He would make no suggestion for settlement except that we get together with North Vietnam, and he implied that we should disregard Peiping.” (Telegram 241 from Bonn, July 23; ibid.)

On the morning of July 22, Rusk telephoned McGeorge Bundy and asked if he had seen Harriman's report. Rusk thought the President would be interested. Bundy noted that he had seen it and passed it on to the President. Rusk said that he had called McNamara and told him that the administration should think hard about the possibility of dealing with the problem of South Vietnam in a low key. He felt that Harriman's message suggested a more critical examination of the number of U.S. troops to be committed to Vietnam, and of the rate at which they would be used. Bundy responded that the problem had become so large that it would be difficult to play it in a lower key. (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

Rusk telephoned William Bundy on the evening of July 22 and instructed him to begin to think hard about establishing contact with Hanoi in connection with Kosygin's remarks to Harriman. Rusk added that Kosygin's suggestion could turn out to be very significant. He had talked to the President and they agreed that it was important to consider “very hard and very fast” whether the United States could find some way to take account of what Kosygin said. Rusk felt that the North Vietnamese four points were subject to “dickering.” Bundy said that he would work on it. (Ibid.)

69. Memorandum From Richard C. Bowman of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 69. Memorandum From Richard C. Bowman of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, July 21, 1965.

SUBJECT

Goodpaster Study on Vietnam

The attached study was prepared at the direction of the Chairman by a small group working under General Goodpaster. It has no endorsement at the moment, and, therefore, should be treated as a non-study. However, some of the contents could be useful to you as background for the coming discussions on Vietnam.

The study advocates a two-fold approach: (1) Stepped-up air offensive against transportation and military targets in NVN with later extension to industrial targets as necessary (but no attacks on population).

(2) Use of U.S. and third country forces to eliminate the Viet Cong regular battalions (the 44 battalion force previously recommended was considered probably sufficient).

In furthering the interdiction of supply routes, the study recommends that the route nine type barrier be established as “experience is gained and capability is developed.”

This looks like an excellent military concept, but the other half of the equation is equally important—an intense program to win over the peasant population and the Viet Cong irregulars, themselves.

Dick

Attachment2

Washington, Washington, July 14, 1965.

INTENSIFICATION OF THE MILITARY OPERATIONS IN VIETNAM: CONCEPT AND APPRAISAL—REPORT OF AN AD HOC STUDY GROUP

[Here follows a table of contents.]

Directive

This study was prepared in response to an oral directive of the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, on 2 July 1965, to prepare for his use an assessment of the assurance the US can have of winning in SVN if we do “everything we can.”

The study was prepared by an ad hoc staff group under the direction of the Office of the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, with representation from that office and the Chairman's Special Studies Group, the Defense Intelligence Agency, J-3, and the Joint War Games Agency.

Summary Report

1. As directed, a study group has assessed the assurance the US can have of winning in SVN if we do “everything we can.”

2. The limitations of the resulting assessment require specific note. It is not final nor is it complete in detail. For operations within SVN, the assessment does not address explicitly the task of providing territorial security, but rather is focused upon operations against VC/DRV battalion-size units. Even for such operations, the military judgment involved in arriving at expected results is as difficult and complex as it is important. Exact, certain solutions cannot be achieved. Time has not permitted discussions with COMUSMACV or CINCPAC. Such should immediately be undertaken, and further work in detail then addressed to the key issues, particularly the results we can expect from offensive ground/air action against VC/DRV battalion-size units in SVN.

3. Nevertheless, a responsive over-all appraisal addressed to the central question can already be given. It amounts to a conditional affirmative, as follows: Within the bounds of reasonable assumptions (particularly as set out below) there appears to be no reason we cannot win if such is our will—and if that will is manifested in strategy and tactical operations.

4. While there are important uncertainties and unknowns, there is little probability that they could invalidate this judgment, providing the assumptions hold true. The key question appears to resolve itself into a matter of means and willingness to use the means. Neither the means visualized, nor the use of these means, appears to go beyond the bounds of reason, realism or prudence. It is possible to outline them with a fair degree of definition.

5. Before doing so, specific note should be taken of the major assumptions which limit the scope of the study and condition the over-all conclusion stated above. They are, in summary, as follows: a. China and Russia will not intervene with armed forces, overtly or covertly, so long as there is no US/SVN land invasion of NVN.

b. Restrictions on US/SVN use of force do not exceed the following: (1) No land invasion of NVN by US/SVN forces.

(2) No use of nuclear weapons or chemical weapons.

(3) No mass bombing of population per se.

c. Once the concept envisaged in this study is approved by higher authority, operations within the scope of the proposed strategy will not be subject to restriction, delay, or planning uncertainties. This implies that the GVN will cooperate as necessary to this end.

d. Operational coordination between US and SVN forces meets minimum acceptable professional standards of effectiveness.

e. Neither the government nor the population of SVN turns against the US and demands withdrawal.

6. “Winning” in SVN, as referred to above, involves achieving an outcome somewhere between, as a maximum, an end to insurgency by DRV/VC decision and as an acceptable minimum, containment of the insurgency, except for minor areas and minor acts of violence, with an end to the need for the presence of substantial US forces. This outcome, the assessment indicates, can be achieved. Hopefully, the VC/DRV will become convinced that they cannot win in SVN, that continued efforts will be extremely costly, and that time is on the side of the Free World. But even if they fight on, it should be possible to attain the minimum cited above. (Outcomes such as complete loss of the area, further erosion, “losing slowly,” and “begging down” in a series of beleaguered coastal enclaves or in inconclusive jungle combat are judged to represent failing rather than winning in the area, and are rejected.)

7. To achieve a “winning” outcome in the above sense requires a substantial step-up in the scope and effectiveness of US/SVN operations in the area. Sources for this step-up include the following, all of which are required: a. Additional forces.

b. Removal of restrictions, restraints and sources of delay and planning uncertainty.

c. Adoption of a strategy for winning the war; such a strategy must be based upon taking the offensive, and gaining and holding the initiative.

d. Adoption of a concept of tactical operations in SVN which exploits the offensive, with the object of putting the VC/DRV battalion forces out of operation.

8. Of these, strategy sets the framework. The strategy contained in the study and outlined below envisages establishing in Southeast Asia a heavy preponderance of US/SVN military power over the VC/DRV, provides a concept for the employment of these forces in the next six to eight months, sets forth objectives and weight of attack for an integrated, interrelated effort involving operations against North Vietnam and operations in South Vietnam, together with action against infiltration in Laos and elsewhere, and indicates broad factors of timing, priority, and coordination between these principal courses of action. This strategy, which is considered feasible and well-calculated to give high assurance of winning in SVN, is set forth in essential outline below. It presupposes the removal of restrictions, delays and planning uncertainties, as well as the completion of preparatory coordinating arrangements at governmental and military level with the South Vietnamese and, to the extent required, with the Thais and Laotians.

9. The basic concept is that allied forces (US, SVN and third country), by aggressive exploitation of superior military force, gain and keep the initiative both in SVN and against NVN, keeping the DRV and VC at a disadvantage, keeping the tempo such as to deny them time to recuperate or regain their balance, progressively destroying the war-supporting power of North Vietnam, and pressing the fight against VC/DRV main force units in SVN to run them to ground and destroy them. The object is to cause them to stop the war, or to render them ineffective if they seek to pursue it. The operations combine to compel the VC/DRV to fight at higher and more sustained intensity with resulting greater logistical consumption and concurrently attack his LOC to limit his capability to resupply forces in combat at this scale. a. Operations against North Vietnam. The object is two-fold—to bring about a DRV decision to stop the war or, failing this, at a minimum, to cut down and limit sharply the support by the DRV of VC/DRV forces in SVN at the same time being prepared to limit the introduction of additional DRV forces into SVN, if attempted, in order to permit containment of the insurgency in the south. By sustained air action the following main categories of targets should be attacked, with timing as indicated: (1) Prior to the initiation of large-scale offensive operations by US forces in South Vietnam, transportation throughout the DRV should be attacked in all its components, to include attack on LOC (including locks) and vehicles, attack on POL, and mining of harbors. In addition, attacks should be conducted on military supplies and equipment, to include attacks on depots, arsenals, barracks and service installations, together with attacks on electric power facilities.

(2) If the DRV and VC continue the war in South Vietnam after the foregoing attacks have been accomplished, the attack should be extended to include industrial facilities and, to the extent feasible, agricultural resources.

(3) At any time required to prevent interference or threatened interference with the above, US/SVN forces should attack the DRV counterair capability, to include radars, AAA,SAMs, MIGs, and IL-28s. (In this connection, it should be noted that strong factors even now weigh in favor of such strikes.)

b. Action against infiltration routes. With the object of cutting down the numbers of men and quantities of supplies moving into SVN, the following major operations should be conducted: (1) The present surveillance operation should be intensified and increased surveillance of waterborne traffic from Cambodia should be instituted.

(2) Air attack should be intensified against land infiltration routes in Laos and border areas of SVN, to include attacks on lines of communication (roads and bridges, depots, truck parks, bivouacs and rest areas), attack of vehicles and of troop units in movement or deployed for security of the LOC. Intelligence efforts should be intensified and restrictions removed (e.g., defoliation should be experimented with), with the object of determining route locations and gaining timely information on vehicle and troop movements.

(3) Ground action should be undertaken against land infiltration in Laos and SVN, expanding operations toward an effective barrier as experience is gained and capability is developed. As feasible, blocking positions should be established, supplies seized or destroyed, and DRV/VC route security forces harassed or destroyed.

c. Military operations in South Vietnam. The object is to put VC/DRV battalion forces out of operation, i.e., to destroy them or cause their disintegration as fighting forces capable of interfering with SVN pacification (territorial security) operations. Basing action primarily on offensive land and air operations of US, RVNAF and third-country forces, the concept is to locate and destroy VC/DRV forces, bases and war-supporting organizations in SVN. For the present, the area of such operations will be the zones of the I Corps and the II Corps, and the northern portion of the III Corps zone, with initial priority of effort to those areas most critical to the success of the offensive. Concentrations of VC forces should be aggressively sought out and attacked by mobile land forces employed in coordination with air forces utilized for close support operations or for general preparatory attack. Maximum effort will be made to avoid piecemeal reaction to VC attacks, thus exposing forces to ambush, and instead to place primary emphasis on launching coordinated attacks to destroy VC units. Maximum effort should be applied to monitoring VC activities, employing all intelligence techniques, to include indigenous sources as well as more sophisticated surveillance techniques, including large-scale, light-plane spotter activity.

10. The concept of tactical operations for the offensive within SVN is, at the present time, the heart of this problem, and the uncertainties that exist must be squarely recognized and acknowledged. With limited and local exceptions, the course of the war to date in SVN does not provide experience directly approximating what is now visualized. Lacking such operations, we cannot assert with certainty that tactics can be devised and operations conducted that will, in fact, put the DRV/VC battalions out of operation and keep them so. Nevertheless, several avenues of operation which are available permit a high order of confidence that such can be achieved: a. Operations to locate and attack VC/DRV units to destroy them or render them ineffective as fighting units.

b. Operations to clear and occupy the base areas from which VC/DRV units operate and are supported.

c. Operations to establish major areas of strength, for example, in the central highlands or other major infiltration avenues, to interdict DRV support for the VC.

11. Closely connected with the foregoing concepts is a further assumption not previously stated: recognizing that it is necessary both to put the VC/DRV battalion-size units out of operation, and to provide security to the territory and the people of SVN if we are to win, it is assumed that if the US, SVN and third countries succeed in accomplishing the former, the SVN with no more than advisory assistance and limited support from the US can achieve and maintain the latter. These assumptions appear reasonable, but they warrant closer study by our top commanders and officials in SVN.

12. The heavy preponderance of force required for this strategy can only be achieved with substantial additional US and third-country ground forces. Forces adequate to initiate such a strategy can be provided from SVN forces plus the 44 battalions of US and ROK forces under consideration for deployment within the next few months. These should be able to establish superiority and turn the tide of battle in favor of the US/SVN. Whether they will be enough to sustain the offensive to achieve the “winning outcome,” or whether such a result will require the commitment of further US and third-country forces, is a question that cannot be answered at this time. It is dependent in part on whether the DRV introduces added forces into SVN, upon the evolving total requirement as the number of surviving VC/DRV battalions declines, and upon the ability of the SVN to shift added forces to this role as such a decline occurs. Rough estimates suggest, however, that additional forces amounting to 7-35 further battalions could prove to be required, depending upon whether the US/SVN operation can be limited to a zone such as that of the I, II, and III Corps, or must be extended to cover the delta region as well.

13. A parallel increase in tactical air forces is also required. Several months will be required to deploy the added ground forces and commit them to combat, and it is appropriate to phase in the tactical air for close air support on a comparable schedule, thus permitting earlier concentration on the air campaign against NVN—as is tactically desirable in any event. On this basis, a requirement is foreseen for the 4 additional squadrons now planned as soon as bases are available, for 6 to 9 additional squadrons within the remainder of this year, and for a substantial increase in the B-52 force available in the Western Pacific for conventional operations. Analysis of capabilities for rapid building of additional air fields, employing aluminum matting, indicates that additional bases adequate for at least 9 of these 10 to 13 squadrons can be made operationally ready by the end of this year.

14. The end results that can be expected to be achieved in NVN, along the infiltration routes, and in SVN through taking action along the lines presented in this study are estimated to be as follows: a. Air operations against NVN. The stepped-up program of air strikes should reduce in major degree the ability of the NVN to support the insurgency in SVN. The SAMs, MIGs, and IL-28s can be effectively eliminated. By attacks against the planned target system, particularly POL and railroads, roads, and waterways, together with mining of harbors, the DRV will be sharply limited in their ability to support VC/DRV forces in SVN at the intensified level of combat envisaged, and will in particular be limited in their capability to reinforce the VC with effective units of division size.

b. Attack against infiltration routes. When the intensity of combat operations in SVN is raised to the extent envisaged and the logistical requirements for VC/DRV forces have been correspondingly increased, the combination of more effective surveillance of sea routes, together with air and ground action against the routes through Laos, should materially limit the ability of VC/DRV forces to move personnel and supplies to SVN, and to withstand the pressure of attacks within SVN. One effect will be the delay of overt introduction of DRV forces into SVN by requiring such movement to be conducted at reduced march rates over long distances.

c. Military operations in SVN. Presently organized and planned GVN forces, except for reserve battalions (possibly including a limited number of ranger and infantry battalions), would retain control over areas now held, extend pacification operations and area control where permitted by the progress of major offensive operations, defend critical installations and areas against VC attack and seek out and eliminate VC militia units. US,SVN, and third-country forces, by offensive land and air action, would locate and destroy VC/DRV forces, bases and major war-supporting organizations in SVN. The cumulative effect of sustained, aggressive conduct of offensive operations, coupled with the interdiction of DRV efforts to provide the higher level of support required in such a combat environment, should lead to progressive destruction of the VC/DRV main force battalions.

[Here follows the full report.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII. Top Secret.

2 Top Secret. The full report is 128 pages long. For information on the background of the report and reactions to it, see William C. Gibbons, The U.S. Government and the Vietnam War, Part III: January-July 1965 (Princeton, N.J., 1989), pp. 359-365.

70. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 70. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 21, 1965, 10:20 a.m.

SUBJECT

Your 11:30 meeting

1. The main business of the general 11:30 meeting will be McNamara's report.2 From 10:30 on the rest of us will be in the Cabinet Room, and my guess is that we will be ready for you earlier if you want to join us.

2. The people present will be those you checked last night,3 with the exception of Goodpaster and Yarmolinsky. I removed them because Bob McNamara expressed very strong feeling that there would be resentment among the JCS if junior officers were brought over while they were not. This does no immediate damage. I understand that Goodpaster has very interesting views of his own, and I will try to have a private talk with him in the next 24 hours.

3. The military recommendations, as usual, are in pretty good order. On the political side, we have hard problems, also as usual. Lodge and McNamara have a disagreement on how far we should have a “peace offensive.” This difference may turn out to be more apparent than real.

4. There is also a major political problem of U.S. leadership in Saigon below the level of the Ambassador. My own view is that the solution is to get not one but two outstanding deputies—Bill Sullivan and Frank Meloy. Meloy can run the ordinary Embassy work, and I think Sullivan can coordinate the pacification activities in a way in which no one else in government can. Lodge is no administrator—a fact which both McNamara and Chet Cooper report as fully confirmed from this trip.

To give him two deputies is abnormal—but Vietnam is not normal. A little heat from you on the State Department would help, although my brother Bill is already sympathetic.

Lodge's confirmation hearing has been put over until Tuesday. Both McNamara and I think it would be wise to keep him out of the immediate argumentation on your program, and Lodge himself wants a last few days of rest.

I will know more after the 10:30 meeting.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. No classification marking.

2 Document 67.

3 On July 20, McGeorge Bundy sent a memorandum to the President asking him to select from a list of possible participants those whom he wanted to attend the meeting scheduled for 11:30 a.m. on July 21 to discuss Vietnam. Johnson selected McGeorge Bundy, Moyers, Valenti, Cooper, Rusk, Ball, William Bundy, Unger, Lodge, McNamara, Vance, Wheeler, McNaughton, Raborn, Helms, Rowan, and Marks. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII)

71. Notes of Meeting 71. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, July 21, 1965, 10:40 a.m.

SUBJECT

Viet Nam

PRESENT

McNamara

Rusk

Vance

Mac Bundy

Gen. Wheeler

Geo. Ball

Bill Bundy

Len Unger

Helms

Raborn

Lodge

Rowan

McNaughton

Moyers

Valenti

(McNamara passed Top Secret paper2 to all in room to read. The paper was returned to McNamara.)

McNamara made it clear that the paper was his own view of the situation—his specific recommendations had been concurred in by Lodge, Sharp, Taylor, Johnson, Westmoreland but the rest of the paper had not—he did not seek or receive their concurrence.

Lodge: If I thought a diplomatic move would be successful, I would be for it. Now, it would harden the enemy. This is not the time to do it. Clarifying objectives is good for the world public, but not necessary for governments. They understand it.

McNamara: Seems to me our call-up and increase in budget is evidence that we are not taking over North Vietnam.

M. Bundy: Our public utterances will make it clear that we are not trying to take over North Vietnam.

McNamara: Our public actions must do this. We must show that we are not in with Ky's objective to invade NVN. We are building such a force that NVN might think that is what we are trying to do.

Lodge: Remember this “on to NVN” movement is part of a propaganda move and nothing more.

M. Bundy: Isn't it true that most of the diplomatic moves come from other nations rather than the U.S. (in rebuttal to Lodge's hard position).

McNamara: This is exactly what I am talking about.

Lodge: The President has done a remarkable job of forming public opinion so far. Very skillful.

M. Bundy: Are there divergences between GVN and US in troop use?

McNamara: GVN wants us to use troops in the highlands. This is unacceptable to us. While GVN originally recommended this, they are now in agreement with us.

Rusk: What is the capability of GVN to mobilize their own forces?

McNamara: They are trying to increase by 10,000 per month. Our country team is optimistic. I am not. Desertion rate is high. They say it is lessening, but I do not agree. We did not find any thread of discontent among our troops. U.S. morale is of the highest order. Proud of their dedication and devotion. It reflects the belief they are doing something worthwhile.

Wheeler: Agree. Advisors are pleased with Vietnamese. They speak very highly of Vietnamese common soldier. Officer corps very different. Some officers are not of highest quality. Not total however. Weakness in VN's forces are lack of adequate officer corps—in their training and attitude—but they are getting better.

Rusk: Any summary of enemy troubles?

McNamara: No, nothing more than we already know. They are suffering heavy losses. They are well supplied with ammunition. I suspect much of inflow of supplies is water-borne. Only part of our action that is unsatisfactory is our patrol of the seashore. But even if we did have tight control, it should make little difference in the next six to nine months.

Rusk: What is the timing on how we should proceed?

McNamara: There ought to be a statement to the American people no later than a week.

Bundy: It is quite possible the message to Congress will be a message to the public.

Rusk: We ought to get civilians in the Congressional testimony to abuse [disabuse] the feeling that the military is making the decisions.

Bundy: Perhaps Rusk should follow up the President's speech with statement of total unanimity.

Ball: It is one thing to ready the country for this decision and another to face the realities of the decision. We can't allow the country to wake up one morning and find heavy casualties. We need to be damn serious with the American public.

McNamara: We discussed the command arrangements—they are to be left as they are—parallel commands.

The President entered the meeting at 11:30 am

McNamara: To support an additional 200,000 troops in VN by first of the year the reserves in the US should be reconstituted by like amount. I recommend calling up 235,000 a year from now, replace the reserves with regulars.

In mid-1966 we would have approximately 600,000 additional men.

President: What has happened in recent past that requires this decision on my part? What are the alternatives? Also, I want more discussions on what we expect to flow from this decision. Discuss in detail.

Have we wrung every single soldier out of every country we can? Who else can help? Are we the sole defenders of freedom in the world? Have we done all we can in this direction? The reasons for the call up? The results we can expect? What are the alternatives? We must make no snap judgments. We must consider carefully all our options.

We know we can tell SVN “we're coming home.” Is that the option we should take? What flows from that.

The negotiations, the pause, all the other approaches—have all been explored. It makes us look weak—with cup in hand. We have tried.

Let's look at all our options so that every man at this table understands fully the total picture.

McNamara: This is our position a year ago (shows President a map3 of the country with legends). Estimated by country team that VC controls 25%—SVN 50%—rest in white area, VC in red areas.

VC tactics are terror, and sniping.

President: Looks dangerous to put US forces in those red areas.

McNamara: You're right. We're placing our people with their backs to the sea—for protection. Our mission would be to seek out the VC in large scale units.

Wheeler: Big problem in Vietnam is good combat intelligence. The VC is a creature of habit. By continuing to probe we think we can make headway.

Ball: Isn't it possible that the VC will do what they did against the French—stay away from confrontation and not accommodate us?

Wheeler: Yes, but by constantly harassing them, they will have to fight somewhere.

McNamara: If VC doesn't fight in large units, it will give ARVN a chance to re-secure hostile areas.

We don't know what VC tactics will be when VC is confronted by 175,000 Americans.

Raborn: We agree—by 1965, we expect NVN will increase their forces. They will attempt to gain a substantial victory before our build-up is complete.

President: Is anyone of the opinion we should not do what the memo says—If so, I'd like to hear from them.

Ball: I can foresee a perilous voyage—very dangerous—great apprehensions that we can win under these conditions. But, let me be clear, if the decision is to go ahead, I'm committed.

President: But is there another course in the national interest that is better than the McNamara course? We know it's dangerous and perilous. But can it be avoided?

Ball: There is no course that will allow us to cut our losses. If we get bogged down, our cost might be substantially greater. The pressures to create a larger war would be irresistible. Qualifications I have are not due to the fact that I think we are in a bad moral position.

President: What other road can I go?

Ball: Take what precautions we can—take losses—let their government fall apart—negotiate—probable take over by Communists. This is disagreeable, I know.

President: Can we make a case for this—discuss it fully?

Ball: We have discussed it. I have had my day in court.

President: I don't think we have made a full commitment. You have pointed out the danger, but you haven't proposed an alternative course. We haven't always been right. We have no mortgage on victory.

I feel we have very little alternative to what we are doing.

I want another meeting before we take this action. We should look at all other courses carefully. Right now I feel it would be more dangerous for us to lose this now, than endanger a greater number of troops.

Rusk: What we have done since 1954-61 has not been good enough. We should have probably committed ourselves heavier in 1961.

Rowan: What bothers me most is the weakness of the Ky government. Unless we put the screws on the Ky government, 175,000 men will do us no good.

Lodge: There is no tradition of a national government in Saigon. There are no roots in the country. Not until there is tranquility can you have any stability. I don't think we ought to take this government seriously. There is no one who can do anything. We have to do what we think we ought to do regardless of what the Saigon government does.

As we move ahead on a new phase—it gives us the right and duty to do certain things with or without the government's approval.

President: George, do you think we have another course?

Ball: I would not recommend that you follow McNamara's course.

President: Are you able to outline your doubts—and offer another course of action? I think it is desirable to hear you out—and determine if your suggestions are sound and ready to be followed.

Ball: Yes. I think I can present to you the least bad of two courses. What I would present is a course that is costly, but can be limited to short term costs.

President: Then, let's meet at 2:30 this afternoon to discuss Ball's proposals. Now let Bob tell us why we need to risk those 600,000 lives.

(McNamara and Wheeler outlined the reasons for more troops.) 75,000 now just enough to protect bases—it will let us lose slowly instead of rapidly. The extra men will stabilize the situation and improve it. It will give ARVN breathing room. We limit it to another 100,000 because VN can't absorb any more. There is no major risk of catastrophe.

President: But you will lose greater number of men.

Wheeler: The more men we have the greater the likelihood of smaller losses.

President: What makes you think if we put in 100,000 men Ho Chi Minh won't put in another 100,000?

Wheeler: This means greater bodies of men—which will allow us to cream them.

President: What are the chances of more NVN men coming?

Wheeler: 50-50 chance. He would be foolhardy to put 1/4 of his forces in SVN. It would expose him too greatly in NVN.

President: (to Raborn) Do you have people in NVN?

Raborn: Not enough. We think it is reliable.

President: Can't we improve intelligence in NVN?

Raborn: We have a task force working on this.

1:00 pm—Meeting adjourned until 2:30 pm.4

Resume same meeting at 2:45 pm

Ball: We can't win. Long protracted. The most we can hope for is messy conclusion. There remains a great danger of intrusion by Chicoms.

Problem of long war in US: 1. Korean experience was galling one. Correlation between Korean casualties and public opinion (Ball showed Pres. a chart)5 showed support stabilized at 50%. As casualties increase, pressure to strike at jugular of the NVN will become very great.

2. World opinion. If we could win in a year's time—win decisively—world opinion would be alright. However, if long and protracted we will suffer because a great power cannot beat guerrillas.

3. National politics. Every great captain in history is not afraid to make a tactical withdrawal if conditions are unfavorable to him. The enemy cannot even be seen; he is indigenous to the country.

Have serious doubt if an army of westerners can fight orientals in Asian jungle and succeed.

President: This is important—can westerners, in absence of intelligence, successfully fight orientals in jungle rice-paddies? I want McNamara and Wheeler to seriously ponder this question.

Ball: I think we have all underestimated the seriousness of this situation. Like giving cobalt treatment to a terminal cancer case. I think a long protracted war will disclose our weakness, not our strength.

The least harmful way to cut losses in SVN is to let the government decide it doesn't want us to stay there. Therefore, put such proposals to SVN government that they can't accept, then it would move into a neutralist position—and I have no illusions that after we were asked to leave, SVN would be under Hanoi control.

What about Thailand? It would be our main problem. Thailand has proven a good ally so far—though history shows it has never been a staunch ally. If we wanted to make a stand in Thailand, we might be able to make it.

Another problem would be South Korea. We have two divisions there now. There would be a problem with Taiwan, but as long as Generalissimo is there, they have no place to go. Indonesia is a problem—insofar as Malaysia. There we might have to help the British in military way. Japan thinks we are propping up a lifeless government and are on a sticky wicket. Between long war and cutting our losses, the Japanese would go for the latter (all this on Japan according to Reischauer).

President: Wouldn't all those countries say Uncle Sam is a paper tiger—wouldn't we lose credibility breaking the word of three presidents—if we set it up as you proposed. It would seem to be an irreparable blow. But, I gather you don't think so.

Ball: The worse blow would be that the mightiest power in the world is unable to defeat guerrillas.

President: Then you are not basically troubled by what the world would say about pulling out?

Ball: If we were actively helping a country with a stable, viable government, it would be a vastly different story. Western Europeans look at us as if we got ourselves into an imprudent fashion [situation].

President: But I believe that these people are trying to fight. They're like Republicans who try to stay in power, but don't stay there long.

(aside—amid laughter—“excuse me, Cabot”)

Ball: Thieu spoke the other day and said the Communists would win the election.

President: I don't believe that. Does anyone believe that?

(There was no agreement from anyone—McNamara, Lodge, B. Bundy, Unger—all said they didn't believe it.)

McNamara: Ky will fall soon. He is weak. We can't have elections until there is physical security, and even then there will be no elections because as Cabot said, there is no democratic tradition. (Wheeler agreed about Ky—but said Thieu impressed him)

President: Two basic troublings: 1. That Westerners can ever win in Asia.

2. Don't see how you can fight a war under direction of other people whose government changes every month.

Now go ahead, George, and make your other points.

Ball: The cost, as well as our Western European allies, is not relevant to their situation. What they are concerned about is their own security—troops in Berlin have real meaning, none in VN.

President: Are you saying pulling out of Korea would be akin to pulling out of Vietnam?

Bundy: It is not analogous. We had a status quo in Korea. It would not be that way in Vietnam.

Ball: We will pay a higher cost in Vietnam.

This is a decision one makes against an alternative.

On one hand—long protracted war, costly, NVN is digging in for long term. This is their life and driving force. Chinese are taking long term view—ordering blood plasma from Japan.

On the other hand—short-term losses. On balance, come out ahead of McNamara plan. Distasteful on either hand.

Bundy: Two important questions to be raised—I agree with the main thrust of McNamara. It is the function of my staff to argue both sides.

To Ball's argument: The difficulty in adopting it now would be a radical switch without evidence that it should be done. It goes in the face of all we have said and done.

His whole analytical argument gives no weight to loss suffered by other side. A great many elements in his argument are correct.

We need to make clear this is a somber matter—that it will not be quick—no single action will bring quick victory.

I think it is clear that we are not going to be thrown out.

Ball: My problem is not that we don't get thrown out, but that we get bogged down and don't win.

Bundy: I would sum up: The world, the country, and the VN would have alarming reactions if we got out.

Rusk: If the Communist world finds out we will not pursue our commitment to the end, I don't know where they will stay their hand.

I am more optimistic than some of my colleagues. I don't believe the VC have made large advances among the VN people.

We can't worry about massive casualties when we say we can't find the enemy. I don't see great casualties unless the Chinese come in.

Lodge: There is a greater threat to World War III if we don't go in. Similarity to our indolence at Munich.

I can't be as pessimistic as Ball. We have great seaports in Vietnam. We don't need to fight on roads. We have the sea. Visualize our meeting VC on our own terms. We don't have to spend all our time in the jungles.

If we can secure their bases, the VN can secure, in time, a political movement to (1) apprehend the terrorist and (2) give intelligence to the government.

The procedures for this are known.

I agree that the Japanese agitators don't like what we are doing but Sato is totally in agreement with our actions.

The VN have been dealt more casualties than, per capita, we suffered in the Civil War. The VN soldier is an uncomplaining soldier. He has ideas he will die for.

Unger: I agree this is what we have to do. We have spotted some things we want to pay attention to.

President: How can we get everybody to compete with McNamara in the press? We are trying to do so many other things with our economic and health projects. Constantly remind the people that we are doing other things besides bombing.

Unger: Took this question up with Zorthian and press people.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House. The notes were originally handwritten by Valenti and later transcribed. They are quoted extensively in Valenti, A Very Human President, pp. 319-40. For another account of this meeting, see Document 72; more information on attendance is in footnote 1 thereto. For other first-hand accounts of the White House meetings on Vietnam on July 21 and July 22, see Johnson, Vantage Point, pp. 147-148; and Ball, The Past Has Another Pattern, pp. 399-403. William Bundy also wrote an account of the meetings. (Johnson Library, Papers of William P. Bundy, Ch. 27, pp. 30-33)

2 Document 67.

3 Not further identified.

4 William Bundy later recalled that the President had a private meeting with McNamara and Rusk before the second full meeting convened at 2:30. (Johnson Library, Papers of William P. Bundy, Ch. 27, p. 31) No other record of this meeting has been found.

5 Not further identified.

72. Memorandum for the Record 72. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, July 21, 1965.

SUBJECT

Meetings on Vietnam, July 21, 1965

This is a summary of the discussion of Secretary McNamara's report and recommendations held in the Cabinet Room on Wednesday, July 21. There were three sessions: a preparatory meeting without the President at 10:30, a meeting with the President from 11:30 until 1:00, another meeting with the President from 2:30 until 5:30. A list of those present is attached at annex.2

Preparatory Meeting—10:30

Secretary McNamara noted that the only Section of his report which contained specific action recommendations and the only one fully coordinated with the principals (Ambassador Taylor, Ambassador Johnson, General Westmoreland, General Wheeler, and Ambassador Lodge) was paragraph 5. The four key recommendations follow: 1. The deployment of US ground troops in Vietnam be increased by October to 34 maneuver battalions (or, if the Koreans fail to provide the expected 9 battalions promptly, to 43 battalions). The battalions—together with increases in other units, would bring the total US personnel in Vietnam to approximately 175,000 (200,000 if we must make up for the Korean failure).

2. Congress be requested to authorize the call-up of approximately 235,000 men in the Reserve and National Guard. This number would provide approximately 36 maneuver battalions by the end of this year.

3. The regular armed forces be increased by approximately 375,000 men (approximately 250,000 Army, 75,000 Marines, 25,000 Air Force and 25,000 Navy). This would provide approximately 27 additional maneuver battalions by the middle of 1966.

4. A supplemental appropriation of approximately $X for FY 1966 be sought from the Congress to cover the first part of the added costs attributable to the buildup in and for the war in Vietnam. A further supplemental appropriation might be required later in the Fiscal Year.

Although no attempt was made to coordinate the remainder of the paper, the comments of other members of the group were solicited. No attempt was made to resolve certain shades of difference, but Ambassador Lodge's concerns about early political moves to obtain a negotiated settlement (paragraphs 4c and 9) were recorded in footnotes.

Ambassador Lodge emphasized that his concern with respect to political moves was basically on the matter of timing. He also felt that channels of communication with the VC and DRV already exist.

McGeorge Bundy noted that such questions of the “liberation” of North Vietnam could be handled in our public utterances. As far as “negotiations” were concerned, third countries could be relied on to keep initiatives going. Secretary McNamara observed that the contemplated size of our forces and bases in South Vietnam could well give Hanoi the impression that we had the intention of “marching North.” Hanoi, Peiping, and Moscow should be made aware that this was not our intent.

In a response to a series of questions from Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara doubted that the GVN could raise the necessary forces to counter increasing VC capabilities (the country team was more optimistic, but we would be prudent to take a pessimistic and skeptical view of the abilities of the GVN—“a non-government”—to push forward with any major program); morale of US forces was excellent (General Wheeler heartily agreed); the monsoon offensive was under way and “there was more to come;” the VC lacked the capability to seize any of the major US bases, or Saigon.

In connection with VC logistics, Secretary McNamara indicated that, although there was little information available, VC supplies appeared to be adequate. Both he and General Wheeler felt that much of the VC supplies were coming in by sea. Our capability to interdict sea supply was inadequate. This, and the lack of tactical intelligence (“POW interrogations must be tightened up”) were the two most important operational problems we faced.

The seeking out of VC main force units was generally regarded as a high priority matter. To a considerable extent this reflected the gaps in intelligence. General Wheeler pointed out that small US-ARVN “foraging teams” operating primarily in the Delta, attempt to locate VC units.

Secretary Rusk stated that, if the McNamara report was accepted, a scenario for Congressional and public actions would be desirable. There was a general feeling that the President would have to move ahead on statements to Congress and the public early in the week of July 26. Although there was already a widespread expectation that we would be expanding our forces in Vietnam, the key question involved calling up reserves.

Secretary Rusk felt that it was important that the new military proposals have civilian (i.e., State Department) endorsement. He thought he should participate in the Congressional testimony. Mr. Bundy suggested that the Congressional presentation should be a DOD responsibility and that Mr. Rusk should participate in the follow-up presentation to the public. Mr. Ball pointed out the need to paint “a sombre picture” and to dispel any idea that the post-monsoon period would see us over the hump. Secretary McNamara felt that we should make it clear to the public that American troops were already in combat.

Meeting with the President—11:30

Mr. Bundy suggested an agenda for the discussion to follow: 1. The Action Recommendations (para. 5 of McNamara report)

2. The political situation and prospects in Vietnam

3. The basic diplomatic position

4. A scenario of action

The President stressed the need for utmost care to avoid any leaks or speculation on the subjects under discussion.

Secretary McNamara summarized his recommendations.

The President indicated that, when the time came to call up the reserves, he wanted a full statement of the situation in Vietnam which required additional US troops. What consequences are likely to flow from a call-up? (The McNamara paper gives no sense of victory, but rather of continuing stalemate.) Why can't we get more third country troops? What are the alternatives available to us? We could tell the GVN that we are leaving, but is this an option we wish to pursue at this time? If we pull out of Vietnam now, will we have to call up more troops and suffer more casualties at some later date? We have explored all initiatives for a peaceful settlement, to an extent, perhaps, that we might already look weak. In short, what are our present options, why do we select the recommended number of troops rather than more or fewer? What will this increased force accomplish?

Mr. McNamara discussed the deterioration in the situation: The VC has greatly expanded its control of the country, populous areas are now isolated, both the VC and ARVN have been suffering heavy casualties. Unless the US steps in with additional forces, the VC will push the GVN into small enclaves and become increasingly ineffective. The VC now controls about 25 percent of the population (CIA Director Raborn estimated that the VC controlled about 25 percent of the population during the day and about 50 percent at night). A year ago, the VC controlled less than 20 percent.

The President felt that our mission should be as limited as we dare make it.

General Wheeler agreed, but felt that we should engage in offensive operations to seek out and fight VC main force units. Although this is difficult because of the lack of tactical intelligence, we know where these base areas are.

Director Raborn reported the CIA's estimate that the VC will avoid major confrontations with US forces and concentrate on destroying our LOCs and on guerrilla warfare, generally.

General Wheeler felt that the VC will have to “come out and fight” and that this will probably take place in the highlands where they will probably attempt to establish a government seat. Mr. Ball thought, however, that the VC might not “accommodate” us by moving in “Phase III” operations. Mr. McNamara felt that if the VC did not choose to fight in large units, the ARVN could proceed with pacification activities and consolidate its oil spots. We don't know what the VC will do when confronted with 175,000 US forces, but they probably will contrive to use their main force units in large concentrations until they get badly mauled (probably by the first part of 1966). At the moment, terrorism is low in terms of VC capabilities. US forces can engage guerrillas as well as the main force units.

Admiral Raborn believed that the VC/PAVN will attempt to achieve a decisive victory in the next six months. In response to the President's query as to the likelihood of this, Mr. McNamara stated that this was highly improbable.

The President asked if there were any dissents from the McNamara recommendations. Mr. Ball felt that we were engaged on “a very perilous voyage.” He had grave apprehensions about our ability to beat the VC because of the nature of the terrain, the softness of the political situation and other factors. However, he would go along with the McNamara report. The President indicated that he was aware of the dangers, but wondered about other courses open to us.

Mr. Ball stated that he could not offer a course that would permit us to “cut our losses” easily. But we should weigh the costs of cutting our losses now as opposed to later. The pressures to move toward a larger war would be “almost irresistible.” He based his views not on a “moral” position but on a “cold-blooded calculation.” We will have to take the risk of Southeast Asia becoming Communist. However, he believed that the losses would be of a short-term nature.

The President felt that Mr. Ball clearly identified the dangers before us, but did not get the impression that Mr. Ball opposes the McNamara course. The President wanted to minimize the dangers of this enterprise but felt that he had no other choice. He would seriously like to explore other alternatives, now or as we proceed.

Mr. Rusk agreed that alternative options should be explored. He felt, however, that if we had met the challenge posed in 1961 by sending “50,000 men” to South Vietnam, Hanoi may have hesitated to proceed with its actions against the South.

Mr. Rowan indicated he would go along with the McNamara proposal, but was worried about the prospects for GVN stability (page 3 of the report). Unless we can achieve stability, our forces will be severely handicapped.

Mr. Lodge pointed out that we cannot count on stability in South Vietnam. Saigon has no roots in the countryside and needs peace to rule the country. In any case, if there were a strong stable government there wouldn't be a war. “We shouldn't take the Government too seriously.” If the area is important to us, we must do what is necessary regardless of the Government.

The President asked Mr. Ball to present his alternative proposal in detail at a meeting in the afternoon.

Mr. McNamara proceeded to develop his option: In essence the VC now had the capability to push ARVN out of positions they now control with a consequent inevitable takeover of the Government. He would not recommend that we hold our forces at the present level. We should increase our forces or get out. General Wheeler pointed out that the ARVN strength had sharply declined because of casualties and desertions. With increased US forces we will have proportionately less casualties. He could not assure the President, however, that an additional 100,000 men would be sufficient.

In response to the President's query why Hanoi couldn't match US man for man, General Wheeler indicated that large-scale PAVN forces would be a favorable development for us. He felt that the PAVN would be unlikely to put more than 25 percent of its own forces into South Vietnam (Note: the PAVN consists of approximately 250,000 troops). Admiral Raborn stated that CIA's estimate was that Hanoi would send 20-25,000 PAVN troops into South Vietnam by the end of the year.

The President urged the DCI to increase CIA's capabilities for intelligence collection in the North. Anything that was needed to accomplish this would be made available. Mr. McNamara stressed the need to increase combat intelligence as well (CIA and MACV J-2 were working on this problem).

The President indicated his deep concern about press stories from Saigon that US forces were bombing innocent civilians. These followed a general discussion on the overall press situation with the President urging State Department officials to work on the matter.

The President closed this session with a request to Messrs. Ball and McGeorge Bundy constantly to explore alternatives to proposed policies. The session adjourned at 1:00 p.m.

Afternoon Session—2:30

Mr. Ball developed the details of his policy alternative. He was basically skeptical of the ability of Westerners successfully to wage war on the terrain and in the political atmosphere of Vietnam. If the war could be won in a year with reasonable casualties, he would not be so concerned. But he feels that it will take at least two years and the fact that we will have put in so much US manpower with no early definitive results, would be a sign of US weakness in the eyes of the world. The fact that our tactical intelligence is so poor indicates the unfavorable political atmosphere in Vietnam. We have underestimated the seriousness of the problem since we started there. And we are still underestimating the seriousness of the situation. “It is like giving cobalt treatment to a terminal cancer case.” The least harmful way to cut our losses is to let the GVN decide it doesn't want us. He has no illusions about the consequences of this in Vietnam or in Southeast Asia. He reviewed these consequences in detail, but felt that in the long run they would be less serious than they might appear at first.

The President agreed that the situation is serious. He regretted that we were embroiled in Vietnam. But we are there. He believes the Vietnamese people want us there, despite the frequent changes of government. In response to the President's query, Mr. McNamara indicated his poor impression of General Ky, and his belief that the present GVN would be removed by the end of the year. General Wheeler stated that he had a good impression of General Thieu. He felt that the stability of the present government would depend on our support.

The President stressed his concern about the GVN's instability. He noted two basic problems: 1. Can Westerners engage in a war in Vietnam?

2. How can we fight a war under a government that changes so frequently?

Mr. Bundy agreed with the McNamara proposals. He felt that no government which could hold power is likely to be one that will invite us to leave. The basic lesson of Mr. Ball's view is that: 1. The post-monsoon season will not see us in the clear.

2. No single speech will be sufficient to reassure the American people.

We will have to face up to the serious, ominous implications of our new policy. This is not a continuation of our present approach. “We are asking Americans to bet more to achieve less.” We will have to engage in a much more massive political and economic effort. New organizational changes may be necessary in our mission in Saigon and in our governmental structure in Washington. There are no early victories in store, although early casualties are likely to be heavy.

Mr. Bundy did not believe that Mr. Ball's “cancer analogy” was a good one. Immaturity and weakness, yes. A non-Communist society is struggling to be born. Before we take our decision to the American people, Ambassador Taylor should go back to the GVN and get greater, more positive assurances. There will be time to decide our policy won't work after we have given it a good try. (Mr. Ball disagreed here, feeling that the larger our commitment, the more difficult would be the decision to get out. “We won't get out; we'll double our bet and get lost in the rice paddies.”)

Mr. Bundy felt that the kind of shift in US policy suggested by Mr. Ball would be “disastrous”. He would rather maintain our present commitment and “waffle through” than withdraw. The country is in the mood to accept grim news.

Secretary Rusk emphasized that the nature and integrity of the US commitment was fundamental. It makes the US stance with the USSR creditable. It would be dangerous if the Communist leadership became convinced that we will not see this through. It is more important to convince the Communist leadership of this than to worry about the opinion of non-Communist countries. He is more optimistic about the outcome of the war than some. The effects of our force increment will be to force the VC into guerrilla activity, to remove the capability of the other side to use major forces against the GVN. The VC must now be faced with difficult decisions. An increased US commitment does not change the nature of the war—we have already gone a long way in the air and on the ground without escalating. Consequently, he wondered whether we should be too dramatic about the increase in US forces. (Mr. Bundy pointed out here that calling up the reserves will require a certain amount of “drama”.)

Mr. McNamara felt that Mr. Ball understated the cost of cutting our losses. He agreed with Mr. Rusk on the international effect of such an action at this time. Mr. Ball also overstates the cost of his (McNamara's) proposal. He agreed that it would take at least two years to pacify the country and we must be prepared to increase our forces by another 100,000.

General Wheeler said that it was unreasonable to expect to “win” in a year regardless of the number of US troops involved. We might start to reverse the unfavorable trend in a year and make definite progress in three years.

The President wondered whether we could win without using nuclear weapons if China entered the war.

General Wheeler felt we could in “Southeast Asia.” He believes US forces can operate in the terrain of Southeast Asia. This is the first “war of National Liberation”; if we walk out of this one, we will just have to face others.

The President asked why, when we have been undertaking military efforts for 20 months, this new effort will be successful. General Wheeler felt that our additional forces will stave off a deteriorating situation.

Ambassador Lodge disagreed with Mr. Ball's approach. He felt, however, that it was essential to get a political/civil program going.

Ambassador Unger agreed with McNamara proposal. He found no unfavorable reactions in South Vietnam to an increase in US forces.

The President raised again the problem of getting more economic/political information into the press. State Department representatives promised to give this increased attention.

The President stressed his desire to get more third country troops into South Vietnam. He also raised the possibility of a Vietnam Task Force which would meet daily.

The meeting adjourned at 5:30.

CLC

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 2 E, 1965 Troop Decision. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Prepared by Cooper on July 22. Valenti's notes of the July 21 meeting do not list Cooper among those present; see Document 71. An attendance list attached to Cooper's record of the meetings indicates that, in addition to those listed by Valenti, Cooper and Busby of the White House staff and Marks of USIA were present for the morning and afternoon meetings. Clark Clifford was invited and attended the afternoon meeting.

2 Attached but not printed.

73. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 73. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, July 21, 1965.

The President invited alternatives to the McNamara proposal.2 What follows, however, is not an alternative but rather an ancillary approach.

This morning's discussion3 noted two possible military outcomes resulting from a substantial increase in US forces: a. The VC main forces will be forced by US forces into reverting to guerrilla warfare.

b. The VC main forces will choose not to confront our units head-on and voluntarily revert to guerrilla actions.

Either way, it would appear that we and the GVN will be faced with the problem of guerrilla rather than positional warfare. The fact that this may mean that the VC cannot achieve a military victory offers small comfort; neither we nor the GVN have as yet demonstrated that we can win this kind of war. The idea of leaving “pacification” duties to the ARVN (while we defend our bases and come to the relief of besieged ARVN units) will not, in itself, do the trick. In effect, the VC will be doing what it is best at. What is needed, if we are successfully to cope with the VC under the circumstances of widespread guerrilla warfare, is a political-economic-psychwar program as carefully developed and as massive in its way as the military effort envisaged in the McNamara proposal. In fact, it may well be that many of the US forces would be redundant under these circumstances and our hopes for “a favorable outcome” will be dependent on the success of our non-military efforts.

In brief, I would recommend that if the McNamara proposals are accepted, there be developed simultaneously a major non-military program to deal with the guerrilla phase of the war. In fact, I do not see how the McNamara approach can succeed without such accompanying non-military planning.

C

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII. No classification marking.

2 Document 67.

3 See Documents 71 and 72.

74. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 74. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 21, 1965, 8 p.m.

SUBJECT

Timing of Decision and Actions in Vietnam

Bill Moyers tells me we got through Wednesday2 with the White House press well enough, but I think the probability is that we will have rising pressure in the coming days. For this reason, I myself continue to think that the right time for your message—or a fireside chat—or both at once, is Monday.3 We really cannot get an orderly and well-considered decision made before that, but I doubt if we can hold the fort any longer.

I myself feel very strongly that we should not dribble out bits and pieces of this to the Press or to publishers before you make your final decision and announcement. The Press people we need most on this particular issue are the regular reporters, and the best thing we can do for them is to be sure they get the news straight, and from you, and on-the-record. If you didn't scare the meeting into silence today, I will be greatly surprised, and I think it makes good sense for your Government to deliberate for three days on an issue of this magnitude. On this basis, it seems to me that on Friday, or Saturday morning, we might announce that you are calling the Leadership to a meeting Sunday afternoon or Monday morning, and expect to go to Congress Monday noon or Monday evening.

I have an additional reason for proposing this schedule. Dean Rusk is going to the Bohemian Grove to give a speech on Saturday, and he has been hoping to take a day of rest in the bargain. He would like to leave Friday morning and return Sunday afternoon. Yet he should clearly be very much on hand when we meet the Leadership. The schedule I have suggested meets both objectives.

I have discussed this matter only with Bob McNamara, and I find that he concurs in this recommendation.

On a separate matter—Bob is carrying out your orders to plan this whole job with only $300-$400 million in immediate new funds. But I think you will want to know that he thinks our posture of candor and responsibility would be better if we ask for $2 billion to take us through the end of the calendar year, on the understanding that we will come back for more, if necessary. Bob is afraid we simply cannot get away with the idea that a call-up of the planned magnitude can be paid for by anything so small as another few hundred million. Cy Vance told me the other day that the overall cost is likely to be on the order of $8 billion in the coming year and I can understand Bob's worry that in the nature of things, these projected costs will be sure to come out pretty quickly, especially if he looks as if he was trying to pull a fast one.

I have not told Bob that I am reporting his worry to you; don't give me away.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. No classification marking.

2 July 21.

3 July 26.

75. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Busby) to President Johnson 75. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Busby) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 21, 1965, 10 p.m.

SUBJECT

Impressions, Vietnam Discussion

The following are some impressions—and personal reactions—to the Vietnam discussions2 which may be pertinent and useful:

Personal Impressions:

—Lodge: Strikingly more impressive, far more involved and committed than on any past occasion where I have seen him close-up. His year of reflection seems to me to have enhanced his vision—and value to you.

—aRusk: Given only a degree or two more of warmth and heat, he would be imposingly persuasive as a public leader. He is too deferential, self-effacing. But his logic and impromptu articulation is devastatingly effective and clear-cut. He assesses the stakes in Vietnam more precisely and convincingly than anyone else I have heard.

—Wheeler: A fortunate choice for his present post. I do wish other Joint Chiefs could hear more of these sessions.

As for the views of Secretary Ball, These are my reactions—and suggestions. Given his point of view, Ball is impressively clear-headed and well-organized in his argument. He is conscientious, not a critic. Obviously, his thinking is influenced by two factors of a decade ago: (1) concern—held-over from the Stevenson 1952 campaign—for adverse U.S. reaction to efforts to keep any Asian war limited, and (2) his other strong personal involvement, i.e., with the French during their fiasco in Indo-China. Anyone emotionally involved in those two experiences would be cautious, as Ball is cautious. Significantly, his argument is not the argument of the academic intellectuals—it is much more sane and sound, and merits respect as such.

Out of the discussions these thoughts occur: 1. Someone mentioned the Viet Cong are “creatures of habit.” So are we. Your advisers have “the habit” of down-playing our role in Vietnam. Hence, a tendency is present to insist that whatever is done is, actually, only an extension of all we have been doing. This may be self-deceptive.

2. What we are considering is not whether we continue a war—but whether we start (or have started) a new war. The 1954-64 premises, principles and pretexts no longer apply. This is no longer South Vietnam's war. We are no longer advisers. The stakes are no longer South Vietnam's. The war is ours. We are participants. The stakes are ours—and the West's.

3. The two great needs are self-assessment—and clearer definition of objectives. a. On Self-assessment: It seems dangerous to insist, passively or vocally that the U.S. has not made mistaken judgments since 1961. We must have done so. It would be constructive to insist upon critical self-analysis to determine at least the pattern of our errors.

b. Objectives: Clearly, the acceptable objectives in Vietnam—acceptable in proportion to U.S. sacrifice required—are world-size, not country-size. It is hard to define an acceptable objective in Vietnam: To seek one there leads inevitably to Ball's conclusion and thesis. The objectives—the acceptable objectives—must be in terms of Southeast Asia, the Pacific or even the broad East-West relationship. Rusk sees it in this dimension—and his logic prevails over Ball's. We do need, I believe, to equate our purposes in Southeast Asia with objectives broader and greater than the one country itself. Only that will justify what lies ahead.

4. On troop support from other nations: We may be thinking too narrowly on this. For many reasons, such support will not be forthcoming. One reason is that our oldest ally already is more involved—relative to strength—than we: i.e., Great Britain. If we can broaden the Nation's perspective and information by defining regional rather than one-country objectives, it would be helpful. Our efforts in Vietnam and Britain's efforts in Malaysia should be packaged together for public consumption. The more relevant line of action among allies would be to stop their trade with North Vietnam rather than pester them for troops.

5. Clearly, the fixation about working with the Vietnam government is a holdover from the ten-year effort to down-play our role there. Basically, we are there not solely because of Vietnam's invitation, but because of our obligations under SEATO. Our fidelity to a Treaty—not to a changeable government—deserves more emphasis abroad and at home. It also offers a predicate for the U.S. to run its own effort rather than stand by seeking permission from a government-that-is-not-a-government.

6. Overall, your initiative in insisting that everyone “think” is very satisfying, useful and stimulating. Defense, as well as State, should be encouraged to re-examine its own premises and past performance—or so it seems to me.

Horace Busby3

1 Source: Johnson Library, Office Files of Horace Busby, Vietnam, Box 3. Secret.

2 See Documents 71 and 72.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

76. Notes of Meeting 76. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, July 22, 1965, noon-2:15 p.m.

PRESENT

President

McNamara

Vance

Gen. Wheeler

Gen. Johnson

Secy. Resor

Gen. McConnell

Gen. Greene

Adm. McDonald

Clifford2

Secy. Nitze

Secy. Zuckert

Secy. Brown

Bundy

President: I asked McNamara to invite you here to counsel with you on these problems and the ways to meet them.

Hear from the Chiefs the alternatives open to you and then recommendations on those alternatives from a military point.

Options open to us

1. Leave the country—with as little loss as possible—the “bugging out” approach.

2. Maintain present force and lose slowly.

3. Add 100,000 men—recognizing that may not be enough—and adding more next year.

Disadvantages of #3—risk of escalation, casualties will be high—may be a long war without victory.

President: I would like you to start out by stating our present position and where we can go.

Adm. McDonald: Sending Marines has improved situation. I agree with McNamara that we are committed to extent that we can't move out. If we continue the way we are it will be a slow, sure victory for the other side. By putting more men in it will turn the tide and let us know what further we need to do. I wish we had done this long before.

President: But you don't know if 100,000 will be enough. What makes you conclude that if you don't know where we are going—and what will happen—we shouldn't pause and find this out?

McDonald: Sooner or later we'll force them to the conference table. We [They?]can't win an all out war.

President: If we put in 100,000 won't they put in an equal number?

McDonald: No. If we step up our bombing—

President: Is this a chance we want to take?

McDonald: Yes, when I view the alternatives. Get out now or pour in more men.

President: Is that all?

McDonald: I think our allies will lose faith in us.

President: We have few allies really helping us.

McDonald: Thailand, for example. If we walk out of Vietnam, the whole world will question our word. We don't have much choice.

President: Paul, what is your view?

Nitze: In that area not occupied by US forces, it is worse, as I observed on my trip out there.

We have two alternatives—support VN all over this country—or fall out from secure position we do have. Make it clear to populace that we are on their side. Gradually turn the tide of losses by aiding VN at certain points.

If we just maintained what we have—more the Pres. problem than ours—to acknowledge that we couldn't beat the VC, the shape of the world will change.

President: What are our chances of success?

Nitze: If we want to turn the tide, by putting in more men, it would be about 60/40.

President: If we gave Westmoreland all he asked for what are our chances? I don't agree that NVN and China won't come in.

Nitze: Expand the area we could maintain. In the Philippines and Greece it was shown that guerrillas lost.

President: Would you send in more forces than Westmoreland requests?

Nitze: Yes. Depends on how quickly they—

President: How many? 200 instead of 100?

Nitze: Need another 100 in January.

President: Can you do that?

Nitze: Yes.

McNamara: The current plan is to introduce 100,000—with possibility of a second 100,000 by first of the year.

President: What reaction is this going to produce?

Wheeler: Since we are not proposing an invasion of NVN, Soviets will step up material and propaganda—same with Chicoms. Might have NVN introduce more regular troops.

President: Why wouldn't NVN pour in more men? Also, call on volunteers from China and Russia.

Wheeler: First, they may decide they can't win by putting in forces they can't afford. At most would put in two more divisions. Beyond that they strip their country and invite a counter move on our part.

Secondly, on volunteers—the one thing all NVN fear is Chinese. For them to invite Chinese volunteers is to invite China's taking over NVN.

Weight of judgment is that NVN may re-inforce their forces, they can't match us on a build-up.

From military view, we can handle, if we are determined to do so, China and NVN.

President: Anticipate retaliation by Soviets in Berlin area?

Wheeler: You may have some flare-up but lines are so tightly drawn in Berlin that it raises risks of escalation too quickly. Lemnitzer thinks no flare-up in Berlin. In Korea, if Soviets undertook operations, it would be dangerous.

President: Admiral, would you summarize what you think we ought to do?

McDonald: 1. Supply forces Westmoreland has asked for.

2. Prepare to furnish more (100,000) in 1966.

3. Commensurate building in air and naval forces, step up of air attacks on NVN.

4. Bring in needed reserves and draft calls.

President: Any ideas on cost of what this would be?

McNamara: Yes—$12 billion—1966.

President: Any idea what effect this will have on our economy?

McNamara: It would not require wage and price controls in my judgment. Price index ought not go up more than one point or two.

McConnell: If you put in these requested forces and increase air and sea effort—we can at least turn the tide where we are not losing anymore. We need to be sure we get the best we can out of SVN—need to bomb all military targets available to us in NVN. As to whether we can come to satisfactory solution with these forces, I don't know. With these forces properly employed, and cutting off their supplies, we can do better than we're doing.

President: Have results of bombing actions been as fruitful and productive as we anticipated?

McConnell: No sir, they haven't been. Productive in SVN, but not as productive in NVN because we are not striking the targets that hurt them.

President: Are you seriously concerned when we change targets we escalate the war?

They might send more fighters down. Can't be certain if it will escalate their efforts on the ground.

Would it hurt our chances at a conference if we started killing civilians?

McConnell: We need to minimize civilian killings.

President: Would you go beyond Westmoreland's recommendations?

McConnell: No sir.

President: How many planes lost?

McConnell: 106 all types—small percentage of total.

President: How many out there?

McConnell: 146 combat. We have lost 54 combat.

President: How many Navy planes?

McConnell: In the 30's—about 125 combat.

Zuckert: It's worth taking a major step to avoid long run consequences of walking away from it.

President: Doesn't it really mean if we follow Westmoreland's requests we are in a new war—this is going off the diving board.

McNamara: This is a major change in US policy. We have relied on SVN to carry the brunt. Now we would be responsible for satisfactory military outcome.

President: Are we in agreement we would rather be out of there and make our stand somewhere else?

Johnson: Least desirable alternative is getting out. Second least is doing what we are doing. Best is to get in and get the job done.

President: But I don't know how we are going to get that job done. There are millions of Chinese. I think they are going to put their stack in. Is this the best place to do this? We don't have the allies we had in Korea. Can we get our allies to cut off supplying the NVN?

McNamara: No, we can't prevent Japan, Britain, etc. to charter ships to Haifong.

President: Have we done anything to get them to stop?

McNamara: We haven't put the pressure on them as we did in Cuba but even if we did, it wouldn't stop the shipping.

Brown: It seems that all of our alternatives are dark. I find myself in agreement with the others.

President: Is there anything to the argument this government is likely to fail, and we will be asked to leave? If we try to match the enemy, we will be bogged down in protracted war and have the government ask us to leave.

Brown: Our lines of communication are long.

President: How long?

Brown: 7000 miles from the West Coast, but not too much greater than China's. Biggest weakness of political base is lack of security they can offer their people.

President: Are we starting something that in 2-3 years we can't finish?

Brown: It is costly to us to strangle slowly, but chances of losing are less if we move in.

President: Suppose we told Ky of requirements we need—he turns them down—and we have to get out and make our stand in Thailand.

Brown: The Thais will go with the winner.

President: If we didn't stop in Thailand where would we stop?

McNamara: Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Burma, surely affect Malaysia. In 2-3 years Communist domination would stop there, but ripple effect would be great—Japan, India. We would have to give up some bases. Ayub would move closer to China. Greece, Turkey would move to neutralist position. Communist agitation would increase in Africa.

Greene: Situation is as tough as when it started. But not as bad as it could be. Marines in 1st Corps area is example of benefits.

Stakes: 1. National security stake. Matter of time before we go in some place else.

2. Pledge we made.

3. Prestige before the rest of the world.

If you accept these stakes, there are two courses of action: 1. Get out

2. Stay in and win.

How to win: 1. South—

2. North

The enclave concept will work. Would like to introduce enough Marines to do this. Two Marine divisions and one air wing. Extend.

28,000 there now—additional 72,000.

McNamara: Greene suggests these men over and above the Westmoreland request.

President: Then you will need 80,000 more Marines to carry this out.

Greene: Yes. I am convinced we are making progress with the SVN—in food and construction. We are getting evidence of intelligence from SVN.

In the North—we haven't been hitting the right targets. We should hit POL storage—essential to their transportation. Also airfields destroyed, MIGs and IL28's. As soon as SAM installations are operable.

President: What would they do?

Greene: Nothing. We can test it by attacking POL storage.

Then we should attack industrial complex in NVN. Also, they can be told by pamphlet drop why we are doing this. Then we ought to blockade Cambodia—and stop supplies from coming down.

How long will it take? 5 years—plus 500,000 troops. I think the US people will back you.

President: How would you tell the American people what the stakes are?

Greene: The place where they will stick by you is the national security stake.

Johnson: We are in a face-down. The solution, unfortunately, is long-term. Once the military solution is solved, the problem of political solution will be more difficult.

President: If we come in with hundreds of thousands of men and billions of dollars, won't this cause them to come in (China and Russia)?

Johnson: No. I don't think they will.

President: MacArthur didn't think they would come in either.

Johnson: Yes, but this is not comparable to Korea. Same situation—China bases and communications—

President: But China has plenty of divisions to move in, don't they?

Johnson: Yes, they do.

President: Then what would we do?

Johnson: (long silence) If so, we have another ball game.

President: But I have to take into account they will.

Johnson: I would increase the build-up near NVN—and increase action in Korea.

President: If they move in 31 divisions, what does it take on our part?

McNamara: Under favorable conditions they could sustain 31 divisions and assuming Thais contributed forces, it would take 300,000 plus what we need to combat VC.

Resor: I'm a newcomer—(interrupted by President)

President: But remember they're going to write stories about this like they did the Bay of Pigs—and about my advisors. That's why I want you to think very carefully about alternatives and plans.

Looking back on the Dominican Republic would you have done anything any differently, General?

Johnson: I would have cleaned out part of the city and gone in—and with same numbers.

President: Are you concerned about Chinese forces moving into NVN?

Johnson: There is no evidence of forces—only teams involved in logistics. Could be investigating areas which they could control later.

President: What is your reaction to Ho's statement he is ready to fight for 20 years?

Johnson: I believe it.

President: What are Ho's problems?

Johnson: His biggest problem is doubt about what our next move will be. He's walking a tightrope between the Reds & Chicoms. Also, he's worrying about the loss of caches of arms in SVN.

President: Are we killing civilians along with VC?

Wheeler: Certain civilians accompanying the VC are being killed. It can't be helped.

President: The VC dead is running at a rate of 25,000 a year. At least 15,000 have been killed by air—half of these are not a part of what we call VC. Since 1961 a total of 89,000 have been killed. SVN are being killed at a rate of 12,000 per year.

Resor: Of the three courses the one we should follow is the McNamara plan. We can't go back on our commitment. Our allies are watching carefully.

President: Do all of you think the Congress and the people will go along with 600,000 people and billions of dollars 10,000 miles away?

Resor: Gallup Poll shows people are basically behind our commitment.

President: But if you make a commitment to jump off a building, and you find out how high it is, you may withdraw the commitment.

President: I judge though that the big problem is one of national security. Is that right?

(murmured assent)

President: What about our intelligence? How do they know what we are doing before we do it? What about the B-52 raid—weren't they gone before we got there?

McNamara: They get it from infiltration in SVN forces.

President: Are we getting good intelligence out of NVN?

McNamara: Only reconnaissance and technical soundings. None from combat intelligence.

President: Some Congressmen and Senators think we are going to be the most discredited people in the world. What Bundy will now tell you is not his opinion nor mine (I haven't taken a position yet) but what we hear.

Bundy: Argument we will face:

For 10 years every step we have taken has been based on a previous failure. All we have done has failed and caused us to take another step which failed. As we get further into the bag, we get deeply bruised. Also, we have made excessive claims we haven't been able to realize.

Also, after 20 years of warnings about war in Asia, we are now doing what MacArthur and others have warned against.

We are about to fight a war we can't fight and win, as the country we are trying to help is quitting.

The failure on our own to fully realize what guerrilla war is like. We are sending conventional troops to do an unconventional job.

How long—how much. Can we take casualties over five years—aren't we talking about a military solution when the solution is political. Why can't we interdict better—why are our bombings so fruitless—why can't we blockade the coast—why can't we improve our intelligence—why can't we find the VC?

President: Gerald Ford has demanded the President testify before the Congress and tell why we are compelled to up the reserves. Indications are that he will oppose calling up the reserves.

McNamara: I think we can answer most of the questions posed.

Clifford: If the military plan is carried out, what is the ultimate result if it is successful?

Wheeler: Political objective is to maintain SVN as free and independent. If we follow the course of action, we can carry out this objective.

Wheeler: Probably after success, we would withdraw most of our forces; [some?] international or otherwise, would have to stay on.

If we can secure the military situation, it seems likely that we can get some kind of stable government.

Meeting adjourned at 2:15 pm

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House. The notes were originally handwritten by Valenti and later transcribed. They are quoted extensively in Valenti, A Very Human President, pp. 340-352. Valenti recalled that before this meeting, President Johnson told him: “All these recommendations seem to be built on a pretty soft bottom. Everything blurs when you get almost to the gate.” (Ibid., p. 341)

2 Clark Clifford was invited to this meeting at the President's request. (Ibid., p. 340)

77. Meeting Agenda 77. Meeting Agenda1

Washington, undated.

Possible Items for Discussion

July 22, 2:30 P.M.

1. How big a change in policy is this and how do we explain it—in political and military terms?

2. How do we inhibit Chinese and North Vietnamese response by both carrot and stick?

3. How do we combine a peace offensive with stepped-up military action?

4. Is this policy justified in terms of Vietnam, Asia or U.S. national interests—or all three?

5. How do we get a political and social effort within Vietnam that is equal in strength to the military effort?

6. What are our war aims? What is the answer to Walter Lippmann's question on this point?2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. No classification marking. The source text bears no drafting information, but the agenda was apparently drafted by McGeorge Bundy between the noon and 3 p.m. meetings; see Documents 76 and 78.

2 Walter Lippmann's question is not further identified.

78. Notes of Meeting 78. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, July 22, 1965, 3-4:20 p.m.

PRESENT

President

McNamara

Rusk

Ball

Busby

Clifford

Gen. Wheeler

Cy Vance

Moyers

Valenti

Bundy

Cater

John McCloy

Arthur Dean

President: I don't think that calling up the reserves in itself is a change of policy. There is a [no?] question though that we are going into a new kind of activity in VN. Basic objective is to preserve the independence and freedom of VN. This is not necessarily tied in with calling up reserves.

Rusk: The essence of policy is why we are there and what our war aims are. Moving from 75,000 to 185,000 men is a change of policy. Much is to be said for playing this low key.

President: That one point needs to be stressed with Congressional leadership—also to explain with candor what we are doing to the American people. But when we do, we help the NVN get their requests fulfilled by China and Russia.

McNamara: We can stay away from “change of policy” but it is a change in risk and commitment. We need to explain why it is in our interest to do it.

Services have submitted budget request by [of?]$12 billion. We can cut this down by half or more.

Moyers: I don't think the press thinks we are going to change basic policy, but the requirements to meet that policy.

President: That's right and we ought to say it.

Ball: I hope we can avoid a debate on whether it is a change. We always lose on this. We are becoming co-defendants with SVN.

McCloy: The country is looking to getting on with the war.

President: There are three alternatives: 1. Sit and lose slowly

2. Get out

3. Put in what needs to go in.

Rusk: If we bring out our message of decision while the Bucharest meeting2 is going on—it might bring them closer together. What we do in SVN is not of great concern to China. But a progressive step-up in bombing increases risk of China intrusion.

President: But the Chiefs say what we are doing in the North is not enough, only pin pricking them, just goosing them.

Rusk: But it is contradictory to do this when we can't find anybody in the South.

Both China and the Soviets have pressure on them. A commitment in SVN is one thing, but a commitment to preserve another socialist state is quite another. This is a distinction we must bear in mind.

We have a 1 in 5 chance of Russia's staying out if we make our commitment and if we bomb Hanoi. A commitment of large forces by us will lead to pressures on us to destroy Hanoi. This is the key point.

McCloy: Do you think they will let go if they still have sanctuary?

Rusk: Their only sanctuary is 1/5 of the country.

A. Dean: What do you do if the war drags on—with mounting casualties—where do we go? The people say if we are not doing what is necessary to end it, why don't we do what is necessary?

McNamara: We are begging the questions. If we bomb Haifong, would this end the war? and the answer is “No.” We have only destroyed so far about 20% of the ammunitions capacity and a lesser percentage of barracks capacity.

Dean: If this carries on for some years, we'll get in the same fix we were in Korea and the Yalu.

Rusk: We were under no pressures to make it a larger war until the war was practically over.

McCloy: If we could define our objectives specifically, what are our objectives in a discussion? What do we have to negotiate?

Rusk: 1. Infiltration from the North must stop.

2. We have no interests in a permanent military base there.

3. 1954-1962 agreements ought to be solved by peaceful means and not …

McCloy: When do the troops get withdrawn?

Rusk: When proof of infiltration—stopping.

Bundy: If we really were the ones for free elections, it would be good. It is difficult for Saigon to sign on.

McCloy: Would we be willing to take a Tito government or a VC victory?

Bundy: That's where our plan begins to unravel.

Now—how to keep a reasonable peace offensive going—

President: We have got to keep peace proposals going. It's like a prizefight. Our right is our military power, but our left must be our peace proposals. Every time you move troops forward, you move diplomats forward. I want this done. The generals want more and more—and go farther and farther. But State has to supply me with some, too.

We need Ernie Pyle out there interviewing soldiers who can tell how proud they are to do their duty.

Rusk: Thinking of Bucharest meeting, I suggest you meet with the leadership on Tuesday3 and make a statement on Wednesday.

Ball: We have big problem of disarmament meeting on Tuesday in Geneva.

McNamara: We can't delay this from the public.

President: Congress ought to be briefed on Saturday or Sunday and go up Monday to Congress. We ought to decide what our decision is, write it, brief Ambassadors and then tell the people.

Is the message a personal talk to the Congress or a normal message? Possibly a normal message.

Meeting adjourned at 4:20 p.m.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. The notes were originally handwritten by Valenti and later transcribed. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House.

2 The ninth congress of the Romanian Communist Party, held in Bucharest July 19-24, was also attended by delegations of over 50 other Communist Parties, including a Chinese delegation and a Soviet delegation led by Brezhnev.

3 July 27.

79. Memorandum From John Kenneth Galbraith to President Johnson 79. Memorandum From John Kenneth Galbraith to President Johnson1

Cambridge, Massachusetts, undated.

How to Take Ninety Percent of the Political Heat out of Vietnam

I assume the following to be true, much official crap to the contrary.

(1) Vietnam is of no great intrinsic importance. Had it gone Communist after World War II we would be just as strong as now and we would never waste a thought on it.

(2) No question of high principle is involved. It is their rascals or ours. Both sides would lose in free elections!

(3) The basic issue is that we must show that we can't be thrown out—that we don't give up under fire. This would also be bad here at home.

(4) It is right to consider the politics of the problem. A great many people who make policy do not have to take the political heat. Rusk ran the Korean War and his career was made by it. Stevenson ran for office during the war and was destroyed. The same would have happened to Harry Truman had he been up.

(5) Political questions are partly what we make them. Despite all of their efforts the Republicans could not make mileage last autumn out of Cuba. That was because nothing was happening there; it wasn't in the news and people couldn't be aroused.

I urge we: (1) Instruct officials and spokesmen to stop saying the future of mankind, the United States and human liberty is being decided in Vietnam. It isn't; this merely builds up a difficult problem out of all proportion. It is also terrible politics. It directs maximum attention to where difficulties are bound to be greatest.

(2) Stop saying that we are going to reconquer the whole country. We are not going to pacify Chicago or Harlem. The easiest way to have a failure is to set one up for ourselves by promising to do what can't be done.

(3) Let us apply a policy of political patience in the area. That is a technique you understand. It means quietly marking out areas (including of course Saigon) which we can hold, protect and feed if necessary for years. Then we hold these and worry very little about the rest. This proves our main point which is that we can't be thrown out. There is a safe haven for Catholics and anti-communists.

(4) The Viet Cong will not attack these areas frontally. Casualties will be low. High level trips and other contrived publicity should be kept to the minimum.

(5) Stop or gradually suspend the bombing north and south. This has slight military value, alarms our people and other countries and, above all, keeps the place at the top of the news with maximum attention there and minimum attention where it belongs. (I think it may harden resistance to negotiation also—but on this no one can be sure and I am confining myself here to facts.)

(6) Keep open the offer of negotiations. But we should not count on this policy forcing them to the table anytime soon. But someday they will come.

Results: (1) Unless they attack head on, which we can rule out, we will prove our staying power. We won't be playing their game by sending our forces out into the jungle where ambush works.

(2) The whole place will go on the back burner. Public attention will come back to areas of sound achievement of the Administration where it belongs.

(3) The Republicans will bleat as Keating did about Cuba. That will hurt them more than us.

(4) It will take the Russians off the hook and enable us to make progress there.

Final Observations:

I would think it worth running some risk of criticism to avoid calling up reserves. This will add to the publicity and wrong emphasis on Vietnam. I hope searching questions are asked on the need for these men. (Why not some from the divisions in Korea?) But after the initial flurry of publicity, this is still the right policy after a call-up.

In the past there were two difficulties with this program. It would have undermined the South Vietnamese government and required the commitment of our troops. Now there isn't any Vietnamese government worth worrying about and our forces are committed.

The great problem is our own eager beavers who do not consider the mood of our own people come the next election, and whose political teat is not in the wringer.

J.K. Galbraith2

1 Source: Johnson Library, Confidential File, ND 19/CO 312. Confidential. Sent to President Johnson by Galbraith under a covering memorandum dated July 22, which states: “This is meant as a sympathetic suggestion on a problem that I know is worrying you.” The covering memorandum is marked with an indication that the President saw Galbraith's memorandum.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. The covering memorandum is signed “Ken.”

80. Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Rowen) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 80. Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Rowen) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, July 22, 1965.

SUBJECT

Alternative methods of call-up of Reserve forces

Legally the Reserves may be called up either by Executive Order or through legislative action. Regarding Executive Order action, 10 U.S.C. 673 authorizes the calling up of up to one million Reserves. However, the President must first declare a new national emergency. 10 U.S.C. 673 does not permit the extension of enlistments except for the Navy and Marine Corps.

The Reserves may also be called up by the Service Secretaries “in time of war or of national emergency declared by Congress, or when otherwise authorized by law …” (10 U.S.C. 672). This was the route used in 1961 during the Berlin crisis when Congress passed a Joint Resolution authorizing the President to “order any unit, and any member not assigned to a unit organized to serve as a unit, in the Ready Reserve of an Armed Force to active duty for not more than twelve consecutive months.” This law also limited the number of Ready Reservists on active duty (other than for training) without their consent under this section at any one time. The law also authorized the involuntary extension of enlistments or other obligated service for not more than twelve months. The Resolution was followed by an Executive Order2 delegating to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretaries of the military departments the authority conferred by the Joint Resolution.

This method of calling up Reserves seems far and away the best. It assures Congressional participation and support and avoids the problems involved in declaring a new national emergency.

Finally, in light of experience we should think about including limitations on the maximum number of Reservists to be called up and the duration of active service under a Congressional Joint Resolution.

Harry

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. No classification marking. McGeorge Bundy forwarded this memorandum to President Johnson at 7:45 p.m. on July 22, noting in his covering memorandum that it was the “quick and dirty report” on calling up the reserves that he had mentioned on the telephone.

2 Executive Order 10957, August 10, 1961.

81. Special National Intelligence Estimate 81. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, July 23, 1965.

SNIE 10-9-65

A draft of SNIE 10-9-65 was submitted by CIA to President Johnson on July 20 with a covering memorandum stating: “This estimate is being given to you tonight in preparation for the meeting tomorrow morning. Admiral Raborn concurs in this estimate although the USIB has not formally considered it.” (Ibid., Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII) The draft estimate, which is marked with an indication that the President saw it, varies in wording in several places from the final estimate and does not include paragraphs 4, 5, 6, 14, the annex, or the substitute language provided in footnote 3 by the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF.

COMMUNIST AND FREE WORLD REACTIONS TO A POSSIBLE
US COURSE OF ACTION

The Problem

To estimate foreign reactions, particularly those of the Communist powers, to a specified US course of action with respect to Vietnam.

Assumptions

For purposes of this estimate, we assume that the US decides to increase its forces in South Vietnam to about 175,000 by 1 November. We further assume related decisions to call up about 225,000 reserves, to extend tours of duty at the rate of 20,000 a month, to increase the regular strength of the armed services by 400,000 over the next year, and to double draft calls.

We further assume (a) that the increase in forces would be accompanied by statements reiterating our objectives and our readiness for unconditional discussions, (b) that US forces would be deployed so that no major grouping threatened or appeared to threaten the 17th Parallel, and (c) that we might either continue present policy with regard to air strikes or extend these strikes in North Vietnam to include attacks on land (but not sea) lines of communication from South China2 and military targets in the Hanoi-Haiphong area.

The Estimate

1. Communists and non-Communists alike would see in the increased US military involvement in Vietnam a strong indication that the US saw little hope of early negotiations. This would be particularly true if, at the same time, the US extended its air operations in North Vietnam.

I. Viet Cong and DRV Reactions

2. At present the Viet Cong (VC) and North Vietnamese (DRV) leaders appear confident that their course in South Vietnam promises ultimate and possibly early success without important concessions on their part. They seem to believe that they can achieve a series of local military successes which, sooner or later, will bring victory through a combination of a deteriorating South Vietnamese army (ARVN) morale and effectiveness, a collapse of anti-Communist government in Saigon, and an exhaustion of the US will to persist.

3. We do not believe that inauguration of the US actions here assumed would basically alter these expectations. The VC and the DRV probably have come to expect increased US commitments, and they probably believe that the VC, with increased North Vietnamese assistance, can find ways to offset the effect of larger US forces. Nor do we think that the extension of air attacks to military targets in the Hanoi and Haiphong area would significantly injure the VC ability to persevere in the South or persuade the Hanoi Government that the price of persisting was unacceptably high.3

4. If the extension of air attacks were to include sustained interdiction of land lines of communication leading from South China, these actions would obviously make the delivery of Soviet and Chinese aid more difficult and costly, and would have a serious impact on the limited industrial sector of the DRV general economy. It would still not have a critical impact on the Communist determination to persevere and would not, at least for the short term, seriously impair VC capabilities in South Vietnam.

5. If, in addition, POL targets in the Hanoi-Haiphong area were destroyed by air attacks, the DRV's ability to provide transportation for the general economy would be severely reduced. It would also complicate their military logistics. If additional PAVN forces were employed in South Vietnam on a scale sufficient to counter increased US troop strength, this would substantially increase the amount of supplies needed in the South. The VC also depend on supplies from the North to maintain their present level of large-scale operations. The accumulated strains of a prolonged curtailment of supplies received from North Vietnam would obviously have an impact on the Communist effort in the South. They would certainly inhibit and might even prevent an increase in large-scale VC military activity, though they would probably not force any significant reduction in VC terrorist tactics of harassment and sabotage. These strains, particularly if they produced a serious check in the development of VC capabilities for large-scale (multi-battalion) operations might lead the DRV to consider negotiations.4 But the final decision on whether to seek negotiations would depend to a great extent on political developments in the Indochina area and elsewhere, and on the actual course of combat in South Vietnam.

6. In response to the US program, the Communists would almost certainly undertake measures to increase their own strength in South Vietnam for a higher level of struggle. They are already augmenting VC units and dispatching additional PAVN forces to South Vietnam; the assumed US actions would probably result in a speeding up of this process. By the end of 1965, the total of PAVN regulars in organized units in South Vietnam could reach 20,000 to 30,000 men. Although the Communists are aware of the dangers of concentrating their troops in large numbers, they might, during the next few months, attempt major assaults against GVN forces and positions, seeking to shatter ARVN before the increased weight of US strength could be brought to bear.

7. In coping with larger US forces employed in a more aggressive fashion, we believe that the Viet Cong would seek to avoid the kind of engagements which risked a serious Communist defect. Instead, they would probably concentrate on harassments intended to bleed and humiliate US forces, trapping and destroying isolated units where possible. At a minimum, the Communists would almost certainly continue present efforts to cut land communication lines and would step up the dispatch of small, expendable teams on sabotage and assassination missions designed to make the US look impotent or foolish. The Communists might also seek to increase their activities in Laos.

8. Over the longer run, the Communists' strategy will depend upon the actual course of combat and their estimates of South Vietnamese stability and US will to persist. They are predisposed to attach great weight to signs of disintegration in Saigon and to manifestations of domestic US opposition to Administration policies. These boost popular morale on the Communist side and reinforce the leadership's conviction that Communist staying power is inherently superior.

9. Should future military and political developments bring this conviction into serious doubt, the DRV might express increased interest in negotiations. However, they would endeavor to preserve their own freedom of action while laying inhibitions on US/GVN military operations, hoping to promote disarray in Saigon and encourage US opinion in favor of withdrawal.

10. Faced with the buildup outlined in our assumptions, the DRV would probably request more air defense equipment from the USSR, including SAMs, fighters, technicians, and perhaps pilots, particularly if US air attacks were expanded. From the Chinese, Hanoi would probably request more radar equipment, anti-aircraft artillery, and technicians in addition to a further increase in shipments of infantry arms and ammunition. Hanoi might also request China (and, perhaps, North Korea) to furnish aircraft and pilots. In general, however, we believe that Hanoi would wish to maintain some limits on, and a rough balance between, Soviet and Chinese personnel.

11. Deployments on the scale here assumed would cause the DRV some concern about US invasion. This would be true even if US forces took up positions which were not suggestive of an invasion. We believe, however, that the DRV would not react to this concern by requesting the introduction of Chinese combat forces. It probably would make such a request only if actual invasion seemed clearly imminent.

II. Chinese Communist Reactions

12. The Chinese are probably even more convinced than the Vietnamese Communists that if the DRV/VC remain firm, in the end the US will be wholly defeated in Vietnam. Renewed US determination, evidenced by the buildup assumed in this estimate, would give the Chinese some pause but, in our view, not much. They would believe that the US measures were sufficient only to postpone defeat while magnifying its eventual effect.

13. We do not believe that the Chinese would react to the assumed US moves including the present level of air attacks, by overtly intervening in the military struggle with combat forces. They are already stepping up their military assistance, including the introduction of some rear service elements into North Vietnam, and would give more aid if requested by the DRV. Moreover, they would try to increase alarm among non-Communists, especially the US public, by intensifying their propaganda and reiterating their willingness to accept hostilities if attacked by the US. They would probably continue to strengthen their forces in South China and might take some further overt steps toward mobilization.

14. If air strikes were extended to the Hanoi-Haiphong area and particularly to lines of communication from South China, the chances of Chinese Communist air intervention from Chinese bases would increase. This would particularly be true if the air strikes were effective in cutting the main roads and rail lines over which the principal supplies are moving. While we believe the Chinese would be reluctant to engage the US in an air war or to risk US retaliation against Chinese military installations, we consider the chances are about even that Chinese aircraft would deliberately engage the US over North Vietnam from bases within China. We do not believe, however, that this would lead to greatly increased Chinese Communist participation in the conflict. In any case, if large numbers of US aircraft were operating close to the frontiers of China the likelihood of hostile encounters would be high.5

The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, believes that the chances are better than even that Chinese aircraft would deliberately engage the US under these circumstances. Even if air engagements were accidental they would have extremely dangerous repercussions and if they were deliberate they could not fail to lead to a wider war. [Footnote in the source text.]

15. If, in the circumstances described in paragraph 9, the Viet Cong and the DRV at some point wished to move toward negotiations, an important divergence might open up between Hanoi and Peiping. The Chinese are themselves not suffering direct military damage and they fear that negotiations would give the USSR a chance to increase its role in Vietnam. Thus they would exert strong pressures to dissuade the DRV from entering into negotiations.

III. Soviet Reactions

16. The USSR hopes for an eventual Communist victory in South Vietnam, but it is more conscious than Peiping and Hanoi of the larger military risks. Moreover, the USSR wants to maintain or improve its influence over the DRV and in the world Communist movement generally; it does not wish the kind of Communist victory which would magnify the prestige and power of China. Unlike Peiping and Hanoi, Moscow is concerned with minimizing damage to East-West relations. In this situation, the USSR prefers a course of negotiations, but it cannot afford to appear laggard in supporting the DRV, and it is deepening its commitment to Hanoi's cause.

17. In the circumstances outlined in our assumptions, we believe that the USSR would see no alternative to continued support of the DRV and further expansion of its military aid. It would thus be likely to grant a DRV request for additional air defense equipment and personnel. It would probably feel compelled to comply promptly with DRV requests to replace air defense equipment destroyed by US attacks in the Hanoi area. The Soviet aid program might be hampered by Chinese restrictions on transit rights.

18. The USSR would probably indicate that, if the US remains unyielding in Vietnam, it faces trouble elsewhere in the world, as, for example, in Berlin. We do not think, however, that Moscow would confront us with a major challenge. Nor do we believe that the Soviets would wish to foreclose the possibility of negotiations at some future stage; indeed, they would probably work to keep this possibility alive on both sides.

19. We believe that the US decisions considered here would produce important reactions in general Soviet policy. Moscow would almost certainly harden its general stance toward the US. For example, although the Soviets have agreed to renewed disarmament talks, partly in order to check the deterioration in East-West relations, the assumed US course in Vietnam would probably lead them to devote the talks entirely to attacks on the US or even to break them off.

20. The assumed moves would carry total US military manpower above the 2.8-2.9 million total which we estimate for the USSR; they would also imply a reversal of the downward trend in US military spending which Kosygin cited in justifying the 1965 reduction in the overt Soviet military budget. We believe that the USSR's declared policy of restraining or even reducing military expenditures has been under attack by military spokesmen in recent months and is the subject of debate within the collective leadership. It is likely that the US moves, plus the worsening of general Soviet-US relations, would strengthen the position of those arguing for additional military appropriations. In those circumstances, the USSR probably would respond with an overt increase in its own military spending.

IV. Non-Communist Reactions

21. Most non-Communist nations have already realized that the US, already heavily engaged in South Vietnam, is likely to increase its commitment if necessary. The measures here considered would nevertheless cause rising alarm because, in combination with Communist statements in response, they would revive and fortify fears of increased cold-war tensions and even of a much larger war. This might make some governments more reluctant to give public support to US policy, particularly governments in political difficulty, e.g., the UK, Canada, and Norway. Significant extension of bombing in North Vietnam would increase apprehension in these countries. Over the longer run, however, the more important reactions will depend on the subsequent course of the conflict.

22. In non-Communist Asia, Japan offers the most serious problem. We believe the Sato government would maintain its policy of supporting US policy in spite of howls from the press and opposition forces. Sato's position would be made much more difficult, however, if Okinawa or especially Japan were to become a greatly expanded conduit for support of US forces in Vietnam, or if it appeared that China was about to become involved in the fighting. India would deplore increased bombing of the DRV but would otherwise continue its position of public questioning and private acquiescence in US actions in South Vietnam. Pakistan, hoping to continue to receive American aid while remaining on good terms with China, would reaffirm its neutrality and its noninvolvement in Vietnam.

V. Reactions to the Mode of Announcement

23. If the announcements were made in piecemeal fashion and with no more high level emphasis than necessary, the development of a crisis atmosphere might be mitigated. It is also possible that private assurances to the USSR that the US increase in overall military strength was directed solely toward the situation in Vietnam, and not meant to improve the US position vis-a-vis the Soviets, might soften the tone of the Soviet response. This avoidance of strident recriminations might in turn decrease somewhat the negative reaction of non-Communist countries. We believe, however, that the reactions of the Communist powers, particularly in the military field, would not be basically changed by the method of announcement. We also believe that there would still be increased apprehension among non-Communist countries.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates File. Top Secret; Sensitive; Controlled Dissem. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of AEC, NSA, and the Departments of State and Defense participated in the preparation of this estimate. The estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the members of the U.S. Intelligence Board, except for the Assistant to the Director of the FBI, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

2 See Annex for a discussion and map of both land and current sea routes from China to North Vietnam. [Footnote in the source text. The Annex is not printed.]

3 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, disagrees with the judgment made in this paragraph and would substitute the following: “3. We believe that inauguration of the US actions here assumed, which emphasize US willingness and determination to become more deeply involved in combat operations in the South and eliminate the concept of an area ‘sanctuary’ in North Vietnam, has a reasonable chance of basically altering the Communists' short-term expectations. While the VC and the DRV probably have come to expect some additional US commitments, and they probably believe that the VC, with increased North Vietnamese assistance, can find ways to offset the effect of larger US forces, such confidence could be quite quickly undermined by effectively expanded US combat operations. Extension of air attacks to military targets in the Hanoi and Haiphong area would pose the added threat that urban/industrial targets might be next. The selective and limited nature of US bombing target selections to date may have led Hanoi seriously to underestimate the extent of US determination to exert the power necessary to force discontinuance of DRV support for the VC. US military actions resulting from the assumed program could well persuade the Hanoi Government that the price of persisting was becoming unacceptably high.” [Footnote in the source text.]

4 The Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State, and the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, believe that in spite of greater damage and harassment caused by sustained air attack on lines of communication (LOC) and other targets, the capacities of DRV and Laos LOC are sufficient to permit support of the war in South Vietnam at the scale envisaged in this estimate. Other significant factors supporting this position are the impossibility of doing irreparable damage to LOC capacity; demonstrated Communist logistic resourcefulness and ability to move large amounts of war material long distances over difficult terrain by primitive means; and the difficulty of detecting, let alone stopping, sea infiltration. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency; Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence); Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF; and the Director of NSA, do not agree with the judgment expressed in this paragraph. They believe that it should read as follows: “If air strikes were extended to the Hanoi-Haiphong area and particularly to lines of communication from South China, the chances of Chinese Communist air intervention from Chinese bases would increase. Nevertheless, we believe the Chinese would be reluctant to engage the US in an air war or to risk US retaliation against Chinese military installations. We therefore consider it unlikely that Chinese aircraft would deliberately engage the US over North Vietnam from bases within China.”

82. Memorandum From Justice Arthur J. Goldberg to President Johnson 82. Memorandum From Justice Arthur J. Goldberg to President Johnson1

Washington, July 23, 1965.

SUBJECT

Viet Nam

In my view, we should take the Viet Nam issue to the UN Security Council concurrently with the announcement about increases in U.S. military efforts there.

I would recommend that we should propose and seek support for a simple Security Council resolution calling for unconditional talks. I would not recommend that the resolution go beyond this into the more controversial areas of cease fire and UN observers.

The virtue of this is that it would emphasize that the President is pursuing a political solution at the same time that he is manifesting his determination that we will not be dislodged by military force.

The judgment of Harlan Cleveland has been that we have the votes to pass the suggested resolution. This would have to be verified by consultations in New York to confirm the accuracy of Mr. Cleveland's conclusion in light of present and proposed developments.

The arguments pro and con undoubtedly have already been adequately presented to you by Secretary Rusk. I have four pro arguments to add: 1. In my experience, I have never found that renewed expressions of the desire to seek a peaceful settlement through unconditional discussions undermine the firm position of the proponent not to settle by force rather than agreement. On the other hand, such expressions reinforce the support of the rank and file and even critical leaders for a firm policy. This was proved by your Baltimore proposal.2 And the other side will judge us by what we do rather than what we say.

2. Placing the matter before the Security Council may afford the Soviet Union an opportunity to blow off steam rather than to respond more drastically.

3. It is at least likely as a result of the developments next week that we will be in the dock of the Security Council on this subject as a defendant. There are obvious advantages in being the plaintiff rather than in a defensive role.

4. The UN desperately needs a concrete expression of renewed faith on your part that it can perform a vital role in keeping the peace.

Draft Resolution on Viet-Nam3

The Security Council

Having considered the question of Viet Nam;

Concerned at the potential threat to world peace involved in a continuation of the present situation;

Believing that every effort should be made to resolve the problem through peaceful means; 1. Calls on all parties concerned to engage in immediate unconditional discussions looking toward a solution of the problem;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to use his good offices in facilitating the conduct of such discussions.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Confidential File, ND 19/CO 312. No classification marking. Attached to a note by President Johnson's secretary, dated August 17, that reads: “Fr. his [Johnson's] pocket, he has had it since Camp David, the weekend of July 23, 1965.” Goldberg had agreed by the time he wrote this memorandum to become U.S. Representative to the United Nations, a position to which he was appointed on July 26.

2 Reference is to the President's speech at Johns Hopkins University on April 7; see vol. II, Document 245.

3 Drafted by Goldberg in hand on the reverse side of the second page of his memorandum.

83. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 83. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 24, 1965, 8:20 p.m.

Mr. President:

I enclose two memoranda. One is from Joe Sisco,2 and the other is a paper on the history of troop recommendations which you instructed me to prepare in our meeting yesterday.

I also had a talk with Sisco, and my own belief is that with further effort we can find a way, showing our readiness to go to the UN without exposing ourselves to much danger in the Security Council. We did it successfully at the time of the Gulf of Tonkin, and I think we can do it again. I believe that the public advantage of showing readiness to speak our peace [piece] in the Security Council outweighs the disadvantage of the Soviet response, and I also think that with appropriate pressures, we can keep at least 8 members of the Security Council on our side in keeping the focus sharply on the need for discussions. The members of the Security Council, for your information, are:

US, UK, France, Nationalist China, and the Soviet Union—Permanent Members

The Netherlands, Uruguay, Bolivia, Jordan, Ivory Coast, and Malaysia—Temporary Members

Sisco himself says we can get the US, the UK, the ChiNats, the Dutch, and the two Latin Americans. I believe that strong diplomacy would give us Jordan, the Ivory Coast, and Malaysia as well—all three of them owe us a lot in different ways.

McG.B.3

Enclosure4

Washington, July 24, 1965, 8:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

The History of Recommendations for Increased US Forces in Vietnam

This story relates almost entirely to 1965. When you became President, US forces in Vietnam totaled 16,000. On 31 December 1964, they totaled 23,000. Today they are between 75 and 80,000, and you are considering increases of another 100,000 between now and November.

In December and January, our attention did not focus upon increased ground forces. We were trying to get the Huong Government to pull up its socks, and we were preparing to authorize air strikes at the right moment. We had no recommendations from the military for major ground force deployments.

At the end of January, after Bob and I discussed with you our growing doubts, you sent me to Vietnam. During that trip, the attack on Pleiku occurred and in February, you put into effect the program of limited air strikes against North Vietnam,5 and unlimited air action in South Vietnam. It is in this connection that the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended, and you approved, the deployment of Marines to Danang. Two battalion landing teams were approved for such deployment on February 25.6

The bombing did not reverse the situation and we did not expect it would. In the first week of March, you sent General Harold Johnson to Vietnam. He returned with three basic recommendations:7 First, a 21-Point program of small actions which was promptly approved;

Second, a deployment of a tailored division force either to the highlands or to certain bases; and

Third, a four division ground force to contain infiltration by land.

The last two recommendations were tentative in form and were not pressed to a decision. General Taylor, in an important dispatch on March 16 (Saigon 3003) weighed the pros and cons of a single US division and recommended that judgment be reserved.8

At the end of March, General Taylor visited Washington and there was discussion of a possible three-division force, as suggested by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, but Taylor himself was skeptical and reported a similar skepticism in Prime Minister Quat.9 The Secretaries of State and Defense recommended that the decision be deferred and that instead we should approve deployment of two additional Marine battalions and an 18-20,000 man increase in other US support forces. This recommendation was accepted in the first days of April.10

The study of ground-force deployment continued in April, and on Tuesday, April 20, McNamara, Taylor, Wheeler, Sharp, Westmoreland, McNaughton, and William Bundy met in Honolulu.11 At that point there were 2,000 Koreans and 33,000 US troops in the country, and an additional 18,000 were already approved. After the Honolulu discussions, McNamara recommended additional deployments leading to a total strength of 82,000—including 13 combat battalions. Part of this recommendation was given formal approval on April 21;12 and other parts on May 15. This set of recommendations was the most important between January and the present, and I attach McNamara's memorandum of April 21.13

Early in May, you requested $700 million for Vietnam,14 and our defense of this request and related statements made it clear that additional forces were being sent. On June 16, McNamara gave a full public exposition, announcing the planned deployment of 15 battalions, with a total military strength of 70-75,000.15

Meanwhile, on June 11, after discussions with MACV and Ambassador Taylor, the Joint Chiefs recommended additional deployments to a total of 116,000.16 The most important element in this recommendation was the air-mobile division. On June 19 you gave approval to the necessary preparatory steps for these deployments, without deciding on the deployment itself.

On July 2, the Joint Chiefs produced a further recommendation for a total troop strength of 179,000, again in coordination with MACV and Ambassador Taylor. Before approving this recommendation, you sent McNamara to Vietnam.17 With marginal modifications, it is this recommendation which is now before you for decision.

The essence of this history, I think, is that initially we all had grave objections to major US ground force deployments. Even those in favor (like my brother Bill), wanted to try other things first, and none of us was prepared to urge on Westmoreland things he was not urging on us.

Then when we got major bases of our own, largely for air action, we moved quite promptly to protect them. These deployments did not give us bad reactions, and it became easier for Westmoreland to propose, and for us to accept, additional deployments. Thus, between the end of March and the beginning of July—a period of only three months—we moved from recommended force levels of 33,000 to recommended force levels of 180,000. We also moved from the mission of base security to the mission of active combat in whatever way seems wise to General Westmoreland.

I have found this review instructive. It suggests to me that McNamara's Plan 3 is better than his other two plans. I think we should now approve the recommended deployments through November. I think that at the same time we should explicitly and plainly reserve decision about further major deployments. After all, we have not yet had even a company-level engagement with Viet Cong forces which choose to stand their ground and fight.

McG.B.18

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Secret.

2 Not attached and not found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

4 Secret.

5 See vol. II, Documents 131 and 149.

6 See ibid., Document 170.

7 See ibid., Documents 179 and 197.

8 Ibid., Document 204. Telegram 3003 was received on March 17.

9 See ibid., Document 220.

10 See ibid., Documents 230 and 242.

11 See ibid., Documents 264 and 265.

12 See ibid., Documents 266, 269, and 271.

13 Ibid., Document 265.

14 See ibid., Document 283.

15 A transcript of McNamara's news conference is in the Johnson Library, Public Statements of Secretary of Defense McNamara, 1965, vol. 5, pp. 1791-1803.

16 See vol. II, Document 346.

17 See Document 49.

18 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

84. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 84. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 24, 1965, 7:50 p.m.

266. Deptel 218.2 In approaching the matter of obtaining additional commitments from GVN in advance of U.S. statement of expanded military effort, we would divide the matter into two parts; those commitments which we might seek privately and those which we might get GVN to state publicly or allow us to use publicly in U.S.

In private, there would be some advantage in informing the senior GVN officials that prior to undertaking to provide additional military aid we would like to verify following understandings: A. Our joint war aims are expressed in general terms in the four points announced by FM Do on June 22.3 We will work together privately in refining and amplifying these general terms, meanwhile will avoid giving any public impression of divergence of views.

B. We will continue as agreed previously to keep each other informed of policy decisions of mutual interest in advance of public information.

C. We will cooperate together to control inflation and to end the currency black market. In this regard we agree that there will be no increase in GVN budget or wage increases without prior consultation.

D. We will always exchange views frankly on the subject of incompetent U.S. or GVN officials who are not performing adequately and will undertake to replace those who are found to be unsatisfactory to the joint effort.

E. U.S. military forces will be employed as determined by General Westmoreland who will be guided by the White House statement of June 9 (Depcirtel 2470, June 9).4

F. GVN will take timely action to provide real estate required by U.S. forces.

G. We will continue to place emphasis on population and resources control.

In presenting this list to Generals Thieu and Ky, we would avoid giving impression of asking for new agreements or imposing conditions for our increased aid commitments but would do so in context of seeking reaffirmation of understandings already explicitly or tacitly reached.

As to a public statement, we believe that one could be prepared which would be acceptable to the GVN, making the following points: a. Determination of GVN to put country on a war footing and to control inflation.

b. Plans to increase forces and reduce desertion.

c. Recognition of importance of Chieu Hoi.

d. Reaffirmation of Do's four points.

To attempt to go beyond the foregoing modest program would probably be unproductive. We do not want to raise conditions in terms likely to be rejected or to require prolonged debate. The private assurances will be no better than subsequent performance which is likely to be spotty. The public statement will be viewed as government propaganda by most observers. We would recommend our taking up the matter in the foregoing terms at our meeting with Ky scheduled for July 27. Meantime we will send the Dept. a draft of the proposed public statement which we will give Ky as a suggested public release.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Bangkok eyes only for Ambassador Johnson. Received at 8:21 a.m. on July 25 and passed to the White House.

2 In telegram 218 to Saigon, July 24, the Department of State indicated that it expected an announcement soon of the expanded U.S. military effort in Vietnam and that an essential accompaniment was a clear understanding with the South Vietnamese Government that it would take every possible step to put the country on a war footing. (Ibid.)

3 Not found.

4 The statement is printed in Department of State Bulletin, June 28, 1965, p. 1041.

85. Notes of Meeting 85. Notes of Meeting1

Camp David, Maryland, July 25, 1965, 5 p.m.

PRESENT

President

Goldberg

McNamara

Clifford

Busby

Valenti

Clifford: 1. Do not think it advisable to go to UN with resolution now. Don't need this to re-inforce peaceful intentions. Inconsistent with going in with additional troops.

2. Stop talking about Vietnam—on part of President, Rusk, Harriman, etc. No talking about where and why we are there. Don't think they are going to be forced to table by any UN proposal. Underplay Vietnam until January.

3. Both above based on this one: Don't believe we can win in SVN. If we send in 100,000 more, the NVN will meet us. If the NVN run out of men, the Chinese will send in volunteers. Russia and China don't intend for us to win the war. If we don't win, it is a catastrophe. If we lose 50,000+ it will ruin us. Five years, billions of dollars, 50,000 men, it is not for us.

At end of monsoon, quietly probe and search out with other countries—by moderating our position—to allow us to get out. Can't see anything but catastrophe for my country. A resolution in the UN with dramatic debate is bad for us.

President: (reading from letter)2 VN is not of intrinsic value—If

There is no high principle involved.

Basic issue is not to get thrown out under fire.

Political questions are what we make them.

1. Instruct officials to stop saying all humankind is at stake.

2. Stop saying we are going to pacify the country.

3. Patience—pressure—quietly marking areas we can hold. Hold these for years if need be. Make a safe haven.

4. Vietcong cannot attack these places frontally.

5. Gradually stop bombings north and south. Maximum attention to it which is wrong.

6. Keep offer of negotiations open.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. The notes were originally handwritten by Valenti and later transcribed. The meeting was held in Aspen Lodge.

2 Document 79.

86. Memorandum From Gordon Chase of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 86. Memorandum From Gordon Chase of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, July 26, 1965.

SUBJECT

Vietnam and the UN

Here is some information which you may not have.

1. Bill Buffum tells me that, over the weekend, the President talked to Joe Sisco a couple times about the desirability of asking for a Security Council session on Vietnam to accompany the forthcoming Vietnam announcements.

2. Joe, expounding the State Department view, thought that it would not be a good thing to have a Security Council session at this time; there would inevitably be a debate which would lead to such things as recommendations for a cessation of bombing and recommendations for including the Viet Cong in any negotiations as an equal negotiating party. Joe went on to suggest that we hold off on a Security Council meeting and possibly have one at a later date.

3. As I understand it, the President bought the State Department view.

GC

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII. Top Secret.

87. Notes of Meeting 87. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, July 26, 1965, 12:30-3:15 p.m.

PRESENT

President

Vice President

McNamara

Rusk

Goldberg

Bundy

Lodge

Gen. Wheeler

Ball

Valenti

Busby

Moyers

Clifford, Helms, Raborn joined the group 30 minutes later

President: Please, Bob, give us your findings and recommendations on SAM sites.

Wheeler: SAM site that shot down the F4C is probably a mobile site, #6.2

(President and McNamara look at map showing where plane was shot down)

President: Any indication that there are more than five sites?

Wheeler: Yes, on Friday night we determined there are two more, #6 and #7. Site #4 is possibility, but 6 and 7 are better possibilities—more probably a mobile site.

(President asked technical questions about sites and their shoot down capabilities)

Wheeler: Chiefs recommendation:

We don't know if any of these sites have equipment. We should attack all sites. At the minimum, we should take out 4, 6, 7.

McNamara: Good, but I would take out only 6 and 7.

President: Where does your intelligence tell you Russians are operating?

Wheeler: In 6 and 7.

President: Are you sure they are Russians?

Wheeler: [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]—that is the weight of our evidence.

Rusk: I would not hit one of the sites close in to Hanoi. Only reason to hit 6 and 7 is to give warning to NVN. Very important if we strike that nothing be said about Russians being there. Political effect of hitting 6 and 7 is a warning to not move sites farther out from Hanoi.

Not at all sure we'll hit anything—they may have moved them out from there.

Intensify reconnaissance to see if we can pick up anything.

President: Are we photoing regularly?

McNamara: Yes, but we are careful over Hanoi. We are using drones more.

President: What are you getting out of this?

McNamara: No reports of radar activity at these sites.

Wheeler: This is the first time we have heard their radar.

President: How much personnel?

Wheeler: About 1/2.

President: How provocative will this be?

Wheeler: When they sent up the missiles, they expected something.

President: What would be our reaction to the Russians bombing our sites?

Rusk: Various indications that if Russians and US collide, it would be dangerous. Killing the first Russians—[1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified].

(Here President admonished the group NOT to speak to anyone about this. “This is a war—and the stakes are high”.)

President: You think, Dean, we should take out the sites even though the Russians are there?

Rusk: I think it would be a warning.

President: (I want the Secretary of State to draw up a document saying that if anyone wants to write article for Life he cannot participate.)

Ball: This is a very hard decision. But our intelligence is not very hard at this time.

There is no way to keep from identifying the casualties as Russians.

Before we make this decision I'd like to know if we take out 6 and 7 there is something there to take out.

Can we make some efforts to find out what is there. We don't have to take them the next day. If they are building an outer perimeter, then we have to take them out.

Wheeler: We have already identified this site. Discussed low level rekky—staff advised against it because they will get out after rekky.

President: The assumption is in your favor, but we don't know exactly where the missiles came from.

McNamara: I don't see the logic to Ball's argument—If we strike and they are not there.

President: Get bad story if we roam around and find nothing

Bundy: We haven't addressed the question of turning [possible omission in the source text]. See advantage of not crossing this bridge until after making Presidential Statement.

President: Let's not assume I am to make a speech. No one has decided that.

Bundy: Rapidity of action in Pleiku gave Russians a talking point. Is our position affecting these sites better later than now—then take them out on our way to munitions plant. Can see advantage if we punish SAM sites quickly. Also reports are saying we shouldn't have let them go this long.

Don't see the merit of waiting. The target is on authorized list—current Rolling Thunder list.

McNamara: Record shows there is military purpose for going over these targets now.

Ball: If we move promptly it will be a decision to step up war. In present heated tension of this decision making, this step will be viewed as a decision break-through—this will be a world impression.

Am sympathetic with view of Bundy—of taking out SAM site with purpose of taking out military target—SAM only incidental.

Also, if we wait we allow Goldberg to present his credentials.3 We ought to disassociate the SAMs from the present heat.

Rusk: Harold Wilson pleads we let him know in advance if we take 6 and 7. He needs to keep his people in line. (Bundy shares this view.)4

President: What do you think about this, Cabot?

Lodge: 6 and 7 are 40 mi. away—the rest are 10 mi away.

Would go ahead on the two that are 40 mi. away. But don't think it is of pressing urgency.

Wheeler: If they announce that there are Russians in the site, it would make your decision more anxious.

President: If we leave 6 and 7 for awhile, what would it do to Rolling Thunder?

Wheeler: Would cut targets in half. Will cut down on armed rekky.

Ball: It's going to make it difficult for us domestically if we don't take out these SAMs right now.

We ought not let domestic politics guide us in making a small war larger.

McNamara: It hasn't been necessary to take out SAM in order to get to a military target.

President: Helms, do you have any intelligence on this? Are we sure they came from 6 and 7? Wasn't there a possibility it could have come from 4?

Wheeler: Our pilots' intelligence—and depending on navigation—there is possibility it came from 4 or mobile site.

President: How liberally is it mobile?

Wheeler: According to Russian terminology this is semi-mobile site.

Rusk: We have knocked a key bridge connecting China with NVN. We could expect the Russians to set up sites there.

President: One of the great dangers is conveying wrong message by letting enemy miscalculate our motives. What will be reaction of enemy if he can knock down US planes and we do nothing about it? The sites are put there to destroy us. Are we going to sit and sit and let them knock down our planes? Are we going to let them move first?

Bundy: Let's see if the sites impede Rolling Thunder.

(Wheeler went over map to point out targets)

Goldberg: It is difficult for the public to distinguish between 6 and 7 and the rest. What will be Russians reaction to this? This is what they have given to NVN. Where will they go for future?

May be a specific reaction to pinpointing the target. Do we know enough out of this episode—is it worthwhile to know how these sites are to be utilized? Is this their policy—or is it a gesture? Is it definitely their policy or is it a trigger happy officer?

Public reaction would be—this is Hanoi area.

Bundy: I don't think we are facing a confrontation with the Russians that Amb. Goldberg suggests. I am attracted by the notion of waiting until we have to go. Real risk if we seem to be diverted by this episode—too much of our plans are operationally known by our military.

President: Why do we ferret out ammo dumps, etc. and lose men—and fail to take out something that is more dangerous like SAM site. How do you justify this. You bring bombing to a standstill. If you are to continue bombing these targets, how can we not take out SAMs.

Rusk: You cannot order pilots to bomb without helping them get back. We don't know enough about sites.

President: Then we ought to cancel targets—we can't send pilots over the missile sites.

V. Pres: We ought to face up to Russian involvement. What impact this will have on Russian relations, I don't know. All the press knows the Russians are in the site business.

Wheeler says if we delay it will aggravate situation. They have to be taken out. If I were forced to decide, then if targets are to be kept, take out sites. If targets can be altered, 2 or 3 days later is not a matter of significance.

We can't leave ourselves without response. But I think we can allow ourselves a little time.

McNamara: We simply have to change targets—we can't keep target schedules with sites in. We are not going to learn anything more in the next 2 or 3 days.

Raborn: Information on these sites was obtained on July 20. First read-out did not read out sites. Finally disclosed on Saturday morning, July 24. Will take coordinated intelligence effort to sort out where these sites are. This effort is underway—using all kinds of intelligence information to come up with answer.

Until the effort is completed, I would recommend not going in. We know 6 and 7 are manned.

McNamara: If striking 6 and 7 properly, at low altitude, we will be protected from 8, 9, 10.

There are two problems: Should we take out 6 and 7 now—or wait.

My decision on taking out 6 and 7 depends on taking out Rolling Thunder targets—as well as telling the Russians we won't allow them to conclude—we won't do anything.

We don't want to send planes to Rolling Thunder targets if they must be shot down.

Raborn: Study will be completed this afternoon. Suggest Thompson and CIA Russian expert tell us of Russian intentions.

President: Next question is US position at United Nations.

Do we want to make a proposal at UN at this time. Goldberg has shown me and Rusk a memo with his views.5 What instructions do we want to give him? My thinking would be if we agree on Westmoreland requests on men, equipment, etc.—playing all our decisions low key, and not telling the Russians we intend to break our policy on economy and nuclear production cutback.

Generally, want Goldberg to talk to every delegate including Secy. Gen. to tell them we are ready to talk unconditionally.

Goldberg: My view is that when you do anything forceful, must say our objective is peace. How best can assurance of peace be done.

1) Laying before Security Council a resolution echoing Balt.6 and confined to single topic—to endorse talks on VN with help of UN. People don't understand sophisticated complexities of UN politics. They do understand their President asking for unconditional talks. Sometimes the public exhibition of an attitude can start us on the way. I would hope we would do the necessary exploration to get the votes—by consulting with our friends. Some dangers may turn out to be virtues—such as Viet Cong. I think there is great advantage in President's saying simply we want to talk.

President: I said that in San Francisco.

Goldberg: Even though I don't expect Russians to say in advance “Yes”, but it doesn't mean they won't come around to this view.

I think we need a new initiative—the effects of President's Baltimore speech have worn off. What would be the worst that could happen to us in the Security Council? Are we so lacking in friends that we won't be applauded? There must be equity in the final agreement.

If I thought the war could go on quietly—then I would acquiesce—but I don't think the war can go on quietly. As we send in more troops—knock out SAMs—something must happen in UN and I want us to be the plaintiff, not the defendant.

Rusk: UN is an organization to which we have a treaty commitment. We have an obligation to use the UN as effectively as we know. But Hanoi and Peking are not parties to this organization.

Advantages: Help placate our critics.

Disadvantages: Can't see how they would help. Maximum benefit is to reconvene conference.

Very negative if we asked for meeting and didn't get it. International recognition of VC would undermine the Saigon government. We have to assume that a resolution that would meet our approval would draw Soviet veto. Might make it difficult for Soviets to push quietly for talks. Might draw amendments that would be inimical to us. If we didn't get at least 7 votes, it would appear that the UN had repudiated us.

Recommend Goldberg talk with U Thant to sound out Soviets as to character and form of resolution and for us not to insist on resolution at this time.

Lodge: Am in disagreement with Goldberg on resolution but there are things he can do—Can do it by a speech—UN couldn't possibly undertake our mission in Vietnam—it hasn't the money nor the muscle.

We mustn't overlook the effect on SVN, Russia and China. Everytime we talk about negotiations, you lower the value of the ARVN. You don't impress China except when you've got blood in your eye.

President: I'm tired of words. I've been giving words for 20 months. I told the UN in San Francisco that I would back any effort by the UN to bring this to the conference table.

Lodge: We had to show the UN that what we are doing is entirely consistent with the UN charter.

Clifford: Goldberg makes a persuasive case. But I am unalterably opposed to a resolution in the UN. But we are in a paradox. On one hand, we are ready to meet commitments, but we are really ready to get out. We can almost guarantee that a resolution would fail. The Soviets must stand by the NVN. I see them using the resolution as a propaganda asset—using bombing and white-vs.-Asians. Talking at this time publicly will not accomplish anything. If it is underplayed, we have a chance to justify our views.

Lodge: How do you send young men there in great numbers without telling why?

Clifford: We have already explained why we are there. We cannot win the war in SVN. China and Russia don't intend for us to win the war. They will match us in manpower. No matter how many men we send, they will match us.

The great danger is that additional troops are not [sic] a notice to the world that we intend to make it a land war.

We should get through the monsoon season and quietly see if we can work out an adjustment. I don't believe we will suffer prestige if we can't sustain.

(Moyers wanted to know if he can release names of those present—President against it because of press hounding the people for information)

President: (to Rusk) Try to determine what would go into Goldberg's statement to the UN—desirability of writing letter signed by me to Secy. General—generally along lines of San Francisco speech—after talking to allies Goldberg can buttress his arguments for resolution.

Any objections to that?

(No one expressed dissent)

Meeting adjourned at 3:15 pm.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House. The notes were originally handwritten by Valenti and later transcribed. An hour before the meeting, McGeorge Bundy sent the President an agenda that included: the SAM site, taking Vietnam to the United Nations, a general plan for Congressional consultation and a public announcement of the build-up, and further consultation with the South Vietnamese Government. In a covering memorandum, Bundy noted that an additional item on covert negotiations was not listed on the agenda. Only he, Rusk, Ball, and McNamara were aware of it, and all felt that no one else should be informed. Bundy suggested that the President might want to have a small follow-up meeting in his office on the matter. (Ibid., National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII) No record of such a meeting has been found.

2 On July 24, a U.S. F-4 aircraft was shot down by a surface-to-air missile launched from a mobile missile site believed to be approximately 30 miles northwest of Hanoi, the first aircraft lost to the SAM missiles deployed by Soviet technicians. Air reconnaissance located two mobile SAM sites in the area of the attack, identified as mobile sites 6 and 7 in the series of SAM sites established near Hanoi. In telegram 265 from Saigon, July 25, Taylor recommended an air attack against the sites “to show Hanoi how seriously we view this incident and to prepare political opinion for our subsequent anti-missile campaign.” A copy of this telegram was sent to the President and there is an indication that he saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Cables) On July 26, however, Harriman advised against attacking the sites, since this would be seen abroad as an escalation and would prejudice efforts to bring Hanoi to the negotiating table. Harriman also felt that Soviet leaders would interpret the attacks as a direct challenge, requiring some sort of retaliation. (Telegram 164 from Belgrade; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 Arthur Goldberg presented his credentials as U.S. Representative to the United Nations on July 28.

4 On the evening of July 26, McGeorge Bundy sent a message through the British Embassy to Prime Minister Wilson informing him of the decision taken (see Document 90) concerning the SAM missile sites. (Telegram 462 to London, July 27; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

5 Document 82.

6 See footnote 2, Document 82.

88. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 88. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 26, 1965, 9:17 p.m.

236. Saigon's 266.2 Agree with your proposal to divide task of obtaining additional commitments into private and public expressions, and you are authorized take matter up with Ky in those terms at your July 27 meeting, subject to following modifications: 1. In private consultation we must have some better understanding that we are not now and do not expect to be engaged in efforts to change the regime in North Viet-Nam. While we recognize there may be some internal political problem for GVN we have impression that General Thieu's comments and GVN statement July 20 are gratuitous revival of issue which should be left dormant. Argumentation recorded Embtel 1403 seems appropriate and would hope it would be effective with GVN officials.

2. It must also be understood with GVN that we do not reject 1954 Geneva Accords. While question remains open what role Accords will play in any eventual negotiation, they should not be rejected and Embassy will note our occasional references to our agreement with the essential purposes of the Accords.

3. Believe would be useful for Ky to include in public statement a reference to request for augmentation US forces in So. Vietnam made to McNamara group.4 This should be in quite general terms and mention only approximate magnitudes.

4. Suggest rewording Point A public statement to eliminate implication which could have unfortunate repercussions here that GVN even now not on war footing, in spite of real fighting and terror going on for several years now.

5. Public statement should also include some reference to economic and social measures to increase solidarity of people and their government. This could include some reference to General Ky's 26 points5 as well as program for financial technical assistance to aid rural economy, including measures to meet tenure problems.

For your guidance there is quoted below possible text of statement to be issued at high level. This text, although subject to change and not to be seen in US Mission except by Ambassadors Taylor and Johnson, will provide indication of framework to which GVN undertakings will have to conform.

Very tentative text follows:

“Like every action the US has taken in Vietnam, these new deployments are ordered at the request of the Government of Vietnam and in support of the efforts of the Vietnamese people themselves. It is fully agreed and understood between that Government and the US that the main effort in South Vietnam must still be made by the Vietnamese themselves. Amb. Taylor has been assured that as US efforts are increased the Vietnamese Government itself is reenforcing its own measures to build up its armed forces and to meet the economic pressures caused by war. That Government is reaffirming its determination and announcing its own programs of increasing action at home, including certain measures in the economic and social fields to enhance the solidarity of the Vietnamese people and their government in their critical efforts.”

Septel6 contains rough first draft of possible US positions to be stated at a high level. You should show this draft to General Ky in your July 27 meeting and secure his concurrence, especially on US policy toward a settlement, which we construe as consistent with GVN position as stated by Tran Van Do in June.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Unger, cleared by McGeorge Bundy and William Bundy, and approved by Unger.

2 Document 84.

3 Dated July 14. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII)

4 See Document 60.

5 Taylor discussed Ky's 26-point program in detail in telegram 4311 from Saigon, June 21. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

6 Document 89.

89. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 89. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 26, 1965, 9:18 p.m.

237. Saigon's 266 and Deptel 236.2 There follows rough first draft of possible US position to be stated at a high level concerning augmentation US forces South Viet-Nam. You should show this draft to General Ky in your July 27 meeting and secure his concurrence, as noted final para ref Deptel. In discussion with Ky you should not refer to other related actions (e.g. calling reserves) which may be taken in connection with these deployments but on which final decisions not yet made.

“In this last week the situation in Viet-Nam and the actions it requires have again been reviewed. This has been the most careful and sustained review that has been made at any time since President Johnson took office. The President has discussed the problem with members of the Cabinet—Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, Ambassador Goldberg. He has discussed it with distinguished Americans in private life who have earned the thanks of their country by earlier service, like Mr. Arthur Dean and Mr. John McCloy. He has had the advice of two great Ambassadors, Maxwell Taylor and Henry Cabot Lodge. He has talked at length with the leaders of the Senate and the House of Representatives. By personal messages and diplomatic discussions the problem has been reviewed with friends and allies in foreign countries. Out of these deliberations have come three important decisions— The first is that US policy and purpose in Viet-Nam are sound and right.

The second is that the US must now take important additional military measures in support of that policy and purpose.

The third is that the US should continue and intensify its diplomatic search for peace.

The US purpose and policy in Viet-Nam are right. The US is there to keep a promise. That promise was and is to help the people and Government of South Viet-Nam to help themselves against attack supported from outside. This American commitment must and will be kept—both for its own sake and for its meaning to world peace. For the peace of the world cannot be kept if there is not respect for the given word of the United States of America.

But there is more to it than that. South Viet-Nam is not the only small state which is threatened by external pressure and ambition. It is not the only country menaced by subversion and infiltration and terror. If South Viet-Nam is lost, then others are weakened.

And finally, the US is there because it has a deep and enduring national interest in preventing the Communist conquest of Asia. It seeks nothing in Asia for itself, but the independence of the peoples of Asia is essential to the peace of the world and to American security itself.

In pursuit of these great purposes, the US has supported and sustained its friends in Asia for a quarter of a century, in war and in peace. It has respected their choice of neutrality or alignment. It has respected their right to determine their own political and social systems. It has helped them to resist aggression—whether by open attack as in Korea, or by bombardment and threat as in the Formosa Straits, or by the more complex and destructive methods now in use against Viet-Nam. This course of action has been right, and it is right today.

And now it is necessary that the US increase its effort in Viet-Nam. The battles of the spring and early summer have brought heavy losses to both sides. It is clear that over a period of many months there has been a growth in the infiltration of Communist forces from North Viet-Nam. The armed forces of South Viet-Nam continue to fight with great courage and with growing skill. But they need more help, and they will get it.

Authorization has been given today for the movement to South Viet-Nam of additional forces which will bring US total troop strength in that country to 175,000 men by November. These enlarged forces will provide 34 combat battalions, 24 air squadrons, and 31 helicopter companies. Under the command of General Westmoreland—an officer who has earned the confidence of all his countrymen—these forces will be used where they are needed. And they will fight.

Like every action the US has taken in Viet-Nam, these new deployments are ordered at the request of the Government of Viet-Nam and in support of the efforts of the Vietnamese people themselves. It is fully agreed and understood between that Government and the US that the main effort in South Viet-Nam must still be made by the Vietnamese themselves. Ambassador Taylor has been assured that as US efforts are increased the Vietnamese Government itself is reenforcing its own measures to build up its armed forces and to meet the economic pressures caused by war. That Government is reaffirming its determination and announcing its own programs of increasing action at home, including certain measures in the economic and social fields to enhance the solidarity of the Vietnamese people and their government in their critical efforts.

The decisions announced today are decisions to do what is necessary—and only what is necessary. This has been US policy; it is US policy still. These new and increased actions are made necessary by the growing battlefield action of others.

The ever closer partnership of the US with the people and Government of Viet-Nam is the inevitable answer which the US gives, with them, to the increasing efforts of the attackers. Yet the purpose remains unchanged. And it is a purpose of peace.

While the US does all that is necessary to turn back the attackers in South Viet-Nam, it will do all that is possible to open the path to peaceful settlement. Again and again it has said that it is ready for unconditional discussion. The US and others have made fifteen efforts to get discussion started. These efforts have all been rejected out of hand. But the US will not be discouraged.

In these last days, messages have been sent to all the more than 30 countries that have given concrete evidence of their concern for the people of South Viet-Nam. It has been emphasized again that just as there is need for wider effort to resist aggression, there is equal need for further effort to open doors to peace. America's friends in these countries know that all their efforts to this end are welcome to the United States.

And the US will do more. Today Ambassador Goldberg has been instructed to consult most urgently with the Secretary General of the United Nations to see if there is not some way in which the good offices of the United Nations can be engaged for peace in Viet-Nam.3 The earlier efforts of the Secretary General have met with rebuff, but no possibility of progress must be overlooked. Ambassador Goldberg will make it entirely plain that the United States continues to hope that a way can be found to bring the United Nations into action in Viet-Nam. The Ambassador will submit a full report on US actions there and its purpose of peace, both formally to the Security Council and informally to all the Delegates who seek to know the US stand. If it proves possible to engage the United Nations in Viet-Nam, the United States will actively support that engagement.

At the same time that the US seeks by every means to start the discussions that can bring peace, it and its friends in South Viet-Nam are making it plain that they are ready for the kind of peace that will be fair and honorable for all. Already in June, the Foreign Minister of Viet-Nam and the Secretary of State of the United States have stated for all to hear the fundamental principles of such a peace:

An end to aggression and subversion.

Freedom for South Viet-Nam to choose and shape its own destiny by democratic principles and without foreign interference.

An end of the military measures now made necessary by aggression, and the removal of foreign military forces from South Viet-Nam.

And effective guarantees for the independence and freedom of the people of South Viet-Nam.

Beyond these principles, it has been made clear that the US looks forward to the day when relations between North Viet-Nam and South Viet-Nam can be worked out by peaceful means—including a free decision by the peoples of all Viet-Nam on the matter of reunification. These principles imply and include the use of free election under international supervision, just as soon as the end of aggression permits.

These purposes in essence are the purposes of the Geneva Agreements of 1954. The failure of the 1954 Agreements was not in purpose but in practice—not in the quality of the objectives, but in the effectiveness of the instruments. When there is a new settlement in Southeast Asia, it must be based on stronger and more lasting guarantees than those of 1954.

But the purpose of peace remains as the US has stated it. The program of peace remains the same. And the program meets the interests of all who have a stake in Southeast Asia.

For the people of South Viet-Nam—on both sides of the current contest—it will bring opportunity for an active and honorable part in the peaceful life of a freely growing society.

For the people and Government of North Viet-Nam it will bring relief from the burdens of war and a prospect of new and peaceful relations with the people to the south.

For the smaller neighbors of Viet-Nam it will mean an end to the danger of nearby warfare and a widened prospect of peaceful development for the whole area.

For the people and Government on the Mainland of China, this plan of peace contains no threat and no danger.

And on a still wider plane, a peace so clearly fair and reasonable for all can remove a clear obstacle to understanding between all of these who call themselves Communists and all of those who don't.

For the real future of Southeast Asia is a future of peaceful progress, not a future of contest and conquest. While the US resists aggression—and probes for peace—it is planning for progress. Already there has been an encouraging response to the proposals put forward in April. The prospects for Asian development are good, and US readiness to help has been made plain.

So today America appeals once again to those who have chosen the path of battle. Let them turn from terror to talk, and from subversion to settlement. Let all interested governments go to the conference table and let them bring with them any other parties that they choose. The US will come with its proposals—let them come with theirs. And let diplomacy replace destruction. The first business of such a conference must be to work out terms that can permit an end of fighting. Its final business must be peace. The Government of Viet-Nam and the Government of the United States are ready.

This readiness comes not from weakness but from strength—not from weariness but from resolution. Until there is a settlement and an end of aggression, America's efforts will go on and they will grow.

The deployments ordered today will be carried out. The Americans who go to Viet-Nam will do their duty. The forces of the United States will carry out the order to resist and to punish aggression. The US is ready for honorable peace, but it will persevere in the hard task of battle until others are ready, too.”

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Drafted by Unger, cleared in substance by William Bundy and McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Unger.

2 Documents 84 and 88.

3 See Document 99.

90. Notes of Meeting 90. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, July 26, 1965, 6:10-6:55 p.m.

PRESENT

President

McNamara

Vice President

Rusk

Wheeler

Ball

Clifford

Thompson

Lodge

Goldberg

Raborn

Helms

Marks

Rowan

Busby

Bundy

Valenti

McNamara: Nothing has developed in our intelligence to show us any new data on missile sites.

Thompson: As long as it looks as if the sites are all not Hanoi we are going after, I think their reaction will be mild. We should not say they are manned by Soviets—need to fuzz that up. It would be good if we can tie it in with something else.

President: Would you take out ammunition dumps and sites simultaneously?

McNamara: Take them out separately.

Wheeler: Chiefs would take out all 7 sites at one time. If not, take out 4, 6, 7. There is the possibility that #4 was mixed up in this shoot-down.

President: Why against #4, Bob?

McNamara: #4 is a part of the Hanoi-Haiphong package. It would vex the Soviets. It is not directly associated with Lao Chi and ammunition dump. There is no operational need to take it out. It is too close to the Migs and would increase the number of aircraft in the air. We have never hit a SAM site and there is no need to make a difficult target more difficult. The chances of success are not perfect. They are about 50-50.

President: If you find them, can you destroy them?

McNamara: Yes, if we find them. However, we have narrow field of vision at 500 mph.

President: If you go in, lose planes and fail to get them, how will we look in the eyes of the world?

McNamara: I foresee no problem there.

President: Is SAM like Hawk?

Wheeler: It is a big van, high mass of radar—missiles like Nike-Hercules.

Rusk: Would the cap come in only if Migs react?

Wheeler: Yes.

McNamara: Possibly, because of lack of friend-or-foe identification, they may shoot our planes if they are present.

President: How far away are the Migs?

McNamara: The Migs are 25-40 miles away.

President: What protection do we have against Migs?

Wheeler: Our cap—F4C—8 F104. Two levels of defense.

President: Please summarize the pros and cons of going in to take out SAMs.

McNamara: (Brought situation up to date chronologically)

We think we should take out 6 and 7 because they lie athwart targets on our authorized list. If we don't, we will give an incorrect reading to Soviets that we are willing to omit targets because of SAMs. It is hard to explain to Congress and the people that we will take out ammo depots but not SAM sites.

Rusk: While these sites are under attack, will radar be on them?

McNamara: Yes. We have changed authorized routes.

President: What about terrain or low level?

McNamara: It is relatively flat in that area.

Rusk: I see some advantage to striking other targets. However, it is unlikely we'll find anything to hit. They will have moved. I wouldn't rely on clearing out a path for the future. In terms of signals to the other side, would strike them and other targets quickly.

McNamara: I would not complicate matters by hitting targets simultaneously. That's very difficult mission.

Lodge: (In response to question from President) I would be in favor of hitting 6 and 7 and hitting ammo targets as soon as practical.

President: Any objections to McNamara's recommendation to hit?

Ball: No objection to recommendation, but let's have no illusions that it will not cause tremors of tension around the world. Raise question of whether to take out all sites then troop deployment, etc.

McNamara: If Migs came out to attack us, we must destroy them.

President: Would you pursue in case of fight?

McNamara: No. Right now the orders are to fight only in the air.

Goldberg: In light of danger of Soviet involvement; intelligence is not sure #4 is not involved; not sure SAM is not mobile; I think we ought to know they are there and #6 and #7 are the responsible ones before making this attack.

I would send another memo to attack the target to make sure if they are knocked down that the SAM site is active.

President: You don't mean sending boys over that SAM site?

Goldberg: Yes.

Raborn: We support Amb. Thompson 100%. Our Soviet experts tell us they are expecting us to come in.

President: If we don't take them out, I want targets off list. If we do take them out, we can go on to better targets. I don't want to send boys over those sites where we know they will be shot down. We may be mis-leading Russians again. Kennedy called up reserves and put nation on war footing after Vienna and Soviets understood that. In missile crisis they understood that.

For 20 months we have been restrained—and I don't want them to misunderstand us. Only pressure we can have is our bombing. We have nothing else to bargain.

Can we find the targets—sites?

Rusk: What happens if we incur additional losses from Migs? We should not make any decisions now to go into Hanoi-Haiphong area. If we do, we will be moving into something by mistake. I would think hard about going into Hanoi to kill Migs.

President: This is not the subject of this meeting. Before we do that, you'll be heard.

Clifford: We are not going to be pushed out of SVN. We show enemy our determination by taking out #6 and #7.

Bargaining: Most valuable asset NVN has is the industrial complex they have laboriously built. If they think SAMs can protect their industry, they have won an important element. We have no bargaining point if their industry is safe.

If Soviets put their men and material into a situation that knocks down American planes, they must expect retaliation.

Thompson: On balance, I support the recommendation.

Bundy: We ought to examine the way we'll discuss this decision.

Rowan: We ought to understand that this will increase the “crisis atmosphere”. Every European newspaper takes it for granted that Russians shot down our plane. I say that even though I support the recommendation to knock them out.

The press reaction in Europe is bound to make the Soviets feel they have lost prestige if we knock out the sites.

V. Pres: I'm much impressed with what Clifford said about long term prospects. If these targets are valuable, we have to do something about what blocks us. I am concerned that we have changed emphasis—that we do indeed have mobile units to face.

McNamara: We are over-emphasizing the mobility of these units. They are semi-mobile. They haven't been mobile in the 99% cases we have examined.

President: How long would it take to go?

Wheeler: If we gave “go” in the next few minutes, we could “go” at about 1 or 2 in the morning our time.

V. Pres: SAM sites #6 and #7 ought to be taken out. Caution: China is not Russia.

Bundy: The conference in Geneva2 is primarily nuclear-proliferation oriented.

Valenti: This could be a piece of definitive action that would signal our determination.

President: TAKE THEM OUT.3 (Given at 6:55 pm)

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House. The notes were originally handwritten by Valenti and later transcribed.

2 Reference is to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee meetings in Geneva.

3 A situation report prepared in the White House for the President at 11:15 p.m. on July 26 stated that, in response to the President's order, 44 Air Force strike aircraft were scheduled to attack SAM missile sites 6 and 7 that night. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (B)) A subsequent situation report for the President, prepared at 6:40 a.m., July 27, indicated that the SAM sites and their associated barracks had been struck, and the pilots reported the destruction of site 6. The results of the attack on site 7 were not clear. Six F-105 aircraft were reported lost in the attack. (Ibid.) Both reports have indications that the President saw them. On August 3, R.C. Bowman sent a memorandum to McGeorge Bundy in which he noted that the attacks on the SAM sites “may have been a DRV trap.” Site 6, he noted, was evidently a dummy site, and there was probably no equipment at site 7. He added that General Wheeler had proposed to McNamara that strike aircraft be given authority to attack mobile SAM sites wherever they were discovered outside the Hanoi area. (Ibid.)

91. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 91. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 27, 1965, 9:05 p.m.

284. Deptel 237.2 Johnson, Manfull and I had very satisfactory meeting with Ky, Thieu and Co (Quang of IV Corps was also present but did not substantively participate) and after considerable discussion noted below obtained their full agreement to draft contained reftel. Also obtained Ky's agreement that he will seek make major address to nation, keyed to and immediately following USG statement.

(He promised submit text to us for comment thus we will not propose statement on this subject to Dept.) Therefore would be greatest assistance if we could let him know as far in advance as possible the timing of our statement and final text.3

Discussion primarily revolved around (1) paragraph on reference to UN, (2) paragraph on NVN and SVN working out relations by peaceful means, including especially last sentence on elections and (3) paragraph on Geneva agreements.

With respect to first point, they accepted our explanation that, although it was not likely constructive UN role could be found, it was important we demonstrate that we have exhausted every possibility to that end.

It was notable that Thieu, as well as others, accepted second point. On question of elections, they accepted fact that Communists never have accepted international supervision of elections and can be expected to oppose in future. However they were somewhat bothered by inclusion of last phrase “just as soon as the end of aggression permits” and it seems to us that sentence is just as strong with omission of this phrase.

Longest discussion revolved around Geneva agreements with Thieu making spirited exposition to effect that their “honor and political situation” did not permit them to recognize binding effect of document which French sought to impose upon them by signature of French General. We pointed out basic incompatibility of seeking to invoke Geneva Accords against the DRV on one hand while on other hand denying their validity. Thieu said they could accept the “factual situation” created in 1954 by the Geneva Accords but GVN could not change what had been consistent and basic position of all GVN's since 1954. However Ky said that GVN could take position that, while GVN had not signed accords, they had always and would continue to respect their principles. Thieu concurred and suggested that there be added to any such public position by GVN that GVN had not and would not seek reunification of country by military means. We concurred that this was sound and defensible position for GVN.During course of discussion Ky and Thieu, as well as Co, concurred that best possible outcome of present struggle might be that the war would passively “fade away”, that is, there would be a return to the de facto 1954 situation and thus that “stronger and more lasting guarantees of 1954” which could presumably be obtained only through general conference were also not necessarily best outcome. We thus suggest consideration to deleting modifying sentence in which that phrase appears.

Although Vietnamese did not catch or raise point, we question next to last two sentences of third paragraph from end, that is, sentence reading, “The first business of such a conference must be to work out terms that can permit an end of fighting. Its final business must be peace.” Thus it seems to us these sentences unnecessarily raise spectre of “cease fire” without effective agreement from other side.

During course of discussion we also obtained Ky's, Thieu's and Co's affirmation on points of public and private understanding essentially as contained in Embtel 266 as modified by Deptel 236.4

Additionally, we obtained Ky's agreement that in his public address he will make specific reference to the Chieu Hoi program.

Throughout our discussion we strongly emphasized sensitivity of draft statement contained Deptel 237 and fact that it was still in draft stage.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Received at 9:45 a.m.

2 Document 89.

3 At 7:57 p.m. on July 27, the Department of State instructed the Embassy, in telegram 251 to Saigon, to inform the South Vietnamese Government that the President intended to make a public statement on July 28 along the lines of the draft agreed upon in telegram 237 to Saigon. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 Documents 84 and 88.

92. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 92. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 27, 1965, 4:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Progress on Vietnamese diplomatic front

You will want to know, before you meet the Leadership, that Taylor and Johnson had a very good meeting with Ky, Thieu, and Co on strengthening our international political position at the same time that we move forward with the planned U.S. reinforcements in Saigon.2 Taylor and Johnson tried out on Ky and Thieu the political language which we drafted over the weekend.3 They did not call it a Presidential statement, but simply a draft U.S. position which might be stated at some point by a high U.S. official. Ky and Thieu accepted the entire position, and that now allows us to use language equivalent to the paragraphs at Tab A.4 This language takes us a long way forward and gives us a good political punch to go with our military decisions. The attached paragraphs can be shortened and tightened into whatever form of statementwe make from here, and they can be expanded and elaborated in any following presentation by Secretary Rusk. What is new in these paragraphs is the following: (1) An explicit affirmation that we are in favor of using the UN if we can get it into the act.

(2) An explicit affirmation that we are in favor of free elections under international supervision.

(3) Definite and clear-cut support for the purposes (but not the weak machinery) of the '54 agreements.

(4) An offer of hope for the Viet Cong if they will turn from war to peace.

(5) A concrete offer to discuss both their proposals and ours—this will be read as movement toward a negotiation in which their points and our points would both be on the table.

All these are important from the point of view of men like Mansfield and Fulbright. A couple of them—like the offer to consider their proposals and the offer of hope for the Viet Cong after a peaceful settlement—may have real impact in Communist circles as well. Yet there is no weakness in them. And I repeat that Taylor has obtained Saigon's approval for them.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XII. Top Secret.

2 See Document 91.

3 See Document 89.

4 Attached but not printed.

93. Summary Notes of the 553d Meeting of the National Security Council 93. Summary Notes of the 553d Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, July 27, 1965, 5:40 p.m.-6:20 p.m.

SUBJECT

Deployment of Additional U.S. Troops to Vietnam

The President: Before formalizing decisions on the deployment of additional U.S. forces to Vietnam, he wished to review the present situation with Council members present. Secretary Rusk will deal with the political situation and Secretary McNamara will describe the military situation.

Secretary Rusk: a. The Chinese Communists are most adamant against any negotiations between the North Vietnamese and the U.S./South Vietnamese. The clash between the Chinese Communists and the Russians continues.

b. According to the Yugoslav Ambassador, Tito got the impression during his visit to Moscow that “things would happen” if we stopped the bombing of North Vietnam. We have asked many times what the North Vietnamese would do if we stopped the bombing. We have heard nothing to date in reply.

c. There appear to be elements of caution on the other side—in Hanoi as well as in Moscow. Our purpose is to keep our contacts open with the other side in the event that they have a new position to give us.

d. The U.S. actions we are taking should be presented publicly in a low key but in such a way as to convey accurately that we are determined to prevent South Vietnam from being taken over by Hanoi. At the same time, we seek to avoid a confrontation with either the Chinese Communists or the Soviet Union.

Secretary McNamara: Summarized the military situation in Vietnam: a. The number of Viet Cong forces has increased and the percentage of these forces committed to battle has increased.

b. The geographic area of South Vietnam controlled by the Viet Cong has increased.

c. The Viet Cong have isolated the cities and disrupted the economy of South Vietnam. The cities are separated from the countryside.

d. Increased desertions from the South Vietnamese Army have prevented an increase in the total number of South Vietnamese troops available for combat.

e. About half of all U.S. Army helicopters are now in South Vietnam in addition to over 500 U.S. planes.

The military requirements are: a. More combat battalions from the U.S. are necessary. A total of 13 additional battalions need to be sent now. On June 15, we announced a total of 75,000 men, or 15 battalions.

b. A total of 28 battalions is now necessary.

c. Over the next 15 months, 350,000 men would be added to regular U.S. forces.

d. In January, we would go to Congress for a supplementary appropriation to pay the costs of the Vietnam war. We would ask now for a billion, in addition to the existing 1966 budget. (Draft plan is attached as Tab A.)2

The attack on the SAM sites in North Vietnam was necessary to protect our planes. Attacks on other priority targets in North Vietnam are required.

Ambassador Lodge: Asked whether the ratio of government to guerrilla ground forces had to be 10:1. During his testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, he had been asked this question. Comment had been made about the astronomical size of U.S. forces required if this traditional 10:1 ratio was valid.

General Wheeler: The mobility and fire power of U.S. and South Vietnamese forces has put an imponderable element into the traditional ratio of 10:1. Perhaps 4:1 is the right ratio.

With the additional forces to be sent to South Vietnam, General Westmoreland believes we can hold our present position and possibly move back into areas now contested. The one exception would be in the Fourth Corps.

Secretary Rusk and Secretary McNamara expressed differences of view concerning a map brought to the meeting by Secretary McNamara which purported to show the amount of territory in South Vietnam controlled by the Viet Cong. Secretary Rusk thought the map overstated the size of Viet Cong controlled areas. Secretary McNamara said it understated the area they control. At least 26% of the population of South Vietnam is controlled by Viet Cong, according to Secretary McNamara's figures.

(The meeting was interrupted briefly to permit the photographers to take pictures.)

The President: The situation in Vietnam is deteriorating. Even though we now have 80 to 90,000 men there, the situation is not very safe. We have these choices: a. Use our massive power, including SAC, to bring the enemy to his knees. Less than 10% of our people urge this course of action.

b. We could get out on the grounds that we don't belong there. Not very many people feel this way about Vietnam. Most feel that our national honor is at stake and that we must keep our commitments there.3

c. We could keep our forces at the present level, approximately 80,000 men, but suffer the consequences of losing additional territory and of accepting increased casualties.4 We could “hunker up”. No one is recommending this course.

d. We could ask for everything we might desire from Congress—money, authority to call up the reserves, acceptance of the deployment of more combat battalions. This dramatic course of action would involve declaring a state of emergency and a request for several billion dollars. Many favor this course. However, if we do go all out in this fashion, Hanoi would be able to ask the Chinese Communists and the Soviets to increase aid and add to their existing commitments.

e. We have chosen to do what is necessary to meet the present situation, but not to be unnecessarily provocative to either the Russians or the Communist Chinese. We will give the commanders the men they say they need and, out of existing materiel in the U.S., we will give them the materiel they say they need. We will get the necessary money in the new budget and will use our transfer authority until January. We will neither brag about what we are doing nor thunder at the Chinese Communists and the Russians.5

This course of action will keep us there during the critical monsoon season and possibly result in some gains. Meanwhile, we will push on the diplomatic side. This means that we will use up our manpower reserves. We will not deplete them, but there will be a substantial reduction. Quietly, we will push up the level of our reserve force.6 We will let Congress push us but, if necessary, we will call the legislators back.

We will hold until January. The alternatives are to put in our big stack now or hold back until Ambassadors Lodge and Goldberg and the diplomats can work.7

Secretary Fowler: Do we ask for standby authority now to call the reserves but not actually call them?

The President: Under the approved plan, we would not ask for such authority now.8

There was no response when the President asked whether anyone in the room opposed the course of action decided upon.9

Bromley Smith

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings File, Vol. 3. Top Secret; Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith. According to an attached list, the following attended the meeting: President Johnson, McNamara, Wheeler, McNaughton, Raborn, Helms, Rusk, Ball, Thompson, William Bundy, Lodge, Fowler, Rowan, Marks, McGeorge Bundy, Valenti, Busby, Goodwin, Moyers, Cater, Smith, and Katzenbach. Valenti and McGeorge Bundy also prepared notes of the meeting. (Ibid., Meeting Notes File, Box 1)

2 Not attached and not found.

3 According to Valenti's notes of the meeting, Johnson also said at this point: “Ike, Kennedy and I have given commitment.”

4 Valenti's notes indicate the President said at this point: “You wouldn't want your boy to be out there and crying for help and not get it.”

5 Valenti notes that Johnson added at this point that the United States should say to Thieu: “You and your military help us there and make what gains we can. Meanwhile, we will explore ways to find peace.”

6 Valenti notes that Johnson added that the United States could not draw down its reserves for long if challenged on another front.

7 According to Valenti's notes, Johnson said that the decision narrowed down in his mind to the options he outlined in paragraphs d and e.

8 Valenti notes that Johnson added: “If Russia, England, etc. wouldn't get all excited about calling up reserves, I would do it right now.”

9 In his memorandum of the meeting, prepared on November 2, 1968, from his handwritten notes dated July 27, 1965, McGeorge Bundy included the following statement: “The notes also record my own feeling that while the President was placing his preference for alternative five [e.], as against alternative four [d.], on international grounds, his unspoken object was to protect his legislative program—or at least this had appeared to be his object in his informal talk as late as Thursday and Friday of the preceding week—July 22, and July 23.”

94. Memorandum of Meeting With the Joint Congressional Leadership 94. Memorandum of Meeting With the Joint Congressional Leadership1

Washington, July 27, 1965, 6:30 p.m.

Present were the President, Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, General Wheeler, Admiral Raborn, Ambassador Lodge, Senators Mansfield, Dirksen, Hickenlooper, Smathers, Kuchel, and Long; Speaker McCormack, Representatives Ford, Arends, Boggs, and Albert, and from the White House—Richard Goodwin, Moyers, Busby, Valenti, O'Brien, Cater, Califano and Bundy.

The President began by outlining the five possible choices: first, to blow them up—not much thought had been given to that.

Second, that we ought to get out. Some people felt that way but did not really come out and say what they thought until you pursued them.

Third, we could leave things just as they are with 80,000 to 90,000 men there today and get Lodge out there and see if he can pull a rabbit out of the hat.

Fourth, we could declare an emergency, call in the reserves, thousands of men and billions of dollars—tell the country that our best guess was Y billion dollars and X thousand men, and ask for it. That course had a good deal of appeal to the President because we should do what is needed, but there is an argument against it in the possible reaction of Hanoi. We did not want to have things get more violent just as we have a new man going to the U.N. We have hints from the Russians what we should take account of. The President did not want to make this any more provocative than necessary. He had reasons for not overstating the case. He did not himself believe that you can simply get in an airplane and settle this thing.

The fifth choice would be to supply Westmoreland with the men and materials he had requested, increase draft calls (the notes say 17-20, 24-28-35), extend enlistment of sailors and marines, and go into the Senate for an additional appropriation of $1 or $2 billion and defer a full presentation of requirements until January, 1966. By then we would be through the monsoon. In the meantime, the Congress would keep its power to call itself back into session. Maybe by then we would be past the monsoon and the Communists would have further thoughts. If the Russians did not come in and if China was not gambling we might be able to say “Cut out your foolishness and come to the conference table.” The President didn't think there was much chance of an early settlement but others kept saying we've got to try even though we have tried fifteen times. Before the President went into the districts of the Congressmen and Senators he would have done what Westy and Wheeler want done. Meanwhile he would lay plans for more reserves. The President also reported that the British pound was in great danger.

In summary the President said the choice was between course four and course five. Either way he would give General Westmoreland what he wants. One course would be to go the full Congressional route now and the other way is to give the Congressional leadership the story now and the bill later. Concluding his presentation, the President said that he was prepared to stay in the meeting just as long as members of the Leadership wanted.

The President was followed by the Secretary of State who gave a political analysis. He pointed out that there was no real reason for a basic difference between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. on Vietnam, but that Moscow had no real influence on the ground. Furthermore, Moscow had a dilemma because of other Communist pressures. At the other end of the spectrum was Peking which was adamant against negotiations—bitter and harsh.

(At this point Bundy was out of the meeting getting certain “Ike papers” for the President. When he returned the notes pick up again.)

Secretary McNamara was discussing the SAM-site problem.

The President then called on Ambassador Lodge who knocked down choices one, two and three—alternative one would not solve the problem, alternative two was worse than a victory for the Kaiser or Hitler in the two World Wars. Alternative three was no alternative at all since you needed a bigger perimeter and you also needed Camranh Bay.

Congressman Albert then said that he agreed with the President's proposal.

Senator Smathers said that we did not want to get into World War III but we did want to stay there. Was there any change in this policy?

The President answered that there was no change in policy but that as their effort increased, ours must.

Congressman Boggs asked if there was any major defection of GVN forces. Secretary McNamara replied in the negative. Congressman Boggs asked about the government and Secretary McNamara said it was a weak government and would be while the VC were free to attack it district by district. About this point the President told the Leadership why he did not call the Leadership earlier (the notes say that this statement was “per my memo to him on Lodge”).2

Congressman Boggs asked why we needed a ten-to-one ratio. General Wheeler took that question and said that perhaps four-to-one was a right ratio, but that ten-to-one was not necessary because the helicopter had provided a new mobility and that this was why the ARVN had been so successful until recently.

The President remarked that we all know that it is a bad situation and we wish we were ten years back or even ten months back.

Senator Long said that Ho Chi Minh talks of a twenty-year war but that he thought that it might be a hundred years long. We should look at the stakes and look at the fact that we have been touched up. Should we put in more men or take a whipping? We'd better go in.

The Speaker said that he did not see any alternatives. Dedicated military leaders have asked for more help. He was impressed by the analogy to Hitler. The road to appeasement was a road to war. We have warned them. We do the things we should, hard as they are. (The notes here remark that “The Leadership seems mighty hawky so far.”) The Russians had problems and weaknesses of their own.

The President read parts of a message from General Eisenhower to Prime Minister Churchill at a time of crisis in Vietnam in 1954. The passage the President was reading came from “Mandate for Change.”3

Congressman Ford asked for clarification of choices four and five. The answer (the speaker is not clearly defined by the notes) was that in either case Westmoreland would get what he wants. The question was rather how you would go about the process—under four you would ask funds from the Congress now and under five you would come back in January and ask for them. The President said that we would ask for the money in any event. We can either guess about larger figures or go for a limited sum in the Senate now. He thought there were good reasons for not calling the reserves; if you call them now you really won't be ready.

In January you would have it better worked out. Under alternative five he might tell the Leadership three times that he was sending an additional 30,000 or so, without saying X billion and 100,000 men if he could avoid it.

Representative Ford said that under alternative five you would double draft calls—and how much of a burden would that place on training forces? The President said that the difference between four and five was that one was more dramatic and blunter and more powerful—if that is what you wanted.

Secretary McNamara said that the draft calls under option five would be about the same as under option four—since when we called the reserves we would still have to double the draft calls. Secretary McNamara also pointed out that Sections 512A and C of the Appropriation Act gave authority to spend money and then get a deficiency appropriation.

The President said again that under alternative four he would have to get a new bill and a great big reserve plan and go through a big process. Under five we would simply put $1.8 billion or whatever into the appropriation bills on the Senate side and then get in order for January.

The Secretary of Defense said that the war was very difficult to predict, that under four we would be asking for a blank check because we did not know what would happen, while under five we would ask for what we see clearly between now and January. Congressman Arends asked what General Westmoreland's needs were. Secretary McNamara answered that he had an immediate requirement of thirteen battalions and 50,000 men. Beyond that there would be a need for further forces before January 1. The Secretary also said that we could supply forces faster than General Westmoreland could receive them. The Secretary of State remarked that while there were sharp engagements, the fighting had not reached the stage of Giap's phase three. The President referred to a speech by the Vice President and said that we were running the danger of saying to Ho what he wants to hear. He also said that he did not want Russia and China in it if he could help it.

Senator Dirksen quoted President Woodrow Wilson to the effect that “the business at hand is undramatic.” But the President was going to have to tell the country that we are in a very serious business. There was then an exchange with Secretary McNamara, about which the notes are unclear—McNamara's comment was that “there was more baloney on that than any other subject,” but the notes do not show what he was talking about.

Senator Dirksen apparently also asked about any possible diversion (?) of anticipated shipments. The President's comment is that every man who leaves will be announced. Senator Dirksen noted that he was receiving many questioning calls, and the President said he was going to tell the country just as soon as he got through telling the Leadership. Senator Dirksen said that he was not going to be like the Committee on the Conduct of the War. The President said that in the morning he was going to get to General Eisenhower. Senator Dirksen said that from now to January was five months and you could not wait that long if you need it. “If you need it you ought to ask for it.” The President said that we would get what we needed. There would be a sizable supplementary in January—a few billion dollars. Senator Dirksen said we should make the country realize that this is dangerous, serious business. The President said he thought the country did realize it.

Senator Mansfield asked the President's indulgence and read a statement4 in which there appeared remarks about apathy, disquiet, and apprehension. He thought that nothing should be put out from the meeting except by the President. He said he would support the President's position as a Senator and as Majority Leader.

Senator Hickenlooper asked if we were getting low on helicopters and whether we were increasing our orders. Secretary McNamara said we had built up our helicopters enormously. The loss rate was only one in 10,000 sorties and helicopters did not wear out. Up to now there was no basis for concern about numbers of helicopters. Nevertheless we were increasing production.

Senator Hickenlooper said that alternatives one, two and three were out. That anything short of a result that would make a reliable buffer against Communism would be disastrous. A negotiated so-called peace that did not do this would merely compound the felony. He did not know just which way it should be done—and he remarked that over the years mistakes had been made. He differentiated between approval and support. He thought his decision now would be to support it but not approve it. The President remarked that he was in the same position as Senator Hickenlooper. He had supported the decisions of 1954 without approving them. Now there were 80,000 to 90,000 men out there asking for help and his answer was yes.

Senator Kuchel asked what Westmoreland's orders were. Must he clean up all the red spots? The notes do not show what answer he got.

Congressman Boggs said that alternative five was the logical way out. The President said that his object was to get the government together, to get the Allies together and to get the country together. And he would make his decision tomorrow. He spelled out three phases in the future and thought that by 1 November we would double our forces.

Congressman Arends asked Secretary Rusk if the Allies could help us on limiting shipping to the DRV. Secretary Rusk answered about help in South Vietnam from Korea, Australia, and New Zealand. Arends persisted on shipping. The Secretary of State said that there had been some improvement and that through various devices we could get a cutback in shipments to Hanoi which might make us feel better but would not really change the situation.

Senator Hickenlooper said that we were treating symptoms; there was a great danger of a negotiated stalemate, and we needed a reliable settlement. The President said that Senator Hickenlooper should talk to Mike Mansfield and Bill Fulbright and see what the three could agree on. Right now settlement was not a practicable problem, because the Communists thought they were winning. The question of settlement was a good long way away. Senator Hickenlooper said the big question was what we were going to do. The President said that we are going to try to bring about a situation where the government of South Vietnam will be able to defend itself against foreign ideology. “Westmoreland wants help—I'm going to give it—the question is how.”

The Speaker closed the meeting by saying that the President would have united support. This was a historic meeting. The President would have the support of all true Americans.

After the meeting with the Leadership, the President held a small meeting in his office. Present were the President—the two Secretaries, Goodwin, Moyers, Busby, and Bundy. The President remarked that we were prolonging the agony for 90 days and that he wanted a statement of 700 words, the essence of which would be that he was giving Westmoreland what he needed. Secretary McNamara repeated the thirteen battalion, 50,000 men figure, and expressed his confidence on the handling of the matter.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Box 1. No classification marking. Prepared by McGeorge Bundy in December 1968 based on handwritten notes he took on July 27, 1965. According to a note by Bundy at the top of the source text: “Nothing not clearly stated in the notes is included.” The parenthetical observations in the memorandum are Bundy's, added in 1968 when he transcribed the notes. The original handwritten notes are ibid., Papers of McGeorge Bundy. Valenti also prepared notes of the meeting. (Ibid., Meeting Notes File)

2 Not further identified.

3 An apparent reference to the April 4, 1954, letter from Eisenhower to Churchill, which is quoted in Dwight D. Eisenhower, Mandate For Change, 1953-1956 (New York, 1963), pp. 346-347. It is also printed in Foreign Relations, 1952-1954, vol. XIII, Part 1, pp. 1238-1241.

4 Not found.

95. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 95. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 27, 1965.

SUBJECT

Response to Presidential Messages on Vietnam

In accordance with your instructions, messages were delivered Monday to approximately 29 countries which are contributing assistance in Vietnam.2 France was omitted for political reasons and Laos, Ecuador, and Guatemala for political reasons or because their contributions have in fact been insignificant.

To date, we have received reports from 23 Embassies, which have presented the Presidential message on Vietnam to the heads of government or highest government official of the host country. These reports show sympathy of our principles of action—resistance to aggression while working for peace—but yield little tangible evidence of prospects of substantially increased assistance.

Some countries—notably Australia, Canada, the Netherlands, and the Philippines—express a willingness to consider an additional effort urgently, but our Ambassador in Ottawa cautions against over optimism while our Ambassador in Manila advises against encouraging the Philippines to diffuse its effort.

In several cases no comment was offered by the foreign government at the time of receipt of the message but comment may be forthcoming later. Thus, Ayub3 has promised a reply in two days.

There was general appreciation of advance notification of our plans.

Details of replies received to date are given in the attached memorandum.4

William P. Bundy5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC History, Deployment of Major U.S. Forces to Vietnam, July 1965. Secret.

2 Circular telegrams 127 and 128, July 25, conveyed instructions to deliver on Monday, July 26, a personal letter from President Johnson to the head of government outlining the necessity to increase the number of U.S. troops involved in South Vietnam, and asking for support and increased assistance in the struggle in Vietnam. The telegrams were sent to Brussels, Ottawa, Copenhagen, Bonn, Tehran, Dublin, Rome, The Hague, Madrid, Tel Aviv, Bern, London, Ankara, Canberra, Rio de Janeiro, Taipei, Tokyo, Seoul, Kuala Lumpur, New Delhi, Wellington, Manila, Bangkok, Athens, and Karachi. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 President Ayub Khan of Pakistan.

4 Attached but not printed.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

96. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to President Johnson 96. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to President Johnson1

Washington, July 27, 1965.

SUBJECT

Meeting on Viet Nam

Subsequent to our telephone conversation, I met with the following Senators in my office at 3:30 this afternoon: Russell

Fulbright

Sparkmant

Cooper

Rusk

I opened the meeting by reporting fully on the Leadership discussion of Viet Nam this morning. There was a general sense of reassurance that your objective was not to get in deeply and that you intended to do only what was essential in the military line until January, while Rusk and Goldberg were concentrating on attempting to get us out. A general desire to support you in this course was expressed. It was felt that one of the best ways this could be done would be by communicating the feelings of some of the senior Members of the Senate to you in this fashion.

Among the major points which were raised by various of the Senators in attendance during the discussions were the following: 1. The estimate of 100,000 men by the end of the year was probably short, that the more likely figure would be 150,000.

2. The Russians feel that they have an obligation to aid the North Vietnamese not unlike ours towards a Western European country which might be attacked and if we expect them to help in getting negotiations started before this situation gets out of hand we have to provide them with some basis for helping.

3. The United Nations may be an important link in a way out of the situation but this possibility is clouded by the issue of Article 19; it may not be opportune to insist upon enforcement of the Article at this time; but heat is already being generated on the issue in the House and some prompt Presidential initiative on the point in public may be desirable.

4. Bridges to Eastern Europe need to be kept open and continued encouragement of the evolution of these nations (Yugoslavia, in particular) towards full independence, political and economic, under their own unique forms of organization is of the greatest importance.

5. The Russians are deeply concerned that we are abandoning the policy of peaceful co-existence; some tangible reassurance that we are not, perhaps through the consular convention, is desirable.

6. The country is backing the President on Viet Nam primarily because he is President, not necessarily out of any understanding or sympathy with policies on Viet Nam; beneath the support, there is deep concern and a great deal of confusion which could explode at any time; in addition racial factors at home could become involved.

7. The main perplexity in the Vietnamese situation is that even if you win, totally, you still do not come out well. What have you achieved? It is by no means a “vital” area of U.S. concern as it was described by Lodge at a hearing this morning.

8. There is reason for concern and irritation at Cao Ky's statement that we should fight on the perimeter while the Vietnamese military is organizing the rear.

9. The President was ill-advised to begin the bombing of North Viet Nam in the first place and the error was then compounded by the limited character of the bombing.

10. In clarification of what would follow a failure of the Goldberg-Rusk effort between now and January, it was pointed out that it would mean that we would probably have to add very substantially to manpower at that time.

11. The military concept of a greatly extended bombing in Viet Nam is sound.

12. Another cessation of bombing of longer duration than the previous one might be desirable as a means of getting discussions underway.

13. Underground contact might be sought not only with the Russians but with the Chinese as well; it could be particularly useful in bringing about talks in the event another pause in the bombing is attempted.

14. France, who has the best contacts in Indochina, has been virtually ignored as a possible avenue of approach to negotiations.

15. The situation at Pleiku is highly dangerous; if the U.S. garrison is attacked it could be another Dien Bien Phu and it could mean increased pressure for our deeper involvement.

16. The French parliament, at no time, permitted conscripts to be used in Indochina.

17. The Viet Cong are highly skilled and formidable fighters; the South Vietnamese forces are of dubious quality and larger and larger desertions can be anticipated.

18. The important thing in a situation like this which is clearly detrimental to us is to concentrate on finding a way out; a possibility might exist in a combination of the coastal enclave strategy, a cessation of aerial bombardment and the use of all possible contacts to get negotiations underway.

19. McNamara has been a disappointment in his handling of this situation, probably because he is being used in a way in which he ought not to be used.

It should be noted that there was obviously not a unanimity among the Members present on all of the points listed. But there was a very substantial agreement on many of them. Moreover, there was full agreement that insofar as Viet Nam is concerned we are deeply enmeshed in a place where we ought not to be; that the situation is rapidly going out of control; and that every effort should be made to extricate ourselves.2

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 1266, #14. No classification marking.

2 At the President's request, McNamara prepared a memorandum commenting on Mansfield's first 18 points, which the President forwarded to Mansfield on July 28 under a covering letter that reads: “With respect to the 19th point, as I have often said, I consider Bob McNamara to be the best Secretary of Defense in the history of this nation.” (University of Montana, Mansfield Papers, Series XXII, Box 102, Folder 13)

97. Editorial Note 97. Editorial Note

On July 28, 1965, President Johnson opened a mid-day press conference at the White House with a statement in which he explained that U.S. involvement in the conflict in Vietnam would be expanded. He stated that the United States intended “to convince the Communists that we cannot be defeated by force of arms or by superior power.” He said that General Westmoreland had outlined the forces needed to meet the “mounting aggression” in South Vietnam, and he added: “We will meet his needs.” He had therefore ordered U.S. forces in Vietnam increased from 75,000 to 125,000, and he noted that additional forces would be dispatched as they were requested. To meet the necessary increase in active forces, the draft call would be raised over a period of time from 17,000 to 35,000 per month. The President reiterated that the United States was ready at any time for unconditional discussions to move the conflict from the battlefield to the conference table. The transcript is printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book II, pages 794-796.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff began implementation of the President's decision on July 28 by approving the deployment of the Air Mobile Division and the Marine Amphibious Brigade to South Vietnam. (Telegram 263 to Saigon, July 28; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) Embassies throughout the world were instructed to convey the substance of the President's announcement to their host governments. (Circular telegram 141, July 27; ibid.) In Vietnam, the U.S. Information Agency released the text of the Presidential announcement to the local press and via radio, distributed some 200,000 illustrated pamphlets, and prepared 1 million leaflets with excerpts from the announcement for airdrop into North Vietnam. (Telegram 361 from Saigon, August 3; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (B))

On August 2, Bromley Smith reported to the President that 30 countries had reacted favorably to the announcement, 5 were apprehensive, and Ghana and all of the Communist states, except Yugoslavia and Romania, were critical. (Memorandum to the President; ibid., Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII)

Discussion on Ending the War and Deployment of Additional U.S. Forces, July 29-November 26, 1965

Discussion on Ending the War and Deployment of Additional U.S. Forces, July 29-November 26, 1965Discussion on Ending the War and Deployment of Additional U.S. Forces, July 29-November 26, 1965

98. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 29, 1965.

Source: Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Mai Van Bo 1965. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Dean and Bundy. Copies were sent to the Department of Defense for McNaughton and to CIA for Colby.

99. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, July 29, 1965, 2:54 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

100. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

Washington, July 30, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (B). Top Secret.

101. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers (Ackley) to President Johnson

Washington, July 30, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Ex ND 19/CO 312. No classification marking. There is an indication on the source text that Johnson saw the memorandum.

102. Editorial Note

103. Memorandum From the Ambassador-Designate to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson

Washington, August 3, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII. No classification marking. McGeorge Bundy sent this memorandum to the President on August 3, under cover of a memorandum in which he observed: “Lansdale appears quite ready to take over MACV—and yet he's not all wrong. Can we afford some creative tension?”

104. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, August 3, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, President Eisenhower. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Goodpaster.

105. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, August 3, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Public Affairs Policy Committee. Confidential. Prepared by Gordon Chase of the NSC Staff on August 4.

106. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, August 4, 1965, 9:30 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII. Confidential.

107. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 5, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVIII, Memos (B), 8/1-12/65. Top Secret.

108. Memorandum from the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, August 5, 1965, 2:45 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII. Secret.

109. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 5, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVIII, Memos (B), 8/1-12/65. Top Secret.

110. Summary Notes of the 554th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, August 5, 1965, 6 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings File, Vol. III. Top Secret; Sensitive; For the President Only. Prepared by Bromley Smith.

111. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 6, 1965, 4:45-5 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII. Confidential. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy on August 11.

112. Editorial Note

113. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, August 6, 1965, 8:50 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET/XYZ. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; XYZ. Drafted by Gullion and cleared by Bohlen. See Document 112 for background information on the “XYZ” contacts.

114. Telegram From the National Security Council Executive Secretary (Smith) to President Johnson, at Camp David, Maryland

Washington, August 7, 1965, 12:43 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVIII, Cables. Secret. Received at 3:55 p.m. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the telegram.

115. Editorial Note

116. Memorandum From the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) to President Johnson

New York, August 9, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXIII, Cables. Secret. Goldberg sent this memorandum to the President on August 9, under cover of a letter in which he represented it as describing “how I believe a pause in the bombing of North Vietnam might be utilized in support of a mediation effort to determine whether we can get Hanoi to start unconditional discussions.” He noted that he had also sent copies of the memorandum to Rusk and McNamara, and he offered to discuss it with the President at his convenience. (Ibid.)

117. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 10, 1965, 5:30-6:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Public Affairs Policy Committee. Confidential. The meeting was held in Moyers' office. The source text bears no drafting information.

118. Memorandum From the Ambassador-Designate to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson

Washington, August 11, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, President Eisenhower. Confidential. There is an indication on the source text that Johnson saw the memorandum.

119. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, August 12, 1965, 5:22 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis.

120. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, August 13, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET/XYZ. Top Secret; Nodis; XYZ. The source text is a copy that was enclosed in a letter from Springsteen to McBride, November 3, together with copies of telegrams reporting on Gullion's (“X”) meetings with Mai Van Bo (“Rupert”) on August 18 and September 1. The copies do not include telegram numbers or times of transmission or receipt. Springsteen transmitted these copies and other documents to McBride at the request of Sturm (“Y”) so that they would be available to Sturm in Paris. In United States-Vietnam Relations, the meeting described in this telegram is incorrectly dated August 15. (Herring, Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War, p. 100)

121. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 17, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 9:06 a.m.

122. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, August 18, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET/XYZ. Top Secret; Nodis; XYZ. The source text is a copy that does not bear a telegram number or a time of transmission or receipt. For additional information, see the source note, Document 120.

123. Memorandum of Meeting

Washington, August 19, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 US/Johnson. Confidential. Drafted by William Bundy on August 26.

124. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 23, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Repeated to USUN. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 2:23 a.m. Ambassador Lodge arrived in Saigon on August 20 and presented his credentials on August 25.

125. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Honolulu, August 23, 1965, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. The source text is a copy sent to the Department of State.

126. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, August 24, 1965, 8 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII. No classification marking.

127. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 26, 1965, 12:41 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

128. Memorandum for President Johnson

Washington, undated.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXIX, Memos. Secret; Limdis. There is no drafting information on the source text, which indicates that the President saw the memorandum.

129. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, August 27, 1965, 1:41 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and David H. Popper of IO on August 26 and cleared by Sisco of IO and Ruth Bacon of FE. Repeated to Saigon, London, Ottawa, Canberra, and Bangkok. At 2:55 p.m. on August 27, McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this cable to the President, noting in a covering memorandum that the response to Thant had been coordinated with the South Vietnamese Government by Ambassador Lodge, and had been prepared in close collaboration with Goldberg. Bundy added: “Dean Rusk and I consider that this entire paper represents no modification of our position, but only a careful and diplomatically skillful statement of it for U Thant's eyes.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII)

130. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, August 27, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Viet 381. Top Secret.

131. Letter From the Ambassador to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson

Saigon, August 31, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Lodge Letters to the President. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Received in the White House and delivered to the President on September 2. (Telegram 614 to Saigon, September 2; ibid.)

132. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

Washington, September 1, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietrnam, Vol. XI, Memos (A). Top Secret.

133. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, September 1, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET/XYZ. Top Secret; Nodis; XYZ. The source text is a copy that does not bear a telegram number or a time of transmission or receipt. For additional information, see the source note, Document 120. In United States-Vietnam Relations, the meeting described in this telegram is incorrectly dated September 3. (Herring, Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War, pp. 106-107)

134. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 4, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 2:51 a.m.

135. Memorandum From the President's Consultant on Vietnam (Taylor) to President Johnson

Washington, September 7, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Memos. Secret. Regarding Taylor's role as a part-time consultant to the President, see Swords and Plowshares, pp. 358-366.

136. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, September 8, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 381. Top Secret.

137. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 8, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, Rolling Thunder Memos, 1965. Secret. Copies were sent to Unger and McGeorge Bundy. The source text is Unger's unsigned copy; McGeorge Bundy's signed copy is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Cables.

138. Memorandum by Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff

Washington, September 10, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 41-Pt. Program in Non-Military Sphere in SVN. Secret.

139. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, September 12, 1965, 11:45 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, President's Appointment File, September 13, 1965. Top Secret; Sensitive.

140. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, September 13, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, President's Appointment File, September 13, 1965. Top Secret. Prepared by Califano.

141. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, September 14, 1965, 7:44 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by William Bundy, approved in draft by McGeorge Bundy and McNamara, and approved by Ball. A September 12 draft of this telegram with handwritten revisions by McGeorge Bundy is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Memos. The substantive changes by McGeorge Bundy are indicated in footnotes below.

142. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Washington, September 15, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 381. Top Secret.

143. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 15, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate the time of transmission; the telegram was received at 6:36 a.m. Lodge sent this unnumbered telegram to the Department of State with instructions to pass it to the White House, but a note on the source text indicates that it was not.

144. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 18, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 6:08 a.m.

145. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, September 20, 1965.

Source: U.S. Military History Institute, Johnson Papers, Close Hold File No. 3. Top Secret. Drafted by Abrams on September 27.

146. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 22, 1965, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Received at 3:37 a.m. and passed to the White House. There is an indication on another copy of this telegram that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Cables)

147. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

Washington, September 22, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. Secret.

148. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, September 22, 1965.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 72 D 139, SNIE 10-11-65. Top Secret; Sensitive. A note on the cover sheet indicates that the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense and NSA participated in drafting the estimate. All members of the USIB concurred except the representatives of the AEC and FBI, who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

149. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

Washington, September 22, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Memos (A). Top Secret.

150. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, September 23, 1965, 3 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. Secret.

151. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, September 23, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. Top Secret. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

152. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, September 24, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Memos (A). Secret. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw this memorandum.

153. Memorandum From the National Security Council Executive Secretary (Smith) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, September 24, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Memos. Top Secret.

154. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 26, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Thompson and approved in S/AL on September 27.

155. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, September 29, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, President's Appointment File, Sept. 29, 1965. Top Secret. Prepared by Califano.

156. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 30, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 2:02 a.m. A retyped copy of this telegram indicates that the President saw the telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV)

157. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 30, 1965, 6:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority. Received at 9:27 a.m. and passed to the White House, Department of Defense, and CIA.

158. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

New York, September 30, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. Top Secret; Nodis; Eyes Only. Also sent to Acting Secretary Ball. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw this memorandum. Rusk and Gromyko were at the United Nations for the 20th session of the General Assembly.

159. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)

Washington, October 1, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron. Top Secret. McNaughton passed a copy of this letter to the JCS on October 6. (Washington National Records Center,RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 381)

160. Memorandum of Conversation

New York, October 7, 1965, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Emmett B. Ford, Jr., of the Office of German Affairs on October 8 and approved in S on October 13. The meeting was held at USUN.

161. Editorial Note

162. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 8, 1965, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to USUN, Moscow, and Budapest.

163. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 9, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLI, Memos (A). Confidential.

164. Paper by the Ambassador at Large (Thompson)

Washington, October 11, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XVI, Memos (A). Secret. Thompson sent this paper to Bundy under cover of a memorandum that reads: “The attached report was largely prepared in State and was reviewed by General Taylor, Mr. McNaughton, Mr. William Bundy, Mr. Unger and myself.

165. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 13, 1965, 1:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

166. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 13, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 6:40 a.m. Bundy sent the President a retyped copy of this telegram on October 14 under cover of a memorandum that reads: “We are puzzled by his conversation with Thieu—in the sense that we see no reason why the Viet Cong should be able to win politically in a fair fight if they are as unpopular as we all believe. I am having a further analysis made on this point. Otherwise, an interesting report.

167. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, October 13, 1965, 8:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-7 VIET. Secret; Exdis.

168. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 14, 1965, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Lisle and approved in S on November 26. The source text is labeled “Part I of III.” The meeting was held in the James Madison Room of the Department of State.

169. Editorial Note

170. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 20, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central File, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate time of transmission; the telegram was received at 2:26 a.m.

171. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 20, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate the time of transmission; the telegram was received at 2:40 a.m. McGeorge Bundy sent a retyped copy of this telegram to the President under cover of an October 20 memorandum that states that Lodge “sheds more light this time on the shape of the political problem. In this sense, it is a better report than last week's, though the more we learn of the problem the harder the job looks.” Bundy noted that “good reporters coming back from Vietnam are optimistic as they have never been before. I have talked at some length with both Joe Alsop and Warren Rogers—listened rather than talked—and both of them are encouraging.

172. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 20, 1965, 5:05 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to USUN and CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 5:52 a.m.

173. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 20, 1965, 4:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-7 VIET. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

174. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 20, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Negotiation. Secret; Eyes Only.

175. Letter From the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) to President Johnson

New York, October 20, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Negotiation. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the original letter was in the U.N.-Goldberg correspondence file.

176. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 21, 1965, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Received at 8:37 a.m. and passed to the White House.

177. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, October 21, 1965, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Mai Van Bo, 1965. Secret; Limdis. Received at 6:08 p.m.

178. Draft Paper by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 22, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLI, Memos (A). Top Secret. According to a typed notation on the source text this was a second draft. A copy of the first, dated October 20, is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 380.

179. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, October 22, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 41-Point Program in Non-Military Sphere in SVN. Secret.

180. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, October 22, 1965, 3:20 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, President Eisenhower. Top Secret. President Johnson wrote the following note on the source text: “See me on this. L”

181. Paper by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 23, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLI, Memos (A). Top Secret. According to a note attached to another copy of this paper, William Bundy sent it “Strictly Eyes Only” to Ball, McGeorge Bundy, and Thompson on October 26. (Department of State, Bundy Papers: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron)

182. Memorandum From the Administrator, Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs (Schwartz) to Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff

Washington, October 25, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLI, Memos (A). Secret. Also sent to McNaughton, William Bundy, Unger, Meeker, and Assist-ant Secretary of State for Public Affairs James L. Greenfield. Drafted by Frank A. Sieverts, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs.

183. Draft Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, October 26, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLI, Memos (A). Secret. There is no indication on the source text that this message was sent.

184. Intelligence Memorandum

Washington, October 27, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLI, Memos (A). Secret; No Foreign Dissem [text not declassified]. Disseminated by the Directorate of Intelligence.

185. Editorial Note

186. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 2, 1965, 7:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

187. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 3, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 5:34 a.m. McGeorge Bundy sent a retyped copy of this telegram to the President with the observation that it was “more cheerful than usual.” There is an indication on the White House copy that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVI)

188. Letter From the Ambassador to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson

Saigon, November 3, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVI. Secret. McGeorge Bundy sent this letter to the President under cover of a November 8 memorandum that reads as follows: “Here is a letter which has just come in from Cabot Lodge for you. I have taken the liberty of giving copies to Rusk and McNamara only, because Lodge's views are deeply relevant to the discussions now going forward. I have not sent a copy to Arthur Goldberg because I am afraid it would only stir him to a very strong reaction. On the other hand, it may be useful for Arthur to know Saigon's thinking. Which do you prefer? “The memorandum, which has an indication that Johnson saw it, did not show the President's preference. (Ibid., Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Memos (B))

189. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

Washington, November 3, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, South Vietnam, Statements and Supporting Papers. Top Secret. Designated as “1st rough draft.” McNamara wrote the following note on the source text: “A copy of this was sent to the Pres. by courier through Mac's office on 11/7 and discussed with him by me, Dean, George, and Mac on 11/7. RMcN” According to the President's Daily Diary, the President's meeting with McNamara, Rusk, Ball, and McGeorge Bundy was held at the LBJ Ranch in Texas on November 11, not November 7. See Document 189 regarding the meeting. The President was at the LBJ Ranch October 23-November 14, recovering from surgery. (Johnson Library) The copy of this memorandum in the Johnson Library has a covering memorandum by McNaughton, who hand-delivered it to McGeorge Bundy on November 4. McNaughton informed Bundy that Rusk and Ball were also getting copies and related McNamara's desire that Bundy not show this memorandum to anyone else without telephoning McNamara first. (Ibid., National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Memos (B)) In The Vantage Point (pp. 233-234), Johnson describes this memorandum and recalls that his “first reaction” to it was “one of deep skepticism.”

190. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 7, 1965, 12:55 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Mildred Asbjornson. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Amb Johnson was present for the call.”

191. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, November 7, 1965, 2:33 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. Top Secret; Eyes Only;Nodis. The President was at the LBJ Ranch.

192. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, November 8, 1965, 11:42 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol XV. Top Secret. President Johnson was at the LBJ Ranch. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the telegram.

193. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 8, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 8:07 a.m. 1623. Eyes only for Bundy. I called on Archbishop Palmas and said that nothing could be said or done as far as I was concerned unless I could see the so called “letter of credentials”.

194. Memorandum for President Johnson

Washington, November 9, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Memos (A). Top Secret. On a covering index listing the nine sections of this memorandum, a handwritten note reads as follows: “The Secretary (from Ambassador Johnson).” A handwritten note by McNaughton on the Department of Defense copy indicates that U. Alexis Johnson was the author of the memorandum. (United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 6, Part IV, C, 7 (a), footnote 31)

195. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, November 9, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Memos (A). Top Secret; Eyes Only.

196. Letter From the Consul General in Hong Kong (Rice) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Hong Kong, November 9, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Correspondence with the Field, June 1965. Secret; Official-Informal. A copy was sent to INR Director Hughes.

197. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Ambassador to Vietnam (Lodge)

Washington, November 10, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Memos (A). Personal and Secret; Nodis.

198. Editorial Note

199. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 11, 1965, 8:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, November 12, 1965, 9:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-7 VIET. Secret. Drafted by Schwartz; cleared by Unger, Meeker, Sieverts, and Robert H. Miller, Director of the Vietnam Working Group; and approved by Rusk.

201. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 17, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 7:21 a.m. McGeorge Bundy sent President Johnson a retyped copy of this telegram under cover of a November 17 memorandum that reads: “Here is Lodge's weekly telegram. He lays proper emphasis on the fact that this week it is the military developments that are the most interesting, but paragraph 4 on rural construction is of equal long-run importance.” There is an indication on the copy of the telegram that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVI)

202. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, November 17, 1965, 6:15 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 6AA, High Level Comments re Bombing Pauses. No classification marking.

203. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Rio de Janeiro, November 18, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 10:13 a.m.

204. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 19, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 41-Pt. Program in Non-Military Sphere in SVN. Secret.

205. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, November 24, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron. Top Secret. Drafted by William Bundy and described on the source text as “Final Draft.” The President was at the LBJ Ranch in Texas November 19-December 12.

206. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Acting Secretary of State Ball and Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, November 23, 1965, 10:10 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Telephone Conversations, Vietnam. No classification marking.

207. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Sisco) to Acting Secretary of State Ball

Washington, November 24, 1965.

Source: Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Vietnam Negotiations, Fanfani. Secret; Eyes Only. Copies were sent to U. Alexis Johnson and William Bundy.

98. Memorandum of Conversation 98. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, July 29, 1965.

SUBJECT

Mai Van Bo Conversation with Urah Arkas-Duntov

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Urah Arkas-Duntov, Dreyfus Fund, New York

Under Secretary of State Ball

Mr. William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

Mr. David Dean, Deputy Director for Asian Communist Affairs

Mr. Allen Whiting, Director, INR/RFE

Background:

Mr. Duntov was interested in ascertaining the North Vietnamese attitudes and position because of the effect the Vietnamese situation has on Dreyfus' investments, and through M. Parisot, Foreign Editor of “France Soir,” arranged to see Nguyen Van Chi in Paris in early May. Dissatisfied with the lack of substance in this contact, however, he asked M. Parisot to get him an interview with Mai Van Bo. This interview was arranged with little less than a week's notice.

Mr. Duntov stated that he had had a two-hour conversation with Mai Van Bo in Paris on the evening of July 16, 1965. Also present were M. Parisot and Elli Maissi, the UPI diplomatic correspondent in Paris. Mai Van Bo explicitly asked that the conversation be regarded as confidential, but he assented when Mr. Duntov asked if he might pass the substance of the conversation to friends in Washington.

Duntov gave Mai Van Bo an explanation of the Dreyfus Fund and of the necessity for keeping abreast of political and economic developments.

Conversation almost immediately focused on the Viet-Nam situation. The following points were raised and discussed: 1. Hanoi's Attitude toward Negotiations. Duntov asked why Hanoi would not negotiate. Bo responded that Hanoi did want to negotiate, and that there were ample contacts in which negotiations might take place. However, there must first be a basis for negotiations. Bo first said that the proper basis would be the Geneva Accords of 1954. He then added that these accords are often misinterpreted and misquoted, and that the true interpretation is found in the Four Points laid out by Pham Van Dong. Thus these formed the proper basis for negotiations.

2. Unification of Viet-Nam. Bo stressed very strongly that Viet-Nam is one country and cannot be divided. When asked whether the US had not made clear its willingness to negotiate unconditionally, Bo replied that the President's Baltimore speech of April 7 was a trap, and that the President was really laying down conditions by his insistence on the necessity of an independent South Viet-Nam and guarantees for such a South Viet-Nam.

One of the participants asked Bo whether his position was not in conflict with statements by the National Liberation Front to the effect that the Front favored an independent South Viet-Nam. Bo seemed somewhat taken aback by this question, but recovered and said that this would be all right, since an “independent” government in South Viet-Nam would in fact decide to join the north.

3. Internal Solution in South Viet-Nam. Bo insisted, somewhat emotionally, that there was one basic premise, self-determination by the South Vietnamese people, and that if this was accepted, a solution was possible. He referred at different times to the phrase, “self-determination,” and to the Liberation Front program for the South (insistence on which, of course, is the third of Pham Van Dong's Four Points). In referring to “self-determination,” Bo explained that, if this principle was recognized, an independent government could be formed. However, he went on to say that no “traitor” could be included, apparently meaning by this that at least the present South Vietnamese military leaders would be excluded.

4. Withdrawal of US Forces. Bo was asked what time schedule would be required—in the event of an agreement for an independent South Viet-Nam—on the withdrawal of US forces. Bo replied that this was no problem and that it was a technical detail that could be worked out as it had been with the French in 1954. The withdrawal could be discussed and could take place over a two-or three-year period. Bo related US withdrawal clearly, however, to acceptance of the principles he had laid down for “independence” and “self-determination” in South Viet-Nam.

5. Cease-fire or Cessation in Bombings. Bo mentioned the bombings of the North only in passing and with mild reproof. He gave no indication that a cessation of bombing was required before there could be discussions.

Comment

1. The position taken by Bo in this conversation appears to be consistent with the latest statements from Hanoi, notably an article on July 16.2 Bo appeared to be quite firm that there must be an agreed basis for discussions, and that this must be the Four Points. Although he persisted in using the phrase “self-determination” to describe the solution within South Viet-Nam, his parallel references to the Liberation Front program seemed to state that Hanoi would still insist that we accept in advance the principle that the Liberation Front be admitted to a coalition government (the core of the Front “program”). His reference to the exclusion of “traitors” also seems to point to a government that would be weighted in favor of the Liberation Front.

2. In clearly not insisting on prior withdrawal of US forces before any discussions, and in avoiding mention of a cessation of bombings as a pre-condition, Bo was also consistent with the Hanoi July 16 statement.

3. Bo's great stress on the necessity for a unified Viet-Nam, and his failure to note the US reference to this subject in Secretary Rusk's speech of June 23,3 suggest that as of the date of the conversation Hanoi was not yet clear what the US position was on reunification. The President's July 28 statement,4 referring specifically to the possibility of “free elections … throughout Viet-Nam under international supervision,” should make clear to Hanoi what our position is on this point. However, it is clear that Hanoi, in the wording of the Four Points and in Bo's stress on Viet-Nam being one nation, wishes an agreement that would effectively assume early reunification, and presumably without any holding of elections in the two Viet-Nams to see if the people wanted it. In other words, there remains a difference of substance between us on this point, but it seems doubtful that the US position could now be misunderstood in Hanoi.5

4. The American source, Duntov, impressed us all as giving an honest and factual account of the conversation. He said that throughout the conversation he asked only clarifying questions and tried to make it clear that he had no message and no standing with the US Government. We were inclined to believe that Bo accepted this although Duntov's closing request to convey the substance to “friends in Washington” must mean that Bo will know that his views got through to us.

5. If we were to consider using Duntov for future contacts with Bo, we would be wise to have a security investigation, and we would also have to take account, despite Duntov's apparent personal discretion, of the fact that he apparently has wide newspaper and other associations who might learn of his approach, even if he did not tell them the substance of his conversation.

1 Source: Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Mai Van Bo 1965. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Dean and Bundy. Copies were sent to the Department of Defense for McNaughton and to CIA for Colby.

2 Reference is apparently to the “White Paper” on “US Aggression and Intervention in Vietnam” released by North Vietnam in English on July 16. For text, see United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, Part VI, B, 2, pp. 146-151.

3 In an address to the American Foreign Service Association, Rusk called for a “free decision by the peoples of North and South Vietnam on the matter of reunification.” For text, see Department of State Bulletin, July 12, 1965, pp. 52-55.

4 See Document 97.

5 In a July 30 memorandum to William Bundy, Dean noted that Mai Van Bo appeared to be confused about the U.S. position on the Geneva Accords, unification, and self-determination. He suggested that “we clarify these points to Mai, and in turn give him a list of specific questions about Hanoi's position.” Dean added that he felt that such a direct approach was necessary to get a firm reading of Hanoi's position. He felt that the danger of public disclosure of such an approach by a U.S. businessman was slight, in that Mai Van Bo had been discreet in the past. (Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Mai Van Bo 1965)

99. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 99. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, July 29, 1965, 2:54 p.m.

191. Subject: Vietnam. Reference: Deptel 138.2 Subsequent to presentation credentials Goldberg accompanied by Plimpton and Yost spent hour yesterday afternoon with SYG accompanied by Bunche, Narasimhan and Rolz-Bennett.3

On Vietnam, Goldberg covered fully points made reftel and talking paper,4 including Harriman-Kosygin conversation.5 Goldberg emphasized that we were suggesting SYG explore three possible steps: (1) an SC mtg concluding with simple res calling for negots; (2) a direct appeal by U Thant for negots; (3) North and South membership in UN. SYG comments on these and other points were as follows.

SYG inquired whether Kosygin in conversation with Harriman had indicated receptivity to SC mtg. Goldberg replied that he had not but that he had during conversation, as evidenced by points Goldberg had just reported, shown degree of flexibility which seemed to warrant further exploration by SYG. Goldberg mentioned that Kosygin had referred to Vietnam as “small problem,” though pointing out that he might have meant only that it is small in relation to such broader issues as disarmament and over-all US-Sov relations.

SYG replied there had been no indication of flexibility concerning UN involvement in Vietnam on part of Sov reps in NY. They had been reluctant to talk about problem at all and had in particular been very negative about any SC mtg. French had also been opposed to SC mtg though less categorically.

Thant mentioned that Stevenson had sounded him out in Geneva in early July on this same point6 and he had replied that he would explore possibility but was not hopeful. Subsequently in Paris he had sounded out Couve, who had been negative because he did not think Peking, Hanoi or Saigon would be willing to attend SC mtg. Thant also mentioned that Ben Bella, during their exchange concerning SYG's attendance at Afro-Asian mtg, had argued Hanoi would not agree to any UN involvement in Vietnam question because of absence from UN of ChiComs. Thant himself fears that in any SC mtg Sovs would have to take strong line against UN involvement and to veto any res. He is doubtful, therefore, as he told Secy at their mtg July 19, that there is any advantage in pursuing idea of SC mtg with Sovs and French.7

As to SYG himself issuing some sort of appeal, Thant mentioned that he had some time ago been asked by Washington to delay cease-fire appeal and had done so. Goldberg expressed appreciation for his having delayed such an appeal and pointed out problem that would be created for us by unpoliced cease-fire. Thant suggested that desirability and character of appeal by him should be more fully explored next time he and Goldberg meet.

SYG expressed disagreement with indication in Harriman report that Hanoi is moving away from Peking. It has been his impression that they are drawing closer to Peking, certainly closer than they were last autumn when Hanoi through Moscow, without clearing with Peking, agreed to meet with us.

As to membership North VN and South VN in UN, Thant posed certain questions. Would Hanoi apply for membership? If it did, would Nationalist China veto admission? It is Thant's belief that Peking would oppose DRV membership and would tell Hanoi not to apply. However, SYG welcomed US “green light” on this point and said he would explore possibilities.

SYG then made several comments on possible Geneva conf. He said it is matter of indifference to him whether conf precedes or follows cease-fire. In former case he concurred that cease-fire should be first item on agenda. However, it is essential that Peking should participate and, while he has had no contact with Peking since becoming SYG, he sees two possible impediments to their participation.

First impediment would be problem of South Vietnamese representation. Peking would claim only Viet Cong should represent SVN. This of course is unrealistic and unacceptable. However, in SYG's view, it would also be unrealistic that only Saigon should represent SVN. Government of SVN changes from month to month and it would not be realistic to claim that Ky and Thieu, or whoever will be in their place at time conf convenes, are competent to represent S Vietnamese people. SYG recommends that SVN be represented at such conf by two delegations, Saigon and Viet Cong, having equal status. He mentioned incidentally that Hanoi would certainly reject Viet Cong appearing only as part of DRV deleg. SYG said he had sounded out both UK and France concerning his suggested dual SVN deleg, but both had said they preferred to await US reaction before commenting.

Second possible impediment to Peking participation in Geneva conf is fact that Peking has insisted publicly, though not recently, that 1954 Geneva Accords must be reaffirmed and implemented by any new conf. Such implementation would of course include withdrawal foreign forces and bases, as well as elections. SYG noted however that Hanoi has apparently not insisted on withdrawal US forces before new conf.

This subject was closed with agreement that SYG would consider suggestions we had presented and would explore them with Sovs and others where he considered appropriate and that conversations would be resumed upon Goldberg's return to NY.8

Goldberg

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

2 In telegram 138 to USUN, July 27, the Department of State reviewed previous exchanges with Thant on the question of Vietnam, and outlined the points that Goldberg should make with Thant in their first talk. Goldberg was instructed to explain the defensive character of the anticipated U.S. troop build-up in South Vietnam, and to suggest that it might be useful at some point for Thant to issue a personal appeal for a Geneva conference to establish conditions for the cessation of hostilities. The Department added that it remained interested in the question of whether the Security Council might play a useful role in connection with Vietnam. (Ibid.)

3 Francis T.P. Plimpton and Charles W. Yost, Deputy U.S. Representatives at the United Nations. C.V. Narasimhan, Under Secretary for General Assembly Affairs and Chef de Cabinet of the United Nations, and Ralph J. Bunche and Jose Rolz-Bennett, Under Secretaries for Special Political Affairs.

4 Not further identified.

5 See Document 68.

6 See footnote 7, Document 52.

7 Rusk and Thant met at 4:30 p.m. on July 19 at the United Nations in New York. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book)

8 Goldberg also gave U Thant a personal letter from President Johnson, dated July 28, at this meeting. In the letter, Johnson indicated that he had instructed Goldberg to maintain contact with Thant on developments in Vietnam, and he welcomed Thant's efforts to move the conflict to the conference table. Thant responded on July 29 in a letter to Johnson in which he expressed his determination to pursue a negotiated settlement of the Vietnam conflict with all the means at his disposal. On July 30, Goldberg sent a letter to the President of the Security Council in which he stated that the United States was prepared to work unconditionally with the members of the Security Council in search for an acceptable formula to restore peace and security to Southeast Asia. All three letters are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 892-894.

100. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 100. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson1

Washington, July 30, 1965.

SUBJECT

Evaluation of the Program of Bombing North Vietnam

Summarized below, as you requested, is an evaluation of the program of bombing North Vietnam.

1. Rationale for bombing the North. The program of bombing NVN began in an atmosphere of reprisal. We had had the August Tonkin Gulf episode; we had absorbed the November 1 attack on Bien Hoa Airfield and the Christmas Eve bombing of the Brinks Hotel in Saigon. The attacks at U.S. installations at Pleiku on February 7 and Qui Nhon on February 10 were the immediate causes of the first strikes against North Vietnam. The strike following Pleiku was announced as a “response”—a “reprisal”; our strike following Qui Nhon was called a response to more generalized VC terrorism. The major purposes of the bombing program, however, were: a. To promote a settlement. The program was designed (1) to influence the DRV to negotiate (explicitly or otherwise), and (2) to provide us with a bargaining counter within negotiations.

b. To interdict infiltration. The program was calculated to reduce the flow of men and supplies from the North to the South—at least, to put a ceiling on the size of war that the enemy could wage in the South.

Supplemental purposes of the program were (c) to demonstrate to South Vietnam, North Vietnam and the world the U.S. commitment to see this thing through, (d) to raise morale in South Vietnam by punishing North Vietnam, the source of the suffering in the South, and (e) to reduce criticism of the Administration from advocates of a bombing program.

2. Achievement of major purposes. The potential targets, targets struck and per cent of destruction are shown at Tab A. In terms of the purposes of the program, its results have been as follows: a. To promote a settlement. Obviously, this objective has not yet been attained. We recognized at the start of the program, as we do now, that the influence of the bombing on a settlement would not be great until the North Vietnamese had been disappointed in their hopes for a quick military success in the South. There is no doubt that the bombing program has become an important counter in the current tacit and explicit bargaining process and will be an important counter in any future bargaining.

b. To interdict infiltration. It is believed that regular North Vietnamese units now in South Vietnam (estimated to be one division) require about 4 tons of supplies daily for the “current” level of combat but would require 67 tons of supplies daily for “light” combat. (“Current” levels are operations conducted largely in small units; “light” combat would involve larger elements in action on the average of every third day, with expenditures of one-third of each unit's basic load of ammunition on each action.) It is believed that regular North Vietnamese units and Pathet Lao forces in the Laos Panhandle require about 21 and 51 tons daily respectively for the two levels of combat. Viet Cong arms, ammunition and other supply requirements are estimated at 8 tons daily for “current” combat and 115 tons for “light” combat. The effect of the interdiction program on the movement of supplies is summarized below:

The 440-ton per day rail traffic from Hanoi south to Vinh has been cut off at Ninh Binh (40 miles south of Hanoi). Supplies still move by sea and over the parallel highway system. The latter has been badly damaged and is subject to armed reconnaissance; sea traffic into SVN is under surveillance. At a minimum, supply is slower and less regular and delivered at increased cost in resources and energy expended. Roads into Laos have been subjected to similar interdiction and armed recce. Only limited interdiction has been imposed on the key rail and road net northwest of Hanoi, and none on the railway net northeast of Hanoi; and port destruction has been minimal. Thus, substantially uninterrupted supply continues from China by rail into Hanoi and by sea into Haiphong to meet major North Vietnamese military, industrial and civilian needs.

The effect of the bombing on military operations is estimated to have been as follows: (1) For regular North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces. The interdiction program has caused North Vietnam increasing difficulty in supplying their units in Laos and South Vietnam. How severe this difficulty is or how stretched North Vietnam's supply capabilities are cannot be estimated precisely. Our interdiction efforts may have either prevented or deterred the North from sending more troops than they already have. The interdiction programs in North Vietnam and Laos also may have influenced a Communist decision to forego a 1965 offensive in Laos.

(2) For Viet Cong forces. Because the VC require significantly less infiltrated arms and ammunition and other supplies than do the North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces, the interdiction program probably has had less of an adverse effect on their operations. By raising VC fears concerning adequacy of supplies, however, the program may have caused the VC summer offensive to be less intense, aggressive and unrelenting than it would otherwise have been. It should be noted that the program has not been a “strategic” bombing program; it has been limited to selected targets of fairly direct military relevance. Populations and targets such as dikes and basic industries have not been struck. Furthermore, the immediate vicinities of Hanoi and Haiphong have been avoided, partly because the targets there are primarily of the “strategic” type and partly because strikes there would involve even more serious risks of confrontations with the Soviet Union and China.

3. Other effects of the program.

a. Deterrence of VC terrorism. There is no evidence that strikes against North Vietnam have affected one way or another the level or kind of VC incidents of terror in South Vietnam.

b. Morale in South Vietnam. Morale in South Vietnam was raised by the initiation of the bombing program (as, later, by the deployment of additional troops). Now—with the bombing programs having become commonplace and with the failure of the situation to improve—morale in South Vietnam is not discernibly better than it was before the bombing program began. In a sense, South Vietnam is now “addicted” to the program; a permanent abandonment of the program would have a distinct depressing effect on morale in South Vietnam.

c. Reduction of criticism of the Administration. Some critics, who advocated bombing, were silenced; others are now as vocal or more vocal because the program has been too limited for their taste. The program has generated a new school of criticism among liberals and “peace” groups, whose activities have been reflected especially in teach-ins and newspaper criticisms.

d. Damage to peaceful image of the US. The price paid for improving our image as a guarantor has been damage to our image as a country which eschews armed attacks on other nations. The hue and cry correlates with the kind of weapons (e.g., bombs vs. napalm), the kind of targets (e.g., bridges vs. people), the location of targets (e.g., south vs. north), and not least the extent to which the critic feels threatened by Asian communism (e.g., Thailand vs. the UK). Furthermore, for a given level of bombing, the hue and cry is less now than it was earlier, perhaps to some extent helped by Communist intransigence toward discussions. The objection to our “warlike” image and the approval of our fulfilling our commitments competes in the minds of many nations (and individuals) in the world, producing a schizophrenia. Within such allied countries as UK and Japan, popular antagonism to the bombings per se, fear of escalation and belief that the bombings are the main obstacle to negotiation, have created political problems for the governments in their support of US policy.

e. Pressures to settle. More countries are now, as a consequence of the bombing program, more interested in taking steps to help bring the war to an end.

f. Impact on US-Soviet detente. The bombing program—because it appears to reject the policy of “peaceful co-existence,” because it involves an attack on a “fellow socialist country,” because the Soviet people have vivid horrible memories of air bombing, because it challenges the USSR as she competes with China for leadership of the Communist world, and because US and Soviet arms are now striking each other in North Vietnam—has strained the US-Soviet detente, making constructive arms-control and other cooperative programs more difficult. How serious this effect will be and whether the detente can be revived depend on how far we carry our military actions against the North and how long the campaign continues. At the same time, the bombing program offers the Soviet Union an opportunity to play a role in bringing peace to Vietnam, by gaining credit for persuading us to terminate the program. There is a chance that the scenario could spin out this way; if so, the effect of the entire experience on the US-Soviet detente could be a net plus.

g. Risk of escalation. The bombing program—especially as strikes move toward Hanoi and toward China and as encounters with Soviet/Chinese SAMs/MIGs occur—may increase the risk of escalation into a broader war.

4. The future of the program. Even with hindsight, I believe the decision to bomb the DRV was wise and I believe the program should be continued. The future program should: a. Emphasize the threat. It should be structured to capitalize on fear of future attacks. At any time, “pressure” on the DRV depends not upon the current level of bombing but rather upon the credible threat of future destruction which can be avoided by agreeing to negotiate or agreeing to some settlement in negotiations.

b. Minimize the loss of DRV “face.” The program should be designed to make it politically easy for the DRV to enter negotiations and to make concessions during negotiations. It may be politically easier for North Vietnam to accept negotiations and/or to make concessions at a time when bombing of their territory is not currently taking place.

c. Optimize interdiction vs. political costs. Interdiction should be carried out so as to maximize effectiveness and to minimize the political repercussions from the methods used. Physically, it makes no difference whether a rifle is interdicted on its way into North Vietnam, on its way out of North Vietnam, in Laos or in South Vietnam. But different amounts of effort and different political prices may be paid depending on how and where it is done. The critical variables in this regard are (1) the type of targets struck (e.g., port facilities involving civilian casualties vs. isolated bridges), (2) type of aircraft (e.g., B-52s vs. F-105s), (3) kind of weapons (e.g., napalm vs. ordinary bombs), (4) location of target (e.g., in Hanoi vs. Laotian border area), and (5) the accompanying declaratory policy (e.g., unlimited vs. a defined interdiction zone).

d. Coordinate with other influences on the DRV. So long as full victory in the South appears likely, the effect of the bombing program in promoting negotiations or a settlement will probably be small. The bombing program now and later should be designed for its influence on the DRV at that unknown time when the DRV becomes more optimistic about what they can achieve in a settlement acceptable to us than about what they can achieve by continuation of the war.

e. Avoid undue risks and costs. The program should avoid bombing which runs a high risk of escalation into war with the Soviets or China and which is likely to appall allies and friends.

Robert S. McNamara

Tab A

Rolling Thunder PROGRAM'S MILITARY EFFECTS

Fixed Targets

Type National Capacity No. of Targets in Country No. of Targets Struck % of National Capacity Destroyed

Barracks 443,000 men 46 35 5.0

Ammo Depots 103,600 metric tons 16 10 26.9

POL Storage 192,000 metric tons 12 4 18.3

Supply Depots 0.6 million square feet 11 7 5.0

Maritime Ports 7,800 short tons/day 6 2 4.2

RR Yards 21,000 short tons/day 4 1 1.8

Power Plants 176,000 kilowatts 17 3 9.0

Industrials:

Ammo Plant 1000 metric tons/year (100% Natl Cap) 1 1 7.5

Steel/Iron Plant 500,000 metric tons/year* (100% Natl Cap) 1 0 0

Machine Tool Plant 1000 units/year (83% Natl Cap) 1 0 0

Chemical Plants Yearly output ? (100% Natl Cap) 3 0 0

Airfields 22 (9 hard-surface fields targeted) 9 4 4.0**

Naval Bases 5 (excluding minor operating bases) 5 2 12.5

Bridges 475 (57 most significant targeted) 57 27 32.8**

Ferries 34 (286 tons/trip for 13 targeted) 13 11 6.5**

Commo Facil 22 (4 key instal-lations targeted) 4 2 25.0**

Radar Sites 29 sites containing 42 radar sets 27 10 17.5

Locks & Dams 91 (11 targeted as critical) 11 0 0

SAM Sites 7 7 2 20***

On Armed Recce Targets

Type DRV Holdings Destroyed/Damaged % Holdings Destroyed

Vessels (naval, merchant to include junks) Unknown 185/357 Unknown

Vehicles Unknown 168/223 Unknown

RR Rolling Stock 1920 (120 engines) 102/314 5.3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVII, Memos (B). Top Secret.

* Only partly operational: 1/3 to 1/2 capacity

** Of targeted capacity

** Of targeted capacity

** Of targeted capacity

** Of targeted capacity

*** Preliminary BDA

101. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers (Ackley) to President Johnson 101. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers (Ackley) to President Johnson1

Washington, July 30, 1965.

SUBJECT

Economic Aspects of Vietnam

Summary

The implications of the Vietnam situation for the economy appear to be these:

It has affected, and may continue to influence, speculative commodity and financial markets.

There are not likely to be significant effects on over-all prices, output, or employment in the next few months.

If expenditures follow the path that Bob McNamara now visualizes as likely, they could provide a significant stimulus to economic activity during the first half of next year.

We will need to intensify our concern about prices and wages.a

Budgetary and tax planning for fiscal 1967 will be affected.

Analysis

1. Our economy has lots of room to absorb a defense step-up.

There is still a $15-$20 billion margin of idle industrial capacity and excessive unemployment.

Our productive capacity is growing by $25-$30 billion a year (apart from any price increases), making room for both more butter and, if needed, more guns.

Apart from the defense effort, market demand would not be likely to grow as fast as productive capacity during the course of FY 1966, and unemployment would probably be creeping up.

2. The stock market is anxious about Vietnam news, because the financial community

—generally hates uncertainties which could cloud the business outlook; and

—specifically fears that a major escalation could bring on increased taxes and wage and price controls.

3. Vietnam news has had an important influence on the stock market.

A 12 point drop in the Dow-Jones Index on July 20 is generally attributed to the Administration's appraisal of the war as “deteriorating.”

Since your statement Wednesday noon,2 the market has been strong, with a gain of 14 points to today's close. On learning that no drastic measures were planned, “Wall Street heaved a sigh of relief,” said the Times.

4. As the stock market rebounded on reassuring Vietnam news, speculative commodity markets retreated.

On Wednesday, copper futures fell sharply. In the previous 2 weeks, they had risen more than 10%.

Fortunately, many other commodity markets had topped out before the latest round of Vietnam news, and prices were not poised to leap ahead.

5. These markets will continue to reflect the ups-and-downs of military action and speculation. But there is no good reason for major flurries in the near future. Nobody can seriously expect that the kind of program you outlined is going to overheat the economy, strain industrial capacity, or generate a consumer buying boom. But speculative excitement inflames easily in the commodity markets, and we should be careful what we say and do.

6. The thought of direct controls on prices and wages is what frightens business most.a The worry on this score is way out of proportion to the facts.

Here are two examples on opposite sides in recent press comment. U.S. News reported—before your press conference—“If the Vietnam war continues to escalate … rising toward the scale of the Korean war, wage and price controls will return, many materials will be allocated, and an excess profits tax will again become a real possibility.” But a knowledgeable broker argued in the Times, “Even if we assume the Vietnam war gets as big as the Korean war, this doesn't mean we would have to have excess profits taxes or commodity controls as we had then.” Your Wednesday press conference should have been reassuring.

We can say—and perhaps should emphasize publicly—that direct controls are simply not live possibilities.

Only in the remote event that the Defense step-up for the near future got into the $10 billion range would we have to give serious thought to higher taxes, selective commodity allocations, or (last of all) to direct controls on wages and prices.

7. The analogy with Korea simply does not hold water.

We started the Korean war with defense purchases running at a $12 billion rate; we doubled them in 9 months and tripled them in 15. Our defense capability is incomparably greater today.

Even so, the real reason for the surge in prices in late 1950 and early 1951 was not the pressure of defense orders or outlays. Many businesses made frantic efforts to pile up inventories, and consumers went on a buying spree. Consumer spending jumped 7-1/2% in the third quarter of 1950 and took another 5-1/2% jump in the first quarter of 1951; consumers virtually stopped saving. Fresh memories of wartime rationing and shortages drove households into a hoarding binge. The consumer has been living in a world of plentiful supplies and well-stocked shelves for a dozen years now. He is not about to panic.

8. The current thinking in DOD, as relayed to me by Bob McNamara on a super-confidential basis, points to a gradual and moderate build-up of expenditures and manpower.

In the closing months of 1965, when the reduction of steel inventories will be holding down our economic advance, the defense step-up will be small and any influence it has will be in the right direction.

In the first half of 1966, the impact on output and employment will be more significant. But it means extra insurance against slowdown or recession during the period (when payroll taxes will jump)—not a threat of overheating.

9. We are certainly not saying that a Vietnam crisis is just what the doctor ordered for the American economy in the next 12 months. But, on a coldly objective analysis, the over-all effects are most likely to be favorable to our prosperity.

10. We were probably heading into a period of a slightly faster creep of wages and industrial prices without Vietnam. The new uncertainties will probably strengthen that tendency.

This underscores the importance of Government-wide emphasis on the guideposts.

It also means we should go slow on measures that will raise business costs—like higher minimum wages.

And we may need to have larger stockpile releases, if commodity markets start to misbehave.

11. Vietnam will pose fiscal problems in our budget planning for FY 1967.

Added defense outlays will take a chunk of the $7 billion normal year-to-year growth of tax revenues that we have to use in order to avoid a fiscal drag. The bigger the defense chunk has to be, the less room for domestic civilian programs or tax cuts.

The uncertainties about defense needs, private demand, and Federal civilian programs prevent any conclusions as yet. It is now less likely that you will want to recommend a tax cut next year. But it remains a possibility that shouldn't be ruled out.

Gardner Ackley

1 Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Ex ND 19/CO 312. No classification marking. There is an indication on the source text that Johnson saw the memorandum.

2 July 28. Reference is to the President's statement at his news conference; see Document 97.

102. Editorial Note 102. Editorial Note

On August 1, 1965, Yugoslav President Tito and Indian Prime Minister Shastri issued a joint communique calling for a suspension of U.S. bombing of North Vietnam, while a conference of interested parties attempted to resolve the Vietnam conflict on the basis of the 1954 Geneva Agreements. (The New York Times, August 2, 1965) Ambassador Harriman had met with President Tito at his summer retreat on the island of Vanga on July 31 and discussed this proposal. Tito indicated that he believed that North Vietnam was prepared to negotiate, and added that he and Shastri would be consulting with other non-aligned countries concerning the initiative. Tito felt that with a return to the 1954 Geneva Agreements, South Vietnam could emerge as an independent, democratic republic which would serve as a buffer against Chinese expansion in the area. (Telegram 479 from London, August 1; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Harriman Talks on Vietnam, July and August 1965)

103. Memorandum From the Ambassador-Designate to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson 103. Memorandum From the Ambassador-Designate to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson1

Washington, August 3, 1965.

Following is an excerpt from a memorandum to me from Edward Lansdale2 in response to a paper of mine to him on “Solving the ‘politico’ part of the ‘Politico-Military’ Vietnam problem.”3 It contains ideas of which, I believe, you should be aware:

“'Politico'. Your paper states sound conclusions when it speaks of the need for an affirmative answer to the threat of Communist-Subversion/Terrorism”, the need for good practical politics in Vietnam, the fact that our other programs even though excellent are no substitute for a real political program, and the need for underscoring the truth of promises through actual performance. Personally, I don't see how the Communists can be defeated without these positive steps. The military can suppress the Communist forces, even keep them suppressed by continued military action, but cannot defeat them short of genocide unless our side puts the war on a political footing in Viet Nam.

“The enemy in Vietnam understands thoroughly the political nature of the war he is waging. The enemy sees his every act as a political act, and uses psychological, military, and socio-economic weapons to gain his political goals. This is a strict rule the enemy borrowed from Clausewitz. Lenin, Mao, Ho, and Giap have been clear and firm on this basic rule. The Viet Cong have obeyed it amazingly well. Our side has broken this rule over and over again. It is being broken daily right now.

“Thus, when you ask my help to get a Counter-Subversion/Terrorism program moving, you really are asking me to help you to get our side to start obeying and applying the prime rule of the war in Vietnam. It isn't separate from the other programs. It is the basis upon which the war in Vietnam will be won or lost. The psychological, military, and socio-economic programs are its instruments, not ends in themselves. Political bankruptcy in Vietnam and the direct use of U.S. combat forces complicate your task vastly. (A U.S. commander, tasked to attack a suspected enemy position, is going to clobber it first by bombing or artillery to cut his own U.S. casualties to a minimum when they attack; casualties of Vietnamese non-combatants must be secondary to his responsibility to his own command and mission.) I point this out to underscore the fact that something brand new, perhaps of considerable difference from anything previous, will have to be worked out in Vietnam to put the war on the essential political footing. It might require heroic measures, such as moving non-combatants out of Central Vietnam into the far South, to permit the military threat to be resolved conclusively in Central Vietnam by military means while non-combatant refugees get a real chance at a new life. Again, this could be a wrong move. You are going to need some exceptionally expert help to solve this vital problem; for many reasons, it's your biggest.”

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII. No classification marking. McGeorge Bundy sent this memorandum to the President on August 3, under cover of a memorandum in which he observed: “Lansdale appears quite ready to take over MACV—and yet he's not all wrong. Can we afford some creative tension?”

2 Lodge selected Lansdale to accompany him to Vietnam to establish a special operating staff in the Embassy to work on political action programs with the South Vietnamese Government. Lansdale arrived in Vietnam on August 29 with a hand-picked group of 10 counter-subversion specialists. He was designated as an assistant to Ambassador Lodge and appointed the U.S. liaison representative on the Central Rural Construction Council, created on July 30.

3 Not found.

104. Memorandum for the Record 104. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, August 3, 1965.

SUBJECT

Meeting with General Eisenhower, 3 August 1965

1. I met with General Eisenhower for an hour and a half in his office at Gettysburg this morning. I had arranged the visit with him previously by phone for the purpose of bringing him up-to-date on the situation and program actions relating to South Viet-Nam.

2. Before I began my remarks he expressed concern over one important aspect of recent actions. Citing Clausewitz, he pointed out that to every action we take, we must expect the enemy to take counter-action. It is important to avoid acting by “driblets.” If we want to win, we should not base our action on minimum needs, but should swamp the enemy with overwhelming force. He recalled that he had previously pointed out that if the enemy has a battalion on a position and we use two battalions against him, we may take the position but losses can be high. If instead we use as much as a division we will take the objective and our losses will be much lower.

3. He said he thought we should avoid using specific numbers in announcing our buildup. Specifically, he was troubled about the announced figure of 50,000. Instead, he thought the statement2 should have been “sufficient to win.”

4. I brought out that the figure of 50,000 had been coupled with the kind of statement he proposed—“additional forces will be needed later and they will be sent,” and that in fact planning and preparatory work is going forward to provide all that General Westmoreland has asked for at a very rapid rate. He reiterated his view that we do better to avoid specific numbers which tend to suggest to our enemies that we are limited in our determination. He would think it better simply to say that SVN within the past year or two has become an open battle ground of freedom against Communism, and that we will do whatever is needed to defeat Communism there.

5. He thought that the call for more draftees struck a good note because it showed our seriousness of purpose. He commented that he had been asked by many people while he was in Wisconsin, particularly by young people, just what we are going to do about Viet-Nam. He said his answer was that we must win there—we must stop the infiltration, stop the Communists from cutting South Viet-Nam to pieces, and give the South Vietnamese a chance to build a free society. He returned to his original point with a statement that this is no time for “piddling” steps, and that such—in the present situation, in which there has been an appeal to force—would be our greatest weakness.

6. At this point I reviewed in terms of major units the planned deployments to Viet-Nam in response to General Westmoreland's request.

7. I next discussed the concept for the employment of the U.S. forces as they close in the area. Secure bases will be provided at each of the key points selected. There will be an ample security force (a brigade or more), and normally a major logistics installation, and major tactical air base capable of general operations. As forces are built up further, they will be used for reaction operations, to fix and destroy Viet Cong units of battalion or greater size when they form for attack, and as a general reserve to locate, pin down and destroy Viet Cong main force units through offensive action, and to attack the Viet Cong base areas. As forces increase, the emphasis will shift toward offensive action on a sustained basis to carry the fight without letup to the Viet Cong. Maximum use will be made of air support, as well as artillery support, in these operations. General Eisenhower indicated he thought well of this concept of operations. I added that the Vietnamese will be expected to join in the foregoing operations to a limited degree (commensurate with their strength), but will particularly be responsible for locating and destroying pockets of Viet Cong smaller units and for establishing security in the countryside through wider areas. General Eisenhower thought these operations were of very great importance. He emphasized that propaganda activities should be intensified, and suggested that we be in position to extend to any village taken over from the Viet Cong immediate assistance in the form of food, medicines and the like. Such assistance, to be most effective, should be given at once.

8. In the course of this discussion I reviewed the general situation in South Viet-Nam, contrasting the situation observed in the Delta on my recent trip (where a highly capable corps commander has his troops on the offensive, carrying the fight to the Viet Cong with considerable effectiveness) with other areas where the Viet Cong encroachment continues, together with disruption of roads, railroads and all forms of communication.

9. I next commented on operations against North Viet-Nam. I told him consideration is being given at this moment to the question of expansion of the scope of attack operations to include attacks on POL, remaining LOC, and possible mining of major harbors. He said he considered that the selection of targets (speaking of military targets) amounts at this stage to deciding tactical matters. He thought that this is a matter for the field commander. It is important to comprehend what war is, and make sure we don't lose effect through detailed control away from the scene of conflict. He thought it was essential to go after the POL and the lines of communication, and would mine the harbors without delay, telling the world to keep shipping out of the area and making clear that there is to be no sanctuary. If this is not done, we will pay in U.S. casualties in South Viet-Nam. He emphasized that the way to keep international pressures down, and to save lives is to win the struggle as quickly as possible.

10. Referring to the surface-to-air missiles, he said that in his judgment we should have hit them before they became operational. He added that he had understood that we were going to do this. He said he would urge that we get the SAM's destroyed before they can be used. He said that, in fact, we should strike quickly whenever we see a new kind of danger building up, and not wait until it is in use. He commented that, operationally, there seems to him to be too much of a brake on everything we do. If the North Vietnamese use their SAM's and anti-aircraft in combination, as they are skillful enough to do, our air operations will become much more difficult and costly.

11. I then outlined the program for force expansion which the President had approved. I mentioned that the question whether to rely upon the draft or call up reserves had received the most searching analysis and careful consideration, culminating in a decision to rely upon the draft, extend terms of service where permitted, and bring selected reserves to a higher state of readiness. The net resulting difference between the two methods will not be large; there might be some limited additional delay in readiness of forces under the scheme adopted. This would be of significance in case a contingency should occur in Europe. General Eisenhower said he was not concerned over this point. If we were to become involved in war in Europe of any substantial proportions, he would not be for sending large forces into the area, but would be for using every bomb we have.

[Here follows brief discussion of the Dominican Republic.]

13. General Eisenhower's principal suggestion was to recognize that we are at war in Viet-Nam, and not base our action on “minimum needs” or a weak strike program against the North, but to “swamp them.”

G.
Lt. General, U.S.A.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, President Eisenhower. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Goodpaster.

2 Reference is to the statement President Johnson made at his July 28 press conference; see Document 97.

105. Memorandum for the Record 105. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, August 3, 1965.

SUBJECT

August 3 Dinner Meeting on the Information Problem

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Cater, Mr. Bundy, Mr. Califano, Mr. Marks, Mr. Chancellor, Mr. Greenfield, Mr. Jorden, Mr. Leibman, Mr. Cooper, and Mr. Chase

At Mr. Cater's invitation, the group met for dinner at the White House Staff Mess to discuss the Government's information program in the field of foreign affairs, and primarily as it pertains to the domestic audience. The discussion generally covered (a) the nature of the information problem and (b) general and specific ideas and agencies for meeting the information problem.

1. The Nature of the Information Problem

(a) Mr. Cater said that, with respect to public information, we lack many of the strengths we once had. We don't seem to have independent validators of policy any more—the Vandenbergs and the Connollys. We don't seem to have elder statesmen any more—Eisenhower is the exception. We don't seem to have the newscasting we once had—the Ed Murrows and the Elmer Davises, to quieten us and to give us perspective; instead, the nature of T.V. is such that we always seem to get our news on a fragmentary basis. Finally, with the exception of the President, the Government does not seem to have the spokesmen it once had. Mr. Cater went on to say that our public posture is fragile; we rely too much on the President and too much on specific facts. There seems to be no basic understanding of the broader aspects on the part of the American people. And with this situation, we are extremely vulnerable to rumor, gossip, and quick reverses.

(b) Mr. Greenfield, with specific reference to Vietnam, outlined a number of dimensions that he sees as part of the information problem. First, we are always meeting the crisis of the moment. In practice, there is little time to think about the long term or the philosophical. We only plug holes and run as fast as we can to stay even. Second, we seem to be obsessed by Vietnam. Foreigners especially believe that the President thinks of nothing else but Vietnam. This is not a healthy image.

Third, we do not always keep the arithmetic in mind. There are almost 300 accredited correspondents in Vietnam and we must recognize that we are going to have to live with some unfortunate stories—e.g., brutality by Americans. Fourth, while our credibility with the press is improving, we are still not credible enough. We suffer substantial losses when we are not accurate, and there are plenty of inaccuracies. (Mr. Califano seconded this point.) Fifth, we do not have the highest quality military spokesmen in Vietnam; they should be improved. Sixth, we are involved in too many cliches. Some of them are all right but others may not be; we should re-examine them. For example, we should look again at “Our country's honor is at stake”; one day we may be sorry that we are tied too closely to this stand. Another cliche we ought to examine is “Our friends won't trust us if we desert the Vietnamese”; this one gives us trouble when foreigners say publicly that they want us out of Vietnam—in effect, pulling the rug out from under us. (Mr. Bundy and Mr. Cooper differed with Mr. Greenfield at this point; both agreed, however, that we should make more of foreign statements which support our argument—e.g., Willy Brandt's reference to the conflict as “our war.”)

Seventh, we should probably try to do something about this curious business involving newsmen who say “the American people don't know what's going on.” When asked what they want, these newsmen say that they want more specific facts (e.g., how many tons of bombs were dropped); at the same time, they agree, when pressed, that the answer does not really bear at all on the essence of the Vietnam situation. Maybe this curious questioning relates to the proposition that the Vietnam war is different from anything we've seen and that we are all groping for ways to understand it. Mr. Cooper agreed that part of the information problem does relate to the fact that Vietnam represents a difficult and brand new type of warfare. While correspondents may not think it is important when B-52's hit a rice dump, it really is important. In short, we may not know how to fight the war in Vietnam but the correspondents don't know how to report it either.

(c) Mr. Jorden said that an essential element in our Vietnam information problem is that the South Vietnamese don't say anything. They don't say why they are fighting or where they are going. We must get them to state their own case—that what they are doing is good, just, etc. It would not only help with their own people but with the outside world as well.

Picking up on this thought, Mr. Cooper said that unfortunately the GVN is shadowy—there is not even a GVN ambassador here. As a matter of fact, for some time we have been trying in vain to get the GVN to do three relatively simple things—appoint an ambassador to the U.S.; appoint an information officer to the U.S.; and hire an American public relations firm to represent the GVN in the U.S. Partly as a result of the GVN's ineffectual and mushy public information program, the American people do not think we are really associated with anyone in Vietnam. Mr. Marks seconded this point and noted that the American people do not really understand that the South Vietnamese have committed 500,000 people to the struggle.

(d) Mr. Chancellor said that this is indeed a remarkable situation; we are faced with an entirely different kind of war and there is no participation in the public information field by the people one would expect to hear from the most—e.g., South Vietnam, North Vietnam, and the Viet Cong. (Some members of the group noted that the Viet Cong was indeed very active in the field.) In essence, perhaps we have, for the first time in our experience, a non-packageable commodity. Perhaps, therefore, we should try to emulate the 19th century British and try to get a sort of general commitment and support by the American people rather than a specific commitment and support for Vietnam. The “This is a long-term proposition—we are a world power and are stuck with this sort of thing” psychology may in fact bring greater comfort to the American people than the definition of the struggle as one of sharp confrontation. Mr. Bundy recognized the force in Mr. Chancellor's argument but added, among other things, that we could never hope for enough support, in the general sense, to do the job. We must get involved in the specifics as well. We are faced with a situation of instant transmission of village episodes. The Communists know this dimension and deal with it effectively; we, too, must cope with this dimension.

(e) Mr. Leibman said that the American people do not yet really understand how we got into Vietnam in the first place; they have received only generalities and they need specifics. Mr. Bundy agreed that there is a problem here, but thought that this particular piece of exposition might simply not be manageable. Our best posture may be to say simply that somehow we are there and that we have to stay.

(f) The group noted that the nature of the information problem in Vietnam is changing in some respects. Mr. Leibman said that the problem will be intensified immeasurably when the effects of the doubling of the draft are felt. Mr. Chancellor said that the press is just beginning to get active in Vietnam. With increased staffs, we are going to get fewer people doing general interpretive work and we are going to get more of the poignant, Ernie Pyle-type stories. This may help our effort in getting support from the American people as the war starts to hit them locally. In this regard, Mr. Leibman noted that it may be useful to consider building local heroes rather than national heroes.

(g) The group discussed the similarities and differences between the Korean War and the Vietnamese war. Mr. Bundy said that the American people may have more patience than they did during Korea; twelve years have passed. He noted that people have been saying for the past several years that the American people would explode if nothing decisive happened in Vietnam; yet, there has been no explosion. Mr. Cater noted the anomaly of Korea which, in fact, was a real success story but was never understood as such by the American people. The job is even tougher in Vietnam.

(h) Mr. Greenfield raised two questions which were largely left unanswered by the group: What reaction would we like to get from the American people and from foreigners? Why do people seem to understand that it is necessary to fight over Berlin but not over Vietnam?

2. Meeting the Information Problem

(a) Mr. Cooper ticked off some of the specific projects that are now under way. First, there are the “American Friends of Vietnam.” While they still have a long way to go, they have done some good work; they work with students, publish a journal, run a speakers' bureau and have an elaborate mailing list. While the Government has been helping and advising this group, we can't get too involved; if it becomes too closely identified with the U.S. Government, its credibility will be badly affected. Second, we have sent 30 students to Vietnam. Our follow-up will, of course, be crucial. Third, we have brought some Vietnamese intellectuals over here. Fourth, we have been providing kits to certain speakers. There are other projects too.

(b) Mr. Leibman said that the key elements that had been raised are the complexity and built-in contradiction of policy and the need for perspective and continuity. With regard to continuity, we should use more effectively the President's experience. Remember that “he was there” for 30 years. Mr. Leibman went on to say that part of the answer lies in using the private sector effectively. The private sector is anxious to be used.

Mr. Leibman then went on to describe a number of possible projects that might be explored. First, perhaps the private sector could brief journalists and editors. There are plenty of institutions and schools that would be willing and anxious to do the job. Second, we could put into effect the “That Was the Week That Was” concept to get across the idea of perspective and “the whole chessboard.” Third, we could make use of the Industrial College of the Armed Forces graduates. Fourth, with respect to high school teachers, there are three different types of programs that could be used—(a) special summer institutes on appropriate political subjects; (b) special programs for all teacher attendees at summer school; (c) year-round programs for teachers as part of in-service training. Fifth, we could use trade association forums. Mr. Leibman added that these ideas are only illustrative. The point is that there is a vacuum. If we don't fill it, then it will be filled against us. He went on to emphasize that the teach-in problem is almost here again and that we should be ready.

(c) Mr. Greenfield noted that the only thing that makes our present posture swing is that the people have confidence in the President. Mr. Leibman added that this is one reason why the President must always be absolutely credible. Mr. Cater interjected that this is evidence of how fragile our posture is and went on to say that the President should not have to bear the whole burden of explanation.

(d) Mr. Califano made the point that there was great merit in repetition. The President and other spokesmen in the Administration should keep repeating the same facts again and again.

(e) Mr. Cooper noted Mr. Chancellor's point that there will be an increase in coverage of Vietnam. He went on to suggest that we give serious consideration to educating the editors so that they know which stories are significant and fit to print.

(f) Mr. Greenfield said that we can only use the private sector effectively if there are effective Government spokesmen to support. And there are only four people who can give the Government position effectively—the President, Rusk, McNamara, and Bundy. Mr. Chancellor said that Bundy is probably not good for the housewife in the back yard; unfortunately, Bundy appeals to the sophisticated and the sophisticated are already rigid in their confusion or in their position pro or con the Administration in Vietnam. Only the other three can do the job that is needed—and, for that matter, McNamara probably less than Rusk.

(g) The group talked at some length about the problem of coordination of the information effort. Mr. Leibman, while recognizing the dangers of too much coordination, noted that it seemed to him that all sorts of people were involved but that no one was clearly carrying the ball or coordinating the effort. Mr. Califano said that there is a real need for orchestration on the Government side. Moreover, the only one who can really do the coordinating job effectively and get the right response from the major players is Bundy or Moyers. Mr. Cater said that what is needed is a sort of Tsar on the outside—a man with great prestige, preferably from New York, who could pull together and coordinate on the private side. Mr. Bundy agreed that there is a coordination problem as well as the ever-present problem of “finding the right man.” He went on to say, however, that the private sector would probably not sit still for a ringmaster. He also suggested that perhaps we do not want to get so heavily organized either in the Government or in the private sector in the area of public information.2

GC

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Public Affairs Policy Committee. Confidential. Prepared by Gordon Chase of the NSC Staff on August 4.

2 A follow-up meeting was held on August 4. (Memorandum for the record by Chase, August 4; ibid.) See also Document 117.

106. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 106. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, August 4, 1965, 9:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

British reaction to Goldberg's letter to U Thant

1. You should know that the British have followed up very briskly on Goldberg's letter of last week to U Thant.2 Foreign Minister Stewart has sent word to Dean Rusk that the British, as Chairman of the Security Council this month, feel that they would be seeming to question our sincerity if they did not press very hard to find ways of having an early meeting of the Security Council on Vietnam. In presenting this view, the British have also presented a resolution which would match an end of our bombing against an unpoliced North Vietnamese undertaking to send no more forces into the South—a notion which is plainly unacceptable to us.3

2. Dean Rusk has given the British a very skillful answer, stressing the need for intense private consultation before there is any Security Council meeting, and pointing out the defects in the UK draft resolution. Meanwhile, Yost talked yesterday to U Thant in New York and found him still adamantly opposed to a Security Council meeting.4 The Russians have told him they would have to use such a meeting for violent denunciation of the U.S. U Thant has said the same thing to the British, and it may be that Stewart will be cooled off.

3. It is obviously going to be hard for State and Goldberg to keep the right balance between good sense and a forthcoming posture at the UN, but so far they are doing very well. It remains to be seen whether Foreign Minister Stewart is really as unhelpful as this particular demarche suggests. Up till now, he has been our best defender in the UK, but there is a fishy smell to this one.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII. Confidential.

2 See footnote 8, Document 99.

3 Rusk and British Ambassador Sir Patrick Dean met on August 2. The draft resolution cited here is attached to the memorandum of conversation. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: FRC 83 A 57, August 1965)

4 Thant said that such a meeting would be “disastrous.” (Telegram 236 from USUN, August 3; Department of State, Central Files,POL 27 VIET S)

107. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 107. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, August 5, 1965.

SUBJECT

Another Pause

A New Element

Last night's attack on the POL facility at Danang has introduced a new factor into the considerations of a pause.

If a pause is to have the desired propaganda and political effect, it must be abundantly clear that we have voluntarily held back our vast power. While the attack on our POL storage facilities in Danang will, in fact, have no effect on our capabilities to bomb the North, the Communists can make a good case that any early pause was merely making a virtue of necessity. (You will recall that the VC and Hanoi proclaimed that our earlier pause was dictated by a lack of fuel and the need to repair our planes.) Thus, this overnight development might detract somewhat from the propaganda effect of an early pause. But the political signal we will be sending will not necessarily be muted; Moscow, Hanoi, Peiping and even the VC know that our logistic capabilities in the Far East cannot be significantly reduced by the destruction of a few POL tanks, and they know that we have sufficient capability within the 7th Fleet alone to destroy everything of value in North Vietnam. If they are waiting for a signal, they can still read this one loud and clear. In any case, a few news stories about our large POL reserves in the area and our impressive resupply capability, a continuation of our bombings on the North until the pause, and a heavy bombing program in the South might jointly remove much of the air from the propaganda balloon.

Timing and Announcement

If we decide on a pause (pros and cons are discussed below), I think we should implement it soon enough so that it appears to be part of the President's package of July 28,2 i.e., within a week or so. There are other advantages to doing it sooner rather than later:

Ambassador Lodge will still be here, and it will be easier to deal with any Communist responses and U.S. counter-moves on the political/diplomatic front when he is in Washington. Of lesser importance, but still worth noting, is that a pause prior to Nkrumah's trip to Hanoi (if, indeed, he decides to go) would give us propaganda points in Africa; a pause prior to Sukarno's 17th of August speech3 might tone him down a little; a pause at this stage of the disarmament conference might also help the atmosphere at Geneva.

My own view would be to stop the bombing without a prior public announcement, but with prior confidential discussion with key allies and the USSR. If possible, the DRV and VC (but not the Chinese—let's keep them stewing on the outside) should be informed through trusted intermediaries. Obviously, a day or two without bombing will arouse great curiosity. In answer to queries, we can state that we are testing the atmosphere, following up on the President's statement, giving Nkrumah a leg up, etc., etc. We should make no commitments in public or private about the duration of our suspension.

The Pros and Cons

The Case for a Pause:

1. It will continue the momentum toward settlement created by the conciliatory portions of the President's press conference statement; the fact that a pause is taking place in an interval of military build-up and after additional sizeable military appropriations should minimize a possible interpretation of “weakness”.

2. It will create, specifically, the most favorable possible climate for Nkrumah's exploratory trip and should increase the pressure on Hanoi for a more conciliatory response to Nkrumah.

3. It will ease the mounting domestic pressures on our allies (above all, the Japanese, whose difficulties are becoming severe, but also the British, Canadians, and Australians).

4. It will meet the persistent objections of friendly unaligned nations and leaders (primarily U Thant, the Indians, and the Yugoslavs).

5. Even if a pause produces no response, it can increase our own room for maneuver within our military track by establishing early an understandable pattern of strikes and pauses; in this regard, each week that passes without a second pause compounds the significance—and the controversial nature, in the U.S. Government and general public—of the pause concept itself. We need to de-fuse this issue in order to free our hands.

6. It will improve the atmospherics, although having no effect on the substance, of the Geneva disarmament talks.

7. It will meet one persistent demand of our domestic critics and waverers.

8. It will further dramatize the good faith of our quest for a negotiated solution.

9. It will permit a more careful testing of Hanoi's interest in negotiations, if any such inclination exists.

10. It may allow Moscow increased leverage in pressing Hanoi toward negotiations, if any such inclination is present within the Soviet leadership. At the same time it may develop strains between Hanoi and Peiping and develop yet additional strains between Moscow and Peiping.

The Case Against a Pause:

1. It may cause deep apprehensions regarding U.S. determination within the already-weakened GVN.

2. An extended pause will permit the DRV to catch its breath, repair damaged communications, and increase its assistance to the Viet Cong.

3. It will appear to the Communist side an admission of the ineffectiveness of the bombings and an indication of U.S. desperation for “negotiations now”.

4. It will arouse strong criticism among domestic proponents of toughness—particularly among Republicans who are looking for a way to make capital out of any signs of Administration softness in Vietnam.

5. It might make a return to air strikes difficult in the context of predictable international pressures to keep the suspension permanent (although resumption of bombings after the last pause was not that difficult).

6. It is a move to which such intermediaries as the Yugoslavs wistfully refer, but not with fierce conviction; it is not a move that the Soviets are pushing with vigor.

On Balance

I favor a pause starting in the next week or so. However, I also think we should give some urgent attention to what sort of signal from Hanoi or the VC we would regard as significant. (Surely we don't really expect the DRV to withdraw its Division from South Vietnam during the period of cessation. On the other hand, we should expect something meaningful in terms of a drop in the scale of VC military activity or a clarification or modification of Communist talking terms.) We should also give thought now to the problem of communication with the other side after the initiation of a pause. None of the would-be intermediaries (the French, the Algerians, etc.) are entirely trustworthy or satisfactory for such a serious and delicate task. This raises the inevitable question of direct U.S. access to the DRV and the VC. We should now identify the best sites and channels for such direct conversations (this problem will be the subject of a subsequent memorandum).

C

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVIII, Memos (B), 8/1-12/65. Top Secret.

2 See Document 98.

3 Sukarno addressed the 20th Anniversary Celebration of Indonesian Independence August 17 in Djakarta; his address is printed in part in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 757-758.

108. Memorandum from the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 108. Memorandum from the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, August 5, 1965, 2:45 p.m.

Agenda for the 5:45 Meeting

You have said that the main item on your mind is the Goldberg suggestion of a pause,2 but before you come to it, you may wish to have brief reports from Dean Rusk and Bob McNamara on their testimony and Congressional reaction this week.3 You may also want to have a report from General Taylor, as we said yesterday we would. So I suggest an order somewhat like this: 1. Brief report by Dean Rusk.

2. Brief report by Bob McNamara.

3. Final report by Max Taylor.

4. Discussion led by the President on the possibility of a bombing pause. In this discussion, the following would be important commentators:

Goldberg—(pro) Arthur can make his own case better than anyone else, if not more briefly. It is surely important that everyone understand the fact that it is the bombing which is now the target of international pressure. Some, but not all, of this pressure is orchestrated from Moscow. Interestingly enough, the bombing is not the centerpiece of propaganda from Hanoi or Peiping, nor is there any indication from either of these Asian capitals that a pause in the bombing would have any effect whatever.

McNamara—(con for now) While Bob believes strongly that at some point a substantial pause may be an important diplomatic card, he would not play the card at a time when it might be thought to come from weakness. He would prefer a sustained pause at a somewhat later stage, after we have shown that we can hold our own, and perhaps even make some money in the South.

Marks—I think Leonard should be asked for comment on the world opinion aspect of this matter. I do not know his current judgment.

Wheeler—if you call on him—will surely go very hard on the military advantages of continuous bombing. Even if he does not make the argument explicitly, he will remind those present that many Americans will find it odd to pause in the bombing that is supposed to restrict aggression just at the time when we are sending ground forces to take casualties in resisting that same aggression.

Rusk—(pretty much con) Dean is inclined to think that we ought not to have a pause until there is some clear signal that it would be matched in some way by the other side. You may wish to ask him what specific matching action we would find acceptable. We need to have a more solid opinion on this point than we have now. (My own judgment is that it will be hard to find a realistic short-term matching action, because such action needs to be visible and provable in order to be acceptable to us, and the only visible actions are in South Vietnam, where the people in Hanoi have to maintain that they have no influence. This is one reason why a long pause at a time of relative U.S. strength seems to me more sensible than a short one now. From a position of strength, we would not have to insist upon public and prompt matching action; we could simply let matters develop for a while with the diplomatic pressure on the other side.)

Just as a checklist, I list the following set of pros and cons:

Pro

1. Pause will sustain peaceful momentum of press conference.

2. Pause will help our allies deal with domestic pressure, especially Japanese.

3. Pause will reassert our flexibility and give us leeway to move up and down in the future.

4. Pause will please domestic peacemakers.

5. Pause may put some diplomatic pressure on Hanoi, during Nkrumah visit.

Con

1. Pause may arouse apprehension in South Vietnam.

2. Pause will give real military advantage to Hanoi.

3. Pause may seem sign of weakness to the Communists—or even a reward for propaganda pressure.

4. Pause may be sharply criticized by Republicans and other hardliners.

5. Pause will do no real good diplomatically.

I am afraid this memorandum is not as evenly balanced as I would like, but that defect at least shows you where I myself come out.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII. Secret.

2 See Document 116.

3 The texts of Rusk's statement on August 3 before the House Foreign Affairs Committee and McNamara's statement on August 4 before the Defense Subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee were released in Why Vietnam (The White House, 1965).

109. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 109. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, August 5, 1965.

SUBJECT

Contact with the NLF

This is not an argument for or against contacts with the NLF (although I can't resist the opportunity to cast an affirmative vote). Rather it is an attempt to explore how best to make such contacts, on the assumption that a decision is taken to do so.

There are four key questions:

Where should the contact be maintained?

Whom should the USG rely on to undertake such contacts?

How and to what extent should the GVN be cut in?

How can we insure that the contact is legitimate rather than a Communist propaganda ploy?

The Front Abroad

The Front maintains representatives in Cuba, the UAR, Algeria, Czechoslovakia, Indonesia, East Germany, China and the USSR. In addition, there appears to be a floating delegation of uncertain stature in France and some slightly irregular and clandestine representation in Cambodia. None of the places where the Front maintains an office seems ideal for discreet contacts, and some of them are patently undesirable. To complicate the matter further, we know very little about the calibre, status and personality of any of the individuals in place. It is likely, however, that once we decide on a locus of contact and once the Front is convinced we are ready for serious talk, the NLF will see to it that their man is suitable at least from their point of view.

There are several reasons why Algiers, at this moment at least, seems to be the best place for contact:

The NLF man now in place, Huynh Van Tam, is personally known to some Americans (see the attached account of Gottlieb's recent conversation with him).2

Of all the places where the Front now has representation, Algiers is probably the “loosest”.

Willy, nilly, we may find ourselves (hopefully unofficially) in contact with Their Man in Algiers. We are still awaiting some word on how (or even if) the VC and the Algerians want to deliver Hertz. It is clear from my talks with the Algerian Ambassador that whatever the precise details may be, the essence of the plan will be to exploit the exchange for at least a propaganda U.S.-VC contact and hopefully for a more substantive relationship.

The Means of Contact

I assume that whatever direct contact we may wish to maintain should be unofficial, very low key, and deniable. This obviously eliminates our Embassy and, in my view, the press. It still leaves three kinds of people: Academic types, Responsible Professional Peaceniks, and just plain Private Citizens. I will, if you desire, shake up some possible candidates in the first two categories (Lucien Pye comes immediately to mind in the Academic field, possibly Gottlieb in the Peacenik area). But I have an inspiration within the 3rd category: Burke Hertz—who, if we can deliver his brother, on the Algiers track, will have ostensibly good reasons for an occasional chat; he is an able bright lawyer, a liberal Democrat, and by now fairly sophisticated in the care and feeding of the Viet Cong. He will need an interpreter since he doesn't speak French, but I think Bill Colby can find one.

Obviously, whoever is chosen, he will have to be someone who the VC thinks has an official ear, if not an official voice.

The GVN Problem

It would be prudent to cut the GVN, at least the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, in on the fact that some American is talking to a Front man (the consequences of it being leaked to them would be more difficult and delicate to handle than a frank admission at the outset). We have a tricky path ahead in our relations with Saigon, and we should tie them to us as we take each step. This is not to say that we have to admit much official interest or direction to the contacts.

The Propaganda Trap

This is the most difficult aspect of the problem. As far as the Front is concerned, its purposes may be well served by publicizing the fact of the contact and distorting the substance of the talks. Perhaps our only protection here is to insure that we can make a credible case for denying any official sanction or character to the talks. This means that both the instrument and his channel to U.S. policy makers will have to be ready to be the patsies.

Chester L. Cooper3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVIII, Memos (B), 8/1-12/65. Top Secret.

2 Attached but not printed.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

110. Summary Notes of the 554th Meeting of the National Security Council 110. Summary Notes of the 554th Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, August 5, 1965, 6 p.m.

Vietnam

Secretary Rusk: Reported to the President on his recent meeting with the House Foreign Affairs Committee. For the present, there is good support in the committee.

Secretary McNamara: In both the Senate and the House Committees, there is broad support, but this support is thin. There is a feeling of uneasiness and frustration. There is criticism of our allies for not helping more in Vietnam. A minority of committee members believes we are not bombing targets of value. The Republicans are making political capital by overstating the effect on the U.S. economy of the cost of the Vietnam war.

General Taylor: The increase in U.S. forces gave a lift to the South Vietnamese. We do agree with Vietnam on war aims, even though General Ky may state, for domestic consumption, that he wants to invade the North. The Saigon Government accepts the principles of the Geneva Accords and is not going to march North. Viet Cong attacks are slowing down. Saigon does not object to our contacts with the other side, but it would worry if we stopped our military pressure on Hanoi during any talks.

General Ky is a young man, but he is better than one would imagine. He may mature. General Thieu is a stabilizing force. He prefers to sit in the background, consequently, he will not take the post of Prime Minister. The present Saigon Government framework is solid but the members of the new government are not yet well-known to us. General Ky is no administrator but he has a strong social conscience.

The present military situation is serious but not desperate. No one knows how much Viet Cong resilience is still left. The arrival of additional U.S. forces must have convinced Hanoi that their chance of winning the war is lessening.

No problem has yet arisen as to the U.S.-South Vietnamese command structure. We are not raising the issue, but are dealing with it on a case-by-case basis.

By the end of 1965, the North Vietnamese offensive will be bloodied and defeated without having achieved major gains. Hanoi may then decide to change its policy. 1966 could be a decisive year. We should seek to increase the South Vietnamese military forces and limit the size of U.S. forces.

Political fragility continues in South Vietnam. We hope that the political situation is at last settling down. Based on recent local elections, a national election held now would not go to Ho Chi Minh.

The military side of the war in South Vietnam is not overstressed as some allege. Security must come before a satisfactory political situation can develop.

At the time our combat forces arrived, the morale in South Vietnam was uncertain but their confidence grew when we began our bombing. This bombing is effective in that it reminds Hanoi of the increasing cost of the war to them. As to the effect of the bombing pause, on balance it was neutral—not all good and not all bad.

As to the press, thanks to the press attache, Barry Zorthian, relations with the correspondents are much better than two years ago. There continue to be a few irresponsible correspondents who cause trouble and have a desire to express things in the negative.

The President: We are getting only bad things from the press.

Mr. Zorthian: A minority of the correspondents cause trouble. Unfortunately, they get more coverage because they work for some of the wire services and some TV networks. Many foreigners represent U.S. press agencies in Saigon. There is a certain amount of advocacy and many of the young correspondents have chips on their shoulders. We should demand that news editors in the United States present a balanced picture in their news reports. AP reporter Arnett is extremely critical of the entire war effort.

Ambassador Harriman: reported on his recent conversations with Kosygin and Tito:

Mr. Kosygin, who speaks for his government, does not want to get the UN involved in the Vietnam problem. He says U.S. bombing will not succeed. As to Soviet influence on Hanoi, he says the Viet Cong are as independent as they say they are.

The Soviets are anxious to avoid war. Their real battle is with the Chinese. They want to maintain the status quo in Europe and in their relations with us.

Tito believes the Chinese are the danger—not because they are Communists but because they are nationalists and imperialists. On Vietnam, he offered no proposals as to how to end the war.

Bromley Smith

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings File, Vol. III. Top Secret; Sensitive; For the President Only. Prepared by Bromley Smith.

111. Memorandum of Conversation 111. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, August 6, 1965, 4:45-5 p.m.

PRESENT

The President, Foreign Minister Quaison-Sackey, the Ambassador of Ghana, Mr. Bill Moyers, Mr. McGeorge Bundy

1. The President greeted the Foreign Minister warmly, and took him and the Ambassador into his small office. He opened the conversation by a friendly reference to the Ambassador's recent trip to Lake Jackson in Texas. The Ambassador reported that he had enjoyed the trip very much and that he looked forward to an opportunity to show this same work on desalinization to the Minister of his Government mainly concerned with these matters. The President told the Foreign Minister that the Ambassador was going to be regarded as a citizen of Texas, and then turned to the Foreign Minister attentively and expectantly.

2. The Foreign Minister said that he brought the President the very warm greetings of President Nkrumah, and a letter.2 He handed the letter to the President. The President joked about the large number of red seals on the letter, produced a pocketknife, opened it carefully, and read it aloud.

3. As soon as he had finished reading the letter, the President gave the Foreign Minister a categorical assurance that no U.S. military operations would interfere with any visit to Hanoi by President Nkrumah. The President said (1) we are not bombing Hanoi, (2) we have not intensified our bombing of North Vietnam, (3) the President will be in no danger, and (4) who is he kidding? (probably referring to Ho, not Nkrumah). The President continued that a peaceful settlement would never be blocked because of any action of the United States. If the aggression ceases, our resistance ceases. Nobody wanted peace more than the United States, and if the efforts of Ghana could get the aggressors to stop, we would stop resistance to the aggression. The President repeated that no one needed to be worried about getting hurt in Hanoi—there was no danger in a visit to Hanoi in search of peace.

4. The President told the Ghanaians that they knew what he thought—that he thought all nations should be happy together—that the world should look forward to a time of peace and progress. The President noted that this had been a great day for progress in the United States, with the signing of the voting rights bill, and his guests enthusiastically agreed, saying that they had seen the ceremony on television and been greatly moved by it.

5. The Foreign Minister said that the reason for the letter was the report of the Ghanaian mission to Hanoi which had experienced some difficulties. It had been given military escort from Peking to Hanoi in a flight which gave rise to some concern. It had heard the sounds of guns on many occasions in Hanoi, and it had advised President Nkrumah not to go to Hanoi at this time. But President Nkrumah wanted very much to go, and he therefore asked whether bombings could not cease for three or four days. Then perhaps he could work for a cessation of all hostilities during peace talks. President Nkrumah felt that he must do all he could for a cease-fire, and this was the explanation for what the Foreign Minister had come to call “the fever-heat diplomacy” of his sudden visit to Washington.

6. The President replied that he was happy to see the Foreign Minister and repeated that the Foreign Minister should return to his President and say (1) that we have not bombed Hanoi and that he need not be frightened, and (2) that if he can get the aggression stopped, there will be peace overnight.

7. The President repeated again that no one wanted peace more than the United States, but he said that no one would be allowed to gobble up little countries. We would stay there and ensure the right of self-determination. We would not run out of there. But the President said once again that President Nkrumah need not be concerned by the bombs that had never fallen on Hanoi.

8. The Foreign Minister raised very gently the question whether the President would wish to receive President Nkrumah either before or after his visit to Hanoi. The President said he thought we should wait until after President Nkrumah got back from Hanoi, and then we would see. So far, visitors in Hanoi had produced no hope from the other side. This matter was left entirely open, but it was made quite plain by omission that the President did not expect to see President Nkrumah before his visit to Hanoi.

9. The President, in closing, made it very clear that he himself thought the North Vietnamese suggestion that President Nkrumah would be in danger was a fraud, and the friendly chuckles of his guests made it appear that they personally did not disagree. It was agreed that the meeting would not be discussed in detail, but that the Press Secretary would give a brief summary of the contents of President Nkrumah's message and of the oral reply which the President had given. The President would send a written reply promptly,3 and it was tentatively agreed that the two letters would be released after the Foreign Minister had carried the reply back and delivered it to President Nkrumah.

10. With exchanges of further best wishes and expressions of regard and satisfaction, the meeting ended. The two visitors had clearly been both impressed and pleased by their reception.4

McG.B.5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII. Confidential. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy on August 11.

2 In this August 4 letter, Nkrumah stated that Ho Chi Minh had informed him that he would not be able to guarantee Nkrumah's safety if he visited Hanoi because of U.S. bombing of North Vietnam. Nkrumah asked for a pause in the bombing to enable him to travel to Hanoi to pursue “this fine opportunity directed towards the achievement of a peaceful settlement in Vietnam.” (Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 277, Ghanaian Mission 1965)

3 On August 6, Johnson sent a letter to Nkrumah, through the Ghanaian Embassy, which summarized the points he had made in his conversation with Quaison-Sackey. (Ibid.)

4 On August 12, Nkrumah sent another letter to Johnson in which he explained that his Foreign Minister had not been privy to all the information that he had received from Hanoi. The information had encouraged him to feel that there was a good possibility that he could broker a negotiated settlement of the conflict. He reviewed the North Vietnamese position, as he understood it, and suggested that he come to Washington to discuss it with Johnson. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII) Johnson replied on August 13 in a letter in which he encouraged Nkrumah again to undertake his mission to Hanoi. He stated, however, that he felt a meeting in Washington was unnecessary until it developed that a firm basis for negotiations had been established. (Ibid.)

5 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

112. Editorial Note 112. Editorial Note

On August 6, 1965, the United States established direct contact with North Vietnam through the North Vietnamese representative in Paris, Mai Van Bo. In response to suggestions from Mai Van Bo, passed through the French Government in May (see volume II, Document 313) and through Urah Arkas-Duntov of the Dreyfus Fund in July (see Document 98), an authorized but unofficial U.S. representative was dispatched to Paris to explore with Bo the possibility of negotiations with North Vietnam. The U.S. representative was retired Ambassador Edmund Gullion, former Deputy Chief of Mission in Saigon. The decision to pursue the negotiating track was very tightly held, and for reasons of security Gullion was referred to in documents relating to the Paris contacts as X, and Mai Van Bo was referred to as Rupert. For records of the four meetings between Gullion and Mai Van Bo, which took place between August 6 and September 1, see Documents 113, 120, 122, and 133. Summaries of this and other documentation on the Paris contacts are in the unpublished portion of United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967 and are printed in George C. Herring (ed.), The Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War: The Negotiating Volumes of the Pentagon Papers, pages 77-107.

Initial talking points and overall objectives, as summarized in United States-Vietnam Relations, were outlined for Gullion before he established contact with Mai Van Bo:

“Initial talking points for X:

“1. These were to be simple and vague, but to set limits in which talks can safely take place.

“2. X was to show desire for peace, and a free, independent, and unified Vietnam.

“3. X was to say that the prolongation of conflict is bound to lead to progressively larger US pressures and long-term China control in NVN.

“4. X was to insist that nothing can force the US out. Indeed, X was to say that pressures in the US to a wider war were growing and that it would be increasingly harder to exercise restraint.

“5. If R[upert] does not seem receptive to a second meeting, then proceed as follows:

“Theme: US is flexible to some degree. See, for example, the President's press conference of 28 July. “a. US ready to discuss the four points.

“b. People of SVN have a right to peace and to determine their own destiny in free elections in SVN or throughout Vietnam under international supervision.

“c. The four points, in some measure, parallel our own. Are we right in assuming these points are not stated as the only basis for starting talks and that other points can be discussed?

“d. The four points mention withdrawal of forces. The US says it will do so once SVN ‘is secure from outside aggression.’

“e. We did not ask SVN to be our ally or to keep US bases there — although a ‘sovereign government should have the right to call for help if necessary in its own self-defense.’

“f. US is not opposed to unification ‘at some future time under democratic processes.’

“Purpose of X's mission:

“Primary—To ascertain whether any serious purpose to negotiate exists and, if so, on what basis? Secondary—R as possible contact? Third—clarify the four points (prerequisite or best basis, timing on unification and elections, a settlement in accord with NLF program, timing on withdrawal). Fourth—Collateral intelligence (DRV attitude on the Indian proposal, UN, China, NLF, and the possible use of Laos and Cambodia as a gambit for talks).” (Herring, Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War, page 97)

Regarding the President's press conference of July 28, see Document 98. For text of the four points outlined on April 8 by Pham Van Dong as a basis for a peace settlement, see volume II, Document 245; excerpts from his address before the United National Assembly, during which he set forth the four points, are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pages 852-853. The Indian and Yugoslav initiative calling for an international conference to resolve the conflict in Vietnam was advanced in a joint communique on August 1; see Document 102.

113. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 113. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State1

Paris, August 6, 1965, 8:50 p.m.

718. Literally eyes only for Ball from Ambassador. X made contact with Rupert2 without intermediaries and had two hour preliminary conversation with him this afternoon with no others present. Following are principal points: 1. Rupert took line similar to that he has used with previous interlocutors. This interesting to degree that he was aware on basis Rupert's introduction that report would probably go straight to official quarters. X believes that Rupert's comments to him were made on instructions.

2. X adhered to script, points 1 through 15,3 at which point Rupert obviously ready to say little until other shoe dropped. Confirmed that situation was as X described it but problem was what to do about it. His country wanted only peace, had been obliged to fight against foreign domination for twenty years and had maintained its independence for thousands of years with only slight interruptions. He did not agree or disagree with X's direr predictions but appeared depressed by prospects.

3. Before continuing per script and discussing conceivable variants Dong's four points X asked whether Hanoi ready to consider discussions or negotiations touching not only on these but also on other points; whether withdrawal of forces was pre-condition of negotiations or discussions (in which case X judged no chance); what modalities Rupert could envisage for re-unification; whether and when the UN could be accepted as “interlocuteur valable”; and if not who would be acceptable. X noted that the “four points” referred several times to the “zones” of Vietnam, seeming to envisage separation for longer or shorter time. X also claimed that Peking originally broadcast four points without the conjoint declaration and always gave Hanoi's position a harder line aspect than Hanoi did. X did not raise question of representation of Liberation Front.

4. Rupert seemed to see this as getting down to cases, appeared slightly agitated, went to his office and brought back notes from which he spoke (from instructions?). Re troop withdrawal he stressed that any “solution” must of course include it, but confirmed that there would be “modalities” including staging and timing. Even convening of discussions should stipulate withdrawal as one of objects.

5. As to UN, Rupert said Conference of Geneva was “a valid international instance” and the accords “a valid base”. The Geneva mechanism brought together the interested countries, which was absolutely necessary to a settlement. Rupert said categorically that his country rejected any intervention of the UN despite X's suggestion that U Thant or member states might limit their activities to good offices.

6. With respect to unification Rupert said Geneva Accords themselves provided for “zones” but accords also recognized Vietnam as constituted by a single people. Rupert contemplated short or considerably longer interval before reunification but stressed latter could only be on basis of free decision and consultation between Vietnamese people; charged that Ngo Dinh Diem backed by U.S. had blocked elections. This couldn't be allowed to happen again, said Rupert, but he gave no sign that elections had to occur soon. Pending reunification Rupert said they wanted freer movement between zones, more trade, etc. (X infers that there are differences possibly existing between north and south which might influence attitude of north, which would not however drop its insistence on long term unification and would be confident of achieving it.)

7. Rupert raised question of representation of national front, declared it solely qualified to represent the south. X merely cited public statements this point by Secretary and President.

8. Re Pham Van Dong's four points, Rupert betrayed interest in X's allegations concerning Chinese treatment of them. (Documentation on this would be useful; Rupert also nodded head once or twice in response to references by X to China in his opening discourse.) He was, however, much less clear on relation of four points as a package to convening of a possible conference than he was on other points cited above. (X believes there may be semantic confusion in Rupert's mind or between Paris and Hanoi, or perhaps more substantive disagreement between factions of Hanoi Government on this point.) Rupert said that principles incorporated in the four points “must be recognized as creating the possibilities for a solution.” However, he also called them the only “right base for a correct solution”. X pointed out that Rupert had referred to Geneva Accords and Geneva Conference as “a” possible machinery or basis, but that he seemed to be stipulating acceptance of the four points as “the” (i.e., exclusive) base. Rupert finally said there was a difference between what was required for a discussion (or negotiation) and what was required for a settlement. There couldn't be a settlement without recognition of the principles within the four points.

9. Re “interlocuteur valable”, Rupert refused to pick up references to either Ghana or France; or the Commonwealth; he referred solely to Geneva machinery; he also claimed to be confused by President Johnson's total of fifteen efforts to negotiate and the interest of some “forty” countries in a settlement.4 X took occasion review many of these orally. He observed that Rupert seemed slightly discomfited by particular reference to abortive Cambodian and Laotian conferences.

10. At this point, and speaking from a handwritten text,5 Rupert said he wished to ask X, “who seemed to be in position to know U.S. Government thinking”, what its reaction would be to whole series of questions. X judged best to reply by citing possible variation on four points which he said had been written only by him but on basis his appreciation of what might be in minds of his friends in Department; he again stressed this not official but might help to clarify. Rupert took note of many of these points but X left no text.6

12. In conclusion, Rupert said his views were those of “Vietnamese Government” taking occasion to point out X's not necessarily those of U.S. Government. Rupert said his policy to try to insure understanding his government's views and indicated contacts with X “could” be continued. When X replied he going out of town Rupert asked when he would return and suggested Wednesday or Thursday7 for possible next contact. He advised meeting be arranged by leaving note rather than through telephone or intermediaries.

13. General impression: Rupert is serious and appears professionally reliable contact. He aware that follow-up might be pursued by persons other than X. Latter believes discussions could be moved or would be moved to negotiating level, if that is desired, in degree that variations on four points are introduced with increasing degree of official standing.

14. Time of next meeting with Rupert could be advanced but it will probably take him several days to hear from his principals.8

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET/XYZ. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; XYZ. Drafted by Gullion and cleared by Bohlen. See Document 112 for background information on the “XYZ” contacts.

2 “X” refers to Edmund Gullion and “Rupert” to Mai Van Bo.

3 Presumably a reference to Gullion's instructions; see Document 112.

4 In his July 28 press conference, President Johnson stated: “Fifteen efforts have been made to start these discussions with the help of 40 nations throughout the world, but there has been no answer.” See Document 98.

5 Not further identified.

6 For text of Sturm's version of the four points, see Herring, Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War, p. 97.

7 August 11 or 12.

8 The source text bears no signature. See Document 120 for the record of the next meeting.

114. Telegram From the National Security Council Executive Secretary (Smith) to President Johnson, at Camp David, Maryland 114. Telegram From the National Security Council Executive Secretary (Smith) to President Johnson, at Camp David, Maryland1

Washington, August 7, 1965, 12:43 p.m.

CAP 65479. Goldberg's report on his talk in New York yesterday with U.N. Security Council members:

Goldberg, Plimpton and Yost met for one hour this afternoon with non-permanent Security Council members Ramani (Malaysia), Velazquez (Uruguay), Aka (Ivory Coast), Quarles (Netherlands), Scott-Murga (Bolivia), Rifai (Jordan).

Ramani opened meeting by stating US letter to Security Council2 placed obligation for action on members. Vietnam is new subject not on Security Council agenda and letter cannot simply be filed. Those present therefore would appreciate clarification as to US intentions and objectives.

Goldberg explained at some length rationale for President's letter to Secretary-General2 and his letter to Security Council, emphasizing our central objective is to bring issue out of battlefield to negotiating table, welcoming any initiatives by Security Council members, collectively or individually, but expressing agreement with Secretary-General's view that Security Council meeting at this time would not be productive. He also stressed that our letter was seriously meant, was in no sense intended as propaganda maneuver, was in fulfillment our Charter obligation to keep Security Council informed, was certainly not designed to put Security Council members on the spot but rather to elicit from them any initiatives or assistance which may lead to negotiations.

We welcome all efforts, he said, to find way to negotiations and honorable settlement, including those by Quaison-Sackey, Tito, Shastri, Nasser and other Africans. Most of all we count on Secretary-General and hope Security Council members will assist him, as well as taking any independent steps toward mediation and conciliation they may feel would be constructive.

Rifai was only non-permanent member who commented at some length. He recognized sincerity of US appeal to Security Council and welcomed it, pointing out he had favored bringing question to Security Council in April but had gotten no positive reaction then. He mentioned he is meeting with Secretary-General today. He would not fear polemical debate in Security Council if something constructive came out of it. He would not, however, wish to go into Security Council meeting without prior understanding where we would come out. There is, moreover, no point in Security Council adopting decision if that decision would not be accepted by interested parties not present in Security Council. If these parties would not come to Security Council, he believed effort should be made to obtain their prior acquiescence to action Security Council would take. He hoped to have further discussion among those present and with others as to what should come out of a Security Council meeting, such as conditions of settlement, organ that carries out settlement, etc. Without disregarding outside efforts he would much prefer that the UN, and in particular, the Security Council find solution in order to strengthen future peacekeeping. He was aware US appeal to Security Council had aroused interest not only of this group but of other Security Council and UN members. He closed by saying he would like to discuss more details later.

Both Velazquez and Quarles asked, if no Security Council meeting were held, what other action could Security Council take.

Goldberg replied that there is nothing in Charter which limits Security Council action to meeting and voting. Conciliation and mediation are not excluded from Security Council jurisdiction. In commenting on Rifai's statement Goldberg said US would of course welcome Security Council playing important role in solution and that is why appeal to it had been made.

Velazquez inquired whether US, having in mind Security Council should not meet on this issue, intends to bring it before General Assembly. Goldberg replied that we still have some time before General Assembly meets in which to consider that possibility but that, since Security Council is organ primarily dealing with peace and security it should not be downgraded by having matter prematurely taken out of its hands.

Aka agreed with Goldberg that it is most desirable to give Secretary-General time and help in finding solution before resorting to Security Council meeting.

Ramani closed meeting by saying he wished later to discuss other aspects of problem with Goldberg, having in mind special Malaysian interests because of geographic proximity.

All members expressed appreciation for meeting and for Goldberg's frankness.

It is our impression that these expressions were genuine and that meeting was very useful even though no concrete proposals emerged.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXVIII, Cables. Secret. Received at 3:55 p.m. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the telegram.

2 See footnote 8, Document 99.

115. Editorial Note 115. Editorial Note

On August 9, 1965, McGeorge Bundy sent a memorandum to President Johnson outlining strategy for Gullion's (X) next meeting in Paris with Mai Van Bo (R), which was scheduled for August 15. The memorandum, which has not been located in the holdings of the Johnson Library, is summarized in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967:

“Talking points for next X meeting with R:

“1. Let R do the talking this time and see if there is any give in his position.

“2. Make clear U.S. interest in ‘unconditional Geneva Conference.’

“3. Instructions: “a. Purpose—set stage for formal negotiations if possible.

“b. Seek a no preconditions Geneva Conference and timing thereof.

“c. On NLF—Throw ball in R's court. What would he suggest, recognizing the U.S. view on negotiations between governments?

“d. Stress that the sole reason for the U.S. presence in SVN is North Vietnamese infiltration of men and supplies. If infiltration stops, the U.S. will go home. This is a matter for Hanoi and no one else. Withdrawal of all forces must be the product of negotiations, not the preliminary.

“e. If R brings up bombing, say that U.S. must view ‘suspension or cessation in the context of adequate reciprocal actions.’

“f. Would R want conference on Vietnam alone, or Vietnam plus Laos and Cambodia? How would he want the conference convened—by invitation from the co-chairmen, privately, publicly, or by direct US-Vietnamese means?

“g. U.S. envisages no NLF role as a right in SVN. Is this really a precondition of the DRV?

“h. Pick up R's suggestion about greater contacts between the zones.” (Herring, Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War, page 98)

116. Memorandum From the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) to President Johnson 116. Memorandum From the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) to President Johnson1

New York, August 9, 1965.

PAUSE IN U.S. BOMBING OF NORTH VIETNAM

The question of another, more extended suspension of US aerial attacks against North Vietnam deserves urgent consideration. The drawbacks are obvious but the advantages have perhaps not been fully explored.

If, contrary to present indications, Hanoi should, in response to some of the mediation efforts now getting under way, indicate a general interest in beginning negotiations in the near future, another temporary suspension of US bombing might greatly facilitate the effort to get negotiations started by arming one of the many possible mediators at hand with convincing proof that the US desire for negotiations is sincere.

The best course would probably be a decision by the United States, in conjunction with a meaningful mediation effort, along the following lines:

To pause in further air attacks against targets in North Vietnam for the reasonable limited period of time required to support a reasonable mediation effort to determine whether the North Vietnamese authorities are prepared to enter into unconditional negotiations for a peaceful settlement. If there were no appreciable progress within a limited time, we would resume bombing. We would, of course, exclude an open-ended commitment to halt bombing indefinitely, as long as negotiations continued; we must avoid repeating our experience in Korea in this regard.

1. Action in Response to an Appeal. We could make a declaration of this character in response to an appeal by one of the world leaders now considering Viet Nam initiatives (e.g., the Secretary General, Tito, Shastri or, less desirably, Nasser or Nkrumah). The action taken would be separate and distinct from a possible briefer pause in bombing during a four-day visit to Hanoi by Nkrumah; Quaison-Sackey mentioned the four-day period to me on Saturday morning.2

If we are to share the credit with anyone (i.e., by responding to an appeal), the best choice would be the Secretary General. He has urged on us previously an appeal for a cessation of hostilities; by responding to an appeal from him, we would thereby reaffirm our support of the UN and tend to keep it in the picture. It would be a logical follow up to your letter of July 28 asking the SYG to play a role.3 It would arm him with the means to probe the other side. This would facilitate a subsequent move on our part to involve the UN in the role of supervising or policing a negotiated settlement. Rejection by Hanoi of an appeal from the Secretary General would do more damage to the Communists' international position than would their rejection of a unilateral US declaration.

2. Private Message. An alternative to responding to an outside appeal would be a private message to Hanoi indicating that we would stop bombing for a reasonable period if it is prepared to enter into unconditional negotiations for a peaceful settlement. While a private message would deprive us at the outset of public credit for an important peace initiative, our initiative would ultimately become public knowledge, whether or not it had succeeded. Hanoi might find it easier to respond affirmatively to such a private message than to an appeal from, say, the Secretary General. It would not require Hanoi to respond publicly—and any public response would entail Hanoi's eating a certain amount of crow in the eyes of its domestic and foreign audiences; rather, it could respond through private, concrete actions which would demonstrate its desire to move toward negotiations.

Whether it is decided to implement a limited pause in air strikes through a third-party intermediary or a direct private message to Hanoi, it will be necessary to emphasize the following points:

That the pause is a genuine effort to facilitate negotiations and reduce the dangers of escalation;

That a response must come from Hanoi within a reasonable time;

That we are ready to discuss a general cease-fire involving mutual concessions as a first item in the negotiations;

But that we are serious in our intention to resume the aerial attacks if there is no forthcoming response from Hanoi.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXIII, Cables. Secret. Goldberg sent this memorandum to the President on August 9, under cover of a letter in which he represented it as describing “how I believe a pause in the bombing of North Vietnam might be utilized in support of a mediation effort to determine whether we can get Hanoi to start unconditional discussions.” He noted that he had also sent copies of the memorandum to Rusk and McNamara, and he offered to discuss it with the President at his convenience. (Ibid.)

2 August 7.

3 See footnote 8, Document 99.

117. Memorandum of Conversation 117. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, August 10, 1965, 5:30-6:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

White House—

Bill Moyers

Chester Cooper

Defense—

Arthur Sylvester

Orville Splitt

USIA—

John Chancellor

Barry Zorthian

State—

James L. Greenfield

William J. Jorden

Abba Schwartz

Leonard Meeker

Frank Sieverts

Mr. Moyers opened the discussion by reviewing previous meetings on Viet-Nam information problems.2 He said the President gives this subject very high priority and wants to do what is right. He noted that Barry Zorthian will be given a new position in the Embassy with responsibility for press and information matters, thus removing USIA from the direct line of authority over military news in Viet-Nam.3 He was looking for ideas of other specific, practical things that could be done to improve public understanding of events in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Greenfield said that the news reports of U.S. soldiers setting fire to Vietnamese villages and related incidents are causing very serious problems here and abroad. We have to recognize that there exists a double standard, that such incidents are considered more serious if Americans, rather than South Vietnamese, are responsible. In view of the extensive press and media coverage in Viet-Nam stories and pictures like these will continue to appear as long as the incidents occur. Alleged maltreatment of Vietnamese civilians and civilian facilities is a moral and humanitarian concern for many Americans. We must recognize this as a serious, long-run problem.

Mr. Chancellor referred to previous meetings in which the importance of making the American people aware of the changing character of war was stressed. The new kind of “twilight” war we are fighting in Viet-Nam requires more maturity, sophistication, and patience from the American people than previous wars. He said we need to find ways to build the necessary understanding of our involvement in Viet-Nam, an involvement that may well be repeated elsewhere in the years to come. Simple aggressive patriotism wasn't enough. You can't just “kill Japs” in a war like this one. We should work on editors and other opinion-influencers to show them that the habits of mind left over from World War II and Korea are not adequate for understanding this war.

Mr. Sylvester stressed the problem of unfriendly correspondents in Viet-Nam, particularly foreigners, including some who work for U.S. news agencies and media. Some of these individuals are known to be less than fully sympathetic with our efforts and appear to miss no chance to embarrass us. The present concern about the village burned near Da Nang arose largely out of a CBS-TV film made and narrated by Morley Safer, a Canadian subject. The incident depicted in the film was not typical, so even if it was not staged (a possibility he did not rule out) it was a distortion since it conveyed an inaccurate impression. He noted that some reporters fail to tell the full story when they depict U.S. forces in action. They don't give equal time to the facts of Viet Cong atrocities, and they fail to point out that villages burned are Viet Cong strongholds, and that “civilians” who appear to be maltreated are Viet Cong personnel who may have killed U.S. or GVN forces.

Mr. Sylvester also said he thought it was important to take steps to inform our personnel of the press problem stemming from such pictures and stories, so that they don't lend themselves to this kind of coverage in the course of carrying out their missions. He said there was a need to provide better information officers in Viet-Nam. As one step in that direction he was considering sending his Special Assistant for Viet-Nam Col. Rodger Bankson as over-all coordinator of military information, with rank of Brigadier General.

Mr. Greenfield said we couldn't pull a curtain on the problem. There were too many reporters covering this war. It isn't just a problem of a few bad apples. We have to get used to fighting in the open. This is a new kind of war, a war in which the basic goal is people, not territory. You can't win the people in Viet-Nam by burning their villages. This may have worked at Iwo Jima, but it won't work in Viet-Nam. We have to take steps to prevent these things from happening, not just to make sure reporters don't see them.

Mr. Meeker said the International Committee of the Red Cross was about to enter the picture. The Secretary of State and the Vietnamese Government were about to send letters indicating that the United States and South Viet-Nam would cooperate with the ICRC. The ICRC will want to take an active role in Viet-Nam. Therefore we should: 1. Instruct our troops in the field to conduct themselves in conformity with the Geneva convention and accepted standards of warfare (without hampering their efforts to prosecute the war); and

2. Publicly demonstrate our concern that the rules of war be observed in Viet-Nam. This should be accomplished by publicizing our willingness to cooperate with the Red Cross, and the Viet Cong-North Viet-Nam unwillingness to do likewise. We should call on the other side to mark their hospitals, permit inspection of prison camps, etc. We should also publicize directives and guidelines given to our troops in the field.

Mr. Cooper said we were dealing with a deeply important problem that goes beyond public relations. At issue here is how the war should be fought. We should examine carefully the usefulness of such actions as bombing raids by the VNAF and our own planes against Vietnamese villages. Our object is not so much to destroy an enemy as to win a people. We must make sure our military operations are in fact productive. If burning a village provides the VC with a hundred additional recruits then that action is counterproductive in basic military terms. He agreed that this is a difficult war to fight, but that is no reason not to deal with these incidents as a problem in and of themselves.

Mr. Cooper also asked about the Vietnamese interpreters who assist U.S. and foreign correspondents. Is there any way of checking to make sure they aren't slanting their advice in favor of the Viet Cong. Could the Ministry of Information run careful checks on these interpreters?

Mr. Zorthian said the interpreters were accredited by MACV after a check by the GVN, but such procedures don't mean much in Saigon.

Mr. Moyers said he was considering meeting with the heads of the major wire services, to discuss the nature of the war and ask for a balanced view of it. We would suggest that they assign better, more mature reporters, preferably U.S. nationals. Such an approach had obvious risks but was worth considering. It might also be worth approaching editors and columnists in a similar vein. He hoped the series of backgrounders for editors and top media people Ambassador Taylor was undertaking in major cities at the President's request would help.

Mr. Zorthian said better military information personnel were essential. He hoped the marines would get a good one not just someone who saw his job as promoting the leatherneck image. As for the village burning problem, it might be best to have orders issued that no villages should be attacked except under very exceptional circumstances. Also, better Vietnamese liaison personnel should be attached to U.S. units in the field.

Mr. Zorthian raised the question of censorship. The present system of voluntary cooperation is working fairly well. But some high officials favor full field censorship.

Mr. Greenfield pointed out that no system of censorship would prevent stories like the village burning or the CBS-TV film. Censorship dealt with questions of military security, not public relations. He suspected some of those who favor censorship saw it as a way to prevent these inconvenient stories. But it would not work that way.

Mr. Moyers asked that memoranda be prepared for the President setting forth what should be done in Saigon and in Washington that we are not now doing to deal with these problems. They should be completed by COB Friday.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Public Affairs Policy Committee. Confidential. The meeting was held in Moyers' office. The source text bears no drafting information.

2 See Document 105.

3 In a telephone conversation with Rusk on August 9, Califano indicated that the President wanted to make Zorthian the Ambassador's Special Assistant for Public Affairs, and bring under him anyone dealing with public affairs in Vietnam. The President's idea was to have Zorthian put out all the news. He felt that this would increase Zorthian's prestige with the public and the press, and make him the Bill Moyers of Saigon. (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

118. Memorandum From the Ambassador-Designate to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson 118. Memorandum From the Ambassador-Designate to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson1

Washington, August 11, 1965.

1. Spent one-half hour with General Eisenhower as you requested.

2. He opposes “dribbling” forces into Viet Nam little by little and favors using adequate forces at once to do the job. He opposes American troops “living in the jungle” saying “we don't know how to live there”. He approves development of strong points along the coast. He wants no formal announcements of total U.S. troop strength. Such announcements give the Viet Cong a pretext to raise their demands on Hanoi, Peking and Moscow. I understand all the above has been conveyed to you already by General Goodpaster.2

3. He stressed the overriding importance of Viet Nam wanting to be free. We should do everything to inculcate such a desire. They must have “heart” or, after we have achieved a successful outcome, they will slump right back. It would be tragic if a successful outcome were followed by an election in which the people voted for the Viet Cong. I told him our plans regarding Lansdale were aimed precisely at such a contingency. He suggested a scheme whereby there would be immediate delivery, “using old C-47's”, to small communities of rice, fish, medicines, or other morale boosting goods to be flown in promptly for distribution by local chiefs. I told him we had this in mind and that I believed AID was set to make such local distribution.3

H.C. Lodge

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, President Eisenhower. Confidential. There is an indication on the source text that Johnson saw the memorandum.

2 See Document 104.

3 Goodpaster briefed Eisenhower again on August 20, at President Johnson's request. Goodpaster reviewed military developments in Vietnam and stressed the continuity of Vietnam policy from the Eisenhower to Johnson administration. (Memorandum for the record, August 20; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Eisenhower Briefing)

119. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 119. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, August 12, 1965, 5:22 p.m.

342. For the Secretary from Ambassador Goldberg. Vietnam. I believe we should respond in a forthcoming and constructive way to the SYG's proposals contained in memo on Vietnam he handed me today.2

Memo states objective as a settlement based on a “return to the essentials of the 1954 Geneva Agreements”. Within this framework SYG suggests two propositions as a basis for settlement: (1) military neutralization of Vietnam involving withdrawal of all foreign troops; and (2) elections under international supervision as established in the Geneva Agreements (we assume this means ICC machinery which would hardly be an effective instrumentality) as a basis for possible reunification at a later stage.

SYG suggests we conduct private explorations “on his personal responsibility” (this is the same distinction Hammarskjold made between his position as SYG and he as a person when he undertook his trip to Peking to free the American fliers)3 in order to probe detailed positions of respective parties. He envisages these private dialogues as a preliminary step toward convening a Geneva conf, at which point Saigon and reps of the NLF would participate.

He also proposes a cessation of all military operations by all sides, as an undertaking prior to the formal convening of the Geneva conf. He suggests that either a public appeal by himself or private probes by himself or others might be a way to determine whether a cease-fire could be achieved.

While SYG's memo will have to be studied in Dept with great care, it offers us opportunity to respond positively, consistent with the Pres's call for unconditional discussion, and to encourage SYG to continue his informal explorations.4 It will be further evidence of our willingness to seriously engage the UN in the Vietnam matter. While Hanoi and Peking may continue to react negatively to the SYG's involvement, memo might at least provide handle for Sovs to become more active in dialogue with us through the SYG as well as with Hanoi and Peking.

I hope therefore Dept can arm me with short letter or memo to give to SYG promptly which makes whatever limited reservations we feel we need to make on certain substantive points, but placing primary emphasis on getting SYG to press informally for clarification from the other side on what the component elements of the de facto cease-fire would include.5

Goldberg

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis.

2 The text of this memorandum, which was also conveyed to the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, France, Canada, India, Poland, China, North Vietnam, and South Vietnam, was transmitted to the Department of State in telegram 340 from USUN, August 12. (Ibid.)

3 For documentation on Hammarskjold's mission to Peking, January 5-10, 1955, see Public Papers of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations, Vol. II, Dag Hammarskjold, 1953-1956, pp. 415-459.

4 Goldberg telephoned Rusk at 1:34 p.m. on August 12. He summarized Thant's memorandum and told Rusk that U.S. allies at the United Nations felt that the U.S. appeal for Security Council action held out better prospects for success. He added that he was returning to Washington that evening and would brief Rusk at greater length on the initiative on the following day. (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

5 In telegram 250 to USUN, August 13, 10:53 p.m., Rusk sent a copy of a message sent to the President at the LBJ Ranch summarizing Thant's initiative. In the message to the President, the Department proposed returning a generally encouraging reply to the Secretary-General and stating that “we believe it would be highly desirable for you to send a personal message to the Secretary-General—purely procedural in nature—encouraging him to continue his private explorations and assuring him of US cooperation.” (Ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

120. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 120. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State1

Paris, August 13, 1965.

Literally eyes only for Ball. In one and one-half hour conversation with X this afternoon Rupert was rigid, even retrograde, in comparison with first meeting. This possibly tactics and possibly connected with appearance Ho Chi Minh interview. X considers it useful to hold third talk if only for purposes of record and to allow for any changes of position which may yet occur in interval. However, if more flexibility is not then manifested X believes his mission should be suspended.

1. X began by reading from Paris papers2 and Reston's recent columns certain references to growing pressures upon President for drastic and conclusive military action. Rupert replied mildly that his government understood “lobbies and pressure groups” in America but it was not these which would decide the issue of war.

2. X asked if Rupert had developed any thoughts since last meeting, particularly with respect to X's version of four points3 which were undoubtedly pretty close to position of U.S. Government leaders. Rupert had indeed reflected and wished to know “what U.S. thought of Pham Van Dong's four points”. X said he thought this had been covered but he reviewed position, as per earlier report. Rupert then stated that X's version did not constitute the basis for a correct solution.

3. At this point (and at least three times thereafter) X tried to pin Rupert down on whether Hanoi's points had to be accepted in toto before conference could be convened. Rupert was more negative than at previous meeting. He assured X that his principals understood point U.S. trying to clarify but that Hanoi's four points had to be taken as “base.” Despite this statement Rupert could not be brought to say categorically one thing or the other with respect to whether or to what extent substance of Hanoi's points had to be stipulated or accepted in advance of the meeting.

4. Rupert said his government believed a “conference of the Geneva type” should be held; whether it should be convened sooner or later depended upon the Americans. X replied that his friends also thought a conference of the Geneva type was desirable if it could be held without pre-conditions. Such a conference he said might deal with Vietnam or with a general examination of conditions under the Geneva and subsequent accords, or with Laos, or with Cambodia. Impression in U.S. was that Cambodian conference project4 aborted because of Hanoi/Peking insistence on FNL as representative of South Vietnam. Rupert asserted Hanoi had not taken this position but had merely gone along with Prince Sihanouk's insistence on FNL. X urged Rupert to check record and said his recollection was that Sihanouk had altered his attitude ending with willingness to see SVN represented by Saigon or by FNL or both and in a variety of combinations. Anyway, X continued, if the Cambodian setting created difficulty conference could be related to other subjects. Rupert had no reply to this but switched to question of FNL.

5. Hanoi had noted President Johnson's reference to some formula for meeting with FNL5 but it was up to U.S. to give concrete details. FNL, Rupert said, bore brunt of struggle, controlled four-fifths of the territory, was suffering “massacres and destruction” while whole world knew Saigon Government represented nothing. X observed that Saigon also had carried on fight for twenty years, its soldiers now fighting and dying, and hundred of thousands of refugees were fleeing Hanoi-controlled regions. Discussion on this point, however, said X, was sterile. Rupert and he should set themselves task of exploring possibility of convening useful meeting. What for example, were obstacles which Rupert saw to such a meeting?

6. Rupert again signally failed to cite U.S. bombing as an obstacle; he did say that U.S. must leave Vietnam alone to work out its destiny without interference; claimed that President Johnson recently said U.S. must remain in Vietnam and could never leave it, which X vigorously denied. In response Rupert's query what U.S. objectives in Vietnam were, X emphasized again that they were those stipulated in Geneva Accords. He also cited his version of Hanoi's four points, particularly numbers three and four, to stress U.S. desire to see self-determination and unification of Vietnam; he emphasized that if there were no North Vietnamese troops or arms in Hanoi U.S. ready to put its policies to the test (i.e., self-determination by Vietnamese and possible non-alignment), and would be ready to begin withdrawals. He said these would have to be phased and balanced with pullback of North Vietnamese. Rupert indicated agreement with idea of balance and verification. He asked if this was what X had meant by “redeploiement” in his version of four points. He then claimed that “these accusations” of North Vietnamese activity in Vietnam were only recent whereas U.S. had begun to sabotage the situation as far back as '54 with the Ngo Dinh Diem operation and sending advisers. X replied that there were other forms of interference, including intimidation, subversion, terrorism, Chinese influence. To latter Rupert countered that Vietnam had defended its independence for thousands of years and X need not worry.

7. At this point X remarked discussion so far provided little prospect for constructive work. He reviewed his understanding of Rupert's position, which he said was apparently more negative than previously. He reiterated that his friends in U.S. would be ready for Geneva-type conference which would certainly take Pham van Dong's program as point of departure; provided this conference were without pre-condition or ultimata. After all we were not in position of French after Dien Bien Phu and in fact possessed fantastic strength we hoped not to use. Hanoi surely could not expect U.S. to accept a conference which stipulated prior acceptance of its points, or which was to be preceded by U.S. troop withdrawals or which obliged us to desert our allies by setting up FNL as sole negotiator. X thought his version of four points if picked up by U.S., as it well might be, represented a very forthcoming effort. He asked again whether Rupert had carefully noted these and whether they had been under study (mis a l'etude). Rupert confirmed that they had.

8. At this point Rupert meaningfully asked whether X had seen declaration by Ho Chi Minh in today's Le Monde in response to written questions from Philippe Devillers.6 (X had not and it would have been hardly possible for him to have done so since paper was only just reaching subscribers at time of interview. It is possibly significant that X had seen Devillers shortly before leaving U.S.) Ho Chi Minh's declaration, said Rupert, represented his government's position and my answer to X. (Timing and Rupert's manner implied possible connection between release of Ho Chi Minh's statement at this time and conversations between Rupert and X.)

9. X asked if it might not be possible for Rupert and him to come to grips with semantics and problem of agenda by envisioning terms in which an initiative on conference might be announced, e.g., “… in order to secure and preserve fundamental right of Vietnamese people, etc., as affirmed in Geneva Accords a meeting of Geneva conferees to be held which would take up Pham Van Dong's four points and other propositions.” Rupert nodded agreement to first part of phrase, disagreement to its ending.

10. Finally, X professed himself discouraged and puzzled at Rupert's greater rigidity. He hoped history would not record that he and Rupert had failed in their duty to seize present opportunity. Said he was not offering any threats but begged Rupert to reflect on devastation which might be unleashed if war escalated. No one who had not seen U.S. power could imagine its full potential. To avert this his friends in U.S. earnestly desired to move the confrontation from the battlefield to the diplomatic table.

11. X said he must now begin to doubt utility of continuing conversations but probably should be one more contact before he obliged to return home. In one of very few positive developments Rupert was eager to have a further meeting in case he said there should be “some change in the points of confrontation”. X said he must return home Tuesday or Wednesday.7 Rupert is moving out of his flat but said he would inform X where next meeting should be held.

12. General impressions and recommendations: (a) Despite negative atmosphere, it could be that stiffening of Rupert's attitude was the obvious thing for him to do tactically. Also whole meeting was held under shadow of Ho Chi Minh's declaration.

(b) X believes he went about as far as it is possible to go, without giving impression of U.S. weakness, in exhibiting U.S. readiness to negotiate under various formulae and in various combinations. He established beyond doubt that the alternate version of Hanoi's four points had been studied and rejected by Hanoi. It is still too early to say, however, that this rejection is final.

(c) Points on which there seem to be some flexibility on part of Hanoi are with respect to troop withdrawals and FNL representation. (X believes Rupert himself would envision ancillary negotiating role for FNL; he inquired how U.S. had dealt with Red China at international conferences.) Less flexibility than before shown on agenda for conference but this may reflect impact of Ho Chi Minh's declaration.

(d) Before next meeting may be desirable to have: (1) statement of X's friends' position on Ho's declaration, especially in relation to Ruperttalks; (2) any further version of four points; (3) a brief formulation X might use as his suggestion along lines of 9 above. This would have virtue of eliminating semantic confusion as source of division, smoking out Viets and making the record of U.S. attitude unmistakable.8

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET/XYZ. Top Secret; Nodis; XYZ. The source text is a copy that was enclosed in a letter from Springsteen to McBride, November 3, together with copies of telegrams reporting on Gullion's (“X”) meetings with Mai Van Bo (“Rupert”) on August 18 and September 1. The copies do not include telegram numbers or times of transmission or receipt. Springsteen transmitted these copies and other documents to McBride at the request of Sturm (“Y”) so that they would be available to Sturm in Paris. In United States-Vietnam Relations, the meeting described in this telegram is incorrectly dated August 15. (Herring, Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War, p. 100)

2 Not further identified.

3 See Document 113. For text, see Herring, Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War, p. 97.

4 Reference is to the March 15 Cambodian proposal to reconvene the Geneva Conference of 1954 to consider the question of the neutrality and territorial integrity of Cambodia. See American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 715-716.

5 In his July 28 press conference, President Johnson stated that the Viet Cong “would have no difficulty being represented” in negotiations “if Hanoi for a moment decides she wants to cease aggression.” See Document 97.

6 Ho Chi Minh's responses to Devillers' questions appeared in an issue of Le Monde apparently distributed on the afternoon of August 13. In its August 14 issue, The New York Times carried an article datelined Paris, August 13, stating that the interview was published “today in Le Monde.” The text of the interview was broadcast in English over Hanoi radio on August 15. Ho Chi Minh stated that the “U.S. Government must give tangible proofs that it accepts the four-point stand of the Government of the DRV.” For text, see Herring, Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War, p. 99.

7 August 17 or 18.

8 The source text bears no signature.

121. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 121. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 17, 1965.

505. For the President.

1. Probably the most important political development of the week was an interview with Buddhist bonze, Tri Quang, in a Hong Kong paper denouncing the Directory government in general and General Thieu in particular. On the military front, the most notable development was that the MACV estimate of VC losses (1,330 killed in action) was the highest since the war began here.

2. The Hong Kong Far Eastern Economic Review interview with Tri Quang quoted him as having said “the people” were against the government and he was also against the government, as well as saying that he hoped the war could be stopped as soon as possible by a cease fire or “by any negotiations which would have the peoples' support”. He was also quoted as saying that a small country like Vietnam could rely only on itself and “certainly on no outsider”. Tri Quang may claim to have been misquoted as he did following an earlier interview with the same correspondent, but the sentiments attributed to him with respect to the government are consistent with what he has recently been telling Embassy officers. It is harder to interpret his enigmatic remarks with respect to the war. Not many weeks ago, he was privately telling visitors that we should pursue the war more vigorously, bombing the north harder and even taking on the Chinese Communists. Thus, I do not think that we should conclude that he is swinging toward “neutralism”, that is, negotiations with the Liberation Front for a coalition government. It is also too early to say what form his opposition to the government may take. A few days ago, he told us that he had discouraged the forming of demonstrations in Hue having anti-government character.

3. Ky and his party took off for Taipei early Sunday morning,2 will be going directly from there to Bangkok, and returning here next Saturday or Sunday. I had a good talk with him before he left, both on his trip and some other matters including the “Chieu Hoi” program, treatment of prisoners taken in combat and land reform. I do not feel that the substance of what he does in Taipei will cause us any problem but, given his propensity for flamboyant statements, I will not make the same prediction for what he says publicly.

4. Our people in the field feel that there has been some improvement in popular attitudes as a result of the recent military successes and that popular aversion to the VC continues somewhat to increase although this does not necessarily translate itself into active commitment to or support for the GVN.

5. On the military side, not only were the VC losses highest ever but the ratio to friendly troops killed (214) was a little better than six to one. The other indicators were also good with more VC and VC weapons captured than government troops missing in action and government weapons lost. The VC also continued to avoid initiating any actions by major units although they kept up their heavy harassment of villages and outposts. The government made a little progress in clearing lines of communication.

6. On the economic side, negotiations with the government on the US currency “black mart” problem made good progress, and we hope that we can have this tied up in the next few days. The rice imports from Thailand appear to have met our immediate needs and should hold the situation until the arrival of additional PL-480 rice.3

Johnson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 9:06 a.m.

2 August 15.

3 On a copy of this telegram retyped for President Johnson, the President wrote: “Mc—Let's rush him plenty of rice now.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXIX, Memos)

122. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 122. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State1

Paris, August 18, 1965.

Literally eyes only for Ball. Today's two hour session with Rupert most positive so far. In principal developments Rupert (a) revealed possible Viet fall back positions from recent Ho Chi Minh declaration;2 (b) pinpointed halt of U.S. bombing as principal “tangible evidence” of acceptance in principle of Hanoi's four points; (c) queried meaning (i.e., chiefly editorial and translation) of X's four points,3 indication serious consideration; (d) stressed desirability further meeting. X believes necessary he return at this time to inventory talks in relation to developments and other indices Hanoi attitudes and discuss next steps.

1. Rupert telephoned yesterday to fix today's meeting. At previous session he had indicated utility of talks and said that even if X were to leave now but “should pass again through Paris” it would be useful to consult.

2. He opened by asking whether X had studied Ho Chi Minh's declaration. X desired clarification on number of points. First was date of Ho/Devillers interview which he assumed was on basis written questions. Rupert confirmed and said date was to be taken as that of appearance in Le Monde (i.e., August 14) and that answers “had only arrived from Hanoi evening before”. (X believes his friends correct in assuming interview was planted answer to him, which also implies indeterminate amount of French help in stage managing.) X said he discouraged by negative tone of statements and Rupert jested that X always seemed discouraged.

3. X noted that neither questions nor replies had made any reference to statement accompanying original four points re “most correct basis for political solution”.4 With uneasiness Rupert asserted Hanoi position still the same. He then linked “recognition of this basis” to “tangible proofs” required by Ho Chi Minh in latest declaration. These, he said, included in the first instance a suspension of bombing but he also referred to withdrawal of troops and halting U.S. “aggression”. (Re latter term X indicated that it would be better in these discussions if terms like “enemy”, “aggression”, etc., were abjured.) Rupert expatiated at some length on the bombing and worldwide condemnation of it. (X got some impression VC and DRV being hurt.) Promising to return to this point, X5 proceeded to review Ho declaration from beginning.

4. Re point number one, Rupert was less categoric than Ho. He claimed that “realistically” only FLN, which was carrying on fight, was suited to speak for South. Whole world knew it was representative but Saigon was not. X disagreed and said it was “not realistic” to expect the most powerful nation in the world to go into negotiations at price of abandoning allies, accepting Hanoi fiat on agenda, and pulling all its troops out. In subsequent discussion X got strong impression Rupert and even Hanoi ready to accept some other formula for SVN representation but wishes to prod U.S. into putting it forward. Rupert alleged France had finally been obliged to accept FLN as sole negotiating agent in Algeria. He did not knock down idea that agreement on formula for representation could be accepted if other obstacles were removed. He did ask just what formula U.S. would imagine. Rupert referred to previous statements of U.S. Government leaders.

5. Re second question of Ho declaration, X judges significant Rupert's confirmation that unification could wait quite some time. X insisted this depended on will of the people and asked what Ho meant by mention of program of front in this connection. Rupert said FLN recognized that unification would come “by stages” and on basis of popular consultation. Hanoi agreed. Rupert insisted on word “stages”. He even said that “there might be people in the south” (or just people) “who might not want unification” and in this case “Hanoi prepared to wait” until they did! Re mechanism for controlling elections, supervision, etc., Rupert made no substantive objection to hypothetical projections made by X.

6. Re point three, X asked what Rupert considered “proofs” to be. When latter again came forth with cessation of bombing Rupert6 replied in preconceived terms that such a gesture had been made once before with no result or counterpart. It was conceivable that such a gesture might be repeated but it was not conceivable that it could be unilateral. Surely Rupert could not expect the U.S. in Saigon or the Saigon Government to negotiate under terrorism and while 325th Division roamed the country. Terrorist acts only weakened Hanoi's case with those who might be disposed to sympathize. Since X said he and Rupert agreed to place their discussions under “sign of realism” it surely was “unrealistic” to pretend that Hanoi did not have units in the country. (Whereat Rupert laughed heartily.) Rupert then became very serious, appeared on the point of making a reply but decided to withhold it. It was entirely obvious that suspension of bombing has now re-emerged as key objective of Viets (as also confirmed in Para 10 infra). Rupert showed X an extract with a Washington byline from a French press digest7 to effect that Department of State spokesman had said that contacts with Hanoi had turned up nothing significant and then referring to an Aide-Memoire Department was supposed to have circulated to a number of governments explaining terms on which U.S. would again suspend bombing.7 Rupert asked if X knew of such a memorandum. X said he had heard something along lines of first part of release but not informed of any memo. Hazarded guess that if indeed it existed, which he questioned, it might be along lines he, X, had employed.

7. X asked whether it was correct to understand that Ho was calling for prior withdrawal of U.S. troops in same time scale as suspension of bombing and as prerequisite to discussions. Rupert again laughed, said that was not “realistic” and that of course he recognized that withdrawals would have to be phased. It should, however, be stipulated that final settlement should see withdrawals completed. X indicated that they should also be balanced, i.e., against pullback of DRV troops (whose presence in South Vietnam Rupert no longer denies). Rupert insisted in his interpretation of Hanoi policy despite fact X pointed out it seemed at variance with Ho interview.

8. X took occasion presented by Rupert's insistence on “poor show” by South Vietnamese troops again to stress futility of Hanoi's hope to force a decision; he remarked on differences between French military posture and that of U.S., said all DRV might achieve would be escalation of war, which could only be to its disadvantage, involving foreign influence in north and south, devastation of North Vietnam, and undesirable hatred between Americans and Vietnamese. Rupert said that in war it was necessary to envision the worst and that the consequences of escalation, including external intervention, had been foreseen and prepared for. (X's purpose was to draw out Rupert on possible evolution of conflict and again to impress him that U.S. not speaking from weakness.)

9. X asked Rupert what he preferred or suggested as channel of contact with Hanoi. Rupert said all the same provided responsible people speak, whether it was in “Paris, Peking, Moscow, or Hanoi”. Then said that since X had obtained clarification Hanoi position he now wished clarifications from X. Latter recalled that in Rupert's own words Rupert represented his government, X only the opinion of some of his friends in government.

10. Rupert then took up X's earlier suggested four points with striking total recall (?) of verbal presentation. His most important observation was on point one: The basic rights of Vietnamese people to peace, etc., are recognized as set forth in the Geneva Accords, etc. Rupert verified French translation of this sentence and then said that point now was to give “tangible proof” that these rights were recognized. Such proof he said might be a cessation of bombardments.

11. Some other points of translation raised were: Line four (X's text, not given to Rupert), “compliance” to which Rupert preferred “acceptance” and “execution” to “acquiescement”. Line nine, what was “quasi-military” and did it apply to personnel or weapons or both? X assumed this meant persons carrying out military functions, suppletifs and partisans, not necessarily regulars. Presumably a truck or aircraft could also be quasi-military. Line 13, “regrouping and redeployment”. X said these almost the same thing, one word perhaps more static than the other. Separation of combatants at some stage should be envisaged. In reply Rupert's question re “indigenous” and “foreign personnel”, X assumed indigenous would mean all types of Vietnamese forces. This might include tribal groups as well as Vietnamese. What then was meant by “foreign personnel”? Just what it said, replied X. Of course if DRV had performed miracles in training indigenous forces to operate missiles they might not be involved in pullback. Rupert thought this a great joke and said “you mean if they were Soviets they should leave”? Yes, said X, and Chinese, etc.

X convinced foregoing had sufficient substance and implication to warrant further contacts. He convinced, however, he should at this point return home to touch base, make sure he does not get out of line, assess possible follow-up, and to discuss means of improving security, contacts, communications, etc. Also desirable to let Rupert marinate. X told Rupert he leaving over weekend and would give him date of departure. Also exchanged addresses, telephone numbers, and means of contact. X set up possibility of return in case he had to “confer further concerning his university connection in Geneva”.

New address of Rupert is: 3 Square de Trocadero, Paris 16e., Telephone 727-38-74.8

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET/XYZ. Top Secret; Nodis; XYZ. The source text is a copy that does not bear a telegram number or a time of transmission or receipt. For additional information, see the source note, Document 120.

2 See footnote 6, Document 120.

3 See Document 113. For text, see Herring, Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War, p. 97.

4 For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 852-853.

5 On the source text the word “Rupert” is crossed out and “X” written above it.

6 “?X” is written in hand before “Rupert.”

7 Not further identified.

8 The source text bears no signature.

123. Memorandum of Meeting 123. Memorandum of Meeting1

Washington, August 19, 1965.

SUBJECT

Points Discussed in the President's Luncheon with the Secretary and Senior State Department Officers, Thursday, August 19, 19652

1. The President laid great stress on the importance of intelligence in South Viet-Nam. Mr. Bundy commented that this was in part a matter of specific actions, but also heavily related to the general improvement in popular morale and cohesion which was the objective of Ambassador Lodge and of the Lansdale group.

2. The President commented at some length on the state of public opinion in the United States concerning the Viet-Nam problem. He hoped that all officers of the Department could be as active as possible in getting the Administration point of view fully expressed in public forums, and also in dealing with critical segments of the press such as the New York Times and, occasionally, the “Kennedy columnists.” The President expressed the general view that public support for Administration policies was generally satisfactory at present, but that this would become more doubtful if the conflict were prolonged another year or more. For this reason, but above all for the overriding reason of its own importance he stressed over and over again that the Department was the agency responsible for finding a proper way to peace. He had several exchanges with the Secretary and with Ambassador Goldberg on the UN and other efforts in progress, and made abundantly clear his whole-hearted support for these efforts.

3. In connection with the Viet-Nam problem, but also more broadly, the President also laid great stress on the importance of relationships with Congress. He particularly underlined the vital necessity of advance consultation with Congressional leaders and interested committees on all actions being contemplated by the Department.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 US/Johnson. Confidential. Drafted by William Bundy on August 26.

2 The senior Departmental officials included Rusk, Ball, Harriman, Goldberg, William Bundy, Thomas Mann, Jack Vaughn, G. Mennen Williams, Joseph Sisco, Harlan Cleveland, Phillips Talbot, and John Leddy. Lloyd Hand and Jack Valenti of the White House staff were also present. The meeting lasted from 1:48 to 4:05 p.m. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary)

124. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 124. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 23, 1965.

581. Reference: Department telegram 509, repeated USUN 289.2 Following are some comments on the general subject of diplomatic negotiations: 1. Although the U Thant proposal is as unfair as one would expect, there is advantage in handling it very carefully—not because it will lead to an end to the aggression in Vietnam, but because news of it will leak and the U.S. Government must appear in a good light in the minds of those who think that peace can be promoted in this manner.

2. Convincing these people that the U.S. Government is leaving no stone unturned has undoubtedly been a big factor in the remarkable education of U.S. opinion in the last six months under the President's leadership. Today, practically every American of good will understands why Vietnam is important and therefore why we must be here.

3. This is of the greatest importance in our effort to ward off the aggression here. In fact, a unified and determined U.S. opinion is the decisive ingredient. It also creates favorable opinion abroad.

4. But there is another aspect which gives me pause. I believe we are approaching the point when further public eagerness by US for “negotiations” will harden Hanoi and Peking's resolve and convince them that we are weak internally (however strong we may be at Chu Lai) thus making things harder for our soldiers, tending to prolong the conflict, and sapping the will to win of the GVN and RVNAF.

5. The President's bombing decision stopped the argument in Saigon as to whether to continue the war and it started the discussion on how best to win it. The President's decision on troops has brought a conviction that the U.S. is not clock-watching and is determined to see this thing through. In Vietnamese minds, this makes a successful outcome inevitable. These are precious assets which must be conserved and cherished and certainly not diluted or destroyed.

6. The above in no way means that we should not work hard for peace, but what is needed for peace at this moment is a conviction in the minds of the enemy that its aggression is doomed to failure.

7. It would be helpful here and would have a constructive effect on U.S. and foreign opinion, and ultimately in the UN, if we gave great prominence to the fact that our effort in Vietnam is being undertaken in the letter and spirit of UN Charter which states in Article I that the member states shall “take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace and for suppression of acts of aggression… .” This is precisely what we are doing. Our effort is thus noble, respectable and legal in the highest sense. It should be made to appear so and not look like a unilateral American adventure. I have only seen one excellent statement by the President at a press conference concerning the aggression aspect. Could not more be done along this line?

8. It is for this reason that I question the wisdom of paragraph 8 of the proposed aide-memoire (reftel). To talk about “a cessation of all hostile military activity by all concerned” implies that we and the South Vietnamese on the one hand are in the same moral position as Hanoi and Peking on the other. This is not the case. Hanoi and Peking wish to dominate South Vietnam. South Vietnam and the U.S. do not wish to dominate North Vietnam. Hanoi and Peking are the aggressors. South Vietnam is the aggrieved party. We must not give the impression that it is “six of one and a half-dozen of the other”.

9. I also fear the effect when paragraph 9 becomes public.

10. And the words “cease fire” make many hairs stand on end in Saigon and could give rise to widespread feeling that the “Americans are negotiating behind our backs and therefore why should we fight any more?”

11. I recognize the difficulty of these decisions and that there is much to be said for a sympathetic attitude toward U Thant's proposals. I also recognize the commitment which we have already made for the record. But there are other factors and a constructive contribution could be made to public thinking by reminding members of the UN and public opinion generally of Article I of the Charter.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Repeated to USUN. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 2:23 a.m. Ambassador Lodge arrived in Saigon on August 20 and presented his credentials on August 25.

2 Telegram 509 to Saigon, August 21, transmitted a copy of the draft reply to U Thant's initiative on August 12, and asked for Embassy comments. (Ibid.) The reply, which incorporated changes in response to Lodge's comments, was approved and sent to Thant on August 27; see Document 129.

125. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 125. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff1

Honolulu, August 23, 1965, 2:30 p.m.

2400302Z. Increasing pressure against DRV (C). A. CINCPAC 220043Z.2

1. We believe a main element of Communist strength in North and South Vietnam has been their complete confidence in ultimate victory according to their strategic plan. VC morale in SVN depends in large measure upon things going as planned. Superiority of the VC over the RVNAF and sure victory is the backbone of troop indoctrination.

2. Indications are that when Hanoi saw in early 1964 that the U.S. had decided to step up assistance to SVN, decision was made to move more rapidly toward victory through increased organized military action in SVN. With SVN political system in disarray, the RVNAF remained the hard core upon which the U.S. could build. Disintegration of the armed forces through multiple large-scale assaults could remove the last stumbling block to decisive control of the country. The rapid build up of the VC with organized PAVN units and augmentation of support activities and political cadres began.

3. Hanoi has received two strategic surprises since initiating what was intended as the final phase. First, the U.S. has introduced, and is continuing to build up, air and ground forces in SVN on a scale that Hanoi must never have anticipated. The second surprise was the air campaign against NVN.

4. The impact of U.S. forces in SVN has upset VC timing. Obvious intentions to embark upon a campaign of large scale attacks materialized in Feb. In their efforts to make 1965 a year of decision, the VC have made some limited gains but at a high price. Since March 1965 they have suffered heavy losses in virtually all of their major military efforts. This trend has been particularly pronounced since May when Viet Cong initiated large-scale operations such as those fought at Song Be, Dong Xoai, and Duc Co which cost the VC very heavy and probably unanticipated casualties. The introduction of expanded U.S. air and ground forces and naval support have further compounded the Viet Cong problem as illustrated by the dramatic U.S. operation on the Van Tuong peninsula, south of Chu Lai, where U.S. Marines destroyed the 1st VC regiment. Employment of U.S. forces in the highlands hear Pleiku can and will disrupt VC plans for seizure and control of that strategic area. Following Chu Lai more ground forces will be introduced when the 1st Cavalry Division lands. Hanoi knows that the ROK division and other U.S. forces will soon be introduced. Employment of B-52's and scheduled deployment of additional U.S. air squadrons will further emphasize U.S. intent. More prisoners are being taken now. More defections are occurring. These rates will rise when augmented U.S. air and ground forces are brought more fully to bear in harassment, attrition, and search and destroy missions.

5. The evidence is now overwhelming that the Communist forces in both Vietnams are all under the command of Hanoi, and the battlefield in North Vietnam can be regarded as the support area or zone of interior. After the first surprise of air attack in NVN, against what must have been regarded as a sanctuary, Hanoi probably expected world opinion to cause the U.S. to limit operations to sporadic, punitive attacks if not stop them completely. We have just reviewed our program, Ref A, we are now at a point where we can move toward the effective disruption of the current RT area. This will make it extremely difficult for Hanoi to continue support to forces in Laos and SVN. But the important thing now is to keep the Communists psychologically off balance. We believe the process is well underway in the SVN portion of the battlefield. In the north we must concentrate upon the same objective. Communist belief in victory must be destroyed. They are now taking comfort from greater air defense capability and there are some indications that use of the IL-28's and MIG's may be contemplated. We may expect some dramatic effort as their need for a morale boost grows. We must not allow their developing capabilities to generate hope of turning the tide.

6. Recommend that hard on the heels of the landing of the 1st elements of the 1st Cavalry Division in SVN that we attack the POL at Hanoi (JCS 49) and at Haiphong (JCS 48). A large percentage of the population in the delta area would see the fires and all would know of the attacks. Grossly exaggerated Hanoi air defense propaganda would begin to ring hollow. These two actions would have a tremendous psychological impact upon NVN.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. The source text is a copy sent to the Department of State.

2 Not found.

126. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 126. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, August 24, 1965, 8 p.m.

SUBJECT

The Republican “White Paper”2

1. I have read the White Paper and discussed it with McNamara, Ball, Moyers, and my brother Bill. I also got some free advice from Phil Potter, who called on another subject. Our unanimous view is that it is a pretty feeble effort and that it does not deserve top-level reply. So I would be inclined to go right past it in the press conference tomorrow and to say simply that we maintain the closest touch with Republican leaders like President Eisenhower3 and Senator Dirksen (who has dissociated himself from the report already), and that there has never been a Republican or Democratic policy toward Southeast Asia in the last 15 years.4

2. If you want to hit harder, it is interesting that this report omits the name of Ambassador Lodge in its discussion of the last months of Diem. It misstates your own position on Southeast Asia in 1961, in that your farsighted report5 specifically warned that we might need to make a commitment of troops if circumstances should change. The document also conveys a false impression of your views on Laos. In Bob McNamara's judgment, it totally distorts his own record on Vietnam.

3. In sum, this document imports into the discussion of foreign affairs the very spirit of narrow partisanship which you have been trying to exclude. We are confident that the American people prefer the attitudes of Republicans like Eisenhower, Dirksen, Lodge, and McNamara, just as it has traditionally expected a spirit that rises above party from Democratic leadership both in Congress and in the White House.

4. I attach a copy of a memorandum done by my brother Bill6 which gives a still more detailed and comprehensive set of criticisms which could be made if one wanted to make them.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII. No classification marking.

2 On August 24, the Republican leadership of the House of Representatives issued a 33-page report on Vietnam, styled a “White Paper,” which charged President Johnson with confusing public opinion and inviting Communist miscalculations. The report was prepared by the House Republican Committee on Planning and Research, under the direction of Representatives Gerald R. Ford, Charles E. Goodell, and Melvin R. Laird. (Washington Post, August 25, 1965)

3 See Document 118.

4 Johnson dismissed the Republican report as misleading during a press conference on August 25. He said that the Vietnamese Communists should not entertain the illusion that the people of the United States were are not united behind the Vietnamese Government. (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book II, pp. 922-923)

5 See United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 11, pp. 159-166, and Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, pp. 149-151.

6 Attached but not printed.

127. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 127. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 26, 1965, 12:41 p.m.

624. 1. There is given below the text of an “Estimate of Viet Cong Situation” drafted by the Mission Intelligence Committee and concurred in by Ambassador Johnson and General Westmoreland which I have found of value and believe will be of interest to concerned Washington agencies:

2. Hanoi appears to have made the decision last year to intensify the war in South Vietnam. Whether the Communists actually expected to gain complete victory this year, or merely to accelerate the transition to their vaunted general counter-offensive, they had reason to hope that an early victory was possible. The build-up of Viet Cong main force and guerrilla units had made substantial progress, and the insurgents had evolved tactics for meeting the improving RVNAF air and ground capabilities. Viet Cong successes in countering the GVN's pacification program had given the Communists control over wide areas which had previously been dominated by the GVN; their food situation had improved, and they had access to a substantial manpower base. Infiltration of both men and material from the north was essentially unchecked. RVNAF morale clearly was sagging, and its desertion rate mounting. Political instability in Saigon appeared to be heightened with each change of government, and further violent clashes involving Catholic, Buddhist and student elements seemed likely.

3. Given these conditions, it must have appeared to Hanoi that a modest escalation of Viet Cong military capabilities might permit the insurgents to end the war relatively quickly. They may have calculated that a successful military campaign would cause RVNAF and civilian morale to collapse, produce an impression of the inevitability of Communist victory, exacerbate political instability in Saigon, and create conditions favorable for a general uprising through which the Communists could seize power. Since the overthrow of the Diem government, Hanoi and the Liberation Front had increasingly put such an uprising forward as a feasible, quick alternative to the traditional protracted resistance struggle. Even if their broader hopes were not realized, the Communists probably believed that a successful offensive campaign by the reinforced Viet Cong would permit them to attain the initiative and pave the way for even greater offensive operations later this year. The Communists may have calculated that they would have a reasonable chance of achieving their aims without provoking increased U.S. intervention because of the seeming reluctance—last fall—of the U.S. to commit its military forces to operations in Vietnam. Even if the U.S. were to react, the Communists may have felt they could attain their objectives before U.S. intervention became effective.

4. To assure success, Hanoi evidently concluded that the military capabilities of both the Viet Cong and DRV would have to be further strengthened. Although the Viet Cong build-up was progressing favorably, their forces were clearly incapable of mounting an offensive of the scale desired. Hence, one of the goals established for 1964 was the accelerated expansion of Viet Cong forces to the extent required to establish that equilibrium with the GVN's forces which is deemed essential by the Communists for the shift to a general counteroffensive. Toward this end, the Viet Cong intensified their recruiting and conscription programs, creating a number of new main force battalions in the southern delta, some of which were transferred to the area north of Saigon. The flow of weapons and equipment from the DRV was stepped up last fall to permit the rearming of some existing units with more modern and effective small arms, and heavy weapons, and to so equip some newly formed units. To add further to Viet Cong capabilities, Hanoi took the calculated risk of escalation by infiltrating regular units of the North Vietnamese Army (PAVN). All three infantry regiments of the PAVN 325th Division evidently have been deployed to South Vietnam, and it is possible that other units have been deployed without identification. To strengthen the DRV's capabilities against the contingency of U.S. air attacks, Hanoi arranged with the Soviets in February for a reinforcement of its air defense resources, to include the introduction of surface-to-air missiles and the augmentation of the nascent DRV air force.

5. The military campaign planned by the Communists appears to be centered on the highlands. While the Viet Cong regard the densely populated and rice-rich Mekong Delta as the prize in South Vietnam, they consider the highlands as the major battleground, since the difficult terrain, dense vegetation, and limited lines of communication tend to minimize RVNAF ground and air superiorities. Their concept of operations envisaged a series of major (regimental-size) attacks against isolated outposts, aimed at destroying ARVN garrisons and drawing ARVN general reserve units into ambushes under conditions favoring Viet Cong success. These larger actions were to be supported by intensified, widespread guerrilla activity in order to consolidate their hold on the people. The principal objectives of the campaign were to destroy RVNAF units, enlarge the liberated zones, and constrict GVN control to isolated district towns and provincial capitals. In the highlands, it appears that they hope to eliminate the GVN strongpoints north of Kontum and create a large liberated area extending over most of Kontum, Pleiku, Quang Ngai and Binh Dinh Provinces. This area, adjoining the Laos infiltration corridor and offering motorable line of communications with North Vietnam, could be developed into an extensive redoubt area from which subsequent major operations could be mounted against the coastal plain or into the southern highlands. In the area northeast of Saigon, the Viet Cong concept was similar, based in this instance on the enlargement of Zone D by extending the liberated area into Phuoc Long, Long Khanh, Phuoc Tuy and Lam Dong Provinces. From this redoubt, the Viet Cong would be in position to mount operations to link up with the northern highlands redoubt, westward to join Zone D with Zone C in northern Tay Ninh, or southwestward against Saigon itself.

6. Although they enjoyed some initial successes, the Viet Cong campaign has been frustrated by a series of fortuitous RVNAF tactical moves coupled with the effective use of increased US-GVN air support. In the prelude to their offensive, the Viet Cong inflicted heavy losses on ARVN units at Binh Gia (Phuoc Tuy Province) in December 1964 and in Binh Dinh Province in February 1965. They suffered a setback in their attack on Song Be, the Phuoc Long Province capital, in early May, but scored their most significant success at Ba Gia in Quang Ngai Province later that month. On 1 June, after overrunning Le Thanh district headquarters in western Pleiku, the Viet Cong placed the CIDG camp at Duc Co in a state of siege, which was to last over two months. The Viet Cong suffered a setback in their attack on the district town of Dong Xoai in Phuoc Long Province; although they inflicted heavy losses on ARVN forces, they were unsuccessful in their attempt to occupy the town and suffered estimated losses in excess of 700 KIA. In Phu Bon Province, the Viet Cong have effectively blocked Route 7 and made gains in outlying areas, but they failed in their attempt to destroy the garrison at ThuanMan (Phu Bon Province) and suffered heavily in an engagement with ARVN airborne units. The “Geneva armistice” anniversary attack on the CIDG post Bu Dop (Phuoc Long Province) was a costly failure, although the Viet Cong profited indirectly when another camp was abandoned to permit reinforcement of the Bu Dop garrison. In the area north of Kontum, their first major gain was the district town of Tuomoroung which fell on 25 July 1965. In mid-August, the Viet Cong intensified their efforts to dislodge the garrison at Duc Co (Pleiku Province) and suffered heavy losses when a joint ARVN/US operation broke the 68-day siege. On 18 August the Viet Cong furthered their gains in the area north of Kontum when they successfully attacked and overran the district town and CIDG post at Dak Sut. They have not yet dislodged or destroyed the GVN garrison at Tan Canh, near Dak To, and Dak Pek near the Laos border, although they have the capability to do so at any time. The Viet Cong have suffered a series of setbacks in fighting along Route 19, and have been unable to deny to RVNAF the use of any road when the latter made a determined effort to use them.

7. Thus, the Viet Cong have made some significant territorial gains during their summer offensive. They also put six RVNAF battalions out of action in the early stages of our campaign, but they were unable to sustain their pattern of success when ARVN altered its normal reaction pattern and, in several instances, spoiled Viet Cong preparations by mounting anticipatory operations. The Viet Cong did succeed in disrupting lines of communication, effectively isolating the highlands from the coast, and interdicting communications between most of the coastal provincial capitals. In the Mekong Delta area, aggressive operations by ARVN's IV Corps appear to have frustrated Viet Cong plans for some major operations and have kept their main force units off balance. RVNAF morale has not collapsed, and may have recovered somewhat from its initial sag last spring. The political situation in Saigon, although still precarious, is not as unstable as the Communists hoped, and conditions are not ripe for a general uprising. Effective police action in the cities, a by-product of draft enforcement activities, and in part a result of improved counter-terror measures, has resulted in the apprehension of a number of Viet Cong cadres and probably has kept their subversive apparatus off-balance. Resources control operations in the Hop Tac area have also resulted in the seizure of explosives destined for Viet Cong terrorists in Saigon.

8. Not only has their campaign failed to achieve the optimum results envisaged by Hanoi, but since its inception the strategic balance has altered unfavorably for them. Preparations for the Viet Cong campaign were underway before the U.S. began its air attacks on North Vietnam and deployed its ground forces to South Vietnam—the bulk of the PAVN 325th Division had entered the south by February. Although US ground forces have not yet played a major role on the main battlefields, the Viet Cong are almost certainly becoming aware of the potential deriving from their presence. Sounder minds in Hanoi must appreciate that the opportunity for an early military victory has passed, and that the forces now available to the Viet Cong are incapable of dislodging the US forces from South Vietnam. Hanoi is therefore faced with the need to reappraise the situation and reassess its alternatives.

9. Courses of action open to Hanoi include the following: A. Massive reinforcement of the Viet Cong, in the form of an overt invasion, in an attempt to regain their offensive momentum and perhaps defeat US forces before they are firmly established.

B. Limited covert reinforcement by infiltrating one or two additional PAVN divisions in order to restore the balance which has now swung in favor of the US-GVN forces and permit the continuation of recent levels of offensive activity.

C. Modest retrenchment of activity, reducing the number of major attacks and placing greater emphasis on local guerrilla activity and on consolidating their political base in preparation for a protracted guerrilla struggle.

D. Substantial reduction of activity aimed at creating the impression of a collapsing insurgency to lull the US into relaxing pressure on both the north and the south.

E. In combination with any of the above, initiating diplomatic moves designed to bring about negotiations for a settlement.

10. Massive reinforcement, either by PAVN alone or with Chinese Communist participation, would require assurance of logistic support on a scale which is probably beyond the capacity of the disrupted lines of communication in the southern DRV. Moreover, both Hanoi and Peking probably would estimate that such action might provoke more extensive US air strikes against the DRV and possibly even Communist China if the latter were directly involved. The same limitations would apply to the use of massive numbers of bloc volunteers. This course of action cannot be ruled out entirely as an irrational, desperation move to prevent the defeat of the Viet Cong or to provide a temporary strengthening of the Communist position as a prelude to negotiations. Because of the risks involved, however, the Communists probably would be inclined initially to pursue more limited aims which would be attained with limited means. The Chinese are also capable of participating in the defense of North Vietnam against air attacks, but have thus far shown an inclination to avoid involvement except when US aircraft approach the Chinese border.

11. Limited covert reinforcement, on the order of one or two PAVN divisions committed in the same fashion as the 325th, is more within their capabilities. Such a move would permit the Communists to restore some semblance of a balance of forces without serious risk of escalation beyond North Vietnam. The principal disadvantage of this course would be the uncertainty of adequate logistical support pending the development of a motorable supply route through the Laos panhandle. Any substantial increase in the number of troops in the highlands area would also further strain the already difficult food situation confronting Viet Cong forces in that region. The Communists cannot be sure that they will be able to deliver sufficient quantities of ammunition by sea in view of increasing US efforts to interdict this line of supply. Some reinforcement is obviously necessary to prevent the Viet Cong from losing the initiative to the expanding US-GVN forces, but, if the movement of the 325th Division is any gauge, the deployment of further reinforcements would require two to four months from the date of decision. Both Hanoi and Liberation Front radio broadcasts appear to be laying the groundwork for some reinforcement through their reference to organizing the “regrouped southerners” in preparation for their return to the south. On the other hand, it must now be apparent to Hanoi that growing US-GVN air and ground capabilities pose serious risks to large concentrations of insurgent forces, thereby placing a premium on smaller scale guerrilla actions of a type for which the capabilities of “foreign” PAVN units are not best suited.

12. A modest retrenchment of activity, similar to that which occurred in 1962 after the initial US intervention, would permit the Viet Cong to conserve the offensive potential of their main force units while studying the impact of current US deployments and operations and evolving a new strategic approach. Widespread guerrilla activity would be continued to counter GVN pacification operations while consolidating the Communist hold on “liberated areas” and developing the Viet Cong subversive apparatus in areas largely under GVN influence. Hanoi could continue the infiltration of key cadre elements and weapons and ammunition to permit the expansion of local guerrilla forces. A major portion of the Viet Cong main force units could be dispersed to support the guerrilla campaign. The principal disadvantage of this course of action would be its adverse impact on Viet Cong morale. Political cadres would face a difficult task in re-educating even the main forces in terms of a prolongation of the struggle. Conscription in Communist areas brought a substantial number of relatively unindoctrinated youths into Viet Cong units of all types, even into the main forces. These inexperienced youngsters have already shown symptoms of an unwillingness to fight, as reflected in the rising numbers of defectors and ralliers from the Viet Cong. If US and GVN forces succeed in inflicting a number of significant defeats on the Viet Cong and continue air actions at the current level, this morale problem will mount despite Viet Cong indoctrination efforts. Although a temporary retrenchment would not decisively impair Viet Cong morale, a prolonged retrenchment might pose insurmountable problems.

13. A substantial reduction of activity, coupled with a voluntary curtailment of support from the DRV, might be attempted in an effort to lull the US into relaxing its pressure. This course would, in effect, produce a limited disengagement. By giving the appearance of a collapsing insurgency and avoiding major actions, the Viet Cong might hope that the US would be inclined to reduce its forces and discontinue its bombing attacks on the DRV. The disadvantages of this course are similar to those enumerated in the preceding paragraph. The adverse psychological impact on the Viet Cong would be even greater, however, since the absence of support from the north would tend to discourage even some hard-core insurgents. If it were explained as a ruse, the Viet Cong could not be assured that word of this would not reach US and GVN authorities, thereby negating the effectiveness of this course. Hanoi might be tempted to adopt this course however, taking the calculated risk that enough of the Communist structure could be held together to permit a renewal of insurgent activity when conditions were more favorable.

14. The Communists could, at any time, embark on diplomatic moves aimed at bringing about negotiations for a settlement. They are not likely to undertake this course until convinced that they cannot achieve success by violent means in the south. DRV leaders continue to give the impression of confidence in the ultimate success of the insurgency, and so far have conveyed no hint that they are prepared to relax their conditions for the initiation of negotiations or for a settlement. Should the Communists agree to negotiations, they will probably first attempt some form of major military action designed to strengthen their position. They can be expected also to demand concessions on our part which would relax US military pressure during the period of negotiations.

15. There are indications that the Communists have already laid down the guidelines for their autumn-winter campaign. Agent reports suggest these are similar—for the Delta area—to those of the summer campaign. Both Hanoi and Liberation Front broadcasts reflect continued determination to press the war, and indicate preparations are underway for the introduction of additional troops from the north. On the other hand, they now speak in terms of a prolongation of the struggle for up to twenty to twenty-five years, suggesting that they see scant prospect for the short-cut solution they were touting as possible only a few months ago. Appeals to the urban populace to prepare for the violent overthrow of the government have similarly lost their urgency. There are no indications that the Communists are preparing for a massive reinsurgement. Continuation of the insurgency at the present level or retrenchment of activity poses serious problems with respect to surrendering the initiative to the reinforced US-GVN forces and sustaining Viet Cong morale. Only limited overt reinforcement—provided the logistical problem is overcome—offers some prospects for negating the impact of the US build-up and sustaining the morale of the Viet Cong.

16. In conclusion, lack of complete success of their summer campaign has frustrated Viet Cong aims for 1965. If they have not done so thus far, the Communists must soon acknowledge their inability either to achieve an early victory or to dislodge the growing military strength of the US forces in the south. Massive intervention is probably beyond their capability to support, and would carry with it the risk of a substantial widening of the war. While retrenchment might permit them to conserve their capabilities, it would pose serious morale problems, and would surrender the initiative to the US and GVN forces, which would gradually be able to resume pacification programs and regain control over populated areas recently acquired by the Communists. Only limited reinforcement offers prospects for sustaining the insurgency on a scale and at a level that provides reasonable expectation of successfully testing and perhaps eroding US determination to continue the war. Diplomatic moves to open negotiations would appear unlikely until the Communists are convinced that US determination to continue the war cannot be eroded and that defeat of the Viet Cong is probable.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

128. Memorandum for President Johnson 128. Memorandum for President Johnson1

Washington, undated.

Following is the text of a cable from Ambassador Lodge (Saigon 626):2 1. I had a meeting yesterday afternoon alone with General Ky which lasted almost an hour, with him doing almost all the talking in deliberate, grammatical English, sometimes interspersed with French. I began by saying that I wished to help in every possible way and that he could count on me to respect a confidence.

2. Ky covered many subjects, but his chief contention was that the people insisted on a revolution, that it was impossible to compete with the Communists without treating the peasant, the poor man, the laborer, and the soldier properly. Neither Minh, Khanh nor Quat had really understood what a revolution is all about.

3. It was impossible for a civilian government to carry out a revolution with the military standing on the sidelines complaining. The military had the power in Vietnam and they had to meet their responsibility.

4. For the future, he wanted the Americans to hold the “strategic points” so that the Vietnamese could concentrate on pacification operations. He was disgusted with the Chieu Hoi program and the way it had been run and said that much American money had been wasted. There were 30,000 cadres in various government departments which he was going to regroup and retrain, and send them to the 235 districts in the country. He would have a paper on this for me to read very soon.

5. I agreed that a Communist offer of a revolution, even though it was in brutality and slavery, could only be beaten by an offer of a revolution for a new life in freedom. We Americans agreed completely and stood ready to help. There were some things which we could not do, but there were many which we could do. If he and his associates could stay in power for a reasonable period of time, then it could be done. But another coup would really be bad. Could we be helpful in this regard.

6. Ky smiled at this, and it seemed to me that he didn't take the possibility of a coup very seriously. He said he had been at Dalat for the last two days and had met with all division and corps commanders, and that they had all been in agreement. He said there had been discussion about my arrival signifying that something new was being brought into the Vietnamese problems. They did not know whether this was true, but they all agreed that I was against Communism.

7. Comment: If this is true, it is good that I am not taken for granted. My main hope at the meeting with Ky was not to settle any specific problem, but to develop a good atmosphere. I feel that this was done to some extent. He was rather tense when I arrived but he had a big smile on his face and was much more relaxed when I left.

8. Other remarks by Ky were as follows: A. The Communists gave the peasant what in effect is a license to kill the landlord and then take the land themselves. “We can do better than that,” said Ky. I assured him of our desire to help, having in mind the report that landlords are heavily represented among generals.

B. Ky said he was aware of the importance of having able Ambassadors and that he would make a number of appointments soon. Lodge.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXIX, Memos. Secret; Limdis. There is no drafting information on the source text, which indicates that the President saw the memorandum.

2 Telegram 626 from Saigon, transmitted at 3:25 p.m., was received at 8:04 a.m. (Department of State, Central Files,POL 15 VIET S)

129. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 129. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, August 27, 1965, 1:41 p.m.

313. Following is text of US aide-memoire for SYG on Viet Nam. Deliver at earliest opportunity on receipt final authorization.

Begin Text.

AIDE-MEMOIRE

1. The United States believes that your memorandum of August 122 contains a number of highly constructive suggestions. It is our earnest hope that the memorandum will be useful in initiating discussions which can provide a basis for the settlement of the Viet Nam conflict. The views expressed below are designed to contribute to this important objective.

2. We agree with your observation that the objective of a Viet Nam settlement should be “a return to the essentials of the 1954 Geneva Agreements.”

3. We concur in the principle you have set forth that neither zone in Viet Nam should adhere to a military alliance or furnish military bases to others, and that foreign troops should be withdrawn from both zones. You have already cited President Johnson's statement of April 73 to this effect on military alliances and military bases. On troop withdrawal, the United States stated on April 8 in reply to the 17-nation declaration on Viet Nam “… when conditions have been created in which the people of South Viet Nam can determine their own future free from external interference, the United States will be ready and eager to withdraw its forces from South Viet Nam.”4

4. Equally basic is the principle of the Geneva Agreements that neither zone of Viet Nam should interfere in the affairs of the other zone. This principle was incorporated in numerous provisions of the Agreements, including Articles 19 and 24 of the Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities in Viet Nam5 and in the provision of Article 5 of the Final Declaration of the 1954 Geneva Conference,6 providing that the respective zones “shall not be utilized for the resumption of hostilities or in the service of an aggressive policy.” It is the violation of this principle by the DRV which has led to the conflict in Viet Nam and to the presence of American forces in the Republic of Viet Nam. These forces, like the forces of other states assisting the Republic of Viet Nam, have as their sole purpose its protection against aggression, consistent with the provisions of the United Nations Charter.

5. It is therefore essential that provisions be made in any settlement of the problem of Viet Nam for the withdrawal from South Viet Nam of the troops and cadres infiltrated from North Viet Nam into the South. The modalities and timing of withdrawal of American and other forces assisting the Government of the Republic of Viet Nam can, of course, only be worked out in the light of similar dispositions regarding the tens of thousands of regrouped Southerners and Northerners infiltrated by North Viet Nam into South Viet Nam over the past several years.

6. A third basic principle of the Geneva Agreements of 1954 was to ensure that the people of Viet Nam have the right of free choice. That purpose still guides our actions in two fundamental respects related to the Geneva Agreements:

a. We maintain that the people of South Viet Nam should have the right to shape their own destiny by peaceful, democratic means and without interference from an aggressive neighbor to the north.

b. We believe that the people of both South Viet Nam and North Viet Nam should have the right of free choice regarding the reunification of Viet Nam. As called for in the Geneva Agreements, any elections held for this purpose should be truly free and secret, with effective international supervision. It was in this sense that President Johnson on July 28 referred to “free elections … throughout all Viet Nam under international supervision.”7

7. With respect to the political problems of South Viet Nam, we do not consider that the provisions of the Geneva Agreements of 1954 are directly applicable to the resolution of the internal problems of either North or South Viet Nam separately, pending procedures for reunification as discussed above. In this connection, the United States Government notes that the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Viet Nam, on June 22, made clear the view of the Republic of Viet Nam that South Viet Nam should be free to shape its own destiny “in conformity with established democratic processes without any intervention of whatever form and whatever source.”8 As Secretary Rusk noted on June 23, the United States Government fully supports this principle,9 and it was in this sense also that President Johnson referred on July 28 to “free elections in the South.” North Viet Nam appears to have expressed a different point of view. We would welcome any appropriate efforts by the Secretary-General to determine whether these divergencies are in fact as profound as they now appear.

8. We concur in the Secretary-General's suggestion that a cessation of military activity might be subject to a variety of formulae, and that it might initially be a matter for de facto action—by both sides—rather than for a more formal arrangement. In any unconditional discussions, or in a conference, conditions for the cessation of hostilities might well be the first order of business.

9. Finally, with respect to the role of the so-called National Liberation Front, we agree that issues of this type need not and should not obstruct the way to a settlement. On July 28 President Johnson referred to negotiation taking place with governments (for example, if there should be a Geneva Conference, those governments which participated in the Geneva Conference of 1954), and indicated that the Viet Cong would have no difficulty being represented and having their views represented if Hanoi desired a peaceful settlement. This should not be an insurmountable problem and could be worked out. This position does not, of course, prejudice the United States Government's view that the so-called National Liberation Front is not in fact an independent party inasmuch as it has been established and is controlled by Hanoi.

10. We remain prepared to engage in unconditional discussions looking toward a peaceful settlement whenever the other side is ready. This can be done, for example, through reconvening the 1954 Geneva Conference or by other means, including discussions through your good offices. We shall give serious consideration to any proposals of this character. End Text.

Prior to delivery, inform GVN observer, pursuant to last para Deptel 310 (sent to Saigon as 564).10

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and David H. Popper of IO on August 26 and cleared by Sisco of IO and Ruth Bacon of FE. Repeated to Saigon, London, Ottawa, Canberra, and Bangkok. At 2:55 p.m. on August 27, McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this cable to the President, noting in a covering memorandum that the response to Thant had been coordinated with the South Vietnamese Government by Ambassador Lodge, and had been prepared in close collaboration with Goldberg. Bundy added: “Dean Rusk and I consider that this entire paper represents no modification of our position, but only a careful and diplomatically skillful statement of it for U Thant's eyes.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XIII)

2 See Document 119.

3 See vol. II, Document 245.

4 For complete text of this statement, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 853-854.

5 For text of the agreement, signed on July 20, 1954, see Foreign Relations, 1952-1954, vol. XVI, pp. 1505-1520.

6 For text of the declaration, signed on July 21, 1954, see ibid., pp. 1540-1542.

7 See Document 97.

8 For an excerpt from Foreign Minister Tran Van Do's address, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, p. 883.

9 For text of Rusk's remarks, see ibid., pp. 884-886.

10 Telegram 310 to USUN, August 26, dealt with coordination of a reply to U Thant's initiative. The final paragraph reads: “We now plan to give our reply to UN SYG some time early next week, and shall consult re timing in advance.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) In telegram 541 from USUN, August 27, Goldberg reported that he had delivered the aide-memoire to Thant that evening. In reply to a question from Goldberg, Thant said that he did not know yet whether the Chinese, North Vietnamese, or Viet Cong had accepted the copies of the proposal, which he had sent to them through a “second channel.” (Ibid.)

130. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 130. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara1

Washington, August 27, 1965.

JCSM-652-65

SUBJECT

Concept for Vietnam (U)

1. (S) In the light of the introduction of major US combat units into Southeast Asia, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider it essential that we further formalize our concept for the future conduct of the war. Recognizing this need, they have developed a concept as set forth in the Appendix. This concept, in which the views of CINCPAC have been considered, envisions the military actions that are part of the over-all US strategy for Southeast Asia, including South Vietnam, North Vietnam, Thailand, and Laos. The correlated military actions to carry out this strategy will be conducted in concert with US major political, economic, and social programs for Southeast Asia. They also will include measures for dealing with the ChiCom threat.

2. (TS) In summary: a. The objective in Vietnam, as stated by NSAM-288, dated 17 March 1964,2 is a stable and independent noncommunist government.

b. The major problems to be dealt with in the conduct of the war are: (1) The continued direction and support of Viet Cong operations by the DRV, infiltration from the north, and the apparent attendant Viet Cong capability to provide materiel support and to replace heavy personnel losses.

(2) The continued existence of a major Viet Cong infrastructure, both political and military, in the RVN.

(3) The greater growth rate of Viet Cong strength as compared to that of the South Vietnamese ground forces.

(4) The continued loss of LOCs, food-producing areas, and population to Viet Cong control.

(5) The lack of a viable politico/economic structure in the RVN.

(6) The threat of ChiCom intervention or aggression in Southeast Asia and elsewhere in the Western Pacific.

c. The basic military tasks, of equal priority, are: (1) To cause the DRV to cease its direction and support of the Viet Cong insurgency.

(2) To defeat the Viet Cong and to extend GVN control over all of the RVN.

(3) To deter Communist China from direct intervention and to defeat such intervention if it occurs.

d. The US basic strategy for accomplishing the above tasks should be: to intensify military pressure on the DRV by air and naval power; to destroy significant DRV military targets, including the base of supplies; to interdict supporting LOCs in the DRV; to interdict the infiltration and supply routes into the RVN; to improve the combat effectiveness of the RVNAF; to build and protect bases; to reduce enemy reinforcements; to defeat the Viet Cong, in concert with RVN and third country forces; and to maintain adequate forces in the Western Pacific and elsewhere in readiness to deter and to deal with ChiCom aggression. By aggressive and sustained exploitation of superior military force, the United States/Government of Vietnam would seize and hold the initiative in both the DRV and RVN, keeping the DRV, the Viet Cong, and the PL/VM at a disadvantage, progressively destroying the DRV war-supporting power and defeating the Viet Cong. The physical capability of the DRV to move men and supplies through the Lao Corridor, down the coastline, across the DMZ, and through Cambodia must be reduced to the maximum practical extent by land, naval, and air actions in these areas and against infiltration-connected targets. Finally, included within the basic US military strategy must be a buildup in Thailand to ensure attainment of the proper US-Thai posture to deter ChiCom aggression and to facilitate placing US forces in an advantageous logistic position if such aggression occurs.

3. (S) The over-all strategic concept for Vietnam, as set forth in the Appendix hereto, provides a basis for terminating the war in Vietnam under conditions which are satisfactory to the United States and the GVN.

4. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that the attached concept be approved as the basis for subsequent development of courses of action, forces, and other requirements to include the phasing of operations. Recommendations based thereon, including a current evaluation of the capabilities of approved force deployments to achieve the objectives of the concept, will be provided you at the earliest practicable date.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Earle G. Wheeler
Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff

Appendix

OVER-ALL US CONCEPT FOR VIETNAM (U)

Introduction

1. (S) The RVN is a politico/military keystone in Southeast Asia and is symbolic of US determination in Asia—as Berlin is in Europe—to prevent communist expansion. The United States is committed to the defense of the RVN in order to assist a free people to remain free. In addition to the freedom of the RVN, US national prestige, credibility, and honor with respect to world-wide pledges, and declared national policy are at stake. Further, it is incumbent upon the United States at this stage to invalidate the communist concept of “wars of national liberation.”

2. (S) The military operations envisioned in this concept paper must: a. Conform to the over-all US strategy and guidelines for Southeast Asia as a whole, including the RVN, DRV, Laos, and Thailand.

b. Be conducted in concert with appropriate US/GVN political, economic, and social programs in order to guide and to expedite the correlated achievement of US objectives.

c. Be conceived and evaluated in terms of how much and how well they will contribute to the above.

Factors Bearing on the Development of a US Military Strategy for Vietnam

3. (S) The Viet Cong are directed, controlled, and supported (including heavy military support and encadrement) by their sponsor, the DRV. Viet Cong activities in the RVN are characterized by persuasion through propaganda, intimidation, and terror. Whenever possible, through armed assault and coercion, the Viet Cong destroy the capability of GVN authority to govern, thus progressively reducing the ability of the GVN to bring the population and resources base to bear on the problem. Having assumed control over an area, the Viet Cong install their own political organization and infrastructure. Then, using local manpower and logistics, the Viet Cong organize, equip, and train military units to resist GVN attempts to establish its authority and to expand Viet Cong control and influence into other areas.

4. (S) For the most part, the Viet Cong have sought to avoid a large-scale sustained battle with US/GVN forces. Instead, their tactics have been to maximize the advantages of initiative and surprise and to strike at weakness with overwhelming strength, “fading away” when the combat strength ratio is unfavorable to them. Currently, one of their major objectives appears to be the destruction, through both attrition and demoralization, of the RVNAF.

5. (TS) At present, the Viet Cong and DRV leaders appear confident that their course in the RVN promises ultimate and possibly early success without important concessions on their part. This apparent confidence may have been fostered in part by the current quest for some negotiating arrangement. They seem to believe that they can achieve a series of local military successes which, sooner or later, will bring victory through a combination of a deteriorating South Vietnamese Army (ARVN) morale and effectiveness, a collapse of anti-communist government in Saigon, and an exhaustion of the United States will to persist.

6. (TS) In coping with larger US forces employed in a more aggressive fashion, the Viet Cong would seek to avoid the kind of engagements which risked a serious communist defeat. Instead, they would probably concentrate on harassments intended to bleed and humiliate US forces, attempting to trap and destroy isolated units where possible. At a minimum, the Viet Cong would almost certainly continue present efforts to cut land communications lines and would step up the dispatch of small, expendable teams on sabotage and assassination missions designed to gain propaganda advantages. The communists might also seek to increase their activities in Laos.

7. (TS) Additionally, there is the possibility of ChiCom overt commitment of major combat forces in Southeast Asia and other areas in the Western Pacific. With the greater US involvement in the war in Vietnam, US military posture must be so oriented as to deter ChiCom intervention and defeat this intervention should it occur.

8. (S) The war in Vietnam is the single most critical international problem facing the United States today, and it portends the most serious immediate threat to continued US world leadership and national security.The development of a US strategy for Vietnam is necessarily influenced in varying degrees by the desirability to maintain amicable relations with certain other nations; by the desirability to receive from third countries a degree of support for US policy; by US objectives and alliances elsewhere; by the fact of the sovereignty of the GVN; and, by the necessity to provide an effective Free World counter or answer to “wars of national liberation.”

9. (S) The situation in the RVN has deteriorated to the point where US national objectives are endangered and may not be achieved unless GVN forces are bolstered, adequate security for the South Vietnamese people is provided, and the DRV is persuaded that the risks of further involvement on their part outweigh the gains.

10. (TS) Our strategy for Vietnam should not allow the communists to keep pace with or more than match our military efforts. A program of slowly rising intensity with both sides in step carries with it the danger that it will lead to less flexibility of choice, creeping intervention by the Soviets and Chinese, first with materiel and later with troops, and the eventual engulfing of both camps unwillingly into an expanded war.

11. (TS) Briefly, the major problems to be dealt with in the conduct of the war are: a. The continued direction and support of Viet Cong operations by the DRV, including infiltration from the North, and the apparent attendant Viet Cong capability to provide materiel support and to replace heavy personnel losses.

b. The continued existence of a major Viet Cong infrastructure, both political and military, in the RVN.

c. The greater growth rate of Viet Cong strength as compared to that of the South Vietnamese ground forces.

d. The continued loss of LOCs, food-producing areas, and population to Viet Cong control.

e. The lack of a viable politico/economic structure in the RVN.

f. The threat of ChiCom intervention or aggression in Southeast Asia and elsewhere in the Western Pacific.

US Objectives, Tasks, and Basic Strategy

12. (TS) US national policy3 includes as an objective in the RVN a stable and independent noncommunist government. Implicit in this objective is the containment of Communist China insofar as expansion into Southeast Asia or elsewhere in the Western Pacific is concerned. Basic military tasks, of equal priority, in support of this objective are: a. To cause the DRV to cease its direction and support of the Viet Cong insurgency.

b. To defeat the Viet Cong and to extend GVN control over all of the RVN.

c. To deter Communist China from direct intervention and to defeat such intervention if it occurs.

13. (TS) Friendly control of population and resources is essential to success in countering guerrilla warfare. In this regard, the RVN areas of major military significance are: the Saigon area and the Mekong Delta; the coastal plain; and the central highlands. It is imperative that the US/GVN have the support of the people and the control of resources in those areas. Elimination of the Viet Cong from these areas must be vigorously undertaken in order to provide adequate security for the people. Of particular importance is the need for friendly control of the main food-producing areas in order that the GVN may gain control of rice, feed the people under its control, enable exports of rice to bolster the economy, and cause the Viet Cong to import or to fight for food. A paramount requirement under this concept is the building and maintaining of a series of secure bases and secure supporting LOCs at key localities along the sea coast, and elsewhere as necessary, from which offensive operations can be launched and sustained, with the subsequent enlargement and expansion of the secure areas.

14. (TS) The US basic strategy for accomplishing the above tasks should be: to intensify military pressure on the DRV by air and naval power; to destroy significant DRV military targets, including the base of supplies; to interdict supporting LOCs in the DRV; to interdict the infiltration and supply routes into the RVN; to improve the combat effectiveness of the RVNAF; to build and protect bases; to reduce enemy reinforcements; to defeat the Viet Cong in concert with RVN and third country forces; and, to maintain adequate forces in the Western Pacific and elsewhere in readiness to deter and to deal with ChiCom aggression. By aggressive and sustained exploitation of superior military force, the United States/GVN would seize and hold the initiative in both the DRV and the RVN, keeping the DRV, the Viet Cong, and the PL/VM at a disadvantage, progressively destroying the DRV war-supporting power and defeating the Viet Cong. The physical capability of the DRV to move men and supplies through the Lao Corridor, down the coastline, across the DMZ, and through Cambodia, must be reduced to the maximum practical extent by land, naval, and air actions in these areas and against infiltration-connected targets. Finally, included within the basic US military strategy must be a build-up in Thailand to ensure attainment of the proper US-Thai posture to deter ChiCom aggression and to facilitate placing US forces in an advantageous logistic position if such aggression occurs.

Principal Measures for Executing the Basic Strategy and for Achieving US Objectives

15. (TS) In order to gain the offensive and to seize and hold the initiative in the RVN, a major effort must be made not only in terms of direct combat action to expand the areas under US/GVN control but also to support the GVN in its rural reconstruction program and to assist that government in the creation of new military units and the rehabilitation of its depleted units as rapidly as possible. A psychological climate must be created that will foster RVN rural reconstruction progress. It will be noted in paragraph 13 above that, along with the Saigon area, the Mekong Delta is considered of primary importance. While no US land operations are currently envisaged in the Mekong Delta (IV Corps Tactical Zone) because of the comparatively inactive enemy situation now existing there, increased Viet Cong activity could later necessitate US/Third Country operations in that important area.

16. (TS) The intensification of military pressures on the DRV, PL/VM, and the Viet Cong, the destruction of military stocks, supporting facilities, and the interdiction of communist infiltration and supply routes into the RVN will necessarily require: a. An immediate acceleration and increase in the scale, scope, and intensity of air and naval actions against the DRV. These actions should be directed against key military and economic targets, the destruction of which should dissuade the DRV from supporting the Viet Cong insurgency; this would include mining of DRV ports. Targets would include these main groupings:POL, LOCs, mines (including coal), military installations, port facilities, and power stations. Attacks against population centers as such would continue to be avoided.

b. Intensified land, naval, and air actions to reduce infiltration into the RVN. Such actions would include a stepped-up land, sea, and air campaign against infiltration routes, designed to minimize the flow into the RVN of personnel and materiel.

17. (TS) During the build-up phase US/Third Country and GVN forces should strengthen military and civilian control in present areas of the RVN while intensifying air and naval attacks against the DRV and communist infiltration and supply routes into the RVN. As the force build-up is achieved, a principal offensive effort within the RVN of US/Third Country forces should be to participate with the RVNAF in search and destroy operations while assisting the RVNAF in clearing and securing operations in support of the rural reconstruction effort. US/Third Country air and ground operations should be conducted on a sustained basis; attack and destruction of base areas should be directed at applying continuous pressure on the VC to keep them off balance.

18. (TS) To deter ChiCom directintervention or aggression in Southeast Asia and elsewhere in the Western Pacific, and to deal with such intervention or aggression if it occurs would, in addition to the measures above, require: a. A credible strategic force posture in Southeast Asia and elsewhere to meet the ChiCom threat.

b. A suitable build-up in Thailand to enable the expeditious deployment there of major US forces. This build-up would include logistic support bases, new airfields, improvement of existing airbases to increase their capacity, improvements to LOCs, and measures to increase the readiness of the Thai armed forces.

Execution

19. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that, as a matter of principle, CINCPAC should be given as wide latitude as possible under the circumstances in executing the above measures in consonance with the forces, support, and general policy guidance provided to CINCPAC by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Viet 381. Top Secret.

2 See vol. I, pp. 172-173.

3 NSAM 288, dated 17 March 1964. [Footnote in the source text.]

131. Letter From the Ambassador to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson 131. Letter From the Ambassador to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson1

Saigon, August 31, 1965.

Dear Mr. President:

Herewith are some of my innermost preoccupations, which I have sent to no one else, and which I send to you in the hope that they may prevent reverses in the future. I will, of course, be glad to have this letter go to Dean Rusk, Bob McNamara and MacBundy—and anyone else whom you may choose.

I am concerned about the current U.S. stress on a “settlement” and on “negotiations” to the neglect of the concept of a satisfactory “outcome” or “result”.

I believe that with great and sustained effort we can get a satisfactory “outcome”, but it is hard for me to visualize a satisfactory “settlement”. In other words, we can succeed in warding off the communist aggression, but we will not get them to admit it. If we do get a satisfactory “outcome”, it will be a real achievement in which we will all be able to take pride.

You should probably make an announcement about it. It must look like the true success which it most certainly would be, and it must not look like a failure because we have not achieved a “settlement”—or because General De Gaulle doesn't enthuse.

We should therefore stress the need for warding off the aggression, for getting a satisfactory “outcome”, and not lay so much stress on diplomatic settlements which we probably are not going to be able to get. The attempt to do so would probably make Ho Chi Minh lose face, thus causing him to fight harder, thus lengthening the war and increasing the bloodshed.

If I am wrong, and we do get a neat diplomatic document in which the communists admit that they have been beaten, then we have lost nothing by following my advice—although it is hard to understand the value of such a document given the worthlessness of such a communist commitment.

Let me give two illustrations:

Illustration No. 1

The heartland of Viet-Nam, as is shown on a population map which I recently sent to Mac Bundy, consists of the coastal plain plus the Delta (of which I class Saigon as a part). About 65 per cent of the population is in those areas.

Suppose that we and the Vietnamese:

—really control the coastal plain (as we appear to be on the way to doing);

—eliminate the Viet Cong from the Saigon-Delta area (which we have not done, but which could be done); and

—continue to hold the 43 provincial capitals which we now hold as well as the 240-odd district towns; and

Then suppose that:

we are strong enough in all these places so that with our air, sea and ground power we can force the Viet Cong to stay back in the hills—or the Camau peninsula—with the snakes and the tigers because they get such a bloody nose every time they try to attack.

If all these things happen, we will be in a very strong position indeed and everything else after that will be mopping up. We will be in control of areas with a total population of about 11 million out of a national total of about 15 million. (Source: Statistics Branch-USOM Public Administration Division)

Neither in the Philippines nor in Malaya was every last communist guerrilla apprehended. Some of them became farmers and some of them went into the hills where they still are—and where they do no harm.

Illustration No. 2

Another possibility is that the Viet Cong suddenly decides to stop fighting and that a silence falls. This has happened in other oriental countries.

We would consider either of the above illustrations as a satisfactory outcome, and you would be entitled to put it out to the public as an effective warding off of the aggression—something in which all Americans could take pride.

But if you make a “settlement” and diplomatic “negotiations” as a symbol of success, you are really reaching for the moon. The communists do not like to sign papers in which they admit that they were defeated. They prefer always to leave these situations hanging, with the implication that a few years later they may be back. The fact that they don't come back forcefully (as they didn't in the Philippines and in Malaya) doesn't alter the fact that they don't like to look as though they have given up.

I understand fully the inestimable value of making it clear to public opinion at home that you are willing to go anywhere and try anything for the sake of peace. It is your willingness to do this which has been a major factor in the extremely skillful job which you have done in unifying American public opinion behind U.S. policy in Viet-Nam—a remarkable performance in every way. But I hope that you can keep U.S. opinion united without at the same time getting yourself into a position where you can't get credit for a satisfactory outcome once it is achieved.

It is surely possible, as we have done so far, to handle U Thant carefully without over-praising him. Surely the aggression can be successfully warded off without at the same time stipulating a re-affirmation of the Geneva agreement, a guarantee of free elections, and undertakings concerning reunification of North and South Viet-Nam—which are not worth much when signed.

With warm and respectful regards,

Faithfully yours,

Cabot L.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Lodge Letters to the President. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Received in the White House and delivered to the President on September 2. (Telegram 614 to Saigon, September 2; ibid.)

132. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 132. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson1

Washington, September 1, 1965.

General Westmoreland has requested and the Joint Chiefs of Staff have concurred in the movement of an additional increment of forces to Vietnam.2 This increment would be in addition to the 28 combat battalions, associated air squadrons, and logistic support forces—totalling 125,000—announced by you on 28 July.3 The request is for six additional combat battalions (making a total of 34), associated air squadrons, and logistic support forces—totaling 85,000 additional United States personnel.

I recommend that these additional forces be authorized for movement.

I further recommend that no announcement be made at this time of the decision to deploy additional forces, but that announcements be made only as forces arrive in the theater.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietrnam, Vol. XI, Memos (A). Top Secret.

2 At the instruction of the JCS, representatives of the Joint Staff, the Military Services, the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Installations and Logistics), CINCPAC, COMUSMACV, and COMUSKOREA conferred at Honolulu August 3-6 on the details of Phase I deployment of U.S. forces to Vietnam. (History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Vietnam, 1960-1968, Part II, ch. 22, p. 8) On August 23, the JCS approved and forwarded to McNamara the program for deployment of U.S. troops in Phase I worked out at the Honolulu conference. The program provided for 34 battalions and 210,000 U.S. personnel for South Vietnam and 41,000 U.S. personnel stationed in other Pacific and Southeast Asian areas outside Vietnam. (JCSM 643-65 to Secretary of Defense, August 23; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 381)

3 See Document 97.

133. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 133. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State1

Paris, September 1, 1965.

Today's long and fumbling session with Rupert produced a very few elements useful in a diagnosis of the Hanoi position but hardly anything that would advance negotiations. Although Rupert insists he has been consistent throughout discussions he seems to fluctuate in phase with Hanoi's pronouncements and this evening he took a stiff line in an obvious effort to parallel that taken by Pham Van Dong in declaration2 published in today's Le Monde. Principal points to emerge were: (a) According to Rupert, any “final solution would have to include a withdrawal of U.S. troops (Pham Van Dong appears to call for their withdrawal now), and in any case troops would have to have left before elections could take place. This was first time Rupert had made this link.

(b) U.S. bombing, especially its intensification north and south in the last fifteen days, could only be interpreted as attempt to force Hanoi to negotiate. Also, U.S. insistence on “counterpart” concessions by Hanoi was psychological warfare and unacceptable. Still, according to Rupert, bombing was unilaterally undertaken; it must be stopped unilaterally immediately, totally, and definitively; then and then only would there be a different atmosphere and a possibility for negotiations. There could be no question, he said, of accepting conditions laid down by U.S. ahead of time as price of suspension of bombing. 1. X opened by remarking that his conversations with Rupert had aroused a lively interest among his friends in Washington, of which Rupert would find evidence in TV interview of Secretary Rusk (August 23).3 Rupert would find some familiar expressions in this discourse and he would also find confirmation that U.S. policy was the same as that expressed in the four points which X had proposed to Rupert.

2. X read extensively from the interview and left the text with Rupert. He noticed that the latter showed particular interest in Rusk's expression of confidence in elections in the south which Rupert seemed to find fantastic. He derided the Saigon Government as U.S. creatures and jeered at its instability and said that practically all Vietnamese, especially since Diem's oppression of nationalist elements, utterly rejected it. X observed he could not of course accept this evaluation and said whatever it was southern population wanted he and Rupert both knew that they didn't want Hanoi imposed on them. Whatever procession governments in Saigon indicated it clearly showed U.S. was not imposing a regime. Rupert retorted with the Vietnamese proverb to the effect a sorcerer can raise phantoms but after a while they control the sorcerer.

Rupert indicated that that might be but Hanoi had no intention of imposing a regime in the south.

3. Discussion of bombing followed X's quotation of Rusk TV remarks on subject and was intermittent throughout the rambling discussion. X recalled Rupert's inquiry about U.S. Aide-Memoire4 and read excerpts from the Memoire. Also left with Rupert handwritten rough translation of pertinent paragraphs on bombing. Also referred to British White Paper5 and the phrase “appropriate and commensurate” in connection with desired type of response from Hanoi.

4. Rupert's temperature here rose to something approaching heat. He denounced U.S. proposal as psychological warfare, as an effort to impress world opinion, etc. He said that the intensification of military activity in the south and bombing north and south, particularly in the last two weeks, showed U.S. trying to compel Hanoi to the conference table. In these conditions there could be no question of Hanoi's yielding. It was left with no alternative but to continue the war. He insisted that U.S. requirement of a counterpart was unrealistic; that U.S. began the bombing unilaterally and should stop it unilaterally and stop its “aggression” as well. He claimed to believe U.S. demanding as counterparts concessions tantamount to abandoning Hanoi's entire military position (X cannot recall just what particulars Rupert cited).

5. Rupert again resorted to phrase about “allegations” re activity of 325th North Viet Division. Later when X said—you apparently now deny 325th Division in the south, Rupert said he did not deny it. He claimed, however, that the 325th not now engaged in military operations.

6. X suggested that he preferred Secretary's word “signal” to Rupert's word “counterpart”. U.S. not asking Hanoi to abandon all its military leverage but wanted at least a token that U.S. gesture in stopping bombing was understood as move toward peaceful settlement. He quoted the U.S. Aide-Memoire to suggest other possibilities for a response by Hanoi, such as stopping infiltration and reducing level of incidents. On latter point X also referred to Algerian precedent when French found it easier to come to conference table when incidents dropped below certain level. X said U.S. could not be expected to halt bombing under circumstances which made it look as though it had found the going too rough and too rude and was accepting military reverse.

7. Rupert at no time rose to bait on stopping infiltration or reduction of incidents. All he would say (and repeatedly) was that if the U.S. stopped the bombing unilaterally there would be a new atmosphere and a new deal.

8. X then went so far as to ask Rupert to comment on handling the problem of a Hanoi response through device of parallel but ostensibly unlinked courses of action, i.e., U.S. to halt bombing while there would be simultaneous actions by Hanoi possibly synchronized by “third party” unspecified.

9. Rupert appeared interested but would say only in effect that if U.S. so acted one would see. However, he then repeatedly revived other Hanoi conditions, including acceptance of the program of the “Front”, halting of U.S. “aggression”, etc.

10. X again insisted he and Rupert losing time using words like “aggression”. Rupert said he willing to substitute “war”. X's reply to charge that U.S. aggressively interested [intensified?] bombing was that Hanoi had been unilaterally making war on the south for four years previously, to which answer Rupert sharply interjected accusation about Diem's activities.

11. According to X his friends in U.S. wanted some sign Hanoi understood what halt in bombing meant. Rupert should be aware restraint in U.S. bombing policy. Although it could easily do so, U.S. not interfering directly with harvest, had not destroyed Haiphong, was not at the present time breaking up industry. Of course there was a rising curve in military actions, especially as military machines on both sides took hold and passions were aroused, but this is what he and Rupert had the opportunity to prevent.

12. Rupert quite excitedly said X was wrong, that thousands were being killed, that he had the figures to show it. It was more obvious than ever before that Hanoi and VC, both north and south, are being grievously hurt. For present, however, Rupert would only say that these bombings more than ever made it inevitable that Hanoi would continue the war for as many years as might be necessary.

13. X rehearsed his earlier arguments, that Hanoi could not obtain a decision, U.S. could not be forced out, escalation could only mean stepping up foreign activity (U.S. and Chinese), north and south, and could threaten continuance of U.S. policy of restraint in bombing.

14. X then undertook to begin review of positions reached by him and Rupert in current talks. Said although we wide apart there seemed to be somewhat less difference of opinion re withdrawal of troops and unification. In reply Rupert made point, new in these discussions, that U.S. troops would have to be withdrawn before elections could take place. On being pressed to state his own understanding of what he and X discussed he affirmed that “any final solution would have to include (comporter) withdrawal of U.S. troops”, but this time added that such withdrawal would have to precede elections. He claimed it was X who had introduced the idea of “stages” in conversation. (X supplied the word but Rupert if anything was ahead of him in endorsing the idea.)

15. X did not say whether this timing was acceptable to his friends but did repeat that U.S. wanted fundamental rights of Vietnam as presented in Geneva Accords agreed. U.S. wanted independent, unified, possibly non-aligned Vietnam, and were willing to put our policy to the test, including free elections without outside intervention. If U.S. troops withdrawn it could not be under conditions which left other outside forces, i.e., Hanoi, free to influence results.

X observed that Rupert had not previously made this point on withdrawals, and took occasion to observe that while Pham Van Dong and Rusk interviews demonstrated awareness X/Rupert conversations, Pham Van Dong had taken a harder line while press widely commented on Rusk's determination to seek peace and had even used phrase “de-escalation”.

16. As to reunification and X's claim that he and Rupert seemed not too far apart, i.e., with respect to international decision by free consultation, north and south, timing and supervision, Rupert said Hanoi was not imposing any decision on the south (meaning the “Front”). Therefore the timetable would be as the south and north should agree. (X again referred to fact that most South Vietnamese probably did not want unification on Hanoi terms.)

17. X asked Rupert to try to resume where he and X stood. Rupert reviewed the positions he had just taken on bombing, reunification, and claimed these represented no change in his prior position. He confirmed that he had noticed in French press account taken by Secretary Rusk and others of these discussions. With reference to internal regime he again insisted on program of the “Front”. X again said it was unrealistic to expect strongest power in the world to accept adversary fiat on agenda, withdraw all its troops prior to negotiation, and accept a priori installation of “Front” as sole negotiating agent and government in south. Latter would certainly find a role to play in national life and reconstruction and could also be included in North Vietnamese delegation. (Rupert sneered at latter idea.) If, as Rupert claimed, Front represented everybody in south X said they would be triumphantly returned by elections. However, X doubted it.

18. Early in interview X had indicated desirability of meeting next week and Rupert agreed to Tuesday,6 at which time X promised refined French text of pertinent parts of U.S. Aide-Memoire to other governments, as well as of parts of TV interview.

At close of meeting X said he would “retain” particularly two of Rupert's points, i.e., position that cessation of bombing could not be conditioned on prior promise or performance by Hanoi of counterpart undertaking, and point that withdrawal of foreign troops must be completed before elections. He expressed obvious reservations, but said he would reflect and consult on these points, and confirmed meeting for Tuesday.

Rupert said a further meeting might be worthwhile if there were anything new, but said discussions thus far had produced little that was new or useful. X said he thought talks had taken a “zig-zag” course and that last previous meeting had seemed “constructive”. This clearly worried Rupert who demanded confirmation that he had always taken a consistent line.

General impressions:

X had stronger impression than previously that Rupert fearful of getting out of line with Hanoi. Rupert obviously worried at implication that in current talks he had ever veered. Indeed, he may already have done so in appearing on earlier occasion to be too relaxed about timing of U.S. troop withdrawals. X suspects some of Rupert's waverings reflect difference within Hanoi Government, pulling and hauling with Front, Chinese, etc.

Although on surface Rupert position on halting bombing and on withdrawal U.S. troops seems notably unfruitful, Washington may wish to consider whether a third party might not be enlisted (not French) to receive from Hanoi assurances that if bombing suspended there might be some action on the part of Hanoi; also what would be time relation between withdrawal U.S. troops and: (a) popular consultation with respect to unification, and (b) with respect to voting on internal regime of South Vietnam, (c) convening of a conference, (d) putting Geneva Accords into effect; also relation of these measures to international control? Should we ask Rupert these questions?

X's general impression is that talks very unfruitful at this point and unless something gives difficult to see beyond next one or two sessions. He thinks Hanoi does not want to talk at this point. In a month's time it may be different.7

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET/XYZ. Top Secret; Nodis; XYZ. The source text is a copy that does not bear a telegram number or a time of transmission or receipt. For additional information, see the source note, Document 120. In United States-Vietnam Relations, the meeting described in this telegram is incorrectly dated September 3. (Herring, Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War, pp. 106-107)

2 Pham Van Dong's National Day report on August 31 was broadcast in English over Hanoi Radio on September 1. For excerpts from the text, see ibid., pp. 103-106.

3 For a transcript of the interview, in which Goldberg and McGeorge Bundy also participated, see Department of State Bulletin, September 13, 1965, pp. 431-444.

4 Not further identified.

5 For text, see Department of State Bulletin, September 13, 1965, pp. 444-447.

6 September 7. Mai Van Bo did not show up for the meeting on September 7.DRV officials indicated that he was “sick.” Gullion and Mai Van Bo held no further meetings. Paul Sturm (“Y”), who replaced Gullion, had an unproductive meeting with Mai Van Bo on November 18. (Herring, Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War, pp. 107-109)

7 The source text bears no signature.

134. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 134. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 4, 1965.

474. Reference: Department telegram 610 rptd CINCPAC unn.2

1. Prospect of fresh political instability in Saigon which Gen. Thi's ambition may represent is merely most recent manifestation of long-term, well-known problem. It is, of course, not related simply to Thi or any other individual. Since early 1963 political instability has been a fact of life here. It does not arise or disappear because of failures or successes against Viet Cong, but it is affected by the way the war goes and changes form accordingly. Were the war to end under acceptable circumstances the problem would not disappear. As the Viet Cong find themselves increasingly frustrated and as Hanoi sees the path to military victory blocked, they may even come to regard the possibility of political chaos and ineffective govt as their best hope for ultimate success and increase their efforts in this sphere accordingly. However, if we were to find ourselves on the threshold of or involved in negotiations with the DRV, they would hope to gain in such negotiations by virtue of political weakness in the south what they could not gain because of combined US-GVN military strength.

2. The Directorate govt has so far taken the line that there must be a moratorium on political activity until the Communist threat has been dealt with. Such a policy is unrealistic by itself, but when complicated by the possible fragility of the unity of the Directorate, it becomes even more probable that we face the danger of sudden opportunistic political moves and unpredictable political change. It is in this context that the evidence of Thi's ambition or the maneuvering of Tri Quang must be examined.

3. Political instability has tended to fluctuate in intensity. Two weeks ago the political pot began to bubble in Hue with mild anti-mobilization demonstrations which developed an anti-government theme.3 But now, due to a variety of factors, the intensity of opposition to the government and the maneuverings of ambitious individuals seem for the moment to have been checked. Moreover, the government's decision to establish a civilian advisory council (Embtel 737)4 could take some of the political heat off the govt for the immediate future.

4. The Directorate has been operating in something resembling a political vacuum when it comes to domestic politics, non-military power groupings, and individual ambitions. One of Nguyen Khanh's essential weaknesses was his failure to deal effectively with non-military political elements and eventually they brought him down. The new advisory council seems able [garble] on part present GVN to cope with such elements.

5. With these introductory remarks in the broader context the more specific comments requested in reftel can be provided.

6. Given the personality of I Corps Commander, Brigadier General Nguyen Chanh Thi, it is extremely difficult to predict with precision just how he might try to make his move or even whether he will try. By common consent, among those who have known him well, Thi is an extremely complex individual. Low-born, he has always been quite aware of the poverty of his antecedents. He has had little formal training outside the army. He is acutely sensitive to this lack. His role in the coup manque of November 11, 1960 has been cast into doubt by those who contend that he was a “late starter” who threw in his lot with coup when they seemed on the verge of victory and broke violently with them in exile in Phnom Penh, berating them for involving him in a lost cause. Exile cost him dearly in terms of pride because he was forced to accept handouts and menial jobs from those he considered inferior merely to live. During this period his wife, in Viet-Nam, took up with another officer and left him.

7. When Thi returned to Viet-Nam following coup of November 1, 1963, he felt that Military Revolutionary Council owed him something in the way of promotion and reward in view of his association with attempt of November 11, 1960 and his long exile. But he was given his old rank and shipped off to I Corps. There he associated himself with Nguyen Khanh who had himself been “late starter” in coup of Nov. 1, 1963. Through his old connections with the airborne brigade, Thi helped Khanh organize the coup of January 30.

8. In wake of January 30 coup, Thi found himself back in I Corps despite promises by Khanh that he was to be his “right hand man” in Saigon. He was First Division Commander and much later he rose to become Corps Commander.

9. At various times during past year Thi has played controversial political role in I Corps. One has only to recall embarrassment Khanh suffered at hands of hostile crowd in Hue the day that a Ngo Dinh Can henchman, Phan Quang Dong, was executed. Such an incident could not have transpired without sure foreknowledge permissive attitude Thi's part. There was also Thi's “hands off” attitude on Hue demonstrations that led to downfall of Huong. Embarrassment of Thieu during course visit to Hue just after Directorate formed is another case in point.

10. There is no doubt that Thi has often thought of himself as a potential saviour of his country. These thoughts have probably also been accompanied by grave doubt about his real ability to govern the land. He seems genuinely convinced of his own honesty and his determination to cope with corruption and bad government (according to his own lights).

11. There seems little doubt Tri Quang and his adherents have felt for some time that Thi was sympathetic and usable. There was a certain identity of interest between them, but at the same time there was also a certain condescension on the part of Tri Quang and company. Probably some of the Hue group of intellectuals around Tri Quang began talking about how Thi could be used. Whatever the means by which he learned of it, Thi appears fully aware of an effort to transform him into a deus ex machina and he resents it.

12. Articles 10 and 15 of Constitutional Charter promulgated June 195 contain provisions for replacement of President of Directorate and Prime Minister respectively. These articles are concerned with death or incapacity, however, and not orderly succession for other reasons. Either could, of course, be used to cover case where either Thieu or Ky resigned and withdrew. By-laws of Congress of Armed Forces (reported in FVS-11,922)6 are more specific and deal with such subjects as reprimands, no-confidence and replacement by Directorate members. Thus legal machinery does exist for orderly and peaceful transfer of power to Thi assuming all parties are agreeable. Nevertheless it is not a question of legal procedures but more a problem of power groups and power plays that will determine the end result.

13. In his conversations with Mission officer regarding his destiny, Thi has come down on side of a peaceful and orderly transfer if he is to take power. He has said on one occasion that he would hope that Ky, on becoming aware of his incapacity to lead, would turn to him and say, “I tried, now it's your turn,” and quietly return to his air force. Such remarks by Thi must be weighed carefully, because they were meant for American consumption with full knowledge of our anxiety that governmental stability be maintained. Given Thi's mercurial nature, one must conclude that the circumstances of the moment would determine whether he made his play within or outside the framework of the existing government. In any event, were he to assume either Thieu's position or Ky's one would have to expect many changes in personnel (Thi has always wanted his own men around him), programs and probably even in fundamental GVN policy.

14. It is our judgment that Thi would be seriously deficient in either military backing or popular support were he to try and assume power. One can imagine a situation developing within the Directorate itself through which he might be named either Chairman or Prime Minister, but he would face virtually insurmountable difficulties from outset in attempting to allay any broad base support. Your judgment is accurate that there would be sharp reaction within the northern Catholic refugee bloc. In addition, the southern mass would probably find this impossible to stomach. His only assets would probably be in the center and even these are uncertain if he were unwilling to accept guidance from Tri Quang. (Thi and Quang are possessed of personalities which are not dissimilar and potentially antipathetic.)

15. In view of foregoing, we will continue taking line proposed in Embtel 6717 with Thi and would hope that we can convince him that he can best serve the nation in present role as I Corps Commander and by lending his support to the principle of continued unity within the Directorate. Defense Minister Co has told us that he was sent to Da Nang while Hue protests were going on for the purpose of reaffirming Thi's support for the government about which certain members of the Directorate were worried. Co claims to have gained Thi's understanding and that Thi continues to support status quo.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 2:51 a.m.

2 In telegram 610 to Saigon, September 1, the Department of State noted with concern the Embassy's report that General Thi believed that events in South Vietnam favored his eventual ascension to power. The Department agreed entirely with Lodge's plan to discourage Thi since it feared that the effects of further political instability in South Vietnam would have serious consequences on U.S. and international public opinion and could only disrupt the war effort against the Viet Cong. The Department asked for the Embassy's assessment of Thi's chances and methods of a possible takeover. (Ibid.)

3 In telegram 724 from Saigon, September 2, the Embassy reported on anti-government student demonstrations in Hue. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

4 Dated September 3. (Ibid., POL 15 VIET S)

5 For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 880-883.

6 Not found.

7 Telegram 671 from Saigon, August 28, contains the report of Thi's statement to an Embassy official that he would eventually replace the corrupt and inefficient Thieu/Ky government. Lodge suggested, according to the cable, “that continuing exposure to Americans all voicing the same line of the need for stability and unity among the members of the Directorate will eventually convince him that he is not our man on the white horse.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

135. Memorandum From the President's Consultant on Vietnam (Taylor) to President Johnson 135. Memorandum From the President's Consultant on Vietnam (Taylor) to President Johnson1

Washington, September 7, 1965.

SUBJECT

A Cease-fire in South Viet Nam

In seeking possible ways of ending the insurgency in South Viet Nam, I have noted with some concern that some of our best friends often consider that at some early point in the procedure it would be desirable or even essential to declare a “cease-fire”. Senator Mansfield in his recent speech2 bore down heavily on the need for a cease-fire and a stand-fast which, he indicated, might start at the outset of negotiations.

If the users of this word, cease-fire, mean it in the sense of a cessation of all use of firearms, it is no more reasonable to talk of a cease-fire in South Viet Nam than of one between police and criminals in a crime-wave. The hostile acts of the Viet Cong which must be brought under control—terrorism, sabotage, oppression of the rural population, recruiting and infiltration—do not depend on the use of weapons. The prevention of these acts by the government does. Hence, a cease-fire without something else would give the Viet Cong the opportunity to continue to harass the population, impress recruits, expand their areas of control and prepare for greater depredations.

The “something else” which would have to be added to make the situation tolerable from our point of view must include provisions for the continued maintenance of law and order by government forces, at least outside of those areas which might be conceded to be normally under Viet Cong control. The government could offer to cease bombings and clearing operations in these Red areas and, in exchange, the Viet Cong/Hanoi would undertake to cease all incidents anywhere in South Viet Nam and all infiltration from outside South Viet Nam. Our side should retain the right of unarmed air reconnaissance of infiltration routes in North Viet Nam and Laos.

In summary, instead of talking of a mutual cease-fire we should talk of a cease-fire on our side in exchange for a cease-aggression on theirs. A fair offer would be for our side to cease all bombing in North and South Viet Nam, and all new clearing operations in Viet Cong held territory, but to retain the right to use force to maintain law and order outside of specified Viet Cong-controlled areas. Additionally, we might agree to freeze foreign force levels but should retain the right of unarmed air reconnaissance of infiltration routes in North Viet Nam and Laos. Their side would cease all incidents in South Viet Nam and infiltration of men and equipment in South Viet Nam. Both sides should have the right on short notice to denounce the agreement for cause.

I believe that the foregoing discussion suggests how involved a cessation of hostilities is in a guerrilla situation such as we have in South Viet Nam. In many ways, the requirements are as demanding as for the negotiating of a final peace settlement. Even, if achieved, the agreement would be susceptible to breach without warning either by a deliberate decision of the Communist leaders or by an act of indiscipline or carelessness by any of the hundreds of thousands of armed men on either side. All of these points need careful consideration before we allow ourselves to become involved in a so-called cease-fire which can be a trap.

Maxwell D. Taylor

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Memos. Secret. Regarding Taylor's role as a part-time consultant to the President, see Swords and Plowshares, pp. 358-366.

2 The text of Mansfield's September 1 speech to the Senate is in The Congressional Record—Senate, September 1, 1965, pp. 22560-22562.

136. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 136. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara1

Washington, September 8, 1965.

I-36114/65

SUBJECT

Concept for Vietnam (U)

In JCSM 652-65 (Tab A),2 the Joint Chiefs of Staff outline a concept for the future conduct of the conflict in Vietnam. In the proposed concept, the Joint Chiefs outline factors bearing on the development of a US military strategy, discuss US objectives, tasks, and basic strategy, and recommend principal measures necessary for executing the basic strategy and for achieving US objectives. The concept includes certain generalized courses of action about which there would be little or no dispute and a number of other courses that are clearly controversial and raise far-reaching policy issues (e.g., blockade and mining of DRV, US build-up in Thailand, intensified RT).

The JCS state that they will submit specific recommendations to implement the concept at an early date. They recommend that the concept be approved as the basis for subsequent development of courses of action, forces and other requirements, to include the phasing of operations.

In my judgment, an over-all approval of the concept proposed by the JCS is not required at this time and would not significantly increase US capabilities and planning in dealing with the situation in SEA in the foreseeable future. Accordingly, I recommend that the concept proposed not be specifically approved at this time. Instead I recommend that you indicate to the Chairman, JCS, that you have studied the referenced JCSM and agree to the use of the proposed concept in the formulation of specific recommendations for future operations in SEA.3

Copies of the referenced JCSM have been provided to Bill Bundy and to McGeorge Bundy.

John T. McNaughton

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 381. Top Secret.

2 Document 130.

3 On September 11, McNamara informed the JCS that he had considered JCSM 652-65 and agreed that the recommendations for future operations in Southeast Asia should be formulated and considered individually as they were developed. McNamara noted that he had sent JCSM 652-65 to the Department of State and White House for use in future deliberations. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 381)

137. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk 137. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, September 8, 1965.

SUBJECT

Systematic Bombing in North Viet Nam

On my return from leave I found that not much progress had been made with respect to bombing policy in North Viet Nam. It may be useful, therefore, for me to set out briefly the proposition about which I talked with you two weeks ago.2 1. Perhaps the most firmly based proposition about the use of airpower is that its systematic and thorough application against a few target systems is geometrically more effective than its diffuse application against many target systems.

2. For this reason, there is little doubt that the most effective use of airpower against North Viet Nam would be systematically to attack certain target systems which are critical to the military supply and production capabilities of that country. The two best candidates are: oil storage and electric power. Although attacks on these target systems need not be sanguinary in terms of civilian casualties, it is evident that they raise issues which have led the President thus far to hold off.

3. This fact does not relieve us of the responsibility of insuring that the use of airpower against North Viet Nam, within present limits, is as efficient as it can be made. At the present time, from the evidence available, I believe our attacks on North Viet Nam suffer from excessive diffusion of effort with respect to target systems. We are attacking ammunition dumps; barracks; some accessible power stations and oil storage depots; transport targets; etc. The indecisive character of the results is suggested by the analyses of the effectiveness of our bombing. They indicate that we have damaged or destroyed a modest proportion of each target system (roughly 5-20%).

4. I propose, therefore, that while keeping open the question of an optimum use of airpower (i.e., systematic attack, including targets near Hanoi, on oil storage and electric power), we devote ourselves forthwith to a transport interdiction campaign with the objectives of: —isolating Hanoi from the Laos and South Viet Nam borders;

—isolating particular regions of southern and western North Viet Nam from each other and from Hanoi.

5. This judgment is based on ample evidence that our transport attacks in North Viet Nam are producing a series of substantial effects on the military and civil economy, as well as on psychological and political morale; but there is also evidence that the lack of system and follow-through in those attacks is denying us their full potentialities.

6. To do this we must establish, by careful analysis, the 50 or so critical transport bottlenecks in North Viet Nam and make a maximum commitment of force to hold those cuts, if possible, by night as well as by day. In turn, this would require that we permit the use of our full sortie capabilities against this transport target system, dropping, if necessary, attacks on target systems of doubtful or lesser value—perhaps barracks and ammunition dumps.

7. No guarantee concerning results can, of course, be made. But a careful reading of the evidence suggests that the transport system of North Viet Nam has been rendered so vulnerable by bombing up to the present point that such a truly systematic interdiction effort might not only make even small military movements across the North Vietnamese borders impractical but also produce significant economic, social, and political consequences.

7. [sic] The adoption of such a program would make urgent an effort which is not lacking in our government; namely, a sophisticated and systematic effort to evaluate from all sources the various different military and civilian effects being imposed by our bombing in the North.

8. A related transport interdiction system should be considered for concurrent or later application; namely, the interdiction of Hanoi from external sources of supply. This system involves the cutting (and holding of cuts) in the rail and road system between Hanoi and the Chicom borders and the mining of Haiphong harbor. A government in Hanoi isolated from its own borders and hinterland and from regular flows of external supplies is likely to take a relatively dim view of its prospects, while still retaining its hard-won industrial and urban infrastructure.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, Rolling Thunder Memos, 1965. Secret. Copies were sent to Unger and McGeorge Bundy. The source text is Unger's unsigned copy; McGeorge Bundy's signed copy is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Cables.

2 No record of this discussion has been found.

138. Memorandum by Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff 138. Memorandum by Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff1

Washington, September 10, 1965.

SUBJECT

Status Report on U.S. Non-Military Programs in Vietnam

Attached is a brief discussion and status report2 of our more important non-military programs. This represents the first in a series of monthly reports for the President.

The range and complexity of our non-military activities are noteworthy—from training village policemen to controlling inflation. The key elements of this comprehensive program are touched on briefly below.

Security and Political Operations. An ambitious internal security program is concentrating on building national, provincial and Special Branch police forces. Recruiting, training and equipping a force of almost 80,000 men is proceeding on schedule. Important steps have also been taken to improve techniques of population control; 7 million identity cards have been issued and population checkpoints have been established.CIA-trained counter-guerrilla units are operating against the VC in its own territory.

The objective of attracting popular support for the Saigon government permeates the full range of programs involved in the counterinsurgency effort. Ky has attempted to project an image of revolutionary reform, but promises have only been slowly fulfilled, and the lack of effective government ties into the villages has dulled the impact of Ky's revolutionary fervor.

The Mission is encouraging Ky to give concrete meaning to his program and to build support for it among the various elements of Vietnamese society. In theory these groups welcome Ky's objectives, but his defensive attitude and the problem of enlisting the support of one group without alienating another inhibit greater progress.

On the level of local action, CIA has trained and equipped various types of small, highly motivated teams which operate throughout the provinces, applying Viet Cong tactics of living and working with the villagers.

The Mission is working with all important political groups to sublimate their deeply embedded historic frictions and encourage their joint effort to defeat the Viet Cong. There is greater covert than overt room for maneuver and programming in this field and CIA has initiated programs to convince both leaders and rank and file that only through cooperation and concentration on prosecuting the war can they avoid Communist domination and realize their respective objectives. The evolution of a national program which can attract their collective energies and subordinate their self-serving interests remains essential if greater progress is to be achieved.

Provincial Operations—Ex Security. The comprehensive military-civilian operation in the Hop Tac area surrounding Saigon has shown progress. The political situation is stable except in Hau Nghia Province where GVN military interference with the Province Chief's operations and instances of indiscriminate shelling have alienated some of the local population.

The refugee problem continues to be serious, although not critical except in the overcrowded camps at Qui Nhon where additional housing is being built. Through the Mission and Dr. Howard Rusk3 we are bringing maximum assistance from both U.S. private and public sectors to bear on the problem.

The recommendations of the Chieu Hoi (rally and amnesty) task force have been approved by our Mission and form the basis for current negotiations with the GVN for a much improved program.

Economic and Social Operations. Economic assistance programs are giving priority to countering the growing threat of inflation, meeting serious logistic problems created by Viet Cong interdiction of land routes, and developing tactics for combatting Viet Cong economic subversion.

Traditional AID programs for agricultural and industrial development continue within the limits of security, with most progress in the Delta and Saigon areas. There is special priority for establishing a light industry complex and creating a planned community in the Cam Ranh Bay area where a major port and U.S. military base are being constructed.

Emphasis is being placed on improving medical facilities in the provinces and increasing the number of surgical suites staffed by U.S. and other Free World medical personnel.

The GVN has initiated some limited new land reform measures. While the GVN is still moving cautiously because of landlord sensitivities, at least the initial step has been taken after a long period of inactivity in this important area.

Psychological Warfare and Information. USIA propaganda directed at North Vietnam has increased considerably with the expansion of Voice of America Vietnamese language service and the initiation of extensive leaflet drops.

Propaganda and psychological operations in South Vietnam have also expanded and grown more effective with the buildup of U.S. information personnel.

U.S. troop orientation programs are attempting to reduce potential causes of friction between U.S. troops and the Vietnamese. There have been instances of friction in urban areas near U.S. military installations; there does not seem to be much of a problem in the countryside.

Veterans benefits programs for the Vietnamese military are being developed to improve morale and sustain their commitment to the war effort and a non-Communist Vietnam.

Our efforts to convince the GVN of the necessity for an effective external information program are now bearing fruit. Pamphlets and other materials have been produced for foreign distribution; newly recruited personnel for assignment abroad are being trained; foreign correspondents, at long last, are being briefed by Saigon spokesmen. The GVN is focusing on better diplomatic representation abroad; agrement has been requested for a new and effective Ambassador to Washington.

C

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 41-Pt. Program in Non-Military Sphere in SVN. Secret.

2 Attached but not printed.

3 With the active encouragement of the Johnson administration, Dr. Howard Rusk was involved in creating an American Southeast Asia Foundation as a non-government fund raising and assistance program for public participation in President Johnson's Southeast Asian program. Secretary Rusk told Dr. Rusk to ignore bureaucratic obstruction with his plans as he had “a direct line to the President.” (Memorandum from Thomson to McGeorge Bundy, September 2; Kennedy Library, Thomson Papers, Southeast Asia, Vietnam, Howard Rusk Project) McGeorge Bundy sent the President a memorandum on September 23, summarizing Rusk's recommendations. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Howard Rusk Mission)

139. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 139. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, September 12, 1965, 11:45 a.m.

SUBJECT

11 AM Meeting on Monday with Rusk, McNamara, Ball, Raborn and Bundy 2

There are several important topics that are ripe for discussion at this meeting. Most of them grow out of a long session on Saturday afternoon of Rusk, McNamara, Ball and myself.3

I. Vietnam

1. Bombing policy. Bob McNamara is eager to get general guidance for the next few weeks on bombing in North Vietnam. As you know, he is engaged in a running discussion with the Chiefs on this subject. His own view is that we should continue with carefully measured attacks on clearly defined military targets that do not take us into the Hanoi-Haiphong area, or into direct engagement of Migs, IL-28s, or the SAM-site systems as a whole. (SAM sites outside the Hanoi-Haiphong area would remain targets of opportunity, as I understand it.) The wider recommendations of the Chiefs have been referred back for additional study.4

Yesterday Dean Rusk felt that while the present pattern of bombing should certainly continue, we should not extend it, as Bob initially suggested, into the part of North Vietnam which is northeast of Hanoi. Bob accepted this advice, and I think the targets he will put forward will be acceptable to Dean. It was also agreed that there would be a further study of target systems in North Vietnam, with the thought that a more sophisticated analysis may permit selection of target systems that would hurt the DRV a lot more, without increasing civilian casualties. It was agreed that the target selection so far has not had this level of sophistication.

2. Diplomatic situation. We had an extended discussion also of the diplomatic situation. On this you must be psychic. I told you yesterday that the Ruppert discussions5 were continuing. But the fact is that Ruppert cancelled a meeting scheduled for last Tuesday, and X has come home. X got the feeling at his last meeting that Ruppert had been called up short, and that there might even be someone watching from behind a curtain which had been drawn for the first time across a doorway in the meeting room. Ruppert carefully drew back from one or two marginal positions taken in earlier talks, and even insisted that he had never taken those positions.

In this situation, there is general agreement that we ought not now to look as if we were very eager for more talks, and we are inclined to keep X at home and show no eagerness for further probes in the next few weeks. We will need your judgment on this also.

(Discussion of this matter on Monday will be indirect and fuzzy because Red Raborn is not currently a member of the Ruppert club—and I doubt if he should be cut in right now unless for some reason you want him to be.)

At the same time that we suspend private diplomatic probing, we think that we should adopt a public posture that our position on negotiations is now totally clear and that the next move is up to the Communists. While we do not like Lodge's leaks to Reston and Nixon, we are inclined to agree with his assessment and to feel that we now have a perfectly good public posture which does not need to be regilded every day. I take it from our phone conversation yesterday that this is your own general view.

Our most difficult and inconclusive discussions turned on the actual program within Vietnam. Our common guess is that the Viet Cong will try to avoid major engagements with our forces and that they will be quite successful in doing so. In this situation, Rusk raised the question whether we really need to move up toward 200,000 men. McNamaracontinues to feel that we do, and I agree. The problem is to make sure that the role of our troops is so understood that neither the country nor the troops themselves get frustrated if the scene of major action shifts toward smaller terrorist activities in which our troops cannot play the dominant role.

We finally agreed that we should ask Lodge and Westmoreland for a general assessment of the prospects for the next few months in this area. We seem to have got past the big monsoon dangers, and we need to be sure that we have an agreed program for the continuing contest of pacification. We will not have anything sharp to report tomorrow morning, but you should know that all of us feel that this is the most important area of effort for the coming weeks and months.

[Here follows discussion of South Asia and Europe.]

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, President's Appointment File, September 13, 1965. Top Secret; Sensitive.

2 See Document 140.

3 According to Rusk's Appointment Book, the Secretary met with McNamara, Ball, and McGeorge and William Bundy from 2:30 to 4 p.m. on Saturday, September 11. (Johnson Library) No other record of this meeting has been found.

4 See footnote 3, Document 136.

5 Reference is to the informal conversations between Mai Van Bo and Edmund Gullion; see Document 112.

140. Memorandum for the Record 140. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, September 13, 1965.

SUBJECT

Luncheon Meeting with the President, Rusk, McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Raborn, Ball, Moyers (first half), and Califano2

McNamara informed the President that the JCS had recommended the bombing of SAM sites, airfields having IL-28s and other targets in areas previously restricted around Hanoi and Haiphong and close to the Chinese border. McNamara said he considered this a significant escalation of war against North Viet Nam and believed that it was premature for the President to consider or act upon any such recommendation until we had a better feel for the likelihood of North Vietnamese use of IL-28s and the North Vietnamese and Chicom reaction to any such action. Rusk agreed with McNamara. McNamara also recommended that certain other targets be hit. Rusk was worried about hitting two bridges between Hanoi and the Communist Chinese border indiscriminately and recommended that the action with respect to each of those bridges be limited to one day. McNamara agreed with Rusk and the President approved this decision. McNamara said that he would be back to the President, after study by Adm. Raborn, with a more fully considered view of the recommendations of the JCS.

[Here follow an extensive discussion of South Asia and a short report by Ball on a trip to Europe.]

JA Califano, Jr.
Special Assistant to the President

1 Source: Johnson Library, President's Appointment File, September 13, 1965. Top Secret. Prepared by Califano.

2 The meeting lasted from 1:16 to 2:20 p.m. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary) The agenda of the meeting is ibid., National Security File, Files of McGeorge Bundy, Luncheons with the President, Vol. I.

141. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 141. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, September 14, 1965, 7:44 p.m.

753. Eyes only Ambassador.

1. Informal high-level review over weekend of Vietnam situation leaves us with feeling situation has more major uncertainties, variables, and possibly occasions for changes in our actions than for some time past. Purpose this message is to give you feel of our thinking and of questions we see becoming acute.

2. Seems likely increasing US ground strength is driving Hanoi/VC to avoid major unit actions and in effect revert to pattern of placing primary emphasis on small-scale actions. Quite possibly we may be faced with VC tactics of prolonged small-scale struggle in which they will rely on international pressures and their doubtless exaggerated view of our internal political opposition to bring about eventual reduction in our effort, while they also hope and work for adverse internal political developments in GVN. In combating such prolonged tactics we need to consider just how we propose to use our greatly increased ground and airstrength, especially the degree to which it can and should be employed in any wider countryside efforts beyond necessarily slow securing efforts close to our base areas.2 (We also question whether and how we can move from patrolling to real pacification in these areas—can ARVN and GVN police take advantage of our nearby strength for this purpose in these areas?) There is even a residual question whether further increases in strength at presently planned pace are wise, or whether we should in some small degree defer further increases. Obviously one crucial element in this is GVN and SVN popular reaction to more extensive US ground operations, and on this subject we would welcome your over-all and up-to-date assessment. In short, if we move rapidly up in force strength, question is bound to arise of effective employment these forces and exactly what concept and strategy we should follow against VC lie-low tactics.

3. Related question concerns scale and effective employment and continuing evaluation of results of presently planned massive further increase in air strike capacity. On this we have noted Westmoreland's excellent directive concerning civilian implications of operations,3 but still feel there is need for better over-all analysis of operations and for some mechanism to evaluate operations currently from all standpoints. One possibility would be to find civilian and military people akin to those who did operations analysis in World War II to act as survey group either on one-shot or continuing basis. Obviously, this too is matter you have under continuing close study, and we need to know your thoughts.4

4. As to pacification/reconstruction effort, we wonder whether time is not fast approaching, or already here, when GVN forces freed by US deployments could put far more steam into Hop Tac and perhaps other key pacification areas where efforts have been pretty much stalled because of force shortage and general security situation. This might involve selecting provinces for really planned and systematic extension of GVN control with firm allotment of necessary military forces, plus police and all other elements of effort. In this connection, we would like for you to develop specific plan for our joint consideration involving concentration of GVN forces on pacification and reliance on US forces to handle large VC actions. What areas would be chosen for pacification; when could the plan be started and what objectives would be set; how many GVN forces would be required, where and when; how many US forces would be required, where and when; etc?5

5. Still further possibility, which we know you have thoroughly in mind, would be extended GVN application of key elements in Acheson plan6 (land reform, Chieu Hoi, etc.) on over-all basis. Moreover, we wonder if it may not become possible to select one or more areas (perhaps in IV Corps area) for application of all elements Acheson plan including local electoral process.

6. On negotiating front we share your view that there is no need to stress our basic position further and that additional stress runs considerable risk misunderstanding in both Hanoi and Saigon. Believe we have taken it far enough to make abundantly clear in all reasonable quarters that it is Hanoi, and especially Peiping, who are the obstacles to peace. Obviously, we shall have to reiterate our position in UN debate, and may have to respond to further third country initiatives, although the field is happily fairly clear at the moment. But we agree we do not need to add to the record or to state our position further except in response to clear need.

7. GVN internal political progress naturally remains basic to any lasting solution whether by negotiation or by course of events without any “settlement”. We have impression Ky Government settling down somewhat and generally acting wisely, with your advice, to deal with possible threats from various quarters. We have no particular suggestions in this area, but look forward to your continuing reports especially directed to the prospects for generating younger, more energetic, and more cohesive leadership group, and winning more positive popular support.7

8. Above are general thoughts on which we would welcome your comment. Some of these areas require continuing decisions and action, but we are inclined to think also that over-all complexity of situation may make it desirable to set up conference—perhaps in Honolulu and perhaps in late October for intensive discussion all these problems. By that time Porter should be in harness and time right for such stock-taking.8

9. Although we have slugged this message for your eyes only, you may of course discuss it with your top people if and to the degree you see fit.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by William Bundy, approved in draft by McGeorge Bundy and McNamara, and approved by Ball. A September 12 draft of this telegram with handwritten revisions by McGeorge Bundy is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Memos. The substantive changes by McGeorge Bundy are indicated in footnotes below.

2 In the September 12 draft, McGeorge Bundy changed the phrase “extending perhaps eventually up to 30-50 miles from our base areas” to read as it does at this point. He also added the subsequent sentence in the parentheses.

3 On September 7, Westmoreland issued MACV Directive 525-3 prescribing guidelines designed to minimize non-combatant battle casualties. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL)

4 In the draft, the phrase originally read: “exchange our thoughts.”

5 Not marked as excised in the September 12 draft, but excised by McGeorge Bundy from the final text of the telegram, was the following paragraph 4:

“Content of bombing program against DRV is next military question. Our inclination is to extend strike program very gradually into area northeast of Hanoi, stressing key targets on northeast rail line and limited number other valid military targets. This would be without stepping up over-all number of strikes per week, but might be accompanied by some intensification armed recce particularly designed to keep key transportation links out of action in area roughly up to 20th parallel. We are still inclined not to hit Hanoi/Haiphong targets or to take actions that would have major chance altering ChiCom posture.”

6 See vol. II, Document 287.

7 McGeorge Bundy added the last phrase to this sentence.

8 McGeorge Bundy suggested deleting the last two sentences of paragraph 8 for the time being. In telegram 1062 from Saigon, September 27, Lodge stated that the Embassy would prefer a Honolulu meeting after November 9 because it wanted time to get pacification and refugee programs started in areas of small guerrilla concentrations and because of the number of official visitors to South Vietnam. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

142. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 142. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Washington, September 15, 1965.

SUBJECT

Air Strikes Against North Vietnam

We have considered the Joint Chiefs of Staff's proposed Rolling Thunder 32/33 program for 17-30 September. That program would implement immediately a major, concentrated effort of air strikes against North Vietnam's Phuc Yen and four other Hanoi/Haiphong airfields, against rail and highway routes and traffic between Hanoi and Haiphong, against rail and highway arteries and traffic between Hanoi/Haiphong and China, against four thermal power plants generating nearly 50% of the DRV's thermal power, and against SAM installations which defend the above areas.

At this date I am not persuaded by the reasoning of JCSM 670-652 that the military advantages the Joint Chiefs of Staff state would flow from the proposed strike effort outweigh the military and political risks involved in implementing the proposal.

There is doubt whether the proposed program will mean a net advantage to US/GVN operations within South Vietnam. For example,while the LOC targets proposed in northeast North Vietnam all relate to interdiction of war materials into North Vietnam and therefore add to our efforts to interdict the flow of materials out of North Vietnam into South Vietnam, the intelligence estimates have been that such US strikes may well lead to a more vigorous effort by the DRV in support of the VC in South Vietnam. And the estimates have been that strikes of the kind proposed by the Joint Chiefs would not at this time significantly injure the VC ability to persevere in the South or persuade the Hanoi Government that the price of persisting was unacceptably high.

More important is the risk of a US-Chinese confrontation, which could well be increased by a program of the kind proposed. I am acutely aware that it is possible that US/GVN forces at Da Nang may be subjected to air attack by North Vietnam's eight IL-28s (and perhaps MIG 15/17s). The intelligence judgment, however, has been that such an attack is unlikely, largely because of the fear of widespread and large-scale retaliation on North Vietnam by the United States. The judgment has been that such a DRV attempt to strike in the South might be triggered by a US/GVN strike against the Hanoi/Haiphong area, and that there is a substantial risk that a strike program of the weight recommended would induce the Chinese Communists to intervene in the air from Chinese bases.

It has been decided therefore that: 1. The Rolling Thunder program proposed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff for the period 17-30 September will not be approved at this time.

2. A new up-to-date Special National Intelligence Estimate will be obtained to determine the likely DRV, Chinese and Soviet military reactions to a program of the magnitude, timing, and scope recommended by the Joint Chiefs.3 This SNIE also should evaluate the effect of the strike program on the effort within South Vietnam and should take into account any new element introduced into the equation since earlier SNIEs were prepared, such as the Pakistan-India war.

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff should make recommendations with respect to any further intensification of air defense and early warning capability required to properly defend South Vietnam and our forces there.

Robert S. McNamara4

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 381. Top Secret.

2 In this September 2 memorandum, the Joint Chiefs recommended the program summarized in the preceding paragraph. (Ibid.) Deputy Secretary of Defense Vance's comments on JCSM 670-65, September 4, are contained in a memorandum to the JCS. (Ibid.)

3 SNIE 10-11-65, September 22, “Probable Communist Reaction to a US Course of Action,” concluded that the Democratic Republic of Vietnam would probably be more susceptible to a U.S. program of bombing attacks on certain new targets than it had been in the past. The Bureau of Intelligence and Research of the Department of State dissented fundamentally from this estimate, and its dissent is included in the SNIE. (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 72 D 139, SNIE 10-11-65)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

143. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 143. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 15, 1965.

Unnumbered. For the President.

1. Refugees—an opportunity.

Am developing program on crash basis to make refugee situation an opportunity for spearheading a national political revolution against Communist-subversion/terrorism instead of treating it as a social and economic liability. New approach now being studied prior to my discussing with GVN.

Program envisages providing adequate care, temporary housing to refugees who will be immediately organized into self-governing units (essentially their own former village organization) and trained in processes of democracy while undergoing rehabilitation. Men of military age will receive paramilitary training for village defense with maximum effort through Chieu Hoi surrenderee program to secure return of those men (often the majority of those villages in refugee areas) still under Viet Cong control. Military civic action personnel expected play important role in all aspects of refugee program in zones of American influence.

Objective of program (in coordination with military progress) is to send village groups, like pilgrim fathers, well trained and organized, back to their original villages wherever economically desirable, inspired and equipped to build new lives, and able and willing to defend themselves against Communist marauders in same way Texas pioneers fought Comanches and Apaches.

Proposal should not be released prior to coordination here with GVN.

2. U.S. troops.

I made my first visit to US ground troops—the Third Marine Division at Danang and the First Cavalry Division at Qui Nhon.2 I wish I could describe the feelings of confidence which they inspire—both as to the understanding of the mixed political and military nature of their mission and as to the confidence which they create among Vietnamese.

3. Political.

The Convention of the Armed Forces met in a day-long closed session in a Saigon movie theater on September 11, with more than 1600 officers from all services. They adopted resolutions rejecting any negotiations with or coalition with North Viet-Nam and denunciation of maneuvers tending to create disorder and division. Purpose of the meeting was to put pressure on the students, the intellectuals and the provincial councils by presenting an image of monolithic solidarity within the armed [forces].

4. Military.

The lull in large-scale Viet Cong activity continued with the Viet Cong apparently going through a period of realignment of their units and re-evaluation of their plans.

5. Economic.

End of the month rice stores in both Saigon and the Delta dipped to lower levels and the previous favorable decline in Saigon rice price was arrested. Since recent rice arrivals have been delivered to Danang, the supply situation in Saigon remains a matter of concern. Expected rice shipment in the next fortnight should relieve the situation.

6. Psychological.

Editorials in the Vietnamese language press were marked by optimism on the course of the war.

7. Negotiations.

(1) Ambassador Goldberg is quoted by the Associated Press under a September 12 dateline as saying that an honorable peace “can only be achieved by negotiation premised on the principles of self-determination”.

(2) If Ambassador Goldberg is correctly quoted, then I would like respectfully to disagree for reasons set forth in my letter to you of August 31.3 I am positive that negotiation is certainly not the “only way”, and I believe that under certain circumstances it may not be the best way.

(3) To the points of my letter of August 31, let me add the following thoughts which have occurred to me upon further reflection: (A) To maintain that the purpose of our military operations is to bring about “unconditional negotiations” puts a floor under the risks which the Communists run. If they know that they can always get to the conference table they have the initiative in setting the time and the terms for negotiations and thus they will have every incentive to continue military operations.

(B) When considering the word “negotiations”, one must never forget that the Communists will not enter negotiations with any intention of “settling” anything, but with the aim of winning at the conference table the prize which eluded them on the battlefield. One thing is absolutely certain: there can be no hope of negotiating them out of anything that they hold on the ground. They will strive not for stability, but for victory, and by then the contest will be largely psychological.

(C) I am, of course, not opposed to negotiations in principle, provided we have a clear and sagacious program, but we must recognize that negotiations begin a new phase of the struggle rather than mark the end of the old phase. Stakes remain extremely high and the conduct of affairs grows more complicated, because it depends on so many intangibles. Negotiations, therefore, require as careful and thoughtful preparation as do our military campaigns.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate the time of transmission; the telegram was received at 6:36 a.m. Lodge sent this unnumbered telegram to the Department of State with instructions to pass it to the White House, but a note on the source text indicates that it was not.

2 Lodge's full report on his visit is in telegram 888 from Saigon, September 14. (Ibid.)

3 Document 131.

144. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 144. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 18, 1965.

953. Ref: Deptel 753.2 Following comments keyed to numbered paragraphs reftel:

Para 1

Agree with your feeling situation has more imponderables than usual. While US military presence appears to have blunted VC offensive, improved Vietnamese morale and given us great opportunity, exploiting this opportunity depends upon climate of mutual trust and confidence with young, inexperienced and highly sensitive government facing complicated political problems.

Para 2

A. Agree with you that increasing US ground strength may be driving VC to avoid major unit actions and to place primary emphasis on small scale actions. These must be dealt with successfully by the Vietnamese themselves making the main effort in conducting a combined politico-military campaign. The presence of American troops does provide the opportunity for thorough pacification of the areas in which they are stationed and full advantage should be taken of this opportunity. It isa very big dividend from our investment of men and money. For example, the Third Marine Division has scored impressive successes north, south and west of Danang, while the police in the city of Danang itself were doing a mediocre job. As I reported in another telegram,3 I directed that the USOM police advisor concentrate entirely on the city of Danang.

B. In this connection, consider the case of 1st Lt. Paul Ek, USMC, who commands a joint action company consisting of 60 Americans and 150 Vietnamese in Phu Bai. They are causing somewhat of a sensation in cleaning out the Viet Cong and, by their able political conduct, increasing the intelligence “take”. If our American troops can emulate this performance (and many are doing so now) in the ratio of 60 to 150, ought to get a tremendous amount of small unit nighttime effective pacification, and we would be neglecting an opportunity not to use American troops for this purpose, thereby pacifying the country and transforming the ARVN, making it into a much more vital and effective element of Vietnamese society, able at some not too remote date to carry on by themselves without outside help.

C. General Westmoreland has had under continuous study how he would use the increased ground and air strength; in fact, the determination of his Phase I troop request was based on a detailed analysis. The strategy and tactics that he contemplates employing have been discussed in detail with the Vietnamese JGS and a MACV concept paper is published for the guidance of US commanders. This policy publication is being forwarded by MACV through military channels.4 Westmoreland feels strongly that the full Phase I troop list should be deployed in accordance with the schedule worked out in Honolulu in August. It is noted that the 1st Division has been alerted but no public announcement has been made for its deployment. We believe this division should be deployed on schedule. In close coordination with the Vietnamese High Command, General Westmoreland proposes to follow the following broad strategy: 1. Halt the VC offensive—stem the tide.

2. Resume the offensive—destroy VC units where they can be found and pacify selected high priority areas.

3. Restore progressively the entire country to GVN control.

4. Support “rural construction” with comprehensive attention to the pacification process as regards regional and popular force units, the police, and the relationship therein between US and GVN regular forces. Emphasis should be accorded the role of civic action of which a police precinct program is a necessary prerequisite. Appreciation and support of political and psychological requirements would be stressed.

5. It is assumed that the air campaign will continue against the DRV and infiltration routes in Laos.

D. We need sufficient strength to insure the success of our strategy and tactics. As we succeed it becomes more difficult for the Viet Cong to marshal main-force units and the pressure will be on them to withdraw such units to more remote areas and/or to transform themselves into small units. This is a considerable triumph for us, because it means that the US presence has in effect fragmented the main force, prevented it from coming into being, or at least has forced it to play a lesser role. We will have kept the main force from becoming more akin to a regular army with which the enemy hoped to conquer the country militarily and without which he surely cannot do so. We will have to keep up the pressure on the main force whenever and wherever it appears to prevent its resurgence on a large scale.

E. General Westmoreland and I are intensively studying the question of “what concept and strategy we should follow against VC lie-low tactics”. With our bases secure and aggressive action against VC concentrations keeping them under pressure and off-balance, the lie-low tactics that the VC may adopt become more a problem for police-and-social-action-type program. We would expect to urge Vietnamese to use the police in the cities, and police-type operation by military forces working out from thoroughly pacified centers to pacify the environs as the basic element in what the Vietnamese call “rural construction”. We are already discussing with the Vietnamese the possibility of singling out areas that look like good prospects, that are potentially pretty much over on our side, and then pacifying them so as to get a little smell of across-the-board success in the air.

F. I also think it is prudent to expect increased VC terrorism, attempts to overthrow the government and economic warfare.

G. We have had no unfavorable GVN and SVN reactions of significance to more extensive US ground operations. Government leaders have made clear their support for our efforts and their desire that we continue. While personal, psychological and economic frictions can arise, there is no evidence that these negative factors now outweigh the positive factors. Our buildup and activity have convinced the Vietnamese that we do not intend to pull out, which has been a nagging fear. Our efforts have contributed to the belief that the VC cannot win and have raised national morale and confidence in the success of the anti-Communist struggle. There are many variables at work and it is hard to predict how long this favorable attitude will continue or whether CQ [VC?] may possibly diminish. In the near future we do not expect unfavorable attitudes of any great significance. We are keeping our collective ears to the ground.

Para 3

We have under evaluation the use of the increased air strike capacity. Westmoreland recently appointed a board of officers to study this matter in depth so as to assure that this available firepower is used effectively, efficiently, and with discretion. This measure by Westmoreland is an extension of the policy directive concerning minimizing battlefield non-combatant casualties.5 Westmoreland feels and I agree that an outsider survey group is not needed at this time. He believes that he is able to translate recent experience into improved methods. He has in his J-3 office a Requirements and Analysis Division which is manned with well qualified officers who devote their entire time to operational studies and analysis of force utilization and requirements. They consult with the civilian elements of the Mission. He will be quick to ask for help when he feels the need.

Para 4

A. I have directed the US Mission Liaison Group to grapple with needed actions in this whole area, which it is starting to do most actively. Also, fine early progress by the staff was made through informal liaison with Minister Ung, Secretary-General of the Council of Rural Construction (Pacification), with the Prime Minister's staff, and with key technicians in GVN Ministries participation in pacification. The unexpected death of Minister Ung in an Air Vietnam crash Thursday6 suddenly has imposed a whole new set of circumstances. Meanwhile, the improvement of Hop Tac operations is receiving priority attention now, including my discussing this with General Ky and making a personal visit to the Hop Tac area on Thursday morning.7

B. I am not ready to say, “what areas would be chosen for pacification, when could the plan be started, what objectives would be set,” but hope to be able to do so soon. I am now encouraging General Ky to concentrate GVN efforts and enthusiasm on pacification so that this can have sustained, wholehearted GVN participation. This will permit development of realistic requirements for our planning.

C. On the military side of the questions raised in para 4, Westmoreland informs me that a campaign plan is being refined by his staff in coordination with the JCS. A first phase schedule of operations has been agreed to between himself and General Co. Further, a study by MACV and JGS is now in progress for the purpose of reviewing AB 139 of 25 December 19648 (this concerns the roles and missions of the various elements of the RVNAF) and the Chien Thang plan (GVN pacification plan) to bring them in line with the campaign plan. I believe these efforts areresponsive to what you have in mind; however this can be better determined after you are briefed on MACV's plans. In this connection, Westmoreland's J-3, Brigadier General Depuy, is going to CINCPAC for a conference the last week of this month and thence to Washington for two weeks leave. Westmoreland states that he will be available with appropriate charts and maps to brief the JCS if such is agreed to by CINCPAC following the Honolulu meeting. In this connection the main purpose of the Honolulu military meeting is to allow Westmoreland to present his Phase II troop deployment concept. The Mission Council is being briefed on this subject by MACV on Sept 21.

Para 5

Development of popular electoral processes from the rice roots up is part of all our current planning for counter subversion/terrorism in “rural construction” (pacification). For example, this has been taken into account in developing temporary refugee status within rural communities which have fled to safe zones pending their return home. I have also been talking with General Ky about making use of provincial councils elected last May 30 in their further election of delegates to Consultative National Council which also will be given further task of commencing draft of new Constitution. GVN has made progress on land reform and is giving increased emphasis to Chieu Hoi. But in this connection I cannot believe it would be prudent to call a halt to military operations anywhere.

Para 6

Appreciate what you say about the “negotiating front”.

Para 7

On the internal political front, we have had a period of relative quiet ever since my arrival. I am studying extraordinary measures to protect ourselves from a coup and hope that with the passage of time and with our advice plus his own natural aptitude, General Ky can become a really effective political leader. The present leadership is sufficiently “young and energetic”, but I agree that the problem is to maintain its cohesion and gain more positive popular support.

Para 8

Hope you will keep Honolulu date open for a while, as it may be that late October would be bad from the standpoint of the work here and that mid-November would be better.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 6:08 a.m.

2 Document 141.

3 Not identified.

4 The MACV Concept Paper, August 30, is in CINCPAC Command History, 1965, Annex A, MACV, pp. 141-153.

5 See footnote 3, Document 141.

6 September 16.

7 September 23.

8 Not further identified.

145. Memorandum for the Record 145. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, September 20, 1965.

SUBJECT

JCS Executive Session with SecDef and Deputy SecDef, 20 Sep 65, 1400 hours

1. This was the first of the regular Monday meetings in executive session with only the Chiefs present initiated by the Chairman for better communication between the Chiefs and SecDef. At the conclusion all the Chiefs felt it had been one of the most useful meetings.

2. The SecDef doubted that there was a need for more air power in Vietnam. He wondered if some of the air effort was not wasted. The Chairman indicated that Westmoreland had set up a group to study this.

3. The SecDef wondered what lies ahead for US troops. Based on the thesis that a moderately successful blunting of the VC Monsoon strategy has occurred, it would appear doubtful that the VC would make sustained attacks for the next three to six months. What strategy will VC use? Will they go to small-scale operations, and if so how do we combat it? The Marines favor an oil spot strategy, expanding their enclaves gradually to hook them together to keep the VC from getting the rice in the coastal plain, mingling with the population there; at the same time training Regional Forces and Popular Forces to take over. SecDef wonders how we hasten this process. It was pointed out that Westmoreland's concept for US forces would prevent main force concentrations; combination of US and RVN forces to attack main force sanctuaries that had been in existence for 25 years, move in and drive them out, then police by RVN. Do away with the sanctuaries. At the same time build up RVN forces. There should be a day when US forces should leave the country. By the end of October we need a plan, a strategy. The Chairman noted that Westmoreland has developed a strategy and a plan in conjunction with the senior Vietnam leadership and Ambassador Lodge.

4. The Secretary of Defense spoke with regard to the next Rolling Thunder, indicating some fixed targets have not been too useful, that fixed targets should be somewhat extended to interdiction in the northwest rail and road lines, increasing slowly with no dramatic impact.

5. The matter of air defense should be reviewed by the Army and Air Force.

6. The SecDef concluded with a talk about leaks on security. He pointed out the many times he had gone into this, including some investigations he had had, which really produced no substantial results, but he urged everyone to look into this again, maybe with a new group, to see what could be done. He pointed out that some leaks had probably resulted in increased casualties for the US and he wished it could be stopped.

7. In leaving he mentioned that he would like to have one of the Chiefs go to Vietnam about each quarter. It was pointed out that General McConnell is going in October and General Wheeler plans to be there at Christmastime.

Creighton W. Abrams
General, United States Army
Acting Chief of Staff

1 Source: U.S. Military History Institute, Johnson Papers, Close Hold File No. 3. Top Secret. Drafted by Abrams on September 27.

146. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 146. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 22, 1965, 3 p.m.

991. For the President.

1. Political-psychological

A. The Govt of Vietnam has finished its twelfth week of stability—a rather astonishing fact which I attribute in large part to the conviction that the U.S. is truly committed to staying as long as is necessary and to doing whatever is necessary to ward off the Viet Cong aggression. This conviction is created by the U.S. combat presence on the ground.

B. The above statement is impossible to prove, but some unusually well informed and sagacious persons believe it. In other words, your decision on troops is not only a great thing militarily, but is paying big dividends politically.

C. Let us hope that this stability continues, and I try to leave no stone unturned to see that it does. I have made it clear in strategic places that a coup would be most unwelcome. I also am taking steps to make sure we are organized to hear about coup plotting in time to do something about it.

D. The Viet Cong defection rate is still disappointing, and the level of VC activity remains high, disruptive and not effectively checked by the GVN.

E. But there is encouragement in figures indicating an increase in the amount of information which Vietnamese citizens are giving to the govt concerning the Viet Cong. Surely this is a most significant index. In a very real sense, the citizen is not just expressing a Gallup Poll type preference; he is actually “voting with his life.” If he decides to give information about the Viet Cong and then gets caught, he may very well get killed. This, therefore, represents a vital judgment. I am having the CIA look into it.

F. I also hear that an order has gone out in some places to the Viet Cong not to congregate in groups of more than 100 men, or at any one place for more than 48 hours. If this becomes a general Viet Cong policy, it would be significant. Much of their strength has been because, in this medievally structured country, they, too, organized themselves in medieval fortresses which were totally impregnable on the ground, where they could stay in safety with plenty of rest for long periods, coming out only to make very well prepared attacks on what the govt had been doing in the countryside. This made the govt's job quite hopeless. Now we are destroying the fortresses.

G. Americans in Vietnam report “cautious optimism”—based on belief in the GVN's ability to carry out its programs, in awareness of Viet Cong reverses, and in passive resistance to Viet Cong “taxes” on recruiting.

H. Yet, all of the above is only the beginning of the impact of the American presence—an impact before the First Cavalry and before most of the First Infantry Division were here at all. Moreover, the U.S. troops which are here have by no means done everything they can do to organize the Vietnamese “regional” and “popular” forces for joint American/Vietnamese police type tactics and night patrolling. Thorough pacification has thus yet to be done even within the U.S. base areas. When this happens, the psychological effect should be marked.

I. The proposed deployment of the First Infantry Division should allow successful operations against the oldest and most vital Viet Cong redoubt which is not only what has been threatening Saigon for so long, but which is the line of communication from the food source in the Delta to the Viet Cong north of Saigon.

J. On another political front,PriMin Ky traveled to Ban Me Thuot and personally presided over the return of 483 Montagnard dissidents who had rallied to the govt. In two speeches, Ky stressed the need for national solidarity, freedom from discrimination, and for the complete merger of the Montagnard and lowland people. He also told me he had evidently taken my advice and had urged his local military commanderto be gradual and tactful in his relationships with the Montagnards. Tension continues and tangible measures must be taken to relieve their inferior status. The U.S. stands ready to help.

K. In Quang Nam Province of central Vietnam, govt forces broke up demonstrations protesting against govt air and artillery bombardments, demanding reimbursement for damages caused by military operations and calling for the release of husbands and sons from military service. These demonstrations apparently had nothing to do with the recent Hue struggle movement. They followed the pattern of disturbances which have occurred at widely separated points in the past, often as a result of Viet Cong agitation.

2. Military

A. Combined forces (U.S., Vietnamese, Australian, and New Zealand) thrust into a Viet Cong base area in Binh Duong Province to upset Viet Cong plans to concentrate strong forces in the area. The 101st Airborne Brigade defeated a major Viet Cong unit north of An Khe in Binh Dinh Province. Meanwhile the Viet Cong mounted only one battalion-size attack, their main activity continuing to be interdiction of communication routes.

3. Pacification

A. The death of Minister for Rural Construction Nguyen Tat Ung was a serious loss to the rural construction (pacification) effort. He was a forceful Minister and Lansdale had begun a relationship with him which promised to be fruitful.

4. Economic

A. Wholesale rice prices began edging up, reflecting low rice stocks in Saigon, poor prospects for further deliveries from the Delta this season, and estimates that the 1966 crop will be 10 to 12 percent below the level of the 1965 crop. The GVN is now relying on PL-480 imports for immediate needs and for stockpile buildup.

5. General Ky

A. I took the occasion during our most recent joint meeting with the Vietnamese to commend Ky's approach to the desertion problem. He is stressing the necessity of eliminating corruption among top officers, of improving the troops' understanding of the war, and of carrying out in practice the policy of equal sharing by officers of hardships and dangers. I also congratulated him for his imaginative attitude regarding the refugee problem.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Received at 3:37 a.m. and passed to the White House. There is an indication on another copy of this telegram that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Cables)

147. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 147. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson1

Washington, September 22, 1965.

General Westmoreland has requested a reaffirmation of his authority to use standard riot control munitions in certain specified combat situations in South Vietnam and Ambassador Lodge has supported his request. This authority would extend only to lacrimatory agents (tear gas) known as CS and CN. Use of nausea-producing agents DM and CN-DM would not be authorized.

The agents would be used primarily to clear tunnels, caves, and underground shelters in cases where their use will lead to far fewer casualties and less loss of life than would the combat alternatives which involve high explosive or flame munitions. Of particular importance would be the reduction in casualties to civilians who are inevitably mingled with hostile military elements as the result of VC tactics.

I agree with General Westmoreland that the use of these riot control agents far outweighs disadvantages that may accrue; in fact there is every indication that we may be in for censure if civilian casualties should accrue because we didn't use tear gas. The disadvantages to which I refer are the likelihood of some sharp international criticism, spurred by Communist propaganda, of the U.S. Government authorizing the employment of what will inevitably be called “poison gas”.

Unless you indicate otherwise I will reaffirm to General Wheeler the current national approval for the use of the riot control agents CS and CN under the combat conditions described above.

Secretary Rusk concurs in this recommendation.

If you approve, the Department of State will send a message to all posts informing them of the decision and providing public affairs guidance.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. Secret.

148. Special National Intelligence Estimate 148. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, September 22, 1965.

SNIE 10-11-65

PROBABLE COMMUNIST REACTIONS TO A

US COURSE OF ACTION

The Problem2

To estimate probable Communist reactions to a US program of air attacks on certain new targets in North Vietnam.

Assumptions

For the purposes of this estimate we assume air strikes against Phuc Yen and four other airfields near Hanoi and Haiphong; against rail and highway routes and traffic between Hanoi and Haiphong and between Hanoi-Haiphong and China; against four major thermal power plants; and against SAM installations defending these areas. We further assume that attacks on all these targets are begun within the next few weeks and in a roughly simultaneous fashion. We also assume restrikes as necessary and subsequent armed reconnaissance against the rail and highway targets.

The Estimate

1. For many months our estimates have emphasized the crucial importance of the fact that the Communists, especially the DRV and China, believed they were winning the war in South Vietnam and needed only to maintain their momentum until the GVN collapsed and the US was forced to abandon the struggle. In this confidence Hanoi has been willing to endure bombings of the DRV, to accept the increasing US commitment, and to refuse any negotiations. Moreover, the Communists have counted on international and domestic pressures on the US, as well as on the growing capabilities of air defense around the critical Hanoi-Haiphong area, to deter further escalation. Finally, they probably have had strong doubts about US determination to face a protracted war, and these feelings have probably been strengthened by repeated US soundings and overtures for negotiations.

2. We think, however, that recently this general confidence has been weakened both by US/GVN military successes and by tangible evidence that the US is willing to increase its commitment. The situation has come to seem more dangerous and discouraging than they probably had expected, and victory must seem to them much further off than it did a few months ago. Thus, we think that the assumed US action would come at a time when DRV doubts may be growing.

3. Public Communist declarations and commitments to continue the struggle, however, remain as firm as ever. Recently, the DRV has once again vigorously rejected negotiations on any terms except its own, apparently in response to approaches from various intermediaries. The Chinese have been vehement in denouncing negotiations altogether; they have even warned the DRV more or less openly against them. Their warnings may indicate Chinese worry that the DRV is weakening; indeed, there are a few indications, private and tentative, that Hanoi may not be quite as adamant in its position as its public declarations assert.

Immediate Reactions

4. The Communists, while they have hoped that the US would continue to exempt the Hanoi-Haiphong area from attack, probably have rated as fairly high the chances of the kind of US attacks assumed here. Their reactions, therefore, would probably not be greatly affected by shock or surprise.

5. The North Vietnamese would, of course, defend as best they could against the attacks. Beyond this, they might retaliate quickly. It is possible that the DRV has contingency plans for surviving aircraft to attack American bases in the South or US carriers. There is no evidence of training for this type of mission. They would probably expect such strikes to provoke wider and heavier US attacks. Thus, we think that the chances would be against such retaliation, though it cannot be ruled out.

6. A second immediate danger would be Chinese air intervention—either over the DRV or against South Vietnam or US carriers. It is possible that Hanoi and Peking already have an agreed plan for the Chinese to intervene from their own bases in response to the kind of US attack assumed in this estimate. We doubt this; the Chinese are not likely to have made a firm or unqualified commitment. They would wish to weigh the effectiveness of the initial US attack and to receive the DRV reaction before making any move likely to invite a US attack on South China. However, the danger of accidental encounters would be particularly high if US aircraft were operating close to the border.

7. Thus in the first few days, during and immediately following the onset of the US attacks, there would be a chance of an attack on US bases or ships and a chance of Chinese air intervention. But we think these unlikely.

8. Of course, there would also be a great hue and cry from the Communist side, and the usual stream of protests, threats and warnings. We would also expect new acts of terrorism and sabotage inside South Vietnam, particularly against US forces. Viet Cong capabilities in these fields are considerably greater than they have yet chosen to demonstrate. The principal Communist reactions however, would come in later weeks and months, and they would of necessity be greatly affected by the ongoing course of military and political events as well as by the US actions we consider in this estimate.

Subsequent Reactions

9. China. The Chinese would strongly urge the DRV to continue the fight; to this end they would probably promise more equipment and personnel to build up air defenses, and particularly to defend and repair the interdicted lines of communication to South China. The Chinese might agree to send their own aircraft and pilots to the DRV, but on balance we think this unlikely in the wake of the demonstrated vulnerability of DRV airfields.3 Almost certainly the Chinese would oppose negotiating, and they might warn the DRV not to count on Chinese support if it moved toward a cease-fire or a diplomatic settlement. We think Chinese views carry great weight in Hanoi, particularly if the DRV leaders were divided over future policy.

10. It may be that these US attacks would tip the balance and cause Chinese intervention. The Chinese might believe that the war had passed the point of no return and that a US-Chinese confrontation was the inevitable price of continuing the war in South Vietnam. The Chinese have made this war the test case for their doctrine of “peoples war” against the US; they have staked much prestige on it. We cannot be very confident that the Chinese would continue to refrain from intervening in the air from their own bases as the US continued attacks near the Chinese border and against a weakened DRV. But on balance we think it unlikely that they would so intervene.4 With somewhat more confidence, we estimate that the US attacks would not provoke large-scale Chinese intervention with ground combat forces; Peking would almost certainly believe that this would run very high risks of war with the US.

11. The USSR. The Soviets would increase their efforts to halt the conflict. They would put pressure on the US and urge negotiations on Hanoi. There are some recent indications that the Soviets are now morewilling to put some pressure on the DRV, perhaps because they believe their military assistance and the trend of the guerrilla war gives their view greater authority. The Soviets would almost certainly agree to DRV requests to replace air defense equipment, although they would do so more to retain their influence with the DRV than in the expectation that they could furnish an adequate defense against US operations.

12. The Soviets could try to relieve pressures on the DRV by moving against the US in Berlin. We continue to believe there are strong inhibitions against a double crisis. Carefully controlled harassments and occasionally provocative demonstrations of US vulnerabilities are always possible, however. A potentially unstable situation in the Soviet leadership adds an element of uncertainty to the Soviet positions.

13. The DRV. In Hanoi, reactions would probably develop along one of two conflicting lines: (a) Hanoi might believe that the new US attacks and the subsequent interdiction campaign did not alter the basic situation. The North Vietnamese might stick to their belief that the guerrilla war is, by definition, a prolonged struggle against heavy odds, that there will be setbacks and defeats, but that the ultimate gain is worth it. They might feel that damping down the war in the wake of US attacks would appear a capitulation. They might feel that if the war were interrupted the Viet Cong movement could not long maintain its morale and cohesion. Along this line of reasoning they might also conclude that the US escalation of bombings would still not do intolerable damage and would probably not be extended to attacks on urban population. They might decide that the US was desperate in the face of a long war involving US troops in the South, and that further struggle, perhaps involving the dispatch of PAVN units to the South on an increased scale, was the best course to crack the Saigon Government and US resolve.

(b) On the other hand, the DRV might estimate the situation quite differently. The growing US commitment in the South might persuade them that the guerrilla war could not be prosecuted to final victory. Without such a promise of ultimate success they might believe Viet Cong morale could not be sustained. Moreover, the attacks on the DRV's air defenses and on a wider range of targets might convince them that the US intended to escalate the air war almost indefinitely, if necessary. Thus they might decide that, while their position in the South was still strong and the Viet Cong still intact, it would be more expedient to move toward negotiations or some tacit understanding in order to pursue their objectives through political means, and possibly at some future time to resume guerrilla warfare.

14. We believe that the US course of action assumed here would reinforce the thinking described in subparagraph (b) above. Even so, it is not likely that the North Vietnamese would move immediately to the conference table; they would probably feel that there was still time to test the effectiveness of the Viet Cong against US forces. They might still hope to strike a critical blow against US and GVN morale, perhaps by engaging US forces somewhere in the hinterland. Failing this, they might next revert to hit and run tactics for a time. And there is still the question of whether China could prevent a switch to political tactics.

15. In general, however, we think it unlikely that in the new situation created by the US attacks assumed here, the DRV would simply continue the war along present lines. We think that this US course of action would be more likely in time to move the North Vietnamese toward political and diplomatic initiatives than to cause them to escalate the war.

16. The Viet Cong. As noted above, Viet Cong morale is an important ingredient in DRV estimates of how to prosecute the war. We have little good evidence on the state of Viet Cong morale. And it is difficult to judge the impact of specific US moves, since their effectiveness is a gradual cumulative process. In the assumed instance, the new US air attacks on the DRV would be unlikely to affect Viet Cong capabilities or intentions in the short run. Over the longer term, however, if it became apparent that supply and reinforcement were more and more difficult, it is likely that VC morale would deteriorate, particularly if they suffered setbacks on the order of Chu Lai together with continuing pressure on the ground and from the air.

17. Other Considerations. A current factor which might play some role is the Indo-Pakistani conflict. The Communists might see the new US move in Vietnam as an attempt to take advantage of the diversion of world attention to the Indian subcontinent. The US attack might help to dissuade the Chinese from any major involvement there. Peking would almost certainly be increasingly reluctant to divert resources to support Pakistan in the face of new escalation in Vietnam, its primary area of concern. In general, however, we think that the course of the Indo-Pakistani conflict would not greatly affect Communist reactions to the US course of action considered in this estimate.

The following is the position of the Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State: 1. The Director, INR, Department of State, dissents fundamentally from the key estimates made above. He believes that the postulated air strikes against the DRV's SAM sites, airfields, thermal plants, and prime rail, road, and traffic targets would be seen by the Communists—as well as by most other observers—as marking a fundamental change in the character of our escalation of the Vietnam war. Separated strikes on these targets, carefully spaced over time, would help reduce adverse reactions, although these would be serious in any event. The composite program assumed here, however, would be regarded as a political and military watershed comparable to that of last February when our bombing of the DRV began.

2. Hanoi, Peking, and Moscow would all view the strikes as initiating—and in large part executing—the highest level of militarily significant escalation available in the DRV short of ground invasion. Even assuming precision bombing, the strikes would inextricably involve industrial and civilian losses beyond the objectives deliberately targeted, as well as almost certain Soviet and Chinese casualties. In operation the new program would appear to have exempted only deliberate attacks (of no military significance) on the population itself. Communists and non-Communists alike would consider that this sudden massive action contradicted the many prior official indications, public and private, that we intended to respect the special sensitivity of the Hanoi-Haiphong complex. They would regard these undifferentiated and simultaneous strikes as a gross departure from our past policy of graduated pressure. They would probably conclude that we had decided to forsake further efforts to project a judicious combination of political-military pressures against the infiltration network, and had chosen instead the blunt instrument of a broad military assault on the chief elements of the DRV economy and its self-defense capability. The credibility of our protestations of limited objectives would slump, and our actions would just as plausibly be seen to invite the capitulation of the DRV under pain of total destruction, raise the specter of an eventual invasion on the ground, and in any case appear to threaten the DRV's ability to survive.

3. Under these circumstances, it is unlikely that Hanoi would choose to move toward negotiations or compromise; it is unlikely that Moscow could afford or would be willing to urge Hanoi to do so; and it is certain that Peking would press Hanoi to persevere. These positions would be mutually reinforcing.

4. The DRV leaders, as the estimate notes, have recently indicated that their terms for negotiation may not be as inflexible as they have sometimes seemed. The assumed attacks, however, would immediately deter Hanoi from any diplomatic overtures it may possibly have been contemplating. It would fear that any sign of compromise under such pressure would be read by friends and enemies as capitulation, would undermine all possible future bargaining positions, would irreparably damage Viet Cong morale, and would predispose the US to renew these pressures at any time and under any conditions it thought appropriate. Whatever hesitancies the DRV may have had would now be resolved in favor of militant prosecution of the war and of more insistent requests for, and far fewer qualms over, Chinese and Soviet aid.

5. Far from seeking a respite from the bombings, the DRV would attempt to retaliate by raising the tempo of the ground war. It would send additional ground forces to Laos and South Vietnam as rapidly as the infiltration routes permit. It probably would surface these efforts, at least to the extent of acknowledging the despatch of “regrouped southerners” and “volunteers,” both to raise Viet Cong morale and to discourage the US and its supporters with the prospect of a long jungle war.

6. The DRV would certainly at once press Peking and Moscow vigorously for prompt aid in rebuilding its defenses against air attacks. Inhibitions about additional Soviet and Chinese presence in the DRV would diminish. Hanoi might well drop whatever reservations it may have had against the use of Soviet or Chinese pilots. It would be most impatient with Sino-Soviet disputes about transit rights, but would expect those past hurdles to be overcome in the new atmosphere.

7. Although Hanoi's reaction will continue to be of primary importance, the locus of decision making will shift perceptibly away from Hanoi to Peking and Moscow. Peking will have a major role in determining the overall Communist response to the assumed US actions. Given the preceding estimate of Hanoi's response, these reactions will be consistent. Hence the frustrating dilemma of the main estimate probably will not arise—Hanoi's switching to a negotiatory track despite giving China's contrary views “great weight.” (Compare paragraphs 9 and 15 of the SNIE.)

8. It is almost certain that Hanoi and Peking have concerted their preparations and discussed plans for Chinese action in the event of US attacks such as the ones assumed here. The Chinese would strongly urge Hanoi to reject any thought of negotiations, and they will purposefully underwrite the DRV's will to persist. They would furnish the DRV with logistic assistance in prosecuting the war in the south and in making further US air attacks as costly as possible. They would give safe haven to any DRV planes which escaped our strikes and would permit them to operate from Chinese bases. They would probably provide Chinese planes and pilots to operate from the remaining DRV facilities if and when useable.

9. The Chinese would immediately increase their defensive air patrols along their frontier and perhaps over adjacent DRV territory in which their ground forces appear to be active. The danger of accidental encounters with US planes will be high and will increase as US planes approach the border. If the DRV airfields are successfully interdicted, there is a better than even chance that Chinese air will intervene from Chinese bases.

10. The Chinese would probably in any case increase their presence on the ground in North Vietnam, furnishing anti-aircraft, engineer, and supply units and, if asked, providing combat forces to defend against a possible US invasion of the north, thus freeing DRV forces to go southward. With the destruction of the rail line into China, the logistical problem of supplying the DRV would increase. To the degree that the US program is successful and South China must become the operational and infrastructure base for further air defense of the DRV, the Chinese will need Soviet support and protection. Greater Soviet involvement might reluctantly be desired to deter the US. This is an additional factor likely to promote a constructive resolution of previous Sino-Soviet frictions over the speed, scope, and method of aiding Hanoi and bolstering South China bases.

11. We do not believe that the Pakistan-India war is likely to place any limitation on Peking's willingness and ability to carry out the foregoing responses. Peking has prepared its forces and its population for some time to face the eventuality of the US actions assumed in this estimate. Its likely actions against India, outlined in SNIE 13-10-65, will probably not be deterred by such US actions, nor will the Indian theater require the diversion of Chinese air or ground forces available to support North Vietnam and to defend South China.

12. Indeed in addition to the general increase in pressures generated by the interacting nature of the two Asian theaters of war, Peking would be aware of certain comparative advantages in an escalatory response to the American move in North Vietnam. Peking knows that the Vietnam theater tends to bring the US into confrontation with both China and the USSR, while the Indian theater tends to bring the US into confrontation only with China. Therefore Peking would hope to breach US-USSR relations on the matter of Vietnam, reducing thereby the freedom of both the USSR and the US to respond against Chinese pressures in the Subcontinent.

13. The Soviets would be specifically affronted by the assumed US course of action in Vietnam. They would almost certainly interpret it as an assault on the viability of North Vietnam, whose security they have committed themselves to defend. They would be likely to regard the US action as a direct challenge to themselves, the more so since it would probably result in Soviet casualties. They would be unlikely to place any credence in assurances that US intentions were still limited (something they have been prepared to do thus far). The sensational nature of the American initiative and the obstinacy of the Chinese and DRV reaction to it would harden the Soviet response.

14. Under these circumstances Moscow would be less likely than ever to press Hanoi to negotiate, and it would redouble its effort to participate meaningfully in the defense of the DRV. Moscow would renew its earlier offers of additional aircraft and pilots and would attempt to increase the flow of SAMs and technicians to man them. The Soviets would renew their proposals of last spring for a cooperative effort with the Chinese to aid Hanoi. The Chinese, for their part, would find it more difficult than previously to refuse reasonable cooperation in expediting Soviet aid, especially in view of the assumed destruction of DRV-Chinese rail lines. Despite the continuing hostility between Chinese and Soviets, their respective stakes in the struggle are likely to lead to competition to see who can help Hanoi most effectively.

15. Unfortunately for them, Soviet problems in providing rapid and effective aid would be serious. DRV airfields and associated installations would be unusable, heavily damaged, or under continuing attack. Previously prepared SAM sites would likewise be difficult to replenish, and the US would presumably not abstain from attacking sites in preparation, as it did during the installation of the present Soviet-supplied SAM capability. Under these conditions, it is likely that the Soviets would make a strong attempt to mount an air defense effort from Chinese territory and we believe that, despite haggling, some arrangement to this end would be consummated. As a bargaining factor with Moscow, Peking will probably request—and Moscow provide—sophisticated Soviet air defense equipment (MIG 21s and SAMs) to protect bases and logistical lines in South China.

16. We believe that fundamentally the Soviets would nevertheless remain interested in an end to the conflict. While under the stepped up military assistance effort which we believe they would be bound to make the Soviets would be prepared to run the risk of direct engagements with US forces in Vietnam, we believe that they would not contemplate these risks with any equanimity and would still attempt to prevent escalation from running out of control. Accordingly, even in addition to its greater military involvement, Moscow can be expected to resort to various forms of political pressures to deter the US, including a further substantial worsening in bilateral relations.

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 72 D 139, SNIE 10-11-65. Top Secret; Sensitive. A note on the cover sheet indicates that the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense and NSA participated in drafting the estimate. All members of the USIB concurred except the representatives of the AEC and FBI, who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

2 The Director of INR, Department of State, dissents from this entire estimate. His reasons are set forth at the end of the estimate. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 The Director, NSA, National Security Agency, considers the chances of the Chinese sending their own aircraft and pilots to the DRV despite the demonstrated vulnerability of its airfields as being about even. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 The Director, NSA, National Security Agency, considers the chances that the Chinese will intervene in the air from their own bases as the US continues attacks near the Chinese border as being about even. [Footnote in the source text.]

149. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 149. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson1

Washington, September 22, 1965.

This memorandum outlines the basis for the increase in estimated US force requirements in South Vietnam from the 175,000 discussed in early July and mentioned in my July 20 recommendations2 to the 210,000 figure referred to in my September 1 memorandum to you.3

You will recall that at your July 28 press conference4 you stated that you had ordered deployments which would raise our fighting strength from 75,000 to 125,000 men almost immediately, that additional forces would be needed later, and that they would be sent as requested.

Prior to that date—specifically, on July 24—the Joint Staff, as a result of MACV requests, had revised their total for 1965 deployment, increasing it to a little more than 195,000. I mentioned this higher figure to you at the time. At the August 2-6 Honolulu Meeting of General Wheeler, Admiral Sharp and General Westmoreland, the 1965 “Phase I” requirements were refined to 210,000. The Joint Chiefs of Staff on August 23 therefore made specific deployment recommendations totaling approximately 210,000.5

Refinements continue to be made. For example, General Wheeler on September 4 listed an additional 3,000 for the 1965 Phase I (mainly three engineer construction/combat battalions); at the same time he indicated that approximately an equivalent number listed earlier (mainly helicopter personnel) will be arriving after the end of 1965. My prediction is that the final version of the 1965 Phase I requirement will end up exceeding 210,000 by a few thousand.

The differences between the 175,000 figure first mentioned in July and the 210,000 number now being discussed are primarily attributable to additional (a) air lift to move supplies around the country for both civilian and military purposes, (b) air defense, (c) artillery to support offensive operations and to provide immediate response to calls for help by villages under attack, (d) strike aircraft and associated support, (e) engineers, primarily to construct additional air bases, and (f) fleshing out, according to General Westmoreland's requests, of existing operational units and advisory and support elements (refugee relief teams, intelligence teams, communications, and security units, etc.).

You have authorized the deployment of 175,000 US personnel. I recommend that, at the present time, you authorize the movement of an additional 35,000 men, bringing the total to 210,000. These deployments are essential to our effort. The authority will cover our requirements as they now appear although, as we have discussed before, forces in addition to the 210,000 may be needed later.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Memos (A). Top Secret.

2 Document 67.

3 Document 132.

4 See Document 97.

5 See footnote 2, Document 132.

150. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 150. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, September 23, 1965, 3 p.m.

RE

Tear Gas in Vietnam

General Westmoreland has requested a reaffirmation of authority to use certain riot control agents in Vietnam, and Secretaries Rusk and McNamara join in recommending that he be given clear authorization to use tear gas (CS and CN), but not the more violent nausea-producing gases (DM and CN-DM), either alone or in combination. As you know, Ambassador Goldberg has had reservations about this recommendation, and in deference to his wishes, the recommendation has been held up until after his initial speech. But now Westmoreland wants to use the tear gas in an operation on Saturday, and we all think it is time to go ahead.

If this recommendation is approved, our plan would be to have no announcement in Washington, but to have Westmoreland make it clear in due course after the Saturday operation that tear gas (and tear gas only) is authorized in cases where it is more humane, and especially with respect to civilians.

There will be some international criticism, but even the New York Times is resoundingly with us on this. I do not worry you with the pros and cons because it seems to me that the common sense of the matter is so clear.

Secretary McNamara's letter is attached.2 Can we go ahead?3

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. Secret.

2 Apparent reference to Document 147.

3 Next to the “Yes” recommendation on this memorandum is a handwritten note that reads: “Returned per our conversation.”

151. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 151. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, September 23, 1965.

SUBJECT

Current and Future Strategy in Vietnam—An Exchange of Views between Washington Principals and Lodge

A recent review of the situation in Vietnam by key officials of State and Defense and myself indicated that the emerging situation there required some hard thinking on future U.S. military and political actions. We posed several questions to Lodge for comment.2

U.S. Ground Operations. In the light of our military build-up we felt that the VC may be avoiding major unit actions and reverting to a strategy of small-scale actions over a prolonged period. The problem arises as to how we use our substantial ground and air strength effectively against small-scale harassment-type action, whether we should engage in pacification as opposed to patrolling actively, and whether, indeed, we should taper off our ground force build-up.

Lodge agreed that VC may seek to avoid large-scale operations but felt that the Vietnamese must deal with small-scale actions through an effective military-political campaign. U.S. forces should undertake “thorough pacification” within their own areas. Lodge endorses Westmoreland's current strategic concept which calls for the deployment of all troops now scheduled for Vietnam. Westmoreland's concept: 1. Halt the VC offensive.

2. Destroy VC units where they can be found and pacify selected high priority areas.

3. Restore progressively the entire country to GVN control.

4. Support “rural reconstruction” with comprehensive attention to the pacification process.

5. Continue the air campaign against the DRV and infiltration routes into Laos.

Lodge and Westmoreland feel VC “lie-low” tactics will become increasingly a police-social action problem. They expect increased VC terrorism, subversion and economic warfare. Thus far, there is no evidence of significant GVN resentment of U.S. ground actions.

Use of Airpower. We noted and endorsed a recent directive by Westmoreland concerning civilian implications of U.S. air operations, but we still felt a need for a better overall analysis and evaluation of our air operations. We suggested the possibility of sending a military-civilian survey team (similar to those of World War II) to Vietnam.

Lodge replied that Westmoreland is already looking into the problem of using our increased air capability more effectively and is opposed to a group coming out from Washington at this time.

Pacification. We asked Lodge to develop a specific plan for our joint consideration which would involve the concentration of GVN forces on pacification and the reliance on U.S. forces to handle large-scale VC actions. We suggested that he propose a system of priorities and a definition of clear objectives in the pacification program.

Lodge reports that the Mission has started to grapple with this whole problem. The Hop Tac operation (pacification of provinces bordering Saigon) is getting priority attention and Lodge is encouraging Ky to concentrate GVN efforts on pacification. Westmoreland is working up a joint U.S.-GVN campaign plan and will be prepared to brief Washington on this by the end of this month. Lodge believes this will be responsive to our desire for a definition of the respective roles for U.S. and GVN forces.

Acheson Plan. We posed the possibility to Lodge of getting the GVN to apply some of the key elements of the Acheson Plan (land reform, Chieu Hoi, etc.) and to select one or more areas for the application of the plan as a whole, including local elections.

Lodge feels that GVN is already giving attention to land reform and Chieu Hoi. He agrees with our desire to get an electoral process started and has been talking to Ky about having the provincial councils elected last May elect, in turn, representatives to a national assembly. The assembly would concentrate on working up a national constitution.

Negotiations. Lodge and we both agree that we have sufficiently stressed our willingness to negotiate and any further public emphasis, except as necessary in the UN, might be misunderstood by the Communists.

Internal Political Situation. Lodge and we agree that Ky's government seems to be settling down. We also agree on the necessity to keep a watchful eye on any potential coups and to encourage Ky to generate more positive popular support.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. Top Secret. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

2 See Documents 141 and 144.

152. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 152. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson1

Washington, September 24, 1965.

SUBJECT

Hanoi's 23 September Memorandum on Negotiations2

Hanoi has now responded to U.S. policy statements on settling the war with an official government memorandum detailing their own current “views”. This statement, in the form of a Foreign Ministry paper, is the most extensive pronouncement on Hanoi policy since the four point proposal of 8 April.3 Hanoi probably regards the document as its side of a dialogue with Washington on terms for negotiation. The memorandum also serves as a response to the many recent proposals by free world leaders on ending the war. Its timing may have been set by a Hanoi desire to go on record prior to the opening of the UN General Assembly. (Incidentally, the paper flatly rejects the use of the UN in settling the war.)

The memorandum offers no new proposals for settling the conflict, and no explicit concessions. It does, however, by dint of its phraseology on several points and by its omission of several hard-line concepts contained in prior statements, convey an impression of greater flexibility than has been present overall in any past policy pronouncements. It is apparently not a signal that Hanoi is now ready to step to the negotiating table, but rather that the North Vietnamese have reviewed their bidding, made some adjustments, and are waiting to hear the response of the other principals, most notably the United States. The statement follows other indications, both public and private, that Hanoi is now more interested in hearing what U.S. officials and friends of the U.S. have to say about negotiations, and that Hanoi is also trying to be more explicit in outlining its own position.

CLC

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Memos (A). Secret. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw this memorandum.

2 The text of the memorandum is printed in FBIS, Daily Report, Far East, September 24, 1965, no. 184. On September 24, the Office of Current Intelligence of the CIA prepared an intelligence memorandum, OCI No. 2324/65, assessing the DRV memorandum. (Department of State, INR Files: Lot 81 D 251, NV/SV Negotiations Sept-Dec 1965) The Director of Intelligence and Research sent the Secretary of State, also on September 24, an intelligence note on the DRV memorandum. (Ibid.: Lot 81 D 343, Vietnam INR Studies, 64-65) The DRV memorandum rejected unconditional discussions and solutions seeking U.N. intervention, insisted on recognition of the NLF's right to have a “decisive say” in negotiations, and asserted that the DRV's four points were the “sole correct basis for a settlement.”

3 See vol. II, Document 25.

153. Memorandum From the National Security Council Executive Secretary (Smith) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 153. Memorandum From the National Security Council Executive Secretary (Smith) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, September 24, 1965.

Mr. Bundy:

Califano told me the following Friday afternoon:2 1. The President asked him to discuss with McNamara the McNamara memo3 on increasing the number of US forces in South Vietnam. The President wanted to know whether a decision had to be made immediately.

2. Califano said McNamara told him a decision did not have to be made today.

3. Upon reporting this information to the President, the President asked that a meeting be set up Tuesday to include McNamara, Secretary Rusk, you and Califano to discuss any increase in the current level of forces. The President appeared reluctant to contemplate going above 200,000 and asked Califano to ask McNamara to be prepared with an alternative ceiling.

4. McNamara will be ready with an alternative proposal on Tuesday, including a phased movement of forces spread over a longer period of time so that a decision could be taken at any time to stop further increases.

Marvin Watson has scheduled a luncheon for Tuesday at 1 p.m. at which time this subject can be discussed.4

BKS

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Memos. Top Secret.

2 September 24.

3 Document 147.

4 A note on the source text in Smith's hand reads as follows: “Later: Luncheon cancelled. Reason not given. Meeting now being set up for noon Wednesday. BKS.” See Document 155.

154. Memorandum of Conversation 154. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, September 26, 1965.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR

Llewellyn E. Thompson, Ambassador-at-Large, Department of State

Dobrynin asked if we had really made clear to the North Viet-Namese what our position was for a settlement. I said that we had been in touch with the North Viet-Namese through various channels but so far had found no disposition on their part to have any serious discussion. He urged that we make clear to them our exact position on their four points. I said I thought we had done this in our many public statements as well as some indirect private ones.

Upon being pressed by him, I said the one point that gave us the most trouble was that concerning the role of the National Liberation Front. Dobrynin said that including dependents, about eight hundred thousand people supported the Viet Cong and our position left them no way out. I disagreed with this and said that if peace were established, they could participate in elections and obtain representation. I said that in dealing with this matter, however, we had to take account of the attitude and position of the South Viet-Namese Government. I said it seemed clear that the Chinese Communists were pressing Hanoi not to negotiate. Dobrynin asked if I did not think there was some difference in the positions of Peking and Hanoi. I said I was not an expert in this field but it seemed to me that there was always a slight difference in the public statements of Peking and Hanoi and that Hanoi always seemed to want to keep the door open just a bit, whereas Peking's position was absolutely rigid.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Thompson and approved in S/AL on September 27.

155. Memorandum for the Record 155. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, September 29, 1965.

SUBJECT

Luncheon Meeting with the President, Ball, McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Raborn, Moyers, and Califano2

Level of Forces in Vietnam

McNamara reviewed his memorandum of September 22, 1965, (attached)3 concerning the need to increase the level of forces in Vietnam. He said that the original estimate of 175,000 was now increased to 210,000. The proposed 35,000 increase did not involve any increase in combat troops; they were support troops, such as communications personnel and refugee relief units. McNamara requested an interim authorization to go to 195,000 men and indicated that he would be back to the President about November 15 with a request for the remaining 15,000 men. The President commented that it was a situation in which he had no choice but to approve the increase. McNamara confirmed the President's comment and the President approved the increase to 195,000 men.

McNamara said that the public announcement of increased troops would be made from Saigon as the troops arrived there. While he admitted that this would encourage rumors, he said that this was important for the security of our men and in line with previously announced policies.

Tear Gas

Bundy noted that Secretary McNamara had authorized a one-time use of tear gas by General Westmoreland.4 He said that the question of the continuing use of tear gas was still up in the air, although the authority to use tear gas technically remained with the field commander, General Westmoreland. Ball said it would be desirable for Westmoreland to use tear gas before the end of the week because of the Red Cross conference next week in Geneva, which might make some statements opposing the use of tear gas. McNamara said that the use of tear gas must be handled carefully in the right operation and that he was opposed to pushing Westmoreland to use it within the next few days unless Westmoreland felt such action was desirable. Bundy said that the President might get a press query about tear gas if he held a press conference tomorrow. McNamara suggested that the President respond by stating (1) tear gas is a humane way to restore order under certain circumstances and (2) Westmoreland is authorized to use it in those circumstances. Bundy underscored the importance of using the words “tear gas” rather than “non-lethal agents” or “riot control agents”. Moyers said that we had been too defensive in our public handling of the tear gas situation, that we should remind the world that the Viet Cong slit throats and bomb children and that any human being in one of the Vietnam caves would prefer to cry from tear gas rather than be killed by hand grenades. Ball and Raborn agreed.

Rice Shipments

Bundy said Lodge had requested 100,000 tons of rice as fast as possible. Bundy proposed to make the rice available in four shipments of 25,000 tons each, rather than in a single shipment. The President approved this. McNamara said that no matter how we were shipping the rice, we were not sending enough rice to South Vietnam and that we should be sending three or four hundred thousand tons of rice. The President agreed and Bundy said he would make sure there was a continuing program for the purchase and shipment of rice to South Vietnam.

Possible Press Conference Statement

Bundy said he was inclined to the view that the President should make a statement at his press conference about the non-military elements of our Vietnam effort. Bundy said that only when the President makes such statements did they get any substantial coverage. He believed it was important to obtain such coverage in view of the world opinion and forthcoming student demonstrations. Bundy said he would submit a statement to the President for his consideration this afternoon.5

[Here follows discussion of the Dominican Republic, foreign visitors to Washington, India-Pakistan, foreign aid, and Cuba.]

The Shipping Question

The meeting adjourned to the President's office with McNamara, Ball, Moyers, Bundy and Califano.6 McNamara presented the proposed Rolling Thunder program.7 He also discussed the question of Hanoi's hardening attitude. He noted that there was a National Intelligence Estimate indicating that Hanoi's attitude was hardening, largely because we were not rough enough in our bombing.8 McNamara pointed out that the estimate was made without the benefit of advice from experts in the government such as Llewellyn Thompson, Maxwell Taylor, et al. He urged a special study of the problem of Hanoi's hardening attitude and the reasons for it. Ball concurred and pointed out that it may well be that some aspects of the bombing program were responsible for Hanoi's hardening attitude. The President approved the Rolling Thunder program proposed by McNamara as well as the recommended study by Taylor, Thompson, McNamara, Ball, Bundy, et al. on the reasons for Hanoi's hardening attitude.

Joseph A. Califano, Jr.

1 Source: Johnson Library, President's Appointment File, Sept. 29, 1965. Top Secret. Prepared by Califano.

2 The meeting was held from 12:29 to 1:20 p.m. in the Cabinet Room of the White House. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary) An agenda for the meeting is ibid., Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV.

3 Document 147.

4 See Document 150.

5 At 7:30 p.m. on September 29, McGeorge Bundy sent the President a statement that he entitled, “The Works of Peace in Vietnam.” Bundy stated that he had learned from Bill Moyers that a press conference was unlikely, but Bundy thought the President might be interested in reading the statement and might consider releasing it in conjunction with publicity for Dr. Howard Rusk's mission to Vietnam. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV) The statement was not issued.

6 This portion of the meeting took place in the Oval Office from 1:22 to 1:30 p.m. Despite the heading, this discussion had nothing to do with shipping 50 percent of U.S. wheat to Communist nations in U.S. carriers, which was the item on the agenda.

7 Rolling Thunder 34/35 (Oct 1-Oct 14). (Memorandum from William Bundy to Rusk, September 28; Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, Rolling Thunder Memos, 1965)

8 Apparently a reference to SNIE 10-11-65, Document 148.

156. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 156. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 30, 1965.

1100. For the President. Politico-Military.

1. Progress along strictly military lines appears to be considerably ahead of progress along civil and political lines. Yet civil-political progress is utterly indispensable to a successful outcome.

2. For one thing, the majority of Viet Cong are probably still in small groups rather than in main force units and will thus not be reached by the planned military offensives. These small VC groups cannot be overcome without the support of the population, organized on a precinct basis. If these VC are not overcome, the worst of the aggression will still be going on, requiring continuing presence of American ground troops.

3. It seems clear that U.S. military can prevent the Viet Cong from taking over the state, can destroy or neutralize main force units, and can destroy hitherto impregnable redoubts. These are very big achievements indeed. But they do not prevent the Viet Cong from continuing to have a disruptive and debilitating effect on the country which would mean that as soon as we left, the Viet Cong would take over again. In other words, a durable result would not have been accomplished.

4. In order to hasten the day when a true precinct organization exists which will destroy the Viet Cong in small groupings, I called a meeting on Monday and presented a working paper for illustrative purposes which was discussed in detail paragraph by paragraph. As a result, there is in the U.S. Mission an organized effort under the chairmanship of Ambassador Porter to help the GVN create their own precinct type structure which will enable it to overcome the VC in small groups.

5. The text of the working paper is as follows:

“In each city precinct and each rural hamlet immediately adjacent to a thoroughly pacified city (i.e. the smallest unit from a public safety standpoint) the following program should be undertaken in the following order: A. Saturate the minds of the people with some socially conscious and attractive ideology, which is susceptible of being carried out.

B. Organize the people politically with a hamlet chief and committee whose actions would be backed by the police or the military using police-type tactics. This committee should have representatives of the political, military, economic and social organizations and should have an executive who directs.

C. With the help of the police or military, conduct a census.

D. Issue identification cards.

E. Issue permits for the movement of goods and people.

F. When necessary, hold a curfew.

G. Thanks to all those methods, go through each hamlet with a fine tooth comb to apprehend the terrorists.

H. At the first quiet moment, bring in agricultural experts, school teachers, etc.

I. The hamlet should also be organized for its own defense against small Viet Cong external attacks.

J. When the above has been done, hold local elections.

End text of working paper

6. I believe that all Americans here are pulling together on this—which is the indispensable first step towards getting the GVN to move. We now await appointment of a Minister of Rural Construction (Pacification) by Prime Minister Ky—at which time we are prepared to move in.

7. After the Viet Cong has been overcome by force, both in its large and small grouping, there must be a certain degree of indigenous political development. Otherwise, our defeat of the VC by force could be followed by a Communist takeover by political means. It could then well be said: the operation was a great success, but the patient died. Tran Van Do, the sagacious Vietnamese Foreign Minister, says:

“If peace were suddenly to return to the land and if elections were to take place soon afterwards, the results would be catastrophic. What would happen if there were to be a cease-fire? The Communists would simply step in to fill a political vacuum.”

8. The United States must thus leave no stone unturned politically, working through both the official and the unofficial (but highly influential) Vietnamese to insure that our victory over the Viet Cong by force is not followed by a Communist takeover by politics. End of politico-military.

Government of Vietnam

9. The government shot three VC ringleaders at Danang on the night of September 22. The VC subsequently shot two American military prisoners. U.S. Mission actively studying implications of this tragic subject. Separate telegram coming.2

10. Prime Minister Ky went to Hue on September 23 and shared the platform with General Thi, I Corps Commander, who castigated those who caused trouble on the home front while troops were dying in the field. This represents a change in Thi's public attitude.

11. We hear that Ky is planning to make a number of changes in key military posts and in the Cabinet in the interests of increased efficiency. The military changes may in fact reflect a response to sentiments expressed by junior officers during the recent armed forces convention in Saigon.

12. While waiting for the Korean Prime Minister's arrival at the airport Ky talked at length and quite freely with the press. He probably did some injudicious ad libbing, but the overall impression he gave was one of complete self-assurance.

13. The Viet Cong became considerably more active militarily during the week particularly in central Vietnam, but so far have taken heavy losses. They seem to be making a major effort along Highway No. 1 north of Qui Nhon.

Economic

14. The Prime Minister and Chief of State put out a decree increasing custom duties on a wide range of goods which should increase annual customs revenues on the order of some 1.8 billion piasters.

15. I have appointed a small economic warfare working group to recommend policy measures to deny needed resources to the VC and to monitor the execution of such denial programs. This has great potential importance.

16. The rice situation in central Vietnam is improving with the arrival of PL-480 and Thai rice. Last week I signed a PL-480 Title I agreement with the Prime Minister providing for shipment of an additional 100,000 metric tons of rice to meet November and December needs. This too is vital.

Psychological

17. Field reports and Vietnamese newspaper coverage reflected considerable optimism, perhaps almost over-optimism, among Vietnamese regarding the progress of the war.

Added note:

18. Since writing the above, I have just learned that Prime Minister Ky sent for Lansdale Wednesday morning in Lansdale's capacity as Chairman of the U.S. Liaison Committee to the Vietnamese Agency for Pacification.3 Lansdale arrived with members of his committee. Ky kept them for five hours, provided lunch and went over his ideas for pacification which appear to be in harmony with ours. Encouraging is his awareness of the psychological factor. He discussed places to receive priority for pacification. He wants our views. He announced his intention of appointing Le Van Tien as Minister of Pacification—an appointment he said he had thought about a great deal, and a man whom he considers very able. Tien has reputation as a brilliant braintruster and idea man. A Catholic, he is said to “retain Buddhist tenets”.

19. Ky said that he will run pacification himself—which he should do, as its importance to Vietnam and to the U.S. is absolutely central.

20. I called a special meeting of the U.S. Mission Council so that we can all take fullest advantage of this unusual and promising opportunity.

21. I am advising Ky that he must not have his pacification plan known as the “Ky plan” because this will automatically put a lot of people to work to sabotage it. He must manage to get credit for many others and to involve all the leading men in Vietnam personally in the plan's success.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 2:02 a.m. A retyped copy of this telegram indicates that the President saw the telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV)

2 The Department of State publicly condemned the execution of U.S. military prisoners Captain Humbert R. Versace and Sergeant Kenneth M. Roroback; see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 901-902. In telegram 1109 from Saigon, September 30, the Embassy offered courses of action in response to these executions. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-7 VIET) See footnote 2, Document 167.

3 See Document 157.

157. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 157. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 30, 1965, 6:40 p.m.

1111. 1. I am glad to be able report that pacification has taken an encouraging new step forward.

2. Yesterday Prime Minister Ky asked Lansdale in his capacity as chairman of the US-Liaison Committee to the GVN Agency for Pacification to bring his committee members from MACV, USOM and JUSPAO and join him and some of his staff in a wide-ranging informal five-hour discussion (including lunch) of a revitalized pacification program.

3. Program has three main elements: (A) General Co will be appointed Deputy Prime Minister for “War and Peace” with overall charge of pacification. Le Van Tien will be appointed Minister of Pacification—an appointment he said he had thought about a great deal, and a man whom he considers very able. Tien has reputation as brilliant braintruster and idea man. A Catholic, he is said to “retain Buddhist tenets”. (B) Special pacification emphasis will be placed on three selected areas. (C) Cadres will be reorganized.

4. Ky also intends discuss his ideas with General Co and chiefs of certain selected provinces tomorrow. He asked that Lansdale's group meet with him again on October 2 to give him benefit of U.S. views. Accordingly, I called special meeting of Mission Council this morning to discuss new program and to enable us to respond constructively.

5. Ky's program calls for mounting major pacification effort in following selected areas: (A) Prime areas—Danang-Quang Nam area: Binh Dinh Province; Saigon-Cholon-Gia Dinh area; (B) Possible additions: Phu Yen area, Cai Son resettlement area (part of An Giang-Ken Giang Province), Phu Quoc island. Pacification efforts now under way other areas should continue.

6. Secondly, he intends to reorganize existing 25,000 cadres in such a way that they would be operationally responsible to Deputy PM for War and Peace to whom new Minister for Rural Construction (Pacification) would also report. Cadres would only receive technical guidance from other interested Ministries. Teams of perhaps 100, composed of 40 PATs and popular forces and 60 public admin, health, works, education, info technicians, would be tailored to needs of each district in Vietnam. Furthermore, he plans establish 4 training centers, [garble] per zone, and give cadres one month of motivational and basic military training. He also plans revitalize concept of national institute of administration and give selected cadres periods of training there, interspersed with periods of duty in districts.

7. Following emerged from U.S. Mission Council discussion: A. Selected areas. While Council generally concurred in concept and location of 3 selected areas, believed that one area from IV Corps should be added to prime targets. Was noted that Danang-Quang Nam and Binh Dinh targets, while in contested areas, are places where increasing U.S. and allied presence will afford solid shield. It is presumed greater Saigon area will correspond roughly to Hop Tac area and that latter will probably be gradually dropped as a separate concept or operation.

In sum, Council endorsed idea of a few well-aimed rifle shots rather than buck-shot approach; first emphasis should be on worth and durability of programs in selected areas rather than on number of areas. Hopefully these successes would spread.

B. Cadre. Essential that cadres be drawn from local areas whenever possible in order inculcate local responsibility. Existing cadres should be used and reorganized rather than imposing yet another layer of officials. Employment in this cadre should be a substitute for army draft. Council endorsed idea of integrating PAT teams into 100-man teams. District-based mobile cadre should be broken down and assigned to villages. Although it is not clear how Ky sees role of province and district chiefs in this set up, Council believes it best to try use them as part of chain of command, thus helping get government apparatus reestablished in countryside. Relationship to these teams of U.S. military and civilians in field will have to be studied in order best weave together our joint efforts and put resources where they most needed.

C. General observations. Important that Ky put over this new program in statesmanlike manner, trying to ensure adhesion all important leadership groups. At same time, in light jaundiced press reaction to somewhat similar schemes that failed in past, publicity on this program should be handled with great caution until some tangible results are actually in hand. Advance notice of areas to be pacified should not be given. In general we all hope this [garble] an historical date for getting more lasting pacification accomplished while taking advantage of the presence of allied combat forces. Weaving all the strands together is complex.

8. Lansdale will present Ky with two papers along foregoing guidelines. After Ky returns from trip to Malaya on October 10 or 11, he plans convene meeting of province chiefs and one elected from each provincial council for discussion of these pacification plans.

9. Comment: These developments are encouraging and are responsive to our long standing desires. Ky has taken a sensible approach to this all-encompassing problem of pacification, notably his awareness of crucial psychological factor. His designation of a Deputy PM for War and Peace in overall charge of pacification, his concept of telescoping our joint efforts in a few areas (while normal pacification is continued elsewhere along present lines), and the consolidation of cadres with a more clearly defined line of authority to Saigon, are all steps in the right direction. Finally, we are pleased that Ky has seen fit to engage in this fruitful exchange of views and to seek our advice before his ideas jelled any further.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority. Received at 9:27 a.m. and passed to the White House, Department of Defense, and CIA.

158. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 158. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson1

New York, September 30, 1965.

We had our first dinner this evening with a second meeting scheduled Friday2 evening when he returns hospitality. I will report separately on the dinner table discussions on Kashmir and disarmament matters.

Before dinner Gromyko and I had a private talk with no one else present. I told him that following Harriman's discussion with Kosygin,3 we had taken Kosygin's suggestion and had been in contact with Hanoi for the purpose of exploring possibilities of peaceful settlement and counter proposals on Hanoi's four points.4 He was much interested, appeared to have been uninformed by Hanoi, and did not press for details on the nature of the contact beyond asking whether a third government was involved—to which I replied no.

Gromyko refused to acknowledge the basic fact of North Vietnam's infiltration and other action against South Vietnam, but it was quite clear that he surely understood that we knew about such things even if on policy grounds he could not admit it. He said it was his impression that Hanoi could not possibly enter into discussions on negotiations while bombing was going on. His point was that Hanoi looked upon discussion during the bombings as a plea from a position of weakness. I told him that Hanoi was not denying to us the facts of their intervention or the presence of regular units of the North Vietnamese Army. I told him we were not asking for conditions because we were prepared to talk while the fighting continued or were prepared to have preliminary discussions about circumstances which would permit more formal negotiations to occur. I told him that we had been unable to get from any communist capital the slightest indication as to what would happen if the bombing stopped. We were not asking this question to raise a condition but were simply asking for a simple factual statement as to what consequences any one could see in the direction of making peace. Obviously, if we stopped the bombing and nothing else happened this would be unacceptable.

Gromyko was much interested in whether contacts with Hanoi had been definitively concluded without result or whether such contacts remained open. I told him that it was my impression that both sides were prepared to renew contact if there was anything interesting to say. His attitude seemed to indicate a hope that whatever channel that was involved would remain open. He did not confirm but did not contradict my remark that there seemed to be some differences of views in Hanoi and that some debate might be going on in that capital.

Under the impact of Chen Yi's Press Conference5 he seemed less reticent about acknowledging that Moscow has a real problem with China than he personally has been with me in the past. For example, in response to a question from me, he stated “very flatly” that he was confident that if Hanoi came to a conference at which the Soviet Union and the United States were present that Peiping would not use force to prevent it.

It was significant to me that he showed no bluster or threats about the matter of Soviet support for Hanoi that he reflected in Vienna in May.6

[Here follows discussion of Soviet propaganda attacks on the President and India-Pakistan.]

My general impression was that Gromyko did not bring with him any instructions to heat up crises on particular points with us, that he did not expect any major break-through in the direction of agreements on important matters, and that he was prepared to be relaxed but direct and businesslike in discussing any matters in which we both are involved. He did not attempt to apply pressure nor did he use threats or any of the normal language associated with the rugged discussions of 1961 and 1962.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. Top Secret; Nodis; Eyes Only. Also sent to Acting Secretary Ball. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw this memorandum. Rusk and Gromyko were at the United Nations for the 20th session of the General Assembly.

2 October 1.

3 See Document 68.

4 See vol. II, Document 245.

5 Chinese Foreign Minister Chen Yi's uncompromising answers to questions on the attitude of the People's Republic of China to the question of a negotiated peace in Vietnam are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 902-903.

6 See vol. II, Document 303.

159. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) 159. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)1

Washington, October 1, 1965.

Dear John:

This is in reply to your letter of September 28.2 I am not in a position to comment further at this moment on the question of locks and dams, but I would like to respond immediately to your last paragraph referring to the language in paragraph 2 of the State dissent to SNIE 10-11-65.3

I have not attempted to go through all of the public statements and press conferences, but it certainly would be my impression that—even though there might not have been specific statements on the question—the various responses indicated generally that we would continue, as far as we could then see, the policy we have been pursuing, which of course does not include attacks on Hanoi and Haiphong. I am confident that our statements have been interpreted in this sense by diplomatic observers and sophisticated newspapermen, and that if Hanoi has any eyes and ears at all the overwhelming reading that has been reported to it is that we were not planning to hit H-H at any early time. I say this despite the fact that the general line of response in all our public statements has been not to exclude such action.

As to private indications, I think you know that we have repeatedly been asked point-blank by the British, Japanese, and others whether we intended to extend our bombing to H-H. We have always replied with some care that we had no such current plan, although the time might come when it would be necessary as a part of the over-all pattern of pressure on the DRV. I do not know whether these diplomatic conversations get back to Hanoi, but I would suspect strongly that some of them do.

More broadly, the question of hitting H-H has repeatedly come up in background conversations and briefings with Congressional groups and newspapermen. We have taken the same line as with the diplomats, but on occasion, notably with Congressmen, I myself—and I am sure others—have necessarily argued the pros and cons in such a way as to indicate that we certainly did not exclude this but had doubts, as of the time of the statements, that it was likely to bring the DRV to accept a solution. Again, I think the net of all these discussions must have been an impression that we would weigh hitting H-H as a very major step and that we were not inclined to do it except for grave reasons or unless there were a clear basis to believe it could significantly help in effecting a favorable resolution of the problem. I cannot help but believe that discussions with these groups necessarily percolate into the bloodstream of Washington, and reach Communist ears which in turn pass them to Hanoi.

On one specific point, I would like to flag that we have seen one TDCS, brought to our attention by Andy Goodpaster, in which a CAS representative was quoted as telling his Soviet contact that we had no plan to hit the SAM sites because Soviet personnel were present. This was not an authorized statement, and we have flagged it to CIA.

On the basis of all this, I do not suppose any of us can say what the DRV leaders really think we intend. The massive air defense effort in Hanoi strongly suggests the assumption that we will eventually hit H-H. But I do think that the statement in the paragraph in question—that there have been many “official indications, public and private,” to the contrary, at least for the present—does represent the fact. It may be that the sentence is a shade overstated, in light of our consistent refusal to exclude such action at some time, but I think the inevitable thrust of all our statements has been in the direction indicated.

In any case, whether the sentence could have been improved or not, those of use who saw the INR dissent—and this included Ambassador Thompson, Alex Johnson, Len Unger, and myself—would still agree with its essential point, namely that the Communists (and non-Communists) would feel that the program discussed in the Estimate would in fact represent a very major change in our level of action.

I am writing this to meet your deadline of October 1, and without having dug up the relevant memoranda of conversations and briefing notes in any detail. But I am confident that I have summed up fairly what has been said. I do want to conclude by assuring you and General Wheeler that we have no intention of changing the line we have taken consistently, basically that we are not excluding this or any other action. Obviously, we must not say anything that could impair our freedom of action or the President's freedom of choice on future actions.

Sincerely,

William P. Bundy4

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron. Top Secret. McNaughton passed a copy of this letter to the JCS on October 6. (Washington National Records Center,RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 381)

2 Not found.

3 Document 148.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

160. Memorandum of Conversation 160. Memorandum of Conversation1

New York, October 7, 1965, 4 p.m.

SecDel/MC/19

SECRETARY'S DELEGATION TO THE TWENTIETH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

New York, September-October 1965

SUBJECT

Viet Nam (Part I of II)2

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

Secretary Rusk

Emmett B. Ford, Jr.

Hungary

Foreign Minister Peter

Ambassador Janos Radvanyi

Peter asked the Secretary his views on the situation in Viet Nam. He asked if the Secretary could see any way out.

The Secretary said that this would depend on what Hanoi is willing to do with respect to its own actions in South Viet Nam. The United States is in South Viet Nam solely because of the infiltration from North Viet Nam to South Viet Nam of armed men and munitions. If this infiltration would stop, we could go home. But we want to be sure that South Viet Nam can solve its problems without armed pressure from the North.

The Secretary went on to say that he had received the impression that differing and sometimes contradictory attitudes had become apparent in Hanoi of late. We think Moscow would be prepared to take part in a conference if Hanoi would assent. It is Peiping which says no. Hanoi is somewhere between the two but currently leaning toward Peiping.

Peter said that, in his opinion, as long as the United States continues to bomb North Viet Nam, no discussion could take place.3 It is difficult to see what advantage can be gained from the continuance of these air attacks.

The Secretary recalled that large-scale infiltration South of the 17th parallel began in 1959 and 1960; we have waited four years before beginning the bombing of North Viet Nam.

Peter made the point that there had been no advance warning of these bombings and no opportunity for negotiations. The Secretary said that the United States had tried every means before the bombings began—all of this is a matter of record. At any rate, the United States has learned since that holding off does not produce a peaceful settlement. In various ways we have tried to ask the question, “What will happen if we stop the bombing; what will this lead to?”

The Secretary pointed out that we have asked Hanoi what will happen and get no answer. Gromyko says to wait and see. But the bombing and killing goes on every day in South Viet Nam. What is the difference whether explosives are carried by a man on foot or delivered in planes from the air? If we stop the bombing, will the North Viet Namese troops go home? Will the Communists come to the conference table?

Peter expressed his conviction that, if the DRV answered such questions as to their intent while the bombing continues or the threat of bombing is still present, it would be regarded by the world as an indication of their weakness. The DRV does not want to look weak.

The Secretary observed that, by the same logic, the reverse would be true if we stopped bombing before we received any indication of intent from the DRV.

Peter said nobody could seriously believe that the United States would stop the bombings out of weakness.

The Secretary saw a difference in opinion on this point. Peiping is continually preaching that the United States is a “paper tiger”. Chen Yi enjoins the Soviet Union not to take such a gloomy view of war. We take a very gloomy view of war, indeed.

The Secretary was of the opinion that there should be some way to avoid the impression of weakness. We don't think that there can really be any misjudgment on this score. If “face” or public posture is involved, surely some private arrangement can be made. We are prepared to stop bombing if we can be assured that this is a step toward peace.

Peter said that it certainly would be a step toward peace. It would create the atmosphere which is necessary to bring all the factors for peaceful negotiation into play. In the present situation, however, Hungary is not able to propose negotiations to its friends in North Viet Nam. The Soviets are in the same position.

The Secretary remarked that part of the answer lies in Peiping. What will Hanoi do if Peiping says no?

Peter said that the Hungarians have some direct contacts with Hanoi. He mentioned that a Hungarian delegation is scheduled to arrive in Hanoi today. Peter's firm conviction was that the DRV is ready to negotiate but that certain conditions must be met. Yet, while North Viet Nam is being bombed or under the threat of bombing, any talks are impossible.

The Secretary pointed out that this works both ways. There is also bombing in South Viet Nam.

Peter said that this situation will continue as long as there is no improvement in the attitude of the United States. The United States should show its goodwill in this matter. The halt in the bombing last summer was not effective because the DRV was still under the threat of renewed attack.

The Secretary observed that Hanoi had not shown any indication of a desire to talk at that time. In fact, they just sent our message back and stuck it under our door. Three days later Gromyko termed our suspension of bombing “an insult”.

We have indicated our willingness to settle this problem not only to the other side, but to our own people. The Secretary said he had repeatedly indicated his willingness to depart “tomorrow” if any one wanted to talk. We have said that we will come to the conference table, we will agree to a cease-fire in the event that a conference is imminent, or that we will come home if the DRV stops its aggression. We have repeatedly said that we want no bases in South Viet Nam and that when the fighting in Viet Nam could be stopped we will join in an economic development project for Southeast Asia.4

If the DRV continues its aggression, the war will continue. It is that simple. How do we deal with that situation? Peter said that a decrease of military action would be a start. There is no other way to decrease military action but to halt the bombing of North Viet Nam. Otherwise escalation will continue with all its dangers.

The Secretary said that escalation is the tragedy. If the war continues to escalate, North Viet Nam will be destroyed. Why do we have to go down that road?

Peter replied that the key to the matter is in United States hands. If bombing is halted, conditions will improve, and negotiations leading to peace will be possible.

The Secretary said that we would get nowhere if such unilateral action meant our acceptance of a program of the “liberation movement”.

Peter reiterated that the conditions necessary to negotiations would arise if the United States stopped its bombing. It would be impossible to get any guarantee from the DRV until after the cessation of bombing.

The Secretary remarked that we cannot move very long on a unilateral basis.

Peter said that before the United States started its air attacks there had been no real proposal for negotiations on the situation in South Viet Nam. The air attacks began without notification thus, if the United States stops its bombing, it is not purely a unilateral concession, but a new start to try to find a solution.

The Secretary asked how long Peter felt it would take for the other side to enter negotiations after the proposed halting of air attacks.

Peter replied certainly a few weeks, provided the attacks were stopped without the threat of renewal. The United States would not lose anything by it and the rest of the world would surely gain.

The Secretary remarked that there are traditional ways and means of coming to an understanding on such matters as this. In the past history of such disputes, there have been means of making clear the possibilities for peaceful settlement which existed.

Peter remarked that, while the bombings continue, any prior indication on the part of the DRV that it is willing to negotiate would be a sign of weakness. They would think that the United States had gotten what it wanted, namely negotiations, through military action.

The Secretary said that it is, indeed, very difficult to get the idea of reciprocity across this ideological gulf. If Hanoi thought it could succeed in achieving its objectives in this way, would the DRV come to the conference table?

Peter said that it may be a long way to the conference table.

The Secretary feared that Hanoi takes an exaggerated view of the force of international opinion. We have consulted with most governments on the problem of North Viet Nam and we know what they think. Hanoi may well believe that, if we stop, the force of world opinion may prevent us from resuming the air attacks. Thus the DRV believes they will have an advantage if we stop.

Peter said that this would not be a unilateral advantage. The United States would gain much more in the way of international support if the air attacks were stopped.

The Secretary said he supposed there was always universal support for the idea of a peaceful settlement, except in Hanoi and Peiping. Some countries, however, feel themselves unable to express their support until Hanoi assents to negotiations.

The Secretary then recalled the manner in which Peiping had torpedoed the conference on Laos and Cambodia. He said that we understand the difficulties currently present in the Socialist world. But it does seem to us that Hanoi has the key.

The Secretary said that, if Hanoi comes to the conference table with the United States and the Soviet Union, Peiping would hesitate to interfere, at least with force. Therefore, Hanoi holds the key. It simply doesn't appear that Hanoi is ready to make any effort toward a peaceful solution. If they wish to do so, there are ways and means of letting us know.

Peter said that as long as the present situation continues, there can be no change in the attitude of Hanoi. The bombing must cease.

The Secretary asked what, besides the bombing, would cease. There must be some reciprocal action on the part of the DRV.

Peter was certain that reciprocal action would come, perhaps on the ground as well. It is impossible to get both sides to move at once.

The Secretary asked why, at a very private level and in the most sophisticated manner, is it necessary for one party to move in advance of the other. This is not the traditional way to negotiate.

Peter didn't agree. The Secretary then reminded him that, as an example, we had contacts with the Soviet Union while Berlin was still under blockade.

Peter termed such contacts as of a special nature and well-established.

The Secretary then explained that the United States has no national ambitions in Southeast Asia. South Viet Nam can be non-aligned, if it is left alone. We want no military bases in Viet Nam. But we do feel strongly about a small nation being overrun by force. Thus, there is an enormous gap between our attitude and that of Peiping.

Peter said that, if the United States has no ambitions in that area, the points of agreement between the two sides are much closer than they seem. The main thing now is to stop the bombing. For Hungary, as a Socialist country, it is impossible to talk to friends in the DRV about negotiations while the bombing goes on. Peter went on to point out that the air attacks are different from the ground fighting in South Viet Nam.

The Secretary said he found it difficult to accept a distinction between the bombing and the fighting in South Viet Nam. Peter repeated his certainty that the key is in the hands of the United States.

The Secretary remarked that, in conflict, surely the key is in the hands of both sides.

Peter said that the United States is the major power in this case.

The Secretary said that other elements entered into the picture. When campaigning for re-election, President Johnson had told the American people that we did not wish a larger war in Viet Nam. After the President had won the election, Hanoi evidently misunderstood the meaning of the President's victory. They thought that they could expand the war without danger of response from the United States.

Peter said that, if the United States were to stop the bombing, it could still maintain “all the present possibilities” if Hanoi acted in bad faith. He then asked the Secretary whether he had anything favorable to say on this whole matter.

The Secretary remarked that he had been very interested in hearing Peter's views. He couldn't say more than he had already said. The whole matter needs further exploration. The greatest difficulty is the absence of any reciprocal intent on the part of the DRV.

Peter told the Secretary that reciprocity would come.

The Secretary said he did not want to mislead Peter. We have thought very hard about this problem and we want peace very much. It is too late in history for war; no one understands this better than we. Most of the great powers understand the dangers of war, with the signal exception of Peiping. This creates problems in the Socialist world as well as in the West.

Suppose that we stop the bombing and the Chinese calculate that they can intervene in safety?

Peter thought that this was an extremely unlikely possibility.

The Secretary felt that, nevertheless, we would have heavy responsibility if such should be the result.

Peter said that there could not be any danger in stopping. It would change the whole atmosphere.

The Secretary recalled one of the deepest disappointments the United States has ever experienced—the failure of President Kennedy's fresh approach on Laos. The DRV never did reduce its forces in Laos more than a few thousand men and continued to use Laos as a base to infiltrate South Viet Nam. Everyone was ready for a peaceful settlement but it didn't work.

Peter remarked that if one binds one's hands as a result of bad experiences one will never get out of a bad situation.

In return, the Secretary quoted an old saying of American horse traders: “If someone cheats me once it is his fault; if he cheats me twice it is my fault.”

Peter said that the United States would have many good friends supporting it if there was a cessation of bombing. This would include the Soviet Union.

The Secretary said that, since both he and Peter were Calvinists, we will continue to give the entire matter “our prayerful Presbyterian consideration.” He wanted to make it clear that he had not made any promise or commitment to Peter. He expressed his appreciation for the opportunity for talking with Peter.5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Emmett B. Ford, Jr., of the Office of German Affairs on October 8 and approved in S on October 13. The meeting was held at USUN.

2 Part II is unrelated to Vietnam.

3 Secto 39 from USUN, repeated to Saigon as telegram 50, October 7, summarized this conversation. The cable also noted that after the discussion, Peter was interviewed by the press at some length and he repeated his belief that a cessation of the bombing was an indispensable first step to creating an atmosphere necessary for negotiations. (Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412,Nodis/Pinta, Series 1, Vol. 1)

4 The next paragraph began with the sentence: “We are not rabbits to be frightened by a snake.” It was apparently erased in the Secretary's office, but remains legible on the source text.

5 This last paragraph was typed on a different typewriter and was probably added in the Secretary's office when the memorandum was approved.

161. Editorial Note 161. Editorial Note

On October 7, 1965, from 12:45 to 1:50 p.m., President Johnson met with Secretary of Defense McNamara, Acting Secretary of State Ball, and McGeorge Bundy. Bundy left the meeting at 1:20 and Ball left at 1:30 p.m. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary) No other record of this meeting has been found, except an agenda that lists Vietnam as one of four items to be discussed. Under Vietnam are three sub-topics: “1. Rolling Thunder, 2. New voluntary organization, 3. Domestic debate.” (Ibid., National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV)

According to a memorandum from William Bundy to Ball, October 7, the Department of Defense informed the Department of State that Rolling Thunder was not to be a topic for discussion at the October 7 meeting with the President. (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, Rolling Thunder—1965) The reference to a new voluntary organization is apparently to efforts by Dr. Howard Rusk to extend voluntary medical services and personnel to South Vietnam's war victims and veterans. An October 6 memorandum from McGeorge Bundy to the President, describing Howard Rusk's recommendations and containing a note that it was to be “Put on the Pres's desk,” is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. In an October 7 memorandum to Chester Cooper, William Jorden previewed the upcoming demonstrations of October 15-16 in the United States and abroad against the Vietnam war and discussed the composition of the protest movement within the United States. (Ibid., Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XL, Memos (A))

162. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 162. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 8, 1965, 6 p.m.

1216. Ref: USUN's 50.2

1. Cables from USUN indicating systematic campaign to bring US pause in bombing and disturbing implications of Vienna's dispatch [sic] well recognized by Deptel 9753 embolden me to make following comments:

2. Mr. Peter's assertion that “US has nothing to lose by cessation of bombing” is manifestly untrue. Bombing is our strongest current weapon against Viet Cong aggression and to cease it, in the way in which Mr. Peter suggests, would be a very serious blow both to our effort in Vietnam and to that of the Vietnamese.

3. Believe the Secretary was absolutely right to reaffirm US position.

4. It is extraordinary to one who worked eight years at the UN to find such apparently widespread indifference to the concept of aggression the prevention of which is, after all, one of the prime aims of the Charter. Yet, if the press is any guide, it is seldom mentioned. President Johnson is right in all that he has said about suppressing aggression. The UN rests on the principle that it is wrong to use force except in self-defense. If the UN does violence to that principle it will cease to deserve respect. Our actions in Vietnam are in full accord with purposes of the UN Charter, rooted in Article I, “Measures for the … Suppression of Acts of Aggression.”

5. One of the most effective things which we can do to ward off aggression and promote peace is our bombing in the north. There should be no pause from us without a pause from them. If we stop cutting roads and blowing up bridges in the north, let them stop doing the same thing in the south, or stop destroying the railroad. A proposition whereby their side is allowed to do with impunity the things which we are not to be allowed to do is manifestly unacceptable.

6. The agitation for a pause should not be taken at face value. When it comes from one of the so called non-aligned countries, it often represents a response to an organized minority more than it represents what the government really thinks.

7. We must avoid steps which: will cause the Hanoi regime to think we are weak and near defeat; of being believed in South Vietnam to be about to negotiate in a UN to which SVN does not belong and behind their backs; of thus lowering morale and destroying an important quantity of Vietnamese fighting power which our own fighting men will have to pay for; or in general, of giving up something and really getting nothing back.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to USUN, Moscow, and Budapest.

2 See footnote 3, Document 160.

3 Reference is to telegram 512 to Vienna for Abba Schwartz, repeated as 975 to Saigon, October 7. Schwartz was in Vienna to explore with the International Committee of the Red Cross a possible exchange of prisoners in Vietnam. The Department of State informed him in the telegram that he should not make contact with DRV or NLF representatives who might be in Vienna, but rather work through the Red Cross representative. Schwartz should also “downplay the idea” that DRV/NLF willingness to exchange prisoners “might signal the beginning of something more important.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-7 VIET)

163. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 163. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, October 9, 1965.

SUBJECT

Refugees

The Refugee Situation

There is no accurate estimate of the current number of refugees in Vietnam. Best guesses hover around 600,000 and more (possibly as much as 400,000 more) by December. Although there are refugees in virtually every provincial capital, the major concentrations are in I and II Corps.

Refugees have flowed in from a variety of causes: floods, VC repression, rice shortages, and the destruction of villages by military (VC and U.S.-GVN) action. If one can generalize at all, the refugees are largely apolitical; the vast majority are children, women and elderly folk with no special skills.

Conditions in the refugee camps are probably not too bad from the physical point of view when compared to the general standards of the country as a whole, which is not to say that there aren't serious problems of food and shelter. But it is the political-psychological aspect of the problem which needs careful attention; the refugees represent a potential source of disaffection and unrest exploitable by the Viet Cong.

The GVN Approach

Despite the enormity of the problem and the prodding of the U.S. Mission, there is a lack of interest, planning and action at the top levels of the GVN. This is reflected in uncertainty and confusion at the province level. The Commanders of I and II Corps regard the refugee problem as a tactical one and take the view that additional refugees should be turned away from the existing centers and that resettlement of those in the centers should be undertaken immediately.

In a country where poverty and misery are so widespread and where social welfare resources are spread so thin, it is not unnatural that refugees are regarded as an unnecessary burden by the government. Moreover, there are many instances where refugees in well-run and well-supplied centers are much better off than non-refugees nearby. The Government is justifiably concerned that “model” centers will simply attract “rice refugees”.

The GVN's Ministry of Social Welfare is the executive agency for the care of refugees and in terms of its resources and capabilities, is doing what it can. But it is not big enough for the job. Enter the U.S.

The U.S. Program

The U.S. Mission has been concerned with the refugee problem since the major floods of last April. With the increase of Viet Cong activity in II Corps and the stepped-up military activity of late spring and summer the refugee rolls began to swell and U.S. AID and private efforts expanded. During the summer USOM established a Refugee Task Force and a coordinator for refugee matters was appointed until AID could recruit a refugee expert. Several Task Force teams were dispatched to the principal refugee centers.

In September a Refugee Relief Division was established in USOM and a Vietnam relief coordinator was appointed in Washington. Sixteen specialists in relief and refugee problems have been recruited for the Relief Division and most are already in place. The Chief of this Division (Ed Marks) and I have had two useful sessions; he will leave this weekend for Saigon.

At least as important, is an overall policy and program which was developed in consultation with the Ministry of Social Welfare. (It is hoped that General Ky will soon announce his Government's interest in and policy toward the refugee problem.) The operative concept for USOM is to “advise and recommend”, but also to be ready to compensate for gaps in GVN capabilities. We must, however, make sure that this is basically and conspicuously a GVN program.

The Voluntary Agencies

The principal agencies now operating in Vietnam are CARE, the Church World Service (primarily Mennonites), the Catholic Relief Service, and the Friends. Each of these agencies, with our urging and encouragement, are expanding their activities and some agencies not now active in Vietnam (notably the Lutherans) may soon undertake programs there. Most of these agencies intend to intensify their fund-raising activities (CARE has already launched theirs) to finance these expanded programs.

In my own contacts with them, in their testimony to the Kennedy Subcommittee, and in discussions with AID officials, the voluntary agencies have revealed a great sensitivity to coordination by a new “umbrella” group and infringement of their sovereignty in fund raising. They are taking steps to increase their coordination effort (which the more candid admit has been thus far unsatisfactory) through their trade association, the American Council of Voluntary Agencies.

Representatives of about 7 key Voluntary Agencies will leave for Vietnam in about a week for a five-day investigation. They are scheduled to return to Washington before Senator Kennedy arrives in Vietnam in late October.

The Kennedy Subcommittee

This group, a non-legislative subcommittee of the Judiciary Committee, became interested in the Vietnam problem in late June. It has held a large number of hearings, but transcripts are hard to come by (I have obtained several involving the Voluntary Agencies). According to Committee staff members, the Report will be prepared around mid-November following the Senator's return from Vietnam. I suggest we get a reading on Senator Kennedy's thinking before he leaves and before we get too deeply into our Foundation. Should I endeavor to do this? (Yes__ No__)2

Problems Ahead

—Any programs undertaken in the refugee field by the Foundation should clearly be of the kind the Voluntary Agencies are not doing and cannot do. Examples: Statistical data; large-scale medical assistance; family tracing service; orphan care and adoption services (Cherne is ready to fold in his program); assistance in resettlement and training.

—Whatever the USG or American voluntary agencies do it must appear, as much as possible, to be a Vietnamese effort. This will become increasingly difficult as American efforts expand.

—The GVN must be encouraged to take a greater role and especially to proceed with political orientation, training and sound resettlement programs.

—The U.S. military logistics capability must be geared closely into U.S. and GVN relief efforts; this is the only way the increased quantities of relief goods can reach refugee centers in timely and adequate fashion.

—Coordination, especially in Saigon, of U.S. voluntary efforts must be strengthened.

C

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLI, Memos (A). Confidential.

2 A note on the source text in McGeorge Bundy's hand reads: “I want to call Ted Kennedy on this on Monday [October 11]. McGB.” No record of the Kennedy-Bundy telephone conversation has been found.

164. Paper by the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) 164. Paper by the Ambassador at Large (Thompson)1

Washington, October 11, 1965.

“McNamara also received a copy, which indicated that he saw it on October 26. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 1266, Vietnam 381)

CONCLUSIONS2

The increased military power we are bringing to bear in South Viet-Nam must have made the Viet Cong realize that we are going to make a determined and serious effort to destroy their capability. As this power makes itself felt, they will probably decide in the near future to break up most of their large units and to move toward one or the other of two strategies: They may change their tactics in the direction of small acts of terror and sabotage; or less likely, they could adopt an even more passive strategy of apparently “fading into the woodwork.”

The purpose of the latter strategy would be to cause a cessation in United States pressures, north and south, until a more propitious moment. This would not be easy for the Viet Cong to accomplish; they would have problems of morale, organization, etc. But if it were attempted it would face us with a critical point of decision with regard to bombing of the north. Two sharply divergent theses could be argued. On the one hand it could be argued that a step-up in bombing of the north would be justified in this circumstance since we could not permit the VC to turn the pressure on and off at their convenience. Stepped up bombing would be designed to force the issue. On the other hand, it could be argued, probably more convincingly, that the bombing should be reduced, perhaps in proportion to the reduction in military activity in the south. This would assume that the pacification program could be pursued successfully and that the United States could persevere in its political and military commitments recognizing that to effectuate the pacification program will take a long period, perhaps years. Though we do not believe we are yet at the preceding point of decision, we do believe that it should be anticipated and the groundwork laid for reaching the necessary policy decisions when and if required.

It is unlikely, however, that our actions in the south have made them ready to switch from a military to a political strategy, and they are unlikely to do so for a matter of months at best. They will in all likelihood recede from “Stage 3” and pursue a strategy of active guerrilla hit-and-run strikes, terror and sabotage. They will continue to oppose negotiations except upon their own terms until such time as it becomes clear to them that we will stay the course and successfully, if gradually, push them back into the woodwork and begin a discernible trend toward pacification of most of the country. The more immediate question, therefore, is what our policy should be with regard to bombing the north in the interim, that is, during the period when the intensity of our own effort in the south is growing, when the VC are pursuing a “1963-4” or “Stage 2” strategy, and when the question whether the VC will recede to “Stage 1” is still unclear.

It is now obvious that we shall probably be faced with the prospect of a continuation of our present courses of action, including the bombing of North Viet-Nam, for many months more. The present rate of escalation of our bombing, however, is bringing us to a point where in a few months further escalation will be possible only by attacking sensitive targets which may pose, in acute form for the other side, the issue of greater Chinese and/or Soviet involvement. We are beginning to attack the last remaining geographic area apart from the area around Hanoi and Haiphong. We may be able to recognize the optimum time for exerting further pressure by increasing the level of our bombing but an increase in our bombing of the North at the present time may bring matters to a head too soon.

It does not appear to us necessary that there be a pronounced escalation in our bombing at the present time since our present activities, while not destroying the military and economic capacity of North Viet-Nam, are causing great strain as indicated in the letters quoted in Annex B.3 (As noted below, Ambassador Thompson and Mr. Bundy would interpret the permissible continuing level of bombing somewhat more narrowly than would General Taylor and Mr. McNaughton.) Moreover, the effects of our present attacks are to some extent cumulative and are bringing a steady increase of pressure on Hanoi. The impressive reports of the growing number of targets destroyed or damaged in the daily armed reconnaissance reports illustrate this. We therefore believe we should more or less level off at about the present rate of bombing in the North. For the present, we should not attack the most sensitive targets, large dams, Phuc Yen and the Hanoi/Haiphong area before January 1, 1966. Though we would not initially recommend hitting such targets as thermal power plants, as we begin to exhaust profitable targets, we might begin very gradually to nibble at some of the industrial targets.

The northeast quadrant presents a special problem. Mr. McNaughton would favor maintaining approximately the present level of attacks; i.e. about four or five missions every two weeks against major LOC targets, to assure destruction of the railroad. These missions should include specific armed recce to prevent daylight movement on the roads. General Taylor would prefer a slight increase from the present level. Ambassador Thompson and Mr. Bundy feel that the present level of activity might well tempt the North Viet-Namese to throw their MIGs into the equation and that this, aside from its intrinsic disadvantages, could lead to a succession of events broadening hostilities still further. Ambassador Thompson and Mr. Bundy would favor a reduction to approximately one attack on the railroad every two weeks and no armed recce except in very special cases and limited to specific targets.

We also conclude that serious consideration should be given to employment of a pause. Though it would have to be carefully managed, its objective would be to provide an opportunity for the north to give concrete evidence of a willingness to come to terms, an evidence which it is difficult, in a political and psychological sense, for it to give while under the pressure of our bombing. We would have to exercise great care that a mere willingness to initiate negotiations would not in and of itself qualify for an indefinite moratorium on the bombing. We would have to convey our intent to reinstitute bombing if the North Viet-Namese refused to negotiate or if their willingness to negotiate is not accompanied by a manifest reduction of VC aggression in the south. If it is necessary to reinstitute bombing, we should be prepared to consider increasing the pressure, e.g. through striking industrial targets, to make clear to Hanoi our continuing, firm resolve.

In summation, we conclude that: 1. the present escalation in the bombing of the north is likely to become increasingly out of phase with the progress of our military operations in the south. It would thus run the risk of forcing the other side prematurely to face the issue of negotiations or greater Chinese and Soviet involvement.

2. we should therefore level off our bombing of the north (with some variance of views among us as to permissible levels in the northeast quadrant, see above) for the interim.

3. we may well be faced with the prospect of altered Viet Cong strategy in the south which will require a reevaluation of our policy on bombing of the north and that this problem should be anticipated and study of its implications begun at once and finally,

4. that a pause in the bombing should be considered, recognizing that it may be a prerequisite to establishing the political and psychological framework for initiating negotiations, but recognizing also that unless carefully managed it contains dangerous pitfalls.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XVI, Memos (A). Secret. Thompson sent this paper to Bundy under cover of a memorandum that reads: “The attached report was largely prepared in State and was reviewed by General Taylor, Mr. McNaughton, Mr. William Bundy, Mr. Unger and myself.

2 This is part VII of a nine-part study, of which only the conclusions were distributed to the White House and Secretary of Defense. The other parts were: I. Historical Background, undated; II. Aims and Interests of the Communist Countries Involved, October 8; III. Aims and Interests of the U.S., October 9; IV. Alternatives to be Considered, undated; V. Communist Reactions, undated; VI. Discussion (not found); VII (a). General Taylor's Views 10/11/65; and Annexes, undated. (Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Thompson Study, 1965)

3 Not found.

165. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 165. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 13, 1965, 1:30 p.m.

1269. Subject: Vietnamese attitudes.

1. Completion of Ky government's first hundred days seems an appropriate moment to review Vietnamese attitudes toward the government. In general, on the basis of contacts with opinion molders within key groups, one is forced to the conclusion that the Vietnamese continue to be fence-sitters. There is no evidence of any rise in public acceptance of Ky government, and the various key groups appear to be awaiting some demonstration of performance on the part of the government, although there is little clarity as to what form such performance might take. It seems noteworthy that there was little editorial reaction to Ky's hundred day speech in vernacular press and what comment there was seemed perfunctory and unenthusiastic. One can only deduce that the editors chose not to react to the speech because they were aware that critical commentary would be censored. Press, in general, continues to be somewhat unsympathetic toward the Ky government. This unhappiness has, in part, a selfish base, stemming from government's attempts to control the number of newspapers and their opinions.

2. Within individual groups, general attitude seems to be as follows: A. Catholics. Ky government is for the moment acceptable to some Catholic groups but there is no great enthusiasm for it. Northern refugees and southerners alike are still devoted to idea of civilian government. They are prepared to give Ky a further grace period but they will be watching every move the government makes and will be prepared to criticize when they feel their interests are in danger. Catholic daily Xay Dung continues to display friendly attitude toward Ky but paper is the personal vehicle of Father Nguyen Quang Lam, a friend of Ky's, and no great importance should be attached to it.

B. Buddhists. Tri Quang continues to indicate his displeasure with present government. However, he has not shown any inclination to mount a full-scale campaign to bring it down. He has taken line that it will, in time, collapse of its own weight. Fact of matter probably is that Quang has not been able to find an issue with which he might rally a significant following in an anti-government campaign. Quang probably found instructive the failure of the student campaign in Hue in August to achieve much backing. Tam Chau continues to talk on what is apparently a friendly and frequent basis with Prime Minister Ky. Chau has told Ambassador Lodge that he believes Viet-Nam needs a government that can stay in place at least two years, thus signalling his intention not to oppose the GVN. The GVN is extending substantial support to the UBA (e.g., Van Hanh University) which undoubtedly makes it easier for Chau to support it. There seems to be a parallel between the current state of play within the UBA vis-a-vis the GVN and that which existed during the early days of the Khanh government. At that time, Chau was able to assure that the UBA would not oppose the GVN. This equilibrium proved fragile then and could prove equally fragile now, especially since preparations are now underway for the biennial meeting of the Unified Buddhist Association (UBA) in December at which Chau will be re-elected or a successor will be chosen.

C. Sudistes. There is no great affection for Ky government amongst southern politicians or southerners in general. Ky is regarded as a brash young man from the north and despite the presence of certain southerners in the Cabinet, his government is not considered representative of the southerners. As has so often been the case in the past, the southerners lack the organization and energy to make their displeasure known in any concerted fashion. Nevertheless, their attitude prevents Ky from being able to rally support within mass of the Vietnamese people, ten million of whom are, after all, Cochin-Chinese.

D. Military. In wake of the September 11 Armed Forces Convention at Saigon, the army continues to give the impression of being unified. Directorate members also provide a public impression of unity. In August and September, General Nguyen Chanh Thi supported GVN against agitators in Hue, and this display of Directorate unity undoubtedly contributed to easing the situation. Lately, however, we have heard rumblings that command changes announced by Ky at his October 1 press conference were not well received in some quarters (e.g., certain southern officers view appointments of Generals Nguyen Bao Tri and Nguyen Duc Thang as further evidence that northerners are gradually taking over all key positions within the military). All this demonstrates that Directorate unity is a fragile thing, constantly subjected to divisive forces. It will require frequent reaffirmation.

E. Student-intellectuals. Student-intellectual group has recorded its unhappiness with the Ky government. Hue student newspaper is continuing to publish despite general Thi's open expression of displeasure and has not restricted its criticism of the military regime. Intellectuals, after their late August seminar in Hue, have not as yet organized a promised follow-up meeting in Saigon. Individually, however, they continue to voice their dislike of the military and wish for a civilian government. This group, despite its articulateness, has little power unless it can draw on the Buddhist mass.

F. Labor. Tran Quoc Buu's CVT raised threat of general strike at the beginning of September. Immediate cause for CVT grievance was rigid enforcement by government of a Diem era decree prescribing 48-hour advance notice before trade union meetings could be scheduled. CVT felt this procedure unduly restrictive if applied to public meetings held in union offices. Behind this issue, however, were other grievances: workers' dissatisfaction with regime's failure to cope with rising cost of living and to provide solutions to accumulated specific labor problems, denial of exit visas to permit attendance at international meetings, and GVN refusal to discuss grievances.

3. By and large, Vietnamese populace seems convinced that the VC will not now be able to achieve a military victory. Thus, this fear no longer preoccupies their attention. Neither is there any longer any doubt about US intention. Main preoccupations of the Vietnamese now are their concern over the damage being inflicted on VN as the war intensifies and their concern over their economic problems. Cost of living has risen sharply in last year, particularly in period since Ky government came to power. Costs of basic commodities have increased an average of 33 percent since this time last year. Significant fraction of that increase has been registered since June 19, when Ky government was formed and great build-up of American forces became apparent. In the minds of the city dwellers and those Vietnamese in regions where the American buildup has been most obvious, an unfortunate equation of American presence with rising prices has asserted itself. Editorials have begun to appear in certain Saigon dailies (notably the Buddhist Institute organ Chanh Dao) which, though they do not directly criticize the American presence, nevertheless take line that the sharp increase in the number of foreigners in Viet-Nam endangers Vietnamese culture and national way of life. Hanoi and the VC can be counted upon to encourage public dissatisfaction, building upon daily irritations and complaints about the cost of living, in order to develop an active hostility to the American presence, something which has not previously been a factor here.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

166. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 166. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 13, 1965.

“Bundy also noted that there had been progress on the rice shortage, at least for the short term. The White House copy of this telegram has an indication that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV)

1273. For the President. Herewith my weekly telegram:

First and foremost my warmest respectful congratulations on your recovery and best wishes for good health.2

1. Trend of the war

A. General Thieu, Chief of State, during a call by me to present CIA visitors, made a rather sweeping review of the whole situation, during the course of which he said:

B. He would not be surprised if the Viet Cong eventually accepted an offer to negotiate—as soon as they were convinced that they could not achieve a military victory with main force units, as guerrilla doctrine prescribes. The purpose of accepting the offer to negotiate would be to end or suspend U.S. military activities, presumably in the expectation that the effect on public opinion in the U.S. would be such that it would be difficult, if not impossible, for us to continue operations.

C. He believed that for the last three months, the Viet Cong had been training political cadres to go into the communities in Vietnam and win the war politically which they had been unable to win militarily. He thought there might be as many as 150,000 such cadres. It would mean 5 Viet Cong political cadremen where now there was one. He spoke of a VC demobilization following an armistice, with the demobilized men returning to their villages to become active Communist political subversive workers. They were already taking credit for the U.S. and GVN economic and social programs. GVN was wholly unready for such a political contest. I reported the same from Foreign Minister Tran Van Do in my wire to you of 30 Sept.3

D. There was no doubt in Thieu's mind that they “could beat us politically now”, not because of their appeal, but because of their superior organization. Evidence available to me indicates only about 15 per cent “sympathize” with the VC and that an aversion to Communist methods, particularly to ChiCom domination, continues strong. But these are no substitute for terrorism and poor GVN operations. Incidentally, a recent survey indicates 97 percent of the people know the U.S. is helping, with good opinions of Americans prevailing over bad, and 81 percent believing that Americans are here mainly to prevent Communism. Thieu recognized that his view about negotiation was frankly a guess but he seemed absolutely certain that as soon as the Viet Cong were convinced that they could not win militarily, they would switch their effort to gain a political victory, with or without diplomatic negotiations.

E. It is not a fair criticism of the Vietnamese to say that they cannot defeat the Viet Cong politically because they are tired and weak and this implication is a major fallacy in Lippmann's recent article, “The Stalemate in Vietnam.”4 The truth is they have not had the chance to do so. When the chance to win over the people was missed some years ago, a situation came into being in which it was indispensable for the Viet Cong large units to be defeated before true community building, with its mixture of political and security measures, would be possible. Otherwise, the Viet Cong battalions, emerging from untouchable sanctuaries, would destroy whatever community building had painstakingly been achieved.

F. Now it looks as though we can surely overcome the Viet Cong main force units. Furthermore, it looks as though the Viet Cong knows this and has already begun to act on this knowledge, transforming themselves into small units, into individual terrorists, and into subversive political operators. General Westmoreland reports an intensification of Viet Cong “incidents” from 605 to 701 in the last week, including a sharp rise in acts of terrorism. This is the highest weekly total since September 1964. There is also a downward total in actions by large units. In fact, no major battles occurred during the week. This transformation to terrorism is emphatically not “de-escalation” as one American “expert” recently said. But it is a change, and a change which we have been anticipating.

G. It cannot be said that since we began defeating main force units the GVN have let the grass grow under their feet. When the Minister of Rural Construction (i.e. community building), Mr. Ung, was killed in a plane crash, the GVN developed a new governmental organization which I discussed in my 1190 to you of 6 Oct,5 and which is as well thought out as one can expect. Lansdale's committee is in close and constant touch. This week they called a meeting, which I attended, of all province chiefs plus elected provincial councillors to enthuse them and give them a clear idea of what they had to do. Vietnam is indeed much further ahead militarily than it is politically for the simple reason they could not really get going politically until the Viet Cong battalions were put out of business.

H. I believe the U.S. Mission is doing everything that it can to help prepare this country for a political struggle. But I am eager for new ideas and would very much appreciate any ideas or guidance which Washington can give me so that if a major political offensive were to be undertaken by the Viet Cong, we could gain time until we could score a real political victory. When we win such a victory, we can feel that we have accomplished something durable and truly worthy of our sacrifice.

2. Coup rumors

A. It is disagreeable to have to report a few coup rumors, the first which have occurred since my arrival. Although they do not look serious today, they are a preoccupation to me, and I am putting out the word in every way available that we do not want a coup, that this is the time to subordinate petty individualistic jealousies and ambitions, and also, that it behooves those who are in government to try to act like real political leaders, by reasoning with the people who are disaffected, by involving them in the new projects, and by arranging matters so that others get some of the credit. This is not normal procedure for Orientals, particularly those who have had a long dose of the egoism of French politicos, but we are trying it.

B. I am also planning to visit the III Corps headquarters which I have not yet visited, to have some frank and, I hope, helpful talks with Generals who, although theoretically military, are actually the heads of civil and political activity and a serious potential threat.

3. Economic

A. The general price trend for the grade of rice used by the working classes continued slow increase as for more than a month. The end of November stock levels are expected to be low but not dangerously so, as a result of delayed PL-480 arrivals. The early rice crop from the Delta area has begun moving into the milling centers. USOM's index of food prices last week rose by 4 percent to a level 6 percent higher than a month ago and 34 percent higher than a year ago. Non-food consumer prices went up 3 percent to a level 6 percent over last and 18 percent over last year. The Vietnamese piaster continued to weaken in terms of hard currencies and gold.

4. Psychological

A. Vietnamese popular attitudes during the week reflected continuing feeling that the war was going badly for the Viet Cong and increasing concern over economic matters.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 6:40 a.m. Bundy sent the President a retyped copy of this telegram on October 14 under cover of a memorandum that reads: “We are puzzled by his conversation with Thieu—in the sense that we see no reason why the Viet Cong should be able to win politically in a fair fight if they are as unpopular as we all believe. I am having a further analysis made on this point. Otherwise, an interesting report.

2 On October 8, President Johnson was operated on for removal of his gall bladder.

3 Document 157.

4 The Washington Post, September 30, 1965.

5 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files,POL 27 VIET S)

167. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 167. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, October 13, 1965, 8:30 p.m.

1015. Ref: Embtel 1109.2

1. Greatly appreciate your most thoughtful message on VC reprisal executions of American prisoners and DRV threats to treat their US prisoners as war criminals. We agree that we can neither submit tacitly to these actions or threatened actions, nor can we ignore them. However, problem is to find ways and means of bringing effective pressure against DRV and VC to move them to treat prisoners in accordance with 1949 Geneva Convention. At same time, GVN must be free to go on treating VC terrorists in accordance with Vietnamese law (but ensuring that punishment is commensurate with crime) and we must continue to do everything possible to reaffirm and emphasize to world clear distinction between such terrorists and prisoners of war.

2. Your proposals reftel are under active consideration here. In meantime, hope shortly to get cable to you and other posts concerned on possibility of naming Protecting Power to assume responsibilities for US prisoners in Communist hands as provided for under Geneva Convention. We also are planning diplomatic approaches following up Vienna Conference and designed to stimulate international pressure on DRV/VC to abide by DRV's obligation under Geneva Convention.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-7 VIET. Secret; Exdis.

2 In telegram 1109 from Saigon, September 30, the Embassy suggested that the Viet Cong executions of American prisoners were an effort to spare or save the lives of Viet Cong agents and terrorists convicted and sentenced to death by South Vietnam. The Embassy outlined three possible courses of action: 1) tacit submission, by convincing South Vietnam to declare a de facto moratorium on executions of Viet Cong agents and terrorists; 2) taking indirect action against Viet Cong reprisal executions by mobilizing world opinion against them; and 3) retaliation at a level of violence calculated to induce the Viet Cong to become reluctant to employ executions. The Embassy favored the third option. (Ibid.)

168. Memorandum of Conversation 168. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 14, 1965, 8 p.m.

SECRETARY'S DINNER FOR RUMANIAN FOREIGN MINISTER Manescu

SUBJECT

Vietnam

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. Secretary Rusk

Assistant Secretary John Leddy

Ambassador-Designate Richard H. Davis

Raymond E. Lisle, Director of the Office of Eastern European Affairs

Rumanian Foreign Minister Corneliu Manescu

Deputy Foreign Minister Mircea Malita

Ambassador Petre Balaceanu

Ion Baschiru, Counselor, Rumanian Embassy

Sergiu Celac, interpreter

The Secretary said there is no lack of means for communicating with Hanoi, Peiping or Moscow, but we have no evidence yet that they are prepared to talk. We have the impression that Hanoi might be willing to talk, and that Moscow would like to see talks take place, but that Peiping is the real obstacle. Nevertheless, there has been some progress. Hanoi no longer denies the existence of infiltration into South Vietnam from the North, and they no longer insist upon a complete withdrawal of US forces as a precondition for discussions. They still insist, however, that any settlement must be on terms imposed by the NLF—a condition which the US can never accept.

The Rumanians, according to Manescu, have some contacts with Hanoi. Since Hanoi is no longer insisting on withdrawal of American forces from South Vietnam as a prerequisite to negotiations, it is unfortunate that the United States apparently cannot consider the cessation of bombings.

The Secretary said we very definitely can think of stopping the bombing. The Government has promised its own people—and this should be convincing—that American troops will be withdrawn as soon as North Vietnam ceases its attempt to impose its system on the people of South Vietnam by force. But Hanoi still insists on acceptance of the NLF program as a prerequisite to negotiations. We cannot accept the imposition of the NLF on South Vietnam—whether by Hanoi, a combination of Hanoi and Peiping, or of Hanoi and Moscow. The Secretary said he was prepared to go to Geneva tomorrow if Hanoi would agree to negotiate without preconditions. There is hope that we may see moves toward peace in Vietnam early next year. It appears that there are divided counsels in Hanoi. The Foreign Minister said he hoped the Secretary was not being too optimistic. The US may be taking external signs as indications of division in Hanoi.

The US has sufficient contact with Hanoi and with Peiping, according to the Secretary. Apart from our own regular contacts, there are many people who are constantly offering their services. At critical moments, however, when there seems to be possibility for agreement, Peiping moves to get in the way of a settlement. Mr. Manescu asked whether the four points made by NVN are unacceptable. The Secretary replied that three of the four points are negotiable. One is entirely unacceptable—imposing the NLF program on the people of South Vietnam.

The Foreign Minister said that one of his colleagues had suggested that, in view of Rumania's relations with Hanoi, it should try to do something. Mr. Manescu had replied that in his view a solution could be reached only by direct talks and that Rumania could not act as a mediator.

The Secretary said that we have our own contacts with Hanoi and he was not asking Mr. Manescu to act as a mediator. One could never tell, however, what channel, direct or indirect, might be used. If Rumania should pick up a signal he would only ask Mr. Manescu to make sure that the signal was not blocked. The Foreign Minister replied that he would inform his Government of this request.

Rumania wants its relations with the US to be better than “normal”. The present situation in Southeast Asia could create very great problems. The Foreign Minister said that so far as Vietnam is concerned, he would be saying too little if he said only that we were in disagreement. Rumania cannot understand the US position. The dangers of escalation are always high and the ladder of escalation is one which is very difficult to descend. In the Rumanian view a military solution is impossible; the problem of Vietnam can be solved only by the Vietnamese.

The Secretary pointed out that we had suffered a great disappointment in Southeast Asia. President Kennedy had come into office and taken a new look at Laos and concluded that if the Laotians were left alone they would not be interested in killing each other. Both the President and Khrushchev had agreed at Vienna that everyone should leave the Laotians to themselves. Thus the Geneva Conference of 1962. We had withdrawn our military, but Hanoi had never accepted the agreement, and had never had less than 6,000 troops in Laos. Nor has NVN stopped using Laos as an infiltration route into South Vietnam. We do not hold Moscow guilty of bad faith, but it is a disappointment to us, since we had hoped it would be the first step to peace in Southeast Asia.

The Foreign Minister asked, “How do you think that the US will emerge from this mixed-up and venturous program in Southeast Asia?”

The Secretary replied that he did not know. The choice is between peace, which is possible if North Vietnam leaves South Vietnam alone, or war. This is the agonizing problem. The US would not object if South Vietnam should decide by free and peaceful means to join with North Vietnam. We cannot permit North Vietnam to impose this unity by force, however. We will remain only so long as Hanoi persists in seeking to impose its solution by force. If North Vietnam continues to use force for 20 years, we also will be there for 20 years. If North Vietnam thinks it can wait until the US loses interest and withdraws its forces, it is wrong. Moscow understands that we cannot accept a forceful change in the status quo, just as Moscow itself would not accept a change in the status quo by force. But Hanoi does not understand this.

The Foreign Minister suggested that perhaps the US should look at the opinions of other countries, to which the Secretary replied that we had done so and are doing so. The 17 unaligned nations have urged negotiations without conditions; we have agreed, but Hanoi has said no. The British Commonwealth had tried to send a group to Peiping, but China had responded by calling the British Prime Minister a nit-wit. Hanoi had sent a delegation to Moscow, but Peiping had moved to block all possibility of agreement.

The Foreign Minister remarked that Cambodia had put forward a sound proposal some years ago, but the US had rejected it. The Secretary pointed out that we had thought that before there was a general conference there should first be bilateral discussions between Cambodia and Thailand, and Cambodia and South Vietnam. We had used our influence to that end, but Prince Sihanouk had been unwilling to discuss any problems with his neighbors. At any rate, that was three years ago. The Laotian settlement of 1962 had been a critical moment in the move toward peace, but Hanoi had rejected it.

In response to a remark that in the long run everyone might say that the Chinese were right, the Secretary said that China is being rejected by one country after another—even Indonesia. The Chinese doctrine of military conquest has not been accepted either by the Socialist world or by the Free World. China is headed either to a basic change of policy or to catastrophe. Fortunately many of the Chinese leaders are practical men who are more prudent in actions than in words. The US is not looking for a pretext to attack China. After all, Chinese nuclear capability within the foreseeable future will always be trivial as compared to that of the US. We are not seeking an opportunity for a preventive strike—all that we want is that smaller nations within the range of China be allowed to live in peace. The Rumanians have a stake in this—it is important to establish that the presence of a great power does not mean that small powers in the area must lose their independence or security. We cannot forget that Hitler moved into the Rhineland and into the Sudetenland without opposition, as Japan moved into Manchuria. These developments led to World War II, for which we were partly responsible. We are not going to make the same mistake again. There is one important element which might bring the opposing parties together in Southeast Asia. Peiping and Hanoi continue to talk of the 1954 agreement, as do we. Both parties have also referred to the 1962 Laos agreement. There is some reason to think that these agreements can be the basis for peace in Southeast Asia. If there are disputes, let them be solved by peaceful means. This is basically the position of Moscow, although it cannot fail to support North Vietnam because of its own dispute with Peiping.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Lisle and approved in S on November 26. The source text is labeled “Part I of III.” The meeting was held in the James Madison Room of the Department of State.

169. Editorial Note 169. Editorial Note

On October 18, 1965, at 10:26 a.m., McGeorge Bundy telephoned Secretary Rusk to inform him that Secretary of Defense McNamara would like to arrange for them to meet with George Ball and William Bundy to discuss the “Vietnam bombing problem.” Rusk suggested to McNamara possible times for the meeting, including 6 p.m. on that day. (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

According to Rusk's Appointment Book, the Secretary met with McNamara, Ball, and McGeorge Bundy at 6:06 p.m. on October 18. (Johnson Library) William Bundy did not attend this meeting. On October 19 at 11:15 a.m., William Bundy called Rusk and stated that he had learned from Assistant Secretary of Defense McNaughton “that there had been some decision between McNamara, Bundy and Sec re looking at pause question.” Rusk replied that “Ball would follow up on that” and asked Bundy to come up to his office. (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations) No other record of the meeting has been found.

170. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 170. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 20, 1965.

1356. For Secretary from Ambassador. Your 1058.2

A. I believe that substantially increased deployment such as is envisioned in Phase 2 would have a good political effect because it would enable us effectively to destroy or neutralize the VC main force units and destroy their present redoubts more quickly than is now the case. This would surely help the GVN in getting an effective community building pacification program going.

B. Clearly an increase in U.S. personnel has possibilities for friction, but I think a long, drawn out American military presence creates more friction in the end than a shorter presence with the people.

C. The contemplated timing is satisfactory.

D. CIA believes and I concur that the VC is working hard to restore the old balance which our U.S. presence has upset. In other words, we have achieved some momentum and should not only maintain, but increase it if we can.

Comment: The President, Secretary McNamara and yourself can take pride in both the diversified scope and thoroughness of the present American effort here, which I believe is quite unprecedented. The extent to which all Americans are pulling together is noteworthy. I feel that some very big things are being created of which Phase 2 is an important part. But if for any reason you cannot undertake Phase 2, I believe we can still do big things with what we have, although it will take longer. If a feeling should catch hold among the people that they have a real stake in this government, things could go very fast indeed. Of this, however, there is as yet no dependable sign.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central File, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate time of transmission; the telegram was received at 2:26 a.m.

2 In telegram 1058, October 19, Rusk asked Lodge to send him privately his reaction to three questions concerning the proposed second phase deployment of U.S. troops to Vietnam. The answers provided by Lodge would aid in the consideration of the issue in Washington. The first question concerned the need for such substantially increased deployment, the second related to the problems such deployment might create in Vietnam, and the third question dealt with the best timing and phasing for such deployment if the U.S. Government decided to undertake it. (Ibid.)

171. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 171. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 20, 1965.

“There is an indication on the White House copy that the President saw the telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV)

1355. For the President. Herewith my weekly telegram. Hope you are feeling better.

1. Current political.

The most striking political news of the week was the complete failure of the Viet Cong's call for a general strike in Saigon on October 15 to inaugurate a “hate America” month. In Saigon and throughout the countryside the population paid not the slightest attention to the strike call.

Prime Minister Ky went on the air with the first in a series of five planned fireside chats. He talked about the rising cost of living for which he blamed hoarders, speculators and the Viet Cong. He explained that the displacement of a number of families in Saigon was due to the construction of a projected new bridge which would increase access to the port of Saigon and thereby increase the port's cargo handling capacity. He promised that death benefits to families of deceased servicemen would be paid within a month or that full explanations would be required.

A conference of province chiefs and members of provincial assemblies was held to improve communication between the national and provincial levels of government. The conference came up with a number of recommendations concerning training, standardization of salaries, and tenure for province chiefs. Some older politicians among the provincial representatives took the occasion to circulate a petition calling on the GVN to form an interim assembly from the provincial councils and to prepare for National Assembly elections. This initiative aroused very little public attention.

2. Basic political.

The more I study and learn, the more impressed I am with the savage and thorough way in which the Viet Cong has destroyed the political structure of this country. Everything that I have read about successful counter-guerrilla activity says that one must start in each hamlet by picking out a good man to be chairman of a committee of up and coming young men. In this country the “good man” all too often has had his head cut off, the grade B people have been driven out and what is left are the old and the weak and the children—not a real community at all.

The GVN, therefore, faces the need of actually bringing in the proposed local leadership. I thought the war veterans would be a likely nucleus but I now learn that 80 percent of the war veterans are afraid to live out in the country and have gathered in the cities. We are, therefore, not just starting from scratch but starting well below scratch.

The plan to form cadres of about 200 carefully selected people with above average gumption and recruited as much as possible among men who used once to live in the village which it is planned to pacify seems sensible.

The political action teams which the CIA has formed can be the nucleus and should be a big help.

Lansdale is working on this—and on the psychological and emotional side to try to make people want a new life and stir them up a little bit with songs.

He and I think rural electrification has a great potential as something that can be done quickly—action rather than words—and which has a wonderful psychological effect.

As the GVN picks its first group of 200 and pacifies—or rather rebuilds—its first community, it will, of course, have the USOM resources in back of it.

I believe a few genuine successes can have a profound psychological effect. We saw how radically psychology can change for the better following your decision to send U.S. troops. I have just learned of 1400 refugees in Binh Dinh Province to whom Americans have given such confidence that they actually went back home. A similar change as regards community building is not inconceivable. The Viet Cong clearly do not expect it. But neither did they expect the capacity to destroy main force units which we have demonstrated.

Whatever we do must be durable. Dependable, local security forces must remain. The new village leaders must be protected from assassination. It is better to do nothing rather than simply recreate another pattern of terrorism and assassination.

3. Security.

The total number of Viet Cong incidents increased for the fourth successive week reflecting largely increased acts of terrorism and increased anti-aircraft fire. The total number of actual Viet Cong attacks decreased considerably. Big U.S. sweeps in two provinces failed to trap Viet Cong units but did keep the Viet Cong on the move, thus weakening their ability to mount attacks.

4. Economics.

Saigon retail rice prices dropped slightly during the week, reversing a slow upward trend that had continued for over a month. The prices dropped despite a decrease in rice stocks on hand. This reflected confident expectations that PL 480 shipments will bring in sufficient rice to meet demands. However concern continued over the increased cost of living in general and the Vietnamese piaster continued to weaken in terms of hard currencies and gold.

The government took a number of measures against the increased cost of living. It rationed sweetened condensed milk. It withheld new price schedules, reflecting tariff increases, pending the liquidation of old stocks. It arrested and fined merchants who sold old stocks at new prices.

5. Psychological.

The failure of the Viet Cong's call for a “day of revenge” to include a general strike and an “hour of silence” on October 15 demonstrated that the Viet Cong enjoy very little real support from the people. The failure of this effort represented a psychological defeat for the Viet Cong and this fact has not been lost on either the Vietnamese people or on foreign correspondents, particularly Asians, who were watching developments closely.

The high cost of living continued to dominate much Vietnamese thinking throughout the country.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate the time of transmission; the telegram was received at 2:40 a.m. McGeorge Bundy sent a retyped copy of this telegram to the President under cover of an October 20 memorandum that states that Lodge “sheds more light this time on the shape of the political problem. In this sense, it is a better report than last week's, though the more we learn of the problem the harder the job looks.” Bundy noted that “good reporters coming back from Vietnam are optimistic as they have never been before. I have talked at some length with both Joe Alsop and Warren Rogers—listened rather than talked—and both of them are encouraging.

172. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 172. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 20, 1965, 5:05 p.m.

1361. 1. Henry Kissinger 2 and I had lunch with PriMin Ky at Nha Trang Oct 19. Ky has been in Nha Trang recuperating from a bad cold. In relaxed environment Ky discussed problems of a negotiated settlement and his internal political difficulties with considerable candor.

2. When the subject of negotiations came up, Ky stated emphatically that Vietnam was in no position at the present time to negotiate a settlement with Hanoi. He said there were two basic reasons for this: (A) Fragility of internal situation and the continuing presence of political divisions, especially on the civilian side. The political fabric of Vietnam is weakened to the extent that it could not yet compete with the Viet Cong in many parts of the countryside—not because VC are popular, but because of their ruthless organization. (B) The announcement of the acceptance of negotiations could weaken the morale and will to resist Communism to a dangerous extent—even to the point where the ARVN could lose its will to fight with “many soldiers giving up and going home.” Ky said also that he did not think a cease-fire at the present time would do anything but provide a means by which the Viet Cong would further consolidate their hold over those areas of the country which they now controlled. This would in effect perpetuate the partition of South Vietnam into pro-Viet Cong and anti-Communist areas.

3. He said that he believed that Hanoi had made a great error from its viewpoint in not accepting the offer to negotiate several months ago when South Vietnam was in even worse shape politically. Things were a little better now. Nevertheless, much had to be done in reorganizing South Vietnam before the govt would be in a position to deal with the Viet Cong politically on the ground. Viet Cong cadres remained well disciplined and the re-orientation and re-dedication of GVN cadres was yet to be accomplished. Ky said that the military strength of South Vietnam, supported by its allies, had now reached the stage where pacification and strengthening of the govt's position could proceed so that hopefully in about one year's time things would be much better.

4. Ky said that the most important political requirement for the immediate future was the maintenance of unity among the various Generals in the armed forces. He said that the only element able to provide necessary leadership in South Vietnam was the armed forces. Civilian political groups had demonstrated their inability to work together and the age-old problems of regionalism and religious differences were such that any govt built around one group would automatically draw to itself such internal political opposition from others that it could not survive. In the circumstances the armed forces must seek to rise above sectional and religious differences. They were capable of doing so because its various people for years had been used to working together regardless of traditional factional factors.

5. He then described a recent conversation with General Co, Deputy PriMin, and other military leaders in which he had impressed upon them the importance of maintaining their unity. This plea, he said, had been occasioned by the interjection of regional and religious differences over the appointment of certain key officers in the last governmental changes. He claimed that as a result of conversations among the Generals, unity had been reaffirmed and the situation was quieter.

6. Ky said that he recognized the importance of enlisting the support of various non-military elements in the work of the govt. He was hopeful that the recent conferences of province chiefs and provincial council reps was a first step in securing a wider participation of all key elements in the community. He intended that such confs would now take place at the regional level to be followed later by another national conf. In this way people would get to know each other and used to working with each other. It would give him the chance to weed out any Communist sympathizers. A national advisory council drawn from the provincial councils and leading sects and groups to serve as a consultative group for the govt would be created. He would see how the first steps now being taken work before formalizing any such arrangements. Its work should be limited to matters which did not embarrass the govt in the conduct of foreign relations or which did not endanger the security of the state.

7. Finally, Ky said that he was placing great emphasis on the new pacification and rural construction effort which was getting underway under the leadership of General Co and General Thang. Cadre reorganization and training would soon begin and he wanted to get the program in action in primary areas: Danang-Quang Nam, Binh Dinh, and the Saigon-Cholon-Gia Dinh area. He asked for full support from the U.S. for these efforts, which I assured him was going to be forthcoming. He said that over the next year he expected that these efforts would yield great results and he expressed confidence in the ability of the govt to re-organize itself to meet the needs of the fundamental political and social economic struggle in the countryside.

8. When I was alone with Gen Ky after lunch, I brought up our concern over the leakage of info to the Viet Cong about military operations. We knew that it worried him as much as it did us. He agreed and said that this was due largely to the frequent changes which had taken place in the GVN and in the military structure. Whenever there were changes, it gave the Communists the chance to work in. He assured me of his best efforts.

9. I took occasion to express the hope that whenever sentence is passed on prisoners that it be publicly made very clear that the punishment was commensurate with the offense. His treatment of prisoners concerned us very intimately because of the fate of our own prisoners. He said he understood and agreed to cooperate.

10. Coming back to the problem of inflation, I stressed the points which had been put to him by Mann at a previous meeting and went on to make a few suggestions as follows: he should particularly watch the prices of the important staples which the people eat, such as rice, nuoc mam, milk, pork, etc. Ky said that he was having this done. I said that it was not too difficult to watch these and that he was in a position to act affirmatively, and that action was better than words or a futile attempt to set up a big administrative structure.

11. I cited reports of Viet Cong in ARVN uniforms diverting truckloads of rice. I pointed out that the police were not allowed to arrest anybody in uniform and that therefore the Vietnamese military should establish checkpoints to stop these trucks and verify the presence of Viet Cong in army uniform.

12. I especially suggested establishing a few emergency sales outlets in Saigon for children and the needy where the scarce staples could be sold at govt price. This was something simple and it too was action rather than words. Yet it would create favorable sentiment for the govt. He could later consider the question of giving some food away.

13. I referred to the congestion in the port of Saigon. He had obviously thought about this a great deal and felt it was not due to trouble with labor unions, but to a very real labor shortage.

14. He referred specifically to a pier owned by the Messageries Maritimes, a French steamship line under control of the French Govt. This pier was not in use and yet the steamship line refused to make it available. General Ky told me finally he had decided to requisition the pier.

15. Comment: This refusal to make an unused pier available to the Vietnamese or to the American military is widely believed to be a direct manifestation of De Gaulle's anti-American policy. How this helps the French colony in Vietnam, or how it helps the rank and file French people in France, or how it can be considered the reaction of an ally are questions the answers to which do not exist here.

16. Every time I see General Ky, I am impressed with the way in which he has grown, in knowledge of this job, in judgment and in general stature. If fate enables him to stay on the job for a reasonable period of time, he could become a first class political leader in the best sense of the term. If there are govts in this world which have a man of much better quality and potential than General Ky, then I do not know what they are.

17. When, therefore, I read Dar-es-Salaam's no. 113 in which Nyerere speaks seriously of “establishing a broader based regime,” I am astounded. I presume the phrase “broader based regime” means putting in the Communists which, of course, means taking out General Ky. I can understand why a Communist would suggest this, but I cannot understand why anyone should consider it other than a crass attempt at gaining by political intrigue what they have not been able to obtain in other ways.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to USUN and CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 5:52 a.m.

2 Henry Kissinger recalls that Lodge asked him to visit South Vietnam as a consultant. He toured the country for 2 weeks in late October and early November talking with civilian and military leaders. See White House Years, pp. 231-233. Records of 12 of Kissinger's “more important” conversations were transmitted in airgram A-285 from Saigon, November 4. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 In this telegram, October 18, sent to the Department of State as telegram 757 and repeated to Saigon, Ambassador William Leonhart reported a conversation on Vietnam with Tanganyikan President Julius Nyerere. (Ibid.)

173. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 173. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 20, 1965, 4:40 p.m.

1360. Dept repeat as desired. Ref: Depcirtel 630.2

1. Following are Mission comments on idea of protecting power for US prisoners in NVN under Geneva Conventions of 1949.

2. As Dept is aware we have long been dubious of significant practical benefits which can reasonably be expected in terms of improved treatment for US prisoners from any of series of legal or propaganda gambits which have been suggested or attempted recently. Dept has under consideration our recommendations for more belligerent measures to improve prisoners' lot.3 We continue to believe that self-interest is only motive governing Hanoi treatment of our prisoners and that normal compunctions of relatively civilized govts do not apply, nor does decent respect for opinion of mankind. It is possible, however, that Hanoi regime does value favorable attitudes of some segments of foreign opinion sufficiently to take their sensitivities into account in weighing best use to make of prisoners. We have in mind here especially Japanese and some other Asian opinion. Thus, for instance, if Hanoi were convinced that Japanese left-wingers would be more upset by execution of U.S. prisoners following sham war-crimes trials than by horrors suffered by NVN civil populace they would be accused during such trials of having caused, then NVN might take this factor into account, along with others, in deciding whether to execute prisoners or not. Thus, our legal and moral leverage through the exercise of public opinion is extremely limited, though there are some points at which we can bring it to bear.

3. The above considerations are relevant to subject at hand for two reasons: we should not expect too much from this proposal, and we should recognize that proposal is essentially an attempt to marshal international public opinion to protect welfare of our prisoners.

4. We think it likely that if request for acceptance of protecting power is advanced by U.S., Hanoi will reject request and will also reject request for assumption by ICRC of role of protecting power. Hanoi has refused to respond substantively to ICRC question about whether it is willing to apply Geneva Conventions to present conflict, and it therefore presumably regards itself as not bound by their provisions. Admittedly, its position is equivocal and inconsistent, since it has cited one of its reservations to Geneva Conventions in laying groundwork for possible trial of U.S. prisoners as war criminals, and has accused U.S. of violating Conventions in our bombings. Nevertheless, we strongly believe that Hanoi regime does not want a third country acting in interests of U.S. nor an international body such as ICRC traveling about NVN visiting prisoners, etc., as required by Conventions. Furthermore, we do not believe Hanoi will want to set any embarrassing precedents for their Front stooges and the VC in accepting applicability of Geneva Conventions.

5. Having said the above, we agree with Dept. that there may be some advantages in propaganda field to be gained from proposal. We should bear in mind our propaganda objectives in making our request and in subsequent steps. First three specific advantages cited in para 3 of reftel presuppose Hanoi's agreeing to protecting power or ICRC, so fourth advantage is one we should be prepared to hammer home.4 One other advantage of course would be that ICRC would be given another project to work on besides alleged U.S. and GVN shortcomings in application Geneva Conventions and it would set record a little straighter on which side trying to act humanely in this conflict. Another advantage would be improvement in our posture with U.S. public and Congress to show that we are doing everything possible, regardless of seeming futility, to try to improve welfare and safety of U.S. prisoners. For same reason it would have a helpful effect on morale of U.S. pilots engaged in NVN missions.

6. We likewise do not see serious disadvantages in proposal, since it is even more unlikely NVN would request protecting power in SVN, as they do not admit having forces in conflict or legitimacy of GVN. Such an eventuality might be embarrassing for GVN and ourselves until handling of prisoners has improved (it is continuing to get better daily and most problems are of administrative nature) and would presumably also afford fine propaganda opportunities for Communists. Should Front call for a protecting power (which we also think unlikely), we might be faced with public opinion problem ourselves in refusing to permit one. This would however open way for us to demand protecting power (perhaps same one as in NVN) for prisoners held by VC.

7. With reference to last sentence para 5 reftel,5 we note USSR and other Communist states expressed reservation limiting application second paragraph Article 10, and wonder whether DRV also did so when it adhered to Conventions (our files are incomplete).

8. Subsequent paragraphs are concerned with which protecting power we should choose. As Dept aware UK assumed protection of U.S. interests and custody of U.S. property when we closed Hanoi Consulate in December, 1955 and UK continues to function in that capacity. Why would continuance that role on behalf U.S. prisoners raise recognition issue more than it already has been? Since UK is already our “protecting power,” in one sense, perhaps British could simply notify Hanoi they had been asked expand that role to cover U.S. prisoners and see when Hanoi responds.

9. We have expended great efforts to persuade Morocco and Senegal not to send reps to Hanoi. Is it worthwhile suggesting they do so now, especially since we doubt DRV would let them subsequently adopt protective power role? Rabat and Dakar of course have better feel for effects of our switch in position on local attitudes.

10. Could ICC be asked to take over this role? Article 10 seems to refer to such possibilities. Even if such were possible, however, we doubt wisdom of involving ICC in this question and do not think they would wish to enter into it. Nevertheless, there may be advantages to such idea which we here do not know about.

11. Bearing in mind propaganda aspects of this proposal, what would be pros and cons of requesting Czechs or Rumanians to be our protecting power, after Hanoi had rejected other choices? Do Eastern European regimes feel themselves now under sufficiently greater moral restraint to warrant our choosing a relatively unfriendly and Communist state to look after our prisoners? Hanoi would surely find it harder to refuse bloc country as protecting power, and if they did, propaganda gains for U.S. would be even greater. If contrary to expectations, Hanoi accepted them, bloc protecting power presumably would be better than none.

12. We doubt very much that GVN would request a protecting power for their own troops held by VC (so far as we know none are held by NVN) since problems of recognition would be raised.

13. Finally we wish to note that none of above affects prisoners held by VC. They are the ones who suffer greatest hardships and the three prisoners who have been executed in reprisals were murdered by the VC.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-7 VIET. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In circular telegram 630, October 20, the Department suggested that, in light of the increasing number of U.S. personnel in North Vietnamese hands, the question of appointing a protecting power capable of assuming the rights and responsibilities under the Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War of 1949 should be urgently explored. (Ibid.)

3 See footnote 2, Document 167.

4 In this paragraph of circular telegram 630, the Department enumerated three advantages of applying the Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War. The first was its provisions requiring due process of judicial proceedings (and exposing reprisals masquerading as war crime punishment); the second was 35 specific articles in the convention defining the role of the protecting power vis-a-vis POWs; and the third was the fact that the protecting power's role supplemented and complemented the ICRC. A fourth advantage would be a propaganda one accruing from the refusal of North Vietnam to accept a protecting power and casting itself in a bad light in world opinion. (Department of State, Central Files,POL 27-7 VIET)

5 In paragraph 5, the Department noted that since the NLF was not recognized and North Vietnam denied its forces were in South Vietnam, there was no question of their requesting a protecting power for their prisoners. However this did not mean that prisoners held by the GVN should not have a protecting power appointed. As the last sentence in paragraph 5 indicated: “Second paragraph Article 10 GPW [Geneva Prisoner of War treaty] requires Detaining Power (GVN) to appoint neutral state or impartial organization to fufill this function, if Hanoi fails to take action in this regard.”(Ibid.)

174. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 174. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, October 20, 1965.

SUBJECT

Lodge vs Goldberg

The attached telegram2 raises a delicate matter which merits your attention. Lodge here (and I believe in conversations with Alsop, Reston and others) is taking a line which has already stirred up some speculation and difficulties (see attached Mansfield's remarks).3

Potentially more serious is the difference between Goldberg's public and private statements at the UN (which are presumably made on instructions from Washington) and Lodge's not-so-private views. We may be confronted with the Hawk-Dove syndrome in the press and, more importantly, with the erosion of the government's credibility. The fact of the matter is that if Hanoi gives a clear “signal” that it is ready to talk we will be placed in a very awkward position if we don't respond in the light of the President's statement (most recently re-asserted in a speech by Cy Vance)4 that we will go “anywhere anytime without preconditions.”

I was told yesterday by Joe Sisco that Goldberg is very concerned about this—as well he might be.

You may recall that before Lodge left I suggested that the President clear up the negotiations matter with him. The longer we leave this in limbo the more difficult it will be to deal with when we have to. At a minimum, I suggest that Lodge be instructed to keep his private thoughts private and be reminded that when and if the time comes when Hanoi says “Geneva here we come”, we will be going too. One of Lodge's high priority tasks should be to reach the kind of understanding with the GVN that will permit the U.S. and the GVN to proceed in tandem.

C

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Negotiation. Secret; Eyes Only.

2 Apparent reference to Document 162.

3 Apparent reference to Mansfield's October 19 speech to the Senate, in which he claimed that unnamed U.S. officials had encouraged press stories that the war in Vietnam need not end in a negotiated settlement, but with a total military solution—the defeat of the Viet Cong. (Congressional Record-Senate, October 19, 1965, pp. 27288-27291)

4 Not found.

175. Letter From the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) to President Johnson 175. Letter From the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) to President Johnson1

New York, October 20, 1965.

Dear Mr. President:

I wish to make a further suggestion concerning United States posture toward unconditional negotiations on Vietnam.

Contrary to our earlier expectations, the situation in Vietnam did not receive overriding emphasis in the General Assembly's general debate—a development due primarily to the sudden eruption of the conflict between India and Pakistan.

Vietnam was, of course, the second topic most frequently touched upon in the general debate. It has been encouraging to find not only that the United States role in Vietnam found considerable support but also that criticism of the American role was neither so severe nor so widespread as had been anticipated. Unqualified criticism of our role and full support for Hanoi was voiced by only the Congo (Brazzaville), the Soviet bloc, plus Cuba, Albania and Cambodia (the latter three predictably exceeded all others in harshness); in addition, somewhat less hostile, but still very critical, statements were made by Kenya, Guinea and Mali. On the other hand, the United States position received support from some eighteen countries, including—and this is worthy of particular note—most of those countries in the Far East which are closest to the threat posed by Hanoi's actions toward South Vietnam. The remainder of the speeches, some with implied criticism of the United States and some with implied criticism of Hanoi, tended to emphasize one of two themes: first, the impossibility of a military solution and the urgency of beginning negotiations (often combined with appeals for a cessation of all hostilities); second, the advocacy of negotiations, coupled with the argument that continued American bombing of North Vietnam virtually rules out negotiations.

It is clear to me that the relatively good treatment the United States role in Vietnam received in the general debate is a direct product of two factors: the frequent reiteration, in months past, of our willingness to begin unconditional negotiations; the excellent work done in Washington and in our Embassies throughout the world to explain the United States goals in Vietnam. In short, the posture the United States has assumed toward negotiations, besides being correct in terms of substance, has proved advantageous in terms of our international image.

Despite the outcome of the general debate, however, I must report that I have sensed some doubt (even among some of our friends) whether we really want negotiations. This doubt has, of course, been compounded by certain statements made recently, as well as by reports of South Vietnam's opposition to unconditional negotiations. It is generally expressed not in outright questioning of United States sincerity; it takes the form, rather, of a feeling that United States publicly-expressed interest in negotiations may stem less from a desire to begin negotiations immediately than from a desire to maintain a positive international image while improving our military posture for negotiations in the future.

Senator Mansfield's speech of October 192 was, of course, immensely helpful in countering this undercurrent of doubt. It would be even more helpful, in my view, if there were to be further periodic reiteration by you and the Secretary of both our continued desire for prompt unconditional negotiations and of our willingness to suspend bombings provided there were some assurance North Vietnam would respond with comparable measures to restrain its military activities in the South. I can, of course, emphasize such statements here, as I have in the past, with good effects on other countries.

Sincerely yours,

Arthur J. Goldberg3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Negotiation. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the original letter was in the U.N.-Goldberg correspondence file.

2 See footnote 3, Document 174.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

176. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 176. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 21, 1965, 6 p.m.

1377. For the President and the Secretary from Lodge. Subj: If Hanoi decides to negotiate.

I. Vietnam not ready

A. This telegram is occasioned by General Thieu's statement to me on Oct 13 that he guessed there would eventually be an offer to negotiate from the Viet Cong (presumably through Hanoi). To this Thieu added the statement (concurred in emphatically by FonMin Tran Van Do and on Tuesday, Oct 19, by PriMin Ky) that Vietnam is absolutely unready for the serious political warfare with the Communists of which such a move would be the beginning; that this offer would cripple Vietnamese military activities; and that it would thus jeopardize all that we and they have struggled to achieve.2

B. I concur with the remarks of these Vietnamese leaders. At present South Vietnam suffers from a fragile political structure, governmental authority is not strong in the countryside. The govt is so overwhelmed with immediate pressures that it has not been able to prepare public opinion for a negotiated settlement. Unless the way has been most carefully prepared—and perhaps even then—entering into negotiations could lead to a direct threat to the existence of the govt. It might not lead to a coup but it would almost certainly lead to frantic jockeying for position in Saigon and encourage Viet Cong political and military pressure against the stability of the govt. To minimize these dangers requires stating conditions which the GVN can endure. Any pressure on the GVN to depart from what they consider a satisfactory outcome could have disastrous consequences.

C. Clearly Hanoi can call for a meeting at any time that it wishes. It is prudent to assume that they will do so at a moment of maximum disadvantage to us. In the light of what has been said we cannot refuse to meet. The protection of our vital interests, therefore, depends on the terms of the negotiation rather than on a refusal to meet. It also means that we be clear and specific in our own minds with respect to these terms. I say this as one who approves the decision of last spring to express a willingness to enter into unconditional discussions, which, I believe, played a big part in bringing about public support of our Vietnam policy in the United States and abroad.

D. If we are going to get ready to negotiate—or to discuss—then I believe it is essential that we have as a standard of measurement what concretely we consider would be a satisfactory outcome of our efforts in Vietnam. In other words it is time to attach specific meaning to such phrases as “ward off the aggression” or “to help the Republic of Vietnam achieve and then maintain its independence.” A satisfactory outcome could be achieved by military, civil-political, economic, and psychological means within South Vietnam or by persuasion on North Vietnam, or by a combination of these various factors. We should decide to remain here until it has somehow been accomplished.

E. The opinion of the U.S. Mission here on what concretely constitutes a satisfactory outcome is obviously pertinent. Accordingly, this matter was discussed at a meeting of the U.S. Mission Council on Tuesday, Oct 19. What follows is the consensus which emerged, broken down into its component parts, of what seems reasonable at this juncture.

II. A satisfactory outcome in Vietnam

A. A satisfactory outcome is, to be sure, distinct from a negotiating position. Off-hand, I would think that an opening negotiating position might insist on a complete elimination of all Viet Cong activity in the entire country, removal of the Viet Cong to North Vietnam, a UN inspection system in North Vietnam to see that no further aggression is committed, freedom for anti-Communists in North Vietnam to move south, and assurance of economic aid (to pull them away from Peking)—all to be agreed to by the GVN.

B. What we consider a satisfactory outcome to be would, of course, be a very closely kept secret. It would include the following, not necessarily in this order: 1. The area around Saigon and south of Saigon (all of the Delta) must be pacified. This area includes about 55 to 60 per cent of the population of Vietnam. “Pacified” is defined as the existence of a state of mind among the people that they have a stake in the govt, as shown by the holding of local elections. It also means a proper local police force. In brief, a pacified area is economically, socially and politically a part of the RVN.

2. The thickly populated northeastern strip along the coast which includes 25 per cent of the population would be completely pacified.

3. The GVN would retain its present control of all cities and all provincial capitals.

4. All principal roads would be open to the Vietnamese military day and night.

5. Those areas not pacified would not be safehavens for the Viet Cong but would be contested by energetic offensive forays to prevent consolidation of a Communist base.

6. The Viet Cong disarms; and their weapons and explosives are removed from their hands. Their main force units would be broken up.

7. North Vietnam stops its infiltration.

8. North Vietnam stops its direction of the war.

9. Chieu Hoi (“Open Arms”) rehabilitation would be extended to individual Viet Cong who are suitable (including those who were impressed into the VC by terrorism), with plans to resettle them.

10. Hardcore VC to go to North Vietnam.

11. GVN to approve.

Comment: This means that we would not be insisting on the complete elimination of the Viet Cong from all corners of the country although no land of safehaven would be allotted to them. It would mean that we and the GVN would control 80 to 85 per cent of the population and that the Viet Cong would be limited to the jungle and mountainous areas where they would go on as bandits, much as their counterparts do today in Malaya and in Luzon—and where the GVN would have the right to pursue them and try to destroy them.

III. Conduct of talks

A. I assume, of course, that the above will not become relevant unless Hanoi itself asks for talks.

1. If this happens, I would advise that our military activity be at first intensified and then continued during the talks. Without continuing military pressure by us, no worthwhile results can be expected.

2. Under no circumstances should a cease-fire be agreed to, because a cease-fire would legalize and make permanent the present occupation of part of the country by the Viet Cong and would stultify our sacrifices. Communists never give up the terrain where they are except under pressure. Moreover, the VC would try to expand their present influence into new areas under cover of the cease-fire.

3. We should place a time limit on the talks—perhaps not more than a month. Failure to set such a time limit will give scope to the favorite Communist tactic of delay which makes us look contemptible, impatient and undignified. It also means that they will use the time which their diplomats gain for them to bring about an improved military position which their soldiers, unaided, had been unable to achieve.

4. Agreement on supervision of any understanding should be item one on the agenda, at the beginning, when our pressure is greatest.

IV. Value of talks

A. In spite of the fact that the Communists will attempt to violate any agreement which is reached if they think it is in their interest to do so, negotiation with the Communists can be said to have value if, in fact, 1. It ends or reduces the bloodshed, and

2. Sets down enforceable conditions which, if we are strong enough to maintain them, will prevent a relapse into the aggression which brought about the conflict in the first place. While we must never depend on the given word of the Communists, an agreement can have value if it can be inspected and enforced.

B. A prolonged negotiation, or one in which we aim to force Ho Chi Minh into a corner by requiring him to admit his defeat by signing a paper, can drag out the conflict and increase the bloodshed. A de facto end of hostilities would be preferable to either of these alternatives and would also be easier for the GVN to accept.

C. It seems clear that we were not as ready for the end of hostilities in 1945 and in 1953 as we should have been. Surely we should learn from these experiences and be perfectly ready for the new turn this war will take if Hanoi decides to try negotiation. You have mounted an American effort here which is unprecedented in the breadth of its sweep, the thoroughness of its execution and in the extent to which all Americans are pulling together. I am sure that our reaction to the next move—if it comes—will be on the same level of excellence.

Porter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Received at 8:37 a.m. and passed to the White House.

2 See Documents 166 and 172.

177. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 177. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State1

Paris, October 21, 1965, 6 p.m.

2189. In separate conversations October 18 and 20 Quai Director Asian Affairs Manac'h told EmbOff: (1) Vietnam. His major impression of changes since his return from 5-weeks vacation were (a) effectiveness of US buildup (b) isolation of China and (c) lack of movement towards peaceful settlement, despite what would appear to be propitious psychological moment view (a) and (b) for new US gesture (presumably bombing pause).

(2) Peace negotiations. He asked Mai Van Bo ten days ago whether Hanoi could accept conditions given Rusk by Hungarian Foreign Minister Peter, i.e., “cease bombardment,” and “cease military operations.” Bo answered “Yes and no,” adding third condition that Americans must specifically accept NLF as negotiating party. When EmbOff asked if 4 points were now 3 points, Manac'h shrugged and suggested that if EmbOff wished ask Bo he could arrange private luncheon, adding Bo confused by approaches private US citizens.2 EmbOff did not accept invitation. Manac'h confirmed that Tho delegation from Hanoi had had nothing constructive to say.

(3) Bion. French Consul was alive and now well, after initial poor treatment and sickness. Quai upset that “intermediaries” (unnamed) offering release Bion at Hanoi, which would involve 1000-mile trek with risk bombardment. Manac'h pressing for Cambodian border or Saigon. Bion had “poor reputation among Americans,” but had not been engaged as rumored in negotiations with Viet Cong on behalf plantation owners.

[Here follow paragraphs on the India-Pakistan situation, Cambodia, Indonesia, China, and the Asian Development meeting at Bangkok.]

(9) Reprisals. Manac'h was not aware of the deaths of the two Americans in North Vietnam. He asked how much warning we had and indicated that France would have been willing to intercede although they had been unsuccessful with Hertz. Undertook to mention issue to Bo and Soviet Charge Usachev whom he seeing Oct 21.

Department repeat as desired.

Bohlen

1 Source: Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Mai Van Bo, 1965. Secret; Limdis. Received at 6:08 p.m.

2 Apparent reference to Mai Van Bo's discussions with American businessman Urah Arkas-Duntov (see Document 98) and with retired Foreign Service officer Edmund Gullion (see Documents 112, 113, 120, 122, and 133).

178. Draft Paper by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 178. Draft Paper by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, October 22, 1965.

ELEMENTS OF SECOND PAUSE SCENARIO

A. Positive and Negative Objectives

1. Positive Objectives

a. To remove for an adequate time the element of continued bombing of the North and thus to test the willingness of North Vietnam to reduce its support of the Viet Cong and Viet Cong activities in the South, and to enter into negotiations without preconditions (i.e., to abandon the present conditions particularly on the “four points”). In other words, a second pause is first and perhaps foremost a serious effort to see if there can be real progress toward a political solution.

b. Whether or not this pause brings about such results, to underscore again our willingness to work toward a solution by reciprocal actions.

c. To satisfy domestic and international opinion that we have indeed exhausted for the time being all possibilities of progress toward a peaceful solution, as a prelude to whatever increased action might then become necessary, such as Phase II deployments or further expansion in the bombing of the North.

d. To halt temporarily the possibilities of a wider war. However, this can only be a subsidiary objective because we must envisage that, if there is no response, we will resume bombing and there may be a larger chance of escalation thereafter.

e. By varying the pattern of bombing attacks on the North, to make the resumption of bombing, if and when it takes place, more psychologically damaging and effective.

f. To insert a proposal that may produce substantial disagreement among the various Communist parties.

2. Negative Objectives

a. We do not wish to upset confidence in South Vietnam or faith in our continued firmness as necessary.

b. To avoid any misunderstanding in Hanoi that our action means we are ready to compromise our objectives and are ourselves afraid we cannot or will not stay the course.

c. To avoid getting into a position where we abandon bombing of the North in return for the DRV entering into negotiations while still continuing major support of the Viet Cong. This is an essential point in itself, made more so by our public statements that we would suspend or cease bombing only if Hanoi took appropriate corresponding action with respect to its support of the VC.

d. If a reciprocal reduction in hostilities should result, to avoid getting into a situation in the South in which the GVN was not able to go about restoring its control throughout the country.

Discussion

If our primary objective is to move Hanoi toward a peaceful solution, it means that we must frame our communications to them and all our public discussion in such a way as to play down the threat of stronger action in the event the pause fails; in other words, we must not appear to be delivering an ultimatum. Yet we must recognize that, even if we do not stress what we will do if the pause fails, and even if we do not take preparatory actions for additional measures, it will be widely assumed that we will resume, and we shall almost certainly have to commit ourselves to the GVN to that effect. In other words, we can only seek to play down the element of threat; we cannot fully remove it.

A second consequence in the listing of our objectives as above is that we must put the diplomacy of the pause at the very front of our calculations. Our May pause lost effect in the world because it seemed too short and because the negative indications from Hanoi, while conclusive to us, could not really be spelled out to the world. This time, we must have a pause that is long enough and includes enough diplomatic openings so that the most skeptical will be persuaded that it was a serious and honest try. In this respect, there is no latent conflict among the various objectives, for what we do towards Hanoi, even if it cannot be revealed in toto, will strengthen our case with the world.

B. What We Do at the Outset of the Pause

1. Nature of Military Action

a. Against the North, we would stop all strikes and armed reconnaissance but would continue Lucky Dragon and Blue Springs (as appropriate) for all North Viet-Nam, and low-level reconnaissance (Blue Tree) in the infiltration areas (south of approximately 20 degrees north latitude and west of 105 degrees west longitude), with peripheral low-level reconnaissance elsewhere. Also sea/air ELINT to cover key areas.

b. Air operations against Laos (Barrel Roll and Steel Tiger) would be continued and intensified including any effective means such as defoliation.

c. Air operations in South Vietnam (including B-52 strikes) would continue as required.

d. As to ground operations in South Vietnam, we should continue all aspects, both pacification and search/base area operations. Not only is this almost certainly required in order to secure GVN concurrence and avoid unfavorable developments, but it appears to have no significant disadvantages in terms of effect on Hanoi.

Discussion

There is a serious issue whether operations in the South should be as stated above. Since one of the DRV responses we seek is a major reduction in VC attacks and terrorism the continuation of all US/GVN operations at then current levels (possibly even increasing as a result of our force increases) might make it harder to identify serious VC reductions. Thus, there is a case for some reduction of military pressure, particularly in US actions such as the B-52 strikes, at least for a period of 2-3 weeks at the outset of the pause.

An opposite alternative, if reassurance to the GVN were considered crucial, would be to step up activity to a real maximum.

The proposal above steers between these two and relies on the continuing arrival of our troops as a major reassuring element to the GVN. In practice, it does not appear that it will be too difficult, even with continuing US/GVN operations, to identify what happens to the basic attack-incident rate by the Viet Cong.

2. Timing and Duration

a. The best time would appear to be toward the end of November, as our Phase I strength nears its peak but while we are still introducing significant forces (to reassure the GVN) under decisions already taken in principle. This timing also allows for an adequate duration before we would have to take or announce further decisions.

b. The duration should be not less than four weeks, in order to allow a convincing time for response by action. At the same time, the GVN would almost certainly be strongly opposed to any significantly longer period. Another element is the desirability of terminating the pause with a month or more then elapsing before we came to major new decisions; the point of this is to avoid the conclusion that we paused simply to permit ourselves to resume at a higher level as had always been planned. On balance, a period of about a month seems optimum.

c. We must consider whether we should not be prepared to resume short of the planning period, if there are clear negative readings from the DRV. For example, our reconnaissance may pick up clear and significant military movements toward the South. Alternatively, the DRV might (although we think it unlikely) give an absolutely explicit negative diplomatic response. There might be marginal cases in between, such as the discovery of additional DRV regular units in the South, sent down prior to the pause. We might also have strident and continued DRV propaganda denunciation of the pause; some of this must be expected and discounted, but at a certain level it might be persuasive of a totally negative reading. We cannot decide now just what would constitute a clearly negative DRV response evident before the end of the planning period. Nor can we decide now whether we should let that negative response sink in for a short time even before we resumed. However, we probably should recognize that there may be developments that should properly cause us to resume before the end of the planning period. (We do not necessarily have to say this to others, as we did to Hanoi in May.)

3. Coordination with the GVN

a. We must bring Ambassador Lodge fully aboard, and wider elements of the Embassy should be briefed so that our contacts with the GVN at all levels are used to keep their reactions under control.

b. Ambassador Lodge should then personally take the lead in explaining the pause to the GVN. (The alternative of a Washington mission working with the Ambassador in the explanation seems less attractive, and undercuts his personal position. But there is a case for this alternative.)

c. The GVN should then be associated in the formal announcement. This seems vital if we are to avoid widespread criticism in South Viet-Nam on the now-familiar basis that the US is acting alone.

Discussion

GVN concurrence could well be the stickiest part of the whole operation. In any event, it must not be hasty or forced; yet, the fact that we would have to mention it to at least four top leaders gives us an immediate security problem. Ideally, we should try to get the Ambassador aboard in a consultation in Washington or Honolulu a few days before he goes to the GVN. The approach to the GVN should then be roughly four days before the initiation of the pause. (If we wish to have GVN couple the pause announcement with a more sweeping declaration of internal policy, as discussed under B 7 below, we would have to allow a longer time to work on that announcement. But it still might be possible to withhold discussion of the pause until very shortly before it was initiated.)

In presenting the matter to the GVN, we should of course make maximum use of our continuing Phase I deployment and of our concurrent plan for continued actions within South Vietnam. We could also point out that the DRV would not be able to take much advantage of a pause without our knowing it at once. Arguments based on domestic and international opinion factors might also be used, but might be less persuasive than the others indicated.

Query if we should indicate to the GVN that we will be prepared to go still further if the pause fails: on the one hand, this would be highly persuasive in bringing them aboard; on the other hand, it forces our hand on Phase II decisions and reduces our flexibility to deal with varied responses to the pause under which, for example, we might wish to resume at a different level and not go forward with major Phase II deployments.

4. Communications with Hanoi

a. In May, we did not alert any third-country channels, apart from the Soviets, who made clear their unwillingness to act as intermediaries. This time, the public and prolonged nature of the pause imposes no security obstacle, and we should alert every possible channel with Hanoi contacts. We would explain to each of these “useful” countries and parties—as a first crack, the USSR, Canada, India, UK, France, Japan, Poland, and U Thant—as to what we were doing and that we would listen carefully for whatever Hanoi had to say. The fact that we would not wish to continue the pause merely in return for Hanoi's entering into negotiations raises a serious tactical question: Should we make this clear at the outset, or should we say we are interested in any message of any sort? This problem is particularly acute for U Thant. Might the answer be to say that we were interested in indications either of reciprocal action or of willingness to negotiate, but felt highly doubtful that the latter would be persuasive without the former?

Discussion

We do not have to communicate with the Chicoms in any way.

As to the Soviets, there is an issue whether they should be given special treatment. There were some indications in May that they resented being singled out, and they have subsequently stressed that they are not intermediaries and that we must deal with Hanoi. It can be argued that they might be more helpful than otherwise if they were treated simply on the same footing as a number of other interested nations, and were told in so many words that this was the case. On the other hand, our over-all relationship with the Soviets might benefit if we sent a private Presidential message noting repeated Soviet references to this very action, expressing the hope that Hanoi would be responsive (while not suggesting any specific action by the Soviets), but equally making clear that we could not lay off indefinitely if action continued in the South.

b. There is a question whether we should ask any third country or party to make public appeals to Hanoi. U Thant might have the urge to do so, and of course in the last analysis we could not stop him. However, the adamant rejection of the UN role by the DRV seems to make this most unpromising, and it is also likely that U Thant would pitch any appeal (even privately) on the basis of the DRV getting the bombing stopped for good if it would only agree to negotiate, without taking any other action.

5. US Domestic Handling

Congressional leaders might be consulted prior to decision, and the full Leadership should certainly be informed prior to public announcement.

6. Notifications of Key Allies and Others

Subject to security considerations, key Asian and NATO allies should be informed in advance leaving off only any special stress on keeping their ears open to Hanoi. We might try to make a rather special production of notification also of countries that have been pressing us on a pause, such as Yugoslavia, India, Ghana, etc.

Most of our key allies could be informed only just prior to the pause. [3 lines of source text not declassified]

7. Public Announcement and Press Backgrounding

a. The public announcement should include the following points: (1) GVN and US have agreed that bombings of the DRV should be suspended “for a significant time” in order to demonstrate GVN/US desire to seek a peaceful solution and in order to see if there will be a constructive response from Hanoi. The length of the pause would not be specified nor would we attempt to indicate just what response was required or anticipated.

(2) The announcement would make clear that we would continue to conduct necessary reconnaissance of North Viet-Nam and necessary air and ground operations in South Viet-Nam. We could add some general sentence that “all other relevant operations will continue” to hint clearly that we would go on acting in Laos.

b. Backgrounding of the press should not go beyond the public announcement. One point of particular difficulty here is that we are on the public record as insisting on an action response, and not simply a willingness to negotiate. Press speculation may find in our failure to reiterate this position a suggestion that we are ready to settle for the latter.

Discussion

Several points in the above script are open to question. The arguments against naming a specific duration publicly seem overwhelming. The opposite alternative of making the suspension entirely open-ended has some appeal, but increases the already-present chance that the GVN would leak the agreed duration. Moreover, we have to reckon that we will be dealing with pressures to turn the suspension into a cessation in any event, and resistance to these might be harder if we had left the thing entirely open.

As to the methodology of the announcement, there is the alternative of avoiding formal announcement until press inquiry made it compulsory. On balance, though this had some merit in May, the fact that the press would probably now be considerably more alert, and the fact that this is intended as a much more prolonged operation, argue for putting it right out in the open at the outset.

The third issue concerns possible additional elements in the US/GVN announcement. We have been hoping for some time that an improved military climate would provide a good setting for the GVN to make a more public and forthcoming statement addressed to the individual members of the VC, to the general effect that they would be received back into South Vietnamese life if they stopped their armed action and accepted an independent SVN without DRV influence. If military actions have continued to go well in the period up to the initiation of the pause, we might well be urging such a statement in any case, and it might be a most effective rounding out of the total message (“DRV get out, but deluded brothers come in”) against a background of continuing strength and firmness in pursuing actions within SVN. On balance, this looks like a good addition; to do it properly will require careful consultation with a wider circle in the Saigon Embassy than we might otherwise bring in at the outset (notably Lansdale).

C. What We Do As We Go Along

1. Probable Communist responses.

a. Chicoms will almost certainly attack pause as US/GVN “trick.” We should ignore and play down such statements, but react promptly and hard if Chicoms take any military action, separating such reactions from continuation of pause against the DRV unless the latter has taken some action itself.

b. Soviet response may include some public denunciation to keep in line, but will almost certainly be reserved and cautious. One of our hopes must be that the Soviets will get busy with the DRV to suggest at least a somewhat forthcoming response and even a serious beginning toward a peaceful solution. As stated earlier, any special effort by us with the Soviets to this end would probably not be fruitful, however.

c. NLF/VC may well oppose DRV attempts to make any significant response to the pause; they may see any such DRV action as unjustified surrender to the implied US/GVN threat to resume bombing, i.e., that the DRV would have decided “to save its own skin.” The VC might, on their own, seek to disrupt the pause by some specific terror actions in SVN. We should probably strive, necessarily in consultation with the GVN (which could be hard), not to respond specifically against the DRV to such VC actions. However, a really major event in the South might compel us, consistently with our over-all theory of Hanoi responsibility, to make a one-shot interruption of the pause in reprisal. This is a tough issue.

d. Hanoi's response is of course the most crucial. It is hard to see Hanoi making no response whatever, or confining its response merely to propaganda denunciation. Alone or in combination we might have any one of the following; (1) At attempt to indicate willingness to talk but without any clear change in position. Hanoi might choose this time to say somewhat more clearly that it does not insist on US withdrawal, and it might use a gentle formulation on NLF representation in negotiations. The crux of the matter would be, however, whether there was any change in the insistence on acceptance of the third point, the NLF entering a coalition in Saigon.

(2) An attempt to indicate willingness to talk with some clear change on the third point, but possibly without any indication of reducing support to the VC.

(3) A suggestion that limited responsive action was being taken such as failure to send additional regular units.

(4) A suggestion that real responsive action was being taken such as withdrawal or lying low of the 325th Division.

Perhaps the most troublesome of all possible Hanoi actions would be a message (perhaps through channels sympathetic to such an approach, such as the French) that Hanoi was indeed willing to talk but only if we undertook not to resume the bombing.

2. Responses to Variations in Hanoi's Action

The variations are so great that it is almost impossible to spell out how we would handle these possibilities. The point would be to shoot down any idea that we would settle merely for willingness to negotiate, while at the same time losing no opportunity to pin Hanoi down to compromises in its present position. Whatever message was conveyed by Hanoi, we would have to weigh carefully what channels to use in reply and how to determine just how far Hanoi was ready to go, without letting ourselves get drawn into a dilatory and fruitless exchange designed on their part to make it extremely difficult for us to resume.

The possibility that we might be drawn into at least preliminary negotiations requires that we review again our negotiating position and see if there are any areas where we could show further “give”—as we have done during the summer on the reunification issue and, verbally at least, on NLF representation.

3. Third-Country Pressures

Most of the “useful” countries would probably not put pressure on us to extend the suspension into a cessation. However, there would undoubtedly be many countries and voices raised in this direction. Our general course of action would seem to be to avoid getting drawn into the issue, let our announcement speak for itself, and keep our mouths shut. However, we might be faced even with UN resolutions or other formal actions that we would have to combat.

A second form of international pressure might arise to extend the suspension into a “ceasefire” in SVN. Apart from the obvious GVN opposition to any such extension, we ourselves would be squarely opposed to it because of the difficulties we have always seen, notably the danger that a total “ceasefire” would consolidate the VC position in secure areas and get us into a Pathet Lao type of situation. Our line of defense should probably be that the GVN and we are entitled to go on dealing with the VC as long as it continues active, and that any suggestion of a complete “ceasefire” is premature until we have seen whether a more limited reduction of hostilities is possible first. On the whole, it would appear probable that we could contain pressures for a complete “ceasefire” at least from our responsible domestic critics, but the general heat on this subject is one of the significant difficulties in the operation.

4. Continued US and GVN Actions

By hypothesis, we would be continuing already decided Phase I deployments during the pause. Beyond this point, even the possibility of decisions for Phase II deployments may require preparatory measures that will become known. We need an assessment from DOD on this point.

D. Conditions and Method of Resumption

1. Basically, we would expect to resume at the end of the agreed period unless we were satisfied that the DRV had made a response that gave really serious and continuing promise of leading toward a peaceful solution. Undoubtedly, the DRV will have tried to muddy the record as much as possible; however, it would have to weigh any attempt to portray itself as having changed position or taken action against the morale drawbacks, particularly vis-a-vis the VC, of such a public position. It might not be too difficult to make up our own minds that the DRV was not responding, but we should be thinking always of the kind of record we could make with key allies and other countries to prove that our reading was correct.

2. When and as we decided to resume, we should probably make a clear and firm public announcement of just what we were doing and why.

3. The pace of resumption needs careful thought. From the military standpoint, renewed destruction of the LOC in the southern areas of the DRV would appear the first requirement. However, we might start with some targets at the northern limits of present strikes to emphasize that we were resuming at least on the old basis.

There is an issue whether we should resume with a “bang”, by some strike beyond present geographic and category limits. This cannot be decided in advance. The case for such extension would be strong if Hanoi had been drastically negative, but even in this case we would have to weigh whether such action, in an atmosphere where tension would go up automatically, might be more likely to produce air battles or Chicom responses that we would still not wish to have to deal with.

Another element in our initial targeting might, of course, be the intervening extension of the SAM system. If we had to hit a number of SAM sites for reasons of military necessity, this in itself would give a considerable psychological “bang” although with much less chance of escalation risks that might attend geographic or category extensions.

4. Finally, there is the question of what additional actions we would then take to increase our pressures in the South. If the pause had made our case clear to the world, we would be in a stronger position to go ahead with greater reinforcements along Phase II lines. But, as noted earlier, we would probably do well to allow a period to elapse before we announced major new decisions. One factor here is that we must not, for future purposes, get our pauses characterized as simply devices to justify major new measures. If the pause does not work this time, its usefulness for the future should still be preserved if possible.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLI, Memos (A). Top Secret. According to a typed notation on the source text this was a second draft. A copy of the first, dated October 20, is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 380.

179. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 179. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, October 22, 1965.

Attached is a report on progress of our non-military programs in Vietnam.2 I'm afraid it is long and somewhat turgid, but our activities are so wide and comprehensive in this field that it is difficult to tell you anything meaningful without going into some detail.

In essence, we are making perceptible progress on a broad front—from inflationary curbs to nurse recruitment, from police training to agricultural experiment stations. Our problems are formidable: the difficulty of communication from the capital to the province towns and from these centers to the countryside; the increasing flow of refugees; the shortages of skilled manpower; the thin administrative resources of the GVN. But I am convinced that each of these are being tackled aggressively.

We will keep you informed periodically.

McGeorge Bundy3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 41-Point Program in Non-Military Sphere in SVN. Secret.

2 Attached but not printed.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

180. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 180. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, October 22, 1965, 3:20 p.m.

1. Because it reports General Eisenhower's view, I think you will want to see the attached memorandum from Andy Goodpaster.2 In essence, Eisenhower is asking why we do not close off shipping to Hanoi. He suggests a declaration that a state of war exists and some undefined reinforcing naval action. But he seems to think the declaration itself might do the trick.

2. Goodpaster has promised Eisenhower additional information on this problem, and McNamara wants you to know that it is one of the issues which is being carefully reviewed as we consider where we go in Vietnam next year. Bob does not think it is a matter which needs urgent attention and decision at your level, and I agree with him.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, President Eisenhower. Top Secret. President Johnson wrote the following note on the source text: “See me on this. L”

2 Attached but not printed.

181. Paper by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 181. Paper by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, October 23, 1965.

POLICY CHOICES AND DECISION-MAKING PROCEDURES ON VIETNAM

Based on the Depuy briefing,2 the draft pause scenario,3 and Lodge's 1377,4 we confront major policy decisions in the next month or six weeks. This memorandum is a very rough attempt to frame the substance of the choices, and to identify some of the related problems we face.

I. Elements of the Problem

A. MACV (through Depuy) makes a strong case that we cannot keep up adequate pressure on the VC without additional deployments totalling about 115,000 men during the course of 1966, raising our total to 325,000 by the end of the year. While the Depuy presentation may be unduly pessimistic in assuming that VC morale will stay up and that they will be able to obtain adequate equipment and even reinforcements, it is also possible (though I think less so) that it errs in the other direction by not assuming a really major DRV effort to increase forces in the South. At the very least, Depuy seems realistic in stating that we shall probably have to make a major additional commitment to attain our basic objectives, and that even with a second phase we cannot say with anything like absolute assurance that we are going to get there. Somewhere along the line the VC will probably weaken, and this may be well short of filling in Depuy's bar charts in blue and green. But we have to have the worst case constantly in mind, and the realistic median view would be that we do have to do a great deal more.

B. If both the American public and international opinion are to accept our doing a great deal more, even on the ground in the South without an expansion of bombing of the DRV, we have to worry about whether we have a convincing case that we have exhausted all avenues to negotiation. We are currently in a fairly easy position on this because of universal reading that the DRV's September statements5 add up to a rejection of negotiations. For the moment, there is no favorable negotiating effort going on on any front, with the SYG effort being known privately to us (and we would suspect to other key countries) to have elicited no response from Hanoi. At the same time, the strength of our position of willingness to negotiate is being slightly eroded by the interpretation put out by Senator Mansfield and others and the apparent diplomatic reading in Washington that we have hardened and are really set to fight the thing through to the end, even including the erroneous exaggerated interpretation that we intend a total military victory over the VC for its own sake, as opposed to whatever degree of pressure will induce the VC and Hanoi to lay off and turn to a political line, which is what we still really intend. The noises out of Saigon, both from the GVN and from our Embassy's dealings with the press, have also tended to confuse matters and to confound the perhaps legitimate point that the GVN needs time to get its house in order with the illegitimate conclusion that they and we could not live with negotiations and that we really are both opposed to it whatever we say in public. In sum, our posture cannot be considered firm and wholly tenable if we look ahead 3-6 months without further moves.

C. On the other hand, any demonstrable move toward a peaceful solution, such as a pause in the next three months, raises the most serious questions of creating misunderstanding in Hanoi and/or interrupting the slow effort we are making to build some real political structure in Saigon. Lodge's 1377 makes it perfectly clear how he would react initially to a pause, and one cannot dismiss his reading of the internal political situation as simply due to his own personal rather superficial view of things. At the very best, we have a major tactical job to do to bring Lodge and the GVN aboard if we are to make a major move such as a pause.

D. The Depuy briefing was somewhat reassuring as to the degree of US casualties we may expect (N.B. it would help to see a projection of this in terms of casualties per committed battalion per month accepting Depuy's judgment that the present rate can be maintained). Nonetheless, we are faced with the pressures from various quarters, symbolized by General LeMay and the Ford/Adair line, to hit the North substantially harder. The degree to which this will rise during the next 3-6 months will depend heavily on actual casualty experience and also on the proportion of apparent successes to apparent reverses (any really adverse engagement could really set the pressures off).

E. The Soviets have been reserved in their private comment, but there may well be substance to the report from Matseev, the Isvestia correspondent, to Robert Kleiman to the effect that the Soviets would like to see a pause of at least three weeks to get diplomatic pressures started that might bring Hanoi onto a negotiating track.6 In other words, the vital Soviet factor argues strongly for a pause. Equally, it almost certainly argues against any real step-up in the bombing, and was a major factor in the Thompson Group conclusion that this was not wise, for this reason as well as because it would probably not have a favorable effect on Hanoi in the absence of greater progress than we have yet achieved in the South.7

II. Broad Policy Choices

A. A serious pause for a month, followed—if it fails—by decisions on Phase II deployment and possibly by some step-up in the bombing of the North. On the objective international factors, this has a great deal to commend it. It would clear the decks in a convincing fashion and probably tend to reduce the dangers of escalation even after we had resumed, at least as to the Soviets.

On the other hand, as noted above, bringing the GVN (and Lodge) aboard would be terribly difficult just in itself, and we must have serious doubts whether it would have an adverse effect on GVN solidity. Any major falling out between the GVN and the US, or any overturn in the GVN political structure, could at this stage set us back enormously, if not fatally.

Another contrary argument is that it might at least confuse our message to Hanoi and justify their tendency to think that, despite all our actions, we are really looking for an easy way out. We could offset this to some degree by the kind of message we get through to them and by our continued actions in the South, but there would still be some chance that the hard-liners in Hanoi would read it the other way notwithstanding. In other words, it could conceivably be a step away from getting Hanoi to seeking a peaceful solution.

Still a third element would be the US domestic reaction. There would be a lot of rumbling below decks and among the harder-action school of critics. This might be kept under control during the pause, but it could also mean that the pressures would be enormous thereafter to “really clobber” the DRV.

B. Finish up Phase I deployments and proceed to Phase II decisions and actions without any major action such as a pause, or any appreciable change in the bombing pattern against the DRV.

In terms of effect on Hanoi and Saigon, this might quite well be the best course. It would indicate steadiness and firmness, as well as patience, and it can be strongly argued that this will bring Hanoi to a peaceful solution more surely and perhaps even sooner than any other course.

The major adverse argument is that the President would have to go through another round of major decision-making in which our soft-line critics, both here and abroad, would raise a great deal of noise that we were not leaving the door sufficiently open to negotiation and that we were really moving inexorably to a wider war. It is hard to say just how serious these pressures would be, but at the very least we should give thought to some less dramatic alternative to a pause—such as another third country mediation effort—that would somewhat dampen these pressures without the adverse effects we might see in a pause in terms of Hanoi and Saigon reaction. It is far from easy to see just what such a “pause alternative” might be, and one cannot identify off-hand any effective or persuasive mediator who would be willing to act in the absence of a pause.

C. Complete Phase I deployments and stop at that point for perhaps three months before going further, while continuing the present bombing pace against the North.

This course, too, can be argued persuasively. It will be January before the weight of our full Phase I effort really comes into play, and, despite the gaps identified in the Depuy analysis (notably the total absence of effort in the IV Corps), we might see at least a significant adverse morale trend in the VC that would indicate we were getting somewhere.

Moreover, it may be useful to give ourselves time to digest the impact of 200,000 men in terms of their effect on the Vietnamese psychology and economy. This is a factor that some reports, notably a recent cable from Saigon on inflationary and labor/diversion problems,8 suggest may be becoming very serious, even to the point of being a real limiting factor on our basic effectiveness in appealing to the people.

Thirdly, the GVN would have additional time, hopefully without serious frictions with us, to get on with its part of the job and to build up a GVN contribution that would not be dwarfed by the US role, a present tendency sharply highlighted by Depuy's presentation.

On the drawback side, deferring additional US deployments—particularly in the face of military recommendations that would almost certainly become known—raises extremely grave problems in our domestic situation. This is not solely a question of the war dragging on—which it can be argued it would be likely to do even with Phase II deployments—but rather, a question of our confronting the 1966 Congressional elections without having clearly done all that our military thought was wise just on the ground alone (leaving aside the problem of extended bombing of the DRV). It would be still more serious, of course, if the rate of progress slowed down, as is certainly a significant possibility.

Variance of B and C in terms of bombing in the North and Negotiating Actions.

As noted above, Course B needs the best possible “pause alternative.” Course C, just by the passage of time, has somewhat the same problem but far less acutely.

Both courses, in addition, raise questions on the policy of bombing the North. The Soviet and international argument against expanding our bombing will remain very cogent. But we have always agreed that they might be outweighed by the arguments in favor of a final “coup de grace” when Hanoi and the VC really find the going in the South extremely difficult. On balance, the objective case would seem to favor not expanding the bombing except as a “coup de grace” or conceivably on a one-shot reprisal basis for some really serious VC outrage for which we could find some parallel target. In one respect, the continuation and growth of US domestic pressures is an asset to us, in that they will keep alive Hanoi's fears that “hawk” views would ultimately prevail in the USG.

III. Knowledge Gaps and Variables

There are a number of factors that could vary the situation, which we should follow closely, and on some of which we simply are not adequately informed. These include: A. What is really happening with respect to DRV infiltration. We probably need to stress the bombings of Laos very heavily, and may wish to divert some part of our DRV air effort to this end. We also need a much better intelligence picture than now exists of how much equipment and reinforcement is really coming down, and how.

If we become convinced that individual targets such as Phu Quoc Island are really heavily contributing to infiltration, might we not conduct a specific amphibious operation against these?

B. We need to follow extremely closely what the ChiComs and Soviets are doing in the DRV. This may well increase, and could suggest at any point that we were nearing some kind of flash signal.

C. South Vietnamese popular reactions to the process will have to continue to be followed extremely closely. We are reasonably satisfied with our current reading that we have not triggered significant adverse reactions either by our presence or by our military tactics, including air attacks on villages. But we surely need to have an acute watch on this and perhaps—as MACV is looking into—tighter control on the use of air.

D. The extent of civilian damage resulting from our DRV attacks also needs a great deal of watching and possibly a review of what we are doing. The recent compilation of photographs of Nam Dinh casts grave doubt on any claim that we can hit urban areas in any surgical fashion. Another cause for concern is the number of unspecified “buildings” being hit by our armed recce. Apart from humanitarian considerations, the degree of civilian damage in the North probably tends to stiffen DRV toughness, and may increasingly give the DRV a propaganda weapon against us, which it now seems they are making a considerable effort to mount.

E. In addition to the civilian damage element, our DRV bombing pattern is being looked at from the standpoint of simple effectiveness. It is disturbing to get reports that bridges have been re-built in the southern areas of the DRV and then not struck again. Are we focussing enough, as a primary and irreducible objective, on keeping key LOC out of action?

F. Even the possibility of a pause, or a “pause alternative,” means that we must look hard again at our over-all negotiating position. Ambassador Unger's special group has done some further work on this, but our thoughts are not nearly as clear as they should be, nor—perhaps above all—have they thoroughly been shared with Saigon, as Lodge's 1377 highlights. It may be that Alexis Johnson would be the man to pull this together into a much more definitive script than we now have. I do not myself see any major change or “give” that we should now display. This, too, needs a hard look in addition to the question of tactical arguments and handling.

IV. Decision-Making Procedures

The pause scenario has suggested that the best time for such action, if taken, might be late November. This means bringing Ambassador Lodge aboard in the middle of November, and it may well be that this could only be done at Presidential level. Another factor is the absence of Secretary Rusk from November 13 till November 25, roughly. How and where are we to consult with Lodge, and how are we to get through to him a somewhat different outlook on the whole subject, even if we should eventually decide not to do the pause itself? Washington seems indicated, but we must decide very soon.

Obviously, a major factor is the degree of visibility of our decision-making. With the President in Texas, major and prolonged gatherings are much more difficult to conceal.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLI, Memos (A). Top Secret. According to a note attached to another copy of this paper, William Bundy sent it “Strictly Eyes Only” to Ball, McGeorge Bundy, and Thompson on October 26. (Department of State, Bundy Papers: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron)

2 On October 21,MACV J-3, General Deputy briefed Rusk, McNamara, the JCS, Taylor, and others on COMUSMACV's Phase II program for deployment of U.S. forces to Vietnam. He stated that, with the exception of a few elite units, ARVN forces would be mainly employed in pacification activities behind a fighting screen of U.S. forces. The U.S. troops would carry the battle to the war zones and wherever VC main forces were found. The GVN favored the concept. (JCS telegram 4827 to CINCPAC, October 22; Department of Defense, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff)

3 Document 178.

4 Document 176.

5 See footnote 2, Document 152.

6 Thompson's account of this meeting as related to him by Kleiman on October 22 is in Department of State, INR Files: Lot 81 D 343, Vietnam—October 1965.

7 See Document 164.

8 Not further identified.

182. Memorandum From the Administrator, Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs (Schwartz) to Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff 182. Memorandum From the Administrator, Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs (Schwartz) to Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff1

Washington, October 25, 1965.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam and the ICRC

This report reviews the main points on Viet-Nam matters emerging from my talks with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and others in Vienna and Geneva. Most of the topics were reported in telegrams to the Department. However this report may be useful as a summary and as an indication of possible actions.

1. Compliance by GVN with Geneva Conventions. This subject is rapidly approaching a critical state. In a letter to President Gonard of the ICRC sent August 10 Secretary Rusk stated “In regard to the hostilities in Viet-Nam the U.S. Government is applying the provisions of the Geneva Conventions and we expect the other parties to the conflict to do likewise.”2 In a subsequent letter the Secretary told M. Gonard that, “In view of the fact that prisoners taken by United States forces are transferred promptly to the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam, we think it is more appropriate for that Government to supply such lists and to arrange for such visits by International Committee representatives, and we have every reason to believe that it will do so. You will recall that the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam informed your representatives on August 11 that it will fulfill its obligations in this regard under the Geneva Conventions of 1949.”3

Up to the present the GVN has failed to comply with the Conventions in a number of important ways. It has not furnished the ICRC with lists of prisoners. It has refused to permit the ICRC delegate in Saigon to make the kind of unescorted visits to prisoner camps that he believes are his responsibility under the Conventions. As far as I know it has taken no steps to transmit prisoner mail to relatives. Nor has it established a central office for collecting names of prisoners as required by the Conventions. In addition, the GVN thesis that all but a handful of the thousands of prisoners in custody are refugees or criminals subject to trial under domestic law is unlikely to convince the ICRC.

The matter is acute for several reasons: (a) The ICRC may publicly criticize the GVN for failure to comply with the conventions. This would reduce the GVN's already precarious standing in the eyes of many other countries.

(b) As long as GVN compliance is incomplete U.S. military forces in Viet-Nam are obligated not to turn over prisoners they take to GVN custody.

(c) GVN non-compliance inhibits our ability to take public or private actions to obtain better treatment for American military personnel held by the Viet Cong and the DRV.

The GVN attitude on this subject, while understandable in light of what their country has endured at the hands of the Viet Cong, and conceivably explainable to someone on the spot who can see at first hand the character of this ugly war, is however virtually certain to be unacceptable as a permanent answer to the ICRC's repeated entreaties on this subject. This will be all the more so if the DRV, which already is substantially complying with important parts of the prisoners Convention by furnishing in some instances at least names, photographs, statements, and mail, takes specific public steps to comply formally with the Conventions. It is by no means out of the question that the DRV will do this. From their own point of view there is little reason (beyond their own fanaticism) why they should not.

Nor is there any valid reason why the GVN should not comply. The steps outlined in Deptel 863 of September 254 should be fully acceptable and could serve to enhance the GVN's reputation with its own population. A change in definitions so that the bulk of prisoners taken in military operations be classified in the first instance as subject to the protection of the Conventions should not cause serious inconvenience. Since education or indoctrination programs free of duress are not proscribed by the Conventions the Chieu Hoi program could continue. Individual terrorists convicted of specific acts could still be charged as criminals and handled outside the Conventions. Refugees who are rehabilitated could of course be freed to return to their villages.

It is worth noting that the narrowness of the GVN category of prisoners undermines our thesis that this is more than a civil war. Our critics can be expected to fasten on to the fact that only 74 of the thousands of prisoners captured or in custody represent an external force and use this as further evidence of DRV non-involvement. By altering the language of the definition large numbers of detainees could be classified as affiliated with Viet Cong-DRV armed forces fighting in South Viet-Nam against the GVN. This would not only have important legal and propaganda advantages, it would also square with the facts as we know them.

If the ICRC delegates in Saigon are not satisfied with the degree of GVN compliance very soon the US Government must examine its own position very carefully. For one thing, our mission should take care not to place itself between the ICRC and the GVN, explaining the one to the other and, ultimately, satisfying neither. The ICRC should go direct to the GVN, the Ministries of Defense and Interior as well as the Foreign Office, to explain their obligations under the Conventions and in turn to hear from the Vietnamese themselves what they are doing to comply. The U.S. position must be squarely on the side of the Conventions. If the ICRC delegates aren't able to make their case with sufficient force to the GVN Ministries of Interior and Defense, the U.S. mission should be instructed to approach the Saigon Government at the highest level to explain the importance of full and prompt compliance.

In the meanwhile, consideration should be given to having U.S. forces keep prisoners they actually capture. The present policy set forth in the Joint State-Defense message of September 24 (Deptel 858 to Saigon)5 provides that lists be kept of prisoners turned over to the GVN. The additional step of holding at least some prisoners would not only keep us in compliance with the Conventions during the time that the GVN is in the process of working itself up to this, it would also provide us with a small amount of additional leverage for use in connection with a possible exchange of prisoners with the DRV or even, conceivably, with the Viet Cong.

2. Prisoner exchanges. The ICRC is aware of our interest in this subject. They also understand the problems. The fact that we hold no prisoners, and that the GVN so far has not asked their assistance in this regard, does not help matters. The ICRC understand the special nature of the Hertz case, though the argument that he as a bona fide civilian held by the Viet Cong is unique is beginning to wear a bit thin now that Dodd, the civilian construction firm employee, has been captured, to say nothing of the three other civilians believed held by the VC.

3. Blockade of medical supplies. This is obviously a most difficult and delicate matter, which was raised several times by the ICRC, both in conference and in private conversations. Without seeking to examine the pro's and con's of the policy, let me just note that the legal argument justifying it will be subject to the ICRC's critical scrutiny. The moral question depends to some extent at least on how the policy is carried out and what consequences it has both for the Viet Cong wounded and for civilians in Viet Cong-held areas.

To be sure, to some extent it depends on how the policy is stated. The ICRC is less likely to object if emphasis is put on the fact that captured medical supplies are not marked with a Red Cross and are comingled with military supplies, in contravention of the Conventions. But the policy cannot be phrased that way just for the benefit of the ICRC. This is not a subject on which it would be wise to try to delude or mislead the ICRC, for short as well as long run reasons. However, a policy carried out on such terms could very likely lead to the interdiction of virtually as many medical supplies as are presently blockaded.

4. ICRC donations to DRV and Viet Cong. Using its own funds the ICRC has donated 50,000 Swiss francs ($11,500) each to the Red Cross of the DRV and GVN. This gift to the DRV was deposited in a DRV bank account in London and the DRV acknowledged receipt. The gift to the GVN is in the form of supplies.

As a result of a communication sent to National Red Cross Societies on August 11 concerning relief action on behalf of victims of the war in Viet-Nam, the ICRC had received by September 20 donations in cash and in kind of a total of about 600,000 Swiss francs ($140,000). These donations came from National Red Cross Societies of: Australia, Denmark, Ethiopia, Finland, Ireland, Japan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Norway and Switzerland; and from the Governments of Sweden and Switzerland as well as from the Viet-Nam Relief Committee in Finland and the Oxford Committee for Famine Relief in Britain. Many of the donors requested that the goods in kind or funds be made available to “all three sides”, apparently not including the U.S. as a party to the war. From these gifts the ICRC sent a consignment consisting mainly of medical supplies to the Viet Cong through the NLF representative in Moscow. It has not yet received any acknowledgment. If an acknowledgment is received, it may well be the opening of a channel of communication to the Viet Cong. Several members of the ICRC pointed out to me that they are hopeful that gifts to the Viet Cong may help gain the confidence of the Viet Cong—an essential precondition for any useful actions by the Red Cross with regard to prisoners or other aspects of the Conventions.

5. Cambodia. I was informed that the Cambodians feel that if they act as a channel to send packages to U.S. prisoners held by the Viet Cong, and even more if they help send medical supplies to the Viet Cong, the U.S. will view this as confirming evidence of our charges, which they deny, that their country serves as a pipeline for supplies going to the Viet Cong. Whether or not any of this is accurate, either as a statement of the facts or as a characterization of their views, it might well be useful, and could do no harm, to have an intermediary act on our behalf to assure Sihanouk that, far from criticizing efforts by his Red Cross to get packages to our prisoners, we would be most grateful, and that we would not be publicly critical if bona fide medical supplies went to the Viet Cong at the same time, if in fact that is our view.

6. ICRC initiatives. The ICRC and its delegates are using a number of means to establish contact and establish a relationship of confidence with the DRV and the Viet Cong. They have sought out the DRV and NLF representatives in Moscow, Prague, Budapest, Paris, and Phnom Penh. They used a forum like the Vienna conference to make additional contacts. They have enlisted the Red Cross leadership of the USSR, Cambodia, Indonesia, France, Britain, and other countries for this purpose. They have applied for a visa to Hanoi in Warsaw and elsewhere. While they remain wholly realistic and thus non-optimistic about these efforts the possibility remains that one or more may at any time bear fruit. Most likely would be an invitation from Hanoi for an ICRC visit, possibly accompanied by a request for supplies, conceivably accepting our proposal that the ICRC inspect their allegations of hospital and leprosarium bombings. If such a visit occurred the ICRC would seek to visit prisoners (including Americans) held by the DRV, and would attempt to take them packages and mail. It would also discuss conditions of prisoners and related matters with the DRV. It is not too soon to consider additional matters we might wish the ICRC to explore if such a visit were to take place.

(Note: while the visa application is in the name of an ICRC delegate (Maunoir, I believe) my understanding is that if the visa is granted President Gonard might himself seek to make the trip, accompanied by staff and possibly by other members of the Committee.)

7. Character and Role of ICRC. It hardly needs saying that the ICRC as a private Swiss organization with unique legal and international responsibilities acts independently on the basis of its own judgment consistent with its well known principles. What may be less obvious is that constituted this way and behaving this way the ICRC is almost certain to serve our own interests. Plainly, this is a point to be made quietly. Any prospects for success the ICRC may have in the delicate undertakings that it is broaching in connection with the Viet-Nam conflict would be shattered if the other side were given public cause to doubt its independence. But the fact remains that individually and collectively the ICRC is, in the most basic sense, on our side. This is very specifically true of the President, Samuel Gonard, formerly the commanding general of the Swiss armed forces, and of his leading associate of the Committee, Vice President Jacques Freymond, Director of the Graduate Institute of International Studies in Geneva. (Freymond's views on wars of national liberation, and the urgent need for the countries of Europe to find ways to get together on a united policy for the West to fight them, as expressed in a paper he wrote for a recent Ford-sponsored conference, are wholly congenial to U.S. policy—and somewhat unusual coming from a European intellectual.)

In light of this I believe that the ICRC does not at present need additional specific proposals. A suggestion like that in Deptel 651 to Geneva,6 besides being overtaken by the ICRC's own initiative in sending medical supplies to the Viet Cong, might well sound a wrong note among the more conservative members of the ICRC, who in the reductive tradition of European intellectualism might well conclude the proposal was a deal partial to U.S. interests and thus not for them to implement. Our present relationship with the ICRC is such that it can best be served by maintaining an open channel of discussion with them, with occasional nudges from us to point them in directions we consider fruitful and/or essential. And by getting the GVN to comply with the Conventions.

8. Publicity. As a corollary to the previous point, publicity now for our efforts to work with and through the ICRC might well interfere with their efforts to gain the confidence of the other side and thus obtain better treatment for our prisoners. The argument that maximum publicity will help get better treatment for U.S. prisoners and will make it harder for the DRV to conduct mock war crimes trials and carry out executions, even if valid, does not contravene this view, since such publicity could be sought without reference to the ICRC.

The domestic U.S. problem is more serious. The families obviously want to know what we're doing to help the boys, as do the military services. Congressional interest is building up. To a point this can be handled by quiet off-the-record briefings. But that point will soon be reached.

I discussed this problem with members and staff of the ICRC. They themselves are becoming more public relations conscious than has been their tradition. They are interested in our own methods of backgrounding and news dissemination. At the right time I believe they will release on their own initiative, or can be gotten to release some information on what they are doing for the benefit of U.S. prisoners. By coordinating in advance we could then give their release our own emphasis here. I am convinced this would be more satisfactory for the present than for us to attempt to background here.

9. Strengthening South Viet-Nam's Red Cross. Without going into details of present shortcomings, suffice it to say that a lot can be done to beef up the South Vietnamese Red Cross. And at relatively little cost or difficulty (with respect to the Conventions, for example) to the GVN. The areas of need are obvious: refugees, direct material aid, children, separated families, etc. Putting the South Vietnamese Red Cross more into the picture would assist efforts being made by other private groups, would enhance the RVN's image abroad, and would deflect attention from shortcomings of the GVN in other areas. Both the ICRC and the American Red Cross would do much more with the Vietnamese Red Cross. But the requests should come from them. A specific project within their competence would be to set up a tracing service to reunite families, both now and when the fighting ends. The ICRC could provide technical assistance for this.

10. Protecting Power. ICRC experts on this subject see no reason not to explore this possibility. They suggest we consider asking an Eastern European country (Poland, Czechoslovakia, Rumania) to take on the job. They have no illusions that any such arrangement will be accepted by the DRV or do much good if it were.

11. Mail, clearing house, official Bureau for Prisoners. Noting that letters from U.S. prisoners have reached their families in a variety of ways, the ICRC thinks it would be useful if a more comprehensive and efficient effort were made to keep track of the mail flow. I am exploring this with the American Red Cross and DOD. The ICRC is seeking to find out what kind of “infractions” regarding mail the DRV is citing as reason for halting the mail flow.

The ICRC also recommends that an official Bureau for Prisoners as provided in the GC be established here and in Saigon. While this would be a formality on our part, it would be an additional argument for the ICRC to use when it tries to get compliance by Hanoi.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLI, Memos (A). Secret. Also sent to McNaughton, William Bundy, Unger, Meeker, and Assist-ant Secretary of State for Public Affairs James L. Greenfield. Drafted by Frank A. Sieverts, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs.

2 For text, see Department of State Bulletin, September 13, 1965, p. 447.

3 found.

4 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-7 VIET)

5 Not printed. (Ibid.)

6 Not printed. (Ibid.)

183. Draft Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Embassy in Vietnam 183. Draft Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, October 26, 1965.

Joint State-Defense-White House message. For Ambassador and Westmoreland only.

1. As we prepare for later discussions with the President on future policy in Vietnam, we are all eager for your personal comments on some of the major problems. Since there is no immediate prospect of meeting with you, we would like to use this channel for informational exchanges in the next few weeks. We count on you to reply in whatever way is convenient to you, and we are not seeking formal Embassy or MACV positions so much as the benefit of your own thinking in whatever form you wish to present it.

2. Last week we listened with great interest to De Puy2 in his preliminary presentation of Phase II plans. While we are impressed by the high quality of the thinking behind this plan, a number of questions have occurred to different ones of us on which we would value your early comment.

3. As presented, these plans focus sharply upon a dominant fighting role for U.S. ground forces. They appear to imply that aggressive operations will be conducted almost exclusively by U.S. forces. We recognize that for planners it is vastly easier to plan in terms of the deployment and use of U.S. forces under direct U.S. command. But some of us are greatly concerned by the possibility that what began as a Vietnamese war with U.S. assistance may end as a U.S. war with only passive Vietnamese cooperation. We doubt if this is your plan, but we fear that the momentum of U.S. military planning and deployment may force us all in this direction if we do not take very strong action to insure maximum use of Vietnamese forces in all forms of combat. It may be that De Puy briefing has misled us because of its natural focus upon the role of additional U.S. troops suggested for Phase II. But in reaching conclusions on Phase II and related problems, we would all be helped if we could have a clearer picture of the efforts you currently envisage for strengthening the Vietnamese armed forces at all levels and for all purposes.

4. Some of us also wonder whether we adequately understand what is now happening in Vietnam. GVN losses are still running several times higher than those of U.S. forces, and we believe, on the basis of estimates here, that most Viet Cong casualties still come from engagements in which the ground forces on our side are mainly Vietnamese. Thus there appears to be a substantial difference between the war as it now is and the war as the Phase II briefing suggests that it may be next year. Your comments on this apparent discrepancy would be welcome.

5. De Puy's briefing relates to the situation on the ground in South Vietnam, and did not directly treat the question of air operations either in the South or in the North. There is an evident requirement on us for correlation of all military action in the theater, and we would be glad to know of your thinking about the relation between ground and air action in the South, and the relation of both to the various possible rates at which the Rolling Thunder campaign might be carried forward.

6. Finally, we face major political decisions in connection with any additional deployments, and it may well be that we would wish to precede any Phase II deployments by another pause in bombing the North. Our preliminary estimate is that any such pause would be unlikely to produce a satisfactory response from Hanoi and would simply demonstrate again that root of problem of war and peace is in Hanoi. Here again we would value your thinking on ways and means of executing such a political preliminary to a further buildup.

7. Very existence of this message series will be held extremely closely here. You can speak as freely on this channel as if you were at the Cabinet table in a carefully restricted meeting. We will do the same.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLI, Memos (A). Secret. There is no indication on the source text that this message was sent.

2 See footnote 2, Document 181.

184. Intelligence Memorandum 184. Intelligence Memorandum1

Washington, October 27, 1965.

No. 2391/65

AN APPRAISAL OF THE BOMBING OF NORTH VIETNAM2

Effects on the DRV Economy

1. The cumulative economic losses caused by air strikes in North Vietnam are still small in relation to total economic activity because the targets attacked thus far have not been located in areas of major economic activity. However, there are now considerably more indications of localized strains upon the economy, most notably in food supply and distribution. The bombings of the railway lines leading from Hanoi to the northwest and northeast are probably having a greater adverse effect on the economy than any targets attacked to date. With the interdiction of three important land lines of communication, domestic production, distribution, and reconstruction are being curtailed and exports and imports are being reduced. Another serious effect is the diversion of scarce resources from productive uses to the repair of damaged facilities and development and the use of alternate means of transportation. This diversion has almost certainly retarded, if not stopped, work on a number of high-priority economic construction projects. The capabilities of North Vietnam's armed forces have not been affected significantly by attacks on economic facilities, but the movement of personnel, equipment, and supplies is being hampered by damaged transportation facilities. The armed forces place little direct reliance on the North Vietnamese economy for materiel.

2. Damage to economic facilities and equipment is now estimated at between $15 and 16 million. Measurable indirect economic losses amount to more than $8 million—mainly reductions in foreign trade and agricultural output. The direct economic losses that can be measured have fallen most heavily on the transport sector of the economy. The cost of permanent reconstruction of rail/highway bridges would be on the order of $7 to 8 million and the replacement or repair of destroyed or damaged transport equipment would cost an additional $3.3 million. Reconstruction of the damaged electric power plants would cost about $4.5 million. Repair costs for the petroleum storage facilities are estimated at about $500 thousand. The growing loss of foreign export earnings—now totaling almost $5 million—is appreciable, though not yet serious. In addition there have been losses from lowered production. Most losses cannot be quantified, but it is estimated that the potential reduction in rice crops this year resulting from shortages of power for irrigation will amount to roughly $3.5 million. The cost of reconstruction, replacement, and repair of damaged facilities, if attempted, would represent over 7 percent of total annual investment in the economy and about 15 percent of annual investment in industry.

3. The official North Vietnam press has tacitly admitted failure to carry out simultaneously all the necessary defense, reconstruction, and production tasks. Party leaders have called for a major reorganization of the Communist Party apparatus in order to strengthen the provincial and district committees of the party. These officials have primary responsibility for directing defense mobilization and production in their respective regions. Thus problems in organization are compounding the chronic shortages of skilled manpower which have become even more apparent during the period of the air strikes. Large numbers of workers have been sent south to repair the damage. Their effectiveness has been impaired, however, by severe local shortages of food and construction materials caused by poor distribution and problems in transportation. Some of the effects of the shortage of skilled manpower may be avoided, however, by the arrival of additional Soviet and Chinese technical personnel. North Vietnam is now receiving increasing numbers of technical advisers to assist in reconstruction as well as quantities of structural components and materials, not only from China, but also from other Communist countries. The transfer of a considerable portion of North Vietnam's limited resources of skilled labor and construction materials to repair and reconstruct the bombed facilities constitutes an appreciable drain in amounts available for the planned investment program and has required a reordering of investment priorities. If orderly economic development is to be continued, there must be a more rapid increase in aid from other Communist countries than has been observed to date.

4. The most significant air strikes against transportation in North Vietnam have been the bombing of two bridges on the Dong Dang-Hanoi railroad line. The Dong Dang-Hanoi line is the principal means by which North Vietnam has received imports of military equipment and economic goods from China by land. The organization of alternative road and sea transportation to compensate for the loss of through rail traffic will take some time. In the meantime, the North Vietnamese will resort to temporary expedients to try to keep military and high-priority economic traffic moving past and interdicted bridges. Continued interdiction of the line will have serious consequences in maintaining production of the two blast furnaces at Thai Nguyen, North Vietnam's only iron and steel complex, which has been receiving about 500 tons of coking coal from China by rail each day.

5. North Vietnam has made little progress in repairing damaged electrical power facilities. Damage to five power plants has reduced the total generating capacity by 13.5 percent, and has caused minor curtailment of mining and industrial operations and loss of power for an irrigation system. Destroyed petroleum storage facilities reduced total capacity by 16.7 percent. Since total national capacity is large in relation to normal consumption, the loss of these facilities has had only a localized impact in the southern part of the country. Dislocations in telecommunications have necessitated the use of priorities and alternate means of communication, and the effectiveness of postal service has declined. Food rations in an area south of Hanoi reportedly have been cut, and food shortages are reported to be particularly serious in the southern provinces. The bombings of the electric power network in Thanh Hoa and Nghe An provinces have interrupted normal irrigation services which, if not restored, will cause a reduction in the fall rice harvests in these areas. The volume of seaborne exports continues to decline and the loss of foreign exchange earnings has been intensified.

North Vietnamese Political and Public Reactions

6. There continues to be no basic change in Hanoi's attitude toward the war. Hanoi continues to assert its determination to press on with the war in South Vietnam despite the continuing attrition of the air war and the increase of US troops in the south. This determination was evident in regime propaganda which placed special emphasis on assertions that the US is not prepared to conduct a prolonged war in Vietnam, but that the Vietnamese insurgents are prepared to do so and have the necessary resources.

7. On the subject of negotiations, Hanoi was unusually vocal. Coverage of this issue centered on a Foreign Ministry memorandum broadcast on 23 September. This and other statements offered no policy departure from the “four-point stand” of 8 April. Rather, by phrasing, emphasis and omission, these statements tend to convey the impression that Hanoi is endeavoring to clarify its position on settling the war and to avoid locking itself into an inflexible position on negotiations.

8. There are no indications that the Hanoi regime's attitude toward the war is being influenced to any greater extent than in the past by the reaction of the DRV populace to the air strikes. The morale of the populace seems to be standing up fairly well, although signs of deterioration in some quarters continue. For the first time in many weeks the regime did evidence some concern over the effect that the air strikes were having on the populace. A broadcast directed to the populace of one region of the country chided them for failing to comply with the planned civil defense measures when strikes occur. The broadcast implied that the local people had little regard for the government's plans and took their own measures to protect themselves.

Effects on Military Targets

9. Air strikes against North Vietnam have further eroded national capacities in measurable areas (see annex),3 while far-ranging armed reconnaissance has disrupted movement along lines of communication and North Vietnamese attempts at reconstruction. Further reduction in national capacities in certain categories will be inhibited to some extent by the heavy concentration of targets in the sanctuary areas. About 51 percent of maritime ports, and about 60 percent of POL, power plant, and railroad yard capacities are within the restricted areas. However, only 10 percent of barracks, 14 percent of supply, and 15 percent of ammunition storage capacities are located in these areas. The continued absence of restoration of barracks and supply and ammunition depots confirms earlier assessments that a large-scale dispersal of men and materials to less vulnerable facilities has occurred. No indications of shortages of ammunition have been detected, and the movement of such materiel is given top priority on the disrupted transportation nets.

10. The four damaged airfields at Vinh, Dong Hoi, Na San, and Dien Bien Phu remain unserviceable. The North Vietnamese appear to be discarding these facilities and concentrating on improving and reactivating airfields in and north of the Hanoi area.

11. Armed reconnaissance sorties passed 11,000 with an attendant increase in destruction of surface vessels, vehicles and railroad rolling stock. While these losses have disrupted North Vietnamese operations, particularly in Military Region IV, they are being offset in part by increased aid from the Communist countries. Similarly, although our air operations have restricted North Vietnam's freedom of movement, especially in the southern provinces, infiltration of materiel to the Viet Cong continues.

12. Increased pressure has been placed on Hanoi by the sustained air attacks on the more sensitive lines of communication and on their supply base. While these operations have not significantly reduced North Vietnamese capabilities to conduct current levels of defense operations, they have substantially curtailed the PAVN's capability to invade South Vietnam. Quick reaction paid dividends last week when an air strike was launched against an occupied SA-2 site near Kep Ha within 48 hours of the site's detection. The attack surprised the North Vietnamese and resulted in destruction of missiles, radar vans, and missile transporters, marking the first successful attack on such a site. The losses incurred constitute a sharp setback to North Vietnamese plans for augmenting SA-2 firing elements northeast of Hanoi. Nevertheless, North Vietnam is steadily increasing its AAA and SA-2 sites, primarily in the Yen Bai and Lang Son areas, and SA-2 firing elements are now in operation to the south, east, and north of Hanoi. The mission of the armed forces of the DRV is unchanged and includes: defending the homeland, training their own and infiltration forces for South Vietnam and Laos, and providing logistics support for their forces and those Communist forces presently deployed in South Vietnam and Laos. To the present, the capability of North Vietnam's armed forces to perform their mission at current levels of activity, while hampered, has not been diminished to an appreciable degree.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLI, Memos (A). Secret; No Foreign Dissem [text not declassified]. Disseminated by the Directorate of Intelligence.

2 This memorandum is CIA's issuance of a joint CIA-DIA study prepared monthly for the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 Attached but not printed.

185. Editorial Note 185. Editorial Note

On November 1, 1965, retired Foreign Service officer Paul Sturm (Y) replaced Edmund Gullion as Mai Van Bo's contact. The unpublished portion of United States-Vietnam Relations summarizes Sturm's instructions as follows:

“November 1, 1965—X introduces Y by letter to R

“Instructions for Y: “1. Stress building pressures in the U.S. for escalation—not a threat but a fact.

“2. Take an anti-Chinese tack.

“3. Develop theme of Asian economic development and aid.

“4. DRV Aide-Memoire, September 23, 1965: “a. Asserts U.S. insists on keeping forces in SVN. With respect to this, pursue the idea of stages.

“b. Asserts U.S. insists on separate Vietnams forever.

“c. Seeming change on point three—now NLF ‘must have decisive say.’

“d. What is meant by ‘solemnly declaring acceptance of four points—stopping all action, withdrawal or agreement to withdraw, bombing cessation?’

“e. Rules out any DRV response to a bombing cessation.” (United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, Part VI, C, 1, page 21)

The Democratic Republic of Vietnam's aide-memoire, September 23, is printed ibid., Book 12, Part VI, B, pages 160-163.

On November 18, when Sturm and Bo met, their discussion was unproductive with Bo expressing puzzlement that Sturm had no new knowledge to convey. (Ibid., Book 12, Part VI, C, 1, page 21)

186. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 186. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 2, 1965, 7:40 p.m.

1532. 1. Ky government is just over four months old. While certain strengths are apparent certain stresses within and outside the government also exist. Trouble spots have appeared although the overall situation in Viet-Nam is better today than it was in the early part of 1965. Behind the shield of American power a greater measure of security has been established but the political and administrative fabric has not yet developed the necessary strength. This report is designed to outline some of the problems which Ky now confronts as he seeks to retain unity among the leadership and develop effective government.

2. Ky is well aware of his problems. He recognizes the need for actions and persuasive leadership if he is to survive the pressures threatening a government massively engaged in fighting a bitter war that reaches into almost every corner of the land and affects every facet of Vietnamese life.

3. Government is faced with complex and potentially dangerous economic problem in form of shortages certain commodities, sharply rising living costs, and inflation. Important as these are intrinsically, they take on greater importance because they have become magnified in the public mind and provide political enemies of government a “safe” weapon for attack. Too timorous to launch a head-on campaign against military government, these elements consider themselves quite safe in associating with spontaneous complaint against inflation and food shortages.

4. Situation has also produced internal stresses within Ky Cabinet. Minister National Economy Ton was under such heavy fire that he was talking of resigning. Although Ky and Directorate colleagues considered his replacement it appears that Ton has survived for the time being. Merits of case aside, there is always powerful impulse to fire a minister when his area of responsibility presents politically difficult problem.

5. Pressures for change exist elsewhere within government. The Minister of Interior is unsure of his job. Minister of Public Works and Minister of Social Welfare have been drawing criticism because of alleged failures of their Ministries to function effectively. (Friday Ky told Ambassador he had dismissed Minister of Public Works because of his inefficiency, but this has not yet been made known publicly.)

6. There continues to be grumbling within the military establishment. DepPriMin Nguyen Huu Co is apparently still unhappy at being relieved from post of Chief, Joint General Staff. He has criticized Ky sharply before American and Vietnamese auditors on a number of occasions and word of his remarks has circulated widely in civilian and military circles (and must certainly have been carried back to Ky). In a recent conversation with General Westmoreland, Co wondered out loud whether anything could be done to deflate Ky's arrogance and force his nose to the grindstone. This is probably an unfair attack on Ky but illustrates the lengths to which Co is now going in his criticism. We have also been hearing of milder criticism of Ky from other senior military quarters.

7. There is a rash of coup rumors, although none are worthy of my trying to react in any way. Before his departure for Hue, Bonze Thich Tri Quang called to warn EmbOff that at least three sudiste groups he knows of are plotting. Adherents to General “Big” Minh and Major General Duong Van Duc, September 13-14 coup leader, are allegedly involved. Story is given substance by fact that Duc was forcibly removed from Ba Xuyen Province last week by military security service and returned to Saigon (where he was set free) presumably at request of Province Chief who objected to his activities. Re “Big” Minh, town has been full of stories of his imminent return for last two weeks. As we have seen in past, Saigon rumor mills need little raw material in order to operate at full blast. We have also noted that VC are quick to pick up and broadcast stories of disunity within GVN. We can assume that they are not idle now. While coup reports so far appear to have no firm basis, their currency is a manifestation of the difficulties within the government. They have become so common that Ky has seen fit to denounce the possibility of a coup. Most recently he told press no one could organize a coup at the present time.

8. On Catholic side of ledger there has been rumor that Generals Nguyen Chanh Thi and Nguyen Huu Co were plotting to become Chief of State and Prime Minister respectively with Unified Buddhist Association concurrence and support. Central Buddhists headed by Tri Quang remain highly critical of government effectiveness and of General Thieu in particular, while old political circles continue to grumble on the sidelines. Catholic circles have been remaining quiet and not agitating against the government but they are basically uncommitted in support of the Ky government.

9. Much of foregoing would be irrelevant and unimportant if Ky government could generate momentum and successfully come to grips with more important problems confronting it. However, on basis past experience, rumors and facts of this sort can have insidious effect on minds of many Vietnamese. As the government steels into its tasks for a longer haul the “out-politicians” launch what have often been irresponsible attacks against government. Members of government are more fully aware of the enormity of tasks confronting them and are forced to come to grips with the hard task of maintaining unity and getting on with the work of government. Some of them, it appears, would rather think of sudden change as a solution.

10. Ky does not give any obvious outward sign of running out of steam. He remains self-assured and has declared his determination remain as Prime Minister regardless number and magnitude problems confronting him. He is being responsive to the Ambassador's advice to calm his opponents, seek out his critics, and maintain his authority by persuasion as well as action. He appears more and more as a reflective man. He retains control of the air force and his potential rivals seem to show a healthy respect for U.S. power and some consideration for the desirability of maintaining unity in government. Although Ky has not been receiving the credit due his successes, he has had a few. More than anything, favorable trends in military solution over past few months have strengthened government's position and dampened earlier fears for security which fostered irrational changes and inspired adventures in leadership.

11. Important to recall that Directorate unity remains key to political stability in present situation. As long as ten Generals who comprise this body remain in essential accord on this point, coups which bring about fundamental changes in GVN's organization or direction can probably be avoided. However, pressures such as those outlined above are putting their unity to an important test.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

187. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 187. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 3, 1965.

1544. For the President. Herewith my weekly telegram.

1. American popularity—You would have been proud of the U.S. troops at the Vietnam National Day celebration on last Monday, November 1. They looked lean and hard—and tall coming after the Vietnamese. The white and Negro soldiers were inter-mingled—a powerful psychological stroke to a crowd conservatively estimated of non-whites. What particularly impressed me was that when, with their massed flags, they appeared, they were the only troops which drew a great roar of applause from the public. Other formations had drawn applause from the reviewing stand but the crowd of rank and file people on the sidewalk applauded only the United States.

When I attended this same celebration two years ago, the public was nowhere to be seen and was not allowed to be present. Today was the first time everyone was allowed to see the parade. The government's self-assurance was justified, for there was no terrorism.

In the afternoon I attended the National Day ceremony at the Buddhist Institute. Mine was the only vehicle, either diplomatic or Vietnamese, which, with its flag, received warm and grinning applause from the crowd outside the pagoda.

We Americans are definitely not considered colonial. They think they know us and our non-imperialistic record in the Philippines and Korea and elsewhere. They know that our soldiers are helpful and friendly. Unfortunately the Army of Vietnam still makes enemies.

2. Economic—Happily, retail rice prices continued their slow downward trend despite a continued decline in rice stocks on hand and despite the fact that prices normally rise at this season. Saigon's needs in rice, which are largely met from private stocks, should be provided for at a reasonable price.

The cost of other local and imported products continued to rise, however, and the retail price index was up 3 percent over last week.

American and Vietnamese representatives agreed on a number of measures to speed up cargo handling and reduce congestion in the port of Saigon.

3. Military—For the third week in a row the pace of the war quickened with the Viet Cong attacking in regimental strength in Phu Yen Province and in battalion strength in Hau Nghia Province and against the U.S. Marines' perimeter outside Danang. Heavy fighting mostly in a battle zone stretching from Phu Yen Province north to Thua Thien Province led to increased casualties on both sides.

The total number of Viet Cong incidents decreased slightly reflecting a decline in the number of anti-aircraft fire and propaganda incidents but the number of Viet Cong attacks went up and terrorism and sabotage increased slightly.

4. Basic political—The number of Viet Cong military or political cadres who came over to the government side during October increased slightly over the September figure continuing a slight but steady upward trend since June.

5. Psychological—Press comment reflected optimism and hopefulness that traditional differences among South Vietnamese religious minorities were diminishing. Press attitudes toward the GVN were generally favorable although complaints continued concerning rising and fluctuating prices and the preference for an elected government.

6. Pacification—Minister Thang of Rural Construction (Pacification) is in the final phase of organizing his Ministry so that he will be free for field supervision of the pacification program in Quang Nam and Binh Dinh starting November 5. After considerable neglect of the program these past two years, and the resignation of most of the Ministry's civilian staff after the death of Minister Ung, Thang has worked hard to get a competent staff, a doctrine designed to win the voluntary support of villagers, with democratic elections in villages as one major goal, and to make some order out of the many types of cadres assigned to this work by past governments. He got GVN approval for his selection of Colonels Lac, Chau, and Anh to be his chief assistants. All three are highly regarded by Americans for their experience and competency in pacification; the latter two have been outstanding province chiefs.

The political action team training center at Vung Tau, started, funded, and guided by CIA, will be made into a national training center for what the Vietnamese call rural construction and which is truthfully translated as community building. I have visited this center and was favorably impressed. Now the Vietnamese want it to play a key role in building a political structure in this country from the ground up. Also, 73 selected graduates of the National Institute for Administration (NIA) are being given a special course in pacification. Thang, who has been participating in this training of selected civil service civilians, will assign the top third in the class to be assistant district chiefs (or district chief, if this is required) in areas selected for priority attention; the middle third of the class will be used at Vung Tau to strengthen the instructor staff; the last third will be used in the Ministry.

7. Medical program—With a party of journalists, I visited USOM aided hospital at Can Tho where major surgery cases went from 86 in 1963 to 170 in 1965 and minor surgery from 30 to 623 in the same period. Outpatient cases went from some 3,300 in 1964 to some 6,600 in 1965.

I also used the opportunity to have a long private talk with the Corps Commander (one of four political satraps in this country) about the importance of national unity and of everyone pulling together.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 5:34 a.m. McGeorge Bundy sent a retyped copy of this telegram to the President with the observation that it was “more cheerful than usual.” There is an indication on the White House copy that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVI)

188. Letter From the Ambassador to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson 188. Letter From the Ambassador to Vietnam (Lodge) to President Johnson1

Saigon, November 3, 1965.

Dear Mr. President:

Herewith is my best attempt to peer into the future: 1. We are beginning to master the technique of thwarting and eventually overcoming the Viet Cong main force units and military redoubts. The process will be long and difficult, but we know what is required to accomplish it.

2. The next step must be to eliminate Viet Cong terrorism and to smash Viet Cong organization in the villages. The GVN, with our help, is just beginning this process.

3. If governmental stability is maintained, I believe that the GVN, with our help, can succeed. But the process is, if anything, more complex than the military one because it involves braiding so many programs together. If the pacification program moves ahead as we intend, I would expect that, within six months, about 300 additional villages of the 2,685 in the country for a total of about 1,100 will have been pacified in the three different areas which are the initial objectives. From then on, it will be straightforward, if slow, plowing ahead with the light at the end of the tunnel growing brighter all the time.

4. No assurance can be given that the government will stay in power. But I try to leave nothing undone to prevent a sudden change. Everyone in the U.S. Mission is alerted to let me know of any rumor that they hear, and whenever I hear one worthy of attention, I will certainly try to do something effective.

5. Let us assume that the government stays in power and that the Viet Cong decide that we and the Vietnamese are able to overcome the terrorists as individuals and in small groups. I expect them then to accept our offer for unconditional discussions and to do so at the time and in the way most embarrassing to us. I do not expect to hear through intelligence ahead of time. Mao Tse-tung's manual says, “Fight, Fight. Talk, Talk.” When the fighting goes against them, they will try to win by talking, by politics, by propaganda, by public opinion. They go to an international discussion not to end the war but to win it.

6. The three most embarrassing things which I can think of now are: 1. a cease-fire; 2. an end to the bombing of the North; and 3. recognition of the Viet Cong (self-styled National Liberation Front) in some form. Let me submit my views on each of these issues.

Cease-Fire

7. As things stand now, if we were to accept a cease-fire (without supervision and without withdrawal of troops), the Government of Viet-Nam would be seriously threatened and could even fall, and the fighting spirit would go out of the Vietnamese military—beyond reasonable hope of being pumped up again. The Viet Cong would thus win in one diplomatic stroke what they had not been able to win by fighting.

8. Moreover, since civilian pacification still lags behind the military program, a premature cease-fire would confirm Viet Cong control in a large portion of the country, enable them to terrorize the population in much of the remainder and would do so in an artful way without seeming to do so.

9. An offer of cease-fire has a superficially attractive appearance and yet at the U.N. an offer of cease-fire was not generally considered worthy of respect unless it was accompanied at the same time by an offer by the aggressor to withdraw troops, together with a practical scheme to supervise the withdrawal.

10. One answer to a cease-fire proposal, therefore, could be a.) a cease-fire must be accompanied by the aggressor's withdrawal of troops and by machinery to supervise and verify; and b.) these are obviously things to be discussed at the meeting and should go on the agenda.

11. But I stress the communist tactic of inscribing as an agenda item the substantive result which they wish finally to achieve at a conference. We think of an agenda as a list of things to discuss; they think of it as an opportunity to win the conference before it has even started.

12. We should thus insist that the first item on the agenda should be machinery to supervise and to verify whatever agreement is ultimately reached.

13. We should also hold that the GVN has a sovereign right to move anywhere in its territory and to suppress armed terrorists where it finds them. This is an exercise of the domestic police power which no sovereign state should be asked to abdicate.

Bombing

14. An end of bombing of the North with no other quid pro quo than the opening of negotiations would load the dice in favor of the communists and demoralize the GVN. It would in effect leave the communists free to devastate the South with impunity while we tie our hands in the North.2

15. We might agree to end the bombing of the North for a limited period—say thirty days—if the following conditions are met: a. A withdrawal of NVN units through international checkpoints to the North.

b. Unimpeded access of the GVN to any part of its territory.

c. A significant reduction of incidents.

d. Cessation of infiltration of men and materiel.

e. If enforcement of all these measures is the first item of any agenda.

16. Your advisers might study the merits of making a new discussion offer in which you said in effect that on April 83 you offered unconditional discussions and were rebuffed; that this offer had stood from April 8 to the present time; that it was not, however, an offer to last through all eternity; and that, therefore, you were revising it along the lines of paragraph 15. Such an initiative might relieve you of the embarrassment of a communist cease-fire proposal by making in effect a cease-fire proposal of your own.

17. Such a public announcement, like all public announcements, should be coordinated in advance with the GVN.

Recognition of Viet Cong

18. Any form of recognition of the Viet Cong—other than as individual members of a Hanoi delegation—will lead to a collapse of the GVN. It would be taken in the countryside—and so represented by the still potent communist underground—as the beginning of a communist takeover. This would, I believe, lead to a rapid disintegration of all we have sacrificed so much to create.

19. I would therefore suggest that our attitude on this be that the Viet Cong will not be recognized, though Hanoi is free to include in its delegation any individual it chooses.

20. I would hate to see you in a position where you had to choose between flying in the face of overwhelming U.S. public opinion on the one hand or losing everything you have gained with so much struggle and sacrifice in Viet-Nam on the other.

21. I believe it will be possible to reconcile U.S. and Vietnamese positions with regard to the holding of discussions with Hanoi, but American opinion must be prepared to give a little ground inasmuch as the Vietnamese have a very different viewpoint, due to their being so close to the conflict and so small and weak a nation, which has suffered so much. Also they take themselves seriously as a sovereign nation—and thus cannot accept a cease-fire for their own troops in their own country in the exercise of their own police power.

With warm and respectful regards,

Faithfully yours,

Cabot L.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVI. Secret. McGeorge Bundy sent this letter to the President under cover of a November 8 memorandum that reads as follows: “Here is a letter which has just come in from Cabot Lodge for you. I have taken the liberty of giving copies to Rusk and McNamara only, because Lodge's views are deeply relevant to the discussions now going forward. I have not sent a copy to Arthur Goldberg because I am afraid it would only stir him to a very strong reaction. On the other hand, it may be useful for Arthur to know Saigon's thinking. Which do you prefer?

“The memorandum, which has an indication that Johnson saw it, did not show the President's preference. (Ibid., Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Memos (B))

2 President Johnson quoted this paragraph in The Vantage Point, p. 234.

3 Reference is to Johnson's April 7 speech at Johns Hopkins University; see vol. II, Document 245.

189. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 189. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson1

Washington, November 3, 1965.

SUBJECT

Courses of Action in Vietnam

We confront major policy decisions with respect to our course of action in Vietnam. This memorandum attempts to frame the substance of the choices and to identify some of the problems we face.

1. US strategy. The February decision to bomb North Vietnam and the July approval of Phase I deployments make sense only if they are in support of a long-run United States policy to contain Communist China. China—like Germany in 1917, like Germany in the West and Japan in the East in the late 30's, and like the USSR in 1947—looms as a major power threatening to undercut our importance and effectiveness in the world and, more remotely but more menacingly, to organize all of Asia against us. The long-run US policy is based upon an instinctive understanding in our country that the peoples and resources of Asia could be effectively mobilized against us by China or by a Chinese coalition and that the potential weight of such a coalition could throw us on the defensive and threaten our security. This understanding of a straightforward security threat is interwoven with another perception—namely, that we have our view of the way the US should be moving and of the need for the majority of the rest of the world to be moving in the same direction if we are to achieve our national objective. We would move toward economic well-being, toward open societies, and toward cooperation between nations; the role we have inherited and have chosen for ourselves for the future is to extend our influence and power to thwart ideologies that are hostile to these aims and to move the world, as best we can, in the direction we prefer. Our ends cannot be achieved and our leadership role cannot be played if some powerful and virulent nation—whether Germany, Japan, Russia or China—is allowed to organize their part of the world according to a philosophy contrary to ours.

There are three fronts to a long-run effort to contain China (realizing that the USSR “contains” China on the north and northwest): (a) the Japan-Korea front; (b) the India-Pakistan front; and (c) the Southeast Asia front. Decisions to make great investments today in men, money and national honor in South Vietnam makes sense only in conjunction with continuing efforts of equivalent effectiveness in the rest of Southeast Asia and on the other two principal fronts. The trends in Asia are running in both directions—for as well as against our interests; there is no reason to be unduly pessimistic about our ability over the next decade or two to fashion alliances and combinations (involving especially Japan and India) which will keep China from achieving her objectives until her zeal wanes. The job, however—even if we can shift some responsibilities to some Asian countries—will continue to require American attention, money, and, from time to time unfortunately, lives.

Any decision to continue the program of bombing North Vietnam and any decision to deploy Phase II forces—involving as they do substantial loss of American lives, risks of further escalation, and greater investment of US prestige—must be predicated on these premises as to our long-run interests in Asia.

2. Estimate of the situation in South Vietnam. The massive infusions of US ideas, aid and manpower have frustrated any Communist design to move into their conventional-warfare “Stage 3,” but the guerrilla war continues at a high pace, the economy of South Vietnam is deteriorating, and there are no convincing indications that the South Vietnamese body-politic is reviving.

a. Military. The large US deployments have thwarted the VC monsoon offensive that was threatening a serious military defeat for the GVN forces at the time of my July memorandum.2 These “Phase I” deployments, 160,000 of whom are already in place, have enabled the GVN forces to begin restoration of their strength, morale and tactical integrity, which is essential if they are to retain their fighting capability in the months ahead. The US forces have also substantially secured their own bases and the areas immediately adjacent to the bases. (see Map I, attached)3 US ground combat elements deployed offensively have moved rapidly—in conjunction with tactical air support and often following up B-52 strikes—to probe into VC base sanctuaries that had long been untouched. The US forces have also proved to be an effective quick-reaction reserve for GVN forces that has turned potential defeat in several battles into VC retreat or at least a stand-off.

But the pace of the war remains high, with VC last week attacking in regimental strength in Phu Yen province and in battalion strength in Hau Nghia province and against the Marine perimeter outside Danang. There are increased casualties on both sides. VC attacks, terrorism and sabotage show no sign of abating. Desertions from Government Forces remain high, but recruitment has improved, permitting a gradual increase in force levels. Defections from the VC are running at 1000 a month and are increasing slowly.

The present assessment is that our Phase I deployments (bringing the US total to about 210,000 to 225,000 men) when completed will achieve the limit of their military potential between December 1965 and March 1966. As can be seen on Map I, the estimate is that Phase I forces, working with the Vietnamese, will result in “control” of 40 per cent of the population and 5-10 per cent of the area; it will keep open 20-25 per cent of the critical lines of communications; it will permit 10-20 per cent disruption of the VC bases and military logistics infrastructure, and 5 per cent disruption of the VC political/security infrastructure. We will then be in a position where a few enclaves, including perhaps 5,500,000 of South Vietnam's 15,000,000 people (of which only some 1,000,000 are in the Delta) are under US or GVN “control”—and even these will of course be subject to sporadic VC mortar and suicide satchel-charge attacks of the October 27 kind.4 Security conditions within the enclaves will be suitable for reconstruction of political infrastructure, but it is probable that the enclaves will be too small and the per cent of population controlled too little to give any hope that such pacification will be rapid or that it will tend to snowball beyond the enclaves.

The capabilities and intentions of the VC and of North Vietnam are troublesome unknowns complicating our estimate of the situation at this time. There are signs that VC morale is sagging. But, even when confronted by the US force-build-up and by our program of actions against North Vietnam and with increasing casualties and weapons losses, the VC have demonstrated an ability to continue the build-up and supply of their forces in the South, both from in-country sources and by infiltration over improved roads in Laos, by sea and via Cambodia. The indications are that the VC are not reverting to a lesser level of insurgency, but are still striving to build up for the transition to conventional warfare—that they are continuing both to upgrade guerrilla units in the Delta and to infiltrate additional regular army elements from the North in order to restore the balance temporarily upset by US deployments.

The VC forces are now estimated at 71,300 VC “main force and logistics,” 40,000 political cadre, and 110,000 guerrillas—an increase in the estimate since early last summer of some 6,000 (9%), 10,000 (33-1/3%) and 18,200 (20%) in the three categories respectively. In addition, although as of last month there were estimated to be three regiments of North Vietnamese regular forces in the South, early this month two additional North Vietnamese regiments were confirmed and three others were estimated as possible. In total, therefore, the NVN/VC forces are now believed to number about 230,000 men, and there is reason to believe that they will continue to increase.

b. Political. In Saigon, the Ky “government of generals” has survived, but accomplished little more during the period since last summer. The government, while recognizing many of its problems and working willingly with the US Mission, still lacks any broad, or even developing, base of support among the various political factions. No major faction (e.g., Buddhists, Catholics) is in open opposition, and all appear to be continuing their “wait and see” attitude. This lack of support probably will not be important over the short-run, so long as the generals in power remain united; over the longer term, however, some base of political support must be developed if the non-Communist elements in SVN are to become prepared to develop a viable society as security in the countryside is expanded and after hostilities cease.

In the countryside, the government's political situation is even worse than in Saigon and other urban centers. The VC have savagely and thoroughly destroyed the political structure of the rural areas. The potential leaders who could form the nucleus of counter-VC efforts in each locale have been killed, intimidated or driven out, leaving the old, weak and incompetent behind. Even most of the war veterans are afraid to live in the rural areas and gather in the cities. Absent security (and where there is security, absent willing and able leadership), rural reconstruction (pacification) continues to make little, if any, progress. The very difficult problem of getting pacification moving has not been solved.

c. Economic. SVN's economic situation today is grave for two reasons: (1) The Communist strategy has been to use some of Vietnam's economy to support the VC's own operations and to withhold the remainder from the Government and from those of the people who support it. Thus, in large part as a consequence of VC operations, Vietnam has become a food-import area, commodities cannot move freely within the country (e.g., rice from the Delta to Saigon), and the VC are in a position to derive much of their own needs (e.g., construction material, food, medical supplies) from the GVN. (2) The rapid and large US/GVN force build-up has introduced a new and strenuous competition for Vietnam's human and material resources. When added to the VC economic warfare efforts, the US/GVN build-up has resulted in a growing inflation in the Vietnamese economy.

3. Objectives in Vietnam. In my July 20 memorandum to you, I stated that in my view a “favorable outcome” for Vietnam has nine fundamental elements: (a) VC stop attacks and drastically reduce incidents of terror and sabotage.

(b) DRV reduces infiltration to a trickle, with some reasonably reliable method of our obtaining confirmation of this fact.

(c) US/GVN stop bombing of North Vietnam.

(d) GVN stays independent (hopefully pro-US, but possibly genuinely neutral).

(e) GVN exercises governmental functions over substantially all of South Vietnam.

(f) Communists remain quiescent in Laos and Thailand.

(g) DRV withdraws PAVN forces and other North Vietnamese infiltrators (not regroupees) from South Vietnam.

(h) VC/NLF transform from a military to a purely political organization.

(i) US combat forces (not advisors or AID) withdraw.

I added that a “favorable outcome” could include also arrangements regarding elections, relations between North and South Vietnam, participation in peace-keeping by international forces, membership for North and South Vietnam in the UN, and so on. It was, and is, my belief that the nine fundamental elements can evolve with or without an express agreement and, except for what might be negotiated incidental to a cease-fire, are more likely to evolve without an express agreement than with one.

Ambassador Lodge has set down his settlement terms (in Saigon 1377):5 (a) The area around Saigon and all of the Delta (55 to 60 per cent of the population of South Vietnam), the thickly populated northeastern strip along the coast (25 per cent of the population), and all cities and provincial capitals would be pacified; and all principal roads would be open to the Vietnamese military day and night. (“Pacified” is defined as the existence of a state of mind among the people that they have a stake in the government as shown by the holding of local elections; it also means a proper local police force. A “pacified” area is economically, socially and politically a part of the Republic of Vietnam.)

(b) Those areas not pacified would not be safehavens for the VC, but would be contested by energetic offensive forays to prevent consolidation of a Communist base.

(c) The VC would disarm, and their weapons and explosives would be removed from their hands. Their main force units would be broken up. Hardcore VC to go to North Vietnam. Chieu Hoi (“Open Arms”) rehabilitation would be extended to individual VC who are suitable, with plans to resettle them.

(d) North Vietnam would stop its infiltration and direction of the war.

(e) The Government of South Vietnam would approve.

Ambassador Lodge added that “this means that we would not be insisting on the complete elimination of the Viet Cong from all corners of the country although no land or safehaven would be allotted to them. It would mean that we and the GVN would control 80 to 85 per cent of the population and that the Viet Cong would be limited to the jungle and mountainous areas where they would go on as bandits, much as their counterparts do today in Malaya and in Luzon—and where the GVN would have the right to pursue them and try to destroy them.”

The question whether we should be prepared ultimately to settle for a “compromise outcome”—for something less than the terms indicated above—may have to be faced soon. The areas where there may be pressure to ease our terms are these: (a) Safehavens. The degree to which the VC are permitted to hold safehavens tacitly allotted to them; the extent to which the VC are permitted to tax in “their” areas and to retain a military organization for “defensive” purposes.

(b) Force withdrawals. The extent to which hardcore VC on the one hand and US forces on the other must withdraw from South Vietnam.

(c) Role of NLF. The extent to which the National Liberation Front is permitted to play a role in the political life of the republic—at local, provincial and national level.

Easing of terms in any of these three areas—especially in giving the NLF status in the Saigon government—runs large risks of putting South Vietnam on the skids toward a Communist-controlled government, probably not “Titoist” but rather subservient to China. Furthermore, because of the attitudes of the present Saigon government and because of the importance of the GVN in any compromise gambit, a “compromise outcome” would be very difficult to manage. The GVN would probably support the “favorable outcomes” described above; but the GVN almost certainly would not support any “compromise outcome”—especially one which appears to “cede” territory or political recognition to the NLF.

Our tactical concern in moving toward any compromise settlement, therefore, is the high probability that the Government of South Vietnam will shake apart in the process. That is, so far as tactics are concerned, we seem to have the problem that if we lower our sights to a “compromise outcome,” we lose the support of the GVN, making the compromise impossible. (It follows that an essential part of any scenario to compromise would be the creation of a Saigon government not hostile to the compromise course.)

On the substantive side of the compromise issue: It should be noted that the decisions that have already been taken this year, and the ones proposed here, are consistent with the strategy stated in paragraph 1 and with a striving for a “favorable outcome,” and are probably inconsistent with any lesser objectives or other strategy. Specifically, we may already have passed the “Y” in the road: Our course of action has been and is increasingly becoming inconsistent with any design to settle, through negotiations or otherwise, for a compromise solution—especially one involving Communists in the Saigon government and the consequent high risk of quick Communist take-over.

4. Tools available. We have four tools available to us in working toward a solution to the problem in South Vietnam: (a) Military power in South Vietnam, Laos and in the adjacent waters; (b) military interdiction in and pressure on North Vietnam; (c) non-military effort in South Vietnam; and (d) efforts to negotiate.

5. Military variables. The military variables are (a) a Pause, (b) Rolling Thunder, and (c) Phase II deployments: a. Pause. An interruption in the program of bombing North Vietnam. The Pause would stand down all strikes and armed reconnaissance in North Vietnam for approximately four weeks unless its futility became apparent earlier. It would not involve stoppage of other reconnaissance or intelligence operations in North Vietnam or of any operations elsewhere. Particularly, ground and air operations in South Vietnam would continue. The Pause would be publicly acknowledged, but a serious effort would be made to avoid advertising it as an ultimatum to the DRV. Third countries would be encouraged to help produce meaningful negotiations and substantial reductions in DRV/VC activity. With respect to termination of the Pause, our state of mind could be (1) “hard-line” or (2) “soft-line”: (1) “Hard-line” Pause. Under a “hard-line” Pause, we would be firmly resolved to resume bombing unless the Communists were clearly moving toward what is described above as a “favorable outcome.” Special care would be taken to avoid being trapped in a status-quo cease-fire or in negotiations which, though unaccompanied by real concessions by the VC, made it politically costly for us to terminate the Pause.

(2) “Soft-line” Pause. Under a “soft-line” Pause, we would be willing to feel our way with respect to termination of the Pause, with less insistence on concrete concessions by the Communists. (This kind of Pause makes sense only if we are working toward a possible “compromise outcome.”)

b. Rolling Thunder. The program of bombing North Vietnam (1) could be intensified abruptly by a sharp, heavy blow, as recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, or (2) could continue to evolve at the present pace (the possibility of reducing the program is omitted):

(1) JCS “sharp blow.” The JCS would initiate immediately, and carry out in a few days, a program of air strikes against

—Phuc Yen, Hanoi/Gia Lam, Hanoi/Bac Mai, Haiphong/Cat Bi, and Haiphong/Kien An airfields, including the aircraft thereon (Phuc Yen to be struck by B-52s).

—Rail, highway and waterway routes and traffic between Hanoi and Haiphong and between Hanoi-Haiphong and South China.

—POL storage facilities at Haiphong (or four thermal power plants generating approximately 50 per cent of North Vietnam's thermal power).

—SAM installations and other AA defenses which pose a threat to the above air operations.

The JCS would permit normal armed reconnaissance in all of North Vietnam, and would order follow-on strikes as necessary to keep the targets destroyed. They would conduct naval surface force operations against targets near the coast and against North Vietnamese shipping at sea. They would mine the harbors. Every effort would be made to minimize destruction of non-military installations; and the civilian populations, as such, would not be targeted.

(2) Present evolving RT. At the present time, we are carrying out 600 armed reconnaissance sorties a week in the “three quadrants” and striking 2 fixed LOC targets a week in the “northeast quadrant” (but not against targets in the “China strip,” the “Hanoi circle,” or the “Haiphong circle”). Natural evolution of the program over a five-month period would maintain activity in the three quadrants at the present level, and would evolve in the “northeast quadrant” as follows:

—1st month. Include Hanoi-Haiphong lines-of-communications targets (outside the Hanoi and Haiphong circles), with 2 fixed LOC targets in the quadrant each week.

—2nd and 3rd months. No fixed targets in the quadrant, but “controlled armed reconnaissance” of selected routes at selected times and at the rate of 100 sorties a week.

—4th month. EXTEND “controlled armed reconnaissance” to LOCs within the Hanoi and Haiphong circles and ADD strikes on 3 key POL targets a month.

—5th month. In the first two weeks, ADD mining of Haiphong harbor; thereafter, change the armed reconnaissance in the northeast quadrant to the kind carried out in the other three quadrants and with no geographical limit except the strip next to China. (Left unstruck would be population targets, power plants, and locks and dams.)

c. Phase II Deployments. US force deployments (1) could stop at the Phase I 225,000+/-or (2) could continue by deployment of a Phase II 125,000+/-.

(1) Stop at Phase I. Limit US forces to Phase I deployments. Added expenditures attributable to Phase I, through FY 1967, are estimated to be $13 billion.

(2) Deploy Phase II forces. Deploy 28 additional combat battalions and 4 additional tactical air squadrons and associated support forces (125,000 additional men), bringing the totals to 62 US combat battalions (plus 10 third-country battalions) and 26 US tactical air squadrons, or approximately 350,000 Americans, in South Vietnam. These deployments would be essentially completed by the end of 1966. They could be accomplished without calling up the Reserves or extending tours of duty, but, in that case, they would lead to further reductions in the strength of our strategic reserve to meet contingencies elsewhere. (An alternative would be to call up Reserves—not only replenishing the strategic reserves, but also giving a clear demonstration of US power and purposes.) Expenditures attributable to Phase II for its first 18 months are estimated very roughly to total $3 billion.

It is estimated—as can be seen on Map II6 —that, by the time Phase II forces are making their full impact in the Spring of 1967, the US/GVN would have “control” of 65 per cent of the population and 20-30 per cent of the land; 60-65 per cent of the critical lines of communications would be kept open; 40-50 per cent of the VC bases and military logistical infrastructure would be subject to disruption; and 30 per cent of the VC political/security infrastructure would be disrupted.

It should be noted that the MACV-proposed Phase II does not allocate any forces to the Delta. To handle the Delta properly, Phase II would have to be augmented by one or two additional divisions—30-60,000 additional men—bringing the Phase II total to 155,000 to 185,000 men.

6. Illustrative scenarios. Here are three illustrative courses of action for the future. It is my recommendation that we follow Course C.

Course A: “Soft-line” Pause, then feel way re RT and force levels toward a “compromise outcome.” This is a compromise course, aimed at reduced objectives described in paragraph 3 above. It would be extremely difficult to gain public acceptance of this course, in view of the size of the US investment already on the line; and it is very doubtful that a scenario for this course can now be written that would support the strategy in paragraph 1. The scenario probably would end up in disintegration in Vietnam, in political humiliation for the US, and in impaired US political effectiveness on the world scene. It also could lead to more costly confrontations with the Chinese later on.

Course B: No Pause, with evolving RT, with no Phase II. This is a continuation of the present evolving course of action.

This course of action can be supported in this way: (1) It will be January before the weight of our full Phase I effort really comes into play. By then we might see at least a significant adverse morale trend in the VC that would indicate we were getting somewhere. (2) It may be useful to give ourselves time to digest the impact of 225,000 men in terms of their effect on the Vietnamese psychology and economy. This is a factor that some reports, notably a recent cable from Saigon on inflationary and labor division problems,7 suggest may be becoming very serious, even to the point of being a limiting factor on our basic effectiveness in appealing to the people. (3) It would give the GVN additional time, hopefully without serious frictions with us, to get on with its part of the job and to build up a GVN contribution that would not be dwarfed by the US role, a present tendency in Vietnam.

On the drawback side are two factors: (1) Deferring additional US deployments—particularly in the face of continuing increases in VC strength—raises grave problems in our domestic situation. This is not solely a question of the war dragging on—which it can be argued it would be likely to do even with Phase II deployments—but rather, a question of not having clearly done all on the ground in Vietnam that appears wise. It would be still more serious, of course, if the rate of progress slowed down, as is likely to be the case. (2) The second drawback is that, by delaying the added deployments, we shall lose momentum in Vietnam—a momentum displaying a determination and confidence that is crucial to the psychology of the confrontation if we are to emerge with an acceptable solution. That is, the product of this course of action is virtually certain to be a stalemate by March 1966 under the unsatisfactory conditions described in paragraph 2 above.

Course C: “Hard-line” Pause, then evolving RT with Phase II. This course involves all three controversial ingredients—(a) a Pause, (b) an evolving Rolling Thunder, and (c) Phase II deployments.

a. Pause. The arguments for the Pause are four: (1) It would offer the DRV and VC a chance to move toward a solution if they should be so inclined—and we continue to receive hints that such may be the state of their minds. (2) It would demonstrate to domestic and international critics that our efforts to settle the war are genuine. (3) It would probably tend to reduce the dangers of escalation after we had resumed the bombing, at least in so far as the Soviets were concerned. And (4) it would set the stage for another Pause, perhaps in late 1966, which might produce a settlement.

Arguments against the Pause are not so much that the North Vietnamese might profit from the respite to repair the damage or to increase infiltration. The arguments are related to Saigon, Hanoi and US hard-liner reactions: (1) In Saigon, bringing the GVN aboard would be difficult just in itself, and it could adversely affect GVN solidity. Any major falling out between the GVN and the US, or any overturn in the GVN political structure, could at this stage set us back enormously. (2) In Hanoi, a Pause might at least confuse our message and justify their tendency to think that, despite all our actions, we are really looking for an easy way out. We could offset this to some degree at the time by the kind of message we get through to them and by our continued actions then and later in the South, but there would still be some chance that the hard-liners in Hanoi would read it the other way notwithstanding. In other words, it could conceivably be a step away from getting Hanoi to seek a peaceful solution. (3) In the US, there would be rumbling among the harder-action school of critics. This might be kept under control during the Pause, but it could also mean that the pressures would increase thereafter to hit the DRV harder.

b. Rolling Thunder. Intensification of the Rolling Thunder program, following the Pause, on an “evolving” (not “sharp blow”) basis as described in paragraph 5(b)(2) above, is designed to accomplish the three fundamentals underlying the bombing program. Those are:

—To promote a settlement. The program was designed (1) to influence the DRV to negotiate (explicitly or otherwise), and (2) to provide us with a bargaining counter within negotiations.

—To interdict infiltration. The program was calculated to reduce the flow of men and supplies from the North to the South—at the least, to put a ceiling on the size of war that the enemy could wage in the South.

—To demonstrate US commitment. The program was intended to demonstrate to South Vietnam, North Vietnam and the world the US commitment to see this thing through.

While the gradual intensification runs some risk of “flashing” China or the USSR into some form of escalation, the risks of this are not great, especially after a Pause, and should be taken in order to keep pressure on the North to stop the aggression in the South.

c. Phase II deployments. The predicted results of Phase II deployments are discussed in paragraph 5(c)(2) above.

Note: There are two variants of Course C: (1) Delete the Pause, and carry out the evolving Rolling Thunder at the same time as (in parallel with) an early Phase II; (2) Postpone Phase II, putting Phase II after (in tandem with) a several-month's evolution of Rolling Thunder.

7. South Vietnamese reaction to Course C. The GVN will enthusiastically support the evolving Rolling Thunder portion of Course C; the people of South Vietnam, so long as we avoid population targets per se,will likewise support the program. Ambassador Lodge has advised that the GVN will react well to our Phase II deployments, performing better as a consequence (he states that the South Vietnamese, knowing our good record in the Philippines, Korea and elsewhere, are more afraid of our leaving than of our becoming entrenched as a “colonial” power);8 I agree with that assessment, provided we take appropriate action especially on the economic side to offset the shortages and inflation caused by the added US and GVN (and VC) efforts. The GVN, as indicated in the discussion of Course C in paragraph 6 above, may misconstrue the Pause—thinking that we are on Course A, looking for an easy way out; but this fear we should be able to handle. Absent Course C—or a course similar to it—we are very likely to find ourselves in a stalemate by Spring of next year. The odds are less than even that South Vietnam could hang on for long in that condition; centrifugal forces in the government and society, on which the VC have always counted to make up for their inferiority in numbers, would be likely to take over causing an eventual collapse and disintegration of the nation we have been supporting. While a similar stalemate could follow even Course C, it is considerably less likely and would certainly come later if it happened. The people of South Vietnam will, I believe, support our moves even though our numbers and functions by that time will be approaching those of an occupation force.

8. Communist reactions to Course C. The Soviets would probably seize upon the Pause as an occasion both to persuade the DRV to negotiate (and perhaps to dampen activities in the South) and to maneuver us into a position so that we could not resume the bombing of the North. With respect to the other aspects of Course C, the USSR can be expected only to throw propaganda barbs and to continue material assistance to North Vietnam.

The Chinese have already sent non-combat personnel into North Vietnam to do construction and repair work. This could be expected to continue at an even higher scale. But they would probably not send regular combat forces or aircraft into the war unless we invaded North Vietnam or struck China. As in the case of the USSR, China might react against our ships at sea if she lost a ship to a mine at Haiphong.

The DRV, like the Soviets, would try during the Pause to maneuver us into a position so that we could not resume the bombing. Later on, under the pressure of the bombing and blockade by us (and fearing the influx of men and influence from China) would probably, over time, look more favorably on a settlement in South Vietnam. At the same time, the DRV can be expected to send into Laos and South Vietnam up to several divisions of regular forces to help the VC. As stated in paragraph 2 above, there are indications that this is already under way. They could, by such deployments, match our deployments on a 1-for-3 or 1-for-4 basis, thus effectively canceling the likelihood that our Phase I and Phase II forces will be able to provide security to areas beyond the enclaves shown on the attached maps. If the DRV does this, we could find ourselves in a position where the pressures were great to invade or to bomb the cities in the North—actions which are likely to lead to open war with China if not with the Soviet Union.

The VC can be expected to continue their “Phase II” sabotage, murder and guerrilla activities, while continuing to strive to build up a conventional military capability. They will depend more and more on regular PAVN forces; they will draw harder on the men and material in the areas they control, including the Delta; and they can be expected to try to bring the economy of South Vietnam to a grinding halt. The question, of course, is whether the pressure on the North and the added forces in the South can frustrate these VC designs.

9. Other actions in South Vietnam. The military moves recommended in this memorandum are essential to success in Vietnam, but they are not sufficient. The heart of South Vietnam will begin to beat and the body to breathe only when GVN militia, police, intelligence and administrative personnel have been introduced in sufficient strength to saturate the area, destroy the VC infrastructure and reestablish the agencies of Government. We are repeatedly told that the GVN is “just now starting” to revitalize this program. We must work hard with the government in Saigon, we must bolster the economy (inflation must be brought under control promptly and boldly), we must press on with our psychological warfare campaign, and we should be prepared to take a more active role in administration of the provinces and districts—even though it will have some attributes of a “military occupation.” Ambassador Lodge is driving hard in these most difficult areas.

10. Actions in Laos. The pattern of infiltration and VC force augmentation strongly implies that Laos is being heavily used both as a channel and as a staging base for operations in South Vietnam. We may soon have to expand our air actions in Laos and to initiate large-scale ground operations there. Furthermore, as a part of any Phase III, if the tide of the war has not begun to turn, the time may come to attempt to seal off South Vietnam by land and sea. Contingency plans should therefore be available for the creation of a 175-mile-long anti-infiltration “barrier” to run near the 17th Parallel from the sea to Thailand. Any such barrier would of course have to be complemented by effective measures countering infiltration by sea and from Cambodia. To minimize political costs, Laotian FAR and Thai forces should probably be used at the west end, and Vietnamese and US forces at the east end of the barrier; and Souvanna's approval should of course be obtained if possible. (In the long term, taking into account the unstable nature of any likely settlement in Vietnam, such a barrier, perhaps manned ultimately by an international force, seems to be an essential.)

11. Political moves. Whatever military actions are taken, the US should continue to keep our lines of communication open with friends and enemies alike and should continue to keep our objectives well understood. Specifically, (a) we should continue the dialogue with Moscow, and should keep our ears open for signals from Hanoi or the VC, and (b) we should keep our allies and neutrals informed—at best, bestirring them to help toward a solution and, at worst, keeping their opposition within manageable proportions.

12. Appraisal. In view of the stagnation, and therefore the beginnings of disintegration, that is otherwise likely to occur in South Vietnam in early to mid-1966, we seem to have only two major courses open to us. One is to start immediately and carefully to plot a course toward cutting our losses (as listed under Course A in paragraph 6 above); the other is to increase our investment (via Rolling Thunder, Phase II, or both). The former course, as I indicated earlier, is inconsistent both with our strategy for Asia (see paragraph 1) and with our objectives in Vietnam (see paragraph 3). I therefore have recommended that we increase our investment in an effort to make further progress in Vietnam.

Further progress inside Vietnam, beyond that predicted for Spring 1966 in paragraph 2 above, will have to be based on one or more of the following developments: —Snowballing support by the people of South Vietnam.

—Increases in, and better, South Vietnamese forces.

—Additional US or Free World forces.

Popular support can be expected to snowball only after there is “hard” security; such security for most of South Vietnam is beyond the immediate horizons. GVN force increases and improvements are under way; but they will be slow and insufficient. We are left therefore with the need to deploy additional US or Free World forces.

An acceptable and early end to the war, however, turns not only on proving that the VC cannot win in the South. It turns also on continuing pressure on the North. Both elements are required.

The situation therefore clearly requires the Phase II deployments and probably requires continued evolution of the Rolling Thunder program. The best timing of these actions is debatable—whether they should proceed together or one before the other, and whether action should be postponed by way of a Pause.

Taking into account all considerations—likelihood of success, risk of escalation, South Vietnamese reaction, domestic support, etc.—I favor the tandem, one-after-the-other scenario: Pause, then evolving RT, and then Phase II.

I favor this sequence because I believe that there is a finite chance that a Pause will lead to a reduction in DRV infiltration and in VC activity (and possibly to profitable negotiations), and because I believe that a Pause is a prerequisite to US public and international acceptance of the stern actions implicit in the evolving Rolling Thunder and Phase II. I favor “evolution” of Rolling Thunder before Phase II deployments because, here too, I believe that there is a finite chance that added pressure on the North, without Phase II deployments, may be enough to bring the DRV/VC to terms; further, US public acceptance of Phase II deployments will be greater if such a Rolling Thunder program has been given a fair run first.

It must be remembered, however, that none of these actions assures success. There is a small but meaningful risk that the course I have recommended—especially the harbor-mining aspect of Rolling Thunder—will lead the Chinese or Russians to escalate the war. US killed-in-action can be expected to increase to 500-800 a month. And the odds are even that the DRV/VC will hang on doggedly, effectively matching us man-for-man (taking into account the lop-sided guerrilla war ratio advantage), while our efforts may not push the South Vietnamese over the crest of the hill, so that the snowball begins to roll our way. That is, the odds are even that, despite our efforts, we will be faced in early 1967 with stagnation at a higher level and with a need to decide whether to deploy Phase III forces, probably in Laos as well as in South Vietnam. And even if my recommended course of action is successful in moving Vietnam toward a “favorable outcome,” it will be difficult to disengage our forces. Any negotiated agreement would, as was the case in Laos, be little better than a reflection of the power situation on the ground. Unless an international force of some kind can be substituted, large numbers of US forces may be required to stay in Vietnam for some time.

My overall evaluation is that the best chance of achieving our objectives, and of avoiding a costly national political defeat, lies in the combination of political, economic and military steps described in this memorandum. If carried out vigorously, they stand the best chance of achieving an acceptable resolution of the problem within a reasonable time.

Robert S. McNamara9

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, South Vietnam, Statements and Supporting Papers. Top Secret. Designated as “1st rough draft.” McNamara wrote the following note on the source text: “A copy of this was sent to the Pres. by courier through Mac's office on 11/7 and discussed with him by me, Dean, George, and Mac on 11/7. RMcN” According to the President's Daily Diary, the President's meeting with McNamara, Rusk, Ball, and McGeorge Bundy was held at the LBJ Ranch in Texas on November 11, not November 7. See Document 189 regarding the meeting. The President was at the LBJ Ranch October 23-November 14, recovering from surgery. (Johnson Library) The copy of this memorandum in the Johnson Library has a covering memorandum by McNaughton, who hand-delivered it to McGeorge Bundy on November 4. McNaughton informed Bundy that Rusk and Ball were also getting copies and related McNamara's desire that Bundy not show this memorandum to anyone else without telephoning McNamara first. (Ibid., National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Memos (B)) In The Vantage Point (pp. 233-234), Johnson describes this memorandum and recalls that his “first reaction” to it was “one of deep skepticism.”

2 Document 67.

3 Attached but not printed.

4 Apparent reference to an October 27 Viet Cong attack on a GVN ranger battalion, 10 miles west of Saigon. (Memorandum for the President by the White House Situation Room briefing officer, November 2; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Memos (A))

5 Document 176.

6 Attached but not printed.

7 Not found.

8 See Documents 170 and 188.

9 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

190. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 190. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, November 7, 1965, 12:55 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO MR. Mac George Bundy

Sec asked if he had seen Saigon's Nodis 16052 and about the request to do some probing. Mr. Bundy said it seemed to him his senior was right and he was more hopeful than he was. Sec asked if he had seen the ticker about the Commissar of the North Vietnamese battalion turning himself in—UPI 820. Bundy said he thought the Sec was right on the nose on the basic structure yesterday.3 Bundy said he came out where the Sec did. It is not a time to make great changes. Sec said he had lived through the Berlin Blockade, Korea and you played for breaks. He was confident the breaks would come. Bundy said he was all for that. Sec asked about getting this to the ranch. Bundy said he was worried about the sensitivity of it and would pouch it. Sec said to mark it Eyes Only President. Bundy will get it on first plane.

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Mildred Asbjornson. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Amb Johnson was present for the call.”

2 For the text as sent to the President, see Document 191.

3 Rusk met with McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, and Vance at 2:58 p.m. on November 6. They were joined at 3 p.m. by Ball and then U. Alexis Johnson, and the meeting lasted until at least 4:25 p.m. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) For a general account of these discussions, see Document 192.

191. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas 191. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, November 7, 1965, 2:33 p.m.

CAP 65666. Dean Rusk has asked me to send you at once an extremely interesting cable from Lodge and the answer which we have sent to him. Lodge's cable reports a possible feeler from the National Liberation Front that might look toward an end of fighting by them. Rusk's answer authorizes a very cautious probe of this feeler. None of us knows how much substance there is in this, but it is barely possible that it represents the beginning of a major change in our favor.

Control: 5676.

Received: November 7, 1965, 2:45 a.m.

From: Saigon.

Action: SecState priority 1605.2

Date: November 7

Top Secret November 07.

Nodis. Eyes only for Bundy.

The Secretary of the Apostolic Delegation called the Political Section to arrange an appointment for Archbishop Palmas to see me. The date was set for Monday afternoon.3

Saturday afternoon I heard rumors of dissatisfaction among some of the Vietnamese Catholic clergy and decided to see Palmas sooner and called at his residence Sunday morning.

He wished me to know the following:

A “former Vietnamese Cabinet Minister” who, he said, is well known to me, who is reputable and intelligent, and whose name Palmas did not wish to divulge, had called a week ago to say that a “duly accredited” representative of the “National Liberation Front” who had “proper letters of credentials” wished to talk with me. Under questioning from Palmas the former Cabinet Minister said that the purpose of this was to approach me “on the basis of Vietnamese nationalism.” When Palmas asked why they did not wish to speak to the Government of Vietnam, the answer was that they did not trust the Government of Vietnam and that they thought that it was composed entirely of military men who would not perceive political factors. The aim in talking to me would be as Vietnamese nationalists who had achieved independence from the Communist domination of Hanoi. In short, the visit would reflect a desire of the nationalist element in the “National Liberation Front” who apparently were now independent of Hanoi to cease their military activities in the south.

Palmas said that obviously if this were what it appeared to be on its face it was a capitulation and was of greatest significance. On the other hand, he was extremely skeptical about it and thought it probably would amount to nothing.

Palmas called on Tran Van Do two days ago and, as he said, out of curiosity, asked Do what his reaction would be if someone representing the nationalist element in the so-called “National Liberation Front” were to propose an end of the war. Do's answer was that such a thing was inconceivable and that the Viet Cong was completely under the domination of Hanoi.

My only answer was that I would have to report this to the US Government and await instructions.

Comment: I obviously agree with Palmas that if this were what it appears to be on the surface or in fact a capitulation it would be of the greatest possible significance. But I also share his skepticism. As far as my talking with this individual is concerned, I foresee considerable difficulty due to the fact that I am under constant observation twenty-four hours a day. For one thing the Government of Vietnam follows me around with four men in a jeep wherever I go. In addition I am sure the Viet Cong observe me too. If therefore such an individual were to come to my house or to come to the Chancery it would surely be observed.

I asked Palmas what he meant by “duly accredited” and having “a letter of credentials”. I wanted to know who had signed the letter but he said that he did not know, that those were the phrases which his Vietnamese informant had given him.

It seems to me highly probable that they would themselves use a relatively junior officer for an initial feeler (hence the need for credentials) while hoping that we would respond at my level. Anything involving me, however, would of course entail severe risks and dangers for us which would require careful study.

Therefore, in my judgment, we should first insist, through Palmas, on seeing copy of letter and if satisfied on that point we could consider arranging meeting without me at relatively junior level purely for “size-up” purposes. At that point, we would be in a better position to assess the validity and usefulness of this feeler, without having exposed ourselves in the meantime. Obviously there could be many things which such people would say to no one but me.

I am aware that we could be entering a period of such feelers and caution and wariness are needed though no opportunity should be over-looked. Lodge.

Top Secret.4

AmEmbassy Saigon. Priority; Nodis.

Eyes only for Ambassador from Secretary. Embtel 1605.

1. Agree with you that reported approach could be of utmost significance. Whether or not it could mean capitulation—of which we, like you, are highly skeptical—it might at least mean opening wedge in reaching non-Communist nationalistic elements of NLF. Contacts could provide real indication of how significant such elements are and, by careful handling, we might induce some degree of controversy and split within NLF-Hanoi relations. Even if only result is defection of one or more key individuals, this could be of immense psychological significance.

2. We therefore concur wholly in your proposed course of action, asking to see copy of letter and thereafter, depending on contents, arranging meeting at relatively junior level for “size-up” purposes. You should proceed on this basis. While we leave this to your judgment, are inclined to think officer should not be from Lansdale group or identifiably from CAS.

3. Danger obviously exists that approach is on “agent provocateur” basis designed to trap us into dealings with NLF that could be publicized as recognition by US or, perhaps more likely, leaked in GVN circles to drive wedge between US and GVN. This danger is far outweighed by constructive possibilities.

Please keep us informed Nodis.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. Top Secret; Eyes Only;Nodis. The President was at the LBJ Ranch.

2 The Department of State copy of telegram 1605 is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S.

3 November 8.

4 This is telegram 1257 to Saigon, November 7. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

192. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas 192. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, November 8, 1965, 11:42 a.m.

CAP 65668. 1. After intensive discussions over the weekend, Rusk, McNamara and I continue to believe that it is highly important for us to meet with you before Rusk goes to Latin America on Friday.2

2. The overriding subject for discussion is Vietnam. We have at hand firm military recommendations for further deployment of more than 100,000 additional men in 1966, and heavy pressures also for strongly intensified attacks on North Vietnam. The tendency here is to accept the probable necessity of additional troop deployment and to defer decisions on bombing targets for the present. But we are divided on a number of major tactical issues. The most urgent of these is whether a substantial pause in the bombing should precede additional deployment decisions. McNamara tends to favor a pause. Rusk and I tend to be opposed until we get some signal from someone that a pause would have results in matching action by Hanoi.

3. Evidence of increasing North Vietnamese infiltration continues to come in, and at the same time there is little evidence that Hanoi is ready to negotiate—though there may well be heavy strains on “Liberation Front” in South Vietnam. We will gradually have to make a choice between the contrasting diplomatic postures recommended by Goldberg and Lodge. Goldberg would continue to emphasize need for negotiations. Lodge would soft-pedal this topic as essentially irrelevant in the light of continuing Hanoi intransigence.

4. A still deeper question upon which McNamara has focussed attention in recent discussions is the question of our underlying purpose in Vietnam. Are we seeking a negotiated solution after which the superior political skill of the Communists would eventually produce a Commie takeover? Or are we determined to do all that is necessary to establish and sustain a genuinely non-Communist South Vietnam? All three of us incline to the latter position, but it is clear that its costs continue to grow, and it is still more clear that only the President can decide it.

5. A substantial staff paper is going into second draft today. It deals with these topics in detail and presents the choices as we now see them. We hope it may lay a basis for an effective discussion with you.

6. Secondary topics are: European nuclear policy, U.S. policy at the Rio conference, progress of the review of the aid program, and tactics with Shastri and Ayub. It does not now appear that any of these will require major decisions this week, but in all of them work goes forward, and there is no substitute for a clear sense of your own concerns, with guidance both on the positions you want taken and the questions to which you want answers.

7. I therefore recommend that a meeting be set up for either Wednesday or Thursday of this week. Thursday would be a little better at this end, but either day is entirely workable, depending on your convenience.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol XV. Top Secret. President Johnson was at the LBJ Ranch. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the telegram.

2 November 14. Rusk attended the Second Special Inter-American Conference in Rio de Janeiro November 17-30.

193. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 193. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 8, 1965.

Archbishop Palmas said, “Then you would be willing to receive somebody who would bring you the letter”.

I said that I did not think I should commit myself to see some junior person not of the equivalent rank to me and that the letter should probably be delivered to someone I would indicate. Archbishop Palmas thought this was reasonable.

He then asked me if I would receive the former Vietnamese Cabinet Minister2 referred to in my 16053 and that he hoped that I would talk to him.

I said, “He is not the Viet Cong representative, is he?”

Archbishop Palmas explained, with a laugh, that he certainly was not.

He agreed to convey the message about my seeing the letter and said he would get in touch with me to give me the result.

We then had a more general discussion in which he agreed with me that unless there was sincerity in this proposition there was no point in wasting time on it. He and I agreed that it might be skullduggery designed to get me in wrong with General Ky. Archbishop Palmas said it had long been evident to him that when I was appointed Ambassador many Vietnamese thought that the Viet Cong would take note of my experience at the United Nations and my interminable negotiations with Communists and might think that my presence here might give a way out.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 8:07 a.m. 1623. Eyes only for Bundy. I called on Archbishop Palmas and said that nothing could be said or done as far as I was concerned unless I could see the so called “letter of credentials”.

2 In telegram 1282 to Saigon, November 10, the Department postulated that the “former Cabinet Minister” might be Le Van Hoach. His Cao Dai affiliation made him a likely candidate as a possible intermediary, but he had a “fairly checkered past.” (Ibid.)

3 Text in Document 191.

194. Memorandum for President Johnson 194. Memorandum for President Johnson1

Washington, November 9, 1965.

Rusk and McGeorge Bundy discussed this memorandum on the telephone on November 9 at 6:07 p.m. Rusk asked Bundy if he had any reaction to the memorandum; Bundy replied there was none from McNamara and he had not read it yet. Rusk said that McNaughton and Vance “had mild reactions” to it and Rusk himself thought it “pretty good.” (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

SUBJECT

Courses of Action in Viet-Nam

We face major policy decisions with respect to Viet-Nam. This memorandum attempts to frame the substance of the choices and to recommend a course of action.

I. Underlying Strategy.

We are helping the South Vietnamese as part of our underlying strategy of seeking to prevent the extension of Communist power beyond the outer limits of aggression reached by the overrunning of China in 1949-50. This strategy is based on the conviction that the extension of Communist power by force beyond these limits could so alter the power balance as to create unacceptable risks for the United States and the rest of the Free World.

In pursuance of this strategy we have consistently opposed all aggressive actions by— (a) the Soviet Union (Berlin, the Cuban Missile Crisis);

(b) Communist China (Formosa, India); and

(c) smaller Communist regimes supported by both the Soviet Union and Communist China (Korea, South Viet-Nam).

We have made few exceptions to this strategy: (a) We did not intervene militarily to support French efforts to deny the whole of Indochina to the Communists in 1954.

But we did (in the SEATO Treaty and subsequently) commit ourselves to assist the Government of South Viet-Nam to prevent Communist aggression beyond the 17th Parallel.

(b) We have not yet put ground combat troops into Laos (although we have delivered certain air strikes) because President Kennedy sought a political settlement which has not yet succeeded because of non-compliance by Hanoi.

The decision you now face is whether to invest substantially more men and money in South Viet-Nam and to assume the increased risks of a higher level of action against North Viet-Nam. This decision must be made in relation to our over-all strategy, our past commitments and the effect of the decision on our relations both with our friends and opponents.

This decision should be approached in light of the following considerations: A. Such a decision must be consistent with our larger strategy.

It is justified only if the United States is determined to continue that strategy (pending limited settlements, as the major Communist power centers become sufficiently benign and tractable). This means: (1) That we will continue to play an active role in Western Europe and maintain the NATO defenses;

(2) That we will continue building the strength, and encouraging the anti-Communist will, of the countries on the southern and western frontiers of China. (a) Japan-Formosa-Korea;

(b) India-Pakistan;

(c) Southeast Asia.

B. The decision must be made in relation to all that has gone before.

We have made commitments to South Viet-Nam. We have taken losses of men and money. We have accepted substantial political costs. To quit now would mean a major loss of prestige and would undermine the credibility of our commitments elsewhere in the world.

C. In deciding our actions in Viet-Nam we should—so far as possible—avoid those acts that exacerbate relations with countries friendly to the United States.

D. We should also—to the greatest extent possible—avoid actions that might enlarge the war by involving either China or the Soviet Union in more active intervention.

In planning our air offensive against North Viet-Nam, we should, therefore, be quite clear as to the possible effects of particular types of attack. We should avoid actions likely to provoke Chinese reactions, since it is explicitly not our purpose to seek to create a pretext for the destruction of Chinese war-making power. We should instead concentrate on those actions designed: (1) To impede the supply of men and equipment to South Viet-Nam; and

(2) To persuade Hanoi of the need to settle the South Vietnamese conflict on a basis more advantageous to South Viet-Nam than a mere ratification of the situation on the ground.

II. Estimate of the situation in South Viet-Nam.

The massive infusions of United States ideas, aid and manpower have frustrated any Communist design to move into their conventional-warfare “Stage III,” but the guerrilla war continues at a high pace, inflation in South Viet-Nam is becoming increasingly serious, and the internal political situation remains fragile.

a. Military. The large United States deployments have thwarted the Viet Cong monsoon offensive designed to impose a major defeat on the Government forces. The “Phase I” deployments, 160,000 of whom are already in place, have enabled the government forces to begin restoration of their strength, morale and tactical integrity, which is essential if they are to retain their fighting capability in the months ahead. The United States forces have also substantially secured their own bases and the areas immediately adjacent to the bases (see Map 1, attached).2 United States ground combat elements deployed offensively have moved rapidly—in conjunction with tactical air support and often following up B-52 strikes—to probe into Viet Cong base sanctuaries that had long been untouched. The United States forces have also proved to be an effective quick-reaction reserve for Government forces and have turned potential defeat in several battles into Viet Cong retreat or at least a stand-off.

But the pace of the war remains high, with the Viet Cong at the end of October attacking in regimental strength in Phu Yen province and in battalion strength in Hau Nghia province and against the Marine perimeter outside Danang. There are increased casualties on both sides. Viet Cong attacks, terrorism and sabotage show no sign of abating. Desertions from Government forces remain high, but recruitment has improved, permitting a gradual increase in force levels. On the other side, defections from the Viet Cong are running at 1,000 a month and are increasing slowly.

The present assessment is that our Phase I deployments (bringing the United States total to about 210,000 to 225,000 men) when completed will achieve the limit of its military potential between December 1965 and March 1966. Assuming, as we in prudence must, that the Viet Cong are able to maintain the strength and morale of their forces, the military estimate illustrated by Map 1 is that Phase I forces, working with the South Vietnamese, will result in “control” of 40 percent of the population and 5-10 percent of the area; these forces will keep open 20-25 percent of the critical lines of communication; these forces will permit 10-20 percent disruption of the Viet Cong's political/security infrastructure.

We will then be in a position where a few enclaves, including perhaps 5,500,000 of South Viet-Nam's 15,000,000 people (of which only some 1,000,000 are in the Delta) are under United States or Government “control”—and even these will, of course, be subject to sporadic Viet Cong mortar and suicide satchel-charge attacks of the October 27 kind.3 Security conditions within the enclaves will be suitable for reconstruction of political infrastructure, but it is probable that the enclaves will be too small and the percent of population controlled too little to give any hope that such pacification will be rapid or that it will tend to snowball beyond the enclaves.

The capabilities and intentions of the Viet Cong and of the North Vietnamese are unknowns complicating our estimate of the situation at this time. There are signs that Viet Cong morale is sagging. But, even when confronted by the United States force build-up and by our program of actions against North Viet-Nam—and with increasing casualties and weapons losses—the Viet Cong have demonstrated an ability to continue the build-up and supply of their forces in the South. The build-up is continuing both from in-country sources and by infiltration over improved roads in Laos and, to a lesser extent, by sea via Cambodia. The indications are that the Viet Cong are not reverting to a lesser level of insurgency, but are still striving to build up for the transition to conventional warfare—that they are continuing both to upgrade guerrilla units in the Delta and to infiltrate additional regular army elements from the North in order to restore the balance temporarily upset by United States deployments.

(The other factor difficult to estimate in the situation is the degree to which improved morale among the South Vietnamese will be reflected in more effective military operations and governmental performance as well as in resistance of the local population to cooperation with the Viet Cong.)

The Viet Cong forces are now estimated at 71,300 “main force and logistic,” 40,000 political cadre, and 110,000 guerrillas. This represents an increase in our estimate since early last summer of some 6,000 (9%), 10,000 (33-1/3%) and 18,200 (20%) in the three categories respectively. In addition—although as of last month there were estimated to be three regiments of North Vietnamese regular forces in the South—early this month two additional North Vietnamese regiments were confirmed and three others were estimated as possible. In total, therefore, the Communist forces are now believed to number about 230,000 men, and there is reason to believe that they will continue to increase.

b. Political. In Saigon, the Ky “government of generals” has survived, but accomplished little more during the period since last summer. The Government, while recognizing many of its problems and working willingly with the United States Mission, still lacks any broad, or even developing, base of support among the various political factions. No major faction (e.g., Buddhists, Catholics) is in open opposition, and all appear to be continuing their “wait and see” attitude. This lack of support probably will not be important over the short-run, so long as the generals in power remain united; over the longer term, however, some base of political support must be developed if the non-Communist elements in South Viet-Nam are ever to build a viable society. While we are doing all possible to facilitate and encourage the development of such a political base, this is a long-term process. It reaches into the roots of Vietnamese society and psychology and is not subject to quick solution by any measures within our power. The only encouraging factor in the situation is that responsible Vietnamese seem to be increasingly concerned with the problem.

In the countryside, the Government's political situation is even worse than in Saigon and other urban centers. The Viet Cong have savagely destroyed most of the political structure of the rural areas. The potential leaders who could form the nucleus of counter-Viet Cong efforts in each locale have been killed, intimidated or driven out, leaving the old, weak and incompetent behind. Absent security (and where there is security, absent willing and able leadership), rural reconstruction (pacification) continues to make little, if any progress. The very difficult problem of getting pacification moving has not been solved.

c. Economic. South Viet-Nam's economic situation today is grave for two reasons: (1) The Communist strategy has been to draw on the Vietnamese economy to support the Viet Cong's own operations and to withhold the remainder from the Government and from those of the people who support it. Thus, in large part as a consequence of Viet Cong operations, Viet-Nam has become a food-import area; commodities cannot move freely within the country (e.g., rice from the Delta to Saigon), and the Viet Cong are in a position to derive much of their own needs (e.g., construction material, food, medical supplies) from within the South Vietnamese economy.

(2) The rapid and large United States/South Viet-Nam force build-up has introduced a new and strenuous competition for Viet-Nam's human and material resources. When added to the Viet Cong economic warfare efforts, the build-up has resulted in a growing inflation in the Vietnamese economy.

III. Acceptable Settlement Objectives.

Our basic objective is the restoration of a South Viet-Nam “free to determine its own future without external interference.”

We are proceeding on the assumption that South Viet-Nam can eventually be made into a workable and reasonably stable non-Communist nation, which, under the right conditions, could cope with the powerful Communist-led apparatus that is now the Viet Cong.

We recognize the possibility—at the end of the road—of North and South Viet-Nam freely deciding the issue of reunification.

In concrete terms—and roughly in the order they might be approached—the conditions precedent to the attainment of our objective—whether worked out through new formal negotiations or resulting from tacit arrangements—are: A. A cessation of infiltration of men and arms, and an end to leadership ties (represented concretely by radio communications) with the North.

B. Cessation or sharp reduction in military actions and terrorism in the South.

C. Withdrawal to the North of the maximum possible number of those who continue to accept Hanoi discipline.

This means particularly post-1954 North Vietnamese citizens (whether Northern or Southern born). In practice this group breaks down into readily identifiable North Vietnamese regular units and individuals born in North Viet-Nam, and the much less readily identifiable “regroupees” or “returnees” who are of Southern origin and who formed the bulk of the infiltration up to early 1964.

D. Cessation of United States/South Vietnamese bombing attacks on the North.

We have said we would do this in return for some combination of A through C above.

E. The establishment of conditions for a viable political structure in the South.

The South Vietnamese have spoken of the use of “established democratic processes,” by which they clearly mean a gradual and controlled extension of indirect representation methods, perhaps based on progressive local elections, subject at every point to security considerations and controls.

Hanoi's present position calls for the National Liberation Front taking over through the device of a coalition (without elections).

The United States has categorically rejected Hanoi's position and would equally oppose the National Liberation Front/Viet Cong remaining intact under any name as a legal political organization. But we have left the door open to amnesty and non-reprisal treatment for any individuals now in the Viet Cong who lay down their arms and accept Government rule.

F. An eventual total “cease-fire.”

The United States and the Government of Viet-Nam would insist on total freedom for the Government to establish law and order throughout the country, and would resist the probable Hanoi attempt to create a situation in which the Viet Cong were able to maintain themselves in key areas they now control. (Hence the danger of the terms “cease-fire” and “stand-fast” as they have been used, e.g., by Senator Mansfield.)4

G. Restoration of the Geneva non-interference provisions between North and South for the future.

On this point we and Hanoi are not far apart—verbally. Hanoi adds “pending reunification,” but this need not be serious. However, the substance of this is what the war is about.

H. Better international machinery to verify cessation of infiltration and withdrawal, and to enforce future non-interference between North and South.

We have not tried to spell this out, partly because we do not want to get drawn into any acceptance of international supervision of the political structure in the South. (Such supervision could well favor the Viet Cong, as Acheson has stressed.)5 But—to the degree possible—we would wish to see stronger machinery than the present ICC to police external interference, perhaps backed by some form of multilateral power guarantee.

I. Acceptance of limited “Neutrality” for an independent South Viet-Nam.

We have said that South Viet-Nam need not be tied to any alliance—and thus “neutral” in this sense. But the South Vietnamese insist that they must retain the sovereign right to call for outside help if they need it, and we would insist on this too unless there were equivalent and really effective international, multilateral guarantees and policing machinery.

J. Withdrawal of United States combat forces and elimination of United States bases.

We have said we would accept this when the South is truly free to run its affairs without interference, i.e., when at least points A through F are resolved satisfactorily. In this sense we agree verbally with Hanoi on the eventual status. However, Hanoi occasionally says our withdrawal must precede any negotiations (we don't believe they mean this), and would in any event seek to get American forces out much sooner and with concomitant performance on their side being limited to the withdrawal of only their own regulars. We would probably seek to retain military advisors, and in any case would expect to maintain economic assistance, which would be badly needed for a long time.

K. Provisions for possible reunification.

We have taken our stand squarely on the principle of ultimate free determination under international supervision, but have said nothing on timing. Hanoi does not mention free elections, but appears content to let the issue be handled later, doubtless expecting that they will succeed in establishing a Communist-oriented government in the South that would move toward reunification in due course. At this stage they also may not wish to offend Southern sentiment—even in the Viet Cong—by making their ambitions nakedly clear. The South Vietnamese are generally willing to accept an indefinite division of the country.

IV. Practical Elements of Achieving Settlement.

While the above analysis indicates the ultimate complexity of a settlement—whether through negotiation or withering away—in practice, we do not have to cross all these bridges now. What we really need to focus on is the kind of factual situation in the South that would, over time, give us the best chance that a stable non-Communist South Viet-Nam would emerge.

From the standpoint of our public posture and any communications we may have with Hanoi on any channel, we need to focus on five areas where we could be “hard, “less hard but still acceptable”, or “soft” in ways that would affect the chances of a favorable non-Communist outcome. It would be convenient if we could stay absolutely firm on conditions that would assure a 100% chance over the long run of a non-Communist outcome. In fact, there can never be such absolute assurance. And, in assessing whether to keep up the military pressure in the hope of achieving an ideal result we must weigh the scale of conflict this might involve and the intangible, but perhaps crucial, effect of our continued massive presence on a future healthy South Viet-Nam.

The patient has got to learn to walk some time, and attempted total eradication of his Communist disease may be worse for his recovery than throwing him more on his own—with some degree of risk—as soon as the chances look reasonably good.

The five areas we need to focus on are: 1. What to accept in return for cessation of bombing of the North.

We should rule out even a limited pause if the quid pro quo were only the initiation of negotiations. Bombing is our only bargaining counter that offers hope of an agreement that does more than ratify the situation on the ground in South Viet-Nam and the balance of forces there. It is, therefore, important that we carefully preserve it and play the card of cessation of bombing only at the optimum point in any type of negotiations.

2. What degree of withdrawal of Hanoi-directed elements.

Our initial position must be that of the South Vietnamese Government—that they all be withdrawn. We should maintain this position inflexibly as to Northerners and also as to identified Southern-born military and political leaders. At the same time we must recognize that it would not be practicable to try to weed out every last man of the 45,000 estimated to have infiltrated—or to attempt to deport to the North all the Viet Cong, whether they come from the North or not. In carrying out any final agreement it would be necessary to apply a practicability test to the former, and to let some of the latter stay.

3. What political status in the South for individuals now in the Viet Cong.

The Geneva Accords—which we are seeking to revive—contain a non-reprisal provision. We do not wish such a provision to be policed by an international body, and we certainly cannot accept the National Liberation Front as a legal political entity. But a full-scale amnesty program—now at best limping along—would be most useful even while the conflict continues. It might be extended, as the Acheson Plan suggests, to allow political participation, under Government control at all stages, of Viet Cong individuals who had laid aside their arms.

4. How complete a roll-up of the Viet Cong military forces.

Although there should certainly be no legalized safe havens, and we must insist that the Government's police power have the right to operate throughout the country, we could in practice settle—as Ambassador Lodge has suggested—for some hard-core Viet Cong remnants off in the hills.

5. What timing for United States withdrawal.

This depends on too many variables for us to take any sure position now. If, as suggested above, we settled for less than total withdrawal of the infiltrators, it would give us the basis to keep some of our forces for a long time if we desired to do so.

The above analysis indicates areas where we could show some “give” at the right time and still have as good a chance as we could expect of the final favorable outcome. But it also identifies “soft” positions that, if taken, would so greatly prejudice the chances of attaining our objectives that we should not accept them unless and until we decide that the problem is not manageable.

Among these are: (a) stopping bombings in return merely for initiation of negotiations, without more concrete action; (b) accepting the National Liberation Front as a valid political entity; (c) legalized Viet Cong safe havens; (d) United States withdrawal on any firm timetable unrelated to other elements.

V. Tools available.

The interacting tools available to us in working toward a solution to the problem in South Viet-Nam are: (a) Military power in South Viet-Nam, Laos and in the adjacent waters;

(b) Military interdiction in, and pressure on, North Viet-Nam;

(c) Political, economic and psychological efforts in South Viet-Nam; and

(d) Political and diplomatic pressures on Hanoi and Peiping.

Military variables.

The military variables are (1) a pause, (2) Rolling Thunder, and (3) the deployment of additional forces:

1. Pause—An interruption in the program of bombing North Viet-Nam.

It has been suggested that we have a pause that would stand down all strikes and armed reconnaissance in North Viet-Nam for approximately four weeks unless its futility became apparent earlier. It would not involve stoppage of other reconnaissance or intelligence operations in North Viet-Nam or of any operations elsewhere. Ground and air operations in South Viet-Nam would continue. The pause would be publicly acknowledged, but a serious effort would be made to avoid advertising it as an ultimatum to North Viet-Nam. Third countries would be encouraged to use the pause to help produce negotiations for an acceptable settlement. With respect to termination of the pause, our state of mind would be (a)“hard-line” or (b) “soft-line”: (a) “Hard-line” Pause.

Under a “hard-line” pause, we would be firmly resolved to resume bombing unless the Communists were clearly moving toward what is described above as an acceptable settlement.

(b) “Soft-line” Pause.

Under a “soft-line” pause, we would be willing to feel our way with respect to termination of the pause, with less insistence on concrete concessions by the Communists. (This kind of pause makes sense only if we are working toward something much less than what has been described above as an acceptable settlement.)

2. Rolling Thunder and armed reconnaissance.

This program (a) could be intensified abruptly by a sharp heavy blow, as recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, (b) could continue to increase at the present pace, or (c) could be maintained at approximately its present level.

(a) JCS “sharp blow.”

The JCS would initiate immediately, and carry out in a few days a program of air strikes against

—Phuc Yen, Hanoi/Gia Lam, Hanoi/Bac Mai, Haiphong/Cat Bi, and Haiphong/Kien An airfields, including the aircraft thereon (Phuc Yen to be struck by B-52s).

—Rail, highway and waterway routes and traffic between Hanoi and Haiphong and between Hanoi-Haiphong and South China.

—Petroleum storage facilities at Haiphong (or four thermal power plants generating approximately 50% of North Viet-Nam's thermal power).

—SAM installations and other anti-aircraft defenses which pose a threat to the above air operations.

The Joint Chiefs would permit normal armed reconnaissance in all of North Viet-Nam, and would order follow-on strikes as necessary to keep the targets destroyed. They would conduct naval surface force operations against targets near the coast and against North Vietnamese shipping at sea. They would mine the harbors. Every effort would be made to minimize destruction of non-military installations; and the civilian populations, as such, would not be targeted.

(b) Extrapolation of Rolling Thunder Program.

Up to this point we have been conducting the Rolling Thunder program on the assumption that our air attacks against North Viet-Nam would become progressively more severe, both with respect to intensity and geography. At the present time, we are carrying out 600 armed reconnaissance sorties a week in the “three quadrants” and striking two fixed lines-of-communication (LOC) targets a week in the “northeast quadrant” (but not against targets in the “China strip,” the Hanoi circle,” or the “Haiphong circle”). If we should continue this progressively intensifying program over a five-month period, we would maintain activity in the three quadrants at the present level. The program might, however, evolve in the “northeast quadrant” along the following illustrative pattern: —1st month. Include Hanoi-Haiphong LOC targets (outside the Hanoi and Haiphong circles), with two fixed LOC targets in the quadrant each week.

—2nd and 3rd months. No fixed targets in the quadrant, but “controlled armed reconnaissance” of selected routes at selected times and at the rate of 100 sorties a week.

—4th month. EXTEND “controlled armed reconnaissance” to LOCs within the Hanoi and Haiphong circles and ADD strikes on three key petroleum installation targets a month.

—5th month. In the first two weeks, ADD mining of Haiphong Harbor; thereafter, change the armed reconnaissance in the northeast quadrant to the kind carried out in the other three quadrants and with no geographical limit except the strip next to China. (Left unstruck would be population targets, power plants, and locks and dams.)

(c) Maintenance at present level.

This would involve continuing a level of armed reconnaissance sorties throughout North Viet-Nam adequate to keep military installations and the line of communication to the south as fully out of action as possible, and to maintain a limited pattern of fixed strikes in the “northeast quadrant”. It might involve elements of the extrapolated program such as strikes on the Hanoi-Haiphong line of communication targets (out-side the circles). And it might be extended in a small way to the “controlled armed reconnaissance” in the northeast quadrant designed to keep these major lines of communication under continuing harassment and interruption.

While the present level of 600 armed reconnaissance sorties a week would remain a rough benchmark, we would need to consider in any case whether the growing evidence of expanded lines of communication in Laos may warrant some diversion of effort to that area. We should also consider getting a much more pronounced daily and weekly variation into the total pattern of air activity over the North, so that the rate of sorties varies greatly. This varied pattern would have merit under any program, but it would be particularly applicable to a “continuing” level in that it would keep Hanoi guessing and minimize any implication that we had settled down without an increase.

The argument for maintaining bombing at the present level is that no feasible amount of bombing of the North is going to achieve an acceptable settlement in the absence of a substantial improvement in the situation on the ground in the South. Therefore, a substantial increase in bombing of the North will have a maximum “climactic” effect if carried out at a time when the situation in the South is more clearly moving in our favor. It would also continue to maintain the Haiphong Harbor and petroleum storage as “hostage” for the now very vulnerable port and petroleum storage at Saigon.

3. Additional (Phase II) Deployments.

United States force deployments (I) could stop at the presently approved 225,000 # during 1966.

(a) Stop at Phase I. Limit United States forces to the presently approved 225,000. Added expenditures attributable to Phase I, through FY 1967, are estimated to be $13 billion.

(b) Deploy additional Phase II forces. Deploy 28 additional combat battalions and four additional tactical air squadrons and associated support forces (125,000 additional men), bringing the totals to 62 United States combat battalions (plus 10 third-country battalions) and 26 United States tactical air squadrons, or approximately 350,000 Americans in South Viet-Nam. These deployments would be essentially completed by the end of 1966, and would be—as proposed by MACV—at a considerably slower rate than the August-December 1965 rate, specifically at the rate of six, seven, nine and six ground combat battalions for each of the four quarters of 1966.

These deployments could be accomplished without calling up the reserves or extending tours of duty, but, in that case, they would lead to further reductions in the strength of our strategic reserve to meet contingencies elsewhere. (An alternative would be to call up reserves—not only replenishing the strategic reserves, but also giving a clear demonstration of United States power and purposes.) Expenditures attributable to Phase II for its first 18 months are estimated very roughly at $3 billion. It is estimated—as can be seen on Map II6 —that, by the time Phase II forces are making their full impact in the spring of 1967, the United States/South Vietnamese forces would have “control” of 65 percent of the population and 20-30 percent of the land; 60-65 percent of the critical lines of communications would be kept open; 40-50 percent of the Viet Cong bases and military logistical infrastructure would be subject to disruption; and 30 percent of the Viet Cong political/security infrastructure would be disrupted.

It should be noted that the MACV-proposed Phase II does not allocate any forces to the Delta. To handle the Delta properly, Phase II would have to be augmented by one or two additional divisions—30,000 to 60,000 additional men—bringing the Phase II total to 155,000 to 185,000 men, or an overall total of between 380,000 and 410,000 men in South Viet-Nam.

VI. Alternative Courses of Action.

A theoretical case can be made for a course of action such as a “soft line” pause, extreme negotiating efforts and—following the pause—maintenance of present force levels in the South and the present level of Rolling Thunder attacks in the North, all designed to feel our way toward a “compromise outcome”. We all believe, however, that such a course of action would not support our basic strategy. It would end up in disintegration in Viet-Nam, in political humiliation for the United States, and impaired American political effectiveness on the world scene. It could also lead to more costly confrontations with the Chinese Communists later on. In essence, it simply is not consistent with the definition given above of what would constitute an acceptable settlement.

Thus, the realistic choices boil down to:

First Course: No Pause, With Continuing or Evolving Rolling Thunder and With No Substantial Further Deployments to South Viet-Nam.

This course of action can be supported in this way: (a) It will be January before the weight of our full presently-approved deployments really comes into play. By then we might see at least an adverse morale trend in the Viet Cong that would indicate we were getting somewhere.

(b) It may be useful to give ourselves time to digest the impact of 225,000 men in terms of their effect on the Vietnamese psychology and economy. This is a factor that some reports, notably a recent cable from Saigon on inflationary and labor division problems, suggest may be becoming very serious even to the point of being a limiting factor on our basic effectiveness in appealing to the people.

(c) It would give the Government of Viet-Nam additional time, hopefully without serious frictions with us, to get on with its part of the job and to build up a South Vietnamese contribution that would not be dwarfed by the United States role.

On the drawback side are two factors: (a) Deferring additional United States deployments—particularly in the face of continuing increases in Viet Cong strength—raises grave problems in our domestic situation. This is not solely a question of the war dragging on—which, one can argue, it would be likely to do even with additional deployments—but rather a question of not having clearly done all on the ground in Viet-Nam that appears wise. It would be still more serious, of course, if the rate of progress slowed down, as is likely to be the case.

(b) The second drawback is that, by delaying the added deployments, we should lose momentum in Viet-Nam—a momentum that reflects a determination and confidence crucial to the psychology of the confrontation.

Basically, this course can continue to assure against a Viet Cong “victory” as long as our relations with the Vietnamese government and people remain good; it can, as indicated above, result in an indefinite stalemate if Hanoi and the Viet Cong can maintain the morale and strength of their forces. It presents the least danger of overt Chinese Communist or Soviet intervention. The two important variables difficult to predict are the morale on the South Vietnamese side (and correspondingly our relations with them) and the morale on the Hanoi-Viet Cong side. Morale has unquestionably improved in South Viet-Nam and we are beginning to see a few small signs of deterioration in morale among the Viet Cong. These hopeful trends may be expected to continue for the time being as the forces we are now deploying there move toward full effectiveness. Their indefinite continuation might result in an acceptable settlement at some time in the foreseeable future even though the balance of military force were not such as to assure a military destruction of the Viet Cong.

But it is not possible to be certain that these trends will continue indefinitely. If there were a stalemate, or only very slow progress, there would—sooner or later—be a tendency for South Vietnamese morale to sag and frustrations to focus on the American presence and the problems associated with that presence. On the Viet Cong-Hanoi side, the continued infusion of North Vietnamese forces may serve somewhat to offset the many factors unfavorable to them.

This development would not be overcome merely by intensified bombing of the North. We have always thought such bombing would bring Hanoi to an acceptable settlement only if the tide were clearly running against them in the South. If the prediction of probable stalemate above held true, in the absence of additional deployments, even the extrapolated Rolling Thunder program would be unlikely to bring Hanoi around.

In sum, this course of action does not appear hopeful.

Second Course: Pause, Extrapolated Rolling Thunder, and Additional Deployments.

In view of the intensified actions involved, Secretary McNamara would not recommend this course of action unless it were preceded by a “hard-line pause”, as set forth in Paragraph V 1. (a) above.

The purposes of—and Secretary McNamara's arguments for—such a pause are four: (a) It would offer Hanoi and the Viet Cong a chance to move toward a solution if they should be so inclined, removing the psychological barrier of continued bombing and permitting the Soviets and others to bring moderating arguments to bear;

(b) It would demonstrate to domestic and international critics that we had indeed made every effort for a peaceful settlement before proceeding to intensified actions, notably the latter stages of the extrapolated Rolling Thunder program;

(c) It would probably tend to reduce the dangers of escalation after we had resumed the bombing, at least insofar as the Soviets were concerned;

(d) It would set the stage for another pause, perhaps in late 1966, which might produce a settlement.

Against these propositions, there are the following considerations arguing against a pause: (a) In the absence of any indication from Hanoi as to what reciprocal action it might take, we could well find ourselves in the position of having played this very important card without receiving anything substantial in return. There are no indications that Hanoi is yet in a mood to agree to a settlement acceptable to us. The chance is, therefore, very slight that a pause at this time could lead to an acceptable settlement.

(b) A unilateral pause at this time would offer an excellent opportunity for Hanoi to interpose obstacles to our resumption of bombing and to demoralize South Viet-Nam by indefinitely dangling before us (and the world) the prospect of negotiations with no intent of reaching an acceptable settlement. It might also tempt the Soviet Union to make threats that would render very difficult a decision to resume bombing.

(c) In Saigon, obtaining South Vietnamese acquiescence to a pause would be difficult. It could adversely affect the Government's solidity. Any major falling out between the Government and the United States, or any overturn in the Government's political structure, could set us back very severely.

(d) An additional factor is that undertaking the second course of action following a pause would give this course a much more dramatic character, both internationally and domestically, and would, in particular, present the Soviets with those difficult choices that we have hereto-fore been successful in avoiding.

On balance, the arguments against the pause are convincing to the Secretary of State, who recommends that it not be undertaken at the present time. The Secretary of State believes that a pause should be undertaken only when and if the chances were significantly greater than they now appear that Hanoi would respond by reciprocal actions leading in the direction of a peaceful settlement. He further believes that, from the standpoint of international and domestic opinion, a pause might become an overriding requirement only if we were about to reach the advanced stages of an extrapolated Rolling Thunder program involving extensive air operations in the Hanoi/Haiphong area. Since the Secretary of State believes that such advanced stages are not in themselves desirable until the tide in the South is more favorable, he does not feel that even accepting the point of view of the Secretary of Defense, there is now any international requirement to consider a “Pause”.

Third Course: No Pause, Continuing Rolling Thunder at Present Levels, and Gradual Phase II Deployments.

This course of action would, like all of those considered, also include maximum diplomatic efforts to explore and exploit all possibilities of achieving an acceptable settlement.

The principal element in this Third Course would be to increase our ground deployments on the basis of a progressive evaluation of need and effectiveness, but to avoid any dramatic decision to the maximum extent possible. This would involve immediate preparations for additional deployments to the South along Phase II lines during 1966. It would almost certainly mean a final decision in early January to carry out first and second quarter Phase II deployments (six and seven combat battalions respectively). Such further deployments would be presented, not as a new “phase” but as the carrying out of your often repeated statement that “we are going to do what we need to do.”

Preparations would also go forward for third and fourth quarter Phase II deployments, but final decision would not be made until late spring.

(Both the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of State agree that at the present time and under present conditions the risks resulting from the reduction in our ready reserve that will result from such additional deployments are acceptable.)

Under this course of action the Rolling Thunder program would be conducted on the “continuing” basis defined in Paragraph V 2. (c) but leaving open the option of moving to the extrapolated program if Hanoi appeared to be weakening. Likewise, a pause would be deferred, but might later be considered if Hanoi appeared to be weakening.

Essentially, this course of action is designed to maintain momentum in the South so that South Vietnamese morale and performance can be improved. In essence, it is designed to “play for the breaks” (as we did in the Berlin blockade and Korea) without actions that would bring the situation prematurely to a head.

From a strictly military standpoint, even the full carrying out of Phase II deployments during 1966 would not extend the areas of government control or weaken the Viet Cong structure decisively. (See Map II.) The major variables would continue to be whether the South Vietnamese Government achieves effectiveness—and above all whether Viet Cong morale cracks significantly.

We cannot say that the chances are better than even that this would happen by the end of 1966, but at least we would be keeping the pressure on and giving ourselves every reasonable chance of getting this decisive “break”.

As between the Second and Third Courses, the Second Course may offer us—if it were to work out favorably—a somewhat greater chance of an acceptable outcome by the end of 1966. On the other hand, with the political dangers of an immediate pause, and the uncertainty and possible widening of the war involved in the latter stage of the extrapolated Rolling Thunder program, the Second Course would also involve significantly greater chances of either an adverse development in the South or a wider war.

The Third Course would give us every reasonable chance of moving ahead in the South before we had to take the critical and difficult actions involved in a pause and a substantially intensified Rolling Thunder program. It would clearly be slower, but it might in the end be surer, particularly in light of the time needed to develop a more solid and effective political structure in the South.

VII. Possible Further Actions.

Neither the third nor any of the other courses of action considered in this memorandum could give positive assurance of success. The North Vietnamese probably could, by additional deployments, match our deployments on a 1-for-3 or 1-for-4 basis, thus effectively cancelling the likelihood that the additional forces set forth in this memorandum would be able to provide security to areas beyond the enclaves shown on the attached maps. If the Hanoi authorities should do this, we could find ourselves in a position where—with our killed-in-action casualties at 500 to 800 per month—the pressures would be great to invade or to bomb the cities in the North—actions which would be likely to lead to a severe reaction from China and possibly from the Soviet Union.

The Viet Cong can be expected to continue their “Phase II” sabotage, murder and guerrilla activities, while continuing to strive to build up a conventional military capability. They will depend more and more on regular PAVN forces; they will draw harder on the men and material in the areas they control, including the Delta; and they can be expected to try to bring the economy of South Viet-Nam to a grinding halt. The question, of course, is whether the pressure on the North and the added forces in the South can frustrate these Viet Cong designs. The question also is whether Hanoi will continue to have the will and the morale to carry this on.

If Hanoi and the Viet Cong are successful in their efforts to stand firm, we may be faced in late 1966 or early 1967 with critical decisions. One possibility which needs further analysis would be military action to “seal off” an infiltration corridor in Laos to a “barrier” just south of the 17th Parallel from the sea to Thailand. Such a “barrier” would require major military forces, including Thai and Laos forces on the West end and Vietnamese and United States forces on the East end. It would create major political problems in Laos, particularly in terms of obtaining the support of Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma, and major international complications in that it would be an open breach of the Laos settlement.

Another, and perhaps more likely, possibility would be the requirement for still additional deployments of American forces in the South. Finally, there would of course be the pressures mentioned above to invade or bomb the cities in the North, with the risks that would flow therefrom, as well as to mine Haiphong Harbor.

(Any consideration of the mining of Haiphong Harbor will, among other considerations, have to consider its effects on and our interests in the relative positions of Moscow and Peiping influence in Hanoi.)

VIII. Non-Military Actions.

Regardless of which of the possible courses outlined above is adopted, maximum effort must be given now and for an extended period to the political, economic and psychological efforts without which South Viet-Nam will never be made into a workable and reasonably stable non-Communist nation able to cope with the Viet Cong apparatus. In a sense, our military effort, however essential, is buying us time in which to work with the Vietnamese to build a political, economic and social base among the bulk of the people and primarily the rural people who make up 80 percent of the population.

The following are the principal elements in our present program: (1) Do what we can to develop out of the present Government of Viet-Nam at all levels a government which will increasingly develop a commitment not only against Communism but also to the cooperation of all its factions and tendencies for the achievement of that objective and also to programs designed to enlist the loyalty and support of the people. As noted previously, this is a long-term process and there is nothing we can do that will produce dramatic results.

(2) Assist and encourage the Vietnamese Government and, where possible, groups with large popular followings, to develop cadres who can form the nucleus in rural areas for organization of the population for economic and social reconstruction and against the Viet Cong infrastructure.

(3) Develop with the Vietnamese Government, and press it to prosecute vigorously, national programs which will give support to the efforts of the cadres mentioned above. This includes land reform and agricultural credit, land development, tax reform, encouragement of small industry and handicrafts, and provision of a range of community development projects which can be put at the disposal of the cadres to be used by the cadres to support their political objectives.

(4) Advise and encourage the South Vietnamese Government to build from the provincial councils elected in May of 1965 toward some national representative body which might initially be elected indirectly and for some time would have only limited responsibilities, such as drafting of a new constitution. At provincial and lower levels, however, elected bodies should promptly be given increasing responsibility where security permits, and particularly where there are cadres who can work with such bodies effectively.

(5) Meanwhile support the Government of Viet-Nam and occasionally on an ad hoc basis substitute for it, in immediate programs (a) to meet emergencies such as the refugee problem, (b) to supply urgently required infrastructure and logistics for the military effort while trying to minimize adverse effects on the civilian economy, (c) to stem inflation, (d) to deny resources to the Viet Cong and secure those resources for those areas under government control, and (e) to establish machinery and a priority system to minimize to the extent possible competition for the increasingly scarce manpower and materials, Vietnamese and American, required for the complex of efforts now under way in South Viet-Nam.

The intensification of these efforts, of course, particularly the increased imports essential to control inflation, means increased AID expenditures. AID expenditures this fiscal year are likely to be in the order of $550 million. The amount required for FY 1967 is not yet determined but it can be anticipated that something in the order of $650 million will be required.

IX. Conclusion.

Perhaps all of the foregoing does not give sufficient weight to the problems as they appear to the other side. As has been pointed out they can now have no hope of “victory”. A large part of our task is to reinforce this conviction and not only to consult our own fears but also to weigh the fears of the other side in drawing up our balance. A stalemate can have no more attraction for them than it has for us. Our determination and our will are certainly not less than theirs. If we can, as recommended in this memorandum, continue to display an increasing level of determination we should not despair, any more than we did in Berlin, Korea and Cuba, of reaching a satisfactory conclusion even though at the moment we may only see through the glass darkly exactly how this is to be accomplished.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Memos (A). Top Secret. On a covering index listing the nine sections of this memorandum, a handwritten note reads as follows: “The Secretary (from Ambassador Johnson).” A handwritten note by McNaughton on the Department of Defense copy indicates that U. Alexis Johnson was the author of the memorandum. (United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 6, Part IV, C, 7 (a), footnote 31)

2 Not found.

3 See footnote 4, Document 189.

4 See footnote 3, Document 174.

5 Presumably a reference to the argumentation supporting the Acheson Plan; see vol. II, Document 287.

6 Not found.

195. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 195. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara1

Washington, November 9, 1965.

SUBJECT

State's Memo to the President (Courses of Action in Viet-Nam)2

The State paper is not substantially different from your draft3 in a number of respects. For example, the statement of US grand strategy is not fundamentally different, nor is the estimate of the situation in South Vietnam, nor is the paragraph dealing with “acceptable settlement objectives,” nor is the pessimism with respect to what can be done on the non-military side inside South Vietnam.

The State memo departs from your version in the following four important ways: 1. Pause. Secretary Rusk opposes a Pause now, preferring to consider it later “if Hanoi appeared to be weakening.” State's main arguments are (1) that a Pause would allow Hanoi to trap us short of our goal so that we would not be able to resume Rolling Thunder and (2) that it would cause serious trouble in Saigon. They add (3) that it (especially if coupled with an intensified RT) would increase the risk of a Soviet “flash” when bombing resumed. They see no chance of a Pause leading to a favorable reaction from Hanoi or from the “nationalist” VC, and they see no need for a Pause to lay the domestic groundwork for the increase in US deployments—perhaps because they believe that Phase II deployments can be carried out quietly by a salami-slice technique. (Incidentally, it is interesting to note that the State memo seems to assume that the Pause is a “card” that can be “played” but once; whereas it is more reasonable to think that it could be played any number of times, with the arguments against it, but not those for it, becoming less each time.)

2. Rolling Thunder. Secretary Rusk opposes what State calls our “extrapolated” Rolling Thunder program, preferring a “leveled-off” program (with periodic “hot and cold” treatments to keep the enemy off base). State says that “no feasible amount of bombing of the North is going to achieve an acceptable settlement in the absence of a substantial improvement in the situation on the ground in the South.” Specifically, they would postpone strikes on POL targets and would postpone mining of harbors; they would permit strikes at LOC targets between Hanoi and Haiphong and would permit “controlled armed recce” in the northeast quadrant outside the Hanoi-Haiphong circles; they would perhaps shift some of the 600 sorties per week to Laos. As in the case of the Pause, State would postpone the intensification of Rolling Thunder, “leaving open the option of moving to the extrapolated program if Hanoi appeared to be weakening.”

3. Phase II. State apparently agrees with your proposal to deploy Phase II forces. They apparently would put the deployments in two packages (first two quarters of 1966 and last two quarters of 1966) and wrap the packages as inconspicuously as possible. I gather that they would not postpone preparations or budget submissions beyond what would be required to meet the MACV Phase II schedule. (Notice that you may have had in mind a faster deployment of Phase II than MACV requested or that State's plan would permit.)

4. Evaluation. State seems to be more optimistic than you. While they do not give good odds of success (and while they give your approach higher odds both of a quick success and of a “flash”), they are avowedly choosing a course “designed to play for the breaks (as we did in the Berlin blockade and Korea) without actions that would bring the situation prematurely to a head.”

My judgment is (a) that there is no real issue with respect to Phase II deployments, (b) that State has a good point in their opposition to “extrapolating” Rolling Thunder, and (c) that State is wrong with respect to the Pause (I hate to miss the small chance it offers to turn this thing around).

Furthermore, I think (d) that both papers set the goals unrealistically high (we should not be fooling ourselves in this respect), (e) that neither memo gives adequate emphasis to what Phases III and IV are likely to look like (“occupation” of South Vietnam, “quarantine” of Indo-China, pressures to invade North Vietnam, war costs at a rate equal to 10-20 times the GNP of the people being fought for, etc.) and the odds that we will have a Phase III and a Phase IV (50-70%), and (f) that neither memo spells out a vigorous “diplomatic offensive” to accompany the military actions.

John T. McNaughton4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Memos (A). Top Secret; Eyes Only.

2 Document 194.

3 Document 189.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

196. Letter From the Consul General in Hong Kong (Rice) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 196. Letter From the Consul General in Hong Kong (Rice) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Hong Kong, November 9, 1965.

Dear Bill:

As you know, Mr. Clark Clifford and Mr. Patrick Coyne were with us October 30. I expect that you have had a more complete run-down than I could give you of the matters which concerned them. If you have heard all you want to know on the subject, you can toss this letter aside. But I will cover the ground of what was said here—just in case you are interested.

Mr. Clifford, who did the talking, said the President spends much of his time on Vietnam, and feels forced to make a great many decisions on the basis of inadequate information. What we lack and what he wants, despite the difficulties, is hard intelligence, including intelligence on matters outlined below.

1. Definite information about the Viet Cong. What about their attitudes? Are they re-evaluating their position? Are their attitudes softening or hardening?

2. North Vietnam. What is the thinking in Hanoi? Are the leaders there determined, or are they seeking a way out? Should we extend and accelerate the bombings? What about the populace: is it softening or hardening? What is the attitude in North Vietnam towards peace overtures?

3. What is the situation today in Red China? What is the attitude of the Government there towards the war in South Vietnam? That they cannot permit the war to be lost? Or that there are more important considerations, such as the drive to make Communist China a nuclear power? What is the attitude towards actual participation in the war? What is the possibility they will, for instance, send troops? What degree of assistance will Communist China give the DRV: unlimited, or if not unlimited, what is the limitation? Are the leaders in Peking determined to see the thing through all the way? What is the degree of fear of becoming over-involved—e. g., in a war with the U.S.?

I thought it might be useful to Mr. Clifford to be given an indication of opinions we have formed on some of these questions, and of our bases for forming them. In giving them I observed that I was not trying to make him a channel for our reporting. That deserved the greater degree of precision possible with written material as opposed to oral communication, and the qualifications one omits from thumb-nail summaries. The following paragraphs represent, except as otherwise noted, an effort to reconstruct from memory what I said after making those caveats.

It is hard for us at this distance, and with access to only some of the available intelligence, to judge whether the VC are softening up or hardening. We watch the statistics, but many of them are of questionable value. For instance, for seven weeks the VC had lost more weapons than the ARVN, whereas the opposite used to be true. But did these losses mean that VC morale and discipline were slipping, or that they now had such a relatively plentiful supply of weapons that they were no longer exercising the same care to prevent weapons losses? (Incidentally, accounts I have seen of the Pleime battle suggest that the fighting discipline of the attackers, comprising VC and DRV regulars, was good indeed. I wonder whether the bombing of the DRV does not give the DRV regulars a doubled motive for fighting—there is added to the motive of “liberating” the south, preparatory to reunification, the motive of getting back at an enemy which is bombing their homeland.)

I expressed to Mr. Clifford the belief that the leaders in the North are a tough lot, unlikely to soften under bombings. If they lost the relatively small industrial sector they have built up, I expected them to count on rebuilding it with Soviet and Chi-Com help. The accounts of visitors to the DRV and the intercepted letters from people there which we had read led us to think the bombings were, if anything, hardening popular attitudes towards the U.S. and cementing the loyalty of the people to the regime. It did not look to us as though the leaders and people of the DRV were ready to respond to overtures.

I said the leaders of Red China regarded the war in South Vietnam as a highly important proving ground for Mao's doctrines on wars of national liberation. They would certainly give all the necessary material assistance they could spare. We believed the DRV would not want them to send in masses of Chinese troops into North Vietnam itself unless that proved absolutely necessary, and that Communist China's leaders would hesitate to send them unless the existence of the DRV appeared threatened. The Chinese Communists are very powerful defensively on their own terrain—Communist China is probably impregnable to military occupation and political domination; it is sensitive about its borders and formidable in areas near them; it lacks the strategic mobility to project military power very far beyond those areas. There was plenty of evidence that Communist China feared U.S. attack and that people in South China fear war (our reading of intercepted letters shows this to be so). Communist China would fight if attacked, but I was not convinced the Chinese Communists would surely throw in their own troops to prevent the defeat of the Viet Cong rebellion, should our forces appear to be bringing the situation in South Vietnam under control. They conceivably could respond to dwindling prospects with the decision it would be better for the VC to draw back, preserve all the assets they could and wait for a better day. However, I thought the leaders in Communist China were like the leaders of other governments in some respects: they probably make some important decisions only as the relevant situations develop, instead of having decided in advance what they would do in all of a variety of contingencies.

I added that I thought some of the answers to the questions Mr. Clifford asked should be available within the U.S. Government through a careful fitting together of all relevant bits and pieces of information. (I also might have observed that some answers will come to those with sufficient background and experience by a process sometimes considered intuitive, i.e. by “feel”—but that would have raised the question of whose “feel” is to be trusted, and whose not? Still, to me, at least, it seems unlikely that we shall get many answers to the hard questions in the form of pieces of intelligence we can point to as “hard.”)

Mr. Clifford asked very few questions about this analysis as I went along and none about it afterwards. We then set forth our various sources of information and there was a little discussion of how they could be improved—e.g., by more extended tapping of British businessmen engaged in trade with Communist China. The meeting then closed.

This “open” meeting included myself, my deputy, the chief of the China Mainland Section, the three military liaison officers, and the CAS station chief. The station chief also had a private session with Messrs. Clifford and Coyne, which he has reported through his channels.

I should have liked to write this hard upon Mr. Clifford's visit, when I could reconstruct my part of dialogue with greater confidence. But we have been inundated by visitors—Governors, trade missions, and CODELs. We will have one arriving on the average every day, with most of them staying for some days, at least through November—but will do the best we can to continue turning out the necessary regular work meanwhile.

I'm sending a copy of this letter to Tom Hughes in INR.

Sincerely,

Edward E. Rice2

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Correspondence with the Field, June 1965. Secret; Official-Informal. A copy was sent to INR Director Hughes.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

197. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Ambassador to Vietnam (Lodge) 197. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Ambassador to Vietnam (Lodge)1

Washington, November 10, 1965.

Dear Cabot:

This personal letter is something of a comment on your 13772 which gives much room for thought.

At present we do not see, through all of the processes of diplomatic “osmosis”, an indication that Hanoi is prepared to enter seriously into negotiations on the basis of stopping their aggression against South Viet Nam and establishing peace in Southeast Asia. It is my impression, and this has been reflected by some comments in the Communist world, that there may well be divided views within Hanoi. But these shades of difference do not indicate any decision in Hanoi to hold their hand and make peace.

It may well be that Hanoi and the Viet Cong would prefer to pull back de facto rather than through negotiations. This was the way the Greek guerrilla affair was wound up. From Hanoi's point of view, a de facto cessation would avoid their having to confess that they were ever doing anything against the South and would avoid commitments with respect to the future. We should always be very alert to significant signs that they are in fact pulling out—but I have not yet seen them.

The subject of “negotiation” is complex and difficult. I am convinced that one of the important strengths of our situation, both at home and abroad, is the demonstration that the obstacle to peace in Southeast Asia is not the United States. I have just finished talking with more than 70 Foreign Ministers—most of whom were here for the opening session of the General Assembly. It seems evident that we have made the point convincingly that the obstacle to peace in Southeast Asia is Hanoi and Peiping. The principal means by which this has been achieved has been a demonstrated readiness on our part to have “negotiations without preconditions”, as the 17 non-aligned nations phrased it, or “unconditional discussions” as the President phrased it.3 The rejection by Hanoi and Peiping of many peace efforts has clarified the policy problems very well.

I also believe that this is an issue which has to do with what might be called “war leadership” of the American people. There is no more peace-loving people in the world. But the American people will do what has to be done if they are convinced that the object is right and that there is no honorable alternative. Our attitude toward negotiation is an integral part of the willingness of our own people to sustain a mean disagreeable struggle half way around the world.

The point which would concern me most would be the idea that the war must be continued because the South Vietnamese authorities with whom we are dealing are afraid of peace. I find it hard to accept the view that the South Vietnamese people would be the first people in history voluntarily to accept a Communist regime through genuinely free elections.All of our effort in South Viet Nam for more than a decade has been based upon the assumption that the South Vietnamese people do not want communism, do not wish it imposed by force, and would not have it if they had a choice. In any event, I see great difficulty in accepting the internal political difficulties of the South Vietnamese as a war aim of the United States. I had supposed that American combat forces are in South Viet Nam because of the infiltration of large numbers of men and large quantities of arms by North Viet Nam into the South. We are there to defend South Viet Nam against external aggression—an attempt to impose a political solution by force upon the South Vietnamese against their own wills.

Frankly, I do not know whether the negotiations will come about in the near future or at all. I do know that it will be contrary to our most fundamental policy to permit negotiations to accomplish what we have resisted by force. It may be that Hanoi and Peiping recognize this elementary point and, therefore, see no possibility of accomplishing their purposes through negotiation. If so, they are well advised.

I realize that the current crop of GVN leaders may be nervous about the idea of negotiations. But they must realize that we have not made the effort and undertaken the burdens of supporting a free South Viet Nam in order to throw in our objectives at a conference table.

I was much interested in the recent conversation you had with the Apostolic Delegate and we shared your skepticism. But if there is any reality in this possibility, nothing could give the entire effort out there a bigger shot in the arm than something important along that line.

We think of you daily and are grateful for the quality and dedication of the job you are doing.

With warm personal regards,

Sincerely,

Dean Rusk4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Memos (A). Personal and Secret; Nodis.

2 Document 176.

3 For text of the appeal by 17 nonaligned countries, March 15, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 843-844. President Johnson expressed U.S. readiness for “unconditional discussions” in his address at Johns Hopkins University on April 7; the text is ibid., pp. 848-852. See also vol. II, Document 245.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

198. Editorial Note 198. Editorial Note

On November 11, 1965, from 2:30 to 3:45 p.m., President Johnson met with Rusk, McNamara, Ball, McGeorge Bundy, and Moyers at the LBJ Ranch in Texas. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary) According to a tentative agenda for the meeting, prepared for the President by Bundy on November 11, Vietnam was one of nine items to be discussed. In the annotated agenda, Bundy briefed the President on Vietnam as follows:

“The most important issues here are treated in the long draft Defense memorandum as revised in the State Department [Documents 189 and 194]. In the main, we are not looking for major decisions but for guidance in further planning. In essence, the issues are these: “(1) Should we currently plan for substantial additional deployments in 1966?

“(2) Should any such additional deployments be preceded by a pause in bombing and/or a new diplomatic effort to prevent further enlargement of the contest? If we want a pause, we must begin to plan for it very promptly.

“(3) What should be our current attitude toward increased bombing in the North in 1966?

“(4) Do we need to choose between the Lodge and Goldberg views of negotiation now?

“(5) Are we agreed on the underlying purpose of our effort in Vietnam: is it to seek a compromise settlement which would eventually turn Communist—or is it to ensure by all necessary means the establishment and maintenance of a non-Communist South Vietnam—and is this the real choice we face?

“(6)We also have questions of timing and consultation: when should Lodge come back or when should we go to him? When should we begin additional consultation with Congress—or is such consultation needed? What, in short, is the time-table of decision in the coming weeks?” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVI)

No record of the meeting has been found.

199. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 199. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 11, 1965, 8:14 p.m.

1677. 1. There is given below the text of an “Estimate of Viet Cong Situation” drafted by the Mission Intelligence Committee and concurred in by Ambassador Porter and General Westmoreland which I have found of value and believe will be of interest to concerned Washington agencies:

2. “The basic trends and patterns in the situation noted in our last estimate (19 August 1965)2 have continued through October. Both Hanoi and Liberation Front broadcasts reflect determination to continue the war, and Viet Cong forces are maintaining relatively strong military pressure. Following a brief decline in Viet Cong activity in September, which may have marked the transition from the largely frustrated summer campaign to the current autumn-winter campaign, the tempo of Viet Cong actions has risen to the highest levels in over a year. The scene of major operations appears to have shifted with the rainy season from the highlands to the coastal provinces, with large-scale attacks recorded in Quang Tri, Phu Yen, and Binh Dinh. Nevertheless, current activity in Pleiku Province indicated that the enemy retains significant capabilities in the highlands.

3. “No regimental-size operations have been mounted by the Viet Cong since June in the III Corps area. Viet Cong main force units in this region apparently have been kept off balance by US-GVN ground and air operations, which have inflicted substantial losses in terms of equipment and supplies. Viet Cong capabilities in this area evidently are being reinforced, however, by the movement of North Vietnamese Army elements from the highlands and the continuing flow of Viet Cong elements coming from the Delta.

4. “Activity in the Delta has increased markedly during the past two months, but consists largely of small-scale harassments and sabotage activities. The lack of aggressive large-scale attacks in this area suggests that the capabilities of main force units have been temporarily reduced by the transfer of cadres and troops to other areas. Nevertheless, the sizeable Viet Cong forces remaining in the Delta appear capable of maintaining their hold on wide areas of the countryside.

5. “The build-up of Viet Cong conventional military capabilities is continuing, despite the heavy losses suffered in large-scale engagements. Documents captured in the Delta in August directed the upgrading of half of the village guerrillas to permit the build-up of main force units. This extraordinary measure, which could produce enough manpower to form two or three new regiments, was rationalized in the documents as necessary to restore the balance of forces which had been upset by the introduction of U.S. and allied ground combat units.

6. “Paralleling this internal reinforcement, the enemy has infiltrated a number of additional North Vietnamese Army elements in recent months. Two additional regimental-sized North Vietnamese Army units have been identified, and there are indications that at least two others may also have arrived. While some of these may comprise cadre groups to permit the creation of new Viet Cong main force units, others apparently are integral North Vietnamese Army combat units. In either case, these elements, well equipped with modern small arms and heavy weapons, represent a significant reinforcement of Viet Cong capabilities.

7. “Paralleling the continuing build-up of Viet Cong forces is the construction of a motorable road from North Viet-Nam through the Laos panhandle to a point at least as far south as Kontum Province. This main route, which is nearing completion, together with lateral roads leading into South Viet-Nam at several points, will permit a substantial increase in the flow of supplies and equipment through Laos, and may replace the now insecure sea infiltration route as the principal axis for Viet Cong logistical support. With a dependable supply route capable of moving ammunition in quantities, the capabilities of Viet Cong forces in the highlands to sustain large-scale operations will be enhanced. Their forces in the Delta, however, will remain largely dependent on shipments by sea or via Cambodia.

8. “Politically and psychologically, the Viet Cong position is less favorable. Although many of the basic factors which contributed to political instability in Saigon last year remain unresolved, the rebuff of the Viet Cong summer campaign and the U.S. and allied military build-up have removed popular fears of an early Viet Cong victory and thereby enhanced the prospects for governmental stability. Nevertheless, the Ky government remains subject to political pressure from the Viet Cong and from opposing political circles. The government has not had time to demonstrate progress in implementing its programs and faces growing economic difficulties. An effective, integrated pacification program is only in the early stages. Repeated success by security forces in uncovering terrorist and propaganda rings in urban areas have disrupted Viet Cong capabilities in this field and shaken the confidence of their clandestine agents. The Liberation Front suffered a significant psychological setback when the populace generally ignored the Front's unprecedented propaganda appeal for a general strike and hour of silence on 15 October to commemorate the anniversary of the execution of a Viet Cong terrorist. The failure of this appeal, and the absence thus far of any spectacular terrorist acts during the much-heralded, month-long ‘Hate America’ campaign represent a blow to Viet Cong prestige among the populace which they may try to recoup. Despite these failures terrorism remains a potent Viet Cong weapon, and the Viet Cong can be expected to make concerted efforts to embarrass and harass Americans through terrorist attacks.

9. “There are growing signs of declining morale among Viet Cong military units as well as in the population in Viet Cong-dominated areas. This decline appears to be the result of tactical setbacks and the impact of sustained U.S.-GVN air attacks on Viet Cong areas. It is reflected in the growing rate of deflections and Chieu Hoi ralliers, as well as in captured documents, statements of captives, and the defensive tone of Front propaganda. Although the Communists have overcome morale setbacks before through extensive indoctrination programs, no significant improvement in Viet Cong morale is likely in the absence of some successes on the battlefield which they are certain to seek.

10. “Viet Cong economic fortunes have been mixed. Their propaganda is actively exploiting the rising cost of living throughout Viet-Nam. Viet Cong efforts to disrupt the economy further and thereby add to inflationary trends are reflected in their continuing sabotage of communications lines and their imposition of an embargo on the flow of goods to markets in some GVN-controlled areas. On the other hand, economic hardships are increasing in Viet Cong-dominated areas. There are indications that their tax collections are not sufficient to meet their financial requirements despite increasingly heavy tax rates. Moreover, the income of farmers has been further reduced by the restrictions on delivery of goods to markets.

11. “In view of their mixed prospects, it is pertinent to review the alternatives which the Viet Cong may adopt in pursuing their aims in South Viet-Nam. The broad alternate approaches open to them are: a) major overt escalation in order to seek an early military decision; b) continuation of the current strategy of augmenting their capabilities for the gradual transition to conventional warfare; c) reversion to a lesser scale of insurgency; or d) a negotiated settlement.

12. “Although the first course offers prospects for quick success, it carries with it the risk of triggering a massive U.S. response. While North Vietnamese ground forces possess considerable strength, disruption of the lines of communication in the north by U.S.-GVN airstrikes may have restricted the size of forces which could be supported in a conventional invasion of the south. The extent of this restriction has not yet been determined. North Vietnamese air capabilities remain weak, and while these could be augmented by the commitment of Chinese Communist air units, the latter course would risk U.S. retaliation against the Chinese Mainland. Despite its continuing propaganda bombast, Peking has shown no inclination to risk general war with the U.S., and its actions in support of North Viet-Nam have been essentially defensive in scope. U.S. airstrikes on the north and the deployment of U.S. ground forces to South Viet-Nam must have raised doubts in Peking regarding their image of the U.S. as a “paper tiger,” and created uncertainties as to how the U.S. would react to any further escalation of the war. Peking may also hold back because it sees no need to change its past strategy, except to strengthen its support to the DRV.

13. “The second alternative—continuing the build-up for transition to conventional warfare—may be viewed by the Communists as carrying less risk of provoking any new major escalation by the U.S. This course is in accordance with Chinese and North Viet-Nam's doctrinal concepts of “liberation wars,” and any deviation from it would be difficult for them to rationalize to their adherents. Both Hanoi and the Liberation Front had stated that their major aim for this year was the build-up of Viet Cong capabilities to achieve a strategic balance of force as a prelude to the general counteroffensive. There is evidence that they concluded this summer that this goal is still attainable, despite the build-up of U.S. and allied forces, and that they have undertaken new measures to restore the balance. Lines of communication from the north are adequate to sustain the infiltration and operations of a limited number of additional North Vietnamese Army units. Although the Viet Cong have suffered substantial losses in large-scale operations, their replacement system appears effective and the Communists do not seem thus far to have been deterred from continuing such actions. The Communists may calculate that this alternative, combined with extensive terrorism—a course which proved successful against the French—offers the best prospects for wearing down the will and determination of the U.S. to continue the war. If their build-up permits them to regain the initiative and momentum on the battlefield which they enjoyed earlier this year, they may feel that the impact on ARVN and civilian morale will cause a resumption of political instability which could prove decisive on the outcome of the war.

14. “The third alternative—reversion to a lesser level of insurgency—would entail serious risks to Viet Cong morale. The Communists might feel that, by foregoing large-scale attacks and diverting their main forces units to support of local forces in small-scale guerrilla actions, their vulnerability to air attacks and large-scale sweeps by U.S.-GVN forces would be reduced. The Communists would encounter substantial problems, however, in rationalizing this doctrinally. Moreover, the loss of momentum would almost certainly cause a major drop in the morale of Viet Cong troops and political cadres, and result in a substantial increase in defections which could reach disastrous proportions for the Viet Cong. It would similarly enhance the confidence of the civilian populace int he ultimate defeat of the Viet Cong. Although guerrilla activity would continue to disrupt lines of communication and harass pacified areas, U.S.-GVN forces would be able to devote more support of rural construction programs and permit the gradual extension of GVN control into areas now held by the Viet Cong. Thus the Communists would risk substantial—and possibly irretrievable—losses to their position by adopting this alternative.

15. “The fourth alternative—seeking a negotiated settlement—also offers mixed blessings to the Communists. The Viet Cong would first negotiate to gain time to build their strength and undermine ours and second to gain a satisfactory settlement. Doctrinally, negotiations would be a feasible alternative if their outcome assured attainment of their ultimate goals, which are unchanged. If their position became progressively weaker through the failure of other alternatives, so that a favorable settlement were not feasible, they might prefer a withering away of the Viet Cong insurgency to embarking on fruitless negotiations. In any event, they are unlikely to seek negotiations, unit they are convinced that victory through other means is not possible.

16. “Current indications point to the second alternative—continuation of the build-up of Viet Cong capabilities for conventional operations. These indications include: a) evidence of the infiltration of additional military units from North Viet-Nam; b) the build-up of main force units at the expense of village guerrilla units; c) captured documents of late July stating that Viet Cong goals for 1965 remain unchanged; d) continued confidence and determination to press the war as reflected in Hanoi and Liberation Front statements; e) final construction of a motorable supply south through Laos; f) resumption of large-scale attacks despite losses suffered in previous actions; and g) the marked increase in Viet Cong activity since early October; h) continued development of North Viet-Nam's air defense capabilities, with Chinese and Soviet support, to reduce the effectiveness of U.S. air strikes and enhance the ability of the DRV to survive them; and i) the continuing fragility of the GVN and its vulnerability to Viet Cong pressures.

17. “In conclusion, we believe the enemy will continue for the next several months at least on his current course of action. We believe the Viet Cong are forming new main force units within South Viet-Nam, and will infiltrate additional units—perhaps the equivalent of one or two divisions—from the north. By doing so, the Communists will hope to restore a strategic balance of forces in order to regain the initiative through a combination of large-scale attacks and widespread guerrilla action. Their purpose will be to expand their base areas, inflict maximum attrition on U.S. and GVN elite units, erode U.S. determination to continue the war, and weaken Vietnamese morale with a view to creating conditions favorable for the collapse of the GVN. We do not expect the Viet Cong to revert to a lesser level of insurgency or to seek a negotiated settlement until they are convinced that their current course will not succeed. The point is not likely to be reached until the capabilities of the forces now being created and deployed have been neutralized or impaired in battle. The units recently infiltrated from North Vietnam will probably be ready for battle within a month after arrival. It may be three months before units now being created are ready for combat.”

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Not further identified.

200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, November 12, 1965, 9:23 p.m.

1315. Exdis for Ambassador from Secretary. I am deeply concerned about limited degree of GVN compliance with Geneva Conventions on treatment of prisoners. As you know, US is responsible under GC for treatment of prisoners transferred from US to GVN custody. Matter is urgent for sake of GVN and US image abroad and as it affects plight of US prisoners held by DRV and VC.

We have an obligation to our soldiers and citizens to take every action not detrimental to security that increases likelihood American prisoners will receive satisfactory treatment. Leverage we can bring to bear on DRV and VC through ICRC and other international efforts depends to considerable extent on degree to which US and GVN standards of prisoner treatment meet requirements of Geneva Conventions. I believe that substantial compliance by GVN and USG with Convention and publicity given such compliance constitute one of best available protections against further mistreatment American prisoners.

Accordingly request you raise matter personally on urgent basis with Prime Minister and other GVN officials where it will have most effect, impressing on them in strongest terms need for concrete, visible actions to implement GC. Most urgent requirement is for compliance with ICRC request for lists of prisoners and unaccompanied visits to POW's. This is essential first step, should not cause serious difficulties, and would have high potential for reciprocal benefits for American prisoners and for favorable publicity.

Detailed discussion in septel.2

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-7 VIET. Secret. Drafted by Schwartz; cleared by Unger, Meeker, Sieverts, and Robert H. Miller, Director of the Vietnam Working Group; and approved by Rusk.

2 Telegram 1314 to Saigon, November 12. (Ibid.) In telegram 1725 from Saigon, November 15, Lodge responded that he was preparing an approach to Ky on this issue, but would discuss it with South Vietnamese Foreign Ministry officials to lay the groundwork in advance. (Ibid.)

201. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 201. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 17, 1965.

1760. For the President. Herewith my weekly telegram:

1. Military

The most interesting event of the week was the appearance of military units in South Viet-Nam consisting entirely of North Vietnamese personnel. In addition to the three regiments of the North Vietnamese 325th Division already carried, General Westmoreland has evidence of the presence of the equivalent of one other division and possibly more. The North Vietnamese appear to be giving considerable attention to the improvement of the line of communications through the Laos panhandle. Earthmoving equipment had been observed. This would permit greater support to the Viet Cong.

This adds a third facet to the war. We have hitherto had to cope with (1) the main force Viet Cong units, containing about 35 percent of Viet Cong strength and (2) the guerrilla terrorists containing some 65 percent—all directed by Hanoi. Now come units which are all from the north.

The U.S. First Cavalry heavily engaged elements of four regular North Vietnamese regiments west of Pleiku near the Cambodian border for three days at the beginning of this week inflicting heavy casualties in what may turn out to be the biggest U.S. battle in the war to date.

Prime Minister Ky told me at Tay Ninh today that he believes there are two NVN divisions in SVN and that “they will keep on sending divisions down until the line of communication is cut”.

2. Basic political

Today I went to Tay Ninh where Prime Minister Ky officially inaugurated a GVN program whereby about 700,000 acres of state-owned land goes to about 180,000 farmers. Communism took over China largely on the strength of the slogan “land to the tiller.” In Tay Ninh I saw this slogan actually being carried out. I know of your long-standing interest in this and, as you know, the U.S. has helped a great deal. To me this is a concrete example of what we mean by “true revolution”.

The number of returnees under the Chieu Hoi program again increased over last week's figure. Analysis of police arrest figures for the first week of November showed a downward trend in the number of deserters and draft dodgers apprehended and an increase in the number of suspected VC and illegal residents rounded up.

3. Economic

For the second successive week prices declined in Saigon, notably in pork, fish, charcoal and rice—the things the masses consume. Rice is actually below last year's level. This is in particular a vindication of our rice policy and in general none of the above would have been possible without U.S. help—and heroic measures in which many hardworking Washington officials can take pride.

4. Pacification—“Rural Construction”

Minister Thang of “Rural Construction” traveled to I, II and IV Corps to meet new and provisional rural construction committees consisting of Corps and Divisional Commanders and Province Chief. He urged realistic planning, stimulation of local initiative, teamwork between military and civilians and, above all, response to the needs and aspirations of the people. He wants elections for executive leadership in the villages to be held as soon as there is freedom from intimidation. He shows marked enthusiasm and verve in all of this.

Thang is also working on creating groups (cadre) which can go into the village and stay indefinitely, capable of self-defense.

I now have learned that his two top priority objectives will be eight villages each in Quang Nam and Binh Dinh. The talk now is of a team of 60 men for each village of which the 40 man political action team will be the nucleus. These estimates and plans change all the time as they learn more about the realities, I report it as I learn about it.

My feeling about pacification is two-fold: that we are certainly on the right track and all too often, that the train isn't moving. And then I think of the unfortunate results of going too fast and of striving for flashy effects as the Vietnamese are all too prone to do. I also recall that Minister Thang is not impulsive and is a careful, thorough, though energetic, man. And I conclude that maybe we can't go much faster at this stage.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 7:21 a.m. McGeorge Bundy sent President Johnson a retyped copy of this telegram under cover of a November 17 memorandum that reads: “Here is Lodge's weekly telegram. He lays proper emphasis on the fact that this week it is the military developments that are the most interesting, but paragraph 4 on rural construction is of equal long-run importance.” There is an indication on the copy of the telegram that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVI)

202. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 202. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, November 17, 1965, 6:15 p.m.

I think you will want to look at this memorandum from George Ball2 on the subject you charged us to study in our meeting last week.3 It may help you to decide whether you need a meeting on this subject tomorrow or Friday.

As you will see on pages 8 and 9,4 the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of State come out on opposite sides, and for very good reasons. The man who has to present next year's defense budget will want to have made a last full try. The man who has to cope with an effort by the Communists to embarrass us by ambiguous responses to a pause tends to be against it. (Schoenbrun's story today about the North Vietnamese feelers to the French is an example of what we could expect in spades in a new pause.)

My own judgment is marginally against the pause, perhaps because I am more concerned with the diplomatic aspects than with the military budget. But I also have some feeling that if we pause, we may seem to admit that our bombing is the cause of the trouble, and this is simply not so. This is a matter which we can brood over without a meeting for another few days—if you wish—but it is of such importance that I feel an obligation to submit it to you now.

McG.B.5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 6AA, High Level Comments re Bombing Pauses. No classification marking.

2 The Top Secret attachment was not seen by Johnson until November 28, after it was resubmitted by McGeorge Bundy on November 27; see Document 208.

3 See Document 198.

4 Pages 8 and 9 of Tab A to Document 208 comprise Section IV.

5 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

203. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 203. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State1

Rio de Janeiro, November 18, 1965.

Secto 16. Eyes only for the President and the Acting Secretary from the Secretary. I deeply regret that I am not in Washington to assist in handling press problems deriving from Sevareid story.2 Here are my comments and suggestions as seen from here. You may wish to draft a suggested statement for me to make, taking into account issues which have been raised up there.

1. I am confident that Adlai Stevenson would not have written the Look article.3 That is why he put his talk off the record. Nor am I confident that the article fairly represents the long conversation. I do not suggest we get into a pitched battle with Sevareid on veracity when the referee is dead. But I note that Sevareid did not report his conversation as a working reporter through his normal channel (television) but wrote a special article for which he probably received a very substantial fee. Under these circumstances, such an article is not likely to avoid the temptation of dramatic effect. But those of us who have spent long hours over a period of many years with Adlai know that one of his charms was a touch of Hamlet. On the subject of resigning, he and I had just had a long talk before his departure for Europe about his plans and arrangements and travel for the rest of the year and the handling of the General Assembly. He was reluctant to accept the job in December 1960 and every few months since then said something about perhaps staying through the “next General Assembly.”

2. On the Hanoi matter, my recollection is that there was some discussion of some such contact before November but I would have to check my own calendar for my own visits to New York and Adlai's visits to Washington to help my memory.4

3. At no time did Adlai Stevenson and I talk about this problem in connection with the US election. We discussed (a) the third-hand nature of the contact and U Thant's warning that Soviet official representatives in New York and Washington were not informed; (b) the absence of any indication as to substance; (c) the difficulties of contact in a relatively small country where diplomatic representatives are under many eyes; (d) the negative results of other contacts of which we were then aware.

4. You might consider, after checking with Paul Martin, surfacing the timing of the first Seaborn contact in Hanoi. The Canadians have already surfaced a part of them and the negative reactions which Seaborn encountered were a part of this problem.

5. Most compelling concern in my own mind was the possibility of a trap in the absence of any indication of a forthcoming attitude on any point of substance. I was concerned that bilateral contact in Rangoon would be made the basis for spreading the word among the South Vietnamese that the US was dickering for a settlement behind the backs of Saigon. Recalling the then situation in Saigon, this could well have been disastrous.

6. In diplomacy there is a difference between rejecting a proposal and not accepting it. This is illustrated by Stevenson's remark to Cleveland about “there may be a time—but not now.” I did not think that we should use this particular channel at that time but, on the other hand, did not wish to foreclose that or any other channel for the future. This distinction was made to U Thant but was apparently lost on him.

7. Bob McNamara had nothing whatever to do with these particular conversations. Why Adlai Stevenson (or Sevareid) attributed a negative reaction to him is beyond my comprehension.

8. I recall that Stevenson and I together had a brief exchange with U Thant on this matter but I would have to check my calendar carefully to try to identify the date. In that conversation, I affirmed to U Thant our interest in a peaceful settlement and suggested to him that he use the same channel to probe the substance. He was very reluctant to do so and I do not wish to get into the problem of veracity with U Thant with Stevenson no longer here.

9. The President and I early this year discussed one aspect of this matter on which I believe an error was made and by me. U Thant, Stevenson and I were so concerned with secrecy that neither Stevenson nor I kept a written account of the conversations of last year. The President quite rightly suggested that anything in the nature of proposals coming from or through Stevenson be reduced to writing and that our response and reaction also be in writing in order to avoid misunderstanding.

10. U Thant's own recollections as reflected in Tosec 395 seem to remove the idea that we on our side discussed this in relation to our elections although apparently he himself took such elections into account.

11. I would have to say that neither U Thant nor Stevenson would lose the chance to believe that peace was about to break out and that they themselves had played an important part in it. But I would add that, at the time, Adlai did not express disagreement to me but seemed fully in accord with the idea that the possibility should be left open but that it should not be acted upon under the then existing circumstances.

12. It might be well to review the chronology of Hanoi's attitude beginning with their contempt for the Laos Agreements of 1962. It is ridiculous to suppose that Hanoi's attitude toward continuing or stopping the war turned upon whether one particular channel out of all of the channels which have been attempted was to be used. They have had literally dozens of opportunities to bring this matter to discussion or conference. Instead, they continue their infiltration, including regular army units, and have been resistant to suggestions for a peaceful settlement which have come to them even from within the Communist world.

13. Please let me know whether you think it is well for me to make a statement on this subject. I am appalled that Eric Sevareid would feel that the off-the-record nature of this discussion was canceled by Stevenson's death. But, I would have to say in his behalf that under the circumstances of off the record, Adlai could say things, as a scintillating conversationalist, which he himself would not say under conditions of complete context and responsibility.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 10:13 a.m.

2 In the November 30 issue of Look magazine (on the newstands by November 16) Eric Sevareid wrote an account of a conversation with Adlai Stevenson, held just 2 days before Stevenson died. Sevareid's article, entitled “The Final Troubled Hours of Adlai Stevenson,” claimed that U.N. Secretary-General Thant obtained agreement from North Vietnam in early autumn 1964 to send an emissary to Rangoon to discuss with U.S. representatives possible peace terms. According to the Sevareid article, “someone in Washington” insisted on postponing the meeting until after the Presidential election. When the matter was pursued after the election, Sevareid stated that Hanoi was still willing to talk, but McNamara was opposed to the idea. Thant supposedly offered to let Washington write the terms of a cease-fire, but McNamara turned him down and Rusk did not respond.

3 Ball discussed the Sevareid article on the telephone with Yost, Goldberg, Rusk, and McGeorge Bundy on the morning of November 17. Transcripts of Ball's telephone calls of 9:15 (with Yost), 10:45 (Goldberg), 11 (Rusk), 11 (Yost), and 11:15 a.m. (McGeorge Bundy) are in the Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Telephone Conversations, Vietnam.

4 See vol. I, pp. 957-958.

5 In Tosec 39, November 18, the Department of State reconstructed the Rusk-U Thant discussions from August 1964 to March 1965 on the Secretary-General's suggestion that the United States and the DRV meet in Rangoon to discuss peace in Vietnam. Ball told Rusk that the “highest authority” wanted Rusk's “best recollection of private talks with Stevenson on this subject,” as well as any comments on modification of the reconstructed chronology. (Department of State, Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272, Vietnam—U Thant)

204. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 204. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, November 19, 1965.

SUBJECT

The Status of Non-Military Actions in Vietnam

Attached is our status report for non-military programs covering roughly the past five weeks.2 It may provide the President with a useful feel for what we've been doing.

The very nature of the non-military struggle in Vietnam is such that we cannot realistically expect dramatic progress from one month to the next. During the past month there have been some concrete results and advances. Both our own efforts and those of the Vietnamese have been impressive, but these efforts must be measured against a backdrop of enormous economic, social, political and security problems. Much is being done. Much more has yet to be done.

At the national level, the most encouraging sign continues to be the growing responsiveness of the GVN leadership to the requirements in this field and its willingness to take new initiatives. This constructive attitude is particularly evident in the areas of pacification program planning, rural reconstruction, labor relations, land reform. But this is but a first step. New programs must be implemented, enlarged, and sustained over the long run. The capabilites of the GVN to perform well here have yet to be proven. Its appeal and ties with the people, especially the peasantry, remain tenuous.

At the GVN working level, the picture continues to be a dismal one of too much corruption, too little motivation. At the grass-roots level there continues to be decreasing effectiveness of local government. However, the GVN, supported by Ky personally, is giving renewed attention to this critical problem. Moreover, USAID efforts to improve the flow of funds to rural construction operations appear to be having positive results. It is the Mission intention, of course, to see that this attitude and trend continue and improve.

The most critical immediate problem is the inflation which could undo the good effects of all our programs. This is being tackled vigorously not only on the monetary front, but by increasing the supplies of essential goods to areas outside of Saigon. Another critical problem, one that does not come through a program-by-program report, is the growing scarcity of manpower and materials in Vietnam. This is a matter calling for a comprehensive program review both here in Washington and in Saigon. You will be hearing more on this subject shortly.

C

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 41-Pt. Program in Non-Military Sphere in SVN. Secret.

2 Not printed. Bundy sent the report to the President under cover of a note that reads: “If you have time for it, this report on the non-military program in Vietnam is worth your attention—this continues to be our toughest long-range set of problems, in spite of all the headlines.” There is an indication on the covering memorandum that the President saw it. (Ibid.)

205. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 205. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson1

Washington, November 24, 1965.

We have now done a careful official translation of the letter which Fanfani addressed to you through Ambassador Goldberg, on which Goldberg informed Valenti. Text is as follows:

Begin text

New York, November 20, 1965.

The President of the General Assembly

Mr. President:

In the interview which you graciously accorded me at the end of May you repeated anew your firm intention to seek assiduously a negotiated solution for the conflict in Vietnam.

In the hope of being able to assist in the realization of this noble purpose, I bring to your attention the following:

On Thursday, November 11, in Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh and the President of the Council, Van Dong, expressed to two persons (known to me) the strong desire to find a peaceful solution to the conflict in Vietnam and, in summary, stated—according to what they wrote me—that “in order for the peace negotiations to come about, there will be necessary (a) a cease-fire (by air, by sea, by land) in the entire territory of Vietnam (north and south); the cessation, that is, of all belligerent operations (including therefore also the cessation of debarkation of further American troops); (b) a declaration according to which the Geneva Agreements of 1954 will be taken as the basis for the negotiations—a declaration made up of the four points formulated by Hanoi, points that are in reality the explanation of the Geneva text and which, therefore, can be reduced to a single point: application in other words, of the Geneva Accords.”

The text of the communication which I have received adds that “the Government in Hanoi is prepared to initiate negotiations without first requiring actual withdrawal of the American troops.”

To the same interlocutors Ho Chi Minh said: “I am prepared to go anywhere; to meet anyone.”

These are the essential points that one of the two interlocutors of Ho Chi Minh and Van Dong sent me in writing last night and which, in this letter of mine—confided to Mr. A. Goldberg, the US representative to the UN, so that he can deliver it promptly and confidentially—I bring word for word to your attention.

You surely have other elements by which to judge the importance of the above. As President of the 20th Assembly, as a high official of Italy, as a sincere friend of the United States and of yourself, I hope that this contribution to the sought-for peaceful solution, always more necessary and more urgent, may be a useful one. And I am at your disposition for any step that you consider opportune in the matter.

With sincere pleasure at your recovery and with best wishes for your high mission, I send my respectful greetings.

Yours,

(Signed) Amintore Fanfani

The Honorable Lyndon B. Johnson,

President of the United States

Washington

End text

As we read the message, it represents a simple restatement of the familiar Hanoi position. Although worded in the most palatable form possible, the second of the stated requirements for peace negotiations amounts simply to our accepting in principle the familiar Hanoi four points, the third of which required the establishment, under the NLF program, of an immediate coalition government in Saigon in which the NLF would play a leading and probably dominant role. We have never accepted this as a basis for negotiations, and never could without surrendering the most crucial of our objectives.

The language about a “cease-fire” has never been expressed in quite this way before, but would amount to an immediate ban on our air operations in the North and on our continuing ground reinforcements, without any compensating act by Hanoi whatever in the form of stopping infiltration, reducing activity in the South, and withdrawing at least regular units. As you know, we have repeatedly told Hanoi through third parties that we cannot consider even stopping the bombing without compensating action in these three areas, and we have in effect said the same thing publicly in more general form.

Accordingly, the message in substance adds up to a reiteration of a firm and inflexible Hanoi position consistent with all our other readings. It corresponds closely with what several third parties have told us of the position asserted by Ho and Pham Van Dong, and also with Hanoi's most recent public statements. The only possible glimmer of light is that Hanoi would not insist on prior withdrawal of US forces—but this too we have long believed they would not press for in the last analysis, and a similar statement was conveyed to us explicitly when the North Vietnamese approached the French just at the end of the pause last May.2

I have consulted with Bob McNamara and Mac Bundy, and it is our recommendation that you approve an instruction to Ambassador Goldberg to discuss the matter promptly and fully with Fanfani along the following lines: a. Thank him profusely for his helpful effort.

b. Explain carefully the generally familiar nature of the message and its unacceptable elements.

c. Make clear that we would be most interested in pursuing the matter, in any appropriate way, if Fanfani's sources should be in a position to indicate, on the basis of a report which Fanfani might make to them, that there is some new light or some change in the unacceptable elements, which in effect amount to a reiteration of preconditions for any useful discussion.

So that the record would be left in no doubt whatever, we have worked out with Ambassador Goldberg an informal written aide-memoire3 that would be left with Fanfani to supplement Ambassador Goldberg's oral presentation and to provide a complete record, for future reference both to Fanfani and to ourselves.

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron. Top Secret. Drafted by William Bundy and described on the source text as “Final Draft.” The President was at the LBJ Ranch in Texas November 19-December 12.

2 See vol. II, Document 313.

3 The aide-memoire was approved by Rusk on November 29 in the form of a letter from Rusk to Fanfani, December 4. (Memorandum from David H. Popper (IO) to Rusk; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) The letter is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 918-919. William Bundy prepared a draft aide-memoire for Fanfani, November 22. (Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Vietnam Negotiations, Fanfani) Goldberg prepared a revised version on November 24. (Ibid.)

206. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Acting Secretary of State Ball and Secretary of Defense McNamara 206. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Acting Secretary of State Ball and Secretary of Defense McNamara1

Washington, November 23, 1965, 10:10 a.m.

McN said he had talked to the President about one aspect without consulting B because McN felt he knew how B stood. The Chiefs have been coming to a boiling point on bombing Haiphong. McN felt it would be wise to insure that Chiefs' views got to the President if Wheeler saw the President. Wheeler saw the President the day before the [he?] left. Wheeler got the impression from the President he favored bombing (POL?) and asked that Wheeler and McN come forward with a joint recommendation. McN said that he had briefly warned the President not to do it at this time. However, because of this feeling, McN thought he had better talk to the President himself. McN told the President on his own long-run program it would be some time in February and didn't see any objection in bringing it forward at the present time. He told him he knew State felt strongly opposed; that he thought McG leaned against it; and that he (McN) was not prepared to recommend it at this time. He didn't feel strongly about changing it from February to December. Said he would be willing to wait until Rusk's return, at which time they would discuss it. McN said that he did not tell the President his own recommendation—an installation of four to six weeks, with several bridges (7-9) and let them hit four of them, plus the surface-to-air missile support facilities. B replied that he would look at this with Bill.

McN continued we have to decide what to do in Phase II. He believes we should put the troop strength and financial requirements into our budget; and, assuming the President does not want to make a firm commitment to the end of Phase II, we should begin shipping the troops in the battalion against that schedule in January, without commitment to go beyond a month—unless the President wants to make a stronger recommendation. B replied that this was his interpretation. McN said on this basis, he would be stopping in Saigon on his way back from Paris.2 He had spoken briefly to the Secretary on this before he left. He was in favor; and the President is in favor of it. McN said he didn't know when we wanted to get Lodge back; since we face the decision to make it would be helpful to sit down with Westmoreland. The President doesn't want a Honolulu meeting or Lodge and Westmoreland both in Washington at the same time. For this reason, the best substitute would be for McN to visit Saigon on the way home. He would plan to be there 24 hours. This raises the problem of transportation. Does B want him to send a plane to pick him up in Paris? B replied that he would plan to go to Paris with McN (from London) and from there come back to Washington commercially.

McN asked if B wanted to meet tomorrow or Thursday to talk about our approach to Wilson. B replied this could perhaps be done on the plane going over. However, he is available should McN wish to do it before that. McN replied they could decide this tomorrow.

McN said he would draft a cable to Lodge telling him of his plans; would let B see it before it is sent.3

1 Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Telephone Conversations, Vietnam. No classification marking.

2 McNamara was in Paris for the November 27 meeting of the Special Committee of NATO Defense Ministers. He was in Saigon November 28-29. For McNamara's recommendations to the President after his trip to Saigon, see Document 212.

3 Not further identified.

207. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Sisco) to Acting Secretary of State Ball 207. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Sisco) to Acting Secretary of State Ball1

Washington, November 24, 1965.

SUBJECT

Goldberg Meeting with Fanfani

Goldberg saw Fanfani this afternoon (November 24) and informed him that we are actively working on a response to his letter and that our answer would come soon. Fanfani confirmed that one of his sources is Lapira. There are two other points of interest which Fanfani mentioned to Goldberg. Fanfani said that one of the sources reported to him orally that Ho Chi Minh said that he is so eager to get this settled that he would be willing even to go to Washington. Fanfani also told Goldberg that both sources had told him orally that their impression is that there is very deep suspicion in Hanoi of Peking.

Today's conversation between Goldberg and Fanfani is being reported to us more fully by letter overnight.2

The Bombing Pause and the Diplomatic Peace Initiative. November 17-December 31

IO—Joseph J. Sisco3

1 Source: Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Vietnam Negotiations, Fanfani. Secret; Eyes Only. Copies were sent to U. Alexis Johnson and William Bundy.

2 Letter from Yost to Sisco, November 25, attached to a memorandum from Sisco to Rusk, November 26. (Ibid.)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

The bombing pause and the diplomatic peace intiative, November 27-December 31The bombing pause and the diplomatic peace intiative, November 27-December 31

208. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, November 27, 1965, 12:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 6AA, High Level Comments re Bomb Pauses. Top Secret; Sensitive. A note on the source text states that this memorandum was received at the LBJ Ranch in Texas at 8:30 p.m. on November 28, and there is an indication that the President saw it.

209. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the President's Special Assistant (Valenti)

November 28, 1965, 2:05 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Secretary Rusk was in Washington; Valenti was in Texas.

210. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, November 29, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET. Top Secret; Exdis.

211. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 29, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Lake and approved by Herbert Thompson of S/S on December 22. The source text is labeled “Part II of II.” The following note is typed at the top of the source text: “As indicated in the attached letter to Mr. Schneider from Mr. Unger, subsequent accounts of the conversation with Bo by Messrs. Mendel and Wood presented a less optimistic picture of the possibility of the DRV's agreeing to talks.” The letter, dated December 5, is ibid.

212. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

Washington, November 30, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 2EE, Primarily McNamara's Recommendations re Strategic Actions. Top Secret. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

213. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, December 2, 1965, 8:34 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Cables. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Flash. Also from Califano and Moyers.

214. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, December 3, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Cables. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The date-time-group on the source text is illegible. An earlier draft indicates that the telegram was sent on December 3. (Ibid.)

215. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, December 4, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. There is an indication on the source text that this memorandum was received at the LBJ Ranch in Texas at 11 a.m. on December 4, and that the President saw it.

216. Letter From the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) to President Johnson

Washington, December 4, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (A). Secret.

217. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 6, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 12:41 a.m.

218. Personal Notes of Meeting

Washington, December 6, 1965, 3 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Papers of McGeorge Bundy, Notes for December 6, 1965. No classification marking. These notes were handwritten by Bundy for his personal use. The meeting was held in Rusk's conference room at the Department of State.

219. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 6, 1965, 6:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Rusk and cleared by William Bundy.

220. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, December 6, 1965, 7:03 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Cables. Top Secret; Eyes Only. A copy was sent to Austin for Moyers.

221. Telegram From the National Security Council Executive Secretary (Smith) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, December 7, 1965, 9:44 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Cables. Secret; Exdis. Also sent to McGeorge Bundy for information. Received at the LBJ Ranch at 9:07 a.m.

222. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

Washington, December 7, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (A). Top Secret. Sent to the President in Texas in CAP 65822, December 6. (Ibid., Vol. XLIII, Cables) There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum. This memorandum is a revision of Document 212. A draft of this memorandum with minor revisions and comments by McGeorge Bundy, December 4, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (A). Another draft with significant revisions, December 6, is ibid., 2EE, Primarily McNamara Recommendations re Strategic Actions.

223. Personal Notes of Meeting With President Johnson

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 7, 1965, 10:25 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Papers of McGeorge Bundy, Notes of December 7, 1965. No classification marking. The notes are in McGeorge Bundy's hand with a small contribution by Komer. At 10 a.m. on December 7, Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, Robert Komer, and McGeorge Bundy arrived by aircraft at the LBJ Ranch in Texas. At 10:10 a.m., they assembled in the living room for this meeting with the President to discuss Vietnam policy. At 10:47 a.m., Bill Moyers and Joseph Califano arrived from Austin and joined the meeting. The participants broke for lunch at 12:35 p.m., and resumed their meeting at 1:35 p.m. on the front lawn of the ranch. At 4:34 p.m., Rusk, McNamara, Komer, and McGeorge Bundy returned by aircraft to Washington. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary)

224. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 8, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis; Priority. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 5:24 a.m.

225. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, December 9, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 6AA, High Level Comments Re Bomb Pauses. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only.

226. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, December 9, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII. Confidential. Received at the LBJ Ranch at noon on December 10. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum

227. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, December 10, 1965, 11:55 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Senator Mansfield's Trip (Southeast Asia). Secret; Nodis. Received at the LBJ Ranch at 12:50 p.m.

228. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Califano) to President Johnson

Washington, December 13, 1965, 9:45 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File, ND 19/CO 230, Vietnam 1964-65. Secret; Eyes Only. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

229. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, December 14, 1965, 7:45 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII. Top Secret; Sensitive. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

230. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 15, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 3:09 a.m.

231. Notes of Meeting

Washington, December 17, 1965, 9:41 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, December 17 Meeting on Vietnam. Secret. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room. McGeorge Bundy sent the President a briefing memorandum for this meeting, which reads in part: “Rusk and McNamara both believe that the most important question before us is that of peaceful actions before January. When last heard from, they were both strongly in favor of the pause. Bob and I have been doing further work on the wider notion of a cease-fire in all Vietnam. I do not know his views, but I continue to think we are not ready for this one yet. “Another matter for discussion is Rusk's report on his European trip. Like Bob McNamara he has found the responses pretty thin on Vietnam. But it remains a good thing that he put our case as strongly as he did.” (Ibid., National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, High Level Comments Re Bomb Pauses)

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 17, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis; Priority. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 8:04 a.m.

233. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to President Johnson

Washington, December 18, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Senator Mansfield's Trip (Southeast Asia). No classification marking. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

234. Draft Papers

Washington, December 18, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (B). Top Secret. There is no drafting information on the papers.

235. Notes of Meeting

Washington, December 18, 1965, 12:35 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, December 18 Meeting with Foreign Policy Advisers on Vietnam. Secret. The source text does not indicate a drafter, but the notes were taken by Valenti. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room. President Johnson describes this meeting in The Vantage Point (pp. 235-237), and quotes from this document.

236. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, December 19, 1965, 5 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII. No classification marking. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

237. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Saigon, December 21, 1965, 1:35 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIV, Cables. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Goodpaster.

238. Notes of Meeting

Washington, December 21, 1965, 12:25 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Meeting with Foreign Policy Advisers. Secret. There is no drafting information on the source text, but the notes were taken by Valenti. The time of the meeting, which was held in the Cabinet Room, is from the President's Daily Diary. (Ibid.)

239. Special Intelligence Supplement

Washington, December 21, 1965.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-311-69. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Prepared jointly by CIA and DIA. A table entitled “DIA Results of Strikes on DRV Targets Thru Tuesday, 14 December 1965” and a distribution list are not printed.

240. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Harriman) to President Johnson

Washington, December 23, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (B). Secret. This memorandum was sent to the President who saw it on December 31. (Memorandum from Bundy to Johnson, December 31; ibid.) Harriman sent a copy of this memorandum to Rusk. (Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Johnson, President, '65)

241. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 23, 1965, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-VIET. Secret; Exclusive Distribution. Drafted by Squire and approved in S on December 27. The meeting was held in the Secretary's office.

242. Editorial Note

243. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, December 23, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 12 VIET S. Secret. According to a December 24 memorandum from Read to Rusk, Rostow felt “some pressure to get his paper to the White House today.” Rusk approved sending it immediately. (Ibid., POL 27-14 VIET)

244. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Meeker) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, December 25, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Prepared at the request of the President who wanted key officers in the Department of State below the Secretary and Under Secretary level to present him with ideas on new diplomatic initiatives in Vietnam. (Memorandum from Read to Rusk, December 24; ibid., POL 27-14 VIET)

245. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, December 27, 1965, 11:05 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIV, Cables. Top Secret; Exdis. The President was at the LBJ Ranch in Texas, December 21-January 2, 1966.

246. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations European Office to the Department of State

Geneva, December 27, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET. Secret; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 2:33 p.m.

247. Paper by Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, December 27, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272, Misc. Vietnam, Vol. IV. No classification marking. Cooper, in The Lost Crusade (pp. 293-294), describes and quotes from this paper. He states that it was prepared by Rusk “in considerable haste” for the benefit of Vice President Humphrey, Harriman, and the other high-level emissaries sent to other countries to explain the U.S. position in potential peace negotiations. Also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 740-742.

248. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, December 27, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron. Top Secret. Prepared at the President's request; see footnote 1, Document 244.

249. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, December 27, 1965, 5:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII. No classification marking. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

250. Letter From the President's Consultant on Vietnam (Taylor) to President Johnson

Washington, December 27, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File, ND 19/CO 312 (Situation in Vietnam, 1964-1965). Secret. McGeorge Bundy sent this letter to the President with the following comment: “Max Taylor prepared this at my request, and I think you will find it an interesting and thoughtful contribution.” A note on Bundy's covering memorandum indicates this letter was sent to the President in Texas on December 31 at 11:45 p.m.; a notation on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

251. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 27, 1965, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking.

252. Draft Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas

Washington, December 27, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII. Secret.

253. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, December 27, 1965.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-310-69. Top Secret. This memorandum, dated January 3, 1966, is based on Taylor's notes, which he took at the time of the conversation.

254. Editorial Note

255. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 28, 1965, 3:45 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Pinta; Exdis. Drafted by Rusk; cleared by William Bundy, U. Alexis Johnson, Thompson, and in substance by McGeorge Bundy and Vance; and approved by Rusk. A copy of this telegram was sent to the President in Texas in White House telegram CAP 65927, December 28, 11:06 a.m. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIV, Cables)

256. Notes of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Ambassador at Large (Harriman)

December 28, 1965.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Johnson, Pres., 1965. No classification marking. The President was in Texas; Harriman was in Washington. According to his diary, President Johnson telephoned Harriman from the LBJ Ranch at 10:36 a.m. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary)

257. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma

Washington, December 28, 1965, 6:13 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S/PINTA. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Pinta. Drafted by William Bundy, cleared by U. Alexis Johnson, and approved by Rusk.

258. Paper by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 28, 1965.

Source: Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Nodis/Pinta, Series 1, Vol. 1. Secret.

259. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 28, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Thompson and approved in S/AL.

260. Draft Telegram From the President's Consultant on Vietnam (Taylor) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Washington, December 28, 1965.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-360-69. Secret. Also addressed to Westmoreland. Taylor sent this draft to the President under cover of a memorandum that reads: “I understand you indicated yesterday to Mac Bundy that it would be helpful if I sent some such message as the attached to Sharp and Westmoreland. If the text is satisfactory, I shall send it at once.” A note by Taylor on the memorandum indicates that the President wanted Wheeler to receive a copy as well. Apparently the telegram was sent.

261. Memorandum for Personal Files

Washington, December 28, 1965.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Divison, Harriman Papers, Secretary Rusk, 1963-1966. No classification marking. Drafted by Harriman.

262. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of Defense McNamara and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, December 28, 1965, 6:40 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Telephone Conversations, Vietnam. No classification marking.

263. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and President Johnson

December 28, 1965, 10 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Telephone Conversations, Presidential Conversations. No classification marking. The President was in Texas; Ball was in Washington.

264. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 29, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 4:35 a.m.

265. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State

Rangoon, December 29, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 7:15 a.m.

266. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State

Warsaw, December 29, 1925.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 8:47 a.m.

267. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State

Warsaw, December 29, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 12:26 p.m. and passed to the White House.

268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 29, 1965, 12:46 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. Drafted by Bundy and approved by Ball. Repeated to the White House.

269. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 29, 1965, 4:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis; Pinta. Drafted by Rusk. Repeated to the White House.

270. Memorandum From the Director of National Intelligence Estimates (Kent) to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Helms)

Washington, December 29, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (B). Secret.

271. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State

Rome, December 29, 1965, 11:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Pinta. Also sent to USUN for Yost. Received at 6:49 p.m. and passed to the White House.

272. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, December 30, 1965.

Source: Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Nodis/Pinta, Series 2, Vol. 1. Secret; Priority; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 8:53 a.m. and passed to the White House.

273. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and President Johnson

December 30, 1965, 11:20 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Telephone Conversations, Presidential Conversations. No classification marking. The President was in Texas; Ball was in Washington.

274. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State

Warsaw, December 30, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 12:51 p.m. and passed to the White House.

275. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 30, 1965, 8:48 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. Drafted by William Bundy. Repeated to the White House.

276. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 31, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 5:12 a.m. and passed to the White House.

277. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of State

Belgrade, December 31, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 9:02 a.m. and passed to the White House. Repeated to Warsaw for Gronouski.

278. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, December 31, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 3:15 p.m. and passed to the White House.

208. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 208. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, November 27, 1965, 12:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Once more on the pause

This is such an important question that I think you may want to look at it once again. Bob McNamara and I have the impression that your mind is settling against a pause, but we both believe that the matter is too important to be decided without making sure that the question has been explored to your satisfaction. I have mentioned our concern to Dean Rusk and while he is still against a pause at present, he has encouraged me to raise the matter with you once more.

On November 17 I sent forward a memorandum from George Ball to you2 which outlined a scenario for a pause, and gave the pros and cons. The scenario is out of date, but the pros and cons are still pretty solid, and I attach them at Tab A, together with the conclusions and recommendations then reached by the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of State.

In the last ten days, one or two additional considerations have developed.

First, the Sevareid episode,3 rightly or wrongly, has strengthened the impression among critics at home that we have not gone the full distance in seeking negotiations. There is now increased value in proving our good faith by a new pause.

Second, Westmoreland's recommendations for 1966 deployments have increased, and the fighting in the Plei Me area shows that we may have to look forward to a pretty grim year.4 This again strengthens the argument for one further demonstration that our determination to seek peace is equal to our determination on the battlefield.

Third, McNamara's budget shows that the alarming figure he mentioned at the Ranch may turn out to be an understatement. Thus the argument for preceding that budget request by one or more peaceful effort is strengthened.

Fourth, there is growing evidence that we can count on quiet but strong Soviet diplomatic support in pushing Hanoi toward the conference table during another pause. At the minimum, a pause will certainly intensify dissension between Peking and Moscow, with Hanoi in the middle. Moreover Dobrynin said to me that they were thinking of a pause of only 12-21 days.5

Finally, it is clear from the McNamara/Ball discussions in London6 that Prime Minister Wilson has some new Vietnam gambit up his sleeve which he means to discuss with you on December 17.7 (He has not said what it is.) We will spike his guns and those of everyone else like him if we have a pause in effect at the time of his visit.

Thus, both the domestic and the international arguments for a pause seem to me substantially stronger than they were two weeks ago, and on balance my own judgment has shifted over toward McNamara. I think that any pause should be very hard-nosed, and we should expect that it will not lead to negotiations, but it will strengthen your hand both at home and abroad as a determined man of peace facing a very tough course in 1966. It is quite true, as I have argued before, that the bombing is not what started the trouble, but it is also true that we have a great interest in proving our own good faith as peace lovers.

I also think that the diplomatic risks can be minimized by firmness and clarity about what we are doing, and that hardline criticism at home can be answered by what is done after the pause ends.

Do you want further work from Rusk and McNamara on this?8

McG. B.

Tab A9

III.

PROS AND CONS

Pros

The principal arguments for a pause are: 1. A pause could lead to either successful negotiations or a tapering off of military action in South Viet-Nam. Although the odds of this happening at this time may be long, the stake is high enough to justify the risks involved. It seems quite clear that the other side does not believe it can agree to negotiations or a cessation of military action while the bombing continues and we cannot know whether or not they desire a settlement until we try them out by a pause. Even if this pause does not bring about the desired result, it can set the stage for a later pause which may bring the desired result.

2. The President's offer of unconditional negotiations greatly strengthened our position throughout the world. A pause can have a similar effect by taking away from the other side the one valid argument they have against negotiations.

3. American casualties are mounting and further involvement appears likely. A pause can demonstrate that the President has taken every possible means to find a peaceful solution and obtain domestic support for the further actions that we will have to take.

4. There are already signs of dissension between Moscow, Peking, Hanoi and the Viet Cong. The pause is certain to stimulate further dissension on the other side and add to the strains in the Communist camp as they argue about how to deal with it.

5. A pause could reduce the likelihood of further Soviet involvement. It would not only help to convince Moscow that we genuinely desire a settlement but would also decrease the ability of Hanoi or Peking to bring pressure upon the Soviet Union for escalating their support.

6. Judging by experience during the last war, the resumption of bombing after a pause would be even more painful to the population of North Viet-Nam than a fairly steady rate of bombing.

7. The resumption of bombing after a pause, combined with increased United States deployments in the South, would remove any doubts the other side may have about U.S. determination to stay the course and finish the job.

Cons

The principal arguments against a pause are: 1. Although Hanoi has repeatedly stated that it cannot “negotiate” as long as the bombing goes on, there is no indication whatever from Hanoi that a pause would lead to meaningful negotiations or actions. Hanoi's continued military reinforcement of the South, plus what Hanoi undoubtedly considers a still weak security and political situation in the South, add up to what appears to be a very small chance that a pause would produce a constructive response.

2. Hanoi's objective with respect to the bombing is not a “pause,” but rather a complete cessation. They could be expected to do all in their power to exploit a pause, not to move toward an acceptable settlement, but to prevent our resumption of bombing and cause us to lose the one card that we have which offers any hope of a settlement that does more than reflect the balance of forces on the ground in the South.

3. Regardless of any resolve we have made beforehand, a unilateral pause at this time would give Hanoi an excellent chance to interpose obstacles to our resumption of bombing and to demoralize South Viet-Nam by indefinitely dangling before us (and the world) the prospect of negotiations with no intent of reaching an acceptable settlement. For example, they could offer to enter into negotiations on condition that the bombing not be resumed and that the Viet Cong be seated at the conference on a basis of full equality with the Government of Viet-Nam. As it would not be possible to accept this latter condition, they could place us in the position of having resumed the bombing over a “procedural” question with respect to a conference. Thus, in the absence of any expression of interest or intent on their part to move toward a settlement that we would find satisfactory, the other side could at this time use a pause to reverse the present international situation, which is very favorable to us.

4. There is danger that, in spite of any steps we may take to offset it, Hanoi may misread a pause at this time as indicating that we are giving way to international and domestic pressures to stop the bombing of North Viet-Nam and that our resolve with respect to South Viet-Nam is thus weakening.

5. Resumption of the bombing following a pause of considerable duration would assume a much more dramatic character than otherwise and could present the Soviets with those difficult choices that we have heretofore been successful in avoiding presenting to them.

6. Apart from the foregoing considerations, it will at this time be very difficult to obtain GVN acquiescence to a pause and could adversely affect the tenuous stability of the present government. Any overturn of the present government in South Viet-Nam could set us back very severely. Even if we obtained the acquiescence of the GVN, it would be very difficult to obtain their continued cooperation, particularly in public statements, throughout the duration of the pause.

IV.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The Secretary of Defense believes that a pause, with the associated obvious efforts to bring the DRV to a settlement, should be carried out. His main reason is (1) to lay a foundation, especially in the minds of the American people and of our allies, for the increased U.S. deployments, casualties, costs and risks that are in prospect. He believes also (2) that a pause now has a bare chance of starting a chain reaction toward a settlement. He thinks that, before intensifying the military confrontation and risks in Viet-Nam, the United States should make every effort to back the DRV/VC down by other means.

Furthermore, the Secretary of Defense believes (3) that, even if a pause does not produce the full result this time, it would contribute toward a settlement later—that the “tacit bargaining” process with the Communists will probably involve several stages before the DRV/VC sights are brought down to a “settlement level” and that a pause now, even if the bombing must be resumed, will contribute to that end.

The Secretary of State feels the balance of arguments is against undertaking a pause at the present time and that a pause should be considered only at such times as the chances appear to be greater than they now seem that it would lead in the direction of a peaceful settlement acceptable to us.

The Secretary of State thus recommends that we continue our discussions with the other side through all possible channels, particularly exploring “what would happen” if there is a pause in the bombing. If such probes at any time give firm indications of a response by specific and acceptable actions on the part of Hanoi, a pause should then be undertaken. This is also entirely consistent with our public position and maintains what he feels is our present favorable international posture.

George W. Ball
Acting Secretary

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 6AA, High Level Comments re Bomb Pauses. Top Secret; Sensitive. A note on the source text states that this memorandum was received at the LBJ Ranch in Texas at 8:30 p.m. on November 28, and there is an indication that the President saw it.

2 For the covering memorandum, see Document 202.

3 See footnote 2, Document 203.

4 On October 19, Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces attacked a Special Forces camp at Plei Me, 25 miles southwest of Pleiku, beginning a month-long campaign that pitted U.S. and ARVN troops against VC/NVN forces. On November 14, the campaign culminated in a battle in the Ia Drang Valley when elements of the U.S. First Cavalry Division engaged VC/NVN troops in more than division strength in the fiercest fighting of the war to date. On November 22, Westmoreland informed CINCPAC that because of the influx of North Vietnamese forces into South Vietnam, he would require a minimum of 13 additional battalions and probably twice that amount. (COMUSMACV telegram 210122Z to CINCPAC, repeated to the White House; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Cables)

5 The last sentence of the paragraph is in Bundy's handwriting. He is referring to a conversation with Dobrynin on November 24. In a November 24 memorandum to the President, Bundy described the conversation as “the most candid and cordial conversation of our three-year acquaintance.” Bundy related that Dobrynin “expressed again the well-known Soviet view that a renewed and longer pause would be helpful.” Dobrynin suggested a pause of 12 to 20 days to allow for intense diplomatic effort, but offered no advance assurances of the results of such discussions. Dobrynin repeated the observation that it was impossible for North Vietnam to negotiate while under U.S. bombardment. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of McGeorge Bundy, Memos of Conversation, 1964-1966)

6 No records of these conversation have been found.

7 See Document 231.

8 The source text does not indicate the President's decision on this question.

9 Top Secret. As Bundy noted in the covering memorandum, this attachment comprises sections III and IV of a November 17 memorandum from Ball to the President. Section I was entitled “Basic Elements of a Second Pause,” and section II was “Possible Date-Time Scenario of a Second Pause.” Section III, printed here, was entitled “Pros and Cons of a Second Pause.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII)

209. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the President's Special Assistant (Valenti) 209. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the President's Special Assistant (Valenti)1

November 28, 1965, 2:05 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO VALENTI (AT THE RANCH)

Sec. said he couldn't reach McGeorge Bundy; wanted to find out whether a copy of the memorandum of conversation between B. and Dobrynin2 had reached the President. V. said it was on the President's desk now. Sec. said to tell the President that he thinks references in there to a pause are very important and that it seems to him that it would be useful to have McNamara bring Amb. Lodge back with him so we can go into this matter a bit;3 a time problem involved because McNamara might be leaving Saigon tonight. Sec. asked that the President him [give] him a ring or the Sec. will check in with him in an hour or two.

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Secretary Rusk was in Washington; Valenti was in Texas.

2 See footnote 5, Document 208.

3 According to telegram 1484 to Saigon for McNamara, November 28, the President did not wish Lodge to return with McNamara after the latter's trip to Saigon November 28-29. This did not preclude the possibility of Lodge returning to Washington in the near future. (Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 OSD)

210. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 210. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, November 29, 1965.

Several representatives of the American Friends Service Committee called this morning on Mr. Unger to recount a conversation which one of them, Mr. Lewis Schneider, had on November 162 in Paris with Mai Van Bo, DRV commercial representative. This conversation suggested that the North Vietnamese position is considerably more flexible than we have heretofore been led to believe; it is of course difficult to evaluate how much was being said for the benefit of an American group which does not support the war in Viet Nam and how much represents approved DRV policy.

The following are the principal points made by Mai Van Bo in the Paris conversation (a full account is in course of preparation):3 1. Mai Van Bo accepted that the United States for reasons of face could not accept North Viet-Nam's four points and said that all that would be required to open the way to negotiations would be a clear statement by the United States in support of the principles of the Geneva Accords of 1954.

2. The withdrawal of American forces is not a prerequisite to negotiations; all that is required is a U.S. statement accepting the principle of withdrawal of US forces, presumably eventually.

3. The DRV will not agree to a ceasefire. Mr. Schneider also did not remember any reference to a cessation of the U.S. bombing of the North.4

4. Mai Van Bo said the DRV was prepared to make an important concession in that it was ready to accept the existence of two separate Viet-Nams, with South Viet-Nam as an independent country.

5. The DRV is prepared to talk with the U.S. but not with the Government in Saigon. On the other hand there are acceptable individuals outside the NLF (and possibly including some people presently in the Government) who could constitute a group which could be represented in the negotiations. Interestingly, Mai Van Bo stated that the DRV would have been prepared to negotiate with the Diem Government but it does not recognize its successors as governments.

6. Mai Van Bo said nothing about next steps. In answer to Mr. Unger's question, the Friends left open the possibility of their carrying the dialogue farther forward, although this point was not pursued.

The AFSC called on Mai Van Bo for the purpose of asking whether North Viet Nam would permit the Friends to carry on humanitarian, civilian relief activities there. Mai Van Bo's answer on this is being awaited. The Friends realize of course that there would be questions about licensing goods to go to North Viet Nam and validation of passports for any American Friends who would wish to participate.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET. Top Secret; Exdis.

2 NB—Two days before last XYZ—BHR” [Footnote in the source text in Read's hand. Regarding the November 18 conversation with Mai Van Bo, see Document 185.]

3 See Document 211.

4 Mai Van Bo also mentioned the possibility, instead of a ceasefire, of a mutual de-escalation of military actions but did not indicate how this might be brought about.” [Footnote in the source text.]

211. Memorandum of Conversation 211. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 29, 1965.

SUBJECT

Mr. Schneider's Conversation with Mai Van Bo, DRV Commercial Representative at Paris—Comments on Negotiations

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Gilbert F. White, Professor in Department of Geography, University of Chicago; Chairman of the Board, AFSC

Colin Bell, Executive Secretary, AFSC

Louis Schneider, Associate Executive Secretary for Program,AFSC

Leonard Unger, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

W.A.K. Lake, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs

1. Mr. Schneider said that Mai Van Bo had made the following comments to him during the course of a conversation on November 16 in Paris on the possibility of the American Friends Service Committee's giving assistance to the people of North Viet-Nam: (a) It might be difficult for the US to accept Pham Van Dong's four points as a basis for negotiations as it would entail a loss of face. Bo suggested that a U.S. declaration of agreement with the principles of the Geneva Accords would be satisfactory to the DRV Government as a basis for negotiations. In response to Mr. Schneider's question, Bo said that the DRV would not demand the withdrawal of American forces as a precondition to negotiations but would require that the US declare its agreement in principle to their eventual withdrawal.

(b) Schneider raised the question of a ceasefire. Bo said that the DRV would not agree to a ceasefire before negotiations began but gave the impression that the DRV would agree to some sort of de-escalation.

(c) Bo said that the DRV would not negotiate with the present Saigon regime, although it would have negotiated with the Diem Government. The successors to the Diem Government were not representative. However, there were many good people in South Viet-Nam, within and outside the National Liberation Front, from whom a group could be formed with which the DRV would negotiate. It was Mr. Schneider's impression that Bo might even have been suggesting that the US form such a group. (In response to Mr. Unger's question, Mr. Schneider said Bo mentioned no names but did mention some categories, including the Buddhists. He would check on what the other categories were.)

(d) Bo said that the DRV was prepared to accept the existence of an independent South Viet-Nam, although they knew that this would not be in accordance with the Geneva Accords.

(e) Mr. Schneider raised the question of an international body to guarantee a settlement. Bo volunteered the thought that the best international supervisory body might be a revitalized International Control Commission.

(f) Bo said that the North Vietnamese were fighting for their independence. They knew what colonialism was like, as they had been fighting against it for a thousand years. Bo made no specific mention of either the USSR or the CPR.

2. In response to Mr. Unger's questions, Mr. Schneider stated that he thought that Bo was anxious to pass these thoughts on to an American and believed that Schneider would forward them to the USG. Bo said nothing, however, about what steps could be taken by the US to follow up on these statements, beyond his proposal that we declare our agreement with the principles of the Geneva Accords and our acceptance of eventual withdrawal of American forces. In response to Mr. Unger's specific question on whether the Friends would carry the dialogue further with Bo, Dr. White said that the Friends would try to be of assistance in any humanitarian way possible. They would prefer not to allow their involvement in political questions prejudice the success of their non-political, strictly humanitarian efforts, however. In response to further questions, Mr. Schneider said that Bo did not mention how de-escalation could be achieved, any connection between US bombing of North Viet-Nam and negotiations, or how the DRV assesses the protest movement in the United States (beyond his remarks on Norman Morrison). Mr. Schneider thought Bo understood well the fact that the AFSC was appealing to the DRV as well as to the US to find a solution to the conflict.

3. Mr. Unger thanked Mr. Schneider for passing on this information, remarking that some of it represented a change from previous DRV statements we had heard.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Lake and approved by Herbert Thompson of S/S on December 22. The source text is labeled “Part II of II.” The following note is typed at the top of the source text: “As indicated in the attached letter to Mr. Schneider from Mr. Unger, subsequent accounts of the conversation with Bo by Messrs. Mendel and Wood presented a less optimistic picture of the possibility of the DRV's agreeing to talks.” The letter, dated December 5, is ibid.

212. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 212. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson1

Washington, November 30, 1965.

This is a supplement to my memorandum to you dated November 3.2 This memorandum incorporates the implications of events since then and information gained on General Wheeler's and my visit with Ambassador Lodge, Admiral Sharp and General Westmoreland in Vietnam on November 28-29.3

1. Introductory comments. Before giving my assessment of the situation and recommendations, I want to report that United States personnel in Vietnam are performing admirably. The massive Cam Ranh Bay complex has sprung into operation since our last visit in July; the troops that we visited (the 173d Airborne Brigade and the 1st Cavalry Division) have fought and are fighting well and their morale is high; and the team in Saigon is working harmoniously.

2. The situation. There has been no substantial change since my November 3 memorandum in the economic, political or pacification situation. There is a serious threat of inflation because of the mixture of US force build-up and GVN deficit on the one hand and the tightly stretched Vietnamese economy on the other; the Ky “government of generals” is surviving, but not acquiring wide support or generating actions; pacification is thoroughly stalled, with no guarantee that security anywhere is permanent and no indications that able and willing leadership will emerge in the absence of that permanent security. (Prime Minister Ky estimates his government controls only 25% of the population today and reports that his pacification chief hopes to increase that to 50% two years from now.)

The dramatic recent changes in the situation are on the military side. They are the increased infiltration from the North and the increased willingness of the Communist forces to stand and fight, even in large-scale engagements. The Ia Drang River Campaign of early November is an example. The Communists appear to have decided to increase their forces in South Vietnam both by heavy recruitment in the South (especially in the Delta) and by infiltration of regular North Vietnamese forces from the North. Nine regular North Vietnamese regiments (27 infantry battalions) have been infiltrated in the past year, joining the estimated 83 VC battalions in the South. The rate of infiltration has increased from three battalion equivalents a month in late 1964 to a high of 9 or 12 during one month this past fall. General Westmoreland estimates that through 1966 North Vietnam will have the capability to expand its armed forces in order to infiltrate three regiments (nine battalion equivalents, or 4500 men) a month, and that the VC in South Vietnam can train seven new battalion equivalents a month—together adding 16 battalion equivalents a month to the enemy forces. Communist casualties and desertions can be expected to go up if my recommendations for increased US, South Vietnamese and third country forces are accepted. Nevertheless, the enemy can be expected to enlarge his present strength of 110 battalion equivalents to more than 150 battalion equivalents by the end of calendar 1966, when hopefully his losses can be made to equal his input.

As for the Communist ability to supply this force, it is estimated that, even taking account of interdiction of routes by air and sea, more than 200 tons of supplies a day can be infiltrated—more than enough, allowing for the extent to which the enemy lives off the land, to support the likely PAVN/VC force at the likely level of operations.

To meet this possible—and in my view likely—Communist build-up, the presently contemplated Phase I forces will not be enough. Phase I forces, almost all in place by the end of this year, involve 130 South Vietnamese, 9 Korean, 1 Australian and 34 US combat battalions (approximately 220,000 Americans). Bearing in mind the nature of the war, the expected weighted combat force ratio of less than 2-to-1 will not be good enough. Nor will the originally contemplated Phase II addition of 28 more US battalions (112,000 men) be enough; the combat force ratio, even with 32 new South Vietnamese battalions, would still be little better than 2-to-1 at the end of 1966. The initiative which we have held since August would pass to the enemy; we would fall far short of what we expected to achieve in terms of population control and disruption of enemy bases and lines of communications. Indeed, it is estimated that, with the contemplated Phase II addition of 28 US battalions, we would be able only to hold our present geographical positions.

3. Military options and recommendations. We have but two options, it seems to me. One is to go now for a compromise solution (something substantially less than the “favorable outcome” I described in my memorandum of November 3), and hold further deployments to a minimum. The other is to stick with our stated objectives and with the war, and provide what it takes in men and materiel. If it is decided not to move now toward a compromise, I recommend that the United States both send a substantial number of additional troops and very gradually intensify the bombing of North Vietnam. Ambassador Lodge, General Wheeler, Admiral Sharp and General Westmoreland concur in this pronged course of action, although General Wheeler and Admiral Sharp would intensify the bombing of the North more quickly. a. Troop deployments. With respect to additional forces in South Vietnam to maintain the initiative against the growing Communist forces, I recommend: 1. That the Republic of Korea be requested to increase their present deployment of nine combat battalions to 18 combat battalions (the addition of one division) before July 1966 and to 21 combat battalions (the addition of another brigade) before October 1966.

2. That the Government of Australia be requested to increase their present deployment of one combat battalion to two combat battalions before October 1966.

3. That the deployment of US ground troops be increased by the end of 1966 from 34 combat battalions to 74 combat battalions.

4. That the FY '67 Budget for the Defense Department and the January Supplement to the FY '66 Budget be revised to reflect the expansion of US forces required to support the additional deployments.

The 74 US battalions—together with increases in air squadrons, naval units, air defense, combat support, construction units and miscellaneous logistic support and advisory personnel which I also recommend—would bring the total US personnel in Vietnam to approximately 400,000 by the end of 1966. And it should be understood that further deployments (perhaps exceeding 200,000) may be needed in 1967.

b. Bombing of North Vietnam. With respect to the program of bombing North Vietnam, I recommend that we maintain present levels of activity in the three quadrants west and south of Hanoi, but that over a period of the next six months we gradually enlarge the target system in the northeast (Hanoi-Haiphong) quadrant until, at the end of the period, it includes “controlled” armed reconnaissance of lines of communication throughout the area, bombing of petroleum storage facilities and power plants, and mining of the harbors. (Left unstruck would be population targets, industrial plants, locks and dams.)

4. Pause in bombing North Vietnam. It is my belief that there should be a three-or four-week pause in the program of bombing the North before we either greatly increase our troop deployments to Vietnam or intensify our strikes against the North.4 The reasons for this belief are, first, that we must lay a foundation in the mind of the American public and in world opinion for such an enlarged phase of the war and, second, we should give North Vietnam a face-saving chance to stop the aggression. I am not seriously concerned about the risk of alienating the South Vietnamese, misleading Hanoi, or being “trapped” in a pause; if we take reasonable precautions, we can avoid these pitfalls. I am seriously concerned about embarking on a markedly higher level of war in Vietnam without having tried, through a pause, to end the war or at least having made it clear to our people that we did our best to end it.

5. Evaluation. We should be aware that deployments of the kind I have recommended will not guarantee success. US killed-in-action can be expected to reach 1000 a month, and the odds are even that we will be faced in early 1967 with a “no-decision” at an even higher level. My overall evaluation, nevertheless, is that the best chance of achieving our stated objectives lies in a pause followed, if it fails, by the deployments mentioned above.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 2EE, Primarily McNamara's Recommendations re Strategic Actions. Top Secret. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

2 Document 189.

3 This visit lasted 1-1/2 days. A copy of the extensive briefing paper by MACV for the Secretary of Defense and General Wheeler, November 28, is in the National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-324-69.

4 My recommendation for a “pause” is not concurred in by Ambassador Lodge, General Wheeler, or Admiral Sharp. [Footnote in the source text.]

213. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas 213. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, December 2, 1965, 8:34 p.m.

CAP 65799. We have been talking about Vietnam deployment recommendations for an hour this afternoon, and think the following preliminary thoughts are worth reporting.

We accept for planning that Westmoreland's deployment recommendations should be approved and that in all probability these deployments will take place in 1966. We do not see any good way of second-guessing Westmoreland and McNamara, although we can have a whack if you ask us to.

On this assumption, the December decisions seem to fall in four categories: 1. Proving that we have done everything that we could to move toward peace;

2. Preparing a solid base for the chosen level of later military action;

3. Building advance consensus for the probable budgetary consequences;

4. Balancing the size and energy of Westmoreland's effort by action to the limit on the political, social and economic front in Vietnam.

Our preliminary thoughts on each of these follow: 1. Efforts for peace. We see four broad general possibilities here.

(1) First and most narrowly, we could make a high-level official gesture to Hanoi proposing unconditional discussions at any one of a number of fixed times and dates and places. One way of doing this would be to send Harriman to Paris to speak to Bo, since Bo is the most visible representative of Hanoi in the West, and Harriman is your most distinguished envoy of peace. We think this should probably be done privately for later surfacing. But it could also be publicly announced if that seemed better. Even if Hanoi unyielding, you will have made specific dramatic effort before Congress returns. Other simultaneous messages to appropriate capitals should be going on during this effort.

(2) You can have a pause in bombing the north. Califano and Moyers think any such pause should probably be very brief, while Bundy shares McNamara's feeling that if we do, it should have a length of 3-4 weeks for international reasons. We all agree that such a pause should be quite hard-nosed. We would make it very clear that we were doing it to see whether there would be a response, and that in the absence of a response we would keep a fully free hand. One strong argument for a pause is that we all expect that it will be necessary to intensify the bombing substantially in 1966, and we will need to have shown that this is the fault of others.

(3) We are in the Christmas season, and it is possible that you could declare a Christmas armistice or ceasefire on a still wider basis, both in the north and in the south. Such a moment of peace could be as short as Christmas day, or as long as three weeks, depending on the balance of advantages and disadvantages. There are real difficulties with this course in South Vietnam, but it has a certain Johnsonian scale. During such a pause our men would of course be free to defend themselves and to reply sharply to any particular attack.

(4) Our diplomatic position on the Geneva Accords and free elections and the eventual future of Vietnam still lacks sharpness and punch. We think you should insist on a wholly new level of directness and definition in our peace aims for your State of the Union message.

2. Preparations for next military courses. (1) Our principal preliminary thought here is that you might call Westmoreland back to consult with you. The deepest domestic danger we see is from those who will charge us with a no-win policy, and our best protection is that you and the responsible commander are on all fours. Moreover, we all feel that reading Westmoreland through other men's eyes—even the eyes of McNamara—is not good enough for a Commander-in-Chief facing the decisions that are now before you. Understanding between you and Westmoreland will also help in insuring that the Chiefs stay with us. Only Wheeler himself among them is as broad gauged as Westmoreland.

(2) December should also include contingent decisions to make Westmoreland's deployments and probably to intensify bombing in the north in 1966, unless peace breaks out. Such preliminary decisions would help keep the Chiefs and other military on board during any pause or ceasefire or diplomatic peace offensive.

(3) We would side strongly with McNamara—and might even go beyond him—in avoiding any reserve call-up or other action not immediately required to meet Westmoreland's needs. In other words, we would carry forward the principle of minimum necessary action which you laid down in July.

3. Preparing the country for the FY-66 supplemental and the FY-67 budget. (1) During this month, the military budget, as well as the civilian one, must be pushed down as far as is consistent with both your basic programs and your ability to withstand charges of concealment. In this connection we are exploring the manner in which the Korean war was financed by Truman.

(2) As your budgetary decisions become clearer, more of the advance background notices of the kind Moyers gave last week could be released to selected elements of the press.

(3) We should get the Business Council to support your budget and any related actions we take as noninflationary, and we should get the top labor leaders to keep the labor movement within economic guidelines.

(4) Before you make any dramatic decisions related to tax increases or even more drastic anti-inflationary steps, people like Heller should be consulted, as well as your principal economic advisers.

Peace steps, military preparations and overall budgetary/economic planning will require most careful orchestration and a gradually growing process of public comment which we should turn our way just as far as possible. It occurs to us that someone like David Ginsburg might be called in to give full time to this problem, so that we get the speeches and statements of support which we want all across the spectrum of opinion from Tom Dewey to Walter Reuther.

These are just our preliminary thoughts. You will clearly need close consultation with Rusk and McNamara before these bridges are crossed, and we think you may also need a chance to talk with more detached advisers like Clifford and Fortas. And as you approach final decisions, you will also want to consult Eisenhower and the Congressional leadership.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Cables. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Flash. Also from Califano and Moyers.

214. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas 214. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, December 3, 1965.

CAP 65810. 1. In two meetings today,2 Rusk and McNamara have made significant progress in clarifying their own thinking on Vietnam. So far they have concentrated mainly on the actual course of war and diplomacy, and have not yet got deeply into the critical questions of political management which Joe and Bill and I opened in our message to you last night.3 But I cannot disagree with their judgment that it is important to sort out the military and diplomatic priorities.

2. Today's discussions confirm the judgment that we shall almost surely wish to proceed energetically on Westmoreland's course in South Vietnam. Thus all of us believe that we should accept for planning purposes additional deployments averaging fifteen thousand a month over the next year. It does not follow that we should announce a large lump sum increase anytime soon. Indeed our preliminary judgment is that steady increase of pressure on the ground should be as undramatic as possible—and of course should have as many third country battalions as we can get (separate paper from McNaughton on this will be in tomorrow's pouch).4

3. At the same time the two Secretaries do share increasing concern about possible Chinese involvement. There will be a special briefing tomorrow morning5 at which they will hear what Max Frankel has already been told. I continue to share Alex Johnson's view that Chinese Communists will not fight for South Vietnam but only for what they regard as survival of North Vietnam.

4. The open question is the pause. The day's discussions here have increased support for some form of pause. I will send a memo tomorrow developing pros and cons further,6 but the long and short of it is that we think the international advantages outweigh the international traps. We also think that firm and steady action in the south, together with public awareness of Chinese Communist danger, should keep most Americans in line with any decision you take on this matter.

5. We have agreed to make assignments for detailed planning documents in all relevant fields in a further meeting tomorrow morning,7 and it is our current intention to have all papers ready for discussion with you by the end of Monday,8 so that we could fly to you on Tuesday if you wish. The controlling item in urgency here is the pause, because it will require intensive diplomatic preparation in more than one capital if it is to have minimum danger and maximum benefit.

6. Meetings today have shown the Secretary of State at his best in the leadership of a complex discussion with a small group he knows well. At the direct request of the two Secretaries, Califano and Moyers have not been included in these meetings, but I have told the Secretaries that I think it important to keep them both fully informed of the course of discussion separately, and both Secretaries have agreed. Both Joe and Bill have a deep and penetrating understanding of your immediate interest, and together the three of us will try to keep in touch with all aspects of the matter from your point of view. But the Secretary of State feels that he has a direct instruction from you to operate this review and my judgment, in which Moyers concurs, is he should run it his way unless you have other instructions.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Cables. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The date-time-group on the source text is illegible. An earlier draft indicates that the telegram was sent on December 3. (Ibid.)

2 According to Rusk's Appointment Book, the Secretary met with McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, and U. Alexis Johnson from 12:30 to approximately 3 p.m. Rusk also met with McNamara, Vance, Ball, U. Alexis Johnson, and McGeorge Bundy from 6:03 p.m. to 7:52 p.m. This telegram was apparently sent during the evening of December 3. (Ibid.)

3 Document 213.

4 Dated December 4. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (A))

5 Hughes and Whiting of INR briefed Rusk, Ball, U. Alexis Johnson, Thompson, McNamara, Vance, McNaughton, and McGeorge Bundy beginning at 9:35 a.m. on December 4 at the Department of State. (Ibid., Rusk Appointment Book) No other record of the briefing has been found.

6 Document 215.

7 These assignments were probably made at the briefing by Hughes and Whiting described in footnote 5 above.

8 December 6.

215. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 215. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, December 4, 1965.

1. I promised you yesterday a memorandum by this pouch on the pros and cons of the pause as it now looks. This memorandum is a personal assessment for your interim consideration. There should be a further paper with fairly general support within the Administration by the end of the day on Monday.2

2. The opinion in favor of a pause continues to grow here. This morning there seems to be a favorable consensus among Rusk, McNamara, Vance, Ball, McNaughton, the Bundy brothers, and Tommy Thompson. We think this is the best single way of keeping it clear that Johnson is for peace, while Ho is for war. This has great advantages in balancing the further military deployments and the big military budget. It has advantages with all third countries, and perhaps particularly with the Soviet Union. Thompson points out that a pause would greatly strengthen the Russian resolve to stand clear of our fighting in Vietnam.

3. The pause also has an important political advantage which has only recently emerged in our discussions. If a pause should lead to the conference table, it would mean that Hanoi had given up one of its current conditions—which is the acceptance of the program of the NLF (the Viet Cong). Thus such a move by Hanoi would drive a sharp wedge between Hanoi and the Communists in South Vietnam. We know that it is just this kind of sell-out that the southern Communists fear. Thus, a pause which led to negotiations could be strongly defended in Saigon and with hard-liners at home as a very powerful instrument of attack on Viet Cong morale—since all of our mounting pressures in the South would still continue. Moreover, we are increasingly persuaded that there is no trap we cannot manage in deciding when and how to end the pause. We would make it clear at every stage that the continuation of the pause and its ending would both be governed by our judgment on the continuing aggression from the North against the South. (To put it another way, while a pause might lead to negotiations, we would never commit ourselves to a permanent end of the bombing merely in return for a conference.) Thus either the infiltration would stop, or we would have a perfectly legitimate and internationally defensible reason for renewed bombing at a time of our choice.

4. We are not agreed here on the timing of a pause. Most of us have thought that it probably ought to happen in December and early January, so that you could end it or not—as you chose—around the time of the State of the Union message. But we now think that perhaps it could come later—and might even be a balancing element in your military announcements for the effort in South Vietnam in January. This needs more thought.

5. The weaknesses of the pause are two—one international and one domestic:

The international danger is that it would simply shift the propaganda of soft-liners from the bombing to the need to recognize the NLF. Our current line on this is fairly good—that Hanoi can bring anyone it wants. But the pressure would grow to give some more explicit recognition to people who “control one-half the country.” This is exactly what we must not do if we do not wish to lose the whole game in South Vietnam. But sooner or later we are going to have to face this music, and perhaps it is not so bad to face it now during a pause.

The domestic problem is more severe. The Joint Chiefs are now pressing very hard for escalation of the bombing, and the whole American Right is likely to be tempted by the argument that just at the moment of trial we are weakening in our support for our men in Vietnam. McNamara can make a very convincing argument that the bombing in the North is only marginally related to the fighting in the South—whether or not we escalate. But it is hard to get certified military agreement to this proposition. Against this, of course, we have the pronouncement of the National Council of Churches, but it is far from clear that they really represent their congregations.3

6. This is only a preliminary paper, but I think it does contain the central elements of what will be the most urgent question before us when we meet with you.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. There is an indication on the source text that this memorandum was received at the LBJ Ranch in Texas at 11 a.m. on December 4, and that the President saw it.

2 December 6; see Document 220.

3 On December 3, the general board of the National Council of Churches in Madison, Wisconsin, released a policy statement that noted with approval the Johnson administration's commitment to unconditional discussions with North Vietnam and its policy of not bombing population centers. It also urged the President to take new initiatives in seeking peace in Vietnam.

216. Letter From the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) to President Johnson 216. Letter From the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) to President Johnson1

Washington, December 4, 1965.

Dear Mr. President:

I have today had a long conversation with Dean Rusk and George Ball regarding the situation in Vietnam.2 I know that you will be faced with some further difficult decisions in the coming days ahead in light of the report made to you by Bob McNamara on his recent trip. Dean and George will convey my views in detail to you at your meeting on Tuesday.3 However, I would like you to know that I strongly favor an early pause in the bombing of North Vietnam, perhaps for 3 or 4 weeks, with a new indication of our willingness to negotiate. I come to this conclusion even though I realize that there is risk that if a pause leads to negotiation it would be difficult to resume bombing North Vietnam as long as those negotiations continued.

My reasons are as follows:

1. If further escalation is in prospect, such a move would help tremendously in carrying world opinion with us.

2. From my talks with the Secretary General and with many UN delegations, I am convinced that such action would be welcomed and strongly supported all over the world as further confirmation of the earnestness and sincerity of the United States' determination to leave no stone unturned in trying to move the Vietnam problem from the battlefield to the conference table. A pause would be a concrete act adding immense reality and weight to your statements calling for unconditional discussions. Such a decision, despite no positive signals from the other side, would be viewed as an undisputed act of statesmanship, an act only a great and strong nation could take.

3. The same is true as regards American domestic opinion. The recent statement of the National Council of Churches is only one sign of mounting concern among responsible citizens as a result of our increased commitment of manpower and the additional American casualties being incurred. A pause would increase the confidence and assurance of the preponderant majority of the American people that while we intend to honor our commitments in Vietnam, you will exhaust every means to make our willingness to negotiate unmistakably clear.

4. Such a proposal would put the Communists further to the test and would intensify pressure on them to negotiate.

5. It would make it less difficult for the Soviets to abandon their present passive attitude and actively to seek to bring Hanoi to the conference table, even in the face of continued opposition from Peking. At least it would offer hope of a more fruitful Soviet-American dialogue on this subject.

6. It would place Hanoi and Peiping in a defensive position in relation to the non-aligned world; it would reassure our friends and supporters and reinforce their domestic position; it would restore the initiative in this matter where it properly belongs, to the leader of the greatest power in the world, the US.

The impact of such an announced pause would be enhanced if coupled with a strong personal reaffirmation on your part of our willingness to go anywhere, at any time, at any level, to negotiate. You might well link this with a restatement of our peace aims in Vietnam.

If you approve this course of action, I would strongly urge you to make such an announcement in the UN General Assembly, before the Assembly closes on December 21. This would have the maximum dramatic effect and would be consistent with your desire to use the UN to the utmost.

I have set forth these views of mine which I strongly hold in rather brief and summary fashion, but I shall be very glad to elaborate upon them if you so desire.

Respectfully submitted,

Arthur J. Goldberg4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (A). Secret.

2 According to Rusk's Appointment Book, Rusk left the briefing by Hughes and Whiting at 11:08 a.m. (see footnote 5, Document 214) for discussions with Goldberg and Sisco, which lasted until 11:31 a.m. Rusk rejoined Goldberg, Sisco, and Ball from 12:30 to 12:55 p.m. (Johnson Library)

3 December 7; see Document 223.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

217. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 217. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 6, 1965.

2024. Eyes only for Bundy.

1. Archbishop Palmas, the Apostolic Delegate, “bumped into” me at the garden party last Sunday night celebrating the King of Thailand's birthday and immediately brought up the matter of the Viet Cong wanting to see me with regard to ending the war.2 He said:

2. Just as he and I had surmised, it has taken them one month to consult with each other. The “former Minister” had called on Palmas last Wednesday or Thursday3 and had said:

3. The leaders of the VC with whom he is in touch had had a long discussion on just what their terms for ending the war should be, and they have decided on three things:

4. First, the United States presence should remain in South Viet-Nam.

5. Second, the United States would guarantee the sovereignty of South Viet-Nam.

6. Third, there would be no negotiations with North Viet-Nam.

7. They also would send a man with “Ambassadorial” rank to see me who would have the necessary letter of credentials.

8. Palmas added that his “former Minister” wept while talking about the sufferings of the Viet Cong, and stressed the urgency of ending the war. He also said there was great alarm among the VC about the entrance of the North Vietnamese troops into South Viet-Nam. He implied that the Viet Cong in South Viet-Nam have the same feelings about Hanoi that Hanoi has about Peking.

9. The “former Minister” also said, according to Palmas, that those who say he and his friends are pro-French “should remember that it is we who killed the French Vice Consul Bion.”

10. Palmas asked what I wanted to do when the “former Minister” came again and asked whether I would receive him. I said I would like to know what his name was before I could answer such a question, but that I would certainly “make some arrangement.”

11. He asked me whether I would receive the representative of the Viet Cong. I said that if he was of high rank—a true envoy plenipotentiary—that I would talk with him but that I did not want to have them send a subordinate official to talk with me. Palmas said that he had been assured that they would send a man “with ambassadorial rank.”

12. Comment: This is a surprising development. I suspect this is a splinter group who will not be able to end the war. But it may presage a real split within the VC. If they could end the war, then we could not possibly ask for better terms. If I am in any doubt as to whether the so-called representative is really senior or not, I will have an Embassy official talk to him to verify that point. I am sure, however, that there is no use in any American here other than me talking peace terms. Both my Residence and that of the Apostolic Delegate are constantly watched, but I think I can find a place which is not watched and where I can meet this man.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 12:41 a.m.

2 See Document 191.

3 December 1 or 2.

218. Personal Notes of Meeting 218. Personal Notes of Meeting1

Washington, December 6, 1965, 3 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Rusk, McNamara, Ball, Vance, UA Johnson, McNaughton, WPB, Wheeler, Raborn, Clifford, McG. B.

Rusk and McNamara state the current military program. Chiefs concur.

A. Scenario

A. Political and Social Action Program

Clifford wonders where the Hell we are going—further & further in with no prospect of a return. Kind of war Mao Tse-tung would fight. But we must do the job—he is sure of that. Can't we use Air Power & hold in defensive positions on ground. Without 600,000 ground troops in jungle war. Clifford remembers Korea. Can we get to the same limited goal by less costly means.

DR: retrospectively perhaps we should have done much more in 1961—maybe 200,000 men to cool 'em off quick.

Wheeler: We have got a real initiative. No one ever won anything by remaining on defensive. We already are pouring air on in SVN—a quantum jump in air power.

DR: US people will do what has to be done if they are sure that everything possible is being done.

Increasing non-military actions.

1. model provinces

2. education

3. health

4. civic action

5. progress toward elections

6. Private Foundation

Sargent Shriver to be deputy for Peace [of a] Southeast Asia Peace Agency.

Clifford's negative argument: 1. admit you're wrong. 2. they put you in a box if you ever resume.

Wheeler: any substantial pause will allow them to repair & move. We've paid price once in planes & pilots; we'll have to pay it again; violent reaction is possible in our own public; the other side will get the wrong signal. Once you stop it's hard to start again & you could shake GVN to its toenails.

If we increase the bombing in the North, we could argue for it now. The world is happier because of it.

Clifford: try & get the benefit of Pause without Pausing. This is the time to negotiate: an all out effort with some indication that it is a last minute effort.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Papers of McGeorge Bundy, Notes for December 6, 1965. No classification marking. These notes were handwritten by Bundy for his personal use. The meeting was held in Rusk's conference room at the Department of State.

219. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 219. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 6, 1965, 6:10 p.m.

1576. Literally eyes only for the Ambassador from the Secretary. I was much interested in your Nodis 2024.2 While one must be skeptical for a lot of reasons, the possibility of any significant defection from the liberation front has great potential importance. I would suggest that you follow up along the lines of your telegram.

It may be that such a group is only a splinter. There would be great advantage, however, if such a splinter had any territorial base which opens up the possibility of a rapid peace in even two or three provinces. Amnesty arrangements might be made and through full cooperation with intelligence, police activities, etc., North Vietnamese elements could be prevented from punishing the splinter group. Depending upon the circumstances, some tacit understanding might even be thinkable which would leave the splinter group certain privileges in a particular area provided the writ of the government ran on other matters. I have in mind the arrangements worked out with the two sects in the Southwest.

You would have to be a little careful about a commitment not to negotiate with Hanoi unless the dimensions of the breakaway are far greater than you and we presently believe. In view of the public position of the President, a commitment on negotiations would need checking with us.

I leave to your judgment the complex question as to when and whether General Ky ought to be informed very privately of such a contact.3 I should think that he would be tempted by the possibility of a major defection and there is always the possibility that he would learn about a contact through channels other than your own.

We are not allowing our hopes to rise on this matter but a significant split within the Viet Cong would be a most welcome Christmas present.

With warm regards.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Rusk and cleared by William Bundy.

2 Document 217.

3 In telegram 2037 from Saigon, December 7, Lodge agreed fully about avoiding any commitment to negotiate with Hanoi and said he would “agree to nothing” at any meeting with an “Ambassador” from the National Liberation Front. Lodge wanted to tell Tran Van Do, rather than Ky, after the meeting took place. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

220. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas 220. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, December 6, 1965, 7:03 p.m.

CAP 65828. 1. Joe Califano has told me that you wonder if we are really ready for the meeting tomorrow.2 It is a fair question, and this message aims to answer it. In the largest sense, we are not fully ready, but nevertheless there are immediate decisions that cannot wait, and on these we believe we are ready.

2. We do not have a complete and fully developed political, economic and social program to match the major new military deployments proposed for 1966. We can and will develop such a program, but we have to understand that unless and until there can be military victories, this program is irrelevant. Moreover, we are making major non-military efforts now which should produce results with victories, although they will come to nothing without them.

3. A strengthened political and economic program can and will include such items as the following: A. New economic programs to prevent inflation.

B. Intensified countrywide health programs.

C. Highlighted educational efforts.

D. Stronger propaganda, including television.

E. Strengthened defector programs.

F. Establishment of model pacification districts and provinces.

G. Economic warfare denial program.

H. Streamlined organization for peace actions both in Saigon and in Washington.

I. Appointment of outstanding executives for peace in both capitals.

J. Redeveloped political action efforts leading toward strengthened anti-Communist political organization and to pave the way for elections.

K. Wider and stronger agricultural reform programs.

Lodge and company would say that they are doing much of this now, but we all know it can be done better, and in any event it should be a major part of your 1966 Vietnam policy.

4. But with or without this stronger non-military program, we face major immediate military and diplomatic decisions. McNamara and the Chiefs are already engaged in detailed planning for the additional deployments and expenditures Westmoreland's program requires. Thus the issues presented in the military paper which was sent to you earlier today (CAP 65822)3 have to be decided this week.

5. We also have to decide now on a pause, if we are to have one before January. Advocates and opponents of a pause agree that it must be about three weeks in length to have any value. It is also agreed that it must have preliminary diplomatic preparation in Saigon and other capitals if it is not to backfire. We also agree that you should have freedom to end the pause before Congress returns, if you wish. In combination, these requirements mean that we must decide to go ahead now, if we are to go ahead at all before Congress returns. It is the calendar and not a lot of insistent subordinates that is forcing the hour of decision.

6. Next following messages contain three papers relating to a pause.4 The first is State Department's statement of a plan, with a summary of the pros and cons. Second is suggested points for Presidential statement announcing a pause. The third is a paper giving questions and answers that might be used by U.S. spokesman in the wake of a Presidential announcement.

7. We have discussed these papers at length today with Clark Clifford, and he sides with Raborn, Wheeler and the Joint Chiefs against a pause. The rest of us are for it. I will be prepared to summarize arguments pro and con tomorrow. Two basic arguments against a pause are, first, that it suggests that bombing is wrong, and second, that it exposes us to diplomatic entrapment which would make resumption very difficult.

8. My own conviction is still that the best preparation for the tough programs of January is a peace offensive in December, and that the pause is the necessary centerpiece of that effort.

PAPER NO. 1

A PLAN FOR A PAUSE

In view of the major additional effort required to continue the South Vietnam conflict along present lines during 1966, we can and should take a major new initiative at an early date both (A) to make another bona fide effort to find a peaceful solution; and (B) to convince the American public and all the key nations that we have in fact exhausted all possibilities before stepping up our effort.

The public and private exchange of negotiating positions between Hanoi and ourselves has been most active in the last nine months. We have gone as far as we can in verbal messages, and only some major new element in the form of a “pause” offers real hope toward either (A) or (B).

Need for a Pause:

1. A pause may be essential to achieve either successful negotiations or a tapering-off of military action in South Vietnam. There is a significant difference between our activities in the south and our bombing of the north. For reasons of face, the Hanoi regime may find it difficult to begin negotiations while its own territory is being bombed. For reasons of prestige in the Communist world, Peiping—and perhaps even Moscow—may feel compelled to prevent any negotiations while a fellow socialist state is under air attack by the United States.

2. This thesis has been reinforced by Ambassador Dobrynin, who has made it clear to McGeorge Bundy that the Soviets would really make an effort if we undertook a pause of “12-20 days”5 —although he made it equally clear that the Soviets could give no assurance of Hanoi's response.

3. In addition to improving (although by no means guaranteeing) the chances for a possible successful negotiation, a pause could improve our peace-seeking posture throughout the world, which has been significantly weakened by the Sevareid story in Look.6

4. A pause could also make it easier for the American people to accept the substantial increase in our 1966 effort, since it would further demonstrate that, before committing more American lives and resources to Vietnam, we are doing everything possible to find a peaceful solution.

5. A pause should reduce the likelihood of further Soviet involvement and stimulate further dissension between Moscow and Peiping.

The Dangers and Disadvantages of a Pause:

1. The peace demonstrations in this country and the first heavy U.S. casualties have increased the danger that Hanoi might interpret a pause as a signal of weakness. Continued large U.S. deployments during the pause period would partially offset the chances of such an interpretation.

2. There is no assurance that a pause would lead to significant negotiations; the chances are much less than fifty percent.

3. What Hanoi is seeking is not a pause, but a complete cessation of bombing. They could be expected to do everything possible to prevent our resumption of bombing—and in this effort they would probably be joined not only by the Soviet Union and Peiping, but by many of our friends around the world.

4. Ambassador Lodge foresees great dangers in a pause and it would certainly be hard to persuade the GVN that a pause is necessary. We must, therefore, assume that a pause would create considerable concern in Saigon.

Recommendation for a Pause:

After balancing these considerations, we recommend that you approve a pause as soon as possible this month. This decision would, of course, be subject to consultation and joint action with the GVN.

Action Issues:

The two main issues that need to be faced in carrying out a pause are: 1. The conditions under which we would resume bombing or continue the pause.

2. A timing scenario for a pause now.

1. Conditions of resumption or continuation. We have all along taken the position that we could suspend or cease bombing only in return for reciprocal actions by Hanoi. We all believe that this must be the way in which we present the pause both publicly and through diplomatic channels.

Nonetheless, the question arises whether we would in fact be prepared to continue the suspension of bombing if Hanoi were to drop its present conditions for negotiation, specifically its insistence on the acceptance of the “NLF program.” Such a switch in Hanoi's position would make it difficult for us to resume bombing at an early date. But it would also represent a really major concession by Hanoi that would tend to create sharp frictions and loss of morale as between Hanoi and the Liberation Front. The latter would see the concession as the possible start of a sell-out of their position. This is a possibility to which both Hanoi and the NLF are most sensitive because of the general belief of Vietnamese Communists that Hanoi itself was sold out in similar fashion by the Soviets in 1954.

We now believe we should be prepared to continue the suspension if Hanoi makes this concession, provided, however, that we would reserve the right to resume bombing if Hanoi in fact kept up the infiltration and high levels of military activity in the south, particularly by regulars. So we are talking of a suspension that might be continued while we fully explore the new possibilities of negotiation, but we would maintain our freedom to resume bombing even while negotiating efforts were still underway.

There is a third Hanoi response that might cause us difficulty: agreeing to negotiate only if the NLF were accepted as a principal party. We believe that your July 28 statement, offering the NLF the chance to present its views but not as a principal party, has gone as far as we can go. We would have to accept the difficulties and criticism of refusing to go further.

2. Timing scenario. We estimate that it would take 12-15 days to complete the preparatory actions after decision, before a pause could be begun. The key elements are: A. Consultation with Lodge. We would need to bring him carefully aboard, probably in Saigon, and this would take 3-4 days, with an emissary far preferable to attempting to handle it by cable. We have to go over with him carefully just how he would handle it with Ky, and we have to bring him into all our reasoning.

B. Lodge's consultation with GVN. This will certainly encounter some initial skepticism or resistance, and we may have to make quite firm commitments on our future ground force deployments. Moreover, the group nature of the GVN means that at least four and possibly more senior leaders have to be brought in. We cannot estimate less than four days for this process.

C. Notification of the Soviets and key allies, and consultation with Congress. We believe this must take place not less than 2 days before the announcement.

The scenario would also provide for a message to Hanoi just before the announcements, and for a short public announcement by the South Vietnamese and U.S. Governments jointly on the day the pause starts, probably supplemented by a fuller statement by you.

PAPER NO. 2

SUGGESTED POINTS FOR PRESIDENTIAL STATEMENT ANNOUNCING SUSPENSION OF BOMBING OF NORTHVIETNAM

1. Aggression in Vietnam continues to be gravest current threat to peace of world.

2. Brief review of basic U.S. position as stated July 28— A. Firmness against aggression;

B. Readiness to do all that is necessary to turn it back;

C. Strengthened economic and social action in South Vietnam;

D. Energetic efforts to move toward peace.

3. Events since July have shown— A. Gallantry and effectiveness of U.S. combat forces;

B. Persistent and increasing aggression from the north;

C. Need for still further strengthening of nonmilitary effort; and

D. Continued complete rejection of peace efforts by Hanoi and Peking.

4. The continuing and increasing Communist infiltration and aggression now produce the prospect of further sharp increases in the level of fighting, with mounting losses and suffering for all concerned.

5. The U.S. remains strong and determined and can meet any challenge at any necessary level.

6. But the U.S. wants peace and will leave no path unexplored.

7. The President has therefore decided to suspend air attack on North Vietnam in order to see whether parallel actions by others can open the way to peace.

8. Meanwhile, our joint effort in South Vietnam will continue. Our peaceful photographic surveillance of North Vietnam will continue, the effort for political progress in the south will continue, and our search for unconditional discussions will continue.

9. This action is based on strength, not weakness. Bombing was and is amply justified, but the object of the bombing is peace, and if a suspension can move us in that direction, no one will be more pleased than the United States.

10. The responsibility for aggression rests with others. The responsibility for action in response to the new decision also rests with them. It is for them to decide whether to move now toward peace or whether their continued aggression will force upon all concerned the additional costs of still more violent war in 1966.

11. Designation of Ambassador Harriman as U.S. plenipotentiary for peace talks at any time, at any place.

12. Designation of Vice President Humphrey to undertake a diplomatic mission to friendly countries explaining both this initiative for peace and the determination of the United States to move forward firmly if there is no adequate response.

PAPER NO. 3

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS FOR APPROPRIATE U.S. SPOKESMAN IN THE WAKE OF THE PRESIDENTIAL ANNOUNCEMENT OF A SUSPENSION OF BOMBING

1. The Military Consequence of the Suspension.

Q. Does this suspension increase the danger to U.S. fighting men in South Vietnam?

A. No. There is only a slow and indirect relation between bombing activity in the north and the level of battle in the south, and it will be quite practicable to make up the time lost in the pause by intensified air attack afterwards if necessary. Moreover, the whole purpose of the suspension is to induce matching action by the other side to back off from its infiltration and aggression, and any such back-off would itself greatly decrease the dangers facing U.S. forces in South Vietnam.

Q. Will not the pause allow dangerous time for reconstruction in the north?

A. No. Any repairs which are effected during a pause can be dealt with afterwards. Our reconnaissance will continue, and our forces will be ready to renew their attacks promptly if necessary.

Q. But you have claimed the bombing is effective. Surely it must follow that the suspension gives an advantage to the enemy.

A. Obviously, the suspension does give a respite while it lasts. But we have never believed or asserted that the bombing of the north is the central part of our activity. To put it another way, we have been bombing the north for 40 weeks. Each week of suspension loses for us only a small proportion of the overall effect of our bombing so far. This is an acceptable loss in order to demonstrate our good faith in seeking peace and in order to open the door to peace if possible.

2. Political Terms and Conditions of the Suspension.

Q. Under what conditions do you plan to resume the bombing?

A. The President has said that this decision will be determined by the actions of others, and we do not wish to lay down precise conditions or to make any sort of ultimatum. We are trying to make it easy for others to respond—not hard.

Q. Are you in communication with Hanoi and Moscow and Peking about this matter?

A. We are making appropriate diplomatic communications on a very wide scale but we think it more productive to do this privately, and we do not expect to discuss these private communications. All of them are governed by the policy declaration of the President.

Q. You used to say that you would only suspend the bombing if there were evidence that others would respond by action on their side. Do you have persuasive evidence or have you changed your position?

A. We have no clear evidence, but the situation has changed in one important respect. The increasing infiltration from the north, and increasing Communist violence in the south have made it clear that unless there is a change in the situation, there will be much intensified warfare in 1966. In this situation the President thinks it right to explore every opportunity for peace, and it is in that spirit that he has suspended the bombing.

Q. Would you keep up suspension in return for unconditional discussions?

A. We could certainly welcome unconditional discussion, and that would be a very encouraging development. But we could hardly sustain this pause for a protracted time if aggression and infiltration from the north are continued as at present.

Q. Is the designation of Governor Harriman indication that you expect another Geneva Conference?

A. The designation of Governor Harriman is designed to underline the sincerity and determination of the United States in seeking to move to the peace table. The form and membership of such a conference are not important to the United States, which will meet with any interested government at any time.

Q. The Communists will undoubtedly now press you on the question of negotiations with the Viet Cong. Are you ready to soften your position on this as you have apparently softened your position on a pause in the bombing?

A. We continue to stand on the President's statement of July 28. “If Hanoi is ready to negotiate, the Viet Cong would have no difficulty in being represented and having their views presented. We would not think that would be an insurmountable problem at all.”

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Cables. Top Secret; Eyes Only. A copy was sent to Austin for Moyers.

2 See Document 223.

3 CAP 65822, December 6, sent to the President in Texas, transmitted a draft of McNamara's memorandum, Document 222. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Situation Room File, Outgoing Traffic)

4 These papers were not sent separately but are included in this telegram.

5 See footnote 5, Document 208.

6 See footnote 2, Document 203.

221. Telegram From the National Security Council Executive Secretary (Smith) to President Johnson, in Texas 221. Telegram From the National Security Council Executive Secretary (Smith) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, December 7, 1965, 9:44 a.m.

CAP 65830. Following is text of cable from Lodge, Saigon 2034.2 Secretary Rusk has a copy in his briefing book:

1. The Viet Cong bombing of the Metropole,3 with its toll of American, New Zealand and Vietnamese dead and wounded, is the fourth such event which has happened during my service in Viet-Nam. Like its predecessors, it stimulates the thought, first, that we are not interlopers or trespassers here but that we are here legally and have a right to be here. This prompts the further thought that we have a duty to protect our own personnel against future terrorist attacks of this kind. For us to strike back, therefore, is not only a just punishment for an outrageous aggression but it may also head off another similar outrage. This is a worthy aim.

2. I therefore recommend that we inflict some punishment on North Viet-Nam which we will state is a retaliation. It could be something which we intend to do anyway.

3. You in Washington are much better informed than I am but some possibilities which seem to me to be worthy are bombing coal mines, textile mills, irrigation ditches, the coastal waterway between South China and North Viet-Nam, steel mills, fertilizer factories and any other unmanned objectives. Lodge.4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Cables. Secret; Exdis. Also sent to McGeorge Bundy for information. Received at the LBJ Ranch at 9:07 a.m.

2 Dated December 5. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S.)

3 Reference is to the bombing of the U.S. servicemen's Metropole Hotel on December 4 in which 9 persons were killed (1 U.S. Marine, 1 New Zealand artilleryman, and 7 South Vietnamese civilians) and 137 injured (of which 62 were civilians).

4 In telegram 1595 to Saigon, December 8, the Department informed Lodge that it had approved a bombing attack on an isolated electric power plant north of Haiphong. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S.)

222. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 222. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson1

Washington, December 7, 1965.

SUBJECT

Military and Political Actions Recommended for South Vietnam

I. Appraisal of Situation in South Vietnam

A. Non-military situation. There has been no substantial change in the past few months in the economic, political or pacification situation. There is a serious threat of inflation because of the mixture of US force build-up and GVN deficit on the one hand and the tightly stretched Vietnamese economy on the other; the Ky “government of generals” is surviving, but not acquiring wide support or generating actions; pacification is thoroughly stalled, with no guarantee that security anywhere is permanent and no indications that able and willing leadership will emerge in the absence of that permanent security. (Prime Minister Ky estimates his government “controls” only 25% of the population today and reports that his pacification chief hopes to increase that to 50% two years from now.)

B. Military situation. The dramatic recent changes in the situation are on the military side. They are the increased infiltration from the North (mainly on greatly improved routes through Laos) and the increased willingness of the Communist forces to stand and fight, even in large-scale engagements. The Ia Drang River Campaign of November is an example. The Communists appear to have decided to increase their forces in South Vietnam both by heavy recruitment in the South (especially in the Delta) and by infiltration of regular North Vietnamese forces from the North. We believe that nine regular North Vietnamese regiments (27 infantry battalions) have been infiltrated in the past year, joining the estimated 83 VC battalions in the South. The rate of infiltration has increased from three battalion equivalents a month in late 1964 to a high of 9 or 12 during one month this past fall. General Westmoreland estimates that through 1966 North Vietnam will have the capability2 to expand its armed forces in order to infiltrate three regiments (9 battalion equivalents, or 4500 men) a month, and that the VC in South Vietnam can recruit and train 7 new battalion equivalents a month—together adding 16 battalion equivalents a month to the enemy forces. Communist casualties and desertions can be expected to go up if our recommendations for increased US, South Vietnamese and third-country forces are accepted. Nevertheless, the enemy can be expected to enlarge his present strength of 110 battalion equivalents to more than 150 battalion equivalents by the end of calendar 1966, when hopefully his losses can be made to equal his input.

As for the Communist ability to supply this force, it is estimated that, even taking account of interdiction of routes by air and sea, more than 200 tons of supplies a day on the average can be infiltrated—more than enough, allowing for the extent to which the enemy lives off the land, to support the likely PAVN/VC force at the likely level of operations.

To meet this possible—and in our view likely—Communist buildup, the presently contemplated Phase I forces will not be enough. Phase I forces, almost all in place by the end of this year, involve 130 South Vietnamese, 9 Korean, 1 Australian and 34 US combat battalions (approximately 220,000 Americans). Bearing in mind the nature of the war, the expected weighted combat force ratio of less than 2-to-1 will not be good enough. Nor will the originally contemplated Phase II addition of 28 more US battalions (112,000 men) be enough; the combat force ratio, even with 32 new South Vietnamese battalions, would still be little better than 2-to-1 at the end of 1966. The initiative which we have held since August would pass to the enemy; we would fall far short of what we expected to achieve in terms of population control and disruption of enemy bases and lines of communications. Indeed, it is estimated that, with the contemplated Phase II addition of 28 US battalions, we would be able only to hold our present geographical positions.

II. Recommendations for Military Deployments

We believe that, whether or not major new diplomatic initiatives are made, the United States must send a substantial number of additional forces to Vietnam if we are to avoid being defeated there. Specifically, to maintain the initiative against the growing Communist forces, we recommend: 1. That the Republic of Korea be requested, at the appropriate time early in 1966, to increase their present deployment of 9 combat battalions to 18 combat battalions (the addition of one division) before July 1966 and to 21 combat battalions (the addition of another brigade) before October 1966.

2. That the Government of Australia be requested to increase their present deployment of 1 combat battalion to 2 combat battalions before October 1966 and that efforts be made to obtain combat forces from other friendly countries—e.g., the Philippines, Thailand and Greece.

3. That the US be prepared to increase its deployment of ground troops by the end of 1966 from 34 combat battalions to 74 combat battalions and approve now the initial increments of this deployment. If the 74 US battalions—together with increases in air squadrons, naval units, air defense, combat support, construction units and miscellaneous logistic support and advisory personnel which we also recommend—were to be deployed, it would bring the total US personnel in Vietnam to approximately 400,000. The end 1965 strength of 200,000 would increase during 1966 at the rate of approximately 15,000 a month. It should be understood that further deployments (perhaps exceeding an additional 200,000 men) may be needed in 1967. Although the 1966 deployments to South Vietnam may require some shift of forces from other theaters, it is believed that they can be accomplished without calling up reserve personnel; however, the Joint Chiefs of Staff do not believe additional forces can be deployed to Southeast Asia or elsewhere unless reserves are called.

The above program is concurred in by General Westmoreland, Admiral Sharp, Ambassador Lodge and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

III. Budget Recommendations

Decisions already taken together with those recommended above will require increased obligational authority both in FY 1966 and FY 1967.

1. In the January 1966 Supplemental for FY 1966, the Department of Defense, to cover increased Vietnam costs, will require approximately $11 billion3 of new obligational authority to be added to the $1.7 billion authorized in the August Supplemental. The expenditure effect in FY 1966 of these two add-ons will be $4-1/2 billion.

2. In FY 1967 the Department of Defense will require $9.8 billion in new obligational authority and $11.8 billion in expenditures to finance the war in Vietnam.

3. The increases in non-military costs attributable to Vietnam in both the FY 1966 January Supplemental and in the FY 1967 budget can be expected to be somewhat less than $1 billion—whatever is required must be provided.

(The estimates of military costs given above are based on the premise that the war will end by June 30, 1967. As time passes and as actions must be taken to cover war costs beyond that date, additional obligational authority will have to be sought. Thus, it may be necessary to go back to the Congress in June or July 1966 for an amendment to the FY 1967 authorizations and appropriations to take account of those added costs.)

IV. Prognosis Assuming the Recommended Deployments

Deployments of the kind we have recommended will not guarantee success. Our intelligence estimate is that the present Communist policy is to continue to prosecute the war vigorously in the South. They continue to believe that the war will be a long one, that time is their ally, and that their own staying power is superior to ours. They recognize that the US reinforcements of 1965 signify a determination to avoid defeat, and that more US troops can be expected. Even though the Communists will continue to suffer heavily from GVN and US ground and air action, we expect them, upon learning of any US intentions to augment its forces, to boost their own commitment and to test US capabilities and will to persevere at a higher level of conflict and casualties (US killed-in-action with the recommended deployments can be expected to reach 1000 a month).

If the US were willing to commit enough forces—perhaps 600,000 men or more—we could ultimately prevent the DRV/VC from sustaining the conflict at a significant level. When this point was reached, however, the question of Chinese intervention would become critical.4 The intelligence estimate is that the chances are a little better than even that, at this stage, Hanoi and Peiping would choose to reduce the effort in the South and try to salvage their resources for another day; but there is an almost equal chance that they would enlarge the war and bring in large numbers of Chinese forces (they have made certain preparations which could point in this direction).

It follows, therefore, that the odds are about even that, even with the recommended deployments, we will be faced in early 1967 with a military standoff at a much higher level, with pacification still stalled, and with any prospect of military success marred by the chances of an active Chinese intervention.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (A). Top Secret. Sent to the President in Texas in CAP 65822, December 6. (Ibid., Vol. XLIII, Cables) There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum. This memorandum is a revision of Document 212. A draft of this memorandum with minor revisions and comments by McGeorge Bundy, December 4, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (A). Another draft with significant revisions, December 6, is ibid., 2EE, Primarily McNamara Recommendations re Strategic Actions.

2 They may or may not intend to use their capability—indications are that they will. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 The January Supplemental for DOD will total about $12.5 billion, including provision for the military and civilian pay increases authorized by Congress after the original '66 budget was submitted by the President. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 We are generally agreed that the Chinese Communists will intervene with combat forces to prevent destruction of the Communist regime in the DRV. It is less clear whether they would intervene to prevent a DRV/VC defeat in the South. [Footnote in the source text.]

223. Personal Notes of Meeting With President Johnson 223. Personal Notes of Meeting With President Johnson1

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 7, 1965, 10:25 a.m.

President pressing for more non-military action/leadership of more senior rank and energy.

RSM: they are running out of money & they feel restraints. Lansdale: a bunch of hot air. Lansdale: a good talker—use him on the Hill.

P[resident]: How to get a policy decision. Republicans on the panel—no[thing?] comes before [illegible—men?] and money.

Can't have 'em all off in different directions.

What is best course?

The chicken [?] is political decision.

We have to try to bring them aboard before we & [?]

Traitors to an Administration who are talking to press.

First get Executive Branch; then get key Legislators; then get key men in committees.

We mustn't take off into wild blue yonder. I don't want to take off till I know I can get back.

What makes it so tough: I've had little real sympathy with Fulbright, but I don't see any light down that barrel. We're getting deeper and deeper in. I bogged my car down. I don't want a bulldozer to come & get me.

Where we were when I came in—I'd trade back to where we were. If I have to decide this morning, full steam ahead.

Let's see if we can't get a little team play & see who'll fight for us—hard to get.

DR responds: the middle choice is still right—as against the alternatives. If you go to them and make them fair choices odds are strong they'll back you—if we go with our own best judgment of what to [do?] with alternatives.

RSM: 1. The alternatives are many. 2. we can do other things. 3. we need a new resolution. We should have a military and a political program.

LBJ: a substantial group: jugular from the air? JCS all would go further to the North.

RSM: As a practical matter the pressure for increased bombing will grow & cannot be resisted under Phase II.

DR: the bombing.

LBJ: POL?

[DR]: JCS strongly recommend in favor it it.

LBJ: any evidence that they are getting ready for a peace offer?

DR: not yet received.

RSM: the evidence points to the opposite view: a decision to escalate.

LBJ: is there any reality in the notion that there were real peace feelers?

We all say NOT. DR reviews the U Thant case—they were ready to give us a face-saving exit.

LBJ: Do any of them really believe it? Stevenson probably said it?

DR: Yes.

DR: How do we get Congress Leaders on board.

The Pause:

President presses on the Pause. Is there any chance?

RSM and McGB: some.

DR: You can get European Communism broken off.

[LBJ or DR:] Wouldn't give 4# for Dobrynin.

RSM: wouldn't recommend a pause if he didn't think we could manipulate it all. We ought to probe.

LBJ: we tried that, every which way, all over the world with a shirttail out. We'll do anything you want—we are prayin' to negotiate.

I think the boys in the rice paddy wouldn't understand a pause. We don't have much of a leadership.

Rusk: prob of war leadership. Chance of getting Fulbright and Kenn[edy]s if we convince them we willing make peace.

Pr[esident]: Doesn't think so.

McN: Won't get Fulb[right], he wants let Commies in.

Pr: Won't get Mans[field] either. Wants to know where the moderates went?

We ought to present: 1. alternatives 2. pause again? We haven't disclosed budget. I haven't got a single thing secret from my government.

How do we determine? Before we take off.

1. Mansfield: Metropole: hit a barracks: we should plaster 'em—4 tits for a tat. 2. Dirksen. 3. Bob Kennedy 4. Russell—cross between LeMay and Fulbright. See them before we go overboard.

Put it all in the debate. Everything will come out there. Bob Kennedy cut off some of our support when he said 700,000,000 is not a blank check.

Send all the men you can anywhere you want—but every time you say it again it's weakness (Ambassador). You've got to make the other fellow price his product. Harriman can go from capital to capital by 707.

I think we'll be spending more time defending ourselves from hawks than from doves. The hawks will be with you longer.

You ought to go visit with Russell. Goodpaster to see Ike on Pause? We're spending too much time with crybabies. Average fella doesn't have much respect. Afraid we'll lose our own fighting men.

You ought to probe Dobrynin.

We've got a new election here. This is a priority problem. It comes ahead of poverty & education. It's a new ball game. 1966 election. Make the old bucks talk.

[illegible] at Westmoreland: [illegible]—is job one.

1st reinforcement is Congress. I won't yield to y'all on that.

P[resident] [asks] RSM to see Bob Kennedy to send Averell (Bob K has to live with Times).2

Johnson briefly described this meeting in The Vantage Point (p. 235), stating that the one thing that “troubled me deeply” was the fear that once the bombing was stopped the United States would have difficulty in resuming it. Johnson wrote that all his advisers assured him that if Hanoi did not respond to the pause, the world would understand the U.S. decision to resume the bombing.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Papers of McGeorge Bundy, Notes of December 7, 1965. No classification marking. The notes are in McGeorge Bundy's hand with a small contribution by Komer. At 10 a.m. on December 7, Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, Robert Komer, and McGeorge Bundy arrived by aircraft at the LBJ Ranch in Texas. At 10:10 a.m., they assembled in the living room for this meeting with the President to discuss Vietnam policy. At 10:47 a.m., Bill Moyers and Joseph Califano arrived from Austin and joined the meeting. The participants broke for lunch at 12:35 p.m., and resumed their meeting at 1:35 p.m. on the front lawn of the ranch. At 4:34 p.m., Rusk, McNamara, Komer, and McGeorge Bundy returned by aircraft to Washington. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary)

2 There is no clear indication when Bundy's notes no longer related directly to the discussion at the meeting, but at this point they appear to change into follow-up notes arising out of the meeting.

224. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 224. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 8, 1965.

2065. Literally eyes only for Bundy from Lodge.

1. I called on Palmas because I wanted to make it absolutely clear that I would be willing to meet his “former Minister”.

2. I brought up the matter of the so-called “Ambassador's” credentials and how to judge their value. He did not answer this, but he did say that he vouched absolutely for the seriousness and respectability of the “former Minister”.

3. Comment: I do not know how to judge the so-called letter of credentials and am disposed to go ahead on the basis that Palmas vouches for the “former Minister” and that the “former Minister” in turn vouches for the “Ambassador”.

4. I said that I was absolutely opposed to any kind of a trick whereby we would be lulled to sleep while the Viet Cong went ahead and gained ground. Also would I be opposed to using talks as a device to get me in wrong with the Government of Viet-Nam. Palmas absolutely vouched for the fact that there would be no trickery of this kind.

5. He then read me what purported to be the entire text of his telegram to the Vatican. Some of the points which became very clear from what he was reading and which I did not cover adequately in my previous telegram were as follows:

6. The entrance into South Viet-Nam of the troops of the Hanoi regime changes the nature of the war completely. Palmas recalled the change in the psychology in Italy during World War II when the Germans came into Italy. The Viet Cong is frightened of North Viet-Nam taking over the entire country and defeating the Americans. They no longer wish help from Hanoi. They had used Hanoi when they were trying to conquer South Viet-Nam but had never wanted to be taken over by them. One reason they want the American troops to stay is to guarantee the independence of South Viet-Nam.

7. It was also made clear in the telegram to the Vatican that the Viet Cong recognized that at the proper time I would have to tell the GVN. I suggested that I do this after the first meeting and he agreed. He also agreed with my judgment that it would be better to tell Tran Van Do in the first instance rather than Ky. It was Tran Van Do who had said to Palmas that he could not conceive of the nationalist element of the Viet Cong defecting but that it would, of course, be wonderful if it happened.

8. Palmas believes that the so-called Liberation Front is distinct from the Viet Cong High Command. He believes that a majority of the Front are nationalist, but that the military command is controlled by Communists.

9. His “former Minister” had said last Wednesday that he would be in touch with Palmas within ten days. One week went by today.

10. Palmas suggested that when the “former Minister” was with him that he could call me up and I could come over and have my talk at the Apostolic Delegate's house.

11. Comment: Upon reflection, I think that would be a good thing to do. In fact, I would not object to having all the discussions in the house of the Papal Delegate. They would know everything, which might be just as well.

12. Your view of para. 11 would be appreciated.

13. If I may turn to another matter, I hope you will read Embtels 1931 and 1997.2 Approving these telegrams would be a tremendous boost to morale here, which badly needs it. Only about 30 women are involved. American women are constantly arriving here to fill places which could be filled by men.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis; Priority. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 5:24 a.m.

2 In telegram 1931, November 29, and telegram 1997, December 3, Lodge recommended allowing spouses to return to Saigon for the Christmas holiday. (Ibid., PS 7-6 US-VIET S)

225. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 225. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, December 9, 1965.

I attach a copy of a conversation that Dean Rusk had with Ambassador Dobrynin after our meeting at the Ranch. The Secretary tells me that he and Thompson both interpret this conversation as confirming their view that the Soviets would make an effort to move things onward during the pause. In this sense they incline to think that it substantiates their belief that Dobrynin's talk with me was important.2 My own valuation remains somewhat more cautious, although I must say I think the two talks together are worth a little bit more than the 4# you said you would not pay for what Dobrynin said to me!3

McG. B

Attachment

Washington, December 8, 1965, 6 p.m.

Memorandum of Conversation4

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin,USSR

The Secretary

Llewellyn E. Thompson, Ambassador-at-Large, Department of State

The Secretary said with respect to the hostilities in Viet-Nam, that it was not clear how we turn at this point. We had been in touch with Hanoi and with various capitals around the world. We had also had conversations with the Hungarian Foreign Minister Peter here in Washington.5 The Ambassador inquired if we had been in touch with Hanoi after the General Assembly discussion.

The Secretary replied that we had.6 There had been no indication of the slightest interest in bringing this affair to a peaceful conclusion. He did not fully understand why the two co-Chairmen could not take some initiative. He said that both we and Hanoi had referred to the 1954 Agreements. Hanoi puts four points as its interpretation of these Agreements but the Secretary wished to point out that the NLF is not mentioned in these Accords.

The Ambassador asked if we had talked with them with regard to the other points. It appeared to him that we were asking unconditional surrender. He said he was not speaking of Hanoi but of the Liberation Front. He said that even yesterday the Secretary indicated he did not want to speak with the people when we were fighting; namely, the NLF. At least they were doing the major fighting.

The Secretary pointed out that our combat troops had not been in Viet-Nam until Hanoi had moved in.

The Ambassador said our own figures showed the great number of South-Vietnamese that had been fighting us. He said no one from their side could accept that it was only Hanoi.

The Secretary said that among the fourteen million people in South Viet-Nam there was an overwhelming consensus that they did not want Hanoi. We were prepared to support the elections in South Viet-Nam but the Liberation Front said, “no.”

The Ambassador asked under what formula we would propose elections. The Secretary replied on the condition that there was peace in the country which would permit elections.

The Ambassador pointed out that Diem had refused to talk of elections. He then inquired about the possibility of stopping the bombardment of North Viet-Nam. Were we prepared to consider this? Parenthetically, he noted that a twelve hour suspension of fighting had been offered7 and that our press spokesman had said neither yes nor no.

The Secretary asked that if the Ambassador were in Viet-Nam, would he put his arms down for twelve hours. The other side had said they would not shoot people who went to church unarmed.

Dobrynin said that this was an aside and he returned to the subject of bombing, which was the main thing.

The Secretary said he had been careful not to close the door on this in his public statements but he could not understand why it was impossible to find out privately what would happen if we did stop the bombing. He had asked Mr. Peter and we had asked Hanoi. Ho Chi Min had sent Linus Pauling a message which Pauling interpreted to mean that the four points were not a precondition of negotiations. If this were a fact, why did they not say so?

Dobrynin said they could not talk of negotiations while the bombing went on. He said, frankly, he did not understand the American stubbornness. The United States was a big power. No one would think we were weak if we stopped the bombing to create a better atmosphere. His feeling was that we were too sensitive to domestic criticism.

The Secretary said this was not the problem. Dobrynin said he did not understand our position and he made clear that in these and other remarks he was speaking personally. He said the suspension for four days had not been enough and may even have done harm. This did not give anyone any chance to do anything about it. He asked what harm it would do to have some criticism in the United States. He was sure it would be understood abroad.

The Secretary said he agreed this was an informal conversation. He continued that we don't even know the direction of the attitude the Soviet Union would take if we stopped bombing. Would they try to arrange a settlement on the basis of the 1954 Accords? Dobrynin said that stopping the bombing would create a better atmosphere. He could not give any undertaking as to what would happen but the Soviet Union would not try to influence North Viet-Nam while they were being bombed.

The Secretary remarked that only the United States is not supposed to have face. During the Berlin blockade we had talked to the Soviet Union privately. (The Ambassador interjected that there had been no fighting going on.) The Secretary continued that during the Korean war we had private talks that had led to peace.

Dobrynin said he did not see any loss for the United States in stopping the bombing. No one would seriously say that the United States was a weak power. He asked whether the Secretary thought the Soviet Government would think that we had lost face.

The Secretary said it was not a question of Moscow, but of Hanoi. Apparently they thought the United States was about to collapse, judging from the publicity they gave the demonstrations in this country against United States policy. Perhaps stopping the bombing would make them think this was so. Neither he nor the Ambassador knew what Hanoi's reaction would be.

The Ambassador said he did not invite us to resume bombing after a suspension, but implied that this was our option. He asked whether the Secretary thought that more and more bombing would convince the other side.

The Secretary said he was prepared to bet a new hat that when Johnson defeated Goldwater, Hanoi had said to themselves that they could have a larger war without reaction from the United States.

Dobrynin said the question was how to finish the affair. Why not begin with the suspension of bombing? The only argument he had heard was that this would be a sign of weakness.

The Secretary said that Hanoi had never even hinted that they would do anything if the bombing stopped. Dobrynin pointed out that both the Hungarians and the Soviets had suggested that this could be a step on a way out. Neither of them, however, had the authority to speak for others.

The Secretary said it was hard for us to understand the failure to carry out the agreement on Laos. Hanoi had never complied with it and there was nothing we wanted more than one thousand percent compliance with it in every respect. The other side had referred to the military clauses of the 1954 Agreement. Why not get back to this and the 1962 Agreement? We have said that we wanted no bases or forces in that area. The South Viet-Namese could determine their own fate provided North Viet-Nam did not intervene by force. Dobrynin said that in view of what the Secretary said regarding bombing in North Viet-Nam, and he was aware that we were already bombing in Laos, he did not see any way out or how the conflict could fail to be enlarged.

The Secretary said we did not want even the present level of hostilities. Dobrynin said that he had heard talk of bombing Haiphong and Laos and Cambodia. The Secretary said the problem was how could we find restraint on the other side? Dobrynin repeated that the United States was a big power but did not want to make any gestures. We were increasing our troops. Were we trying to impress the Soviets? The Secretary said no, we were trying to impress Hanoi. Dobrynin asked what would come afterwards. Would we intervene in North Viet-Nam? If this occurred, then what would happen?

The Secretary said that Dobrynin had used the phrase “unconditional surrender.” Speaking frankly, this was an abuse of language. We were not asking the other side to surrender or do anything but to stop their intervention. Dobrynin said we were trying to force the Liberation Front to admit they were only tools or stooges of Hanoi. He pointed out that they had representatives in Peking and Moscow and elsewhere. The other side was asked to accept unconditional discussions, ignoring the Liberation Front, and to accept the United States position that it was only Hanoi that was involved. This made the situation very difficult for Hanoi, as well as for the Soviet Union. He was not sure that some of the people in South Viet-Nam would continue their activities no matter what happened.

The Secretary pointed out that we were not shooting them until Hanoi came in. Dobrynin repeated that from the beginning we demanded Hanoi accept our condition that we were not fighting local people but Hanoi. He said there could be no armed intervention unless there were local people fighting and we did not wish to recognize the people that were fighting us.

The Secretary replied that we wished to recognize them all, including the Buddhists, the Catholics, the Montagnards.

Dobrynin contended that the Secretary was saying to the other side, “Accept our formula and then we will have unconditional talks.” He asked if we were at war with Hanoi.

The Secretary said we had told Hanoi that they could talk about their four points but we wanted to talk about our points. He did not see any other way than to sit down at the table to do this.

Dobrynin again said his personal feeling was that the best thing was to stop the bombing. He could not say what would happen but he was sure the atmosphere would be better.

The Secretary inquired whether if we did stop bombing and there were no response, would the crisis then be greater?

Dobrynin responded that if we stopped it only for a short time and put it in the form of an ultimatum, this might be. The Secretary asked what if we stopped and there were an ultimatum from Peking or from Moscow as to what would happen if we resumed? We did not even know if this would happen or not.

Dobrynin said there was nothing to discuss now while we continued to wage a big war.

The Secretary said it was extraordinary that there could be discussions only if one side stopped shooting.

Dobrynin replied that he presumed we would continue shooting in the South, although he was not suggesting we do so.

The Secretary raised the question as to whether North Viet-Nam would keep infiltrating the South. Dobrynin said that the Soviets were sure that North Viet-Nam did not have control of all Viet Cong units. The Secretary rejoined that we were very sure and had good information that there were very few that Hanoi did not control.

After a brief discussion reported separately on non-proliferation, the Secretary said that both the Soviet Union and the United States had enormous stakes in Asia. We believed that frontiers should not be changed by force. If help were needed to demarcate the frontier or to settle disputes, we should both help. We had a considerable community of interest in this.

Dobrynin said that as far as he knew, there was no question of frontiers. The Secretary said the Chinese had asked for changes in their frontier with India. Dobrynin interjected that the Soviet Union had made clear its disapproval of this.

The Secretary said they also had some claims for a large chunk of Soviet territory.

Dobrynin replied that there had been reports in the press to this effect but in fact they had asked for only five kilometers. (It was not clear whether he was talking of square kilometers or what.) Dobrynin continued that he thought we must give more attention to our relations, which were not developing well. He did not know if this deterioration was deliberate or a result of a chain of events. He made reference to the Penkovsky papers8 and a recently published Dodd Committee report9 which accused the leaders of the Soviet Union of being murderers. He also mentioned a man who paraded near the Soviet Embassy with a placard saying that Kosygin and Brezhnev were murderers.

The Secretary remarked that he understood there were ten thousand demonstrators in front of our Embassy today. Dobrynin continued that he now understood that Soviet attaches had no right to buy books in Brentano's on certain subjects unless they asked the Pentagon first. He thought this was incredible. The Secretary replied that we were aware of the instructions given to the Communist Party in this country. Dobrynin said they did not come from his Embassy.

The Secretary concluded by stating that perhaps he would be in touch with the Ambassador again on how to proceed. He again referred to the bitterness in this country after the breaking of the Laotian agreement. He also referred to a recent interview charging us with aggression.10 He said the Soviets must realize what disappointment the breaking of the Laotian agreement had caused here.11

Dobrynin said the Soviets were in favor of compliance. The Secretary asked if they could not get together with the British and demand compliance.

Dobrynin said this was difficult now as our planes were flying there. The Secretary said this should not be a problem as we were ready to comply completely. He continued that the Soviets had accused us of being dragged along by the Germans. We thought that the Soviets were being dragged along by Hanoi. Dobrynin referred to the number of times he had come to the Secretary to try to get discussions going on Cambodia, but he had refused. The Secretary replied that this was because Sihanouk had raised these matters in complete hostility to Thailand and South Viet-Nam. We had been working with Thailand and South Viet-Nam to get these matters settled before a conference.

At this point, since both the Ambassador and the Secretary had dinner engagements, the conversation ended.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 6AA, High Level Comments Re Bomb Pauses. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only.

2 See footnote 5, Document 208.

3 See Document 223.

4 Secret. Drafted by Thompson on December 8 and approved in S on December 9. The meeting took place in Rusk's office.

5 See Document 160.

6 See Document 205.

7 A communique of the Central Committee of the NLFSV, broadcast by Liberation Radio on December 7 in Vietnamese to South Viet-Nam, stated that “the NLFSV decides that the South Viet-Nam Liberation Armed Forces will stop attacks throughout South Viet-Nam during Christmas night” for a 12-hour period so that Catholic soldiers of various forces could attend Mass and celebrate Christmas Eve. The same broadcast carried a similar communique from the South Viet-Nam Liberation Armed Forces Command which contained regulations governing the cease-fire, including the condition that troops carry no weapons or means of spying. (Text in FBIS, South Vietnam, December 8, 1965)

8 Oleg Penkovsky, The Penkovsky Papers (Garden City, NJ: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1965).

9 Not further identified.

10 Reference is to an interview of Kosygin on December 6 by James Reston of The New York Times; extract in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 580-581.

11 See the response by Rusk to a question asked at a news conference on December 9; ibid., pp. 789-790.

226. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 226. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, December 9, 1965.

1. I attach Bob McNamara's account of his telephone conversation with members of Congress on South Vietnam. It is highly instructive. Before he left for Chicago and the Coast, Dean Rusk had seen Sparkman, Church, and Javits.2 He gave me the following account of their views:

Sparkman thinks we need a resolution and that it should be quite a tough one. He would favor a pause if there is even a 5% chance that it would be successful in opening the road to negotiations.

Senator Church does not think a resolution would be a good idea unless we are proposing some major change, like bombing Hanoi, or putting ground forces in Laos. He is strongly in favor of a pause.

Senator Javits is in favor of a resolution and would like to be helpful in any way he can about it. He would also favor a pause unless the military authorities say it would have a major military impact on the effectiveness of our effort in the south. (This last sounds like an effort to have it both ways.)

2. I continue to be a strong believer in a December pause, and of course the time is getting shorter every minute. Rusk and McNamara and I plan to review this matter again on Saturday morning,3 and at that point it may be wise for us to call you and take a final reading. It will be very difficult to do a good job of the pause if the decision is put over beyond that point.

3. My own basic reason for supporting the pause is simply that we are going to have to do these other tough things in January. I think the criticism the pause will get will be rubbed out by the energy of our January message, and on the other hand, I think the peace-lovers will support our January actions a whole lot more if there has been a pause beforehand. I find that Komer strongly shares this view, and that Califano seems to be shifting toward it.

McG. B.

Attachment

Washington, December 9, 1965.

Memorandum by Secretary of Defense McNamara4

MEMORANDUM OF TELEPHONE CONVERSATIONS WITH MEMBERS OF CONGRESS RELATING TO SOUTH VIETNAM

I called but was unable to talk to the following men:

Senator Lister Hill—has had minor surgery and will be out of his office for two or three days.

Senator Stuart Symington—out of the country

Senator Henry Jackson—in Vietnam

Representative Glenard Lipscomb—in the Far East

Representative Robert Sikes—in the Far East

Representative George Mahon—on vacation; cannot be reached until 14 December

Representative William Bates—in Europe

Representative Philip Philbin—in Europe

Representative Mendel Rivers—in Europe

With each of the following I summarized the current situation, the prospects for continuing increases in Viet Cong strength, the possibility that the conflict would increase in intensity, and the need for increased U.S. deployments if we were to avoid a military defeat or stalemate. I estimated that the cost of our South Vietnamese operations would require a January Supplement of some $10-12 billion and a FY '67 budget of equal amount. I asked for their opinions on expanding U.S. forces; requesting Congressional support; intensifying the bombing of North Vietnam, and initiating diplomatic initiatives, (e.g., a pause in the bombing, an appeal to the UN, visits to Communist states by peace emissaries).

1. Senator John Pastore a. He asked theoretically where we are going if we put in 400,000 men.

b. Most of the American public doesn't understand what we are up against—the American public won't take the war for long.

c. We should make a serious effort to settle the conflict (through use of pause, etc.) before we start bombing on an expanded scale or further increase the number of U.S. troops in South Vietnam.

d. The President should come before the Congress and see the matter debated before he expands U.S. forces in Southeast Asia.

2. Senator Mike Monroney a. He is leery of escalation beyond the current level of conflict. The country doesn't want to see the war expanded beyond its present boundary.

b. The country would accept the deployment of a total of 400,000 men if it believes the war will not spread beyond South Vietnam.

c. We should not undertake an expanded military program without holding out the opportunity for peace negotiations through the UN or through other third parties.

d. He seriously questions whether we should substantially expand the bombing in North Vietnam—he does not believe the added bombing would be worth the risk.

e. We should go to Congress for a Joint Resolution if substantial additional forces are to be sent to the Far East.

3. Senator Warren Magnuson a. The people now feel we are at war and we should do whatever is required to finish the job—in particular, we should deploy whatever troops are necessary.

b. He is not certain how the bombing program should be changed, if at all. He is unclear as to how effective it has been to date, but he is certain the people would support more if the President considers it desirable.

c. Peace moves should be made to coincide with whatever additional military action we take.

d. The President should request Congressional support in the form of a Joint Resolution.

e. He wished to emphasize again the President should with one hand carry on the war and with the other hand fight for peace.

4. Senator Leverett Saltonstall a. Increasingly, the people are asking what do we want and how far are we going.

b. The Congress will support the deployment of additional troops, but such action should be complemented by a request for some form of Congressional Resolution.

c. The increasing number of casualties is beginning to stir up the people to ask why are we in South Vietnam; what can be done about further losses; how far are we going.

d. Expanding the bombing program in the North is a terrible risk, but we must consider it. He would support a Presidential decision to bomb Hanoi and Haiphong because we must do enough to bring the Viet Cong to a sensible peace negotiation. He believes we should mine Haiphong Harbor.

e. He doesn't believe a pause in the bombing would accomplish anything. We must keep the military pressure on so that Hanoi will be forced to sit down at the bargaining table.

5. Senator Robert Kennedy a. It is difficult for him to provide a worthwhile judgment after only two or three minutes of thought.

b. People are becoming more and more concerned as the casualties rise. They do not understand the alternatives open to us and these should be explained to them. The political situation is extremely dangerous because the people do not understand the war.

c. He cannot give an answer as to whether or not we should expand our troop deployments after only two or three minutes of discussion.

d. We should take some form of dramatic political action. Such action might be built around Christmas. Political action is absolutely required if a further military buildup is likely. Among actions which might be considered would be an appeal to the Pope; a cease fire; contacts with the Liberation Front in Algeria; a longer suspension of the bombing. Political actions are important for support both within the U.S. and also abroad. He sees no sign of any major effort on the political side.

e. If we do authorize an additional military buildup, some form of Congressional action is desirable.

6. Speaker John McCormack a. We are committed in Vietnam and we must do everything necessary to carry out our commitment.

b. He is on the side of expanding our military strength in Vietnam.

c. The situation is comparable to that faced by the Free World when Hitler started his aggression. If South Vietnam goes, the rest of Asia will collapse like dominoes before an aggressive China.

d. Whatever additional bombing is necessary he would initiate.

e. Without further thought, he would be hesitant to ask action of Congress, but he would want more time to think about this question.

f. Whatever decisions are made by the President he will back up.

7. Representative Gerald Ford a. People are asking: are we getting too deeply involved on the ground; are we fully utilizing our air power; why don't we stop the flow of goods into the port of Haiphong.

b. Before supporting an expansion of our ground forces, he would like to see us use more air power against military targets in North Vietnam, and, in particular, he believes we should mine Haiphong Harbor.

c. He believes it would be wise to ask for Congressional support of an expanded program of military deployments.

8. Representative Edward Hebert. a. We should do whatever is necessary to win. If more troops are required, send them. If more bombing is necessary, including mining the Haiphong Harbor, initiate it.

b. We haven't made clear to the people why we are there.

c. Diplomatic moves may help psychologically, and if so, they should be undertaken, although nothing concrete is likely to follow from them.

d. If additional deployments are undertaken, it may be necessary to go back to Congress to get a Resolution of support.

9. Senator Sam Ervin a. We ought to bomb North Vietnam out of existence because they are initiating the aggression. We can't afford to retreat further in the world.

b. He would put more troops in South Vietnam if they are needed.

c. It might be advisable to go back to Congress for further support.

d. He believes it would be wise to give North Vietnam a warning or a chance to negotiate (e.g., through a pause) before expanding the bombing.

10. Representative Leslie Arends a. If we need more men in South Vietnam we should send them, although he hates to think about it.

b. He believes we should expand the bombing in North Vietnam and he is certain we should do this if we send in more troops.

c. He would favor a request for a Congressional Resolution of support.

d. He does not favor diplomatic moves now. He doubts the values of negotiation because we can't trust the other side. However, we should continue to probe peace offers when they come.

e. He believes we should stay in Vietnam. We are doing what needs to be done. He will continue to support us.

11. Senator Thomas Kuchel a. He believes we should and must expand our forces in South Vietnam.

b. The people in California want us to get on with the war and would favor expanding the bombing.

c. The people would like to see the problem moved to the conference table, but they believe the initial move must come from Hanoi.

d. He does not feel qualified to advise on whether we should initiate a pause or move to the UN.

e. He does not believe additional Congressional action is required.

Robert S. McNamara5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII. Confidential. Received at the LBJ Ranch at noon on December 10. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum

2 Rusk met with Sparkman from 12:05 to 12:33 p.m. on December 8, with Church from 3:30 to 4:06 p.m. also on December 8, and with Javits from 8:45 to 9:20 a.m. on December 9. (Ibid., Rusk Appointment Book)

3 December 11.

4 No classification marking. A typewritten note at the end of the source text reads: “Dictated but not read.”

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

227. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas 227. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, December 10, 1965, 11:55 a.m.

CAP 65864. Secretary Rusk asked Francis Meloy, a senior Foreign Service officer, traveling with the Mansfield party,2 to seek the Senator's reaction, very privately, to a possible early pause in the North Vietnam bombing. The exchange of cables follows:

(Repeat Manila 1132 and Deptel to Hong Kong 762 attached)3

For Meloy from Secretary.

Would you inform Senator Mansfield we have been having some discussion here about the various public proposals for a limited possibility of an early pause in the bombing of North Viet-Nam. Although we have no significant indication that there would be any constructive Hanoi response, it can be argued that such a pause would at least open the way to Soviet activity and at the very least might persuade people that we were exhausting every reasonable avenue to peace. On the negative side, we have been somewhat concerned at the possibility of misinterpretation in Saigon or even in Hanoi, and Senator Mansfield may have had relevant discussions or observations in Saigon.

I would be most grateful if you could discuss this privately and quietly with him, so that his reactions could be conveyed to me at once.

For the Secretary from Meloy.

Your message was received and discussed with Senator Mansfield just prior departure Hong Kong for Manila. Senator Mansfield has given careful thought to the question and has consulted Senator Aiken privately. Following is substance Senator Mansfield's views: 1. American officials in Saigon made little reference to subject of bombing North Vietnam or its expansion or suspension, taking the position they have no responsibility for it. Neither was matter discussed in detail by Vietnamese authorities during Saigon visit. However, it could be expected that Ky and his colleagues might well look with disfavor and concern on any action which would appear to be letting up of our military pressure on the enemy. On other hand bombing of north is now less of a psychological factor in south in view of the reassuring presence of large U.S. forces.

2. Influx of men and material from North Vietnam will probably continue whether bombing is suspended, maintained or extended. Senator certainly received the impression that present bombing of the North was not an insuperable impediment to such a flow and holds view that it is probably hardening the North Vietnamese will to continue conflict.

3. In conversations with Rumanians and particularly with Poles and Soviets the point was repeatedly made that they could do nothing as long as bombing of North Vietnam and “U.S. aggressive actions” continued. They were especially emphatic regarding bombing of the north. Conversely, however, none indicated what, if anything, they could or would do or what would happen if bombing were stopped. Suspension of bombing for an appreciable period could perhaps smoke out whether there is any real disposition on part of Eastern Europeans and Soviets to be helpful, although in this connection Senator observed no indication on the part of the Russians of willingness to take action at this time.

4. Although originally opposed to bombing, Senator not at all persuaded that an isolated act of suspension at this point would prove fruitful, particularly if it is intended as a measure which, if it fails to produce negotiations, will be followed by a resumption and extension of the bombing.

5. Senator feels that if it is attempted at all at this time, it ought to be not “a wait and see” gesture but, rather, coupled with other direct U.S. initiatives, with Poles, Rumanians and, perhaps, even with Chinese in Warsaw.

6. Senator suggests, further, that consideration be given not solely to question of suspending North Vietnamese bombing, which involves only a unilateral forbearance on our part but also to a call for a suspension of all hostilities throughout Viet Nam in connection with recent reported Viet Cong offer of a 12 hour cease-fire over Christmas.

He believes thought should be given to the practicability of calling upon the Viet Cong to extend this period of cease-fire from Christmas through the important Vietnamese New Year holiday (Tet) which is generally observed for approximately three days beginning January 21 or 22. If it works, this would have virtue of providing substantial period of about one month in which possibility for negotiations may be thoroughly tested. If it does not, it would still be a significant initiative for peace from our side which should have considerable effect on world and domestic opinion.

7. In sum, Senator feels that pause in bombing of itself would likely be of doubtful utility in bringing about negotiations at this time unless coupled with broader U.S. initiatives in other fields.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Senator Mansfield's Trip (Southeast Asia). Secret; Nodis. Received at the LBJ Ranch at 12:50 p.m.

2 Senators Mansfield, Aiken, Boggs, Muskie, and Inouye, along with three staff aides, were in South Vietnam December 2-5. Memoranda of conversation between this delegation and Generals Thieu, Ky, and Foreign Minister Tran Van Do, all on December 3, were transmitted as enclosures to airgram A-356 from Saigon. (Department of State, Central Files, LEG 7 MANSFIELD) A briefing of Mansfield's delegation by the U.S. Mission in Saigon, December 2, is in the University of Montana, Mansfield Library, Mansfield Papers, Series XXII, Box 99, Fld 4.

3 Copies of these telegrams are in Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S.

228. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Califano) to President Johnson 228. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Califano) to President Johnson1

Washington, December 13, 1965, 9:45 p.m.

I appreciate the magnitude and the difficulty of the decisions you now face in respect to Vietnam. Although I do not want to complicate your problems or impinge upon the roles of your primary advisers in the national security area, I have myself given a lot of thought to this over the past week-end as a result of the meetings last week. For what they are worth, my views are as follows.

The more I think about it, the more I am opposed to a pause in the bombing as the dramatic gesture for peace. I think it is very difficult for a President to order such a pause when the Joint Chiefs of Staff are unanimously opposed to it and when they (to some degree) base their opposition on the ground that the bombing is effective in supporting the effort of 200,000 American boys on the ground in South Vietnam. Further, I think many Americans, including many influential Congressmen, would raise vigorous objections to such a pause and would become aware through one means or another (and through no fault of the Chiefs) of the JCS views. Finally, I fear that Hanoi may be able to place us in the position of protracted but totally non-productive negotiations with our men still fighting on the ground—only so long as we do not resume bombing. By shrewd diplomacy, they may be able to present us with the dilemma of denying us the benefits of bombing through such pseudo-negotiations or putting the onus of breaking off such negotiations on us for resumption of bombing.

Nevertheless, I believe some dramatic peace gesture is necessary. In part, it can be the trip of Averell Harriman to various capitals of the world. However, I would suggest that some consideration be given to your responding to the 12-hour ceasefire proposed by the Viet Cong with a longer ceasefire—perhaps to run from Christmas through Tet (the Vietnamese holiday), with the obvious caveat that our boys would fire in self-defense and resume the attack on ground and in the air if the Viet Cong do not honor the ceasefire. (I do not know how workable in the field a step of this kind is but you might want to have the Defense Department explore the feasibility of an action such as this.) While the ceasefire was in effect, you might offer to send some distinguished American directly to Hanoi.

Short of an action such as a ceasefire, and in addition to Averell Harriman's trip, I believe you might at least offer to send someone directly to Hanoi to try to bring them to the negotiating table.

1 Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File, ND 19/CO 230, Vietnam 1964-65. Secret; Eyes Only. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

229. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 229. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, December 14, 1965, 7:45 p.m.

RE

Broodings on Vietnam

As I said on Saturday,2 I think the moment of truth on peaceful moves before Christmas is likely to be Friday morning3 after Dean Rusk's return. (Bob McNamara gets back Wednesday night, but Dean is spending another day on a long scheduled visit to Madrid.) As of Saturday, Rusk and McNamara and all their top subordinates were strongly favorable to the pause. Rusk himself has moved steadily and strongly in that direction over the last two weeks, although he wants you to be absolutely certain that whatever you decide will also be his recommendation. The arguments are wearisomely familiar to you, but the interesting thing to me is that people with very different basic views of the course of the war think that a pause would help now. And no one believes, either that the other side can trap us or that a two-week pause in the North would weaken us in the South.

Today Bill Moyers and George Ball and I have discussed the wider proposal of a cease-fire and a peace mission to Hanoi in accordance with your instruction to Bill this morning. This is an idea which has real attractions and real disadvantages. We will be working on it some more tomorrow with Cy Vance, because it turns out—not for the first time—that the people in Defense have done more staff work in this peace proposal than the people in State.

The possible advantages of a cease-fire are these: 1. To the degree that it is respected by the other side, our casualties stop;

2. We get a chance to emphasize peaceful actions and to go about the work of relief and reconstruction, and other works of peace. If the other side allowed such free movement, we should be able to make some money in the countryside. If they did not, it would be plainly their fault.

3. If the cease-fire is rejected—which is quite possible—the international political rewards are very great indeed.

4. If the cease-fire is accepted, the chances of turning the whole business toward the peace table are considerably greater than they would be with a pause.

The disadvantages a cease-fire offers are also serious: 1. The Chiefs and Lodge and Westmoreland would all be unanimously and very strongly opposed. They would use some or all of the arguments that follow.

2. The whole object of our deployment is to get the initiative against the Viet Cong. A cease-fire would hand it back to them and allow them to rest, refit, regroup, retrain, and redouble their resistance after the fighting begins again.

3. A cease-fire would gravely shake the morale of the GVN and of the people in Saigon. It would also reopen the whole question of U.S. determination, doubts of which were so near the center of the crisis in morale a year ago.

4. A cease-fire offer could convey a very bad signal of apparent weakness to Hanoi. (I don't quite believe in this one myself because if we ourselves use a cease-fire to move around the countryside, we can make things very tough for Hanoi and the Viet Cong both.)

5. If the South Vietnamese stop fighting, it may be very hard to get them to start again.

My own personal worry about a cease-fire right now is that I doubt if we can get organized to do it right in the short time between now and Christmas. I also believe that it is a card which we can play a little better some distance down the road than we can today. I believe the pause is both easier to defend and easier to execute, and I do not believe that it carries unacceptable costs with the troops in the field or public opinion. I feel this far more strongly because I am quite certain that with careful explanation of the need for a pause as a prelude to cease-fire, we can get the solid support of both Westmoreland and Eisenhower and if they are with us, I do not fear those who are against us.

McG. B.

P. S. George Ball made an interesting argument this afternoon to the effect that it would be a very good thing for us all if we could get out of bombing in the North altogether. He was talking from rough notes, and I asked him to leave them with me for my instruction. Because of your interest in every aspect of this problem, I think they may interest you too, and I attach them at Tab A.

Attachment4

VIET-NAM

Original purpose of bombing North: 1. Primarily to improve morale in South.

2. To interdict movement of supplies to South.

3. To persuade Hanoi to quit or to come to conference table.

Present consequences of bombing:

1.Is it fulfilling purposes?

a. Not needed to raise morale in South with massive troop deployments.

b. Not effective to reduce flow of supplies below critical level although it raises cost.

c. It is not breaking popular will of Hanoi but is uniting country against U.S.

2. Unfavorable aspects:

a. Driving Soviet and Peking together when we should be splitting them since Soviets want a pause.

b. Prevents possibility of settlement since Communist cannot settle in the face of US bombardment of socialist state.

c. Enormously raises the dangers of escalation—already signs of creeping involvement on both Chinese and Soviet sides.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII. Top Secret; Sensitive. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

2 December 11.

3 December 17.

4 No classification marking. A handwritten note at the top of the source text reads: “G. Ball's informal notes on bombing.”

230. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 230. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 15, 1965.

2147. For the President. Herewith my weekly telegram:

1. Course of the war

The entrance of North Vietnamese troops in large numbers into South Viet-Nam is truly an escalation of the war, with all the serious connotations which attach to the word “escalation”. For Hanoi, it means grave risks; for us it means the grimness of intensified effort.

If it were not for the incursion from Hanoi we could be taking some satisfaction from the progress which has been made with regard to the rank and file Viet Cong.

Porter recently was in a village surrounded by Viet Cong when one defector came into the village and said that he and his comrades simply could not stand the air and artillery attacks anymore, adding that if he was well treated many more of his comrades would come out. He appeared emaciated.

Viet Cong defectors to the Chieu Hoi camps during November numbered 1,482, the highest monthly total on record, with air and artillery attacks also playing a big part.

22 members of a V.C. platoon surrendered a few days ago to the U.S. 173rd Airborne Brigade. This is believed to be one of the largest single groups ever to surrender voluntarily to U.S. forces.

Mr. Goure, of the Rand Corporation, told me that his 14 selected Vietnamese investigators had interviewed about 180 Viet Cong prisoners and defectors between July and December of this year. They noted a change as between 1965 and 1964. In 1964, 65 percent believed in victory because they were convinced the Viet Cong had the support of the people. In 1965, only 20 percent believed in victory.

This too is due in great part to the jets, the B-52s, artillery and helicopters. In particular, the B-52s had had a big impact with their destruction looming large in Viet Cong eyes because of the comparison of sizes of bomb craters with the sizes of their own dwellings. The air attacks had put the value of their passive defense measures in doubt and made them realize there was no survival by digging.

They also had fear of detection and were obsessed with the idea that there were agents among them. The officers of one main force battalion made everybody strip off their clothes so as to look for hidden radios. Defoliation had been effective in enhancing detection. V.C. had adopted the practice of cooking in villages so that the smoke of their cooking would not be detected. If villages were not available, they cooked in special ovens so as to dispel the smoke. These are cumbersome. They also try to put out a fire when a plane appears. The result is that many units are down to one hot meal a day at 3 o'clock in the morning. The average food consumption is one can and a half of cold rice a day. There is much beri-beri. There is also a high rate of malaria in the army of North Viet-Nam.

Other items are:

The army of North Viet-Nam abandoned the dead at Plei Me.

It is curious, he said, that there are no amputees, blind men, under-nourished veterans to be seen anywhere in the towns of North Viet-Nam. What happens to them?

The V.C. believe that the refugees, by taking farmers away from the farm, are reducing the Viet Cong food supply.

70 percent of the recruits are said now to be deserting.

The V.C. are transferring the civilian cadres to military work, many of whom, although loyal when in a civilian capacity, desert from the military.

Shortage of thoroughly indoctrinated officers means that when an officer is criticized, he tends to leave.

They are depressed by the reports of the bad condition of their family at home.

The saying now is: The ocean in which we are supposed to swim is receding and drying up. We must depend on the people; but the people are leaving us. End Goure account.

Keyes Beech, of the Chicago Daily News, who is, I believe, the senior American journalist as regards Viet-Nam, and a former combat correspondent in Korea, believes that success in Viet-Nam is now assured, provided U.S. opinion remains steadfast. He considers this to provide really the only chance for defeat. He believes that Hanoi intends to drag the conflict out until the 1968 Presidential election and is counting on the ending of the war being the issue which will cause an outcome in which the V.C. are still in power in the country-side. Incidentally, he added that there were more casualties after the peace talks began in Panmunjon than there had been in that period preceding the peace talks.

2. Economic and social

After remaining steady for four weeks the piaster has moved up in terms of gold and the dollar. Retail food prices and the prices of imported goods eased slightly during the week.

The cost of coastal trading between Danang and Saigon has gone down from 8,000 piasters per metric ton in July to 2,000 piasters in October to 1,200 today as result of measures USOM and the GVN have taken to supply more ships.

The U.S. medical teams are being received with enthusiasm in the provinces.

3. Psychological

There was much editorial comment about the recent terrorism attack against the U.S. enlisted billet.2 The vein of this commentary was generally one of loathing and hatred for the Viet Cong for having perpetrated this attack which produced so many civilian casualties.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 3:09 a.m.

2 See footnote 3, Document 221.

231. Notes of Meeting 231. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, December 17, 1965, 9:41 a.m.

PRESENT

President, Rusk, McNamara, Bundy, Ball, Valenti

(The following is taken from notes by Jack Valenti.)

The meeting opened with a discussion of the visit of Prime Minister Wilson.2 Then the President turned to Secretary Rusk, who had just returned from NATO,3 and asked:

Did you bring back any peace proposals:

Rusk: No. After moving around in NATO, I find Wilson is a paragon of courage. The rest are doing nothing. I really can't see why the British can't put in men to support the Australians.

President: Wilson is going to do nothing. He wants a DSC for fending off his enemies in Parliament. I think this man Cameron's articles are having a large effect on this country. I wish I could see to the end of the gun barrel in Viet-Nam.

The Viet Cong atrocities never get publicized. Nothing is being written or published to make you hate the Viet Cong; all that is being written is to hate us.

Ball: There is a racial element in what we do to the North. It's not there when the North hits the South.

President: they do a far better propaganda job than we do. On NBC today it was all about what we are doing wrong. We've got to find some way to do another Baltimore speech.4 Not desperate, but proper. Wilson says his line has been steady since the Baltimore speech. Wilson tells his opposition to bring the Viet Cong to a conference table and he'll produce the President.

I'm willing to take any gamble on stopping the bombing if I think I've got some hope of something happening. We must evaluate this very carefully. You have no idea how much I've talked to the Fulbrights and Lippmanns. They're not coming aboard.

McNamara: We will increase bombing. It is inevitable. We must step up our attacks.

President: (The President read an editorial by Norman Cousins.)

Ball: I am holding an heretical view but I think the bombing in the North is having a negative effect.5

McNamara: We just don't know if we are hurting the North Vietnamese or the Chinese. We may be able to hurt them enough without 400,000 men to make them behave differently. If we don't, what should we do? We shouldn't be doing anything that has a one-in-three chance.

Perhaps a cease-fire in place.

Bundy: Not now. It takes time.

Rusk: It could cause the dissolution of South Viet-Nam.

McNamara: Our military has a one-in-three success order.

Bundy: I'm more optimistic. Our military is hurting them.

Ball: No one can say. If we look hard at bombing in the North, it isn't producing a salutary effect. We started bombing: 1) to raise morale

2) to interdict supplies

3) to get Hanoi to change its mind

The first is not needed any more. Bombing hasn't served the other two reasons. We can restrict supplies only to a critical level, no lower.

Obviously we are not breaking the will of North Viet-Nam. They are digging in. A hardened line. I was in Charge of bombing surveys in World War II and bombing never wins a war. We are driving the North Vietnamese into a greater dependency on China—and boxing in the Soviets. We are also making plans for negotiation more difficult.

I think the risks of escalation are very great—and the risk is in the North, not in the South. The one hope we have is to stop bombing and seize every opportunity not to resume. Meanwhile, (we should) conduct the war in the South with redoubled vigor.

President: That has some appeal to me. The problem is the Chiefs go through the roof when we mention this pause.

McNamara: I can take on the Chiefs.

President: I don't think you can sell the American people on the merits of stopping the bombing.

McNamara: The Navy and the Air Force are conducting 3,000 sorties in North Viet-Nam. There is no way to stop bombing in the North except as part of a political move.

Rusk: On Ball's remarks, I don't think bombing has caused North Viet-Nam to escalate. They are determined to do so.

We tell the Russians: you ask us to pause—we pause—now what would you do for us?

McNamara: You need several of these moves. We had one pause; we need more.

Bundy: Look at what would happen if there wasn't any bombing from the day before Christmas until the day after New Years.

President: I have no objections. What are the objections?

Rusk: The Russians need more time to get something on with the Chinese.

McNamara: If the press asks us why no bombing, we answer we are increasing our effort in Laos and the South.

Ball: Only 40 per cent of the missions are going on now. Concentrate in the South.

President: Shouldn't we have someone moving throughout the world trying for peace?

McNamara: All the time this is being done we will move toward increasing our forces in Viet-Nam.

(President thinking—thoughtful, quiet, obviously concentrating deeply.)

President: Is this what you want to explore with the Chiefs?

McNamara: No, I need to know what you want. The Chiefs will be totally opposed. (Problem with Wheeler—he has eye trouble and needs to be operated on.)

We decide what we want and impose it on them. They see this as a total military problem—nothing will change their views. They will answer: we are better off now with bombing than without it.

President: We are there now because of the bombing. We wouldn't be there without it.

McNamara: I know exactly what the arguments of the Chiefs are. Before you decide, I cannot deliver. After you decide, I can deliver.

Rusk: Work on specific suggestions and get back to the President later.

President: I am opposed to announcements of a pause. If you pick weather as an excuse and Christmas as a factor—the position of the allies also—take a poll where they say we are not doing enough to find peace.

Take all this—try to sell our enemies that we want peace. We owe this to the American people. We can't do this if we are dropping bombs on the enemy. (Like Kosygin in Hanoi.)

Anything with bombs is bad for the peace effort. Let's put off bombing until we can talk to others.

Because of weather, receiving thousands more people, solidifying our position, we can have a pause. Let McNamara say to the Chiefs: we've got a heavy budget, tax bill, controls, danger of inflation, kill the great society. With all these things, we've got to make sure the diplomats can talk. They claim they can't talk with bombs dropping. Period: 22 December through 22 January.

Sometime during this period have Westmoreland and Lodge come here to the U.S.—or the President go to Honolulu—and look at it—letting the people know what we're doing.

Then on the 23rd of January, tell the people where we stand. Meanwhile, try to figure out how to cut losses. Don't believe that bombing will help us.

They are right: the weakest chink in our armor is public opinion. Our people won't stand firm—and will bring down the Government.

We're going to suffer political losses. Every President does in off years. But it is because of damn fool liberals who are crying about poverty (which funds I doubled in one year). But we need money for all these programs. How do you divide up this money? Every hangover Kennedy columnist is sniping about Johnson cutting off Great Society programs.

The only man that helps me survive is Jim Webb. He is trying to reduce funds in his agency. Orville Freeman is a soldier—he's trying.

Meeting ended at 11 a.m.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, December 17 Meeting on Vietnam. Secret. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room. McGeorge Bundy sent the President a briefing memorandum for this meeting, which reads in part:

“Rusk and McNamara both believe that the most important question before us is that of peaceful actions before January. When last heard from, they were both strongly in favor of the pause. Bob and I have been doing further work on the wider notion of a cease-fire in all Vietnam. I do not know his views, but I continue to think we are not ready for this one yet.

“Another matter for discussion is Rusk's report on his European trip. Like Bob McNamara he has found the responses pretty thin on Vietnam. But it remains a good thing that he put our case as strongly as he did.” (Ibid., National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, High Level Comments Re Bomb Pauses)

2 Harold Wilson arrived in New York on December 15 to address the U.N. General Assembly. On December 16, he traveled to Washington for a formal meeting at the White House in the late morning. In the late afternoon, Wilson and Johnson met privately for almost two hours. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary) Wilson described his meeting with the President in A Personal Record, pp. 186-188. On Vietnam, Wilson recalled that he pressed Johnson for a suspension of the bombing to test North Vietnamese sincerity. Wilson also recalled that he warned the President that if the United States bombed Hanoi and Haiphong, the United Kingdom would have to publicly disassociate itself from such action.

3 Rusk attended the Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Paris December 14-16.

4 Reference is to Johnson's address at the Johns Hopkins University on April 7. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 848-852. See also vol. II, Document 245.

5 A different view prepared jointly by DIA and CIA is in a DIA Special Intelligence Supplement, “An Appraisal of the Bombing of North Vietnam,” December 12. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-311-69)

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 232. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 17, 1965.

2172. Eyes only for Bundy.

1. I received word from Mission officer that a man purporting to be connected with the Viet Cong had said that a V.C. attempt to approach me had been unsuccessful because I was apparently not interested.

2. This was so much the reverse of the truth that I told Archbishop Palmas about it so that he would be in a position to clear up any misunderstanding. He vouched for the complete lack of basis for such an idea. On the contrary, he said I had always made it clear that I was interested.

3. In fact, Archbishop Palmas will tell his “former Minister” when he sees him that he feels that he had not been dealt with in a correct manner.

4. Palmas assumes that either his “former Minister” has been cheated and deceived by the V.C. or there has been an intervention from the north to quash separate peace making activities from among the Viet Cong. A sign of this can be found in the new Viet Cong flag which now contains the hammer and sickle.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis; Priority. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 8:04 a.m.

233. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to President Johnson 233. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to President Johnson1

Washington, December 18, 1965.

SUBJECT

Summary of Conclusions of the Report on Viet Nam2

If the objectives of our policy remain the same, the war in Viet Nam is just beginning for the United States. The ultimate needs cannot be estimated, either as to U.S. manpower, costs or time. Prudence requires, however, that we anticipate a doubling and redoubling of U.S. forces in the next year or two. The truth is that we are up against an open-ended military situation which can eventually spread to encompass Southeast Asia and even China. The war has, in fact, already spilled over into Laos and may be on the verge of involving Cambodia.

The end of the road on the basis of present policy is not in sight either in the sense of a military solution or a solution by negotiations. The Communists give no signs of acquiescing in the basic requirement of our present policy which, in effect, is that North Viet Nam either agree to or be compelled “to leave its neighbors alone”. That concept, in any event, is an oversimplified interpretation of the situation. The bulk of Communist manpower in South Vietnam is still South Vietnamese. South Vietnamese and North Vietnamese are all mixed together, on both sides, in this conflict. The disputants are not only “neighbors,” they are also “relatives”.

Any immediate prospects of opening a Conference (and they are slim) are not likely to be realized on the “neighbor” concept but, if at all, on the basis of “cease fire and stand fast.” That would appear to be a necessary preliminary to straightening out the complex Vietnamese relationships in general accord with the Geneva Agreements of 1954. A cease fire and stand fast now, as a practical matter, would leave the Viet Cong in control of most of the rural areas, and the government in control of the cities which probably contain in excess of 50% of the total population of South Viet Nam.

It is not likely that third parties can be of much help in bringing about a Conference any more than they can be counted on for much real assistance in carrying on the war. Almost without exception, the principal concern other nations have, whether in Europe or in Asia, is staying clear of involvement themselves.

The Russians, in particular, are unwilling to help bring about negotiations at this time. Indeed, it may well be that they do not find the present situation at all without benefits from their point of view. The fact is that their principal rivals in the world and in the Communist bloc (the United States and China respectively) are both deeply involved in Viet Nam. The Russians, as of now, are in the clear and have almost a free hand in promoting their position and interests both within the bloc and in the world in general.

The most realistic hope (and it is not much) for a conference in the near future would appear to lie in a direct initiative with the Chinese and North Vietnamese and on the initial basis of “cease fire and stand fast.” A possible approach was outlined to Secretary Rusk in a cable on December 10, 1965.3 If a Conference on this basis could be achieved, the present state of the war in Viet Nam would obviously not give the Saigon government and the United States control of all South Viet Nam but we would still have a substantial position for negotiating purposes.

If a Conference cannot be brought off at this time, the decision which faces us resolves itself into this: Shall we plunge in further militarily, into depths which are unfathomable and could eventually involve war with China or can we hold a more limited position in South Viet Nam by more limited military means until the Communists come around to negotiations? Apart from the costs in lives and resources which have to be considered in this decision, there is the additional factor of the worldwide consequences of a deeper and more widespread U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia. In my judgment, these consequences are likely to be very adverse to the position of the United States, particularly with respect to Europe and Japan which are, in fact, the only other two major power-seats in the non-Communist world.

This is a conflict in which all the choices open to us are bad choices. We stand to lose in Viet Nam by restraint; but we stand to lose far more at home and throughout the world by the more extensive military pursuit of an elusive objective in Viet Nam.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Senator Mansfield's Trip (Southeast Asia). No classification marking. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

2 Dated December 17. (Ibid.) Printed in part in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 738-740.

3 Text in Document 227.

234. Draft Papers 234. Draft Papers1

Washington, December 18, 1965.

The following draft papers have been prepared for discussion at 11:45 AM, December 18:2 1. An outline of the U.S. public position. (Tab 1)

2. A draft message to Ambassador Lodge (Tab 2)

3. A one-page scenario of initial diplomatic action (Tab 3)

4. A draft statement by Secretary Rusk or Ambassador Thompson to Ambassador Dobrynin (Tab 4)

5. A draft circular telegram to selected capitals. (Tab 5)

Tab 13

OUTLINE OF U.S. PUBLIC POSITION DURING A SUSPENSION OF BOMBING

1. Assumptions

(1) Bombing would be suspended from December 22 and the U.S. must keep free to continue or end the suspension as the President determines. An internal planning assumption is that suspension might last through Vietnamese New Year, which comes on January 21, 22 and 23.

(2) The U.S. will make absolute minimum of official public comment on the suspension of the bombing, as such. The U.S. instead will emphasize during the suspension the overriding need for unconditional peace talks and will make it clear that all of its actions at every level—political, military, and diplomatic—are directed at achieving a peaceful settlement.

2. Official Public Statements

(1) Within the next few days, and not later than December 22, the Secretary of State makes a major statement on peace in Vietnam. He rehearses the full list of our efforts to start negotiations. He re-states and re-emphasizes our readiness for free elections and Geneva agreements and the other elements of our strong diplomatic position as last developed by the President on July 28. He rededicates the U.S. to this search for peace and hails the readiness of Prime Minister Wilson to do his best. He announces on behalf of the President that Vice President Humphrey and Governor Harriman will be proceeding to friendly and neutral capitals right after Christmas to explain in full the U.S. position and to enlist the help of all concerned in moving toward peace.

(2) On December 22 bombing is suspended in the North, but without comment. This position of “no comment” is rigorously sustained at every official headquarters, and there is no comment on background either, until the President gives the word.

(3) At a time determined by the President, the White House Press Secretary responds to questions on the suspension by saying that every action of the U.S. is related to two purposes: first, to turn back the aggressor in the South, and second, to open the way to peaceful settlements. This comment is echoed precisely by all U.S. officials. All officials continue to draw attention to the statement of the Secretary of State and to the diplomatic missions of the Vice President and Governor Harriman.

3. Background comments

At times directed by the President, the following background comments will be made by officers of the appropriate departments: (1) Our military effort in the South is being sustained and intensified. The deployments continue and the aircraft not being used in the North are being redirected against Laos and South Vietnam where they have work to do. The South is where the contest will be decided. (Defense)

(2) The fact that there is no bombing is directly related to the desire to create a favorable environment of response for the Secretary's speech and the Humphrey/Harriman missions. We do not wish to have this series of peace appeals punctuated by the sound of bombs exploding in the North. (State)

(3) The suspension of the bombing carries no serious military risks because —the aircraft are doing their job elsewhere;

—the weather is bad over North Vietnam this month anyway;

—reconnaissance continues over North Vietnam;

—if no progress is made toward peace, we can catch up later in the North (Defense).

(4) the whole peace effort, including the suspension of the bombing, has two purposes: to open the way for peace if possible, and to prove to men of good will in every country the good faith of the U.S. in its commitment to a peaceful settlement. (State)

(5) If this peace effort does not work, the prospect of more and heavier fighting is real, because the determination of the U.S. is unchanged. (every one)

4. Very deep background or off the record

(1) This effort is the necessary peace punch to go with the military punch which is coming in January. We face a big budget, larger reinforcements, and possibly other drastic measures in the field of taxes and controls. The President cannot ask the American people to join in united support of these hard measures until we have given complete proof of our determination to move toward peace, if possible. (Defense)

(2) This peace effort, including the suspension of bombing, is designed to give an opening for debate and pressure for a peace conference within the Communist world. We make no comment at all about what one Communist capital may be saying to another, but we do know that it has been hard for any of them to speak of peace while a Socialist country was being bombed. We hope they are making the most of the suspension. (State)

Tab 2

Draft Telegram4

Literally eyes only for Ambassador from President.

1. I am determined to leave no stone unturned in pursuit of a peaceful settlement of the war consistent with our objective of an independent and secure South Viet-Nam. But over the past few weeks we have been repeatedly told by the Soviet Union, representatives of various Eastern European countries, our Western Allies and various significant leaders of American opinion that effective steps toward peace are difficult if not impossible while North Viet-Nam is under air bombardment.

2. None of us has illusions that a suspension of bombing would be likely to lead to acceptable peace moves by Hanoi. But before taking the critical next steps that I now face, I must satisfy myself, the American people, and the world that every opportunity has been provided for peaceful initiatives. If it did nothing else we have reason to believe that a suspension could add to the strains and dissensions in the Communist camp and make it easier for Moscow to avoid deep involvement.

3. These next steps include budget increases of many billions of dollars which will become public in January, the deployment of large numbers of additional men during 1966 and the acceptance of stepped-up casualties associated with such increased deployments.

4. I am confident the American people will be prepared to do whatever is necessary to see the struggle to a successful conclusion and that our additional efforts will have the support of most of our friends around the world. But it appears to me that sustained support for these very difficult undertakings can be best assured by one further measure to satisfy the world that America is doing everything possible to create the conditions that will facilitate progress toward peace.

5. With these considerations in mind—and after an exhaustive balancing of all implications and consequences—I have decided to order the suspension of air attacks on NVN beginning December 22 in order to permit opportunity for both Communist and friendly countries to exercise all diplomatic initiatives they can and will undertake. For the moment no decision will be made as to precise duration of suspension. This will depend on progress of diplomatic efforts being undertaken by our friends and on both the words and the actions of Hanoi. We will, of course intensify our efforts in the South, and continue our actions against infiltration routes in Laos. We will also continue unarmed reconnaissance over DRV.

6. I do not contemplate any public announcement of suspension. At the beginning, the stand-down may hopefully be related to weather conditions. As attention becomes focused on continued suspension we shall publicly explain it as a step in the search for peace. At the same time the press can be informed on background basis that suspension is taking place during period when weather conditions in Viet-Nam limit effectiveness of bombing. Press will certainly draw its own conclusions about relation of suspension to the Christmas season.

7. But while there will be no public announcement we do plan quietly to inform various key governments, including certain Communist governments, which have indicated interest in some diplomatic initiative. Moreover I shall dispatch various emissaries to key capitals to explore possibilities of probing intentions and encouraging diplomatic initiatives.

8. I know of your own reservations regarding any suspension of bombing and am fully aware of possible costs and dangers. Nevertheless, I feel that this action is a necessary preparation for the difficult days that lie ahead.

9. I also recognize the delicate and complicated problem you will face in handling this matter with the GVN. This will draw on your best diplomatic resources. We must emphasize to the GVN that the American determination is unswerving but that before entering into a new and more costly phase of the conflict requiring a very much greater US effort we must satisfy our people and the world that all measures are being exhausted to bring about peace on a basis consistent with the objectives for which we are both fighting. Our stake is so large in this enterprise that we cannot permit the GVN to veto this essential measure.

10. I leave it to your best judgment how to approach GVN. I know you will bear in mind the serious problem of premature leaks. You carry a very high responsibility and I know I can trust you to do everything possible in bringing off this difficult but essential undertaking.

Tab 35

SCENARIO

1. December 21, P.M. Speech at the UN.

2. December 21, P.M. Following speech Goldberg informs U Thant of plan with regard to suspension.

3. December 21, P.M. Following speech Ambassador Thompson and/or Secretary Rusk informs Ambassador Dobrynin along lines of attached draft

4. December 22 Delivery of personal message from Secretary Rusk to Hungarian Foreign Minister Peter similar to message given Ambassador Dobrynin.

5. December 22, A.M. UK requested to deliver oral message to Hanoi informing Hanoi of suspension and willingness of UK to act as channel of communication and otherwise to hold itself in readiness to do anything possible that will move situation toward peaceful solution.

6. December 22, A.M. Instructions transmitted to US Ambassadors following countries for delivery to the Chief of Government personal message from the President along lines attached draft: United Kingdom, Thailand, Australia, New Zealand, Korea, Canada, India, Japan, Philippines (both Macapagal and Marcos).

7. December 22, P.M.(December 23 A.M. Saigon Time) Initiation of suspension.

8. December 26 Vice President departs for Japan and inauguration of Philippine President. Following Philippine inauguration he visits Australia, New Zealand and India.

9. December 26 Gov. Harriman departs for European capitals.

Tab 46

DRAFT STATEMENT TO DOBRYNIN

I wish to inform you confidentially in advance that on December ___ we will suspend our bombing operations against North Vietnam. We are taking this step fully conscious of the risks involved. One of these is that the other side may take advantage of our action to step up the intervention in South Vietnam. We will, therefore, continue our reconnaissance of North Vietnam. Another risk is that the authorities in Hanoi and Peiping may interpret our action as a sign of weakness or lack of determination to carry out our commitment to the Government and people of South Vietnam. This risk is heightened by the fact that as always is the case in a society such as ours when controversial issues are under public discussion, a small minority has come out in opposition to our policy in Southeast Asia. I am sure that on the basis of reports from you and other sources your government can put these manifestations in their proper perspective. I am not so sure that this is the case in Hanoi and Peiping.

The resistance to the North Vietnamese controlled and directed hostilities in South Vietnam will continue but can quickly be brought to an end either by formal negotiations or by the simple cessation of North Vietnamese intervention. I realize that we do not have a common view of the past history of this affair but I am hopeful that we do hold in common a desire to see peace restored in that unhappy land; to see the killing and the terrorism ended and the long-suffering people of this area given the opportunity to devote their lives to peaceful pursuits in which we stand ready to assist them. As we have repeatedly stated, we seek no military bases or other advantages in this area and we believe that the Geneva Accords of 1954 could furnish the basis for a settlement.

I can assure you of our sincerity when I tell you that we are determined to live up to our commitments but that peace is our objective and that the action of which we are informing your Government has no other purpose.

Tab 57

DRAFT CIRCULAR TELEGRAM TO U.S. AMBASSADORS IN SELECTED CAPITALS

The President requests that you call on Chief of Government before the close of business on __________ to give him the following personal message from the President.

“I want you to know that in pursuit of the objective set forth in my address at the UN, I have instructed the Secretary of State to conduct a renewed and intensive effort to move the problem of Vietnam to the peace table. I have asked the Secretary to coordinate a number of efforts of all sorts, public and private, to persuade the Government of North Vietnam of the importance of moving in this direction.

“In order to insure the most favorable possible environment for this effort, I have agreed with the Government of Vietnam that there will be a suspension of the bombing in North Vietnam beginning on December ______.

“In all its actions in Vietnam, my Government has aimed from the first for a peaceful settlement. These new actions are a part of this same policy and purpose. It is my hope that the climate that should result will make it possible for your Government to take initiatives of its own in furtherance of the objective of a peaceful settlement. I have asked my Ambassador to be available to you at any time for further discussion of these matters.”

For the Ambassador's information: Unarmed reconnaissance of North Vietnam will continue and we will be alert to and reserve full freedom of action to deal with any aggressive actions that the DRV may take which are clearly contrary to our objective of peaceful solutions. We also expect to maintain and even accelerate the pace of military action in South Vietnam. In your discretion you should insure that these elements of our policy are understood.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (B). Top Secret. There is no drafting information on the papers.

2 For a record of the December 18 White House meeting, see Document 235.

3 Top Secret; Sensitive.

4 Top Secret; Nodis.

5 Top Secret.

6 Top Secret.

7 Top Secret.

235. Notes of Meeting 235. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, December 18, 1965, 12:35 p.m.

PRESENT

The President, Rusk, McNamara, Bundy, Clifford, Ball, Alex Johnson, Abe Fortas, Jack Valenti

SUBJECT

Possible bombing pause in North Vietnam

President: Publicity seekers and amateurs cannot have a hand in our affairs with other nations (in regard to Fanfani affair). When Adlai (wrote) letter rebuking the Sevareid break, CBS only carried 30 seconds. The denial never catches up with the accusation.

Stevenson had a martyr complex but he never was going to resign.

Amateur excursions into diplomacy can cost you greatly. But having to reply to it, it destroyed its effectiveness. We can't conduct negotiations …

(Guard these papers2 we are reading. We simply cannot allow this information to get out. I had a conversation with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff3 —and I can understand what McNamara is living with—he gave me the reasons why the Chiefs are against a cease-fire and a pause—it almost makes it impossible to attack …

(I would treat missions without mentioning or pointing up. After the fact, it is alright but we cannot announce their schedule as a peace mission. It would get nowhere.)

The military say a month's pause would undo all we've done.

McNamara: That's baloney—and I can prove it.

President: I don't think so. I disagree. I think it contains serious military risks. It is inaccurate to say suspension of bombing carries no military risk.

Bundy and McNamara: We can resume bombing at any time.

President: If we're confronted with 60-100,000 more men, and we didn't anticipate it, that's an error. If they fix all their bridges and transportation … (I thought we took this power plant out.)

Rusk: I don't believe the suspension will last to January 27 unless we are well on the way toward peace.

President: I agree. It could be of very short duration.

Bundy: It would be better to start on the 23rd or 24th.

McNamara: It would leak if we give Lodge longer than 23rd. Start Wednesday the 22nd.

Bundy: Which is then Thursday, their time. If you go to the UN, the pause ought to come right after.

Think carefully about if there is a turnaround on Lodge's part. The question is do we want to know more before we push the button. If he says the situation would collapse, you may want to know more.

President: What does Max Taylor think? How would he vote?

McNamara: On balance, “no”. But he would vote with the Presidnt.

Bundy: This is not what he considers his arena.

McNamara: He thinks the military program and pacification is going better than it is.

President: Why do it the 22nd? Why not the 7th or 8th?

Bundy: Christmas time is a good time psychologically—also get it started before Congress comes back.

President: If you wind up bombing during New Year, wouldn't it be better to do it during their New Year?

Ball: Wouldn't it be better to do it before Congress comes back?

President: Incidentally, do we want a personal State of the Union message? Clark, I want you to think about this. My inclination is not to speak in person. We wrote an 8-year program in our first State of the Union message. We've got all this the first year.

McCormack thinks personal delivery will help elect the Congress. I don't agree.

Rusk: I disagree. If you didn't, you would be giving up your leadership, here and abroad. I do have objection to a 9 p.m. appearance.

McNamara: I don't think you have to go before Congress to assert leadership. You ought not to go unless (the message) has something to say.

Clifford: I think it would be a serious mistake if you didn't go in person. Last year you laid out a domestic program. This time you report on the shape of the program.

I think, after your illness, failure to appear would be injurious to world leadership. To break a long standing custom would be serious.

Rusk: If we were at peace in Viet-Nam, it might be alright, but not now.

President: I think there is a good deal to what Cliff says.

Clifford: I would do it on the 11th or 12th.

President: We could do it on Monday, the 10th, the first day. That's what we did last year.

(Fortas, Rusk, Clifford all intensely in favor of personal delivery.)

(After reading the position paper on a pause)

It rankles me that we have to prove again to Congress we are striving for peace. We've done that again and again.

Rusk: It's “What have you done for me lately?”

President: Would we read about the suspension on the 23rd?

Bundy: The British will probably leak it.

President: Who will you tell about this?

Rusk: The UK, Thailand, Australia, New Zealand, Korea, Canada, India, Japan, the Philippines. We need to tell them something within 36 hours.

Alex Johnson: After the first Saigon briefing of no mention of an attack on the North, the press will be hounding us.

President: You better move your dates back. I'm not ready to do anything yet. We have a lot of talking to do.

Dean, tell me what you think will be achieved by execution of this recommendation of a pause?

Rusk: First, there is the underlying question of the American people. They are isolationists at heart. (I am) convinced the people will do what has to be done in a war situation if they are convinced there is no alternative. You must think about the morale of the American people if the other side keeps pushing.

We must be able to say that all has been done.

President: Haven't we done this?

Rusk: To my satisfaction, but perhaps not to that of the American people.

Second, it's our deepest national purpose to achieve our goal by peace not war. If there is one chance in ten or twenty, a step of this sort could lead to a settlement on the Geneva agreements and 17th parallel I would take it. One chance in twenty is my guess.

Try to create a heavy obligation on the Russians' part to settle. If we pause, they will owe us something. The Russians, Yugoslavs, Hungarians have all pressed this with me. There is a possibility of deception.

President: They are pretty good at that, aren't they?

Rusk: If there is a chance Russia would take advantage of a suspension to start a movement toward peace, it is good. If it fails …

(I am) influenced by the fact Russia and Iron Curtain countries acted in India-Pakistan crisis.

Also they don't want China policy to win. Also, they don't want a confrontation with the United States over Southeast Asia policy.

If it moves to the U.S. and China directly engaged, they have a deadly problem. This worries them. This ought to be clarified. We may get this clarified on the 3rd day like the last time.

A minor point (it would) make sure the world knows the U.S. is not the obstacle to peace. Those who support us will find it easy to support us.

President: From a propaganda point, there is a long shot chance. First, the Russians owe us something; second, it gives supporters reasons to go along with the U.S.

Rusk: Possibility of trap—parlay pause into unilateral pause.

President: Do we eliminate this by keeping the pause on an indefinite time limit?

Rusk: Right.

Another concern is a pause that fails. It will bring pressure to go all out to get it settled.

President: That is the most dangerous aspect. Don't we know a pause will fail? If we are in worse shape then, won't we be bringing a deadly crisis on ourselves? The Republicans are looking for an exit. When we suffer reverses, it will be attributable to this. The support we have will be weak as dishwater.

Rusk: The answer to Dirksen is that no real settlement came from Korea … They allowed North Viet-Nam to become communist.

President: Bob?

McNamara: The Soviets have not applied all the pressure they could.

President: Have they ever applied pressure?

Rusk: Yes. During the first pause. They said they didn't have time.

McNamara: Our first pause was a propaganda effort. It was a propaganda effort—not for the Soviets to help.

Rusk: Another indication is that the Russians have waged a great struggle against China.

President: Do we gain anything by doing this on the heels of the Italian move?4

Rusk: There is some disagreement in the timing. (One) the hardliners say you paused in the face of Hanoi's intransigence. (Two) the leftwing says you are pausing because you don't believe anything will happen.

McNamara: My point is they haven't made all the effort they are capable of.

President: How do you know that? Have they talked with you?

McNamara: No. No contacts. This comes from State.

This pause will give us leverage on them. It stops them from precipitous action against us—such as an amphibious landing. Such Russian action is less likely if we pause.

I think there is some movement from the DRV. We don't really understand the DRV reactions. We don't really know. We are out of communication. (There is) danger because of this. (There is a) bare chance this pause will help them move toward us.

President: What does Thompson say about the Russians?

Ball: It would relieve them of intense pressure on response to our actions. (There is) more danger of Russian response than Chinese response. So we must push them into a corner.

Rusk: Suppose the Russians were trying to avoid a confrontation with the U.S.? What are those Americans up to?

(The President left the room to take a phone call at 1:40. He re-entered at 1:50 p.m.)

Bundy: We don't think you should contact Ford of the House of Representatives. He will denounce us.

(The President did not answer.)

McNamara: 1. The Soviets have not applied all the pressure they are capable of.

2. Action stops Russians from responding as forcefully to our attacks …

3. North Viet-Nam might make a favorable movement. We don't know enough of their reactions to judge.

4. Suspension of bombing will widen the gap between the Russians and Chinese.

5. Strong feeling of American public that Government peace efforts have been superficial and inadequate.

6. Military solution to problem is not certain—one out of three or one in two. Ultimately we must find solution, we must finally find a diplomatic solution.

President: Then, no matter what we do in military (field) there is no sure victory.

McNamara: That's right. We have been too optimistic. One in three or two in three is my estimate.

Rusk: I'm more optimistic, but I can't prove it.

McNamara: I'm saying: we may not find a military solution. We need to explore other means. It is impossible to negotiate a settlement we find acceptable.

Rusk: I don't agree. The other side knows South Viet-Nam is not going to negotiate on uneven terms.

McNamara: Our military action approach is an unacceptable way to successful conclusions.

Ball: What you are saying is: they quit and come to the conference table?

McNamara: Right. This seems a contradiction. I come to you for a huge increase in Viet-Nam—400,000 men. But at the same time it may lead to escalation and undesirable results. I suggest we look now at other alternatives.

1. Military advantage to North Viet-Nam infiltration. I don't think it is serious—small advantage to North Viet-Nam.

2. Possibility North Viet-Nam will interpret a pause as a sign of weakness.

3. May lead to trouble with Lodge and the South Vietnam. It doesn't make any difference what or who is in South Viet-Nam—don't worry about them.

Lodge is a great admirer of the President. He will act like a soldier.

President: I differ with you. I think Lodge and the South Vietnamese government are problems. We've had enough governments out there. We must give thought to where the St. Louis Post-Dispatch episode5 leads to.

Ask Dobrynin in the light of North Vietnamese reaction where are we?

Also Mansfield—he is arriving with a full report.

McNamara: Pressure for escalation after suspension. Don't believe it will be a major problem. This pressure is only in terms of the North.

Republicans don't dare suggest we bomb cities.

P.O.L.? I will recommend we bomb them too.

Mine Haiphong Harbor? I will suggest this later myself. Three to six months from now we will have to do this. But danger is Russian reaction. It will be less if we have pause.

Rusk: Think you underestimate problem we face with South Viet-Nam.

McNamara: Find it inconceivable that is so.

Greatest danger is right in this room. Simply cannot discuss this with your wife. I can see stories about this—and I am embarrassed. Please let us check ourselves and discuss with no human being.

(Meeting adjourned for lunch at 2:20 p.m. Meeting resumed at 3:05.)

Bundy: For the pause. Share McNamara view that settlement must be political. This will be form of diplomatic initiative.

President: I'm not in position to quote Wheeler on pros or cons of pause. He is a good soldier and will follow Commander-in-Chief. Don't think his views are emotional. He is loyal to McNamara and me— —but has convictions … point up systematically his views.

McNamara: Whatever decision you make, Wheeler will follow.

Bundy: If we are going to do a pause, I'd much rather have done it before the Congress comes back.

Fortas: Divide into two parts:

1. Military effects.

2. Psychological and political aspects.

Political effects on this country:

(1) Case is not proven. Believe this action will be good—if it results in some kind of conference or suspension of hostilities.

Think public reaction will be negative—showing uncertainty. Always think there is possibility of error in assessing public opinion. What they really want is cessation of hostilities. Not very much point in responding to manifestation of public opinion that says “you're not doing enough”.

Anytime there is evidence of lack of certainty on the government's part, it leads to negative thinking in the public mind. It will cause people to worry about depth of conviction in government objective.

Negative on net balance.

Real question—on whether this action should be taken—is whether this action results in actual accomplishment.

As I understand it, this action will not be done with pre-arrangement with Russians. This is an action ambivalent and ambiguous. We use the Christmas season—and by that fact and presentation we are diluting the effort [effect] in its hoped-for psychological and political results. Also diluting effect on Russians—and any bringing about of peace negotiations.

Concerned as to what happens if this fails.

If failure, we won't get credit for it. There will be renewed pressure for drastic action. We'll have obstacles to negotiations because of failure of major and spectacular effort.

President: What do you think? What would be the value?

Fortas: If we could do this by pre-arrangement with the Russians: “If we would finally consider a pause, would this give you an opportunity to get the VC to the conference table?”

President: We've already done this with the Russians.

Bundy: We don't think we can put them in a corner. The paper to the Russians is drafted carefully to go as far as we can with the Russians.

Rusk: We've tried to engage the Soviets in the Viet-Nam settlement but Moscow can't deliver Hanoi.

Fortas: This venture depends on the Russians using our actions for some purpose with North Viet-Nam. All I do is raise the question as to whether we have adequate reason for assumption.

Ball: This assumption is not based on one conversation, but on a number of them. Very often the means used by communists is not direct. Also this assumption is based on direct conversation with the Soviets. If we paused, the Soviets tell us they will do the best they can (based on twenty or more conversations).

Fortas: There is danger Hanoi would greet a pause as visible evidence that protests have had effect on the U.S. Government.

Ball: The thing that offsets that is heavy deployment in the South.

Alex Johnson: We can't have it said by Hanoi and China that Russia is conspiring with the United States.

Clifford: Arguments for pause are well presented. Even if I accepted them, I still feel deep concern over this move.

1. Tried to figure out the circumstance under which North Viet-nam would talk. Only their belief they are not going to win the war in South Viet-Nam. I don't believe they are at that stage now. I think they believe they are not losing. They are sending large numbers of men down. They have the example of the French before them. They believe that ultimately the United States will tire of this and go home and North Viet-Nam will prevail. Until they know they're not going to win the war, they will not talk and the Russians cannot convince them.

2. Believe the President and the government have talked enough about peace. Don't believe any more talk will do any good. Any objective citizen knows the government's position. Talk of peace is interpreted as a sign of weakness.

This pause would encourage North Viet-Nam—take this to be a step backward, in response to U.S. protest opinion and world opinion.

Anything that hinders the North Viet-Namese from figuring they can't win hinders the close of the war.

3. When the time comes to resume (and it will resume because chances are only one in twenty or one in fifty) those who want peace at any price, who want us to get out are … that we not resume. They will urge enough … events to happen to encourage the pause to go on.

4. If you accept the hypothesis that there is no chance of success, others will know it too. And I don't like the President to take a posture that is clearly unproductive. Might end up being viewed as a gimmick. Timing during Christmas is unfortunate.

5. Don't believe Viet-Nam is going to be settled publicly. Humphrey and Harriman publicized trips will not settle anything. Only when Hanoi feels nothing to be gained by further fighting is this war going to end.

6. If Soviets believe it is to their best interest to take favorable steps, they can do it at any time. Simply because bombing is going on will not stop them from intervening.

7. Time might come when pause would be valuable—if we thought there was a chance it would be successful, then and only then would I do it.

Ball: Think we make a mistake in feeling Hanoi has freedom of action. They can no more give up this war alone than we would let Saigon fall. It's what the communist powers believe is the right course. The bombing immobilizes China and the USSR.

McNamara: Should we pursue military estimate of 50-50 chance of victory—or what should we do?

Rusk: In carrying the political battle, I need something more than we have at the present time. We need to make clear that the United States is honorable and has been given no alternative. We strengthen our position by proving we want peace.

Fortas: Seems to me you have already made your case for peace. Perhaps it looks different on the inside than it does on the outside.

McNamara: If we put in 400,000 men, what will they do? They will match us. We are going to be bombing assets of North Viet-Nam dearer to them than the ones we are bombing. China is beginning to ready planes to meet us in the skies. It appears that MIGs are being introduced into North Viet-Nam. They are getting ready for escalation—and will call on Russia. They don't want to confront us in Vietnam—they want a way out.

Fortas: The way we are doing it is too little to get the Soviets to do anything.

Ball: But North Viet-Nam would know a diplomatic offensive is going on on behalf of the Russians. If North Viet-Nam says “no” to the Soviets, they have a way out when North Viet-Nam calls on them for more arms and men.

President: Dean, have you given any thought to me going to the UN?

Rusk: Yes. It is related to whether or not you envisage doing the pause. If you are going up to greet and thank the UN on their last day—a short statement—recount the main elements of our policy—also try to look beyond Viet-Nam—and the hopes of mankind all over the world—education, health and peace—that kind of twenty minute visit would be worthwhile. It would be particularly worthwhile if you do the pause.

McNamara: Not so sure if you are not going to pause. Want to see the speech before final decision.

President: Anything further to be gained between the Secretary or Goldberg and the Russians—on the basis: We will do this if you will follow through? Tell them: Here's what we want to do if you will acknowledge that you will do something.

Bundy: You're never going to be in a position to be in partnership with the Russians. They will always deny being in league with a capitalistic power.

Rusk: Moscow, Poland and Hungary have been in touch with Hanoi. We have never heard from Poland and Hungary.

If we don't do this, have we any other diplomatic moves we can make—any approaches with any other government?

(Silence for a few minutes)

Rusk: We could take it to the Security Council if the Russians didn't veto and ask the Secretary General to go to Hanoi. We could press the Hungarian channel pretty hard—they are in touch with Moscow.

I worry about bringing this to the assembly in view of the Rhodesia question.

We could continue these discussions of which we have had a lot.

President: Did Wilson say anything about this?6 I don't know.

Rusk: He was very relaxed about it.

President: He asked me about the 12-hour truce.

Rusk: That should be left to local commanders. It's not very long.

President: Let's outline all other courses and see them.

Ball: We have just about exhausted third party contacts based on what we have given them about our position.

President: But the Viet Cong haven't done anything. They get a lot of hay by just talking.

Bundy: If we had a newspaper in Hanoi not under their control, we could do more (laughter).

Down the road there are a lot of areas we haven't done—such as formulas on when they shoot and we shoot back as we move around Vietnam.

We could plow a straight furrow during winter and spring and clean out the South—and put the onus of continued fighting on them.

I would like to get the diplomatic experience of this pause. We have a lot of diplomatic maneuvering to do.

Rusk: One of the pitfalls is that a new situation can always turn out different. For example, lifting of the Berlin blockade came as a surprise. In the Pusan peninsula, we thought we couldn't hang on—and we did.

I have a feeling that the other side is not that tough—and it does not follow in a year or two we won't be in the far more favorable position. I think the other side is hurting just as we are hurting.

Clifford: We could make quite a case that our stand is producing good results by preventing the Viet Cong from achieving their objective. Perhaps we can connect beneficial events in Indonesia with our presence in Viet-Nam. At heart we are preventing a communist takeover in Viet-Nam and that is to our credit.

Rusk: I presume you don't think we can put a greatly increased offensive? (to McNamara)

McNamara: No. We are increasing but so are the Viet Cong. We have 34 U.S. battalions plus 7 more soon, plus 10 Australian and others. South Viet-Nam has 600,000 men. The Viet Cong have 240,000 (probably two or three North Vietnamese divisions—and increasing). By the end of January, 230,000 U.S. and others.

President: What do you think we ought to do if we don't pause, Bob?

McNamara: As a minimum, carry on the military buildup.

Study the possibility of a ceasefire, which I would recommend in a few months, whether as a propaganda device or a military standstill.

President: Any solid information of increasing of North Vietnamese activities?

McNamara: Stepped-up infiltration to 1500 a month through Laos. Soon up to 4,000 a month—this has not been proved, however. About a year ago they began bringing in regular troops instead of cadres. About nine regiments of regulars are there. They have substantially expanded facilities.

Fortas: What would the Viet Cong propose in this 12-hour truce?

Alex Johnson: They said that soldiers without arms would not be attacked for 12 hours.

Fortas: If we are concerned about public opinion, this is something we ought to consider carefully. This would be capable of producing an adverse reaction in this country.

President: Mac, would you undertake to lay out a speech for Tuesday?

Dean, would you lay out alternatives available to us?

Alex, do you have any strong views. If you were President what would you do?

Alex Johnson: I'd take the pause—if for no other reason than to engage the Russians.

President: Couldn't we engage them by saying we are ready to stop if the Viet Cong are?

Alex Johnson: No, I don't think we can without a bombing pause.

President: What troubles me more is their doubt as to our will to see this thing through.

What problems do we get into if we don't bomb on Christmas—and tell the Russians what we are doing—and that we might do more?

You say the Russians won't and can't do any more unless we stop bombing. And they probably won't do anything.

Meeting adjourned at 5:10 p.m.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, December 18 Meeting with Foreign Policy Advisers on Vietnam. Secret. The source text does not indicate a drafter, but the notes were taken by Valenti. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room. President Johnson describes this meeting in The Vantage Point (pp. 235-237), and quotes from this document.

2 Document 234 and attachments.

3 No record of this conversation has been found.

4 See Document 205.

5 On December 17, the Washington correspondent of the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Richard Dudman, broke the story of the Rusk-Fanfani exchange of November 20-December 4, compelling the Department of State to release the texts of the exchange on December 17. See Document 205 and American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 917-919.

6 See footnote 2, Document 231.

236. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 236. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, December 19, 1965, 5 p.m.

I attach two papers which you commissioned yesterday afternoon.

At Tab A is a memorandum from Dean Rusk on alternative diplomatic actions. As he points out himself, the proposals are modest—not because of caution, but because there simply is not much more that we can do by diplomatic means alone.

At Tab B is a draft speech for your use in the United Nations.2 It is very much of a first draft, and it needs a lot of cutting and polishing. There are three points worth making about it: 1. It includes an announcement of a pause. I know this is not something you are planning to do, but I thought it important to have a try at the right kind of language because Art Goldberg has told me most emphatically that he thinks it would be a great mistake for you to go to the UN if you do not have some sort of dramatic announcement to make. I can't think of any other.

2. I have included a pretty full discussion of the international programs which are now being prepared by Joe Califano's office in the fields of food, health and education. I have also drafted a pretty bold statement on population policy. I feel sure that Joe would recommend strongly against such a discussion of major elements of your 1966 program in the UN forum. But we have given all the general assurances before, and without something concrete, this part of the speech would have little interest.

3. I have reviewed your speech to the 20th Anniversary celebration in San Francisco, and I attach a copy at Tab C,3 because I think it shows the problem we are up against. That speech was thoughtful and eloquent, but it had little hard news in it, and it got a disappointing reception. Unless we go beyond it in some clearly specific way, we run the risk of a renewal of this same line of argument—that the Johnson Administration takes no real interest in the UN and has nothing of importance to tell it.

I think there may well be some way of stating our Vietnam position which is a little less precise about the pause but which still has some news and punch in it, and I will have another look at that problem this evening. But I send you these papers now because I know how hard and steadily you are thinking about this whole business.

McG. B.

Tab A

Washington, December 19, 1965.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson4

1. We have established the American position with regard to Viet Nam and have made known our position through all possible channels, public and private. The result has been a firm and repeated negative from Hanoi and Peiping.

2. We see no serious possibility of immediate diplomatic progress of a public nature unless we are prepared to change the conditions under which public diplomatic action could be undertaken. The principal change of condition available to us would be a pause in the bombing.

3. We have reexamined the question of a formal consideration of Viet Nam by the United Nations Security Council or General Assembly. I have discussed this today with Ambassador Goldberg. We both believe that the results would be negative. There would not be general and strong support, in the votes cast, for the United States position, and there is a high probability that a majority in the Security Council or in the Assembly would call for a unilateral termination of the bombing by the United States. We believe that the Soviets would bitterly resist any constructive action by the United Nations and would veto any resolution in the Security Council acceptable to us. The point remains that a bitter debate in the United Nations would further freeze the Soviet public position and reduce their options for the future.

4. Private diplomacy. I do believe we should continue our discussions with the Soviet Union, Hungary, Yugoslavia and others to make sure that at least the Eastern European Communists fully understand our position and understand that Hanoi's insistence upon their four points (amounting to victory in South Viet Nam) is the central obstacle to peace. I am attaching a copy of a memorandum of conversation between Mr. Zinchuk of the Soviet Embassy and William Bundy which you will find of interest.5 From this memorandum it appears that Hanoi's attitude toward a pause would be negative, but that the Soviets themselves would be much interested in one.

5. I believe that we should send a new circular on Viet Nam to all of our Missions abroad giving them an up-to-date recapitulation of peace efforts and our understanding of the present position of Hanoi, as a basis for full discussion of the problem with other governments.

6. The Vice President, after attending the Philippine inauguration, should visit Korea and Japan and make a special effort in Japan to explain the Viet Nam question.

7. I should think, also, that Averell Harriman might take a trip after the Christmas holidays and combine interest in Viet Nam with a number of other matters, visiting, for example, Paris, the North African Arab countries, Saudi Arabia and Iran. There are a number of other questions which he could usefully take up in a number of these capitals. While in Paris he could get a full report from Chauvel's trip to Hanoi and Peiping.6

8. The above proposals are rather modest. The central point is, however, that diplomacy cannot produce miracles if Hanoi remains determined to seize South Viet Nam. I have no doubt that this remains their objective. The reason they do not come to a conference table is that they know that we would not agree to the attainment of their objective at such a conference. What is true of Hanoi is even more true of Peiping. In this instance diplomacy is working within the limitations imposed by Hanoi's objectives in South Viet Nam, which are still in fundamental conflict with our own, and Hanoi's continuing hope that they can somehow succeed on the battlefield.

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII. No classification marking. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

2 Not printed. (Ibid.)

3 For text of the speech given on June 25, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book II, pp. 703-706.

4 Top Secret.

5 Dated December 16, not printed. A copy is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S.

6 Reference is to French diplomat Jean Michel Henri Chauvel's visit to Hanoi and Peking. No record of Harriman receiving a briefing on the trip while in Paris has been found.

237. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 237. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to Secretary of Defense McNamara1

Saigon, December 21, 1965, 1:35 p.m.

MAC 6569. Reference: JCS 4939-65.2

Part I—General

1. In accordance with reference, commencing 0300 this morning I discussed thoroughly with Lodge and Westmoreland subject President outlined to me last Friday evening.3 I covered the following salient points: A. The international and domestic pressures on the administration to undertake this action.

B. The desire to bolster our position both at home and abroad by silencing, or at least disarming, critics of our policy in order that we may proceed with solid backing to achieve US objectives in SE Asia.

C. The fact that, for military and other reasons, I had recommended that this course of action not be adopted. The JCS agree unanimously with the foregoing recommendation.

D. That, if this course of action were adopted, I believed the following safeguards, as a minimum, were needed: (1) no public announcement of the fact; (2) continue as flying conditions permit photographic, visual and other reconnaissance over the DRV; (3) continue and possibly increase air reconnaissance, air strikes and armed recce against infiltration routes through Laos; (4) continue and possibly increase ground and air operations in South Vietnam; and (5) continue our military buildup in South Vietnam.

E. That the President had authorized me to consult with General Goodpaster regarding this matter in order further to analyze and evaluate the problem and to inform him, through Goodpaster, of any “alarming or overly-dangerous aspects”.

F. That, in evaluating the problem, we should consider this course of action could be followed throughout the period Christmas Eve through Tet (21-22-23 Jan '66) unless DRV actions led us to resume pressures on DRV.

2. Upon conclusion of our discussion we agreed that Ambassador Lodge would prepare separate comments. The remainder of this report is arranged accordingly.

Part II—Views of General Westmoreland and General Wheeler

1. We can identify no military advantage to be derived from this course of action except the faint chance that US objectives in SE Asia might be achieved without prolonged armed conflict. In this connection, we note that advocates of this course of action consider chances of this action bringing the Hanoi regime to the conference table are so remote as to be negligible.

2. In theory advantages could accrue if conditions/safeguards could be established on a practical basis. But it is a fact of life that the covert nature of the VC/DRV operations makes it virtually impossible to determine on a day-to-day basis the extent of infiltration of men and equipment. We could therefore find ourselves in a position of ceasing to apply our primary instrument of pressure on the DRV regime without adequate means of proving or determining the extent of continued DRV aggression. Reconnaissance aircraft are reasonably effective in good weather in detecting movement along well established routes. However, we have limited capabilities of determining movement at night or in foul weather. The extent of compliance with our demands can be ascertained to a degree by enemy fire on reconnaissance aircraft. However, this action is completely unrelated to the aggression which we are trying to stop.

3. We consider it a surety that the DRV would use a period of relaxed pressure on the DRV and lessened restrictions on movements of men and materiel to repair and improve LOC's, to improve the readiness of AA defenses, to increase security of vital installations, and to step up the movement of men, equipment, and supplies to the south. In summary, we believe that our relative military posture could be weakened substantially.

4. Additionally, we consider that there are important political and psychological detriments inherent in this course of action. These are:

A. We could be inhibited from resuming pressure against the DRV by the force of world opinion, by publicized threats or commitments of aid by the USSR and/or the ChiComs which would raise the specter of intervention by one or both, and by lack of clear evidence on our part that the DRV are in fact continuing substantial movements of men and materiel to the south.

B. Inevitably the nature of our action would leak and concern would be created in the minds of the RVN military leadership, which concern would be difficult to dispel. Our actions could be interpreted as a prelude to US unilateral negotiations and as a softening in attitude toward Hanoi while the VC are stepping up their military initiatives and acts of terror.

C. It would seem that we would be in a stronger psychological and political position if we had achieved a more solid military posture with respect to troops, airfields, and logistics prior to any consideration of slackening our military efforts. We believe that we have now stopped losing but have not yet started to win. A winning stance would seem to be essential to any successful negotiations. Can we expect Hanoi to negotiate until she has been convinced that she cannot win?

5. In briefest terms, the “alarming or overly-dangerous aspects” of this course of action are comprised of the following:

A. Finding ourselves inhibited from resuming pressure against the DRV, despite the need to do so for the protection of our forces and to prove to the Hanoi regime the costs of aggression.

B. Allowing our forces to be tactically endangered because of rapid deployment of DRV forces to the south.

C. Encountering increased risks of further confrontation with the ChiComs or Soviets should resumption of pressure against the DRV be required.

D. Risking misinterpretation of our actions by the GVN leadership.

6. In consonance with the foregoing, we recommend against adoption of this course of action for the reasons set forth, which we believe cogent. However, if this course of action is nevertheless adopted, we recommend that the safeguards set forth in sub-paragraph 1D of Part I be established as a minimum.

7. We feel that there is merit in cessation of our bombing campaign in the DRV on Christmas day, on New Year's eve and New Year's day, and during the three day period of Tet (21, 22 and 23 January). During these days reconnaissance aircraft should be evident in the skies over the DRV for the purposes of distributing leaflets as part of a psywar campaign and to demonstrate that the GVN/US are calling the shots in this war.

Part III—Views of Ambassador Lodge Herewith my comments on the proposal for an indefinite suspension of bombing, said suspension to begin at Christmas, bombing to be resumed if infiltration from North Viet-Nam is continued, the purpose being to bring North Viet-Nam to the negotiating table.

Comment:

1. I recognize current political realities and the appeal of this idea to some persons. Yet it rests on fundamental misconceptions as to the real nature of Communist governments and would, if carried out, tend to defeat its own purpose.

2. Actually a proposal like this will lead the Communists away from negotiations because it will be interpreted by them as being a sign of weakness and indecision. The proposal assumes that the Communists are like us; that they are in effect like misguided Americans who will reciprocate our kindness and our toleration and our sense of fair play when every experience we have had with Communists, whether at the United Nations or Panmunjom, or in Berlin, shows that the reverse is the case and that they can only be induced to follow a certain course by the application of pressure. They are in truth indifferent to human life and are always probing.

3. The way to end this war, therefore, is by the application of U.S. force. If talks should ever begin, they must be held to the accompaniment of the application of force or else they are foredoomed to failure. We should not forget that there were more people killed after the peace talks began at Panmunjom than there were before because we overlooked this simple principle. I believe the proposition, therefore, as stated, looks at the Vietnamese situation through the wrong end of the telescope, and that it would achieve the opposite result from what its sponsors intend.

4. The fact is that our bombing of North Viet-Nam must be equated with the Viet Cong aggression against South Viet-Nam—and not merely the infiltration aspect. Indefinite cessation of bombing without cessation of the Viet Cong aggression would leave the Viet Cong free to devastate the south with impunity while we tie our hands down in the north.

5. Cessation of bombings should be equated with withdrawal of North Vietnamese units through international checkpoints to the north; unimpeded access of the GVN to any part of its territory; a significant reduction of incidents; cessation of infiltration of men and materiel; and an agreement that at any talks which would be held the matter of an inspection system and enforcement devices would be the first item on the agenda.

6. There is, to be sure, in the proposal no mechanism wherewith to check infiltration or withdrawal of North Vietnamese units. Suppose we started bombing again on the basis of intelligence information, the source of which we could not reveal. Would not the uproar among the wishful thinkers be even greater than it is now? Would we not be in an interminable wrangle over resumption?

7. As far as the GVN is concerned, the Fanfani talks had a devastating effect here because the GVN thought for a moment that we were negotiating their very life behind their backs. It threatened to destroy much that had been built up here in the way of confidence and good feeling. An open ended, unequated suspension of bombing could, I think, either bring about the collapse of the government or its determined opposition. It would also collapse morale in the ARVN.

8. Finally, it would destroy the very big political accomplishments which the President's policies have brought about. Let us not forget that the strongest thing in Viet-Nam is not seeing the B-52s overhead; it is not having the Seventh Fleet come circling in; it is not the huge expenditures by USOM. It is faith in American steadfastness. It was when the Vietnamese saw the American soldier on the ground that they were persuaded that we were committed, and said to themselves: “If the Americans can commit themselves, then I can commit myself.” It is on this belief that the government, which no one thought would last more than three weeks, has lasted as long as it has. This was a big political accomplishment before our troops even fired a shot. When they distinguished themselves in battle, of course, it added to the confidence.

9. An open ended, unequated cessation of bombing would destroy the tremendous political accomplishments President Johnson has wrought, and for which American fighting men sacrifice themselves—some of them, their lives. This is a very serious thing to do without a real chance that the objective of peace will be achieved—a chance which I do not see.

10. A variant of the main proposal is that the bombing be stopped for Christmas, New Year, Tet and during bad weather. It might be possible to do these things without a public announcement and not do too much harm, although I believe we should tell the GVN, as they would certainly find out about it.

11. I recognize the President's very grave problem.He is the one who must cope with the Senate and with public opinion. Yet he deserves to know what his representatives on the spot in their heart of hearts think of the consequences. I shall, of course, loyally support his decisions.

Appendix:

I believe steps should be taken to educate public opinion about the nature of the problems involved in negotiating with Communists; for example:

That NBC or CBS make a TV documentary based on Admiral Joy's book about negotiations with the Communists at Panmunjom.4

That Professor Henry Kissinger, who is extraordinarily well informed and persuasive on this subject, having taken part in the Berlin negotiations himself, have private conversations with Senator Mansfield, Senator Fulbright, and so forth. He would not be suitable for television but he is very persuasive in private with intelligent, well-informed men.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIV, Cables. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Goodpaster.

2 Not printed. (Ibid., Papers of William C. Westmoreland, Eyes Only File)

3 Wheeler met with the President from 5:50 to 6:47 p.m. on December 17. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary) No other record of this meeting has been found.

4 C. Turner Joy, How the Communists Negotiate (New York: Macmillan & Co., 1955).

238. Notes of Meeting 238. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, December 21, 1965, 12:25 p.m.

(President, Rusk, McNamara, Ball, A. Johnson, Bundy, Valenti)

Rusk: Let the Christmas stand-down go.

President: What should I say?

Ball: There is perfectly good language.

A Johnson: Not everyone in Saigon is signed on—they are getting to Ky now. This evening the Vietnamese will be making a statement.2 It's a good statement. Having urged this on them, I wouldn't want to take the play away from them.

President: I can't say anything tomorrow. If we have anything, we ought to say it and get credit for it.

A Johnson: The question is, how it is said in Vietnam. Tonight our time. Everybody but the Prime Minister has signed on.

President (?): I don't think I should say anything except yes or no on the cease fire.

A Johnson: My thought was we'd follow up with a similar statement.

President: I would say: “We and our allies will take no military initiative except in self defense on Christmas Day”. We'd say this as soon as it is cleared. What about New Years and Tet?

Rusk: Much more comprehensive operation on Tet.

President: Do we do anything else?

Bundy: We ought to examine the question of a continuous pause, the only kind useful with the Soviets. Benevolent, but not internationally significant unless we have a clear specific period. We could get a major political advantage from this.

One paragraph in Lodge's message says that bombing be stopped on Christmas, New Years, and Tet—bad weather, etc.3

Rusk: Would that story work?

McNamara: Not really, but we can blur it with statistics and bad weather.

Rusk: I'd go ahead with Christmas—and beyond that, talk to the Hungarians to see.

We won't link anything else to it—and wait to hear.

Bundy: But you won't hear in that time frame. Unless you tell the Russians something they won't do anything.

Rusk: I'm not giving up the possibility for a pause. But we ought to talk to the Hungarians and Russians.

Bundy: I don't see where it leads us.

Rusk: Go for one day at Christmas. Defer further action until we talk to the Hungarians and Russians.

Bundy: Do you think they will tell us anything they haven't before?

Rusk: If Thompson had one of his personal chats with Dobrynin he might pick up something.

Does the President think a pause is possible while Congress is in session?

President: Yes, but don't look with favor on it—it's more a sign of weakness than anything else. All we'll get is distrust from our allies, despair from the troops, and disgruntled generals.

Hanoi and Peking tell us we're weak—won't do anything if we pause. If we suffer a severe reverse as a result of this, we'd never explain it. It's not difficult to explain why we fight when we are attacked every hour. But when commanders say it's suicide, and we do it anyway, there's no explanation.

I want more evidence from the Russians before I override Taylor and Wheeler et al.

Rusk: Congress returns on the 10th? We'll see if we can get more evidence from the Hungarians and Russians.

Bundy: I don't find the cables persuasive, but I understand your position. I think the cables miss the point—as a commitment to do nothing for a month. We can stop bombing, not say anything, and resume when we choose.

President: Would pressure mount to tell the press?

Bundy: Yes, it would be brutal. But Christmas and [Congress' recess?]seem a logical time to pause.

Ball: We don't know if the Russians are really organizing a Communist Congress in the spring.

President: 1. Once we take our step, we could have serious problems to resume bombing.

2. The danger is that it conveys the wrong signal—and I think it does.

If men we rely on to fight for us feel as strongly as they do—as Lodge does—I'd hate to have them at odds with us.

McNamara: We've had a good discussion. But we need political initiative. But we have had the best discussion ever on this subject.

President: Yes, but this is not the political initiative we want now.

McNamara: Question: Should we take out POL in Haiphong? I say we need to—but not at this time.

We need to go into Hanoi circle—30 miles—and take three bridges in this circle. Let the field commanders pick up 4 out of 7 possible targets. This would begin Thursday noon our time. The probability is that it will be after Christmas due to weather. Those targets are only a few miles inside the circle.

Bundy: There is a Cambodian problem as a result of giving commanders the right to defend their troops.

The leak came from Saigon. The first story came from Keyes Beech—and Times confirmed it.

President: Mansfield was very laudatory about Keyes Beech. I think our Congressmen go out and are very frank—and to show how smart they are.

I had the Governors out to my Ranch—and I told Reed of Maine he was the leak to Charles Mohr of the Times.

[Here follows a short discussion unrelated to Viet-Nam.]

Meeting adjourned at 1:10 p.m.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Meeting with Foreign Policy Advisers. Secret. There is no drafting information on the source text, but the notes were taken by Valenti. The time of the meeting, which was held in the Cabinet Room, is from the President's Daily Diary. (Ibid.)

2 Apparent reference to an announcement by Republic of Vietnam authorities on December 23 that they would observe a cease-fire from 6 p.m. on Christmas eve until midnight on Christmas day. The United States made a similar statement.

3 Apparent reference to Part III of Document 237.

239. Special Intelligence Supplement 239. Special Intelligence Supplement1

Washington, December 21, 1965.

SIS 1221-65

AN APPRAISAL OF THE BOMBING OF NORTH VIETNAM

Effects on the DRV Economy

The US/GVN air strikes to date fall far short of crippling the North Vietnamese economy. But the sustained and increasing rate of attrition is causing the economy to develop a noticeable limp. Even with increasing assistance from other Communist countries, the adverse impact is now becoming more apparent in the economically important areas of the country. The extension of interdiction measures to lines of communication joining important industrial centers is compounding already aggravated distribution problems. The regime is apparently making increased use of ocean transport to provide relief to overland distribution channels. Hanoi now admits publicly to a substantial upheaval of production plans in many industrial plants. Import and export programs are in disarray. The planned program under the First Five Year Plan (1961-1965) has undergone substantial rearrangement. A recent report indicates, moreover, that implementation of the Second Five Year Plan scheduled to begin in January 1966 has been postponed. The increasing rate of deterioration of some important sectors of the economy still has not greatly reduced total economic activity. The primary strains continue to be in distribution, allocation of manpower, and management resources. In the face of great difficulties, however, priority traffic continues to move. The air strikes have not yet halted, or even reduced, priority short-term support by the economy to North Vietnam's military efforts, but this support has been maintained only by transferring men and materials away from long-term activities and projects.

The air strikes against overland transport facilities and routes in North Vietnam have hampered the movement of personnel, equipment, and supplies but have not significantly reduced the North Vietnamese capability to provide and increase their logistic support for the Communist forces in Laos and South Vietnam. The capacity of specific transport routes has been reduced by the bombings, but on most routes it is still in excess of the present level of logistic movements. The North Vietnamese have demonstrated a remarkable capability to keep supplies moving in spite of the air attacks. The various improvements and improvisations instituted by the Communists have increased their capability to move men and supplies into Laos and South Vietnam during the present dry season. Even with an intensification of air attacks it is doubtful that the capacity of the overland transport system can be reduced below the level required to provide logistic support at the existing scale of combat in South Vietnam.

The ability of the North Vietnamese to keep the industrial economy moving on a makeshift basis, to maintain priority transportation movements, and to provide the support necessary for military operations, is in large part a result of increasing assistance from other Communist countries. This assistance has taken several forms: the assignment of elements of two Chinese railroad engineer divisions to help keep transportation lines open; large increases in shipments of motor trucks; the provision of structural steels and prefabricated shapes for bridge repair and reconstruction; and the assignment of technical and industrial advisers from the USSR and European Satellite countries. The amount and scope of this support continued to grow in recent weeks.

Direct losses caused by damage to economic facilities and equipment are now estimated at almost $23 million and measurable indirect losses amount to almost $9 million. The cost of permanent reconstruction of rail/highway bridges would be more than $10 million, and the replacement or repair of destroyed or damaged transport equipment would cost an additonal $5.4 million. The cost of temporary repairs to bridges would be more than $1 million. Reconstruction of the damaged electric power plants, the petroleum storage facilities, and the Nam Dinh textile mill would cost about $6 million. The loss of foreign exchange earnings totals at least $5.2 million. The growing losses from lower production throughout the economy can be quantified only in agriculture where losses in the fall rice crop may have amounted to about $3.5 million. The measurable costs of reconstruction, replacement, and repair of damaged facilities, if attempted, would represent more than 20 per cent of total gross annual investment in industry. The additional cost which North Vietnam is incurring for temporary expedients to compensate in part for the damaged facilities cannot be quantified at this time.

The most severe disruptions of economic activity in North Vietnam have been in the southern part of the country where the transportation system has been heavily bombed and electric power stations have been destroyed. Industry in this part of the country normally accounts for only about 20 per cent of total gross industrial output, however, and consists mainly of textile production, food processing, lumber and paper production, chromite mining, and processing of crude phosphate fertilizers. Continued shortages of manpower and equipment in the areas directly affected by bombing have hampered reconstruction efforts and created severe hardships for local populations, but the primarily rural nature of these regions has permitted continued functioning of the subsistence economy.

The disruptions caused by bombing are now being felt in the more economically important areas of the country. The difficulties in maintaining production in the face of insoluble management problems and shortages of skilled manpower have been compounded by the disruption of the distribution system. In November, for the first time, the transportation system connecting North Vietnam's major industrial areas was attacked. Through rail service between Hanoi and Nam Dinh was interdicted by the destruction of the Phu Ly railroad bridge on the Hanoi-Vinh line. However, rail traffic is apparently still moving on stretches of this rail line between interdicted points. A combination railroad and highway bridge serving the Hanoi-Haiphong railroad line and Route 5 was also attacked. The damage to this bridge was light and by undertaking priority repair measures rail service on the line was quickly restored. Nevertheless, these air strikes undoubtedly further disrupted the flow of exports, imports, and goods for domestic use. According to the regional press, distribution problems resulting from damage to the transportation system have “turned upside down” production plans in many enterprises in Haiphong, where some plants have been substituting inferior materials for unavailable regular supplies. Essential materials and equipment can still be delivered to Haiphong by sea, however, and until 1 December other industrial centers could still receive supplies from China via the Hanoi-Dong Dang rail line where previous bomb damage was quickly repaired. On 1 December, however, the Cao Nung railroad bridge on the Hanoi-Dong Dang line was again attacked and several spans were dropped. Several weeks will be required to make temporary repairs to the bridge. In the meantime some cargo probably will be moved across the river by fording, and some can be moved by road on alternate routes such as 13B, which has not been attacked, and 1A and 18, where enough time has probably elapsed for bomb damage to have been repaired. Some freight normally shipped by rail between China and North Vietnam probably was already being transferred to sea transportation before the 1 December strike. This action was taken so that high priority items such as military supplies could be handled more easily by rail. Despite the increasing disruptions, work on major economic development projects of the First Five Year Plan (1961-1965) is continuing and several new projects have been undertaken in the past few months.

The Hanoi-Lao Cai railroad line reportedly was opened for through traffic early in December even though there were a series of strikes against this line at the end of November. Although photography is not available to assess the results of these strikes, damage must have been slight or negligible for the line to be opened so quickly. If the line remains open we would expect to see a resumption of apatite shipments moving to Haiphong for export. Practically no Chinese transit traffic to and from Yunnan has moved through North Vietnam since July. There have been no indications, however, that either Yunnan or the rest of China has suffered serious shortages because of the loss of transit service through North Vietnam. Truck transport within China apparently is being used to replace this transit service. Transportation in the southern part of North Vietnam continues to be complicated by air attacks. In spite of heavy damage to bridges, substantial amounts of both economic and military traffic continue to be hauled by motor truck and on a makeshift rail line south of Vinh. The movement of all types of traffic on the waterways also appears heavy. Supplies are again being moved from North Vietnam on Route 15 to Routes 12 and 23 in Laos through Mu Gia Pass and on a newly reported truckable by-pass around the Pass. The transport system of North Vietnam appears to be carrying as much tonnage during 1965 as it did during 1964. The interruption on certain rail lines, however, will result in a considerably lower performance in terms of ton-kilometers.

There have been no recent strikes or restrikes against bulk oil storage facilities or electric power plant in North Vietnam.2 There are localized problems in petroleum distribution and storage, but there is no over-all petroleum shortage in the country. Bulk petroleum storage facilities have been reduced in capacity by about 17 per cent. No action has been taken to rehabilitate any of these bombed POL storage facilities. However, recent photography discloses the existence of seven additional petroleum storage sites distributed in an arc at distances of about 30 miles north of Hanoi. These sites include a total of about 300 semi-buried tanks (each about the size of an airport refueling tank truck), but represent total storage of only 2,200 tons. The size of the tanks and the number of sites suggest that this storage is intended to disperse petroleum supplies rather than provide for significant reserves. The reduction of total generating capacity by about 14 per cent continues to cause relatively minor curtailment of mining and industrial operations and loss of power for irrigation systems. A continuing study of all available source material has disclosed no recent information concerning bomb damage to machine building plants or to non-food light industrial plants. Priorities and alternate means of communication have been established in the telecommunications industry.

There is no evidence that the air strikes have further aggravated the tight food situation in North Vietnam. The harvest promises at best to be mediocre, and in light of increased distribution problems because of the war the tight food situation will continue. Labor shortages in the agricultural cooperatives continue to be aggravated because of the air strikes.

North Vietnamese Political and Public Reactions

There continues to be no indication of any significant decline in North Vietnamese morale. Regime propaganda continued to stress the resolve and ability of the Vietnamese to ultimately defeat the “US aggressors.” Hanoi paid particular attention to the Vietnam protest movements in the US and cited them as an indication that the cost of the war in men and materiel could ultimately undermine American morale and force a change in the US policy toward the war. This theme was generally coupled in DRV propaganda with claims of world-wide support for the Vietnamese Communists and references to the recent Viet Cong “victories” over US and GVN forces. Although both these themes were designed to sustain the fighting will of the insurgents as well as the DRV populace, they probably accurately reflect current Hanoi estimates of the situation.

The disruptive effect of the air strikes on the DRV's economy was reflected in the regime's propaganda. This recently took the form of efforts to spur the populace on to greater patriotic endeavors in order to meet and overcome the difficulties caused by the strikes. A party daily editorial on 18 November in taking note of the disruption in transportation and communications called upon persons to pay more attention to these two areas and to be “determined, urgent and flexible in meeting war circumstances.” In addition, other articles stressing the necessity of increasing food production and distribution as well as improving public order “for the sake of the anti-US and national salvation cause” were highlighted in DRV propaganda.

The growing disruption caused by the bombings also appeared to be the motive behind Hanoi's dispatching its high-ranking economic expert, politburo member Le Thanh Nghi, to Moscow, Peiping and Pyongyang in late November. Nghi's trip—his second in less than six months—is probably an indication that the bombings have affected the DRV economy to such an extent that consultations on additional economic aid from the Bloc are now needed. Through Nghi's trip Hanoi may be seeking additional supplies of capital equipment for bomb damage repair and perhaps even food, clothing and other necessities. The North Vietnamese may also believe it essential to get some long range commitment on future Bloc assistance in the event that US bombings destroy most of North Vietnam's industry and transportation system.

Effects on Military Targets

There has been no recent, appreciable change in the intensity of air operations against North Vietnam. The air effort continued to place emphasis on the armed reconnaissance program, aimed at inhibiting movement over the lines of communication and restriking and neutralizing previously attacked targets. The JCS-designated targets recently attacked have been predominantly rail and highway bridges north of 20 degrees. As the air strikes concentrated on targets north and east of Hanoi, the requirement to neutralize SA-2 sites accelerated. Armed reconnaissance aircraft have continued to attack SA-2 sites. These attacks produced few dramatic results, but possibly caused a more frequent displacement of SA-2 firing elements which could result in reduced operating efficiency. Since no major effort has been expended against barracks, supply and ammunition depots and POL storage areas, related national capacities have not been appreciably altered. The North Vietnamese are continuing their efforts to disperse such vulnerable elements of their infrastructure as barracks, supply and ammunition depots. Recent evidence points to a new program of dispersing POL stocks to locales north of Hanoi within the SAM protected area.

While there are periodic indications of specific, tactical, reactions to the air offensive, the most overriding reaction is the emergence of strategic indicators which suggest Hanoi's willingness to persevere indefinitely. These latter indicators include dispersal of industry, partial mobilization, intensified coordination with other Communist countries to obtain increased military aid, and long range construction programs aimed at improving military air facilities. In a tactical sense, the North Vietnamese have recognized the effectiveness of US measures to counter the SA-2 threat. In this regard, they have taken action to degrade our capability to detect and counter FAN SONG (SA-2 guidance radar) operations by compressing the operating time of this vital guidance system.

While the air strikes against logistics facilities and sensitive lines of communications are causing major distribution problems, these operations have not significantly reduced the DRV capability to continue to support the Communist forces in Laos and South Vietnam.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-311-69. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Prepared jointly by CIA and DIA. A table entitled “DIA Results of Strikes on DRV Targets Thru Tuesday, 14 December 1965” and a distribution list are not printed.

2 This assessment does not take into count the 15 December air strike against Uong Bi Thermal Power Plant, since Bomb Damage Assessment data is not yet available to confirm initial pilot reports. [Footnote in the source text.]

240. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Harriman) to President Johnson 240. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Harriman) to President Johnson1

Washington, December 23, 1965.

On the plane back to Washington from the Ranch on Friday afternoon, December 10, I discussed with Bob McNamara the potential for new flags and additional military contributions to Viet-Nam. I also reviewed the problem with Dean Rusk on my return. It was agreed that both Secretaries would discuss the possibility of a Greek and Turkish military contribution at the NATO Meeting in Paris,2 and that other NATO countries would be encouraged to increase their material assistance. As you know, Dean made a vigorous speech at NATO, urging that NATO Members make a greater effort in support of South Vietnam. Dean's initiative will be followed up with each country, as you did with Erhard.3

As to the Far East, Hubert Humphrey will take up the question of a Philippine military contribution with the new Philippine President, and will discuss getting a second division from Korea when he visits Seoul.4 These Korean negotiations are already under way.

I talked with the Australian Ambassador here last week and our Embassy in Canberra has been in touch with the Australian Government. Bob Menzies plans to undertake to increase the Australian military contribution but he believes that any action should be an Australian self-starter rather than under pressure from the U.S. I told the Ambassador of your personal interest and he agreed to pass the message on to Menzies.

The manner in which Thailand can be most helpful is being reviewed. As you know, the Thais are giving us the fullest possible cooperation in the use of their facilities.

In Latin America, Brazil is the first case. Ambassador Gordon explained to President Castelo Branco that while the program loan decision was not contingent on a Brazilian military contribution in Viet-Nam, it was expected that Castelo Branco would make every effort to help in Vietnam. In a long and serious conversation with Castelo on December 15th he explained our position in great detail. Castelo has promised to give the matter his prayerful consideration. He pointed out that under the Brazilian Constitution Congressional approval is required before troops can be sent abroad and the Brazilian Congress does not reconvene until March. Gordon and our military attache, General Walters, will follow this up closely and, although keenly aware of the political problems Castelo faces, they are hopeful that a Brazilian contribution in some form can be worked out.

We will take up with each of the other Latin American countries on a case by case basis the kind of contribution each might be induced to make.

As far as Africa is concerned, all hands agree that there is no possibility of a contribution from any African country particularly at this time with the preoccupation over Southern Rhodesia.

On Iran, Dean feels that a military contribution might stir up the Russians and that it would be better to let sleeping dogs lie. We are, however, going after Iran for a military-medical team on a large enough scale to take care of one Province. The senior USOM Public Health officer in Saigon, General Humphreys, will go to Iran to work out the details.

I will continue to keep in close touch with the Regional Bureaus to see that the maximum effort is made to get more flags and more assistance, military or material, as well as to try to get more publicity on what is being done.

Dean thinks that it might be useful for me to make a trip in January to certain European countries, possibly including Yugoslavia. Based on my talks with Tito last summer, there is a possibility that he might be induced to exert his influence on Moscow to persuade the Soviets to take greater initiative with Hanoi to come to the negotiating table. It might also be useful to stop off in the North African countries and Iran.

Averell

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (B). Secret. This memorandum was sent to the President who saw it on December 31. (Memorandum from Bundy to Johnson, December 31; ibid.) Harriman sent a copy of this memorandum to Rusk. (Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Johnson, President, '65)

2 The Ministerial Session of the North Atlantic Council met in Paris December 14-16.

3 During the visit of Chancellor Erhard to Washington December 20-21.

4 The Vice President visited Manila, Tokyo, Taipei, and Seoul December 28, 1965-January 3, 1966.

241. Memorandum of Conversation 241. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, December 23, 1965, 5 p.m.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam

PARTICIPANTS

US

The Secretary

Christopher A. Squire, OIC Hungarian Affairs, EUR

Hungarian

Janos Radvanyi, Charge d'Affaires a.i., Hungarian Legation

Endre Szluka, Hungarian Legation

Hungarian Charge Radvanyi came to the Department at the Secretary's request. The Secretary said that he appreciated Radvanyi's coming to the Department just before the Christmas holidays, and expressed interest in whether Foreign Minister Peter had developed any postscript to his last talk with the Secretary in New York,2 at which Charge Radvanyi had been present. He was not inquiring whether Radvanyi had any instructions, although he assumed not. The Secretary had invited Minister Peter to use a little “16th Century Hungarian diplomacy”, and would now be grateful if Radvanyi could ask Minister Peter if there were anything Peter could add to what was said in New York.

The Secretary said that he might make two or three comments as background for asking Charge Radvanyi to come to the Department. American newspapers had referred recently to peace feelers. Hanoi had denied these stories, and he knew of no instance in which Hanoi had taken an initiative in this matter. Others, such as U Thant and the Mayor of Florence, had taken such initiatives. All such initiatives were, however, taken by third parties. He had the impression that Hanoi's representatives abroad, and in Hanoi itself, were socially very busy; everyone wanted to see them. When third parties go to see such representatives, they come back with initiatives which evidently they believe important. We are not aware of any initiative taken by Hanoi at its own instance.

His second point, the Secretary said, was that many initiatives had been taken by a large number of people towards unconditional discussions. The initiatives known publicly were only a fraction of those taken privately. Thus far no initiative had produced any results. The key question continued to be Point 3 of Hanoi's 4 points, namely acceptance of the program of the Liberation Front for South Viet-Nam. The third point was what the shooting was all about. Hanoi wanted it, and they could not have it by force.

The Secretary said he would like to review for Minister Peter the things said publicly on our side with respect to peace in Southeast Asia: 1. We have said that the Geneva Agreements of 1954 and 1962 are a basis for peace in Southeast Asia;

2. We would welcome a conference on Southeast Asia, or on any part of it;

3. We would welcome negotiations without preconditions (using the terms of the 17 nations);

4. We would welcome unconditional discussions (using the President's term);

5. The question of cessation of hostilities can be taken first and then made the grounds for a conference, or, if anyone preferred, made the subject of preliminary discussions;

6. Hanoi's 4 points can be discussed at a conference, provided that those points others have in mind are also discussed;

7. We do not wish to maintain any bases in Southeast Asia;

8. We do not wish to retain any military forces in South Viet-Nam;

9. There could be free elections in South Viet-Nam;

10. The question of reunification is to be subject to the free choice of the people of Viet-Nam, and not to be imposed by force;

11. We would much prefer to use our resources, both economic and social, in developing Southeast Asia. North Viet-Nam was free to join in a regional program in which we were prepared to invest $1 billion;

12. We could stop bombing as a step towards peace, as Minister Peter knows we have said. But tell us what would happen if we stopped bombing. Would the bombing in South Viet-Nam stop? Would they come to the conference table? Would the 325th Division go home?

When one put it all together, the Secretary continued, the basket was filled from our side. The only thing not in the basket was South Viet-Nam. The only thing we could add was “Take South Viet-Nam.” That we could not say. Perhaps Hanoi did not believe some of these things we have said. The Secretary recalled he had said he would go to Geneva tomorrow afternoon. The way for Hanoi to find out, added the Secretary, is to find out. We can get there faster than they can. Perhaps they do not believe what we say about bases in Southeast Asia. But they can find out.

Secretary Rusk told Charge Radvanyi that he just wanted Radvanyi to tell Minister Peter that he had thought often of their talk in New York. The Secretary wondered if there was anything else that Minister Peter wished to pass on.

Charge Radvanyi asked the Secretary to clarify what had been reported in the papers about a 30-hour Christmas lull in Viet-Nam. The Secretary said that the 12-hour ceasefire proposed by the Viet-Cong was not very significant to us from the religious point of view since Christmas Eve and Christmas Day were a single unit. We were not particularly attracted to the Viet Cong idea that we take 12 hours to trim our Christmas trees and then watch out for the plastic bombs. So we had said we would treat the period as a whole, for 30 hours.

He owed it to Minister Peter, the Secretary continued, to point out that this was an indication of some flexibility on our part. We did not expect the 30-hour period to be a political initiative, as the period was too short. It was indicative of some flexibility, just a tiny indication. If he were advising Charge Radvanyi how to report the importance of the 30-hour lull, he would not stress its political importance too much. The US had decided, so far as the Viet Cong would allow it, to introduce this lull at Christmas not only in South Viet-Nam but also as far as bombing of the North was concerned. The opportunity might arise again, at the time of the Vietnamese New Year. If the other side were responsive, we might find a way to move towards peace by steps like these.

The Secretary stressed that no commitments could be made at this time with respect to the future, but he did mention the fact that New Year was coming, with its Viet-Nam holiday also, and this fact might offer an occasion to do something like the Christmas ceasefire again. No decision could be made on the future yet, however, as it depended partly on what happened at Christmas.

The Secretary noted that he would also appreciate it if Minister Peter had any comments regarding the Hanoi and Peiping statements of the last two weeks which had been of some interest.3 The Secretary would protect Minister Peter's discretion. Peiping had chided Moscow, which made it sound as if Peiping knew that the subject of peace moves had been discussed in Hanoi. Broadly speaking, the Secretary continued, what he was asking was that in the light of the very interesting conversation the Secretary had had in New York with Minister Peter, was there anything else that Minister Peter could add privately?

At this point Charge Radvanyi remarked that although the Secretary could count on absolute discretion from the Hungarian side, there had already been press inquiries about the subject of the Charge's call on the Secretary. It was agreed by the Secretary and by Charge Radvanyi that the press would be informed only that the present meeting was a continuation of the Secretary's previous discussion with Minister Peter in New York, on general questions and bilateral questions. Charge Radvanyi noted that as to bilateral questions, he believed the present atmosphere was less of an obstacle for bilateral US-Hungarian talks in Budapest then it was in Washington. The Secretary observed that the reverse was true in terms of US-Soviet relations. The Secretary indicated that after the holidays he would be glad to discuss bilateral US-Hungarian affairs at greater length.

Charge Radvanyi said that he would inform Budapest immediately of the discussion, and would convey an answer to the Secretary as fast as he received it. The Secretary said he would await any answer with interest, that he would remain in Washington over the Christmas holidays, and that he could be reached at any hour of the day or night through the White House switchboard.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-VIET. Secret; Exclusive Distribution. Drafted by Squire and approved in S on December 27. The meeting was held in the Secretary's office.

2 See Document 160.

3 Apparent reference to a commentary in Hanoi's official paper, Nhan Dan, on December 9, broadcast by Hanoi in English; an interview of Ho Chi Minh by British journalist Felix Greene, broadcast by Hanoi on December 8; and a broadcast by Hanoi on December 10, commenting on the deceptive nature of U.S. peace moves. (Texts in FBIS, North Vietnam) On December 20, speaking at a reception in Peking in honor of the fifth anniversary of the founding of the National Liberation Front, Chou En-lai accused the Soviet Union of “sowing discord in an attempt to undermine the Vietnamese people's unity against U.S. aggression and the unity of the Vietnamese and Chinese people against U.S. imperialism.” (Peter Cheng, A Chronology of the People's Republic of China (Totowa, NJ, 1972), p. 212)

242. Editorial Note 242. Editorial Note

In telegram 1744 to Saigon, December 22, 1965, the Departments of State and Defense instructed General Westmoreland to announce in Saigon that U.S. commanders had given instructions to U.S. forces not to fire except in self-defense between 6 p.m. on December 24 and midnight on December 25, local time. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) At President Johnson's urging, the Departments of State and Defense also informed the Embassy in Saigon, the Commander in Chief, Pacific, and the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, in telegram 1786 to Saigon, December 24, that the Christmas truce should not end by U.S. acts of force, but by a renewal of Viet Cong violence. Therefore, until confirmed and public evidence of significant Viet Cong violence was available, the restrictions prohibiting firing except in self-defense, suspending operations against North Vietnam and North Vietnamese troops in Laos, and halting B-52 operations would remain in force. Washington fully expected the Viet Cong to break the truce within a day or so. (Ibid.)

The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Wheeler, who was in Bangkok at the time, expressed “grave concern at the military hazards inherent in the directives,” which he believed created a “de facto in-place cease-fire for US/GVN forces while permitting VC/PAVN forces complete freedom of movement.” Wheeler feared that the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces would capitalize on U.S. restraint and not renew hostilities. (Telegram BNK 1876 from Wheeler to McNamara, December 25; Johnson Library, Papers of William C. Westmoreland, Top Secret, Eyes Only Message File) General Westmoreland added his opinion that the military advantages of the Christmas cease-fire were outweighed by military disadvantages and hoped that it would not be repeated during Tet. (COMUSMACV telegram 260936Z, December 26; ibid., National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIV, Cables) Admiral Sharp, Commander in Chief, Pacific, informed the Joint Chiefs of Staff that he agreed completely with Westmoreland. (CINCPAC telegram 262159Z, December 26; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Pentagon Papers Files: FRC 77 A 62, SecDef Cable Files, binder 45)

In a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense (JCSM 907-65), December 27, the Joint Chiefs reviewed the results of the Christmas cease-fire and concluded that “from a military standpoint, no advantages accrued to the US/GVN from the ceasefire,” and there were considerable military disadvantages. For these reasons, the Joint Chiefs opposed a similar cease-fire during the Tet holiday (January 21-22, 1966). (Ibid.,OSD/ADMIN Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Vietnam 380)

243. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) to President Johnson 243. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) to President Johnson1

Washington, December 23, 1965.

Herewith four ideas about Viet Nam, submitted to you at Jack Valenti's suggestion.

A. A South Vietnamese Political Party

1. Proposal. That we focus our political energies in Saigon—and seek Korean assistance—in building a widely based South Vietnamese political party.

2. Discussion. The critical missing element in the stabilization of politics in South Viet Nam is an effective political party engaging the major groups which constitute now—and will constitute in the future—an effective majority.

We all understand the deep splits in the political and social life of South Viet Nam: Northerners v. Southerners; French trained Catholics v. more indigenous Buddhists; etc. We are doing what we can in Saigon to urge them to come closer together; Ky is considering a representative advisory group; and the most wholesome political fact about South Viet Nam is that the Vietnamese are beginning to talk and worry about what the Communists will do to them if they remain split and peace (or negotiations) breaks out.

Focussing right now on a political party may seem like a gimmick. But our experience in Korea over the last five years indicates that it is something more: it may prove the device for crystallizing minimum national unity.

I am now convinced, for example, that it was the creation of the government party in Korea that converted Park from a well-meaning soldier into an effective politician and, even, a statesman—laying the base for the true Korean “miracle” now under way.

To my certain knowledge, our people were almost as hopeless about Korea in 1961, after the young officers' coup, as they now are about politics in South Viet Nam. The Koreans were about as fragmented, inexperienced, and helpless in making a political life as the Vietnamese have been.

Moreover, what we have seen happen in other parts of the world suggests that a widely based national political party is fundamental to stable government in a developing country.

The secret of Indian democracy, for example, is not the British-trained civil service: it is the Congress Party, containing representatives of all regions and major social groups. Such parties are the secret of success in Mexico and Tunisia and of the relative stability of Tanzania, Kenya, and Ghana. I believe Castelo Branco is on the right track with his effort to force by law the making of big parties in Brazil.

Why is this so?

Big national parties force the various regional and special interests to come to compromise and to formulate national programs in order to get elected and enjoy the fruits of victory. They also establish a minimum political base and the minimum political discipline to permit an elected President to govern.

The central political weakness in the developing nations is that fragmented political parties and squabbling politicians, representing narrow regional interests, press directly and irresponsibly against the democratically elected presidents. The presidents are so busy balancing off these pressures they find it hard to act. And that is why military coups happen.

What General Soglo said the other day in Dahomey, as he took over, is the epitaph of scores of early experiments in democracy in developing nations: “Considering that after two years, the political authorities demonstrated their inability to lead the country to a better future by struggles for influence harmful to the superior interests of Dahomey; …

“Considering that our country is obviously on the eve of a veritable catastrophe whose only victims will be the humble workers in our towns and rural areas;

“[We]2 therefore decide in the superior interests of the nation and in order to safeguard our prestige on the international scene to take over power temporarily and endeavor to effect national reconciliation on which alone depends the moral and economic recovery of our dear fatherland.”

Can the job be done now in Viet Nam?

I don't know. But I do know we should focus our efforts around the task. I do know there are glimmerings of a desire among the Vietnamese to pull together. And I do know they are beginning to understand they will either hang together or hang separately.

Moreover, we should enlist the Koreans in the effort. Their experience is the closest parallel to that in South Viet Nam. They, too, began with a mandarin autocrat; then had squabbling civil politicians; then a young officers' coup.

Finally, the Koreans have, next to us, the biggest direct political as well as military stake in the future independence and stability of South Viet Nam.

3. Action.

a. We should approach General Park and suggest that he write directly to General Ky explaining fraternally the lessons of his experience in building a stable civil government in South Korea over recent years; the role of the government party in that process; and offering to send to General Ky men who will explain in detail how his national political party was organized and how they made the transition in Seoul from military to civil politics.

b. That Ambassador Lodge and his staff, including the Lansdale team, focus their efforts on encouraging the government in Saigon and various non-governmental political persons to move in this direction. Many specific political projects now under consideration or under way in South Viet Nam would begin to take better shape if they were related to the making of a national political party; for example, the proposed Advisory Group, the attempts to formulate national objectives; to design a national economic reconstruction and development plan; to mobilize student leaders; to create a domestic peace corps; etc.

B. The Military and the Future of Politics and Administration in South Viet Nam

1. Proposal. That we begin to consider with a few selected military leaders in South Viet Nam how the military organization now fighting the Viet Cong can, in the future, be used to bridge the gap until the time that a stable, civil politics can fully take hold.

2. Discussion. At the moment the military structure in South Viet Nam holds the country together and represents the biggest single pool of administrative competence. It probably also contains many of the men most capable of assuming political leadership in the postwar phase of the country. Until the kind of party proposed in suggestion A, above, comes into being and generates momentum, the country will have to rely heavily on the army for both administrative skill and political leadership.

This could take many forms: —A massive civic action and public works rehabilitation program;

—The actual transfer of competent officers into civil administrative posts;

—The kind of literacy and agricultural education programs the Korean army has conducted;

—The packing away of their uniforms by key officers as they assumed full time political life.

In short, as we look ahead to the future of South Viet Nam, we should be looking at the army as a critically important administrative and political asset; and, as suggested in proposal A, the Korean experience should be made fully available to our friends in South Viet Nam.

3. Action. That we suggest this line of thought to Ambassador Lodge; make available to him full details of the Korean experience on the transitional role of the military in these various civil functions; and encourage the Koreans, under proposal A, to widen their discussions with the South Vietnamese to include this range of issues.

C. The Proper Use of Air Power Against North Viet Nam

Note: I appreciate that you, Secretary Rusk, and Secretary McNamara may well have come to solid conclusions about this subject; but I am moved to set down my own reflections because of continued evidence of widespread confusion at lower levels, reflected, for example, in the recent SNIE 10-12-65, “Probable Communist Reactions to a U.S. Course of Action.”3

1. Proposal. That we systematically bomb the oil refining and storage capacity and the electric power facilities in North Viet Nam.

2. Discussion. Thought in this town is split between those who advocate massive and somewhat generalized air attacks on the Hanoi-Haiphong complex and those who fear that such attacks would dangerously escalate the war, deny Hanoi a stake in its future by destroying what has been built over the last decade, and lead to a last-ditch mentality which would make a negotiated settlement impossible.

As you know, I have long felt that the proper course of action was a systematic but surgical use of air power to take out the oil refining and storage capability and electric power systems in the Hanoi-Haiphong area. This would exact a considerable cost but still leave the cities and factories standing. Given the possibilities of protracting the war by continued infiltration, this has seemed the only practical way to force Hanoi to pay a price sufficient to induce them to negotiate soon, without denying them a future.

It is difficult for those who did not live through the application of systematic, precision bombing against the German air force, German oil facilities, and the Seine-Loire bridges to understand how vastly more effective this kind of bombing is than generalized air attacks. By systematic, I mean the attack on all the major plants in a given target system.

In the Far Eastern war we conducted generalized bombing against Japan, including the burning of cities. In the Korean war we hit everything we could see and a lot we couldn't see.

No one can tell you for certain—and only an irresponsible man would guarantee to you—that this kind of precise, systematic application of force will tip the balance of thought and policy in Hanoi to the acceptance of the kind of negotiation we envisage. Clearly, we must continue to hold them on the ground in the south and exact there a high price for continued aggression. Clearly, we must maintain minimum political stability in Saigon; for they would be tempted to continue the war, even if hamstrung around Hanoi, if their prospects for early military or political victory in the south were good.

For what it is worth, however, my judgment is this: —We have an enormous stake at home and abroad in forcing an early, rather than late, ending to the war in Viet Nam.

—There is a possibility that this kind of purposeful, systematic, and surgical attack on the Hanoi-Haiphong oil and power installations might so limit the economic and military capacity of North Viet Nam that those who now argue for a negotiated settlement in Hanoi might, at last, prevail.

—The North Vietnamese civil casualties involved could be quite severely limited if the operations are well planned; and we should be conscious that our present level of sorties in armed reconnaissance and other attacks are imposing some civilian casualties on them and the loss of some of our own finest and best-trained men.

—This kind of attack is not likely to change radically the degree of Soviet and Chinese Communist involvement in the war.

—Such attacks will heighten the noise level in the Free World against us, but, if our backs remain stiff, it will also heighten the pressure on Hanoi from the outside to negotiate, including, especially, the pressure from Moscow.

3. Action. That we proceed early in the New Year to go swiftly and purposefully into the systematic attack on oil and electric power, but try to establish—even before the attacks—direct diplomatic contact with Hanoi, as suggested in proposal D.

D. Direct Contact With a Representative of Hanoi

1 Proposal. That we soon quietly establish, at our initiative, direct diplomatic contact with a representative of Hanoi.

2. Comment. In all the other postwar confrontations with Communists, there was no great problem of communication when they decided to cease their aggression. They either knocked it off without talking to us, as in the case of the Greek guerrilla campaign, or they found a way to communicate through diplomatic channels, as in the case of the Berlin blockade of 1948-49, the Korean war, and the Cuban missile crisis.

In these cases of communication, we were then, however, dealing with Russians. And, when the time comes, this is the way it may be again.

But the fact is that Hanoi, not Moscow, is the center of this war; it is in a complex relation to both the Chinese Communists and the Soviet Communists; in the long run it must live with Communist China, even if it decides to negotiate; and, thus, the Sino-Soviet split makes it hard for them to turn wholly to Moscow at this critical moment in their history.

Therefore, direct contact with us may facilitate getting over the hump into negotiations—even if what we discuss is whom to talk to and where.

Hanoi's position is compounded by the fact that if they knock off the war, without negotiations, they leave the U.S. with all our troops and bases in South Viet Nam and with great freedom of action. For that reason alone, they may be led to get the best deal they can out of a negotiation, including our withdrawal; but negotiations in the midst of a large guerrilla war are exceedingly complex and require quite a bit of talk to get started.

I am led to the view that a direct contact would be useful for another reason. Every war game I have been involved in has been marked by signals that were not accurately read. One side will say something or do something designed to give the other side a message; but the receiving side will not hear or it will misinterpret the message.

Now we and the Russians have been at this game for a generation. And we rarely misread each other's messages. But this has taken a long time; and our communications are thick—operating at many places and levels.

We must constantly bear in mind that, this time, we are not dealing with a self-confident major power. We are dealing with a small, provincial, isolated power which has had little contact with us, and is caught up between two allies who are bitterly contending with one another.

Finally, our experience with third parties, however well meaning, suggests that they are not necessarily accurate; they leak; and they are too often bucking for a Nobel Peace prize.

Action. That we consider promptly establishing a direct contact with a North Vietnamese representative. I would not pretend to expertise, but Mai Van Bo in Paris would be my first choice, for two reasons: he is quite high in rank; and Paris is a big city, easier for quiet contacts than most of the alternatives. Cairo, Vientiane, and Djakarta are other possibilities. If discovered, we should simply say that if we can talk with the Chinese Communists, we can certainly talk with the North Vietnamese Communists. The contact should be set up, if possible, before the bombing attacks suggested in proposal C. The first message should be an authoritative statement of all our present negotiating proposals. We should remain in contact steadily as the air attack mounts. If there is any indication of willingness to negotiate, we should be willing to explore formulae which would save Hanoi's face and offer a golden bridge of retreat.

It is wholly possible that they will not be willing to make direct contact with us; but, especially if we plan to increase the heat on Hanoi-Haiphong, it is appropriate to try.

Walt

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 12 VIET S. Secret. According to a December 24 memorandum from Read to Rusk, Rostow felt “some pressure to get his paper to the White House today.” Rusk approved sending it immediately. (Ibid., POL 27-14 VIET)

2 Brackets in the source text.

3 Dated December 10. This SNIE included footnotes indicating dissenting views of most of the chiefs of the intelligence agencies. (Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron, Aug-Dec 1965)

244. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Meeker) to Secretary of State Rusk 244. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Meeker) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, December 25, 1965.

SUBJECT

Viet Nam Initiatives

Background

To summarize quickly, the United States in ten years has moved from the provision of military assistance to Viet Nam, through the furnishing of military advisers, the increase of their numbers and giving them an active role in combat, to infusing ever larger contingents of American fighting men in organized units to wage the war against the Communists. At the end of 1965's long monsoon season, we are evidently not poised for dramatic gains and military victory.

We confront a limited number of choices: (1) to seek negotiations now; (2) to continue military operations at recent levels, with the aim of inducing a greater disposition on the part of the Communists to negotiate; (3) to increase three-fold or more our already heavy military investment in Viet Nam in order to crush North Viet Nam and wipe out the Viet Cong.

Experience to date negatives any likelihood that carrying on the war will improve the prospects of negotiation. Stepping up the US military commitment to somewhere between 500,000 and one million American troops—in order to eliminate the Communist opposition in Viet Nam—threatens the following consequences: greatly increased US casualties, on a scale not known since World War II; substantially increased taxes at home, probably accompanied by inflation and increasing economic and social dislocations; an end, for practical purposes, to the struggle against poverty at home and the building of the Great Society; escalation of the Viet Nam conflict that could put the US in a war with Communist China, whose magnitude and course are withheld from our view today.

The net of this paper is that we will do better to accept the fact of conflict in Viet Nam and seek to transfer it to the political plane; to wait out with patience and intelligent action the long period while Vietnamese nationalism gradually asserts itself against China, and while China goes through the process of development enabling it to function—in the way the Soviet Union has come to function—as a member of the community of nations.

For the United States—with the aims and purposes we hold—the path is narrow between prevention or frustration of forcible aggression, on the one hand, and being drawn into actions that lead progressively to larger—and perhaps nuclear—conflict, on the other. There have been signs, coming out of Hanoi, Peking, and Moscow that we may be better able to pursue our aims at this stage through shifting to a political and diplomatic offensive. We are at a point where it may be possible to strengthen significantly the hand of the peace party throughout the Communist camp.

Suggestions

An armistice. The basic idea advanced here is that we want a cessation of fighting in Viet Nam followed by negotiations. It should be a total cessation, of ground action in the South, of air strikes against the North, of terrorism in the cities and in the countryside. The cessation could be initiated in connection with the observance of Tet in Viet Nam. It could be related to a public appeal that selected governments or Pope Paul VI might address to all the authorities concerned. The cessation could be proclaimed for a fixed time period (such as 30 days) and could be extended without limit of time if satisfactory steps were being taken with a view to negotiated settlement; this feature should probably be made clear from the outset.

Whether such an armistice could last would, of course, depend on the willingness of the two sides. We should test the Communist side to see whether it would keep a cease-fire. An armistice seriously intended by both sides could survive incidents of violation through mistake or misunderstanding. If the Communist side breached the armistice, this would quickly be apparent. The US and GVN would be free to resume military operations. The responsibility would be clear, and this should have a good effect in furthering greater understanding and increased support for US policy toward Viet Nam.

Upon the taking effect of an armistice, neither side would stand down its preparations, reinforcement, etc. If fighting had to be resumed, relative military advantage would be essentially unchanged. But this is not a state of affairs we should wish to see indefinitely continued. We should want to see the process of armament and military preparation put in reverse. This can only be done as the result of negotiated agreements.

Negotiation. At the earliest possible time the United States should make a formal and comprehensive statement of our aims in Viet Nam. You summed them up very cogently at the end of the large staff meeting this last Thursday morning. A statement like this should be made to press, radio and TV. The text should be formally communicated to governments around the world. We should take pains to see that it is delivered to Hanoi—through the French, the Canadians, India, the USSR, other Eastern European countries, etc. This could be a factor in deciding the debates that must now be going on in Hanoi.

Once an armistice is begun, a peace conference should follow whatever reasonable time is required to prepare it. There are many ways of organizing a conference. The Geneva Co-Chairmen could take the initiative. A meeting of 14 nations could be convened, or it could be limited to some of them. Perhaps the meeting should involve directly only Hanoi, the NLF, Saigon and the United States. The UK and USSR could stay in the background and seek to act as catalysts in the negotiating process. We should not exclude from consideration the idea of Communist China being absent from the international meetings, except to attend a formal conference of larger size which would confirm the understandings reached by a smaller group. We should look forward to protracted discussions. So long as the armistice were kept, we should be prepared to engage in a very long negotiation.

It is impossible at this stage to block out the contents of a settlement. Terms can emerge only from prolonged and close bargaining and the inter-action of negotiating efforts. Negotiation might run through a series of phases, just as a settlement itself would have multiple phases.

An early subject of discussion should probably be observation and policing of the armistice. International teams of military observers—perhaps made up of Commonwealth and Bloc personnel—might be employed. Withdrawal of military forces should be a focus of attention. International observation could identify what forces are present in Viet Nam, and could later verify and supervise an agreed withdrawal—perhaps first to staging areas, some for North Vietnamese units and others for US forces. Ultimately, all foreign forces would be withdrawn from South Viet Nam.

One of the most difficult of all questions is what to do about the Viet Cong and their weapons. It is not likely to be practicable to segregate them in any supervised garrison areas. Experience with the disarming of insurgents and the central collection of their weapons gives no ground for believing this would be feasible in South Viet Nam. The Viet Cong would have to be left alone during the armistice, as would the GVN's military units. The military problem is likely to be solved only after a new political structure has been created in the South, following on internationally supervised elections, the establishment of a representative assembly, and the effective functioning of institutions of local government.

International assistance. During the long period of negotiation as well as afterward there would be great value in a wide program of international assistance for the reconstruction of South Viet Nam. Organizations such as the United Nations, the FAO, and voluntary agencies could perform great humanitarian service and also contribute significantly to political settlement through the provision of needed food and medical relief, technical assistance in agriculture and building, war-scarce materials for civilian use, and personnel to help with community services. It might be possible for a large and imaginative program of this sort to supply the needs of local government for a substantial period of time—obviating the assertion of authority and the exercise of control by the GVN or Viet Cong in disputed areas. The US should be prepared to contribute largely to the financing of such a program, which would have to be under neutral direction. We should seek also at an early date to give practical effect to President Johnson's long-standing offer to arrange for the participation of North Viet Nam in an internationally aided program of economic development for Southeast Asia.

Humanitarian measures. Whether or not an armistice is arranged in the near future, we should make every effort to proceed with an exchange of prisoners held by the two sides in Viet Nam. This could be undertaken by the ICRC along with its other responsibilities. Exchanges need not be on a one-for-one basis, but could be so calculated as to bring about the repatriation of all prisoners held on each side. In the event of an armistice, an early measure for consideration in the ensuing discussions would be an amnesty for political prisoners and others detained on account of offenses in connection with the war.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Prepared at the request of the President who wanted key officers in the Department of State below the Secretary and Under Secretary level to present him with ideas on new diplomatic initiatives in Vietnam. (Memorandum from Read to Rusk, December 24; ibid., POL 27-14 VIET)

245. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas 245. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, December 27, 1965, 11:05 a.m.

CAP 65917. Following is the text of a message from Westmoreland2 regarding the resumption of bombing in North Vietnam.

1. Although I am not aware of all the considerations leading to the continuation of the standdown in Rolling Thunder air operations over North Vietnam, I consider that their immediate resumption is essential.

2. Strictly from the standpoint of the war in South Vietnam it is difficult to understand why the pressure has been taken off the nerve center of direction, supply and manpower located in North Vietnam.

3. Air attack against lines of communication is extremely difficult in this part of the world. It is clear that air interdiction at any one point can be circumvented by the Viet Cong/North Vietnamese forces and all local obstacles can be overcome by ingenuity and hard work, both of which they display in ample quantities. Therefore, our only hope of a major impact on the ability of the North Vietnamese to support the war in Vietnam is continuous air attack over the entire length of their lines of communication from the Chinese border to South Vietnam, and within South Vietnam. Although at any one point the impact may not be great, the cumulative effect of armed reconnaissance, bridge busting, rail cutting and barge sinking and forcing them to operate almost exclusively at night, must be great.

Notwithstanding the heavy pressure on their transportation system over the past 9 months, they have demonstrated an ability to deploy forces into South Vietnam at a greater rate than we are now deploying US forces.

4. I notice that since the 3d of September, there has been a steady decrease in ordnance delivering sorties over North Vietnam. During the period 3 to 16 September, 982 such sorties were flown. By 15 to 28 October, this had been reduced to 700, and in the period 10 to 23 December, it had further diminished to 662. I recognize that part of this can be explained in increased activity in Laos, but this does not change the basic fact that our pressure against North Vietnam is decreasing.

5. Considering the course of the war in South Vietnam and the capability which has been built up here by the Viet Cong/North Vietnamese forces—the full impact of which we have not yet felt—the curtailment of operations in North Vietnam is unsound from a military standpoint. Indeed, we should now step up our effort to higher levels.3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIV, Cables. Top Secret; Exdis. The President was at the LBJ Ranch in Texas, December 21-January 2, 1966.

2 COMUSMACV telegram 45265 to CINCPAC, December 27. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 Admiral Sharp in Honolulu sent comments that were relayed to the LBJ Ranch in White House telegram CAP 65918, December 27, 10:51 p.m.: “1. I have already indicated some of the disadvantages in a continued stand down of Rolling Thunder and recommended immediate resumption.

“2. Westmoreland has made a plea for resumption of Rolling Thunder and notes the decrease in Rolling Thunder strike sorties in the last three months. He requests that pressure on North Vietnam be increased.

“3. I have recommended programs for Rolling Thunder designed steadily to increase the pressure on North Vietnam. These programs will drastically reduce the flow of military supplies reaching North Vietnam and hence the Viet Cong.

“4. The armed forces of the United States should not be required to fight this war with one arm tied behind their backs. I urgently recommend that Rolling Thunder commence immediately and that the target programs I have recommended be approved.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Reprisal Program, Vol. IV)

246. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations European Office to the Department of State 246. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations European Office to the Department of State1

Geneva, December 27, 1965.

1106. For Secretary. Subj: Quaker Committee meeting with DRV rep in Paris.2

1. Duncan Wood of Friends Service Committee told me today that meeting with Mai Van Bo on 21st in Paris not productive. Wood and Wolfe Mendel spent about hour with Bo, who rather ill at ease.

2. Bo had no response re Quaker offer aid to DRV, promised to let Committee know when or if received. When Wood raised question political situation in Viet Nam, Bo switched conversation to discussion differences family life in England, France.

3. Wood: “The time of our meeting could hardly have been worse, after the Italians' disclosure and especially after Chou En-Lai's speech.”

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET. Secret; Nodis. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 2:33 p.m.

2 Prior to the December 21 meeting with Mai Van Bo, Duncan Wood of the American Friends Service Committee called on Tubby in Geneva and asked if there was anything the United States wanted passed to Mai Van Bo. Tubby was noncommittal, but noted that the previous meeting on November 16 was discouraging. (Telegram 1063 from Geneva, December 20; ibid., POL 27-14 VIET S) Accounts of the November 16 meeting are in telegram 925 to Geneva, December 1; telegram 960 from Geneva, December 2; and telegram 2563 from London, December 4. (All ibid.)

247. Paper by Secretary of State Rusk 247. Paper by Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, December 27, 1965.

THE HEART OF THE MATTER IN VIET-NAM

I. The Fact of Aggression

The simple fact is that tens of thousands of trained and armed men, including units of the North Vietnamese regular army, have been sent by Hanoi into South Viet-Nam for the purpose of imposing Hanoi's will on South Viet-Nam by force. It is this external aggression which is responsible for the presence of U.S. combat forces. Indeed, it was not until the early summer of 1965 that the number of U.S. military personnel in South Viet-Nam reached the number of those which have been infiltrated by Hanoi. If this aggression from the outside were removed, U.S. combat forces would not be needed.

II. The U.S. Commitment

The United States has a clear and direct commitment to the security of South Viet-Nam against external attack. This commitment is based upon bilateral agreements between the United States and South Viet-Nam, upon the SEATO Treaty (whose obligations are both joint and several), upon annual actions by the Congress in providing aid to South Viet-Nam, upon the policy expressed in such Congressional action as the August 1964 resolution, and upon the solemn declarations of three U.S. Presidents. At stake is not just South Vietnam, nor even Southeast Asia; there is also at stake the integrity of a U.S. commitment and the importance of that commitment to the peace right around the globe.

III. Initiatives for Peace

A. We are not aware of any initiative which has been taken by Hanoi during the past five years to seek peace in Southeast Asia. Reports of “peace feelers” have to do with initiatives by third parties. Hanoi has denied that it has ever made any “peace feelers”. We ourselves know of none. During 1965 Hanoi has consistently insisted that its four points must be accepted as the sole basis for peace in Viet-Nam. The third of these four points would require the imposition of the program of the liberation front upon South Viet-Nam, whether the South Vietnamese wanted it or not.

B. The initiatives for peace undertaken by our side, and by many other governments, would be hard to count. They began with President Kennedy's talk with Premier Khrushchev in Vienna in June 1961 and have not ceased. The publicly known initiatives have been multiplied many times by private initiatives not yet disclosed. On the public record, however, are the following instances: 1. Kennedy-Khrushchev talks in June 1961;

2. Geneva Conference on Laos;

3. U.S. reference of Gulf of Tonkin matter to the UN Security Council in August 1964;

4. The Polish proposal to convene the two Co-Chairmen and the three members of the ICC (India, Canada and Poland) to take up the question of Laos;

5. The call of 17 non-aligned nations for negotiations without pre-conditions;

6. Attempts by U Thant to visit Hanoi and Peiping;

7. President Johnson's call for unconditional discussions;

8. The British Commonwealth Committee on Viet-Nam;

9. Attempted or actual visits by Patrick Gordon Walker, Mr. Davies (MP), and Ghanaian Delegation.

IV. U.S. Contributions to the Basket of Peace

The following statements are on the public record about elements which the U.S. believes can go into peace in Southeast Asia;2 1. The Geneva Agreements of 1954 and 1962 are an adequate basis for peace in Southeast Asia;

2. We would welcome a conference on Southeast Asia or on any part thereof;

3. We would welcome “negotiations without pre-conditions” as the 17 nations put it;

4. We would welcome unconditional discussions as President Johnson put it;

5. A cessation of hostilities could be the first order of business at a conference or could be the subject of preliminary discussions;

6. Hanoi's four points could be discussed along with other points which others might wish to propose;

7. We want no U.S. bases in Southeast Asia;

8. We do not desire to retain U.S. troops in South Viet-Nam after peace is assured;

9. We support free elections in South Viet-Nam to give the South Vietnamese a government of their own choice;

10. The question of reunification of Viet-Nam should be determined by the Vietnamese through their own free decision;

11. The countries of Southeast Asia can be non-aligned or neutral if that be their option;

12. We would much prefer to use our resources for the economic reconstruction of Southeast Asia than in war. If there is peace, North Viet-Nam could participate in a regional effort to which we would be prepared to contribute at least one billion dollars;

13. The President has said “The Viet Cong would not have difficulty being represented and having their views represented if for a moment Hanoi decided she wanted to cease aggression. I don't think that would be an insurmountable problem.”

14. We have said publicly and privately that we could stop the bombing of North Viet-Nam as a step toward peace although there has not been the slightest hint or suggestion from the other side as to what they would do if the bombing stopped.

In other words, we have put everything into the basket of peace except the surrender of South Viet-Nam.

1 Source: Department of State, Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272, Misc. Vietnam, Vol. IV. No classification marking. Cooper, in The Lost Crusade (pp. 293-294), describes and quotes from this paper. He states that it was prepared by Rusk “in considerable haste” for the benefit of Vice President Humphrey, Harriman, and the other high-level emissaries sent to other countries to explain the U.S. position in potential peace negotiations. Also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 740-742.

2 These 14 points appeared in The Washington Post, December 29, 1965.

248. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 248. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, December 27, 1965.

SUBJECT

Possible Diplomatic or Peace Initiatives

1. Review of Elements of US Position.

A summary of our basic position, and of Hanoi's contrasting resistance to any agreement, is a “must” in any case. This could be based on the memorandum you did today for the use of the Vice President,2 and might be supplemented by an up-dated history of the various negotiating efforts that have been made since the circulation of our 15-point list in July.3 Such an up-dating should be ready in a day or two, although I would note that it is less thick and impressive than the record of negotiating efforts through July.

2. Re-Statement of our Position in Four-Point Form.

In your television appearance of last August, you dealt with the essential elements of a settlement in the same order as Hanoi's four points, but took out the clear objections in Hanoi's formulation. A more systematic effort in this direction might be used as a framework for an offer to negotiate on the basis of such a four-point statement. This wouldhave the appeal in many world quarters, and among sophisticated domestic critics such as the New York Times, of using Hanoi's own framework and indicating the general principles which would be acceptable. It could be stated as a possible basis for negotiations, while we reiterated at the same time that we were prepared for negotiations without any conditions or basis whatever, or—as we explicitly said in the Fanfani reply—on the basis of Geneva Accords of 1954. If we provided two or three possible formulations, it would tend to strengthen our position verbally, without any substantive change.

3. Bombing Position.

Assuming that we do not continue the Christmas pause, the next possible occasion for a pause would be the stand-down of all military operations that we have now virtually agreed with the GVN to take place over Tet, January 21-23. With a three-day opening period already agreed, we might well extend this for another ten days and take the prior diplomatic measures that we have all considered useful and indeed essential in the pause scenario discussed in the last six weeks. I would most emphatically not recommend a pause at this or any other time that lasted for less than about two weeks. It must be long enough to be convincing to third countries that a serious opportunity was given for diplomatic activity. Similarly, it must be preceded by careful consultation with the GVN and our key allies, and by messages at the last moment to Hanoi through various possible intermediary channels.

4. Pacing our Bombing in Accordance with Communist Activity in the South.

Many of us have felt for some time that our bombing of the North would be much more effective in the military and psychological sense if it were more irregular in pattern in any case. It may be too difficult to introduce daily variation pegged to the level of VC activity in the preceding day or two, as today's Washington Post seems to be suggesting. However, we could make a general statement that the level of our bombing in the North would be governed by the pace of Communist activity in the South in the preceding period (not specified). This would have the advantage of a built-in justification for increasing the level of our bombing if Communist activity increases. But it would also have the “peace” significance of opening the way for the other side, by reducing its own activity, to bring about a reduction in our bombing and thus to open the way to what Kennan and others have urged as a progressive de-escalation of hostilities. At the same time, this line of approach is inherently more controllable than an outright pause and leaves the way open to increases that do not raise the problem of outright resumption after a pause.

5. Cambodian Supervision.

We have already started probing with the British the question of their discussing this with the Soviets and the ICC members. We have Sihanouk's own request for expanded ICC supervision in certain areas, and the issue is one that is wholly consistent with our own past position. Conceivably it might be a matter for UN Security Council discussion, but only if the Soviets fully agreed. I would be much more favorable to a co-chairmen/ICC format, which could produce discussions that might go beyond Cambodia, although this should emphatically not be stated as a purpose at the outset. This strikes me as a useful initiative in any event, although of limited utility at least for a time in meeting any need for a Vietnam peace initiative.

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron. Top Secret. Prepared at the President's request; see footnote 1, Document 244.

2 Document 247.

3 The 15-point list, July 26, updated the June 10 list of 13 points by adding references to the June 19 British Commonwealth initiative and the Harold Davies mission to Hanoi of July 9-13. (Johnson Library, Papers of Paul C. Warnke, McNaughton Files, State (Bundy) on Negotiations) The 13-point list is ibid., Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXXV.

249. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 249. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, December 27, 1965, 5:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Further Notes on Bombing the North

1. I had a meeting of second-level public relations people dealing with Viet Nam this afternoon, and they all said very strongly, that if the pause goes more than another day or so, it should go long enough to be a real answer to our critics. Otherwise, we would fall between two stools and get criticized by the military without making any money with the peacemakers. I argued with them, but I think the point has force.

2. Bill Moyers has reaffirmed to me this afternoon his own feeling that since we have gone these days, we should go on through New Year's Day. He thinks we will be heavily criticized for a half-hearted effort if we resume now.

3. Most interestingly, General Taylor came to see me this afternoon to say that he now feels very strongly that since we have endured three days of pause, we might as well go on for long enough to take the starch out of the idea once and for all. He also undertook to write personally to Westie and to Admiral Sharp if you decide to continue the current suspension and to explain to them the great importance of this course of action from the point of view of proving to the American public that we have left no door to peace untried.2 Taylor said that he does not think the military cost is great. He thinks the political reward of a solid pause is worth it at this stage.

4. I should report that I planned to be in New York tomorrow for a day of talks with my prospective employers.3 I can easily cancel this visit if you wish, and of course, I can be reached on the telephone through the White House Board at all times. Bob Komer will cover here and is fully briefed.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII. No classification marking. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

2 See Document 252.

3 On December 4, McGeorge Bundy tendered his resignation and informed the President that he had been offered a position at the Ford Foundation. Bundy agreed to remain in his post until February 28, 1966. (Memorandum from Bundy to Johnson, Deceamber 4, with attached letter of resignation; Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII)

250. Letter From the President's Consultant on Vietnam (Taylor) to President Johnson 250. Letter From the President's Consultant on Vietnam (Taylor) to President Johnson1

Washington, December 27, 1965.

Dear Mr. President:

As the New Year approaches, I am sure that the thought uppermost in your mind and that of your senior advisers is what to do about Viet-Nam in 1966. Not knowing exactly the present state of development of plans within the government, I am venturing to convey to you some of my personal views as to the goals set for next year.

Our overall objective remains that of assuring South Viet-Nam the right to determine its own form of government and its own way of life without having to accept a Communist government imposed by Hanoi. It may or may not be possible to attain this objective in 1966; we should, however, establish ambitious bench marks in all sectors of our endeavors which, if reached, should offer a reasonable hope of convincing the Communist leaders that the invincibility of the “War of Liberation” being waged in South Viet-Nam is a myth and hence they had better change their game.

In seeking to establish an objective for the ground combat in South Viet-Nam during 1966, I would suggest its expression in terms of population made sufficiently secure to permit progress by the non-military agencies in developing the secured areas. At present, it is estimated (although the estimate is sometimes challenged) that about 53 percent of the population is already in this state of security. If we took some figure like 75-80 percent of the population as our year-end goal for security, it would have the effect of focusing the military effort more specifically on population as our primary objective rather than territory. If we take control of territory as our goal, it invites us to disperse our forces throughout the jungles and forests of negligible military and political value and into terrain most favorable to the military operations of the enemy. It will create endless U.S. troop requirements if we undertake to pursue the guerrilla bands into the remote fastnesses of Viet-Nam; we had better concentrate our troop resources on securing the maximum number of people and thus get the most out of our deployments.

The role of our U.S. ground forces in this campaign for increased population security should be primarily the destruction of mainline Viet Cong-North Vietnamese units, preferably after they have been located by South Vietnamese ground action. Let the South Vietnamese army find and fix the enemy; we are best suited to hold and destroy them. I know that no pat formula such as this can apply in all cases but it can serve as a general guide. I have been disturbed by growing evidence from Saigon that our military in South Viet-Nam are inclined to turn over all or most of the heavy fighting to U.S. forces and allow the bulk of the Vietnamese forces to retire behind a screen of U.S.-provided protection to perform clearing jobs and local defense. At least half of the South Vietnamese regular units should be used in mobile combat roles and some such level of Vietnamese participation should be required by the U.S. military authorities in Saigon.

It is more difficult to set concrete goals in the area of development and rural reconstruction. I would suggest one, however; namely, that we take as a 1966 objective the conduct of free elections in all the secure areas of South Viet-Nam for the purpose of electing a constituent assembly. If all elements of civil government are oriented toward this goal, I would expect substantial progress to be made in all the subordinate programs for such purposes as the improvement of administration, agriculture, distribution of commodities, public health and the like. For our part, we should indicate our unequivocal support for such elections and our willingness to accept the results whatever they may be.

In planning the air campaign against North Viet-Nam for 1966, we should first remind ourselves of the three purposes we had in starting it in February, 1965. First, there was the need to give the South Vietnamese the opportunity for the first time in eleven years of conflict to strike back at the source of all their troubles; it also gave us an opportunity to retaliate for such terrorist attacks as the mortaring of the Bien Hoa air base, the bombing of the Brink hotel and the attack on U.S. barracks at Pleiku. Second, there was the need to use our air superiority to retard and make more difficult the continued infiltration of men and materiel from North Viet-Nam into South Viet-Nam. No one expected air power alone to be able to stop infiltration and clearly it has not. But any serious examination of the physical destruction of our bombings and the effect on daily circulation of our armed reconnaissance is bound to conclude that the air campaign has made life very difficult for those in the North who are supporting the Viet Cong insurgency.

The third and, in the long run, the most important purpose of our bombings was and is to convince the Hanoi leaders that the aggression must stop or they will have to pay an increasingly high price for its continuance. We are all aware that they have thus far given no indication of an intention to mend their ways. But neither did the leaders in Moscow give any intention of calling off the Berlin airlift or the North Korean-Chicom leaders of abandoning their effort to take over South Korea until the game had been played down to the last card. Up to that point, their attitude was one of defiant, aggressive confidence. We should expect nothing different from Hanoi now. The leaders there still hope that international or U.S. domestic pressures will cause us to weaken and modify our purpose—or perhaps the Saigon Government may cave in as it has in the past. Until these hopes prove vain, I am convinced we must keep up the pressure and pursue inexorably a bold offensive course in 1966.

In this spirit, I would recommend that, during 1966, we continue the deliberate destruction of all fixed targets in North Viet-Nam outside of heavily populated areas which have any relation to the war-supporting capability of North Viet-Nam and continue to interdict road and rail movement throughout the country. This will require after due warning the aerial mining of the principal ports. In order to increase the reluctance of the DRV to denude North Viet-Nam of army units to reinforce the Viet Cong in South Viet-Nam, it may be desirable to encourage the South Vietnamese to conduct commando raids with U.S. support along the North Vietnamese coast to give an occasional reminder that the ground of North Viet-Nam may eventually be no more of a sanctuary than its air space.

On the politico-economic front in Saigon, we need to sustain and improve the Ky government and work increasingly to hold inflation within bounds. We also need to keep the Saigon political leaders in mental step with us as we plan for the termination of hostilities. If, as I believe, we are going to be obliged to take the Viet Cong in some form into any negotiation, we need to work hard now to overcome the inevitable objections of our ally.

In conditioning Hanoi for negotiation, we need to work much harder in 1966 to carry the message to the people of North Viet-Nam and to the Viet Cong that a better life awaits them if they abandon their aggression against the south. Some of the specific advantages need to be spelled out more precisely than up to now. All our propaganda activities should then be directed at getting this message to a people who must be coming increasingly unhappy under the burdens of war.

On our domestic front, I am sure you will agree that there is continuing work to be done in explaining the Viet-Nam situation to our people. Since returning to the U.S. in August, I have made nearly fifty speaking or TV appearances from which I have drawn two conclusions. The substantial people of the country are solidly behind the actions of our government but there is wide-spread criticism that the government does not adequately explain what is going on. There is even some suspicion that this government is holding back and perhaps concealing some of the facts. At the moment, in many quarters there is an unreasoning confidence in negotiations as an end in themselves and their initiation as necessarily synonymous with the restoration of peace. Our people need to be reminded again and again of our Korean experience—twenty-five months of negotiations while we lost some 46,000 American and 150,000 allied casualties. I suggest the need in 1966 of many more high-level explanations to our people of the basic issues in South Viet-Nam to give them the feeling of being taken more into the confidence of their government.

In closing, let me say that, as one of your advisers, I am not discouraged or dismayed by the prospects in Viet-Nam for 1966—provided we stay on course and refuse to be diverted from the overall objective which you have stated so many times—the independence of South Viet-Nam and its freedom from attack. My attention was recently drawn to a staunch sentence of Sir Francis Drake which gives me considerable comfort in such times as these. “There must be a beginning of every matter but it is continuing unto the end that yields the true glory.”

With warm regards for a New Year which will bring its share of glory,

Respectfully,

Maxwell D. Taylor

1 Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File, ND 19/CO 312 (Situation in Vietnam, 1964-1965). Secret. McGeorge Bundy sent this letter to the President with the following comment: “Max Taylor prepared this at my request, and I think you will find it an interesting and thoughtful contribution.” A note on Bundy's covering memorandum indicates this letter was sent to the President in Texas on December 31 at 11:45 p.m.; a notation on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

251. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 251. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, December 27, 1965, 7 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL FROM MR Mac Bundy

B told of his talks with the Pres re the pause;2 he feels he has gotten into this without making a diplomatic record except with the Hungarians. Sec said he would be inclined to go ahead; the Hungarian Charge just came in; he had a message from Foreign Minister, a question; Sec briefed B on the talk;3 Sec did not feel this affected the bombing in the north problem. B said it was not any argument for going ahead either. Sec agreed; the argument for going ahead is not to have misunderstandings; if we start now we would be under a handicap of doing a four days pause. They had a rather lengthy discussion of the problem. Sec was inclined to go ahead with the bombing and perhaps have another pause beginnning with our new year; we cannot count these four days if we expect to develop a pause from a diplomatic point of view; it also misleads Vietnamese for we have not developed with them the concept of a pause; Sec said he was with Thompson, Johnson and Wm Bundy 4 and all of us feel we should resume even if we can develop another type of pause in the next few days. B will report Sec's views; B did not think anything would be done until Pres had talked with McNamara.

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking.

2 According to his diary, the President and McGeorge Bundy talked by telephone at 9:35 a.m., noon, and 1:06 p.m. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary)

3 See Document 258.

4 Rusk was meeting with these men from 6:55 to 7:35 p.m. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book)

252. Draft Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas 252. Draft Telegram From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson, in Texas1

Washington, December 27, 1965.

1. I talked to Dean Rusk 2 to urge him to get on every diplomatic wire and tell people that there has been no noise over North Vietnam for four days and that we certainly would like to know it if anyone has heard any signal of any sort that this lack of action has done any good. I found him very resistant indeed and he told me that he and Alex Johnson and Tommy Thompson and my brother Bill all think that we cannot get diplomatic mileage this way. They really would prefer to resume bombing right away and have a longer pause later on, with advance notice to the Russians, as they initially recommended last week.

2. I tried gently to say to Dean that this was not the present problem. I said that I thought we now had a 4-day start and the question was what use we could make of it if we continued for another period of up to a week. He continued to resist my suggestion, and I do not feel that I should make further diplomatic contacts tonight behind his back.

3. What I do think is that if you should decide—as I myself hope you may—that it makes sense to withhold the bombing for another several days, you might then speak to the Secretary yourself about the usefulness of directing the attention of every available diplomat to the fact that there is a pause and the further fact that we certainly want to know it if anyone has any way of finding out whether there is any prospect of a response.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XVII. Secret.

2 See Document 251.

253. Memorandum for the Record 253. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, December 27, 1965.

Telephone call to my apartment from President Johnson, 10:00 PM on December 27, 1965.

President Johnson called me from the Ranch to ask my opinion of an extension of the Christmas bombing pause in North Viet-Nam. Secretary McNamara was on the line. The President explained his feeling of the need of the extension to meet domestic opinion and to strengthen all fences prior to asking the Congress for more funds and more men for Viet-Nam.

He had had a strong message from Westy and Admiral Sharp supporting an immediate resumption of the bombing of North Viet-Nam2 and was clearly reluctant to override their military arguments. I told him that I had always opposed a pause in the bombing, feeling that it was futile to expect Hanoi to make any responsive moves during a pause while international attention was concentrated upon their every move. I expressed the view from a military point of view the commanders were right and we should get on with the bombing campaign.

However, in my judgment, a few days delay would not matter from a military point of view if the President felt that, by an extension of the cease-fire, he could expose once and for all the futility of expecting reasonableness from the leadership in Hanoi and Peking. I felt there was no danger to our troops in terms of loss of life or exposure to attack as the result of the extension of the bombing pause for a few days.

I repeated my often expressed fear of being trapped into extended negotiations in the course of a pause.

The President expressed his determination not to be caught and to resume bombing within a few days as soon as he had given our opponents a reasonable chance to respond to the extension of the cease-fire.

MDT

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-310-69. Top Secret. This memorandum, dated January 3, 1966, is based on Taylor's notes, which he took at the time of the conversation.

2 See Document 245 and footnote 3 thereto.

254. Editorial Note 254. Editorial Note

At approximately 10:30 p.m. on December 27, 1965, President Johnson called Secretary Rusk from Texas and advised him that he had decided to defer resumption of the bombing of North Vietnam for several more days, possibly into the middle of the week beginning January 2, 1966. At 10:55 p.m. on December 27, Rusk called the Department of State Operations Center and asked that Vance, U. Alexis Johnson,Thompson, and McGeorge and William Bundy be asked to assemble at the Operations Center immediately. (Chronology of Second Pause in US/GVN Bombing Program against North Vietnam; Johnson Library, Papers of Paul C. Warnke, McNaughton Files, V, Planning Pressures)

According to Cooper (The Lost Crusade, page 291), the men assembled at the Operations Center and dispatched instructions to Saigon; see Document 255.

255. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 255. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 28, 1965, 3:45 a.m.

1805. Eyes only for Ambassador and Porter from Secretary.

1. President has given most searching consideration to question of further delay in resumption of bombing of DRV, and has taken fully into account views expressed by you and Westmoreland on this subject.2 He has decided that he wishes to defer resumption of bombing for several more days, possibly into middle of next week. No commitments would be made, publicly or privately, which would limit our freedom of action in the event of a major contingency or serious provocation. Air, ground, and sea operations in SVN would continue, including Arc Light, as well as air operations in Laos.

2. For your own personal guidance, a major factor in decision is the action which will have to be made public in January. The prospect of large scale reinforcement in men and defense budget increases of some twenty billions for next eighteen month period requires solid preparation of American public. A crucial element will be clear demonstration that we have explored fully every alternative but that aggressor has left us no choice.

3. We do not, quite frankly, anticipate that Hanoi will respond in any significant way. We have seen nothing in the mass of speculation or diplomatic gossip pointing to an interest in peace on Hanoi's part and we have certainly had no such indication through any official channel. If, contrary to our expectations, there was some significant response, we would of course be in touch with you immediately. Thus, we do not want to commit ourselves irrevocably to a specific date for resumption.

4. While confidential until published this week, most recent Harris poll will show that 73% of American people would favor renewed effort for cease-fire (including 64% of Goldwater voters) and 59% would favor bombing pause (including 48% of Goldwater voters). Same poll will show 61% favoring increased bombing effort if cease-fire or pause fails to elicit interest of other side. Such polls do not make decisions, but they illustrate need to prepare our people for major sacrifices by making it crystal clear where responsibility lies. Same problem is reflected in Congress which will be reconvening on January 10 to face hard facts of required national effort. The simple fact is that we must sustain support for what has to be done in months ahead, if the other side is not interested in peace. Compared to this over-riding requirement, the destruction of the limited targets which would otherwise be struck during this period is a secondary matter.

5. Underlying above reasons is our genuine interest in securing SVN without major bloodshed if that can be accomplished. There is only the slimmest of chances that suspension of bombing will be occasion for basic change of objective by other side but communist propaganda on this point should be tested and exposed.

6. Another purpose of continuing suspension would be to drive rift between Communist powers and between Hanoi and NLF. We have considerable reason to believe differences exist that would come into play in a suspension, and tend to interpret Hanoi's propaganda blast against pause on December 10 and 11 in sense that Hanoi itself is concerned about this.3 To this end we will be in touch with a few interested governments.

7. Accordingly, you should discuss this decision ASAP with GVN officials, in whatever way you think best, to obtain their private understanding and concurrence with this brief delay in resumption of bombing.4 Following are additional elements you should explain: a. We plan no formal announcement other than responding to questions as to when bombing will resume by saying no decision taken.

b. All actions for further reinforcement in SVN will go forward without change, including specifically plans for two additional brigades and Marine Landing Team due to arrive in January. USG plans major further reinforcement in 1966 as required, and you may tell GVN this.

c. On side of countering possible GVN objections, you should note that Hanoi can hardly doubt our resolve in face of our present and planned effort. Suspension does not suggest, nor is there, slightest change in our negotiating position and objectives, which are familiar to GVN.

8. I know you will appreciate the importance of overwhelming support from the home front for the gallant job you and all hands are doing on the fighting front.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Pinta; Exdis. Drafted by Rusk; cleared by William Bundy, U. Alexis Johnson, Thompson, and in substance by McGeorge Bundy and Vance; and approved by Rusk. A copy of this telegram was sent to the President in Texas in White House telegram CAP 65927, December 28, 11:06 a.m. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIV, Cables)

2 See Document 245.

3 Reference is to a Hanoi radio broadcast in English on December 10 and a commentary in Hanoi's official paper, Nhan Dan, December 11, that the potential U.S. bombing pause was a trick to mask aggression, which deceived no one. (FBIS, North Vietnam, December 13, 1965)

4 In telegram 2306 from Saigon, December 28, Lodge reported that he called on General Ky and gave him the “pertinent and appropriate parts of Deptel 1805. When I had concluded he allowed a moment's silence to go by and said: ‘I understand the problem and, of course, I have no objection.’” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

256. Notes of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Ambassador at Large (Harriman) 256. Notes of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Ambassador at Large (Harriman)1

December 28, 1965.

The President called WAH.

P—Hello, Averell, how are you getting along?

H—I wrote you a little note. Hope you saw about the …

P—Averell, I talked to Rusk this morning and I don't know how you feel about it. We talked to the Hungarians last Thursday.2 Are you familiar with the conversations?

H—Only in a general way.

P—We told them that we were listening and we were hoping they would listen if they heard anything we would like to know about it and if they could get any encouragement along the peace front, it would certainly be appealing to us. They come in now and want to know if we are willing to talk to the VC on some of our 14 points and we told them we would have no trouble for the VC to be adequately heard.3 Actually, we don't have much confidence that much will come out of this but that is no reason not to try. I don't think I would be elected to Congress the first time when I ran. I think with your friends Fulbright, Scotty Reston, Mansfield, Arthur Krock and the New York Times (men), all these people thinking there could be peace, if we were only willing to have peace, we ought to give it the old college try. There's the poll—43% of the people think we haven't tried enough diplomatic moves—they don't know enough what economic work we are doing in SEA. If you don't mind picking up your old kit bags, going to visit your old friend Tito, tell him how we feel and how I feel, sit down and talk to him, and see if he has any channels, go to Poland—just quietly, one of your general vacationing around, the elder statesman visiting around the world to see the state of the world, then probably get into see that Hungarian Foreign Minister; you can go to Hungary, Poland, Yugoslavia, any place you drop in or out.

H—What about seeing Bo in Paris?

P—That would be good. He ought to be talked to.

H—I think all of this ought to be done with Rusk's blessing.

J—I have told him this morning that I wanted you to do this. You report directly to me like when you were down in Chile and some of these other good trips you have taken. When you get back, you can talk to the Times people, etc. I think that yesterday it has been four days now and there hasn't been a bomb dropped on NVN. We are not going to drop any until after the New Year if there is no serious provocation. Keep your trip at low level as you can. Don't be making us explain—you never do. I talked about it to Bob McNamara this morning. Said you went down to Chile and nobody knew (you were there until you got the job done). Bob McNamara is here. There is a plane warming up. You go see Dean Rusk. You just get him the word just as soon as you can… . There has been five days since there hasn't been a bombing.

H—Which should I go to first?

J—You be the judge. I think you want to build Gronouski up a little and pull him in on it. Tito, good. Hungarian Foreign Minister—they are the first ones (notify). You ought to look at it—when I go before the Committee for 25 billion dollars for special mission in VN—and an extra 500,000 men. Then I can say the day before Christmas no bombing, and then we sent Harriman to Poland, to Yugoslavia, and we sent Goldberg and Rusk here and Wilson there. We have walked the last mile.

H—Do you think we ought to go to Hungary first?

J—It seems to me that they are not any of them in State very strong for this. You bear that in mind. But they weren't strong for Chile. You can at least explain when you get back to Washington where you have been, whom you have talked to, you have tried everything. And maybe you can see the Russians later. We are seeing Dobrynin.

H—It might be good for me to stop there.

J—Don't you let Dean talk you out of it. You had a mighty good year. You were a great comfort. My love to Marie.

H wished the President a Happy New Year and said no one deserved it more.

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Johnson, Pres., 1965. No classification marking. The President was in Texas; Harriman was in Washington. According to his diary, President Johnson telephoned Harriman from the LBJ Ranch at 10:36 a.m. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary)

2 See Document 241.

3 See Document 258.

257. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma 257. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma1

Washington, December 28, 1965, 6:13 p.m.

202. Eyes only for Ambassador from Secretary.

1. President has decided that he wishes defer resumption of bombing for several more days. We are most anxious that word of this action be conveyed directly to DRV, although we are also naturally conveying message to key Communist governments that are in touch with Hanoi.

2. Accordingly, you should convey aide-memoire in text given below in some manner to DRV Ambassador Rangoon. Moscow experience last May was that DRV Ambassador refused to meet with Kohler or to accept written communication. However, junior member of Embassy was able to hand written note to junior member of DRV Embassy staff so that effective delivery was achieved even though DRV Embassy returned note on following day allegedly unopened. We would suspect DRV Embassies may now have prior instructions to reject any communication from us, and you will have to explore carefully how to make first move in way that would ensure physical delivery of note to some DRV representative, even if, as we expect, Ambassador himself refuses to receive you. Use of reliable Burmese intermediary is not excluded if purpose can only be achieved in this way. If necessary, you could approach appropriate level RGUB to remind them of Burmese willingness, expressed to U Thant apparently during 1964, that Rangoon would be available as site for contacts between US and DRV. We leave method entirely to you, but action should be taken soonest and in way that ensures effective delivery. Please give full account of actions you take and of DRV reactions.

3. Text of aide-memoire is as follows:

Begin text:

“1. As you are no doubt aware, there has been no bombing in North Viet-Nam since December 24 although some reconnaissance flights have continued. No decision has been made regarding a resumption of bombings and unless there is a major provocation we would hope that the present stand-down, which is in its fifth day, could extend beyond New Year. If your government will now reciprocate by making a serious contribution toward peace, it would obviously have a favorable effect on the possibility of further extending the suspension.

“2. I and other members of my Embassy staff stand available at any time to receive any communication you may wish to address to me or to us.”2

End text.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S/PINTA. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Pinta. Drafted by William Bundy, cleared by U. Alexis Johnson, and approved by Rusk.

2 In Paris, Paul Sturm was instructed to inform Mai Van Bo of his knowledge of this telegram and that a possible DRV response to a bombing cessation would be “a clear major reduction in level of VC military activity and terrorism in SVN.” On January 1, 1966, Sturm tried to contact Bo but was told that Bo was sick. On January 3, Sturm met with Vo Van Sung of the DRV delegation in Paris and gave him a copy of the Rangoon aide-memoire. (Telegrams 3707 and 3732 from Paris, January 2 and 3, 1966; ibid., POL 27-14 VIET/XYZ)

258. Paper by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 258. Paper by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, December 28, 1965.

Record of the Secretary's Contacts with the Hungarian Charge

1. December 23. The Secretary called in the Charge in order to give him a message inquiring whether the Hungarian Foreign Minister had received any information that would throw light on the question the Secretary had asked Peter at the UN in October. (The Secretary's question had been, in effect, what would happen on the other side if we were to stop bombing.)

In the course of the conversation, the Secretary spelled out in some detail 12 basic points concerning the US position. He asked that these points be brought to the attention of the Hungarian Foreign Minister and anyone else he chose.

The Charge said that he would report the conversation urgently.2

2. December 24. The Charge called the Secretary to say that he would like to see him urgently. The Charge asked for clarification of our intentions concerning a Christmas truce. The Secretary responded that we had received no indication of the VC attitude on our own 30-hour military ceasefire. He stated emphatically that any ceasefire, of 12 or 30 hours, could not be unilateral. He said that he might know more about our precise military plans during the day. Finally, the Secretary said that we remained interested in knowing what the other side would do if we stopped shooting or bombing.

3. December 25. The Secretary telephoned the Charge during the evening to say that the outcome of the ceasefire within South Viet-Nam depended on the VC attitude and actions. However, he went on to say that he wished the Charge to know that we did not expect to conduct bombing attacks in North Viet-Nam for “a day or two” after Christmas. He said that he would be most interested in any message the Charge might produce on the basis of this information.

4. December 27. The Secretary called the Charge early in the afternoon to ask if he had had any message. The Charge responded in the negative, but later in the afternoon called again to say that he now had instructions. Accordingly, the Secretary received him at 6 p.m.

The Charge conveyed a very precisely phrased message from Peter:

“Can the Secretary's messages be interpreted to mean that the USG is ready or willing to enter into negotiations on ‘the platform presented by you’ with the NLF?”

The Charge went on to say that the “platform” obviously referred to the 12 points summarized by the Secretary to the Charge on December 23.

The Secretary responded by making five points: 1. He referred to President Johnson's remarks at his July 28 press conference3 to the effect that the VC would not have difficulty being represented or having their views presented, “if Hanoi decided it wished to cease aggression.”

2. The US problem of peace lies with Hanoi, not the NLF. US forces are in Viet-Nam only because Hanoi has sent tens of thousands of men, including regular forces, into South Viet-Nam. If Hanoi had not done this, US forces would not be there. Thus, our problem is with Hanoi.

3. Our 12 points are a matter of public record. If the NLF is seriously interested in these 12 points, they can tell us or Peter or anyone such as the Geneva Co-Chairmen. We would be interested if Peter has any indication that the NLF is thus interested.

4. There is no technical problem applicable to contact with the NLF. Members of the NLF have family ties and are well known in Saigon. The Charge interjected to ask whether this meant they could talk to the US or to South Viet-Nam in both directions. The Secretary responded by going on to his fifth point below.

5. The USG cannot enter into negotiations with the NLF. The Secretary emphasized this two or three times in the conversation. He pointed out that there were other groups in South Viet-Nam—Buddhists, Catholics, Montagnards, sects, etc., who had their own leaders and would have to be considered. The local VC were part of a population of 14 million. One could not negotiate with them simply because they happened to have rifles.

At this, Charge grunted disagreement, and the Secretary remarked: “I predicted your disagreement,” and the Charge responded: “You predicted correctly.”

Having made these five basic points, the Secretary went on, “in confidence,” to say that at times there seemed to be nuances of difference between the NLF and Hanoi, between Hanoi and Peiping, and of course well known differences between Moscow and Peiping. Under these circumstances, it was very hard to find anyone with whom to make peace. The Secretary said he put this remark in confidence because he did not wish to exaggerate, but that this was the reason for the suggestion that he would be interested in any expression of NLF views on the 12 points.

The Charge complained at this point that they had been given very little time to get any response and had had no time to get out “to the jungle.”

The Secretary then said he did not connect Peter's message to the bombing. He could not say at that moment when the bombing would be resumed. It could be at any time. However, he wished to underscore that even the cessation of bombing for these three days had shown that it was a point of flexibility on our side, if there was any interest on the other side.

At this point the Charge asked if he might make a personal remark, and asked rhetorically: “Do you think Peter speaks on his own?” (The obvious intended implication was that Peter had been in touch with Hanoi or the NLF, or both.) The Secretary responded that if Peter had reported Hanoi moving in the direction of peace, that would be very important. Peter's report on the NLF was also interesting, but he repeated that he did not connect Peter's message with the bombing of the North. The Secretary went on to say that we could stop the bombing but we still wanted to know what Hanoi would then do—not a commitment but at least an indication. He recalled his own participation in the negotiations that terminated the Berlin Blockade and started up in 1951 concerning Korea, and said that there were ways for diplomats to find these things out privately. He went on to say that our 12 points meant exactly what they said and were reliable. If Hanoi thinks we are not in good faith, let them probe us.

The Charge interjected that the present US response appeared to be that we could not negotiate with the NLF. The Secretary said this was indeed the case. The Secretary said however that we mean all we say, for example about not having bases or a military presence in South Viet-Nam and that if Hanoi gets out, we will.

The Charge put on an act of discouragement at this point and asked how we could find a solution. The Secretary responded that if Hanoi was determined to absorb South Viet-Nam by force, there was bound to be further war. The Charge then asked what would happen if free elections led to Communist control of the South. The Secretary said this was a matter for the people of South Viet-Nam. The Charge then backtracked a bit with some remarks about how hard it was to find the will of the people in any circumstances, and admitted under the Secretary's teasing that he took a standard Communist view of elections.

The conversation then went back to what would happen if the bombing continued to be suspended. The Charge again complained that he had had no time to get “to the jungle.” He thought this was a pity, as this was a very good psychological moment. Now, he regretted to say, he found our response discouraging and was afraid the bombing would resume. Nonetheless he would carefully report the Secretary's statement that our action should at least be taken as an indication of our flexibility on this point.

The Secretary then noted that the VC had put on at least 20 incidents even during their own ceasefire period, and then 60 more during ours. The Charge responded that he had been surprised there hadn't been a major attack; the VC didn't have IBM machines to give orders.

The Charge then referred to the Secretary's call on Christmas evening. The Secretary said that our informing the Hungarians of our intent was part of our saying that we were interested in peace, but could not pay the price of South Viet-Nam. If you looked at our 12 points, we had been fair and constructive on every other element, but we were simply not about to trade South Viet-Nam for peace. The Charge then reverted to saying that that was all very well, but we still wouldn't talk with the NLF.

The Secretary then asked, as a point of information, whether there was now an NLF office in Budapest. The Charge responded that one had just been installed.

The Secretary brought the conversation to a close by saying that he did appreciate Peter's interest.

5. December 28. The Secretary summoned the Charge about noon to give him a simple statement that we were not proposing to resume bombing for at least several more days. The Secretary's message followed exactly the text used with the Soviets and Poles as well, and is attached.

In response, the Charge gave the Secretary the following message from Peter (subsequently phoned in absolutely correct form to Mr. Bundy). It was as follows: “I have got your newer message and your pressing questions. Every one of your proposals is under careful study [in place of ‘I am carefully studying all your proposals,' which the Charge explained orally to Mr. Bundy meant that the proposals were being studied by 'someone other than Peter.’]4

“I will give a complete answer soon.”

Attachment5

Washington, December 28, 1965.

1. As you are doubtless aware, there has been no bombing in North Viet Nam since December 24th although some reconnaissance flights have continued. I have been asked to tell you that no decision has been made regarding a resumption of bombing and that this will depend upon developments. We would hope that the present standdown, which is in its fifth day, could extend at least through New Year's. We cannot make a flat commitment as to timing because of the possibility of some particularly outrageous action or some major new move by the other side. If, on the other hand, the other side should reciprocate by making a serious contribution toward peace, it would obviously have a favorable effect on the possibility of extending the suspension.

2. Because of the interest and concern of your government about this problem, this information is being passed to you for whatever use your government may wish to make of it.

1 Source: Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Nodis/Pinta, Series 1, Vol. 1. Secret.

2 See Document 241.

3 See Document 97.

4 Brackets in the source text.

5 No classification marking.

259. Memorandum of Conversation 259. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, December 28, 1965.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR

Llewellyn E. Thompson, Ambassador-at-Large, Department of State

I made the following oral statement to Dobrynin:

[Here follows the identical text of the statement that Rusk gave to Radvanyi; see the attachment to Document 258.]

Dobrynin said he would, of course, promptly inform his Government but he wished it understood that he was not undertaking to pass this information to Hanoi. He asked if we were taking any steps to inform Hanoi, to which I replied that we were informing the Hungarian Government and possibly some other Governments and assumed that the information would reach them. In any event, they would be aware that the bombing had been suspended.

Dobrynin said that, speaking quite off the record, his Hungarian colleague had obtained the impression from the Secretary that as of yesterday the Secretary had thought that the bombing might be resumed any day, including possibly today. He asked me if I could tell him for his own information whether the Hungarian had misunderstood or whether something had happened between yesterday and today.

I replied by drawing his attention to the fact that the President was in Texas and said that my guess was that the Secretary was simply being cautious in order not to mislead the Hungarian the other way.

Dobrynin asked me what the words “could extend beyond New Year's” meant. When I said I hesitated to make any interpretation of these words as I wished to be very careful not to mislead him, he said that he would assume that the stand-down would probably go for a few days beyond New Year's. I said I thought this was probably a reasonable interpretation.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Thompson and approved in S/AL.

260. Draft Telegram From the President's Consultant on Vietnam (Taylor) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 260. Draft Telegram From the President's Consultant on Vietnam (Taylor) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Washington, December 28, 1965.

Having noted your messages on the resumption of Rolling Thunder2 and understanding thoroughly the sound military reasons behind your recommendations for a prompt resumption, it occurred to me that you might be interested in getting more of the feeling at the Washington end on this subject.

Since returning from Saigon last August, I have made nearly fifty speaking or TV appearances about the country, an experience which has opened my eyes to problems of the domestic front which I did not know existed. Although there is a strong majority support for the Administration's position on Viet-Nam, it is more the normal American reaction to rally around the President in time of crisis than the result of any deep conviction that our course of action is necessary and right. There is still confusion over the basic issues in spite of the many statements of our leaders and a subdued but real uneasiness that important facts are being held back or concealed from the public.

One often expressed doubt is over the sincerity of our desire for a negotiated settlement in Viet-Nam. This doubt has been fed by the false rumors of rejected feelers which have received extended press treatment. A recurrent allegation is that we deliberately create conditions under which Hanoi could not be expected to respond to our offer of unconditional discussions.

Most of these critics make common cause in urging a prolonged bombing pause to give Hanoi a chance to respond. I have always opposed such a pause for a variety of reasons but have always feared that pressures for one might sometime get out of hand. Hence, once the Christmas cease-fire became a fact, I was inclined to take the position that, if a bombing pause were ever to be undertaken, now is the time to do it. It can be done in a low-key way without elaborate comment or explanation and terminated without fanfare after running for a short, unspecified period. If such an action would expose once and for all the futility of letting up the pressures on the enemy, it would be a worthwhile exercise despite the military disadvantages which you see so clearly.

The overall thought which I want to convey is that there is justified concern over the long-term durability of our home front. Everything depends on the ability of the President to keep the country aligned behind his Viet-Nam policy in spite of mounting casualties, a vast budget increase and the seeming endlessness of the conflict. If the suspension of Rolling Thunder to New Year's or some such time will materially help him in this task, I have no personal hesitation in advising him to do so. After this test period is over, I would hope that Rolling Thunder would be resumed with a heightened intensity which, after the lull, would be all the more unpleasant for Hanoi.

Regards to you both,

Taylor

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-360-69. Secret. Also addressed to Westmoreland. Taylor sent this draft to the President under cover of a memorandum that reads: “I understand you indicated yesterday to Mac Bundy that it would be helpful if I sent some such message as the attached to Sharp and Westmoreland. If the text is satisfactory, I shall send it at once.” A note by Taylor on the memorandum indicates that the President wanted Wheeler to receive a copy as well. Apparently the telegram was sent.

2 See Document 245 and footnote 3 thereto.

261. Memorandum for Personal Files 261. Memorandum for Personal Files1

Washington, December 28, 1965.

SUBJECT

Conversation with the Secretary following the President's telephone call to me2 to travel to certain capitals

The Secretary took a negative view. I told him the President told me “Don't let Dean talk you out of it.” He proposed my going to Paris to see Chauvel.3 Also to Rome and Iran. I said I wasn't going to Iran—that would not achieve the President's purposes, and there was also no use my trying to twist people's arms to increase aid to Viet-Nam during the bomb pause; and anyway the President wanted me to be able to testify when I got back that he had sent me to go the last mile in trying to come to a settlement.

He seems opposed to my seeing Bo. He says we are making a contact. He didn't tell me who. He said he would talk to the President this afternoon. I said the President wanted me to go today. That seemed to take him aback. I said it wasn't much time before the end of the year and the President wants the time to be used.

He is afraid talking to the Hungarians would put them on the spot and be counterproductive. I asked him why, because I understood they had indicated that we hadn't taken their contact sufficiently seriously.

He said “You and Tommy 4 talk it over some more.” Tommy suggested I talk to Alex to see whether the South Vietnamese wouldn't be terribly upset. I said “Tommy, this is the President of the United States, not South Viet-Nam, whom you are working for. South Viet-Nam we can protect as much as possible, but the President has the job of convincing Congress he has made the last effort. Anyway, Alex is basically opposed to talks.” He suggested going to Paris, Rome, Yugoslavia, which could be done without any harm. I said that wouldn't equip me to testify that we had run down every lead.

W.A.H.

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Divison, Harriman Papers, Secretary Rusk, 1963-1966. No classification marking. Drafted by Harriman.

2 See Document 256.

3 See footnote 6, Document 236.

4 Llewellyn E. Thompson.

262. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of Defense McNamara and the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 262. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of Defense McNamara and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, December 28, 1965, 6:40 p.m.

Mc said now that we have it we should try to make something of it.2 B said we had sent a telegram to Byroade in Rangoon for him to get in touch with the DRV Ambassador and give him an Aide-Memoire.3 B said he was also getting Presidential letters to Wilson, Erhard, Pearson, Moro and De Gaulle. B said we would get the French Ambassador in tomorrow subject to clearance with the Ranch.

Mc asked Ball if he thought it would be wise for Ball to go to see Wilson. B said he thought Wilson would appreciate a quiet Presidential letter more than he would someone coming over. B thought the same thing could be done in Ottawa. B told Mc that Harriman was going to Warsaw tonight. B said he and Rusk agreed that the Hungarians should work their own way out re Harriman. They have given indications they are trying to make a serious effort here. The Charge came back today with a lot of questions. B said we proposed, if approved by the President, that Harriman go to Budapest only if invited by the Hungarians. After spending a few days in Warsaw H[arriman] could go to Paris.

B told Mc that Goldberg was on his way to N.Y. and presumably would see U Thant tonight; then he would fly to see the Pope; and return home.

Mc said he thought this was what had been discussed earlier today. Mc thought it would be desirable for H to see Tito if he could. Ball said he thought the problem was that Tito is so unpopular with the rest of the Bloc.

Mc said one of the things we should get are views of other people. How do they see this shaping up in the future. Mc said he realizes as well as Ball that it is unlikely that this is all going to end with unconditional surrender by NVN. They both agreed there had to be face savers.

McN said if we send these people out we cannot end this pause New Year's Eve. Ball agreed and said if it did not run until at least the end of next week we would be charged with bad faith. Mc said he had told the Pres this last night and he thought he was prepared to go beyond the first if we get anything at all. Mc said he had sent a telegram to Westmoreland,4 Wheeler, and Sharp telling them why we were doing this and saying we were going to keep a sharp eye.

Mc said we were going to start our Blue Tree Reconnaissance again. We are not to return fire unless trying to recover a pilot who has been shot down and we are trying to rescue.

Ball informed Mc of Moscow's announcement that Shelepin is going to Hanoi shortly. B thought this might be in our favor re timing.

It was decided that when Rusk, McN and Ball meet tomorrow they should discuss what should be said to the press.5

1 Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Telephone Conversations, Vietnam. No classification marking.

2 The bombing pause.

3 See Document 257.

4 Telegram 5041-65 from McNamara to Westmoreland, December 29. (Center of Military History, Westmoreland Papers, COMUSMACV, Message Files)

5 No record of this meeting has been found.

263. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and President Johnson 263. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and President Johnson1

December 28, 1965, 10 p.m.

Ball informed the Pres that he had sent him a long memorandum describing exactly what we were doing and proposing including some draft letters.2

Pres asked Ball to give him the gist of what was being transmitted. President told Ball he wanted him here because he was inspiring, stimulating and “shoving” just as he had on two or three other occasions in this field. Pres said even if all this comes to naught he would feel better. He said he had to survive this thing. He has 3 more years to go and he said he wanted Ball sitting at the bridge calling the signals and he is not to let “them” talk him out of “it”. Pres told Ball to get his Dutch toes in concrete and is to say “this is what the man (the Pres) wants and I am here to shove.”

Ball told the Pres that Harriman left tonight at 8:00 and while enroute we are expecting clearance from the Polish Govt so he will go straight to Warsaw and will plan to spend a couple of days with the Poles. Ball said we had asked the Hungarian Govt whether they would like to have H come there. We have had an indication from the Charge that the Govt wants to be active in this. They have asked clarification of 2 or 3 of the things we gave them and Dobrynin told Thompson the Charge (Hungarian) had been in touch with him regularly. Ball said we think something significant might come from the Hungarian efforts. However, Ball said, we don't want to send Harriman there unless they want him but we do want to have him available and at their option so he can be helpful to them. We don't want to take a chance of Harriman's coming in and having them close-up by saying he has embarrassed them by coming.

Pres said this is all right, however, he would not worry about the Hungarians. Pres thinks Harriman should go to Hungary in any event. He said we could always find reasons for his not going. Pres said he would not hesitate to take the responsibility.

Re the Yugoslavs Ball said we had not been able to set it up with Tito. He has left Brioni but we would keep working on it.

Ball said he thought we would have an answer from the Hungarians tomorrow and in the meantime H would go on to Warsaw and we would not lose any time. H will try to get the Polish govt to start moving.

Ball said we had sent an Aide-Memoire to Amb. Byroade in Rangoon to deliver to the NVN Consul General there.3 This was our appraisal of the best fellow to deal with on a fast basis and this is the fellow U Thant would have used last fall. Ball said he was going to have Goldberg tell Thant tonight what we were doing so he will know what we are talking about. Ball explained this was a formal way we could deal with the Govt and we would have an absolute record made. It should be delivered tomorrow as early as possible.

Goldberg should be leaving for Rome tonight at 2:00 Ball said. However, there is one problem, Ball told the Pres. Fanfani tendered his resignation today to Moro over the La Pira incident4 and apparently it appears that the Italian Govt is in a shakey position. Ball said he was concerned that since Goldberg was associated with Fanfani in the La Pira incident that the Italian press would say we are interfering in domestic politics. The Pres interrupted to say he wanted a Jew seeing the Pope. Ball said the problem was that since Goldberg was a high official in the Govt he would have to see the Italian officials. Pres said this had nothing to do with it. Goldberg is to call on the Pope and get right on to Paris.

Pres said Goldberg is to tell the Pope we appreciate what he said about the Christmas truce and we are responding to what he said about a truce on New Years and we want him to get busy and get some action of us and get right into Hanoi. Pres said what he liked best was a Jew talking to a Catholic. Ball said we would send Goldberg on but he wanted to alert the Pres to the difficulties that might arise. Pres said Goldberg should say he could not discuss the La Pira incident at all. It is an internal matter.

Ball said on the UK, Canada, France, Germany and Italy we have drafted letters from the President.5 Re Italy when Goldberg sees the Pope he would also deliver this letter from the Pres to Fanfani which would be a courtesy. Ball said we were trying to get the letters out tonight. Pres said he would look at them the minute they reach the Ranch.

Ball read the Wilson letter and the President approved. He suggested that Ball add that he is restricting this information to a very few and he would hope that Wilson, etc. would do the same.

Pres also said he preferred something other than the statement “the first of the year”. He suggested “for a more extended period”, or “for many days”. Pres said he did not want to be committed. Ball said he would fix this.

Pres said he thought someone should talk to Pearson. Ball said he could go up. Pres said he would rather Ball stay here. Pres thought MacBundy could perhaps meet Pearson in Philadelphia or go to Ottawa.

Pres said Ball should be sure to have a letter from him to the Pope for Goldberg to deliver. It should thank him for the Christmas truce and the New Year's truce so the Pope would feel we were complying. Ball said he would do this.

Pres said he was depending on Ball as his lawyer and his devil's advocate. Pres said Ball was not to let “them” talk him out of anything. Pres said Ball should stay right on it until we are sure we have bled it for all it is worth.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Telephone Conversations, Presidential Conversations. No classification marking. The President was in Texas; Ball was in Washington.

2 Dated December 28. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 See Document 257.

4 Italian law professer and ex-Mayor of Florence Giorgio La Pira went to Hanoi for discussions with DRV officials. He then transmitted a peace feeler from the DRV through Italian Foreign Minister Fanfani to Goldberg; see Documents 205 and 207. When La Pira's identity was leaked by the Italian press and his connection to Hanoi revealed, the DRV disassociated itself from the peace feeler.

5 The text of the letter from President Johnson to Prime Minister Moro of Italy is in telegram 1362 to Rome, December 29; the letter to Pope Paul VI is in telegram 1363 to Rome, December 29; the letter to British Prime Minister Wilson is in telegram 3677 to London, December 29; and the letter to French President De Gaulle is in telegram 2899 to Paris, December 29. (All in Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

264. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 264. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 29, 1965.

2308. For the Secretary from Lodge. Herewith some comment on ideas in your 1805.2

A. Your para 8. No one will applaud more than I your efforts to secure support from the homefront. With homefront support we cannot fail. Without, we cannot win.

B. Your para 5 statement that “assuring South Viet-Nam without major bloodshed” is obviously of capital importance in bringing about steadfast homefront support. For this reason, I urge that USG in its own mind be clear as to what it regards as a satisfactory outcome of this war since some outcomes may require more bloodshed than others.

C. Let me think aloud purely for illustrative purposes. It is obvious that if we define a satisfactory outcome as 1.) seeking out and utterly destroying the North Vietnamese military main forces and potential, or 2.) seizing the Laos panhandle and the valley of the Mekong, or 3.) as meaning a state of affairs in which elections free from any intimidation can be held in every one of the 2, 658 villages in all 43 provinces, we may be taking on jobs which cannot be done without major bloodshed.

D. If, on the other hand, we define “satisfactory outcome” as the U.S. Mission tried to do it in our 1377,3 this is, hold the delta and the coastal plain, the provincial capitals and the roads, push out durably, even though slowly, within South Viet-Nam through the kind of pacification-countryside rebuilding which Lansdale is promoting and ward off the North Vietnamese aggression so as to make possible the achievement of the above, perhaps we could hold on for a long time without “major bloodshed”. I realize that even this may cause bloodshed too.

E. Your para 4. There is no doubt of the intense interest which public opinion polls must hold for all of us in government, and I do not question the authenticity of the Harris Poll. It does, however, point up the need for us who are in the work of foreign relations to educate one [our?] public at least in two respects:

First, that a cease fire, unaccompanied by a verified withdrawal of forces in effect confirms the Viet Cong aggressors in all the places where they are now. It also denies the sovereignty of the Government of Viet-Nam. In a very real sense, therefore, it gives the Viet Cong the victory before negotiations have been started. In fact, had our Christmas truce offer been accepted, we might have been in an extremely critical situation for the above reason. Therefore, we should first consider educating public opinion about what constitutes an honest and a dishonest cease fire, and it was in that connection that I suggested that a television documentary be made based on Admiral Joy's book about negotiations at Panmunjom.4

Secondly, the public needs to be educated on the fact that Hanoi and Peking do not react like Americans, and that over-eagerness on our part is interpreted by them as a sign of weakness. Therefore the 72 per cent who favor “renewed effort for a cease fire” in the belief that it would promote the chance of peace are actually defeating their own purpose and are hardening the resolve of the enemy.

I believe that sooner or later we are going to have to make these things very clear, and, of course, I will do everything I can to help.

F. I am also interested in your paragraph 6 about differences existing between the Viet Cong and Hanoi. As my conversations with Palmas have shown, we suspect this also.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 4:35 a.m.

2 Document 255.

3 Document 176.

4 See footnote 4, Document 237.

265. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State 265. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State1

Rangoon, December 29, 1965.

315. Eyes only for Secretary. Ref: Deptel 202;2 Embtel 311.3 I called upon DRV Consul General at 3 p.m. today. Was received initially by Lam Bao who remained as interpreter during discussion. I took Leo Reddy, junior officer of Political Section who speaks French, in hopes he might be useful if further liaison develops.

Vu Huu Binh then received me with slight smile and ready handshake. I told him I was grateful for opportunity to see him personally as my government wished me to convey message directly to him for transmittal to his government. I then handed him the aide-memoire. He and his interpreter studied document together with interpreter translating parts thereof into Vietnamese.

After studying document Vu Huu Binh said he would transmit it to his government. At this point we were served with beer (I believe South Vietnamese). I thanked him and told him I planned to keep my visit to him and the subject thereof quite confidential. I had come in official U.S. Embassy car but not my own because it was conspicuous. He said that on his part he would also keep matter confidential.

I told him my instructions had reached me just as I was departing for the airport to go to Sandoway for a few days rest and to join my family who were already there. I wanted him to know that I was cancelling my vacation and would be available in Rangoon anytime of day or night if he should wish to see me. Also, a member of my staff could always be available if he wished to relay a message. I told him I cared nothing about protocol niceties and we could meet quite secretly if he so desired.

Vu Huu Binh said he could tell me nothing except that he would transmit message to his government. I thanked him again for receiving me and he thanked me for coming. He accompanied me to car and politely shook hands. Discussion lasted about eight minutes.

Although conversation was interpreted, it was obvious Vu Huu Binh understood my remarks. Moreover, by his acceptance of formal communication I believe we got our message across to DRV.

Byroade

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 7:15 a.m.

2 Document 257.

3 Telegram 311 from Rangoon, December 29, concerned preliminary arrangements for delivery of the aide-memoire under discussion here. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 VIET)

266. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State 266. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State1

Warsaw, December 29, 1925.

1060. For the President and Secretary from Harriman.

1. Ambassador and I have just concluded one hour and a quarter talk with Rapacki, Winiewicz, Michalowski and Wierna.

2. I outlined President's position regarding pause in bombing as a step towards peace with hope Hanoi would respond. We gave Rapacki the Secretary's 14 points as U.S. attitude towards peace in Southeast Asia.

3. Rapacki, after some argument that we were giving ultimatum to Hanoi by threat of resuming bombing with possible escalation, finally accepted my contention that pause was in fact giving Hanoi an opportunity for peaceful settlement if she would seize it and respond with a return indication.

4. Rapacki suggested adjournment for lunch. He said our talk had resulted in an understanding of each other's position and that this afternoon he wants to discuss the kind of message he might convey to Hanoi.

5. Ambassador feels my visit and our discussion have been useful as Rapacki is obviously gratified to be consulted and is anxious to play a role in these events.

Gronouski

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 8:47 a.m.

267. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State 267. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State1

Warsaw, December 29, 1965.

1066. For the President and Secretary from Harriman. We lunched with Rapacki and same group of his associates. After some informal discussion on changes in Soviet leadership and Sino-Soviet dispute, Rapacki focused discussion on what he might transmit to Hanoi. He asked for explanations of several matters particularly President's statement on NLF representation at conference. As he tried to read into it acceptance on our part of NLF as full members conference I firmly stated our position that only governments could be members but Front could be fully heard. Argument over this lasted some time, but Rapacki finally accepted fact that we were only dealing at the moment with the possibility of a favorable reaction by Hanoi to the President's pause in bombing. Question of how further talks could take place was left open, necessarily through Geneva type conference.

Rapacki was eventually satisfied on the points he had raised and said he would try to transmit US position faithfully to Hanoi for its consideration which might take some time. The Ambassador and I underlined pressures on the President which required a prompt reaction from Hanoi. We emphasized not only military considerations but early date of decision on State of Union message and budget. Discussion ended on most cordial note. Rapacki stated simply and with dignity that he would do what he could and pointed out how important ending of Vietnam war was to world stability.

We agreed to give press brief statement that I had come to Warsaw to talk with Polish Government about Vietnam in its capacity as member ICC and had discussion with Rapacki, etc. Statement is now being drafted. Detailed memcons follow.2

Gronouski

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 12:26 p.m. and passed to the White House.

2 The memorandum of this conversation was transmitted in telegram 1069 from Warsaw, December 30. (Ibid.)

268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 29, 1965, 12:46 p.m.

1815. Eyes only for Ambassador and Porter.

1. You should be aware of following diplomatic actions we have taken in connection with deferring resumption of bombing: a. We have informed British, Australians, and New Zealanders very fully here, and Canadians [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].2 Our Ambassadors have also informed ROK, Japan, GRC, RLG, and RTG at highest levels, and we expect to do same for Marcos probably 31st.3 We have urged all these governments to hold our intentions closely, and we have no indication either way as to whether they are informing their Saigon representatives. Any inquiry from these governments in Saigon should be met by saying simply that their governments have been informed. Naturally, if representatives indicate they have received the word, you may elicit comment for whatever use it may be.

b. We have informed Soviets, Poles, and Hungarians here,4 treating matter as one of information and not pressing them for specific action. We have specifically told them period might be shorter in event of major provocation, but also that we are most interested in any Hanoi response. Our supposition is that one or more may already have been in touch with Hanoi, and Hungarians came back to us even over Christmas period to ask if we would negotiate with NLF. We replied clearly that we would not, for familiar reasons.

c. Byroade yesterday conveyed note directly to DRV Consul General in Rangoon informing them that resumption might be deferred at least over New Year's.5 Same format as notification to Soviets, Poles, and Hungarians. Noteworthy that DRV rep received Byroade personally and did not seek to play games as DRV Ambassador in Moscow did last May.6

d. We have also informed U Thant and Indians in general terms.

e. Harriman has been dispatched to Warsaw and is talking today to Rapacki.7 We have also indicated to Hungarians that Harriman available to go to Budapest, but have had no response. He may also be sent to Belgrade, to talk with Tito. Purpose of his mission is to show concretely our interest in discussion with Eastern European countries and generally to make strong record of diplomatic activity. There may be speculation Warsaw trip related to contact with Chicoms. We are doing nothing to encourage this here, and it might be specifically useful for us to tell Do privately this is not part of Harriman mission.

f. Goldberg has been sent to Rome to inform Pope and consult with him.8 This done in light Pope's general interest and not with expectation he has effective contact with Hanoi.

2. Above adds up to broad notification and essential diplomatic effort so that we will learn rapidly of any response by Hanoi. Only direct contact with DRV has been by Byroade. We have no reason to believe this will be publicized, but if it should be there is ready parallel to our May efforts through DRV Ambassador Moscow and through British in Hanoi, which are well known to GVN and have been made public subsequently.

3. You may be assured that if anything substantive should appear as a result of this activity we will be in immediate touch with you.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. Drafted by Bundy and approved by Ball. Repeated to the White House.

2 Further details are in William Bundy's Pinta Log, December 28-29. (Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Nodis/Pinta, Series 1, Vol. 1)

3 Instructions were sent in telegram 651 to Seoul, also sent to Bangkok, Vientiane, Tokyo, Taipei, and Manila, December 28. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 See Documents 258 and 259. No record of the discussions with the Poles in Washington has been found. In telegram 937 to Warsaw, December 28, Rusk instructed Gronouski to inform Rapacki of the talks. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

5 See Document 265.

6 See vol. II, Document 299.

7 See Documents 266 and 267.

8 See Document 271.

269. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 269. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 29, 1965, 4:14 p.m.

1821. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Many thanks for your helpful 2308.2 My 18053 was sent under some pressure of time and did not therefore go into certain details. Following are some additions.

1. No one is under any illusion here about our elementary choices if Hanoi and Peiping continue to push into Southeast Asia by force. We can either get out of their way and let them have it or we can meet them. We have decided to meet them. When I spoke of “securing South Viet-Nam without major bloodshed” I was referring to the contingency that the other side may look down the road ahead and decide that it is too costly or too dangerous for them to persist. This has happened with the Greek guerrillas, the Berlin blockade, Korea and the Cuban missile crisis. I realize important differences of attitude publicly expressed by Peiping but thus far (fingers crossed) Peiping has been much more cautious in its actions than it has been in its words. My remark was addressed to giving the other side every chance to pull back.

2. I personally do not see any “satisfactory outcome” which involves giving Hanoi and their Viet Cong puppets the fruits of their aggression by force in South Viet-Nam. A deal was made in 1954 and 1962. Once again the communist world is saying what is ours is ours and what is yours must be talked about and divided up further. I feel we should insist upon the 1954 and 1962 agreements. If the other side persists in attempting to destroy those agreements by force, then I fear there shall be bloodshed.

3. I agree with you fully that there is a fundamental difference between an honest and a dishonest cease-fire. From an operational point of view the most important point would be a pulling apart of North Viet-Nam and South Viet-Nam militarily. That would mean stopping infiltration, return of northern infiltrators and comparable actions on our side. This is feasible although verification would present some difficulties. We do not have in mind a cease-fire within South Viet-Nam itself which would deny the authority of the Government of South Viet-Nam in any part of the country. A long-term internal cease-fire could only be based upon a cessation of DRV aggression and acceptance by the Viet Cong of the idea that they must lay down arms and take their chances in peaceful political processes. It may be that public opinion needs more education on this subject. We have not undertaken it in any significant way because we have not even reached the point where Hanoi is willing to stop its aggression.

4. Your point that Hanoi and Peiping may interpret interest in peace as weakness is a good one and this has been much in our minds. We have talked about this frankly with Eastern European governments. If there is any such misunderstanding, it will be dramatically corrected when the President asks the Congress in January for $25 billion for Viet-Nam for the next eighteen months. You should know personally that we have made it very clear to those in touch with the other side that Hanoi is up against a moment of truth. If they do not now move towards peace, they must face the most disagreeable possible consequences.

5. As you may know, the Vatican is concerning itself very actively with Viet-Nam. They have not revealed to us fully what they are doing but our impression is that they are very busy. This makes it quite important that Archbishop Palmas fully understand that if there is any delay or reluctance in connection with his conversations with you, these are to be bound on the other side and not on our side. If you have not done so in the last ten days, I would suggest you merely inquire of him whether he has anything further pursuant to earlier conversations.

6. I am sending in a separate telegram a listing of points already made public by the United States on various occasions having to do with the basis for peace in Viet-Nam.4 I find that when these are drawn together most people, including foreign diplomats as well as newsmen, are surprised. Their surprise comes from their lack of diligence in doing their homework. But under Pinta restrictions, I should tell you that the Hungarian Foreign Minister asked me the other day whether the United States would be prepared to negotiate with the National Liberation Front on the basis of “this platform”. I replied that the Government of the United States cannot negotiate with the Liberation Front since they are only one element in a population of fourteen million and the views of Buddhists, Catholics and other sects and others must be taken into account. I told him I would be interested if he himself learned that the Liberation Front was interested in the points which we have made public.5 Thus far no reply. I cannot overemphasize the importance of any substantial defection from the Liberation Front away from Hanoi. If this momentum should begin to roll, the other side's position would, in my judgment, deteriorate very fast.

7. I need not repeat to you how grateful the President and I are for the job you are doing. I am deeply convinced that the American people will do what has to be done in meeting their commitments if they can do so in good conscience and with a clear understanding that all honorable and peaceful avenues have been closed by the aggressor.

Warm regards.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis; Pinta. Drafted by Rusk. Repeated to the White House.

2 Document 264.

3 Document 255.

4 Reference is to circular telegram 1243, December 30, which repeated the text of Document 247, to all diplomatic posts and Hong Kong. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

5 See Document 258.

270. Memorandum From the Director of National Intelligence Estimates (Kent) to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Helms) 270. Memorandum From the Director of National Intelligence Estimates (Kent) to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Helms)1

Washington, December 29, 1965.

SUBJECT

Three Memoranda Attached Re Vietnam

1. I have asked the boys, on the basis of the bombing pause and press reports of some kind of US contact with the DRV, to think about a number of the possibilities raised if these stories are true. The results, which I attach, are:2 (a) A paper outlining current Soviet tactics on Vietnam and how these relate to Moscow's recent maneuvers against China; it concludes that Shelepin in Hanoi will push hard the case for more reliance on diplomacy and politics, less on military means. (Tab A)

(b) A paper thinking about China's attitude toward negotiations and concluding that Peiping will threaten big difficulties whenever it senses a weakening of Hanoi's resolve to continue fighting. (Tab B)

(c) A paper on South Vietnamese attitudes toward negotiations, which concludes that they are largely negative but not insurmountably so. This one was promised to the Director some time ago and has been approved by the Board of National Estimates. (Tab C)

2. None of these deal with the central question of how Hanoi itself now views its options. Some in this town may be better informed than we on this one; perhaps we'll get some evidence soon.

3. I think you will find all of these papers interesting and hopefully a contribution to your thinking. At least the first two (A and B above) were written with this principally in mind and we do not recommend any further circulation. In a few days we may all know enough more to warrant review, revision, and circulation to a wider audience.

SK

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLIII, Memos (B). Secret.

2 All of the tabs are attached but none is printed.

271. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 271. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State1

Rome, December 29, 1965, 11:45 p.m.

1654. For President Johnson LBJ Ranch, SecState Rusk, Under Secy Ball. From Ambassador Goldberg.

1. I arrived in Rome at 1600 and shortly thereafter at 1800 had an hour-long private audience with Pope Paul VI. His interpreter Mons. Cronin, an American priest, was only other person present. I handed His Holiness letter from the President2 which he read with great care. He immediately expressed his appreciation for what he termed a very sincere and prompt response to his appeal for a Christmas truce and to mankind's anxiety for concrete steps working toward permanent peace in Vietnam. He said he would like me to assure the President that he does not want to disturb in any way the American situation in Vietnam but rather to be of help in the direction of a fair and honorable settlement. His Holiness said that all his efforts would be directed to this end, which he was confident the President shared. He enquired about the President's health and I assured him the President was in fine fettle.

2. His Holiness said he recalled with great satisfaction his private conversation with the President during his visit to the UN in October and said there too he was impressed with the President's sincerity and devotion to peace, now reaffirmed by this communication. I then enquired whether he had received any specific replies to his Christmas appeal. In answering he handed me a copy of Osservatore Romano of Dec 27 which contains full text of his message and in his own hand underlined text of appeal on Vietnam. I understand this text has already been forwarded to Washington. The Pope then went on to say that he had received replies from Ho Chi Minh and from the Govt of South Vietnam. He termed the Ho Chi Minh reply harsh and distressing. The text (in French) of this reply is being sent by separate telegram.3 He apparently had received the reply from South Vietnam only this morning and therefore had no extra copies. He showed me the text which he termed, and I agreed, to be quite affirmative. He directed Mons. Cronin to make this reply available to us shortly and it will be forwarded as soon as received.4 His Holiness then said he intended, notwithstanding the harsh nature of Ho Chi Minh's reply, to pursue the matter further. To this end he was planning to send to Vietnam Mons. Rodhain, a French priest who is head of Caritas, a charitable organization of the Church. He said Mons. Rodhain's purpose would be charitable in nature but that he would also be vested with instructions from the Pope to explore avenues of a peaceful settlement. The Holy Father emphasized that Mons. Rodhain is a man of great discretion and enjoyed his complete confidence. Plan would be for Mons. Rodhain to go Hanoi as well as Saigon and the Pope indicated that enquiries had been made to Hanoi as to whether Rodhain would be received there. The proposal is to send him promptly.

3. The Pope then enquired as to our govt's views on the situation in Vietnam. I reviewed the various steps which President Johnson and his administration have taken to transfer this conflict from the battlefield to the bargaining table and stressed that the latest move—the bombing pause—was further evidence of the US Govt's desire to seek peace in this troubled area. The Pope then specifically enquired whether the Geneva Agreement of 1954 was considered by the US Govt a cornerstone of a possible peace settlement. I replied that the President on several occasions, the Secretary, the Under Secretary, and I at the UN had repeatedly confirmed that we would be willing to negotiate on the basis of the Geneva Accords, at Geneva or at any other appropriate forum. I explained that we did not agree with Hanoi's interpretation of the Geneva Accords; particularly their point—one of the four—that the Government of South Vietnam had to be reconstituted along the lines of the program of the National Liberation Front. I pointed out that this nowhere appeared in the Geneva agreement and that postwar experience had shown that governments reconstituted by Communist movements had frustrated rather than forwarded genuine self-determination by the people involved. I recalled that Poland, among other countries, was a case in point. His Holiness nodded in agreement at this stage.

4. I conveyed the content of the aide-memoire cabled to Rangoon (Dept's 202 to Rangoon)5 to be communicated by Ambassador Byroade to the North Vietnamese Ambassador there. His Holiness was much impressed by the forward step taken in this aide-memoire and again repeated that this was great evidence of President Johnson's sincere desire for peace and willingness to take long steps forward toward achieving it. His Holiness then turned to another aspect of the problem. He said he wanted the President to know that his own efforts stood apart from any initiatives by La Pira. He esteemed La Pira as a good person but the Pope was pursuing his efforts in his own way and through his own channels. In this connection the Pope mentioned Archbishop Palmas, Apostolic Delegate to Vietnam and Cambodia. The Archbishop, while concerned primarily with refugees and religious matters, was also being employed by the Pope to help in the political situation. I interjected to express our grave concern at the sanctuary being afforded the North Vietnamese in Cambodia and indicated that this situation was most troublesome, particularly in light of Prince Sihanouk's failure to take effective action to prevent his territory from being used for purposes of aggression by Hanoi. I also reminded the Holy Father that Sihanouk had avoided resumption of the Geneva conference on Cambodia which, hopefully, might have led to discussions on Vietnam.

5. At this point I conveyed the greetings of Secretary General U Thant which U Thant had asked me to express when I met with him last night. The Pope expressed great regard for U Thant as a man of peace and said that before issuing his Christmas appeal he had in general terms obtained U Thant's concurrence that such an appeal would be desirable. The Pope showed great interest in the fact that the President had conveyed messages concerning the bombing pause to Moscow, Budapest and Warsaw, as well as to a number of our allies. He enquired whether we had communicated with Peiping. I replied that I did not know, but doubted that we had, in the belief that Peiping would not accept a direct approach. I pointed out, however, that undoubtedly Peiping would have knowledge of this development through a Communist source. The Pope indicated indirectly that he shared the belief that the Soviets would be more inclined to urge a favorable response than the Red Chinese.

6. Finally His Holiness indicated that after consultation with his Secretary of State and other advisors he would prepare a written reply to the President's letter, hopefully in time for delivery before my planned departure tomorrow evening. It will be cabled when received.6

7. Although His Holiness was warm, affable and gracious to me, recalling our exchanges when I was part of the President's party in New York on the occasion of his UN visit, and also when he received me in private audience in the summer of 1964, his general demeanor was one of grave concern about the Vietnam situation.

8. The Pope asked whether the President's letter could be made public. I said that this was in his discretion but that I would not do so. With his approval I prepared following press statement to be made tonight by Embassy spokesman.

9. “The Honorable Arthur J. Goldberg, US Ambassador to the United Nations, arrived in Rome late this afternoon and immediately had an audience with His Holiness Pope Paul VI lasting about an hour.

10. “The President sent Ambassador Goldberg on a special mission to convey to His Holiness Pope Paul VI the President's gratitude for the Holy Father's message and inspiration which were so helpful in helping to bring about a Christmas truce in Vietnam. The President also asked Ambassador Goldberg to thank His Holiness for the continuous efforts he is making in furtherance of peace in Southeast Asia. The President's gratitude, on behalf of the American people, is, in his view, shared by all mankind.”

11. The Pope stated that upon inquiries from the press he would make a statement of similar import. It was my latest impression that he would not publicize the text of the President's letter but would refer to it in favorable terms.

12. Following the audience I called upon Secretary of State Cicognani and spent approximately one half hour reviewing in briefer terms my conversation with His Holiness. The Sec of State indicated sympathy with the American point of view on Vietnam, but added that perhaps the best way towards a peaceful solution was the Pope's more evenhanded approach.

13. Prime Minister Moro is out of Rome but is returning tomorrow and has asked to see me about 7:00 p.m. tomorrow evening. He requested that the President's letter7 be sent to him through Pompei, his diplomatic advisor. This has been done. Pompei indicated he would make a copy of the letter to the Prime Minister available to President Saragat.

Reinhardt

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Pinta. Also sent to USUN for Yost. Received at 6:49 p.m. and passed to the White House.

2 Transmitted to Rome in telegram 1363, December 29. (Ibid.)

3 Not found.

4 The text of this December 27 message is in telegram 1657 from Rome, December 30. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

5 Document 257.

6 The text was transmitted in telegram 1661 from Rome, December 30. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S/PINTA)

7 The text was transmitted in telegram 1632 to Rome, December 29. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

272. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 272. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State1

Bangkok, December 30, 1965.

1277. Deptel 1075 to Bangkok.2

1. In absence of Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, I conveyed requested information to Acting FonMin Pote Sarasin as directed in para 4 reftel.

2. After a long pause Pote asked that I convey to the Secretary his understanding of the action taken. He said that as an Asian, thinking as an Asian, he thought it was a mistake. It would be interpreted in Asia as a sign of weakness and indecision and would reinforce Hanoi determination to carry on until American public opinion forced withdrawal. Consequently, he thought it would prolong war rather than shorten it and cost more American casualties rather than fewer.

3. In referring to third purpose as outlined in para 4-D reftel, Pote doubted effect on third countries would be as beneficial as we might have thought. He said it would not help to convince the already convinced and as for the others we would always get the argument that if the pause had been extended for “another day, another week, another month,” it might have been successful.

4. In response to my direct inquiry he said that he personally had no doubt whatever as to American firmness.

5. I later conveyed the same information to Deputy Prime Minister Praphat who had much the same reaction as Pote. He added reporting of comment which Tun Razak, Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia, attributed to Ne Win, who had suggested closer consultations between Burmese, Thai, and Malaysians for their own protection when Americans pull out. He said he had told Tun Razak he did not expect Americans to leave until the safety of Southeast Asia was assured. He also added that every day the pause continued, however, the more question there would be of American intentions and this, he added, was a dangerous attitude to let build up for too long a time.3

Martin

1 Source: Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Nodis/Pinta, Series 2, Vol. 1. Secret; Priority; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 8:53 a.m. and passed to the White House.

2 In telegram 1075, December 28, the Embassy in Bangkok was instructed to inform the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of the decision on and purpose of the suspension of the bombing of North Vietnam. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 In telegram 1096 to Bangkok, December 30, the Department of State sent assurances to Thailand that the bombing pause was not the prelude to U.S. withdrawal from Southeast Asia, but a test to see if Hanoi could come to a realistic appraisal of the situation. The United States was in Vietnam “to stay whatever and how long it takes.” (Ibid., EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 412, Nodis/Pinta, Series 2, Vol. 1)

273. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and President Johnson 273. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and President Johnson1

December 30, 1965, 11:20 a.m.

Ball reported to the President that Goldberg had made a courtesy call on the Italian Govt and the press had not created any problems.

Ball said we had had word from Paris that De Gaulle is prepared to see Goldberg at noon tomorrow. Ball said the radio was announcing that Harriman had seen Gomulka and was seeing Tito. Ball said there were two proposals for H. 1) H might go on to India because India is a member of the ICC. Pres thought this a very good idea. In covering this Pres thought it should be said that the Pres had given his views in some detail to PM Wilson, Chancellor Erhard, and Ayub Khan. He had sent McG Bundy to talk to Pearson; Goldberg to certain diplomats at the UN and to the Pope because the Pope had been in communication with the Pres and the Pres wanted him to know his views on VN; Goldberg will also be seeing others. Pres said he thought Mann should fly down and see the Pres of Mexico and tell him how strongly we feel; how much we are trying; what we are trying to do. Pres thought India as head of the Commission should be talked to. Pres thought Shastri needs a little buttering up. Shastri should be told how much we are looking forward to his visit; what a fine visit we had with his Agricultural Minister; we thought the talks went very well with Ayub although there is a lot of bitterness there; we thought the visit with Ayub a plus; we are getting our experts together to go to India on their food problem; and tell him how we feel on VN; what can they do; we salute them; we just want to keep them informed.

Ball agreed these were all good points and it would be good to get Harriman out to see Shastri before he leaves for Tashkent and sees the Russians. Pres thought in talking to Shastri the point to be stressed would be the food problem and his visit. This gives it a little cover and we don't want to give the impression that we are in a panic or frantic, the Pres said.

Pres said he wanted to be sure that every person that should be informed of our views is informed and that we come through loud and clear. Pres said Ball knows how he feels—like Ball on this peace business—but he is not sure this has been conveyed. Pres thinks that this is now a good chance to do this.

Pres said he had talked to Bundy and told him to get in touch with Ball and for them to spend an hour to see who has not been informed and who could be informed. Pres said it did no harm for an Ambassador to say the Pres of the US asked me to tell you that he wants you to know how he feels.

Pres said for Ball to get the Mann thing cleared up. Ball said he would do that right away.

Pres said if it could be arranged for Harriman to go by New Delhi it might be a good idea for him to come by and see Nasser. Ball agreed with this. Pres thought they should be informed right away so they would not think they were on the second table.

Ball told the Pres that the Hungarians would rather not have Harriman at the moment. They have given the impression this would embarrass them.

Ball said that our intelligence people had told us that Shelepin would probably be in Hanoi over the week-end.

Ball said that Harriman had come in asking about seeing Bo in Paris. Ball told the Pres that we had another contact we were reactivating there on another basis. Pres thought we had better be careful here and he did not think it wise for Harriman to see Bo. Pres said he would leave it up to Ball's judgment. Ball said he thought it would create problems. Pres said Ball should tell Harriman to see just the above two and when he finishes seeing them we would have other plans—imply that H will come by there (Paris) later, but we don't want the visits too close together. Pres said we did not want to mess the Bo thing up.

Pres asked Ball if he had any ideas for Moyers. Pres said he had to be a little more affirmative. Pres suggested saying, “The Pres, Sec. of State and Bundy have been giving their views. We are going to other capitals. The discussions that are taking place are not in any way unusual.” Ball said he thought this good enough and that the press would be fairly understanding.

Pres said he thought Ball should give some serious thought to getting away a few hours and flying down to talk to Fulbright. Pres said Ball was first to explain to Fulbright that the stories about his not being invited to the WH had no basis and were nonsense. Pres said there was no custom where the head of the For. Relations Committee had to be invited to all the WH functions. Pres said they had checked the records and found that Fulbright had been invited to the WH at least three times more than anybody else. Second, when Princess Margaret was here, Fulbright had been in New Zealand. Third, no one but govt people had been invited to the Wilson dinner. And there was nothing significant about Ayub that they thought should call for including Fulbright in the dinner. Pres said Ball should tell Fulbright that he (the President) had been laughing about most of this bunk and that he thought most of it was coming from Marcy. Re VN Ball should point out that this is what Fulbright has been saying and the Pres is trying to show our real feelings in the matter and our attempt to do so is not because we are in a panic. Ball should tell him that Bundy talked to Pearson; Pres talked to Erhard; Bruce talked to Wilson. This is just reiteration of our points and our feelings. It is just an execution of what Fulbright has talked about. Ball should try to make it a Fulbright proposal.

President thought Ball should do the same thing with Mansfield. Ball should say the President had thought it over carefully and thought he should try for peace. Goldberg and Harriman do not have any great hope but in effect are doing what Mansfield has said. Pres said Ball should do this if he has someone in the Dept who could take over for him. Ball said that Johnson was backstopping him. Pres said this was fine if he had enough initiative to go on through. Ball said that Dirksen was also in Florida. Pres said Ball should tell Fulbright, Mansfield, and Dirksen not to tell anyone that he is coming down.

Ball mentioned Hickenlooper. Pres said he should be talked to. Pres said Hickenlooper says he does not know enough. Ball should emphasize that this is just a continuation of what the President has said—starting in Baltimore. Ball should not let Hickenlooper think we are retreating. Re the bombing nothing much could be gained by bombing during Holy Week; the weather is not good; and we are just telling everybody about our position.

Pres told Ball to get Mann out and for him to say we are exchanging views. Ball is to tell Mann he should come back by the Ranch.

Ball said re the Goldberg visit to De Gaulle, they would like not to have it announced until after the meeting. Pres agreed with this.

Pres thought more thought should be given to seeing some other people. He said the main thing was to call them and tell them that the President had asked Ball to talk to them.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Papers of George Ball, Telephone Conversations, Presidential Conversations. No classification marking. The President was in Texas; Ball was in Washington.

274. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State 274. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State1

Warsaw, December 30, 1965.

1073. From Harriman.

1. Memcon with Michalowski, Director General, FonMin, 7:30-8:00 p.m., December 29, 1965 at Ambassador Gronouski's residence.

2. Michalowski said the Polish Government was treating our approach on the Viet-Nam matter very seriously and would do its best and use all means at its disposal, but he would like to impress upon us question of time. He said it was not easy to communicate rapidly with Hanoi through ordinary channels and they might have to use special means. He repeated it may take time to get an indication of any value from Hanoi.

3. He said Poles were transmitting to Hanoi their opinions and judgment together with their own formulation of U.S. position. He wanted to make clear there would be no misunderstandings of the facts concerning U.S. position in the Polish approach. He listed the following five points the Polish Govt intends to send to Hanoi as their interpretation of U.S. views: A. The U.S. realized that in order to facilitate entry onto a road of negotiations in the Viet-Nam conflict that a period of calm and tranquility is required. So the U.S. made a pause in the bombing beginning December 24. The U.S. expects that the Viet-Nam side will reciprocate with a parallel gesture. The U.S. side hopes that mutual gestures of that kind will facilitate entry on the road to negotiations. The U.S. has made certain suggestions as examples of the gestures which it would expect from the North Viet-Nam side. It envisages possibilities of other types of gestures and would welcome any other similar gesture from the North Viet-Nam [side].

B. The U.S. side is quite conscious of the need to give appropriate time. However it wishes to draw attention to the difficulties stemming from the convening of the U.S. Congress, the approaching budget considerations and other domestic pressures. In this connection it would appreciate some indication from the Viet-Nam side at the earliest possible time.

C. The U.S. side has reiterated the statement of President Johnson's of July 28, 1965 that there will be no difficulties with finding ways for the Front to present its attitudes and views during talks. It elaborated, however, that it does not recognize the Front as a government and from this fact, in the U.S. opinion, would stem certain limitations for the role of the Front in the possibility or event of a conference of the Geneva type. On the other hand, future negotiations can take various forms. The U.S. attitude in this regard is flexible and it is ready to consider the possibilities of talks in all variations and with different participants including also the National Liberation Front.

D. In the course of eventual talks the U.S. side is ready to discuss the 4 points of the DRV as well as all other proposals coming from other parties including also South Viet-Nam.

E. The U.S. side wishes also that the known position of the USG in the 14 point statement published on December 292 also be taken into consideration as expressing the general attitude of the U.S.

4. I told Michalowski there was an urgent need for quick action and prompt response from Hanoi. I described at some length the pressures affecting the USG. Michalowski reiterated that in such a complicated situation it was necessary to be patient and quiet. He said the Polish initiative is in good faith and time would be required. He said he understood pressures on USG, but we must understand Hanoi is in a very delicate position and will need a little time to work out its response.

5. He said Poles are convinced of necessity of secret negotiations and they are afraid publicity might jeopardize their initiative. I agreed the less publicity the better.

Gronouski

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 12:51 p.m. and passed to the White House.

2 See Document 248.

275. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 275. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 30, 1965, 8:48 p.m.

1853. 1. We are again keeping you up to date on diplomatic developments for your own information and for use with GVN as you see fit.

2. Harriman had most useful talks in Warsaw. Since major operating result is message that Poles may now convey to Hanoi, we are repeating to you Warsaw's 1073.2 Although not in exact form stated by Harriman we believe this represents fair summary of position as it might be conveyed to Hanoi. Reference to “14-point statement” is to memorandum (actually composed by Secretary) which you will receive through circular to all posts sent tonight.3 We suspect Poles may be most active Eastern European at least until Shelepin reaches Hanoi.

3. We continue to have only public information on Shelepin visit to Hanoi,4 but fact that announcement came only very shortly after we informed Dobrynin that we were deferring resumption of bombing indicates that visit arranged on some other basis. Our best guess is that it was political in character (Shelepin being Party man) and perhaps related to large volume of reports suggesting plans for early conference of Soviet-oriented nations, in which Vietnam would be major topic. We have reports Shelepin may arrive Hanoi over weekend, and his presence and possible statements there may of course become major factor in situation even though trip arranged on other grounds.

4. Harriman is now in Belgrade and we believe will go to New Delhi thereafter, rounding out ICC consultations represented by Harriman in Warsaw and McGeorge Bundy in Ottawa. (Latter released today.) FYI: Harriman may then go to Karachi, Teheran, and Cairo, in some order, plans not yet final. End FYI. We do not anticipate significant substantive results from talks with Tito or Shastri.

5. Goldberg had useful, although general, talk with Pope, who among other things expressed gratification at message received from GVN. You might convey this to Do and indicate it was distinct plus in worldwide terms. Goldberg now goes to Paris and will see De Gaulle tomorrow. We will naturally take no initiatives and will not encourage any from French side.

6. Mann going to Mexico for consultation there on general basis, as part of effort to cement our Latin relations on Vietnam and generally. This will probably be announced sometime tomorrow.

7. All of above adds up to continuing effort to demonstrate diplomatic activity and to open all avenues for constructive Hanoi response. So far there has been no such response. We have of course noted first indirect Hanoi reference to situation but have not completed our analysis. At first glance, Hanoi is at least taking somewhat different rhetorical line, even though it concludes with familiar statements about accepting four points and taking other actions.5 Would be much interested in your analysis.

8. One sidelight of Harriman talk with Rapacki was that latter brought up “second-hand” report that Chauvel may propose handling NLF representation issue on basis co-chairmen convening conference, with each then free to invite any party they choose. Would appreciate your comment on this suggestion. Rapacki conversations generally, as well as Hungarians over weekend, have indicated NLF representation issue may well become central focus of some Communist counter-gambit. We have all along taken line that any position NLF might be granted should be matched by equivalent status for other interested groups in South Vietnam such as Buddhists, Catholics, sects, etc. Chauvel proposal might lend itself to such handling, although it would remain vital to affirm position of GVN as sole legitimate government of SVN.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. Drafted by William Bundy. Repeated to the White House.

2 Document 274.

3 See footnote 4, Document 269.

4 Assessments of the announced visit to Hanoi of A.N. Shelepin are in telegram 2040 from Moscow, December 29, and Intelligence Note No. 651 from Hughes to Rusk, December 30. (Both in Department of State, EA/ACA Files: Lot 69 D 277, Communist Positions and Initiatives—Soviet) A CIA assessment by William Hyland, December 29, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XLII, Memos (B).

5 Reference is to a broadcast by the Voice of Vietnam on December 30, entitled “We Are Determined To Smash All Maneuvers of War Expansion and All Peace Tricks of the U.S. Aggressors.” Text in FBIS, North Vietnam, January 3, 1965. A Department of State telegram sent as 717 to Harriman in Belgrade and 2960 to Goldberg in Paris, December 30, provided INR interpretation of the North Vietnamese commentary. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

276. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 276. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 31, 1965.

2337. For the Secretary from Lodge.

1. In response to your 1821,2 I called on Archbishop Palmas, told him that I was indeed still interested in meeting his “former Minister” and asked him if there was any news.

2. Palmas said that he had received a note from the “former Minister” under date of December 23 (when I was in Bangkok) asking to be excused because of his inability to come personally to express his good wishes for Christmas and the New Year. The note went on to say that for more than twenty years, the war had gone on in Vietnam and that he prayed to God to put an end to it, saying that the Vietnamese people had paid a heavy price, and that if the war continued there would be a “general extermination”.

3. The note went on to say that he was “still waiting for news of the matter we talked about”, adding that “when I do get news I will come and we can examine the question together”.

4. On December 28, Archbishop Palmas acknowledged receipt of the note. He showed me the note which was written in rather illegible French, and down at the bottom was a rather illegible signature, which could be interpreted as spelling out Hoac. If so, it would confirm our surmises.

5. Palmas' theory that the “former Minister's” initiative had been genuine, but had been quashed by Hanoi as soon as Hanoi heard of it seems plausible.

6. We then branched out into a general discussion, with Palmas expressing the view that the one thing above all others which was keeping the war going was the division of opinion within the free world. He believed that if the French Government would recognize the true interest of the French people, and merely show verbal non-disapproval of the U.S. effort that it would have a very discouraging effect in Hanoi. The Hanoi regime, it appears, pays attention to French moods and French postures way out of proportion to the amount of chips which France actually has bought in the poker game—which is practically nil.

7. He said the fact that the Pope had sent messages both to Ho Chi Minh and General Thieu did not mean that he equated them both, or that he was unmindful of the fact that North Vietnam was the aggressor and wished to exterminate Christianity. Indeed, said Archbishop Palmas, if it were not for the arrival of American troops, Christianity would already be in the process of extermination in South Vietnam now, and he, Palmas, would not even be here at this time.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 5:12 a.m. and passed to the White House.

2 Document 269.

277. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of State 277. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of State1

Belgrade, December 31, 1965.

965. For President and Secretary from Harriman.2

1. Upon reflection on talks at Warsaw I and officers traveling with me are convinced from statements and attitude of Rapacki and Michalowskias well as Gomulka that Polish Government intends to carry our message faithfully to Hanoi and add their own arguments to influence Hanoi. They are deeply concerned over their own possible involvement if war continues to escalate and as Rapacki put it “everyone including U.S. may lose control of events”.

2. Poles also frankly expressed concern over possibility of increased Chinese influence unless we move towards peaceful solution.

3. The Poles repeatedly emphasized the time required to present their arguments to Hanoi, indicating that their usual means of communication were erratic and that special means might have to be used.

4. In order maintain pressure on Poles for prompt response from Hanoi you may wish to authorize Ambassador Gronouski to tell Rapacki that the U.S. Government is following with close interest the Polish efforts with Hanoi and also explain purpose of my trip to India as consultation with Chairman ICC—although we realize that Indians do not have the intimate relations with Hanoi as have the Poles. Furthermore, because of Polish emphasis on secrecy he might indicate that my visit to India (ICC Chairman) and other countries will serve to divert attention from Polish efforts.

Elbrick

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 9:02 a.m. and passed to the White House. Repeated to Warsaw for Gronouski.

2 Harriman was in Yugoslavia to talk to Tito, but his appointment was delayed until January 1, 1966.

278. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 278. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State1

Paris, December 31, 1965.

3701. For Secretary, Under Secretary and Yost. Department pass LBJ Ranch. As arranged I2 called on General De Gaulle at the Elysee Palace and conversed with him for about an hour and ten minutes. General De Gaulle opened the discussion by expressing great appreciation to President Johnson for his letter3 and for the President's extreme courtesy in advising him privately and promptly as to the moves President Johnson was taking in regard to the Viet-Nam conflict.

As requested in the Department's 2943,4 I brought up the question of Cambodia and told the General that our desire [was?] to preserve the neutrality of this country provided Prince Sihanouk would maintain a neutral attitude on his part. The General expressed the strong hope that the Viet-Nam war not be extended in any form to Cambodia and I assured him this was not our government's plan or desire. The problem, I explained, was the failure on the part of the Cambodian Government and the ICC properly to ensure that the border was sealed and that Cambodia was not used as a sanctuary for the North Vietnamese or Viet Cong and as a source of supply. I urged the General as I had done earlier in the day to Couve de Murville that the French Government support our efforts for an enlarged and effective ICC supervision of the international boundary. As reported in a separate telegram Couve de Murville stated that he had already made representations to this effect5 and the General indicated support for this move.

I in turn on behalf of the President congratulated General De Gaulle upon his re-election, assured him of the President's great respect for substantial achievements on behalf of the people of France and thanked him for his courtesy in receiving me as the President's representative on short notice.

The General then spoke at some length about Viet Nam. He said that the President's latest move could have a good and constructive effect upon world opinion and would strengthen the position of the United States in the eyes of nations troubled as to its intentions. In all candor, however, he added that he did not believe that the bombing pause would lead to an acceptance by Hanoi of President Johnson's offer for unconditional negotiations at Geneva or in any other forum. He said that in his view that only tenable solution for the Viet Nam problem was the withdrawal of US forces but he recognized how difficult this was since the honor and prestige of America as a great and powerful nation was involved by its commitments. Perhaps, he said, it is too late to consider whether these commitments should have been publicly extended but he recognized that they were there and that they were a substantial factor in the situation. Notwithstanding, he stressed that he thought withdrawal was the key to a solution of the problem and the only basis on which negotiations were possible. This, he added, did not mean that American troops had to be withdrawn immediately but he stressed that withdrawal had to be agreed upon in principle before the negotiations commenced if Hanoi was to be brought to the bargaining table. I intervened to point out that it has been our repeated policy that we desire no permanentpresence in Viet Nam and that the President and his advisors had made it clear that American troops could and would be withdrawn after the aggression from the north ceased and the south had an opportunity under free conditions to determine its own destiny. The principle of self determination did not preclude reunification, provided that the unification was determined by the people of South Viet Nam in a free and properly supervised [garble—election]. America, I added, however, would not withdraw its troops under pressure or force and leave South Viet Nam and its people to the tender mercies of the Communists.

This was not contemplated by the Geneva agreements and is not contemplated by our government. Without debating the point, the General went on to say that his view was that it was not detrimental to the interests of the free world, including the United States, if all of Viet Nam, Thailand and Laos were to have Asiatic Communist regimes. Asiatic Communism, in his view, would not be either Chinese or Soviet Communism but would follow its own patterns, and emergent nationalisms would control the future of these countries. Cambodia could and might remain neutralized although the same philosophy could be applied to Cambodia. The General, however, recognized that America was, despite his contrary views, firmly determined to support the independence and sovereignty of South Viet Nam. Of course, he said, the United States has the power to do this and perhaps after one or two years of demonstration of this power Hanoi might be willing to come to the conference table but he did not conceive that it would do so before then. Red China had no interest in any peaceful accommodation in that area of the world but he agreed that the Soviets and the Eastern bloc countries would be much more likely to encourage a detente with the U.S. Hanoi, however, would not now agree to any such detente and its lack of agreement would ultimately be supported not only by China but by the Soviet Union and the other bloc countries as well. I emphasized that one of the considerations leading to the pause was the repeated assertions of the bloc countries and even intimations from the Soviet Union that this would possibly lead to the conference table. General De Gaulle dismissed this as an assumption on their part not warranted by realistic understanding of Hanoi's determination to unite the country along its lines and to eliminate American influence in the area.

As requested in the Deptel,6 I did not invite any proposals from President De Gaulle as to our future course of action nor did I attempt to indicate what it would be if the bombing pause did not lead to negotiations.

The views expressed by General De Gaulle were on his own motion.

The General reiterated that he was extremely grateful that the President had sent him a private letter indicating our intentions and he was particularly pleased that the President had dispatched me to give him a more extended review of President Johnson's thinking in this grave matter.

He inquired about the President's health and I assured him that President was in the best of health and spirits. I extended on behalf of the President and Mrs. Johnson their best wishes for the New Year.

As the meeting concluded, I brought up the question of our cooperation at the UN, pointing out that this was increasingly necessary because of the voting strength of the Afro-Asian bloc. I praised the cooperative attitude of his representative, Ambassador Seydoux, and told General De Gaulle that the Ambassador had played a very cooperative role in the Kashmir debate and in other matters before the Security Council. I further said that the Ambassador and I had discussed the necessity for coordination of the four big powers activities in preparation for the next General Assembly. The General said in reply that he in turn was grateful for my cooperation at the UN and that indeed the future of the UN depended upon the cooperation of the five major powers including China. He obviously meant Communist China. I said that we were not finding Communist China cooperative in Viet Nam or anywhere else. We parted, however, on the more cordial note of his expression of greetings for the New Year to President and Mrs. Johnson.

McBride

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pinta. The source text does not indicate a time of transmission; the telegram was received at 3:15 p.m. and passed to the White House.

2 Ambassador Goldberg.

3 The text was transmitted in telegram 2899 to Paris, December 29. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 Dated December 30. (Ibid.)

5 The discussion between Couve de Murville and Goldberg, which lasted 50 minutes, was reported in telegram 3700 from Paris, December 31. (Ibid.)

6 See footnote 4 above.

Index Index

Abdul Razak, Tun, 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 272]

Abrams, Creighton W., 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145]-399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Acheson, Dean, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 7], 137n [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 55], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 194]

Acheson Plan, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 54], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 141], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 151], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 194]

Ackley, Gardiner, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 101]-289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103]

Adair, 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 181]

AFL-CIO, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25]

Africa, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76]

Afro-Asian Conference, Algiers (postponed), 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Agency for International Development (AID) (see also U.S. economic aid under Vietnam, Republic of): food aid to villagers, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119] FY 1967 estimated budget, 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

industrial development, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138]

infrastructure development, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 25], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

refugee programs, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25]

Aiken, George D., 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 635n [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Air strikes against DRV (see also Pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV; U.S. - RVN operations against DRV): approval of, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15]

assessment of, 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 100]-285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 100], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 184]-504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 231]

British position, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 41], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 100], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 159]

calls for ending of, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 160]-436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 160], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 162], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 168]-456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

China, People's Republic of, possible response, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 34], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 78], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 388n [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 141], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 142], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 148]-405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 148], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 148]-411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 189]

CIA position, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 34]

civilian casualties from, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 181]

continuation of, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 144]

decrease in, 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 245]

DRV, effect on: civilian morale, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 184]-503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 184], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 194], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 239]

economic situation, 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 239]-684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 239]

military targets, destruction of, 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 239]-685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 239]

DRV position, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133]-371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 133], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 148]-404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 148], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 148]-410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 148], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 239], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Hanoi as target, 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 78], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 81], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238]

harbors as targets, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 34]

Hungarian position, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 160]-436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 160]

increase in, 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 67], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 69], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 194], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 243]-697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 243]

industrial targets, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 69], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 239], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 239]

Japanese position, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 41], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 100], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 159]

JCS position, 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 206] “sharp blow” proposal, 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 189], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 194]-545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 194]

levelling off of, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 164]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 194]-546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 194], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 195], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 212]

military targets, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 69], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 76], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 104], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 239]

missile sites, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 34], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 43], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87]-245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 104], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 239]

RVN position, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 60], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 124], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 189]

Soviet reaction to, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 34], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 41], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 55], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 148]-406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 148], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 148]-411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

target selection, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 100]-284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 100], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 388n [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 141]

transportation targets, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 38], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 69], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 141], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 184]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 184], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 239]-683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 239], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 239]

U.S. policy, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 55], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 194]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 194], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 248], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 250]

Aka, Moise, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 114]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 114]

Albania, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 175]

Albert, Carl, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94]-265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 94]

Algeria, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 107] France, war with, 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 59], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 122], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 133]

U.S. contacts with representatives of Communist insurgency, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 109]-307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 226]

Algiers Conference, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30]

Alsop, Joseph, 458n [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

American Friends Service Committee (AFSC), 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 163], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 210]-591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

American Red Cross, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 182]-498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

American Southeast Asia Foundation, 382n [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 163]

Amnesty. See Chieu Hoi program.

Anh, Col., 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 187]

Arends, Leslie C., 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 94], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 226]

Arkas-Duntov, Urah, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 98]-277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 474n [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 177]

Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN). See Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces.

Arnett, Peter, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Asia, 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 89]

Australia (see also Australia and Australian subheadings under other subjects), 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182] bombing pauses, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

domestic opposition to U.S. Vietnam policy, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8]

military involvement in Vietnam, 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 67], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 94], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 212]-593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 212], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 222]

political settlement in Vietnam, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 40], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

Ayub Khan, Mohammed, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 192], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273]-750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273]

Bacon, Ruth, 353n [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Balaceanu, Petre, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 168]

Ball, George W., 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14], 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 123n [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 47], 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 189], 529n [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 597n [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 598n [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214] air strikes against DRV, 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 161], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 229]-641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 231]-646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 231] missile sites as targets, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 87]-243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 90], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

Communist insurgency: 1965 monsoon as test period, 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

terrorist attacks, 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 21]-51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 22]

U.S. contacts with 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 53], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 73], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 193], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 217], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

declaration of war, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

economic sitation in RVN, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25]-61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 25]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 206], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218] White House advisers meeting, July 21, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 71]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 71], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 72]-204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

White House advisers meeting, July 22, 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 208]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 215], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 216], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 229], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 235], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 235], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 235], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238]

personal impressions of, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 75]

political settlement in Vietnam, 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 271], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273]-751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278] international conference, proposed, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

U.N. Security Council initiatives on Vietnam, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

U.S. - DRV contacts, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 40]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 40], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 113], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 120], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 122], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 203], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 207]

Republican “White Paper,” 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: force levels, 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]-41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155]

legal basis of, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 24]

tear gas, use of, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155]

U.S. military loss, likelihood of, 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 40]

withdrawal of U.S. forces, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 24]-57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26]-66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 113n [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

U.S. policy on Vietnam, 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 231]

Bankson, Brig. Gen. Roger, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 117]

Bao Dai, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

Baschiru, Ion, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 168]

Bates, William, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226]

Beech, Keyes, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 230], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238]

Bell, Colin, 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

Ben Bella, Ahmed, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 99]

Bennett, Sgt. Harold G., 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]-48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22]-51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 22], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Berlin, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14]-39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 24], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 76], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 105], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 148], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238] blockade of, 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 160], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 237], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 243], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 250], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 258], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 269]

Big Minh. See Duong Van Minh, Gen.

Bion (France), 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 177], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 217]

Black, Eugene R., 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 29]-73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 51]

Blue Tree Reconnaissance, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 262]

Boggs, Hale, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94]-266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 94], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 94], 635n [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Bohlen, Charles E., 314n [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 113]

Bolivia, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83]

Bombing pauses. See Pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV.

Bowman, Richard C., 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 69], 257n [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

Bradley, Gen. Omar N., 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55]

Brandt, Willy, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 105]

Brazil, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240]

Brement, Marshall, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59]

Brezhnev, Leonid, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225]

Brown, Harold, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 76], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 76]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76]

Bruce, David K.E., 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4], 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Buddhists. See Religious groups in Vietnam.

Buffum, William, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 86]

Bui Diem, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]

Bui Tuong Huan, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2]

Bunche, Ralph J., 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Bundy, McGeorge, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 62n [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26], 77n [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 113n [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 147n [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59], 217n [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 247n [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 89], 257n [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 367n [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133], 382n [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 389n [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 147], 442n [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181], 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 187], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 189], 535n [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194], 614n [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 619n [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 622n [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 686n [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240], 728n [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 260] air strikes against DRV, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14]-38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 14], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 100]-284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 100], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 159]-430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 159], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 161], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 164], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 231], 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]-710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250] missile sites as targets, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 87]-244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 87], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

China, People's Republic of, position on Vietnam, 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]-559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Communist insurgency: morale of troops, 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

political victory by, 448n [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

small - scale actions by, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 151]

terrorist attacks, reponse to, 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 21]-51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 22]

U.S. contacts with, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 53], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 73], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 193], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 217], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

declaration of war, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

economic situation in RVN, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25]-61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 25]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218] cost of, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 74]-207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

foreign reaction to, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 97]

history of recommendations for, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

reserves call - up, 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

timing of decision for, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 74]

White House advisers meeting, July 21, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 71], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 71], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 72]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 72], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 72]-203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 72]

White House advisers meeting, July 22, 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78]

White House - Congressional leadership meeting, July 27, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

White House - JCS meeting, July 22, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 76], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 76]-217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

French and U.S. roles in Vietnam, similarity, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 33]

Goodpaster Study, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 69]

JCS recommendations for Vietnam war, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Lodge appointment as ambassador, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 49]-127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 49], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Morse memorandum, 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 18]-45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Nkrumah trip to Hanoi, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 107], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 178]-484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 192], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227] Christmas truce, 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 231]

ending of, 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 251]

length and timing for, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 235], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 235], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

pros and cons of, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 208]-584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 208], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214]-600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 215]

Soviet pressure on DRV during, 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 235]

political settlement in Vietnam, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]-364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 131] DRV position, 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 205]

international conference on Vietnam, proposed, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3]

negotiations for, 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273]-751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

peace initiatives, 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Prime Ministers' mission, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

U.S. position, 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

political situation in RVN, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 25]-60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25]

public information program, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105]

refugees, 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

Republican “White Paper", 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126]-344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Soviet - U.S. relations, 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 235]

U.N. role in Vietnam, Thant memorandum, 353n [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

U.N. Security Council initiatives on Vietnam, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 86], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 106]

U.S. - DRV secret contacts, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 53], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 115]

U.S. economic aid to Vietnam, 333n [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 121]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: force levels, 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 153], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 183]

legal basis for, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

63 - battalion plan, 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64]

tear gas, use of, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 150], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155]

Vietnamese public opinion on, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 48]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 35]-91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 35] Congressional reaction to, 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226]

discussion of draft proposals, 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

planning for, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 36], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 198]

State vs. Defense Department proposals, 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

Vietnam, Republic of: billion - dollar appropriation for, 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

Christmas truce, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 229]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 229]

internal security in, 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 25]

non - military programs in, 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 151], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 220]

provincial governments in, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 25]-59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 25]

Bundy, William P., 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 62n [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26], 123n [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 47], 153n [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 171n [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 247n [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 89], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123], 353n [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 383n [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 442n [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 492n [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182], 576n [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 581n [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 207], 721n [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 753n [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275] air strikes against DRV, 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 159]-430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 159], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 206]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 83], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

White House advisers meeting, July 21, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 71], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71]

JCS recommendations for Vietnam war, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Lodge appointment as ambassador, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 215], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 251], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

political settlement in Vietnam, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14]-38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 14], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68]

Republican “White Paper", 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Soviet - U.S. relations, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236]

U.N. Security Council initiatives on Vietnam, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

U.S. contacts with representatives of Communist insurgency, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 181]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98], 276n [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 98]

Vietnam Panel recommendations, 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Burma, 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]-722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258] U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam, consequences of, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 40], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 272]

Busby, Horace, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14], 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 197n [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93] air strikes against DRV, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]-209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76] White House advisers meeting, July 22, 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

White House - Congressional leadership meeting, July 27, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

U.N. Security Council initiatives on Vietnam, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 85]

Byroade, Henry A., 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]-740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 271]

Califano, Joseph, 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 220], 619n [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223] air strikes against missile sites in DRV, 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

force levels, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 153], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155], 594n [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 228]

public information program, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105]-295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 105], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 322n [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117]

United Nations, 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 236]

White House - Congressional leadership meeting on Vietnam, July 27, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94]

Cambodia (see also Cambodia and Cambodian subheadings under other subjects), 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 112], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 182], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238] Communist movement of supplies through, 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 130], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 199], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 271], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 278]

DRV, diplomatic support in U.N. for, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 175]

Geneva conference, proposed, 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 113], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 115], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 120], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 160], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

ICC role in, 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

Red Cross packages to Communists in the south, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

RVN, relations with, 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168]

Thailand, relations with, 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168]

U.S. military involvement in, 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 233] air strikes, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 225]

blockade, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 189]

surveillance of water traffic, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69]

U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam, consequences of, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76]

Canada, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81] bombing pauses, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 178], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

ICC role of, 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

opposition to U.S. Vietnam policy, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8]

political settlement in Vietnam, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 38], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 203], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 244], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

Cao Dai, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 534n [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 193]

CARE, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 163]

Caritas, 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 271]

Castelo Branco, Humberto, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 243]

Cater, S. Douglass, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14]-38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 14], 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 105]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105]

Catholic Relief Service, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 163]

Catholics. See Palmas, Archbishop; Paul VI, Pope; Religious groups in Vietnam.

Cease - fires. See Pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV; see under Political settlement in Vietnam; U.S. - RVN operations against DRV.

Celac, Sergiu, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 168]

Censorship, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 29], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 54], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 71n [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 166], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 170], 500n [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 184] DRV, intelligence collection in, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 71], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 72]

DRV strategy in RVN, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 38]-104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

training of counterinsurgency teams by, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 25], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 138], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 171], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 187]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 34]-89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 34]

Chancellor, John, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 105], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117]-323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 117]

Chase, Gordon, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 86]

Chau, Col., 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 187]

Chauvel, Jean Michel Henri, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Chemical weapons, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 69]

Ch'en Yi, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 158], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 160]

Cherne, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 163]

Chien Thang (pacification) plan (see also pacification program under Vietnam, Republic of), 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 144]

Chieu. See Pham Xuan Chieu [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6].

Chieu Hoi (amnesty) program, 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92] Geneva Convention, 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 182]

number of participants, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 230]

RVN position, 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 60], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 62], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 128], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 144]

U.S. position, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 29], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 37], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 38], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 141], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 143], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 151], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 176]

Chile, 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256]

China, People's Republic of (see also China, People's Republic of subheadings under other subjects): air strikes in DRV, effect on, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 100]-284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 100], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 194], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 235]

containment of, 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 189]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 189]

DRV, relations with, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 41], 690n [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 241]

exclusion from settlement in Vietnam, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam and, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 89]

French assessment of, 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 278]-760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Index]

India, attack on, 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 148], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225]

Indonesia, relations with, 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, effect on, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 237]

political settlement in Vietnam: position on, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 10], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 93], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94]-265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 94], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 269], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 270]

U.S. initiatives, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 38], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 244]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 244], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 271]

Southeast Asia, threat to, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Soviet Union, relations with, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 93], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 158], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 243], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 270] bombing pauses, effect on, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 107], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 208], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 216], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 241], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 255]

border disputes, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225]

U.S. actions in Vietnam, effect of, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 59]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 235]

United Kingdom, relations with, 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 87], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 119], 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

U.S. airmen held by, 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 119]

U.S. operations against DRV, response to, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]-559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

U.S. relations with, 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 120], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168]-456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 178] carrot - and - stick approach, 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

secret contacts, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 96], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Vietnam war, entry into, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 67], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 69], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 71], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 76], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 124], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 160], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 178], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]-559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197] conditions for, 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214], 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 244]

nuclear weapons use in the event of, 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Soviet position, 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]-261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 93]

U.S. counterattack, 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 199]-566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 199]

Yugoslav assessment of, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

China, Republic of: political settlement in Vietnam, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 71], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83], 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

Chou En - lai, 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 241], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Church, Frank F., 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 33], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Church World Service, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 163]

Churchill, Winston L.S., 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 94]

Cicognani, Cardinal, 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

Clausewitz, Karl Maria von, 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 103]-291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 104]

Cleveland, J. Harlan, 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 82], 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 203]

Clifford, Clark, 197n [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]-559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197] air strikes against missile sites in DRV, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 218] White House - JCS meeting, July 22, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 76], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 220], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 235], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 235]

State of the Union speech, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 235]-660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

U.N. Security Council initiatives on Vietnam, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 85], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 87]

Co. See Nguyen Huu Co [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 7].

Colby, William E., 274n [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 109]

Colonialism, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 33], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 211]

Commercial Import Program (CIP), 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 60]-156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 60]

Commonwealth of Nations, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 113], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 244], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247], 707n [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Communist insurgency (see also Expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam; Political settlement in Vietnam; U.S. military involvement in Vietnam; U.S. - RVN operations against DRV): assassination of village leaders by, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 171], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 194]

battles: Bien Hoa airfield, Nov., 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 100], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 250]

Binh Gia, Dec., 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 127]

Bu Dop, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 127]

Chu Lai, 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 124], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 125]

Dak Sut, Aug. 18,, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 127]

Danang, Aug. 4,, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 107]

Dien Bien Phu, May 1954, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 33], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 33]

Dong Xoai, June, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 60], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 125], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 127]

Duc Co, June - Aug., 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 125], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 127]-347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 127]

Ia Drang Valley, Nov. 14, 583n [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 208], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 212], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 222]

Kontum Province, June, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 32]

Phuoc Long, June, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1]

Pleiku, Jan., 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 83], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 87], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 100], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 250]

Plei Me, Oct., 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 196], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 208]-583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 208], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 230]

Qui Nhon, Feb. 10, 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 100]

Song Be, May, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 125], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 127]

capabilities and objectives of, 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 199]-568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

casualty levels, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 51], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 71], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 76], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 194]

case-file: Christmas truce, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 225]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 225], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 228], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 229]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 229], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 231], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 233]-650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 235], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 237], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 241], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 258], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 258], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 264], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

U.S. requirements for, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 135]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 194]

China, People's Republic of, military aid to, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 76]

coalition government, inclusion, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 194]

defeat of, possible, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 188], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 194]

defense of Central Plateau, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1]

deserters from, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 29], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 37], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 38], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 60], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 62], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 146], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 194], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 230]

disarmament of, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 176], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 189], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 244]

diversion of supplies by, 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 194]

DRV, relations with, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 59]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 59], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 215], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 255], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

espionage by, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 172]

expansion of U.S. commitment, effect on, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 125]-342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 125]

fading away of, 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 131]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 131], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 157], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 164]

force levels, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 33], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 189], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 194], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 199]-568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 212], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 222]

formation of government by, 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 72]

general strike, failure of, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 199]-565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 199]

Hate America campaign, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 199]

heavy weapons, use of, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1]

highlands as target of, 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 127]

logistics for, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 72]

medical supplies blockaded to, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 182]-495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

monsoon of 1965, 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 34], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 37], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 67], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 127]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 194]

morale of troops of, 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 67], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 148]-409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 148], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 194], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 194], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 230]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 178], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 178]-482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 178]

political strength of, 448n [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 166]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 166], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 172]

recognition of, 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 188], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 215], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 220], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 241]-689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 241], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 258]-725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 258], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 274], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Red Cross donations to, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 182]

removal to DRV of, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 176]-472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 176]

rice, theft of, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172]

rise in incidents by, 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 166], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 171]-460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 187]

RVN - U.S. differences on negotiations with, 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 250]

small - scale actions by, 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 144], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 146], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 151], 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 164]

Soviet assessment of, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 154]

Soviet military aid to, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 76]

territory controlled by, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 72]

terrorist attacks: Brinks Hotel bombing, 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 100], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 250]

Metropole Hotel bombing, 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]-615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 230]

My Canh restaurant bombing/Bennett execution, 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]-48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22]-51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 22], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

suicide satchel - charge attack, Oct. 27, 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 189], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 194]

transport, interference with, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 32], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 37], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 51]

U.N. sessions, participation in, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 86]

U.S. assessment of, 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 130]-359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 130], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 189]-517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 189]

U.S. contacts with, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 46], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 50], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 53], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 73], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 107], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 120], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 191], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 193], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 217]-604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 219], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 224], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 226], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 269], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 271]-746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 271], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277] French role in, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 107]

mechanisms for, 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]-307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 191]-532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

U.S. force level increases, 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 69], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 81]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 81], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 189]-516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 189]

U.S. prisoners, 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 156], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 167], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 182]

Congo, Republic of the (Brazzaville), 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 175]

Congress, U.S. (see also House of Representatives, U.S.; Senate, U.S.): Acts of: Appropriations Acts, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 94]

Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 33], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247]

Joint Resolution, 1961 (Berlin crisis), 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]-224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

P.L. 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 178], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 60], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 166], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

bombing pauses, 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 178], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 220], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 238], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 255], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 274]

Dodd Committee, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225]

expansion of U.S. commitment to Vietnam, 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223]

Javits resolution, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15]

President's message re force buildup, 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 72], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 74]

President's relationship with, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123]

prisoners of war, 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 173], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 182]

supplemental appropriations for Vietnam, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 33], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 67], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 72], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 93], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 222]

$25 billion approprations request for Vietnam, 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 269]

U.S. - RVN operations against DRV, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 90]

White House - Congressional leadership meeting, July 27, 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 94]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Cooper, Chester L., 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]-166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 197n [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72] anti - war demonstrations, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 161]

bombing pauses, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 107]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

government information program, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 117]

non - military programs in Vietnam, 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 73], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

political settlement in Vietnam, 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 152]

Red Cross role in Vietnam, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182]

refugees, 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

U.S. contacts with representatives of Communist insurgency, 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]-307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Cooper, John Sherman, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Council of Notables, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2]

Counterinsurgency operations (see also Communist insurgency; Psychological warfare; U.S. - RVN operations against DRV): Arrest and Detention Law, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 25]

bounties on Viet Cong leaders, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 25]

CIA training of local teams, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 25], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 138], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 171], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 187]

countersubversion, 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 25]

foraging teams, use of, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 72]

indicators of success or failure in, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 54]

informants, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 25]

non - military program, 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 73]

police forces, expansion of, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 138]

political requirements for, 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 103]

resettlement of villagers, 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 103]

U.S. troop committment for, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4]

Cousins, Norman, 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 231]

Couve de Murville, Maurice, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 99], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 278]

Cowles, John, 137n [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55]-141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

Coyne, Patrick, 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Cronin, Mons., 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 271]

Crop destruction, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

Cuba, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 76], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 79]-222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 79], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 175], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 243], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 269]

Czechoslavakia, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 173], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Dai Viet, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]

Davies, Harold, 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247], 707n [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Davis, Elmer, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105]

Davis, Richard H., 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 168]

Dean, Arthur, 137n [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 55]-140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 89]

Dean, David, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98], 276n [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 98]

Dean, Patrick, 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 299n [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 106]

Defense, U.S. Department of (see also Joint Chiefs of Staff), 71n [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29] budget for, 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 212], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 222]

prisoners of war, 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

troop deployment to Vietnam, deferral of, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 41], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 43]

Defoliation, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 178]

De Gaulle, Gen. Charles, 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172], 733n [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263] political settlement in Vietnam, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 40], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 131], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Index]

De Lattre de Tassigny Plan, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]

Denmark, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

DePuy, Brig. Gen. William E., 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 31], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 144], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181]-487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 181], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 181], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 183]

Devillers, Philippe, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 120], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 122]

Dewey, Thomas, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Diem. See Ngo Dinh Diem.

Diem government, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 60], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 210], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 211]

Dinh Trinh Chinh, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2]

Diplomatic peace initiatives. See Pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV; Political settlement in Vietnam.

Dirksen, Everett McK., 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 94]-268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 94], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 235], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Disarmament, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 107]

Do. See Tran Van Do .

Dobrynin, Anatoliy F., 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 154], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225]-630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226] pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 208], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 220], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 225]-628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 225], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234]-656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 234], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 238], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256]-721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 259], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 263], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

Dominican Republic, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 18], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 104], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155]

Domino theory, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]-41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 40]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 40], 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 55], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 79], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 226]

Dreyfus Fund, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]

Dudman, Richard, 663n [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 235]

Duong Van Duc, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 186]

Duong Van Minh, Gen., 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 128], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 186]

Eastern Europe, 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 244]

Economic situation in RVN (see also Rice): actions by Ky government, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 60]

agricultural production, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 67]

balance of payments, 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 60]

black market in U.S. dollars, 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 60]-157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 60], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 84], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 121]

distribution of commodities, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 51], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 67], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 143], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 189]

hoarding by merchants, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 32], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 37]-95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 37]

industrial development, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138]

inflation, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 67], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 84], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 166], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 172]-463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 187], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 230]

land reform, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 141], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

military buildup, effect of, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 189]-518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 189], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 189], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 194], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 194]

shipping, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172]

Ecuador, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Eighteen - Nation Disarmament Committee meetings, Geneva, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 107]

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 94]-267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 94], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126] bombing pauses, 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 229]

consultation with, 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 104]-293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 104], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

declaration of war, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Korean armistice, 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 35]

U.S. commitment to Vietnam, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 24], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 59], 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 93]

Ek, Lt. Paul, 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 144]

Elections (see also under Political situation in RVN): U.N. - supervised, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 89], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 91], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 98]

U.S. 1964 elections, 572n [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 203]

Erhard, Ludwig, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 40], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Ervin, Sam, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 226]

Ethiopia, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

Ethnic groups in Vietnam: Cambodians, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 39]

Chinese, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 39]

military coup, effect on, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2]

Montagnards, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 25], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 39], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 146]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 225], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 258]

Expansion of U.S. commitment to Vietnam (see also U.S. military involvement in Vietnam; U.S. policy in Vietnam): Americanization of the conflict, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 75]

Australian position, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Canadian position, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

China, People's Republic of, reaction, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 81]-229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 81]

cost of, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 74]-207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 76], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 208]

deferment of, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 194]-548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 194]

DRV reaction, 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 81]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 81], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 125]-342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 125]

education of the public on, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105]

Ghanaian position, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 97]

history of recommendations for, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Honolulu meeting, April 20, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 83]

non - Communist world reactions, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81]-231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]

Netherlands position, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Pakistani position, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Philippine position, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

public statement re, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 74], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 89]-253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 257n [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 97]

quiet reversal of, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 85]

recommendations for 1966, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 208], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 212], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 222]

recommendations for 1967, 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 212], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 222]

RVN position, 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 189]

Soviet reaction, 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 81]-231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]

support forces in Asian and Pacific areas, 366n [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S. economy, effect on, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 101]-289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103]

U.S. - RVN understandings for facilitation of, 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 84], 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 89], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 89], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

White House advisers meeting, July 21, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70]-204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

White House advisers meeting, July 22, 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78]

White House - Congressional leadership meeting, July 27, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

White House - JCS meeting, July 22, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Fanfani, Amintore, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 207], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 235], 663n [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 235], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 237], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 248], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263]

Federenko, Nikolai, 132n [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52]

Finland, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

Ford, Emmett B., Jr., 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 160]

Ford Foundation, 710n [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Ford, Gerald R., Jr., 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 94], 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 181], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 226], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 235]

Formosa Straits, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 89], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194]

Fortas, Abe, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 235], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 235]-665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 235]

Fowler, Henry H., 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 93]

France (see also France and French subheadings under other subjects), 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 182] Algerian war, 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 59], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 122], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 133]

diplomatic break with RVN, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 14]-39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Indochina war, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 33], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 33]-83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 33], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 75]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 178]

political settlement in Vietnam, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 40] French role in, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 96], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 113], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 133], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Goldberg - de Gaulle talks, 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Index]

U.S. initiatives, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 38], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 244], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83], 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

United States, relations with, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172]

U.S. military aid to, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7]

Frankel, Max, 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214]

Freeman, Orville, 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 231]

Freymond, Jacques, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 182]

Friends. See American Friends Service Committee.

Fulbright, J. William, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 33], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96] expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 96], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 223], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 231]

international conference on Vietnam, proposed, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273]-751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Galbraith, John Kenneth, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 79]-223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 85]

Geneva Accords, 1954, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 59], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78], 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 89], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 233], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 248] amnesty provision, 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 194]

China, People's Republic of, position, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99]

DRV position, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 98], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 113], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 205], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 210], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 211], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 225]

Indian position, 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103]

RVN position, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 91]

Thant memoranda, 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

U.S. position, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 120]-331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 120], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 129], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 133], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 194], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 225], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 234], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 241], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 271]

Yugoslav position, 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103]

Geneva Accords on Laos, 1962, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59]-148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 59], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 168]-456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 203], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 225], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 241], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247]

Geneva Conference on Korea and Indochina, 1954, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 33], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 129]

Geneva Conference on Peace in Southeast Asia, proposed, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 38] British position, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99]

Cambodian position, 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 271]

China, People's Republic of, position, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99]

DRV position, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 113], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 120]

French position, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99]

Soviet position, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52]

U.N. role in, 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99]

U.S. position, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52]-132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 55], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 115], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 244]

Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War, 1949, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 167], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]-466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 173], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182]-494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 182], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 182]-498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Geneva convention on warfare, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 117]

Geneva disarmament talks, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 107]

Germany, Federal Republic of, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 24], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 40], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263]

Ghana, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 113], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 178], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 243], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247]

Giap. See Vo Nyuyen Giap.

Gilpatric, Roswell L., 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Ginsburg, David, 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 213]

Goldberg, Arthur J., 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]-232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 82], 367n [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 572n [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203] air strikes against missile sites in DRV, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 87]-244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 90]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 89], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 89]

Johnson speech before U.N., 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 116]-321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 116], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 216]-602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 216], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256]

political settlement in Vietnam, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 143], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 192], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274] DRV proposal, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 207]

French - U.S. talks, 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Index]

talks with the Pope, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 262], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 271]-747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

tear gas use in Vietnam, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 150]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99] Thant memorandum, 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 119], 353n [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

U.N. Security Council initiatives on Vietnam, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 85], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 87]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 93], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 96], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 106], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 114]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 114], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236]

Goldwater, Barry M., 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 23], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 225], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 255]

Gomulka, Wladislaw, 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Gonard, Samuel, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 182]

Goodell, Charles E., 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126]

Goodpaster, Lt. Gen. Andrew A., 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70] air strikes against DRV, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 159]

declaration of war, 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Eisenhower, meetings with, 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 104]-293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 104], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 237]

study on Vietnam, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 69]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 69]

Goodwin, Richard, 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Gordon, Lincoln, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240]

Goure (Rand Corp.), 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 230]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 230]

Great Society, 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 231]

Greece, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 197], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 222], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 243], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 269]

Greene, Felix, 690n [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 241]

Greene, Gen. Wallace M., Jr., 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 76], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76]-215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 76]

Greenfield, James L., 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105]-295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 105], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 105]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117]-323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 117], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 492n [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182]

Gromyko, Andrei A., 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 22]-54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]-428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 158], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 160]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 160]

Gronouski, John A., 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 267], 739n [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 274], 756n [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Gruening, Ernest, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 33]

Guam, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 12]

Guatemala, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Guinea, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 175]

Gulf of Tonkin incident, 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 100], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247]

Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 33], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247]

Gullion, Edmund S., 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 113], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 115], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 120]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 122]-337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 122], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133]-371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 133], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 139], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Hammarskjold, Dag, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 83]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Hand, Lloyd, 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123]

Harlech, Lord. See Ormsby Gore, David.

Harriman, Marie, 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

Harriman, W. Averell, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123] air strikes against missile sites in DRV, 240n [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87]

diplomatic role for, 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223]-622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 228], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 234]-652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 234], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 235], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 220], 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]-721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

third - country troops, request for, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240]

U.N. Security Council initiatives on Vietnam, postponement of, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 85], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 99]

U.S. commitment in Vietnam, nature of, 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

U.S. - DRV contacts, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213]

visits: Europe, Dec. 1965 - Jan. 1966, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240], 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]-721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 263], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 267], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273]-754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

India, Jan. 1966, 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

Moscow, July 1965, 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59]-152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 59], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 99], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]

Yugoslavia, July 1965, 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Hebert, Edward, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 226]

Heller, Walter W., 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 213]

Helms, Richard N., 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14], 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 270] missile sites as targets in DRV, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

U.S. contacts with Communists in the south, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

White House advisers meeting, July 21, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Herfurt, Jack A., 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]

Herring, George C., 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 112], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 115], 328n [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 120], 371n [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 133]

Hertz, Burke, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 109]

Hertz, Gustav C., 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 109], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 177], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 182]

Hickenlooper, Bourke B., 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 94]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Hill, Lister, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226]

Hitch, Charlie, 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Ho Chi Minh, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 33], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 59], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59]-152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 59], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 71], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 76], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 103], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 120] Le Monde declaration, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 120]-331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 120], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 122]-337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 122]

political settlement in Vietnam, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 205]-578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 205], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 207], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 225], 690n [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 241], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 271]-745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 271], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

political support in the south, 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 110]

U.S. military aid to France, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7]

willingness to fight long war, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 94], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 131], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 176]

Hoa Hao, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2]

Hoang Quynh, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9]

Hoffman, Paul G., 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 55]-140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55]

Hop Tac program, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 54]

House of Representatives, U.S. (see also Congress, U.S.): Foreign Affairs Committee, 303n [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 110]

Republican Committee on Planning and Research, 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126]

Hughes, Thomas L., 556n [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 598n [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214], 601n [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 216], 754n [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

Humphrey, Hubert H., 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 94], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240] air strikes against missile sites in DRV, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 220], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 234]-652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 234], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 235]

U.S. commitment in Vietnam, nature of, 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Humphreys, Gen., 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240]

Hungary, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 225], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236], 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]-720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268] talks with the U.S., 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 160], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 241]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 251], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 258], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273]

Huong government, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 83], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 134]

Huynh Van Tam, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 109]

Hyland, William, 754n [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

ICRC. See Red Cross, International Committee of the.

Ignatius, Paul, 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

India (see also India and Indian subheadings under other subjects), 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76] pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 178]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 178], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

China, People's Republic of, attack, 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 148], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225]

Communist takeover of Vietnam, effect of, 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Congress Party, 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 243]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81]

ICC role of, 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Pakistan, conflict with, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 142], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 148], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 148], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 158], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

political settlement in Vietnam, 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 244], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

United States, relations with, 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 189]

Indochina. See Indochina war under France.

Indonesia, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 182], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 235] China, People's Republic of, relations with, 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168]

U.S. military role in Malaysia conflict, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 71]

political settlement in Vietnam, effect of, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 40]

Information program, U.S., 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117]-325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 213]

Inouye, Daniel, 635n [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). See Red Cross, International Committee of.

International conference on Vietnam, proposals, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 59] Prime Ministers' mission role in, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

International Control Commission (ICC), 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 173], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 194], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 211], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 267], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278] Cambodia, role in, 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 278]

Communist terrorist attacks, 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20]

Laos crisis, 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247]

International Rescue Committee, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25]

Iran, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Ireland, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

Italy, 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273]

Ivory Coast, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83]

Jackson, Henry, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226]

Jacobson, Col., 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 62]

Japan (see also Japan and Japanese subheadings under other subjects), 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 243] DRV, trade with, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 76]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 178], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

United States, relations with, 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 189]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 71], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236]

U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam, effect of, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 40], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76]

Javits, Jacob K., 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Javits Resolution, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15]

Johnson, Gen. Harold, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 76], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 76], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 83]

Johnson, Lyndon B., 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14], 62n [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 34], 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 125n [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 48], 147n [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59], 217n [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 104], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 382n [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138], 686n [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240], 707n [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 728n [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 260] air strikes against DRV, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 100], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 161]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 162], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 223] assessment of, 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 100], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 231]

military targets, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87]-244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

British - U.S. discussions, 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

cease - fires: Christmas truce, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 229], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 231]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 231], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

requirements for, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 135]

Communist insurgency: defeat of, possible, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 188]

1965 monsoon as test period, 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

small - scale actions by, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 151]

terrorist attacks by, 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 21], 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

troop morale, 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

U.S. contacts with, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 53], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 120], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

coup against Quat government, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5]

declaration of war, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

DRV attitude toward election of, 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 160]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 93]-263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 93], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 223] cost of, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 74]-207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

history of recommendations for, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83]-235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 83]

public statement for, 257n [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 97]

timing of decision for, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 74]

U.S. economy, effect on, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 101]

White House advisers meeting, July 21, 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 71]-195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 72]-202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 72], 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

White House advisers meeting, July 22, 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78]

White House - Congressional leadership meeting, July 27, 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

White House - JCS meeting, July 22, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

government information program, 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

Ky government, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Lodge appointment as ambassador, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 49]-127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 49], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70]

McNamara - Lodge mission, July:

Lodge's report, 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

McNamara's report, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70]

media position on policies of, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 33]

message re force buildup, 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 72], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 74]

Morse memorandum, 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 18]

Nkrumah trip to Hanoi, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]

non - military programs in Vietnam, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 220], 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 223]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 116], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 181], 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 622n [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 235], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266] announcement of, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 220]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 220], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 234], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238]

Christmas truce, 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 231]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 231] ending of, 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 251]-716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

extension of, 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

pros and cons of, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 208], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 208], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 215], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 235]

safeguards for U.S. interests during, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 237], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 237]

U.N. draft speech for explanation of, 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 235]-667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 235], 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

political settlement in Vietnam, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 53], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 115], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131] DRV statements on negotiations, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 152]

Harriman talks with European leaders, 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 263], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

international conference, proposals, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 59]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 113]

negotiations for, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 152], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 175], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 197], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 203], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 236], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 244], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247], 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]-721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 263]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 267], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 271]-747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Index]

political situation in Vietnam, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Republican “White Paper", 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126]

Southeast Asian economic development programs, 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

Soviet - U.S. relations, 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68]

talks on Vietnam, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 59], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]

speeches: State of the Union, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 235]-660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

U.N. anniversary, San Francisco, June 25, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 10]-33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 46n [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 87]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 236]

U.N. Security Council initiatives on Vietnam, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 85]-239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 86], 279n [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 106], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 114]

unification of Vietnam, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 98], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 129]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 129]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: force levels, 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 132], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 170]

legal basis for, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]-55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 24] planning for,

41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 189]

63 - battalion proposal, 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64]

tear gas, use of, 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 147], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 150], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194] British position, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 231]-645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 231]

Congressional reaction to, 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

discussion on draft proposals, 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

planning for, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 36], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 198]

State vs. Defense Department proposals, 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

U.S. public opinion on, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 71]

Vietnam, Republic of: appropriation requests for, 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

broad - based political party, establishment of, 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

intelligence collection in, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123]

internal security in, 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

refugees, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 143]

U.S. economic aid, 333n [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 121]

U.S. goals for 1966 in, 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Vietnam panel recommendations, 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

weekly Embassy reports to, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12]-35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 12], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 51]-130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65]-170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]-333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 121], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 143]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]-451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 166], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171]-460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 187]-510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 230]

Johnson, U. Alexis, 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 236n [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 529n [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 581n [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 207], 597n [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 598n [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214], 717n [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 721n [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257] air strikes against DRV, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 159]

Communist insurgency, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 22], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 50], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

DRV - U.S. secret contacts, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 50]

McNamara - Lodge mission, July, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 71], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 181], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 235], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 235], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 235]-669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 238], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 251]-716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

peace initiatives, 174n [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 67], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: force levels, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 113n [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

RVN military performance, effect on, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 49]

U.S. - RVN understandings on, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 88], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194]-554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) (see also Wheeler, Gen. Earle G.), 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181], 500n [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 184] air strikes against DRV, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145], 429n [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 159], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 223] escalation of, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 215]

military targets, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 43], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 142]

“sharp blow,” 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 189], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 194]-545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 194]

airfields in Vietnam, increase of, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28]

call - up of reserves, 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 222]-618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 222]

Christmas truce, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 229]

deployment of Marines to Danang, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 83]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 76]-217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 97], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 220]

force levels, 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 149]

memoranda: JCSM-643-65, 366n [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 132]

JCSM-652-65, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 130], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

JCSM-670-65, 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

JCSM-907-65, 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

military planning for Vietnam, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 144]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 213], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 220], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 228], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 231]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 231], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 235], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 237], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

Jordan, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83]

Jorden, William J., 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105]-295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 105], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 161]

Joy, C. Turner, 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 264]

Kashmir, 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Index]

Katzenbach, Nicholas deB., 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Keating, Kenneth B., 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 79]

Keldysh, Mstislav V., 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23]

Kennan, George F., 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23]-53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 23], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 248]

Kennedy, Edward M., 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 163]

Kennedy, John F., 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 90], 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 93], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 168], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194]-536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 194], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247]

Kennedy, Robert F., 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223]-622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 226]

Kennedy - Khruschev summit, Vienna, June 1961, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 90]

Kent, Sherman, 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 270]

Kenya, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 175], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 243]

Khang, Gen., 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]

Khanh. See Nguyen Khanh, Maj. Gen.

Khrushchev, Nikita S., 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 90], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 168], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247]

Killen, James S., 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 32]

Kissinger, Henry, 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Kistiakowsky, George S., 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 55]

Kleiman, Robert, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 181]

Kohler, Foy D., 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 22]-54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59], 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

Komer, Robert W., 619n [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226], 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Korea, Democratic Republic of, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 10]-30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 10], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 81]

Korea, Republic of: pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

broad - based political party in RVN, 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]-694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 243]

political settlement in Vietnam, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 40], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 71]-195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

Soviet military intervention in, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 76]

troops in Vietnam: base security role for, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1]

educational programs by, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 243]

force increases, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 31], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 67], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 69], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

U.S. position, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 94], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 212]-593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 212], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 222], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236]

Korean war, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 10], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 75], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 76], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 79], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 89], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 213], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 243], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 250], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 269] armistice talks, 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 237], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 250], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 258], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 264]

comparisons to Vietnam war, 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 101]-288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 101], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 105]-297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 105]

U.S. public opinion during, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 71]

Kosygin, Alexei N., 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30]-75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 231] Harriman talks, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59]-152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 59], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 99], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]

Soviet military budget reductions, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81]

Krock, Arthur, 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256]

Kuchel, Thomas H., 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 94], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Ky government (see also Political situation in RVN; Vietnam, Republic of), 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 14] assets and liabilities of, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9]-27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 186]-507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 186]

Cabinet changes, 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 156]

control of territory by, 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 212], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 222]

coup against Quat, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5]

DRV position, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 133]

inaction of, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 189], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 194], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

McNamara - Lodge mission, meeting with, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Papal appeal for peace, 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 271]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 235], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 237]

public opinion toward, 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]-448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

public relations activities of, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 37]-96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 37]

stability of, 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 60]-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 62], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 67], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 72]-202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 72], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 141], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 151], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 199] coup rumors, 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 134]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 134], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 166]-451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 166], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 186]

26 - point program, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 9], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 37], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 37], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 88]

U.S. initiatives for support of, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 38]-102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 38], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 194]-554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 250]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 35]-92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 36]

U.S. veto power over actions of, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 67], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 71]

withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 76]

Ky. See Ky government; Nguyen Cao Ky.

La Pira, Giorgio, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 207], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 271]

Labor movement, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 165], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172]

Lac, Col., 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 187]

Laird, Melvin R., 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 33], 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126]

Lake, W.A.K., 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

Lam Bao, 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Lansdale, Maj. Gen. Edward G., 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103]-290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 103], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 166] broad - based political party in RVN, establishment of, 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 243]

Congressional witness role for, 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

pacification program, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156]-426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 157], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 171], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 264]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 178]

Laos, 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 112], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 127], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247] Communist activity in: DRV forces, 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 160], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 189]-526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 189], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 235], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

DRV logistical support for, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 57], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 100], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 125], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 239]

increase of, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 81], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 148]

road - building, 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 199], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 222]

Communist control of, 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 278]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Geneva Accords, 1962, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59]-148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 59], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 168]-456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Geneva conference, proposed, 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 113], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 115], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 120], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 160]

Operation Barrel Roll, 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 178]

Operation Steel Tiger, 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 178]

political settlement in Vietnam, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

U.S. military actions in, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 69], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 233] air strikes, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 54], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 69], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 144], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 151], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 178], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 178], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 181], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 225], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 231], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 234], 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 245], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

anti - infiltration barrier proposal, 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 189]-527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 189]

ground forces, use of, 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 189], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194]-536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 194], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

reconnaissance flights, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 135]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Special Forces interdiction of Ho Chi Minh trail, 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 35], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 38], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 69]

U.S. policy in, 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 130], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 264]

withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam, 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26]

Larson, Arthur H., 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55]

Latin America, 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240]

Le Van Hoach, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 191], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 193], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Le Van Tien, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156]-425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 157]

Lebanon, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

Leddy, John, 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 168]

Leibman, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 105]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105]

LeMay, Gen. Curtis, 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 181], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223]

Lemnitzer, Gen. Lyman L., 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 76]

Lenin, V.I., 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 103]

Leonhart, William, 463n [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172]

Lewis, Anthony, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 14]

Li Thanh Nghi, 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 239]

Liechtenstein, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

Lippmann, Walter S., 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 166], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 231]

Lipscomb, Glenard, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226]

Lisle, Raymond E., 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 168]

Lodge, Henry Cabot (see also McNamara - Lodge Mission to Saigon, July), 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 231] air strikes against missile sites in DRV, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 90]

appointment as ambassador to RVN, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 36], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Christmas truce, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 229]

Communist insurgency: capabilities and objectives of, 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 199]

defeat of, possible, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 188], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 194]

defections from, 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 146], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 151]

DRV differences with, 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

political strength of, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 166]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 166]

slowdown in, 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 144]

Eisenhower, meeting with, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

expansion of U.S. commitment to RVN, 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 189], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 206], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 212] White House advisers meeting, July 21, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 71], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 71], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71]-198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 72], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 72], 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

White House - Congressional leadership meeting, July 27, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94]-266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 94]

French - U.S. relations, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172]

neutral Vietnam, prospect of, 179n [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

pauses in U.S. bombing of North Vietnam, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 107], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 162]-439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 178], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 181]-488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 181], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 181], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 220]-611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 220], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 234]-654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 234], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 718n [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 255] safeguards for U.S. interests during, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 237], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 237]-676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 237]

personal assessments of, 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

political settlement in Vietnam: concerns re, 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 131], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 264], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 269]

negotiations for, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 143]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]-473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 176], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 192], 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

peace initiatives, 174n [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 67], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70]

U.S. contacts with DRV, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 53], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 139]

U.S. contacts with representatives of Communist insurgency, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 53], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 193], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 217]-604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 219], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 224], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Republican “White Paper", 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 87], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 93], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 124]-340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 124], 353n [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 93], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 144]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 170]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 42], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 139]

Vietnam, Republic of: broad - based political party, establishment of, 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 243]

force level requirements, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 222]

military role in, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 243]

pacification programs in, 389n [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 144], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 151], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 172]

public opinion toward Ky government, 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]-448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

refugees, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 143]

stability of Ky government, 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 186]-507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 186]

Thi coup threat, 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 134]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 134]

weekly Embassy reports to the President, 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]-333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 121], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]-451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 166], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171]-460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 187]-510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 230]

Long, Russell B., 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 94]

Lovett, Robert, 137n [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55]

Macapagal, Diosdado, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234]

MacArthur, Gen. Douglas, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 76]-216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 76]

Magnuson, Warren, 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 226]

Mahon, George, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226]

Maissi, Elli, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98]

Mai Van Bo, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 40], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 47], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 177] meeting with Arkas-Duntov, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98]-277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

meetings with Quaker committee, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 210]-591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

“Rupert - X” (XYZ) talks, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 113], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 115], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 120]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 122]-337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 122], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133]-371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 133], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 139], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

U.S. negotiations with, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 243], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256], 722n [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]-730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273]

Malaya, 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 131], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 176]

Malaysia, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 40], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 71], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 114], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 272]

Mali, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 175]

Malita, Mircea, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 168]

Manac'h, Etienne, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 177]

Manfull, Melvin L., 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

Mann, Thomas, 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273]-751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

Mansfield, Mike, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 33], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 94]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95] cease - fire in Vietnam, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 135]

Metropole bombing, 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223]

negotiations, 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 175], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 181], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 235], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Mao Tse - tung, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 59], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 103], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 188], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 196]

Marcos, Ferdinand, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

Margaret, Princess, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273]

Marks, Ed, 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 163]

Marks, Leonard H., 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 197n [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 105], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 108]

Martin, Graham A., 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]-748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 272]

Martin, Paul, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 203]

Matseev (Izvestia correspondent), 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 181]

Maunoir (ICRC), 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 182]

McBride, Robert H., 328n [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 120]

McCloskey, Robert J., 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 22]

McCloy, John J., 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 89]

McConnell, Gen. John P., 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 76], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 76]-213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 76], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

McCormack, John W., 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 94], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 226], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 235]

McDonald, Adm. David L., 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 76]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 76]

McNamara, Robert S. (see also McNamara - Lodge mission to Saigon, July), 62n [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 34], 92n [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 36], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 320n [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 116], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 442n [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181], 500n [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 184], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 529n [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191] air strikes against DRV, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14]-38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 14], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 139], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 142], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 161], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 223], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 243] assessment of, 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 100]-284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 100], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 231]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 231]

China, People's Republic of, reaction, 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 235]

missile sites as targets, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87]-244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90], 257n [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141] C

Communist insurgency, 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145]

declaration of war, 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

economic situation in RVN, 157n [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 60], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]-616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 222]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 89], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 93]-262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 93], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 194], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 206], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]-595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 220], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 235] Congressional reaction to, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

cost of, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 74]-207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

history of recommendations for, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 83]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

troop increases, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 7], 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 42]-118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 60], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 132], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 149], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 153], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 170]

U.S. economy, effect on, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 101], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 101]

White House advisers meeting, July 21, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

White House advisers meeting, July 22, 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78]

White House - Congressional leadership meeting, July 27, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 94]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

White House - JCS meeting, July 22, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Fulbright's opinion of, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 96]

JCS recommendations for Vietnam, 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Laos, 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 189]-527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 189], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 235]

Lodge appointment as ambassador, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

non - military programs in Vietnam, 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 223]

odds of U.S victory, 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 235]

pacification programs in RVN, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]-616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 222]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 108] 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 189]-521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 189], 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 192], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 194], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 215]-601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 216], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 229], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 235]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 235], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243] length of, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 251]

pros and cons of, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 208]-584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 208], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 235]

Soviet pressure on DRV during, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 235]-663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 235]

political settlement in Vietnam, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 262] concerns re, 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 189]-520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 189]

DRV position, 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 205]

U.S. - DRV negotiations, 572n [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 203]

political situation in RVN, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]-616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 222]

Republican “White Paper", 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126]

security leaks, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145]-399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

third - country troops, request for, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240]

U.N. Security Council initiatives on Vietnam, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 85]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: call - up of reserves, 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 213]

casualty levels, 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 189]

force levels, 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 60], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 132], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 149]

planning for, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 189]-516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 189]

tear gas, use of, 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 147], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 150], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 35] British position, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 231]

Congressional reaction to, 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 226]

expanded military and political moves, 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]-104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

planning for, 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

State vs. Defense Department proposals, 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 208], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214]

U.S. - RVN operations against DRV: creation of barrier along 17th parallel, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 54]

DRV position, 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

force levels, 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 189]-525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 189], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 235]

Vietnam Panel recommendations, 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 55]

McNamara - Lodge mission to Saigon, July, 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]-165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63] Ky government, meeting with, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 88]

Lodge's report, 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

McNamara's report, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 73]

planning for, 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 49]-127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 49], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 54]-137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

return home of, 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65]-170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

McNaughton, John T., 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14], 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 62n [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 34], 97n [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 171n [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 274n [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98], 442n [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 492n [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 189], 535n [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194] air strikes against DRV, 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 159]-430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 159], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 164]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 83], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

JCS recommendations for Vietnam war, 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

State Department recommendations for Vietnam war, 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Meeker, Leonard C., 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 117], 492n [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 244]-702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

Meloy, Francis E., Jr., 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]-637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Mendel, Wolfe, 589n [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Mendes - France, Pierre, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 33]

Menzies, Robert G., 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240]

Mexico, 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 243], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

Michalowski, Jerzy, 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 267], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 274]-753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Military Assistance Command, U.S. (MACV): crop destruction report, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

Directive 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 189]-3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 387n [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 141]

force levels, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 38], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 149], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 189], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 194]

military planning for Vietnam, 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]-164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 62], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 144]-397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 144]

press interpreters, accreditation of, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 117]

Mitchell, Derek, 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Mohr, Charles, 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238]

Monaco, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

Monroney, Mike, 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 226]

Montagnards, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 39], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 225], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 258] grievances of, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 25], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 146]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146]

Moro, Aldo, 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

Morrison, Norman, 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

Morse, Wayne, 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]-33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 33], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52]

Moyers, Bill D., 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 87], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 420n [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155], 594n [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 619n [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223] air strikes against DRV, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 74]

force increases, 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155]

White House advisers meeting, July 22, 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 78]

White House - Congressional leadership meeting, July 27, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

government information program, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 117]-325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 213]

Nkrumah trip to Hanoi, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 111]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 229], 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273]

Republican “White Paper", 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126]

Murrow, Edward R., 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105]

Muskie, Edmund S., 635n [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Narasimhan, C.V., 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Nasser, Gamal Abdul, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 116], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273]

National Council of Churches, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 215]-601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 216]

National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam (NLF). See Communist insurgency.

National Leadership Council, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

National Liberation Front (NLF). See Communist insurgency.

National Security Council (NSC): meetings: 553d, July 27, 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]-263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 93]

554th, August 5, 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Navarre Plan, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]

Ne Win, 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 272]

Netherlands, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83]

Neutralization of Vietnam, 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 119], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 120]

New Zealand, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273] military involvement in Vietnam, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 94], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146]

nationals as casualties of Metropole bombing, 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

political settlement in Vietnam, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 40], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

Ngo Dinh Can, 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 134]

Ngo Dinh Diem (see also Diem government), 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 64n [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 33], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 113], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 120], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 127], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 133], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 225]

Nguyen Bao Tri, Gen., 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 165]

Nguyen Cao Ky (see also Ky government), 635n [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227] broad - based political party, establishment of, 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 243]-694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 243]

Cabinet post changes by, 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 156]

Catholic attitude toward, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9]

coup against Quat government, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2]

DRV, negotiations with, 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]-461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 172]

economic situation in Vietnam, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 37]-96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 37]

elections, 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 144]

force increases, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 29], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 60], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 67]

French - RVN relations, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15]

government stability, 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 60]-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 128]

inflation, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 172]-463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172]

local government, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

McNamara - Lodge mission, July, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]

military effectiveness, increase in, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 37]-94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 37]

Montagnards, 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 146]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146]

negotiations, unreadiness for, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

pacification program, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 144], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156]-427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 172]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 220], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 255]

prisoners of war, 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

rear - guard role for RVN troops, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 96]

refugees, 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 163]

resignation of, possible, 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 134]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 134]

revolutionary change, necessity for, 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 128]

RVN diplomatic representation, lack of, 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

RVN invasion of DRV, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 71], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 110]

selection as prime minister, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5]

Taylor's assessment of, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 32], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 110]

U.S. assessment of, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 9]-26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 9], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 62], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 72], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 186], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 186]

U.S. contacts with representatives of Communist insurgency, 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 193], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 219], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 224]

U.S. - RVN understandings on expansion of commitment, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 84], 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 89], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

visits: Malaysia, Oct. 1965, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 157]

Taipei, Bangkok, Aug. 1965, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 121]

withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]

Nguyen Chanh Thi, Gen., 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 134]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 134], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 156], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 165], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 186]

Nguyen Duc Thang, Gen., 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 165], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 187]

Nguyen Huu Co, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 62] coup threat in RVN, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 134]

force levels, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 29], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 31], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 60]

Ky government, criticism of, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 186]

military planning, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 144]

pacification program, 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 157], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 172]

RVN armed forces unity, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 172]

U.S. - RVN understandings on expansion of commitment, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Nguyen Khanh, Maj. Gen., 136n [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 54], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 60], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 128], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 134]-374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 134]

Nguyen Tat Ung, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 144], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 166], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 187]

Nguyen Van Chi, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98]

Nguyen Van Thieu, Gen., 635n [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227] Buddhist attitude toward, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 9], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

Catholic attitude toward, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Communist insurgency, political strength of, 448n [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 166]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 166]

coup against Quat government, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2]

elections, 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 84], 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

McNamara - Lodge mission, July, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]-154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 60]

negotiations, unreadiness for, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

political strength of, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12]

resignation of, possible, 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 134]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 134]

RVN force increases, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 37]

selection as head of state, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

U.S. assessment of, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 72], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 110]

U.S. force increases, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 60], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 67]

Nigeria, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30]

Ninth Congress of Romanian Communist Party, Bucharest, July 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 78]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78]

Nitze, Paul H., 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 76]-211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 76]

Nixon, Richard M., 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 139]

Nkrumah, Kwame, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 116] visit to Hanoi, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 107], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 111]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 111], 312n [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]

Norodom Sihanouk, Prince, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 120], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 271], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 278]

North Africa, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240]

North Atlantic Council Ministerial meeting, Paris, Dec. 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 231], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240]

North Atlantic Treaty, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 24]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 24], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 40], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 178], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 194]

Norway, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

Nuclear war, 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 35]

Nuclear weapons, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 69], 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168]

Nyerere, Julius, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172]-464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

O'Brien, Lawrence, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94]

Okinawa, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81]

Operation Arc Light, 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Operation Barrel Roll, 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 178]

Operation Rolling Thunder. See Air strikes against DRV.

Operation Steel Tiger, 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 178]

Oxford Committee for Famine Relief (OXFAM), 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

Pacification program. See under Vietnam, Republic of.

Pakistan, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 142] expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81]-231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]

India, conflict with, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 142], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 148], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 148], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 158], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

Palmas, Archbishop, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 25], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265] U.S. contacts with representatives of Communist insurgency, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 191]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 191], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 193], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 217]-604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 224], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 269], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 271]-746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 271], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Parisot, M., 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98]

Park Chung Hee, 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 243]-694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 243]

Pastore, John, 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 226]

Pathet Lao, 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 57], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 178] DRV logistical support of, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 57], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 100], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 125], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 239]

Paul VI, Pope, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 25], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 226], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 244], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 262], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 271]-747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Pauling, Linus, 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 225]

Pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV (see also Air strikes against DRV; Political settlement in Vietnam; U.S. - RVN operations against DRV): advantages of, 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 216]-602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 216], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 220]-613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 220]

announcement of, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 220]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 220]

Australian position, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 107]

British position, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 107]

conditions for, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 188], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 194], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 220]-614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

disadvantages of, 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

DRV position, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 122], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 178]-478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 178], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 178], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 189]-526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 189], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 267]

ending of, 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 178]-484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 237], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 251]-716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Goldberg proposals, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 107]-305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]

Hungarian position, 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 235], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 238]-679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238]

Indian position, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 107], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 112]

Japanese position, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 107]

June pause, 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]-22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

length and timing of, 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 215], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 220], 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]-710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 259]

notification of RVN officials, 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 234]-654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 234]

notification of Soviets, 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234]-656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 234]

planning for, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 220]-611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 220], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234]

Polish position, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 227]-637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 235], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 274]-753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

prerequisite to increased bombing, 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 189], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 194], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 215]

private messages regarding, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 116]

pros and cons of, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 208]-586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 208], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214]-600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 215]

Romanian position, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 227]-637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

RVN, effect on, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 227]

RVN position, 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 208], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 220]

RVN - U.S. coordination for, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 178]-479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 178]

safeguards for U.S. interests during, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

second pause, scenario for, 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 178]-484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 248]

Soviet position, 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 160], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 189], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 227]-637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

Soviet pressure on DRV during, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 235]-669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Thai position, 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]-748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 272]

types of, 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 189]-524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 189], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 194]

U.N. campaign for, 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 162]-439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

U.N. resolutions regarding, 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 178]

U.S. position, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 116]-321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 116], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 194]-550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 194], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 195], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 260]-729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

U.S. public posture for, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 234]-652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 234], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 234]

Yugoslav position, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 107]-302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 107], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 112], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

Peace initiatives. See Political settlement in Vietnam.

Pearson, Drew, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

Pearson, Lester, 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Penkovsky, Oleg, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225]

People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN). See under Vietnam, Democratic Republic of.

Peter, Janos, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 160]-436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 160], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 162], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 177], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 225]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 225], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 241]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 251], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 258], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 269]

Petrovsky (USSR), 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23]

Pham Ngoc Thao, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65]

Pham Van Dong, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 133], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 205]-578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 205] four - point proposal, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 47], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 98]-276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 98], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 113]-315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 113], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 120]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

Pham Van Lieu, Lt. Col., 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9]

Pham Xuan Chieu, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]

Phan Huy Quat (see also Quat government), 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 25], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 47], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 67], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 83], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 128]

Phan Khac Suu, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 9]

Phan Quang Dong, 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 134]

Philbin, Philip, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226]

Philippines, 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 131], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236] military involvement in Vietnam, 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 222]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

political settlement in Vietnam, consequences of, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40]

Plimpton, Francis T.P., 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 114]

Poland, 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 271] ICC role of, 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

political settlement in Vietnam, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 178], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 258], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 263]-733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

Political settlement in Vietnam (see also Geneva Conference on Peace in Southeast Asia, proposed; Pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV): cease - fire proposals, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4]-13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 12], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 188]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 188]

China, People's Republic of - DRV differences over, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 154], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 160]

DRV position, 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236]-672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Harriman talks with European leaders, 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]-730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 263]

Hungarian - U.S. talks, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 160], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 241]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 251], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 258], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273]

international conference, proposed, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 59]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 113]

international supervision in, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 194]

negotiations for, 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]-720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256] DRV four - point proposal, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 47], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 98]-276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 98], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 113]-316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 113], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 120]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 152], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 168], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 178], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 184], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 248], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 274]

French - U.S. talks, 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Index]

Mai Van Bo meeting with Arkas-Duntov, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98]-277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Mai Van Bo meetings with Quaker committee, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 210]-591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Papal peace appeal, 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 271]-745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 271]

participation of Communists in the south, 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 188]

risks from, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 143]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

“Rupert - X” meetings (see also U.S. - DRV contacts below), 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 113], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 120]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 122]-337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 122], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133]-371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 133]

RVN unreadiness for, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]-471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 176], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 270]

Soviet - U.S. talks, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30]-75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Stevenson Look interview on, 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 220]

suggestions for, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 244]-702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

unlikelihood of, 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

U.S. - DRV contacts (see also Mai Van Bo subheadings above; “Rupert - X” meetings above), 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 40]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 40], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 139], 572n [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 203]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 203], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 207], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 210]-589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 243], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256]-723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 258], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]-730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273]

U.S. contacts with representatives of Communist insurgency, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 46], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 50], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 53], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 73], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 107], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]-307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 120], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 193], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 217]-604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 219], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 224], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 226], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 269], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 271]-746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 271], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

U.S. deemphasis of, 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 151]

Polish role in, 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 258], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 263]-733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 267], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

postponement of peace initiatives, 174n [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 67]

RVN position, 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]-461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 172], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 175], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Soviet position, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 160], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 208]

Soviet role in, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68]

U.S. concerns re, 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 131], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 176]-472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 176], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 264], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 269]

U.S. fourteen points for, 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247]-707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

U.S. initiatives to Soviets, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 38]

U.S. initiatives to the United Nations, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 38]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 38]

U.S. position, 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

Political situation in RVN (see also Economic situation in RVN; Ky government; Quat government), 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 151] broad - based political party, establishment of, 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]-695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 243]

CIA efforts to eliminate friction, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 138]

Communist participation in government, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 194]

elections, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 59], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 250]-712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 250], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 264] Communist victory, possibility of, 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 110], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 156]-423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 156], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 197]-561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 258]

development of electoral processes, 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 144]

U.N. supervision of, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3]

U.S. withdrawal facilitated by, 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

expanded U.S. presence, effect of, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 38]-104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

government opposition groups, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9]-25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 9]

lack of effective government, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 7]

military role in, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 243]

Montagnard grievances, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 25], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 146]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146]

negotiations, unreadiness for, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]-471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 176]

provincial government, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 25]-59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 25], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 194]

student demonstrations, Sept., 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 134], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 134]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 134], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146]

taxation, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156]

Thi coup threat, 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 134]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 134]

village leadership, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 171]

youth and students, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 25]

Popper, David H., 353n [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Porter, William J., 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 156], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 199], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

Pote Sarasin, 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 272]

Potter, Phil, 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126]

Praphat748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 272]

President's Panel on Foreign Affairs, 137n [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Prime Ministers' mission: cease - fire in conjunction with, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 12]

China, People's Republic of, position, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

RVN position, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Soviet position, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 14]

U.S. position, 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Prisoners of war (see also Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War, 1949): exchange of, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 182], 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

of DRV, 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 162], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 167], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]-467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 182], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 182]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 182], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

of RVN, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 27], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 156], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 167], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 172], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182]-494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 182], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

of the Viet Cong, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 167], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 182]

Psychological warfare, 134n [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 54] crop destruction, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

DRV position, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 133]

expanded program of, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 73], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138]

Pye, Lucien, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 109]

Pyle, Ernie, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 105]

Quaison-Sackey, Alex, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 116]

Quakers. See American Friends Service Committee.

Quarles. See Ufford, Leopold Quarles van.

Quat. See Phan Huy Quat.

Quat government, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12]

Raborn, Adm. William F., Jr., 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14], 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 34], 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 224n [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93] air strikes against missile sites in DRV, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 87]-245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 90], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 42], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218] White House advisers meeting, July 21, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 71]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 71], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 72]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 72]

White House - Congressional leadership meeting, July 27, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94]

force levels, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 220]

tear gas, use of, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155]

U.S. - DRV contacts, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 139]

Racial issues, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 96], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 187], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 231]

Radvanyi, Janos, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 160], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 241]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 251], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 259], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 262]-732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 263]

Ramani, Radhakrishna, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 114]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 114]

Rand Corporation: Defoliation Study, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

Motivation and Morale Study, 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 54], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 230]

Rapacki, Adam, 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 267], 739n [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Read, Benjamin H., 692n [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 699n [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 244]

Red Cross, International Committee of the (ICRC), 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 117], 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 162], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 173], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182]-498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

Red Cross conference, Geneva, Oct. 1965, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155]

Reddy, Leo, 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Reed, John H., 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238]

Refugees, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 138]-382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138]

Reischauer, Edwin O., 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71]

Religious groups in Vietnam, 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 187] Buddhists, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 39], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 225], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 258], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276] by government attitude toward, 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 165], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 194]

military coup, effect on, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 154n [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 60]

political activities of, 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 134]

Catholics, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 39], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 225], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 258], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276] death of Col. Thao, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65]

Ky government attitude toward, 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 165], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 194]

military coup, effect on, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2]

National Consultative Council, formation of, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 25]

political influence of, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 33]

Southern regionalist, alliance with, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9]-25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 9]

Republican “White Paper", 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126]-344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF): air strikes, effect on morale of, 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 100]

Binh Dinh, withdrawals from, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1]

bombing pauses, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 237]

Convention of the Armed forces, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 143]-392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 143], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 156]

force levels, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 33]

landlords as officers of, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 128]

moratorium on new battalion formation, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

pacification efforts by, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 141]-388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 141], 389n [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181]

rear - guard role for, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 96]

unity of, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 172]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 172]

U.S. assessment of, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 67], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 71]

U.S. military role increase, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 34], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 49]

veterans benefits programs, 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171]

Resor, Stanley R., 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 76], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 76]-216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 76]

Reston, James, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 120], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 139], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256]

Reuther, Walter, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Revolution for a New Life, 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Rhodesia, 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 235], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240]

Rice, Edward E., 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]-559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Rice: Communist theft of, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172]

DRV harvests, decline in, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 184], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 239]

price of, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 166], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 187]

refugees and, 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 163]

shortages of, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 32], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 37]-95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 37], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 51], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 143], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156], 448n [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

Thailand, imports from, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 121], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156]

U.S. aid for purchase of reserve supplies, 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 60], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 67]-177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 67], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155]

Rifa'i, Abdul Monem, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 114]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 114]

Rio Treaty, 1947, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 24]

Rivers, Mendel, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226]

Rodhain, Mons., 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 271]

Rogers, Warren, 458n [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171]

ROK. See Korea, Republic of.

Rolling Thunder, Operation. See Air strikes against DRV.

Rolz - Bennett, Jose, 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Romania, 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 78]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 97], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 173], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 227]-637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Roroback, Sgt. Kenneth M., 423n [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 156]

Rostow, Walt W., 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]-698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 243]

Rowan, Carl, 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 72], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Rowen, Henry S., 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]-224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Rupert. See Mai Van Bo.

Rusk, Dean, 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 62n [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26], 92n [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 36], 147n [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59], 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 189], 535n [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 581n [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 207], 619n [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 692n [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 721n [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 754n [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275] air strikes against DRV, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14]-38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 14], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 133], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 133], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 139], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 195], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 231]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 231], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 243] calls for ending of, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 160]-436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 160], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 162], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 168]-456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

missile sites as targets, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87]-244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

selection of targets, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

cease - fire, 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 233]

Communist insurgency, 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

domino theory, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]-41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 74], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 89], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 89], 26 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]-262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 93], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 194], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 218] Congressional reaction to, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]

troop increases, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 7], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 153], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 170]

White House advisers meeting, July 21, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 71], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 71], 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 71], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 71], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 72]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 72], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 72], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 72]

White House advisers meeting, July 22, 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 78]

White House - Congressional Leadership meeting, July 27, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9]-265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 94], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 94]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Korean war, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 79]

McNamara - Lodge mission, 127n [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 49], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64]

odds of U.S. victory, 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 235]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 181], 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 192], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 194], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 195], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 215], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 216], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]-636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 227], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273] ending of, 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 251]-715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

length of, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 235], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]-722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

pros and cons of, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 208], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 208]

Soviet pressure on DRV during, 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 235]

personal impressions of, 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

political settlement in Vietnam, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68], 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256]-721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257] DRV position, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 210]

Harriman talks with European leaders, 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]-730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Hungarian - U.S. talks, 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 241]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

negotiations for, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 175], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 177], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 236]-672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 244], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 258], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 271], 755n [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Soviet - U.S. talks, 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]-428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 158], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 225]-630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

U.S. concerns re, 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 269]

President's State of the Union speech, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 235]-660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

prisoners of war, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 167], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182]

Stevenson Look interview on, 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

tear gas, use of, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 150]

third - country troops, request for, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240]

U.N. diplomatic moves on Vietnam, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 96], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 235] Thant memoranda, 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 119], 353n [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

U.N. Security Council initiatives on Vietnam, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 82], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 85], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 87], 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 96]

unification of Vietnam, 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 98]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 42]-118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198] British position, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 231]

Congressional reaction to, 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226]

State vs. Defense Department proposals, 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 208]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214]

Vietnam, Republic of: elections in, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133]

self - determination for, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 129]

U.S. commitment to, nature of, 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Vietnam Panel recommendations, 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 55]

visit to Europe, Dec. 1965, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 229], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 231]

Rusk, Howard, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138], 420n [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 161]

Russell, Richard, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223]

Salan Plan, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]

Saltonstall, Leverett, 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 226]

Saragat, Giuseppi, 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

Sato, Eisaku, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 71], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81]

Saudi Arabia, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236]

Schneider, Lewis, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 210]-591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

Schwartz, Abba, 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117], 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 162], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182]-498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Scott-Murga, Guillermo, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 114]

Seaborn, J. Blair, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 203]

Second Special Inter - American Conference, Rio de Janeiro, Nov. 1965, 532n [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 192]

Senate, U.S. (see also Congress, U.S.): Defense Subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee, 303n [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Foreign Relations Committee, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 93], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 110], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273]

Kennedy Subcommittee of the Judiciary Committee, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 163]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 237]

supplemental appropriation for Vietnam, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 94]

Severeid, Eric, 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 203], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 208], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 220], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 235]

Seydoux, Roger, 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Index]

Sharp, Adm. Ulysses S. Grant, 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 13], 41n [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 69n [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67] expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 83], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

force levels, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 149], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 222]

McNamara - Lodge mission, July, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 71]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 212], 594n [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 703n [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 245], 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 260]-729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 262]

Shastri, Lal Bahadur, 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 116], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 192], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

Shelepin, A.N., 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 262], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 270], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]-754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

Shriver, Sargent, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 218]

Sieverts, Frank A., 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117], 492n [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182]

Sihanouk, Prince. See Norodom Sihanouk.

Sikes, Robert, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226]

Sisco, Joseph J., 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 86], 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123], 353n [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 207], 601n [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 216]

Smathers, George A., 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94]-265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 94]

Smirnovsky, M.N., 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59]

Smith, Bromley, 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 97], 307n [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 114]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 114], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 153], 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]-615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]

Soglo, Gen. Christophe, 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 243]

South Asia, 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Southeast Asia: China, People's Republic of, threat to, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 130], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 130]-363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

economic development programs, 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247]

U.N. role in, 279n [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99]

U.S. forces stationed in, 366n [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S. policy toward, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 75]-209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247]

Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty and Protocol, Sept. 1954, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 24], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 24]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 24], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Southern Rhodesia, 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 235], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240]

Souvanna Phouma, 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 189]-527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 189]

Soviet Union: air strikes against DRV, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 41], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 100]-284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 100], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 181]

China, People's Republic of, relations with, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 93], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 148]-411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 158], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 243], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 270] bombing pauses, effect on, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 107], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 208], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 220], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 241], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 255]

border disputes, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225]

U.S. actions in Vietnam, effect of, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 59]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 235]

DRV participation in negotiations, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 94], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 233]

Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War, 1949, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 173]

ICC role in Cambodia, 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

Korean war, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 10]

military budget reductions, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81]

missile sites as U.S. bombing targets in DRV, 240n [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 87]-245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 87], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 90]-256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 107], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 178], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 178], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 208], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 220]. 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 220], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 225]-628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 225], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 237], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 238], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 241], 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 255], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 258]-727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 259]

political settlement in Vietnam, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30]-75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 38], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 160], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 208], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 244]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 244], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 271]

Red Cross in, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 182]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83] Thant memorandum, 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 119]

U.N. Security Council initiatives on Vietnam, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 87]

United States, relations with, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23]-54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 54], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 79], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 160], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 278] China, People's Republic of, actions, effect on, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 34]

consular convention, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 96]

DRV actions, effect on, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30]

Harriman-Kosygin talks, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59]-152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 59], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68]

U.S. controls on Soviet diplomats, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225]

U.S. secret contacts with, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 96]

Vietnam war, entry into, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 67], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 69], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 76], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 194], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 194]

Sparkman, John, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Special Committee of NATO Defense Ministers, 580n [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 206]

Special Intelligence Supplement SIS 1221-65, 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 239]-685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 239]

Special Memorandum No. 18-65, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

Special National Intelligence Estimates: SNIE 10-9-65, 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]

SNIE 10-11-65, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 142], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 148]-411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 159]

SNIE 10-12-65, 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 243]

SNIE 13-10-65, 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 148]

Splitt, Orville, 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117]

Springsteen, George S., 328n [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 120]

Squire, Christopher A., 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 241]

Stalin, Joseph, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59]-152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 59]

Stennis, John, 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Stevenson, Adlai E., 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 235] Korean war, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 75], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 79]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 99]

U.S. - DRV talks, 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 223]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223]

Stewart, Michael, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 106]

Stoessel, Walter J., Jr., 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23]

Strategic Air Command (SAC), 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 93]

Sturm, Paul, 316n [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 113], 328n [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 120], 371n [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 133], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 722n [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

Sudistes (southern regionalists), 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9]-26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 9], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 46], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 165], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 186]

Sukarno, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 107]

Sukhodrev, V.M., 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 59]

Sullivan, William, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 36], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70]

Suu. See Phan Khac Suu.

Sweden, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

Switzerland, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

Sylvester, Arthur, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117]-323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 117]

Symington, Stuart, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 226]

Szluka, Endre, 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 241]

Talbot, Phillips H., 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123]

Tam Chau, 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 165]

Tanzania, 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 243]

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D., 24n [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9], 52n [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 442n [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181] air strikes against DRV, 240n [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 164]

cease - fire requirements, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 135]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Communist insurgency, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5]-15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 32] bombing of bases of, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 12]

terrorist attacks, reponse to, 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]-49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 21], 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 22]

U.S. contacts with, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 50]

coup against Quat government, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5]

death threats against, 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 21]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 83]-235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 83] U.S. - RVN agreements for facilitation of, 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 84], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 88], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 89], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

government information program, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 117]

Ky government, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

Lodge appointment as ambassador, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 49]-127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 49]

McNamara - Lodge mission, July, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 71], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72] Ky government, talks with, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]

planning for, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 54]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 235], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238], 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]-710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 260]-729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

peace initiatives, 174n [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 67]

replacement as ambassador, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 36]

RVN military effectiveness, increase in, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 37]-94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 37]

U.S. - DRV contacts, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 50]

U.S. force increases, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 29], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 31]

Vietnam, Republic of: economic situation, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 37]-96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 37]

goals for 1966 in, 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]-713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 250]

weekly Embassy reports to the President, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12]-35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 12], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 51]-130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65]-170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Taylor, Jacquelyn, 33n [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Teach - ins, 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 100], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 105]

Tear gas, 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 147], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 150], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155]

Tet, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 237], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 237], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 238], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 244], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 248]

Thailand (see also Thailand and Thai subheadings under other subjects): Cambodia, relations with, 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Communist control of, 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 278]

Laos, military involvement in, 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 189]-527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 189]

military involvement in Vietnam, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 76], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 222], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

political settlement in Vietnam, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 40], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

U.S. military buildup in, 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 130], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

U.S. policy in, 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 130]

U.S. - Thai military coordination, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 69]

withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam, 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 71], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 76], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 76]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 272]

Thang, Gen., 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 31]-77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 60]-160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 60], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 172]

Thant, U, 46n [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20] pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 107], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 116], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 178]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 178], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 216], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 223], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234]

political settlement in Vietnam, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 262] direct appeal for Vietnam negotiations, 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 99], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 181], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 241]

Geneva Conference for, 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99]

U.S. initiatives, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 38], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 89]

U.N. Security Council actions on Vietnam, 130n [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52]-132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 87]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 114]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 114] British position, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 106]

U.S. - DRV contacts, 572n [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 203]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 203], 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 258]

Vietnam memorandum, Aug. 12, 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 119], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 124]-340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 124], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 131]

visits to Hanoi, 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 235], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247]

Thi. See Nguyen Chanh Thi.

Thien Mien, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 9]

Thieu. See Nguyen Van Thieu, Gen.

Tho, Gen., 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 177]

Thompson, Herbert, 589n [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

Thompson, Llewellyn E., Jr., 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14]-39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 42], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 154], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181], 598n [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214] air strikes against DRV, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 159], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 181]

military strategy, 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 215], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 225], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 238], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 251]-715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 259], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 263]

Vietnam Panel recommendations, 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 55]

Thomson, James C., 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Tito, Marshal Josef Broz, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 93], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 116], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 262]-732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 263], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275], 756n [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Toon, Malcolm, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23]

Tran Quang Thuan, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2]

Tran Quoc Buu, 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 165]

Tran Van Dang, 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20]

Tran Van Do, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 37], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 635n [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227] negotiations, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 88], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 89], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 166], 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 191], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 275]

U.S. contacts with representatives of Communist insurgency, 606n [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 219], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 224]

self - determination for RVN, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 129], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 156]

Tri Quang: Catholic attitude toward, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9]

Ky government, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 9], 154n [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 60], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]-333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 121], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 165]

military coups, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 134]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 134], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 186]

Truman, Harry S, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 10], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 79], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 213]

Truong Tai Ton, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]-157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 60]

Tubby, Roger W., 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Tunisia, 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 243]

Turkey, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240]

Ufford, Leopold Quarles van, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 114]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 114]

Unger, Leonard, 62n [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 123n [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 47], 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 247n [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 89], 442n [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 492n [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182] air strikes against DRV, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 159]

McNamara - Lodge mission, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]-166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 108], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 181]

U.S. - DRV contacts, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 210]-589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

White House advisers meeting, July 21, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71]-197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Ung. See Nguyen Tat Ung.

Unification of Vietnam: Communist insurgency position, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 98]

DRV position, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98]-276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 98], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 113], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 122], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 210]

RVN position, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 91], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 133]

U.S. position, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 47], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 89], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 120], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 131], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 194]-542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 194], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 241], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 278]

Unified Buddhist Association (UBA), 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 9], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 165]

United Kingdom (see also British subheadings under other subjects): China, People's Republic of, relations with, 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168], 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

DRV, trade with, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 76]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 81]

ICC role in Cambodia, 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

Malaysian - Indonesian confrontation, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 71], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

military involvement in Vietnam, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 75]-209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 231]-645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 231]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 178], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 234], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 235]

political settlement in Vietnam, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 38], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268]

Red Cross role in Vietnam, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]-496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 182]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83], 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

U.S. interests in DRV, representative for, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 173]

U.S. policy on Vietnam, 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55]

United Nations (see also United Nations and U.N. subheadings under other subjects; United Nations Charter; United Nations General Assembly; United Nations Security Council): Communist insurgency, inclusion in international talks, 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55]

diplomatic actions on Vietnam: Nationalist Chinese position, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 10]

DRV opposition to, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 10]

French position, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 10]

Morse memorandum, 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]-32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 10], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 18], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52]

Soviet position, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 10], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52]

Thant memorandum, 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 119]

U.S. initiatives, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 38]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 38]

U.S. position, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 89], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 141], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 151]

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 244]

international programs of, 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 236]

Papal visit to, 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 271], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 271]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 235]

U.N. peace force for Vietnam, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

Vietnam elections supervised by, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3]

United Nations Charter, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 10] Article 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 124], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 162]

Article 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 96]

Article 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 10]

Article 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 10]-30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 10], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 10]

Article 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 12], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 10]-32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 10]

Article 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 10]-32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 10]

Article 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 22], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 10], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 24]

Article 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 38], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 10]

United Nations General Assembly, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 152], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 175], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 203], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 225], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Index]

United Nations Security Council: Gulf of Tonkin incident, 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 247]

ICC role in Cambodia, 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

role of, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 10]-30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 10]

British position, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 106] DRV position, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 113]

French position, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 99]

Soviet position, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 99], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 106]

U.S. air attacks on DRV, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236]

U.S. initiatives on Vietnam, 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]-232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 82], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 87]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88] postponement of, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 85]-239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 86]

RVN position, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 91]

Uruguay, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83]

U.S. information program, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117]-325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 213]

U.S. Liaison Committee to the Vietnamese Agency for Pacification, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156]-426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 157]

Usachev (USSR), 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 177]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam (see also Expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam; Military Assistance Command, U.S. (MACV)): Afro - Asian bloc position, 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 55]-140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55]

assumption of dominant fighting role, 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 183]

billion - dollar appropriation proposal for, 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

burning of villages, 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117]-325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

casualty levels, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 67]-179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 71], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 71], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 76]-213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 76], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 181], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 189], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 194], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

China, People's Republic of, response to, possible, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 38]

command issues in joint RVN - U.S. operations, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 29]

crop destruction missions, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

deployment of Marines to Danang, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 83]

enclaves, holding of, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 79]-222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 79]

expansion of U.S. armed forces for, 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 67], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 67], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 67], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 72]

force levels in RVN, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 55], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 170], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 189]-525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 189], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 194]-547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 194], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 195]-556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196] Eisenhower recommendations for, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

RVN position, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 29] tactical air forces increase, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 69]

U.S. Embassy, Saigon, recommendations, 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 54]-136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 54]

U.S. mobilization for increase of, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

44-battalion plan, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 60], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 69], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

63-battalion plan, 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 64]

70, 000 troops, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 33]

75, 000 troops, 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 67]

85,000 troops, 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

100,000 troops, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 7], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 96]

175,000 troops, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 67], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 71], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 72], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 89]

200,000 troops, 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 35]-91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 35], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 60], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 139]-385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

210, 000 troops, 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 149], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 189]

275,000 troops, 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 76]

285, 000 troops, 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 132]

325,000 troops, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181]

400,000 troops, 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 212], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 222], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 235]

500,000 troops, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76]

Goodpaster study, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 69]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 69]

history of, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 83]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

increased U.S. combat role, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 13], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 38]-100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 38], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 51] China, People's Republic of, response to, possible, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 38]

DRV response to, possible, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 38]-104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

effect on ARVN, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 49]

MACV plan for, 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]-164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 62]

RVN position, 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]-164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 62]

Soviet response to, possible, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 38]

legal basis for sending forces to Vietnam, 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 24]

long - term conflict, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 71], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 71]

morale of U.S. forces, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 72]

national state of emergency, declaration of, 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

options for, possible, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]-21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

planning for, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]-41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 67]-176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 67], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 189]-516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 189]

prisoners of war, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 182]

racial issues, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 96], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 187], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 231]

Republican Party position, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 33], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 79]

Reserve and National Guard troops, call - up of, 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64], 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 64], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 67], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]-224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 263n [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 93], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 213]

RVN position, 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 67]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 67]

self - assessment of U.S. role in, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 75]

settlement v. outcome, 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 131], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 176]-472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 176], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 189]-520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 189]

tear gas, use of, 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 147], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 150]

third - country troops, requests for, 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 75], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 240]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240]

Thompson's paper on strategy, 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]

troop deployment, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 250]

21 - point program of small actions, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 83]

U.S. combat role restrictions, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 40]

U.S. military defeat, likelyhood of, 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 40]

U.S. numerical superiority, requirements for, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 93]

uses for additional troops, 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 144]-395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 144]

Vietnamese public opinion on, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 48]

Western European position, 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 71]

withdrawal of forces, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 24]-57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26]-66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 194], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 194] DRV position, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 98], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133]

world opinion regarding, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 76]-211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 76]

zonal bombing against Communist targets, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 12], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 54]

U.S. policy in Vietnam (see also Expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam; U.S. public opinion on Vietnam), 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 78] assurance of victory, assessment of, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 69]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 69]

British position, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 231]-645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 231]

CIA position, 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 34]-91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 35]

comparison of alternatives, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 181]

Congressional reaction to, 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

decision - making procedures, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 181]-492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182]

discussion of draft proposals, 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Johnson (U. Alexis) courses of action memoranum, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194]-554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Lodge vs. Goldberg split, 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 176], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 192], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 198]

1967 U.S. budget for, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 222], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 226], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 269]

planning of, 92 r, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 144]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 198]

Republican “White Paper” on, 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 126]-344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

security leaks, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145]-399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

State vs. Defense Department proposals, 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 208]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214]

Thompson's paper on strategy, 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]

victory and defeat, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 39], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 55], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 67], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 69]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 69], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 76]-217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

U.S. public opinion on Vietnam, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 38], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 59], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 71], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 255], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 264] anti - war demonstrations, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 161], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 225]-627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 225], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 225]

bombing pauses, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 181]-489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 181]

hardline opposition, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 33], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 107], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 215]

peace - oriented opposition, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 33]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 33], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 100], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 215]

U.S. image abroad, 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 100]

U.S. - RVN operations against DRV (see also Air strikes against DRV; Pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV): barrier along 17th parallel, creation of, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 54]

cease - fires: Christmas truce, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 225]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 225], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 228], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 229]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 229], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 231], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 233]-650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 235], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 237], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 241], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 258], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 258], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 264], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

U.S. requirements for, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 135]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 194]

economic losses from, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 184]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 184]

escalation, consequences of, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 69]

escalation of action in, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 13], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 69]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 69]

invasion of DRV, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 67], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 71], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 72]:

Metropole bombing, retaliation for, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]

mining of harbors, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 34], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 35], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 38]

propaganda leafletting, 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20]

Romanian position, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 168]-456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

shooting down of U.S. aircraft, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87]-241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 87]

Thai position, 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 100]

U.S. ground action, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 250]

U.S. reconnaissance flights, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 135]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 237]

Valenti, Jack, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 36], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64], 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 93], 263n [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 93], 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123] air strikes against DRV, missile sites as targets, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90]

DRV conditions for negotiation, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam: White House advisers meeting, July 21, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 197n [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

White House advisers meeting, July 22, 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

White House - Congressional leadership meeting, July 27, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94]

White House - JCS meeting, July 22, 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 235], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

U.N. Security Council initiatives, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 85]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 231]-645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 231]

Vance, Cyrus R., 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 14], 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 529n [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 535n [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 194], 597n [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 598n [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214], 717n [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255] air strikes against DRV, 389n [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

diplomatic moves on Vietnam, 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218] cost of, 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

White House advisers meeting, July 21, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

White House advisers meeting, July 22, 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

White House - JCS meeting, July 22, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

force increases, 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 215], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 229], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Vandenberg, Arthur S. , 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 105]

Vatican City, 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 269]

Vaughn, Jack H., 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123]

Velasquez, Carlos Maria, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 114]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 114]

Versace, Capt. Humbert R., 423n [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 156]

Viet Cong. See Communist insurgency.

Viet Minh, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 27], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 33], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 33]

Vietnam. See Neutralization of Vietnam; Unification of Vietnam.

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of (DRV) (see also Air strikes against DRV; Communist insurgency; Pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV; Political settlement in Vietnam; U.S. -RVN operations against DRV; DRV subheadings under other subjects): airdrop of U.S. pamphlets, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 97]

anti - U.S. propaganda, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7]

arrot - and - stick approach to, 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

China, People's Republic of, military aid to, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 81]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 81]

China, People's Republic of, relations with, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 41]

Chinese volunteers in, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 38], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 76], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 127], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 239]

Communist insurgency, relations with, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 59]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 59], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 215], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 255], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

economic situation, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 184]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 184]

execution of Americans by, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 177]

foreign trade with, limiting of, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 94]

four - point proposal, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 47], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 68], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 98]-276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 98], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 113]-315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 113], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 120]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 168]

infiltration of, effect of air strikes on, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 57]-145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 57]

intelligence collection in, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 71], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 72], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 76]

Japan, trade with, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 76]

Korea, Democratic People's Republic, military aid to, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 81]

land reform, 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 27]

military capabilities of, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 184]-504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

military involvement in RVN, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 89], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 124], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 133], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 237] cessation of, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 189], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 194], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 194], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 244]

force levels, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 72], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 81], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 212], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 222], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 230]

logistics for, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 100]-282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 100], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 222], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 239]

Nkrumah trip to Hanoi, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 107], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 111], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 116]

People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) force levels, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 33]

prisoners of war, 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 162], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 167], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]-467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 182], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 182]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 182], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

Quaker aid offer to, 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Red Cross donations to, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

RVN, relations with, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 54], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 143]

Southeast Asian economic development programs, 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247]

southern self - determination, call for, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 98]-276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 98]

Soviet military aid to, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 38], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 81]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 81], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 127], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 239]

Soviet volunteers in, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 76]

strategy in RVN, CIA estimate of, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 38]-104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

United Kingdom, trade with, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 76]

U.N. membership for, 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 99], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 119], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 176] Thant memorandum, 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

U.S. - Chinese air battles over, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 81], 229n [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 81]

U.S. contacts with, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 40]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 40], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 47]-124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 47], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 50], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 53], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98]-275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 98], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 107], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 210]-591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 213], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 243], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]-722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]-730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 273] “Rupert - X” (XYZ) talks, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 113], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 115], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 120]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 122]-337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 122], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 133]-371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 133], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 139], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

U.S. peace proposals, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 243]-698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 243]

withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam, 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26]

Vietnam, Republic of (see also Communist insurgency; Counterinsurgency operations; Economic situation in RVN; Expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam; Ky government; Political situation in RVN; Quat government; Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF); U.S. military involvement in Vietnam; U.S. - RVN operations against DRV; RVN subheadings under other subjects): U.S. economic aid, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56] agriculture, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 38], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138]

boat - building, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 38]-102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 38]

emergency action teams, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25]

food for villagers, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

industrial development, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138]

levels of, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 60]-156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 60]

low - cost housing, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 25]

medical facilities, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138]

port and harbor facilities, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25]-61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 25]

rural electrification, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 25]

RVN position, 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 60]-157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 60]

U.S. military aid (see also Military Assistance Command, Vietnam): airfield construction, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 54]

Military Assistance Program (MAP), 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 54]

police training, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Popular Forces, improvement of, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 25]-59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 25]

RVN position, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 60]-158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 60]

Cambodia, relations with, 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

civilian casualties in, 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 76], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 138]

civilian security needs, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 189]

Communist prisoners of war: execution of, 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 156]

repatriation of, 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

treatment of, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 27], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 167], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 172], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 182]-494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 182]

Constitutional Charter of June, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 134]

diplomatic representation abroad, lack of, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 37], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 62], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 105], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

DRV, relations with, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 54], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 67]

DRV military involvement in, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 89], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 124], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 133], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 237] cessation of, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 189], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 194], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 194], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 244]

force levels, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 72], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 81], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 212], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 222], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 230]

infiltation, increase in rate, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 71], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 127], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 127]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 127], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 148]-409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 148]

infiltration, effect of air strikes on, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 57]-145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 57]

logistics for, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 100]-282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 100], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 222], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 239]

France, relations with, 14n [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 14]-39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

French and U.S. roles, similarity of, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 33]

government contacts with Communist insurgency, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 54]

government information programs, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 25], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 105]-296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 105], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

intelligence collection in, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123]

internal security in, 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 25]

international assistance to, 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 244]-702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

international military observers in, 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 244]

labor movement, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 165], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

land reform, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 138], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 141], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

local government, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

local support for Communists, 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 40]

media in, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 29], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 37]-96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 37], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 105], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 117]-325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 143], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 187]

medical care in, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

military deserters, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 59], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 67], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 71]

military draft, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 67]

morale, civilian, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 37]-97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 100], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 194], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 194]

neutralist government, prospect for, 179n [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 194]

non - military programs: planning for, 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 73], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103]-290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 103], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 220]

status of, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 223]

pacification program, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 62] definition of pacification, 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 189]

planning for, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 60], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 104], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 144]-396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 144], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 187], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

RVN troops used for, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 141], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 181]

success of, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 188]

U.S. support of, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 67], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 141]-388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 141], 389n [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

U.S. troop participation in, 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 144]

village leadership, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 171]

weakness of, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 67]

police, activities of, 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 144]-395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 144]

Red Cross donations to, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 182]

Red Cross (RVN), 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 182]

refugee programs, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 143], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

rural reconstruction, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

self - determination for, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 129]

shipping, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 172]

taxation: customs duties, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156]

elimination of, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

transportation, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 32]

U.N. membership for, 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99]

U.N. role in Vietnam, 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

U.N. Security Council initiatives on, effect of, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 87]

U.S. commitment to, nature of, 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

U.S. goals for 1966 in, 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]-713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 250]

U.S. popularity in, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 187]

U.S. contacts with representatives of Communist insurgency, reaction to, 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 45]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 46]

U.S. veto power over RVN actions, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 67], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 71]

weekly Saigon Embassy reports to the President, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12]-35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 12], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 51]-130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65]-170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]-333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 121], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 146], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 156], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]-451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 166], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 171]-460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 187]-510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 230]

Vietnam Panel meeting, July 1965, 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

Vietnam Task force, 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Vietnamese Workers Confederation (CTV), 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 25]

Vo Nguyen Giap, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 94], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 103]

Vo Van Sung, 722n [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

Vu Huu Binh, 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 268], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 271]

Walker, Patrick Gordon, 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 247]

Walters, Gen., 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240]

Warnke, Paul C., 707n [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Watson, Marvin, 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 153]

Webb, James, 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 231]

Westmoreland, Gen. William C., 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 223], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 231], 728n [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 260] air strikes against DRV, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 76], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 141]

Christmas truce, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 229], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

Communist insurgency: capabilities and objectives of, 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 199]

force levels, 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 212]

small - scale actions by, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 166]

conflict escalation, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 13], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

counterinsurgency operations, U.S. troop commitment for, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 32]

DRV force levels, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 222]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 83], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 206], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 220] recommendations for 1966, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 208], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

uses for additional forces, 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 144]-396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 144], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 151]-415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 151]

McNamara - Lodge mission, July, 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 54], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 60], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 71], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

military planning, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 144]-397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 144]

pauses in bombing of DRV, 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 262] ending of, 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]-703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 245], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

safeguards for U.S. interests during, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 237]

U.S. combat role restrictions, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 40]

U.S. force requirements for Vietnam, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 38], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 93], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 104]-292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 104], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 222]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: combat role for U.S. troops, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 51]

force increases, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 29], 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 76], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 76], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 89], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 149]

tear gas, use of, 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 147], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 150], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 155]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 155]

Wheeler, Gen. Earle G., 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15], 97n [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 231], 728n [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 260] air strikes against DRV, 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 212] assessment of, 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

missile sites as targets, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 87]-244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 87], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 90], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 90], 257n [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

Christmas truce, 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

Communist terrorist attacks, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22]

expansion of U.S. commitment in Vietnam, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 13], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 83], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 94], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 212], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 213], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 218] force increases, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 7], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 149]

White House advisers meeting, July 21, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 71], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 71]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 71], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 72]-202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 72], 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

White House advisers meeting, July 22, 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

White House - Congressional Leadership meeting, July 27, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 94]

White House - JCS meeting, July 22, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 76]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 76], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 76]-217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

McNamara - Lodge mission, July, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 108], 594n [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 218], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 220], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 235], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 235], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 238], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 262]

personal impressions of, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 75]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 93], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 145]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 42] Goodpaster study, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 69]

Vietnam, Republic of, 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

White, Gilbert F., 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]-590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 211]

Whiting, Alan, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 98], 598n [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 214], 601n [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 216]

Wierna (Poland), 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 267]

Williams, G. Mennen, 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 123]

Wilson, Harold, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 168], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 206], 733n [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 263], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264] air strikes against DRV, 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 87]

pauses in U.S. bombing of DRV, 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 235], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 273], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Prime Ministers' mission, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 14], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

visit to Washington, Dec. 1965, 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 208], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 231]-645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 231], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 234]

Winiewicz, Josef, 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 267]

Wood, Duncan, 589n [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Wright, Oliver, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4]

X. See Gullion, Edmund S.

Y. See Sturm, Paul.

Yarmolinsky, Adam, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 70]

Yost, Charles W., 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 106], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 114], 572n [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 581n [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 207], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Yugoslavia, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 96], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 97], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 178], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 240], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 256]

Zinchuk, Alexander, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 236]

Zorthian, Barry, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 29], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 110]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 117], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 117]-325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

Zuckert, Eugene M., 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 76], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 76]
