The Institutes of Gaius (Gaius (James Muirhead, trans.), 1880)
==========================================================
Gaius' Institutes (c. 160 CE): the Roman law textbook that taught law for a millennium. Translated by James Muirhead. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/institutesofgaiu00gaiuuoft).

ionourablc  PUUam  |)roiiDfoot

fur

lltutmu  JlLniv

in

.     .  1888  -1300.

1

THE    INSTITUTES    OF    GAIUS

AND

RULES    OP    ULPIAK

PRINTED  BY  MORRISON  AND  GIBB
FOR

T.    &    T.    CLARK,    EDINBURGH.

LONDON,  .      .  STEVENS  AND  SONS.

STEVENS  AND  HAYNES.

j>

GLASGOW, J-  SMITH  AND  SON-

THE

INSTITUTES    OF    GAIUS

AND

RULES    OF    ULPIAK

THE  FORMER  FROM  STUDEMUND'S  APOGRAPH
OF  THE  VERONA  CODEX.

WITH

TRANSLATION  AND  NOTES,  CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY,
AND  COPIOUS  ALPHABETICAL  DIGEST.

BY

JAMES     MUIRHEAD,

PROFESSOR  OF  THE  CIVIL  LAW  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH.

EDIKBUEGH:

T.    &    T.    CLAEK,    LAW    BOOKSELLEKS.

1880.

PREFACE.

SOME  apology  may  be  thought  necessary  for  a  new  edition  of  the
Institutional  Commentaries  of  Gaius,  with  Translation  and  Xotes,
in  presence  of  the  two  excellent  ones  we  already  possess  from  the
pens  of  Mr.  Poste  and  Messrs.  Abdy  and  Walker.  It  is  that  neither
of  these  incorporates  the  results  of  Studemund's  revision  of  the
Verona  Codex.

I  began  this  book  with  no  other  intention  than  that  of  correct-
ing from  his  Apograph  my  own  copy  of  the  text  previously  in  use.
I  soon  found  that  the  margins  were  insufficient  to  contain  the
amendments  his  fac-simile  revealed,  and  that  every  here  and  there
an  interleaved  note  was  required.  Before  long  I  was  so  impressed
with  the  value  of  the  corrections  and  additions  that  it  became  a
matter  of  regret  to  me  that  they  were  not  accessible  to  students.
So  I  set  myself,  in  the  hours  I  could  spare  from  other  duties,  to
prepare  an  edition  for  college  use ;  and,  to  make  it  more  service-
able, I  eventually  resolved  to  add  to  it  a  translation  and  notes.

Had  the  recent  editions  of  Krueger,  Huschke,  and  Polenaar,
which  all  embody  Studemund's  amendments,  been  published
earlier,  my  task  probably  would  never  have  been  undertaken ;
they  are  the  work  of  much  more  competent  hands  than  mine,
directed  by  profound  knowledge  of  their  subject,  and  by  great
critical  and  paloeographical  experience.  But  that  of  Krueger,
edited  in  conjunction  with  Studemund  himself,  did  not  appear
until  the  end  of  1877  ;  Huschke's  appeared  last  year;  and  the  last
part  of  Polenaar's  only  in  the  beginning  of  the  present  one.  Their
successive  publication  has  contributed  to  the  delay  in  the  appear-
ance of  the  present  volume  ;  for  they  occasioned  three  revisions  of
my  text  after  its  completion,  that  I  might  have  the  opportunity  of
introducing  any  readings  of  theirs  that  seemed  to  me  preferable  to
my  own.  It  was  with  agreeable  surprise  I  found  how  little  those
I  had  adopted  varied  from  those  of  Krueger  and  Huschke ;  fre-
quently when  I  differed  from  them  I  accepted  their  interpretations

VI  PREFACE.

without  hesitation ;  sometimes,  notwithstanding  my  unbounded
respect  for  the  authority  of  two  such  masters,  I  have  unfortunately
felt  constrained  to  adhere  to  my  own  humble  opinion,  and  mention
its  divergence  in  the  footnotes.

To  affirm  that  the  Institutes  of  Gaius  are  worthy  of  being  sub-
mitted to  the  student  in  as  complete  and  perfect  a  form  as  it  is
possible  to  give  them,  is  happily  at  the  present  day  superfluous  ;
they  are  everywhere  regarded  and  studied  as  the  necessary  com-
plement of  those  of  Justinian.  In  the  one  we  have  the  outlines  of
the  nearly  completed  fabric  of  Roman  jurisprudence,  when  its  law
and  equity  had  almost  ceased  to  be  distinguishable ;  in  the  other
we  have  before  us  the  separate  fabrics  of  the  jus  civile  and  the  jus
honorarium,  and  can  see  the  portals  of  the  latter  opening  to  those
who  have  been  repulsed  from  the  former.  In  other  words,  we  can
trace  step  by  step  in  the  pages  of  Gaius  the  process  whereby  Koine's
natural  law  was  developed  alongside  her  civil  law,  and  the  way
prepared  for  that  matured  jurisprudence  which  the  compilations  of
Justinian  have  preserved.

In  the  short  Introduction  that  follows  will  be  found  all  that  it
seems  essential  for  the  student  to  know  of  Gaius  and  his  Institutes,
of  the  Verona  Codex  and  Studemuiid's  Apograph.  I  have  parti-
cularly to  request  his  attention  to  the  explanations  he  will  find
there  of  the  peculiarities  of  typography  it  has  been  considered
expedient  to  employ  in  the  text  and  translation.

To  the  Institutes  of  Gaius  I  have  appended  what  are  commonly
known  as  Ulpian's  Fragments, — a  portion,  and  unfortunately  all
we  possess,  of  an  abridgment  by  an  unknown  hand,  made  probably
in  the  early  part  of  the  fourth  century,  of  his  Book  of  Eules.  In
regard  to  them  and  their  author  I  have  also  said  a  few  words  in  the
Introduction.

To  both  I  have  added  a  copious  Alphabetical  Digest.  I  well
remember  the  difficulties  I  experienced  in  my  student-days  from,
the  want  of  such  a  conspectus  ;  and  I  cherish  the  hope  that  it  may
prove  of  service  to  some  who  are  only  commencing  their  study  of
the  law  of  Rome.  To  others  also  it  may  possibly  be  found  useful,
who  have  no  intention  of  devoting  themselves  to  jurisprudence,  yet
are  occasionally  puzzled  by  allusions  they  find  to  its  rules  and
institutions  in  the  pages  of  the  classical  writers.

Some  corrigenda  are  noted  on  p.  435.
EDINBURGH,  November,  1879.

INTRODUCTION.

I.— GAIUS.

1.  His  Period  and  Place  in  Jurisprudence.

2.  His  Institutes.

3.  The  Verona  Codex.

4.  Studemund's  Apograph.

5.  The  Present  Edition.

6.  Typographical  Explanations.

7.  The  Translation  and  Notes.

1.  Gains'  Period  and  Place  in  Jurisprudence. — Of  the  history
of  Gams  we  unfortunately  know  little  ;  for  though  he  was  G-aius
Noster,  as  Justinian  calls  him,  with  the  Byzantines  of  the  fifth
and  sixth  centuries, — '  the  Gaius  whom  we  all  know  so  well,'
— he  is  unmentioned  by  any  of  his  contemporaries  or  succes-
sors of  the  classical  period.  That  before  the  death  of  Hadrian
he  was  old  enough  to  take  note  of  passing  events  we  gather  from
an  observation  of  his  own  in  a  passage  from  his  pen  preserved  in
the  Digest;  and  internal  evidence  testifies  that  his  works  were
written  in  the  reigns  of  Antoninus  Pius  and  Verus  and  Marcus
Aurelius.  Whether  he  was  a  Boman  or  a  provincial  jurist  is  a
matter  of  controversy.  The  latter  view  is  espoused  by  Mommsen,
who  has  assigned  his  reasons  for  entertaining  it  in  an  elaborate
paper  in  the  Jahrluecher  des  gemeinen  dcutsclien  Eechts,  vol.  iii,  p.  1 ;
but  Huschke,  whose  opinion  on  any  question  of  Ante-Justinianian
law  or  its  history  must  always  be  received  with  the  utmost  respect,
seems  inclined  to  arrive  at  a  different  result.  Whether  or  not  he
possessed  the  jus  respondendi,  which  he  himself  describes  in  §  7  of
the  First  Book  of  his  Institutes,  is  also  disputed  :  some,  relying  on
the  fact  that  Justinian's  instructions  to  his  Digest  Commissioners
were  to  make  use  only  of  those  authors  who  had  the  imperial
licence,  and  that  Gaius  is  one  whom  they  utilised  to  a  large  extent,
maintain  the  affirmative ;  while  others  think  that  in  his  case,  and

vm  INTRODUCTION.

because  of  his  repute  in  the  schools,  those  instructions  were  dis-
regarded.

It  is  quite  certain  that  we  have  no  record  of  any  of  his  Eesponses  ;
and  there  is  good  reason  to  think  that  he  was  not  so  much  a  prac-
titioner as  a  teacher  and  a  literary  jurist.  He  himself  refers  in  his
Institutes  to  three  or  four  earlier  works :  one  on  the  writings  of  Q.
Mucius  Scaevola,  one  on  the  Edict,  one  on  Bonorum  Posscssio,  and
another  on  the  Eights  of  Patrons.  On  the  Edict,  both  urban  and
provincial,  he  wrote  voluminously ;  and  amongst  other  treatises  of
his  from  which  passages  are  preserved  in  the  Digest  the  more
important  are  his  Commentary  on  the  Twelve  Tables  and  his
Libri  Rerum  Cottidicniarum, — his  Aurca  or  Golden  Sayings,  as  they
came  to  be  called  at  a  later  period.  To  the  last  Justinian  speci-
ally refers  in  his  preface  to  his  Institutes.  From  the  remains  of
them  which  we  possess  it  is  impossible  to  judge  of  their  purpose  ;
they  are  written  more  carefully  and  elaborately  than  one  would
expect  to  be  the  case  with  daily  jottings,  as  some  regard  them,  and
rather  give  the  impression  of  being  materials  for  a  more  ambitious
work,  which  its  author  did  not  live  to  complete.

2.  His  Institutes. — The  Institutionum  Commentarii  Quattuor,  re-
produced in  the  following  pages,  seem  to  have  been  written  partly
in  the  reign  of  Antoninus  Pius,  partly  in  that  of  Marcus  Aurelius.
It  has  been  suggested  that  they  are  not  directly  the  work  of  Gaius,
but  rather  notes  of  his  lectures  made  by  an  auditor.  There  are  no
doubt  turns  of  expression  in  them  that  afford  grounds  for  such
a  surmise ;  but  taking  them  as  a  whole  they  do  not  convey  the
idea  of  the  record  of  a  spoken  discourse ;  they  are  much  more  of  the
nature  of  a  text,  requiring  exposition  and  illustration  by  a  speaker.
Had  they  not  been  a  genuine  work  of  Gaius'  they  could  hardly
have  enjoyed  the  reputation  which  caused  them  to  be  used  as  the
elementary  text-book  from  the  time  of  the  establishment  of  the
Constantinople  law-school  in  425  down  to  that  of  Justinian's  re-
forms in  533,  to  be  drawn  upon  so  largely  as  authoritative  state-
ments of  Eoman  law  in  the  Collatio  Legum  Romanarum  ct  Mosai-
carum  in  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century,  and  to  be  epitomised  by
Alaric's  commissioners  for  his  Lex  Eomanm  Visigothorum  in  506.

That  Justinian,  in  the  Institutes  that  bear  his  name,  had
borrowed  largely  from  the  earlier  ones  of  Gaius,  was  a  fact  well
known ;  but  it  was  not  until  the  Verona  MS.  was  deciphered  that

INTRODUCTION.  ix

the  extent  of  his  obligations  to  them  was  disclosed.  It  was  impos-
sible to  discover  it  from  the  West  Gothic  Epitome,  in  two  books,
of  the  matter  contained  in  the  first  three  of  the  genuine  Commen-
taries ;  and  comparison  of  the  Justinianian  Institutes  with  passages
in  the  Digest  that  bear  to  be  excerpted  from  those  of  Gains  showed
no  more  than  this, — that  in  several  places  the  later  work  was  a
literal  transcript  of  the  earlier.  But  now  we  know,  that  although
other  books  dating  from  the  Antoninian  period  were  brought  into
requisition  by  the  authors  of  the  Justinianian  compilation,  and  that
a  good  deal  of  new  matter  was  clumsily  introduced  to  adapt  it  to
the  existing  state  of  the  law,  not  only  was  Gains  taken  as  their
model  in  plan  and  construction,  but  his  text  was  really  made  the
basis  of  theirs.

3.  The  Verona  Codex.  —  In  1732,  and  again  in  1742,  Scipio
Maffei,  in  describing  some  of  the  manuscripts  in  the  Chapter
Library  at  Verona,  referred  to  and  printed  a  stray  leaf,  which  he
supposed  had  been  cut  either  out  of  a  copy  of  the  Pandects  or  out
of  some  compendium  of  Justinian's  Institutes,  and  of  which  the
greater  part  dealt  with  the  subject  of  interdicts.  Somehow  this
escaped  the  notice  of  the  jurists  until  1816,  when  Haubold  lighted
upon  it,  and  at  once  came  to  the  conclusion  it  was  a  leaf  from  the
long-lost  Gaius.  Almost  at  the  same  moment,  by  a  curious  coin-
cidence, Niebuhr  was  passing  through  Verona,  visited  the  library,
came  upon  the  same  leaf,  and  arrived  at  the  same  conclusion.  But
simultaneously  he  made  a  much  more  important  discovery;  for,  un-
derneath what  had  previously  passed  for  no  more  than  a  copy  of  the
Epistles  of  St.  Jerome,  he  detected  the  very  copy  of  the  Institutes
of  Gaius  from  which  the  leaf  in  question  had  been  extracted.

Niebuhr's  discovery  was  promptly  communicated  to  Savigny ;
and  in  the  following  year,  at  his  suggestion,  Goeschen  and  Bekker
were  deputed  by  the  Prussian  Academy  of  Sciences  to  proceed  to
Verona  to  make  a  transcript.  Bekker  having  soon  afterwards  been
prevented  by  other  duties  from  going  on  with  the  undertaking,
Bethmann-Hollweg  became  Goeschen's  associate.  Their  task  was
no  easy  one  ;  for  not  only  had  the  MS.  of  St.  Jerome  to  be  removed,
but  011  some  leaves  an  intermediate  writing ;  and  the  difficulty  of
reviving  the  original  characters  was  increased  by  the  fact  that  in
many  places  they  had  been  erased  with  pumice-stone,  and  the
parchment  thus  rendered  susceptible  of  serious  injury  from  the

x  INTRODUCTION.

tise  of  even  the  mildest  chemicals.  They  succeeded  so  far,  how-
ever, as  to  be  able  to  give  to  the  world  in  the  end  of  1820  the  first
edition  of  the  complete  Institutiones  or  Institutional  Commentaries
of  Gaius.

Two  years  later  Blume  was  in  Verona,  and  seized  the  oppor-
tunity to  revise  those  pages  of  the  MS.  that  had  yielded  Goeschen
his  least  fruitful  results.  It  appears  from  a  communication  of
Blume's  to  one  of  the  German  law  journals  in  1864,  that,  through
loss  in  transit  by  post  of  a  communication  to  Hugo,  the  world
never  got  the  full  benefit  of  his  readings.  This  is  the  more  to  be
deplored,  as  it  is  to  his  somewhat  reckless  use  of  chemicals,  far
more  powerful  than  those  Goeschen  had  ventiired  to  employ,  that
some  pages  of  the  MS.  have  been  reduced  to  a  condition  which
leaves  even  the  most  sanguine  little  ground  for  expectation  that
they  will  ever  be  deciphered.

4.  Studemund's  Apograph. — Although  Boecking,  in  1866,  pub-
lished what  he  called  an  Apograph  of  the  Verona  Codex,  yet  it  was
in  reality  produced  not  from  the  original,  but  from  the  copies  made
by  Goeschen,  Hollweg,  and  Blume,  preserved  in  the  Eoyal  Library
at  Berlin.  Leaving  out  of  account  as  of  little  value  what  was
done  by  Tedeschi  in  1856,  the  only  conscientious  revision  of  the
MS.  that  has  been  accomplished  since  Goeschen  and  Hollweg's  is
that  of  Studemund,  commissioned,  as  they  had  been,  by  the  Prus-
sian Academy.  He  began  his  labours  in  1866,  and  in  1867  and
1868  had  the  benefit  occasionally  of  the  advice  and  assistance  of
Mommsen  and  Krueger.  Interruptions  from  various  causes,  and
the  deplorable  condition  of  some  of  the  leaves,  made  the  revision  a
work  of  years  ;  but  when  completed  the  results  were  considered  so
valuable,  that  the  same  learned  body  at  whose  instigation  the  task
had  been  commenced  resolved  that  jurisprudence  should  have  the
benefit  of  them  in  a  reproduction  approaching  as  nearly  as  possible
to  a  fac-simile.  Types  truthfully  representing  the  letters  of  the  MS.,
with  its  abbreviations  and  other  marks,  were  cast  for  the  purpose
from  a  photographic  reproduction  of  one  of  the  sheets ;  and  the
Apographum  was  eventually  published  in  a  magnificent  quarto
volume  in  the  beginning  of  1874.

The  MS.,  it  must  be  admitted,  displays  many  imperfections.  It
seems  to  have  been  written,  as  the  best  judges  are  at  one  in  think-
ing, in  the  earlier  half  of  the  sixth  century,  and  probably,  as  the

INTRODUCTION.  xi

absence  of  the  Greek  quotations  suggests,  in  Italy.  Of  the  258
pages,  each  of  24  lines,  which  it  originally  embraced,  six,  i.e.  three
leaves,  have  disappeared,  viz.  those  between  pages  80  and  81,  126
and  127,  and  194  and  195,  as  now  numbered.  Of  those  that  re-
main there  are  but  two — those  on  the  leaf  published  by  Maffei —
that  are  not  palimpsest ;  and  of  those  of  them  that  have  been  three
times  written  on  very  little  is  decipherable.  Throughout  they
abound  in  contractions  and  conventional  abbreviations ;  of  these
one  cannot  well  complain,  for  they  are  in  accordance  with  the
practice  of  the  period.  But  the  execution  is  slovenly, — the  work
apparently  of  a  scribe  more  than  usually  careless,  who  seems  to  have
frequently  fallen  half  asleep  over  his  task,  here  omitting  not  words
merely  but  lines  or  even  sentences,  there  repeating  them  not  once
only  but  sometimes  twice.  He  has  often  incorporated  in  his  text
what  in  that  he  was  reproducing  were  merely  marginal  or  inter-
linear glosses,  due  not  to  Gaius  but  an  annotator ;  and  his  own
transcript  has  here  and  there  been  subjected  to  correction,  or  what
was  intended  as  such,  by  a  later  hand.

Studemund  has  most  properly  refrained  from  any  attempt  to
remedy  those  defects,  and  as  far  as  possible  reproduced  the  text  of
the  MS.  exactly  as  it  stands.  But  he  carefully  distinguishes  those
parts  of  it  whose  reading  is  so  clear  as  to  be  past  question,  and
those  which  he  believes  he  has  accurately  deciphered  but  in  which
he  may  be  mistaken  ;  the  former  he  reproduces  in  dark  characters,
the  latter  in  faint  ones.  Where  letters  can  be  counted,  yet  not
deciphered,  they  are  indicated  by  asterisks ;  where  no  more  can  be

said  than  that  writing  had  once  existed,  a  line or  lines  are

introduced  to  represent  the  illegible  text ;  while  here  and  there,
following  the  MS.,  a  space  of  a  line  or  two  is  left  entirely  blank,
indicating  the  transition  from  one  subject  to  another.  There  are
no  numerals  to  indicate  paragraphs ;  these  were  the  device  of
Goeschen,  and  are  occasionally  found  to  be  inconvenient  as  our
knowledge  of  the  text  is  increased.

5.  The  Present  Edition.  -  -  The  method  of  treatment  that  was
alone  legitimate  in  the  reproduction  of  the  Codex  would  be  very
inappropriate  in  an  edition  designed  for  the  use  of  students  and
intended  to  represent  the  text  of  Gaius  as  completely  as  can  be
done  with  confidence.  The  blanks  in  the  MS.  must  be  filled  wher-
ever that  can  be  done  from  other  reliable  sources,  such  as  the

xii  INTRODUCTION.

Collatio  and  the  Digest  and  Institutes  of  Justinian;  contractions
and  conventional  signs  must  be  interpreted  and  rendered  in  the
words  they  seem  to  have  been  intended  to  represent ;  obvious
clerical  errors  must  be  corrected;  and  manifest  glosses,  though
they  ought  rarely  to  be  deleted,  should  yet  be  carefully  indicated.
The  editors  and  critics  of  the  half  century  before  1874,  operating
on  material  less  perfect  than  that  which,  thanks  to  Studemund,
we  now  possess,  have  made  this  in  many  parts  of  the  text  com-
paratively easy;  and  not  without  considerable  diffidence  and
hesitation  can  one  venture  anywhere  to  call  in  question  the  con-
clusions of  such  masters  as  Goeschen  and  Boecking,  Huschke  and
Krueger,  unless  there  be  something  revealed  by  the  Apograph  that
throws  a  doubt  on  their  accuracy.  There  are  some  passages,  how-
ever, in  which  I  have  ventured  to  differ  from  them,  alike  in
interpreting  contractions,  correcting  clerical  errors,  and  noting
explanatory  glosses.  Illustrations  of  what  seem  to  me  legitimate
amendments  in  each  of  those  varieties  of  editorial  duty  will  be
found  in  II,  §  112,  II,  §  118,  and  IV,  §  16  respectively;  and  others
will  hardly  fail  to  catch  the  eye  of  the  careful  reader.

6.  Typographical  Explanations. — Impressed  with  the  importance
of  keeping  the  text  as  pure  as  possible,  and  of  guarding  against
any  suggestion  of  the  absolute  certainty  of  a  reading  which  there
is  any  room  to  question,  I  have  had  recourse  to  varieties  of  type,
and  to  braces  [  ]  and  marks  of  parenthesis  ( ) ;  and  to  the  following
explanations  of  them  I  ask  the  reader's  particular  attention  : —

(1.)  As  much  of  the  text  as,  according  to  the  testimony  of  the  Apograph,
may  be  regarded  as  absolutely  certain,  is  printed  in  ordinary  roman  type.

(2.)  Trifling  errors,  omissions,  and  surplusages  in  the  MS.,  if  obviously
clerical,  are  corrected,  supplied,  and  deleted  as  of  course,  and  without
indication  of  them  by  peculiarity  of  type  or  otherwise.

(3.)  What  appear  to  be  glosses,  and  not  part  of  the  original,  are  put
within  braces  [  ],  but  without  peculiarity  of  type.

(4.)  What  to  Studemund  is  the  apparent  reading,  but  not  absolutely
certain,  is  printed  in  italics;  but  if  verified  from  other  sources  it  is  in
roman  type.

(5.)  What  is  illegible  in  the  MS.,  but  either  obvious  from  the  context
or  supplied  from  other  reliable  sources,  is  in  italics,  within  marks  of
parenthesis  (  ).

(G.)  What  there  is  no  trace  of  in  the  MS.,  but  is  required  to  complete
the  sense,  and  is  either  supplied  from  other  reliable  sources  or  manifestly
justified  by  the  context,  is  in  italics,  within  braces  [  ].

INTRODUCTION.  xiii

(7.)  Passages  that  are  illegible  in  the  MS.,  and  pages  that  have  disap-
peared, if  incapable  of  being  supplied  without  drawing  purely  on  con-
jecture, are  indicated  by  dashes,  thus ;  where  there  is  material

for  it,  the  reconstructions  that  have  been  proposed  are  referred  to  in  the
footnotes.

7.  The  Translation  and  Notes. — In  the  translation  I  have  aimed
at  accuracy  rather  than  grace.  I  have  abstained,  as  far  as  practic-
able, from  the  use  of  modern  technical  Mrords ;  where  they  are
unavoidable,  and  those  of  Scots  and  English  law  are  different,  I
have  naturally  given  the  preference  to  the  former ;  they  have  the
advantage  in  most  cases  of  coming  nearer  the  Roman  ones.  The
following  are  explanations  of  the  peculiarities  of  type  that  occur
in  it : —

(1.)  Words  that  are  interpolated  to  elucidate  the  meaning  are  put
within  braces,  thus  [  ],  but  printed  in  rornan  type.

(2.)  Passages  that  are  illegible,  or  only  partially  legible  in  the  text,  but
as  to  whose  meaning  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt,  are  printed  simply
in  italics.

(3.)  What  is  supplied  conjecturally  as  representing  the  probable
general  import  of  an  illegible  or  imperfect  passage  is  put  in  italics  within
braces  [  ].

In  the  notes  there  is  reference  throughout  to  the  corresponding
passages,  if  any,  in  the  Institutes  of  Justinian  ;  and  the  rubrics  of
his  titles  are  printed  in  capital  letters  in  their  proper  places.
The  words  '  tit.  I.  afd.,'  which  are  of  constant  recurrence,  mean  the
last  preceding  title  of  the  Institutes  whose  rubric  is  so  printed.
In  dates  of  enactments,  etc.,  where  a  double  number  is  given,  the
first  refers  to  the  year  of  Eome,  the  second  to  that  before  or  after
Christ,  as  the  case  may  be.  The  authorities  referred  to  by  abbrevia-
tions are  tabulated  immediately  after  the  Introduction.

II.  ULPIAN.

8.  His  Place  in  Jurisprudence.

9.  His  'Book  of  Rules.'
10.  The  Present  Edition.

8.  His  Place    in  Jurisprudence.  —  Domitius   Ulpianus   was    a
Phoenician,  born  probably  about  the  year  170.     While  officiating

INTRODUCTION.

as  an  assessor  to  one  of  the  praetors  in  Rome,  be  attracted  the
notice  of  Papinian,  then  praetorian  prefect  under  Septimius  Severus,
and  was  by  him  promoted  to  his  council.  He  is  not  said  to  have
held  office  or  taken  any  active  part  in  public  life  under  Caracalla ;
his  greater  works  were  written  in  the  reign  of  that  emperor,  from
which  we  may  infer  that  he  was  holding  aloof  from  politics,  and
devoting  himself  to  jurisprudential  literature.  Although  one  of  the
historians  speaks  of  him  as  praetorian  prefect  under  Heliogabalus,
this  is  hardly  credible ;  for  it  was  his  efforts,  when  acting  as  the
adviser  of  Alexander,  to  undo  the  mischievous  policy  of  that  prince,
that  brought  upon  him  the  enmity  of  the  praetorian  guard  and
induced  his  assassination.

The  relations  of  Ulpian  with  Alexander  Severus,  and  latterly
with  his  mother  Mammaea,  were  of  the  most  friendly  and  confi-
dential character.  It  has  been  frequently  charged  to  his  memory
that  he  encouraged  the  persecution  of  the  Christians;  but  the
accusation  rests  on  the  most  slender  basis,  and  is  contradicted  by
the  whole  life  and  conduct  of  the  young  prince  whose  guardian  he
was,  and  whose  character  he  had  a  large  part  in  forming.  The
general  testimony  of  history  affirms  not  merely  his  wisdom  but
his  humanity ;  and  supports  the  verdict  of  Lampridius  that,  if  the
reign  of  Alexander  wTas  a  beneficent  one,  it  was  chiefly  because
he  was  guided  by  the  advice  of  Ulpian,  —  quiet,  Ulpiani  consiliis
praecipue  rempublicam  rexit.

The  greatest  of  Ulpian's  literary  works  are  his  commentary  on
the  jus  civile,  under  the  title  of  Ad  Sabinum  libri  LI,  and  his
commentary  on  the  edict  under  the  title  of  Ad  Edictum  libri
LXXXIII.  In  addition  to  these  there  is  a  commentary  on  the
Julian  and  Papia-Poppaean  law  in  twenty  books,  one  on  the  office
of  the  proconsul  in  ten,  six  books  on  testamentary  trusts,  a  variety
of  monographs,  some  books  of  Eesponses,  Opinions,  Disputations,
etc.,  and  an  institutional  treatise  in  two  books, — Institutionum
libri  II.  But,  with  exception  of  a  very  few  fragments  elsewhere,
these  are  known  to  us  only  through  the  extracts  which  Justinian
has  preserved  in  the  Digest,  and  which  are  so  numerous  that
they  constitute  about  one-third  of  the  whole  collection.

9.  His  '  Book  of  Rules? — Ulpian  was  the  author  of  two  sets  of
Piules,  one  in  seven  books,  the  other  in  a  single  book, — Liber
srnyularis  Rccjularum,  of  which  we  have  a  few  extracts  in  the

INTRODUCTION.  xv

Collatio  and  the  Digest.  An  abridgment  of  this  Liber  singularis
seems  to  have  been  made  by  an  unknown  hand  soon  after  the  year
320;  the  design  of  the  epitomist,  apparently,  having  been  to
exclude  what  had  become  obsolete  or  was  simply  of  historical
interest,  and  to  retain  only  so  much  as  gave  expression  to  still
current  law.

Of  this  epitome  a  manuscript  of  the  tenth  century  came  into  the
possession  of  Jean  Du  Tillet,  who  published  it  in  1549,  under  the
name  of  '  Tituli  ex  corporc  Ulpiani ';  it  is  now  in  the  Vatican,  and
is  the  only  one  known  to  exist.  But  it  is  incomplete.  Ulpian,
as  we  know  from  the  sources  already  referred  to,  dealt  with  both
obligations  and  actions ;  and,  so  far  as  can  be  judged,  followed
much  the  same  lines  as  Gains.  But  the  manuscript  of  the  epitome
finishes  abruptly  with  the  law  of  succession,  and  is  besides
defective  in  its  opening  passages.  It  is  nevertheless  a  precious
monument  of  the  classical  jurisprudence.  It  is  the  remains,  not
of  an  institutional  book,  but  of  a  handbook  for  the  practitioner ;  a
vade  mecum,  as  modern  law-writers  would  call  it,  of  which  every
line  almost  embodies  a  doctrine.  Ulpiani  Eegulae,  says  Mommsen
most  truly,  ea  brevitate,  perspicuitate,  proprietate  conscriptae  sunt,
quam  adhuc  secuti  sumus  omnes,  assecutus  est  nemo.

10.  The  Present  Edition. — A  book  of  which  there  exists  but  one
Codex,  and  that  has  passed  during  three  centuries  through  such
hands  as  those  of  Cujas,  Le  Caron  (Charondas),  Schulting,  Meer-
man,  Cannegieter,  Hugo,  Boecking,  Mommsen,  Vahlen,  Huschke,
and  Krueger,  can  need  but  little  editing.  My  task  therefore  has
been  comparatively  easy,  —  a  holding  of  the  balance  between
divergent  readings  in  those  places  in  which  the  manuscript  is
defective,  indistinct,  or  manifestly  corrupt ;  it  is  only  very  rarely
that  I  have  thought  it  necessary  to  suggest  a  reading  of  my  own.
I  have  abstained  from  following  the  attempts  of  some  editors  to
indicate  the  places  where  passages  have  been  omitted  by  the
abridger;  for  the  book  is  not  Ulpian's,  but  only  an  epitome  of
Ulpian's;  and  it  is  enough  to  rectify  the  clerical  errors  and
omissions  of  the  transcriber  of  the  manuscript,  without  vainly
trying  to  reproduce  the  original  Liber  Regularum  as  it  came  from
the  pen  of  its  author.

As  regards  the  typography  of  the  text,  words  in  italics  represent
those  that  in  the  Codex  are  uncertain  or  corrupt,  and  words  in

INTRODUCTION.

italics  within  braces  [  ]  represent  those  omitted  per  incuriam  in
the  Codex,  and  supplied  by  the  editors.  In  the  translation  words
in  italics  within  braces  [  ]  represent  the  probable  general  import
of  defective  passages  in  the  text,  which  in  most  cases  it  has  not
been  attempted  to  reconstruct ;  words  in  roman  type  within
braces  [  ]  have  been  interpolated  for  the  sake  of  greater  lucidity.

TABLE   OF  AUTHORITIES.

(The  following  Authorities  are  referred  to  in  the  Notes  by  the  abbreviations  prefixed
to  them.  Those  used  to  indicate  the  works  of  the  ordinary  classical  writers
are  too  familiar  to  require  mention. )

APOGK.  =  Gaii  Inslitutionum .  .  .  Codicis  Veronensis  Apographum  .  .  .  edidit  Guilel-

mus  Studemund,  Lipsiae,  1874.
ARCHIV.  GimiiD.  =  Archivio  Giuridico,  Pisa,  Bologna,  1868-79;  23d  volume  now

current.
ASCON.  =  Asconii  Pediani  in  Ciceronis  Orationes  Commentarii.     They  were  written

about  A.D.  60,  and  are  to  be  found  in  various  editions  of  Cicero.

B-AS.  =  Basilicorum  Libri  LX.     The  latest  and  best  edition  is  that  of  W.  E.  Heiin-

bach,  6  vols.,  Leipzig,  1833-70.
BEKKER,  AKT.  =  Die  Aktionen  des  roemischen  Privatrechts,    by   Ernst  Immanuel

Bekker,  Prof,  in  Greifswald,  2  vols.,  Berlin,  1871,  1873.
BETHMANX-HOLLWEG,  R.   CP.  —  Der  roemische  Civilprozess,  by  M.  A.  von  Beth-

mann-Hollweg  (died  1878),  3  vols.,  Bonn,  1864-66,  forming  the  first  part  of  his

Civilprozess  des  gemeinen  Rechts  in  geschichtlicher  Entwicklung.
BK.  (in  notes  to  Gaius)  —  Boecking's  (Eduard)  5th  edition  of  Gaius,  Leipzig,  1866.

Boecking  died  1870.
BK.  (in  notes  to  Ulp.)  =  Boecking's  4th  edition  of  Ulpian's  Fragments,  Leipzig,

1855.
BL.  =  Blume's  Collation  of  the  Verona  MS.,  utilised  by  Goeschen  in   his  second

edition  of  Gaius,  and  by  Lachmann  in  his  edition  of  1842.
BOETH.  —  Boethii  Comment,  in  Ciceronis  Topica.     They  are  in  various  editions  of

Cicero.     Boethius  died  A.D.  524.
BKUNS,   FONTES  =  Fontes  Juris  Romani  Antiqui,  by   Carl   Geo.   Brans,   Prof,    in

Berlin  ;  3d  ed.,  Tuebingen,  1876.

C.  =  Justinian's  Codex  repetitae  praelectionis,  in  all  editions  of  the  Corpus  Juris,
and  re-edited  from  the  best  MSS.  by  Krueger,  Leipzig,  1873-77.

C.  GREG.  =  The  Gregorian  Code  in  the  Codicis  Gregoriani  et  Codicis  Hermogeniani
Fragmenta.  The  former  was  published  about  A.D.  295,  the  latter  about  365.
The  last  edition  is  that  of  Haenel,  Bonn,  1837.  Krueger  proposes  to  reprint
them  in  the  third  part  of  his,  Mommsen's,  and  Studenmnd's  Collectio  Librorum
Juris  Antejustiniani.

C.  TH.  =  Codex  Theodosianus.  It  was  published  in  438.  The  last  edition  is  that
of  Haenel,  Bonn,  1842.

&

xviii  TABLE  OF  AUTHORITIES.

•

CANN.  =  Dom.   Ulpiani  Fragmenta  .  .  .  quibus  notas  adjeclt  Joannes  Cannegieter,

Lugd.  Bat.  1874.
COLLAT.  =  Lex  Del,  sive  Mosaicarum  et  Romanarum  Legum  Collatio,  of  the  third

or  fourth  decade  of  the  5th  century.     Last  separate  edition  hy  Blume,  Bonn,

1833.     Also  in  Huschke's  Jurisprudentia  Antejustiniana  and  other  collections

of  ante-Justinianian  law.    A  new  edition  by   Mommsen  promised  for  that  of

Krueger,  etc.
CONSULT.  =  Consultatio  veteris  cujusdam  Jurisconsulti,  of  the  first  half  of  the  5th

century.     Last  separate  edition  by  Pugge,  Bonn,  1834.     Also  in  Huschke's  and

other   collections   of  ante-Justinianian   law  ;    and  a  new  edition  promised  by

Krueger.
^       CuJ.  =  Cujas's  editions  of  Ulpian  of  1566  and  1586,  the  latter  reproduced  in  his

Opera  Omnia,  2d  Naples  edition  (1757),  vol.  i,  col.  301.
•y      CTJJ.  NOTAE  —  Cujas's  Notes  on  Ulpian,  in  the  same  volume.

G'UJ.   OBSERV.  =  Cujacii  Observationum  et  Emendationum,  libri  XXVIII,  in  same

edition  of  his  works,  vol.  iii,  col.  1.

DANZ  ;  DANZ,  E.    R.  ;  or  DANZ,  GESCH.  D.  R.  R.  =  Lehrbuch  der  Gescldchte  des

roemitchen  Rechts,  by  Dr.  H.   A.  A.  Danz,  Professor  in  Jena,  2ded. ,  2  vols.,

Leipzig,  1871.
DANZ,  SACKALE  SCHUTZ  =  Der  sacrale  Schutz  im  roemischen  Rechtsverkelir,  by  the

same  author,  Jena,  1857.
D'ARNAUD  =  Georgii  D'Arnaud  Variarum  Conjectiirarum  librl  duo,  Leoiuardlae,

1744.     D'Arnaud  died  1740.

D.  or  DIG.  =  Justinian's  Digest  or  Pandects,  in  all  editions  of  the  Corpiis  Juris  Civilis.
*  The  most  trustworthy  version  is  that  of  Mommsen,  2  vols.,  Berlin,  1872.     The

text  of  it  is  reprinted  in  his  and  Krueger's  edition  of  the  Corpus  Juris,  not  yet

completed.
DIRKS.  MANUALE  =  Manuale,  Latinitatis  Fontium  Juris  Civilis  .  .  .  aiict.  Henr.

Ed.  Dirksen,  Berolini,  1837.     Dirksen  died  1868.
Du  TILLET  =  The  editio  princeps  of  Ulpian,   cura  Jo.  Tilius,   Parisiis,   1549.     I

have  not  been  able  to  consult  this  edition,  but  have  used  the  still  rarer  one

published  Patavii,  1554,  which  I  understand  is  a  literal  reproduction.

EPHEM.  EPIGRAPH.  =  Epliemeris  Epigraphies/,,  a  periodical  supplement  to  the
Berlin  Corpus  Inscription/urn  Latinarum,  published  by  the  Archaeological
Institute  in  Rome,  vols.  i-iv,  1872-79.

EPIT.  =  The  Epitome  of  Gaius,  sometimes  called  the  West  Gothic  Gaius,  preserved
in  the  Breviarium  A  lariciamun  of  506.  It  has  been  often  published  separately;
and  is  to  be  found  in  several  of  the  Gothofredan  editions  of  the  Corpus  Juris,
and  in  Schulting's,  Hugo's,  and  other  collections  of  ante-Justinianian  law.

TEST.  =  Sexti  Pomp.  Festi  de  Verborum  Significatione  quae  supersunt,  cum  Pauli
epitome.     The  best  edition  is  Mueller's,  Leipzig,   1839  ;  but  there  is  a  good
selection  of  passages  illustrative  of  legal  antiquities  in  Bruns,  Fontes  etc.
FR.  DE  JURE  FISCI  =  Fragmentum  dejurefisci,  of  the  end  of  the  second  or  beginning
X  of  the  third  century,  discovered  by  Niebuhr  at  Verona  at  the  same  time  as  the

MS.   of  Gaius.     It  will  be  found   in   Huschke's,   Krueger's,   and   other   ante-
Justinianian  collections.

XFR.  Dos.  —  Fragmentum  fieyularum  incerti  auctoris,  Cervidii  Scaevola  ut  videtur,
a  Dositlieo  servatum,  in  Huschke's,  Krueger's,  and  other  collections.
»/     FRONT.  DE  CONTROV.  =  Jul'ri  Frontini  de  controversies  agrorum  libri  II.     Frontinus

TABLE  OF  AUTHORITIES.  xix

flourished  about  80  or  90  A.D.  I  have  used  the  edition  in  Die  Schrtften  der
roem.  Feldmesser,  by  Blume,  Lachmann,  and  Rudorff,  2  vols. ,  Berlin,  1848, 1852.
Fn.  VAT.  =  the  so-called  Vatican  Fragments,  dating  from  about  430,  published  by  ^
Cardinal  Mai  in  1823,  from  a  MS.  in  the  Vatican  library.  There  is  a  fac-simile,
with  notes,  by  Mommseu,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Berlin
for  1859.  The  text  is  in  Huschke's  and  other  collections  of  ante-Justinianian
law  ;  and  Mommsen  promises  a  new  edition  for  that  of  Krueger,  etc.

G.  or  GOESCH.  =  Goeschen's  editions  of  Gains,  1820  and  1824.  He  died  in  1837,
and  his  papers  were  used  by  Lachmann  for  the  edition  of  1842.

Gou.  =  Kritische  Aanteelcen'mgen  op  Gajus,  critical  notes  on  Studemund's  revision,
by  J.  E.  Goudsmit,  Professor  in  Leyden.  Leyden,  1875.

HAENEL,  CORP.  LEG.  =  Corpus  Legum  ab  Imperatoribus  Romanis  ante  Justinianum

latarum,  quae  extra  Constitutionum  Codices  supersunt  ....  Instruxit  Gustavus

Haenel,  Lipsiae,  1857.

HE.  =  Heffter's  (A.  G.)  edition  of  the  Fourth  Book  of  Gains,  Berlin,  1827.
HEIMBACH,  CREDITUM  =  Die  Lehre  von  dem  Creditum,  by  Gustav  Ernst  Heimbach,

Leipzig,  1849.
HEINECC.  AD  L.  JUL.  =  Jo.  Gottl.  Heineccii  ad  legem  Juliam  et  Papiam  Poppaeam

Commentarii.     I  have  used  the  edition  of  Amsterdam,  1731.     Heineck  died  in

1741.

HOLLWEG  :  see  BETHMANN-HOLLWEG.
Hu.  (in  notes  to  Gai.)  =  Huschke's  (Phil.  Eduard)  editions  of  Gaius,  and  particularly

his  editio  separata  tertia,  revised  after  Studemund's  Apograph,  Leipzig,  1878.
Hu.  (in  notes  to  Ulpian)  =  Huschke's  edition  of  Ulpian  in  his  Jurisprudent  Ante-

justiniana.
Hu.  BEITR.  —  Huschke's  Gaius  :  Beitraecje  zur  Kritlk  und  zum  Verstaendnisse  seiner

Insiitutionen,  Leipzig,  1855.
Hu.  J.  A.  =  Huschke's  Jurisprudentiae  Antejustinianae  quae  supersunt,  4th  edition,

Leipzig,  1879.
Hu.  MULTA  =  Huschke's  Die  Multa  und  das  Sacramentum  in  ihren  verschiedenen

Amvendungen,  Leipzig,  1874.
Hu.    NEXUM  =  Huschke    Ueber  das  Recht  des  Nexum  und   das  alte   roemische

Schuldrecht,  Leipzig,  1846.

Hu.  STUDIEN  —  Huschke's  Studien  des  roemischen  Rechts,  Breslau,  1830.
HUGO  (in  notes  to  Ulp.)  =  Hugo's  (Gustav)  editions  of  Ulpian,  particularly  that  of

Berlin,  1834.     Hugo  died  1844.
HUGO,   J.   C.  A.  =  Jus   Civile  Anteju8tmia.ne.um  .  .  .  a  societate  jurisconsultorum

curatum,  edente  Gustavo  Hugo,  in  2  vols.,  Berlin,  1815.

I.    or   INST.  =  The  Institutes   of  Justinian  ;   best  editions   those  of  Krueger  and     •%

Huschke.
IHERING,  G.   D.  R.  R.  =  Geist  des  roemischen  Rechts  auf  den  verschiedenen  Stufen

seiner  Entwicklung,  by  Rudolph  von  Ihering,  Prof,  in  Vienna,  3d  edition,  4

vols.,  Leipzig,  1873.     There  is  a  French  translation  by  Meulenaere,  under  the

title  of  L' Esprit  du  Droit  Romain,  4  vols.,  Paris,  1878.
INST.    GLOSS.   TAUB.  =  The   Turin   Gloss  of  Justinian's    Institutes,    in   Savigny's     y-

Geschichte,  ii,  428,  and  (by  Krueger)  in  Z.  f.  RG.  vii,  44.

JAHRB.  D.  G.  R.  =  Jahrbuch  des  gemeinen  deutschen  Rechts,  by  Bekker,  etc.,  6
vols.,  Leipzig,  1857-63.

xx  TABLE  OF  AUTHORITIES.

K.  (or  KR.,  in  notes  to  Gai.)  =  Krueger's  notes  in  his  and  Studemund's  edition  of

Gaius  ;  see  K.  tr.  S.
K.  (or  KR.,  in  notes  to  Ulp.)  =  Krueger's  notes  to  liis  edition  of  Ulpian  in  his  Coll.

libr.  jur.  Antej.;  see  KR.  J.  A.
K.  TJ.  S.  =  Krueger  and  Studemund's  edition  of  Gaius  after  the  latter's  Apograph,

with  an  epistula  critica  bjr  Mommsen,  Berlin,  1877.
KARLOWA,  E.  CP.  =  Der  roemische  Civilprozess  zur  Zeit   der  Legisactionen,  by

0.  Karlowa,  Prof,  in  Heidelberg,  Berlin,  1872.
KELLER,   LITISCONTESTATIOX  =  Litiscontestation   und    Urtlieil     nach    classischem

roemischem  JRecht,  by  Fried.  Ludw.  von  Keller,  Zurich,  1827.    Keller  died  1860.
KELLER,   E.   CP.  =  Der  roemische  Civilprocess  und  die  Actionen,  by  F.  L.  von

Keller,  5th  edition,  by  Adolf  Wach,  Leipzig,  1877.

KR.  J.  A.  =  Krueger's  Collectio  librorum  Juris  Antejustiniani,  now  in  course  of  pub-
lication, in  co-operation  with  Mommsen  and  Studemund.
KRUEGER,  KRIT.  VERS.  =  Krueger's  Kritische  Versuche  im  Gebiete  des  roemischen

Rechts,  Berlin,  1870.
KUNTZE     E.E.  =  Institutionen   und   GeschicMe    des    roemischen   Rechts,    by  Joh.

Emil  Kuntze,  Prof,  in  Leipzig,  2  vols. ,  Leipzig,  1869.

L.  (in notes  to  Gai.)  =  Lachmann  (Karl),  in  his  edition  of  1842.

L.  (in  notes  to  Ulp.)  =  Lachmann's  Kritischer  Beitrag  zu  Ulpians  Fragmenten,  in

Z.f.  g.SW.,is,17i.
LANGE,  EOEM.  ALT.  =  Lange's  (Ludwig)  Roemische  Alterthuemer,  2d  ed.,  3  vols.,

Berlin,  1863-71.
LEX  BURGTJND.  =  Lex  Romano,  Burgundlonum,   circa  520  ;  last  edition  by  Aug.

Fried.  Barkow,  Greifswald,  1826.

M.  (in  notes  to  Gai.)  =  Mommsen's  observations  in  his  introductory  epistula  critica

and  in  the  footnotes  to  Krueger's  edition  of  1877.

M.  (in  notes  to  Ulp.)  =  Mommsen's  observations  in  Boecking's  edition  of  1855.
M.  u.  M.  EOEM.  ALT.  =  Handbucli  der  Roemischen  Alterthuemer,  by  Joachim  Mar-

quardt  and  Theodor  Mommsen,  Berlin,  1871-78.     Volumes  1-3,  dealing  with

the  Staatsrecht  (the  3d  not  yet  published),  are  by  Mommsen  ;  vols.  4-6,  dealing

with  the  Staatsverwaltung,  by  Marquardt.     A  7th  vol.,  also  by  Marquardt,  will

deal  with  the  Privatleben.
MEERM.  THES.  =  Meerman's  (G.)  Novus  Thesaurus  Juris  Civilis  et  Canonici,  in  7

vols.,  published  at  the  Hague  in  1751-53  ;  and  a  supplemental  volume  by  his

son,  J.  L.  B.  Meerman,  in  1780.
MOMMS.  EOEM.  FORSCH.  =  Mommsen's  Roemische  Forschungen,  2  vols.,   Berlin,

1864,  1879.
MOMMS.  STADTR.  VON  SALPENSA,  ETC.  —  Die  Stadtrechte  der  lateinischen  Gemein-

den  von  Salpensa  und  Malaga,  edited  by  Mommsen  in  the  Transactions  of  the

Eoyal  Society  of  Sciences  of  Saxony,  Philologico-Historical  Series,  vol.  ii,  (1857).

Nov.  =  Justinian's  Novels  (Novellae  Constitutiones),  in  most  editions  of  the  Corpus
Juris.

ORELL.  AND  HENZ.  =  Inscriptionum  Latinarum  Collectio,  the  first  two  vols.  by  Jo.

Caspar  Orelli,  Zurich,  1828,  the  third  by  Henzen,  Zurich,  1856.
OTTON.  THESAUR.  =  Otto's  (Everard)  Thesaurus  Juris  Romani,  5  vols.,  Utrecht,

1733-35.

TABLE  OF  AUTHORITIES.  xxi

P.  =  Gai  Institutiones  Jitr.  Civ.  secundum  Guildmi  Studemund  collationem   ....

appositis  Justiniani  Institutionibus   .    .    .    edidit  B.  J.    Poltnaar,  Luyd.  Bat.

1876-79.
PAUL.  =  Julii  Paidl  Sententiarum  ad  filium  libri  V.     Paulus  was  a  contemporary

of  Ulpian's  ;  his  Sentences  will  be  found  in  Huschke's,  Krueger's,  and  other

collections  of  ante-Justinianian  law.
PAUL.  DIAC.  :  see  FEST.  above.
PAUL.  EX  FESTO  :  see  FEST.  above.
PERNICE  =  Marcus  Antistius  Labco  :  das  Roemische  Privatreclit  im  ersten  Jahr-

hunderte  der  Kaiserzeit,  by  Dr.  Alfred  Pernice,  Professor  in  Halle,  1st  and  2d

vols.,  Halle,  1873,  1878.
PETRA,   TAVOLETTE  =  Le    Tavolette  cerate  di  Pompei, — 'a   series  of  wax-tablets

recording  the  business  transactions  of  an  auctioneer,  discovered  in  Pompeii  in

1875,  published  in  1877  by  Prof.  Giulio  de  Petra,  Director  of  the  Museum  at

Naples.

REV.  DE  LEGISLAT.  =  Revue  de  Legislation  andenne'et  moderne,  by  Laboulaye,  De

Roziere,  etc.,  6  vols.,  Paris,  1870-76.
ROEDER  =  Versuche  der  Berichtigung  von   Vlplani  Fragmenta,  by  Karl  Dav.  Aug.

Boeder,  Goettingen,  1856.
RUDORFF,  EDICT.  =  Edicti  Perpetui  quae  reliqua  sunt,  constitute,  adnotavit,  edidit

Adolfus  Frid.  Rudorff,  Lipsiae,  1869.
RUDORFF,  R.  RG.  =  Roemische  Rechtsgeschichte,  by  A.  F.  Rudorff,  2  vols.,  Leipzig,

1857.     Rudorff  died  in  1873.

SAV.  G.  D.  R.  R.  =  GeschicJtte  des  Roemischen  Rechts  im  Mittelalter,  by  Fried.  Carl  y

von  Savignjr,  2d  edition,  7  vols.,  Heidelberg,  1834-51.     The  illustrious  author

died  in  1861.
SAV.  OBL.  =  Das  Obligationenrecht  als  Theil  des  heutigen  roemischen  Rechts,  by  the  \/

same  author,  2  vols.,  1851,  1853.     This  is  in  continuation  of  his  System,  but

is  unfortunately  incomplete.
SAV.  SYST.  =  System  des  heutigen  roemischen  Rechts,  by  the  same  author,  8  vols. ,    v

Berlin,   1840-49.      This  is  the  first  part  of  his   contemplated  System,  and   '

contains  the  general  doctrines.
SAV.  VERM.  SCHR.  =  Vermischte  Schriften,  by  the  same  author,  5  vols.,  Berlin,

1850.
SCHEURL,  BEITR.  =  Beitraege  zur  Bearbeitung  des  roemischen  Rechts,  by  Ch.   G.

Adolf  von  Scheurl,  Professor  in  Erlangen,  Erlang.  1853.
SCHILL.  ANIMADV.  =  Animadversiones  criticae  ad   Ulpiani  Fmgmenta,  by  Fried.

Ad.  Schilling,  4  parts,  Leipzig,  1830,  1831.     Schilling  died  1865.
SCHILL.  BEMERK.  =  Bemerkunyen  ueber  roemische  Rechtsgeschichte,    by  the  same

author,  Leipzig,  1829.
SCHOELL,  TAB.  =  Legis  Duodecim  Tabularum  reliquiae,  by  Rudolf  Schoell,  Leipzig,

1866.     It  has  been  followed  by  Bruns  in  the  version  of  the  Twelve  Tables  given

by  him  in  his  Fontes.
SCHMIDT,  INTERD.  =  Das  Interdiktenverfahren  der  Roemer,  by  Karl  Adolf  Schmidt,

Leipzig,  1853.
SCHULT.  =  Schulting's  (Anton.)  edition  of  Ulpian  in  his  Jurisprudentia  vetus  Ante-

justinianea,  Lugd.  Bat.  1717.     Schulting  died  1734.
SERV.  IN  VIRGIL.  =  Commentarii  in  Virgilium  Mauri  Servii  Honorati.      Servius

nourished  about  420.     I  have  used  the  edition  by  Lion,  2  vols.,  Goettingen,

1826.

xxii  TABLE  OF  AUTH01UTIES.

TH.  (or  THEOPH.  PAR.  )  =  Theophilus' Greek  Paraphrase  of  Justinian's  Institutes,
almost  contemporary  with  them.  The  best  edition  is  that  by  Reitz,  published
at  the  Hague  in  1751.

•^         ULP.  =  Ulpiani  Fragmenta  or  Exccrpta  ex  Ulpiani  Libra  singular!  Regularum.
^t         ULP.  INST.  =  Fragments   from  Ulpian's  Institutions  in  Huschke's,  Krueger's,  and
other  collections  of  ante- Justinianian  law.

VAHLEN  =  his  edition  of  Ulpian,  Bonn,  1856.

.       VALER.  PKOB.  =  M.  Valeril  Probi  de  juris  civilis  notarum  significatione  commentarius.
^  Probus  flourished  in  the  reign  of  Nero.     The  authoritative  edition  is  that  of

Mommsen  in  Keil's  collection  of  the  latin  grammarians,  (vol.  iv,  p.  971,  Leipz.
1864).  The  Notae  will  also  be  found  in  Huschke's,  Krueger's,  and  other  collec-
tions of  ante- Justinianian  law.

VANCX.  LAT.  JUN.  =  Ueber  die  Latinl  Junlani,  by  Carl  Adolph  von  Vangerow,
Marburg,  1833.  Vangerow  died  1870.

VOIGT,  Jus  NAT.  =  Das  Jus  Naturale,  Aequum  et  bomtm,  und  Jus  gentium  der
Rocmer,  by  Moritz  Voigt,  4  vols.,  Leipzig,  1856-75,

VOIGT,  BEDEUTUNGSWECHSEL  =  Ueber  den  BedeutungswecUsel  gewlsser  die  Zu-
reclnntnr)  .  .  .  bezeichncnder  Inteinischer  Ausdruecke,  by  the  same  author,  in  the
Trans.  Roy.  Society  of  Sciences  of  Saxony,  Phil.-Hist.  Series,  voL  vi,  (1872).

Z.   F.  G.  R\V.  =  Zeit$chriftfueryeschichtUcheItechtsivissenschaft,l)y  Savigny,  Gocsch-

en,  Rudorff,  etc.,  15  vols.,  Berlin,  1815-50.
Z.  F.  RG.  =  Zeitschrift  fuer  Rechtsgescldchte,  by  Rudorff,   Bruns,   etc.,   13   vols.,

Weimar,  1861-78.

GAII

INSTITUTIONUM  JUEIS   CIVILIS
COMMENTABII  IV

EDITIO  AD  STUDEMUNDI  APOGRAPHUM
CURATA.

GAII    INSTITVTIONVM    IVRIS    CIVILIS
COMMENTARII    QYATTVOR.

[COMMENTARIVS  PRIM  VS.}

(Omnes  populi,  qui  legibus  et  moribus  reguntur,  partim  suo
(proprio,  partim  communi  omnium  hominum  iure  utuntur:  nam
( quod]  quisque  populus  ipse  sibi  ins  constituit,  id  ipsius  pro-
prium  est  uocaturque  ius  ciuile,  quasi  ius  proprium  ciuitatis ;
quod  uero  naturalis  ratio  inter  omnes  homines  constituit,  id
apud  omnes  populos  peraeque  custoditur  uocaturque  ius  gen-
tium, quasi  quo  iure  omnes  gentes  utuntur.  populus  itaque
Eomanus  partim  suo  proprio,  partim  communi  omnium  homi-
num iure  utitur.  quae  singula  qualia1  sint,  suis  locis  pro-
ponemus.

1  All  peoples  that  are  under  the  government  of  laws  and  customs
use  in  part  their  own  law,  in  part  what  is  common  to  mankind;
for  ivliat  each  people  has  established  on  its  own  account  is
peculiar  to  itself,  and  is  called  its  civil  law,  in  the  sense  of
being  the  proper  law  of  the  particular  state  or  ciuitas;  whereas
what  its  natural  reasonableness  has  caused  to  be  received  by
mankind  generally  is  observed  by  all  peoples  alike,  and  is
called  the  law  of  nations, — that,  as  it  were,  which  all  nations
make  use  of.  The  Roman  people,  therefore,  employs  a  body
of  law  which  is  partly  its  own,  partly  common  to  all  men.
What  each  branch  includes  will  be  explained  in  due  course.

§§  1-8.    Comp.  tit.  I.  DE IVRE  NATVRALI,  of  par.  illegible  ;  supplied  from  Gai.

GENTIVM,  ET  civiLl  (i.  2).     In  the  (lib.  i.  List.)  in  fr.  9,  D.  de  1.  et  I.

MS.  before  §  1,  is  the  rubric — /.  De  (i,  1).

lure  ciuili  et   naturali,    in   a  later  *  Stud,  thinks  qualia  erroneous  ;

hand.  ,  P.  has  quaenam.
§  1.       §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.     First  three  lines

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS          [I,  §§  2,  3.

2  Constant  autem  iura1  populi  Eomani  ex  legibus,  plebiscitis,
senatusconsultis,    constitutionibus   principum,  edictis   eorum

3  qui  ius  edicendi  habent,  responsis  prudentium.         Lex  est
quod  populus  iubet  atque  constituit.     Plebiscitum  est  quod
plebs  iubet  atque  constituit.     plebs  autem  a  populo  eo  distat,
quod  populi  appellatione  uniuersi  ciues  signiticantur,  connu-
meratis  etiam  patriciis ;  plebis  autem  appellatione  sine  patriciis
ceteri  ciues  significantur ;  unde  olim  patricii  dicebant  plebi-
scitis se  non  teneri,  quiet1  sine  auctoritate  eorum  facta  essent ;
sed  postea  lex  Hortensia8  lata  est,  qua  cautum  est  ut  plebiscita
uniuersum  populum  tenerent :   itaque  eo  modo  legibus  exae-

2  The  laws  of  the  Roman  people   are   the  product  of  leges
[i.e.  comitial  enactments],  plebiscits,  senatusconsults,  imperial
constitutions,  edicts  of  those  enjoying  the  ius  edicendi,  and

3  responses  of  the  jurisprudents.         A  lex  is  a  law  enacted  and
established  by  the  whole  body  of  the  people ;  a  plebiscit,  one
enacted  and  established  by  its  plebeian  members.     The  differ-
ence between  plebs  and  populus  is  this, — that  the  latter  denotes
the  whole  mass  of  the  citizens,  patricians  included,  whereas  the
former  denotes  only  the  citizens  who  are  not  patricians.     It
was   because  of  this  distinction  that  of  old  the  patricians
maintained    that    plebiscits   were    not   binding   upon   them,
because  enacted  without  their  authorisation.     But  in  course,
of  time  the  Hortensian  law  was  passed,  declaring  that  plebi-
scits should  be  of  force  universally ;  and  thus  they  were  put

§  3.

Comp.  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  Constant  autem  iura  in  the
MS.  ;  Hu.  prefers  constat  autem  ius
duile.

Comp.  §  4,  fit.  I.  afd.

1  Instead  of  quia  P.  prefers  quae  ;
the  MS.  has  q,  which  does  not  ap-
pear to  occur  elsewhere  as  a  con-
traction of  either  word.

-  The  lex  Hortensia  was  enacted
467  |  287  ;  comp.  Plin.  H.  N.  xvi,
10  ;  Gell.  xv,  27,  §  4.  On  the  L.  Vale-
ria Horatia,  305  |  449,  (Liv.  iii,  55,)
and  L.  Publilia  Philonis,  415  |  339,
(Liv.  viii,  12,)  which  at  first  sight
appear  to  have  long  before  intro-
duced the  same  change  as  the  L.
Hortensia,  see  Mommsen,  Roem.
Forsch.,  vol.  I,  pp.  163-6,  200-1,
215-17.  He  distinguishes  between
the  comitia  tributa  and  the  conci-
lium j)lebis,  holding  that  the  enact-

ments of  the  former  were  always
called  leges,  and  only  those  of  the
latter  called  plebiscita.  According
to  his  view,  the  L.  Vol.  Horatia
created  the  comitia  tributa,  while
the  L.  Publilia  endowed  it  with
the  capacity  to  legislate  under  the
presidency  and  on  the  proposal  of  the
praetor ;  the  L.  Hortensia,  on  the
other  hand,  referred  to  the  concilium
plebis,  and  declared  that  its  enact-
ments should  for  the  future  be  bind-
ing on  the  citizens  generally,  without
the  necessity  of  approval  by  the
patres.  (For  he  argues  that  ex-
ceptionally, and  with  that  approval,
as  in  the  case  of  the  lex  Camdeia,
309  |  445,  a  plebiscit  sometimes  did
have  the  effect  of  a  lex  even  before
the  L.  Hortensia;  a  view  which  so
far  justifies  Polenaar's  reading  quae
above  referred  to.)

I,  §§  4-C.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

4  quata  sunt.        Senatusconsultum  est  quod  senatus  iubet  atque
constituit,  iclque  legis  uicem  optinet,  quamuis  fuerit  quaesitum.

5  Coustitutio  principis  est  quod  imperator  decreto1  uel  edicto1
uel  epistula1  constituit.     nee  umquam  dubitatum  est  quin  id
legis  uicem  optineat,  cum  ipse  imperator  per  legem2  imperium

6  accipiat.         lus  autem  edicendi  habent  magistrates  populi
Eoniani.     sed  amplissimum  ius  est  in  edictis  duorum  praeto-
rum,  urbani1  et  peregrini,2  quorum  in  prouinciis  iurisdictionem
praesides  earum  habent ;  item  in  edictis  aedilium  curulium,3

4  on  a  par  with  leges.         A  senatusconsult  is  a  law  enacted  and
established  by  the  senate,  and,  although  at  one  time  doubted,

5  has  all  the  force  of  statute.         An  imperial  constitution  is
what  the  emperor  has  established  by  decree,  edict,  or  letter.   It
has  never  been  disputed  that  such  a  constitution  has  the  full
force  of  a  lex ;  for  it  is  by  a  lex  that  the  emperor  is  invested

0  with  the  imperium.  The  ius  edicendi  [or  right  to  publish
edicts]  is  an  attribute  of  the  magistrates  of  the  Eoman  people.
Nowhere  has  it  a  more  ample  exponent  than  in  the  edicts  of
the  two  praetors,  the  urban  and  the  peregrin,  whose  jurisdic-
tion is  exercised  in  the  provinces  by  the  provincial  governors;
as  also  in  that  of  the  curule  aediles,  whose  jurisdiction  is

§  4.      Comp.  §  5,  tit.  I.  afcl.
§  5.      Comp.  §  6,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  Decretum  was  a  decision  given
by  the  emperor  on  a  question  brought
before   him  judicially  ;   edictum,   a
law  formally  promulgated  ;  epistula,
a  declaratory  statement  of  the  law
in  answer  to  an  application  either
from  an  official  or  a  private  party,
usually  called  a  rescriptum.

2  See  the  Lex  de  imperio  Vespa-
siani,  in  Brans,  Fontes,  p.  118;  Tac.
Hist,  iv,  3.

§  6.  Gomp.  §  7,  tit.  I,  afd.  One  would
have  expected  here  a  definition  of  the
cdicta  mayistratuum,  and  possibly
it  has  been  accidentally  omitted  by
the  transcriber  ;  Hu.  interpolates —
Edicta  sunt  praecepta  eorum  qui  ius
edicendi  habent.

1  The  urban  praetorship  was
created  as  an  immediate  consequence
of  the  leges  Liciniae  of  387  |  367
(opening  the  consulate  to  the  plebe-
ians,) and  with  the  view  of  keeping

the  administration  of  the  law  in  the
hands  of  the  patricians.  See  Liv.
vi,  42 ;  Pompon,  in  fr.  2,  §  27,
D.  de  0.  I.  (i,  2).  This  magis-
trate is  referred  to  in  various  old
laws  as  praetor  qui  inter  dues  ius
dicit.

2  The    peregrin    praetorship   was
created  in  or  about  the  year  507  |
247  ;  the  duty  of  the  new  magistrate
being  to  administer  justice  between
foreigners    resident    in    Rome,     or
between  foreigners  and  citizens.    See
Liv.  Epit.  xix  ;  fr.  2,  §  28,  D.  de
0.  I.  (i,  2).

3  The    curule    aediles    were    first
created  at   the   same    time   as   the
urban  praetor.     Amongst  their  vari-
ous functions  they  had   the   over-
sight  and  regulation   of  the   slave
and  cattle  markets,  with  jurisdiction
in  questions  arising  out  of  market
transactions.        See    Liv.    vi,    42  ;
Mommsen,  in  M.  u.  M.  Roem.  Alt.
ii,  470.

i  GAIT  INST1TVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS  [I,  §§  6-11.

quorum  iurisdictionem  in  prouinciis  populi  Eomani4  quaestores
habent ;  nani  in  prouincias  Caesaris4  omnino  quaestores  non
mittuntur,  et  ob  id  hoc  edictum  in  his  prouinciis  non  pro-

7  ponitur.         Eesponsa  prudentium  sunt  sententiae  et  opiniones
eorum  quibus  permissum  est  iura  condere.     quorum  omnium
si  in  unum  sententiae  concummt,  id  quod  ita  sentiunt  legis
uicem  optinet;   si  uero  dissentiunt,  iudici  licet  quam  uelit
sententiam  sequi ;  idque  rescripto  diui  Hadriani  significatur.

8  Omne  autem  ius  quo  utimur1  uel  ad  personas  pertinet,  uel
ad  res,  uel  ad  actiones.     sed2  prius  uideamus  de  personis.

9  Et  quidem  summa  diuisio  de  iure  personarum  haec  est,  quod

10  omnes  homines  aut  liberi  sunt  aut  serui.         Eursus  liberorum

11  hominum  alii  ingenui  sunt,  alii  libertini.         Ingenui  sunt  qui

exercised  in  the  popular  provinces  by  the  quaestors:  (there
are  no  quaestors  sent  to  the  imperial  provinces,  where,  con-

7  sequently,  the  aedilitian  edict   is   not  propounded).         The
responses  of  the  jurisconsults  are  the  decisions  and  opinions
of  individuals  licensed  to  lay  down  the  law.     If  those  con-
sulted be  unanimous,  their  decision  or  opinion  has  the  force
of  statute ;   but  if  they  differ,  the  judge  may  adopt  any  of
their  opinions  he  pleases ;  so  it  is  declared  in  a  rescript  of  our
late  emperor  Hadrian's.

8  The  whole  body  of  law  in  use  amongst  us  relates  either
to  persons,  things,  or  actions.     Let  us  first  turn  our  attention
to  persons.

9  The  primary  division  of  the  law  of  persons  is  this, — that  all

10  men  are  either  free  or  slaves.         Of  freemen  again  some  are

11  ingenui  and  others  libertini.         Ingenui  are  those  that  have

4  Comp.  ii,  21.  The  division  of
the  provinces  into  popular  and  im-
perial was  due  to  Augustus ;  after  the
third  century  they  were  all  imperial.

7.  Oomp.  §  8',  tit.  L  afd. ;  Th.  i,  2,  §  8.

8.  This  par.  is  preceded  in  the  MS.
by  the  rubric,  in  a  later  hand, — II.
De  iuris  dudsione.    Gai.  in  fr.  1,  D.
de  stat.  horn,  (i,  5) ;  §  12,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  It  is  a  question  how  the  phrase
omne  iu-s  quo  utimur  is  to  be  under-
stood :  it  may  be  rendered  either  as
above,  or  as  'Every  right  exercised
by  us. '

-  The  MS.  has  sed ;  K.  u.  S.   and

Hu.  read  et.
§§  9-12.  Preceded  in  the  MS.  by  marginal

rubric,  in  a  later  hand, — 111.  De  con-

dicione  hominum.

§§  9-10.      Comp.    tit.    I.    DE  IVRE  PER-
SON AEVM  (i,  3).
§  9.  Gai.  in  fr.  3,  D.  de  stat.  horn,  (i,  5);

pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

§10.     Comp.  §  5,  tit.  I.  afd.
§§  11-35.     Comp.  tit.    I.   DE  INGENVIS

(i,  4)  and  DE  LIBKRTINIS  (i,  5).
§  11.     Comp.   pr.   I.   de  imjen.   and  pr.

de  libert.

I,  §§  11-15.]

COMMENTAKII    QVATTVOR.

liberi  nati  sunt;  libertini,  qui  ex  iusta  servitute  manumissi

1 2  sunt.        Eursus  libertinorum  [tria  sunt  genera  :  nam  aut  dues
[Romani  aut  latini  aut  dediticiorum~\  nuraero  sunt.     de  quibus
singulis  dispiciamus  ;  ac  prius  de  dediticiis.

13  Lege  itaque  Aelia  Sentia  1  cauetur,  ut  qui  serui  a  dominis
poenae  nomine  uincti  sint,  quibusue  stigmata  inscripta  sint,
deue  quibus   ob  noxam  quaestio  tormentis   habita  sit  et  in
ea  noxa  fuisse  conuicti  sint,  quiue  ut  ferro  aut  cuni  bestiis
depugnarent  traditi   sint,  inue    ludum  custodiamue   coniecti
fuerint,  et  postea  uel  ab  eodem  2  domino  uel  ab  alio  manumissi,
eiusdem  condicionis  liberi  h'ant  cuius  condicionis  sunt  per-

1-4  egrini  dediticii.         Vocantur  autem  \_peregrini  dediticii]1  hi

qui   quondam   aduersus   populum   Romanum   armis   suscep-

15  tis  pugnauerunt,  deindi  uicti  se  dediderunt.         Huius  ergo

been  born  free ;  libertini  those  manumitted  from  lawful  slavery.

12  Again,  of  libertini  or  freedmen  there  are  three  classes ;  for  they
may  be  either  Roman  citizens,  or  latins,  or  classed  with  the  dediti-
cians.  Let  us  deal  with  these  separately,  beginning  with  the  last.

13  By  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  it  is  provided  in  regard  to  slaves
who  have  been  put  in  chains  or  branded  by  their  masters  by
way  of  punishment,  or  who  have  been  put  to  the  torture  on
account  of  some  offence  of  which  they  have  eventually  been
convicted,  or  who  have  been  given  up  to  fight  in  the  arena
either  with  men  or  beasts,  or  who  have  been  committed  either
to  a  gladiatorial  training  school  or  to  prison,  that  if  afterwards
they  be  manumitted  either  by  the  owner  who  has  thus  dealt
with  them  or  by  a  later  one,  they  shall  as  freemen  be  of  the

14  same  condition  as  the  peregrini  dediticii.         Those  are  called
peregrini  dediticii  who,  having  taken  up  arms  and  made  war
against  the  Roman  people  and  been  vanquished,  have  after-

15  wards  unconditionally  surrendered.         Slaves  disgraced  in  any

12.  Comp.  Vlp.  i,  5  ;  Fr.  Dos.  §§  4  f.
The  words  in  ital.  are  supplied  by
G.  from  the  Epit.,  and  adopted  by
all  eds.

13.  A  rubric  interlineated — 7/77.  De
dediticiis     uel    lege    Aelia    Sentia.
Comp.     Sueton.     -Aug.     40  ;     Dio
Cass.  Iv,  13  ;  Vlp.  i,  11  ;  Paul,  iv,
12,  §§  3,  5-8  ;  Th.  i,  5,  §  3.

1  The  lex  Aelia  Sentia,  enacted
757  |  4,  contained  a  body  of  regula-
tions on  the  subject  of  enfranchise-
ments, and  was  intended  to  restrain

that    immoderate    resort    to    them

from  motives  of  ostentation  that  had

been  flooding  the  state  with  citizens

of  slave  origin.

2  So  G.    and  most  eds.  ;  the  MS.

has  eo.
§14.     Rubric  interlineated —  V.  De  perc-

rjrinis  dediticiis.     Comp.  Liv.  i,  38  ;

Th.  i,  5,  §  3.

1  These  words  are  on  the  margin

of  the  MS.,  in  a  later  hand.
§15.     Comp.  i,  26.

6

GAII  INST1TVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS        [I,  §§  15-19.

turpitudinis  seruos  quocumque  modo  et  cuiuscumque  aetatis
manumissos,  etsi  pleno  iure  '  dominorum  fuerint,  numquam
aut  ciues  Romanes  aut  latinos  fieri  dicemus,  sed  omni  modo

16  dediticiorum   numero  constitui  intellegemus.          Si  nero  in
nnlla  tali  turpitudine  sit  seruus,  manumissum  modo  ciuem  Eo-

17  manmn,  modo  latinum  fieri  dicemus.         nam  in  cuius  persona
tria  liaec  concurrunt,  ut  maior  sit  annorurn  triginta,  et  ex  iure
Quiritium  domini,  et  iusta  ac  legitima  manumissione l  libere-
tur,   id   est  uindicta2  aut  censu3  aut   testamento,4  is   ciuis
Eomanus  fit ;  sin  uero  aliquid  eorum  deerit,  latinus  erit.

18  Quod  autem  de  aetate  serui  requiritur  lege  Aelia  Sentia
introductum  est.     nam  ea  lex  minores  xxx  annorum  seruos
non  aliter  uoluit  manumissos  ciues  Eomanos  fieri,  quam  si
uindicta,  apud  consilium,  iusta  causa  manumissionis  adpro-

19  bata,  liberati  fuerint.         Iusta  autem  causa  manumissionis

of  the  ways  described,  no  matter  how  or  at  what  age  they  may
have  been  manumitted,  and  even  though  their  mamimitter
may  have  held  them  in  full  ownership  [i.e.  both  bonitarian
and  quiritarian],  can  never  become  either  Eoman  citizens  or
latins,  but  must  ever  be  classed  as  dediticians.

16  If,  however,  no  such  disgrace  attach  to  a  slave,  he  becomes
on  manumission   sometimes  a  Eoman   citizen,  sometimes  a

17  latin.         He  becomes  a  Eoman  citizen  in  whose  person  these
three  requisites  concur, — that  he  is  above  thirty  years  old,
that  he  is  held  by  his  owner  on  quiritarian  title,  and  that  he
is  freed  by  a  legally  recognised  mode  of  manumission,  i.e.  by
vindicta,  census,  or  testament ;  if  any  of  these  requisites  fail
he  will  be  a  latin.

18  The  requirement  as  to  the  age  of  the  slave  was  introduced
by  the  Aelia-Sentian  law,  which  declared  that  slaves  manu-
mitted under  the  age  of  thirty  should  not  become  Eoman
citizens  unless  their  manumission  were  vindicta,  and  upon

19  adequate  cause  approved  by  the  council.         There  is  such

1  Pleno  iure  means  both  in  bottis
and  ex  iure  Quiritium  ;  comp.  i,  54  ;
ii,  §§  40,  41.  The  difference  between
these  two  terms  is  explained  in  ii,
40,  note,  and  Vlp.  i,  16.
§17.  Comp.  Vlp.  i,  §§  6-10,  12,  16;
Th.  i,  5,  §  4.

1  Comp.  Fr.  Dos.  §  5  ;  also  note
to  §  41.

2  Comp.  Boeth.  in  Cic.  Top.  i,  2,
§  10  (Brims, 'p.  294)  ;  Th.  as  above.

3  Comp.    Boeth.    and   Th.    as   in
note  1.

4  Comp.  ii,  §§  224,   267  ;  Vlp.  i,
23  ;  ii,  7  ;  Th.  as   in  note  1.

§18.  Interlineation  in  MS. —  VI.  De
manumissione  uel  causae  probatione.
Comp.  Vlp.  i,  12;  Vlp.  in  fr.  16,
pr.  D.  de  manum.  uind.  (xl,  4)  ;
Fr.  Dos.  §  13.

§  19.  Comp.  i,  39  ;  §  5,  I.  qut  quib.  vx
cans,  (i,  6) ;  Th.  i,  6,  §  5.

I,  §§  19-21.]  COMMEXTARII  QVATTVOR.  7

est  ueluti  si  quis  filium  filiamue  aut  fratrem  sororemue
naturalem,1  aut  alumnum,  aut  paedagogum,2  aut  seruum  pro-
curatoris  habendi  gratia,  aut  ancillam  inatrimonii  causa  apud

20  consilium    manumittat.         Consilium l  autern    adhibetur  in
urbe  Eoma  quidem  quinque  senatorum  et  quiuque  equitum
Eomanorum  puberum  ;  in  prouinciis  autem  uiginti  recupera-
torum  ciuium  Eomanorum.     idque  fit  ultimo  die  conuentus  ; 2
sed    Eomae    certis    diebus  apud   consilium  manumittuntur.
maiores  uero  triginta  annorum  serui  semper  manumitti  solent,3
adeo  ut  uel  in  transitu  manumittantur,  ueluti  cum  praetor
aut  proconsul 4  in  balneuin  uel  in  theatrum  eat.

21  Praeterea  minor  triginta  annorum  seruus  manumissus  potest

adequate  cause  when,  for  instance,  in  presence  of  the  council,
a  man  manumits  his  natural  child,  brother,  or  sister,  or  his
foster-child,  his  children's  instructor,  a  slave  that  he  means  to
make  his  procurator,  or  a  woman-slave  whom  he  means  to

20  marry.         The  council  consists  in  Eome  of  five  senators  and
five  Eoman  knights  of  the  age  of  puberty ;  in  the  provinces
of  twenty  recuperators,  Eoman  citizens.     It  is  held  in  the
provinces  on  the  last  day  of  the  assize ;  but  in  Eome  there
are  certain  fixed  days  for  council  manumissions.     But  slaves
above  thirty  may  be  manumitted  at  any  time,  even  en  route,
as  when  the  praetor  or  a  proconsul  is  on  his  way  to  the  bath
or  the  theatre.

21  A  slave  under  thirty  at  manumission  may  become  a  Eoman

1  The   phrase   filius  naturalis  is  also  got  the  name  of  conuentus,  and
used  in  the  texts  to  indicate  some-  the  same  word  was  used  as  a  collec-
times  a  child  by   birth    as   distin-  tive  appellation  for  the  individuals
guished  from  adoption,  sometimes  a  — Roman  citizens  settled  in  the  pro-
child  by  a  mistress  or  a  slave,  as  vince — who  were  qualified  to  act  as
distinguished  from  a  lawful  wife.  jurymen,    and    required   to    attend

2  This  word  is  used  in  different  (conuentus  ciuium  Romanorum).   See
senses  here  and  in  §  39  ;  in  the  one  Th.  as  in  note  1.

place,  as  by  Vlp.   in  fr.   13,  D.  de  3  Comp.  §  2,  I.  de  libertin.  (i,  5).

manum.  uind.  (xl,  4),  it  may  mean  4  The  MS.  and  most  eds.  have  pro

the  manumitter's  own  teacher;  in  consule;  but  see  iv,  139.
the  other,  as  by  the  same  Vlp.  in       §  21.     Comp.   ii,  154  ;  Vlp.  i,  14  ;  §  1,

fr.  35,  D.  de  fideic.  lib.  (xl,  5),  his  I.  qui  quib.  ex  caus.  (i,  6).     The  last

children's.  line  of  p.  4  of  the  MS.  is  legible,  but

§  20.     Interlineated    rubric  —  VII.    De  not  very  comprehensible  ;  p.  5,  with

concilia  adhibendo.  exception  of  a  few  isolated  words,  is

1  Comp.  Vlp.  i,  13  ;  Th.  i,  6,  §  4.  undecipherable.     Momms.  (K.  u.  S.

2  The   provinces   in   the   time  of  footnote)  suggests  as  the  completion
Gains  were    divided  into    districts  of  the  sentence   begun   on   p.    4—
(iuridici  conuentus,    iurisdictiones)  ;  alius  heres   nullus   excludit ;    idque
and  in  winter  the   governor  made  eadem  lege  Aelia  Sentia  cautum  est.
his  circuit,  holding  an  assize  at  the  This  does  not  correspond  with  the  few
principal  town  of  each.     This  assize  letters  decipherable  in  the  MS.  ,  but

8  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS  [I,  §  21.

ciuis  Eomanus  fieri,  si  ab  eo  domino  qui  soluendo  non  erat
testamento  euin  liberum  et  heredem  relictum    —

—    —    —.         [215]    ____     —     —      -.

citizen  if  his  insolvent  owner  have  by  testament  both
given  him  his  freedom  and  instituted  him  as  heir,  [provided
[no  similar  institution  of  another  slave  precede  his,  and  no
[other  person  voluntarily  accept  the  inheritance,  under  the
[will ;  so  it  was  enacted  by  the,  same  Aelia-Sentian  law.  Out
[of  a  regard  for  freedom  the  rule  will  apply,  according  to
[Proculus,  even  though  the  slave  thus  instituted  heir  have  no

2  la  [express  grant  of  liberty.  In  conformity  ivith  the  declaration
[of  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  that  it  is  only  the  slave  first  thus
[instituted  in  a  testament  that  is  to  he  free,  it  has  been  ruled  that
[if  a  man  institute  as  his  heirs  with  freedom  all  his  bastard
[children  by  a  certain  slave-woman  of  his,  none  of  them  will  be
[free;  for  neither  is  it  possible  in  such  a  case  to  say  which  of
[them  is  instituted  first,  nor  ought  the  deceaseds  creditors  to  be
[defraudedby  the  ivithdrawal  of  so  many  slaves  from  his  insolvent
[estate;  and  a  senatusconsult, passed  to  amend  the  Fufia-Can-
[_inian  law,  declares  null  and  void  any  device  resorted  to  by  a

2lb[tcstator  to  defeat  the  provisions  of  the  statute^]         [21&]    —

22  [Under  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  a  slave  under  thirty,  manu-
[mitted  either  by  testament  or,  on  cause  shown,  among  friends,
[becomes  a  latin,  (although  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  it  is  to  that
[law  that  his  name  of  latin  is  due) ;  so  does  a  slave  over  thirty,
[if  manumitted  by  an  owner  who  had  him  only  in  bonis  (even
[though  the  manumission  may  have  been  in  solemn  form) ;  or  if

no  doubt   accurately   expresses  the  patrimonio  decent  decedere ;  denique,

idea.      Hu.    (footnote)   suggests—  senatusconsulto    ad    leyem    Fufiam,

seruus  similiter  cum,  libertate  heres  Caniniam  facto  prouisum  est,  ne  in

scriptus  testamento  non  praecedat,  et  potestate   debitoris   esset    eius  legis

nemo  alius   ex   eo   testamento  heres  auctoritatem  per  hanc   artem  euer-

sit;  idque  eadem  lege  Aelia  Sentia  tere.      216.    Ex  hire  Quiritium  fit

cautum  est.     idem  fauore  libertatis  seruus  noster    non  per    hoc   solum

de  eo  seruo  Proculus  existimat,  qui  quod  pecunia  nostra  conparatur,  seil

sine  libertate  heres  scriptus  sit.  ulterius  requiritur  iusta  serui   ac-

§§21a,  216.  The  same  ed.  conjectures  that  quisitio    propterea  quod    quaedam

the  continuation  of  p.   5  may  have  etiam  non  iustae  sunt  acquisitiones ;

run  as  follows  (the  words  legible  in  nam  ea,  quae  traditione  alienantur,

the  MS.  being  in  roman  type) : — 21a.  quamuis  mancipi  sint,  nee  uel  manci-

Cum  uero  lege  Aelia   Sentia  testa-  patione  uel  in  hire  cessione  uel  usu-

mento   primus  scriptus  solus  ciuis  capione  acquiruntur,  tantumin  bonix

Romanus  fiat,  placuit,  si  quis  forte  fiunt.     As  authority  for  §  21ft,  Hu.

ex  ancilla  sua  natos  spurios  liberos  refers  to  the  Epit.  i,  2,  §  2  ;  and  for

et  heredes  scripserit,  omnes  seruos  216,  to  Gai.  i,  35  ;  ii,  §§  41,   204  ;

manere,  quia  quis  primus  sit  ex  ea  Vlp.  i,  16  ;  Fr.  Dos.  §  9.
oratione    non    intellegitur,     nee    in       §  22.     The  commencement  of  this  par.

fraudem     creditorum      plures     ex  is  on  p.  5.    H u., founding  on  iii,  56 ;

I,  §§  22,  23.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

9

22  —    —    —    —    —   homines  latini   luniani  appellantur ;
latini  ideo  quia  adsimulati  sunt  latinis  coloniariis  ; l  luniani
ideo,  quia  per  legem  luniam 2  libertatem  acceperunt,  cum  olim

23  serui  uiderentur  esse.         Non  tamen  illis  permittlt  lex  lunia

23

[manumitted  amongst  friends  without  cause  shown,  provided  in
[either  case  there  be  no  other  impediment.  All  these  werefor-
[merly  maintained  in  what  had  the  semblance  of  freedom  ;  the
[praetor  giving  them  protection  as  freemen,  though  according  to
[quiritarian  law  they  were  still  slaves.  But  now  persons  thus
[manumitted]  are  called  Junian  latins  :  latins,  because  they  are
assimilated  to  the  colonial  latins ;  Junian,  because  they  owe
their  freedom  to  the  Junian  law,  having  been  previously
as  slaves.  This  law  does  not  allow  them  either

regarded

Epit.  i,  2,  §  2  ;  Vlp.  i,  §§  10,  12 ;
Fr.  Dos.  §§  5,  6,  reconstructs  as
follows: — Latinus  fit  ex  lege  Aelia
Sentia  seruus  minor  XXX  annorum
qui  testamento  uel  inter  amicos  causa
probata  liberatur,  quanquam  latin-
urn  ipsa  lex  Aelia  Sentia  nondum
fecit;  item  qui  ea  aetate  maior  a
domino,  cuius  est  in  bonis,  quamuis
iusta  manumissione  manumittitur,
uel  qui  inter  amicos  liberatur,  si
modo  alia  causa  libertatem  non  im-
pediat.  Hi  omnes  tamen  olim  qui-
dem  hi  forma  libertatis  seruabanlur,
cum  praetor  eos,  licet  serui  ex  iure
Quiritium  essent,  in  libertate  tueretur.
nunc  uero  hi  homines,  etc.

1  Comp.  i,  131  ;  iii,  56.  On  the
nature  of  colonial  latinity  see
Savigny,  Verm.  Schr.  iii,  279;  Mar-
quardt  in  M.  u.  M.  Roem.  Alt.  iv,
47-57  ;  Voigt,  lus.  Nat.  ii,  pp.
714-26,  738-45  ;  Mommsen  and
Huebner  on  the  lex  Coloniae  lul.
Genetiuae,  —  the  charter  or  act  of
incorporation  of  a  Latin  colony,
founded  by  Julius  Caesar  at  Urso,
not  far  from  Seville,  and  partially
discovered  on  bronze  tablets  in  the
years  1871  and  1875,—  inthe^fiem.
Epigraph,  vol.  ii,  pp.  105-51,  221-
32,  vol.  iii,  pp.  91-112  ;  Giraud  on
same  law,  under  title  of  Les  Bronzes
d'Osuna,  Par.  1874,  Les  Bronzes
d'Osuna,  Remarques  nouvelles,  Par.
1875,  and  Les  nouveaux  Bronzes
d'Osuna,  Par.  1877.  (The  first
published  portion  of  the  law  is  re-
printed by  Bruns,  under  the  title  of
Lex  Vrsonitana,iii}iisFontes,]).lQ6. )

There  is  a  good  deal  on  the  same
subject  in  the  writings  of  Berlanga,
Mommsen,  Huebner,  Giraud,  Van
Swinderen,  Van  Lier,  and  others  on  the
Leges  Malacitana  et  Salpensana, —
charters  granted  by  Domitian  to  the
municipia  of  Malaga  and  Salpensa,
considerable  portions  of  which,  en-
graved on  bronze,  were  found  near
Malaga  in  the  year  1851.  They  are
included  by  Bruns  in  his  Fontes,
pp.  120,  124.

There  is  an  interesting  controversy
on  the  question  whether  those  muni-
cipia were  municipia  latina  or  mun.
ciuium  Romanorum  ;  the  former
view  is  taken  by  most  of  the  authors
above  named  ;  the  latter  by  Zumpt
in  his  Studia  Romana  (Berol.  1859),
pp.  269  f.,  and  by  Houdoy,  Le  droit
municipal  chez  les  Remains  (Paris,
1876),  pp.  76  f.

2  Gai.  always  mentions  this  law
simply  as  the  L.  lunia,  and  so  does
Justinian  in  tit.  C.  de  lat.  lib.  toll.
(vii,  6) ;  but  in  §  3,  I.  de  libertin.
(i,  5),  and  Th.  i,  5,  §  3,  it  is  called
lex  lunia  Norbana.  M.  Junius
Silanus  and  L.  Norbanus  Balbus
were  consuls  in  the  year  772  |  19  ;
and  this  date  is  usually  assigned  to
the  enactment.  Mommsen,  how-
ever (Jahrb.  d.  g.  R.  ii,  338),  and
others,  argue  against  both  name  and
date,  on  the  ground  that  comitial
legislation  had  by  that  time
ceased.

§  23.  Comp.  ii,  §§  110,  275  ;  Vlp.  xx,
§§  14,  15  ;  xxii,  8  ;  Fr.  Vat.  §
172.

10  GA1I  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVEIS  CIVILIS        [I,  §§  23-27.

uel  ipsis  testamentum  facere,  uel  ex  testamento  alieno  capere,

24  uel  tutores  testamento  dari.         Quod  autem  diximus  e.x  testa-
mento eos  capere  non  posse  ita  intellegemus,  ne  quid  inde
directo1   hereclitatis   legatorumue   nomine   eos   posse   capere
dicamus  ;  alioquin  per  fideicommissum  capere  possuut.

25  Hi  uero  qui  dediticiorum  numero  sunt  nullo  modo  ex  testa-
mento capere  possunt,  non  magis  quam  quilibet  peregrinus  ;
quin  nee  ipsi  testamentum  facere  possunt  secundum  id  quod

26  magis  placuit.         Pessima  itaque  libertas  eorum  est  qui  dedi-
ticiorum numero  sunt ;  nee  ulla  lege  aut  senatusconsulto  aut
constitutione  principali  aditus  illis   ad  ciuitatem '  Romanana

27  datur.         Quin  et  in  urbe  Eoma  uel  intra  centesimum  urbis
Romae  miliarium  morari  prohibentur ;  et  si  contra  fecerint,
ipsi  bonaque  eorum  publice  uenire  iubentur  ea  condicione,  ut
ne  in  urbe  Roma  uel  intra  centesimum  urbis  Eomae  miliarium
seruiant,   neue    umquani    manumittantur ;   et   si   manumissi
fuerint,  serui  populi  Eomani  esse  iubentur.     et  haec  ita  lege
Aelia  Sentia  conprehensa  sunt.

themselves  to  make  a  testament,  or  to  take  under  that  of
another  person,   or  to    be    appointed    testamentary    tutors.

24  Our  statement,  however,  that  they  cannot  take  under  a  testa-
ment, is  to  be  understood  as  meaning  that  they  cannot  take
directly  under  it,  either  by  way  of  inheritance  or  legacy ;  for
they  may  take  by  trust  bequest.

25  Those,  on  the  other  hand,  that  are  classed  amongst  the
dediticians,  cannot,  any  more  than  any  other  peregrin,  take  in
any  way  under  a  testament ;  nor,  according  to  the  prevailing

26  doctrine,  can  they  themselves  make  one.         Their  freedom,
therefore,  is  of  the  most  miserable  sort ;   nor  can  they  ever,
either  by  law,   senatusconsult,   or  imperial   enactment,    be

27  admitted  to   the  privileges   of  Roman   citizenship.         Nay
more,   they   are   forbidden   to   live  in  Rome  or  within   the
hundredth  milestone  from  the  city.     On  contravention,  they
themselves  and  their  effects  are  ordered  to  be  put  up  to  public
sale  for  the  benefit  of  the  exchequer,  and  that  under  the  con-
dition that  they  shall  not  be  employed  in  Rome  or  within  the
hundredth  milestone,  nor  ever  again  be  manumitted ;  if  this
last   condition   be   disregarded   they  become    slaves   of   the
Roman  people.  All  this  was  provided  by  the  Aelia-Sentian  law.

§  24.     Comp.  ii,  275  ;  Vlp.  xxv,  7.  which  K.  u.  S.  and  Hu.  change  into

directo.

1  Inde  directo  is  an  emendation  of      §  25.     Comp.   iii.   75  ;  Vlp.  xx,  §§  14,
Goudsmit's  ;  the  MS.  reads  indirecto,  15  :  xxii,  2.

I,  §§  28,  29.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

11

28       Latin!  uero  imiltis  modis  ad  ciuitatem  Eomanam  perueniunt.

'29  Statimenimex  lege  Aelia  Sentia  cautum  est  ut1  minores  triginta
annorum  2  manumissi  et  latini  facti,  si  uxores  duxerint  uel
ciues  Eomanas  uel  latinas  coloniarias  uel  eiusdem  condicionis
cuius  et  ipsi  essent,  idque  testati  fuerint  adhibitis  non  minus
quam  septem  testibus  ciuibus  Eomanis  puberibus,  et  filium
procreauerint,3  cum  is  films  anniculus 4  esse  coeperit,  datur  eis
potestas  per  earn  legem  l  adire  praetorem,  uel  in  prouinciis
praesidem  prouinciae,  et  adprobare  se  ex  lege  Aelia  Sentia
uxorem  duxisse  et  ex  ea  filium  anniculum  habere  :  et  si  is
apud  quern  causa  probata  est  id  ita  esse  pronuntiauerit,  tune
et  ipse  latinus 5  et  uxor  eius,  si  et  ipsa  eiusdem  [condicionis
[sit,  et  ipsorum  filius  si  et  ipse  eiusdem']  6  condicionis  sit,  ciues

28  Latins  may  attain  to  Roman  citizenship  in  many  ways.

29  Thus,  by  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  it  was  provided  that  a  slave
who  had  been  manumitted  before  attaining  the  age  of  thirty,
and  had  thus  become  a  latin,  and  who  afterwards  married  a
woman  that  was  either  a  Roman  citizen,  or  a  colonial  latin,
or  even  of  the  same  condition  as  himself,  and  had  the  fact
attested  by  not  fewer  than  seven  witnesses,  Eoman  citizens
above  puberty,  called  together  for  the  purpose,  and  had  a  son
born  to  him  of  the  marriage,  might,  on  said  son's  completing
his  first  year,  go  before  the  praetor,  or  in  a  province  before
the  governor,  and  prove  that,  in  terms  of  the  Aelia-Sentian
law,  he  had  married  a  wife  and  had  by  her  a  year-old  son ;
and  if  the  magistrate  before  whom  cause  had  thus  been  shown
pronounced  accordingly,  then  the  latin  himself,  his  wife  if  she
were  of  the  same  condition,  and  their  child  if  he  also  were  of

§§  28-35.  The  matter  of  these  pars,  is
introduced  by  a  rubric,  in  a  later
hand,  on  a  vacant  line  at  foot  of  p.
6 — latini  ad  ciuitatem  Romanam
perueniant.  Probably  it  began  with
Quibus  modis,  but  those  words  are
no  longer  visible.

§  29.  Comp.  Vlp.  iii,  3.  Gai./here  and
elsewhere  attributes  the /pro vision
referred  to  in  this  par.  to/the  Aelia-
Sentian  law  ;  as  Vlp.  explains,  and
as  is  probable  from  coytext,  it  was
introduced  by  the  Jun/an  law.  In
§  80  Gai.  speaks  of  me  lex  Aelia
Sentia  et  lunia  as  yt  the  Junian
were  an  amended  rarsion  of  the
earlier  enactment.  '

1  P. ,  K.  u.  S. ,  and  Hu.  omit  the
words  cautum  est  ut  as  a  gloss  ;  as
does  P.  the  per  earn  legem  in  the
middle  of  the  par.

2  Comp.  §  31.

3  A  daughter  answered  the  pur-
pose as  well  as  a  son  ;  comp.  §§  32a,
72,  and  Vlp.  iii,  3.

4  See  fr.   134,   D.   de  verb.    sign.
(1,  16).

5  After  latinus  what  seems  to  be
lunianus  is    interlined  ;    but   only
the  termination  (anus)  is  certain.

6  The  words  in  italics  are  not  in
the  MS.,  but  suggested  by  Goesch.,
and    accepted   by  most    editors  as
essential ;  see  next  par.

12

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVKIS  CIVILIS         [I,  §§  30-32.

30  Eomani    esse    iubentur.         Ideo    autem    in   persona   filii '
adiecimus  '  si  et  ipse  eiusdem  condicionis  sit,'  quia  si  uxor
latini  ciuis  Eomana  est,  qui  ex  ea  nascitur,  ex  nouo  senatus-
consulto  quod  auctore  diuo  Hadriano  factum  est,  ciuis  Romanus

31  nascitur.         Hoc  tamen  ius  adipiscendae  ciuitatis  Roraanae
etiamsi  soli  !  minores  trigiuta  annorum  manumissi  et  latini
facti  ex  lege  Aelia  Sentia  habuerunt,  tamen  postea,  senatus-
consulto  quod  Pegaso  et  Pusione  consulibus  factum  est,  et
maioribus  triginta   annorum  manumissis  latinis  factis   con-

32  cessum  est.         Ceterum  etiamsi  ante  decesserit  latinus  quam
anniculi  filii  causam  probauerit,  potest  mater  eius  causani  pro-
bare,  et  sic  et  ipsa  fiet  ciuis  Romana    —    —    —    —    —   — .

30  the  same  condition,  were  declared  to  be  Roman  citizens.         The
reason  why  in  reference  to  the  son  we  add  '  if  he  also  be  of
the  same  condition,'  is  this, — that  if  the  wife  of  a  latin  happen
to  be  a  Roman  citizen,  then,  by  a  recent  senatusconsult,  of
which  our  late  emperor  Hadrian  was  the  author,  any  child
born  of  the  marriage  will  be  a  Roman  citizen  in  right  of  birth.

31  Although  by  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  it  was  only  slaves  manu-
mitted and  made  latins  under  the  age  of  thirty  that  were  able
to  acquire  Roman  citizenship  in  the  way  described,  yet  after-
wards, by  a  senatusconsult  passed   at  the  instance   of  the
consuls  Pegasus  and  Pusio,  the  same  privilege  was  extended
to  those  manumitted  and  made  latins  after  attaining  that  age.

32  If  a  latin  have  died  before  proving  his  claim  to  citizenship  on
the  strength  of  a  year-old  son,  the  mother  may  establish  it,
and  so  both  herself  become  a  Roman  citizen  [and  acquire  that

§  30.     Comp.    §   80  ;  Vlp.   iii,    3.     The

senatusconsult     here     rei'erred     to

seems  to  have  been  a  very  compre-
hensive one  regulating  birth-status  ;

see  §  67,  note.

1  So  P. ;  Hu.   and   previous  eds.

have  in   ipsorum  filio;  K.  u.  S.  in

huius  persona ;  the  MS.  is  indistinct.
§  31.     Comp.  §  29.     Pegasus  and  Pusio

were  consuls  in  the   reign  of  Ves-
pasian (a.  70-79),  but  year  unknown;

see  §  5,  I.  de  fideicom.  hered.    (ii,

23).

1  So  Hu.   and  K.  u.   S. ;  the  MS.

has  socii,  but  with  a  dot — equivalent

to  deletion — over  some  if  not  all  of

the  letters.
§  32.     Comp.    iii,    5  ;    Paul,    in   C allot .

xvi,  3,  §  15.     The  last  two  words

in  the  text,  ciuis  Romana,  are  the

two    first    and  only  quite    certain

words  in  the  first  line  of  p.  8  of
MS.  ;  lines  2-5  are  more  or  less
illegible.  M.  (K.  u.  S.  p.  xviii)
proposes  — et  sic  et  ipsa  fiet  ciuis
Romana  etJUlus,  scilicet  si  latina  sit.
»S'«  mater  ante  patrem  decesserit  ue/
post  eum  causa  nan  probata,  ft
spatium  supersit,  rein  peraget  per
tutores  ipse  filius,  ciuisque  Romania*
fiel ;  scilicet  ita  debet  causam  pro-
bare  ut  supra  expositum  est.  Hu.
proposes  —  et  sic  et  ipsa  fiet  ciuis
Romana,  si  latina  est,  et  filius,  isqt/e
tamquam  iustis  nuptiis  procreotus,
quasi  suus  postumus  heres  patri*
bona  apiscitur.  si  uero  et  pater  et
mater  decesserint,  ipse  filius,  cuius
interest  cum  ciuitate  Romana  bona
consequi  quae  ab  eis  relicta  sunt,
debet  causam  probare,  ut  tamen
pupilli  tutor  causam  agat.

I,  §§32, 33.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  13

32aQuae  supra  diximus  de  filio  anniculo,  dicta intellegemus  (etiam
(defilia  anniculci).

32b  —  —  —  —  —  id  est  fiunt  ciues  Eomani,  si  Komae
inter  uigiles  sex  annis  militauerint.  Postea  dicitur  factum
esse  senatusconsultum,  quo  data  est  illis  ciuitas  Eomana  si

32c  triennium  militiae  expleuerint.  Item  edicto  Claudii  latini
ius  Quiritium  consecuntur,1  si  nauem  marinam  acdificauerint,
quae  non  minus  quam  decem  milia  modiorum 2  (frumenti] 3
capiat,  eaque  nauis,  uel  quae  in  eius  locum  substituta

33  (sit,  sex)3  annis  frumentum  Romam  portauerit.  Praeterea
—  —  —  —  —  ut,  si  Latinus  qui  patrimonium  scstertium

[status  for  her  child,  that  is  to  say  if  she  herself  be  a  latin.  If  she
[have  predeceased  her  husband,  or  died  after  him  but  before  cause
[lias  been  shown,  the  son  will  proceed  himself  through  his  tutor,
[and  thus  acquire  citizenship ;  that  is  to  say,  he  will  show  cause

Z"2a[on  his  own  account  in  the  manner  above  described.'}  What
has  been  said  in  regard  to  a  year-old  son  is  to  be  understood
as  equally  applicable  to  a  year-old  daughter.

32&  [Further,  by  the  Visellian  law,  those,  whether  under  or  over
[thirty  years  of  age,  who  on  manumission  have  become  latins,
[acquire  the  ius  quiritium],  that  is  to  say,  become  Koman
citizens,  when  they  have  served  six  years  in  Eome  in  the
night  watch.  It  is  said  that  by  a  senatusconsult  of  later  date
citizenship  was  conceded  to  them  after  three  years'  service.

32c  Then,  by  an  edict  of  Claudius',  a  latin  acquires  quiritarian
rights  by  building  a  vessel  large  enough  to  hold  10,000  pecks
of  grain,  and  continuing  for  six  years  to  import  corn  to  Eome

33  either  in  it  or  in  another  vessel  equally  large.  Further  [by
[an  enactment  of  the  time  of  Nero'],  if  a  latin  worth  200,000

§  32«.     See  §  29,  note  3.  referred  to  in  note  2  to  §  22,  and  on

§  326.     Comp.  Vlp.  iii,  5.    Lines  7  and  8  the  strength  of  an  inscription.

of  p.   8  are  entirely  illegible.     On       §  32c.     Comp.  Suet.    Claud.    18  ;    Vlp.

authority  of  Vlp.,  Hu.  thus  recon-  iii,  5.

struots    them  : — Praeterea  ex    lege  '  The  MS.  has  secuntur.

Visellia  tarn  maiores  quam  minores  'J  The  modius  equalled  1  '896  imp.

XXX  annorum  manumissi  et  latini  gall.,  or  '948  of  an  imp.  peck.

facti  ius  Quiritium  adipiscuntur,  etc.  3  Those  words,  illegible  in  the  M.S.,

The  Visellian  law,  referred  to  in  are  supplied  on  the  authority  of  Vlp.
connection  with  other  provisions  in       §  33.     Comp.    Vlp.   i,    5.      A  lacuna  of

tit.   C.  ad  leg.   Visell.  (ix,   21),  and  about  half  a  line,  in  which  the  only

tit.    C.    quando    cm.    actio    crim.  letters   legible   are  ne .  s.     On   the

praemd.(ix,  31),  has  been  attributed  strength  of  Tac.  Ann.  xv,  43,  Hu.

to   the  year    777  \  24,    when    Ser.  suggests — a  Nerone  constitutum  eat

Cornel.    Cethegus   and   L.  Visellius  edicto;'?. — Nerone auctore (for which

Varro  were   consuls  ;    but  Moiams.  word  the  letter  a  would  be  a  sufficient

(Jahrb.  d.  g.  R.  ii,  335)  claims  for  contraction)  smatus  permisit ;   and

it  an  earlier  date,    on  the   ground  K.  u.  S. — a  Nerone  constitutum  est.

14

GAII  INSTiTVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS        [I,  §§  33-35-

CC  milmm  plurisue  liabebit,  in  urbe  Roma  domum  aedificauerit,
in  quam  non  minus  quam  partem  diniidiara  patrimonii  sui

34  inpenderit,  ius  Quiritium  consequatur.  Denique  Traianus
constituit  ut  si  (latinus)  in  urbe  triennio  pistrinum  exer-
cuerit,  (in  quo  in)  dies  singulos  non  minus  quam  centenos
(modios)  frumenti  pinscrd,  ad  ius  Quiritium  perueuiret.

34a—     _    —    —    —    —.      [35]       _—___    —

sesterces  or  more  spend  not  less  than  half  that  sum  in  build-
ing a  house  in  Rome,  he  will  thereby  acquire  quiritarian

34  rights.         Still  later  Trajan  enacted  that  a  latin  who  had
worked  a  mill  in  Rome  for  three  years,  grinding  in  it  daily
not  less  than  a  hundred  pecks  of  corn,  should  thereby  attain

34ato  the  same  distinction.         [A  latin  may  also  become  a  citizen
\by  direct  grant  of  citizenship  from  the  emperor,  or,  in  the  case  of

35  \_a  woman,  l>y  giving  birth  to  three  children.         finally,  those
[who  are  latins  because,  they  have  been  manumitted  informally

§34.     Comp.  Vlp.  iii,  1.

§  34a.  The  first  three  lines  of  p.  9  are
entirely  illegible,  but  probably  con-
tained a  reference  either  to  acquisi-
tion of  citizenship  benejicio  principals,
as  mentioned  by  Vlp.  iii,  2,  or  to
the  privilege  of  the  latina  ter  enixa
mentioned  by  him  in  §  1.

§  35.  Lines  4-14  of  p.  9  are  to  a  great
extent  illegible,  but  most  probably
dealt  with  acquisition  of  citizenship
iteratione,  referred  to  in  Vlp.  iii,  4  ;
Fr.  Dos.  §  14  ;  Fr.  Vat.  §  221  ;  Gai.
Epit.  i,  1,  §  4.  K.  in  his  Krit.
Versuche,  p.  116,  proposed  a  recon-
struction, which  in  K.  u.  S.  he  has
amended  as  follows : — Minores  XXX
annorum  manumissi,  si  latini  facti
sunt  quia  causa  manumissionis  apud
consilmm  adprobata  non  futrit  ;
item  maiores  XXX  annorum  qui  uel
inter  amicos  uel  ab  eo  manumissi
sunt  cuius  in  bonis  non  ex  hire
Quiritium  fuerunt,  fient  'dues
liomani  si  is  cuius  ex  iure  Quiri-
tium sunt  iuste  manumissionem
iterauerit.  ergo  si  seruus  tuis  quidem
in  bonis,  ex  iure  Quiritium  autem
meus  est,  latinus  quidem  a  te  solo
fieri  potest,  nee  iamen  a  me  iterum
manumissus  -ullo  modo  ciuis  Roma-
nus  libertus  Jit ;  sed  si  tu  postea  ius
Quiritium  consecutus  manumis-
sionem iteraueris  ciuis,  Romanus
fit.  Patronatus  sane  ius  tibi  in

eo    conseruatur    quocunque     modo,
etc.

Hu.  proposes  :  —  Item  minores
XXX  annorum  manumissi,  si  latini
facti  sunt  quod  inter  amicos  causa
apud  consilium  probata  est,  postea
uero  maiores  XXX  annorum  facti,
item  maiores  XXX  annorum  ideo
latini  facti  quod  uel  inter  amicos
uel  qitocunque  modo  ab  eo,  cuius
tantum  in  bonis  erant,  manumissi
sunt,  iteratione  ius  Quiritium  conse-
quipossunt,  id  estfiunt  ciuesRomani,
si  is,  cuius  ex  iure  Quiritium  sunt,
iuste  manumissionem  iterauerit.  ergo
si  seruus  tuis  quidem  in  bonis,  ex  iure
Quiritium  autem  meus  est,  latinus
quidem  a  te  solo  fieri  potest,  nee
pariter  tamen  iuste  postea  siue  a
te  sine  a  me  iterum  manumissus,
ciuis  Romanus  libertus  fit.  sed  si
postea  ius  Quiritium  consecutus  in
manumisso  fuerit  is  a  quo  lathius
factus  est,  iterando  eum  ad  ius
Quiritium  perducere  potest,  idque  ius
ei  datur  quocunque  modo,  etc.

Neither  of  those  reconstructions
adapts  itself  very  well  to  the  words
decipherable  in  the  MS.  ;  and  Krue-
ger's  reference  to  the  patronatus  is
entirely  unsupported.  They  differ
on  the  two  important  questions —
(1)  what  latins  could  by  iteration  be-
come citizens  ?  and  (2)  from  whom
could  the  iteration  proceed  ?

I,  §§35-39.]  COMMENTAKII  QVATTVOR.  15

35  datur,  quocunque  modo  ius  Quiritram  fuerit  consecutus.  (cuius
(autem  ef)  in  bonis1  et  ex  iure  Quiritium  sit  manumissus,  ab
eodein  scilicet  et  latinus  fieri  potest  et  ius  Quiritium  consequi.

36  (Non  tamen  cuicumque  uolenti  manumittere  licet.          nam

37  (is  qui)  in  fraudem  creditorum  uel  in  fraudem  patroni !  manu-
mittit  nihil  agit,  quia  lex  Aelia  Sentia  inpedit  libertatem.

38  Item  eadem  lege  minori  xx  annorum  domino  non  aliter  manu-
mittere perrnittitur,  quarn  si  uindicta  apud  consilium  iusta

39  causa  manumissionis  adprobata  fuerit.1         lustae  autem  causae
manurnissionis  sunt  ueluti  si  quis  patrem  aut  rnatrem  aut
paedagogum   aut   conlactaneum    manumittat.     sed    et    illae

[when  under  the  a
[or  renewal  of  the
[renewed  in  solem
[renewed  informal*

ye  of  thirty,  may  become  citizens  ~by  iteration
nanumission,  and  that  immediately  if  it  be
i  form, — after  they  have  reached  thirty  if
while  those  whose  latinity  is  attributable

c

•J

[to  the  fact  that  they  have  been  manumitted  by  an  owner  who
[held  them  only  in  bonis,  may  acquire  citizenship  on  iteration
[cither  by  him  who  was  their  quiritarian  owner  at  the  time
[the  first  manumission,  or  by  the  original  manumitter]  on  his
subsequently  acquiring  quiritaiy  right  over  them,  no  matter
how.  A  slave,  therefore,  who  is  manumitted  by  an  owner
holding  him  at  once  on  bonitarian  and  quiritarian  title,  may
from  him  acquire  first  the  position  of  a  latin  and  then  that  of
a  Roman  citizen.

36  It  is  not  every  man  who  pleases  that  can  manumit.         Thus

37  the  act  of  one  who  does  so  in  fraud  of  his  creditors  or  of  his
patron  is  void ;  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  is  here  an  obstacle  to

38  liberty.         By  the  same  law  an  owner  under  twenty  years
old  cannot  manumit  otherwise  than  vindicta,  upon  adequate

39  cause  established  before  the  council.         That  the  slave  being
manumitted  is  the   manumitter's  father   or   mother,  or   his
teacher,  or  his  foster-brother,  is  regarded  as  such  an  adequate

1  On  the  difference  between  owner-  §  37.     Comp.  Vlp.  i,  15.

ship  ex  lure  Quiritium  and  in  bonis,  1  This  assumes  manumission  by  a

and  the  effect  of  manumission  by  a  freedman  ;    the  enfranchisement  of

person  having  only  the  latter,  see  his    slave     destroyed    his    patron's

i,  54,  ii,  40,  note,  and  Vlp.  i,  16  ;  reversionary  interest  in  the  latter,

on    manumission  inter  amicos,   see  §  38.     §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.    Conip.  §§  20,  41 ;

note  to  §  41.  Vlp.   i,    13  ;    Fr.    Dos.    §  13  ;    Lex

§§  36-41.     Comp.  tit.  I.  QVI  QVIBVS  EX  Salpensana,  c.  28  (Bruns,  p.  123).

CAVSIS  MANVMITTERE  NON  POSSVNT  l    So    the    MS.;    Hu.    substitutes

(i,  6).  manumiserit.

§  36.     Lines  19  and  20,  p.  9,  are  vacant  §  39.     §   5,   tit.    I.   afd.     Comp.    §   19.

in  the  MS.  ,  and  Stud,  finds  no  trace  Several    words    in     this    par.    are

of  writing.     The  words  in  ital.  are  omitted  by  P.  as  glosses.
from  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

Liz  ft .  /,  XT

1 6  GAII  IXSTITVTION7VM  IVRIS  CIVILIS       [I,  §§  39-42.

causae  quas  superius  in  seruo  minore  xxx  annorum  exposui-
mus,  acT  hunc  quoque  casum  de  quo  loquimur  adferri  possunt.
item  ex  diuerso  hae  causae  quas  in  minore  xx  annorum
domino  rettulimus,  porrigi  possunt  et  ad  seruum  minorem

40  xxx   annorum.          Cum   ergo    certus   modus   manumittendi
minoribus  xx  annorum  dominis  per  legem  Aeliam  Sentiam
constitutus  sit,  euenit  ut  qui  xim  annos  aetatis  expleuerit,
licet  testamentum  facere  possit  et  in  eo  heredem  sibi  insti-
tuere  legataque  relinquere,  tamen  si  adhuc  minor  sit  annorum

41  xx,  libertatem  seruo  dare  non  possit.         Et  quamuis  latinum
facere  uelit  minor  xx  annorum  dominus,  tamen  nihilo  minus
debet  apud  consilium  causam  probare,   et   ita   postea   inter
amicos  manumittere.

42  Praeterea  lege  Fufia  Caninia  certus  modus  constitutus  est

cause ;  to  which  may  be  added  those  causes  already  enumer-
ated in  speaking  of  the  manumission  of  a  slave  under  thirty  ;
(while,  contrariwise,  those  just  specified  may  be  added  to
those  mentioned  when  speaking  of  slaves  under  thirty  as

40  equally  applicable   to   their   case.)         A   certain  limitation
being  thus  imposed  by  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  upon  the  power
of  an  owner  under  twenty  to  make  manumissions,  it  results  that
although  when  he  has  completed  his  fourteenth  year  he  may
make  a  testament,  and  thereby  institute  an  heir  and  bequeath
legacies,  yet  if  he  be  still  under  twenty  he  cannot  enfranchise

41  one  of  his  slaves.         Although  an  owner  under  twenty  may
intend  nothing  more  than  to  make  his  slave  a  latin,  he  is  none
the  less  required  to  establish  the  cause  of  manumission  before
the  council,  and  then  he  may  manumit  informally.

42  The  Fufia-Caninian  law  also  has  imposed  a  limitation  upon

§  40.     §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.  §§    42-46.       Comp.    tit.     I.     DE   LEGE

§  41.     Comp.  §§  20,  38  ;  Fr.  Dos.  §§  6,  FVFIA   CANINIA  SVBLATA    (i,    7).

7,  13.     There  were  various  informal  Before  §  42  is  a  vacant  line,  intended

modes  of  manumission,  of  which  the  probably  for  a  rubric,
principal  were — (1)  inter  amicos,  by       §  42.     Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.      Comp.  ii,  228  ;

verbal    declaration  in    presence   of  Paul,  iv,  14.     The  L.  Fufia  Caninia

friends  ;  (2)  per  epistulam,  by  letter,  has   hitherto  been    usually  known

used  when  slave   from   home  ;  and  under  the  name  L.  furia  Caninia,

(3)  per  mensam,  by  an  invitation  to  and  attributed  to  the  year  761  |  8,

the  slave  to  sit  at   table  with   his  apparently  for  no  other  reason  than

owner  ;  see  Th.  i,  5,  §  4.     Gai.  is  in  that  M.  Furius  Camillus  was  one  of

the   habit   of    including    all    those  the  consuls  of  that  year.     It  seems

informal     modes     of    manumission  to   be   referred   to,   along  with  the

under  the  specific  man.  inter  amicos.  Aelia-Sentian  law,  in  Sueton.  Au<j.

Their  effect  was  to  make  the  manu-  40.
missus  only  a  latin,  §  17.

I,  §§43-45.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  1*7

43  in  seruis  testamento  manumittendis.          nam  ei  qui  plures
quam  duos  neque  plures  quam  decem  seruos  habebit,  usque
ad  partem  dimidiam  eius  numeri  manmnittere  permittitur  ;
ei  uero  qui  plures  quam  x  neque  plures *  quam  xxx  seruos
habebit,  usque  ad  tertiam  partem  eius  numeri  manumittere
permittitur.       at    ei   qui   plures    quam    xxx    neque   plures
quam  centum  habebit,  usque  ad  partem    quartam   potestas
manumittendi  datur.     nouissime  ei  qui  plures  quam  c  habe-
bit nee  plures  quam  D,2  non  plures  manumittere  permittitur
quam   quintam    partem.      neque  plures    numerantur ; 3    sed
praescribit   lex   ne   cui   plures  manumittere   liceat   quam   c
contra,  si*  quis   unum   seruum   omnino  aut  duos  habet,  ad
hanc  legem 5  non  pertinet,  et  ideo  liberam  habet  potestatem

44  manumittendi.         Ac   ne  ad   eos   quidem   omnino  haec  lex
pertinet  qui  sine  testamento  manumittunt.     itaque  licet  iis
qui  uindicta  aut  censu  aut  inter  amicos  manumittunt,  totam
familiam  liberare,  scilicet  si  alia  causa  non  inpediat  libertatem.

45  Sed  quod  de  numero  seruorum  testamento  manumittendorum

43  testamentary  manumission.         It  allows  the  owner  of  from
two  to  ten  slaves  to  manumit  to  the  extent  of  one-half  of  the
actual  number;  him  who  has  more  than  ten  but  not  over
thirty  to  manumit  a  third  of  them ;  and  him  who  has  over
thirty  but  not  more  than  a  hundred  to  manumit  a  fourth.
Lastly,  he  who  has  more  than  a  hundred  but  not  more  than
five  hundred  is  not  allowed  to  manumit  more  than  a  fifth  of
the  number.     The  enumeration  proceeds  no  further ;  but  the
enactment  forbids  any  one  to  manumit  more  than  a  hundred
of  his  slaves  in  all.     On  the  other  hand,  it  does  not  affect  him
who  has  only  one  slave  or  at  most  two ;  his  power  of  rnanu-

44  mitting  is  unrestricted.         Nor  does  the  enactment  apply  in
any    way   to   manumissions    otherwise   than    by    testament.
Accordingly,  by  vindicta,  or  by  the  census,  or  informally,  a
man  may  if  he  pleases  manumit  his  whole  slave  establish-

45  ment,  provided  always  there  be  no  other  impediment.         As
regards  the  number  that  may  be  manumitted  by  testament,  it

§  43.    Comp.  Vlp.  i,  24  ;  Paul,  iv,  14,  §  4.  after  neque  plures  Hu.    supplies  —

1  The  words  quam  X  neque  plures  quam  D  habentis  ratio  habetur,  ut  ex
are  a  marginal  amendment.  KO  numero  pars  definiatur.

2  The  words  nee  plures  quam  D  *  The  contra  si  is  from  P.  ;  the
are  an  interlinear  addition,  which  MS.    has  cqsi;   K.   u.   S.   and  Hu.
P.  omits.  quod  si.

3  So  Gou.  ;  the  MS.  has  only  atur,  b  Ad  hanc  legem  is  the  reading  of
without  any  space    between   those  the  MS.  ;  P.  suggests  ad  hunc  lex.
letters  and  the  antecedent  plures ;      §  45.     Comp.  Vlp.  i,  24.

B

18

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [r,  §§  45,  46.

diximus  ita  intellegemus,  ne  umquam  ex  eo  numero  ex  quo
dimidia  aut  tertia  aut  quarta  aut  quinta  pars  liberari  potest,
— •  —  —  — l  liceat  quam  ex  antecedent!  numero  licuit.
et  hoc  ipsa  (ratione)  *  prouisum  est :  erat  enim  sane  absurdum,
ut  X  seruorum  domino  quinque  liberare  liceret,  quia  usque
ad  dimidiam  partem  eius  numeri  manumittere  ei  conceditur,
alteri  autem  3  xii  seruos  habenti  non  plures  liceret  manumittere
quam  mi ;  at  eis  qui  plures  quam  X  neque  — •  —  —  —
45a .«  [45a] [46]  Nam

is  to  be  understood  that  a  man  entitled  to  enfranchise  the
half,  or  a  third,  fourth,  or  fifth  part  of  his  whole  establish-
ment is  in  no  case  to  lie  limited  to  a  smaller  number  than  he
might  have  liberated  had  such  establishment  been  reckoned
on  the  immediately  preceding  [i.e.  the  next  lowest]  scale.
This  interpretation  of  the  statute  is  dictated  by  common  sense ;
for  verily  it  would  be  absurd  that,  while  the  owner  of  ten
slaves  might  enfranchise  five  of  them,  because  the  statute
empowers  him  to  manumit  to  the  extent  of  a  half,  another
owning  twelve  should  not  be  allowed  to  enfranchise  more
than  four ;  and  so  he  who  has  more  than  ten,  but  not  [more
[than  fourteen,  may  enfranchise  Jive,  though  this  number  is
45a  [greater  than  a  third  of  his  whole  establishment.  If  any  one
[have  intended  to  manumit  by  testament  a  greater  number  than
[aforesaid,  the  order  in  which  he  has  named  them  is  to  be  scrupu-

1  P.  fills  the  lacuna  with  pauciores
manumitti ;  K.  u.  S.  and  Hu.  pau-
ciores manumittere.

2  So  P. ;  Hu.  and  K.  u.  S.  have
ipsa  lege.     Both  are  objectionable,
so  thatGou.  suggests  epeciali  senatus-
comulto.      The    ipsa    in    the    sis.,
however,  is  quite  distinct,  although
the  next  word  is  illegible.

3  Hu.    reads    ulteriua  autem,    P.
simply  ut,   K.  u.   S.  domino  uero.
The  letters  in  the  MS.  are  interlined,
and  the   reading  in  the  text  seems
best  to  correspond  to  them.

4  The  par.  ends  on  p.  12,  which
is  almost  quite  illegible.     Hu.  con-
jectures— neque  plures  quam   XXX
habent,   eadem  ratione  utique  etiam
quinque,     quot     X    habenti     licuit,
manumittere  licet.      I   prefer  some-
thing like  this — neque  plures  quam
XIV    habent,    quinque    manumittere
permittitur,  licet  amplior  sit  numerus
quam  tertia  pars.

§  45c«.    P.  12  of  the  MS.  is  illegible.    But

in  the  Epit.  i,  2,  §  2,  immediately
preceding  the  words  standing  in  the
text  as  part  of  §  46,  we  read  : — Si
aliquis  ex  testamento  plures  manu-
mittere uoluerit  quam  continet
numerus  supra  scriptus,  ordo  ser-
uandus  est :  ut  illis  tantum  libertas
ualeat  qui  prius  manumissi  sunt,
usque  ad  ilium  numerum  quern  ex-
planatio  continet  superius  compre-
hensa  :  qui  uero  postea  supra  con-
stitutum  numerum  manumissi  legun-
tur,  integre  in  seruitute  eos  cerium
est  permanere.  Quod  si  non  nomi-
natimserui  uelancillae  in  testamento
manumittantur,  sed  confuse  omnes
seruos  suos  uel  ancillas  is  qui  testa-
mentumfacit  liber os  facere  uoluerit,
nulli  penitus  firma  esse  iubetur  hoc
ordine  data  libertas,  sed  omnes  in
seruili  condicione,  qui  hoc  ordine
manumissi  sunt,  permanebunt.
Comp.  ii,  239  ;  Vlp.  i,  25.
§  46.  Comp.  21a;  45a,  note  ;  Epit.  i,  2,
§  2  ;  ii,  239.

I,  §§46-49.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOK.  19

46  et   si  testamento  scriptis  in  orbem  seruis  libertas  data  sit,
quia  nullus  ordo  manumissionis  inuenitur,  nulli  liberi  erunt ;
quia  lex   Fufia   Caninia  quae    in   fraudem   eius   facta    sint
rescindit.     sunt   etiam   specialia   senatusconsulta   quibus  re-
scissa  sunt  ea  quae  in  fraudem  eius  legis  excogitata  sunt.

47  In  surnma  sciendum  est,  [cum]  lege  Aelia  Sentia  cautum
sit  ut  creditorum  fraudandorum  causa  manumissi  liberi  non
fiant,  etiam  hoc  ad  peregrines  pertinere, — senatus  ita  ceusuit
ex  auctoritate  Hadriani :  cetera  uero  iura  eius  legis  ad  pere-
grines non  pertinere.

48  Sequitur  de  iure  personarum  alia  diuisio.      nam  quaedam
personae  sui  iuris  sunt,  quaedam  alieno  iuri  subiectae  sunt.

49  Sed  rursus  earum  personarum  quae  alieno  iuri  subiectae  suut,

[lously  observed  ;  the  gift  of  freedom  will  avail  those  only  who
[are  first  manumitted  andwithin  the  lawful  number, as  explained
[above,  while  those  mentioned  afterwards  and  beyond  that  num-
[ber  unquestionably  remain  in  slavery.  If  the  slaves  be  not
[manumitted  each  by  name,  but  the  testator  has  attempted  to
[enfranchise  them  in  mass,  the  freedom  thus  conferred  will  be  of
[no  avail  to  any  of  them ;  on  the  contrary,  all  who  have  been
[thus  manumitted  will  still  continue  in  their  old  condition  as

46  [slaves.]         And  so,  if  the  names  of  the  slaves  to  be  en-
franchised be  written  in  the  testament  in  a  circle,  as  there  is
thus  no  order  or  sequence  that  can  be  followed,  none  of  them
will  be  free;   for  the  Fufia-Caninian  law  nullifies  anything
done  in  fraud  of  it.     There  are  besides  some  special  senatus-
consults  rescindiDg  acts  devised  to  defeat  the  statute.

47  Finally,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  provision  of  the  Aelia-Sen-
tian  law  negativing  the  freedom  of  slaves  manumitted  in  fraud
of  creditors  applies  even  to  peregrins, — so  it  was  declared  by
the  senate  at  the  instance  of  Hadrian ;  the  other  provisions
of  the  statute,  however,  have  not  been  extended  to  them.

48  Now  comes  another  division  of  the  law  of  persons ;  for  some
are  sui  iuris  [or  their  own  masters],  others  alieni  iuris  [or

49  domestically  dependent].         Further,  of  those  who  are  alieni

§  47.     Comp.  §  37.  §  49.     Comp.  Fr.  Vat.  §§  298,  300  ;  L.

§§  48-54.  Comp.  tit.    I.  DE  HIS  QVI  Sri  Salpensana,  c.  22  (Bruns,  p.   121).

VEL  ALIENI  IVRIS  SVNT  (i,  8).     In  Persons  in  potestate  are  dealt  with

the  MS.  there  is  a  vacant  line  before  in   §§    52-107,    125-136  ;    those   in

%  48,  probably  for  a  rubric.  manu    in    §§    108-115,    137;    and

§§48-51.    Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.,  which  of  course  those    in   mancipio   in  §§  116-123,

omits  mention  of  mamts  and  man-  138-141.
cipium.

20  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIV1LIS       [I,  §§  49-53.

aliae   in   potestate,   aliae   in  manu,   aliae  in  mancipio  sunt.

50  Videamus  nunc  de  iis  quae  alierio  iuri  subiectae  sint :  si  cog-
nouerimus  quae  istae  personae  sint,  siraul  intellegemus  quae

51  sui  iuris  sint.         Ac  prius  dispiciamus  de  iis  qui  in  aliena
potestate  sunt.

52  In  potestate  itaque  sunt  serui  dominonim, — quae  quidem
potestas  iuris  gentium l  est :  nam  apud  omnes  peraeque  gentes
animaduertere  possumus   dominis   in   seruos  uitae   necisque
potestatem   esse,2 — et    quodcumque   per   seruum   adquiritur,

53  id  domino    adquiritur.3          sed  hoc    tempore  neque  ciuibus
Eomanis,  nee  ullis  aliis  hominibus  qui  sub  imperio  populi
Eomani  sunt,  licet  supra  modum  et  sine  causa  in  seruos  suos
saeuire  :  nam,  ex  constitutione  imperatoris  Antonini,  qui  sine
causa   seruum   suum    occiderit   non    minus   teneri    iubetur
quam  qui  alienum   seruum    occiderit.     sed  et  maior  quoque
asperitas   dominorum  per  eiusdem  principis   constitutionem
coercetur  :  nam,  consultus  a  quibusdam  praesidibus  prouin-
ciarum   de  his   seruis  qui   ad   fana  deorum  uel   ad  statuas
principium  confugiunt,  praecepit,  ut  si  intolerabilis  uideatur

iuris,  some  are  in  potestate,  others  in  manu,  others  in  mancipio.
v    50  Let  us  see  first  who  are  alicni  iuris ;  from  that  we  can  gather

51  who  are  sui  iuris.         And  let  us  begin  with  those  who  are  in
another  person's  potestas.

52  Slaves,  then,  are  in  the  potestas  of  their  owners, — and  this
potestas  is  iuris  gentium ;  for  we  find  that  amongst  all  nations
alike  owners  have  the  power  of  life  and  death  over  their
slaves, — and  whatever  is  acquired  by  a  slave  is  acquired  for

53  his  owner.         But  at  the  present  day  neither  Roman  citizens
nor  any  other  persons  subject  to  the  sway  of  Rome  are  allowed
to  inflict  excessive  or  causeless  cruelties  upon  their  slaves ;
for,  by  a  constitution  of  our  emperor  Antonine's,  any  one
causelessly  killing  his  slave  is  as  much  amenable  to  justice  as
if  he  had  killed  a  slave  of  a  third  party.     Even  great  severity
on  the  part  of  owners  is  restrained  by  a  constitution  of  our
same  sovereign's;    for,  being  consulted  by  some   provincial
governors  as  to  what  was  to  be  done  with  slaves  seeking  an
asylum  in  temples  or  at  imperial  statues,  he  replied  that  if
the  harshness  of  their  owners  seemed  really  to  be  intolerable,

<  .V2.     §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  3  Comp.  ii,  §§  86,  88  ;  iii,  §§  163,

'  Comp.   Vlp.   in  fr.    4,  D.   de  I.  166.

et  I.  (i,  1).  §  53.     §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  ;  Vlp.  in  CoUat.

2  Comp.  Senec.  de  benef.  iii,  23,  §3.  iii,  3,  §§  1-3.

/          1  c     f
X

I,  §§  53-55.]

COMMENTAPJI  QVATTVOR.

21

domiuorum  saeuitia,  cogantur  seruos  suos  uendere.  et
utrumque  recte  fit : l  male  enim  nostro  lure  uti  non  debemus  ;
qua  ratione  et  prodigis  interdicitur  bonorum  suorum  adminis-

54  tratio.2         Ceterum   cum   apud   ciues    Romanes   duplex  sit
dominium, — nam  uel  in  boiiis  uel  ex  hire  Quiritium  uel  ex
utroque  iure   cuiusque  seruus  esse  intellegitur, — ita  dernum
seruum  in  potestate  domini  esse  dicemus  si  in  bonis  eius  sit,
etiamsi  simul  ex  iure  Quiritium  eiusdem  non  sit :  nam  qui
nudum  ins  Quiritium  in  semo  habet,  is  potestatem  habere
non  intellegitur.

55  Item   in   potestate    nostra   sunt   liberi   nostri   quos  iustis
nuptiis l  procreauimus.     quod  ius  proprium  ciuium  Romano-
ruui  est : '  fere  enim  nulli  alii  sunt  homines  qui  talem  in  filios

these  last  should  be  compelled  to  sell  the  slaves  in  question.
And  in  both  cases  he  resolved  justly ;  for  one  ought  not  to
misuse  his  right, — a  principle  we  acknowledge  in  interdicting

54  the  administration  of  his  estate  to  a  spendthrift.         But  as
amongst  Roman  citizens  there  is  a  double  ownership, — for  a
slave  may  belong  to  a  man  either  on  a  bonitarian  or  a  quiri-
tarian  title,  or  on  both  at  once, — a  slave  is  in  the  potestas  of
the  owner  who  has   him  in  bonis  [or  in   bonitarian  right],
although  not  at  the  same  time  holding  the  quiritarian  title  ;
for  he  who  has  the  bare  quiritarian  right  over  a  slave  is  not
regarded  as  having  him  in  potestate.

55  Likewise  in  our  potestas  are  those  of  our  children  begotten
in  a  marriage  approved  by  the  ius  ciuile.     This  right  is  one
peculiar  to  Roman  citizens :  there  are  scarcely  any  other  men

1  After  Jit  the   MS.  has  regula ;
the    word    has    evidently    been    a
marginal  note  on  the  original,  but
stupidly    transferred    by  the    tran-
scriber to  the  text.     See  the  same
mistake  in  iii,  §§113,  126.

2  Comp.    Vlp.  xx,   13  ;  Paul,   iii,
4o,  §  7.

54.  Comp.  §  35  ;  ii,  40,  and  note;  ii,
88  ;  iii,  166  ;  Vlp.  i,  16  ;  Th.  i,  5,
§  4.     It  is  from  the  Sio-xorni  /2«v<-
ra.fia;  of  the  latter  that  the  phrase
'  bonitarian  ownership  '  is  borrowed,
as    a    convenient    rendering    of    in
bonis.

55.  Comp.   tit.    I.    DE    PATRIA    POTE-
STATE (i,  9)  ;  also  Vlp.  v,  1.

1  lustae    nuptiae    would   not   be

adequately  rendered  by  '  lawful
wedlock.'  There  were  many  in'msta
or  illegitvma  matrimonia  that  were
quite  lawful,  though  only  as  iurla
gentium  alliances,  unproductive  of
the  pure  civil  law  consequences
of  Roman  marriage  ;  see  §  77,  last
clause  ;  ii,  241.

2  That  the  colonial  latins  had  a
patria  potestas  of  their  own,  as  also
a  manus  and  mancipium,  is  said  to
be  established  by  chaps.  21  and  22
of  the  lex  Salpensana,  referred  to  in
note  to  §  22.  It  is  evident  that  tin-
burgesses  of  Salpensa,  and  probably
al.so  of  Malaga,  enjoyed  those  rights;
but  this  may  possibly  have  been  din-
to  some  special  concession  to  those

22  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVIL1S       [I,  §§  K-57.

suos  habent  potestatem  qualem  nos  habemus ;  idque  diui
Hadrian!  edicto,  quod  proposuit  de  his  qui  sibi  liberisque
suis  ab  eo  ciuitatem  Romanam  petebant,  significatur.3  (nee
me  praeterit  Galatarum  gentem  credere  in  potestate  parentum
liberos  esse.)

56  [Tustas  autem  nuptias  dues  Romani  contraxisse  intelleguntur]
si   ernes  Eomanas  uxores  duxerint,   uel  etiam  latinas  pere-
grinasue  cum  quibus  conubium  habeant :    cum  enim  conubium
id  efficiat 1  ut  liberi  patris  condicionem  sequantur,  euenit  ut
non  [solum] 2  ciues  Eomani  fiant  sed  et  in  potestate  patris  sint.

57  Unde    causa    cognita l    ueteranis    quibusdam    concedi   solet
principalibus    constitutionibus   conubium    cum    his     latinis

who  have  over  their  sons  such  a  power  as  we  have ; — a  fact
noticed  by  our  late  emperor  Hadrian  in  an  edict  of  his  in
reference  to  persons  applying  for  a  grant  of  citizenship  for
themselves  and  their  children.  (It  does  not  escape  me,  how-
ever, that  the  Galatians  maintain  that  their  children'  are  in
potestate  of  their  parents.)

56  Roman  citizens  are  held  to  have  contracted  a  marriage  approved
~by  the  ius  ciuile  if  they  have  taken  Eoman  citizens  for  their
wives,   or  even  latins  or  peregrins  with   whom  they  hare
conubium  [or  right  of  intermarriage].   Yor  as  it  is  a  consequence
of  this  right  of  intermarriage  that  the  children  follow  the
condition  [or  status]  of  their  fathers,  it  thus  comes  to  pass  not
only  that  they  become  Eoman  citizens,  but  that  they  are  in

57  their  father's  potestas.         Further,  after  investigation  of  the
circumstances,  imperial  constitutions  have  occasionally  con-
ceded to  veterans  the  right  of  intermarriage  with  such  latin

municipia,  which  appear  to  have  §  56.  Lines  5  and  6  of  p.  15  are  blank,
been  exceptionally  favoured.  See  and,  according  to  Stud. ,  have  never
Houdoy,  Le  droit  municipal  chez  ha  been  written  on.  The  first  may
domains  (Par.  1876),  pp.  32  f.  See  probably  have  been  for  a  rubric,  and
also  the  passage  in  the  L.Salpensana,  the  second  for  such  words  as  printed
in  Bruns,  p.  121.  above  in  ital.  ;  they  are  from  pr.
3  After  significatur  P.  interpolates  tit.  I.  afd.  Comp.  Vlp.  v,  §§  2,  3,
sic,  so  as  to  impute  the  words  nee  4,  8.
me  praeterit,  etc. ,  to  Hadrian  ;  and  a  Comp.  §  80.
Hu.  gives  effect  to  the  same  idea  by  s  The  sense  requires  the  inter-
introducing  a  it  after  praeterit.  But  polation  of  solum,  modo,  or  some
it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  the  equivalent.

emperor,    in   granting   a  favour  to       §  57.     There    exist    numerous     tabulae

a  suppliant,  would  have  sought  thus  honestae  missionis  containing  such

to  depreciate  his  gift  ;  besides,   nee  concessions,  some  of  them  found  in

me  praeterit  is  a  locution  of  which  Britain  ;    see   examples    in    Bruns,

Gaius  was  fond,  as  see  i,  73,  iii,  76,  pp.  177-79.

iv.  24.  J  So  P.  interprets  the  cc  of  the

§§56-96.      Comp.    tit.    I.    DE  XVPTIIS  MS.  ;  K.  u.  S.,  Hu.,  and  other  eds.,

(i,  10).  convert  them  into  et.

I,  §§57-60.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  23

peregrinisue  quas  primas  post  missionem  uxores  duxerint;
et  qui  ex  eo  matrimonio  nascuntur  et  ciues  Romani  et  in
potestate  parenturn  fiunt.

58  [Non  omnes  ciues  Eomanas  nobis  uxores  ducere  licet]  :  nam  a

59  quarundam  nuptiis   abstinere    debemus.         Inter   eas   enim
personas  quae  parentum  liberorumue  locum  inter  se  optinent,
nuptiae  contrabi  non  possunt,  nee   inter  eas  conubium  est,
ueluti  inter  patrem  et  filiam  uel  matrem  et  filium  uel  auum
et  neptem ;  et  si  tales  personae  inter  se  coierint,  nefarias  et
incestas  nuptias  contraxisse  dicuntur.     et  haec  adeo  ita  sunt,
nt  quamuis  per  adoptionem  parentum  liberorumue  loco  sibi
esse  coeperint,  non  possint  inter  se  matrimonio  coniungi,  in
tantum   ut   etiam   dissoluta   adoptione   idem    iuris    maneat.
itaque  earn  quae  mini  adoptione  filiae  seu  neptis  loco  esse
coeperit,  non  potero  uxorem   ducere,  quamuis  earn    emanci-

60  pauerim.1         Inter  eas  quoque  personas  quae  ex  transuerso

or  peregrin  women  as  they  should  take  for  their  first  wives
after  their  discharge ;  the  issue  of  such  marriages  are  Roman
citizens  and  in  the  potestas  of  their  parents.

58  It  is  not  every  woman  who  is  a  Roman  citizen  that  we  may
lawfully  take  to  wife :  from  some  marriages  we  are  bound  to

59  abstain.         Marriage  cannot  be  contracted,  nor  is  there  any
comibium,  between  those  who  stand  to  each  other   in   the
relation  of  ascendants  and  descendants,  for  example,  father  and
daughter,  mother  and  son,  grandfather  and  granddaughter  ;  if
such  persons  have  formed  a  union,  they  are  said  to  have  con-
tracted a  nefarious  and  incestuous  marriage.     So  far  is  this
the  case,  that,  though  the  relationship  of  parent  and  child  may
have  been  created  only  by  adoption,  they  cannot  be  united  in
marriage, — no,  not  even  when  the  bond  of  adoption  has  been
dissolved.     la 'like  manner  I  cannot  take  her  to  wife  who  by
adoption  has  once  become  my  daughter   or  granddaughter,
even  though   I   may   subsequently   have    emancipated  her.

60  The  same  observation  applies  to  the  case  of  persons  related

58.    Again  two  vacant  lines  in  the  MS.  §  59.    §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Vlp.  v,  6;

Hu.   suggests — Cum  seruilibus  uero  Paul,  in  Collat.  vi,  3,  §§  1,  2.

personisne  nuptiae  quidemsunt.  Sed  '  Although  the  artificial  relation  -

nec  liberas  omnes  nobis  uxores  ducere  ship  was  dissolved  (§  158),  yet  it  was

licet.    But  probably  the  first  line  was  repugnant  to  one's  sense  of  propriety

meant  for  a  rubric,  and  the  next  one  to  allow  those  who  had  once  been

intended  to  run  somewhat  as  printed  related     as    parent    and    child    to

above  in  ital.     The  words  are  from  afterwards    become    husband     and

§  1,  tit.  I.  afd. ;  ciues  Romanas  being  wife.

interpolated  to  adapt  them  to  the  §§  60,  61.     §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Vlp.

state  of  matters  in  the  time  of  Gai.  and  Paul,  as  in  last  note.

24  GAII  INST1TVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS       [I,  §§  60-63.

gradu  cognatione  iunguntur,  est  quaedam  similis  obseruatio,

61  sed  non  tanta.         sane  inter  fratrem  et  sororem  prohibitae
sunt  nuptiae,  sine  eodem  patre  eademque  matre  nati  fuerint
sine  alterutro  eorum.     sed  si  qua  per  adoptionem  soror  mihi
esse  coeperit,  quamdiu  quidem  constat  adoptio,  sane  inter  me
et  earn  nuptiae  non  possunt  consistere  ;  cum  uero  per  eman-
cipationem  adoptio  dissoluta  sit,  potero  earn  uxorem  ducere ;
sic   etiam  si  ego  emancipatus  fuero  nib.il  impedimento   erit

62  uuptiis.         Fratris  filiam  uxorem  ducere  licet :  idque  primum
in  usum  uenit  cum  diuus  Claudius  Agrippinam   fratris   sui
filiam  uxorem  duxisset ; J  sororis  uero  filiam  uxorem  ducere
non  licet.2     et  haec  ita  principalibus  constitutionibus  signifi-

63  cantur.         Item  amitam  et  materteram  uxorem  ducere  non
licet;  item  earn,  quae  mihi  quondam  socrus  aut   nurus  aut
priuigna  aut  nouerca  fuit.     ideo  autern  diximus  '  quondam,'
quia  si  adhuc  constant  eae  nuptiae,  per  quas  talis  adfinitas
quaesita  est,  alia  ratione  mihi  nupta  esse  non  potest  ;  quia

61  collaterally,  though  not  quite  to  the  same  extent.         As  a
matter  of  course  marriage  is  prohibited  between  brother  and
sister,  whether  so  related  through  both  parents  or  only  through
one.     If  a  woman  have  become  my  sister  by  adoption,  then
assuredly,  so  long  as  the  bond  exists,  we  cannot  marry  ;  but
if  the  adoption  be  put  an  end  to  by  her  emancipation  I  may
take  her  to  wife  ;  and  the  impediment  will  equally  be  removed

62  by  my  emancipation.         A   man   may  lawfully   marry  his
brother's  daughter,  the  practice  having  been  introduced  by
the  emperor  Claudius,  who  took  to  wife  his  brother's  daughter
Agrippina ;    but   he   is   not   allowed   to    marry  his    sister's
daughter.     The  distinction  is  recognised  in  various  imperial

63  constitutions.         It  is  also  unlawful  to  marry  a  father's  or
mother's  sister.     Neither  can  I  marry  her  who  has  aforetime
been  my  mother-in-law  or  step-mother,  or  daughter-in-law  or
step-daughter.     I  say  '  aforetime ; '  for  if  the  marriage  which
has  created  the  affinity  still  subsist,  I  cannot  take  her  to  wife

§  62.  Comp.  Vlp.  v,  6  ;  §§  3,  5,  tit.  I.  afd.  2  Marriage  with  the  daughter  of

1  Comp.  Tac.  Ann.  xii,  5-7  ;  Suet.  either  a  brother  or  sister  was  forbid-

Claud.  §  26.     Domitian,  following  den  by  Constantius  in  339  ;  1.  1,  C.

the  example  of  Claudius,  married  the  Th.  de  incest,  nupt.  (iii,  12).
daughter  of  his  brother  Titus ;  Suet.       §  63.    Comp.  Vlp.  v,  6  ;  Paul,  in  Collat.

Dom.  22.     Nerva  is  said  to  have  re-  vi,  3,  §  3  ;  §§  6,  7,  tit.  I.  afd.    Most

pealed  the  Claudian  enactment ;  but  eds.  throw  item  amitam  .    .    .  licet

the  rule  it  established  seems  to  have  into  §  62,  and  begin  §  63  with  item

revived.  earn.

I,  §§  63-66.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

25

neque  eadern  duobus  nupta   esse   potest,   neque   idem   duas
uxores  habere.

64  Ergo  si  quis  nefarias  atque  incestas  nuptias  contraxerit,
neque  uxorem  habere  uidetur  neque  liberos.     itaque  hi  qui
ex   eo    coitu    nascuntur  matrem   quidem    habere   uiclentur,
patrem  uero  non  utique,1  nee  ob  id  in  potestate  eius  sunt,
[sed  tales  sunt 2]  quales  sunt  hi  quos  mater  uulgo 3  concepit :
nam  et  hi  patrem  habere  non  intelleguntur,  cum   is  etiam
incertus  sit ;  unde  solent  spurii  filii   appellari,  uel  a  Graecu,
uoce  quasi  <r-/ropa^v  concepti,  uel  quasi  sine  patre  filii.4

65  [Aliquando  autem  euenit,  ut  libcri  qui  staiim  ut  nati~\  sunt
parentum  in  potestate  non  fiant,  postea  tamen  redigantur  in

66  potestatem.         (Nam  si  latinus)1  ex  lege  Aelia  Sentia  uxore
clucta  filium  procreauerit,  aut  latintnn  ex  latina,  aut  ciuem  Eo-

for  this  other  reason,  —  that  neither  can  the  same  woman  have
two  husbands,  nor  can  the  same  man  have  two  wives.
64  He  who  contracts  a  nefarious  and  incestuous  marriage  is
held  to  have  neither  wife  nor  children  ;  therefore  the  issue  of
the  connection,  while  indeed  they  are  held  to  have  a  mother,
yet  are  not  held  to  have  a  father,  and  so  are  not  in  his  potestas.
They  are  in  much  the  same  position  as  those  whom  a  woman
has  conceived  in  promiscuous  intercourse  ;  for  these  are  not
regarded  as  having  any  father,  his  identity  being  uncertain.
Whence  it  is  that  they  are  called  spurious  children,  either
(from  a  Greek  word)  as  being,  as  it  were,  conceived  here  and
there,  ffvopddw,  or  as  being  children  without  a  father.

65  It  sometimes  happens  that   children   who   are  not   in   the
potestas  of  their  parents  at  birth  are  yet  subjected  to  it  after-

66  wards.         For  instance,  if  a  latin  who  has  married  in  terms  of
the  Aelia-Sentian  law  have  begotten  a  son,  —  whether  a  latin  of
a  latin  wife,  or  a  Eoman  citizen  of  a  Roman  wife,  —  he  will  not

§  64.    §  12,  tit.  I.  afd.    Comp.  Vlp.  iv,  2  ;

v,  7.

1  P.   transposes   thus — non  uero
patrem,  nee  ob  id  in  potestate  eius
sunt;  quales  utique  sunt  hi,  etc.

2  The  words  sed  tales  sunt  are  sup-
plied by  K.  u.  S.  after  the  lead  of  the
Inst.  ;   Hu.    reads    sed  sunt  quales
ii,  etc.

3  Uulgo   would   not  be   properly
translated  by  '  out  of  wedlock, '  for
the  children  of  a  concubine  were  not

spvrii  but   liberi  naturales;  comp.
§  19,  note  1.

4  Such  a  child  often  had  the  letters
S.  P.  (sine  patre)  appended  to  his
name.

65.  Two  lines  vacant,   the  first  pro-
bably for  a  rubric.     The  second  is
supplied  from  §  13,  tit.  I.  afd.

66.  Comp.  §§  29,  80  ;  Vlp.  vii,  4.

1  The  words  nam  si  latinus  are
illegible,  but  obvious  from  context.

26  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS       [I,  §§  66-68.

manum  ex  ciue  Eomana,  non  habebit  eum  in  potestate ;

—    —    —  2     simul  ergo  eum  in  potestate  sua  habere  incipit.

67  Item  si  ciuis  Eomanus  latinam  aut  peregrinam  uxorem  duxeiit
per  ignorantiam,  cum  earn  ciuem  Eomanam  esse  crederet,  et
lilium  procreauerit,  hie  non  est  in   potestate  eius,  quia  ne
quidem  ciuis  Eomanus  est,  sed  aut  latinus  aut  pereghnua,  id
est   eius  condicionis  cuius  et  mater  fuerit;   quia  non  aliter
quisquam  ad  patris  condicionem  accedit  quam  si  inter  patrem
et    matrem    eius    conubium   sit.      sed   ex    senatusconsulto l
permittitur    ei  causam  erroris  probare,  et  ita  uxor   quoque
et  films    ad  ciuitatem  Eomanam  perueniunt,  et  ex  eo  tern-
pore   incipit   films  in  potestate   patris  esse.     idem  iuris  est
si  earn  per  ignorantiam  uxorem  duxerit   quae  dediticiorum
numero     est,      nisi     quod     uxor     non    fit    ciuis     Eomaiia.

68  Item    si   ciuis    Eomana   per    errorem   nupta  sit    peregrino
tamquam  ciui  Eomano,  permittitur  ei  causam  erroris  probare,

have  that  son  in  his  potestas;  [but  if  afterwards,  on  cause  shown
[Bunder  the   statute,  the  father   become  a  Roman   citizen,']  he

67  thereupon  at  once  begins  to  have  him  in  potestate.         So,  if  a
Eoman  citizen  have  in  ignorance  taken  to  wife  a  latin  or  a
peregrin,  believing  her  to  be  a   Eoman   citizen,   and   have
begotten  a  son,  the  latter  is  not  in  his  father's  potestas,  because
he  is  not  a  Eoman  citizen,  but  either  a  latin  or  a  peregrin,
that  is,  of  the  same  condition  as  his  mother ;  for  no  one  can
follow  his  father's  [status  or]  condition  unless  there  has  been
conubium  between  his  father  and  mother.     But  by  the  senatus-
consult  he  is  allowed  to  prove  cause  of  error,  whereby  both
his  wife  and  son  attain  to  citizenship  ;  and  from  that  moment
his  son  begins  to  be  in  his  potestas.     And  the  same  rule  holds
if  through  ignorance  he  has  married  a  woman  from  amongst
those  who  are  accounted  dediticians,  except  that  she  does  not

68  become  a  Eoman  citizen.         So  also  if  a  woman  who  is  a
Eoman  citizen  has  by  mistake  married  a  peregrin  as  if  he

2  About  a  line  almost  entirely  ille-  §§  30,  80,  81,  92,  and  Vlp.  iii,  3,

gible.     Bk.  suggests — sed  si  postea  and   in  all   of  them   attributed  to

causa  probata  ciuitatem  Romanam  Hadrian, — a   comprehensive   enact-

consecutu-s  est  pater,  which  suits  the  ment  regulating  the  birth- status  of

sense,  and,  with  the  usual  contrac-  children,  and  inter  alia  introducing

tions,    suits  the   space.      The  sug-  error  is  cauaae  probatio  as  a  means

gestions  of  K.  u.  S.  and   Hu.    are  of  improving  it.    The  fact  that  both

substantially  the  same.  Hadrian  and  Antoninus  Pius  found

i    67,  68.     Comp.    §§  26,   80;    ii,   142;  it   necessary  to   explain   it  by   re-

iii,  §§  5,  73  ;  Vlp.  vii,  41.  scripts  (§§  73,  74)  argues  for  its  then

1  There  is  reason  for  thinking  that  recent  enactment,
this  Set.  is  the  same  as  referred  to  in

I,  §§68-71.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  27

et  ita  films  quoque  eius  et  maritus  ad  ciuitatem  Romanam
perueniunt,  et  aeque  simul  incipit  filius  inpotestate  patris
esse.  idem  iuris  est  si  peregrine  tamquam  latino  ex  lege
Aelia  Sentia  nupta  sit;  nam  et  de  hoc  specialiter  sena-
tusconsulto  cauetur.  idem  iuris  est  aliquatenus  si  ei  qui
dediticiorum  numero  est  tamquam  ciui  Romano  aut  latino  e
lege  Aelia  Sentia  nupta  sit,  nisi  quod  scilicet  qui  dediticiorum
numero  est  in  sua  condicione  permanet,  et  ideo  filius,  quamuis
fiat  ciuis  Romanus,  in  potestatem  patris  non  redigitur.

69  Item   si   latina  peregrine,  cum   eum   latinum  esse  crederet,
nupserit,  potest  ex  senatusconsulto  filio  nato  causam  erroris
probare,  (et  ita)  omnes  fiunt  ciues  Romani,  et  filius  in  potestate

70  patris  esse  incipit.         Idem  constitutum  est   si  latinus  per
errorem  peregrinam  quasi  latinam  aut  ciuem  Romanam  e  lege

71  Aelia  Sentia  uxorein  duxerit.         Praeterea  si  ciuis  Romanus,
qui  se  credidisset  latinum  esse,  ob  id  latinam  [duxerit],  permit-

also  were  a  citizen,  she  is  permitted  to  prove  cause  of  error,
whereby  both  her  son  and  her  husband  acquire  the  status  of
citizens,  the  former  beginning  at  the  same  time  to  be  in
potestate  of  the  latter.  The  same  is  the  case  if  she  have
married  a  peregrin  under  the  belief  she  was  marrying  a  latin
in  terms  of  the  Aelia-Sentian  law ;  this  is  a  contingency
specially  provided  for  in  the  senatusconsult.  And  the  same
is  also  to  some  extent  the  case  if  she  have  married  a  man
from  the  ranks  of  those  reckoned  as  dediticians,  believing  him
to  be  either  a  Roman  citizen  or  a  latin  privileged  by  the
Aelia-Sentian  law ;  only  here  the  quasi-deditician  husband
retains  his  status,  and  his  son,  though  becoming  a  Roman

69  citizen,  does  not  pass  into  his  potestas.         So  likewise  if  a
latin  woman  have  married  a  peregrin  whom  she  believed  to
be  a  latin,  she  may,  under  the  senatusconsult,  on  the  birth  of
a  son,  prove  cause  of  error,  whereby   all  of  them  become
Roman  citizens,  and  the  son  passes  into  the  potestas  of  his

70  father.         Exactly  the  same  is  the  rule  where  a  latin  has  by
mistake  married  a  peregrin  woman,  in  the  manner  enjoined  by
the  Aelia-Sentian  law,  under  the  impression  she  was  a  latin

71  or  a  Roman  citizen.         Further,  if  a  Roman  citizen,  believing
himself  to  be  a  latin,  have  on  that  account  married  a  latin

§  71.    The  statement  in  the  first  part  of  Sentian  law.     It  is  this  probably

the  par.  is  unsatisfactory ;  for  it  was  that  has  led  Hu.  to  make  a  trans-

not    cause   of   error,    but   cause   of  position,  and  to  read — ob  id  latinam

marriage  that  was  shoM-n  by  a  latin  tamquam  e  lege  Aelia  Sentia  uxorem

married    in    terms    of    the    Aelia-  duxerit,  permittitur,  etc.

28

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS       [f,  §§  71-74.

titur  ei  filio  nato  erroris  causam  probare,  tamquam  [si]  e  lege
Aelia  Sentia  uxorem  duxisset.  Item  his  qui,  cum  ciues
Eomani  essent,  peregrines  se  esse  credidissent  et  peregrinas
uxores  duxissent,  permittitur  ex  senatusconsulto  tilio  nato
causam  erroris  probare  :  quo  facto  fiet  peregrina  uxor  ciuis
Eomana  et  filius  —  — l  non  solum  ad  ciuitatem  Romanam

72  peruenit  sed  etiam  in  potestatem  patris  redigitur.         Quae-
cumque  de  filio  esse  diximus,  eadem  et  de  filia  dicta  intellege-

73  mus.         Et  quantum  ad  erroris  causam  probanclam  attinet,
nihil  interest  cuius  aetatis  filius  sitjiliaue,     — -     —     —     —
—    —    — /     si  minor  anniculo  sit  filius  filiaue,  causa  probari
non  potest.    nee  me  praeterit,  in  aliquo  rescripto  diui  Hadrian!
ita  esse  constitutum,  tamquam  quod  ad  erroris  quoque  causam

74  probandam  — —  —  — .2       Si  peregrinus  ciuern

Eomanam  uxorem  duxerit  an  et  is   causam  probare  (possif)

woman,  he  is  allowed  on  the  birth  of  a  son  to  prove  cause  of
error,  just  as  if  he  had  married  in  terms  of  the  Aelia-Sentian
law.  He  also  who,  being  really  a  Eornan  citizen,  but  believ-
ing himself  to  be  a  peregrin,  has  married  a  peregrin  woman,
is  allowed  by  the  senatusconsult,  on  the  birth  of  a  son,  to
prove  his  cause  of  error ;  whereupon  the  peregrin  wife  becomes
a  Eornan  citizen,  and  the  son  born  of  the  marriage  not  only
attains  to  citizenship  but  passes  into  the  potcstas  of  his  father.

72  Whatever  has  here  been  said  of  a  son  applies  equally  to  a

73  daughter.         As   regards  proving  cause  of  error,  it  is  im-
material what  be  the  age  of  the  child,  [the  senatusconsult  sayimj
[nothing  on  the  subject ;  unless,  indeed,  the  Aclia-Sentian  law  be
[founded  on,  and  theii]  proof  of  the  marriage  will  not  be  allowed
if  the  son  or  daughter  be  less  than  a  year  old.     I  do  not  over-
look that,  as  if  in  reference  to  this  matter  of  proving  cause  of
error,  it  is  laid  down  in  a  rescript  of  Hadrian's  that     —    —

74  —   —    —    —    —    — .         It  is  a  question  whether  a  peregrin,

if  he  have  married  a  woman  that  is  a  Eoman  citizen,  can
prove  cause  of  error  —    —    —    —    —    —    —    —  — .

1  Gou.  fills  the  lacuna  with  qui  ex
ea  natus  est,  P.  with  quoque  statim,
Hu.  with  quoque  ex  ea.
§  72.     Comp.  §  29,  note  3  ;  Vlp.  iii,  3.
§  73.     Comp.  §  29.

1  Hu.  fills  the  lacuna  (two  lines)
with — cum  senatusconsulto  nihil  de
ea  re  caueatur:  nisi  forte  latinus
nel  latina  proponatur,  quia  etiam

ex  ipsa  lege  Aelia  Sentia  latini,  si
minor,  etc.

2  The  same  ed.  fills  this  lacuna  (last
three  lines  of  p.]  9)  thus: — anniculum
Jilium  factum  necesse  sit;  sed  non
semper  uideri  debet  generale  ius  iii-
ductum,  cum  imperator  epistulam  ad
quondam  dedit.
§  74.  Comp.  §  68.

1,  §§  74-76.]

COMMENTAR1I  QVATTVOR.

29

quaeritur.     —  —  —   —  —  —  — '     hoc  ei  specialiter  con-

cessum  est.  sed  cum  peregrinus  ciuem  Eomanam  uxorem
duxisset,  et  filio  nato  alias2  ciuitatem  Eomanam  conse-
cutus  esset,  deinde  cum  quaereretur  an  causam  probare
posset,  rescripsit  imperator  Antoninus  proinde  posse  euni
causam.  probare,  '  atque  si  peregrinus  mansisset.'  ex  quo
75  colligimus  etiam  peregrinum  causam  probare  posse.  Ex
Us  quae  diximus  apparet,  sine  ciuis  Eomanus  peregrinam,
siue  peregrinus  ciuem  Eomanam  uxorem  duxerit,  eum  qui
nascitur  peregrinum  esse.  scd  si  quidem  per  errorem  tale
matrimonium  contractum  fuerit,  emendari  uitium  eius  [licet],
secundum  ea '  quae  superius  diximus ;  si  uero  nullus  error
interuenerit,  [sed]  scientes  condicionem  suam  ita  coierint,
nullo  casu  emendatur  uitium  eius  matrimonii.

Loquimur  autem  de  his  scilicet  [inter]  quos  comibium  non

76

sit.    Nam  alioquin  si  ciuis  Eomanus  peregrinam   cum   qua

But  in  the  case  of  a  peregrin  who  had  taken  a  Roman  citizen
to  wife,  and,  after  the  birth  of  a  son,  had  himself  otherwise
become  a  citizen,  when  the  question  was  raised  whether  he
could  prove  cause,  our  emperor  Antonine  decided  by  rescript
that  he  might,  'just  as  if  he  had  continued  to  be  a  peregrin.'
From  which  latter  observation  we  gather  that  even  a  peregrin

75  may  prove  cause.         From  what  has  been  said  it  is  apparent
that,  whether  it  be  a  Roman  citizen  that  has  taken  a  peregrin
wife,  or  a  peregrin  that  has  taken  a  Eoman  wife,  the  issue
\vill  be  a  peregrin ;  but  if  such  a  marriage  have  been  entered
into  through  mistake,  the  flaw  in  it  may  be  removed  in  the
way  that  has  been  described.     If,  however,  there  have  been
no  error,  but  the  parties  have  entered  into  the  relationship  in
knowledge  of  each  other's  condition,  then  in  no  case  can  the
defect  of  the  marriage  be  remedied.

76  We  have  been  speaking,  of  course,  of  persons   between
whom  comibium  does  not  exist.     When,  on  the  other  hand,  a

1  Between  two  and  three  lines  (p.
20)  illegible.  What  Gai.  seems  to
have  said  is,  that  he  was  unable  to
point  to  any  enactment  enabling  a
peregrinus,  the  husband  of  a  citizen
wife,  himself  to  acquire  citizenship
by  showing  error  ;  but  that,  judging
from  an  expression  of  Antoninus
Pius'  in  one  of  his  rescripts,  it  must
be  held  that  such  procedure  was
competent.  The  only  error,  however,

that  he  could  plead  was  error  as  to

his  own  condition.

2  Say  by  gift  of  citizenship  from

the  emperor  ;  for  this  did  not  confer

the  potestas  unless  expressly  coupled

\\iththeciuitas,  §93;  ii,  135a;  iii,20.
§  75.     Comp.  §  68.

1  For  secundum  ea  the  MS.  has  ex

clea;   K.  u.   S.,  ex  senatusconsulto

licet  secundum  ea.
§  76.    Comp.  §  56.

30

GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS       C1,  §§  76-78.

77

ei  couubium  est  uxorem  duxerit,  sicut  supra  quoque  diximus,
iustum  matrimonium  contrahit,  et  tune  ex  iis  qui  nascitur
ciuis  Romanus  est  et  in  potestate  patris  erit.  Item  si  ciuis
Eomana  peregrine  cum  quo  ei  conubium  est  nupserit,  pere-
grinus  sane  procreatur,  et  is  iustus  patris  filius  est l  tamquam
si  ex  peregrina  eum  procreasset.  (hoc  tamen  tempore,  e
senatusconsulto  quod  auctore  diuo  Hadriano  factum  est,
etiam  si  non  fuerit  conubium  inter  ciuem  Romanam  et  pere-
78  grinum,  qui  nascitur  iustus  patris  filius  est.)  Quod  autem
diximus  inter  ciuem  Romanam  peregrinumque  —

Roman  citizen  has  married  a  peregrin  woman  with  whom  he
has  conubium,  it  is,  as  we  have  already  explained,  a  lawful
Roman  marriage  that  is  contracted,  and  the  issue  of  it  will  be

77  a  Roman  citizen  and  in  his  father's  potestas.         And  so,  if  a
woman  who  is  a  Roman  citizen  has  given  herself  in  marriage
to  a  peregrin  with  whom  she  has  conubium,  the  issue  will  be
a  peregrin  and  the  lawful  child  of  his  father,  just  as  if  his
mother  had  been  a  peregrin.    (At  the  present  day,  however,  in
virtue  of  a  senatusconsult  which  we  owe  to  the  late  emperor
Hadrian,  the  issue  of  a  marriage  between  a  Roman  citizen
woman  and  a  peregrin  is  held  to  be  a  lawful  child  of  his
father   even    though    there   may   not   have   been    conubium

78  between  the  parents.)         Our  statement  that  [where  a  mar-
\_riage  has  been  contracted]  between  a  Roman  citizen  and   a

§  77.  The  latter  half  of  this  par.  speaks
of  the  legality  and  validity  of  a  mar-
riage that  was  not  instum  matrimo-
nlum;  see  references  in  notes  to  §§
55,  56.

1  It  would  appear  that  prior  to  the
passing  of  the  senatusconsult  there
was  doubt  as  to  the  actual  position
of  a  child  in  such  a  case  as  here  put ;
its  purpose  was  to  declare  that  if  a
marriage  had  actually  taken  place
between  his  citizen  mother  and  pere-
grin father,  he  was  to  be  recognized
as  his  father's  lawful  son,  the  absence
of  conubium  notwithstanding.

§78.  Comp.  Vlp.  v,  8.  This  par.,
which  is  in  explanation  of  the  open-
ing statement  in  §  75,  is  to  a  con-
siderable extent  illegible  ;  and  there
is  some  reason  to  believe  that  the
transcriber  has  accidentally  omitted
a  few  words.  The  first  lacuna  in  the
text  represents  four  lines  of  the  MS.
(5-8  of  p.  21),  and  the  second,  one

line  (the  llth)  ;  but  in  both  there
are  several  words  perfectly  distinct.
The  reconstructions  proposed  sever-
ally by  K.  (K.  u.  S.  footnote),  M.
(K.  u.  S.  p.  xviii),  and  Hu.  differ
very  considerably,  and  none  is  alto-
gether satisfactory;  but  probably  the
rendering  in  the  translation  pretty
accurately  expresses  the  meaning  of
the  passage.  Vlpian's  words  are—
lex  Minicia  ex  alterutro  peregrino
natum  deterioris  parentis  condicio-
nem  sequi  iubet.

Prior  to  Studemund's  recension
of  the  Verona  MS.  the  L.  Minicia  here
referred  to  had  always  been  spoken
of  as  lex  Mensia ;  it  is  so  called  in
the  Vatican  MS.  of  Vlp.  Its  date  is
unknown ;  but  from  next  par.  it
must  have  been  of  some  antiquity,
and  at  all  events  anterior  to  the  leges
de  ciuitate  of  the  years  664  |  90  and
665  I  89.

I,  §§  78-80.]

COMMENTAR1I  QVATTVOR.

31

—  —    —    —   —   peregrinus  ex  eo  coitu  nascatur.     sed  hoc
maxime  casu  necessaria  lex  Minicia  [fuit];  nam  remota  ea  lege,

conubium,  qui  nascitur  iure  gentium  matris

condicioni  accedit.     qua  parte  auteru  iubet  lex  ex  ciue  Bomano
et  peregriua  peregrinum  nasci,  superuacua  uidetur;  nam  et

79  remota  ea  lege  hoc  utique  iure  gentium  futurmn  erat.         Adeo
autem  hoc  ita  est  ut    —   —   —   —   —   — l    solum  exterae

nationes  et  gentes,  sed  etiam  qui  Latini  nominantur ;  sed  ad
alios  Latinos  pertinet,8  qui  proprios  populos  propriasque  ciui-

80  tates  habebaut  et  erant  peregrinorum  numero.       Eadem  ratione

79

peregrin,  the  issue  will  be  a  peregrin,  [is  made  on  the  authority
[of  the  Minician  law,  according  to  which  the  child  born  of  an
[unequal  marriage']  follows  the  condition  of  the  parent  [of  lower
[status.  For]  by  that  enactment  [it  was  provided  that  if,  without
[couubium,  a  Roman  citizen  took  a  peregrin  to  wife,  or  if  a
[peregrin  took  to  wife  a  Roman  citizen^]  the  issue  of  the  marriage
should  be  accounted  a  peregrin.  It  was  mainly  to  meet  the
latter  case  that  the  Minician  law  was  necessary;  for  in  the
absence  of  such  an  enactment  [the  child  would  have  followed
[the  condition  of  its  mother ;  such  is  the  rule  of  the  ius  gentium
[where  there  is  'marriage  without  conubium].  That  part  of
the  enactment,  however,  which  declares  that  the  child  of  a
Roman  citizen  and  a  peregrin  woman  shall  be  born  a  peregrin
seems  superfluous ;  for  this  would  be  the  case  under  the  law
of  nations  irrespective  altogether  of  the  statute.  So  far
does  this  go,  that  [it  is  simply  on  the  strength  of  the  rule  of  the
[ius  gentium  that  the  child  born  of  a  marriage  between  a  Roman
[citizen  and  a  woman  that  is  a  Junian  latin  follows  the  condition
[of  its  mother.  No  doubt  the  word  'peregrin '  in  the  Minician
[law  has  been  held  to  include]  not  only  strictly  foreign  nations
and  peoples,  but  also  those  who  pass  by  the  name  of  Latins ;
but  the  allusion  is  to  Latins  of  a  different  sort,  who  had  their
own  separate  communities  and  separate  states,  and  were
really  included  among  the  peregrins.  Conversely,  and

between  the  Junian  latins,  irregu-
larly enfranchised  freedmen,  dwell-
ing alongside  and  under  the  patronage
of  Roman  citizens,  and  the  old  Latins
of  Italy  and  members  of  the  Latin
colonies,  who  both  formed  commu-
nities apart,  and  were  members  of
their  own  ciuitates.  See  upon  this
Vangerow,  die  Latini  luniani,  p.  91 ;
Voigt,  lus.  Nat.,  etc.,  ii,  p.  721;
Gai.  i,  131.
§  80.  Comp.  §  30 ;  Vlp.  iii,  3,

80  really    included,   among

§  79.     Comp.  §  80  ;  Vlp.  v,  §§  8,  9.

1  More  than  two  lines  totally  ille-
gible.    The  following  probably  ex-
presses the  sense  of  what  is  lost : —
Adeo  autem  hoc  ita  est,  ut  etiam  ex
ciue  Romano  et  latina  luniana  qui
nascitur,  ex  nolo  iuris  gentium  regula,
matris    condicioni    accedat.       Sane
'  peregrinorum  '  appellatione  in  lege
Minicia  conprehendi  intellegebantur
non  solum  exterae  nationes,  etc.

2  The  allusion  is  to  the  distinction

GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS       [I,  §§  80-82.

ex  contrario  ex  latino  et  ciue  Romana,  sine  ex  legc  Aelia  Sentia
siue  aliter  contractum  fuerit  matrimonium,  ciuis  Komanus
nascitur.  fuerunt  tamen  qui  putauerunt  ex  lege  Aelia  Sentia
contracto  matrimonio  latinum  nasci,  quia  uidetur  eo  casu
per  legem  Aeliam  Sentiam  et  luniam  coiiubium  inter  eos
dari,  et  semper  conubium  efficit *  ut  qui  nascitur  patris  con-
dicioni  accedat ;  aliter  uero  contracto  matrimonio,  eum  qui
nascitur  iure  gentium  matris  condicionem  sequi,  et  ob  id  esse
ciuem  Eomanum.  sed  hoc  iure  utimur,  ex  senatusconsulto 2
quo  auctore  diuo  Hadriano  significatur,  ut  quoquo  modo3  ex

81  latino  et  ciue  Romana  natus,  ciuis  Romanus  nascatur.         His
conuenienter  et  illud  senatusconsultum,  diuo  Hadriano  auctore,
significauit  ut  ex  latino  et  peregrina,  item  contra  ex  peregrine
et  latina  [qui]  nascitur,  is  matris  condicionem  sequatur.

82  Illud  quoque  his  consequens  est,  quod  ex  ancilla  et  libero
iure  gentium   seruus  nascitur,  et  contra  ex  libera  et  seruo

upon  the  same  principle,  the  child  of  a  [Junian]  latin  father
and  Roman  citizen  mother  is  a  Roman  citizen,  and  that
whether  the  parents  have  married  in  accordance  with  the
Aelia-Sentian  law  or  not.  Some,  indeed,  have  thought  that,
if  the  marriage  had  been  contracted  as  enjoined  by  that  enact-
ment, the  issue  would  be  a  latin,  the  Aelia-Sentian  and
Junian  laws  apparently  conceding  right  of  intermarriage  in
such  a  case  to  the  parents,  and  the  rule  being  that,  where
there  is  conubium,  the  issue  follows  the  condition  of  the
father ;  but  that  if  the  marriage  had  not  been  contracted
under  the  statute,  the  issue,  according  to  the  rule  of  the  ius
(jentium,  would  follow  the  condition  of  the  mother,  and  thus
be  a  Roman  citizen.  But  we  follow  the  rule  laid  down  in
Hadrian's  senatusconsult, — that,  in  whatever  way  their  mar-
riage may  have  been  contracted,  the  issue  of  a  latin  husband

(SI  and  a  Roman  citizen  wife  shall  be  a  Roman  citizen.  In
entire  conformity  with  all  that  has  been  said  above,  this  also
is  laid  down  in  the  same  senatusconsult, — that  the  child  born
of  a  latin  father  and  peregrin  mother,  or  vice  versa,  follows  the
condition  of  its  mother.

82  Further,  it  follows  from  the  rules  we  have  been  explaining
that,  by  the  ius  gentium,  the  issue  of  a  slave  mother  and  a
freeman  is  born  a  slave,  while  conversely  the  issue  of  a  free

1  Comp.  §  56.  3  The  MS.  has  merely  qm;  K.  u.  S.

2  See  §§  30,  67,  68,  note  1  ;  Vlp.  have  omnl  modo.

iii,  3.  §82.    Comp.  §88;  Vlp.  v,  9.

I,  §§  83-85.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

o  o
OO

83  liber  nascitur.         Animaduertere   tamea    debemus   ne   iuris
gentium  regulam  uel  lex  aliqua  uel  quod  legis  uicem  optinet

84  aliquo  casu  cominutauerit.         ecce  enim  ex  seuatusconsulto
Claudiano  poterat  ciuis  Eomana,  quae  alieno  seruo  uolente
domino  eius  coiit,  ipsa  ex  pactione  libera  permanere  sed  ser-
uum  procreare  ;  nam  quod  inter  earn  et  dominum  istius  serui
conuenerit  eo  senatusconsulto  ratum  esse  iubetur.     sed  postea
diuus    Hadrianus,  iuiquitate  rei  et   iuelegantia  iuris  motus,
restituit  iuris   gentium  regulam,  ut  cum  ipsa   mulier   libera

85  permaneat,  liberum  pariat.         [Item]  ex  ancilla  et  liberopote-
rant  liberi  nasci  ;  nam  ea  lege  cauetur,  ut  si  quis  cum  aliena

83  woman  and  a  slave  is  born  free.         But  we  must  be  careful
to  see  whether  in  any  case  this  rule  of  the  ius  gentium  may
not  have  been  altered  by  statute,  —  by  some  lex  or  other

84  enactment   of   equal   effect.         Take  the  Claudian  senatus-
consult:    under    its    provisions    a    Roman    citizen    woman
cohabiting  with   another  person's   slave   with    the    owner's
consent,  might,  in  virtue  of  agreement  with  the  latter,  herself
retain  her  freedom,  and  yet  give  birth  to  a  slave ;    for  the
seuatusconsult  declared  that  any  such  agreement  between  her
and  her  slave-paramour's  o  \vner  should  be  sustained  as  valid.
But  afterwards  Hadrian,  moved  by  the  want  of  equity  in  the
matter  and  the  incongruity  of  the  rule,  re-established  the
principle   of  the  ius  gentium,  —  that  if  the  woman  herself
remain  free  it  will  be  to  a  freeman  that  she  will  give  birth.

85  So  also  there  might  be  free  children  born  of  a  slave  mother
and  a  free  father  ;  for  by  the  same  enactment  it  was  provided

83.  Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.  24,  D.  de  statu
horn,  (i,  5).

84.  As  regards  the  S.  C.  Claudianum
generally,  see  §§  91,  160 ;  Tac.  Ann.
xiii,  53;  Paul,  ii,  21;  tit.   Th.   C.
ad  8.  C.  Claudian.  (iv,  11);  tit.  C.
de  S.  G.  Claud,  toll,  ^vii,  24) ;  tit.  I.
de  success,  sublat.  (iii,  12).

5  85,  86.  Before  the  opening  words  of
§  85,  P.  lias  Ex  contrario  per  legem
.  .  .  ,  K.  u.  S.  Item  per  legem, .  .  .  ,
and  Hu.  Item  e  lege  latina ;  their
idea  being  that  the  allusions  in  these
two  pars,  are  to  some  other  enact-
ment than  the  Claudian  Set.  I  see
no  good  reason  for  this  view.  There
is  nothing  very  unusual  in  speaking
of  a  Set.  as  a  lex  ;  the  Claudian  law
on  the  tutory  of  women,  for  ex-
ample, was  in  fact  a  Set.,  yet  is

always  spoken  of  as  lex  Claudia ;
see  §  157,  note.  The  conventional
arrangement  referred  to  in  §  85  may
quite  well  have  been  one  of  the  pro-
visions of  the  Claudian  Set. ,  though
not  mentioned  elsewhere  ;  and  tho
rule  in  the  first  part  of  §  86,  which
Gai.  calls  pars  eiuudem  legis,  seems
to  be  the  same  as  is  alluded  to  by
Paul,  ii,  21,  §  14,  and  by  him
attributed  to  the  Claudian  Set.
The  apud  quos  tails  lex  non  est  does
not  refer  to  the  absence  of  local
statute,  but  to  the  non-applicability
of  the  particular  provision  of  the  Set.
immediately  before  alluded  to, —
slavery  of  the  issue  when  the  free
mother  was  aware  of  the  condi-
tion of  the  slave  father.  Comp.
§  89.

C

34  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVIUS  CIVILIS       [I,  §§85-88.

ancilla  quam  credebat  liberam  esse  coierit,  siquidem  masculi
nascantur,  liberi  sint,  si  uero  feiuinae,  ad  eum  pertineant  cuius
mater  ancilla  fuerit.  sed  et  in  hac  specie  diuus  Vespasianus,
inelegantia  iuris  motus,  restituit  iuris  gentium  regulam,  ut
omni  modo,  etiamsi  masciili  nascantur,  serui  sint  eius  cuius

86  et  mater  fuerit.         Sed  ilia  pars  eiusdem  legis  salua  est,  ut
ex  libera  et  seruo  alien  o,  quern  sciebat  seruum  esse,  serui
nascantur.     itaque  apud  quos  talis  lex  non  est,  qui  nascitur
iure  gentium  matris  condicionem  sequitur  et  ob  id  liber  est.

87  Quibus  autem  casibus  matris    et    non  patris  condicionem
sequitur  qui  nascitur,  isdem  casibus  in  potestate  eum  patris,
etiamsi  is   ciuis   Eomanus   sit,   non   esse   plus   quam  mani-
i'estum  est ;  et  ideo   superius  rettulimus  quibusdam  casibus
per  errorem  non  iusto  contracto  matrimonio  senatum   inter-
uenire  et  emendare  uitium  matrimonii,  eoque  modo  plei  unique
efficere  ut  in  potestatem  patris  films  redigatur.

88  Sed    si  ancilla  ex  ciue  Eomano  conceperit,  deinde  manu-

that  if  a  freeman  had  cohabited  with  another  person's  slave,
believing  her  to  be  free,  the  male  issue  should  be  free,  while
the  female  issue  should  belong  to  the  owner  of  the  slave
mother.  But  here,  again,  Vespasian,  struck  by  the  absurdity
of  the  provision,  interfered,  and  re-established  the  iuris
gentium  rule,  that,  even  if  the  issue  of  the  connection  were
males,  they  should  be  slaves  of  him  to  whom  the  mother

86  belonged.         This  part  of  the  enactment,  however,  is  still  in
force, — that  the  issue  of  a  free  woman  and  another  person's
slave,  of  whose  condition  she  was  well  aware,  will  be  slave.
But  in  the  case  of  parents  to  whom  it  does  not  apply,  [i.e.
when  the  free  mother  is  ignorant  of  the  condition  of  the  slave
father,]  the  issue,  according  to  the  ius  gentium,  follows  the
condition  of  the  mother  and  consequently  is  free.

87  It  is  abundantly  manifest  that,  when  a  child  follows  not
his  father's  but  his  mother's  condition,  he  cannot  be  in  the
potestas  of  his  father,  even  though  the  latter  be  a  Roman
citizen ;  and  therefore  it  is  that  we  have  above  explained  how,
in  certain  cases  of  marriage  that  through  mistake  has  not  been
contracted   according   to   law,  the   senate  has  interfered   to
remedy  the  defect,  and  thus  almost  always  brought  about  the
result  of  putting  the  child  born  of  it  in  his  father's  potcstas.

88  But   if  a  slave  woman,  who  has  conceived  by  a  Roman

§  87.     Comp.  §§  67  f.

§  88.     Comp.  §§  55,  89  ;  Vlp.  in  fr.  46,  D.  de  adopt,  (i,  7).

T,  §§88-91.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  35

missa  ciuis  Eomana  facta  sit,  et  tune  pariat,  licet  ciuis
Eomanus  sit  qui  nascitur,  sicut  pater  eius,  non  tamen  in
potestate  patris  est,  quia  neque  ex  iusto  coitu  conceptus  est
neque  ex  ullo  senatusconsulto  talis  coitus  quasi  iustus  consti-

89  tuitur.         Quod  autem  placuit,  si  ancilla  ex  ciue  Eomano
conceperit,  deinde  manumissa  pepererit,  qui  nascitur  liberum
nasci,  naturali  ratione  fit  :  nara  hi  qui  illegitirne  concipiuntur
statum  sumunt  ex  eo  tempore  quo  nascuntur;  itaque  si  ex
libera  nascuntur,  Hberi  fiunt,  nee  interest  ex  quo  mater  eos
conceperit  cum   ancilla  fuerit :    at  hi  qui  legitime  concipi-

90  untur   ex   conceptionis   tempore    statum   sumunt.         itaque
si  cui   mulieri  ciui  Romanae  praegnati  aqua   et  igni  inter-
dictum    fuerit/    eoque    modo    peregrina  facta   tune   pariat,
conplures  distinguunt  et  putant,  siquidem  ex  iustis  nuptiis
conceperit   ciuem    Eomanum    ex    ea   nasci,    si    uero   uulgo

91  conceperit  peregrinum  ex  ea  nasci.          Item  si  qua  rnulier
ciuis   Eomana  praegnas  ex  senatusconsulto  Claudiano  ancilla

citizen,  on  subsequent  manumission  herself  become  a  Eoman
citizen,  and  then  give  birth  to  her  child,  although  it  will  be
a  citizen  as  its  father  is,  yet  it  will  not  be  in  his  potestas,  for
it  was  not  conceived  in  lawful  intercourse,  nor  is  there  any
senatusconsult  that  deals  with  such  intercourse  as  if  it  had

89  been  lawful.         The  rule  that,  if  a  slave  woman  conceive  by
a  Eoman  citizen  but  do  not  give  birth  to  her  child  until  after
manumission,  the  child  will  be  free  born,  rests  upon  considera-
tions of  natural  reason.     For  children  illegitimately  conceived
take  their  status  from  the  moment  of  birth,  so  that  if  born  of
a  free  woman  they  are  free,  it  being  quite  immaterial  by
whom   their  mother   conceived   them   in   her  slavery;    but
children  legitimately  conceived  date  their  status  from  the

90  moment  of  conception.         Therefore  if  a  pregnant  woman  who
is  a  Eoman  citizen  be  interdicted  fire  and  water,  and,  after  thus
becoming  a  peregrin,  give  birth  to  a  child,  many  draw  a  dis-
tinction, and  hold  that  if  she  have  conceived  in  lawful  Eomaii
wedlock  the  child  will  be  a  Eoman  citizen,  but  that  if  she  have
conceived  in  casual  intercourse  it  will  be  born  a  peregrin.

91  So  if  a  pregnant  woman  who  is  a  Eoman  citizen  become  a
slave  under  the  Claudian  senatusconsult,  because  she  has  been

§  89.     Comp.  Vlp.  v,  10;  Vlp.  in  fr.  24,  a  See  §  128,  note  2.

D.  de  statu  horn,  (i,  5).  §  91.     Comp.  §§  64,  160,  and  note  to  §

§  90.     Comp.  §  161  ;  Vlp.  in  fr.  18,  D.  84  ;  Vlp.  xi,  11  ;  Paul,  ii,  24,  §  2  ;

de  statu  horn,  (i,  5).  pr.  tit.  I.  de  ingen.  (i,  4).

36  GAII  INST1TVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS       [I,  §§  91-94.

facta  sit,  ob  id  quod  alieno  seruo,  inuito  et  denuntiante
domino  eius,  \_coierit~],  conplures  distinguunt  et  existimant,
si  quidem  ex  iustis  nuptiis  conceptus  sit,  ciuem  Eomamim  ex
ea  nasci,  si  uero  uolgo  conceptus  sit,  seruum  nasci  eius  cuius

92  mater  facta  esset  ancilla.         Peregrina  quoque  si  uulgo  cou-
ceperit,   deinde  ciuis  Eomana  facta  tune  pariat,  ciuem  Eo-
manum  parit ;  si  uero  ex  peregrino  secundum  leges  moresque
peregrinorum  conceperit,  ita  uidetur  ex  senatusconsulto  quod
auctore  diuo  Hadriano  factum  est  ciuem  Eomanum  parere,
si  et  patri  eius  ciuitas  Eomana  donetur.

93  Si   peregrinus    sibi    liberisque    suis    ciuitatem  Eomanam
petierit,  non  aliter  filii  in  potestate  eius  fient  quam  si  im-
perator  eos  in  potestatem  redegerit :    quod  ita  demum  is  facit
si  causa  cognita  aestimauerit  hoc  filiis  expedire.    diligentius
autem  exactiusque  causam  cognoscit  de  inpuberibus  absenti-
busque :    et    haec    ita    edicto    diui    Hadriani    significantur.

i  94  Item  si  quis  cum  uxore  praegnate  ciuitate  Eomana  donatus

cohabiting  with  another  person's  slave  against  the  will  and  in
spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  the  slave's  owner,  many  again
draw  a  distinction,  and  think  that  if  she  had  conceived  in
lawful  Eoman  wedlock  her  child  will  be  born  a  Eoman  citizen,
but  that  if  she  had  conceived  in  illicit  intercourse  it  will  on
birth  be  the  slave  of  him  who  has  become  the  mother's  owner.

92  If  a  peregrin  woman  who  has  conceived  in  illicit  intercourse
afterwards  become  a  Eoman  citizen,  and  then  give  birth  to
her  child,  it  will  be  of  a  Eoman  citizen  that  she  is  delivered  ;
if,  however,  she  have  conceived  by  a  peregrin  according  to  the
laws  and  customs  of  peregrins,  it  appears  i'rom  Hadrian's
senatusconsult  that  she  will  give  birth  to  a  Eoman  citizen
then  only  when  the  father  also  of  the  child  has  had  a  gift  of
citizenship.

93  If  a  peregrin  have  petitioned  for  a  grant  of  citizenship  for
himself  and  his   children,  these  will  not  be  in  his  potcstas
unless  the  emperor  has  expressly  subjected  them  to  it.     This
he  does  only  when,  having  investigated  the  whole  circum-
stances, he  considers  it  for  their  advantage ;  and,  as  enjoined
in  an  edict  of  Hadrian's,  the  inquiry  is  to  be  all  the  more
careful  and  minute  if  the  children  be  under  puberty  or  absent

94  at  the  time.         Further,  if  a  peregrin  have  obtained  a  gift  of

§92.     Comp.   §§   77,   94;    also   note  to       §93.    Comp.  §  55;  ii,  135a;  iii,  20;  Plin.
§§  67,  68.  Paneij.  37.

§  94.     Comp.  §§  92,  93.

I,  §§  94-9G.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

37

sit,  quamuis  is  qui  nascitur,  ut  supra  dixi,  ciuis  Romanus
sit,  tainen  in  potestate  patris  non  fit:  idque  subscriptions
diui  Hadriani  siguificatur.  qua  de  causa,  qui  intellegit
uxorem  suam  esse  praegnatem,  dum  ciuitatem  sibi  et  uxori
ab  imperatore  petit,  sirnul  ab  eodem  petere  debet  ut

95  eum   qui  natus  erit  in  potestate  sua  habeat.         Alia   causa
est   eorum   qui    Latii   iure   cum  liberis   suis   ad    ciuitatem
Eomanam  perueniunt ;  nam  horum  in  potestate  fiunt  liberi.

96  quod  ius  quibusdam   peregrinis  ciuitatibus  datum  est  uel  a
populo  Eomano  uel  a  senatu  uel  a  Caesare,   —     —     —     —

citizenship  for  himself  and  his  pregnant  wife,  while,  as  already
said,  the  child  when  bom  will  be  a  Eoman  citizen,  yet  he  will
not  be  in  his  father's  potcstas ;  so  it  is  declared  in  a  rescript
of  our  late  emperor  Hadrian's.  Consequently,  in  seeking  from
the  emperor  a  gift  of  citizenship  for  himself  and  his  wife,  he
should,  if  he  knows  her  to  be  pregnant,  at  the  same  time  ask
that  he  may  have  the  child  who  may  be  born  of  her  in  his

95  potestas.  The  case  is  different  with  those  who  by  right  of
latinity  attain  citizenship  along  with  their  children ;  for  their

96"  children  do  become  subject  to  their  potcstas.  This  latiuity
has  been  granted  to  some  peregrin  states  either  by  the  Roman
people,  the  senate,  or  the  emperor,  [and  is  called  the  greater

§§  95,  96.  One  of  the  ways  in  which  a
colonial  or  municipal  latin  might
acquire  Roman  citizenship  was  by
filling  a  municipal  office  for  a  certain
time  ;  it  is  to  this  that  Pliny  alludes
in  the  formula,  per  Latium  uenire  in
ciuitatem  (Paneg.  37).

Studemund's  revision  of  the
Verona  MS.  has  established  the  fact,
which  many  had  doubted,  that  of
this  Latium  or  ius  Latii  there  were
two  varieties,  a  greater  and  a  lesser.
But  the  distinction  is  not  yet  abso-
lutely certain.

Filling  up  the  lacuna  as  proposed
by  K.  u.  S. — Huius  autem  iuris
duae  species  sunt:  nam,  etc. — the
difference  in  favour  of  the  mains
Latium,  so  far  as  can  be  gathered
from  the  text,  was  that,  in  munici-
palities which  enjoyed  it,  not  only
the  magistracy  but  also  the  de-
curionate  was  a  stepping-stone  to
citizenship.  If  this  had  really  been
the  distinction,  there  would  have
been  no  occasion  for  Gai.  to  allude
to  it;  he  is  speaking  not  so  much

of  acquisition  of  citizenship  as  of
acquisition  of  the  patria  potestas  ;
and  it  seems  sufficiently  obvious
that  what  he  meant  to  point  out
was,  that  sometimes,  but  not  always,
this  was  a  result  of  the  ius  Latii.

There  is  reason  to  believe  that
sometimes  not  only  did  the  magis-
trate or  decurion  himself  become  a
Roman  citizen  on  termination  of  his
period  of  office,  but  his  wife  and
children  became  citizens  along  with
him,  while  in  other  cases  he  was
the  sole  beneficiary  ;  this  depended
on  the  terms  of  the  municipal
charter.  The  first,  in  all  pro-
bability, was  technically  mains
Latium, — what  seems  to  have  been
enjoyed  by  the  municipality  of  Sal-
pensa  (see  the  L.  Salpensana,  c.  21,
Bruns,  p.  120)  ;  the  second  techni-
cally minus  Latium.

The  lacuna  in  the  text  represents
about  half  a  line  of  the  MS.  P.  sug-
gests— maiusque  Latium  adpellalur.
Nam  aut,  etc.  The  same  critic—
whose  view  is  that  the  Verona  MS.

38

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVR1S  CIVILIS       [I,  §§  96-99.

aut  maius  est  Latium  aut  minus :  mains  est  Latium  cum  et  hi
qui  decuriones  leguntur,  et  ei  qui  honorem  aliquern  aut  magis-
tratum  gerunt,  ciuitatem  Eomanam  consecuntur ;  minus
Latium  est  cum  hi  tantum  uel  qui *  magistratum  uel  honorem
gerunt  ad  ciuitatem  Eomanam  perueniunt.  idque  conpluri-
bus  epistulis  principum  significatur.

97  \_Non  solum  tamen  naturales  libcri,  secundum  ea  quae]  dixi-
mus,  in  potestate  nostra  sunt,  uerum  et  hi  quos  adoptamus.

98  Adoptio  autem  duobus  modis  fit,  aut  populi  auctoritate,  aut

99  imperio  magistratus,  ueluti  praetoris.         Populi  auctoritate
adoptarnus  eos  qui  sui  iuris   sunt :  quae  species  adoptionis

[latinity.  For]  latinity  is  either  the  greater  or  the  lesser.
There  is  the  greater  latinity  when  those  who  are  elected  to
the  office  of  decurions,  or  who  fill  some  high  office  or  magis-
tracy, acquire  Eoman  citizenship  [along  with  their  parents,
[ivives,  and  children] ;  the  lesser,  when  those  who  [fire  appointed
{decurions,  or]  hold  a  magisterial  or  other  high  office,  themselves
alone  attain  to  citizenship.  So  it  is  stated  in  many  imperial
epistles.

97  It  is  not  only  our  children  by  birth,  however,  that  are  in  our
potestas  in  the  manner  we  have  described,  but  those  also  whom

98  we  adopt.         Adoption  is  effected  in  two  ways, — either  by
authority  of  the  people,  or  by  the  imperium  of  a  magistrate,

99  such  as  the  praetor.         By  authority  of  the  people  we  adopt
those  who  are  sui  iuris.     This  species  of  adoption  is  called

was  copied  from  an  older  one  written
in  double  columns,  and  consequently
in  much  shorter  lines — is  of  opinion
that  the  copyist  has  accidentally
omitted  two  of  those  lines,  and  that
the  text  should  read  thus  : — Mains
est  Latium  cum  et  hi  qui  decuriones
leguntur,  et  ei  qui  honorem  aliquem
ant  magistratum  gerunt,  ciuitatem
Romanam\cum  parentibus uxoribus-
que  ac  liberis]  consecuntur ;  minus
Latium  est  cum  hi  tantum  [ipsi  qui
decuriones  fiunt],  uel  qui  magistra-
tum uel  honorem,  etc.

As  the  text  stands  there  is  no
appreciable  difference  between  the
maius  and  minus  Latium.  Pole-
naar's  amended  definition  of  the
former  consists  with  cap.  21  of  the
lex  municipalis  Salpensana  (except
that  this  reads  coniugibusque  in-
stead of  uxoribiisque),  and  corre-
sponds exactly  with  the  opinion
arrived  at  by  Rudorff  and  Mommsen

before  the  Verona  text  had  been
deciphered  by  Stud,  as  above.  See
Rudorff,  Disp.  crit.  de  maiore  ac
minore  Latio  (Berol.  1860)  ;  Momm-
sen, die  Stadtrechtf.  von  Salpensa,
etc.,  p.  405  ;  Vqigt,  lus.  Nat.  ii,  724.
1  It  is  in  favour  of  Polenaar's
conjecture,  just  referred  to,  that  we
have  in  the  MS.  cum  hi  tantum  uel
qui  magistratum,  etc.,  which  Hu.
and  K.  u.  S.  think  necessary  to
amend,  the  former  by  transposing
the  uel  qui,  the  latter  by  deleting
the  uel  altogether.

§§  97-107.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  ADOPTIONI-
BFS  (i,  11).

§  97.  Two  lines  blank  in  the  MS.  ;  on
the  first  (line  6,  p.  26)  are  faint
traces  of  a  rubric.  The  passage  in
ital.  is  supplied  from  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.
Comp.  Vlp.  viii,  1.

§§  98,  99.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afcl.  Comp.  Cic.
pro  domn,  xiii,  34;  xxix,  77;  Cell,
v,  19  ;  Vlp.  viii,  §§  2,  3.

I,  §§99-102.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  39

dicitur  adrogatio,  quia  et  is  qui  adoptat  rogatur,  id  est  inter-
rogatur,  an  uelit  eum  quern  adoptatums  sit  iustum  sibi  filiuin
esse ;  et  is  qui  adoptatur  rogatur  an  id  fieri  patiatur ;  et
populus  rogatur  an  id  fieri  iubeat.  imperio  magistratus
adoptamus  eos  qui  in  potestate  parentum  suut,  siue  primuin
gradum  liberorum  optineant,  qualis  est  filius  et  filia,  siue

100  inferioreni,  qualis  est  nepos  neptis,  pronepos  proneptis.         Et
quidem  ilia  adoptio  quae  per  populum  fit  nusquam  nisi  Eomae
fit ;  at  haec  etiam  in  prouinciis  apud  praesides  earum  fieri

101  solet.         Item  per  populum  feminae  non  adoptantur,  nam  id
magis  placuit;  apud  praetorem  uero,  uel  in  prouinciis  apud
proconsulem    legatumue,1     etiam    feminae    solent    adoptari.

102  Item    inpuberem  apud    populum   adoptari  aliquando  prohi-
bitum   est,   aliquando  permissum :   nunc  ex  epistula  optimi
imperatoris  Antonini l   quam   scripsit   pontificibus,  si   iusta
causa  adoptionis  esse  uidebitur,  cum  quibusdam  condicioni-
bus  permissum  est.      apud  praetorem  uero  et  in  prouinciis

adrogation  ;  because  both  he  who  is  adopting  is  asked,  rogatur,
whether  he  will  have  as  his  lawful  son  him  he  is  about  to
adopt,  and  he  who  is  being  adopted  is  asked  whether  he
submits,  and  the  people  is  asked  whether  it  ordains  that
so  it  shall  be.  By  the  imperium  of  a  magistrate  we  adopt
those  who  are  in  the  potestas  of  parents,  whether  they  be^
descendants  of  the  first  degree,  as  son  or  daughter,  or  of  a
more  remote  one,  such  as  grandson  or  granddaughter,  great-

100  grandson  or  great-granddaughter.         Note  that  that  sort  of
adoption  which  is  effected  by  the  vote  of  the  people  can  pro-
ceed only  in  Eome ;   but  the  latter  may  be  effected  even  in

101  the   provinces  before  the  provincial  governors.          Further,
women   are   never   adopted  by  popular  vote,  —  the  general
opinion  was  against  it ;  but  it  is  not  uncommon  for  them  to
be  adopted  before  the  praetor,  or  in  the  provinces  before  the

102  proconsul  or  legate.         Still   further,   adoption   of  a   pupil
before  the  people  has  sometimes  been  forbidden,  sometimes
allowed, — at  present,  according  to  a  letter  of  our  most  excel-
lent emperor  Antonine,  addressed  to  the  pontiffs,  if  an  adequate
cause  be  shown  for  it,  it  will  be  allowed  on  certain  conditions  ;

§  100.  Comp.  Vlp.  viii,  4.  of  the  popular  or  senatorial  pro-

§  101.  Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  21,  D.  de  vinces,  the  legates  governors  of  the

adopt,    (i,    7),  where  he   says  that  imperial  ones.

women  might  be   adopted  by  im-  §  102.  Comp.  Vlp.  viii,  5  ;  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.

perial  rescript.  '  Antoninus  Pius,  in  whose  reign

1  The  proconsuls  were  governors  Gai.  was  writing  this  first  book.

i'

40  GAII  IXSTITVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIYIL1S   [I,  §§  102-108.

apud  proconsulem  legaturirae  cuiuscumque  aetatis  [personas] 2

103  adoptare  possumus.         Illucl  uero  utriusque  adoptionis  com-
mune  est,   quod   et   hi   qui   generare    nou    possunt,   quales

104  sunt    spadones,    adoptare    possunt.         feminae    uero    nullo
modo  adoptare  possunt,  quia  ne  quidem  naturales  liberos  in

105  potestate  liabent.         Item  siue  quis  per  populum  sine  apud
praetorem  uel  apud  praesidem  prouinciae  adoptauerit,  potest

106  eundem  alii  in  adoptionem  dare.         Sed  et  ilia  quaestio,  an
minor  natu  maiorem  natu  adoptare  possit,  utriusque  adop-

107  tionis  communis  est.         Illud  proprium  est  eius  adoption-is
quae  per  populum  fit,  quod  is  qui  liberos  in  potestate  habet,
si  se  adrogandum  dederit,  non  solum  ipse  potestati  adrogatoris
subicitur,  sed  etiam  liberi  eius  in  eiusdem  fiunt  potestate
tamquam  nepotes.

108  [Nunc  dc  his  personis  uidcamus  quae  in  manu  nostra  sunt.

but  we  may  adopt  a  person  of  any  age  before  the  praetor,  or

103  in  the  provinces  before  the  proconsul  or  legate.         On  the
other  hand,  it  is  common  to  both  species  that  those  who  are
unable  to  procreate  of  their  bodies,  such  as  eunuchs,  may  yet

104  adopt ;         but  women  cannot  in  either  way,  for  they  have  not

105  their  natural  children  in  their  potestas.         Further,  whether
the  adoption  have  proceeded  before  the  people,  or  before  the
praetor  or  a  provincial  governor,  the  adopter  may  give  his

106  adopted  child  in  adoption  to  a  third  party.         The  question,
too,  whether  the  younger  in  years  can  adopt  the  elder,  is

107  common  to  both  sorts  of  adoption.          But   this   result  is
peculiar  to  that  which  proceeds  before  the  people, — that  if  a
man  who  himself  has  children  in  his  potestas  give  himself  in
adrogation,  not  only  does  he  himself  become  subject  to  the
potestas  of  the  adrogator,  but  his  children  do  so  too  in  the
character  of  grandchildren.

108  Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  to  persons  that  are  in  our

2  Added  by  K.  u.  S.  See  Cic.  pro  domo,  xiii,  34  ;  §  4.

§  103.  §  9,  tit.  I.  afd.,  where  a  distinc-  tit.  I.  afd.

tion  is  made  between  natural  and  §107.  §  11,  tit.  I.  afd.   Comp.  Vlp.  viii,  8.

artificial    disability.       Comp.     Vlp.  §  108.     Two  vacant  lines  (1  and  2  of  p.

viii,  6.  28)  in  the  MS.  ;  the  first  intended

§104.  Comp.  Vlp.  viii,  ??-§  10-,-4it.-L  probably  for  a  rubric,  and  the

afd.  Sf  A- ,  second  to  contain  words  such  as

§  105.  Comp.  §  8,  tit.  I.  afd.  those  in  ital.,  suggested  by  Goesch.

§  106.  The  answer  was  in  the  negative.  and  approved  by  all  editors.

I,  §§  109-112.]

COMMENTAKII  QVATTVOR.

41

109  [quod]  et  ipsum  ins  proprium  ciuium  Roniauorum  est.         Sed
in  potestate  quidem  et  masculi  et  feminae  esse  solent;  in

110  manum  autem  feminae  tantum  conueniunt.         Olim  itaque
tribus  modis  in  manum  conueniebant,  usu,  farreo,  coemptione.

111  Usu   in   manum   conueniebat,   quae   anno    continuo    nupta
perseuerabat ; 1  nam  udut 2  annua  possessione  usucapiebatur,3
in  familiam  uiri  transibat,  filiaeque  locum  optiuebat.     itaque
lege  duodecim  tabularum  cautum  est  ut  si  qua  nollet  eo  modo
in  manum  mariti  conuenire,  ea  quotannis  trinoctio  abesset  atque
eo  modo  cuiusque  anni  [usum\  interrumperet.     sed  hoc  totum
ius  partim  legibus  sublatum  est,4   partirn   ipsa  desuetudine

112  oblitteratum    est.  Farreo    in    manum    conueniunt    per
quoddam  genus  sacrificii  quod  loui  Farreo  fit,  in  quo  farreus
panis  adhibetur :  unde  etiam  confarreatio  dicitur.     conplura
praeterea  huius  iuris  ordinandi  gratia  cum  certis  et  sollem-

manus,  (which  also  is  a  right  peculiar  to  Roman  citizens).

109  Both  males  and  females  may  be  in  potestate,  but  it  is  only

110  females  that  can  be  in  manu.         Of  old  they  used  to  pass
into   this   relationship  either  by  use,  confarreation,   or   co-

111  emption.         A  woman  passed  in  manum  by  use  who,  after
marriage,  cohabited  with  her  husband  for  a  year  continuously;
for  she  was  usucapted,  as  it  were,  by  a  year's  possession,  and
so  passed  into  her  husband's  family,  and  acquired  in  it  the
position  of  a  daughter.     Therefore  it  was  provided  by  the  law
of  the  Twelve  Tables,  that  if  a  wife  was  unwilling  in  this  way
to  pass  into  the  manus  of  her  husband,  she  should  every  year
absent  herself  for  three  nights,  and  thus  interrupt  the  currency
of  each  year's  use.     But  all  the  law  in  reference  to  this  matter
is  obsolete,  being  in  part  repealed  by  statute,  in  part  obliterated

112  by  disuse.         Manus  is  created  farreo  by  a  certain  kind  of
sacrifice  offered  to  Jupiter  Farreus,  in  which  a  spelt  cake,
panis  farreus,   is    employed;    hence   the   word    confarreatio.
Various  other  formalities  are  observed  in  the  course  of  the

§  110.     Corap.  Serv.  in  Vergil.  Geary,  i,

31  (Bruns,  p.   299)  ;  Boeth.   in  'dc.

Top.  ii,  3,  §  14  (Bruns,  p.  294).
§  111.     Comp.    Cic.  pro  Flacco,  xxxiv,

84  ;  Gell.  iii,  2,  §§  12,  13  ;  Serv.  as

in  last  note.

1  The  MS.  has  perseuerabant ;  Pol.
perseueranter  [in  domo  mariti  com-
morabatur].

2  The  MS.  has  nuii;  Husch.   quia
enim  udut ;  K.  u.  S.  quaeenim  ueluti.

.  3  For  the  description  of  usucap-
Juon,  the  cure  of  a  defective  right  of
property  by  possession  for  a  certain
period,  see  ii,  §§  41-44.

4  Comp.  Tac.  Ann.  iv,  16.
§  112.  Comp.  §  136  ;  Vlp.  tit.  ix  ;
Dion.  Hal.  ii,  25,  27,  30-32 ;  Plin.
H.  N.,  xviii,  3,  §  10  ;  Tac.  Ann.
iv,  16,  53  ;  Serv.  in  Aen.  iv,  103,
374  (Bruns,  p.  297)  ;  in  Georg.  i,
31  (Bruns,  p.  299).

42

GAII  ISSTITVTIONVM  IVIUS  CIVILIS   [I,  §§112-114.

nibus  uerbis,  praesentibus  decem  testibus,  aguntur  et  fiunt.
quod  ius  etiam  nostris  temporibus  in  usu  est :  nam  flamines
niaiores,  id  est  Diales  Martiales  Quirinales,  item  reyes  sacrorum
nisi  ex  farreatis  nati  non  leguntur,  ac  ne  ipsi  quidem  sine

113  confarreatione    sacerdotium  habere   possunt.          Coemptione
uero  in  manum  conueniunt  per  mancipationem,  id  est  per
quandam  imaginariam  uenditionem  ;  nam  adhibitis  non  minus
quam  v  testibus  ciuibus  Eomanis  puberibus,  item  libripende,1

114  —   —    —   — 2    cuius  in  nianum  conuenit.         Potest  auteni

ceremony,  accompanied  by  certain  solemn  words  of  style,  and
all  in  the  presence  of  at  least  ten  witnesses.  The  rite  is
observed  even  to  this  day ;  for  no  person  is  elected  to  the
office  of  one  of  the  greater  flamens,  i.e.  a  flamen  of  Jupiter,
Mars,  or  Quirinus,  nor  yet  to  be  a  rex  sacrorum,  unless  born
of  farreate  parents ;  nor  can  any  such  person  fill  any  such
priestly  office  unless  he  himself  have  been  married  by  con-

113  farreation.         By  coemption  a  woman  passes  into  a  man's
manus  by  means  of  a  mancipation,  i.e.  a  sort  of  imaginary
sale ;  for,  in  the  presence  of  five  Roman  citizens  of  the  age  of
puberty,  brought  together  as  witnesses,  as  also  of  a  balance-
holder,  [the  man  purchases]  with  an  as  [the  woman  he  is  receiving
[in  mauum,  and  reciprocally']  the  woman  purchases  him  whose

114  manus  she  is  entering.         She  can  perform  this  coemption,

There  is  reason,  therefore,  to  be-
lieve—  as  seems  to  be  the  opinion
of  P.,  though  he  does  not  suggest
a  reconstruction — that  the  copyist
has  omitted  some  words  describing
the  transaction  as  a  mutual  one,  and
that  the  original  text  may  have  been
to  this  effect — asse  emit  uirmulierem
quam  in  manum  recipit  (seeii,  §  98),
et  inuicem  emit  eum  mulier  cuius  in
manum  conuenit.  This,  so  far,  is
the  view  now  adopted  by  Hu.,  who
in  his  last  edition  reads — asse  emit
eum  mulier  et  is  mulierem  cuius,  etc.

It  is  not  to  be  lost  sight  of  in
regard  to  the  solemnities  of  coemp-
tions and  mancipations  generally,
that  in  early  latin  emere  did  not
mean  to  purchase  for  a  money  price,
but  simply  to  take,  receive,  or  ac-
quire ;  see  Test.  v.  Redemptores
(Bruns,  p.  259),  Paul,  ex  Festo,
vv.  Abemito  and  Emere  (Bruns,  pp.
236,  241).

114.  Comp.  §  136  ;  ii,  §§  139,  159.
The  transcriber  has  here  been  so
careless  that  some  parts  of  the  par.  arc
introduced  no  fewer  than  three  times.

3,    §   14
Orifj.   v,

§  113.     Comp.    §    123 ;    Non.    Marcell.
xii,   50  (Bruns,    p.   287) ;   Serv.    in
Aen.  iv.  103,  214  (Bruns,  p.  297)
Boeth.    in   Cic.     Top.    ii,
(Bruns,   p.    294) ;    Isidor.
24,  §  26  (Bruns,  p.  301).

1  On  the  function  of  the  libripens
or  balance-holder,  see  below,  §  119.

2  In  what  is   here  marked  as  a
lacuna,    the   MS.    has  a   emit    eum
mulierem.     Gou.  accepts  it,  render-
ing the  initial  a  by  asse ;  K.  u.  S.
read  simply  emit  is  mulierem.

Neither  of  these  readings  can  well
be  accepted.  They,  as  well  as
others  that  have  been  proposed,
proceed  on  the  assumption  that  the
man  was  the  party  fictitiously  pur-
chasing the  woman.  But  it  is  clear
that  they  were  both  active  agents  in
the  matter  ;  for  while  Gai.  speaks
of  the  man  as  coemptionator  (§  118),
he  refers  to  the  woman  as  quaefacit
coemptionem  (§§  114,  115).  Servius,
Boethius,  and  Isidore,  all  speak  of
the  coemptio  as  a  reciprocal  pur-
chase, Non.  Marcellus  referring  only
to  the  purchase  by  the  woman.

I,  §§  114, 115.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  43

coemptionem  facere  mulier  non  solum  cum  marito  suo  sed
etiam  cuni  extraneo  ;  scilicet  aut  matrimonii  causa  facta  coemp-
tio  dicitur,  aut  fiduciae  causa :  quae  enim  cum  marito  suo  facit
coemptionem,  [ict]  apud  eum  filiae  loco  sit,  dicitur  matrimonii
causa  fecisse  coemptionem ;  quae  uero  alterius  rei  causa  facit
coemptionem  aut  cum  uiro  suo  aut  cum  extraneo,  ueluti  tutelae
euitandae  causa,1  dicitur  fiduciae  causa  fecisse  coemptionem.

115  quod  est  tale:  si  qua  uelit  quos  habet  tutores  deponere1  et
alium  nancisci,  illis  tutoribus  [auctoribus] 2  coemptionem
facit ;  deinde  a  coemptionatore  remancipata  ei  cui  ipsa  uelit,
et  ab  eo  uindicta  manumissa,  incipit  eum  habere  tutorem  a  quo
manumissa  est;  qui  tutor  fkluciarius  dicitur,  sicut  [ex]  infcri-

115ft  oribus3  apparebit.  Olim  etiam  testamenti  faciendi  gratia
fiduciaries  fiebat  coemptio  ;  tune  enim  non  aliter  feminae  testa-
menti faciendi  ius  habebant,  exceptis  quibusdam  personis,
quani  si  coemptionem  fecissent  remancipataeque  et  manu-
missae  fuissent.  sed  hanc  necessitatem  coemptionis  faciendae

however,  not  only  with  her  husband,  but  even  with  a  stranger,
— in  other  words,  it  may  be  performed  either  matrimonially  or
fiduciarily :  for  she  who  performs  it  with  her  husband  that
she  may  stand  to  him  in  the  position  of  a  daughter,  is  said  to
do  so  for  the  sake  of  marriage ;  whereas  she  who  performs  it,
whether  with  her  husband  or  with  a  stranger,  with  some  other
object  in  view,  as,  for  instance,  getting  rid  of  a  tutory,  is  said

115  to  have  done  so  for  a  fiduciary  purpose.  It  is  managed
thus  :  if  she  wants  to  set  aside  her  existing  tutors  and  obtain
another  in  their  stead,  she  performs  coemption  with  auctoritas
of  the  former ;  being  then  remancipated  by  her  coemptionator
to  a  person  of  her  own  selection,  and  afterwards  by  this  last
manumitted  vindicta,  she  begins  to  have  as  her  tutor  him  who
has  manumitted  her,  and  who,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  is

115«called  her  fiduciary  tutor.  Fiduciary  coemption  was  also
had  recourse  to  of  old  to  enable  a  woman  to  make  a  will ;  for
then  women,  with  a  few  exceptions,  had  not  the  right  to
execute  a  testament  unless  they  had  performed  coemption,
afterwards  been  remancipated,  and  finally  manumitted.  But
the  necessity  for  this  coemption  was  abolished  by  the  senate

1  See  §  115.     As  regards  fiduciary  *  So  K.  u.  S.   and  Hu.  ;  the  MS.

coemption  testamenti  faciendi  gratia,  has  reponere.

see  §  115a,  and  that  interimendorum  2  K.  u.  S.  change  tutoribus,  which

sacrorum  causa  (not  mentioned  by  is  in  the  MS.,  into  auctoribus.
Gai.),  Cic.  pro  Mur.  xii,  27.  3  So  the  MS.  ;  K.  u.  S.  substitute

§  115.     Comp.  §§  118,  166,  195a;  Fest.  inferius.

v.  Renmncipatam  (Bruns,  p.  160).  §  115a.     Comp.  Liv.  xxxix,  9.

44  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVR1S  C1VILIS   [I,  §§  115-118.

ex  auctoritate  diui  Hadrian!  senatus  remisit ; ' .2

115&  —  —  —  — -  —  — ,  nihilo  minus  filiae  loco  incipit  esse  :
nam  si  omnino  qualibet  ex  causa  uxor  in  manu  uiri  sit,
placuit  earn  filiae  iura  nancisci.

116  Superest  ut  exponamus   quae  personae  in  mancipio   sint.

117  0 nines  igitur  liberorum  personae,  siue  masculini  siue  feminini
sexus,   quae  in   potestate  parentis   sunt,   mancipari   ab  hoc
eodem   modo   possunt   quo   etiam   semi   mancipari   possunt.

118  Idem  iuris  est  in  earum  personis  quae  in  manu  sunt:  nam
feminae  a  coemptionatoribus  eodern  modo  possunt  —  -

—  —  —  —  —  apud  coemptionatorem  filiae  loco  sit  -
nupta  sit,  tamen  nibilo  minus  etiam  quae  ei  nupta  non  sit,  nee
1 1 8aob  id  filiae  loco  sit,  ab  eo  mancipari  possit.         [Sect]  plerunique l

on  tbe  authority  of  our  late  emperor  Hadrian;  [and  women
[are  now  held  to  have  ipso  iure  as  much  right  in  this  matter
11 5b  [as  if  they  had  gone  through  the  old  form.  But,  observe,
[that  though  a  woman  s  coemption  with  her  husband  may  lie
[intended  to  be  only  fiduciary],  she  nevertheless  begins  to  stand
to  him  in  the  position  of  a  daughter ;  for,  no  matter  what  the
cause  of  a  wife's  being  in  the  manus  of  her  husband,  it  is  held
that  she  thereby  acquires  a  daughter's  rights.

116  We  have  yet  to  explain  what  persons  are  in  mancipio.

117  Well,  then,  all  children,  whether  male  or  female,  that  are  in
the  potestas  of  a  parent  may  be  mancipated  by  him  exactly

118  in  the  same  way  as  slaves.         And  so  with  persons  in  manu  ;
for  women  may  be  mancipated  by  their  coemptioners  in  the
same  way  [as  are  children  by  their  parents;  and  though  she
[alone~]  stands  to    her    coemptionator   in   the   position   of  a
daughter  who  is  married  to  him,  yet  none  the  less  may  one
who  is  not  married  to  him,  and  therefore  not  related  to  him

llSaas  a  daughter,  be  mancipated  by  him.         But  for  the  most

1  Comp.  ii,  §  112.  §  118.     About  a  line  and  a  half  partially

2  Hu.  thus  conjecturally  fills  up  illegible  ;  and  reason  to  believe  that
the   lacuna  : — censentur   enim    ipso  some  words  have  been  omitted  per
iure  feminae  capite  deminutae.  incuriam.      Bk.,    followed    almost

§1156.      Hu.   conjecturally  fills  up  the  literally  by  Hu.,  renders  the  passage

lacuna  as  follows: — Si  tamen  mulier  thus- — eodem  modo  possunt  manci-

fiduciae  causa  cum  uiro  suo  fecerit  pari  quo  liberl  a  parente  maiwipan-

coemptionem,  etc.,  K.   u.  S.  agree-  tur;  adeo  quidem  ut  quamuis  ea  sola

ing   as  to  all    but   the   first   three  apud    coemptionatorem    filiae    loco

words.      Comp.   §§  114,   118,   136;  sit  quae  ei  nupta  sit,  etc.     Comp.

iii,  li.  §§114,  115,  123,  127.

§  116.     A  vacant  line  in  the  MS.  before       §  118a.   Comp.  §  132.

this  par.  1  So  Hu.  and  P.  ;  G.  and  K.  u.  S.

§  117.     Comp.  §  132.  prefer  Plerumque  uero  tune.

I,  §§  118-120.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

45

[tum~\  solum  et  a  parentibus  et  a  coemptionatoribus  mancipan-
tur,  cum  uelint  parentes  coernptionatoresque  e  suo  iure  eas
personas  dimittere,  sicut  inferius  euidentius  apparebit.

119  Est  autem  mancipatio,  ut  supra  quoque  diximus,  imaginaria
quaedam   uenditio:    quod   et  ipsum   ius    proprium    ciuium
Eomanorum  est.     eaque  res  ita  agitur:  adhibitis  non  minus
quam  quinque  testibus  ciuibus  Eomanis  puberibus,  et  prae-
terea  alio  eiusdem  condicionis  qui  libram  aeneam  teneat,  qui
appellatur  libripens,  is  qui  mancipio  accipit 1  rem 2  tenens  ita
dicit :  HVNC  EGO  HOMINEM  EX  IVEE  QVIKITIVM  MEVM  ESSE  AID,

ISQVE  MIHI  EMPTVS  3  ESTO  HOC  AERE  AENEAQVE  LIBEA  ;  deinde

aere  percutit  libram,  idque  aes  dat  ei  a  quo  mancipio  accipit,1

120  quasi  pretii  loco.         Eo  modo  et  seruiles  et  liberae  personae
mancipantur ;   animalia  quoque  quae  mancipi  sunt,1   quo  in

part  parents  and  coemptionators  proceed  to  mancipation  only
when  they  wish  to  release  from  their  right  those  who  are
subject  to  it,  as  will  appear  more  clearly  in  the  sequel.

119  Now,  mancipation,  as  already  observed,  is  a  sort  of  imaginary
sale ;  and  the  right  to  make  use  of  it  is  peculiar  to  Eoman
citizens.     It  is  gone  about  thus  :  in  the  presence  of  not  fewer
than  five  Eoman  citizens  of  the  age  of  puberty,  called  together
as  witnesses,  and  of  another  person  of  the  same  condition
holding  a  pair  of  copper  scales,  who  is  called  a  libripens,  the
mancipee  or  party  taking  mancipio,  having  hold  of  the  thing
that  is  being  transferred,  says, — '  I  say  that  this  slave  is  mine
in  quiritary  right,  and  be  he  my  purchase  with  this  as  and
these  copper  scales:'    and  thereupon  he  strikes  the    scales
with  the  coin,  which  he  then  gives  to  the  mancipant  or  party
from  whom  the  slave  is  being  received,  as  if  by  way  of  price.

120  In  this  manner  both  slave  and  free  persons  are  mancipated ;
as  also  such  animals  as  are  mancipi,  among  which  are  reckoned

119.  Comp.  §  113;  Vlp.  xix,  §§  3,
4 ;  Th.  i,  12,  §  6;  Boeth.  in  Cic.  Top.
v,  28  (ed.  Baiter,  p.  322);  Isidor.
Orirj.  y,  25,  §  31  (Brans,  p.  302).

1  As  regards  the  use  in  the  trans-
lation of  the  words  mancipee  and
mancipant, as  renderings  respectively
of  is  qui  mancipio  accipit  and  ei  a
quo  mancipium  accipitur,  it  is  to  be
observed  that  it  was  usual  to  'say  of
the  transferor  seruum  mancipat,  and
of  the  transferee  ei  mancipatur;  see
§132.

3  Bk.,  K.  u.  S.,  and  Hu.  read  aes
tenens,  and  P.  stipem  tenens.  The
leading  aes  is  that  given  by  Boeth-

ius,  but  the  rem  in  the  MS.  is  quite
distinct,  and  justified  byGai.  i,  121,
Vlp.  xix,  6,  and  Isidore  as  above.
The  same  phrase,  rem  tenens,
occurs  in  the  formula  of  in  iure  cessio
in  Gai.  ii,  24,  where  again  it  is  a
question  of  transfer  of  a  slave.

3  On  the  early  meaning  of  the  word
emptus,  see  §  113,  note  2.
120.     Comp.  ii,  §§  15,  17,  29,  31;  Vlp.
xix,  1.

1  For  a  resumd  of  the  various  ex-
planations that  have  been  suggested
of  the  famous  distinction  between
res  mancipi  and  nee  mancipi,  see
Danz,  Gescfi.  d.  R.  R.,  §  119.

46

GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIV1LIS   [I,  §§  120-122.

numero  habentur  boues  equi  muli  asini ;  item  praedia  tarn
urbana  quam  rustica  quae  et  ipsa  mancipi  sunt,  qualia  sunt

121  italica/  eodem  modo  solent  mancipari.         In  eo  solo  praedi-
orum  mancipatio  a  ceterorum  mancipatione  differt,  quod  per-
sonae  seruiles  et  liberae,  item  animalia  quae  mancipi  sunt,
nisi  in  praesentia  l  sint  mancipari  non  possunt ;  adeo  quidem
ut  eum  qui  mancipio  accipit   adprehendere  id   ipsum   quod
ei   mancipio   datur   necesse    sit;     (unde    etiarn    mancipatio
dicitur   quia    manu   res   capitur) : 2    praedia   uero   absentia 3

122  solent  mancipari.         Ideo  autem  aes  et  libra  adhibetur  quia
olim  aereis  tantum  nummis  utebantur,  et  erant  asses  dupuudii
semisses   et    quadrantes,1   nee   ullus    aureus    uel    argenteus
nnmmus  in  usu  erat,  sicut  ex  lege  xn  tabularum  intellegere

oxen,  horses,  mules,  and  asses.  Such  immoveables  likewise,
whether  houses  or  lands,  as  are  mancipi — and  those  are  so
that  are  of  italic  right — are  mancipated  in  the  same  way.

121  Mancipation  of  immoveables  differs  from  other  mancipations
in   this  respect  only,  that  slave  and  free   persons,  as   also
animals  that  are  mancipi,  cannot  be  mancipated  unless  they
be  on  the  spot,  it  being  necessary  that  the  rnancipee  should
lay  hold  of  the  very  thing  which  is  being  transferred  to  him
as  a  mancipium, — the  ceremony  gets  the  name  of  mancipatio
because  the  thing  in  question   is   taken  with  the   hand, —
whereas  immoveables  are  very  often  mancipated  elsewhere.

122  The  copper  and  scales  are  employed  because  formerly  only
copper  money  was  in  use,  the  as  namely,  and  the  double,  half,
and  quarter  as,  no  gold  or  silver  coin  being  current ;  this  we
gather  from  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables.     The  efficacy  of

-  Praedia  italica  were  provincial
lands  enjoying  the  same  privileges
as  lands  in  Italy  (ius  italicum);  in
particular,  that  were  capable  of
being  held  in  property  on  a  perfect
Roman  title  (ex  iure  Quiritium),  and
of  being  transferred  by  the  forms  of
conveyance  of  the  ius  ciuile.  See
Savigny,  Z.  f.  g.  RW.  v,  242,  and
vi,  356 ;  also  Verm.  Schr.  i,  73.
§  121.  Comp.  Vlp.  xix,  6;  Isidor.  Ori;/.
v,  25,  §  31  (Brans,  p.  302).

1  Comp.  §  119  ;  iv,  16.

2  Comp.  ii,  22  ;   Varro  de  L.  L.
vi,  §  85.

3  Comp.  iv,  17.

§  122.    The  two  first  blanks  are  variously
supplied.     The  sentence  containing

them,  according  to  K.  u.  S. ,  may
have  run  thus — sed  in  pondere
posita;  nam  et  asses  librales  erant,
et  dupundii  bilibres;  unde,  etc.  Hu.
has — sed  in  pondere  ;  namque  ueluti
asses  librales  erant,  et  dupundii  duct-
rum  librarum ;  unde,  etc.  In  the
third  blank,  which  represents  rather
more  than  half  a  line  of  the  MS.,
Bk.  reads — item  qui  dabat  olim  ;  but
Stud,  says  this  is  not  justified  by
what  is  still  legible.  Hu.  suggests
— tune  ifjltur  et  qui  dabat  alicui,  etc.
Comp.  Varro,  de  L.  L.  v,  §§  169,
170  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii,  3,  §  13.

1  The  words  et  erant  asses  .  .  .
quadrantes  are  dropped  by  P.  as  a
gloss.

I,  §§  122, 123.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

47

123

123

possumus  :  eorumque  nummorum  uis  et  potestas  non  in  numero

erat  sed  in  pondere asses  librales  erant,  et  dupundii

—  —  — ;  unde  etiam  dupundius  dictus  est  quasi  duo  pondo,
quod  nomen  adhuc  in  usu  retinetur.  semisses  quoque  et  quad-
rantes  pro  rata  scilicet  portione  ad  pondus  examinati  erant.  —

pecuniam,  non  adnumerabat  earn,  sed  appendebat ;  unde

semi  quibus  permittitur  administratio  pecuniae,  dispensatores
appellati  suut  et  adhuc  uocantur.
—  —  —    —   —   —   —   —   —  mancipati  mancipataeue

seruorum  loco  coristituuntur,  adeo  quidem,  ut  ab  eo  cuius  in
mancipio  sunt,  neque  hereditatem  neque  legata  aliter  capere
possint  quam  si  simul  eodem  testamento  liberi  esse  iubeantur,
sicut  iuris  est  in  persona  seruorum.  sed  differentiae  ratio
manifesta  est,  cum  a  parentibus  et  a  coemptionatoribus  iisdem
uerbis  mancipio  accipiantur  quibus  serui ;  quod  non  similiter
fit  in  coemptione.

such  copper  money  depended  not  on  number  but  on  weight.
The  asses  weighed  each  a  pound,  and  the  double  as  [two
[pounds] — the  word  dupundius,  which  is  still  in  use,  means  duo
pondo  ;  while  the  half  and  quarter  as  were  of  a  weight  care-
fully proportioned  to  the  pound.  [In  those  times  those  who
[had  to  pay]  money  did  not  count  but  weigh  it ;  whence  those
slaves  who  had  charge  of  their  owner's  money  were,  and  still
are,  called  dispensers.

[If  it  be  asked  ivherein  consists  the  difference  between  a  woman
[ivJw  has  performed  coemption  and  persons  mancipated  by  parents
[or  coemptionators,  our  answer  is  that  whereas  the  former  retains
\_her  freedom'],  the  latter  are  really  in  the  position  of  slaves ;
so  much  so  that,  like  these  last,  they  cannot  take  either  an
inheritance  or  a  legacy  from  him  who  holds  them  in  mancipio,
unless  by  the  same  testament  he  has  given  them  their  free-
dom. The  reason  of  the  difference  is  manifest :  persons
mancipated  by  parents  and  coemptionators  are  appropriated
by  the  mancipee  with  the  very  same  words  with  which  he
would  appropriate  a  slave;  but  the  words  are  different  in
coemption.

123.  Four  lines  of  the  MS.  (19-22,
p.  32)  in  great  part  illegible.  Stud,
declares  his  inability  to  trace  several
words  and  letters  which  appeared
decipherable  to  G.  and  Bl. ;  and
none  of  the  many  readings  suggested
can  be  accepted.  It  is  evident,
however,  that  it  was  the  purpose  of

the  par.  to  indicate  the  difference  in
effect  of  the  mancipation  involved  in
coemptio  and  the  mancipation  by  a
parent  or  coemptionator  ;  the  former
placed  the  woman  so  mancipated  in
the  position  of  a  daughter,  while  the
latter  put  her  in  the  position  of  a
slave.  Comp.  ii,  §§  159,  160.

48  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  1VRIS  CIVILIS    [I,  §§  124-128.

124  Videamus  nunc  quo  modo  hi  qui  alieno  iuri  subiecti  sunit
eo  iure  liberentur.

125  Ac  prius  de  his  dispiciamus  qui  in  potestate  sunt.         Et

126  quidem   serui   quemadmodum   potestate    liberentur,    ex    his
intellegere  possumus  quae  de  seruis  manumittendis  superius

127  exposuimus.         Hi  uero  qui  (in potestate} par entis  sunt,  (mortuo
(eo  sui  iurisfiunt.    scd  hoc)  distinctionem.  recipit ;  nam  (mortuo
(patre  sane]    omni   modo    filii  filiaeue   sui  iuris  efficiuntur ;
mortuo  uero  auo   (non  omni  modo  nepotes  neptesque  sui  iuris
(fiunt,  sed  ita  si  post  mortem  aui)  in  patris  sui  potestatem
recasuri  non  (sunt.     Hague)  si  moriente  auo  (pater  eorum  ct
(uiuat  ct  in  potestate)  patris  [sui]  fuerit,  tune  post  (obitum  aui  in
(patris)  sui  potestate  fiunt;  si  uero  is,  quo  tempore  auus  rnoritur,
aut  iam  (moi^tuus  est  aut)  exiit  de  potestate  [patris,  tune  hi,  quia
[in  potestatem^  l   eius  cadere  non   possunt,   sui   iuris    fiunt.

128  Cum  autem  is  cui  ob  aliquod  maleficium  ex  lege,  [uclut  ex

124  Let  us  see  now  how  those  who  are  subject  to  another  person's
right  may  be  released  from  it.

125  And  let  us  deal  first  with  those  that  are  in  potestate.        How

126  slaves  are  freed  from  the  potestas  [of  owners]  may  be  under-
stood from  what  has  already  been  said  on  the  subject  of  their

127  manumission.         As  for  those  who  are  in  the  potestas  of  a
parent,  they  become  their  own  masters,  sui  iuris,  on  his  death.
But  there  is  this  distinction, — that  while,  by  the  death  of  their
father,  sons  and  daughters  invariably  become  sui  iuris,  grand-
children, on  the  death  of  their  grandfather,  do  not  in  every  case
become  so,  but  only  when  by  that  event  they  do  not  fall  under  the
potestas  of  their  father.     Accordingly,  if  on  the  death  of  their
grandfather  their  father  be  alive,  and  have  been  till  that  moment
in  the  potestas  of  his  father,  the  grandchildren,  after  the  death
of  the  Latter,  are  in  the  potestas  of  their  father ;    but  if,  at  the
time  of  their  grandfather's  death,  their  father  either  be  already
dead   or  have  passed  out  of  the  potestas  of   his  father,  the
grandchildren,  because  they  cannot  pass   into   the  potestas  of

128  their  father,  become  sui  iuris.         Then  again,  as   a   person
who,  on  account  of  crime  and  in  terms  of  [some  such  enact -

§§  124-135.  Comp.  tit.  I.  QVIBVS  MODIS  theses,  illegible  in  the  text,  are  bor-

1VS  POTESTATIS  SOLVIIVR  (i,  12).  rowed.  Comp.  Vlp.  x,  2.

§  124.     Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  '  Words  omitted  in  the  MS.  anil

§126.     Comp.  §§  13-47.  supplied  from  the  I nst.

§127.  Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.,  from  which  most  §128.  Comp.  Vlp.  x,  3;§  1,  tit.  I.

of  the  words  in  italics  within  paren-  afd.

I,  §§  128, 129.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  49

\Jcyc\ l  Cornelia,  aqua  et  igni  interdicitur 2  ciuitatem  Eomanam
amittat,  sequitur  ut  quia  eo  modo  ex  numero  ciuium  Eomano-
rum  tollitur,  proinde  ac  mortuo  eo  desinant  liberi  in  potestate
eius  esse  :  nee  enim  ratio  patitur  ut  peregrinae  condicionis
homo  ciuem  Komanum  in  potestate  habeat.  pari  ratione  et
si  ei  qui  in  potestate  parentis  sit  aqua  et  igni  interdictum
fuerit,  desinit  in  potestate  parentis  esse,  quia  aeque  ratio  non
patitur  ut  peregrinae  condicionis  homo  in  potestate  sit  ciuis
129  Eomani  parentis.  Quodsi  ab  hostibus  captus  fuerit  parens,
quamuis  seruus  hostium  fiat,  tamen  pendet  ins  liberorum
propter  ius  postliminii,  quo  hi  qui  ab  hostibus  capti  sunt,  si
reuersi  fuerint,  omnia  pristina  iura  recipiunt ;  itaque  reuersus
habebit  liberos  in  potestate  :  si  uero  illic  mortuus  sit,  erunt
quidem  liberi  sui  iuris;  sed  utrum  ex  hoc  tempore  quo
mortuus  est  apud  hostes  parens,  an  ex  illo  quo  ab  hostibus
captus  est,  dubitari  potest.  ipse  quoque  films  neposue  si  ab

\_ment  as]  the  Cornelian  law,  has  been  interdicted  fire  and
water,  forfeits  his  civic  privileges,  it  follows  that,  as  he  is
thus  removed  from  the  ranks  of  the  citizens  of  Eome,  his
^children  cease  to  be  in  his  potestas  exactly  as  if  he  were  dead  ;
for  it  would  be  contrary  to  all  principle  to  admit  that  a  man
of  peregrin  condition  can  have  a  Eoman  citizen  in  his  potestas.
In  like  manner,  if  a  person  who  is  in  the  potestas  of  a  parent
be  interdicted  fire  and  water,  he  ceases  to  be  in  potestate ;
for  it  is  equally  against  principle  that  a  man  of  peregrin
condition  should  be  in  the  potestas  of  a  parent  who  is  a  Eoman
129  citizen.  But  if  a  parent  be  taken  captive  by  an  enemy,
although  for  the  time  he  becomes  a  slave  in  the  enemy's
hands,  yet  his  right  over  his  children  is  merely  suspended,
and  that  on  account  of  the  ius  postliminii,  whereby  those
captured  by  an  enemy  resume  all  their  old  rights  on  recrossing
the  frontier ;  on  his  return  he  will  again  have  his  children  in
his  potestas.  If,  however,  he  die  in  captivity,  his  children  will
be  sui  iuris ;  but  whether  as  from  the  time  of  his  death  in
captivity,  or  as  from  that  of  his  capture,  may  be  a  matter  of
doubt.  In  like  manner,  if  a  son  or  grandson  be  taken  captive,

1  The  words  uelul  ex  leye  inter-  popular  decree  excommunicating  and.

jected  by  Hu. ;  for  there  were  several  forbidding  shelter  to  an  individual

Cornelian  laws,  as  well  as  other  who  had  voluntarily  become  an  exile

penal  statutes,  that  imposed  the  in  order  to  avoid  punishment,  Cic.

penalty  of  interdiction  of  fire  and  pro  domo,  xxx,  78 ;  but  in  course  of

water.  The  particular  one  referred  time  it  was  a  sentence  judicially  pro-

to  may  have  been  the  L.  Cornelia  de  nounced  upon  a  criminal,  depriving

sicarlis.  him  of  his  status  as  a  citizen.

-This  was  originally  done  by  a       §129.     §  5,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Vlp.  x,  4.

D

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIYILIS   [I,  §§  129-132.

hostibus   captus  fuerit,   similiter  dicemus  propter  ius  post-
130  liminii  potestatem  quoque  parentisin  suspense  esse.         Prae-
terea   exeunt    liberi   uirilis   sexus   de   parentis   potestate   si
flamines  Diales  inaugurentur,  et  feminini  sexus  si   uirgines

131  Vestales  capiantur.         Olini   quoque   quo   tempore  populus
Ronianus  in  Latinas  regiones  colonias  deducebat,  qui  iussu
parentis  in  coloniam  Latinam  nomen  dedissent,  (desinebant  in
(potestate)1  pareutis  esse,quia  efficerentur  alterius  ciuitatis  ciues.

132  (Praeterea)    emancipatione    desinunt    liberi    in    potestate
parentium  esse.      sed   films   quidem  tribus  mancipationibtis,
ceteri  uero  liberi,  siue  masculini  sexus  siue  feminini,  una
mancipatione  exeunt   de  parentum  potestate:   lex  enim  xn
tabularum  tantum  in  persona  filii  de  tribus  mancipationibus
loquitur  his  uerbis  :  '  si  pater  filiuni  \ter~]  uenumduit,  a  patre
filius   liber   esto.'      (eaque)   res   ita   agitur :   mancipat   pater

the  potestas  of  his  parent  will  be  suspended  by  reason  of  the

130  same  ius  postliminii.         Further,  children  of  the  male  sex
pass  out  of  the  potestas  of  a  parent  on  inauguration  as  flamens
of  Jupiter,  and  those  of  the  female  sex  on  their  being  taken

131  as  Vestal  virgins.         Formerly  also,  in  the  days  when  Eome
was  in  the  habit  of  despatching  bands  of  colonists  into  latin
districts,  a  child  who  with  his  parent's  authority  enrolled  his
name  in  such  a  band,  ceased  to  be  in  that  parent's  potestas,
because  he  had  become  a  citizen  of  another  state.

132  There  is  yet  another  way  in  which  children  cease  to  be  in
the  potestas  of  parents,  namely,  by  emancipation.   A  son  indeed
does   so   only   after  three   mancipations ;    but   as  for   other
children,  whether  males  or  females,  their  exit  from  i\\&  potestas
is  accomplished  by  one :  for  the  law  in  the  Twelve  Tables —
'  if  a  father  have  thrice  sold  his  son,  then  be  the  son  free  from
his  father ' — speaks  of  three  mancipations  only  in  the  case  of  a
son.     It  is  managed  thus  :  the  father  mancipates  his  son  to  a

§  130.     Comp.  §  145  ;  iii,  114  ;  Vlp.  x.  5.

§  131.  Comp.  iii,  56 ;  Cic.  pro  Gaec.
xxxiii,  98  ;  pro  domo,  xxx,  78  ;
Boeth.  in  Top.  ii,  4,  §  18  (ed.  Bait,
p.  302).

1  These   words   are   illegible,   but
self-evident.

§  132.  A  vacant  line  in  the  MS.  before
this  par.,  and  the  initial  word  (bor-
rowed from  the  Inst. )  unwritten.
Comp.  §  135;  ii,  141;  iv,  79;  Epit.
i,  6,  §  3  ;  Vlp.  x,  1 ;  §  6,  tit.  I.  afd. ;
Th.  i,  12,  §  6.  The  last  few  lines  of
the  par.  are  thus  completed  by  Hu.

— isque  eum  postea  similiter  ulndicta
manumittit,  quo  facto,  cum  rursus  in
potestatem  patris  fuerit  reuersus,
tertio  pater  eum  mancipat  uel  eidem
uel  alii — sed  hoc  in  usu  est,  tit  ei-
dem niancipetur — eaque  mancijta-
tione  desinit  in  potestate  patris  esse,
ac  si  nondnm  manumissus  sit,  sed
adliuc  in  causa  maucipii  apud  eum
cul  mancipatus  est.  a  quo  si  rursus
manumittatur,  sui  iurisjit.  Restitu-
tions by  other  eds.  are  to  much  the
same  elfect.  See  the  form  of  manci-
pation in  §  119.

I,  §§  132, 133.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  5 1

filium  alicui;  is  eura  uindicta  manumittit;  eo  facto  reuertitur
in  potestatem  patris ;  is  eum  iterum  mancipat  uel  eidem  uel
alii,  (sed  in  usu  est  eidem  mancipari,)  isque  cum  postea
similiter  —  —  in  potestatem  —  —  —  . —

tertio  pater  eum  mancipat  uel  eidem  uel  alii,  (sed  hoc  in  usu

est  ut  eidem  nmncipetur,) ac  si  nondum  manu-

inissus  sit,  sed  adhuc  in  causa  mancipii.     —    - — •    —    —

133  -  —  .   [133a] —    — .

133a

third  party;  the  latter  manumits  him  vindicta ;  thereupon  he
falls  again  into  his  father's  potestas ;  the  father  again  manci-
pates  him  either  to  the  same  person  as  before  or  to  a  different
one, — it  is  the  usual  practice  to  mancipate  to  the  same, — who
again  in  like  manner  manumits  Kim  vindicta,  whereupon  lie
once  more  returns  into  the  potestas  of  his  father ;  then  a  third
time  his  father  mancipates  him  either  to  the  same  person  or
to  another, — but  our  practice  is  again  to  mancipate  to  the
same, — and  by  this  last  mancipation  he  ceases   to  be  in  the
potestas  of  his  father,  though  not  yet  manumitted,  but  still
in  the  position  of  a  mancipium  [in  the  hands  of  the  individual
[to  whom  he  has  been   mancipated;    but  if  he  be  once  again
133  [manumitted  by  the  latter,  he  then  becomes  sui  iuris.         There-
fore,, when  the  son  has  been  mancipated  the  third  time,  his  father
ought  to  take  care  that  the  mancipee  remancipates  to  him,  i.e.
the  father,  that  so  he  may  become  the  manumitter,  and  thus,  in
[the  event  of  his  sons  death,  be  entitled,  rather  than  the  mancipee,
to  his  succession.         Females  and  grandsons  by  a  son  pass  out
of  the  potestas  of  their  father  or  grandfather,  and  become  sui
=iuris,  by  one  mancipation.     But  though  this  be  the  case,  yet
unless  they  have  been  remancipated  by  the  mancipee  to  their
[father  or  grandfather,  and  by  him  manumitted,  he,  the  father
[or  grandfather,  will  not  be  entitled  to  succeed  to  them  ;  if,  hoiv-
[ever,  he  be  their  manumitter  after  emancipation,  he  will  be
133&  [entitled  to  their  succession.]          We  must  keep  in  mind  that  it

§§  133,  133«.     Of  page  36  of  the  MS.  not  de  patris  uel  aul  exeunt  potentate  et

more  than  three  or  four  words  are  sui  iuris  efficiuntur.   Et  hi  ipsi,  quam-

legible.      It  probably  contained  at  libet  una  mancipation  de  patris  uel

greater^  length  what  we   find   thus  aui  potestate   exeant,    nisi  a  patre

stated  in  the  Epit.  i,  6,  §  3 — Tamen  Jiduciario  remancipati  fuerint  et  a

cum  tertio  mancipatus  fuerit  filius  a  naturali  patre  manumissi,  succedere

patre  naturali  Jiduciario  patri,  hoc  eis  naturalis  pater  non  potest,   nisi

agew  debet  naturalis  pater,  ut  ei  a  fiduciarius  a  quo  manumissi  sunt.

Jiduciario  patre  rernancipetur  et   a  *Nam  si  remancipatum  eum  sibi  na-

naturali  patre  rnanumittatur,  iit  si  turalis  pater  uel  auus  manumiserit,

filius  ille  mortuus  fuerit,  ei  in  here-  ipse  eis  in  hereditate  succedit.  Comp.

ditate  naturalis  pater,  non  Jiducin-  last  sentence  of  §  6,  tit.  I.  afd.
rius,  succedat.     Feminae  uel  nepote*       §  133ft.     None  of  what  is  borrowed  from

mascidi  ex  Jilio  una  emancipations  the   Inst.    and  printed  under  this

GAII  TXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVJLIS    [I,  §§  133, 134.

l?>3b(Admonendi  autcm  sumus  liberum  arbitrium  esse  ei  qui  filium
(et  ex  eo  nepotem  in  potestate  habebit,  filium  quidem  potestate
(dimittcre,  nepotem  uero  in  potestate  retinere :  uel  ex  diuerso
(filium  quidem  in  potestate  retinere,  nepotem  uero  manumittere,
(uel  omnes  sui  iuris  efficere.  eadem  et  de  pronepote  dicta  esse
(intellegemus.}

134 —  —  —  —  —  —   et  duae    intercedentes   manu-

inissiones  proinde  fiunt,  ac  fieri  solent  cum  ita  eum  pater
de  potestate  dimittit  ut  sui  iuris  efficiatur.  deinde  aut  patri
remancipatur,  et  ab  eo  is  qui  adoptat  uindicat  apud  praetorem  l
filium  suum  esse,  et  illo  contra  non  uindicante  a  praetore
uiudicariti  filius  addicitur ;  aut  non  remancipatur  patri,  sed
ab  eo  uindicat  is  qui  adoptat  (apud  quem  in  tcrlid)2  manci-
patione  est :  sed  sane  commodius  est  patri  remancipari.  in
ceteris  uero  liberorum  personis,  sen  masculini  sen  feminini

13-4

is  in  the  option  of  a  man  who  has  at  the  same  time  a  son  and  a
grandson  l>y  that  son  in  his  potestas,  to  release  the  son  from  it
but  retain  the  grandson ;  or  he  may  retain  his  son  in  it,  releasing
his  grandson ;  or  he  may  make  both  sui  iuris.  And  the  same
observation  applies  to  the  case  of  a  great-grandson.

\_Then  again,  parents  cease  to  have  in  their  potestas  those  of
[their  children  whom  they  have  given  in  adoption.  In  the  case
[of  a  son  who  is  being  given  in  adoption,  three  mancipations']  and
two  intermediate  manumissions  are  carried  through,  just  as
when  he  is  being  dismissed  from  his  father's  potestas  in  order
that  he  may  become  sui  iuris.  Then  either  he  is  remancipated
to  his  father,  and  from  him  vindicated  by  the  adopter  before
the  praetor,  who  adjudges  him  to  the  adopter  in  the  event  of
the  father  asserting  no  counter-vindication ;  or  else,  without
any  remancipation  to  his  father,  he  is  vindicated  by  the
adopter  directly  from  the  party  in  whose  ius  he  is  in  virtue  of
the  third  mancipation :  but  it  is  certainly  more  convenient
that  he  be  remancipated  to  his  father.  As  regards  other
descendants  than  sons,  no  matter  whether  male  or  female,  one

number,  is  legible  in  the  M.S.  But.
from  fr.  28,  D.  de  adopt,  (i,  7),
we  know  it  to  have  been  taken
from  the  first  book  of  Gai.,  and,
judging  from  the  Epit. ,  this  seems
its  proper  place.  Comp.  Epit.  i,  6,
§  3;  §  7,  tit.  I.  aid.

1:54.  The  commencement  of  this  par.
is  on  p.  36,  and  illegible.  Goeseh.
and  Husch.  supply  it  as  follows  : —

Praeterea  parentes  etiam  liberos  in
adoptionem  datos  in  potestate  nabere
desinunt.  et  in  filio  quidem,  si  lit
adoptionem  datur,  tres  mancipa-
tiones  et  duae,  etc.  As  regards  the
par.  generally,  comp.  §  8,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  The  uindicatio  referred  to  is  the
procedure  by  in  litre  cessio,  described
below,  ii,  24.

-  So  rendered  by  all  recent  eds.

I,  §§  134-136.]  COMMEXTARII  QVATTVOR.  53

sexus,  una  scilicet  mancipatio  sufficit,  et  aut  remancipantur
parent!  aut  non  remancipantur.     Eadem  et  in  prouinciis  apud

135  praesidem  prouinciae  solent  fieri.       Qui  ex  filio  semel  iterumue
mancipato  conceptus  est,   licet  post  tertiam   mancipationein
patris  sui  nascatur,  tamen  in  aui  potestate  est,  et  ideo  ab  eo
et  emancipari  et  in  adoptionem  dari  potest.     at  is  qui  ex  eo
filio  conceptus  est  qui  in  tertia  mancipatione  est,  non  nascitur
in  aui  potestate  :  sed  eum  Labeo l  quidem  existimat  in  eiusdem
inancipio  esse  cuius  et  pater  sit :  utimur  autem  hoc  hire,  ut
quaradiu  pater  eius  in  mancipio  sit,  pendeat  ius  ems  ;  et  si
quidem  pater  eius  ex  mancipatione  manumissus  erit,  cadat  in
eius  potestateui ;  si  uero  is  dum  in  mancipio  sit  decesserit,

13 oa sui  iuris  fiat.         Eadem  scilicet  —   —  —   —  —  ;

nam,  ut  supra  diximus,  quod  in  filio  faciunt  tres  mancipationes,

136  hoc  facit  una  mancipatio  in  nepote.         [136]

mancipation  is  sufficient,  which  may  or  may  not  be  followed
by  emancipation  to  the  parent.     The  same  process  is  gone

135  through  in  the  provinces  before  the  governor.         A  child
-  begotten  by  a  son  after  his  first  or  second  mancipation,  even

though  he  be  not  born  till  after  the  third,  is  nevertheless  in
the  potestas  of  his  grandfather,  by  whom  consequently  he  may
be  emancipated  or  given  in  adoption.  But  one  begotten  after
the  son's  third  mancipation  is  not  born  in  his  grandfather's
potestas.  According  to  Labeo,  he  is  in  mancipio  of  the  person
to  whom  his  father  has  been  mancipated :  but  our  rule  is  that
so  long  as  his  father  continues  in  mancipio  the  child's  status
is  in  suspense  ;  if  the  former  be  manumitted  from  mancipium,
the  latter  will  fall  under  his  potestas,  but  if  he  die  in  mancipio
135«  the  child  will  be  sui  iuris.  [The  same  rule  applies  to  the  case
[of  a  great-grandson  by  a  grandson,  though  the  latter  has  been
Emancipated  only  once  ;]  for,  as  already  said,  the  same  results
that  follow  three  mancipations  of  a  son  follow  one  mancipa-

136  tion  of  a  grandson.         [The  fact  that  a  woman  has  passed  in
[manum  does  not  as  a  matter  of  course  release  her  from  her
[fathers  potestas,  unless  she  have  performed  coemption ;  for  by  n
[senatusconsult  in  reference  to  the  wife  of  the  flamen  of  Jupiter,

§  135.     Comp.   §§  89,   132  ;  §  9,  tit.  I.  semel    tantum    mandpatus  fuerit ;

afd.  nam,  etc.

1  See  §  196,  note  1.  §  136.     In  the  outset  nearly  three  lines

§  135a.     More   than   a  line   and  a  half  (p.  38,  11.  6-8)  are  illegible  ;  in  the

(p.  38,  11.  2,  3)  illegible.     The  text  middle  rather  more  than  a  line  (1. 12).

may  have  run  to  this  effect— Eadem  To  fill  the  first  blank  Hu.  suggests

scilicet  intelleijere  debemus  de  pro-  — Muller  eo  quod  in  manum  con-

nepote  ex  nepote  nato,    licet  nepos  venlt,  nisi  coemptionem  fecerit,  pn-

54

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIV1LIS   [I,  §§  136, 137.

Maximi    et   Tuberonis    cautum    cst,  ut    haec   quod  ad  sacra
tan  turn  trideatur  in  manu  esse,  quod  uero  ad  ceteras  causas
proinde  habeatur  atque  si  in  manum  non  conuenisset.
—  — —  —  potestate  parentis  liberantur  ;    nee    in-
terest an  in  uiri  sui  manu  sint  an  extranei,  quamuis  hae  solae
loco  filiarum  habeantur  quae  in  uiri  manu  sunt.
137       —   —   —  —   —   —  .         [137«]    (Sed  et  remancirjatione)

[passed  at  the  instance  of]  Maximus  and  Tubero,  it  was  enacted
that  she  should  be  regarded  as  in  manu  only  as  concerned  the
sacra,  but  that  to  all  other  intents  she  should  be  held  as  if
she  had  not  passed  in  manum  at  all.  [Those,  however,  who  pass
[in  manum  by  coemption  are  thereby']  freed  from  their  parent's
potestas ;  nor  does  it  matter  whether  they  be  in  the  manus  of
husbands  or  strangers,  (although  she  only  is  in  the  position  of
a  daughter  who  is  in  manu  of  her  husband).

[  Women  in  manu  are  liberated  therefrom  in  the  same  ways
[as  a  daughter  is  freed  from  the  potestas,  namely,  by  the  death
[of  those  in  whose  manus  they  are,  or  by  their  being  interdicted
137 a[  fire,  and  water."]         By  remantipixtion  also  they  cease  to  be  in

137

rentis  potestate  Jiodie  liberatur;  nam
de  jiaminica  Diall  lege  Aslnia  An-
tistia  ex  auctoritate  Cornelli  Maximi,
etc.

To  iustify  this  reading  Hu.  relies
chiefly  on  Tac.  Ann.  iv,  16.  Tac.
relates  that  Tiberius,  having  expe-
rienced difficulty  in  filling  up  the
office  of  flamen  Dialis,  through  a
paucity  of  persons  qualified  by  far-
reate  birth  (see  Gai.  i,  112),  induced
the  senate,  in  the  year  776  |  23,  to
pass  a  law  to  the  intent  set  forth
above.  To  this  enactment,  which,
judging  from  the  language  of  Tac.,
must  have  been  a  senatusconsult,
Hu.,  at  his  own  hand,  gives  the
name  of  L.  Aslnia  Antistia,  from
the  two  consuls  of  the  year  ;  adding
(to  make  his  conjecture  correspond
with  the  mention  of  Maximus  and
Tubero  in  the  MS.  )  that  it  had  origin-
ally been  recommended  by  Cornelius
Maximus  and  (Q.  Aelins)  Tubero,
two  celebrated  jurists  of  the  end  of
the  republic,  but  hardly  contem-
poraries.

But  Augustus  had  previously  dealt
with  the  matter ;  so  Tac.  himself
mentions  in  the  passage  above  re-
ferred to.  The  occasion  was  the  re-
establishment  of  the  office  of  flamen
Dialis,  long  in  abeyance.  This  was

in  the  year  743  |  11  ;  see  Dio  Cas?.
liv,  27,  Suet.  Aug.  31.  The  consuls
of  that  year  were  Q.  Ael.  Tubero  and
Paulus  Fabius  Maximus.  We  are
therefore  fairly  entitled  to  assume
that  as  Augustus  did  in  fact  do
something  to  (as  Tac.  puts  it)  adapt
the  old  confarreation  to  modern
ideas, — that  as  he  certainly  was
dealing  with  the  position  of  the
flamen  Dialis  in  the  year  743,  and
that  as  the  consuls  of  that  year  were
a  Maximus  and  a  Tubero, — the  re-
ference in  Gai.  is  to  them  ;  see  Kar-
lowa,  die  Roem.  Ehe,  (Bonn,  1868),
p.  42.  Hence  I  prefer  something
like  this  —  nam  senatusconsulto  de
flaminica  Diali  (Gai.  i,  112,  last
clause)  facto,  ex  auctoritate  Maximi,
etc.

The  second  lacuna  Hu.  supplies
with  the  words — eae  uero  muUeres,
tjuae  in  manum  conueniunt  per  co-
emptionem,  potestate,  etc.  This  pro-
bably represents  accurately  the
meaning  of  the  words  that  are
awanting.

137,  137«.  Here  apparently  was  in-
troduced an  account  of  the  ways  of
ending  the  manus.  The  first  three
and  a  quarter  lines  (p.  12,  11.  16- 19)
of  the  passage  are  illegible,  and  so
are  three  and  a  half  (with  exception

T,  §§  137-UO.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  55

137«desinunt  in  manu  esse;  et  si  ex  ea  mancipations  manumissae
fuerint,  sui   iuris   efficiuntur.      —    —

iiihilo  magis  potest  cogere,  quam  et  filia  patrem.  sed  filia
quidem  nullo  modo  patrem  potest  cogere,  etiam  si  adoptiua
sit :  haec  autem  [uirum~]  repudio  misso  proinde  compellere
potest  atque  si  ei  nunquam  nupta  fuisset.

138  li  qui  in  causa  mancipii  sunt,  quia  seruorum  loco  habentur,

139  uindicta,  censu,  testamento  manumissi  sui  iuris  fiunt.         Nee
tamen    in  hoc  casu  lex  Aelia  Sentia   locum   habet :  itaque
nihil  requirimus   cuius  aetatis  sit  is  qui  manumittit  et  qui
manumittitur ;  ac  ne  illud  quidem  an  patronum  creditoremue
manumissor  liabeat.    ac    ne   numerus   quidem    legis  Fufiae

140  Caniniae  finitus  in  his  personis  locum  habet.         Quin  etiam

manu ;  and  on  manumission  after  remancipation  become  sui
iuris.  {But  between  the  woman  ivJw  has  performed  coemption
[with  a  stranger  and  her  who  has  performed  it  with  her
[husband  there  is  this  difference, — that  the  former  may  compel
[her  coemptionator  to  remancipate  her  to  any  one  she  pleases,
[whereas  the  latter"]  can  no  more  compel  her  husband  to  do  so
"  than  can  a  daughter  compel  her  father  to  emancipate  her.  A
daughter  can  never  do  this,  even  though  she  be  only  an  adop-
tive one ;  but  a  wife,  who  has  had  a  writing  of  divorce  sent  to
her,  may  compel  her  husband  to  free  her  from  the  mantis,  as
if  she  had  never  been  married  to  him.

138  Those  in  the  position  of  mancipia,  being  regarded  as  if  they
were  slaves,  become  sui  iuris  on  their  manumission  either
uindicta,  or  through  the  medium  of  the  census,  or  by  testa-

139  ment.         But  in  their  case  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  does  not
apply;  therefore  it  is  unnecessary  to  inquire  as  to  the  age
either  of  the  manumitter  or  the  manumitted,  or  whether  the
manumitter  has  a  patron  or  creditors ;  and  such  persons  are
not  affected  by  the  limitations  of  the  Fufia-Caninian  law  as
to   the   number  [of  persons  an   individual  may   manumit].

140  Moreover,  they  may  obtain  their  freedom  by  means  of  the

of  the  words  cogere  coemptionatorem)  fecerit,  hoc  interest,  quod  ilia  quidem

in  the  middle  of  it  (11.  21-24).     To  cogere  coemptionatorem  potest  ut  se

supply  the  first  blank,  Hu.  suggests  remancipat  cui  ipsa  uelit,  haec  au-

—t'eminae  quae  in  manu  sunt  simi-  tern  uirum  suum  nihilo  magis,  etc.

liter  eo  iure  liberantur  atque  filiae.  Both    those    restitutions    probably

quae  in  potestate  sunt,  uelut  inorte  fairly  represent  the  import  of  the

eius  cuius  in  manu  sunt,  siue  ei  aqua  illegible  lines.     Comp.  §  118.

et   igni  inter  dictum  fuer  it.     Sed  et  §138.     Comp.  §§  17  (notes),  123;  ii,  160;

remancipatione,  etc.     To  supply  the  iii,  114.

second,  K.  u.  S.  suggest— Inter  earn  §  139.     Comp.  §§  18,  37,  38,  42-47.

nero   quae    cum   extraneo,    et    earn  §  140.     Comp.  iv,  §§  75,  79  ;  Papin.  in

quae    cum    uiro    suo    coemptionem  Collat.  ii,  3;§  7, 1.  denox.  act.  (iv,  8),

56  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS  [I,  §§  140-142.

inuito  quoque  eo  cuius  in  mancipio  sunt  censu  libertatem
consequi  possunt,  excepto  eo  quern  pater  ea  lege  manciple
dedit  ut  sibi  remancipetur ;  nam  quodammodo  tune  pater
potestatem  propriam  reseruare  sibi  uidetur  eo  ipso  quod
mancipio  recipit.  ac  ne  is  quidern  dicitur  inuito  eo  cuius  in
mancipio  est  censu  libertatem  consequi,  quern  pater  ex  noxali
causa  [mancipio  dedit],1  ueluti  quod  furti  eius  nomine  dam-
natus  est,  [et  eum]  l  mancipio  actori2  dedit:  nam  hunc  actor

141  pro  pecunia  habet.         In  surnma  admonendi  surnus  aduersus
eos  quos  in  mancipio  habemus  nihil  nobis  contumeliose  facere
licere ;  alioquin  iniuriarum  l  tenebimur.     ac  ne  diu  quidem  in
eo  iure  detinentur  homines ;  sed  plerumque  hoc  fit  dicis  gratia
modo2  uno   momento,  nisi   scilicet   ex   noxali   causa   manci-
parentur.3

142  Transeamus    nunc    ad    aliam  diuisionem.      nam    ex    his

census  even  against  the  will  of  him  who  has  them  in  mancipio,
except  when  he  holds  under  condition  of  remancipation  to  the
father  from  whom  he  has  received  them ;  in  such  case  the
father  is  held  to  have  in  a  manner  reserved  his  power  over  his
child  by  his  bargain  that  he  is  to  have  him  back  again  as  a
mancipium.  Nor  can  he  who  has  been  given  by  his  father
as  a  noxal  mancipium, — as  when  his  father,  having  on  his
account  been  condemned  in  an  actio  furti,  has  surrendered
him  to  the  pursuer, — obtain  his  freedom  by  means  of  the  census
against  the  will  of  the  party  to  whom  he  has  been  surrendered ;
for  the  latter  holds  him  instead  of  pecuniary  compensation.

141  And  be  it  observed,  finally,  that  we  must  not  treat  with  in-
dignity those  we  hold  in  mancipio,  otherwise  we  shall  be  liable
to  them  in  an  actio  iniuriarum.    It  is  not  for  any  long  time
that  persons  are  detained  in  this  condition,  but  usually  as  a
mere  matter  of  form  and  only  for  a  moment,  unless  they  have
been  mancipated  noxally.

142  Let  us  pass  now  to  another  division  [of  the  law  of  persons] :

1  Kejectecl  by  M.  (K.  u.  S.  foot-  *  Comp.  iii,  §§  220  f.
note)  as  glosses.  "  So  Hu. ;  the  MS.  has  m.

2  The   noxal   surrender   was   not  3  So  the  MS.  ;  P.  reads  by  way  of
necessarily    to    the    owner    of    the  emendation — mancipati  sint  a  par-
stolen   property,  but  to  the  party  ente.

entitled  to  the  actio  furti;  see  iv,  203.       §§142-1.54.     Comp.  tit.  I.   DE  Tl'TELia
§  141.     Comp.  §  118a,  and  references  in  (i,  13).

note  to  last  par.  §§  142,  143.     Tr.  tit.  I.  afd.

I,  §§  142-145.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOK.

personis  quae  neque  in  potestate  neque  iu  manu  neque
in  mancipio  sunt,  quaedam  uel  in  tutela  sunt  uel  in  cura-
tione,  quaedam  neutro  iure  tenentur.  uideamus  igitur  quae
in  tutela,  quae  in  curatione  sint:  ita  enim  intellegemus

143  ceteras  personas  quae  neutro  iure  tenentur.         Ac  prius  dis-
piciamus  de  his  quae  in  tutela  sunt.

144  Permissum  est  itaque  parentibus  liberis  quos  in  potestate
sua  habent  testamento  tutores  dare  :  masculini  quideni  sexus
inpuberibus,  [feminini  etiam  puberibus,  et  turn  <^o]que  l  cum
nuptae  sint.     ueteres2  enim  uoluerunt  feminas,  etiamsi  per-
fectae  aetatis  sint,  propter  animi  leuitatem 3  in   tutela   esse.

145  Itaque  si  quis  filio  filiaeque  testamento   tutoreni  dederit,  et
ambo  ad  pubertatem  peruenerint,  filius  quidem  desinit  habere
tutorem,  filia  uero  nihilo  minus  in  tutela  permanet :  tantum
enim  ex  lege  lulia  et  Papia  Poppaea  *  iure  liberorum  tutela

for  of  those  who  are  neither  \npotestas,  manus,  nor  mancipium,
some  are  under  tutory  or  curatory,  and  others  under  neither
of  those  guardianships.  Let  us  see,  therefore,  who  are  under
tutory,  and  who  under  curatory ;  for  thus  we  shall  understand

143  who  they  are  that  are  in  neither.         And  let  us  begin  with
those  who  are  in  tutelage.

144  It  is  permitted,  then,  to  parents  to  appoint  tutors  by  testa-
ment to  those  of  their  children  who  are  in  potestate, — to  males
if  under  puberty,  [to  females  even  if  above  it,  and  even']  though
they  be  married.    For  the  old  jurists  thought  it  right  that
women,  although  of  full  age,  should  continue  under  tutory

145  because  of  their  fickleness  of  judgment.         Therefore,  if  a
man  have  by  testament  appointed  a  tutor  to  his  son  and
daughter,  and  these  both  arrive  at  the  age  of  puberty,  the
former  thereupon  ceases  to  have  a  tutor,  but  the  latter  still
continues  to  be  in  tutelage ;  for  it  is  only  in  respect  of  the
privilege  they  enjoy  under  the  Julian  and  Papia-Poppaeaii

144.     Comp.    Vlp.  xi,  §§  1,  14,  15;
§  3,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  The  words  in  ital.  are  not  in  the
MS.  ;  they  are  supplied  as  manifestly
omitted  per  incuriam,  and  necessary
to   complete  the  sense.     K.    u.    S.
interpolate — feminini   autem    sexus
cuiuscumque  aetatis  sint,  et  turn  quo-
fine,   etc. ;   Hu.  — feminini  uero  in-
puberibus puberibusque,  etc.

2  A  technical  word  with  the  classi-
cal jurists,  designative  of  their  pre-
decessors of  the  republican  period.

3  Comp.  §  190  and  notes  ;  Vlp.
xi,  1.

§  145.     Comp.   §  194;  iii,  44;  Vlp.  xi,
28a.

1  A  '  matrimonial  code, '  carried  by
Augustus  in  the  year  762  |  9,  as  a
revision  and  amendment  of  the
L.  lulia  de  maritandis  ordinibiifi
(passed  757  |  4,  after  having  been
twenty-one  years  before  the  legisla-
tive bodies):  see  Tac.  Ann.  iii,  §§  25,
28;  Dio  Cass.  Ivi,  10.  It  was  re-
garded as  one  of  the  most  important

58  GAII  INST1TVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [I,  §§  145-147.

liberantur  feminae.  loquimur  autem  exceptis  uirginibus
Vestalibus,  quas  etiam  ueteres  in  honorem  sacerdotii  liberas
esse  uoluerunt : 2  itaque  etiam  lege  xn  tabularum  cautum  est.

146  ISTepotibus  autem   neptibusque  ita  demum  possumus   testa-
mento   tutores  dare,  si  post  mortem  nostram  in  patris  sui
potestatem  iure  recasuri  non  sint.     itaque  si  filius  meus  mortis
meae  tempore  in  potestate  mea  sit,  nepotes  qnos  ex  eo  [habeo]
non  poterunt  ex  testamento  meo  habere  tutorem,  quamuis  in
potestate  mea  fuerint ;  scilicet  quia  mortuo  me  in  patris  sui

147  potestate   futuri  sunt.         Curn   tamen   in   conpluribus   aliis
causis   postumi  pro  iam    natis  habeantur,  et  in  hac   causa
placuit  non  minus  postumis  quam  iam  natis  testamento  tutores
dari  posse,  si  modo  in  ea  causa  sint  ut,  si  uiuis  nobis  nascan-

law  as  mothers  of  children,  that  women  are  freed  from  tutory.
We  must  except,  however,  the  Vestal  virgins,  whom  even  the
ancients,  out  of  respect  for  their  priestly  office,  held  to  be  free :
so  in  fact  it  was  provided  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables.

146  To  our  grandsons  and  granddaughters  we  can  appoint  tutors
by  will  then  only  when  they  are  not  on  our  death  to  pass  by
operation  of  law  into  the  potestas  of  their  father.     Accordingly,
if  niy  son  be  in  my  potestas  at  the  time  of  my  death,  my
grandchildren  by  him  cannot  have  a  tutor  under  my  testa-
ment, notwithstanding  that  they  may  be  in  my  potestas ;  for

147  on  my  death  they  will  be  in  that  of  their  father.         As  in
other  cases  posthumous  children  are  regarded  as  already  born,
so  in  this ;  for  it  is  held  that  we  may  by  testament  appoint
tutors  to  our  children  to  be  born  as  well  as  to  those  already
in  life,  provided,  as  regards  the  former,  that  if  they  be  born

pieces  of  Roman   statute  law,   and  individual  who  was  childless  ;    for

formed  the  subject  of  innumerable  women,  relief  from  tutory,  and  right,

commentaries.  more  or  less  restricted,  of  indepen-

The  purpose  of  the  lex  de  marl-  dent    testamentary    disposition,    if

tand.   ordinib.  seems  to  have   been  they  were  the  mothers  of  a  certain

to    prevent  misalliances,  encourage  number  of  children.     Of  the  penal-

i-qual   marriages,    and   regulate   di-  ties  of  celibacy  and  unfruitful  mar-

vorce;  the  Papia-Poppaean  additions  riage,  the  chief  was  incapacity  in

went  farther,  endeavouring  not  only  many  cases  to  take  a  testamentary

to  multiply  marriages,  but  to  insure  succession  or  bequest.     Many  testa-

their    fruitfulness.      This    was    at-  mentary  gifts  thus  lapsed  or  became

tempted  by  a  system  of  rewards  and  technically  caduca.     For  their  dis-

penalties.      Amongst    the    rewards  posal  the  statute  contained  elaborate

were  —  for    men,    a     gradation    of  provisions  :  hence  the  name  of  Lex

honours  according  to  the  number  of  Caducaria  so  often  applied  to  it.

their  lawful  children  alive  or  killed  2  See  Pint.  Numa,   10  ;   Schoell,

in  battle,  and  admission  to  office  in  Tab.  v,  I .

the  state  in  the  case  of  a  parent  at       §  146.     §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  §  127.
an  earlier  age  than  in  the  case  of  an       §  147.     §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.

I,  §§  147-150.]

COMMEKTARII  QVATTVOR.

59

tur,  in  potestate  nostra  fiant :  hos  [_enwi\  l  etiam  heredes  insti-
tuere  possumus,2  cum  extraneos  postumos  heredes  instituere

148  permission  non  sit.3         [Vxori]  quae  in  manu  est,  proinde
ac  filiae,  item  nurui  quae  in  filii  manu  est,  proinde  ac  nepti,
tutor  dari  potest.

149  Rectissime   autem    tutor  sic  dari  potest:    LVCIVM   TITIVM

LIBERIS    MEIS     TVTOREM     DO  ;     LVCIVM    [TITIVM    VXORI  MEAE]

TVTOREM  DO.     sed  et  si  ita  scriptum  sit:  LIBERIS  MEIS  uel

150  VXORI  MEAE  TITIVS  TVTOR  ESTO,  recte  datus  intellegitur.         In
persona  tamen  uxoris   quae  in  manu  est  recepta  est   etiam
tutoris  optio,  id  est  ut  liceat  ei  permittere  quern  uelit  ipsa
tutorem  sibi  optare,  hoc  modo:   TITIAE  VXORI  MEAE  TVTOEIS

in  our  lifetime  they  will  be  in  our  potestas.  For  we  may
institute  such  posthumous  children  as  our  heirs ;  although
we  cannot  so  institute  the  after-born  children  of  a  stranger.

148  A  tutor  may  be  appointed  to  a  wife  in  manu  as  if  she  were
a  daughter,  and  to  a  daughter-in-law  in  the  manus  of  a  son  as
if  she  were  a  granddaughter.

149  The  most  regular  way  of  appointing  a  testamentary  tutor
is  by  words  such  as  these:  'I  appoint  Lucius  Titius  as  tutor
to  my  children ; '  '  I  appoint  Lucius  [Titius]  as  tutor  [to  my
[wife]'     But  if  it  be  in  these  terms  :  '  Be  Titius  tutor  to  my
children,'  or  'to  my  wife,'  the  appointment  will  equally  be

150  sustained  as  regular.         In  the  case  of  a  wife  in  manu,  how-
ever, an  option  may  be  conferred  upon  her ;  that  is  to  say,  a
husband  may  permit  his  wife  to  choose  whom  she  will  as  her
tutor,  in  this  way :   '  To  my  wife  Titia  I  give  the  choice  of

1  Added  by  Hu.  and  adopted  by
K.  u.  S.

2  Comp.  ii,  130.

3  Comp.  ii,  242.

§  148.  Comp.  ii,  159  ;  Boeth.  in  Cic.
Top.  ii,  4,  §  18  (ed.  Baiter,  p.  302).

§  149.  Comp.  ii,  289  ;  Paul,  in  Fr.  Vat.,
§  229.  In  the  MS.  we  have  Ititiu
mliberismeistutdolic.  ttitdo,  which  Bk.
and  Hu.  (in  previous  editions)
render — '  L.  Titlum  liberis  meis  tu-
torem do  lego'  aut  'do.'  Gou.,
pointing  out  that  we  have  no  example
of  lego  being  employed  in  the  testa-
mentary appointment  of  a  tutor,
renders  the  lic.tutdo  of  the  MS.  by
Lucium  tutorem  do,  as  a  second  and
simpler  style.  This  is  adopted  by
:  P.  in  his  text;  but  in  a  footnote  he
suggests  that  the  second  style  pos-

sibly applied  to  the  appointment  of
a  tutor  to  a  wife,  and  that  the  copyist
may  have  omitted  the  appropriate
words.  This  view,  I  think,  may  be
accepted  for  two  reasons — (1)  that
though  we  often  have  Titius  stand-
ing alone,  we  nowhere  in  the  text
find  Lucius;  (2)  that  the  second
branch  of  the  par.  seems  to  refer  to
an  antecedent  form  of  appointing  a
tutor  to  a  wife,  in  which  the  word
do  has  been  used.  Hu.,  in  his  last
edition,  adopts  a  similar  reading  ;
but  K.  u.  S.  drop  the  lic.tutdo
altogether.

150-153.  Comp.  Liv.  xxxix,  19;
L.  Salpensana,  c.  22  (Brans,  p.  121).
The  words  tutorem  optare  in  §  150
are  not  in  the  MS.,  but  manifestly
have  been  omitted  per  incuriam.

GO  GA1I  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIV  [US   [I,  §§  150-15G.

OPTIONEM  DO  ;   quo  casu  licet  uxori  [tutorem  optare]  uel  in

151  omnes  res  uel  in  unam  forte  aut  duas.         Ceterum  aut  plena

152  optio  datur  aut  angusta.         Plena  ita  dari  solet  ut  proxime
supra  diximus.     angusta  ita  dari  solet:   TITTAE  VXORI  MEAE

TVTORIS  OPTIONEM  DVMTAXAT1  SEMEL  DO,  aut  DVMTAXAT  BIS  DO.

153  Quae  optiones  plurimum  inter  se  differunt.     nam  quae  plenam
optionem  habet,  potest  semel  et  bis  et  ter  et  saepius  tutorem
optare  :   quae  uero  angustam  habet  optionem,  si  dumtaxat
semel  data  est  optio,  amplius  quam  semel  optare  noil  potest  ;
si  tantum   bis,  amplius   quam  bis   optandi  facultatem   non

154  habebit.         Vocantur  autem  hi  qui   nominatim   testameuto
tutores  dantur,  datiui,  qui  ex  optione  sumuutur,  optiui.

155  Quibus  testamento  quidem  tutor  datus  non  sit,  iis  ex  lege
xii  \tabularum~]  agnati  sunt  tutores,  qui  uocantur  legitimi.

156  Sunt  autem  agnati  per  uirilis  sexus  personas  cognatione  iuncti,
quasi  a  patre  cognati,  ueluti  frater  eodem  patre  natus,  fratris
films  neposue  ex  eo,  item  patruus  et  patrui  filius  et  nepos  ex

her  tutor.'     \\7hen  this  is  done  she  is  free  to  choose  either  a
tutor  who  is  to  act  with  her  in  all  her  affairs,  or  one  who  is  to

151  act  for  her  in  one  or  two  matters  only.         Her  option  may  be

152  either  limited  or  unlimited.          It  is  unlimited  when  con-
ferred in  such  terms  as  above ;  limited  when  conceived  in  this
way :  '  I  give  my  wife  Titia  the  choice  of  her  tutor,  but  only

153  once,' or  '  only  twice.'         There  is  a  great  difference  between
these  two  options;   for  she  who  has  unlimited  option  may
choose  a  tutor  once,  twice,  thrice,  or  oftener  if  she  likes ;
whereas  she  whose  option  is  limited  by  '  once '  cannot  choose
oftener  than   once,  while  if  limited  by  'twice'  she  has  no

154  right  to  choose  oftener  than  twice.         Tutors  appointed  in  a
testament  by  express  nomination  are  called  tutors  dative ;
those  selected  in  virtue  of  a  power  of  option,  tutors  optive.

155  Those  to  whom  no  tutor  has  been  appointed  by  testament,
by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  have  their  agnates  as  tutors,

156  — hence  called  tutors-at-law.         And  by  agnates  are  to  be
understood  persons  who  are  of  kin  through  males, — cognate,
as  it  were,  through  the  father ;  as,  for  instance,  a  brother  by
the  same  father,  such  a  brother's  son  or  a  grandson  through
the  latter,  a  father's  brother,  a  father's  brother's  son,  or  a
father's  brother's  grandson  through  the  last.     Those  who  are

§  152.    a  In  MS.  dumtaxat  tut.  optionem.  §  155.     Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Schoell,
§  154.     Comp.  Vlp.  xi,  14.  Tab.  v,  6  ;  Vlp.  xi,  3.

§§  155-158.    Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  LEGITIMA  §  156.     §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  iii,  10  ;
AGNATORVM  TVTELA  (i,  15).  Vlp.  xi,  4.

I,  §§  156-158.]

COM M E XT A1II I  QVATTVOR.

Gl

eo.  at  hi  qui  per  feminini  sexus  personas  cognatione  con-
iunguntur  non  sunt  agnati,  sed  alias  naturali  iure  cognati.
itaque  inter  auunculum  et  sororis  filium  non  agnatio  est,  sed
cognatio.  item  amitae,  materterae  filius  non  est  mini  agnatus,
sed  cognatus,  et  inuicem  scilicet  sic  ego  illi  eodem  iure
coniungor;  quia  qui  nascuntur,  patris,  non  matris  familiam

157  secuntur.         Sed  olim  quidem,  quantum  ad  legem  xn  tahu-
larum  attinet,  etiam  femiuae  agnatos  habebant  tutores.     sed
postea  lex  Claudia '  lata  est,  quae,  quod  ad  feminas  attinet,
[agnatorum~\  tutelas  sustulit :  itaque  masculus  quidem  inpubes
fratrem  puberem  aut  patruurn  habet  tutorem ;  femina  uero 2

158  talem  habere  tutorem  non  potest  \_cogi\.z         Sed  agnationis
quidem  ius  capitis  deminutione  perimitur,  cognationis  uero
ius  eo  modo  non  commutatur ;  quia  ciuilis  ratio  ciuilia  quidem
iura  corrumpere  potest,  naturalia  uero  non  potest.

of  kin  through  females  are  not  agnates,  but  merely  by  natural
law  cognates.  Therefore  there  is  no  agnation  between  a
mother's  brother  and  her  son, — only  cognation.  The  son  of
my  father's  or  mother's  sister  is  not  my  agnate,  but  my
cognate,  and  I  of  course  stand  to  him  in  the  same  relationship;
for  children  follow  the  family  of  their  father,  not  that  of  their

157  mother.         Of  old,  and  under  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,
women  also  had  their  agnates  for  their  tutors.    But  afterwards,
by  the  Claudian  law,  this  tutory  was  abolished  in  so  far  as
women  were  concerned ;  so  that  now,  while  a  male  under  the
age  of  puberty  has  as  his  tutor  his  own  or  his  father's  brother,
a  woman  cannot  be  compelled  to  have  such  a  person  as  her

158  tutor.         The  right  of  agnation  is  put  an  end  to  by  capitis
dcminutio.     This,  however,  makes  no  alteration  in  the  right
of  cognation  ;    for,  though  purely  civil   considerations  may
destroy  civil  rights,  they  cannot  have  that  effect  on  natural
ones.

§  157.     Comp.  §  171  ;  Vlp.  xi,  8  ;  1.   3,
C.  de.  leg.  tut.  (v,  30).

1  We  have  no  precise  information
as  to  the  enactment  of  the  Claudian
law  here  referred  to  ;  though  called  a
lex  it  was  probably  a  senatusconsult
passed  on  the  proposal  of  Claudius,
as  Lange    (Roem.   Alt.)  thinks,    in
the  year  800  |  47;  comp.  note  to  §§
173,  174.

2  That   is   to   say,    women   above
puberty;  for  it  does  not  appear  that

female  any  more  than  male  pupils
were  ever  exempted  from  the  tutory -
at-law  of  their  agnates.

3  So  Gou.  The  MS.  has  only  pote,
with  a  blank  space  following  it  suffi-
cient for  five  or  six  letters.  K.  u.  S.
and  Hu.  have  simply  potest;  but  this
seems  too  absolute  ;  there  could  be
nothing  to  prevent  a  woman  select-
ing her  brother  or  uncle  as  her  tutor.
§  158.  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.  Comp.  iii,
§§  21,  27 ;  Vlp.  xi,  9.

62

GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [I,  §§  159-161.

159  Est  autem   capitis  demiuntio  prioris  capitis   permutatio.1
eaque  tribus  modis   accidit:    nam   aut   maxima   est   capitis
deminutio,  aut   minor,   quam   quidani   mediam   uocant,   aut

160  minima.          Maxima  est  capitis  deminutio  cum  aliquis  simul
et  ciuitatein  et  libertatem  amittit ;  quae  accidit  incensis  1  qui
ex  forma  censuali  uenire  iubentur.     quod  ius    —   —   —

—   —  ex  lege  —    —   —    —   —   — ,2  qui  contra  cam

legem  in  urbe  Roma  domicilium  habuerint :  item  feminae  :i
quae  ex  senatusconsulto  Claudiano  ancillae  fiunt  eorum
dominorum,  quibus  inuitis  et  denuntiantibus  nihilo  minus4

161  cum  semis  eorum  coierint.         Minor  sine  media  est  capitis

159  By  capitis  deminutio  is  meant  the  changing  of  one's  former
caput.      And   it   occurs   in  three    ways ;    for   every   capitis
deminutio  is  either  of  the  highest  degree,  of  the  lesser  (which

160  some  call  intermediate),  or  of  the  lowest.         It  is  of  the
highest  degree  when  a  man  loses  at  once  both  citizenship  and
freedom;    as  happens  to  persons  who  have  wilfully  evaded
inscription  in  the  censorial  register,  and  consequently,  by  the
rules  of  the  census-taking,  are  ordered  to  be  sold  as  slaves.
It  occurs  also    —    —    —    —    —    —    who,  in  contravention

of  the  statute,  have  taken  up  their  abode  within  the  burgh-
liniits  of  Rome.     A  woman,  too,  according  to  the  Claudian
senatusconsult,  becomes  the  slave  of  him  with  whose  male
slave  she  has  been  carrying  on  an  improper  intimacy,  against
the  will  and  in  spite  of  the  formal  warnings  of  his  owner.

161  There  is  lesser  or  intermediate  capitis  deminutio  when  citizen-

§§  159-164.     Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  CAPITIS
MINVTIONE  (i,  16).

§  159.  Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  Comp.  Vlp.  xi,
10  ;  Boeth.  in  Cic.  Top.  ii,  4,  §  18
(ed.  Baiter,  p.  302) ;  Paul,  ex  Festo,
v.  Deminutus  capite  (Bruns,  p.  240).
1  Gai.  (ad  ed.  prov.)  in  fr.  1,  D.
de  cap.  min.  (iv,  5),  has  status  per-
mutatio; and  this  is  substituted  by
K.  u.  S.  and  Hu.  for  the  cap.  perm.
of  the  MS.

By  caput  is  to  be  understood  the
family  position  of  a  citizen.  It  is
sometimes  denned  as  a  man's  position
in  regard  to  freedom,  citizenship,
and  family  rights  ;  but  the  two  first
came  under  consideration  only  as
all'ecting  the  last.

§  160.     Comp.  Vlp.   xi,  11;  §  1,  tit.  I.
afd. ;  Boeth.  as  in  note  to  last  par.

1  Comp.  Cic.  pro  Caec.  xxxiv,  99;
Dion.  Hal.  iv,  15;  Vlp.  xi,  11.

2  Nearly  two  lines  (p.  44, 11.  1-3),
with  exception  of  ex  lege,  are  ille-
gible in  the  MS.     It  has  been  sug-
gested— and  M.   (K.    u.    S.  p.  xix)
and  Hu.  adhere  to  the  view — that
the  allusion  may  have  been  to  the
provision  in  the  Aelia-Sentian  law
that  deditician-freedmen  should  not
reside   in   Rome   under  penalty   of
being  again  reduced  to  slavery;  see
§  27.     The  difficulty,  as  Gou.  pro-
perly observes,  is  that  it  could  not
be  said  of  such  a  freedman — simul
ciuitatem  et  libertatem  amittit;  for
he  was  not  a  citizen.

3  Comp.  §91;  Vlp.  xi,  11;  §  1,  I.
de  success,  sublat.  (iii,  12).

4  So  Hu.  ;  the    MS.  has  dominix,
omitted  by  P.  and  K.  u.  S.  as  a  gloss.

§  161.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  Comp.  §  128,
note  2;  Vlp.  xi,  12 ;  Boeth.  as  in  note
to  §  159.

I,  §§  161-164.]  COMMENTAEII  QVATTVOR.  63

deminutio   cum  ciuitas   amittitur,    libertas   retinetur ;    quod

162  accidit  ei  cui  aqua  et  igni  interdictum  fuerit.         Minima  est
capitis  deminutio  cum  et  ciuitas   et  libertas  retinetur,  sed
status  hominis  commutatur ;  quod  accidit  in  his  qui  adopt-
antur,  item  in  his  quae  coemptionem  faciunt,  et  in  his  qui
mancipio    dantur  quique  ex  mancipatione   manuniittuntur ;
adeo  quidem  ut  quotiens  quisque  mancipetur  ut l  manumit-

163  tatur,  totiens   capite   deminuatur.         Nee   solum  maioribus
deminutionibus  ius  agnationis  corrumpitur,  sed  etiam  minima;
et  ideo  si  ex  duobus  liberis  alterum  pater  emancipauerit,  post
obitum  eius  neuter  alteri  agnationis  iure  tutor  csse  poterit.

164  Cum  autem  ad   agnatos  tutela   pertineat,   non   simul   ad
omnes  pertinet,  sed  ad  eos  tantum  qui  proximo  gradu  sunt.

ship  is  lost  but  liberty  retained  ;  which  happens  to  him  who  is

162  interdicted  fire  and  water.        There  is  capitis  deminutio  of  the
lowest  degree  when  both  citizenship  and  liberty  are  retained,  and
only  the  status  or  condition  of  the  individual  [in  private  life]
is  changed;  it  happens  in  the  case  of  persons  who  are  adopted,
of  women  who  perform  coemption,  and  of  individuals  who  are
given  in  mancipium  and  manumitted  therefrom;  for  as  often
as  there  is  mancipation  with  a  view  to  manumission,  so  often

163  is  there  a  capitis  deminutio.         It  is  not  by  the  greater  capitis
deminutiones  alone  that  the  right  of  agnation  is  destroyed,  but
even  by  that  of  the  lowest  degree  ;  consequently,  if  a  father
emancipate  one  of  two  children,  neither  of  them  can  be  the
other's  tutor  by  right  of  agnation  after  the  father's  death.

164  Although  it  is  true  that  the  right  of  tutory  belongs  to  a
pupil's  agnates,  yet  it  does  not  belong  to  all  of  them,  but  only

164«to  those  who  are  nearest  of  degree.  [Failing  agnates,  it
[passed  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  to  the  gens ;  but  the
[rights  of  the  gens  in  this  respect  have  long  ago  gone  into  disuse."]

§162.  Comp.  Vlp.  xi,  13;  §3,  tit.  Twelve  Tables  the  tutory-at-law  of  a

I.  afd. ;  Boeth.  as  in  note  to  §  pupil  passed  on  that  event  to  his

159.  gens  is  nowhere  expressly  stated.

1  So  P.;  the  MS.  and  K.  u.  S.  have  But  we  know  (iii,  17)  that  failing

aut;  Hu.  \_aut  ut  remancipatur]  aut  agnates  a  man's  succession  devolved

ut  manumittatur.  on  his  gens ;  and  it  was  a  general

§  163.  Comp.  Vlp.  xi,  13;  §  3, 1.  de  ley.  principle  that,  except  when  an  in-

agn.  tut.  (i,  15).  heritance  fell  to  a  woman,  the  rights

§  164.     §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.  of  succession  and  tutory  went  to-

§  164re.  The  first  17  lines  of  p.  45  of  gether  (§  165).  Besides,  we  have  to

the  MS.  are  almost  entirely  illegible.  guide  us  the  analogy  of  the  curatory

There  is  reason  to  believe  they  con-  of  a  lunatic,  which  went  to  his

tained  a  reference  to  the  tutory  agnates,  and  failing  them  to  his

exercised  by  the  gens  on  failure  of  gens;  see  Cic.  de  Inv.  II,  1,  148  ;  fr.

agnates  ;  see  iii,  17.  That  by  the  53,  pr.  D.  de  V.  S.  (1,  16).

G4

GAII  INSTITUTION VM  IVRIS  C1VILIS   [I,  §§  165,  166.

165

166

Ex  eadem  lege  duodecim  tabularum  libertarum  et  in-
puberum  libertorum  tutela  ad  patronos  liberosque  eorurn
pertinet ;  quae  et  ipsa  tutela  legitima  uocatur,  non  (quia  nomi-
(natwi)  ea  lege  de  hac  tutela  (cauetur,  sed)  quia  proinde  accepta
est  per  interpretationem  atque  si  uerbis  legis  introducta l
esset:  eo  enim  ipso  (quod  hereditates)  libertorum  libertarurn-
que,  si  intestati  decessissent,  iusserat  lex  ad  patronos  liberosue
eorum  pertinere,  crediderunt  ueteres2  uoluisse  legem  etiam
tutelas  ad  eos  pertinere,  quia  et  agnatos,  quos  ad  hereditatem
uocauit,  eosdem  et  tutores  esse  iusserat.

Exemplo  patronorum  receptae  sunt  et  aliae  tutelae  quae
fiduciariae  uocantur,  id  est,  quae  ideo  nobis  competunt  quia
liberum  caput  mancipatum  nobis  uel  a  parente  uel  a  coemp-

165  By  the  same  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  the  tutory  of  freed-
wornen  and  of  freedmen  under  puberty  belongs  to  their  patrons
and  their  patrons'  children.     This  tutory  likewise  is  spoken
of  as  a  tutory-at-law.     Not,  however,  because  it  is  expressly
mentioned  in  the  Tables,  but  because  it  has  been  recognised
by  interpretation  as  fully  as  if  it  had  been  so  mentioned ;  for
inasmuch  as  it  was  declared  by  the  Tables  that  the  inheritances
of  freedmen  and  freedwomen  dying  intestate  should  belong  to
their  patrons  and  patrons'  children,  the  old  jurists  concluded
that  it  must  be  the  intent  of  the  statute  that  the  tutory  of
such  freedmen  and  freedwomen  should  go  in  the  same  direc-
tion, seeing  that,  when  it  calls  agnates  to  a  succession,  it  at
the  same  time  confers  upon  them  the  right  of  tutory.

166  On  the  analogy  of  that  of  patrons,  certain  other  tutories
have  been  recognised  which  are  called  fiduciary,  i.e.  which  are
competent  to  us  as  manuinitters  of  a  free  person  mancipated

§  165.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  LEGITIMA
PATRONORVM  TVTELA  (i,  17),  from
which  the  words  in  ital. ,  illegible  in
the  MS.  ,  are  supplied ;  Vlp.  xi,  3.

1  So  Hu.   and  K.  u.  S. ;  the  MS.
has  accepta;  P.  praecepta.

2  See  §  144,  note  2.

§§  166-184.  Comp.  tits.  I.  DE  LEGITIMA
PARENTVM  TVTELA  and  DE  flDVCI-
ARIA  TVTELA  (i,  18,  19).  In  the
MS.,  immediately  after  exemplo pa-
tronorum in  beginning  of  §  166,  we
have  the  words  de  fiduciaries,  pro-
bably an  unfinished  rubric.

§  166.  Comp.  §§  115,  172,  175,  195«;
Vlp.  xi,  5 ;  tits.  I.  afd.  K.  u.  S.,  on
the  authority  oflnst.  i,  18,  and  §  172,

below,  make  an  interpolation,  and
render  the  par.  thus  :  —  Exemplo
patronorum  receptae  sunt  et  aliae
tutelae, quae  et  ipsae  lerjitimae  uocan-
tur.  nam  si  quis  JUium  autfiliam,
nepotem  aut  neptem  ex  filio,  et  dein-
ceps  alteri  ea  lege  mancipio  dedit  ut
xibi  remanciparetur,  delude  reman-
cipatum  remancipatamue  rnann-
misit,  leyitiimis  eorum  tutor  erit.
Sunt  et  aliae  tutelae  quae  fiduciariae,
etc.  Hu.  (in  his  last  edition)  adopts
this  addition  ;  and  makes  the  sunt
et  aliae  the  commencement  of  a
.separate  par.  (§  166a).  But,  looking
at  the  language  of  §  175,  it  is  doubt-
ful whether  this  be  justified.

I,  §§  167-170.]  COMMENT ARII  QVATTVOR.

167  tionatore   manumiserimus.          Sed  latinarum   et    latinorum
inpuberum  tutela  non  omni  modo  ad  manumissorcs  libertinorum1
pertinet,  sed  ad  eos  quorum  ante  manumissionem  ex   hire
Quiritium  [fuerunt :   unde  si  ancilla  ex  iure  Quiritium~\ 2  tua
sit,  in  bonis  mea,  a  me  quidem  solo,  non  etiana  a  te  manumissa
latina  fieri  potest,  et  bona  ems  ad  me  pertinent;  sed  eius
tutela  tibi  conpetit :  nam  ita  lege  lunia  cauetur.    itaque  si
ab  eo  cuius  et  in  bonis  et  ex  iure  Quiritium  ancilla  fuerit
facta  sit  latina,  ad  eundem  et  bona  et  tutela  pertinent.

168  Agnatis  et  patronis  et  liberorum  capitum  manumissoribus
permissum  est  feminarum  tutelam  alii  in  iure  cedere ; '  pupil-
lorum  autem  tutelam  non  est  permissum  cedere,  quia  non

169  uidetur    onerosa,    cum   tempore   pubertatis   finiatur.2          Is

170  autem  cui  ceditur  tutela  cessicius   uocatur.         quo  mortuo
aut  capite  deminuto  reuertitur  ad  eum   tutorem  tutela   qui
cessit ;  ipse  quoque  qui  ccssit  si  mortuus  aut  capite  deminutus

167  to  us  either  by  a  parent  or  a  coemptionator.          But  the
tutory  of   Junian   latin/  under  puberty,   whether— male   OP-
fomalo>  does  not  in  all  cases  belong  to  their  manumitters,  but
rather  to  those  who  before  their   manumission   were   their
quiritarian  owners.     Therefore,  if  a  woman-slave  be  yours  in
quiritarian  and  mine  in  bonitarian  right,  it  is  I  alone,  not
you,  that  can  by  manumission  make  her  a  latin,  and  her
estate  will  be  mine ;  but  her  tutory  will  belong  to  you :  for  so
it  is  provided  by  the  Junian  law.    Accordingly,  if  a  woman
have  been  made  a  latin  by  a  person  who  held  her  both  in
bonitarian  and  quiritarian  ownership,  her  estate  [on  her  death]
and  her  tutory  [during  her  life]  will  both  be  his.

168  Agnates,   patrons,   and   manumitters   of  free   persons   are
permitted  to  transfer  the  tutory  of  females  to  another  person
by  cession  in  court ;  but  that  of  male  pupils  cannot  be  ceded,
for,  as  it  terminates  with  the  arrival  of  puberty,  it  cannot  be

169  regarded  as  burdensome.         He  to  whom  a  tutory  is  thus

170  ceded  gets  the  name  of  tutor  cessicius.         On  his  death  or
capitis  deminutio  it  reverts  to  him  by  whom  it  had  been
ceded  ;  while  if  it  be  the  latter  that  dies  or  is  capite  deminutus.,

§  167.    Comp.  §  35;  iii,  56;  Vlp.  xi.  19.  they  have  obviously  been   omitted

1  The    MS.   has  libertineorum ;  P.  per  incuriam.

omits  the  word;  K.  u.  S.  make  it  §  168.     Comp.  Vlp.  xi,  §§  6,  8,  17.
eorum;  Hu.  libertorum  eorum.  l  Comp.  ii,  24.

-  These  words  are  the  suggestion  2  Comp.  §  196.

of  Goesch.,  approved  by  most  eds. ;  §§  169,  170.     Comp.  Vpl.  xi,  7.

66  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  C1VILIS   [I,  §§  170-174.

sit,  a  cessicio  tutela  discedit  et  reuertitur  ad  eum  qui  post
eum  qui  cesserat  secundum  gradum  in  ea  tutela  habuerit.

171  Sed   quantum   ad   agnatos    pertinet   nihil   hoc   temper e    de
cessicia  tutela  quaeritur,  cum  agnatorum  tutelae  in  feminis

172  lege  Claudia 1  sublatae  sint.        Sed  fiduciarios  quoque  quidam
putauerunt  cedendae  tutelae  ius  non  liabere,  cum  ipsi  se  oneri
subiecerint.     quod  etsi  placeat,  in  parente  tamen  qui  filiam
neptemue  aut  proneptem  alteri  ea  lege  mancipio  dedit  ut  sibi
rernanciparetur,  remancipatamque  manumisit,  idem  dici  noil
debet,  cum  is  et  legitimus  tutor  habeatur,  et  non  minus  huic
quam  patronis  honor  praestandus  sit.

173  Praeterea    senatusconsulto   mulieribus    permissum   est   in
absentis  tutoris  locum  alium  petere  ;  quo  petito  prior  desinit ;

174  nee  interest  quam  longe  absit  is  tutor.         sed  excipitur  ne
in   absentis   patroni   locum    liceat   libertae   tutorem   petere.

it  passes  from  the  cessicius  and  reverts  to  him  who  is  entitled

171  to  it  as  next  of  degree  after  the  ceclent.         So  far,  however,
as  agnates  are  concerned,  there  can  nowadays  never  be  any
question  about  this  cessicia  tutela,  seeing  that  the   agnatic
tutory  of  women  has  been  abolished  by  the  Claudian  law.

172  Some  jurists  have  been  of  opinion  that  fiduciary  tutors  have
no  power  of  ceding  their  office,  since  they  have  subjected
themselves  to  the  burden  by  their  own  act.     Even  if  this
opinion  be  correct,  the  rule  will  not  apply  to  a  parent  who
has  given   his   daughter   or   granddaughter  or    great-grand-
daughter to  a  third  party  in  mancipium,  on  the  express  con-
dition of  remancipation  to  himself,  and  who  has  manumitted
her  on  such  remancipation ;  for  he  is  regarded  as  also  a  tutor-
at-law,  and  is  entitled  to  no  less  consideration  than  a  patron.

173  Moreover,  by  the  senatusconsult,  women   are   allowed   to
apply  for  the  appointment  of  a  new  tutor  in  room  of  one  who
is  absent ;  the  latter's  tutory  comes  to  an  end  by  the  new
appointment,  apart  from  any  consideration  of  how  far  away

174  he  is.         There  is  an  exception,  however,  in  the  case  of  a
freedwoman ;  for  she  cannot  thus  obtain  the  supercession  of

§  171.  Coinp.  §  157;  Vlp.  xi,  8.  178-182,  and  Vlp.  xi,  §§  20-23,  to

1  See  §  157,  note.  have  dealt  pretty  comprehensively

§  172.  Comp.  §§  132,  166,  175, 192;  tit.  with  the  subject  of  the  tutory  of

I.  de  leg.  parent,  tut.  (i,  18).  women,  and  may  possibly  have  been

§§  173,  174.  Comp.  VTp.  xi,  22.  The  the  same  enactment  that  is  else-
author  and  date  of  the  Set.  referred  where  referred  to  under  the  name
to  cannot  be  determined  with  cer-  of  lex  Claudia;  comp.  §  157,
tainty.  It  seems,  judging  from  §§  note  1.

I,  §§  175-180.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  67

175  Patroni  autem  loco  habemus  ctiam  parentem,  qui  ex  eo  quod
ipse  sibi  remancipatani  filiam  neptemue  aut  proneptem  manu-
misit,  legitimam  tutelam  nanctus  est.     huius  quidem  liberi
fiduciarii    tutoris    loco    numerantur;    patroni    autem   liberi
eandem  tutelam  adipiscuntur  quarn  et  pater  eorum  habuit.

176  Sed  aliquando  etiam  in  patroni  absentis  locum  pcrmittitur  tuto-

177  rem  petere,  ueluti  ad  hereditatem  adeundain.         Idem  senatus

178  censuit  et  in  persona  pupilli  patroni^w.         Item '  lege  lulia  de
maritandis  ordinibus  ei  quae  in  legitima  tutela  pupilli  sit  per-
mittitur  dotis  constituendae  gratia  a  praetore  urbauo  tutorem

179  petere;         sane  [enim]1   patroni  filius,  etiamsi  inpubes  sit,
libertae  efficietur  tutor,  quamquam  in  nulla  re  auctor  fieri  potest,
cum  ipsi  nihil  permissum  sit  sine  tutoris  auctoritate  agere.

180  Item  si  qua  in  tutela  legitima  furiosi  aut  rnuti  sit,  permittitur
ei  senatusconsulto  dotis  constituendae  gratia  tutorem  petere.

175  her  absent  patron.         And  under  the  word  patron  we  here
include  a  parent  who,  by  the  mere  fact  of  manumission  of  a
daughter,   granddaughter,    or    great-granddaughter   who   has
been  remancipated  to  him,  has  thereby  become  her  tutor-at-
law.     The  children  of  such  a  parent  are  accounted  fiduciary
tutors ;  but  the  children  of  a  patron  succeed  to  a  tutory  of  the

176  same  character  as  their  father's.         Yet  sometimes  a  woman
is  allowed  to  apply  for  the  appointment  of  a  tutor  to  herself  in
place  even  of  an  absent  patron ;  for  instance,  when  she  desires

177  to  enter  upon  an  inheritance.         The  senate  has  granted  the
same  relief  in  such  circumstances  to  a  woman  in  the  tutory

178  of  her  patron's  son,  himself  a  pupil.         Further,  by  the  Julian
law  regulating  the  marriages  of  the  orders,  a  woman  in  the
tutory-at-law  of  a  pupil  may  petition  the  urban  praetor  to
appoint  her  an  [interim]  tutor  for  the  purpose  of  making  a

179  dotal  provision ;         (for  there  is  no  question  that  a  patron's
son,  even  though  under  puberty,  becomes  tutor  of  his  father's
freedwoman,  notwithstanding  that,  as  he  cannot  act  in  any
matter  without  his  own  tutor's  auctoritas,  he  cannot  be  auctor

ISO  in  any  of  her  affairs.)  A  woman  likewise  who  is  in  the
tutory  of  a  lunatic  or  a  mute  is  allowed  by  the  senatuscon-
sult  to  apply  for  a  tutor  for  the  purpose  of  making  a  dotal

§  175.     Comp.  §§  166,   172;   tit.   I.  de  gards   this    Julian   law  see   §   145,

fiduc.  tut.  (i,  19).  note  1.

§§  176,  177.     Comp.  Vlp.  xi,  22.  §  179.    Comp.  §  13, 1.  de  excus.  tut.  (i,  25).

§  178.     Comp.  Vlp.  xi,  20.  '  This  word  is  interpolated  because

1  So  P. ;   the  MS.   seems  to  have  the  par.  seems  to  be  a  parenthetical

nam   e   lege   Julia;  K.   u.    S.    and  explanation.

Hu.    nam    et    lege  Julia.      As   re-  §  180.     Comp.  Vlp.  xi,  21.

68  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVEIS  CIVILIS   [I,  §§  181-184.

181  Quibus  casibus  saluani  manere  tutelam  patrono  patronique

182  filio  manifestum  est.         Praeterea  senatus  censuit  ut  si  tutor
pupilli  pupillaeue  suspectus  a  tutela  remotus  sit,  siue  ex  iusta
causa  fuerit  excusatus,  in  locum  eius  alius  tutor  detur,  quo

183  facto  prior  tutor  amittit  tutelam.         Haec  omnia  similiter  et
Eomae  et  in  prouinciis  obseruantur  ;  scilicet  [ut  Bomae  aprae-
[tore\  l  ct  in  prouinciis  a  praeside  prouinciae  tutor  (peti  debcat}.2

184  Olim  cum  legis  actiones1  in  usu  erant,  etiam  ex  ilia  causa
tutor  dabatur,  si  inter  tutorem  et  mulierem  pupillumue  lege
agendum  erat.     nam  quia  ipse  tutor  in  re  sua  auctor  esse  nou
poterat,  alius  dabatur,  quo  auctore  legis  actio  perageretur :  qui
dicebatur  praetorius  tutor,  quia  a  praetore  urbano  dabatur.
sed  post  sublatas  legis  actiones  quidam  putant  hanc  speciem
dandi  tutoris  in  usu  esse  desiisse  ;  (aliis  uero) 2  2^cicet  adhuc  in
usu  esse  si  legitimo  judicio 3  agatur.

181  settlement.         But  in  all  such  cases,  as  is  manifest,  the  [per-
manent] tutory  of  the  patron  or  his  son  remains  undisturbed.

182  Further,  the  senate  has  ordained  that  if  the  tutor  of  a  male  or
female  pupil  be  removed  from  office  as  suspect,  or  be  excused
on  some  good  ground  from  undertaking  it,  another  shall  be
appointed  in  his  place,  on  whose  appointment  the  original

183  tutor  loses  his  tutory.         Upon  all  these  matters  the  rules  are
the  same  in  the  provinces  as  in   Rome ;   in  the  latter  the
application  for  appointment  of  a  tutor  must  be  made  to  the
praetor,  in  the  former  to  the  governor.

184  In  the  olden  time,  when  the  actions- of-the-law  were  in  use,
it  was  the  practice  to  appoint  an  [interim]  tutor  when  a
process  was  instituted  between  an  [ordinary]  tutor  and  his
female  or  pupil  ward :  as  the  [ordinary]  tutor  could  not  be
auctor  in  a  matter  in  which  he  himself  was  concerned,  another
was  appointed,  with  whose  auctoritas  the  action-of-the-law
might  be  carried  through  all  its  stages,  and  who  was  called  a
praetorian  tutor,  because  his  nomination  proceeded  from  the
urban   praetor.      But,    after   the    actions -of -the -law    were
abolished,  the  practice  of  appointing  a  tutor  in  this  way,  accord-
ing  to  some   authorities,  went  altogether  into  disuse,  while
according  to  others  it  is  still  competent  in  a  legitimum  iudicium.

§  182.     Comp.  Vlp.  xi,  23.  §  184.     Comp.  Vlp.  xi,  24  ;  §  3,   I.  de
§  183.      Comp.  Vlp.  xi,  20.  auct.  tut.   (i,   21);  pr.   I.  de  his  p.

1  So  K.  u.  S.     P.  has — [nisi]  scili-  quos  agere  poss.  (iv,  10).
cet  [quod  Romae  a  praetore  urbano  J  Comp.  iv,  §§  11,  12.

uel  peregrino  praetore]  et,  etc.  2  The  first  three  letters  of  aliis  are

2  These  words  are  illegible,  with  quite  legible.     K.  u.   S.   and  Hu.
exception   of  the  pe  of  peti;   but  have  aliis  autem.

their  propriety  is  obvious.  3  Comp.  iv,  104.

I,  §§  185-188.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOK.  69

185  Si  cui  nullus  omnino  tutor  sit,  ei  datur  iu  urbe  Eoma  ex
lege  Atilia 1  a  praetore  urbano  et  maiore  parte  tribunoruiu
plebis,  qui  Atilianus  tutor  uocatur ;  in  prouinciis  uero  a  prae-

186  sidibus  prouinciarum  ex  lege  lulia  et  Titia.2         Et  ideo  si
cui  testarnento  tutor  sub  condicione  aut  ex  die  certo  datus  sit,
quamdiu  condicio  aut  dies  pendet  tutor  dari  potest ;  item  si
pure  datus  fuerit,  quamdiu  nemo  heres  existat,  tamdiu  ex  his
legibus  tutor  petendus  est ;  qui  desinit  tutor  esse  posteaquam

187  aliquis  ex  testamentc   tutor   esse   coeperit.         Ab   hostibus
quoque  tutore  capto  ex  his  legibus  tutor  peti  debet,  qui  desinit
tutor  esse  si  is  qui  captus  est  in  ciuitatem  reuersus  fuerit :
nam  reuersus  recipit  tutelam  iure  postliminii.

188  Ex    his    apparet    quot   sint   species   tutelarum.      si   uero

185  If  a  pupil  have  no  tutor  at  all,  then  in  Eome,  in  terms  of
the  Atiliau  law,  one  is  given  him  by  the  urban  praetor  and  a
majority  of  the  plebeian  tribunes,  who  is  called  an  Atilian
tutor ;  while  in  the  provinces  one  is  appointed  to  him  by  the

186  governor,  in  terms  of  the  Julian  and  Titian  law.         If  there-
fore any  one  have  a  tutor  appointed  to  him  by  testament,  but
only  conditionally  or  as  from  a  certain  date,  a  tutor  may  be
given  him  by  the  magistrate  until  the  condition  is  fulfilled  or
the  time  has  arrived.      So   also,  although  the   testamentary
appointment  have  been  unconditional,  so  long  as  no  heir  has
come  forward  a  tutor  may  be  applied  for  under  those  statutes.
But  [in  all  these  cases]  the  magisterially  appointed  tutor
ceases  to  hold  that  position  the  moment  there  is  one  qualified

187  under  the  testament.         Further,  if  a  tutor  be  taken  captive
by  an  enemy,  application  should  be  made  under  those  statutes
for  the  appointment  of  another,  who  will  cease  to  hold  office
when  the  former  has  recrossed  the  frontier ;  for  on  his  return
he  recovers  his  tutory  iure  postliminii.

188  From  what  has  been  said  it  is  clear  how  many  species  there
are  of  tutories.     But  if  we  proceed  to  inquire  in  what  number

§§  185-187.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  ATILIANO  immediately  thereafter  extended  by

TVTORE  (i,  20).  M.  Titius,  cos.  suf.,to  the  popular

§  185.  Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  Comp.  Vlp.  ones.  In  some  at  least  of  the  semi-

xi,  18.  independent  municipia  the  appoint-

1  The  date  is  tinkuown,  but  before  ment  seems  to   have  been  by  the
568  |  186  _;  see  Liv.  xxxix,  19.  municipal  authorities,  as  prescribed

2  Th.   (i,  20,  pr. )  says  these  were  by   the   charter  ;    see   lex  Salpens.
two  separate  laws.     Hu.  (Beitraege  c.  29  (Brims,  p.  123),  and  note  2  to
pp.  31,  32)  thinks  a  lex  lulia  was  §  55,  above.

enacted    in  the    first    instance    by  §  186.     §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.

Augustus    (Octavian)    in    722  |  32,  §  187.     §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.

applying  the  Atilian  law  to  the  im-  §188.     Comp.  Vlp.  xi,  2;  Paul.   fr.  7,

perial  provinces;   and   that   it  was  pr.  D.  de  cap.  mm.  (iv,  5).

70  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS  [I,  §§  188, 189.

quaeramus  in  quot  genera  hae  species  deducantur,  longa  erit
disputatio  :  nam  de  ea  re  ualde  ueteres1  dubitauerunt,  iiosque2
diligentius  hunc  tractatum  executi  sumus  et  in  edicti  inter-
pretatione  et  in  his  libris  quos  ex  Quinto  Mucio  feciraus.
hoc  tantisper3  sufficit  admonuisse,  quod  quidam  quinque
genera  esse  dixerunt,  ut  Q.  Mucius ; 4  alii  tria,  ut  Serv.  Sul-
picius;5  alii  duo,  ut  Labeo  ;6  alii  tot  genera  esse  crediderunt
quot  etiam  species  essent.

189  Sed  inpuberes  quidem  in  tutela  esse  omnium  ciuitatium
iure  contingit;  quia  id  naturali  rationi  conueniens  est,  ut  is
qui  perfectae  aetatis  non  sit  alterius  tutela  regatur ;  nee  fere
ulla  ciuitas  est  in  qua  non  licet  parentibus  liberis  suis  in-
puberibus  testamento  tutorem  1  dare ;  quamuis,  ut  supra  dixi-
inus,2  soli  ciues  Romani  uideantur  liberos  3  suos  in  potestate

of  genera  those  species  can  be  ranged,  we  get  into  a  fertile
field  of  dispute,  the  matter  being  one  about  which  the  old
jurists  seem  to  have  had  much  hesitation,  and  which  we  have
discussed  very  fully  in  our  treatise  on  the  Edict  and  our  com-
mentary on  Quintus  Mucius.  It  is  sufficient  here  to  observe
that  some,  as  for  instance  Quintus  Mucius,  hold  that  there
are  five  such  genera ;  that  others,  like  Servius  Sulpicius,  limit
the  number  to  three,  and  others  again,  like  Labeo,  to  two ;
while  some  hold  the  number  of  genera  to  be  equal  that  of
the  species.

189  That  persons  under  the  age  of  puberty  should  be  in  tutelage
is  the  law  everywhere ;  for  it  is  in  accordance  with  natural
reason  that  he  who  is  not  of  perfect  age  should  be  controlled  by
the  tutory  of  another.  Indeed,  there  is  scarcely  any  country
that  does  not  recognise  the  right  of  a  parent  to  appoint
a  testamentary  tutor  to  his  children  under  puberty ;  although,
as  already  said,  it  is  only  citizens  of  Koine  that  have  their

1  See  §  144,  note  2.  in  703  |  51,  and  according  to  Cicero

2  So  K.  n.  S. ;  the  MS.  and  P.  have  not   much    behind    Q.    Mucius    in
nos  qui ;  Hu.  nos  quia.  the     practice     of    his    profession,

3  The  MS.  reads  hoc  totum  tant'iK-  while  excelling  him  as  a  scientific
per ;  for  totum  Hn.  proposes  sohim,  jurist.

and  P.  tantum;  none  of  the  three  6  About  Labeo,  see  §  196,  note  1.

words  seems  appropriate.     Momm-  §  189.     Comp.  §  6,  tit.  I.  afd.

sen's  suggestion   of  loco  (K.  u.  S.  J  The  MS.    has  co.st.tut.,   which

footnote)  is  more  probable.  P.    thinks    may    be    a    corruption

4  Quintus  Mucius    Scaevola,  the  of  cust.    u,    tut.,   i.e.    custodes  uel
younger,  consul  in  659  |  95,  accord-  tutores.

ing  to  Cicero  the  greatest  jurist  of  2  See  §  55.

his  day.  3  The  MS.  and  Hu.  have  tantum

5  Serving  Sulpicius  Kufus,  consul  before  this  word.

I,  §§  190-192.]  COMMENTAR1I  QVATTVOR.  71

190  habere.        Feminas  uero  perfectae  aet-atis  in  tntela  esse  fere
null  a  pretiosa  ratio  suasisse  uidetur  :  nam  quae  uulgo  creditur,
quia  leuitate  anirni  plerumque  decipiuntur  et  aequum  erat  eas
tutorum  auctoritate  regi,  magis  speciosa  uidetur  quam  uera ;
mulieres  enim  l  quae  perfectae  aetatis  sunt  ipsae  sibi  negotia
tractant,  et  in  quibusdam  causis  dicis  gratia  tutor  iuterponit
auctoritatem  suam ;  saepe  etiam  inuitus  auctor  fieri  a  praetore

191  cogitur.         Unde  cum  tutore  nullum  ex  tutela  iudicium  mu-
lieri  datur :  at  ubi  pupillorum  pupillarumue  negotia  tutores
tractant,  eis  post  pubertatem  tutelae  iudicio  rationem  reddunt.

192  Sane  patronorum  et  parentuin  legitimae  tutelae  uim  aliquarn
habere  intelleguntur  eo  quod  hi  neque  ad  testamentum  facien-
dum,1 neque  ad  res  mancipi  alienandas,2  neque  ad  obligationes
suscipiendas  3  auctores  fieri  coguntur,  praeterquam  si  magna
causa  alienandarum  rerum  mancipi  obligationisque  suscipi-
endae  interueniat.     eaque  omnia   ipsorum   causa   constituta

190  children  in  their  poUstas.         But  it  is  difficult  to  discover
any  good  reason  why  women  of  full  age  should  be  in  tutelage  ;
that  commonly  assigned — that   owing  to  their  weakness  of
judgment  they  are  easily  imposed  upon,  and  therefore  ought,
in  common  fairness  to  them,  to  be  guided  by  the  auctoritas  of
a  tutor — is  more  specious  than  true.     For  women  of  perfect
age  manage  their  business  affairs  for  themselves ;  the  inter-
position of  tutorial  auctoritas  in  some  cases  is  merely  for
form's  sake ;  for  not  unfrequently  their  tutor  is  compelled  by

191  the  praetor  to  be  auctor  whether  he  will  or  not.         It  is  for
this  reason  that  a  woman  has  no  tutelae  iudicium  against  her
tutor;  whereas  when  tutors  administer  the  affairs  of  pupils,
whether  male  or  female,  they  must,  on  their  attaining  puberty,

192  render  them  an  account  in  an  action  of  that  sort.         The
tutories-at-law  of  patrons  and  parents,  on  the  other  hand,
derive  such  efficacy  as  they  possess  from  the  fact  that  such
persons  cannot  be  compelled  to  grant  their  auctoritas  either  to
the  execution  of  a  testament  by  their  female  wards,  or  the
alienation  by  them  of  res  mancipi,  or  the  undertaking  by
them  of  obligations,  unless,  as  regards  alienation  or  obligement,
there  be  a  weighty  reason  to  justify  it.     And  all  this  is  in  the

§  190.     Comp.  §  144;  Vlp.  xi,  1;  Cato  J  Comp.  ii,  §§  112,  118,  122;  iii,

apud  Liv.  xxxiv,  2  ;  Cic.  pro  Mur.  43 ;  Vlp.  xx,  16  ;  xxix,  23.

xii,  27;  Isidor.  Orig.  ix,  7,  §  30.  2  Comp.  ii,  §§  47,  80;  Paul,  in  Fr.

1  Comp.  ii,  122  ;  Vlp.  xi,  §§  25, 27.  Vat.  §§  1,  45.

§  191.     Comp.  §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.  3  Comp.  iii,  §§  108,  176  ;  Cic.  pro

§192.     Comp.    Vlp.    xi,    27;    Cic.   pro  Flacco,  xxxv,  86;  pro  Caec.   xxv,

Flacco,  xxxiv,  84.  72.

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVEIS  CIVILIS    [I,  §§  192-195.

sunt,  ut,  quia  ad  eos  intestatarum  mortuaruni  hereditates
pertinent,  neque  per  testamentum  excludantur  ab  hereditate,
neque  alienatis  pretiosioribus  rebus  susceptoque  aere  alieno

193  minus  locuples  ad  eos  hereclitas  perueniat.         Apud  pere-
grinos  non  similiter  ut  apud  nos  in  tutela  sunt  feminae  ;  sed
tamen  plerumque  quasi  in  tutela  sunt :  ut  ecce  lex  Bithyno-
rurn,1  si  quid  mulier  contraJiat,  maritum  auctorem  csse  iubet 2
aut  filium  eius  puberem.

194  Tutela  autem  liberantur  ingenuae  quidem  trium  [liberorum
[iure,1  libertinae  uero  quattuor,  si  in  patroni]  liberorumue  eius
legitima  tutela  sint ;  nam  [et  ceterae]  quae  alterius  generis
tutores  habent,  [uelut  Atilianos  aut  fiduciarios],  trium  libero-

195  rum  iure  tutela  liberantur.         Potest  autem  pluribus  rnoclis
libertina  alterius  generis  [tutbrem]  habere,  ueluti  si  a  femina
manumissa  sit ;  tune  enim  e  lege  Atilia  petere  debet  tutorem,

interest  of  the  patrons  and  parents  themselves ;  in  order  that,
as  they  are  entitled  to  the  succession  of  their  female  wards
dying  intestate,  they  may  neither  be  excluded  from  it  by  will,
nor  find  it  diminished  in  value  by  the  alienation  of  the  more
precious  articles  belonging  to  it  or  the  burdening  of  it  with

193  debt.         Amongst  peregrins  women  are  not  in  tutelage  exactly
as  with  us,  although  very  often  in  a  sort  of  quasi-tutelage ;  a
law  of  the  Bithynians,  for  instance,  requires  that,  if  a  woman
enter  into  a  contract,  her  husband  or  a  son  above  puberty
shall  be  auctor.

194  Women  of  free  birth  are  released  from  tutory  in  right  of
their  having  three  children.     [Freedwomen  in  the  tutory-at-
[law  of  their  patrons  or  patrons'  children  are  released  from  it  in
[right  of  four ;]  but  if  they  have  any  other  sort  of  tutors,
Ati'lian,  for  instance,  or  fiduciary,  they  also  are  released  in  right

195  of  three.         For  there  are  various  ways  in  which  a  freedwoman
may  have  another  sort  of  tutor  than  her  patron ;  for  example,
if  it  be  by  a  woman  that  she  has  been  manumitted  she  must
have  a  tutor  appointed  under  the  Atilian   law,  or   in   the

§  193.     Comp.    Cic.   pro   Flacco,    xxx,  Holhveg,    and    have  been   adopted

§  74.  substantially  by  all  subsequent  eds.

1  Bithynia  was  originally  one  of  The  et  ceterae  and  uelut  Atil.  aut

the  popular  provinces,  but  by  Had-  fiduc.  are  omitted  by  P.  as  glosses.

rian  eventually  made   an  imperial  *  The  concession  of  privileges  to

one.  those  who  were  mothers  of  a  certain

-  Reading  doubtful,  the  MS.  run-  number  of  children  was  one  of  the

ning  —  siquitrnul.hat .  marit.  autee.  means  provided  in  the  Papia-Pop-

iuuet.  paean  law  for  encouraging  marriage;

§  194.     Comp.  §  145  ;  iii,  44;  Vlp.  xxix,  see  §  145,  note  1.
3.     The  words  in  ital.   are  due  to      §  195.     Comp.  §  185.

I,  §§  195, 196.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

uel  in  prouinciis  e  [lege  lulia  et~\  Titia :  nam  in  patronae

~L95atutelaJ   esse   non  potest.         Item  si   a   masculo    raanumissa

\_fuerit~]  et  auctore  eo  coemptionem  fecerit,  deinde  remancipata

et  manumissa  sit,  patronum  quidem  habere  tutorem  desinit,

incipit  autem  habere  eum  tutorem  a  quo  manumissa  est,  qui

195&fiduciarius   dicitur.          Item    si  patronus   (eiusue  films)1  in

adoptionern  se  dedit,  debet  liberta  (e  lege  Atilia  uel  lulia  e£f

195c  Titia  tutorem  petere.         Similiter  ex  iisdem  legibus  .petere

debet  tutorem  liberta  si  patronus  decesserit,  nee  ullum  uirilis

sexus  liberorum  in  familia  religucrit.

Masculi  (autem  cum]  puberes  esse  coeperint  tutela  liber-
antur.  (puberem  autem}  Sabinus  '  quidem  et  Cassius  1  ceteri-
que  nostri  pr acceptor es l  eum  esse  putant  qui  habitu  corporis

196

provinces  under  the  Julian  and  Titian,  seeing  she  cannot  be

19 Sain  the  tutory  of  her  patroness.  Again,  if  she  have  been
manumitted  by  a  male,  and  with  his  auctoritas  have  performed
coemption,  and  have  thereafter  been  remancipated  and  manu-
mitted, she  ceases  to  have  her  patron  as  tutor,  and  begins  to
.have  in  that  capacity  him  by  whom  she  was  latterly  manu-

195&mitted,  and  who  is  called  her  fiduciary  tutor.  So  if  a
patron  or  his  son  have  given  himself  in  adoption,  the  freed-
woman  must  have  a  tutor  appointed  under  either  the  Atilian

135cor  Julian  and  Titian  law.  In  like  manner  she  must  apply
for  a  tutor  under  these  same  laws  if  her  patron  be  dead,  no
male  member  of  his  family  surviving  him.

196  Males  are  freed  from  tutelage  on  attaining  puberty.
Sabinus,  Cassius,  and  the  other  leaders  of  our  school  hold  him
to  have  arrived  at  puberty  who  manifests  it  by  his  bodily

1  Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.  2,  pr.  D.  de
JR.  I.  (1.  17).

§  195a.     Comp.  §§  115,  166.

§  1956.     Comp.  Vlp.  xi,  9 ;  §  4,  I.  quilt,
mod.  tut.  Jin.  (i,  22).

J  Suggested  by  Stud,  as  corre-
sponding fairly  to  the  traces  visible
in  the  MS.

2  Stud.,   in  a  footnote,   observes
that  the  MS.  has  faint  traces  of  some-
thing like  deytitiaet.

§  195c.     Comp.  §  179.

§  196.  Comp.  tit.  I.  qVIBVS  MODIS  TV-
TELA  F1NITVR  (i,  22) ;  Vlp.  xi,  28.
1  The  reference  in  the  words  nostri
praeceptores  and  diuersae  scholae
auctores  —  and  it  is  of  frequent
recurrence — is  to  the  two  rival
schools  or  sects  of  the  Sabinians  or

Cassians  and  the  Proculians  ;  comp.
Pompon,  in  fr.  2,  §  47,  D.  de  0.  I.
(i.  2).

They  both  arose  in  the  time  of
Augustus;  the  founder  of  the  first
being  Ateius  Capito,  and  his  imme-
diate successors  Massurius  Sabinus
and  Caius  Cassius  Longinus  ;  that  of
the  second  being  Antistius  Labeo,  and
his  successors  Nerva  the  elder  and
Proculus.  Pomponius  says  that
Capito  and  his  followers  were  con-
servative in  their  doctrine,  Labeo
and  his  school  of  a  more  critical
spirit,  and  readier  to  innovate  ;  the
former  were  inclined  to  bow  to
authority,  the  latter  to  inquire  for
themselves.  It  can  hardly  be  said,
however,  that  this  is  always  mani-

74

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  1VRIS  CIYILIS   [I,  §§  196, 197.

197

pubertatem  ostendit,  id  cst  cum  qui  generare  potest ;  sed  in
his  qui  pnbescere  non  possunt,  quales  sunt  spadones,  earn
aetatem   esse  spectandam   emus  aetatis  puberes  fiunt ;    sed
diuersae  scholae   auctores '   annis  putant  pubertatem   aesti-
mandam,  id  est  eum  puberern  esse  existimant  —  —  —  — 2.

—   —  —   —   —   —   aetatem  peruenerit  in  qua  res  suas

tueri  possit,  sicuti  apud  peregrinas  gentes  custodiri  superius

197

development,  in  other  words,  who  can  procreate ;  but  that  in
those  who  can  never  do  so,  eunuchs  for  example,  that  age
is  to  be  regarded  as  definitive  at  which  persons  usually
reach  puberty.  The  authorities  of  the  other  school  think
that  puberty  ought  always  to  be  dealt  with  as  a  matter  of
years,  and  hold  him  to  have  reached  it  [who  has  attained  the  age

[of  fourteen']. — .

—    —    —    —    —    — .    \_By  the  Plactorian  law  it  is  pro-

[vided  that  in  certain  cases  «  minor  who  has  passed  the  years
[of  pupillarity  shall  have  the  assistance  of  a  curator  appointed
[by  the  praetor ;  but  his  office  lasts  only  until  he  has  fulfilled
[the  duty  for  which  he  has  been  appointed,  and  not  until  the
[minor  has]  reached  the  age  at  which  he  can  take  care  of  his
own  affairs.  This  practice,  as  already  said,  prevails  also  in

fest  in  the  records  of  their  contro-
versies.

Gai.  professed  himself  a  Sabinian,
but  was  not  an  indiscriminate  ad-
herent of  the  school.

Of  the  many  treatises  on  the  sub-
ject the  best  modern  one  is  that  of
Dirksen  (die  Sclmlen  der  Roem.
Juristen)  in  his  Beitraege  zur  Kunde
des  Roem.  Redds,  Leipz.  1825.

-  The  conclusion  of  the  par.  is  on
p.  53,  the  whole  of  which  is  illegible,
but  qui  XIIII  annos  expleuit  is  the
likely  reading;  comp.  §  168,  Vlp.  xi,
28.  It  is  possible  that  on  the  same
page  Gai.  may  have  mentioned  some
of  the  other  modes  of  extinction  of  a
tutory  which  we  find  enumerated  in
tit.  I.  afd.

§§  197,  198.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  CVRATO-
RIBVS  (i,  23).  Part  of  the  illegible
p.  53  seems  to  have  been  devoted  to
the  subject  of  curatory.  In  the  Epit.
i,  8,  we  have — Pcractis  pupillaribus
annis,  quibus  tutores  absoluuntur,  ad
curatores  ratio  minorum  incipit  per-
tinere.  Sub  curators  sunt  minores
aetate,  maiores  euersores,  insani.
Hi  qui  minores  sunt  usque  ad  ui-

f/inti  et  quinque  annos  impletos  sub
curator e  sunt.  Qui  uero  euer sores
aut  insani  sunt,  omni  tempore  uitae
auae  sub  curatore  esse  iubentur,  quia
substantiam  suam  rationabiliter  gu-
bernare  non  possunt.  For  the  reason
stated  in  next  note,  however,  this
cannot  be  a  correct  representation  of
what  was  contained  in  the  pages  of
Gaius.  Comp.  Vlp.  tit.  xii ;  Paul,
iii,  4a,  §  7.

197.  In  the  absence  of  the  context  the
meaning  of  this  par.  is  by  no  means
clear.  There  is  no  previous  allusion
to  curatory  of  minors  above  puberty
among  foreigners  ;  §  189  refers  to
pupils,  i.e.  minors  under  puberty.
In  Rome  the  curatory  of  minors  was
introduced  in  certain  cases  by  a  lex
Plaetoria  of  the  sixth  century  u.  c.
(Cic.  deOffic.  iii,  15,  §  61.;  Vlp.  xiL  4),
on  which  see  Savigi1?^  %. '/.'  g.  K  W.
x,  232,  and  Verm.  Schr.  ii,  321 ;  also
Hu.,  Z.  f.  RG.  xiii,  311.  Marc.
Aurelius  made  the  hitherto  excep-
tional practice  a  universal  rule, —
'  statuit  ut  omnes  adulti  curatores
accipiunt,  non  redditis  cairns '  (Capi-
tolin.  in  Marc.  c.  10).

I,  §§  198-200.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

75

198  indicauimus.         Ex  isdem  causis  et   in  prouinciis  a  praesi-
dibus  earum  curatores  dari  solent.1

199  NQ  tamen  et  pupillorum  et  eorum  qui  in  curatione  sunt  ne-
gotia  a  tutoribus  curatoribusue  consumantur  aut  deminuantur,
curat  praetor  ut  et  tutores  et  curatores  eo  nomine  satisdent.

200  sed  hoc  non  est  perpetuura ;  nam  et  tutores  testamento  dati
satisdare  non  coguntur,  quia  fides  eorum  et  diligentia  ab  ipso
testatore  probata  est ;  et  curatores  ad  quos  non  e  lege  curatio
pertinet,  sed  uel  a  consule  uel   a   praetore   uel  a  praeside
prouinciae  dantur,  plerumque  non  coguntur  satisdare,  scilicet
quia  satis  honesti  (elccti  sunt).

198  foreign  countries.        In  the  same  cases  curators  are  appointed
in  the  provinces  by  the  governors.

199  To  prevent  the  destruction  or  dilapidation  of  the  estates  of
pupils  and  adolcooont  minors  by  their  tutors  or  curators,  the
praetor  requires   them  to  give  their  personal   undertaking,
backed  by  that  of  sureties,  that  nothing  of  the  sort  shall

200  happen.         But  not  universally ;  for  not  only  are  testamentary
tutors  not  compelled  to  do  so,  because  their  integrity  and
diligence  have  been  approved  by  the  testator  himself,  but
curators  who  do  not  hold  their  office  by  mere  devolution  of
law,  but  have  been  appointed  by  a  consul,  praetor,  or  provincial
governor,  are  generally  relieved  from  the  necessity  of  giving
such  an  undertaking,  having  in  fact  been  selected  because  of
their  sufficient  trustworthiness.

§  198.  The  words  ex  iisdem  causis
doubtless  refer  to  the  cases  enume-
rated in  the  Plaetorian  law  ;  for  Gai.
was  writing  this  first  book  before
the  enactment  of  Marc.  Aurel.  re-
ferred to  in  last  note.

1  The  MS.  and  previous  eds.  (except
K.  u.  S.  )  have  uolunt  or  uolult,
evidently  a  mistake.

§§  199,  200.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  SATIS-
DATIONE  TVTORVM  VEL  CVRATORVM
(i,  24),  from  which  the  final  words,
electi  sunt,  are  borrowed.

The  words    satisdare   and    satis-

y  /t  •  4  3  c?

datio  are  of  constant  recurrence  in
the  texts.  Very  exceptionally  the
simple  undertaking  of  the  party
himself,  technically  repromissio,  was
held  to  amount  to  satisdatio  (fr.  61,
D.  de  V.  S.,  1,  16)  ;  but  usually
sureties  were  required  in  addition
(fr.  1,  D.  qui  satisdare  cogantur,
ii,  8)  ;  and  this  was  invariably  the
case  where  the  security  was  required
by  the  praetor,  —  a  pledge  or  hypo-
thec could  not  be  accepted  in-
stead (fr.  7,  D.  de  stlpulat.  praetor.
xlvi,  5).

-/

76  GAII  INSTITUTION VM  IVRIS  CIVILIS          [II,  §§  1-

[COMMENTARIVS  SECVNDVS.]

1  \Supenore   commentario  de  iure  personarum]  exposuimus  ;
modo  uideamus  de  rebus  :  quae  uel  in  nostro  patrimonio  sunt,
uel  extra  nostrum  patrimonmm  habentur.

2  Summa  itaque  rerum  diuisio  in  duos  articulos  diducitur :

3  nam  aliae   sunt  diuini  iuris,  aliae  humani.         Diuini  iuris

4  sunt   ueluti  res   sacrae   et   religiosae.          sacrae  sunt,   quae
diis  superis  consecratae  sunt ;  religiosae,  quae  diis  Manibus

5  relictae  sunt.         Sed  sacrum  quidem  hoc  solum  existimatur
quod  ex  auctoritate  populi  Romani  consecratum  cst,  ueluti  lege

6  de  ea  re  lata  aut  senatusconsulto  facto.         religiosum  uero
nostra  uoluntate  facimus  mortuum  inferentes  in  locum  no-

7  strum,  si  modo  ems  mortui  funus  ad  nos   pertineat.         sed

1  In  the  preceding  Commentary  we  have  explained  the  law
concerning  persons.     Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  to  things.
And  these  are  either  in  our  patrimony  or  beyond  it,  [i.e.
either  capable  or  incapable  of  being  subjected  to  a  private
person's  rights.]

2  The  first  division  then  of  things  is  into  two  classes ;  for  some

3  are  of  divine  and  others  of  human  right.         Of  divine  right  are

4  those  that  are  sacred  and  religious.         Sacred  are  those  con-
secrated to  the  gods  above ;  religious  those  devoted  to  the  gods

5  below.         That  alone  is  esteemed  sacred  which  has  been  con-
secrated by  authority  of  the  state,  say  by  a  comitial  enactment

6  or  a  senatusconsult  passed  for  the  purpose.         But  we  can  at
our  own  hand  make  ground  belonging  to  us  religious  by  burying
a  corpse  in  it,  provided  we  be  the  persons  charged  with  the

7  funeral  obsequies.         It  is  generally  held  that  ground  in  the

§§  1-11.     Comp.  pr.  §§  1-10,  tit.  I.  DE  §  4.     Comp.  §  8,  tit.  I.  afd.

RERVM  DIVISIONS  (ii,  1).  §5.  Comp.  Fest.  v.  Sacer  (Bruns,

§  1.  The  first  line  of  p.  55  of  the  MS.  p.  261);  §  8,  tit.  I.  afd.

is  blank.     Comp.  pr.  tit.   I.   afd.,  §  6.     Comp.  Gell.  iv,  9,  §  8  ;  §  9,  tit.  I.

from  which  the  missing  words  are  afd.

supplied.  §  7.  Comp.  i,  6  ;  Front,  de  controu.

§§  2,  3.  Gai.  in  fr.  1,  pr.  D.  de  dlu.  rer.  agr.  (ed.  Lachm.  p.  36)  ;  Th.  ii,  1,

(i,  8).     Comp.  iii.  97.  40.

II,  §§7-11.]  COMMENTARY  QVATTVOR.  77

in  prouinciali  solo  placet  plerisque  solum  religiosum  non
fieri,  quia  in  eo  solo  dominium  populi  Roman!  est  uel  Caesaris,
nos  autem  possessionem  tantum  uel  usumfructum  habere
uidemur  :  utique  tamen  etiamsi  non  sit  religiosum  pro  re-
ligioso  habetur.  item  quod  [in  prouinciis]1  non  ex  auctori-
tate  populi  Roman!  consecraturn  est,  proprie  sacrum  nou  est,

8  tamen  pro  sacro  habetur.         Sanctae  quoque  res,  ueluti  rnuri

9  et  portae,   quodammodo   diuini   iuris   sunt.         Quod  autem
diuini  iuris  est,  id  nullius  in  bonis  est :  id  uero  quod  human!
(iuris   est  plerumque   alicuius   in  bonis  est ;  potcst  autem  et
(nullius  in  bonis  esse :  nam  res  hereditariae  antequam  aliqids

9a  (heres  existat  nullius  in  bonis  sunt.')     [9a]  —  — —

10  —  domino.         Hae  autem  quae  human!  iuris  sunt  aut  publi-

11  cae  sunt  aut  priuatae.        Quae  publicae  sunt  nullius  uidentur
in    bonis    esse  ;    ipsius    enim   uniuersitatis    esse   crecluntur.
priuatae  sunt  quae  singulorum  sunt.

provinces  cannot  thus  be  made  religious,  as  the  ownership  of  it
belongs  either  to  the  Eoman  people  or  to  the  emperor,  private
persons  having  only  the  possession  or  usufruct  of  it ;  but
though  it  may  not  strictly  be  religious,  it  is  at  any  rate
regarded  as  quasi-religious.  In  the  same  way  what  is  conse-
crated without  the  authority  of  the  state  [i.e.  at  a  private  party's
own  hand],  is  not  properly  speaking  sacred,  but  is  dealt  with  as

8  quasi-sacred.        Holy  places,  such  as  a  city's  walls  and  gates,

9  are  also  in  a  manner  of  divine  right.         What  is  of  divine
right  cannot  be  amongst  any  [private]  person's  belongings.
But   what  is  of  human  right   ordinarily  does  belong  to  some
one;  though  it  may  belong  to  no  one,  as  is  the  case  with  the
items  of  an  inheritance,  which,  until  an  heir  has  come  forward,

9 a  are  not  in  any  person's  estate.         [9 a] —  —  —

10 .         Things  of  human  right  are  either  public  or  private.

11  Those  that  are  public  are  not  regarded  as  belonging  to  indi-
viduals; they  are  held  to  belong  to  the  corporate  body  itself.
Those  are  private  that  belong  to  individuals.

1  These  words,  according  to  M.  first  eleven  lines  of  p.  56  are  entirely

(K.  u.  S.  footnote),  should  be  ex-  illegible;  the  words  in  ital.,  which

punged  as  a  gloss.  are  from  the  Dig.  as  quoted,  may

§  8.  Gai.  (lib.  ii.  Inst.)  in  fr.  1,  pr.  D.  have  occupied  the  first  three  or

de  dm.  rer.  (i,  8);  §  10,  tit.  I.  afd.  four.

§  9.  Gai.  in  fr.  1,  pr.  D.  de  diu.  rer.  §§  10,  11.  Gai.  in  fr.  1,  pr.  D.  de  diu.

(i,  8) ;  comp.  §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.  The  rer.  (i,  8).

78

GAII  INST1TVTIONVM  IVEIS  CIVILIS      [II,  §§  12-14.

12  Quaedampraeterea  res  corporales  sunt,quaedam  incorporales.

13  [Corporales]  hae  sunt  quae  tangi  possunt,  uelut  fundus,  homo,
uestis,  aurum,  argentuni  et  denique  aliae  res  innumerabiles.

14  Incorporales   sunt   quae  tangi  non  possunt,   qualia  sunt  ea
quae  in  iure  consistunt,  sicut  hereditas,  ususfructus,  obliga-
tiones  quoquo  modo  contractae.     nee  ad  rem  pertinet  [quod  in
[hereditatc  res  corporales  continentur ;  nam']  et  fructus  qui  ex
fundo   percipiimtur   corporales   sunt,   et  id   quod  ex  aliqua
obligatione   nobis  debetur  pleruinque  corporale  (est,  ueluti)
fundus  homo  pecunia :  nam  ipsum  ius  successionis  et  ipsum
ius  utendi  fruendi  et  ipsum  ius  obligationis  incorporale  est.
eodem  numero  sunt  et  iura  praedioruni  urbanorum  et  rusti-

14«  corum,  (quae  etiam  seruitutes  uocantur.")         [14«]  —  —  —
altius   tollcndi  —   —  —  luminibus  uicini  acdiitm,  aut  non

12  Further,    some    things    are    corporeal,    some    incorporeal.

13  Corporeal  are  those  that  are  tangible,  such  as  land,  a  slave,  a

14  garment,  gold,  silver,  and  other  things  innumerable.         In-
corporeal are  those  that  are  intangible, — things  that  have  a
mere  jural  existence,  such  as  an  inheritance,  a  usufruct,  obliga-
tions, in  whatsoever  way  contracted.     Nor  does  it  affect  our
definition  that  there  are  corporeals  included  in  an  inheritance  ;
for  the  fruits  gathered  from  the  soil  [by  a  usufructuary]  are
also  corporeal,   and  what  is  due  to  us  under  an  obligation  is
generally  corporeal,  as,  for  example,  land,  a  slave,  money :  it  is
the  right  of  succession,  the  right  of  usufructing,  and  the  right
under  the  obligation  that  is  incorporeal.     To  the  same  class
belong  those  rights  over  urban  and  rural  estates  which  go  by

14«  the  name  of  servitudes.          Urban  servitudes  are  such  as  these  :
the  right  of  building  higher  and  thus  obstructing  a  neighbour's

§§  12-14.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  REBVS  IN-
CORPORALIBVS  (ii,  2),  from  which
the  words  supplied  in  §  14  are  de-
rived. See  also  Gai.  fr.  1,  §  1,  D.
de  diu.  rer.  (i,  8).  Comp.  Cic.  Top.
v,  §§  26,  27.

§§  ]4a-15a.  These  pars,  are  on  p.  57  of
the  MS.,  the  greater  part  of  which  is
illegible.

§  14a.  Comp.  pr.  §§  1,  2,  tit.  I.  DE
SERVITVTIBVS  (ii,  3).  The  begin-
ning of  the  par.  may  have  run  thus :
Urbanorum  praedioruni  iura  sunt
altius  tollemli  et  eo  modo  qfficiendi
luminibus  uicini  aediuin,  aut  non,
etc. ;  see  Gai.  in  fr.  2,  6,  D.  de  seruit.
praed.  urb.  (viii.  2).  The  next  five

lines  give  us  nothing  decipherable,
except  the  words  ius  aquae  ducendae;
whence  it  may  be  concluded  that
they  contained  a  partial  enumera-
tion of  the  rural  as  well  as  the
urban  seruitutes  praedioruni.  The
Epit.  ii,  2,  §  3,  enumerates  them
thus  :  Praediorum  urbanorum  iura
sunt  stillmdia,  fenestrae,  cloacae,
altius  erigendae  domus  aut  non  eri-
ijendae,  et  luminum,  ut  ita  quisfabri-
cet  ut  uicinae  domui  lumen  non
tollat.  Praediorum  uero  rusticorum
iura  sunt  uia  uel  iter,  per  quod
pecus  aut  animalla  debeant  ambu-
lare  uel  ad  aquam  duel,  et  aquae-
ductus.

'V

II,  §§  14,  15.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

79

extollendi  ne  luminibus  uicini  officiatur :    item  fluminum  et

stillicidiorum  ius, .

15       Ees  —    —    —  —  nee  mancipi.     mancipi  sunt  —  —  —
—  —  —  ;   item  aecles  in  italico  solo1  —   —   —  —  —  —

praedioruin  urbanorum  nee  mancipi  (habentur).     item

stipendiaria  praedia  et  tributaria  nee  mancipi  sunt.         Sed
quod  diximus  —  —  —  —  mancipi  esse  —  —  —  —  —  —

statim  ut  nata  sunt  maucipi  esse  putant ;  Nerua  uero  et
Proculus  et  ceteri  diuersae  scholae  auctores1  non  aliter  ea
mancipi  esse  putant  quam  si  domita  sunt;  et  si  propter
nirniam  feritatem  domari  non  possunt,  tune  uideri  mancipi
esse  incipere  cum  ad  earn  aetatem  peruenerint  qua  domari

lights,  and  his  right  to  prevent  us  building  higher  lest  thereby
his  light  should  be  obstructed ;  the  rights  of  roof-gutter  and
rain-drop,  [and  others.  Among  rural  servitudes  are  rights  of
[way  and  passage  for  men  or  animals,  and  right  of  aqueduct^

15  Further,  things  are  either  mancipi  or  nee  mancipi.  Mancipi
are  lands  and  houses  in  places  of  italic  right,  [slaves,  and
[animals  domesticated  by  yoke  or  saddle.  Rural  praedial  scrvi-
[tudcs  likewise  are  mancipi ;  but  those  over~\  urban  estates  are
regarded  as  nee  mancipi.  Stipendiary  and  tributary  pro-

15«vincial  lands  are  also  nee  mancipi.  The  statement  that
'animals  we  arc,  wont  to  tame  are  mancipi  is  variously  under-
stood; for  while  the  authorities  of  our  school  are  of  opinion
that  such  animals — oxen,  mules,  horses,  and  asses'] — are  res
mancipi  from  the  moment  of  birth,  Nerva  and  Proculus,  and
the  leaders  of  the  other  school,  hold  that  they  become  so  only
when  tamed,  or,  if  this  be  impossible  because  of  their  unusual
ferocity,  when  they  attain  the  age  at  which  such  animals  are

§  15.  The  next  seven  or  eight  lines,  for
the  most  part  undecipherable,  seem
to  have  contained  a  reference  to  the
distinction  between  res  mancipi  and
nee  mancipi  (i,  120,  note  1),  and  an
enumeration  of  the  former.  It  might
be  reconstructed  thus :  Res  autem
uel  mancipi  sunt  nel  nee  mancipi.
Mancipi  sunt  praedia  rustica  in
italico  solo ;  item  aedes  in  italico
solo  ;  item  send,  et  animalia  man-
sueta  quae  collo  dorsoue  doman-
tur.  seruitutes  quoque  praedioritm
rusticorum  mancipi  sunt;  sed  serui-
tutes praediorum  urbanorum  nee
mancipi  habentur.  item  stipendiaria

praedia  et  tributaria  nee  mancipi
stint.  Comp.  i,  §§  12U.  121;  ii,
§§  17,  21,  29;  Vlp.  xix,  §§  1,  f.

1  As  regards  praedia  in  italico
solo,  see  i,  120,  note  2.
§  loci.  The  last  three  lines  of  p.  57  are
almost  illegible.  They  must  have
run  to  the  following  effect :  Sed
quod  diximus  ea  animalia  quae
domari  solent  mancipi  esse  uarie
accipitur.  Nostri  quidem  jjraecep-
tores  haec  animalia,  qualia  sunt  boues
mull  equi  asini,  statim,  etc.  Comp.
Isidor.  Orig.  ix,  4,  §  45  (Bruns,
P.  303).

1  See  i,  196,  note  1.

80  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS     [II,  §§  16-21.

16  solent.         (Sect)  ferae  bestiae  nee  mancipi  sunt,  uelut  ursi,
leones ;  item  ea  animalia  quae  fere  bestiamm  numero  sunt,
uelut  elephant!  et  cameli ;  et  ideo  ad  rem  non  pertinet  quod
haec  animalia   etiam  collo  dorsoue  domari  solent ;  nam  ncc
[notitia]1   quidem   eorum   animalium  illo  tempore  fuit  quo
constituebatur    quasdam    res    mancipi     esse,    quasdam    non

17  mancipi.          Item   fere   omnia   quae   incorporalia  sunt  nee
mancipi  sunt,  exceptis  seruitutibus  praediorum  rusticorum ;
nam  eas  mancipi  esse  constat,  quamuis  sint  ex  numero  rerum
incorporalium.

18  Magna  autem   differentia   est   inter   mancipi   res    et    nee

19  mancipi.         nam  res  nee  mancipi  ipsa  traditione  pleuo  iure
alterius  fiunt,  si  modo   corporales   sunt  et   ob  id  recipiunt

20  traditionem.         itaque  si  tibi  uestem  uel  aurum  uel  argentum
tradidero,  siue  ex  uenditionis  causa  sine  ex  donationis  siue
quauis  alia  ex  causa,  statim  tua  fit  ea  res,  si  modo  ego  cius

21  dominus  sim  iure  ciuili.1         In  eadem  causa  sunt  prouincialia
praedia,  quorum   alia  stipendiaria    alia   tributaria    uocamus.

16  generally  broken  in.        But  wild  beasts,  such  as  bears  and  lions,
are  nee  mancipi;   so  are  such  semi-wild  beasts  as  elephants
and  camels.     Nor  does  it  matter  that  those  last  are  often
broken  in  as  draught  or  carrying  animals ;  for  none  of  them
were  even  known  at  the  time  when  it  was  settled  what  things

17  should   be   mancipi   and   what  ncc   mancipi.         Almost   all
incorporeals  are  nee  mancipi,  except  rural  praedial  servitudes ;
for  these  are  held  to  be  res  mancipi,  though  incorporeal.

18  There  is  an  important  difference  between  res  mancipi  and

19  res  nee  mancipi.         For  what  are  nee  mancipi  pass  to  another
in  full  ownership  by  simple  delivery,  provided  they  are  cor-

20  poreal  and  thus  deliverable.         Therefore,  if  I  have  delivered
to  you  a  garment,  or  gold,  or  silver,  whether  in  pursuance  of
a  sale,  or  as  a  donation,  or  upon  any  other  sufficient  cause,
it  straightway  becomes  yours,  provided  always  that  I  who

21  deliver  it  am  in  law  its  owner.         In  exactly  the  same  posi-
tion are  provincial  lands,  some  of  which  we  call  stipendiary,

§  16.  Comp.  Vlp.  xix,  1.  §  28  (ed.  Bait.  p.  321)  ;  Th.  ii,  1,

1  So  Hu. ;  K.  u.  S.  have  nam  [ne]  §  40.

nomen  quidem  eorum  animalium  illo  §  19.     See  §  40,  note.

tempore  \notuvi\fuit.  §  20.  1  So  P.  renders  the  io  or  ic  of  MS.,
§  17.  Comp.  i,  120,  and  notes  ;  ii,  §§  15,  disregarded  by  K.  u.  S.,  and  placed

29;  Vlp.  xix,  1.  byHu.  at  the  beginning  of  next  par.

§§  18-20.  Comp.  Vlp.  xix,  7;  Fr.  Vat.  §  21.  Comp.  i,  6 ;  ii,  7;  §  40,  I.  de  rer.

§  313  ;   Bouth.   in  Cic.    Top.   v,    5,  dht.,  ii,  1;  Th.  ii,  1,  §  40.

II,  §§  21-24.]

COMMENTAKII  QVATTVOR.

81

stipendiaria  sunt  ea  quae  in  his  prouinciis  sunt  quae  propriae
populi  Eomani  esse  intelleguntur ;  tributaria  sunt  ea  quae
iii  his  prouinciis  sunt  quae  propriae  Caesaris  esse  creduntur.

22  Mancipi  uero   res  sunt  quae  per   mancipationem  ad  alium
transferuntur ;    unde   etiam  mancipi  res  sunt   dictae.     quod

23  autem  ualet  mancipatio  [idem  ualet  et  in  iure  cessio.         Et
[mancipatio]  quidem  qtiemadmodum  fiatsuperiore  commentario

24  tradidimus.         In  iure  cessio  autem  hoc  modo  fit :  apud  magi-
stratum  populi  Eomani,  ueluti  praetorem,  [uel  apud  praesidem
prouinciae],1  is  cui  res  in  iure  ceditur  rem  tenens  ita  dicit :

HVNC  EGO  HOMINEM2  EX  IVRE  QVIRITIVM  MEVM  ESSE  AIO  ;  deinde,

postquam  hie  uindicauerit,  (praetor  interrogat)3  eum  qui  cedit
an  contra  uindicet ;  quo  negante  aut  tacente  tune  ei  qui
uindicauerit  earn  rem  addicit ;  idque  legis  actio  uocatur.
hoc  fieri  potest  etiam  in  prouinciis  apud  praesides  earum.

and  others  tributary.  Stipendiary  lands  are  those  situated  in
provinces  regarded  as  specially  belonging  to  the  Roman
people ;  tributary  those  lying  in  provinces  held  to  belong
2~  specially  to  the  emperor.  But  those  things  are  res  mancipi
that  are  transferred  by  mancipation ;  hence  their  name.
[Equally  effectual  with  it  is  in  iure  cessio,  i.e.  cession  in  court.]
23  How  mancipation  is  effected  has  been  explained  in  the  pre-
24  ceding  Commentary.  Cession  in  court  proceeds  thus:  in
the  presence  of  one  of  the  Roman  magistrates,  a  praetor  say,
he  to  whom  the  thing  in  question  is  being  ceded,  having  hold
of  it,  says — '  I  say  that  this  slave  is  mine  in  quiritarian  right ; '
when  he  has  thus  vindicated,  the  praetor  asks  the  cedent
whether  he  makes  any  counter -vindication  ;  on  the  latter
replying  in  the  negative  or  remaining  silent,  the  praetor
adjudges  the  thing  to  the  vindicant.  The  procedure  is  spoken
of  as  a  legis  actio ;  and  it  may  be  employed  even  in  a  province,

§§  22,  23.  The  words  in  ital.  in  these
pars. ,  suggested  by  G. ,  are  adopted
by  most  eds.  P.  proposes :  quae
priuatim  fieri  potest,  idem  ualet
utique  in  hire  cessio.

§  22.  Comp.  i,  121;  Vlp.  xix,  3  ;  Varro
de  R.  R.  ii,  10,  §  4  (Brims,  p.  283);
Boeth.  in  Cic.  Top.  v,  5,  §  28  (ed.
Bait.  322).

§  23.     Comp.  i,  119.

§  24.  Comp.  i,  134  ;  ii,  96  ;  iv,  16  ;
Vlp.  xix,  §§  9,  10;  Boeth.  in  Cic.
Top.  v,  5,  §  28  (ed.  Bait.  p.  322)  ;

Lsidor.  Oriy.  v,  25,  §  32  (Bruns,  p.
302).

1  These   words    are   manifestly   a
gloss,  as  the  statement  occurs  more
directly   in   the   end  of   the   para-
graph.

2  In  illustrative  styles  or  formulae
of  transactions   referring  to  move-
ables,   a  slave  is  usually  made  the
object.

3  The   words   praetor    interrorjat
are  from  Boeth.,  who  is  professedly
quoting  from  Gai.

82  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS     [II,  §§  25-30.

25  Plerumquc   tamen   et   fere   semper  mancipationibus  utimur :
quod  enim  ipsi  per  nos  praesentibus  amicis  agere  possumus,
hoc  non  est  necesse  cum  maiore  difficultate  apud  praetorem

26  aut   apud   praesidem    prouinciae    agere.          Quod  si   neque
mancipata  neque  in  iure  cessa  sit  res  mancipi,

27  •   -  — .         [27]     —  -

28  (Res)  incorporales  traditionem  non  recipere  manifestum  est.

29  Sed  iura  praediorum  urbanorum  in  iure  cedi  possunt ;  rusti-
corum  uero  etiam  mancipari  possunt.

30  Vsusfructus  in  iure  cessionem  tantum  recipit :  nam  dominus
proprietatis  alii  usumfructum  in  iure  cedere  potest,  ut  ille
usumfructum  habeat  et  ipse  nudam  proprietatem  (retineaf).
ipse  usufructuarius  in  iure  cedendo  domino  proprietatis  usum-

25  before   the    governor.         Usually,   however,   indeed    almost
always,  we  make  use  of  mancipation ;  for  as  we  can  carry  out
the  latter  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  a  few  friends,  it  is  un-
necessary to  have  recourse  to  the  more  troublesome  procedure

26  before  a  praetor  or  provincial  governor.         If  a  res  mancipi
have  been  neither  mancipated  nor  ceded  in  court,  —

97  .  r^71

AI  .    _     i^i]  -  —     —       .

28  It  is  manifest  that  incorporeals  are  incapable  of  transfer  by

29  delivery.         But  urban  praedial  rights  may  be  ceded  in  court,
and  rural  ones  may  also  be  mancipated.

30  A  usufruct  can  be  transferred  only  by  cessio  in  iure;  for  an
owner  can  cede  the  usufruct  of  what  belongs  to  him  to  another,
so  that  the  cessionary  shall  have  the  usufructuary  right,  he
himself  retaining  the  bare  property.     The  effect  of  cession  of
the  right  of  usufruct  by  the  usufmctuary  to  the  owner  of  the
property  is  that  it  thereby  passes  from  the  cedent  and  merges

§  26.     The  initial  words  of  this  par.  are  tion  of  the  ius  commercii,  as  in  Vlp.

on  the  last  line  of  p.  59;  of  p.  60  xix,  §§  4,  5;  and  the  words  extant

not   above   a   dozen   words  are  de-  on  p.  61  show  that  it  also  included

cipherable.     The  par.  possibly  con-  some  reference   to  the   qualities  of

tained  a    statement  of  the    conse-  land  in  the  provinces,  according  as

quences  of   neglect   of  mancipation  it  did  or  did  not  enjoy  the  privileges

or   cession  in   court  in    conveyance  of  the  ius  italicum  (upon  which  see

of  a    res  mancipi;    although    this  i,  120,  note  2).

matter  is  afterwards  referred  to  in  §  28.     Comp.  §  19  ;  Gai.  in  fr.  43,  §  1,

§  41.  D.  de  adq.  rer.  dom.  (xli,  1).

§  27.     This  par.  is  assumed  to  have  in-  §  29.     Comp.  §  17.

eluded  the  latter  half  of  p.  60  and  first  §§30-33.     Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  VSVFRVCTV,

twelve  lines  of  p.  61.     These  last  are  (ii,  4).

partially  legible,  though  no  line  com-  §  30.     Comp.  §  33;  Vlp.  xix,  11;  Paul,

pletely  so.      It  is   not   improbable  iii,  6,  §  32  ;  Fr.  Vat.  §  45;  §  3,  tit.

that  they  contained  some  explana-  I.  afd.

II,  §§30-33.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  83

fructum  efficit  ut  a  se  discedat  et  conuertatur  in  proprietatem  :
alii   uero   in   iure  cedendo   nihilo  minus  ius  suum   retinet  •

31  creditur  enim  ea  cessions  nihil  agi.          Sed  haec  scilicet  in
italicis  praediis1  ita  sunt,  quia  et  ipsa  praedia  mancipationem
et   in  iure  cessionem  recipiunt.     alioquin   in  prouiucialibus
praediis,  siue  quis  usumfructum  siue  ius  eundi  agendi  aquamue
ducendi,  uel  altius  tollendi  aedes  aut  non  tollendi  ne  luminibus
uicini  officiatur,2  ceteraque  similia  iura  constituere  uelit,  pac-
.tionibus  et  stipulationibus3  id  efficere  potest;  quia  ne  ipsa
quidem  praedia  mancipationem  aut  in  iure  cessionem  recipiunt.

32  Sed  cum  ususfructus  et   hominum  et  ceterorum  animalium
constitui   possit,   intellegere    debemus   horum    usumfructum
etiam  in  prouinciis   per   in   iure  cessionem  constitui  posse.

33  Quod  autem  diximus  usumfructum  in  iure  cessionem  tantum
recipere  non  est  temere  dictum,  quamuis  etiam  per  mancipa-

again  in  the  property ;  by  cession  in  court  to  a  third  party,
however,  the  usufructuary  still  retains  his  right, — the  cession

31  is  held  in  that  case  to  be  resultless.         But  this  applies  only
to  a  usufruct  of  lands  that  have  italic  privilege ;  for  they  are
susceptible  both  of  mancipation  and  cession  in  court.     In  the
case  of  [unprivileged]  provincial  lands,  if  a  man   desire  to
constitute  a  usufruct,  or  a  right  of  footpath  or  cattle  road,  of
aqueduct,  of  higher -building  or  preventing  higher-building
lest  a  neighbour's  lights  should  be  interfered  with,  or  any
similar  description  of  servitude,  he  must  carry  out  his  object
by  means  of  pacts  and  stipulations ;   for  lands  such  as  these
are  not  themselves  susceptible  of  mancipation  or  cession  in

32  court.         But   there   may   be  usufruct   both   of  slaves   and
animals ;  and  it  should  be  understood  that  such  a  servitude
may  be  constituted  by  in  iure  cessio  even  in  the  provinces.

33  Our  statement  that  a  usufruct  can  be  transferred  only  by-
cession  in  court  is  not  made  inconsiderately ;  for  although  it
is  true  that  it  may  be  constituted  by  mancipation  in  this

§31.     Cornp.    Gai.   in  fr.   3,   pr.   D.   de  3  The  pactio  was  the  agreement  to

usufr.  (vii,  1);  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd. ;  §  4,  constitute  ;  the  stipulatio   a  subse-

I.  de  seruitut.  (ii,  3).  quent  engagement  (under  a  penalty)

1  See  i,  120,  note  2.  by  the  owner  of  the  servient  tene-

2  There  is  here,  as  in§  14a,  a  little  nient  not  to  interfere  with  the  exer-
confusion  of  the  easement  and  the  cise  of  the  right  by  the  owner  of  the
burden.  Seruitas  was  used  to  express  dominant  one.     See  fr.  2,  §  5,  fr.  4,
either;    but    properly   it    was    the  §  1,  fr.  38,  §§  10,  f.,  D.  de   V.   0.
burden,    ius    seruitutis    being    the  (xlv,  1).

easement.  §  33.     Comp.  §  30;  Fr.  Vat.  §§  47,  50.

84  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS     [IF,  §§33-36.

tionem  constitui  possit  eo  quod  in  mancipanda  proprietate
detrahi  potest;  non  enim  ipse  ususfructus  mancipatur,  sed
cum  in  mancipanda  propriotate  deducatur,  eo  fit  ut  apud  alium
ususfructus  apud  alium  proprietas  sit.

34  Hereditas    quoque    in     iure    cessionem    tantum    recipit.

35  Nam   si   is   ad   quern   ab   intestate    legitimo    iure    pertinet
hereditas,  in  iure  earn  alii  ante  aditionem  cedat,  id  est  ante-
quam  heres  extiterit,  proinde  fit  heres  is  cui  in  iure  cesserit,
ac  si  ipse  per  legem  ad  hereditatem  uocatus  esset  ;  post  obli-
gationem  uero  si  cesserit  nihilo  minus  ipse  heres  permanet
et   ob  id  creditoribus  tenebitur,  debita  uero  pereunt  eoque
modo  debitores  hereditarii  lucrum  faciunt ;  corpora  uero  eius
hereditatis  perinde  transeunt  ad  eum  cui  cessa  est  hereditas,

36  ac  si  ei  singula  in  iure  cessa  fuissent.         Testamento  autem
scriptus  heres  ante  aditam  quidem  hereditatem  in  iure  cedendo
earn  alii  nihil  agit ;  postea   uero   quam  adierit  si  cedat,  ea
accidunt  quae  proxime  diximus  de  eo  ad  quern  ab  intestato
legitimo  iure  pertinet  hereditas,  si  post  obligationem  in  iure

sense — that  an  owner  reserves  it  in  mancipating  his  property,
here  it  is  not  the  usufruct  that  is  mancipated,  but  in  the
mancipation  of  the  property  the  usufruct  is  reserved,  and  thus
it  comes  to  pass  that  the  usufruct  is  in  one  person  while  the
property  is  in  another.

34  An  inheritance  also  is  not  otherwise  transferable  than  by

35  cession  in  court.         For  if  he  who  on  intestacy  is  entitled  to
an  inheritance   as   heir-at-law  cede  it  in  court  to   another
person  before  entry,  that  is,  before  he  has  assumed  the  position
of  heir,  the  cessionary  becomes  heir  just  as  if  the  inheritance
had  devolved  upon  him  by  operation  of  law.     If,  however,  the
cession  be  after  the  heir-at-law  has  accepted  the  responsi-
bilities of  his  position,  he  nevertheless  still  remains  heir  and
responsible  to  the  deceased's  creditors,  while  debts  due  to  the
inheritance  are  extinguished,  and  the  deceased's  debtors  by  so
much  the  gainers ;  but  the  corporeal  items  of  the  inheritance
pass  to  the  cessionary  just  as  if  they  had  each  been  ceded  to

36  him  separately.         Cession  of  an  inheritance  by  the  testa-
mentary heir  before  entry  is  of  no  avail ;  if,  however,  he  cede
after  entry,  the  same  results  follow  that  we  have  described  in
speaking  of  cession  by  an  heir-at-law  ab  intestato  after  assump-

§  34.     Before  this  par.  a  line  and  a  half      §§  35,  36.     Comp.   iii,   §§  85,  86  ;  YJp.
vacant  in  the  MS.     Comp.  Vlp.  six,  11.  xix,  §§  12-15.

II,  §§37-40.]  COMMENTAKII  QVATTVOR.  85

37  cedat.         Idem  et  de  necessariis  heredibus  diuersae  scholae
auctores1    existimant,    quod    nihil    uidetur   interesse  utrum
[aliquis]  adeundo  hereditatem2  fiat  heres  an  inuitus  existat ;
quod  quale  sit  suo  loco3  apparebit :    sed  nostri  praeceptores
putant  nihil  agere  necessarium  heredem  cum  in  iure  cedat
hereditatem.

38  Obligationes  quoquo  modo  contractae  nihil  eorum  recipiunt :
nam  quod  mihi  ab  aliquo  debetur,  id  si  uelim  tibi  deberi,
nullo  eorum  modo  quibus  res  corporales  ad  alium  transferuntur
id  efficere  possum:    sed  opus  est  ut  iubente  me  tu  ab  eo
stipuleris;  quae  res  efficit  ut  a  me  liberetur  et  incipiat  tibi

39  teneri.     quae  dicitur  nouatio  obligationis.         sine   hac  uero
nouatione  non  poteris  tuo  nomine  agere,  sed  debes  ex  persona
mea  quasi  cognitor  aut  procurator  rneus  experiri.

40  Sequitur  ut  admoneamus  apud  peregrinos  quidem  unuin  esse

37  tion  of  the  heir's  responsibilities.         The  authorities  of  the
other  school  think  that  cession  by  a  necessary  heir  also  pro-
duces those  same  results,  it  being  in  their  opinion  immaterial
whether  a  man  becomes  heir  by  his  own  act  of  entry  or  has
that  character  imposed  upon  him  against  his  will,  —  the  dis-
tinction will  be  explained  in  the  proper  place  ;  our  school,  on
the  other  hand,  holds  that  cession   of  an   inheritance  by  a
necessary  heir  is  altogether  inoperative.

38  There  is  nothing  of  this  sort  in  obligations,  howsoever  con-
tracted ;  for  by  none  of  those  modes  whereby  corporeals  are
transferred  can  I  bring  it  about  that  what  a  man  owes  me,  he
shall  in  future,  if  I  wish  it,  owe  to  you.     What  must  be  done
is  this  :  you  must  yourself,  on  my  instruction,  take  from  him
a  stipulatory  engagement  [for  the  same  debt]  ;  thereby  he  is
discharged  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  but  begins  to  be  bound

39  to  you.     This  is  called  novation  of  an  obligation.         Without
such  novation  you  cannot  proceed  against  him  in  your  own
name,  but  must  sue  in  mine  as  my  cognitor  or  procurator.

40  We  have  next  to  observe  that  among  peregrins  there  is  but

§  37.      Comp.  iii,  87.  BVS  ET  LONGI  TEMFORIS  POSSESSIO-

1  See  i,  196,  note  1.  NIBVS  (ii,  6).

-'  The  MS.  has  hereditatemstatem  ;       §  40.     Comp.  i,  §§  54  (and  note),  "167  ;

which  has  led  P.  to  interject  statim,  ii,  88;  iii,  166;  Th.  i,  5,  §  4.     The

not,  however,  before  fiat,  but  before  latter  passage  runs   (vers.    Reitz.)  :

existat.  Est  igitur,  ut  dixi,   naturale   domi-

3  See  §§  152,  f.  mum  (<po<n%9i  "SitrTOTiia)  et  legitimum

§  38.     Comp.  iii,  176.  dominiwm    (ewofios    Ssa-sraTt/'a).      Ac

§  39.     Comp.  iv,  §§  82,  86.  naturale  dicitur  in  bonis,  et  dominus

§§  40-61.     Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  VSVCAPIONI-  bonitarius:   legitimum   dicitur  iure

80

GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [II,  §§  40-42.

dominium:  nam  aut  dominus  quisque  est  aut  dominus  non
intellegitur.  Quo  itire  etiam  populus  Eomanus  olim  utebatur  :
aut  enim  ex  hire  Quiritium  unusquisque  dominus  erat,  aut
non  intellegebatur  dominus.  sed  postea  diuisionem  accepit
dominium,  ut  alius  possit  esse  ex  iure  Quiritium  dominus,

41  alius  in  bonis   habere.         nam  si  tibi  rem   mancipi  neque
mancipauero  neque  in  iure  cessero  sed  tantum  traclidero,  in
bonis  quidem  tuis  ea  res  efficitur,  ex  iure  Quiritium  uero  mea
permanebit  donee  tu  earn  possidendo  usucapias  :  semel  enim
inpleta  usucapione  proinde  pleno  iure  incipit,  id  est  et  in
bonis  et  ex  iure  Quiritium,1  tua  res  esse,  ac  si  ea  mancipata

42  uel  in  iure  cessa  [esset.         Vsucapio  autem\  mobilium  quidem
rerum  anno  conpletur,  fundi  uero  et  aedium  biennio ;  et  ita
lege  xn  tabularum  cautum  est.

one  sort  of  ownersbip ;  for  a  man  either  is  owner  or  is  not.
And  so  it  was  of  old  time  with  the  people  of  Home ;  a  man
was  either  owner  according  to  the  law  of  the  Quiritians,  or  he
was  not  held  to  be  owner  at  all.  But  afterwards  property
underwent  this  distinction, — that  while  one  man  may  be
owner  of  a  thing  in  quiritary  right,  another  may  have  it  in

41  lonis.         Thus,  suppose  I  have  neither   mancipated   a   res
mancipi,  nor  conveyed  it  to  you  by  cession  in  court,  but  have
simply  delivered  it,  while  you  will  thereby  have  it  in  bonis,
it  will  still  remain  mine  in  quiritary  right  until  you  have
usucapted  it  by  possession  ;  for  the  moment  your  usucapion
of  it  is  completed  it  forthwith  begins  to  be  yours  in  plenary
ownership,  i.e.  both  in  bonitarian  and  in  quiritarian  right,
exactly  as  if  it  had  been  mancipated  to  you  or  ceded  to  you

42  in  court.         The  usucapion  of  moveables  is  completed  in  one
year,  that  of  lands  and  houses  in  two  ;  so  it  is  provided  in  the
Twelve  Tables.

Quiritium,  id  est  Romanorum

.  .  Sed  si  quis  utrumque  habebat
dominium,  dicebatur  pleno  iure
(ri^iiu  'Six.a.iea)  dominus,  utpote  ambo
habens,  legitimum  et  naturale.  The
distinction  was  abolished  by  Just.,  1.
un.  C.  de  undo  iure  Quir.  toll,  (v,  25).

§  41.  Comp.  §'204;  iii.  80;  Vlp.  i,  16  ;
Boeth.  in  Cic.  Top.  iii,  5,  §  28  (ed.
Bait.  p.  322).

1  The  words  id  est  .   .   .   .  Quiri-
tium are  omitted  by  P.  as  a  gloss.

§  42.  The  initial  words,  supplied  by  L.,
are  accepted  by  most  eds.  Comp.
Cic.  Top.  iv,  23;  pro  Caec.  xix,  54;

Schoell,  Tab.  vi,  3  ;  Gai.  ii,  204  ;
Vlp.  xix,  8  ;  pr.  tit.  I.  af'd. ;  Th.  ii,
6,  pr.  P.  altogether  rejects  the  par.,
as  not  only  a  gloss,  but  an  erroneous
one  ;  seeing  it  contradicts  the  re-
peated statement  of  Cic.  that  houses
were  not  mentioned  in  the  provision
of  the  xii  Tab.  as  to  usucapion,  but
the  rule  as  to  lands  analogically  ex-
tended to  them  by  the  early  jurists,
or  rather  by  the  pontiffs,  in  whose
hands  (Pomp,  in  ir.  2,  §  6,  D.  de
O.  I.  i,  2)  was  the  interpretation
(interpretandi  scientia)  of  the  xii
Tables.

II,  §§43-47.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  87

43  Ceterum  etiam  earum  rerum  usucapio  nobis  conpetit  quae
non  a  domino  nobis  traditae  fuerint,  siue  mancipi  sint  eae  res
siue  nee  mancipi,  si  modo  eas  bona  fide  acceperimus,  cum

44  crederemus  euni  qui  traderet  dominum  esse.         quod  ideo
receptum  uidetur  ne  rerum  dominia  diutius  in  incerto  essent,
cum  sufficeret  domino  ad  inquirendam  rem  suam  anni  aut
bienii    spatium,    quod   tempus    ad    usucapionem   possessori
tributum  est.

45  Sed  aliquando  etiamsi  maxime  quis  bona  fide  alienam  rem
possideat,  nou  tamen  illi  usucapio  procedit,  uelut  si  quis  rem
furtiuam  aut  ui  possessam  possideat;  nam  furtiuam  lex  xn
tabularum1  usucapi  prohibet,  ui  possessam  lex  lulia  et  Plautia.2

46  Item     prouincialia      praedia     usucapionem    non    recipiunt.

47  [Item   olim]1  rnulieris   quae   in    agnatorum   tutela   erat   res

43  We  may  also  acquire  by  usucapion  things,  whether  man-
cipi or  nee  mancipi,  that  have  been  conveyed  to  us  by  one  not
their  owner,  provided  we  have  accepted  them  in  good  faith,
believing  that  the  party  conveying  them  was  in  truth  their

44  owner.         This  rule  seems  to  have  been  received  in  order  to
prevent   a   too   prolonged   uncertainty   as   to   a  question  of
ownership  ;  one  or  two  years — the  time  allowed  to  a  possessor
for  usucapion — being  thought  ample  for  an  owner  making
inquiries  after  a  thing  belonging  to  him.

45  But  sometimes,  even  though  a  man  possess  in  the  best  of
faith,  there  can  be  no  usucapiou  in  his  favour,  as  when  what
he  possesses  has  been  stolen  or  acquired  by  a  previous  holder
by  force ;  for  the  Twelve  Tables  prohibit  the  usucapion  of
stolen  goods,  and  the  Julian  and  Plautian  law  that  of  things

46  violently  taken  possession  of.         Further,  provincial   lands

47  are  not  susceptible  of  usucapion.         Formerly  also  the  res
mancipi  of  a  woman  in  tutelage  of  her  agnates  could  not  be

§§  43-64.     These  pars,  postponed  by  P.  tioned  by  Cic.  pro  Mil.  xiii,  35,  and

— as  appears    to    me    without  any  the  lex  lulia  de  ui,  which  forms  the

justification — to  §§  65-79.  subject  of  tit.  D.  xlviii,  7,  but  whose

§§  43,  44.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.   1,  D.  de  history  is  somewhat  obscure.

usurp,  (xli,  3);  Vlp.  xix,  8  ;  pr.  tit.       §  46.     Comp.  §§  7,  21;  pr.  tit.   I.  afd. ;

I.  afd.  1.  un.  C.  deusucap.  transf.  (vii,  31).

§  45.     Comp.  §§  1,  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  §  47.     Comp.  i,  192  ;  Cic.  ad  Ait.  i,  5,

1  See  Schoell,  Tab.  viii,  17.  A  §  6  ;  Schoell,  Tab.  v,  2.
similar  provision  as  to  res  furtiuae  l  G.  and  most  eds.  interject  these
was  contained  in  a  lex  Atinia  of  two  words ;  but  this  necessitates  the
557|197(?);  comp.  Gell.  xvii,  7,  rejection  of  res,  which  stands  before
§  lj  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  mulieris  in  the  MS.  P.  manages  to
*  From  Th.  ii,  6,  §  2,  it  appears  retain  it  by  thus  supplying  the  den-
that  these  were  two  distinct  laws  ;  ciency  in  the  text :  [item  ante  legem
probably  the  lex  Plautia  de  ui,  men-  [Claudiam,  si  eranf]  res  mulieris,  etc.

88  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS     [II,  §§47-50.

mancipi  usucapi  non  poterant,  praeterquam  si  ab  ipsa  auctore
tutore  traditae  essent :  id  ita  lege  xn  tabularum  manifestatur.2

48  Item  liberos  homines  et  res  sacras  et  religiosas  usucapi  non

49  posse  manifestum  est.         Quod  ergo  uulgo  dicitur  furtiuarum
rerum  et  ui   possessarum  usucapionem  per  legem  xn  tabu-
larum prohibitam  esse,  non  eo  pertinet  ut  (ne  ipse)  fur  (quiue
(per)  uim  (possidef)  usucapere  possit,  (nam  huic  alia  ratione
usucapio  non  conpetit,  quia  scilicet  mala  fide  possidet) ;  sed
nee  ullus  alius,  quamquam  ab  eo  bona  fide  emerit,  usucapi-

50  endi   ius    habeat.         Vnde    in    rebus   mobilibus   non   facile
(procedit  ut  bonae  fidei  possessori  usucapio}  conpetat,  quia  qui
alienarn  rem  uendidit  et  tradidit  furtum  committit ;  idemque
accidit  etiam   si    ex   alia  causa   tradatur.      sed   tamen   hoc
aliquando  aliter  se  habet;  nam  si  heres  rem  defuncto  com-
modatam  aut  locatam  uel  apud  eum  depositam,  existimans
earn  esse  hereditariam,  uendiderit  aut  donauerit,  furtum  non
committit ; 1  item  si  is  ad  quern  ancillae  ususfructus  pertinet,

usucapted  unless  they  had  been  delivered  with  her  tutor's

48  auctoritas ;  this  is  clearly  shown  in  the  Twelve  Tables.         And
it  is  also  manifest  that  free  persons  and  things  sacred  and

49  religious  cannot  be  usucapted.         The  common  saying  that
by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  usucapion  is  prohibited  of
things  stolen  or  forcibly  taken  possession  of  does  not  mean
that  the  actual  thief,  or  person  taking  possession  by  force,
cannot  usucapt, — his  usucapion  is  impossible  for  a  different
reason,  namely,  that  he  possesses  in  bad  faith, — but  that  no
other  person  lias  the  right  of  usucapting  them,  even  though
he  may  have  purchased  them  in  good  faith  from  the  malae

50  fidei  possessor.         As  regards  moveables,  therefore,  usucapion
is  hardly  possible  for  a  bonae  fidei  possessor,  seeing  that  he  who
sells  and  delivers  what  belongs  to  another  commits  a  theft ;
and  so  it  is.  if  the  delivery  be  on  some  other  ground.     Some-
times, however,  it  is  otherwise ;  for  if  an  heir  sell  or  make  a
present  of  a  thing  that  has  been  lent  or  located  to  or  deposited
with  the  deceased,  under  the  impression  that  it  belongs  to
the  inheritance,  he  does  not  steal  it ;   neither  does  the  usu-
fructuary of  a  slave  woman  who  sells  or  makes  a  gift  of  a

2  So  M.  (K.  u.  S.,  footnote) ;  the  §  50.  Down  to  tradatur  the  par.  corre-

MS.  has  mf.:  most  eds.  substitute  spends  to  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.,  from

cautum  est  or  cautum  erat.  which  the  words  in  ital.  are  sup-

§  48.     Comp.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  plied.

§49.  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.,  from  which  the  '  §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.  Comp.  Gai.

words  in  ital.,  illegible  in  the  in  fr.  36,  pr.  D.  de  usurp,  (xli,

MS.,  are  supplied.  See  also  §  45.  3).

H,  §§50-52.]  COMMENTAPJI  QVATTVOR.  89

partum  etiam  suum  esse  credens  uendiderit  aut  donauerit,
i'urtum  non  committit ;  furtum  enim  sine  adfectu  furandi  non
committitur.2  aliis  quoque  modis  accidere  potest  ut  quis  sine
uitio  furti  rem  alienam  ad  aliquem  transferat  et  efficiat  ut  a

51  possessore  usucapiatur.3         Fundi  quoque  alieni  potest  aliquis
sine  ui  possessionem  nancisci,  quae  uel  ex  negligentia  domini
uacet  uel  quia  dominus  sine  successore  decesserit  uel  longo
tempore   afuerit:  quam   si  ad  alium  bona  fide  accipientem
transtulerit,  poterit  usucapere  possessor ;  et  quamuis  ipse  qui
uacantem   puosessionem   nactus   est   intellegat  alienum  esse

fundum, —  —  — l    ad   usucapionem  nocetur,  [cum]

inprobata  sit  eorum  sententia  qui  putauerint  furtiuum  fundum2
fieri  posse.

52  Piursus  ex  contrario  accidit  ut  qui  sciat  alienam  rem  se
possidere  usucapiat,  ueluti  si  rem  hereditariam  cuius  posses-

child  to  which  she  has  given  birth,  under  the  belief  that  it  is
his ;  for  there  can  be  no  theft  without  intent  to  steal.  And
there  are  yet  other  ways  in  which  it  may  happen  that  a  man
transfers  to  another,  without  any  taint  of  theft,  what  belongs
to  a  third  party,  and  thus  puts  the  possessor  in  a  position  to

51  usucapt  it.         It  is  quite  possible  also  for  a  man  to  take
possession  without  any  violence  of  land  that  is  not  his,  if  it
be  unoccupied  either  through  the  negligence  of  the  owner,  or
because  he  has  died  leaving  no  successor,  or  has  for  a  long
time  been  absent ;  and  if  the  party  who  has  thus  obtained
possession  transfer  it  to  another  who  takes  it  in  good  faith,
the  latter  may  usucapt ;  for  the  knowledge  of  the  appropriator
of  the  vacant  possession  that  the  land  in  question  belongs  to
a  third  party  [will  not  impede  the  usucapion  of  the  bonae  fidei
[possessor],  the  opinion  of  those  who  used  to  think  that  land
may  bear  the  taint  of  theft  being  now  universally  condemned.

52  On  the  other  hand,  it  [sometimes]  happens  that  a  person
may  usucapt  who  takes  possession  of  what  he  well  knows  to

2  §  5,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Gai.  in  magis  K.  u.  S.  and  Hu.  read  nihil
fr.  36,  §  1,  fr.  37,  pr.  D.  de  usurp.  hoc.

(xli,  3).  2  Comp.  Gell.  xi,  18,  §§  12,  13.

3  §  6,  tit.  I.  afd.  §  52.     Comp.'iii,  201.    There  seems  good
§  51.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  37,  §  1,  fr.  38,  reason  for  believing  that  bona  Jides

D.   de  usurp,  (xli,   3);  §  7,  tit.    I.  was   not   originally   a   condition  of

afd.  usucapion  ;    consequently   the  usu-

1  Nearly  a  line  illegible,  with  ex-  capions  mentioned  in  §§  52-61  were

ception  of  nihilomm.    Gou.  proposes:  merely  varieties  in  which,  for  special

tamen    nihilo    magis    bonae    fidei  reasons,  the  original   doctrine   was

possessori,    etc. ;     while    for    nihilo  not  departed  from.

90

GA1I  TNSTITVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS     [II,  §§  52-55.

sionem  heres  nondum  nactus  est  aliquis  possederit ;  nam  ei
concessum  [est  «sw]capere,  si  modo  ea  res  est  quae  recipit
usucapionem :  quae  species  possessionis  et  usucapionis  pro

53  herede  uocatur.         Et  in  tantum  haec  usucapio  concessa  est

54  ut  et  res  quae  solo  continentur  anno  usucapiantur.         quare
autem  hoc  casu1  etiam  soli  rerum  annua  constituta  sit  usu-
capio ilia  ratio  est,  quod  olim  rerum  hereditariaram  posses-
sione2  ipsae  hereditates  usucapi  credebantur,  [scilicet  anno]  :3
lex  enim  xn  tabularum  soli  quidem  res  biennio  usucapi  iussit,
ceteras  uero  anno;4  ergo  hereditas  in  ceteris  rebus  uidebatur
esse,  quia  soli  non  est  quia  neque  corporalis  est :  et  quamuis
postea  creditum  sit  ipsas  hereditates  usucapi  non  posse,  tamen
in  omnibus  rebus  hereditariis,  etiam  quae  solo  tenentur,  annua

55  usucapio   remansit.          Quare   autem   omnino   tarn  inproba

belong  to  another,  as  for  instance  when  lie  appropriates  some-
thing belonging  to  an  inheritance,  but  which  the  heir  has  not
yet  reduced  into  possession ;  in  such  a  case  he  is  allowed  to
usucapt,  provided  the  thing  in  question  be  susceptible  of
usucapion.  This  variety  of  possession  and  usucapion  is  said

53  to  be  pro  herede,  [i.e.  in  the  character  of  heir.]         And  to
such  an  extent  has  this  usucapion  been  conceded,  that  even

54  immoveables  may  thus  be  usucapted  in  a  year.         The  reason
why  in  this  case  a  one  year's  usucapion  of  immoveables  was
introduced  is  this — that  formerly  by  possession  of  the  con-
stituent items  of  an  inheritance  the  inheritance  itself  was  be-
lieved to  be  usucapted,  and  thatdn  a  year.     (For  the  provision
of  the  Twelve  Tables  was  that  immoveables  were  to  be  usu-
capted in  two  years,  but  other  things  in  one ;  and  an  inherit-
ance seemed  to  be  included  amongst  the  '  other  things,'  for
it   is   not  immoveable,  because  not  even  corporeal.)      And,
although  afterwards  it  came  to  be  admitted  that  an  inheritance
as  such  was  not  susceptible  of  usucapion,  still  the  one  year's
usucapion  continued   to   be   applied   to   every  item   of  the

55  hereditary  estate,  even  though  immoveable.         That  such  an
iniquitous  possession  and  usucapion  should  ever  have  been

§§  53,  54.     Comp.  Cic.  ad  Alt.  i,  5,  §  6;
Sen.  de  belief,  vi,  5.

§54.     !  The  MS.  has  etiam  hoc  casu.

2  Forpossfssioncs  ut,  which  stands
in  the  MS.  ,  G. ,  Bk. ,  Hu. ,  and  K.  u.  S.
read  possession?  uelut;  P.  possessione,
[eae],  sicut.  Possessiones  usucapi  is
certainly  an  unusual  phrase,  though
there  is  something  very  like  it  in  the

possessionem  usurecipi  of  §  61.  1
am  disposed,  however,  to  delete  both
the  final  s  and  the  ut,  and  to  read
this  simply  possessione.

3  These  words  seem  to  be  a  gloss.

4  See  §  42.

55.  Comp.  Cic.  de  ler/ib.  ii,  19,  §§  48,
49 ;  20,  §§  50,  51 ;  Fest.  v.  Sine
sacris  hereditas  (Bruns,  p.  267).

II,  §§  55-59.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

91

possessio  et  usucapio  concessa  sit  ilia  ratio  est,  quod  uoluerimt
ueteres  maturius  hereditates  adiri,  ut  essent  qui  sacra  facerent,
quorum  illis  temporibus  summa  obseruatio  fuit,  et  ut  credi-

56  tores  haberent  a  quo  suum  consequerentur.         Haec  autem
species  possessionis  et  usucapionis  etiam  lucratiua  uocatur :

57  nam  sciens  quisque  reni  alienam  lucrifacit.         sed  hoc  tern-
pore   iam   non   est   lucratiua :    nam  ex  auctoritate  Hadrian!
senatusconsultum  factum  est  ut  tales  usucapiones  reuocaren-
tur ;  et  ideo  potest  heres  ab  eo  qui  rem  usucepit  hereditatem
petendo  perinde  earn  rem  consequi  atque  si  usucapta  non

58  esset.         necessario   tamen   herede1   extante  nihil  ipso  iure
pro  herede  usucapi  potest.

59  Adhuc  etiam  ex  aliis  causis  sciens  quisque  rem  alienam

recognized  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  anxiety  of  our
ancestors  to  accelerate  entry  to  an  inheritance,  in  order  that
there  might  be  some  one  to  attend  to  the  sacred  rites  [of  the
family],  on  which  great  store  was  set  in  those  days,  and  that
the  creditors  [of  the  deceased]  might  have  some  one  from

56  whom  they  could  recover  what  was  due  to  them.         This  sort
of  possession  and  usucapion  is  also  sometimes  called  usucapio
lucrativa ;  because  the  possessor  knowingly  enriches  himself

57  with  what  belongs  to  another.         But  at  the  present  day  it  is
no  longer  lucrative ;    for,  by  a   senatusconsult   enacted   by
authority  of  the  emperor  Hadrian,  such  usucapions  may  be
revoked,  and  the  heir  recover  from  the  usucaptor  by  kereditatis

58  petitio  as  if  there  never  had  been  any  usucapion.         If  a
necessary  heir  exist,  however,  nothing  can  be  ipso  iure  usu-
capted  pro  herede.

59  There  are   yet  other  cases  in  which  a  man  may  usucapt

§  56.  Comp.  fr.  71,  D.  defurt.  (xlvii,  2);
fr.  33,  §  1,  D.  de  usurp,  (xli,  3).

§  57.  By  Marc.  Aurel.  it  was  made  an
offence,  under  the  name  of  crimen
expilatae  hereditatis,  for  a  person,
not  pretending  a  title,  to  take  posses-
sion of  an  inheritance  either  before
or  after  the  heir's  entry;  see  tit.  D.
expil.  hered.  (xlvii,  19).

§  58.  Comp.  iii,  201.  It  is  remarkable
that,  prior  to  Studemund's  revision
of  the  text,  all  eds.  made  both  these
two  pars,  affirmthe  reverse  of  the  truth.
1  See  the  meaning  of  necessarius
litres  in  §  153.  Hu.  reads  [suo]  et
necessario  tamen  herede;  on  the
ground  that  the  MS.  has  et  before

necessario,  and  that  it  can  be  ex"
plained  only  on  the  supposition  that
suo  has  been  omitted.  (Who  were
sui  et  necessarii,  see  described  in
§  156.  The  difference  in  position  of
the  two  classes  is  well  explained  by
Vlp.  xxii,  24)  But  as,  in  iii,  201,
Gai.  again  uses  simply  the  word
necessarii,  I  do  not  think  Huschke's
emendation  can  be  accepted.
59.  Comp.  iii,  201.  The  thing  con-
veyed jiduciae  causa  was  itself
spoken  of  as  afiducia;  as  such,  even
though  it  might  be  a  res  soli,  it
came  under  the  category  of  '  other
things  '  (§  54),  and  so  could  be  usu-
capted  in  a  year.

02  GAII  INSTITVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS     [II,  §§  59-61.

nsucapit :  nam  qui  rem  alicui  fiduciae  causa  mancipio  dederit
uel  in  itire  cesserit,  si  eandem  ipse  possederit,  potest  usu-
capere,  anno  scilicet,  [etiam]  soli  si  sit.  quae  species  usu-
capionis  dicitur  usureceptio,  quia  id  quod  aliquando  habuimus

GO  recipimus  per  usucapionem.  Sed  cum  fiducia  contrahitur
aut  cum  creditore  pignoris  iure,  aut  cum  amico  quo  tutius
nostrae  res  apud  eum  essent,  si  quidem  cum  amico  contracta
sit  riducia  sane  oinni  modo  conpetit  usureceptio ;  si  uero  cum
creditore,  soluta  quidem  pecunia  omni  modo  conpetit,  non-
dum  uero  soluta  ita  demum  conpetit  si  neque  conduxerit  earn
rem  a  creditore  debitor,  neque  precario  rogauerit  ut  earn  rem
possidere  liceret;  quo  casu  lucratiua  usucapio  conpetit.

61  Item  si  rem  obligatam  sibi  populus  uendiderit,  eamque
dominus  possederit,  concessa  est  usureceptio :  sed  hoc  casu
praedium  biennio  usurecipitur :  et  hoc  est  quod  uulgo  dicitur

what  he  knows  to  belong  to  another.  Thus,  if  an  individual
have  taken  possession  of  a  thing  which  he  had  previously
mancipated  or  ceded  in  court  to  another  for  a  fiduciary  pur-
pose, he  may  usucapt  in  a  year,  even  though  the  thing  in
question  be  immoveable.  This  sort  of  usucapiou  is  called
usureception ;  because  we  recover  by  usucapion  what  was

60  once  our  own.         Such  a  fiduciary  conveyance  may  be  either
to  a  creditor  by  way  of  real  security,  or  to  a  friend  in  whose
hands  we  think  our  property  will  be  safer  than  in  our  own.
In  the  latter  case  usureception  on  our  part  is  competent  under
any  circumstances.      In  the  former  it  is  always  competent
after  we  have  paid  our  debt ;  but  before  payment  it  is  com-
petent only  if  we  have  neither   taken  the  thing  from  our
creditor  in  location,  nor  on  our  own  request  obtained  posses-
sion of  it  from  him  during  his  pleasure ;  in  the  absence  of
either  of  those  obstacles  there  may  be  a  lucrative  usucapion.

61  Then  again,  if  a  man  have  taken  possession  of  lands  of  his
that  have  been  mortgaged  to  the  state,  and  that  have  been
sold  by  its  officials,  usureception  is  competent,  but  only  in

60.     Comp.  Booth,  in  Oic.  Top.  iv,  10,  or  second  century,  was  found  near

§  41  (Bruns,  p.  295)  ;  Isidor.  Orig.  Seville  in  1867  ;   the  inscription  is

v,  25,  §  23   (Brans,  p.   302).     The  in  Bruns,  p.  180.
fiduciary  nature  of  the  transaction,       §61.     Comp.  Liv.   xxii,   60;    Varro   de

when  in  the  form  of  a  mancipation,  L.  L.  v,  40 ;  Schol.  Bob.  in  or.  pro

was    expressed  in  the   uerba  nun-  Flacco  (ed.  Bait.  p.  244);  Mommsen

cupata,  as  to  which  see  §  104,  note  7.  on  cautiones  praedibus  praediisque,

A  bronze  tablet,  with  the  record  of  a  in  his  Stadtrechte  von  /Salpenaa,  etc.,

mancipatio  fiduciae  causa  engraved  pp.  466,  f.
thereon,  supposed  to  be  of  the  first

II,  §§  61-64.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

93

ex  praediatura  possessionem  usurecipi :  nam  qui  mercatur  a
populo  praediator  appellatur.

62  Accidit  aliquando  ut  qui  dominus  sit  alienandae  rei  potes-
tatem  non  habeat,  et  qui  dominus  non  sit  alienare  possit.

63  Nam   dotale   praedium   maritus    inuita    muliere   per   legem
Iuli«™  i  prohibetur  alienare,  quamuis  ipsius  sit  uel  mancipa-
tum  ei  dotis  causa  uel  in  iure  cessum  uel  usucaptum.     quod
quidem  ins  utrum  ad  italica2  tantum  praedia,  an  etiam  ad

64  prouincialia3   pertineat,   dubitatur.          Ex   diuerso    agnatus
furiosi  curator  rem  furiosi  alienare  potest  ex  lege  XII  tabu-
larum  ; l  item  procurator  —    —    —    —    — ; 2  item  creditor

two  years ;  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  common  saying  that
possession  is  usurecapted  ex  praediatura,  a  purchaser  from  the
state  being  called  praediator.

62  It  sometimes  happens  that  he  who  is  owner  cannot  alienate,

63  and  that  one  who  is  not  owner  can.         For  by  the  Julian
law  a  husband  is  forbidden  to  alienate  dotal  lands  against  the
will  of  his  wife,  although  they  may  have  been  mancipated  to
him  or  ceded  to  him  in  court  or  usucapted  by  him  as  a  dotal
provision.     But  it  is  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  this  prohibi-
tion is  confined  to  immoveables  of  italic  right  or  applies  also  to

64  provincial  lands.      Contrariwise  the  agnatic  curator  of  a  lunatic
is  empowered  by  the  Twelve  Tables  to  alienate  his  ward's  pro-
perty ;  a  procurator  \inay  alienate  perishables  belonging  to  his
[principal],  and  a  creditor  by  agreement  may  alienate  a  pledge

§§  62-64.  Comp.  pr.  §  1,  tit.  I.  QVIBVS
ALIENARE  LICET  \'EL  NON  (ii,  8).
AdoptingasuggestionofHeimbach's,
most  eds.  place  those  pars,  between
§§  79  and  80  ;  and  unquestionably
there  is  some  reason  for  so  doing,  as
§§  80-88  deal  with  the  same  subject-
matter.  But  there  does  not  seem  to
be  sufficient  to  justify  the  transposi-
tion ;  which  is  the  view  taken  by
M.  (K.  u.  S.  p.  xix).

§  62.     Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

§  63.  Comp.  Paul,  ii,  216,  §  2  ;  pr.  tit.
I.  afd.

1  The  enactment  referred  to  is  the
L.  lulia  de  adulteriis,  of  the  year
736  |  18.

2  See  i,  120,  note  2.

3  Comp.  §§  7,  21.

§  64.    a  Comp.  Cic.  de  inu.  ii,  50,  §  148;

ad  Herenn.  i,  13,  §  33  ;  Vlp.  xii,  2;
Schoell,  Tab.  v,  7.

2  The  first  half  of  line  8,  p.  69,  is
illegible  in  the  MS.  Bk.  suggests —
id  cuius  libera  administratio  ei  data
est  ;  Gou. — cui  pecuniae  adminis-
tratio data  est;  K.  u.  S.  —  rem
absentis,  cuius  negotiorum  libera
administratio  ei  permissa  est;  M.
(K.  u.  S.  p.  xx) — si  quid  ne  corrum-
patur  distrahendum  est ;  Hu. — iure
ciuili,  cuius  persona  afficio  muneri-t
eadem  est.  None  of  these  readings
seems  to  correspond  with  the  traces
of  individual  letters  made  out  by
Stud. ;  but  Mommsen's  seems  prefer-
able in  point  of  doctrine,  a  procurator
not  being  entitled  to  sell  anything
but  perishables  without  special  man-
date, fr.  63,  D.  de  proc.  \\\i,  3).

94

GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [II,  §§  G4-67.

pignus  ex  pactione,  quamuis  eius  ea  res  non  sit.3  sed  hoc
forsitan  ideo  uideatur  fieri  quod  iioluntate  debitoris  intelle-
gitur  pignus  alienari,  qui  olira  pactus  est  ut  liceret  creditor!
pignus  uendere  si  pecunia  non  soluatur.

65  Ergo  ex  his  quae  diximus  apparet  quaedam  naturali  iure
alienari,  qualia  sunt  ea  quae  traditione  alienantur,  quaedam
ciuili ;  nam  mancipations1  et  in  iure  cessionis2  et  usucapionis3
ius  proprium  est  ciuiurn  Eomanorum.

66  Nee  tamen  ea  tantum  quae  traditione  nostra  fiunt  naturali
nobis  ratione  adquiruntur,  sed  etiam  quae  occupando   ideo

l  quia  antea  nullius  essent,  qualia  sunt  omnia  quae

67  terra  mari  coelo  capiuntur.         Itaque  si  feram  bestiam  aut
uolucrem  aut  piscem   —   —          —   — ,l  eo  usque   nostrum

held  by  him,  although  it  is  not  his.  (But  it  may  perhaps  be  held
in  the  last  case  that  the  pledge  is  to  be  understood  as  alienated
by  consent  of  the  debtor,  who  agreed  in  the  outset  that  his
creditor  might  sell  it  if  the  debt  were  not  paid.)

65

It  appears,  therefore,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  some
things  are  alienated  according  to  natural  law, — those,  for
example,  that  are  transferred  by  delivery, — and  others  accord-
ing to  the  civil  law  ;  for  mancipation,  cession  in  court,  and
usucapion,  are  peculiar  to  Roman  citizens.

But  it  is  not  only  those  things  that  become  ours  by
delivery  that  we  acquire  on  a  natural  title,  but  also  what  we
appropriate  by  occupancy  as  previously  unowned  ;  such  are
all  things  that  are  captured  either  on  land,  in  the  sea,  or  in
67  the  air.  Therefore  if  we  capture  a  wild  beast,  or  a  bird,  or
a  fish,  [it  becomes  ours  the  moment  it  is  caught, ,]  and  is  held  to

66

3  Comp.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.
§§  65-79.  Comp.  §§  11-34,  tit.  I.  DE

RERVM  DIVISIONS  (ii,  1).
§  65.  Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  1,  pr.  D.  de  A.

JR.  D.  (xli,  1);  §11,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  Comp.  i,  119.

2  Comp.  §  24.

3  Comp.  §  41.

§66.     Comp.   Gai.  in  fr.  ],  §  1,  D.   de
A.  R.  D.  (xli,  ]);  §  12,  tit.  I.  afd.

'l  There  are  about  fourteen  letters
on  line  20,  p.  69,  more  or  less  ille-
gible in  the  MS.,  of  which  various
reconstructions  have  been  proposed.
The  nostra  fecerimus  of  Bk.  doubt-
less expresses  the  meaning,  though

it,  like  the  other  conjectural  render-
ings, does  not  quadrate  with  the
traces  discernible.

i  67.  Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  3,  §  2,  fr.  5,pr.  D.
de  A.  R.D.  (xli,  1) ;  §  12,  tit.  I.  afd.
1  About  a  line  and  a  half  (lines  23,
24,  p.  69)  illegible,  with  exception
of  word  captum.  Bk.  proposes —
ceperimus,  quidquid  ita  captum
fuerit,  continue  nostrum  Jit,  et  eo
usque,  etc.;  Hu. — ceperimus,  simul
atquc  captum  hoc  animal  est,  statim
nostrum  Jit,  et  eo  usque,  etc. ;  K.  u.  S.
— ceperimus,  quidquid  ita  captum
fuerit,  statim  nostrum  Jit,  et  eo  usque,
etc.

H,  §§67-70.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  95

esse  intellegitur  donee  nostra  custodia  coerceatur;  cum
uero  custodiam  nostram  euaserit  et  in  naturalem  libertatem
se  receperit,  rursus  occupantis  fit,  quia  nostrum  esse  desinit.
naturalem  autem  libertatem  recipere  uidetur  cum  aut  oculos
nostros  euaserit,  aut  licet  in  conspectu  sit  nostro  dimcilis
G8  tamen  eius2  persecutio  sit.  In  his  autem  animalibus  quae
ex  consuetudine  abire  et  redire  solent,  ueluti  columbis  et
apibus,  item  ceruis  qui  in  siluas  ire  et  redire  solent,  talem
habemus  regulam  traditam  ut  si  reuertendi  animum  habere
desierint  etiam  nostra  esse  desinant  et  fiant  occupantium  :
reuertendi  autem  animum  uidentur  desinere  habere  cum

69  reuertendi  cousuetudinem  deseruerint.         Ea  quoque  quae  ex
hostibus  capiuntur  naturali  ratione  nostra  fiunt.

70  Sed  et  id  quod  per  adluuionem  nobis  adicitur  eodem  iure
nostrum  fit :  per  adluuionem  autem  id  uidetur  adici  quod  ita
paulatim  flumen  agro  nostro  adicit  ut  aestimare  non  possimus
quantum  quoquo  momento  temporis  adiciatur :  hoc  est  quod
uulgo  dicitur  per  adluuionem  id  adici  uideri  quod  ita  paulatim

-  continue  ours  so  long  as  it  is  under  the  restraint  of  our
keeping ;  but  the  moment  it  evades  our  custody  and  regains
its  natural  liberty  it  becomes  the  property  of  the  next  captor,
having  ceased  to  be  ours.  And  it  is  regarded  as  having
regained  its  natural  liberty  when  we  can  no  longer  see  it,  or

68  when,  though  still  visible,  its  pursuit  is  difficult.        As  regards,
however,  such  animals  as  are  in  the  habit  of  going  and  coming,
— pigeons,  for  instance,  and  bees,  and  deer,  which  are  wont
to  go  to  the  woods  and  come  back  again, — the  rule  is  tradi-
tional that  they  cease  to  be  ours  and  fall  to  the  next  captor
when  they  no  longer  have  the  animus  revertendi  ;  and  that  is
held  to  have  occurred   when  they  have  discontinued  their

69  habit  of  returning.         Things  captured  from  an  enemy  also
become  ours  by  natural  law.

70  By  the  same  law  that  becomes  ours  which  is  brought  to
us  by  alluvion.     That  is  held  to  be  thus  brought  to  us  which
a  river  adds  to  our  land  so  gradually  that  we  cannot  appreciate
how  much  is  being  added  at  any  particular  moment, — which,
as  the  saying  goes,  is  added  so  gradually  as  to  elude  our

2  Instead  of  eius,  which  we  have  §  69.     Comp.   Gai.   in  fr.  5,  §  7,  D.  de

in  the  Dig.  and  Inst. ,  the  MS.  reads  A.    R.    D.    (xli,    1);  §   17,   tit.    I.

inrei.     M.  (K.  u.  S.  p.  xx)  suggests  afd.

inderei;  Hu.  in  re  eius.  §70.     Comp.   Gai.  in  fr.  7,  §  1,  D.  de

§68.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  5,  §  5,  D.  de  A.  A.    R.   D.   (xli,    1);  §   20,    tit.    I.

R.  D.  (xli,  1)  ;  §§  14,  15,  tit.  I.  afd.  afd.

96

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIV1LIS     [II,  §§  71-76.

71  adicitur  ut  oculos  nostros  fallat.         Itaque  si  flumen  partem
aliquam   ex   tuo   praedio  resciderit,   et  ad  meum  praedium

72  attulerit,  haec  pars  tua  manet.          At  si  in  medio  flumine
insula  nata  sit,  haec  eorum  omnium  communis  est  qui  al)
utraque  parte  fluminis  prope  ripam  praedia  possident ;  si  uero
non  sit  in  medio  flumine,  ad  eos  pertinet  qui  ab  ea  parte  quae

73  proxima  est   iuxta  ripam   praedia   habent.          Praeterea  id
quod  in  solo  nostro  ab  aliquo  aedificatum  est,  quamuis  ille
suo    nomine    aedificauerit,   iure   naturali   nostrum   fit,   quia

74  superficies  solo  cedit.         Multoque  magis  id  accidit   et  in
planta  quam  quis  in  solo  nostro  posuerit,  si  modo  radicibus

75  terram  conplexa  fuerit.         Idem    contiugit  et  in   frumento

76  quod  in  solo  nostro  ab  aliquo  satum  fuerit.         Sed  si  ab  eo
petamus  fundum1  uel  aedificium,  et  inpensas  in  aedificium
uel  in  seminaria  uel  in  sementem  factas  ei  soluere  nolimus,
poterit  nos  per  exceptionem2  doli  mali3  repellere,  utique  si

71  vision.         If,  therefore,  the  [force  of  the]  stream  have  torn
away  a  part  of  your  ground  and  swept  it  over  to  mine,  the

72  part  so  detached  still  remains  yours.         An  island  rising  in
the  middle  of  a  river  is  the  common  property  of  the  riparian
proprietors  ;  but  if  it  be  not  in  the  middle  of  the  stream  it  will

73  belong  to  the  riparian  owners  on  the  nearer  side.         Further,
what  one  has  built  on  our  ground,  although  he  may  have
built  it  on  his  own  account,  by  natural  law  becomes  ours,

74  because  the  superstructure   follows    the    solum.          All   the
more  is  this  the  case  with  a  plant  which  some  person  has
planted  in  our  ground,  provided  it  have  laid  hold  of  the  earth

75  with  its  roots.         And  the  same  happens  with  corn  which

76  another  person  has  sown  in  our  ground.         But  if  we  claim
from  him  the  land  or  the  house,  yet  decline  to  repay  him  his
outlay  in  building,  planting,  or  sowing,  he  can  defeat  us  with
an  exception  of  fraud,  at  least  if  he  have  been  a  bonae  fidci

1  So  Bk. ,  Hu. ,  and  K.  u.  S. ;  the  MS.
\\asfructum.

2  Per  exceptionem;  comp.  iv,  116.

3  Exceptio  doli  mali  was  the  generic
name  for  a  plea  by  the  defender,
•which,  while  admitting  the  pursuer's
claim  to  be  well-founded  in  strict
law,  yet   disputed   it  in  equity  as
involving  fraud  (iv,  119).     But   in
many  of  its  applications  it  was  known
by  a  more  specific  name,  such  as  ex.
rei  uenditae  el  traditae,  ex.  pacti  con-
uenti,  etc.

§  71.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.   7,  §  2,  D.  de

A.  R.  D.  (xli,  1) ;  §  21,  tit.  I.  afd.
§  72.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  7,  §  3,  D.  de

A.  E.  D.  (xli,  1);  §  22,  tit.  I.  afd.
§  73.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.   7,  §  12,  D.  de

A.  R.  D.  (xli,  1);  §§  29,  30,  tit.  I.

afd.
§  74.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  6,  §  13,  D.  de

A.  R.  D.  (xli,  1);  §  31,  tit.  I.  afd.
§  75.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.   9,   pr.   D.    de.

A.  R.  D.  (xli,  1);  §  32,  tit.  I.  afd.
§  76.    Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  9,  pr.  D.  de  A .  R.

D.  (xli.  !);§§  30,  32,  tit.  I.  afd.

II,  §§77,78.]

COMMENTARII  Q VATTVOR.

97

77  bonae  fidei  possessor  fuerit.         Eadem  ratione  probatum  est
quod  in  chartulis  siue  membranis  meis  aliquis  scripserit,  licet
aureis  litteris,  meum  esse,  quia  litterae  chartulis  siue  mem-
branis cedunt :   at  aeque l  si  ego  eos  libros  easue  membranas
petam,  nee  inpensam  scripturae  soluam,  per  exceptionem  doli

78  mail  nvimoueri   potero.          sed   si   in   tabula   mea  aliquis
pinxerit  ueluti  imaginem,  contra  probatur :  magis  enim  dicitur
tabulam  picturae  cedere ;  cuius  diuersitatis  uix  idonea  ratio
redditur:   certe  secundum   hanc   regulam   si   me   possidente
petas  imaginem  tuam  esse,  nee  soluas  pretium  tabulae,  poteris
per   exceptionem   doli  naali  summoueri;   at  si  tu  possideas,
consequens  est  ut  utilis  mihi  actio1  aduersum  te  dari  debeat;

77  possessor.         Upon   the  same  principle  it  is  admitted  that
what  one  has  written,  even  in  letters  of  gold,  on  my  paper  or
parchment,  is  mine,  because  the  writing  cedes  to  the  paper  or
parchment ;  but  here,  in  like  manner,  if  I  sue  for  the  books
or  parchments,  yet  refuse  to  pay  the  cost  of  the  writing,  my

78  action  may  be  defeated  by  an  exception  of  fraud.         If,  how-
ever, some  one  has  painted  a  portrait  say*  on  my  pannel,  the

-rule  is  reversed,  and  the  pannel  said  to  cede  to  the  picture, —
an  anomaly  for  which  no  satisfactory  reason  can  be  assigned.
According  to  this  rule,  if  you  raise  an  action  against  me  who
am  in  possession,  and  maintain  that  the  portrait  is  yours,
but  fail  to  pay  me  the  value  of  the  pannel,  you  may  be
defeated  by  an  exception  of  fraud.  If,  however,  you  are  in
possession,  it  results  that  I  am  entitled  to  . an  i  utilis  actio

§  77.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  9,  §  1,  D.  de
A.  ft.  D.  (xli,  1);  §  33,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  So  Hu.  in  his  earlier  editions  ;
the  MS.  has  itaque.

§  78.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.   9,  §  2,  D.  de
A.  R.  D.  (xli,  1);  §  34,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  It  often  happened  that  a  man
was  unable  to  obtain  the  benefit  of
some  judicial  remedy  intro.luced
either  by  the  common  law,  statutory
enactment,  or  the  praetor's  edict,
because,  although  his  case  was  with-
in the  spirit  of  the  provision  upon
which  he  was  founding,  it  yet  was
not  within  the  letter  of  it.

The  remedy  might  have  been
promised  to  or  against  a  par-
ticular class  of  individuals,  but
he  or  the  party  in  relation  to  whom
he  desired  relief  might  not  belong  to
that  class  ;  or  it  might  have  been
promised  in  certain  specified  circum-

stances, but  those,  that  had  arisen,
though  generically  the  same,  might
yet  specifically  be  different.  In  such
a  case  the  praetor  was  in  the  practice
of  intervening,  and  of  introducing
some  modification — and  there  were
various  ways  in  which  he  did  so—-
into the  formula  or  style  of  the  ordi-
nary action,  exception,  or  interdict
(actio  directa  or  uulyaris,  ex.  dir.,
etc. ),  whereby  such  action  was
adapted  to  and  made  serviceable
(utilis)  in  the  special  circumstances
that  had  emerged.  This  is  the
meaning  of  utilis  actio  in  its  usual
acceptation  ;  and  the  phrases  utilis
exceptio,  ut'de  inter  dictum,  were  used
in  the  same  sense.

Sometimes  the  new  remedy  was
one  of  such  extensive  applicability
and  great  importance  as  to  deserve  a
special  name,  as  in  the  case  of  the

G

98  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [II,  §§78,70.

quo  casu,  nisi  soluam  inpensam  picturae,  poteris  me  per
exceptionem  doli  mali  repellere,  utique  si  bonae  fidei  posses-
sor fueris.  illud  palam  est,  quod  slue  tu  subripuisses  tabulam
sine  alius,  conpetit  mibi  furti  actio.2

79  In  aliis  quoque  speciebus  naturalis  ratio  requiritur  :
proinde  si  ex  uuis  (aut  oliuis  aut  spicis)1  meis  uinum  aut
oleum  aut  frumentum  feceris,  quaeritur  utrum  meum  sit  id
uinum  aut  oleum  aut  frumentum,  an  tuuni.  item  si  ex  auro
aut  argento  meo  uas  aliquod  feceris,  uel  ex  tabulis  meis
nauem  aut  armarium  aut  subsellium  fabricaueris ;  item  si  ex
lana  mea  uestimentum  feceris,  uel  si  ex  uino  et  melle  meo
mulsum  feceris,  siue  ex  medicamentis  meis  emplastrum  aut
collyrium  feceris,  [quaeritur  utrum  tuum  sit  id  quod  ex  meo
[effeceris]2  an  meum.  quidam  materiam  et  substantiam  spec-

against  you  ;  but  then,  if  I  decline  to  pay  the  cost  of  the
picture,  you  can  defeat  me  with  an  exception  of  fraud,  at
least  if  you  are  a  bonae  fidei  possessor.  It  is  clear  that  if
either  you  yourself  or  another  person  obtained  the  pannel
surreptitiously,  I  have  an  actio  furti.

79  On  a  change  of  species  also  the  question  of  ownership  depends
on  natural  considerations.  Thus,  if  you  have  made  wine,  oil,
or  wheat  out  of  my  grapes,  olives,  or  ears  of  corn,  the  question
arises  whether  the  wine,  oil,  or  grain  is  mine  or  yours  ;  just
as,  when  you  have  made  a  vase  of  some  sort  out  of  my  gold
or  silver,  or  have  constructed  a  boat,  or  a  chest,  or  a  chair
out  of  my  planks,  or  have  manufactured  clothing  out  of  my
wool,  or  have  converted  my  wine  and  honey  into  mead,  or
my  drugs  into  a  plaster  or  eye-salve,  [it  becomes  a  question
[whether  what  you  have  made  out  of  my  materials  is  yours]  or
mine.  Some  are  of  opinion  that  the  raw  material, — the  sub-

actlo  Publiciana,  which,  by  means  actio   and   the   utilis   actio  ex   leye

of  an  interpolated  fiction,  was  just  Aquilia;  and  from  §  16,  I.  tie  ley.

an  adaptation  of  the  rei  uindicatio  Aq.  (iv,  3),  it  will  be  observed  that

to  circumstances  in  which  it  was  not  even  the  utilis  actio,  under  the  name

strictly  competent  (iv,  36);  but  more  of  actio  infactum  ex  leye  Aquilia,

frequently  the  ordinary  name  of  the  might  be  adapted  to  circumstances

action,  etc.,  whose  range  of  useful-  somewhat   different  from   those   to

ness  was  being  thus  extended,  was  which  it  was  usually  applied,

retained,  and  the  word  utilis  adjected,  2  Comp.  iii,  203.
as    utile    indicium  familiae    ercis-       §  79.       Comp.   Gai.    in  fr.    7,    §   7,    D.

cundae,  utile  inter  dictum  ve  quid  in  de  A.   It.   D.   (xli,   1);  §  25,  tit.  I.

loco  publico,  utilis  actio  de  pecunia  afd.

constitula,  etc.  '  Supplied  fiom  Inst.

In  Gai.  iii,  219,  may  be  seen  very  2  Supplied  by  L.,  and  adopted  by

distinctly  the  difference  between  the  most  eds.

II,  §§79-82.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  99

tandam  esse  putant,  id  est  ut  cuius  materia  sit  illius  et  res
quae  facta  sit  uideatur  esse,  idque  maxime  placuit  Sabino  et
Cassio ; 3  alii  uero  eius  rem  esse  putant  qui  fecerit,  idque
maxime  diuersae  scholae  auctoribus 3  uisum  est :  sed  eum
quoque  cuius  materia  et  substantia  fuerit  furti  aduersus  eum
qui  subripuerit  habere  actionem ;  nee  minus  aduersus  eundem
condictionem4  ei  competere,  quia  extinctae  res,  licet  uindi-
cari5  iion  possint,  condici  tanien  furibus  et  quibusdam  aliis
possessoribus  possunt.

80  Nunc  admouendi  sumus  neque  feminam  neque  pupillurn
sine   tutoris   auctoritate   rem   mancipi   alienare   posse ;    nee
mancipi  uero  feminam  quidem  posse,  pupillum  non  posse.

81  ideoque   si   quando   mulier   mutuam   pecuniam    alicui    sine
tutoris  auctoritate  dederit,  quia  facit  earn  accipientis,  cum
scilicet  pecunia  res  nee  mancipi  sit,  contrahit  obligationem.

82  at  si  pupillus  idem  fecerit,  quia  [pecuniam]  non  (facit  actipi-

stantial  element,  is  to  be  looked  at,  that  is  to  say,  that  the
owner  of  the  material  is  to  be  held  the  owner  of  the  manu-
"  factured  article ;  this  is  the  view  that  commended  itself  to
Sabinus  and  Cassius.  Others  are  of  opinion  that  the  thing
manufactured  belongs  to  the  maker  of  it, — the  view  preferred
by  the  authorities  of  the  other  school ;  but  that  he  to  whom
the  material,  the  substance,  belonged  has  not  only  an  actio
furti  but  also  a  condidio  against  him  who  has  surreptitiously
appropriated  it ;  because,  though  things  no  longer  extant
cannot  be  vindicated,  they  may  yet  be  claimed  by  condiction
from  thieves  and  certain  other  possessors.

80  "VVe  have  next  to  be  reminded  that  neither  women  nor  pupils
can  alienate  their  res  mancipi  without  the  auctoritas  of  their
tutors  ;  a  woman,  however,  may  herself  alienate  her  res  nee

81  mancipi,  though  a  pupil  cannot.         Therefore  if  at  any  time
a  woman  lend  money  without  the  authorization  of  her  tutor,
it  is  a  valid  obligation  that  she  thereby  contracts  ;  for,  as  the
money  lent  is  a  res  nee  mancipi,  she  effectually  makes  it  the

82  property  of  the  borrower.         But  if  a  pupil  do  the  same  he

3  See  i,  196,  note  1.  quid  a  se  alienare  possunt,  partly  in

4  Comp.  iv,  §§  4,  5.  the  original,  partly  in  a  later  hand.

5  Comp.  iv,  §§  3,  5.  §  80.     Comp.  i,  192;  ii,  47  ;  Gai.  in  fr.
§§  80-85.     Comp.    §   2,    tit.  I.    QVIBVS              9,  D.  de  auct.  tut.  (xxvi,  8) ;  Vlp.

ALIENARE  LICET  VEL  NON  (ii,   8),  xi,  27  ;  Fr.  Vat.  §  1;  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.

and  see  note  to  §§  62-64.     In  the  §  81.     Comp.  iii,  90.

MS.  §§  80-85  are  introduced  with  §  82.     Comp.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd. ;  Th.  ii,  8,
the  rubric  —R.  V.  De  pupillis  an  all-  §  2.

100

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [II,  §§  82,  83.

(entis)1  sine  tutoris  auctoritate,2  nullam  contrahit  obligationem  :
unde  pupillus  uindicare  quidem  nummos  suos  potest  sicubi

extent,  id  est  eos  petere  suos  ex  iure  Quiritium  esse?

.     unde  de  pupillo  quidem  quaeritur  an  nummos

quos  mutuos  dedit  ab  eo  qui  accepit actione  eos

83  persequi  possit,  quoniam potest.4        At  ex  contra-

rio  ornnes  res  tarn  mancipi  quam  nee  mancipi  mulieribus  et

contracts  no  obligation,  for  he  cannot  pass  the  property  of  the
money  lie  is  advancing  without  his  tutor's  auctoritas ;  therefore
the  pupil  may  vindicate  his  coins  as  far  as  still  extant,  that
is,  may  claim  them  as  his,  in  quiritary  right,  [it  being  incom-
[petent  for  him  to  claim  them  in  an  action  presupposing  the
[validity  of  the  loan.~]  It  is  a  question,  however,  whether,
when  the  money  advanced  as  a  loan  [has  been  consumed']  by  the
receiver,  the  pupil  may  not  then  recover  it  by  a  [personal]
action,  seeing  that  he  can  \_uyithout  his  tutor's  auctoritas  acquire
83  [a  claim  founded  on  the  consumption].  But,  on  the  other
hand,  both  res  mancipi  and  res  nee  mancipi  may  be  paid  to

1  These  words,  with  exception  of
the  last  syllable  (tis),  are  illegible  in
the  MS.,  and  borrowed  from  §  2,  tit.
I.  afd.

2  Those  three  words   not   in   the
Inst.  ;   but   suggested  by  s  in   the
MS.  after  the  tis  of  accipientis,  and
in  themselves  almost  necessary.

3  K.  u.  S.  and  Hu.  concur  in  the
reading  here   given,    though   it    is
difficult  to  discern  in  the  MS.

4  The  latter  part  of  the  par.  (lines
18-23,  p.  73,  of  MS.)  is  to  a  great
extent  illegible.     K.  u.  S.  suggest —
mulier  uero  minime  hoc  modo  repe-
tere  potest,  sed  ita :  DARI SIBI OPOR-
TERE.  Vnde  de  pupillo  quidem  quae-
ritur, an,    si  nummi,  quos  mutuos
dedit,  ab  eo  qui  accepit  bona  fide
cpnsumpti  fuerint,  ex  mutuo  actione
eos  persequi  possit,  quoniam  obliga-
tionem etiam  sine  tutoris  auctoritate
adquirere  sibi  potest.     M.  (K.  u.  S.
p.  xx)  suggests — neque  tamen  stricto
iure  petere  potest  sibi  eos  dari  opor-
tere.     Vnde  de  pupillo  quidem  quae-
ritur an  nummis  quos  mutuos  dedit,
ab  eo  qui  accepit  consumptis,  ciuili
actione  eos  persequi  possit,  quoniam
dari  eos  sibi  oportere  intendere  non
potest.     Hu.  has — mulier  uero  per
mutui  actionem  a  reo  pecuniam  re-

petere  potest,  sed  non  suum  esse
petere.  Vnde  de  pupillo  quidem
quaeritur,  an  nummis  [Us]  quos
mutuos  dedit,  ab  eo  qui  accepit  con-
sumptis,  aliqua  actione  eos  persequi
possit,  quoniam  nisi  a  possidente
uindicari  non  potest.  None  of  these
reconstructions  is  quite  satisfac-
tory.

The  view  given  effect  to  in  the
translation  is  simply  this  :  the  pupil
lending  without  auctoritas  had  no
actio  ex  mutuo,  for  there  was  no
valid  mutuum  ;  but,  if  the  money
was  still  extant  in  the  hands  of  the
borrower,  he  might  recover  it  by  a
uindicatio  as  still  his  own  ;  while  if
it  had  been  consumed  by  the  bor-
rower, and  so  was  no  longer  extant,
he  might  claim  the  amount  of  it  in
a  condictio  sine  causa,  on  the  ground
expressed  by  Pompon,  in  fr.  206,  D.
de  R.I.  (1, 16) — iure  naturae  aequum
est  neminem  cum  alterius  dctrimento
et  iniuria  fieri  locupletiorem.  See
fr.  19,  §  1,  D.  de  reb.  cred.  (xii,  1).
§  83.  Comp.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd. ;  pr.  I.  de
auct.  tut.  (i,  21).  The  rendering  of
the  illegible  half  line  (1.  24,  p.  73)
in  the  MS.  seems  obvious  from  the
context,  and  is  that  adopted  by  both
K.  u.  S.  and  Hu.

II,  §§83-86.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  10

pupillis  sine  tutoris  auctoritate  solui  possunt,  quoniam  meli-
orem  condicionem  suam  facere  eis  etiam  sine  tutoris  auctori-

84  tate  concessum  est.         itaque  si  debitor  pecuniam  pupillo
soluat,  facit  quidem  pecuniam  pupilli ;  sed  ipse  non  liberatur,
quia  nuliam  obligationem  pupillus   sine   tutoris   auctoritate
dissoluere  potest,  quia  nullius  rei  alienatio  ei1  sine  tutoris
auctoritate  concessa  est ;   sed  tamen  si  ex  ea  pecunia  locu-^
pletior  factus  sit  et  adhuc  petat,  per  exceptionem  doli  mali2

85  summoueri  potest.         Mulieri  uero  etiam  sine  tutoris  aucto-
ritate recte  solui  potest,  nam  qui  soluit  liberatur  obligatione  ;
quia  res  nee  inancipi,  ut  proximo  diximus,1  a  se  dimittere
mulier  etiam  sine  tutoris  auctoritate  potest :  quamquam  hoc
ita  est  si  accipiat  pecuniam ;  at  si  non  accipiat,  sed  habere  se
clicat  et   per   acceptilationeni2  uelit   debitorem   sine   tutoris
auctoritate  liberare,  non  potest.

80       Adquiritur  autem  nobis  non  solum  per  nosmet  ipsos  sed
etiam  per  eos  quos  in  potestate  manu  mancipioue  habemus ;

women  and  pupils  without  their  tutors'  auctoritas,  seeing  that
even   without   it   they    are   free   to   better    their   condition.

84  Therefore  if  a  debtor  pay  money  to  a  pupil  be  makes  that
money  the  pupil's :  but  he  is  not  himself  discharged ;  for  a
pupil,  inasmuch  as  he  is  unable  to  alienate  anything  without
his  tutor's  auctoritas,  cannot  without  it  extinguish  any  claim
he  has  under  an  obligation.     But  if  he  be  the  richer  for  that
money,  and  nevertheless  sue  for  it,  his  action  may  be  defeated

85  by  an  exception  of  fraud.         To  a  woman,  however,  payment
may   be   made   quite   effectually  even   without    her    tutor's
auctoritas ;  the  debtor  paying  is  freed    from  his  obligation,
because,  as  has  just  been  explained,  a  woman  does  not  need
tutorial  auctoritas  in  divesting  herself  of  a  res  nee  mancipi.
At  least  this  is  the  case  if  she  have  really  received  the  money  ;
if  she  have  not  received  it,  though  she  may  say  she  has,  and
may  mean  to  discharge  her  debtor  by  acceptilatiori  without
her  tutor's  authority,  she  cannot  do  so.

86  Acquisitions  are  made  for  us  not  only  through  our  own
instrumentality   but    also   through    that    of   persons   in   our

§  84.     Comp.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd. ;  Th.  ii,  8,  '  See  §  80.

§  2.  2  Acceptilation  described  iii,  169.

1  So  quite  distinctly  in  the  MS.;  §§  86-100.    Corep.  tit.  I.  PER  QVAS  PER-
but  Hu.  substitutes— cui  nee  ulllm  SONAS  NOBIS  ADQVIRITVR  (ii,  9).
rei  alienatio  sine,  etc,  §  86.     Gai.  in  fr.  10,  pr.  D.  de  A.  R.  D.

2  See  §  76,  note  3.  (xli,  1);  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.     Conip.  Vlp.
§  85.     Comp.  iii,  17L                                               xix,  §§  18-21.

102  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS     [H,  §§  86-90.

item  per  eos  seruos  in  quibus  usumfructum  habemus ;  item
per  homines  liberos  et  seruos  alienos  quos  bona  fide  posside-

87  mus :   de   quibus   singulis   diligenter   dispiciamus.         Igitur
[quod]  liberi  nostri  quos  in  potestate  habemus,  item  quod
serui  mancipio  accipiunt  uel  ex  traditione  nanciscuntur,  siue
quid  stipulentur  uel  ex  aliqualibet  causa  adquirant,  id  nobis
adquiritur :  ipse  enim  qui  in  potestate  nostra  est  nihil  suum
habere  potest ;  et  ideo  si  heres  institutus  sit  nisi  nostro  iussu
hereditatem  adire  non  potest ;  et  si  iubentibus  nobis  adierit,
hereditas  nobis  adquiritur  proinde  atque  si  nos  ipsi  heredes
instituti  essemus ;    et  conuenienter  scilicet  legatum  per   eos

88  nobis  adquiritur :         dum  tamen  sciamus,  si  alterius  in  bonis
sit  seruus,  alterius  ex  iure  Quiritium,  ex  omnibus  causis  ei

89  soli  per  eum  adquiri  cuius  in  bonis  est.         Non  solum  autem
proprietas  per  eos  quos  in  potestate  habemus  adquiritur  nobis,
sed   etiam   possessio ;    cuius   enim   rei   possessionem   adepti
fuerint,  id  nos  possidere  uidemur ;  unde  etiam  per  eos  usu-

90  capio  procedit.         Per  eas  uero  personas  quas  in  manu  man-

potestas,  inanus,  or  mancipium,  of  slaves  we  are  usufructing,
and  of  freemen  and  other  people's  slaves  possessed  by  us  in
good  faith.  We  shall  deal  with  each  of  those  classes  separately.

87  Whatever  then  our  children  in  potestate  or  our  slaves  receive
in  mancipation  or  acquire  by  delivery,  whatever  claim  they
obtain  either  by  stipulation  or  on  any  other  ground,  is  acquired
for  us  ;  for  he  who  is  in  potestate  can  have  nothing  of  his  own.
Therefore  if  he  be  instituted  heir  under  a  testament  he  cannot
enter  to  the  inheritance  except  on  our  instructions  ;  and  if  we
have  ordered  him  to  enter,  the  inheritance  is  acquired  for  us,
just  as  if  we  ourselves  had  been  instituted  heirs.     In  like

88  manner  a  legacy  to  them  is  acquired  for  us.         But  let  it  be
borne  in  mind  that  if  a  slave  be  in  bonis  of  one  person  and  in
the  quiritarian  ownership  of  another,  it  is  in  every  case  for

89  his  bonitarian  proprietor  alone  that  he  acquires.         It  is  not
only  property  that  is  acquired  for  us  by  those  in  our  potestas,
but  also  possession  :  we  are  held  to  possess  what  they  have
acquired  possession  of;  consequently  through  them  we  can

90  complete   a   usucapion.         Through   the   instrumentality  of

§87.  Gai.  infr.  10,  §1,  D.  deA.  R.  D.  §90.  Nowhere  does  the  reason  appear

(xli,  1).  Comp.  §  189  ;  §§  1,  2,  why  persons  in  manu  mancipioue

tit.  I.  afd. ;  Vlp.  xix,  §§  18,  19.  should  be  less  in  the  possession  of

§  88.  Comp.  §§  40,  41;  Vlp.  xix,  the  paterfamilias  than  his  children

20.  in  potestate.  Comp.  §  94  ;  iii,  199;

§  89.  Gai.  in  fr.  10,  §  2,  D.  de  A.  It.  D.  Modest,  in  fr.  54,  §  4,  D.  de  A.  R.  D.

(xli,  1);  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  (xli,  1).

II,  §§90-93.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOK.  103

cipioue  habemus  proprietas  quidem  adquiritur  noLis  ex  omni-
bus causis,  sicut  per  eos  qui  iu  potestate  nostra  sunt;  an
autem  possessio  adquiratur  quaeri  solet,  quia  ipsas  non  possi-

91  demus.        De  his  autem  seruis  in  quibus  tantum  usumfructum
habemus  ita  placuit,  ut  quidquid  ex  re  nostra  uel  ex  operis
suis    adquirant  id  nobis   adquiratur;    quod   uero   extra   eas
causas,  id  ad  dominum  proprietatis  pertineat :  itaque  si  iste
seruus  heres  institutus  sit,  legatumue  quid  ei  [aut]  donatum

92  fuerit,1  non  mihi  sed  domino  proprietatis  adquiritur.         Idem
placet  de  eo  qui  a  nobis  bona  fide  possidetur,  sine  liber  sit  sine
alienus  seruus:    quod   enim  placuit  de  usufructuario,  idem
probatur  etiam  de  bonae  fidei  possessors :  itaque  quod  extra
duas  istas  causas  adquiritur,  id  uel  ad  ipsum  pertinet  si  liber

93  est,  uel  ad  dominum  si  seruus  est.         Sed  bonae  fidei  pos-
sessor cum  usuceperit  seruum,  quia  eo  niodo  dominus  fit,  ex
omni  causa  per  eum  sibi  adquirere  potest.      usufructuarius

persons  whom  we  hold  in  manu  or  in  mancipio  property  is
acquired  for  us  on  any  title,  just  as  it  is  through  that  of
persons  in  our  potestas  ;  but  it  is  a  question  whether  we  can
acquire  possession  through  their  means,  seeing  they  theni-

91  selves   are   not   possessed   by  us.         As  regards  a  slave  of
whom  we  have  only  a  usufruct,  the  rule  is  that  whatever  he
acquires  by  his  own  labour,  or  by  means  of  funds  with  which
we  have  provided  him,  is  acquired  for  us,  but  that  acquisi-
tions from  any  other  source  belong  to  his  owner  ;  therefore  if
he  be  instituted  heir  or  have  something  bequeathed  or  gifted
to  him,   the  acquisition  enures  not  to  me  but  to  his  pro-

92  prietor.         The   same  is  the  rule  as  regards  a  person  bona
fide  possessed  by  us,  whether  he  be  a  freeman   or  a  slave
belonging   to   a   third   party  :   the  doctrine   applicable  to  a
usufructuary  is  equally  applicable  to  a  possessor  in  good  faith  ;
whatever  therefore  is  acquired  by  a  person  so  possessed  from
any  other  source  than  the  two  referred  to,  belongs  to  himself

93  if  he  be  free,  to  his  owner  if  he  be  a  slave.         When,  how-
ever, the  bonae  fidei  possessor  usucapts  the  slave,  as  he  thus
becomes  his  owner,  he  may  in  future  acquire  by  his  means
from  any  source.     But  a  usufructuary  cannot  usucapt ;  firstly,

§§  91-93.  Gai.  in  fr.  10,  §§  3-5,  D.  de  and  Hu.  retain.  The  correction  in

A.  R.  D.  (xli,  1);  §§  4,  5,  tit.  I.  afd.  the  text  is  from  the  Inst.  Legatum

Comp.  iii,  §§  164,  165;  Yip.  xix,  21.  dare  is  a  phrase  not  unknown  to  the

§  91.  a  The  MS.  has  legatumue  quod  (or  law,  and  is  used  frequently  by  Vlp. ;

quid,  the  contraction,  q,  applying  to  but  it  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in

either)  ei  datum  fuerit,  which  K.  u.  S.  Gai.

104  GA1I  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [If,  §§  93-96.

uero  usucapere  non  potest;  primum  quia  non  possidet  sed
habet  ius  utendi  fruendi ;  deinde  quia  scit  alieuum  seruum

94  esse.         De  illo  quaeritur,  an  per  eum  seruum  in  quo  usum-
fructum  habemus  possidere  aliquam  rem  et  usucapere  possi-
mus,  quia  ipsum  non  possidemus.     per  eum  uero  quern  bona
fide  possidemus   sine  dubio  et  possidere  et  usucapere  pos-
sumus.      loquimur    autem   in   utriusque   persona   secundum
definitionem  quam  proxime  exposuimus,  id  est  si  quid  ex  re

95  nostra  uel  ex  operis  suis  adquirant.         Ex  his  apparet  per
liberos  homines  quos  neque  iuri  nostro  subiectos  habemus
neque  bona  fide  possidemus,  item  per  alienos  seruos  in  quibus
neque  usumfructum    habemus   neque   iustam   possessionem,
nulla  ex  causa  nobis  adquiri  posse,     et  hoc  est  quod  uulgo  dici-
tur  per  extraneam  personam  nobis  adquiri  non  posse,     tantum
de  possessione  quaeritur  an  per  (procured  or  em) l  nobis  adquira-

96  tur.         In  summa  sciendum  est  his  qui  in  potestate  manu
mancipioue  sunt  nihil  in  iure  cedi  posse ;  cum  enirn  istarum

because  he  does  not  possess,  but  has  only  the  right  of  using
and  taking  fruits  and  profits ;    secondly,  because  he  knows

94  that  the  slave  belongs  to  another.         It  is  a  question  whether
we  can  possess  and  usucapt  through  a  usufructed  slave,  for  he
is  not  in  our  possession ;  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  we  can
possess  and  usucapt  through  a  person  whom  we  possess  in
good  faith.     (In  both  cases  of  course  we  are  speaking  under
reference  to   the  limitation  already   mentioned,    namely,   if
their  acquisitions  be  due  to  means  we  have  furnished,  or  to

95  their  own  labour.)         From  what  has  been  said  it  is  apparent
that  we   cannot  on  any  ground  acquire  through  the  instru-
mentality of  freemen  who  are  neither  subject  to  our  potestas
nor  possessed  by  us  in  good  faith,  nor  yet  by  that  of  other
people's  slaves  whom  we  do  not  hold  either  in  usufruct  or  in
lawful  possession.     This  is  the  meaning  of  the  adage  that  we
cannot   acquire  through  a   stranger;    the    only  doubt  being
about  possession, — whether  we  cannot  acquire  it  through  the

96  instrumentality  of  a  procurator.         Finally,  it  is  to  be  observed
that  there  can  be  no  cession  in  court  to  those  who  are  in  our
potestas,  manus,  or  mancipium  ;  for,  as  none  of  them  can  have

§  94.  Comp.  §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.  to  include  a  tutor  or  curator.  But

§  95.  Comp.  Paul,  v,  2,  §  2  ;  §  5,  tit.  I.  persona  libera  never  occurs  in  Gai. ;

afd.  it  is  always  libera  persona.  The

1  Only  the  first  letter  of  procvra-  Inst.  have  per  liberam  personam,

torem  is  legible  in  the   MS.     Hu.  ueluti  per  procuralorem.

makes  it  per  personam  liberam,  so  as  §96.     Comp.  §§  24,  87.

II,  §§  96-100.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

105

personarum  nihil  suum  esse  possit,  conueniens  est  scilicet  ut
nihil  suum  esse1  in  iure  uindicare  possint.

97  [Hac*:,Ms\   tantisper   admonuisse  sufficit  quaemadmodum
singulae  res  nobis  adquirantur :  nam  legatorum  ius,  quo  et
ipso  singulas  res  adquirimus,  opportunius  alio  loco  referemus.
uideamus  itaque  nunc  quibus  modis  per  uniuersitatem  res

98  nobis  adquirantur.         Si  cui  heredes  facti  sunius,1  siue  cuius
bonoruni  possessionem  petierimus,2  siue  cuius  bona  emerimus,3
siue  quern  adoptauerimus,4  sine  quam  in  manum  ut  uxorem

99  receperimus,5   eius   res  ad   nos   transeunt.          Ac   prius   de
hereditatibus  dispiciamus,  quarum  duplex  condicio  est :  nam

100  uel  ex  testamento  uel  ab  intestate  ad  nos  pertinent.         Et

98

anything  of  their   own,  it  follows  that  they  cannot  appear
before  a  magistrate  and  vindicate  a  thing  as  theirs.

97  Thus  far  we  have  said  enough  for  the  present  about  the
[modes  of]  acquiring  things  singly ;  the  matter  of  legacies,
whereby  also  things  are  thus  acquired,  will  be  referred  to
more  conveniently  elsewhere.  Let  us  now  see  how  things  are
acquired  per  universitatem,  [i.e.  on  a  universal  title.]  If  we
have  become  heirs  of  any  one,  or  have  applied  for  possession
of  a  deceased  person's  estate,  or  have  bought  the  estate  of  an
insolvent,  or  have  adopted  any  one  [by  adrogation],  or  have
received  a  woman  into  our  manus  as  our  wife,  his  or  her
effects  become  ours.  We  shall  deal  first  with  inheritances  ;
which  are  of  two  sorts, — those  that  come  to  us  by  testament,
100  and  those  that  belong  to  us  on  intestacy.  To  begin  with,
let  us  see  what  falls  to  us  by  testament.

99

1  The  second  suum  esse,  according
to  M. ,  should  be  deleted  as  a  gloss.

§§  97-100.  See  §  6,  tit.  I.  afd.,  from  which
the  initial  word  of  §  97,  unwritten
in  the  MS.,  is  borrowed.  The  MS.
has  a  vacant  line  before  §  97,  pro-
bably for  a  rubric.

§  97.  The  law  of  legacies  is  introduced
in  §  191.

§  98.  This  par.  contains  an  enumeration
of  the  principal  varieties  of  universal
acquisition  (adquisitio  pc.r  universi-
tatem}.

1  The  succession  of  the  ius  ciuile,
either  under  a  testament  (ii,  §§  104-
190),  or  ab  intestato  (iii,  §§  1-52).

2  Succession  under  the  praetorian
rules  modifying  those   of    the   ius

cluile  ;  the  explanations  of  them  are
dispersed  through  the  passages  re-
ferred to  in  last  note.

3  Bonorum  emptlo  was  purchase
in  gross  of  the  estate  of  an  insolvent ;
see  iii,  §§  77-81.

4  When  a  man  adopted  a  pater-
familias by  adrogation,  the  estate  of

the  latter  (so  far  as  not  annihilated
by  the  capitis  deminutlo)  Ipso  iure
passed  to  the  adrogator  ;  iii,  §§  83,
84,  compared  with  i,  §  99.

5  There  was    a   similar  ipso  iure
passage  of  a  woman's  estate  to  the
man    whose    manus    she    entered,
whether  as  his  wife  or  merely  Jidu-
ciae  causa;  iii,  §§  83,  84,  compared
with  i,  §§  108-115.

106  GAII  IXSTITVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS  [II,  §§  100-103.

prius  est  ut  de  his  dispiciamus  quae  nobis  ex  testamento
obueniunt.

101  Testamentorum  autem  genera  initio  duo  fuerunt :  nam  ant
calatis  comitiis  testamentum  faciebant,  quae  comitia  bis  in
anno  testamentis  faciendis  destinata  erant,  aut  in  procinctu,
id  est  cum  belli  causa  arma  sumebant ;  procinctus  est  enim
expeditus  et  armatus  exercitus.     alterum  itaque  in  pace  et

102  in   otio  faciebant,  alterum  in  proelium  exituri.         Accessit
deinde   tertium  genus   testamenti  quod   per   aes   et   libram
agitur:  qui  [enim']  neque  calatis  comitiis  neque  in  procinctu
testamentum  fecerat,  is,  si   subita   morte  urguebatur,  amico
familiam  suam,  id   est  patrimonium  suum,  mancipio   dabat,
eumque  rogabat  quid  cuique  post  mortem  suam  dari  uellet.
quod  testamentum  dicitur  per  aes  et  libram,  scilicet  quia  per

103  mancipationem    peragitur.         Sed   ilia   quidem   duo   genera
testamentorum  in  desuetudinem  abierunt;    hoc  uero  solum
quod  per  aes  et  libram  fit  in  usu  retentum  est.     sane  nunc
aliter   ordinatur   quam   olim  solebat;  namque  olim  familiae
emptor,  id  est  qui  a  testatore  familiam  accipiebat  mancipio,

101  Originally  testaments  were  of  two  sorts  ;  for  they  were
made  either  in  calatis  comitiis — comitia  that  were  convened
twice  a  year  for  the  purpose,  or  in  procinctu,  when  the  people
were    arming    for    battle ;  for   procinctus    means    an    army
equipped  and  armed.    The  one  sort  therefore  was  made  in  time
of  peace  and  leisure,  the  other  when  the  testator  was  going

102  forth  on  a  campaign.         Afterwards  came  a  third  sort. — that
executed  by  the  copper  and  the  scales  :  he  who  had  not  made
his  testament  either  in  the  comitia  or  on  the  eve  of  battle,
if  urged  by  the  imminent  approach  of  death,  conveyed  his
familia,  i.e.  his  patrimony,  by  mancipation  to  a  friend,  whom
he  instructed  what  he  wished  to  have  given  to  each  of  his
beneficiaries  after  his  death.     This  is  called  a  testament  by
the  copper  and  the  scales  because  it  is  executed  by  mancipa-

103  tion.         The  two  earlier  varieties  are  out  of  date ;  that  by
the  copper  and  the  scales  is  the  only  one  now  in  use.     But  it
is  very  true  that  it  is  not  now  ordered  as  it  was  of  old.
Formerly  the  familiae  emptor,  that  is  to  say  the  person  who
received  the  estate  by  mancipation  from  the  testator,  held  the

§§  101-108.      Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  TESTA-  xv,  27,  §§  1,  2  ;  Paul,  ex  Festo,  vv.

MENTIS  ORDINANDIS  (ii,  10).  Endo  procinctu  and  Prodncta  classis

§§101-103.     Comp.   Vlp.   xx,   2;    §  1,  (Bruns,  pp.  241,  257).

tit.  I.  afd.  ;  Th.  ii,  10,  §  1  ;  Cell.

II,  §§103, 104.]  COMMEXTARII  QVATTVOR.

107

heredis  'locum  obtinebat,  et  ob  id  ei  mandabat  testator  quid
cuique  post  mortem  suam  dari  uellet ;  nunc  uero  alius  heres
testamento  instituitur  a  quo  etiam  legata  relinquuntur,
alius  dicis  gratia  propter  ueteris  iuris  imitationem  familiae
104  emptor  adhibetur.  Eaque  res  ita  agitur :  qui  facit  \testamen-
\turn],  adhibitis,  sicut  in  ceteris  mancipationibus,1  v  testibus
ciuibus  Kornanis2  puberibus  et  libripende,  postquam  tabulas
testament!  scripserit,  mancipat  alicui  dicis  gratia  familiam
suam ;  in  qua  re  his  uerbis  familiae  emptor  utitur :  FAMILIA3

PECVNIAQVE4    TVA    ENDO    MANDATELAM    TVAM    CVSTODELAMQVE

position  of  heir,  and  therefore  it  was  that  the  testator  gave
him  instructions  what  he  wished  to  be  given  to  any  particular
individual  after  his  death.  But  now  one  person  is  instituted
heir  in  the  testament,  and  on  him  the  legacies  are  charged ;
while  another  is  introduced  merely  for  form's  sake,  in  imita-
104  tion  of  the  familiae  emptor  of  the  old  law.  The  procedure
is  as  follows:  the  testator  having  (as  in  all  other  manci-
pations) obtained  the  attendance  of  five  witnesses,  Roman
citizens  above  puberty,  and  a  balance-holder,  after  he  has
written  the  tablets  of  his  testament,  as  a  matter  of  form
mancipates  his  estate  to  some  one.  This  person,  the  familiae
emptor,  makes  use  of  these  words :  '  Your  estate  and  belong-

§  104.     Comp.  Vlp.  xx,  §§  2,  9.

1  Comp.    i,   §   119.     It  is  to  be
observed   that  while   mancipatio  is
spoken  of  there  as  imaqinaria  uen-
ditio,  the  test,  per  aes  et  libram  as
here  described  was  only  imaginaria.
mancipatio  (Vlp.  xx,  2).

2  Citizens  or  Junian  latins,  Vlp.
xx,  8.

3  The  first  part   of  the   formula
stands  in  the  text  as  follows  :  F4M-
ILIAM  PECVNIAMQVE    TVAM,   ENDO
MANDATELA   TVAM  CVSTODELAQVE
MEA,  QVO   TV  IVRE   TESTAMENTVM
F AGERE   POSSIS     .     .    .     ESTO    MI  HI
EMPTA.     The  ra  at  the  end  of  the
initial    words    has    induced    many
eds. ,  including  Hu.,  to  interpolate
before  the  QVO  TV  the  words  ex  iure
Quiritium  esse  aio,  eaque.     But  this
subverts  the  idea  of  the  proceeding.
Studemund's  revision  has  also  shown
the  unwarrantableness  of  the  endo
mandatela,    TVTELA,     custodelaque
mea    of   previous    eds.,     strangely
enough  still  retained   by  Hu.  ;   it
cjuite    destroyed    the  force  of   the

formula, — '  I  take  into  my  charge,
but  subject  to  your  instructions.'

4Gai.,  §  102,  defines  familia  as
patrimonium;  that  makes  it  synony-
mous with  pecunia,  as  defined  by
Paul,  in  fr.  5,  D.  de  V.  S.  (1,  16).
But  the  early  jurists  were  not  given
to  useless  tautologies  ;  and  originally
there  must  have  been  a  distinction.
Kuntze  (R.  R.  ii,  pp.  88,  89)  is  of
opinion  that  familia,  or  res  fami-
liaris,  included  the  family  estate
proper, — the  res  mancipi  attached  to
the  family,  and  not  easily  alienable
by  the  paterfamilias ;  pecunia  the
res  nee  mancipi,  the  lesser  articles
that  made  up  the  bona  held  by  the
paterfamilias  as  dominus,  and  more
fully  at  his  disposal.  Lange  (Roem.
Alt.  i,  pp.  129,  136)  holds  that  in
prehistoric  Rome  the  familia  could
not  be  alienated  by  the  pater-
familias either  inter  uiuos  or  mortis
causa,  but  that  the  bona  (duona)
were  alienable  from  the  first.  I  am
inclined  to  think  that  the  distinc-
tion between  the  familia  and  pecunia

108

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS

[II,  §  104.

MEAM,  QVO  TV  IVKE  TESTAMENTVM  FACERE  POSSIS  SECVNDVM

LEGEM  PVBLICAM,5  HOC  AERE  (et  ut  quidam  adiciunt  AENEAQVE
LIBRA)  ESTO  MIHI  EMPTA;6  deinde  aere  percutit  libram,  idque
aes  dat  testator!  uelut  pretii  loco,  deinde  testator  tabulas
testament!  tenens  ita  dicit :  HAEC  ITA  VT  IN  HIS  TABVLIS

CERISQVE  SCRIPTA  SVNT,  ITA  DO,  ITA  LEGO,  ITA  TESTOR,  ITAQVE
VOS  QVIRITES  TESTIMONIVM  MIHI  PERHIBETOTE  ;7  et  hoc  dicitlir

nuncupatio  :8  nuncupare  est  enim  palain  nominare,  et   sane

ings,  be  they  mine  by  purchase,  with  this  bit  of  copper  (and/
as  some  add, '  these  copper  scales),  subject  to  your  instructions,
but  in  my  keeping,  that  so  you  may  lawfully  make  your
testament  according  to  the  statute  ; '  then  he  strikes  the  scales
with  the  coin,  and  gives  the  latter  to  the  testator  as  if  by
way  of  price.  The  testator,  holding  his  testamentary  writings
in  his  hand,  then  says  :  '  As  is  written  in  these  tablets,  so  do
I  give,  so  do  I  legate,  so  do  I  declare  my  will;  therefore,
Quirites,  grant 'me  your  testimony.'  This  last  act  is  called
the  nuncupation,  nuncupare  meaning  to  declare  publicly;
whatever  the  testator  has  written  in  detail  in  his  testa-

corresponded  pretty  nearly  to  that
between  estate  by  descent  and  pur-
chase in  England,  or  heritage  and
conquest  in  Scotland.

5  The   phrase  SECVNDVM  LEGEM
PVBLICAM,  which  recurs  in  the  for-
mula of  the   nexi   liberatio,   m   iii,
174,  refers  in  all  probability  to  some
provision  of  the  Twelve   Tables, —
either   the  general   one  recited   by
Gai.    §  224,    '  uti   legassit  suae  rei,
ita  ius  esto, '  or  one  not  preserved  to
us  that  dealt  specifically  with  this
particular     mode      of      testament-
making.

6  Empta,  as  already  observed,  (i,
113,note  2,)did  not  originally  and  of
necessity  mean  acquired  in.  property
for  a  money  price  ;    says   Paul,  ex
Festo,   v.    Emere   (Brans,    p.    241)
— '  Emere,    quod  nunc  est  mercari,
antiqui  accipiebant  pro  sumere.'

7  On  the  import   of    the    phrase
testimonium  perkibere  see  Danz,  R.
K.   ii,   pp.    15-17,    and   authorities
there  quoted.     It  appears  from  Paul,
iii,  4a,  §  4,  that  the  witnesses  were
not     silent    onlookers,     but    actual
parties    to    the   transaction ;    their
part,   according  to   Danz,  being  to
affirm  the  regularity  of  the  solem-
nity, —  that    the    testament    was

iustum,    i.e.     made     according     to
law.

8  Huschke  (jVi?:nm)  has  shown  that
.  part  of  the  value  of  every  negotium
per  aes  et  libram,  whether  employed
in  execution  of  a  conveyance  of  pro-
perty inter  uiuos,  a  bond,  or  a  testa-
mentary disposition,  was  its  pub-
licity,— its  sanction  and  attestation
by  the  five  witnesses  who  were  the
representatives  of  the  five  Servian
classes,  and  therefore  of  the  nation.
The  negotium  per  aes  et  libram,
latterly  at  least,  was  in  all  those
eases  a  purely  formal  act ;  its  import
was  defined  by  the  nuncupatio  that
accompanied  it,  and  which  consti-
tuted the  lex  mancipii  (Gai.  i,  §§
140, 172),  nexi,  or  testamenti  (fr.  14,
D.  qui  test.  fac.  poss.  xxviii,  1),  as
the  case  might  be,  and  in  reference  to
which  we  have  in  the  Twelve  Tables
the  provision  (Fest.  v.  Nuncupata,
ed.  Muell.,  p.  173) — cum  nexumfa-
ciet  mancipiumque,  uti  lingua  nun-
cupassit  ita  ius  esto.  The  declared
terms  of  any  jural  transaction  con-
stituted its  lex,  —  the  law  that
governed  it ;  and  it  is  not  improbable
that  it  is  to  this  lex  that  we  owe  the
word  Ivgare, — 'uti  leyassit  suae  rei,
ita  ius  esto. '

II,  §§  104-108.]  COMMENTAKII    QVATTVOR.  109

quae  testator  specialiter  in  tabulis  testament!  scripserit   ea

105  uidetur  general!  sermone  nominare  atone  confirmare.         In
testibus  a'lLem  non  debet  is  esse  qui  in  potestate   est  aut
familiae  emptoris  aut  ipsius  testatoris,  quia,  propter  neteris
iuris  imitationem,  totum  hoc  negotium  quod  agitur  testament!
ordinandi  gratia  creditur  inter  familiae  emptorem  agi  et  testa-
torem :   quippe   olim,  ut  proxime  diximus,   is   qui   familiam
testatoris    mancipio    accipiebat    heredis    loco    erat;    itaque

106  reprobatum  est  in  ea  re  domesticum  testimonium.         unde
et  si  is  qui  in  potestate  patris  est  familiae  emptor  adhibitus
sit,  pater  eius  testis  esse  non  potest ;  ac  ne  is  quidem  qui  in
eadem  potestate,  est,  uelut  frater  eius.     sed  et  si  filiusfamilias
ex  castrerisi  peculio1  'post  inissionem  faciat  testamentum,  nee
pater  eius  recte  testis  .adhibetur  nee  is  qui  in  potestate  patris

107  est.         De  libripende  eadem  quae  et  de  testibus  dicta  esse

108  iutellegemus :  nam  et  is  testiurn  numero  est.         Is  uero  qui
in  potestate  heredis  aut  legatarii  est,  cuiusue  heres  ipse  aut

mentary  tablets  he  is  regarded  as  declaring  and  confirming

105  by  this  general  statement.         No  one  ought  to  figure  among
the  witnesses  who  is  in  the  potestas  either  of  the  familiae
emptor  or  of  the  testator,  seeing  that,  in  imitation  of  the  old
law,  the  whole  business,  of  ordering  the  testament  is  held  to  be
between  those  two  parties  ;   for,  as  already  said,  in  old  time
he  who  received  the  estate  by  mancipation  from  the  testator
occupied  the  position  of  heir.     It  is  for  this  reason  that,  in  a
matter  of  this  sort,  the  testimony  of  members  of  the  same

106  household  has  been  rejected.         Accordingly  if  the  person
acting  as  familiae  emptor  happen  to  be  in  potestate,  his  father
cannot  be  a  witness ;  neither  can  any  one  in  the  same  potestas
as  he, — for  instance,  his  brother.     And  even  in  the  case  of  a
filiusfamilias  making  a  testament  disposing  of  his  peculium
castrense  after  his  discharge  from  the  army,  neither  his  father
nor  any  person  in  his    father's  potestas   can   officiate    as    a

107  witness.          What  has   been   said   about  witnesses   applies
equally  to  the  balance-holder ;  for  he  also  is  reckoned  of  their

108  number.         But  a  man  who  is  in  the  potestas  of  an  heir  or
legatee,  or  to  whose  potestas  either  of  these  is  subject,  or  who

§  105.     Comp.  Vlp.  xx,  §§  3-5  ;  §  9,  tit.  and   which    he    dealt    with   as   de

I-  afd.  facto  his  own  ;   see   Vlp.    xx,    10  ;

§  106.     See  references  in  last  note.  Paul,  iii,  4a,  §  3  ;  pr.   I.  quib.  non

1  Castrense    peculium     was     the  est  permits,  (ii,  12).

separate  estate  amassed  by  a  filius-  §  107.     Comp.  Vlp.  xx,  3.

familias  while  on  military  service,  §  108.     Comp.  §§  10,  11,  tit.  I.  afd.

110  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVlilS  CIVIUS   [ll,  §§  108-111.

legatarius  in  potestate  est,  quique  in  eiusdem  potestate  est,
adeo  testis  et  libripens  adhiberi  potest,  ut  ipse  quoque  heres
aut  legatarius  iure  adhibeantur.  sed  tamen  quod  ad  heredem
pertinet  quique  in  eius  potestate  est  cuiusue  is  in  potestate
est,  minime  hoc  iure  uti  debemus.

109  Sed  haec  diligens  obseruatio  in  ordinandis  testamentis  mili-
tibus  propter  nimiam  inperitiam  constitutionibus  principum
remissa  est :  nam  quamuis  neque  legitimum  numerum  testium
adliibuerint  iieque  uendiderint  familiam  neque  nuncupauerint

110  testamentum,  recte  nihilo  minus  testantur.         Praeterea  per-
missum  est  iis  et  peregrinos  et  latinos  instituere  heredes  uel
iis  legare ;  cum  alioquin  peregrini  quidem  ratione  ciuili  pro-
hibeantur  capere  hereditatem  legataque,  latini  uero  per  legem

111  luniam.          Caelibes1    quoque,  qui   lege   lulia2   hereditatem
legataque  capere  uetantur,  item  orbi,3  id  est  qui  liberos  noil
habent,  quos  lex — .4

is  in  potestate  of  the  same  person  as  either  of  them,  may  be
employed  as  a  witness  or  balance-holder;  nay,  even  an  heir
or  legatee  himself  may  lawfully  so  officiate.  So  far,  however,
as  regards  an  heir,  as  well  as  those  in  his  potestas  and  the
person  to  whose  potestas  he  is  subject,  we  ought  to  take
advantage  of  this  right  as  seldom  as  possible.

109  But  such  strict  observance  of  the  formalities  in  ordering  of
testaments  is  dispensed  with  by  imperial  enactments  in  the
case  of  soldiers,  on  account  of  their  great  inexperience  in
business  matters  ;  for  although  they  may  neither  have  pro-
vided the  number  of  witnesses  required  by  law,  nor  manci-
pated  their  familia,  nor  nuncupated  their  will,  they  do  not

110  the  less  test  validly.         Further,  they  are  allowed  to  institute
latins   and   peregrins   as   their   heirs,  or  to  bequeath  them
legacies  ;  whereas  in  the  ordinary  case  peregrins   are   pro-
hibited by  the  civil    law  from  taking  an  inheritance  or  a
legacy,  and  latins  similarly  prohibited  by  the  Junian  law.

111  Unmarried  persons,  though  forbidden  by  the  Julian  law  to
take  an  inheritance  or  a  legacy,  and  orbi  or  childless  persons,

§§  109-111.    Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  MILITARI      §  111.     The  conclusion  of  what  Gai.  said
TESTAMENTO  (ii,  11).     Those  three  on   the   subject   of   soldier's    testa-
pars,  are  preceded  by  the  rubric  de  nients  fails  us,  a  leaf  of  the  MS.  (pp.
testamentis  militum,    apparently  in  80*  and  80**)  being  lost,
the  same  hand.  '  Comp.  §§  144,  286  ;  Vlp.  xxii,  3.

§109.     Comp.    §    114;  Vlp.    xxiii,   10;  -  See  i,  145,  note  1.

pr.  tit.  1.  afd.  3  Comp.  §  286a.

§  110.     Comp.    i,   23  ;  ii,   §§  218,   275  ;  4  Hu.    completes  the  par.    thus  :

Vlp.  xxii,  §§  2,  3.  quos  lex  Papiaplus  quarn  dimidiaa

II,  §  112.]

COMMEXTAKII  QVATTVOR.

Ill

112 ex   auctoritate   diui  Hadrian!

senatusconsultum  factum  est  quo  perinissum  est  (sui  iuris}1
feminis  etiam  sine  coemptione  testamentum  facere,  si  modo
non  minores  essent  annorum  xn,  tutoribus  auctoribus ; 2

112

whom  [the  Papian  law  does  not  allow  to  take  more,  than  a  half
[of  an  inheritance  or  bequest  that  has  been  left  to  them,  may  take,
[in  full  under  a  soldier's  testament.^

[It  is  not  every  one  that  can  make  a  testament.     TJwse  can-
[not  do  so  who  are  not  sui  but  alieni  iuris, — our  children,  that

is  to  say,  whether  they  be  so  by  birth  or  by  adoption.  Neither
'can  persons  sui  iuris,  who  are  under  the  age  of  puberty,  i.e.

'males  under  fourteen  and  females  under  twelve.  Neither  can
[persons  who  are  insane,  except  during  their  lucid  intervals.
[At  one  time  neither  could  women  of  full  age,  if  their  tutors
[dissented,  without  going  through  the  formality  of  coemption,
[and  thus  replacing  their  old  tutors  with  others  of  their
[own  selection,  whose  auctoritas  they  could  command.  But
[eventually}  a  senatusconsult  was  passed,  on  the  proposition
of  the  emperor  Hadrian,  allowing  women  who  were  sui  iuris
to  make  a  testament  without  coemption,  provided  they  were
not  under  the  age  of  twelve,  with  the  auctoritas  of  their  tutors.

paries  hereditatis  legatorumque
capere  uetat,  ex  militis  testamento
solidum  capiunt.  See  §§  286,  286a.

§§  112, 113.  Conip.  tit.  l.QJ'IBVSNON  EST
PERMISSVM  TEST  AMENTA  FACERE
(ii,  12).  It  is  probable  that  on  the
missing  leaf,  and  on  page  81,  of
which  all  but  the  last  three  lines
are  illegible,  Gai.  spoke  of  the  testa-
mentary incapacity  of  persons  alieni
iuris,  lunatics,  and  pupils.  In  the
Epit.  ii,  2,  we  have  as  follows :
§  1.  Id  quoque  statutum  est,  quod
non  omnibus  liceat  facere  testa-
mentum :  sicuf  sunt  hi  qui  sui  iuris
non  sunt  sed  alieno  iuri  subiecti,  hoc
est  filii  turn  ex  nobis  nati  quarn
adoptiui.  §  2.  Item  testamenta
facere  non  possunt  impuberes,  id  est
minores  quattuordecim  annorum,
aut  puellae  duodecim.  §  3.  Item  et  hi
quifuriosi,  id  estmenteinsanifuerint,
non  possunt  facere  testamenta.  sed
hi  qui  insani  sunt,  per  interualla
qmbus  sani  sunt  possunt  facere  testa-
menta. Comp.  Vlp.  xx,  §§  10-16.

§  112.  Comp.  i,  115a;  Paul,  iii,  4a,
§  1.  The  probable  import  of  the
commencement  of  the  par.  is  in-
dicated in  the  translation.

1  Stud,  notes  that  there  is  room
for  puberibus ;  but  the  context  ex-
cludes the  possibility  of  such  a  word
having  been  used.  Hu.  suggests
capite  non  minutis,  as  less  '  insipid  '
than  sui  iuris.

'-  For  tutoribus  auctoribus  the  MR.
lias  simply  tab.  Most  eds.  have
treated  those  letters  as  introduced
per  incuriam,  under  the  idea  that
xn  tab.  (meaning  the  Twelve
Tables)  came  so  often  from  the
scribe's  pen,  that  the  tab.  naturally
followed  the  xn  when  this  was  used
in  a  different  collocation.  But  we
have  tutore  auctore  represented  con-
stantly by  ta.,  (as  in  the  very  next
par. );  consequently  there  seems  little
difficulty  in  rendering  tab.  by
tutoribus  auctoribus.  No  doubt  the
phrase  is  unusual ;  but  we  have  it
in  i,  §  115,  and  to  all  appearance  it
occurs  again  in  ii,  §  118,  which  see.
Omitting  those  two  words,  Hu.
introduces  tutore  auctore  between
testamentum  and  facere.  It  would
rather  appear  from  the  terms  of  §
122,  that  after  the  senatusconsult
this  a.uctoritas  could  rarely,  if  ever,
be  withheld.

112

GA1I  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVIL1S    [I!,  §§  112-114.

[scilicet  ut    quae  tutela  liberatae3   non   essent   ita4   testari

113  deberent.]5         Videntur  ergo  melioris  condicionis  esse  femi-
nae    quam   masculi;    nam    masculus   minor   annorum    xim
testamentum  facere  non  potest,  etiamsi  tutore  auctore  testa-
mentum   facere   uelit;   femina  uero  post1  xn  annum   testa-
ment! faciendi  ius  nanciscitur.2

114  Igitur   si   quaeramus    an    ualeat    testamentum,    inprimis
aduertere  debemus  an  is  qui  id  fecerit  habuerit  testament!
factionem:1  deinde,  si  habuerit,  require mus  an  secundum  iuris
ciuilis  regulam  testatus  sit,  exceptis  militibus,  quibus  propter
nimiam  inperitiam,  ut  diximus,2  quomodo  uelint  uel  quomodo
possint  permittitur  testamentum  facere.

(This  requirement,  of  course,  applied  only  to  those  who  had

113  not  been  released  from  tutelage.)         Women,  therefore,  seem
to   be  in  a  better  position  than   men;    for   a   male   under
fourteen  cannot  make  a  testament,  even  though  he  may  wish
to  do  so  tutore  auctore,  whereas  a  female  acquires  the  right  of
testament-making  on  reaching  twelve.

114  In  considering  whether  or  not  a  testament  is  valid  we  must
inquire,   firstly,    whether   the    maker   had   testamcnti  factio ;
secondly,  whether  he  has  made  it  according  to  the  rules  of
the  civil  law,  (unless  he  be  a  soldier,  who,  as  already  said,  on
account  of  his  inexperience,  is  allowed  to  make  a  testament
in  any  way  he  will  or  can.)

3  Comp.  i,  194  ;  Vlp.  xxix,  3.

4  So  the  MS.  ;  but  most  eds.  sub-
stitute tutore  auctore.     This  is  un-
necessary with  tut.  auctoribus  in  the
preceding  clause.^

5  The  words  scilicet  .  .  .  deberent
look  like  a  gloss.

113.  Comp.  Vlp.  xx,  §§  12,  15  ;  pr.
tit.  I.  afd.

1  The  MS.  has  potest ;  hence  Hu.
is  induced    to   read— femina    uero
potest;  [nam  si  est]  XII  annorum,
testamenti  fac'umdi  [tutore  auctore]
ius  nanciscitur.

2  There  is  a  vacant  line  in  the
MS.    between    this    and    the    next
par.

114.  Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  4,  D.  qui  test,
fac.  poss.  (xxviii,  1).

1  It    is  very  usual   to    say   that
testamenti  factio  was  of  three  sorts—

(1)  capacity  to  make   a  testament,

(2)  capacity  to   be   instituted   heir
or  made  a  legatee  in   it,   and   (3)

capacity  to  act  as  a  witness  to  it.
There  seems  to  be  no  sufficient
warrant  for  the  third.  All  that
Vlp.  says  (xx,  2)  is  that  the  wit-
nesses must  be  persons  with  whom
the  testator  has  test,  factio,  i.e.  whom
he  may  lawfully  make  his  heirs  or
legatees.  No  doubt  Vlp.  also  ob-
serves (xx,  8)  that  a  Junian  latin
might  witness  a  will,  quonium  cum
eo  test,  factio  est ;  and  it  is  assumed
that  this  must  have  been  test,  factio
of  the  third  sort,  because  he  had  not
the  first.  But  then  he  had  the
second  ;  he  might  be  instituted  heir,
(Vlp.  xxii,  3,)  although  he  could
not  take  the  inheritance  unless  he
became  a  citizen  within  a  certain
limited  period.  Test,  factio  of  the
first  sort  is  called  by  the  civilians
actiua,  that  of  the  second  passiua.
Comp.  §  4,  I.  de.  qual.  et  diff.  her.
(ii,  19).

2  See  §  109.

II,  §§  115-119.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  113

115  Non  tamen  ut  iure  ciuili  ualeat  testamentum  sufficit  ea
obseruatio  quam  supra  exposuimus  de  familiae  uenditione  et

1 1 6  de  testibus  et  de  uuncupationibus : '         ante  omnia  requireu-
dum  est  an  institutio  heredis  sollemni  more  facta  sit ;  nam
aliter  facta  institutione,  nilril  proficit  familiam  testatoris  ita
uenire  testesque  ita  adhibere  et  mmcupare  ita  testamentum  ut

117  supra  diximus.         Sollemnis  autem  institutio  haec  est :  TITIVS
HERES    ESTO  ;   sed   et   ilia  iam   conprobata  uidetur :   TITIVM
HEREDEM   ESSE   IVBEO ;    at  ilia  non  est   conprobata:    TITIVM
HEREDEM  ESSE  VOLO  ;  sed  et  illae  a  plerisque  inprobatae  sunt :

TITIVM  HEREDEM  INSTITVO,  item  :    HEREDEM  FACIO.

118  Obseruandum  praeterea  est,  ut  si  mulier  quae  in  tutela  est
faciat   testamentum,  tutoribus   auctoribus   id  facere   debeat:1

119  alioquin  inutiliter  iure  ciuili  testabitur.         Praetor  tamen  si
septem  signis  testium  signatum  sit  testamentum,  scriptis  here-

115  It  is  not  enough,  however,  to  render  a  testament  valid
according  to  the  ius  ciuile  that  all  the  rules  we  have  above
explained   about  sale   of  the  familia,  witnesses,  and   nun-

116  cupations  have  been  observed.         Above  all  things  we  must
see  whether  the  institution  of  the  heir  has  been  made  with
the  customary  solemnity ;  if  it  has  been  made  otherwise,  then
it  avails  nothing  that  the  testator's  familia  has  been  sold,  the
witnesses  adhibited,  and  the  testament  nuncupated  in  the

117  way  previously  described.         Here  is  a  solemn  institution:
'  Be  Titius  my  heir ; '  and  this  one,  '  I  order  that  Titius  shall
be  my  heir,'  seems  also  to  be  approved ;  but,  '  I  wish  Titius  to
be  heir,'  is  not  approved,  nor  by  most  persons  are  these,  '  I
institute  Titius  as  heir,'  arid  '  I  make  Titius  my  heir.'

118  It   is  further   to  be  observed  that  if  a  woman  who  is  in
tutelage  make  a  testament,  she  must  do  so  with  auctoritas  of
her  tutors ;  otherwise,  according  to  the  civil  law,  her  testa-

119  rnent  will  be  useless.         If,  however,  it  be  sealed  with  the
seals  of  seven  witnesses,  the  praetor  will  grant  possession  of

§§115-137.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  EXHEREDA-  i  The  MS.  has  tutores  habet  facere

TWNE  LIBERORVM  (ii,  13).  debeat.      K.   u.    S.    and   Hu.,    like

§  115.     Comp.  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  previous  eds.,    read   tutore  auctore

1  See  §  104.  fac.  deb.    I  prefer  the  reading  given

§  116.     Comp.    §   229  ;  Vlp.    xxiv,   15  ;  above  ;   the   original  probably  was

§  34,  I.  de.  legal,  (ii,  20).  tut.   ab.   (or  tab.)  id  facere  debeat,

§117.     Comp.   Vlp.  xxi.     All  this'm-  which  has  been  wrongly  apprehended

anis  obseruatio  '  abolished  by  Con-  by  the  copyist  in  transcribing.     See

stantius,  1.  15,  C.  de  test,  (vi,  23).  §  112,  note  2.
§  118.     Comp.  i,  192  ;  ii,  112  ;  iii,  43  ;       §  119.    Comp.  §  147  ;  Cic.  //.  Verr.  i,  45,

Vlp.  xx,  16.  §  117  ;  Vlp.  xxiii,  6  ;  xxviii,  6.

II

114

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS

[II,  §  119.

dibus  secundum  tabulas  testament!  ~bonorum  possessionem^  pol-
licetur,2  [et]  si  nemo  sit  ad  quern  ab  intestate  iure  legitimo
pertineat  hereditas,  uelut  frater  eodem  patre  natus  aut  patruus
aut  fratris  filius,  ita  poterunt  scripti  heredes  retinere  heredi-
tatem :  nam  idem  iuris  est  et  si  alia  ex  causa  testamentum
non  ualeat,  uelut  quod  familia  non  uenierit  aut  nuncupationis

the  defunct's  estate  to  the  testamentary  heirs  in  terms  of  the
will.  If  in  such  a  case  there  be  no  one  on  whom  the  estate
devolves  by  law  as  heir  ab  intcstato,  say  a  brother  by  the
same  father,  or  a  father's  brother,  or  a  brother's  son,  the  heirs
nominated  in  the  testament  will  be  in  a  position  to  retain  the
inheritance ;  for  the  rule  is  the  same  here  as  if  the  testa-
ment were  invalid  on  some  other  ground,  as,  for  instance,
failure  on  the  part  of  a  testator  to  mancipate  his  familia  or

1  Bonorum  possessio  was  one  of
the  most  important  institutions  of
praetorian  equity,  often  spoken  of  as
praetorian  succession,  in  contradis-
tinction to  the  hereditas  or  succession
of  the  ius  ciuile,  — the  right  of  bene-
ficial enjoyment  of  adeceased  person's
estate,  and  that  tuitione  praetoris,
even  though  the  legal  title  of  heir
might  for  some  reason  be  awanting.

It  was  of  three  varieties  —  (1)
b.  p.  secundum  tabulas,  (2)6.  p.  con-
tra tabulas,  and  (3)  b.  p.  inlestati.

The  first — that  referred  to  in  this
par.,  and  again  in  §  147  —  was
granted  when  the  wishes  of  a  testator
were  in  danger  of  being  frustrated
because  of  some  informality  of  his
testament  which  rendered  it  in  law
invalid  ;  the  testamentary  heir  in
such  a  case  often  obtained  a  grant
of  honor,  possessio  according  to  the
tenor  of  the  will,  which  prevented
the  succession  passing  to  the  heir  ab
intestato.

The  second  was  granted  in  cases
where  the  testament  was  in  point
of  form  unchallengeable,  yet  in  its
provisions  inequitable,  as  when  an
emancipated  child  of  the  testator's
was  passed  over  (§  135) ;  the  testa-
ment was  not  upset,  because  iure
ciuili  it  was  quite  valid,  but  the
praeteritus  was  allowed  to  partici-
pate to  a  greater  or  smaller  extent
in  the  benefits  of  the  succession  by
bon.  pos.  contra  tabulas,  i.e.  against
the  tenor  of  the  will.

The  third  was  granted  on  intestacy

to  those  who  were  not  heirs  ab  in-
testato according  to  the  rules  of  the
ius  ciuile,  but  preferred  to  such
persons  by  the  more  equitable  pro-
visions of  the  praetor's  edict ;  see
examples  in  iii,  §§  26-31.

As  Gai.  points  out  in  iii,  32,  the
grantee  of  any  of  those  bonor.  pos-
sessiones  did  not  thereby  become
heir,  nam  praetor  heredes  facere  non
potest.  He  was  therefore  unable  to
make  use  of  the  legal  remedies
available  to  heirs  for  the  realization
and  protection  of  their  rights ;  so
that  it  became  necessary  for  the
praetor  to  devise  new  remedies  on
his  behalf.

These  were  in  some  respects  more
efficient  than  those  competent  to
heirs.  Whence  this  result, — that  a
man,  whose  position  as  heir  under
the  civil  law  was  unchallenged  and
unchallengeable,  often  deemed  it
advisable  to  fortify  it  with  a  grant  of
bon.  possessio,  that  so  he  might  have
the  advantage  of  the  remedies  com-
petent to  a  bonor.  possessor  (iii,  34).

The  subject  of  honor,  possessio  is
dealt  with  in  tit.  I.  iii,  9.

-  Bon.  pos.  polliceri,  in  integrum
restitutionem  polliceri,  and  such
like,  are  technical  expressions  for
the  praetor's  declaration  in  his
Edict  that  in  such  or  such  cases  he
would  grant  such  or  such  a  remedy.
To  say  that  he  '  promises '  it,  might
lead  to  misunderstanding  ;  therefor^
'  grants '  or  '  will  grant '  is  pre-
ferred in  the  translation.

II,  §§  120-122  ]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  115

120  uerba  testator  locutus  non  sit.         Sed  uideamus  an1  etiamsi
frater  aut  patruus  extent  potiores  scriptis  heredibus  habeantur  :
rescripto  enim  imperatoris  Antonini2  significatur  eos  qui  secun-
dum  tabulas  testament!  non  iure  factas  bonorum  possessionem
petierint,  posse  aduersus  eos  qui  ab  intestate  uindicant  here-

121  ditatem  defendere  se  per  exceptionem  doli  mali.3         quod  sane
quidem  ad  masculorum  testaraenta  pertinere  certum  est ;  item
ad  feminarum  quae  ideo  non  utiliter  testatae  sunt  quod  uerbi
gratia   familiam   non  uendiderint   aut   nuncupationis  uerba
locutae  non  siut :  an  autem  et  ad  ea  testamenta  feminarum
quae  sine  tutoris  auctoritate  fecerint  haec  constitutio  pertineat

122  uidebimus.1         Loquimur  autem  de  his  scilicet  feminis  quae
non  in  legitima  parentium  aut  patronorum  tutela  sunt,  sed  de
his  quae   alterius   generis   tutores   habent,  qui  etiam  inuiti
coguntur  auctores  fieri:1  alioquin  parentem  et  patronum  sine
auctoritate  eius  facto  testamento  non  summoueri  palam  est.

120  pronounce  the  words  of  nuncupation.         But  is  it  the  case
that  a  brother  or  a  father's  brother,  supposing  them  to  exist,
are  really  preferred  to  the  heirs  named  in  the   testament  ?
[Hardly] ;  for  by  a  rescript  of  our  emperor  Antonine's  it  is
declared  that  persons  who  have  applied  for  possession  of  a
defunct's  estate  in  terms  of  a  testament  not  executed  accord-
ing to  law,  can  defend  themselves  with  an  exception  of  fraud

121  against  those  claiming  the  inheritance  ab  intestato.        That
this  rescript  applies  to  testaments  of  men  is  certain  ;  and  it  is
equally  certain  that  it  applies  to  any  made  by  women  that

•"  are  invalid  because  they  have  omitted  to  mancipate  their
familia  or  to  recite  the  words  of  nuncupation :  but  whether
it  applies  to  such  testaments  of  theirs  as  have  been  made
without  tutorial  auctoritas  is  a  matter  for  consideration.

122  We  are  referring,  of  course,  to  women  who  are  not  under  the
tutory-at-law  of  parents  or  patrons,  but  have  tutors  of  some
other  sort, — tutors  who  may  be  compelled   to   grant   their
auctoritas  whether  they  will  or  not :  that  a  parent  or  patron
is  not  to  be  displaced  by  a   testament   made  without  his
auctoritas  is  quite  clear.

§  120.     Comp.  §  149,  and  notes.  latter,  as  the  former  is  referred  to

1  Hu.  and  several  other  eds.  in-  in  §  195  as  diuus  Pius.
terpolate   non    after     an,    entirely  3  See  §  76,  note  3.
subverting    the    meaning     of    the  §  121.     Comp.  §§  104,  115,  118.

par.  l  The  question  is  answered  indi-

2  Doubtful  whether  it   be  Anto-  rectly  in  next  par.
ninus  Pius  or  Marcus  Aurelius  that  §  122.     Comp.  i,  §§  190,  192.
is  here  referred   to  ;  probably   the  l  Comp.  §  115.

116  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [II,  §§  123, 124.

123  Item  qui  filium  in  potestate  habet  curare  debet  ut  eum  uel
heredem  instituat  uel  nominatim1  exlieredet ;  alioquin  si  eum
silentio  praeterierit    inutiliter   testabitur:    adeo   quidem   ut
nostri  praeceptores2  existiment,  etiamsi  uiuo  patre  filius  de-
functus  sit,  neminem  heredem  ex  eo  testamento  existere  posse,
quia  scilicet  statim  ab  initio  non  constiterit  institutio;  sed
diuersae    sckolae    auctores,2   si   quidem  filius   mortis  patris
tempore  uiuat,  sane  inpedimento  eum  esse  scriptis  heredibus
[et   ilium  ab  intestate  heredem  fieri]3  confitentur;  si  uero
ante   mortem   patris   interceptus   sit,   posse    ex    testamento
hereditatem  adiri  putant,  nullo  iam  filio  inpedimento ;  quia
scilicet  existimant  [wo?i]4  statim  ab  initio  inutiliter  fieri  testa-

124  mentum  filio  praeterito.         Ceteras'uero  liberorum  personas
si  praeterierit  testator  ualet  testamentum.     [sed]  praeteritae
istae  personae  scriptis  heredibus  in  partem  adcrescunt,1  si  sui

123  Moreover,  a  testator  who  has  a  son  in  potestate  must  take
care  either  to  institute  him  as  heir  or  by  name  to  disinherit
him ;  if  he  pass  him  over  in  silence  his  testament  will  be
useless.     So  far  do  the  authorities  of  OUT  school  carry  this
doctrine  that,  even  though  the  son  predecease  his  father,  they
hold  there  can  be  no  heir  under  the  testament,  the  institution
having  been  void  from  the  first.     Those  of  the  other  school,
however,  while  they  admit  that,  if  the  son  survive  his  father,
the  heirs  nominated  in  the  testament  will  be  cut  out  by  him
and  he  take  ab  intestato,  yet -are  of  opinion  that,  if  he  prede-
cease his  father,  the  inheritance  may  be  taken  up  under  the
testament,  the  son  being  no  longer : an  obstacle;  for  their  view
is  that  a  testament  is  not  ab  initio  invalid  because  a  son  of

124  the  testator's  has  been  passed  over.         If,  however,  it  be  not
a  sou  but  other  descendants   [in  potestate']  that  have  been
passed  over,  the  testament  is  valid ;  but  those  passed  over
come  in  for  a  share  by  accretion  along  with  the  heirs  nomi-

i§  123.     Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.Vlp.  xxii,  :  This  did  not  mean  '  by  name'

16.     From  these  it  appears  that  the  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  words,

Sabinian  doctrine,  approved  by  Gai.,  §  127  ;  and  probably  it  was  enough

was  still  adhered  to  as  the  true  one.  that  there  was  a  distinct  indication

The  sui   heredes  were  joint-owners  who  was  intended.     See  Gai.  in  fr.

with  the  paterfamilias  during  his  24,  D.  de  man.  uind.  (xl,  4).

lifetime  (§    157),    but  without  ad-  2  See  i,  196,  note  1.

ministration;    and    on    his    death  3  With  P.,  I  ani  disposed  to  regard

they  simply  continued  their  owner-  the  words  within  brackets  as  a  gloss,

ship   (Paul,   in  fr.  11,  D.  de  lib.  et  *  This  non  is  approved  by  all  eds.
post,   xxviii,    2),    unless,    by  testa-       §  124.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxii,  17  ;  pr.  tit.  1.

mentary   disherison,    he   had  effec-  afd.

tually  deprived  them  of  their  right.  *  There  was  accretion  to  the  heirs,

So  it  was  at  least  in  the  case  of  sons.  — their  number  was  increased.

II,  §§  124-126.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOK.  117

heredes2  shit  in  uirilcm,  si  extranei  in  dimidiam :  id  est,  si
quis  tres  uerbi  gratia  filios  heredes  instituerit  et  filiam
praeterierit,  filia  adcrescendo  pro  quarta  parte  fit  heres,  et
ea  ratione  id  consequitur  quod  ab  intestate  patre  mortuo
habitura  esset ;  at  si  extraneos  ille  heredes  instituerit  et  filiam
praeterierit,  filia  adcrescendo  ex  dimidia  parte  fit  heres.  quae
de  filia  diximus  eadem  et  de  nepote  deque  omnibus  liberorum
personis  seu  masculini  seu  feminini  sexus  dicta  intellegemus.

125  Quid   ergo   est?       licet    eae,    secundum    ea  quae    diximus,
scriptis  heredibus  dimidiam  partem  modo  detrahant,  tamen
praetor  eis  contra  tabulas  bonorum  passessionem  promittit,
qua  ratione  extranei  heredes  a  tota  hereditate  repelluntur  ct

126  efficiuntur  sine  re  heredes.1         et  hoc  iure  utebamur,  quasi  l
nihil  inter  feminas  et  masculos  interesset :  sed  nuper  imperator
Antoninus2  significauit  rescripto  suas3  nonplus  nancisci  femi-
nas per  bonorum  possessionem  quam  quod  iure  adcrescendi

nated  in  the  will, — an  equal  share  if  these  be  sui  heredes,  a
half  of  the  whole  inheritance  if  they  be  strangers.  In  other
words,  if  a  man  have  instituted  say  his  three  sons  as  his
heirs,  but  have  passed  over  his  daughter,  she  by  accretion
becomes  heir  to  the  extent  of  a  fourth  of  the  inheritance,  and
by  this  means  obtains  exactly  what  she  would  have  been
entitled  to  on  her  father's  death  had  he  died  intestate ;  but  if  a
testator  have  instituted  strangers  as  his  heirs,  and  passed  over
his  daughter,  she  by  accretion  becomes  heir  for  a  half.  And
as  with  a  daughter,  so  with  a  grandson  or  any  other  descen-

125  dant,  whether  male  or  female,  [except  a  son.]         But  what  of
that  ?     Although,  according  to  this  statement  of  the  law,  they
cut  the  heirs  nominated  in  the  testament  out  of  only  a  moiety
of  the  inheritance,  yet  the  praetor  promises  them  possession
of  the  defunct's  estate  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  the  will,  so
that  the  stranger-heirs  are  really  excluded  from  the  whole
inheritance,  and  become  heirs  in  name  only,  heredes  sine  re.

126  This  was  the  law  we  used  to  act  upon,  as  if  there  were  no
difference   between   males   and   females ;    but   recently   our
emperor  Antonine  has  intimated,  by  a  rescript  of  his,  that  in
future  women  shall  obtain  no  more  by  grant  of  possession  of

2  See  §§  156,  157.  2  See  §  120,  note.

§  125.  Comp.  §129  ;  Vlp.  xxviii,  §§  2,  3.  3  The  MS.  and  K.  u.  S.  have  suo,

1  Comp.  §  148;  Vlp.  xxviii,  13.  referring  to  rescripto;  P.  and  Hu.

§  126.     Comp.    lust,  in  1.   4,   C.  de  lib.  suas,  referring  to  feminas,  and  thus

praet.  (vi,  28).  distinguishing  them  from  the  eman-

1  So    Stud.  :   only  the  final  t   is  cipatae  in  next  line,
visible  in  the  MS.

118  GAII  INSTITVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [II,  §§  126-129.

consequerentur.  quod  in  emancipatarura  quoque  personis
obseruandum  est :  (nam  quod  praeteritae}*  aderescendi  iure
habiturae  essent  si  in  potestatae  fuissent,  id  ipsum  etiam  per

127  bonorum  possessionem  habeant.         Sed   si   quidem  filius   a
patre  exheredetur,  nominatim1  exheredari  debet,  alioquin  non
prodest  eiim2  exheredari.    nominatim  autem  exheredari  uidetur
sine  ita  exheredetur :  TITIVS  FILIVS  MEVS  EXHERES  (ESTO,  sine
(ita :  FILIVS  MEVS}3  EXHERES  ESTO,  non  adiecto  proprio  nomine.

128  Ceterae  uero  liberorum  personae,  ^^el  feminini  sexns  uel  mas-
culini,   satis  inter   ceteros   exheredantur,   id  est   his  uerbis :
(CETERiy  OMNES  EXHEKEDES  SVNTO  :  quae  uerba  (semper  post}2

129  institutionem  heredum  adici  solent.         Sed  hoc  ita  (est  iure
(ciuili}  ;'  nam  praetor  omnes  uirilis  sexus  (liberos,  tarn  filios
(quam  ceteros},2  id  est  nepotes  quoque  et  pronepotes,

the  defunct's  estate  than  they  are  entitled  to  by  accretion.
And  this  rule  applies  also  to  women  who  have  been  eman-
cipated ;  for,  if  they  be  passed  over,  they  are  to  take  no  more
by  bonorum  possessio  than  they  would  have  got  by  accretion

127  had  they  been  still  in  potestate.         If  a  son  be  disinherited
by  his  father  it  must  be  by  name, — disherison  in  any  other
way  does  no  good ;  and  he  is  held  to  be  nominately  disin-
herited either  thus :  '  Be  my  son  Titius  disinherited,'  or  thus  :
'  Be  my  son  disinherited,'  without  the  addition  of  any  proper

128  name.         But  other  descendants,  whether  male  or  female,  are
sufficiently  disinherited  inter  ceteros,  that  is  by  such  words  as,
'  Be  all  the  others  disinherited,'  which  are  usually  inserted

129  after  the  institution  of  the  heirs.         Such  is  the  rule  of  the
civil  law.     But  the  praetor  requires  that  all  descendants  of
the  male  sex — not  sons  only,  but  others  also,  such  as  grand-
sons and  great-grandsons — [shall  be  disinherited  by  name  ;  but

4  So  P. ;  K.  u.  S.  suggest  ut  hae  ing,  although  the  space  is  rather  too

quoque  quod ;  Hu.  ut  nimirum  hae  great  for  it.

quoque  quod.  -  Illegible,    but  obvious   enough.

§  127.    Comp.  Vlp.  xxii,  20;  §  1,  tit. I.  afd.  A  nominate  disherison,  according  to

1  See  §  123,  note.  a  rescript  of  Trajan's,  might  either

2  So  P. ,  on  the  strength  of  §§  1 40,  precede  or  follow  the   institution  ;
141  ;  the  MS.    has  psiet ;  K.   u.  S.  see  Vlp.  in  fr.  1,  pr.  D.  de  her.  inst.
uidetur.  (xxviii,  5).

3  The  words  in  parenthesis,  ille-       §  129.     Comp.  §  135.

gible  in  the  MS.,  are  supplied  from  J  The  context  naturally  suggests

the  Inst.  this  reading.

128.  Comp.  Vlp.  xxii,  20  ;  pr.  §  1,  tit.  a  So  K.  u.  S.;  P.  and  Hu.  have

I.    afd.;    lust,  in  1.    4,  C.    de  lib.  liberorum  personas;  only  the   ini-

praet.  (vi,  28).  tial  lib  is  legible  in  the  MS.

1  Ceteri  seems  the  obvious  read-  3  Hu.  suggests  as  completion  of

II,  §§  130-132.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  119

130  Postumi  quoque  liberi  (uel  heredes)  iustitui  debent  uel  ex-

131  heredari.        Et  in  eo  par  omuium  condicio  (est,  quod  et  in)  filio
(postumo  et  in  quolibet  ex  ceteris)  liberis,siue  (feminini  sexus  siue)
masculini,  praeterito,  ualet  (quidem  testamentum,  sed  postea
(agnatione  postumi}   siue  postumae  rumpitur,  et  ea  ratione
(Mum}  infirmatur.     (ideoque)  si  mulier  ex  qua  (postumus  aut
(postuma)  sperabatur  abortum  (fecerit,  nihil  inpedimento  est

132  (scriptis  heredibus  ad  hereditatem  adeundam.         Sed  feminini)
quidem  sexus  personae  (uel  nominatim  uel)  inter  ceteros  (exhere-
(dari  solent,  dum  tamen  si  inter  ceteros  exkeredentur  aliquid  eis
(legetur,ne  uideantur  per  obliuionem)  praeteritae  (esse:  masculini
(uero  sexus  personas)  placuit  non  aliter  recte  (exheredari  nisi
(nominatim  exheredentur,  hoc  scilicet  modo :  QVICVMQVE  Mini

[allows  females,  daughters,  that  is  to  say,  and  granddaughters
[and  great-granddaughters,  to  be  disinherited  either  ~by  name  or
[in  the  ceteri  clause.']

130  Descendants  that  may  possibly  be  born  after  the  making
of  a  testament  must  also  be  either  instituted  or  disinherited.

131  They   are   all   on   the   same   footing   in  this  respect, — that,
whether  it  be  a  son  or  any  other  male  or  female  descendant  to  be
born  after  the  making  of  the  testament  that  is  unmentioned  in
it,  it  is  nevertheless  valid ;  but  on  the  agnation  of  any  such
after-born,  it  is  broken  and  thereby  rendered  altogether  void.
Therefore  if  a  woman  from  whom  a  child  is  expected  mis-
carry [after  the  execution  of  a  testament],  there  is  nothing  to
prevent  the  heirs  named  in  it  entering   upon   the  inheritance.

132  Females  may  be  disinherited  either  ~by  name  or  amongst  'the
others,'  the  precaution  being  taken,  when  they  are  disinherited
by  the  latter  mode,  of  leaving  them  a  legacy  to  show  that  they
have  not  been  passed  over  through  forgetfulness  ;  but,  as  regards
after-born  males,  it  has  been  held  that  they  cannot  validly  be
disinherited  otherwise  than  by  name,  thus :  '  Any  son  that

the  par.  — nominatim  exlieredari  from  them  completed.  Between  lines
iubet,  feminini  uero  sexus  liberos,  2  and  11  of  p.  87  there  seems  to  have
id  est  filias  et  neptes  et  proneptes,  been  some  matter  which  Justinian
exheredari  aut  nominatim  aut  inter  has  not  reproduced;  it  is  indicated  as
ceteros  satis  habet.  This  will  about  §  132a.  In  the  MS.  §  130  runs-
fill  the  vacant  two  lines  and  a  quar-  Postumi  quoque  liberi  nominatim,
ter  (lines  8-10,  p.  86).  etc. ;  the  nominatim  has  been  excluded
§§130-134.  Pp.  86  and  87  of  the  MS.  as  an  inaccurate  gloss.  The  word
are  for  the  most  part  illegible  ;  but  postumi  can  be  adequately  rendered  in
those  pars,  are  reproduced  in  the  the  translation  only  by  a  periphrasis.
Inst—  the  two  last  also  in  an  ex-  §§  130-132.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  Comp.Ylp.
tract  from  Gai.  in  the  Dig.,— and  xxii,  §§  15,  18-21  ;  xxiii,  2.

120  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  132-134.

132&  (FIL1VS  GENITVS  FVERIT,  EXHERES  ESTO).          [132a]

133 .         (Postumorum  autem  loco  sunt  et  hi  qui  in

(sui  heredis  locum  succedendo  quasi  agnascendo  fiunt  parenti-
(bus)  sui  heredes  :  ut  ecce  si  filium  et  (ex  eo  nepotem}  neptemue
(in  potestate  habeam,  quia  filius  gradu  praecedit,  is  solus  iura
(sui  heredis  habet,  quamuis  nepos)  quoque  et  neptis  ex  (eo  in
(eadem  potestate  sint ;  sedsifilius  meus  me  uiuo  moriatur,  aut
(qualibet  ratione  exeat  de  potestate  mea,  incipit  nepos  neptisue  in
(eius  locum  succedere,  e£)  eo  modo  iura  suorum  (heredum  quasi
134  (agnatione)  nanciscuntur.  Ne  ergo  eo  modo  rumpatur
mihi  testamentum,  (sicut  ipsum  filium  uel  heredem)  instituere
uel  exheredare  debeo  ne  (non  iure  faciam  testamentum,  ita  ct}
nepotem  neptemue  ex  eo  necesse  est  mihi  (uel  heredem  instituere
(uel  exheredare,  ne  forte,  me  uiuo  filio  mortuo,  succedendo  in
(locum  eius  nepos  neptisue}  quasi  agnatione  rumpat  testa-
mentum :  idque  lege  lunia  Vellaea1  prouisum  est — in  qua
simul  exheredationis  modus  notatur — ut  uirilis  sexus  \joostumi]
nominating  feminini  uel  nominatim  uel  inter  ceteros  exhere-

132ama?/  be  born  to  me  hereafter  is  hereby  disinherited!       [132«]  —

133 .         In  the  same  position  as  after-born

descendants  are  those  who,  on  coming  in  place  of  a  suus  heres,
by  quasi-agnation  become  sui  heredes  of  their  parents.  For
example,  if  I  have  in  my  potestas  a  son  and  a  grandchild,
male  or  female,  by  that  son,  the  latter,  being  of  the  nearer  degree,
alone  has  the  rights  of  a  suus  heres,  notwithstanding  that  my
grandchild  by  him  is  also  in  my  potestas  ;  but  if  my  son  die  in
my  lifetime,  or  for  any  reason  cease  to  be  in  my  potestas,  my
grandchild  steps  into  his  place,  and  thus  by  quasi-agnation
134  acquires  the  privileges  of  a  suus  heres.  Now,  just  as  I
must  either  institute  or  disinherit  my  son  in  order  to  make  my
testament  legally  valid  ab  initio,  so  must  I,  in  order  to  prevent
its  being  broken,  either  institute  or  disinherit  my  grandchild
by  that  son,  lest  possibly  the  latter  should  die  during  my  life-
time, and  my  grandchild,  succeeding  in  his  father's  place,
should  break  my  testament  by  quasi-agnation.  And  it  was
expressly  enacted  by  the  Junia-Vellaean  law — in  which  the
form  of  disinheriting  is  at  the  same  time  described — that
males  must  be  disinherited  by  name,  while  females  may  be

§  133.  Gai.  in  fr.  13,  D.  de  iniusto  rupto  though  usually  called  Junia  Velleia.

(xxviii,  3)  ;  §  2,  tit.  I.  aid. ;  Vlp.  It  was  enacted  prnhahly  in  the  year

xxiii,  3.  799^46,  and  consulate  of  M.  Junius

§  134.  See  refs.  in  last  note.  Silanus  and  Velleus  Tutor  ;  see  fr.

1  So  the  law  is  named  in  the  MS.,  2,  pr.  D.  ad  SC.  Velleian.  (xvi,  1).

II,  §§  134-136.]  COMMEXTAK1I  QVATTVOR.  121

dentur,  dum  .tamen  iis  qui  inter  ceteros  exlieredantur  aliquid
legetur.

135  Emancipates  liberos  iure  ciuili  neque  heredes   instituere
neque  exheredare  necesse  est,  quia  non  sunt  sui  heredes  :  sed
praetor  omnes,  tam  femiuini  quam  masculini  sexus,  si  heredes
non  instituantur  exheredari  iubet,  uirilis  sexus  nominatim,
feminini   uel   nominatim   uel   inter    ceteros :    quodsi    neque
heredes  instituti  fuerint  neque  ita  ut  supra  diximus  exheredati,
praetor  promittit  eis  contra  tabulas  bonorum  possessionem.1

135aln  potestate  patris  non  sunt  qui  cum  eo  ciuitate  Eomana
donati  sunt,  nee  in  accipienda  ciuitate  Eomana  pater  petiit l  a
principe2  ut  eos  in  potestate  haberet,  aut  si  petiit  non  impetra-
uit ;  nam  qui  in  potestatem  patris  ab  imperatore  rediguntur

136  nihil  differunt  — >  — .3         Adoptiui   filii,  quamdiu   manent

disinherited  either  by  name  or  inter  ceteros,  provided  in  the
latter  case  some  legacy  be  left  them.

135  By  the  civil  law  it  is  unnecessary  either  to  institute  or  dis-
inherit emancipated  children,  because  they  are  not  sui  heredes.
But  the  praetor  requires  that,  if  they  be  not  instituted,  they
shall  all,  both  males  and  females,  be  disinherited, — the  former
by  name,  the  latter  either  by  name  or  amongst  '  the  others.'    If
they  be  neither  instituted  heirs  nor  disinherited  in  the  manner
aforesaid,  the  praetor  will  grant  them  bonorum  possessio  contra
tabulas,  [i.e.  possession  of  the  defunct's  estate  contrary  to  the

135atenor  of  his  testament]  Those  children  are  not  in  their
father's  potestas  who  have  obtained  along  with  him  a  gift  of
citizenship,  if  either  the  potestas  had  not  been  specially
applied  for  from  the  sovereign,  or,  being  applied  for,  had  not
been  granted ;  but  those  who  have  been  subjected  by  the
emperor  to  their  father's  potestas  differ  in  no  respect  from

136  [children  lorn  in  it].         Further,  adoptive  sons,  so  long  as

§  135.     §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.Vlp.  xxii,  ever,  suggests  it  ;  and  Hu.,  to  pro-

23  ;  xxviii,   4.     But  it  was    under  long  it,  adds  statim.

condition  of  collation  with  the  un-  2  So    I   think   may  be  rendered

emancipated  sui  heredes,  at  least  in  the   ap  of  the   MS.,    which    K.    u.

the  time  of  Vlp.  S.    ignore,    and    Hu.    renders    aut

1  Comp.  §  119,  note  1.  post.

§  135«.     Comp.  i,  §§   93,   94 ;   iii,   20  ;  3  The  MS.  appears  to  have  some-

"Vlp.  in  Collat.  xvi,  7,  §  2.     Some  thing  like    athisunit.     P.    suggests

words  in  the  MS.  are  indistinct,  and  ab  suis  hcredibus,  and   Hu.   a  sic

one  or  two  illegible.  natis ;    as   K.    u.    S.    observe,    one

1  The  indistinct  letters  in  the  MS.  might  expect  ab  his  qui  in  potestate

do  not  resemble  petiit, — there  is  too  patris  natisunt.
much  space  for  it.     The  sense,  how-       §  13t>.     Comp.  §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.

122~  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVR1S  C1VILIS    [II,  §§  136-140.

in  adoptione,  naturalium  loco  sunt ;  emancipati  uero  a  patre
adoptiuo,  neque  iure  ciuili  neque  quod  ad  edictuua  praetoris

137  pertinet  inter  liberos  numerantur.         Qua  rations  accidit  ut
ex  diuerso,  quod  ad  naturalem  parentem  pertinet,  quaindiu
quideni  sint  in  adoptiua  familia  extraneorum  numero  habe-
antur ;    si   uero  emancipati  fuerint  ab  adoptiuo  patre,  tune
incipiant  in  ea  causa  esse  qua  futuri  essent  si  ab  ipso  naturali
patre  [emancipati]  fuissent.

138  Si  quis  post  factum  testamentum  adoptauerit  sibi  filium,
aut  per  populum  eum  qui  sui  iuris  est,  aut  per  praetorem
eum  qui  in  potestate  parentis  fuerit,  omni  modo  testamentum

139  eius  rumpitur  quasi  agnatione  sui  heredis.         Idem  iuris  est
si  cui  post  factum  testamentum  uxor  in  manum  conueniat,  uel
quae  in  manu  fuit  nubat :  nam  eo  modo  filiae  loco  esse  incipit

140  et  quasi  sua.1         nee  prodest  siue  haec  siue  ille  qui  adoptatus
est  in  eo  testamento  sit  institutus  institutaue :  nam  de  exhere-
datione  eius  superuacuum  uidetur  quaerere,  cum  testamenti

they  remain  in  the  adoptive  family,  are  in  the  same  position
as  natural  children ;  on  emancipation,  however,  by  their
adoptive  parent  they  are  no  longer  included  amongst  his
descendants,  either  by  the  civil  law  or  by  the  praetor's  edict.

137  And  thus  it  comes  to  pass,  conversely,  that,  so  long  as  they
are  in  the  adoptive  family,  they  are  reckoned  as  strangers  in
relation  to  their  natural  parent ;   if,  however,  they  be  emanci-
pated by  their  adoptive  parent,  they  then  begin  to  be  in  the
same   position   they  would   have   occupied   had   they   been
emancipated  by  their  natural  parent.

138  If  a  man  after  making  his  testament  adopt  a  son, — either  a
person  who  is  sui  iuris  by  vote  of  the  people,  or  a  filiusfamilias
by  magisterial  authority, — his  testament  is  invariably  broken

139  by  this  quasi-agnation  of  a  suus  heres.         The  result  is  the
same  if  after  making  his  testament  he  take  a  wife  in  manum,
or  if  a  woman  already  in  his  manus  become  his  wife  ;  in  either
way  she  begins  to  hold  the  position  of  a  daughter  and  be-

140  comes  quasi  sua  heres.         Nor  does  it  prevent  such  result  that
either  the  wife  or  the  adopted  child  has  been  instituted  heir
in  the  testament ; — it  is  unnecessary  to  say  anything  of  their

§  137.     §4,  tit.  I.  afd.,  from  which  the  §  139.   Comp.  i,  §  114  ;  Vlp.  xxiii,  3.

penultimate  emancipati  is  supplied.  *  After    sua   the    MS.    has    an  i,

§§138-151.  Comp.  tit.  I.  QVIBVS  MODIS  which    Hu.    converts    into   [heres]

TEST  AMENTA  INFIRMANTVR  (ii,  17).  fit.

§  138.    §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  i,  §§  98  f. ;  §  140.    Comp.  fr.  18,  D.  de  iniusto  rupto

Vlp.  xxiii,  §§  2,  3.  (xxviii,  3).

II,  §§  140-144.]  COMMEXTAEII  QVATTVOR.  123

faciendi     ternpore     suorum     heredum    numero    non    fuerit.

141  Filius  quoque  qui  ex  prima  secundaue  mancipatione  manu-
mittitur,  quia  reuertitur  in  potestatem  patriam,  rumpit   ante
factum  testamentum ;  nee  prodest  [si]  in  eo  testamento  heres

142  institutus  uel  exheredatus  fuerit.         Simile  ins  olim  fu.it  in
eius  persona   cuius  nomine  ex  senatusconsulto  erroris  causa
probatur,  quia  forte  ex  peregrina  uel  latina,  quae  per  errorem
quasi  ciuis  liomana  uxor  ducta  esset,  natus  esset :  iiam  siue
heres  institutus  esset  a  parente  siue  exheredatus,  siue  uiuo
patre    causa  probata    siue    post   mortem   eius,   omni    modo

143  quasi   agnatione   rumpebat   testamentum.         Nunc  uero  ex
nouo  senatusconsulto  quod  auctore  diuo  Hadriano  factum  est,
si   quidem   uiuo  patre  causa  probatur,  aeque  ut  olim  omni
modo  rumpit  testamentum  ;  si  uero  post  mortem  patris,  prae-
teritus   quidem   rumpit  testamentum ;   si   uero   heres  in   eo
scriptus  est  uel  exheredatus,  non  rumpit  testamentum,   ne
scilicet  diligenter  facta  testamenta  rescinderentur  eo  tempore

144  quo  renouari  non  possent.         Posteriore  quoque  testamento

disherison,  for  at  the  time  the  testament  was  made  they  were

141  not  of  the  testator's  sui  heredes.         A  son  also,  who  is  manu-
mitted after  a  first  or  second  mancipation,  breaks  a  previous
testament  of  his  father's  by  reverting  into  his  potestas ;  nor
does  it  matter  though  in  said  testament  he  may  have  been

142  either  instituted  or  disinherited.         Formerly  the  rule  was
the  same  in  the  case  of  a  person  on  whose  account  cause  of
error  had  been  established  under  the  senatusconstilt,  say  be-
cause he  had  been  born  of  a  peregrin  or  latin  woman  whom
his  father  had  married  by  mistake,  believing   her  to  be  a
citizen ;  for,  whether  he  had  been  instituted  or  disinherited
by  his  parent,  and  whether  the  cause  of  error  had  been  estab-
lished before  or  after  his  father's  death,  in  any  case  the  testa-

143  ment  was  broken  by  his  quasi-agnation.         But  now,  by  a  later
senatusconsult,  due  to  the  late  emperor  Hadrian,  if  the  cause
of  error  have  been  established  in  the  father's  lifetime  the  testa-
ment is  invariably  broken  just  as  it  used  to  be ;  but  if  cause
be  not  shown  till  after  the  father's  death,  while  it  will  still  be
broken  if  the  son  have  been  passed  over,  that  will  not  happen
if  he  has  been   either  instituted   in  it  or  disinherited,  lest
otherwise  a  carefully  executed  testament  be  set  aside  when

144  it  is  no  longer   possible  to  re-make  it.         An  earlier  testa-

§'141.     Comp.  i,  §  132  ;  Tip.  xxiii,  3.          §144.     §2,    tit.   I.  afd.      Com  p.    Tip.
§  142.     Comp.  i,  §§  67-74.  xxiii,  2.

124  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  144-146.

quod  iure  factuin  est  superius  rumpitur;  nee  interest  an
extiterit  aliquis  ex  eo  heres  an  non  extiterit:  hoc  enim
solum  spectatur  an  existere  potuerit.  ideoque  si  quis  ex
posteriore  testamento  quod  iure  factum  est  aut  noluerit  heres
esse,  aut  uiuo  testatore  aut  post  mortem  eius  antequam  here-
ditatem  adiret  decesserit,  aut  per  cretionem  exclusus  fuerit,1
aut  condicione  sub  qua  heres  institutus  est  defectus  sit,  aut
propter  caelibatum  ex  lege  lulia  summotus  fuerit  ab  heredi-
tate : 2  quibus  casibus  paterfamilias  intestatus  moritur :  nam
et  prius  testamentum  non  ualet,  ruptum  a  posteriore,  et  pos-
terius  aeque  nullas  uires  habet,  cum  ex  eo  nemo  heres  exti-

145  terit.         Alio  quoque  modo  testamenta  iure  facta  infirmantur,
uelut  [cum]  is  qui  fecerit  testamentum  capite  deminutus  sit ;
quod  quibus  modis  accidat  primo  commentario  :  relatum  est.

146  hoc  autem  casu  inrita  fieri  testamenta  dicemus,  cum  alioquin
et  quae  rumpuntur  inrita  fiant,  \et  quae  statim  ab  initio  non  iure
[fiimt  inrita  sint ;  sed  et  ea  quae  iure  facta  sunt  et  posted  propter

ment  is  also  broken  by  a  later  one  duly  executed.  And  it
is  immaterial  whether  any  one  has  become  heir  under  the
second  one  or  not ;  the  sole  question  is,  could  there  have
been  an  heir  under  it  ?  Therefore  if  the  heir  under  a  later
testament,  made  according  to  the  requirements  of  law,  either
lias  declined  the  inheritance,  or  has  predeceased  the  testator,
or,  having  survived  him,  has  died  before  entry,  or  has  been
excluded  by  cretion  or  through  failure  of  a  condition  upon
which  his  institution  depended,  or  has  been  debarred  by  the
Julian  law  on  account  of  celibacy, — in  any  of  those  cases
the  party  dies  intestate ;  for  his  earlier  testament  is  invalid,
having  been  broken  by  the  later  one,  and  this  is  equally  of  no

145  avail  since  no  one  becomes  heir  in  terms  of  it.         There  is
yet  another  way  in  which  a  testament  duly  executed  may  be
annulled,  namely  by   the   testator's   capitis  deminutio ;    and
how  this  may  occur  lias  been  explained  in  our   first    Com-

146  mentary.         But  in  this  case  we  say  it  is  irritated,  \_i.e.  be-
comes untenable.]     No  doubt  those  which  are  broken  become
untenable,  as   are  those   also   that  at  the  first   were  not   exe-
cuted according  to  law ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  those  that
ivere  originally  made  in  due  form,  but  have  subsequently  been

1  Comp.  §§  166  f.  J  Comp.  i,  §§  159-162.

2  Comp.  §§  111,  286  ;  Vlp.  xxii.  4.       §  146.     §  5,  tit.  I.  afd.,  from  which  the
§145.     §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.       Comp.   Vlp.  words  in  italics,  omitted  in  the  MS.,

xxiii,  4.  are  borrowed.

II,  §§  146-148.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  125

[capitis  deminutionem  inrita  JtuntJ]  possunt  niliilominus  rupta
dici:  sed  quia  sane  commodius  erat  singulas  causas  singulis
appellationibus  distingui,  icleo  quaedam  non  iure  fieri  dicun-
tur,  quaedam  iure  facta  rumpi  uel  inrita  fieri.

147  Non  tamen  per  omnia  inutilia  suut  ea  testamenta  quae  uel
ab  initio  non  iure  facta  sunt  uel  iure  facta  postea  inrita  facta
aut  rupta  sunt :  nam  si  septem  testium  signis  signata  sint
testamenta,  potest  scriptus  heres  secundum  tabulas  bonoruni
possessionein    petere,    si    niodo   defunctus   testator   et   ciuis
Eomanus  et  suae  potestatis  mortis  tempore  fuerit :  nam  si
ideo  inritum  factum  sit  testamentum  quod  puta  ciuitatem  uel
etiam  libertatem  testator  amisit,  aut  quod  is  in  adoptionem  se
dedit  et  mortis  tempore  in  adoptiui  patris  potestate  fuit,  non
potest  scriptus  heres  secundum  tabulas  bonorum  possessionem

148  petere.         \_Qui   igitur]  l  secundum  tabulas  testamenti  quae
aut   statim   ab  initio  non  iure  factae  sunt,  aut  iure  factae
postea  ruptae  uel   inritae  [factae]2  erunt,  bonorum  posses-

rendered  untenable  by  capitis  deminutio,  may  none  the  less  be
said  to  be  broken.  But  as  it  is  obviously  more  convenient
to  distinguish  particular  cases  by  particular  names,  we  say  of
some  testaments  that  they  have  not  been  executed  according
to  law,  and  of  others  that  have  been  duly  executed  that  they
are  either  broken  or  irritated.

147  Those  testaments,  however,  are  not  altogether  useless  that
either  have  not  at  first  been  executed  according  to  law,  or,
having  been  so  executed,  have  afterwards  been  irritated  or
broken.     For  if  a  testament  be  sealed  with  the  seals  of  seven
witnesses,  the  heir  named  in  it  may  apply  for  possession  of
the  defunct's  estate  in  terms  of  the  writing,  provided  the  tes-
tator was  a  citizen  and  sui  iuris  at  the  moment  of  his  death ;
but  such  application  is  incompetent  if  the  testament  have
been  irritated   say   by   the   testator's   loss   of  citizenship  or
liberty,   or  by  his  having  given   himself  in   adoption   and
having  continued  till  his  death  in  the  potestas  of  his  adoptive

148  father.         Those  who  have  a  grant  of  possession  of  a  defunct's
estate  in  terms  of  a  testament  that  was  either  from  the  first
not  executed  according  to  law,  or  that,  having  been  duly
executed,  has  afterwards  been  broken  or  irritated,  will  have

§  147.     §  6,  tit.   I.  afd.     Coinp.  §  119,  1  Supplied  by  K.  u.  S. ;  P.  sup-

and  note  1  ;  Vlp.  xxiii,   6  ;  xxviii,  plies  sed  si  qui,  and  Hu.  si  tjui.

§§  5,  6.  2So   P. ;  K.  u.  S.,  following  the

§  148.     Comp.  iii,  §§  35-38  ;  Vlp.  xxiii,  MS.,  have  simply  erunt;  Hu.  [factae]

6  ;  xxviii,  13.  sunt.

126

GAII  IN3TITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [H,  §§  148,  149.

sionem  accipiunt,  si  modo  possunt  hereditatem  obtinere,
habebunt  bonorum  possessionera  cum  re  ;  si  uero  ab  iis  auo-
cari  hereditas  potest,  liabebunt  bonorum  possessionem  sine
149  re.  Nam  si  quis  heres  iure  ciuili  institutus  sit,1  uel  ab
intestato  iure  legitimo  heres  sit,  is  potest  ab  iis  hereditatem
auocare ;  si  uero  nemo  sit  alius  iure  ciuili  heres,  ipsi  retinere
hereditatem  possunt ;  nee  ullum  ius  aduersus  eos  habent

—  legitimo  iure  dejiciuntur. quoque  notauimus,

etiam  legitimis  quoque  (hercdibus)  potiores  scripti  habentur,

—  —  —  —   factum   sit    testamentum    quod   familia   non
uenierit  aut  nuncupationis   uerba  testator  locutus  non   sit ;
cum  enim  agnati  petant  hereditatem,  —  —  —  —  —  —  .2

lonorum  possessio  cum  re,  [real  and  effectual  possession],  if  only
they  can  retain  the  inheritance ;  but  if  it  can  be  taken  past
them,  their  grant  of  possession  will  be  sine  re,  [without  real
149  effect].  For  if  an  individual  have  been  instituted  heir  [in
an  earlier  testament  executed]  according  to  the  requirements
of  the  civil  law,  or  be  heir-at-law  ab  intestato,  he  is  in  a  posi-
tion to  deprive  them  of  the  inheritance ;  but  if  there  be  no
other  person  that  is  heir  by  the  civil  law,  they  can  retain  it ;
for  [cognates  and  other  persons]  not  enjoying  the  character  of
heirs  under  the  civil  law  have  no  right  in  preference  to  them.
[Sometimes,  however,  as~]  we  have  already  observed,  the  heirs
instituted  in  the  invalid  testament  are  preferred  even  to  the
heirs-at-law,  [as  when  the  objection  to  the  regularity  of  its  exe-
[cution  is  merely}  that  the  testator  had  not  duly  mancipated
his  familia  or  expressed  the  words  of  nuncupation  ;  if  in  such
a  case  the  agnates  claim  the  inheritance,  [they  may,  according
[to  a  constitution  of  our  emperor  Antonines,  be  defeated  by  ex-

§§  149-151.  P.  92  of  the  MS., which  con-
tains the  greater  part  of  these  pars. ,
is  to  a  considerable  extent  illegible  ;
while  of  much  that  Stud,  has  repro-
duced he  does  not  profess  himself
certain.

§  149.     Comp.  §§  119-121.

1  After    sit   the  MS.    has    uel    ex
primo  uel  ex  posteriore  testamento :
these  words  I  have  expunged  as  an
inaccurate  gloss  ;  for  if  there  were  a
valid  later  testament  there  could  not
well  be  any  claim  under  an  earlier
invalid  one,  §  144.

2  The  par.  may,  I  think,  be  com-
pleted as  follows  :    nee   ullum   ius
aduersus  eos  habent  cognati  quiue

legitimo  iure  deficiuntur.  A  liquando
tamen,  ut  supra  quoque  notauimus,
etiam  legitimis  quoque  keredibwt
potiores  scripti  habentur,  ueluti  si
idea  non  iure  factum  sit  testamen-
tum quod  familia  non  uenierit  aut
nuncupationis  uerba  testator  locu-
tus non  sit ;  cum  enim  agnati  petant
hereditatem  per  exceptionem  doll
mall  ex  conatitutione  imperatoris
Antonini  (§  120)  summoueri possunt.
The  meaning  I  take  to  be  this  :  a
grant  of  honor,  possessio  to  a  person
instituted  in  an  invalid  will  was,
under  the  limitations  mentioned  in
§  147,  effectual  (cum  re)  as  against  a
cognate  or  other  merely  praetorian

II,  §§150,151.]

COMMENTAKII  QVATTVOR.

12'

150

151

—  lege  bona  caduca  fiunt  et  ad  populum

deferri  iubentur  si  defuncto  nemo .

Potest  ut  iure  facta  testamenta  contraria  (uoluntate)
infirmentur.  Apparet  [autem]  non  posse  (ex  eo  solo  infirmari)
testamentum  (quod  posted]  testator  (id  noluerit]  ualere,  usque
adeo  ut  si  linum  eius  incident  nihilo  minus  iure  ciuili  ualeat.
quin  etiam  si  deleuerit  quoque  aut  olleuerit  tabulas  testamenti,
non  ideo  protinus 1  desinent  ualere  quae  fuerant  scripta,  licet
eorum  probatio  difficilis  sit.  quid  ergo  est  si  quis  ab  intestate
bonorum  possessionem  petierit,  et  is  qui  ex  eo  testamento

150  [ception  of  fraud.         Nor  does  the  Julian  law  take  away  the
[inheritance  from  those  named  in  the  invalid  testament  if  they
[have    obtained  bonorum  possessio   under   the   edict ;  for  l>y
\that~]   enactment  the  estate  of  a  person  deceased  becomes
caduciary  and  falls  to  the .  state  only  \ivhen  lie,  has  no  heir
[either  civil  or  praetorian].

151  It  is  possible  even  for  a  duly  executed  testament  to  be
invalidated  by  a  contrary  manifestation  of  will.     It  appears,
however,  that  it  is  not  enough  to  invalidate  it  that  the  testa-
tor has  afterwards  meant  it  to  be  of  no  effect ;  so  little  is  this
the  case  that  even  if  he  have  cut  the  strings  that  secured  it,
still  it  is  valid  by  the  civil  law ;  nay,  even  if  he  have  deleted
some  part  of  it,  what  was  there  written  does  not  straightway
cease  to  be  valid,  although  the  proof  of  it  may  be  troublesome.
But  what  if  some  one  claim  lonorum  possessio  as  by  right  of
intestacy,  and  he  who  under  the  testament  is  entitled  to  the

successor  claiming  ab  intestato.  As
against  persons  claiming  under  an
earlier  and  valid  testament,  or  ab
intestato  as  heirs  of  the  ius  ciuile
(sni,  agnates,  and  patrons),  it  was,
as  a  rule,  ineffectual  (sine  re) ;
but,  as  against  agnates  at  least,  it
was  effectual  if  the  ground  of  in-
validity was  nothing  more  serious
than  omission  of  the  mancipatio  or
uerba  nuncupationis.

The  reconstructions  of  K.  u.  S.
and  Hu.  proceed  on  a  somewhat
different  track,  and  seem  to  me
hardly  reconcilable  with  the  doc-
trine of  §  120.

§  150.  The  only  legible  words,  be-
sides those  in  the  text,  are  lulia  on
line  10,  and  possessores  on  line  11.
K.  ingeniously  conjectures  :  Sane
lege  lulia  scriptis  non  aitfertvr  here-
ditas  si  bonorum  possessores  ex

edicto  constituti  sint.  nam  Ha  de-
mum  ea  lege  bona  caduca  fiunt  et
ad  populum  deferri  iubentur,  si  de-
fimcto  nemo  heres  uel  bonorum  pos-
sessor existat.  Comp.  Vlp.  xxviii,  7,
last  clause.  The  Julian  law  referred
to  is  the  L.  lulia  et  Papia  Poppaea
(i,  §  145,  note  1),  whose  caduciary
provisions  were  often  spoken  of
under  the  name  of  Lex  caducaria.
Comp.  generally  on  subject  of  ca-
duca, Vlp.  xvii,  §§  1-3.
§  151.  This  par.  occupies  the  last  ten
lines  of  p.  92,  to  a  considerable  ex-
tent illegible,  and  the  first  two  of
p.  93.  Comp.  §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.,  from
which  the  words  in  ital.  in  the  second
and  third  lines  are  supplied.

1  So  P. ;  the  MS.  seems  to  have
non  ideo  minus,  for  which  Hu.  sub-
stitutes non  ideo  magis,  and  K.  u.  S.
nihilo  minus  non.

128  GAII  INSTITUTION VM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [II,  §§  151-154.

lieres  est  petal  hereditatem  ? —  —  —  —  —  —  per-

ueniat  hereditas  :2  et  hoc  ita  rescripto  imperatoris  Antonini
significatur.

152  Heredes  autem  aut  necessarii  dicuntur  aut  sui  et  necessarii

153  aut  extranei.         Necessarius  heres  est  seruus  cum  libertate
heres  institutus ;  ideo  sic  appellatus  quia  siue  uelit  siue  nolit
omni  modo  post  mortem  testatoris  protinus  liber  et  heres  est.

154  Vnde  qui  facultates  suas  suspectas  habet,  solet  seruum  suum
primo  aut  secundo  uel  etiam   ulteriore   gradu J  liberum  et
heredem  instituere,  ut  si  creditoribus  satis  non  fiat  potius
huius  heredis  quam  ipsius  testatorius  bona  ueneaut,2  id  est  ut
ignominia  quae  accidit  ex  uenditione  bonorum  hunc  potius

inheritance  raise  his  hereditatis  petitio  ?  [The  latter  may  in
[that  case  be  displaced  ~by  exception  of  fraud,  and  the  inherit-
[ance  thus  be  prevented  from  falling  to  one  whom,  according  to
[the  last  manifestation  of  his  ivill,  the  testator  did  not  mean
[to  be  his  heir] ;  such  is  the  rule  laid  down  by  our  emperor
Antonine  in  one  of  his  rescripts.

152  Heirs  are  called  either  necessarii,    or  sui  ct  necessarii,  or

153  extranei.         A  necessary  heir  is  a  slave  instituted  with  gift
of  freedom ;  so  called  because  in  every  case,  whether  he  will
or  not,  he  straightway  on  the  testator's  death  becomes  free  and

154  heir.         Accordingly  it  is  not  unusual  for  a  man  who  has
doubts  about  his  solvency  to  institute  one  of  his  slaves  as
free  and  heir  in  the  first  or  second  place,  or  even  in  a  lower
one ;  so  that,  if  the  creditors  cannot  be  paid  in  full,  the  de-
ceased's estate  may  be  sold  rather  as  that  of  the  heir  thus
instituted  than  of  the  testator  himself,  and  the  consequent

2  Hu.,  who,  like  K.  u.  S.,  makes  this  on  the  two  lines  (23  and  24)

the  question  begin    and   end   with  appropriate  to  it.     I  prefer :  Potest

quid   ergo   est,    reconstructs   thus  :  scriptus  heres  per  exceptionem  doli

Potest  eum  per    exceptionem    doli  mall  repelli,  lie  ad  ilium   qui  non

mail  repellere,  si  modo  ea  mens  tes-  habet  uoluntatem  defuncti  perueniat

tatoris  fuisse  probetur,   ut   ad  eos  hereditas.     As  authority  see  ii,  198  ;

qui  ab  intestato  uocantur  perueniat  Vlp.  in  fr.  1 ,  §  8,  D.  si  tab.  test.  nidi.

hereditas.     K.    (in  K.    u.    S.,   and  extab.  (xxxviii,  6),  and  in  fr.  4,  §  10,

modifying  somewhat  his    previous  D.  de  dol.  mal.  exc.  (xliv,  4).

reconstruction  in  his  Krit.   Vers.,  p.  §§152-173.    Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  HEREDVM

13)  proposes  :  Per  exceptionem  doli  QVALITATE  ET   DIFFERENTIA     (ii,

mall  repelletur ;  si   uero   nemo    ab  19).     A  vacant  line  in  the  MS.  ,  pro-

intestato  bonorum  possessionem  peti-  bably  for  a  rubric,  before  §  152.

erit,  ftscus  scripto  heredi  quasi    in-  §  152.     Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

digno  auferat  hereditatem,  ne  ullo  §  153.     §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.

modo  ad  eum  quern  testator  heredem  §  154.     §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  i,  21.

Jiabere  noluit   perueniat  hereditas.  l  See  §  174.

There   does  not  seem  room  for  all  2  Comp.  iii,  79.

II,  §§  154-156.]

COMMEXTARII  QVATTVOR.

129

heredem  quam  ipsum  testatorem  contingat ;  quamquam  apucl
Fufidium 3  Sabino 4  placeat  eximendum  euin  esse  ignominia,5
quia  non  suo  uitio  sed  necessitate  iuris  bonorum  uenditionem

155  pateretur;  sed  alio  iure  utimur.         Pro  hoc  tamen  incom-
modo  illud  ei  commodum  praestatur,  ut  ea  quae  post  mortem
patroni  sibi  adquisierit,  siue  ante  bonorum  uenditionem  siue
postea,   ipsi   reseruentur ;    et   quamuis   pro  portione, z   bona
uenierint  iterum  ex  hereditaria  causa  bona  eius  non  uenient,
nisi  si  quid  ei  ex  hereditaria  causa  fuerit  adquisitum,  uelut  si
latinum  adquisierit 2  [et]  locupletior  factus  sit;  cum  ceterorum
hominum  quorum  bona  uenierint  pro  portione,  si  quid  postea

156  adquirant,  etiam  saepius  eorum  bona  uenire  solent.3         Sui
autem  et  necessarii  heredes  sunt  uelut  filius  filiaue-,  nepos

disgrace  attach  to  the  former  rather  than  to  the  latter.
Sabinus,  according  to  Fufidius,  was  of  opinion  that  the  slave
should  be  exempt  from  ignominy,  since  he  had  to  submit
to  the  sale  not  from  any  fault  of  his-  own  but  as  a  legal  neces-

155  sity;    but  the  law  is  otherwise.         In  return,  however,  for
that  drawback  he  enjoys  this  advantage, — that  he  is  entitled
to  retain  what  he  himself  has  acquired  after  the  death  of  his
patron,  whether  before  or  after  the  sale  ;  and  although  the
sale  of  the  estate  may  have  yielded  the  creditors  only  a  per-
centage on  their  claims,  yet  his  goods  will  not  be  sold  a  second
time   on   account  of  hereditary  debts,   unless   it   be   things
acquired  by  him  from  a  hereditary  source,  such  as  the  estate
of  a  deceased  latin  [freedman  of  the  testator's]  that  has  fallen  in
to  him  and  left  him  a  profit ;  whereas  when-  the  goods  of  other
insolvents  are  brought  to  sale  and  yield  only  a  percentage,
their  subsequent  acquisitions  may  be  sold  again  and  again

156  [until  the  creditors  have  been  paid  in  full].  '      Heirs  sui  et
necessarii  are  such  as  a  son  or  daughter,  a  grandson  or  grand-

3  A  jurist  of  whom  little  is  known,
but  mentioned  by  Africanus  (fr.  5,
D.  de  auro,  xxxiv,  2)  as  the  author
of  some  books  of  '  Questions.'

4  Seei,  §  196,  note  1.

5  Comp.  Cic.  p.  Quint,  xv,  §§  49,
50 ;    lex    lulia    municip.    cap.    25
(Brans,  p.  97);  1.  3,  C.  Th.  de  inof.
test,   (ii,  19).     Comp.  also  pr.   I.  de
succ.  sublat.  (iii,  12) ;  Th.  iii,  21,  pr.

§  155.     Comp.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  The   MS.    has   propter  contrac-
tions ;  Heise's  emendation  is  unani-
mously accepted.

2  The    MS.    runs— si    latinus    ad-

quisierit locupletior  factus  sit.  Va-
rious emendations  have  been  pro-
posed ;  that  in  the  text  is  due  to
Gou.,  and  justified  by  Gai.  ii,  195.
As  Gou.  observes,  latinum  adtjuirere
is  the  same  thing  as  latini  liberti
mortui  bona  adquirere.  Comp.  iii,
58  ;  Plin.  Ep.  x,  105,  (ius  latinorum
sitorum  mihi  reliquit. )

3  Cp.  fr.  7,  D.  decess.  bon.  (xlii,  3).
156-158.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.,  from
which  the  words  in  italics  are  bor-
rowed. Comp.  §  123,  note  ;  iii.  §§
2f.;  Paul,  in  fr.  11,  D.  de  lib',  et
post,  (xxviii,  2) ;  Vlp.  xxii,  24.

130  GAII  INSTITVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIVIL1S    [II,  §§  15C-1GO.

neptisue  ex  filio,  [et~\  deinceps  ceteri  qui  modo  in  potestate
morientis  fuerunt :  sed  uti  nepos  neptisue  suus  heres  sit  non
sufficit  eum  in  potestate  aui  mortis  tempore  fuisse,  sed  opus
est  ut  pater  quoque  eius  uiuo  patre  suo  desierit  suus  heres
esse,  aut  morte  interceptus  aut  qualibet  ratione  liberatus
potestate;  turn  enim  nepos  neptisue  in  locum  sui  patris

157  succedunt.         Sed  sui  quidem  heredes  ideo  appellantur  quia
clomestici  heredes  sunt  et  uiuo  quoque  parente  quodammodo
domini  existimantur ;  unde  etiam  si  quis  intestatus  mortuus
sit,  prima  causa  est  in  successione  liberorum.     necessarii  uero
ideo  dicuntur  quia  omni  modo,  [siue]   uelint  [st]ue  \nolint,

158  [tarn]  ab  intestate  quam  ex  testamento  heredes  fiunt.         sed
his  praetor  .permittit  abstinere  se  ab  hereditate,  ut  potius

159  parentis  bona  ueneant.          idem  iuris  est  et  in  uxoris  per-
sona quae  in  manu  est,  quia  filiae  loco  est,  et  in  nuru  quae  in

160  manu  filii  est,  quia  neptis  loco  est.         quin  etiam  similiter
abstinendi  potestatem  facit  praetor  etiam   ei   qui   in  causa
mancipii  est '  [si]  cum  libertate  heres  institutus  sit,  quam-

daughter  by  a  son,  and  so  on,  who  were  in  potestate  of  the
deceased  when  dying.  But  to  make  a  grandchild  a  suus  heres
it  is  not  enough  that  he  was  in  the  potcstas  of  his  grandfather
at  the  time  of  his  death, — it  is  also  necessary  that  his  father
should  have  ceased  to  be  suus  in  the  grandfather's  lifetime,
having  either  been  cut  off  by  death  or  for  some  reason  released
from  the  potcstas;  for  then  the  grandson  or  granddaughter

157  steps  into  the  place  of  their  father.         They  are  called  sui
heredes  because  they  are  heirs  of  the  house,  and  even  in  their
parents'  lifetime  are  regarded  as  in  a  manner  owners  [of  the
family  estate] ;  wherefore,  if  any  one  die  intestate,  the  first
place  in  the  succession  belongs  to  his  children.     And  they  are
called  necessarii,  because  in  every  case,  as  well  on  intestacy
as  under  a  testament,  they  become  heirs  whether  they  will  or

158  not.         But  the  praetor  allows  them  to  abstain  from  the  in-
heritance, that  so  the  estate  [if  insolvent]  may  rather  be  sold

159  in  name  of  their  [deceased]  parent.         The  rule  is  the  same  as
regards  a  wife  in  manu,  for  she  is  in  the  position  of  a  daughter,
and  of  a  daughter-in-law  in  manu  of  a  son,  for  she  is  in  the

160  position  of  a  granddaughter.         Nay,  the  same  power  of  ab-
staining is  conceded  by  the  praetor  even  to  a  person  in  causa
mancipii  who  has  been  instituted  heir  with  freedom ;  and  this

§  159.     Comp.  iii,  3  ;  i,  111  ;  ii.  139.  '  The  MS.  adds  id  est  mandpato  :

§  160.     Com]),  i,  §§  123,  138  ;  iii,  114.  omitted  as  obviously  a  gloss.

II,  §§  160-163.]  COMMENTAKII  QVATTVOR.  131

uis 2  necessarius,  non.  etiam  suus  heres  sit,  tamquam  seruus.

161  Ceteri  qui  testatoris  iuri  subiecti  non  sunt  extranei  heredes
appellantur :    itaque   liberi   quoque   nostri   qui  in  potestate
nostra  non  sunt  heredes  a  nobis  instituti  [sicut] l   extranei
uidentur ;  qua  de  causa  et  qui  a  matre  heredes  instituuntur
eodem  numero  sunt,  quia  feminae  liberos  in  potestate  non
habent.2      serui  quoque  qui  cum  libertate  heredes  instituti
sunt  et  postea  a  domino  manumissi 3  eodem  numero  habentur.

162  Extraneis  autem  heredibus  deliberandi  potestas  data  est  de

163  adeunda   hereditate   uel   non   adeunda.          Sed   siue  is   cui
abstinendi  potestas  est  inmiscuerit  se  bonis  hereditariis,  siue
is  cui  de  adeunda  [kereditate]  deliberare  licet  adierit,  postea
relinquendae  hereditatis  facultatem  non  habet  nisi  si  minor
sit  annorum  xxv:    nam  huius  aetatis   hominibus,  sicut   in
ceteris  omnibus  causis  deceptis,  ita  etiam  si  temere  damnosam
hereditatem  susceperint  praetor  succurrit.     scio  quidem  diuum
Hadrianum  etiam  maiori  xxv  annorum  ueniam  dedisse,  cum

although  he  is  only  a  necessary  heir,  like  a  slave,  and  not  a

161  suus.         Other  heirs,  who  are  not  subject  to  the  testator's  right,
are  called   extranei,   stranger-heirs.     Those  of  our  children,
therefore,  who  are  not  in  our  potestas,  if  we  institute  them,  are
regarded  as  strangers  ;  and  for  the  same  reason  so  are  those  in-
stituted heirs  by  their  mother,  seeing  women  do  not  have  their
children  in  potestate.     Slaves  also,  who  have  been  instituted
heirs  with  liberty,  but  afterwards  manumitted  by  their  owner,

162  belong  to  the  same  class.         To  such  stranger-heirs  there  is
given  a  power  of  deliberating  whether  or  not  they  will  enter

163  upon  an  inheritance.         But  if  an  heir  who  has  the  right
of  abstaining  have  once  intromitted  with  hereditary  effects,  or
one  who  is  entitled  to  deliberate  as  to  entering  have  once
entered,  he  has  not  the  power  of  afterwards  relinquishing  the
inheritance,  unless  he  be  under  twenty-five  years  of  age ;  for,
as  the  praetor  grants  relief  to  men  of  this  age  in  every  other
case  in  which  they  have  been  taken  advantage  of,  so  does  he
when  they  have  accepted  a  detrimental  inheritance.     I  am
aware,  however,  that  the  late  emperor  Hadrian  once  granted
the  same  relief  to  an  individual  above  twenty-five,  on  his  dis-

2  So  K.  u.  S.  and  Hu. ,  correcting  2  Comp.  i,  104  ;  Vlp.  xxvi,  7.

the  MS.  ,  which  has  cum.  3  Comp.  §  188.

§161.  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.  Comp.Vlp.xxii,25.  §§  162,  163.     §   5,  tit.    I.   afd.     Comp.
1  According  to  M. ,  a  gloss.  Paul,  iii,  4?>,  §  11.

132  GAII  raSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [II,  §§  163-167.

post  aditam  hereditatem  grande  aes  alienum,  quod  aditae
hereditatis  tempore  latebat,  apparuisset.

164  Extraneis  heredibus  solet  cretio  dari,  id  est  finis  deliber-
andi,  ut  intra  certum  tempus  uel  adeant  hereditatem,  uel  si
non  adeant  temporis  fine  summoueantur :  ideo  autem  cretio
appellata  est  quia  cernere  est  quasi  decemere  et  constituere.

165  Cum   ergo   ita   scriptum    sit:    HERES    TITIVS    ESTO,   adicere
debemus :   CERNITOQVE  IN   CENTVM  DIEBVS   PROXIMIS   QVIBVS

SCIES     POTERISQVE.        QVODNI     ITA    CREVERIS,     EXHERES     ESTO.

166  Et  qui  ita  heres  institutus  est,  si  uelit  heres  esse,  debebit
intra  diem  cretionis  cernere,  id  est  haec  uerba  dicere :  QVOD

ME   PVBLIVS  MEV1VS  TESTAMENTO   SVO   HEREDEM  INSTITVIT,  EAM

HEREDITATEM  ADEO  CERNOQVE ;  quodsi  ita  non  creuerit,  finite
tempore  cretionis  excluditur:;  nee  qujcquam  proficit  si  pro
herede  gerat,  id  est  si  rebus  hereditariis  tamquam  heres

167  utatur.        At  is  qui  sine  cretione  heres  institutus  est,  aut

covery  after  entry  of  the  existence  of  a  debt  of  large  amount
which  was  latent  when  that  step  was  taken..

164  To  stranger-heirs  it  is  the  practice  to  prescribe  cretion,  that
is  a  term  for  deliberating,  so  that  they  must  either  enter  within
the  time  fixed,  or,  on,  its  expiry  without  their  having  entered,
be  displaced;  it  is  so  called  because  cernere,  means  to  decide  and

165  determine.         When  therefore  we  have  written, '  Titius  be  my
heir,'  we  ought  to  add  these  words  :  '  and  cern  within  the  next
hundred  days  in  which  you  know  and  can  ;  in  default,  be  dis-

166  inherited.'         If  the  individual  so  instituted  desire  to  be  heir,
he  must  cern  within  the  time  for  cretion,  that  is,  announce
his  resolution  in  these  words  :;  '  Whereas  Publius  Mevius  has
instituted  me  heir  in  his  testament,  I  enter  upon  and  cern  to
his  inheritance.'     If.  he  have  not  cerned  in  this  way,  he  is
debarred   when   the   cretionary  term   is   ended;  nor  does  it
avail  him  anything  that  he  is  behaving  as  heir,  that  is,  deal-
ing with  the  items  of  the  inheritance  as   if  he  were  heir.

167  But  he  who  is  instituted  heir  without  cretion,  or  called  to  the

§  164.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxii,  27  ;  Varro  de  §  166.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxii,  §§  25,  26,  28  ;

L.  L.  vii,  98  ( Brans,  p.  281).     The  §  7,  tit.   I.   afd.     It  would  appear

cretio  here  described  was  no  longer  that  the  cerniture  was  declared  in

used  in  the  Justinianian  law.  the  presence  of  witnesses  convoked

§  165.     Comp.   §§  171,  177  ;  Vlp.  xxii,  for  the  purpose.      Comp.    Cic.    ad

27.     The  cretion  was  perfect  or  im-  Att.    xiii,    46,    §  2,    and   Varro   de

perfect  according  as  it  was  or  was  L.  L.  vi,  81  (Bruns,  p.  278).

not  under  pain  of  disherison  ;  Vlp.  §  167.     Comp.  iii,  87  ;  Vlp.  xxii,  25  ;  §

xxii,  34.  7,  tit.  I.  afd.

II,  §§  167-170.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  133

qui  ab  intestate  legitimo  iure  ad  hereditatem  uocatur,  potest
aut  cernendo  aut  pro  herede  gerendo  uel  etiam  iiuda  uolun-
tate  suscipiendae  liereditatis  heres  fieri  :  eique  liberum  est
quocumque  tempore  uoluerit  adire  hereditatem ;  sed  solet
praetor  postulantibus  hereditariis  creditoribus  tempus  con-
stituere  intra  quod  si  uelit  adeat  hereditatem,  si  minus,  ut

168  liceat  creditoribus   bona   defuncti   uendere.         Sicut   autem
[qui]  cum  cretione  heres  institutus  est  nisi  creuerit  heredi-
tatem non  fit  heres,  ita  non  aliter  excluditur  quam  si  non
creuerit  intra  id  tempus  quo  cretio  finita  sit ;  itaque  licet  ante
diem   cretionis   constituerit   hereditatem    non   adire,   tamen
paenitentia  actus  superante  die  cretionis  cernendo  heres  esse

169  potest.         At  is  qui  sine  cretione  heres  institutus  est,  quiue
ab  intestato  per  legem  uocatur,  sicut  uoluntate  nuda  heres  fit,
ita  et  contraria  destinatione  statirn  ab  hereditate  repellitur.

170  Omnis  autem  cretio  certo  tempore  constringitur.     in  quam
rem   tolerabile   tempus   uisum   est   centum   dierum:    potest
tamen  nihilo  minus  iure  ciuili  aut  longius  aut  breuius  tempus

inheritance  ab  intestato  by  devolution  of  law,  may  become
heir  either  by  cerning  or  by  behaving  as  heir,  or  even  by  an
informal  expression  of  his  intention  to  take  up  the  inherit-
ance, and  it  is  free  to  him  to  enter  to  it  at  any  time  he
chooses ;  but  it  is  the  practice  for  the  praetor,  on  the  peti-
tion of  the  creditors  of  the  deceased,  to  fix  a  time  within
which  the  heir  must  enter,  if  such  be  his  pleasure,  or  the
creditors  be  entitled,  if  he  do  not,  to  sell  the  deceased's  estate.

168  But  just  as  an  heir  instituted  withewt  cretion  does  not  become
heir  unless  he  has  cerned,  so  he  is  not  otherwise  excluded
than  by  failure  to  cern  before  the  cretionary  term  has  expired ;
therefore  though,  before  the  last  day  of  cretion,  he  may  have
resolved  not  to  enter  upon  the  inheritance,  yet,  repenting  of
his  resolution,  he  may  still  become  heir  by  cerniture  while

169  any  part  of  the  term  remains.         He,  on  the  other  hand,  who
is  instituted  heir  without  cretion,  or  who  is  called  by  law  on
intestacy,  as  he  becomes  heir  by  any  informal  declaration  of
will,  is  likewise  at  once  excluded  from  the  inheritance  by  any

170  declaration  to  the  contrary.         Every  cretion  is  limited  to  a
certain  time.     A  hundred  days  have  been  considered  a  reason-
able allowance,  although  by  the  civil  law  either  a  longer  or  a

§  168.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxii,  30.  §  170.     Comp.  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xiii,  46,  §  2  ;

§  169.     Comp.   Vlp.   xxii,  29  ;  §  7,  tit.  Testamentum  Dasumii,  p.  C.  109,

I.  afd.  (Bruns,  p.  202).

134  GAII  INSTITUTION VM  IVRIS  CIVILIS  [II,  §§  171-173.

171  dari ;  longius  tamen  interdum  praetor  coartat.         Et  quamuis
onmis  cretio   certis   diebus  constringatur,  tamen  alia  cretio
uulgaris  uocatur,  alia  certorum  dierura :   uulgaris  ilia  quain
supra  exposuimus,  id  est  in  qua  adiciuntur  haec  uerba  :  QVIBVS
SCIET  POTERITQVE  :  certorum  dierum,  in  qua  detractis  his  uerbis

172  cetera  scribuntur.        Quarum  cretionum  magna  differentia  est :
nam  uulgari  cretione  data  nulli  dies  conputantur  nisi  quibus
scierit  quisque  se  heredem  esse  iustitutum  et  possit  cernere ;
certorum  uero  dierum  cretione  data,  etiam  nescienti  se  here-
dem institutum  esse  numerantur  dies  continui ;  item  ei  quoque
qui  aliqua  ex  causa  cernere  prohibetur,  et  eo  aniplius  ei  qui
sub  condicione  heres  institutus  est,  tempus  numeratur ;  unde

173  melius  et  aptius  est  uulgari  cretione  uti.         [Continua  haec
cretio  uocatur  quia  continui  dies  numerantur ;  sed  quia  tarn l
dura  est  haec  cretio  altera  magis  in  usu  2  habetur ;  unde  etiam
uulgaris  dicta  est.]

shorter  period  may  be  granted  ;  but  a  longer  one  is  some-

171  times  abridged  by  the  praetor.         And  although  every  cretion
is  under  a  certain  limitation  of  time,  yet  one  variety  is  called
ordinary  cretion,  and  another  determinate :  the  first  is  that
we  have  been  describing,  and  in  which  there  are  contained
in  the  cretion-clause  the  words, '  in  which  he  knows  and  can  ; '
the  second  occurs  when  we  have  the  cretion-clause  without

172  those  words.         There  is  a  great  difference  between  the  two  ;
for  where  ordinary  cretion  is  enjoined,  no  days  are  counted
but  those  during  which  the  party  knows  that  he  has  been
instituted  heir,  and  is  in  a  position  to  cern ;  whereas  where
the  cretion  is  determinate,  the  days  are  reckoned  continuously,
even  against  a  party  who  is  not  aware  that  he  has  been  insti-
tuted heir,  against  him  who  from   any  cause  is   prevented
cerning,  and  against  him  who  is  instituted  only  conditionally.
It  is  better  and  fitter  therefore  to  employ  the  ordinary  cre-

173  tion.         The  determinate  cretion  is  [also]  called  continuous,
because  the  days  are  reckoned  continuously ;  but,  as  it  is  so
strict,  the  other  is  more  frequently  employed,  and  therefore
called  ordinary.

§§  171,  172.     Comp.  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xi,  12,  l  The  MS.  has  tm,  which  usually

§  41  ;  de  orat.  i,  22,  §  101  ;   Vlp.  stands  for  tamen  ;  K.  u.  S.  so  print

xxii,  §§  31,  32.  it,  while  P.  has  tarn,  and  Hu.  omits

§    173.     This  par.    looks  like   a  gloss;  the  word  altogether.

it  is  little   more  than  an  amplifi-  2  The   MS.    has    minus ;  intended

cation,   somewhat   clumsy,   of   the  possibly,  as  G.  suggests,  for  myin-
final  words  of  the  preceding  one.

II,  §§  174-177.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  135

174  Interdum  duos  pluresue  gradus  heredum  facimus,  hoc  modo :

LVCIVS  TITIVS  HERES  ESTO,  CERNITOQVE  IN  DIEBVS  \_CENTVM]
PROXIMIS  QVIBVS  SCIES  POTERISQVE.  QVODNI  ITA  CREVERIS,
EXHERES  ESTO.  TVM  MEVIVS  HERES  ESTO,  CERNITOQUE  IN

DIEBVS  CENTVM  et  reliqua ;  et  deinceps  in  quantum  uelimus

175  substituere  possumus.         Et  licet  nobis  uel  unum  in  unius
locum  substituere  pluresue,  et  contra  in  plurium  locum  uel

176  unum  uel  plures  substituere.         Primo  itaque  gradu  scriptus
heres  hereditatem  cernendo  fit  heres  et  substitutus  excluditur  ;
non  cernendo   summouetur,  etiamsi  pro  lierede  gerat,  et  in
locum  eius  substitutus  succedit ;  et  deinceps  si  plures  gradus

177  sint  in  singulis  simili  ratione  idem  contingit.         Sed  si  cretio
sine   exheredatione  sit  data,  id  est  in  haec   uerba  :    sr  NON

CREVERIS    TVM   PVBLIVS    MEVIVS     HERES    ESTO,  illud    diuersum

inuenitur,  quod  si  prior  omissa  cretione  pro  herede  gerat,  sub-
stitutum  in  partem  admittit,  et  fiunt  ambo  aequis  partibus
heredes  ;  quodsi  neque  cernat  neque  pro  lierede  gerat,  turn  sane

174  Sometimes  we  make  two  or  more  degrees  of  heirs,  thus :
'  Lucius  Titius  be  my  heir,  and  cern  within  the  next  hundred
days  in  which  you  know  and  can ;  if  you  have  not  cerned,
be  disinherited :  in  that  case  Mevius  be  my  heir,  and  cern
within  a  hundred  days,'  and  so  on ;  and  we  may  substitute

175  successively  to  any  extent  we  like.         And  we  may  substi-
tute either  one  person  or  several  in  the  place  of  one ;  or,  on
the  other  hand,  either  one  or  several  in  the  place  of  several.

176  The  party,  therefore,  who  is  named  heir  in  the  first  degree,
becomes  heir  by  cerniture,  and  the  substitute  is  excluded ;  by
not  cerning,  the  former  is  displaced,  even  though  he  behave  as
heir,  and  the  substitute  succeeds  in  his  stead ;  and  if  there  be
several  degrees  the  same  rules  apply  to  each  of  them  in  suc-

177  cession.         But   if  cretion   be   enjoined   without  disherison,
that  is  to  say  in  such  words  as  'if  you  do  not  cern,  then
Publius  Mevius  be   heir,'  the  rule  is   different ;  because   if
the  institute-heir  has  neglected  to  cern,  yet  has  behaved  as
heir,  the  substitute  is  admitted  pro  parte,  and  both  become
heirs  for  a  moiety.     If,  however,  the  institute  neither  cern  iior

§§  174-178.     Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  VVLGARI  §  176.     Comp.  §  166.

SVBSTITVTIONE  (ii,  15).     In  the  M.S.  §§  177,  178.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxii,  34,  from

those  pars,  are  introduced  with  the  which  it  appears  that  the  rule  was

rubric  de  substitutionibus,  apparently  modified  by    Marc.    Aurelius,    and

by  the  original  hand.  gestio  pro   herede  by  the   institute

§174.  .  Comp.  Vlp.  xxii,  33;  pr.  tit.I.afd.  held  sufficient  to  altogether  exclude

§  175.     Comp.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  the  substitute.

136

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM

179

in  uniuerso  summouetur  et  SI:VRIS  CIVILIS   [II,  §§  177-179.
178  succedit.         Sed  Sabino  qu'

eo  modo  heres  fieri  possit  ^stitutus  in  totam  hereditatem
non  tamen  admitti  substi/dem  placuit,  quamdiu  cernere  et
turn  pro  herede  gerent|frior>  etiamsi  pro  herede  gesserit,
placuit  etiam  superanttutum  ;  cum  uero  cretio  finita  sit,
in  partem  substitutun  admitti  substitutum  :  l  aliis  2  uero
reuerti  non  posse.  A  cretione  eum  3  pro  herede  gerendo
Liberia  nostris  W  admittere  et  amplius  ad  cretionem
solum  ita  ut  supra  i

heredes  non  extm^en^yg  qllos  [n  potestate  habemus  non
ut  etiamsi  heredfliximus  substituere  possumus,  id  est  ut  si
fuermt,  sit  Us  ^erint  alius  nobis  heres  sit  ;  sed  eo  amplius
MEVS  MIHI  HEPes  nobis  extiterint  et  adhuc  inpuberes  mortui
(SIVE  HERESfoliqms  heres,  uelut  hoc  modo:  TITIVS  FILIVS

/ES  ESTO.      SI  FILIVS  MEVS  MIHI  (HERES  NON  ERIT,
ERIT  ET    PR1VS  MORI  AT  VR   QVAM     IN   SVAM   TVTE-

behave  as
178  and  the

/

-,  •    i  •  heir,  then  undoubtedly  he  is  altogether  displaced,
j  substitute  succeeds  to  the  whole  inheritance.         It
I          opinion  of  Sabinus  that,  so  long  as  the  institute  had
vs  power  to  cern  and  thus  become  heir,  there  was  no
?  ,  /or  the  substitute,  even  though  he,  the  institute,  might
been  behaving  as  heir  ;  and  that  it  was  only  after  the
of  cretion  had  expired  that,  notwithstanding  the  insti-
e's  gestio  pro  herede,  the  substitute  was  admitted.     But  it
s  held  by  the  lawyers  of  the  other  school  that  if  the  insti-
ute,  while  his  time  for  cretion  was  still  running,  chose  to  act
as  heir,  he  thereby  let  in  the  substitute  for  a  share,  and  could
not  afterwards  fall  back  on  his  cretion.

To  our  impuberate  descendants  in  potestate  we  may  not  only
make  a  substitution  in  the  manner  already  described,  that  is
to  say  by  providing  that,  if  they  do  not  become  heirs,  another
person  shall  be  our  heir  instead  of  them,  —  but  we  may  also
appoint  some  one  to  be  their  heir  in  the  event  of  their  having
become  our  heirs,  but  died  in  pupillarity  ;  as,  for  example,
thus  :  '  Be  my  son  Titius  my  heir  ;  if  he  do  not  become  my
heir,  or  if,  having  done  so,  he  die  before  passing  into  his  own

1  This  appears  to  be  the  reading
of  the  MS.,  and  is  approved  by  P.
and  K.  u.  S. ;  Hu.  renders  it — turn
pro  herede  gerentem  admittere  sub-
stitutum..

-  See  i,  196,  note  1.

3  Before    this  word  the  MS.  has

posse,   deleted  as  suggested  by  K.

(K.  u.  S.  footnote).
§§  179-184.     Cornp.  tit.   I.   DE  PVPIL-

LARI  SVBST1TVTIONE  (ii,  16).
§  179.     Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.,  from  which  the

words  in  ital.  are  borrowed.    Comp.

Vlp.  xxiii.  7.

II,  §§  180,  181.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  137

180  LAM  VENEEIT,  TVNC  SEivs  HEiiES  ESTO.        quo  casu  si  quidem
non   extiterit    heres   filius,   substitutus  patri    fit   heres;    (si
(uero)  1  heres  extiterit  filius   et   ante  pubertatem  decesserit,
ipsi  filio  fit  heres  substitutus.     quam  ob  rein  duo  quodam-
niodo   sunt  testamenta,   aliud    patris    aliud    filii,    tamquam
si    ipse   filius   sibi   heredem   instituisset ;    aut   certe    unum

181  est  testamentum  duarum   hereditatum.         Ceterum  ne  post
obitum    parentis     periculo     insidiarum    subiectus    uideatur
pupillus,  in  usu  est  uulgarem  quidem  substitutionem  palam
facere,   id   est   eo  loco  quo  pupillum  heredem  instituimus.
uulgaris  substitutio  ita  uocat  ad  hereditatem  substitution  si
omnino  pupillus  heres  non  extiterit ;  quod  accidit  cum  uiuo
parente  moritur,  quo  casu  nullum  substituti  maleficium  sus-
picari  possumus,  cum  scilicet  uiuo  testatore  omnia  quae  in
testamento  scripta  sint   ignorentur :   illam   autem   substitu-
tionem  per  quam,  etiamsi  heres   extiterit  pupillus  et  intra
pubertatem   decesserit,   substitutum   uocamus,   separatim   in
inferioribus  tabulis  scribimus,  easque  tabulas  proprio  lino  pro-
priaque  cera  consignamus,  et  in  prioribus  tabulis  cauemus  ne

180  tutelage,  then  be  Seius  my  heir.'         In  this  case,  if  the  son
has  not  become  his  father's  heir,  the  substitute  takes  that  posi-
tion ;  if,  however,  the  son  have  become  heir,  but  died  in  pupil-
larity,  the  substitute  becomes  the  son's  heir,  [not  the  father's.]
There  are  thus  in  a  manner  two  testaments, —  one  the  father's,
the  other  the  son's,  just  as  if  the  latter  had  instituted  an  heir
for  himself;  or  at  any  rate  there  is  one  testament  disposing

181  of  two  inheritances.         But  lest  the  pupil  after  his  parent's
death  should  be  exposed  to  the  risk  of  foul  play,  it  is  usual  to
make  the  ordinary  substitution  openly,  i.e.  in  that  part  of  the
testament  which  contains  the  institution  of  the  pupil  as  heir.
By  the  ordinary  substitution  the  substitute  is  called  to  the
inheritance  only  in  the  event  of  the  pupil  not  having  become
heir  at  all ;  this  happens  when  he  predeceases  his  parent ;
and  until  then  we  cannot  suspect  any  misconduct  on  the  part
of  the  substitute,  seeing  that  so  long  as  the  testator  lives  the
contents  of  his  testament  are  unknown.     But  the  substitution
whereby  we  appoint  a  substitute  in  the  event  of  the  pupil
having  become  heir  but  died  before  reaching  puberty  we  insert
by  itself  in  the  later  tablets,  which  we  tie  up  and  seal  with

§  ISO.     Pr.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  the  MS.

1  From  the  Inst.,  but  hardly  suf-       §  181.     Corap.  Epit.  ii,  4,  §  2  ;  §  3,  tit.
ficient  to  fill  the  illegible  space  in  I.  afd.  ;  Th.  ii,  16,  3.

138  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [II,  §§  181-184.

inferiores  tabulae  uiuo  filio  et  adhnc  inpubere  aperiantur.  sed
longe  tutius  est  utrumque  genus  substitutionis  [separatim]  l  in
inferioribus  tabulis  consignari ;  quod,  si  ita  [consignatae  uel]  1
separatae  fuerint  substitutiones  ut  diximus,  ex  priore  potest

182  intelligi  in  altera  quoque  2    idem  esse   substitutus.         Non
solum  autem  heredibus  institutis  inpuberibus  liberis  ita  sub-
stituere  possumus,  ut  si  ante  pubertatem  mortui  fuerint  sit  is
heres  quern  nos  uoluerimus,  sed  etiam  exheredatis :  itaque  eo
casu  si  quid  pupillo  ex  hereditatibus  legatisue  aut  donationi-
bus  propinquorum  adquisitum  fuerit,  id  omne  ad  substitutum

183  pertinet.          Quaecumque   diximus    de    substitutione   inpu-
berum  liberorum,  uel  heredum  institutorum  uel  exheredato-

18-4  rum,  eadem  etiam  de  postumis  l  intellegemus.  Extraneo
nero  heredi l  institute  ita  substituere  non  possumus  ut  si  heres
extiterit  et  intra  aliquod  tempus  decesserit  alius  ei  heres  sit ;
sed  hoc  solum  nobis  permissum  est,  ut  eum  per  fideicommis-

cord  and  seals  of  their  own ;  and  in  the  earlier  ones  we  give
instructions  that  the  others  are  not  to  be  opened  so  long  as
our  son  is  alive  and  still  a  pupil.  It  is  much  safer,  however,
to  seal  up  both  the  substitutions  in  the  final  tablets ;  because,
if  they  have  been  sealed  up  or  separated  in  the  manner  above
described,  it  may  readily  be  conjectured  from  the  one  that  the

182  same  person  is  also  substituted  in  the  other.         It  is  not  only
to  those  of  our  children  Tinder  puberty  whom  we  have  insti-
tuted heirs  that  we  can  make  a  substitution  to  the  effect  that,
if  they  die  in  pupillarity,  the  person  whom  we  have  chosen
shall  be  their  heir, — we  may  do  so  also  for  children  we  have
disinherited ;  and  in  such  a  case  if  the  pupil  have  acquired
anything  in  the  shape  of  inheritances,  bequests,  or  donations

183  from  kinsmen,  it  will  all  belong  to  the  substitute.         All  that
has  been  said   about   substitution  for  impuberate   children,
whether  instituted  or  disinherited,  applies  equally  to  those

184  that  may  he  after-born.         But  we  cannot  substitute  to  a
stranger-institute  on  the  footing  that,  if  he  become  heir  but
die  within  a  certain  period,  another  person  shall  be  his  heir ;
all  that  we  can  do  is,  by  creation  of  a  trust,  to  lay  him  under

Recording  to  M.  and  K.  u.  S.,  §182.     §   4,   tit.    I.    afd,     Comp.    Vlp.

the  words  seftaratim  and  consignatae  xxiii,  8.

uel  are  glosses,  and  the  first   obvi-  §  183.     §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.

ously  inaccurate.  l  See  §§  130  f.

2  Between  altera  and  quoque  the  §  184.     §  9,  tit.  I.  afd.

MS.    has  alter,  obviously  per  incu-  l  Before  heredi,  P.,  following  the

rlam.  Inst.,  interjects  uel  puberi  filio.

II,  §§  184-188.]  COMMEKTAEII  QVATTVOR.  139

sum  obligernus  ut  hereditatem  nostram  uel  totam  uel  [pro]
parte  restituat ;  quod  ius  quale  sit  suo  loco  2  trademus.

185  Sicut  autem  liberi  homines,  ita  et  serui,  tarn  nostri  quam

186  alieni,  heredes  scribi  possunt.         Sed  noster  seruus  simul  et
liber  et  heres  esse  iuberi  debet,  id  est  hoc   modo :  STICHVS

SERWS  MEVS  LIBER   HERESQVE  ESTO,  uel  HERES  LIBERQVE  ESTO  :

187  nani  si  sine  libertate  heres  institutus  sit,  etiamsi  postea  manu-
missus  fuerit  a  domino,  heres  esse  non  potest,  quia  institutio
in  persona  eius  non  constitit ;  ideoque  licet  alienatus  sit  non

188  potest    iussu    domini    noui    cernere    hereditatem.         Cum
libertate   uero   heres   institutus,   si   quidem  in  eadem  causa
durauerit,  fit  ex  testamento  liber  et  inch  necessarius  heres :
si   uero   ab   ipso  testatore   manumissus   fuerit,   suo   arbitrio
hereditatem   adire   potest;  quodsi  alienatus  sit,  iussu   noui
domini  adire  hereditatem  debet,  qua  rations  per  eum  dominus
fit   heres  :   nani    ipse   neque   heres  neque  liber  esse  potest.1

obligation  to  convey  the  inheritance  wholly  or  partially  to
another:  how  this  is  done  we  shall  explain  in  its  proper
place.

185  Slaves,  whether  our  own  or  belonging  to  another  person,

186  may  be  instituted  heirs  quite  as  well  as  freemen.         But  a
slave  of   our  own  must  be  manumitted  and -appointed  heir
simultaneously,  thus  :  '  Let  Stichus  my  slave  be  free  and  heir/

187  or  '  my  heir  and  free.'         For,  if  he  have  been  instituted  heir
without  grant  of  freedom,  he  cannot  be  heir,  even  though  he
may  in  the  meanwhile,  have  been  manumitted  by  his  owner,
the  institution  having  been  invalid  from  the  point  of  view  of
his  persona  at  the  time ;  and,  for  the  same  reason,  if  he  have
been  alienated  in  the  meanwhile  he  cannot  cern  on  the  in-

188  structions  of  his  new  owner.         A  slave  instituted  with  gift  of
liberty,  if  he  have  till  the  last  remained  in  the  ownership  of
the  testator,  becomes  free  under  the  testament,  and   hence
a    necessary   heir ;  if,  however,   he   have   been   manumitted
by  the  testator,  it  is  in  his  own  discretion  to  enter  upon  the
inheritance ;  if   he  have   been   alienated,  he  can  enter  only
on  the  order  of  his   new    owner,    who   thus   becomes   heir
through  the  slave, — for  the  latter  can  now  neither  be  heir  nor

2§§246f.,  277.  §188.  Comp.  §§87,  153;  Vlp.  xxii,

§§  185-190.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  HEKEDI-  §§  11,  12  ;  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.

BVS  INSTITVEXDIS  (ii,  14).  l  P.,  borrowing  from  the  Inst.,

§§  185,  186.  Comp.  Vlp.  xxii,  7  ;  Paul.  adds — etsi  cum  libertate  heres  insti-

iii,  46,  §  7  ;  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  tutus  fuerit;  destitisse  enim  a  liber-

§  187.  Comp.  Vlp.  xxii,  §  11.  tatis  datione  uidetur  dominus.

140  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVKIS  CIVILIS   [II,  §§  189-191.

189  Alienus  quoque   seruus   Leres  institutus,  si  in  eadem  causa
durauerit,    iussu   domini   hereditatem   adire  debet ;   si   uero
alienatus  ab  eo  fuerit,  aut  uiuo  testatore  aut  post   mortem
ems,  antequam  cernat,  debet  iussu  noui  domini   cernere:  si
uero  manurnissus  est  suo  arbitrio  adire  hereditatem  potest.

190  Si  autem  seruus  alienus  heres  institutus  est  uulgari  cretione
data,   ita    intellegitur   dies   cretionis    cedere   si  ipse   seruus
scierit  se  heredem  institutum  esse,  nee  ullum  inpedimentum
sit    quominus   certiorem   dominuni   faceret    ut   illius   iussu
cernere  possit.

191  Post  haec  uideamus  de  legatis.     quae  pars  iuris  extra  pro-
positam  quidem  materiam  uidetur :  nam  loquimur  de  his  iuris
figuris  quibus  per  uniuersitatem  res  nobis  adquiruntur :  sed
cum  omni  modo  de  testamentis  deque  heredibus  qui  testa-
mento  instituuntur  locuti  sumus,  non  sine  causa  sequenti
loco  poterit  haec  iuris  rnateria  tractari.

189  free.         If  another  man's  slave  instituted  as  heir  continue
in  the    same    ownership,    he    enters    upon   the  inheritance
or  not  as  his  owner  may  direct ;  if  he  have  been  alienated,
either  during  the  testator's   lifetime  or  after  his  death,  but
before  cretion,  he  must  cern  on  the  order  of  his  new  owner ;
but  if  he  have  been  manumitted,  he  may  use  his  own  discre-

190  tion  as  to  entering  upon  the  inheritance.         If  he  have  been
instituted  under  ordinary  cretion,  the  cretionary  period  is  held
to   begin  to  run   only  when   the  slave  himself  has   become
aware  of  his  institution,  and  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  him
informing  his  owner  of  the  fact,  and  so  being  in  a  position
to  cern  on  his  command.

191  After  all  this  let  us  turn  our  attention  to  legacies.     It  is  a
branch  of  the  law  not  exactly  within  our  present  subject-
matter  ;  for  we  are  dealing  with  the  modes  known  to  the  law
of  acquiring  things  on  a  universal  title.      But  as  we  have
discussed  from  every  point  of  view  the  law  of  testaments  and
testamentary  heirs,  this  matter  of  legacies  may,  not  without
reason,  be  treated  of  in  the  next  place.

§  189.  Comp.  §  87  ;  Vlp.  xxii,  13;  §  1,  troduced  in  the  MS.,  in  a  later  hand,

tit.  I.  afd.  on  a  vacant  line  between  §§  191  and

§  190.     Comp.  §  172.  192.

§§  191-223.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  LEGATIS  §  191.  Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  Comp.  above,

(ii,  20).  The  rubric  de  legatis  is  in-  §  97.

II,  §§  192-195.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  141

192  Legatorum   itaque   genera   sunt   quattuor:   aut   eniin   per
uindicationem   legamus,  aut  per  danmationem,  aut  sinendi
modo,  aut  per  praeceptionem.

193  Per  uindicationem  hoc  modo  legamus :  TITIO  uerbi  gratia
HOMINEM  STICK VM  DO  LEGO  ;  sed  [et]  si  alterutrum1  uerbum
positum  sit.  ueluti  DO  aut  LEGO,   aeque   per  uindicationem
legatum  est :  item,  ut  magis  uisum  est,  si  ita  legatum  fuerit :
SVMITO,  uel  ita:  SIBI  BABETO,  uel  ita:    CAPITO,  aeque   per

194  uindicationem  legatum  est.         Ideo  autem  per  uindicationem
legatum  appellatur  quia  post  aditam  hereditatem  statim  ex
iure  Quiritium  res  legatarii  fit ;  et  si  earn  rem  legatarius  uel
ab  herede  uel  ab  alio  quocumque  qui  earn  possidet  petat,
uindicare1  debet,  id  est  intendere  suam  rem  ex  iure  Quiritium

195  esse.        In  eo  solo  dissentiunt  prudentes,  quod  Sabinus  quidem
et  Cassius.  ceterique  nostri  praeceptores l  quod  ita  legatum  sit
statim  post  aditam  hereditatem  putant  fieri  legatarii,  etiamsi

192  There  are  then  four  kinds  of  legacies  ;  for  we  legate  either
by  vindication,  by  damnation,  by  permission,  or  by  preception.

193  By  vindication  we  legate  thus :  '  To  Titius  I  give  and  legate,'
for  example,  '  the  slave  Stichus.'     If  one  or  other  only  of
the  words  be  used,  as  '  I  give,'  or  '  I  legate,'  the  bequest  is
equally  one  by  vindication.     And  so  it  is,  according  to  the
prevailing  opinion,  if  the  words  employed  be — '  Titius  is  to

194  take,'  (sumito  or  capito,}    or  'is  to  have  for  himself.'         A
legacy  by  vindication  is  so  called  because  the  thing  bequeathed
becomes  the  property  of  the  legatee  in  quiritarian  right  the
moment  the  inheritance  has  been  entered  upon ;  and,  if  the
legatee  have  on  account  of  it  to  sue  either  the  heir  or  any
third  party  in  possession,  he  must  do  so  by  vindication,  i.e.
he   must   plead  that  the  thing  is  his  in  quiritarian   right.

195  On  this  point  alone  the  jurists  disagree, — that  Sabinus,  Cassius,
and  the  rest  of  our  school,  are  of  opinion  that  the  thing  legated
at  once  becomes  the  property  of  the  legatee  when  the  inheritance
has  been  entered  on.  even  though  he  be  ignorant  of  the  bequest,
but  that  if  he  have  [declined  if]  after  hearing  of  it,  it  is  as  if  it
had  not  been  bequeathed ;  whereas  Nerva  and  Proculus,  and
the  other  leaders  of  their  school,  hold  that  the  bequest  does
not  become  the  property  of  the  legatee  unless  such  be  his

§192.  Comp.Vlp.  xxiv,  2;  §2,  tit.  I.afd.  §  194.     Comp.  Th.  ii,  20,  §  2.
§  193.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxiv,  3.  J  Comp.  iv,  41.

1  The  MS.  apparently  has  alterum;  §  195.     Comp.  Paul,  iii,  6,  §  7.

sohasHu.;G.,  Bk.,  P.,  and  K.u.S.,  l  See  i,  196,  note  1.

alterutrum.

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  C1VILIS   [II,  §§  195, 196.

ignoret  sibi  legatum  esse  [dimissum],2  sed3  posteaquam  scierit

et 4  legatum,  perinde  esse  atque  si  legatum  non  esset ;

Nerua  uero  et  Proculus  ceterique  illius  scholae  auctores l  non
aliter  putant  rem  legatarii  fieri  quam  si  uoluerit  earn  ad  se
pertinere.  sed  hodie  ex  diui  Pii  Antonini  constitutione  hoc
magis  iure  uti  uidemur  quod  Proculo  placuit ;  nam  cum
legatus  fuisset  latinus5  per  uindicationem  coloniae,  'Deliberent,'
iriquit,  '  decuriones,  an  ad  se  uelint  pertinere,  proinde  ac  si
196  uni  legatus  esset.'  Eae  autem  solae  res  per  uindicationem
legantur  recte  quae  ex  iure  Quiritium  ipsius  testatoris  sunt ;
sed  eas  quidem  res  quae  pondere  numero  mensura  constant,
placuit  sufficere  si  mortis  tempore  sint  ex  iure  Quiritium
testatoris,  ueluti  uinum  oleum  frumentum  pecuniam  nume-
ratam ;  ceteras  res  nero  placuit  utroque  tempore  testatoris  ex
iure  Quiritium  esse  debere,  id  est  et  quo  faceret  testamentum

pleasure.  At  the  present  day,  as  appears  from  a  constitution
of  our  late  emperor  Antoninus  Pius,  we  seem  rather  to  follow
the  rule  laid  down  by  Proculus;  for,  when  a  latin  had  been
legated  by  vindication  to  a  colony,  he  wrote  :  '  The  decurions
must  deliberate  whether  they  wish  to  have  him,  just  as  if  he
196  had  been  legated  to  an  individual.'  Those  things  alone  can
competently  be  legated  by  vindication  which  belong  to  the
testator  himself  in  quiritarian  right.  As  regards  those  that
pass  by  weight,  number,  or  measure,  such  as  wine,  oil,  corn,
and  current  coin,  it  is  held  to  be  sufficient  that  they  belonged
to  the  testator  in  quiritarian  right  at  the  time  of  his  death ;
but  as  regards  other  things  it  is  held  that  they  must  have
been  his  in  quiritarian  right  at  both  times,  i.e.  both  when  he
made  his  testament  and  at  the  time  he  died,  otherwise  the

2  Hu.  and  K.   u.    S.  regard  this  i.e.   a  legacy  that  the  legatee  has

word  as  a  gloss,  the  former  on  the  expressly  repudiated  (or  put  away

ground  that  although  dimittere  lega-  from  him),  or  even  one  that,  know-

tum    occurs    in    the   West    Gothic  ing  of  its  bequest,  he  has  simply

Gaius,   in   the   sense   of  leg.  relin-  disregarded,  etc.

quere,  it  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  3  The  MS.  has  et.

of  the  Roman  texts.     M.  (K.  u.  S.  4  The  letters  in  the  MS.  look  like

p.    xxi)    makes    it   demissum.     P.  ceerit,  but  are  very  indistinct.     G.

retains  it,  but  in  a  different  accepta-  (on  suggestion  of  Niebuhr),  Bk.,  and

tion.     As  admittere  legatum  (§  200)  now  Hu.,  think  spreuerit  a  likely

means  to  accept  a  legacy,   so,  ac-  reading ;  it  finds  its  justification  in

cording    to     him,    does    dimittere  iii,  62,  and  §  8,  tit.  I.  afd.     P.,  as

mean  to  reject  it.     He  accordingly  mentioned    in   last  note,    proposes

severs  dimissum  from  the   preced-  et/am  spretum;  M.  suggests  omis-

ing  words,  and,  filling  up  the  lacuna  erit;  K.  u.  S.,  repudiauerit.

with  ctiam  spretum,  reads — dimis-  5  Comp.    §   155,  note   2 ;  iii,    §§

sum,   et  posteaquam   scierit   etiam  56-58.
spretum  legatum,  perinde  esse,  etc.,       §  196.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxiv,  7.

II,  §§  197-199.]  COMMENTAKII  QVATTVOR.  143

197  et  quo  moreretur,  alioquin  inutile  est  legatum.         Sed  sane
hoc  ita  est  hire  ciuili :  postea  uero  auctore  Nerone  Caesare
senatusconsultum  factum  est,  quo  cautum  est  ut  si  earn  reni
quisque  legauerit  quae  eius  numquam  fuerit,  proinde  utile  sit
legatum  atque  si  optimo  iure  relictum  esset :  optimum  autem
ius  est  per  damnationem  legati ;  quo  genere  etiam  aliena  res

198  legari  potest,  sicut  inferius1  apparebit.         Sed  si  quis  rein
suam  legauerit,  deinde  post  testamentum  factum  earn  aliena-
uerit,  plerique  putant  non  solum  iure  ciuili  inutile  esse  lega-
tum sed  nee  ex  senatusconsulto  confirmari.    quod  ideo  dictum
est,  quia  et  si  per  damnationem  aliquis  rem  suam  legauerit
eamque  postea  alienauerit,  plerique  putant,  licet  ipso  iure  de-
beatur  legatum,  tamen  legatarium  petentem  posse  per  excep-
tionem  doli  mali1  repelli,  quasi  contra  uoluntatem  defuncti

199  petat.       Illud  constat,  si  duobus  pluribusue  per  uindicationem
eadem  res  legata  sit,  siue  coniunctim  siue  disiunctim,1  partes  >
ad  siugulos  pertinere  et  deficientis  portionem  collegatario  ad-

197  legacy  will  be  useless.        Such  at  least  was  the  rule  of  the  civil
law.    But  afterwards,  on  the  suggestion  of  the'  emperor  Nero,
a  senatusconsult  was  enacted,  wherein  it  was  provided  that  if
a  man  legated  a  thing  that  had  never  been  his,  the  legacy
should  be  as  valid  as  if  it  had  been  bequeathed  in  the  most
favourable  form  :  and  the  most  favourable  form  of  legacy  is
by  damnation ;  for  in  that  way,  as  will  appear  presently,  one

198  may  bequeath  even  what  belongs  to  a  third  party.         If  a
man  have  legated  something  of  his  own,  but  have  alienated  it
after  making  his  testament,  most  jurists  hold  that  the  legacy
is  not  only  invalid  by  the  civil  law,  but  is  not  even  validated
by  the  senatusconsult,     The  ground  of  this  opinion  is  that
when  a  man  has  bequeathed  something  of  his  own  by  damna-
tion and  afterwards  alienated  it,  while,  according  to  most
authorities,   the   legacy   is   due   ipso   iure,   nevertheless,  the
legatee,  if  he  sue  for  it,  may  be  defeated  by  an  exception  of
fraud,  as  making  a  claim  inconsistent  with  the  real  intent  of

199  the  deceased.         It  is  a  well-established  rule  that  if  the  same
thing  be  legated   by  vindication  to   two  or   more  persons,
whether  conjointly  or  disjointly,  they  take  each  a  share,  while

§  197.  Comp.  Vlp.  xxiv,  llo.  *  After  disiunctim  the  MS.  has  et

1  See  §  202.  omnes  ueniant  ad  legatum;  but  this

§  198.  Comp.^§  12,  tit.  I.  afd.  is  so  inconsistent  with  the  imme-

1  See  §  76,  note  3.  diately  following  deficientis  portio

§  199.  Comp.  §  206  ;  Yip.  xxiv,  12  ;  that  the  words  must  be  rejected  as

Paul,  iii,  6,  §  26 ;  §  8,  tit.  I.  afd.  a  gloss.

144  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  199-201

crescere.     coniunctim  autem  ita  legatur :  TITIO  ET  SEIO  HOMI-

NEM  STICHVM   DO  LEGO  ;   disiunctim  ita  :   LVCIO  TITIO   HOMINEM

200  STICHVM   DO   LEGO.      SEIO  EVNDEM  HOMINEM  DO  LEGO.  Illud

quaeritur,  quod  sub  condicione  per  uindicationem  legatum  est,
pendente  coudicione  cuius  esset :  nostri  praeceptores1  heredis
esse  putant  exeraplo  statuliberi,2  id  est  eius  serui  qui  testa-
mento  sub  aliqua  condicione  liber  esse  iussus  est,  quern  constat
interea  heredis  seruum  esse ;  sed  diuersae  scliolae  auctores J
putant  nullius  interim  earn  rem  esse ;  quod  multo  magis
dicunt3  de  eo  quod  [sine  condicione]4  pure  legatum  est,  ante-
quam  legatarius  admittat  legatum.

201  Per  damnationem  hoc  modo  legamus  :  HERES  MEVS  STICHVM

SERVVM    MEVM   DARE    DAMNAS 1  ESTO  ;   sed   et   si  DATO  SCriptum

the  share  of  any  one  who  fails  accresces  to  his  co-legatee.  A
thing  is  legated  conjointly  thus :  'To  Titius  and  Seius  I  give
and  legate  the  slave  Stichus ;'  and  disjointly  thus  :  '  To  Lucius
Titius  I  give  and  legate  the  slave  Stichus :  I  give  and  legate

200  the  same  slave  to  Seius.'         When  a  thing  is  conditionally
legated  by  vindication,  it  is  a  question  whose  it  is  while  the
condition  is  unfulfilled.     Our  authorities  hold  it  belongs  to
the  heir,  on  the  analogy  of  a  statuliber,  i.e.  a  slave  who  has  by
testament  a  conditional  grant  of  freedom,  and  who,  as  is
admitted,  belongs  in  the  meanwhile  to  the  heir.     But  the
authorities  of  the  other  school  think  that  in  the  meantime  the
thing  belongs  to  no  one ;  and  a  fortiori  they  maintain  the  same
doctrine   in  reference  to  an  unconditional  legacy   not   yet
accepted  by  the  legatee.

201  By  damnation  we  legate  in  this  way  :  '  Be  my  heir  bound
to  give  my  slave  Stichus ; '  but  though  the  words  be  simply —
'  Let  my  heir  give,'  the  legacy  is  still  one  by  damnation.

§  200.     Comp.   Gai.   in  fr.   29,  §  1,  D.  1  Damnas  is  a  word  for  which  it

qui  et  a  quib.  man.  (xl,  9);  Vlp.  iu  is  not  easy  to  give  a  precise  English

fr.  12,  §  2,  D. /am.  erase,  (x,  2).  equivalent.    It  is  thus  explained  by

1  See  i,  196,  note  1.  Serv.  (inAen.  xii,  727) — In  iure  cum

2  Comp.  Vlp.  ii,  §§  1,  2.  dicitur  'Damnas  esto,'  hoc  est  dam-

3  Comp.  §  195.  natus  es  ut  des,  hoc  est  damno  te  ut

4  As  the  text  stands,  either  sine  des  neque  alias  libereris.    The  phrase
condicione  or  pure  must  be  regarded  damnas  eslo  was  employed  where  a
as  a  gloss.     Van  der  Hoeven  (Z.  f.  penalty  or  liability  was  imposed  by
RG.  vii,  p.  258)  suggests  sine  condi-  a  law,  whether  a  public  statute,  such
done  per  uindicationem ;  his  theory  as  the  lex  Mamiiia,  lex  lulia  Munici-
being  that  the  two  last  words  were  palis,   lex  Aquilia,  etc.,    or  a  law
represented  by  the  contraction  pu,  established  by  a  private  individual
which  the    transcriber    has  trans-  by  a  public  act  (§  104,  note  8),  as  in
formed  into  pure.  the   uerba  nuncupata  of  a  nexum

§  201.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxiv,  4  ;  Th.  ii,  20,  or  a  testament,  or  in  the  dedication

§  2.  of  a  monument  whose   safety  the

II,  §5  202-204.]  COMMEXTARII  OVATTVOR.  145

202  fuerit,  per  damnationem  legatum  est.         Eoque  genere  legati
etiam  aliena  res  legari  potest,  ita  ut  lieres  [rem]  redimere  et

203  praestare  aut  aestimationem  eius  dare  debeat.         Ea  quoque
res  quae  in  rerum  natura  non  est.  si  modo  futura  est,  per
damnationem  legari  potest,  uelut '  fructus  qui  in  illo  fundo

204  nati  erunt,'  aut  'quod  ex  ilia  ancilla  natum  erit.'         Quod
autem  ita  legatum  est,  post  aditam  hereditatem,  etiamsi  pure
legatum  est,  non,  ut  per  uindicationem  legatum,1  continuo
legatario  adquiritur,  sed  nihilo  minus  heredis  est;  et  ideo
legatarius  in  personam  agere  debet,  id  est  intendere  heredem
sibi  dare  oportere,2  et  turn  heres  [rern],  si  mancipi  sit,  man-
cipio  dare3  aut  in  iure  cedere4  possessionemque  tradere  debet;
si  nee  mancipi  sit,  sufficit  si  tradiderit:5  nam  si  mancipi  rem
taiitum  tradiderit  nee  mancipauerit,  usucapione  pleno  iure  fit
legatarii:6  conpletur  autem  usucapio,  sicut  alio  quoque   loco

202  By  this  form  of  legacy  even  what  belongs  to  another  may  be
bequeathed ;  and  then  the  heir  is  bound  either  to  purchase

203  and  convey  it  or  else  to  pay  its  value.       What  has  no  natural
existence  can  also  be  legated  by  damnation,  provided  it  may
be  expected  to  come  into  existence  later ;  as,  for  instance,  the
crop  to  be  produced  from  particular  lands,  or  the  child  to  be

204  born  of  a  particular  woman-slave.         A  thing  thus  legated,
even  unconditionally  or  without  limitation  of  time,  does  not
straightway  become  the  property  of  the  legatee  when  the
inheritance  is  entered  upon,  like  a  legacy  by  vindication,  but
none  the  less  still  belongs  to  the  heir.     Therefore  the  legatee
must  sue  for  it  by  a  personal  action,  i.e.  must  plead  that  the
heir  is  bound  to  give  him  it ;  the  heir,  if  the  thing  be  res
mancipi,  must  then  mancipate  it  or  cede  it  in  court,  and  give
up  the  possession  ;  but  if  it  be  nee  mancipi  it  is  enough  that
he  deliver  it.    If,  being  a  res  mancipi,  he  has  merely  delivered
it  without  mancipation,  it  becomes  the  legatee's  in  plenary
right  by  usucapion;  and,  as  explained  elsewhere,  that  usu-

founder  was  protecting  by  a  penalty.  esto    is    very    fully    discussed    by

A  party  contravening  the  prohibi-  Brini,  Archirio  Giuridico,  xxi,  pp.

tion,  or  failing  to  perform  the  duty  225  f.

thus  imposed,  was  said  to  be  dam-  §  202.     Comp.  §  197  ;  Yip.  xxiv,  8 ;  §  4,
natus  (iii,  175);  and  there  is'reason  tit.  I.  afd.

to  believe  that,  in  early  times,  when  §  203.     §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.

proceedings    against    him    became  §  204.    a  Comp.  §  194.
necessary,  and  the  liability  was  for  2  Comp.  §  213  ;  iv,  41.

a  definite  sum  of  money,  they  were  3  Comp.  i,  119.

taken  not  by  action  but  by  manus  4  Comp.  §  24.

iniectio  (iv,  21).  5  Comp.  §  19.

The  meaning  of  the  phrase  damnas  6  Comp.  §  41.

i*-  *~  3    **»"  K

146  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  204-207.

diximus,  mobilium  quidem  rerum  anno,  earum  uero  quae  solo

205  tenentur  biennio.7          Est  et  ilia  differentia  huius  et  per  uin-
dicationem  legati,  quod  si  eadem  res  duobus  pluribusue  per
damnationem  legata  sit,  siquidem  coniunctim,  plane  singulis
partes  debentur,  sicut  in  illo  [quod  per]  uindicationem  lega-
tum  est,1  si  uero  disiunctim,  singulis  solida  res  debetur ;  ita  Jit
ut  scilicet  heres  alteri  rem  alteri  aestimationem  eius  praestare
debeat ;  et  in  coniunctis  deficientis  portio  non  ad  collegata-
rium  pertinet  sed  in  hereditate  remanet.

206  Quod  autem  diximus  deficientis  portionem  in  per  damna-
tionem quidem  legato  in  hereditate  retineri,  in  per  uindica-
tionem uero  collegatario  adcrescere,  admonendi  sumus  ante
legem  Papiam1  iure  ciuili  ita  fuisse ;  post  legem  uero  Papiam
deficientis  portio  caduca2  fit,  et  ad  eos  pertinet  qui  in  eo  testa-

207  mento   liberos   habent.         et  quamuis   prima   causa   sit  -in
caducis   uindicandis2  heredum  liberos  habentium,  deinde,  si
heredes  liberos  non  habeant,  legatariorum  liberos  habentium ,

capion  is  completed  in  the  case  of  moveables  in  one  year,  and
205  in  that  of  things  connected  with  the  soil  in  two.  There  is
this  further  difference  between  a  legacy  of  this  sort  and  one
by  vindication, — that  if  the  same  thing  be  legated  by  damna-
tion to  two  or  more  persons,  and  that  conjointly,  a  share  of  it
is  due  to  each  of  them,  as  in  a  legacy  bequeathed  by  vindica-
tion ;  but  if  it  be  legated  to  them  disjointly,  the  whole  legacy
is  due  to  each,  so  that  the  heir  must  give  the  thing  itself  to
one,  and  its  value  to  the  other.  In  a  conjoint  legacy  of  this
sort  the  share  of  one  who  fails  to  take  does  not  fall  to  his
co-legatee,  but  remains  in  the  inheritance.

206  But  in  saying  that  the  share  of  a  legatee  failing  to  take
remains  in  the  inheritance  in  the  case  of  a  legacy  by  damna-
tion, but  goes  by  accretion  to  his  co-legatee  in  that  of  one  by
vindication,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  so  it  was  by  the  civil
law  before  the  Papian  enactment ;  since  the  Papian  law  the
lapsed  share  becomes  caducous,  and  falls  to  those  persons
named    in    the   testament  who   happen   to   have    children.

207  Although  the  right  to  claim  caduciary  bequests  belongs  in  the
first  place  to  the  heirs  who  have  children,  and  next,  if  there
be  none  such,  to  the  legatees  who  have  children,  yet  it  is

7  Comp.  §  42.  §§  206-208.     Comp.   §§  150,  note,  and

§  205.     Comp.  §  199;  Vlp.  xxiv,  13.  199,  205  ;  Vlp.  i,  21;  xxiv,  §§12, 13.

1  Passage  indistinct  in  the  MS.;  '    Comp.    §    150,    note;    i,    145,

the   rendering   adopted   is   that   of  note  1.

K.  u.  S.  2  Comp.  §§  286,  286a.

II,  §§  207-212.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  147

tamen  ipsa  lege  Papia  significatur  ut  collegatarius  coniunctus,
si  liberos  habeat,  potior  sit  heredibus,  etiamsi  liberos  habebunt.

208  sed  plerisque  placuit,  quantum  ad  hoc  ius  quod  lege  Papia  con-
iunctis  constituitur,  nihil  interesse  utrum  per  uindicationem
an  per  damnationem  legatum  sit.

209  Sinendi   modo   ita  legamus:    HERES   MEVS   DAMNAS1  ESTO

SINERE    LVCIVM     TITIVM     HOMINEM     STICHVM     SVMERE     SIBIQVE

210  HABERE.         Quod  genus  legati  plus  quideui  habet  [quam]  per
uindicationem  legatum,  minus  autem  quam  per  damnationem :
nam  eo  modo  non  solum  suam  rem  testator  utiliter  legare
potest  sed  etiam  heredis  sui,  cum  alioquin  per  uindicationem
nisi  suam  rem  legare  non  potest,  per  damuationem  autem

211  cuiuslibet  extranei  rem  legare  potest.        Sed  si  quidem  mortis
testatoris  tempore  res  uel  ipsius  testatoris  sit  uel  heredis,
plane  utile  legatum  est,  etiamsi  testamenti  faciendi  tempore

212  neutrius  fuerit.         quodsi  post  mortem  testatoris  ea  res  here-
dis esse  coeperit,  quaeritur  an  utile  sit  legatum :  et  plerique
putant  inutile  esse.     quid  ergo  est  ?  licet  aliquis  earn  rem

expressly  provided  by  the  Papian  law  that  a  conjoint  co-legatee
who  has  children  shall  be  preferred  even  to  the  heirs  that

208  have  children.        And  it  is  generally  held,  as  regards  the  right
thus  conferred  by  the  Papian  law  upon  conjoint  legatees,  that
it  is  immaterial  whether  the  legacy  be  by  vindication  or  by
damnation.

209  By  permission,  sinendi  modo,  we  legate  thus  :  '  Be  my  heir
bound  to  allow  Lucius  Titius  to  take  and  have  for  himself  the

210  slave  Stichus.'         There  is  more  in  a  legacy  of  this  sort  than
in  one  by  vindication,  but  less  than  in  one  by  damnation.
For  in  this  form  a  testator  may  effectually  legate  not  only
what  is  his  own  but  also  what  is  his  heir's ;  whereas  by  vindi-
cation a  man  can  legate  only  what  belongs  to  himself,  while
by  damnation  he  may  legate  the  property  of  any  third  party.

211  If,  at  the  time  of  the  testator's  death,  the  thing  legated  belong
either  to  him  or  his  heir,  then  clearly  the  legacy  is  valid,
although  at  the  time  of  executing  the  testament  it  may  have

212  belonged  to  neither.         If  however  it  have  not  become  the
property  of  the  heir  until  after  the  testator's  death,  it  is  a
question   whether   the   legacy   be   of  any  use ;   the  general
opinion  is  that  it  is  not.    But  what  of  that  ?  Although  a  man

§209.     Comp.Vlp.xxiv,5;Th.ii,20,§20.  §  210.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxiv,  10;  Paul,  iii,

1  The    MS.     has    DARE     DAMNAS  6,  §  11.

ESTO,  obviously  per  incuriam.     fciee  §  212.     Comp.  §  197.
§  201,  note  1.

148  GAIT  INSTITVTIONVAI  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  212-215.

legauerit  quae  neque  eius  umquain  fuerit  neque  postea  heredis
eius  umquam  esse  coeperit,  ex  senatusconsulto  Neroniano  pro-

213  inde  uidetur1  ac  si  per  damnationem  relicta  esset.         sicut
antem  per  damnationem  legata  res  non  statim  post  aditam
hereditatem  legatarii  efficitur,  sed  manet  heredis  eo  usque
donee  is1  tradendo  uel  mancipando  uel  in  iure  cedendo  lega-
tarii earn  fecerit,  ita  et  in  sinendi  modo  legato  iuris  est ;  et
ideo  hums  quoque  legati  nomine  in  personam  actio  est  QVID-

214  QVID  HEREDEM  EX  TESTAMENTO  DARE  FACERE  OPORTET.2          SUllt

tamen  qui  putant  ex  hoc  legato  non  uideri  obligatum  lieredem
ut  mancipet  aut  in  iure  cedat  aut  tradat,  sed  sufficere  ut
legatarium  reni  sumere  patiatur ;  quia  nihil  ultra  ei  testator
imperauit  quam  ut  sinat,  id  est  patiatur,  legatarium  rem  sibi

215  habere.         Maior  ilia  dissensio  in  hoc  legato  interuenit :  si
eandem  rem  duobus  pluribusue  disiunctim   legasti,1  quidam
putant  utrisque  solidam  deberi,  sicut  per  damnationem;2  non-

have  legated  [by  permission]  a  thing  that  was  never  his,  and
has  never  subsequently  become  his  heir's,  yet  by  the  Neronian
senatusconsult  it  is  regarded  as  if  bequeathed  by  damnation.

213  Just  as  a  thing  legated  by  damnation  does  not  at  once  become
the  property  of  the  legatee  when  the  inheritance  is  entered
upon,  but  continues  to  belong  to  the  heir  until  the  latter  has
made  it  the  legatee's  by  tradition,  mancipation,  or  cession  in
court,  so  is  it  when  the  legacy  is  bequeathed  sinendi  modo;
consequently  the  action  for  a  legacy  of  this  sort  is  also  a  per-
sonal one,  the  claim  being  for  '  whatever  the  heir  ought  to

214  give  or  do  under  the  testament.'         There  are  some  jurists,
however,  who  think  that  in  this  kind  of  legacy  the  heir  is
under  no  obligation  to  mancipate,  cede  in  court,  or  deliver  the
thing  bequeathed,  but  that  it  is  enough  that  he  suffer  the
legatee  to  take  it ;  because  the  testator  has  laid  no  further

O  7

command  upon  him  than  that  he  shall  permit  or  suffer  the

215  legatee  to  appropriate  the  thing.         There  is  this  more  im-
portant difference  of  opinion  in  reference  to  a  legacy  of  this
sort:  if  you  have  legated  the  same  thing  to  two  or  more

1  K.    (K.  u.  S.    footnote)   thinks  §  215.     Comp.  Gels,  in  fr.  14,  D.  de  usu

tittle  should  be  interpolated  before  et  iisvfr.   leg.  (xxxiii,  2) ;  lust,  in

mdetur.  1.  un.  §11,  0.  decaduc.  toll,  (vi,  51).

§  213.     Comp.  §  204;  Th.  ii,  20,  §  2.  'So  the  MS.  ;  Hu.  reads  legata  sit,

1  The  MS.  interjects  heres  between  changing  rem  into  res.

is  and  tradendo.  2  The  MS.  has  uindicationem  ;  the

2  Comp.  iv,  §§  41,  47.  reason  for  preferring  damnationem
%  214.     Comp.  Alfen.  infr.  29,  D.  locati,  is  obvious.     P.  and  K.  u.  S.  regard

(xix,  2).  the  three  words  as  a  gloss.

IT,  §§  215-218.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

nulli  occupantis  esse  meliorem  condicionem  aestimant,  quia
cum  eo  genere  legati  damnetur  heres  patientiam  praestare  ut
legatarius  rem  habeat,  sequitur  ut  si  priori  patientiam  prae-
stiterit  et  is  rem  sumpserit,  securus  sit  aduersus  eum  qui
postea  legatum  petierit,  quia  neque  habet  rem  ut  patiatur
earn  ab  eo  sumi,  neque  dolo  malo  fecit  quominus  earn  haberet.

216  Per  praeceptionem  hoc  modo  legamus :  LVCIVS  TITIVS  HOMI-

217  NEM  STICHVM  PRAECIPITO.         Sed  nostri  quidem  praeceptores1
nulli  alii  eo  modo  legari  posse  putant  nisi  ei  qui  aliqua  ex
parte  heres  scriptus  esset :  praecipere  enim  esse  praecipuum
sumere  ;  quod  tantum  in  eius  persona  procedit  qui  aliqua  ex
parte  heres  institutus  est,  quod  is  extra  portionem  hereditatis

218  praecipuum  legatum  habiturus  sit.       ideoque  si  extraneo  lega-
tum fuerit,  inutile  est  legatum,  adeo  ut  Sabinus  existimauerit
ne  quidem  ex  senatusconsulto  Neroniano1  posse  conualescere  :
'  nam   eo,'  inquit,   '  senatusconsulto   ea  tantum  confirmantur
quae  uerborum  uitio  iure  ciuili  non  ualent,  non  quae  propter

persons  disjointly,  some  hold  that  the  whole  of  it  is  due  to
each,  as  in  the  case  of  a  legacy  by  damnation ;  but  others
think  that  he  who  first  appropriates  it  is  in  the  better  position,
because,  as  all  that  the  heir  is  bound  to  prestate  in  such  a  case
as  this  is  sufferance,  it  follows  that  if  he  have  accorded  this
sufferance  to  the  first  comer,  and  the  latter  have  taken  the
thing  away,  the  heir  is  safe  against  any  subsequent  claim  for
the  legacy,  seeing  he  neither  has  the  thing,  so  as  to  be  in  a
position  to  suffer  it  to  be  taken  from  him,  nor  has  he  done
anything  fraudulent  to  prevent  the  legatee  appropriating  it.

216  By  preception  we  legate  in  this  fashion  :  '  Let  Lucius  Titius

217  first  take  the  slave  Stichus.'         Our  authorities  are  of  opinion
that  no  one  can  have  a  legacy  bequeathed  to  him  in  this  form
who  is  not  instituted  heir  to  a  part  of  the  inheritance  ;  for
praecipere  is  to  take  a  praecipuum,  [i.e.  something  separated
from  the  rest  of  the  estate  before  any  distribution] ;  and  that
can  be  done  only  by  one  who  is  instituted  heir  for  a  part,
because  he  is  to  have  what  is  legated  to  him  by  preception

218  over  and  above  his  share  of  the  inheritance.         Therefore  if
the  legacy  be  to  one  who  is  not  an  heir,  it  is  useless,  so  much
so  that  Sabinus  held  it  incapable  of  convalescence  under  the
Neronian  senatusconsult ;  '  for/  says  he, '  those  legacies  alone
are  validated  by  that  senatusconsult  which  are  invalid  by  the

§216.     Comp.Vlp.xxiv,6;Th.ii,20,§2.       §218.     Oomp.  Vlp.  xxiv,  lla.
§  217.     l  See  i,  196,  note  1.  *  Comp.  §  197.

150  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  218-220.

ipsam  personam  legatarii  non  debentur.'   sed  luliano  et  Sexto2

i
placuit  etiam  hoc  casu  ex  senatusconsulto  confirmari  legatum;

nam  ex  uerbis  etiam  hoc  casu  accidere  ut  iure  ciuili  inutile  sit
legatum  inde  manifestum  esse,  quod  eidem  aliis  uerbis  recte
legetur,  ueluti  per  uindicationem,  per  damnationem,  sinendi
modo ;  tune  autem  uitio  personae  legatum  non  ualere  cum  ei
legatum  sit  cui  nullo  modo  legari  possit,  uelut  peregrine3  cum
quo  testamenti  factio4  non  sit;  quo  plane  casu  senatusconsulto

219  locus  non  est.         Item  nostri  praeceptores  quod  ita  legatum
est  nulla  actione1  putant  posse  consequi  eum  cui  ita  fuerit
legatum  quam  iudicio  familiae  erciscundae,2  quod  inter  heredes
de  hereditate  erciscunda,  id  est  diuidunda,  accipi  solet :  officio
enim  iudicis  id  contineri  ut  ei  quod  per  praeceptionem  legatum

220  est  adiudicetur.         Vnde  intellegimus  nihil  aliud  secundum

civil  law  because  of  some  defect  of  language, — not  such  as  are
not  due  because  of  some  disability  in  the  legatee.'  But  Julian
and  Sextus  held  that  even  here  the  legacy  was  validated  by
the  senatusconsult ;  that  in  this  case  also  it  is  through  erro-
neous wording  that  the  legacy  is  by  the  civil  law  invalid,  is
manifest,  [say  they],  from  the  consideration  that  it  would
have  been  valid  if  bequeathed  in  another  form  of  words,
namely  by  vindication,  damnation,  or  permission ;  and  a
legacy  is  only  then  invalid  through  disability  of  the  individual
when  it  is  in  favour  of  a  person  to  whom  a  legacy  cannot  be
bequeathed  in  any  way,  as,  for  instance,  a  peregrin  with  whom
there  is  no  testamenti  factio.  In  such  a  case  there  is  obviously

219  no  room  for  the  senatusconsult.         Our  authorities  are  also  of
opinion  that  the  only  process  whereby  a  legatee  can  recover  a
legacy  bequeathed  to  him  in  this  form  is  a  indicium  familiae
erciscundac, — the  action  resorted  to  amongst  heirs  for  '  hercis-
cating '  an  inheritance,  i.e.  dividing  it ;  for  it  is  part  of  the
official  duty  of  the  judge  to  adjudicate  a  legacy  by  preception

220  [to  the  heir  entitled  to  it].         Hence  we  gather  that,  accord-

2  The  original  words  in  the  MS.  3  Comp.  §  285;  Vlp.  xxii,  2.

were  luliano  ex  Sexto,  not  et;  the  4  See  §  114,  note  1.
latter  is   an  interlinear  alteration.       §  219.     Comp.  Paul,  iii,  6,  §  1 ;  Th.  ii,

It  isimpossible  to  say  which  is  right.  20,  §  2.

The  _  Julianus    here    referred  to   is  1  Previous  eds.  read  [alia]  ratione;

Salvius  lulianus,  the  consolidator  of  but  the  MS.   gives  quite  distinctly

the  praetorian  edict  in  the  reign  of  the  contracted  form  of  actione,  only

Hadrian.     The  Sextus  has  generally  interpolating  an  accidental  r  before

been  supposed  to  refer  toPomponius;  it.

Mommsen  (.?./.  fiG.vii, 479)  thinks  2  Comp.    iv,    42;    Vlp.   xix,   16;

it  may  be  Sextus  CaeciliusAfricanus;  §§  4,  7,  I.  de  offic.  iud.  (iv,  17).
the   first   was    a    contemporary   of      §  220.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxiv,  11;  Paul,  iii,

Julian's,  thelatteroneofhis scholars.  6,  §  8.

II,  §§  220-222.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  151

nostrorum  praeceptorimi  opinionem  per  praeceptionem  legari
posse  nisi  quod  testatoris  sit :  nulla  enim  alia  res  quam  here-
ditaria  deducitur  in  hoc  iudicium.  itaque  si  non  suam  rem  eo
modo  testator  legauerit,  iure  quidem  ciuili  inutile  erit  legatum ;
sed  ex  senatusconsulto  confirmabitur.  aliquo  tamen  casu
etiam  alienam  rem  per  praeceptionem  legari  posse  fatentur,
ueluti  si  quis  earn  rem  legauerit  quam  creditori  fiduciae  causa1
mancipio  dederit ;  nam  ofticio  iudicis  coheredes  cogi  posse  ex-
istimant  soluta  pecunia  luere2  earn  rem,  ut  possit  praecipere  is

221  cui  ita  legatum  sit.3         sed  diuersae  scholae  auctores  putant
etiam  extraneo  per  praeceptionem  legari  posse,  proinde  ac  si
ita  scribatur :  TITIVS  HOMINEM  STICHVM  CAPITO,  superuacuo  ad-
iecta  PKAE  syllaba ;  ideoque  per  uindicationem  earn  rem  legatam
uideri :  quae  sententia  dicitur  diui  Hadriani  constitutione  con-

222  firmata  esse.         Secundum  hanc  igitur  opinionem  si  ea  res  ex
iure  Quiritium1  defuncti  fuerit potest2  a  legatario  uindicari,  siue

ing  to  the  opinion  of  our  school,  nothing  can  be  legated  by
preception  that  is  not  the  property  of  the  testator ;  for  nothing
that  does  not  belong  to  the  inheritance  is  included  in  this
action.  Therefore  if  a  testator  have  legated  in  this  way  some-
thing that  is  not  his,  the  legacy  will  be  invalid  by  the  civil
law ;  but  it  will  be  validated  by  the  senatusconsult.  There  is
a  case,  however,  in  which  they  admit  that  what  belongs  to  a
third  party  may  be  legated  by  preception,  namely  when  a
man  has  legated  a  thing  which  he  has  fiduciarily  mancipated
to  a  creditor ;  for  they  hold  it  to  be  within  the  powers  of  the
judge  to  require  the  co-heirs,  by  payment  of  the  debt,  to
release  the  thing  in  question,  that  so  he  to  whom  it  has  been

221  legated  may  take  it  by  preception.         The  authorities  of  the
other  school  think  that  a  legacy  may  be  left  by  preception.
even  to  a  stranger,  as  if  the  words  ran — '  Titius  is  to  take  the
slave  Stichus ; '  holding  that  the  addition  of  the  syllable  prae
[i.e.  before  distribution]  is  superfluous,  and  the  thing  therefore
to  be  regarded  as  legated  by  vindication.     This  opinion  is  said
to  have  been  confirmed  by  a  constitution  of  the  late  emperor

222  Hadrian's.         According  to  this  view,  therefore,  if  the  thing
legated  belonged  to  the  deceased  in  quiritarian  right,  it  may
be  vindicated  by  the  legatee,  whether  he  be  one  of  the  heirs

1  Comp.  §  60.  §  222.     Comp.  §§  40,  196,  197.

2  So  L.  and  most  subsequent  eds. ;  l  See  i,  54,  and  note  ;  ii,  40,  and
the  MS.  has  soluere.  note.

3  Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  26,  fr.  28,  D.  2  So  G.  and  most  eds. ;   the  MS.
fam.  ercisc.  (x,  2).  has  posse;  P.  suggests  paret  posse.

152

GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  222-224.

223

224

is  unus  ex  heredibus  sit  siue  extraneus ;  si3  in  bonis  tantum
testatoris  fuerit,  extraneo  quidem  ex  senatusconsulto  utile  erit
legatum,  heredi  uero  farailiae  herciscundae  iudicis  officio  prae-
stabitur ;  quodsi  nullo  iure  fuerit  testatoris,  tarn  heredi  quam
extraneo  ex  senatusconsulto  utile  erit.  Si1  tamen  heredi-
bus secundum  nostrorum  opinionem,  siue  etiam  extraneis
secundum  illorum  opinionem,  duobus  pluribusue  eadem  res
coniunctim  aut  disiunctim  legata  fuerit,  singuli  partes  habere
debent.

Sed  olim  quidem  licebat  totum  patrimonium  legatis  atque
libertatibus  erogare,  nee  quicquam  heredi  relinquere  praeter-
quam  inane  nomen  heredis ;  idque  lex  xn  tabularum  perniit-
tere  uidebatur,  qua  cauetur  ut  quod  quisque  de  re  sua  testatus
esset  id  ratuni  haberetur,  his  uerbis  :  '  uti  legassit  suae  rei,  ita
ius  esto  :>l  quare*  qui  scripti  heredes  erant  ab  hereditate  se3  ab-

or  a  stranger ;  if  it  was  only  in  bonis  of  the  testator,  the  legacy
will  be  effectual  to  a  stranger  by  the  senatusconsult,  while  to
an  heir  it  will  be  made  available  by  the  judge  in  an  actio
familiae  crciscundae;  if  it  did  not  belong  to  the  testator  either
in  quiritarian  or  bonitarian  right,  it  will  be  effectual  under

223  the  senatusconsult  either  to  an  heir  or  to  a  stranger.         If  the
same  thing  be  legated  [by  preception]  to  two  or  more  persons,
either  conjointly  or  disjointly, — whether  they  be  heirs,  accord-
ing to  our  opinion,  or  strangers,  according  to  that  of  the  other
school, — each  is  entitled  to  a  share  of  it.

224  In  olden  times  it  was  lawful  to  exhaust  the  whole  patri-
mony in  legacies  and  gifts  of  freedom,  and  leave  nothing  for
the  heir  but  the  empty  name.     And  this  seemed  to  be  per-
mitted by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  which,  in  the  words
— '  As  a  man  has  legated  in  regard  to  his  belongings,  so  be  it

3  The  MS.  seems  originally  to  have
had  quod  si,  with  interlinear  emen-
dation et  si;  P.  and  K.  u.  S.  retain
the  former,  Hu.  the  latter.

§  223.  Comp.  lust,  in  1.  un.  §  11,  C.
de  cacluc.  toll,  (vi,  51).

1  So  M.  (K.  u.  S.  p.  xxi)  ;  the
MS.  and  all  eds.  have  siue.

§§  224-228.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  LEGS  FAL-
CIDIA  (ii,  22).  In  the  MS.,  before
§  224,  there  is  a  vacant  line,  on
which  is  the  rubric  ad  legem  Falci-
diam  in  a  later  hand.

§  224.  Comp.  pr.  tit.  I.  afd. ;  Th.  ii,
22,  pr.  '

1  The  MS.  has  uti  leyasset  suae  res,

ita,  etc.  P.,  in  an  excursus  ap-
pended to  Book  III.  of  his  Syntag-
ma, argues  that  the  provision  ran
— uti  legassit  suae  res  (for  rei)  ius,
esto,  i.e.  'as  a  man  may  have  testa-
mentarily  disposed  of  his  family
patrimonial  rights  (izts  suae  rei),  so
be  it.'  Comp.  Schoell,  Tab.  v,  3  ;
Cic.  de  inuent.  ii,  50,  §  148  ;  Auc-
tor  ad  Herenn.  i,  13,  §  23  ;  Vlp.  xi,
14  ;  Pomp,  in  fr.  120,  D.  de  V.  8.
(1,  16)  ;  Nov.  xxii,  c.  2.  See  also
above  §  104  and  notes.

2  So  K.  u.  S.  and  Hu. ;  the  MS.  has
que,  which  P.  interprets  qua  aetate.

3  So  the  MS.  ;  P.  reads  saepe.

II,  §§  225,  226.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  153

225  stinebant,  et  idcirco  plerique  intestati  moriebantur.  Itaque
lata  est  lex  Furia,  qua,  exceptis  personis  quibusdam,1  ceteris
plus  mille  assibus  legatorum  nomine  mortisue  causa  capere2
permissum  non  est.  sed  et  haec  lex  non  perfecit  quod  uoluit :
qui  enim  uerbi  gratia  quinque  milium  aeris  patrimonium
habebat,  poterat  quinque  hominibus  singulis  millenos  asses

22G  legando  totura  patrimonium  erogare.  Ideo  postea  lata  est
lex  Voconia,  qua  cautum  est  ne  cui  plus  legatorum  nomine
mortisue  causa  capere  liceret  quam  heredes  caperent :  ex  qua
lege  plane  quidem  aliquid  utique  heredes  habere  uidebantur  ;
sed  tamen  uitium  simile  nascebatur :  nam  in  multas  legatari-
orum  personas  distribute  patrimonio  poterat  [testator']  adeo
heredi  minimum  relinquere,  ut  non  expediret  heredi  huius

law,'  provided  that  whatever  testamentary  disposition  a  man
might  make  of  his  estate  should  be  sustained ;  whence  it  came
(ibout  that  those  who  were  instituted  heirs  often  abstained
from  the  inheritance,  and  many  persons  thus  died  intestate.

225  For  this  reason  the  Furian  law  was  enacted,  whereby  all  but
certain  excepted  persons  were  forbidden  to  take  more  than  a
thousand  asses  by  way  of  legacy  or  otherwise  by  reason  of
death.     But  this  enactment  did  not  accomplish  what  it  in-
tended; for  a  testator  who  had  say  five  thousand  asses  of  patri-
mony could  still  give  away  the  whole  of  it  by  legating  to  five

226  different  people  a  thousand  asses  each.         So,  after  a  while,
the  Voconian  law  was  passed,  providing  that  it  should  not  be
lawful  for  any  one  to  take  more  in  name  of  legacy  or  other-
wise by  reason  of  death  than  remained  to  the  heirs.      Thanks
to  it,  it  seemed  very  clear  that  the  heirs  must  at  all  events  get
something :  yet  here  too  a  defect  soon  showed  itself  almost  of
the  same  sort  as  before ;  for,  by  distributing  his  estate  amongst
a  multitude  of  legatees,  a  testator  was  able  to  leave  so  little  to
his  heir  as  to  make  it  not  worth  the  latter's  while,  for  the  sake
of  this  small  gain,  to  undertake  the  burdens  of  the  whole  in-

§  225.     The  lex  Furia  testamentaria  was  tion  of  A.  as  heir  on  condition  of  his

a  plebiscit  passed  in  571  |  183  (?).  paying  say  10,000  asses  to  B.     This

Comp.   Cic.  pro  Balbo,  viii,   §  21  j  was  not  in  form  a  legacy  to  B. ;  but

Vlp.  i,  2  ;  xxviii,  7;  Fr.  Vat.  §  301;  if  he  accepted  it,  it  was  on  his  part

Th.  ii,  22,  pr.  mortis  causa  caplo.    For  other  forms

1  The  excepted  persons  were  kins-  of  it  see  fr.  8  pr.,  fr.  31,  pr.  §  2,  fr.
men  up  to  the  sixth  degree,  includ-  38,  D.  de  mort.  c.  donat.  (xxxix,  6).
ing    the    sobrino  natus;   Fr.    Vat.       §  226.     The  lex   Voconia,  a  plebiscit  of
§  301.  585  |  169,  introduced  by  Q.   Voco-

2  According  to  Ihering  (G.  d.  R.  nius  Saxa  at  the  instance   of  the
R.  vol.  iii,  part  1,  p.  114,  note)  the  elder  Cato,  was  one   of  the  most
mortis  causa  capio  referred  to  may  famous   of    the   Roman   sumptuary
have  been  the  result  of  an  institu-  laws.     In  its  first  chapter  it  pro-

154

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  227-231.

227  lucri  gratia  totius   hereditatis   onera  sustinere.         Lata   est
itaque  lex  Falcidia,  qua  cautum  est  ne  plus  ei  legare  liceat
quam  dodrantem  :  itaque  necesse  est  ut  heres  quartam  partem

228  hereditatis  habeat :  et  hoc  nunc  iure  utimur.         In  libertati-
bus  quoque   dandis  nimiain  licentiam  conpescuit  lex  Fufia
Caninia,  sicut  in  primo  commentario  rettulimus.

229  Ante  heredis  institutionern  [m]utiliter  legatur,  scilicet  quia
testamenta  uim  ex  institutione  heredis  accipiunt,  et  ob  id
uelut  caput  et  fundamentum  intellegitur  totius  testament!

230  heredis  institutio.         Pari  ratione  nee  libertas  ante  heredis

231  institutionem  dari  potest.       Nostri  praeceptores1  nee  tutorem
eo  loco  dari  posse  existimant :  sed  Labeo  et  Proculus1  tutorem

227  heritance.         Therefore  the  Falcidian  law  was  enacted,  which
provides  that  it  shall  not  be  lawful  for  a  testator  to  dispose  of
more  than  three-fourths  of  his  estate  in  legacies ;  thus  the
heir  must  necessarily  have  a  fourth  of  the  inheritance.     This

228  is  the  law  now  in  observance.         The  Fufia- Caninian   law
likewise,  as  stated  in  our  first  Commentary,  has  placed  some
restriction  on  extravagance  in  [testamentary]  gifts  of  freedom.

229  Until  an  heir  has  been  instituted  it  is  useless  to  bequeath  a
legacy  ;  for  it  is  from  the  institution  of  an  heir  that  testaments
derive  their  efficacy, — in  fact,  the  institution  is  regarded  as  the

230  starting-point  and  foundation  of  the  whole  deed.         For  the
same  reason  a  gift  of  freedom  cannot  precede  the  heir's  institu-

231  tion.         Neither,  according  to  our  school,  can  the  appointment
of  a  tutor ;  but  Labeo  and  Proculus  think  that,  as  a  tutor's

biscit,  and  enacted  in  714  |  40,  re-
pealed the  restrictions  of  the  Furian
and  Voconian  laws  in  the  matter  of
bequest,  substituting  the  provision
in  the  text.  It  apparently  did  not
contain  any  reference  to  other  mortis
causa  capio  than  that  resulting  from
a  legacy.  Coin  p.  Dio.  Cass.  xlviii,

hibited  a  citizen,  whose  fortune
was  estimated  in  the  censorial  re-
gister at  100,000  asses  or  more,  from
instituting  a  woman,  even  his
daughter  or  sister,  as  his  heir  ;  Cic.
//.  Verr.  i,  41,  42,  §§  107,  108  ;
below,  §  274  ;  Aug.  de  ciu.  Dei,
iii,  21.  In  its  second,  however,  it
allowed  such  a  citizen  to  leave  to
women  legacies  of  a  greater  amount
than  was  sanctioned  by  the  Furian
law,  provided  these  did  not  in  the
aggregate  exceed  one-half  of  the
testator's  estate  ;  Quintil.  Declam.
246.  The  third,  that  referred  to  in
the  text,  forbade  any  one  to  take
more  as  a  legacy  or  otherwise  through
death  under  the  testament  of  such  a
citizen  than  remained  to  the  heir  or
heirs  ;  Cic.  //.  Verr.  i,  43,  §  110  ;
Th.  ii,  22,  pr.
§  227.  The  Falcidian  law,  also  a  ple-

33  ;~Vlp.  xxiv,  32;  Paul,  iii,  8,  §  1;
Paul,  in  fr.  1,  pr.  D.  ad  I.  Faltid.
(xxxv,  2);  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

j  228.     Comp.  i,  42.
g§  229-237.     Comp.  \
LEGATIS  (ii,  20).

34-36,  tit.  I.  DE
In  the  MS.,  on  a

before  §  229,  we  have
de    inutlliter    relictis

vacant  line

the     rubric

legatis.
§§  229,  230.     Comp.  Vlp.  i,  20 ;  xxiv,

15 ;  §  34,  tit.  I.  afd.
§  231.     Comp.  §  3,  I.  qui  dari  tut.  poss.

(i,  14).

1  See  i,  196,  note  1.

II,  §§  231-235.]     COMMENTAR1I  QVATTVOR.  155

posse  dari,  quod  nihil  ex  hereditate  erogatur  tutoris  datione.

232  Post  mortem  quoque  heredis  inutiliter  legatur,  id  est  hoc
modo :  CVM  HERES  MEVS  MOKTVVS  ERIT  DO  LEGO/  aut  DATO.2
ita  autem  recte  legatur :  CVM  HERES  MORIETVR,  quia  non  post
mortem  heredis  relinquitur,  sed  ultimo  uitae  eius  tempore.
rursum  ita  non  potest  legari :  PRIDIE  QVAM  HERES  MEVS  MORIE-

233  TVR  ;  quod  non  pretiosa  ratione  receptum  uidetur.         Eadem
23-4  et  de  libertatibus  dicta  intellegemus.         Tutor  uero  an  post

mortem  heredis  dari  possit  quaerentibus  eadem  forsitan  po-
tent esse  quaestio  quae1  de  [_eo]  agitatur  qui  ante  heredum
institutionem  datur.

235  Poenae  quoque  nomine  inutiliter  legatur.  poenae  autem
nomine  legari  uidetur  quod  coercendi  heredis  causa  relinqui-
tur,  quo  magis  heres  aliquid  faciat  aut  noil  faciat,  ueluti  quod
ita  legatur :  si  HERES  MEVS  FILIAM  SVAM  TITIO  IN  MATRIMONIVM

CONLOCAVERIT,  X  \MILIA\  SEIO  DATO,  uel  ita :   SI  FILIAM  TITIO  IN

appointment  takes  nothing  out  of  the  inheritance,  he  may  be

232  nominated  [even  before  an  heir  has  been  instituted].         It  is
useless  also  to  legate  as  after  the  heir's  death,  thus  :  '  On  my
heir's  death  I  give  and  legate,'  or — '  let  him  give.'     But  a
legacy  '  when  my  heir  is  dying '  is  quite  regular ;  for  it  is  not
left  after  the  heir's  death  but  in  his  last  moments.     On  the
other  hand  one  cannot  legate  thus  :  '  The  day  before  my  heir
dies;'  a  rule  which  seems  to  have  been  adopted  without  any

233  adequate  reason.         The  same  remarks  are  to  be  understood

234  as  applying  to  gifts  of  freedom.         Whether  a  tutor  can  be
appointed  after  the  death  of  the  heir  is  a  question  that  pro-
bably depends  on  the  same  consideration  as  that  previously
mooted,  namely,  whether  he  can  be  appointed  before  an  heir
has  been  instituted.

235  A  legacy  by  way  of  penalty  is  also  useless.     And  that  is
held  to  be  legated  by  way  of  penalty  which  is  bequeathed  for
the  purpose  of  coercing  the  heir  to  do  or  forbear  from  some-
thing ;  as,  for  instance,  a  legacy  in  these  terms  :  '  If  my  heir
bestow  his  daughter  in  marriage  on  Titius,  then  let  him  give
ten  thousand  sesterces  to  Seius  ; '  or  in  these  :  '  If  my  heir  do

§  232.     Comp.  iii,  100;  Vlp.  xxiv,  16  ;  l  The  MS.  has  quam,   and  omits

Paul,   iii,   6,  §§  5,  6  ;  iv,  1,  §  11  ;  the  eo.     At  the  best  the  sentence  is

§  35,  tit.  I.  afd.  clumsy.

1  Comp.  §  193.  §  235.  '  On  a  vacant  line  before  this  par.

8  Comp.  §  201.  the  MS.    has  the  rubric  de  poenae

§  233.     Comp.  Vlp.  i,  20.  causa  relictis  legatis  in  the  original

§  234.     Comp.  §  231;  Paul,  in  fr.  7,  D.  hand.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxiv,  17  ;  xxv,

de  test.  tut.  (xxvi,  2).  13  ;  §  36,  tit.  I.  afd.

156  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVlilS  CIVILIS   [II,  §§  235-238.

MATRIMONIVM  NON   CONLOCAVERIS,  X   MILIA  TITIO  DATO  ;   Sed  et

si  hcredem,  [si\  uerbi  gratia  intra  biennium  monumentuui  sibi
non  fecerit,  x  [milia]  Titio  dare  iusserit,  poenae  nomine  lega-
tum  est.  et  denique  ex  ipsa  definitione  multas  similes  species

236  circumspicere1   possumus.          Nee    libertas    quidem    poenae

237  nomine  dari  potest,  quamuis  de  ea  re  fuerit  quaesitum.         De
tutore  uero  nihil  possumus  quaerere,  quia  non  potest  datione
tutoris  heres  conpelli  quidquam  facere  aut  non  facere :  ideo,
quando  etiam  l  poenae  nomine  tutor  datus  fuerit,  magis  sub
condicione  quam  poenae  nomine  datus  uidebitur.

238  Incertae  personae  legatum    inutiliter  relinquitur.     incerta
autem  uidetur  persona  quam  per  incertam  opinionem  animo
suo  testator  subicit,  uelut  cum  ita  legatum  sit :  QVI  PEIMVS  AD

FVNVS  MEVM  VENERIT,  (El  HERES]  MEVS  X  [_MILIA\   DATO  ;  idem

not  bestow  his  daughter  in  marriage  on  Titius,  then  let  him
give  Titius  ten  thousand  sesterces.'  Further,  if  he  have
ordered  his  heir  to  give  ten  thousand  sesterces  to  Titius  in
the  event  say  of  his,  the  heir's,  failure  to  erect  a  monument
within  two  years  to  him,  the  testator,  the  legacy  is  again  by
way  of  penalty.  And,  briefly,  from  the  mere  definition,  we
can  conceive  for  ourselves  many  other  instances  of  the  same

236  sort  of  thing.         Not  even  freedom  can  be  given  by   way
of  penalty,  (although  on  this  point  there  has  been  doubt.)

237  As  regards  a  tutor  the  question  cannot  arise.     An  heir  cannot
be  compelled  to  do  or  forbear  from  anything  merely  by  the
fact  that  a  tutor  is  appointed  in  the  will ;  if  therefore  any
such  appointment  seem  on  the  face  of  it  to  have  been  made  by
way  of  penalty,  it  must  be  held  conditional  rather  than  penal.

238  A  legacy  to  an  uncertain  person  is  also  useless.     And  that
person  is  regarded  as  uncertain  of  whose  individuality  the
testator  has  formed   no  definite  idea  in  his   own   mind,   as
when  he  legates  thus  :  '  To  the  person  who  comes  first  to  my
funeral  my  heir  shall  give  ten  thousand  sesterces.'     The  law
is  the  same  if  the  testator  have  legated  to  all  and  sundry  in

1  P.  and  K.  u.  S.  both  admit  that  Hu.  reads  facere  ideo  quod  datur.

this  seems  to  be  the  reading  of  the  [Si  igitur]  poe.nae  nomine,  etc.     M.

MS.,   but  doubt  its  propriety;  Hu.  (K.   u.    S.    footnote),    ideoque   [ftsi

adopts  it.  secundum  mentem  testatoris  is  qui

§  236.     Comp.  §  36,  tit.  I.  afd.  tutor}  datus  est  poenae  nomine,  etc.

§  237.     Comp.  Marcian.  in  fr.  2,  D.  de  §§  238-245.     Comp.  §§  25-33,  tit.  I.  DE

poen.  causa  relict,  (xxxiv,  6).  LEGATIS  (ii,  20).

1  So  P.  ;  the  MS.  has  quae  dalur,  §  238.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxiv,  18  ;  Paul,  iii,

which  he  thinks  must  have  been  an  6,   §  13  ;    §  25,   tit.    I.   afd.,   from

inaccurate  rendering  by  the  tran-  which,  except  milia,  the  words  in

scriber  of  the  qdo  et  of  the  original.  italics  are  borrowed.

II.  §§  288-241.]  COMMENTAIU1  QVATTVOR.  157

iuris  est  si  generaliter  omnibus  legauerit :  QVICVMQVE  AD
FVNVS  MEVM  VENER1T.  in  eadem  causa  est  quod  ita  relinqui-

tur :   QVJCVMQVE  FILIO  MEO  IN  MATKIMONIVM  FILIAM   SVAM   CON-

LOCAVERIT,  El  HERBS  MEVS  x  MILIA  DATO  ;  illud  quoque  l  quod
ita  relinquitur :  QVI  POST  TESTAMENTVM  (SCRIPTVM  PKIMI]
CONSVLES  DESIGNATI  ERVNT,  aeque  incertis  personis  legari
uidetur ;  et  denique  aliae  multae  huiusmodo  species  sunt.
Sub  certa  uero  demonstratione  incertae  personae  recte  lega-
tur,  ueluti :  EX  coGNATis  MEIS  QVI  NVNC  SVNT  QVI  PRIMVS  AD

239  FVNVS  MEVM  VENERIT,  El  X  MILIA  HERES  MEVS  DATO.  LibertaS

quoque  non  uidetur  incertae  personae  dari  posse,  quia  lex

240  Fufia  Caninia  iubet  nominatim  semos  liberari.          Tutor  quo-

241  que  certus  dari  debet.         Postumo  quoque  alieno  inutiliter
legatur.      est  autem  alienus  postumus  qui  natus   inter   suos
heredes  testatori  futurus  non   est:    ideoque   ex  emancipato
quoque  filio    conceptus  nepos   extraneus  postumus  est;  item
qui  in  utero  est  eius  quae  iure  ciuili ]  non  intellegitur  uxor,2

such  words  as — '  Whoever  shall  come  to  my  funeral.'  Of  the
same  character  is  a  legacy  in  these  terms :  '  To  any  man  that
bestows  his  daughter  in  marriage  on  my  son  my  heir  shall
give  ten  thousand  sesterces.'  A  legacy  bequeathed  thus :
^Whoever  shall  be  the  next  consuls  designate  after  the  execu-
tion of  my  testament,'  is  equally  regarded  as  in  favour  of
uncertain  persons ;  and  there  are  many  other  varieties  of  it.
One  may  competently  legate,  however,  to  an  uncertain  person
who  is  indicated  by  a  definite  description ;  as,  for  example :
'  To  that  one  of  my  kinsmen  now  alive  who  comes  first  to  my

239  funeral  my  heir  shall  give  ten  thousand  sesterces.'         It  is
also  held  impossible  to  make  a  testamentary  gift  of  freedom
to   an  uncertain  person ;  fur  the  Fufia-Caninian  law  ordains

240  that  slaves  shall  be  enfranchised  by  name.         Further,  it  is

241  only  a  definite  person  that  can  be  appointed  as  tutor.         A
legacy  to  a  stranger  after-born  is  also  invalid.     By  a  stranger
after-born  we  mean  a  person  who  will  not  on  birth  be  one  of
the  sui  heredes  of  the  testator ;  therefore  the  grandchild  be-
gotten of  an  emancipated  son  will  be  a  stranger  after-born ;
and  a  child  in  utcro  of  a  woman  whom  the  ius  ciuile  does
not  recognise  as  a  wife  is  held  to  be  a  stranger  after-born

1  After  illud  quoque  the  MS.  has  §  240.     Comp.  §  289  ;  §  27,  tit.  I.  afd..

in  eadem  causa  est;  but  these  words  §  '241.     §  26,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  §  287.
are  deleted  as  an  unnecessary  gloss.  !  In  contradistinction  to  iure  gen-

§  239.     Comp.  i,  §§  42,  45«;  §  25,  tit.  tium.

I.  afd.  2  A   marriage   without  convMwm

158  GAII  INST1TVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  242-244.

242  extraneus    postumus    patri    intellegitur.  Ac    ne    heres
quidem  potest  institui  postumus  alienus :  est  enim  incerta

243  persona.         Cetera  uero  quae  supra  diximus  ad  legata  proprie
pertinent  quamquam  non  inmerito  quibusdam  placeat  poenae
nomine  heredem  institui  non  posse  :  nihil  enim  interest  utrum
legatum  dare  iubeatur  heres  si  fecerit  aliquid  aut  non  fecerit,
an  coheres  ei  adiciatur ;  quia  tarn  coheredis  adiectione  quam
legati  datione  conpellitur  ut  aliquid  contra  propositum  suum
faciat  aut  non  faciat.

2i4  An  ei.  qui  in  potestate  sit  eius  quern  heredem  instituimus
recte  legemus  quaeritur.  Seruius  l  recte  legari  probat,  sed
euanescere  legatum  si  quo  tempore  dies  legatorum  cedere
solet 2  adhuc  in  potestate  sit ;  ideoque  siue  pure  legatum  sit
et  uiuo  testatore  in  potestate  heredis  esse  desierit,  siue  sub
condicione  et  ante  condicionem  id  accident,  deberi  legatum.

242  even  in  relation  to  his  father.         Nor  can  a  stranger  after-

243  born  be  instituted  heir ;  for  he  is  an  uncertain  person.         The
foregoing  observations  apply  more  especially  to  legacies.    But
some  hold,  and  not  without  reason,  that  an  heir  cannot  be
instituted  by  way  of  penalty ;  for  it  is  a  matter  of  indiffer-
ence whether  an  heir  be  ordered  to  pay  a  legacy  in  the  event
of  his  doing  or  not  doing  something,  or  [in  that  event]  have
a  co-heir  conjoined  with  him ;  because  alike  by  the  addition
of  a  co-heir  and  by  the  giving  of  a  legacy  he  is  compelled  to
do  or  forbear  contrary  to  his  own  inclination.

244  It  is  a  question  whether  we  can  lawfully  legate  to  one  who
is  in  the  potestas  of  the  instituted  heir.     Servius  holds  that
we  can,  but  that  the  legacy  evanishes  if  at  the  time  it  vests
the  legatee  be  still  in  potestate ;  consequently  that,  if  the
legacy  be  unconditional  and  the  legatee  have  ceased  to  be  in
potestate  during  the  testator's  lifetime,  or  if  it  be  conditional
and  he  become  sui  iuris  before  the  condition  is  fulfilled,  it
must  be  paid.     Sabinus  and  Cassius  think  that  a  conditional

•was  not  matrimonium  iuris  ciuilis  who  first  declared  that  a  poslumus

(i,  56  ;   Vlp.  v,  2);   its   issue  were  alienus  might  he  instituted  heir;  see

not  in  potestate  of  their  father   (i,  pr.  I.  de  bon.  poss.  (iii,  9).
§§  67,  80);  therefore  they  could  not       §  243.     Comp.  §§  229,  232,  235  ;  §  36,

be  his  sui  heredes  if  born  in  his  life-  tit.  I.  afd.

time  (ii,  156);  and  the  text  is  only       §  244.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxiv,  23  ;  §  32,  tit.

consequent  in  declaring  that  they  I.  afd.

must  be  postumi  alieni  (or  extranei)  '  Servius  Sulpicius  Rufus  ;  see  i,

if  born  after  his  death  (or,  rather,  188,  note  5.

after  the  execution  of  his  testament).  2  Comp.   Vlp.  xxiv,  31.     For  the

§242.     Comp.  i,  147;  ii,  287;  §  28,  tit.  meaning   of  the   technical  phrases

I.   afd.     Justinian  there  states  the  dies  cedit  and  dies  uenit  see  i'r.  213,

law  inaccurately;  it  was  he  himself  D.  de  V.  S.  (1,  16).

II,  §§  244-247.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  159

Sabinus  et  Cassius3  sub  condicione  recte  legari,  pure  non
recte,  putant ;  licet  enim  uiuo  testatore  possit  desinere  in
potestate  heredis  esse,  ideo  tamen  inutile  legatum  intellegi
oportere,  quia  quod  nullas  uires  habiturum  foret  si  statim
post  testamentum  factum  decessisset  testator,  hoc  ideo  ualere
quia  uitam  longius  traxerit  absurdum  esset ; 4  sed  diuersae
scholae  auctores  3  nee  sub  condicione  recte  legari,  quia  quos
in  potestate  habemus  eis  non  magis  sub  condicione  quam

245  pure  debere  possumus.         Ex  diuerso  constat  ab  eo  qui  in
potestate  [tua]  est  herede  institute,  recte  tibi  legari ;  sed  si
tu  per  eum  heres  extiteris  euanescere  legatum,  quia  ipse  tibi
legatum  debere  non  possis ;  si  uero  films  emancipatus   aut
seruus  manumissus  erit  uel  in  alium  translatus,  et  ipse  heres
extiterit  aut  alium  fecerit,  deberi  legatum.

246  Nunc  transeamus  ad  fideicommissa.         [247]  Et  prius  de

247  hereditatibus  uideanms.

legacy  to  him  is  valid,  but  not  a  pure  one ;  that  even  though
it  be  possible  for  him  to  cease  to  be  in  the  heir's  potestas
during  the  testator's  lifetime,  still  the  legacy  must  be  re-
garded as  useless,  because  it  would  be  absurd  that  what  would
have  been  of  no  effect  had  the  testator  died  the  moment  after
making  his  testament  should  become  valid  for  no  other  reason
than  that  his  life  has  been  prolonged.  The  authorities  of  the
other  school  are  of  opinion  that  we  cannot  legate  to  such  a
person  even  conditionally ;  because  we  can  no  more  be  condi-
tionally indebted  to  persons  in  our  potestas  than  we  can  be

245  unconditionally.         On  the  other  hand  it  is  admitted  that
you  may  competently  have  bequeathed  to  you  a  legacy  that  is
to  form  a  charge  upon  a  person  in  your  potestas  who  has  been
instituted  heir ;  but  if  through  his  instrumentality  you  have
become  heir  the  legacy  evanishes,  because  you  cannot  owe  a
legacy  to  yourself.     If  however  your  son  be  emancipated,  or
your  slave  either  manumitted  or  alienated,  and  either  he  or
another  person  through  his  means   have  become  heir,  then
your  legacy  will  be  due.

246  Now   let   us   pass   to   mortis  causa   trusts,  fideicommissa.

247  And  let  us  begin  with  [fideicommissary]  inheritances.

3  See  i,  196,  note  1.  §§  246-259.     Comp.  tit.    I.   DE   FIDEI-

4  This    is    the    so-called    regula  COMMISSABIIS  HEREDITATIBVS  (ii,
Catoniana ;  on  which  see  tit.  D.  de  23).

reg.  Cat.  (xxxiv,  7).  §§  246,  247.    Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.    The  MS.  has

§245.  Comp.Vlp.xxiv,24;  §33,  tit.  I.  afd.  Hinc  transeamus,  etc.

160  GAII  INSTITVTIOXVM  IVIUS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  243-252.

248  Inprimis   igitur  sciendum  est  opus  esse  ut  aliquis  heres
recto  iure  instituatur,  eiusque  fidei  comrnittatur  ut  earn  heredi-
tatem  alii  restituat ;  alioquin  inutile  est  testamentum  in  quo

249  nemo  recto  iure   heres  instituitur.1         Verba  autem  [utilia]  1
fideicommissorum  haec  [recte]  l  maxime  in  usu  esse  uidentur
— PETO,  ROGO,  VOLO,  FIDEICOMMITTO,  quae  proinde  firma  singula

250  sunt  atque  si  omnia  in  unum  congesta  sint.         Cum  igitur
scripserimus  :  [LVCIVS]  TITIVS  HERES  ESTO,  possumus  adicere  :

ROGO  TE,  LVCI  TITI,  PETOQVE  A  TE,  VT  CVM  PRIMVM  POSSIS  HERE-
DITATEM  MEAM  ADIRE,  CAIO  SEIO  REDDAS  RESTITVAS.      pOSSUmuS

autem  et  de  parte  restituenda  rogare  ;  et  liberum  est  uel  sub
condicione  uel  pure  relinquere  fideicommissa,  uel  ex  die  certa.

251  Restituta  autem  hereditate  is  qui  restituit  nihilo  minus  heres
permanet ;  is  uero  qui  recipit  hereditatem  aliquando  heredis

252  loco  est  aliquando  legatarii.         Olim  autem  nee  heredis  loco
erat  nee  legatarii  sed  potius  emptoris  :  time  enim  in  usu  erat
ei  cui  restituebatur  hereditas  nummo  uno  earn  hereditatem

248  The  first  thing  to  be  noted  is  that  it  is  necessary  that  some
one  be  regularly  instituted  heir  according  to  law,  and  that  it
be  committed  to  his  honour  to  restore  the  inheritance  to  a
third  party ;  for  a  testament  is  useless  in  which  there  is  no

249  one  in  due  form  instituted  heir.         Of  the  words  suitable  for
fideicomrnissary  disposition  these    seem   most  in  use, — -pcto,
rogo,  uolo,  fideicommitto  ;  and  each  by  itself  is  as  effective  as

250  if  all  were  used  together.         When  therefore  we  have  written
in  our  testament — '  Lucius  Titius  be  heir/  we  may  add :  '  I
ask  you,  Lucius  Titius,  and  desire  of  you,  that  as  soon  as  you
have  been  able  to  enter  upon  the  inheritance,  you  give  it  up
and  restore  it  to  Caius  Seius.'     But  we  may  limit  our  request-
to  restitution  of  a  part  of  the  inheritance ;  and  it  is  in  our
power  to  bequeath  the  trust-gift  either  conditionally  or  uncon-

251  ditionally,  or  as  from  a  certain  date.         On  restitution  of  the
inheritance  he  who  has  restored  it  nevertheless  still  remains
heir ;  he  who  has  received  it  is  sometimes  in  the  position  of

252  heir,  sometimes  in  that  of  a  legatee.         But  formerly  he  was
in  the  place  neither  of  heir  nor  of  legatee,  but  rather  of  a
purchaser.     For  it  was  then  the  practice  that  the  inheritance

§  248.     §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  §  250.     §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  Comp.  §  229.  §  251.     §  3,  tit.  I.  afd,     Comp.  §  255.

§  249.     §  3,  I.  de  slnrj.  reb.  p.  fid.  rel.  §  252.     The  pro  forma  sale  was  to  pave
(ii,  24).     Comp.  Vlp.  xxv,  §§  1,  2  ;  the  way  for  the  interchange  of  the

Paul,  iv,  1,  §§  5,  6.  stipulations.      Comp.    Th.    ii,    23,

1  Apparently  glosses.  §  3.

II,  §§  252,  253.]  COMMENT/ART!  QVATTVOR.

1G1

dicis  causa  uenire;  et  quae  stipulationes  inter  [uenditorem
\licreditatis  et  emptorem  interponi  solent,  eaeclem  interponebantur
[inter] l  heredem  et  eum  cui  restituebatur  hereditas,  id  est
hoc  modo :  heres  quideui  stipulabatur  ab  eo  cui  restituebatur
hereditas,  ut  quicquid  hereditario  nomine  condemnatus  sol-
uisset?  siue  quid  alias  bona  fide  dedisset,  eo  nomine  indemnis
esset?  et  omnino  si  quis  cum  eo  hereditario  nomine  ageret
ut  recte  defenderetur ;  ille  uero  qui  recipiebat  hereditatem
inuicem  stipulabatur  ut  si  quid  ex  hereditate  ad  heredem
peruenisset  id  sibi  restitueretur,  ut  etiarn  pateretur  eum  here-
ditarias  actiones  procuratorio  aut  cognitorio  nomine  4  exequi.
253  Sed  posterioribus  temporibus  l  Trebellio  Maximo  et  Annaeo
Seneca  consulibus  senatusconsultum  factum  est,2  quo  cautum

should,  for  form's  sake,  be  sold  for  a  single  coin  to  the  person
to  whom  it  was  to  be  restored,  and  the  same  stipulations  that
were  usually  interchanged  between  the  vendor  and  purchaser  of
an  inheritance  were  interchanged  between  the  heir  and  the
person  to  whom  the  inheritance  was  restored,  in  this  way :
the  heir  took  a  promise  from  him  to  whom  he  was  restoring
the  inheritance  that  he,  the  heir,  should  be  kept  scathless  in
respect  of  any  payment  made  in  pursuance  of  any  judgment
given  against  him  on  account  of  the  inheritance,  or  of  any-
thing given  otherwise  in  good  faith,  and  that  he  should  in
every  case  be  duly  defended  when  sued  in  his  character  of
heir ;  while  he,  in  turn,  who  received  the  inheritance,  took  a
promise  from  the  heir  that  the  latter  would  restore  anything
belonging  to  it  that  might  come  into  his  hands,  and  that  he
would  allow  the  stipulant  to  prosecute  all  actions  competent
in  respect  of  the  inheritance  as  his,  the  heir's,  procurator  or
253  cognitor.  But  at  a  later  period,  in  the  consulate  of  Tre-
bellius  Maximus  and  Annaeus  Seneca,  it  was  provided  by  a

1  These  words  interpolated  by  G.
and  justified  by  context.

2  So  K.  u.  S.  ;  the  MS.  and  most
eds.  have  fuisset ;  P.  reads  ut  quid-
quid  hereditario    nomine    [dedisset,
siue  cuius  rei  nomine]  condemnatus
fuisset,  etc.

3  Savigny's  reading,    universally
accepted  ;     the    MS.    has    indenis-
set.

4  Comp.  iv,  §§  82-87.

253.     §  4,  tit.  I.    afd.      Comp.    Vlp.
xxv,  14  ;  Paul,  iv,  2.

1  So  the  MS.,  K.  u.  S.,  and  Hu. ;

P.    reads  postea  Neronis  tempori-
bu*.

2  It  appears  from  one  of  the
numerous  wax  tablets  recording  the
business  transactions  of  an  argen-
tarius  (banker  and  auctioneer),  dis-
covered at  Pompeii  in  1875,  that
Trebellius  Pollio  and  L.  Annaeus
Seneca  were  consuls  in  the  latter
half  of  the  year  56,  (Petra,  Tavo-
lette,  p.  21)  ;  this  fixes  a  date
hitherto  uncertain.  The  Set.  is  re-
produced by  Vlp.  in  fr.  1,  §  1,  D.
ad  SO.  Trebell  (xxxvi,  1).

162  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  253,  254.

est  ut  si  cui  hereditas  ex  fideiconimissi  causa  restitute  sit,
actiones  quae  iure  ciuili  heredi  et  in  heredem  conpeterent  ei
et  in  eum  darentur  cui  ex  fideicommisso  restituta  esset  here-
ditas  ;  per  quod  senatusconsultum  desierunt  illae  caution es  in
usu  haberi :  praetor  enim  utiles  actioues  3  ei  et  in  eum  qui
recepit  hereditatem,  quasi  heredi  et  in  heredem,  dare  coepit,
254  eaeque  in  edicto  proponuntur.  Sed  rursus  quia  heredes
scripti,  cum  aut  totam  hereditatem  aut  paene  totam  plerumque
restituere  rogabantur,  adire  hereditatem  ob  nullum  aut  mini-
mum luerum  recusabant,  atque  ob  id  extinguebantur  fidei-
commissa,  postea  Pegaso  et  Pusione  \_consuiibus~]  l  senatus
censuit,  ut  ei  qui  rogatus  esset  hereditatem  restituere  perinde
liceret  quartam  partem  retinere  atque  e  lege  Falcidia  in  legatis
retinendis  2  conceditur ;  (ex  singulis  quoque  rebus,  quae  per
fideiconimissum  relinquuntur,  eadem  retentio  permissa  est;)
per  quod  senatusconsultum  ipse  ouera  hereditaria  sustinet;
ille  autem  qui  ex  fideicommisso  reliquam  partem  hereditatis

senatusconsult  that,  when  an  inheritance  was  restored  to  any
person  on  the  ground  of  a  trust,  the  actions  competent  by  the
civil  law  to  or  against  the  heir  should  be  given  to  or  against
the  party  to  whom  the  inheritance  was  restored  ex  fideicom-
misso. In  consequence  of  this  senatusconsult  the  stipulations
of  which  we  have  been  speaking  went  out  of  use ;  for  the
praetor  began  to  grant  utiles  actiones  to  and  against  the  re-
cipient of  the  inheritance,  as  if  to  or  against  an  heir ;  and
254  these  are  set  forth  in  the  edict.  Still  later,  and  because  the
instituted  heirs,  when  asked  to  restore  the  whole  or  nearly  the
whole  of  the  inheritance,  often  refused  to  enter  upon  what
was  to  yield  them  little  or  no  profit,  and  thus  caused  the  ex-
tinction of  the  fideicommissary  gifts,  the  senate,  in  the  con-
sulate of  Pegasus  and  Pusio,  decreed  that  an  heir  who  was
asked  to  restore  an  inheritance  should  be  entitled  to  retain  a
fourth  part  of  it,  just  as  by  the  Falcidiau  law  he  is  entitled  to
do  in  respect  of  legacies ;  (and  the  same  retention  is  allowed
in  the  case  of  single  things  bequeathed  by  trust-gift.)  By
this  senatusconsult  it  is  the  heir  himself  that  has  to  bear  the
burdens  of  the  inheritance,  while  he  who  receives  the  rest  of
it  in  terms  of  the  trust  is  in  the  position  of  a  partiary  legatee,

3  See  §  78,  note  1.  sometime    between    the    years    70

§  254.     §  5,   tit.    I.   afd.     Comp.    Vlp.  and  80.

xxv,  §§  14,  15  ;  Paul,  iv,  3.  2  So   the    MS.;    M.     regards    the

1  Pegasus   and   Pusio   were   con-  word  as  a  gloss  ;  K.   u.    S.    substi-

suls   in    the    reign    of    Vespasian,  tute  retinere,  Hu.  relinendi  his.

II,  §§  254-256.]  COMMENT ARII  QVATTVOK.  1G3

recipit  legatarii  partiarii  loco  est,  id  est  eius  legatarii  cui  pars
bonorum  legatur ;  quae  species  legati  partitio 3  uocatur,  quia
cum  herede  legatarius  partitur  hereditatem :  unde  effectum
est  ut  quae  solent  stipulationes  inter  heredem  et  partiarium
legatarium  interponi,  eaedem  interponantur  inter  eum  qui  ex
fideicommissi  causa  recipit  hereditatem  et  heredem,  id  est  ut
et  lucrum  et  damnum  hereditarium  pro  rata  parte  inter  eos

255  commune  sit.         Ergo  siquidem  noil  plus  quam  dodrantem  L
hereditatis  scriptus  heres  rogatus  sit  restituere,  turn  ex  Tre-
bellian o  senatusconsulto  restituitur  hereditas,  et  in  utrumque
actiones  hereditariae  pro  rata  parte  dantur,  in  heredem  quidem
iure  ciuili,  in  eum  uero  qui  recipit  hereditatem  ex  senatus-
consulto Trebelliano  ;    quamquam  heres  etiam  pro  ea  parte
quam   restituit    heres    permanet,  eique   et   in   eum   solidae
actiones  conpetunt;   sed  non  ulterius  oneratur  nee  ulterius
illi  dantur  actiones  quam  apud  eum  commodum  hereditatis

256  remanet.         at  si  quis  plus  quam  dodrantem  uel  etiam  totam
hereditatem  restituere  rogatus  sit,  locus  est  Pegasiano  senatus-

i.e.  a  legatee  to  whom  a  share  of  the  estate  is  legated.  (A
legacy  of  this  sort  is  called  partitio,  because  the  legatee  shares,
partitur,  the  inheritance  with  the  heir.)  The  result  is  that
the  same  stipulations  that  are  wont  to  pass  between  an  heir
and  a  partiary  legatee  are  exchanged  between  the  fideicom-
missary  recipient  of  the  inheritance  and  the  heir,  namely,  that
the  profit  and  loss  of  the  succession  shall  be  common  to  both

255  in  proportion  to  their  respective  interests.         If  therefore  the
instituted  heir  be  asked  to  restore  no  more  than  three-fourths
of  the  inheritance,  he  does  so  under  the  Trebellian  senatus-
consult,   and  actions   affecting   the   inheritance  are  granted
against  both  parties  according  to  their  respective  interests, —
against  the  heir,  by  the  civil  law,  against  the  individual  to
whom  the  inheritance  is  restored,  under  the  Trebellian  senatus-
consult.     For  although  the  heir  remains  heir  even  as  regards
the  part  he  has  restored,  and  [according  to  the  civil  law]  action
is  competent  to  or  against  him  in  solidum,  yet  [under  the  sena-
tusconsult]  he  is  not  held  responsible,  nor  are  actions  granted
to  him,  beyond  the  beneficial  interest  in  the  inheritance  that

256  he  still  retains.         But  if  the  heir  be  asked  to  restore  more
than  three-fourths,  perhaps  the  whole,  of  the  inheritance,  the

3  Comp.Vlp.xxiv,25;Th.ii,23,§5.  1  Comp.  §  5,  tit.  I.  de  hered.  inst.

§§  255,   256.     §  6,  tit.   I.   afd.     Comp.  (ii,  14).

Vlp.  xxv,  14.

164  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  257-259.

257  consulto.         Sed  is  qui  semel  adierit  hereditatem,  si  modo
sua   uoluntate   adierit,   siue  retinuerit  quartam  partem  siue
noluerit  retinere,   ipse   uniuersa   onera  hereditaria  sustinet:
sed  quarta  quidem  retenta  quasi  partis  et  pro  parte  l  stipula-
tiones  interponi  debent,   tarnquam   inter  partiarium  legata-
rium  et  heredem ;  si  uero   totam  hereditatem  restituerit,  ad
exemplum    emptae    et   uenditae    hereditatis     stipulationes 2

258  interponendae  sunt.          Sed  si  recuset  scriptus  lieres  adire
hereditatem  ob  id  quod  dicat  earn  sibi  suspectam  esse  quasi
damnosam,  cauetur  Pegasiano  senatusconsulto  ut,  desiderante
eo  cui  restituere  rogatus  est,  iussu  praetoris  adeat  et  restituat,
proindeque  ei  et  in  eum  qui  receperit  actiones  dentur  ac  iuris
est  ex  senatusconsulto  Trebelliano :  quo  casu  nullis  stipula-
tionibus  opus  est,  quia  siraul  et  huic  qui  restituit  securitas
datur,  et  actiones  hereditariae  ei  et  in  euni  transferuntur  qui

259  receperit  hereditatem.         Nihil  autem  interest  utrurn  aliquis

257  Pegasian  senatusconsult  comes  into  play.         If  he  have  once
entered,  provided  always  he  has  done  so  voluntarily,  then,
whether  he  have  retained  his  fourth  or  have  not  cared  to  do
so,  he  is  liable  for  the  whole  burdens  of  the  succession  :  if  he
have  retained  his  fourth,  stipulations  similar  to  those  between
an  heir  and  a  partiary  legatee  must  be  interchanged  for  his
share  and  in   proportion  thereto,  partis  et  pro  parte;  but  if
he  have  restored  the  whole  inheritance,  then  stipulations  are
to  be  interchanged  after  the  model  of  those  employed  when

258  an  inheritance  has  been  bought  and  sold.         But  if  he  refuse
to  enter,  alleging  that  he  has  reason  to  suspect  the  inherit-
ance may  be  a  source  of  loss  to  him,  it  is  provided  by  the
Pegasian  senatusconsult  that,  on  the  application  of  the  party
to  whom  he  is  asked  to  make  restitution,  he  may  be  required
to  enter  and  restore  by  order  of  the  praetor,  and  that  actions
shall  be  granted  to  and  against  the  recipient  as  would  be  done
under  the  Trebellian  senatusconsult.     In  this  case  there^is  no
need  of  any  stipulations,  for  at  the  same  time  security  is
afforded  to  him  who  has  restored  the  inheritance,  and  the
actions  affecting  it  are  transferred  to  and  against  him  who

259  has  got  it  back.         It  is   of  no  moment  whether  an  heir

§  257      §  6,  tit.    I.    afd.     Comp.    Yip.  of  the  charges,

xxv,  15  ;  Paul,  iv,  3,  §  2.  '  Comp.  §  252.

i  Partis,  i.e.  that  each  shall  have  §  258.     §  6,   tit.    I.    afd.       Comp.   Vlp.
his  share  of  the  assets  ;  pro  parte,  xxv,  16  ;  Paul,  iv,  4.

that  each  shall  bear  his  own  share  §  259.     §  8,  tit,  I.  afd.

II,  §§  259-262.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  165

ex  asse l  heres  institutus 2  aut  totam  liereditatem  aut  pro
parte  restituere  rogetur,  an  ex  parte  heres  institutus  aut  totam
earn  partem  aut  partis  partem  restituere  rogetur  :  nam  et  hoc
casu  de  quarta  parte  eius  partis  ratio  ex  Pegasiano  senatus-
consulto  haberi  solet.

260  Potest  autern  quisque  etiam  res  singulas  per  fideicommissum
relinquere,  uelut  funduin  horninem  uestem  argentum  pecuniam,
et  uel  ipsum  heredem  rogare  ut  alicui  restituat  uel  legata-

261  rium,  quamuis  a  legatario  legari  nou  possit.1         Item  potest
non  solum  propria  testatoris  res  per  tideicommissum  relinqui,
sed  etiam  heredis  aut  legatarii  aut  cuiuslibet  alterius :  itaque
et  legatarius  non  solum  de  ea  re  rogari  potest  ut  earn  alicui
restituat  quae  ei  legata  sit,  sed  etiam  de  alia,  siue  ipsius  lega-
tarii sine  aliena  sit.     hoc  solum   obseruandum  est,  ne  plus
quisquam  rogetur  alicui  restituere  quam  ipse  ex  testamento

262  ceperit ;  uam  quod  amplius  est  inutiliter  relinquitur.         Cum

instituted  to  the  whole  inheritance  be  asked  to  restore  the
whole  or  a  part  of  it,  or  an  heir  instituted  only  to  a  share
be  asked  to  restore  the  whole  or  a  part  of  that  share  ;  for  even
in  the  latter  case  account  will  be  taken  under  the  Pegasian
senatusconsult  of  a  fourth  of  the  share  [to  which  he  has  been
instituted].

260  It  is  also  competent  for  a  testator  to  bequeath  single  things
by  fideicommissary  gift, — land,  for  example,  or  a  slave,  a  gar-
ment, plate,  money ;  and  either  to  ask  the  heir  himself  to
restore  it  to  some  third  party,  or — though  it  is  impossible  to
make  a  legacy  a  charge  upon  him — to  ask  the  legatee  to  do

261  so.         It  is  not  only  what  belongs  to  the  testator  himself  that
may  be  bequeathed  by  trust,  but  also  what  belongs  to  the
heir,  a  legatee,  or  even   an  utter  stranger ;  and  therefore  a
legatee  may  be  requested  to  give  up  to  another  person  not
only  what  is  legated  to  him,  but  even  something  else,  whether
belonging  to  himself  or  to  a  third  party.     There  is  this  only
to  remark, — that  no  man  can  be  asked  to  give  up  more  than
he  himself  has  got  under  the  testament :  a  fideicommissary

262  bequest  beyond  that  is  useless.         When  something  belong-

1  Comp.  §  5,  tit.  I.  de  liered.  inst.       §  260.     Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

(ii,  14).  i  Comp.  §  271  ;  Vlp.  xxiv,  20.

2  The  MS.  has  instituatur.  §  261.     §  1,   tit.   I.    afd.     Comp.    Vlp.
§§  260-267.     Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  siNGrLTS  xxv,  5  ;  Paul,  iv,  1,  §§  7,  8.

REBVS    PER    FIDEICOMMLWM  RE-       §  262.     §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.    Comp.  Vlp.  and
LICTIS  (ii,  22).  Paul,  as  in  last  note.

166  GAII  IXSTITVTIOKVM  IVHIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§.262-267.

autem  aliena  res  per  fideicommissum  relinquitur,  necesse  est
ei  qui  rogatus  est  aut  ipsam  redimere  et  praestare  ant  aesti-
mationem  eius  soluere,  sicut  iuris  est  si1  per  danmationem
aliena  res  legata  sit :  sunt  tamen  qui  putant  si  rem  per  fidei-
commissum relictain  dominus  non  uendat  extingui  fideicom-
missum ;  sed  aliam  esse  causam  per  damnationem  legati.

263  Libertas  quoque  seruo  per  fideicommissum  dari  potest,  ut

264  uel  heres  rogetur  manumittere  uel  legatarius.         (nee  interest,
(utrum  de  suo  proprio)  seruo  testator  roget,  an  de  eo  qui  ipsius

265  heredis  aut  legatarii  uel  etiam   extranei  sit.  Itaque  et
alienus  seruus  redimi  et  manumitti  debet :  quodsi  dominus
eum  non  uendat,  sane  extinguitur  fideicommissaria  libertas,

266  quia  hoc  (casu] l  pretii  conputatio  nulla  interuenit.         Qui
autem  ex  fideicommisso  manumittitur  non  testatoris  fit  libertus,
etiamsi  testatoris    seruus  (fuerit),  sed  eius  qui   manumitti t.

267  at  qui  directo  testameiito  liber  esse  iubetur,  uelut  hoc  modo  :

ing  to  a  third  party  is  bequeathed  by  trust-gift,  he  who  is
asked  to  give  it  up  must  either  purchase  and  convey  it  or  pay
its  value  instead,  as  in  the  case  of  a  legacy  by  damnation  of
what  belongs  to  another.  There  are  some,  however,  who
think  that,  if  the  owner  of  a  thing  bequeathed  by  trust-gift
wrill  not  sell  it,  the  bequest  is  extinguished ;  but  that  the  rule
is  different  as  regards  a  legacy  by  damnation.

263  Further,  there  may  be  a  grant  of  freedom  to  a  slave  by
means  of  a  trust,  either  the  heir  or  a  legatee  being  desired  to

264  manumit  him.         Nor  does  it  matter  whether  the  request  be
to  enfranchise  a  slave  of  the  testator's,  or  one  belonging  to

265  the  heir,  a  legatee,  or  even  a  stranger.         If  the  slave  be
another  person's,  he  must  be  purchased  and  manumitted  ;
but  if  his  owner  will  not  sell  him,  the  fideicommissary  gift
of  freedom  becomes  void ;  for  in  this  case  there  is  no  room

266  for  an  alternative  money  value.         A  slave  who  is  manu-
mitted in  pursuance  of  a  trust  does  not  become  a  freedman
of  the  testator's,  even  though  he  may  have  belonged  to  him,

267  but  is  a  freedman  of  the  manumitter's.         But  he  who  has  a

1  So  G.  and  most  eds.  ;  see  Labeo  1  Casu  illegible  in  the  MS.  Comp.

in  fr.  30,  §  6,  D.  de  leg.  III.  (xxxii).  Vlp.  ii,  11  ;  Vlp.  in  fr.  9,  §  3,  D.

The  MS.  seems  to  have  s  .  .  miri  de  sfattilib.  (xl,  7) — libertas  pecunia

•  •  .  e.s.  lui  non  potest.

§§263,264.  §2,  tit.  I.  afd.,  from  which  §§  266,  267.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.,  from

the  words  in  ital.  in  §  264  are  bor-  which  the  words  in  brackets  in  §

rowed.  Comp.  §  272  ;  Vlp.  ii,  §§  7,  267  (with  exception  of  Quiritium)

10;  xxv,  18;  Paul,  iv,  12,  §  4;  iv,  13.  are  borrowed.  Comp.  Vlp.  ii,  §§

§  265.     Comp.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  7,  3  ;  Th.  i,  14,  §  1.

II,  §§  267-270.]  COMMENT ARII  QVATTVOR.  167

STICHVS  SERVVS  MEVS  LIBER  ESTO,  uel  llOC  :   ST1CHVM  SERVVM

MEVM  LIBERVM  ESSE  IVBEO,  is  (ipsius  testatoris)  fit  libertus.
nee  alius  ullus  directo  ex  testamento  libertatem  habere  potest
quam  qui  utroque  tempore  testatoris  ex  iure  (Quiritium
(fuerit,  et  quo  facer -ef)  testamentum  et  quo  moreretur.

268  Multum  autem  (differuntea)  quae  per  fideicommissum  relin-

269  qmintur  ab  his  quae  directo  iure  legantur.         nam  ecce  per
fideicommissum  —  —  heredis  relinqui  potest :  cum  alioquin

270  legatum  —  -          -  inutile   sit.         Item  intestatus  moriturus
potest  ab  eo  ad  quern  bona  eius  pertinent  fideicommissum  alicui

270«relinquere,  cum  alioquin  ab  eo  legari  non  possit.  (Item
(legatum  codicillis)  relictum  non  aliter  ualet  quam  si  a  testatore
confirmati  fuerint,  id  est,  nisi  in  testamento  cauerit  testator
ut  quidquid  in  codicillis  scripserit  id  ratum  sit ;  fideicom-
missum uero  etiam  non  confirmatis  codicillis  relinqui  potest.

direct  grant  of  freedom  by  testament  in  sucli  words  as  these :
'  My  slave  Stichus  is  to  be  free,'  or,  '  I  order  that  my  slave
Stichus  shall  be  free,'  is  a  freedman  of  the  testator  himself.
jSTo  one,  however,  can  have  a  grant  of  freedom  directly  under
a  testament  who  did  not  belong  to  the  testator  in  quiritarian
right  both  at  the  time  of  the  latter's  testament-making  and  at
the  time  of  his  death.

268       Trust  bequests  differ  in  many  respects  from  direct  legacies.

269 .        [270]  Further,  an  individual

270  about  to  die  intestate  may  burden  his  successor  with  a  trust
in  favour  of  a  third  party ;  but  he  cannot  so  burden  him  with

270o  a  legacy.  Further,  a  legacy  bequeathed  ~by  a  codicil  is  not
valid  unless  the  latter  have  been  confirmed  by  the  testator,
i.e.  unless  he  have  provided  in  his  testament  that  any  dispo-
sition made  by  him  by  codicil  shall  be  given  effect  to  ;  "but  a
trust-gift  may  be  bequeathed  by  a  codicil  not  thus  confirmed.

§  268.     Before  this  par.  there   are  two  §  269.     To  complete   this  is  hopeless;

vacant   lines  (p.    123,    lines   1,   2),  any  reconstruction   is   pure   guess-

with  faint  traces  of  a  rubric.     The  work,   and  may  be  put  in  half-a-

first   four  letters  of   differunt  were  dozen  ways.

legible  to  Bl. ;  but  he  has  so  greatly  §  270.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxv,  4  ;  §  1,  tit.  I.

injured  the  page  with  his  chemicals  afd.

that  some  of  what  he   could  read  §  270a.     The  first  three  words,  though

must  now  be  taken  on  trust.     Part  illegible  in  the  MS.  ,  seem  warranted

of  it  seems  to  have  dealt  with  the  by  the  context.     Cornp.  Vlp.  xxv,

same  matter  as  tit.   I.  DE  CODICIL-  8  ;  Paul,  iv,  1,   §  10  ;  §  1,   tit.    I.

Lis  (ii,  25).  afd.

168

GAII  INSTITVTIOXVM  IV11IS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  271-276.

271  Item  a  legatario  legari  non  potest ;  sed  fideicornmissum  relinqui
potest.     quin  etiam  ab  eo  quoque  cui  per  fideiconnnissum
relinquimus  rursus  alii  per  fideicommissum  relinquere  possu-

272  mus.         Item  seruo  alieno  directo  libertas  dari  non  potest,  sed

273  per  fideicommissum  potest.         Item   codicillis    nemo   heres
institui  potest  neque  exheredari,  quamuis  testamento  confir-
mati  sint ;  at  is  qui  testamento  heres  institutus   est  potest
codicillis  rogari  ut  earn  hereditatem  alii  totam  uel  ex  parte
restituat,  quamuis  testamento  codicilli  confirmati  non   sint.

274  Item  mulier,  quae  ab  eo  qui  centum  milia  aeris  census  est  per
legem  Voconiam  heres  institui  non  potest,  tainen  fideiconi-

275  misso  relictam  sibi  hereditatem  capere  potest.         Latini  quo-
que, qui  hereditates  legataque  directo  iure  lege  lunia  capere

276  prohibentur,  ex  fideicommisso  capere  possunt.         Item  cum

271  Further,  a  legacy  cannot  be  charged  upon  a  legatee,  but  a
trust-gift  may ;  nay,  we  may  even  burden  an  individual  to
whom  we  leave  a  trust-gift  with  a  trust  in  favour  of  a  third

272  party.         Further,  while  freedom  cannot  be  bequeathed  directly
to    another   man's   slave,   it  may   be   given   by   trust   deed.

273  Further,  no  one  can  either  be  instituted  or  disinherited  by  a
codicil,  even  though  it  be  confirmed  by  testament ;  but  the
heir  instituted  in  the  testament  may  be  required  by  codicil  to
make  over  the  inheritance,  in  whole  or  in  part,  to  a  third
party,  notwithstanding  the  codicil  may  not  have  been  con-

274  firmed  by  the  testament.         Further,  although  by  the  Voco-
nian  law  a  woman  cannot  be  instituted  heir  by  a  man  whose
estate  is  valued  in  the  censorial  register  at  not  less  than  a
hundred   thousand  asses,  yet  she  may  nevertheless  take  an
inheritance  he  has  bequeathed  to  her  by  means  of  a  trust.

275  Latins  also,  though  prohibited  by  the  Junian  lav/  from  taking
inheritances  or  legacies  left  to  them  directly,  may  yet  take

276  under  a  fideicommissum.         Further,  although  a  man  is  for-

§  271.     Comp.  §§  260,  261  ;  Vlp.  xxiv,

20  ;  pr.    §   1,    I.    de  sing.   reb.  (ii,

24).
§  272.     Comp.   §§  264,   267  ;  §  2,  I.  de

sing.  reb.  (ii,  24).
§  273.     Comp.   Vlp.  xxv,  11  ;  §  10,   I.

dejideicom.  hered.  (ii,  23)  ;  §  2,  tit.

I.  afd.

§  274.     See  §  226,  note.
§  275.     Comp.  i,   §§  23,  24 ;  Vlp.  xxii,

3  ;  xxv,  7.
§  276.     It  is  generally  assumed  that  the

allusion  here  to  a  senatusconsult  is

erroneous,  and  that  the  provision
referred  to  was  one  of  those  intro-
duced by  the  lex  Aelia  Sentia,  and
mentioned  above,  i,  18.

From  this  view  I  differ.  A  tes-
tamentary gift  merely  of  freedom
made  the  slave  under  thirty  a  latin
the  moment  the  testament  became
operative  by  the  succession  of  a
suus  or  entry  of  a  stranger  (i,  22  ;
Vlp.  i,  11) ;  and  as  a  latin  he  might
competently  be  instituted  heir  in
another  testament,  though  unable

II,  §§  276-278.]  COMMENT ARII  QVATTVOR.  169

senatusconsulto  prohibitum  sit  proprium  seruum  rninorem
annis  xxx  liberum  et  heredem  instituere,  plerisque  placet
posse  nos  inhere  liberum  esse  cum  annorum  xxx  erit,  et  rogare

277  ut  tune  illi  restituatur  hereditas.         Item  quamuis  non  \_pos-
[simus]  post  mortem  eius  qui  nobis  heres  extiterit  aliuin  in
locum  eius  lieredem  instituere,  tamen  possumus  euni  rogare
ut  cum  morietur  alii  earn  bereditatem   totam   uel  ex  parte
restituat ;  et  quia  post  mortem  quoque  heredis  fideicornmissuin
dari  potest,  idem  efficere  possumus  et  si  ita  scripserimus  :  CVM

TITIVS  HERES  MEVS  MOETVVS  ERIT,  VOLO  HEREDITATEM  ME  AM  AD

PVBLIVM  MEVIVM  PERTINERE :  utroque  autem  modo,  tarn  hoc
quam  illo,  Titius  heredem  suum  obligatum  relinquit  de

278  fideicommisso  restituendo.         Praeterea  legata  [per]  formu-

bidden  by  senatusconsult  to  institute  his  slave  under  thirty
as  free  and  heir,  yet  it  is  the  general  opinion  that  he  may
declare  that  he  shall  be  free  on  attaining  that  age,  and  desire

277  that  the  inheritance  be  then  given  up  to  him.         Further,
although  we  cannot  institute  a  person  to  be  our  heir  after  the
death  and  in  the  place  of  him  who  has  actually  become  our
heir,  yet  we  may  request  the  latter  to  make  over  the  inherit-
ance to  another,  either  wholly  or  in  part,  when  he  is  dying ;
and,  as  we  can  leave  a  trust-gift  to  be  given  after  the  death
of  the  heir,  we  can  effect  the  same  result  by  expressing  our-
selves thus :  '  When  Titius,  my  heir,  is  dead,  I  wish  my  in-
heritance to  go  to  Publius  Mevius;'  in  either  way,  either
the  former  or  the  latter,  Titius  leaves  his  heir  bound  to  restore

278  the  trust-gift.          Moreover  we  sue  for  legacies  by  formula  ;

to   enter  unless   he   had  converted  i,  14).     It  may  have  been  for  the

his  latinity  into  citizenship  within  purpose  of  authoritatively  negativ-

the  cretionary  period  (Vlp.  xxii,  3).  ing  the  idea  that  a  solvent  testator

In  the  case  in  the  text,  however,  might  follow  the  same  course  that

the  enfranchisement  and  institution  a    senatusconsult    was     considered

proceeded   from   one  and  the  same  necessary.

act,  and  had  to  take  effect  simul-  Exactly  the  same  rule  as  is  here

taneously   or  else  both  be  useless.  laid  down  was  applied  where  a  slave

But  the  grant  of  freedom  could  not  instituted  heir  with    freedom   was

make  the  slave  more  than    a  latin  only  in  bonis  of  the  testator  (Vlp.

(i,  18  ;  Vlp.  i,   12)  ;  as  a  latin   he  xxii,    8)  ;  and   the   reason  given  is

could  not  enter  to  the  inheritance  ;  the   same   as  is    here    suggested —

and  until  he  had  entered  he  could  quia  latinitatem  consequitur,   quod

not  be  free.  non  proficit  ad  hereditatem  capien-

The  case,  so  far  as  appears  from  dam.
the  text,  was  not  one  directly  met       §  277.     Comp.  §  184.
by  the  Aelia-Sentian  law,    which,       §  278.     Comp.   Vlp.  xxv,  12.     "What  is

however,  expressly  authorised  such  meant  is  this, — that  while   in  ac-

enfranchisement  and  manumission  tions   for  legacies   the    magistrate,

by  an  insolvent  testator  (i,  21  ;  Vlp.  according  to   the   usual  procedure,

170  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§  278-282.

lam1  petimus:  fideicommissauero  Eomaequidem  apud  consulem
uel  apud  eum  praetorern  qui  praecipue  de  fideicommissis  ius
dicit2  persequimur ;  in  prouinciis  uero  apud  praesidem  prouinciae.

279  Item  de  fideicommissis  semper  in  urbe  ius  dicitur  ;  de  legatis

280  uero  cum  res  aguntur.         Fideicornmissorum  usurae  et  fructus
debentur,  si  modo  moram  solutionis  fecerit  qui  fideicommis-
sum   debebit ;  legatorum  uero  usurae  non  debentur :    idque
rescripto  diui   Hadriani  significatur.      scio   tamen   luliano J
placuisse  in  eo  legato  quod  sinendi  modo  relinquitur 2  idem
iuris  esse  quod  in  fideicommissis ;  quam  sententiam  et   his

281  temporibus   magis   optinere    uideo.          Item    legata   Graece

282  scripta  non  ualent ;  fideicommissa  uero   ualent.         Item  si
legatum  per  damnationem1  relictum  heres  infitietur,  in  duplum

but  in  Eome  we  sue  for  trust-gifts  before  the  consul  or  the
praetor  who  is  specially  charged  with  jurisdiction  in  matter

279  of  trusts,  and  in  the  provinces  before  the  governor.        Further,
in  Eome  itself  judicial  proceedings  regarding  trusts  may  go
on  at  any  time  ;  but  those  regarding  legacies  can  go  on  only

280  during  term.         Interest  and  fruits  and  profits  are  due  upon
a  trust-gift  if  the  debtor  be  in  mora  in  paying  it,  but  interest
is  not  due  upon  legacies ;  so  it  is  stated  in  a  rescript  of  our
late  emperor  Hadrian's.     I  am  aware,  however,  that  Julian
thought  the  rule  to  be  the  same  in  the  case  of  a  legacy  be-
queathed sinendi  modo  as  in  that  of  a  trust-gift ;  and  I  observe

281  that   his    opinion    is    now   generally    adopted.         Further,
legacies  bequeathed  in  Greek  words  are  not  valid,  but  trust-

282  gifts  are.         Further,  if  an  heir  deny  that  a  legacy  has  been
left  by  damnation,  the  action  against  him  is  for  double  the

sent  an   issue  (formula)  to  a  judge  amended  his  scheme  ;  and  later  the

(index)  for  trial,  in  those  for  trust-  matter  was  regulated  by  an  Oration

gifts  the  procedure  was  from  first  to  of  Marc.  Aurelius',  which  prolonged

last  before  the  consul,  fideicommis-  the  year's  sittings  to  230  days  and

sary  praetor,  or  provincial  governor,  rearranged  the  vacations  (Capitolin.

without  any  remit  to  a  index.  Marc.  10).

1  See  iv,  §§  30,  39,  f.  §  280.     Paul,  held  that  interest  was  due

2  Conip.  §  1,  I.  de  fid.  hered.  (ii,  on  legacies  as  well  as  trust-bequests,
23)  ;  Pomp,  in  fr.   2,  §  32,  de  0.  I.  iii,  8,  §  4  ;  so  did  Vlp.  in  fr.  34,  D.
(i,  2).  de  iisur.  (xxii,  1).

§  279.     Augustus  fixed  two  law  terms,  l  See  §  218,  note  2.

a  summer  and  winter  one  ;  Claudius  2  See  §  209.

is  said    to    have   combined    them,  §  281.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxv,  9.

leaving  December  and  January  en-  §  282.     Comp.  iv,   §§  9,   171  ;  Paul,   i,
tirely     free,    and    giving    frequent  19,  §  1  ;  §  7,  I-   de  obi.  qitae  q.  ex

holidays,  especially  at  the   seasons  contr.  (iii,    27).

of    harvest     and    vintage  ;     Galba  1  See  §  201.

II,  §§  282-286.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  171

cum   eo   agitur;  fideicommissi  uero  nomine  semper  in  sim-

283  plum  persecutio  est.         Item  quod  quisque  ex  fideicommisso
plus  debito  per  errorem  soluerit  repetere  potest,  at  id  quod  ex
causa  falsa  per  damnationem  legati  plus  debito  solutum  sit
repeti  non  potest.     idem  scilicet  iuris  est  de  eo  legato  quod
non  debitum  uel  ex  hac  uel  ex  ilia  causa  per  errorem  solutum
fuerit.

284  Erant    etiam    aliae    differentiae    quae    nunc    non    sunt :

285  ut  ecce  peregrin!  ipoterajabjideicommissa  capere,  et  fere1  haec
fuit  origo  fideicommissorum  :  sed  postea  id  prohibitum  est ;  et
nunc  ex  oratione  diui  Hadriani  senatusconsultum  factum  est

286  nt  ea  fideicommissa  fisco  uindicarentur.         Caelibes  quoque
qui  per  legem  luliam '  hereditates 2  legataque  capere  prohi-

286«bentur,  olim  fideicommissa  uidebantur  capere  posse.  Item
orbi,  qui  per  legeui  Papiam  l  [ob  id  quod  liberos  non  habe-
bant] 2  dimidias  partes  hereditatum  legatorumque  perdunt,

amount  of  it ;  but  for  a  trust-gift  action  is  always  in  simplum.

283  Further,  there  may  be  repetition  of  anything  paid  by  mistake
beyond  what  was  due  under  a  trust ;  but  what  has  been  paid
upon  some  erroneous  ground  in  excess  of  what  is  due  under  a
legacy  by  damnation  cannot  be  recovered.     The  rule  is  the
same  in  regard  to  a  legacy  which,  though  not  due  at  all,  has,
from  some  cause  or  other,  been  paid  by  mistake.

284  There  used  to  be  other  differences,  which  do  not  now  exist.

285  For  instance,  peregrins  used  to  be  able  to  take  trust-gifts, —
in  fact,  this  may  almost  be  said  to  have  been  the  origin  of
them  ;  but  afterwards  this  was  prohibited ;  and  now,  by  a
senatusconsult  passed  at   the   instance  of  our  late  emperor
Hadrian,  such  fideicommissa  are  to  be  claimed  for  the  fisc.

286  Celibates,  too,  who  were  forbidden  by  the  Julian  law  to  take
inheritances  or  legacies,  were  yet  in  former  times  regarded

286aas  qualified  to  take  trust-gifts.  Further,  childless  persons,
who  by  the  Papian  law,  and  because  they  have  no  children,
forfeit  one-half  of  their  inheritances  and  legacies,  were  for-

§  283.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxiv,  33  ;  Paul,  iii,  Th.    de  infirm,  poen.  caelib.  et  orb.

6,  §  92  ;  §  7,  I.  de  obi.  quae  q.  ex  (viii,  16).

contr.  (iii,  27).  l  See  i,  145,  note  1.

§  284.     Comp.  §  268.  2  After  luliam  the  MS.  has  appa-

§285.     Comp.   i,    25;  ii,  §§  110,   118;  rently  nas;  Hu.  thinks  this  should

Vlp.  xx,  §§  14,  15  ;  xxii,  2  ;  Th.  ii,  be  Was,  and  accordingly  interpolates

23,  §  1.  testamentarias  before  hereditates.
1  The   MS.  has  fidem  commissam       §  286cr.     See  refs.  in  last  note.

facere  etferre,  etc.  !  See  i,  145,  note  1.

§286.     Comp.  §§  111,  144;  Vlp.  xvii,  2  P.  deletes  these  words  as  a  gloss,

1  ;  xxii,  3  ;  Constantin.  in  1.  un.  C.  which  K.  u.  S.  also  esteem  them.

172  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [II,  §§286-289.

olim  solida  fideicommissa  uidebantur  capere  posse,  sed  postea
senatusconsulto  Pegasiano 3  proinde  fideicommissa  quoque  ac
legata  hereditatesque  capere  pro  semisse 4  prohibit!  sunt ;  eaque
translata  sunt  ad  eos  qui  [in  eo] 5  testamento  liberos  habent,
aut  si  nullus  liberos  habebit  ad  populum,  sicuti  iuris  est  in
legatis  et  in  hereditatibus  quae  eadem  aut  siniili  ex  causa

287  [caduca  fiunt]."         Item  olim  incertae  personae  uel  postumo
alieuo  per  fideicommissum   relinqui  poterat,  quamuis  neque
heres  institui   neque   legari   ei   posset ;   sed  senatusconsulto
quod  auctore  diuo  Hadriano  factum  est  idem  in  fideicommissis

288  quod   in  legatis  hereditatibusque   constitutum  est.         Item
poenae  nomine  iam  non  dubitatur  nee  per  fideicommissum
quidem  relinqui  posse.

289  Sed  quamuis  in  multis  iuris  partibus  longe  latior  causa  sit
fideicoinmissorum  quarn  eorum  quae  directo  relinquuntur,  in
quibusdam  tantumdem  ualeant,  tamen  tutor  non  aliter  testa-

merly  considered  qualified  to  take  trust-gifts  in  full.  But
latterly,  by  the  Pegasian  senatusconsult,  they  are  as  much
forbidden  to  take  trust-gifts  beyond  a  half  as  inheritances  and
legacies  ;  the  lapsed  portion  is  now  transferred  to  those  per-
sons named  in  the  testament  who  have  children,  or,  if  there
be  none  such,  to  the  state,  as  is  the  rule  in  regard  to  legacies
and  inheritances  which  for  that  or  any  similar  reason  become

287  caducous.        Further,  it  was  formerly  possible  to  bequeath
by   trust  to   an  uncertain  person   or  a  stranger  after-born,
although  it  was  impossible  either  to  institute  him  heir  or  leave
him  a  legacy ;  but,  by  a  senatusconsult  passed  at  the  instance
of  our  late  emperor  Hadrian,  the  rule  has  been  made  the  same

288  for  trust-gifts  as  for  legacies  and  inheritances.         Further,
there    is    now  no  doubt    that  even    a    trust-gift  cannot  be
bequeathed  by  way  of  penalty.

289  But  although  in  many  of  their  jural  characteristics  trust-
gifts  are  not  so  circumscribed  as  direct  bequests,  while  in
other  respects  the  two  are  equally  effectual,  yet  a  tutor  cannot

3  Comp.  §  254.  §  287.     Comp.  §§  238,  241  ;  Vlp.  xxii,

4  So  P. ;  the  MS.  hasp'sem,  which  4  ;  xxv,  13  ;  §  12,  I.  de  kered.  iiist.
most  eds.  renderpos.se.  (ii,  14).

5  In  eo  added  by  P.  §  288.     Comp.  §§  235  f.,  243 ;  Vlp.  xxv,

6  Caduca  Jiunt  added  by  P.     Pre-  13.

vious  eds.  (as  does  Hu.  still)  made  §  289.     Comp.  i,  149  ;  Vlp.  in  fr.  3,  §  1 ;

§  286rt  end  with  hereditatibus,  and  Paul,    in    fr.  7,  D.    de   test,  tutela

the  next  one  begin — [cum]que  eadein  (xxvi,  2).
aut  simili  ex  causa  item  olim,  etc.

IT,  §289.]  COMMEKTARII  QVATTVOE.  173

mento   dari   potest  quam  directo,  ueluti  hoc  modo :  LIBERIS

MEIS  TITIVS  TVTOK  ESTO,  uel  ita  :   LIBERIS  MEIS  TITIVM  TVTOREM

DO  ;  per  fideicommissum  uero  dari  non  potest.

be  appointed  by  testament  otherwise  than  directly,  for  ex-
ample thus :  '  Be  Titius  tutor  to  my  children,'  or,  '  I  make
Titius  tutor  to  my  children ; '  he  cannot  be  appointed  fidei-
commissarily.

174

GAII  INST1TVTIOXVM  I  VMS  CIVILIS        [III,  §§  1,  2.

[COMMENT A  RI VS  TER  TI  VS.  ]

1  [Tntestatorum  hereditates  ex  lege  AT/  tabularum  '  primum  ad

2  [suos  hercdes2  pertinent.         Sui   autem   heredes  existimantur
[liberi  qui  in  potentate  morientis  fuerunt,  ueluti  filius  filiaue,
[iiepos  neptisue  ex  filio,  pronepos  proneptisue  ex  nepote  filio  nato
\_prognatus  prognataue:  nee  interest  naturales  sint  liberi  an
[_adoptiui :  ita  demum  tamen  nepos  neptisue  et  pronepos  pro-
[neptisue  suorum  hercdum  numcro  sunt  si  praecedens  persona
\_desierit  in  potestate  parentis  esse,  sine  morte  id  acciderit  sine
[alia  ratione,  ueluti  emancipation ; !  nam  si  per  id  tempiis

1  The  inheritances  of  intestates,  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,

2  belongs  in  the  first  place  to  sui  heredes.         Those  are  held  to
be  sui  heredes  who  were  in  the  potestas  of  the  deceased  at  his
death, — a  son  or  daughter  for  instance,  a  grandson  or  grand-
daughter, or   a    great-grandson  or   great-granddaughter  by  a
grandson  who  was  the  issue  of  a  son  ;  and  it  is  quite  immaterial
whether  they  be  children  by  birth  or  by  adoption.     As  regards
grandson  and  granddaughter,  great-grandson  and  great-grand-
daughter, however,  they  are  reckoned  sui  heredes  then  only  when
the,  person  next  before  them  has  ceased  to  be  in  the  potestas  of  the
common  parent,  whether  this  have  happened  by  death  or  other-
wise, say  by  emancipation ;  for  if,  at  the  moment  of  a  man's

:;§  1-8.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  HEREDITATI-
BVS  QYAE  AB  INTESTATO  DEFERVN-
TVR  (iii,  1).

§§  1-5.  A  sheet  of  the  MS.  is  lost,  cut
out,  as  is  supposed,  by  the  scribe
who  overlaid  the  parchment  with
Jerome's  Epistles.  The  first  side
probably  was  blank  ;  the  contents
of  the  second,  down  to  the  middle
of  §  5,  are  supplied  from  the  Collat.
xvi,  2,  §§  1-5,  which  bear  expressly
to  be  from  the  Inst.  of  Gai.  It  is
not  improbable  that  they  were  pre-
ceded by  a  par.  corresponding  to  the
pr.  of  tit.  I.  afd.,  introducing  the
subject  of  intestacy.

1.     §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxvi,
1  ;  Paul,  in  Collat.  xvi,  3,  §  3.

1  'Si  intestatus  moritur,  cui  suus
heres   nee  escit,    aynatus  proximus
famlliam  habeto,  '  Schoell,  Tab.  v,  4.

2  For    the    reason   why  the    sui
heredes  were  so  called,  see  ii,  157.
Poste  calls  them  self-heirs  ;  but  this
phrase,  though  with  terseness  and
accuracy  describing  their  position,
is   not   sufficiently   self-explanatory
for  general  use.

§  2.     §§  2,  26,  tit.   I.  afd.     Comp.  Vlp.

xxv,   1;    Paul,
§§  4,  8.

1  Comp.  i,  132.

in    Collat.    xvi,    3,

Ill,  §§2-7.]       COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  175

[quo  quis  moritur  Jilius  in  poteslate  eius  sit,  nepos  ex  eo  suus
[heres  esse  non  polcst.     idem  ct   in  ceteris  deinceps  lilcrorum

3  [personis  dictum  intellegcmus.          Vxor  quoque  quae  in  manu
[morientis  est  sua  heres  est,  quia  Jiliae  loco  est ;  item  nurus
[quae  in  filii  manu  est,  nam  et  haec  ncptis  loco  est :  scd  ita
[demum  erit  sua  heres  si  filius,  cuius  in  manu  fuerit,  cum  pater
[moritur  in  potestate  eius  non  sit.    idcmque  dicemus  et  de  ea
[quae  in  nepotis  manu  matrimonii  causa1  sit,  quia  proncptis

4  [loco  est.         Postumi  quoque  qui,  si  uiuo  parente  nati  essent,  in

5  [potestate  eius  futuri  forent,  sui  heredes  sunt.         Idem  iuris  est
[de  his  quorum  nomine  ex  lege  Aelia  Sentia  uel  ex  senatuscon-
[sulto  post]  mortem  patris  causa  probatur:  nam  et  hi  uiuo

6  patre  causa  probata  in  potestate  eius  futuri  essent.         Quod
etiam  de  eo  filio  qui  ex  prima  secundaue  mancipatione  post
mortem  patris  manumittitur  intellegemus.

7  Igitur  cum  filius  filiaue  et  ex  altero  filio  nepotes  neptesue

death,  his  son  be  in  his  potestas,  a  grandson  by  that  son  cannot
lie  his  suus  heres.     The  same  remark  applies  to  the  rest  of  a  man's

3  descendants  in  their  order.         The  wife,  too,  that  is  in  his  maims
when  he  dies,  is  a  sua  heres,  because  she  is  in  the  position  of  a
daughter.     So  is  his  daughter-in-law  in  his  son's  manus,  for
she  stands  to  him  in  place  of  a  granddaughter ;  she  will  lie  sua
heres,  however,  only  if  the  son,  in  whose  manus  she  has  been,  was
not  in  potestate  of  his  father  at  the  moment  of  the  latter  s  death.
The  same  may  be  said  of  her  who  is  matrimonially  in  manu  of
a  grandson ;  for  she  stands  in  the  position  of  a  great-grand-

4  daughter.         Posthumous  children  also  who,  had  they  been  born
in  the  lifetime  of  the  parent  [whose  succession  is  in  question],

5  would  have  been  in  his  potestas,  are  sui   heredes.          Those
are  in  the  same  position  on  whose  account  cause  o^-eww-  has  been
proved  under  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  or  under  the  senatusconsult
after  their  father's  death  ;  for,  had  it  been  proved  during  the

6  latter's  lifetime,  they  would  have  been  in  his  potestas.         And
a  son  who,  after  a  first  or  second   mancipation,   has   been
manumitted  after  his  father's  death,  is  also  to  be  regarded  as
in  the  same  position.

7  When   therefore   a   man  leaves   a   son   or  daughter,  and

§  3.     Comp.  i,  136  ;  ii,  §§  139,  159;  Vlp.  §  6.     Gai.  in  Collat.  xvi,  2,  §  6.     Comp.

xxii,  14  ;  Gell.  xviii,  6,  §  9.  i,  132  ;  ii,  141;  Vlp.  xxiii,  3;  Paul.

1  Comp.  i,  §§  114,  118.  in  Collat.  xvi,  3,  §  7.    Manumission

§  4.     §  26,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.   ii,  130  ;  after  a  third  mancipation  would  not

Vlp.  xxii,  15.  have  had  the  same  effect.

§  5.     Comp.  i,  §§  29,  31,  32;  ii,  142;  Vlp.  §§  7,  8.     Gai.  in  Collat.  xvi,  2,  §§  7,  8  ;

vii,  4  ;  Paul,  in  Collat.  xvi,  3,  §  7.  §  6,  tit.  I.  afd.    Comp.  Vlp.  xxvi,  2.

176  GAII  INSTITVTIOXVM  1VRIS  CIVILIS      [III,  §§  7-10.

extant,  pariter  ad  hereditatem  uocantur ;  nee  qui  gradu
proximior  est  ulteriorem  excludit :  aequum  enim  uidebatur
nepotes  neptesue  in  patris  sui  locum  portionemque  succedere.
pari  ratione  et  si  nepos  neptisue  sit  ex  filio,  et  ex  nepote  pro-
nepos  proneptisue,  simul  omnes  uocantur  ad  hereditatem.

8  Et  quia  placebat  nepotes  neptesue,  item  pronepotes  pronep-
tesue  in  parentis  sui  locum  succedere,  conueniens  esse  uisum
est  non  in  capita   sed  in  stirpes  hereditatem  diuidi,   ita  ut
filius  partem  dimidiarn  hereditatis  ferat,  et  ex  altero  filio  duo
pluresue  nepotes  alteram  dimidiam ;  item  si  ex  duobus  filiis
nepotes  extent,  et  ex  altero  filio  unus  forte  uel  duo,  ex  altero
tres  aut  quattuor,  ad  unuin  aut  ad  duos  dimidia  pars  pertineat,
et  ad  tres  aut  quattuor  altera  dimidia.

9  Si  nullus  sit  suorum  heredum,  tune  hereditas  pertinet  ex
10  eadem  lege  xn  tabularum  l  ad  agnatos.          Vocantur  autem

agnati   qui  legitima  cognatione  iuncti  sunt :  legitima  autem

grandsons  or  granddaughters  by  another  son,  they  are  called
simultaneously  to  the  inheritance ;  the  nearer  in  degree  does
not  exclude  the  more  distant ;  for  it  seemed  but  fair  that  the
grandsons  and  granddaughters  should  succeed  in  their  father's
place  and  to  his  share.  Upon  the  same  principle,  if  there  be
a  grandson  or  granddaughter  by  a  son,  and  a  great-grandson  or
great-granddaughter  by  a  grandson,  they  are  all  called  simul-

8  taneously.         And  as  it  was  thought  right  that  grandsons
and  granddaughters,  great-grandsons  and  great-granddaugh-
ters, should  succeed  in  the  place  of  their  parents,  it  seemed  to
accord  with  this  view  that  the  inheritance  should  be  divided
in  stirpes  rather  than  in  capita,  [i.e.  by  reckoning  branches
rather  than  individuals,]  so  that  a  son  should  have  one  half  of
the  inheritance,  and  the  grandsons  by  another  son,  whether
two  or  more,  should  have  the  other  half.     So,  if  there  be
grandsons,  issue  of  two  sons, — one  or  perhaps  two  by  one  of
them,  three  or  four  by  the  other,  one  half  belongs  to  the  one
or  two,  and  the  other  half  to  the  three  or  four.

9  If  there  be  no  suus  heres,  then,  by  the  same  law  of  the
Twelve   Tables,    the    inheritance   belongs    to    the    agnates.

10  Those  are  called  agnates  who  are  allied  by  legitima  coynatio,

§§  9-17.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  LEGITIMA  §  10.  Gai.  in  Collat.  xvi,  2,  §  10,  from

AGNATOHVM  SUCCESSIONS  (iii,  2).  which  the  few  words  illegible  in  the

§  9.  Gai.  in  Collat.  xvi,  2,  §  9.  Comp.  MS.  are  supplied  ;  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.

Vlp.  xxvi,  1 ;  Paul,  in  Collat.  xvi,  Comp.  Vlp.  xxvi,  1 ;  Paul,  in  Collat.

3,  §  13  ;  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  xvi,  3,  §§  13,  15  ;  Vlp.  in  Collat.

1  See  note  1  to  §  1.  xvi,  6,  §  1.

Ill,  §§  10-13.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  177

cognatio  est  ea  quae  per  uirilis  sexus  personas  (coniungitur  :
(itaque  eodem}  patre  nati  fratres  agnati  (sibi  sunt,  qui  etiam
(consanguinei]  uocantur,  nee  requiritur  an  etiaui  matrem
eandem  habuerint ;  item  patruus  fratris  filio  et  inuicem  is  illi
agnatus  est ;  eodem  numero  sunt  fratres  patrueles  inter  se,  id
est  qui  ex  duobus  fratribus  progenerati  sunt,  quos  plerique
etiam  consobrinos :  uocant :  qua  ratione  scilicet  etiam  ad
plures  gradus  agnationis  peruenire  poterimus.

11  N"on  tarnen  omnibus  simul  agnatis  dat  lex  xn  tabularum
hereditatem,  sed  his  qui  tune  *  cum  certum  est  aliquem  in-

12  testato   decessisse   proximo  gradu  sunt.         Nee  in  eo  iure
successio  est :  ideoque  si  agnatus  proximus  hereditatem  omi-
serit,  uel  antequam  adierit  decesserit,  sequentibus  nihil  iuris

13  ex  lege   conpetit.         Ideo   autem  non  mortis  tempore   quis
(proximus}   fucrit   requirimus,  sed   co  tempore    quo   certum

[i.e.  the  kinship  of  the  ius  ciuile ;]  and  that  is  legitima  cognatio
in  which  the  alliance  is  through  persons  of  the  male  sex.
Therefore  brothers  born  of  the  same  father,  often  called
Irothers-consanguinean,  are  each  other's  agnates,  without  re-
ference to  the  consideration  whether  or  not  they  have  the
same  mother ;  an  uncle  on  the  father's  side  is  an  agnate  of  his
brother's  son,  and  the  latter  in  turn  an  agnate  of  his  uncle ;
agnates  also,  each  of  the  other,  are  fratres  patrueles,  i.e.  the
children  of  two  brothers,  by  most  people  called  consobrini.
It  is  plain  that  in  this  way  we  may  arrive  at  many  degrees
of  agnation.

11  It  is  not,  however,  to  all  a  man's  agnates  at  once  that  the
Twelve  Tables  give  his  inheritance,  but  only  to  those  who
are  nearest  in  degree  at  the  time  it  has  been  ascertained  that

12  he  has  died  intestate.         Nor  is  there  any  succession  in  this
right  of  the  nearest  agnate ;   consequently  if  he   have  not
taken  up  the  inheritance,  or  have  died  before  entry,  those

13  next  in  degree  have  no  claim  to  it  under  the  statute.         The
reason  why  we  seek  for  the  nearest  agnate,  not  as  at  the  time
of  a  man's  death,  but  as  at  the  time  when  it  has  been  ascer-

1  Consobrini  originally  meant  chil-  turn  ;    corrected    from    Collat.    and

dren  of  sisters,  but  was  extended  so  Inst.

as   to   mean    first   cousins   without  §  12.    Gai.  in  Collat.  xvi,  2,  §  12.    Comp.

distinction.  §  22  ;   Vlp.   xxvi,  5  ;    Paul,   iv,  8,

11.     Gai.  in  Collat.   xvi,  2,  §  11;  §  1,  §§  23,  26  ;  §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.

tit.   I.  afd.     Comp.  §  13  ;  Paul,  in  §  13.     Gai.  in  Collat.  xvi,  2,  §  13,  from

Collat.    xvi,    3,    §    17  ;   §  6,   tit.   I.  which  the  few  words  illegible  in  the

afd.  MS.    have    been    supplied.      Comp.

1  The  MS.    seems   to  have  quibus  §  11;  §  6,  tit.  I.  afd.

M

178  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [III,  §§  13-15.

fuerit  aliquena  intestatum  decessisse,  quia  si  quis  (testamento)
facto  decesserit,  melius  esse  uisum  est  tune  eius  l  requiri
proximum  cum  certum  esse  coeperit  neminem  ex  eo  testa-
mento fore  heredem.

14  Quod   ad   feminas   tamen   attinet,   in    hoc   hire   aliud   in
ipsarum    hereditatibus    capiendis   placuit,   aliud    in    cetero-
rum  bonis 1   ab   his  capiendis :   nam   feminarum   hereditatcs
proinde  ad  nos  agnationis  iure  redeunt  atque  masculorum,
nostrae  uero  hereditates  ad  feminas  ultra  consanguineorum
gradum  non  pertinent ;  itaque  soror  fratri  sororiue  legitima
heres  est,  amita  uero  et  fratris  filia  legitima  heres  esse  [non
\_potest ;  sororis  autem  nobis  loco  est]  etiam  mater  aut  nouerca
quae  per  in  manum  conuentioiiem  apud  patrem  nostrum  iura
filiae  nacta2  est.

15  Si  ei  qui  defunctus  erit  sit  frater  et  alterius  fratris  filius,
sicut   ex   superioribus :   intellegitur,   frater  prior 3  est,   quia

tained  that  he  has  died  intestate,  is  this, — that,  if  he  died
leaving  a  testament,  the  proper  course  seemed  to  be  to  look
for  the  agnate  nearest  to  him  at  the  moment  it  became
certain  that  no  one  was  to  be  heir  under  that  testament.

14  As  regards   women,  one  rule  has   been   received   in  this
branch  of  the  law  as  to  taking  an  inheritance  from  them,  but
quite  a  different  one  as  to  taking  by  them;  for,  while  the
inheritances  of  females  devolve  on  us  by  right  of  agnation
just  as  do  those  of  males,  our  inheritances  do  not  belong  to
females  beyond  the  consanguinean  degree.     Therefore,  while
a  sister  is  heir-at-law  of  her  brother  or  sister,  a  father's  sister
or  a  brothel's  daughter  cannot  be  heir-at-law  [of  her  nephew
or  uncle],     A  mother  or  stepmother,  however,  who  by  passing
in  manum  of  our  father  has  acquired  the  rights  of  a  daughter
of  his,  stands  to  us  in  the  position  of  a  sister.

15  If  a  person  deceased  be  survived  by  a  brother  and  the  son
of  another  brother,  the  brother,  as  may   be  gathered  from

1  So  P. ;  the  MS.  appears  to  have  but  we  find  Gai.  frequently — as  in

etiis,  which  Hu.  renders  ex  Us,  and  §§  36  f. — using  hereditas  for  bono-

K.  u.  S.  omit.  rum  possessio,  which  in  strictness  is

jj  14.     Gai.  in  Collat.  xvi,  2,  §  14,  from  equally  inaccurate.

which  the  words  [non  .  .  .  loco  est],  2  The  MS.  has  nancta  ;  Hu.,  fol-

omitted   in   the    MS.    are   supplied.  lowing  the  Collat.,  substitutes  con-

Comp.  Vlp.  xxvi,  6  ;  Paul,  in  Collat.  secuta.

xvi,  3,  §§  16,  20;    Vlp.  in  Collat.      §15.    Gai.  in  Collat.  xvi,  2,  §  1 5.    Com  p.

xvi,  7,  §  1;  §§  3,  3a,  Bb,  tit.  I.  afd.  Panl.  in  Collat.  xvi,  3,  §  18  ;  §  5,  tit.

1  This  word  omitted  by  many  eds.  I.  afd.

as  a  gloss,  on  the  ground  that  it  !  See  §11.

would  hardly  be  applied  by  a  classi-  2  So  the  MS.  ;  the  Collat.  and  Inst.

cal  jurist   to  a  leyitima   /tereditas;  have  potior,  which  K.  u.  S.  adopt.

Ill,  §§  15-17.]  COMMENTAEII  QVATTVOR.  IT 9

gradu  praecedit :  sed   alia  facta  est  iuris  interpretatio  inter

16  suos   heredes.3         Quodsi  defuncti  nullus  frater  extet,  [scd]
sint  liberi  fratrum,  ad  omnes  quidem  hereditas  pertinet ;  sed
quaesitum  est,  si  dispari  forte  numero  sint  nati,  ut  ex  imo
unus  uel  duo,  ex  altero  tres  uel  quattuor,  utrum  in  stirpes
diuidenda  sit  hereditas,  sicut   inter   suos  heredes  iuris   est,
fin   potius  in   capita :  iam   dudum  tamen   placuit  in  capita
diuidendam   esse    hereditatem ;    itaque    quotquot  erunt    ab
utraque  parte  personae,  in  tot  portiones  hereditas  diuidetur,
ita  ut  singuli  singulas  portiones  ferant.

17  Si  nullus  agnatus  sit,  eadem  lex  xn  tabularum  l  gentiles  2
ad  hereditatem  uocat.     qui  sint  autem  gentiles  priino  com-
mentario 3   rettulimus ;    et    cum   illic   admonuerirnus   totuin
gentiliciuna  ius  in  desuetudinem  abisse,  superuacuurn  est  hoc
quoque  loco  de  eadem  re  curiosius 4  tractare.

what  has  been  said,  is  preferred,  for  he  is  nearer  of  degree ;
but  a  different  interpretation  is  put  upon  the  law  in  the  case

16  of  sui  heredes.         If  he  leave  no  brother,  but  is  survived  by
children  of  brothers  predeceased,  the  inheritance  belongs  to
all  of  them.     It  used  to  be  a  question,  when  the  families
were  of  unequal  number, — one  brother  having   one  or  two
children  say,  another  three  or  four, — whether  the  inheritance
should  be  divided  in  stirpes,  as  is  the  rule  with  sui  heredes,
or  in  capita.     It  has  long  been  settled,  however,  that  the
division  must  be  in  capita  ;  therefore,  whatever  be  the  number
of  individuals  in  the  two  families  collectively,  the  inheritance
must  be  divided  into  the  same  number  of  shares,  so  that  each
individual  may  have  one.

17  On  failure   of  agnates,   the   gentiles,  by  the  same  law  of
the  Twelve  Tables,  are  called  to  the  inheritance.     Who  the
gentiles  are  we  have  explained  in  our  First  Commentary ;  it
would  be  superfluous  again  to   go  into   the  details  of  the
matter,  seeing,  as  there  already  observed,  that  the  whole  law
affecting  them  has  become  obsolete.

o

3  Comp.  §  8.  2  Comp.  Liv.  x,  8  ;  Cic.  Top.  vi,

§16.     Gai.  in  Collat.  xvi,  2,  §16.   Comp.  29;    Paul,    ex    Festo,    v.     Gentilis

Vlp.  xxvi,  4  ;  Paul,  in  Collat.  xvi,  (Bruns,  p.  242).

^3,  §§  17,  19  ;  §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.  3  See  i,  164a,  note.

§    17.     Comp.    Vlp.    in   Collat.    xvi,  4,  4  Between   re  and   curiosius    the

§  2.  MS.  has  tin,  with  a  dot  over  the  n,

'Si  agnatus   nee   escit,   gentiles  usually  a   mark   of  deletion.     Hn.

familiam    habento, '    Schoell,    Tab.  and  many  earlier  eds.  read  iterum  ;

v,  5.  Gou.  and  P.  et.

180  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS     [HI,  §§  18-24.

18  Hactenus  lege  xn   labularum   finitae   sunt   intestatorum '
hereditates  :  quod  ins    quemadmodum  strictum  fuerit  palam

19  est  intellegere.         Statim  enim  emancipati  liberi  nullum  ius
in  hereditatem  parentis  ex  ea  lege  habent,  cum  desierint  sui

20  heredes   esse.         Idem   iuris  est  si  ideo   liberi   non  sint  in
potestate  patris  quia  sint  cum  eo  ciuitate  Eomana  donati  nee

21  ab  imperatore  in  potestatem  redacti  fuerint.         Item  agnati
capite  deminuti  non  admittuntur  ex  ea  lege  ad  hereditatem,

22  quia  nomen  agnationis  capitis  deminutione  perimitur.         Item
proximo  agnato  non  adeunte  hereditatem,  nihilo  magis  sequens

23  iure  legitimo  admittitur.         Item  feminae  agnatae  quaecum-
que  consanguineorum  gradum   excedunt  nihil   iuris  ex  lege

24  habent.         Similiter  non  admittuntur  cognati  qui  per  femi-
nini  sexus  personas   necessitudine  iunguntur,  adeo   quidein
ut  nee  inter  matrem  et  filium  filiamue  ultro  citroque  here-
ditatis    capiendae     ius    conpetat,    praeterquam    si    per    in

IS       Here,  according  to  the  Twelve  Tables,  there  was  an  end  of
the  inheritances  of  intestates  ;  and  how  strict  the  law  was  in

19  regard  to  them  is  very  evident.         Thus  children  the  moment
they  are  emancipated  have  no  longer  any  right  under  the
statute  in  the  inheritance  of  their  ancestor,  for  they  have

20  ceased  to  be  sui  heredes.         The  rule   is   the   same   where
children  happen  not  to  be  in  potestate  of  their  father  for  the
reason  that,  though  they  have  received  with   him  a  gift  of
citizenship,  the  emperor  has  not  declared  them  subject  to  his

21  potestas.          Further,  agnates  who    have   undergone   capitis
deminutio  are  by  the  statute  excluded  from  the  inheritance,
because    agnation    is    thereby    in    every    sense    destroyed.

22  Further,  if  the  nearest  agnate  fail  to  enter,  the  next  in  degree
is  none  the  more  on  that  account  entitled  to  admission  under

23  the  statute.         Further,  female  agnates  beyond  the  consan-

24  guinean  degree  of  relationship  have  no  right  under  it.         In
like  manner  those  kinsmen  are  not  admitted  that  are  related
merely  through  females.     So  far  does  this  go  that,  as  between
a  mother  and  her  son  or  daughter,  there  is  not  on  either
side  any  right  to  take  an  inheritance,  except  when  consan-

§    18.     Comp.    pr.    I.    de   SO.     Tcrtull.  §   21.       Comp.    i,    158  ;   iii,    27  ;    Vlp.

(iii,  3).  xxvii,  5;  §  1,  I.  de  succ.   cognatur.

1  After  this  word  Hu.  interpolates  (iii,  5).

ingemiorum.  §  22.     Comp.  §§  12,  28.

§  19.     Comp.  §  9,  I.  de  hcred.  q.  ab.  int.  §  23.     Comp.  §  14.

(iii,  1).  §  24.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxvi,  §§  7,  8  ;  pr.  I.
§  20.     Comp.  i,  §§  93,  94  ;  ii,  135a.  dc  SO.  Tertidl.  (iii,  3).

Ill,  §§  24-27.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  181

manum  conuentionem  consanguinitatis  iura'  inter  eos   con-
stiterint.

25  Sed  hae  iuris  iniquitates  edicto  praetoris  emendatae  sunt.

26  Nam  eos  omnes  1  qui  legitimo  iure  deficiunttir  uocat  ad  here-
ditatem 2  proinde  ac  si  in  potestate  parentum  mortis  tempore
fuissent,  sine  soli  sint,  sine  etiam  sui  heredes,  id  est  qui  in

27  potestate  patris  fuerunt,  concurrant.         Agnatos  autem  capite
deminutos  non  secundo  gradu '  post  suos  heredes  uocat,   id
est  non  eo  gradu  uocat  quo  per  legein  uocarentur  si  capite
minuti  non   essent,   sed   tertio,  proximitatis   nomine ;   (licet
enim  capitis   deminutione   ius   legitimuni  perdiderint,   certe
cognationis  iura  retinent)  :2  itaque  si  quis  alius  sit  qui  iute-
grum  ius  aguationis  habebit,  is  potior   erit,  etiamsi  longiore

guinity  has  been  established  between  them  by  in   manum
conuentio.

25  But  those  inequalities  of  the  ius  ciuile  have  been  corrected

26  by  the  praetor's  edict.         For  he  calls  to  the  inheritance  all
descendants  who  have  no  statutory  title,  just  as  if  they  had
been  in  the  potestas  of  their  ancestor  at  the  time  of  his  death  ;
and  that  whether  they  stand  alone,  or  whether  sui  heredes —
persons,  that  is  to  say,  who  were  actually  in  potestate  of  the

27  deceased  parent — claim  along  with  them.         As  for  agnates
who  have  undergone  capitis  deminutio,  he  does  not  call  them
in  the  second  class  immediately  after  the  sui  heredes, — he  does
not  call  them,  that  is  to  say,  in  that  class  in  which  they
would  have  been  called  by  the  statute  had  they  not  been
capite   minuti,  but  in  the  third  class,  on  the  ground  of  pro-
pinquity ;  (for  although  by  their  capitis  deminutio  they  have
lost  their  statutory  title,  they  still  retain  the  rights  of  kinship.)
If,  therefore,  there  be   any  other  person  whose  right  as  an
agnate  remains  unimpaired,  he  will  be  preferred  to  them,  even

1  The  rights  arising  from  the  rela-  subsequent  eds.,  except  P.,  substi-

tionship  of  brother  and  sister  or  of  tute  liberos;   but  unnecessarily,  as

sisters;  comp.  §14.  the  context  sufficiently   limits   the

§  25.     A  vacant  line  in  the  MS.  before  pronoun.

this  par.      Comp.    pr.    §   2,    I.    de  2  Comp.  §  32.

honor,  poss.  (iii,  9).  §  27.     Comp.  §  21;  Vlp.  xxviii,  9  ;  §  1,

§§  26-31.    Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  SVCCESSIOXE  tit.  I.  afd.

COGNATORVM  (iii,  5).  1  Here  and   in   subsequent  pars.

§  26.     Comp.  §§  19,  20;  Vlp.  xxviii,  8  ;  there  is  a  confusion  between  gradus

Vlp.  in  Gollat.  xvi,  7,  §  2  ;  §  9,  I.  de  and  ordo;  sui,  agnati,  coynati,  were

hered.  q.  ab.  int.  (iii,  1);  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  ordines  rather  than  gradus.

1  So  the  MS.     For  eos  G.  and  all  2  Comp.  i,  158.

182  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [III,  §§  28-32.

-28  gradu  fuerit.3  Idem  iuris  est,  ut  quidani  putant,  in  eius
agnati  persona  qui  proximo  agnato  omittente  hereditatem
nihilo  magis  iure  legitimo  admittitur ;  sed  sunt  qui  putant
hunc  eodeui  gradu  a  praetore  uocari  quo  etiam  per  legem

29  agnatis  hereditas    datur.          Feminae    certe   agnatae    quae
consanguineorum  gradum  excedunt  tertio  gradu  uocantur,  id

30  est  si  neque  suus  heres  neque  agnatus  ullus  erit.         Eodem
gradu  uocantur  etiam  eae  personae  quae  per  feminini  sexus

31  personas  copulatae  sunt.          Liberi  quoque  qui  in  adoptiua
familia  sunt  ad  naturalium  parentum  hereditatem  hoc  eodem
gradu  uocantur.

Quos  autem  praetor  uocat  ad  hereditatem,  hi  heredes  ipso
quidem  iure  non  fiunt:  nam  praetor  heredes  facere  non
(potest ;  per  legem  enim  tantum  ud  similem  iuris  constitu-

28  though  he  be  of  a  more  distant  degree.         The  rule  is  the
same,  as  some  think,  in  the  case  of  the  remoter  agnate  who,
on  the  declinature  of  the  inheritance  by  him  who  is  nearest
of  degree,  nevertheless  is  not  on  that  account  admitted  by
statutory  right.     There  are  others,  however,  who  think  that
such  a  man  is  called  by  the  praetor  in  the  same  class  in
which     the    inheritance    goes    by  statute    to    the   agnates.

29  Female  agnates  beyond  the  consanguinean  degree   are   un-
doubtedly called  in  the  third  class ;  in  the  absence,  that  is

30  to  say,  of  both  sui  and  agnates.         In  the  same  class   are
called   also   such   persons    as   are   related   through   females.

31  Children,  too,  who  are  in  an  adoptive  family,  are  called  in
this  same  class  to  the  inheritance  of  their  natural  parents.

32  Those,  however,  whom  the  praetor  calls  to  an  inheritance
do  not   become  heirs  ipso   iure;  the   praetor   cannot   make
men  heirs, — it  requires  a  comitial  enactment  or  some  similar

3  For   ex. ,    a  deceased    brother's  would  take  as  an  agnate,  to  the  entire

son,  who  was  an  agnate,  would  be  exclusion  of  cognates,

preferred    to    a    brother    who,    by  §  29.     Comp.  §  23  ;  Paul,  iv,  8,  §  22a  ;

cap.  deminutio,  had  become  only  a  §  3,  I.  de  leg.  agn.  succ.  (iii,  2).

cognate.  §  30.     Comp.  §  24  ;  Vlp.  xxviii,  9  ;  §  2,

§  28.     Comp.  §§  12,  22  ;  §  7,  I.  de  leg.  tit.  I.  afd.

agn.  Slice,  (iii,  2).  According  to  §  31.  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.
the  first  view  here  suggested, — and  §  32.  §  2,  I.  de  honor,  pass,  (iii,  9),
which,  as  appears  from  §  7,  I.,  re-  from  which  the.  words  in  ital.,  mostly
ferred  to,  eventually  prevailed, — he  illegible  in  the  MS.,  are  supplied;
would  take  only  as  a  cognate,  in  for  the  ordinary  contraction,  how-
concurrence  with  other  cognates  of  ever,  of  praetor  dat  bonorum  posses-
the  same  degree,  and  might  himself  sionem  (prdatbp),  the  MS.  appears
be  excluded  by  cognates  of  nearer  to  Stud,  to  have  proper.  Conip.  ii,
degree  ;  according  to  the  second,  he  119,  note  1 ;  iii,  §  80;  Vlp.  xxviii,  12.

Ill,  §§  32,  33.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

183

(tionem  heredes  fiunt},  ueluti  per  senatusconsultum  et  con-
stitutionem  principalem  :  sed  cum  eis  praetor  dat  bonorum
possessionem,  loco  heredum  constituuntur.

33  (Adhuc  autem  etiam)  alios  conplures  gradus  (fecit  praetor
(in  bonorum  possessionibus  dandis,  dum,  id  agcbat  ne  quis  sine
(succcssore  moreretur).  de  quibus  in  his  commentariis  con-
sulto  (non  agimus,  quia)  hoc  ius  totum  propriis  commentariis

33a  executi  sumus.  (Hoc)  solum  admonuisse  sufficit  ---
—  —  —  —  —  in  manum  conuentionem  iura  coiisanguini-

[34]  (Aliquando  tamcn  nequc

33&       --------

33

statutory  provision,  such  as  a  senatusconsult  or  imperial  con-
stitution, to  do  that.  But  as  the  praetor  gives  such  perso?is
possession  of  the  deceased's  estate,  they  are  [practically]  put  in
the  position  of  heirs.

Various  other  classes  o/ bonorum  possessores  have  ~been  created
by  the  praetor  in  Ms  anxiety  to  prevent  persons  dying  ivithout
successors,  which  we  purposely  refrain  from  dealing  with  in
these  pages,  seeing  we  have  explained  the  whole  of  this

3 oa branch  of  the  law  elsewhere  in  a  special  treatise.        It  is
enough  to  observe .

33&      [Bonorum  possessio  was  introduced  by  the  praetor  for  the
'purpose  of  amending  the  old  laiv.     And  it  was  not  only  in  the
case  of  the  inheritances  of  intestates  that  he  amended  the  old
'law  in  this  way,  as  has  been  above  described,  but  also  in  the
[case  of  those  of  persons  who  have  left  a  testament.     For,  if  a

§  33.  The  illegible  words  in  the  first
sentence  of  this  par.  (p.  132,  lines  6,
7  of  the  MS.  )  are  supplied  from  §  2,
I.  de  honor,  poss.  (iii,  9).  Those  ille-
gible in  the  second  sentence  are
naturally  suggested  by  the  context.

§  33a.  This  par.  begins  on  line  10  of
p.  132  of  the  MS.  Of  the  fourteen
lines  that  follow  there  is  very  little
decipherable,  while  on  p.  133  only  a
few  letters  can  be  made  out.  It  is
generally  supposed  that  the  first  of
these  pages  contained  an  account  of
the  provisions  of  the  Tertullian
senatusconsult ;  in  regard  to  which
see  tit.  I.  de  SO.  Tertull.  (iii,  3),  and
Vlp.  xxvi,  8.  The  Orphitian  sena-
tusconsult (I.  iii,  4),  though  enacted
during  the  lifetime  of  Gai.,  was  pro-
bably posterior  to  his  Institutes.

§  336.  Assuming  that  §  34  stood  in  Gai.
as  printed  in  the  text,  i.e.  as  it

stands  in  §  1,  I.  DE  BONORVM  POS-
SESSIONIBVS  (iii,  9),  Huschke's  con-
jecture seems  more  than  probable
that  it  may  have  been  preceded  by
what  we  now  have  in  the  pr.  of  that
title  ;  indeed  the  initial  aliquando
tamen  of  §  34  necessitates  it.  The
words  of  the  pr.  are:  Ius  bonorum
possessionis  introductum  est  a  prae-
tore  emendandi  ueteris  iuris  gratia.
Nee  solum  in  intestatorum  heredita-
tibus  uetus  ius  eo  modo praetor  emen-
dauit,  sicut  supra  dictum  est,  sed  in
eorum  quoque  qui  testamento  facto
decesserint.  Nam  si  alienus  postu-
mus  heres  fuerit  institutus,  quamuis
hereditatem  iure  ciuili  adire  non
poterat,  cum  institutlo  non  ualebat,
honorario  tamen  iure  bonorum  pos-
sessor efficiebatur,  uidelicet  cum  a
praetore  adiuuabatur.  Comp.  §§
25  f.;  ii,  §§242,  287.

184  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILTS    [III,  §§3-1-36.

34  (emendandi  neque  impugnandi  ueteris  iuris,  sed  magis  confir-
(mandi   gratia  pollicetur    bonorum  posscssionem.      nam  illis
(quoque),  qui  rede  (facto  testament  a  lieredes  instituti  sunt,  dat
(secundum  tabulas  bonorum  possessionem  :  item  ab   m)testato
heredes   suos   et   agnatos   ad   bonorum  possessionem   nocat.
quibus  casibus  beneficium  eius  in  eo  solo  uidetur  aliquam
utilitatem  habere,  ut  is  qui  ita  bonorum  possessionem  petit
interdicto  cuius  principium  est  QVORVM  BONORVM  *  uti  possit :
cuius  interdict!  quae  sit  utilitas  suo  loco  proponemus  :  alio-
quin  remota  quoque  bonorum  possessione  ad  eos  hereditas
pertinet  iure  ciuili.

35  Ceterum  saepe  quibusdam  ita  datur  bonorum  possessio  ut
is  cui  data  sit  [non  tamen  idco}  J  optineat  hereditatem  ;  quae

36  bonorum  possessio  dicitur  sine  re.         nam  si  uerbi  gratia  iure

[man  have  instituted  a  stranger  after-born  as  his  heir,  the  latter
[cannot  enter  to  the  inheritance  according  to  the  ius  ciuile,  the
[institution  being  invalid ;  but  by  the  ius  honorarium  he
[becomes  bonorum  possessor,  the  praetor  coming  to  his  aid.~\

34  Sometimes,  however,  it  is  for  the  purpose  neither  of  amending
nor  of  impugning,  but  rather  of  confirming  the  old  law,  that
the  praetor  promises  possession  of  a  deceased  person's  estate  ;  for
he  grants  it  in  terms  of  the  deed  to  those  who  have  been  insti-
tuted heirs  under  a  regularly  executed  testament ;  while  in  the
event   of  intestacy   he   calls   both   sui   heredes   and  agnates.
In  such  cases  his  grant  seems  to  be  useful  only  in  this  re-
spect,— that  he  who   thus    petitions   for   possession  of  the
estate    can    employ   the   interdict   which    begins   with   the
words  '  Quorum  bonorum^  whose  advantages  we  shall  explain
in  the  proper  place ;  but  in  any  case,  even  were  the  bonorum
possessio  put  out   of  view,   the  inheritance   belongs  to  such
persons  by  the  ius  ciuile.

35  It  frequently  happens  that  bonorum  possessio  is  given  under
circumstances  which  prevent  the  grantee  therewith  obtaining
the  [beneficial  interest  in  the]  inheritance ;  a  possession  of
this  sort  is  said  to  be  only  nominal,  bonorum  possessio  sine  re.

36  Suppose,  for  example,  that  the  heir  instituted  under  a  duly

§  34.     Ever  since  first  suggested  by  G.  *  Comp.  iv,  144.

there  has  been  a  general  consensus  §   35.     Comp.    ii,    148  ;    Vlp.  xxiii,  6  ;

of  opinion  that  this  par.,  begun  on  xxviii,  13.

p.  133  and  ended  on  p.  134,  was,  in  J  So   P.,    and    preferable    to   the

the  first  half  of  it,  the  same  as  §  1,  simple  non  of  other  eds.     The  intro-

tit.  I.  aid.  ;  and  I  have  given  effect  duction  of  a  negative  is  absolutely

to  this  view  by  introducing  the  pas-  necessary.

sage  in  the  text  as  reasonably  certain.  §36.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxviii,  13.

Comp.  Paul,  in  Collat.  xvi,  3,  §  5.

Ill,  §§  36-38.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOK.  185

facto  testamento  heres  iustitutus  creuerit1  hereditatem,  sed
bonorum  possessionem  secundum  tabulas  testament!  petere
noluerit,  contentus  eo  quod  iure  ciuili  heres  sit,  nihilo  minus
ii,  qui  nullo  facto  testamento  ad  intestati  bona  uocantur,
possunt  petere  bonorum  possessionem ;  sed  sine  re  ad  eos
hereditas2  pertinet,  cum  testamento  scriptus  heres  euincere

37  hereditatem   possit.         Idem    iuris   est    si   intestate    aliquo
mortuo  suus  heres  noluerit  petere  bonorum  possessionem,  con-
(tentus  legitimo  iure : l  nam)  et  agnato  conpetit  quidem  bono-
rum possessio,  sed  sine  re,  quia  euinci  hereditas  a  suo  herede
potest.     et  conuenienter,2  si  ad  agnatum  iure  ciuili  pertinet
hereditas,  et  is  adierit  hereditatem  sed  bonorum  possessionem
petere  noluerit,  si  quis  3  ex  proximis  cognatis  petierit,  sine  re
habebit   bonorum   possessionem    propter    eandem    rationem.

38  Sunt  et  alii  quidam  similes  casus,  quorum  aliquos  superiore
commentario  tradidimus.

executed  testament  has  declared  his  acceptance  of  the  inherit-
ance, but,  content  with  his  legal  title  of  heir,  has  refrained
from  petitioning  for  possession  of  the  estate  in  terms  of  the
deed,  those  who  are  called  ab  intestato  in  the  absence  of  a
testament  are  entitled  to  demand  bonorum  possessio ;  but  it
will  be  theirs  sine  re,  [i.e.  without  beneficial  result,]  seeing

37  the  testamentary   heir   can   evict.          The  law  is  the  same
when,  on  a  man's    death    intestate,    his  suus  heres  has   re-
frained from  demanding  bonorum  possessio,  content  with  his
right  under  the  statute ;  here  again  an  agnate-heir  may  have
bonorum  possessio,    but   sine  re,  for  the  inheritance  may   be
evicted  by  the  suus  heres.     In  the  same  wyay,  if  the  inherit-
ance belong  by  the  ius  ciuile   to   an   agnate,   and   he   have
entered,  but  refrained  from  demanding  bonorum  possessio, — if
this  be  claimed  by  one  of  the  nearest  cognates,  the  latter  will

38  get  it  onlv  sine  re.  for  the  same  reason  as  before.         There

O  v

are  other  cases  of  the  same  sort,  some  of  which  have  been
mentioned  in  the  immediately  preceding  Commentary.

1  Comp.  ii,  §§  164  f.  2  The  MS.  has  illud  conuenientur  ;

2  Hereditas  in  this  and  subsequent  for  which  P.  suggests  illud  conueni-
pars.  is  occasionally  used  as  mean-  en\ter  inueni]tur;  K.  (K.  u.  S.  foot-
ing the  deceased's  estate, — the  bona  note),   illud  conueni[ens  inuenijur;
of  which  possession  had  been  granted.  and  Hu.,  illud  conuenien\ter  dice]tur.
See.  §  14,  note  1.  3   The   MS.    has   et  si  quis;  most

§  37.     J  The  words  legitimo  iure,  illegi-  eds.  retain  the  et,  Hu.  reading  et  sic

ble  except  the  initial  I,  are  supplied  quis.

by  Hollweg,   aud  justified   by  the  §  38.     Comp.  ii,  §§  119,  148,  149.
context.

186  GAII  INSTITUTION VM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [III,  §§  39-41.

39  Nunc  de  libertorum  bonis  uideamus.         [40]  Olim  itaque

40  licebat  liberto  patronum  suum  inpune  testamento  praeterire :
nam   ita  demum  lex   xn  tabularum  ad  hereditatem   liberti
uocabat  patronum,  si  intestatus  mortuus  esset  libertus  nullo
suo  herede  relicto  :  itaque  intestate  quoque  mortuo  liberto,  si
is  suum  heredem  reliquerat,  nihil  in  bonis  eius  patrono  iuris
erat ;  et  siquidem  ex  naturalibus  liberis  aliquem  suum  here-
dem reliquisset,  nulla  uidebatur  esse  querella;  si  uero  uel
adoptiuus  filius  filiaue,  uel  uxor  quae  in  manu  esset,  [suus  uel}
sua  heres  esset,  aperte  iniquum  erat  nihil  iuris  patrono  super-

41  esse.         Qua  de  causa  postea  praetoris  edicto  haec  iuris  ini-
quitas  emend  ata  est :  siue  enirn  faciat  test  amentum  libertus,
iiibetur  ita  testari  ut  patrono  suo  partem  dimidiam  bonorum
suorum  relinquat,  et  si  aut  nihil  aut  minus  quam  partem  dimi-
diam reliquerit,  datur  patrono  contra  tabulas  testamenti  partis
dimidiae  bonorum  possessio  ;  *  si  uero  intestatus  rnoriatur,  suo

39  Let  us  see  now  about  the  estates  of  freedmen.         [40]  For-

40  merly  a  freedman  might  pass  over  his  patron  in  his  testament
with  perfect  impunity;    for  the   law  of  the  Twelve  Tables
called  a  patron  to  the  inheritance  of  his  freedman  then  only
when  the  latter  had  died   intestate   leaving  no   suus  heres.
Accordingly  if  a  freedman  dying  intestate  did  leave  a  suus
heres,  his  patron  had  no  right  in  his  estate,  and  if  that  suus
heres  was  one  of  the  freedman's  natural  children  there  was  no
cause  for  complaint ;  if,  however,  it  was  either  an  adoptive
son  or  daughter,  or  his  wife  in  manu,  that  was  his  suus  heres,
then  it  was  obviously  unfair  that  no  right  should  remain  to

41  the  patron.         Accordingly  this  want  of  equity  in  the  law
was  afterward  corrected  by  the  praetor's  edict.     A  freedman,
if  he  make  a  testament,  is  thereby  required  to  do  it  in  such  a
way  as  to  leave  to  his  patron  one-half  of  his  estate  ;  if  he
have  left  him  nothing,  or  less  than  a  half,  the  patron  may
obtain  bonorum  possessio  of  one-half  of  it  contrary  to  the
terms  of  the  testament.     If  the  freedman  die  intestate,  leav-

§§39-76.    Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  SVCCESSIONE  MS.,    are    supplied.      Comp.    Vlp.

LIBEBTORVM  (iii,  7).     Before  §  39  a  xxix,  1.

line  vacant  in  the  MS.,  probably  for  1  This  is  not  to  be  taken   abso-

a  rubric.  lutely  ;  for,  as  appears  from  the  end

§§   39,     40.      Pr.    tit.    I.    afd.      Comp.  of  the  par.,   a  testament  made  in

i,     165  ;     Vlp.     xxvii,     1  ;     xxix,  favour  of  his  children  by  birth  by  a

1.  freedman  who  was  not  a  centenarius

§  41.     §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.,  from  which  the  (§  42),  was  free  from  challenge  by

words   in  italics,    illegible    in    the  his  patron.

Ill,  §§  41,  42.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  187

herede  relicto  adoptiuo  filio,  uel  uxore  quae  in  manu  ipsius
esset,  uel  nuru  quae  in  manu  filii  eius  fuerit,  datur  aeque
patrono  aduersus  hos  suos  heredes  partis  dimidiae  bonorum
possessio.  prosunt  autem  liberto  ad  excludenduin  patronum
naturales  liberi,  non  solum  quos  in  potestate  mortis  tempore
liabet  sed  etiam  emancipati  et  in  adoptionem  dati,  si  niodo
aliqua  ex  parte  heredes  scripti  (sint,  aut  praeteriti  contra)
tabulas  testamenti  bonorum  possessionem  ex  edicto  petierint :
42  nam  exheredati  riullo  modo  repellunt  patronum.  Postea
lege  Papia  l  aucta  sunt  iura  patronorum  quod  ad  locupletiores
libertos  pertinet :  cautum  est  enim  ea  lege,  ut  ex  bonis  eius
qui  sestertiorum  (centum  milium  plurisue) s  patrimonium
rcliquerit,  et  pauciores  quam  tres  liberos  habebit,  siue  is  testa-
mento  facto  siue  intestate  mortuus  erit,  uirilis  pars  patrono
debeatur;  itaque  cum  unum  filium  unamue  filiam  heredem
reliquerit  libertus,  perinde  pars  dimidia  patrono  debetur  ac
si  sine  ullo  filio  filiaue  moreretur  ;  cum  uero  duos  duasue  here-

ing  as  his  suus  heres  either  an  adoptive  son,  or  the  wife  who
had  been  in  his  manus,  or  a  daughter-in-law  who  had  been  in
manu  of  his  son,  the  patron  is  equally  entitled  to  possession  of
a  half  of  the  estate  in  opposition  to  those  sui  heredes.  Not
only,  however,  will  those  of  his  children  by  birth  avail  the
freedman  to  exclude  his  patron  who  were  in  his  potcstas  at
his  death,  but  also  those  he  had  emancipated  or  given  in
adoption,  provided  they  have  either  been  instituted  to  a  share
of  his  inheritance,  or,  having  been  passed  over,  have  petitioned
under  the  edict  for  bonorum  possessio  contrary  to  the  tenor  of
the  will ;  but  those  who  have  been  disinherited  by  no  means
42  exclude  the  patron.  The  rights  of  patrons  having  very
wealthy  freedmen  were  afterwards  enlarged  by  the  Papian
law.  By  that  enactment  it  was  provided  that,  of  the  estate  of
a  freedman  who  left  a  fortune  of  or  over  a  hundred  thousand
sesterces  and  fewer  than  three  children,  and  whether  he  died
testate  or  intestate,  one  equal  share  should  go  to  the  patron.
Accordingly  if  a  freedman  have  left  one  son  or  one  daughter
as  his  heir,  a  half  of  his  estate  is  due  to  his  patron,  just  as  if
he  had  died  without  any  child ;  but  if  he  have  left  two  sons

42.     §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  with  room  for  about  twenty  more.

1  See  i,  145,  note.  Centum  milium  are  from  the  Inst.,

2  Of  those  three  words  only  the  and  plurisue  will  about  fill  the  re-
letters  mill  are  distinct  in  the  MS.,  maining  space.

188  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [HI,  §§  42-44.

des  reliquerit  tertia  pars  debetur,  si  tres  relinquat  repellitur
patronus.

43  In  bonis  libertiuarum  nullam  iniuriam  antique  iure  patie-
bantur  patroni :  cum  enim  hae  in  patronorum  legitima  tutela
essent,  non  aliter  scilicet  testamentum  facere  poterant  quam
patrono  auctore.     itaque  si  ei  1  auctor  ad  testamentum  faci-
endum factus  erat, • 2  factus  erat,

sequebatur  hereditas  ;  si  uero  auctor  ei  factus  non  erat,  et  in-
testata  liberta   moriebatur,   ad   —   —   —   —   —   —  posset

44  patronum  a  bonis  libertae  —  —  repellere.3         Sed  postea

or  daughters  as  his  heirs,  only  a  third  part  is  due ;  while  if
he  have  left  three  the  patron  is  altogether  excluded.

43  As  regards  the  estates  of  their  freed  women,  patrons  suffered
no  injury  by  the  old  law ;  for  as  the  former  were  under  the
tutory-at-law  of  the  latter,  they  could  not  otherwise  make  a
testament  than  patrono  auctore.     Therefore  if  a  patron  had
interponed  his  authority  to  a  testament  made  by  his  freed-:
woman,  [either  he  had  himself  to  blame  if  he  had  not  therein
[been  named  heir,  or,  if  he  had  been  so  named'],  he  took  the
inheritance  under  the  will ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  he  had  not
interponed  his  auctoritas,  or  she  had  died  intestate,  [the  in-
[heritance  belonged  to  him  as  patron,  a  woman  having  no  sui
[heredes ;  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  a  case']  in  which  a
patron  could  be  kept  out  of  the  succession  of  his  freedwoman

44  against  his  will.         But  afterwards  the  Papian  law,  in  liber-

j  43.     Before   this  par.    a  vacant  line.  bertae  inuitum  repellere.     Krueger's

Comp.  i,  192  ;  Vlp.  xxix,  2.  seems  the  preferable  reading,   with

1  The  MS.  and  all  eds.  have  slue  this  emendation, — that  ad  patronum
instead  of  si  ei.  should  go  before  quid,  etc. ,  the  ad

2  The  first  2  lines  of  p.  137  mostly  appearing  in   the  MS.    after  morie-
illegible.     Krueger's  reconstruction  batur.

(Krit.  Vers.  p.  132)  has  been  gene-      §  44.     Comp.  i,  145,  note ;  i,  194  ;  iii,

rally  approved;  it  runs— aut  de  se  47;  Vlp.  xxix,  §§2,  3.     The  par.,

queri  debebat  quod  heres  ab  ea  re-  which  is  on  lines  8-17  of  p.  137,  is

lictus  non  erat,  aut  ipsum  ex  testa-  to   a  considerable   extent  illegible.

mento,  si  heres  factus  erat,  etc.  The  first  lacuna  in  the  text  may  very

3  The  greater  part  of  lines  5-7  are  well  be  filled  with  condere  testamen-
illegible.     Krueger  (Krit.    Vers.   p.  tuin,  prospexit,  and  the  second  with
132)   reconstructs   thus:    quia  suos  quos  liberta  mortis  tempore,  both  as
heredes  femina  habere  non  potest,  ad  proposed  by  K.  (Krit.  Vers.  p.  133),
patronum   pertinebat,    nee   cogitari  and  justified  by  Yip.  xxix,  3.     The
ullus  casus  poterat  quo  quis  posset  third   K.    fills   thus,    Hu.   substan-
patronurn  a  bonis  libertae  inuitum  tially  adopting  his  reading :   eique
repellere.   Hu.  proposes :  ad  eundem,  ex  bonis  eius  quae  C  milium  se*t<  r-
quia  suos  heredes  femina  habere  non  tiorum  plurisue  reliquerit  patrimo-
potest,    hereditas    pertinebat  :     nee  nium,  si  testamentum  fecerit,   dim-
cogitari  ullus  heres  poterat,  qui  hire  idia  pars  debeatur;  si  uero  intestata
ciuili  posset  patrouum   a  bonis  li-  liberta  decessit,    tola    hereditas    ad

Ill,  §§  44,  45.]  COMMEXTARII  QVATTVOR.

189

lex  Papia,  cum  quattuor  liberorum  iure  liber  tin  as  tutela  patro-
norum  liberaret,  et  eo  modo  concecleret  eis  etiam  sine  tutoris

auctoritate ut  pro  numero  liberorum

habuerit,   uirilis  pars  patrono  debeatur,  eique  ex  bonis  eius,
quae   —  —   —   • —   —   —   —   —  hereditas   ad  patronuni
pertinet.
45       Quae  diximus  de  patrono  eadem  intellegemus  et  de  filio

45

ating  freedwomen  enjoying  the  privilege  of  four  children
from  the  tutelage  of  their  patrons,  and  thus  conceding  to
them  the  power  of  executing  a  testament  without  their  tutor's
authority,  provided  that  a  share  of  afreedwoman's  inheritance,
[varying  according  to  the  number  of  children  by  whom  she  was

[survived,  should  still  be  due  to  her  patron. .

[If,  however,  she  die  intestate,  the  whole']  inheritance  belongs  to
the  patron.

What  has  been  said  of  a  patron  applies  equally  to  his  son,

patronum  pertinet.  M.  (K.  u.  S.
p.  xxi)  proposes  :  scilicet  ex  bonis
eius  quae  centum  milium  sestertium
plurisue  substantiam  habeat.  nam
si  minor  is  eafuerit,  nonnisi  db  intes-
tato  hereditas  ad  patronum  pertinet.
But  neither  of  those  conjectural
readings  seems  to  be  justified  by  the
letters  Stud,  has  deciphered  ;  for  the
C  milium  sestertiorum  plurisue,
Stud,  has  omnia. . .  dorideoiuris,  and
for  the  other  words  letters  equally
inappropriate.

I  find  no  warrant  for  the  assump-
tion that  the  Papian  law  applied
any  special  rule  to  the  case  of  a
freedwoman  who  had  a  fortune  of
100,000  sesterces  or  more.  A  patron
•was  entitled  to  a  share  of  the  estate
of  a  libertus  centenarius,—a,freedman
who  left  a  fortune  of  that  amount,
whether  he  died  testate  or  intestate,
provided  he  left  no  more  than  two
children  (§  42).  But  if  a  freed-
woman, whatever  her  fortune,  died
intestate,  her  patron  was  her  heir-
at-law,  however  numerous  her  chil-
dren ;  while  it  was  not  unless  she
had  four  children  at  least  that  she
could  at  her  own  hand  make  a  testa-
ment and  thereby  prejudice  her
patron's  right.

The  position  of  matters  under  the
Papian  amendment  seems  to  have
been  this  :  If  a  freedwoman  had

fewer  than  four  children  she  con-
tinued incapable  of  making  a  testa-
ment without  her  patron's  aucto-
ritas ;  but  the  moment  her  fourth
child  was  born  she  was  freed  from
tutelage,  and  might  at  any  time
thereafter,  and  even  though  her
children  had  all  died  in  the  interval,
make  a  testament  entirely  at  her
own  hand.  If  she  died  intestate,
her  patron  took  everything  as  heir-
at-law  ;  for,  even  if  she  had  chil-
dren, they  were  not  sui  heredes,  and
so  could  not  exclude  him.  If  she
left  a  will,  she  could  not  thereby
defeat  her  patron's  right  to  a  share
at  least  of  her  estate  as  portio  legi-
tima ;  for,  whatever  the  nature  of
her  testamentary  arrangements. —
whether  she  left  her  fortune  to  her
children  or  to  strangers, — he  was  en-
titled to  a  share  which,  if  not  left  to
him  directly,  he  might  obtain  by  a
grant  of  honor,  possessio.  And  this
share  varied  according  to  the  num-
ber of  children,  whether  instituted
or  not,  by  whom  she  was  survived  ;
if  three,  say,  he  was  entitled  to  a
fourth,  if  only  one,  to  a  half  ;  while,
if  all  her  children  had  predeceased
her,  he  was  entitled  to  her  whole
succession,  thus  altogether  defeating
her  testamentary  disposition.
§  45.  Comp.  §  58  ?  Vlp.  xxix,  4 ;  pr.  I.
de  adsiijn.  lib.  (iii,  8).

190  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVKIS  C1VILIS   [HI,  §§45-47.

patroni ;  item  de  nepote  ex  filio,  pronepote  ex  nepote  filio  nato

46  prognato.         Filia  uero  patroni,  et  neptis  ex  filio  et  proneptis
ex  nepote  h'lio  nato  prognata,  olim  quideni  eo  iure  \_utel}antur~\

qiLod  1  lege  xn  tabularum  patrono  datum  est, 2

sexus  patronorum   liberos  —   —  —  — 3  testament!  liberti
\_auf]  ab  intestate  contra  filium  adoptiuum,  uel  uxorem  nurum-
ue  quae  in  manu  fuerit,  bonorum  possessionem  petat,  trium
liberorum   iure   lege   Papia  consequitur ;  aliter  hoc  ius  non

47  habet.         Sed  ut  ex  bonis  libertae  testatae  quattuor  liberos
habentis  l  uirilis  pars  ei  debeatur,  ne  liberorum   quidem  iure
consequitur,  ut  quidam  putant,  sed  tantum  2  intestata  liberta
mortua  uerba  legis  Papiae  faciunt  ut  ei  uirilis  pars  debeatur.
si  uero  testamento  facto  mortua  sit  liberta,  tale  ius  ei  datur
quale  datum  est  contra  tabulas  testament!  liberti,  id  est  quale

to  his  grandson  by  a  son,  and  to  his  great-grandson   by   a

46  grandson  who  is  the  issue  of  a  son.         As  for  his  daughter,
his  granddaughter  by  a  son,  and  his  great-granddaughter  by  a
grandson  the  issue  of  a  son,  they  had  in  old  times  the  same
right  as  was  conferred  by  the  Twelve  Tables  on  the  patron
himself.    [The  praetor,  however,  calls  only]  the  male  descendants
of  patrons.     \If  a  daughter  demand  possession  of  the  estate  of
[a  frecdman  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  his]  testament,  or  claim  it
on  intestacy  as  against  an  adoptive  son  or  a  wife  or  daughter-
in-law  who  had  been  in  manu,  it  is  under  the  Papian  law
that  she  does  so,  and  in  virtue  of  her  privilege   of  three

47  children ;  otherwise   she  has  no  such  right.         Some  think
that  this  privilege  of  maternity  does  not  entitle  a  patron's
daughter  to  a  proportionate  share  of  the  estate  of  a  freed-
woman  with  four  children  who  has  executed  a  testament, —
that,  according  to  the  letter  of  the  Papian  law,  it  is  only  in  the
event  of  the  freedwoman  dying  intestate  that  a  child's  share
is  due  to  her.     But  if  the  freedwoman  have  left  a  testament,
the  patron's  daughter  has  really  the  same  rights  as  against
the  will  that  she  would  have  were  it  that  of  a  freedman, — that
is  to  say,  the  same  rights  that  male  descendants  of  a  patron

§  46.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxix,  5.  uero  ut  contra  tabulas  testamenti,

1  Olim  .  .  .  quod  is  the  reading  of  etc.

K.  (K.  11.  S.  footnote)  ;  the  MS.  is  §  47.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxix,  5.

very  indistinct.  *  The  fact  that  she  was  mother  of

2  K.      fills      this     blank     with  four   children  freed  a  liberta  from
praetor  autem  non  nisi  uirilis  sexus,  tutelage,  and  enabled  her  to  make  a
etc.  will  at  her  own  hand ;  see  §  44.

3  The   same   ed.   fills  the   second  2  So  P. ;  the  MS.  and  other  eds.
blank    with    liberos    uocat ;   Jilia             have  tanu-n.

Ill,  §§  47-50.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  191

et  uirilis  sexus  patronorum  liberis  contra  tabulas  testament!
liberti  habent : 3  quamuis  parum  diligenter  ea  pars  legis  scripta

48  sit.         Ex  his  apparet  extraneos  heredes   patronorum  longe
remotos  esse  ab  omni  eo  iure  quod  uel  in  intestatorum  bonis
uel  contra  tabulas  testamenti  patrono  conpetit.

49  Patronae  olim  ante  legem  Papiam  hoc  solum  ius  habebant
in  bonis  libertorum  quod  etiam  patronis  ex  lege  xn  tabularum
datum   est.     nee  enim  ut  contra  tabulas  testamenti  ingrati
liberti,  uel  ab  intestato  contra  filium  adoptiuum  uel  uxorem
nurumue  bonorum  possessionem  partis  dimidiae  peterent,  prae-

50  tor  similiter  ut  de  patrono  liberisque  eius  curabat.         Sed  lex
Papia  duobus  liberis  honoratae  ingenuae  patronae,  libertinae
tribus,  eadem  fere  iura  dedit  quae  ex  edicto  praetoris  patroui
habent ; '  trium  uero  liberorum  iure  honoratae  ingenuae  patro-

have  as  against  the    testamentary  writings  of  a   freedman ;
[such  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  enactment],  although  in  this

48  part  of  it  it  is  not  very  carefully  worded.         From  what  has
been  said  it  is  clear  that  stranger-heirs  of  a  patron  have  no
participation  in  the  rights  competent  to  him  either  in  regard
to  the  estates   of  his  intestate  freedmen,  or,  by  procedure
contra  tabulas,  in  regard  to  those  who  have  died  testate.

49  Formerly,  and  before  the  Papian  law,  patronesses  had  no
greater  right  in  the  estates  of  their  freedmen  than  had  been
accorded  to  patrons  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables;  the
praetor  did  not  concede  to  them,  as  he  did  to  a  patron  and  his
children,  the  right  to  claim  either  possession  of  the  estate  of
an  ungrateful  freedman  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  his  testament,
or  possession  of  half  the  estate  of  a  freedman  dying  intestate
as  against  his  adoptive  son  or  his  wife  or  daughter-in-law.

50  The  Papian  law,  however,  gave  a  patroness  of  free  birth  who
had  the  honour  of  being  the  mother  of  two  children,  and  to  a
freedwornan-patroness  who  was  the  mother  of  three,  almost
the  same  rights  as  are  enjoyed  by  patrons  under  the  edict.
Further,  it  gave  to  a  free-born  patroness  with  three  children

3  On  the  death  intestate  of  a  freed-  was  thus  in  much  the  same  position

woman  her  patron's  daughter,  if  she  as  a  patrona  (§  52).      At  least  this

enjoyed  the  ius  trium  liberorum,took.  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  par.

an  equal  share  with  the  children  by  §  48.     Comp.  §§  58,  64.

whom  the  freedwoman  was  survived;  §  49.     Comp.  §§  40,  41  ;  Vlp.  xxvii,  1  ;

if  the   latter  died   testate,  leaving  xxix,  6.

her  succession  to  her  children,  the  §  50.     Comp.  §§  41,   42  ;  Vlp.  xxix,  §§

patron's  daughter  had  no  claim  ;  but  6,  7.

if  the   testatrix  left  her  estate   to  l  I.  e.  the  right  to  honor,  possessio

strangers,  there  was  a  claim  contra  dimidae  partis  where  the  succession

tabulas  for  honor,  possessio  dimidiae  was   testamentarily    left   to   others

partis,  so  that  a  patron's  daughter  than  the  freedmau's  sui  by  birth.

192  GAII  INST1TVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [HI,  §§  50-52.

nae  ea  iura  dedit  quae  per  eandem  legem  patrono  data  sunt;2

51  libertinae  autem  patronae  non  idem  iuris  praestitit.         Quod
autem  ad  libertinarum   bona  pertinet,  si  quidem  intestatae
decesserint,  nihil  noui  patronae  liberis  bonoratae  lex  Papia
praestat :  itaque  si  neque  ipsa   patrona  neque  liberta  capite,
deminuta  sit,  ex  lege  xn  tabularum  ad  earn  bereditas  pertiuet
et  excluduntur  libertae  liberi ;  quod  iuris  est  etiam  si  liberis
honorata  non  sit  patrona :  numquam  enim,  sicut  supra  dixi-
mus,1   feminae   suum   beredem  babere  possunt :  si  uero  uel
buius  uel  illius  capitis  deminutio  interueniat,  rursus  liberi
libertae    excludunt    patronam,    quia,    legitimo    iure    capitis
deminutione  perempto,    euenit  ut  liberi  libertae  cognationis

52  iure    potiores   habeantur.         Cum    autem    testamento    facto
moritur    liberta,   ea    quidem  patrona    quae    liberis  honorata
non    est   nihil    iuris    habet    contra    libertae    testamentum  ;
ei    uero    quae    liberis   bonorata    sit    hoc    ius   tribuitur    per

the  same  rights  it  had  itself  conferred  upon  a  patron ;  but

51  these  were  not  extended  to  a  freedwoman-patroness.         As
regards  the  estates  of  freedwornen  who  had  died  intestate,  the
Papian  law  conceded  nothing  new  to  a  patroness  privileged
by  reason  of  her  children  ;  so  that  if  neither  the  patroness
herself  nor  her  freed  woman  be  capite  deminuta,  the  inheritance
belongs  to  the  former  according  to  the  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables,  and  the  freedwoman's  children  are  excluded.     The
rule  is  the  same  even  if  the  patroness  be  not  privileged  as
the  mother  of  children ;  for,  as  already  observed,  a  woman
can  never  have  a  suus  heres.     If,  however,  there  have  been
capitis  deminutio  either  of  the  patroness  or  of  her  freedwoman,
the  latter's  children  then  exclude  the  patroness  ;  for,  on  the
extinction  of  her  statutory  right  by  capitis  deminutio,  the
children  of  her  freedwoman  are  preferred  in  right  of  kinship.

52  When   the   deceased   freedwoman   has   left    a   testament,   a
patroness  who  has  no  privilege  by  reason  of  children  has  no
right  in  opposition  to  it ;  on  her,  however,  who  is  the  mother
of  children,  the  Papian  law  confers  the  same  right  that  a

2  I.f.  right  to  a  uirilis  portio  of  a  patroness  could  make  a  will,  even

the  estate  of  a  centenarius  leaving  though  she  had  not  the  ius  libero-

not  more  than  two  children.  rum,  and  was  still  in  tutelage  ;  for

§  51.     Comp.  i,  158  ;  Vlp.  xxvii,  5.  she  was  under  the  tutory  not  of  her

1  Comp.  ii,  161  ;  iii,  43.  patroness  but  of  an  Atilian  tutor,

§52.     Comp.   §§  41,   47;  Vlp.  xxix,  7.  who  could  not  withhold  his  auctori-

A  liberta  who  had  not  a  patron  but  tas  (ii,  122).

Ill,  §§  52-56.]     CUMMEXTARII  QVATTVUR.  193

legem  Papiam  quod  habet  ex  edicto  patroims  contra  tabulas
liberti.

53  Eaclem  lex  patronae  filio  liberis  honorato '  patroni*

iura  dedit ;  sed  in  huius  persona  etiani  uhius  filii  filiaeue  ins
sufficit.

54  Hactenus  omnia  [in  bona  ciuium  liomanorum  liber  tinorum~]
iura  quasi  per  indicem  tetigisse  satis  est.     alioquin  diligentior

55  interpretatio  propriis  commentariis  exposita  est.         Sequitur

56  ut   de   bonis   latinorum   libertinorum   dispiciamus.         Quae
pars  iuris  ut  manifestior  fiat,  admouendi  sunius  id  quod  alio
loco  diximus,  eos  qui  mine  latini  luniani  dicuntur  olim  ex

patron  enjoys  under  the  edict  in  opposition  to  tbe  testament
of  bis  freedman.

53  Tbe  same  enactment  bas  conferred  on  tbe  son  of  a  patroness,
himself  honoured  on  account  of  children,  almost  the  same
right  it  gives  to  a  patron  (?) ;  but  in  his  case  one  sou  or
daughter  suffices.

54  It  is  enough  to  have  thus  touched  in  a  sort  of  outline  upon
all  those  rights   [of  patrons  in  the  estates  of  those  of  their
[frcedmen  who  are  Roman  citizens]  ;  a  more  minute  exposition

55  of  them  is  given  elsewhere  in  a  special  treatise.         We  have
now  to  deal  with  the  estates  of  freedmen  who  are  latins.

56  To  render  this  branch  of  our  subject  more  intelligible,  let  us
bear  in  mind  what  was  said  in  another  place, — that  those  who
are  now  called  Junian  latins  were  formerly  by  quiritarian

§53.     Comp.   Paul.  fr.  18,  Pap.  fr.  42,  pars.: — '  The  capacity  of  the  Juniau

pr.  D.  de  bon.  libertor.  (xxxviii,  2).  latin   to   execute    a  testament  was

1  In   the  blank  the  MS.  has  ere.  denied  by  the  law.     The  law,  there-
M.  (K.  u.  S.  footnote)  suggests  ciui  fore,  and  not  his  will,  could  alone
Romano;  K.   (Krit.   Vers.  p.  127),  decide  to   whom   his  estate  should

fere;  P.,  omnia  fere;  Hu.,  prope.  fall.     There  was  no  room,  however,

2  The    MS.    and   most  eds.    have  to  speak  of  any  real  successio  ab  in-
patroni,    Gou.    and   P.,    patronae.  testato,  for  a  latin  had  no  agnates.
A  patron  had  greater  rights  than  a  Even  his  patron  could  not  succeed
patroness  ;  but  it   seems  unreason-  ab  intestato  ;  for  the  patronal  right
able  to   suppose  that    a    son  could  of  succession  was  based  on  a  ficti-
have  greater  rights  than  the  mother  tious  agnation  ;  and  such  a  fiction
he  represented.  could  not  possibly   be  entertained

§  54.  It  is  generally  supposed  that  where  the  capacity  to  be  a  party  in
there  is  something  omitted  in  the  an  agnatic  relationship  was  abso-
MS.  ;  the  words  interpolated  seem  to  lutely  denied.  Accordingly  no  one,
express  what  is  meant.  The  treatise  not  even  his  patron,  would  have
to  which  Gai.  refers  was  possibly  his  had  a  right  to  the  estate  of  a  de-
commentary  on  the  lex  lulia  et  ceased  latin,  had  not  the  Junian  law
Papla.  made  express  provision  for  its  dis-

§  55.     Preceded  in  the  Ms.  by  a  vacant  posal.'    (Vang.  Lat.  Jun.  p.  129).
line,    probably  for  a  rubric.      The      §  56.     Comp.  i,  §g  22,  131  ;  Vlp.  i,  10 ;

following  sentences  may  serve  as  an  Fr.  Dos.  §§5,  6  ;  §  4,  tit.   I.  afd.  ;

introduction  to  the  next  six  or  seven  1.  un.  pr.  C.  de  lat.  lib.  toll,  (vii,  6).

N

194  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  1VRIS  CIVILIS          [III,  §  50.

iure  Quiritium  seruos  fuisse,  sed  auxilio  praetoris  in  libertatis
forma  seruari  solitos ;  uncle  etiam  res  eorum  peculii  iure  ad
patronos  pertiuere  solita  est :  postea  uero  per  legem  luniam1
eos  omnes  quos  praetor  in  libertate  tuebatur  liberos  esse
coepisse  et  appellatos  esse  latinos  lunianos ;  latinos  ideo,  quia
lex  eos  liberos  periiide  esse  uoluit  atque  si  essent  ciues
Romani  ingenui2  qui  ex  urbe  Roma  in  latinas  colonias
deducti  latini  coloniarii  esse  coeperunt ;  lunianos  ideo,  quia
per  legem  luniam  liberi  facti  sunt,  etiamsi  non  essent  ciues
Romani.2  legis  itaque  luniae  lator,  cum  intellegeret  futu-
rum  ut  ea  fictione  res  latinorum  defunctorum  ad  patronos
pertinere  desinerent,  quia  (scilicet)3  neque  ut  serui  decederent
ut  possent  iure  peculii  res  eorum  ad  patronos  pertinere,  neque
liberti  latini  Juniani 4  bona  possent  manumissionis  iure  ad
patronos  pertinere,5  necessarium  existimauit,  ne  beneficium
istis  datum  in  iniuriam  patron orum  conuerteretur,  cauere6  ut

law  slaves,  although,  by  help  of  the  praetor,  they  used  to  have
assured  to  them  a  semblance  of  freedom ;  consequently  that
their  effects  used  to  belong  to  their  patrons  as  in  law  no
more  than  peculium  ;  but  that  afterwards,  by  the  Junian  law,
all  those  whom  the  praetor  protected  in  [the  enjoyment  of
de  facto]  freedom,  began  really  to  be  freemen,  and  to  be  called
Junian  latins, — latins,  because  it  was  the  intention  of  the
statute  that  they  should  be  in  the  position  of  those  freebom
Roman  citizens  who,  having  been  despatched  from  the  City
to  latin  colonies,  became  colonial  latins ;  Junian,  because  by
the  Junian  law  they  became  free,  although  they  were  not
Roman  citizens.  And  so  the  author  of  the  Junian  law,  fore-
seeing that  by  this  fiction  the  estates  of  deceased  latins  would
cease  to  belong  to  their  patrons^ — for,  as  they  were  not  to  die
slaves,  their  effects  could  not  belong  to  their  patrons  in  virtue
of  an  owner's  ius  peculii,  neither  could  the  estate  of  a  Junian
freedman  belong  to  his  patron  in  right  of  manumission, —
thought  it  necessary,  in  order  to  prevent  the  boon  conferred

1  The  lex  lunia  Norbana  ;  see  i,  be  deleted  as  a  gloss,  as  suggested
22,  note  2.  by  K.  u.  S.,  hominis  may  stand  ;  but

2  The  passages  atque  .  .  .  ingenui,  1  prefer  to  retain  the  former,  and
and  etiamsi  .  .  .  Romani,  according  replace  the  latter  with  lunlani.

to  M.  (K.  u.  S.  footnote),  are  glosses.  5  The  patron's   right  was   a  suc-

3  Illegible  in  the  MS.  ;   suggested  cessio   leyitima,   sanctioned   by  the
by  Stud.,  and  adopted  by  P.  and  all  Twelve  Tables  (i,  ]65),  which  knew
later  eds.  only  citizen  freedmen,  and  nothing

4  The  MS.  has  liberti  latini  hominis,  of  Junian  latins.

which  is  evidently  a  mistake,  though  6  The  MS.  has  cauere  uoluit ;  Hu.

accepted   by   most  eds.      If  liberti  reads  the  latter  word  uoluitque.

Ill,  §§56-60.]     COMMENTAR1I  QVATTVOR.  195

bona  eoruin  proinde  ad  manumissores  pertinerent   ac  si  lex
lata  non  esset :  itaque  iure  quodammodo  peculii  boua  latino-

57  rum  ad  manumissures  ea  lege  pertinent.          Vnde  accidit  ut
lonye  differant  ea  iura  quae  in  bonis  latinorum  ex  lege  lunia
constituta  sunt  ab  his  quae  in  hereditate  ciuium  Eomanorum

58  libertorum  obseruantur.         Nam  ciuis  Eomani  liberti  here-
ditas  ad  extraneos  heredes  patroni  nullo  modo  pertinet ;  ad
filium  autem  patroni  nepotesque  ex  filio  et  pronepotes  ex
nepote  [filio  nato] l  prognatos  omnimodo  pertinet,  etiamsi  a
parente  fuerint  exheredati ;  latinorum  autem  bona  tamquam
peculia  seruorum  etiam  ad  extraneos  heredes  pertinent,  et  ad

59  liberos  manumissoris  exheredatos  non  pertinent.        Item  ciuis
Eomani  liberti  hereditas  ad  duos  pluresue  patronos  aequaliter
pertinet,  licet  dispar  in  eo  seruo  dorninium  habuerint ;  bona
uero  latinorum  pro  ea  parte  pertinent  pro  qua  parte  quisque

60  eorum  dominus  fuerit.         Item  in  hereditate  ciuis  Eomani
liberti    patronus    alterius   patroni   filium   excludit,   et   films

upon  the  freedmen  becoming  an  injury  to  their  patrons,
to  provide  that  their  estates  should  belong  to  their  manu-
mitters  just  as  if  the  enactment  had  not  been  passed  ;  accord-
ingly, in  virtue  of  the  enactment,  the  estates  of  [deceased]
latins  belong  to  their  enfranchisers  in  a  manner  iure  peculii.

57  Hence  it  happens  that  the  rights  created  in  the  estates  of
latins  by  the  Junian  law  differ  veiy  much  from  those  that  are
recognised  in  reference  to  the  inheritance  of  a  freedman  who

58  is  a  Eoman  citizen.         For,  first,  the  inheritance  of  a  citizen
freedman   in   no  case  belongs  to  the  stranger-heirs  of  his
patron, — on  the  contrary  it  belongs  in  all  cases  to  the  patron's
son,  his  grandsons  by  a  son,  or  great-grandsons  by  a  grandson
who  is  the  issue  of  a  son,  and  that  even  though  they  may
have  been  disinherited  by  their  parent ;  whereas  the  estates
of  latins,  just  as  if  they  were  the  peculia  of  slaves,  pass
even  to  stranger-heirs,  and  do  not  belong  to  the  disinherited

59  children  of  the  mauumitter.         Further,  the  inheritance  of  a
citizen  freedman  belongs  to  two  or  more  patrons  equally,  even
though  they  may  have  owned  him  in  unequal  shares  when
a  slave ;  whereas  they  succeed  to  the  estates  of  their  latin
freedmen  in  shares  corresponding  to  those  they  each  had  as

60  owners.         Further,  in  the  inheritance  of  a  citizen  freedman
one  patron  excludes  the  son  of  another,  and  the  son  of  one

§  58.     Comp.  §§  45-48.  §  60.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxvii,  §§  2,  3  ;  Taul.

1  These  words  introduced  by  L.,  iii,  2,  §  1  ;  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.

and  adopted  by  all  eds.

196  GAII  INSTITVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIV1LIS    [HI,  §§  60-G3.

patroni  alterius  patroni  nepotem  repellit :  bona  autem  latino-
rum  et  ad  ipsum  patronum  et  ad  alterius  patroni  hereclem
simul  pertinent,  pro  qua  parte  ad  ipsum  manumissorem  per-

61  tinerent.         Item  si  unius  patroni  tres  forte  liberi  sunt  et
alterius  unus,  hereditas  ciuis  Romani  liberti  in  capita  diuiditur,
id  est  tres  fratres  tres  portiones  femnt  et  unus  quartam ;  bona
uero  latinorum  pro  ea  parte  ad  successores  pertinent  pro  qua

62  parte  ad  ipsum  manumissorem  pertinerent.         Item  si  alter
ex   his   patronis   suam   partem  in   hereclitate  ciuis   Eomani
liberti  spernat,  uel  ante  moriatur  quam  cernat,  tota  hereditas
ad  alterum  pertinet;  bona  autem  latini  pro  parte  deficientis1
patroni  caduca2  fiunt  et  ad  populum  pertinent.

63  Postea,  Lupo  et  Largo  consulibus,  senatus  censuit  ut  bona
latinorum   primum   ad  eum  pertinerent  qui   eos  liberasset ;
deinde   ad   liberos1    eorum   non  nominatiin  exheredatos,  uti

patron  excludes  the  grandson  of  another ;  but  the  estate  of  a
latin  belongs  at  the  same  time  to  his  [surviving]  patron  and
his  [deceased]  patron's  heir,  [and  to  the  latter]  to  the  extent  to

61  which  it  belonged  to  the  [deceased]  manumitter.         Further,
if  there  be  three  children  say  of  one  patron  and  one  child  of
another,  the  inheritance  of  a  citizen  freedman  is  divided  in
capita,  i.e.  the  three  brothers  take  three  shares,  and  the  single
child  gets  the  fourth ;  the  estate  of  a  latin,  however,  belongs
to  successors  in  the  same  proportions  in  which  it  belonged

62  to  the  mauumitters  themselves.         Further,  if  one  of  two
patrons  decline  his  share  of  the  inheritance  of  a  citizen  freed-
mau,  or  die  before  declaring  his  acceptance  of  it,  the  whole
inheritance'  belongs  to  the  other ;  but  the  estate  of  a  latin,  as
regards  the  share  of  a  patron  failing  to  take,  becomes  caducous
and  falls  to  the  state.

63  Afterwards,  during  the  consulate  of  Lupus  and  Largus,  the
senate  decreed  that  the  estates  of  [deceased]  latins  should
belong  in  the  first  place  to  those  who  had  manumitted  them ;
in  the  next  place  to  the  latter's  descendants  not  nominately  dis-
inherited, according  to  proximity  ;  [failing  such  descendants,]

§  61.     Comp.  Vlp.  xxvii,  §  4  ;  Paul,  iii,  gianum.     There  was  a  Largus  con-

2,  §  3  ;  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.  sul  p.  C.  42.
§  62.     Comp.  Paul,  iii,  2,  §  2.  l  Liberi  is  to  be  understood  here

1  So  G.    and  most  eds. ;  the  MS.  in  the  sense  in  which  the  word  is
has  decedentis.  used  by  the  praetor  in  his  edict ;  as

2  See  Vlp.  tit.  xvii.  meaning,  not  descendants  generally,
§  63.  Comp.  §  4,  tit.   I.   afd..  where  the  but  children  whom   a  testator  was

SC.  referred  to  is  called  Sclum  Lur-  required    to    disinherit,  —  sni   and

yuasi  sui ;  see  §  71.

IN,  §§  63-65.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  197

quisque  proximus  esset ;  tune  antiquo  iure  ad  heredes  eoruiu

64  qui  liberassent  pertinerent.         Quo  senatusconsulto  quidain
[id]1  actum  esse  putant,  ut  in  bonis  latinorum  eodem  iure
utamur  quo  utiinur  in  hereditate  ciuiuni  Eomanorum.  liberti-
norum ;  idque2  maxirae  Pegaso3  placuit.     quae  sententia  aperte
falsa  est:  nam  ciuis  Eomani  liberti  hereditas  numquam  ad
extraneos  patroni  heredes  pertinet;    bona  autem  latinorum
etiam4  ex  hoc  ipso  senatusconsulto  non  obstautibus  liberis
manumissoris  etiam  ad  extraneos  heredes  pertinent ;  item  in
hereditate   ciuis   Eomani   liberti   liberis  manumissoris  nulla
exheredatio   nocet,   in   bonis    latinorum    nocere    nominatim
i'actam    exheredationem     ipso    senatusconsulto    significatur.
uerius  est  ergo  hoc  solum  eo  senatusconsulto  actum  esse,  ut
manumissoris  liberi  qui  nominatim  exheredati  non  sint  prae-

65  i'erantur   extraneis   heredibus.         Itaque   emancipatus   films
patroni  praeteritus,  quamuis  contra  tabulas  testamenti  parentis
sui  bonorum  possessionem  non  petierit,  tamen  extraneis  here-

then  to  the  heirs  of  the  manumitters  in  accordance  with  the

64  old  law.         It  is  a  result  of  this  senatusconsult,  as  some
jurists  maintain,  that  we  must  follow  the  same  rule  in  refer-
ence to  the  estates  of  latins  that  we  do  in  reference  to  the
inheritance  of  citizen  freedraen, — a   view  that  commended
itself  notably  to  Pegasus.     But  their  opinion  is  manifestly
erroneous.     For  the  inheritance  of  a  citizen  freedman  never
belongs  to  stranger-heirs  of  the  patron ;  whereas,  by  the  very
terms  of  the  senatusconsult,  the  estates  of  latins  do  belong  to
stranger-heirs  of  the  manumitter,  failing  his  children.    Further,
in  the  inheritance  of  a  citizen  freedman,  the  children  of  the
manumitter  are  not  prejudiced  by  any  disherison ;  whereas  it
is  expressly  declared   in  the  senatusconsult  that  nominate
disherison  does  prejudice  them  as  regards  the  estates  of  latins.
The  more  correct  view  therefore  is  that  all  that  was  done  by
this  senatusconsult  was  to  declare  that  children  of  the  manu-
mitter, not  individually  disinherited,  should  be  preferred  to

65  stranger-heirs.         An  emancipated  son  of  a  patron,  conse-
quently, who  has  been  passed  over  in  his  testament,  although
he  may  not  have  petitioned  for  possession  of  the  estate  of  his
parent  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  the  will,  is  yet  preferred  to
stranger-heirs  in  the  estates  of  latins  [manumitted  by  his

64.  Comp.  §§  48,  58.  3  See  ii,  254,  note  1.

1  G.  and  all  eds.  4  K.    u.    S.  think  this   word  has

2  So  G.  and  all  eds.  ;  the  MS.  has               crept  in  per  incurlam,  and  should
idemqtie.  be  deleted.

198  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVIUS  CIVILIS    [III,  §§  66-70.

€6  dibus  in  bonis  latinorura  potior  habetur.  Item  filia  ceterique
sui  heredes,  licet  hire  ciuili  inter  ceteros  exheredati  sint,  et
ab  omni  hereditate  patris  sui  suminoueantur,  tamen  in  bonis
latinorum,  nisi  nominatim  a  parente  fuerint  exheredati,  poti-

67  ores  erunt  extraneis   heredibus.         Item  ad  liberos  qui  ab
hereditate  parentis  se  abstiimerunt,1  nihilo  minus  bona  latino-
rum  pertinent ;  (nam  hi  quoque  exheredati  nullo  modo  dici  pos-
sunt,  non  magis  quam  qui  testamento  silentio  praeteriti  sunt).

68  Ex  his  omnibus  satis  illud  apparet,  si  is  qui  latinum  fccerit,

69  —  —   —  —   —   —   —   — .         Item  illud  quoque  constare

uidetur,  si  solos  liberos  ex  disparibus  partibus  patronus

—  —  —  —  tant  ad  eos  pertinere,  quia  nullo  interueniente

70  extraneo  herede  senatusconsulto  locus  non  est.         Sed  si  cum

66  parent].         A  daughter,  too,  and  other  sui  heredes,  although
they  may  have  been  disinherited  in  a  ceteri  clause  according
to  the  requirements  of  the  ius  ciuile,  and  thus  excluded  from
any  participation  in  their  father's  inheritance,  are  neverthe-
less preferred  to  his  stranger-heirs  in  the  estates  of  latins  of
his,  unless  they  have  been  nominately  disinherited  by  him..

67  Further,  the  estates  of  latins  belong  to  children  notwithstand-
ing they  may  have  held  aloof  from  their  parent's  inheritance  ;
for  such   children  can  no  more  be  said  to  have  been  indi-
vidually disinherited  than  can  those  who  have  been  passed
over  by  a  testator  in  silence.

68  From  all  this  it  is  sufficiently  evident  that  he  who  has
made   his    slave    a    latin    —    —    —  —    — .

69  Further,  this  also  seems  to  be  the  general  opinion, — that  if  a
patron  have  left  his  children  his  sole  heirs,  but  instituted  them
to  unequal  shares,  [the  sounder  view  is  that  of  those  who  think
[that  the  estate  of  a  deceased  latin  will  belong  to  them  in
[proportion  to  their  shares  of  the  inheritance^  ;    for,  as  there
is  now  no  question  of  the  intervention  of  a  stranger-heir,

70  the  senatusconsult  does  not  apply.         But  if,  along  with  his

§  67.     A  few  letters  in  the  MS.  are  alto-  gible.     P.  suggests — patronus  here-

gether  illegible,   and  others  uncer-  des    reliquerit,    rectius    existimare

fain.     The   reading  given  above  is  qui  latinum  pro  hereditariis  parti-

that  of  K.  u.  S.  ;  there  have  been  bui  putant  ad  eos,   etc.     K.   u.    S.

others  proposed,  but  all  are  substan-  propose — patronus    heredes    institu-

tially  to  the  same  effect.  erit,  ex  eisdem  partibus  bona  latin!,

1  Comp.  ii,  158.  si  patri  heredes    ex/stant,    ad   eos,

§  68.     "With  exception  of  the  first  word  etc.     Hu.  proposes— patronus  hert-

(fecerit),  the  last  line  of  p.  143  of  the  des  reliquerit,  quod  pro  hereditariis

MS.  is  illegible  ;  so,  with  the  excep-  partibus,    non  pro    uirilibust   bona

tion  of  a  word  here  and  there,   are  latini  2}utmt  ad  eos,  etc.
the  first  twenty-one  lines  of  p.  144.         §70.     Caelius  (spelt  Selius  in  the   MS.)

§  69.  Last  line  arid  a  half  of  p.  144  ille-  Sabinus  flourished  in  the   reign  of

Ill,  §§  70, 71.]  COMMENTARTI  QVATTVOR.  199

liberis  suis  etiam  extraneum  heredem  patronus  reliquerit,
Caelius  Sabinus  ait  tota  bona  pro  uirilibus  partibus  ad  liberos
defunct!  pertinere,  quia  cum  extraneus  heres  interuenit  non
habet  lex  lunia  locum,  sed  senatusconsultum ;  lauolenus
autem  ait  tantum  earn  partem  ex  senatusconsulto  liberos
patroni  pro  uirilibus  partibus  habituros  esse  quam  extranei
heredes  ante  senatusconsultum  lege  lunia  habituri  essent,
reliquas  uero  partes  pro  hereditariis  partibus  ad  eos  pertinere.
71  Item  quaeritur  an  hoc  senatusconsultum  ad  eos  patroni  liberos
pertineat  qui  ex  filia  nepteue  procreantur,  id  est  ut  nepos
meus  ex  filia  potior  sit  in  bonis  latini  mei  quam  extraneus
heres :  item  [an~]  ad  maternos  latinos  hoc  senatusconsultum
pertineat  quaeritur,  id  est  ut  in  bonis  latini  materni  potior  sit
patronae  filius  quam  heres  extraneus  matris.  Cassio  placuit
utroque  casu  locum  esse  senatusconsulto ;  sed  huius  senten-
tiam  plerique  inprobant,  quia  senatus  de  his  liberis  patrono-

children,  the  patron  have  also  left  a  stranger-heir,  Caelius
Sabinus  maintains  that  the  whole  estate  [of  the  deceased
latin]  will  belong  to  the  patron's  children  in  equal  shares,
since,  owing  to  the  intervention  of  a  stranger-heir,  it  is  not
the  Junian  law  but  the  senatusconsult  that  comes  into  play;
Javolenus,  however,  holds  that  under  the  senatusconsult  the
patron's  children  will  take  in  equal  shares  so  much  only  of
the  [latin's]  estate  as,  before  the  senatusconsult  and  under
the  Junian  law,  the  stranger-heir  would  have  been  entitled  to,
and  that  the  remainder  will  belong  to  them  in  proportion  to
71  their  shares  in  their  father's  inheritance.  Then  it  is  asked
whether  this  senatusconsult  applies  to  those  descendants  of  a
patron  who  are  the  issue  of  a  daughter  or  granddaughter, —
that  is,  whether  my  grandson  by  my  daughter  is  to  be  pre-
ferred to  a  stranger-heir  in  the  estate  of  a  latin  of  mine  ?  It
is  also  asked  whether  the  senatusconsult  applies  to  a  mother's
latins, — that  is,  whether  the  son  of  a  patroness  has  a  better
right  to  the  estate  of  a  latin  of  hers  than  her  stranger-heirs  ?
Cassius  held  that  in  both  cases  there  was  room  for  the
senatusconsult.  But  this  opinion  of  his  is  disapproved  by
most  jurists,  on  the  ground  that  the  senatusconsult  does  not
have  in  view  those  descendants  of  a  patron  who  really  are

Vespasian (fr.  2,%47,D.deorig.  iur.  i,  §71.     The  Cassius  here  mentioned— C.

2),  and  probably  was  a  son  of  Masu-  Cassius  Longinus — was  leader  of  the

rius  Sabinus  referredto  in  i,  1 96,  note  Sabinian  school  immediately  before

1.     lauolenus  Priscus  was  his  sue-  Caelius  Sabinus  ;  from  him  they  got

cessor  as  chief  of  the  Sabinian  school.  their  occasional  name  of  Cassians.

200  GAII  INST1TVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIV/LIS    [HI,  §§  71,  72.

rum1  nihil  sentiat  qui  aliam  familiam  sequerentur ;  idque  ex
eo  adparet  quod  nominatim  exheredatos  summouet;  nam
uidetur  cle  his  sentire  qui  exheredari  a  parente  solent  si
heredes  non  instituantur ;  neque  autem  matri  filium  filiamue,
neque  auo  materno  nepotem  neptemue,  si  eum  eamue  heredem
non  instituat,  exheredare  necesse  est,  siue  de  hire  ciuili  quae-
ramus,  siue  de  edicto  praetoris  quo  praeteritis  liberis  contra
tabulas  testament!  bonorum  possessio  promittittir.
72  Aliquando  tamen  ciuis  Romanus  libertus  tamquam  latinus
moritur,  uelut  si  latinus  saluo  iure  patroni  ab  imperatore  ius
Quiritium  consecutus  fuerit ;  item  '  si  latinus  inuito  uel  igno-
rante  patrono  ius  Quiritium  ab  imperatore  consecutus  sit;
quibus  cas'ibus  ut  diuus  Traianus  constituit,1  dum  uiuit  iste
libertus,  ceteris  ciuibus  Romanis  libertis  similis  est  et  iustos
liberos  procreat,  moritur  autem  latiui  iure,  nee  ei  liberi  eius
heredes  esse  possunt;  et  in  hoc  tantum  habet  testamenti

members  of  a  different  family.  And  this  is  evident  from  the
fact  that  it  excludes  children  individually  disinherited,  and
thus  seems  to  have  in  view  only  such  children  as  it  is  the
custom  for  a  parent  to  disinherit  if  he  is  not  instituting  them
heirs.  But  it  is  not  necessary  for  a  mother  to  disinherit  her
son  or  daughter  if  she  is  not  instituting  him  or  her  as  her
heir,  nor  for  a  maternal  grandfather  to  disinherit  his  grandson
or  granddaughter :  it  is  unnecessary  whether  we  look  to  the
ius  ciuile  or  to  the  edict  of  the  praetor  promising  possession
of  an  estate  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  a  testament  to  children
passed  over  in  it.

72  Sometimes  a  freedman  that  is  a  Roman  citizen  dies  as  if  he
were  a  latin,  as,  for  instance,  when  a  latin  has  obtained  from
the  emperor  a  grant  of  citizenship  under  reservation  of  patronal
rights ;  as  also  when  a  latin  has  obtained  the  ius  Quiritium
from  the  emperor  against  his  patron's  will  or  without  his
knowledge.  In  those  cases,  as  was  enacted  by  the  late
emperor  Trajan,  so  long  as  such  a  freedman  lives  he  is  in  like
position  with  all  other  citizen  freedmen,  and  the  children  he
begets  are  lawful  children ;  yet  he  dies  as  a  latin,  and  his
children  cannot  be  his  heirs ;  his  testamentary  capacity  is

1  The   MS.  has  patronarum  ;    in  iliuus  Traianus  constituit,  a  text  that

either  form  the  word  is  probably  a  makes  quibus    casibus   unmeaning.

gloss,    in  the  latter    an   inaccurate  Hu.,    altering  the  nam  into  item,

one.  transposes  the  other  four  words,  and

§  72.     Comp.  §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.  by  placing  them  after  quibus  casibus

1  After  fuerit  the  MS.  has  nam  ut  restores  these  their  value.

Ill,  §§  72-75.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  201

factionem,  nt  patronum  heredem  instituat  eique  si  heres  esse

73  noluerit  alium  substituere  possit.          Et  quia  hac  constitu-
tione  uidebatur  etfectum  ut  ne  umquam  isti  homines  tainquam
ciues  Eomani  morerentur,  quamuis  eo  iure  postea  usi  essent
quo  u el  ex  lege  Aelia  Sentia  uel  ex  senatusconsulto  ciues
Eomani  essent,  diuus  Hadrianus,  iniquitate  rei  motus,  auctor
fuit  senatusconsulti  faciendi,  ut  qui  ignorarite  uel  recusante
patrono  ab  imperatore  ius  Quiritium  consecuti  essent,  si  eo
iure  postea  usi  essent  quo  ex  lege  Aelia  Sentia  uel  ex  senatus-
consulto, si  latini  mansisscnt,1  ciuitatem  Eomanam  conseque-
rentur,  proinde  ipsi  haberentur  ac  si  lege  Aelia  Sentia  uel
senatusconsulto  ad  ciuitatem  Eomanam  peruenissent.

74  Eorum  autem  quos  lex  Aelia  Sentia  dediticiorum  numero
facit,  bona  modo  quasi  ciuium  libertorum,  modo  quasi  latino-

75  rum  ad  patronos  pertinent.         Nam  eorum  bona  qui,  si  in
aliquo  uitio  non  esseut,  manumissi  ciues  Eomani  futuri  essent,
quasi  ciuium  Eomanorum  patronis   eadem  lege  tribuuntur.

limited  to  tbis, — that  he  may  institute  his  patron  as  his  heir,
and  substitute  some  third  party  in  his  place  in  the  event  of

73  his  declining  the  inheritance.         As  it  seemed  to  be  the  effect
of  this  constitution  [of  Trajan's]  that  such  freedmen  could
never  die  as  Eoman  citizens,  even  although  they  afterwards
took  advantage  of  the  procedure  for  becoming  citizens  either
under  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  or  under  the  senatusconsult,  the
late  emperor  Hadrian,  moved  thereto  by  the  unfairness  of  the
case,  induced  the  senate  to  decree  that  if  those  who  had
obtained  the  ius  Quiritium  from  the  emperor,  without  the
knowledge  or  notwithstanding  the  objections  of  their  patrons,
afterwards  made  use  of  the  procedure  whereby,  had   they
remained  latins,  they  would  have  acquired  Eoman  citizenship
either  under  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  or  under  the  senatus-
consult, they  were  to  be  regarded  as  if  they  had  in  fact
attained  citizenship  under  one  or  other  of  these  enactments.

74  The  estates  of  those  whom  the  Aelia-Seutian  law  ranks
as  dediticiaus  belong  to  their  patrons,  sometimes  after  the
manner  of  the  estates  of  citizen  freedmen,  sometimes  after  the

75  manner  of  those  of  latins.         The  estates  of  those  who,  had
there  been  no  blemish  on  their  characters,  would,  on  manu-
mission, have  been  citizens,  are  by  that  statute  given  to  their
patrons,  just  as  if  they  were  the  estates  of  citizens.     For

73.     Comp.  i,  §§  29,  66-71.  §  74.     Comp.  i,  13.

1  So  G.  and  all  eels. ;  the  MS.  lias       §  75.     Comp.  i,  §§  25,  26  ;  Vlp.  xx,  §§
manumissi  esaent.  14,  15.

202

GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS     [HI,  §§  75-78.

non  tamen  hi  habent  etiam  testaraenti  factionem  :  nam  id
plerisque  placuit,  nee  inmerito :  nam  incredibile  uidebatur
pessimae  condicionis  hominibus  uoluisse  legis  latorem  testa-

76  menti  faciendi  ius  concedere.         Eorum  uero  bona  qui,  si  non
in  aliquo  uitio  essent,  manumissi  futuri  latini  esseut,  proinde
tribuuntur  patronis  ac  si  latini  decessissent :  nee  me  praeterit
non  satis  in  ea  re  legis  latorem   uohmtatem   suam   uerbis
expressisse.

77  Videaraus    autem   et   de   ea    successione   quae    nobis   ex

78  emptione  bonorum   conpetit.         Bona   autem   ueneunt   aut
uiuorum  aut  mortuorum  :  uiuorum,  ueluti  eorum  qui  frauda-
tionis  causa  latitant  nee  absentes  defenduntur ; l  item  eorum
qui   ex   lege    lulia   bonis   cedunt;2    item   iudicatorum   post

dediticians  have  no  testamentary  capacity, — so  most  have
held,  and  riot  without  reason ;  for  it  seemed  incredible  that
the  legislature  could  have  meant  to  concede  the  right  of
76  making  a  testament  to  men  of  the  basest  condition.  The
estates  of  those  again  who,  had  they  been  of  unblemished
character,  would,  when  manumitted,  have  been  latins,  are
given  to  their  patrons  just  as  if  they  had  died  latins.  It  does
not  escape  me,  however,  that  on  this  point  the  author  of  the
enactment  has  not  expressed  his  meaning  quite  satisfactorily.

77
78

Let  us  consider  now  the  succession  that  devolves  on  us  by
emptio  bonorum.  It  is  the  estates  of  insolvent  debtors,
whether  living  or  dead,  that  are  thus  brought  to  sale.  There
is  sale  of  the  estates  of  living  debtors  in  the  case  of  those  who
fraudulently  keep  out  of  the  way  of  their  creditors  and  are
not  defended  in  their  absence ;  of  those  who  have  ceded  their
effects  under  the  Julian  law;  and  of  judgment-debtors  after

§§  77-81.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  SVCCESSIO-
N1SVS  SVBLATIS  (Hi,  12).

§  77.  Comp.  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  Emptio
bonorum  was  purchase  of  the  estate
of  an  insolvent,  the  purchaser  be-
coming his  universal  successor.
Gai.  (iv,  35)  attributes  its  introduc-
tion to  Publ.  Rutilius,  generally
understood  to  be  P.  Rutilius  Rufus,
the  celebrated  orator,  jurist,  and
statesman,  who  became  consul  in
649  |  105.

§  78.  l  Comp.  Cic.  pro  Quint,  xix,  60,
xxiii,  74  ;  Vlp.  in  fr.  7,  D.  qulb.  ex

cans,  in  poss.  eatur  (xlii,  4)  ;  Th.
iii,  12,  pr.

'2  Comp.  tit.  D.  de  ce.ss.  bonor.
(xlii,  3) ;  tit.  C.  qui  bonis  cedere
possimt  (vii,  71).  It  is  doubtful
whether  the  lex  lulia  here  referred
to  was  the  work  of  Julius  Caesar  or
of  Augustus  ;  more  probably  it  was
the  hitter,  as  the  lex  Coloniae  Julias
Genetiuae  (i,  22,  note  1),  due  to  the
former,  preserves  unmodified  the
rigorous  system  of  personal  execu-
tion previously  in  use.

Ill,  §§  78,  79.]

COMMENTAEII  QVATTVOR.

203

79

tempus  quod  eis  partim  lege  xn  tabularum  partim  edicto
praetoris  ad  expecliendam  pecuniam  tribuitur.3  inortuorum
bona  ueneunt  ueluti  eorum  quibus  certum  est  neque  heredes
neqne  bonorum  possessores  neque  ullum  alium  iustum  succes-
sorem  existere.*  Si  quid  em  uiui  bona  ueneant,  iubet  ea
praetor  per  dies  continues  xxx  possideri  et l  proscribi,  si  uero
mortui,  per  dies  xv ;  postea  iubet  conuenire  creditores  et  ex
eorum  immero 2  magistrura  creari,  id  est  eum  per  quern  bona
ueneant:  idque,  si  uiui  bona  ueneant,  in  diebus  x fieri  iubet,3
si  mortui,  in  dimidio.4  diebus  itaque  uiui  bona  XXXX?  mortui
uero  xx,6  emptori  addici  iubet.7  quare  autem  tardius  uiuen-

expiry  of  the  period  which,  partly  under  the  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables  and  partly  under  the  praetor's  edict,  is  allowed
them  for  procuring  the  money.  There  is  sale  of  the  estates
of  deceased  debtors  in  the  case,  for  example,  of  persons  to
whom  it  is  certain  that  there  will  be  neither  heir,  nor  bonorum
79  possessor,  nor  any  other  lawful  successor.  If  it  be  the  estate
of  a  living  debtor  that  is  being  sold,  the  praetor  orders  it  to
be  taken  and  held  possession  of,  and  publicly  advertised,  for
thirty  continuous  days ;  or  if  it  be  the  estate  of  a  deceased
debtor,  for  fifteen  days.  He  then  orders  the  creditors  to  meet,
and  one  of  their  number  to  be  appointed  magister,  the  party,
that  is  to  say,  by  whom  the  estate  is  to  be  sold ;  and  the  sale
itself  he  orders  to  be  carried  through  in  ten  days  if  the  estate
be  that  of  a  living  debtor,  and  in  half  that  time  if  it  be  that
of  one  who  is  dead.  He  thus  orders  that  the  estate  of  a
living  debtor  shall  be  adjudged  to  the  purchaser  in  forty  days,

3  The  allusion  is  to  the  praetorian
amendment  of  the  old  procedure-in-
execution  of  the  xn  Tables,  upon
which  we  get  a  little  light  from  the
lex  Rubria,  chaps.  21,  22  (Brims,
pp.  86-91).

4Comp.  ii,  §§154,  158.
§  79.     Comp.  Cic.  pro  Quint,  viii,  30  ;
Th.  iii,  12,  pr.

1  The  MS.  has  possederit ;  a  read-
ing which  P.  retains,  and  justifies  by
introducing  certain  words,   making
the  passage  run — iubet  ea  praetor,
[postquam  ea  allquis  ex  edicto]  per
dies  continues  XXX  possederit,  pro-
scribe.

2  The  MS.  has  ex  eo  numero.

3  This  is  Mommsen's  reading  (in
K.  u.  S.  footnote).      The  MS.  has —
itaque,  si  uiui  bona  ueneant,  in  die-

bus  V  fieri  iubet.  K.  (Krit.  Versuche,
p.  137),  reading  the  V  as  a  contrac-
tion of  uenditionem,  proposes — ita-
que, si  uiui  bona  ueneant,  in  diebus
[X  bonorum]  uenditionem  fieri  iubet.
Hu.  has — itaque  ...  in  diebus  [X
legem  bonorum]  uendendorum  fieri
iubet.

4  So  the  MS.  ;  Hu.,   dropping  the
dimidio,  utilizing  the  next  word,  and
interjecting  v,  makes  it  in  diebus  V.

5  The  MS.  has  XXX, — an  obvious
error.

6  Hu.  has — [die]  tandem  uiui  bona
XX,  mortui  uero  X,  etc.

7  The  addictio  was  the  act  of  the
magister.     The  same  word  was  used
to  express  the  knocking-down  of  a
lot  by  an  auctioneer  to  the  highest
bidder  at  a  sale  (Cic.  pro  Caec.  vi,  16).

204

GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  1VIUS  CIVILIS    [HI,  §§  79-81.

tiuni  bonorum  uenditio  coupler!  iubetur  ilia  ratio  est,  quia
de  uiuis  curandum  erat  ne  facile  bonorum  uenditiones
paterentur.8

80  Neque  autem  bonorum  possessorum  neque  bonorum  empto-
rum  res  pleno  iure  fiunt,  sed  in  bonis  efficiimtur ;  ex  iure
Quiritium    autem   ita   demum   adquiruntur   si   usuceperunt.
interdum  quidem  bonorum  emptoribus  ne  usus  quidem  capio
contingit,  ueluti  si  per  cos    —    —    —    —    —    —  — .l

81  Item  quae  debita   —    —    —    aut  ipse  debuit,  neque  bonorum
possessor  neque  bonorum  emptor  ipso  iure  debet

80

and  that  of  a  deceased  debtor  in  twenty.  The  reason  why  the
sale  of  the  estates  of  living  debtors  is  ordered  to  be  completed
more  slowly  is,  that  care  ought  to  be  taken,  where  living
persons  are  concerned,  that  they  have  not  to  submit  to  sale
of  their  estates  unnecessarily.

Neither  in  bonorum  possessio  nor  in  bonorum  uenditio  do  the
things  thereby  acquired  belong  to  the  possessors  or  purchasers
in  full  ownership, — they  are  theirs  only  in  bonis;  but  they
acquire  them  eventually  in  quiritarian  right  by  usucapion.
In  the  case  of  bonorum  emptores,  however,  usucapion  is  some-
times impossible,  as  for  instance,  when .

81  [What  was  due  to  kirn  to  whom  the  estate  formerly  belonged'],  or
due  by  him,  is  neither  due  ipso  iure  to  the  bonorum  possessor
or  bonorum  cmptor,  \_nor  due  by  him ;  consequently  it  is  ncces-

8  The  proper  reading  of  this  par.
(from  idque  down  to  addici  iubet)
is  much  controverted.  Th.,  in  his
account  of  bonor.  emptio,  specifies
three  acts  of  the  magistrate  in  refer-
ence to  the  insolvent's  estate,  viz.
(1)  grant  of  bonorum  posscssio,  (2)
order  upon  the  creditors  to  elect  a
trustee  and  advertise  the  bank-
ruptcy, and  (3)  approval  of  the
price  and  the  conditions  of  sale  ;
between  each  of  those  acts,  he  says,
there  was  an  interval  of  days,  which
he  leaves  undefined  ;  and  then,  after
a  third  interval,  came  (4)  the  ad-
dictlo.  As  against  this  we  have  in
the  notae  of  Valer.  Probus — B.  E.  E.
p.  P.  v.  Q.  I.  (bona  ex  edicto  possideri
proscribe  uenireque  iubebo),  and  the
bona  possiderei  proscreibei  ueneire
of  the  L.Rubria  de  Gallia  Cisalpina,
c.  22  (Brims,  p.  91),  which  both
point  to  three  orders  by  the  prae-

tor (though  not  the  same  as  are
mentioned  by  Th.),  viz.  to  take  pos-
session, to  advertise,  and  to  sell  ;
and  these  orders  imply  only  two
intervals,  which  may  correspond  to
those  of  Gaius,  viz.  '30  +  10  =  40,
and  15  +  5  =  20.  See  also  Cic.
ad  Alt.  vi,  1.

§  80.  Comp.  Paul,  in  fr.  2,  §  19,  D.
pro  emptore  (xli,  4)  ;  Th.  iii,  12,  pr.
1  Two  lines  illegible,  with  excep-
tion of  the  words  bonorum  emptor.
See  Vlp.  in  fr.  7,  §  3,  D.  quib.  ex
cans,  inposs.  eatur  (xlii,  4).

§  81.  Comp.  iv,  §§  33,  145  ;  iii,  12,  pr.
These  indicate  the  drift  of  the  pas-
sage, viz.  that  in  regard  to  what

was  due  to  or  by  a  bonor.
or  a  bonor.  emptor,  neither  held  the
position  of  creditor  or  debtor  in
strict  law,  yet  nevertheless  might
sue  or  be  sued  by  means  of  utiles
actiones;  (see  ii,  78,  note  1).

ITI,  §§  81-84.]  COMMEXTARII  QVATTVOR.  205

de  omnibus  rebus —    —  in  seguenti  commentario  pro-

ponemus.

82  Sunt  autem  etiam  alterius  generis  successiones  quae  neque
lege  xn  tabularum  neque  praetoris  edicto,  sed  eo  iure  [quod]

83  consensu  receptum  est  introductae  sunt.         Ecce  enim  1  cum
paterfamilias   se  in  adoptionem   dedit,  mulierue  in  man  urn
conuenit,2  omnes  eius  res  incorporales  et  corporales,  quaeque
ei  debitae  sunt,  patri  adoptiuo  coemptionatoriue  adquiruntur,
exceptis  his  quae  per  capitis  deminutionem  pereunt,  quales
sunt  ususfructus,5  operarum  obligatio  (libertinoruin)  quae  per
iusiurandmn  contracta  est,4  et  (lites  quae  aguntur)5  legltimo

84  iudicio.6         Ex  diuerso  quod  is  debuit  (qui  se  in)  adoptionem
dedit  quaeue  in  manum  conuenit,  (non)  transit  ad  coemptiona-
torem  aut  ad  patrem  adoptiuum,   nisi  si  hereditarium   aes
alienum  (fuerit.     tune)  enim,  quia  ipse  pater  adoptiuus  aut
coemptionator  heres  fit,  directo  tenetur  iure  ;  (is  uerd)  qui  se

\sary  that  he  sue.  or  be  sued  ly  means  of  utiles  actiones,  which]
we  shall  give  an  account  of  in  our  next  Commentary.

82  There  are  besides  successions  of  another  sort,  which  owe
their  introduction  neither  to  the  Twelve  Tables  nor  to  the
praetor's  edict,  but  to  those  rules  that  have  been  received  by

83  general  consent.         Thus  when   a  paterfamilias   has  given
himself  in  adoption,  or  a  woman  has  passed  in  manum,  all  their
belongings,  corporeal  and  incorporeal,  and  everything  that  is
due  to  them,  become  acquisitions  of  the  adoptive  father  or
the  coemptionator,  except  those  that  come  to  an  end  by  capitis
deminutio,  such  as  a  right  of  usufruct,  undertakings  of  service
on  the  part  of  freedmen  contracted  by  oath,  and  suits  pro-

84  ceeding  in  a  indicium  legitimum.         Contrariwise,  [liability
for]  what  was  due  by  him  who  has  given  himself  in  adoption,
or  her  who  has  passed  in  manum,  does  not  pass  to  the  coemp-
tionator or  adoptive  father,  unless  the  debt  be  a  hereditary
one ;  in    that   case,    as   the  adoptive  father    or  the  coemp-
tionator himself  becomes  heir,  he  becomes  directly  liable,  he

§§  82-84.      C'omp.    tit.    I.    DE  ADQVISI-  *>  Studemund's  suggestion,  as  ac-

TIONE  PER  ADROGATIONEM  (iii,  10).  cordant  with  the   traces  visible  in

§  82.     Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  the  MS.     K.  u.  S.  and  Hu.,  follow-

§83.     Comp.  §§  1,  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  ing    Rudorff    and    Gou.,    and    on

1  So  the  Inst. ;  the  MS.  has  etenim.  the    authority    of    fr.    58,    D.     de

2  Comp.  Cic.  Top.  iv,  23.  0.   et  A.  (xliv.   7),   read   lites  con-

3  P.,  following  the  Inst.,  reads —  testatae.

quales  sunt  [ius  agnationis,  i(sus,]  6  Comp.  iv,  104.

ususfructus.  §  84.     Comp.  iv,  §§  38,  80  ;  Vlp.  in  fr.

4  Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.  7,  D.  de  oper.  2,  pr.  §  1,  D.  de  cap.  min.  ;  §  3,  tit.
lib.  (xxxviii,  1).  I.  afd.

20G  GAII  INSTITVriONVM  IVKIS  CIVILIS    [III,  §§  84,  85.

adoptandum  dedit,  quaeue  in  marram  conuenit,  desinit  esse
heres.  De  eo  uero  quod  proprio  nomine  eae  personae  debue-
rint,  licet  neque  pater  adoptiuus  teneatur  neque  coemptio-
nator,  (et  ne)  ipse  quidem  qui  se  in  adoptionem  dedit  (uel]
quae  in  manuni ,  conuenit  maneat  obligatus  obligataue,  guia
scilicet l  per  capitis  deminutionem  liberetur,  tamen  in  eum
eamue  utilis  actio  datur,2  rescissa  capitis  deminutione,  et  si
aduersus  hanc  actionem  non  defendantur,  quae  bona  eorum
futura  fuissent  si  se  alieno  iuri  non  subiecissent  uniuersa
uendere  creditoribtis  praetor  permittit.

85       [Si  quis]  legitimam  hereditatem  (ei  delatam,  antequam  cer}-
nat  aut  pro  herede  gerat,  alii  in  iure  cedat,  pleno  iure  fit  ille

\vlio  has  given  himself  in  adoption,  or  she  who  has  passed
in  manum,  ceasing  to  be  heir.  As  regards,  however,  debts
due  by  such  persons  on  their  own  account,  although  neither
the  adopted  father  nor  coemptionator  is  liable,  and  neither  the
man  who  has  given  himself  in  adoption  nor  the  woman  who
has  passed  in  manum  continues  bound  by  the  obligation,
seeing  they  have  been  relieved  from  it  by  their  capitis
deminutio,  an  utilis  actio  is  nevertheless  given  against  him  or
her,  the  capitis  deminutio  being  held  rescinded ;  and  if  no
defence  be  entered  for  them  against  this  action,  the  praetor
will  allow  their  creditors  to  sell  the  whole  goods  and  effects
which  would  have  been  theirs  had  they  not  subjected  them-
selves to  another  person's  right.

85       If  an  individual,  before  he  has  formally  declared  his  accept-
ance of  an  inheritance  that  has  devolved  upon  him  by  law,  or

1  The  M.S.  lias  si  after  this  word.  nendo  aut  pro  herede  gerendo  .  .  .

2  See  ii,  78,  note.  hercs  fieri.

§  85-87.     Comp.  ii,  §§  34-37,  of  which      §§  85,  86.     Comp.  §§  35,  36  ;  Vlp.  xix,

these  are  substantially  a  repetition.  §§12-15.     Stud,  observes  that  lines

P.     considers    them    spurious,    and  5,   6,  and  8   of  p.   150   of  the   Ms.

an  interpolation  by  some  scholar  of  seem  to  have  been  written  in  ver-

Gaius'  ;  and  consequently  relegates  milion.     The  fifth  is  entirely  illeg-

thein   to    an    appendix.       But    his  ible ;  of  the  sixth  only  the    words

argument  against  their  authenticity  legitimam  h.    are    decipherable  ;   of

— that    neither     cernere     nor   pro  the   eighth   only    the    first   half  is

herede  gerere  can  be  used  with  pro-  legible.     The  meaning,  however,  is

priety  in  regard  to  a  legitima  here-  so  obvious  that  no  difficulty  is  ex-

ditas — is  very  inconclusive  ;  for  in  perienced  in  supplying  deficiencies,

ii,  §  167,  we  find  Gains  saying—  is  The  readings  of  K.  u.   S.  and  Hu.

qui .  .  .  ah  intestato  legitimo  iure  ad  are  substantially  the  same  as  that

hereditatem  uocatur,  potcst  aut  cer-  given  above.

Ill,  §§  85-88.]     COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  207

heres  cui  cessa  est  hereditas,  (proinde  ac  si  ipse,  per}  legem  ad
hereditatem  uocaretur ;  quodsi  posteaquam  heres  extiterit
cesserit,  adhuc  heres  manet,  et  ob  id  creditoribus  ipse  tene-
bitur ;  sed  res  corporales  transferet  proinde  ac  si  singulas  in
iure  cessisset,  debita  uero  pereunt,  eoque  mo  do  debitores

86  hereditarii  lucrura  faciunt.         Idem  iuris  est  si  testamento
scripttis   heres,  posteaquam  heres  extiterit,  in  iure  cesserit
hereditatem  ;  ante  aditam  uero  hereditatem  cedendo  nihil  agit.

87  Sims  autem  et  necessarius  heres  an  aliquid  agant  in  iure
cedendo  quaeritur  :  nostri  praeceptores  nihil  eos  agere  existi-
mant ;  diuersae  scholae  auctores  idem  eos  agere  putant  quod
ceteri  post  aditam  hereditatem;  nihil    enim  interest  utrum
aliquis  cernendo  aut  pro  herede  gerendo  heres  fiat,  an  iuris
necessitate  hereditati  adstringatur.

88  (Nunc  transeamus)  ad  obligationes,  quarum  surnma  diuisio

before  he  has  behaved  as  heir,  transfer  it  to  a  third  party  by
in  iure  cessio,  he  to  whom  the  inheritance  is  thus  ceded
becomes  heir,  with  all  the  rights  of  heir,  just  as  if  he  himself
had  been  called  to  the  inheritance  as  heir-at-law.  If,  however,
it  is  not  until  after  he  has  assumed  the  character  of  heir  that
he  has  ceded  the  inheritance,  he  still  remains  heir,  and  it  is
he  consequently  that  will  be  liable  to  the  deceased's  creditors;
the  corporeals  he  must  hand  over,  as  if  they  had  been  ceded
individually ;  but  claims  are  extinguished,  and  the  debtors  of

86  the  deceased  thus  become  gainers.         The  law  is  the  same  if
a  testamentary  heir  transfer  the  inheritance  by  in  iure  cessio
after  he  has  taken  the  position  of  heir ;  by  ceding  before  he

87  has  entered,  however,  he  really  does  nothing.         Whether  the
suus  or  the  necessary  heir  does  anything  effectual  by  ceding
an   inheritance   in   court  is  a  matter  of  controversy.     Our
authorities  think  that  they  do  not.     Those  of  the  other  school
think  that  their  act  has  the  same  effect  as  that  of  other  heirs
ceding  the  inheritance  after  entry;  it  being  of  no  moment
whether  a   man   become   heir  by  formal   acceptance  or  by
behaviour  as  heir,  or  be  astricted  to  the  inheritance  by  neces-
sity of  law.

88  Now  let  us  pass  to  obligations.     Their  primary  division  is

§  87.     Comp.  ii,  37.  §  88.     The  first  two  words,  unwritten  in

§§  88,   89.     Corn  p.   tit.    I.   DE  OBLIGA-  the  MS.,  are  supplied  from  pr.  tit.

TIONILl'S  (iii,  13).  I.  afd.

208

GAII  IXSTITVriOXVM  I  VMS  CIVILIS      [HI,  §§88-90.

in  cluas  species  didticitur:  omnis  enim  obligatio  uel  ex  con-
tractu  nascitur  uel  ex  delicto.

89  Et  prius  uideamus  de  his  quae  ex  contractu  nascuntur.
ham m  autem  quattuor  genera  sunt:  aut  euim  re  l  eontrahitur
obligatio  aut  uerbis  aut  litteris  aut  consensu.

90  Re  eontrahitur  obligatio  uelut  mutui  datione  ;  \inutui  autem

into   two    classes ;   for   every  obligation  originates  either  in
contract  or  in  delict.

89  First  let  us  consider  those  that  arise  from  contract.  Of
these  there  are  four  genera ;  for  an  obligation  is  contracted
either  by  thing  done,  by  [spoken]  words,  by  writing,  or  by
consent.

An  obligation  is  contracted  by  thing  done  by  giving  a

90

§  89.  Comp.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  The  verbal
and  literal  contracts  are  often  spoken
of  by  the  civilians  as  formal  con-
tracts, in  contradistinction  to  the
real  and  consensual  ones,  which  they
call  material.  In  the  verbal  and
literal  contracts  the  obligation  was
created  by  words  of  style,  written  or
spoken,  no  matter  whether  or  not
any  substantial  causa  oblicjandi  un-
derlay them.  The  absence  of  such
substantial  causa  might  possibly
afford  an  equitable  defence  to  any
action  upon  the  contract ;  but  ipso
iure  it  was  valid  and  effectual  simply
on  the  strength  of  the  formal  words
made  use  of  by  the  parties.

Earlier  than  any  of  those  four
classes  were  the  nexum  and  the  ius-
iurandum, — one  a  civil,  the  other  a
religious  contract  (or  form  of  con-
tracting), and  both  formal.  The
nexum  is  referred  to  by  Gai.  only  in
connection  with  the  discharge  of  an
obligation  thereby  created  (iii,  173);
the  iusiurandum  he  refers  to  in
§  84,  in  connection  with  the  special
case  in  which  it  was  still  employed ;
but  practically  both  were  long  out
of  date.  The  nexum  has  been  the
subject  of  many  disquisitions,  and
opinions  about  it  are  conflicting  ;
the  more  notable  theories  are  sum-
marised, and  the  references  to  it  in
the  ancient  writers  collected,  by
Danz,  R.  R.  ii,  pp.  18  f.  Danz  him-
self (Sacrale  Schutz),  and  Voigt  in
his  Jus  Naturale,  etc.,  are  the  lead-
ing writers  on  the  iusiurandum  ;
see  a  resumd  of  Danz's  views,  and

references  to  his  authorities,  ancient
and  modern,  in  his  R.  R.  ii,  pp.
32  f.  See  further,  note  to  §  92,  last
paragraph.

1  To  translate  res  as  '  the  thing '
(Sandars)  or  'the  thing  itself '  (Abdy
and  Walker)  is  too  narrow,  while
'performance  '  (Poste)  is  ambiguous.
It  is  really  equivalent  to  factum,
and  appropriately  rendered  by  'act '
( Hunter,  p.  281).  It  is  in  this  sense
Gai.  says  that  obligations  ex  delicto
are  all  of  one  and  the  same  genus
(§  182);  they  all  arise  re, — by  thing
done ;  see  Gai.  in  fr.  4  D.  de  0.  et  A.
(xliv,  7).  It  is  in  the  same  sense
that  the  so-called  innominate  con-
tracts are  spoken  of  as  real,  whether
falling  under  the  category  do  ut  dcs,
do  ut  facias,  facio  ut  des,  or  f  ado  ut
facias;  see  fr.  5,  §  1,  D.  de praescr.
uerb.  (xix,  5).  There  were  other
obligations  that  were  said  to  be
created  re, — by  facts  and  circum-
stances, such  as  those  arising  from
vicinage,  from  joint  ownership,  from
jettison  at  sea,  from  neyotiorum
ijestio,  etc.,  some  of  which  are  dealt
with  in  tit.  I.  de  obi.  q.  ex  contr.
(iii,  27).

Comp.  tit.  I.  QVIBVS  MOOTS
HE  CONTRAHITVR  OBLIGATIO  (iii,
14).  Just,  enumerates  four  real  con-
tracts— mutuum,  commodatum,  de-
position, pifjnus;  Gai.  mentions  only
the  first.  Commodate,  deposit,  and
pledge  were,  long  before  his  time,  all
well  known  as  transactions  of  daily
life,  and  are  frequently  referred  to
in  his  pages.  But  their  contractual

§§  90,  91.

Ill,  §§  90, 91.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  209

[datio]  proprie  in  his  [fere]  rebus  contingit  quae  pondere
numero  mensura  constant,  qualis  est  pecunia  numerata  uiuum
oleum  frumentum  aes  argentum  aurum ;  quas  res  aut  numeran-
do  aut  metiendo  aut  pendendo  in  hoc  damus,  ut  accipientium
fiant  et  quandoque  nobis  non  eaedem  sed  aliae  eiusdem  naturae
reddantur :  unde  etiam  nmtuum  appellatum  est,  quia  quod  ita
91  tibi  a  me  datum  est  ex  meo  tuum  fit.  Is  quoque  qui  noil
debitum  accepit  ab  eo  qui  per  errorem  soluit  re  obligatur ;
nani  proinde  ei  condici  potest  si  PARET  EVM  DARE  OPORTERE/
ac  si  niutuum  accepisset.  unde  quidam  putant  pupillum  aut
mulierem,  cui  sine  tutoris  auctoritate  non  debitum  per  errorem
datum  est,  non  teneri  coudictione  non  niagis  quam  mutui
datione.2  sed  haec  species  obligationis  non  uidetur  ex  con-

loan  for  consumption.  This  occurs  for  the  most  part  only
in  the  case  of  things  that  are  weighed,  counted,  or  mea-
sured, such  as  money,  wine,  oil,  corn,  bronze,  silver,  gold.
In  transferring  such  things  by  number,  measure,  or  weight,
we  do  so  with  the  intent  that  they  shall  become  the  property
of  the  receiver,  and  that  not  the  identical  articles,  but  others
of  the  same  sort,  shall  some  time  or  other  be  returned  to  us.
Hence  the  word  mutuum  ;  for  what  is  thus  given  by  me  to  you,
91  from  mine  becomes  thine.  He  also  is  laid  under  obligation
by  thing  done  who  has  taken  payment  of  what  is  not  really
due  to  him  from  a  party  paying  it  in  mistake ;  for  on  this
ground  a  condiction  will  lie  against  him,  with  an  intention
'  if  it  appear  that  he  ought  to  give/  in  the  same  way  as  if  he
had  received  the  money  in  loan.  Accordingly  some  are  of
opinion  that  a  pupil  or  a  woman,  to  either  of  whom,  without
tutorial  auctoritas,  something  has  been  paid  in  error  that  was
not  really  due,  is  no  more  liable  in  a  condictio  indebiti  than
[on  an  action]  for  money  lent.  But  this  sort  of  obligation  is
not  to  be  regarded  as  arising  from  contract ;  for  he  who  gives
a  thing  by  way  of  payment  means  rather  to  distract  than

characteristics   were    not    yet   well  of  a  depositary  as  a  delict   rather

settled  ;  comraodate  and  pledge  were  than  a  breach  of  contract.

still  often  dealt  with  as  varieties  of  §  90.     Gai.  in  fr.  1,  2,  D.  de  0.  et  A.

creditum  (Vlp.  in  fr.  1,  fr.  4,  §  1,  D.  (xliv,  7),  from  which  the  iuterpo-

de  reb.  creel,  xii,  1),  giving  rise  to  a  lated  words  in  ital.   are  supplied;

certi  condictio  in  the  same  way  as  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.     fere  seems  to  be  a

mutuum  ;  while  deposit  had  not  yet  gloss.

been  altogether  freed  from  the  ini-  §  91.     §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  §  6,  I.  de

press  of  the  rule  of  the  xn  Tables  obi,  q.  quasi  ex  contr.  (iii,  27).

(Paul,  in  Cpllat.  x,  7,  §  11),  which  1  Comp.  iv,  §§  5,  41.

regarded  failure  of  duty  on  the  part  2  Comp.  ii,  §§  80-84.

0

210

GAII  IX8TITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS     [HI,  §§  91,  92.

tractu  consistere,  quia  is  qui  soluendi  animo  dat  inagis  dis-
trahere  uult  negotium  quam  contrahere.
92       Verbis  obligatio  fit  ex  interrogatione  et  responsione,  uelu-

ti    DARI    SPONDES  ?    SPONDEO,    DABIS  ?    DABO,    PROMITTIS  ?    PRO-
MITTO,    FIDEPROMITTIS  ?    FIDEPROMITTO,    FIDEIVBES  ?    FIDEIVBEO,

to  contract,  [i.e.  rather  to  dissolve  a  contract  than  to  enter
into  one.]

92  A  verbal  obligation  is  created  by  question  and  answer  thus  :
'  Do  you  religiously  engage  that  such  or  such  a  thing  shall  be
given  ?' '  '  I  religiously  engage  [apondeo]  ; '  '  Will  you  give  ? '  '  I
\vill  give  ;'  '  Do  you  promise  ? '  '  I  promise ; '  '  Do  you  promise
on  your  plighted  faith  ? '  '  I  promise  on  my  plighted  faith  [fide-
[promitto],; '  'Do  you  authorize  on  your  plighted  faith  ? '  '  I
authorize  on  my  plighted  faith  [fideiubeo]  ; '  '  Will  you  do  ? '

§§  92-96.     Comp.
OBLIGATIONS

tit.  I.  DE  VEliBORVM
iii^  15').

§  92.     Comp.  pr.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  ;  Paul,
ii,  3.

It  is  difficult  in  translation  to
convey  an  idea  of  the  differences
between  those  fornmlae.  Spondes  ?
spondeo,  was  the  oldest  of  them  all,
and  even  in  the  time  of  Gad.  still
affected  by  peculiarities  (see  §§  93,.
120)  that  testified  to  its  antiquity
and  its  origin  in  the  iusiurandum.
It  might  be  employed  either  between
the  creditor  and  the  principal  debtor,
or  between  the  creditor  and  a  surety
(§§  115,  116).

Promittis?  promittQ,  became  the
usual  words  of  style  in  stipulation,
unless  when  coupled  with  dare  ;  so
that  the  debtor  in  it  ordinarily  got
the  name  of  promissor  (§  100,  etc.).
But  there  is  some  reason  to  believe
that  originally  they  amounted  to  a
minor  form  of  oath,  promittere  ma-
num  (Serv.  ad  Aen.  iv,  103),  por-
rigere  dextram  (Plin.  H.  N.  xi,
45,  §  250),  being  to  appeal  to  Fides,
whose  seat  was  in  the  right  hand
(Liv.  i,  21;  xxiii,  9  ;  Serv.  ad  Aen.
iii,  607).

The  simplicity  of  ddbis?  dabo,
fades?  faciam,  shows  them  to  be  of
later  introduction  than  the  two
former.  Dare  meant  to  give  in
property  (§  99;  iv,  4);/ace?-e  applied
to  any  other  act,  positive  or  nega-
tive, including  giving  otherwise
than  in  property  (see  iv,  2,  note  2  ;
fr.  175,  fr.  189,  fr.  218,  D.  de  V.  S.
i,  16).

fidepromitto  (i.e..  idem  fide  meet
promitto),  fideiubeo  (i.e.  Jide  mea
iubeo),  were  styles  used  only  by
sureties,  the  former  when  the  under-
taking of  the  principal  debtor  arose
from  verbal  contract,  the  latter  no
matter  how  the  principal  debtor  had
contracted  (§  119).  The  force  of
them  lay  in  the  tua  and  mea :
idem  fide  TVA  promittis,  iubes  ?
(§§  112,  116);  fide  MEA  promitto,
iubeo.

The  phrase  'plighted  faith  '  in
the  translation  seems  justified  by  the
fidem  obligare,  fidem  dare  of  the
lay  writers  ;  see  Cic.  Phil,  v,  18,
§  51;  Cato  maj.  xx,  75;  de  off.  xiii,
39  ;  Plaut.  Persa,  v.  242.  This  fides,
which  Cic.  calls  fundamentum  iusti-
tiae,  and  which  he  defines  as  dicto-
rum  conuentorumque  constantia  et
uer itas,  truthfulness  in  and  adherence
to  one's  assurances  and  agreements
(de  off.  i,  7,  §  21),  was  reckoned  by
the  Romans  of  the  Republic  the
highest  of  the  virtues.  To  rely
upon  it  was  credere,  a  derivative
from  the  sansc.  crat,  trust  or  belief,
and  dhd,  Gr.  h,  to  place,  (A.  W.
Schlegel,  as  quoted  by  Pernice,  i,
409,  n.  8).  To  break  it,  fidem  fal-
lere,  might  not  entitle  the  injured
creditor  to  relief  by  action  if  it  had
been  plighted  informally,  but  the
defaulter  incurred  the  risk  of  infamy
with  all  its  serious  consequences;  and
thus  it  was  that  Rome  progressed  so
long  with  an  imperfect  system  of
contracts.  See  §  89,  note  ;  §  119«,
note  1.

Ill,  §§  93, 94.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  2 1 1

93  FACIES  ?    FACIAM.         Sed   liaec   quidem   uerborum   obligatio
DAEI  SPONDES  ?    SPONDEO   propria   ciuium   Eomanorum   est ;
ceterae  uero  iuris  gentium  sunt,  itaque  inter  omnes  homines,
siue  ciues  Romanes  sine  peregrines,  ualent ;  et  quamuis  ad
Graecam  uocem  expressae  fuerint,  uelut  hoc  modo  :

e/g ;  "O/ioXoyw*  Ularu  xsXfvttg;  THarst
n<M^<r«],  [etiam  haec]  tamen  inter  ciues  Romanes
ualent,  si  modo  Graeci  sermonis  intellectum  habeant;  et  e
contrario  quamuis  Latine  enuntientur,  tamen  etiam  inter
peregrines  ualent  si  modo  Latini  sermonis  intellectum  habeant.
at  ilia  uerborum  obligatio  DAKI  SPONDES  ?  SPONDEO  adeo
propria  ciuium  Romanorum  est,  ut  ne  quidem  in  Graecuni
sermonem  per  interpretationem  proprie  transferri  possit,

94  quamuis  dicatur  a  Graeca  uoce  figurata  esse.1         Vnde  dicitur
uno  casu  hoc  uerbo  peregrinum  quoque  obligari  posse,  uelut
si  imperator  noster  principem  alicuius  peregrini  populi  de
pace    ita    interroget :    PACEM    FVTVRAM    SPONDES  ?    uel    ipse
eodem  modo  interrogetur :  quod  nimium  subtiliter  dictum  est,
quia  si  quid  aduersus  pactionem  fiat,  non  ex  stipulatu  agitur,

93  '  I  will  do.'         The  verbal  obligation  by  the  words  dari  spondes?
spondeo  is  peculiar  to  Roman  citizens  ;  the  others  are  iuris
gentium,  and  valid  between  any  persons,  whether  citizens  or
peregrins.     Even  when  expressed  in  Greek  thus — d&uos/s ;  dusu-
ofj.o'ko'ysTg ;  o/xoXoyi'  cn'ffrs;  xf>.£i/s/s  ;  XIGTII  xeXevu*  iroi'/iazig  ;   Koiqau,
they  are  valid  between  Roman  citizens,  provided  they  under-
stand that  language  ;  just  as  when  conceived  in  Latin  they  will
be  binding  as  between  peregrins  who  understand  the  Latin
language.     But  the  verbal  obligation  '  dari  spondes  ?  spondeo  '
is  so  peculiarly  Roman  that  it  cannot  adequately  be  rendered
in  Greek,  notwithstanding  that  the  word  spondeo  is  said  to  be

94  derived  from  that  language.         There  is  one  case,  however,  in
which  it  is  held  that  this  word  spondeo  will  impose  an  obli-
gation even  upon  a  foreigner,  namely  whom  the  emperor  thus
interrogates,  or  is  interrogated,  by  the  sovereign  of  a  foreign
state  in  regard  to  a  treaty  of  peace :  '  Do  you  religiously  engage,
spondes,  to  be  at  peace  with  us  in  future  ? '     But  this  is  too  in-
geniously put ;  for  if  there  be  a  violation  of  the  treaty,  redress
is  had  by  the  arbitrament  of  war  and  not  by  an  actio  ex  stipu-

§93.     Comp.   §§  119,  179;  §  1,  tit.   I.  268).     The  Latin  spondeo,  sponsio,

afd. ;    Th.  iii,  15,  §  1,  from  which  were  said  to  be  derived  from  the  Greek

the  Greek  words,  wanting  as  usual  o-vzv'Sca,  tr-m^ai,  which  speaks  for  their

in  the  MS.,  are  supplied.  original  religious  significance.

1  Cp.  Fest.  v.  Spondere  (Bruns,  p.  §  94.     Comp.  Liv.  ix,  §§  5,  41.

212

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVPJS  CIVILIS     [HI,  §§  95,  96.

95  sed  iure  belli  res  uindicatur.         Illud  dubitari  potest,  si  quis

96       Sunt  et  aliae  obligationes  —   —  — .

— —  —  iureiurando  homines  obligantur,

95  lain.         It  may  be  doubted  whether,  if  a  man  [ivere  interro-
gated   promittis  ?  and  were,  to  answer  o/tofayu,    there   would
\be  any  valid  obligation."]

96  There  are  other  verbal  obligations  [that  may  be  contracted
'without   any   antecedent   interrogatory,  as  when  a  woman —
'whether  simply  affianced  and  addressing  the  man  she  is  to
'marry,  or  already  married  and  addressing  her  husband — con-
'stitutes  a  dowry  by  dotis  dictio.     She  may  include  in  it  either
'moveables  or  immoveables.     And  it  is  not  only  the  woman  her-
self that  may  be  thus  laid  under  obligation  ;  so  may  her  father  ;

[and  any  debtor  of  hers  may  also,  by  dotis  dictio  addressed  to
[her  future  husband,  give  the  money  he  owes  her  the  character  of
[dowry.  But  these  are  the  only  three  persons  that,  without
[any  antecedent  interrogatory,  can  lawfully  be  bound  by  dotis
[dictio.  Any  other  person  promising  a  dowry  for  a  woman  can
[become  liable  only  according  to  the  provisions  of  the  common
[law  ;  i.e.  he  must  answer  to  a  question,  and  let  his  promissio
9Qa[follow  a  stipulatio.  There  is  another  case  in  which  a  verbal

§§  95,  96.  Only  a  few  words  are  legible
on  p.  153.

§  95.  K.  u.  S.,  relying  probably  on  fr.  1,
§§  2,  6,  D.  de  uerb.  obi.  (xlv,  1),  and
Th.  iii,  15,  §  1,  think  the  par.  may
have  run  either — Illud  dubitari  po-
test, si  quis  intcrroganti '  dare  spon-
des?'  respondent  'promitto'  uel
'  dabo,'  an  recte obligetitr,  or — si  quis
interroganti  'promittis  ?  '  respondeat
'QpoXoyia,  an  recte  obligetur.

§  96.  Gai.  seems  in  this  and  the  next
par.  to  have  passed  to  the  descrip-
tion of  some  other  verbal  contracts
than  those  created  by  question  and
answer  ;  and,  from  one  or  two  words
distinguishable  on  p.  153,  it  would
appear  that  he  alluded  in  the  first
place  to  dotis  dictio.  Regarding  this
contract,  which  had  become  obsolete
before  the  time  of  Justinian,  we
have  the  following  in  the  Epit.  ii,
9,  §  3:  —  'Sunt  et  aliae  obligationes
quae  nulla  praecedente  interrogatioiie
contrahi  possunt,  id  est  ut  si  mulier,
siue  sponso  uxor  futura  siue  iam
marito,  dotem  dicat.  Quod  tarn  de
mobilibus  rebus  quam  de  fundis  fieri

potest.  Et  non  solum  in  hac  obliga-
tione  ipsa  mulier  obligatur,  sed  et
pater  eius  et  debitor  ipsius  mulier  Is,
si  pecuniam  quam  illi  debebat  sponso
creditricis  ipse  debitor  in  dotem  dix-
erit.  Hae  tantum  tres  personae
nulla  interroga.tione  praecedente  pos-
sunt dictione  dotis  legitime  obligari.
Aliae  uero  personae  si  pro  muliere
dotem.  uiro  promiserint,  commit ni
iure  obligari  debent,  id  est  ut  et  in-
terrogata  respondeant  et  stipulata
jjromittant.'  Comp.  Ter.  Andr.  v,
4,  vv.  48,  49,  and  thereon  Donat. ;
Vlp.  vi,  §§  1,  2;  Vlp.  in  fr.  19,  §  2,
D.  de  aedil.  ed.  (xxi,  1);  Fr.  Vat.
§§  99,  100  ;  1.  4,  Th.  C.  de  dot.  (iii,
13) ;  1.  6,  C.  de  dotis  prom,  (v,  2).
§  95a.  In  the  first  and  undecipherable
part  of  this  par.,  Gai.  seems  to  have
referred  to  tne  iurata  promissio  ope-
rarum  liberti,  and  in  the  second  to
have  expressed  the  opinion  that,  as
regards  citizens  at  least,  that  was
the  only  undertaking  that  was  obli-
gatory simply  because  fortified  with
an  oath.  Says  the  Epit.  ii,  9,  §  4  :
—  'Item  et  alio  casu,  uno  loquente  et

Ill,  §§  96-98.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  21

o

utique  cum  quaeritur  de  iure  Eomanorum.  nam  apud  pere-
grinos  quid  iuris  sit,  singularurn  ciuitatiurn  iura  requirentes
aliud  intellegere  poterimus.1

97  Si  id  quod  dari  stipulamur  tale  sit  ut  dari  non  possit,
inutilis  est  stipulatio,  uelut  si  quis  hominem  liberum  quern
seruum  esse  credebat,  aut  mortuum  quern  uiuum  esse  credebat,
aut  locum  sacrum  uel  religiosum  quern  putabat  humani  iuris

97«esse,  dari  stipuletur.          [Item  si  quis  rem  quae  in  rerum
[natura  esse  non  potest,  uelut  hippocentaurum,  stipuletur ,]  aeque

98  inutilis   est  stipulatio.         Item  si   quis   sub   ea   condicione
stipuletur  quae  existere  non  potest,  ueluti  '  si  digito  caelum
tetigerit,'  inutilis  est  stipulatio.     sed  legatum  sub  inpossibili

[obligation  is  contracted  by  the  promise  of  one  of  the  parties  as
[sole  speaker,  and  not  in  answer  to  a  question,  namely  when  a,
\frecdman  gives  his  oath  to  his  patron  that  he  will  make  him
[some  present  or  perform,  for  him  certain  duties  or  services, — an
[obligation,  however,  that  derives  its  efficacy  not  so  much  from  the
[formality  of  the  ivords  used  as  from  the  sanctity  of  the  oath
[that  accompanies  them.  But  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  an
[oath  be  obligatory  in  any  other  case],  at  least  so  far  as  the  law
of  Rome  is  concerned.  As  regards  peregrins,  if  we  were  to
look  into  the  laws  of  their  particular  states,  we  might  possibly
find  a  different  rule  prevailing.

97  If  what  we  have  stipulated  shall  be  given  to  us  be  such  that
it  cannot  be  given,  the  stipulation  is  useless ;  as  when  one
stipulates  for  a  freeman  whom  he  believes  to  be  a  slave,  or
for  a  slave  deceased  whom  he  believes  to  be  alive,  or  for
ground  sacred  or  religious  which  he  believes  to  be  of  human

97aright.         If  one  stipulate  for  something  that  can  have  no  exist-
ence, such  as  a  hippocentaur,  the  stipulation  is  equally  useless.

98  So  is  one  subject  to  a  condition  that  can  never  be  fulfilled,  as
'if  he  touch  the  sky  with  his  finger.'     The  leaders  of  our

sine,   interrogatione  alii  promittente,  the  par.  ;    possibly  in  aliis  ualere.

contrahitur  obligatio,  id  est  si  liberties  Comp.  §120.

patrono  aut  donum  aut  munus  aut  §§  97-109.    Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  INVTILIBVS

operas  se  daturum  esse  iurauit:  in  STIPVLATIONIBVS^,^}.  A  vacant

qua  re  supradicti  liberti  non   tarn  line  before  §  97.

uerborum    sole-imitate    quam    iuris-  §97.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  1,  §  9,  D.  de  0.

iurandi    religione   retinentur.      Sed  et  A.  (xliv,  7);  §§  1,  2,  tit.  I.  afd.

nulla  altera  persona  hoc  online  obli-  §  97a.     The  emendation,   suggested  by

c/ari potest.'     Comp.  §83;  Paul,  ii,  L.  and  approved  by  most  eds.,  is

32;  tit.  D.  deoper.  libertor.  (xxxviii,  made  on  the  authority  of  §  1,  tit.  I.

1);  tit.  C.  de  op.  lib.  (vi,  3).  afd.

1  Stud,  thinks  there  are  traces  of  §  98.     Comp.  §  11,  tit.  I.  afd.;  §  10,  I.
a  few  additional  letters  at  the  end  of  de  hered.  inst.  (ii,  14).

214  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [III,  §§  98-100.

condicione  relictum  nostri  praeceptores  !  proinde  deberi  pu-
tant  ac  si  sine  condicione  relictum  esset;  diuersae  scholae
auctores  '  non  minus  legatum  inutile  existimant  quam  stipu-
lationem :  et  sane  uix  idonea  diuersitatis  ratio  reddi  potest.
99  Praeterea  inutilis  est  stipulatio  si  quis,  ignorans  rem  suam
esse,  dari  sibi  earn  stipuletur :  quippe  quod  alicuius  est,  id  ei
100  dari  non  potest.  Denique  inutilis  est  talis  stipulatio,  si
quis  ita  dari  stipuletur :  POST  MORTEM  MEAM  DARI  SPONDES  ?
uel  ita:  [POST  MORTEM  TV  AM  DARI  SPONDES?  ualet  aulem  si
[quis  ita  dari  stipuletur:  CVM  MORIAR,  DARI  SPONDES?  uel  ita:]
CVM  MORIERIS  DARI  SPONDES  ?  id  est  ut  in  nouissimum  uitae
tempus  stipulatoris  aut  promissoris  obligatio  conferatur :  nam
inelegans  esse  uisum  est  ab  heredis  persona  incipere  obliga-
tionem.  rursus  ita  stipulari  non  possumus :  PRIDIE  QVAM

MORIAR,  aut    PRIDIE   QVAM   MORIERIS,  DARI   SPONDES  ?   quia  11011

potest  aliter  intellegi  '  pridie  quani  aliquis  morietur '  quam  si
mors  secuta  sit;  rursus  morte  secuta  in  praeteritum  redduci-

scliool  hold  that  a  legacy  bequeathed  under  an  impossible
condition  is  as  much  due  as  if  it  had  been  left  unconditionally  ;
those  of  the  other  school  think  the  legacy  quite  as  much  a
nullity  as  the  stipulation ;  and  certainly  it  is  difficult  to
99  justify  the  distinction.  Further,  that  stipulation  is  null
in  which  a  man  stipulates  that  something  shall  be  given
him,  not  knowing  that  it  is  already  his  ;  for  what  already
100  belongs  to  him  cannot  be  given  to  him  in  property.  Finally,
a  stipulation  is  void  that  is  conceived  thus  :  '  Do  you  engage
that  such  a  thing  shall  be  given  me  after  my  death  ? '  or  '  after
your  death  T  It  is  valid,  however,  if  in  such  words  as :  '  Do  you
engage  to  give  when  I  am  dying  ? '  or  '  when  you  are  dying  ? '
i.e.  if  the  obligation  be  made  coincident  with  the  last  breath
of  the  stipulant  or  promiser ;  for  it  has  been  reckoned  incon-
sistent with  principle  that  an  obligation  should  begin  in  the
person  of  the  heir.  Again,  \ve  cannot  stipulate  thus  :  '  Do  you
engage  that  it  shall  be  given  the  day  before  I  die  ?'  or  '  the
day  before  you  die  ?'  for  '  the  day  before '  can  be  known  only
after  death  ;  but  after  death  the  stipulation  refers  to  the  past,

1  See  i,  196,  note  1.  been  approved  by  all  subsequent

§  99.  Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  1,  §  10,  D.  de  eds.  His  principal  authorities  for

0.  et  A.  (xliv,  7)  ;   iv,  4  ;  §§  2,  22,  it  are  Gai.  ii,  232  ;  fr.  45,  §§  1,  3,

tit.  I.  afd.  fr.  121,  §  2,  D.  de  uerb.  obi.  (xlv,  i);

§  100.  Comp.  §§  13,  15,  tit.  I.  afd.  The  Fr.  Vat.  §  98  ;  1.  15,  §  1,  C.  de  con-

eniendation  here  was  suggested  by  trail,  et  commit,  slip,  (viii,  38);  Th.

Hu.  in  his  Studien,  p.  279,  and  has  iii,  19,  §  14.

Ill,  §§  100-103.]         COMMENTAKII  QVATTVOR.

215

tur  stipulatio  et  quodammodo   tails  est :    HEREDI  MEO   DAEI

101  SPONDES  ?  quae  sane  inu tills  est.         Quaecumque  de  morte
diximus,  eadem  et  de  capitls  deminutione  dicta  intellegemus.

102  Adhuc  inutilis  est  stipulatio  si  quis  ad  id  quod  interro-
gatus  erit  non   respondent,  ueluti  si  sestertia  x  a  te  dari
stipuler  et  tu  sestertia  v  promittas,  aut  si  ego  pure  stipuler,

103  tu  sub  condicione  promittas.         Praeterea  inutilis  est  stipu-
latio si  ei  dari  stipulemur   cuius  iuri  subiecti  non  sumus :
unde  illud  quaesitum  est,  si  quis  sibi  et  ei  cuius  iuri  subiectus
non  est  dari  stipuletur,  in  quantum  ualeat  stipulatio :   nostri
praeceptores  *  putant  in  uniuersum  ualere,  et  proinde  ei  soli
qui  stipulatus  sit  solidum  deberi,  atque  si  extranei  nomen  non

and  is  equivalent  to  this  :  '  Do  you  engage  that  it  shall  be

101  given  to  my  heir  ? '  which  undoubtedly  is  invalid.         These
observations  about  death  apply  equally  to  capitis  deminutio.

102  A  stipulation  is  likewise  void  if  the  answer  do  not  corre-
spond to  the  question  ;  for  instance,  if,  when  I  stipulate  for
ten  sestertia,  you  promise  five,  or  if,  when  I  stipulate  purely,

103  you  promise  conditionally.         Again,  a  stipulation  is  null  in
which  we  stipulate  that  a  thing  shall  be  given  to  a  person  to
whose  right  we  are  not  subject.     Hence  the  question,— sup-
pose a  man  stipulates  for  something  to  be  given  to  himself
and  another  person  to  whom  he  is  not  subject,  how  far  is  the
stipulation  valid  ?     Our  authorities  think  that  it  is  good  to
the  full,  and  that  the  debt  is  due  in  solidum  to  the  stipulant,

§  101.    Comp.  §  153.

§  102.  Comp.  Epit.  ii,  9,  §§  8-10;  §  5,
tit.  I.  afd.  The  MS.  reads — ettunce-
stertiail .  miliapmittas,  which  is  gene-
rally rendered  as  above,  the  n  after
tu  and  the  milia  being  deleted  as
accidental  interpolations.

Thus  rendered,  however,  the  doc-
trine— supported  by  the  Epit.  and
Just.  lust. — is  in  disaccord  with  the
statements  of  Vlp.  in  fr.  1,  §  4,  and
Paul,  in  ir.  83,  §  3,  D.  de  uerb.  obi.
(xlv,  1),  where  it  is  laid  down  that
'  a  promise  for  five  in  response  to  a
stipulation  for  ten  was  effectual  for
the  smaller  sum.

Hu.  (Beitraege,  p.  62)  maintains
that  if  the  n  and  the  milia  of  the
MS.  be  retained,  the  sestertia,  changed
into  sestertium,  and  the  passage  read
et  tu  nummum  sestertium  v  milia
promittas,  the  contrariety  between
Gai.  on  the  one  hand,  and  Paul,  and

Vlp.  on  the  other,  will  disappear.
For  then,  he  argues,  there  would  be  a
difference  not  as  to  the  quantity  but
as  to  the  thing  the  parties  were  bar-
gaining about ;  a  sestertium,  though
of  the  value  of  a  thousand  nummi
sestertii,  being  not  money  at  all,  but
a  certain  weight  (2J  pounds)  of  silver.

Had  the  contrariety  between  the
x  and  the  v  of  the  text  not  existed,
there  might  have  been  more  to  say
for  this  ingenious  suggestion.  But
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  ordi-
nary language  sestertia  decem  and
nummum  sestertium  decem  milia
were  synonymous ;  and  whether  the
reading  of  Hu.  or  that  given  above
be  adopted,  the  statement  of  Gai.  is
still  the  same.  As  to  how  it  may  be
reconciled  with  those  of  Paul,  and
Vlp.,  see  note  to  §  5,  tit.  I.  afd.
103.  Comp.  §  4,  tit.  1.  afd.

1  See  i,  196,  note  1.

216  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [HI,  §§  103-107.

adiecisset :  seel  diuersae  scliolae  auctores  l  climidium  ei  debere
existimant,  pro  altera  uero  parte  inutilem  esse  stipulationem.

Alia  causa    est dari    spondes  -

solidum  deberi,  et    me  — -  —  etiam   Titio  —  —

104  —  — ?         (Item}  inutilis  est  stipulatio  si  ab  eo  stipuler  qui
iuri  meo  subiectus  est,  item  si  is  a  me  stipuletur.    [sed]  seruus
quidem,  et  qui  in  mancipio  est,  et  (Jiliafamilias),  et  quac  in
manu  est,  non  solum  ipsi  cuius  iuri  subiecti  subiectaeue  sunt

105  obligari   non  possunt,  sed  ne   alii  quidein   ulli.         Mutuni
neque  stipulari  neque  promittere  posse  palam  est.    idem  etiam
in  surdo  receptum  est ;  quia  et  is  qui  stipulatur  uerba  pro-
inittentis,  et  qui  promittit  uerba  stipulantis  exauclire  debet.

106  Furiosus  imllum  negotium  gerere  potest,  quia  non  intellegit

107  quid  agat.         Pupillus  omne  negotium  recte  gerit,  ut  tamen,1

just  as  if  the  stranger's  name  had  not  been  added ;  those  of
the  other  school  hold  that  one  half  is  due  to  the  stipulant,  but
the  stipulation  void  as  to  the  other  half.  The  case  is  different
where  you  engage  to  give  ['  to  me  or  Titius ; '  for  then]  the
whole  is  due  to  me,  [and  I  alone  can  sue  upon  the  stipulation,
[although  ~by  payment]  to  Titius  [you  will  lie  effectually  dis-

104  [charged].         Further,  a  stipulation  is  useless  in  which  I  take
a  promise  from  one  who  is  subject  to  my  right,  or  he  takes
a  promise  from  me ;  indeed,  slaves,  persons  in  mancipio,  filiac-
familias,  and  women  in  manu,  are  not  only  incapable  of  be-
coming obliged  to  him  to  whose  right  they  are  subject,  but

105  cannot  be  obliged  to  any  other  person.         That  mutes  can
neither  stipulate  nor  promise  is  quite  plain.     The  same  is  the
rule  as  regards  a  person  who  is  deaf ;  for  the  stipulant  must
hear  the  words  of  the  promiser,  and  the  promiser  those  of  the

106  stipulant.         A  madman  cannot  be  a  party  to  any  business-
matter,  because  he  does  not  understand  what  he  is  about.

107  But  all  sorts  of  business  affairs  may  be  legally  transacted  by  a

2  Three  lines  and  a,  half  to  a  great  £>ossc,  quamquam  etiam  Titio   so/-

extent illegible.     Hu.  conjectures —  uendo  liber ar is.

Alia  causa  est,  si  ueluti  '  seruo  ud  §104.     Comp.    §   6,    tit.   I.    afd.,   from
Jiliofamilias  meo  et  miki  dari  spon-  which  it  will  be  seen  that  a  JHius-

des?'  stipulatus  sim.     tune  enim  con-  familias  might.

stat  solidum  deberi,  et  me  solidum  a  §  105.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  1,  §§  14,  15,  D.
promissore petere  posse :  quod  etiam  de  0.  et  A.  (xliv,  7) ;  §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.

n't  cum  tantum  uelut  '  Jiliofamilias  '  §  106.     §  8,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Gai.  in
stipulor.      K.  u.    S.    suggest— Alia  fr.  1,  §  12,  D.  de  0.  et  A.  (xliv,  7).

causa    est,    si    ita    stipulatus  sim :  §107.     §  9,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  ii,  83  ;
' mlhi  aut  Titio  dari  spondes?'  quo  iii,  §§  119,  176.

casu  constat  mild  solidum  deberi,  fit  J  Hu.,     following    L.,   reads    ita

nie   solum  ex  ea  stipulations  ayere  tamcn  ut  tutor.

Ill,  §§  107-112.]          COMMENTAKII  QVATTVOK.  217

sicubi  tutoris  auctoritas  necessaria  sit,  adhibeatur,  ueluti  si
ipse  obligetur;  nam  aliuin  sibi  obligare  etiam  sine  tutoris

108  auctoritate  potest.         Idem  iuris  est  in  feminis  quae  in  tutela

109  sunt.        Seel  quod  diximus  de  pupillo,  utique  de  eo  uerum  est
qui  iam  aliquem  intellectura  habet ;  nam  infans  et  qui  infanti
proximus  est  non  multum  afurioso  differt,  quia  huius  aetatis
pupilli  nullum  intellectum  habent :  sed  in  his  pupillis  propter
utilitatem  benignior  iuris  interpretatio  facta  est.

110  Possumus   tameu  ad  id  quod  stipulamur  alium  adhibere
qui   idem  stipuletur,  quern  uulgo   adstipulatorem   uocamus.

111  Huic  proiucle  actio  conpetit  proindeque  ei  recte  soluitur  ac
nobis;  sed  quiclquid  consecutus  erit   mandati   iudicio  nobis

112  restituere  cogetur.         Ceterum  potest  etiam  aliis  uerbis  uti
adstipulator   quam  quibus  nos  usi  sumus  :    itaque  si  uerbi
gratia  ego  ita  stipulatus  sim :  DAEI  SPONDES  ?  ille  sic  adsti-
pulari  potest :  IDEM  FIDE  TVA  PEOMITTIS  ?  uel  IDEM  FIDEIVBES  ?

pupil,  provided  that,  where  tutorial  authorization  is  required,
his  tutor  has  intervened,  as  when  he  is  undertaking  an  obli-
gation ;  for  he  may  take  another  person  bound  to  him  without

1 08  his  tutor's  auctoritas.         The  law  is  the  same  in  the  case  of

109  women  in  tutelage.         But  what  has  been  said  about  a  pupil
applies  only  to  one  who  has  some  intelligence ;  for  an  infant,
or  a  child  approximating  to  infancy,  is  little  different  from  a
lunatic,   pupils   of  such  age  having  no  understanding ;  yet
even  in  their  case,  for  utility's  sake,  the  law  is  favourably
interpreted.

110  It  is  in  our  power,  in  entering  into  a  stipulation,  to  con-
join with  us  a  third  party,  who  stipulates  in  the  same  terms
as   we  have   done;  such    a   person  is   commonly  called   an

111  adstipulator.         Action  is  competent  to  him  on  the  stipula-
tion, and  payment  of  what  is  stipulated  for  may  as  effectually
be  made  to  him  as  to  us ;  but  whatever  he  has  recovered  he
may  be  compelled  to  make  over  to  us  by  means  of  an  actio

112  mandati.         The  adstipulator  need  not  use  the  very  same
words  that  we  have  used ;  for  example,  if  a  stipulant  have
employed  the  formula  spondes  ?  he  may  \\sefide  tua promittis  ?

§  108.     Comp.  i,  192  ;  iii,  §§  119,  176.  is  explained  in  §  117.     They  have

§  109.     §  10,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Gai.  in  no  counterpart  in  the  Inst. ,   Just.

fr.  1,  §  13,  D.  de  0.  et  A.  (xliv,  7).  having  rendered   the   device  unne-

A  vacant  line  intervenes  in  the  MS.  cessary  by  tit.   C.  ut  act.  ab  fiere-

between  this  and  the  next  par.  dib.   et  contra  hered.  incipiant  (iv,

§§  110-114.     These  pars,   deal  with  ad-  11).

stipulatio,    whose  ordinary  purpose      §  111.     Comp.  §§  117,  155,  215.

218  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [HI,  §§  113, 114.

113  nel  contra.         Item    minus J    adstipulari   potest,   [plus   non
potest:]2  itaque  si  ego  sestertia  x  stipulatus  sum,  ille  sestertia
v  stipulari  potest ;  contra  uero  plus  non  potest.     item  si  ego
pure   stipulatus   sim,   ille    sub    condicione   stipulari   potest;
contra  uero  non  potest.     non  solum  autem  in  quantitate  sed
etiam  in  tempore  minus  et  plus  intellegitur ;  plus  est  enim

114  statim  aliquid  dare,  minus  est  post  tempus  dare.3         In  hoc
auteni  hire  quaedam  singular!  iure  obseruantur :  nam  adsti-
pulatoris  heres  non  habet  actionem.1    item  seruus  adstipulando
nihil  agit,  quamuis*  ex  ceteris  omnibus  causis  stipulatione
domino  adquirat.3     idem  de  eo  qui  in  mancipio  est  magis
placuit ;  nam  et  is  serui  loco  est :  is  autem  qui  in  potestate
patris  est  agit  aliquid,  sed  parenti  non  adquirit,  quamus  ex
omnibus  ceteris   causis   stipulando   ei   adquirat;    ac  ne  ipsi
quidern  aliter  actio  conpetit  quam  si  sine  capitis  deminutione
exierit  de  potestate  parentis,4  ueluti  morte  eius  aut  quod  ipse

113  or  fideiules  ?  and  vice   versa.         He  may  stipulate  for  less,
but  not  for  more.     Therefore  if  I   have  stipulated  for  ten
sestertia,  he  may  limit  his  stipulation  to  five ;  but  he  cannot
go  beyond  the  ten.     So,  if  I  have  stipulated  purely,  he  may
stipulate  conditionally ;  but  not  contrariwise.     And  more  or
less  may  depend  upon  time  as  well  as  quantity :  to  give  a
thing  at  once  is  to  give  more ;  to  give  it  after  a  while  is  to

114  give  less.         In  this  branch  of  the  law  there  are  some  pecu-
liarities.    Thus,  an  adstipulator's  heir  cannot  sue  upon  the
contract.     Adstipulation  by  a  slave  is  of  no  avail,  although
in  all  other  cases  of  stipulation  he  thereby  acquires  for  his
owner.     The  same  rule  holds  in  regard  to  a  person  in  man-
cipio ;  for  he  is  in  the  position  of  a  slave.     A  son,  however,
who  is  in  the  power  of  his  father,  may  effectually  adstipulate,
yet  does  not  thereby  acquire  anything  for  his  father,  although
he  does  so  in  every  other  case  of  stipulation ;  and  no  action
on  the  adstipulation  is  competent  to  such  a  filiusfamilias
until  he  has  passed  out  of  his  parent's  potestas  without  capitis
dcminutio,  as,  for  instance,  by  his  father's  death  or  his  own

§  113.     a  The   MS.    has    mrginus.     The  3  Comp.    iv,   53  ;  §  5,  tit.    I.    de

copyist    has     introduced    into    the  fdeiuss.  (iii,  20).
middle  of  the  word  the   letters  rg      §  114.     a  Comp.  iv,  4ft

=  regula,    which    he    had    found  2  So  G.  and  K.  u.  S. ;  the  MS.  has

noted  on  the  margin  of  the  arche-  quid.

type.      See  the  same  error  in  i,  53,  3  Comp.  ii,  87  ;   iii,  163  ;  §  1,   I.

and  iii,  126.  de  stip.  seru.  (iii,  17).

2  These  words  seem  to  be  a  gloss.  4  Comp.  i,  §§  127,  130.

Ill,  §§114-117.]         COMMENTAEII  QVATTVOR.  219

fiamen  Dialis  inauguratus  est.     eadem  de  filiafamilias  et  quae
in  manu  est  dicta  intellegemus.

115  Pro  eo  quoque  qui  promittit  solent  alii  obligari,  quorum
alios  spousores,  alios  fidepromissores,  alios  fideiussores  appel-

116  lamus.          Sponsor  ita  interrogatur :    IDEM   DAW   SPONDES  ?
fidepromissor  \ita\ :  IDEM  FIDEPROMITTIS  ?  fideiussor  ita :  IDEM
FIDE   TVA   ESSE  IVBES  ?    uidebimus l    [de   his] 2  autem 3  quo
nomine  possiut  proprie  appellari  qui  ita  interrogantur :  IDEM

117  DABIS?  IDEM  PKOMITTIS  ?  IDEM  FACIES  ?         Sponsores  quidem
et  fidepromissores  et  fideiussores  saepe  solemus  accipere  dum
curamus  ut  diligentius  nobis  cautum  sit ;  adstipulatorem  uero
fere  tune  solum  adhibemus  cum   ita  stipulamur  ut  aliquid
post  mortem  nostram  detur.1     \ita\ 2  stipulaudo  nihil  agimus  ;3
adhibettir  autem   adstipulator    ut  is   post   mortem   nostram

inauguration  as  a  flamen  of  Jupiter.  And  the  same  rules  are
to  be  understood  as  applying  to  &  JHiafamilias  and  a  woman
in  manu.

115  For  him  who  promises  other  persons  frequently  become
bound,  of  whom  some  are  called  sponsors,  others  fidepromis-

116  sors,  others  fidejussors.         A  sponsor  is  interrogated  thus:
'  Do   you   religiously   engage  that  the  same  thing  shall  be
given  ? '    a    fidepromissor :  '  Do   you   promise  the    same  on
your  plighted  faith  ? '  a  fidejussor  :  '  Do  you  authorize  the
same  thing  on  your  plighted  faith  ? '     How  those  are  called
who  are  interrogated  thus  :  '  Will  you  give  the  same  ? '    'Do
you  promise  the  same  ? '     '  Will  you  do  the  same  ? '  we  shall

117  see  bye  and  bye.         We  often  take  sponsors,  fidepromissors,
or  fidejussors  when  we  are  anxious  to  have  an  undertaking  to
us  better  secured  ;  but  we  hardly  ever  associate  with  us  an
adstipulator  except  when  we  are  stipulating  for  something  to
be  given  after  our  death.     So  stipulating  our  act  is  useless  ;
therefore  we  conjoin,  with  us  an  adstipulator  that  he  may  sue

§§  115-127.     Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  FIDEIVS-  2  Apparently  a  gloss.

SORIBVS  (iii,  20).  3  Hu.  has  an  aliquo.
§  115.     A  vacant  line  before   this   par.       §  117.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  1,  §  8,  D.  de

Comp.  Paul,  i,  9,  §  5  ;  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  0.  et  A.  (xliv,  7)  ;  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

§  116.     Comp.  §  92,  note  ;  Epit.   ii,   9,  1  Comp.  §§  110-114.

§  2  ;  §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.  2  Instead   of  ita   Hu.    introduces

1  Gai.  does  not  recur  to  the  sub-  the   words   quia  enim   ut   ita  nobls

ject ;  but  such  persons  went  by  the  detur.

generic  name  of  adpromissores.  3  Comp.  §  100.

220  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [HI,  §§  117-119.

agat :  qui  si  quid  fuerit  consecutus,  de  (restituendo)  eo  mandati
iudicio  heredi  meo  tenetur.4

118  Sponsoris  uero  et  fideproinissoris  similis  condicio  est,  fide-

119  iussoris  ualde  dissimilis.         Nam  illi  quidem  nullis  obliga-
tionibus  accedere  possunt  nisi  uerborum,  quamuis  interdum.
ipse  qui  promiserit  non  fuerit  obligatus,  uelut  si  (mulier")  aut
pupillus  sine  tutoris  auctoritate,1  aut  quilibet  post  mortem
suam,2   dari   promiserit;  (at  illud   quaeritur,   si   seruus   aut
peregrinus  spoponderit,3  an  pro  eo  sponsor  aut  fidepromissor

119aobligetur.)  Fideiussor  uero  omnibus  obligationibus,  id  est
sine  re  sine  uerbis  sine  litteris  sine  consensu  contractae
fuerint  obligationes,  adici  potest.  ac  ne  illud  quidem  interest
utrum  ciuilis  an  naturalis  obligatio  l  sit  cui  adiciatur ;  adeo

after  our  death,  who  is  bound  by  an  actio  mandati  to  make
over  to  our  heir  whatever  he  may  have  recovered.

118  The  positions  of  sponsor  and  fidepromissor  are  much  the

119  same,  but  that  of  a  fidejussor  is  materially  different.         The
former  cannot  become  accessory  to  any  but  a  verbal  obli-
gation.    [And  they  are  bound  even]  although,  as  sometimes
happens,  the  original  promiser  is  not, — a  woman,  for  instance,
or   a   pupil,   promising   without    tutorial  auctoritas,  or   any
person  whatever  promising  that  something  shall   be  given
after  his  death.     But  if  a  slave  or  a  peregrin  have  promised
by  the  formula  spondeo,  it  is  questionable  whether  a  sponsor

119«or  fidepromissor  can  become  bound  for  him.  A  fidejussor,
on  the  other  hand,  may  be  superadded  to  an  obligation  of  any
sort,  whether  contracted  by  thing  done,  by  spoken  words,  by
writing,  or  by  consent.  And  it  is  immaterial  whether  the
obligation  to  which  he  accedes  be  civil  or  natural ;  he  may

4  Comp.  §§  215,  216.  fr.   95,    §    4,  D.    de  solut.  xlvi,  3),

§  119.     Comp.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  and  held  consequently  to  be  a  suffi-

1  Comp.  §§  107,  103.  cient    foundation  for    an   accessory

2  Comp.  §§  100,  117.  undertaking     by     a    fideiussor   (as

3  The  sponsio  of  a  peregrin  or  a  above),    or   for  a   real   security  (fr.
slave  was  an   absolute   nullity,   en-  5,  pr.    D.   de  pign.    xx,   1)  ;    as   a
gagement  in  that  form  being  com-  sufficient  answer   to  a  condictio  in-
petent  only  to  citizens,  §  93.  debiti  (fr.  16,  §  4,  D.  de  fidej.  xlvi,

§  11 9a.     Comp.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  1)  ;  as  pleadable  in  compensation  (fr.

1  A  civil  obligation  was  enforcible  6,  D.  de  comp.  xvi,   2)  ;  as  a  good

directly  by  action  at  the   instance  basis  for  a  constitutum  (fr.  1,  §  7,  D.

of  the   creditor    in    it ;    a   natural  de  pec.  const,  xiii,  5),  or  a  novation

obligation  was  one  that,   by  reason  (fr.  1,  §  1,  D.  de  nou.  xlvi.  2)  ;  and

of  absence  of  formalities,  defect  in  as  in  many  cases  affording  an  effec-

the    capacity   of  the  individual,  or  tual  equitable  exception  to  an  action

other  ciuilis  ratio,  was  not   enforc-  by  the  other  party  (fr.  7,  §  7,  D.  de

ible    by  action,    though  recognised  pact,  ii,  14).
as  a  uinculum  aequitatis  (Papin.  in

Ill,  §§  119-121.]         COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

901

£l  4J  JL.

quidem  ut  pro  seruo  quoque  obligetur,  siue  extraneus  sit  qui
a  seruo  fideiussorem  accipiat,  siue  ipse  dominus  in  id  quod  sibi
120  debeatur.2  Praeterea  sponsoris  et  fidepromissoris  heres
non  tenetur,  nisi  si  de  peregrino  fidepromissore  quaeramus  et
alio  iure  ciuitas  eius  utatur ; T  fideiussoris  autem  etiam  heres
tenetur.2  Item  sponsor  et  fidepromissor  lege  Furia  biennio
liberantur,  et  quotquot  erunt  numero  eo  tempore  quo  pecunia
peti  potest,  in  tot  partes  diducitur  inter  eos  obligatio,  et
singuli  uiriles  partes  dare  iubentur ; '  fideiussores  uero  2  per-

121

become  bound  even  for  a  slave,  whether  it  be  a  stranger  that
is  taking  him  as  fidejussor,  or  the  owner  of  the  slave  in  re-

120  spect  of  what  the  latter  owes  him.         Besides,  the  heir  of  a
sponsor  or  fidepromissor  is  not  bound,  unless  in  the  case  of  a
peregrin  fidepromissor  in  whose  country  a  different  rule  is
followed;  but  a  fidejussor's  heir  is  as  much  bound  as  himself.

121  Further,  sponsors  and  fidepromissors  are  freed  from  liability
after  two  years,  in  terras  of  the  Furian  law ;  and,  whatever
be  their  number  when  the  debt  is  sued  for,  the  obligation  is
divided  into  just  so  many  parts,  and  each  has  to  pay  an
equal  share.     But  fidejussors  are  bound  for  ever,  and,  what-

2  Cornp.  Gai.  in  fr.  70,  §  3,  D.  de
fideiuss.  (xlvi,  1).
§  120.     Comp.  iv,  113.

1  Comp.  §  96.

2  Comp.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.

§  121.  The  L.  Furia  de  sponxu  (iv,  22)
is  assigned  by  Rudorff  (R.  RG.  i,
p.  51)  to  the  year  409  |  345  ;  by
Hu.  to  the  beginning  of  the  fifth
century  of  the  city  ;  by  Voigt  (lus
Nat.,  etc.,  iv,  p.  424)  to  536  |  218  ;
by  Brans  (Z.  f.  RG.  xii,  134)  to
the  second  half  of  the  sixth  cen-
tury ;  and  by  Appleton  (Etude  sur
les  sponsores,  etc.,  Rev.  de  Ligis-
Int.,  1876,  p.  558)  to  654  |  100  or
655  |  99.

Huschke's  reason  (Beitraeye,  p.
83)  for  assigning  it  so  early  a  date
is  that  both  it  and  the  L.  Publilia
(§  127)  authorized  a  legis  actio  per
manus  iniectionem  pro  indicate*  (iv,
22)  ;  and  therefore  they  must  have
been  earlier  than  the  L.  Valeria  of
413  341,  which  declared  that  every
manus  iniectio,  except  in  the  cases
of  iudicatum  and  depensum,  should
be  pura  (iv,  25).

It   now   appears,    however,    from

Studemund's  Apographum,  that  it
was  not  a  lex  Valeria  but  a  lex
Vallia  that  made  this  change,  and
of  its  authorship  and  precise  date
we  are  ignorant ;  all  we  know  (iv,
g§  24,  25)  is  that  it  was  subsequent
to  the  L.  Furia.

But  Brims  draws  attention  to  the
fact  that  in  an  inscription  edited  by
Mommsen  (Ephem.  Epigraph,  ii,
198),  and  which  he  attributes  to  the
first  half  of  the  sixth  century  of  the
city,  man.  iniectio  pro  iudicato  is
authorized  as  the  means  of  recover-
ing certain  penalties  thereby  im-
posed ;  whence  he  argues  that  the
L.  Vallia  must  have  been  later.

As  regards  the  L.  Furia  in  parti-
cular, Bruns  concludes  from  inter-
nal evidence  that  it  must  have  been
later  than  the  L.  C'incia,  which  dates
from  550  |  204.

1  So  Hu. ;  the  MS.  has  liocabcntur.
K.  u.  S.,  interpolating  in  before
uiriles,  make  it  obligantur, — a  read-
ing against  which  Hu.  protested  by
anticipation  in  his  Beitraegc,  p.
88.

-  Comp.  §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.

222  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVIL1S   [HI,  §§  121,  122.

petuo  tenentur,  et  quotquot  erunt  numero  singuli  in  solidum
obligantur :  itaque  liberum  est  creditori  a  quo  (uelit]  solidum
petere  :  sed  nunc  ex  epistula  diui  Hadriani  (conpellitwr)  creditor
a  singulis  qui  modo  soluendo  sint  partes  petere.  eo  igitur
distat  haec  epistula  a  lege  Furia,  quod  si  quis  ex  sponsoribus
aut  fidepromissoribus  soluendo  non  sit,  hoc  onus  ad  \_ceteros
[non  pertinet ;  sed  ex  Jideiussoribus  etsi  unus  tantum  soluendo

\1\a\_sit ,  ad  euni  onus] 3  ceterorum  quoque  pertinet.  Sed  cum
lex  Furia  tantum  in  Italia  locum  habeat,  euenit  ut  in  ceteris
prouinciis  sponsores  quoque  et  fidepromissores  proinde  ac
fideiussores  in  perpetuum  teneantur  et  singuli  in  solidum
obligentur,  nisi  ex  epistula  diui  Hadriani  hi  quoque  adiuuen-

]  22  tur  in  parte.  Praeterea  inter  sponsores  et  fidepromissores
lex  Apuleia  quandam  societatem  introduxit :  nam  si  quis
lioruin  plus  sua  portione  soluerit,  de  eo  quod  amplius  dederit
aduersus  ceteros  actiones  constituit.  quae  lex  ante  legem
Furiam  lata  est,  quo  tempore  in  solidum  obligabantur.  unde

ever  be  their  number,  are  liable  each  for  the  whole ;  so  that
it  is  free  to  the  creditor  to  sue  any  one  he  pleases  for  the
whole  amount.  Now  however,  by  a  letter  of  our  late  em-
peror Hadrian's,  a  creditor  is  compelled  to  limit  his  demand
against  each  of  them  who  is  solvent  to  a  proportionate  share
of  the  whole.  The  provision  in  this  letter  differs  from  that
of  the  Furian  law  to  this  extent, — that  if  any  of  several
sponsors  or  ndepromissors  be  insolvent,  the  burden  upon  the
others  is  not  thereby  increased,  whereas,  should  only  one  of
several  Jidcjussors  be  solvent,  he  has  to  bear  the  burden  of  those

12lathat  are  insolvent.  But  as  the  Furian  law  is  in  force  only
in  Italy,  it  follows  that  in  the  provinces  sponsors  and  fidepro-
missors,  in  the  same  way  as  fidejussors,  are  liable  for  ever,
and  each  for  the  whole ;  unless  it  be  held  that  these  last  also

122  have  partial  relief  under  the  letter  of  Hadrian.  Moreover,
the  Apuleian  law  introduced  a  kind  of  partnership  between
sponsors  and  fidepromissors  ;  for  if  any  one  of  them  had  paid
more  than  his  share,  it  allowed  him  action  against  the  others
for  the  excess.  But  this  law  was  enacted  before  the  Furian,
and  at  a  time  when  the  liability  was  in  solidum.  It  is
therefore  a  question  whether  the  boon  conferred  by  the

3  This  addition  is  Mommsen's  in  §  122.  Comp.  §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.     Rudorff

K.  u.  S.  ;  Hu.  reads — hoc  onus  [ad  and  Hu.  attribute  the  lex  Apuleia

ceteros  non  pertinet,  si  uero  ex  jideius-  to   364  |  390;  Voigt  to  524  j  230;

soribus],  ad  ceteros  quoque  pertinet.  and  Appleton  to  652  |  102.

Ill,  §§  122, 123.]         COMMEXTARII  QVATTVOR.  223

quaeritur  an  post  legem  Furiam  adhuc  legis  Apuleiae  bene-
ficium  supersit:  et  utique  extra  Italian.!  superest;  nam  lex
quidern  Furia  tan  turn  in  Italia  ualet,  Apuleia  uero  etiam  in
ceteris  proiiinciis :  sed  an  et  in  Italia 1  beneficium  legis
Apuleiae  supersit  ualde  quaeritur.  (Ad  fideiussores  autem
(lex]  Apuleia  non  pertinet :  itaque  si  creditor  ab  uno  totum
consecutus  fuerit,  huius  solius  detrimentum  erit,  scilicet  si  is
pro  quo  fideiussit  soluendo  non  sit:  (sed  ut  ex]  supra  dictis
apparet,  is  a  quo  creditor  totum  petit  poterit  ex  epistula  diui
123  Hadriani  desiderare  ut  pro  parte  in  se  detur  actio.  Prae-
terea  lege  Cicereia  cautum  est,  ut  is  qui  sponsores  aut  fide-
promissores  accipiat,  praedicat  palam  et  declaret  et  de  qua  re
satis  accipiat,  et  quot  sponsores  aut  fidepromissores  in  earn
obligationem  accepturus  sit;  et  nisi  praedixerit,  permittitur
sponsoribus  et  fidepromissoribus  iritra  diem  xxx  praeiudicium1
postulare,  quo  quaeratur  an  ex  ea  lege  praedictum  sit ;  et  si
iudicatum  fuerit  praedictnm  non  esse,  liberantur.  qua  lege

Apuleian  law  has  survived  the  Furian.  Certainly  it  sur-
vives out  of  Italy ;  for  while  the  Furian  law  applies  only  in
Italy,  the  Apuleian  extends  to  the  provinces  generally ;  but
whether  or  not  it  survives  in  Italy  is  extremely  doubtful.
The  enactment  does  not  apply,  however,  to  fidejussors  ;  conse-
quently, if  a  creditor  have  obtained  payment  of  the  whole
debt  from  one  of  several  fidejussors,  that  one,  if  the  party  for
whom  he  has  become  surety  be  insolvent,  has  to  bear  the  whole
loss.  But  then,  as  is  manifest  from  what  has  been  already
said,  a  surety  from  whom  a  creditor  seeks  payment  of  the
whole  debt  may  require  that  action  against  him  be  limited  to
123  his  share,  in  accordance  with  Hadrian's  letter.  Then  again
it  is  provided  by  the  Cicereian  law  that  any  one  accepting
sponsors  or  fidepromissors  shall  first  openly  state  and  declare
what  is  the  matter  in  respect  of  which  he  is  taking  security,
and  how  many  sponsors  or  fidepromissors  he  proposes  to
have  ;  if  he  fail  in  this,  the  sponsors  and  fidepromissors  may
at  any  time  within  thirty  days  demand  a  praejudiciary  in-
quiry as  to  whether  or  not  the  provisions  of  the  enactment
have  been  complied  with  ;  and  if  the  judgment  be  that  no
such  declaration  had  been  made,  they  are  discharged  of  lia-

1  The  MS.  has  set  an  etiam  alls.  this  law  appears  for  the  first  time  in

§123.     The  only  Cicereius  we  read  ot  was  Stud.  Apograph.

praetor  in  581  |  173.     The  name  of  1  Comp.  iv,  41.

224  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS  [III,  §§  123-125.

fideiussorum  mentio  nulla  fit :  sed  in  usu  est,  etiam  si  fidc-
iussores  accipiamus,  praedicere.

124  Sed  beneficium  legis  Corneliae  omnibus  commune  est:  qua
lege  idem  pro  eodem  apud  eundern  eodem  anno  uetatur  in
ampliorem  summam  obligari  creditae  pecuniae  quam  in  xx
milia ;  et  quarnuis  sponsor  uel  fidei  promissor l  in  ampliorem 2
pecuniam,  ueluti  si  sestertium  c  milium  [se  dbligauerit,  tamen
[duntaxat  xx  damnatur] ; 3  pecuniam  autem  creditam*  dicimus
non  solum  earn  quam  credendi  causa  damus,  sed  omnem  quam
turn  cum  contrahitur  obligatio  certum  est  debitum  iri,  id  est
[^?6«e]  sine  ulla  condicione  deducitur  in  obligationem ;  itaque
et  ea  pecunia  quam  in  diem  certum  dari  stipulamur  eodem
numero  est,  quia  certum  est  earn  debitum  iri,  licet  post  tern  pus
petatur.     appellatione  autem  pecuniae 5  omnes  res  in  ea  lege
significantur ;  itaque  si  uinum  uel  frumentum,  etiam  si  fundum

125  uel   hominem   stipulemur,  haec  lex   obseruanda   est.         Ex

bility.     In  this  enactment  no  mention  is  made  of  ficlejussors ;
but  it  is  the  practice  to  make  a  declaration  even  in  their  case.

124  The   relief  conferred  by  the   Cornelian  law,  however,   is
common  to  all  classes  of  sureties.     By  this  law  the  same
person  is  forbidden  to  become  bound  for  the  same  debtor,  to
the   same    creditor,  and   in   the  same   year   for   more  than
20,000  sesterces  of  credita  pecunia  ;  and  although  a  sponsor,
fidepromissor,  or  fidejussor,  may  have  bound  himself  for  more,
say  for  100,000,  yet  judgment  against  him  will  be  limited  to
20,000.     By  pecunia  credita  we  mean  not  only  money  advanced
in  loan,  but  all  that,  at  the  time  of  contracting  the  obligation,
we  are  certain  will  become  a  debt,  i.e.  all  that  is  unconditionally
made  matter  of  obligation ;  and  there  is  thus  included  in  it
money  which  we  stipulate  is  to  be  paid  at  a  time  fixed,
because  it  is  certain  that  such  money  will  fall  due,  although
it  can  be  sued  for  only  when  the  time  of  payment  has  arrived.
And  by  pecunia,  in  the  sense  of  the  Cornelian  law,  we  are  to
understand  every  sort  of  thing;  therefore,   even   if  we  are
stipulating  for  wine  or  corn,  for  land  or  for  a  slave,  the  rule  of

125  the  statute  is  to  be  obeyed.     In  some  cases,  however,  it  allows

§  124.     The  lex  Cornelia  (de  sponsorilius)  3  The     addition     is     Huschke's,

Hu.  thinks  may  have  been  enacted  adopted  substantially  by  K.  u.  S.
in  673     81  ;    but    Voigt  attributes  *  Comp.  Isidor.  Orlg.  v,  25,  §  14

it  to  427  |  327.  (Brims,   p.  302)  ;    fr.   37-39,  D.    de

1  So  the  MS.;  Hu.  reads  uel  pro-  reb.  cred.  (xii,  1).

missores  [uel  fideiussores}.  5  Comp.   fr.   178,  pr.,  fr.  222,  D.

2  Instead  of  ampliorem  the   MS.  de  V.  8.  (1,  16).

has  amplam.  §  125.     The  lex  Julia  de  vicesima  here-

Ill,  §§  125-127.]         COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  225

quibusdam  tamen  causis  permittit  ea  lex  in  infinitum  satis
accipere,  ueluti  si  dotis  nomine,  uel  eius  quod  ex  testamento
tibi  debeatur,  aut  iussu  iudicis  satis  accipiatur.  et  adhuc  lege
uicesima  hereditatium  cauetur,  ut  ad  eas  satisdationes  quae

126  ex  ea  lege  propommtur  lex  Cornelia  non  pertineat.         In  eo
quoque  iure  par  condicio  est  omnium,  sponsorum,  fidepro-
missorum,  fideiussorum,  quod    ita    obligari  non  possunt  ut
plus   debeant l   quam   debet  is  pro  quo   obligantur :    at   ex
diuerso  ut  minus  debeant  obligari  possunt,  sicut  in  adstipu-
latoris  persona  diximus ;  nani  ut  adstipulatoris  ita  et  horum
obligatio   accessio   est  principalis   obligationis,  nee   plus   in

127  accessione  esse  potest  quam  in  principal!  re.         In  eo  quoque
par  omnium  causa  est,  quod  si  quid  pro  reo  soluerint,  eius
reciperandi  causa  habent  cum  eo  mandati  iudicium ; l  et  hoc
amplius  sponsores  ex  lege  Publilia  *  propriam  habent  actionem
in  duplum,  quae  appellatur  depensi.3

security  to  be  taken  to  any  extent,  as  when  it  is  given  on
account  of  a  dotal  provision,  or  of  a  debt  due  under  a  testa-
ment, or  when  it  is  required  by  order  of  a  judge.  Further,
the  law  imposing  a  five  per  cent,  succession  duty  exempts  the
suretyships  it  calls  into  play  from  the  operation  of  the  Corne-

126  lian  law.         In  this  respect  also  all  are  on  a  par,  whether
sponsors,  fidepromissors,  or  fidejussors, — that  they  cannot  be
bound  for  more  than  is  due  by  him  for  whom  they  are  sureties ;
but,  on  the  other  hand,  they  may  be  bound  for  less,  as  ex-
plained in  reference  to  an  adstipulator ;  for,  like  the  obligation
of  an  adstipulator,  that  of  a  surety  is  accessory  to  the  principal
one,  and  there  cannot  be  more  in  the  accessory  than  in  the

127  principal.         Finally,  they  all  stand  on  the  same  footing  in
this  respect, — that  if  they  have  paid  anything  for  the  principal
debtor,  they  have  an  action  of  mandate  against  him  for  its
recovery ;  and  sponsors,  by  the  Publilian  law,  have  over  and
above  an  action  peculiar  to  themselves  for  double  the  amount,
which  goes  by  the  name  of  actio  depensi.

ditatum,  enacted  759  |  6,  imposed  a  duced  a  marginal  rg,  =  regula,  into

duty  of  5  per  cent,  on  testamen-  his  text.     See  §  113,  note,
tary     successions     and    bequests  ;      §  127.  Comp.  §  6,  tit.  I  afd.

Dio   Cass.   Iv,   25,   Ivi,    28  ;    Plin.  l  Comp.  §  111.

Paneg.  37.  2  This  law  was  enacted  possibly

§  126.     Comp.  113  ;  §  5,  tit.  I.  afd.  in  355  j  399,    or  more   probably  in

1  The   MS.   again  has  ut  rg  plus  '671     383.

debeant,   the    scribe   having  intro-  3  Comp.  iv,  22.

226  GAII  INST1TVTIOXVM  IVKIS  CIVILIS   [III,  §§  128-131.

128  Litteiis  obligatio  iit  ueluti  nominibus  transscripticiis.     fit
autem   nomen   transscripticium  duplici   rnodo,   uel   a  re   in

129  personam  uel  a  persona  in  persoriam.         \_A  re  in  personam
[^ra?is]scriptio  fit,  ueluti  si  id  quod  ex  emptionis  causa  aut
conductionis  aut  societatis  mihi  debeas,  inde 1  expensum  tibi

130  tulero.         A  persona  in  personam  transscriptio  fit,  ueluti  si
id  quod  mihi  Titius  debet  tibi  inde  l  expensum  tulero,  id  est

131  si  Titius   te2   delegauerit3   mihi.         Alia   causa   est  eorum
nominum  quae  arcaria  uocantur :  in  his  enim  rei,  non  littera-
rum  obligatio   consistit,  quippe  non   aliter  ualent  quam   si

128  A  literal  obligation  is  created  by  transcribed  entries;  and
these  are  made  in  two  ways, — either  from  thing  to  person,  or

129  from  person  to  person.         There  is  transcription  from  thing  to
person  when,  for  example,  I  enter  to  your  debit  a  sum  you
already  owe  me  by  reason  of  a  purchase,  a  conduction,  or  a

130  partnership.         There  is  transcription  from  person  to  person
when,  for  example,  I  enter  to  your  debit  what  is  due  me  by
Titius,  provided  always  he  has  delegated  you  to  me  in  his

131  stead.         The  case  is  different  with  those  [direct]  entries  [of
cash  payments]  which  go  by  the  name  of  nomina  arc-aria.
In  these  the  obligation  is  really  one  created  by  thing  delivered
rather  than  by  writing,  seeing  it  has  no  effect  unless  the

§  128-134.     Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  LITTERA-  i-iii;  Sen.  de  benef.  ii,  23,  iii,  15  ;

UVM  OBLIGATIONS  (iii,    21).     That  Th.   iii,  21.    Heimbach    (Creditum,

title   refers   to   a   different    sort   of  p.  329),  criticising  Reitz's  text    of

literal  obligation  from  any  of  those  Theoph.,    draws   attention    to    the

explained  by  Gai.  in  these  pars.,  all  fact  that,  in  his  account  of  the  lit.

of  which  had  gone  out  of  use  before  obligatio  as  contained  in  the  most

the  time  of  Justinian.     Th.,   how-  authoritative  MSS.,  there  are  preserved

ever,   alludes   to    them,   and   gives  — not  in  a  Greek  dress,  but  in  the

sume  details  of  interest  in  reference  original  Latin — two  formulae  which

to  that  mentioned  in  §  129.  are  said  to  have  been  both  spoken

§  1 28.     The  transscriptio  here  referred  to  and  written  by  the  parties  ;  by  the

took  place  in  the   codex  expensi  et  creditor—  centum  aureos  qvos  mihi

accepti,  which,  so  long  as  the  perio-  ex   causa    locationis  debes  expenses

dical  census  was  regularly  observed,  tibi  full  ?  and  by  the  debtor — ex-

every  citizen  was  required  to  keep  ;  pemos  mihi  tulisti.
see  Ps.  Ascon.  in  II.  Verr.  i,  23,  §  60  !  So  Hu. ;  the  MS.  has  id.

(Bruns,   p.  292).      Danz    (R.R.  ii,      §130.     See  references  in  note  to  §  128.
pp.   43-61)   gives  a   remm6  of  the  J  So  Hu. ;  the  MS.  has  id.

principal  theories  broached   in  re-  2  The    MS.    has   te    se ;    Hu.     te

ference  to  the  Eoman  house-books,  [/?ro]  se.
and  the  nomina  they  contained.  3  Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.  11,  pr.  D.  de

§  129.     The  words  in  italics  are  omitted  nouat.  (xlvi,  2).

in   the   MS.,    but    self-evident.     In      §131.     A  loan  ex  area,  paid  in  cash  out

reference     to    the    par.    generally,  of  the  household  money-chest,  be-

comp.  §§  137,  138;  Cic.  de  off.  iii,  came  a  nom en  arcarium  when  booked

14,   §§   58-60  ;  pro  Q.  Hose.    com.  in  the  lender's  codex.

Ill,  §§  131-134.]         COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

227

numerata  sit  pecunia;  numeratio  autem  pecuniae  rei  facit
obligationeni :  qua  de  causa  recte  dicemus  arcaria  noxnina
nullam  facere  obligationem,  sed  obligationis  factae  testi-

132  monium  praebere.        Vnde  proprie  dicitur  arcariis  nominibus
etiam  peregrines  obligari,  quia  non  ipso  nomine  sed  numera-
tione    pecuniae    obligantur,   quod    genus   obligationis    iuris

133  gentium  est.         transscripticiis  uero  nominibus  an  obligentur
peregrin!  merito  quaeritur,  quia  quodammodo  iuris  ciuilis  est
talis   obligatio:    quod   Neruae1  placuit:    Sabino :    autem   et
Cassio  l  uisum  est,  si  a  re  in  personam  fiat  nomen  transscrip-
ticium,   etiam    peregrinos    obligari;    si    uero    a    persona    in

134  persouam,   non    obligari.         Praeterea    litterarum

obligatio

money  has  actually  been  told ;  but  the  paying  down  of  money
is  creative  of  a  real  obligation ;  therefore  it  may  be  said  with
perfect  accuracy  that  an  entry  of  a  cash  payment  does  not
make  an  obligation,  but  only  afford  evidence  of  one  already

132  created.         Hence  it  may  be  said  quite  properly  even  that
peregrins  are  bound  by  arcaria  nomina ;  for  they  are  bound
not  by  the  entry,  but  by  the  paying  down  of  the  money, —

133  a  cause  of  obligation  which  is  iuris  gentium.          Whether
they  can  be  bound  by  transcribed  entries  has  very  reasonably
been  questioned ;  for  an  obligation  so  created  is  in  a  manner
an  invention  of  the  ius  ciuile.     Nerva  was  of  opinion  that
they  could  not ;  but  Sabinus  and  Cassius  hold  that  they  may
be  bound  by  transcription  from  thing  to  person,  though  not

134  by  that  from  person  to  person.         Further,  a  litterarum  obli-

§  132.  P.  places  etiam  after  unde  in-
stead of  after  nominibus.  Hu.
(Beitraege,  p.  94),  followed  by  Bk.
and  K.  u.  S.,  interjects  non  before
proprie,  on  the  ground  that  if  an
arcarium  nomen  did  not  create  any
obligation  at  all  (§  131),  it  could  not
be  obligatory  on  a  peregrin.  But
Gai.  says  in  the  same  sentence — in
arcariis  nominibus  rei  .  .  obligatio
consistit.  Consequently  I  prefer  to
keep  the  text  as  it  is,  believing  that
Gaius  meant  here  to  distinguish
between  the  recognised  liability  of
a  peregrin  upon  a  nomen  arcarium
as  a  real  and  iuris  gentium  contract,
and  the  doubtfulness  of  his  liability
upon  a  nomen  transscripticium  as  a
literal  and  iuris  ciuilis  one.

§  133.  The  new  obligation  arising  from
transscriptio  a  persona  in  personam

had  no  foundation  except  in  the  ius
ciuile  ;  where  the  transscriptio  was  a
re  in  personam  the  foundation  of  the
prior  iuris  gentium  obligation,  thus
novated,  still  remained.

1  See  i,  196.  note  1.
134.  Comp.  Cic.  ad  Alt.  v,  21,  vi,  2  ;
Ps.  Ascon.  in  II.  Verr.  i,  36,  §  91
(Bruns,  p.  293).  The  chirographum
of  the  Greek  provinces  was  a  written
acknowledgment  of  debt  under  the
hand  of  the  debtor,  and  was  obliga-
tory upon  him,  if  a  peregrin,  for  the
simple  reason  that  amongst  pere-
grins a  nudum  pactum  was  creative
of  action  ;  if,  however,  he  was  a
citizen,  it  was  obligatory  in  the
first  instance  only  if  it  embodied  a
stipulation,  and  therefore  as  a  uer-
borum  obligatio,  though  capable  of
becoming  in  time  a  litterarum  obli-

228

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [III,  §§  134-137.

fieri  uidetur  chirographis  et  syngraphis,  id  est  si  quis  debere
se  aut  daturum  se  scribat,  ita  scilicet  si  eo  nomine  stipulatio
non  fiat :  quod  genus  obligationis  proprium  peregrinorum  est.

135  Consensu  fiunt  obligationes  in  emptionibus  et  uenditioni-
bus,    locationibus     conductionibus,     societatibus,     mandatis.

136  Ideo  autem  istis  modis  consensu  dicimus  obligationes  con-
trahi,  quia  neque  uerborum  neque  scripturae  ulla  proprietas
desideratur,  sed  sufficit  eos  qui  negotium  gerunt  consensisse :
unde  inter  absentes  quoque  talia  negotia  contralumtur,  ueluti
per  epistulam  aut  per  internuntium,  cum  alioquin  uerborum

137  obligatio  inter  absentes  fieri  non  possit.1         Item  in  his  con-

gatio  is  held  to  arise  out  of  chirographa  and  syngraphae, —
documents  whereby  a  man  either  acknowledges  himself  in-
debted, or  engages  to  give  something  without  employing  the
formula  of  stipulation ;  this  sort  of  obligation  is  peculiar  to
peregrins.

135  Obligations   arise   from   consent   in   purchases   and   sales,

136  locations  and  conductions,  partnerships,  mandates.         We  say
that  in  these  forms  obligations  are  contracted  by  consent,
because  no  formality  either  of  words  or  writing  is  required,
it  being  enough  that  the  parties  to  the  business  have  arrived
at  a  common  understanding  ;  accordingly  such  contracts  may,
through  the  intervention  of  a  letter  or  a  messenger,  be  entered
into  even  between  those  who  are  not  in  each  other's  presence,
which  is  impossible  in  the  case  of  an  obligation  by  spoken

137  words.         Further,  in  the  consensual  contracts  the  parties  are

gatio,  as  explained  in  tit.  I.  afd.
The  peculiarity  of  the  synyrapha —
which  also  contained  an  acknow-
ledgment of  debt  and  informal
promise  to  pay — seems  to  have  been
either  that  it  was  executed  in  dupli-
cate, and  one  of  the  documents  re-
tained by  each  of  the  parties,  or
that,  after  execution,  like  the  more
modern  indenture  or  charte-partie,
it  was  cut  in  two,  and  a  part  taken
by  each  for  preservation  and  as  a
precaution  against  fraud.

§§  135-138.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  CON-
SENSY  OBLIGATIONS  (iii,  22).

§  135.  Gai.  in  fr.  2,  pr.  D.  de  0.  et  A.
(xliv,  7) ;  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

§  136.  Gai.  in  fr.  1,  2,  D.  de  0.  et  A.
(xliv,  7)  ;  §§  1,  2,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  Comp.  §  12,  I.  de  inut.  slip,  (iii,
19).  The  inconvenience  resulting
from  the  rule  that  there  could  be  no
stipulation  inter  absentes  was  obvi-
ated in  this  way  :  If  a  man  had  no
slave  of  his  own  in  or  near  the  place
where  he  desired  to  obtain  a  debtor's
promise,  he  employed  one  resident
there  ;  that  slave,  pretending  that
for  the  time  he  was  the  property  of
and  represented  the  absent  creditor,
acted  as  stipulant,  and  took  a  pro-
mise on  his  behalf ;  and  a  minute
of  the  transaction,  in  which  the
absentee  was  described  as  owner  of
the  stipulating  slave,  was  usually
written  out  and  signed  by  the  parties.
This  seems  at  least  to  be  a  legitimate
inference  from  Justinian's  words  in

HI,  §§  137-140.]          COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  229

tractibus  alter  alter!  obligatur  de  eo  quod  alterum  alter!  ex
borio  et  aequo  praestare  oportet,  cum  alioquin  in  uerborum
obligationibus  alius  stipuletur,  alius  promittat,1  et  in  nomini-

138  bus  alius  expensum  ferendo  obliget,  alius  obligetur.2         Sed
absent!    expensum    ferri    potest,   etsi   uerbis   obligatio   cum
absente  contrahi  non  possit.1

139  (Emptio  et  uenditio  contrahitur]  cum  de  pretio  conuenerit,
quamuis  nondum  pretium  numeratum  sit,  ac  ne  arra  quidem
data  fuerit :  nam  quod  arrae  nomine  datur  argumentum  est

140  emptionis  et  uenditionis  contractae.        Pretium  autem  certum
esse  debet :  nam  alioquin  si  ita  inter  nos  conuenerit  ut  quanti

reciprocally  liable  for  what  each  ought  in  fairness  and  equity
to  do  for  the  other ;  whereas  in  verbal  obligations,  while  one
stipulates,  only  the  other  promises ;  and  in  nomina,  while  one,
by  making  an  entry  to  the  other's  debit,  lays  him  under

138  obligation,  it  is  only  the  latter  that  is  obliged.         But  an
entry  to  a  man's  debit  may  be  made  in  his  absence,  although
a  verbal  contract  with  one  who  is  not  present  is  impossible.

139  Purchase  and  sale  is  contracted  the  moment  parties  have
agreed  about  the  price,  although  it  have  not  been  paid,  nor
any  earnest  given ;  for  what  is  given  in  name  of  earnest  is
only  evidence  that  a  purchase  and  sale  has  been  contracted.

140  But  the  price  must  be  definite  :  if  the  agreement  between  us
be  that  a  thing  is  bought  for  such  a  price  as  may  be  put  upon

1.   14,  pr.  §  1,    C.    de  contr.    slip.  the  stipulating  slave  was  not  really

(viii,  38).  the  property  of  the  party  for  whom

Relying  on  the  statement  of  Gai.  the  minute  bore  that  he  was  acting,

i,  §  54 — that  in  iii,  166,  is  more  to  The  emperor's  declaration  was  that

the  point — that  it  was  for  his  boni-  an  averment  of  ownership  in  such  a

tarian  and  not  his  quiritarian  owner  minute  was  not  afterwards  to  be  dis-

that  a   slave   acquired  a   claim  by  puted,  however  false  in  point  of  fact,

stipulation,  Ubbelohde  (Z.  f.  RG.  §  137.     Gai.    in  fr.  3,   D.  de  0.  et  A.

xiii,  pp.    488  f.)  surmises  that  the  (xliv,  7)  ;  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.

practice  must    have   been   for    the  J  Comp.  §  92.

absentee  to  get  a  friend  in  the  place  2  Comp.  §§  129,  130.

of  contract  to  take  delivery  of    a  §  138.     This  par.   seems  to  be  a  gloss,

slave  on   his   account ;  that  would  suggested,  doubtless,  by  the  reference

place  the  slave  in  bonis  of  the  ab-  to  nomina  in  §  137.     Most  eds.  in-

sentee,  and  entitle   him  to  act   for  troduceit  after  §  136  ;  but  even  there

the  latter  ;  after  the  stipulation  he  it  looks  like  an  annotation,

would    be    redelivered   to    his   old  J  Comp.  §  136  ;  §  12,  I.  de  inut.

owner,  who  had  still  retained  the  slip,  (iii,  19).

quiritarian  right.  This  acquisition  §§139-141.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DEEMPTIONE
of  the  slave,  however,  as  he  thinks,  ET  VENDITIONE  (iii,  23).  These
must  have  become  a  mere  form,  and  pars,  are  preceded  by  a  rubric,  pro-
have  often  been  neglected ;  otherwise  bably  de  emptione  et  uenditione,  of
Justinian  would  not  have  said  in  his  which  only  the  first  four  letters
preamble  that  stipulations  had  often  are  legible,
been  challenged  on  the  ground  that  §  140.  Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

230  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [HI,  §§  140,141.

Titius  rem  aestimauerit  tanti  sit  empta,  Labeo  '  negauit  ullam
uim  hoc  negotium  habere  ;  cuius  opinionem  Cassius  1  probat  :
Ofilius  2  et  earn  emptionem  et  uenclitionem  [esse  putauif]  ;
141  cuius  opinionem  Proculus1  secutus  est.  Item  pretium  in
numerata  pecunia  consistere  debet  :  nam  in  ceteris  rebus  an
pretium  esse  possit,  ueluti  homo  l  aut  toga  aut  fundus  alterius
rei  [pretium],2  ualde  quaeritur.  nostri  praeceptores  3  putant
etiam  in  alia  re  posse  consistere  pretium  ;  unde  illud  est,  quod
uulgo  putant,  per  permutationem  rerum  emptionem  et  uen-
ditionem  contrahi,  eamque  speciem  emptionis  uenditionisque
uetustissimam  esse  ;  argumen  toque  utuntur  Graeco  poeta  Ho-
mero,  qui  aliqua  parte  sic  ait  :

cp    oiv

/  ft,sv  p/aXxw,  aXXo;  d'  aitiuvi
ds  pivcT:,  a>.Xo/  6'  airJjov  f3oeffffiv,

diuersae  scholae  auctores  3  dissentiunt,  aliudque  esse  existi-

it,  say  by  Titius,  then,  according  to  Labeo,  in  whose  opinion
Cassius  concurs,  the  transaction  can  have  no  effect,  while
Ofilius,  and  with  him  Proculus,  holds  that  it  amounts  to  pur-
141  chase  and  sale.  Further,  the  price  must  be  fixed  in  current
money.  Whether  the  price  of  a  thing  can  consist  of  some-
thing else,  such  as  a  slave,  a  toga,  or  a  bit  of  land,  has,  not
without  reason,  been  a  matter  of  controversy.  Our  authorities
think  that  it  may ;  hence  the  common  notion  amongst  them,
that  barter  is  just  a  contract  of  purchase  and  sale,  and  the
very  earliest  form  of  it ;  for  which,  by  way  of  argument,  they
quote  the  Greek  poet  Homer,  who  says  somewhere :  '  The  long-
haired Achaeans  bought  wine,  some  for  brass,  some  for  glistening
steel,  some  for  hides,  some  for  cattle,  some  for  slaves'  The
authorities  of  the  other  school  do  not  take  this  view,  but  hold

1  Comp.  i,  196,  note  1.  was  not  an  indiscriminate  adherence

2  Aulus  Ofilius  did  not  belong  to  that  the  latter  accorded  his  master,
either  of  the  schools,  but  was  a  dis-  §  141.     Comp.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.
tinguished   jurist    in    the   time    of  1  The  MS.  has  hoc  modo,  which  is
Julius  Caesar   (fr.  ii,  §   44,   D.    de  corrected  from  the  Inst.

orig.  iuris,  i,  2),    and  supposed  to  2  This    word   seems  necessary  to

have  been  his  adviser  and  assistant  complete  the  sense.     The  Inst.  have

in  the  digest  of  the  law  he  did  not  pretium  esse   possit,    and   so  have

live  to  complete  (Suet.   hd.   c.   44).  most  eds. ;  but  the  two  latter  words

Ofilius  was  also  a  teacher  of  repute,  can  be  spared,
and   had    among    his   pupils    both  3  See  i,  196,  note  1.

Capito  and  Labeo  (fr.  2,  §  47,  D.  as  4  Horn.  //.    vii,    472-475.       The

above).  The  text  furnishes  an  instance  quotation,   as  usual,   is  not  in  the

•    of   divergence  of   opinion   between  MS.  ,  et  reliqua  being  all  that  stands

Labeo  and  Proculus,  showing  that  it  for  it ;  it  is  supplied  from  the  Inst.

Ill,  §§  141-143.]          COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  231

mant  permutationem  rerum,  aliud  emptionem  et  uenditionem ;
alioquin  (non  posse) 5  rem  expediri  permutatis  rebus,  quae
uicleatur  res  uenisse,  et  quae  pretii  nomine  data  esse,  sed
rursus  utramque  rem  uideri  et  uenisse  et  utramque  pretii
nomine  datam  esse  absurdum  uideri.  sed  ait  Caelius  Sabinus,"
si  rem  tibi  uenalem  habenti,  ueluti  fundum,  [acceperim,  et] 7
pretii  nomine  hominem  forte  dederim,  fundum  quidem  uideri
uenisse,  hominem  autem  pretii  nomine  datum  esse,  ut  fundus
acciperetur.

142  Locatio  autem  et  conductio  similibus  regulis  constituitur :
nisi   enim  rnerces  certa  statuta  sit,  non  uidetur  locatio  et

143  conductio  contrahi.         unde  si  alieno  arbitrio  merces  per-
missa   sit,   uelut   quanti   Titius    aestimauerit,   quaeritur   an
locatio  et  conductio   contrahatur:    qua  de  causa  si  fulloni
polienda  curandaue,  sarcinatori  sarcienda  uestimenta  dederim,
nulla  statim  mercede  constituta,  postea  tantum  daturus  quanti
inter  nos  conuenerit,  quaeritur  an  locatio  et  conductio  con-

barter  to  be  one  thing,  purchase  and  sale  another  and  different
one ;  otherwise  it  would  be  impossible  to  determine,  as
between  two  things  given  in  exchange,  which  was  the  article
sold,  and  which  given  in  name  of  price ;  while  to  hold  that
each  was  at  the  same  time  both  ware  and  price  would  be
absurd.  But,  says  Caelius  Sabinus,  if  I  come  to  you  who
have  something  for  sale,  say  a  plot  of  ground,  and  give  you
for  it  a  slave  in  name  of  price,  the  ground  will  be  considered
sold,  and  the  slave  given  as  price,  that  so  I  may  have  the  land.

142  Location  and  conduction  are  subject  to  much  the  same  rules
[as  purchase  and  sale]  ;  for  unless  a  definite  remuneration  be
agreed  upon,  location  and  conduction  cannot  be  said  to  have

143  been  contracted.         Hence,  if  the  remuneration  be  left  to  the
determination  of  a  third  party, — say  'whatever  sum  Titius
may  fix,' — it  is  a  question  whether  there  be  here  a  contract  of
location  and  conduction.     And  the  same  question  arises  when
I  give  clothes  to  a  fuller  to  be  pressed  or  scoured,  or  to  a
tailor  to   be   mended,  no   sum  being  fixed   at  the  time  as
remuneration,  but  it  being  understood  that,  after  the  job  is
finished,  I  am  to  give  so  much  as  may  then  be  agreed  upon

5  These   two   words,    illegible  in  A  vacant  line  precedes  these  pars,
the  MS.,  supplied  from  the  Inst.  in  the  MS.,  probably  for  a  rubric.

6  See  §  70,  note.  §  142.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  2,  pr.  D.  loc.

7  These  two  words,    according  to  (xix,  2) ;  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

K.  n.  S.,  are  a  gloss.  §  143.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  25,  pr.  D.  loc.

§§142-147.      Comp.    tit.    I.    DE    LOC  A-  (xix,    2);    Gai.    in    fr.    22,    D.    de,

TIONE   ET  CONDVCTIONE  (Hi,    23).  praescr.  uerb.  (xix,  5);  §  l.tit.  I.  afd.

232  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [HI,  §§  144-146.

144  trahatur.         Item l  si  rem  tibi  utendam  dederim  et  inuicem
aliam  rem  utendam  acceperim,  quaeritur  an  locatio  et  con-

145  ductio  contrahatur.         Adeo  autem   emptio   et  uenditio   et
locatio  et  conductio  familiaritatem  aliquam  inter  se  habere
uidentur,  ut  in  quibusdam  causis  quaeri  soleat  utrum  emptio
et  uenditio  contrahatur  an  locatio  et  conductio :  ueluti  si  qua
res  in  perpetuum  locata  sit,  quod  euenit  in  praediis  municipum,
quae  ea  lege  locantur  ut  quamdiu  uectigal '  praestetur  neque
ipsi  conductori  neque  heredi  eius  praedium  auferatur ;   sed

146  magis  placuit  locationem  conductionemque  esse.         Item  si1
gladiatores  ea  lege  tibi  tradiderim  ut  in  singulos  qui  integri
exierint  pro   sudore   denarii  xx  mihi  darentur,  in  eos  uero
singnlos  qui  occisi  aut  debilitati  fuerint  denarii  mille,  quae-
ritur   utrum   emptio    et   uenditio    an   locatio    et    conductio
contrahatur:    et   magis  placuit   eorum  qui   integri   exierint
locationem  et  conductionem  contractam  uideri,  at  eorum  qui
occisi  aut  debilitati  sunt   emptionem  et  uenditionem  esse ;

144  between  us.         It  is  also  doubtful  if  there  be  location  and
conduction  when  I  have  given  you  the  use  of  a  thing,  receiv-

145  ing  from  you  the  use  of  something  else  in  return.         So  much
do  purchase  and  sale  and  location  and  conduction  seem  to
have  in  common,  that  in  some  cases  there  is  room  for  question
whether  it  is  the  one  or  the  other  that  has  been  contracted  ;
as,  for  example,  when  a  thing  is  located  in  perpetuity,  as
happens  in  the  case  of  lands  belonging  to  a  municipality
granted  by  it  in  lease  under  a  provision  that,  so  long  as  the
rent  charged  upon  them  is  duly  paid,  they  shall  not  be  with-
drawn either  from  the  lessee  or  from  his  heir.    The  prevailing
opinion  is  that  this  is  a  contract  of  location  and  conduction.

146  Again,  if  I  have  furnished  you  with  a  band  of  gladiators,  on
an  agreement  that  for  each  of  them  that  shall  come  scathless
out  of  the  combat  I  am  to  have  twenty  denarii  in  payment
of  his  exertions,  and  a  thousand  for  each  that  is  killed  or
disabled,  it  is  disputed  whether  the  contract  be  one  of  pur-
chase and  sale  or  of  location  and  conduction.     It  has  been
held  that  as  regards  those  who  are  unhurt  it  is  one  of  location
and  conduction,  but  one  of  purchase  and  sale  as  regards  those,
who  have  been  killed  or  disabled.     Therefore,  what  the  con-

§  144.     Gomp.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  the  MS.  haszcZ,  for  which  Hu.  substi-

1  So  P.,  K.  u.  S.,  and  Hu. ;  the  tutes  inde.

MS.  has  uel.  §  146.     l  Before  si  the  MS.  has  quaeritur  ;

§  145.     Comp.  §  3,  tit.  1.  afd.  obviously  unnecessary.
1  Between  quamdiu  and  uectiyal

Ill,  §§  146-149.]         COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  233

idque  ex  accidentibus  apparet,  tamquam  sub  condicione  facta
cuiusque  uenditione  an  locatione : 2  (iam  enim  non  dubitatur

147  quin  sub  condicione  res  ueniri  aut  loeari  possint.)3         Item
quaeritur,  si  cum  aurifice  mihi  conuenerit  ut  is  ex  auro  suo
certi    ponderis    certaeque    formae    anulos    mihi    faceret,   et
acciperet  uerbi  gratia  denarios  cc,  utrum  emptio  et  uenditio
an  locatio  et  conductio  contrahatur :    Cassius 1  ait  materiae
quidem  emptionem  uenditionem   contrahi,  operarum  autem
locationem  et  conductionem ;  sed  plerisque  placuit  emptionem
et  uenditionem  contrahi.     atqui  si  meum  aurum  ei  dedero,
mercede  pro  opera  constituta,  conuenit  locationem  conductio-
nem contrahi.

148  Societatem  coire  solemus  aut  totorum  bonorum  aut  unius
alicuius  negotii,  ueluti  mancipiorum  emendorum  aut  uenden-

149  dorum.         Magna   autem   quaestio   fuit  an  ita  coiri   possit

tract  is  will  appear  from  the  chapter  of  accidents,  just  as  if
there  had  been  both  a  conditional  sale  and  a  conditional
location  of  each  individual  gladiator ;  (for  that  things  may  be

147  sold  and  located  under  a  condition  is  undoubted.)         And
again,  if  I  have  agreed  with  a  goldsmith  that  he  shall  make
me  with  his  own  gold  some  rings  of  a  certain  weight  and
pattern,  and  get  say  two  hundred  denarii  for  them,  it  is  a
point  of  controversy  whether  this  be  purchase  and  sale  or
location  and  conduction.     Cassius  thinks  there  is  purchase
and  sale  of  the  material,  location  and  conduction  of  the  labour
expended  upon  it ;  but  the  general  opinion  is  that  the  con-
tract is  one  of  purchase  and  sale.     But  if  I  provide  the  gold,
agreeing  to  give  the  goldsmith  so  much  for  his  labour,  the
contract  is  admittedly  one  of  location  and  conduction.

148  We  may  enter  into  a  partnership  either  as  regards  our
whole  means  and  estate,  or  as  regards  some  particular  business,

149  such  as  the  buying  and  selling  of  slaves.         It  was  once  a

2  The  passage  idque  .  .  .  locatione  3  Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr,  20,  pr.  D.  loc.

is  not  very  intelligible.     It  would  (xix,  2).

be  better  thus  :  ideoque  ex  acciden-  §  147.     §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Gai.  in

tibus  apparet,   tanquam  sub  condi-  fr.  2,  §  1,  D.  loc.  (xix,  2).

done  facta  cuiusque  et  uenditione  et  '  See  iii,  71,  note.

locatione,  [utrum  emptio  et  uenditio  §§  148-154.      A    vacant  line    precedes.

contracta  sit  an  locatio  et  conductio].  Comp.    tit.    I.    DE  SOCIETATE   (iii,

Two  conditional  contracts  were  en-  25).

tered  into   as  regards   each  of  the  §  148.     Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

gladiators,  one  of  sale,  the  other  of  §149.     Comp.    §   2,  tit.    I.    afd.,   from

location  ;  the  event  was  to  determine  which  G. ,  followed  by  all  eds. ,  has

which  becanxe  operative.  supplied  the  words  in  italics.

234  GAII  TNSTITVTIONVM  1VRIS  CIVILIS   [III,  §§  149-151.

societas  ut  quis  maiorem  partem  lucretur,  minorem  damni
praestet:  quod  Quintus  Mucius1  [contra  naturam  societatis
[esse  censuit ;  sed  Seruius  Sulpicius,1  cuius]  etiam  praeualuit
sententia,  adeo  ita  coiri  posse  societatem  existimauit,  ut
dixerit  illo  quoque  modo  coiri  posse  ut  quis  nihil  omnino
damni  praestet  sed  lucri  partem  capiat,  si  modo  opera  eius
tarn  pretiosa  uideatur  ut  aequum  sit  eum  cum  hac  pactione
in  societatem  admitti:  nam  et  ita  posse  coiri  societatem
constat  ut  unus  pecuniam  conferat,  alter  non  conferat,  et
tamen  lucrum  inter  eos  conmune  sit ;  saepe  enim  opera  ali-

150  cuius  pro  pecunia  ualet.         Et  illud  certum  est,  si  de  partibus
lucri  et  damni  nihil  inter  eos  conuenerit,  aequis  ex  partibus
commodum  et  incommodum  inter  eos  commune  esse ;  sed  si
in  altero  partes  expressae  fuerint,  uelut  in  lucro,  in  altero
uero  ornissae,  in  eo  quoque  quod  omissum  est  similes  partes

151  erunt.         Manet  an  tern  societas  eo  usque   donee  in  eodem
sensu   perseuerant;    at   cum   aliquis  renuntiauerit   societati,

great  question  whether  partnership  could  exist  on  the  under-
standing that  one  of  the  parties  was  to  have  a  larger  share  of
the  profit  than  he  was  to  bear  of  the  loss.  Quintus  Mucius
held  such  an  arrangement  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of
partnership ;  but  Servius  Sulpicius,  whose  opinion  prevailed,
saw  nothing  to  prevent  it,  and  went  so  far  as  to  maintain
that  it  might  even  be  contracted  on  the  footing  that  one  of
the  partners  should  bear  none  of  the  loss  at  all,  yet  take  a
share  of  the  profits,  if  only  his  services  were  esteemed  so
valuable  as  to  render  it  fair  that  he  should  be  admitted  to  the
partnership  on  such  terms.  That  there  may  be  partnership
where  one  of  the  partners  contributes  money  capital,  while
the  other  does  not,  is  allowed  on  all  hands;  for  a  man's

150  services  are  often  as  much  worth  as  his  money.         It  is  clear
that  if  nothing  have  been  agreed  between  the  partners  as  to
their  respective  shares  of  profit  and  loss,  they  will  equally
benefit  by  the  one  and  suffer  from  the  other ;  but  if  the  agree-
ment be  express  as  to  one  of  the  incidents  of  the  contract,
the  share  say  of  the  profit  which  each  is  to  take,  and  no
mention  be  made  of  the  loss,  a  corresponding  share  in  it  will  be

151  held  implied.        A  copartnery  continues  as  long  as  the  partners
are  of  the  same  mind  ;  if  one  of  them  renounce,  it  is  dissolved.

1  See  i,  188,  note  4.  interjects     tamen;     T.    substitutes

§  150.     Cornp.  §§1,  3,  tit.  I.  afd.     Be-  totum.

tween  conuenerit  and  aequis  the  MS.      §  151.     §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.

Ill,  §§  151-154.]         COMMENTARII  QVATTVOK.

235

societas  soluitur:  sed  plane  si  quis  in  hoc  renunciauerit
societati  ut  obueniens  aliquod  lucrum  solus  habeat,  ueluti
si  milii  totorum  bonorum  socius,  cum  ab  aliquo  heres  esset
relic tus,  in  hoc  renuntiauerit  societati  ut  hereditatem  solus
lucri  faciat,  cogetur  hoc  lucrum  coinmunicare ;  si  quid  uero
aliud  lucri  fecerit  quod  non  captauerit,  ad  ipsum  solum
pertinet:  mihi  uero  quidquid  ornnino  post  renuntiatam

152  societatem   adquiritur   soli    conceditur.  Soluitur    adhuc
societas   etiam   morte   socii,  quia   qui   societatem   contrahit

153  certain  personam  sibi  eligit.         Dicitur  etiam  capitis  deminu-
tione  solui  societatem,  quia  ciuili   ratione  capitis  deminutio
morti  coaequatur ;  1  sed  utique  si  adhuc  consentiant  in  socie-

154  tatem  noua  uidetur  incipere  societas.          Item  si  cuius  ex
sociis  bona  publice  aut  priuatim  uenierint,  soluitur  societas.

154aSed  haec  quoque   societas  de  qua  loquimur  —  —  consensu

But  clearly  if  he  have  renounced  in  order  to  have  all  to
himself  some  profit  that  is  close  at  hand, — as  when  one  who
is  my  partner  in  a  partnership  of  our  whole  means  and  effects,
being  left  heir  by  some  third  party,  renounces,  on  purpose
that  he  may  enjoy  alone  the  whole  gain  of  the  succession, —
he  will  be  compelled  to  communicate  a  share.  Any  gains
coming  to  him  otherwise,  however,  and  which  he  had  not  in
view  in  renouncing,  fall  entirely  to  him;  while,  of  course,
whatever  I  acquire  after  the  renunciation  falls  to  me  alone.

152  Partnership  is  also  dissolved  by  death;  for  he  who  has  con-
tracted a  partnership  has  chosen  a  particular  person  for  his

153  partner.         It  is  also  held  to  be  dissolved  by  capitis  deminutio,
which,  according  to  the  theory  of  our  civil  law,  is  equivalent
to  death ;  but  if  the  partners  consent  to  remain  as  before,  a

154  new  partnership  is  held  to  be  thereby  commenced.         Further,
if  the  estate  of  any  one  of  the  partners  have  been  confiscated,
or  sold  by  his  creditors  on  his  bankruptcy,  the  partnership  is

154a  dissolved.         But  the  partnership  of  which  we  are  speaking

§  152.     §  5,  tit.  I.  afd.

§  153.  Comp.  fr.  4,  §  1,  fr.  58,  §2,  fr.
63,  §  10,  fr.  65,  §  11,  D.  pro  socio
(xvii,  2).

J  Comp.  iii,  §§  100,  101.

§  154.     Comp.  §§  7,  8,  tit.  I.  afd.

§  154a.  The  lacuna  after  loquimur  re-
presents four  letters,  of  which  the
second  seems  to  be  o,  and  the  fourth
q  ;  and  instead  of  iurisque  gentium
the  MS.  has  iuris  cogentium.  The
par.  is  generally  supposed  to  be

corrupt ;  but  of  the  many  attempts
to  reconstruct  it  none  is  quite  satis-
factory. It  is  possible  that  Gai.  had
in  view  the  distinction  alluded  to  by
Pompon,  in  fr.  59,  pr.  D.  pro  soc.
(xvii,  2),  between  societates  priuatae
and  societates  uectigalium,  which
latter  were  governed  in  some  re-
spects by  rules  of  their  own  ;  and
that  he  meant  to  limit  his  preced-
ing observations  to  partnerships  of
the  former  class, — societates  uoliin-

236  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [III,  §§  154-156.

contrahitur  nudo  iurisque  gentium  est ;   itaque  inter   omnes
homines  natural!  ratione  consistit.

155  Mandatum  consistit  sine  nostra  gratia  mandemus  siue  aliena.
itaque  siue  ut  mea  negotia  geras,  siue  ut  alterius,  mandauerim,
contrahitur  mandati  obligatio,  et  inuicem  alter  alteri  tene-
bimur 1  in  id  quod  uel  me  tibi  uel  te  mihi  bona  fide  praestare

156  oportet?         nam  si  tua  gratia  tibi  mandem  superuacuum  est
mandatura ;  quod  enim  tu  tua  gratia  facturus  sis,  id  de  tua
sententia,  non  ex  meo  mandatu  facere  debes ;  itaque  si  otiosam
pecuniam  domi   te  habentem  hortatus  fuerirn  ut  earn  faene-
rares,  quamuis  earn  ei  mutuam  dederis  a  quo  seruare   non
potueris,  non  tamen  habebis  mecum  mandati  actionem  :  item
si  hortatus  sim  ut  rem  aliquam  emeres,  quamuis   non   ex-
pedierit   tibi  earn  emisse,  non  tamen  tibi  mandati  tenebor.1
et  adeo  haec  ita  sunt  ut  quaeratur  an  mandati  teneatur  qui

is  that  which  is  contracted  by  bare  consent,  and  which  is  iuris
gentium ;  consequently  its  existence  depends  everywhere  on
considerations  of  natural  law.

155  There  is  mandate  whether  the  commission  given  by  us  be
on  our  own  account  or  on  that  of  another  person.     Accord-
ingly, whether  I  instruct  you  to  transact  some  business  for
myself,  or  to  do  so  for  some  other  person,  an  obligation  of
mandate  is  contracted,  and  we  are  reciprocally  responsible  for

156  what  each  ought  in  good  faith  to  do  for  the  other.         A
mandate  to  you  to  act  on  your  own  behalf  is  superfluous ;  if
you  do  act  for  yourself,  you  ought  to  do  so  according  to  your
own  judgment,  and  not  upon  my  instructions.     Therefore  if,
knowing  you  to  have  money  lying  idle  at  home,  I  advise  you
to  put  it  out  at  interest,  and  you  lend  it  to  a  person  from
whom  you  are  unable  to  recover  it,  you  will  have  no  action
of  mandate  against  me ;  neither  will  I  be  responsible  if  I  have
advised  you  to  employ  it  in  making  a  purchase  which  has
turned  out  disadvantageous.     It  has  even  been  questioned
whether  a  man  would  be  responsible  to  you  in  an  action  of

tariae,  as  Vlp.  calls  them  in  fr.  63,  §§  155-162.     Comp.    tit.     I.    DE    MAN-

§  8,  tit.  D.  afd.     If  so,  all  that  is  DATO  (iii,  26).

necessary  is  to  fill  the  blank  with  §  155.     Comp.    Gai.    in    fr.    2,    pr.   D.

the  words  ea  est  quae  (eaeq).      The  mand.  (xvii,  1)  ;  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

force  of  the  remark  lies  in  the  natu-  J  Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  5,  pr.  D.  de

rail  ratione  ;  if  the  socii  persisted  in  0.  et  A.  (xliv,  7).

consenting  to  be  partners,  their  con-  2  The  MS.  has  oportere.

sent,  which  was  the  naturalis  ratio  §  156.     Comp.  Gai.  infr.  2, pr.  §§5,6,  D.

of  the  contract,  was  not  to  be  de-  mand.  (xvii,  1);  pr.  §§5, 6,  tit.  I.  afd.

feated  by   such   ciuiles   rationes   as  '  So  G.  and  most  eds. ;   the  MS.

cap.  deminutio  or  bankruptcy.  has  teneri ;  P.  teneri  \polero\,

Ill,  §§  156-160.]         COMMENT  AKII  QVATTVOR.  237

mandauit  tibi  ut  Titio  pecuniam  faenerares.  Seruius 2  negauit ;
nee  magis  hoc  casu  obligationem  consistere  putauit  quam  si
generaliter  alicui  mandetur  uti  pecuniam  suam  faeneraret :
sequimur  [autem]  Sabini3  opinionem  contra  sentientis*  quia
non  aliter  Titio  credidisses  quam  si  tibi  mandatum  esset.

157  Illud  constat,  si  quis  de  ea  re  mandet  quae  contra  bonos  mores
est,  non  contrahi  obligationem,  ueluti  si  tibi  mandem  ut  Titio

158  furtuni  aut  iniuriam  facias.          Item  si  quis  post1  mortem
meam  faciendum  [mihi]  mandet,  inutile  mandatum  est,  quia
generaliter  placuit  ab  heredis  persona  obligatiouem  incipere

159  non  posse.         Sed  recte  quoque  contractual1  mandatum,  si
dum    adhuc    integra    res    sit    reuocatum     fuerit,    euanescit.

160  Item   si   adhuc   integro    mandate   mors   alterutrius   alicuius
interueniat,   id   est   uel   eius   qui    mandauerit   uel   eius   qui
mandatum    susceperit,    soluitur    mandatum;    sed    utilitatis
causa  receptum  est,  ut  si  mortuo  eo  qui  niihi  mandauerit,

mandate  who  commissioned  you  to  lend  your  money  say  to
Titius.  Servius  denied  that  he  would,  holding  that  in  such  a
case  the  mandant  was  no  more  obliged  than  he  who  in  general
terms  advised  another  to  lend  out  his  money  at  interest ;  but
we  adopt  the  opinion  of  Sabinus,  who  took  the  opposite  view,
holding  that  here  you  would  not  have  lent  your  money  to

157  Titius  but  for  the  mandate  you  had  received.         There  is  no
doubt  of  this,  that  if  a  man  commission  another  to  do  some-
thing that  is  immoral,  no  obligation  is  contracted,  as,  for
example,  when  I  commission  you  to  steal  from  Titius  or

158  assault  him.         If  a  man  give  me  a  mandate  to  do  something
after  my  death,  it  is  useless,  according  to  the  general  rule  that
an  obligation  cannot  commence  in  the  person  of  an  heir.

159  A  mandate,  however  regularly  granted,  evanishes  if  revoked

160  before  anything  has  been  done  in  pursuance  of  it.         It  is
dissolved  likewise  by  the  supervening  death  of  either  mandaut
or  mandatory,  no  step  having  been  taken  towards  its  execu-
tion ;  but,  in  order  not  to  diminish  the  utility  of  such  con-
tracts, the  law  allows  that,  if  after,  but  in  ignorance  of,  the

2  See  i,  188,  note  5.  §  159.     §  9,  tit.  I.  afd.

3  See  i,  196,  note  1.  '  Instead    of    contractual    (as  in

4  So  all  the  later  eds. ;  the  MS.  and  Inst. )   the   MS.    has    consummatur,
previous  eds.  have  consentientis.  usually     rendered     consummatum.

§  157.     §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.  But,    as    P.   observes,    this   means

§  158.     Comp.  §  100.  'carried  out,'  which  is  inconsistent

1  After  post  K.  u.  S.  interpolate              with  the  idea  of  res  integra.

mortem  suam  uel  post.  §  160.     §  10,  tit.  I.  afd.

238  GAII  INST1TVTIOXVM  IVJilS  CIVILIS   [HI,  §§  160,  161.

ignorans  eum  decessisse  executus  fuero  mandatum,  posse  me
agere  mandati  actione ;  alioquin  iusta  et  probabilis  ignorantia
damnum  mihi  adferret.  et  huic  simile  est  quod  plerisque
placuit,  si  debitor  meus  manumisso  dispensatori  meo  per
ignorantiam  soluerit,  liberari  eum,  cuni  alioquin  stricta  iuris
ratione  non  posset  liberari  eo  quod  alii  soluisset  quam  cui
161  soluere  deberet.  Cum  autem  is  cui  recte  mandauerim
egressus  fuerit  mandatum,  ego  quid  em  eatenus  cum  eo  habeo
mandati  actionem  quatenus  mea  interest  inplesse  eum  man-
datum, si  modo  inplere  potuerit ;  at  ille  mecum  agere  non
potest.  itaque  si  mandauerim  tibi  tit  uerbi  gratia  fundum
mihi  sestertiis  c  emeres,  tu  sestertiis  CL  emeris,  non  habebis
mecum  mandati  actionem,  etiamsi  tanti  uelis  mihi  dare
fundum  quanti  emendum  tibi  mandassem ;  idque  maxime
Sabino  et  Cassio 1  placuit :  quodsi  minoris  emeris,  habebis
mecum  scilicet  actionem,  quia  qui  mandat  ut  c  milibus
emeretur,  is  utique  mandare  intellegitur  uti  minoris  si  posset

death  of  my  mandant,  I  have  executed  his  commission,  I  may
still  have  my  action  of  mandate ;  otherwise  my  very  excusable
error  might  be  to  me  a  source  of  loss.  On  similar  grounds
most  are  of  opinion  that  if  my  debtor  pay  to  a  former  slave  of
mine  who  acted  as  my  steward,  in  ignorance  of  the  latter's
manumission,  he  is  discharged  of  liability  ;  although,  accord-
ing to  the  strict  rule  of  law,  a  man  is  not  discharged  by  pay-
ment to  another  than  the  person  to  whom  such  payment
161  ought  to  have  been  made.  If  he  to  whom  I  have  given  a
mandate  in  proper  form  exceed  the  limits  of  his  commission,
I  may  claim  against  him,  in  an  actio  mandati,  damages  for  the
loss  I  have  sustained  by  his  failure  to  fulfil  his  contract,
provided  fulfilment  were  possible ;  but  he  has  no  action
against  me.  Accordingly,  if  I  have  commissioned  you  say  to
buy  for  me  certain  land  for  a  hundred  thousand  sesterces,  and
you  buy  it  for  a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand,  you  will  not  have
any  action  against  me,  even  though  you  be  willing  to  give  me
the  ground  at  my  own  price, — such  at  least  is  the  opinion  of
Sabinus  and  Cassius ;  but  if  you  buy  it  for  less  money  than  I
named,  you  will  have  action  of  mandate  against  me,  seeing
that  one  who  authorises  a  purchase  at  the  price  of  a  hundred
thousand,  is  held  to  authorise  such  purchase  at  a  lower  price

§  161.     Comp.  Paul,  in  fr.  3,  §  2,  and  Gai.  fr.  4,  D.  mand.  (xvii,  1)  ;  §  8,  tit.  I.  afd.
1  See  i,  196,  note  1.

Ill,  §§  162-166.]         COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  239

162  emeretur.         In  summa  sciendum  [est,  quotiens  faciendum]
aliquid  gratis  dederim,  quo  nomine  si  mercedem  statuisseni
locatio  et   conductio    contraheretur,  mandati  esse   actionem,
ueluti  si  fulloni  polienda  curandaue  uestimenta  [dederim]  aut
sarcinatori  sarcienda.

163  Expositis  generibus  obligationum  quae  ex  contractu  nascun-
tur,  adrnonendi  sumus  adquiri  nobis  non  solurn  per  nosmet
ipsos,  sed  etiam  per  eas  personas  quae  in  nostra  potestate  manu

164  mancipioue  sunt.         Per  liberos  quoque  homines  et  alienos
seruos  quos  bona  fide  possidemus  adquiritur  nobis ;  sed  tantum
ex  duabus  causis,  id  est  si  quid  ex  operis  suis  uel  ex  re  nostra

165  adquirant.         Per  eum  quoque  seruum  in  quo  usumfructum
habemus  similiter  ex   duabus  istis  causis  nobis  adquiritur.

166  Sed  qui  nudum  ius  Quiritium  in  seruo  habet,  licet  dominus
sit,  minus  tamen  iuris  in  ea  re 1  habere  intellegitur  quam
usufructuarius  et  bonae  fidei  possessor :  nam  placet  ex  nulla

162  if  possible.         Finally,  let  it  be  understood  that  if  I  have
given  a  thing  to  be  done  for  me  gratuitously,  the  giving  of
which,  had  it  been  to  be  done  for  reward,  would  have  amounted
to  a  contract  of  location  and  conduction,  an  action  of  mandate
will   lie;  as  when  I  have  given  clothes  to  a  fuller  to  be
pressed  or  scoured,  or  to  a  tailor  to  be  repaired.

163  Now  that  the  various  sorts  of  obligations  arising  from  con-
tract have  been  explained,  we  must  call  attention  to  this, —
that  they  may  be  acquired  for  us  not  only  by  our  own  instru-
mentality, but  also  by  those  who  are  in  our  potestas,  manus,  or

164  mancipium.        They  are  also  acquired  for  us  by  freemen  and
by  slaves  belonging  to  other  people  whom  we  possess  in  good
faith ;  but  only  in  two  cases,  namely,  when  the  acquisition  is

165  due  either  to  their  labour  or  to  our  funds.         In  the  same  two
cases  we  acquire  an  obligation  through  a  slave  of  whom  we

166  have  the  usufruct.         But  he  who  has  only  the  bare  quiritarian
title  to  a  slave  is  held  to  have  even  less  right  in  this  respect,
though   he  be  owner,  than  a  usufructuary  or  a  possessor  in
good  faith ;  it  is  held  that  in  no  case  can  there  be  acquisition

§  162.      Comp.  §  13,  tit.  I.  afd.     The  §§  164,  165.     §§  1,  2,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.
words  in  ital.  supplied  by  G.  ii,  §§  86,  91,  92.

§§  163-167.     Comp.    tit.    I.    PER   QVAS  §  166.     Comp.  ii,  88.

PERSON  AS  NOBIS  OBLIGATW  ADQVI-  l  So  the  MS.  ;  Hu.  amends  thus—

RITVR  (iii,  28).  [adquisita  ab]  eo  re.

§  163.     Comp.  ii,  86  ;  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

240  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVEIS  CIVILIS    [HI,  §§  166, 167.

causa 2  ei  adquiri  posse ;  adeo  ut  etsi  nominatim  ei  dari  stipu-
latus  fuerit  seruus,  mancipioue  nomine  eius  acceperit,  quidam
167  existiment  nihil  ei  adquiri.  Communem  seruurn  pro
dominica  parte  dominis  adquirere  certura  est,  excepto  eo
quod  uni  nominatim  stipulando  aut l  mancipio  accipiendo 2
illi  soli  adquirit,  uelut  cum  ita  stipuletur :  TITIO  DOMINO  MEO
DAW  SPONDES  ?  aut  cum  ita  mancipio  accipiat :  HANG  REM  EX

IVRE  QVIRITIVM  L.  TITII   DOMINI  MEI  ESSE   AIO,  EAQVE   EI   EMPTA

167«ESTO  HOC  AERE  AENEAQVE  LIBRA.  Illud  quaeritur  [an]  tam-
quam  domini  nomen  adiectum  domini  efficit,1  idem  faciat
unius  ex  dominis  iussum  intercedens.  nostri  praeceptores 2
perinde  ei  qui  iusserit  soli  adquiri  existimant,  atque  si  nomi-
natim ei  soli  stipulatus  esset  seruus  mancipioue  accepisset;
diuersae  scliolae  auctores 2  proinde  utrisque  adquiri  putant,
ac  si  nullius  iussum  interuenisset.

for  him  [by  direct  operation  of  law]  ;  and  some  go  so  far  as  to
think  that  he  acquires  nothing  even  when  a  slave  has  stipulated
expressly  in  his  name,  or  has  taken  in  his  name  a  conveyance

167  by  mancipation.  There  is  no  doubt  that  a  slave  owned  in
common  acquires  for  his  owners  according  to  their  respective
proprietary  interests  in  him,  except  when  he  expressly  stipu-
lates or  takes  by  mancipatory  conveyance  in  the  name  of  one
of  them  in  particular ;  then  he  acquires  for  that  one  alone,  as
when  he  stipulates  thus :  '  Do  you  engage  to  give  to  my
master  Titius  ? '  or  when  he  takes  a  conveyance  in  these
terms :  '  I  say  that  this  thing  belongs  to  my  master  Lucius
Titius  in  quiritarian  right,  and  be  it  his  by  purchase  with

167«this  bit  of  copper  and  these  copper  scales.'  It  is  disputed
whether  or  not  the  previous  instructions  of  one  in  particular
of  the  owners  will  make  the  acquisition  his  as  effectually  as
the  mention  of  his  name.  The  leaders  of  our  school  think
that  he  alone  acquires  who  gave  authority  to  the  slave,  just  as
if  the  slave  had  stipulated  for  or  taken  a  conveyance  to  him
nominatim ;  those  of  the  other  school  maintain  that  in  such  a
case  all  the  owners  share  in  the  acquisition,  as  if  there  had
been  no  instruction  from  any  of  them.

2  The  MS.  adds  alia,  obviously  per      §  167a.     Comp.  ii,  87  ;  §  3,  tit.  I  afd. ;

incuriam.  §  3,  I.  de  slip.  seru.  (iii,  17).

§  167.     Comp.  §  3,  tit.   I.  afd.;  §  3,  I.  l  This  seems  to  me  the  reading  of

de  stip.  seru.  (iii,  17).  the  MS.     K.  u.  S.,  however,  follow-

1  Before  aut  the  MS.  has  uel  man-  ing   G.,    have   quod  domini  nomen
cipando,    again    an    obvious    mis-  adiectum  efficit ;  Hu. — quod  nomen
take.  adiectum  unius  domini  efficit.

2  Comp.  i,  119.  2  Comp.  i,  196,  note  1.

Ill,  §§  168-171.]         COMMENT  ARII  QVATTVOR.  241

168  Tollitur   autem   obligatio   praecipue    solutione   eius   quod
debetur :  unde  quaeritur,  si  quis  consentiente  creditore  aliud
pro  alio  soluerit,  utrum  ipso  iure  liberetur,  quod  nostris  prae-
ceptoribus  l  placet,  an  ipso  iure  maneat  obligatus,  sed  aduersus
petentem  exceptione  doli  inali  defendi  debeat,  quod  diuersae
scholae  auctoribus  l  uisura  est.

169  Item  per   acceptilationem  tollitur   obligatio.     acceptilatio
autem  est  ueluti  imaginaria  solutio  :  quod  enim  ex  uerborum
obligatione  tibi  debeam,  id  si  uelis  mihi  remittere  poterit  sic
fieri,  ut  patiaris  haec  uerba  me  dicere :  QVOD  EGO  TIBI  PROMISI,

170  HABESNE  ACCEPTVM  ?  et  tu  respondeas  :  HABEO.         Quo  genere,
ut  diximus,  \tantiim  cae  obligationcs  soluuntur  quae  ex  uerbis
[consistunt,]  non  etiarn  ceterae ;  consentaneum  enim  uisum  est
uerbis  factam  obligationem  posse  aliis  uerbis  dissolui :  sed  et
id  quod  ex  alia  causa  debeatur  potest  in  stipulationem  deduci

171  et  per  acceptilationem  [dissolui.         Quamuis  uero  dixerimus
\_perfici  aeceptilationem]  imaginaria  solutione,  tamen  mulier

168  An  obligation  is  extinguished  first  and  foremost  by  pay-
ment of  what  is  due.     Hence  it  is  a  question  whether  a  debtor
who,  with  consent  of  his  creditor,  has  paid  something  that  is
not  due  in  place  of  that  which  is,  is  thereby  freed  by  direct
operation  of  law,  as  our  authorities  maintain,  or  is  not  still
bound  according  to  the  letter  of  the   law,  as  held  by  the
authorities  of  the  other  school,  and  obliged  to  meet  any  action
against  him  with  an  exception  of  dole.

169  An  obligation  is  also  extinguished  by  acceptation,  which
is  as  it  were  an  imaginary  payment.     1'or  if  you  wish  to  re-
lease me  what  I  owe  you  on  a  verbal  obligation,  it  may  be
done  by  your  letting  me  say :  '  That  which  I  promised  you
have   you   received  ? '    and    by  your   answering :    '  I   have.'

170  By  this  process,  as  already  said,  only  obligations  by  verbal  con-
tract can  be  extinguished,  not  other  kinds ;  for  it  seems  accord-
ing to  reason  that  an  obligation  contracted  by  spoken  words
should  be  dissoluble  by  other  words.     But  what  is  due  upon
some  other  ground  may  be  embodied  in  a  stipulation  and  then

171  extinguished  by  acceptilation.         Although  we  have  said  that
acceptilation  is  effected  by  imaginary  payment,  yet  a  woman

§§    168-181.      Comp.    tit.     I.     QVIBVS  which  the  words  in  ital.   are   bor-

MODIS  OBLIGATIO  TOLLITVR  (iii,  29).  rowed.

§  168.     Comp.  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  §  171.     Comp.    ii,   85.      The   words   in

1  Comp.  i,  196,  note  1.  ital.  are  supplied  by  Hu. ;  instead  of

§§  169,    170.     §  1,    tit.    I.    afd.,    from  perfici,  K.  u.  S.  suggest  contlneri.

Q

242  GAII  INST1TVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [HI,  §§  171-174.

sine  tutoris  auctoritate  acceptum  facere  non  potest,  cum  alio-

172  quin  solui  ei  sine  tutoris  auctoritate  possit.         Item  quod
debetur,  pro  parte  rede  soluitur;  an  auteni  in  partem  acceptum
fieri  possit  quaesitum  [est].

173  Est  etiam  alia  species  imaginariae  solutionis  per  aes  et
libram ;  quod  et  ipsum  genus  certis  in  causis  receptum  est,
ueluti  si  quid  eo  nomine  debeatur  quod  per  aes  et  libram

174  gestum  sit,  sine  quid  ex  iudicati  causa  deb[eatur.         eague
[res  ita  «^]itur :  adhibentur  non  minus  quam  quinque  testes
et  libripens  ;  deinde  is  qui  liberatur  ita  oportet  loquatur :  QVOD

EGO  TIBI  TOT  MILIBVS  CONDEMNATVS  (SVM\  ME  EO  NOMINE
A  TE  SOLVO  LIBEROQVE  HOC  AERE  AENEAQVE  LIBRA :  HANG  TIBI
LIBRAM  PRIM  AM  POSTREMAMQVE  EXPENDO  [SECVNDVM~]  LEGEM

PVBLICAM.     deinde  asse  percutit  libram,  eumque  dat  ci  a  quo

cannot   acceptilate   without  her  tutor's   auctoritas,   notwith-
standing that  without  it  payment  may  effectually  be  made  to

172  her.         Again,  while  a  debt  may  quite  well  be  paid  in  part,
it  is  a  question  whether  partial  acceptilatioii  be  competent.

173  Another  sort  of  imaginary  payment  is  that  by  the  copper
and  the  scales ;  a  procedure  employed  only  in  certain  cases,
as  when  the  debt  has  been  formally  created  per  aes  et  libram,

174  or  is  due  upon  a  judgment.         It  is  gone  about  thus :  in  the
presence  of  at  least  five  witnesses    and    a   scale-bearer,    he
who  is  being  freed  from   his  obligation  must  speak  as  fol-
lows :  '  Whereas  I  have  been  condemned  to  you  in  so  many
thousand  sesterces,  in   respect  thereof  I  now  release  and  free
myself  from  you  with  this  copper  and  these  copper  scales  ;  /
iveiyh  out  to  you  this  the  first  and  last  pound,  according  to  the
statute.'     Then  he  strikes  the  scales  with  the  as,  and  gives  it

§  172.  Comp.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  The  MS.  bramprimamp'tremanfyxpejidelege-

has  ([nod  debet  pro  parte  debet  recte  mpu\j\icam.  The  rendering  adopt-

solui  recte  soluit  a.  at  In  partem,  ed  in  the  text  is  that  of  Karlowa

etc.  (R.  GP.  p.  151)  ;  it  is  approved

§  173.  Comp.  Fest.  v.  ^exum  (Bruns,  by  K.  u.  iS. ;  Goudsra.  and  Pol.  read

p.  248)  ;  Varro  de  L.  L.  vii,  §  105  recte  instead  of  a  te;  Hu.  iriterpo-

( Bruns,  p.  281).  lates  dum  between  libra  and  hanc.

§  174.  The  words  introduced  in  the  Expendo  has  its  explanation  in  the

beginning  of  the  par.  are  the  sug-  account  Gai.  gives  of  the  origin  of  the

gestion  of  K.  u.  S.  The  formula,"  negotium  per  aeset  libram  in  i,  174.

which  is  not  found  elsewhere,  is  The  secundum  in  the  end  of  the

indistinct  in  the  MS.  It  is  thus  formula  is  introduced  on  the  autho-

deciphered  by  Stud., — letters  not  rity  of  Gai.  ii,  104.  On  the  nego-

absolutely  certain  being  in  italics,  Hum  per  aes  et  libram  in  other

and  those  that  are  illegible  repre-  applications,  see  (in  addition  to  the

sented  by  dots  : — qegotibitotmilib-  authorities  referred  to  in  last  note)

condemnat .  .  .  .  megonmen.ctesoluo-  Gai.  i,  119  ;  ii,  104  (and  note  8)  ;

liueroqh  '  aereaeueaqlibrahanctibili-  iii,  89,  note  ;  iii,  167.

Ill,  §§  175,  176.]          COMMENTAR1I  QVATTVOR.  243

175  liberatur  ueluti  soluendi  causa.         Similiter  legatarius  liere-
dem  eodem  modo  liberat  de  legato  quod  per  damnationem  1
relictum  est,  ut  tamen  scilicet,  sicuti  iudicatus  condemnatum
se  esse  significat,  ita  heres  (tcstamento) 2  se  dare  damnas  3  esse
dicat.     de  eo  tameii  tantum  potest  heres  eo  modo  liberari  quod
pondere  numero  constet,4  et  ita  si  certum  sit :  quidam  et  de
eo  quod  mensura  constat  idem 5  existimant.

176  Praeterea  nouatione   tollitur   obligatio,  ueluti  si  quod  tu
mihi  debeas  a  Titio  dari  stipulatus  sim ;  nani  interuentu  nouae
personae  noua  nascitur  obligatio  et  prima  tollitur  translata
in  posteriorein,  adeo  ut  interdum,  licet   posterior  stipulatio
inutilis  sit,  tamen  prima  nouationis  iure  tollatur,  ueluti  si
quod  mihi  debes  a  Titio  post  mortem  eius,  uel  a  muliere
pupilloue  sine  tutoris  auctoritate,  stipulatus  fuero ;  quo  casu
rem  amitto,  nam  et  prior  debitor  liberatur  et  posterior  obli-

to  him  from  whom  he  is  being  released,  as  if  in  payment.

175  In  the  same  way  a  legatee  releases  the  heir  from  obligation
for  a  legacy  which  has  been  bequeathed  per  damnationem ;
but,  while  the  judgment  debtor  recites  that  he  is  condcmnatus,
the  heir  declares  himself  testamento  damnas  to  pay  the  legacy.
But  an  heir  can  be  freed  in  this  way  only  in  respect  of  what
can  be  weighed  or  counted,  and  is  of  definite  amount ;  some
include  what  may  be  measured.

176  Further,  an  obligation  is  extinguished  by  novation,  as  when
I  stipulate  with  Titius  that  he  shall  pay  me  what  you  owe  me  ;
for,  by  the  intervention  of  a  new  party,  a  fresh  obligation  is
created,  and  the  original  one  is  put  an  end  to,  being  translated
into  the  new.     So  far  does  this  go,  that  sometimes  the  ori-
ginal obligation  is  extinguished  on  the  principle  of  novation
even  though  the  new  one  be  invalid,  as  when  I  stipulate  that
what  you  owe  me  shall  be  paid  by  Titius  after  his  death,  or
by  a  woman  or  a  pupil  acting  without  tutorial  auctoritas ;  in
such  a  case  I  lose  everything,  for,  while  the  original  debtor  is

§  175.     Comp.  ii,  201.  esto  was  the  phrase   employed   to

1  See  ii,  §§  201  f.  impose   the    burden    on   the    heir,

2  So   Karlowa,    followed    by    P.,  damnas  sum  must  have  been  recited
K.  u.  S.,  and  Hu.  by  him  in  operating  his  discharge.

3  The  MS.  has  damnat,  but  Stud.  4  Such    things     alone     could    be
does  not  think  the  last  letter  abso-  covered  by  the  word  expendo.
lutely   certain.     The   eds.   all   read  5  So  G.  and  all  eds. ;  the  MS.  has
damnatum ;  but  as   every  formula  inde.

had  to  adopt  the  words  of  the  formal       §  176.     §  3,  tit.   I.  afd.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,
act  to  which  it  referred  (iv,  23,  Vlp.  38  ;  iii,  §§  100,  107,  108,  119  ;  Fr.

xxiv,  29,  and  note),  arid  as  damnas  Vat.  §  263.

244  GAII  INSTITUTION VM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [HI,  §§  176-179.

gatio  nulla  est.     non  idem  iuris  est  si  a  seruo  stipulates  fuero ;
imm  tune  [prior]1  proinde  adhuc  obligatus  tenetur,  ac  si  postea

177  a  nullo  stipulatus  fuissem.         Sed  si  eadem  persona  sit  a  qua
postea  stipuler,  ita  demum  nouatio  fit  si  quid  in  posteriore
stipulatione  noui  sit,  forte  si  condicio  uel  dies  uel  sponsor 1

178  adiciatur  aut  detrahatur.         Sed  quod  de  sponsore  diximus,
non  constat :  nam  diuersae  scholae  auctoribus 1  placuit  nihil
ad   nouationem  proficere  sponsoris   adiectionem  aut  detrac-

179  tionem.         Quod  autem  diximus  si  condicio  adiciatur  noua-
tionem   fieri    sic    intellegi   oportet,   ut  ita   dicamus   factam
nouationem  si  condicio  extiterit ;  alioquin  si  defecerit  durat
prior  obligatio :  sed  uideamus  num  is  qui  eo  nomine  agat  doli
mali  aut  pacti  conuenti  exceptione  possit  summoueri,  quia
uidetur  inter  eos  id  actum,  ut  ita  ea  res  peteretur  si  posteri-
oris  stipulationis  extiterit  condicio.     Serums  tamenSulpicius1

discharged,  the  second  obligation  is  null.  But  the  rule  is
different  if  my  [novatory]  stipulation  be  with  a  slave  ;  in  this
case  the  original  debtor  still  remains  bound  as  fully  as  if  there

177  had  been  no  subsequent  stipulation  at  all.         A  subsequent
stipulation  with  the  same  person  as  the  first  will  operate  a
novation  then  only  when  there  is  in  it  something  new ;  for
instance  when  a  condition,  or  a  specification  of  time,  or  a

178  sponsor,  is  either  introduced  or  excluded.         This,  however,  is
not  universally  admitted  so  far  as  a  sponsor  is  concerned  ;  for
the  authorities  of  the  other  school  hold  that  his  introduction

179  or  exclusion  does  not  produce  novation.         In  saying  that
there  is  novation  when  a  condition  is  introduced,  we  are  to  be
understood  as  meaning  that  there  will  be  novation  when  the
condition  is  fulfilled ;  if  it  fail,  the  original  obligation  still
subsists.     But  it  may  be  a  question  whether  the  creditor  suing
in  such  a  case  upon  the  original  obligation  may  not  be  de-
feated by  an  exception  of  dole  or  of  covenant,  seeing  .that
apparently  it  was  the  true  intention  of  parties  that  action  for
the  debt  should  be  competent  only  on  fulfilment  of  the  condi-
tion annexed  to  the   second   stipulation.     Servius  Sulpicius

1  Supplied  from  Inst.  dido   aut  dies  ant  Jideiussor  adici-

§  177.     §  3,  tit.  I.  ai'd.  atur,   it  would  seem  that  the  dies

1  The  MS.  has — condicio  uel  spon-  has  only  been  transposed.

sor  a   dies  adiciatur.      P.    regards  §  178.     '  See  i,  196,  note  1.

the  d  dies  as  a  mistake  of  the  tran-  §179.     Comp.    Gai.    fr.    30,    §§    1,    2,

scriber,   whose    eye   had  carelessly  D.    de  pact,    (ii,    14)  ;  §   3,    tit.    1.

caught  the  first  few  letters  of  adict-  afd.

atur.     But  as  the  Inst.  have  si  con-  1  See  i,  188,  note  5.

Ill,  §§  179, 180.]          COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

245

180

existimauit  statini  et  pendente  condicione  nouationem  fieri,
et  si  defecerit  condicio  ex  neutra  causa  agi  posse  [et]  eo  modo
rem  perire ;  qui  consequenter  et  illud  respondit,  si  quis  id  quod
sibi  Lucius  Titius  deberet  a  seruo  fuerit  stipulatus,  nouationem
fieri  et  rem  perire,  quia  cum  seruo  agi  non  potest :  [scd]  in
utroque  casu  alio  iure  utimur :  nee  magis  his  casibus  nouatio
fit,  quam  si  id  quod  tu  niihi  debeas  a  peregrino,  cum  quo
sponsus 2  communio  non  est,  SPONDES  uerbo  stipulatus  sim.3
Tollitur  adhuc  obligatio  litis  contestatione,1  si  modo  legitimo

180

held  that  there  was  novation  at  once,  and  while  the  condition
was  still  open ;  and  that  on  its  failure  neither  obligation  could
be  sued  upon,  so  that  the  claim  of  the  creditor  was  altogether
extinguished.  Upon  the  same  principle  he  gave  an  opinion
upon  a  case  put  to  him,  that,  if  a  man  stipulated  with  a  slave
for  something  due  him,  say  by  Lucius  Titius,  he  operated  a
novation,  and  thereby  extinguished  the  claim,  action  against
the  slave  being  impossible.  But  in  both  cases  we  follow  a
different  rule ;  there  is  no  novation  in  either  of  them,  any
more  than  when,  using  the  formula  spondes  ?  I  stipulate  with  a
peregrin,  whom  the  law  does  not  hold  qualified  to  act  as  sponsor.
Finally,  an  obligation  is  extinguished  by  litiscontestation  or

2SoBk.,  K.  u.  S.,  amlHu.  The
MS.  has  sponsio ;  G.  sponsionis ;
Savigny  and  P.  S2)onsi.

3  Gomp.  §§  93,  119,  176.
180,  181.     Comp.  §  10,  I.  de  except.
(iv,  13).

These  two  pars,  deal  with  what
has  been  called  necessary  or  pro-
cessual  novation,  in  contradistinc-
tion to  the  voluntary  or  conven-
tional novation  described  in  those
immediately  preceding.  And  it
amounted  to  this, — that  in  certain
eases  of  action  upon  a  debt  the
joinder  of  issue  extinguished  the
original  contention  of  the  creditor
fhat  his  debtor  was  bound  to  pay
the  debt,  substituting  for  it  this
new  one, — that  the  debtor  ought  to
be  condemned  ;  consequently,  if  the
action  was  for  any  reason  not  carried
to  a  conclusion,  the  creditor  could
not  ipso  iure  raise  a  new  one,  his
original  claim  having  ceased  to  exist.

Under  the  early  system  of  proce-
dure by  legis  actio  (described  by
Gai.  iv,  §§  11-29),  if  a  man  had
once  raised  an  action,  no  matter
what  the  nature  or  form  of  it,  but

failed  to  bring  it  to  a  conclusion,
he  had  no  power  to  begin  anew  ;
he  had  exhausted  his  remedy  (iv,
108).  But  under  the  formular  sys-
tem (iv,  §§  30-52),  in  use  in  the
classical  period,  this  ipso  iure  ex-
haustion of  his  judicial  remedy
(consumptio  actionis)  on  joinder  of
issue  was  limited  to  indicia  legitima
in  personam,  with  an  intentio  in  ius
concepta  (iv,  107)  ;  if  it  was  desired
to  put  a  stop  to  an  action  in  rem,  or
to  any  other  sort  of  actio  in  per-
sonam, upon  the  ground  that  the
parties  had  previously  joined  issue  on
the  same  question,  it  was  necessary
to  state  an  exception  of  res  i,u  iudi-
cium  deducta,  the  fresh  action  being
ipso  iure  quite  competent  (iv,  100).
Gai.,  in  §§180,  181,  above,  does
not  expressly  affirm  that  the  nova-
tion resulting  from  litiscontestation
was  limited  to  actions  in  personam
with  an  intentio  in  ius  concepta  (see
iv,  §§  45-47)  ;  but  the  illustration
in  §  181  shows  this  to  have  been  his
meaning  (Keller,  Lititscontestation,
p.  85).
ISO.  J  Litiscontestatio  was  marked  in

246

GAII  IXSTITVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [HI,  §§  180, 181.

iudicio *  fuerit  actura  :  nam  time  obligatio  quidem  principalis
dissoluitur,  incipit  an  tern  teneri  reus  litis  contestations ;  sed
si  condemnatus  sit,  sublata  litis  contestatione  incipit  ex  causa
iudicati  teneri.  et  hoc  \esf\  quod  apud  ueteres 3  scriptum  est,
ante  litem  contestatam  dare  debitorem  oportere,  post  litem
contestatam  condemnari  oportere,  post  condemnationem  iudi-
181  catum  facere  oportere.  Vnde  fit,  ut  si  legitimo  iudicio
debitum  petiero,  postea  de  eo  ipso  hire ]  agere  non  possim,
quia  inutiliter  intendo  DARI  MIHI  OPORTERE,2  quia  litis  con-
testatione dari  oportere  desiit:  aliter  atque  si  imperio  con-
tinenti  iudicio 3  egerim ;  tune  enim  nihilo  minus  obligatio
durat,  et  ideo  ipso  iure  postea  agere  possum,  sed  debeo  per

joinder  of  issue,  provided  it  be  in  a  legitimum  indicium  ;  lor
thereby  the  primary  obligation  is  extinguished,  and  the  de-
fender begins  to  be  bound  by  the  litiscontestation ;  and  if  he
be  condemned,  the  litiscontestation  falls  aside,  and  he  begins
to  be  obliged  by  the  judgment.  Hence  the  saying  of  the  old
jurists  that,  before  joinder  of  issue,  the  creditor's  conten-
tion is  that  his  debtor  ought  to  pay ;  after  joinder,  that  he
ought  to  be  condemned ;  after  condemnation,  that  he  ought
181  to  satisfy  the  judgment.  Accordingly,  if  I  have  proceeded
against  my  debtor  in  a  legitimum  indicium,  I  cannot  after-
wards, as  a  matter  of  abstract  right,  sue  him  again  for  the
same  debt,  because  I  can  no  longer  validly  maintain  that
he  ought  to  pay,  the  '  ought  to  pay  '  having  been  put  an
end  to  by  the  litiscontestation.  It  is  different  if  I  have  been
proceeding  in  a  indicium  imperio  continens ;  then  the  original
obligation  nevertheless  continues  ;  consequently  I  am  by  law
entitled  to  raise  a  fresh  action  ;  but  if  I  do,  I  must  be  defeated

the  early  procedure  by  the  calling  of
witnesses  to  hear  the  magistrate
settle  the  issue  to  be  determined  by
the  court  or  judge  to  whom  it  was
remitted  for  trial  ;  Paul,  ex  Fest.  v.
Contestari  (Bruus,  p.  239).  In  the
classical  procedure  it  was  marked  by
the  praetor's  delivery  to  the  pursuer
of  the  written  formula,  which  con-
tained the  issue.

-  This  phrase  seems  almost  un-
translatable. Neither  '  statutable
action '  (Abdy  and  Walker),  nor
'  statutory  action '  (Poste),  is  an
adequate  rendering  ;  for,  as  Gai.
observes  (iv,  109),  an  action  might
have  been  introduced  by  statute,

yet  not  be  legit,  hid.,  while  contrari-
wise it  might  be  legit,  iud.  though
introduced  not  by  statute  but  by
praetorian  equity.  See  iv,  §§  103  f.

3  See  i,  144,  note  2.
181.  l  The  words  ipso  iure  are  im-
portant ;  for  there  were  cases  in
which  fresh  action  might  be  allowed
on  grounds  of  equity  by  reatitutio
in  integrum  or  otherwise  ;  see  IV.
25,  fr.  46,  §  5,  D.  de  admin,  <-t
peric.  tut.  (xxvi,7) ;  1.  2,  C.  de  iudidis
(iii,  1).

a  Comp.  iv,  41.

3  Equally  untranslatable  with  leiji-
t'lmum  indicium;  see  description  in
iv,  105.

Ill,  §§  181-184.]         COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  247

exccptionem  rei  iudicatae  uel  in  indicium  deductae  summoueri.4
quae  autem  legitima  indicia  et  quae  imperio  continentia
sequenti  commentario  referemus.5

182  Transeamus  nunc  ad  obligationes  quae  ex  delicto  nascuntur,
ueluti  si  quis  furtum  fecerit,  bona  rapuerit,  damnum  dederit,
iniuriara    commiserit:    quarum  omnium   rerum   uno  genere
consistit  obligatio,1  cum  ex  contractu  obligationes  in  mi  genera
diducantur,  sicut  supra  exposuimus.2

183  Furtorum  autem  genera  Seruius  Sulpicius 1  et  Masurius
Sabinus2  mi  esse  dixerunt,  manifestum  et  nee  manifestum,
conceptum  et  oblatum :  Labeo 2  duo,  manifestum  et  nee  mani-
festum ;  nam  conceptum  et  oblatum  species  potius  actionis
esse  furto  cohaerentes   quam   genera  furtorum;    quod  sane

184  uerius   uidetur,   sicut    inferius    apparebit.  Manifestum1
furtum  quidam  id  esse  dixerunt  quod  dum  fit  deprehenditur :

if  an  exception  be  pleaded  of  judgment  recovered  or  of  pre-
vious joinder  of  issue  on  the  same  question.  What  are  legitima
indicia  and  what  indicia  imperio  continentia  will  be  explained
in  our  next  Commentary.

1 82  Let  us  pass  now  to  those  obligations  that  originate  in  delict,
as  when  theft  has  been  committed,  robbery,  wrongful  damage
to  property,  or  [personal]  injury.     The  obligation  in  all  of  these
is  of  the  same  sort;  whereas,  as  we  have  seen,  contractual
obligations  are  of  four  sorts.

183  According   to   Servius   Sulpicius    and   Masurius    Sabinus,
theft  is  of  four  varieties, — manifest  and  non-manifest  theft,
discovery  of  stolen  goods,  and  introduction  of  them  into  the
premises  of  a  third  party.     But  Labeo  recognised  only  two
varieties,  the  manifest  and  non-manifest ;  discovery  of  stolen
goods,  and  introduction  of  them  into  the  premises  of  a  third
party,  he  regards  rather  as  grounds  of  action  presupposing
theft  than  varieties  of  it;  and  this  seems  the  more  correct

184  view,  as  will  appear  presently.         A  theft,  according  to  some,
is  to  be  regarded  as  manifest  then  only  when  it  is  detected

4  Comp.  iv,  106.  2  See  §  89.

5  See  iv,  §§  104,  105.  §  183.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  2,  D.  de  furt.
§§182-208.      Comp.    tit.    I.    DE    OBLI-  (xlvii,  2);  Gell.  xi,  18;  Paul,  ii,  31,

GATIONISVS     QVAE      EX      DELICTO  §  2 ;  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.

NASCVNTVR  (iv,  1).  l  See  i,  188,  note  5.

§  182.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  4,  D.  de  0.  et  2  See  i,  196,  note  1.

A.  (xliv,  7)  ;  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  §§  184,  185.     Comp.  Gell.,  Paul.,  Inst,

1  All  created  re,  that  is  by  thing  as  in  last  par.

done.  :  The  MS.  has  metum  fructum.

248  GA1I  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [HI,  §§  184-186.

alii  uero  ulterius,  quod  eo  loco  deprelienditur  ubi  fit,  ueluti
si  in  oliueto  oliuarum,  in  uineto  uuarum  furtum  factum  est,
quamdiu  in  eo  oliueto  aut  uineto  fur  sit?  aut  si  in  domo
furtum  factum  sit,  quamdiu  in  ea  domo  fur  sit :  alii  adhuc  ulte-
rius, eousque 3  manifestum  furtum  esse  dixerunt  donee

perferret  eo  quo  perferre  fur  destinasset :  alii  adhuc  ulterius,
quandoque  earn  rem  fur  tenens  uisus  fuerit ;  quae  sententia
non  optinuit :  sed  et  illorum  sententia  qui  existimauerunt,
donee  perferretur  eo  quo  fur  destinasset,  deprehensum  furtum
manifestum  esse,  ideo  non  uidetur  probari  quod  magnain
recipit  dubitationem  utrum  unius  diei  an  etiam  plurium
dieruni  spatio  id  terminandum  sit;  quod  eo  pertinet,  quia
saepe  in  aliis  ciuitatibus  subreptas  res  in  alias  ciuitates  uel
in  alias  prouincias  destinant  fures  perferre  :  ex  duabus  itaque
superioribus  opinionibus  alterutra  adprobatur;  magis  tamen

185  plerique   posteriorem   probant.          Nee   manifestum   furtum
quid  sit  ex  iis  quae  diximus  intellegitur :  nam  quod  mani-

186  festum  non  est,  id  nee  manifestum  est.         Conceptum  furtum

while  being  committed  ;  others  extend  the  definition  to  theft
detected  while  the  thief  is  still  in  the  place  of  its  commission,
— while  he  is  still  in  the  olive-garden,  say,  from  which  he  has
been  stealing  olives,  or  the  vineyard  in  which  he  has  been
stealing  grapes,  or,  if  the  theft  have  been  committed  in  a
house,  before  he  has  left  it;  others  go  further,  and  hold  a
theft  to  be  manifest  until  the  thief  has  reached  his  destination
with  the  stolen  property ;  while  others  go  further  still,  and
reckon  the  theft  manifest  if  at  any  time  the  thief  be  dis-
covered with  the  goods  in  his  hands.  This  last  opinion  has
not  met  with  favour ;  nor  does  that  which  regards  a  theft  as
manifest  until  the  thief  has  reached  his  destination  seem  to
be  approved,  there  being  great  dubiety  as  to  the  time,  whether
one  day  or  several,  within  which  that  must  occur, — for  a  thief
often  means  to  carry  the  things  he  has  stolen  in  one  city  into
another  city  or  province.  One  or  other  of  the  first  and  second
opinions,  therefore,  is  adopted,  and  more  generally  the  second.

185  What  is  non-manifest  theft  may  be  gathered  from  what  has
been  already  said ;  whatever  is  not  manifest  is  non-manifest.

186  There  is  said  to  be  furtum  conceptum  when  stolen  goods  are
sought  for  and  discovered  on  a  man's  premises  in  the  presence

2  The  MS.  has  fuerit.  inserts  cuiusque  rei.

3  P.  conjectures  that  the  illegible       §  186.     §  4,  tit.   I.  afd.     Cornp.  §§191,
word  may  have  been  scilicet;  Hu.  192  ;  Paul,  ii,  31,  §§  3,  5.

Ill,  §§  186-189.]          COMMEXTAim  QVATTVOR.

249

dicitur  cum  apud  aliquem  testibus  praesentibus  furtiua  res
quaesita  et  inuenta  est  :  nam  in  eum  propria  actio  constituta

187  est,  quamuis  fur  non  sit,  quae  appellatur  concept!.       Oblatum
furtum  dicitur  cum  res  furtiua  tibi  ab  aliquo  oblata  sit,  eaque
apud  te  concepta  sit  ;  utique  l  si  ea  mente  data  tibi  fuerit  ut
apud  te  potius  quam  apud   eum  qui   dederit  conciperetur:
nam  tibi,  apud  quern  concepta  est,  propria  aduersus  eum  qui
optulit,   quamuis   fur   non    sit,    constituta   est   actio    [gwae]

188  appellatur  oblati.         Est  etiam  prohibit!  furti  [actio]  aduersus
eum  qui  furtum  quaerere  uolentem  prohibuerit.

Poena  manifest!  furti  ex  lege  xn  tabularum  capitalis1  erat:
nam  liber  uerberatus  addicebatur  ei  cui  furtum  fecerat  ;  utrum
autem  seruus  efficeretur  ex  addictione  an  adiudicati  loco  con-
stitueretur  ueteres  quaerebant  :  2  -----  .3  seel  postea

189

of  witnesses  ;  it  gives  rise  to  a  special  action  against  him,
even  though  he  be  not  the  thief,  which  goes  by  the  name  of

187  actio  furti  concepti.         Furtum   oUatum  occurs  when  stolen
property  has  been  brought  to  you  by  some  one  and  discovered
on  your  premises,  at  least  if  it  have  been  given  to  you  with
the  intent  that  it  should  be  found  in  your  house  rather  than
his ;  you,  on  whose  premises  the  discovery  has  been  made,
are  entitled  to  an  action  against  the  individual  who  intro-
duced the  stolen  goods,  even  though  he  be  not  the  thief,  which

188  is  called  an  actio  furti  oblati.         The  actio  furti  prohibiti  is
that  made  use  of  against  a  man  who  prevents  search  being
made  [on  his  premises]  for  stolen  property.

189  The  punishment  of  manifest  theft,  according  to  the  Twelve

137.     §  4,  tit.   I.  afd.     Comp.  §  191  ;
Paul,  ii,  31,  §§  3,  5.

1  The  MS.  has  uelutiqite.
188.     §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  §  192.
3  189,  190.     Comp.  Cic.  pro  Tullio,  v,
47  ;  Gel],  xi,   18,  xx,  1  ;  Serv.   ad
Aen.   viii,  205  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  i,  4,
§  19  ;  §  5,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  A  capital  punishment  was  one
that  affected  the  caput  of  the  in-
dividual by  depriving  him  of  life,
liberty,  or  citizenship.

2  Gai.   seems  to  be  pointing  to
the    distinction    between   an   indi-
vidual  who    by    judicial    sentence
became    in    the    fullest    sense    the
slave  of  the  party  to  whom  he  was
awarded,   and  an   adiudicatus,    i.e.
an  insolvent  debtor  handed  over  to
his  creditor  to  work  off  his  debt,

and  who  was  only  de  facto  in  the
position  of  a  slave,  de  iure  a  free-
man. That  the  convicted  manifest
thief  could  not  have  been  in  the
position  of  a  mere  adiudicatus  (who
forfeited  neither  freedom  nor  citizen-
ship) seems  clear ;  if  he  had  been,
his  punishment  could  not  have
been  described  as  capital.  Gell.
(xi,  18,  §  8)  says  that  if  the  theft
was  by  night,  or  the  thief  armed,
the  punishment  was  death;  but  that,
in  the  absence  of  either  of  those
aggravations,  decemuiri  .  .  .  liberos
uerberari  addicique  iusserunt  ei,  etc.
This  may  be  ambiguous;  but  in  xx,
1,  §  7,  he  says  distinctly— -fur em
manifestum  ei  cui  furtum  factum  est
in  seruitutem  tradit.

3  The  illegible  passage  (two-thirds

250  GAII  IXSTITVTIOXVM  IVKIS  CIVIL1S    [HI,  §§  189-192.

inprobata  est  asperitas  poenae,  et  tarn  ex  serui  persona  quam

190  ex  liberi  quadrupli  actio  praetoris  edicto  constituta  est.       Nee
manifest!  furti  poena  per  legem  [AT/]  tabularum  dupli  inro-

191  gatur,  eamque  etiam  praetor  conseruat.         Concept!  et  oblati
poena  ex  lege  xn  tabularum  tripli  est,  eague  similiter  a  prae-

192  tore   seruatur.          Prohibit!   actio   quadrupli   est,   ex   edicto
praetoris  introducta :  lex  autem  eo  nomine  nullam  poenam
constituit;  hoc  solum  praecipit,  ut  qui  quaerere  uelit  nudus
quaerat,  linteo1  cinctus,  lancem  habens  ;  qui  si  quid  inuenerit,2

Tables,  was  capital.  If  the  thief  was  a  freeman,  he  was
scourged  and  given  up  by  magisterial  decree  to  him  whose
goods  he  had  stolen  ;  but  whether  this  addiction  made  him  a
slave,  or  only  put  him  in  the  condition  of  an  insolvent  judg-
ment debtor,  was  a  point  of  controversy  with  the  old  lawyers.
[//  a  slave,  he  was  first  scourged  and  then  thrown  from  the
\_Tarpeian  rock.]  But  afterwards  these  punishments  were
disapproved  on  account  of  their  severity ;  and  an  action  for
fourfold  the  value  of  the  thing  stolen,  applicable  alike  to  free-
men and  slaves,  was  substituted  by  the  praetorian  edict.

190  Non-manifest  theft  was  punished  by  the  Twelve  Tables  with
CL-  twofold  sostittt-kiott- ;  and  this  the  praetor  has  left  untouched.

191  The  punishment  for  stolen  goods  discovered  or  introduced,
according  to  the   Tables,  was  of  threefold  the  value  of  the
stolen    property ;    and    this    too   the   praetor    has    retained.

192  The  actio  furti  prohibiti  for  fourfold  the  value  was  introduced
by   the   edict.     The   Twelve   Tables   had   not   provided  any
punishment  for  this  offence ;  all  they  required  was  that  he
who  proposed  to  search  another's  premises   for   stolen   pro-
of a  line)  was  thus  supplied  by  Hu.       §191.     Comp.    iv,   173;    Gell.   xi,   18;
in    his    third    edition — in    seruum  Paul,  ii,  31,  §  14  ;  §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.
aequc   uerleratum    animaduerteba-      §  192.     Comp.    Plato    de    leg.    xii,    7  ;
tur,  and  this   conjecture  has   been               Schol.  Aristoph.   Nub.    499  ;  Paul.
adopted  by   K.   u.    S.     Hu.  in  his-              ex  Festo,  v.  Lance  et  lido  (Bruns,  p.
last  edition,  however,  proposes — in              244)  ;  Gell.  xi,  18,  xvi,  10   (where
eum   autem,    qui   [seruus    erat   ae-               he  says  that  the  practice  of  search
que]  uerberatum  animaduertebatiir.               lance  et  lido  was  abolished  by  the
Neither  reading  is  satisfactory  ;  and               lex  Aebutia,  as  to  which  see  below,
we    can  hardly   suppose   that   Gai.               iv,  30,  note  1)  ;  Lex  Burgund.  tit.
would  content  himself  with  so  feeble  12  ;  §  4,   tit.   I.   afd.;  Inst.    Gloss,
a  word  as  animaduertere,  when  he               Taurin.  iv,  1,  §  4  (Z.f.  RG.  vii,  78).
was  in  the  same  breath  denouncing  l    So    the    MS.  ;    many    editors,
the  asperitas  poenae.     Gell.    (§  8)               following   GelliuSj    etc.,    substitute
says — iusse.ru.nt  .  .  .  servos  .  .  .  uer-               lido;  Hu.,  both   here  and  in   sub-
beribiis  adjici  et  e  saxo  praedpitari.               sequent  pars. ,  retains  the  linteo  and
Hence  Schoell  (Leg.   XII  Tab.  rel.              adds  lido.

p.  146)  suggests — seruus  aeque  uer-  2  So  those  four  words  in  the  MS.

beratus  e  saxo  deidebatur.  But  there  is  good  reason  to  doubt

in,  §  193.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

251

193  iubet  id  lex  furtum  manifestum  esse.  Quid  sit  autem
linteum  quaesitum  est :  sed  uerius  est  eum  consuti  genus  esse,
quo  necessariae  partes  tegerentur.  quae  res  tota1  riclicula  est;
nam  qui  uestitum  quaerere  prohibet,  is  et  rmdum  quaerere
prohibiturus  est,  eo  magis  quod  ita  quaesita  re  inuenta  maiori
poenae  subiciatur.  deinde  quod  lancem  siue  ideo  haberi
iubeatur  tit  manibus  occupatis 2  nihil  subiciat,  siue  ideo  ut

193

perty  should  do  so  naked,  wearing  nothing  but  a  linteum
and  carrying  a  platter;  and  if  he  found  anything,  then,
according  to  the  Tables,  the  case  was  to  be  dealt  with  as
one  of  manifest  theft.  What  this  linteum  was  has  been
doubted,  but  it  seems  to  have  been  some  sort  of  cloth  or
towel  worn  round  the  loins  for  decency's  sake.  But  the
whole  thing  is  ridiculous ;  for  he  who  would  prevent  a  man
wearing  his  ordinary  dress  from  making  a  search,  would
equally  prevent  him  when  naked,  especially  as  the  discovery
of  a  thing  when  sought  for  would  subject  the  prohibiter  to  a
heavier  penalty.  And  as  regards  the  platter,  whether  it  be
said  that  its  use  was  enjoined  in  order  that,  the  hands  of

their  accuracy,  and  to  warrant  tlie
surmise  that  Gai.  had  formed  an
erroneous  notion  of  the  distinction
between  furtum  conceptum  and  fur-
turn  prohibitum.  That  he  was
puzzled  is  evident  from  what  he
says  in  the  next  par.  The  view
that  occurs  to  me,  and  that  seems
to  obviate  the  difficulty  he  there
expresses,  is  this :  that  in  the  earlier
law  search  required  in  every  case  to
he  made  lance  et  licio,  and  at  a  later
period  (§  186  ;  §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.)  in
the  presence  of  witnesses  ;  that  if
the  search  was  permitted,  and  the
stolen  property  discovered,  there
•was  furtum  conceptum  with  a  three-
fold penalty  ;  but  that  if  it  were
prevented  there  was  under  the
Twelve  Tables  a  constructive  fur-
tum manifestum,  and  under  the
edict  an  offence  called  furtum
prohibitum,  punished  with  the
same  fourfold  penalty  as  manifest
theft.

If  this  be  the  correct  view,  quod
si  prohibitus  fuerit  ought  to  be  sub-
stituted for  qui  si  quid  inuenerit ;
for  the  actio  furti  prohibits  appears
to  have  been  based,  not  on  the  dis-
covery of  the  stolen  goods  in  spite

of  prohibition, — indeed  it  is  ex-
tremely doubtful  whether  under
such  circumstances  search  was  pos-
sible, for  to  enter  a  man's  house
against  his  will  was  an  offence  (Gai.
in  fr.  18,  D.  de  in  ius  uoc.  ii,  4),—
but  on  the  prohibition  itself  (§  188).
If  there  had  been  an  actio  furti  pro-
hibiti  only  when  the  stolen  property
had  been  discovered,  what  shadow
of  reason  could  there  have  been  for
the  contention  of  some  of  the  jurists
(§  194)  that  furtum  prohibitum  was
theft  only  by  fiction  of  law,  lege,
non  natura  ?

§  193.     See   references  and   remarks  in
notes  to  last  par.

1  The  MS.  has  qrlextota  ;  but  the
lex  seems  to  be  a  gloss, — some  anno-
tator's     explanation    of    what    he
understood  by  the  res.     Hu.  reads
quare  lex  tota.

2  The   MS.    has    occupantis;   the
correction  is  Vangerow's  in  his  dis-
sertation de  furto  conccpto  ex  lege
XII  Tab.  (Heidelb.  1845),— a  mono-
graph very  amusing  in  its  exposure
of  the  vagaries  of  the  civilians  on
this  subject,  but  which  itself  rests
content  with  the  explanation  of  Gai.
as  in  all  respects  satisfactory.

252  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVEIS  CIVILIS   [III,  §§  193-195.

quod  inuenerit  ibi  inponat,  neutrum  eorum  procedit  si  id
quod  quaeratur  eius  magnitudinis  aut  naturae  sit  ut  neque
subici  neque  ibi  inponi  possit.  certe  non  dubitatur  cuius-

194  cumque  materiae  sit  ea  lanx  satis  legi  fieri.         Propter  hoc
tamen  quod  lex  ex  ea  causa  maniiestum  furtum  esse  iubet,
sunt  qui  scribunt  furtum  manifesturn  aut  lege  [intellegi] l  aut
natura ;  lege  id  ipsum  de  quo  loquimur,  natura  illud  de  quo
superius  exposuimus :   sed  uerius  est  natura  tantum  mani-
festurn furtum  intellegi ;  neque  enim  lex  facere  potest  ut  qui
manifestus  fur  non  sit,  manifestus  sit,  non  magis  quam  qui
omnino  fur  non  sit,  fur  sit,  et  qui  adulter  aut  honiicida  non
sit,  adulter  uel  honiicida  sit;  at  illud  sane  lex  facere  potest,
ut  proiride  aliquis  poena  teneatur  atque  si  furtum  uel  adul-
terium   uel   homicidium    admisisset,   quamuis    mini    eorum
admiserit.

195  Furtum  autem  fit  non  solum  cum  quis  intercipiendi  causa
rem  alienam  amouet,  sed  generaliter  cum  quis  rein  alienam

the  holder  being  occupied  in  carrying  it,  he  could  not  sur-
reptitiously take  anything  into  the  premises,  or  in  order  that
lie  might  place  upon  it  anything  found  by  him,  neither  reason
could  be  satisfactory  when  the  article  sought  for  was  of  such
a  size  or  nature  that  it  could  neither  be  smuggled  into  the
premises  nor  put  upon  the  platter.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the
law  was  complied  with  if  a  platter  was  there,  no  matter  of

194  what  material  it  might  be.         On  the  strength  of  the  declara-
tion of  the  Tables  that  the  discovery  of  stolen  articles  in  this
way  is  to  be  treated  as  manifest  theft,  some  maintain  that  a
theft  may  be  manifest  either  by  force  of  law  or  in  point  of
fact ;  by  force  of  law  in  the  case  we  have  just  been  dealing
with,  in  point  of  fact  in  that  previously  explained.     But  it  is
more  accurate  to  say  that  theft  can  be  manifest  only  when  it
is  so  in  point  of  fact ;  the  law  can  no  more  make  a  man  a
thief  who  is  not  so,  than  it  can  make  that  person  an  adulterer
or  a  homicide  who  is  innocent  of  adultery  or  manslaughter;
but  it  may  do  this, — it  may  declare  a  man  liable  to  punish-
ment as  if  he  had  committed  theft,  adultery,  or  manslaughter,
although  he  be  not  actually  guilty  of  any  of  them.

195  There  is  theft  not  only  when  a  man  removes  another's  pro-
perty with  the  intention  to  deprive  him  of  it,  but  generally
when  one  meddles  with  what  belongs  to  another  against  the

§  194.     Comp.  Gai.  in  fr.  2,  §  1,  D.  de  x  Huschke's  addition.

usufr.  ear.  rcr.  (vii,  5).  §  195.   §6,  tit.  I.afd.  Cp.  Paul.  ii,31,§  1.

TU,  §§  196-198.]  CO. \IMEXT ARII  QVATTVOR.

253

196  inuito  domino  contrectat.         Itaque  si  quis  re  quae  apucl  eum
deposita  sit  utatur,  furtum  committit ;  et  si  quis  utendara  reni
acceperit,  eamque  in  alium  usum  transtulerit,  furti  obligatur,
ueluti   si   quis  argentura  utendum  acceperit,   [quod] 1   quasi
amicos  ad  cenam  inuitaturus  rogauerit,2  et  id  peregre  secum
tulerit,    aut    si   quis   equum    gestandi    gratia    commodatum
longius  secum 3  aliquo  duxerit,  quod  ueteres  scripserunt  de  eo

197  qui  in  aciem  4  perduxisset.         Placuit  tamen  eos  qui  rebus
commodatis   aliter  uterentur   quam  utendas  accepissent  ita
furtum  committere,  si  intellegant  id  se  inuito  domino  facere,
eumque  si  intellexisset  non  permissurum  ;  at  si  permissurum
credant,  extra  furti  crimen  uideri :  optima  sane  distinctione,

198  quia  furtum  sine  dolo  malo  non  committitur.1         Sed  et  si

196  owner's  will.         Accordingly,  if  a  man  take  the  use  of  a  thing
deposited  with  him,  he  commits  a  theft.     So  does  he  who,
having  received  a  thing  to  be  used  in  a  particular  way,  takes
the  use  of  it  in  another  way  ;  as,  for  instance,  when  a  man  on
his  own  request,  and  on  the  representation  that  he  is  about  to
entertain  his  friends,  has  received  the  use  of  certain  silver
plate,  which  he  carries  away  with  him  into  the  country  ;  or
when  one  takes  with  him  to  a  distance  —to  use  an  illustration
of  the  old  jurists,  when  he  takes  into  battle — a  horse  bor-

197  rowed  by  him  merely  for  a  ride.         But  the  statement  that  a
borrower  commits  theft  by  using  what  he  has  borrowed  for
another  purpose  than  that  for  which  it  was  lent,  must  be
taken  with  this  qualification, — if  he   know  that  the  owner
does  not  consent,  and  that  the  latter,  if  he  were  aware  of
what  was  being  done,  would  not  allow  it.     If  the  borrower
believe  that  it  would  be  allowed,  the  idea  of  theft  is  excluded  ;
and  the  distinction  is  a  very  proper  one,  seeing  that  there  can

198  be  no  theft  without  wrongful  intent.         Even  when  a  man

§  196.  §  6,  tit.  I.  afd.  Comp.  Cell,  vi,
15  ;  Valer.  Max.  viii,  2,  §  4  ;  Paul.
ii,  31,  §  29.

1  Inserted  by  all  eds.  except  Hu.,
P. ,  and  K.  u.  S. ,  who  drop  the  sub-
sequent rogauerit,  and  so  find  quod
unnecessary.

2  This    word    in    the    MS.,    but
deleted    by    the    eds.    just    men-
tioned.

3  The  MS.  has  longius  cum  aliquo;
secum   is    Goeschen's    amendment,
approved  by  most  eds. ;  K.   u.   S.
drop  the  word  altogether ;  Hu.  re-

forms the  sentence, — longius  [quam
quo  rogauerit]  aliquo,  etc.

4  The  MS.  has  in  aciem  quite  dis-
tinctly ;  but  Hu.  in  his  last  edition
has  substituted  ids  Ariciam,  under
the  belief  that  the  reference  is  to
the  story  told  by  Valer.  Max.  of  a
man  who  was  condemned  for  theft
because,  having  borrowed  a  horse
to  ride  to  Aricia,  he  took  it  a  little
further.

§  197.     §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  Comp.  ii,  50  ;  Paul,  ii,  31,  §  1.

§  198.     §  8,  tit.  1.  afd.

254  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [III,  §§  198-200.

credat  aliquis  inuito  domino  se  rem  contrectare,  domino  autem
uolente  id  liat,  dicitur  furtum  non  fieri,  unde,1  cum  Titius
seruum  meum  sollicitauerit 2  ut  quasdam  res  mi  hi  subriperet
et  ad  eum  perferret,  [et  seruus] 3  id  ad  me  pertulerit,  ego,  dum
uolo  Titium  in  ipso  delicto  deprehendere,  permiserim  seruo
quasdam  res  ad  eum  perferre,  quaesitum  est  utrum  furti  an
serui  corrupti  iudicio 4  teneatur  Titius  mihi,  an  neutro  ?
responsum  neutro  eum  teueri;  furti  ideo  quod  non  inuito
me  res  contrectauerit,  serui  corrupti  ideo  quod  deterior  seruus

199  factus  non  sit.         Interdum  autem  etiam  liberorum  hominum
furtum  fit,  ueluti  si  quis  liberorum  nostroram  qui  in  potestate
nostra  sunt,  siue  etiam  uxor  quae  in  manu  nostra  sit,1  sine
etiam   adiudicatus 2    uel  auctoratus 3  meus  subreptus  fuerit.

200  Aliquando  etiam  suae  rei  quisque  furtum  committit,  ueluti  si
debitor  rem  quam  creditori  pignori  dedit  subtraxerit,  uel  si

believes  that  he  is  dealing  with  a  thing  against  the  will  of
its  owner,  yet  if  in  fact  the  owner  consents,  it  is  held  that  no
theft  is  committed.  Hence,  when  Titius  was  importuning
a  slave  of  mine  to  carry  away  things  belonging  to  me  and
give  them  to  him,  (of  which  my  slave  informed  me,)  and  I,
desiring  that  Titius  should  be  taken  in  the  act,  allowed  my
slave  to  take  some  articles  to  him,  this  question  arose, — Was
Titius  liable  to  me  in  an  action  for  theft,  or  in  an  action
for  corrupting  my  slave  ?  or  was  he  liable  in  neither?  The
answer  was  that  he  was  liable  in  neither ;  that  he  was  not
liable  for  theft,  because  there  had  been  no  meddling  with  my
property  against  my  will,  nor  for  corrupting  my  slave,  because
the  latter  was  not  a  whit  the  worse  for  what  had  happened.

199  Sometimes  there  may  be  theft  even  of  free  persons;  as  when
any  of  my  children  in  my  potcstas  is  stealthily  carried  off,  or
my  wife  in  manu,  or  even  my  judgment  debtor,  or  one  of  my

200  sworn  gladiators.         Sometimes,  too,  a  man  may  steal  what  is
his  own,  as  when  a  debtor  surreptitiously  takes  away  some-

1  After  unde   the   MS.    has   illud  iudicatus ;  the  amendment  is  due  to
quaesitum   et  probatum  est,   which  Hu.,  who  rightly  observes  that  the
have  been  expunged  as  a  gloss.                        iuilir.atus  or  judgment   debtor  was

2  So  the  Inst.;  the  MS.  has  colliyi-  not  in  any  sense  in  the  possession
taret.  of  his  creditor  until  adiudicatio, — •

3  Supplied  from  the  Inst.  a  step  in  execution  rendered  neces-

4  Comp.  §  23,  I.  de  act.  (iv,  6).  sary  by  his  having  no  effects.

§  199.     Comp.  §  9,  tit.  I.  afd.  3  See  Collat.   iv,   3,  §  2,   ix,   2,

1  Comp.    ii,  90  (ipsas  non  possi-  §  2 ;  L.  lulia  Munidpalis,  cap.  25

demus).  (Bruns,  p.  79).

*  See  §  189,  note  2  ;  iv,  21,  note  §  200.     Comp.   §  204;  Paul,   ii,  31,   §§

6.     The   MS.   and  most   eds.    have  21,  36  ;  §  10,  tit.  I.  afd.

Ill,  §§  200-202.]          COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  255

bonae  fidei  possessor!  rein  meam  possidenti  subripuerim:  unde
placuit  eum  qui  seruum  suum,  queni  alius  bona  fide  posside-

201  bat,  ad  se  reuersum  celauerit,  furtum  committere.         Rursus
ex  diuerso  interdura  alienas  res  occupare  et  usucapere  con-
cessum  est,  nee  creditur  furtum  fieri,  ueluti  res  hereditarias
quarum  heres  non  est  nactus  possessionem,  nisi  necessarius
heres  esset  ;l  nam  necessario  herede  extante  placuit  nihil  pro
herede  usucapi  posse.     Item  debitor  rem  quain  fiduciae  causa
creditori   mancipauerit  aut  in   iure   cesserit,  secundum    ea'-2
quae  in  superiore  commentario  rettulimus,  sine  furto  possidere

202  et  usucapere  potest.        Interdum  furti  tenetur  qui  ipse  furtum
non  fecerit,  qualis  est  cuius  ope  consilio  furtum  factum  est  :
in  quo  numero  est  qui  nuinmos  tibi  excussit  ut  eos  alius  sub-
riperet,  uel  obstitit  tibi  ut  alius  subriperet,  aut  oues  aut  bones
tuas  lugauit  ut  alius  eas  exciperet :  et  hoc  ueteres l  scripserunt

thing  he  has  given  to  his  creditor  as  a  pledge,  or  when  I
stealthily  take  away  something  of  mine  from  a  party  possess-
ing it  in  good  faith  ;  and  accordingly  it  has  been  ruled  that  he
who  conceals  his  own  slave,  who  has  run  away  from  a  third

201  party  possessing  him  in  good  faith,  is  guilty  of  theft.         On
the  other  hand  we  are  sometimes  allowed  to  possess  ourselves
of  another's  property,  and  acquire  a  title  to  it  by  usucapion,
without  any  theft  being  held  to  have  been  committed ;  as
[when  we  take  possession  of]  things  belonging  to  an  inheritance
before  the  heir  has  entered,  provided  always  he  is  not  a  neces-
sary heir  ;  for  it  is  held  that  if  there  be  a  necessary  heir  there
can  be  no  usucapion  pro  herede.     A  debtor,  also,  may,  without
any  imputation  of  theft,  possess  and  reacquire  by  usucapion  a
thing  he  has  fiduciarily  conveyed  to  his  creditor  by  mancipa-
tion or  cession  before  a  magistrate,  as  explained  in  the  preced-

202  ing  Commentary.         Occasionally  a  man  may  be  chargeable
with  theft  although  he  may  not  have  been  the  actual  thief,
namely,  when  it  has  been  committed  with  his  aid  or  counsel.
He  belongs  to  this  class  who  has  knocked  money  out  of  your
hand  that  another  might  make  off  with  it,  or  has  impeded
your  movements  that  another  might  take  something  from  you,
or  has  scattered  your  sheep  or  cattle — as,  in  an  old  case  in  the
books,  by  the  use  of  a  red  flag — that  another  might  get  them
away  from  you.     But  if  any  of  such  things  have  been  done  in

§  201.     Comp.  ii,  g§  52,  56-60;  Paul,  ii,  -  The  MS.  has  dnm  ea.

31,  §  11."  §  202.     §  11,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  iv,  37;
1  So  the  MS.  ;  K.  u.  S.  and  Hu.  Paul,  ii,  31,  §10;  §§12, 13,  tit.  I.  afd.

have  cxtet ;  I  tail  to  see  why.  1  See  i,  144,  note  2.

256  GA1I  IXSTITVTIONVM  I  VMS  CIVILIS   [HF,  §§  202-205.

de  eo  qui  panno  rubro  fugauit  armentum.  sed  si  quid  per
lasciuiam  et  non  data  opera  ut  furtum  committeretur  factuin
sit,  uidebinms  an  utilis 2  actio  dari 3  debeat,  cum  per  legein
Aquiliam 4  quae  de  damno  lata  [est]  etiam  culpa  puniatur.

203  Furti  autem  actio  ei  conpetit  cuius  interest  rem  saluam  esse,
licet  dominus  non  sit :  itaque  nee  domino  aliter  conpetit  quam

204  si  eius  intersit  rem  non  perire.         Vnde  constat  creditorem  de
pignore  subrepto  furti  agere  posse ;  adeo  quidern  ut  quamuis
ipse  dominus,  id  est  ipse  debitor,  earn  rem  subripuerit,  nihilo

205  minus  creditor!  conpetat  actio  furti.         Item  si  fullo  polienda
curandaue  aut  sarcinator  sarcienda  uestimenta  mercede  certa
acceperit,  eaque  furto  amiserit,  ipse  furti  habet  actionem,  non
dominus ;    quia  dornini  nihil  interest1  ca  non  periisse,  cum
iudicio  locati  a  fullone  aut  sarcinatore  suum  consequi  possit,  si
modo  is  fullo  aut  sarcinator  rci  praestandae2  sufficiat;  nam  si
soluendo  non  est,  tune  quia  ab  eo  dominus  suum  consequi  uon

pure  wantonness,  and  not  of  set  purpose  to  facilitate  a  theft,
it  will  be  for  consideration  whether  an  utilis  [Aquilian]  actio
ought  not  to  be  allowed,  since,  by  the  Aquilian  law  concerning
wrongful  damage  to  property,  even  culpa  is  punishable.

203  The  actio  furti  is  competent  to  him  whose  interest  it  is  that
the  thing  should  be  safe,  even  though  not  its  owner ;  there-
fore the  owner  can  raise  it  then  only  when  it  is  his  interest

204  that  the  thing  should  not  be  lost.         Hence  it  is  acknow-
ledged that  a  creditor  may  raise  it  in  respect  of  theft  of  what
has  been  pledged  to  him,  and  that  even  when  it  is  the  owner,

205  that  is  to  say  his  debtor,  that  has  taken  it  from  him.         So,  if
clothes  have  been  given  to  a  fuller  to  be  pressed  or  scoured,
or  to  a  tailor  to  be  repaired,  and  that  for  a  fixed  recompense,
if  he  has  lost  them  by  theft  it  is  he  that  has  the  actio  furti,
and  not  the  owner;  for  it  matters  not  to  the  latter  whether
they  be  lost  or  not,  seeing  he  can  recover  damages  from  the
fuller  or  tailor,  if  he  be  solvent,  by  an  action  of  location.     If,
however,  he  be  insolvent,  then,  as  the  owner  cannot  recover

2  See  ii,  78,  note  1.  §  205.     Comp.  Paul,  ii,  31,  §  29  ;  §  15.

3  The  MS.   has  atque  deari ;  the  tit.  I.  afd  ;  §  5,  I.  de  locat.  et  cond.
Inst.   actio  dari;  but  for  atque  one  (iii,  24).

might  perhaps  read  A  qullia.  1  So   the   Inst. ;  the   MS.    has   id

4  Comp.  §211.  est.

§203.     §  13,  tit.  1.   afd.     Comp.  Paul.  2  The   MS.    has    rempstandepic  ;

ii,  31,  §  4.    On  the  condictiofitrtlua  P.  reads  representandae  pecuniae ;

see  iv,  4.  Ku.  ret  praestandae  plene  ;  K.  u.  S.

§  204.     Comp.  Paul,  ii,  31,  §  19  ;  §  14,  as  above.

tit.  I.  al'd.

Ill,  §§  205-208.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  257

potest,  ipsi  furti  actio  conpetit,  quia  hoc  casu  ipsius  interest

206  rem  saluam  esse.         Quae  de '  fullone  aut  sarcinatore  diximus,
eadem  transferemus  et  ad  eum  cui  rem  commodauimus :  nam
ut  illi  mercedem  capiendo  custodiam  praestant,  ita  hie  quoque
utendi  comrnodum  percipiendo  similiter  necesse  habet  cus-

207  todiam  praestare.         Sed  is  apud  quern  res  deposita  est  custo-
diam non  praestat,  tantumque  in  eo  obnoxius  est  si  quid  ipse
dolo  [malo] l  fecerit ;  qua  de  causa  [si]  res 2  ei  subrepta  fuerit
quae  restituenda  est/ eius  nomine  actione  depositi  non  tenetur,
nee  ob  id  eius  interest  rem  saluam  esse ;  furti  itaque  agere  non
potest,  sed  ea  actio  domino  conpetit.

208  In  sumrna  sciendum  est  quaesitum  esse  an  inpubes  rem
alienam   amouendo   furtum    faciat.      plerisque   placet,    quia
furtum  ex  adfectu  consistit,1  ita  demum  obligari  eo  criniine

from  him  what  he  is  entitled  to,  he,  the  owner,  may  sue  the
actio  furti,  because  in  this  case  he  has  an  interest  in  the

206  safety  of  his   property.         What  has  been  said  of  a  fuller
or  tailor  applies  equally  to  him  to  whom  we  have  lent  some
specific  article ;  for  as  the  former,  in  consideration  of  the  pay-
ment they  are  to  receive,  are  responsible  for  the  safe  custody
of  the  thing  entrusted  to  them,  so  of  necessity  is  the  latter,
for  the  simple  reason  that  he  is  enjoying  the  advantage  of

207  using  it.         A  depositary,  however,  is  not  responsible  for  the
safe-keeping  of  what  has  been  deposited  with  him,  being  liable
only  in  so  far  as  he  himself  has  done  something  doleful ;  con-
sequently if  it  be  taken  from  him  surreptitiously,  as  he  cannot
on  that  account  be  convened  in  an  action  of  deposit,  and  has
really  no  interest  in  the  safety  of  the  thing,  it  is  not  he  but
the  owner  that  is  entitled  to  the  actio  furti.

208  Finally,  it  is  a  question  whether  a  child  below  the  age  of
puberty   commits   theft   by   taking   away   what    belongs   to
another.      Most  agree  that,  as  theft   depends   upon   intent,
such  a  child  can  only  oblige  himself  in  respect  of  it  when  he

«§  206.     §  16,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Collat.  3  So  the  MS.,  quite  distinctly  and

x,  2,  §§  1,  6  ;  §  2,  I.  quib.  mod.  re  intelligibly.    Hu.  and  K.  u.  S.,  pre-

contr.  obi.  (iii,  14).  ferring   apparently   the   version    of

1  The  MS.  has  deque.  the    lust. ,    read    quia  restituendae

§  207.     §  17,  tit.   I.  afd.     Comp.    §   3,  eius,    and     drop     the     subsequent

I.    quib.    mod.    re   contr.    obi.    (iii,  itaque;   P.    does  the   same,    except

14).  that  he  reads  qui  instead  of  quae  or

1  Malo  from   Inst.,   omitted  in  quia.

the  MS.  §  208.     §  18,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Gai.  in

2  For   qua  de  causa  [si]  res,  the  fr.  Ill,  pr.  D.  de  R.  I.  (1,  17).
MS.  has  quadegreis.  l  Comp.  §  197.

E

258

GA1I  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [HI,  §§  208-210.

209

210

inpnberem  si  proxinras  pubertati2  sit  et  ob  id  intellegat  se
delinquere.

Qui  res  alienas  rapit,  tenetur  etiam  furti :  quis  enim  magis
alienam  rem  inuito  domino  contrectat  quam  qui  rapit  ? l
itaque  rede  dictum  est  eum  inprobum  furem  esse :  sed  pro-
priam  actionem  eius  delicti  nomine  praetor  introduxit  quae
appellatur  ui  bonorum  raptorum,  et  est  intra  annum  qua-
drupli,2  post  annum  simpli :  quae  actio  utilis  est  etsi  quis  uiiam
rem,  licet  minimam,  rapuerit.

Damni  iniuriae   actio   constituitur    per  legem   Aquiliam,

209

210

is  close  upon  puberty  and  therefore  understands  that  he  is
committing  an  offence.

He  also  who  takes  anything  belonging  to  another  by
robbery,  is  held  guilty  of  theft ;  for  who  can  with  more  truth
be  said  to  meddle  with  another  man's  property  without  its
owner's  consent  than  he  who  takes  it  away  by  force  ?  He
is  therefore  rightly  spoken  of  as  an  atrocious  thief.  The
praetor,  however,  has  introduced  an  action  appropriate  to  this
particular  offence  under  the  name  of  actio  ui  bonorum  raptorum,
for  fourfold  the  value  of  the  thing  stolen  if  raised  within  the
year,  and  for  the  single  value  afterwards ;  and  it  is  competent
even  though  but  a  single  thing,  however  trifling,  has  been
carried  off.

The  actio  damni  iniuriae  was  introduced  by  the  Aquilian

2  Comp.  §  109.

§  209.  Comp.  tit.  I.  VI  BONORVM  RAP-
TORVM  (iv,  2),  and  particularly  the
principium.

1  The  Inst.    have   quam   qui  ui
rapit,  and  most  eds.  introduce  the
ui  into  the  text  of  Gai.     But  if  it
were  a  necessary  adjunct  one  would
have  equally  to  correct  the  initial
and  final  words,   and  read  qui  res
alienas  ui  rapit,  and  ui  rapuerit.

2  The   MS.    has   quadrupli   actio,
but  the  latter  word  has  been  ex-
punged as  a  gloss.

§§  210-219.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  LEGE
AQVILIA  (iv,  3).  This  law,  accord-
ing to  Th.  (iv,  3,  §  15)  and  a
scholiast  of  the  Bas.  (Ix,  3,  1.  1),
was  a  plebiscit  enacted  at  the  in-
stance of  a  tribune  of  the  name  of
Aquilius,  at  a  crisis  in  the  feud
between  the  senate  and  the  people  ;

a  date  which  historians  are  inclined
to  identify  with  the  third  secession
in  467  |  287,  and  probably  immedi-
ately after  the  passing  of  the  lex
Hortensia,  which  gave  plebiscits  the
force  of  leges.

In  a  passage  in  Cicero  (Brut.
xxxiv,  131)  it  is  called  the  L.
Aquilia  de  iustitia ;  for  the  two
latter  words  Orelli  substitutes  damni
iniuriae;  Hu.  (Beitr.  p.  106)  is  of
opinion  they  should  be  de  rupitia.
We  know  from  Festus,  under  the
words  Rupitias  and  Sarcito  (Bruns,
pp.  261,  264),  that  the  xn  Tables
contained  a  law  (or  laws)  in  which
those  words  occurred  ;  and  many
civilians  are  of  opinion  that  they
constituted  or  formed  part  of  a  pro-
vision such  as  rupitias  sarcito,  ru-
pitias qui  faxit  sarcito,  qui  rupitias
dederit  sarcilo,  or  the  like, — 'let

Ill,  §§  210-212.]     COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  259

cuius  primo  capite  cautum  est  \_ut~]  si  quis  homiuem  alienum,
alienamue  quadrupedem  quae  pecudum  numero  sit,  iniuria
occiderit,  quanti  ea  res  in  eo  anno  plurimi  fuerit,1  tantum*

211  domino  dare  damnetur.         iniuria  autem  occidere  intellegitur
cuius  dolo  ant  culpa  id  acciderit,  nee  ulla  alia  lege  damnum
quod  sine  iniuria  datur  reprehenditur ;  itaque  inpunitus  est
qui  sine  culpa  et  dolo  malo  casu  quodam  damnum  committit.1

212  Nee  solum  corpus  in  actione  huius  legis  aestimatur;  sed  sane
-si1  seruo  occiso  plus   dominus  capiat  damni  quam  pretium

serui  sit,  id  quoque  aestimatur,  ueluti  si  seruus  meus  ab
aliquo  heres  institutus,  antequam  iussu  meo  hereditatem  cer-
neret,2  occisus  fuerit :  non  enim  tantum  ipsius  pretium  aesti-
matur, sed  et  hereditatis  amissae  quantitas.  item  si  ex

law;  whose  first  chapter  provides  that  he  who  wrongfully
kills  another  man's  slave,  or  a  quadruped  of  his  cattle,  shall
be  condemned  to  pay  the  owner  a  sum  equal  to  the  highest

211  value  it  could  have  fetched  during  the  year.         He  is  held
to  have  killed  wrongfully  to  whose  dole  or  fault  death  is
attributable,  there  being  no  law  that  imputes  blame  for  loss
occasioned  without  wrong-doing;  therefore  a  man  goes  un-
punished who,  by  some  accident,  and  without  fault  or  dole,

212  does  some  damage  to  another's  property.        It  is  not  the  mere
corpus  that  is  considered  in  measuring  damages  under  this
enactment ;  for  there  is  no  question  that  if  a  slave  be  killed,
and  the  consequent  loss  to  his  owner  be  greater  than  his
intrinsic  value,  that  also  will  be  taken  into  account.     For
example,  if  a  slave  of  mine,  who  has  been  instituted  heir  by
some  one,  be  killed  before  he  has  by  my  authority  declared
his  acceptance  of  the  inheritance,  not  only  his   individual
value  will  fall  within  the  assessment,  but  also  the  amount
of  the  inheritance  that  has  thus  gone  past  me.     So  too  if  one

him  who  has  destroyed  property  re-  1  For  meaning  of  quanti  ea  res

place    it.'     (See    the   literature   on  fuerit   see  fr.    179,   fr.    193,   D.  de

the  subject    in    Sell,   die  Actio  de  V.  S.  (I,  16).

rupitiis  sarciendis  der  XII  Tafeln,  2  The    words    of   the    enactment
Bonn,  1877).     It  was  to  amend  this  were  tantum  aes  dare  domino  dam-
very  vague  and  general  provision,  nas  esto   (see   ii,    §   201,    note    2),
together  with  all  subsequent  legis-  which  has  induced  Hu.  to  interpo-
lation on  the  subject   of  damnum  late  aes  after  tantum.
iniuria   not  of  a  special  character,       §  211.     Comp.  Vlp.  in  Collat.  vii,  3,  §§
that  the  Aquilian  law  was  enacted  1,  4  ;  §§  2,  3,  14,  tit.  I.  afd.
(fr.  1,  pr.  D.  ad  leg.  Aquil.  ix,  2)  ;  l  Casus  ...  a  nullo  praestantur,
hence,  if  Hu.  be  right,  its  name  of  fr.  23,  D.  de  R.  I.  (1,  1 7).
L.  Aquilia  de  rupitia.                              §  212.     Comp.  §  10,  tit.  I.  afd.
§210.  Pr.    tit.   I.    afd.      The  words  of  l  The  MS.  has  xanei;  Hu.  changes
cap.  i.  are  given  by  Gai.  in  fr.  2,  pr.  it  into  si  ueluti.
D.  ad  leg.  Aquil.  (ix,  2).  s  Comp.  ii,  87  ;  Vlp.  xix,  19.

260  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  I  VMS  CIVILIS   [HI,  §§  212-216.

gemellis  uel  ex  comoedis  uel  ex  symplioniacis  unus  occisus
fuerit,  non  solum  occisi  fit  aestimatio,  sed  eo  amplius  [id]3
quoque  conputatur  quod  ceteri  qui  supersunt  depretiati  sunt.
idem  iuris  est  etiam  si  ex  pari  mularum  unam  uel  etiam  ex

213  quadrigis  equorum  unum  occiderit.         Cuius  autem  seruus
occisus  est,  is  liberum  arbitrium  habet  uel  capitali  crimirie
reum  facere  eum  qui  occiderit,  uel  hac  lege  damnum  persequi.

214  Quod  autem  adiectum  est  in  liac  lege :  QVANTI  IN  EO  ANNO
PLVEIMI  EA  EES  FVEEIT,  illud  efficit,  si  clodum  puta  aut  luscum
seruum  occiderit  qui  in  eo  anno  integer  fuerit,  [ut  non  quanti
[clodus  aut  luscus,  sed  quanti  integer  fuerit}1  aestimatio  fiat;
quo  fit  ut  quis  plus  interdum  consequatur  quam  ei  damnum
datum  est.

215  Capite  secundo  [aduersus]  adstipulatorem1   qui  pecuniam
in  fraudem  stipulatoris  acceptam  fecerit,2  quanti  ea  res  est,3

216  tauti  actio  constituitur.         qua    et    ipsa  parte  legis  damni

of  twins,  or  one  of  a  company  of  actors  or  musicians  be  killed,
not  only  his  separate  value  will  be  taken  account  of,  but  also
the  depreciated  value  of  those  that  remain.  And  so  also  if
one  of  a  pair  of  mules  be  killed,  or  even  one  of  a  team  of  four

213  chariot  horses.         A  man  whose  slave  has  been  killed  has  it
in  his  option  either  to  proceed  against  the  delinquent  by  pro-
secution for  a  capital  crime,  or  to  sue  him  for  damages  under

214  this  enactment.         The  introduction  in  the  enactment  of  the
words,  '  Whatever  within  the  year  was  the  highest  value  of
the  thing,'  has  this  effect, — that  if  it  is  a  lame  or  one-eyed
slave  that  has  been  killed,  but  who  has  been  sound  during
the  year,  the  measure  of  damages  will  be  not  his  value  as  lame
or  one-eyed,  but  his  value  as  sound  and  whole ;  so  that  it  may
sometimes   happen   that  an  owner  will   recover   more  than
covers  the  loss  he  has  sustained.

215  By  the  second  chapter  of  the  same  Aquilian  law  an  action
for  the  value  involved  is  allowed  against  an  adstipulator  who,
in  fraud  of  the  stipulant,  has  granted  the  debtor  a  discharge

216  by  acceptilation.         It  is  plain  as  regards  this  part  also  of

3  Supplied  from  Inst.  2  Comp.  §  169.

§  213.     Comp.  §  11,  tit.  I.  afd.  3  See  §  210,  note  1.
§  214.     Comp.  §  9,  tit.  I.  afd.                         §  216.     An  adstipulator  acceptilating  in

1  The  words  in  ital.  are  Huschke's;  fraud  of  the  stipulant  destroyed  and

Bk.,  K.  n.  S.,  and  other  eds. ,  inter-  deprived    him    of    an    incorporeal

polate  to  the  same  effect ;  P.  is  con-  item  of  his  estate  (ii,  14),  viz.  his

tent  with  ita.  claim    against    his    debtor ;    there

§  215.     Comp.  §  12,  tit.  I.  afd.  was     therefore     damnum     iniuria

1  Comp.  §§  110,  117.  datum.

Ill,  §§  216, 217.]  COMMENTARII    QVATTVOR.  261

nomine  actionem  introduci  manifestum  est :  sed  id  caueri  non
f uit  necessarium,  cum  actio  mandati  ad  earn  rein  sufficeret ; 1
nisi  quod  ea  lege  aduersus  infitiantem  in  duplum  agitur.8
217  Capite  tertio  de  omni  cetero  damno  cauetur.  itaque  si  quis
seruum  uel  earn  quadrupedein  quae  pecudum  [numero  est
[iiulnerauerit,  siue  earn  quadrupedem  quae  pecudum]  numero
non  est,  ueluti  canem,  aut  feram  bestiam,  ueluti  ursum,  leonem
uulnerauerit  uel  occiderit,  hoc  capite  actio  constituitur :  in
ceteris  quoque  animalibus,  item  in  omnibus  rebus  quae  aniina
carent,  damnum  iniuria  datum  hac  parte  uindicatur ;  si  quid
enim  ustuna  aut  ruptum  aut  fractum  [fuerit],  actio  hoc  capite
constituitur,  quamquam  potuerit  sola  rupti  appellatio  in  omnes
istas  causas  sufficere:  ruptum  [enim  intellegitur  quod  quoquo
\_modo  corruptuni]  est ;  unde  non  solum  usta  [aut  rupta] l  aut
fracta,  sed  etiam  scissa  et  conlisa  et  effusa  et  quoquo  modo
uitiata  aut2  perempta  atque  deteriora  facta  hoc  uerbo  continen-

the  enactment,  that  it  was  because  of  damage  done  that  the
action  was  introduced.  The  provision,  however,  would  hardly
have  been  necessary,  and  an  action  of  mandate  would  have
been  sufficient  to  meet  the  case  but  for  this, — that  in  the
action  under  the  statute  the  condemnation  of  a  defender
denying  his  liability  is  in  double  damages.

217  In  the  third  chapter  provision  is  made  for  all  other  cases  of
damage  to  property.  Therefore,  if  any  one  have  wounded  a
slave,  or  a  quadruped  of  a  man's  cattle,  or  have  wounded
or  killed  a  quadruped  that  is  not  of  his  cattle,  such  as  a  dog,
or  a  wild  beast,  such  as  a  bear  or  a  lion,  a  remedy  is  provided
by  this  clause.  In  the  case  of  other  animals,  as  well  as  of
inanimate  things  generally,  if  wrongful  damage  be  done  to
them,  redress  is  given  by  this  same  part  of  the  enactment,
which  confers  a  right  of  action  wherever  anything  has  been
burned,  destroyed,  or  broken.  This  enumeration  is  almost
unnecessary,  seeing  that  the  single  word  ruptum,,  destroyed,
includes  all  three — ruptum  in  fact  being  equivalent  to  corrup-
tum, spoiled,  no  matter  in  what  way  ;  therefore  not  only  things
burned,  destroyed,  or  broken,  but  also  things  cut,  bruised,
emptied  out,  or  in  any  way  vitiated,  demolished,  or  deteriorated,

1  Comp.  §  111.     Notwithstanding  words  in  ital.,  omitted  in  the  MS.,
what  Gai.  says  there  and  here,  it  is  are  supplied.    Comp.  Vlp.  in  Collat.
extremely  doubtful  whether  an  actio  ii,  4  ;  xii,  7.

mandati  was  known  to  the  law  at  l  Not    in     Inst.  ;    apparently     a

the  time  of  the  enactment  of  the  L.  gloss.

Aquilia.  2  These   two    words  also   omitted

2  Comp.  iv,  §§  9,  171.  from  the  Inst.     Hu.  reads—  uitiata
§  217.     §  13,  tit.  I.  afd.,  from  which  the  itaque perempta  aut  deteriora.

262  GAII  IXSTITVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIYILIS    [III,  §§  218, 219.

218  tur.         Hoc  tamen  capite  non  quanti  in  eo  anno,  sed  quanti
in   diebus   xxx   proximis   ea    res  fuerit,   damnatur    is    qui
daninum  dederit ;  ac  ne  '  plurimi '  quidem  uerbum  adicitur :
et  ideo  quidam  putauerunt  liberum  esse  iudici1  ad  id  tem-
pus    ex    diebus    xxx   aestimationem    redigere   quo   plurimi
res  fuerit,  uel  ad  id  quo  minoris  fuerit :  sed  Sabino  placuit
proinde  habendum  ac  si  etiam  hac  parte  '  plurimi '  uerbum
adiectum  esset ;  nam  legis  latorem  contentum  fuisse,  [quod

219  [prima  parte   eo  uerbo  usus  csset.]*          Ceterum  placuit  ita
denium  ex  ista  lege  actionem  esse  si  quis  corpore  suo  dam-
num  dederit ;  ideoque l  alio  modo  damno  dato  utiles  actiones"
dantur,  ueluti  si  quis  alienum  horuinem  aut  pecudem  iucluserit
et  fame  necauerit,  aut  iumentum  tarn  uehementer  egerit  ut
rumperetur ;  item  si  quis  alieno  seruo  persuaserit  ut  in  arborem
ascenderet  uel  in  puteum  descenderet,  et  is  ascendendo  aut
descendendo  ceciderit  [et~\  aut  mortuus  fuerit  aut  aliqua  parte
corporis  laesus  sit;  item3  si  quis  alienum  seruum  de  ponte  aut

218  are  covered  by  this  one  word.         Under  this  clause,  however,
he  who  has  done  the  damage  is  condemned,  not  in  the  value
the  thing  has  borne  during  the  year,  but  in  its  value  during
the  thirty  days  immediately  preceding.    As  the  word  'highest'
is  not  added,  some  have  thought  that  it  was  in  the  discretion
of  the  judge  to  put  upon  the  thing  either  its  highest  value
during  the  thirty  days,  or  any  lower  value  it  possessed  during
that  period ;  but  according  to  Sabinus  the  clause  is  to  be  read
as  if  it  contained  the  word  '  highest,'  the  author  of  the  law
having  contented  himself  with  mentioning  it  in  the  first  clause.

219  It  has  been  held  that  the  statute  confers  a  right  of  action
then  only  when  a  man  has  caused  damage  with  his  body,  [i.e.
by  his  own  direct  act.]      Vtiles  actiones,  however,  are  granted
when  it  has  been  done  in  any  other  way ;  as,  for  example,
when  a  man  has  shut  up  another's  slave  or  beast,  and  caused
it  to  die  of  starvation,  or  driven  another's  horse  so  hard  as  to
cause  it  to  founder;  likewise  if  he  have  persuaded  another
man's  slave  to  mount  a  tree  or  descend  a  well,  and  the  slave
falls  in  mounting  or  descending,  and  is  either  killed,  or  hurt
in  some  part  of  his  body ;  so  also  if  he  have  pushed  another

§  218.     Comp.  §§  14,  15,  tit.  I.  afd.  2  See  ii,  78,  note  1.

1  The  MS.  has  iudicium.  3  For  item  K.  u.  S. ,  following  the

*  Omitted  in  the    MS.  ;  supplied  Inst.,  substitute  sed,  Hu.  substitut-

from  Inst.  ing  at  enim  uero  ;  the  quamquam

§  219.     Comp.  §  16,  tit.  I.  afd.  hie  is  omitted  by  K.   u.  S.,  and  by

1  This  word   is   taken   from    the  Hu.    changed    into    hunc    quoqm.

Inst. ;  the  MS.  has  quo.  The  object  of  both  is  to  make  the

m,  §§  219-221.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  263

ripa  in  fiurnen  proiecerit  et  is  suffocatus  fuerit,  quamquam  hie '
corpore  suo  damnum  dedisse  eo  quod  proiecerit  non  difficiliter
intellegi  potest.

220  Iniuria  autem  committitur  non  solum  cum  quis  pugiio  puta
aut  fuste  percussus  uel  etiam  uerberatus  erit,  sed  et  si  cui  con-
uicium  factum  fuerit,  sine  quis  bona  alicuius  quasi  debitoris
sciens  eum  nihil  sibi  debere  proscripserit,1  siue  quis  ad  in-
famiam   alicuius   libellum   aut   carmen   scripserit,  siue  quis
matremfamilias  aut  praetextatum  adsectatus  fuerit,  et  denique

221  aliis  pluribus  modis.         Pati  auteni  iniuriam  uidemur  non
solum  per  nosmet  ipsos,  sed  etiam  per  liberos  nostros  quos  in
potestate   habemus,  item  per  uxores   nostras  cum  in  nianu
nostra  siut;1  itaque  si  Titiae,  filiae  mae,2  quae  Titio  nupta  est,

man's  slave  off  a  bridge  or  river  bank  into  the  water  whereby
he  is  drowned,  (although  here  it  can  easily  be  seen  that,  by
the  push  given  to  the  slave,  the  delinquent  did  the  mis-
chief by  his  direct  act.)

220  [Personal]  injury  is  committed  not  only  when  one  is  struck
say  with  the  fist  or  with  a  stick,  or  when  he  is  flogged,  but
also  when  he  is  opprobriously  addressed  in  public ;  when  a
man  announces  the  sale,  as  if  in  bankruptcy,  of  the  goods  of
one  who  he  pretends  is  his  debtor,  but  who,  as  he  well  knows,
is  not  indebted  to  him  at  all ;  when  one  writes  defamatory
matter  about  another  either  in  prose  or  verse ;  when  one  per-
sistently follows  an  honest  woman  or  a  young  lad;  and  in

221  many  other  ways  besides.         We  may  suffer  injury  not  only
in  our  own  persons,  but  also  in  those  of  our  children  in

statement  of  Gains  not  only  agree  with  P.,  to  let  the  text  stand  as  in

with  that  of  Justinian,  but  be  con-  the  MS.

sistent  in  itself.     Just,  denies  that       §§  220-225.     Comp.  tit.  I.   DE  INIVRIIS

an    utilis   actio  was    required,   the  (iv,  4).

direct  one  being  competent,  as  the      §  220.     Comp.    §   1,  tit.  I.  afd. ;  Paul.

damage  was  corpore   datum;  Cai.  v,  4,  §§  1,  3,  4,  14  f.

admits    that    the    damage  was    so  *  See  §  78.

caused,  yet  declares  an  utilis  actio      §  221.    Cp.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd. ;  Paul,  v,  4,  §  3.

to  be  the  proper  remedy.     But  there  :  K.  u.  S.  and  Hu. ,  following  L. ,

was  room    for  argument   that   the  read  quamuis  in  manu  [non]  sint  ;

damnum    was  not  corpore  datum,  Gou.,  M.  (K.  u.  S.  p.  xxii),  and  P.

— that  it  was  due  not  to  the  push  approve    the   reading    of    the    MS.

from  the  bridge,  but  to  the  subse-  There  is  really  no  more  reason  for

quent  suffocation,  which  might  not  changing  the  statement  about  the

have  happened  had  the  slave  been  wife  than  for  making  the  reference

able  to  swim.     This  view, — that  the  to     children    run    quamuis    eos   in

death  was  only  indirectly  due  to  the  potestate  non  habemus.

push, — may  have  been  the  prevail-  2  The  MS.  has   ueltiae  filiae;    P.

ing  one  in  the  time  of  Gai.,  though  reads    Gaiae    Titiae    filiae    meae ;

disapproved  by   him   and  departed  K.  u.   S.   simply  filiae  meae;  Hu.

from   by  Just.;  therefore   1  prefer,  ueluti  filiaefamiUae  meae, — admis-

264  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [III,  §§  221-224.

iniuriam  feceris,  non  solum  filiae  nomine  tecum  agi  iniuriarum

222  potest,  uerum  etiam  meo  quoque  et  Titii  nomine.         Seruo
autem  ipsi  quidem  nulla  iniuria  intellegitur  fieri,  sed  domino
per  eum  fieri  uidetur :  non  tamen  isdem  modis  quibus  etiam
per  liberos  nostros  uel  uxores  iniuriam  pati  uidemur,  sed  ita
cum  quid  atrocius  cominissum  fuerit  quod  aperte   in   con-
tumeliam  domini  fieri  uidetur,  ueluti  si  quis  alienum  seruum
uerberauerit ;  et  in  hunc  casum  formula  proponitur ;  at  si  quis
seruo  conuicium  fecerit  uel  pugno  eum  percusserit,  non  pro-
ponitur ulla  formula,  nee  ternere  petenti  datur.

223  Poena  autem  iniuriarum  ex   lege   xn   tabularum  propter
membrum  quidem  ruptum  talio  erat :  propter  os  uero  fractum
aut  conlisum  trecentorum  assium  poena  erat,  ueluti  si  libero
os  fractum  erat ;  at  si  seruo,  CL  :  propter  ceteras  uero  iniurias
xxv  assium  poena  erat  constituta.     et  uidebantur  illis  tem-
poribus  in  magna  paupertate  satis  idoneae  istae  pecuniariae

224  pocnae.1         Sed  nunc  alio   iure   utimur :    permittitur   enim

pot  estate  and  our  wives  in  manu ;  therefore  if  you  Lave  done
injury  to  my  daughter  who  is  married  to  Titius,  action  will
lie  against  you  on  account  of  it  not  only  in  name  of  my

222  daughter  but  also  in  mine  and  in  that  of  Titius.         A  slave
cannot  himself  be  held  to  have  suffered  injury ;  but  it  may
be  done  to  his  owner  through  him.     Through  him,  however,
we  do  not  suffer  it  in  the  same  ways  as  through  our  children
or  wives,  but  only  when  something  very  atrocious  has  been
done  to  him,  which  is  obviously  intended  as  an  insult  to  us,
as  when  some  one  has  flogged  him ;  for  such  a  case  there  is  a
formula  in  the  edict ;  but  there  is  no  formula  there  to  meet
the  case  of  opprobrious  language  addressed  to  him,  or  a  blow
given  him  with  the  fist,  nor,  if  one  were  asked  for,  would  it
be  granted  without  mature  consideration.

223  By  the  Twelve  Tables  the  penalties  of  [personal]  injury
were, — for  destruction  of  any  of  the  members,  talion ;  for  a
bone  broken  or  dislocated,  three  hundred  asses  if  the  sufferer
was  a  freeman,  a  hundred  and  fifty  if  a  slave ;  for  any  other
injury,  twenty-five  asses.     In  those  times  of  great  poverty

224  these  money  penalties  were  deemed  sufficient.         But  now  the

sible  only  on  his  theory  that  man  us  1,  §§  12-18;  Paul,   v,    4,   §§  6,   7  ;

was  immaterial  as  regarded  the  hus-  Paul,  in  Collat.  ii,  5,  §  5.

band's  right  to  sue.  *  So  K.  u.  S.,  following  G.  and

§  222.  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.  Bk. ;  the  MS.  has  pecuniae  poenae  ;

§  223.  §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.  Comp.  Schoell,  Hu.  adds  me.

Tab.   viii,    cap.    2,    3,    4  ;  Fest.  v.       §  224.     Comp.  Paul,  v,  4,  §  7  ;  Paul,  in

Talionis  (Bruns,  p.  269) ;  Cell,  xx,  Collat.  ii,  6  ;  §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.

Ill,  §§  224, 225.]  COMMEXTARII  QVATTVOR.  265

nobis  a  praetore  ipsis  iniuriam  aestimare,  et  iudex  uel  tanti
condemnat  quanti  nos  aestimauerimus,  uel  minoris,  prout  ci
uisum  fuerit;  sed  cum  atrocem  iniuriam  praetor  aestimare
soleat,  si  simul  constituent  quantae  pecuniae  nomine  fieri
debeat  uadimonium,1  hac  ipsa  quantitate  taxamus  formulam,2
et  iudex,  quamuis  possit  uel  minoris  danmare,  plerumque
tamen  propter  ipsius  praetoris  auctoritatem  non  audet  minuere
225  condemnationem.3  Atrox  autem  iniuria  aestimatur  uel  ex
facto,  ueluti  si  quis  ab  aliquo  uulneratus  aut  uerberatus  fusti-
busue  caesus  fuerit ;  uel  ex  loco,  ueluti  si  cui  in  theatre  aut  in
foro  iniuria  facta  sit ;  uel  ex  persona,  ueluti  si  magistratus
iniuriam  passus  fuerit,  uel  senatoribus  ab  humili  persona  facta
sit  iniuria.

law  is  different ;  we  are  now  allowed  by  the  praetor  to  put
our  own  estimate  on  the  injury  done  us,  and  the  judge  may
condemn  in  the  full  amount  of  it  or  in  a  smaller  sum  as  lie
thinks  fit.  But  as  it  is  the  practice  of  the  praetor  himself  to
put  an  estimate  on  injury  of  atrocious  character,  if  he  have
once  fixed  what  shall  be  the  amount  of  the  security  to  be
found  by  the  defender  for  his  appearance  at  the  trial,  we  then
tax  our  formula  at  the  same  figure ;  and  although  it  is  in  the
power  of  the  judge  to  give  less,  yet  in  deference  to  the  praetor's
authority  he  seldom  ventures  to  limit  the  condemnation.
225  An  injury  is  esteemed  atrocious  either  by  reason  of  the  nature
of  it,  as  when  a  man  is  wounded,  or  flogged,  or  beaten  with
sticks ;  or  by  reason  of  the  place,  as  when  an  injury  is  done
to  a  man  in  a  theatre  or  in  the  forum ;  or  by  reason  of  the
person,  as  when  injury  has  been  suffered  by  a  magistrate,  or
when  it  is  done  to  a  senator  by  a  man  of  the  lower  orders.

1  See  iv,  §§  184-186.  par.  finishes  on  line  11,  p.  187  ;  and

2  Comp.  iv,  51.  a  little  lower,  in  another  hand,  we

3  See  iv,  52.  have — LIB.  III.  EXPLIC.     The  next
§  225.     §  9,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Paul,  v,  page  (188)  is  blank.

4,  §  10  ;  Paul,  in  Collat.  ii,  2.     The

266

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS       [IV,  §§  1,  2.

[COMMENTARIVS  QVARTVS.']

1  [Superest  ut  de  actionibus   loquamur.      Quod  si  quaeratur]
quot  genera  actionum  sint,  uerius  uidetur  duo  esse,  in  rem  et
in   personam :   nam   qui   mi   esse   dixerunt  ex   sponsionum
generibus,   non  animaduerterunt  quasdam  species   actionum

2  inter  genera  se  rettulisse.1        In  personani  actio  est  qua  agimus
cum  aliquo  1  qui  nobis  uel  ex  contractu  uel  ex  delicto  obligatus
est,  id  est  cum  intendimus 2  dare,  facere,  praestare  oportere.3

1  There  remains  for  consideration  the  subject  of  actions.     If  it
be  asked  how  many  genera  of  them  there  are,  the  more  correct
answer  seems  to  be  that  there  are  two, — actions  in  rem  and
actions  in  personam;  those   who,   taking   into   account  the
different  sorts  of  actio  per  sponsionem,  have  maintained  that
there  are  four,  have  not  observed  that  they  were  confounding

2  genus  and  species.         That  action  is  in  personam  whereby  we
proceed  against  some  person  who  is  under  obligation  to  us  by
reason  either  of  contract  or  delict ;  that  is  to  say,  when  we
contend  that  he  ought  to  give  us  something,  or  do  something

DE  ACTIONIBVS

§§  1-10.     Comp.  tit.  I.
(iv,  6).

§  1.  Comp.  pr.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd. ;  Vlp.  in
fr.  25,  pr.  D.  de  0.  et  A.  (xliv,  7).
The  first  five  words  in  ital.  are  from
pr.  tit.  I.  afd.,  the  last  three  con-
jectural, but  more  than  probable.
Those  words  represent  the  contents
of  the  first  line  of  p.  189  of  the  MS.,
which  is  vacant.

1  The  four  here  alluded  to,  ac-
cording to  Hu. ,  founding  on  §§  4,
91,  95,  were — (1)  personalis  actio;
(2)  petitoria  formula;  (3)  in  rem
actio  per  sponsionem  cuius  summa
per  formulam  petitur  ;  (4)  per  spon-
sionem cuius  summa  sacramenti
actione  petitur, — the  last  three  being
varieties  of  the  actio  in  rem.

§  2.     References  as  in  §  1.

1  The  MS.  has  qua  agimus  quotiens
cum  aliquo.  Hu.  transposes  quo-

tiens,  and,  instead  of  cum  intendi-
mus (as  in  the  MS.),  reads  quotiens
eum  intendimus.

2  Comp.  §  41.

3  For  the  meanings  of  dare  and
facere,  as  descriptive  of  the  matter

of  an  obligation,  see  iii,  92,  note.
The  formula  (§  30)  dare  oportere
was  employed  when  the  pursuer's
claim  was  for  something  definite,
which  he  averred  the  defender  was
bound  to  give  him  in  property
(certi  condictio) ;  dare  facere  oportere
— for  facere  oportere  never  stood
alone  —  was  employed  where  the
pursuer,  after  stating  in  a  demon-
stratio  (§  40)  the  ground  of  his
action,  asked  a  judgment  as  to  what
in  the  circumstances  the  defender
should  give  (in  the  technical  sense)
or  do  (incerti  condictio).

There   is    more    difficulty  about

,  §§3,4.]  COMMENTAEII  QVATTVOR.  267

3  In    rem    actio    est    cum    aut    corporalem    reni    intendimus
nostrain  esse,  aut  ius  aliquod  nobis  conpetere,  uelut  utendi
aut   utendi    fruendi,    eundi,   agendi,    aquamue    ducendi    uel
altius  tollendi  prospiciendiue :  actio l  ex  diuerso  aduersario

4  est  negatiua.         Sic  itaque   discretis  actionibus  certum  est
non  posse  nos  rem  nostram  ab  alio  ita  petere :  si  PARET  EVM
DARE  OPORTERE  ;  nee  enim  quod  nostrum  est  nobis  dari  potest,
cum  scilicet  id  dari  nobis  intellegatur  quod   [ita  datur  uf\
nostrum  fiat ;  nee  res  quae  nostra  [iam  est,  nostra]  amplius
fieri  potest.1     plane  odio  furum,  quo  naagis  pluribus  actionibus
teneantur,  receptum  2  est  ut  extra  poenam  dupli  aut  quadrupli

3  for  us,  or  make  us  some  other  prestation.         It  is  in  rem
either  when  we  contend  that  some  corporeal  is  ours,  or  that
we  are  entitled  to  some  right,  such  as  one  of  usufruct,  of  foot
or  carriage  way,  of  drawing  water,  of  building   higher,  or  of
having  a  prospect.     The  action  competent  to  our  adversary,

4  on  the  other  hand,  is  negative  of  those  rights.         [Eeal  and
personal]  actions  being  thus  differentiated,  it  is  clear  that  in
claiming  from  another  what  is  ours  we  cannot  do  so  in  the
form, '  Should  it  appear  that  he  ought  to  give ; '  for  what  is
our  own  cannot  be  given  to  us,  seeing  that  to  give  us  a  thins;

*J  '  O  O  O

means  to  so  give  it  that  it  shall  become  ours ;  but"  what  is
already  ours  cannot  be  made  more  ours  than  it  is  already.
Nevertheless,  in  detestation  of  thieves,  and  to  make  them
responsible  in  a  greater  number  of  actions,  it  has  been  re-
ceived as  law  that,  over  and  above  the  double  and  quadruple

praestare.     There  is  no  instance  of      §  3.     Comp.   §§  41,  87  ;  §§  1,  2,  tit.  I.

praestare    oportere    in   a    formula,  afd. ;  fr.    25,   pr.    D.    de  0.    et   A.

either  alone  or  in  conjunction  with  (xliv,  7).

other  words.     Some   have   held   it  '    1  Before  actio  K.  u.  S. ,  on  the  sug-

intended    to     cover    the    damnum  gestion   of   M.,    interpolate  quibus

decidere,  and  such  like  phrases  em-  casibus,  Hu.  item.     P.  reads — actio

ployed  in  actions  ex  delicto  (§  37) ;  ex    diuerso    aduersario    [contraria

others  that  it  refers  to  the  possible  nihilo  minus  etiam  actio  est  in  rem,

secondary    claims    arising    out    of  quamquam]  est  negatiua.     The  re-

bonae  fidei  obligations,  such  as  re-  ference  is  to  what  was  technically

sponsibility     for     culpa,    eviction,  called  actio  negatoria, — that  where-

mora,    etc. ;    others   again   that   it  by  a  proprietor  sought  to  have  it

was  meant  to  apply  to  the  claim  in  judicially  declared  that  his  property

an  action  with  a  formula  infactum  was  free  from  some  pretended  servi-

concepta    (§    46),    dare   and    dare.  tude  or  other  burden  ;  see  fr.  5,  §  6,

facere  oportere   being    confined  to  D.  si  ususfr.  pet.  (vii,  6).
formulae   in  ius  conceptae   (§    45).       §4.     §  14,  tit.   I.  afd.,  from  which  the

The  probability  is  that,   as  being,  passages  in  ital.  are  supplied,

like   praestatio,    a    word    of    very  l  Comp.  iii,  99.

general  meaning,   it  was   intended  2  Hu.,  following  Inst.,  substitutes

to  include  every  personal  claim  not  effectum.
covered  by  dare  or  dare  facere.

268  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS         [IV,  §§  4-9.

rei recipieudae  nomine3  fures  etiam*  hac  actione  teneantur:  si
PARET  EOS  DAKE  OPORTERE,5  quamuis  sit  etiam  aduersus  eos

5  haec   actio  qua  rem  nostram  esse  petimus.         Appellantur
autem  in  rem  quidem  actiones  uindicationes,   in   personam
uero  actiones  quibus  dari  fieriue  oportere   intendimus,  con-
dictiones.

6  Agimus  autem  interdum  ut  rem l  tantum  consequamur,  in-

7  terdum  ut  poenam  tantum,  alias  ut  rem  et  poenam.         Eem
tantum  persequimur  uelut  actionibus  [quibus]  l  ex  contractu

8  agimus.         Poenam  tantum  persequimur  l  uelut  actione  furti
et  iniuriarum,  et  secundum  quorundam  opinionem  actioue  ui
bonorum  raptorum  :  nam  ipsius  rei  et  uiudicatio  et  condictio

9  nobis  conpetit.         Rem  uero  et  poenam  persequimur  uelut  ex
his  causis  ex  quibus  aduersus  infitiantem  in  duplum  agimus  ;
quod  accidit  per  actionem  iudicati,1  depensi,2  damni  iniuriae

penalties  to  which  they  are  subject,  they  are  also  liable  to  an
action  [for  the  value  of  stolen  goods]  in  the  form,  '  Should
it  appear  that  they  ought  to  give ; '  although  there  also  lies
against  them  the  action  whereby  we  claim  a  thing  as  ours.

5  Actions  in  rem  are  called  vindications  ;  while  those  in  which
we  contend  that  something  ought  to  be  given  to  &  done  for
us  are  called  condictions.

6  Sometimes  we  proceed  in  an  action  solely  to  obtain  a  thing,
sometimes  solely  to  obtain  a  penalty,  sometimes   for   both

7  purposes  at  once.         In  actions  upon  contract,  for  example,

8  we  sue  only  for  a  thing.         We  sue  only  for  a  penalty  in  the
actions  of  theft  and   personal   injury;  to   which    some   add
robbery,  seeing  that  for  the  thing  taken  from  us  we  have  a

9  vindication  or  condiction.         We  sue   for   both   thing   and
penalty  in  those  cases  in  which  we  claim  double  the  value  on
the  defender's  denial ;  which  happens  in  the  action  upon  a
judgment;  the  actio  depensi,  the  action  upon  the  Aquilian  law

3  See  iii,  §§  189,  190.  §  7.     Comp.  §  17,  tit.  I.  afd.

4  So  the  Inst. ;  the  MS.  has  ex.  l  Added  by  L.,  and  adopted  by

5  Comp.  ii,  79,  last  clause.  most  eds. ;  Hu.  does  without  it  by
§  5.     Comp.  §  15,  tit.  I.  afd.     It  should  dropping  the  final  agimus.

be  noticed  that  Gai.  limits  the  con-  §  8.     Comp.  §§  18,  19,  tit.  I.  afd.;  Just.

dictioto  personal  actions  proceeding  differs  as  to  the  character  of  the  a.

on  a  dare  or  dare  facere;  see  §  2,  ui  bonor.  raptor.

note  3.  1  The  MS.  has  consequimur.

§  6.     Comp.  §  16,  tit.  I.  afd.  §  9.     Comp.  §  171  ;  Paul,  i,    19,    §    1 ;

1  7?es  here  includes  factum  prar-  §  19,  tit.  I.  afd.

standum, — what   we   ask   shall   be  '  See  Cic.  pro  Flacco,  xxi,  49.

done  for  us,  as  well  as  what  we  ask  2  Comp.  iii,  127  ;  below,  §  22.
shall  be  given  us.

A

IV,  §§9-11.]      COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  269

legis  Aquiliae,3  aut  legatoruin  nomine  quae  per  damnationem
certa  relicta  sunt.4

10  Quaedam  praeterea  sunt  actiones  quae  ad  legis  actionem
exprimuntur,  quaedam  sua  ui  ac  potestate  constant :  quod  ut
manifestum  fiat,  opus  est  ut  prius  de  legis  actionibus  loquamur.

11  Actiones   quas   in   usu   ueteres  habuerunt    legis   actiones
appellabantur,  uel  ideo  quod  legibus  proditae  erant,  (quippe
tune  edicta  praetoris,  quibus  conplures  actiones  introductae
sunt,  nonduin  in  usu  habebantur,)  uel  ideo  quia  ipsarurn  legum
uerbis  accommodatae  erant  et  ideo  inmutabiles  proinde  atque
leges  obseruabantur :  unde  cum  quis1  de  uitib'us  succisis  ita
egisset  ut  in  actione  '  uites'  nominaret,  responsum  [est]  eum
rem  perdidisse,  quia  debuisset  '  arbores'  nominare  eo  quod  lex

on  account  of  wrongful  damage,  and  the  action  to  recover  a
legacy  of  definite  amount  bequeathed  by  damnation.

10  Further,  there  are  some  actions  that  are  expressly  founded
on  some  legis  actio,  others  that  are  effectual  on   their  own
inherent  merits.     To  make  this  distinction  clear,  we  must  first
explain  the  nature  of  the  legis  actiones.

11  The  actions  employed  by  our  ancestors  were  called  legis
actiones  either  because  they  had  been  introduced  by  leges,
legislative  enactments,  (the  edicts  of  the  praetor,  which  were
subsequently  a  fertile  source  of  actions,  not  being  then  in
use),  or  because  the  very  words  of  the  laws  to  which  they
were  due  were  imported  into  them,  so  that  in  style  they
became  as  immutable  as  those  laws  themselves.      Hence,  when
a  man  who  was  proceeding  against  another  for  cutting  down
his  vines  used  the  word  '  vines '  in  his  action,  it  was  ruled
that  he  had  lost  his  case, — that  he  ought  to  have  employed
the  word  '  trees,'  seeing  that  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,

3  Comp.  iii,  §§  210,  216.  the  actio  arborum  furtim  caesarum

4  Comp.  ii,  §§  201,  282  ;  iii,  175.  alluded  to  in  this  par. ;  these  were
§  10.     Comp.  §§  31a,  32,  33.  very    numerous,  —  there    probably
§  11.     Comp.  Pompon,  in  fr.  2,  §§6,  12,  was    one  for    every  law  that   was

38,   D.   de  0.   I.   (i,   2).      See  also  contravenable, — but  most  of  them

Yarro,  deL.  L.  vi,  30  (Bruns,  p.  277).  explicated  by  sacramental  procedure.

The  phrase  legis  actiones  is  used  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  certain

by  Gai.  in  two  different  senses.     In  non-contentious  proceedings,  whose

one,  as  in  the  sacramenti  actio  of  form    was    prescribed    by    statute,

§  13,  it  means  the  modus  agendi,  were  also  called  legis  actiones,  as,

the  form  of  procedure  ;  and  of  these  for  example,  in  iure  cfosio  (ii,  24).     &/
there  were  five,  which  are  enumerated  *  The  MS.  has  eum  qui,  retained    /

in  §  12.     In  the  other  it  means  the  by  K.  u.  S. ;  but  this  necessitates  the

particular  action  made  use  of,   as  deletion  of  eum  after  responsum  est.

270

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [IV,  §§  11-13.

xii  tabularum,  ex  qua  de  uitibus    succisis  actio  conpeteret,

12  generaliter  de  arboribus  succisis  loqueretur.1         Lege  autem
agebatur   modis   quinque,  sacramento,    per   iudicis   postula-
tionem,  per  condictionem,  per  maims  iniectionem,  per  pignoris
capionem.

13  Sacramenti  actio  generalis  erat :  de  quibus  enim  rebus  ut
aliter   ageretur  lege   cautum   non    erat,    de   his   sacramento
agebatur.1     eaque  actio  perinde  periculosa  erat  falsi ,2

under  which  an  action  for  vines  cut  down  was  competent,

12  spoke  in  general  terms  of  the  cutting  down  of  '  trees.'         The
procedure  in  those  legis  adiones  was  in  one  or  other  of  five
modes, — by  sacrament,  by  petition  for  a  judge,  by  condiction,
by  personal  arrest,  or  by  distress.

13  The  sacramental  procedure  was  general  in  its  application  ;
for  wherever  no  other  mode  was  prescribed  by  statute,  this
was  followed.     It  was   a  perilous   procedure  for  the  [false

2  Comp.  fr.  1,  fr.  2,  fr.  3,  pr.  D.
arb.furt.  caes.  (xlvii,  7).  That  an
action  should  be  thrown  out  on
such  a  technicality  seems  on  the
first  blush  very  shocking.  Yet  it
is  no  more  than  an  anticipation  of  a
rule  of  modern  practice, — that  in  a
statutory  prosecution  any  variance
from  the  words  of  the  statute  will
be  fatal  to  the  charge,  as,  for  ex-
ample, saying  that  an  act  was  done
'  wickedly  and  feloniously, '  instead
of  '  wilfully,  maliciously,  and  un-
lawfully '  (case  of  Affleck,  1  Br.  354).

§  12.  Sacramento,  §§  13-17;  per  con-
dictionem, §§  18-20  ;  per  mamis
iniectionem,  §§  21-25  ;  per  pignoris
capionem,  §§  26-29.  The  descrip-
tion of  the  procedure  per  iudicis
postulationem  is  lost.  On  all  these
see  Karlowa,  R.  CP.

§  1 3.  Gaius'  account  of  the  actio  sacra-
mento is  unfortunately  very  incom-
plete. It  begins  on  p.  191  of  the
MS.,  but  p.  192  is  undecipherable,
and  the  final  sentences  were  on  a
leaf  between  pp.  194  and  195,  that
seems  to  have  been  cut  out  by  the
writer  of  the  superimposed  St.
Jerome.  We  are  thus  left  to  a  great
extent  in  the  dark  as  to  the  true
nature  of  the  procedure.

The  difference  between  two  defi-
nitions of  sacramentum  given  by
Festus  (Bruns,  p.  262), — in  one  of
which  it  is  spoken  of  as  an  oath  of

verity,  and  in  the  other  (agreeing
with  the  statement  of  Varro,  de  L.
L.  v,  180)  as  a  sum  of  money
staked  by  each  of  the  parties,  to
abide  the  issue  of  the  suit  and  to  be
forfeited  by  the  loser, — has  led  to  a
host  of  more  or  less  conjectural  ex-
planations. A  classification  of  them
is  given  by  Danz,  Z.  f.  EG.  vi,
339  ;  and  amongst  subsequent  pub-
lications illustrative  of  the  subject
may  be  mentioned  Karlowa,  as  in
last  note ;  Huschke,  MuUa;  and
Muendeiioh,  ueberSchein  und  Wirk-
lichkeit  an  der  legis  actio  sacra-
menti  in  rem,  Z.  f.  EG.  xiii,  445.

1  It  was  the  general  mode  of  pro-
cedure  both  in   real   and  personal
actions,   and  in  the  latter  whether
the  claim  arose  ex  contracts  or  ex
delicto.     Comp.  §  20.

2  Eight  letters    illegible,  —  the
more  remarkable   that  the   line  in
which  they  occur  and  the  two  that
follow,  i.e.  from  falsi  to  uictus  erat,
are    accidentally    repeated    in    the
MS.   He.  proposes  falsis  sacramentis;
lludorff  falsidicis;  Danz,  falsi  sacra-
menti  causa;  M.  (K.  u.  S.  p.  xxii),
falsi    damnatis    or    falsi   conuictis ;
Hu. ,  falsiloquo  propter  iusiurandum
(falsiloq  pp  II).     This  last  recom-
mends itself  as  in  harmony  with  the
immediately  following  reo  propter
sponsionem     and     actori     propter
restipulationem  ;  but  its  acceptance

IV,  §§13,  14.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  271

atque  hoc  tempore  periculosa  est  actio  certae  creditae  pecuniae
propter  sponsionem  qua  periclitatur  reus  si  temere  neget,3
[et]  restipulationem  qua  periclitatur  actor  si  non  debitum
petat :  *  nam  qui  uictus  erat  summam  sacramenti  praestabat
poenae  nomine,5  eaq-ue  in  puUicum  cedebat  praedesgue  eo
nomine  praetori  dabantur,6  non  ut  nunc  sponsionis  et  resti-
14  pulationis  poena  lucro  cedit  aduersario  qui  uicerit.  Poena
autem  sacramenti  aut  quingenaria  erat  aut  quinquagenaria :
nam  de  rebus  mille  aeris  plurisue  quingentis  assibus,  de
minoris  uero  quinquaginta  assibus  sacramento  contende-
batur ;  nam  ita  lege  xu  tabularum  cautum  erat.  [at]  si
de  libertate  hominis  controuersia  erat,  etsi  pretiosissimus
homo  esset,  tamen  ut  L  assibus  sacramento  contenderetur

\swearer~] ;  in  the  same  way  as  at  the  present  day  the  action
for  a  definite  sum  of  money  due  is  perilous  for  a  defender
rashly  denying  his  liability,  on  account  of  his  sponsion,  and
for  a  pursuer  claiming  what  is  not  due  to  him,  on  account  of
his  restipulation.  For  he  who  was  defeated  forfeited  the
amount  of  his  sacrament  by  way  of  penalty ;  it  fell  to  the
state,  and  sureties  were  given  for  it  to  the  praetor,  instead  of
its  becoming  so  much  gain  to  the  successful  adversary,  as  does
the  amount  of  the  sponsion  or  restipulation  under  the  present
14  system.  The  sacramental  penalty  was  either  five  hundred
or  fifty  asses, — five  hundred  when  the  object  of  litigation  was
valued  at  or  over  a  thousand,  fifty  when  less  than  that ;  so  it
was  provided  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables.  If,  however,
the  dispute  was  as  to  the  freedom  of  an  alleged  slave,  then,
although  he  might  be  ever  so  valuable,  the  same  law  provided
that  the  parties  should  contend  by  sacrament  with  fifty  asses,

depends  upon  the  prior  considera-  money  was  the  later  practice  ;    in

tion  whether  Hu.  is  right  in  regard-  the  earlier,  according  to  Varro  (as

ing  the  sacramentum  as  an  oath  of  in  last  note),  it  was  actually  de-

i.     verity,  "f  posited  adpontem,  and  probably  in

3  Comp.  §  171.  the  hands  of  the  pontiffs,  who  he

4  Comp.  §  180.  says  (v,    83)   had    constructed  the

5  Comp.  Varro,  de  L.  L.   v,  180.  bridge  ut  in  eo  sacra  et  uls  et  cis
The  question,  so  far  as  the  sacra-  Tiberim    non    mediocri  rilu  fiant.
mentum  was  concerned,  was,  whose  Ihering,  (in  G.  d.  R.  R.  i,  p.  298,)
was  just,    whose    unjust,  —  utrius  founding  on  Pomp,  in  fr.  2,  §  6,  D.
sacramentum  iustum,  utrius  iniustum  de  O.  1.  (i,  2),  thinks  that  origin-
sit;  see  Cic.  pro  Caec.  xxxiii,  §  97;  ally  the  whole  procedure  was  before
pro  Mil.   xxvii,   §  74  ;  pro  domo,  one   of  the  pontiffs,  and  that  the
xxix,  §  78.    He  whose  sacramentum  forfeited  deposit  was  a  payment  to
was  pronounced  just  recovered  his  the  college  for  its  judicial  services,
deposit,    while    the     other     party  i.  e.  that  it  was  court  dues,
forfeited  his.                                               §14.     Comp.    Fest.    v.     Sacramentum

6  The  giving  of  sureties  for  the  (Bruns,p.  262);  Varro, deL.L.  v,130.

s- 'if  ft"**'

272

GAII  INSTITUTION VM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [IV,  §§  13-15.

eadem  lege  cautum  est,  fauore  scilicet  libertatis,1  ne  onera-

14arentur  adsertores.2         [14a] .         [15]  —

15 ad   iudicem    accipiendum    uenirent;    postea

uero  reuersis  dabatur.     ut  autem  [die]  xxx.  index  daretur l
per  legem   Pinariam 2   factum   est ;   ante   earn  autem   legem

and  that  out  of  favour  for  freedom,  and  that  those  acting  on

the  pretended  slave's  behalf  should  not  be  unduly  burdened.

14a .         [15] should

15  appear  to  receive  a  judge  ;  and  the  appointment  was  made  on
their  return.  That  he  should  be  appointed  on  the  thirtieth
day  was  a  provision  of  the  Pinarian  law ;  prior  to  its  enact-

1  Liv.  iii,  44  f.

2  P.  has  ne  morarentur  adserta-
tores.    No  one  who  was  claimed  as  a
slave  could  maintain  his  defence  in
person ;  he  had  to  be  represented  by
an  adsertor  libertatis.

§  14a.  On  p.  192  of  the  MS.  the  only
letters  legible  are  sin  on  1.  5,  iidq.s
on  1.  6,  staeomnesaones  on  1.  12,
onecassae  on  1.  17,  ecaptus  on  1.  18,
and  ad  iudicem  accipund  at  the  end
of  1.  24  (the  last  on  the  page).

Hu.  thinks  that  lines  1  to  middle
of  11  may  have  run  to  the  follow-
ing effect :  —  E  diuerso,  si  inter
populum  et  priuatum  controuersia
erat  uel  ad  centumuiros  ibatur,  siue
res  mille  aeris  plurisue  siue  minoris
esset,  sacramenti  poena  ex  lege
Hateria  Tarpeia  a  praetore  aesti-
mabatur,  modo  ne  minor  quingentis
neque  maior  in  milibus  aeris  statue-
retur.  praeterea  lege  lulia  Papiria
cautum  est,  ne  pluris  quam  ipsa  res
esset  sacramentum  statueretur.  si
uero  magistratus  pro  populo  agebat,
etiam  priuatus  tantum  sacramento
interrogabatur.  idque  semper  fiebat,
cum  ex  lege  aliqua  eum,  qui  contra
legem  fecisset,  in  sacrum  iudicare
licebat,  id  est  ut  a  magistratu  sacra-
mento  interrogaretur,  se  contra  legem
nonfecisse.  As  authorities  he  refers
to  §  95  ;  lex  Silia  de  pond,  as  in
Fest.  v.  Publ.  pondera  (Bruns,  p.
40)  ;  Lex  de  infer,  v.  6  (C.  I.  L.,
I,  1409,  p.  263)  ;  Cic.  de  Rep.  ii,  35,
§  60;  Fest.  v.  Sacramentum,  Sacra-
mento (Bruns,  p.  262).

§  1 5.  Hu.  supposes  that  the  par.  began
on  1.  11,  and  proposes  the  following
reconstruction : — Ceterum  cum  etiam
istae  omnes  actiones,  quibus  sacra-

mento  agebatur,  aut  in  re.ro.  aut  in
personam  essent,  si  in  personam
agebatur,  cum  uterque  in  ius  uenis-
set,  actor  id,  quod  sibi  ab  altero
darifieriue  oporteret,  apprehendens
eum  intendebat,  uelut  hoc  modo  :
AIO  TE  MIHI  HS.  X  MILIA  DARE
OPORTERE.  aduersarius  negabat.
delude  actor  dicebat  :  QVANDO
NEGAS,  SA.CRAMENTO  QVINGENARIO
TE  PROVOCO.  aduersarius  quoque
dicebat:  QVANDO  AIS  EGOOVE  ABS
TE  EA  RE  CAPTVS  SVM,  SIMILITER
EGO  TE  SACRAMENTO  QVINGENA-
RIO  PROVOCO.  Itaque  uterque
alterum  sacramfnto  (in  fano  louis
uel  Dii  Fid'd)  adigebat,  die  tamen
demum  XXX.  iudicem  accipiebant  et
litem  contestabantur,  id  est  uterque
nominata  causa  litis  dicebat :  STLI-
TEM  MIHI  TECVM  ESSE  EFFOR,
TESTES  ESTOTE !  quam  ob  rem  in
eum  diem  inuicem  sibi  denuntiabant
ut  in  ius  ad  iudicem,  etc.  Huschke's
principal  authorities  are — for  the
first  part  of  his  reconstruction,
Valer.  Prob. ;  and  for  the  second
Paul,  ex  Festo,  v.  Contestari  (Bruns,
p.  239),  and  Diomed.  Ars  gramm.
i,  p.  378,  ed.  Keil.

1  Comp.  Ps.  -Ascon.  in  II.  Verr.  i,
26  (Bruns,  p.  292).

2  Mommsen,    Rudorff,    and   Hu.
identify  this  law  with  one  referred
to  by  Macrob.  Sat.  i,  13,  §  21,  as
dealing  with  the  matter  of  intercala-
tion, and  which  he  says  was  enacted
in  the  consulate  of  L.  Pinarius  and
P.  Furius,  i.e.  in  282  |  472  (Liv.  ii,
56).  WithVoigt(/«s.AraUi,p.lS7),
1  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  en-
actment to  which  Gai.  refers  must
have  been  later,  not   earlier,  than

IV,  §§  15, 1C.]  COMMEXTARII  QVATTVOR.

273

16

statim  3  dabatur  index,  illud  ex  superioribus  intellegimus,  si
de  re  rninoris  quam  [J/]  aeris  agebatur,  qiunquagenario  sacra-
inento,  non  quingenario  eos  contendere  solitos  fuisse.  Postea
tamen  quam  index  datus  esset  conperendinum  diern  ut  ad
iudicem  uenirent  denuntiabant ;  *  deinde  cum  ad  iudicem  uene-
rant,  antequam  apud  eum  causam  perorarent,  solebant  breui-
ter  ei  et  quasi  per  indicem  rem  exponere :  qtiae  dicebatur
causae  coniectio,5  quasi  causae  suae  in  breue  coactio.

Si  in  rem  agebatur,  mobilia  quidem  et  mouentia,  quae  modo
in  ius  adferri  adduciue  possent,  in  hire  uindicabantur  ad  hunc
modum:  qui  uindicabat1  festucam  tenebat;  deinde  ipsam  rem
adprehendebat,  ueluti  hominem,  et  ita  dicebat :  HVNC  EGO

HOMINEM  EX  IVRE   QVIRITIVM    MEYM   ESSE   AIO    SECVNDVM   SVAM

1(5

ment  the  judge  was  named  at  once.  As  we  have  seen  already,
it  was  with  a  sacrament  of  fifty  asses,  and  not  five  hundred,
that  the  parties  contended  where  the  object  in  dispute  was  of
less  value  than  a  thousand.  On  the  judge  being  appointed
they  cited  each  other  to  attend  him  on  the  third  day  there-
after. When  they  had  come  before  him,  and  before  entering
upon  the  merits  of  his  case,  each  explained  shortly  and  in
outline  the  leading  points  of  it ;  this  was  called  the  causae
coniectio, — an  epitome  of  the  whole  cause.

When  the  proceedings  were  in  rem,  moveable  and  self-
moving  things  that  could  be  carried  or  brought  into  court
were  vindicated  in  this  way  :  the  vindicant  held  in  his  hand
a  rod ;  then  he  took  hold  of  the  thing  in  dispute,  say  a  slave,
and  made  his  averment  thus  :  '  I  say  that  this  man  is  mine  in
quiritarian  right,  on  the  title  I  have  already  explained ;  behold,
1  have  laid  my  uindicta  upon  him ; '  and  at  the  same  moment

the  xn  Tables.  He  suggests  the
year  322  |  432,  when  L.  Pinarius
Mamercinus  Eufus  and  L.  Furius
Medullimus  Fusus  were  two  of  the
military  tribunes  ;  and  thinks  Varro,
whom  Macrob.  cites  as  his  autho-
rity, may  have  made  the  mistake  of
confounding  the  military  tribunes
with  the  earlier  consuls  of  the  same
name.

3  Before  Studemund's  revision  of
the  Verona  Codex  most  eds.  were
in  the  habit  of  reading  nondum  in-
stead of  statim  ;  thus  inferring  that
it  was  the  L.  Pinaria  that  first
authorized  remit  to  a  single  judge
instead  of  to  the  centumviral  court.

4  Comp.  Cic.  pro  Mur.   xii,  27  ;
Ps.-Ascon.     as    in   note    1  ;    Paul,
ex   Festo,    v.    Res    camper  endinata
(Bruns,  p.  260);  Gell.  x,  24,  §  9.

5  The  Ms.  has  collectio.     But  see
Ps.-Ascon.  as  in  note  1  ;   fr.  1,  D.
de  E.  I.  (1,  17).

16.  Corap.  ii,  24,  containing  the
formula  of  in  hire  cessio,  which  was
nothing  else  than  a  rei  uindicatio
arrested  in  its  first  stage,  because  of
no  opposition  on  the  part  of  the
nominal  respondent.

1  '  Id  est,  qui  uindex  erat.  Vt
autem  index  est  is  qui  iudicat  ubi
et  quid  sit  ius,  sic  uindex  ubi  et
quae  sit  uis  demonstrat, '  Poleuaar.

S

274

GAII  INST1TVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS

[IV,  §  16.

CAVSAM,2   SICVT  DIXI  ;   ECCE  TIBI,  VINDICTAM   INPOSVI,3  et  sinilll

homini  festucam  inponebat.  aduersarius  eadem  similiter
dicebat  et  faciebat.4  cum  uterque  uindicasset  praetor  dice-
bat:  MITTITE  AMBO  HOMINEM.  illi  mittebant.  qui  prior
uin.Aica[uerat  ita  altcrum  interroga]b&t : 5  FOSTVLO  ANNE
DICAS  QVA  EX  CAYSA  viNDiCAVEKis  ?  ille  respondebat :  ivs

he  touched  him  with  the  rod.  Thereupon  the  other  party
spoke  and  acted  in  like  manner.  Each  having  thus  vindi-
cated, the  praetor  said  :  '  Both  of  you  let  the  man  alone.'
They  did  so.  He  who  had  made  the  first  vindication  then
interrogated  the  other  thus  :  '  I  ask  you,  will  you  state  upon
what  title  you  have  vindicated  ? '  to  which  the  other  party

-  There  is  some  difference  of
opinion  as  to  the  meaning  of  the
words  sec.  suam  causam,  and  their
relation  to  the  immediately  follow-
ing sicut  dixi.  Hu.  holds  that  the
words  sec.  suam  causam  were  in-
tended as  an  affirmation  that  the
pursuer  was  claiming  the  slave  as
already  his  on  a  sufficient  title,  and
not  now  claiming  him  for  the  first
time  as  in  an  in  iure  cessio  ;  further,
that  the  sicut  dixi  has  no  particular
reference  to  the  sec.  suam  causam,
but  is  the  connecting  link  between
the  two  parts  of  the  uindicatio,—
'  as  I  have  asserted  my  ownership
by  word  of  mouth,  so  do  I  now
by  my  act.'  K.  u.  S.  also  dis-
connect sicut  dixi  from  what  goes
before,  from  which  it  may  perhaps
be  inferred  that  they  put  the  same
meaning  as  Hu.  upon  sec.  suam
causam.

I  am  disposed,  however,  to  hold
by  the  older  idea — still  maintained
by  several  of  the  later  civilians  of
eminence,  for  instance  Ihering  (G.
d.  R.  R.  iii,  p.  88)— that  the  sec.
suam  causam,  sicut  dixi  refer  to  a
previous  informal  statement  by  the
first  vindicaut  of  the  title  upon
which  he  maintained  his  ownership;
without  it  he  could  hardly  in  fair-
ness ask  his  adversary  what  was  his
title.  But,  although  this  may  ac-
count for  the  introduction  of  the
words  into  the  ritual  of  the  uin/li-
catio,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that
they  would  be  used  only  when  a
preliminary  statement  of  his  title
had  actually  been  made  by  the  first

vindicant ;    they   became   words   of
style,  spoken  as  of  course.

3  P.  thinks  inposui  a  gloss,  (1)  as
unwarranted  by  the  S.  S.  C.  S.  D.  E.  T.  V.
of  Valer.  Prob.,  and  (2)  as  inconsis-
tent with  the  immediately  following
simul  inponebat.

4  That  the  respondent  (aduersa-
rius) contravindicated,   or   at   least
made  a  counter  averment  of  owner-
ship in  the  same  terms  as  the  first
vindicant,  and  accompanied  by  the
same  ceremonial,  is  denied  by  some
jurists,  on  the  ground  that  the  result
might   be   a  judicial    finding    that
neither  party  was  owner  ;  and  they
impute  to  Gai.  an  inaccuracy,  due
they  think  to  his  unfamiliarity  with
a  procedure  that  had  become  a  mere
matter   of  history.      But   we   have
other  authority  for  it  in  Plaut.  Rud.
iv,  3,  1.   84;  Cic.  pro  Mur.  xii,.  26
(fundus  Sabinus  meus  est  :    immo
meus);  and  Gai.  himself  in  his  de-
scription of  in  iure  cessio  (ii,   24).
The  action  was  in  fact  originally  a
duplex  indicium ;  which  may  account
for  Gai.  not  calling  the  parties  actor
and  reus  (pursuer  and  defender),  but
qui  uindicabat  or  qui  prior  uindi-
cabat in  the  one  case,  and  aduersarius
in  the  other.

5  Added  by  G.,  and  adopted  by
most  eds.     Hu.  has  qui  prior  uindi-
ca\_uerat  ita  aduersarium,  et  rursus
post  is  alterum  interrogajbat.     This
interrogatory  is  probably  the  earliest
specimen  of  the  interrogatio  in  iure
that  played  an  important   part   in
judicial  procedure  at  a  later  period  ;
see  tit.  D.  de  inter  rog.  in  iure  (xi,  1).

IV,  §  16.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

275

FECI  SICVT  VINDICTAM  INPOSVI.  delude  qui  prior  uindica-
uerat  dicebat :  QVANDO  TV  INIVEIA  VINDICAVISTI,  D  AEKIS  SACRA-
MENTO TE  PEOVOCO  ;  aduersarius  quoque  dicebat  similiter  : 6  ET
EGO  TE  ;  [scilicet  L  asses  sacrament!  nominabant.]  7  delude
eadem  sequebantur  quae  cum  in  personam  ageretur.8  postea
praetor  secundum  alterum  eoruni  uindicias  dicebat,9  id  est
interim  aliquem  possessorem  constituebat,  eumque  iubebat
praedes  10  aduersario  dare  litis  et  uindiciarum,  id  est  rei  et
fructuum :  u  alios  autem  praedes  ipse  praetor  ab  utroque  acci-
piebat  sacranienti,  quod  id  in  publicum  cedebat.  festuca
autem  utebantur  quasi  hastae  loco,  signo  quodam  iusti
dominii,  [quod]  maxime 12  sua  esse  credebant  quae  ex  hostibus

replied  :  '  I  have  done  what  I  had  a  right  to  do  in  lay-
ing my  uindicta  upon  him.'  Then  again  the  first :  '  Since
you  have  vindicated  without  right,  I  challenge  you  with  a
sacrament  of  fifty  asses ; '  to  which  the  other  answered  in  like
manner  :  '  And  I  you.'  Then  followed  the  same  procedure  as
in  the  actio  in  personam.  When  it  was  completed  the  praetor
granted  the  uindiciae  or  interim  possession  to  one  or  other
of  them,  requiring  him  to  give  sureties  to  his  adversary  litis
et  uindiciarum,  i.e.  for  the  tiling  itself  and  its  profits ;  and  he
further  required  each  of  them  to  furnish  sureties  for  his
sacrament,  because  that  was  to  fall  to  the  state.  The  rod
spoken  of  was  used  in  place  of  a  spear,  the  symbol  of  lawful
ownership,  men  esteeming  those  above  all  things  to  be  theirs
which  they  had  taken  from  an  enemy ;  wherefore  it  is  that  a

6  Other  eds.  put  this  word  similiter
into  the  mouth  of  the  respondent  as
part  of  his  challenge.

7  The  MS.   has    scil.l  asses,    etc.
K.  u.  S.  interpolate,  and  read  scilicet
[si  de  re  maioris  quam  M  aerls  age-
batur,    D,   si  de  minoris,]  L  asses,
etc.;  Hu. — scilicet  [si  de  re  minoris
quam  M  aeris  agebatur,]  L  asses,  etc.
Gou.  regards  scil  and  the  three  words
that   follow   as   a  gloss,     and    the
second  I  as  merely   a   mis-spelling.
I  also  read  them  as  a  gloss,  but  one
which  in  the  second  I  makes  a  very
proper  correction.     The  illustration
Gai.  is  employing  is  a  vindication  of
a  slave,  and   he   consequently   errs
(§  14)  in  speaking  of  challenge  with
a  sacrament  of  five  hundred  asses  ;
says  the  glossarist  —  '  it  was  fifty. '
In  the  translation .  I  have  made  the

correction  in  the  first  instance  and
omitted  the  gloss.

8  Comp.  §  15.

9  Comp.  Fest.  v.  Vindiciae  (Bruns,
p.  272).    Most  authors  are  of  opinion
that  the  uindiciae  were  granted  as
a  matter  of  course  to  the  de  facto
possessor  at  the  moment.     Ihering
(G.  d.  H.   It.  iii,  p.  102,  note  129c)
combats    this    view,    holding    that
the  matter  was  one  entirely  in  the
discretion   of  the   magistrate,    who
acted  on  his  first  impression  of  the
justice  of  the  case.

10  Comp.  Paul,  ex  Festo,  v.  Praes
(Brans,  p.  256);  Varro,  de  L.  L.  vi,
74  (Bruns,  p.  278).

11  Comp.  §  94;  Ps.-Ascon.  in  II.
Verr.  i,  115  (Bruns,  p.  293).

12  The    MS.    has    dominio    XXI.
me.

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [IV,  §§  16-17a.

cepissent;  uncle  in  centumuiralibus  iudiciis13  hasta  prae-
17  ponitur.1*  Si  qua  res  tails  erat  ut  sine  incommodo  non
posset  in  ius  adferri  uel  adduci,  ueluti  si  columna 1  aut  grex
alicuius  pecoris  esset,  pars  aliqua  inde  sumebatur,  deinde  in
earn  partem  quasi  in  totam  rem  praesentem  fiebat  uindicatio  ;
itaque  ex  grege  uel  una  ouis  aut  capra  in  ius  adducebatur,  uel
etiam  pilus  iade  sumebatur  et  in  ius  adferebatur ;  ex  naue
uero  et  columna  aliqua  pars  defringebatur.  similiter  si  de
fundo  uel  de  aedibus  sine  de  hereditate  controuersia  erat,  pars
aliqua  inde  sumebatur  et  in  ius  adferebatur,  et  in  earn  partem
perinde  atque  in  totam  rem  praesentem  fiebat  uindicatio,  ueluti
ex  fundo  gleba  sumebatur  et  ex  aedibus  tegula,  et  si  de  here-
ditate controuersia  erat  aeque .2

17  spear  is  set  up  in  front  of  the  centumviral  bench.  If  the
thing  in  question  was  such  as  could  not  conveniently  be  carried
or  brought  into  court,  a  pillar,  for  example,  or  a  flock  or  herd
of  animals,  a  part  was  taken  and  the  vindication  made  upon
it  as  if  the  whole  had  been  there ;  a  single  sheep  or  goat  of  a
herd  was  driven  into  court,  or  perhaps  only  a  little  of  the
wool  or  hair  of  one  of  them  taken  into  it ;  while  from  a  ship
or  a  pillar  a  small  portion  was  broken  off.  In  like  manner  if
the  dispute  was  about  land  or  houses,  or  about  an  inherit-
ance, some  small  part  was  taken  into  court,  and  the  vindica-
tion made  upon  it  as  if  the  whole  had  been  there ;  for
example,  a  turf  was  taken  from  the  land  or  a  tile  from  the
house ;  and  if  the  thing  in  controversy  was  an  inheritance,
then  too  -

13  Comp.  Cic.  de  Oral,  i,  28,  §  173;
.  Paul,    ex    Festo,   v.   Centumuiralia
•  (Bruns,  p.  238);  Quintil.  I.  0.  v,  2,

§  1.  According  to  Cic.  the  centum-
viral  court  seems  to  have  been  a
competent  forum  in  a  great  range
of  cases  ;  but  in  the  time  of  Gai.,
according  to  the  prevalent  opinion,
it  sat  only  for  the  trial  of  some
questions  of  inheritance.  See  below,
§  31.

14  Comp.  Suet.  Aug.  36  ;  Quintil.
as  in  last  note.

17.  See  Cic.  pro  Mur.  xii,  26,  where
he  narrates  with  much  ridicule  the
procedure  followed  when  lands  were
in  dispute  ;  see  further  the  ingenious
explanation  of  its  origin  and  import

by  Muenderloh,  as  quoted  in  §  13
note  ;  also  Cell,  xx,  10.

1  P.  interpolates  aut  nauls.

2  The  par.  probably  concluded  with
res  aliqua  inde  sumebatur,  or  words
to  the  same  effect ;  they  are  wanting
in  the  MS.  ,  as  explained  in  next  note.

17«.  Between  what  are  numbered
pp.  194  and  195  of  the  MS.  a  leaf  is
amissing,  cut  out,  as  Stud,  thinks,
by  the  writer  of  St.  Jerome's
Epistles.  We  thus  lose  48  lines  of
the  text,  which  contained  the  con-
clusion of  the  account  of  the  legis
actio  sacramento,  the  whole  account
of  that  per  iudicis  postulationem,
and  part  of  the  account  of  that  per
condictionem.

IV,  §§  176-20.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

277

17& ad  iudicein  capiendum  praesto  esse  dc-

berent.1      condicere    autem    denuntiare    est    prisca    lingua."'

18  Itaque  haec  quidem  actio  proprie  condictio  uocabatur :  nani
actor  aduersario  denuntiabat  ut  ad  iudicein  capiendum  die
xxx.  adesset;  nunc  uero    non  proprie  condictioneni  dicimus
actionem  in  personam    \esse   qua] l    intendimus    dari 2  nobis
oportere :  nulla  enim  hoc  tempore  eo  nomine  denuntiatio  fit.

19  Haec   autem  legis  actio  constituta  est  per  legem  Siliam   et
Calpurniam;  lege  quidem   Silia   certae   pecuniae,   lege  uero

20  Calpurnia  de  omni  certa  re.         Quare  autem  haec  actio  desi-

17Z> ,  when  they  should  be  bound  to  attend  to

have  a  judge  appointed.     For  condicere  in  early  Latin  meant

18  the  same  as  denuntiare,  to  give  formal  notice.         This  pro-
cedure therefore  was  quite  properly  called  condictio;  for  the
pursuer  gave  notice  to  his  opponent  to  appear  on  the  thirtieth
day  for  the  appointment  of  a  judge.     In  now  giving  the  name
of  condiction  to  the  personal  action  in  which  we  maintain
that  something  ought  to  be  given  to  us,  our  language  is  not  so
appropriate ;  for  at  the  present  day  there  is  no  notice  given

19  such  as  wTe  have  been  speaking  of.         This  legis  actio  was
established  by  the  Silian  and  Calpurnian  laws  ;  the  Silian  law
introducing  it  in  the  case  of  money  due  of  definite  amount,
the  Calpurnian  extending  it  to  every  other  thing  that  was

20  definite  and  certain.         But  it  may  well  be  asked  what  was

176.     See  last  note.     The  first  line  and
a  half  of  p.  195  is  illegible.

Hu.  conjecturally  supplies  the  first
part  of  the  par.  thus  :  Per  condictio-
nem  tantum  ayebatur  de  his  rebus
quas  nobis  dari  oportet,  quam  actio-
nem eliam  nunc  condictionem  uoca-
mus.  Et  per'mde  hoc  modo  ayebant,
detracto  tamen  ipso  sacramento,  acsi
sacramento  in  personam  ageretur.
The  line  and  a  half  at  top  of  p.  195
he  thus  reconstructs  :  obseruabant
enim  eundem  diem  et  aequalem  mo-
dum  capiendi  iudicis  condicendique
diem  quo  ad  iudicem,  etc.

1  Of  deberent  (Hu.)  only  the  first
two  letters  are   legible  ;    K.   u.   S.
and  P.  prefer  debtbant.

2  Comp.  Paul,  ex  Festo,  v.  Condi-
cere  (Bruns,  p.  239);  §  15,  I.  de  act.
(iv,  6).

§  18.     Comp.   §§  5,  33;  §  15,  I.  de  act.
(iv,  6).

These  two  words  supplied  from
the  lust.

2  The  MS.  has  id.

§  19.  There  is  no  means  of  fixing  the
dates  of  those  two  enactments  with
anything  like  certainty.  While
Voigt  (lust.  Nat.  iv,  401)  puts  the
L.  Silia  between  311  |  443  and  329  |
425,  and  Ihering  (G.  d.  It.  R.  ii,  p.
390)  attributes  it  to  the  first  half  of
the  fifth  century  (u.  c.),  Hu.  (Midta,
p.  492)  thinks  it  cannot  have  been
earlier  than  the  first  half  of  the  sixth
century,  and  possibly  the  same  year
(510  |  244)  as  the  L.  Silia  regulating-
weights  and  measures.  But  this
brings  it  too  near,  and  even  post-
pones it  to,  the  introduction  of  the
formular  system  sanctioned  by  the
lex  Aebutia,  if  507  |  247  be  the
proper  date  of  that  law.  See  §  30,
note  1.

§  20.  Comp.  §  13.  The  condictio  had
this  very  obvious  advantage, — that
it  did  not  necessitate  the  appearance
of  the  parties  in  court  until  they
met  for  the  appointment  of  a  index.

278  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [IV,  §§  20,  21.

derata  sit,  cum  de  eo  quod  nobis  dari  oportet  potuerimns  sacra-
mento  aut  per  iudicis  postulationem  agere,  ualde  quaeritur.
21  Per  maims  iniectionem  aeque  \dc]  his  rebus  agebatur  de
quibus  ut  ita  ageretur  lege  aliqua  1  cautum  est,  uelut  iudicati
lege  xii  tabularum  : 2  quae  actio  tails  erat.  qui  agebat  sic  dice-
bat  :  QVOD  TV  MIHI  IVDICATVS  (slue  DAMXATTS)  3  E8  SESTER-
TIVM  X  MILIA,  QVANDOC  4  XON  SOLVISTI,  OB  EAM  EEM  EGO  TIBI

SESTERTIVM  x  MiLiVM  IVDICATI  MANVM  iNicio,  et  simul  aliquam
partem  corporis  eius  prendebat ;  nee  licebat  iudicato  manum
sibi  depellere  et  pro  se  lege  agere,  sed  uindicern 5  dabat  qui
pro  se  causam  agere  solebat :  qui  uindicem  non  dabat  domum

the  need  for  it,  seeing  that  where  it  was  alleged  that  some-
thing '  ought  to  be  given/  action  was  already  competent  either
by  sacrament  or  by  petition  for  a  judge.

21  Manus  iniectio  was  employed  in  those  cases  in  which  it  was
expressly  prescribed  by  statute,  as,  under  the  provisions  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  in  proceedings  upon  a  judgment.  The  pro-
cedure was  as  follows  : — the  pursuer  addressed  the  other  party
thus:  '  Whereas  by  judgment '  (or  '  by  damnation  ')  '  you  are
indebted  to  me  in  the  sum  of  ten  thousand  sesterces,  inas-
much as  you  have  not  paid  them,  in  respect  thereof  I  now  lay
hands  upon  you  for  ten  thousand  sesterces  of  judgment  debt ; '
and  at  the  same  time  he  laid  hold  of  some  part  of  the  body  of
his  debtor.  The  latter  was  not  allowed  to  resist  the  arrest  or
defend  himself  in  person,  but  had  to  provide  a  [substitute,
called  a]  uindex,  who  acted  on  his  behalf ;  if  he  failed  to  pro-
vide one,  he  was  carried  home  by  the  arrester  and  put  in

Further,  the  court  was  one  presided  *  So  the   MS.,    and  approved   by

over  by  the  praetor  ;  and  if  Ihering  Karlowa  (R.    CP.   p.    157)   and  by

(see  above,  §  13,  note  6)  be  right  in  K.  u.  S. ;  Festus(ed.  Mueller,  p.  258)

thinking  that  the  sacramental  pro-  says  that   so   qitando  was  spelt  in

cedure  took  place  before  a  pontiff,  the  xn  Tables.     G.,  whose  reading

this  was  in  itself  a  mighty  change,  was   followed  for  some    time,    had

— the  substitution  of  a  civil  for  an  quae  dolo  mala.     Hu.  in  his  second

ecclesiastical  tribunal.  edition,    on   the    authority   of  JI.,

21.     Comp.    the   lex   Coloniae  IiiUae  substituted   quae   ad    hoc;    in    hi.s

Genetiuae  (see  above,  i,  22,  note  1),  two  later   editions   he   has   [eaqi«-]

c.  61,  in  Ejilem.  Ejiii/raph.  iii,  91 ;  quando    oportet,      P.    has    qitandu

Serv.  adAen.  x,  419  (Bruns,  p.  298).  causam.

1  So  G.  and  most  eds. ;  the  MS.  has  5  Comp.  Fest.  v.  Vindex  (Bruns.
Aquilia.  p.    272);  Cell,   xvi,   10,   §  5.     The

2  Comp.  Gell.  xx,  1,  §  45 ;  Schoell,  creditor's  right  over  his  debtor's  per-
Tab.  iii,  1-4.  son   being   in   question,    the   latter

3  Keller  (R.   CP.   §  19)  proposes  could  not  act  for  himself ;  the  uindex
to  add  siue  COXFESSVX.     Damnatut  took  his  place  much  in  the  same  way
refers  to  ihedamnas  esto  of  a  nexum,  as  did  an  adsertor  libertatls  (§  14,
testament,  or  penal  statute  ;  see  ii,  note  2)  in  a  ulndlcatio  in  seruitutem.
201,  note  1.  See  §  16,  note  1.

IV,  §§22, 23.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  279

22  ducebatur  ab  actore  et  uinciebatur.6         Postea  quaedam  leges
ex  aliis  quibusdam  causis  pro  iudicato  manus  iniectionem  in
quosdam  dederimt,  sicut  lex  Publilia  in  euin  pro  quo  spon-
sor dependisset,  si  in  sex  mensibus  proximis  quam  pro   eo
depensum  esset  non  soluisset  sponsori  pecuniam;  item   lex
Furia  de    sponsu  aduersus   eum   qui  a  sponsore   plus  quam
uirilem  partem  exegisset,  et  denique  conplures  aliae  leges  in

23  multis  causis  talem   actionem  dederimt.         Sed   aliae  leges
ex  quibusdam  [causis]  constituerunt l  [in~]  quosdam  2  actiones
per  manus  iniectionem,  sed  puram,  id  est  non  pro  iudicato,
uelut  lex  [Furia]  fcestamentaria 3  aduersus  eum  qui  legatorum
nomine  mortisue  causa  plus  J/*  assibus  cepisset,  cum  ea  lege
non  esset  exceptus  ut  ei  plus  capere  liceret ;  item  lex  Marcia 5

22  chains.         Some  subsequent  laws  allowed  manus  iniectio  pro
iudicato,  as  upon  a  judgment,  in  certain  other  cases.     It  was
allowed,  for  example,  by  the  Publilian  law  against  a  debtor
who   had  failed  within  six  months  to  refund  to   a  sponsor
who  had  paid  his  debt  for  him ;  the  Furian  law  respecting
suretyship  allowed  it  against  a  creditor  who  had  exacted  from
one  of  several  sponsors  more  than  his  proportion  of  the  debt ;
and  by  numerous  other  statutes  it  was  sanctioned  in  a  variety

23  of  other  cases.         A  different  set  of  enactments  authorized
in  certain  cases  what  was  called  manus  iniectio  pur  a,  that  is,
not  proceeding  upon  the  footing  of  a  judgment ;  the  Furian
testamentary  law,  for  instance,  allowed  it  against  a  man  who
had  taken  more  than  a  thousand  asses  in  name  of  legacy
or  other  singular  mortis  causa  gift,  he  not  being  one  of  the
excepted  individuals  who,  under  its  provisions,  might  take  a
greater  sum ;   and  the  Marcian  law  against  usury   provided

6  Comp.  L.  Col.  lul.  Genetiuae,  as  the  debtor ;  the  creditor's  real  satis-
above  ;  Gell.  xx,  1,  §  45.  The  lex  faction  could  only  come  out  of  his
Poetilia  of  429  |  325  or  441  |  313—  estate.

see  Liv.  viii,  28 ;  Varro,  de  L.L.  vii,       §  22.     Comp.  iii,  §  121  (L.  Furia),  §  127

105  (ed.  Muell.  p.  162,  in  preference  (L.  Publilia).

toBruns,p.  281) — has  generally  been       §  23.     x  The  MS.  has — Sed  aliae  leges  in

supposed  to  have  abolished  the  irn-  multis  causis  ex  quibusdam  si  con-

prisonment,  and  chains,  and  slavery  stituerunt;  the  reading  above  is  that

or   death   that   often   followed    the  of  Gou. ,  followed  by  K.  u.  S.

manus  iniectio;  but  the  words  of  the  2  In  quosdam  due  to  Hu.,  follow-

L.  Col.  lul.  Genetiuae,  probably  of  ing  §   22  ;   the    MS.    has    quasdam

the  year  710  |  44,  are — ni  uindicnn  without  in;  P.  substitutes  quidem.

dabit  iudicatumue  faciet,  secum  du-  3  See  ii,  225.    Instead  of  lex  Furia

cito;  iure  ciuili  uinctum  habeto.     See  the  MS.  has  letje.

also  the  statement  of  Gai.  in  §  25.  4  The  MS.  has  C-

This    imprisonment    however     was  5  Enacted     402  |  352    (Liv.     vii,

meant  simply  to  secure  the  person  of  21).

280  GAII  INSTITVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS       [IV,  §§  23-25.

aduersus  faeneratores,  ut  si  usuras  exegissent,  de  his  reddendis

24  per  manus  iniectionem  cum  eis  ageretur.         Ex  quibus  legi-
bus  et  si  quae  aliae  similes  essent  cum  agebatur,  manum  sibi
depellere  et  pro  se  lege  agere  [reo  licebaf\  :  nam  et  actor  in
ipsa  legis  actione  non  adiciebat  hoc  uerbum  PRO  IVDICATO,
sed  noininata  causa  ex  qua  agebat  ita  dicebat :  OB  EAM  REM
EGO  TIBI  MANVM   iNicio ;  cum  hi  quibus  pro  iudicato  actio
data  erat,  noniiuata  causa  ex  qua  agebant,  ita  inferebant :  OB

EAM    REM    EGO     TIBI    PRO    IVDICATO     MANVM    INICIO  :    neC    1116

praeterit  in  forma  legis  Furiae  testamentariae  PRO  IVDICATO
uerbum  inseri,  cum  in  ipsa  lege  non  sit ;  quod  uidetur  nulla

25  ratione  factum.         Sed  postea  lege  Vallia,  excepto  iudicato
et  eo  pro  quo  depensum  est,  ceteris  omnibus  cum  quibus  per
manus  iniectionem  agebatur  permissum  est  sibi  manum  de-
pellere et  pro  se  agere  :  itaque  iudicatus  et  is  pro  quo  depen-
sum est  etiam  post  hanc  legem  uindicem  dare  debebant,  et
nisi   dareiit    domum    ducebantur.1      istaque 2  quamdiu    legis

that  if  a  lender  exacted  interest  upon  his  loan,  manus  iniectio

24  might  be  used  upon  him  to  compel  its  restitution.         In  the
case  of  arrest  tinder  these  enactments,  and  any  similar  ones
(if  there  were  such),  it  was  lawful  for  the  arrested  party  to
resist  and  defend  himself  in  person.     For  here  the  pursuer,  in
reciting  the  words  of  style,  did  not  make  use  of  the  phrase  '  as
upon  a  judgment,'  but,  specifying  the  ground  of  his  action,
said  simply,  '  in  respect  thereof  I  lay  hands  upon  you.'     Those
on  the  other  hand  to  whom  the  action  as  if  upon  a  judgment
was  allowed,  after  specifying  the  ground  of  it,  used  the  words,
'  in  respect  thereof  I  lay  hands  upon  you  as  upon  a  judgment.'
I  am  aware  that  in  the  formula   employed  in  proceedings
under  the  Furian  testamentary  law  the  words  '  as  upon  a
judgment '  are  inserted,  though  they  are  not  in  the  law  itself;

25  but  this  appears  to  me  unwarranted.         Subsequently,  by  the
Vallian  law,  all  against  whom  proceedings  might  be  taken  by
manus  iniectio,  except  judgment  debtors   and  principals  for
whom  a  sponsor  had  made  payment,  were  permitted  to  resist
the  arrest  and  defend  in  person.     The  judgment  debtor,  how-
ever, and  the  principal  indebted  to  his  sponsor,  had  still,  not-
withstanding this  enactment,  to  find  a  substitute  ;  on  failure
they  were  carried  home  by  their  creditors.     And  so  it  always

§24.   The  words  reolicebat  are  Husehke's;  !  See  L.  Col.  lul.  Genetiuae,  as  in

previous  eds.  have  only  liccbat.  §  21,  note.

§  25.     On  the  lex    Vallia,  see  iii,  121,  2  The  MS.    has   itaque  ;  K.  u.   S.

note.  and  P.,  following  L.,  idijue.

IV,  §§25-28.]      COMMENTAKII  QVATTVOR.  281

actiones  in  usu  erant  semper  ita  obseruabantur  ;  uncle  nostris
temporibus  is  cum  quo  iudicati  depensiue  agitur  iudicatum
solui  satisdare  cogitur.3

26  Per  pignoris  capionem  lege  agebatur  de  qiiibusdam  rebus

27  moribus,  [de  quibusdam~\ l  lege.         Introducta  est  moribus  rei
militaris :  nam  et  propter  stipendium  licebat  niiliti  ab  eo  qui
distribuebat,1  nisi  daret,  pignus  capere ;  dicebatur  autem  ea
pecunia  quae  stipendii  nomine  dabatur  aes  militare.2     item
propter  earn  pecuniam  licebat  pignus  capere  ex  qua  cqmis  3
emendus  erat,  quae   pecunia  dicebatur   aes   equestre  : 4   item
propter   earn  pecuniam  ex  qua    hordeum  equis    erat   conpa-

28  randum,  quae  pecunia  dicebatur   aes    hordiarium.5          Lege
autem  introducta  est  pignoris  capio,  ueluti  lege  xn  tabularum
aduersus  eum  qui  hostiam  emisset  nee   pretium  redderet ; l

was  while  the  legis  actiones  continued  in  use ;  wherefore  it  is
that  even  now,  in  an  action  upon  a  judgment,  and  in  an  actio
dcpcnsi,  the  defender  must  give  security  for  payment  of  the
sum  in  which  he  may  eventually  be  condemned.

26  The  legis  actio  by  pignoris  capio  or  distress  was  introduced

27  in  some  cases  by  custom,  in  others  by  statute.         It  was  in-
troduced by  custom  in  some  matters  affecting  the  army  :  for  a
soldier  could  distrain  upon  the  paymaster  if  his  pay  or  aes
militare  was  in  arrear  ;  and  a  knight  could  distrain  for  the
aes  equestre  or  sum  to  which  he  was  entitled  for  the  purchase
of  a  horse,  and  for  his   aes   hordiarium   or   forage   money.

28  The  Twelve  Tables  authorized  it  against  him  who  had  pur-
chased a  victim  for  sacrifice  but  failed  to  pay  the  price ;  as

3  Comp.  §  102.  (Brans,  p.  275) ;  Cato  apud  Cell,  vi,

§  26.     Gell.  (vi,  10)  says  that  the  proper  10,  §  2.

spelling  is   capio,   not  captio ;   the  3  So  Savigny  and  most  eds. ;  the

latter  form,  however,  occurs  once  or  MS.  has  eciuis;  Hu.  equus  us.

twice  in  the  Verona  MS.  4  Comp.  Paul,  ex  Festo,  v.  Equcs-

1   Added    by    G.,    and   substan-  tre  aes  (Bruns,  p.   241) ;  this  capio

tially    adopted    by   all   subsequent  was  also  against  the  tribunus  aera-

eds.  rius,    the    purchase-money    coining

§  27.     Comp.  Fest.  v.   Vectigal  (Bruns,  from  the  public  ;  Liv.  i,  43.

p.  271).  a  Comp.  Paul,  ex  Festo,  v.  Hordi-

1  The  MS.  has  distruebat;  Hu.  has  arium  aes  (Bruns,  p.  243).     As  the
qui  id  Us  tribu[ere  deb]ebat;  K.  u.  8.  maintenance  of  the  cavalry  horses
and  P.  qui  [id]  distribuebat.     The  was  a  burden  upon  widows,  it  was
paymaster,  against  whom  the  capio  they  possibly  who  were   proceeded
was   competent,    was  the    tribunus  against;  see  Liv.  i,  43;  Cic.  de  Re-
aerarius;  Paul,  ex  Festo,  v.  Aerarii  publ.  ii,  20,  §  36.

tribuni.  §  28.    '  Competent,  according  to  Goettling

2  The  army  first  began  to  receive  (Roem.  Staatsverfassung,  p.  185),  to
pay  in  349  |  405,  Liv.  iv,  59.    Comp.  the  colleges  of  priests,  who  kept  and
Varro,    de   L.    L.   \,    §§   181,    182  sold  animals  fit  for  sacrifice.

282

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [IV,  §§  28,  29.

item  aduersus  eum  qui  mercedem  non  redderet  pro  eo  iumento
quod  quis  ideo  locasset  ut  inde  pecuniam  acceptam  in  dapem,
id  est  in  sacrificium,  inpenderet ; 2  item  lege  censoria  3  data  est
pignoris  capio  publicanis  *  uectigalium  publicorum  populi
Romani  aduersus  eos  qui  aliqua  lege  uectigalia  deberent.*
29  Ex  omnibus  autem  istis  causis  certis  uerbis  pignus  capiebatur,
et  ob  id  plerisque  placebat  hanc  quoque  actionem  legis  actio-
nem  esse ;  quibusdam  aliter  J  placebat,  primum  quod  pignoris
capio  extra  ius  peragebatur,  id  est  non  apud  praetorem,
plerumque  etiam  absente  aduersario,  cum  alioquin  ceteris
actionibus  non  aliter  uti  possent  quam  apud  praetorem  prae-
sente  aduersario  ;  praeterea  quod  nefasto  quoque  die,  id  est
quo  non  licebat  lege  agere,2  pignus  capi  poterat.

also  against  the  person  who  failed  to  pay  for  a  beast  which
another  had  let  him  on  hire  in  order  to  raise  money  for  an
offering  to  Jupiter  Dapalis  ;  and  by  the  censorial  law  the  same
remedy  was  allowed  to  the  farmers  of  the  public  revenue
29  against  those  whose  taxes  were  unpaid.  In  all  these  cases
the  pignoris  capio  was  accompanied  with  a  set  form  of  words,
and  hence  it  also  has  generally  been  accounted  a  legis  actio.
Some  however  think  that  it  should  not  be  so  regarded,  firstly,
because  it  took  place  extra  ius,  that  is,  not  before  the  praetor,
and  often  in  the  absence  of  the  adversary,  whereas  the  other
legis  adiones  were  competent  only  before  the  praetor  and  in
the  presence  of  the  adversary ;  and,  secondly,  because  it  might
take  place  on  a  dies  nefastus  or  day  upon  which  procedure  by
legis  actio  was  unlawful.

2  Twice  a  year,  at  the  spring  and
autumn  seed-time,  it  was  the  custom
for  the  husbandman  to  offer  a  feast
(daps)  to  Iiipiter  dapalis  in  implor-
ing rain  for  his  fields  and  cattle  ;
Cato,  de  S.  JR.  §§  131,  132;  Paul,  ex
Festo,  v.  Daps  (ed.  Mueller,  p.  68).
If,    to    obtain   the   wherewithal  to
make  this  offering,  he  had  to  let  o\it
his  draught  cattle  for  hire,  and  this
was  not  paid,  then  he  had  pign.  capio
against  the  hirer.

3  The  leges  censoriae  were  the  con-
ditions and  stipulations  contained  in
the  contracts  entered  into  by  the
censors  with  the  farmers  of  the  re-
venue and  others  on  behalf  of  the
public  ;  comp.  Cic.  de  nat.  deor.  iii,
19,   §  49;  II.    Verr.  i,   55,  §  143;
Varro,  de  R.  R.  ii,  1,  §  16  (Brims,
p.  282).

4  P.    interpolates   id  est  conduc-
toribus.

5  Comp.  Cic.  //.  Verr.  iii,  11,  §
27  ;  47,  §§  112,  113.

29.  Gai.  lays  stress  on  the  fact  that
pignoris  capio  began  extrajudicially;
but  so  did  the  actio  sacramenti  (for
the  in  ius  uocatio  was  a  private  act) ;
and  so  did  the  condictio  and  the
manus  iniectio.  In  this  respect,
therefore,  it  was  not  peculiar.

1  A  liter  suggested   by   Gou. ;  the
MS.    has   at. ,  with  a  line  over  the
letters.     K.  u.  S.  read  autem,  and
interpolate    contra;    Hu.,     follow-
ing G. ,   also  reads  autem,  and  in-
terpolates legis  actionem  non  esse  ;
P.  reads  hand.

2  Comp.    Varro,  de  L.  L.  vi,  30
(Bruns,  p.  277) ;  Ovid.  Fast,  i,  47  ;
Macrob.  Sat.  i,  16.

IV,  §§  30,  31.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

283

30  Sed  istae  omnes  legis  actiones  paulatim  in  odium  uenerunt ;
namque  ex  nimia  subtilitate  ueterum  qui  tune  iura  condide-
runt  eo  res  perducta  est  ut  uel  qui  minimum  errasset  litem
perderet ;  itaque  per  legem  Aebutiarn l  et  duas  lulias  2  sub-
latae  sunt  istae  legis  actiones,  effectumque  est  ut  per  concepta

31  uerba,  id  est  per  formulas,  litigaremus.         Tantum  ex  duabus
causis  permissum  est  lege  agere,  damni  infecti  et  si  centum-
uirale    indicium  futurum   est.     sane,  quidem  l    cum    ad  cen-
tumuiros  itur,   ante  lege  agitur  sacramento  apud  praetorem
urbanum   uel  peregrinum ; 2    damni   uero  infecti  nemo  unit
lege  agere,3  sed  potius  stipulatione  quae  in  edicto  proposita

30

o  -i
Ol

But  all  those  leg-is  actiones  gradually  fell  into  discredit  ;
for,  owing  to  the  extreme  subtility  of  the  jurists  of  the  re-
public, whose  province  it  then  was  to  declare  the  law,  it  came
about  that  a  litigant  making  even  the  slightest  mistake  lost
his  cause  ;  therefore,  by  the  Aebutian  and  two  of  the  Julian
laws,  the  legis  actiones  were  abolished,  and  litigation  by  certain
set  forms  of  words,  i.e.  per  formulas,  put  in  place  of  them.
Only  in  two  cases  is  it  still  competent  to  proceed  by  legis
actio,  namely,  in  that  of  damnum  infectum,  and  when  the
action  is  one  to  be  referred  to  the  centumviral  court.  When
this  latter  course  is  in  view  there  must  first  be  a  legis  actio  by
sacrament  before  the  urban  or  peregrine  praetor ;  but  in  the
case  of  damnum  infectum  no  one  thinks  of  proceeding  by  legis
actio,  but  rather  takes  his  adversary  bound  to  him  by  the

§  30.     Comp.  §§  11,  39  f.;  Cell,  xvi,  10,
§8.

1  There    is     great    difference    of
opinion  as  to  the  date  of  this  enact-
ment, those  suggested  ranging  from
the  middle  of  the  fifth  to  the  middle
of  the  seventh  century  of  the  city  ;
but   the  preponderance   of  surmise
attributes  it  to  about  the  same  date
as  the   institution  of  the  peregrin
praetorship  in    507  |  247.       It   did
not  abolish  the  legis  actiones,   for
Cicero  speaks  of  them  ten  times  for
once  that  he  mentions  the  formu-
lae ;  but  it  probably  authorized  the
praetor  to  introduce  such  new  judi-
cial remedies  as  he  thought  proper
alongside  of  them, — adiuuandi  uel
supplendi  uel  corrigenda  iuris  ciuilis
gratia,  propter  utilitatem  publicam
(Papin.  fr.  7,  §  1,  D.  de  I.  et  I.  i,  1).

2  Comp.  §  104.     '  The  two   leges
Inline,  (presumably  the  iudidariae

of  Augustus)  still  further  restricted
the  employment  of  the  legis  actiones.
Details  are  uncertain  ;  but  probably
they  inter  alia  abolished  the  court
of  the  decemuiri  as  an  independent
one,  and  diminished  the  number  of
the  ce.ntumuirales  causae'  (Keller,
R.  CP.  §  23).  See  next  par.
31.  As  regards  centumviral  causes  see
§  16,  note  10.  It  is  the  opinion  of
Bethman-Hollweg  (R.  CP.  i,  p.  204,
note  13),  and  Karlowa  (R.  CP.  p.
216),  that  pignoris  capio  was  the
appropriate  action  of  the  law  for
damnum  infectum ;  and  this  view
has  been  given  effect  to  in  the  text.

1  So  K.  u.  S. ;  the  MS.  hassane^;
Hu.  saneque.

2  After  peregrinum  the  MS.   has
pr.,  which  I  take  to  mean  praetor  em,
and  have  omitted  as  a  gloss.

3  Damnum  infectum  was  damage
or    danger    apprehended   from   the

284

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVR1S  CLVILIS      [IV,  §§  31-33.

est 4  obligat  aduersarium  suum ;  Hague  et 5  commodius  ius  et
plenius  est  \_quani}  6  per  pignoris  [capionem'].

apparet.          [32]  Item l    in   ea   for-

32  mula2  quae  publicano  proponitur  tails  fictio  est,  ut  quanta
pecunia  olim,  si  pignus  captum  esset,  id  pignus  is  a  quo
captum  erat  luere  deberet,  tantam  pecuniam  condemnetur.
Nulla  autem  formula  ad  condictionis  fictionem  exprimitur:
sine  enim  pecuniam  sine  rem  aliquam  certam  debitam  nobis
petamus,  earn  ipsam  dari  nobis  oportere  intendimus,  nee  ullam
adiungimus  condictionis  fictionem  ;  itaque  siniul  intellegimus

oo
OO

stipulation  set  forth  in  the  edict,  and  thus  acquires  a  remedy
at   once   more  convenient  and  more  effectual  than  that  by
pignoris  capio.
31a  .         [32]  So  in  the  formula  settled

32  to  meet  the  case  of  a  publican  [or  farmer  of  the  revenue]  there
is  a  fiction  of  this  sort, — that  whatever  sum,  had  there  in
former  times  been  a  distress,  the  debtor  would  have  had  to
pay  for  redeeming  what  had  been  distrained,  in  that  he  shall

33  be  condemned.         But  no  formula  contains  any  reference  to
a  feigned   legis   actio  per   condictionem.     When  we  claim  as
due  to  us  either  a  definite  sum  of  money  or  any  other  thing
definite  and  certain,  we  simply  contend  that  that  sum  or  thing
ought  to  be  given  to  us,  and  say  nothing  as  to  what  our  right
would  have  been  under  the  older  procedure ;  from  which  it  is
to  be  understood  that  those  formulae  in  which  our  contention

ruinous  or  neglected  condition  of  a
neighbour's  property.  Probably  if
the  owner,  on  formal  warning,  failed
to  make  the  necessary  repairs,  the
complainer  was  entitled  to  resort  to
pignoris  capio,  take  possession,  and
make  them  himself.  But  prefer-
ence was  usually  given  to  the  pro-
cedure authorized  by  the  edict, —
cautio  damni  infecti,  followed  if
necessary  by  misslo  in  possessio-
nem ;  see  §  2,  I.  de  diu.  slip,  (iii,
18).

4  Comp.    lex    Rultria    de    Gallia
dsalpina,  c.  20  (Bruns,  p.  88)  ;  §2,
I.  de  diu.  stip.  (iii,  18).

5  So  the  MS.,

as  a  correction  of  et ;  K.  u.  S.,  Hu. ,
and  P.  idque  et.

6  Interpolated  to  give  effect  to  the
view  stated  above.     K.  u.  S.,  Hu.,
and  P.  make  est  the  end  of  the  par. ,
and  per  pignoris  the  beginning  of  a

ei  being  interlined

new  one,  continued  on  p.  199  (now
entirely  illegible).

§  31a.  K.  u.  S.  and  Hu. ,  following
earlier  eds.,  suppose  Gai.  on  p.  199
to  have  given  some  further  explana-
tion of  the  legis  actio  per  pign.
capionem  ;  but  this  idea  is  a  result
of  their  separation  of  the  words
per  pignoris,  at  the  foot  of  p.  198,
from  those  immediately  preceding
them.  Gai.  seems  rather  to  have
dealt  with  those  actions  quae  ad
legis  actionem  exprimuntur  (§  10)
by  the  introduction  into  the  for-
mulae of  a  reference  to  the  legis
actiones  they  had  displaced.

§  32.     Comp.  §  28.

1  This  word  doubtful ;  G.  makes
it  uelut,    Hu.    and   P.  contra ;  the
proper  reading  depends  on  what  pre-
ceded it,  and  that  is  unknown.

2  The  MS.  has/o?'?na.
§  33.     Comp.  §§  18,  -19.

IV,  §§  33,  34.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

285

eas  formulas  quibus  pecuniam  aut  reni  aliquam  nobis  dari l
oportere  intendimus  sua  ui  ac  potestate  ualere.  eiusdem
naturae  sunt  actiones  commodati,  fiduciae,  negotiorum  gesto-
rum  et  aliae  innumerabiles.

Habemus  adhuc  alterius  generis  fictiones  in  quibusdam
formulis,  ueluti  cum  is  qui  ex  edicto  bonorum  possessionem
petiit  ficto  se  herede  agit :  cum  enim  praetorio  iure  is,  non
legitimo,  succedat  in  locum  defimcti,  non  liabet  directas
actiones,  et  neque  id  quod  defimcti  fuit  potest  intendere  suum
esse,  (neque  id  quod  ei}1  dcbcbatur  potest  intendere  \_dar{\  sibi
oportere  ;  itaque  ficto  se  herede  intendit  ueluti  hoc  modo :
IVDEX  ESTO.  si  AVLVS  AGERivs,2  id  est  si  ipse  actor,  LVCIO

77770  HERES  ESSET,    TVM  SI  3  FVNDVM  DE  QVO  AGITVR   EX    IVRE

QVIRITIVM  EIVS  ESSE  PARERET  ;* ,5  praeposita simi-

is  that  a  sum  of  money  or  some  other  thing  ought  to  be  given
us,  depend  for  their  efficacy  on  their  own  inherent  strength.
And  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  actions  of  commodate,  fidu-
ciary covenant  upon  a  conveyance,  unauthorized  management
of  another  person's  affairs,  and  others  innumerable.

We  have  a  different  sort  of  fiction  in  some  formulae,  as  when
a  man  who,  in  terms  of  the  edict,  has  sought  possession  of  the
estate  of  an  individual  deceased,  sues  under  the  pretence  that
he  is  heir.  Coming  in  place  of  the  defunct,  as  he  does,  by
praetorian  and  not  by  legal  right,  he  has  no  direct  actions,  and
can  neither  maintain  that  what  belonged  to  his  predecessor  is
his,  nor  that  what  was  due  to  the  latter  ought  to  be  paid  to

1  The   MS.    has    dare ;   but    this
occurs  very  frequently  in  passages
in  which  the  eds.  have  felt  them-
selves constrained  to  substitute  dari.
§  34.     Comp.  iii,  §§  32,  81.

1  Hollweg  and  most  eds.

2  Aulus   Agerius    and    Xumerius
Negidius  are  the  typical  names  given
by  Gai.  to  the  pursuer  and  defender
respectively  in  his  illustrations  of
the  formulae.

3  The    words  printed  above  as
Lucio   Titio  heres  esstt  turn   si  are
very  much  abbreviated  in  the  MS.,
and  anything  but  distinct.

4  K.   u.    S.    read   '  turn  si  [eum]
fundum  de  quo  agilur  ex  iure  Quir.
ems   esse   oporteret,'  and   Hu.    and
other  editors    in   substantially  the
same  way.     All  that  can  be  said  of
the  MS.    is  that  for  the  last  three

words  it  has  ten  almost  undecipher-
able letters  ;  for  while  Bl.  in  his  re-
cension thought  he  could  make  out
fuisse. . .  t,  Stud,  cannot  vouch  for
them.  But  Gai.  says  of  this  action
(§  111) — imitatur  his  leyitimum  ;
what  it  imitated  was  the  'siparet
hominem  ex  iure  Quir.  A.  Arjerli
esse '  of  the  formular  rei  nindicatio
(%  41)  ;  and  'si  eius  esse  pareret'
is  a  much  closer  imitation  than  '  si
eius  esse  oporteret.'  Probably  the
preference  of  the  editors  for  the  lat-
ter locution  is  due  to  the  fact  that
it  seems  employed  by  Gai.  in  the
formula  of  the  Publician.  But  it  is
very  questionable  whether,  for  the
reason  suggested  in  note  1  to  §  36,
it  can  even  there  be  accepted.

3  K.    u.  S.   (footnote)   suggest  et
si  .  .  dehtatur  pfcunia  ;  M.  (K.  u.  S.

286  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [IV,  §§  34-36.

liter6  fidionc,  ilia,7  ita  subicitur :  TVM  si  PARERET*  NVMERIVM

NEGIDIVM  2  \_A  VLO\  AGEPJO  SESTERTIVM  X  MILIA  DARE  OPORTERE.

35  Similiter  et  bonorum  emptor  ficto  se  lierede    agit.     sed  in-
terdum   et   alio   modo    agere    solet :    nam    ex   persona  eius
cuius  bona   emerit   sumpta  intentione,   conuertit  condemna-
tionem  in  suam  personam,  id  est  ut  quod  illius  esset  uel  illi
clari    oporteret,    eo   nomine   aduersarius  huic   condemnetur:
quae  species  actionis  appellatur   llutiliana,  quia   a  praetore
Publio   Eutilio,1    qui   et  bonorum  uenditioneni  introduxisse
dicitur,  conparata  est.     superior  autem  species  actionis  qua
ficto   se   herede   bonorum   emptor    agit   Seruiana 2    [uocatur.

36  [Eiusdem  generis  est  quae  PuUiciana]1  nocatur :  datur  autem

him.  Accordingly,  pretending  to  be  heir,  he  frames  his  in-
tentio thus  :  '  So  and  so  be  judge.  Supposing  Aulus  Agerius,'
i.e.  the  actual  pursuer,  '  to  be  the  heir  of  Lucius  Titius  ;  if  in
that  case  it  would  appear  that  the  land  in  question  is  his  in
quiritarian  right.'  [If  the  action  be  for  something  that  was
[owing  to  Lucius  Titius~],  the  same  fiction  is  prefixed,  and  the
formula  proceeds  :  '  if  in  that  case  it  would  appear  that  Xume-
rius  Negidius  ought  to  give  Aulus  Agerius  ten  thousand

35  sesterces.'         In  like  manner  the  purchaser  of  a  bankrupt's
estate  may  sue  on  the  pretence  that  he  is  heir.     But  some-
times he  sues  in  another  way ;  for,  allowing  the  intentio  to  run
in  the  name  of  the  bankrupt  whose  estate  he  has  purchased,
he  formulates  the  clause  of  condemnation  in  his  own  name,
that  is  to  say,  [he  claims]  that  his  adversary  shall  be  con-
demned to  him  in  respect  of  what  belonged  or  was  due  to  the
bankrupt.     This  last  action  is  called  the  Kutilian,  having  been
devised  by  the  praetor  Publius  Eutilius,  the  inventor  of  the
procedure  by  sale  of  the  bankrupt's   estate.     The  other,  in
which  the  purchaser  proceeds  upon  a  fiction  of  heirship,  is

36  called  Servian.         The  action  knoivn  as  the  PuUician  is  of  the

p.  xxii)  et  sic  de  debito  cum  ;  Hu.  si  §  35.     Comp.  iii,  §§  77-81.

ue.ro  de  debito  agatur  ;  P.  et  si  illi  1  See  iii,  77,  note.

debebatur  aeque.  2  Not  to  be  confounded  with  the

6  So  Scheurl  (Beitraege,  p.   132)  ;  a.  Seruiana  de  rebus  coloni,  §  31,  I.
K.  u.   S.,  Hu. ,  and  P.  have  simili ;  de  act.  (iv.  6).

the  letters  that  follow  in  the  MS.  are       §  36.     Comp.  §§  3,  4,   I.  de  act.  (iv,  6)  ;

uncertain.  fr.  1,  pr.  D.   de   Publ.   in  rem  act.

7  So  Bl.   in  his  recension  of  the  (vi,  2).     The  date  of  the  introduc-
MS.  ;  K.  u.  S.  and  M.  have  heredis ;  tion   of  this    action    is    uncertain.
Hu.  intentio.  The    general    opinion    is    that    its

8  So  K.  u.  S.  on  the  suggestion  of  author  was  Q.  Publicius,  praetor  in
M. ;  the    MS.    has  parct.     But  the  685  |  69,  the  assumption  being  that
emendation  had  previously  been  sug-  it  must  have  been  of  later  date  than
gested  by  Scheurl,  Beitraege,  p.  133.  the  ordinary  petitoria,  in  rem  for-

IV,  §§36,37.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

287

haec  actio  ei  qui  ex  iusta  causa  traditam  sibi  rein  nondum
usucepit,  eamque  amissa  possessione  petit ;  nam  quia  non
potest  earn  ex  iure  Quiritium  suam  esse  intendere,  fingitur
rem  usucepisse,  et  ita  quasi  ex  iure  Quiritium  dominus  factus
esset,  intendit  ueluti  lioc  moclo :  IVDEX  ESTO.  si  QVEM  HOMI-

NEM  AYLVS  AGERIVS  EMIT  [ET]  IS  EI  TRADITVS  EST,  ANNO
POSSEDISSET,  TVM  SI  EVM  HOMINEM  BE  QVO  AGITVR  EX  IVRE

QVIRITIVM  EIVS  ESSE  PARERET2  et  reliqua.  Item  ciuitas
Eomana  peregrine  fingitur  si  eo  nomine  agat  aut  cum  eo
agatur,  quo  nomine  nostris  legibus  actio  constituta  est,  si
modo  iustum  sit  earn  actionem  etiam  ad  peregrinum  extendi,
uelut  si l  furti  nomine  agat  peregrinus  aut  cum  eo  [agatur ;

same  sort.  It  is  granted  to  a  person  who,  before  completing
his  usucapion,  has  lost  the  possession  of  a  thing  that  has  been
delivered  to  him  on  a  good  title,  and  who  now  claims  it.  As
he  is  not  in  a  position  to  aver  that  it  is  his  in  quiritarian
right,  a  fiction  of  usucapion  is  introduced,  and,  as  if  he  had
really  become  quiritarian  proprietor,  he  formulates  an  intentio
in  these  terms  :  '  So  and  so  be  judge.  Suppose  such  or
such  a  slave,  whom  Aulus  Agerius  bought,  and  who  was
delivered  to  him,  to  have  been  possessed  by  him  for  a  year ;
if  it  would  appear  in  such  case  that  said  slave  is  his  in  quiri-
tarian right,'  etc.  Eoman  citizenship  is  also  fictitiously
attributed  to  a  peregrin  who  is  either  suing  or  being  sued  in
an  action  upon  some  law  of  our  own,  if  it  be  reasonable  that
it  should  be  extended  to  peregrins,  as,  for  example,  if  he  sue
[or  be  sued]  in  an  actio  furti.  [If  he  be  sued]  the  formula  runs

mulct  (§  41).  which,  from  the  way  it
is  mentioned  by  Cic.  //.  Verr.  ii,
12,  §  31  (anno  684  |  70),  is  thought
not  to  have  been  then  very  long  iu
use.  Voigt  however,  (his.  Nat.  iv,
p.  5 05,)  attributes  it  to  M.  Publicius
Malleolus,  praetor  516  |  238  ;  hold-
ing that  originally  its  formula  was
not  petitory,  but  per  sponsionem
mere  praeiudicialem,  like  the  ordi-
nary rei  uindicatio  (§  93),  without
any  fiction  of  completed  usucapion.

1  So  most  eds. ;    K.    u.    S.   have
item  usucapio  fingitur  in  ea  actione
quae  Publiciana,  etc.

2  The  MS.   has  oret,   which  most
editors    render   oporteret;    Scheurl
(Beitraege,    p.    133)     and    Kuntze
(fi.fi.  ii,  p.  226)  \iavepareret.   Opor-
tere  is  a  word  of  style  appropriate  to

an  actio  in  personam,  and  altogether
out  of  place  in  one  in  rem.  '  It  is
the  technical  expression  for  the
necessitas  alicuius  soluendae  rei  that
creates  the  uinculum  iuris  of  an
obligation  '  (Scheurl).  But  the  con-
tention of  the  pursuer  in  the  Pub-
lician,  like  that  of  the  bonorum
possessor  (§  34),  was  that  the  object
of  dispute  was  already  his,  not  that
it  ought  to  be  his.

§  37.     Comp.  Cic.  de  nat.  deor.  iii,  30,
§  74  ;  U.  Verr.  ii,  12,  §  31.

1  After  si  Hu.  interpolates  furti
uel  ope  consilio  facti.  But  they  are
unnecessary  ;  the  accomplice  was  in
law  as  much  a  thief  as  the  actual
agent  (iii,  202);  the  action  compe-
tent in  either  case  went  by  the  name
of  actio  furti.

288

GAII  IXSTITVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [IV,  §§  37,  38.

\_nam  si  cum  eo] 2  agatur  formula  ita  concipitur  :    IVDEX  ESTO.

SI  PARET  [A  DIONE  HERMAEI  FIL1O  (aut  SI  PA  RET  OPS']3  CON-
SILIOVE  DIONIS  HERMAEI  FILIl)  4  FVRTVM  FACTVM  ESSE  5  PATERAE
AVREAE,  QVAM  OB  REM  EVM,  SI  CIVIS  ROMAXVS  ESSET,  PRO  FVRE

DAMNVM  DECIDERS  6  OPORTERET  et  reliqua  ;  item  si  peregrinus
furti  agat,  ciuitas  ei  Romana  fingitur.  similiter  si  ex  lege
Aquilia  peregrinus  damni  iniuriae  agat  aut  cum  eo  agatur,
38  ficta  ciuitate  Eomana  iudicium  datur.  Praeterea  aliquando
fingimus  aduersarium  nostrum  capite  deminutum  non  esse  :
nam  si  ex  contractu  nobis  obligatus  obligatue  sit  et  capite
deminutus  deminutaue  fuerit,  uelut  mulier  per  coemptionem,

thus  :  '  So  and  so  be  judge  :  should  it  appear  that  [Dio,  son  of
[Hermaeus,  has  stolen'  or  that '  with  the  aid^}  or  counsel  of  Dio,
son  of  Hermaeus,  there  has  been  stolen  a  golden  cup,  by  reason
whereof,  were  he  a  Roman  citizen,  he  would  have  to  make
amends  as  a  thief,'  etc.  In  the  same  way  a  peregrin  feigns
citizenship  when  he  is  pursuer  in  the  same  action ;  and  there
is  the  same  fiction  if  he  be  either  pursuer  or  defender  in  an
action  on  the  Aquilian  law  for  wrongful  damage  to  property.
38  Further,  we  sometimes  proceed  upon  a  fiction  that  our  oppo-
nent has  not  been  capite  deminutus.  For  if  one  who  is  indebted
to  us  on  a  contract  undergo  capitis  deminutio,  a  female  say  by
coemption,  or  a  male  by  adrogation,  he  ceases  by  the  civil  law

~  Added  by  K.  u.  S.

3  The    addition   is   suggested   by
Gou.    and   adopted   by     K.    u.    S.,
though  by  both  expressed  in  a  greater
number  of  words.

4  The  MS.  has  er.meiflio.

5  Most  eds.  interpolate  Lucio  Titio.
Of  course  there  must  have  been  a
name  in  the  formula,  though  Gai.
has  not  thought  it  necessary  to  ex-
press it.

6  Comp.  Cic.  de  nat.  deor.  iii,  30,
§  74  ;  Fest.  v.  Vindiciae  (Brans,  p.
273).     Hu.  (Beitr.  p.  121),  Kitsch  1,
(Rkein.  Mus.f.  Phil,  1861,  p.  384),
and   Voigt    (Bedeutungsivechsel,    p.
151),   all   point  out   that   damniim
in   the   xn    Tables   did    not   mean
damage — noxi.a    was    the   technical
word  for  that,   but  the  amends  or
pecuniary    reparation    a    man    was
bound  to  make  for  wrong  done.

Voigt  is  of  opinion  that  the  words
pro  fure  dammim  decidere  mean
'  to  make  amends  as  if  he  were  the

thief,'  and  that  they  are  appropriate
only  to  the  case  of  a  counselling
accomplice ;  in  other  words,  that
they  cannot  have  been  used  in  the
ordinary  formula  of  the  act  to  furti
against  the  actual  offender.  But
there  is  no  authority  for  this  idea.
The  phrase,  in  all  probability,  was
used  originally  in  sacramental  pro-
cedure against  a  thief, — aio  te  pro
fnre  damnum  decidere  oportere.  The
penalty  of  furtum  man/festum,  ac-
cording to  the  old  law,  was  slavery  ;
to  avoid  this  the  thief  was  allowed
to  compound  (Vlp.  in  fr.  7,  §  14,  D.
de  pact.  ii.  14)  ;  hence  the  action
requiring  him  to  pay  the  amount  of
his  composition ;  and  the  phrase
employed  in  it  was  retained  by
the  praetors  under  the  formular
system.

§  38.     Comp.  i,  162  ;  ii,  98  ;  iii,  84;  iv
80  ;  Vlp.  in  fr.   2,  §  1,  D.  de  cop.
mm.  (iv,  5)  ;  §  3,  I.  de  adqicis.  per
adrog.  (iii,  10).

IV,  §§38-41.]      COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  289

masculus  per  adrogationem,  desinit  iure  ciuili  debere  nobis
nee  directo  intend!  potest  dare  eum  eamue  oportere ;  sed  ne
in  potestate  eius  sit  ius  nostrum  corrumpere,  introducta  est
contra  eum  eamue  actio  utilis  l  rescissa  capitis  demiuutione,
id  est  in  qua  fingitur  capite  deminutus  deminutaue  non  esse.

39  Partes  autem  formularum  hae  sunt :  demonstratio,  intentio,

40  adiudicatio,  condemnatio.         Demonstratio  est  ea  pars  for-
mulae quae — l  ut  demonstretur  res  de  qua  agitur,

uelut  haec  pars   formulae :    QVOD   AVLVS   AGERIVS   NVMERIO

NEGIDIO   HOMINEM   VENDIDIT,  item  haec  :   QVOD   AVLVS   AGERIVS

41  [APrD]   NVMERIVM   NEGIDIVM  HOMINEM   DEPOSVIT.  Intentio

est  ea  pars  formulae  qua  actor  desiderium  suum  concludit,
uelut  haec  pars  formulae :  si  PARET  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM  AVLO

AGERIO  SESTERTIVM  X  MILIA  DARE  OPORTERE  ;  item  haec :  QVID-
QVID  PARET  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM  AVLO  AGERIO  DARE  FACERE

[OPORTERE]  ;l  item  haec :  si  PARET  HOMINEM  2  EX  IVRE  QVIRI-

to  be  our  debtor,  nor  can  we  contend  directly  that  he  is  bound
to  give  us  what  he  owed ;  but,  to  prevent  it  being  in  his  power
thus  to  defeat  our  right,  we  may  have  against  him  an  utilis
actio,  the  capitis  deminutio  being  rescinded, — in  other  words,
an  action  embodying  the  fiction  that  he  has  not  been  capite
deminutus.

39  The  clauses  of  a  formula  are  these, — the  demonstration,  the

40  intention,  the  adjudication,  and  the  condemnation.         The
demonstration  is  that  part  of  the  formula  which  [is  inserted
[at  the  outset]  on  purpose  to  show  what  is  the  matter  in  dis-
pute ;  for  example,  thus  :  '  Whereas  Aulus  Agerius  sold  a  slave
to  Numerius  Negidius ; '  or  thus :  '  Whereas  Aulus  Agerius

41  deposited  a  slave  with  Numerius  Negidius.'         The  intention
is  the  clause  in  which  the  pursuer  embodies  his  demand ;  for
example,  thus:  'Should  it  appear  that  Numerius  Negidius
ought  to  give  ten  thousand  sesterces  to  Aulus  Agerius ; '  or,
'  Whatever  it  shall  appear  that  Numerius  Negidius  ought  to
give  to  or  do  for  Aulus  Agerius ; '  or,  '  Should  it  appear  that
the  slave  so  and  so  belongs  to  Aulus  Agerius  in  quiritarian

1  See  ii,  78,  note  1.  iweritur,     the     other    letters,     in

§  40.     Conip.  Paul,  in  Collat.  ii,  6,  §§  1,  the  form  of  praecipuae,  being  intro-

4,  5.  duced  by  them  in  §  39,  after/orwiM-

1  The   MS.   has   p'cipuediunserit',  larum.

but  the  eighth,  ninth,  eleventh,  and       §  41.     Comp.  Cic.  pro  Rose.  com.  iv,  11;

twelfth  letters  uncertain  ;  M.  (K. U.S.  //.  Verr.  ii,  12,  §  31 ;  L.  Rubria,

p.    xxii)  suggests  praecipit  id  quod  c.  20  (Bruns,  p.  88).

geritur ;   K.   u.   S.    (footnote)  prin-  l  Added  by  all  eds.

cipio  ideo  ponitur  ;  Hu.  and  P.  ideo  2  After  hominem  Hu.  interpolates

290  GAII  INST1TVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [IV,  §§  42-44.

42  TIVM  AVLI  AGEEII  ESSE.         Adiudicatio  est  ea  pars  formulae
qua  permittitur  iudici  rem  alicui  ex  litigatoribus  adiudicare,
uelut  si  inter  coheredes  familiae  erciscundae  agatur,  aut  inter
socios  communi  diuidundo,  aut  inter  uicinos  finium  regun-
dorum:  nam  illic  ita  est:   QVANTVMI   ADivmcARi  OPOKTET,

43  IVDEX  TITIO  2  ADIVDICATO.       Condemnatio  est  ea  pars  formulae
qua  iudici  condemnandi   absoluendiue  potestas  permittitur,
uelut  haec  pars  formulae:   IVDEX  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM  AVLO

AGEEIO    SESTEKTIVM    X    MILIA    CONDEMNA.      SI    NON    PAEET,   AB-
SOLVE ;  item   haec:  IVDEX  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM  AVLO  AGEEIO

DVMTAXAT  \_X  MILIA]    CONDEMNA.      SI   NON   PAEET,  ABSOLVITO  ;

item  haec :  IVDEX  NVMEEIVM  NEGIDIVM  AVLO  AGEEIO  CONDEM-
NATO   et    reliqua,   ut    non    adiciatur    DVMTAXAT   [x  MILIA].

44  Non  tamen   istae   onines   partes   simul1    inueniuntur,   sed2

42  right.'         The  adjudication  is  the  clause  whereby  the  judge
is  authorized  to  adjudicate  a  thing  to  one  in  particular  of  the
litigants,  as  when  co-heirs  are  suing  for  partition  of  an  in-
heritance, or  partners  for  division  of  their  estate,  or  conter-
minous proprietors  for  settlement  of  boundaries ;  it  runs  thus  :
'  So  much  as  ought  to  be  adjudicated,  do  you,  judge,  adjudicate

43  to  Titius.'         The  condemnation  is  the  clause  whereby  the
judge  is  empowered  to  condemn  or  absolve;  as,  for  example  :
'  Do  you,  judge,  condemn  Numerius  Negidius  to  Aulus  Agerius
in  ten  thousand  sesterces ;  should  it  not  so  appear,  absolve
him ; '  or,  '  Do  you,  judge,  condemn  Numerius  Negidius  to
Aulus  Agerius,  but  not  beyond  ten  thousand  sesterces;  should
it  not  so  appear,  absolve  him ; '  or,  '  Do  you,  judge,  condemn
Numerius   Negidius    to    Aulus    Agerius,'   etc.,   without   the

44  addition  of  '  but  not  beyond  ten  thousand  sesterces.'        Those

Stichum.  But  this  seeins  unneces-  §  43.  Comp.  §§  47-52,  57,  68,  73  ;  lex
sary.  Of  course  the  thing  vindicated  Rubria,  c.  20  (Bruns,  p.  88).  The
had  to  be  named,  whether  a  slave  or  writer  of  the  MS.  seems  to  have  be-
lands^  but  Gai.  here,  as  elsewhere,  come  confused  by  the  repetition  of
contents  himself  with  a  skeleton  A'  milia;  he  omits  the  words  twice
style.  where  they  should  be,  and  inserts
42.  Comp.  Vlp.  xix,  16;  §  20,  I.  de  them  once— after  condemnato,  de-
act,  (iv,  6);  §§  4-6,  I.  de  off",  iud.  leted  above — where  they  should
(iv,  17).  not.

1  So  most  eds. ;  the  MS.  has  qtam.       §  44.     This  par.  has  been  subjected  to

2  So  the  MS.  ;  but  Hu.   reads  cui  much  interpolation  at  the  hands  of
oportet  (cuio),  which  certainly  seems  the  eds.,   and,  as  it  seems  to  me,
more  consistent  with  the  nature  of  more  than  necessary.    Gai.  says  that
the  action.     P. ,  assuming  that  Titio  the  four  parts   of    a   formula  were
is   an   erroneous    rendering   by  the  never  found  together  ;  the  eds.,  with
copyist  of  the  abbreviation  tt  of  the  exception  of  He.,  Hu.,  and  perhaps
original,  substitutes  tantum.  K.  u.  S.,  dispute  this,  and  hold  that

IV,  §44.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  291

quaedam2  inueniuntur,  quaedam  non  inueniuntur.  certe
intentio  aliquando  sola  inuenitur,  sicut  in  praeiudicialibus
formulis,  qualis  est  qua  quaeritur  aliquis  libertus  sit,  uel
quanta  dos  sit,  et  aliae  conplures  : 3  demonstratio  autem  et
adiudicatio  et  condemnatio  numquam  solae  inueniuntur,  nihil
enim  oinnino  [demonstratio]  *  sine  intentione  uel  condemna  -
tione  ualet;  item  condemnatio  sine  demonstratione  uel  in-
tentione, uel  adiudica[£io  sine  demonstratione  et  interi]tione 5
nullas  uires  habet :  ob  id  numquain  solae  inueniuntur.

clauses,  however,  are  not  all  found  together  in  a  formula ;
some  are  present,  others  not.  Sometimes,  indeed,  the  inten-
tion alone  is  found ;  this  occurs  in  praejudiciary  formulae
such  as  that  for  determining  whether  an  individual  is  or  is
not  a  freedman,  what  is  the  amount  of  a  marriage  portion,  and
various  other  questions.  The  demonstration,  adjudication,
and  condemnation,  however,  never  stand  alone :  for  [a  demon-
[stration]  is  utterly  useless  apart  from  an  intention  or  con-
demnation ;  a  condemnation  is  equally  inoperative  apart  from
a  demonstration  or  intention ;  and  an  adjudication  [is  useless
[without  a  demonstration  and  intention}.  This  is  why  they
[i.e.  the  demonstration,  adjudication,  and  condemnation]  are
never  found  by  themselves.

the  three  divisory  actions  contained  simple  division  would  not  be  equit-

them  all.     I  am  inclined  to  think  able  without  some  payment  or  con-

they  contained  only  demonstration,  cession  on  one  side  or  other,

intention,  and  adjudication.  But  I  much   doubt  that  it   ever

Budorff  (Edict,  p.  86)  conjecturally  was  so  introduced  ;  it  appears  to  me

constructs  the  formula  of  the  actio  pretty  clear  from  the  language  of  §§

communi  diuidundo  thus:  Index  esto.  4-6, 1.  de  off.  hid.  (iv,  17),  that  it  was

Quod  illefundus  illi  et  illi  communis  of  the  office  of  the  judge,  without

est,  quam  ob  rein  ille  ilium  communi  being  moved  thereto  by  anything  on

diuidundo  provocauit,    quantum  ob  the  face  of  the  pleadings,  and  simply

earn  rem  alteri  ab  altero  aut  Titio  as  incident  to  the  adjudication,  to

adiudicari   oportet,   id   index  alteri  pronounce  such  order  or  condemna-

aut  Titio  adiudicato,  quodque  alte-  tion,  over  and  above  his  adjudica-

rum  alteri  ob  earn  rem  dare  facere  tioii,  as  was  necessary  to  do  justice

praestare  oportet  ex  fide  bona,  eius  between  the  parties.

iudex  altcrum  alteri  condemna;  si  l  After  simul  Hu.  and  P.    inter-

non   paret    absolue.     Here   are   (1)  polate  in  omnibus  formulis.

demonstration,  (2)  intention,  (3)  ad-  2  After  sed  Hu.  interpolates  solae;

judication,    (4)  a  second  intention,  and  after  quaedam  he  adds  tantum.

and   (5)   condemnation  ;    but   it    is  K.  u.  S.  leave  a  blank  after  sed,  and

because  there  are  two  actions  con-  (footnote)  on  the  authority  of  M.,

joined  in  one  formula, — a  indicium  propose  to  fill  it  with  abesse  potest

diuisorium  and  an  incerti  condictio,  una  aliaue  ;  item  solae.

to  which  latter  alone  the  second  in-  3  Comp.  iii,  123;  Paul,  v,  9,  §  1.

tention  and  the  condemnation  belong.  4  So  K.  u.  S.,  Hu.,  and  most  eds.

The  condictio  was  not  a  necessary  5  Bk.  and  K.  u.  S.  have  sine  de-

adjunct  of  the  divisory  formula  ;  if  monstratione  uel  intentione ;  P.  sine

introduced  at  all,  it  was  only  where  demonstratione  et  intentione  et  con-

292  GAII  INSTITVTIOXVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS       [IV,  §§  45,  46.

45  Sed  eas  quidem  formulas  in  quibus  de  iure  quaeritur  in  ius
conceptas  uocamus,  quales  sunt  quibus  intendinms  nostrum
esse  aliquid  ex  iure  Quiritium,  aut  nobis  dari  oportere,  aut
pro  fure  damnum  [decidi  oportere;  in]1  quibus  iuris  ciuilis

46  intentio  est.         ceteras  uero  in  factum  conceptas  uocamus,
id  est  in  quibus  nulla  talis  intentionis  conceptio  est,  [srcf)
initio  formulae  nominato  eo  quod  factum  est,  adiciuntur  ea
uerba  per  quae  iudici  damnandi  absoluendiue  potestas  datur ;
qualis  est  formula  qua  utitur  patronus  contra  libertum  qui
eum  contra  edictum  praetoris  in  ius  uocauit : l  nam  in  ea  ita

est:  KECVPERATOEES 2  SVNTO.  SI  PARET  ILLVM  PATRONVM  AB
ILLO  [ILLIVS]  PATRONI 3  LIBERTO  CONTRA  EDICTVM  PRAETORIS  4
IN  IVS  VOCATVM  ESSE,  RECVPERATORES  ILLVM  LIBERTVM  ILLI
PATRONO  SESTERTIVM  X  MILIA  CONDEMNATE.  SI  NON  PARET,

ABSOLVITE.     ceterae  quoque  formulae  quae  sub  titulo  DE  IN

45  We  say  of  those  formulae  which  raise  a  question  of  civil
right  that  they  are  conceived  in  ius  ;  such  are  those  in  which
we  contend  that  something  is  ours  on  quiritarian  title,  or  that
something  ought  to  be  given  us,  or  that  some  one  ought  to
make  amends  as  a  thief ;  in  them  our  intention  is  founded

46  upon  a  rule  of  the  ius  ciuile.         On  the  other  hand  we  call
those  in  factum  conceptae  which  contain  no  such  intention,
but   in  which,  after   reference   in   the   outset  to  what   has
occurred,  words  are  introduced  empowering  the  judge  to  con-
demn or  absolve.     The  formula  employed  by  a  patron  against
a  freedman  who  has  summoned  him  in  contravention  of  the
edict  is  of  this  description,  and  is  in  these  terms  :  '  So  and  so
be  recuperators.     Should  it  appear  that  so  and  so,  a  patron,
was  summoned  by  so  and  so,  a  freedman  of  said  patron,  in
contravention  of  the  praetor's  edict,   do   you,   recuperators,
condemn  said  freedman  to  said  patron  in  ten  thousand  ses-
terces; should  it  not  so  appear,  absolve   him.'      The  other
formulae  set  forth  in  the  title  of  the  edict '  de  in  ius  uocando '

demnatione.     Hu.  interpolates  only  2  See  §  105,  note.

sine  intentione ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  3  The  MS.  has  patrono  ;  the  illius

see  how  a  demonstration  could  be  is  due  to  Hollweg,  and  adopted  by

dispensed  with  in  a  divisory  action.  Hu.

§  45.     Comp.  §§  41,  60.  4  The  MS.  has  illius  praetoris;  but

1  So   all  eds.      Comp.    §   37   and  it  was  not  the  practice  to  name  the

thereto  note  6.  author  of   any  particular  provision

§  46.     Comp.    §   60  ;    §   12,    I.    de   act.  of  the  edict ;  and  probably  the  illius

(iv,  6).  here  is  the  one  that  ought  to  have

1  Comp.   §§  183,  187;  §  3,  I.  de  stood  before  patroni,  as  mentioned

poena  tern.  lit.  (iv,  16).  in  last  note.

IV,  §§  46,  47.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

293

TVS  VOCANDO  5  propositae  sunt  in  factum  conceptae  sunt,  tielut
aduersus  eum  qui  in  ius  uocatus  neque  uenerit  neque  uindicem
dederit;  item  contra  eum  qui  ui  exemerit  eum  qui  in  ius
uocatur ;  et  denique  innumerabiles  eius  modi  aliae  formulae
47  in  albo  proponuutur.  Sed  ex  quibusdam  causis  praetor  et
in  ius  et  in  factum  conceptas  formulas  proponit,  uelut  depositi
et  commodati.  ilia  enim  formula  quae  ita  concepta  est :

IVDEX  ESTO.  QVOD  AVLVS  AGERIVS  APVD  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM
MENSAM  ARGENTEAM  DEPOSVIT,  QVA  DE  RE  AGITVR,  QVIDQV1D
OB  EAM  REM  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM  AVLO  AGERIO  DARE  FACERE
OPORTET  EX  FIDE  BONA,  EIVS  l  IVDEX  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM  AVLO
AGERIO  CONDEMNATO  N.  R.2  SI  NON  PARET,  ABSOLVITO,  in  IUS

are  also  in  factum  conceptae ;  for  example  that  against  a  person
who,  having  been  duly  summoned,  has  neither  appeared  nor
found  a  uindex,  that  against  a  person  who  has  forcibly  carried
off  another  duly  summoned  in  an  action,  and  many  others
47  that  are  set  forth  in  the  album.  To  meet  certain  cases  the
praetor  has  provided  in  the  edict  formulae  both  in  ius  and  in
factum  conceptae,  as  in  deposit  and  commodate.  The  formula
conceived  as  follows  is  in  ius :  '  So  and  so  be  judge.  Whereas
Aulus  Agerius  deposited  with  Numerius  Negidius  the  silver
table  in  question,  whatever  it  appears  that  on  that  account
Numerius  Negidius  ought  in  good  faith  to  give  to  or  do  for
Aulus  Agerius,  in  that,  judge,  condemn  Numerius  Negidius
to  Aulus  Agerius,  —  — ;  should  it  not  so  appear,  absolve

5  Comp.  tits.  D.  si  q.  in  ius  uoc. ,
etc.  (ii,  5,  6,  and  8);  tit.  C.  de  in  ius
uoc.  (ii,  2).

47.  Comp.  §  60.  Many  attempts  have
been  made,  but  all  unsuccessfully,  to
explain  the  reason  of  the  double
formula  described  in  this  par.  The
solution  of  the  difficulty  might  be
easier  if  we  knew  for  certain  what
were  the  quaedam  causae  to  which
Gai.  refers, — whether  his  uelut  is  to
be  taken  as  enumerative  (which  it
sometimes  is)  or  as  merely  indica-
tive.

The  par.  is  useful,  however,  as
clearly  displaying  the  distinction
between  an  intent  io  in  ius  concepta
and  one  in  factum  concepta.  In  the
former  the  question  for  the  iudex  to
determine  was  one  of  law,  though  of
course  involving  inquiry  into  facts,
—'is  or  is  not  the  defender  in-
debted to  the  pursuer  under  a  con-

tract of  deposit  ?  and  if  so,  in  how
much  ? '  In  the  latter  the  question
was  purely  one  of  fact, — 'was  the
thing  deposited,  and  has  the  deposi-
tary dolefully  failed  to  restore  it  ?
If  so,  condemn  him  in  its  value.'

1  The  MS.  has  eius  id  iudex ;  and
some  eds.  so  read  the  passage,  refer-
ring eius   to  the  preceding  ex  fide
bona.     The  syntax,  however,  is  eius
(i.e.  nomine)  condemna,  and  id  must
be  deleted.

2  Hu.  (Studien,  p.  316)  interprets
these  letters  as  nisi  restituat,  on  the
strength  of  a  passage  of  Vlpian's  (fr.
1,  §  21,  D.  depositi,  xvi,  3),  where  he
says  that,  in  the  particular  case  he
is  referring  to,  the  defender  in  an
a.  depositi  would  be  condemned  if
he  did  not  give  up  the  thing  depo-
sited,— nisi  restituat.     But  this  af-
fords no  proof  that  the  words  were
inserted  in  the  formula  ;  acquittal

294

GAII  INSTITVTTONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [IV,  §§47-50.

/

concepta  est  :  at  ilia  formula  quae  ita  concepta  est  :  IVDEX

ESTO.  SI  PAKET  AVLVM  AGERIVM  APVD  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM
MENSAM  ARGENTEAM  DEPOSVISSE,  EAMQVE  DOLO  MALO  NVMERII
NEGIDII  AVLO  AGERIO  REDDITAM  NON  ESSE,  QVANTI  EA  RES  ERIT,3
TANTAM  PECVNIAM  IVDEX  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM  AVLO  AGERIO

CONDEMNATO.  si  NON  PARET,  ABSOLVITO,  in  factum  concepta
est.  similes  etiam  conmiodati  formulae  sunt.

Omnium  autem  formularum  quae  condemnationem  habent  ad
pecuniariam  aestimationem  condemnatio  nunc  l  concepta  est  :
itaque  et  si  corpus  aliquod  petamus,  ueluti  funduni  hominem
uestem  [aurwrri]  argentum,2  iudex  non  ipsam  rem  condemnat
eum  cum  quo  actum  est,  sicut  olim  fieri  solebat,3  [sed]  aestimata

49  re  pecuniam  eum  condemnat.          Condemnatio   autem   uel

50  certae  pecuniae  in  formula  proponitur  uel  incertae.         cer-

48

him.'  When  framed  in  the  following  terms  the  formula  is  in
factum  :  '  So  and  so  be  judge.  Should  it  appear  that  Aulus
Agerius  deposited  with  Numerius  Negidius  a  silver  table,
and  that,  through  dole  on  the  part  of  Numerius  Negidius,  it
has  not  been  returned  to  Aulus  Agerius,  then,  judge,  what-
ever be  the  value  of  the  table,  in  that  sum  condemn  Numerius
Negidius  to  Aulus  Agerius  ;  should  it  not  so  appear,  absolve
him.'  The  formulae  in  commodate  are  in  similar  terms.

48  In  formulae  containing  a  condemnatory  clause  the  actual
condemnation  is  always  in  a  money  estimate  ;  and  even  if  our
claim  be  for  some  corpus,  —  land,  a  slave,  a  garment,  gold,
silver,  the    judge  does  not   condemn    the    defender  in  the
thing  itself,  as  used  to  be  done  under  the  older  system,  but,

49  having  put  a  value  upon  it,  condemns  him  in  money.         The
clause  of  condemnation  may  either  fix  a  certain  sum  of  money

50  or  leave  it  uncertain.         A  certain  sum  is  named  when  the

in  the  event  of  restitution  must
have  been  implied  in  the  bona  fides
of  the  indicium,  and  was  enjoined
directly  by  the  rule  omnia  indicia
absoluloria  sunt  (§  114).

3  Comp.  fr.  179,  fr.  193,  D.  de
V.  S.  (I.  16).  While  in  the  actio
in  factum  the  condemnation  was  to
be  in  the  actual  value  (or  in  some
cases  twice  the  value,  fr.  1,  §  1,  D.
depositi)  of  the  thing  not  returned,
in  that  in  ins  it  was  to  be  in  the
interesse,  —  the  damage  sustained  by
the  depositor.

§§  48-60.     Comp.  §§  32-35,  tit.  I.   DE
ACTIONIBVS  (iv.  6).

§  48.     Comp.  §  32,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  So  P.  renders  the  n  of  the  MS.  ,
overlooked  by  other  eds.

2  The  MS.  has  argumentum  ;  but
the  enumeration  we  have  here  is  so
frequent  (comp.  ii,  §§  13,  20)  as  to
leave  no  doubt  as  to  its  meaning,  or
as  to  the  propriety  of  interpolating
aurum.

3  Under    the    procedure     sacra-
mento  ;   it  had   to   be  followed  by
an  arbitrium  litis  aestimandae,  for
converting  the  condemnation  into
money.

§§  49-51.     Comp.  §  43.

IV,  §§50-52.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVQR.  295

tae  pecuniae  uclut  in  ea  formula  qua  certain  pecuniam
petimus ;  nam  illic  ima  parte  formulae  ita  est :  IVDEX
NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM  AVLO  AGERIO  SESTEETIVM  X  MILIA  CON-

51  DEMNA.     si   NON  PARET,  ABSOLVE.         incertae  uero  condem-
natio   pecuniae   duplicem   significationem   habet:    est   enim
una  quidem  cum l  aliqua  praefinitione,  quae  uulgo  dicitur  cum
taxatione,  uelut  si  incertum  aliquid  petamus ;  nam  illic  ima
parte  formulae  ita   est:    IVDEX  NVMERIVM    NEGIDIVM  AVLO

AGERIO    DVMTAXAT   SESTERTIVM    X   MILIA    CONDEMNA.       SI    NON

PARET,  ABSOLVE  :  uel  incerta  est  et  inftnita  condemnatio,2  uelut
si  rem  aliquam  a  possidente  nostram  esse  petamus,  id  est
si  in  rem  agamus  uel  ad  exhibendum ;  nam  illic  ita  est :

QVANTI    EA   RES  ERIT,    TANTAM    PECVNIAM,    IVDEX,    NVMERIVM

NEGIDIVM   [AVLO  AGERIO]   COXDEMNA.     si  NON    PARET,  AB-

52  SOLVITO.         Quid   ergo   est  ? '    index,   si   condemnet,   certam
pecuniam  condemnare  debet,  etsi  certa  pecunia  in  condem-
natione  posita  non  sit.      Debet  autem  index  attendere,  ut

formula  is  one  in  which  a  definite  sum  is  claimed ;  in  such
a  case  the  final  clause  runs  thus :  '  Do  you,  judge,  condemn
Numerius  Negidius  to  Aulus  Agerius  in  ten  thousand  ses-

51  terces ;   should  it  not  so  appear,  absolve  him.'         A  clause
of  condemnation  in  an  uncertain  amount  may  mean  either  of
two   things.     It   may  mean   one   in  which  there  is  a  sort
of  anticipatory  limitation,  commonly  called  taxation,  following
on  an  illiquid  claim ;  and  then  the  final  clause  of  the  formula
is  as  follows :  '  Do  you,  judge,  condemn  Numerius  Negidius
to  Aulus  Agerius  in  not  more  than  ten  thousand  sesterces ;
should   it  not  so  appear,  absolve   him.'      Or  it   may  mean
one  altogether  uncertain  and  unlimited,  as  when  we  claim
a  thing  from  the  party  in  possession  of  it  on  the  averment
that  it  is  ours,  in  other  words,  when  our  action  is  in  rem  or
ad  exhibendum ;  then  it  runs  :  '  Whatever  be  the  value  of  the
thing,  do  you,  judge,  condemn  Numerius  Kegidius  to  Aulus
Agerius  in  that  amount ;  should  it  not  so  appear,  absolve  him.'

52  JVhat  does  all  this  come  to?     That  a  judge,  if  he  condemn,
must  do  so  in  a  definite  sum  of  money,  even  though  no
definite  sum  be  mentioned  in  the  clause  of  condemnation.

1  So  Bk. ;  the  MS.   lias  quae,  but       §  52.     Comp.  §  32,  tit.  I.  afd.

with  an  interlinear  substitution  of  c  !  So  K.  u.   S.  and  Hu. ,  but  very

for  the  final  e.     K.  u.   S.  and  Hu.  doubtful.     The  reading  proposed  by

have  simply  una  cum;  P.  una  qua  Hu.  in  his  earlier  editions, — Qui  de

cum.  re   uero   est  iudex,  comes   quite  as

2  So  I  interpret  the  letter  c  in  MS.  close  to  the  MS.

296

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [IV,  §§  52,  53.

cum  certae  pecuniae  conclemnatio  posita  sit,  neque  maioris
neque  minoris  summa  posita  condenmet,  alioquin  litem  suam
facit ; 2  item  si  taxatio  posita  sit,  ne  pluris  condemnet  quam
taxatum  sit,  alias  enim  similiter  litem  suam  facit : 2  minoris
auteni  damnare  ei  permissum  est.  at  si  etiam .

53       Si  quis  intentione  plus  conplexus  fuerit  (causa  cadif),1  id
est  rem  perdit,  nee  a  praetore  in  integrum  restituitur,  prae-

terquam  quibusdam  casibus  in  quibus .2

(Plus  auteni  guattuor)  modis  petitur :  re,  tempore,  loco,  causa.
(re,  ueluti  si  quis  pro  x)  milibus  quae  ei  debentur  xx  milia

But  lie  must  take  care  that,  when  a  definite  sum  is  men-
tioned in  it,  he  does  not  condemn  in  either  a  larger  or  smaller
sum,  otherwise  he  makes  the  cause  his  own ;  if  the  condem-
nation be  taxed,  and  he  condemn  in  more  than  the  maximum,
he  runs  the  same  risk ;  but  he  may  lawfully  condemn  in  less.

53  If  a  pursuer  have  claimed  in  his  intention  more  than  he  is
entitled  to,  he  fails  in  his  suit,  that  is  to  say,  he  loses  his  claim
altogether,  nor  can  he  be  reinstated  by  the  praetor  except  in

those  few  cases  in  which .     Too  much  may

l)e  claimed  in  four  ways, — in  respect  of  amount,  time,  place,
or  circumstances.  There  is  over-claim  in  respect  of  amount

2  Comp.  pr.  I.  de  obi.  q.  quasi  ex
del.  (iv.  5).  '  A  judgment  that  did
not  correspond  to  the  formula  had
none  of  that  efficacy  which  the
praetor  guaranteed  to  one  that  was
within  its  terms.  According  to
the  Roman  system  of  procedure  the
pursuer  was  in  such  a  case  destitute
of  any  remedy'  against  the  de-
fender ;  for,  after  judgment  had
been  pronounced,  it  was  impossible
for  the  judge  to  rectify  it,  and  a
fresh  action  against  the  defender
was  inadmissible.  Under  these  cir-
cumstances the  judge  himself,  in-
stead of  the  defender,  was  declared
responsible  to  the  pursuer,  who  had
thus  been  deprived  of  his  remedy,'
Ihering,  G.  d.  K.  R.  ii,  p.  75,  note.
§  52a.  P.  206  of  the  MS.  is  to  a  great
extent  illegible.  The  first  seven
lines  are  thus  conjecturally  rendered
by  Hu. — at  si  etiam  taxatio  posita
non  sit,  quanti  uelit  condemnare
potest.  [52a]  Vnde,  quia  quod  petit,
qui  formulaui  accipit  intendere  de-

bet,  nee  amplius  index  quam  certa
condenmatione  constringitur,  sed
nee  iterum  eandem  formula.m  accipit
qui  egit,  et  in  condemnations  certain
pecuniam  quam  petit  ponere  debet ;
ne  consequatur  minus  quam  uelit.
53.  Comp.  Paul,  i,  10,  §  1  (and  in
Consult,  v,  4);  §  33,  tit.  I.  afd.,  from
which  the  words  in  ital.,  illegible  in
the  MS.,  are  supplied.

1  Causa  cadere,  lite  cadere,  for-
mula   cadere,    formida     excidere,
though  sometimes  used  more  gene-
rally, yet  in  strictness  meant  to  fail
through  some  mistake   of  form   or
procedure,  rather  than  on  the  merits ;
see  Cic.  de  Inu.  ii,  19,  §  57  ;  Quintil.
hist.  Or.  iii,  6,  §  69.

2  Three  lines  illegible,   with  the
single  exception  of  the  word  patitur.
Hu.  proposes — in  quibus  omnes  ac-
tores  praetor  non  patitur  ob  errorem
suum  damno  ajfici ;  nam  minor  ibun
A'A'F  annorum  semper   ut   in  aliis
causis  et  hie  succurrit.     Comp.  §  33,
tit.  I.  afd.

IV,  §53.]  COMMENTAEII  QVATTVOE.  297

petierit,  ant  si  (is  cuius)  ex  parte  res  est  totam  earn  aut  maiore
ex  parte  (suam]  esse  inteuderit.  (tempore,  uduti  si  quis  ante
(diem  ud}  ante  (conditioned  petierit.  loco,  uduti  si  quod
(certo  loco)  dari  promissum  est,  id  (alio  loco  sine  commemora-
(fa'o)ne  eius  loci  petatur,  ueluti  si  (quis  ita  stipulatus  fuerit :
(EPHESI}  DARE  SPONDES  ?  deinde  Eomae  pure  (intend at  dari

(sibi  oportere}. 3  petere,  id  est  non

adiecto  loco,  causa  plus  petitur  uelut  si  quis  in  intentioue
tollat  electionem  debitoris  quam  is4  habet  obligationis  hire,
uelut  si  quis  ita  stipulatus  sit:  SESTERTIVM  x  MILIA  AVT
HOMINEM  STICHVM  DARE  SPONDES  ?  deinde  alterutrum 5  ex  his
petat ;  nam  quamuis  petat  quod  minus  est,  plus  tamen  petere
uidetur,  quia  potest  aduersarius  interdum  f'acilius  id  praestare
quod  non  petitur.  similiter  si  quis  genus  stipulatus  sit,  deinde

when,  instead  of  ten  thousand  sesterces  which  are  due  to  him,
a  man  claims  twenty  thousand;  or  when,  owing  an  equal
share  of  a  thing,  he  avers  that  the  whole  or  the  greater  part
is  his.  TJiere  is  over-claim  in  point  of  time  when  he  sues
before  the  day  of  payment  or  the  fulfilment  of  a  condition.
There  is  over-claim  in  respect  of  place  when  what  it  has  been
promised  shall  be  paid  at  a  certain  place  is  sued  for  elsewhere
without  mention  of  that  place;  as  when  a  person  who  has
stipulated  thus :  '  Do  you  engage  to  pay  at  Ephesus  ?  '  after-
wards sues  in  Rome,  contending,  without  any  qualification,
that  the  money  ought  to  lie  paid  to  him.  —  —  —  —  —
—  — .  There  is  over-claim  in  respect  of  circumstances
when  a  pursuer  in  his  intention  deprives  his  debtor  of  an
election  to  which  he  is  entitled  by  the  terms  of  the  obligation.
Suppose  a  man  has  acquired  a  claim  under  a  stipulation
conceived  in  such  terms  as  :  'Do  you  engage 'fo  give  me  ten
thousand  sesterces  or  the  slave  Stichus  ? '  if  he  thereupon  sue
for  one  in  particular  of  these  alternatives,  although  it  be  that
of  least  value,  still  he  is  claiming  more  than  he  is  entitled  to  ;
for  it  may  be  that  it  would  be  easier  for  the  defender  to  give
that  which  is  not  sued  for.  So  if  a  man  who  has  stipulated
generically  sues  specifically,  as  when,  having  stipulated  iu

3  Four  lines   illegible,    with  the  tium  X  milia  ex  stipulatu  dare  mihi

exception   of    dare    mihi    oportere  oportere  ;  plus  enim  petere  ideo  in-

(consecutively).      To   utilise    them  tellegor,  quia  utilitatem  promissori

Hu.  alters  the  reading  given  above  adimo,  quam  si  Ephesi  daret  habi-

(from  the  Inst.)  in  this  way — uelut  turns  esset.  Ephesi  tamen  etiam  pure

si  a  te  stipulatus  sim :  '  X  milia  ses-  potero  petere,  id  est,  etc.

tertium  dare  spondes  ? '  and  proceeds  4  The  MS.  has  quamuis.

—  deinde    uero    Romae     pure   hoc  5  So  the  Inst. ;  the  MS.  has  alteru-

modo  inttndam  :  si  paret  te  sester-  trumeorum;  Hu.  alterutrum  sol  urn.

298  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [IV,  §§  53-55.

speciem  petat,  uelut  si  quis  purpuram  stipulates  sit  generaliter,
deinde  Tyriam  specialiter  petat ;  quin  etiam  licet  nilissimam
petat,  idem  iuris  est  propter  earn  rationem  quam  proxime
diximus.  idem  iuris  est  si  quis  generaliter  hominem  stipu-
latus sit,  deinde  nominatim  aliquem  petat  uelut  Stichum,
quamuis  uilissirnum.  itaque  sicut  ipsa  stipulatio  concepta  est,

54  ita  et  intentio  formulae  concipi  debet.         Illud  satis  apparet
in  incertis    formulis   plus   peti   non   posse,  quia   cum  certa
quantitas  uon  petatur,  sed  QVIDQVID  aduersarium  DARE  FACERE
OPORTEKET  intendatur,  nemo  potest   plus   intendere.      idem
iuris  est  et  si  in  rem  incertae  partis    actio  data  sit,  uelut

talis  :    QVANTAM   PARTEM    PARET  IN    EO    FVNDO,  QVO    DE    AGITVR,

actoris  ESSE  :  quod  genus  actionis  in  paucissimis  causis  dari

55  solet.         Item  palam  est  si  quis  aliud  pro  alio  intenderit  nihil
eum  periclitari,  eumque  ex  integro  agere  posse,  quia  nihil  ante
uidetur  egisse;  ueluti  si  is  qui  hominem  Stichum  petere  deberet
Erotem  petierit,  aut  si  quis  ex  testamento  dari  sibi  oportere

general  terms  for  purple,  he  specifically  claims  that  of  Tyre  ;
nay,  even  although  he  were  to  claim  specifically  the  poorest
of  purples,  still,  for  the  reason  already  stated,  he  would  be
demanding  too  much.  And  the  same  is  the  case  when  a  man,
having  stipulated  generally  for  a  slave,  sues  for  one  in  par-
ticular by  name,  say  Stichus,  no  matter  how  worthless  he
may  be.  The  intention  therefore  of  the  formula  must  be  con-
ceived in  exactly  the  same  terms  as  the  stipulation  that  is

54  sued  upon.          In  uncertain   formulae,  as  is   clear  enough,
there  can  be  no  excess  of  claim ;    for   as   no  definite  sum
is   sued   for,  but   simply   '  whatever '  his   adversary   '  ought
to  give  or  do,'  no  pursuer  can  possibly  frame  his  intention
beyond  that.     The  same  observation  applies  to  the  case  of  an
actio  in  rem  in  reference  to  an  uncertain  share ;  for  example,
'  whatever  share  of  the  land  in  question  appears  to  belong '
to  the  pursuer;  but  an  action  of  this  sort  is  very  seldom

55  granted.         It  is  equally  clear  that  a  man  who  in  his  inten-
tion has  named  one  thing  instead  of  another,  runs  no  risk,
and  may  proceed  anew,  being  regarded  as  if  he  had  not  yet
sued  at  all ;  as  when  he  who  ought  to  have  claimed  the  slave
Stichus  has  actually  sued  for  Eros,  or  when  one  whose  claim
is  really  upon  a  stipulation  has  averred  in  his  intention  that

§  54.     In  the  first  intentio  in  this  par.  mula  in  ius  recited  in  §  47,  and  its

Hu.  substitutes  oportere  pareat  for  repetition  in  §  60.

oportet ;    but   that   the   latter  was  §  55.     Comp.  §  35,  tit.  I.  afd.  ;  Th.  iv,

quite  regular  appears  from  the  ./or-  6,  §  35.

TV,  §§55-58.]      COMMENTARII  OVATTVOE.  299

intenderit  cui  ex  stipulatu  debebatur,  aut  si  cognitor  aut  procu-

56  rator1  intenderit  sibi  dari  oportere.        Sed  plus  quidem  inten-
dere  sicut  supra  diximus  periculosum  est ;  minus  autem  inten-
dere  licet ;  sed  de  reliquo  intra  eiusdem  praeturam  agere  non
permittitur :  nam  qui  ita  agit  per  exceptionem  excluditur,  quae

57  exceptio  appellatur  litis  diuiduae.1         At  si  in  condemna'tione
plus  petitum  sit  quam  oportet,  actoris  quidem1  perictilum
nullum  est;  sed  [reus,  cum~\z  iniquam  formulam  acceperit,  in
integrum  restituitur  ut  minuatur  condemnatio :  si  uero  minus
positum  fuerit  quam  oportet,  hoc  solum  [_actor~]  2  consequitur
quod  posuit;   nam  tota  quidem  res  in  indicium  deducitur,
constringitur  autem  condemnationis  fine,  quam  iudex  egredi
non  potest.     nee  ex  ea  parte  praetor  in  integrum  restituit :
facilius  enim  reis  praetor  succurrit  quam  actoribus :  loquimur
autem  exceptis  minoribus  xxv  annorum ;  nam  huius  aetatis

58  hominibus  in  omnibus  rebus  lapsis  praetor  succurrit.         Si

the  defender  ought  to  give  him  something  due  under  a  testa-
ment, or  when  one  who  is  only  a  cognitor  or  procurator  has
contended  that  the  defender  was  bound  to  pay  [not  to  his

56  principal  but]  to  him.         To  claim  too  much  in  the  intention,
as  already  observed,  is  hazardous ;  but  it  is  quite  allowable
to  claim  too  little.     Action  for  the  remainder,  however,  is  not
permitted  within  the  same  praetorship ;  if  raised  sooner,  it
will  be  barred  by  an  exception  of  Us  diuidua,  divided  suit.

57  If  a  greater  sum  than  ought  to  be  is  named  in  the  clause  ot
condemnation,  the  pursuer  does  not  thereby  incur  any  risk ;
but  the  defender,  on  account  of  the  unfairness  of  the  formula,
will  be  reinstated  by  the  praetor  in  order  to  have  the  con-
demnation reduced.     If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  smaller  sum  be
mentioned  in  this  clause  than  ought  to  have  been,  the  pursuer
can  get  no  more  than  is  so  mentioned ;  his  whole  claim  has
been   submitted   to  the  arbitrament  of  the  judge,  but  the
formula  is  controlled  by  the  last  clause  of  it,  beyond  which
the  judge  is  not  allowed  to  travel.     Nor  is  there  here  any
room  for  his  reinstatement  by  the  praetor,  who  is  always
much  readier  to  lend  assistance  to  a  defender  than  to  a  pur-
suer :  unless  indeed  the  latter  be  under  twenty-five  years  of
age ;  for  the  praetor  will  always  interfere  in  aid  of  a  minor,

58  in  any  case  in  which  he  may  have  been  prejudiced.         If  too

1  Comp.  §  86.  l  So  G.  and  all  eds. ;  MS.  has  qa.

§  56.     Comp.  §  34,  tit.  I.  afd.  2  Added  by   G.  and  adopted  by

1  Comp.  §  122  ;  §  34,  tit.  I.  afd.  most  eds.

§  57.     Comp.  §  43.  §  58.     Comp.  §  40.

300  GAII  INSTITUTION VM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [IV,  §§  58-60.

in    demonstratione    plus   aut   minus    positum   sit,   nihil  in
indicium  deducitur,  et  ideo  res  in  integro  manet :  et  hoc  est

59  quod  dicitur  falsa  demonstratione  rem  non  perimi.         Sed  sunt
qui  putant  minus  recte  conprehendi,  ut  qui  forte  Stichum  et
Erotem  emerit  recte  uideatur  ita  demonstrare :  QVOD  EGO  DE
TE  HOMINEM  EROTEM  EMI,  et  si  uelit  de  Sticho  alia  formula  l
agat,  quia  uerum  est  eum  qui  duos  emerit  singulos  quoque
emisse :  idque  ita  maxime  Labeoni 2  uisum  est :  sed  si  is  qui
unum  emerit  de  duobus  egerit,  falsum  demonstrat.     idem  et

60  in  aliis  actionibus  est,  uelut  commodati  et  depositi.      Sed
nos  apud  quosdam  scriptum  inuenimus,  in  actione  depositi,
et  denique  in  ceteris  omnibus  ex   quibus   damnatus   unus-
quisque    ignominia  notatur,1  eum  qui  plus  quam  oporteret
demonstrauerit  litem  perdere,  ueluti  si  quis  una  re  deposita
duas  pluresue  [se  cfcjposuisse  demonstrauerit,  aut   si   is  cui
pugno  mala  percussa  est,  in  actione  iniuriarum  etiam  aliam

much  or  too  little  be  condescended  on  in  the  demonstration,
there  is  nothing  really  submitted  to  the  judge,  and  the  pur-
suer's claim  remains  intact ;  this  is  what  is  meant  by  the
saying  that  a  claim  is  not  extinguished  by  an  erroneous

59  demonstration.         Some  lawyers,  among  whom  Labeo  is  pre-
eminent, think  that  to  found  in  it  on  less  than  is  due  is  quite
regular, — that  if,  for  example,  a  man  has  purchased  Stichus
and  Eros,  he  may  quite  correctly  say  in  his  demonstration,
'  Whereas  I  bought  from  you  the  slave  Eros,'  and  may  if  he
likes  have  a  separate  formula  applicable  to  Stichus,  the  fact
being  indisputable  that  he  who  has  bought  two  slaves  has
bought  each  of  them ;  but  that  if  a  man  who  has  bought  only
one,  mention  two  in  his  action,  he  demonstrates  falsely.    And
they  apply  the  same  principles  to  other  actions,  such  as  those

60  of  commodate  and  deposit.         But  we  have  read  in  the  pages
of  some  of  the  jurists,  in  reference  to  the  action  of  deposit
and  those  actions  generally  in  which  condemnation  entails
infamy,  that  he  who  in  his  demonstration  has  condescended
on  more  than  he  ought  to  have  done,  loses  his  claim ;  as  when
a  man  who  has  deposited  only  one  thing  states  in  his  demon-
stration that  he  has  deposited  two  or  more,  or  when  one  who
has  had  a  blow  from  the  fist  on  his  face,  avers  in  an  actio

\  59.     Comp.   Vlp.  in  fr.  33,  D.  de  act.  2  The   MS.   has   laticoni.      See  i,

empt.  (xix,  1).  196,  note  1.

1  After  this  word  the  MS.  has  id,  §  60.     J  An  enumeration  of  those  actions

which  Hu.  renders  iterum,  and  P.,  in  §  182.
omitting  alia  formula,  idem.

IV,  §  60.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

301

partem  corporis  percussam  sibi  demonstrauerit : 2  quod  an
debeamus  credere  uerius  esse,  diligentius  requiremus.  certe
cum  duae  sint  deposit!  formulae,  alia  in  ius  concepta,  alia  in
factum,  sicut  supra  quoque  notauimus,3  et  in  ea  quidem
formula  quae  in  ius  concepta  est  initio  res  de  qua  agitur
demonstratorio  rnodo 4  designetur,  deincle  inferatur  iuris  con-
tentio  his  uerbis :  QVIDQVID  OB  EAM  HEM  ILLVM  ILLI  DAEE
FACERE  OPORTET;  in  ea  uero  quae  in  factum  concepta  est,
statim  initio  intentionis  alio  modo  res  de  qua  agitur  designetur
his  uerbis :  si  PARET  ILLVM  APVD  [ILLVM  REM~\  5  ILL  AM  DE-
POSVISSE,  dubitare  non  debemus  quin  si  quis  in  formula  quae
in  factum  conposita  est  plures  res  desiguauerit  quam  deposu-
erit,  litem  perdat,  quia  in  intentione  plus  posuisse  (uidetur*).6

60a     —

.         [61]

iniuriarum  that  he  has  been  struck  on  some  other  part  of  his
body.  Let  us  examine  the  matter  to  see  whether  this  be  the
true  view  of  it.  As  we  have  already  observed,  there  are  two
formulae  applicable  to  the  case  of  deposit, — one  in  ius,  and
the  other  in  factum  concepta.  In  that  which  is  in  ius  concepta
the  matter  of  dispute  is  first  set  forth  in  a  demonstratory
manner,  and  then  the  pursuer's  contention  in  point  of  law  is
inferentially  stated  in  the  words,  '  whatever  in  respect  thereof
so  and  so  ought  to  give  to  or  do  for  so  and  so ; '  in  that  in
factum  concepta,  on  the  other  hand,  the  matter  of  dispute  is
described  in  the  first  part  of  the  intention  in  a  different  way,
in  these  words :  '  Should  it  appear  that  so  and  so  deposited
such  and  such  a  thing  with  so  and  so.'  There  is  no  room  to
doubt  that  if  a  person  using  this  formula  in  factum  concepta
has  described  in  it  more  things  than  he  actually  deposited,
he  loses  his  action,  because  he  has  put  too  much  in  his
intention.

2  The  offence   was  more   or  less
aggravated  according    to   the   part
struck,  etc. ;  see  iii,  225,  and  §  9,  I.
de  iniur.  (iv,  4).

3  See  §  47.

4  So    the   MS.    quite   distinctly ;
Hu.  substitutes  demonstretur ,  id  est
modo.

5  Added  by  Hu. ,    and  generally
accepted.

6  The  last  word  is  supplied  con-

[61] -  that,

jecturally  by  G.  AVhether  the  par.
should  end  here  is  extremely  doubt-
ful ;  pp.  210,  211  of  the  MS.  are  en-
tirely illegible,  therefore  we  have  no
means  of  knowing.

§§  60c^68.  Comp.  §§  36-40,  I.  DE  AC-
TIONIBVS  (iv,  6).

§  60a.  It  is  generally  assumed  that  on
pp.  210,  211,  Gai.  dealt  with  the
same  matters  as  are  referred  to  in
§§  36-39,  tit.  I.  afd.

302  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS      [IV,  §§  61-64.

61  coutinetur  ut  habita  ratione  eius  quod  inuicern  actorem  ex
eadem  causa  praestare  oporteret,  in  reliquum  eum  cum  quo

62  actum  est  condemnare.         Sunt  autem  bonae  fidei  indicia
haec  :  ex  empto  uendito,  locate  conducto,  negotiorum  gestorum,
mandati,  depositi,   fiduciae,  pro  socio,  tutelae,  [_rei  uxoriae,
[commodati,   pigneraticium,   familiae    erciscundae,    communi

63  \_diuidundo  ^\praescriptis  uerbis.         (In  his)1  tamen  iudici  nul-

lam  omnino  inuicem  conpensationis  rationem  habere 2

formulae  uerbis  praecipitur ;  sed  quia  id  bonae  fidei  iudicio
conueniens    uidetur,    ideo3   officio    eius    contineri    creditur.

64  Alia  causa  est  illius  actionis  qua  argentarius  experitur :  nam
is  cogitur  cum  conpensatione  agere,  et  ea  conpensatio  uerbis
formulae  exprimitur,  adeo  quidem  ut  itaque1  ab  initio  conpen-
satione facta  minus  intendat  sibi  dari  oportere :  ecce  enim  si

61  account  being  taken  of  anything  which  the  pursuer  is  bound
to  pay  on  his  side  in  respect  of  the  same  matter,  the  defender

62  is  to  be  condemned  only  in  the  balance.         The  bonae  fidei
actions  are  those  arising  out  of  purchase  and  sale,  location
and  conduction,  unauthorized  management  of  another's  affairs,
mandate,  deposit,  fiduciary  covenant  upon  a  conveyance,  part-
nership, tutory,  a  woman's  dowry,  commodate,  and  the  contract
of  pledge ;  together  with  those  for  partitioning  an  inheritance
amongst  the  heirs  and  for  dividing  common  property,  and  that

63  praescriptis  uerbis.         There  is  nothing  in  the  wording  of  the
formula  in  those  actions  that  enjoins  the  judge  thus  to  set  off
claims  between  the  parties ;  but  as  such  a  course  is  consonant
with  the  notion  of  a  bonae  fidei  indicium,  it  is  held  to  be  within

64  the  scope  of  the  judge's  office.         The  rule  is  different  in  the
case  of  the  action  made  use  of  by  a  banker.     He  is  required
to  set  off  his  customer's  counter-claim,  and  this  is  stated  in
the  formula  in  so  many  words,  so  that  here,  from  the  very
first,  the  averment  in  the  intention  is  that  the  defender  is
bound  to  pay  less  than  the  nominal  amount  of  his  debt ;  for

§  61.     Comp.   §  39,  tit.   I.  afd.,   to  the  inuicem     conpensationis     rationem,

latter  half  of  which  the  legible  por-  etc.

tion  of  this  par.  (on  p.   212)  corre-  l  So    K.    u.     S.  ;    Hu.    proposes

sponds.     Comp.   also    Paul,    ii,    5,  uerum.     But  there  is  no  space  in

§  3.  A  the  MS.  between  uerbis  in  last  par.

§  62.     Comp.  §   28,  tit.    I.    afd.,    from  and  tamen  in  this.

which   the  words  in  ital.   are  sup-  2  The  letters  in  the  MS.  seem  to

plied,  (the  a.  rei  uxoriae  being  in-  be   ntrartae,  which   K   u.    S.  read

troduced  on  the  suggestion  of  §  29).  discrte.

Comp.  also  Cic.  Top.  xvii,  66.  3  The  MS.  has  id.
§  63.     K.  u.  S.  think  this  par.  corrupt,       §  64.     Comp.  §  68.

and   that    it    should    run — In    his  '  K.    u.    S.    delete   itaque  ;    Hu.

tamen   iudici    nulla    omnino  parte  and  P.  substitute  stalim.

IV,  §§  64-66.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  303

sestertium  x  milia  debeat  Titio,  atque  ei  xx  debeantur,  sic
intendit :  si  PAEET  TITIVM  SIBI  x  MILIA  DARE  OPORTERE  AMPLIVS

65  QVAM  IPSE  TITIO  DEBET.         Item  bonorum  emptor  cum  deduc-
tione  agere  iubetur,  -id  est  ut  in  hoc  solum  aduersarius  eius
condemnetur   quod    superest,  deducto   eo    quod    iuuicem    ei

66  bonorum  emptor  defraudatoris  nomine  debet.         Inter  con-
pensationem  autem  quae  argentario  opponitur,  et  deductionem
quae  obicitur  bonorum  emptori,  ilia  differentia  est,  quod  in
conpensationem  hoc  solum  uocatur  quod  eiusdem  generis  et
naturae  est ;  ueluti  pecunia  cum  pecunia  conpensatur,  triticum
cum  tritico,  uinum  cum  uino,  adeo  ut  quibusdam  placeat  non
onini  modo  uinum  cum  uino  aut  triticum  cum  tritico  con-
pensandum,  sed  ita  si  eiusdem  naturae  qualitatisque  sit ;  in
deductionem  autem  uocatur  et  quod  non  est  eiusdem  generis ;
itaque  si1  pecuniam  petat  bouorum  emptor  et  inuicem  fru-
menturn  aut  uinum  is  debeat,  deducto2  quanti  id  erit,  in  reli-

example,  if  the  banker  be  due  Titius  ten  thousand  sesterces,
and  the  latter  be  due  the  banker  twenty  thousand,  he  words
his  intention  thus :  '  If  it  appear  that  Titius  ought  to  pay  him
ten  thousand  sesterces  more  than  he  himself  is  due  to  Titius.'

65  The  purchaser  too  of  a  bankrupt's  estate,  when  proceeding
against  one  of  its  debtors,  is  required  to  sue  cum  deductione ;
in  other  words,  the  defender  is  to  be  condemned  only  in  so
much  as  still  remains  due  after  deducting  anything  owTing  to

66  him  by  the  pursuer  as  representing  the  bankrupt.         There
is  this  difference,  however,  between  the  compensation  plead-
able  against   a  banker  and  the   deduction  required  of  the
purchaser  of  a  bankrupt's  estate,  that  only  things  of  the  same
sort  can  be  set  off  one  against  the  other, — money  against
money,  wheat  against  wheat,  wine  against  wine,  some  even
going  so  far  as  to  hold  that  wine  cannot  in  every  case  be  com-
pensated with  wine,  or  wheat  with  wheat,  but  only  when  of  the
same  variety  and  quality ;  but  that  may  be  made  a  matter  of
deduction  which  is  not  of  the  same  sort,  so  that  if  the  pur-
chaser of  a  bankrupt's  estate  claim  money,  and  he  on  his  side
be  due  corn  or  wine,  the  value  of  the  latter  is  deducted,  and

§  65.     Comp.  iii,  81.  defraudatoris  nomine  pecuniam   is

§  66.     Comp.  Paul,  ii,  5,  §  3.  debeat,  quanta  amplius  ea  pecunia

1  After  si  is   u,    with  a  small  o  id  frumentum  aut   uinum  erit,   in

superscribed,  —  the    ordinary    con-  condemnatione   ponitur  ;    si     uero,

traction  of  wero.  This  leads  K.  u.  S.  etc.

(footnote)  to  surmise  that  something  2  After  deducto  the  MS.  has  some-
like  the  following  has  been  omitted  :  thing  like  fore,  which  induces  Hu.
itaque  si  frumentum  aut  uinum  to  read  deducta  ea  re,  and  P.  deducto
petat  bonorum  emptor  et  inuicem  a  bonorum  emptore.

304  GAII  INSTITVTTONVM  IVRIS  CIVIL1S      [IV,  §§  67-70.

67  quum  experitur.         Item  uocatur  in  deductionem  et  id  quod
in  diem  debetur;  conpensatur  autem  hoc  solum  quod  prae-

68  senti  debetur.         Praeterea  conpensationis  quidem  ratio   in
intentione   ponitur ;  quo  fit  ut  si  facta  conpensatione  plus
nummo  uno  intendat  argentarius,  causa  cadat1  et  ob  id  rem
perdat :  deductio  uero  ad  condemnationem  ponitur,  quo  loco
plus  petenti  periculum  non  interuenit ;  utique  bonorum  em-
ptore  agente,  qui  licet  de  certa  pecunia  agat,  incerti  tamen
condemnationem  concipit.

69  Quia    tamen  superius l  mentionem   habuimus   de   actione
qua  in  peculium  filiorumfamilias  seruorumque  agitur,  opus
est  ut  de  hac  actione,  et  de  ceteris  quae  eorumdem  nomine
in  parentes  dominosue  dari  solent,  diligentius  admoneamus.

70  Inprimis  itaque  si  iussu  patris  dominiue  negotium  gestum
erit,   in   solidum   praetor   actionem    in    patrem   dominumue
conparauit :  et  recte,  quia  qui  ita  negotium  gerit,  magis  patris

(57  he  obtains  only  the  balance.  Further,  while  a  debt  with  a
postponed  term  of  payment  may  be  a  matter  of  deduction,
there  can  be  set-off  only  of  what  is  payable  on  the  instant.

68  Besides,  the  amount  of  a  set-off  is  stated  in  the  intention,  so
that  if  a  banker,  after  allowing  compensation,  condescends  on
a  single  sesterce  too  much,  he  fails  in  his  suit,  and  thereby
loses  his  claim ;  [matter  of]  deduction,  however,  is  stated  in
the  clause  of  condemnation,  and  the  mention  there  of  too
large  a  sum  does  no  harm,  at  least  in  the  case  of  action  by
the  purchaser  of  a  bankrupt's  estate,  whose  formula,  though
founding  on  a  claim  of  definite  amount,  is  yet  framed  with  an
indefinite  condemnation.

69  Allusion  has  been  made  in  a  previous  page  to  the  action
directed  against  the  peculium  of  filiifamilias  and  slaves ;  we
must  now  explain  it  more  minutely,  as  well  as  those  other
actions  that  are  granted  against  parents  and  owners  on  their

70  account.         In  the  first  place  then,  if  any  transaction  have
been  entered  into  on  the  order  of  father  or  owner,  an  action
of  praetorian  introduction  lies  against  such  father  or  owner
for  the  full  amount  of  the  debt  incurred ;  and  very  properly,
because  the  other  party  to  such  a  transaction  relies  in  it
rather. on  the  credit  of  the  father  or  owner  than  on  that  of

§  67.     Comp.  fr.  7,  pr.   D.  de  conpens.  NEGOTIVM  GESTVM  ESSE    DICITVR

(xvi,  2).  (iv,  7).

§  68.     Comp.  §§  53,  57.  §  69.     Comp.  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

1  Comp.  §  53,  note  1.  l  In  §  60a,  i.e.  in  the  course  of  the

§§69-74.     Comp.  tit.   I.  QVOD  CVM  EO  illegible  pages  210  or  211  of  the  MS.

QVI     IN   ALIENA     POTESTATE    EST  §  70.      Comp.  §' 1,  tit.  I.  afd.

IV,  §§71,  72.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  305

71  domiuiue  quam  filii  seruiue  fidem  sequitur.  Eadem  ratione
conparauit  duas  alias  actiones,  exercitoriam  et  institoriam : x
tune  autem  exercitoria  locum  habet  cum  pater  dominusue
filium  seruumue  magistrum  naui  praeposuerit,  et  quid  cum  eo
ems  rei  gratia  cui  praepositus  fuit  [negotium] 2  gestum  erit ;
cum  enim  ea  quoque  res  ex  uoluntate  patris  dominiue  contrahi
uideatur,  aequissimum  esse  uisum  est  in  solidum  actionem
dari:  quin  etiam,  licet  extraneum  quisque  magistrum  naui
praeposuerit,  sine  seruum  siue  liberum,  tamen  ea  praetoria
actio  in  eum  redditur :  ideo  autem  exercitoria  actio  appellatur,
quia  exercitor  uocatur  is  ad  quern  cottidianus  nauis  quaestus
peruenit.  institoria  uero  formula  turn  locum  habet  cum  quis
tabernae  aut  cuilibet  negotiationi  filium  seruumue  aut  quem-
libet  extraneum,  siue  seruum  siue  liberum,  praeposuerit,  et
quid  cum  eo  eius  rei  gratia  cui  praepositus  est  contractum
fuerit :  ideo  autem  institoria  uocatur,  quia  qui  tabernae  prae-
ponitur  institor  appellatur :  quae  et  ipsa  formula  in  solidum

7 ''2  est.          Praeterea  tributoria  quoque  actio  in   patrern   domi-

71  the  son  or  slave.         On  the  same  principle  the  praetor  has
devised  two   other  actions,  the  exercitorian  and  institorian.
The  exercitorian  comes  into  play  when  a  father  or  owner  has
placed  his  son  or  slave  in  command  of  a  vessel,  and  the  latter
has  entered  into  some  undertaking  on  the  ship's  account ;  as
his  contract  in  such  a  case  is  virtually  authorized  by  his  father
or  owner,  it  seemed  in  the  highest  degree  equitable  to  grant
[the  other  party]  an  action  for  the  full  amount.     And  what  is
more,  even  if  it  be  a  stranger,  whether  a  freeman  or  a  slave,
that  has  been  put  in  command  of  the  vessel,  this  praetorian
action  will  be  allowed  against  the  person  who  placed  him
there.     It  is  called  exercitorian,  because  exercitor  is  the  name
given  to  the  individual  who  is  drawing  the  daily  profits  of  the
ship.     The  iustitorian  action  is  employed  when  a  person  has
committed  the  management  of  a  shop  or  business  of  any  kind
to  his  son  or  slave,  or  to  some  stranger,  whether  free  or  not,
and  some  contract  has  been  entered  into  by  the  latter  on
account  of  the  shop  or  business  entrusted  to  him ;  it  is  called
institorian,  because  the  individual  placed  in  charge  of  a  shop
is  spoken  of  as  its  institor.    This  action  likewise  is  in  solidum.

72  Besides  these  there  is  the  tributorian  action  against  a  father

§71.     Comp.  §2,  tit.   I.  afd. ;  Paul,  ii,  (footnote)  remark  is  also  the  reading

tits.  6,  8.  of  the  best  MSS.  of  the  Inst.

1  The  MS.   has  throughout    insti-  2  Seems  to  be  a  gloss.

tutor  and  institutoria,  which  K.  u.  S.  §72.     Comp.  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.     The  end

U

30G  GAII  INSTJTVTIOXVM  IVIUS  CIVILIS    [IV,  §§  72,  73.

immue  constituta  est  cum  films  seruusue  in  peculiari l

merce  sciente  patre  dominoue  negotietur ;  nam  si  quid  eius

rei  gratia  cum  eo  contractum  fuerit,  ita  praetor  ius  dicit,  ut

73  quidquid  in  his  mercibus .          [73]  —

or  owner,  whose  son  or  slave  has  with  his  father's  or  owner's

knowledge  invested  his  peculium  in  merchandise;  if  in  the

course  of  his  trade  he  have  entered  into  any  contract,  the  rule

laid  down  by  the  praetor  is,  [that  all  the  goods  acquired  by  him

in  course  of  business,  and  all  the  money  made  in  it,  shall  lie

divided  between  his  father  or  owner  and  the  other  creditors,  in

proportion  to  their  respective  claims.     And  as  the  father  or

owner  himself  is  allowed  to  make  the  distribution,  if  any  of  the

[creditors  complain  that  less  than  he  was  entitled  to  has  been

[apportioned  to  him,  tributum,  the  praetor  will  accord  him  the

73  [action  that  goes  by  the  name  of  tributorian.         There  has  also

[been  introduced  the  actio  de  peculio  et  de  in  rem  verso,  i.e.

[in  respect  of  a  peculium  and  of  what  has  been  turned  by  a

[filiusfamilias  or  a  slave  to  his  fathers  or  owners  profit ;  in

[order  that,  although  the  child  or  slave  may  have   contracted

[without   his  father  s   or  owner's   consent,  yet  the  latter  shall

[be  made  to  pay  in  fall  for  anything  turned  to  his  profit,

[or,  if  there  be  nothing  of  that  sort,  that  he  shall  be  compelled

[to    pay    to    the   extent    of  the    child's   or  slave's    peculium.

[Everything  is  held  to  be  turned  to  the  fathers  or  owner's  profit

[that  has  been  necessarily  expended  by  his  son  or  slave  on  his

[account ;  as  when  the  latter  has  borrowed  money  and  therewith

[paid  his  father  s  or  owner's  creditors,  or  repaired  buildings  of

[his  which  were  becoming  ruinous,  or   bought  wheat  for  his

[establishment,  or  even  purchased  for  him  land  or  any  other

[necessary.     Accordingly,  if,  of  say  a  thousand  sesterces  which

[your  son  or  slave  has  borrowed  from  Titius,  he  has  paid  five

[hundred  to  a  creditor  of  yours,  but  has  spent  the  other  five,

[hundred  in  some  other  way,  you  will  be  condemned  for  the  first

[five  hundred  in  full,  but  as  regards  the  rest  only  for  so  mu<a

as  is  included  in  the  peculium;  whence  it  is  apparent  that..'ve

the  whole  thousand  sesterces  have  been  expended  to  your  pr ulon

the  whole  thousand  may  be  recovered  from  you  by  Titius.   'vvner

though  it  is  in  one  and  the  same  action  that  a  claim  is  JPerty>

both  against  the  peculium  and  in  respect  of  expenditure 's  ln  ^

of  the  par.  is  on  p.  215,  and  quite  suggests  forte.

illegible  ;    but    it    probably    corre-  §  73.     Oomp.  §§  4-4c,  tit.  "
sponded  very  closely  to  the  reading  ii,  9.     What  is  said  s  ?•<

of  the  lust,  (wind!  see)  part   of  §   72   in  £the  course  of  the

1  The  MS.  seems  to  nave  qoptio ;  applies  equally  tr-x       0-,-,  Of  tv,e  Ms

Hu.    reads    cuiusuis    pretii ;    Gou.  this  one.  • ,    T     ^

1

IV,  §§  73-74a.]  COMMENT ARTI  QVATTVOR.  307

deducitur  quod  patri  dominoue  quique

iu  eius  potestate  sit  a  filio  seruoue  debetnr,  et  quod  superest
hoc  solum  peculium  esse  intellegitur ;  aliquando  tamen  id
quod  ei  debet  films  seruusue  qui  in  potestate  patris  dominiue
sit  uon  deducitur  ex  peculio,  uelut  si  is  cui  debet  in  huius

74  ipsius  peculio  sit.1  Ceterum  dubium  non  est  quin  et  is  qui
iussu  patris  dominiue  contraxerit,  cuique  exercitoria  uel  insti-
toria  formula  conpetit,  de  peculio  aut  de  in  rem  uerso  agere
possit ;  sed  nemo  tarn  stultus  erit,  ut  qui  aliqua  illarum  actio-
num  sine  dubio  solidum  consequi  possit,  uel  in  difficultatem
se  deducat  probandi  habere  peculium  eum  cum  quo  contraxerit
exque  eo  peculio  posse  sibi  satisfieri,  uel  id  quod  prosequi-

74atur  in  rem  patris  dominiue  uersum  esse.  Is  quoque  cui
tributoria  actio  conpetit  de  peculio  uel  de  in  rem  uerso  agere
potest ;  sed  huic  sane  plerumque  expedit  hac  potius  actione

fathers  or  owner's  benefit,  yet  it  embraces  two  distinct  condem-
' nations;  and  accordingly  the  judge  before  whom  it  is  tried
'ought  first  to  see  whether  anything  has  been  turned  to  the

father's  or  owner's  profit,  and  not  proceed  to  consider  the
'amount  of  the  peculium  unless  nothing,  or  at  least  something

less  than  the  whole,  has  been  so  expended.     In  proceeding  to

estimate  the  amount  of  the  peculium,  anything  that  may  be]

due  by  the  son  or  slave  to  his  father  or  owner,  or  any  one  in

the  potestas  of  these  last,  is  first  deducted,  and  only  what

remains  is  regarded  as  peculium.     Sometimes,  however,  what

is  due  by  the  son  or  slave  to  an  individual  in  the  potestas  of

his  father  or  owner  is  not  deducted ;  for  instance,  when  such

74  individual  is  a  slave  belonging  to  the  peculium.         There  is

no  doubt  that  he  who  has  entered  into  a  contract  on  the  order

of  father  or  owner,  as  well  as  he  to  whom  an  exercitorian  or

institorian  formula  is  competent,  may  sue   by  the  actio    de

peculio  uel  dc  in  rem  uerso ;  but  no  one  who  could  recover  in

full  by  one  of  the  three  first  named  actions  would  be  so  foolish

as  to  encumber  himself  with  the  burden  of  proving  that  either

'<J\e  person  with  whom  he  had  contracted  possessed  a  pecidium,

aci  that  there  was  enough  in  it  to  satisfy  his  claim,  or  that

ins  outcome  of  the  contract  had  been  turned  to  the  advan-

is  sp  of  the   father   or   owner.         He    also    to   whom    the

72  Beside rian  is  competent  may  sue  de  peculio  uel  de  in  rem

§  71.    Comp.  §  d  indeed  it  is  more  for  his  advantage  to  do  so.     For

tits.  6,  8.

1  The  MS.   Ir-d  a  seruus  uicarius,       §  74.     Comp.  §  5,  tit.  I.  afd.
tutor  and  institut^n,  20).  §  74a.     Comp.  §  5,  tit.  I.  afd.

308  GAII  INSTITUTION VM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [IV,  §§  74a-76.

uti  quam  tributoria ;  nam  in  tributoria  eius  solius  peculii
ratio  habetur  quod  in  his  mercibus  est  in  quibus  negotiatur
filius  seruusue  quodque  iude  receptum  erit,  at  in  actions
peculii,  totius :  et  potest  quisque  tertia  forte  aut  quarta  uel
etiam  minore  parte  peculii  negotiari,  maximam  uero  partem
peculii  in  aliis  rebus  habere ;  longe  magis,  si  potest  adprobari
id  quod  [dederit  qui]1  contraxit  in  rem  patris  dominiue  uer-
sum  esse,  ad  hanc  actionem  transire  debet;  nam,  ut  supra
diximus,2  eadem  formula  et  de  peculio  et  de  in  rem  uerso
agitur.

75  Ex  maleficio  filiorumfamilias  seruorumque,  ueluti  si  furtum
fecerint  aut  iniuriam  commiserint,  noxales  actiones  proditae
sunt,   uti  liceret    patri   dominoue    aut    litis    aestimationem
sufferre  aut  noxae *  dedere :   erat  enim  iniquum  nequitiam
eorum  ultra  ipsorum  corpora  parentibus  dominisue  damnosam

76  esse.         Constitutae  sunt  autern  noxales  actiones  aut  legibus

in  the  tributorian  account  is  taken  only  of  so  much  of  the
peculium  as  has  been  converted  into  merchandise  by  the  son
or  slave,  with  the  profits  thereof,  while  in  that  de  peculio  the
whole  of  it  is  reckoned ;  and  it  may  happen  that  only  a  third
or  a  fourth  or  even  a  smaller  part  of  the  peculium  has  been
expended  on  mercantile  wares,  the  greater  portion  having
been  otherwise  invested.  Still  more  is  it  for  the  creditor's
advantage  to  employ  the  action  de  peculio  if  he  is  in  a  position
to  prove  that  what  he  gave  his  debtor  under  the  contract  was
converted  to  the  uses  of  the  latter's  father  or  owner;  for,  as
already  said,  it  is  by  one  and  the  same  formula  that  a  party
sues  de  peculio  and  de  in  rem  uerso.

75  In  respect  of  the  wrong-doing  of  filiifamilias  and  slaves,  as
when   they  have   committed  theft  say,  or  personal  injury,
noxal  actions  have   been  provided,  whereby  the   father   or
owner  has   the   option   either  of  submitting   to    pecuniary
damages,  or  of  surrendering  the  wrong-doer  in  reparation ;
for  it  was  held  unfair  that  parents  or  owners  should  be  losers
on  account  of  the  wickedness  of  those  subject  to  them  in

76  more  than  the  bodies  of  these  last.         Those  noxal  actions
have  been  established  either  by  enactment  or  by  the  praetorian

1  Added  by  Hu. ;  K.  u.  S.  inter-  ACTIONIBrs  (iv,  8).

polate  dederit  is  qui  cum  Jilio  ser-  %  75.     Pr.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.    Comp.  i,  140  ;
uoue.  Paul,  ii,  31,  §  7.

2  In  §  73  ;  comp.  §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.  l  See  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  and  note.
i§  75-78.     Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  NOXALISVS  §  76.     §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.

IV,  §§76-78.]     COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  309

aut  edicto  praetoris :  legibus,  uelut  furti  lege  xn  tabularum,1
damni  iniuriae  item 2  lege  Aqiiilia ; 3  edicto  praetoris,  uelut

77  iniuriarum4  et  ui  bonorum  raptorum.5         Omnes  autera  nox-
ales  actiones  capita1  sequuntur :  nam  si  filius  tuus  seruusue
noxam  commiserit,  quamdiu  in  tua  potestate  est  tecum  est
actio ;  si  in  alterius  potestatem  peruenerit,  cum  illo  incipit
actio  esse ;  si  sui  iuris  coeperit  esse,  directa  actio  cum  ipso
est  et  noxae  deditio  extinguitur.     ex  diuerso  quoque  directa
actio  noxalis  esse  incipit :  nam  si  paterfamilias  noxam  com-
miserit, et  is  se  in  adrogationem  tibi  dederit  aut  seruus  tuus
esse  coeperit,  [quod]  quibusdam  casibus  accidere  primo  com-
mentario2  tradidimus,  incipit  tecum  noxalis  actio  esse  quae

78  ante  directa  fuit.         Sed  si  filius  patri  aut  seruus  domino
noxam  commiserit,  nulla  actio  nascitur :  nulla  enim  omnino
inter  me  et  eum  qui  in  potestate  mea  est  obligatio  nasci  potest ;
ideoque  et  si  in  alienam  potestatem  peruenerit  aut  sui  iuris

edict :  by  enactment,  as  in  the  case  of  theft,  in  accordance
with  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  and  of  wrongful  damage
to  property,  in  accordance  with  the  Aquilian  law ;  by  the
edict  of  the  praetor,  as  in  personal  injury  and  violent  away-

77  taking  of  another's  goods.         Noxal  actions  invariably  follow
the  wrong-doer.     Therefore  if  your  son  or  slave  have  com-
mitted an  offence,  action  lies  against  you  so  long  as  he  remains
in  your  potestas ;  if  he  pass  into  that  of  another  person,  action
begins  to  lie  against  the  latter ;  if  he  become  sui  iuris,  direct
action  begins  to  lie  against  himself,  and  noxal  surrender  is  no
longer  demandable.     Conversely  an  action  which  is  in  the
first  instance  direct,  may  afterwards  become  noxal ;  for  if  a
paterfamilias  has  committed  a  delict,  and  subsequently  gives
himself  to  you  in  arrogation  or  becomes  your  slave, — and  this,
as  we  have  explained  in  our  First  Commentary,  might  happen
occasionally, — the  action  which  was  originally  direct  begins

78  to  be  a  noxal  one  against  you.         But  if  a  child  or  slave  have
committed  a  delict  against  his  father  or  owner,  there  is  no
action,  obligation   between   me   and  an    individual   subject
to  my  potestas  being  an   impossibility ;    consequently,  even
though  he  pass  into  the  potestas  of  a  third  party  or  become

1  Comp.  iii,  §§  189  f.  §  77.     §  5,  tit.  I.  afd.

2  The  MS.  has  u.  1  So  the  MS.  ;  most  eds.  make  it

3  Comp.  iii,  210.  caput.

4  Comp.  iii,  224.  2  See  i,  160.

5  Comp.  iii,  209.  §  78.     Comp.  §  6,  tit.  I.  afd.

310  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [IV,  §§  78,  79.

esse  coeperit,  neque  cum  ipso  neque  cum  eo  cuius  nunc  in
potestate  est  agi  potest.  unde  quaeritur,  si  alienus  seruus
filiusue  noxam  commiserit  mihi,  et  is  postea  in  mea  esse
coeperit  potestate,  utrum  intercidat  actio  an  quiescat :  nostri
praeceptores1  intercidere  putant,  quia  in  eum  casum  deducta
sit  in  quo  actio2  consist  ere  non  potuerit,  ideoque  licet  exierit
de  mea  potestate  agere  me  non  posse ;  diuersae  scholae
auctores1  quamdiu  in  mea  potestate  sit  quiescere  actionem
putant,  quia  ipse  mecum  agere  non  possim,  cum  uero  exierit
79  de  mea  potestate  tune  earn  resuscitari.  Cum  autem  filius-
familias  ex  noxali  causa  mancipio  datur,  diuersae  scholae
auctores1  putant  ter  eum  mancipio  dari  debere,  quia  lege  xn
tabularum  cautum  sit  [ne  alitcr  filius  dc  potestate  pafois]2  exeat
quam  si  ter  fuerit  mancipatus  :  Sabinus  et  Cassius  ceterique
nostrae  scholae  auctores1  sufficere  unam  mancipationem  credi-
derunt,  et  illam3  '  tres '  legis  xn  tabularum  ad  uoluntarias
mancipatioues  pertinere.

sui  iuris,  I  cannot  proceed  either  against  him  or  against
the  third  party  to  whom  he  has  become  subject.  Hence  the
question, — suppose  another  man's  slave  or  son  has  committed
a  delict  against  me,  and  has  afterwards  become  subject  to
my  potestas,  is  my  right  of  action  extinguished  or  merely
suspended  ?  The  leaders  of  our  school  think  that  it  is  extin-
guished, matters  having  been  brought  into  a  position  in  which
an  action  could  not  have  arisen,  and  that  therefore  I  cannot
sue  even  though  he  should  eventually  pass  out  of  my  potestas;
those  of  the  other  school  are  of  opinion  that  my  action  is  only
suspended  while  the  child  or  slave  is  in  my  potestas,  because
I  cannot  proceed  against  myself,  but  that  it  revives  on  the
79  potestal  relationship  coming  to  an  end.  The  jurists  of  the
other  school  are  further  of  opinion  that  when  a  filiusfamilias
is  noxally  mancipated  there  must  be  three  mancipations,  in
consequence  of  the  provision  in  the  Twelve  Tables  that  a  son
is  not  released  from  his  father's  potestas  unless  mancipated
three  times ;  but  Sabinus  and  Cassius,  and  the  other  teachers
of  our  school,  hold  one  mancipation  sufficient,  being  of  opinion
that  the  word  '  three '  in  the  Twelve  Tables  refers  only  to  such
mancipations  as  are  voluntary.

1  See  i,  196,  note  1.  §  79.     Comp.  i,  §§  132,  140,   141  ;  also

2  According  to  Bl.  the  MS.  has  the  §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.
usual   contraction  for  actio;  Stud.  1  See  i,  196,  note  1.

has   doubts;  K.     u.    S.    omit    the  2  Added    by    G.,    and    generally

word  ;    Hu.    substitutes   initio ;   V.  adopted.

omnino,  a  So  the  MS.,  nocem  being  under-

IV,  §§  80, 81.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  311

80  Haec  ita  de  his  personis  quae  in  potestate  [sunt~\,  sine  ex
contractu  sine  ex  maleficio  earum  nomine,  actio   sit.1     quod
uero  ad  eas  personas  quae  in  manu  mancipioue  sunt  ita  ius
dicitur,  ut  cum  ex  aliquo  actu2  earum3  agatur,  nisi  ab  eo  cuius
iuri  subiectae  sint  in  solidum  defendantur,  bona  quae  earum
futura  forent  si  eius  iuri  subiectae  non  essent  ucneant :  sed
cum  rescissa  capitis  deminutione  cum4  iis  imperio  continenti
iudicio5  agitur,6  —  — —  — .

80« -.         [81]

81  diximus,  quamquam  non  permission  fuerit  et  mortuos  homines

80  These  rules  apply  in  the  case  of  individuals  in  potestate,
whether  the  action  [against  those  to  whom  they  are  subject]
be  in  respect  of  a  contract  of  theirs  or  of  a  delict.     As  regards
those  in  manu  or  in  mancipio  the  rule  is  that,  if  action  be
raised  upon  any  act  of  theirs,  unless  they  be  defended  in
solidum  by  him  to  whom  they  are  subject,  the  estate  which
would  have  been  theirs  but  for  their  subjection  will  be  put
up   to   sale.     If,  however,  they  be  proceeded  against   in   a
indicium  imperio  continens,  the  capitis  deminutio  having  been
rescinded, .

80« .         [81] ,

81  although  it  is  not  allowed  to  make  a  noxal  surrender  of  dead

stood.     K.  u.  S.  read  et  illas  ;  Hu.  iudicio    ought   to    be    interpolated

etenim,  the  legis  being  changed  into  after  earum.

lege.  4  These  three  words  not  recognis-

§  80.     Comp.  iii,  84  ;  iv.  38.     The  par.  able  in  the  apparent  ipnp  of  the  MS.  ;

is   incomplete;  p.    219   being  ille-  but  justified  on  reference  to  iii,  84.
gible,   with   exception  of  the   first  5  Comp.  §§  104,  105.

word,  agitur.  6  Hu.,    referring  to  Vlp.  xi,   27,

1  The  MS.  has  inomisiaeet.     K.  u.  thus  completes  the  par. — si  aduer-
S.  leave  the  letters  uninterpreted ;  sus  earn  actionem  non  defendantur,
Gou.   suggests  in  alios  actio  esset ;  etiam    cum   ipsa   muliere   dum    in
Hu.,  following  Bk.,  controuersia  sit  manu  est  agl  potest,  quia  turn  tutoris
(for  esset)  •  P.  has  instituta  actio  est.  auctoritas  necessaria  non  est.     But
The  nearest  interpretation  seems  that  this  takes  no  account  of  persons  in
I  have  given  above,  sit  being  sub-  mancipio,    though    equally  within
stituted  for  esset,  just  as  is  agatur  the  scope  of  Gains'  explanation.

for  the  ageretur  of  the  MS.  two  lines       §  SOa.     The  illegible  page  219  is  sup-
lower,  posed  to  have  contained  an  exposi-

2  The  letters  in  the  MS.   are  un-  tion  of  a  man's  liability  for  mischief
certain,  but  seem  to  be  exoliiactu.  done   by    an   animal   belonging  to
K.  u.  S.  and  Hu.  read  ex  contractu.  him,  corresponding    to    tit.    I.    SI
The    traces  seem   to   me  nearer  ex  QVADRVPES    PAVPERIEM    FECISSE
aliq  actu,  which  includes  both  con-  DICITVR  (iv,   9)  ;  he  had  either  to

V       tract  and  delicff  see  fr.  2,  §  5,  D.  df.  pay  damages  or  noxally   surrender

reb.  cred.  (xii,  1),  fr.  225,  D.  de  V.  it.

S.  (I,    16).      On   the   consequences  §81.     More  than  half  of  the  first  line  of

of  delict  by  capite  minuti  see  fr.  2,  p.    220   is    uncertain,    and  as    de-

§  3,  D.  de  cap.  min.  (iv,  5).  ciphered  incomprehensible.     One  of

3  Probably    the     words     legitimo  the  rules  in  regard  to  noxal  actions

>12  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS  [IV,  §§  81-8:5.

dedere,  tamen  etsi  quis  eum  dederit  qui  fato  suo  uita  exces-
serit  aeque  liberatur.

82  Nunc  admonendi  sumus  agere  nos  aut  nostro  nomine  ant
alieno,  ueluti  cognitorio,  procuratorio,  tutorio,  curatorio  ;  cum
olim,  quo  teinpore  legis  actiones  in  usu  fuissent,  alieno  nomine

83  agere  non  licQYet1  praeterquam2  ex  certis  causis.3         Cognitor
autem  certis  uerbis  in  litem  coram  aduersario  substituitur :
nam  actor  ita  cognitorem  dat :  QVOD  EGO  A  TE  uerbi  gratia

FVNDVM  PETO,  IN  EAM  KEM  LVCIVM  TITIVM  TIBI  COGNITOKEM  DO  ;

aduersarius  ita :  QVIA  TV  A  ME  FVNDVM  PETIS,  IN  EAM  [REM]

TIBI    PVBLIVM    MEVIVM    COGNITOREM    DO.      potest    lit    actor    ita

men,  yet  if  a  defender  have  surrendered  a  slave  that  has
succumbed  to  the  common  fate  of  humanity  [i.e.  has  died  a
natural  death],  he  is  equally  freed  from  his  liability.

82  The  next  matter  of  observation  is,  that  we  may  sue  either
in  our  own  name  or  through  an  agent,  such  as  a  cognitor,
procurator,  tutor,  or  curator;    whereas  formerly,  when  the
legis  actiones  were  in  use,  it  was  unlawful,  except  in  certain

83  cases,  to  sue  in  another  person's  name.        A  cognitor  is  made
our  substitute  in  a  cause  by  certain  formal  words  spoken  in
presence  of  the  adversary ;  by  the  pursuer  thus :  '  Whereas
I  am  claiming  from  you,'  for  example,  '  such  and  such  lands,
I  give  you  Lucius  Titius  as  my  cognitor  in  the  matter ; '  and
by  the  defender  thus :  '  As  you  are  claiming  from  me  such
and  such  lands,  I  give  you  Publius  Mevius  as  my  cognitor  in
the  matter.'     Or  the  pursuer  may  say :  '  Whereas  I  mean  to

was,  that  if  the  offending  slave  or  third  party  in  fault.     It  might  be,

animal  died  before  litiscontestation,  however,  that  after  litiscontestation

the  owner  was  no  longer  liable,  fr.  the   slave  or    animal  had    died    a

39,  §  4,  D.  de  nox.  act.  (ix.   4),  fr.  natural    death  ;  what  then  ?     This

1,  §  13,  D.  si  quadrup.  paup.  (ix,  not  improbably  was  the  question  to

1)  ;  and  this  may  have  been  stated  which  an  answer  is  given  in  what

in  the  text.     But  what  if  the  death  of  the  text  remains.

were  after  litiscontestation?     Was       §§   82-87.     Comp.    tit.    I.  DE  HIS  PER

it  sufficient  for  the  owner  to  give  up  QVOS  AGERE   POSSVMVS    (iv,    10);

the    dead    body?      That    question  also  Fr.  Vat.  §§  317-341.

seems  to  have  been  answered  in  the       §  82.     Comp.  Cic.  pro  Rose.  com.  xviii,

negative  ;  as  Vlp.  says  in  fr.  1,  §  14,  53;   Ps.-Ascon.    in  Cic.  Div.   §   ]  1

D.  siquadr.  paup.  (ix,l), — noxaede-  (Brans,  p.  291);  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

dere  e.stlradere  uiuum.  And  rightly,  1  Comp.  fr.  123,  pr.  D.  de  H.  /.

if  either  the  owner  or  a  third  party  (1,  17).

had   culpably    caused    his    death  ;  2  The   MS.    has   propequam;    P.

in  either  of  those  cases  the  owner  proprie  quarn.

was  still  liable,  — in  the  former  be-  3  Pro  populo,  pro   libertate,  pro

cause  by  his  own  act  he   had  de-  tutela,  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

prived     himself     of     his    facultas      §  83.     Comp.  §  97  ;  Paul,  ex  Festo,  v.

dedendi,    in   the  latter  because  he  Cognitor  (Brans,  p.  233);  Fr.  Vat.

was  entitled  to  damages  from  the  §§  318  f . ;  Isidor.  Differ.  123.

IV,  §§83-86.]     COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  313

dicat :  QVOD  EGO  TECVM  AGEKE  VOLO,  IN  EAM  EEM  COGNITOREM
DO  ;  aduersarius  ita :  QVIA  TV  MECVM  AGERE  vis,  IN  EAM  REM
COGNITOREM  DO  :  nee  interest  praesens  an  absens  cognitor
detur ;  sed  si  absens  datus  fuerit,  cognitor  ita  erit  si  cognouerit

84  et  susceperit  officium  cognitoris.         Procurator  uero  nullis
certis  uerbis  in  litem  substituitur,  sed  ex  solo  mandato,  et
absente  et  ignorante  aduersario,  constituitur  :  quin  etiam  sunt
qui  putant   eum   quoque    procuratorem   uideri   cui   noil   sit
mandatum,  si  modo  bona  fide  accedat  ad  negotium  et  caueat
ratam  rem  dominum  habiturum :  quamquam  et  ille  cui  manda-
tum  [esf]  plerumque  satisdare  debet,1  quia  saepe  mandatum
initio  litis  in  obscuro  est  et  postea  apud  iudiceni  ostenditur.

85  Tutores    autem    et    curatores   quemadmodum   constituantur

86  primo  commentario  rettulimus.         Qui  autem  alieno  nomine
agit,  intentionem  quidem  ex  persona  domini  sumit,  condem-
nationem  autem  in  suani  personam  conuertit :  nam  si  uerbi
gratia  Lucius  Titius  [pro]  Publio  Meuio  agat,  ita  formula  con-

raise  an  action  against  you,  I  give  you  so  and  so  as  my
cognitor  in  it ; '  and  the  defender :  '  As  you  propose  to  raise
an  action  against  me,  I  give  you  in  it  so  and  so  as  my
cognitor.'  And  it  is  immaterial  whether  the  party  thus
accredited  as  cognitor  be  present  or  absent;  but  if  he  have
been  nominated  in  absence,  he  will  not  actually  be  cognitor
until  he  has  heard  of  his  appointment  and  accepted  office.

84  No  words  of  style  are  used  in  appointing  a  procurator  as  sub-
stitute in  a  litigation ;  a  mandate  to  him  is  sufficient,  though
granted  in  the  absence  and  without  the  knowledge  of  the
adversary.     Some  jurists  go  so  far  even  as  to  hold  that  a  man
may  be  regarded  as  a  procurator  who  has  no  mandate,  pro-
vided he  intervene  in  good  faith  and  give  security  that  his
principal  will  ratify  his   actings;    although   he   who  has  a
mandate  is  also  in  most  cases  bound  to  give  the  same  caution,
the  existence  of  the  mandate  being  often  not  quite  clear  in
the  first  stage  of  a  process,  though  afterwards  proved  before

85  the  judge.  •       How  tutors  and  curators  are  appointed  has

86  been  explained  in  our  First  Commentary.         A  person  suing
on  another's  account  frames  his  intention  in  name  of  his  prin-
cipal, but  formulates  the  condemnation  in  his  own  favour.
Suppose  Lucius  Titius  to  be  suing  as  agent  of  Publius  Mevius,

§  84.     Comp.  Paul,  ex  Festo  as  in  last  3  Comp.  §§  90,  98.

note;    Paul,  i,  3;  Fr.  Vat.  §§  112,       §  85.     §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.    Comp.  i,  §§  144  f.
333;  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  §  86.     Comp.  §  55;  Th.  iv,  10,  §  2.

314  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS       [IV,  §§  86-89.

cipitur:  si  PAKET  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM  PVBLIO  MEVIO  SESTER-

TIVM  X  MILIA  DARE  OPORTERE,  IVDEX  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM  LVCIO
TITIO  SESTERTIVM  X  MILIA  CONDEMNA.      SI  NON  PARET,  ABSOLVE;

in  rem  quoque  si  agat  intendit  PVBLII  MEVII  REM  ESSE  EX  IVRE
QVIRITIVM,  et  condemnationem  in  suam  personam  conuertit.

87  Ab  aduersarii  quoque  parte  si  interueniat  aliquis  cum  quo
actio  constituitur,  intenditur  dominum  dare  oportere,  condem-
natio  autem  in  eius  personam  conuertitur  qui  indicium  acce-
pit ;  sed  cum  in  rem  agitur,  nihil  in  intentione  facit  eius  persona
cum  quo  agitur,  sine  suo  nomine  sine  alieno  aliquis  iudicio
interueniat :  tantum  enim  intenditur  rem  actoris  esse.1

88  Videamus  nunc  quibus  ex  causis  is  cum  quo  agitur,  uel  hie

89  qui  &[yit,  cojgatur l  satisdare.         Igitur  si  uerbi  gratia  in  rem
tecum  again,  satis  mihi  dare  debes :  aequum  enim  uisum  est
[tc  i]deo l  quod  interea  tibi  rem,  quae  an  ad  te  pertineat  du-
bium  est,  possidere  conceditur,  cum  satisdatione  mihi  cauere

the  formula  will  run  thus :  '  If  it  appear  that  Numerius
Negidius  ought  to  pay  Publius  Mevius  ten  thousand  sesterces,
then,  judge,  condemn  Numerius  Negidius  to  Lucius  Titius  in
ten  thousand  sesterces ;  if  otherwise,  acquit  him ; '  while  if
the  action  be  in  rem  he  will  maintain  in  his  intention  that
the  thing  in  question  belongs  to  Publius  Mevius  in  quiritarian
right,  and  make  the  condemnation  run  in  his  own  favour.

87  If  it  be  on  the  side  of  the  defender  that  an  agent  is  inter-
vening, it  is  averred  in  the  intention  that  the  principal  is
indebted,  but  the  condemnation  is  directed  against  the  agent,
— the  person  who  has  really  joined  issue  in  the  action.     If
however  the  proceedings  be  in  rem,  there  is  no  mention  of
the  defender  in  the  intention,  whether  he  be  defending  on  his
own  account  or  as  agent  for  another ;  all  that  is  said  in  it  is
that  the  thing  belongs  to  the  pursuer.

88  Let  us  see  now  in  what  cases  the  defender  or  pursuer  is

89  required  to  give  security.         If  then  I  am  proceeding  against
you  in  rem,  you  must  find  caution ;  as  the  possession  of  what
probably  does  not  belong  to  you  is  conceded  to  you  in  the
meantime,  it  is  but  equitable  that  you  should  give  me  the
security  of  sureties,  so  that  if,  in  the  event  of  your  being

§  87.  Comp.  Fr.  Vat.  §  340(1);  Th.  iv,  '  So  G.,  K.  u.  S.,  and  Hu. ;  the

10,  §  2.  MS.  has  qui  agat'  satisdare;  Bk.  reads

1  Comp.  §§  3,  41.  qui  agit,  satisdare  [debeat].

§§  88-102.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  SATISDA-  §  89.  Cp.  pr.  tit.  I.  afd. ;  Paul,  i,  11,  §1.

TIONIBVS  (iv,  11).  l  So  Hu.  and  K.  u.  S.  ;  the  MS.

§  88.     See  i,  199,  note.  has  de  eo;  G.  [te]  de  eo.

IV,  §§89-94.]      COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  315

ut  si  uictus  sis,  nee  rcm2  ipsam  restituas  nee  litis  aestima-
tionem  sufferas,  sit  mihi  potestas  aut  tecum  agendi  aut  cum

90  sponsoribus  tuis.         Multoque  magis  debes  satisdare  mihi  si

91  alieno  nomine  indicium  accipias.         Ceterum  cum  in  rein
actio  duplex  sit, — aut  enim  per  formulam  petitoriam  agitur
aut  per  sponsionem, — siquideni  per  formulam  petitoriam  agi-
tur, ilia  stipulatio  locum  habet  quae  appellatur  '  iudicatum
solui,' l  si   uero   per   sponsionem,  ilia  quae   appellatur  '  pro

92  praecle   litis   et   uindiciarum.'2          Petitoria   autem   formula

93  haec  est  qua  actor  intendit  rein  suain  esse.         Per  sponsionem
uero  hoc  moclo  agimus :  prouocamus  aduersarium  tali  spon-
sione :  si  HOMO,  QVO  DE  AGITVR,  EX  IVKE  QVIKIT  IVM  MEVS  EST,
SESTEKTIOS  xxv  NVMMOS  DAKE  SPONDES  ?     deinde  formulam
edimus  qua  intendimus  sponsionis  summam  nobis  dari  opor-
tere ;  qua  formula  ita  demum  uincimus  si  probauerimus  rem

94  nostram  esse.         ISTon  tamen  haec  summa  sponsionis  exigitur:
nee  enim  poenalis  est  sed  praeiudicialis,  et  propter  hoc  solum

defeated,  you  fail  either  to  restore  the  thing  in  dispute  or  pay
me  the  value  of  the  cause,  [i.e.  the  amount  of  your  condem-
natio,]  I  may  have  the  power  of  suing  either  you  or  them.

90  All  the  more  ought  you  to  give  me  security  when  you  join

91  issue  for  a  third  party.        But  as  an  action  in  rem  is  twofold,
— for  it  may  be  either  by  petitory  formula  or  by  sponsion, — if
you  sue  by  petitory  formula  there  is  room  for  what  is  called
the  stipulatio  iudicatum  solui,  [i.e.  that  the  judgment  will  be
satisfied] ;    while  if  you  sue  by  sponsion  there  is  room  for
that  known  as  the  stipulatio  pro  praede  litis  et  uindiciarum.

92  The  petitory  formula  is  that  in  which  the  pursuer  asserts

93  that  the  thing  in  dispute  is  his.         By  sponsion  we  proceed
as  follows :  we  challenge  our  adversary  with  such  a  sponsion
as  :  'If  the  slave  in  question  is  mine  in  quiritarian  right,  do
you  engage  to  give  me  twenty-five  sesterces  ? '  then  we  draw
up  a  formula  in  which  we  contend  that  the  amount  of  the
sponsion  is  due  to  us ;  and  our  success  in  it  depends  on  our

94  proving  that  the  slave  is  ours.        The  amount  of  the  sponsion,
however,  is  not  exacted ;  for  it  is  not  penal  but  prejudicial,
and  entered  into  solely  that  by  means  of  it  a  judgment  may

2  The  MS.  has  remn'.  2  Comp.  §§  16,  94.

§90.     Comp.  pr.  tit.   I.  afd.;  Fr.  Vat.      §92.     Comp.  §  41.

§  317.  §  93.     Coinp.    Cic.    //.    Verr.    i,   45,   §

§  91.     Comp.  Fr.  Vat.  §  336.  115.

1  Comp.  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  §  94.     Comp.  §  13,  §  16,  and  notes  7-9.

316

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVEIS  CIVILIS        [IV,  §§  94-97.

fit  ut  per  earn  de  re  iudicetur ;  uncle  etiam  is  cum  quo  agitur
non  restipulatur ;  ideo  autem  appellata  est  '  pro  praede  litis
uindiciarum '  stipulatio,  quia  in  locum  praedium  successit ;
quia1  olim,  cum  lege  agebatur,  pro  lite  et  uindiciis,  id  est
pro  re  et  fructibus,  a  possessore  petitori  dabantur  praedes.2

95  Ceterum  si  apud  centumuiros  agitur  summam  sponsionis  non
per  formulam  petimus  sed  per  legis  actionem ;  sacramento
enim  reus  prouocatur  : l  eaque  sponsio  sestertium  cxxv  num-

96  mum2  fieri  sold3  propter  legem  Creperiam*         Ipse    autem

97  qui  in  rem  agit,  si  suo  nomine  agat,  satis  non  dat.         Ac  nee
si  per  cognitorem  quidem  agatur  ulla  satisdatio  uel  ab  ipso
uel  a  domino  desideratur :  cum  enim  certis  et  quasi  sollemni-

be  arrived  at  on  the  question  of  property ;  and  for  the  same
reason  the  defender  does  not  restipulate.  The  stipulation  is
called  pro  praede  litis  et  uindiciarum  because  it  has  come  in
place  of  praedes  ;  for  formerly,  under  the  system  of  the  legis
actiones,  praedes,  sureties,  were  given  by  the  possessor  to  the
pursuer  pro  lite  et  uindiciis,  that  is  for  the  thing  in  dispute

95  and  its  fruits  and  profits.         If  however  we  are  proceeding  in
the  centumviral  court  we  claim  the  amount  of  the  sponsion
by  a  legis  actio  and  not   by   a  formula,  for  the  defender  is
challenged  with  a  sacrament ;  and  the  sponsion  in  this  case
is  one  of  a  hundred  and  twenty-five  sesterces,  in  consequence

96  of  the  Creperian  law.       The  pursuer  of  an  actio  in  rem,  suing

97  on  his  own  account,  does  not  give  security.         Nor  if  the
action  be  by  a  cognitor  is  any  security  required  either  from
him  or  his  principal ;  for  as  a  cognitor  is  substituted  for  his

1  So  the  MS. ;    K.  u.  S.  and  Hu.
read  qui ;  P.  quod.

2  So    the    MS.  ,    but    deleted    by
K.   u.    S.    and  Hu.     See   Paul,    ex
Festo,  v.  Praes  (Bruns,  p.  256).

§   95.     Conip.    §    31  ;   also   §   16,   note
10.

1  K.  u.  S.  read  reum  prouocamus;
Hu.  sacramento  [quingenario]  modo
reo  prouocato  ;  P.   sacramento  ma-
iore  prouocato.

2  The  old  sacramental  500  asses
(§  14);  the  sesterce  having  been  de-
clared equivalent  to  4  asses  (instead
of  2^  as  formerly)  at  the  time  of  the
second  Punic  war  ;  see  Plin.  H.  N.
xxxiii,  13,  §  45.

3  Indistinct  in  the  MS.  ;  K.  u.  S.
substitute  Jit    scilicet;    but    Stud.

(Apogr.  footnote)  rejects  soil. ,  and
thinks  fieri  solet  possible.

4  Name  not  quite  distinct,  but  so
Stud,  deciphers  it.  Mommsen  (M.
u.  M.  jRoem.  Alt.  ii,  part  2,  p.  209,
footnote)  supposes  it  to  have  been
the  enactment  reducing  the  value  of
the  sesterce,  and  perhaps  conferring
on  the  centumviral  court  its  juris-
diction in  questions  of  inheritance.
Hu.  thinks  the  reference  must  be  to
the  lex  lulia  Papiria  of  324  |  430,
converting  cattle  -  penalties  into
money-penalties  (100  asses  for  an
ox,  10  for  a  sheep);  but  the  relation
of  this  enactment  to  the  subject  in
hand  is  far  from  apparent.

§  96.     Comp.  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

§  97.     Comp.  §  83;  Fr.  Vat.  §  317.

IV,  §§  97-102.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  317

bus   uerbis   in   locum   domini   substituatur   cognitor,  merito

98  domini  loco  liabetur.          Procurator  uero  si  agat  satisdare
iubetur  ratarn  rem  dominum  habiturum :  periculum  enim  est
ne  iterum  dominus  de  eadem  re  experiatur  ;  quod  periculum
[11011]  interuenit  si  per  cognitorem  actum  fuerit,  quia  de  qua
re  quisque  per  cognitorem  egerit  de  ea  non  magis  amplius

99  actionem  habet  quam  si  ipse  egerit.         Tutores  et  curatores
eo  modo  quo  et  procuratores  satisdare  debere  uerba  edicti

100  faciunt;  sed  aliquando  illis  satisdatio  rernittitur.         Haec  ita
si  in  rem  agitur ;   si  uero  in  personam,  ab  actoris  quidem
parte  quando  satisdari  debeat  quaerentes,  eadem  repetemus

101  quae  diximus  in  actione  qua  in  rem  agitur.         ab  eius  uero
parte  cum  quo  agitur,  siquidem  alieno  nomine  aliquis  inter-
ueniat,  omni  modo  satisdari  debet,  quia  nemo  alienae  rei  sine
satisdatione  defensor  idoneus  intellegitur :  sed  siquidem  cum
cognitore  agatur,  dominus  satisdare  iubetur ;  si  uero  cum  pro-
curatore,  ipse  procurator,     idem  et  de  tutore  et  de  curatore

102  iuris  est.         Quodsi  proprio  nomine  aliquis  indicium  accipiat
in  personam,  certis  ex  causis1  satisdari  solet,  quas  ipse  praetor

principal  by  certain  quasi-solemn  words,  he  is  rightly  enough

98  regarded  as  in  the  same  position  as  his  principal.         A  pro-
curator, however,  if  he  is  suing,  must  give  security  that  his
principal  will  ratify  his  actings  ;  for  there  is  some  risk  that
the  principal  may  subsequently  proceed  anew  in  the  very
same    matter.      But   there   is    no    such   risk  where   it  is    a
cognitor  that  is  suing;  for  a  man  suing  by  a  cognitor  has  no
more  power  to  raise  a  new  action  about  the  same  matter  than

99  he  would  have  were  he  suing  in  person.         By  the  terms  of
the  edict  tutors  and  curators  are  required  to  give  the  same
security  as  procurators  ;  but  it  is  sometimes  dispensed  with.

100  These  observations  apply  to  the  case  of  an  action  in  rem.
Where  it  is  in  personam  the  rules  are  the  same  so  far  as  the

101  pursuer  is  concerned.         As  regards  the  defender,  if  a  third
party  appear  for  him,  security  must  be  given  in  any  circum-
stances;  for  no  one  is  esteemed  an  adequate   defender  in
another  person's  cause  without  it.     If  the  defence  be  con-
ducted by   a   cognitor,  it  is  the   principal  that   must  give
security;  if  by  a  procurator,  it  is  the  agent  that  gives  it.

102  The  rule  is  the  same  in  the  case  of  a  tutor  or  curator.         In
certain  cases  mentioned  by  the  praetor  the  defender  in  an

§§  98-101.     Comp.  pr.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  *  After    causis    Hu.    interpolates

§102.     Cp.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd. ;  Fr.  Vat.  §  336.  iudicatum  solui.

318

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVPJS  CIVILIS    [I  V,  §§  102-104.

significat  :  quarum  satisdationum  duplex  causa  est,  nam  aut
propter  genus  actionis  satisdatur,  aut  propter  personam  quia
suspecta  sit:  propter  genus  actionis,  ueluti  iudicati2  depensiue,3
aut  cum  de  moribus  mulieris  agetur;4  propter  personam,
ueluti  si  cum  eo  agitur  qui  decoxerit,5  cuiusue  boua  a  credi-
toribus  possessa  prescript  aue  sunt,6  siue  cum  eo  herede  agatur
quern  praetor  suspectum  aestimauerit.7

Omnia  autein   indicia1  aut  legitimo   iure   consistunt   aut
104  imperio    continentur.2          Legitinia    sunt    indicia    quae    in
urbe  Eoma  uel  intra  primum  urbis  Romae  miliarium  inter
omnes  ciues  Romanos  sub  uno  iudice  accipiuntur  ;  eaque  e
lege  lulia  iudicaria  nisi  in  anno  et  sex  mensibus  iudicata

103

action  in  personam  must  give  security  even  when  conducting
his  own  defence.  And  this  security  may  be  required  either
because  of  the  nature  of  the  action,  or  because  of  some  sus-
picion attaching  to  the  defender  personally  :  on  account  of  the
nature  of  the  action  in  the  actio  iudicati,  the  actio  depensi,
^  and  the  aetion  .in-  which  the  bchaviouxJiLarmarried-  womaft  is
called  in  question  ;  on  account  of  the  person,  as  when  the
action  is  against  an  embezzler  or  a  bankrupt,  or  against  an
heir  whom  the  praetor  regards  as  suspect.

103       All  proceedings  before  indices  are  either  indicia  legitima  or

1  04  indicia  imperio  continentia.       Those  are  indicia  legitima  which

are  carried  on  in  Rome  or  within  the  first  milestone  from  the

city,  between  parties  who  are  all  citizens,  and  before  a  single

judge.     According  to  one  of  the  Julian  judiciary  laws  they

2  Comp.  §§  21,  171.

J   Comp.    iii,     27  ;     iv,

171.

§§     22,

4  Comp.   Vlp.   vi,   §§  9,  12;  1.  1,
C.  Th.  de  dot.  (iii,  13);  1.  11,  §  2,
C.  de  repud.  (v,  17).

5  It  is  difficult  to  give  a  precise
meaning    to    this   word.     See   Cic.
Philipp.  ii,  18,  §  44  ;  Sen.  Ep.  36,
§  5;  Spartian.  Jfadr.  18;  1.  12,  C.
de  susceptor.  (x,  70).

6  Comp.   iii,  79  ;  Cic.  pro  Quint.
viii,  30.

7  Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.  31,  D.  de  reb.
auct.  iud.  posts,  (xlii,  5).

§103.     Comp.  i,  184;   iii,   §§  83,   181;
iv,  80.

1  Indicium  is  sometimes  employed
loosely  as  synonymous  with  actio.
Properly  it  was  the  name  given  to
a  process  after  the  inagistrate  had

sent  it  to  a  court  for  trial  ;  either  to
a  single  index  (then  indicium  in  the
narrowest  sense),  or  to  an  arbiter
(then  sometimes  called  arbitrium),  or
to  recuperators  (indicium  recupera-
torlum}.

2  So  G.  and  all  eds.  ;  the  MS.  has
continunt.

§  104.  The  law  here  referred  to  is  the
lex  lulia  ludiciaria  (iudiciorum  pri-
uatoritan), mentioned  above,  §  30.
It  is  probable  that  it  was  this  enact-
ment  that  settled,  by  enumeration  of
their  conditions,  what  indicia  should
be  dealt  with  as  legitima  and  what
as  imperio  continentia  ;  otherwise  one
would  have  expected  to  have  found
included  amongst  the  latter,  con-
trary  to  what  appears  in  §  109,  all
those  that  arose  out  of  actions  due
solely  to  praetorian  agenc

IV,  §§  104-106.]         COMMEN'TAHTI  QVATTVOE.

319

fuerint  expirant  :l  et  hoc  est  quod  uulgo  dicitur  e  lege  lulia

105  litem   anno   et   sex   mensibus   mori.         Imperio   uero   con-
tinentur  recuperatoria  et  quae  sub  uno  iudice  aeeipiuntur
interueniente   peregrin!  persona   iudicis   aut   litigatoris ;    in
cadem1  causa  sunt  quaecumque  extra  primum  urbis  Eomae
niiliarium  tarn  inter  ciues  Eomanos  quam  inter  peregrines
accipiuntur :  ideo  autem  imperio  contineri  iudicia  dicuntur,
quia    tamdiu    ualent    quamdiu    is  qui    ea    praecepit   impe-

106  rium    habebit.2         Et   siquidem   imperio    continenti  iudicio

come  to  an  end  in  a  year  and  a  half  if  judgment  have  not
been  pronounced  by  that  time ;  and  this  is  what  is  meant
by  the  vulgar  saying  that  by  the  Julian  law  an  action  dies
105  in  eighteen  months.  Those  iudicia  are  imperio  continentia
that  proceed  before  recuperators,  as  also  those  before  a  single
judge,  in  which  either  he  or  any  of  the  litigants  is  a  peregrin,
and  those  carried  on,  whether  by  citizens  or  peregrins,  at  a
greater  distance  than  a  mile  from  Rome ;  they  are  so  called
because  they  last  only  so  long  as  the  impcrium  of  the  magis-

Now,  suppose  a  man  sues  in  a

for  recuperation  in  the  treaties  be-
tween Rome  and  friendly  states,
Fest.  v.  Reciperatio  (Bruns,  p.  259).
In  course  of  time,  thanks  probably
to  its  expedition,  it  came  to  be
adopted  in  certain  cases  even  where
none  but  citizens  were  concerned.
This  happened,  for  example,  in  all
litigations  of  private  right,  fiscal  or
otherwise,  raised  by  the  state  against
citizens ;  in  the  actio  iniuriarum  and
a.  ui  bonor.  raptorum;  in  actions
for  penalties  incurred  through  con-
travention of  magisterial  edicts  for
regulating  procedure  (see  §§  46,  185),
etc.  In  many  cases  it  was  free  to
the  magistrate  to  remit  either  to  a
index  or  to  recuperators,  the  latter
being  preferred  where  a  speedy
judgment  was  desirable.  Eeference
to  recuperators  was  the  ordinary
practice  in  the  provinces  ;  for  pere-
grins could  act  in  that  character,
though  incompetent  as  indices.

1  So  G.  and  all  eds. ;  the  MS.  has
simply  ea.

2  Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.  13,  §  1,  D.  de
iurisd.  (ii,  1).

§  106.  Comp.  iii,  §§  180,  181,  and  note;
iv,  §  121.  The  reason  why  here
fresh  proceedings  might  be  com-
menced t2)so  hire  was  that  the  earlier

106  trate  who  granted  them.

1  It  is  said  that  prior  to  this  enact-
ment all  such  actions  were  perpetual,
i.e.  might  be  in  dependence  for  an
indefinite  period  (Hu. ,  note  to  this
par.).  That  might  be  so  with  a
indicium  formulated  upon  an  action
based  upon  the  ius  ciuile;  but  that
it  should  have  been  the  case  with
one  that  had  no  foundation  except
in  the  ius  honorarium,  and  that
could  in  no  sense  be  called  statutory
before  Julian's  consolidated  edict
(temp.  Hadr.,  1,  2,  §  18,  G.  de  uet.
iur.  enucl.  i,  17)  had  been  approved
by  a  senatusconsult,  is  inconsistent
with  all  one's  ideas  of  the  tuitio
praetoris,  and  not  easily  reconciled
with  what  Gai.  states  in  §§  110,  111.
It  seems  more  probable  that  while
the  lex  lulia  limited  the  duration  of
iudicia  founded  on  the  ius  ciuile,  it
extended  that  of  such  as  were  founded
solely  on  the  edict,  provided  always
the  three  conditions  above  mentioned
were  concurrent.  In  fact  it  aug-
mented the  number  of  the  leyitima
iudicia  by  giving  to  the  term  a  new
and  more  artificial  meaning.
§  105.  Reference  to  recuperators,  instead
of  to  a  iudex,  was  practised  originally
in  causes  to  which  foreigners  were
parties,  and  in  virtue  of  provisions

320

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRTS  CIVILIS    [IV,  §§  106-108.

actum1  fuerit,siue  in  rem  sine  inpersonam,  siue  ea  formula  quae
in  factum  concepta  est,  siue  ea  quae  in  ius  habet  intentionem
postea  nihilo  minus  ipso  iure  de  eadem  re  agi  potest ;  et  ideo
necessaria  est  exceptio  rei  iudicatae  uel  in  indicium  deductae.

107  si  uero1  legitimo  iudicio  in  personam  actum  sit  ea  formula
quae   iuris  ciuilis   habet   intentionem,   postea   ipso   iure   de
eadem  re  agi  uon  potest,2  et  ob  id  exceptio  superuacua  est ;  si
uero  uel  in  rem  uel  in  factum  actum  fuerit,  ipso  iure  nihilo
minus  postea  agi  potest,3  et  ob  id  exceptio  necessaria  est  rei

108  iudicatae  uel  in  indicium  deductae.         Alia  causa  fuit  olim
legis  actionum :  nam  qua  de  re  actum  semel  erat,  de  ea  postea

indicium  of  this  latter  sort,  and  no  matter  whether  his  action
be  in  rem  or  in  personam,  or  his  formula  in  ius  or  in  factum,
he  is  nevertheless  entitled,  in  strict  law,  to  sue  again  on  the
same  premises  ;  to  prevent  this  an  exception  is  necessary
either  of  judgment  recovered  or  of  previous  submission  of  the

107  matter  to  the  arbitrament  of  a  judge.         But  if  he  sue  in  a
legitimum  indicium,  by  an  action  in  personam  with  a  formula
containing  an  intentio  iuris  ciuilis,  further  action  by  him  on
the  same  premises  is  ipso  iure  incompetent,  and  an  exception
is  consequently  superfluous ;  but  if  his  action  have  been  in
rem,  or  [his  formula]  in  factum,  he  is  ipso  iure  entitled  to  sue
afresh,  so  that   here  also  an   exception   becomes   necessary

108  either  of  judgment  recovered  or  matter  put  in  issue.         It
was  different  formerly  with  the  legis  actiones :  [under  that
system],  if  there  had  once  been  an  action  about  any  par-

ones  were  ipso  iure  of  no  effect, —
they  were  effectual  only  in  virtue  of
the  imperium.

1  The  MS.  has  pactum,  i.e.  perac-
tum;  but  actum  is  more  appropriate,
and  the  word  employed  in  next  par.
§  107.     References  as  in  note  to  §  106.

1  The  MS.   has  at  (or  ai)  u  (with
superscribed  o)  ;   Hu.  reads  at  si ;
P.  at  ubi.

2  Because  of  the  novation  involved
in  thelitiscontestation,iii,§§  180,181.

3  There  could  be  no  novation  in  an
actio  in  rem,  or  in  one  in  personam
with  a,  formula  in  factum  concepta;
in  the  former  because  no  obligation
was  involved,  in  the  latter  because
none  was  averred.

§  108.  This  is  not  to  be  understood  as
a  statement  that  under  the  system
of  the  legis  actiones  no  account  could

be  taken  of  any  plea  in  defence  that
under  the  formular  system  became
matter  of  exception.  It  may  be  that
pleas  arising  from  statute,  such  as
those  founded  on  the  leges  Furiae,
lex  Cincia,  lex  Plaetoria,  etc.,  were
presented  in  what  Ihering  (G.  d.
R.  R.  iii,  p.  49)  calls  an  after-suit  ;
but  the  probability  is  that  res  iudi-
cata  or  res  in  indicium  deducta  was
pleaded  in  the  form  of  a  prescription
(§  133),  which,  if  proved,  was  a  bar
to  the  entertaining  of  the  action
(Keller,  R.CP.  §  43;  Beth.  Holl-
weg,  R.CP.  ii,  p.  401).  This  view
receives  some  countenance  from  the
fact  that  the  exceptio  rei  iudicatae
is  occasionally  spoken  of  as  a  prae-
scriptio,  e.g.  in  fr.  42,  D.  de  lib.
causa  (xl,  12),  fr.  63,  D.  de  re  hid.
(xlii,  1),  etc.

IV,  §§  108-111.]         COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  321

ipso  iure  agi  non  poterat ;  nee  omnino  ita  ut  nunc  usus  erat

109  illis  temporibus  exceptionum.         Ceterum  potest  ex  lege  qui-
dem  esse  iudicium  sed  legitimum  non  esse ;  et  contra  ex  lege
non  esse,  sed  legitimum  esse ;  nam  si  uerbi  gratia  ex  lege
Aquilia  uel  Ollinia  uel  Furia  in  prouinciis  agatur,  imperio
continebitur  iudicium ;  idemque  iuris  est  et  si  Eomae  apud
recuperatores  agamus,  uel  apud  unum  iudicem  interueniente
peregrini  persona ;  et  ex  diuerso  si  ex  ea  causa  ex  qua  nobis
edicto  praetoris  datur  actio,  Eomae  sub  uno  iudice  inter  omnes
ciues  Eomanos  accipiatur  iudicium,  legitimum  est.

110  Quo  loco  admonendi  sumus  eas  quidern  actiones  quae  ex
lege  senatusue  consultis  proficiscuntur,  perpetuo  solere  prae-
torem  accommodare,  eas  uero  quae  ex  propria  ipsius  iurisdic-

111  tione  pendent,  plerumque  intra  annum  dare.         Aliquando
tarnen  (et  perpetuo  eas  dat,  uelut  quibus}1  imitatur  ius  legiti-

..

ticular  thing,  it  was  impossible  for  tho  pursuer  ipeo  iure  to
sue  again ;  nor  were  there  in  those  days  any  exceptions  in

109  use  such  as  we  have  now.  A  iudicium  may  quite  well
be  based  on  a  lex  [or  statute]  and  yet  not  be  a  iudicium
legitimum,  and  conversely  may  be  legitimum  though  not
founded  on  statute.  For  if  proceedings  be  taken  in  a  pro-
vince on  the  Aquilian  law  say,  or  the  Ollinian  or  Furian,  the
iudicium  will  be  imperio  continens ;  and  so  it  will  though
the  proceedings  be  in  Eome,  if  they  be  before  recuperators,
or  even  before  a  single  judge  when  he  or  either  of  the  parties
happens  to  be  a  peregrin.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  proceedings
be  in  Eome,  at  the  instance  of  parties  who  are  all  citizens,
and  before  a  single  judge  who  also  is  a  citizen,  the  iudicium
will  be  legitimum  even  though  the  action  be  one  introduced
by  the  praetor's  edict.

1.10  It  may  here  be  observed  that  actions  attributable  to  a  law
or  senatusconsult  may  be  granted  by  the  praetor  at  any  dis-
tance of  time,  but  those  that  depend  on  his  proper  jurisdiction
are  granted  by  him  for  the  most  part  only  within  a  year  [of

111  the  occurrence  to  which  they  relate].  Sometimes,  however,
he  grants  actions  of  this  sort  even  in  perpetuity, —  such,

§109.     Of  the  L.  Ollinia  mentioned  in  §§   110-114.      Comp.    tit.    I.    DE  PER-
this  par.  nothing  is  known.     It  is  PETVIS  ET  TEMPORALIBVS  ACTWNI-

probable  that  the  copyist  has  made  BVS,  ET  QVAE  AD  HEREDES  VEL  IN

a  mistake  in  the  name,  as  Gai.  would  HEREDES  TRANSEVNT  (iv,  12).

likely  take  as  his  illustration  some  §110.     Comp.  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

statute  with  which  every  one  was  §  111.     Comp.  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.   -i
familiar.    But  the  error,  if  it  be  one,  1  So  Hu. ;  the  words  are  illegible

does  not  affect  the  argument.  in  the  MS.     K.  u.  S.,  P.,  and  M.  (K.

322  GAII  INSTITUTION VM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [IV,  §§  111-113.

mum :  quales  sunt  eae  quas  bonorum  possessoribus  ceterisque
qui  heredis  loco  sunt  eoue  efficiuntur  dare  sold?  furti  quoque
manifest!  actio,  quamuis  ex  ipsius  praetoris  iurisdictione
proficiscatur,3  perpetuo  datur;  et  merito,  cum4  pro  capital!
poena  pecuniaria  constituta  sit.

112  Non1  omnes  actiones  quae  in  aliquem  aut  ipso  in  re  con-
petunt  aut  a  praetore  dantur  etiam  in  heredem  aeque  con-
petnnt  aut  dari  solent :  est  enim  certissima  iuris  regula  ex
maleficiis  poenales   actiones  in  heredem  nee  conpetere   nee
dari  solere,  uelut  furti,  ui   bonorum   raptorum,  iniuriarum,
damni   iniuriae :    sed   heredibus  quidem   [uidelicet   actoris]2
huiusmodi  actiones  coupetunt  nee  denegantur,  excepta   in-
iuriarum  action e   et   si   qua   alia   similis    inueniatur    actio.

113  Aliquando  tameu  {etiam'}  ex  contractu  actio  neque  heredi  ne-

namely,  as  are  modelled  upon  the  common  law ;  as,  for  ex-
ample, those  he  is  in  the  practice  of  giving  to  bonorum
possessores  and  other  persons  in  the  position  of  or  by  him
treated  as  heirs.  The  actio  furti  manifesti,  too,  though  it  is
a  creature  of  the  praetor's  jurisdiction,  is  perpetual;  and  very
properly,  seeing  the  pecuniary  penalty  in  it  is  merely  a
substitute  for  the  [original]  capital  punishment.

112  Not  every  action  that  is  competent  against  a  man  at  com-
mon law,  or  that  will  be  granted  against  him  by  the  praetor,
is  equally  competent  or  will  equally  be  granted  against  his
heir ;  for  it  is  one  of  the  best  settled  rules  of  law  that  penal
actions  resulting  from  delict,  such  as  those  consequent   on
theft,   robbery,  wrongful   damage   to    property,  or   personal
injury,  neither  are  competent  nor  will  be  granted  against  the
heir  of  the  delinquent.     Such  actions,  however,  are  competent
and  will  not  be  denied  to  the  heirs  [of  the  party  wronged],
with  the  exception  of  the  actio  iniuriarum  and  others,  if  there

113  be  such,  of  the  same  class.          Sometimes  even  an  action

u.  S.    footnote)  substantially  agree  4  So  the  MS.  ;  Hu.  has  cum  tantum.

with-  Hu.      Gou.    prefers    praetor       §  112.     Conip.  Gai.  in  fr.   Ill,  §  1,  D.

quibusdam  actionibus  dandis.  de  R.  I.  (1,  17);  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.

2  For  the  last  four  words  I  am  J  Hu.  reads  contra  non.
indebted  partly  to  Gou.  and  partly  2  The  words  uid.  actoris  seem  to
to  Hu.     K.  u.  S.  and  P.  use  instead  be  a  gloss.     There  are  four  letters
the  one  word  accommodat,  as  in  the  illegible  after  hdi,  which  I  assume
Inst.  ;   but  not   only  is   the    space  to  have  been  bqui ;  hence  the  read-
in  the  MS.  much  too  great  for  it,—  ing  heredibus  quidem.      Hu.   reads
the  quueejjci. . . iiias  of  the   Apogr.  heredi  defuncti  uidelicet  actoris;  K.
come  very  near  eoueefficiunt'ds.     A  u.  S.  read  heredibus,  and  omit  the
bonorum  emptor  may  be  taken  as  next  three  words  ;  P.  heredibus  qui-
an  example  of  a  person  qui  heredis  dern,  omitting  the  other  two.

loco  praetore  efficitur  (§  35).  §113.      Comp.   §  1,   tit.   I.  afd.,   from

3  Comp.  iii,  189.  which  etiam  is  borrowed.

IV,  §§  113,  114.]         COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

323

114

que  in  beredem  conpetit :  nam  adstipulatoris  heres  non  habet
actionem,1  et  sponsoris  et  fidepromissoris  heres  non  tenetur.2

Superest  ut  dispicianius,  si  ante  rem  iudicatam  is  cum  quo
agitur  post  acceptum  iudicium  satisfaciat  actori,  quid  officio
iudicis  conueniat,  utrum  absoluere,  an  ideo  potius  daumare
quia  iudicii  accipiendi  tempore  in  ea  causa  fuerit  ut  damnari
debeat  :l  nostri  praeceptores 2  absoluere  eum  debere  existi-
mant ;  nee  interesse 3  cuius  generis  sit  iudicium :  et  hoc  est
quod  uulgo  dicitur  Sabino  et  Cassio2  placere  omnia  iudicia

absolutoria  esse. *  de  ~bonae  fidei  iudiciis  autcm

idem  sentiunt,  quia  in  eiusmodi  iudiciis  liberum  est  officium
iudicis.5  tantumdem  et  de  in  rem  actionibus  putant,  quia  6
—  —  —  sunt  etiam  in  personam  tales

114

upon  contract  is  not  competent  to  or  against  an  heir ;  for  the
heir  of  an  adstipulator  cannot  sue,  and  the  heir  of  a  sponsor
or  fidcipromissor  cannot  be  sued.

Now  let  us  see  what  is  the  duty  of  the  judge  if,  before
judgment,  but  after  issue  joined,  the  defender  has  satisfied  the
pursuer's  demand ;  is  he  to  acquit,  or  is  he  bound  to  condemn,
on  the  ground  that,  at  the  moment  when  the  cause  was  re-
mitted to  him,  the  defender's  position  was  such  as  to  warrant
condemnation  ?  Our  authorities  think  that  he  ought  to  pro-
nounce judgment  of  acquittal,  and  that  no  matter  what  the
nature  of  the  action ;  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  common
saying  that  according  to  Sabinus  and  Cassius  all  iudicia  are
absolvitory.  The  leaders  of  the  other  school  —  —  —  —  .
As  regards  bonae  fidei  iudicia,  however,  they  are  of  the
same  opinion,  because  in  them  the  judicial  office  has  free
scope.  And  they  extend  the  same  rule  to  actions  in  rem;
because .  There  are  even  some

1  Comp.  iii,  114.

2  Comp.  iii,  120.

114.  Comp.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afJ.  P.  227
is  for  the  most  part  illegible,  the
1st,  4th,  and  24th  lines  being  the
only  ones  that  are  complete.  There
is  reason  to  believe  that  in  lines
6-22  Gai.  proceeded  to  refer  to  the
actlones  arbitrariae,  both  in  rem
and  in  personam,  in  which  the  judge
was  authorized,  if  he  found  the  case
proved,  to  make  such  order  on  the
defender  as  he  considered  would
meet  the  justice  of  the  case,  and,  if
it  were  complied  with,  to  acquit
him;  see  §  31,  tit.  I.  de  act.  (iv,  6).

1  Comp.  iii,  180.  '

2  Comp.  i,  196,  note  1.

3  So  G.  and  most  eds.  ;  the  MS.
and  P.  have  interest.

4  The  suggestion  of  K.  u.  S.  (foot-
note) commends   itself, — that  Gai.
here  affirmed  of  the  Proculians  that
they  held  a  different  opinion  in  so
far  as  stricti  iuris  actions  were  con-
cerned ;  the  only  objection  is  that
there   is    not    room   for   it   in    the
lacuna  of  half  a  line.

5  Comp.  §  30,  tit.  I.  de  act.  (iv.  6).

6  The  next  few  words,  according
to  K.  u.  S.,are  quia  formulae  uerbis
id  ipsum  exprimatur.

324  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [IV,  §§  114-116a.

actiones   in   quibus7    —   —    —    —    —    —    —   —  actum

fuit.

115  Sequitur  ut  de  exceptionibus  dispiciamus.         [H6]  Con-

116  paratae  sunt  autem  exceptiones  defendendorum  eorum  gratia
cum  quibus  agitur:    saepe  enim  accidit  ut  quis  iure  ciuili
teneatur,  sed  iniquum  sit  eum  iudicio  condemnari :  ueluti  si
stipulatus  sim  a  te  pecuniam  tamquam  credendi  causa  nume-
raturus,  nee  numerauerim ;  nam  earn  pecuniam  a  te  peti  posse
certum  est ;  dare  enim  te  oportet,  cum  ex  stipulatu  teneris ;
sed  quia  iniquum  est  te  eo  nomine  condemuari,  placet  per

UGaexceptionem  doli  mali  te  defendi  debere.  item  si  pactus
fuero  tecum  ne  id  quod  mini  debeas  a  te  petam,  nihilo  minus
id  ipsum1  a  te  petere  possum  dari  mihi  oportere,  quia  obligatio
pacto  conuento  non  tollitur ;  sed  placet  debere  me  petentem

actions  in  personam   of  this   class,  in   which  — —

115  We  must  next  turn  our  attention  to  exceptions.     [116]  They

116  have  been  devised  for  the  sake  of  defenders  ;  for  it   often
happens  that  a  man  may  be  liable  according  to  strict  law,  and
yet  that  it  would  be  contrary   to  equity  to  condemn  him.
Suppose   that,   under   the   expectation   that  I  was  about  to
advance  you  in  loan  a  certain  sum  of  money,  you  have  given
me  a  stipulatory  engagement  for  that  amount,  and  that  after
all  I  have  not  made  the  advance :  there  is  no  doubt  that  I  am
entitled  to  sue  you  for  the  money,  for  you  are  bound  to  pay
it,  being  obliged  by  the  stipulation ;  but  as  it  would  be  inequit-
able in  such  circumstances  that  you  should  be  condemned,
you  are  allowed  in   defence  to  plead  an  exception  of  dole.

116a  Again,  suppose  I  have  agreed  not  to  take  proceedings  against
you  for  what  you  owe  me,  I  am  nevertheless  entitled  to  sue,
and  to  maintain  that  you  are  bound  to  pay  me  the  very  thing
I  had  agreed  not  to  claim,  because  an  obligation  cannot  be
extinguished  by  [bare]  agreement ;  but  it  is  held  that  if  you
plead  an  exccptio  pacti  conuenti  in  answer  to  my  claim,  I  will

7  This  may  have  been  the  com-  §  116.     Comp.  pr.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.

mencement  of  a  reference  to  some  §  116a.     Comp.  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.

of  the  actiones   arbitrariae  in  per-  l  K.   u.   S.   regard  id  ipsum  as  a

sonam.      Huschlce's   reconstruction  gloss ;  Hu.  substitutes  id  ipso  iure.

is  too  conjectural  to  be  reproduced.  But,  as  Gou.  points  out,  the  words

§§  115-125.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  EXCEP-  are  appropriate,  as  indicating  the

TIONIBVS  (iv,  13).  very  id  which  it  had  been  agreed

§  115.  Pr.  tit,  I.  afd.  should  not  be  sued  for.

IV,  §§  117-119.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

325

117  per  exceptionem  pacti   comienti   repelli.         In  his  quoque
actionibus  quae  [noil]1  in  personam  suut  exceptiones  locum
habent,  ueluti  si  metu  me  coegeris  aut  dolo  induxeris  ut  tibi
rem  aliquam  mancipio  darem ;  nam  si2  earn  rem  a  me  petas,
datur  mihi  exceptio  per  quam,  si  metus  causa  te  fecisse  uel

UTadolo  malo  arguero,  repelleris.  item  si  fundum  litigiosum
sciens  a  non  possidente  emeris  eumque  a  possidente  petas,
opponitur  tibi  exceptio  per  quam  omm  modo  summoueris.

118  Exceptiones  autem  alias  in  edicto  praetor  habet  propositas,
alias  causa  cognita  accommodat.     quae  onines  uel  ex  legibus
uel  ex  his  quae  legis  uicem  optinent  substantiam  capiunt,  uel

119  ex   iurisdictione   praetoris   proditae   sunt.         Omnes   autem
exceptiones  in  contrarium  concipiuntur,  quia l  adfirmat  is  cum
quo  agitur  :  nam  si  uerbi  gratia  reus  dolo  malo  aliquid  actorem

117  be  defeated.          There  is  room  for  exceptions  even  in  actions
that  are  not  in  personam,  as  when  you  have  constrained  me
by  threats,  or  induced  me  by  doleful  representations,  to  con-
vey something  to  you  by  mancipation ;  for  if  you  raise  an
action  against  me  to  obtain  possession  of  it,  I  am  entitled  to
an  exception,  whereby,  if  I  prove  that  there  was  intimidation  or

117adole  on  your  part,  your  action  will  be  defeated.  So  also  if
you  have  knowingly  purchased,  from  one  not  in  possession  of
them,  lands  then  forming  the  subject-matter  of  a  litigation,  and
you  raise  action  for  them  against  the  possessor,  he  will  be
entitled  to  state  an  exception  which  will  effectually  displace

118  your  claim.         Some  exceptions  are  published  by  the  praetor
in  the  edict,  others  are  granted  on  cause  shown.    And  all  are
either  founded   on   statute  or  some  enactment  that  has  the
force  thereof,  or  have  been  devised  by  the  praetor  in  the  exer-

119  cise  of  his  jurisdiction.  All   exceptions  are  formulated
negatively ;  for  the  affirmative   proceeds   from   the   pursuer.
For  example,  if  the  defender  avers  that  there  has  been  dole  on

§  117.     Comp.  §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.

1  Added  by  G.

2  The  MS.   has  deminansin.      P.
reads  rem  aliquam  manclpi  d[ar~\em
man[dpio] ;  si  enim,  etc. ,  which  is
ingenious.

§  H7a.     Comp.  Fr.  de  lure  Fisci,  §  8  ;  fr.

1,  §  1,  fr.  2,  D.  de  litig.  (xliv,  6).
§  118.     Comp.  §  7,  tit.  I  afd.
§  119.     Comp.  Paul,   in  fr.   22,  pr.    D.

de  except,  (xliv,  1).

1  So  Gou. ;  the  MS.  has  qul ;  K.  u.  S. ,

Hu.,  arid  most  eds.  quam.  Although

there  were  one  or  two  actions  in
which  the  pursuer  maintained  a
negative,  e.g.  in  denial  of  the  exist-
ence of  a  servitude  over  his  pro-
perty, yet  the  rule  was  that  he
maintained  an  affirmative  ;  and_  in
his  exception  the  defender  by  im-
plication admitted  that,  on  sub-
stantiating his  averment,  the  pursuer
would  be  entitled  to  judgment  if
something  had  not  happened — that,
namely,  which  was  averred  by  the
defender — to  exclude  it.

326  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVIL1S   [IV,  §§  119-121.

facere  dicat,  qui  forte  pecuniarn  petit  quam  non  numerauit,
sic  exceptio  concipitur :  si  IN  EA  RE  NIHIL  DOLO  MALO  AVLI
AGERII  FACTVM  SIT  NEQVE  FIAT  ;  item  si  dicat  contra  pactionem
pecunia  peti,  ita  concipitur  exceptio  :  si  INTER  AVLVM  AGEKIVM

ET  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM  NON   CONVENIT  NE  EA    TECVNIA  PETE-

RETVR  ;  et  denique  in  ceteris  causis  similiter  concipi  solet :
ideo  scilicet  quia  omnis  exceptio  obicitur  quidem  a  reo,  sed  ita
formulae  inseritur  ut  condicionalem  faciat  condemnation  em,
id  est  ne  aliter  index  eum  cum  quo  agitur  condemnet,  quam
si  nihil  in  ea  re  qua  de  agitur  dolo  actoris  factum  sit ;  item  ne
aliter  index  euni  condemnet  quam  si  nullum  pactum  con-
uentum  de  non  petenda  pecunia  factum  fuerit.

120  Dicuntur  autem  exceptiones  aut   peremptoriae   aut   dila-

121  toriae.         Peremptoriae  sunt  quae  perpetuo  ualent  nee  euitari
possunt,  ueluti  quod  metus  causa,1  aut  dolo  malo,1  aut  quod
contra  legem  senatusue  consultum  factum  est,2  aut  quod  res
iudicata  est,3  uel  in  indicium  deducta  est,3  item  pacti  conuenti

the  part  of  the  pursuer,  who  perhaps  is  claiming  repayment  of
money  which  he  has  never  advanced,  the  exception  will  be  in
such  terms  as  these :  '  if  there  neither  has  been  nor  is  any  dole
in  the  matter  on  the  part  of  Aulus  Agerius  ; '  if  his  aver-
ment be  that  the  pursuer  is  claiming  payment  notwithstanding
an  agreement  to  the  contrary,  it  will  run  thus  :  '  if  there  has
been  no  agreement  between  Aulus  Agerius  and  Numerius
Negidius  that  the  money  should  not  be  sued  for;'  and  in
other  cases  it  will  be  framed  in  like  manner.  It  is  always
the  defender  that  states  the  exception,  but  it  is  so  engrafted
on  the  formula  as  in  effect  to  render  the  clause  of  condemna-
tion conditional :  in  other  words,  it  instructs  the  judge,  in  the
one  case,  that  he  is  not  to  condemn  the  defender  unless  there
have  been  no  dole  in  the  matter  on  the  part  of  the  pursuer  ;
in  the  other,  that  he  is  not  to  condemn  unless  there  has  been  no
agreement  between  the  parties  that  action  would  not  be  taken
upon  the  debt.

120  Exceptions  are  said  to  be  either  peremptory  or  dilatory.

121  Those   are    peremptory   that   remain    available   always,  and
cannot  be  excluded ;  such  are  the  exceptions  of  constraint  or
dole,  of  contravention  of  a  law  or  senatusconsult,  of  judgment
recovered,  of  submission  of  a  cause  to  the  arbitrament  of  a  judge,

§  120.     Comp.  §  8,  tit.  I.  afd.  2  Comp.  §  118.

§  121.     Comp.  §  9,  tit.  I.  afd.  3  Comp.  iii,  181  ;  iv,  106.

1  Comp.  §  117.

IV,  §§  122-124.]         COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  327

122  quod  factum  est  ne  ornnino  pecunia  peteretur.4         Dilatoriae
sunt  exceptiones  quae  ad  tempus  nalent,  ueluti  illius  pacti
conuenti  quod  factum  est  uerbi  gratia  ne  intra  quinquennium
peteretur ;  finite  enim  eo  tempore  non  habet  locum  exceptio.
cui  similis  exceptio  est  litis  diuiduae l  et  rei  residuae : 2  nam
si  quis  partem  rei  petierit  et  intra  eiusdem  praeturam  reliquam
partem  petat,  hac  exceptione  summouetur  quae  appellatur
litis  diuiduae  j1  item  si  is  qui  cum  eodem  plures  lites  babebat,
de  quibusdam  egerit,  de  quibusdam  distulerit  ut   ad   alios
indices  eant,3  si   intra  eiusdem  praeturam  de  bis  quas  ita
distulerit   agat,  per  bane   exceptionem  quae   appellatur  rei

123  residuae2  summouetur.         Obseruandum  est   autem   ei   cui
dilatoria  obicitur  exceptio,  ut  differat  actionem;  alioquin  si
obiecta  exceptione  egerit,  rem  perdit ;  nee  enim,  post  illud
tempus  quo  integra  re  [earn] l  euitare  poterat,  adhuc  ei  potestas
agendi  superest,  re  in  indicium  deducta  et  per  exceptionem

124  perempta.         Non  solum  autem  ex  tempore  sed  etiam  ex

122  and  of  absolute  agreement  not  to  sue.         Those  are  dilatory
that  are  available  only  for  a  time,  such  as  that  of  an  agree-
ment not  to  sue  say  for  five  years ;  on  their  expiry  there  is  no
longer  any  room  for  the  exception.     To  the  same  class  belong
the  exceptio  litis  diuiduae  and  exceptio  rei  residuae :  for  if  an
individual  have  raised  action  for  part  only  of  that  to  which  he
is  entitled,  and  afterwards,  and  within  the  same  praetorship,
sues  for  the  remainder,  he  may  be  barred  by  an  exception  of
divided  suit ;  and  if  a  man  who  has  several  causes  of  action
against  the  same  party,  and  has  proceeded  in  some  of  them,
but  held  over  others   in  order  to   bring  them   before  other
judges,  have  begun  to  sue  upon  these  last  within  the  same
praetorship,  he  may  be  met  with  an  exception  of  claim  held

123  over.         When  a  dilatory  exception  is  pleaded  the  pursuer
should  be  careful  to  postpone  his  action ;  if  he  go  on  in  face
of  it,  he  will  lose  his  case  ;  and,  if  this  have  been  once  sub-
mitted to  a  judge  and  thrown  out  on  the  strength  of  the
exception,  he  will  be  unable  to  proceed  afresh  even  after  the
time  when,  had  matters  been  entire,  the  exception  might  have

124  been   elided.  Dilatory  exceptions  may  be  founded  not

4  Comp.  §§  119,  126.  though  apud  iudicem  agere  is  fre-

§  122.     Comp.  §  10,  tit.  I.  afd.  quent  enough,  ad  iudicem  agere  is  a

1  Comp.  §§  56,  131.  phrase  unknown.

2  Comp.    1.   10,   C.    de   iud.  (iii,       §  123.     Comp.  §  10,  tit.  I.  afd.

1).  l  Added  by  Hu.,  and  generally

3  The  MS.  has  egant.     Hu.  reads  adopted.

agantur ;    but,    as    Gou.    observes,       §  124.     Comp.  §  11,  tit.  I.  afd.

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [IV,  §§  124-126.

persona  dilatoriae  exceptiones  intelleguntur,  quales  sunt
cognitoriae,1  uelut  si  is  qui  per  edictum  cognitorem  dare  non
potest  per  cognitorem  agat,  uel  dandi  quidem  cognitoris  ius
habeat,  sed  eum  det  cui  uon  licet  cognituram  snscipere  :  nam
si  obiciatur  exceptio  cognitoria,  si  ipse  talis  erit  ut  ei  non
liceat  cognitorem  dare,  ipse  agere  potest ;  si  uero  cognitori
non  liceat  cognituram  suscipere,  per  alium  cognitorem  ant  per
semet  ipsum  liberam  habet  agendi  potestatem,  et  tarn  hoc
quam  illo  modo  euitare  [potesf] 2  exceptionem :  quodsi  dissi-

125  niulauerit  earn  et3  per  cognitorem  egerit,  rem  perdit.         Sed
peremptoria  quidem  exceptione  si  reus  per  errorem  non  fuerit
us  us,  in  integrum   restituitur  adiciendae  exceptionis  gratia :
dilatoria  uero  si  non  fuerit  usus,  an  in  integrum  restituatur,
quaeritur.

126  Interdum  euenit  ut  exceptio  quae  prima  facie  iusta  uidea-

only  on  some  objection  to  the  time  of  suing,  but  also  on  some
objection  to  the  person  of  the  pursuer,  as  in  the  exceptiones
cognitoriae.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  man  is  suing  by  a
cognitor  who  is  not  by  the  edict  entitled  to  do  so,  or  that  he
has  accredited  as  his  cognitor  a  person  who  cannot  act  in  that
capacity  :  if  an  exceptio  cognitoria  be  stated,  the  principal  who
is  not  entitled  to  appoint  such  an  agent  may  sue  in  person,
while,  if  the  objection  be  to  the  qualification  of  the  party
nominated  as  cognitor,  he  may  appoint  another  instead  of  him
or  sue  in  person,  and  in  either  way  elide  the  exception  ;  but
if  [in  either  case]  he  disregard  it,  and  allow  the  action  to
proceed  in  the  name  of  the  cognitor  [originally  nominated],

125  he  loses  his  cause.         If  a   defender  have  by    inadvertence
omitted  to  avail  himself  of  a  peremptory  exception  competent
to  him,  he  will  be  reinstated  by  the  praetor  in  order  that  it
may  be  added  [to  the  formula] ;  but  it  is  disputed  whether
there  can  be  such  reinstatement  when  it  is  only  a  dilatory
exception  that  has  been  overlooked.

126  It  sometimes  happens  that  an  exception,  which  prima  facie

1  Comp.  §  83 ;  Paul,  i,  2,  §§  1 ,  2  ;  S.  read  [et]  cum  ei  [per  cognitorem
Fr.    Vat.   §§  322  f. ;  Quintil.    Inst.  agere  non  liceret,  nihilo  minus}  per
Or.  vii,  1,  §§  19  f.  cognitorem;  M.    (K.  u.   S.  p.  xxii)

2  Added  by  G.,  and  adopted  by  proposes  turn  et  per  cognitorem.

all  eds.  §  125.     Comp.  §§  53,  57,  123  ;  1.  2,  C.

3  So  Hu.,  following  Hollweg,  and  sent,  rescind,  non  posse  (vii,  50).
justified  by  Th.  iv,  13,  §  11.     The  §§  126-129.     Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  KEPLICA-
MS.  has  cum  ei  or  cum  et,  the  t\vo  TWNIBVS  (iv,  14).

last  letters  being  indistinct.     K.  u.       §  126.     Pr.  tit.  I.  afd.

IV,  §§  126,  1260.]       COMMENTARII  QVATTVOE.  329

tur  inique  noceat  actori :  quod  cum  accidit  alia  adiectione
opus  est  adiuuandi  actoris  gratia:  quae  adiectio  replicatio
uocatur,  quia  per  earn  replicatur  atque  resoluitur  uis  excep-
tionis:  nam  si  uerbi  gratia  pactus  sum  tecum  ne  pecuniam
quam  mihi  debes  a  te  peterem,  deinde  postea  in  contrarium
pacti  sumus,  id  est  ut  petere  mihi  liceat,  et,  si  agam  tecum,
excipias  tu  ut  ita  demum  mihi  condemneris  si  non  conuenerit
ne  earn  pecuniam  peterem,  nocet  mihi  exceptio  pacti  conuenti ;
namque  nihilo  minus  hoc  uerum  manet  etiam  si  postea  in
contrarium  pacti  sumus ;  sed  quia  iniquum  est  me  excludi
exceptione,  replicatio  mihi  datur  ex  posteriore  pacto  hoc
modo:  si  NON  POSTEA  CONVENEEIT  VT  MIHI  EAM  PECVNIAM
1 2  6a  PETERE  LICERET.  Item  si  argentarius  pretium  rei  quae
in  auctionem  uenierit  persequatur,  obicitur  ei  exceptio  ut  ita
demum  emptor  damnetur  si  ei  res  quam  emerit  traclita  est ;
et  est  iusta  exceptio :  sed  si  in  auctione  praedictum  est  ne  ante
emptori  traderetur  quam  si  pretium  soluerit,  replicatione  tali

seems  just  enough,  will  yet  bear  inequitably  upon  the  pursuer.
When  this  occurs  it  becomes  necessary  to  introduce  yet
another  clause  into  the  formula  for  the  pursuer's  benefit,  which
is  called  a  replication,  because  thereby  the  force  of  the  excep-
tion is  replicated  and  destroyed.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  I
have  agreed  not  to  proceed  against  you  for  money  you  owe  me,
and  that  subsequently  we  enter  into  a  counter-agreement  that
I  may  sue  if  I  please ;  if  I  do  sue,  you  may  except  that  you
are  to  be  condemned  to  me  only  if  there  have  been  no  agree-
ment not  to  sue.  That  exception  forms  a  bar  to  my  action ;
for  there  was  such  an  agreement  between  us,  although  fol-
lowed by  one  contradicting  it.  But,  as  it  would  be  incon-
sistent with  equity  that  my  claim  should  thus  be  defeated,  I
am  allowed  a  replication  upon  the  subsequent  agreement  in
these  terms :  '  if  there  have  been  no  later  agreement  giving
12 Game  leave  to  sue.'  Or  suppose  an  auctioneer  sues  for  the
price  of  a  thing  he  has  sold  by  auction,  and  that  the  exception
is  taken  that  the  defender  ought  not  to  be  condemned  unless
the  thing  he  has  purchased  has  been  delivered  to  him,  the
exception  is  good  ;  but  if  it  was  one  of  the  conditions  of  sale
that  there  should  be  no  delivery  until  payment  of  the  price,  the

§  126a.     A  great  mass  of  accounts  and  p.   C.   were    discovered  at   Pompeii
other  documents   (on  wax  tablets)  in  1875,  and  have  since  been  pub-
relating  to  the  auction  business  of  lished;  see  Petra,  Tavolette,  etc.
an  arrjentarius  in  the  years  53-62

330  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [IV,  §§  126a-131.

argentarius  adiimatur:    AVT  si  PEAEDICTVM  EST  NE  ALITEE

EMPTORI  RES  TRADERETVR  QVAM  SI   PRETIVM  EMPTOR  1  SOLVERIT.

127  Interdum  autem  euenit  ut  rursus  replicatio,  quae  prima  facie
iusta  sit,  inique  reo  noceat ;  quod  cum  accidit  adiectione  opus

128  est  adiuuaudi  rei  gratia,  quae  duplicatio  uocatur.         Et  si
rursus  ea  prima  facie  iusta  uideatur,  sed  propter   aliquam
causam  inique  actori  noceat,  rursus  ex  [contrario  alia] 1  adiec-
tione opus  est  qua  actor  adiuuetur,  quae  dicitur  triplicatio.

129  Quarum  omnium  adiectiouum  usuni  interdurn  etiam  ulterius
quam  diximus  uarietas  negotiorum  introduxit.

130  Videamus  etiam  de  praescriptionibus  quae  receptae  sunt
L31  pro   actore.          Saepe   enim   ex   una   eademque   obligatione

aliquid  iam  praestari  oportet,  aliquid  in  futura  praestatione
est,  ueluti  cum  in  singulos  annos  uel  menses  certam  pecuniam
stipulati  fuerimus :  nam  fmitis  quibusdam  annis  aut  mensibus,
huius  quidem  temporis  pecuniam  praestari  oportet,  futurorum
autem  annorum  sane  quidem  obligatio  contracta  intellegitur,

auctioneer  may  have  this  replication :  '  or  if  it  was  announced
previous  to  the  sale  that  the  thing  would  not  be  delivered

127  to  the  purchaser  until  he  had  paid  the  price.'         But  it  some-
times happens  that  a  replication,  though  it  in  turn  may  prima
facie  seem  just,  yet  operates  inequitably  against  the  defender;
in  that  case  an  additional  clause  is  added  on  his  account,

128  which  gets  the  name  of  duplication.         If  this  again  appear
prima  facie  to  be  just,  but  for  any  reason  be  really  inequit-
able to  the  pursuer,  still  another  clause  is  necessary  on  the

129  other  side  for  his  relief,  which  is  called  a  triplication.         And
the   employment   of  such  interjected  clauses   may   go  even
further  than  we  have  indicated,  if  the  circumstances  of  the
case  require  it.

130  Let  us  also  consider  the  nature  of  the  prescriptions  employed

131  for  the  sake  of  pursuers.         It  often  happens  that  out  of  one
and  the  same  obligation  there  arises  both  an  immediate  and  a
future  claim,  as  when  we  have  stipulated  for  a  certain  sum
yearly  or  monthly  ;  at  the  end  of  the  first  year  or  month  the
payment  in  respect  of  it  then  becomes  due,  but  there  is  not
yet  any  claim  for  the  payments  applicable  to  future  years,

1  For  emptor,  as  in  the  MS.,  Hu.  in  former  editions  contra.     Alia  is

substitutes  emptae  rei.  from  the  Inst.

§  127.     §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  §  129.     Comp.  §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.

§  128.     §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.  §  130.     Comp.  Cic.  defin.  i,  1,  §  3.

1  The  MS.  has  merely  ex ;  K.  u.  §  131.      Comp.   Cic.    de  oral,   i,    37,   §
S.  delete  it ;  Hu  reads  ex  [ea],  and  168.

IV,  §§  131,  ISla.]        COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  331

praestatio  uero  adhuc  nulla  est;  si  ergo  uelimus  id  quidem
quod  praestari  oportet  petere  et  in  indicium  deducere,  futuram
uero  obligationis  praestationem  in  integro  relinquere,  necesse
est  ut  cum  hac  praescriptione  agamus  :  EA  RES  AGATVR  cvivs
REI  DIES  FVIT;  alioquin  si  sine  hac  praescriptione  egerimus
ea  scilicet  formula  qua  incertum  petimus,  cuius  intentio  his
uerbis  concepta  est:  QVIDQVID  PARET  NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM
AVLO  AGERIO  DARE  FACERE  OPORTERE,1  totam  obligationem,  id
est  etiam  futuram,  in  hoc  indicium  deducimus,  et  quae  ante

131a  tempus  obligatio .2         Item  si  uerbi

gratia  ex  empto  agamus  ut  nobis  fundus  mancipio  detur,
debemus  hoc  modo1  praescribcre :  EA  RES  AGATVR  DE  FVNDO
MANCIPANDO,  ut  postea,  si  uelimus  uacuam  possessionem  nobis

although  an  obligation  for  them  is  held  to  have  been  con-
tracted. If  therefore  we  desire  to  sue  for  what  is  now
payable,  and  submit  our  claim  in  respect  of  it  to  judicial
decision,  and  at  the  same  time  to  reserve  entire  our  future
claims  under  the  same  obligation,  we  must  have  a  prescription
in  these  terms  :  '  The  matter  of  action  is  what  is  now  payable  ; '
if  this  prescription  be  omitted,  and  our  formula  be  an  in-
definite one,  with  an  intentio  in  these  terms :  '  whatever  it
appears  that  in  respect  thereof  Numerius  Negidius  ought  to
give  to  or  do  for  Aulus  Agerius,'  the  whole  obligation,  even
as  it  affects  the  future,  is  submitted  to  the  judge,  and  so  much
of  it  as  is  sued  for  prematurely  [can  neither  be  included  in  the
[condemnation  nor  sued  for  afresh  when  the  term  of  payment
131«[7ios  arrived].  In  like  manner  if,  for  example,  we  are  suing
by  an  actio  ex  empto  for  mancipatory  conveyance  to  us  of
lands  we  have  bought,  we  ought  to  have  a  prescription  in  this
way  :  '  The  matter  of  action  is  the  mancipation  of  the  lands  in
question,'  so  that,  if  we  afterwards  desire  delivery  of  vacant

1  Comparing  this  with  the  formula  perdimus.     K.  u.  S.  (footnote)  sug-
in  the  next  par.,  it  would  appear  gest— et  quae  ante   tempus  obliga-
that  the  intentio  of  an  incerti  con-  tionis  in  indicium  deducuntur,   ea
dictio  might  be  either  in  the  form  neque  in    condemnationem   ueniunt
quidquid  paret  d.  f.  oportere,  or  in  neque   postea    rursus  de   Us   ar/ere
that  of  quidquid  d.  f.  oportet.  potest.      M.  (K.   u.   S.  p.  xxii)— et

2  About  a  line  and  a  half  (p.  233,  quae  ante  tempus   obligatio  in  iu-
11.  4,5)  illegible.  Gou. "proposes— et  dicium  deducitur,  etc.,  substituting
quae  ante  tempus  obligatio  in  iudi-  uenit  and  ea  for  the  ueniunt  and  Us
ciumfuit  deducta  consumpta  est,  quo  of  K.  u.  S.

fit  ut  postea  permissum  non  sit  de  §  131a.     Cornp.  fr.  48,  §  7,  D.  de  aedil.

eadem  re  denuo  agere.     Hu.  has —  ed.  (xxi,  1).

et  quod    ante   tempus   obligatio?iis  l  K.  u.  S.  have  ita  ;  but,  accord -

emensum  petitio  nullo  modo  fieri  ex  ing  to  Stud.,  there  are  four  illegible

ea  potest  nee  est  permissa,  reliquum  letters  in  the  MS.  (hocm).

332  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILI3   [IV,  §§  131«-133.

tradi, 2  simms,  totius  illius  iuris  obligatio

ilia  incerta  actione :  QVIDQVID  OB  EAM  KEM  NVMERIVM  NEGI-
DIVM  AVLO  AGERIO  DAEE  F AGERE  OPORTET,  propter 3  intentionem
consumitur,  ut  postea  nobis  agere  uolentibus  de  uacua  posses-

132  sione   tradenda   nulla   supersit   actio.          Praescriptiones  sic
appellatas  esse  ab  eo  quod  ante  formulas  praescribuutur  plus
quam  manifestum  est.

133  Sed  his  quidem  temporibus,  sicut  supra1  quoque  notauimus,
omnes  praescriptiones  ab  actore  proficiscuntur :  olim  autem
quaedam  et   pro  reo  opponebantur :    qualis   ilia   erat  prae-
scriptio  :  EA  RES  AGATVR  si  IN  EA  2  PRAEIVDICIVM  HEREDITATI
NON  FIAT,  quae  nunc  in  speciem  exceptionis  deducta  est,3  et
locum  habet  cum  petitor  hereditatis  alio  genere  iudicii  prae-

possession,  [we  may  sue  afresh  for  it  by  a  new  action ;  if  we
\iieglect  to  have  such  a  prescription},  all  that  we  can  claim  under
the  obligation  is  exhausted  by  [joinder  of  issue  upon]  the
indefinite  formula — '  whatever  in  respect  thereof  Numerius
Negidius  is  bound  to  give  to  or  do  for  Aulus  Agerius  ; '  and,
should  we  afterwards  want  delivery  of  vacant  possession,  no

132  action  remains  to  us  for  obtaining  it.         That  prescriptions
are  so  called  because  they  are  prefixed  to  the  formulae  is  more
than  manifest.

133  At  the  present  day,  as  already  observed,  all  prescriptions
originate  with  the  pursuer.     But  at  one  time  there  were  some
prefixed  for  the  benefit  of  the  defender.     Of  this  sort  was  the
prescription  :  '  This  action  may  proceed  provided  the  question
of  inheritance  be  not  thereby  prejudged.'     But  now  it  is  con-
verted into  a  sort  of  exception,  employed  when  there  is  danger
that  the  claimant  of  an  inheritance,  suing  [not  by  hereditatis
petitio  but]  by  some  other  action,  say  for  some  specific  article,
may  get  a  decision  on  the  question  of  succession ;  for  it  would
be  unfair  [that  a  judgment  in  reference  to  some  trifle  should

2  Rather  more  than  a  line  illegible.  3  So  Bekker  (ATct.  i,  p.  343),  and

Gou.    suggests — contra    uenditorem  preferable  to  the  per  of  K.  u.  S.  and

agere    possimus     eadem     actione ;  Hu.     Some  eds.  read  per  litis  con-

alioquin     si     non     praescribimus,  testationem.     See  iii,   §§  180,    181,

totius,  etc.     K.    u.  S.    suggest — uel  and  note.
tradita  ea  de  euictione  nobis  caueri,       §  133.     Comp.  §  108,  note.

iterum   ex   empto    agere    possimus.  !  See  §  130.

nam  si  praescribere  [obliti]  sumus,  2  K.  u.  S.  si  in  ea  re  ;  Hu.  si  ea

etc.     Hu.  supplies — eius  tradendae  re.

causa  ex  stipulatu  uel  ex  empto  agere  3  See  an  example  of  this  sort  of

supersit ;  [nam  si]  obliti  sic  prae-  exception  in  fr.  1,  §  1,  D.  fam.  ere.

scribere  sumus,  etc.  (x,  1).

IV,  §§  133, 134.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

333

indicium  hereditati  faciat,  ueluti  cum  singulas  res  petat ;  esset

enim  iniquum .4

134       — —  — l  intentione  formulae  (de  iure

(quaeritur)*  id  est  cui  dari  oportet ;   et  sane  dornino  dari

[prejudge  the  general  question  of  inheritance],

134 in  the  intention  of  the  formula

the  question  that  is  raised  is  one  of  right,  namely,  who  it  is

4  P.  234  of  the  MS.  is  entirely
illegible.  Bl.  thought  he  could
make  out,  as  the  last  words  of  p.
233,  per  unius  rei;  and,  utilising
these,  K.  u.  S.  suggest  as  the
completion  of  the  par. — est  enim
iniquum  per  unius  rei  petitionem
hereditati  praeiudicium  fieri.  Hu.
suggests— est  enim  iniquum  per  unius
rei  forte,  minimae  rei  petitionem,  de
qua  apud  unum  iudicem  agitur,  de
tola,  hereditate  iudicari,  cuius  Us  ad
centumuiros  defertur  (comp.  1.  12,
pr.  C.  de  her.  pet.  iii,  31).  Et  olim
quidem,  quamdiu  ex  hac  causa  prae-
scribebatur,  iudex  principaliter  de
hoc  cognoscebat,  an  hereditati  prae-
iudicium fieret ;  quod  si  pronuncia-
nerat,  indicium  de  singulis  rebus
petitis  nullum  erat,  ideoque  finita
de  hereditate  quaestione,  actor  qui
uicerat  denuo  eas  petere  poterat.
Nunc  uero  cum  in  speciem  excep-
tionis  haec  praescriptio  deducta  sit,
nisi  actorobiecta  ea  actionem  differat,
rem  perdit,  quia  reus,  si  praeiudi-
cium fieri  probauerit,  absohdtur,  et
iterum  petenti  actori  nocet  exceptio
rei  iudicatae.

§  134.  See  note  4  to  last  par.  It  is
possible  that  Gai.  proceeded  to  give
one  or  two  other  illustrations  of
prescriptions  that  had  formerly  been
prefixed  for  the  benefit  of  defenders
(see  §  108,  note).  It  is  clear  at  all
events  that  he  passed  to  prescrip-
tions that  may  be  said  to  have
been  in  the  interest  of  both  parties,
and  intended  to  give  notice  of  some
point  in  the  pursuer's  case  which
the  structure  of  the  formula  would
otherwise  have  left  undisclosed.

Pages  235  and  236  of  the  MS.  are
not  palimpsest.  They  constitute
the  leaf  that  was  published  by
Scipio  Maffei  in  1732.

1  From  what  is  extant  of  the  par.

Hu.  surmises  that  if  a  stipulation
unusual  in  its  character,  say  for  one
or  other  of  two  things  of  which  the
stipulant  had  the  choice,  had  been
contracted  by  a  slave, — and  such  a
stipulation,  like  every  other,  made
his  owner  creditor,  and  entitled
him  to  sue  in  his  own  name, — it
was  necessary  to  set  forth  the  fact
of  the  slave's  agency  in  a  prae-
scriptio, there  being  no  room  for  it
in  the  intentio.  Borrowing  an
illustration  from  fr.  141,  pr.  D.  de
V.  0.  (xlv,  1),  he  supposes  a  slave
to  have  stipulated  for  '  this  or  that,
which  I  please  ; '  and  proceeds  to
suggest  that  when  the  owner  came
to  sue  it  would  be  necessary  for  him
to  have  a  formula  with  a  prescrip-
tion in  terms  like  these  :  '  Ea  res
ayatur,  quod  Stichus  Auli  Agerii
serutts  de  Numeric  Negidio  stipulatus
est.  si  paret  Numerium  Neyidium
AuloAgerio  decem  milia  dare  opor-
tere  ;  '  and  he  thinks  that  Gai. ,  hav-
ing given  some  such  illustration,
proceeded  thus  :  itaque  in  intentione
formulae,  etc.

But  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that  it
was  only  when  there  was  something
unusual  in  a  slave's  stipulation  that
a  praescriptio  was  required  ;  there
could  not  logically  be  any  more
need  of  it  when  his  choice  was
founded  on,  than  when  the  action
was  in  virtue  of  a  stipulation  by
him  in  the  simplest  of  forms.  It  is
possible  therefore  that  there  was  a
prescription  in  every  case  in  which
the  stipulation  sued  upon  had  been
by  a  slave  or  other  party  subject  to
the  ius  of  the  individual  who  thereby
became  creditor  in  the  contract  (iii,
163)  ;  and  this  seems  to  be  the
opinion  of  K.  u.  S.

2  So  Hu. ;  and  the  reading,  judged
by  the  context,  is  reasonable  :  ac-

334  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS  [IV,  §§  134-137.

oportet  quod  seruus  stipulatur;  at  in  praescriptione  de  facto3
quaeritur,  quod  secundum  naturalem  significationem  uerum

135  esse  debet.         Quaecumque  autein  diximus  de  seruis,  eadem
de  ceteris  quoque  personis  quae  nostro  iuri  subiectae  sunt
dicta  intellegemus.

136  Item  admonendi  sumus,  si  cum  ipso  agamus  qui  incertum
promiserit,  ita  nobis  formulam  esse  propositam  ut  praescriptio
inserta  sit  formulae  loco  demonstrationis,  hoc  modo:  IVDEX

ESTO.  QVOD  AVLVS  AGERIVS  DE  NVMERIO  NEGIDIO  INCERTVM
STIPVLATVS  EST,  CVIVS  REI  DIES  FVIT,  QVIDQV1D  OB  EAM  EEM
NVMERIVM  NEGIDIVM  AVLO  AGERIO  DARE  FACERE  OPORTET  et

137  reliqua.         Si1  cum  sponsore  aut  fideiussore  agatur,  praescribi
solet  in  persona  quidem  sponsoris  hoc  modo :  EA  RES  AGATVR

QVOD  AVLVS  AGERIVS  DE  LVCIO  TITIO  INCERTVM  STIPVLATVS  EST,
QVO  NOMINE  NVMERIVS  NEGIDIVS  SPONSOR  EST,  CVIVS  REI  DIES

that  is  entitled  to  payment  ;  and  undoubtedly  it  is  the
owner  that  is  entitled  to  payment  in  virtue  of  his  slave's
stipulation  :  but  in  the  prescription  the  question  is  as  to  facts,
which  ought,  to  be  stated  according  to  their  natural  [rather

135  than  their  jural]  meaning.         What  has  been  said  of  slaves
applies  equally  to  other  persons  subject  to  our  potestas.

136  We  must  further  keep  in  mind  that  if  we  are  proceeding
against   an    individual   who  himself  by  stipulatory  promise
has  engaged  to  us  indefinitely,  we  can  have  our  formula  so
worded  as  to  put  the  prescription  in  place  of  the  demonstra-
tion, thus  :  '  So  and  so  be  judge.     Whereas  Aulus  Agerius
stipulated  with  Numerius  Negidius  for  something  indefinite,
whose  term  of  payment   hao   arrivody  whatever   in   respect
thereof  Numerius  Negidius  ought  to  give  to  or  do  for  Aulus

137  Agerius,'   and  so  on.          But  if  the  proceedings  be  against
a  sponsor  or  fideiussor,  there  is  in  the  case  of  the  former  a
prescription  in  these    terms  :  '  This  is  the  matter  of  action,
—  that  Aulus  Agerius  stipulated  with  Lucius  Titius  for  some-
thing  indefinite,  on  account  whereof  Numerius  Negidius  be-
came  sponsor,  and  whose  term  of  payment  hao  arrived  ;'  and

cording  to  the  natural  meaning  of  except  Hu.  ,  who  converts  the  final

the  words,    it   was  the    slave  that  ra  into  modo.
stipulated  ;    according  to  the   legal       §  137.     The  prescriptions   in  this  par.

one,  it  was  his  owner.  served   a    twofold    purpose  ;     they

3  So  Savigny  and  all  subsequent  indicated  the  origin  of  the  claim,

eds.  ;  the  MS.  \\aapacto.  and  limited  it  to  what  had  fallen

§  136.     For  incertum  stipulatus  est  the  due.

MS.  has  icertestipem  ;  the  reading  is  J  So   the   MS.  ;  Hu.    quod   si  ;  P.

that  of  G.,   followed  by  all    eds.  at  si.

o  o

IV,  §§  137-140.]         COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  ooo

FVIT  ;   in  persona   uero   fideiussoris :   EA  RES  AGATVR   QVOD

NVMERIVS   NEGIDIVS   PRO   LVCIO   TITIO   INCERTVM  FIDE  SVA  ESSE

IVSSIT,  cvivs  REI  DIES  FVIT  ;  deinde  formula  subicitur.

138  Superest  ut  de  interdictis  dispiciamus.

139  Certis  igitur  ex  causis  praetor  ant  proconsul  principaliter  1
auctoritatern  suani  finiendis  controuersiis  interponit ; 2  quod
turn  maxime  facit  cum  de  possessions  aut  quasi  possessione
inter  aliquos  contenditur;   et  in   surnrna   aut   iubet  aliquid
fieri  aut  fieri  prohibet :  formulae  autem  et  uerborum3  concep-
tioncs  quibus  in  ea  re  utitur  interdicta  decretaque  *  [uocantur].5

140  Vocantnr  autem  decreta  cum  fieri  aliquid  iubet,  ueluti  cum
praecipit   ut   aliquid  exhibeatur  aut  restituatur ;    interdicta
uero  cum  prohibet  fieri,  uelut  cum  praecipit  ne  sine  uitio
possidenti  uis  fiat,1  neue  in  loco  sacro  aliquid  fiat : 2  unde

in  the  case  of  a  fidciussor  it  will  be  thus  worded  :  '  The  matter
of  action  is  this, — that  Numerius  Negidius  gave  his  fidejus-
sionary  undertaking  for  Lucius  Titius  for  something  indefinite,
whose  term  of  payment  bao  aifjved. ; '  and  then  will  come  the
formula.

138  The  next  matter  for  consideration  is  that  of  interdicts.

139  There  are  certain  cases  in  which  the  praetor  or  proconsul
peremptorily  interpones  his  authority  with  a  view  to  bring
disputes  to  an  end,  but  most  frequently  when  these  are  about
possession  or  quasi-possession.     To  state  the  matter  shortly,
he  either  orders  or  prohibits  something  to  be  done ;  and  the
formulae  and  styles  he  makes  use  of  for  the  purpose  are  called

140  interdicts  and  decrees.         They  are  called  decrees  when  he
orders   something   to  be  done,  as  when  he  commands  that
something  shall  be  produced  or  restored  ;  interdicts,  when  he
prohibits  something  to  be  done,  as  when  he  commands  that
violence  shall  not  be  used  towards    an  individual  in   non-
vitious  possession,  or  that  a  sacred  place  shall  not  be  dese-

§§  138-170.     Comp.   tit.    I.    DE  INTER-  legible  in  the  MS.,  with  just  suffi-

DICTIS  (iv,  15).  cient  space  for  the  remainder.

§  139.     Comp.  pr.  tit.  I.  afd.  5  K.  u.    S.    are   of  opinion    that

1  The     MS.     has    principialiter ;  something  more  has  dropped  out  of
there  are  different  opinions  about  its  the  text  than  the  uocantur,  and  that
meaning.  it  probably  ran :  interdicta  [uocantur,

2  So   all  the  later   eds. ;  the   MS.  uel  accuratius  interdicta]  decretaque.
has  proponit.                                              §  140.     Comp.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.

3  So  Hu.  and  most  recent  eds.;  *  Comp.  §  148.

the  MS.  has  uerborum  et.  2  Comp.  tit.   D.    ne  quid  in  loco

4  Only   the    first    three   letters  sacro  fiat  (xliii,  6).

336  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [IV, §§  140-144.

omnia  interdicta  aut  restitutoria  ant  exhibitoria  aut  prohibi-

141  toria  uocantur.3         Nee  tamen  cum  quid  iusserit  fieri  aut  fieri
prohibuerit  statim  peractum  est  negotium,  sed  ad  iudicem
recuperatoresue  itur,  et  ibi  editis  formulis  quaeritur  an  aliquid
aduersus  praetoris  edictum  factum  sit,  uel  an  factum  non  sit
quod  is  fieri  iusserit.     et  modo  cum  poena  agitur,  modo  sine
poena  :  cum  poena,  ueluti  cum  per  sponsionem  agitur,  sine
poena,  ueluti  cum  arbiter  petitur  ;  et  quidem  ex  prohibitoriis
interdictis  semper  per  sponsionem  agi  solet,  ex  restitutoriis
uero   uel  exhibitoriis  modo  per  sponsionem,  modo  per  for-
mulam  agitur  quae  arbitraria  uocatur.

142  Principals  igitur  diuisio  in  eo  est  quod  aut  prohibitoria

143  sunt  interdicta  aut  restitutoria  aut  exhibitoria.         Sequens  in
eo  est  diuisio  quod  uel  adipiscendae  possessionis  causa  con-
parata  sunt  uel  retinendae  l  uel  reciperandae.

144  Adipiscendae  possessionis  causa  interdictum  accommodatur
bonorum  possessori,1  cuius  principium  est  QVORVM  BONOKVM  ;
eiusque  uis  et  potestas  haec  est,  ut  quod  quisque  ex  his  bonis

crated.     Hence  every  interdict  is  said  to  be  either  restitutory,

141  or  exhibitory,  or  prohibitory.         But  the  matter  is  not  at
once  at  an  end  when  he  has  pronounced  his  order  or  prohibi-
tion ;  it  then  goes  to  a  judge  or  to  recuperators,  and,  formulae
having  been  adjusted,  the  question  is  tried  whether  or  not
anything  has  been  done  in  contravention  of  his  prohibition,  or
whether  or  not   there  has  been  failure  to  do  what  he  has
ordered  to  be  done.     And  this  subsequent  procedure  is  some-
times penal,  sometimes  not :  penal,  when  the  proceedings  are
by  sponsion ;  non-penal,  when  an  arbiter  is  demanded.     The
procedure  following  upon  a  prohibitory  interdict  is  always  by
sponsion ;  that  following  on  a  restitutory  or  exhibitory  one
may  be  either  by  sponsion  or  by  an  arbitrary  formula.

142  The  principal  division  then  of  interdicts  is  this, — that  they

143  are  either  prohibitory,  restitutory,  or  exhibitory.         The  next
division  is  that  they  are  provided  as  a  means  either  of  acquir-
ing possession,  or  of  retaining  it,  or  of  recovering  it.

144  There  is  an  interdict  for  acquiring   possession,  beginning
with  the   words  quorum  bonorum,  provided    for  a   bonorum
possessor ;  its  force  and  effect  is  that  anything  belonging  to

3  Comp.  §  142.  l  After    retinendae  the    MS.    has

3  HI.     Comp.  §§  162-170  ;  Vlp.  v,  §§  possessionis  causa  interdictum.

1,  2.  §  144.     §3,  tit.  I.  afd.
§  142.     Comp.  §  140  ;  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.  J  Comp.  iii,  34.

i?  113.     Comp.  §  2,  tit.  I.  afd.

IV,  §§  144-147.]         COMMENTABII  QVATTVOR.  337

quorum  possessio  alicui  data  est,  si2  pro  herede  aut  pro
possessore  3  possideat,  id  ei  cui  bonorum  possessio  data  est
restituatur.  pro  herede  autem  possidere  uidetnr  tarn  is  qui
heres  est  quam  is  qui  putat  se  heredem  esse  ;  pro  possessore
is  possidet  qui  sine  causa  aliquam  rem  hereditariam,  uel
etiam  totam  hereditatem,  sciens  ad  se  non  pertinere,  possidet.
ideo  autem  adipiscendae  possessionis  uocatur  quia  ei  tantum
utile  est  qui  mine  primum  conatur  adipisci  rei  possessionem ;
itaque  si  quis  adeptus  possessionem  amiserit,  desinit  ei  id

145  interdictum  utile  esse.         Bonorum  quoque  emptori  similiter
proponitur  interdictum,  quod  quidam  possessorium   uocant.

146  Item  ei  qui  publica  bona  emerit  eiusdem  condicionis  inter-
dictum proponitur,  quod  appellatur  sectorium,  quod  sectores

J47  uocautur  qui  publice  bona  mercantur.  Interdictum  quo-
que  quod  appellatur  Saluianum  adipiscendae  possessionis
[causa]  conparatum  est,  eoque  utitur  dominus  fundi  de

the  deceased's  estate  that  may  at  the  moment  be  in  the  pos-
session of  another  either  pro  herede  or  pro  possessore  must  be
restored  to  him  to  whom  the  possession  has  been  granted.
He  is  regarded  as  possessing  pro  herede  not  only  who  is  heir
but  also  who  [erroneously]  believes  himself  to  be  so  ;  he
possesses  pro  possessore  who,  without  any  title,  is  in  possession
of  the  whole  or  part  of  an  inheritance,  knowing  that  it  does
not  belong  to  him.  And  the  interdict  in  question  is  said  to
be  for  acquiring  possession,  because  it  is  of  use  only  to  a
person  endeavouring  to  obtain  possession  for  the  first  time  ;
for  if  he  have  lost  it  after  once  obtaining  it,  such  an  interdict

145  ceases  to  be  of  any  service  to  him.         A  similar  interdict  is
provided  for  the  purchaser  of  a  bankrupt's  estate,  which  by

146  some  is  termed  interdictum  possessorium.         One  of  the  same
sort,  under  the  name  of  interdictum  sectorium,  is  propounded
for  the  purchaser  of  a  confiscated  estate  at  public  sale ;  so
called  because  sector  is  the  name  given  to  a  person  trafficking

147  in  that  way.         What  is  known  as  the  Salvian  interdict  is  also
one  for  acquiring  possession ;  it  is  employed  by  a  landlord  for

2  K.  u.  S.  and  Hu.  delete  si.  §  146.     Comp.  Ps.-Ascon.   in  II.   Verr.

3  On  the   strength   of  fr.    1,    D.  i,  52  (Brans,  p.  292).     The  sale  sub
quor.   honor,    (xliii,    2),   which  re-  hasta  of  the   forfeited  estate  of  a
cites  the  words  of  the  edict,    Hu.  condemned  criminal,  of  an  inherit-
interpolates  possidet,     doloue  fecit  ance  that  had  fallen  to  the  lisc,  etc.,
quo  minus,    substituting  possideret  was  called  sectio.

for  the  possideat  of  the  MS.  §  147.     §  3,  tit.  I.  afd.

§  145.     Comp.  iii,  §§  77-80.

338  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [IV,  §§  147-151.

rebus  colon!  quas   is  pro  mercedibus  fundi  pignori  futuras
pepigisset.

148  Eetinendae  possessionis  causa  solet  interdictum  reddi  cum
ab  utraque  parte  de  proprietate  alicuius  rei  controuersia  est,
et  ante  quaeritur  uter  ex  litigatoribus  possidere  et  liter  petere
debeat;    cuius  rei  gratia   conparata  sunt  VTI  POSSIDETIS  et

149  VTRVBI.         Et  quidem  VTI  POSSIDETIS  interdictum  de  fundi
uel  aedium  possessione  redditur,  VTRVBI  uero  de  rerum  mobi-

150  Hum  possessione.         Et  si  quidem  de  fundo  uel  aedibus  in-
terdicitur,  eum  potiorem  esse  praetor  iubet  qui  eo  tempore
quo  interdictum  redditur  nee  ui  nee  clam  nee  precario  ab
aduersario  possideat ;  si  uero  de  re  mobili,  eum  potiorem  esse
iubet  qui  maiore  parte  eius  anni 1  nee  ui  nee  clam  nee  precario
ab  aduersario  possederit ;   idque  satis  ipsis  uerbis  interdic-

151  torum  significatur.         Sed  in  VTRVBI  interdicto  non  solumsua
cuique l  possessio  prodest,  sed  etiam  alterius  quarn  iustum  est

obtaining  possession  of  effects  of  his  farm-tenant  which  he  has
bargained  shall  stand  hypothecated  for  the  rent.

148  An  interdict  for  retaining  possession  is  granted  when  there
are  two  parties  disputing  about  the  property  of  a  thing,  and
there  is  a  prior  question  which  of  them  ought  to  be  regarded
as  in  possession  of  it,  and  which  ought  to  stand  pursuer  in  the
action  for  its  recovery  ;  for  deciding  this  matter  the  interdicts

149  uti  possidctis  and  utrubi  have  been  devised.         The  first  is
employed  when  the  question  is  about  the  possession  of  land
or  of  a  house  ;  the  second  when  it  is  about  the  possession  of

150  moveables.         When  the  controversy  is  about  land  or  about  a
house  the  praetor  gives  the  preference  to  him  who  is  in  pos-
session at  the  moment  of  the  interdict,  and  that,  so  far  as  his
opponent  is  concerned,  neither  violently,  clandestinely,  nor  on
sufferance  ;  but  if  it  be  about  a  moveable,  he  is  preferred  who
has  been  in  possession  of  it  for  the  greater  part  of  the  year,  and
that  neither  by  violent,  clandestine,  nor  precarious  exclusion
of  his  adversary,  all  as  indicated  sufficiently  in  the  words  of

X  151  the  ediet.  But  in  the  interdict  utrubi  it  is  not  merely  a
man's  own  possession  that  counts  to  him,  but  also  any  other
person's  that  can  rightly  be  regarded  as  accessory;  as,  for
example,  that  of  an  individual  to  whom  he  has  succeeded  as

§§  148,  149.  Comp.  §  160  ;  Paul,  v,  6,  §  151.  Comp.  fr.  14-16,  D.  de  diu.

§  1  ;  §§  4,  4a,  tit  I.  afd.;  Th.  iv,  15,  temp.  pr.  (xliv,  3)  ;  fr.  13,  §§  12,

§  3.  13,  D.  de  adq.  u.  am.  pass,  (xli,  2).

§  150.  Comp.  §  160  ;  §  4,  tit.  I.  afd.  J  The  contraction  in  the  MS.  is

1  Comp.  fr.  156,  D.  de  V.  S.  (1, 16).  qq.

u^*  isu  Te/t  d^^cA^i

IV,  §§  151-153.]         COMMENT ARII  QVATTVOR.  339

ei  accedere,  uelut  eius  cui  heres  extiterit,  eiusque  a  quo
emerit  uel  ex  donatione  aut  dotis  nomine  acceperit :  itaque
si  nostrae  possession!  iimcta  alterius  iusta  possessio  exuperat
aduersarii  possessionem,  nos  eo  interdicto  uincimus.  nullam
autem  propriam  possessionem  habenti  accessio  temporis  nee
datur  nee  dari  potest :  nam  ei  quod  nullum  est  nihil  accedere
potest :  sed  et  si  uitiosam  liabeat  possessionem,  id  est  aut  ui  aut
clam  aut  precario  ab  aduersario  adquisitam,  non  datur  accessio;

152  nam  ei  [possessio]  sua  nihil  prodest.         Annus  autem  retrorsus
numeratur  :  itaque  si  tu  uerbi  gratia  vin  mensibus  possederis
prioribus  et  ego  vn  posterioribus,  ego  potior  ero,  quod  trium
priorum1  mensium  possessio  nihil  tibi  in  hoc  interdicto  prodest,

153  quia  alterius  anni  possessio  est.         Possidere  autem  uidemur
non  sol  urn  si  ipsi  possideamus  sed  etiam  si  nostro  nomine
aliquis  in  possessione  sit,  licet  is  nostro  iuri  subiectus  non  sit,
qualis  est  colonus  et  inquilinus :  per  eos  quoque  apud  quos
deposuerimus,  aut  quibus  commodauerimus,  aut  quibus  gra-

heir,  or  from  whom  he  has  purchased  a  thing,  or  received  it  as
a  gift  or  by  way  of  dowry :  consequently  if  the  rightful  pos-
session of  another,  taken  along  with  our  own,  have  exceeded
that  of  our  opponent,  we  are  successful  in  this  interdict.
But  no  accession  of  time  is  or  can  be  given  to  a  person  who
has  no  possession  of  his  own ;  for  there  can  be  no  accession
to  a  nullity.  Nor  can  there  be  any  accession  in  favour  of  a
party  whose  own  possession  is  vitious,  i.e.  acquired  from  his
opponent  violently,  clandestinely,  or  in  defiance  of  the  recal
of  a  grant  during  pleasure  ;  for  his  own  possession  [in  such

152  a  case]  is  of  no  avail  to  him.         The  year  is  reckoned  back-
wards :  therefore  if  you  have  been  in  possession  say  for  eight
months  before  me,  and  I  have  possessed  for  the  last  seven,  I
must  prevail ;  for  the  three  first  months  of  your  possession
do  not  count  to  you  so  far  as  this  interdict  is  concerned,  seeing

153  the  possession  during  them  was  in  a  different  year.         We
are  regarded  as  possessing  not  only  when  we  do  so  ourselves,
but  when  any  person  is  in  possession  in  our  name,   even
though  he  be  not  subject  to  our  potestas,  but  merely  a  tenant
say,  either  of  a  farm  or  of  a  house.     We  are  also  regarded  as
possessing  by  those  with  whom  we  have  deposited  a  thing  or
to  whom  we  have  lent  it,  as  also  by  those  to  whom  we  have

§  152.     Comp.  Paul,  v,  6,  §  1  ;  Th.  iv,       §  153.     §  5,  tit.   I.  afd.     Comp.  Gai.  in

15,  §  4.  fr.   9,  1).   de  adq.   ml  amitt.  poss.

*         !  The  MS.  has  trumporum.  (xli,  2).

'

340  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS   [IV,  §§  153, 154.

tuitam  habitationem  praestiterimus l  ipsi  possidere  uidemur :
et  hoc  est  quod  uulgo  dicitur  retineri  possessionem  posse  per
quemlibet  qui  nostro  nomine  sit  in  possessione.  quin  etiam
plerique  putant  animo  quoque  (retineri)  possessionem,  [_id  est
\_ut  quamuis  neque  ipsi  simus  in~\ "  possessione  neque  nostro
nomine  alius,  tamen  si  non  relinquendae  possessionis  animo,  sed
postea  reuersuri  inde  disccsserimus,  retinere  possessionem  uide-
amur.  Apisci  uero  possessionem  per  quos  possimus  secundo
commentario  rettulimus;3  nee  ulla  dubitatio  est  quin  animo
possessionem  apisci  non  possimus.4

154  Eeciperandae  possessionis  causa  solet  interdictum  dari  si
quis  ex  possessione  [fundi  uel  aedium]  l  ui  deiectus  sit :  iiam
ei  proponitur  interdictum  cuius  principium  est  VNDE  TV  ILLVM
vi  DEIECISTI,  per  quod  is  qui  deiecit  cogitur  ei  restituere  rei
possessionem,  si  modo  is  qui  deiectus  est  nee  ui  nee  clam  nee

granted  a  {usufruct,  or  a  right  of  use,  or]  gratuitous  habita-
tion ;  and  this  is  what  is  meant  by  the  common  saying  that
possession  may  be  retained  through  any  person  that  is  in  pos-
session in  our  name.  Nay,  most  jurists  go  so  far  as  to  think
that  it  may  be  retained  by  a  mere  effort  of  will,  i.e.  that
although  neither  we  ourselves  are  in  possession  nor  yet  any  other
person  on  our  account,  still,  if  we  have  left  a  place  without
any  intention  of  relinquishing  the  possession  of  it,  but  really
meaning  to  return,  we  are  to  be  regarded  as  retaining  posses-
sion. In  our  Second  Commentary  we  have  explained  who  they
are  through  whom  we  may  acquire  possession ;  there  has  never
been  any  doubt  that  for  such  acquisition  a  mere  effort  of  will
is  ineffectual.

154  An  interdict  is  granted  for  recovering  possession  when  a
man  has  been  forcibly  ejected  [from  his  land  or  house'] ;  to  meet
his  case  there  is  one  published  beginning  with  the  words
unde  tu  ilium  ui  deiecisti,  whereby  the  ejector  is  compelled  to
restore  the  possession,  provided  the  party  ejected  was  not  [at
the  time]  possessing  as  the  result  of  violent,  clandestine,  or
precarious  taking  from  the  ejector  himself;  for  he  who  has

1  So  Bk.  and  K.  u.  S.     The  MS.  3  Comp.  ii,  §§  89-95.
lias  rtituerimus,  and  then  a  repeti-                  4  Comp.  Paul,  v,  2,  §  1.

tion  of  aut  quibus  gratuitam  habi-  §  154.     Comp.  Cic.  pro  Caec.  xi,  §§  31,

tationem.     This  induces  Hu.  to  read  32  ;  pro  Tidl.  §§  44,  45  ;  Paul,  v,  6,

praestiterimus,    aut    quibus  [usum-  §§  4-8  ;  fr.   1,    pr.    D  de   ui  (xliii,

fnictum  uel  usum  con]stituerimus.  16)  ;  §  6,  tit.  I.  afd.

2  Borrowed  from  the  Inst.,  with  J  These  three  words  are  from  the
the   necessary  grammatical   altera-  Inst.

tions.

IV,  §§  154-159.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOE.

341

precario  yosscderit  (cib  alter 6) ,  cum  qui  a  me  ui  aut  clam  ant

155  precario  possidet  inpune  deici  potest.2        Interdum  tamen  etsi
cum  ui  deiecerim  qui  a  me  ui  aut  clam  aut  precario  posse-
derit,  cogor  ei  restituere  possessionem,  ueluti  si  armis  eum  ui
deiecerim :  nam  propter  atrocitatem  delicti  in  tantum  patior
animaduersionem 1  lit   omni  modo  debcam  ei  restituere  posses-
sionem.    armorum  autem  appellatione  non  solum  scuta  et  gla-
dios  et  galeas  significari  intellegemus,  sed  et  fustes  et  lapides.

156  Tertia  diuisio  interdictorum  in  hoc  est,  quod  aut  simplicia

157  sunt  aut  duplicia.         Simplicia  sunt  ueluti  in  quibus  alter
actor   alter  reus    est,   qualia    sunt    omnia    restitutoria    aut
exhibitoria :    nam   actor  est  qui   desiderat  aut   exhiberi  aut
restitui,  reus  is  est  a  quo  desideratur  nt  exhibeat  aut  resti-

m^M"

158  tuat.         Prohibitorium  autem  interdictororum  alia  duplicia,

^\

159  alia  simplicia  sunt.         Simplicia  sunt  ueluti  quibus  proliibet

taken  possession  from  me  by  violence  or  clandestinity,  or  in
defiance  of  my  recal  of  a  grant  during  pleasure,  may  be  ejected

155  by  me  with  impunity.         Yet  sometimes,  if  I  have  forcibly
ejected  a  party  who  had  taken  possession  from  me  violently,
clandestinely,  or  precariously,  I  will  be  compelled  to  restore
the  possession  to  him, — then,  namely,  when  I  have  ejected
him  by  force  of  arms  ;  on  account  of  the  gravity  of  the  offence
I  have  to  suffer  punishment  at  least  to  this  extent,  that  I
must  in  any  case  reinstate  him  in  possession.     And  under  the
word  '  arms'  we  are  to  understand  not  only  shields,  swords,  and
helmets,  but  also  sticks  and  stones.

156  A  third  division  of  interdicts  is  due  to  the  consideration

157  that  they  are  either  single  or  double.         Those  are  single  in
which  one  party  is  pursuer,  the  other  defender,  as  is  the  case
in  all  the  restitutory  and  exhibitory  interdicts  ;  he  is  pursuer
who  desires  exhibition  or  restitution,  and  he  defender  at  whose

158  hands  exhibition  or  restitution  is  required.         Of  the  prohi-

159  bitory  interdicts  some  are  double,  some  single.         Those,  for
example,  are  single  in  which  the  praetor  forbids  the  defender

2SoK.u.  S.  Hu.  reads — necpre-
cario  [ab  eo]  possideret ;  enimuero
eum  qui  .  .  .  inpune  deicio.  The
final  letter  is  illegible  in  the  MS.  ,  and
may  have  been  either  t',  which  would
make  the  reading  deidtur,  or  o,  as
assumed  by  Hu. ,  or  p  (contraction
for  potest),  as  assumed  by  K.  u.  S.
§  155.  Comp.  refs.  in  note  to  last  par. ;
also  fr.  3,  §§  2-12,  D.  de  ui  (xliii,  16).

1  The  MS.  has  aonem ;  K.  u.  S.

and  P.  read  patior  actionem  ;  to  this

Hu.  objects,  and   substitutes  ratio

facti  habetur  ;  but  the  patior  of  the

MS.  is  quite  distinct,  though  aonem

is  not  perfectly  certain.     See  anim-

aduersio    employed    in    this    sense,

in  fr.    131,    §   1,    D.  de   V.  S.   (1,

16).

§§  156-159.     Comp.  §  7,  tit.  I.  afd.

342  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [IV,  §§  159-162.

praetor  in  loco  sacro  ant  in  flumine  publico  ripaiie  eius
aliquid  facere  reum :  nam  actor  est  qui  desiderat  ne  quid  fiat,
160  reus  is  qni  aliquid  facere  conatur.  Duplicia  sunt  uelut
VTI  POSSIDETIS  interdictum  et  VTRVBI  :  ideo  autem  duplicia
uocantiir  qnia  par  utriusque  litigatoris  in  his  condicio  est,  nee
quisquam  praecipue  reus  uel  actor  intellegitur,  sed  unusquis-
qne  tarn  rei  quam  actoris  partes  sustinet;  quippe  praetor
pari  sermone  cum  utroque  loquitur:  nam  summa  conceptio
eorum  interdictorurn  haec  est:1  VTI  NVNC  POSSIDETIS,  QVO-
MINVS  ITA  POSSIDEATIS,  VIM  FIERI  VETO  ;  item  alterius  : 2  VTRVBI

HIC   HOMO   DE     QVO    AGITVE 3   MAIORE   PARTE   HVIVS   ANNI  FVIT,
QVOMINVS  IS  EVM  DVCAT,  VIM  FIEPJ  VETO.

]  61  Expositis  generibus  interdictorum  sequitur  ut  de  ordine  et
de  exitu  eorum  dispiciamus ;  et  incipiamus  a  simplicibus.

162  \Si]  igitur  restitutorium  uel  exhibitorium  interdictum  redditur,
ueluti  ut  restituatur  ei  possessio  qui  ui  deiectus  est,  aut

to  go  on  with  any  operation  in  a  sacred  place,  or  in  a  public
river,  or  on  its  bank ;  he  is  pursuer  who  wishes  to  prevent  it,

160  and  he  defender  by  whom  it  is  attempted.         Double  are
such  interdicts  as  the  uti  possidetis  and  utrubi.     They  are  so
called  because  in  them  the  litigants  stand  on  the  same  foot-
ing, neither  being  regarded  as  peculiarly  pursuer  or  peculiarly
defender,  but  each  holding  both  characters,  inasmuch  as  the
praetor   addresses  both   in   exactly   the   same   terms.      For,
putting  them  in  the  briefest  possible  shape,  those  interdicts
run  thus :  the  first — '  I  forbid   any  violence  being  done  to
prevent  you  two  continuing  to  possess  as  you  do  now ; '  the
second — '  I  forbid  any  violence  being  done  to  prevent  that
one  of  you  with  whom  the  slave  in  question  has  been  for  the
greater  part  of  this  year  from  taking  said  slave  away  with
him.'

161  The  various  sorts  of  interdicts  having  been  described,  we
have  next  to  consider  the  procedure  in  them,  and  its  issue.

162  We  shall  begin  with  the  single  ones.         If  then  a  restitu-
tory  or  exhibitory  interdict  be  granted,  ordaining  for  example
that  possession  be  restored  to  a  party  who  has  been  forcibly

§  160.     Comp.  §  149,  and  note.  formula  of  the  interdict  in  the  Dig.

1  Comp.  Test.  v.  Possessio  (Bruns,  (see  last   note)  ;    I    have  therefore

p.   254) ;  fr.    1,  pr.   D.    uti  possid.  expunged  them  as   a  gloss,  which

(xliii,  17).  K.  u.  S.,  M.,  and   P.  also   regard

-  Comp.  tit.  D.  utrubi  (xliii,  31).  them.

3  Before  maiore  the  MS.  has  apud  §  161.     Comp.  §  8,  tit.  I.  afd.

yuem.     These  words  are  not  in  the  §  162.     Comp.  §§  141,  157.

IV,  §§  162, 163.]          COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

343

exhibeatur  libertus  cui  patronus  operas  inclicere  uellet,1  modo
sine  periculo  res  ad  exitum  perducitur,  modo  cum  periculo.
163  Namque  si  arbitrum  postulauerit  is  cum  quo  agitur,  accipit
formulam  quae  appellatur  arbitraria,  et  iudicis  arbitrio,  si  quid
restitui  uel  exbiberi  debeat,  id  sine  periculo  exhibet  aut
restituit  et  ita  absoluitur;  quodsi  nee  restituat  neq\ie  exhi-
beat,  quanti  ea  res  est1  condemnatur.  sed  et  actor  sine  poena
experitur  cum  eo  quern  neque  exbibere  neque  restituere
quicquam  oportet,  praeterquam  si  calumniae  indicium2  ei
oppositum  fuerit  decimae  partis  :  quamquam,  Proculo  3  placuit
non  esse  permittendum  calumniae  iudicio  [uti]  ei 4  qui  arbitrum
postulauerit,  quasi  hoc  ipso  confessus  uideatur  restituere  se
uel  exhibere  debere :  sed  alio  iure  utimur ;  et  recte ;  potius

103

ejected,  or  that  a  freedman  be  produced  upon  whom  his  patron
wishes  to  impose  certain  duties  of  service,  the  matter  is
brought  to  an  issue  sometimes  with  and  sometimes  without
any  risk  being  incurred.  For,  if  the  defender  have  de-
manded a  reference  to  an  arbiter,  he  obtains  what  is  called  an
arbitrary  formula;  and  if,  on  the  discretionary  order  of  the
judge,  he  restores  or  exhibits  that  which  he  is  held  to  be  in
law  bound  to  restore  or  exhibit,  he  does  so  without  incurring
any  penalty,  and  is  at  once  absolved ;  while  if  he  fail  to
restore  or  exhibit,  he  is  simply  condemned  in  what  the  pur-
suer can  show  himself  entitled  to  as  damages.  The  pursuer
also  litigates  without  any  risk  with  a  party  who  is  not  bound
to  exhibit  or  restore  anything,  unless  a  indicium  calumniae,
concluding  for  a  tenth  part  of  the  value  of  the  cause,  be  raised
against  him.  Proculus,  indeed,  was  of  opinion  that  a  defender
who  had  demanded  an  arbiter  could  not  be  allowed  a  calumniae
indicium,  as  his  application  for  an  arbiter  involved  an  admis-
sion that  he  was  bound  to  restore  or  exhibit ;  but  we  follow
a  different  practice,  and  rightly ;  for  his  application  for  an

1  Comp.    fr.     2,    §  1,    de  inter d.
(xliii,  1) ;  fr.  13,  §  2,  D.  de  oper.  lib.

(xXXVTll     1)

§  163.     Comp.  Vlp.  lust.  fr.  5.

1  Comp.  fr.  2,  §  2,  D.  quod  leg.
(xliii,  3)  ;  fr.  3,  §  11,  D.  de  tab.
exhib.  (xliii,  5)  ;  fr.  6,  fr.  15,  D.  de
ui  (xliii,  16).  Quanti  res  est  often
means  the  market  value  of  the  thing
in  dispute  (fr.  179,  fr.  193,  D.  de
V.  S.  1,  16)  ;  but  here,  to  judge
by  the  passages  referred  to,  it  means

what  is  commonly  expressed  by  id
quod  interest  — damages,  the  amount
of  the  pursuer's  loss  imputable  to
the  defender.

2  Comp.  §§  175,  181.

3  Comp.  i,  196,  note  1.

4  So  Gou. ;  K.  u.  S.  have  placuit
denegandum  calumniae  indicium  ei ;
Hu.  placuisse  dicitur  prohibendum
calumniae  iudicio  esse  eum  ;  P.  fol-
lows Gou.

344

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVPJS  CIVILIS   [IV,  §§  163-165.

cnim  ut  modestiore  uia  litiget 5  arbitrum  quisque  petit  quam

164  quia  confitctur.6         [ceterum']  obseruare  debet  is  qui  milt  arbi-
trum petere  ut  statim  petat  antequam  ex  iure  exeat,  id  est
antequam  a  praetore  discedat :  sero  enim  petentibus  non  indul-

165  getur.         Quod  si  arbitrum  non  petierit,  sed  tacitus  de  iure
exierit,  cum  periculo  res  ad  exitum  perducitur:  nam  actor
prouocat  aduersarium  sponsione  ni  contra  edictum  praetoris
non   exhibuerit    aut   non    restituerit;    ille   autem    aduersus
sponsionem    aduersarii    restipulatur ;    deinde    actor    quidem
sponsionis/ormwfam  edit  aduersario,  ille  huic  inuicem  resti-

pulationis :  sed  actor  sponsionis l  et  aliud  indicium

de  re  restituenda  uel  exhibenda,  ut  si  sponsione  uicerit,  nisi
ei  res  exhibeatur  aut  restituatur,2 •

arbiter  should  be  imputed  not  so  much  to  any  admission  on
his  part,  as  to  his  desire  to  litigate  by  the  less  pretentious

164  procedure.          A  defender  who  desires  to  have  an  arbiter
appointed  must  take  care  to  apply  for  him  at  once,  and  before
withdrawing  from  the  presence  of  the  praetor  in  iure ;  if  the
demand  be  not  made  until  a  later  stage  it  will  not  be  granted.

165  If  he  have  not  made  any  such  application,  but  have  left  the
court  without  speaking,  the  matter  proceeds  to  its  issue  at  his
risk ;  for  the  pursuer  challenges  him  with  a  sponsion  upon
the  question  whether  it  is  not  in  defiance  of  the  praetor's
interdict  that   he  has  failed  to  exhibit  or  restore,   and  the
defender  restipulates  as  against  this  sponsion.     The  parties
then  have  formulae  adjusted  upon  their  respective  sponsion
and  restipulation,  the  pursuer  getting  words  added  to  his  for-
mula containing  a  remit  to  the  judge  upon  the  main  question
of  restitution  or  exhibition  ;  so  that,  if  he  is  successful  on  his
sponsion,  and  exhibition  or  restitution  is  still  refused,  [the
[judge  haspoiver  to  condemn  the  defender  not  only  in  the  amount
[of  the  sponsion  and  restipulation,  but  also  in  damages'].

5  So  K.  11.  S.  and  Hu. ;  Gou.  has
potius    enim    ut    per    modestiorem
actionem  lit/get.      The  word  mode-
stius  is  used  in  this  sense  by  Pap.  in
fr.  25,  §  1,  D.  de  pec.  con.  (xiii,  5).

6  So  Gou.  and  K.  u.  S. ;  Hu.  has
quia  causae  nonfidit;  P.  quia  con-
uictus  sit.

§  164.  Ceterum  added  by  Hu.  and
adopted  by  P. ;  K.  u.  S.  have  ob-
seruare  [autem].

§  165.     Cp.  Cic.pro  Caec.  viii,  23,  xxxi,

91 ;  pro  Trill.  §  53  ;  Gai.  iv,  141.

1  In  this  lacuna  Bk.,    K.  u.    S.,
and   Hu.   insert  formulae   subicit ;
but  these  words  do  not  correspond
to  the  traces  visible  in  the  MS.

2  P.    241    of  the  MS.   ends  with
restituatur ;  p.  242  is  entirely  ille-
gible ;  and  on   p.    243   not   half-a-
dozen  words  are  decipherable.     The
words  in   ital.    in  the    translation
probably    represent    generally    the
sense  of  the  final  words  of  this  par.

IV,  §166.]

COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

345

166

--------  fructus  licitando,1  is  tantispcr  in

possessione   constituitur,   si    modo   aduersario   suo    fmctuaria
stipulatione  (cauerif),  cuius  uis  et  potestas  haec  est,  ut  si  contra
eum  de  possessione  pronuntiatum  fucrit,  earn  summam  aduer-
sario soluat.     Haec  autem  licendi  contentio  fructus  licitatio
uocatur   scilicet   quia   —   —   —   —   —   —  .2       postca   alter

alterum  sponsione  prouocat  quod  3  aduersus  edictura  praetoris

166  -  —  .       [Interdict  having  been  pro-

[nounced,and  the  parties  having  made  pretence  of  violence  towards
[each  other,  then,  in  order  to  prevent  any  real  and  serious  contest
[about  the  interim  enjoyment  of  the  land  or  house  in  question
[while  the  proceedings  are  in  dependence,  the  praetor  requires
[them  to  bid  for  it  ;  and  he  who  is  successful]  in  the  bidding  is
awarded  the  interim  possession,  provided  he  has  given  security
to  his  opponent  by  a  fructuaria  stipulatio,  whose  effect  is  that
he  must  pay  to  the  latter  the  sum  promised  in  the  event  of
judgment  being  against  him,  the  promiser,  on  the  main  ques-
tion of  possession.  This  bidding  and  counter-bidding  is  called
fructus  licitatio,  bidding  for  the  fruits,  because  [neither  of  the
[bidders  gets  the  thing  itself,  but  only  the  right  to  possess  it  and
[draw  the  fruits  and  profits  of  it  in  the  meantime'].  Afterwards
each  challenges  the  other  with  a  sponsion,  on  the  suggestion

are  illegible.  Krueg.  (Krit.  Vers.  p.
92)  suggests  et  uter  eorum  uicerit
fructus  licitando,  etc.  ;  but  these
words  do  not  correspond  to  the  let-
ters  in  the  Apographum.  The  be-
ginning  of  the  sentence  may  have
been  something  like  this,  suggested
by  Hu.,  footnote  :  Reddito  uero  in-
terdicto,  si  ab  alterutro  alteri  tils
facta  sit,  statim  de  ea  sponslones  et
restipulationes  fiunt.  ne  tamen  in-
ciuili  et  propria  ui  possessionem
obtinere  conentur,  praetor  f  met  it*
licitationem  inter  eos  instituit,  et  uter
eorum  uicerit  fructus  licitando,  etc.

2  Gou.  proposes  —  neuter  eorum  qui
licentur    ipsam    rem,  sed  tantispcr
possidendi    et  fruendi    re   adquirif
facultatem  ;  K.  (K.    u.  S.  footnote)

—  de  eo  inter  se  certant  uter  eorum
fructus  interim  percipiat  ;  Hu.—
dum  uolunt  uterque  frui  tantisper
re,  proprie  quod  eis  praetor  uendit,
est,  ut  id  interea  liceat.  None  of
these  reconstructions  much  resembles
what  is  visible  in  the  MS.  ;  which,
however,  is  greatly  injured  at  this
place  by  Bluhme's  chemicals.

3  P.  substitutes  ni.

§  166.  It  is  presumable  that,  in  the  re-
mainder  of  pp.  242,  243,  Gai.,  hav-
ing  finished  his  observations  on  the
procedure  in  the  single  interdicts,
must  have  commenced  to  explain
that  followed  in  the  double  ones,—
the  matter  dealt  with  in  pp.  244-
246.  The  illegibility  of  pp.  242,
243  is  particularly  to  be  regretted  ;
if  they  could  be  deciphered  they
would  probably  throw  some  light  on

/N  the  uis  ex  conuentu^ihat  followed
the  interdict  uti  possidetis,  and  that
is  incidentally  mentioned  in  §  170.
For,  notwithstanding  the  final
words  of  that  interdict,  uim  fieri
ue.to,  the  very  first  thing  the  parties
did,  and  were  expected  to  do,  was
to  offer  (or  pretend  to  oifer)  violence
to  each  other  in  regard  to  the  pos-
session.  It  was  only  thus  that  a
question  could  be  raised  for  the
judge,  —  'both  parties  have  done
violence;  which  of  them  is  it  that  has
done  it  in  defiance  of  the  interdict,
—that  has  done  it  in  disturbance
of  the  possession  previously  exist-
ing  ?  '

1  The  first  word  or  two  on  p.  244

346

GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVPJS  CIVILIS   [IY,§§16G,  1C7.

possidenti  sibi  uis  facta  est,  et  inuicem  ambo  restipulantur
aduersus  sponsionem:  uel  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  .*

166«  -----  index  apud  quern  de  ea  re  agitur  illud  scilicet
requirit  [quod]  praetor  interdicto  conplexus  est,  id  est  uter
eorum  eum  fundurn  easue  aedes  per  id  tempus  quo  inter-
dictum  redditur  nee  ui  nee  clarn  nee  precario  possideret.
cum  index  id  explorauerit,  et  forte  secundum  me  iudicatum
sit,  aduersarium  mihi  et  sponsionis  et  restipulatiouis  summas
quas  cum  eo  feci  condemnat,  et  conuenieuter  me  sponsionis
et  restipulationis  quae  naecum  factae  sunt  absoluit;  et  hoc
amplius,  si  apud  aduersarium  nieum  possessio  est,  quia  is
fructus  licitatioue  uicit,  nisi  restituat  mihi  possessionem,

167  Cascelliano  siue  secutorio  iudicio  condemnatur.1  Ergo  is
qui  fructus  licitatione  uicit,  si  non  probat  ad  se  pertinere
possessionem,  sponsionis  et  restipulationis  et  fructus  licita-
tionis  summam  poenae  nomine  soluere  et  praeterea  posses-

that,  contrary  to  the  praetor's  interdict,  violence  has  been  done
to  him  while  possessing,  and  both  reciprocally  restipulate  in

1  6  Qa  answer  to  the  sponsion  ;  --------  .          \For-

[mulae  having  thereafter  been  adjusted  icpon  all  those  sponsions
[ctnd  restipulations],  the  judge  to  whom  the  matter  is  remitted
proceeds  to  consider  the  question  dealt  with  by  the  praetor  in
his  interdict,  namely,  which  of  the  parties  possessed  the  land  or
house  in  question,  and  that  neither  violently,  clandestinely,  nor
on  sufferance,  at  the  time  when  the  interdict  was  pronounced.
Having  done  so,  and  given  judgment  (let  us  suppose)  in  my
favour,  he  finds  my  opponent  liable  to  me  in  the  amounts  of
the  sponsion  and  restipulation  I  entered  into  with  him,  and
conformably  acquits  me  in  respect  of  the  sponsion  and  restipu-
lation in  which  I  was  promiser  ;  whilst  my  opponent,  if  the
possession  be  with  him,  because  he  had  over-bid  me  in  the
fructus  licitatio,  is  over  and  above  condemned  in  the  Cascel-

167  lian  or  after-process,  if  he  do  not  restore  it.  He  therefore
who  has  been  successful  in  the  fructus  licitatio,  if  he  fail  to
establish  that  he  is  entitled  to  possession,  has  to  pay  as  a
penalty  the  sums  severally  covered  by  his  sponsion,  restipu-

4  Schmidt  (Interd.  p.  288)  sug-
gests  —  uel  si  unus  tantum  sponsions
prouocauit  alterum,  una  inter  eos
sponsio  et  una  tantum  restipulatio
aduersus  earn  fit  ;  Hu.  —  uel  stipula-
tionibus  iunctis  duabus  una  inter  eos
sponsio  itemque  restipulatio  una
alterius  aduersus  earn  fit.  quod  et

commodius  ideoque  mac/is  in  u-su  est.
§  166a.  Hu.  suggests  as  the  conmience-
ment  of  the  par.  :  Delude  ab  utroque
editis  formulis  omnium  stipulationum
et  restipulationum  quas  fieri  placuit,
iudex,  etc.

*  Comp.   §  169  ;  fr.    3,  §  11,  D.
uti  poss.  (xliii,  17).

IV,  §§  167-170.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOlt.  3-i7

sionem  restituere  iubetur,  et  hoc  amplius  fructus  quos  interea
percepit  redclit ;  summa  enim  fructus  licitationis  non  pretium
est  fructuum,  seel  poenae  nomine  soluitur,  quod  quis  alienam
possessionem  per  hoc  tempus  retinere  et  facultatem  fruendi

168  nancisci  conatus  est.          Ille  autem  qui  fructus  licitatione
uictus  est,  si  non  probauerit  ad  se  pertinere  possessionem,
tantum  sponsionis  et  restipulationis  surnmam  poenae  nomine

169  debet.         Adnionendi    tamen    sumus    liberum   esse   ei  qui
fructus  licitatione  uictus  erit,  omissa  fructuaria  stipulatione,
sicut  Cascelliano  siue  secutorio  iuclicio  de  possessione  recipe-
randa  experitur,  ita  (similiter) l  de  fructus  licitatione  agere :  in
quam  rem  proprium  indicium  conparatum  est  quod  appellatur
fructuarium,  quo  nomine  actor  iudicatum  solui 2  satis  accipit :
dicitur   autem   et   hoc   indicium  secutorium,   quod   sequitur
sponsionis  uictoriam ;  sed  non  aeque  Cascellianum  uocatur.

170  Sed  quia  nonnulli  interdicto  reddito  cetera  ex  iuterdicto

lation,  and  licitatio,  and  is  required  besides  to  restore  posses-
sion and  return  the  fruits  he  has  drawn  in  the  meanwhile ;
for  the  amount  of  the  fructus  licitatio  is  not  the  purchase-
price  of  the  fruits,  but  paid  by  way  of  penalty,  in  considera-
tion that  the  party  has  attempted  for  the  time  to  retain  a
possession  that  belonged  to  another,  and  the  power  of  taking

168  the  fruits  and  profits.         He,  on  the  other  hand,  who  has
been  unsuccessful  in  the  fructus  licitatio,  if  he  fail  to  prove
that  the  possession  is  his,  owes  no  more  than  the  amount  of
his  sponsion  and  restipulation,  and  that  by  way  of  penalty.

169  It  must  not,  however,  be  overlooked  that  it  is  in  the  power  of
the  nnsuccessful  party  in  the  fructus  licitatio  to  disregard  the
fructuary  stipulation,  and  take  separate  proceedings  upon  the
licitatio,  just  as  he  does  in  the  Cascellian  or  after-process  for
recovery  of  the  possession;  and  for  this  purpose  a  separate
procedure,  called  a  iudicium  fructuarium,  has  been  devised,  in
respect  whereof  the  pursuer  is  entitled  to  have  security  from
the  defender  for  payment  of  whatever  the  judge  may  find  to
be  due.     This  iudicium  fructuarium  is  also  spoken  of  as  an
after-process,  because  it  is  a  sequel  to  success  in  the  sponsion  ;
it  does  not,  however,  get  the  name  of  Cascellian.

170  But  as  some  persons,  after  interdict  had  been  pronounced,

§  169.     Comp.  §  166.  2  Comp.  §  91.

1  Gou.,  K.  u.  S.,  and  Hu.  are  all  §  170.  It  is  from  Studemund's  revision
agreed  upon  this  word,  although  no  of  the  Verona  MS.  that  we  first  be-
more  than  the  initial  s  is  legible.  come  acquainted  with  the  secondary

348

GAII  INST1TVTIONVM  IVEIS  CIVILIS          [IV,  §  170.

facere  nolebant,  atque  ob  id  non.  poterat  res  expediri,  praetor
in  earn  rein  prospexit  d  conparauit  interdicta  quae  secundaria
appellamus,  quod  secundo  loco  redduntur :  quorum  (uis  d
(2}otestas  kaec  est,  ut  qui) 1  cetera  ex  interdicto  non  faciat,  ucluti
qui  uim  non  faciat  aid  fructus  non  liceatur,  aut  qui  fructus
licitationis  satis  non  det,  aut  si2  sponsioncs3  non  faciat  spon-
sionumue4  indicia  non  accipiat,  sine  possidcat,  restituat5
aduersario  possessionem,  (sine  non  possideat,  uim} 6  illi  possi-
denti  ne  faciat.  Itaque  etsi  alias  potmrit  interdicto  VTI

POSSIDETIS  uincere,  si  cetera  ex  interdicto 7  tamen

170a  per  interdictum  secundarium .8         [170ft]

occasionally  refused  to  take  the  necessary  steps  under  it,  and
so  put  a  stop  to  further  procedure,  the  praetor  turned  his
attention  to  the  matter  and  introduced  interdicts  of  another
sort,  which  we  call  secondary,  because  they  are  had  recourse
to  only  in  the  second  instance.  Their  purpose  and  effect  is
this, — that  he  who  fails  to  do  what  is  incumbent  upon  him
[with  a  view  to  further  procedure]  under  the  interdict, — who,
for  example,  will  not  offer  [conventional]  violence  [to  his
adversary],  or  wrill  not  bid  for  the  fruits,  or  will  not  give
security  for  the  fructus  licitatio,  or  will  not  be  a  party  to  the
sponsions,  or  will  not  defend  the  indicia  founded  upon  them,
— must,  if  he  possess,  restore  the  possession  to  the  other
party,  or,  if  he  do  not  possess,  must  abstain  from  offering
violence  to  the  possessor.  And  thus,  although  he  might  very
possibly  have  been  successful  in  the  interdict  uti  possidetis,
had  he  been  ready  to  do  what  was  necessary  on  his  part  [to
further  the  procedure],  the  possession  is  nevertheless,  by  this
170a  secondary  interdict,  transferred  to  his  adversary.

interdict  described  in  this  par.,  and
get  an  enumeration  of  the  various
steps  of  procedure  in  the  int.  uti
possidetis.  Although  a  considerable
portion  of  the  par.  is  printed  in  ital.
as  not  absolutely  certain,  yet  as  a
whole  it  may  be  taken  as  accurate.
Comp.  Front,  de  contr.  agr.  p.  44.

1  So  K.  (Krit.  Vers.  p.  84),  K.u.S.,
Hu.;  and  P.

2  Hu.  proposes  to  delete  si.

3  The  MS.  has  sponsionibus.

4  Hu.  reads  [ex]  sponsionibusue.

5  Before  restituat  Hu.  interpolates
cum /ructibus.

6  So  K.  u.  S.,  Hu.,  and  P.

7  K.  (Krit.  Vers.  p.  102)  proposes
paratus  sit  facere;  Hu.  fecisset,  si
non  fecit ;  P.  facere  uoluisset.

8  K.  (Krit.  Vers.  p.  102)  proposes
possessio   in  aduersarium  transfer-
tur;  Hu.  uincitur.     K.  u.  S.  (foot-
note)   suggest   the   transposition  of
tamen,   making    the    sentence   run
thus  :  Itaque  etsi  alias  potuerit  in-
terdicto uti  possidetis  uincere,  tamen
si  cetera  ex  interdicto  facere  uoluerit,
per  interdictum  secundarium  posses-
sio  in  aduersarium  transfertur.

§  170a.     Lines  11-24  of  p.  246  of  the

IV,  §§  171,  172.]         COMMENTAR1I  QVATTVOR.

349

171 (modci)  pecuniaria  poena,  modo  iuris-

iurandi  reliyione :  eaque  praetor J

aduersus  (infitiantem  ex  quibusdam)  causis  dupli  actio  cori-
stituitur,  udwti  si  iudicati 2  aut  dcpcnsi 3  aut  damni  iniuriae  *
ant  legatorum  per  damnationcm  relictorum 5  nomine  agitur :
ex  quibusdam  causis  sponsionem  facere  permittitur,  uelut  de
pecimia  certa  credita 6  et  pecunia  constituta ; 7  sed  certae
quidem  creditae  pecuniae  tertiae  partis,  constitutae  uero

172  pecuniae  partis  dimidiae.  Quodsi  neque  sponsionis  neque
dupli  actionis  periculum  ei  cum  quo  agitur  iniungatur,1  ac  ne
statim  quidem  ab  initio  pluris  quam  simpli  sit  actio,  permittit

171  [We  have  to  observe  in  the  next  place  that,  in  the  old  lau\
[endeavour  was  made  to  restrain  rash  and  precipitate  litigation],
sometimes  by  pecuniary  penalties,  sometimes  by  the  religious
compulsitor  of  an  oath  ;  and  these  [devices  are  still  made  use
[of  by]  the  praetor.     [As  regards  in  the  first  place  a  defender}
denying  his  liability,  action  is  granted  against  him  in  certain
cases  for  double  the  amount  of  his  debt,  as  in  the  case  of
the  actio    iudicati,  the   actio  dcpcnsi,   the    action   upon    the
Aquilian   law,  and  the  action  for   a  legacy   bequeathed  by
damnation.     In   certain   other   cases    a   [penal]   sponsion  is
allowed,  as   in  the  actions  de  pecunia  certa  credita.  and  de
pecunia.  constituta ;  in  the  former  the  sponsion  is  for  a  third

172  part  more,  in  the  latter  for  a  half.         Where  the  risk  neither
of  a  sponsion  nor  of  an  action  for  double  the  amount  of  his
debt  is  laid  upon  the  defender,  and  the  action  is  not  one  that
from  the  first  is  for  more  than  the  simple  sum  claimed,  the

MS.  are  almost  entirely  illegible.
But  we  have  secundarium  on  1.  13,
ijuamuis  hanc  opinionem  on  1.  14,
and  Sabinus  et  Cassitis  secuti  fuerint
on  1.  15.  We  may  conclude  there-
fore that  Gai.  went  here  into  some
further  explanation  of  the  interdic-
tum  secundarium.

§§  171-183.  Comp.  tit.  I.  DE  POENA
TEMERE  LITIGANTIVM(\V,  16).  All
but  the  last  three  lines  of  p.  247,
and  two  or  three  letters  on  11.  8,  9,
are  illegible ;  even  the  last  three
lines  are  only  partially  legible.

§  171.  Comp.  §§  9,  13  ;  pr.  tit.  I.
afd.

1  Hu. ,  borrowing  from  the  Inst. ,
thus  completes  the  par. :  Nunc  ad-
monendi  sumus,  ne  facile  homines
ad  litigandum  procederent,  mm  an-

tiquo  iure  placuisse  temeritatem  liti-
gandi  uariis  incommodis,  modo  pe-
cuniaria poena,  modo  iurisiurandi
religione,  coercendam  esse :  eaque
praetor  quoque  tuetur.  ideo  ex
parte  eius  cum  quo  agitur  aduersus,
etc.

2  Comp.  §  9.

3  Comp.  iii,  127.

4  Comp.  iii,  §§  210  f . ;  iv,  9.

5  Comp.  iii,  §§  201-204.

6  Comp.  Cic.  pro  Hose.  com.  iv,
10,  v,  14  ;  Gai.  iii,  124  ;  iv,  13.

7  Comp.  Paul,  ii,  2,  §  9  ;  §  9,  I.
de  act.  (iv,  6);  tit.  D.  de  const,  pec.
(xiii,  5).

§  172.     Comp.  §  1,  tit.   I.  afd.;  fr.  44,
§  4,  D.  fam.  ercisc.  (x,  2).

1  So  L.  and  all  eds. ;  the  MS.  has
conhmgatur.

350  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [IV, §§  172-175.

praetor  iusiurandum  exigere  'non  calumniae  causa  infitias
ire : ' :!  unde  quamuis 3  heredes  uel  qui  heredum  loco  habeutur
simplotenus*  obligati  sint,  item  feminis  pupillisque  eximatur

173  pcriculum    sponsionis,  iubet  tamen    eos  iurare.  Statim
autem  ab  initio  pluris   quam  simpli   actio  est  ueluti  furti
inanifesti  quadrupli,  nee  manifest!  dupli,  concept!  et  oblati
tripli :  nam  ex  his  causis  et  aliis  quibusdam,  sine  quis  neget
sine  fateatur,  pluris  quam  simpli  est  actio.

174  Actoris  quoque  calumnia *  coercetur  modo  calumniae  iudicio

175  modo  contrario,  modo  iureiurando,  modo  restipulatione.        Et
quidem  calumniae  iudicium  aduersus  omnes  actiones  locum
habet,  et  est  decimae  partis  rei,1  sed2  aduersus   adsertorem

praetor  allows  an  oath  to  be  exacted  from  him  '  that  he  is
not  vexatiously  denying  his  liability.'  Accordingly,  although
heirs  and  those  in  the  position  of  heirs  are  not  held  liable  for
more  than  single,  payment,  and  women  and  pupils  are  exempt
from  the  risk  of  a  sponsion,  still  the  praetor  requires  all  of

173  them  to  give   their   oath  [of  calumny].         Of  actions  that
from  the  first  are  for  more  than  single  payment,  we  have  the
action   of  manifest   theft  for  fourfold,  that  of  non-manifest
theft  for  twofold,  and  those  for  receipt  of  stolen  property  and
introduction  of  it  into  another  person's  premises,  which  are
for  threefold ;  in  these  and  in  some  other  cases  the  action  is
for  more  than  single  payment,  no  matter  whether  the  defender
deny  his  liability  or  admit  it.

174  Vexatious  conduct  on  the  part  of  a  pursuer  is  likewise
repressed,  sometimes  by  a  iudicium  calumniae,  sometimes  by
a  iudicium  contrarium,  sometimes  by  his  oath,  sometimes  by

175  restipulation.         There  is  room  for  a  calumniae  iudicium,  [i.e.
an  instruction  to  the  judge,  in  the  event  of  the   defender's
acquittal,  to  inquire  whether  the  proceedings  of  the  pursuer
were  groundless  and  vexatious]    in  all  actions ;  it   justifies
condemnation  in  a  sum  equal  to  one-tenth  of  the  value  of  the
cause  of  action,  but  as  against  an  adsertor  libertatis  one-third.

2  Comp.  Paul,  i,  5,  §  1.  with  the  calumniae  iudicium  in  §§

8  The  MS.  has  qu;  Hu.  quia.  175-179  ;   the  contrarium  iudicium

*  So    Stud.  ;    Bk.    suggests    iure  in  §§  177-179 ;  the  restipulation  in

ciuilinon  amplius ;  K.  u.  S.  (foot-  §180.

note),  nisi  ex  suo  facto ;  Hu.   aliis  l  See  Paul,  i,  5,  §  1.
quoque  poenis  obligati  [non]  sunt.            §  175.     l  Comp.  §  163.

S  173.     §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  2  K.  u.  S.  read  praeterquam  quod,

§§  189-191.  adding  est  after  partis;  Hu.  has  tan-

§  174.     Comp.  §  1,  tit.  I.  afd.    Gai.  deals  turn,  with  same  addition.

IV,  §§  176-178.]          COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.  351

176  tertiae  partis.3         Liberum  est  autem  ei  cum  quo  agitur  aut
calumniae  iudiciuni  opponere  aut    iusiurandum  exigere  non

177  calumniae  causa  agere.          Contrarium  autem  iudiciuni  ex
certis  causis  constituitur,  ueluti  si  iniuriarum  agatur,1  et  si
cum  muliere  eo  nomine  agatur  quod  dicatur  uentris  nomine
in  possessionem   missa   dolo   malo   ad   alium    possessionem
transtulisse,*  et  si  quis  eo  nomine  agat  quod  dicat  se  a  prae-
tore  in  possessiouem  missum  ab  aliquo  3  admissum  non  esse :  *
sed    aduersus    iniuriarum  quidem   actionem   decimae   partis

178  datur,  aduersus  uero  duas  istas  quintae.         Seuerior  autem
coercitio  est  per  contrarium  iudiciuni :  nam  calumniae  iudicio
x.  partis  nemo  damnatur  nisi  qui  intellegit  non  recte  se  agere,
sed  uexandi  aduersarii  gratia  actionem  instituit,  potiusque  ex
iudicis  errore  uel  iniquitate  uictoriam  sperat  quam  ex  causa
ueritatis :  calumnia  enim  in  adfectu  est,  sicut  furti  crimen :
contrario  uero  iudicio  omni  modo  damnatur  actor  si  causani

176  It  is  for  the  defender  to  elect  whether  he  will  have  this
calumniae  indicium  superinduced  upon  the  action,  or  insist
upon  the  pursuer's  oath  that  he  is  not  litigating  vexatiously.

177  The  contrarium  indicium  [or  cross-action]  is  competent  only
in  certain  cases,  as  when  the  action  is  an  actio  iniuriarum,  or
an  action  against  a  woman  on  the  allegation  that,  having  been
put  into  possession  of  an  estate  to  preserve  it  for  an  infant  in
utero,  she  fraudulently  transferred  it  to  another,  or  an  action
by  any  one  on  the  allegation  that,  having  obtained  from  the
praetor  a  grant  of  possession,  the  defender  opposed  his  entry  :
when  it  is  in  response  to  an  actio  iniuriarum  it  is  for  a  tenth
part  [of  the  claim  made  therein],  but  when  in  answer  to  either

178  of  the  other  two,  it  is  for  a  fifth  part.         The  contrarium
indicium  is  more  coercive  than  the  calumniae  indicium ;  for
in  this  last  a  man  is  never  condemned  in  the  tenth  unless  he
really  knew  that  his  proceedings  were  unjustifiable,  and  was
in  fact  litigating  for  the  purpose  of  annoying  his  opponent,
basing  any  hopes  of  success  rather  on  the  possible  mistakes
or  unfairness  of  the  judge  than  on  the  goodness  of  his  cause ;
for  calumnia,  vexatious  litigation,  like  theft,  depends  on  in-
tention.    In  the  contrarium  indicium,  on  the  other  hand,  the

3  Comp.  Paul,  v,  33,  §  7  ;  tit.  C.  2  Cp.  tit.  D.  si  uentr.  nom.  (xxv,  5).

Th.  de  lib.  causa  (iv,  18);  tit.  C.  de  3  The  MS.,  K.  u.  S.,  Hu.,  and  P.

adsert.  toll,  (vii,  17).  have  olio  quo.

§  176.     Comp.  Paul,  ii,  1,  §  2.  *  Comp.  tit.  D.  ne  uis  fiat  ei  q.  in

§  177.     x  Comp.  Paul,  v,  4,  §  11 ;  fr.  43,  poss.  (xliii,  4).

D.  de  iniur.  (xlvii,  10).  §  178.     Comp.  iii,  197.

352  GAII  IXSTITVTIONVM  IVRIS  CIVILIS    [IV,  §§  178-182.

non  termerit,  licet  falsa  l  opinione  inductus  crediderit  se  recte

179  agere.        Vtique  autem  ex  quibus  causis  contrario  iudicio  agi
potest,  etiam  calumniae  iudicium  locum  habet ;  sed  alterutro
tantum  iudicio  agere  permittitur :    qua  ratione  si  iusiuran-
dum  de  calumnia  exactum  fuerit,  quemadmodum  calumniae
iudicium    non    datur,  ita   et   contrarium    dari   non 1    debet.

180  Restipulationis  quoque  poena  ex  certis  causis  fieri  solet;  et
quemadmodum   coutrario    iudicio  omni   modo    condemnatur
actor  si  causam  non  tenuerit,  nee  requiritur  an  scierit  non
recte  se  agere,  ita  etiam  restipulationis  poena  omni  modo

181  damnatur  actor.1 restipulationis  poena  petitur,

ei  neque  calumniae  iudicium   opponitur  neque  iurisiurandi
religio    iniungitur;    nam  contrarium  iudicium  in  his  causis
locum  non  habere  palam  est.

182  Quibusdam  iudiciis  damnati  ignominiosi  fiunt.  ueluti  furti,

pursuer,  if  he  have  failed  in  his  suit,  is  invariably  condemned,
even  though,  labouring  under  some  misapprehension,  he  may

179  have  believed  that  his  proceedings  were  well-founded.         Of
course,  in  those  cases  in  which  the  contrarium  iudicium  is
competent,  there  is  room  also  for  the  indicium  calumniae ;  but
we  can  employ  only  one  or  other  of  these  remedies.     Upon
the  same  principle,  just  as  a  indicium  calumniae  is  disallowed
where  the  defender  has  required  an  oath  of  calumny  from  the
pursuer,  so  must  the  contrarium  iudicium  be  excluded  in  the

180  same  circumstances.         A  restipulatory  penalty  is  also  im-
posed in  certain  cases ;  and  just  as  in  the  contrarium  iudicium
the  pursuer  who  has  failed  in  proving  his  averments  is  invari-
ably condemned,  without  any  inquiry  whether  or  not  he  knew
that  he  was  suing  improperly,  so  is  he  [when  unsuccessful]
invariably  mulcted  in  the  amount  of  his  penal  restipulation.

181  When  a  man  sues  under  a  restipulatory  penalty,  neither  can
a  iudicium  calumniae  be  imposed  upon  him,  nor  can  he  be
fettered  by  the  sanctity  of  an  oath  :  that  in  such  a  case  there
can  be  no  iudicium  contrarium  is  quite  clear.

182  In  some  actions  a  defender  who  is  condemned  therein  is

1  So  M.   (K.    u.   S.  footnote)  and  illegible  half  line  at  the  commence-

P. ;  the  MS.  has  alia  ;  G.,  K.  u.  S.,  ment  of  p.  250  of  the  MS.  to  have

and  Hu.  aliqua.  belonged  to  it, — possibly  si  sponsione

§  179.     Cornp.  §  176.  uictus  est.

1  The  MS.  has  non  dari.  §  181.     For  the  illegible  initial  words  K.

§  180.     Comp.  §§  13,  171.  (K.  u.  S.  footnote)  suggests  a  quo

1  Hu.  assumes  this  to  be  the  end  autem;    Hu.    supplies  sed  cum  ab

of  the  par. ;  K.   (K.  u.  S.  footnote)  actore  cum.

supposes  some  of  the  words  in  the  §  182.     Comp.    §   2,    tit.    I.    afd.     The

IV,  §§  182,  183.]         COMMENTARII  QVATTVOR.

O   "*  »">

000

183

ui  bonorum  raptorum,  iniuriarum :  item  pro  socio,  fiduciae,
tutelae,  mandati,  deposit!:  sed  furti  aut  ui  [bonorum']  rap-
torum ant  iniuriarum  non  solum  damnati  notantnr  igno-
minia  sed  etiarn  pacti,  ut  in  in  edicto  praetoris  scriptum  est ;
et  recte :  plurimuni  enim  interest  utrum  ex  delicto  aliquis  an
ex  contractu  debitor  sit.1  Item  ilia  parte  edicti  id  ipsum
nominatim  exprimitur  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  nomine

iudicio  interuenire ;  interest  enim .2

In  summa  sciendum  est  eum  qui :  et  eum  qui

uocatus  est — .*     quasdam  (tamen  personas)

183

branded  with  infamy ;  this  happens,  for  example,  in  the
actions  for  theft,  robbery,  or  personal  injury ;  as  also  in  those
arising  out  of  partnership,  fiduciary  agreement,  tutory,  man-
date, and  deposit.  In  the  three  first,  according  to  the  praetor's
edict,  it  is  not  only  a  defender  who  has  actually  been  con-
demned that  becomes  infamous,  but  also  one  who  has  compro-
mised ;  and  very  properly ;  for  it  makes  a  great  difference
whether  a  man's  indebtedness  arises  from  delict  or  from
contract.  In  the  same  chapter  of  the  edict  it  is  expressly
declared  [that  a  person  who  is  infamous  is  in  most  cases  dis-
[qualificd  for  addressing  a  court  of  law  on  another  person's
[behalf,  for  appointing  a  cognitor  or  procurator,  and  for  him-
[self  acting  in  either  capacity]  in  judicial  matters  ;  for  it  is  of
importance  [that  litigation  should  be  conducted  honourably'].

Finally  be  it  observed  that  he  [who  is  moving  in  a  litigation
[must  formally  summon  his  adversary ;  if  the  latter  do  not  obey

words  of  the  edict  referred  to  in  the
legible  part  of  the  par.  are  in  f r.  1 ,
D.  de  his  qui  not.  infam.  (iii,  2) ;
from  which  it  will  be  observed  that
infamy  resulted  only  when  the  party
was  defending  proprio  nomine.

1  Infamy  was  avoided  by  compro-
mise when  the  debt  was  ex  contractu,
but  not  when  ex  delicto.

2  K.   u.  S.  suggest  the  following
reconstruction   (legible    words    and
letters  being  in  roman  type) — «rpn-
mitur  pactum  quoque  ignominiosam
fieri  qiia  prohibeiwr1  pro  aliis  postu-
late, uel  procurator  dari  [uel]  pro-
curatorem     adhibere    cognitorermie,
uel  cognitorio  nomine  iudicio  inter-
uenire.     The  statement  here  is  in-
correct ;  the  reference  to  the  infama-
tory  result  of  compromise  of  a  claim
ex  delicto  is  in  the  edict  de  infamia
(fr.  1,  D.  de  his  q.  not.  inf.  iii,  2);
that  forbidding  infamous  persons  to

act  as  procurators,  etc.,  is  in  the
edict  de  postulando  (fr.  1,  §  8,  D.  de
post,  iii,  1).  Hu.  proposes — expri-
mitur  ut  qui  «<7?iominiosus  sit  pler-
umque  prohibeafatr  pro  aliis  postu-
late, item  coj/nitorem  dare,  procura-
torem  adhibere,  uel  cognitorio  aut
procuratouo  nomine  iudicio  inter-
uenire ;  interest  enim  cum  honestis
litigare.  This  is  a  very  reasonable
reconstruction.  Comp.  Paul,  i,  2,
§  1 ;  Fr.  Vat.  §  324  ;  fr.  1,  §  8,  D.
de  post,  (iii,  1).

183.     Comp.   §§  46,  187;  fr.  1-4,  fr.
23-25,  D.  de  in  ius  uoc.  (ii,  4).

1  Hu.    proposes  experitur,   in  ius
uocare  oportere.     K.  u.  S.  agree  as
to  the  idea,  but  are  unable  to  suggest
probable  words  for  the  illegible  half
line.

2  Here  Hu.  proposes  si  non  sequi-
tur,  sine  auctoritate  praetoris  posse
secum  ducere.

354  GAII  INSTITVTIONVM  IVEI8  CIVILIS    [IV, §§  183-186.

sine  permissu  praetoris  in  ius  uocare  non  licet,  ueluti  parentes
patronos  patronasque,  liberos  et  parentes  patroni  patronaeue  ;

184  et  in  eum  qui  aduersus  ea  egerit  poena  constituitur.         Cum
autem  in  ius  uocatus  fuerit  aduersarius,  neque  eo  die  finiri
potuerit  negotium,  uadimonium  ei   faciendum   est,  id  est  ut

185  promittat    se    certo    die    sisti.         Fiunt    autem    uadimonia
quibusdam  ex  causis  pura,  id  est  sine  satisdatione,  quibusdam
cum  satisdatione,  quibusdam  iureiurando,  quibusdam  recuper-
atoribus  suppositis,  id  est  ut  qui  non  steterit  is  protinus  a
recuperatoribus  in  summam  uadimonii  condemnetur :  eaque

186  singula  diligenter  praetoris  edicto  significantur.         Et  siqui-
dem  iudicati  depensiue  agetur,  tanti  fit  uadimonium  quanti
ea  res  erit ;  si  uero  ex  ceteris  causis,  quanti  actor  iurauerify
non  calumniae  causa   postulare  sibi  uadimonium  promitti :
nee  tamen  [  pluris  quam  partis  dimidiae,  nee]  pluribus  quam
sestertium   c   milibus   fit    uadimonium :    itaque    si    centum
milium  res  erit,  nee  iudicati  depensiue  agetur,  non  plus  quam

[the  summons,  the  pursuer  may  bring  him  into  court}.  There
are  certain  persons,  however,  whom  it  is  unlawful  to  summon
without  the  praetor's  permission,  such  as  parents,  patrons,  and
the  children  or  parents  of  patrons ;  any  one  contravening  in

1 84  this  respect  is  liable  to  a  penalty.         When  the  defender  has
been  summoned  into  court,  but  the  case  cannot  be  concluded
the  same  day,  he  must  give  his  uadimonium,  i.e.  his  stipula-

185  tory  undertaking  to  appear  again  on  a  day  fixed.         In  some
cases  uadimonia  are  pure,  i.e.  without  sureties,  in  some  sure-
ties are  necessary,  in  some  they  are  coupled  with  an  oath,
while  in  others  there  is  a  reference  to  recuperators,  i.e.  the
defender  consents  that  if  he  fail  to  appear  he  may  at  once  be
condemned  by  them  in  the  amount  of  his  uadimonium ;  all

186  these  are  carefully  distinguished  in  the  edict.         In  the  case
of  an  actio  iudicati  or  an  actio  depensi  the  uadimonium  is  of
the  same  amount  as  is  sued  for.     In  other  cases  it  is  fixed  at
such  an  amount  as  may  be  named  by  the  pursuer,  under  an
oath  that  he  is  not  naming  it  vexatiously,  so  long  as  it  does  not
[relatively  exceed  one-half  of  the  sum  at  stake]  nor  [absolutely]
a  hundred  thousand  sesterces  ;  so  that  if  the  matter  of  dispute
be  worth  a  hundred  thousand  sesterces,  and  the  action  neither

§  184.     Comp.  iii,  224  ;  Varro,  de  L.  L.  §  186.     The  words  in  ital.  are  added  by

vi,  74  (Bruns,  p.  278).  Hu.,  and  adopted  by  K.  u.  S.  and

§  185.     Comp.  tit.  D.  qui  satisdare  cog.,  P.,  and  from  the  context  absolutely

uel  iuraio  promittunt,  utl  suae  pro-  necessary.
missioni  committantur  (ii,  8).

IV,  §187.]  COMMENTARII  QVATTVOK.  355

187  sestertium  quinquaginta  milium  fit  uadimonium.  Quas
autem  personas  sine  permissu  praetoris  inpune  in  ius  uocare
non  possumus,  easdem  nee  uadimonio  inuitas  obligare
possumus,  praeterquam  si  praetor  aditus  permittat.

an  actio  iudicati  nor  an  actio  depensi,  the  uadimonium  cannot
187  exceed  fifty  thousand.  But  we  cannot  require  those  persons
whom  we  cannot  summon  with  impunity  without  the  praetor's
permission  to  become  bound  to  us  in  a  uadimonium  against
their  will,  unless  the  praetor  allow  it  on  special  application.

§  187.     Comp.  §  183  ;  fr.  1-3,  D.  in  his  uocati  (ii,  6).

DOMITII    VLPIANI

QVAE  VOCANT

FRAGMENTA

[SIVE  EXCERPT  A  EX

VLPIANI   LIBKO   SINGVLAEI   EEGVLAEVM.

EXCERPTA  EX

DOMITII    VLPIANI
LIBEO   SINGVLARI   EEGVLAEVM.

prohibet,   exceptis   quibusdaui

1  \_A  statute  is  either  perfect,  or  imperfect,  or  short  of  perfect.
[It  is  perfect  when  it  forbids  something  to  lie  done,  and  if  done
prescinds  it;  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  is  a  statute  of  this  sort.
[That  is  imperfect  which  forbids  a  thing,  yet  if  it  be  done
[neither  rescinds  it  nor  imposes  a  penalty  on  the  contravener  ;
[such  is  the  Cincian  law,  whicli\  prohibits  [donations  beyond  a
[specified  amount],  except  to  certain  kinsmen,  yet  does  not

E.UBRIC.  In  place  of  this  rubric  the  MS.
has  the  words  INCIPIVNT  TITVLI
EX  CORPORE  VLPIANI,  followed  by
a  list  of  the  titles  into  which  the
treatise  is  divided.  As  those  titles,
however,  are  generally  admitted  not
to  be  Ulpian  s,  nor  even  the  work
of  the  epitomist  to  whom  we  owe
these  'Excerpts'  (see Introduction),
I  have  thought  it  inexpedient  to
reproduce  the  list.

Owing  probably  to  a  displacement
of  pages  in  the  copy  of  the  archetype
used  by  the  transcriber,  the  text  of
the  MS.  begins  with  what  is  here
numbered  as  §  4,  Mores  sunt  tacitus
consensus  populi  longa  consuetudine
inueteratus  ;  then  comes  the  list  of
titles  just  referred  to  ;  next  §§  5-9  ;
next  §§  1-3  ;  and  after  them  §§  10  f.
This  order  was  preserved  in  the
earliest  editions,  the  sentence  Mores
sunt,  etc.,  being  printed  as  a  sort  of
motto.  The  mistake  is  obvious.
It  is  evident  that  Ulpian,  before
proceeding  to  deal  with  persons,
devoted  a  few  pars,  to  law  in  gene-
ral and  its  sources  ;  but  the  com-
mencement of  what  he  said  on  the
subject  is  lost,  and  probably  was

not  contained  in  the  copy  from
which  the  Vatican  MS.  was  tran-
scribed. We  know,  however,  from
fr.  10  D.  de  7.  et  I.  (i,  1)  that  what
stands  as  the  pr.  and  §§  1  and  3  of  the
first  title  of  the  first  book  of  the  Inst.
were  from  this  treatise  of  Ulpian's.
,  All  eds.  are  agreed  that  the  par.
must  have  commenced  with  such
words  as  these  :  Lex  aut  perfecta
est  aut  imperfecta  aut  minus  quam
perfecta.  Perfecta  lex  est  quae  uetat
aliquid fieri,  et  sifactum  sit  rescindit,
quails  est  lex  —  — •  — .  Imperfecta
lex  est  quae,  uetat  aliquid  fieri,  et  si
factum  sit  nee  rescindit  nee  poenam
iniimgit  ei  qui  contra  legem  fecit,
qualis  est  lex  Cincia,  quae  supra
certum  moduni  donari  prohibet,  etc.

As  Ulpian's  probable  illustration
of  a  lex  perfecta,  Cuj.  suggests  the
L.  Aelia  Sentia.

Macrob.  (in  Somn.  Scip.  ii,  17)
defines  a  lex  imperfecta  as  one  in
qua  nulla  deuiantibus  poena  sanci-
tur.  On  the  L.  Cincia  (of  550  |  204)
see  Cic.  ad  Ait.  i,  20,  §  7;  Tac.
Ann.  xi,  5  ;  Fr.  Vat.  §§  298-313.
Another  illustration  of  an  imperfect
law  is  the  L.  Valeria  (Liv.  x,  9).

360  EXCERPT  A  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI  [I,  §§  2-5-

2  cognatis,1   et   si  plus   donatum  sit  non  rescindit.         Minus
quam  perfecta  lex  est  quae  uetat  aliquid  fieri,  et  si  factum  sit
non  rescindit,  sed  poenam  iniungit  ei  qui  contra  legem  fecit ;
qualis  est  lex  Furia  testamentaria,   quae   plus   quarn   mille
assium  legatum  raortisue  causa 1  prohibet  capere,  praeter  ex-
ceptas  personas,3  et  aduersus  eum  qui  plus  ceperit  quadrupli
poenam  constituit.

3  Lex  aut  rogatur,  id  est  fertur ;  aut  abrogatur,  id  est  prior
lex  tollitur  ;  aut  derogatur,  id  est  pars  primae,  [legis] 1  tollitur ;
aut  subrogatur,  id  est  adicitur  aliquid  primae  legi ;  aut  obro-
gatur,  id  est  mutatur  aliquid  ex  prirna  lege.

4  Mores  sunt  tacitus  consensus  populi  longa    consuetudine
inueteratus.

[7.     DE  LIBERTIS.~\

Libertorum  genera  sunt  tria,  ciues  Eomani,  latini  luniani,
dediticiorum  numero.

2  nullify  what  is  given  in  excess.  Short  of  perfect  is  that
which  forbids  a  thing,  and  if  it  be  done  does  not  rescind  it,
but  imposes  a  penalty  upon  the  contravener ;  of  this  class  is
the  Furian  testamentary  law,  which  forbids  all  but  certain
excepted  persons  to  take  more  than  a  thousand  asses  as  a
legacy  or  otherwise  by  reason  of  death,  and  imposes  a  fourfold
penalty  upon  him  who  has  taken  a  larger  sum.

We  say  of  a  law  '  rogatur  '  when  it  is  passed  ;  '  abrogatur'
when  it  is  repealed  ;  ' derogatur'  when  part  of  it  is  repealed  ;
'  subrogatur'  when  something  is  added  to  it ;  ' obrogatur^  when
some  of  its  provisions  are  altered.

4  By  '  mores '  we  mean  the  tacit  consent  of  a  people,  become
inveterate  by  long  observance.

[7.     OF  FREED  MEN.]

5  There   are   three    classes    of    freedmen, — Eoman  citizens,
Junian  latins,  and  those  numbered  among  the  dediticians.

1  Hu.  proposes  as  an  amendment  §  3.     Comp.  Fest.  and  Paul.  Diac.  vv.

exceptis  [personis]  quibusdam[uelut]  Rogatlo,  Abrogare,  Deroyare,  Obro-

cognatis,   on  the   ground  that  the  gare,    Exrogare  (Bruns,    pp.    261,

exception  was  not  confined  to  cog-  240,  250,  241)  ;  Modest,  in  fr.  102,

nates.  1).  de  V.  8.  (1,  16).

§  2.     On  the  L.   Furia,   see  xxviii,  7  ;  *  So  Cuj.  and  most  eds. ;  the  MS.

Gai.  ii,  225  ;  iv,  23.  has  pars  prima.

1  See  Gai.  ii,  225,  note  2.  §  4.     Comp.  §  9, 1.  de  iure  natural!  (i,  2).

2  See  Gai.  ii,  225,  note  1.  §  5.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  12.

I,  §§6-10.]  LIBRO  SINGVLAEI  EEGVLARVM.  361

6  Cities  Eomani  sunt  liberti,  qui  legitime  [manumissi  sunt,
[id  est  aut  uinclicta  auf]  l  censu  aut  testamento,  nullo  iure

7  inpediente.2         Vindicta   inanumittuntur   apud  magistratum
populi  Romani?    uelut    consulem    proconsulem  praetoremue.z

8  Censu  manumittebantur  olim  qui  lustrali  censu  Eomae  iussu

9  dominorum  inter  ciues  Eomanos  censum  profitebantur.         Vt
testamento  manumissi   liberi   sint  lex   duodecim    tabularum
facit,  quae  confirmat }

10  -  — l  hodie  autem  ipso  iure  liberi  sunt  ex

lege   lunia,   qua   lege   latini   sunt   nominati 2  inter  amicos 3
manumissi.

G       Those  freedmen  are  Eoman  citizens  that  have  been  manu-
mitted formally,  i.e.  by  uindicta,  census,  or  testament,  in  the

7  absence  of  any  legal  impediment.         Manumission  uindicta
takes  place  before  a  magistrate  of  the  Eoman  people,  such

8  as  a  consul,  proconsul,  or  praetor.         Those  used  formerly  to
be  manumitted  censu  who,  at  the  lustral  census  in  Borne,  by
order  of  their  owners,  gave  in  their  names  for  enrolment  as

9  Eoman  citizens.         That  those  manumitted  by  testament  are
free  results  from  the  provisions  of  the  Twelve  Tables  declar-
ing the  validity  of  testaments.

10  [Latins  are  freedmen  de  facto  in  possession  of  freedom  simply
[by  the  pleasure  of  their  owners.  Formerly  their  enjoyment  of  it
[depended  on  their  protection  in  it  ~by  the,  praetor} ;  but  now
they  are  ipso  iure  free  by  the  Junian  law,  wherein  slaves
manumitted  inter  amicos  are  spoken  of  as  latins.

§  6.     Cornp.  Gai.  i,  §§  17,  44.  §  10.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  22,  and  note ;  iii,

1  This  addition  substantially  the  56.

same  with  all  eds.  i  Cuj.  (Observ.  xix,  30)  proposed

2  _  Such  as  the  restrictions  of  the  to  fill  the  blank  thus  :  Inter  arnicas
Aelia-Sentianlaw,  referred  to  below,  manumissi  olim  non  erant  ipso  iure
§§  11-15,  or  Fufia-Caninian  law,  §24.  liberi,  sed  uoluntate  domini  in  liber-

§  7.     See  refs.   in  Gai.   i,    17,  note  2  ;  tate  morabantur,  et  eos  seruire  non

also  tit.  D.  de  man.  uind.  (xl,  2)  ;  permittebatur  praetor.      Hu.    has  :

1.  4,  C.  de  uind.  (vii,  1).  Latini  sunt  liberti  qui  non  legitime,

1  Here,  as  in  xx,  16,  the  MS.  has  uelut  inter  amicos,  nullo  iure  inpedi-
praetoriani  for  populi  Romani.  ente,    manumissi  sunt,     quos    olim

2  So  Momms.  (Stadr.  v.  Salpensa,  praetor   tantum  tuebatur  in  forma
note  131) ;  the  MS.  has  apud  mayis-  libertatis  ;  nam  ipso  iure  seruimane-
tratum  praetoremue,  uelut  consulem,  bant.     M.   proposes  more   simply:
proconsulem.  Latini    sunt     liberti    qui   uoluntate

§  8.     See  refs.  in  Gai.  i,  17,  note  3.  domini  in  libertate  morantur.     quos

§  9.     See  refs.  in  Gai.  i,  17,  note  4  ;  also  olim  praetor  tuebatur  in  possessione

below,  §§  20-25.  libertatis,  etc.

*  M.  thinks  testamenta  sufficient ;  2  So  the  MS.  and  the  earliest  eds.

Cuj.     suggested  ^testamento    datas  L.  and  Bk.  have  latini  sunt  nomi-

libertates  ;  to  which  Hu.,  following  natim  ;  Hu.  latini  luniani nominati

L.,    adds    his   uerbis    f  uti   leyassit  sunt;  K.  latini  faint  nominatim.

suae  rei,  ita  ius  esto.'  *  See  Gai.  i,  41,  note.

3G2

EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI  [I,  §§  11-13.

11  Dediticiorum  numero  sunt  qui  poenae  causa  uincti  sunt  a
domino,  quihisue  stigmata1  scripta  fuerunt,  qui[«e]    propter
noxam  torti  nocentesque  inuenti  sunt,  quiue  traditi  sunt  ut
ferro  aut  cum  bestiis  depugnarent,  \inue  luduni\  *  uel  custo-
diam  coniecti  fuerunt,  deinde  quoquo  modo  manumissi  sunt :
idque  lex  Aelia  Sentia 3  facit.

12  Eadem  lege  cautum  est  ut  minor  triginta  annorum  seruus
uindicta  mauumissus  ciuis  Romanus  uon  fiat  nisi  apud  con-
silium  causa  probata  fuerit ;  ideo  *  sine  consilio  manumissum
Cassius 2  seruum  manere  putat.     testamento  uero  manumissum
perinde  haberi  iubet  atque  si  dornini  uoluntate  in  libertate

13  esset ; 3  ideoque  latinus  fit.         Eadem  lex  eum  dominum  qui
minor   uiginti   aunorum    est   prohibet   seruum   manumittere

11

12

Those  [freedmen]  are  ranked  as  dediticians  who  have  been
put  in  chains  by  their  owners  as  a  punishment,  or  branded,  or
put  to  the  torture  because  of  some  offence  and  thereof  found
guilty,  or  given  up  to  fight  either  with  the  sword  or  with  wild
beasts,  or  cast  into  a  gladiatorial  training-school  or  into  prison,
and  have  afterwards  been  manumitted,  no  matter  how.  All
this  is  in  terms  of  the  Aelia-Sentian  law.

By  the  same  law  it  is  provided  that  a  slave  under  thirty
manumitted  uindicta  shall  not  become  a  citizen  unless  cause
has  been  proved  before  the  council ;  hence  Cassius  (?)  is  of
opinion  that  if  manumitted  without  the  [approval  of]  the
council  he  remains  a  slave.  It  ordains,  however,  that  if  he
have  been  manumitted  by  testament  he  shall  be  regarded  as
in  possession  of  freedom  by  the  pleasure  of  his  owner  ;  conse-
13  quently  he  becomes  a  latin.  The  same  enactment  forbids
an  owner  under  twenty  to  manumit  his  slave  without  proving

§  11.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  13,  and  refs.

1  So  Cuj.,  after  Gai. ;  the  MS.  has
quib.  uestigia.     Branding  seems  to
have  been  resorted  to  when  the  slave
was  a  deserter  (fugitiuus)  ;  see  Quin-
til.  Inst.  Oral,  vii,  4,  §  14.

2  Added  from  Gai.

3  The  MS.  here  as  elsewhere  has
L.  Ascia.     See  Gai.  i,  13,  note  1.

§  12.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  13,  22.

1  So  the  MS.;  Bk.  and  Vahl.,  fol-
lowing L.,  have  id  est;  Hu. proinde
(pinde).

2  The  MS.  has  Caesaris.     Hence
various    suggestions, — censmie,    lex
Aelia  Sentia,  Cassius,  Caelius  Sa-
binus,    eius  aetatis,    etc.     Bk.    and
Vahl.  prefer  L.  Aelia  Sentia,  and  K.

Caesaris.  The  phrase  lex  putat  is
certainly  very  unusual,  although
Non.  Marcell.  (v.  lurgium,  Bruns,
p.  286)  attributes  it  to  Cicero.
Caesaris  seruum  manere  is  hardly
justifiable  when  the  question  is  of
manumission  of  a  slave  belonging
not  to  the  emperor  but  to  a  private
party.  Therefore  I  have  given  the
preference  to  the  Cassius  of  Puchta  ;
although  Hollweg's  Caelius  Sabinus
(Gael.  Sabis.)  is  not  improbable.
The  L.  Aelia  Sentia  was  passed  in
757  |  4  (Gai.  i,  13,  note  1),  and
Cassius  (Gai.  iii,  71,  note)  was  con-
sul in  783  |  30.

3  Comp.  above,  §  10.
§  13.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  38,  41.

I,  §§13a-16.]  LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  363

13apraeterquam  si  causam  apud  consiliuin  probauerit.  In
consilio  autem  adhibentur  Eomae *  quinque  senatores  et  quin-
que  equites  Eomaui,  in  prouinciis  uiginti  reciperatores  ciues

14  Eomani.         Ab  eo  domino  qui  soluendo  non  est  seruus  testa-
mento  liber  esse  iussus  et  heres  institutes,   et  si  minor  sit

.  triginta  annis  uel  in  ea  causa  sit  ut  decliticius  fieri  debeat,
ciuis  Eomanus  et  heres  fit ;  si  tamen  alius  ex  eo  testamento
nemo  heres  sit.  quod  si  duo  pluresue  liberi  heredesque  esse
iussi  sint,  primo  loco  scriptus  liber  et  heres  fit ;  quod  et  ipsum

15  lex  Aelia  Sentia  facit.         Eadem  lex  in  fraudem  creditoris  et
patroni  manumittere  prohibet.

16  Qui  tantum  in  bonis,  non  etiam  ex  iure  !  Quiritium  seruum
habet,  manumittendo  latinum  facit.     in  bonis  tantum  alicuius
seruus  est  uelut  hoc  modo,  si  ciuis  Eomanus  a  ciue  Eornano  2
seruum  emerit,  isque  traditus  ei  sit,  neque  tamen  mancipatus
ei  neque  in  iure  cessus  neque  ab  ipso  anno  possessus  sit :  nam

13a  cause  before  the  council.         This  council  consists  in  Eome  of
five  senators  and  as  many  knights,  and  in  the  provinces  of

14  twenty  recuperators,  Eoman  citizens.         A  slave  ordered  to
be  free    and  instituted   heir  in  the  testament   of  his  insol-
vent owner  becomes  a  Eoman  citizen  and  heir  under  the  will,
even  though  he  be  under    thirty  or  so   circumstanced  that
he  ought  [otherwise]  to  be  a  deditician,  provided  always  that
there   is   no   other   testamentary   heir.     If  two   or   more  be
ordered  to  be  free  and  heirs,  the  one  first  mentioned  becomes

15  free  and  heir;  this  too  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  enacts.         The
same  statute  prohibits  manumission  in  fraud  of  a  creditor  or
patron.

16  He  who  holds  a  slave  in  bonitarian  ownership  only,  and  not
also  in  quiritarian  right,  by  manumitting  him  makes  him  a
latin.     And  a  slave  is  in  bonis  only  when,  for  example,  a  Eoman
citizen  buys  him  from  another  citizen,  and  delivery  follows,
but  the  slave  is  neither  mancipated,  nor  ceded  in  court,  nor
possessed  by  the  purchaser  for  a  year ;  for  until  one  or  other

§  13a.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  20.  the  MS.  has  ex  ius  instead  of  ex  lure.

1  The  MS.  has  Romani.  2  If  the   acquisition  was  from   a

§14.     Comp.   Gai.  i,    21,  and  note;  ii,  peregrin,    then,    even    though  the

154.  thing  was  res  mancipl  by  the  ius

§  15.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  37,  47.  ciuile,  yet  in  his  hands  it  was  res

§  16.     Comp.    Gai.  i,   §§  17,   35.     Also  nee  mancipi,  and  the  full  property

below,  xix,  §§  4,  7,  20  ;  Gai.  ii,  §§  passed  by  tradition  according  to  the

41,  204;  iii,  80.  rules  of  the  ius  gentium  ;  comp.  Fr.

1  Here,  as  in  many  other  places,  Vat.  §  47.

364  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI  [I,  §§  16-21.

quamdiu  horum  quid  fiat,3  is  seruus  in  bonis  quidem  empto-

17  ris  est,  ex  iure  l  Quiritium  autem  .uenditoris  est.         Mulier
quae  in  tutela  est,  item  pupillus  et  pupilla,  manumittere  non

18  possunt.         Communem  seruum  unus  ex  dominis  manumit-
tendo  partem  suani  amittit,  eaque  adcrescit  socio  ;  maxime  si
eo  modo  manumiserit  quo,  si  proprium  haberet,  ciuem  Eoma-
num  facturus  esset.     nam  si  inter  amicos  eum  manumiserit,

19  plerisque  placet  eum  nihil  egisse.         Seruus  in  quo  alterius
est  ususfructus,  alterius  proprietas,  a  proprietatis  domino  manu-
missus  liber  non  fit,  sed  seruus  sine  domino  est.

20  Post  mortem  heredis  aut  ante  institutionem  heredis  testa-
mento  libertas  dari  non  potest,  excepto   testamento   militis.

-  21  Inter  medias  heredum  institutiones  libertas  data  utrisque
adeuntibus  non  ualet :  solo  autem  priore  adeunte  iure
antiquo  ualet.  sed  post  legem  Papiam  Poppaeam,1  quae

of  these  takes  place,  the  slave,  though  in  bonis  of  the  pur-
chaser,  is  still  in  the   quiritarian  ownership  of  the   seller.

17  A  woman  who  is    in  tutelage  cannot  manumit  [without  her
tutor's   auctoritas] ;    neither   can   a  pupil,  whether  male   or

18  female.         One  of  two  joint-owners  manumitting  a  common
slave  loses  his  share,  which  accrues  to  his  partner.     This  is
so,  at  any  rate,  if  the  manumission  have  been  in  a  form
which,  had  he  been  sole  owner,  would  have  made  the  slave  a
citizen  :   for  if  it  have  been  only  inter  amicos,  the  general

19  opinion  is  that  it  is  of  no  effect.         Manumission  by  the
owner  of  a  slave  usufructed  by  a  third  party  does  not  make
him  free  ;  he  becomes  a  slave  without  an  owner.

20  Freedom  cannot  be  given  by  testament,  unless  it  be  that  of
a  soldier,  [when  it  is]  either  [to  take  effect]  after  the  heir's

21  death  or  [given]  prior  to  his  institution.         Nor  is  such  a  gift
valid  if  introduced  between  two  institutions,  and  both  the  heirs
enter ;  but  it  was,  according  to  the  old  rule,  if  the  sole  intrant
was  the  heir  first  instituted.     Since  the  Papia-Poppaean  law,

3  Before  fiat  many  eds.  insert  non.  §19.     Comp.    Fr.    Dos.    §13;  Vlp.   in

But  quamdiu  in  the  sense  of  donee  fr.  9,  §  20,  D.  de  her.   inst.  (xxviii,

is  by  no  means  unusual  with  Ulpian;  5)  ;  lustin.  in  1.  1,  pr.  C.  comrmm.

see   fr.    15    D.   qidb.    mod.   usuxfr.  de  man.   (vii,  15).     M.  suggests  the

amitt.   (vii,  4),    fr.   1,  D.  de  penu.  addition   of    such  words    as  donee

leg.  (xxxiii,  9).  manet  ususfructus,  quofinito  latinus

§  17.     Gomp.  Gai.  i,  §§  40,  192  ;  below,  effiritur.

xi,  27.     M.  thinks  the  words   nisi  §  20.     Comp.  xxiv,  §§  15,  16  ;  Gai.  ii,

tutore  auctore  (nta)  should  be  added  §§  230,  233  ;  §§  34,  35,  I.  de  legal.

after  possunt.  (ii,  20).

§  18:     Comp.  Paul,  iv,  12,  §§  1,  5  ;  §  4,  §  21.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  206-208,  286.

I.  de  donat.  (ii,  7).  l  See  Gai.  i,  145,  note  1.

I,  §§21-24.]          LIBRO  SIXGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  365

partem  non  adeuntis  caducam  facit,  si  quidem  primus  heres
uel  [ius  liberorum  uel] 2  ius  antiquum 3  habeat,  ualere  earn
posse  placuit :  quod  si  non  habeat,  non  ualere  constat,  quod
loco  non  adeuntis  legatarii  patres  lieredes  fiunt.4  sunt  tamen

22  qui  et  hoc  casu  ualere  earn  ft  posse  dicunt.6         Qui  testameuto
liber  esse  iussus  est,  mox  quam  uel l  unus  ex  heredibus  adierit

23  hereditatern  liber  fit.         lusta  libertas  testamento  potest  clari
his  seruis  qui  testamenti  faciendi  et  mortis  tempore  ex  iure
Quiritium  testatoris  fuerunt.

24  Lex  Fufia  Caninia  iubet  testamento  ex  tribus  seruis  non
plures  quam  duos  manumitti,  et  usque  ad  decem  dimidiam
partem   manumittere   concedit ;  a   decem  usque  ad   triginta
tertiarn  partem,  ut  tamen  adhuc  quinque  manumittere  liceat

which  makes  the  share  of  an  heir  who  does  not  enter  caducous,
it  is  held  that  the  gift  of  freedom  will  still  be  valid  if  the  heir
first  instituted  [be  the  intrant  and]  have  cither  the  privilege
of  children  or  the  old  right  of  accretion ;  if  he  have  not,  it  is
held  to  be  invalid,  for  the  legatees  who  are  fathers  corne  in
place  of  the  non-entering  heir.  There  are  some,  however,  who
maintain  that  even  in  this  case  the  gift  of  freedom  will  be

22  valid.         A  slave  whom  a  testament  orders  to  be  free  becomes
free  the  moment  that  an  heir,  though  only  one  of  several,  has

23  entered.         Freedom  such  as  the  ius  ciuile  recognises  can  be
given  by  testament  [only]  to  those  slaves  who  belonged  to  the
testator  on  quiritarian  title  both  at  the  date  of  his  testament
and  the  time  of  his  death.

24  The  Fufia-Caninian  law  ordains  that  of  three  slaves  no  more
than  two  shall  be  enfranchised  by  testament,  and  up  to  ten
allows  manumission  of  half  the  actual  number ;  from  ten  to
thirty  a  third,  but  so  that  at  least  five  may  be  manumitted  as

2  So    L.,    Bk.,    Hu.,    and    K. ;  6  Comp.  xvii,  3.

Schult.  has  liberos  uel ;  M.  proposes  §  22.     Comp.  fr.  23,  §  1,  fr.  25,  D.  de

ius  patris  uel,  which  is  adopted  by  manum.  test,  (xl,  4).     The  assump-

Vahl.  tion   is    that   the    enfranchisement

3  The  ius  antiquum  was  the  right  stood  in  the  testament  posterior  to
of  accretion   (ius  aderescendi)   that  all  the  institutions.

existed  before  the   Papia-Poppaean  1  The  MS.  lias  quamuis,  which  Bk.

caduciary    legislation,     and    which  and  Vahl.  retain  ;  quam  uel  is  the

was  allowed  to  continue  in  favour  of  suggestion  of  Marezoll,  adopted  by

certain  near  kinsmen  of  the  testa-  Hu.  and  K.

tor  ;  see  below,  tit.  xviii,  and  notes.  §  23.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  267.     If  the  slave

4  Comp.  Gai.  ii,  207.  was  only  in  bonis  of  the  testator,  he

5  So  Hu.    and  K.     The  MS.   has  became  a  latin  ;  see  xxii,  8.
eiused;  hence  Hugo  iure  earn  ;  L. ,  §24.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  42-45.     In  the
Bk. ,    and  Vahl. ,  eius  causam ;  and  MS.   the    law    is    called  L.    Fusia
M.  t  testamento  earn.  Caninia.

366         EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI     [I,  §§  24,  25  ;  II,  §§  1-5.

aeque  ut  ex  priori  uumero ;  a  triginta  usque  ad  centum  quar-
tam  partem,  aeque  ut  decem  ex  superior!  numero  liberari
possint ;  a  centum  usque  ad  quingentos  partem  quintam,
sirniliter  ut  ex  antecedenti  numero  uiginti  quinque  possint
fieri  liberi.  et  denique  praecipit  ne  plures  omnino  quam
25  centum  ex  cuiusquam  testamento  liberi  fiaiit.  Eadem  lex
cauet  ut  libertates  seruis  testamento  nominatim  dentur.

[//.     DE  STATV  LIBERO   VEL  STATV  LIBERIS.}

1  Qui  sub  condicione  testamento  liber  esse  iussus  est  statu

2  liber   appellatur.          Statu   liber   quamdiu   pendet  condicio

3  seruus  heredis  [esf\.         Statu  liber  sen  alienetur  ab   herede
siue  usu  capiatur1  ab  aliquo,  libertatis  condicionem  secum

4  trahit.         Sub   hac  condicione  liber  esse   iussus :  si  DECEM
MILIA  HEKEDI  DEDERIT,  etsi  ab  herede  abalienatus  sit,  emptori
dando  pecuniam  ad  libertatem  perueniet ;  idque  lex  duodecim

5  tabularum  iubet.         Si    per   heredem  factum   sit   quominus

in  the  previous  case  ;  from  thirty  to  a  hundred  a  fourth,  but  so
that  at  least  ten  may  be  freed  as  under  a  lower  number ;  from
a  hundred  to  five  hundred  a  fifth,  it  being  in  any  case  com-
petent to  enfranchise  the  twenty-five  enfranchisable  within
the  lower  numbers.  And  it  adds  finally  that  not  more  than  a
hundred  shall  under  any  circumstances  become  free  under  a
25  testament.  The  same  enactment  requires  that  testamentary
gifts  of  freedom  shall  be  conferred  on  slaves  by  name.

[//.     OF  STATV  L TBERI. ]

1  He  goes  by  the  name  of  statu  liber  who  in  a  testament  is

2  ordered   to  be    free    under   some    condition.         So   long  as
the   condition  is  pendent   he  remains  a  slave  of  the  heir's.

3  Whether  he  be  alienated  by  the  heir  or  usucapted  by  a  third

4  party,  he  still  carries  with  him  his  conditional  liberty.         A
slave  ordered  to  be  free  on  condition  of  his  paying  ten  thou-
sand sesterces  to  the  heir,  if  he  be  alienated  by  the  latter,
acquires  his  liberty  on  paying  the  money  to  his  purchaser ;  so

5  it  is  ordained  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables.         If  by  any

tj  25.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  45a  ;  ii,  239.  >  So  Cuj.    and  all  eds. ;  the   MS.

has  xuscipiatur.

TIT.  n,  §§  1,  2.     Comp.   Fest.  v.  Statu  %  4.    Cp.  fr.  6,  §§  3,  7,  D.  de  statu.  (xl,  7).

liber  (Brims,  p.  268) ;  Gai.  ii,  200 ;  §  5.     Comp.  Fest.  as  in  note  to  §§1,2;

fr.  1,  pr.,  fr.   3,  pr.   D.  de  statulib.  fr.  3,  §§1,  11,  D.  de  statulib.  (xl,  7);

(xl,  7).  fr.  24,  D.  de  cond.  et  dem.  (xxxv,

§  3.     Cp.  fr.  2,  pr.  D.  de  statulib.  (xl,  7).  1);  fr.  161,  D.  de  R.  I.  (1,  17).

LIBEO  SIXGVLAEI  REGVLARVM.  307

statu  liber  conclicioni  pareat,  proinde  fit  liber  atque  si  condicio

i  explet-,   fuisset.         Extraneo  pecuniam  dare  iussus  et  liber

paratus  sit  dare,  et  is  cui  iussus  est  dare  aut  nolit

pere  aut  antequam  acceperit  moriatur,  proiude  fit  liber  ac

aiam  dedisset.

:tas  et  directo  potest  dari  hoc  modo :  LIBER  ESTO,  LIBER
SIT,  jjj-.ERVM  ESSE  IVBEO,  et  per  fideicommissum,  ut  puta :

fIDEI    COMMITTO     HEREDIS    MEI,    VT    ST1CHVM1    SERVVM

8  MANVMITTAT.         Is  qui  directo  liber  esse  iussus  est,  orcinus
fit  libertus  ;  is  autem  cui  per  fideicommissum  data  est  libertas,

9  non  testatoris  sed  manumissoris  fit  libertus.         Cuius  fidei
committi  potest  ad  rein  aliquam  praestandam,  eiusdem  etiarn

10  libertas  fidei  committi  potest.         Per  fideicommissum  libertas
dari  potest  tarn   proprio  seruo  testatoris   quam  heredis   aut

11  legatarii  uel  cuiuslibet  extranei  seruo.         Alieno  seruo  per
fideicommissum  data  libertate,  si  dominus  eum  iusto  pretio
non  uendat,  extinguitur  libertas,  quoniam  nee  pretii  conpti-

act  of  the  heir's  a  statu  liber  is  prevented  complying  with  the
condition,  he  becomes  free,  just  as  if  it  had  been  fulfilled.

6  If  a  slave  ordered  to  pay  money  to  a  stranger  as  the  condi-
tion of  his  freedom  be  ready  to  pay  it,  but  the  person  to  whom
he  is  desired  to  pay  it  either  refuse  to  accept  it  or  die  before
doing  so,  he  thereupon  becomes  free,  exactly  as  if  he  had
paid.

7  Freedom  may  be  given  [by  testament]  either  directly  thus  :
'  Be  free,'  '  Let  him  be  free,'  or  '  I  order  him  to  be  free ; '  or
by  fideicommissum  thus  :  '  I  request,'  '  I  entrust  to  my  heir's

8  good  faith  that  he  manumit  the  slave  Stichus.'         A  slave
who  has  a  direct  gift  of  freedom  becomes  a  libertus  orcinus
[i.e.  whose  patron  is  in  the  nether  world] ;  but  he  to  whom
freedom  is  given  fideicommissarily  is  a  freedman  not  of  the

9  testator's  but  of  the  manumitter's.         Any  person  to  whose
good  faith  it  can  be  committed  to  prestate  a  thing  may  also
have   it   committed   to   his   good   faith    to    confer    freedom.

10  Liberty  can  be  given  by  fideicommissum  either  to  the  testator's
own  slave,  to  one  belonging  to  the  heir  or  a  legatee,  or  to  one

11  belonging  to  any  third  party.         When  given  to  the  slave  of
a  third  party,  if  the  latter  will  not  sell  him  for  a  fair  price,  the
gift  of  liberty  is  extinguished,  because  it  is  impossible  to  fix

§  6.     Comp.  fr.  3,  §  10,  fr.  20,  §  3,  fr.  1  The  MS.  has  tote  cum.

28,  pr.  D.  destatulib.  (xl,  7).  §§  10,  11.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  264,  265,
§§  7,  8.     Comp.  xxv,  §§  2,  18  ;  Gai.  ii,  272.

§§  263,  266,  267.

368

EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIAXI     [H,  §  12  ;  III,  §§1-3.

12  tatio  pro  libertate  fieri  potest.  Libertas  sicut  dari  ita  et
adimi  tarn  testamento  quam  codicillis  testamento  confirmatio
potest ;  ut  tamen  eodem  modo  adimatur  quo  et  data  est.

[///.     DE  LATINIS.]

1  Latini  ius  Quiritiura   consequuntur   his   modis :  beneficio
principali,  liberis,  iteratione,  militia,  naue,  aedificio,  pistrino  ;
praeterea    ex    senatusconsulto   ingenua   quae   sit   ter  enixa.

2  Beneficio  principali  latinus  ciuitatem  Eomanam  accipit  si  ab

3  imperatore  ius  Quiritium  impetrauerit.         Liberis  ius  Quiri-
tiura  consequitur  latinus  qui  minor  triginta  annorum  manu-
missionis  tempore   fuit.     nam  lege  lunia  cautum  est  ut  si

12  a  money  equivalent  in  lieu  of  freedom.  As  freedom  can  be
conferred,  so  also  can  it  be  adeemed  either  by  testament  or
by  codicil  confirmed  by  testament ;  only  it  must  be  adeemed
in  the  same  way  in  which  it  was  given.

[///.     OF  LATINS.]

1  Latins  acquire  the  ius  Quiritium  in  these  ways  :  by  impe-
rial grant,  by  children,  by  iteration,  by  service  in  the  night
watch,  by  ship-trading,  by  house-building,  by  flour-milling  :  so
also,  under  the  senatusconsult,  does  a,  free-born  latin  woman

2  who  has  thrice  given  birth  to  children.         A  latin  acquires
Eoman  citizenship  by  imperial  grant  if  he  have  obtained  the

3  ius  Quiritium  from  the  emperor  on  his  own  petition.         By
children  a  latin  who  was  under  thirty  years  old  at  the  time
of  his  manumission  acquires  the  ius  Quiritium.      For  it  is

§  12.  Comp.  xxiv,  29,  and  note  1  ;  fr.
50,  D.  de  fideic.  lib.  (xl,  5) ;  fr.  14,
pr.  D.  de  legat.  II.  (xxxi).

TIT.  in,  §  1.  Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  28-35.
Acquisition  of  citizenship  aedificio
and  pistrino,  not  further  referred  to
by  Vlp. ,  are  explained  by  Gai.  in  §§
33,  34.  As  regards  a  woman  ter
enixa,  the  MS.  has  uulgo  quae  sit  ter
enixa.  Most  eds.  retain  the  uulgo  ;
one  or  two  substitute  mulier ;  and
Sav.  suggested  Volusiano,  a  name
he  devised  for  the  Set.  immediately
before  alluded  to.  Nowhere  is  there
any  corroboration  of  the  uulgo  ;  and
it  is  almost  incredible  that  the  law
could  thus  have  rewarded  prostitu-

§2.
§  3.

tion.  In  Paul,  iv,  9,  §  8,  we  read —
Latino,  ingenua,  ius  Quiritium  con-
secuta  si  ter  peperit,  ad  legitimam
filii  hereditatem  admittitur  ;  non  est
enim  manumissa.  Not  a  hint  of
such  a  thing  as  illegitimacy  ;  the
whole  stress  is  on  the  ingenua  ;  ac-
cording to  him  it  was  a  woman  that
was  a  latin  by  birth,  not  by  manu-
mission, that  became  a  citizen  on
her  third  accouchement,  —  for  a
triple  birth  at  one  confinement  did
not  answer  the  purpose  (Paul,  iv,  9,
§  2).  Therefore  for  the  uulgo  of
the  MS.  I  have  substituted  ingenua.

Comp.  Gai.  i,  34o.  ;  iii,  72.

Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  29-32.

HI,  §§3-6.]  LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  369

ciuem  Eomanam  uel  latinam  uxorem  duxerit,  testatione  in-
terposita  quod  liberorum  quaerendoruni  causa  uxorem  duxerit,
postea  filio  filiaue  nato  nataue  et  anniculo  facto,  possit  apud
praetorem  uel  praesidem  prouinciae  causam  probare  et  fieri
ciuis  Eornanus,  tarn  ipse  quam  filius  filiaue  eius  et  uxor,
scilicet  si  et  ipsa  latina  sit ;  nam  si  uxor  ciuis  Eomana  sit,
partus  quoque  ciuis  Eomanus  est  ex  senatusconsulto  quod

4  auctore   diuo  Hadriano   factum   est.         Iteratione  fit    ciuis
Eomanus  qui,  post  latinitatem  quam  acceperat  maior  triginta
annorum,  iterum  iuste  manumissus  est  ab  eo  cuius  ex  iure
Quiritium  seruus  fuit.     sed  huic  concessum  est  ex  senatus-

5  consulto  etiam  liberis  ius  Quiritium  consequi.1         Militia  ius
Quiritium  accipit  latin  us  [si]  inter  uigiles  Eomae  sex  annis
militauerit,  ex  lege  Visellia.     praeterea  ex  senatusconsulto
concessum  est  ei  ut  si  triennio  inter  uigiles  militauerit  ius

6  Quiritium  consequatur.         Naue  latinus  ciuitatem  Eomanam
accipit  si  non  minorem  quam  decem  milium  modiorum  nauem
fabricauerit  et  Eomam  sex  annis  frumentum  portauerit,  ex
edicto  diui  Claudi.

provided  by  the  Junian  law  that  if  he  have  taken  to  wife
either  a  Eoman  citizen  or  a  latin,  declaring  before  witnesses
that  he  was  marrying  in  order  that  he  might  get  children,
he  may,  after  the  birth  of  a  son  or  daughter,  and  when  it
has  completed  its  first  year,  show  cause  before  the  praetor  or
provincial  governor,  and  thus  not  only  himself  become  a
Eoman  citizen,  but  also  his  child  and  his  wife, — these,  of
course,  only  if  the  wife  too  be  a  latin  ;  for  if  she  be  a  Eoman
citizen,  then,  in  terms  of  Hadrian's  senatusconsult,  her

4  child  is  born  a  citizen.         By  iteration  he  becomes  a  Eoman
citizen  who,  having  been  made  a  latin  after  he  had  passed
the  age  of  thirty,  is  anew  formally  manumitted  by  the  person
who  had  the  quiritarian  right  in  him  when  a  slave.     But  by
senatusconsult  it  is  allowed  even  to  such  a  latin  to  acquire

5  citizenship  by  children.         A  latin  acquires  the  ius  Quiritium
by  military  service,  under  the  Visellian  law,  when  he  has
done  duty  in  Eome  for  six  years  in  the  night  watch.     A  later
senatusconsult  concedes  it  to  him   on  three   years'   service.

6  By  an  edict  of  the  late  emperor  Claudius',  a  latin  acquires
citizenship  naue  who  has  built  a  ship  capable  of  carrying  not
less  than  10,000  pecks,  and  has  imported  corn  in  it  to  Eome
for  six  years.

I.     Cornp.  Gai.  i,  35.  §  5.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  326.

1  This  Set.  referred  to  by  Gai.  i,  31.       §  6.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  32c.

2  A

370

EXCERPT A  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI     [IV,  §§  1,  2  ;  V,  1-3.

[////.     DE  HIS  QV1  SVI  IVRIS  SVNT.}

1  Sui  iuris  sunt  familiarurn  suarum  principes,  id  est  pater
familiae  itemque  mater  familiae.

2  Qui  matre  quidem  [certo],1  patre  autem  incerto  nati  sunt,
spurii  appellantur.

[  V.     DE  HIS  Q  VI  IN  POTESTA TE  SVNT.]

1  In  potestate  sunt  liberi  parentum  ex  iusto  matrimonio  nati.

2  lustum  matrimonium  est  si  inter  eos  qui  nuptias  contrahunt
conubium  sit,  et  tarn  mascultis  pubes  quam  feniina  potens  sit,
et  utrique  consentiant  si  sui  iuris  sunt,  aut  etiam  parentes

3  eorum  si  in  potestate  sunt.          Conubium   est  uxoris   iure

[IV.     OF  PERSONS  SVI  IVRIS.}

1  Those  are  sui  iuris  who  are  the  heads  of  their  own  families,
— the  paterfamilias,  that  is  to  say,  and  the  materfamilias.

2  Children  of  a  known  mother  but  unknown  father  are  called
spurious.

[  V.     OF  PERSONS  IN  PO  TES  TA  TE.  ]

1  Children  who  are  the  issue  of  a  marriage  approved  by  the
ius  ciuile  are  in  the  potestas  of  their  parents.

2  A  marriage  is  iustum  [i.e.  approved  by  the  ius  ciuile']  when
there  is  conubium  between  the  contracting  parties,  when  the
man  has  reached  puberty  and  the  woman  become  marriage-
able, and  when  both  of  them  if  sui  iuris,  or  their  parents  if

3  they  be  in  potestate,  give  their  consent.         Conubium  is  capa-

§2.

TIT.  iv,  §  1.  Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.  195,
§  2,  D.  de  V.  S.  (1,  16).  Paterfa-
milias did  not  necessarily  involve
the  idea  of  paternity ;  materfamilias,
as  used  in  the  text,  never  involved
that  of  maternity.  That  man  was
paterfamilias  who  was  not  subject
to  any  ascendant,  either  because
none  survived  or  because  he  had  been
emancipated  ;  he  needed  not  to  have
wife  or  children,  and  might  himself
be  a  mere  infant.  So  with  a  woman  ;
she  did  not  require  to  be  a  wife,  nor
yet  the  mother  of  children ;  she
might  be  wife  and  mother,  and  yet
herself  be  filiafamilias ;  if  married,
but  not  in  manu,  she  was  not  a
member  of  her  husband's  family,
and  her  children  were  never  mem-
bers of  hers  ;  if  independent,  she
was  familiae  suae  et  caput  et  finis.

Comp.  v,  7,  and  refs.
1  Added  by  all  eds.

TIT.  v,  §  1.  Comp.  Gai.  i,  55,  and
note  1.

§  2.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  56  f.

§  3.  Comp.  Serv.  in  Aen.  i,  73.  The
definition  in  the  text  is  unsatisfac-
tory, for  it  confines  the  idea  to  the
man.  Like  commercium  (xix,  5,
note),  the  word  might  be  employed
either  abstractly,  concretely,  or  re-
latively. Abstractly,  a  person  was
said  to  have  conulium  who  was
qualified  to  enter  into  a  matrimo-
nium iuris  ciuilis  in  the  absence  of
other  impediments  ;  in  this  sense
every  Roman  citizen  had  it,  although
he  might  not  have  it  in  the  con-
crete, as,  for  example,  when  he  was
a  child  of  tender  years  and  too

V,  §§  4-7.]

LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.

371

4  ducendae  facultas.         Conubium  habent  ciues  Eomani  cum
ciuibus  Eomanis ;  cum  latinis  autem  et  peregrinis  ita  si  con-

5  cessum  sit.         Cum  serais  nullum  est  conubium.         [6]  Inter

6  parentes  et  liberos  infinite l  cuiuscumque  gradus  \sinf\  conu-
bium non  est.     inter  cognates  autem   ex   transuerso   gradu
olim  quiclem  usque  ad  quartum  gradum 2  matrimonia  contrahi
non  poterant :  nunc  autem  etiam  ex  tertio  gradu 2  licet  uxo-
rem  ducere,  sed  tantum  fratris  filiam,  non  etiam  sororis  filiam
aut  amitam  uel  materterain,  quamuis  eodem  gradu  sint.     earn
quae 3  nouerca  uel  priuigna  uel  nurus  uel  socrus  nostra  fuit,

7  [uxorein] 4  ducere  non  possumus.         Si  quis  earn  quam  non

4  city  for  marrying  a  wife  according  to  law.         Eoman  citizens
have  it  with  Eoman  citizens  ;  with  latins  and  peregrins  only

5  when  these  have  had  it  specially  conceded  to  them.         With

6  slaves  there  is  no  coniibium.         Nor  is  there  conubium  be-
tween ascendants  and  descendants,  however  distant  the  degree
of  relationship.     Formerly  marriage  could  not  be  contracted
between  persons  related  collaterally  as  far  as  the  fourth  degree.
Now,  however,  a  man  may  take  as  his  wife  a  woman  related
to   him  even  in  the  third   degree ;    but   only   his   brother's
daughter, — not  his  sisters,  nor  yet  his  father's  or  mother's
sister,  although  they  are  in  the  same  degree.     Nor  can  we
rnarry  her    who  has   been    our   step-mother,    step-daughter,

7  daughter-in-law,  or  mother-in-law.         If  a  man  marry  a  woman

§4.
§5.

6.

young  to  marry.  But  though  a
citizen  had  conubium  in  the  ab-
stract, yet  as  a  rule  he  had  it  not
relatively  with  a  Junian  latin,  say,
or  a  peregrin  (§  4),  for  these  last  did
not  possess  it  in  the  abstract.  And
even  though  both  parties  had  it  in
the  abstract,  they  might  not  have
it  relatively  and  inter  se ;  as  when
marriage  between  them  was  ex-
cluded on  account  of  propinquity  or
affinity  (§  6).  In  the  sense  therefore
in  which  the  word  is  used  in  the
text  it  would  have  been  better  de-
nned as  right  of  intermarriage.

Comp.  Gai.  i,  56.

Hu.  in  his  edition  of  GaL  intro-
duces a  similar  statement  in  a  par.
which  he  numbers  i,  57 a.  Comp.
Paul,  ii,  19,  §  6.

Beproduced  in  the  Collat.  vi,  2,  §§
1-3,  where  they  are  attributed  to
'  Vlpianus,  libra  regularum  singu-
lari,  sub  titulo  de  nuptiis.'  Comp.
Gai.  i,  §§  59-63.

regards

this    word    as    a

1  Bk.

gloss.

2  The  degree  of  relationship  be-
tween two   individuals   was    deter-
mined by  counting  upwards   from
the  first  to  the  common  ancestor  and
down    again  to    the    second,    each
generation  each  way  marking  a  de-
gree.    Thus  first  cousins  were  re-
lated   in  the   fourth    degree,    each
being  removed  two  generations  or
degrees    from  their  grandfather  as
common .  ancestor.      By  the    same
mode  of  calculation  uncle  and  niece
were  related  in   the   third  degree.
See  pr.   §  7,  I.  de  grad.  cogn.  (iii,
6).

3  This  is  the  reading  of  the  Col-
lat. ;  the  MS.  has  eademque  uxore.

4  From  the  Collat. ;  omitted  in  the
MS.,   or  erroneously  imported  into
the  preceding  line,  as  mentioned  in
last  note.

Comp.  iv,    2  ;  Collat.  vi,  2,  §  4  ;
Gai.  i,  64.

372  EXCERPT  A  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI  [V,  §§  7-10.

licet    uxorem    duxerit,    incesttim     matrimonium    contraliit :
ideoque  liberi  in  potestate  eius  non  fiunt,  sed  quasi  uulgo x

concepti  spurii  sunt.

8  Conubio  interueniente  liberi   semper    patrein   seqimntur :
non   interueniente   conubio  matris  condicioni  accedunt,  ex-
cepto  eo  quiex  peregrine  et  ciue  Romana  peregrinus  nascitur,1
quoniam  lex  Minicia2  ex  alterutro  peregrine  natum    dete-

9  rioris  parentis  condicionem  sequi  iubet.         Ex  ciue  Romano
et   latina   latinus   nascitur,   et  ex  libero  et   ancilla  seruus ;
quoniam,  cum  his  casibus  conubia  non  sint,  partus  sequitur

10  rnatrem.  In  his  qui  iure  contracto  matrimonio  nascuntur
conceptionis  tempus  spcctatur : l  in  his  autem  qui  non  legitime
concipiuntur,  editionis.  ueluti  si  ancilla  conceperit,  deinde
manumissa  pariat,  liberum  parit ;  nam  quoniam  non  legitime
concepit,  cum  editionis  tempore  libera  sit,  partus  quoque  liber
est.

whom  it  is  not  lawful  for  him  to  marry,  his  marriage  is  inces-
tuous ;  his  children  therefore  are  not  in  his  potestas,  but  are
spurious,  as  if  conceived  in  promiscuous  intercourse.

8  If  there  be   conuUum  between  the   parents   the   children
always  follow  the  father.     In  the  absence  of  conubium  they
follow  the  condition  of  the  mother,  except  that  the  issue  of  a
peregrin  father  and  Roman  citizen  mother  is  by  birth  a  pere-
grin ;  for   the   Minician  law    ordains   that   a  child  born  of
parents  of  whom  either  is  a  peregrin  shall  take  his  status

9  from  the  inferior  one.         The  child  of  a  Roman  citizen  father
and  a  latin  mother  is  a  latin,  and  the  child  of  a  free  man  and
a  slave  woman  is  a  slave ;  for,  as  in  these  cases  there  is  no
conubium  between  the  parents,  the  child  follows  its  mother's

10  condition.  In  the  case  of  the  issue  of  a  marriage  con-
tracted according  to  law,  it  is  the  date  of  conception  that  is
referred  to  [in  determining  their  status],  but  when  they  have
been  conceived  illegitimately  it  is  the  time  of  their  birth.
Consequently  if  a  slave  have  conceived,  but  be  manumitted
before  her  confinement,  it  is  to  a  freeman  that  she  gives  birth;
for  although  she  conceived  illegitimately,  yet  as  she  was  free
at  the  time  of  her  delivery,  her  child  also  is  free.

1  See  Gai.  i,  64,  note  2.  78,  note.

§  8.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  78,  67.  §  9.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  79,  82.

1  As  regards  the  issue  of  a  latin  §  10.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  89-92.
father    and    Koman    mother,    see  1  So  most  eds. ;  the  MS.  has  tern-

above,  iii,  3.  pore  expectatur  ;   Bk.    and    Vahl.

-  Mensia  in  the  MS.  ;  see  Gai.  i,  tempore  disceptatur.

1-5.]

LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.

373

[VI.    DE  DO  TIB  VS.}

1  Dos  aut  datur,  aut  dicitur,  aut  promittitur.         [2]  Dotem

2  dicere   potest  mulier  quae  nuptura  est,  et   debitor  mulieris
si  iussu  eius  dicat ;  item l   parens  nmlieris  uirilis  sexus   per
nirilem  sexum  cognatione  iunctus,  uelut  pater  aims  paternus.
dare,  promittere  dotem  omnes  possunt.

3  Dos  aut  profecticia  dicitur,  id  est  quam  pater  mulieris  dedit ;
aut  aduenticia,  id  est  ea  quae  a  quouis  alio  data  est.

4  Mortua  in   matrimonio   muliere   dos  a  patre   profecta  ad
patrem  reuertitur,   quintis  in  singulos  liberos  in   infinitum
relictis  penes  uirum.     quod  si  pater  non  sit,  apud  mariturn

5  remanet.        Aduenticia   autem   dos  semper  penes  maritum
remanet,  praeterquam  si  is  qui  dedit  ut  sibi  redderetur  stipu-
latus  fuerit ;  quae  dos  specialiter  recepticia  dicitur.

[VI.     OF  DOWRIES.}

1  A  dowry  is  either  given,  or  specified,  or  promised.         [2]  It

2  may  be  specified  by  the  woman  about  to  marry  or  any  debtor
of  hers  doing  so  on  her  instructions ;   as  also  by  any  male
ascendant  of  hers  related  to  her  through  males,  such  as  her
father  or  paternal  grandfather.     Any  person   whatever  can
give  or  promise  it.

3  A   dowry  is   either    profecticious,  that   is,   given   by  the
woman's  father,  or  adventicious,  given  by  some  other  person.

4  If  a  woman  die  during  the  subsistence  of  her  marriage  the
dowry  advanced  by  her  father  reverts  to  him,  a  fifth  being
retained  by  the  husband  for  each  of  the  children  until  ex-
hausted.    If  the  father  be  dead  the  whole  remains  with  the

5  husband.         But  an  adventicious  dowry  always  remains  with
the  husband,  unless  the  person  who  gave  it  have  expressly
stipulated  that  it  shall  be  returned  to  him  ;  such  a  dowry  is
called  specifically  recepticious.

fac.it;  therefore  a  dowry  for  an
emancipated  daughter  was  as  much
profecticia,  as  one  for  a,jiliafamilia#,
if  given  by  the  woman's  father  as  a
parental  duty  ;  if,  however,  he  was
indebted  to  his  daughter,  and  gave
it  as  her  debtor  and  by  her  desire,
it  was  aduenticia.

4.  Comp.  Paul,  in  Fr.  Vat.  §  108.

5.  Comp.   below,    xvi,    4,    note   2  ;
lust,  in  1.  1,  §  13,  C.  de  rei  ux.  act.
(v,  13).     On  dos  recepticia,  see  Gai.
in  fr.  31,  §  2,  D.  de  mort.  c.  don.
(xxxix,  6).

TIT.  VI,  §§  1,  2.  On  dotisdictio,  see  Gai.
iii,  96,  note.  Dotem  dare  was  to
constitute  a  dowry  by  instant  trans-
fer to  the  husband  ;  promittere  to
constitute  it  by  stipulatory  promise.
In  the  later  law  it  might  be  pro-
mised informally  by  what  was  called
nuda  pollicitatio;  see  1.  6,  C.  de
dot.  prom,  et  nudapollicit.  (v,  11).
1  The  MS.  has  institutus.

§  3.  Comp.Vlp.  in  fr.  5,  D.  de  iure  dot.
(xxiii,  3).  In  §  11  of  that  fr.  Vlp.
observes  —  non  ius  potestatis  sed
parentis  nomen  dotem  profectickim

374

EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANT          [VI,  §§  6-10.

6  Diuortio  facto,  si  quidem  sui  iuris  sit  mulier,  ipsa  habefc
actionem,  id  est  dotis  repetitionem  ;  quodsi  in  potestate  patris
sit,  pater  adiuncta  filiae  persona  habet  actionem  rei  uxoriae  ; 1

7  nee  interest  aduenticia  sit  dos  an  profecticia.         Post  diuor-
tium  defuncta  muliere  heredi  eius  actio  non  aliter  datur  quam
si  moram  in  dote  mulieri  reddeuda  maritus  fecerit.

8  Dos  si  pondere  numero  mensura  contineatur,  annua  bima
trima  die  redditur,  nisi  si  ut  praesens  reddatur   conueuerit.
reliquae  dotes  statim  redduntur.

9  Eetentiones  ex  dote  fiunt  \_aut propter  liberos]*  aut  propter
mores,   aut  propter  inpensas,  aut   propter   res   donatas,  aut

10  propter  res  amotas.         Propter  liber os  retentio  fit  si  culpa
mulieris  aut  patris  cuius  in  potestate  est  diuortium  factmn

9

10

6  On  divorce,  if  the  woman  be  sui  iuris,  she  herself  is  entitled
to  sue  for  its  recovery ;  if  in  potestate,  her  father  raises  the
actio  rei  uxoriae,  she  being  joined  with  him  in  the  suit ;  and
it  is  immaterial  whether  the  dowry  be  adventicious  or  pro-

7  fecticious.         If  the  woman  die  after  divorce  her  heir  is  not
entitled  to  sue  unless  her  husband  have  been  guilty  of  culp-
able delay  in  restoring  the  dowry  to  her.

8  A  dowry  made  up  of  things  that  pass  by  weight,  number,
or  measure,  is  restored  in  instalments  at  the  end  of  the  first,
second,  and  third  year  [after  the  dissolution  of  the  marriage],
unless  there  have  been  an  agreement  for  its  immediate  resti-
tution.    Other  dowries  are  restored  at  once.

Eetentions  out  of  a  dowry  are  competent  either  on  account
of  children,  on  account  of  immorality,  on  account  of  outlays,
on  account  of  things  donated,  or  on  account  of  things  ab-
stracted. There  is  retention  on  account  of  children  when
divorce  has  occurred  through  the  fault  of  the  wife  or  herpatcr-

§  6.  Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.  2,  D.  sol.  matr.
(xxiv,  3)  ;  Fr.Vat.  §§  116,  119  ;  1. 1,
§  13,  C.  de  rei  ux.  act.  (v,  13).

1  So  Cuj.  and  most  eds. ;  the  MS.
has  reuera, — probably  an  erroneous
rendering  by  the  copyist  of  the  ab-
breviation r.u.  A  few  eds.  trans-
pose the  words,  placing  them  (as  ig
more  appropriate)  after  the  first
habet  actionem.  Others,  again,  in-
sert them  in  both  places.

§  7.  Comp.  fr.  57,  D.  sol.  matr.  (xxiv,
3);  1. 1,  §  4,  C.  de  rei  ux.  act.  (v,  13).

§  8.  Comp.  below,  §  13  ;  fr.  14-16,  D.
de  pact.  dot.  (xxiii,  4)  ;  fr.  1,  §  2,
D.  de  dotepraelerj.  (xxxiii,  4)  ;  1.  1,
§  7,  C.  de  rei  ux.  act.  (v,  13).

§  9.  Comp.  Fr.Vat.  §  120  ;  fr.  5,  D.  de
dote  praeleg.  (xxxiii,  4)  ;  1.  1,  §  5,
C.  de  rei  ux.  act.  (v,  13).  As  regards
retentio  propter  res  donatas,  comp.
Fr.  Vat.  §  103  ;  fr.  66,  §  1,  D.  de
don.  inter  ulr.  et  ux.  (xxiv,  1).  As
regards  that  propter  res  amotas,  see
vii,  2  ;  tit.  D.  de  act.  rer.  amotar.
(xxv,  2) ;  tit.  C.  rer.  am.  (v,  21).

1  Not  in  the  MS.,  but  inserted  by
all  eds.  on  the  strength  of  §  10.

§  10.  Comp.  Boeth.  in  Cic.  Top.  ii,  4,
§  19,  on  the  authority  of  '  Paulus,
Institutorum  libri  secnndi  titulo  de
dotibus'  (Bruns,  p.  295);  vi,  17,
§  65  (Bruns,  same  page)  ;  Fr.  Vat.
§§  105-107.

VI,  §§  10-13.]        LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.

375

sit :  tune  enim  siugulorum  liberorum  nomine  sextae  retinen-

11  tur  ex  dote;  non  plures  tamen  quam  tres.         Sextae  in  re-
tentione  sunt,  non  in  petitione  ;  [nam]  dos  quae  semel  functa
est  amplius  fungi  non  potest,  nisi  aliud  matrimonium  sit.

12  Morum  nomine  grauiorum  quidem  sexta  retinetur,1  leuiorum
autem  octaua.     grauiores  mores  sunt  adulteria  tantum,  leuiores

13  omnes  reliqui.         Mariti  mores  puniuntur  in  "ea  quidem  dote
quae  a  die *  reddi  debet,  ita  [iit\  propter  maiores  mores  prae-
sentem  dotem  reddat,  propter  minores  senum   mensum  die.

familias ;  in  such  a  case  a  sixth  part  is  retained  on  behalf  of

11  each  child,  but  not  more  than  three  sixths  in  all.         Those
sixths,  though  they  may  be  retained,  cannot  be  recovered  by
action  ;  for  a  dowry,  once  it  has  fulfilled  all  its  purposes,  cannot
be  further  dealt  with  as  such  except  in  another  marriage.

12  On  account  of  gross  immorality,  mores  grauiores,  there  is
retention  of    a  sixth ;  for  less  serious,  mores  leuiores,  of  an
eighth.     Adultery  is  the  only  immorality  falling  under  the
head  of  mores  grauiores;  any  other  misconduct  is  included

13  amongst  the  leuiores.         Immorality  on  the  part  of  a  husband
is  punished,  in  the  case  of  a  dowry  repayable  by  instalments,
by  requiring  him  to  make  immediate  restitution  if  his  mis-

par.

The

11.  The  first  six  words  of  this
are  usually  thrown  into  §  10.
remainder  of  it  has  been  the  subject
of  much  comment.  Many  eds.  pro-
fess themselves  unable  to  understand
its  purport,  and  most  hold  it  to  be
out  of  place.  Schill.  (Bemerk.  pp.
369-375)  seems  to  have  given  a  fairly
satisfactory  explanation  of  it.  It  is
intended  to  assign  a  reason  for  the
sextae  in  retentione  sunt,  non  in  peti-
tione ;  and  the  interpolation  of  nam
or  quia  after  these  words  makes  it
quite  simple.

If,  on  the  dissolution  of  a  mar-
riage by  divorce,  the  husband  had
paid  over  the  dowry  without  deduct-
ing any  sixths  to  which  he  was
entitled,  he  could  not  afterwards
recover  them  by  action.  They  were
to  come  out  of  the  dos  ;  but  this  no
longer  existed  as  such  once  it  had
fulfilled  all  its  purposes  and  been
restored  to  the  party  entitled  to  it.
It  might  again  become  a  dowry  in
connection  with  a  subsequent  mar-
riage ;  but  as  regarded  that  which
had  been  dissolved  by  divorce  it
no  longer  had  any  such  character,

and  therefore  could  not  be  affected
by  an  action  instituted  for  payment
of  the  sixths  which  might  lawfully
have  been  deducted  from  it  before
restitution.

§  12.  Conip.  fr.  39,  D.  sol.  matr.  (xxiv,
3)  ;  fr.  11,  §  3,  D.  de  adult,  (xlviii,
5)  ;  tit.  C.  'lh.  de  repud.  (iii,  16) ;
1.  7,  1.  8,  1.  11,  C.  de  repud.  (v,  17).
1  So  Cuj.  and  most  eds.  The  MS.
has  sextae  retinentur,  which  Hu.
retains  on  the  ground  of  the  insuffi-
ciency of  one-sixth  as  a  penalty,  and
on  the  strength  of  a  case  recorded
by  Valer.  Max.  (viii,  2,  §  3)  in
which  a  husband  deprived  his  wife
of  her  whole  dowry  because  of  her
impudicitia.  But  Hu.  omits  to
notice  that,  on  proceedings  by  the
wife,  the  husband  was  held  to  have
acted  illegally,  and  was  compelled
to  restore  it  without  any  deduction.

§  13.     See  refs.  in  note  to  last  par.

1  So  the  MS.  Cuj.  in  his  Notae
preferred  annua  bima  trima  die  (§
11),  and  in  his  Observ.  (vii,  20)  sug-
gested annua  die ;  Bk.  has  ad
diem  ;  Hu.  annua  die.

376  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI   [VI,  §§  13-17  ;  VII,  §  1.

in  ea  autem  quae  praesens  reddi  solet,  tantum  ex  fructibus
iubetur  reddere  quantum  in  ilia  dote  quae  triennio 2  redditur
repraesentatio 3  facit.

14  Inpensarum  species  sunt  tres  :  aut  enim  necessariae  dicun-

15  tur  aut  utiles  aut  uoluptuosae.        Necessariae  sunt  inpensae
quibus  non  factis  dos  deterior  futura  est,  uelut  si  quis  ruinosas

16  aedes  refecerit.         Vtiles  sunt  quibus  non  factis  quidem  de-
terior dos  non  fuerit,  factis    autem   fructuosior   effecta   est,

17  .ueluti  si  uineta  et  oliueta  fecerit.        Voluptuosae  sunt  quibus
neque  omissis  deterior  dos  fieret  neque  factis  fructuosior  effecta
est ;  quod  euenit  in  uiridiariis  et  picturis  similibusque  rebus.

[VII.    DE  IV RE  DONATION VM  INTER  VIRVM  ET  VXOREM.]
1       Inter  uirum  et  uxorem  donatio  non  ualet    nisi  certis    ex

conduct  amount  to  adultery,  and  in  six  months  if  it  be  less
serious  :  where  it  is  returnable  at  once,  he  must  pay  in  addi-
tion, out  of  the  fruits  and  profits,  a  sum  equal  to  the  difference
in  value  between  instant  repayment  and  repayment  in  three
annual  instalments.

14  Of  outlays  there  are  three  varieties  ;  they  are  described  as

15  either  necessary,  useful,  or  pleasure -giving.         Those  outlays
are  necessary  by  whose  omission  the  dowry  would  be  dimin-
ished  in  value, — expenditure,   for  instance,   in   repairing   a

16  house  going  to  ruin.         Those  are  useful  whose  omission  does
not  indeed  render  the  dowry  less  valuable,  but  whose  dis-
bursement makes  it  more  profitable,  as  when  land  is  laid  out

17  in  vineyards   or   olive  plantations.         Those    are   pleasure -
giving  whose  omission  will  not  render  the  dowry  less  valuable,
but  whose  disbursement  will  not  make  it  more  profitable ;  such
is  the  case  with  [expenditure  on]  pleasure-grounds,  pictures,
and  such  like.

[  VII.     OF  THE  LA  W  OF  DONA TIONS  BETWEEN  HUSBAND

AND   W1FE.~\

1       A  donation  between  husband  and  wife  is  invalid  except  in

2  So   Hugo  and    all    subsequent  fr.  79,  D.  de  V.  S.  (1,  16) ;  fr.  1,  fr.
eds.;    the   MS.  and  earlier  editions  5,  fr.  7,  fr.  14,  D.  de  inpens.  (xxv,
have  quadriennio.  1);  1. 1,  §  5,  C.  de  rei  ux.  act.  (v,  13).

3  So  Cuj.  and  most  eds. ;  the  MS.

has  repensatio,  which  Bk.  and  Vahl.  TIT.  VII.     This  rubric  is  obviously  in-

retain.     Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.  1,  §§2,  appropriate,  and   due— as   most  of

12,  fr.  2,   pr.  D.   de  dote  praeltg.  them  are— either  to   the  epitomist

(xxxiii,  4).  or  some  transcriber  of  his  original.

§§  14-17.     Comp.  §  37,  I.  de  act.  (iv,  6)  ;  The  contents  of  the  first  two  pars.

VII,  §§1-4.]          LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  377

causis,  id  est  mortis  causa,  diuortii  causa,  serui  rnanumittendi
gratia,  hoc  amplius  principalibus  constitutionibus  coiicessum
est  mulieri  in  hoc  donare  uiro  suo,  ut  is  ab  imperatore  lato
clauo l  uel  equo  publico 2  similiue  honore  honoretur.

2  Si  maritus 1  diuortii  causa  res  amouerit,2  rerum  quoque  *
amotarum  actione  tenebitur.

3  Si  maritus  pro  muliere  se  obligauerit  uel  in  rem  eius  in-
penderit,  diuortio  facto  eo  nomine  cauere  sibi  solet  stipulatione
tribunicia.

4  In  potestate  parentum  sunt  etiam  hi  liberi  quorum  causa

a  few  cases,  namely,  when  made  in  prospect  of  death,  in  pro-
spect of  divorce,  or  to  procure  the  manumission  of  a  slave.
Further,  by  imperial  constitutions  a  woman  is  allowed  to
make  a  gift  to  her  husband  to  enable  him  to  obtain  from  the
emperor  the  distinction  of  senatorial  or  equestrian  rank,  or
some  other  honour  of  that  sort.

2  If  a  husband  have  theftuously  abstracted  anything  of  his
wife's  in  prospect  of  divorce,  he  also  is  responsible  in  an  actio
rerum  amotarum.

3  If  a  husband  have  become  bound  for  his  wife,  or  have
spent  money  upon  her  property,  it  is  usual  for  him,  in  the
event  of  divorce,  to  secure  himself  in  respect  thereof  by  a
tribunician  stipulation.

4  Those  children  also  are  in  the  potestas  of  their  parents  on

clearly  indicate  that  Vlp.  had  gone  quoque  suggests  that  he  had  referred

on  to  explain  the  retentiones  propter  to  it  in  the  first  instance,  although

res  donatas   and   res  amotas,    and  the  reference  has  disappeared,

that  it  was  in  illustration  of  the  first  l  So   in  the   MS.      M.    and    Hu.

that  he   mentioned  the  matter  of  think  it  should  be  mttlier  or  uxor.

donationsbetween  husband  and  wife.  As  the  texts  referred  to  show,    it

Pars.  2-4  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  was  competent  to  either  party.

§  1.     Comp.  Paul,  ii,  23  ;  fr.   1,  fr.   40,  2  The  MS.  has  mouerit.

fr.  42,  fr.  60,  §  1,  D.  de  donat.  inter      §  3.     Comp.  fr.  25,  §  4,  fr.  55,  D.  sol.

uir.  (xxi,  1).  matr.  (xxv,  2).     When,  on  divorce,

1  The   latus  dauus  was  a  broad  a  man  was  sued  for  restitution  of  a
perpendicular    band    or     stripe    of  dowry  in  respect  of  which  he,  as  its
purple  sewed  on  the  tunic  from  the  owner  during  the  marriage,  had  in-
throat  downwards,  and  one  of  the  curred  obligations  to  third  parties,
badges     of     senatorial    rank ;     see  he  was  entitled  to  require  that  his
Smith's  D.  G.  R.  A.  v.  Clauus  latus.  wife  should  first  give  him  an  under-

2  Equo   publico    honoratus    is    a  taking  of  relief.     This  was  done  by
phrase  that  occurs  in  many  inscrip-  a  stipulation,  which  Vlp.  calls  tri-
tions  as  indicative  of  admission  to  bunician,    probably    because    sanc-
the  ranks  of  the  equites.  tioned   originally  by  the   plebeian

§  2.     Comp.  fr.  1,  fr.  7,  D.  de  act.  rer.  tribunes,   who  were  not  without  a

amotar.  (xxv.    2).     The   husband's  limited  iurisdictlo.     Comp.  fr.  2,  §

action    against    his    wife    on    this  34,  D.  de  0.  I.  (i,  2).

ground    is   much    more  frequently  §  4.     Vlp.    here  reverts  to   his  proper

alluded  to  in  the  texts  ;  andUlpian's  subject-matter,  —  creation  of  the

378

EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIAXI      [VII,  §  4 ;  VIII,  §§  1,  2.

probata  est,  per  errorem  contracto  matrimonio  inter  disparis
condicionis  personas : 1  nam  siue  ciuis  Eomanus  latinam  aut
peregrinam  uel  earn  quae  dediticiorurn  numero  est  quasi
[ciuem  Bomanarri]  2  per  ignorantiam  uxorem  duxerit,  siue  ciuis
Eomana  per  errorem  peregrino  uel  ei  qui  dediticiorum  nuniero
est  \_quasi  ciui  Romano]  2  aut  etiam  quasi  latino  ex  lege  Aelia
Sentia  nupta  fuerit,  causa  probata  ciuitas  Eomana  datur 3  tarn
liberis  quam  parentibus,  praeter  eos  qui  dediticiorum  numero
sunt ;  et  ex  eo  fiunt  in  potestate  parentum  liberi.

[  VIII.     DE  ADOPTIONIB  VS.']

1  Non   tantum  naturales  liberi  in  potestate  parentum   sunt

2  sed  etiam  adoptiui.         Adoptio  fit  aut  per  populum  aut  per
praetorem  uel  praesidem  prouinciae.     ilia  adoptio  quae  per

whose  behalf  cause  [of  error]  has  been  proved  when  a
marriage  has  been  contracted  by  mistake  between  persons
of  unequal  condition;  for  whether  it  be  a  Koman  citizen
that  in  ignorance  has  taken  to  wife  a  latin  or  a  peregrin
or  a  woman  of  deditician  condition,  believing  that  he  was
marrying  a  citizen  ;  or  a  woman  who  is  a  Eoman  citizen  that
by  mistake  has  given  herself  in  marriage  to  a  peregrin  or  a
man  of  the  deditician  class,  believing  him  to  be  a  Eoman
citizen,  or  even  believing  him  to  be  a  latin  whom  she  was
marrying  in  terms  of  the  Aelia-Sentian  law, — on  the  cause
[of  error]  being  proved  Eoman  citizenship  is  granted  as
well  to  the  children  as  the  parents,  excepting  those  who  are
only  dediticians ;  and  thus  the  children  pass  into  the  potestas
of  their  parents.

[VIII.     OF  ADOPTIONS.}

1  It  is  not  only  natural  but  also  adoptive  children  that  are

2  in  the  potestas  of  parents.         Adoption  is  effected  either  by
intervention  of  the  people  or  by  that  of  a  praetor  or  pro-

That  effected  by  intervention  of  the  people

vincial  governor.

patria  potestas.  For  it  arose  either
from  marriage,  tit.  v  (to  which  the
law  of  dowries,  vi,  vii,  3,  is  an  ap-
pendix) ;  or  causae  probatio,  vii,  4  ;
or  adoption,  tit.  viii.  With  this
par.  comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  65-75.

1  So  Hugo  and  most  subsequent
eds. ;  the  MS.  has  dispares  condignis
X>ersonarum ;  Cuj.  dispares  con-

dignis  personas;  later  eds.    before
Hugo  dispares  condicione  personas.

2  Omitted  from  the  MS.

3  The   MS.    has  reddatur ;    obvi-
ously a  mistake  of  the  copyist  in
transcribing  r.  (=  Romano)  datur.

TIT.  viii.     See  note  to  vii,  4.
§§  1-5.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  97-102.

VIII,  §§  3-8a.]       LIBEO  SIXGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  379

3  populum  fit,  specialiter  adrogatio  dicitur.         Per  populum  qui
sui  iuris  sunt  adrogantur ;  per  praetorem  autem  filii  familiae  a

4  parentibus  dautur  in  adoptionem.         Adrogatio  Romae  dum-
taxat l  fit ;  adoptio  autem  etiam  in  prouinciis  apud  praesides.

5  Per  praetorem  uel  praesidem  prouinciae  adoptari  tarn  mas-
culi  quam  feminae,  et  tarn  puberes  quam  inpuberes  possunt.
per  populum  uero  Romanum  feminae 2  non  adrogantur  ;  pupilli
ante  quidem 3  non  poterant  adrogari,  nunc  autem  possunt  ex

C  constitutione  diui  Antonini.         Hi  qui  generare  non  possunt,
uelut  -  spado,  utroque  modo  possunt  adoptare.     idem  iuris  est

7  in  persona    caelibis.          Item  is    qui   filiuni   non   habet  in

8  locum  nepotis  adoptare  potest.         Si  pater  familiae  adrogan-
dum  se  dederit,  liberi  quoque  ems  quasi  nepotes  in  potestate

Safiunt   adrogatoris.          Feminae   uero   neutro    modo   possunt
adoptare,  quoniam  nee  naturales  liberos  in  potestate  habent.

3  is  specifically  called  adrogation.         It  is  persons  sui  iuris
that  are  adrogated  by  the   people's    authority ;  JiUifamilias
are  given  in  adoption  by  their  parents  by  authority  of  the

4  praetor.         Adrogation  can  take  place  only  in  Rome ;   but
adoption  may  take  place  even  in  the  provinces  before  the

5  governors.         Both  males  and  females,  and  whether  puberate
or  impuberate,  may  be  adopted  by  authority  of  a  praetor  or
governor  of  a  province.     But  women  cannot  be  adrogated  by
co-operation  of  the  Roman  people ;  neither  in  former  days
could  pupils,  although  now  they  may  according  to  one  of  the

6  constitutions  of  the  late  emperor  Antoninus  [Pius].         Those
who  are  unable  to  procreate,  such  as  eunuchs,  may  adopt
by  either  mode.      The  rule  is  the  same  in  the  case  of  an

7  unmarried  person.         Further,  he  who  has  no  son  may  adopt

8  [a  child]  in  the  character  of  a  grandson.         When  a  pater-
familias gives  himself  in  adrogation,  his  children  also  fall
under  the  potestas  of  the  adrogator  in  the  character  of  grand-

Sachildren.         But  women   cannot   adopt   by  either   method,
for  they  have  not  even  their  natural  children  in  potestate.

1  So  L.  and  most  subsequent  eds. ;  3  So  the   earliest  editions,    and
a  few  have    tantum ;  the  MS.    has  now  M.     The  MS.  has  aut  quidem.
data, — a  corruption  by  the  copyist,  Bk.    (in  his   later   editions)    reads
as  L.  suggests,  of  the  abbreviation  pupilli    autem    quondam ;     Vahl. ,
dt.  following  Schill. ,  pupilli  autem  olim

2  The   MS.    has  feminae  quidem.  quidem ;  Hu.  pupilli  qui  [olim]  item.
The  last  word,   though  apparently       §  6.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  103.

an  addition  by  another  hand,   has       §  7.     Comp.  §  5,  I.  de  adopt,  (i,  11).
been  accepted   by  most   eds.;    M.,       §8.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  107.
however,  rejects  it.  §  Sa.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  104.

380

EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI      [IX ;  X,  §§  1,  2.

[  VII1I.    DE  HIS  Q  VI  IN  MANY  8 VN T. ]

Farreo  conuenit  uxor  in  manum  certis  uerbis  et  testibus  x
praesentibus  et  sollemni  sacrificio  facto,  in  quo  panis  quoque
farreus  adhibetur.

[X.     Q  VI  IN  PO  TESTA  TE  MANCIPIO  VE  S  VNT  Q  VEMADMOD  VM

EO  IV RE  LIBERENTVR.]

1  Liberi  parentum  potestate  liberantur  emancipatione,  id  est
si  posteaquam  mancipati  fuerint  manumissi  sint.      sed  films
quidem  ter  mancipatus  ter  manumissus  sui  iuris  fit ;  id  enim
lex  duodecim  tabularum  iubet  his  uerbis :  '  si  pater  filium  ter
uenumdauit,1  filius  a  patre   liber  esto.'     ceteri  autem  liberi
praeter  filium,  tarn  masculi  quam  feminae,  una  mancipatione

2  manumissioneque  sui  iuris  fiunt.         Morte  patris  filius  et  filia
sui  iuris  fiunt :  morte  autem  aui  nepotes  ita  demum  sui  iuris

[IX.     OF  THOSE  WHO  ARE  IN  MANU.}

There  is  conventio  in  manum  farreo  by  exchange  of  certain
words  in  the  presence  of  ten  witnesses,  and  the  offering  of  a
solemn  sacrifice,  in  which  a  spelt  cake  plays  a  part.

[X.     HOW  PERSONS  IN  POTESTATE  OR  IN  MANCIPIO  ARE
LIBERATED  THEREFROM.]

1  Descendants  are  freed  from  the  potestas  of  ascendants  by
emancipation,  that  is,  when  they  are  manumitted  after  having
been  mancipated.     A  son  indeed  becomes  sui  iuris  only  when
thrice  mancipated  and  thrice  manumitted;    so  the  Twelve
Tables  ordain  in  these  words :  '  If  a  father  have  thrice  sold
his  son,  the  son  shall  be  free  from  his  father.'    But  other
descendants  than  sons,  males  as  well  as  females,  become  sui

2  iuris  by  one  mancipation  and  one  manumission.         Sons  and
daughters  become  sui  iuris  by  the  death   of  their  father;
grandchildren,  however,  become  sui  iuris  by  the  death  of  their

TIT.  ix.  Comp.  Gai.  i,  112.  Far  was
a  coarse  kind  of  wheat,  the  triti-
cum  spelta  of  botanists.  The  epito-
mist  has  not  preserved  the  account
which  Vlp.  must  doubtless  have
given  of  the  other  modes  of  creating
manus ;  because  when  he  compiled
his  abridgment  it  had  ceased  to  be
recognised  except  for  sacred  pur-

poses, which  required  confarreation
(Gai.  i,  136,  and  note).

TIT.  x,  §  1.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  132.

1  So    the    MS.  ;  some    eds.    have

uenundabit ;   others  uenumduit  (as

in  Gai.).
§  2.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  127.

X,  §§2-5.]  LIBRO  SINGVLARI  EEGVLARVM.  381

fiunt  si  post  mortem  aui  in  potestate  patris  futuri  non  sunt,
uelut  si  moriente  auo  pater  eorum  aut  iam l  decessit  aut  de
potestate  dimissus  est :  nam  si  mortis  aui  tempore  pater
eorum  in  potestate  eius  sit,  mortuo  auo  in  patris  sui  potestate

3  fiunt.         Si  patri  uel  filio  aqua  et  igni  interdictum  sit  patria
potestas  tollitur,  quia  peregrinus  fit  is  cui  aqua  et  igni  inter-
dictum  est ;  neque  autem  peregrinus  ciuem  Eomanum  neque

4  ciuis  Eomanus  peregrinum  in  potestate  habere  potest.         Si
pater  ab  hostibus  captus  sit,  quamuis   seruus  hostium   fiat,
tamen  cum  reuersus  fuerit  omnia  pristina  iura  recipit  iure
postliminii.     sed  quamdiu  apud  hostes  est  patria  potestas  in
filio  eius  interim  pendebit,  et  cum  reuersus  fuerit  ab  hostibus
in  potestate  filium  habebit ;  si  uero  ibi  decesserit,  sui  iuris
filius  erit.    Films  quoque  si  captus  fuerit  ab  hostibus,  similiter

5  propter  ius  postliminii  patria  potestas  interim  pendebit.         In
potestate  parentum  esse  desinunt  et  hi  qui  flamines  Diales
inaugurantur  et  quae  uirgines  Vestae  capiuntur.

grandfather  only  when  on  that  event  they  will  not  be  in  the
potestas  of  their  father,  as  for  example  when,  at  the  time
of  their  grandfather's  death,  their  father  is  either  already  dead
or  released  from  potestas ;  for  if,  when  the  grandfather  dies,
the  children's  father  is  in  the  grandfather's  potestas,  by  the
death  of  the  latter  they  become  subject  to  the  potestas  of  their

3  father.         If  either  father  or  son  be  interdicted  fire  and  water
the  patria  potestas  is  put  an  end  to ;  for  a  person  to  whom  this
happens  becomes  a  peregrin  ;  and  neither  can  a  peregrin  have
a  Roman  citizen  in  his  potestas,  nor  a  citizen  a  peregrin.

4  If  a  father  be  taken  captive  by  an  enemy,  although  he  thereby
becomes   a   slave  of  the  enemy's,  yet  when   he   returns  he
recovers  all  his  former  rights  iure  postliminii.     So  long  as
he  is  in  the  enemy's  hands  his  potestas  over  his  son  is  for  the
time  suspended ;  if  he  return  home  he  will  again  have  him
in  potestate ;  but  if  he  die  in  captivity  his  son  will  be  sui
iuris.     And  so  too  if  a  son  be  captured  by  an  enemy,  the
potestas  of  his  father  will  in  like  manner  be  suspended  for  the

5  time  on  account  of  the  ius  postliminii.         Those  also  cease
to  be  in  potestate  who  are  consecrated  as  flamens  of  Jupiter  or
taken  as  Vestal  virgins.

1  The  MS.   and   some    eds.   have      §  3.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  128,  and  note  2.
etiam  ;  we  have  iam  in  the  passage      §  4.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  129  ;  below,  xxiii,  5.
of  Gai.  referred  to.  §  5.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  130,  145.

EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI  [XI,  §§  1-5.

[XL     DE  TVTELIS.']

1  Tutores  constituuntur  tarn   masculis   quam   feminis :    sed
masculis  quidem  inpuberibus  dumtaxat  propter  aetatis  infir-
mitatem ;  feminis  autem  [tain]  inpuberibus  quam  puberibus,
et   propter  sexus  infirmitatem  et   propter   forensium   rerum
ignorantiam.

2  Tutores  aut  legitimi  sunt  aut  senatusconsultis  constituti  aut
moribus  introducti.

3  Legitimi  tutores  sunt  [yui]  ex  lege  aliqua  descendunt ;  per
eminentiarn  autem  legitimi  dicuntur  qui  ex  lege  duodecim
tabularum  introducuntur,  sen  propalam,  quales  sunt   agnati,

4  seu  per  consequential^  quales  sunt  patroni.         Agnati  sunt  a
patre  cognati  uirilis  sexus  *  per  uirileni  sexum  descendentes
eiusdem  familiae,2  uelut  patrui,  fratres,  filii  fratris,  patrueles.

5  Qui  liberuni  caput  mancipatum  sibi  uel  a  parente  uel  a
coemptionatore  *  manumisit,  per  similitudinem  patroni  tutor
efficitur,  qui  fiduciarius  tutor  appellatur.

[XL     OF  TU TORIES.]

1  Tutors  are  appointed  both  to  males  and  females :  but  to
males  only  while  under  puberty,  because  of  their  infirmity
of  age;    to  females,   however,  both   while   under   and   over
puberty,   on   account   both   of    their   infirmity   of    sex   and
ignorance  of  forensic  matters.

2  Tutors  are  either  tutors-at-law,  or  derive  their  office  from
a  senatusconsult,  or  have  had  it  introduced  by  custom.

3  Those  are  tutors-at-law,  legitimi,  who  derive  their  office  from
some  lex  ;  but  those  are  emphatically  so  called  who  owe  it  to
the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  either  directly,  such  as  agnates,

4  or  by  implication,  as  patrons.         Agnates  are  persons  of  the
male  sex  related   through  a   common   father,  tracing   their
descent  from  him  through  males,  and  members  of  the  same
family;  for  example,  paternal  uncles,  brothers,  a  brother's
sons,  a  paternal  uncle's  sons.

5  He  who  has  manumitted  a  free  person,  mancipated  to  him
either  by  a  parent  or  a  coemptioiiator,  becomes  that  person's
tutor  after  the  manner  of  a  patron,  and  is  called  a  fiduciary  tutor.

TIT.  xi,  §  1.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  144,  189-  agnates,    no    doubt    because    they

193.  could  not  be  tutors.

§  2.     Legitimi,  §§  3-20  ;  Sctis.  constituti,  2  Eiusdem  familiae    means    un-

§§  20-23  ;  moribus  introducti,  §  24.  emancipated  ;  for  emancipation,  as

§  3.  '  Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  155,  165.  a  capitis  minutio,  severed  the  bond

§  4.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  156  ;  iii,  10  ;  below,  of  agnation  (§§  9,  13).
xxvi,  1.                                                       §  5.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  166.

1  This  definition  excludes  female  1  Comp.  Gai.  i,  115.

XI,  §§  6-12.]          LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  383

6  Legitimi    tutores   alii    tutelam    in    iure   cedere   possunt.

7  Is  cui  tutela  in   iure  cessa   est   cessicius  tutor  appellatur;
qui  siue  mortuus  fuerit,  siue  capite  minutus,  siue  alii  tutelam
cesserit,1    redit    ad   legitimum   tutorem   tutela.       sed   et    si
legitimus    decesserit    aut    capite    minutus     fuerit,    cessicia

8  quoque  tutela  extinguitur.         Quantum  ad  agnatos  pertinet
hodie  cessicia  tutela  non  procedit,  quoniam  permissum  erat  in
iure  cedere  tutelam  feininarum  tantum,  non  etiam  masculo-
rum  ;  feminarum  autem  legitimas  tutelas  lex  Claudia  sustulit*
excepta  tutela  patronorum.

9  Legitima  tutela  capitis  deminutione  amittitur.       [10]  Capi-

10  tis   minutionis  species    sunt  tres,  maxima,  media,  minima.

11  Maxima  capitis  deminutio  est  per  quam  et  ciuitas  et  libertas
amittitur,  ueluti   cum   incensus   aliquis   uenierit,   aut   quod
mulier  alieno  seruo  se  iunxerit  denuntiante  domino,  et  ancilla

12  facta  fuerit '  ex  senatusconsulto  Claudiano.         Media  capitis
deminutio4  dicitur  per  quam,  sola  ciuitate  arnissa,  libertas  re-

6  A  tutor- at-law  may  transfer  his  tutory  to  another  person

7  by  cession  in  court.         He  to  whom  it  is  ceded  gets  the  name
of  tutor  cessicius.     If  he  die,  or  be  capite  minutus,  or  cede  the
tutory  to  a  third  party,  it  reverts  to  the  tutor- at-law.    And  if
it  is  the  latter  that  dies  or  is  capite  minutus,  the  cessicia

8  tutela  then  also  comes  to  an  end.         So  far  as  agnates  are
concerned,  there  is  now-a-days  no  room  for  a  cessicia  tutela ;
for  it  never  was  lawful  to  cede  a  tutory  over  males,  but  only
that  over  females ;  and  the  Claudian  law  has  abolished  the
tutories-at-law  over  women,  except  that  exercised  by  patrons.

9  A  tutory-at-law  is  lost  by  capitis  deminutio.          [10]   And

10  this  is  of  three  kinds, — the  greatest,  the  intermediate,  and  the

11  smallest.         That  capitis  deminutio  is  of  the  highest  degree
in  which  both  citizenship  and  liberty  are  lost,  as  when  a  man
is  sold  for  avoiding  enrolment  in  the  census-list,  or  a  woman
has    become   a   slave    under    the   Claudian    senatusconsult,
because  she  has  insisted  in  cohabiting  with  another  person's

12  slave  notwithstanding  that  person's  warnings.       That  is  said
to  be  of  the  intermediate  degree  in  which,  although  citizen-
ship is  lost,  freedom  is  retained ;  it  occurs  on  interdiction  of

i§  6-8.     Comp.  §17  ;  Gai.  i,  §§168-171.  2  So  Cuj.   and  all  eds. ;  the   MS.

1  The   MS.    has  pcesserit ;    hence  has  sustinet.

many  eds.  read^orro  cesserit.     K.,  §  9.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  158,  195a.

following  Boeder,  in  iure  (in  i.)  ces-  §  10-13.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  159-162.
serit.     Following  the   earliest   edi-  *  Hu.    reads— aut    mulier,    quod

tions,  I  have   dropped   the    initial  alieno  seruo  se  iunxerit  denuntiante

letter.  domino  eius,  ancilla,  facta  fuerit.

384  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI       [XI,  §§  13-17.

13  tinetur ;  quod  fit  in  eo  cui  aqua  et  igni  interdicitur.         Mi-
nima capitis  deminutio  est  per  quam,  et  ciuitate  et  libertate
salua,  status  dumtaxat  hominis  2  mutatur ;  quod  fit  adoptione
et  in  manum  conuentione.3

14  Testamento  quoque  norninatim  tutores  dati  confirmantur
eadem  lege   duodecim   tabularum  his   uerbis:    'uti  legassit
super  l  pecunia  tutelaue 2  suae  rei,3  ita  ius  esto : '  qui  tutores

15  datiui  appellantur.4        Dari  testamento  tutores  possunt  liberis

16  qui  in  potestate  sunt.         Testamento  tutores  dari  possunt  hi
cum  quibus  testamenti  faciendi  ius  est,1  praeter  latinum  luni-
anurn ;  nam  latinus  habet  quidem  testamenti  factionem,  sed
tamen  tutor  dari  non  potest;  id  enim  lex  lunia  prohibet.

17  Si   capite    deminutus   fuerit 1   tutor   testamento    datus,   non
amittit  tutelam;  sed  si  abdicauerit1  se  tutela,  desinit  esse

13  fire  and  water.         It  is  of  the  lowest  degree  when,  without
loss  of  either  citizenship  or  liberty,  there  is  simply  a  change
in  a  person's  domestic  status,  as  happens  in  adoption  and  in
manum  conuentio.

14  Tutors  appointed  by  name  in  a  testament  are  also  con-
firmed [i.e.  have  their  appointment  sanctioned]  by  the  same
law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  in  these  words:  'As  a  man  has
legated  in  regard  to  his  belongings,  whether  about  property
or  tutory,   so   be   it   law;'    such    tutors   are   called   dative.

15  Tutors  may  be  appointed  by  testament  to  children  in  potestate

16  [of  the  testator].         Those  persons  may  thus  be  appointed
tutors  with  whom  the  testator  has  testamenti  factio,  except  a
Junian  latin.    For  although  it  is  true  that  a  latin  has  testa-
menti factio,  yet  he  cannot  be  appointed  tutor ;  the  Junian

17  law  forbids  it.         If  a  testamentary  tutor  be  capite  deminutus
he  does  not  lose  his  tutory,  but  if  he  have  abdicated  he  ceases

2  Homo  means  the   man  rather      §  15.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  144.

than  the  citizen, — the  individual  in  §  16.     Comp.  Paul,  in  fr.  21,  D.  de  test.

his  private  rather  than  his  political  tut.  (xxvi,  2).

character.  1  See  Gai.  ii,  114,  note  1  ;  i,  23.

3  The  MS.  has  in  manu  conditions.  §  17.     Comp.  above,  §  7.
§  14.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  224,  104,  note  8.  l  Comp.  §  9.

1  Bk.,    on  the   authority  of  Cic.  2  Comp.   Cic.  ad  Att.  vi,  1,  §  3.
de.  inv.  ii,    50,  §   148,  interpolates              Abdicatio  seems  to  have  been  re-

familia.  nunciation  of  a  tutory  in  course  of

2  The  MS.  has  pecuniam  tutelabae.  administration.     There  is  no   trace

3  Vti  legassit  suae  rei  is  the  same  of  it  either  in  Gai.   or  in  the  Jus-
thing  as  uti  legem  dedisset  suae  rei ;  tinianian  law  ;  indeed  it  seems  quite
the  last  two  words  are  in  the  dative,  inconsistent  with  the  idea  that  per-
not  the  genitive.  vades  the  whole  of  tit.  I.  de  excusat.

4  Comp.  Gai.  i,  154.  tut.  (i,  25).

I  e

XI,  §§  17-21.]        LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  385

tutor :  abdicare  autem  est  dicere  nolle  se  tutorem  esse.  in  iure
cedere  3  autem  tutelam  testamento  datus  non  potest :  nam  et  *
legitimus  in  iure  cedere  potest,  abdicare  se  non  potest.

18  Lex  Atilia   iubet   mulieribus   pupillisue   non  habentibus
tutores  dari  a  praetore  et  maiore  parte  tribunorum  plebis,
quos   tutores   Atilianos   appellanaus.       sed   quia    lex   Atilia
Eomae  tantum  loeum  habet,  lege  lulia  et  Titia  prospectum
est  lit  in  prouinciis  quoque  similiter  a  praesidibus  earum

19  dentur  tutores.        Lex  lunia  tutorem  fieri  iubet  latinae  uel
latini  inpuberis1  eum  cuius  etiam  ante  manumissionem  ex

20  iure2  Quiritium  fuit.         Ex  lege  lulia  de  maritandis  ordini-
bus  tutor  datur  a  praetore  urbis  ei  mulieri  uirginiue  quam  ex
hac  ipsa  lege  nubere  oportet,  ad  dotem  dandam  dicendam  pro-
mittendamue,1  si  legitimum  tutorem  pupillum  habeat.     sed
postea  senatus  censuit  ut  etiam  in  prouinciis  quoque  similiter

21  a  praesidibus  earum  ex  eaclem  causa  tutores  dentur.         Prae-
terea  etiam  in  locum  muti  furiosiue  tutoris  alterum  dandum

to  be  tutor ;  (to  abdicate  is  to  intimate  tbat  he  declines  to  be
tutor).  He  cannot,  however,  transfer  his  tutory  to  another  by
cession  in  court ;  a  tutor-at-law  may,  but  he  cannot  abdicate.

18  The  Atilian  law  ordains  that  tutors  shall  be  appointed  by
the  praetor  and  the  majority  of   the  plebeian   tribunes  to
women  and  pupils  who  have  none ;  and  such  tutors  are  called
Atilian.    But  as  this  enactment  does  not  extend  beyond  Rome,
it  is  provided  by  the  Julian  and  Titian  law  that  in  the  pro-
vinces tutors  shall  be  similarly  appointed  by  the  governors

19  thereof.         The  Junian  law  ordains  that  a  latin  woman,  or  a
male  latin  under  puberty,  shall  have  as  tutors  those  to  whom
they  belonged  in  quiritarian  right   previous  to  their  manu-

20  mission.         By  the  Julian  law  for  regulating  the  marriages
of  the  orders,  a  tutor  is   appointed  by  the  praetor  to  any
woman  or  virgin  required  by  that  enactment  to  marry,  on  pur-
pose to  enable  her  to  give,  specify,  or  promise  a  dowry,  when
her  tutor-at-law  is  a  pupil  [and  therefore  unable  to  grant  his
auctoritas].     Afterwards  the  senate  decreed  that  in  the  pro-
vinces tutors  should  be  similarly  appointed  for  the  same  pur-

21  pose   by   the  provincial    governors.         The    senate    further
decreed  that  where  a  tutor  is  dumb  or  insane  another  shall

3  Comp.  §§  6-8.  2  The  MS.,  here  as  elsewhere,  has

4  So  most  eds. ;  the   MS.  has  na  qui  ius.

et ;  M.  suggests  tametsi.  §20.     Comp.   Gai.  i,  §§  178,  183,  and
§  18.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  185.  note  to  §§  173,  174.

§  19.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  167  ;  above,  i,  16.  l  Comp.  vi,  1.

1  The  MS.  has  latinis  impuberibus.  §  21.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  180.

2B

386  EXCEEPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI       [XI,  §§  22-26.

22  esse  tutorem  ad  dotem  constituendam  senatus  censuit.       Item
ex  senatusconsulto  tutor  datur  mulieri  ei  cuius  tutor  abest,
praeterquam  si  patronus  sit  qui  abest :  nam  in  locum  patroni
absentis  alter 1  peti  non  potest  nisi  ad  hereditatem  adeundam
et  nuptias  contrahendas.     idemque  permisit  in  pupillo  patroni

23  filio.         Hoc  amplius   senatus   censuit,   ut  si  tutor  pupilli
pupillaeue  suspectus  a  tutela  submotus  fuerit,  uel  etiam  iusta
de  causa  excusatus,  in  locum  eius  tutor  alius  [detur].1

24  Moribus  tutor  datur  mulieri  pupilloue  qui  cum  tutore  suo
lege1  aut  legitimo  iudicio2   agere  uult,  ut  auctore  eo  agat,3
(ipse  enim  tutor  in  rem  suam 4  auctor  fieri  non  potest),  qui
praetorius5  tutor  dicitur,  quia  a  praetore  urbis  dari  consueuit.

25  Pupillorum   pupillarumque   tutores   et  negotia   gerunt   et
auctoritatem  interponunt;  mulierurn  autem  tutores  auctori-

26  tatem  dumtaxat  interponunt.       Si  plures  sunt  tutores,  omnes

be  appointed  in  his  place  for  the  purpose  of  constituting  a

22  dowry.          A  tutor  is  also  given   under  the  senatusconsult
to  a  woman  whose  tutor  is  absent,  unless  the  absentee  be  her
patron ;  for  another  tutor  cannot  be  petitioned  for  [by  a  freed-
wornan]  in  place  of  an  absent  patron,  except  for  the  special
purpose  of  enabling  her  to  enter  upon  a  succession  or  contract
marriage.     It  sanctions  the  same  course  where  a  [deceased]

23  patron's  son  is  in  pupillarity.         Further,  the  senate  has  also
decreed  that  if  the  tutor  of  a  male  or  female  pupil  be  removed
as  suspect,  or  for  some  good  reason  be  excused,  another  shall
be  appointed  in  his  place.

24  By  customary  law  a  tutor  is   appointed  to  a  woman  or
pupil  who  proposes  to  proceed  against  her  [proper]  tutor  either
by  legis  actio  or  in  a  legitimum  indicium,  on  purpose  that  he
may  be  auctor  in  the  suit, — for  a  tutor  cannot  be  auctor  in
an  affair  of  his  own;  and  such  an  one  is  called  a  praetorian
tutor,  because  it  has  been  the  custom  for  the  urban  praetor
to  make  the  appointment.

25  The  tutors  of  pupils,  both  male  and  female,  both  act  for
them  and  [act  with  them,  i.e.]  interpone  auctoritas ;  but  the

26  tutors  of  women  only  interpone  auctoritas.         If  there  be

§  22.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  173-177,  179.  2  Comp.  Gai.  iv,  104.

1  So  most  eds.    The  MS.  has  alter,  3  Comp.  §  27.

which  L.,    Bk.,  and  Vahl.  render  *  Comp.  §  3,  note  1,  I.  deauct.  tut.

aliter.     Hu.  reads  a  liberta  tutor.  (i,  21).
§  23.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  182.  5  The  MS.  has  praetorianus ;  but

1  Supplied  by  all  eds.  see  Gai.

24.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  184.  §§  25-27.     Comp.    Gai.   i,   §§   190-192,

1  Comp.  Gai.  iv,  §§  11,  12,  31.  and  notes'l  and  2  to  §  24,  above.

XI,  §§ 26-28a.]     LIBRO  SINGVLARI  EEGVLARVM.  387

in  omni  re  debent  auctoritatem  accommodare,  praeter  eos
qui  testamento l  dati  sunt ;  nam  ex  his  uel  unius  auctoritas
sufficit.

27  Tutoris  auctoritas  necessaria  est  mulieribus  quidem  in  his
rebus :  si  lege  aut  legitirno  iudicio  agant,  si  se  obligent,  si
ciuile  negotium  gerant,  si  libertae  suae  permittant  in  con-
tubernio  alien!  serui  morari,2  si  rem  mancipi  alieneut.    pupillis
autem  hoc  amplius  etiam  in  rerum  nee  mancipi  alienatione
tutoris  auctoritate  opus  est.

28  Liberantur  tutela   masculi  quidem   pubertate.      puberem
autem  Cassiani l  quidem  eum  esse  dicunt  qui  habitu  corporis
pubes  apparet,  id  est  qui  generare  possit ;  Proculeiani '  autem
eum  qui  quattuordecim  annos  expleuit ;  uerum  Priscus 2  euni
puberem  esse  in  quern  utrumque  concurrit,  et  habitus  corporis

2S«et  numerus  annorum.         Feminae  autem  tutela  liberantur

more  than  one  tutor  they  must  all  grant  their  auctoritas  in
each  particular  transaction,  unless  they  be  testamentary  tutors;
in  their  case  the  auctoritas  of  any  one  of  them  is  sufficient.

27  Tutorial  auctoritas  is  needful  for  women  in  these  matters :
if  they  are  suing  in  a  legis  actio  or  a  legitimum  iudicium,  if
they  are  undertaking  an  obligation,  if  they  are  taking  part
in  any  transaction  of  the  ius  ciuile,  if  they  are  granting  per-
mission to  a  freedwoman  to  cohabit  with  another  person's  slave,
if  they  are  alienating  a  res  mancipi.  Over  and  above  these
cases  it  is  necessary  to  pupils  in  alienation  even  of  res  nee
mancipi.

Males  are  released  from  tutelage  by  puberty.  The  Cassians
hold  that  he  has  reached  puberty  who  •  appears  to  have  done
so  from  his  bodily  development,  i.e.  who  can  procreate ;  the
Proculians  say  that  he  has  done  so  who  has  completed  his
fourteenth  year;  but  Priscus  maintains  that  he  only  is
puberate  in  whom  both  those  indicia  occur, — bodily  develop-

28ament  and  the  aforesaid  number  of  years.  Women  are
released  from  it  [in  right  of  three  children;  but  if  they  befreed-
[women  in  the  tutelage  of  a  patron,  only  in  right  of  four'].

1  So  Cuj.  and  most  eds. ;  the  MS.  2  In  fr.  10,  §  2,  D.  de  usu  et  hab.
has  tune.  (vii,    2).     Vlp.    mentions   Priscus,

2  Because    her    freedwoman,    in  meaning,   as  is  generally  supposed,
terms  of  the  SO.  Claudianum,  would  lauoleuus  Priscus  (Gai.  iii,  70,  note),
fall  to  the  owner  of  the  slave  with  Schill.    (Animadv.    in,   pp.     6-10)
whom  she  was  cohabiting  ;  see  Paul.  proposes  plerisque  uisum  est ;    but
11,  21a,  §  6.  the    Priscus   of    the   MS.    is    quite

23.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  196.  distinct.

1  See  Gai.  i,  196,  note  1.  §  28a.     Incomplete    in    the    MS.       See

388  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI          [XII,  §§

[XII.     DE  CVRATORIBVS.]

1  Curatores  aut  legitimi  sunt,  id  est  qui  ex  lege  duodecim
tabular um  dantur,  aut  honorarii,  id  est  qui  a  praetore  con-

2  stituuntur.         Lex  duodecim  tabularum  furiosum,  itemque
prodigum  cui  bonis  interdictum  est,  in  curatione  iubet  esse

3  agnatorum.         A   praetore   constituitur    curator   quern   ipse
praetor  uoluerit  libertinis  prodigis,  itemque  ingenuis  qui  ex
testamento  parentis  heredes  facti  male  dissipant  bona:    his
enim  ex  lege  curator  dari  non  poterat,  cum  ingenuus  quidem
non  ab  intestate  sed  ex  testamento  heres  factus  sit  patri ;
libertinus  autem  nullo  modo  patri  heres  fieri  possit,  qui  nee
patrem  habuisse  uidetur,  cum  seruilis   cognatio l  nulla  sit.

4  Praeterea   dat   curatorem  ei  etiam  qui  nuper  pubes  factus
idonee  negotia  sua  tueri  non  potest.

[XII.     OF  CURA  TORS.  ]

1  Curators  are  either  legitimi,   i.e.  given  by  the  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  or  Jionorarii,  i.e.  given  by  the  praetor  [at  his

2  own  hand].         The  Twelve  Tables  ordain  that  a  madman,  as
also  a  spendthrift  who  has  been  interdicted  the  administra-
tion of  his  estate,  shall  be  under  the  curatory  of  his  agnates.

3  To  freedmen  spendthrifts,  as  well  as  to  persons  of  free-birth
who,  being  testamentary  heirs  of  their  parents,  are  squander-
ing their  estates,  the  praetor  appoints  as  curator  any  person
he  pleases.     For  neither  of  these  two  classes  was  a  curator
provided  by  the  statute, — the  man  of  free-birth  because  he
was  his  father's  heir  by  testament  instead  of  ab  intestate  ;  the
freedman  because  he  could  not  be  his  father's  heir  either  way,
and  in  fact  was  regarded  as  having  no  father,  there  being  no

4  such  thing  as  servile  cognation.         The  praetor  also  appoints
a  curator  to  an  individual  who,  having  only  just  passed  the
age  of  puberty,  is  still  unable  to  look  properly  after  his  own
affairs.

xxix,  3  ;  Gai.  i,  §§  194,  195.     Hu.  64  ;  below,   xx,   13  ;  Vlp.  in  fr.   1,

proposes  —  Feminae    autem    tutela  pr.  D.  de  cur.  fur.  (xxvii,  10).

liberantur   [trium    liberorum  iure  ;  §  3.     Comp.  Val.  Max.  viii,  6,  §  1  ;  Gai.

libertae    tantum,    quae    in  patroni  i,    53 ;  Paul,    iii,   4a,    §   7  ;  below,

lutela  sunt,  quaftuor  liberorum  iure  xx,  13.

ab  ea  liberantur].  J  That  for  certain  purposes  the  law

always  recognised  seruilis  cognatio

TIT.  xn.  Comp.  Gai.  Epit.  i,  8  (hi  note  appears  from  §10, 1.  denupt.  (i,  10);

to  Gai.  i,  §§  197,  198).  and  from  §  10,  I.  de  grad.  cogn.

§  2.  Comp.  Cic.  de  inv.  ii,  50,  §  148  ;  (iii,  6),  it  will  be  seen  that  Just,  re-

Tusc.  disp.  iii,  5,  §  11  ;  Hor.  Sat.  cognised  it  as  creative  of  a  right  of

ii,   3,   218;  Fest.  v.  Nee  (Brans,  p.  succession.

248);  Schoell,   Tab.  v,  7;  Gai.  ii,  §4.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  197,  198,  and  refs.

XIII,  §§  1,  2.]       LIBRO  SINGVLART  REGVLARVM.

380

[XIII.     DE  CAELIBE  ORBO  ET  SOLITARIO  PATRE.]

1  Lege  lulia  prohibentur  uxores  ducere   senatores   quidem
liberique  eorum  libertinas,  et  quae   ipsae   quarumue   pater
materue  artem  ludicram  fecerit,  item  corpore  quaestum  faci-

2  entem.         Ceteri  autem  ingenui  prohibentur  ducere  lenam,
et  a  lenone  lenaue  manumissam,  et  in  adulterio  deprehensam,
et  iudicio  publico  damnatam,  et  quae  artem  ludicram  fecerit :
adicit  Mauricianus l  et  a  senatu  damnatam.2

[XIII.     OF  THE  UNMARRIED  MAN,    THE  CHILDLESS  MAN,
AND  HIM  WHO  HAS  BUT  ONE  CHILD.}

1  By  the  Julian  law  senators  and  their  children  are  forbidden
to  marry  their  freedwomen,  or  women  who  themselves,  or
whose  father  or  mother,  have  followed  the  profession  of  the

2  stage,   or  women  who   are   common   prostitutes.          Other
persons  of  free-birth  are  forbidden  to  marry  a  procuress,  a
freedwoman  manumitted  by  a  procurer  or  procuress,  a  woman
that  has  been  taken  in  adultery,  one  that  has  been  convicted
in  a  public  criminal  prosecution,  or  one  that  has  been  an
actress ;  to  these  Mauricianus  adds  one  convicted  before  the
senate.

TIT.  xiii.  Sol'darius  pater  has  been  de-
fined (Abdy  and  Walker)  as  a  '  father
who  has  lost  his  children.'  But
this,  which  really  makes  it  synony-
mous with  orbus  in  one  of  its  appli-
cations, is  not  the  meaning  the
civilians  attach  to  it.  Says  Heinecc.
(ad  L.  lul.  ].  ii,  c.  15,  §  91):  Pater
uero  solitarius  est  qui  uel  unicum
habet  filium.  That  a  single  child
saved  a  man  from  the  penalties  of
orbitaa  appears  from  a  well-known
passage  in  Juvenal  (Sat.  ix,  82  f.),
which  is  confirmed  by  Gai.  in  fr.
148,  D.  de  V.  S.  (1.  16).  Heinecc.
therefore  reconstructs  the  provision
of  the  L.  lulla  et  Papia  thus  :  Ex
aliorum  testamentis  pater  solitarius
solidum  capita  ( '  the  father  of  only
one  child  may  take  in  full  under  a
stranger's  testament').  The  caelebs
on  the  other  hand  could  not  take  at
all,  and  the  orbus  only  a  half  of  what
was  left  him  (Gai.  ii,  §§  111,  286,
2S6«).

As  will  be  seen  from  the  text,  the
only  two  pars,  the  epitomist  has
thought  it  necessary  to  retain  do
not  touch  the  matters  indicated  in
the  rubric.

1.  The   law  referred    to    is   the    L.
Iidia  de  maritandis  ordinibus ;  see
Gai.  i,  145,  note  1.     Its  words,  so
far  as  they  deal  with  the  subject-
matter  of  this  par.,  are  reproduced
by  Paul,  in  fr.  44,  pr.  D.  de  ritu
nupt.  (xxiii,  2).     Comp.  below,  xvi,
2  ;  Vlp.  in  fr.  43,  D.  de  ritu  nupt.
(xxiii,  2)  ;  lust.  1.  28,  C.  de  nupt.
(v,  4).

2.  Vahl. ,  making  §  1  end  with  fecerit,^
proposes  this  transposition  :    ceteri
autem   ingenui  prohibentur    ducere
corpore    quaestum  facicntem,  item
lenam  et  a  lenone,  etc.     M.  approves
this  suggestion.

1  lunius  Mauricianus,   a  contem-
porary of  Gaius',  was  the  author  of
a  commentary  on   the   L.    lulia  et
Papia  Poppaea  (fr.  15,  D.  de  iure
Jisci,  xlix,  14) ;  and  it  was  probably
in  the  course  of  it  that  he  made  the
observation  to  which  Vlp.  refers.

2  From  the  time  of  Augustus  (or
at  least  Tiberius),  and  down  to  that
of  Diocletian,  senators  or  members
of  their  families,   against   whom  a
criminal  charge  was  brought,  were
entitled  to  have  it  disposed  of  by
their  peers  of  the  senate  ;  the  pro-

390  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI      [XIV;  XV,  §§  1,  2.

[X1II1.    DE  POENA  LEGIS  IVLIAE.]

Feminis  lex  lulia  a  morte  uiri  anni  tribuit  uacationem,
a  diuortio  sex  mensum;1  lex  autem  Papia  a  morte  uiri
biennii,  a  repudio  anni  et  sex  mensum.1

[XV.     DE  DEC  I  MIS.}

1  Vir  et  uxor  inter  se  matrimonii  nomine  decimam  capere
possunt.      quod   si   ex   alio    matrimonio   liberos   superstites
habeant,  praeter  decimam  quam  matrimonii  nomine  capiunt

2  totidem  decimas  pro  numero  liberoruin  accipiunt.         Item

[XIV.     OF  THE  PENALTY  OF  THE  JULIAN  LA  W.}

The  Julian  law  allowed  women  exemption  from  its  penal-
ties for  a  year  after  their  husband's  death,  and  for  six  months
after  divorce  ;  the  Papian  law  gives  them  two  years'  grace
from  the  death  of  their  husband,  and  eighteen  months'  from
the  date  of  divorce.

[XV.     OF  TENTHS.]

1  Husband  and  wife  may  take  [by  testament  to  the  extent
of]  one-tenth  of  each  other's  estate,  [simply]  on  the  strength  of
their  marriage ;  but  if  either  of  them  have  children  of  a  previous
marriage  surviving,  he  or  she  may,  in  addition  to  the  tenth
taken  matrimonii  nomine,  take  as  many  more  tenths  as  there

2  are  children.         Further,  a  son  or  daughter,  issue  of  the  two

cess  was   not  strictly  a  publicum      TIT.  xv,  §§1,  2.     Although  these  deci-

iudicium ;  but  there  was  no  reason  mae  are   frequently  alluded  to    in

why  a  condemnation   in  it  should  vague  terms  in  the  Theod.  Code,  and

not  be  regarded  as  arising  out  of  a  once  or  twice  in  the  Dig. ,  yet  there

public  prosecution    so    far    as   the  is  no  explicit  reference  that  can  be

provisions  of  the  lex  Julia  were  con-  cited  as   confirmatory  of  the  text,

cerned.     See  Dio.  Cass.    Hi,  21  f.  ;  From  the    words   of    Constantine,

Dirkaen,  Civilistische  Abhandlungcn,  however,  in   repealing  the   restric-

i,  pp.   185  f . ;  Laboulaye,   Lois  cri-  tion     on    testamentary  disposition

minelks  des  Remains,  pp.  414  f.  between  husband  and  wife  (1.   un.,

§  2,  C.  Th.  de  infirm,  poen.  caelib.

TIT.    xiv.     The     Julian    law    required  viii,  16),  it  seems  that  it  was  in  ap-

women  to  marry,   whether  virgins  prehension  of  the   consequences   of

or  widows  ;  but  in  the  case  of  the  the   fallaces   Uanditiae  for   which

latter  allowed  them  an  interval  be-  marriage  gave  the  opportunity,  that

tween  the  dissolution  of  one  mar-  Augustus,  in  the  L.    lulia  Papia,

riage  and  celebration  of  the  next,  prohibited  mortis   causa  liberality

during  which,  although  for  the  mo-  between  spouses,  except  under  the

ment  unmarried,  they  could  take  in  restrictions   indicated   in  this   and

full  under  a  testament.     The  legis-  the    next    following    title.     It  led

lation  of  the  later  empire,  however,  sometimes,    as   observed  by  Quint,

all  tended  to  discourage  second  mar-  (Inst.  Orat.  viii,  5,   §  19),  to  this

riages  ;  see  tit.  C.  de  secund.  nupt.  strange  result, — that  a  man  could

(v,  9).  leave  more  to  his  mistress  than  he

1  The  MS.  has  menses.  was  allowed  to  leave  to  his  wife.

XV,  §§  2,  3  ;  XVI,  §  1.]     LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.

391

communis  films  filiaue  post  nominum  diem  *•  amissus  amis-
saue  unam  decimam  adicit ;  duo  autem  post  nominum  diem 2
3  amissi  duas  decimas  adiciunt.  Praeter  decimam  etiam
usumfructum  tertiae  partis  bonorum  coniuges1  capere  possunt,
et  quandoque  liberos  habuerint,  eiusdem  partis  proprietatem.2
Hoc  amplius  mulier  praeter  decimam  dotem  [capere]  3  potest
legatam  sibi.4

[AT/.     DE  SOLIDI  CAPACITATE  INTER  VIRVM  ET  VXOREM.]
1       Aliquando  uir  et  uxor   inter  se  solidum  capere  possunt,

spouses,  who  has  died  after  his  name-day,  adds  another  tenth;
3  two  dying  after  their  name-days  add  two-tenths.  Besides,
either  of  them  may  take  the  usufruct,  and  if  they  have
children,  the  ownership-right  of  a  third  part  of  the  other's
estate.  And  the  wife  is  entitled,  over  and  above  her  tenth
[or  tenths],  to  take  a  bequest  of  her  dowry.

[XVI.     OF  CAPACITY.  AS  BETWEEN  HUSBAND  AND  WIFE,   TO

TAKE  IN  FULL.]

I       Sometimes  husband  and  wife  may  take  in  full  what  each

1  See  Paul,  ex  Fest.    v.  Lustrici
(ed.  Muell.  p.  120).     The  name-day
was  the    ninth  for  boys    and  the
eighth  for  girls.

2  The  MS.  has  nono  die.

Comp.  fr.  48,  D.  de  usur.  (xxii,
1)  ;  fr.  10,  D.  de  praescr.  uerb.
(xix,  5).  It  was  a  common  prac-
tice, under  this  provision  of  the
Papian  law,  for  a  husband  to  make
his  wife  an  unconditional  bequest
of  the  usufruct  of  a  third  of  his
estate,  and  a  bequest  of  the  property
of  it  conditional  on  her  having
children.

1  So  Schill.  (Animadv.,  spec,  iii,
p.  13)  ;  approved  by  Bk.     The  MS.
has  ems,  which  K.  thinks  a  gloss,
to  be  omitted,  not  corrected.     Hu.
substitutes  [uir]  et  uxor.

2  Comp.  fr.  78,  §  14,  D.  ad  SC.
Trebell.  (xxxvi,  1)  ;  fr.   25,   D.    de
cond.  et  dem.  (xxxv,  1).

3  Added  by  Bk. ,  on  the  sugges-
tion of  Schill. ,  and  adopted  by  K. ;
Cuj.    amended  by  changing  potest
into  petet.

4  Comp.  fr.  53,  D.   de  legal.  II.

(xxxi)  ;  tit.    D.    de  dote    praeleg.
(xxxiii,  4).

TIT.  xvi.  This  is  really  a  continuation
of  the  same  subject  as  in  the  pre-
vious title.  But  all  the  rules  it
contains  were  abolished  in  the  later
empire  ;  comp.  tit.  C.  Th.  de  inftr-
mand.poen.  caelibat.  (viii,  16)  ;  tit.
C.  de  infirm,  p.  cael.  (viii,  58)  ;  1.
27,  C.  de  nupt.  (v,  4).

The  explanation  Vlp.  gives  here
of  some  of  the  provisions  of  the  L.
lulia  et  Papia  Poppaea  is  not  so
distinct  as  one  could  desire.  Un-
fortunately it  does  not  admit  of
supplement  to  any  extent  from  other
sources ;  and,  though  much  has
been  written  on  the  subject,  and
notably  by  Jacques  Godefroy  (Otton.
Thes.  torn,  iii,  pp.  203  f.),  Kanios
del  Manzano  (Mcerm.  Thesaur.
torn,  v),  and  Heinecc.  (ad  L.  lul.
etPap.  Popp.  Comment.),  the  matter
is  really  no  clearer  than  Vlp.  left  it.

§  1.  The  words  aut  si  uir  ....  abesse
desierit  are  removed  by  Hu.  to  §  la,
and  introduced  after  inpetrauerint.

392  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI      [XVI,  §§  1,  la.

uelut  si  uterque  uel  alteruter  eorum  nondum  eius  aetatis  sint
a  qua  lex  liberos  exigit,  id  est  si  uir  minor  annorum  xxv  sit
aut  uxor  annorum  xx  minor;  item  si  utrique  lege  Papia
finitos  annos  in  matrimonio  excesserint,  id  est  uir  LX  annos,
uxor  L  •*  item  si  cognati  inter  se  coierint  usque  ad  sextum
^  gradum  ;  aut  si  uir  absit,2  et  donee  abest  et  intra  annum  post-
la  quam  abesse  desierit.  Libera  inter  eos  testamenti  factio
est  si  ius  liberorum  a  principe  inpetrauerint,  aut  si  filium
filiamue  communem  habeant,  aut  quattuordecim  annorum
filium  uel  filiam  duodecim  amiserint,  uel  si  duos  trimos,  uel
tres  post  nominum  diem  amiserint,  ut  intra  annum  tamen  et
sex  menses  etiam  unus  cuiuscumque  aetatis  inpubes  amissus
solidi  capiendi  ius  praestet.  item  si  post  mortem  uiri  intra
decem  menses  uxor  ex  eo  pepererit,  solidum  ex  bonis  eius
capit.

has  left  the  other,  as  when  both  or  either  of  them  has  not  yet
reached  the  age  at  which  the  [Papian]  law  requires  issue  [as
the  condition  of  the  ius  capiendi],  i.e.  if  the  husband  be  under
twenty-five  or  the  wife  under  twenty ;  as  also  if,  as  married
persons,  they  have  both  survived  the  ages  mentioned  in  the
Papian  law  as  those  beyond  which  its  provisions  do  not
apply,  i.e.  sixty  for  the  husband,  fifty  for  the  wife ;  or  if  they
be  related  to  each  other  within  the  sixth  degree ;  while,  if  the
husband  be  absent  from  home,  [he  is  exempt  from  the  penal-
ties of  the  statute]  both  during  his  absence  and  for  a  year
la  after  his  return.  Husband  and  wife  are  further  quite  free
to  take  under  each  other's  testaments  if  they  have  obtained  a
concession  from  the  emperor  of  the  privilege  resulting  from
children ;  or  if  they  have  a  surviving  son  or  daughter  of  their
marriage,  or  have  lost  a  son  of  fourteen  or  a  daughter  of
twelve ;  or  if  they  have  lost  two  children  over  three  years  of
age,  or  three  that  survived  their  name-days :  and  the  death
of  any  of  those  impuberates  within  eighteen  months  [after
the  dissolution  of  the  marriage]  secures  for  them  the  right  of
taking  in  full  [exactly  as  if  it  had  occurred  before  the  mar-
riage was  dissolved],  Further,  if  the  wife  give  birth  to  a
child  by  her  husband  within  ten  months  of  his  death,  she  is
equally  entitled  to  take  in  full  anything  he  may  have  left  her.

1  Comp.  §  3.  and  so   prevented  from  complying

2  Cuj.  and  many  later  eds. ,  with  with  the  provisions  of  the  statute,
some   show    of  reason,    interpolate  §   la.     The   testamenti  factio   here   re-
reipublicae    causa,     thus     limiting  ferred  to  is  that  which  the  civilians
the    exemption   to    persons    absent  call    passiua ;     see    Gai.    ii,     114,
from  home  on  the  public   service,  note  1.

XVI,  §§  2-4.]         LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.

393

2  Aliquando  nihil  inter  se  capiunt,  id  est  si  contra  legem
luliain  Papiamque  Poppaeam  contraxerint  matrimonium,  uerbi
gratia  si  famosam  quis  uxorem  duxerit  aut  liber  tin  am  senator.

3  Qui  intra  sexagesimum  uel  quae  intra  quinquagesimum
annum   neutri  legi   paruerit,  licet   ipsis   legibus   post  hanc
aetatem  liberatus  esset,  perpetuis  tamen  poenis  tenebitur  ex

4  senatusconsulto    Perniciano.         sed    Claudiano    senatuscon-
sulto l  maior  sexagenario  si  minorem  quinquagenaria  duxerit
perinde  habebitur  ac  si  minor  sexaginta   annorum  duxisset
uxorem.     quod  si  maior  quinquagenaria  minori  sexagenario
nupserit,  inpar  matrimonium  appellatur,  et  senatusconsulto
Caluitiano 2  iubetur  non  proficere  ad  capiendas  hereditates  et
Icgata  [et]  dotes.3     itaque  mortua  muliere  dos  caduca  erit.

2  Sometimes   they   take   nothing   from  each  other,  namely
when  they  have  contracted  marriage  in  contravention  of  the
Julian  and  Papia-Poppaean  law,  as,  for  example,  when  any
man  [of  free-birth]  has  married  a  woman  of  infamous  character,
or  a  senator  a  freedwoman.

3  A  man  who  has  failed  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of
either  branch  of  the  statute  within  his  sixtieth  year,  and  a
woman  who  has  failed  to  do  so  within  her  fiftieth,  are  after
that  age  exempt  from  its  provisions  [so  far  as  the  statute  itself
is  concerned] ;  yet  by  the  Pernician  senatusconsult  they  are

4  liable  permanently  to  the  penalties  [of  celibacy].         But  by
a   Claudian   senatusconsult   a   man   over   sixty   marrying  a
woman  under  fifty  is  to  be  regarded  as  if  he  had  married
before  reaching  sixty ;  if,  however,  a  woman  over  fifty  marry
a  man   under  sixty,  the  marriage  is  styled  unequal,  and  is
declared  by  the  Calvitian  senatusconsult  to  be  of  no  avail  as
a  qualification  for  taking  either  an  inheritance,  a  legacy,  or
a  dowry.     On  the  wife's  death,  therefore,  her  dowry  will  be
caducous.

§  2.     See  tit.  xiii,  and  refs.

§  3.  The  SO.  Pernicianum  is  not  men-
tioned elsewhere.  Perizonius  thinks
it  should  be  Persicianum,  attribut-
ing it  to  P.  Fab.  Persicus,  consul
787  |  34.  This  is  probably  right,
as  Sueton.  (in  Claud.  §  23),  referring
to  the  Claudian  Set.  mentioned  in
next  par. ,  says  it  was  corrective  of  an
enactment  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius.

§  4.  I  have  followed  Hu.  in  making
this  par.  begin  at  sed  Claudiano.
Most  eds.  make  it  commence  at

quod  si  maior.

1  See  note  to  last  par.

2  Augustinus,  Perizonius,  Schult-
ing,   and  others,  alter  the  name  of
the   Set.    to  Caluisianum ;    Haenel
(Corp.  Leg.  p.  54)  attributes  it  to
Nero,  and  year  61.

3  The  MS.    has   Icgata  dotes,  and
many  of  the  earlier  editions  legatan
dotes.     The  correction  in  the  text
was  suggested  by  Cuj.,  and  has  been
adopted    by   Hugo,   Bk. ,    and   K. ;
Gneist  and  Vahl.  have  leyata  dotes-

394

EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI       [XVII,  §§  1,  2.

[XVII.     DE  CADVCIS.]  '

1  Quod  quis  sibi  testamento  relictum,  ita  ut  iure  ciuili  capere
possit,  aliqua  ex  causa  non  ceperit,  caducum  appellatur,  ueluti
ceciderit  ab  eo :   uerbi  gratia  si  caelibi  uel  latino  luniano
legatum  fuerit,  nee  intra  dies  centum  uel  caelebs  legi  paruerit
uel  latinus  ius  Quiritium  consecutus  sit ;  aut  si  ex  parte  heres
scriptus  uel  legatarius  ante  apertas   tabulas   decesserit  uel

2  pereger '   factus  sit.         Hodie  ex  constitutione  imperatoris
Antonini  omnia  caduca  fisco  uindicantur;  sed  seruato  iure

[XVII.     OF  CADUCOUS  TESTAMENTARY  GIFTS.]

A  testamentary  gift  which,  for  some  reason  or  other,  he
to  whom  it  was  left  has  failed  to  take,  although  so  left  that
according  to  the  rules  of  the  ius  ciuile  he  might  have  taken  it,
is  called  caducous,  as  if  it  had  fallen  from  his  grasp,  ceciderit
ab  eo ;  for  instance,  if  a  legacy  have  been  left  to  a  celibate  or
Junian  latin,  but  the  celibate  has  failed  within  a  hundred
days  to  comply  with  the  statute,  or  the  latin  to  acquire  citizen-
ship ;  or  if  an  heir  instituted  to  a  share  of  the  inheritance,  or
a  legatee,  have  died  or  become  a  peregrin  before  the  opening
of  the  will.  At  the  present  day,  by  a  constitution  of  the
emperor  Antonine's,  all  such  lapses  are  claimed  for  the  fisc ;
the  rule  of  the  old  law,  however,  being  retained  in  favour  of

gue,  and  Hu.  legala  aut  dotem.
The  difficulty  is  to  reconcile  the  idea
of  dos  caduca  with  the  definition  of
caducum  in  next  title.  We  have  the
phrase,  however,  in  fr.  38,  §  1,  fr.  61,
D.  de  ritu  nupt.  (xxiii,  2),  and  again
in  1.  86,  C.  de  nupt.  (v,  4).  The
statement  seems  to  refer  to  the  dos
aduenticia.  According  to  the  gene-
ral rule  (above,  vi,  5),  semper  penes
maritum  remanet  on  his  wife's
death  ;  but  it'  the  marriage, .  though
not  null,  was  yet  a  forbidden  one,
the  surviving  husband  had  to  pay
it  over  (under  deduction  of  inpen-
sae,  fr.  61,  D.  de  ritu  nupt.)  to  the
fisc  as  caducous.

TIT.  xvn,  §  1.  Comp.  xxviii,  7  ;  xix,
17  ;  xxii,  §§  2,  3  ;  Gai.  ii,  §§  111,
144,  150,  286  ;  lust,  in  1.  1,  C.  de
caduc.  toll,  (vi,  51).

1  So  in  the  MS.  ;  Cuj.  and  many
eds.  have  pererjrinus.

§  2.     It  is  Caracalla  that  is  here    re-

ferred to  ;  and  Haenel  (Corp.  Leg.
p.  152)  assigns  his  enactment  to  the
year  212.

M. ,  Bk.,  Vahl.,  and  Hu.  are  of
opinion  that  the  copyist  has  taken
this  par.  from  the  margin  of  the  ori-
ginal, and  wrongly  introduced  it
here  instead  of  before  the  sentence
that  stands  as  tit.  xviii.

Hu.  is  further  of  opinion  that  it
must  have  been  preceded  by  such
words  as  these,  explanatory  of  the
ius  antiquum :  Caduca  iure  antiquo
quidem  ad  coheredes  uel  collegata-
rios  pertinebant  iure  adcrescendi,
aut  legato,  in  hereditate  remanebant.
Ex  lege  Papia  autem  translata  sunt
ad  heredes  patres  uel  legatarios
patres,  certo  online  in  caducis  uindi-
candis  constituto,  ut  si  heres  uel
legatarius  pater  non  esset  uel  non
uindtcaret,  caducum  ad  populum
deferretur.  Et  eiusdem  bona  esse
iubentur  si  nemo  defuncto  heres
factus  sit.

XVII,  §  3-XIX,  §  1.]     LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  395

3  antique  liberis  et  parentibus.  Caduca  cum  suo  onere  fiunt :
ideoqtie  libertates  et  legata  [et]  fideicommissa  ab  eo  data,  ex
cuius  persona  hereditas  caduca  facta  est,  salua  sunt :  sed  et l
legata  et  fideicommissa  cum  suo  onere  fiunt  caduca.

[X  VIII.     Q  VI  HABEA NT  I VS  ANTIQ  VVM  IN  CAD  VCIS.  ]

Item  liberis  et  parentibus  testatoris  usque  ad  tertium
gradum  lex  Papia  ius  antiquum  dedit,  ut  heredibus  illis  insti-
tutis,  quod  quis  ex  eo  testamento  non  capit,  ad  hos  pertineat
aut  totum  aut  ex  parte,  prout  pertinere  possit.

[X  VII1I.     DE  DOMINIIS  ET  ADQ  VISIT  10 NIB  VS  RER  VM. ]

1  Omnes  res  aut  mancipi l  sunt  aut  nee  mancipi.  mancipi
res  sunt  praedia  in  Italico  solo,2  tarn  rustica,3  qualis  est
fuudus,  quarn  urbana,  qualis  domus ;  item  iura  praediorum

3  descendants  and  ascendants  [of  the  testator].  "When  a  gift
becomes  caducous  it  does  so  with  its  burdens ;  therefore  gifts
of  freedom,  legacies,  and  trust-bequests  charged  upon  him  in
whose  person  an  inheritance  has  become  caducous,  are  still
effectual.  And  when  legacies  or  trust-gifts  [themselves]
become  caducous,  they  also  are  still  subject  to  their  burdens.

[XVIII.     WHO  ARE  UNDER  THE  RULES  OF  THE  OLD  LA  W  IN

CASES  OF  LAPSE.]

The  Papian  law  granted  [the  benefit  of]  the  ancient  law  to
descendants  and  ascendants  of  the  testator  as  far  as  the  third
degree ;  so  that  if  they  had  been  instituted  heirs,  and  any  one
failed  to  take  under  the  testament,  what  thus  lapsed  was  to
belong  to  them  in  whole  or  in  part  as  the  case  might  be.

[XIX.     OF  OWNERSHIPS  AND  OF  THE  MODES  OF  ACQUIRING

THINGS.]

1  Things  are  all  either  mancipi  or  nee  mancipi.  Res  mancipi
include  praedia  in  places  of  Italic  right,  both  rural,  as  a  field,
and  urban,  as  a  house  ;  also  rights  belonging  to  rural  praedia,

§  3.     Cornp.  i,  21.     Vahl.  puts  this  par.  1.  1,  pr.  C.  de  caduc.  toll,  (vi,  51).
before  §  2.

1  So  Cuj.,  and  much  more  appro-  TIT.  xix,  §  1.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  15-17.

priate  than  the  scilicet  of  the  MS.  ,  l  In  most  cases  spelt  mancepi  in

retained  by  Bk.,  Vahl.,  and  K.  the  MS.

2  Comp.  Gai.  i,  120,  note  2.

TIT.  xviii.     See  note  &»svii,  2>     Comp.  3  The  MS.  has  solo  aut  rustico.

I,  *LI

396  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI        [XIX,  §§1-5.

rusticorum,  uelut  uia  iter  actus  *  aquaeductus ;  item  serui  et
quadrupedes  quae  dorso  colloue  domantur,  uelut  boues  muli
equi  asini.  ceterae  res  nee  mancipi  sunt.  elephant!  et
caineli,  quamuis  collo  dorsoue  domentur,  nee  mancipi  sunt,
quoniam  bestiarum  numero  sunt.

2  Singularum  rerum  dominium1  nobis  adquiritur  mancipa-
tione,  traditione,  in  iure  cessione,  usucapione,  adiudicatione,
lege.

3  Mancipatio  propria  species  alienationis  est  rerum  mancipi ;
eaque  fit  certis  uerbis,  libripende  et  quinque  testibus  prae-

4  sentibus.1         Mancipatio  locum  habet  inter  ciues  Eomanos
et  latinos  coloniarios  latinosque  lunianos  eosque  peregrinos

5  quibus  commercium  datum  est.         Commercium  est  emendi

such  as  rights  of  way  in  the  forms  of  uia,  iter,  and  actus,  and
right  of  aqueduct ;  as  also  slaves,  and  animals  that  are  tamed
by  yoke  or  saddle,  such  as  oxen,  mules,  horses,  asses.  All
other  things  are  nee  mancipi.  Elephants  and  camels,  though
tamed  by  yoke  and  saddle,  are  nee  mancipi,  being  classed
amongst  wild  beasts.

2  We  acquire  the  ownership  of  things  singly  by  mancipation,
by  tradition,  by  cession  in  court,  by  usucapiou,  by  adjudica-
tion, or  by  statute.

Mancipation  is  a  mode  of  alienation  peculiar  to  res  mancipi,
and   is   performed   by  recital  of  certain  words  of  style,  in

4  presence  of  a  balance-holder  and  five  witnesses.         It  is  com-
petent between  Eoman  citizens  and  colonial  and  Junian  latins,
and  such  peregrins  as  have  had  a  concession  of  commercium.

5  Commercium  is  the  capacity  for  reciprocally  acquiring  and

4  Comp.  pr.  I.  de  seruitut.  (ii,  3).       §  5.     Comp.  Th.  iii,  19,   §  2.     Just  as

§  2.     Comp.  Varro,  de  R.  It.  ii,  10,  §  4  conubium  (v,  3,  and  note)  was  the

(Brans,  p.  283) ;  Gai.  ii,  65.     Man-  technical  expression  for  capacity  to

cipatio  is  dealt  with  in  §§  3  -6,  Gai.  contract  a  marriage  of  the  ius  ciuile

ii,  §§  22-37  ;  traditio,  §  7,  Gai.  ii,  and  to  participate  in  all  its  conse-

§§   19-21  ;  in  iure  cessio,  §§  9-15,  quences,    so   was    commercium  the

Gai.   ii,    §§   22-37  ;  usucapro,  §  8,  capacity  to  acquire  or  alienate  estate

Gai.    ii,    §§  40-60  ;    adiudicatio,   §  according  to  the  forms   of  the  ius

16,  Gai.  iv,  42 ;  lex,  §  17.  ciuile,  and  to  participate  in  the  ad-

1  The  MS.  has  dominia  both  here  vantages  or  disadvantages  resulting

and  in  §§  7,   8,   and  16  ;  in  all  of  therefrom  ;  as   the  former  was  the

these,  following  the  example  of  Bk.,  qualification  for  participating  in  the

Hu.,  and  K.,  I  have  substituted  the  family  relations  of  the  ius  ciuile,  so

singular.  was   commercium  the  qualification

§  3.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  119  ;  ii,  22.  for  participating  in  its  patrimonial

1  The  MS.  has  tesles  praesentes.  relations.

§  4.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  22.     On  the  latini  To  speak  of  commercium  as  the

coloniarii,  see  Gai.  i,  22,  and  notes;  right  to  buy  and  sell,  i.e.  to  be  a

iii,    56  :     on    the    latini    luniani,  party  to  the  iuris  gentium  contract

above,  i,  §§  12-16.  of  emptio  uenditio,  would  be  decep-

XIX,  §§6-9.]          LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  397

6  uendendique  inuicem  itis.        Res  mobiles  non  nisi  praesentes
mancipari  possunt,  et   non   plures   quam   quot   nianu   capi
possunt ;  immobiles  autem  etiam  plures  simul,  et  quae  diuersis
locis  sunt,  mancipari  possunt.

7  Traditio  propria  est  alienatio  reram  nee  mancipi.     harum
rerum  dominium  ipsa  traditione  adprehendimus,  scilicet  si  ex
iusta  causa  traclitae  sunt  nobis.

8  Vsucapione    dominium    adipiscimur   tarn    mancipi   rerum
quam  nee  mancipi.     usucapio  est  autem  dominii  adeptio  per
continuationem  possessionis  anni  uel  biennii :  rerum  mobilium
anni,  immobilium  biennii.

9  In  iure  cessio  quoque  communis  alienatio  est  et  mancipi
rerum  et  nee  mancipi:  quae  fit  per  tres  personas,  in  iure

6  alienating  [according  to  the  forms  of  the  ius  ciuile].         Move-
ables  cannot  be  mancipated  except  in  the  presence  of  the
parties,  and  not  more  at  a  time  than  can  be  taken  by  the
hand  [of  the  mancipee] ;  but  immoveables  can  be  mancipated
several  at  once,  and  though  situate  in  different  localities.

7  Tradition  is  a  mode  of  alienation  appropriate  to  res  nee
mancipi.     And  simply  by  tradition  we  acquire  the  ownership
of  such  things,  provided  always  it  proceed  upon  a  title  suffi-
cient in  law.

8  By   usucapion  we   acquire  the  ownership  as  well  of  res
mancipi  as  of  res  nee  mancipi.     And  usucapion  is  acquisition
of  ownership  by  continuance  of  possession  for  one  or  two
years, — one  in  the  case  of  moveables,  two  in  that  of  immove-
ables.

9  Cession  in  court  also  is  a  mode  of  alienation  common  both
to  res  manci-pi  and  res  nee  mancipi;  and  is  accomplished  by

tive  in  the   extreme  ;  the  word  is  Like  conubium,  the  word  commer-

older  by  centuries  than  the  contract.  cium  had  its  abstract,  concrete,  and

As  mentioned  in  Gai.  i,  113,  note  relative  meanings.     In  the  abstract

2,  and  ii,  104,  note  6,  emere  in  the  it  was  a  prerogative  of  every  citizen

old  law  meant  simply  to  take,   re-  and    afterwards    of    every    Junian

ceive,  or  acquire,  without  reference  latin  ;  but   in  the  concrete  it  was

to  a  price  ;  as  Pompon,  says,  on  the  denied   to   the    interdicted    spend-

authority  of  Aristo,  in  fr.   29,  §  1,  thrift  (above,  xii,  3  ;  Paul,  iii,  40,

D.  de  statulib.  (xl,  7),  lex  duodecim  §  7).     Eelatively   a   citizen   had   it

tabularum  emtionis    uerbo    ornnem  with    his   fellow-citizens   and  with

alienationem    complexa    uideretur.  Junian  latins  ;  but  not  with  pere-

Therefore,  to  have  the  commercium  grins,  unless  the  latter  enjoyed  it

or  ius  emendi  uendendique  in  the  by  special  grant  (§  4).

sense  of  the  xn  Tables,  was  to  be  §  6.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  121.

capable  of  acquiring   or  alienating  §  7.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  19,  20,  65.

according  to  any  of  the  forms  of  the  §  8.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  42-44.

ius  ciuile  that  did  not  necessarily  §§  9,  10.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  22,  24.
imply  conubium.

398  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI      [XIX,  §§  10-16.

10  cedentis,  uinclicantis,  addicentis.1         In  iure  cedit  dominus;

11  uindicat  is  cui  ceditur;  addicit1  praetor.         In  iure  cedi  res
etiam  incorporales  possunt,  uelut  ususfructus  et  hereditas  et

12  tutela   legitima   libertae.         Hereditas   in   iure   ceditur   uel

o

13  antequam  adeatur  uel  posteaquam  adita  fuerit.         Antequam
adeatur,  in  iure  cedi  potest  db  hcrede  legitimo ; l  posteaquam
adita  est,  tarn  a  legitimo  quam  ab  eo  qui  testamento  heres

14  scriptus  est.         Si  antequam  adeatur  hereditas  in  iure  cessa
sit,  proinde  heres  fit  cui  cessa  est  ac  si  ipse  heres  legitimus

15  esset.        Quod  si  posteaquam2  adita  fuerit  in  iure  cessa  sit,  is
qui  cessit  permanet  heres,  et  ob  id  creditoribus  defuncti  manet
obligatus ;  debita  uero  pereunt,  id  est  debitores  defuncti  libe-
rantur:  res  autem  corporales,  quasi  singulae  in  iure   ccssae
essent,3  transeunt  ad  eum  cui  cessa  est  hereditas.

16  Adiudicatione     dominium     nanciscimur    per     forrnulam1

[co-operation  of]  three  persons, — the  cedent,  the  vindicant,

10  and  the  addicent.         It  is  the  owner  that  cedes  ;  he  to  whom

11  the  thing  is  ceded  vindicates  ;  the  praetor  addicts.         Even
incorporeals  can  be  ceded  in  court,  as  for  instance  a  usufruct,

12  an  inheritance,  or  the  tutory-at-law  of  a  freed  woman.         An

13  inheritance  is  ceded  either  before  or  after  entry.         Before
entry  it  may  be  ceded  by  the  heir-at-law ;  after  it,  not  only
by  an  heir-at-law  but  also  by  an  heir  instituted  by  testament.

14  If  the  cession  have  been  before  entry,  the  cessionary  at  once

15  becomes  heir,  as  if  he  himself  were  heir-at-law.         If  the
cession  be  after  entry,  the  cedent  still  remains  heir,  and  con-
sequently is  responsible  to  the  creditors  of  the  deceased ;  but
his  claims  are  extinguished,  i.e.  the  deceased's  debtors  are
discharged.     The  corporeals  that  belonged  to  him,  however,
pass  to  the  cessionary  of  the  inheritance  as  if  they  had  been
ceded  to  him  one  by  one.

16  We  acquire  ownership  by  adjudication  in  the  action  for

1  I  am  unwillingly  obliged  to  coin  l  The  MS.  has  legitimo'  ab  herede ;

a  word  for  the  translation.     Adju-  hence  in  the  earlier  editions  legitime

cant  and  adjudicate    would    popu-  ab  herede,  and  in  those  of  last  cen-

larly  express  the   idea,   but  might  tury  a  legitimo  herede.     The  version

generate  a  serious  misapprehension.  in  the  text  is  that  of  Bk. ,  Vahl.,

Addictio  and  adiudicatio  were  two  Hu. ,  and  K.

very   different    acts  :   the  first  was  2  The  MS.  has  posteacum.

magisterial,  the  second  judicial ;  the  3  The   words   quasi   .    .    .    cessae

one  that  of  a  praetor,  the  other  that  essent  are  adopted  by  all  recent  eds.

of  a  index  (cornp.  §  30  with  §  16).  on  the  strength  of  Gai.  ii,  35  ;  the

§  11.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  §§  168-171  ;  ii,  §§  MS.  has  quoties  .   .   .   cesse  sunt.
14,  29-38  ;  above,  xi,  §§  6-8.                  §  16.    Comp.  Gai.  iv,  42  ;  §  20, 1.  de  act.

§§   12-15.      Comp.  Gai.    ii,   §§   34-37;  (iv,6);  §§  4-7,  I.  de  off.  iud.  (iv,  17).

iii,  §§  85-87.  a  The  formula,  was  the  record  or

XIX,  §§  16-18.]      LIBRO  SIXGVLAEI  REGVLARVM.  399

familiae  erciscundae,  quae  locum  habet  inter  coheredes,'  et
per  formulam  coinmuni  diuidundo,  cui  locus  est  inter  socios,
et  per  formulam  finium  regundorum,  quae  est  inter  uicinos.
nam  si  iudex  uni  ex  heredibus  aut  sociis  aut  uicinis  rem
aliquam  adiudicauerit,  statim  illi  adquiritur,  siue  mancipi  siue
nee  mancipi  sit.

17  Lege  nobis  adquiritur  uelut  caducurn1  uel  ereptorium*  ex
lege  Papia  Poppaea,  item  legatum3  ex  lege  duodecim  tabu-
larum,  siue  mancipi  res  sint  siue  nee  mancipi.

18  Adquiritur  autem  nobis  etiam  per  eas  personas,  quas  in
potestate    manu l    inancipioue    habemus.      itaque    si   quid  *
mancipio  puta  acceperint,  aut  traditum  eis  sit,  uel  stipulati

partitioning  an  inheritance,  employed  by  co-heirs  ;  in  that  for
dividing  common  property,  competent  between  partners ;  and
in  that  for  settling  boundaries,  employed  between  neighbours.
For  if  the  judge  have  adjudicated  any  particular  thing  to  one
of  the  heirs,  partners,  or  neighbours,  it  instantly  becomes  his,
whether  it  be  mancipi  or  nee  mancipi.

17  We  acquire  by  operation  of  statute  in  the  case  of  lapsed
and  forfeited  testamentary  gifts  under  the  provisions  of  the
Papia-Poppaean  law,  and  in  that  of  a  legacy  under  the  law  of
the  Twelve  Tables,  whether  the  thing  acquired  be  res  mancipi
or  nee  mancipi.

18  We  acquire  [not  only  by  our  own  instrumentality  but]  also
by  means  of  those  persons  whom  we  have  in  our  potestas,
manus,  or  mancipium;  if  therefore  they  have  received  any-
thing by  mancipation,  or  have  had  a  thing  delivered  to  them,
or  have  stipulated  for  something,  the  thing  [or  the  claim]

issue  sent  by  the  praetor  to  a  iudex  actually  reduced  into  possession  by

for  trial  (Gai.  iv,  §§  39-43),  and  is  the  heirs,  legatees,  or  trust-benefi-

here  used  synonymously  with  actio  ciaries,  were  afterwards  taken  from

or  indicium.  them   at  the  instance   of  the   fisc,

2  The  MS.  has  inter  quos  heredes.  because  of  some  wrong  done  or  dis-
§  17.     Comp.  fr.  130,  D.  de  V.  S.  (1.  16).  respect  shown  by  them  to  the  de-

Usucapion  might  quite  as  well  have  ceased  or  his  family,  some  act  done

been  styled  a  mode  of  acquisition  contrary  to  the  instructions  of  his

ex  lege  as  any  of  the  three  enume-  testament,  or  the  discovery  of  some

rated  in  this  par. ,  seeing  that  like  informal   deed    revoking  his    libe-

them  it  rested  on  statutory  autho-  rality.     Comp.  Paul,  iii,  5,  §§  10,

rity.  13  ;  tit.  D.  de  his  quae  ut  indignis

1  Comp.  above,  tit.  xvii.  attfentntur  (xxxiv,   9)  ;  tit.  C.   de

3  The  MS.  has  erurupturium,  and  Ms  quib.  ut  indign.  (vi,  35).
the  early  editions  ereptitium.     The  a  Comp.  xi,  14  ;  Gai.  ii,  97.
word  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the       §§  18,  19.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  86-90.
texts  ;  but  it  referred  to  successions  *  See  note  to  tit.  ix.

or   bequests    •which,    having    been  2  The  MS.  has  siquidem.

400    EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI  [XIX,  §§  19-21;  XX,  §§1,2.

19  fuerint,  ad  nos  pertinet.         Item  si  heredes   instituti  sint
legatumue  eis  sit,  et  hereditatem  iussu  nostro  adeuntes  nobis

20  adquirunt  et  legatum  ad  nos  pertinet.         Si  seruus  alterius
in  bonis,  alterius  ex  iure  Quiritium  sit,  ex  omnibus  causis

21  adquirit  ei  cuius  in  bonis  est.         Is  quern  bona  fide  possi-
demus,  siue  liber  siue  alienus  seruus  sit,  nobis  adquirit  ex
duabus  causis  tantum,  id  est  quod  ex  re  nostra  et  quod  ex
operis l  suis  adquirit :  extra  has  autern  causas  aut  sibi  adquirit
si  liber  sit,  aut  domino  si  alienus  seruus  sit.     eadem  sunt  et
in  eo  seruo  in  quo  tantum  usumfructum  habemus.

[XX.     DE  TESTAMENT  IS.}

1  Testamentum  est  mentis  nostrae  iusta  contestatio,  in  id

2  sollemniter  factum  ut  post  mortem  nostram  ualeat.         Testa-
rnentorum  genera  fuerunt  tria,  unum  quod  calatis  comitiis,
alterum  quod  in  procinctu,  tertium  quod  per  aes  et  libram
appellatum  est.     his  l  duobus  testamentis  abolitis  hodie  solum

19  belongs  to  us.         So  also  if  they  have  been  instituted  heirs,
or  if  a  legacy  has  been  left  them,  they  acquire  the  inheritance
for  us  by  entry  on  our  instructions,  and  the  legacy  belongs  to

20  us.         If  a  slave  be  in  bonis  of  one  man,  but  belong  to  another
ex  iure  Quiritium,  it  is  in  every  case  for  his  bonitarian  owner

21  that  he  acquires.         An  individual  whom  we  possess  in  good
faith,  whether  he  be  a  freeman  or  another  person's  slave,
acquires  for  us  in  two  cases  only, — namely,  what  he  has  made
with  means  we  have  provided,  or  by  his  own  labour.     Outside
those  two  cases  he  acquires  for  himself  if  he  be  a  freeman,  for
his  owner  if  he  be  the  slave  of  a   third   party.     And   the
same  rules  apply  to  a  slave  of  whom  we  have  only  a  usufruct.

[XX.     OF  TESTAMENTS.]

1  A  testament  is  the  testification  of  our  will,  in  the  form  pre-
scribed by  law,  made  solemnly,  on  purpose  that  it  may  be

2  effectual  after  our  death.         There  used  to  be  three  kinds  of
testament, — one  called  a  testament  calatis  comitiis,  another  in
procinctu,  and  the  third  per  aes  et  libram.     The  two  first  having
become  obsolete,  the  only  one  now  in  use  is  that  executed  by

§  20.     Comp.  i,  16  ;  Gai.  ii,  88.  test,  (ii,  10).

§  21.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  91,  92  ;  iii,  §§      §  2.       Comp.    Gai.    ii,    101-104,     and
164-166.  notes.

1  The  MS.  has  operibus.  l  So  the  MS.  ,  Bk. ,  Vahl. ,  and  K. ;

most  other  eds.  have  illis,  which  is
TIT.  xx,  §  1.     Comp.   §  9  ;  pr.    I.   de  more  accurate.

XX,  §§2-7.]          LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  401

in  usu  est  quod  per  aes  et  libram  tit,  id  est  per  mancipationem
imaginariam.  in  quo  testamento  libripens  adhibetur,  et
familiae  emptor,  et  non  minus  quam  quinque  testes  cum

3  quibus  testamenti  factio  est.         Qui  in  potestate  testatoris
est  aut  familiae  emptoris,  testis  aut  libripens  adhiberi  non
potest,quoniam  familiae  mancipatio  inter  testatorem  et  familiae
emptorem  fit,  et  ob  id  doinestici  testes  adhibendi  non  sunt.

4  Filio  familiam   emente1  pater   eius   testis   esse  non   potest.

5  Ex  duobus  fratribus,  qui  in  eiusdem  patris  potestate  sunt,
alter  familiae  emptor  alter  testis  esse  non  potest,  quoniam
quod  unus  ex  his  mancipio  accipit  adquirit  patri,  cui  films

6  suus  testis  esse  non  debet.         Pater  et  [filius]  qui  in  potes-
tate eius  est,  item l  duo  fratres  qui  in  eiusdem  patris  potestate
sunt,  testes  utrique,  uel  alter  testis  alter  libripens  fieri  pos-
sunt,  alio  familiam  emente ;  quoniam  nihil  nocet  ex  una  domo

7  plures   testes   alieno    negotio    adhiberi.          Mutus,   surdus,
furiosus,  pupillus,  femina  iieque  familiae  emptor  esse  neque

the  copper  and  the  scales,  i.e.  by  an  imaginary  mancipation.
In  this  testament  a  balance-holder  takes  a  part,  and  a  familiae
emptor,  and  not  fewer  than  five  witnesses  with  whom  the

3  testator  has  testamenti  factio.         He  who  is  in  potestate  of  the
testator  or  of  the  familiae  emptor  cannot  officiate  as  balance-
holder  or  as  a  witness;   for  the  testator  and  the  familiae
emptor  are  the  parties  to  the  mancipation,  and  on  that  account

4  the  testimony  of  members  of  their  families  is  excluded.         If
a  son  be  familiae  emptor  his  father  cannot  be  a  witness.

5  Of  two  brothers  who  are  in  the  potestas  of  the  same  father,
one  cannot  be  familiae  emptor  and  the  other  a  witness ;  for
what  the  former  acquires  by  the  mancipation  is  acquired  by
him  for  his  father ;  and  a  son  ought  not  to  be  a  witness  to  his

6  father's  deed.         A  father  and  his  son  in  potestate,  or  two
brothers  in  the  potestas  of  the  same  father,  may  both  be
witnesses,  or  one  of  them  a  witness  and  the  other  the  balance-
holder,  where  a  third  party  is  familiae  emptor  ;  for  there  is  no
harm  in  getting  more  than  one  person  from  the  same  house-

7  hold  to  act  as  witnesses  of  a  stranger's  deed.         A  dumb  or
deaf  person,  a  madman,  a  pupil,  or  a  woman,  can  neither  be
familiae  emptor  nor  be  employed  as  a  witness  or  as  balance-

§  3.  Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  105,  107.  filius,  omitted  in  the  text,  is  bor-

§§  4,  5.  Comp.  Gai.  ii,  106.  rowed.  Comp.  §  8,  I.  de  testam.

1  The  MS.  has  familiae  mente  ;  (ii,  10).

hence  many  etis.jiliofamiliae  emente.  1  So  in  the  fr.  Dig.  and  par.  Inst.

§  6.  Reproduced  infr.  17,  D.  detestibus  referred  to  ;  institutus  in  the  MS.

(xxii,    5),    from    which   the    word  §  7.     Comp.  §  6,  I.  de  testam.  (ii,  10).

2c

402

EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI        [XX,  §§  8-11.

8  testis  libripensue  fieri  potest.        Latinus  lunianus  et  familiae
emptor  et  testis  et  libripens  fieri  potest,  quoniam  cmn  eo
testamenti  factio  est.

9  In  testamento  quod  per  aes  et  libram  fit  duae  res  aguntur,
familiae  mancipatio  et  nuncupatio  testamenti.      nuncupatur
testamentum  in  hunc  modum :    tabulas  testamenti  testator
tenens  ita  dicit :   HAEC  VT  IN  HIS  TABVLIS  CERISVE  l  SCRIPTA

SVNT   ITA    DO,    ITA    LEGO,  ITA    TESTOR ;     ITAQVE    VOS,  QVIRITES,

TESTIMONIVM  PERHiBEWTE.2      quae   nuncupatio  et  testatio3
uocatur.

10  Filius   familiae  testamentum  facere  non  potest,  quoniam
nihil  suum  habet  ut  testari  de  eo  possit.     sed  diuus  Augustus
militibus  concessit l  ut  filius  familiae  miles  de  eo  peculio  quod

11  in  castris  adquisiuit  testamentum  facere  possit.         Qui  de
statu  suo  incertus  est,  fac  eo l  quod  patre  peregre  mortuo

9

10

8  holder.  A  Junian  latin  may  be  employed  either  as  familiae
emptor,  witness,  or  balance-holder;  for  with  him  there  is
testamenti  factio.

In  a  testament  by  the  copper  and  the  scales  there  are  two
separate  acts, — the  mancipation  of  ihefamilia  [or  estate],  and
the  nuncupation  of  the  testament.  The  nuncupation  proceeds
thus :  the  testator,  holding  his  testamentary  tablets,  speaks  as
follows  :  'As  is  written  in  these  waxen  tablets,  so  do  I  give,
so  do  I  legate,  so  do  I  declare  my  will ;  therefore,  Quirites,
grant  me  your  testimony.'  This  nuncupation  is  also  called
testatio.

A  Jiliusfamilias  cannot  make  a  testament;  for  he  has
nothing  of  his  own  about  which  to  declare  his  will.  But  the
emperor  Augustus  made  this  concession  to  the  military  pro-
fession,— that  a  Jiliusfamilias,  being  a  soldier,  might  make  a
testament  disposing  of  the  peculium  he  had  acquired  on
service.  He  who  is  in  uncertainty  as  to  his  status,  as  when
he  is  ignorant  that  he  has  become  sui  iuris  through  his  father's

pr.  I.  quib.  non  est  perm.  test.  fac.
(ii,  12).  The  MS.  has  Augustus
Marcus  constituit.  It  has  been  pro-
posed to  substitute  Magnus  or  pri-
mus for  Marcus ;  Hu.  replaces  it
with  moribus ;  and  K.,  following
Cuj.,  deals  with  it  as  an  incautious
gloss.  So  does  Bk.  in  his  text.  I
prefer  the  suggestion  in  his  notes.
11.  Comp.  fr.  14,  fr.  15,  I),  qui  test,
fac.  poss.  (xxviii,  1).

1  So   Hu.,   improving  on  Heirn-

11

§  8.     Comp.   xi,    16  ;  xx,  14 ;  xxii,    3  ;

Gai.  ii,  114,  note  1.
§  9.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  104,  and  notes.

1  Gai.  has  cerisque  ;  so  has  Isidor.
Orig.  v,  24,  §  12.

2  Pbitote  in  the  MS.  ,  whence  most
eds.  praebitote.

3  Comp.  pr.  I.  de  test,  (ii,  10).

§  10.     Comp.  Paul,  iii,  4a,  §  3  ;  pr.  I.

quib.  non  est  perm.  test.  fac.  (ii,  12).

1  This  is  a  suggestion  of  Boeck-

ing's,  and  finds  some  justification  in

XX,  §§  11-14.]      LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  403

ignorat   se   sui  iuris   esse,  testamentum   facere   non   potest.

12  Inpubes,  licet  sui  iuris  sit,  facere  testamentum  non  potest,

13  quoniam  nondum  plenum  indicium  animi  habet.         Mutus,
surdus,  furiosus,  itemque  prodigus  cui  lege  bonis  interdictum
est,  testamentum  facere  non  possunt :  mutus,  quoniam  uerba
nuncupationis   loqui    non    potest;    surdus,   quoniam    uerba
familiae  emptoris  exaudire   non  potest ;    furiosus,   quoniam
mentem  non  habet  ut  testari  de  sua  re1  possit;    prodigus,
quoniam  commercio 2  illi  interdictum  est 3  et  ob  id  familiam

14  mancipare   non   potest.2          Latinus  lunianus,   item   is   qui
dediticiorum  numero   est,   testamentum   facere    non  potest:
latinus  quidem  quoniam  nominatim  lege  lunia  prohibitus  est ;
is  autern  qui  dediticiorum  numero  est,  quoniam  nee  quasi
ciuis  Eomanus  testari  potest,  cum  sit  peregrinus,  nee  quasi

12  death  abroad,  cannot  make  a  testament.         A  person  under
puberty,  though  he  may  be  sui  iuris,  cannot  make  a  testament,

13  for  his  judgment  is  still  defective.         Neither  a  person  who
cannot  speak,  nor  one  who  cannot  hear,  nor  a  madman,  nor  a
spendthrift  to  whom  the  law  has  interdicted  the  management
of  his  property,  can  make  a  testament :  a  mute,  because  he
cannot  utter  the  words  of  nuncupation ;  a  deaf  person,  because
he  cannot  hear  the  words  of  the  familiae  emptor ;  a  madman,
because  he  has  no  rational  will  to  enable  him  to  declare  it  in
reference  to  his  estate ;  a  spendthrift,  because  he  is  denied  the
commercium,   and   so   is   unable  to   mancipate   his  familia.

14  Neither  a  Junian  latin  nor  a  freedman  numbered  amongst  the
dediticians  can  make  a  testament :  a  latin,  because  he  is  ex-
pressly forbidden  by  the  Junian  law ;  a  deditician  freedman,
because  he  can  neither  test  as  a  Eoman  citizen,  seeing  he  is  a
peregrin,  nor  as  a  peregrin,  seeing  he  is  not  a  citizen  of  any

bach's/ac  ideo  ;  the  MS.  has  facto  ;  *  So  Hugo  and  Kr.  The  MS.  has
Bk.,  Vahl.,  and  K.,  factus.  The  de  ea  re,  which  Bk.  and  Hu.  retain,
illustration  does  not  seem  a  very  the  former  explaining  that  he  un-
happy one,  as,  except  he  were  a  derstands  it  to  mean  cum  effectu.
soldier,  a  man  would  not  be  likely  But  this,  as  well  as  the  de  ea  recte
to  make  a  testament  unless  he  be-  of  Cann. ,  amounts  to  testatio  mentis
lieved  himself  sui  iuris  ;  while  if  he  (§  1)  de  mente,  which  is  a  question-
was  a  soldier,  making  a  military  able  locution,
testament,  it  did  not  matter  in  the  2  See  xix,  5,  note,
least  whether  he  was  sui  or  alieni  3  See  the  formula  of  interdiction
iuris.  in  Paul,  iii,  4«,  §  7.  See  also

§  12.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §  113.  xii,  3.

§13.     Comp.    Paul,   iii,    4a,  §§    5,  11,       §14.    Comp.  i,  §§10,  11  ;  xi,  16;  xvii,  1 ;

12  ;  §§  2,  3,  I.  quib.  non  est  perm.  xxii,  §§  2,  3  ;  Gai.  i,  §§  13,  22-25  ;

(ii,  12)  iii,  74.

404      EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI  [XX,  §§  14-16  ;  XXII,  §  1.

peregrinus,  quoniam  nullius  certae  ciuitatis  ciuis  est,1  ut
.15  secundum*  leges  ciuitatis  suae  testetur.  Feminae  post

duodecimum  annum  aetatis  testamenta  facere  possunt  tutore
16  auctore,  donee  in  tutela  sunt.  Seruus  publicus  populi

Eomani l  partis  dimidiae  testamenti  faciendi  habet  ius.

[XXL     Q  VEMADMOD  VM  HERES  INSTIT VI  DEBEA  T. ]
Heres  institui  recte  potest  his  uerbis :  TITIVS  HERES  ESTO,

TITIVS    HERES    SIT,   TITIVM    HEREDEM    ESSE    IVBEO  ;    ilia    auteill

institutio  :  HEREDEM  INSTITVO,  HEREDEM  FACIO,  plerisque  inpro-
bata  est.

[XXII.     Q  VI  HEREDES  INSTIT VI  POSS VNT.  ]
1       Heredes   institui   possunt  qui  testamenti  factioneni    cum

particular  [peregrin]  state,  so  as  to  be  able  to  test  according  to

15  the  laws  of  his  own  country.        Women  can  make  testaments
after  their  twelfth  year,  [but  only]  with  auctoritas  of  their

16  tutors  so  long  as  they  are  in  tutelage.         A  public  slave  of
the  Eoman  people  has  the  right  to  make  a  testament  of  one
half  [of  his  peculiuin\.

[XXI.    HOW  AN  HEIR  OUGHT  TO  BE  INSTITUTED.]

An  heir  can  be  properly  instituted  by  these  words  :  '  Titius
be  heir,'  or  '  Let  Titius  be  heir,'  or  '  I  order  that  Titius  shall
be  heir.'  But  such  an  institution  as  '  I  institute  [Titius]  as
heir,'  or  '  I  make  [Titius]  my  heir,'  is  generally  disapproved.

[XXII.     WHO  CAN  BE  INSTITUTED  HEIRS.]
1       Those  can  be  instituted  as  heirs  who  have  testamenti  factio

1  So  Cuj.  and  all  subsequent  eds. ;  their  comrades, — intra  domum  ~  see
the  MS.  has  sciens.  Plin.  Epist.  viii,  16.

2  The     MS.     has    aduersus,  —  a  l  Here,  as  in  xxiv,   28,  the  MS.
mistake    which     occurs    again    in  has  praetoriani.

xxviii,  1.

§  15.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  113,  118.  TIT.  xxr.      Comp.    Gai.    ii,    117,    and

§  16.     This  statement  is  not  supported  note  ;  Vlp.  in  fr.  1,  §§  3-7,  D.  de

elsewhere.     Pomp,    in  fr.    16,   pr.,  heredib.  imtlt.  (xxviii,  5)  ;  Const,  in

Modest,  in  fr.  19,  and  Vlp.  himself  1.  15,  C.  de  testam.  (vi,  23).

in  fr.  20,  §  7,  D.  qui  test.  fac.  pass.

(xxviii,   1),    all   deny  that  a  slave  TIT  xxil,  §  1.     Comp.  §  24,  I.  de  legal.

could  make  a  testament.     Owners,  (ii,    20) ;    fr.   16,  D.   qui   test.  fac.

however,    sometimes  allowed  their  poss.    (xxviii,    1).     On  meaning  of

slaves  to  make  'quasi  testamenta,'  testamenti  factio,   see  Gai.  ii,  114,

disposing  of  their  peculia  amongst  note  1.

XXII,  §§  2-5.]       LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.

405

2  testatore  habent.         Dediticiorum  numero  heres  institui  non
potest,  quia  peregrinus  est,  cum  quo  testament!  factio  non  est.

3  [Latinum  lunianum  heredem  instituere  omnino  licet,  et] *   si
quidem  mortis  testatoris  tempore  uel  intra  diem  cretionis*
ciuis  Eomanus  sit,  heres  esse  potest ;  quodsi  latinus  manserit,
lege  lunia  capere  hereditatem  prohibetur.     idem  iuris  est  in

4  persona  caelibis  propter  legem  luliam.3          Incerta  persona
heres  institui  non  potest,  uelut  hoc  modo :  QVISQVIS  PKIMVS
AD  FVNVS  MEVM  VENERIT  HERES  ESTO ;  quoniam  certum  con-

5  silium  debet  esse  testantis.         Nee  municipia  nee  municipes
heredes  institui   possunt,  quoniam  incertum  corpus  est,  et
neque  cernere  uniuersi  neque  pro  herede  gerere l  possunt  ut
heredes  fiant :    senatusconsulto   tamen   concessum   est  ut   a
libertis   suis   heredes   institui   possint.      Sed    fideicommissa
hereditas  rnunicipibus  restitui  potest;  denique  hoc  senatus-

2  with  the  testator.         An  individual  numbered  amongst  the
dediticians  cannot  be  instituted  heir,  for  he  is  a  peregrin,  and

3  with  him  there  is  no  testamenti  factio.         A  Junian  latin  may
at  any  time  be  •  instituted  as  heir,  and  if,  at  the  date  of  the
testator's  death,  or  before  the  time  for  cretion  has  expired,  he
be  a  Eoman  citizen,  he  can  actually  become  heir ;  but  if  he
have  remained  a  latin  he  is  forbidden  by  the  Junian  law  to
take  the  inheritance.     The  rule  is  the  same  in  the  case  of  an

4  unmarried  person  by  reason  of  the  Julian  law.         An  un-
certain person  cannot  be  instituted  heir,  for  example  thus :
'  Whoever  shall  come  first   to  my  funeral,  let  him    be   my
heir;'   for  the  intention  of  a  testator  ought  to  be  definite.

5  Neither  a  municipality  nor  its  members  can  be  instituted
heirs,  for  the  body  is  uncertain,  and  neither  can  they  cern
collectively,  nor  collectively  behave  as  heirs,  so  as  to  become
heirs ;  but  a  senatusconsult  allows  them  to  be  instituted  by
their  freedmen.     An  inheritance  left  to  them  in  a  trust-deed,
however,  may  be  made  over  to  the  members  of  a  municipal
corporation;  in  fact  this  is  provided  by  the  same  senatus-

§  2.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  125  ;  ii,  §§110,  218.

§  3.     Comp.  Gai.  i,   §§  23,  24  ;  ii,  275  ;

below,  §  8  ;  above,  xvii,  1  ;  xx,  14.

1  Added  by  M.     Bk.,  Valil.,  and
K.  have  simply  Latinus  lunianus  ;
Hu.  has  Latinus  lunianus  heres  in-
stituti  potest,  et,  etc.

2  See  §§  25  f.

3  Comp.  xvii,  1  ;  Gai.  ii,  §§  144,
286.      To   obtain  the  ius  capie.ndi
the  celibate  had  to  qualify  himself

by  marriage  within  the  same  period.

4.  Comp.  xxiv,  18 ;  Gai.  ii,  287.

5.  Comp.  xxiv,  28  ;  Vlp.  infr.  1,  §  1,
D.  de  libert.  univ.  (xxxviii,  3)  ;  fr.
26,  D.  ad  SO.    Trebell.  (xxxvi,  1)  ;
1.  12,  C.  de  hered.  inst.  (vi,  24).

1  So  Bk.,  VahL,  Hu.,  and  K.
The  MS.  has  p  hirede  herede  cernere  ;
the  earlier  editions,  including  those
of  last  century,  pro  libito  de  herede
cernere.

406  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMIT1I  VLPIANI      [XXII,  §§  6-9.

6  consulto  prospectum  est.         Deos  heredes  instituere  non  pos
sumus  praeter    eos  quos  senatusconsulto  constitutionibusue
principum  instituere  concessum  est,  sicuti  louem  Tarpeium,
Apolliiiem  Didymaeum  Mileti,1  Martem  in  Gallia,  Mineruam
Iliensem,  Herculem  Gaditanum,  Dianam  Ephesiam,  Matrem
Deorum    Sipylensem2  quae  Smyrnae3  colitur,  et  Caelestem
sanctam  deam  *  Garth aginis.

7  Seruos  heredes  instituere  possumus,  nostros  cuni  libertate,
alienos   sine    libertate,   communes   cum    libertate    uel    sine

8  libertate.         Eum  seruum  qui   tantuni  in  bonis  noster  est
nee  cum  libertate  heredem  instituere  possumus,  quia  latini-
tatem  consequitur,  quod  non  proficit  ad  hereditatem  capien-

9  dam.          Alienos  seruos   heredes   instituere    possumus    eos

6  consult.         We  cannot  institute  deities  as  our  heirs,  except
those   whose   institution   has   expressly  been   permitted   by
senatusconsult  or  imperial  constitutions,  such  as  the  Tarpeian
Jove,   the   Didymaean   Apollo   of    Miletus,   Mars   in   Gaul,
Minerva  of  Troy,  Hercules  of  Cadiz,  Diana  of  Ephesus,  the
Sipyleniau  Mother  of  the  Gods  worshipped  at  Smyrna,  and
Caelestis,  the  holy  goddess  of  Carthage.

7  We  may  institute  slaves  as  our  heirs, — our  own  with  liberty,
other  people's  without   it,  common  ones  either  with  it  or

8  without  it.         We  cannot  institute  one  whom  we  hold  only
in  1)01118,  even  though  with  gift  of  freedom ;  for  thereby  he
acquires  [no  more  than]  latinity,  which  does  not  avail  him  for

9  taking  an  inheritance.         Other  people's  slaves  we  can  insti-

5.     Comp.  Dio  Cass.  Iv,  2  ;  Ixxix,  12  ;  But  Caelestis  is  to  be  read  here  as

fr.  38,  §  6,  D.  de  legal.  III.  (xxxii).  the  proper  name  of  the  deity,  not

1  SoM.,  Hu.,  and  K.,  with  good  as  a   mere  epithet:    see   Capitolin.
geographical  reason ;    the   MS.    has  Pertinax,   4  ;  Macrin.    3  ;    Trebell.
sicuti,  which  Bk.  retains.  Poll.    Tyr.    trig.    29 ;    Orelli    and

2  So  Bk.     The   MS.  has  Sipilen-  Henzen,  nos.  1943,  5859.    Salinensis
sim;    Cuj.  Cybelen  earn.      M.   and  may  mean  '  originally  of  Salinae, ' — -
Hu.   read  Sipylenen ;   the    former,  and  there  were  many  places  of  that
following  Jahn,  finding  a  use  for  the  name  ;  but  the  inscription  last  re-
sim  of  the  MS.  by  converting  it  into  ferred  to   (discovered    in   Algeria),
Nemesim,     probably    because    this  in  its  words  'deaesanc tae  Caelestis,'
deity  was  figured   on  some  of  the  suggests  that  the  copyist  may  thus
coins  of  Smyrna.     But  quae  Smyr-  have   corruptly   rendered   the   con-
nae  colitur  is  equally  applicable  to  traction  sctam  deam  (sanctam deam}.
Strabo's   610.   s/wuXjj'm,    the   Cybele  In  the  inscription  first  referred  to,
of  Mount  Sipylos,    in  the  vicinity  she  is  called  Caelestis  Augusta  Car-
of  Smyrna.  thaginis.

3  The  MS.  has  hysmirne.  §§  7-13.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  185-190  ;  pr.

4  The  MS.  has  Caelestem  Salinensem  §§  1-3,  I.  dehered.  inst.  (ii,  14).
Carthaginis,  which  is  retained  by       §  8.     Cp.  Gai.  ii,  276,  note  ;  above,  §  3.
most  eds.      Hu.    substitutes    Cae-      §  9.     Comp.    fr.   31,  pr.,  fr.   32,  D.  de
lestem   Selenen  deam   Carthaginis.  her.  inst.  (xxviii.  5).

XXII,  §§  9-14.]     LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  407

tantutn l  quorum  cum  dominis  testamenti  factionem  habemus.

10  Communis  seruus  cum  libertate  recte  quidem  lieres  instituitur
quasi  proprius  pro  parte  nostra ;  sine  libertate  autem  quasi

11  alienus  propter  socii  partem.         Proprius  seruus  cum  liber-
tate heres  institutus,  si  quidem  in  eadem  causa  permanserit,

12  ex  testamento  liber  et  heres  fit,  id  est  necessarius.         Quod
si  ab  ipso  testatore  uiuente  manumissus  uel  alienatus  sit,  suo
arbitrio  uel  iussu  emptoris  hereditatem  adire  potest.     sed  si
sine  libertate  sit  institutus,  omnino  non  consistit  institutio.

13  Alienus  seruus  heres  institutus,  si  quidem  in  ea  causa  per-
manserit, iussu  domiiii  debet  hereditatem  adire  ;  quod  si  uiuo
testatore  manumissus  aut  alienatus  a  domino  fuerit,  aut  suo
arbitrio  aut  iussu  emptoris  poterit  adire  hereditatem.

14  Sui  heredes  instituendi  sunt  uel  exheredandi.     sui  autem
heredes  sunt  liberi  quos  in  potestate  habemus,  tarn  naturales
quam  adoptiui ;  item  uxor  quae  in  manu  est,  et  nurus  quae

tute  as  our  heirs  only  when  we  have  testamenti  factio  with

10  their  owners.         A  slave  that  is  common  to  us  and  some  other
person  is  rightly  instituted  with  liberty,  seeing  that  he  is  our
property  in  so  far  as  our  share  is  concerned ;  or  without  it,
seeing  he  is  another  person's  so  far  as  regards  our  partner's

11  share.         If  the  testator's  own  slave,  instituted  with  freedom,
continue  in  the  same  condition,  he  becomes  free  and  heir

12  under  the  testament,  i.e.  a  necessary  heir;         but  if  he  have
been  either  manumitted  or  alienated  by  the  testator  himself
during  his  lifetime,  then  he  can  enter  at  his  own  discretion
[in  the  one  case],  or  on  the  instruction  of  his  purchaser  [in
the  other].     If,  however,  he  be  instituted  without  accompany-

13  ing  gift  of  freedom,  the  institution  fails  entirely.         Another
person's  slave,  who  has  been  instituted  heir,  if  he  remain  in
the  same  condition,  must  enter  on  his  owner's  instructions ;
but  if  he  have  been  manumitted  or  alienated  by  his  owner
during  the  testator's  lifetime,  he  can  enter  of  his  own  accord
[in  the  first  case],  by  order  of  his  purchaser  [in  the  second].

14  Sui  heredes  must  be  either  instituted  or  disinherited.    Sui
heredes  are  the  descendants  whom  we  have  in  our  potestas,
whether  natural  or  adoptive ;  together  with  our  wife  in  manu,
and   our   daughter-in-law   in  manu   of    a   son  in  potestate.

1  So  Hugo   and  subsequent  eds. ;  implied  in  the  institution ;  pr.  I.

the  MS.  has  tamen.  de  hered.  inst.  (ii,  14).

§  10.     Comp.  Paul,  iii,  6,  §  4.  §§  14-22.     Comp.    Gai.  ii,  §§  123-137
§  12.     Just,  declared  an  express  gift  of  tit.  I.  de  exher.  lib.  (ii,  13).

freedom  to  be  unnecessary,   being

408  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI       [XXII,  §§  15-21.

15  in  manu  est  filii  quern  in  potestate  habenms.         Postumi
quoque  liberi,  id  est  qui  in  utero  sunt,  si  tales  sunt  ut  nati
in  potestate  nostra  futuri  sint,  suorum  heredum  numero  sunt.

16  Ex  suis  heredibus  filius  quidem  neque  heres  institutus  neque
nonainatim 1   exheredatus   non   patitur  ualere    testamentum.

17  Reliquae  uero  personae  liberorum,  uelut  filia  nepos  neptis,  si
praeteritae  sint,  ualet  testamentum,  [sect]  scriptis  heredibus
adcrescunt,  suis  quidem  heredibus  in  partem  uirilem,  extraneis

18  autem  in  partem  dimidiam.         Postumi  quoque2  liberi  cuius-
cumque   sexus  omissi  quod   ualuit   testamentum   agnatione

19  rumpunt.         Eos  qui  in  utero  sunt,  si  nati  sui  heredes  nobis
futuri  sunt,  possumus   instituere  heredes :    si   quidem  post
mortem  nostram  nascantur,  ex  iure  ciuili ;  si  uero  uiuentibus
uobis,  ex  lege  lunia.3

20  Eilius  qui  in  potestate  est,  si  non  instituatur  heres,  nomina-
tim   exheredari  debet ;    reliqui  sui  heredes  utriusque  sexus

21  aut  nominatim  aut  inter  ceteros.         Postumus  filius  nomina-
tim   exheredandus   est;   filia  postuma  ceteraeque  postumae

15  After-born  descendants  too  are  classed  amongst  our  sui  heredes,
i.e.  such  children  in  the  womb  as,  were  they  already  born,

16  would  be  in  our  potestas.         The  fact  that  a  son,  being  one
of  our  sui  heredes,  is  neither  instituted  heir  nor  disinherited

17  by  name,  precludes  the  validity  of  our  testament.         If  how-
ever  other   descendants,  such   as  a  daughter,   grandson,   or
granddaughter,  be  passed  over,  the  testament  is  valid;  but
they  come  in  for  a  share  along  with  the  heirs  that  have  been
instituted, — with  sui  on  a  footing  of  equality,  with  strangers

18  for  one-half  of  the  inheritance.          Omitted  after-born   de-
scendants of  either  sex,  by  agnation  [i.e.  by  their  birth]  break

19  a  testament  previously  valid.         We  may  institute  as  heirs
children  in  the  womb,  provided  they  would  have  been  amongst
our  sui  heredes  if  already  born;  [we  are  entitled  to  do  so],
as  regards  those  born  after  our  death,  by  the  ius  ciuile,  and
as  regards  those  born  in  our  lifetime,  by  the  Junia-  Vcllaean
law.

20  A  son  in  potestate,  if  he  be  not  instituted  heir,  must  be  dis-
inherited by  name ;  other  sui  heredes   of  either  sex  may  be

21  disinherited  either  by  name  or  amongst  '  the  others.'         An
after-born  son  must  be  expressly  disinherited  ;  a  daughter  or

1  After  nominatim  the    MS.    has  "  Hu.  substitutes  quicunque.

quo ;  Vahl.  substitutes  no  (ut  opor-  3  The  MS.  has  lulia.     But  the  law

let),   which  finds  a  justification  in  referred  to  seems  to  be  the  lex  lunia

xxiii,  2.  Vellaea  ;  see  Gai.  ii,  134,  and  note.

XXII,  §§  21-25.]    LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  409

feminae  uel  nominatim  uel  inter  ceteros,  dummodo  inter
22  ceteros  exheredatis  aliquid  legetur.  Nepotes  etpronepotes,
ceterique  masculi  postumi  praeter  filium,  uel  nominatim  uel
inter  ceteros  cum  adiectione  legati  sunt  exheredandi ;  sed
tutius  est  tamen  nominatim  eos  exheredari ;  et  id  obseruatur

magis.

23  Emancipates  liberos   guamuis  iure1  ciuili  neque  heredes
instituere  neque  exheredare  necesse  sit,  tamen  praetor  iubet,
si   non    instituantur    heredes,   exheredari,   masculos    omnes
nominatim,   feminas    uel    [nominatim    uel~] 2   inter    ceteros ;
alioquin  contra  tabulas  bonorum  possessionem  eis  pollicetur.

24  Inter    necessaries    heredes,   id   est    seruos   cum   libertate
heredes  scriptos,  et  suos  et  necessaries,  id  est  liberos  qui  in
potestate  sunt,  iure  ciuili  nihil  interest :  nam  utrique  etiam
inuiti  heredes  sunt.     sed  iure   praetorio  suis  et  necessariis
heredibus  abstinere  se  a  parentis  hereditate  permittitur ;  ne-
cessariis autem  tantum  heredibus  abstinendi  potestas  non  datur.

25  Extraneus  heres,  siquidem  cum  cretione  sit  heres  institutus,

other  female  after-born  may  be  disinherited  either  expressly
or  in  the  ceteri  clause,  provided  in  the  latter  case  that  some

22  legacy   is   left   her.         Grandsons,  great-grandsons,  and   all
other  male  after-born  descendants  than  a  son,  may  be  disin-
herited either  expressly  or  amongst '  the  others,'  [in  the  latter
case]  with  bequest  of  a  legacy ;  but  it  is  safer  to  disinherit
them  by  name  ;  and  this  is  the  usual  practice.

23  Although   by  the   ius  ciuile  it  is   unnecessary   either  to
institute  or  disinherit  emancipated  children,  yet  the  praetor
requires  that,  if  not  instituted,  they  shall  be  disinherited, —
males,  without  exception,  by  name,  females  either  ly  name  or
in  the  ceteri  clause ;  otherwise  he  grants  them  possession  of
the  deceased's  estate  in  opposition  to  the  testament.

24  By  the  ius  ciuile  there  is  no  difference  between  heredes
necessarii,  i.e.  slaves  instituted  heirs  with  freedom,  and  sui  et
necessarii,  i.e.  descendants  in  potcstate  of  the  testator ;  for  both
become  heirs  whether  they  will  or  not.     But  by  the  prae-
torian law  sui  et  necessarii  are  allowed  to  abstain  from  the
inheritance  of  a  parent ;  to  heirs  who  are  simply  necessarii,
however,  this  power  of  abstaining  is  not  conceded.

25  A  stranger  heir,  if  he  be  instituted  with  cretion,  becomes

§  23.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  135  ;  below,  xxviii,  2  Added  by  K.

§§  2-4.  §  24.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  153,  156,  160.

1  So  Schill.   and  all  recent  eds.;  §§  25-30.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  164-170;
the  MS.  has  qui  in  re.  Paul,  iv,  8,  25.

410  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMIT1I  VLPIANI      [XXII,  §§25-31.

eernendo  fit  heres  ;  si  uero l  sine  cretione,  pro  herede  gerendo.

26  Pro  herede  gerit  qui  rebus   hereditariis   tamquam   dominus
utitur,  uelut  qui  auctionem2  rerum  hereditariarum  facit  aut

27  seruis  hereditariis  cibaria  dat.         Cretio  est  certorum  dierum
spatium  quod  datur  instituto  heredi  ad  deliberandum  utrum
expediat 3  ei  adire  hereditatem  nee  ne,  uelut :  TITIVS  HEKES

ESTO,  CERNITOQVE   IN  DIEBVS   CENTVM  PROXIMIS  QVIBVS  SCIERIS

28  POTERISQVE  :  NISI  IT  A  CREVERis  EXHERES  ESTO.         Cernere  est
uerba  cretionis  dicere  ad  hunc  modum:  Q.VOD  ME  MEVIVS*

29  HEREDEM  INSTITVIT  EAM  HEREDITATEM  ADEO  CERNOQVE.         Sine

cretione  heres  institutus,  si  constituent  nolle  se  heredem  esse,
statim  excluditur  ab  hereditate  et  amplius  earn  adire  non

30  potest.         Cum  cretione  uero  heres  institutus,  sicut  eernendo
fit  heres,  ita  non  aliter  excluditur  quam  si  intra  diem  cretionis
non  creuerit:  ideoque  etiamsi  constituent  nolle  se  heredem
esse,  tamen,  si  supersint  dies  cretionis,  poenitentia  actus  eer-
nendo heres  fieri  potest.

31  Cretio  aut  uulgaris  dicitur  aut  continua :  uulgaris,  in  qua

26  heir  by  cerning  ;  if  without  it,  by  behaving  as  heir.         He
behaves  as  heir  who  deals  with  the  hereditary  estate  as  if  it
were  his  own,  as  for  instance  when  he  puts  up  things  belong-
ing to  it  to  auction,  or  furnishes  the  slaves  belonging  to  it

27  with  food.         Cretion  is  a  certain  period  of  time  allowed  to
the  instituted  heir  for  deliberating  whether  or  not  it  will  be
for  his  advantage  to  enter  to  the  inheritance,  thus  :  '  Titius  be
heir,  and  cern  within,  the  next  hundred  days  after  you  know

28  and  can  ;  if  you  have  not  thus  cerned,  be  disinherited.'         To
cern  is  to  recite  the  words  of  cerniture  in  this  way :  '  Whereas
Mevius  has  instituted  me  his  heir,  I  hereby  enter  to  and  cern

29  his  inheritance.'         An  heir  instituted  without  cretion,  if  he
have  declared  his  resolution  not  to  be  heir,  is  at  once  excluded
from  the  inheritance,  and  has  no  further  opportunity  of  enter-

30  ing.         He,  however,  who  is  instituted  with  cretion,  as  he
becomes  heir  by  cerniug,  is  not  otherwise  excluded  than  by
failing   to    cern    within    the    cretionary   period ;    therefore,
although  he  may  have  [informally]  declared  that  he  does  not
mean  to  be  heir,  yet  if  there  be  still  part  of  the  time  for
cretion  unexpired,  repenting  of  what  he  has  done  he  may  still
become  heir  by  cerning.

31  Cretion  is  styled  either  common  or  continuous, — common,

1  The  MB.  has  slue.  *  The   MS.    has  cum  id  medlus ;

3  The  MS.  has  actionem.  but  see  Gai.  ii,  166.

3  The  MS.  has  expiat.  §§  31,  32.     Oomp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  171,  172.

XXII,  §§  31-34.]     LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  411

adiciuntur  lia.ec  uerba :  QVIBVS  SCIERIS  POTEEISQVE  ;  continua,

32  in  qua  non  adiciuntur.         Ei  qui  uulgarern  cretionem  habet
dies  illi  tantum1  computantur  quibus  sciit*  se  heredem  institu-
tuni  esse  et  potuit  cernere ;  ei  uero  qui  continuam-habet  cretio-
nem etiam  illi  dies  computantur  quibus  ignorauit  se  heredem
institutum,  aut  sciuit  quidem  sed  non  potuit  cernere.

33  Heredes  aut  instituti  dicuntur  aut  substituti:  [instituii],
qui  primo  gradu  script!  sunt ;  substituti,  qui  secundo  gradu
uel  sequentibus  lieredes  scripti   sunt,  uelut:    TITIVS   HEEES

ESTO,   CEKNITOQVE   IN   DIEBVS    PROXIMIS    CENTVM    QVIBVS    SCIES
POTERISQVE:    [QVODNI']1   ITA    CREVERIS,   EXHERES   ESTO.      TVNC

MEVIVS  HERES  ESTO,  CERNiTOQVE  IN  DIEBVS  et  reliqua.    similiter
et  deinceps  substitui  potest.

34  Si  sub  inperfecta  cretione  heres  institutus  sit,  id  est  non
adiectis  his  uerbis :  si  NON  CREVERIS  EXHERES  ESTO,  sed  si  ita  :
si  NON  CREVERIS,  TVNC  MEVIVS  HERES  ESTO,  cernendo  quidem
superior  inferiorem  excludit ;  non  cernendo  autem,  sed   pro

when  the  words  '  in  which  you  know  and  can '  are  added,

32  continuous,  when  those  words  are  not  added.         Against  him
who  has  common  cretion  those  days  only  are  counted  in  which
he  knows  that  he  has  been  instituted  heir  and  is  in  a  position
to  cern ;  against  him,  on  the  other  hand,  whose  cretion  is  con-
tinuous, even  that  time  is  counted  in  which  he  was  ignorant
that  he  had  been  instituted  heir,  or  may  have  known  it  per-
haps but  was  unable  to  cern.

33  Heirs  are  called  either  institutes  or  substitutes, — institutes,
when  their  names  are  mentioned  in  the  testament  in  the  first
place,  substitutes  when  in  the  second  or  a  subsequent  place,
thus :  '  Titius  be  heir,  and  cern  within  the  next  hundred  days
after  you  know  and  can;  if  you  do  not  so  cern,  be  disin-
herited ;  then   Mevius   be   heir,   and  cern   within  the   next
hundred  days,'  etc.     And  any  number  of  successive  substitu-
tions may  be  made  in  the  same  way.

34  If  an  heir  be  instituted  under  an  imperfect  cretion-clause,
i.e.  one  in  which  the  words  are  not  '  If  you  have  not  cerned,
be  disinherited,'  but  '  If  you  have  not  cerned,  then  Mevius  be
heir,'  the  institute  by  cerning  excludes  the  substitute ;  if  he
do  not  cern,  however,  but  only  behave  as  heir,  he  lets  in  the

1  So   K. ;   the    MS.    has   dantur ;  l  So  Bk.  and  subsequent  eds. ,  on
most  eds.  duntaxat.  the  authority  of  Gai.  ii,  174  ;  omit-

2  The  MS.  has  scit  ;  Bk.  and  K.  ted  in  the  MS.  ;  by  earlier  eds.  nisi,
stiuit.     But  see  Fr.  Vat.  §§  1,  156.  §  34.      Comp.     Gai.    ii,    §§    177,    178,

§  33.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  174-176.  where,  however,   there   is  no  men-

412     EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI  [XXII,  §  34 ;  XXIII,  §§  1-3.

herede  gerendo,  in  partem  admittit  substitution,  sed  postea
diuus  Marcus  constituit  ut  et  pro  herede  gerendo  ex  asse  fiat
heres.1  quod  si  neque  creuerit  neque  pro  lierede  gesserit,  ipse
excluditur  et  substitutus  ex  asse  fit  heres.1

[XXIII.     QVEMADMODVM  TEST  AMENTA  RVMPVNTVR.}

1  Testamentum   iure   factum    infirmatur   duobus   modis,   si
ruptuni  aut  inritum  factum  sit.

2  Eumpitur  testamentum  mutatione,  id  est  si  postea  aliud
testamentum  iure  factum  sit ;  item  agnatione,  id  est  si  suus
heres  agnascatur,  qui  neque  heres  institutus  neque  ut  oportet

3  exheredatus  sit.        Agnascitur  suus  heres  aut  agnascendo,  aut
adoptando,  aut   in   manum   conueniendo,   aut  in  locum  sui
heredis  succedendo,  uelut  nepos  mortuo  filio  uel  emancipate,

substitute  for  a  part  of  the  inheritance.  (But  the  late  emperor
Marcus  afterwards  provided  by  a  constitution  of  his  that  by
simply  behaving  as  heir  the  institute  should  become  heir  to
the  whole  of  it.)  If  he  have  neither  cerned  nor  behaved  as
heir,  then  the  institute  is  altogether  excluded,  and  the  substi-
tute becomes  heir  to  the  whole  inheritance.

[XXIII.     HOW  TESTAMENTS  ARE  BROKEN.}

1  A  testament  made  according  to  the  requirements  of  law  is
invalidated  in  either  of  two  ways, — if  it  be  broken,  or  if  it  be
irritated.

2  A   testament   is   broken   by  mutatio,   i.e.   if  subsequently
another  testament  be  made  with  all  legal  formalities ;  also  by
agnatio,  i.e.  if  a  suus  heres  come  into  existence  who  has  neither
been  instituted  heir  nor  disinherited  as  the  law  prescribes.

3  A  suus  heres  comes  into  existence  either  by  birth,  or  by  adop-
tion, or  by  in  manum  conuentio,  or  by  stepping  by  succession
into  the  place  of  another  suus  heres  (as  a  grandson  into  the
place  of  a  deceased  or  emancipated  son),  or  by  manumission,

tion   of  the   constitution  of  Marc.  TIT.    xxm,   §   1.     Comp.    pr.    I.    quib.
Aurelius.  mod.  test,  infirm,  (ii,  17).

1  Equivalent  to  the  in  totam  here-  §  2.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  144,  131  ;  above
ditatem  succedit  of  Gai.     The  entire  xxii,  §§  14-18.

estate  was  figured  as    an  as,   divi-  §  3.     Comp.    Gai.   ii,  §§  133,    138-141,
sible  into  so  many  twelfths  (unciae)  159  ;  iii,  6  ;  Paul,  in  Collat.  xvi,  3,

or  multiples  of  a  twelfth  ;  see  §  5,  §  7.

1.  de  hercd.  inst.  (ii,  14).

XXIII,  §§  3-7.]      LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVAL  413

aut  manumissione,  id  est  si  films  ex  prima  secundaue  man-
cipatione  manumissus  reuersus  sit  in  patris  potestatem.

4  Inritum  fit  testamentum  si  testator  capite  deminutus  fuerit,
aut  si  iure  facto  testamento  nemo  extiterit  heres.

5  Si  is  qui  testamentum  fecit  ab  hostibus  captus  sit,  testa-
mentum eius  ualet ;  si  quidem  reuersus  fuerit,  iure  postliminii,
si  uero  ibi  decesserit,  ex  lege  Cornelia,  quae  perinde  succes-
sionem  eius  confirmat  atque  si  in  ciuitate  decessisset.

6  Si  septeni  signis  testium  signatum  sit  testamentum,  licet
iure   ciuili  ruptum  uel  inritum  factum  sit,  praetor  scriptis
heredibus  iuxta  tabulas  bonorum.  possessionem  dat,  si  testator
et  ciuis  Eomanus  et  suae  potestatis  cum  moreretur  fuit ;  quam
bonorum  possessionem  cum  re,  id  est  cum  effectu  habent,  si
nemo  alius  iure  heres  sit.

7  Liberis   inpuberibus    in   potestate   manentibus,   tarn  natis
quam  postumis,  heredes  substituere  parentes  possunt  duplici
niodo,  id  est  aut  eo  quo  extraneis,  ut  si  heredes  non  extiterint

i.e.  by  the  return  into  the  patria  potestas  of  a  son  manumitted
from  a  first  or  second  mancipation.

4  A  testament  is  irritated  when  the  testator  suffers  capitis
deminutio,  or  when,  though  executed  in  all  respects  regularly,
no  one  has  become  heir  under  it.

5  If  a  man  who  has  made  a  testament  be  taken  captive  by  an
enemy,  his  deed  is  nevertheless   valid :  if  he  have  returned
home,  it  is  so  iure  postliminii  ;  if  he  have  died  in  captivity,
it  is  so  by  the  Cornelian  law,  which  declares  that  his  succes-
sion shall  hold  good  just  as  if  he  had  died  a  citizen.

6  If  a  testament  be  sealed  with  the  seals  of  seven  witnesses,
then,  notwithstanding  that  according  to  the  ins  ciuile  it  may
have  been  broken  or  irritated,  the  praetor  gives  to  the  heirs
named  in  it  possession  of  the  estate  in  terms  of  the  deed,  pro-
vided the  testator  was  a  Eonian  citizen  and  sui  iuris  when  he
died ;  and  this  possession  will  be  cum  re,  i.e.  effectual  to  them,
if  there  be  no  other  person  whom  the  law  prefers  as  heir.

7  To  his  impuberate  children  in  potestate,  both  born  and  to  be
born,  a  parent  may  substitute  heirs  in  two  ways, — either  in
that  employed  in  substituting  to  strangers,  viz.  that  if  the

§  4.  Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  144-146.  to  the  heredes  scripti,  and  the  pos-.

§  5.  Comp.  Paul,  iii,  4a,  §  8  ;  §  4,  I.  session  of  the  latter  consequently

quib.  non  est  perm,  (ii,  12).  was  sine  re.  See  also  below,  xxviii,'

§  6.  Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  119,  147-149,  §§  6,  13.

where    he    indicates    the  cases   in  §§  7-9.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  179-184.

which  an  heir-at-law  was  preferred

414  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI  [XXIII,  §§  7-10  ;  XXIV,  §1.

liberi  substitutus  lieres  fiat;  aut  proprio  itire,  id  est  [uf]  si
post  mortem  parentis  heredes  facti  intra  pubertatem  deces-

8  serint    substitutus    heres    fiat.         Etiam    exheredatis    filiis

9  substituere  parentibus  licet.         Non  aliter  inpuberi  filio  sub-
stituere  quis    heredem  potest  quam  si  sibi  prius  l  heredem
instituerit  uel  ipsurn  filium  uel  quemlibet  alium.

10  Milites  quomodocumque 1  fecerint  testamenta,  ualent,  id
est  etiam  sine  legitima  obseruatione.  nam  principalibus  con-
stitutionibus  permissum  est  illis,  quomodocumque  uellent,
quomodocumque  possent,  testari.  idque  test  amentum  quod
miles 2  contra  iuris  regulam  fecit  ita  demum  ualet,  si  uel  in
castris  mortuus  sit  uel  post  missionem  intra  annum.

[XX  III!.     DE  LEG  AT  IS.]

1  Legatum  est  quod  legisrnodo,  id  est  imperatiue,  testamento
relinquitur.  Nam  ea  quae  precatiuo  modo  relinquuntur  fidei-
commissa  uocantur.

children  shall  not  have  become  heirs  the  substitute  shall  be
heir,  or  in  one  appropriate  to  the  particular  case,  viz.  that
if  they  have  become  heirs  after  their  parent's  death,  but  have
died  before  reaching  puberty,  then  the  substitute  shall  be  heir.

8  A  parent  may  make  a  [pupillary]  substitution  even  to  his  dis-

9  inherited  children.         But  no  one  can  thus  substitute  an  heir
to  his  impuberate  child,  unless  he  has  first  instituted  as  his
own  heir  either  that  child  or  some  other  person.

10  The  testaments  of  soldiers  are  valid  however  made,  that  is
to  say  even  though  the  legal  formalities  have  not  been  ob-
served ;  for  by  imperial  constitutions  soldiers  are  allowed  to
test  in  any  way  they  like,  in  any  way  they  can.  And  such
a  testament  made  by  a  soldier,  contrary  to  the  rules  of  the
common  law,  is  held  valid  if  he  die  either  in  active  service  or
within  a  year  after  his  discharge.

[XXIV.     OF  LEGACIES.]

1  A  legacy  is  what  is  bequeathed  in  a  testament  by  a  lex,
that  is,  imperatively.  For  what  are  bequeathed  in  words  of
request  are  called  fideicommissa.

1  So  most  recent  eds.,  following  2  So    most    eds.,    following    Du

Vlp.  in  fr.  2,  §  4,  D.  de  uulg.  subst.  Tillet ;  the  MS.  has  testamento  cum

(xxviii,  6) ;  the  MS.  has  gwis.  illis.
§  10.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  109-111,  114  ;

above,  xx,  10.  TIT.  xxiv,  §  1.     Comp.    pr.   tit.    I.  de

1  The  MS.  has  commodocumque.  legat.  (ii,  20)  ;  Gai.  ii,  104,  note  8.

XXIV,  §§  2-10.]     LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  415

2  Leganras  autem  quattuor  modis :   per  uindicationem,  per

3  damnationem,  sinendi  modo,  per  praeceptionem.         Per  uin-
dicationem his  uerbis  legamus  :  DO  LEGO,  CAPITO,  SVMITO,  SIBI  l

4  HABETO.        Per  damnationem  his  uerbis :  HERBS  MEVS  DAMNAS

5  ESTO  DARE,    DATO,   FACITO,  HEREDEM   MEVM    DARE  IVBEO.  Si-
nendi moda  ita:  HERES  MEVS  DAMNAS   ESTO  SINERE   LVCIVM

6  TITIVM   SVMERE  ILLAM  REM   SIBIQVE   HABERE.  Per  praecep-

tionem  sic  :  LVCIVS  TITIVS  ILLAM  REM  PRAECIPITO.

7  Per  uindicationem  legari  possunt  res  quae  utroque  tempore
ex  iure  Quiritium  testatoris  fuerunt,  mortis  et  quo  1  testamen-
tum  faciebat,  praeterquam  si  pondere  numero  meusura  con-
tineantur ;  in  his  enim  satis  est  si  uel  mortis  dunitaxat  tem-

8  pore  [eius] 2  fuerint  ex  iure  Quiritium.         Per  damnationem
omnes  res  legari   possunt,  etiam   quae   non    sunt  testatoris,

9  dummodo  tales  sint  quae  dari  possint :         liber  homo  aut  res
populi   aut  sacra  aut  religiosa  nee  per  damnationem  legari

10  potest,  quoniam  dari   non   potest.         Sinendi    modo    legari

2  We  legate  in  four  ways, — by  vindication,  damnation,  per-

3  mission,  and  preception.         By  vindication  we  legate  thus :

4  '  I  give  and  legate,'  '  take,'  '  have  for  yourself ; '         by  dam-
nation thus  :  '  Be  my  heir  bound  to  give,'  '  let  my  heir  give  '

5  or  '  do,'  '  I  order  my  heir  to  give ; '         by  permission  thus  :
'  Be  my  heir  bound  to  let  Lucius  Titius  take  such  or  such  a

6  thing  and  have  it  for  himself ; '         by  preception  thus  :  '  Let
Lucius  Titius  first  take  such  or  such  a  thing.'

7  By  vindication  those  things  may  be  bequeathed  that  be-
longed to  the  testator  on  quiritary  title  both  at  the  time  of
his  death  and  when  he  made  his  testament,  except  things
passing  by  weight,  number,  or  measure  ;  as  regards  them  it  is
enough  that  they  were  his  ex  iure  Quiritium  though  only  at

8  the  time  of  his  death.         By  damnation  anything  whatever
may  be  legated,  even  though  not  the  property  of  the  testator,

9  provided  it  be  such  as  can  be  given  :         a  freeman,  or  a  thing
belonging  to  the  people,  or  a  thing  that  is  sacred  or  religious,
cannot  be  legated  even  by  damnation,  because  it  cannot  be

10  given.         By  permission  such  things  may  be  legated  as  are

§  2.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  192  ;  §  3,  I.  de  legal.  Bk.    and    Hu.    quam ;    most    eds.

(ii,  20).  quando.

§  3.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  193.  2  So  Hu. ;  L.  and  Bk.  insert  tes-

1  The  MS.  has  slue  ;  but  see  Gai.  tatoris  ;  many  eds.  leave  the  text  as

§  4.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  201.  in  the  MS.

§  5.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  209.  §  8.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  197,  202.

§  6.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  216.  §  9.     Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.  39,  §§  8-10,  D.

§  7.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  196.  de  legat.  I.  (xxx)  ;  Gai.  iii,  97.

1  So   K. ;  the  MS.   has  quomodo ;  §  10.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  210.

416

EXCERPT  A  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI  '  [XXIV,  §§  11-13.

11  possunt  res  propriae  testatoris  et  heredis  eius.        Per  prae-
ceptionem  legari  possunt  res  quae  etiam  per  uindicationem.

lla  Si  ea  res  quae  non  fuit  utroque  tempore  testatoris  ex  iure
Quiritium  per  uindicationem  legata  sit,  licet  iure  ciuili  non
ualeat  legatum,  tamen  senatusconsulto  Neroniano  firmatur,1
quo  cautum  est  ut  quod  minus  pactis 2  uerbis  legatum  est
perinde  sit  ac  si  optimo  iure  legatum  esset :  optimum  autem
ius  legati  per  damnationem  est.

12  Si  duobus  eadem  res   per  uindicationem   legata   sit,   siue
coniunctim,  uelut :  TITIO  ET  SEIO  HOMINEM  STICHVM  DO  LEGO,
[sine  disiunctim,  uelut:  TITIO  HOMINEM  STICHVM  DO  LEGO,  SEW
[EVNDEM  HOMINEM  DO  LEGO,~]  1    iure  ciuili  concursu   partes
fiebant,  non  concurrente  altero  pars  eius  alteri  adcrescebat : 2
sed  post  legem  Papiam  Poppaeam  non  capientis  pars  caduca

13  fit.3         Si  per  damnationem  eadem  res  duobus  legata  sit,  si
quidem  coniunctim,  singulis  partes  debentur,  et  non  capientis

1 1  the  property  of  the  testator  or  his  heir.         By  preception  the
same  things  may  be  legated  as  by  vindication.

lla  If  a  thing  that  was  not  the  testator's  in  quiritary  right  at
both  dates  have  been  legated  by  vindication,  although  by  the
ius  ciuile  the  legacy  is  invalid,  yet  it  is  confirmed  by  the
ISTeronian  senatusconsult.  For  it  is  thereby  provided  that  a
legacy  clothed  in  inappropriate  words  shall  be  treated  as  if
bequeathed  in  the  most  advantageous  form;  arid  the  most
advantageous  form  of  legacy  is  that  by  damnation.

12  If  the  same  thing  had  been  left  by  vindication  to  two
persons,  either  conjointly  thus :  '  To  Titius  and  Seius  I  give
and  legate  the  slave  Stichus,'  [or  disjointly  thus :  '  To  Titius
[I  give  and  legate  the  slave  Stichus ;  to  Seius  I  give  and  legate
[the   same  slave,']   concourse,   according    to    the   ius    ciuile,
created  a  share  in  each,  while  if  one  of  the  legatees  did  not
concur,  his  share  accresced  to  the  other ;  since  the  enactment
of  the  Papian  law,  however,  the  share  of  the  non-taker  becomes

13  caducous.        If  the  same  thing  be  bequeathed  to  two  legatees
by  damnation,  and  that  conjointly,  a  share  of  it  is  due  to  each,

§  11.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  220-222.
§  lla.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  197.

1  Hu.  reads  coiiftrmatur.

2  So  the  MS.     Many  amendments
have  been  proposed, — aptis,  rectis,
iustis,    perfectis,     ratis,    probatis,
exactis,  etc.     But  Dirks.  (Manuale,
v.  Pactus)  assumes  the  correctness
of  pactis,  and  defines  it  as  solemniter

expressis.

12,  13.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  199,  205-
208  ;  §  8,  I.  de  legal,  (ii,  20).

1  Added  from  Gai.  by  Hugo  and
all  recent  eds.

2  On   ius  adcrescendi  comp.  frs.
34-36,  D.  ad  L.  Aquil.  (ix,  2).

3  On    caduca    see    xvii,    2 ;  xix,
17.

XXIV,  §§  13-1G.]     LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  417

pars  iure  ciuili  in  hereditate  reniauebat,  nunc  autern  caduca
ht ;  quod  si  disiunctim,  singulis  solidum  debetur.

14  Optione   autem   legati   per    uindicationem   data,   legatarii
electio  est,  ueluti :  HOMINEM  OPTATO,  ELEGITO  ;  idemque  est  et

si  tacite  -          —  —  HOMINEM HERES HOMINEM

DAEE,  heredis  electio  est  [quern] l  uelit  dare.

15  Ante    heredis    institutionem    legari  non   potest,   quoniam
[uis]  l  et  potestas  testament!  ab  heredis  institutioue  incipit.

16  Post  mortem  heredis  legari  non  potest,  ne  ab  heredis  herede
legari   uideatur,   quod   iuris   ciuilis   ratio   non  patitur.     in  l

— by  the  ins  ciuile  the  share  of  a  non-taker  remained  in  the
inheritance,  but  now  becomes  caducous ;  but  if  it  be  be-
queathed disjointly,  each  is  entitled  to  the  whole.

14  When  the  option  of  a  legacy  is  bequeathed  by  vindication,
in  such  words  as  '  choose  (or  select)  a  slave,'  the  choice  is
with  the  legatee  ;  and  so  it  is  when  I  have  tacitly  {bequeathed
[a  choice  in  this  way.:  '  I  give  and  legate]  a  slave.'      [But  if
[bequeathed  thus  :  '  Let]  my  heir  [be  bound]  to  give  a  slave,'  the
election  is  the  heir's  to  give  what  slave  he  pleases.

15  A  man  cannot  legate  until  he  has  instituted  an  heir;  for
the  force  and  power  of  the  testament  begins  at  the  institution.

16  A  legacy  cannot  be  bequeathed  [to  take  effect]  after  the  heir's
death ;  for  this  would  be  to  charge  it  upon  the  heir's  heir,
which  is  contrary  to  the  principle  of  the  ius  ciuile.     But  it

§  14.     Comp.  §§  22,  23,  I.  de  legal,  (ii,  si  tacite  data  sit  optio  hoc  modo  :

20).     The  MS.  does  not  exhibit  the  TITIO  HOMINEM    DO  LEGO,     si  uero

same   defects   as  in   the   text  ;    for  per  damnationem,  uelut  HERES  MEVS

there  the  lacunae  are  filled  up  in  a  DAMN  AS  ESTO  HOMINEM  DARE,  etc.

hand   of  the   sixteenth   century  as  From  the  last  two  reconstructions  a

follows  :  et  si  tacite  legauerim  Titio  reading  may  be  extracted  that  is  more

hominem    aut    decem,    heres  meus  satisfactory  than  either, — than  the

dato  hominem  dare,  etc., — a  recon-  first  because  it  utilizes  the  hominem

strnction  that  is  on  all  hands  dis-  of  the  MS.,  and  than  the  second  be-

credited.     Cuj.  (Obs.  xvii,  28)  sug-  cause  it  does  not  so  overcrowd  the

gested — idemque    est  si  generaliter  lacunae  :    idemque  est   et  si  tacite

(instead   of  tacite)   legauerim  Titio  optionem     legauerim     hoc     modo  :

hominem.     At  si  ita:  HERES  MEVS  HOMINEM    no   LEGO.      At  si    ita :

DAMN  AS  ESTO  HOMINEM   DARE,  etc.  HERES    MEVS  DAMS  AS  ESTO    HOMI-

Savigny  (Obi.  i,  p.  393)  proposes  a  NEM  DARE,  etc.

reading  that  so  far  commends  itself,  x  Added  by  Cuj.

but  that  necessitates  the  alteration  of  §  15.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  229.

hominem  (between  the  first  and  second  J  Added   by  L.    on   authority  of

lacuna)    into     optionem :    idemque  Gai.  as  quoted.

est  et  si  tacite  legauerim  optionem.  §    16.       Comp.    Gai.    ii,    232  ;    below,

At    si    ita  :    HERES    MEVS  DAMN  AS  XXV,  8.

ESTO  HOMINEM    DARE,    etc.     Hu. ,  l  So  most  eds. ;  the  MI?,  has  et ;  L.

following   L.,  has — idemque  est  et  and  Bk.  ad,

2D

418  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI      [XXIV,  §§16-19.

mortis  autem  heredis  tempus  legari  potest,  uelut :  CVM  HEEES

MOEIETVE.

17  Poenae   causa   legari    non    potest.      poenae    autem  causa
legatur  quod  coercendi  heredis  [causa]  l  relinquitur,  ut  faciat
quid  aut  non  faciat,  non  ut  [ad]  legatarium  pertineat,  ut  puta
hoc  modo ::  si  FILIAM  TVAM  IN  MATEIMONIVM  TITIO  CONLOCA-

VEEIS,  DECEM  MILIA  SEIO  DATO.

18  Incertae  personae  legari  non  potest,  ueluti :  QVICVMQVE  FILIO

MEO    FILIAM1  SVAMJ  IN  MATEIMONIVM    CONLOCAVEEIT,    El    HERES

MEVS  l  TOT  MILIA  DATO.     sub  certa  tamen  demonstratione  in-
certae  personae  legari  potest,  uelut :  EX  COGNATIS  MEIS  QVI

NVNC    SVOT,    QVI    PRIM!VS    AD    FVNVS  MtEVM   VENEEIT,    El    HERES
MEVS  ILLVD  DATO.,

19  Neque  ex  falsa  demonstratione  neque  ex  falsa  causa  lega-
tum  infirmatur.     falsa  demonstratio  est  uelut :.  TITIO  FVNDVM
QVEM  A  TITIO'  EMI  DO  LEGO,  cum  is  fundus  a  Titio  einptus  non
sit.     falsa  causa   est   uelut:.   TITIO,    QVONIAM    NEGOTIA  MEA

may  be  bequeathed  [to  take  effect]  at  the  moment  of  the
heir's  death,  as  'when  my  heir  is  dying.'

17  A  thing  cannot  be  legated  by  way  of  penalty..    And  that  is
legated  by  way  of  penalty  which  is  left  for  the  purpose  of
constraining  the  heir  to  do  or  forbear  from  doing  something,
rather  than  to  benefit  the  legatee,  as  for  instance  thus :  '  If
you  fail  to  bestow  your  daughter  in  marriage  on  Titius,  then
give  Seius  ten  thousand  sesterces.'

18  There  can  be  no  legacy  to  an  uncertain  person,  as  thus  :
'  My  heir  shall  give  so  many  thousands  to  any  one  who  gives
his  daughter  in  marriage  to  my  son.'     One  may  legate,  how-
ever, to  an  uncertain  person  definitely  described,  for  instance
thus  :  '  To  that  man  amongst  those  now  my  kinsmen  who
first  comes  to  my  funeral  let  my  heir  give  so-and-so.'

19  A  legacy  is  not  invalidated  either  by  an  erroneous  descrip-
tion or  an  erroneous  [statement  of  the]  cause  of  granting.
There  is  an  erroneous  description  in  the  words — '  I  give  and
legate  to  Titius  the  land  I  bought  from  him,'  if  in  fact  it  was
not  bought  from  him.     There  is  an  erroneous  cause  of  grant-
ing assigned  in  the  words — '  I  give  and  legate  the  laud  to

17.  Comp.  Gai.  ii,  235;  below,  xxv,  13.  l  So  Schult.   and  all    subsequent

1  Added  from  Gai.  eds. ;  the  MS.  has  Jiomini.

§  18.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  238  ;  above,  xxii,  §  19.     Comp.    §§   30,    31,    I.    de    legat.

I ;  below,  xxv,  13.  (ii,  20).

XXIV,  §§  19-25.]     L1BRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.

419

CVEAVIT,  FVNDVM  DO  LEGO,  cum  negotia  eius  numquam  Titius
curasset.

20  A  legatario  legari  non  potest.         [21]  Legatum  ab  eo  tan-

21  turn  dari  potest  qui  (heres  scriptus  est]  :  1  ideoque  filio  familiae
lierede  instituto  uel  seruo,  neque  a  patre  neque  a  domiuo  legari

22  potest.         Heredi  a  semet  ipso  legari  non  potest.         [23]  Ei

23  qui  in  potestate  manu  mancipioue  est  scripti  heredis  sub  con-
dicione  legari  potest,  ut  requiratur  quo  tempore  dies  legati

24  cedit  in  potestate  heredis  non  sit.         Ei  cuius  in  potestate
maim  maucipioue  est  heres  scriptus  legari  [non]  potest.

Sicut  singulae  res  legari  possunt,  ita  uniuersarum  quoque
summa  legari  potest,  ut  puta  \_hoc~]  modo  :  HEKES  MEVS  CVM

TITIO  HEltEDITATEM  MEAM  PARTITO,1  DIVIDITO  ;    quo  casu  dimidia

25

Titius  because  he  managed  my  affairs  for  me,'  if  in  fact  Titius
had  never  managed  affairs  of  the  testator's.

20  A  legacy  cannot  be  charged  on  a  legatee.         [21]  He  only

21  can  be  burdened  with  it  who  is  named  heir  in  the  testament ;
therefore  if  it  be  a  filiusfamilias  or  a  slave  that  is  instituted
heir,  a  legacy  cannot  be  charged  upon  his  paterfamilias  or

22  owner.         The  heir  cannot  be  burdened  with  a  legacy  to

23  himself.         A  legacy  may  be  left  conditionally  to  a  person  in
the  potestas,  manus>  or  mancipium  of  the  instituted  heir ;  but
[to  make  it  effectual],  it  is  requisite  that,  when  the  time  of
vesting  arrives,  the  legatee  shall  be  no  longer  in  the  heir's

24  potestas.         A  legacy  cannot  be   bequeathed   to   the   person
in  whose  potestas,  m-arms,  or  mancipium  the  instituted  heir
happens  to  be.

25  Just  as  individual  articles  may  be  bequeathed,  so  may  a
certain  amount  of  [the  testator's]  aggregate  estate,  for  instance
thus :  '  My  heir  is  to  share  (or  divide)  the  inheritance  with
Titius.'     In  this  case  there  is  held  to  be  a  legacy  of  one-half

§  20.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  260,  271.

§  21.     Comp.  xxv,  10.

1  There  is  here  a  lacuna  in  the  MS.  ,
which  has  been  filled  in  the  six-
teenth century  with  the  words  extra-
neus  est.  The  reading  in  the  text  is
that  of  L.,  on  authority  of  xix,  13.
Hu.  and  K.  have  heres  instltutus  est.

§  22.  Comp.  fr.  116,  §  1,  D.  de  legal.
I,  (xxx)

§  23.  Comp.  Gai.  ii,  244  ;  §  32,  I.  de
legat.  (ii,  20),  on  the  strength  of
which  many  eds.  interpolate  an
after  requiratur.

§  24.     Comp.   Gai.  ii,   245  ;  §  33,   I.  de

legat.  (ii,  20).  Most  eds.,  from
Cuj.  downwards,  agree  that  the  non
(in  brackets)  should  be  deleted.
Hu.  retains  it  by  assuming  a  homeo-
teleutic  omission  and  reading — le-
gari [potest,  etiam  sine  condicione  ;
si  tamen  heres  ab  eo  factus  sit,  lega-
tum  consequi]  non  potent.  This  is
in  accordance  with  the  Inst.,  which,
for  consequi  non  potest,  uses  the
word  euanescit.

25.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  254  ;  fr.  164,  §  1,
D.  de  V.  S.  (1,  16).

1  So   the  MS.  ;  Schult,  L.,    and
K.  prefer  partitor.

420

EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI      [XXIV,  §§  25-29.

pars  bonorum  legata  uidetur.     potest  autem  et  alia  pars,  nelut
tertia  uel  quarta,  legari.     quae  species  partitio  appellattcr.2

26  Ususfructus  legari  potest  iure  ciuili  earum  rerum  quaruna
salua  substantia  utendi  fruendi  potest  esse  facultas :  et  tarn

27  singularum  rerum  quani  plurium ;   item    partis.         Senatus-
consulto  cautum  est  ut  etiamsi  earum  rerum  quae  in  abusu
continentur,  ut  puta  uini  olei  tritici,  ususfructus  legatus  sit,
legatario  res  tradantur,  cautionibus  interpositis  de  restituendis
eis  cum  ususfructus  ad  legatarium  pertinere  desierit.

28  Ciuitatibus  omnibus  quae  sub  imperio  populi  Romani l  stint
legari  potest ;  idque  a  diuo  Nerua  introductum,  postea  a  senatu
auctore  Hadriano  diligentius  constitutum  est.

29  Legatum,  quod  datum  est,  adimi  potest  uel  eodem  testa-
mento  uel  codicillis  testamento  confirmatis,  dum  tamen  eodem
modo  adimatur  quo  modo  datum  est.1

of  the  estate ;  but  any  other  part,  a  third  say,  or  a  fourth,
may  be  bequeathed.     A  legacy  of  this  sort  is  styled  partitio.

26  According  to  the  ius  ciuile  the  usufruct  can  be  legated  of
things  which  are  capable  of  being  used,  and  whose  fruits  can
be  taken,  without  diminishing  their  substance;  and  it  may
be  a  usufruct  of  one  thing  or  of  several,  or  of  a  part  [of  the

27  whole  estate].         And  it  is  provided  by  senatusconsult  that
if  a  usufruct  be  bequeathed  even  of  things  whose  use  lies  in
their  consumption,  wine  say,  or  oil,  or  wheat,  they  shall  be
delivered  to  the  legatee,  on  his  giving  security  for  restitution
[of  an  equal  quantity]  when  the  usufruct  has  ceased  to  belong
to  him.

28  A  man  may  legate  to  any  municipal  corporation  within  the
Empire ;  a  power  first  conferred  upon  testators  by  the  emperor
Nerva,  and  afterwards  more  carefully  denned  by  the  senate  at
the  instance  of  Hadrian.

29  A  legacy  that  has  been  bequeathed  may  be  adeemed  either
in  the  same  testament  or  in  a  codicil  confirmed  by  it ;  but  it
must  be  adeemed  in  the  same  way  in  which  it  has  been  given.

*  This  word  is  in  the  MS.  ,  but  in
a  later  hand.

§  26.     Comp.  pr.  §  1,  I.  de  usufr.  (ii,  4);
fr.    43,  D.   de   usufr.   leg.    (xxxiii,

2).
§  27.     Comp.  §  2,  I.   de  usufr.  (ii,  4),

and  refs.
§  28.     Comp.  xxii,  5  ;  fr.  117,  fr.  122,

pr.,  fr.  73,  §  1,  fr.  32,  §  1,  D.   de

leijat.  I.  (xxx).

1  Again  praetoriani  in  the  MS.;
see  xx,  16.

§  29.     Comp.    pr.    I.    de    adempt.    leg.
(ii,  21).

1  Comp.  fr.  14,  D.  de  accept il.
(xlvi,  4).  The  words  of  ademption
were  to  be  a  repetition  of  those  of
beqnest,  with  the  addition  of  a
negative  :  do  If  go,  non  do  non  lego  ;
heres  dato,  heres  ne  data.

XXI  Y,  §§  30-33  ;  XXV,  §  1.]    LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.     421

30  Ad  hereclem  leg  atari!  legata  non  aliter  transeunt  nisi  si  iani

31  die  legatorum   cedente   legatarius  decesserit.          Legatorurn
quae  pure  uel  in  diem  certum  J  relicta  sunt  dies  cedit  antiquo
quidem  iure  ex  mortis  testatoris  tempore  ;  per  legem  autem
Papiam  Poppaeam  ex  apertis  tabulis  testamenti  :  eoruin  uero
quae  sub  condicione  l  relicta  sunt  cum  condicio  extiterit.

32  Lex  Falcidia  iubet  non  plus  quam  dodrantem  totius  patri-
monii  legari,  ut  oruni  modo  quadrans  integer  apud  heredem
remaneat.

33  Legatorum  perperam  solutorum  repetitio  non  est.

DE  FIDmcOMMISSIS.}

1       Fideicommissum  est  quod  non  ciuilibus  uerbis  sed  precatiue
relinquitur,  nee  ex  rigore  iuris   ciuilis  proficiscitur,  sed   ex

30  Legacies  do  not  pass  to  the  heir  of  the  legatee  unless  they

31  have  already  vested  before  the  latter's  decease.         Those  left
unconditionally  or  [to  be  paid]  at  a  fixed  date  vested  by  the
old  law  at  the  testator's  death ;  by  the  Papia-Poppaean  law,
however,  they  vest  at  the  opening  of  the  testament.     But
those  that  are  conditional  vest  only  when  the  condition  is
fulfilled.

32  The  Falcidian  law  ordains  that  not  more  than  three-fourths
of  the  testator's  patrimony  shall  be  legated ;  so  that  in  every
case  a  clear  fourth  shall  remain  to  the  heir.

33  There  can  be  no  repetition  of  a  legacy  paid  inadvertently.

\XXV.     OF  FIDEICOMMISSA.}

1  A  fideicommissum  is  bequeathed  not  in  the  language  of  the
ius  ciuile  but  by  words  of  request ;  according  to  the  strictness
of  the  ius  ciuile  it  is  ineffectual ;  it  derives  its  value  solely

j§  30,  31.     Comp.   Vlp.  fr.  5,  fr.  7,  D.  though  it  was  sure  to  come  sooner
quando   dies   leg.    ced.   (xxxvi,    2)  ;  or  later,  such  as  the  death  of  a  third
lust,  in  1.  1,  §  5,  C.  de  cad.  toll.  party,  the  legacy  did  not  vest  un-
(vi,  51).  less  the  legatee  survived  it  ;  in  other
1  Says  fr.  75,  D.  de  cond.  (xxxv,  words,  the  legacy  was  dealt  with  as
1),  Dies  incertus  condidonem  in  te-  a  conditional  one.
stamento  facit.     The  only  uncertain  §  32.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  224-227.
date  that  formed  an  exception  was  §  33.     Comp.   Gai.   ii,   169.     Hu.   reads
that  of  the  death  of  the  testator  ;  a  — legatorum  [per  damnationem]  per-
legacy,  therefore,  on  the  testator's  peram,  etc.
death    was    regarded    as    uncondi-
tional, and  vested  at  once,  fr.  79,  TIT.  xxv,  §  1.     Comp.   xxiv,   1  ;  §§  1,
de  cond.     But  if  the  reference  was  12,  I.  de  Jideicom.  hered.   (ii,  23);
to  any  other  uncertain    date,  even  §  3,  I.  de  legat.  (ii,  20).

422  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI    [XXV,  §§  2-10.

2  uoluntate  datur  relinquentis.         Verba  fideicommissorum  in
usu  fere  haec  sunt :  FIDEICOMMITTO,  PETO,  VOLO  DARI  et  similia.

3  Etiam   nutu   relinquere   fideicommissum   usu   receptum  est.

4  Fideicommissum  relinquere  possunt  qui  testamentum  facere
possunt,   licet   non   feceririt :   nam   intestate    quis  moriturus

5  fideicommissum  relinquere  potest.         Res  per  fideicommissum
relinqui   possuut   quae   etiam  per  damnationem   legari  pos-

6  suut.         Fideicommissa  dari  possunt  his  quibus l  legari  potest.

7  Latini  luniani  fideicommissum  capere  possunt,  licet  legatum

8  capere  non  possint.         Fideicommissum  et  ante  heredis  insti-
tutionem  et  post  mortem  heredis  et  codicillis  etiam  non  con-
firmatis  testamento  dari  potest,  licet  [ita] 1  legari  non  possit.

9  Item  Graece  fideicommissum  scriptum  ualet,  licet  legatum
10  Graece  scriptum  non  ualeat.         Filio   qui   in   potestate  est

seruoue  heredibus  institutis,  seu  si  bis1  legatum  sit,  patris  uel
domini  fideicommitti  potest,  quamuis  ab  eo  legari  non  possit.

2  from  the  fact  that  so  he  willed  who  bequeathed  it.         The
words  usually  employed  in  fideicommissa  are  these :  '  I  com-
mit to  your  good  faith  to  give,'  '  I  ask  you  to  give,'  '  I  wish  to

3  be  given,'  and  such  like.         And  it  has  been  held  in  practice
that  a  fideicommissary  gift  may  be  left  even  by  a  mere  nod.

4  Those  can  bequeath  a  trust-gift  who  can  make  a  testament,
though  they  may  not  have  made  one ;  for  a  man  who  is  about

5  to  die  intestate  may  yet  leave  a  fideicommissum.         The  same
things  can  be  left  by  it  that  can  be  legated  by  damnation.

6  It  can  be  given  to  those  to  whom  a  legacy  can  be  bequeathed.

7  A  Junian  latin  can  take  it,  though  unable  to  take  a  legacy.

8  It  may  be  bequeathed  before  the  heir's  institution,  or  after  his
death,  or  even  in  a  codicil  unconfirmed  by  testament ;  although

9  in  none  of  those  ways  can  a  legacy  be  left.         It  is  valid
though  written  in  Greek  ;  whereas  a  legacy  in  that  language

10  is  invalid.  If  a  son  in  postestate  or  a  slave  be  instituted
heir,  or  if  a  legacy  be  left  them,  a  fideicommissum  may  be
imposed  on  father  or  owner,  though  a  legacy  cannot  so  be

§  2.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  249  ;  Paul,  iv,  1,  l  The  MS.  has  hi  qui.

§§  5,  6.  §  7.     Comp.  Gai.  i,  24  ;  ii,  275.

§  3.     Instead  of  usu  the    MS.    has    in  §  8.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  269,  270a,  277  ;

usU'  above,  xxiv,  §§  15,  16.

§  4.     Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.   2,  D.  de  legal.  l  Ita  added  by  Hu. ,  adopted  by

/.  (xxx)  ;  Gai.  ii,  270.  K.,  and  approved  by  Bk.

§  5.     Comp.    xxiv,    §§   8,   25  ;   Gai.    ii,  §  9.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  281.

260-262.  §  10.     Comp.  xxiv,  21.
§  6.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  285-287  ;  above,  1  So    the   MS.  ;    Boeck.    suggests

xxii,  5  ;  xxiv,  28.  slue  its.

XXV,  §§  11-14.]      LIBEO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  423

11  Qui  testamento  heres  institutus  est,  codicillis  etiam  non  con-
firm atis  rogari  potest  uel l  ut  hereditatem  to  tarn  uel  ex  parte
alii  restituat,  quamuis  directo  heres  institui  ne  quidem  con-

12  firmatis  codicillis  possit.         Fideicommissa  non  per  formulam
petuntur,  ut  legata,  sed  cognitio  est  Eomae  quidem  cousulum
aut  praetoris  qui  fideicommissarius  l   uocatur ;   in  prouinciis

13  uero  praesidum  prouinciamm.         Poenae  causa  uel  incertae
personae  ne  quidem  fideicommissa  dari  possunt.

14  Is  qui  rogatus  est  alii  restituere  hereditatem,  lege  quidem
Falcidia  [locum] 1  non  habente,  quoniam  non  plus  puta  quani
dodrantem  restituere  rogatus  est,  ex  Trebelliano  senatuscon-
sulto  restituit,  ut  ei  et  in  eum  dentur  actiones  cui  restituta
est  hereditas :  lege   autem   Falcidia  interueniente,   quoniani
plus  dodrantem  uel  etiam  totam  hereditatem  restituere  rogatus
sit,  ex  Pegasiano2  senatusconsulto  restituit,  ut,  deducta  parte

11  charged  upon  him.         He  who  is  instituted  heir  in  a  testa-
ment can  be  asked  in  a  codicil,  even  though  it  be  riot  confirmed
by  the  testament,  to  restore  the  inheritance  in  whole  or  in
part  to  some  other  person ;  whereas  a  man  cannot  be  directly
instituted  heir  in  a  codicil,  notwithstanding  it  may  have  been

12  confirmed  by  testament.         Fideicammdssa  are  not  sued  for  by
formula,  like  legacies ;  it  is  the  consuls,  or  the  praetor  who  is
styled  praetor  fideicommissarius,  that  has  cognisance  of  them
in   Rome,   and   in   the   provinces   the   provincial  governors.

13  But  not  even  fideicommissa  can  be  given  by  way  of  penalty,
or  to  an  uncertain  person.

14  He  who  is  asked  to  restore  .an  inheritance,  if  the  Falcidian
law  does  not  come  into  operation  because  what  he  is  asked  to
restore  does  not  exceed  three-fourths,  does  so  under  the  pro-
visions  of  the   Trebellian   senatusconsult,   whereby   actions
[affecting  the  inheritance]  are  granted  to  or  against  the  party
to  whom  the  inheritance  is  restored  ;  if,  however,  the  Falci-
dian law  does  come  into  play,  because  the  heir  has  been  asked
to  restore  more  than  three-fourths,  perhaps  the  whole,  of  the
inheritance,  restitution  is  made  under  the  Pegasian  senatus-
consult, so  that  after  the  [Falcidian]  fourth  has  been  deducted,
actions  still  continue  to  lie  in  favour  of  and  against  the  in-

§  11.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  273  ;  above,  §  8.  §  14.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  253-257.

1  Vahl.  and  K.  omit  this  uel.  l  Added    by  Du  Tillet,   and  ac-

§  12.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  278.  ceptcd  by  all  eels.

1  In  the  MS.  fideicommisso.  *  The    MS.    has    Pccatiano  both

§  13.     Comp.  xxiv,  §§  17,  18  ;  Gai.   ii,  here  and  in  §  15  ;  iu  §  16,

§§  287,  288.  tiano.

424  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI     [XXV,  §§  14-17.

quarta,  ipsi  qui  scriptns  est  heres  [et] 3  in  ipsum   actiones
conseruentur,  is  autem  qui  recipit  hereditatem  legatarii  loco

15  habeatur.         Ex  Pegasiano    senatusconsulto    restituta   here-
ditate,   commoda  et   incommoda  hereditatis  communicantur
inter  heredem  et  eum  cui  reliquae  partes  restitutae  siuit,  in-
terpositis  stipulationibus  ad   exemplum  partis  et  pro  parte
stipulationum.      partis    autem    et    pro   parte     stipulations
proprie   dicuntur   quae   de  lucro   et    dam  no   comnmnicando
solent  interponi  inter  heredein  et  legatarium  partiarium,  id

16  est  cum  quo  parti tus  est  heres.         Si  heres  damnosam  here-
ditatem dicat,  cogitur  a  praetore  adire  et  restituere  totam,  ita
ut  ei  et  in  eum    qui  recipit    hereditatem   actiones   dentur,
proinde   atque    si    ex  Trebelliano   senatusconsulto   restituta
fuisset.     idque  ut  ita  fiat  Pegasiano  senatusconsulto  cautum.

17  Si  quis  in  fraudem  '  tacitam  fidem  accommodauerit  ut  non
capieuti2   fideicommissuni    restituat,   nee    quadrantem    eum

stituted  heir  himself,  while  he  to  whom  the  inheritance  is

15  restored  is  dealt  with  as  a  legatee.         On  restitution  of  an
inheritance  under  the  Pegasian  senatusconsult,  its  advantages
and  disadvantages  are  shared  between  the  heir  and  the  party
to  whom  the  residue  has  been  restored,  stipulations  being
interchanged  after  the  model  of  those  known  as  stipulations
2)artis  et  pro  parte.     Those  stipulations  are  properly  so  called
which  are  interchanged,  for  the  purpose  of  securing  a  fair
division  of  gain  and  loss,  between  an  heir  and  a  partiary
legatee,  i.e.  a  legatee  with  whom  the  heir  has  shared  the  iii-

16  heritance.        If  an  heir  declare  that  an  inheritance  will  prove
a  source  of  loss  to  him,  he  is  compelled  by  the  praetor  to  enter
and  to  restore  the  whole  of  it ;  and  then  actions  proceed  at
the  instance  of  or  against  him  who  has  received  it,  as  if  the
restitution  had  been  made  under  the  Trebellian  senatusconsult.
The   Pegasian   senatusconsult   provides   expressly   that   this
course  shall  be  followed.

17  If  any  one  have  fraudulently  given  a  secret  promise  to  re-
store a&fideicommissum  to  a  person  who  has  not  the  ius  capiendi,

3  Added  by  Hugo,   and   adopted  a  I.e.  in  fraudem  legis.

by  all  later  eds.  2  Say  to  an  unmarried  or  a  child-

§15.  Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  254,  257,  and  less  person,  xxii,  3.  A  Jnnian  latin

note  1  ;  above,  xxiv,  15.  might  take  a  fideicommissum  be-

§  16.  Comp.  Gai.  ii,  258.  queathed  openly  on  the  face  of  the

§  17.  Comp.  fr.  11,  D.  dehisq.  utlncliyn.  testament,  §  7  ;  but  it  is  doubtful

(xxxiv,    9) ;  fr.   59,  §  1,  D.  ad  L.  whether  he  could  take  under  a  secret

Falcid.  (xxxv,  2)  ;  fr.  48,  pr.,  fr.  49,  and  undisclosed  trust.

D.  de  iurefisci  (xlix,  14).

XXV,  §§17,  18;  XXVI,  §1.]  LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  425

declucere  senatus  censuit 3  nee  caducura  uindicare  ex  eo  tes-
tamento  si  liberos  habeat.*
18       Libertas  dari  potest  per  fideicommissum.

[XX  VI.     DE  LEGITIMIS  HERED1B  VS.  ]

1  Intestatorum l  ingenuorum  hereditates  pertinent  primuni
ad  suos  heredes,  id  est  liberos  qui  in  potestate  sunt  ceterosque
qui  liberorum  loco  sunt : 2  si  sui  heredes  non  suut,  ad  consan-
guineos,  id  est  fratres  et  sorores  ex  eodem  patre :  si  nee  hi
suut,  ad  reliquos  agnatos  proximos,  id  est  cognates3  uirilis
sexus  per  mares  descendentes  eiusdem  familiae.*  id  enim
cautum  est  lege  duodecim  tabularum  hac :  '  si  intestate  mori-
tur,  cui  suus  heres  nee  [escit],  agnatus  proximus  familiam5
habeto.' 6

the  senate  has  decreed  that  he  shall  not  be  entitled  to  deduct
his  fourth,  nor  yet,  supposing  him  to  have  children,  to  vindi-
cate gifts  under  the  testament  that  have  become  caducous.
18       Freedom  may  be  conferred  by  fideicommissum.

[XX  VI.     OF  HEIRS- A  T-LA  W.  ]

1  The  inheritances  of  intestates  of  free-birth  belong  in  the
first  place  to  their  sui  heredes,  i.e.  their  children  in  potestate
and  other  persons  who  are  in  the  position  of  children ;  if  there
be  no  sui  heredes,  then  to  their  consanguineans,  i.e.  their
brothers  and  sisters  by  the  same  father  ;  if  these  fail,  then  to
the  other  nearest  agnates,  i.e.  kinsmen  of  the  male  sex,  de-
scended through  males,  and  members  of  the  same  family.
For  so  it  is  provided  in  this  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  :  '  If
a  man  die  intestate,  to  whom  there  is  no  suus  heres,  let  his
nearest  agnate  take  his  patrimony.'

3  By  a  senatusconsultum  Planci-
anum,  not  later  probably  than  the
time  of  Hadrian  ;  for,  by  a  rescript
of  Antoninus  Pius',  the  fourth  thus
forfeited  by  the  heir  fell  to  the  fisc,
fr.  59,  §  1,  D.  ad  L.  Falc.  (xxxv,  2).

4  Comp.  Gai.  ii,  §§  206,  207.
§  18.     Comp.  ii,  7.

TIT.  xxvi,  §  1.  Eeproduced  in  Collat.
xvi,  4,  §  1.  Comp.  Gai.  iii,  §§  1-5,
9-11.

1  In  Collat.  it  is  gentiliciorum.

2  For  example,  a  wife  in  manu,
who  was^/i/iae  loco.

3  The  words  proximos  i.e.  cogiiatos
are  omitted  in  Collat.

4  See  xi,  3,  and  note  2.

5  See  Gai.  ii,  102.

6  After  this  par.   Hu.  and  K.  in-
troduce from  Collat.,  as  §  la, — <S7
aynatus  defuncti  non  sit,  eadem  lex
duodecim     tabularum    gentiles    ad
hereditatem   uocat    his   uerbis :    '  at
agnatus  nee  escit,  gentiles  familiam
habento. '     nunc  nee  gentiles  nee  yen-
tilicia  iura  in  usu  sunt.     But  there
can  be  no  doubt  this  passage   was
purposely  omitted  by  the  abridge!.1
as  mere  matter  of  history.

426  EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANI     [XXVI,  §§  2-5.

2  Si  defuncti  unus  l  sit  films,  ex  altero  filio  iam  mortuo  2
nepos  unus  uel  etiam  plures,  ad  omnes  hereditas  pertinet ;
non  ut  in  capita  diuidatur  sed  in  stirpes,  id  est  ut  filius  solus
mediam  partem  habeat  et  nepotes  quotquot  sunt  alteram
dimidiam :  aequum  est  enim  nepotes  in  patris  sui  locum  sue-
cedere,  et  earn  partem  habere  quani  pater  eoruin  si  uiueret
habiturus  esset.

Quamdiu  suus  heres  speratur  heres  fieri  posse,  tamdiu  locus
agnatis  non  est ;  uelut  si  uxor  defuncti  praegnans  sit  aut
filius  apud  hostes  sit.

4  Agnatorum  hereditates  diuiduntur  in  capita ;  uelut  si  sit
fratris  filius  et  alterius  fratris  duo  pluresue  liberi,  quotquot
sunt  ab  utraque  parte  person  ae,  tot  fiunt  portiones,  ut  singuli
singulas  capiant.

5  Si  plures  eodem  gradu  sint  agnati,  et  quidam  eorum  liere-

2  If  a  man  deceased  leave  one  son,  and  one  or  more  grand-
children by  another  son  who  has  predeceased  him,  the  inherit-
ance belongs  to  all  of  them.  They  take,  however,  not  as
individuals,  but  as  branches  [of  the  parent  tree] ;  that  is  to
say  the  son  who  stands  alone  will  take  one  half,  and  the
grandchildren,  whatever  their  number,  the  other  half.  For  it
is  but  fair  that  the  grandchildren  should  succeed  to  the  place
their  father  held,  and  have  the  share  to  which  he  would  have
been  entitled  had  he  survived.

So  long  as  there  is  hope  that  a  suus  heres  may  become  heir,
there  is  no  room  for  the  agnates ;  as  when  the  widow  of  the
deceased  is  pregnant,  or  his  son  in  the  hands  of  an  enemy.

4  The  inheritances  of   agnates  are   divided  per  capita   [i.e.
according  to  the  number  of  individuals  entitled] ;  for  example
if  there  be  [one]  son  of  [one  deceased]  brother,  and  two  or
more  children  of  another  brother  [also  deceased],  whatever  be
the  number  of  persons  in  the  two  brandies  together,  the  in-
heritance is  divided  into  just  so  many  portions,  so  that  each
may  take  one.

5  If  there  be  several  agnates  of  the  same  degree,  and  some  of

§  2.     Comp.    Gai.  iii,  §§7,    8  ;    Collat.       §  3.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  13  ;  §7,1.  de  her.
xvi,  4,  §  9.  q.  ab  int.  (iii,  1)  ;  §  6,  L  de  leg.  ayn.

1  So  Cann.  and  L.  and  most  later  succ.  (iii,  2).

eds. ;  Hu.  and  K.,  following  Cuj.,  §  4.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  16.

have  simply  defuncti ;  the  MS.  has  §  5.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  §§  12,  22  ;  fr.  9,  D.

defunctus.  de  suis  et  leg.   (xxxviii,  16)  ;  §  4,  I.

2  So  Arndts  ;  the  MS.  and  many  de  SC.  Orph.  (iii,  4) ;  §7,  I.  de  ley.
eds.  have  inortuo   iam;    L.,    Bk.,               agn.  succ.  (iii,  2).

and  Vahl.  mortuo  item.

XXVI,  §§  5-8.]      LIRRO  SIXGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  427

ditatera  ad  se  pertiriere  noluerint,  uel  antequam  adierint
clecesserint,  eorum  pars  adcrescit  his  qui  adierint ;  quod  si
nemo  eortmi  adierit,  ad  insequentem  gradum  ex  lege  liere-
ditas  non  transmittitur,  quoniam  in  legitirnis  hereditatibus
successio  non  est.

6  Ad  feminas  ultra  consanguineorum  gradum  legitima  here-
ditas  non  pertinet ;  itaque  soror  fratri  sororiue  legitima  heres
fit.1

7  Ad   liberos  matris  intestatae  hereclitas  ex  lege  duodecini
tabularum  nou  pertinebat,   quia   feminae  suos   heredes  non
habent ;  sed  postea  imperatorum  Antonini  et  Commodi  ora-
tione  in  senatu  recitata  id  actum  est,  ut  sine  in  manum  con-
uentione  l  matrum  legitimae  hereditates  ad  filios  pertineant,

8  exclusis  consanguineis  et   reliquis  agnatis.         Intestati  filii
hereditas  ad  matrem  ex  lege  duodecim  tabularum  non  perti-

them  have  declined  the  inheritance  or  died  before  entry,  their
shares  accresce  to  those  who  have  entered ;  but  if  none  of  them
have  entered,  the  inheritance  is  not  transmitted  by  the  statute
to  those  of  the  next  degree,  for  in  the  inheritances  of  the
Twelve  Tables  there  is  no  succession  [of  degrees].

6  An  inheritance-at-law  does  not  belong  to  women  [related]
beyond  the  consanguinean  degree  ;  therefore  [while]  a  sister
becomes  heir-at-law  of  her  brother  or  sister,  [a  father's  sister,
[a  brothers  daughter,  and  so  on,  does  not].

7  According  to  the  Twelve  Tables  the  inheritance  of  a  mother
dying  intestate  did  not  belong  to  her  children,  because  women
have  no  sui  heredes;    but  afterwards,   in   pursuance    of   an
Oration  in  the  senate  by  the  emperors  Marcus  Aurelius  and
Commodus,  it  was  enacted  that,  even  without  in  manum  con-
uentio,   the  inheritances  of  mothers  should  belong  to    their
children,  to  the  exclusion  of  consanguinean  and  other  agnates.

8  The  inheritance  of  a  son  dying  intestate  does  not  belong  to
his  mother  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  ;  but  by  the  Ter-

§  6.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  §§  14,  23  ;  Collat.  late  of  Julianus  Rufus  and  Gavius

xvi,  3.  Orphitus.

1    Hu.,    following    Gai.    iii,     14,  l  Before  this  Set.  children  had  a

thinks  there  is  here  a  homeoteleutic  right  of  succession  to  their  mother

omission,  and  adds — amita  uero  uel  if  she  had  been  in  manu  of  their

fratris  filia    et    deinceps    legitima  father  ;  for  in  that  case  mother  and

heres  non  Jit.  children  were  related  as  agnates.

§  7.     Comp.  pr.  I.  de  SO.  Orph.  (iii,  4).       §  8.     Comp.  tit.  I.  de  SG.   Tertutt.  (iii,

In  Gai.  iii,  24,  this  Set.  is  not  men-  3)  ;  Gai.  iii,§§  23,24.     It  is  thought

tioned.     It  was  the  outcome  of  the  that  Gai.  must  have  referred  to  this

oration    referred    to   in   the    text ;  Set.   in    an    illegible   page    of  the

enacted  in  the  year  178,  and  consu-  Verona  MS.  ;  see  iii,  §  33,  note.

428    EXCERPTA  EX  DOM1TII  VLPIANI    [XXVI, §8;  XXVII,  §§  1-4.

net;  sed  si  ius  liberorum  habeat,  ingenua  trium,  libertina
quattuor,  legitima  heres  fit  ex  senatusconsulto  Tertulliano,  si
tamen  ei  filio  neque  suus  heres  sit  quiue  inter  suos  heredes  ad
bonorum  possessionem  a  praetore  uocatur,  neque  pater  ad
quern  lege  hereditas  bonorumue  possessio  cum  re  pertinet,1
neque  frater  consanguineus  :  quod  si  soror  consanguinea  sit,
ad  utrasque  pertinere  iubetur  hereditas.

[XX VI I.     DE  LIBERTORVM  SVCCESSIONIBVS  VEL  BON  IS.]

1  Libertorum  intestatorum  hereditas  priraum  ad  suos  heredes
pertinet ;  deiude  ad  eos  quorum  liberti  suiit,  uelut  patrouum

2  patronam  liberosue  patroni.          Si   sit  patronus  et   alterius

3  patroni  films,  ad  solum  patronum  hereditas  pertinet.         Item

4  patroni  filius  patroni  nepotibus  obstat.         Ad  liberos  patro-
norum  hereditas   defuncti  pertinet,  ita  ut  in  capita  non  in
stirpes  diuidatur.

tullian  senatusconsult  she  becomes  his  heir-at-law  if  she  have
the  privilege  resulting  from  children,  three  in  the  case  of  a
woman  of  free-birth,  four  in  that  of  a  freedwoma'n ;  provided
always  that  her  son  is  neither  survived  by  a  suus  heres,  nor  by
any  person  whom  the  praetor  calls  to  possession  of  the  estate
along  with  sui,  nor  by  his  father  if  he  be  entitled  either  to  the
statutory  inheritance  or  to  effectual  possession  of  the  estate,
nor  by  a  consanguinean  brother.  But  if  there  be  a  cousan-
guinean  sister  surviving,  it  is  ordained  that  the  inheritance
shall  belong  to  her  mother  and  her  jointly.

[XXril.     OF  THE  SUCCESSIONS  OR  ESTATES  OF  FREEDMEN.]

1  The  inheritance  of  a  freedman  dying  intestate  belongs  in
the  first  place  to  his  sui  heredes  ;  then  to  the  person  whose
freedman  he  is,  as  his  patron,  his  patroness,  or  his  patron's

2  children.         If  he  be  survived  by  a  patron  and  the  son  of
another  patron,  the  inheritance  belongs  solely  to  the  former.

3  A  patron's  son,  too,  excludes  [another]   patron's  grandsons.

4  The  inheritance  of  the  deceased  so  belongs  to  his  patron's
children  that  it  is  divided  in  capita  and  not  in  stirpes.

1  An  adoptive  father  did  not  come  pr.  D.  de  sitis  et  legit,  (xxxviii,  16);

within  this  limitation,  fr.   2,   §  15.  Gullat.  xvi,  8  ;  Gai.  iii,  40.

D.  ad  SC.  Tertull.  (xxxviii,  17).  §§  2,  3.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  60.

§  4.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  61  ;  Paul,  iii,  2,  §
TIT.  xxvii,  §  1.     Comp.  Yip.  in  fr.  3,  3  ;  §  3,  I.  de  succ.  lib.  (iii,  7).

XXVII,  §5;  XXVIII,  §§1-4.]  LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  429

5       Legitimae  hereditatis  ius,  quod  ex  lege  duodecim  tabularum
descendit,  capitis  minutione  amittitur.

[XX  VIII.     DE  POSSESSIONS  VS  DANDIS. ]

1  Bonorum  possessio  datur  ant  contra  tabulas  testament!,  aut
sec'iindum  l  tabulas,  \aut~]  intestati.

2  Contra  tabulas  bonorum  possessio  datur  liberis  emancipatis  l
testamento  praeteritis,  licet  legitimo  [iure]  2  non  ad  eos  perti-

3  neat  hereditas.         Bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas  liberis
tarn  naturalibus  quam  adoptiuis  datur ;  sed  naturalibus  quidem
emancipatis,  non  tamen  et  illis  qui  in  adoptiua  familia  sunt ;
adoptiuis    autern    his   tantum    qui   in   potestate    manserunt.

4  Emancipatis  liberis  ex  edicto   datur  bonorum   possessio,   si

5       The  right  to  an  inheritance  as  heir-at-law,  if  it  be  derived
from  the  Twelve  Tables,  is  lost  by  capitis  deminutio.

[XXVIII.     OF  GRANTS  OF  POSSESSION.]

1  Possession   of  the  estate   of  a   party  deceased  is  granted
either  in  opposition  to  his  testamentary  writings,  or  in  terms
thereof,  or  on  his  intestacy.

2  Bonorum  possessio  in  opposition  to  a  testament  is  granted  to
emancipated  children  who  have  been  passed  over  in  it,  although
the  inheritance  does  not  belong  to  them  under  the  ius  ciuile.

3  It  is  granted  both  to  natural  and  adoptive  children ;  to  the
former^if  emancipated,  but  not  if  they  have  passed  into  aii
adoptive  family;  to  the  latter,  however,  only  if  they  have

4  remained  in  potestate  [of  their  adoptive    parent].  It   is
granted   by   the    edict  to  emancipated  children  if  they  are
prepared  to  give  security  to  their  brothers  who  have  continued

§  5.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  §§  21,  27,  51  ;  §  2,  §  2.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,    135  ;  above,  xxii,

I.  de  SO.  Orph.  (iii,   4).     The  new  23  ;  §  3,  I.  de  bon.  pass,  (iii,  9).

legitimae  hereditates  of  the  imperial  1  Hu.     interpolates   uel    between

jurisprudence    were     not     lost    by  liberis      and      emancipatis.        But

capitis  minutio.  wrongly  ;  for  praeterition  of  a  suus

invalidated  a  will  and  caused  intes-

TIT.  xxviu,  §  1.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  119,  tacy,  Gai.  ii,  123.

note    1  ;  Gai.    iii,    §§    33,    34,    and  *  Added   by    L.      Previous    eds.

notes  ;  pr.    §   1,    I.    de   bon.   IJQSS.  omitted  it,  reading  legitima  instead

(iii,  9).  of  leyilimo  as  in  the  MS.

1  Here,  as  in  xx,  14,  the  MS.  has  §  3.     Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.  1,  §  6,  D.  de  b.

aduersus  instead  of  secundum.     As  p.   c.  t.  (xxxvii,  4);  §§9-12,  I.  de

it  omits  the  last  aut  there  results  her.  q.  ab  int.  (iii,  1).

the  curious  reading — aduersus  tabu-  §  4.     Comp.  Vlp.  in  Oottat.  xvi,  7,  §  2  ;

fas  intestati.  Gai.  ii,  270  ;  Paul,  v,  9,  §  4.

430

EXCERPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIAXI    [XXVIII,  §§4-7

parati  sunt  cauere  fratribus  l  suis,  qui  in  pot-estate  manserunt,
bona  quae  moriente  patre  habuerunt  se  conlaturos.

5  Secundum  tabulas  bonorum  possessio  datur  scriptis  here-
dibus,  scilicet  si  eorum  quibus  contra  tabulas  competit  nemo

6  sit,  aut  petere  nolint.         Etiam  si  iure  ciuili  non  ualeat  tes-
tamentum,   forte  quod   familiae  mancipatio   uel   nuncupatio
defuit,  si  signatum  testamentuni  sit  non  minus  quarn  septem
testium  ciuium  Romanorum  signis,  bonorum  possessio  datur.

7  Intestati   datur    bonorum    possessio    per    septem   gradus  :
primo    gradu    liberis;    secundo    legitimis    heredibus;    tertio
proximis  cognatis  ;  quarto  familiae  patroni  ;  [quinto]  patrono
patronae,  item   liberis,  [parentibtt&]ue  l   patroni    patronaeue  ;
sexto  uiro  uxori  ;  septimo  cognatis  manumissoris  quibus  per

*

in  potentate  that  they  will  collate  [i.e.  bring  into  division]  the
estate  belonging  to  them  at  their  father's  death.

5  Bonorum  possessio  in  terms  of  a  testament  is  given  to  the
heirs  named  therein,  if  there  be  no  person  to  whom  possession
in  opposition  to  the  deed  is  competent,  or  if  all  to  whom  it  is

6  competent  refrain  from  applying  for  it.         Even  though  a
testament  may  be  invalid  by  the  ius  ciuile,  say  because  of  the
omission  of  the  familiae  maneipatio  or  of  the  words  of  nuncu-
pation, yet  if  it  be  sealed  with  the  seals  of  not  fewer  than
seven  witnesses,  Eoman  citizens,  possession  of  the  estate  will
be  granted  [in  accordance  with  it].

7  Bonorum  possessio  upon  intestacy  is  granted  through  seven
degrees :  in  the  first  degree  to  children  ;  in  the  second  to  the
heirs-at-law  [i.e.  collateral  agnates  and  patrons] ;  in  the  third
to  the  nearest  cognates ;  in  the  fourth  to  the  family  of  the
patron  ;  in  the  fifth  to  the  patron*«*  patroness  0f  a  patron- or
patronoas,(and  the^hildrenJaLtke-f-erffi^,  as  also  to  the  parents-
of  a   patron    or   patroness  [mfimiinjtt.p^  c.  n-La^c-ini^-  in  the

§  5.

§6.

§  7.

sixth  to  husband  or  wife  ;  in  the  seventh  to  those  cognates  of
a  manumitter  who  are  allowed  by  the  Furian  law  to  take

1  The  MS.  has  patribus,  first  cor-
ructed  by  Cuj.

Comp.  Vlp.  in  fr.  2,  pr.  D.  de  b.
p.  s.  t.  (xxxvii,  11)  ;  §§  1,  3,  I.  de
bon.  pass,  (iii,  9).  The  peculium
casfrense  uel  quasi  was  not  required
to  be  collated.

Comp.  xxiii,  6;  Gai.  ii,  §§  119,
149.

Comp.  §  1,  I.  de  bon.  poss.  (iii,  9).
1  See  Vlp.   in  Collat.  xvi,  9,  §  1,
on  the  strength  of  which  Cuj.  inter-
polated  parentibus,  the  MS.  having

liberosue.  There  has  been  much
controversy  about  this  fifth  grant  ;
and  the  difficulty  is  not  cleared  up,
but  on  the  contrary  increased,  by
Just,  in  §  3,  I.  de  honor,  poss.  (iii,
9),  and  Theoph.  in  his  Paraphrase.
The  meaning  of  patrono  patronae,
patroni  patronaeue  is  plain  enough  ;
it  is  the  intermediate  words  that
have  proved  to  many  unintelligible.
The  explanation  in  the  translation
is  that  suggested  by  Hu.  in  his
Studien,  pp.  58  f.

XXVIII,  §§  7-12.]    LIBRO  SINGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  431

legem  Furiam 2  plus  mille  asses  capere  licet :  et  si  nemo  sit
ad  quern  bonoruin  possessio  pertinere  possit,  aut  sit  quidem
sed  ius  suum  omiserit,  populo  bona  deferuntur  ex  lege  lulia

8  caducaria.3         Liberis  bonorum  possessio  datur,  tain  his  qui
in  potestate  usque  in  mortis  tempus  fuerunt  quam  emanci-
patis ;  item  adoptiuis,  non  tamen  etiam  in  adoptionern  datis.

9  Proximi  cognati  bonorum  possessionem  accipiunt  non  solum
per  feminini  sexus  personam  cognati  sed  etiam  agnati  capite
deminuti :  nam  licet  legitimum  ius  agnationis  capitis  minu-
tione  amiserint,  natura  tamen  cognati  manent.1

10  Bonorum  possessio  datur  parentibus  et  liberis  intra  annum

11  ex  quo  petere  potuerunt,  ceteris  intra  centum  dies.         Qui
omnes  intra  id  tempus  si  non  petierint  bonorum  possessionem,
sequens  gradus   admittitur,  perinde  atque  si  superiores  non
essent ;  idque  per  septem  gradus  tit,

12  Hi   quibus  ex  successorio  edicto  bonorum  possessio  datur

more  than  a  thousand  asses.  If  there  be  no  one  entitled  to
the  bonorum  possessio,  or  if  there  be  such  an  one  but  he  have
waived  his  right,  the  estate  passes  to  the  people  in  virtue  of

8  the  Julian  caduciary  law.         The  bonorum  possessio  '  to  chil-
dren '  is  granted  not  only  to  those  who  have  remained  in
potestate  down  to  the  time  of  the  parent's  death,  but  also  to
those  who  have  been  emancipated ;  to  adopted  children  too,  but

9  not  to  those  given  in  adoption.         Not  only  do  those  obtain
it  as  '  nearest  cognates- '  who  are  of  kin  through  a  female,
but  also  agnates  who  have  undergone  capitis  deminutio ;  for
though  they  have  thereby  lost,  their  civil  right  of  agnation,  by
natural  law  they  still  continue  kinsmen.

10  JBonorum  possessio  is  granted  to  ascendants  and  descendants
[at  any  time]  within  a  year  after  it  has  become  competent  to
them  to  apply  for  it ;  to  other  persons  within  a  hundred  days.

11  When  all  [those   included   in   any   particular   degree]  have
failed  to  apply  for  it  within  the  time  limited,  the  next  degree
is  admitted,  just  as  if  the  preceding  ones  were  non-existent ;
and  this  is  the  case  through  the  seven  degrees.

12  Those  to  whom  bonorum  2)ossessio  is  granted  by  the  edict

2  Comp.   i,  2;  Gai.   ii,   255,   and       §9.     Comp.   Gai.  iii,  §§  27,  30;  tit.  I.
notes.  de  succ.  cogn.  (iii,  5).

3  See  Gai.  i,  145,  note  1.  '  Comp.  Gai.  i,  158.

i  8.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  26  ;  fr.  1,  §  2,  D.  §§  10,  11.     Comp.  §§  9,    10,  I.  de   bon.
quis  ordo  (xxxviii,  15)  ;  fr.  1,  §  6,  pass,  (iii,  9).

fr.  4,  fr.  5,  D.  si  tab.  test,  (xxxviii,  §  12.     Comp.   Gai.  iii,  32  ;  iv,  34  ;  §  2,
6).  I.  de  bon.  poss.  (iii,  9).

432  EXCERPTAEX  DOM1TII  VLPIANI  [XXVIII,  §§  12,  13;  XXIX,  §1.

heredes  quidem  non  sunt,  sed  heredis  loco  constituuntur
beneficio  praetoris.  ideoque  seu  ipsi  agant  sen  cum  his
agatur,  ficticiis  actionibus  opus  est,  in  quibus  heredes  esse
finguntur.

13  Eonorum  possessio  aut  cum  re  datur  1  aut  sine  re  :  cum  re,
[CW?TI]  2  is  qui  accepit  cum  effectu  bona  retineat  :  sine  re,  cum
alius  hire  ciuili  euincere  hereditatem  possit  ;  ueluti  si  suus
heres  in  tesi&[me?ito  praeteritus  sit,  licet  scriptis  heredibus  secun-
\_dum  tabulas  bonorum  possessio  deferatur,  erit  tamen  cci]  3
bonorum  possessio  sine  re,  quoniam  suus  heres  euincere  heredi-
tatem iure  legitimo  potest.

[XX  Vltll.     DE  BONIS  LIBER  TOR  VM.  ]

1  Ciuis  Roniani  liberti  hereditatem  lex  duodecim  tabularum
patrono  defert,  si  intestato  sine  suo  herede  libertus  decesserit  :
ideoque  siue  testamento  facto  decedat,  licet  suus  heres  ei  non

regulating  successions  are  not  in  truth  heirs,  but  only  estab-
lished in  the  position  of  heirs  by  the  beneficial  intervention  of
the  praetor.  Therefore  whether  they  are  suing  or  being  sued,
fictitious  actions  must  be  employed,  in  which  it  is  pretended
that  they  are  heirs.

13  Bonorum  possessio  is  granted  either  cum  re  or  sine  re, — cum
re  when  he  to  whom  it  is  granted  can  effectively  retain  the
bona  ;  sine  re  when  some  other  person  can  wrest  the  inherit-
ance from  him  by  aid  of  the  ins  ciuile.  For  example,  if  a  suus
heres  [have  been  passed  over  in  a  testament,  although  bonorum
[possessio  secunclum  tabulas  be  granted  to  the  heirs  instituted
[therein,  yet  it  will  be]  sine  re,  since  the  suus  heres  can  wrest  the
inheritance  from  them  in  virtue  of  his  statutory  right.

[XXIX.     OF  THE  ESTATES  OF  FREEDMEN.]

1  The  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  confers  the  inheritance  of  a
Eoman  citizen  freedman  upon  his  patron,  if  the  freedman  die
intestate  without  a  suus  heres ;  therefore  if  he  die  leaving  a
testament,  though  possibly  not  a  suus  heres,  or  intestate  but

i  13.     Comp.  Gai.  ii,  148  ;  iii,  §§  35-37  ;  bonorum-  possessio  sine  re  [est],  quo-

above,  xxiii,  6  ;  xxvi,  8.  niam,   etc.     But  Krueger's  ameinl-

1  The  MS.  has  autern  reddatur.  ment  is  preferable.

2  Added  by  Hugo.

3  Interpolated  by  K.     After  heres       TIT.   xxix,  §  1.     Comp.   Schoell,    Tab.
the  MS.   has  intestati.     Bk.  reads —  v,  8  ;  Gai.  iii,  §§  39-42  ;  above,  tit.
ueluti  si  [sit]  suus   heres,    intestate,  xxvii  ;  tit.  I.  de  succ.  libert.  (iii,  7).

XXIX, §§1-3.]       LIBRO  SIXGVLARI  REGVLARVM.  433

sit,  seu  intestate,  et  suus  heres  ei  sit  quamuis l  non  naturalis,
sed  uxor  puta  quae  in  manu  fuit  uel  adoptiuus  filius,  lex
patrono  nihil  praestat.  sed  ex  edicto  praetoris,  seu  testato  *
libertus  moriatur,  ut  aut  nihil  aut  minus  quam  partem  dirni-
diam  bonorum  patrono  relinquat,  contra  tabulas  testament  i
partis  dimidiae  bonorum  possessio  illi  datur,  nisi  libertus
aliquem  ex  naturalibus  liberis  successorem  sibi  relinquat;
siue  intestato  decedat,  et  uxorem  forte  in  manu  uel  adoptiuum
filium  relinquat,  aeque  partis  mediae  bonorum  possessio  contra
suos  heredes  patrono  datur.

2  In  bonis  libertae  patrono  nihil  iuris  ex  edicto  datur.     itaque

T  seu  intestata  moriatur  liberta,  semper  ad

eum  hereditas   pertinet   licet  liberi    sint    libertae,   quoniani

3  non   sunt   sui   heredes   matri  \_ut~]  obsteni 2  patrono.         Lex
Papia  Poppaea  postea  libertas  quattuor  liberorum  iure  tutela
patronorum  liberauit:  et   cum  intulerit  iam   posse  eas   sine

with  a  suus  heres,  though  perhaps  not  a  natural  one  but  only
a  wife  in  manu  say  or  an  adopted  son,  the  statute  gives
nothing  to  the  patron.  By  the  praetor's  edict,  however,  if  the
freedman  die  testate,  but  leave  his  patron  nothing,  or  less  than
the  half  of  his  estate,  the  patron  gets  possession  of  a  half  of
the  bona  in  opposition  to  the  testament,  unless  the  freedman
have  left  one  of  his  children  by  birth  as  his  successor ;  if  he
die  intestate,  survived  say  by  his  wife  in  manu  or  an  adopted
son,  possession  of  a  half  of  his  estate  is  in  like  manner  granted
to  the  patron  as  against  [those  artificial]  sui  heredes.

2  No  right  in  the  estate  of  a  freedwoman  is  conferred  by  the
edict  on  her  patron.     Therefore  [if  she  wish  to  make  a  testa-
[ment,  it  is  in  the  power  of  her  patron  to  withhold  his  auctoritas
[if  he  be  not  instituted  in  it  as  her  heir]  ;  if  she  die  intestate,
the  inheritance  must  always  belong  to  him,  even  if  she  leave
children,  seeing  they  are  not  their  mother's  sui  heredes,  and

3  so   cannot  exclude  the  patron.         The  Papia-Poppaean  law
afterwards  liberated  freedwomen  from  tutory  in  right  of  four
children ;  and  as  it  was  a  necessary  result  that  they  could
thenceforth  make  testaments  without  the  auctoritas  of  their

1  So  Bk. ;  the  MS.  has  qua  ;  Vahl. ,  with  such  words  as  seu  testari  uolu-
Hu.,  and  K.  quamquam.  erit  liberta,  in  patroni  potestate  erat

2  So  Cuj.  and  the  later  eds. ;  the  ne   testamento  auctor  fieret   in  quo
MS.    has    testamento;   most  earlier  ipse  heres  institutus  non  esset,seu,etc.
eds.  testamento  facto.  2  Vt  obstent  is  due  to  L. ;  the  MS.

§  2.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  43  ;  i,  192.  has  obstit.

1  K.  proposes  to  fill  the  lacuna       §  3.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  44  ;  i,  194.

2E

434  EXCEIIPTA  EX  DOMITII  VLPIANT.      [XXIX,  §§3-7.

auctoritate   patronorum    testari,    prospexit  ut    pro   numero
liberorum  libertae  superstitum  l  uirilis  pars  patrono  debeatur.

4  Liberi  patroni   uirilis  sexus  eadem  iura  in  bonis  libertorum

5  parentum  suorum  habent  quae  et  ipse  patronus.        Feminae
uero  ex  lege  quidem  duodecim  tabularum  perinde  ius  habent
atque  masculi  patronorum  liberi ;  contra  tabulas  autem  tes-
tamenti  liberti,  aut  ab    intestate   contra    suos  heredes  non
naturales,  bonorum  possessio  eis   non   competit;  sed  si   ius
trium  liberorum  habuerunt  etiam  haec  iura  ex  lege   Papia

6  Poppaea  nanciscuntur.         Patronae  in x  bonis  libertorum  illucl
ius  tantum  habebant 2  quod  lex  duodecim  tabularum  intro-
duxit ;  sed  postea  lex   Papia   [ingenuae]  3  patronae   duobus
liberis  honoratae,  libertinae  tribus,  id  iuris  dedit  quod  patronus

7  habet   ex   edicto.          Item   ingenuae   trium  liberorum   iure
honoratae  eadem  lex  id  ius  dedit  quod  ipsa  *  patrono  tribuit.

EXPLICIT.5

patrons,  it  provided  that  a  share  of  a  freedwoman's  estate,
proportionate  to  the  number  of  her  surviving  children,  should

4  in  future  be  due  to  her  patron.         A  patron's  male  children
have  the  same  right  in  the  estates  of  his  freedmen  as  he  himself.

5  By  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  a  patron's  female  descendants
have  the  same  rights  as  his  male  descendants ;  they  are  not
entitled,  however,  [under  the  edict,]  to  bonorum  possessio  in
opposition  to  the  testament  of  a  freedman,  or,  on  his  intes-
tacy, as  against  his  artificial  sui  heredes;  but  they  acquire
even  this  right  by  the  Papia-Poppaean  law  if  they  be  mothers

6  of  three  children.         Patronesses  used  to  have  no  more  right
in  the  estates  of  their  freedmen  than  was  allowed  by  the
Twelve  Tables ;  but  afterwards  the  Papia-Poppaean  law  con-
ferred upon  a  free-born  patroness  with  two  children,  and  a
freedwoman  patroness  with  three,  the  same  rights  that  a  patron

7  enjoys  under  the  edict.         The  same  statute  further  conferred
upon  a  free-born  patroness,   privileged  in  respect   of  three
children,  the  same  rights  that  itself  it  conferred  upon  a  patron.

THE  END.

1  The  MS.  has  subprestitum.  5  This  is  the  end  of  the  so-called

§  4.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  §§  45,  46.  '  Fragments '     But  that  Vlp.,   fol-

§  5.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  §§  46,  47.  lowing  Gai.,  proceeded  to  deal  with

§§  6,  7.     Comp.  Gai.  iii,  §§  49,  50.  obligations    and  actions  is  evident

1  The  MS.  has  ex.  from  the  fact  that  in  the  Collatio,

2  Habeant  in  the  MS.  ii,   2,   we  have  a  passage  from  the

3  Added  by  Cuj.  and  adopted  by  Begulae  on  the  subject  of  iniuria,
all  eda.  and  in  fr.  25,  D.  de  O.etA.  (xliv,  7)

4  The  MS.  and  all  eds.  have  ipsi ;  another  containing  an  enumeration

seems  more  appropriate.  of  the  leading  varieties  of  actions.

/fti

ADDITIONS   AND   CORRECTIONS.

P.  11.  Delete  first  note  to  §  29,  substituting  as  follows : — '  Vlp.  iii,
3,  and  Fr.  Dos.  §  7,  attribute  this  provision  to  the  Junian  law  ;
and  Gai.  in  i,  80  speaks  of  it  as  introduced  by  the  lex  Aelia
Sentia  et  lunia,  as  if  the  Junian  law  were  an  amended  version
of  the  earlier  enactment.  Probably  this  to  some  extent  is
right.  The  Junian  law  seems  to  have  done  more  than  merely
give  a  name  to  and  define  the  position  of  those  who,  through
non-observance  in  their  manumission  of  the  requirements  of
the  ius  ciuile  and  the  Aelia-Sentian  law,  were  not  citizens,  but
still  de  iure  slaves  though  de  facto  free,  Gai.  iii,  56.  The
Ael.-Sent.  law  had  given  the  benefit  of  causae  probatio  to  those
de  facto  freemen  whose  want  of  citizenship  was  due  to  the
fact  that  they  were  under  thirty  when  manumitted,  and  that
their  manumission  had  not  been  uindicta  on  cause  approved
by  the  council,  but  either  without  such  approval,  or  censu  or
testamento,  comp.  §  29  with  §§  17,  18,  Vlp.  i,  12.  The  Junian
law  seems  to  have  extended  the  remedy  to  slaves  under  thirty
at  manumission  who  had  been  manumitted  neither  uindicta,
censu,  nor  testamento,  but  informally,  Gai.  i,  41,  iii,  56,  Vlp.  i,
10,  iii,  3,  or  by  a  bonitarian  owner,  Vlp.  i,  16.  But  it  required
the  Set.  referred  to  in  Gai.  i,  31,  Vlp.  iii,  4,  to  extend  it  to
slaves  manumitted  informally  or  by  a  bonitarian  owner  after
the  age  of  thirty.'

Pp.  14  and  15.  Delete  the  first  four  and  a  half  lines  ('  Finally
.  .  .  informally ')  of  the  conjectural  translation  of  §  35,  and
substitute : — '  Finally,  those  who  are  latins  because,  being
under  thirty  at  manumission,  they  were  manumitted  otherwise
than  uindicta  with  sanction  of  the  council,  may  become
citizens  by  iteration  or  renewal  of  the  manumission  by  their
quiritarian  owner,  and  that  immediately  if  the  renewal  be  in
the  manner  required  by  the  Aelia-Sentian  law, — after  they
have  passed  thirty  if  the  iteration  be  uindicta  (without  the
necessity  of  the  council's  approval),  or  censu,  or  testamento ;
those  who  are  latins  because,  when  over  thirty,  they  were

436  ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.

manumitted  neither  uindicta,  censu,  nor  testamento,  but  in-
formally, may  become  citizens  by  iteration  by  their  quiritarian
owner  in  one  of  those  three  ways  ;  while,'  etc.

P.  20,  second  line  of  translation,  before  '  from  that,'  insert — '  if  we
know  who  they  are.'

P.  23,  in  translation,  fourth  line  from  foot,  for  '  in  like  manner/
read  '  therefore.'

P.  39,  after  '  they  be,'  at  end  of  sixth  line  of  translation,  insert —
'  to  take  the  position  of.'

P.  40,  note  to  §  104,  for  '  Vlp.  viii,  1,'  read— <Vlp.  viii,  8a.'
P.  41,  §  111,  note  3,  for  '  usucaption,'  read  '  usucapion.'

P.  pp,  first  line  of  translation,  for  '  But  the  tutory  of  Junian  latins
under  puberty,  whether  male  or  female,'  read — '  But  the  tutory
of  Junian  latin  freedwomeu,  and  of  latin  freedmen  under
puberty.'

P.  75,  fourth  line  of  translation,  for  '  adolescent  minors,'  read
'  persons  in  curatory.'

P.  120,  §  134,  note  1,  fifth  line  from  end,  for  'It  was  enacted  pro-
bably,' read — '  It  is  generally  supposed  to  have  been  enacted ;'
and  at  end  of  note  add — '  But  as  senatusconsults  had  by  that
time  taken  the  place  of  leges,  it  probably  was  of  earlier  date.'

P.  133,  in  first  line  of  translation  of  §  168,  for  'without  cretion,'
read  '  with  cretion.'

P.  145,  in  fourth  line  of  continuation  of  note  1  to  §  201,  before
'  damnatus,'  insert '  damnas  or.'

P.  172,  to  note  3  to  §  286,  add — '  It  is  possible  that  Pegasiano  is  a
mistake  for  Planciano,  see  Vlp.  xxv,  17,  n.  3,  and  that  it  is
the  same  Set.  as  referred  to  in  §  285.'

P.  175,  in  translation,  eighth  line  from  foot,  delete  '  of  error.'
P.  204,  in  note  to  §  81,  for  '  iii,  12,  pr.'  read— 'Th.  iii.  12,  pr.'

P.  250,  second  line  of  translation  of  §  190,  for  'twofold  restitution,'
read  '  a  twofold  penalty.'

P.  268,  first  line  of  translation  of  §  5,  for  'while  those  in  which,'
read — '  while  those  in  personam  in  which.'

P.  269,  fourth  line  from  foot  of  second  col.  of  notes,  for  'cassia,'  read
'  cessio.'

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.  437

P.  271,  at  the  end  of  note  2  to  §  13,  add — 'which  the  phras^
poena  sacramenti,  §  14,  tends  to  confirm.'

P.  290,  fourth  line,  first  col.  of  notes,  after  '  lands,'  insert—'  Paul
ad  Ed.  in  fr.  6,  D.  de  E.  V.  (vi,  1).'

P.  302,  to  note  to  §  61,  add — '  By  a  rescript  of  Marc.  Aurelius  com-
pensation was  allowed  to  be  pleaded  in  answer  to  stricti  iuris
actions,  under  cover  of  an  exceptio  doli,  §  30,  tit.  I.  afd.  This
rescript  may  have  been  published  before  Gai.  wrote,  yet  not
have  come  to  his  knowledge.'

P.  311,  in  middle  of  note  2  to  §  80,  after  'contract  and  delict,'
insert—'  and  is  used  in  the  words  of  the  edict,  fr.  2,  §  1,  D.  de
cap.  min.  (iv,  5).'

P.  318,  sixth  line  of  translation,  for  '  action  in  which  the  behaviour
of  a  married  woman,'  read — '  actio  rei  uxoriae  when  the  wife's
conduct.'

P.  321,  first  line  of  translation,  for  '  it  was  impossible  for  the  pur-
suer ipso  iure  to  sue  again,'  read — '  it  was  ipso  iure  impossible,'
etc.

Pp.  334,  335,  for  '  has  arrived,'  once  in  §  136  and  twice  in  §  137,
read  '  is  past.'

P.  338,  last  line  of  translation  of  §  150,  for  '  edict,'  read  'respective
interdicts.'

P.  339,  add  to  note  to  §  152 — 'The  interdict  was  a  praetorian
remedy,  and  the  praetor  dealt  only  with  what  had  happened
during  his  own  year  of  office,  which  (Momms.  in  M.  u.  M.
Eoem.  Alt.  i,  493),  from  the  year  601  |  153  downwards,  began
on  1st  January.'

P.  341,  second,  last  line  of  text,  for  ' prohibitorium,'  read  'proliibito-
riorum.'

P.  344,  last  line  of  translation,  delete  '  and  restipulation.'

P.  345,  middle  of  note  to  §  166,  after  'uis  ex  conuentu,'  insert — 'uis
moribus  fact  a,  (Cic.  pro  Caec.  i,  2,  viii,  22).'

P.  384,  add  to  note  2  to  §  17 — '  Probably  it  was  lawful  only  in
tutory  of  women,  and  there  allowed  to  a  testamentary  tutor
on  the  same  principle  (noticed  in  Gai.  i,  168)  that  was  held  to
justify  cession  by  a  tutor-at-law.'

P.  392,  add,  as  a  note  to  the  words  '  item  si  cognati  inter  se  coierint

438  ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.

usque  ad  sextum  gradum,'  on  fifth  line  of  text — Tr.  Vat.
§§  216-219,  show  that  relationship  to  a  testator  within  the
sixth  degree  inclusive  gave  both  caelibes  and  orbi  a  general
exemption  from  the  caduciary  penalties  of  the  Julian  law;
see  also  §  158.'

P.  394,  add  to  note  to  xvii,  §  2 — '  It  is  a  moot  point  whether
Caracalla's  enactment  merely  transferred  caduca  from  the
aerarium  to  the  fisc,  i.e.  from  the  state  to  the  emperor,  or
abolished  in  favour  of  the  aerarium  or  the  fisc — for  the  words
are  sometimes  used  indiscriminately — the  prior  right  given  by
the  Julian  law  to  heirs  and  legatees  who  had  children,  Gai.  ii,
207,  286.  Taken  in  connection  with  another  statement  of
Ulpian's,  (Collat.  xvi,  9,  §  3),  that  Caracalla  very  greatly  re-
stricted the  right  of  succession  ab  intestate,  obviously  in  order
to  increase  the  influx  to  the  fisc  of  lona  uacantia,  the  latter
view  appears  the  more  probable.'

P.  395,  in  note  to  tit.  xviii,  for  '  see  note  to  xvii,  2,'  read — '  see
note  3  to  i,  21.'

P.  412,  last  line  of  translation,  for  '  deceased  or  emancipated  son,'
read — '  son  who  has  died  or  been  emancipated.'

P.  429,  in  fifth  last  line  of  translation,  after  '  former,'  insert '  even.'

P.  430,  in  second  last  line  of  text,  insert  a  comma  after  liberis,
and  for  '  [parcntibus]ue,'  read  '  [parenti]ue'  In  fourth  last
line  of  translation,  fifth,  fourth,  and  third  lines  from  foot,
instead  of  '  in  the  fifth  .  .  .  e  mancipio,'  read — '  in  the  fifth
to  the  patron  and  patroness  (and  their  children),  as  also  to
the  parens  manumissor,  of  a  patron  or  patroness.'

P.  430,  in  first  line,  second  col.,  of  note  1  to  §  7,  after  '  liberosue'
add — '  but  as  there  could  be  only  one  parens  manumissor,  it
is  proper  to  read  parenti  rather  than  parentibus.'  At  end  of
same  note  add — '  He  however  retains  the  parentibus  of  Cujas.'

ALPHABETICAL    DIGEST

OF  THE  MATTERS  CONTAINED  IN  THE

TEXT    AND    NOTES,

AND  OF  SERVICE  AS  AN

INDEX.

DIGEST.

ABDICATION,  abdicatio,  of  a  testamentary  tutor,  U.  xi,  17  and  n.  2.

ABROGATIO  LEGIS,  U.  i,  3.

ABSTINENDI  POTESTAS,  (see  Hereditas,  3,  4),  power  to  hold  aloof
from  an  inheritance  allowed  by  the  praetor  to  sui  heredes
(which  see),  G.  ii,  158,  U.  xxii,  24;  to  quasi-sui,  G.  ii,  159;
to  a  person  in  causa  mancipii  instituted  heir  with  freedom
(see  Mancipii,  etc.*),  160  ;  but  not  to  slaves  instituted  as  heredes
necessarii  (see  Necess.  heredes},  153,  U.  xxii,  24.  If  a  party
entitled  to  abstain  had  once  iutromitted  with  the  inheritance,
abstention  became  impossible,  unless,  being  a  minor,  he  ob-
tained in  inter/rum  restitutio  (which  see),  G.  ii,  163.  Abstention
did  not  deprive  him,  however,  of  his  rights  of  patronage  over
and  succession  to  his  parent's  freedmen,  G.  iii,  67.

ACCEPTILATION,  (see  Obligation,  3),  a  verbal  mode  of  discharging
an  obligation  without  actual  payment,  G.  iii,  169  ;  see  style,
ibid.  It  was  applicable  only  to  obligations  created  verbis,
170,  (see  Verbal  obligations) ;  but  others  might  by  novation
(which  see)  be  embodied  in  a  stipulation  and  then  thus  dis-
charged, 171.  It  was  incompetent  to  a  woman  unless  with
her  tutor's  auctoritas,  G.  ii,  85,  iii,  171.  If  an  adstipulator
granted  such  a  discharge  in  fraud  of  the  stipulant,  he  was
liable  in  an  action  under  the  Aquilian  law,  G.  iii,  215,  the
condemnation  being  in  duplum,  (see  Cretio  litis  in/it  iatione),
216,  iv,  171.  Whether  a  debt  could  be  partially  acceptilated
was  matter  of  dispute,  G.  iii,  172.

ACCESSIO  TEMPORIS,  reckoning  the  possession  of  the  author  as  an
adjunct  to  that  of  the  successor,  G.  iv,  151 ;  see  Interdicts,  8.

ACCESSION  as  a  mode  of  acquiring  property,  see  Property,  4,  6.

ACCESSORY  RIGHTS,  see  Principal  and  Accessory.

ACCIDENT  created  no  responsibility,  G.  iii,  211  and  n.  1.

ACCRETION,  see  Adcretio.

ACTIONS,  see  passim  Book  iv  of  Gaius,  which  deals  with  jus

quod  ad  actioncs  pertinet,  G.  i,  8.
I.   ACTIONS  GENERALLY,  AND  THEIR  CLASSIFICATIONS.

1.  Actio  and  judicium. — Actio  sometimes  meant  the  right  to

442  DIGEST.

ACTIONS— continued.

I.    ACTIONS  GENERALLY,  AND  THEIR  CLASSIFICATIONS — continued.

raise  a  particular  action,  G.  iii,  161,  or  the  liability  to
have  to  answer  to  it,  G-.  iv,  4 ;  but  usually  it  meant  the
process  itself,  G.  iv,  2,  3.  In  this  sense  actio  andjudicium
were  often  used  indiscriminately,  as  mandati  actionem
habere,  G.  iii,  161,  mandati  judicium  habere,  G.  iii,  127 ;
strictly  speaking,  judicium  was  the  action  when  remitted
to  ajudex,  G.  iv,  103,  note  1.

2.  Actions  civil  and  praetorian. — Actions  were  either  civil  or

praetorian  according  as  they  had  been  introduced  by  the
jus  civile  or  by  the  praetor  in  the  exercise  of  his  juris-
diction, G.  iv,  110  ;  for  the  edict  was  one  of  their  most
prolific  sources,  G.  iv,  11.

3.  Actions  in  rem  and  in  personam. — As  regards  form,  their

most  important  distinction  was  that  they  were  either  in
rem  or  in  personam,  G.  iv,  1 .  In  the  former  the  pursuer
averred  either  that  a  thing  was  his,  or  that  he  had  a
usufruct  or  servitude  over  another's  property,  or  that  his
own  property  was  free  from  such  burdens,  G.  iv,  3,  with-
out mention  in  his  averment  of  any  person  as  disputing
his  right,  G.  iv,  87 ;  so  it  was,  at  least,  if  he  was  suing
per  formulam  petitoriam,  and  not  by  the  unusual  actio
per  sponsionem,  which  was  in  form  one  in  personam,
G.  iv,  91,  93,  (see  In  rem  actio  per  sponsionem).  In  an
action  in  personam  the  pursuer's  averment  was  that  the
defender  was  indebted  to  him  and  bound  dare,  facere,  or
praestare,  G.  iv,  2 ;  words  defined  in  note  3.  Those
founded  on  dare  or  dare  facere  were  technically  con-
dictions,  G.  iv,  5,  (see  Condictio) ;  while  actions  in  rem
with  a  petitory  formula  were  called  vindications,  ibid.,  (see
Vindicatio).

4.  Actions  petitory, penal,  divisory,  and  prejudicial. — An  action

was  petitory  when  the  pursuer  claimed  a  thing  as  his  or
as  due  to  him  under  a  contract  or  other  lawful  deed,  G.  iv,
7  ;  penal,  when  he  claimed  a  penalty,  for  theft  say  or
assault,  8 ;  both  petitory  and  penal,  when  the  claim
was  originally  on  contract  or  other  lawful  deed,  but  the
defender's  liability  augmented  because  of  his  denial  of  it,
(see  Cretio  litis  infttiatione),  9, 171.  The  divisory  actions
were  the  a.  familiae  erciscundae  for  partitioning  an  inherit-
ance, communi  dividundo  for  dividing  common  property,
and  finium  regundorum  for  settling  boundaries,  G.  iv,  42.
Prejudicial  were  intended  merely  to  settle  a  question  of
right  or  fact,  without  any  immediate  practical  result,  G.
iii,  123,  iv,  44.

DIGEST.  443

ACTIONS— continued.

I.   ACTIONS  GENERALLY,  AND  THEIR  CLASSIFICATIONS — continued.

5.  Actiones  in  jus  and  in  facturn  conceptae. — This  distinction

was  based  on  the  structure  of  the  formula,  and  the
actions  so  called  according  as  the  pursuer  founded  on  a
right  competent  to  him  at  law,  or  merely  averred  that
something  had  been  done  or  omitted  by  the  defender
which  under  the  edict  gave  him  a  claim  against  the
latter,  G.  iv,  45,  46  ;  see  Formula,  3.

6.  Actiones  utiles  and  in  factum. — Those  actions  were  called

utiles  which,  being  inapplicable  to  particular  persons  or
cases  as  originally  formulated  by  the  jus  civile  or  pub-
lished in  the  album,  the  praetor  rendered  serviceable  to
them,  by  alteration  of  the  phraseology  or  otherwise,  when
they  were  within  the  spirit  though  not  the  letter  of  the
remedy,  G.  ii,  78  and  n.  1,  253,  iii,  202,  219 ;  they  were
sometimes  called  fictitiae,  where  the  adaptation  was  by
introduction  of  a  fiction  (see  Fiction},  G.  iv,  34-38,  U.
xxviii,  12.  The  utiles  actiones  of  frequent  occurrence
became  stereotyped,  and  took  their  place  in  the  edict,  G.
ii,  253 ;  when  a  case  occurred  which  none  of  them
exactly  fitted,  then,  if  the  principle  which  underlay  it
was  the  same,  the  praetor  constructed  a  special  formula
to  meet  the  particular  facts,  which  got  the  name  of  actio
in  factum,  G.  ii,  78,  note  1.

7.  Actions  competent  to  and  against  heirs,  and  adjectician  and

noxal  actions. — Actions  ex  contractu  were  usually  compe-
tent to  or  against  heirs ;  but  the  heir  of  an  adstipulator
(see  Adstipulatiori)  could  not  sue,  and  the  heirs  of  sponsors
and  fideipromissors  (see  Verbal  obligations}  could  not  be
sued,  G.  iv,  113.  Penal  actions  ex  delicto  were  not
competent  against  the  heirs  of  the  delinquent,  but,  with
exception  of  the  a.  injuriarum,  were  competent  to  those
of  the  injured  party,  112;  in  those  that  against  the
original  debtor  would  have  been  both  penal  and  petitory,
heirs  were  not  liable  in  penalties,  172.  Actions  adjecticiae
qualitatis  were  those  against  patresfamilia  in  respect  of
the  obligations  ex  contractu  of  Jiliifamilias  and  slaves,  G.
iv,  69-74a,  (see  Adjectician  actions) ;  noxal,  those  compe-
tent in  respect  of  their  delicts,  75-79,  (see  Noxal  actions).

8.  Stricti  juris,  bonae  fidei,  and  arbitrariae  actiones. — In  some

judicia  the  judge  was  authorised  to  decide  according  to
general  principles  of  good  faith,  ex  aequo  et  lono,  without
holding  himself  fettered  by  the  actual  engagements  of
parties ;  these  were  called  bonae  fidei  judicia,  G.  iv,  62,
(see  Bonae  fidei  jud^) :  all  others  were  stricti  juris,  (though

444  DIGEST.

ACTIONS— continued.

I.  ACTIONS  GENEEALLY,  AND  THEIK  CLASSIFICATIONS — continued.

the  phrase  is  not  in  Gams.)  Those  were  arbitrariae  in
which  the  judge  had  power,  before  proceeding  to  condemn
the  defender, — for  the  condemnation  could  only  be  in
money,  G.  iv,  48,  which  possibly  the  pursuer  did  not
want, — to  ordain  him  to  do  what  he  thought  right,  say  to
deliver  what  was  claimed  in  the  action ;  if  the  order  was
complied  with  proceedings  went  no  further,  and  condem-
nation was  avoided,  G.  iv,  114,  note.

9.  Actions  perpetual  and  temporary. — Actions  were  perpetual
or  temporary  in  two  different  senses.  The  right  of  action
was  perpetual  in  the  case  of  those  introduced  by  statute,
whereas  in  those  derived  from  the  praetor's  jurisdiction,
with  exception  of  a  few  modelled  after  others  of  the
jus  civile,  it  endured  only  for  a  year,  G.  iv,  110,  111.  The
action  itself,  if  the  judicium  was  legitimum,  expired  in
eighteen  months,  while  if  imperio  continens  it  came  to  an
end  with  the  demission  of  office  by  the  magistrate  who
granted  it,  (see  Jud.  leg.  and  imp.  cont.),  104,  105.  (For
other  branches  of  the  jus  quod  ad  actiones  pertinet,  see,  in
addition  to  references  above,  Procedure,  Legis  actiones,
Formula,  Litis  contcstatio,  etc.)

II.  SPECIAL  ACTIONS. — (See  also  Condictio,  Vindicatio.}
A.  ad  exhibendum,  G.  iv,  51.

A.  arborum  furtim  caesarum,  G.  iv,  11.

A.  certae  creditae  pecuniae,  G.  iv,  13  ;  it  involved  penal  spon-
sion and  restipulation  of  a  third  part  of  the  sum  claimed,
which  went  by  way  of  penalty  to  him  who  was  success-
ful, G.  iv,  171,  180;  see  Sponsio  et  restipulatio.

A.  commodati,  competent  to  a  lender,  G.  iv,  47  ;  it  might  be
either  in  jus  or  in  factum  concepta,  ibid.,  and  in  the
former  case  was  bonae  fidei,  G.  iv,  62  ;  see  Commodate.

A.  communi  dividundo,  for  dividing  common  property,  G.  iv,
42,  44,  note  ;  it  was  bonae  fidei,  G.  iv,  62,  and  entitled
the  judge  to  proceed  to  adjudication,  G.  iv,  42,  U.  xix,  16.

A.  conducti,  competent  to  a  lessee  or  hirer  against  his  lessor  ;
was  also  bonae  fidei,  G.  iv,  62  ;  see  Location.

A.  damni  injuriae  ex  lege  Aqiiilia,  G.  iii,  210,  iv,  9;  see  Wrong-
ful damage  to  property.

A,  depensi,  introduced  by  the  Publilian  law  in  favour  of  a
sponsor  paying  for  the  original  debtor,  competent  if  he
was  not  reimbursed  within  six  months,  and  in  duplum,
G.  iii,  127,  iv,  9,  22,  171.  Under  the  system  of  the  legis
actiones  the  procedure  was  by  manus  injectio  pro  judicato
(see  Legis  actiones,  5),  G.  iv,  22 ;  consequently  under  the

DIGEST.  445

ACTIONS— continued.

II.  SPECIAL  ACTIONS — continued.

formular  system  the  defender  was  required  to  give  cautio
judicatum  solvi,  (see  Cautiones,  etc."),  G.  iv,  25,  102.  See
Suretyship,  5.

A.  depositi,  competent  to  a  depositor,  G.  iii,  207.  It  might  be
either  in  jits  or  in  factum  concepta,  G.  iv,  47,  in  the  former
case  being  bonae  fidei,  62  ;  and  condemnation  entailed
infamy  on  the  defender,  G.  iv,  60,  182.  See  Deposit.

A.  de  peculio  et  de  in  rem  verso,  G.  iv,  73,  74« ;  see  Adjectician
actions,  3.

A.  depecunia  constitute,  G.  iv,  171 ;  it  involved  penal  sponsion
and  restipulation  of  a  sum  equal  to  one-half  of  that
claimed,  171,  180  compared  with  94.  See  Sponsio  et
restipulatio.

A.  empti,  competent  to  a  purchaser;  was  bonae  fidei,  G.  iv,
62.  See  Sale.

A.  exercitoria,  one  of  the  adjectician  actions,  G.  iv,  71,  74 ;  see
JExercitorian  action.

A.  familiae  erciscundae,  a  bonae  fidei  action,  G.  iv,  62,  for
partitioning  an  inheritance,  G.  ii,  219,  iv,  42,  and  em-
powering the  judge  to  adjudicate  to  the  heirs  what  he
held  each  entitled  to,  ibid.,  U.  xix,  16.  Nothing  could  be
included  in  it  that  did  not  form  part  of  the  hereditas,  G.
ii,  220  ;  but  it  was  the  proper  action  for  claiming  a  legacy
by  preception  (see  Legacy,  28),  G.  ii,  219.

A.fiduciae,  a  bonae  fidei  action,  G.  iv,  62,  competent  against
him  who  failed  to  reconvey  property  transferred  to  him
ex  facie  absolutely,  but  under  trust  to  reconvey,  G.  ii,  59 ;
condemnation  rendered  him  infamous,  G.  iv,  182.  See
Fiducia.

A.  finium  regundorum,  for  defining  boundaries,  also  entitling
the  judge  to  adjudicate,  G.  iv,  42,  U.  xix,  16.

A.furti,  G.  iii,  203-207  ;  iv,  8,  37,  111,  112;  condemnation,
or  even  compromise,  rendered  the  defender  infamous,  G.
iv,  182.  See  Theft,  6.

A.furti  concepti,  G.  iii,  186,  191 ;  see  Theft,  4,  5.

A.furti  oblati,  G.  iii,  187,  191  ;  see  Theft,  4,  5.

A.  furti  prohibiti,  G.  iii,  188,  192  and  n.  2 ;  see  Theft,  4,  5.

A.  injuriarum,  G.  iii,  224,  iv,  8  ;  it  was  not  competent  to  the
heir  of  the  injured  party,  G.  iv,  112,  and  condemnation
or  compromise  made  the  defender  infamous,  182.  See
Personal  injury.

A.  institoria,  G.  iv,  71,  74 ;  see  Institorian  action.

A.judicati  was  in  duplum,  G.  iv,  9,  171.  Under  the  system
of  the  legis  actiones  the  procedure  was  by  manus  injectio

446  DIGEST.

ACTIONS— continued.

II.  SPECIAL  ACTIONS — continued.

(see  Legis  actiones,  5),  G.  iv,  21 ;  consequently  under  the
formular  system  the  defender  had  to  give  cautio  judi-
catum  solvi,  (see  Cautiones,  etc.),  G.  iv,  25,  102.

A.  mandati,  a  bonaefidei  action,  G.  iv,  62,  competent  either  to
mandant,  G.  iii,  111,  127,  or  mandatory,  156,  161 ;  con-
demnation rendered  the  defender  infamous,  G.  iv,  182.
See  Mandate.

A.  negatoria  in  rem,  that  by  which  a  man  sought  to  have  it
declared  that  property  of  his  was  free  from  a  usufruct,
servitude,  or  other  pretended  burden,  G.  iv,  3  and  n.  1.

A.  negotiorum  gestorum,  G.  iv,  33.

A.  praescriptis  verbis,  which  arose  out  of  an  innominate  con-
tract do  ut  des,  etc.,  (see  Contract,  1),  G.  iii,  89,  note  1,  was
bonaefidei,  G.  iv,  162.

A.  pro  socio,  for  adjustment  of  partnership  disputes,  was  bonae
fidei,  G.  iv,  62  ;  but  condemnation  in  it  entailed  infamy,
G.  iv,  182.  See  Partnership.

A.  Publiciana,  G.  iv,  36 ;  see  Publician  action.

A.  quodjussu,  G.  iv,  70,  74;  see  Adjectician  actions,  1.

A.  rei  uxoriae,  a  bonaefidei  action,  G.  iv,  62,  for  restitution  of
a  dowry  on  the  dissolution  of  a  marriage,  competent  to
the  wife,  her  father  and  her  jointly,  her  heirs,  or  the  party
from  whom  the  dowry  had  come,  according  to  circum-
stances, U.  vi,  4-7.  If  the  husband  (or  his  heirs)  defend-
ing impugned  his  wife's  morals — and  to  prove  immorality
on  her  part  entitled  him  to  retain  a  part  of  the  dowry,  U.
vi,  9,  12 — he  was  required  to  give  cautio  judicatum  solvi
(see  Cautiones,  etc.},  G.  iv,  102.  See  Dowry,  7.

A.  rcruin  amotarum,  a  less  offensive  name  for  an  actio  furti  by
a  husband  or  his  heirs,  on  the  dissolution  of  a  marriage
by  divorce  or  death,  against  the  wife,  and  vice  versa,  II.
vii,  2  and  note  ;  see  Husband  and  wife,  6.

A.  Eutiliana,  one  of  the  actions  used  by  a  bonorum  emptor  or
purchaser  of  a  bankrupt  estate  for  enforcing  claims  against
the  bankrupt's  debtors,  G.  iv,  35  ;  see  Emptio  bonorum,  3.

A.  servi  corrupti,  G.  iii,  198  ;  see  Slavery,  9.

A.  Sermana,  the  alternative  action  competent  to  a  bonorum
emptor  against  the  bankrupt's  debtors,  and  in  which  he
pretended  to  be  the  bankrupt's  heir,  G.  iv,  35 ;  see  A.
Rutiliana,  Emptio  bonorum,  3.

A.  Serviana  de  rebus  coloni,  that  by  which  a  landlord  sought
to  recover  effects  of  his  farm  tenant  hypothecated  for  the
rent,  but  which  had  passed  into  the  hands  of  third  parties,
G.  iv,  35,  note  2.

DIGEST.  447

ACTIONS— continued.

II.  SPECIAL  ACTIONS — continued.

A.  tributoria,  G.  iv,  72,  74a ;  see  Adjectician  actions,  4.
A.  tutelae,  the  action  against  a  tutor,  on  his  ward's  attaining
puberty,  for  accounting  and  payment,  G.  i,  191.     It  was
lonae  fidei,  G.  iv,  62 ;  but  condemnation  in  it  rendered
the  tutor  infamous,  G.  iv,  182.     A  woman,  though  in
tutelage,  had  no  such  action  when  she  was  freed  from  it,
G.  i,  191.     See  Tutory,  9.
A.  venditi,  competent  to  a  vendor,  the  counterpart  of  the

a.  empti,  and  like  it  bonae  fidei,  G.  iv,  62  ;  see  Sale.
A.  vi   bonorum   raptorum,   G.   iii,   209,   at   once   penal   and
petitory,  G.  iv,  8 ;    either  condemnation  or   compromise
rendered  the  defender  infamous,  G.  iv,  182  ;  see  Bobbery.
ACTOK  and  EEUS,  pursuer  and  defender,  G.  iv,  16,  note  4,  57,  157,

159,  160.

ADCKETIO,  accretion  or  accrual.     Eights  arose  in  this  way  in  the
following  cases : —

1.  In  intestate  succession. — Where  there  were  several  agnates  of

the  same  degree,  and  some  declined  the  inheritance,  their
shares  went  by  accretion  to  those  who  took,  U.  xxvi,  5 ;
see  Her  edit  as,  9.

2.  In  testate  succession. — Under  the  old  law  when  one  of  several

testamentary  heirs  failed,  his  share  went  to  the  others
jure  adcrescendi ;  but  by  the  Julian  law  it  was  declared
caducous,  and  was  disposed  of  according  to  the  caduciary
rules  it  had  introduced,  U.  xvii,  1,  2,  i,  21  and  n.  3,  but
with  reservation  of  the  old  right  to  descendants  and
ascendants  of  the  testator  to  the  third  degree,  U.  xviii.
See  Julian  and  Papia-Poppaean  law,  9,  Caducity,  3,  5.

3.  In  the  case  of  praeterition. — If  a  testator  neither  instituted

nor  disinherited  sons  who  were  sui  his  testament  was
useless,  G.  ii,  123 ;  if  other  sui,  such  as  a  daughter  or  a
grandchild,  were  passed  over,  the  testament  was  valid,  but
they  were  entitled  by  accretion  to  share  in  the  inheritance
in  certain  proportions,  according  as  the  heirs  instituted  in
the  testament  were  sui  or  extranei,  G.  ii,  124,  126.  See
Testament,  10.

4.  In  joint  legacies. — In  the  case  of  a  joint  legacy  by  vindica-

tion, if  one  of  the  legatees  failed,  his  share  accrued  to  the
other,  until  the  rule  was  modified  by  the  Julian  and  Pap.
Popp.  law,  G.  ii,  199,  206,  207,  U.  xxiv,  12  ;  see  Legacy,
31,  34.

5.  Where  a  slave,  was  manumitted  by  one  only  of  several  owners.

— In  such  a  case  if  the  manumission  was  irregular  there
was  no  result ;  if  regular,  the  slave  did  not  become  free,

448  DIGEST.

ADCKETIO — continued.

but  the  manumitter's  interest  in  him  accrued  to  the  other
owners,  U.  i,  18;  see  Manumission,  2.

ADDICTIO  BONOKUM  EMPTORI,  G.  iii,  79  and  n.  7.

ADDICTUS  and  ADJUDICATUS,  difference,  G.  iii,  189,  190,  note  2.

ADEMTIO,  revocation  of  a  legacy  or  a  testamentary  gift  of  freedom,
might  be  either  in  the  testament  itself  or  in  a  codicil
confirmed  by  it,  U.  xxiv,  29,  ii,  12 ;  but  in  either  case
the  same  form  had  to  be  observed  in  the  ademption  as  in
the  grant,  ibid.,  and  note  1  to  29.

ADITIO  HEKEDITATIS,  entering  to  an  inheritance,  see  Hereditas,  5-7.

ADJECTTCIAN  ACTIONS,  the  so-called  actiones  adjecticiae  qualitatis,
praetorian  actions  against  a  paterfamilias  in  respect  of
debt  contracted  by  a  filiusfamMias  or  a  slave,  G.  iv,
69-74.

1.  The  actio  quod  jussu. — If  a  filiusfamilias  or  a  slave  con-

tracted debt  on  the  authority  of  parent  or  owner,  the
praetor  held  the  latter  liable  in  full,  on  the  ground  that  it
was  his  credit  that  had  in  fact  been  relied  on,  G.  iv,  70.

2.  Exercitorian  and  institorian  actions. — There  was  the  same

in  solidum  liability  where  a  parent  or  owner  had  put
his  filiusfamilias  or  slave  in  charge  of  a  vessel  or  of  a
shop  or  store,  G.  iv,  71 ;  see  Exercitorian  action,  Insti-
torian action.

3.  The  actio  de  peculio  et  de  in  rem  verso. — If  a  filiusfamilias

or  slave  had  a,  peculium  (which  see),  then  for  any  debts
contracted,  whatever  the  nature  of  them,  the  paterfamilias
or  owner  was  always  liable  to  the  extent  of  the  peculium,
G.  iv,  73 ;  he  was  entitled,  however,  to  deduct  from  it  the
amount  he  had  advanced  towards  it,  and  for  which  his
filiusfamilias  or  slave  was  his  debtor  under  a  natural  obli-
gation (see  Obligation,  5,  7),  ibid.  But  if  any  part  of  the
debt  for  which  a  creditor  was  suing  had  been  contracted
in  procuring  things  which  had  been  applied  to  the  uses
of  the  paterfamilias  or  owner,  even  without  his  authority,
or  by  one  who  was  in  charge  neither  of  a  ship  nor  of  a
store,  for  that  he  was  liable  in  solidum,  ibid.;  conse-
quently, it  was  the  practice  for  the  creditor  to  conjoin
the  two  actions,  and  to  sue  simultaneously  de  peculio  et
de  in  rem  verso,  ibid.

4.  The  tributorian  action. — Vihen  filiusfamilias  or  slave,  with

the  knowledge  of  the  parent  or  owner,  had  embarked  any
part  of  his  peculium  in  trade,  the  trade  creditors  were
entitled  to  claim  on  the  trade  assets  pari  passu  with  the
parent  or  owner,  who  might  be  proceeded  against  in  an
actio  tributoria  to  compel  him  to  pay  a  pro  rat  a  dividend,

DIGEST.  449

ADJECTICIAN  ACTIONS — continued.

G.  iv,  72.  But  any  creditor  entitled  to  the  tributorian
might  of  course,  if  more  for  his  advantage,  employ  that
de  peculio  instead,  74«.

ADJUDICATIO  (I.),  one  of  the  clauses  of  a,  formula,  G.  iv,  39,  (see
Formula,  1),  used  only  in  the  actio  familiae  crciscundae,
a.  communi  dividundo,  and  a.  finium  regundorum,  42,
(see  those  words),  and  coming  after  the  demonstratio  and
intentio,4A  and  note.  It  empowered  the  judge  to  adjudi-
cate to  each  of  the  litigants  such  a  share  of  the  matter
in  dispute  as  he  considered  him  entitled  to,  42,  44,  note.

ADJUDICATIO  (II.),  the  award  of  the  judge  in  any  of  the  three
divisory  actions  enumerated  in  last  head,  U.  xix,  16 ;  it
conferred  upon  the  parties  a  quiritarian  right  of  property
in  what  was  adjudged  to  them,  whether  res  mancipi  or
nee  mancipi,  ibid.

ADJUDICATUS,  G.  iii,  199  and  n.  2,  189,  note  2  ;  see  Judicatum.

ADOPTION  and  ADKOGATION,  G.  i,  97-107,  U.  tit.  viii.  See  also
Parent  and  child  ;  Patria  potestas.

1.  Adoption,  what? — Adoption  was  a  mode  of  transferring  a

person  into  a  new  family,  and  placing  him  in  patria
potestate  of  another  than  his  natural  parent,  G.  i,  97,  U.
viii,  1 ;  and  so  complete  was  the  transfer  that  the  adop-
tive parent  was  entitled  to  pass  the  child  in  adoption  to
a  third  party,  G.  i,  105.  The  adoption  was  either  of  a
paterfamilias  (see  U.  iv,  1,  note),  specifically  adrogatio,
or  of  a  filiusfamilias — adoption  in  the  stricter  sense,  G.  i,
99,  U.  viii,  2,  3.

2.  Adrogation  of  a  paterfamilias. — This  could  take  place  only

in  Borne,  G.  i,  100,  U.  viii,  4;  for  it  required  to  be
sanctioned  by  vote  of  the  comitia,  G.  i,  99,  U.  viii,  3.  An
adrogatus  could  be  adopted  only  in  the  character  of  a  son,
G.  i,  99 ;  if  he  had  children  of  his  own  in  potestate,  they
passed  into  the  potestas  of  the  adrogator  as  grandchildren,
G.  i,  107,  U.  viii,  8.

3.  Adoption  of  a  filiusfamilias. — The  transfer  here  was  the  act

of  the  natural  paterfamilias — for  it  was  only  a  child  in
potestate  that  could  be  given  in  adoption,  G.  i,  99 — by  a
somewhat  intricate  process  described  in  G.  i,  134,  ending
with  a  vindicatio,  i.e.  an  injure  cessio  (see  Injure  cessio),
before  the  praetor  or  a  provincial  governor,  G.  iv,  100,
134,  U.  viii,  3,  4.  The  child  might  be  adopted  either  as
a  son  or  grandson,  G.  i,  99 ;  it  being  immaterial  in  the
latter  case  whether  the  adopter  had  a  son  of  his  own  or
not,  U.  viii,  7.

4.  Who  could  or  could  not  adrogate  or  adopt. — Women  could

2F

450  DIGEST.

ADOPTION  and  ABROGATION — continued.

not  adopt  in  either  way,  having  no  potestas,  G.  i,  104,  U.
viii,  Sa ;  but  an  unmarried  man  might,  U.  viii,  6,  and  so
might  one  unable  to  procreate,  G.  i,  103,  U.  viii,  6.  The
adopter  of  course  required  to  be  the  senior,  G.  i,  106  and
note.

5.  Who  could  be  adrogated  or  adopted. — A  woman  could  not  be

adrogated,  G.  i,  101,  U.  viii,  5  ;  neither  by  the  earlier  law
could  a  male  who  was  a  pupil,  though  allowed  under  the
imperial  law  where  circumstances  justified  it,  G.  i,  102,
U.  viii,  5.  But  a  child  of  either  sex,  of  any  age,  and  of
any  degree  of  relationship  to  the  natural  parent,  if  only
in potcstate,  might  be  given  in  adoption,  G.  i,  99, 101, 102,
U.  viii,  3,  5.

6.  Results  for  the  adrogating  or  adopting  parent. — In  adroga-

tion  invariably,  and  in  adoption  when  the  child  was
adopted  as  a  son,  (i.e.  not  as  a  grandson  or  remoter
descendant),  the  adopting  parent  got  a  suus  heres  (see
Agnatio  sui  heredis),  whom  he  was  bound  to  mention  in
his  testament ;  consequently  one  made  by  him  previously
was  thereby  invalidated,  G.  ii,  138,  U.  xxiii,  3.  See
Testament,  22.

7.  Results  for  the   adrogated  or  adopted   child.  —  The   child

became  so  identified  with  his  new  family  that,  while  the
relationship  lasted,  it  was  an  impediment  to  his  marriage
with  any  member  of  it  within  the  prohibited  degrees,  G.
i,  59,  61 ;  and  even  after  its  dissolution  he  was  forbidden
to  marry  any  member  of  it  who  had  been  related  to  him
as  an  ascendant,  59.  Under  both  the  Twelve  Tables  and
the  edict,  if  the  child  was  still  in  potcstate  of  his  adoptive
parent  at  the  latter's  death,  he  succeeded  to  him  ab  intes-
tato  equally  with  his  natural  children,  G.  iii,  2,  U.  xxviii,
8.  By  the  Tables  he  had  no  longer  any  legal  right  of
succession  to  his  natural  parent,  the  civil  relationship
having  been  destroyed  by  the  capitis  deminutio  (which  see,
No.  3)  involved  in  the  adoption,  G.  i,  158,  162,  U.  xi,  13  ;
but  the  edict  allowed  him  to  claim  his  natural  parent's
succession  as  a  cognate,  on  failure  of  agnates,  G.  iii,  31,
(see  Bonorum  posscssio,  16).  Both  by  the  Tables  and  the
edict  the  adoptive  child  had  the  rights  of  a  natural  child
in  regard  to  the  testament  of  his  adoptive  parent,  pro-
vided he  was  still  in  the  adoptive  family  when  the
latter  died,  G.  ii,  136,  U.  xxviii,  3,  (see  Bonor.  poss.,  6).

8.  Results  peculiar  to  adrogation. — The  estate  of  the  adrogated

paterfamilias  passed  to  the  adrogator  per  universitatem,
G.  ii,  97,  98,  with   exception  of  such   rights   as   were

DIGEST.  451

ADOPTION  and  ABROGATION — continued.

destroyed  by  capitis  deminutio  (which  see,  No.  3),  G.  iii,  83.
The  adrogator  did  not,  however,  become  liable  in  law  for
his  new  son's  personal  debts,  84,  (though  he  did  for  his
hereditary  ones,  as  he  himself  became  heir  through  his
son,  ibid.} ;  but  equity  gave  the  creditors  relief  by  utiles
or  fictitious  actions  (see  Actions,  6),  in  the  manner  de-
scribed in  G.  iii,  84,  iv,  38,  80.

9.  Emancipation  of  adrogated  or  adopted  children. — The  effects
were  these, — that  the  child  then  ceased  to  have  any
rights  in  regard  to  the  adoptive  parent's  succession,  testate
or  intestate,  G.  ii,  136,  U.  xxviii,  3,  but  began  from  that
moment  to  have  the  rights  of  an  emancipated  child  in
reference  to  that  of  his  natural  parent,  G.  ii,  137,  (see
Emancipation,  4).

ADPROMISSIO,  see  Suretyship.

ADQUISITIO  PER  UNIVERSITATEM,  varieties  of,  G.  ii,  98  and  notes.

ABROGATION,  see  Adoption.

ADSERTOR  LIBERTATIS,  G.  iv,  14  and  n.  2  ;  see  Slavery,  9.

ADSTIPULATION,  G.  iii,  110-114;  see  also  Stipulation.

1.  What  ? — Adstipulation  was  the  addition  of  a  second  stipu-

laut  in  a  stipulation,  to  whom  the  promiser  engaged  to
pay  what  he  had  already  promised  to  pay  to  the  prin-
cipal stipulant,  G.  iii,  110,  112.  The  second  stipulation,
however,  did  not  require  to  be  in  the  same  words  as  the
first,  and  might  be  for  a  smaller  sum,  or  conditional  while
the  first  was  pure,  112,  113.

2.  Its  purpose. — It  was  seldom   employed  except  when  the

original  stipulation  was  for  payment  after  the  stipulant's
death,  G.  iii,  117 ;  in  which  case  the  adstipulator  might
receive  payment  or  sue  upon  the  contract  as  the  stipu-
lant's agent,  with  responsibility  to  the  latter's  heirs  ex
mandato,  111,  117.

3.  Peculiarities. — Adstipulation  by  a  slave  was  useless,  G.  iii,

114;  that  of  a  Jiliusfamilias  gave  no  right  of  action  to
his  paterfamilias,  ibid. ;  he  himself  could  not  sue  upon
it  until  he  had  passed  out  of  the  potestas  (see  Patria  pot?)
without  capitis  deminutio,  (see  Cap.  dem.,  2),  ibid. ;  if  he
died  before  payment  was  due,  action  was  not  competent  to
his  heirs,  ibid.,  iv,  113.  An  adstipulator  who  fraudulently
acceptilated  (see  Acceptilation]  was  liable  in  damages
under  the  Aquilianlaw,  G.  iii,  215,  (see  Wrongful  damage
to  property,  4) ;  which  were  doubled  if  he  disputed  his
liability,  G.  iii,  216,  iv,  9,  171.

AEDIFIUATIO,  acquisition  of  property  by,  G.  ii,  73  ;  remedies,  76,
(see  Property,  6).     Aedificatio  as  one  of  the  modes   in

452  DIGEST.

AEDIFIC  ATIO  — continued.

which  a  latin  acquired  citizenship,  G.  i,  33,  U.  iii,  1,  (see
Junian  latinity,  7).

AEDILES,  curule,  their  edicts,  G-.  i,  6 ;  their  functions,  6,  note  3.

AELIA-SENTIAN  LAW,  the,  of  A.D.  4,  was  intended  to  regulate  manu-
mission of  slaves,  G.  i,  13  and  n.  1,  but  did  not  apply
to  that  of  free  persons  in  causa  mancipii,  G.  i,  139,  (see
Mancipii,  etc.,  3).  The  following  were  its  leading  provi-
sions : —

1.  Manumission  in  fraud  of  creditors. — It  prohibited  any  manu-

mission in  fraud  of  creditors  or  patrons,  G.  i,  37,  U.  i,  15,
— a  prohibition  afterwards  extended  to  peregrins,  to
whom  the  provisions  of  the  statute  itself  did  not  apply,
G.  i,  47.

2.  Manumission   by   owners   under   twenty.  —  Owners   under

twenty  years  old  were  not  to  manumit  their  slaves  except
vindicta  (which  see),  before  a  magistrate,  U.  i,  7,  in  pre-
sence of  a  council  which  sat  at  stated  times  for  the  pur-
pose of  sanctioning  manumissions,  G.  i,  20,  U.  i,  13,  and
which  had  heard  and  approved  the  reasons  of  it,  G.  i,  38,
U.  i,  13,  such  as  kinship  between  owner  and  slave,  etc.,
G.  i,  19,  39.

3.  Manumission  of  slaves  of  bad  character. — Slaves  who  had

been  punished  for  crime  or  otherwise  disgraced  were  not
on  manumission  to  become  citizens,  but  to  be  of  the
same  condition  as  deditician  peregrins,  G.  i,  13-15,  U.
i,  11,  incapable  of  ever  attaining  citizenship,  and  subject
to  many  and  serious  disabilities,  G.  i,  25-27,  (see  Dedi-
tician freedmen).

4.  Manumission  of  slaves  under  thirty  years  of  age. — Manumis-

sion of  slaves  under  thirty,  even  of  unblemished  charac-
ter, was  not  to  make  them  citizens  unless  it  had  been
accomplished  vindicta,  on  cause  approved  by  the  council,
G.  i,  18,  U.  i,  12.

5.  Exception  to  the  last  two  rules  in  the  case  of  an  insolvent

owner. — An  insolvent  owner  might  in  his  testament
institute  or  substitute  one  of  his  slaves,  even  one  who
had  been  disgraced  or  was  under  thirty  years  old,  as
his  necessary  heir  with  freedom,  who  would  take  the
estate  and  become  a  citizen  in  the  event  of  the  volun-
tary heirs  all  declining,  G.  i,  21,  U.  i,  14,  (see  Necessarii
hercdcs).

6.  Remedy  provided  for  slaves  under  thirty  manumitted  irregu-

larly.— In  aid  of  a  slave  under  thirty,  whose  manumission
had  not  made  him  a  citizen  because  the  combined  re-
quirements of  vindicta  and  consilium  had  been  disre-

DIGEST.  453

AELIA-SENTIAN  LAW — continued.

garded,  it  contained  this  provision, — that  if  he  married
a  woman  not  a  peregrin,  in  presence  of  seven  witnesses,
to  whom  he  declared  that  he  was  doing  so  in  order  to
have  the  benefit  of  the  statute,  he  might,  after  a  child
of  the  marriage  had  reached  the  age  of  twelve  months
(anniculus},  prove  those  facts  to  the  praetor,  and  by  him
be  declared  a  citizen,  along  with  his  wife  and  child  if
she  was  not  one  already,  G.  i,  29,  (see  Causae  prob.  ex  I.
Aelia  Sentia).

7.  Extension  of  the  remedy  by  subsequent  legislation. — Ulp.  in
iii,  3,  says  this  provision  was  introduced  by  the  Junian
law  ;  the  probability  is  that  the  latter  only  confirmed  it,
and  declared  the  same  procedure  competent  to  those  under
thirty  who  had  not  been  manumitted  by  any  of  the  recog-
nised modes  of  manumission,  but  informally,  or  whose
manumission  had  proceeded  only  from  a  bonitarian  owner
(which  see),  G.  i,  29,  note,  as  amended  in  Additions,  etc.
A  Set.  of  the  time  of  Vespasian  further  extended  it  to
those  irregularly  manumitted  after  passing  the  age  of
thirty,  G.  i,  31.  Hence  the  phrase  ex  lege  Aelia  Sentia  ad
civitatem  pervenire,  G.  iii,  73.

AEQUUM  est  neminem  cum  alterius  detrimento  et  injuria  fieri  locuple-
tiorem ;  see  G.  ii,  82,  note  4.

AES  ET  LIBRA,  the  copper  and  the  scales  used  as  a  solemnity  in
various  transactions  of  the  jus  civile,  e.g.  mancipation  (which
see)  either  of  res  mancipi  (which  see)  or  of  free  persons,
G.  i,  119,  ii,  23,  U.xix,  3;  in  coemption  (see  Mamts,  2),
G.  i,  113 ;  in  emancipation,  emancipation,  and  adoption
(see  those  words),  G.  i,  132,  134 ;  in  the  formal  contract
of  nexum  (which  see),  G.  iii,  89,  note;  in  ncxi  solutio
(which  see),  G.  iii,  173,  174;  and  in  testamentum  per  aes
etlibram  (see  Testament,  3,4),  G.  ii,  102-104,  U.  xx,  2,  9.
The  procedure  is  described  in  G.  i,  119,  and  its  origin
explained  in  G.  i,  122  ;  latterly  it  was  a  mere  formality,
though  an  essential  one,  G.  ii,  104,  note  8.

AES  MILITARE,  aes  equestre,  and  aes  hordiarium  might  be  re-
covered by  pignoris  capio,  G.  iv,  27,  (see  Legis  actiones,  6).

AFFINITY,  adjinitas,  as  a  bar  to  marriage,  G.  i,  63  ;  see  Marriage,  4.

AGGRIPINA,  her  marriage  with  her  uncle  Claudius,  G.  i,  62.

AGNATIO  (or  ADGNATIO)  sui  HEREDIS,  advent  of  a  suus  heres  (see
Sui  heredes),  invalidated  a  testament,  U.  xxiii,  2,  (see
Testament,  22).  There  was  such  agnation  when  a  living
postumus  was  born  to  the  testator,  G.  ii,  131,  U.  xxii,  18  ;
and  though  Ulp.  xxii,  15,  defines  postumus  as  a  lawful
child  in  utero  at  the  date  of  his  father's  testament,  Gai.

454  DIGEST.

AGNATIO  sui  HEEEDIS — continued.

ii,  131,  includes  any  lawful  child  born  thereafter,  (see
Postumi).  There  was  quasi  agnatio  sui  when  an  imme-
diate male  suus  heres,  say  a  son,  of  the  testator's  died
or  was  emancipated,  leaving  a  child  in  potentate  of  the
latter,  G.  ii,  133, 134,  U.  xxiii,  3.  In  both  of  these  cases,
however,  ruptio  testamenti  was  avoided  by  the  testator's
having  taken  the  precaution  of  either  instituting  or  dis-
inheriting the  suus,  (see  Testament,  10).  There  was  also
quasi  agnatio  sui  when  a  testator  adopted  a  child  as  his
son,  G.  ii,  138,  U.  xxiii,  3  ;  when  he  took  a  wife  in  manum,
ibid.,  for  she  acquired  the  rights  of  a  daughter  (see  Manus,
4),  G.  i,  I15b ;  or  when  a  son  of  his  was  manumitted  from
a  first  or  second  mancipation  (see  Emancipation,  1,  3),  G.
ii,  141,  U.  xxiii,  3.  But  in  the  two  first  of  those  cases
ruptio  was  not  excluded  by  previous  institution, — dis-
herison was  impossible  ;  nor  in  the  third  by  either  insti-
tution or  disherison.  Finally  there  was  quasi  agnatio  sui
by  crroris  causae  probatio  (which  see),  G.  ii,  142,  143,
converting  a  matrimonium  non  justum  of  the  testator's
into  justum  matrimonium  (see  Marriage,  1,  8),  .and  thus
placing  the  issue  of  it  in  potestate,  G.  i,  67.  If  cause
was  proved  during  the  testator's  life,  a  previous  testa-
ment was  thereby  invariably  invalidated;  but  if  not
proved  until  after  his  death,  then,  by  a  Set.  of  Hadrian's,
there  was  no  ruptio  unless  the  child  had  been  neither
instituted  nor  disinherited,  G.  ii,  142,  143.

AGNATION,  agnatio,  G.  i,  156,  iii.  10  ;  U.  xi,  4,  xxvi,  1.

1.  Definition. — Agnation  was  legitima  cognatio,  G.  iii,  10,  U.

xxvi,  1, — kinship  of  the  jus  civile,  as  distinguished  from
the  natural  or  blood  kinship  of  cognation,  G.  i,  156.  It
was  a  relationship  through  males ;  for  those  alone  were
agnates  inter  se  who  were  in  the  potestas  of  a  common
parent,  or  would  have  been  had  he  been  alive  at  the
moment.  And  as  the  relationship  resulted  from  the
patria  potestas,  it  might  arise  from  anything  whereby  this
was  created,  e.g.  adoption,  adrogation,  etc.,  as  also  from  in
manum  conventio,  U.  xxvi,  7,  which  put  a  wife  in  the
position  of  a  daughter  to  her  husband,  and  a  sister  to  her
children,  G.  iii,  14.  Apart  from  adoption,  in  manum
conventio,  etc.,  it  could  have  no  existence  for  those  who
were  not  free  by  birth,  and  so  had  never  been  in  potestate  ;
consequently  in  succession  to  freedmen  that  of  agnates
was  unknown,  G.  iii,  40.

2.  Degrees. — It  was  of  different  degrees,  G.  iii,  10,  the  nearest

being  that  of  brother  and  sister,  who  were  frequently

DIGEST.  455

AGNATION — continued.

described  as  consanguinei,  ibid.,  U.  xxvi,  1 ;  and  following
it  that  of  a  brother  and  a  brother's  children,  then  that  of
the  children  of  two  brothers,  often  called  consobrini,  and
so  on,  G.  iii,  10.  For  the  mode  of  counting  the  degrees,
see  U.  v,  6,  note  2.

3.  Eights  it  conferred. — The  nearest  agnates  were  entitled  at

law  to  the  tutory  of  a  pupil  agnate,  G.  i,  55,  (see  Tutory,
2),  and  to  succeed  ab  intestato  to  one  who  had  died
without  sui  keredes,  G.  iii,  9,  U.  xxvi,  1,  (see  Intestate
succession,  4) ;  but  by  the  praetorian  system  some  who  by
the /MS  civile  were  neither  sui  nor  agnates  were  preferred
to  them,  G.  iii,  26,  U.  xxviii,  8,  (see  Bonor.  %>ossessio,  15).

4.  Its  extinction  by  capitis  deminutio. — The  relationship  itself

and  the  legal  rights  it  conferred  were  lost  by  capitis
deminutio  of  any  sort,  (see  Cap.  dem.,  1),  G.  i,  158,  163,
iii,  21,  U.  xi,  9  ;  but  the  praetors  admitted  minuti  to  the
succession  after  agnates  intcgri  juris,  G.  iii,  27,  U.  xxviii,
9,  for  though  the  civil  relationship  was  gone  the  natural
one  remained,  G.  i,  158,  iii,  27,  (see  Bonor.  poss.,  16).

ALBUM  PRAETOKIS,  the  white  boards  on  which  the  praetor's  edicts,
etc.,  were  published,  G.  iv,  46.

ALIENATION,  see  Property,  9.

ALIENI  JURIS  PERSONAE,  those  domestically  dependent,  i.e.  subject
to  the  jus  of  a  family  head ;  see  also  Persons,  3.

1.  Who  were,  alieni  juris. — See  Persons,  3.

2.  Their  disability  and  capacity  as  regarded  property. — They

were  so  much  subject  to  the  paterfamilias  that  not
merely  slaves, — who  were  things,  and  might  be  bought
and  sold,  G.  ii,  15,  iv,  40,  U.  xix,  1, — but  filiifamilias  and
wife  in  manu,  if  taken  from  him  surreptitiously,  were  held
to  have  been  stolen,  G.  iii,  199.  They  could  have  nothing
of  their  own,  G.  ii,  87,  and  all  they  acquired  accrued  to
their  paterfamilias,  G.  ii,  86,  iii,  163  ;  but  M7hile  they  might
acquire  by  all  natural  modes,  and  even  by  mancipation,  G.
ii,  87,  iii,  167,  they  could  not  do  so  by  injure  cessio,  G.  ii,  96.

3.  Their  disability  and   capacity  in  obligation. — They  might

contract  with  third  parties  for  payment  to  or  performance
for  the  paterfamilias,  G.  ii,  87 ;  but  he  was  not  liable  on
their  contracts,  except  in  the  case  of  slaves  andjiliifamilias,
for  whom  he  might  in  some  cases  be  made  responsible  by
the  praetorian  adjectician  actions  (see  Adject,  actions'),  G.
iv,  69-74,  just  as  for  their  delicts  he  was  answerable  in
noxal  actions  (which  see),  G.  iv,  75-79.  Civilly  none  of
them  but  a  jiliusfamilias  could  oblige  himself  by  con-
tract, G.  iii,  104;  though  they  might  do  so  naturally  (see

456  DIGEST.

ALIEN:  JURIS  PERSONAE — continued.

Obligation,  5,  10),  and  have  their  engagements  effectually
guaranteed  by  sureties,  G-.  iii,  119.  Between  them  and
him  to  whom  they  were  subject  there  could  be  no  civil
obligation,  G.  iv,  78  ;  yet  in  certain  cases  natural  in-
debtedness on  their  part  was  recognised,  G.  iv,  73.

4.  Their  disability  and  capacity  in  matter  of  testaments. — As

they  had  nothing  of  their  own  they  could  not  make  a
testament,  G.  ii,  112,  U.  xx,  10,  with  a  limited  exception
in  the  case  of  JUiifamilias  who  were  or  had  been  in  the
army,  U.  xx,  10,  and  slaves  belonging  to  the  state,  U.
xx,  1 6 ;  while,  if  they  were  instituted  heirs  by  third
parties,  they  could  not  enter  except  on  the  instructions
of  those  to  whom  they  we're  subject,  G.  ii,  87.

5.  How  they  ceased  to  be  alieni  juris. — See  G.  i,  124-141,  and

separately  Slavery,  Patria  potestas,  Manus,  Mancipii,  etc.

ALLUVION  as  a  means  of  acquiring  property,  G.  ii,  70 ;  distinguished
from  avulsion,  71.  See  Property,  4.

ANIMALS,  wild  and  domesticated,  property  in,  G.  ii,  66-68.

ANNICULUS,  G.  i,  29,  32,  73,  U.  iii,  3 ;  see  Aelia-Sentian  law,  6.

ANTIQUUM  jus,  see  Jus  antiquum.

ANTONINUS  (IMPERATOR)  sometimes  means  Antoninus  Pius,  some-
times Marcus  Aurelius,  sometimes  Caracalla  ;  see  those
names  under  Constitutions  principum.

APOLLO  DIDYMAEUS,  U.  xxii,  6.

AQUA  ET  IGNI  INTERDICTIO  was  a  media  capitis  deminutio  (see
Cap.  dem.,  1),  G.  i,  161,  U.  xi,  12,  of  which  the  nature  is
described  in  G.  i,  128,  n.  2 ;  it  reduced  the  individual  who
suffered  it  to  the  condition  of  a  peregrin,  G.  i,  128,  U.  x,  3,
(see  Peregrinity).

AQUILIAN  LAW,  see  Wrongful  damage  to  property.

ARBITER  and  ARBITRARIA  FORMULA  in  procedure  in  interdicts,  G.
iv,  141,  163-165;  see  Interdicts,  11.

ARBITRARY  ACTIONS,  see  Actions,  8.

ARCARIA  NOMINA,  G.  iii,  131 ;  see  Literal  obligations,  2.

ARGENTARIUS,  peculiarities  of  pleading  in  action  by  him  against  a
customer,  G.  iv,  64,  66-68 ;  combined  auctioneering  with
banking,  G.  iv,  126a  and  note.

ARRA,  earnest  given  in  certain  contracts,  G.  iii,  139 ;  see  Sale,  1.

As,  use  of,  in  mancipation  explained,  G.  i,  122  ;  by  Julia  Papirian
law,  converting  cattle-penalties  into  money-penalties,  100
asses  were  declared  equivalent  to  an  ox,  10  to  a  sheep,
G.  iv,  95,  note  4 ;  the  500  asses  of  the  leg.  actio  sacra-
menti  were  afterwards  converted  into  125  sesterces, .ibid.
note  2.

ASSE  INSTITUTUS,  EX,  instituted  in  a  testament  as  sole  heir,  as

DIGEST.  457

ASSE  INSTITUTUS,  EX—  continued.

distinguished  from  ex  parte  institutus,  instituted  only  to

part,  G.  ii,  259.

ASSIZES,  provincial,  G.  i,  20  and  n.  2.
ATILIAN  TUTOE,  see  Tutory,  4,  13,  22.
ATROX  INJURIA,  G.  iii,  225  ;  see  Personal  injury,  2.
AUCTORATUS,  a  freeman  who  had  voluntarily  engaged  as  a  gladiator,

and  who  was  so  much  in  the  possession  of  his  lanista

that  the  latter  had  an  actio  furti  against  any  one  carrying

him  off,  G.  iii,  199.

AUCTORITAS  TUTORIS,  see  Tutory,  7,  16,  23.
AUGUSTUS  was  the  first  to  authorise  a  filiusfamilias  to  dispose  of

his  peculium  castrense  (which  see)  by  testament,  U.  xx,  10.

BANKRUPTCY,  (seelZmptw  lonorum),  entailed  infamy,  G.  ii.  154,  and
the  sale  of  the  estate  and  distribution  of  the  proceeds
amongst  the  creditors  did  not  imply  discharge  of  the
bankrupt,  G.  ii,  155.  If,  however,  an  insolvent  had  made
one  of  his  slaves  his  necessary  heir  (see  Necess.  heredes),
the  latter,  though  rendered  infamous  by  the  sale  in  his
name  after  his  succession,  G.  ii,  154,  was  entitled  to
retain  all  his  own  subsequent  acquisitions,  however  small
the  dividend  paid  to  the  deceased's  creditors,  155.  Bank-
ruptcy of  a  partner  in  strictness  dissolved  the  partnership
(see  Partnership,  3),  G.  iii,  154.

BARTER,  permutatio,  G.  iii,  141 ;  see  Sale,  2.

BELLI  jus,  G.  iii,  94.

BENEFICIUM  DIVISIONIS,  G.  iii,  121,  122  ;  see  Suretyship,  4.

BITHYNIANS,  their  quasi-tutory  of  women,  G.  i,  193.

BONA  FIDES  in  usucapion  of  a  thing  delivered  to  the  usucapient  by
one  wrho  was  not  its  owner  (see  Usucapion,  3),  was  belief
by  the  usucapient,  at  the  moment  of  acquiring,  that  the
party  from  whom  he  had  received  the  thing  wras  in  fact
its  owner,  G.  ii,  43.  Bona  /ides  in  contracts  was  the
general  standard  of  fairness  and  equity  according  to  which
parties  were  in  some  cases  to  measure  their  obligations,
G.  iii,  137,  155.

BONAE  FIDEI  JUDICIA,  the,  are  enumerated  in  G.  iv,  62;  see  Actions,  8.
In  them  the  intentio  of  the  formula  was  qualified  with
the  words  ex  fide  bona,  G.  iv,  47;  consequently  liberum  est
officium  judicis,  G.  iv,  114.  He  was  bound  ex  officio  to
allow  set-off  (see  Compensation)  of  any  counter-claim  of
the  defender's  arising  out  of  the  same  matter,  and  con-
demn only  in  the  balance,  G.  iv,  61,  63 ;  and  if  after
litiscontestation  (which  see)  the  defender  satisfied  the
pursuer's  claim,  it  was  the  judge's  duty  to  acquit,  G.iv,  114.

458  DIGEST.

BONAE  FIDEI  POSSESSIO  was  technically  the  possession  of  an  indi-
vidual who  was  not,  yet  in  good  faith  believed  himself,
owner  ;  his  rights,  though  inferior  to  those  of  a  full  pro-
prietor, were  superior  to  those  of  a  merely  quiritarian
dominus,  (see  Quir.  ownership),  G.  iii,  166.

1.  Rights  of  a  bonae  fidei  possessor  as  against  the  true  owner. —

If  he  had  in  good  faith  acquired  a  thing  from  one  not  its
owner,  he  might — unless  it  was  res  furtiva,  G.  ii,  45 —
complete  his  title  to  it  by  possession  for  the  requisite
period,  G.  ii,  43, 44,  (see  Usucapion,  3).  If  the  owner  sur-
reptitiously deprived  him  of  it,  he  had  against  the  former
an  actio  furti,  G.  iii,  200.  If  in  good  faith  he  was  in
possession  of  another  man's  slave,  he  was  entitled,  as
against  the  owner,  to  all  the  slave's  acquisitions  due  to
the  latter's  labour  or  his  own  funds,  G.  ii,  92,  iii,  164.
If,  being  in  good  faith  in  possession  of  another  man's
property,  he  made  additions  to  it  which  augmented  its
value,  as  by  building,  sowing,  or  planting  on  his  lands,
or  writing  a  treatise  on  his  parchments,  or  painting  a
picture  on  his  paunel,  he  could  not  be  required  to  yield
the  possession  until  he  had  been  reimbursed,  G.  ii,  76-78,
(see  Property,  6).

2.  His  rights  as  against  third  parties. — If  a  third  party  dis-

puted his  right,  and  withheld  from  him  that  of  which  he
had  been  in  possession,  he  had  against  him  a  praetorian
real  action  in  the  Publician,  G.  iv,  36,  (see  Publ.  action).
If  any  third  party  deprived  him  of  his  possession  surrep-
titiously, he  had  against  him  an  actio  furti,  G.  iii,  200.
And  if  it  was  a  freeman  that  he  was  in  good  faith  pos-
sessing as  a  slave,  he  was  entitled  to  his  acquisitions  to
the  same  extent  as  if  the  freeman  had  been  a  servus
alienus,  G.  ii,  92,  iii,  164,  and  might  through  his  agency
possess  and  usucapt,  G.  ii,  94.

BONIS,  IN. — A  person  who,  e.g.,  had  acquired  a  res  mancipi  by
simple  delivery,  was  said  to  have  it  only  in  bonis,  in  his
estate  ;  the  dominium  ex  jure  Quiritium,  or  legal  owner-
ship title,  remained  in  the  transferor  until  usucapion  was
completed,  because  of  the  omission  of  the  proper  form  of
conveyance,  G.  ii,  41,  U.  i,  16,  (see  Sanitarian  ownership).
In  bonis  hdbere  was  not  the  same  thing  as  bona  fide,  pos-
sidere  ;  see  the  distinction  in  G.  ii,  41  compared  with  43.

BONITARIAN  OWNERSHIP.    See  also  Property;  Bonis,  in;  Quiritarian

ownership.

1.  Origin  and  meaning  of  the  phrase. — Bonitarian  ownership,
dominium  bonitarium,  was  first  suggested  by  the  words
of  Theoph. — f/uffixri  dso^orsia  l.'iyiTcu  in  bonis,  xai  o

DIGEST.  459

BONITARIAN  OWNERSHIP — continued.

fiovirdpioc,  G.  ii,  40,  note ;  it  means  the  same  thing  as  in
bonis  habere, — beneficial  ownership  without  the  legal
title,  G.  ii,  41,  as  distinguished  from  the  plenum  jus
dominii,  which  included  both,  ibid.,  and  the  nudum  jus
Quiritium,  which  was  the  legal  title  without  the  benefi-
cial interest,  G.  iii,  166.  The  distinctions,  results  of  prae-
torian equity,  eventually  disappeared  with  Justinian's
abolition  of  the  civil  forms  of  conveyance,  G.  ii,  40,  note.

2.  How  a  bonitarian  right  was  created. — When  one  citizen

acquired  a  res  mancipi  (which  see)  from  another,  but
merely  had  it  delivered  to  him  instead  of  conveyed  in
due  form  of  lawT,  he  got  only  the  bonitarian  ownership,
G.  ii,  41,  TJ.  i,  16 ;  but  if  it  was  from  a  peregrin  he  thus
acquired,  he  held  it  pleno  jure,  conveyance  according  to
the  forms  of  the  jus  civile  being  impossible,  U.  i,  16,  note
2.  The  right  of  a  lonorum  possessor  too  in  the  corporeal
items  of  the  estate  to  which  he  succeeded  was  bonitarian,
G.  iii,  80,  (see  Bonor.  posscssio,  5) ;  and  so  was  that  of  a
bonorum  emptor  in  the  corporeals  of  the  bankrupt  estate
he  had  purchased,  ibid.,  (see  Emptio  bonorum,  3).

3.  Eights  of  a  bonitarian  owner. — Having  the  beneficial  in-

terest, it  was  he  that,  e.g.,  had  potestas  over  a  slave  he  had
acquired  informally,  G.  i,  54,  and  he  got  all  the  slave's
acquisitions,  G.  ii,  88,  iii,  166.  If  he  had  to  sue  for  his
recovery  from  a  third  party  the  praetor  granted  him  the
Publician  or  other  fictitious  action,  G.  iv,  34-36.  But
he  could  not  by  manumission  make  him  a  citizen, — only  a
latin,  G.  i,  17,  (see  Manumission,  2),  and  therefore  he  could
not  by  testament  institute  him  his  heir  with  freedom,  G.
ii,  276,  note,  U.  xxii,  8,  (see  Testament,  14).  If  the  latin
was  a  male  under  puberty,  or  a  woman,  it  was  the  quiri-
tarian  owner  that  was  tutor,  for  this  was  a  jus  Icgitimum,
G.  i,  167,  U.  xi,  19,  (see  Tutory,  19) ;  but  the  latin's  estate
nevertheless  went  on  his  death  to  his  bonitarian  manu-
mitter,  G.  i,  167,  iii,  56,  (see  Succession  to  Junian  latins,  2).

4.  How  the  right  luas  converted  into  plenum  dominium. — The

bonitarian  right  was  only  temporary ;  it  became  quiri-
tarian  on  the  completion  of  the  ordinary  usucapion,  G.
ii,  41,  (see  Usucapion,  2,  4).
BONORUM  EMPTOR,  see  Emptio  bonorum.
BONORUM  POSSESSIO,  G.  ii,  118-122, 125, 126,  132,  147-151 ;

iii,  25-38 ;  U.  tit.  xxviii.     See  also  SUCCESSION.
I.  BONORUM  POSSESSIO  GENERALLY,  (see  G.  ii,  119,  note  1).

1.  Origin. — In  the  rules  of  the  jus  civile  in  regard  to  succes-
sion there  was  much  naturally  unjust,  G.  iii;  25,  which

460  DIGEST.

BONORUM  POSSESSIO— continued.

I.  BONORUM  POSSESSIO  GENERALLY — continued.

the  praetors  so  far  remedied  by  granting  to  those  they
considered  entitled  in  equity  to  an  inheritance  which  the
law  denied  them,  possession  of  a  deceased  person's  estate,
— the  benefits  of  the  inheritance  without  the  name  of  it,
U.  xxviii,  12 ;  and  once  its  advantages  were  recognised
it  often  was  applied  for  and  granted  to  those  who  had  a
good  legal  title,  but  desired  to  have  the  aid  of  some  of
the  remedies  the  praetors  had  invented  for  honor,  posses-
sores,  but  which  did  not  apply  to  heirs,  heredes,  G.  iii,  34.

2.  Varieties. — There   were   three   varieties, — (a.)  bonor.  poss.

contra  tabulas,  i.e.  in  contradiction  of  a  testament,  granted
to  sui  heredes  (which  see)  of  a  testator,  other  than  a  son,  who
were  unmentioned  in  the  deed,  G!  ii,  135,  U.  xxviii,  2, —
praeterition  of  a  son  in  potestate  invalidated  the  testament
and  caused  intestacy,  G.  ii,  123,  U.  xxii,  16  ;  (6.)  bonor.
poss.  secundum  tdbulas,  i.e.  in  terms  of  a  testament,  granted
to  testamentary  heirs  whose  right  was  in  law  defective
through  a  flaw  in  the  execution  of  the  deed,  or  the  sub-
sequent occurrence  of  something  that  rendered  it  invalid,
G.  ii,  118,  119,  147,  U.  xxviii,  5,  6 ;  (c.)  bon.  poss.  ab  in-
testato,  i.e.  in  the  absence  of  a  testament,  G.  iii,  26-31,  U.
xxviii,  7,  granted  to  claimants  in  the  order  established  by
the  edictum  successorium,  U.  xxviii,  12.

3.  How  obtained. — The  grant  had  to  be  formally  applied  for,

bonor.  poss.  petere,  G.  ii,  98,  etc.,  iii,  37,  U.  xxviii,  10,  etc.
To  petition  for  that  ab  intestato  ascendants  and  descend-
ants of  the  deceased  were  allowed  a  year,  other  persons
being  limited  to  100  days,  U.  xxviii,  10 ;  the  period  for
those  entitled  in  the  second  place  beginning  when  that
of  those  entitled  in  the  first  had  expired,  and  so  on,  U.
xxviii.  11.

4.  Effect  as  against  the  juris  civilis  heir. — The  bonor.  posscssio

was  granted  pericido  petentis,  and  might  be  cum  re,  real
and  substantial,  or  sine  re,  merely  nominal,  according  as
the  grantee  could  or  could  not  maintain  it  against  the  ipso
jure  heir,  G.  ii,  148,  iii,  35,  U.  xviii,  13 ;  for  the  latter
was  not  bound  to  apply  for  bonor.  poss.,  but  entitled  to
stand  on  his  testamentary  or  statutory  title,  G.  iii,  37.
Examples  of  bonor.  poss.  sine  re  occur  in  G.  ii,  149,  iii,  36,
37,  U.  xxviii,  13.

5.  Effect  as  against  third  parties. — The  succession  of  the  bonor.

possessor  being  not  civil  but  praetorian,  it  gave  him  only  a
bonitarian  right  in  the  corporeal  items  of  the  deceased's
estate,  convertible  into  quiritarian  right  by  usucapiou,  G.

DIGEST.  461

BONORUM  POSSESSIO— continued.

I.   BONORUM  POSSESSIO  GENERALLY — continued.    •

iii,  80,  (see  Bonitar.  ownership,  2,  4) ;  to  enable  him  to
obtain  possession  the  praetor  gave  him  the  interdict
quorum  bonorum,  (see  Interdicts,  5),  G.  iii,  34,  iv,  144.  Not
being  heir,  G-.  iii,  32,  he  was  not  entitled  directly  to  an
heir's  actions  against  third  parties ;  but,  by  interpolation
of  a  fiction  of  heirship,  the  praetor  adapted  them  to  the
altered  circumstances,  rendering  them  utiles  or  serviceable,
Gai.  ii,  81,  iv,  34,  U.  xxviii,  12,  (see  Actions,  6).
II.  BONORUM  POSSESSIO  CONTRA  TABULAS.

6.  To  sui  praeteriti  (other  than  sons). — When  a  suus  heres,

other  than  a  son  (see  above,  No.  2),  had  been  neither
instituted  nor  disinherited  in  a  testament,  he  was  entitled
under  the  jus  civile  to  a  share  of  the  inheritance  by
accretion,  G.  ii,  124,  (see  Adcretio,  3) ;  but  the  praetor
held  this  insufficient  where  he  had  been  passed  over  in
favour  of  a  stranger,  and  allowed  him  (and  other  sui  con-
curring with  him)  possession  of  the  whole  estate,  thus
rendering  the  testament  inoperative,  G.  ii,  125.  And
this  right  was  competent  not  only  to  natural  children  but
also  to  adoptive  ones,  if  still  in  potestate  of  the  adoptive
father-testator  at  his  death,  U.  xxviii,  3.

7.  To  emancipated  children. — By  the  jus  civile  a  testator  was

not  required  to  mention  his  emancipated  children  (see
Emancipation},  for  they  had  ceased  to  be  sui  heredes,  G.
ii,  135.  But  the  praetors,  recognising  their  natural  claims,
required  that  they  should  be  either  instituted  or  dis-
inherited, giving  them  Ion.  poss.  contra  tab.  if  they  were
not,  ibid.,  U.  xxviii,  2 ;  under  condition  however  of  colla-
tion (which  see)  with  instituted  sui,  U.  xxviii,  4.  If  an
emancipated  child  had  passed  into  an  adoptive  family,
this  possession  was  not  competent  to  him,  U.  xxviii,  3.

8.  To  a  patron. — See  Succession  to  citizen  freedmen,  Succession

to  Junian  latins.

9.  Peculiarity  in  the  case  of  females. — A  rescript  of  Marcus

Aurelius'  enacted  that  women  should  not  in  any  case  be
allowed  more  by  bonor.  poss.  contra  tab.  than  they  would
have  been  entitled  to  by  accretion  of  the  jus  civile  (above,
No.  6), — a  rule  that  could  apply  strictly  only  to  suae,  but
whose  principle  was  extended  to  emancipatae,  G.  ii,  126.
III.  BONORUM  POSSESSIO  SECUNDUM  TABULAS.

10.  Circumstances  in   which  it  could  be  applied  for. — Some

formality  in  the  execution  of  a  testament  might  have
been  neglected,  such  as  the  familiae  venditio  or  the  nun-
cupatio,  G.  ii,  104,  (see  Testament,  3,  4),  or,  in  the  case  of

462  DIGEST.

BONOKUM  POSSESSIO— continued.

III.   BONOKUM-  POSSESSIO  SECUNDUM  TABULAS — continued.

that  of  a  woman,  her  tutor's  auctorilas,  G.  ii,  118,  (see
Tutory,  16,  23),  in  any  of  which  cases  it  was  said  to  be  non
jurefactum,  G.  ii,  146  ;  or,  though  ab  initio  valid,  it  might
have  been  subsequently  invalidated  by  agnatio  sui  heredis,
a  later  testament,  or  the  testator's  capitis  demimitio,  G.  ii,
138-145,  U.  xxiii,  2-4,  (see  Testament,  22,  23)  :  in  such
circumstances  the  testamentary  heirs  had  no  legal  right,
but  were  nevertheless  entitled,  under  the  qualifications
stated  below,  Nos.  11, 12,  to  honor,  poss.  sccundum  tabulas,
G.  ii,  119,  U.  xxiii,  6,  xxviii,  6.

11.  What  still  required  as  regarded  testator  and  testament. —
To  justify  it  in  any  case,  the  praetors  required  that  the
testator,  even  though  capite  deminutus  in  the  interval,
should  have  been  a  citizen  and  sui  juris  at  the  moment
of  his  death,  G.  ii,  147,  U.  xxiii,  6 ;  and  as  regards  his
testament  that  it  was  sealed  by  at  least  seven  citizen
witnesses,  G.  ii,  119,  U.  xxiii,  6,  xxviii,  6.

12.  Who  preferred  to  the  heredes  scripti  in  the  invalid  testament.
— Any  one  with  a  good  claim  contra  tabulas  excluded  the
scripti  heredes,  U.  xxviii,  5.      So  at  one  time  did  agnates
of  the  testator  claiming  jure  legitimo,  G.  ii,  119,  (see  In-
testate succession,  4) ;  but  by  a  rescript  of  Marc.  Aurelius'
the  scripti  heredes  could  defeat  their  claim  with  an  ex-
ceptio  doli,  G.  ii,  120, 121,  (see  Exception,  8).     If  the  testa-
ment was  a  woman's,  and  the  objection  to  it  that  it  was
made  without  the  auctoritas  of  patron   or  parent  (see
Tutory,  16,  23),  the  latter  had  preference  over  the  scripti
heredes,  G.  ii,  122 ;  but  if  in  tutelage  under  an  Atilian
tutor  (who  had  no  right  of  succession),  the  claim  of  the
scripti  heredes  was  preferable  to  that  of  her  agnates,  ibid.

IV.    BONORUM  POSSESSIO  AB  INTESTATO.

13.  The  evils  that  were  to  be  remedied. — The  civil  rules  of  in-
testate succession  were  extremely  strict,  G.  iii,  18 :  for
they  did  not  admit  emancipated  children,  G.  ii,  19,  or
agnates  who  had  undergone  capitis  deminutio  (which  see,  2),
G.  ii,  19,  21 ;  they  admitted  no  female  agnate  except  a
sister,  23  ;  if  the  nearest  agnates  did  not  take,  no  right
was  recognised  in  those  of  the  next  degree,  22, — in  legiti-
inis  hereditatibus  successio  non  est,  U.  26,  5  ;  and  cognates,
i.e.  those  of  kin  to  the  deceased  through  females,  were
not  admitted  at  all,  G.  ii,  24.      These  and  other  iniqui-
tatcs,  G.  ii,  25,  the  praetors  remedied  by  establishing  a
new  order  of  succession,  which  Ulp.  says  embraced  seven
gradus  (or  rather  ordines),  U.  xxviii,  7 ;  some  of  them,

DIGEST.  463

BONOKUM  POSSESSIO— continued.

IV.  BONORUM  POSSESSIO  AB  iNTESTATO — continued.

however,  applied  only  to  the  successions  of  freedmen,
and  are  referred  to  under  Succession  to  citizen  freedmen,  8.

14.  The  honor,  possessio  granted  to  liberi,  descendants. — The

first  entitled  were  those  descendants  of  the  testator  whom
he  was  bound,  either  by  the  jus  civile  or  the  edict,  to
institute  or  disinherit  if  he  made  a  will, — in  other  words,
his  wife  in  manu,  (who  was  regarded  as  a  daughter  in
matter  of  succession),  with  his  natural  sons  and  daughters,
whether  in  potestate  or  emancipated,  and  the  representa-
tives of  those  that  were  dead,  G.  iii,  26,  63,  note  1,  U.
xxviii,  7 ;  adoptive  children  concurring  if  in  potestate  at
deceased's  death,  but  not  if  emancipated  (see  Adoption,  7),
U.  xxviii,  8.

15.  That  granted  to  agnates. — Under  their  old  name  oflegitimi

heredes  the  deceased's  nearest  agnates  were  admitted  in
the  second  place,  U.  xxviii,  7.

16.  That  granted  to  cognates. — Though  the  grant  in  the  third

place  was  nominally  to  cognates,  i.e.  those  related  through
females,  G.  iii,  30,  U.  xxviii,  7,  9,  yet  with  them  were
included  agnates  of  the  first  degree  who  through  cap-
itis  deminutio  had  lost  their  legal  rights,  G.  iii,  27,  U.
xxviii,  9 ;  agnates  of  the  second  or  a  remoter  degree  on
failure  of  the  first,  G.  iii,  28 ;  female  agnates  more  dis-
tantly related  than  sisters,  29  ;  and  natural  children  of
the  deceased's  who  were  at  the  moment  in  an  adoptive
family,  31.

17.  That  granted  to  the  survivor  of  husband  and  wife. — This

came  last,  U.  xxviii,  7;  i.e.  to  a  wife  if  not  in  manu;
for  if  in  manu  she  was  loco  filiae  and  took  with  liberi,
G.  iii,  5.

CADUCARIA  LEX,  U.  xxviii,  7,  a  name  given  to  the  Julian  and

Papia-Poppaean  law,  which  see.
CADUCITY,  testamentary  lapse,  U.  tit.  xvii.

1.  What  meant  by  caducity. — With  the  two  exceptions  referred

to  below,  Nos.  6  and  7,  the  word  applied  only  to  testa-
mentary gifts  valid  and  capable  of  being  taken  so  far  as
the  jus  civile  was  concerned,  but  which  the  donee  was  either
prevented  taking  by  reason  of  some  prohibition  unknown
to  the  jus  civile,  or  failed  to  take  from  some  other  cause,
U.  xvii,  1.

2.  Influence  of  the  Julian  and  Papia-Poppaean  law. — It  was

this  statute  that  originated  it;  for  by  prohibiting  un-
married persons  to  take  testamentary  inheritances  or

464  DIGEST.

CADUCITY — continued.

legacies  at  all,  and  childless  persons  to  take  more  than  a
half  of  what  was  left  them  (see  Jul.  and  P.  P.  law,  Nos.
4,  5),  and  by  its  postponement  of  the  date  of  vesting  from
the  time  of  a  testator's  death  to  that  of  the  opening  of
his  testament  (see  Jul.  and  P.  P.  law,  No.  7),  it  created
lapses  that  previously  had  no  existence,  ibid.  The
Junian  law  (see  Junian  latinity,  4)  a  few  years  later
made  a  testamentary  inheritance  or  a  legacy  left  to  a
Junian  latin  caducous,  if  he  did  not  qualify  himself  to
take  it  within  100  days  after  the  opening  of  the  will,  U.
xvii,  1,  xxii,  3.

3.  How  the  Julian  law  disposed  of  the  caduca. — A  caducous

inheritance,  where  the  institution  was  ex  parte  only,  i.e.  to
a  share,  went  first  to  the  other  testamentary  heirs  who
either  were  descendants  or  ascendants  of  the  testator  to
the  third  degree  inclusive, — to  these  the  jus  antiquum,  or
old  right  of  accretion  (see  Adcretio,  2),  was  reserved  by  the
statute,  U.  tit.  xviii, — or  themselves  were  parents,  G.  iii,
286a,  U.  i,  23  and  n.  3 ;  next  to  legatees  who  had  chil-
dren, ibid.  ;  and  finally  to  the  state,  G.  ii,  150,  iii,  286«.
If  the  party  failing  to  take  was  sole  heir,  the  caducity
caused  intestacy,  G.  ii,  144 ;  but  the  legatees  were  not
thereby  defrauded,  (see  below,  No.  4).  Caducous  legacies
were  dealt  with  in  the  same  way  as  a  caducous  share  of
an  inheritance,  G.  ii,  206,  with  this  modification, — that  a
conjoint  legatee  who  was  a  parent  was  to  be  preferred  to
heirs,  G.  ii,  207,  208,  U.  xxiv,  12,  13.  Fideicommissa
were  not  included  in  the  provisions  of  the  Julian  law  ;
latins  were  allowed  to  take  them,  G.  i,  24,  ii,  275,  U.  xxv,
7,  and  for  a  time  so  were  caelibes  and  orbi,  G.  ii,  286,  286ff.
But  this  was  so  far  altered  by  the  Pegasian  (Plancian  ?)
Set.  that  trust-gifts  to  caelibes  and  orbi  were  made  subject
to  the  same  caduciary  rules  as  inheritances  and  legacies,
G.  ii,  286a.

4.  Charges  on  a  caducum  ran  with  it. — Caducity  did  not  extin-

guish legacies,  gifts  of  freedom,  or  Jideicommissa  charged
on  testamentary  provisions  ;  they  passed  to  and  became
burdens  on  the  caduciary  beneficiary,  U.  xvii,  3,  even
when  he  was  an  heir  ab  intestate,  G.  ii,  144,  or  the  fisc,
U.  xvii,  2.

5.  Caracalla's  constitution. — Caracalla  decreed  that  all  caduca

should  in  future  go  to  the  fisc,  under  reservation  of  the  right
of  accretion  to  near  relatives  of  the  testator,  U.  xvii,  2  ;  but
whether  he  meant  that  the  fisc  should  be  preferred  to  heirs
and  legatees  entitled  by  the  Julian  law  to  take  on  the

DIGEST.  465

CADUCITY — continued.

strength  of  their  paternity,  or  that,  failing  such  heirs  and
legatees,  the  rise  should  take  in  future  instead  of  the
acrarium,  is  doubtful,  ibid.,  note,  as  amended  in  Addi-
tions, etc.

6.  Caducous  dowries. — By  the  Calvitian  Set.  (see  SO.  Calv.}  if

a  woman  over  fifty  married  a  man  under  sixty,  the
marriage  was  unequal ;  and  on  its  dissolution  she  was
not  allowed  to  claim  her  dowry,  which  went  to  the  fisc
as  caducous,  U.  xvi,  4  and  n.  3.  See  Dowry,  8.

7.  Caducity  in  the  succession  of  latins. — When  a  Juuian  latin

had  two  patrons,  and  on  his  death  one  of  them  declined
his  share  of  his  freedman's  estate,  it  became  caducous
and  fell  to  the  state,  G-.  iii,  62,  (see  Succession  to  Jimian
latins,  4).

CAELESTIS  CARTHAGINIS,  U.  xxii,  6.

CAELIBES,  unmarried  persons,  were  incapacitated  by  the  Papian
law  for  taking  testamentary  inheritances  or  legacies,  G.
ii,  111,  144;  but  might  avoid  the  disability  by  marriage
before  the  expiry  of  the  100  days  of  cretion,  U;  xvii,  1,
xxii,  3,  (see  Julian  and  Pap.  Popp.  law,  4).  They  might,
however,  take  under  a  military  testament,  G.  ii,  111,  (see
Testament,  25).  At  one  time  it  was  held  that  a  celibate
was  entitled  to  take  a  testamentary  trust-gift ;  but  this
was  altered  by  a  SC.  Pegasianum  (?),  whereby  such  a
fidcicommissum  became  caducous,  like  inheritances  or
legacies,  G.  ii,  286,  (see  Fidcicommissum,  3,  Caducity,  3).
An  unmarried  person  was  not  forbidden  to  adopt  a  child,
U.  viii,  6,  (see  Adoption,  4).

CAESAR'S  (Julius)  contemplated  Code,  G.  iii,  140,  note  2.

CALATA  COMITIA,  G.  ii,  101,  U.  xx,  2.

C  ALUMNI  A  in  adfectu  est,  G.  iv,  178 ;  Calumniae  judicium,  G.  iv,
163,  174-181;  Calumniae  jusjurandum,  oath  of  calumny,
G.  iv,  172,  176.  See  Vexatious  litigation.

CAPERE  EX  TESTAMENTO,  see  Jus  capiendi.

CAPITA  and  STIRPES  in  succession,  G.  iii,  8,  16,  61,  U.  xxvi,  2,  4,
xxvii,  4.

CAPITAL  PUNISHMENTS,  what,  G.  iii,  189,  190,  note  1.

CAPITIS  DEMINUTIO  (or  minutio),  G.  i,  159-163,  U.  xi,  10-13.

1.  Idea  and  varieties. — Cap.  dem.  was  change  in  a  citizen's
eaput,  G.  i,  159,  i.e.  his  family  position,  ibid,  note  1 ;  and
according  to  the  jus  civile  was  equivalent  to  death  as
extinctive  of  his  personality,  G.  iii,  153.  It  was  of  three
degrees,  G.  i,  159,  U.  xi,  10, — maxima,  when  freedom
was  lost,  G.  i,  160,  U.  xi,  11,  (see  Freedom} ;  media  or
minor,  when  freedom  was  retained  but  citizenship  lost,

2G

466  DIGEST.

CAPITIS  DEMINUTIO — continued.

and  the  sufferer  reduced  to  the  condition  of  a  peregrin,
G.  i,  162,  U.  x,  3,  xi,  13,  (see  Citizenship,  9,  Peregrinity) ;
minima,  when  only  the  status  hominis,  G.  i,  163,  U.  xi,
13,  was  changed,  i.e.  that  of  the  individual  in  his  private
rather  than  his  public  character,  U.  xi,  13,  note  2.

2.  Capitis  deminutio  minima  in  particular. — To  amount  to

cap.  dem.  the  change  of  status  required  to  be  either  per-
manently or  temporarily  for  the  worse, — permanently,  as
in  the  abrogation  or  in  manum  conventio  of  a  person  sui
juris,  G.  iii,  83,  U.  xi,  13  ;  temporarily,  as  in  mancipation
of  a  filiusfamilias  as  the  first  step  in  his  emancipation  or
adoption,  G.  i,  162,  134,  the  mancipation  putting  him  for
the  moment  in  the  condition  of  a  slave,  G.  i,  138.
Change  of  family  status  without  degradation  was  not  a
minutio  capitis,  as  when  a  filiusfamilias  became  sui  juris
by  his  parent's  death  or  his  own  inauguration  as  a  priest
of  Jupiter,  G.  iii,  114,  or  a  Jiliafamilias  by  being  taken
as  a  Vestal  virgin,  U.  x,  5,  (see  Patria  potestas,  17).

3.  Results  of  cap.  dem.  according  to  the  jus  civile.  —  Capitis

deminutio,  even  minima,  put  an  end  to  the  patria  potestas,
G.  i,  128,  134,  and  to  agnation,  G.  i,  158,  163,  iii,  21,  U.
xxviii,  9,  without,  however,  affecting  cognation,  G.  i,  158,
iii,  27,  U.  xxviii,  9,  (see  Agnation,  4,  Cognation*) ;  that  of
a  tutor  consequently  put  an  end  to  a  tutory-at-law,  G.  i,
158,  U.  xi,  9,  7,  though  not  to  a  testamentary  tutory,  U.  xi,
17,  (see  Tutory,  8,  17,  22) ;  while,  whether  it  occurred  in
the  person  of  the  deceased  or  of  the  heir,  it  extinguished
the  legitimae  successiones  of  the  XII  Tables,  G.  iii,  21,  27,  51,
U.  xxvii,  5,  (see  Intestate  succession,  6,  Succession  to  citizen
freedmen,  1,10).  If  suffered  by  a  person  sui  juris  it  invali-
dated any  testament  made  by  him  previously,  G.  ii,  145,
U.  xxiii,  4 ;  it  utterly  extinguished  any  usufruct  enjoyed
by  him,  his  claim  for  services  from  his  freedmen,  and
anyjudicia  legitima  in  which  he  was  suing,  G.  iii,  83 ;  it
dissolved  a  copartnery  of  which  he  was  a  member,  G.  iii,
153  ;  and  in  strict  law  it  relieved  him  of  liability  to  his
creditors,  G.  iii,  84,  iv,  38.

4.  Modification  of  those   results  ~by  praetorian  intervention. —

Many  of  those  results,  whether  for  the  capite  minutus  or
for  third  parties,  were  regarded  as  unjust  according  to
natural  rules,  and  indirectly  prevented  by  praetorian
remedies.  Thus  on  certain  conditions  a  testament  was
given  effect  to  by  grant  of  bonorum  possessio  secundum
tabulas  notwithstanding  the  testator's  cap.  minutio,  see
Bonor.  poss.,  10,  11  ;  an  emancipated  child  was  granted

DIGEST.  467

CAPITIS  DEMINUTIO — continued.

honor,  poss.  contra  tabulas  if  passed  over  in  his  parent's
will,  see  Bon.  poss.,  7 ;  lie  was  granted  honor,  poss.  con-
currently with  sui  on  his  parent's  intestacy,  see  Bon.  poss.,
14 ;  while  an  agnate  who  had  lost  his  jus  lc.gitim.um  by
his  own  cap.  dem.  or  that  of  the  deceased  was  admitted
as  a  cognate,  see  Bon.  $>oss.,  16.  As  regards  creditors  the
praetor  gave  them  relief  by  utiles  actiones,  G.  iii,  84,  pro-
ceeding on  the  fiction  (see  Fictions,  3)  that  cap.  deminutio
had  not  taken  place, G.iv,  38  ;  which  the  paterfamilias,  into
whose  jus  the  minutus  had  passed,  was  bound  to  defend,
on  pain  of  having  to  give  up  all  the  estate  he  had
acquired  by  the  adrogation  or  in  manum  convcntio,  G.
iii,  84,  iv,  80,  which  had  created  a  universal  succession
in  his  favour,  G.  iii,  83.

5.  Capitis  deminutio  ly  hostile  capture. — A  citizen's  capture  by
an  enemy  involved  cap.  dem.  ;  but  its  usual  results  were  in
this  case  avoided  by  the  jus  postliminii  and  fictio  Icgis
Corneliae,  G.  i,  129,  187,  U.  x,  4,  xxiii,  5,  (see  Captivity
apud  hostes).

CAPITO,  C.  ATEIUS,  founder  of  the  Sabiuian  school  or  sect,  consul
A.D.  5,  died  A.D.  22,  G.  i,  196,  note ;  see  Sabinians  and
Proculians.

CAPTIVITY  APUD  HOSTES. — A  citizen  taken  captive  by  an  enemy
became  a  slave  and  continued  so  while  in  their  hands,  G.
i,  129,  U.  x,  4  ;  but  his  rights  were  held  to  be  suspended
merely,  and  revived  jure  postliminii  on  his  recrossing  the
frontier,  ibid.,  G.  i,  187.  A  testament  made  by  him  pre-
viously was  not  invalidated  by  his  captivity  ;  it  was  good
jure  postliminii  if  he  returned,  and,  under  a  Cornelian  law
equally  valid  if  he  died  in  captivity,  thanks  to  a  fiction
that  he  had  died  at  the  moment  of  capture,  U.  xxiii,  5.
If,  had  he  been  free,  he  would  have  been  entitled  to  a
succession  ab  intestato  in  the  character  of  suus,  then,  so
long  as  he  remained  captive,  the  agnates  were  excluded,
U.  xxvi,  3.

CARACALLA,  see  Constitutiones  principum.

CASCELLIANUM  JUDICIUM,  a  stage  of  procedure  in  the  interdicts  uti
possidetis  and  utrubi,  G.  iv,  166a,  169  ;  see  Interdicts,  16.

CASSIANS  AND  PROCULIANS,  G.  i,  196,  note  1  ;  see  Sabinians  and
Proculians.

CASSIUS  LONGINUS,  C.,  consul  A.D.  30,  one  of  the  leaders  of  the
Sabinians,  who  were  sometimes  called  Cassians  in  his
honour,  G.  i,  196,  note  1 ;  ii,  79, 195, 244 ;  iii,  71  and  note,
133,  140,  147,  161 ;  iv,  79,  114,  170a,  note,  U.  i,  12  and
n.  2.  See  Sabinians  and  Proculians.

468  DIGEST.

CASTEENSB  PECULIUM,  see  Peculium  castrense.
CASUS,  see  Accident.

CATONIANA  EEGULA  in  law  of  legacies,  G.  ii,  244  ;  see  Legacy,  12.
CAUSA  CADERE,  meaning,  G.  iv,  53,  note  1.

CAUSAE  PROBATIO  EX  LEGE  AELIA  SENTIA  ;  see  also  Aelia-Sentian
law,  4,  6,  7.

1.  The  original  provision. — See  Aelia-Sentian  law,  6.

2.  Its  extensions. — See  Aelia-Sentian  law,  7.

3.  Its  application. — Cause  might  be  proved  not  only  by  the

latin  himself  who  had  married  under  the  law  or  the  Set.,
but  after  his  death  by  his  wife,  G.  i,  32,  or  even  (with
the  aid  of  tutors)  by  the  child,  whether  son  or  daughter,
G.  i,  32a,  U.  iii,  3,  whose  completed  first  year  it  was  that
warranted  the  probatio,  G.  i,  32  and  note.  And  the
marriage  and  all  that  followed  might  be  resorted  to  even
by  a  latin  who  had  already  acquired  citizenship  by
imperial  grant,  but  without  the  knowledge  of  his  patron,
G.  iii,  73 ;  for  such  a  grant,  unknown  to  the  patron,
while  it  gave  the  latin  the  privilege  of  a  citizen  during
his  life,  left  him  a  latin  at  his  death,  so  that  his  children,
though  lawful,  could  not  be  his  heirs,  U.  iii,  72,

4.  Its  effect. — The  effect  of  the  praetor's  pronuntiatio,  or  find-

ing that  cause  had  been  proved,  was  to  make  the  latin  a
citizen,  and  to  do  the  same  for  his  wife  and  child  if  the
former  also  was  a  latin,  colonial  or  Junian,  G.  i,  29.  If
she  was  already  a  citizen,  it  was  only  her  husband  wrhose
status  had  to  be  raised ;  for  by  a  Set.  of  Hadrian's  the
issue  of  a  citizen  wife  and  her  latin  husband  was  a  citizen
without  any  causae  probatio,  G.  i,  30,  80,  U.  iii,  3,  (see
Status,  2).  On  becoming  a  citizen  the  latin  father  acquired
the  potestas  over  his  anniculus  and  all  subsequent  chil-
dren, G.  i,  66,  U.  vii,  4,  (see  Patria  potestas,  10),  they
acquiring  at  the  same  time  the  rights  of  sui  heredes  (which
see),  U.  xxii,  14;  and  even  though  cause  might  not  be
proved  until  after  the  father's  death,  still  the  anniculus
became  a  suus  and  took  the  inheritance,  G.  iii,  5.

CAUSAE  PROBATIO,  ERRORIS,  see  Erroris  causae  pro~batio.

CAUTIO  DAMNI  INFECTI,  G.  iv,  31,  note  3.

CAUTIONES  IN  JUDICIAL  PROCEDURE,  G.  iv,  89-102,  184-187.

1.  Initial  security  ~by  defender  for  his  future  appearance. — On

appearing  in  answer  to  a  summons  (see  In  jus  wcatio),  if
the  proceedings  could  not  be  finished  the  same  day,  the
defender  gave  security  for  his  subsequent  reappearance
on  a  day  named,  G.  iv,  184,  (see  Vadimoniuni) ;  this  was
all  but  universal,  187.

2.  The  cautiones  in  a  vindicatio. — In  a  real  action  by  petitory

DIGEST.  469

CAUTIONES  IN  JUDICIAL  PROCEDURE — continued.

formula  (wndicatid),  no  security  was  required  from  a
pursuer  suing  on  his  own  account,  G.  iv,  96,  nor  from
a  cognitor  (see  Procurator1}/  in  litigation,  2),  because,  on
account  of  the  solemnity  of  his  appointment,  he  wTas  in
much  the  same  position  as  his  client,  97,  98  ;  but  a  pro-
curator had  to  give  security  that  his  client  would  ratify
his  actings,  cautio  de  rato,  98.  The  defender,  whether
defending  on  his  own  account  or  as  cognitor  or  procurator,
in  consideration  of  enjoying  the  interim  possession,  had  to
give  security  for  implement  of  any  judgment  against  him,
cautio  judicatum  solvi,  G.  iv,  89.

3.  Those  in  a  real  action  by  sponsion. — In  an  in  rem  actio

per  sponsionem  (which  see)  the  rules  were  the  same,
except  that  the  security  given  by  defender  was  cautio  pro
praede  litis  et  vindiciariim,  i.e.  for  the  thing  itself  and  its
fruits  and  profits,  in  place  of  the  praedes  of  the  actio
sacramento  (see  Legis  actiones,  2),  G.  iv,  91,  94.

4.  Those  given  in  personal  actions. — In  a  personal  action  the

rules  as  regarded  a  pursuer  were  the  same  as  in  the  real
one,  G.  iv,  100.  A  party  defending  on  his  own  account
was  not  required  to  give  c.  judicatum  solvi  except  in  a
few  special  cases,  G.  iv,  102.  But  where  the  defence  was
by  an  agent  it  was  indispensable,  101 :  in  the  case  of  a
cognitor,  the  client  gave  the  security,  ibid. ;  in  that  of  a
procurator,  he  himself  did  so,  ibid.

5.  Tlie  stipulatio  fructuaria. — This  was  a  security  given  by  the

party  to  whom  the  interim  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  and
profits  had  been  awarded  in  proceedings  on  the  interdict
uti  possidetis  or  utrubi,  G.  iv,  166,  (see  Interdicts,  14) ;  if
the  other  party,  succeeding  in  the  int.,  chose  to  disregard
the  stipulatio  and  proceed  for  the  fruits  in  a  separate
judicium,  the  defender  had  to  give  c.jud.  solvi,  169.

6.  Eules  of  general  application. — Tutors  and  curators  acting

for  their  wards  were  dealt  with  as  procurators,  G.  iv,  99  ;
although  in  their  case  security  was  sometimes  dispensed
with.  The  cautio  was  by  satisdatio,  G.  iv,  88,  i.e.  personal
undertaking  of  the  party,  backed  by  that  of  sureties,  G.  i,
199  and  200,  note.

CENSUS. — Entry  of  the  name  of  a  slave,  by  his  owner's  authority,
in  the  census  at  its  periodical  revision  was  one  of  the
civil  modes  of  freeing  him  ;  he  thereby  became  a  citizen
if  he  was  over  thirty  and  in  the  quiritarian  ownership  of  a
manumitter  over  twenty,  G.  i,  17,  U.  i,  8,  (see  Manumis-
sion, 4, 6).  A  free  person  in  causa  mancipii,  and  therefore
servi  loco,  might  be  liberated  in  the  same  way,  whatever

470  DIGEST.

CENSUS — continued.

his  own  age  or  that  of  the  person  to  whom  he  was  subject,
G.  i,  139  ;  and  even  against  the  will  or  without  the  know-
ledge of  the  latter,  provided  he  was  held  neither  noxally
nor  fiduciarily,  140,  (see  Mancipii  etc.,  3).  A  citizen
wilfully  evading  inscription  was  sold  as  a  slave  by  way  of
punishment,  G.  i,  160,  (see  Slavery,  1).

CENTENARIUS  LIBEKTUS,  G.  iii,  42.

CENTUMVIRAL  COURT,  G.  iv,  16  and  n.  13,  31,  95  and  n.  3.

CESSICIA  TUTELA,  G.  i,  168-172,  U.  xi,  6-8  ;  see  Tutory,  20.

CESSIO  BONORUM,  G.  iii,  78  and  n.  2.

CESSIO  IN  JURE,  see  In  jure  cessio.

CHILD,  see  Parent  and  child.

CHIROGRAPHUM,  G.  iii,  134  and  note ;  see  Literal  obligations,  2.

CITIZENSHIP,  civitas  Eomana,  G.  i,  94,  160,  iii,  73,  iv,  37,  etc.
U.  iii,  2,  xi,  11,  etc.;  jus  Quiritium,  G.  i,  33,  iii,  73,  U.  iii,
1,  etc.

I.  PRIVATE  RIGHTS  AND  CAPACITIES  OF  WHICH  CITIZENSHIP  WAS  A
CONDITION.

1.  In  the  family  relations. — It  was  only  a  citizen  that  could

contract  justae  nuptiae,  justum  matrimonium,  G.  i,  56,
and  it  was  only  a  woman  who  was  a  citizen,  or  a  latin
or  peregrin  on  special  concession,  that  could  become  his
wife,  legitima  uxor,  ibid.,  U.  v,  2-4.  Only  a  citizen
could  take  his  wife  in  manum,  G.  i,  108 ;  it  was  only  a
citizen  that  could  have  patria  potestas  over  his  children,
G.  i,  55,  189  ;  and  none  but  citizens  could  be  in  potestate,
G.  i,  128,  I/,  x,  3.  And  as  agnation  was  an  efflux  of  the
patria  potestas  (see  Agnation,  1),  none  but  citizens  could
have  or  be  agnates,  or  enjoy  or  be  subject  to  the  family
rights  to  which  agnation  gave  rise,  G.  i,  158, 161,  U.  xi,  9.

2.  In  matter   of  property. —  Although   non-citizens   enjoyed

quiritarian  ownership  of  res  nee  mancipi,  yet  the  dominium
ex  jure  Quiritium  (see  Quiritarian  ownership)  of  res  man-
cipi (which  see),  according  to  Gai.,  was  confined  to  citizens ;
such  things  could  as  a  rule  be  acquired  only  by  mancipa-
tion, injure  cessio,  or  usucapion,  and  these  he  says  were
peculiar  to  citizens,  G.  ii,  65,  (for  when  a  slave  acquired
by  mancipation  or  usucapion,  G.  ii,  87,  89,  iii,  167,  he
did  so  merely  as  the  instrument  of  his  citizen  owner,
G.  ii,  89).  Ulp.,  on  the  other  hand,  says  mancipation  was
competent  not  only  to  citizens  but  to  colonial  and  Junian
latins,  and  to  peregrins  to  whom  commcrcivirn  (see  U.  xix,
5,  note)  had  been  specially  conceded,  U.  xix,  4 ;  this
would  render  them  capable  of  holding  res  mancipi  in
quiritarian  right  if  so  conveyed.

DIGEST.  471

CITIZENSHIP— continued.

I.  PRIVATE  RIGHTS  AND  CAPACITIES  OF  WHICH  CITIZENSHIP  WAS  A
CONDITION — continued.

3.  In  matter  of  contract. — The  juris  gentium  contracts  were

competent  even  to  peregrins,  G.  iii,  132,  154a ;  but  a
verbal  contract  in  which  the  word  spondeo  was  used,  and
the  literal  contract  by  transscriptio  a  persona  in  personam
were  confined  to  citizens,  G.  iii,  93,  133 ;  and  according
to  the  view  of  Gai.  they  alone  could  give  or  obtain  dis-
charge by  nexi  solutio  (which  see),  for  it  involved  a  manci-
pation, G.  iii,  174,  compared  with  ii,  65.

4.  In  matter  of  succession. — It  was  only  a  citizen  that  could

make  a  testament,  U.  xx,  14,  and  it  was  not  sustained
even  to  the  extent  of  allowing  the  heirs  in  it  to  have
bonorum  possessio  secundum  tabulas  unless  the  maker  was
a  citizen  at  his  death,  G.  ii,  147,  U.  xxiii,  6,  (see  Bonor.
poss.,  11).  Except  in  the  case  of  a  testamentum  militarc,
G.  ii,  110,  only  a  citizen  could  take  anything  under  a
testament, — inheritance,  legacy,  or  fideicommissum,  G.  i,
25,  ii,  110,  285,  U.  xxii,  2;  for  while  a  Junian  latin  might
be  instituted  heir  or  have  a  legacy  left  him,  U.  xxii,  3,
yet  he  could  not  take  either  until  he  became  a  citizen,
G.  i,  23,  ii,  110,  275,  U.  xxii,  3,  (though  as  a  latin  he
might  take  a  fideicommissum,  G.  i,  24,  ii,  275,  U.  xxv,  7).
Finally,  as  none  but  citizens  could  be  in  potestate,  or  be
related  to  other  people  as  agnates  (above,  No.  1),  it  was
they  alone  that  could  succeed  ab  intestato.

5.  In  matter  of  enfranchisement. —  It  was  only  a  citizen  that

could  make  his  slave  a  citizen  by  enfranchisement ;  for
he  alone  could  do  so  who  was  the  slave's  quiritarian
owner,  G.  i,  17  ;  and  as  a  slave  was  a  res  mancipi,  this
position,  according  to  Gai.,  could  be  held  only  by  a  citizen
(above,  No.  1).  Further,  the  provincial  consilia  for  sanc-
tioning manumissions  required  to  be  composed  of  citizens,
G.  i,  20,  U.  i,  13a,  (see  Consilium}.

6.  In  matter  of  witnessing  deeds. — It  was  only  citizens  that

could  act  as  witnesses  of  an  Aelia-Sentian  marriage  (see
Aelia-Sentian  law,  6),  G.  i,  29  ;  of  a  marriage  ceremony  by
confarreatioii  (see  Manus,  1),  G.  i,  112  ;  of  a  coemptio  (see
Manus,  2),  G.  i,  113;  and  of  a  mancipation  (which  see),
G.  i,  119.  According  to  Gai.,  citizens  alone  could  validly
witness  a  testament  per  aes  et  libram,  G.  ii,  104 ;  though
Ulp.  says  any  one  could  with  whom  the  testator  had
testamenti  factio  (which  see),  U.  xx,  2.  According  to
Ulp.,  even  to  justify  Ion.  poss.  sec.  tab.,  a  praetorian  testa-
ment had  to  be  sealed  by  seven  citizen  witnesses,  U.

472  DIGEST.

CITIZENSHIP— continued.

I.  PRIVATE  RIGHTS  AND  CAPACITIES  OF  WHICH  CITIZENSHIP  WAS  A
CONDITION — continued.

xxviii,  6 ;  but  here  it  is  Gai.  that  omits  the  qualification
of  citizen,  G.  ii,  119.

7.  In  judicial  procedure. — A  judicium  legitimum  (which  see)

was  possible  only  when  all  the  parties,  judge  included,
were  citizens,  G.  iv,  104  Further,  many  judicial  remedies
were  competent  directly  only  to  and  against  citizens  ;  if
it  was  reasonable  in  the  circumstances  to  grant  them  to
or  against  one  who  was  not  a  citizen,  this  could  only  be
done  by  introducing  into  the  formula  a  fiction  of  citizen-
ship, G.  iv,  37,  (see  Fiction,  3).

II.   HOW  CITIZENSHIP  WAS  ACQUIRED  AND  LOST.

8.  How  acquired. — It   usually  was    acquired   by  birth,   see

Status,  2.  It  might  be  acquired  by  a  slave  by  manumis-
sion according  to  the  requirements  of  the  Aelia-Sentian
law,  G.  i,  17,  (see  Manumission) ;  by  a  colonial  latin  by
filling  office  in  his  municipium,  G.  i,  95  and  96,  and  note,
or  by  imperial  grant,  G.  i,  93,  (see  Colonial  latinity,  2,
Jus  Latii) ;  by  a  Junian  latin  in  a  variety  of  ways  ex-
plained in  G.  i,  28—35,  U.  iii,  1-6,  (see  Junian  latinity,  7)  ;
and  by  a  peregrin  by  erroris  causae  probatio  (which  see),
G.  i,  67-75,  U.  vii,  4,  or  imperial  grant,  G.  i,  93,  (see
Peregrinity,  8).  Such  a  grant  did  not  carry  potestas  over
children  already  born,  or  even  over  an  infant  in  utero,
unless  applied  for  and  expressly  included  in  the  con-
cession, G.  i,  93,  94,  ii,  135a,  iii,  20.

9.  How  lost. — It  was  lost  not  only  by  any  event  which  made

the  citizen  a  slave,  as  in  G.  i,  160,  U.  xi,  11,  (see  Slavery,  1),
but  by  joining  a  latin  colony  (see  Colon,  latinity],  G.  i,
131,  or  by  anything  that  made  him  a  peregrin,  such  as
interdiction  of  fire  and  water,  which  practically  was  out-
lawry, G.  i,  128  and  n.  2,  161,  U.  x,  3,  xi,  12.  Loss  of
citizenship  without  loss  of  freedom  was  called  capitis
deminutio  minor  or  media,  ibid.,  (see  Cap.  dem.,  1).
CLAUDIAN  SENATUSCONSULT,  the,  contained  the  following  provi-
sions in  reference  to  cohabitation  of  persons  of  whom
one  was  slave  and  the  other  free : — (1.)  If  a  freeman
cohabited  with  another  person's  slave,  believing  her  free,
male  issue  were  to  be  free,  females  slave,  G.  i,  85 ;
Vespasian  however  repealed  the  rule,  reverting  to  that
of  the  jus  gentium, — slave  mother,  slave  child,  G.  i,  85.
(2.)  If  a  woman  of  free  birth  continued  to  cohabit  with
a  servus  alicnus  in  spite  of  his  owner's  warning,  she  was
herself  to  fall  to  the  latter  as  a  slave,  G.  i,  91,  160,  U.

DIGEST.  473

CLAUDIAN  SENATUSCONSULT — continued.

xi,  11;  but  this  was  not  to  happen  to  a  freedwoman,
for,  unless  the  cohabitation  was  with  her  patron's  ap-
proval, it  was  to  him  she  became  a  slave  again,  U.  xi,  27
and  n.  2.  (3.)  Any  child  born  to  a  freewoman  by  a
slave  father  of  whose  condition  she  was  aware, — a  cir-
cumstance, as  Paul,  remarks,  that  made  her  a  slave
whether  warned  or  not, — was  to  be  slave-born,  G.  i,  86
and  note.  (4.)  It  was  to  be  lawful  for  a  freewoman,
cohabiting  with  a  servus  alienus  with  his  owner's  consent,
to  bargain  with  the  latter  that  though  her  child  would
be  born  a  slave  she  was  to  remain  free,  G.  i,  84 ;  but
Hadrian,  while  still  permitting  an  agreement  guaran-
teeing the  mother's  freedom,  re-established  the  juris
gentium  rule  that  in  such  case  the  child  also  must  be
free,  ibid.

CODICIL,  codicilli,  (see  Testament,  26),  was  an  informal  expression
of  last  will,  which  might  be  made  either  as  supplementary
to  or  in  the  absence  of  a  testament,  G.  ii,  270,  270«,  and
in  the  former  case  be  confirmed  by  it  or  not,  270«.  No
institution  or  disherison  could  in  any  case  be  made  in  it
directly,  G.  ii,  273,  U.  xxv,  11;  if  unconfirmed,  neither
legacies  nor  direct  grants  of  freedom  could  be  bequeathed
in  it,  G.  ii,  270ft,  U.  ii,  12,  xxv,  8,  or  adeemed,  U.  xxiv,
29  and  note ;  but  whether  confirmed  or  not,  and  even  in
the  absence  of  a  testament,  a  jideicommissum  might  be
imposed  in  it  upon  the  heir  to  any  extent,  G.  ii,  273,
U.  xxv,  4,  8.

COEMPTIO,  one  of  the  modes  of  in  manumconventio,  G.  i,  113-115&  ;
see  Manus,  2.

COGNATION  in  its  wider  acceptation  was  kinship  generally  ;  in  its
narrower,  natural  blood  relationship  as  distinguished
from  the  civil  or  legitima  cognatio  of  agnation,  G.  i,  156.
It  is  often  described  as  kinship  through  females,  ibid.,
but  was  not  so  necessarily ;  for  agnates  related  through
males  remained  cognates  even  when  capita,  minuti,
G.  iii,  27.  By  the  jus  civile  cognation  created  incapaci-
ties, as  in  marriage,  G.  i,  59-62,  but  conferred  no  rights.
By  the  rules  of  succession  of  the  Twelve  Tables  cognates
were  ignored,  G.  iii,  24 ;  but  the  praetors  admitted  them
to  honor,  poss.  ab  intestato  immediately  after  agnates
integri  juris,  G.  iii,  30,  U.  xxviii,  7,  9,  (see  Bonor.  poss.,
16).  For  the  mode  of  computing  the  degrees  of  cogna-
tion, see  U.  v,  6,  note  2.

COGNITOE,  see  Procuratory  in  litigation,  2.

COGNITORIAE  EXCEPTIONES,  G.  IV,  124;   S66  Exception,  10.

474  DIGEST.

COLLATION. — It  was  under  condition  of  collating  their  acquisi-
tions since  they  had  become  sui  juris  by  their  emanci-
pation, i.e.  of  throwing  them  into  their  father's  estate
for  general  division,  that  the  praetors  granted  bonor.  pos-
sessio  to  emancipated  children  passed  over  in  a  testament
in  which  brothers  of  theirs  inpotestatc  had  been  instituted,
U.  xxviii,  4,  (see  Bonor.  poss.,  7).

COLONIA  LATINA,  a  colony  established  in  a  province  on  the  under-
standing that  its  members  were  to  have  the  rights  enjoyed
by  the  latins  of  Italy ;  a  citizen  joining  it  ceased  to  be
such,  and  became  a  colonial  latin,  G.  i,  131,  iii,  56.  The
charters  or  acts  of  constitution  of  a  great  many  provincial
municipia,  which  there  was  no  pretence  for  calling  colonies,
gave  to  their  members  rights  in  private  life  much  the
same  as  those  of  the  colonists,  G.  i,  22,  note  1.

COLONIAL  LATINITY,  G.  i,  22,  note  1.

1.  Rights  of  colonial  latins. — They  had  no  comibium  (see  U.

v,  3,  note)  with  citizens  except  by  special  concession,  G.  i,
56,  U.  v,  4  ;  and  the  issue  of  a  colonial  latin  and  a  Eoman
citizen  wife  was,  by  the  Miniciari  law,  a  latin  like  his
father,  whether  there  was  comibium  between  the  parents
or  not,  G.  i,  55,  77-79.  But  the  law  did  not  recognise  in  a
colonial  latin  any  right  ofmamts  ovpatriapotestas,  at  least
that  could  be  attended  with  their  juris  civilis  consequences,
G.  i,  55,  108, 109 ;  although  it  appears,  from  the  terms  of
some  extant  charters  of  latin  municipia,  that  they  had  a
de  facto  manus  and.  potestas,  G.  i,  55,  note  2.  As  regards
their  right  in  matters  of  property,  contract,  and  succes-
sion, see  Citizenship,  2,  3,  4.  It  does  not  appear  that  they
had  the  privilege  conferred  by  the  lex  Junia  on  Junian
latins  of  taking  under  a  testament  if  they  converted  their
latinity  into  citizenship  within  a  hundred  days,  G.  ii,  110,
U.  xvii,  1,  xx,  3.

2.  How  they  acquired  Eoman  citizenship. — It  was  peculiar  to

them  that  they  could  acquire  citizenship  by  what  was
called  jus  Latii,  G.  i,  95  and  96,  and  note.  The  charters  of
latin  communities  conferred  upon  them  sometimes  majus
Latium,  sometimes  minus;  where  it  was  the  first,  a
member  who  had  served  as  a  decurion  or  in  higher  office
not  only  himself  became  a  citizen,  but  thereby  elevated
his  parents,  wife,  and  children ;  where  it  was  the  second,
citizenship  in  the  same  circumstances  was  confined  to
himself,  G.  i,  96.  Without  this  process  he  might  also
directly  become  a  citizen  by  imperial  grant,  G.  i,  93,  etc.,
(see  Citizenship,  8).
COMITIA  CALATA,  G.  ii,  101,  U.  xx,  2 ;  see  Testament,  1.

DIGEST.  475

COMMEECIUM  explained  in  U.  xix,  5,  note ;  colonial  and  Junian
latins  enjoyed  it  as  well  as  citizens;  and  it  might  be
specially  conceded  to  peregrins,  U.  xix,  4.

COMMODATE,  commodatum  ;  see  also  Seal  obligations.

1.  Commodatc,  what? — Cornmodate  was  loan  of  a  thing  for

use,  to  be  returned  in  specie.  It  was  not  very  early  re-
cognised as  an  independent  contract,  and  is  not  mentioned
by  Gaius  in  his  reference  to  obligations  created  re,  G.  iii,
90  and  91,  and  note.

2.  Sights  of  lender. — Though  he  had  given  up  the  custody  of

the  thing  lent,  yet  the  legal  possession  still  remained
with  the  lender,  G.  iv,  153 ;  and  if  the  borrower,  animo
furandi,  used  what  had  been  lent  in  a  different  way  from
what  had  been  intended,  the  lender  might  proceed  against
him  for  theft,  G.  iii,  196,  197.

3.  Obligations   of  borroiver.  —  The   borrower  had    custodiatn

praestare,  i.e.  to  answer  for  the  safety  of  the  thing  lent,
G.  iii,  206 ;  consequently  if  stolen  from  him,  and  he  was
solvent,  it  was  he  that  had  the  actio  furti,  205,  206.

4.  Special  action. — The  action  arising  out  of  the  contract  was

the  a.  commodati;  in  this  respect  peculiar,  that  it  was
sometimes  in  jus,  sometimes  in  factum  concepta,  G.  iv,  47,
(see  Actions,  5).     When  in  jus  concepta  it  was  bonae  fidei
(see  Actions,  8),  G.  iv,  47,  62.
COMPENSATION  or  set-off,  compensatio,  G.  iv,  61-68.

1.  In  bonae  fidei  judicia. — In  these  (see  Bon.  fid.  jud.},  and

without  any  instruction  in  the  formula,  the  judge  was
bound  to  set  off  against  the  pursuer's  claim  any  counter
claim  of  the  defender's  arising  out  of  the  same  matter,
and  condemn  the  latter  only  in  the  balance,  if  any,  G.  iv,
61,  63.

2.  In  judicia  stricti  juris. — By  a  rescript  of  Marc.  Aurelius'

compensation  was  allowed  to  be  pleaded  in  answer  to
stricti  juris  judicia  generally,  under  cover  of  an  exceptio
doli;  see  addition  to  G.  iv,  61,  note,  in  Additions  etc.

3.  In  actions  bij  bankers. — An  argentarius  suing  a  customer

was  required  formally  to  set  off  in  his  intentio  (which
see)  any  counter  claim  of  his  creditor's,  G.  iv,  65,  if  of  the
same  sort  as  the  pursuer's,  though  not  arising  out  of  the
same  matter,  e.g.  money  against  money,  wine  against
wine,  66,  if  exigible  at  the  moment,  67,  on  pain  of  losing
his  cause  altogether,  68.

4.  In  actions  ly  bonorum  emptores. — When  a  honor,  emptor

or  purchaser  of  a  bankrupt's  estate  (see  Emptio  bonoruni)
proceeded  against  a  debtor,  the  latter  was  entitled  to  have
deducted  any  counter  claim  he  had  against  the  bankrupt,

476  DIGEST.

COMPENSATION — continued.

no  matter  though  for  things  of  a  different  sort  than  those
he  owed,  G.  iv,  65,  66,  and  even  though  not  yet  due,  67 ;
but  this  deductio  was  not  referred  to  in  the  intentio,  only
given  effect  to  in  the  condemnation,  68.

COMPERENDINUS  DIES,  G.  IV,  15.

COMPROMISE  of  a  claim,  even  by  simple  agreement,  entitled  the
debtor  to  an  exceptio  pacti  conventi  if  sued  in  disregard  of
it,  G.  iv,  116ft..  Compromise  of  an  action  for  theft,  rob-
bery, or  personal  injury,  made  the  delinquent  infamous,
just  as  if  he  had  been  condemned,  G.  iv,  182.

CONCUBINE,  children  of,  were  not  spurii,  G.  i,  64,  note  3.

CONDEMNATIO,  one  of  the  clauses  of  a,  formula;  which  see,  No.  1.

1.  General  purpose. — It  contained  the  instruction  to  the  judge

to  condemn  or  absolve  according  to  the  evidence,  G.  iv,
39;  styles,  ibid.  It  was  necessary  in  all  but  prejudicial
and  probably  divisory  actions,  44  and  note;  and  when
present  always  stood  last,  39,  50.

2.  It  was  either  fixed,  taxed,  or  indefinite. — Under  the  earlier

system  (see  Legis  actiones)  an  unsuccessful  defender  was
always  condemned  in  the  very  thing  sued  for,  G,  iv,  48
and  note  3 ;  but  under  the  formular  system  condemnation
was  in  all  cases  in  money,  G.  iv,  48.  The  amount  might
either  be  fixed  definitely  in  the  formula,  cond.  certa,  or  be
limited  to  a  maximum,  cond.  incerta  sed  taxata,  or  be  left
entirely  to  the  discretion  of  the  judge,  cond.  incerta  ct
infinita,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  action,  G.  iv,
50,  51.  It  might  happen,  though  unusual,  that  a  cond.
incerta  was  the  sequel  to  an  intentio  certa,  as  when  a
honor,  emptor  sued  for  a  definite  sum;  for  then  the  debtor
was  entitled  before  condemnation  to  have  deducted  any
counter  claim  of  his  against  the  bankrupt,  (see  Compensa-
tion, 4),  G.  iv,  68.

3.  What  if  the  praetor  had  put  too  great  or  too  small  a  sum  in

a  condemnatio  certa  ? — In  the  former  case  the  pursuer
obviously  was  not  prejudiced,  but  the  defender  was
entitled  to  in  integrum  restitutio  (which  see)  in  order  to
get  the  formula  amended,  G.  iv,  57 ;  in  the  latter  the  pur-
suer had  in  general  to  take  the  consequences,  in  integrum
restitutio  being  refused  unless  he  was  a  minor,  ibid.

4.  Cases  in  which  the  condemnatio  ran  in  another  name  than

the  intentio. — The  condemnatio  always  contained  not  only
the  name  of  the  party  who  was  to  be  condemned,  but
also  that  of  him  to  whom  he  was  to  be  condemned  in  the
event  of  the  action  not  ending  in  acquittal;  but  those
names  were  not  necessarily  the  same  as  in  the  intentio

DIGEST.  477

CONDEMNATIO — continued.

(which  see).  If  a  bonorum  emptor  sued  by  the  Kutilian
action,  he  took  the  intentio  in  name  of  the  bankrupt  as
the  party  to  whom  the  defender  was  really  indebted,  but
the  condemnatio  in  his  own,  G.  iv,  35 ;  and  if  either  suit
or  defence  was  conducted  by  a  tutor  or  curator,  cognitor
or  procurator,  (see  Procurators/  in  litigation),  it  was  the
principal's  name  that  appeared  in  the  intentio,  the  agent's
in  the  condemnatio,  G.  iv,  86.
5.  Judge's  duty  in  regard  to  the  condemnatio. — See  Procedure,  10.

CONDICEKE,  meaning  of,  G.  iv,  17&.

CONDICTIO  was  the  generic  name  for  a  personal  action  in  which  the
intentio  (which  see)  embodied  either  dare  oportere  or  dare
facere  oportere,  G.  iv,  5,  the  meaning  of  those  words  being
explained  in  G.  iv,  2,  note  3  ;  the  first  was  condictio  certi,
the  second  condictio  incerti,  ibid.  As  a  general  rule  a
condictio  was  inapplicable  where  a  man  was  claiming  his
own, — he  could  not  maintain  that  another  was  bound  to
give  him  in  property  what  was  already  his ;  but  excep-
tionally it  was  allowed  against  thieves  in  the  condictio
furtiva,  G.  ii,79,  iv,  4, (see  Theft,*!},  and  against  other  malae
field  possessors  in  one  or  two  cases  unspecified,  G.  ii,  79.
On  condictio  indebiti  in  particular,  see  Indebiti  solutio.

CONDICTIONEM,  LEGis  ACTio  PER,  G.  iv,  17&-20;  see  Legis  actiones,  4.

CONDITION. — The  phraseology  was — condicio  pendet,  G.  i,  186,  ii,
200,  iii,  179,  while  fulfilment  or  failure  was  still  in  the
future  ;  cond.  exstitit,  G.  iii,  179,  or  expleta  est,  U.  ii,  5,
when  it  had  been  fulfilled ;  cond.  defecit,  G.  iii,  179,  when
it  had  failed.

1.  Conditions  in  contracts. — Sale  and  location  might  both  be

conditional,  G.  iii,  146,  and  so  might  a  stipulation,  102,
113.  But  while  a  conditional  answer  to  an  unconditional
question  was  useless  (see  Stipulation,  5),  G.  iii,  102,  it
was  quite  competent  in  adstipulation  to  make  the  second
stipulation  conditional  though  the  first  wras  pure,  i.e.
unconditional,  (see  Adstipulation,  1),  G.  iii,  113.  The  ex
intervallo  introduction  of  a  condition  was  such  a  change
in  an  obligation  as  to  amount  to  novation  (which  see,  No.
4)  if  the  condition  was  fulfilled,  though  not  if  it  failed,
G.  iii,  177,  179.

2.  Conditions  in  testaments. — An  heir  might  be  instituted  under

a  condition;  if  it  failed,  and  he  was  sole  heir  without
a  substitute  (see  Substitution,  1),  the  result  was  intestacy,
G.  ii,  144.  Any  testamentary  provision  might  be  con-
ditional,— a  legacy,  U.  xxiv,  31,  a  trust  gift,  G.  ii,  250,
the  enfranchisement  of  a  slave,  U.  ii,  1,  or  the  appoint-

478  DIGEST.

CONDITION — continued.

ment  of  a  tutor,  G.  i,  186  ;  and  in  all  these  a  dies  incertus
was  regarded  as  a  condition,  U.  xxiv,  31  and  note.  As  a
conditional  legacy  did  not  vest  until  the  condition  was
fulfilled  or  the  dies  incertus  had  come,  ibid.,  there  was  a
nice  question  as  to  the  ownership  pendente  condicione  of
a  legacy  bequeathed  per  vindicationem  (see  Legacy,  21),
G.  ii,  200.

3.  Impossible  conditions. — A  contract  under  an  impossible  con-

dition was  a  nullity,  G.  iii,  98.  When  such  a  condition
was  annexed  to  a  legacy,  the  Sabinian  view  was  that  the
legacy  was  to  be  held  valid,  and  the  condition  regarded  as
unwritten;  the  Proculians,  however,  maintaining  that  the
rule  should  be  the  same  as  in  contract,  ibid.

4.  Defeat  of  a  condition  by  a  party  interested  in  its  failure. —

When  this  happened — as  when  a  slave  had  a  testamen-
tary gift  of  freedom  on  condition  of  paying  a  certain
sum  to  the  heir,  and  the  latter  would  not  accept  it — the
condition  was  regarded  as  fulfilled,  U.  ii,  6.

CONFARREATION,  G.  i,  112,  U.  tit.  ix ;  see  Manus,  1.

CONFISCATION  of  the  estate  of  a  partner  in  strictness  put  an  end  to
the  partnership,  (which  see,  No.  3),  G.  iii,  154.

CONJOINT  and  DISJOINT  LEGACY  to  co-legatees,  G.  ii,  199  ;  see  Legacy,
30-34.

CONSANGUINEI  defined,  U.  xxvi,  1 ;  consanguineorum  gradus,  G.  iii,
14,  23,  29,  U.  xxvi,  6  ;  consanguinitatis  jura,  G.  iii,  24  and
note  1.  See  Intestate  succession,  4.

CONSENSUAL  OBLIGATIONS  (see  Contract,  1)  were  so  called  because
a  common  understanding  was  sufficient  to  create  them
without  any  formality,  G.  iii,  136 ;  consequently  they
might  be  contracted  even  between  persons  at  a  distance
from  each  other,  by  the  medium  of  a  letter  or  a  messenger,
ibid.  They  arose  from  the  four  contracts  of  sale,  location,
partnership,  and  mandate,  (see  those  words),  G.  iii,  135  ;
the  parties  to  them  each  becoming  bound  for  what  in  the
circumstances  he  ought  to  do  in  fairness  and  equity,  137.

CONSILIUM,  the,  that  sat  to  consider  questions  of  manumission  (which
see,  Nos.  2-4,  6)  was  composed  in  Rome  of  five  senators
and  as  many  knights ;  in  the  provinces,  of  twenty  recu-
perators, Eoman  citizens,  G.  i,  20,  U.  i,  13a.

CONSOBEINI,  G.  iii,  10  and  n.  1.

CONSTITUTIONES  PRINCIPUM  were  enactments  of  the  emperors  (see
Statute,  1),  in  the  form  either  of  decrees,  edicts,  or  epistles,
G.  i,  5  and  note  1,  and  were  held  to  have  the  force  of  leges
in  consideration  of  the  imperium  vested  in  the  sovereign,
ibid.  The  following  are  specially  mentioned  : —

DIGEST.  479

CONSTITUTIONES  PRINCIPUM — continued.

Antoninus  Pius.  Eescript  (?)  regarding  the  punishment  to
be  awarded  to  an  owner  killing  his  slave,  (see  Slavery,  2),
G.  i,  53  ;  rescript  denouncing  unnecessary  cruelty  to  a
slave,  ibid. ;  rescript  about  erroris  causae  probatio  by  a
peregrin,  (see  Error,  c.  prob),  74 ;  epistle  about  adrogation
of  pupils,  (see  Adoption,  5),  102,  U.  viii,  5 ;  rescript  about
a  legacy  of  a  Junian  latin  to  a  colony,  (see  Succession  to
Junian  latins,  2),  G.  ii,  195.

Augustus.  Enactment  allowing  a  soldier  filiusfamilias  to  dis-
pose of  his  peculium  castrense  by  testament,  U.  xx,  10,  (see
Soldier,  Testament,  6,  25).

Caracalla,  (imperator  Antoninus  in  text).  Enactment  giving
caduca  to  fisc,  U.  xvii,  2,  (see  Caducity,  5).

Claudius.  Edict  declaring  that  a  latin  might  acquire  citizen-
ship nave,  G.  i,  32c,  U.  iii,  6,  (see  Junian  latinity,  7).

Hadrian.  Eescript  regulating  the  responsa  prudentium  (which
see),  G.  i,  7  ;  edict  on  subject  of  petitions  by  peregrins
for  grants  of  citizenship,  (see  Citizenship,  8),  G.  i,  55,  93;
rescript  about  erroris  causae  probatio  (which  see),  G.  i,  73  ;
enactment  modifying  the  Claudian  Set.  (which  see).  G.  i,
84 ;  rescript  as  to  effect  of  grant  of  citizenship  to  a  pere-
grin, (see  Patria  potestas,  12),  G.  i,  94 ;  rescript  (?)  excep-
tionally allowing  in  integrum  restitutio  to  a  man  above
twenty-live  who  had  in  excusable  ignorance  taken  an  in-
solvent inheritance,  (see  In  integrum  restitutio},  G.  ii,  163  ;
rescript  (?)  about  legacies  by  preception  to  others  than
heirs,  (see  Legacy,  28, 29),  G.  ii,  221;  rescript  as  to  interest
on  legacies  and  trust-gifts  when  heir  in  mora  (which  see),
G.  ii,  280 ;  epistle  conferring  beneftcium  divisionis  upon
sureties  (see  Suretyship,  4),  G.  iii,  121,  I2la,  122.

Marc.  Aurelius.  Enactments  that  an  institute  with  imperfect
cretion  should  totally  exclude  substitute  by  simple  gestio
pro  herede,  (see  Cretio,  3),  U.  xxii,  34  ;  rescript  (attributed
in  the  text  to  imp.  Antoninus)  allowing  instituted  heirs
under  an  imperfect  testament,  who  had  obtained  bonorum
possessio,  to  plead  exceptio  doli  to  any  attempt  of  the  agnate
heirs-at-law  to  eject  them,  (see  Bonorum  possessio,  12),  G.
ii,  120 ;  rescript  (attributed  in  text  to  imp.  Antoninus,
and  by  Just,  in  1.  4,  C.  de  lib.  praet.  vi,  28,  to  Magnus
Ant., — inapplicable  to  Ant.  Pius)  limiting  bonor.  possessio
granted  to  females  practeritae  to  the  amount  they  were
entitled  to  by  adcretio,  (see  Bonorum  possessio,  9),  G.  ii,  126;
rescript  (attributed  in  text  to  imp.  Antoninus)  allowing
heir  under  a  testament  partially  obliterated  or  other-
wise defaced  to  plead  exceptio  doli  against  heirs-at-law

480  DIGEST.

CONSTITUTIONES  PRINCIPUM — continued.

obtaining  bonor.  possessio  dbintestato,  (see  Bonor.  possessio,
12),  G.  ii,  151 ;  edict  (?)  allowing  minors  to  have  curators
in  other  than  the  exceptional  cases  of  the  Plaetorian  law,
(see  Curatory,  3),  G.  i,  197,  note  ;  rescript  allowing  com-
pensation to  be  pleaded  in  answer  to  stricti  juris  actions,
addition  to  G.  iv,  61,  note,  in  Additions  etc.
Nero  (?).  Edict  (?)  conferring  citizenship  xm  latins  aedificatione,

G.  i,  33  and  note,  (see  Junian  latinity,  7).
Nerva.     Enactment  about  legacies  bequeathed  to  municipali-
ties, U.  xxiv,  8,  (see  Legacy,  6).

Trajan.  Edict  (?)  as  to  acquisition  of  citizenship  by  a  latin
pistrino,  (see  Junian  latinity,  7),  G.  i,  34 ;  rescript  (?)  in
regard  to  grants  of  citizenship  to  latins  either  salvo  jure
patroni  or  without  consent  of  patrons,  (see  Succession  to
Junian  latins,  5),  G.  iii,  72.
Vespasian.  Enactment  modifying  the  Claudian  Set.  (which  see),

G.  i,  85.

Authorship  unknown.  Constitution  granting  indefinite  conu-
bium  to  discharged  soldiers,  (see  Soldiers),  G.  i,  57  ;  about
marriage  between  cousins,  (see  Marriage,  4),  G.  i,  62  ;  on
the  jus  Latii,  (see  Colonial  latinity,  2),  96 ;  about  military
testaments,  (see  Testament,  25),  G.  ii,  109 ;  relaxing  the
prohibition  of  donations  between  husband  and  wife,  (see
Husband  and  wife,  5),  U.  vii,  1 ;  allowing  certain  divini-
ties to  be  instituted  as  heirs,  (see  Testament,  13),  U.  xxi,  6.

CONSTITUTUM,  acknowledgment  of  indebtedness,  actionable  as  a
praetorian  pact :  a  natural  obligation  was  sufficient
foundation  for  it,  G.  iii,  119a,  note  1.

CONSUETUDE,  see  Custom.

CONSUMPTIO  ACTIONIS,  exhaustion  of  a  right  of  action  by  its  de-
ductio  in  judicium,  i.e.  by  adjustment  on  it  of  a  formula
and  transmission  of  the  latter  to  a  judge  for  trial,  G.  iv,
131,  131a;  see  Litis  contcstatio.

CONTRACT,  one  of  the  modes  of  creating  an  obligation  (which  see),
G.  iii,  88.

1.  Varieties. — There  were  four  varieties  —  the  contracts  re,

vcrbis,  litteris,  and  consensu,  giving  rise  to  the  so-called
real,  verbal,  literal,  and  consensual  obligations,  G.  iii,  89,
(see  those  words).  The  innominate  contracts  in  one  or
other  of  the  forms  do  ut  dcs,  do  ut  facias,  facio  ut  facias,
facio  ut  des,  were  regarded  as  real,  ibid.,  note  1.  The
obligations  created  by  the  verbal  and  literal  contracts
were  unilateral,  while  those  arising  out  of  the  consensual
ones  were  bilateral  or  mutual,  G.  iii,  137.

2.  Difference  between  contract  and  pact. — See  Obligation,  2.

DIGEST.  481

CONTRACT — continued.

3.  Formal  contracts. — The  contracts  verbis  and  litteris  were

formal  contracts,  i.e.  if  the  prescribed  form  was  gone
through  liability  was  in  law  created,  although  equity
might  give  relief,  G.  iii,  89,  note;  e.g.  if  a  stipulatory
promise  was  made  to  pay  a  certain  sum  in  consideration
of  an  expected  loan,  the  promise  was  binding  even  though
the  loan  was  not  advanced,  but  might  be  rendered
ineffectual  by  an  exccptio  doli  mali,  G.  iv,  116.  The
nexum  and  jusjurandum  of  the  early  law  (see  those
words)  were  of  the  same  class,  G.  iii,  89,  note.

4.  Useless  contracts. — Many  of  the  circumstances  that  Gai.

refers  to  as  rendering  a  stipulation  useless,  and  which  are
placed  under  that  head  in  deference  to  his  example,  were
applicable  to  contracts  generally;  see  Stipulation,  3-5.

CONTRARIUM  JUDiciUM,  G.  iv,  177  ;  see  Vexatious  litigation.

CONUBIUM.

1.  What  meant  by  it. — See  explanation  in  U.  v,  3,  note.

2.  Who  had  it  inter  se. — Eoman  citizens  had  it  with  citizens,

but  not  with  latins  or  peregrins  except  by  special  con-
cession, G.  i,  56,  U.  v,  4.  Veterans,  who  had  obtained
honourable  discharge,  occasionally  obtained  an  indefinite
concession  of  it,  empowering  them  to  marry  any  latin  or
peregrin  woman  as  if  she  were  a  citizen,  G.  i,  57.  But
there  could  be  no  conubium  with  a  slave,  U.  v,  5.

3.  Consequences  of  its  presence. — The  rule  was  that  where  a

man  married  a  woman  with  whom  he  had  conubium,  the
issue  followed  the  condition  of  their  father, — were  citizens
or  peregrins  according  as  he  was  one  or  other,  G.  i,  56,
76,  77,  U.  v,  8 ;  but  whereas,  if  he  was  a  citizen,  the
marriage  v?&s  justum  matrimonium  (see  Marriage,  1),  and
his  children  in  potcstate,  G.  i,  56,  76,  if  he  was  a  peregrin
the  marriage  was  only  a  peregrin  marriage,  and  his  chil-
dren, though  lawful,  were  not  in  his  potestas,  77.

4.  Consequences  of  its  absence. — The  rule  of  the  jus  gentium  was

that  in  the  absence  of  conubium  a  child  followed  the  con-
dition of  its  mother,  G.  i,  78,  U.  v,  8;  but  was  altered  by  the
Minician  law,  which  provided  that  the  issue  of  parents  of
unequal  status,  who  had  not  comibium,  should  invariably
follow  the  lower,  ibid.  Hadrian  subsequently  enacted
that  if  a  Eoman  woman  married  a  Junian  latin,  whether
under  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  or  not — there  was  no  conu-
bitim  between  citizens  and  Junian  latins,  G.  i,  80 — her
children  should  be  citizens,  ibid.  See  Status,  2.

CONVENTIO  IN  MANUM,  S66  Manus.

CONVENTUS  or  provincial  assizes,  G.  i,  20  and  n.  2.

2n

482  DIGEST.

CORPOREALS,  G.  ii,  13  ;  see  Things,  4.

CREDERE,  etymology,  G.  iii,  92,  note.

CREDITA  PECUNIA  defined,  G.  iii,  124.

CRETIO,  G.  ii,  164-173,  U.  xxii,  25-30 ;  see  also  Hereditas,  5.

1.  Cretio,  what? — Cretion  was  a  period  formally  limited  in  a

testament  for  the  heir's  entry,  G.  ii,  164,  165,  U.  xxii,
27,  failure  being  sometimes  under  penalty  of  disherison
(perfecta  cretio),  ibid.,  sometimes  merely  under  penalty  of
admission  of  a  substitute  (imperfecta  cretio),  G.  ii,  177,
U.  xxii,  34.

2.  Cerniture,  what? — Cerniture  in  compliance  with  the  cre-

tion-clause  was  a  formal  declaration  of  acceptance  of  the
inheritance,  in  presence  of  witnesses,  and  in  well-estab-
lished words  of  style,  G.  ii,  166  and  note,  U.  xxii,  28  ;  and
it  required  to  be  made  before  the  time  limited,  usually  a
hundred  days,  had  expired,  G.  ii,  166.

3.  Were  equivalents  possible  1 — Where  the  cretion  was  perfect,

informal  declaration  or  gestio  pro  herede  could  not  be
admitted  as  equivalents,  G.  ii,  168  ;  but  in  imperfect
cretion  gestio  pro  herede  entitled  the  institute  at  first  to
retain  a  half  of  the  succession,  G.  ii,  177,  and  afterwards
the  whole  of  it,  U.  xxii,  34.

4.  Vulgar  and  continuous  cretion. — These  are  distinguished  in

G.  ii,  171-173,  U.  xxii,  31,  32.

CRETIO  LITIS  INFITIATIONE. — To  check  vexatious  litigation  an  un-
successful defender  was  sometimes  condemned  in  double
the  amount  of  his  normal  liability  as  the  penalty  of  his
denial,  G.  iv,  171,  e.g.  in  the  a.  judicati  and  a.  dcpensi,  G.
iv,  9, 171,  (see  those  words) ;  in  the  action  for  a  legacy  by
damnation  (see  Legacy,  22,  23),  G.  iii,  282,  iv,  9,  171 ;
and  in  the  Aquilian  action  against  an  adstipulator  (see
Adstipulation)  who  had  acceptilated  in  fraud  of  the
stipulant,  G.  iii,  215,  216,  iv,  9,  171.  But  the  penalty
was  not  incurred  where  the  defence  was  by  the  heir  of
the  original  debtor,  G.  iv,  172.  See  Vexatious  litigation,  1.

CURATORY,  curatio,  G.  i,  197,  198,  U.  tit.  xii.

1.  Curatory  of  lunatics  and  prodigals. — The  Twelve  Tables
enacted  that  lunatics,  and  prodigals  who  had  been  inter-
dicted the  administration  of  their  estates  because  they
were  dissipating  the  patrimony  to  which  they  had  suc-
ceeded ab  intestato,  should  be  in  curatory  of  their  agnates,
U.  xii,  2  ;  and  the  praetors  gave  curators  of  their  own
selection  to  freedmen  spendthrifts,  and  to  those  free-born
ones  who  had  succeeded  to  a  family  property  ex  tcstamento,
neither  of  those  classes  being  included  in  the  provision
of  the  statute,  U.  xii,  3.

DIGEST.  483

CURATORY — continued.

2.  Duties  and  powers  of  such  curators. — Latterly  those  of  them

who  took  the  office  by  devolution  of  law  were  required  to
give  security,  satisdatio,foT  the  faithful  discharge  of  their
duties,  G.  i,  200  ;  their  powers — at  least  those  of  the
agnatic  curator  of  a  lunatic — extended  even  to  the  aliena-
tion of  the  estate,  G.  ii,  64 ;  and  they  might  sue  or  be
sued  on  account  of  their  wards,  giving  the  same  securities
as  required  from  procurators,  G.  iv,  82,  (see  Procurators/  in
litigation,  2).

3.  Curatory  of  minors. — By  the  Plaetorian  law  the  praetor  was

authorised  in  certain  cases  to  appoint  tutors  to  minors
(see  Minority),  G.  i,  197  and  note ;  and  Marc.  Aurelius
afterwards  withdrew  the  limitation  to  certain  cases  and
authorised  it  generally,  ibid.,  U.  xii,  4.  Such  curators
were  not  required  to  give  security,  their  qualifications
having  been  approved  beforehand,  G.  i,  200.

CUSTOM,  mores,  consuetudo,  a  factor  in  every  system  of  law,  G.  i,  1,
resting  on  tacit  acceptance  by  the  nation,  U.  i,  4,  G.  iii,
82.  Among  the  institutions  due  to  it  are  mentioned  the
Tiniversal  acquisitions  by  manus  (which  see)  and  adrogatio
(see  Adoption,  8),  G.  iii,  83,  certain  tutories,  U.  xi,  2,  24,
and  one  or  two  cases  of  procedure  per  pignoris  capionem
(see  Legis  actiones,  6),  G.  iv,  27.

DAMAGE  TO  PROPERTY,  WRONGFUL,  G.  iii,  210-19;  see  Wrongful
damage  to  property.

DAMAGES,  see  Jnteresse,  Wrongful  damage  to  property,  1,  3.

DAMNAS  ESTO,  a  phrase  employed  in  statutes  and  private  deeds,
such  as  testaments,  to  impose  a  liability,  G.  ii,  201  and
n.  1,  iii,  210,  note  2,  U.  xxiv,  5 ;  the  party  thereby  made
debtor  was  called  damnas  (indeclinable)  or  damnatus,  G.
ii,  201,  note  1,  iii,  175  and  note  3 ;  and  by  the  XII  Tab.
summary  execution  by  manus  injectio  (see  Legis  actiones,  5)
was  authorised  against  him  on  the  strength  of  the  dam-
natio,  G.  iv,  21,  though  the  Vallian  law  afterwards  gave
him  some  relief,  G.  iv,  25.  If  the  creditor  desired  to  give
the  debtor  a  discharge  without  payment,  he  had  to  do  so
per  aes  ct  libram,  G.  iii,  175,  (see  Nexi  solutio}.

DAMXATI,  DAMNATIO,  see  Damnas  esto.

DAMNATIONEM,  LEGATUM  PER,  see  Legacy,  22-24,  32,  34.

DAMNUM,  DAMNUM  DECIDERE,  G.  iv,  37,  note  6.

DAMNUM  INFECTUM,  G.  iv,  31  and  notes.

DAMNUM  INJURIA  DATUM,  see  Wrongful  damage  to  property.

DAPS,  G.  iv,  28  and  note  2.

DARE,  technical  meaning,  G.  iii,  92,  note,  iv,  4.

484  DIGEST.

DARE,  FACERE.  PRAESTAJIE,  G.  iv,  2  and  note  3.

DEAF  PERSON,  surdus,  could  not  be  a  party  to  a  stipulation,  G.  iii,
105 ;  nor  could  he  validly  execute  a  testament  per  aes  et
libram,  U.  xx,  13,  or  assist  at  the  execution  of  another  per-
son's Sisfamiliae  emptor,  witness,  or  balance-holder,  U.xx,  7.

DECIMAE,  tenths  of  the  estate  of  husband  or  wife,  one  or  more  of
which  the  survivor  was  empowered  by  the  Julian  law
to  take  in  certain  circumstances  under  the  other's  testa-
ment, U.  xiv,  1,  2  and  note;  see  Julian  and  Pap.  Papp.
law,  6.

DECRETUM  (PRINCIPIS),  a  form  of  imperial  enactment,  G.  i,  5,  note  1,
(see  Constitutions  principum] ;  dccretum  praetoris,  a  form
of  interdict,  G.  iv,  140,  (see  Interdicts,  1).

DEDITICIAN  FKEEDMEN,  libcrti  qui  dediticiorum  numero  sunt.

1.  Origin  of  this  class. — It  was  a  provision  of  the  Aelia-Sentian

law  (which  see,  No.  3)  that  slaves  who  had  deservedly  been
subjected  to  disgraceful  punishment  should  not  become
citizens  on  manumission,  but  rank  with  those  peregrins
who  after  defeat  had  surrendered  to  Eome  uncondition-
ally, G.  i,  13,  14,  U.  i,  11;  the  only  exception  being  iii
the  case  of  one  who  was  instituted  necessary  heir  with
freedom  in  the  testament  of  his  insolvent  owner,  (see
Necessarii  heredes),  U.  i,  14.

2.  Disabilities  of  a  deditician. — He  could  never  in  any  way

become  a  citizen  or  even  a  latin,  G.  i,  15,  26 ;  and  was
forbidden  to  reside  within  a  hundred  miles  of  Eome,
under  penalty  of  reduction  again  to  perpetual  slavery,  G.
i,  27.  As  nothing  more  than  a  peregrin  he  could  neither
make  a  testament,  G.  i,  25,  iii,  75,  U.  xx,  14,  nor  have  any
interest  in  that  of  another  person,  G.  i,  25,  U.  xxii,  2.
Yet  though  only  a  peregrin  he  might  possibly  be  husband
and  father  of  citizens,  viz.  when  a  citizen  woman  had
married  him  believing  he  was  a  citizen,  and  on  discover-
ing her  mistake  proved  cause  of  error  (see  Erroris  causae
probatio),  and  thus  made  her  children  citizens,  G.  i,  67,
68  ;  over  them,  however,  the  deditician  father  had  no
potestas,  ibid.

3.  Disposal  of  his  estate  on  death. — If,  but  for  the  stain  on  his

character,  he  would  have  been  a  citizen  on  manumission,
his  estate  belonged  to  his  patron  according  to  the  rules
of  succession  to  citizen  freedmen,  (see  Succession  to  cit.
freedmen),  G.  iii,  75 ;  but  if,  by  reason  of  the  form  of  his
manumission,  he  would,  but  for  the  stain,  have  been  a
latin,  it  went  to  the  manumitter  and  his  heirs,  according
to  the  rules  of  succession  to  latin  freedmen,  (see  Succ.  to
Jun.  latins),  G.  iii,  76.

DIGEST.  485

DEDUCTIO  in  action  by  bonorum  cmptor,  G.  iv,  65-G8 ;  see  Compen-
sation, 4.

DELATIO  HEEEDITATIS,  see  Hereditas,  1,  2.

DELEGATIO,  G.  iii,  130 ;  see  Novation,  3.

DELIBERANDI  TEMPOS,  time  allowed  to  a  stranger  heir  to  consider
whether  it  was  for  his  advantage  to  accept  an  inherit-
ance, G.  ii,  162 ;  see  Hereditas,  6.

DELICT  was  one  of  the  sources  of  obligation,  G.  iii,  88,  182 ;  (see
also  Obligation,  2).

1.  Varieties. — There  were  four  nominate  delicts,  furtum,  vis

bonorum  raptorum,  damnum  injuria  datum,  injuria,  G.
iii,  182,  (see  Theft,  Robbery,  Wrongful  damage  to  property,
Personal  injury} ;  but  all  were  of  the  same  genus,  there
being  no  delict  where  there  was  no  res,  i.e.  no  act  done,
ibid.

2.  Delicts  of  persons  alieiii  juris. — A  wrong  done  by  &jilws-

familias  or  slave  to  his  paterfamilias  or  owner  gave  the
latter  no  action  ex  delict  o,  obligation  between  them  being
impossible,  G.  iv,  78  ;  but  for  delicts  committed  by  them
against  strangers  the  paterfamilias  was  responsible  in
noxal  actions  (which  see),  75.

3.  How  far  heirs  affected. — The  heir  of  a  delinquent  was  not

liable  in  the  penal  action  ex  dclicto,  G.  iv,  112 ;  but  the

heir  of  the  party  wronged  was  entitled  to  sue,  except  in

the  a.  injuriarum,  ibid.
DELIVERY,  traditio,  see  Property,  5.
DEMONSTRATE,  one  of  the  clauses  of  a  formula,  G.  iv,  39 ;  see

Formula,  1.

1.  Its  purpose  and  position. — When  present  it  stood  first,  its

purpose  being  briefly  to  explain  what  had  given  rise
to  the  action,  G.  iv,  40 ;  styles,  40,  47,  59,  136.  It  re-
quired to  be  followed  with  an  intcntio  and  condemnatio
(see  those  words),  44,  except  when  an  adjudicatio  (which
see)  came  in  place  of  the  latter,  44,  note.

2.  When  necessary. — In  formulae  in  jus  conceptae  it  was  intro-

duced only  when  the  claim  was  illiquid,  and  the  intentio
in  the  style  '  quidquid  ob  earn  rem  ilium  illi  dare  facere
oportet,'  G.  iv,  60;  such  &  formula  was  called  incerta,  54,
131.  In  formulae  in  factum  conceptae,  the  demonstratio
was  in  a  manner  amalgamated  with  the  intcntio,  47,  60.

3.  Introduction  of  restrictive  words. — Where   a    demonstratio

was  present  it  was  competent  to  introduce  into  it  a
'cujus  rei  diesfuit'  or  such  like,  which  in  a  formula  without
a  demonstratio  was  made  matter  of  prescription,  G.  iv,
136,  (see  Praescriptio).

4.  IVhat  if  too  much  or  too  little  demonstrated  ? — If  a  man  in

486  DIGEST.

DEMONSTEATIO — continued.

his  demonstratio  condescended  on  too  much  or  too  little,
his  action  was  resultless,  but — differing  from  the  rule  in
regard  to  the  inteniio,  G.  iv,  53,  56 — his  claim  remained
intact,  58  ;  at  least  this  was  the  opinion  of  Gai.,  although
to  some  extent  not  shared  by  other  jurists,  59,  60.

DEPENSUM,  see  Actio  depensi,  Suretyship,  5.

DEPOSIT,  dcpositum,  is  not  mentioned  by  Gai.  in  his  description  of
the  obligatio  re  contracta,  G.  iii,  90  and  91,  note.

1.  Nature  of  the  contract. — The  deposit  still  left  the  legal  pos-

session in  the  depositor,  the  depositary  being  merely  his
agent  in  possessing,  G.  iv,  153.

2.  Obligations  of  the  depositary. — If,  animo  furandi,  he  used

what  was  deposited  with  him,  he  committed  theft,  G.
iii,  196.  He  was  bound  to  give  it  back  to  the  depositor
on  demand  ;  but  he  was  liable  in  damages  on  failure
only  when  attributable  to  dole  on  his  part, — he  was
not  responsible  for  careless  keeping,  whereby  it  had  been
stolen,  G.  iii,  207.  Therefore,  unlike  a  borrower,  205,
206,  he  had  not  an  actio  furti  against  the  thief;  the
depositor  was  alone  entitled  to  it,  207.

3.  The  actio   depositi. — This  was   one  of  the  actions  which

exceptionally  might  be  formulated  either  in  jus  or  in
factum,  G.  iv,  47,  59,  60  ;  styles,  47.  When  in  jus  con-
cepta  it  was  bonaefidei,  62.  Condemnation  of  the  depo-
sitary made  him  infamous,  60.

DEROGATIO  LEGIS,  partial  repeal  of  a  statute,  U.  i,  3.

DIANA  OF  THE  EPHESIANS,  U.  xxii,  6.

DIES,  a  date  at  which  a  right  was  to  become  operative, — money  to
be  payable  under  a  contract,  G.  iii,  124,  a  legacy,  or  a
trust-gift,  or  a  tutor's  appointment  under  a  testament,  G.
i,  186,  ii,  250,  U.  xxiv,  31.  The  date  might  be  either
certus  or  incertus ;  in  testaments  a  dies  incertus  was  re-
garded as  a  condition,  U.  xxiv,  30  and  31,  note.  The  ex
intervallo  introduction  of  a  date  into  an  obligation,  or
withdrawal  of  one  from  it,  amounted  to  novation  (which
see,  No.  4),  G.  iii,  177  ;  the  reason  being  that  a  postponed
debt  counted  for  less  than  one  immediately  exigible,  G.
iii,  113.

DIES  LEGATI  CEDEBAT,  i.e.  a  legacy  vested,  under  the  old  law  at  the
testator's  death.  By  the  Julian  and  Pap.-Poppaean  law
it  vested  on  the  opening  of  the  testament,  if  it  was  either
pure  or  in  diem  cerium;  if  conditional  or  in  diem  incertum,
only  on  the  condition  happening  or  uncertain  date  arriving,
U.  xxiv,  31.  If  a  legatee  survived  the  dies  cedens,  his
right  passed  to  his  heirs,  30.

DIGEST.  487

DIES  NEFASTUS, — a  leyis  actio  (which  see)  could  not  proceed  upon
it,  G.  iv,  29.

Dn  SUPERI,  DII  MANES, — things  consecrated  to  them  were  respec-
tively sacred  and  religious,  G.  ii,  4.  A  few  specially
favoured  deities  might  be  instituted  heirs  in  a  testament,
U.  xxii,  6.  The  fana  deorum  were  regarded  as  sanctu-
aries, G.  i,  53.

DILATORY  EXCEPTIONS,  G.  iv,  122  ;  see  Exception,  5.

DISHERISON,  see  Testament,  10-12.

DISJOINT  and  CONJOINT  LEGACY  to  co-legatees,  G.  ii,  199  ;  see  Legacy,
30-34.

DISPENSATOR,  G.  i,  122,  iii,  160.

DIVERSAE  SCHOLAE  AUCTORES,  a  phrase  used  by  Gaius  to  denote  the
Proculians ;  see  Sabinians  and  Proculians.

DIVINI  JURIS,  things  that  were,  G.  ii,  3-9 ;  see  Things,  1.

DIVISIONIS,.BENEFICIUM,  G.  iii,  121 ;  see  Suretyship,  4.

DIVORCE,  divortium,  repudium,  see  Husband  and  wife,  6.

DODRANS,  in  matter  of  testaments,  three-fourths  of  a  testator's
estate,  and  in  particular  the  three-fourths  which  legatees
might  take  under  the  Falcidian  law,  U.  xxv,  14;  see
Legacy,  16.

DOLUS,  DOLUS  MALUS,  intent  to  injure  or  defraud,  or  knowingly  taking
advantage  of  what  caused  that  result,  G.  ii,  215  ;  iii,  197,
207,  211 ;  iv,  47.  Doli  mali  exceptio,  see  Exception,  8.

DOMESTICUM  TESTIMONIUM  was  not  allowed  in  testaments,  G.  ii,
105-108,  U.  xx,  3-6.

DOMINICA  POTESTAS,  see  Slavery.

DOMINIUM,  see  Property.

DONATION  beyond  a  certain  amount  was  prohibited  by  the  Cincian
law  except  to  near  kinsmen,  U.  i,  1 ;  between  husband  and
wife  it  was  generally  invalid,  (see  Husband  and  wife,  5),
U.  vii,  1.

DOTIS  DICTIO,  a  particular  mode  of  constituting  a  dowry,  U.  vi,  2,
G.  iii,  96  and  note ;  see  Verbal  obligation,  Doivry,  1.

DOWRY,  dos,  U.  tit.  vi,  was  the  contribution  made  by  or  on  behalf
of  a  wife,  who  was  not  passing  in  manum  mariti,  towards
the  support  of  the  onera  matrimonii.  See  also  Husband
and  wife.

1.  How  and  by  whom  constituted. — There  were  three  modes  of
constituting  it, — dotis  datio,  instant  transfer,  U.  vi,  1  ;
dotis  dictio,  specification  of  it  in  a  formal  way,  which  was
held  to  amount  to  a  verbal  obligation  (which  see),  though
not  contracted  by  way  of  question  and  answer,  G.  iii,  96
and  note,  U.  vi,  1 ;  and  dotis  promissio,  in  the  shape  of  an
ordinary  stipulation  (which  see),  U.  vi,  1.  Any  person
could  give  or  promise  a  dowry,  U.  vi,  2 ;  but  it  was  only

488  DIGEST.

DOWRY — continued.

the  woman  herself,  a  male  ascendant  related  through
males,  or  a  debtor  of  hers  acting  on  her  instructions  that
could  constitute  it  by  dictio,  G-.  iii,  96,  U.  vi,  2.  If  the
woman  was  constituting  it  herself,  her  tutor,  even  her
patron,  was  obliged  to  give  his  auctoritas,  G.  i,  178,  180  ;
and  if  he  was  incapable,  she  got  an  interim  Atilian  tutor
for  the  purpose,  178.

2.  Varieties. — It   was  profecticia   when   constituted   by   the

woman's  father,  U.  vi,  3 ;  adventicia  when  it  proceeded
from  some  other  quarter,  ibid. ;  or  recepticia,  when,  being
adventicious,  the  party  advancing  it  had  bargained  that
it  was  to  revert  to  him  on  the  dissolution  of  the  marriage,
U.  vi,  5.

3.  The  husband's  right  in  it. — "While  the  marriage  lasted  the

husband  was  legally  its  owner,  G.  ii,  63  ;  but  he  was  thus
far  under  disability,  that  the  lex  Julia  de  adulteriis  forbade
him  to  alienate  lands  belonging  to  it,  at  least  italica
pracdia,  ibid,  and  n.  1.  He  might  bequeath  any  part  of
it  to  his  wife,  U.  xv,  3 ;  which  entitled  her  to  claim  it
the  moment  an  heir  entered  under  his  will,  instead  of
having  to  wait  for  it.  For,  if  there  was  no  agreement
to  the  contrary,  the  rule  was  that,  when  it  came  to  be
returned,  the  husband  or  his  heirs  did  so  in  three  annual
instalments,  so  far  as  money  or  other  fungibles  were  con-
cerned, U.  vi,  8,  non-fungibles,  however,  being  restored  at
once,  ibid.

4.  Its  fate  on  the  predecease  of  the  wife. — The  dos  profecticia

then  reverted  to  her  father  if  he  was  alive,  but  under
deduction  of  a  fifth  for  each  child  of  the  marriage  until
exhausted,  U.  vi,  4.  If  the  father  was  dead,  the  husband
retained  the  whole,  ibid.  A  dos  adventicia  he  was  also
entitled  to  retain,  U.  vi,  5,  unless  it  was  recepticia,  and
then  it  reverted  to  the  party  who  had  advanced  it,  ibid.

5.  Its  fate  on  divorce. — The  wife,  if  sui  juris,  was  then  entitled

to  sue  for  it,  whether  profecticious  or  adventicious,  U.
vi,  6 ;  if  a  filiafamilias  her  father  sued  along  with  her,
ibid.  If  she  died  after  the  divorce,  her  heirs  had  no
action  for  it  unless  her  husband  had  been  in  mora  in
returning  it,  according  to  the  practice  explained  above,  7.

6.  The  husband's  rights  of  retention. — The  husband  had  various

rights  of  retention.  Thus,  when  divorce  was  due  to  the
fault  of  the  wife  or  her  paterfamilias,  the  husband  was
entitled  to  retain  one-sixth  for  each  child  of  the  marriage,
but  not  more  than  one-half  in  all,  U.  vi,  10,  11.  Where
his  wife  had  been  guilty  of  adultery  he  retained  another

DIGEST.  489

DOWRY — continued.

sixth,  or  an  eighth  if  her  misconduct  had  been  less  serious,
12.  (If  he  himself  had  been  guilty  of  immorality,  he  was
punished  by  being  required  to  restore  fungibles  at  once,
and  pay  besides  a  sum  equal  to  three  years'  income  of
non-fungibles,  13.)  He  was  also  entitled  to  retention  for
outlays  on  the  dotal  estate  (see  Impensae),  9,  14^17  ;  for
gifts  made  by  him  to  his  wife,  9,  donations  between  them
being  as  a  rule  prohibited,  (see  Husband  and  wife,  5),  U.
vii,  1 ;  and  for  the  value  of  property  of  his  theftuously
carried  off  by  his  wife  in  prospect  of  divorce,  U.  vi,  9.

7.  The  actio  rei  uxoriae. — See  this  head  under  Actions.

8.  Caducous  dowry. — See  Caducity,  6.
,  DUPLICATION,  G.  iv,  127 ;  see  Replication.

DUPUNDIUS,  G.  i,  122.

EDICTA  MAGISTKATUUM,  G.  i,  6 ;  see  Jus  Romanorum.

EDICTUM  IMPERATORIS,  a  form  of  imperial  enactment,  G.  i,  5  and

note  1;  see  Constitutiones  principum.
EDICTUM  SUCCESSORIUM,  that  portion  of  the  praetor's  edict  which

regulated  the  matter  of  succession  testate  and  intestate,

U.  xxviii,  12.
EMANCIPATION,  exclusion  or  release  of  a  filiusfamilias  from   the

patria  potestas  (which  see),  G.  i,  132-135&.

1.  How  effected. — When  a  paterfamilias  mancipated  (see  Manci-

pation, 1)  his  daughter  or  his  grandchild  in  potestate  to  a
third  party,  and  the  latter  manumitted  her  or  him  (see
Manumission}  from  the  quasi  -  slavery  created  by  t^ie
mancipation  (see  Mancipii  etc.,  3),  the  daughter  or  grand-
child at  once  became  sui  juris,  G.  i,  132,  U.  x,  1 ;  but  in
the  case  of  a  son,  the  Twelve  Tables  (which  see,  No.  2)
required  three  mancipations  to  free  him  from  the  potestas,
and  as  many  manumissions  to  make  him  a  paterfamilias,
ibid.  Noxal  surrender  of  a  son  (see  Noxal  actions]  was
not  equivalent  to  emancipation,  the  mancipation  being
performed  only  once,  G.  iv,  79.

2.  Results  for  the  emancipated  child. — Becoming  sui  juris,  the

child  acquired  all  the  rights  incident  to  that  position,  (see
Sui  juris  personae).  But  as  the  emancipation  involved
capitis  deminutio  (which  see,  No.  2),  according  to  the  jus
civile  he  lost  all  right  of  succession  to  his  emancipating
parent  or  to  those  who  had  been  his  agnates,  G.  iii,  19,  21 ;
his  parent  was  not  bound  to  institute  or  disinherit  him,
G.  ii,  135,  U.  xxii,  23 ;  if  he  was  instituted,  he  took  as  a
stranger  heir  (see  Ex.tr anei  heredes),  not  as  a  suus,  G.  ii,
161.  By  the  praetorian  edict,  however,  if  his  parent  passed

490  DIGEST.

EMANCIPATION — continued.

him  unmentioned  in  his  testament,  he  was  entitled  to
bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas,  on  condition  of  collating
with  sui,  G.  ii,  135,  U.  xxii,  23,  xxviii,  2, 4,  (see  Bonor.  poss.,
7) ;  on  his  parent's  intestacy  he  was  admitted  to  honor,
poss.  ab  int.  along  with  sui,  G.  iii,  26,  U.  xxviii,  8  ;  and  he
might,  as  a  cognate,  claim  possession  of  the  estate  of  one
who,  but  for  the  capitis  deminutio,  would  have  been  his
agnate,  G.  iii,  27,  U.  xxviii,  9.

3.  Results  for  the  parent  and  third  parties. — If  the  parent  died

before  completing  a  son's  emancipation,  the  latter's  manu-
mission from  his  first  or  second  mancipation  invalidated
his  parent's  testament  by  quasi  agnatio  sui,  (see  Agn.  sui
heredis),  even  though  he  might  be  instituted  in  it  or  dis-
inherited, G.  ii,  141,  U.  xxiii,  3  ;  or,  if  the  parent  was
intestate,  entitled  him  to  succeed,  as  again  become  a  suus
heres,  G.  iii,  6.  The  manumitter  was  entitled,  as  quasi-
patron,  to  be  the  child's  tutor  G.  i,  166,  U.  xi,  5 ;  but  the
parent,  in  order  to  reserve  this  right,  usually  had  the  child
remancipated  to  him  and  himself  became  the  manumitter,
G.  i,  133,  172.  As  parens  manumissor  and  quasi-patron
he  was  entitled  not  only  to  be  tutor  of  but  to  succeed  to
his  emancipated  child  dying  without  issue,  G.  i,  133,  iii,
40,  41,  U.  xxviii,  7  and  n.  1,  as  amended  in  Additions  etc.

4.  Emancipation  of  an  adopted  child. — When  this  happened

the  child  was  regarded  as  if  in  fact  emancipated  by  his
natural  parent,  G.  ii,  137,  and  ceased  to  have  any  rights
in  relation  to  the  adoptive  parent's  succession,  G.  ii,  136,
U.  xxviii,  3.

EMERE  and  EMPTIO,  early  meaning,  G.  i,  113,  note  2,  ii,  104,  note  6,
U.  xix,  5,  note.

EMPHYTEUSIS, — the  name  is  not  in  Gai.,  but  of  later  date, — grant  of
lands  to  a  man  and  his  heirs  in  perpetuum,  so  long  as  the
vectigal  was  regularly  paid,  G.  iii,  145.  It  was  a  question
whether  the  contract  was  sale  or  location ;  but  held  to  be
the  latter,  ibid.

EMPTIO  BONORUM,  G.  iii,  77-81,  the  last  stage  of  the  bankruptcy
procedure  introduced  by  Publ.  Eutilius,  G.  iii,  77,  note,
iv,  35.

1.  To  what  estates  it  applied. — It  applied  to  the  estates  of  in-
solvent debtors,  whether  living  or  dead,  G.  iii,  78  :  living
ones,  if  they  either  fraudulently  kept  out  of  the  way  of
their  creditors  and  were  undefended  in  the  latter's  actions,
or  had  made  a  cessio  bonorum,  or  had  failed  to  pay  a  judg-
ment debt  within  the  days  of  grace,  ibid. ;  dead,  when
it  became  clear  that  they  were  without  heirs,  ibid.

DIGEST.  491

EMPTIO  BONORUM — continued.

2.  Procedure. — The  creditors  were  first  put  by  the  praetor  into

possession,  in  possessioncm  missi,  of  the  estate  of  the
bankrupt,  and  then  the  proceedings  were  publicly  adver-
tised, a  trustee  (magister)  elected,  and  the  estate  knocked
down  by  him  to  the  highest  bidder ;  those  various  steps
being  at  intervals  longer  or  shorter,  according  as  the
debtor  was  living  or  dead,  G-.  iii,  79  and  n.  8.

3.  Position  of  the  bonor.  emptor. — His  purchase  amounted  to

an  acquisition  of  the  estate  per  universitatem,  G.  ii,  98.
His  right,  however,  was  praetorian  only ;  his  ownership
of  its  corporeal  items  therefore  was  in  the  first  instance
bonitarian  (see  Bonitar.  ownership),  convertible  into  quiri-
tarian  by  usucapion,  G.  iii,  80.  Debtors  of  the  bank-
rupt's he  sued  either  by  an  actio  Serviana  on  a  fiction  of
heirship  (see  Fiction,  1),  G-.  iii,  81,  iv,  35,  or  by  the  a.
Rutiliana,  with  intentio  in  name  of  the  bankrupt  and
condemnatio  in  his  own,  (see  Condemnatio,  4),  G.  iv,  35.
A  debtor  sued  by  him  was  entitled  to  deduction  of  all
counter  claims  of  whatever  sort,  and  even  though  not  yet
exigible,  (see  Compensation,  4),  G.  iv,  65-68.

4.  Result  for  the  bankrupt. — See  Bankruptcy.

EMPTIO  HEREDITATIS,  in,  heir  and  purchaser  exchanged  stipulations
emptae  et  venditae  hereditatis,  the  heir  undertaking  to
transfer  to  purchaser  everything  belonging  to  the  inherit-
ance that  might  come  into  his  hands,  and  to  allow
latter  to  prosecute  all  claims  as  his,  the  heir's,  procurator,
(see  Procuratory  in  litigation,  4),  and  the  purchaser  under-
taking to  defend  the  heir  in  all  actions,  and  relieve  him
of  all  judgments,  G.  ii,  252.  (This  must  not  be  confounded
with  injure  cessio  hereditatis,  described  in  G.  ii,  34-37,  iii,
85-87,  U.  xix,  12-15,  and  under  Hereditas,  No.  15.)

EMPTIO  VENDITIO,  see  Sale.

ENTAIL  created  by  series  of  testamentary  trusts,  G.  ii,  277  compared
with  271 ;  see  Fideicommissum,  5.

EPISTULA  HADRIANI  introducing  beneficium  divisionis  in  favour  of
sureties,  G.  iii,  121,  122 ;  see  Suretyship,  4.

EPISTULA  PRINCIPIS,  a  form  of  imperial  enactment,  G.  i,  5  and  n.  1 ;
see  Constitutio7ies  principum.

EREPTORIUM,  U.  xix,  17  and  note  2  ;  see  Hereditas,  10.

ERROR,  if  excusable,  justa  et  probabilis  ignorantia,  was  not  to  be  a
source  of  loss  to  a  man,  G.  iii,  160 ;  illustrations,  G.  iii,
91,  160.

ERRORIS  CAUSAE  PROBATIO,  G.  i,  67-75,  U.  vii,  4,  a  device,  due  to  an
unknown  Set,  for  curing  the  defects  of  a  marriage  entered
into  by  mistake  between  persons  of  unequal  condition ;

492  DIGEST.

ERIIOKIS  CAUSAE  PEOBATIO — continued.

for  if  the  parties  knew  of  the  inequality  the  remedy  was
inadmissible,  G.  i,  75.

1.  Gases  in  which  applicable. — Gaius  enumerates  six  or  seven

cases,  from  which  it  appears  to  have  been  immaterial
whether  the  mistake  was  on  the  part  of  husband  or  wife,
and  whether  the  mistaken  party  was  a  citizen,  a  latin,  or
a  peregrin,  G.  i,  67-71,  74.  The  following  illustrates
the  general  idea: — A  citizen  having  married  a  latin,
peregrin,  or  deditician  wife,  believing  her  a  citizen,  was
allowed  to  prove  cause  of  error ;  by  doing  so  he  made  her
(unless  a  deditician)  and  any  children  of  the  marriage
citizens,  and  at  the  same  time  acquired  potestas  over  the
latter,  67.  But  error  does  not  seem  ever  to  have  been
proveable  until  a  child  had  been  born  of  the  marriage,
and,  if  it  had  been  contracted  under  the  Aelia-Sentian
law  (which  see,  No.  6),  until  the  child  had  completed  its
first  year,  73.

2.  Effects  of  the  causae  probatio. — Besides  creating  citizenship

and  potestas,  it  invalidated  any  testament  previously  made
by  the  husband  and  father ;  for  with  the  potestas  he  ob-
tained sui  heredes,  G.  ii,  142,  (see  Agnatio  sui  heredis].  In
strictness  this  result  followed  whether  cause  had  been
proved  during  his  life  or  after  his  death,  ibid. ;  but
Hadrian  enacted  that,  if  not  proved  until  after  his  death,
his  testament  was  not  to  be  invalidated  unless  his  chil-
dren had  been  neither  instituted  nor  disinherited,  143.
Though  cause  was  not  proved  until  after  their  father's
death,  still  the  children  succeeded  ab  intestato  as  sui,  G.
iii,  5.

EXCEPTION,  exceptio,  G.  iv,  115-125.
I.  EXCEPTIONS  GENERALLY.

1.  Definition. — An  exception  was  a  plea  allowed  to  a  defender

who,  though  possibly  liable  according  to  the  letter  of  the
law  and  of  the  pursuer's  intentio,  yet  averred  facts  which,
if  proved,  would  make  condemnation  inequitable  or  im-
politic, G.  iv,  116 :  as  e.g.  no  value  received  for  a  stipu-
latory  promise  given  on  the  understanding  of  an  advance,
ibid. ;  informal  agreement — and  therefore  not  civilly  but
only  naturally  obligatory — displacing  the  contract  sued
upon,  116a ;  fraud  or  constraint  used  to  obtain  a  transfer
of  property,  117  ;  or  purchase  when  title  known  to  be  a
matter  of  litigation,  ibid.

2.  Sources  of  such  exceptions. — A  large  number  of  exceptions

of  frequent  recurrence  was  published  in  the  edict,  more
special  ones  formulated  to  meet  particular  cases,  G.  iv,  118;

DIGEST.  493

EXCEPTION— continued.

I.  EXCEPTIONS  GENERALLY — continued.

some  of  them  authorised  by  statute,  others  flowing  from
the  praetor's  jurisdiction,  119.

3.  How  introduced  in  the  formula. — In  grafting  an  exception

upon  the  formula  (which  see),  it  was  worded  negatively
— if  there  has  been  no  subsequent  agreement  not  to  sue,  if
there  has  been  no  fraud,  if  the  thing  was  not  known  to  be
litigous  when  purchased,  etc. —  and  inserted  immediately
before  the  condemnatio  (which  see),  so  as  in  effect  to  make
the  latter  conditional,  G.  iv,  119  ;  and  it  was  made  use
of  even  in  bonae  fidei  judicia,  126a,  notwithstanding  the
libcrum  officium  possessed  in  such  cases  by  the  judge,  114.

4.  Answer  to  it  by  pursuer. — See  Replication.

5.  Exceptions  either  peremptory  or  dilatory. — Peremptory  were

those  that  could  not  be  excluded  by  lapse  of  time,  of
which  illustrations  are  given  in  G.  iv,  121 ;  dilatory  those
available  only  for  a  time,  as  illustrated  in  122,  or  those
founded  on  some  objection  to  the  qualification  of  the
pursuer  that  was  capable  of  removal,  124.

6.  What  if  dilatory  exception  disregarded  by  pursuer  ? — If  a

dilatory  exception  was  disregarded,  and  the  action  not
postponed  in  the  one  case,  nor  the  defect  cured  in  the
other,  the  pursuer  going  on  in  spite  of  it  lost  his  cause,
G.  iv,  123,  124.

7.  What  if  a  peremptory  exception  overlooked  by  defender  ?—

A  defender  inadvertently  omitting  to  state  a  peremptory
exception  might  obtain  in  intcgr.  restitutio  (which  see)  in
order  to  have  it  added  to  the  formula,  G.  iv,  125  ;  but
disputed  whether  this  applied  to  a  dilatory  one,  ibid.

II.  PARTICULAR  EXCEPTIONS.

8.  The  exceptio  doli  mali. — See  an  explanation  in  G.  ii,  76,

note  3.  It  might  be  pleaded,  for  example,  in  answer  to
a  pupil  invoking  technicalities  in  disregard  of  equity,
G.  ii,  84 ;  to  an  owner  attempting  to  oust  a  possessor,
who  had  in  good  faith  increased  the  value  of  the  former's
property,  say  by  building  or  planting  on  it,  without
reimbursing  him,  G.  ii,  76-78 ;  to  a  legatee  claiming
as  a  legacy  what  the  testator  had  subsequently  alienated,
G.  ii,  198 ;  to  an  heir-at-law  attempting  to  oust  a  testa-
mentary heir  holding  bonor.  possessio,  on  the  ground  of  a
trifling  informality  in  the  testament,  G.  ii,  120,  151 ;  to
a  party  claiming  possession  on  the  strength  of  a  convey-
ance he  had  impetrated  by  fraudulent  representations,
G.  iv,  117  ;  to  a  creditor  claiming  payment  in  a  stricti
juris  action  without  giving  the  debtor  credit  for  counter

494  DIGEST.

EXCEPTION— continued.

II.  PARTICULAR  EXCEPTIONS — continued.

claims  ex  eadem  materia,  addition  to  G.  iv,  61,  note,  in
Additions  etc.

9.  Other  peremptory  exceptions. — Amongst  those  referred  to  are
the  ex.  rei  in  judicium  deductae,  (see  Litis  contestatio),  G.
iii,  181,  iv,  107,  108,  121 ;  ex.  rei  judicatae  (see  Judi-
catae  etc.),  ibid. ;  exception  of  constraint,  metus,  G.  iv,  117,
121 ;  exception  that  a  transaction  sued  on  was  pro-
hibited by  statute,  121,  or  that  pursuer  had  agreed  never
to  sue,  ibid. ;  ex.  non  numeratae  pecuniae,  (often  generi-
cally  ex.  doli  mali),  116;  ex.  rei  litigiosae,  117a;  and  ex.
rei  nondum  traditae  in  answer  to  vendor's  action  for
price,  126a.

10.  Particular  dilatory  exceptions.  —  Exception  that  pursuer
had  agreed  not  to  sue  for  a  certain  time,  G.  iv,  116a;  ex.
litis  dividuae,  G.  iv,  56, 122,  and  ex.  rei  residuae,  122,  both
processual  exceptions ;  also  the  ex.  cognitoria,  objection
to  the  qualifications  of  a  cognitor,  (see  Procurator?/  in  liti-
gation, 2),  or  to  the  right  of  a  party  to  sue  by  an  agent,  124.

EXERCITOPJAN  ACTION,  a  praetorian  action  in  solidum  granted  to  a
creditor  against  &  paterfamilias  or  owner,  who,  as  exercitor
of  a  ship,  had  placed  \\isjiliusfamilias  or  slave  in  charge
of  it,  to  recover  payment  of  debts  properly  incurred  on  the
ship's  account,  G.  iv,  71;  afterwards  allowed  even  where
it  was  a  stranger  freeman  or  a  servus  alienus  that  had  been
placed  in  command  and  contracted  the  debt,  ibid.

EXPENDO,  G.  iii,  174  and  note,  175,  note  4.

EXPENSI  LATIO,  expcnsumferre,  G.  iii,  130 ;  see  Literal  obligations,  1.

EXTRANEI  HEREDES,  stranger  heirs,  included  all  who  were  neither
sui  nor  necessarii,  (see  Sui  heredes,  Nee.  her.),  i.e.  those  who
had  not  been  subject  to  the  jus  of  the  deceased,  G.  ii,  161,
e.g.  emancipated  children  in  relation  to  their  father,  all
children  in  relation  to  their  mother,  brothers  in  relation
to  each  other,  ibid.  To  complete  their  right  an  act  of
entry  was  requisite, — there  was  in  their  case  no  ipso  jure
vesting,  U.  xxii,  25,  (see  Hereditas,  5,  6).  An  extraneus
hercs  of  a  patron  had  no  right  of  succession  to  his  citizen
freedmen,  G.  iii,  58,  64,  but  had  right  to  that  of  his
Junian  latins,  58,  63,  see  Succession  to  cit.  freedmen,  5,
Succ.  to  Jun.  latins,  3.

EXTRAORDINARIAE  COGNITIONES,  see  Procedure,  13.

FACERE,  technical  meaning,  G.  iii,  92,  note,  iv,  2,  note  3.
FALSA  DEMONSTRATE  in  a  testament,  U.  xxiv,  19,  (see  Legacy,  9)  ;  in
a,  formula,  G.  iv,  58,  (see  Demonstratio,  4).

DIGEST.  495

FAMILIA  in  sense  of  patrimonium,  G.  ii,  102  ;  familia  pecuniaqiie,

104,  note  4.
FAMILIAE  EMPTOK,  FAM.  VENDITIO,  FAM.  MANCIPATIO,  see  Testament,

3,4.

FAR,  what,  U.  tit.  ix,  note  ;  see  Manus,  1.
FESTUCA,  see  Vinclicta.
FICTION,  fictio,  an  assumption  contrary  to  fact  introduced  into  a

formula  (which  see),  to  adapt  it  to  a  case  to  which  it  was

appropriate  in  equity  and  common  sense,  though  not  in

law,  G.  iv,  34-38.

1.  Fiction  of  heirship. — This  was  introduced  in  the  formulae

granted  to  or  against  bonorum  possessores,  to  enable  them
to  sue  or  be  sued  as  heirs,  G.  iv,  34,  U.  xxviii,  12,  and
the  same  fiction  was  introduced  on  behalf  of  a  bonorum
emptor,  G.  iv,  35.

2.  Fiction  of  usucapion. — This  was  introduced  in  favour  of  a

proprietor  of  a  res  mancipi  who  had  acquired  it  merely
by  tradition,  and  had  lost  possession  before  actually  com-
pleting his  quiritarian  right,  or  of  a  bonae  fidei  acquirer  a
non  domino  in  the  same  position, — the  Publician  action
(which  see),  G.  iv,  36.

3.  Fictions  of  citizenship  and  caput  integrum. — Citizenship  was

sometimes  feigned,  in  order  to  allow  action  to  or  against
a  peregrin,  contrary  to  the  strict  letter  of  the  law,  G.  iv,
37  ;  and  the  non-occurrence  of  a  capitis  deminutio  which
had  actually  taken  place  was  sometimes  pretended,  in
order  to  preserve  to  a  creditor  a  claim  against  his  debtor
which  the  capitis  minutio  had  in  strict  law  extinguished,
G.  iv,  38.

4.  Fictions  that  certain  legis  actiones  underlay  the  corresponding

formulae. — Fictions  of  another  sort  imported  into  certain
formulae  a  reference  to  old  legis  actiones,  when  the  right
sued  upon  had  no  existence  apart  from  the  declaration  of
law  that  in  the  circumstances  the  legis  actio  referred  to
should  be  competent,  G.  iv,  31«-33.

FIDEICOMMISSUM,  a  testamentary  trust-gift  or  trust  to  give,—
the  word  is  used  in  both  senses,  G.  ii,  246-289,  U.  tit.  xxv  ;
see  also  TESTAMENT.

I.    FlDEICOMMISSA  IN  GENERAL.

1.  Nature  and  varieties. — The  distinctive  feature  of  a  fidd-
commissu?n  was  that  it  was  left  not  in  imperative  but  in
precative  language,  U.  xxiv,  1 — rogo,  pcto,  volo,  fideicom-
mitto,  and  such  like,  G.  ii,  249,  U.  xxv,  2  ;  being  in  form
a  request  to  heir,  legatee,  or  even  a  trust-beneficiary,  to
give  effect  to  the  truster's  wishes,  G.  ii,  248, 260.  By  the
jus  civile  ftdeicommissa  were  not  recognised  as  binding,  U.

496  DIGEST.

FIDEICOMMISSUM— continued,

I.   FlDEICOMMISSA  IN  GENERAL — continued.

xxv,  1 ;  it  was  the  consuls  who  first  began  to  enforce
obedience  to  them  as  expressive  of  a  testator's  will,  and
in  course  of  time  a  particular  magistrate,  the  praetor
fideicommissarius,  was  appointed  for  that  purpose,  G.  ii,
278,  U.  xxv,  12.  There  were  three  varieties,  the  /id.
hercditatis,  when  the  request  was  to  the  heir  to  denude
of  the  whole  or  part  of  the  inheritance,  G.  ii,  250  ;  fid.
rei  singularis,  when  the  heir  or  legatee  was  requested  to
denude  of  a  particular  thing,  G.  ii,  260  ;  and  fid.  libertatis,
when  heir  or  legatee  was  asked  to  enfranchise  a  slave,
G.  ii,  263.  The  only  testamentary  provisions  that  could
not  be  put  in  the  form  of  a  trust  were  the  institution  of
an  heir,  G.  ii,  248,  and  the  appointment  of  a  tutor,  G.
ii,  289.

2.  Who  could  have  a  fideicomrnissum. — Only  a  man  who  had

made  a  testament,  and  therein  validly  instituted  an  heir,
could  bequeath  a  fid.  hereditatis,  G.  ii,  249  ;  but  any  one
qualified  to  make  a  testament,  even  though  he  had  not
done  so,  but  was  dying  intestate,  might  leave  a  fid.  rei
singularis  or  libertatis,  U.  xxv,  4.

3.  To  whom  it  might  lie  bequeathed. — Neither  hereditas  nor  res

singulae  could  be  left  by  trust  to  a  peregrin,  G.  ii,  285,
although  to  benefit  peregrins  was  one  of  the  principal
reasons  for  the  introduction  of  the  institution,  ibid. ;
neither,  except  in  the  case  of  a  municipality,  U.  xxii,  5,
could  they  be  left  to  incertae  personae  or  postumi  alieni,
though  the  rule  wTas  not  always  so,  G.  ii,  287,  U.  xxv,
13.  An  heir  etc.  fraudulently  giving  a  secret  promise  to
denude  in  favour  of  one  to  whom  trust-gift  was  prohibited
rendered  himself  liable  to  penalties,  U.  xxv,  17.  The
restrictions  of  the  Voconian  law  did  not  apply  to  a  fid.
hereditatis  in  favour  of  a  woman,  G.  ii,  274,  and  a
Junian  latin  could  take  by  trust  either  hereditas  or  res
singulae  without  becoming  a  citizen,  275,  U.  xxv,  7  ;  by  a
Pegasian  (?)  Set.,  however,  the  Julian  penalties  of  celibacy
and  orbitas  (see  Julian  and  Pap.  Popp.  law,  4,  5)  were
extended  to  fideicommissa,  G.  ii,  286,  286a.

4.  In  what  manner. — To  validate  a  fid.  hereditatis  there  re-

quired to  be  a  testament  and  testamentary  heir,  G.  ii,
248 ;  the  trust,  however,  might  be  embodied  in  a  codicil,
whether  confirmed  or  not,  G.  ii,  273,  U.  xxv,  11.  But
a  testament  was  not  a  necessity  in  the  case  of  fid.  rei
singularis ;  if  there  was  one,  the  trust  might  be  in  it,
or  in  a  codicil  whether  confirmed  or  unconfirmed,  U.

DIGEST.  407

FIDEICOMMISSUM— continued.

I.  FIDEICOMMISSA  IN  GENERAL — continued.

xxv,  8 ;  but  if  the  truster  was  dying  intestate,  still  he
might  impose  &fid.  rei  singularis  upon  his  heir-at-law,
G.  ii,  270,  U.  xxv,  4.  Fid.  rer.  singularum,  if  left  in
a  testament,  were  not  invalid  because  placed  in  it  before
the  heir's  institution,  U.  xxv,  8  ;  they  did  not  require,
like  legacies,  to  be  worded  in  latin,  G.  ii,  281,  U.  xxv,
9  ;  in  fact  it  was  not  essential  that  they  should  be  put
in  words  at  all,  any  intelligible  indication  of  the  truster's
will  being  sufficient,  U.  xxv,  3.

5.  On  whom  it  might  be  made  a  burden. — A  fid.  hercditatis

could  be  imposed  only  on  the  heir,  G.  ii,  250,  or  the  heir's
heir,  277  ;  but  &fid.  rei  singularis  might  be  imposed  either
on  heir,  legatee,  or  trust- beneficiary,  or  their  respective
heirs,  271, 277, 278,  and  an  entail  thus  created  by  a  succes-
sion of  trusts,  ibid.  Contrary  to  the  rule  in  legacies,  if  it
was  a  filiusfamilias  or  slave  that  was  instituted  heir,  a
trust  might  be  imposed  on  his  paterfamilias  or  owner,  U.
xxv,  10.  But  in  no  case  was  a  trust  sustained  that  had
been  imposed  by  way  of  penalty,  G.  ii,  288,  U.  xxv,  13.

II.  FIDEICOMMISSUM  HEEEDITATIS.

6.  The  request  to  the  heir. — The  request  to  the  heir  was  either

at  once,  or  at  a  certain  date,  or  on  a  certain  condition,  G.
ii,  250,  or  after  his  death, — in  which  case  it  was  really  a
request  to  his  heirs,  277, — to  denude  of  the  whole  or  a
part  of  the  inheritance  and  transfer  it  to  the  beneficiary,
250.

7.  Heir  and  ~beneficia,ry  as  vendor  and  vendee. — The  heir  de-

nuding did  not  thereby  cease  to  be  heir,  but  the  position
of  the  beneficiary  varied  from  time  to  time,  G.  ii,  251.
Originally,  in  virtue  of  a  pro  forma  sale,  it  was  that  of
purchaser  ;  and  his  relations  with  the  heir  were  adjusted
by  stipulationes  emptae  et  venditae  hereditatis,  G.  ii,  252,
(see  Emptio  hereditatis).

8.  The  Trebellian  senatusconsidt. — This  enactment  rendered  the

pro  forma  sale  unnecessary,  by  providing  that  actions
competent  to  or  against  an  heir  might  be  granted  to  or
against  a  trust-beneficiary,  G.  ii,  253,  U.  xxv,  14;  an
arrangement  that  was  satisfactory  only  where  what  the
heir  was  asked  to  transfer  did  not  exceed  three-fourths
of  the  inheritance,  G.  ii.  255.

9.  The  Pegasian  senatusconsult. — To  meet  the  case  of  more

than  three-fourths  being  included  in  the  fideicommissum,
and  the  heir  declining  such  unprofitable  entry  and  thus
defeating  the  trust,  this  Set.,  following  the  Falcidian  law

2i

498  DIGEST.

FIDEICOMMISSUM— continued.

II.  FIDEICOMMISSUM  HEREDITATIS — continued.

(see  Legacy,  16),  authorised  him  to  retain  for  himself  a
fourth  of  the  inheritance,  G.  ii,  254,  U.  xxv,  14 ;  the
trust-beneficiary,  as  regarded  the  other  three-fourths,  took
the  position  of  a  partiary  legatee  (see  Legacy,  8),  G.  ii,
254-257,  U.  xxv,  15;  and  stipulations  partis  et  pro  parte
were  then  interchanged,  assuring  pro  rata  division  of
assets  and  liabilities,  ibid.,  although  actions  remained
competent  only  to  and  against  the  heir,  U.  xxv,  14.

10.  What  if  heir  declined  to  enter1? — In  that  case  it  was  provided
by  the  Pegasian  Set.  that,  on  application  of  the  trust-
beneficiary,  the  praetor  should  compel  him  to  enter ;  but
he  incurred  no  risk,  and  derived  no  advantage  ;  the  bene-
ficiary took  everything,  and  sued  and  was  sued  under  the
Trebellian  Set.,  G.  ii,  258,  U.  xxv,  16.

III.  FIDEICOMMISSUM  KEI  SINGULARIS.

11.  What  might  be  so  left. — Anything  that  might  be  legated
by  damnation  (see  Legacy,  22,  23)  might  be  bequeathed
by  fideicommissum,  U.  xxv,  5,  no  matter  to  whom  it
belonged,  G.  ii,  261  ;  but  the  person  burdened  with  it
could  not  be  required  to  transfer  more  than  he  had  him-
self received  under  the  testament,  ibid.     Where  it  was  a
res  aliena,  it  had  to  be  purchased  and  delivered,  or  its
value  paid  in  money,  G.  ii,  262  ;    although  some  were
of  opinion  that  if  its  owner  refused  to  sell  the  trust  was,
extinguished,  ibid.

IV.  FIDEICOMMISSUM  LIBERTATIS  ;  see  also  Manumission.

12.  To  whom  freedom  might  be  bequeathed  by  trust. — A  testator

might  desire  his  heir  or  legatee  to  manumit  slaves  whom
he  could  not  himself  enfranchise  directly,  e.g.  a  servus
alienus,  G.  ii,  264,  272,  U.  ii,  10 ;  the  heir  was  then  re-
quired to  buy  and  manumit  him,  G.  ii,  265 ;  but  if  his
owner  would  not  sell  him,  the  gift  failed,  freedom  having
no  alternative  value,  ibid.,  U.  ii,  11.  Further,  though  a
man  could  not  (unless  insolvent,  G.  i,  21)  institute  one  of
his  own  slaves  as  his  heir  with  freedom,  yet  he  might  by
fldeicommissum  direct  that  his  slave  should  be  enfranchised
and  have  the  succession  on  attaining  that  age,  G.  ii,  276
and  note.

13.  How  patronage,  was  influenced  by  fideicommissary  enfran-

chisement.— Where  a  slave  was  directly  enfranchised  by
testament,  the  deceased  testator  was  his  patron,  G.  ii,  267,
U.  ii,  8 ;  but  one  manumitted  under  a  trust  became  a
freedman  not  of  the  testator's  but  of  the  manumitter's,
G.  ii,  266,  U.  ii,  8.

DIGEST.  499

V.  POINTS  OF  DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  LEGACIES  AND  FIDEICOMMISSA.
—  There  are  a  great  many  of  these  indicated  in  G.  ii,
268-288,  and  U.  xxv,  7-13  ;  but  it  is  unnecessary  here
to  reproduce  them.
FIDEJUSSIO,  see  Suretyship,  4.

FlDEM  DARE,  OBLIGARE,  FALLERE,  G.  ill,  92,  note.

FIDEPROMISSIO,  see  Suretyship,  2,  3.

FIDES,  BONA,  see  Bona  fides.

FIDES  (DEA),  G.  iii,  92,  note.

FIDUCIA  was  an  agreement  accompanying  a  conveyance  by  man-
cipatio  or  in  jure  cessio,  whereby  the  transferee  undertook
to  reconvey  in  a  certain  event,  G.  ii,  59,  60.

1.  Fiducia  contacted   loith  a  friend.  —  This  was  of  frequent

occurrence  before  the  development  of  the  real  contract  of
deposit  :  a  man  about  to  travel  say,  to  ensure  the  safety
of  something  belonging  to  him,  conveyed  it  in  property
to  a  friend,  the  latter  undertaking  to  reconvey  on  demand,
G.  ii,  60  and  note.  The  agreement  founded  in  favour  of
the  transferor  in  trust  an  actio  fiduciae,  which  was  juris
civilis,  G.  iv,  33,  and  bonaefidei,  62;  condemnation  in  it
rendered  the  unfaithful  trustee  infamous,  182.  If  the
transferor  reacquired  possession,  even  without  a  recon-
veyance, he  made  the  thing  his  again  by  usureceptio,  (see
Vsucapion,  7),  one  year's  possession  being  sufficient  even
in  the  case  of  lands,  G.  ii,  59  and  note,  60.

2.  Fiducia  contracted  ivith    a  creditor.  —  This   was  common

before  the  contract  of  pledge  was  developed  ;  by  way  of
security  a  debtor  conveyed  property  to  his  creditor,  on
an  agreement  for  reconveyance  when  the  debt  was  paid,
G.  ii,  60,  220,  which  also  founded  an  actio  fiduciae,  as
above.  When  the  debt  was  paid  the  debtor  had  usure-
ceptio in  a  year,  whatever  his  causa  possessionis,  ibid.  ;  but
while  unpaid,  he*  could  not  usurecapt  the  fiducia  —  the
name  was  given  to  the  thing  as  well  as  the  agreement,
59,  note  —  if  he  had  it  in  location  or  by  precarious  grant
from  his  creditor,  60.  Yet  even  before  reconveyance  or
usureception,  the  debtor  had  thus  far  still  an  equitable
interest  in  it,  —  that  if  he  legated  it  by  preception  (see
Legacy,  28)  to  one  of  several  heirs,  the  others  had  to
redeem  it,  G.  ii,  220.

FIDUCIARY  COEMPTIO,  G.  i,  114,  see  Manus,  7  ;  fiduciary  tutory,  G.
i,  166,  see  Tutory,  3,  12,  21.

FILIUSFAMILIAS,  FILIAFAMILIAS,  a  child  in  potestate,  not  necessarily
son  or  daughter,  but  even  a  remoter  descendant,  if  in
the  potestas  of  the  paterfamilias  ;  and  not  necessarily  of

500  DIGEST.

FlLIUSFAMILIAS,  FILIAFAMILIAS — continued.

youthful  age,  for  a  filiusfamilias  might  himself  be  father
or  even  grandfather,  G.  i,  127,  133&.  For  the  modes  in
which  a  person  became  or  ceased  to  be  filiusfamilias,  see
Patria  potcstas,  7-17  ;  for  an  indication  of  his  capacities
and  disabilities,  see  Alieni  juris  personae,  2-4 ;  for  an
indication  of  his  rights  in  regard  to  the  hereditas  of  the
paterfamilias,  see  Sui  heredes.  A  filiusfamilias  was  under
no  incapacity  so  far  as  regarded  acts  done  in  his  character
of  a  citizen,  as  e.g.  witnessing  a  transaction  per  aes  et
libram,  or  acting  as  libripens  or  familiae  emptor,  G.  ii,
105-108.

Fiscus,  the  imperial  treasury.  By  a  Set.  of  Hadrian's  fideicom-
missa  to  peregrins  were  to  fall  to  the  fisc,  G.  ii,  285  ;  and
by  a  constitution  of  Caracalla's  caduca  (see  Caducity,  5)
were  to  go  to  it,  with  a  certain  reservation  in  favour  of
near  relatives  of  the  testator's,  U.  xvii,  2  and  note,  as
amended  in  Additions  etc.

FLAMINES  MAJORES  required  to  be  issue  of  a  confarreate  marriage,
and  themselves  be  wedded  in  the  same  way,  G.  i,  112.

FLAMINICA  DIALIS,  G.  i,  136  and  note.

FOREIGN  LAW  was  occasionally  appealed  to  where  peregrins  were
concerned,  as  for  example  in  judging  of  the  legitimacy
of  issue  of  a  peregrin  marriage,  G.  i,  92,  the  validity  of  a
peregrin  testament,  U.  xx,  14,  or  the  effect  for  his  heir  of
a  peregrin's  fidepromissio,  G.  iii,  120.

FORMAL  AND  MATERIAL  CONTRACTS,  G.  iii,  89,  note  ;  see  Contract,  3.

FORMULA,  G.  iv,  39-68,  the  issue  which,  under  the  formular  system
(see  Procedure,  8),  was  adjusted  for  the  trial  of  a  cause.

1.  Its  form  and  parts. — It  was  addressed  either  to  a  single

judex  or  to  recuperators,  G.  iv,  46,47, 105  and  note  ;  and,
in  its  simplest  form,  instructed  them,  if  they  found  it
proved  that  the  property  claimed  by  the  pursuer  was  his,
or  that  the  defender  was  indebted  to  him  in  what  was
claimed,  then  to  condemn  the  defender  to  the  pursuer,
but  if  not  proved  to  acquit  him,  G.  iv,  41,  43.  The
ordinary  clauses  were  the  demonstratio,  intentio,  adjudi-
catio,  and  condemnatio,  (see  those  words),  39-43 ;  but
only  the  intentio  could  stand  alone,  viz.  in  praejudicia,
44.  Besides  these  a  formula  might  be  preceded  by  a
praescriptio  (which  see),  G.  iv,  130-137,  and  have  incorpo-
rated in  it  fictions,  32-38,  exceptions,  115-125,  and  re-
plications, duplications,  etc.,  126-129,  (see  those  words).

2.  In  whose  names  it  ran. — If  parties  were  not  litigating  in

person  but  by  cognitors  or  procurators  (see  Procurator^  in
litigation),  the  intentio  was  formulated  in  the  name  of  the

DIGEST.  501

FORMULA — continued.

principal,  and  the  condemnatio  in  that  of  the  agent,  G.
iv,  86,  87.  The  same  course  was  taken  when  a  man  was
suing  upon  a  claim  he  had  acquired  by  purchase  or
otherwise, — he  took  the  intentio  in  name  of  the  original
creditor,  and  the  condemnatio  in  his  own,  G.  iv,  35.

3.  Formulae  in  jus  and  in  factum  couceptae. — A  formula  was

said  to  be  in  jus  concepta  when  the  pursuer  laid  his  in-
tentio on  the  jus  civile,  in  one  or  other  of  the  forms  ejus
esse  ex  jure  Quiritium,  dare  oportere,  dare  facer  e  oportere,  or
damnum  decidere  oportere,  G.  iv,  45,  47,  60;  in  factum
when  he  contended  that  something  had  happened  which,
under  the  praetor's  edict,  entitled  him  to  redress,  46.  In
one  or  two  cases,  as  in  deposit  and  commodate,  the  for-
mula could  be  conceived  either  way,  47  and  note.  Of  those
in  factum  there  was  a  large  collection  in  the  album,  46.

4.  Certae  and  incertae  formulae. — A  formula  was  certa  when

the  claim  was  for  a  specified  thing  or  a  definite  sum  of
money,  G.  iv,  44 ;  incerta  when  it  was  illiquid,  and  for
what  in  the  circumstances  the  judge  might  find  the
pursuer  entitled  to,  41,  54,  131.  An  intentio  certa  might
sometimes  be  followed  by  a  condemnatio  incerta,  G.  iv,
68,  (see  Condemnatio,  2).

FORMULAE  SYSTEM,  see  Procedure,  2,  8.

FRAUDULENT  EVASION  OF  A  STATUTE,  G.  i,  46.

FRAUDULENT  MANUMISSION  to  injury  of  creditors  or  patrons,  G.  i,
37,  U.  i,  16  ;  see  Ad.  Sent,  law,  1.

FREEDMEN,  in  the  abstract  libertini,  in  relation  to  a  patron  liberti,
were  persons  freed  from  lawful  slavery,  G.  i,  11,  and  were
either  citizens,  Junian  latins,  or  classed  with  the  dediti-
cians,  G.  i,  12,  U.  i,  5  ;  (see  Manumission,  Junian  lati-
nity,  Deditician  freedmen).  In  the  ordinary  case  they
were  in  patronage  of  their  manumitters,  the  patron  being
entitled  to  services  from  his  liberti,  G.  iii,  83,  96a,  iv,  162,
(see  Patronate,  3) ;  to  the  tutory  of  males  among  them
who  were  under  puberty,  and  females  of  any  age,  G.  i,
165,  iii,  43,  (see  Tutory,  18,  19) ;  and  to  their  estates  on
their  death,  (see  Succession  to  citizen  freedmen,  Succ.  to
Junian  latins,  Ded.  freedmen,  3).  The  right  to  services,
and  those  of  tutory  and  succession,  being  jura  legitima,
were  extinguished  by  capitis  deminutio  of  either  patron
or  freedman,  G.  iii,  51,  83,  U.  xi,  9.  A  freedman  was
not  permitted  to  summon  his  patron  without  leave  of  the
praetor ;  if  he  did,  the  patron  was  allowed  an  action  of
damages,  G.  iv,  46.

FREEDOM  was  enjoyed  by  ingenui  by  right  of  birth,  by  libertini  in

502  DIGEST.

FREEDOM — continued.

respect  of  their  subsequent  acquisition  of  it,  (see  Freed-
men),  G.  i,  10.  It  was  lost  by  a  man  who  wilfully  evaded
inscription  in  the  census  register,  G.  i,  160,  U.  xi,  11,
and  by  a  woman  who  persevered  in  cohabiting  with  a
slave  notwithstanding  the  warning  of  the  latter's  owner
(see  Claudian  Set.),  ibid.  It  was  held  incapable  of
valuation ;  therefore  if  a  fideicommissary  grant  of  freedom
to  a  servus  alienus  failed  through  his  owner's  refusal  to
sell  him,  it  was  impossible  to  recompense  him,  G.  ii,  265
and  n.  1.  Out  of  favour  for  freedom  an  adsertor  liber-
tatis  deposited  the  smallest  sacramentum  known  to  the
law,  G.  iv,  14  and  n.  2  ;  see  Slavery,  9.

FRUCTUARIA  STIPULATIO,  G.  iv,  166 ;  FRUCTUAKIUM  JUDICIUM,  G.  iv,
169  ;  see  Interdicts,  14,  Cautiones  etc.,  5.

FKUCTUS  LICITATIO,  G.  iv,  166  ;  see  Interdicts,  14.

FURIOSI,  see  Lunacy.

FURTUM,  see  Theft.

GALATIANS,  the,  claimed  to  have  a  patria  potcstas,  G.  i,  55.

GENS,  the,  by  the  Twelve  Tables  had  rights  of  tutory  and  succes-
sion on  failure  of  agnates,  G.  i,  164«  and  note,  iii,  17.
The  law  affecting  it  was  obsolete  before  the  time  of  Gai.,
G.  iii,  17.

GESTIO  PRO  HEREDE,  G.  ii,  166,  U.  xxii,  26  ;  see  Hereditas,  5,  6.

GLADIATORS,  G.  iii,  146,  199.

GRADUS  and  ORDO  in  succession,  distinction,  G.  iii,  27,  note  1.

HABITATIO,  a  gratuitous  right  of  occupancy  of  a  house,  which  left
the  legal  possession  in  the  granter,  G.  iv,  153.

HADRIAN,  see  Constitutions  principum,  Senatusconsults.

HASTA,  the  symbol  of  quiritarian  ownership,  G.  iv,  16,  and  as  such
displayed  in  the  centumviral  court,  ibid.  For  certain  pur-
poses a  rod,festuca  or  vindicta,  was  used  as  a  substitute,
see  Vindicta.

HERCULES  GADITANUS,  U.  xxii,  6.

HEREDITAS,  inheritance,  the   succession   of  the  jus  civile,  in
contradistinction  to  the  bonorum  possessio  of  the  praetors.
See  also  SUCCESSION,  BONORUM  POSSESSIO.
I.  DELATION  OF  AN  HEREDITAS.

1.  Delation  ex  testamento. — See  Testament.

2.  Delation  ab  intestato. — See  Intestate  succession.

II.    HOW  IT  VESTED  IN  THE  HEIR.

3.  In  the,  case  of  sui  heredes. — An  inheritance,  whether  delate

ex  testamento  or  ab  intestato,  vested  in  sui  heredes  (which
see)  ipso  jure,  G.  ii,  157,  U.  xxii,  24;  for  they  were  not

DIGEST.  503

HEEEDITAS— continued,

II.  How  IT  VESTED  IN  THE  HEIR — continued.

only  sui  but  also  necessary  heirs,  ibid.  The  praetor,  how-
ever, allowed  them  to  abstain  when  the  estate  was  insol-
vent, G.  ii,  158,  U.  xxii,  24,  (see  Abstinendi  potestas).  But
a  suus  who  had  once  intromitted  could  not  afterwards
relinquish,  unless  he  was  a  minor  and  obtained  in  inte-
grum  restitutio  (which  see),  G.  ii,  163.

4.  In  that  o/necessarii  heredes. — A  lures  nccessarius  (see  Ncc.

heredes),  whether  a  slave  of  the  testator's  or  a  person  held
by  him  in  mancipii  causa, — and  both  could  succeed  only
ex  testamento, — also  acquired  ipso  jure,  G.  ii,  153,  U.  xxii,
24 ;  but  the  latter  had  the  same  benefitium  abstinendi
as  a  suus,  G.  ii,  160,  while  the  former  could  in  no  case
decline,  153.

5.  In  that  of  an  extraneus  heres  testamentarily  instituted  with

cretion. — A  stranger  heir  instituted  with  cretion,  under
penalty  of  disherison,  G.  ii,  164,  165,  U.  xxii,  27,  (see
Cretio,  1),  had  to  cern  within  the  time  limited,  G.  ii,  166,
170,  U.  xxii,  30;  informal  acceptance  was  insufficient,
G.  ii,  168 ;  but  informal  declinature  did  not  preclude
subsequent  cerniture  if  the  cretion-days  had  not  expired,
ibid.,  U.  xxii,  30.  If  the  penalty  of  non-cerniture  was  not
disherison  (see  Cretio,  1),  but  admission  of  a  substitute
(see  Substitution,  1),  G.  ii,  177,  U.  xxii,  34,  the  rule  in  the
time  of  Gai.  was  that,  by  behaving  as  heir  (gestio pro  lure.de)
instead  of  cerning,  he  let  in  the  substitute  for  an.  equal
share,  G.  ii,  177 ;  but  it  was  afterwards  altered  in  his
favour  so  as  to  let  him  keep  the  whole,  U.  xxii,  34.

6.  In  that  of  an  extraneus  instituted  without  cretion  or  taking

ab  intestate. — In  either  of  these  cases  a  stranger  might
enter  either  by  cerning,  by  informal  declaration  of  accept-
ance, or  by  behaving  as  heir,  G.  ii,  167,  U.  xxii,  25,  26  ;
an  informal  declinature  was  sufficient  to  exclude  him,  G.
ii,  169  ;  but  if  he  had  once  entered  he  could  not  relinquish,
unless  a  minor,  163.  He  was  not  required,  however,  to
decide  at  once, — he  was  allowed  a  tempus  deliberandi,  162,
fixed  by  the  praetor  on  the  petition  of  the  deceased's
creditors,  167,  who  were  entitled  to  sell  the  estate  if  he
did  not  enter  before  its  expiry,  ibid.

7.  Entry  by  persons  in  tutelage,  filiifamilias,  and  slaves. — A

pupil  or  a  woman  in  tutelage  could  not  enter  without
tutorial  auctoritas,Q.\,  176 ;  &filiusfamilias  could  enter  only
on  the  instructions  of  his  paterfamilias,  ii,  87,  U.  xix,  19  ;
and  a  slave  on  those  of  his  owner  at  the  moment,  G.  ii,
188-190,  U.  xxii,  13,  14.

504  DIGEST.

HEREDITAS— continued.

III.  FAILURE  OF  THE  HEIR  TO  TAKE  OR  KEEP.

8.  Failure  to  take  under  a  testament. — As  regards  the  results  of

failure  of  one  or  more  of  several  testamentary  heirs,  see
Adcretio,  2,  Caducity,  3.  Total  failure  caused  intestacy,
G.  ii,  144;  but  that,  by  operation  of  the  Julian  law,  the
inheritance  went  to  the  heir-at-law  caduciarily,  and
under  burden  of  all  the  legacies,  etc.,  contained  in  the
testament,  seems  fairly  deducible  from  U.  xvii,  3,  xxviii,
7,  and  G.  ii,  149.  (The  case,  however,  is  hardly  conceiv-
able ;  for  if  the  inheritance  was  lucrative,  the  testamentary
heirs  were  unlikely  to  decline  it,  while  if  insolvent  it
would  be  taken  by  deceased's  creditors  for  what  it  was
worth,  G.  ii,  167.)

9.  Failure  to  take  ab  intestate. — When  there  was  failure  of  one

or  more  of  several  equally  entitled,  there  was  accretion  in
favour  of  those  who  took,  U.  xxvi,  5.  If  all  the  legitimi
heredes  of  the  first  degree  failed,  there  was  by  law  no  trans-
mission to  those  of  the  next,  G.  iii,  12,  U.  xxvi,  5  ;  they
were  admitted,  however,  by  the  praetors  iobonorumpossessio
as  cognates,  G.  iii,  28,  (see  Bonor.  possessio,  16).  When
there  was  total  failure  both  of  civil  and  praetorian  heirs,
the  inheritance  fell  to  the  state,  G.  ii,  149,  U.  xxviii,  7.

10.  Incapacity  of  an  heir  to  retain  what  had  come  to  him. —

When  a  testamentary  heir  was  guilty  of  ingratitude  or
disrespect  to  the  memory  or  the  family  of  the  testator,  he
was  liable  to  have  his  inheritance  taken  from  him  on  the
petition  of  the  fisc ;  it  was  then  called  ereptorium,  and
went  to  the  state,  U.  xix,  17  and  n.  2.

IV.  THE  HEIR'S  POSITION.

11.  In  reference  to  co-heirs. — Their  rights  inter  se  were  adjusted

in  an  actio  familiae  erciscundae  (which  see),  G.  ii,  219.

12.  In  reference  to  legatees. — See  Legacy,  18—34.

13.  In   reference   to   trust -beneficiaries. — See  Fideicommissum,

6-11.

14.  In  reference  to  third  parties. — Inheritance  was  a  universal

acquisition  of  the  deceased's  estate,  G.  ii,  98.  For  a  few
of  his  debts  the  heir  was  not  liable,  and  in  a  few  of  his
claims  he  could  not  insist,  see  Actions,  7 ;  but  with  those
exceptions,  he  was  entitled  to  proceed  against  deceased's
debtors,  G.  iv,  34,  and  was  liable  to  action  at  the  instance
of  his  creditors,  G.  ii,  35,  and  even  to  be  made  a  bankrupt
on  account  of  his  debts,  G.  ii,  154.

V.  CESSION  OF  AN  HEREDITAS  IN  JURE.

15.  Cession  by  an  heir-at-law. — An  agnate  ceding  injure  before

entry  made  the  cessionary  heir  in  his  stead,  G.  ii,"  35,  iii,

DIGEST.  505

HERE  DITAS—contimted.

V.  CESSION  OF  AN  HEEEDITAS  IN  JUKE — continued.

85,  U.  xix,  13,  14.  If,  however,  the  cession  was  not  until
after  entry,  the  cedent  remained  heir  and  responsible  to
the  deceased's  creditors,  ibid.,  U.  xix,  15;  corporeals  passed
to  the  cessionary  as  if  they  had  been  ceded  individually  ;
while  claims  were  extinguished  and  the  deceased's  debtors
so  much  the  gainers,  ibid.

16.  Cession  by  a  testamentary  heir. — Any  such  cession  before

entry  was  useless,  G.  ii,  36,  iii,  86 ;  after  entry  it  had
the  same  effect  as  cession  by  an  heir-at-law  in  similar
circumstances,  ibid.

17.  Could  there  ~be  cession  ~by  a  necessary  heir  ? — The  Proculians

were  of  opinion  that  after  entry  he  had  the  same  power
of  cession  as  others ;  the  Sabiuians  held  cession  by  him
useless,  G-.  ii,  37,  iii,  87.

HOMER  quoted,  G.  iii,  141.

HOSTIA,  G.  iv,  28  and  n.  1.

HUSBAND  AND  WIFE.

1.  Creation  of  the  relationship. — See  Marriage.

2.  Respective  positions  of  the  parties  when  marriage  accompanied

ly  in  manum  conventio. — See  Manus,  4,  5.

3.  Position  of  the  wife  when  marriage  unaccompanied  by  manus.

— She  did  not  become  a  member  of  her  husband's  family,
but  still  remained  sui  juris  or  in  patria  potestate,  as  the
case  might  be,  U.  vi,  6  ;  her  children  were  not  civilly  her
agnates,  but  only  naturally  her  cognates,  G.  iii,  24.  If  she
were  assaulted  or  insulted,  her  husband  was  entitled  to
an  actio  injuriarum  if  she  was  in  manu;  but  judging  from
the  language  of  Gai.  he  seems  to  have  had  no  such  right
without  it,  G.  iii,  221.

4.  The  dos  or  dowry. — See  Dowry.

5.  Donations  between  the  spouses. — Although,  in  the  absence  of

manus,  each  had  or  might  have  a  separate  estate,  yet
donations  by  one  to  the  other  were  invalid  except  they
were  mortis  causa,  divortii  causa,  or  to  obtain  freedom
for  a  slave ;  the  wife  being  also  allowed  in  a  few  cases  to
make  a  gift  to  her  husband  to  enable  him  to  obtain  rank
or  dignity,  U.  vii,  1.  If  the  husband  had  made  a  donation
to  his  wife,  not  being  one  of  those  excepted,  he  was
entitled  to  deduct  it  from  the  amount  of  the  dowry  in
restoring  it  on  the  dissolution  of  the  marriage,  U.  vi,  9,
and  note  to  rubr.  tit.  vii.

6.  Divorce. — A  wife  in  manu,  in  the  event  of  divorce,  might

compel  her  husband  to  release  her  from  manus  by  reman-
cipation  (which  see),  G.  i,  137.  In  the  absence  of  manus

506  DIGEST.

HUSBAND  AND  WIFE — continued.

it  was  one  of  the  consequences  of  divorce  that  the  dos
had  to  be  restored,  with  or  without  deduction,  U.  vi,  6  f.,
(see  Dowry,  5,  6).  Before  restoring  it  the  husband  was  en-
titled to  be  relieved  of  any  obligation  he  had  undertaken
in  respect  of  it,  or  of  his  wife's  property  generally,  U.  vii,
3  and  note.  After  dissolution  of  the  marriage  either
might  sue  the  other  in  an  actio  rerum  amotarum,  on
account  of  theftuous  removal  of  property  in  prospect  of
divorce,  U.  vii,  2  and  note.

7.  Their  rights  of  succession  inter  se. — A  wife  in  manu  was
filiae  loco  and  one  of  her  husband's  sui  heredes,  U.  xxii,
14,  and  entitled  therefore  to  all  their  rights  and  privileges
in  the  matter  of  succession ;  see  Sui  heredes.  A  wife
not  in  manu  had  no  right  of  succession  under  the  jus
civile  ;  but  the  praetors  admitted  the  survivor  of  husband
or  wife  to  bonorum  possessio  ab  intestato  of  the  prede-
ceaser  next  after  cognates,  U.  xxviii,  7 ;  and  the  Julian
and  Pap.  Popp.  law  (which  see,  jSTo.  6)  contained  elaborate
provisions  as  to  the  extent  to  which  one  might  take  under
the  other's  testament,  and  which  were  to  a  great  extent
dependent  on  consideration  of  the  number  of  children
born  of  the  marriage,  U.  xv,  xvi,  1,  la,  2,  4.

HYPOTHEC,  landlord's,  over  the  invccta  et  illata  of  his  farm-
tenant,  G-.  iv,  147.

ILLEGITIMACY,  see  Parent  and  child.

IMAGINARY  DEEDS. — Mancipation  was  an  imaginary  sale,  G-.  i,  119;
testamentum  per  aes  et  libram,  an  imaginary  mancipation,
U.  xx,  2 ;  acceptilatiou  and  nexi  sohitio,  imaginary  pay-
ments, G.  iii,  169,  173.

IMPENSAE,  outlays  on  account  of  a  thing,  were  either  necessary,
beneficial,  or  superfluous  (necessariae,  utiles,  voluptuosae],
U.  vi,  14  :  the  first  such  as  were  needful  to  maintain  the
status  quo,  15  ;  the  second  such  as  increased  revenue,  16 ;
the  third  such  as  only  added  to  amenity,  17.

IMPERFECTA  LEX,  one  that  neither  nullified  what  was  done  in  contra-
vention of  it  nor  punished  the  contravener,  U.  i,  1.

IMPERIAL  CONSTITUTIONS,  G-.  i,  5 ;  see  Constitutions  prindpum.

LMPERIO  CONTINENS  JUDICIUM,  see  Judicia  legitima  etc.

IMPUBERATES,  males  and  females  under  14  and  12  respectively,  G.
i,  196,  ii,  112,  (see  Puberty].  They  might  be  either  sui
juris  (and  then  called  pupils)  or  alieni  juris ;  neither
class  could  contract  marriage,  U.  v,  2,  or  act  as  witness  of
a  mancipation  or  other  solemn  deed,  G-.  i,  29,  113,  119,  ii,
104 ;  unless  23ubertati  proximi  neither  was  held  responsible

DIGEST.  507

LMPUBERATES — continued.

for  crime  or  delict,  G.  iii,  208.  A  sui  juris  impuberate
could  not  make  a  testament,  G.  ii,  113,  U.  xx,  12,  but
one  might  be  made  for  him  by  pupillary  substitution  in
that  of  his  father  (see  Substitution,  2),  G.  ii,  179,  U.  xxiii,
7  ;  in  other  transactions  he  could  act  with  auctoritas  of  a
tutor,  though  it  was  not  always  necessary,  (see  Pupils).

IN  BONIS  HABERE,  see  Bonitarian  ownership.

INCERTA  PERSONA,  one  of  whom  it  was  impossible  for  a  testator
to  have  formed  any  definite  idea  in  his  own  mind,  G.  ii,
238,  could  neither  be  instituted  heir,  G.  ii,  242,  287,
U.  xxii,  4,  nor  be  left  a  legacy,  G.  ii,  238,  287,  U.  xxiv,
18,  or  trust-gift,  G.  ii,  287,  U.  xxv,  13,  except  sub  certa
demonstratione,  i.e.  under  reference  to  a  well-defined  class,
G.  ii,  238,  U.  xxiv,  18.  A  postumus  alienus  (see  Postu-
mi,  3)  was  regarded  as  incerta persona,  G.  ii,  242 ;  and  so
was  a  municipality,  so  far  as  institution  by  any  but  its
own  freedmen  was  concerned,  U.  xxii,  5,  although  it  might
take  both  legacies,  U.  xxiv,  28,  and  trust-gifts,  U.  xxii,  5.
An  incerta  persona  could  not  be  appointed  tutor,  G.  ii,
240  ;  and  the  Fufian  law  made  testamentary  enfranchise-
ment useless  unless  the  slave  was  named,  G.  ii,  239.

INCESTUOUS  MATRIMONIAL  CONNECTION,  see  Marriage,  6.

INCORPOREALS,  what,  G.  ii,  14 ;  were  mostly  nee  mancipi,  17 ;
were  incapable  of  tradition,  19.  See  Things,  4.

INDEBITI  SOLUTIO,  payment  under  erroneous  belief  of  indebtedness,
in  the  ordinary  case  imposed  on  the  payee  an  obligation
to  refund,  enforceable  by  a  condictio  indebiti,  G.  iii,  91  ;
even  a  pupil  or  a  woman  receiving  an  indebitum  without
tutorial  auctoritas  was  liable,  because  the  obligation,
though  created  re,  yet  did  not  arise  from  contract,  ibid.
It  was  a  sufficient  answer  to  the  condictio  that  what  had
been  paid  was  due  naturally,  though  possibly  not  civilly,
(see  Obligation,  5),  G.  iii,  119«,  note  1.  There  was  an
arbitrary  rule  that  an  erroneous  payment  by  an  heir  in
name  of  legacy — Gai.  confines  it  to  one  per  damnationem,
G.  ii,  283 — did  not  entitle  him  to  a  condictio,  U.  xxiv,  33  ;
but  it  did  not  apply  to  fideicommissa  indebita,  G.  ii,  283.

INFAMY,  ignominia,  resulted  from  condemnation  in  an  action
arising  out  of  partnership,  fiduciary  agreement,  tutory,
mandate,  or  deposit,  and  from  either  condemnation  in  or
compromise  of  one  arising  out  of  theft,  robbery,  or  per-
sonal injury,  G.  iv,  182  ;  while  the  same  result  followed
sale  of  a  bankrupt's  estate,  G.  ii,  154.  An  individual
affected  by  it  was  disqualified  for  acting  in  a  litigation  on
another  person's  behalf,  or  himself  appointing  a  cognilor
or  procurator,  G.  iv  182.

508  DIGEST.

INFANCY,  children  in,  or  not  much  beyond  it,  were  in  law  regarded
as  having  no  more  intelligence  than  a  lunatic  ;  their
tutors  therefore,  if  they  were  sui  juris,  acted  for  them,
not  with  them,  G.  iii,  106,  107,  109,  U.  xi,  25.  (Infancy
ended  at  the  age  of  seven.)

INFIRMATIO  TESTAMENTI,  invalidation  of  a  testament,  which  see,  ISTos.
21-24.

INGENUI,  persons  of  free  birth,  G.  i,  11 ;  see  Persons,  1.

INHERITANCE,  see  ffereditas.

IN  INTEGRUM  RESTITUTIO,  a  praetorian  relief  granted  to  persons
who  had  suffered  injury,  loss,  or  damage  for  which  there
was  no  available  or  convenient  remedy  by  action  :  the
praetor  reinstated  them  in  the  position  they  occupied
before  the  event  occurred  to  which  their  loss  was  attri-
butable. It  was  granted  to  minors  in  omnibus  rebus
lapsis,  G.  iv,  57  ;  e.g.  on  inconsiderate  entry  to  a  damnosa
hcreditas,  G.  ii,  163,  loss  of  an  action  by  reason  of  over-
claim  (see  Intentio,  3),  G.  iv,  53,  or  acceptance  as  pursuer
of  a  formula  containing  too  little  in  the  condemnatio
(which  see,  No.  3),  G.  iv,  57.  It  was  not  often  granted
to  persons  of  full  age,  G.  ii,  163  ;  but  any  defender  in  an
action  was  entitled  to  have  it  when  the  praetor  had  in-
serted too  great  a  sum  in  the  condemnatio,  in  order  to
have  it  diminished,  G.  iv,  57,  such  relief  being  always
granted  more  readily  to  a  defender  than  a  pursuer,  ibid.

IN  JURE  CESSIO,  a  civil  mode  of  conveyance,  and  really  a  vindicatio
(which  see)  arrested  in  its  first  stage,  on  the  defender's
confession  injure,  G.  ii,  24,  96,  iv,  16,  note.

1.  Ceremonial. — The  parties,  transferor  and  transferee,  appeared

in  jure,  i.e.  before  a  magistrate,  bringing  with  them,  if
corporeal,  the  thing  to  be  ceded ;  the  transferee,  laying-
hold  of  it,  asserted  that  it  was  his  in  quiritariau  right ;
the  magistrate  asked  the  transferor  whether  he  made  any
counter- vindication  ;  and  if  he  got  no  answer,  or  one  in
the  negative,  he  declared  the  thing  to  belong  to  the  trans-
feree, G.  ii,  24,  U.  xix,  9,  10.  But  the  cession  might  be
under  reservations  or  qualifications,  e.g.  a  pactum  fiduciae
(see  Fiducia),  G.  ii,  59,  iii,  201.

2.  To  whom  competent. — As  a  civil  mode  of  conveyance  it  was

peculiar  to  citizens,  G.  ii,  65,  but  probably  competent  also
to  colonial  and  Junian  latins  and  to  peregrins  who  had
commercium  (which  see),  U.  xix,  4 ;  but  it  could  not  be
employed  by  persons  alieni  juris  on  account  of  the  words
of  style,  G.  ii,  96.

3.  What  might  be  conveyed  by  it. — It  was  a  suitable  form  of

conveyance  either  for  res  mancipi  or  nee  mancipi  (which

DIGEST.  509

IN  JURE  CESSIO — continued.

see),  U.  xix,  9  ;  but  for  the  former  mancipation  was  pre-
ferred, as  usually  more  convenient,  G.  ii,  25.  It  was
suitable  for  conveyance  either  of  corporeals  or  incor-
poreals,  and  (with  exception  of  rural  praedial  servitudes,
which  might  be  mancipated,  G.  ii,  29)  the  only  civil  form
applicable  to  the  latter,  e.g.  urban  praedial  servitudes,  G.
ii,  29,  a  usufruct,  G.  ii,  30-32,  U.  xix,  11,  an  inheritance,
G.  ii,  34-37,  iii,  85-87,  U.  xix,  12-15,  and  certain  tutories,
G.  i,  168-172,  U.  xi,  6-8,  xix,  11.  But  it  was  inappli-
cable to  provincial  lands  that  were  not  juris  Italici  (see
Jus  Italicutn),  G.  ii,  31,  for  they  belonged  to  the  state,
G.  ii,  7,  nor  to  obligations,  because  their  cession  was
impossible,  G.  ii,  38.
INJURIA,  see  Personal  injury.

IN  JUS  VOCATIO,  formal  summons  to  appear  in  court, — a  necessary
initiative  of  any  litigation,  G.  iv,  183  ;  but  children  and
freedmen  were  not  allowed  to  summon  parents  or  patrons
without  leave  of  the  praetor,  ibid.,  and  if  they  did  were
liable  to  penalties,  46,  183.  If  the  party  summoned
neither  attended  nor  found  a  substitute,  he  also  was
liable  in  penalties,  46  ;  and  so  was  any  one  carrying  him
off  to  prevent  his  attendance,  ibid.

INNOMINATE  CONTRACTS,  G.  iii,  89,  note  1 ;  see  Contract,  I.
IN  REM  ACTIO  PER  SPONSIONEM,  alternative  to  that  per  formulam
pctitoriam  (the  vindicatio) ,  G.  iv,  91-96.  The  preliminary
step  was  a  stipulation  by  the  claimant  for  twenty-five
sesterces  from  the  possessor  in  the  event  of  the  thing  in
dispute  being  found  to  belong  to  the  former,  93 ;  but  there
was  no  restipulation,  the  sponsion  being  prejudicial,  not
penal,  94.  On  the  promise  a  formula  was  adjusted,
stipulant  claiming  the  twenty-five  sesterces,  93  ;  and
defender  gave  security  in  a  stipulatio  pro  praede  litis  et
vindiciarum,  in  imitation  of  the  old  sacramental  proce-
dure, (see  Legis  actiones,  2),  91,  94.  Condemnation  or
absolvitor  on  the  sponsion  involved  judgment  on  the
question  of  property,  94.  If  the  action  was  to  be  in
the  centumviral  court,  a  sacr amentum  before  the  praetor
took  the  place  of  the  sponsio,  95,  31 ;  the  stake  being
125  sesterces,  95,  the  equivalent  of  the  500  asses  of  the
older  procedure,  95,  note  2,  14.
INSANITY,  see  Lunacy.

INSTITORIAN  ACTION,  one  of  the  praetorian  adjectician  actions,
granted  to  a  creditor  against  a  paterfamilias  or  owner,
who  had  placed  his  filiusfamilias  or  slave  as  institor  in
charge  of  a  shop  or  other  business,  to  recover  payment  in

510  DIGEST.

INSTITORIAN  ACTION — continued.

solidum  of  debts  properly  incurred  on  account  thereof,  G.

iv,  71 ;  afterwards  allowed  even  when  it  was  a  stranger

freeman  or  a  servus  alienus  that  had  been  placed  in  charge

and  contracted  the  debt,  ibid.
INTENTIO,  one  of  the  clauses  of  a  formula,  (which  see,  No.  1).

1.  Its  purpose  and  position. — It  was  in  the  intentio  that  the

pursuer  embodied  his  claim,  G.  iv,  41 ;  it  was  so  impor-
tant that  no  formula  could  do  without  it,  44 ;  where  there
was  no  demonstratio  (which  see)  it  stood  first,  86,  and
with  one  it  stood  second,  47.  In  formulae  in  jus  conceptae
(see  Formula,  3)  it  was  couched  in  technical  words
derived  from  the  jus  civile,  41,  37  ;  in  those  in  factum  it
was  in  a  freer  style,  with  which  a  demonstration  was  in
a  manner  amalgamated,  46,  47.

2.  Styles. — («.)  Rei  vindicatio — '  si  paret  Jiominem  ex  jure  Qui-

ritium  actoris  esse'  G.  iv,  41:  (b.)  vindication  of  a  thing  pro
indiviso  (preceded  by  a  demonstratio) — '  quantum  partem
pciTd  in  eo  fundo,  quo  de  agitur,  actoris  esse,'  G.  iv,  54  :
(c.)  condictio  certi  (applicable  to  claim  on  loan  of  money,
stipulatory  promise  for  a  definite  sum,  literal  obligation,
indebitum,  etc.) — '  si  paret  reum  actori  X  milia  dare  opor-
tere,'  G.  iii,  91,  iv,  4,  41,  86,  etc. :  (d.)  actiones  incertae
(preceded  by  a  demonstratio) — '  quidquid  paret  ob  earn  rein
reum  actori  dare  facere  oportere,'  or  '  quidquid  ob  earn  rem
reum  actori  dare  facere  oportet,'  G.  iv,  41,  47,  54,  60,
131,  131«,  136,  applicable  to  claims  on  bonaejidei  con-
tracts, indefinite  claims  under  stipulations,  etc. :  (e.~)  for-
mulae in  factum  conceptae — '  si  pcir&t  patronum  (actorem]  a
liberto  (reo)  contra  edictum  praetoris  in  jus  vocalum  esse,'
G.  iv,  46 ;  'si  paret  actorem  apud  reum  mensam  deposu-
isse,  eamque  dolo  malo  rei  actori  redditam  non  esse,'  47.
But  these  styles,  and  many  others  given  by  Gai.,  are
skeletons  merely ;  what  was  vindicated  in  real  actions
had  to  be  properly  described,  G.  iv,  41,  note  2,  as  amended
in  Additions  etc. ;  and  in  personal  ones  the  ground  of
claim, — testament,  stipulation,  or  what  not,  to  be  ex-
plained, 55.  In  bonae  Jidei  judicia  (which  see)  the  words
ex  fide  bona  were  introduced,  G.  iv,  47.  When  the
action  was  by  an  argentarius  against  a  customer,  he  had
to  set  off  in  the  intentio  any  counter-claim  of  the  latter's
of  the  same  description  as  that  sued  upon,  (see  Compen-
sation, 3) — '  si  paret  reum  actori  x  milia  dare  oportere
amplius  quam  ipse  actor  reo  debet,'  G.  iv,  64.

3.  Consequences  of  claiming  too  much,  too  little,  or  under  a  wrong

description. — If  in  his  intentio  a  man  claimed  more  than

DIGEST.  511

INTENTIO — continued.

he  was  entitled  to — which,  however,  was  impossible  in
those  that  were  incertae,  G.  iv,  54 — he  lost  his  cause,  no
matter  how  good  it  might  be  for  less,  53,  60,  68,  and  could
not  be  reinstated  so  as  to  sue  afresh  except  on  the  ground
of  minority,  53  and  n.  2,  (see  In  integr.  restitutio).  To
claim  less  than  he  was  entitled  to  was  of  course  lawful ;
but  he  could  not  sue  for  the  residue  within  the  same  prae-
torship,  56.  To  claim  one  thing  instead  of  another,  or
wrongly  to  describe  the  source  of  claim,  as  e.g.  testament
instead  of  contract,  did  not  prevent  a  fresh  action  at  any
time,  55.

INTERDICTIO  AQUA  ET  IGNI,  practically  outlawry,  G.  i,  128  and  n.  2,
161,  U.  x,  3,  xi,  12  ;  see  Citizenship,  9.

INTERDICTION   OF  PRODIGALS,   G.   i,   53,   U.  xii,  23,  xx,  13  ;  see
Curatory,  1.

INTERDICTS,  interdicta,  G.  iv,  138-170a.
1.  NATURE  AND  CLASSIFICATIONS.

1.  Interdict,  what? — It  was  an  order -pronounced  by  a  magis-

trate, on  application  of  an  individual,  to  facilitate  the
settlement  of  some  dispute,  139 ;  when  put  positively  it
was  specifically  a  decree  (decretum),  the  name  of  interdict
being  more  appropriate  to  one  put  negatively,  140.

2.  Restitutory,    exhibitory,   and  prohibitory   interdicts. — They

were  called  restitutory  when  the  order  was  to  restore  a
thing,  exhibitory  when  the  order  was  for  production,
prohibitory  when  something  was  prohibited,  140,  142.

3.  Possessory  interdicts. — A  large  class  of  them  were  either

adipiscendae  vel  retinendae  vel  reciperandae  possessionis
causa  comparata,  according  as  their  purpose  was  the
acquisition,  retention,  or  recovery  of  possession,  143.

4.  Interdicts  single  and  double. — They  were  said  to  be  single

(simplicia)  when  the  applicant  became  pursuer  in  the
proceedings  that  followed  the  order,  and  his  adversary
defender,  157,  as  in  all  the  restitutory  and  exhibitory
and  most  of  the  prohibitory  interdicts,  159,  158  ;  double
(duplicia)  when  each  party  was  at  once  pursuer  and
defender,  as  in  uti  possidetis  and  utrubi,  for  retaining
possession,  160.
II.  THE  POSSESSORY  INTERDICTS  IN  PARTICULAR.

5.  Those  adipiscendae  possessionis   causa  comparata. — They

were  so  called  because  they  were  of  service  only  to  an
individual  who  had  not  yet  obtained  possession  at  all,
144.  The  principal  were  the  int.  quorum  bonorum  at  the
instance  of  a  honor,  possessor  (see  Bonor.  possessio,  5),  to
enable  him  to  obtain  things  belonging  to  the  inheritance

512  DIGEST.

INTERDICTS— continued.

II.  THE  POSSESSORY  INTERDICTS  IN  PARTICULAR — continued.

from  any  one  retaining  them  either  as  heir  (pro  herede)
or  without  any  pretence  of  title  (pro  possessore),  ibid. ;  the
int.  possessorium  at  the  instance  of  a  bonor.  em2Jtor  (see
Emptio  bonor.},  and  the  int.  sectorium  at  the  instance  of  a
bonor.  sector  or  purchaser  of  a  confiscated  estate, — both  for
the  same  purpose  as  the  quor.  bonor.,  145, 146;  and  the  int.
Salvianum  to  enable  a  landlord  to  obtain  possession  of
effects  of  his  farm-tenant's  hypothecated  for  the  rent,  147.

6.  Those  retinendae  possessionis  causa  comparata. — These,  viz.

uti  possidetis  and  utrubi,  were  to  enable  a  man  to  keep
possession  which  was  being  disturbed,  and  are  said  to
have  been  introduced  as  ancillary  to  a  litigation  about
ownership,  and  for  the  purpose  of  deciding  which  party  was
to  stand  pursuer,  which  defender,  in  the  vindicatio,  148.

7.  The  int.  uti  possidetis. — This  was  employed  in  reference  to

immoveables,  149 ;  it  was  addressed  equally  to  both
parties,  forbidding  both  to  use  any  force,  vis,  to  disturb
the  existing  state  of  possession,  160 ;  and  he  eventually
prevailed  who  proved  that  he  was  actually  in  possession
at  the  moment  of  the  interdict,  and  had  not  taken  it
vitiously  from  his  adversary,  i.e.  either  forcibly,  stealthily,
or  by  refusal  to  vacate  on  recal  of  a  grant  during  pleasure
(precario'),  150.

8.  The  int.  utrubi. — This  was  used  when  the  dispute  was

about  moveables,  149  ;  it  also  was  addressed  to  both
parties,  who  were  both  prohibited  forcibly  interfering
with  the  possession  of  that  one  of  them — which  ?  was  to
be  afterwards  ascertained — who  had  been  in  possession
for  a  longer  period  during  the  praetorian  year  than  his
adversary,  160,  150,  152,  and  note  in  Additions  etc.,  and
that  without  vitious  exclusion  of  the  latter,  150 ;  and  if
his  own  possession  was  non-vitious,  either  party  was
entitled  to  add  to  it  the  rightful  possession  of  any  one
from  whom  he  had  justly  acquired  it,  151,  (see  Accessio
temporis).  In  both  interdicts  the  possession  founded  on
might  be  that  of  a  representative,  or  even  one  retained
without  occupancy,  by  mere  effort  of  will,  153,  (see
Possession).

9.  The  int.  unde  vi. — For  recovering  possession  that  had  been

lost  the  int.  unde  vi  was  employed,  154;  its  purpose
being  the  reinstatement  of  a  party  who  had  been  forcibly
ejected  from  his  land  or  house,  ibid.,  but  provided  always
he  had  not  himself  in  the  first  instance  taken  the  posses-
sion vitiously  from  the  ejector,  ibid.  In  the  ordinary

DIGEST.  513

— continued.

II.  THE  POSSESSORY  INTERDICTS  IN  PARTICULAR — continued.

case  it  was  lawful  to  use  force  to  eject  a  vitious  posses-
sor, ibid.,  so  long  as  it  was  not  force  of  arms,  155 ;  for
then,  as  a  punishment  of  the  offence,  the  ejector  was
invariably  compelled  to  restore  the  possession,  ibid.

III.  PROCEDURE  IN  SINGLE  INTERDICTS.

10.  Alternative  courses  open  to  defender. — The  pronouncing  of

the  interdict  was  but  the  first  step  in  the  procedure,  141 ;
the  next  was  to  remit  it  for  trial  on  the  merits,  ibid.  In
prohibitory  interdicts  there  was  but  one  course — to  inter-
change penal  sponsions,  adjust  a,  formula  upon  them,  and
send  it  to  a  judex,  ibid. ;  but  in  restitutory  and  exhibitory
ones  the  defender  might  demand  a  less  hazardous  arbi-
traria  formula  and  a  remit  to  an  arbiter,  ibid.,  which  was
always  granted  if  the  demand  was  made  at  once,  and
before  he  had  left  the  presence  of  the  magistrate  who
had  pronounced  the  interdict,  164.

11.  Procedure  by  arbitrary  formula. — If  the  defender  elected

this  procedure,  the  arbiter  had  to  decide  whether  there
were  grounds  to  justify  the  interdict,  163;  if  he  found
there  were,  he  ordered  compliance,  ibid. ;  if  the  defender
obeyed,  he  was  at  once  acquitted,  ibid. ;  but  if  he  refused
to  restore  or  exhibit  he  was  condemned  in  damages,  ibid.

12.  Procedure  when  defender  declined  reference  to  an  arbiter. —

If  the  defender  had  not  demanded  an  arbitrary  formula,
and  yet  failed  to  restore  or  exhibit,  the  pursuer  challenged
him  with  a  sponsion,  to  which  he  replied  with  a  restipu-
lation  (see  Sponsio  et  restipulatio')  on  the  question  whether
there  had  been  breach  of  interdict,  165 ;  on  the  sponsion
and  restipulation  formulae  were  adjusted,  the  pursuer
getting  added  to  his  a  remit  to  the  judex  on  the  question
whether  the  interdict  was  justifiable,  ibid. ;  if  on  both
issues  the  judge  found  for  the  pursuer,  and  the  defender
still  refused  to  restore  or  exhibit,  the  latter  was  con-
demned not  merely  in  damages  but  in  the  amount  of  the
sponsion,  ibid,  and  correction  in  Additions  etc. ;  what
happened  if  the  finding  was  for  the  defender,  or  if,  being
against  him,  he  obeyed  the  judge's  order,  does  not  appear,
the  MS.  being  illegible,  ibid.,  note  2.

IV.  PROCEDURE  IN  THE  DOUBLE  INTERDICTS.

13.  First  step — each  offered  violence  to  the  other. — The  beginning

of  Gams'  account  of  the  procedure  in  the  double  interdicts
is  illegible,  166,  note ;  but,  from  an  observation  in  §  170,
it  appears  that,  as  the  interdict  was  equally  addressed  to
both  parties,  each  at  once  contravened  its  prohibition  by

2K

614  DIGEST.

INTERDICTS— continued.

IV.  PKOCEDURE  IN  THE  DOUBLE  INTERDICTS — continued.

offering  pretence  of  violence  (vis  moribus  facta,  vis  ex
conventu}  to  the  other,  so  as  thus  to  raise  the  question
which  of  them  had  in  fact  committed  breach  of  interdict
by  doing  violence  to  the  party  truly  in  possession, — a
circuitous  way  of  determining  who  was  possessor  when
the  interdict  was  pronounced,  16G,  note,  as  amended  in
Additions  etc.

14.  Second  step — the   fructus   licitatio  and  award  of  interim
possession. — The  praetor  then  assigned  the  interim  enjoy-
ment of  the  fruits  and  profits  to  the  highest  bidder,  166,
who  gave  security  for  payment  to  his  adversary  of  the
sum  bid — which  was  regarded  not  as  price  but  as  penalty,
167 — in  the  event  of  the  latter  being  ultimately  success-
ful, 166.

15.  Third   step — the   sponsiones   and   formulae. — Next,  each

challenged  the  other  to  a  sponsion  on  the  question  whether
he  had  committed  breach  of  interdict,  and  each  restipu-
lated,  (see  Sponsio  et  restipulatio},  166;  and  upon  the
sponsions  and  restipulations  formulae  were  adjusted  and
sent  to  ajudcx,  166«.

16.  The  judicia  and  their  results. — If  judgment  was  for  the
party  who   had  succeeded  in   the  fructus  licitatio   (the
bidding),  his  adversary  had  to  pay  only  the  amount  of
the  sponsion  and  restipulation,  168  :  if  against  him,  he
had  to  pay  to  his  adversary  the  amount  of  the  sponsion
and  restipulation,  and  the  sum  bid  for  the  interim  enjoy-
ment, and  return  the  fruits  drawn  or  their  value,  166a,
167  ;  and  if  thereupon  the  possession  was  not  also  yielded
up,  the  adversary  might  recover  damages  in  ajudicium
secutorium,  or  after  process,  known  as  the  judicium  Casccl-
lianum,  166«.     But  the   successful  party  might,  if  he
pleased,  disregard  the  fructuaria  stipulatio,  i.e.  the  en-
gagement for  payment   of  the   amount   of  the  fructus
licitatio,  and  have  a  separate  action  in  reference  to  the
fruits,  known  as  i\ie  judicium  fructuarium,  169.

17.  The  secondary  interdict. — It  sometimes  happened  that  the

procedure  could  not  thus  be  explicated,  owing  to  the  re-
fusal of  one  of  the  parties  to  offer  pretence  of  violence,
bid  for  the  interim  enjoyment  of  fruits,  etc. ;  he  was  in
such  a  case  assumed  to  be  in  the  wrong,  and  by  an  inter-
dictum  secundarium  required,  if  he  had  it,  to  restore  the
possession  to  his  adversary,  if  otherwise,  to  abstain  from
disturbing  him,  170.
INTERESSE,  quanti  mea  interest,  damages,  G.  iii,  161.

DIGEST.  515

INTEREST,  usurae,  and  fruits  and  profits  were  due  on  &  fideicommis-
sum  if  debtor  in  mora,  but  not  on  legacies,  except  those
left  sinendi  modo,  G.  ii,  280  and  note.

INTERPRETATIO  PONTIFICIUM,  G.  ii,  42,  note ;  see  Jus  JKomanorum.

INTESTATE   SUCCESSION  (to  freebom  citizens),  G.  iii,  1-38,
U.  xxvi,  xxviii,  7-9 ;  see  also  SUCCESSION,  HEREDITAS,
BONORUM  POSSESSIO.      For  succession  to  freedmen,  see
Succession  to  cit.  freedmen,  Succession  to  Junian  latins.
I.  INTESTACY  GENERALLY.

1.  When  it  arose. — There  was  intestacy  not  only  when  a  man

had  died  without  a  testament,  but  even  when  he  had
made  one  if  it  turned  out  inoperative,  G.  iii,  13.  And
this  might  be  due  to  irregularity  in  its  execution,  omission
to  institute  or  disinherit  filii  sui,  or  to  its  subsequent
invalidation,  G.  ii,  138-146,  U.  xxiii,  2-4,  (see  Testament,
II.,  IV.) ;  or  else  to  the  death  of  a  sole  heir  during  the
testator's  lifetime  or  before  entry,  his  loss  of  testamenti
factio  and  consequent  incapacity  to  take,  non-fulfilment
of  the  condition  under  which  he  was  instituted,  expiry  of
the  period  of  cretion  without  cerniture,  or  his  exclusion  by
the  Julian  law  on  the  ground  of  celibacy,  G.  ii,  144.

2.  Difference  between  the  civil  and  praetorian  rules. — In  all  the

above  cases  there  was  intestacy  by  the  jus  civile;  but
where  it  was  due  neither  to  the  entire  absence  of  a  testa-
ment, omission  to  institute  filii  sui,  nor  failure  of  heirs  ex
testamento,  but  to  irregularity  in  point  of  form  or  the
subsequent  occurrence  of  something  that  invalidated  it,
the  praetors  gave  the  heredes  scripti  possession  of  the  estate
according  to  the  tenor  of  the  deed,  and  disregarded  the
civil  intestacy.  See  Bonorum  possessio,  10-12.

II.    THE  INTESTATE  SUCCESSION  OF  THE  TWELVE  TABLES.

3.  First  to  sui  heredes. — Sui  heredes  took  first,  G.  iii,  1,  U.  xxvi,

1 ;  i.e.  descendants  in  potestate,  whether  natural  or  adop-
tive, who  became  sui  juris  by  their  parent's  death,  G.  iii,
2  ;  wife  in  manu,  and  daughter-in-law  in-  manu  of  a  son  not
in  potestate,  3  ;  postumi  (which  see),  who  would  have  been
in  potestate  had  they  been  born  during  the  parent's  life,
4 ;  children  on  whose  behalf  cause  had  been  proved  (see
Causae  prob.  ex  1.  Aelia  Sentia,  Erroris  causae  probatio}
after  their  parent's  death,  5 ;  and  sons  manumitted  from
a  first  or  second  mancipation  (see  Emancipation,  3),  6.  All
of  these,  who  did  not  on  the  death  of  the  intestate  pass
into  another  person's  potestas,  participated  in  the  hereditas
no  matter  of  what  degree  of  relationship,  G.  iii,  7,  U.  xxvi,
2  ;  the  division  being  in  stirpes,  i.e.  by  branches  and  not  by
heads,  G.  iii,  8,  U.  xxvi,  2.

516  DIGEST.

INTESTATE  SUCCESSION— continued.

II.  THE  INTESTATE  SUCCESSION  OF  THE  TWELVE  TABLES — Continued.

4.  Next  to  agnates. — Ulp.  says  that  failing  sui  the  inheritance

passed  to  consanguineans,  i.e.  the  intestate's  brothers  and
sisters  by  the  same  father,  and  in  the  third  place  to
agnates,  U.  xxvi,  1 ;  but  consanguineans  were  just
agnates  of  the  first  class,  and  Gai.  includes  them  under
that  name,  G.  iii,  9.  The  justification  of  Ulpian's  dis-
tinction maybe  this, — that  in  the  class  of  consanguineans
both  males  and  females  were  entitled  to  succeed,  whereas
beyond  it,  in  what  he  calls  the  class  of  agnates,  females
had  no  right  of  succession,  G.  iii,  14,  U.  xxvi,  6.  (Agnate
defined  in  G.  i,  156,  iii,  10,  U.  xi,  4,  xxvi,  1 ;  see  Agnation,
1.)  Only  those  wTere  entitled  to  take  who  were  nearest  of
degree  when  the  fact  of  intestacy  was  ascertained,  G.  iii,
11,  13  ;  if  they  declined,  the  inheritance  did  not  pass  to
those  of  the  next  degree,  G.  iii,  12,  U.  xxvi,  5,  there  being-
no  succession  of  degrees  for  agnates  under  the  Tables,
ibid. ;  the  division  therefore  was  in  capita,  by  heads,  not
by  branches,  G.  iii,  15,  16,  U.  xxvi,  4.  But  there  was  no
room  for  the  admission  of  agnates  so  long  as  there  was  a
possibility  of  sui,  as  when  the  intestate's  widow  was
pregnant  or  his  son  in  captivity  (which  see),  U.  xxvi,  3.

5.  Lastly  to  the  gens. — Failing  agnates  the  hercditas  passed  to

the  intestate's  gens,  G.  iii,  1*7.  The  Tables  did  not  (and
hardly  could)  carry  the  succession  any  farther,  18.

6.  Defects  of  the  system. — Amongst  them  were  these  : — that  it

excluded  emancipated  children,  G.  iii,  19,  children  who
had  received  a  gift  of  citizenship  with  their  deceased
father,  but  had  not  at  the  same  time  been  subjected  to
his  potestas,  20,  agnates  wdio  had  undergone  capitis  dcmi-
nutio  even  minima  (see  Cap.  dem.,  2),  21,  females  more
distantly  related  than  sisters,  23,  and  cognates,  including
children  in  relation  to  their  mother  and  vice  versa,  24 ;
further,  that  on  failure  of  agnates  of  the  first  degree  there
was  no  devolution  to  those  of  the  next,  22.

III.    THE    INTESTATE    SUCCESSION    OF    THE    EDICT;    S66   BonOTUlll

possessio,  TV.
IV.  LATER  AMENDMENTS.

7.  Succession  between  mother  and  child. — By  the  Twelve  Tables

there  was  no  right  of  succession  between  a  mother  and
her  children,  because  they  were  only  cognates  ;  unless
indeed  she  was  or  had  been  in  manu  of  their  father,  and
then  she  stood  to  them  sororis  loco,  G.  iii,  14,  24,  U.  xxvi,
7,  note  1.  The  edict  only  partially  amended  the  defect
by  recognising  a  right  in  cognates  on  failure  of  agnates,

DIGEST.  517

INTESTATE  SUCCESSION— continued.
IV.  LATER  AMENDMENTS — continued.

G.  iii,  30,  U.  xxviii,  9.  But  by  the  Orphitian  Set.  it  was
provided  that  the  inheritance  of  a  mother  should  belong
to  her  children  to  the  exclusion  of  agnates,  U.  xxvi,  7;
and  the  Tertullian  Set.  gave  a  mother  who  had  the  jus
liberorum  (which  see)  a  right  of  succession  to  a  child  who
was  survived  neither  by  sui  heredes,  father,  nor  consan-
guinean  brother,  U.  xxvi,  8.

Irso  JURE  and  OPE  EXCEPTIONIS  distinguished,  G.  iii,  168,  181 ;  iv,
106,  107,  116a.

IREITANCY  of  a  testament,  see  Testament,  23.

ISLAND  rising  in  a  river,  to  whom  it  belonged,  G.  ii,  72 ;  see  Property^.

ITALICA  PRAEDIA,  solum  Italicum,  land  in  Italy,  or  in  those  parts  of
the  provinces  that  enjoyed  the  jus  Italicum,  (which  see).

ITERATIO,  one  of  the  modes  in  which  a  latin  acquired  citizenship,
G.  i,  35,  as  amended  in  Additions  etc.,  U.  iii,  1,  4 ;  see
Junian  latinity,  7.

JAVOLENUS  PRISCUS,  a  Sabinian,  praetor  in  reign  of  Hadrian,  died
A.D.  138,  G.  iii,  70  and  note,  U.  xi,  28.

JUDEX,  office  and  duty  of,  see  Procedure,  10.

JUDICATAE,  EXCEPTIO  RET,  a  peremptory  exception  alleging  that  the
question  in  dispute  had  already  been  judicially  deter-
mined, G.  iv,  121  ;  see  Exception,  9,  Litis  contestatio,  Jud.
leg.  and  imp.  cont.

JUDICATUM,  judgment,  entitled  the  judgment  creditor,  under  the
system  of  the  legis  actiones,  to  proceed  against  his  debtor
(who  was  spoken  of  as  judicatus,  G.  iii,  78,  iv,  21)  by
manus  injectio, — arrest  and  imprisonment,  G.  iv,  21,  (see
Legis  actiones,  5).  In  course  of  time  this  practice  was
abolished,  and  an  actio  judicati  substituted  against  a
debtor  who  delayed  voluntarily  to  implement  a  judgment
against  him ;  like  all  those  that  replaced  procedure  per
manus  injectionem,  it  was  in  duplum,  G.  iv,  21,  and  the
defender  bound  to  give  cautio  judicatum  solvi,  G.  iv,  25,
102;  and  the  result  of  it  was  that  the  creditor  had  his
debtor  adjudged  to  him  (ad judicatus)  to  work  off  his
debt,  G.  iii,  189  and  n.  2,  199  and  n.  2.  If,  however,
the  debtor  had  funds,  real  execution  might  proceed  upon
the  judgment,  after  expiry  of  the  days  of  grace,  by  missio
in  possessionem,  etc.,  G.  iii,  78  f.,  (see  Emptio  bonoruni).

JUDICATUM  SOLVI,  CAUTIO,  see  Cautiones  etc.,  2,  4.

JUDICIA  BONAE  FiDEi,  see  Bonae  fidei  judicia.

JUDICIA  LEGITIMA  and  IMPERIO  CONTINENTIA,  G.  IV,  103-109.

1.  Judicia  legitima. — Those  judicia  alone  were  legitima  which

518  DIGEST.

JUDICIA  LEGITIMA  and  IMPERIO  CONTINENTIA—  continued.

were  carried  on  («,)  in  or  within  a  mile  of  Eome,  (&.)
between  parties  who  were  all  citizens,  and  (c.)  before
a  single  judex,  who  also  was  a  citizen,  G.  iv,  104,  109  ;
but  it  was  immaterial  whether  the  ground  of  action  arose
ex  lege,  i.e.  from  statute,  or  from  the  praetor's  edict,  109.
By  the  Julian  judiciary  law  they  expired  in  eighteen
months  if  judgment  was  not  sooner  pronounced,  104  and
n.  1 ;  and  they  were  extinguished  by  capitis  deminutio,
such  as  manus  or  adrogatio,  G.  iii,  83.  Litiscontestation
in  a  judicium  of  this  sort,  if  in  personam  with  an  intentio
in  jus  concepta,  (see  Formula,  3),  ipso  jure  extinguished
the  pursuer's  right  to  a  new  action  on  the  same  grounds,
G.  iii,  180,  181,  iv,  107  and  n.  2  ;  but  if  the  judicium
was  in  rem,  or  if,  being  in  personam,  it  had  an  intentio  in
factum  concepta,  further  right  of  action  was  not  ipso  jure
extinguished,  and  an  exception  was  necessary,  G.  iv,  107
and  n.  3.

2.  Judicia  imperio  continentia. — They  were  so  called  because
dependent  on  the  imperium  and  not  authorised  by  the
jus  legitimum  or  civile  ;  and  included  all  («.)  in  which  any
of  the  litigants  was  a  peregrin,  or  (5.)  that  were  carried
on  at  more  than  a  mile  from  Rome,  or  (c.)  before  recu-
perators, or  (d.)  a  peregrin  as  sole  judex,  G.  iv,  105,  109  ;
it  being  here  again  immaterial  whether  the  cause  of
action  was  praetorian  or  statutory,  109.  They  lasted
only  during  the  year  of  office  of  the  magistrate  by  whom
they  were  granted,  105  ;  but,  being  founded  not  on  a
civilis  but  a  naturalis  ratio,  G.  i,  158,  they  do  not  seem
to  have  been  put  an  end  to  by  capitis  deminutio  of  the
pursuer,  G.  iv,  80.  For  the  same  reason  litiscontestation
in  them  did  not  ipso  jure  extinguish  the  pursuer's  right
to  a  new  action  on  the  same  grounds  ;  but  if  raised  it
might  be  defeated  by  exceptio  rei  in  judicium  deductae  or
ex.  rei  judicatae,  G.  iii,  181,  iv,  106  and  note.

JUDICIS  POSTULATIONEM,  LEGis  ACTio  PER,  see  Legis  actiones,  3.

JUDICIUM,  see  Actions,  1.

JUDICIUM  CALUMNIAE,  see  Vexatious  litigation.

JUDICIUM  CASCELLIANUM,  see  Interdicts,  16.

JUDICIUM  DEDUCTAE,  EXCEPTIO  REI  IN,  a  peremptory  exception
alleging  that  issue  had  been  joined  on  the  same  question
in  a  previous  action  ;  it  was  used  alternatively  with  and
in  the  same  cases  as  the  exceptio  rei  judicatae,  G.  iii,  181,
iv,  106,  107.  See  Litis  contestatio,  Jud.  legitima  etc.

JUDICIUM  FRUCTUARIUM,  G.  iv,  69  ;  see  Interdicts,  16.

JUDICIUM  SECUTORIUM,  G.  iv,  69  ;  see  Interdicts,  16.

DIGEST.  519

JULIAN  AND  PAPIA-POPPAEAN  LAW.

1.  History. — The  history  of  the  statute  is  referred  to  in  G.  i,

145,  note  1  ;  bat  some  only  of  its  provisions  are  recorded
by  Gai.  and  Ulp.

2.  Relaxation  of  the  tutela  mulierum. — It  relieved  from  tutory

freeborn  women  with  three  children  and  freedwomen
with  four,  G.  i,  145,  194,  iii,  44,  U.  xxix,  3  ;  and,  when  a
woman's  tutor-at-law  happened  to  be  a  pupil,  authorised
the  appointment  of  an  Atilian  tutor  in  his  stead,  to  aid
her  in  constituting  a  dowry,  G.  i,  178,  U.  xi,  20,  (see
Tutory,  17,  22,  24).

3.  Prohibition  of  certain  marriages. — It  forbade  senators  and

their  children  to  marry  their  freedwomen,  women  con-
nected with  the  stage,  and  prostitutes,  as  well  as  those
still  more  disreputable  characters  whom  no  man  of  free
birth  was  allowed  to  marry,  U.  xiii  and  notes,  xvi,  2  ;
and  declared  the  survivor  incapable  of  taking  anything
under  the  testament  of  the  predeceaser,  U.  xvi,  2.

4.  Requirement  of  marriage  as  the  general  condition  of  taking

at  all  under  a  testament. — It  made  marriage  the  condition
of  taking  under  a  testament  for  men  under  sixty  and
women  under  fifty,  G.  ii,  111,  144,  U.  xvi,  1,  unless  of  kin
to  the  testator  within  the  sixth  degree,  U.  xvi,  1,  and  new
note  in  Additions  etc. — it  does  hot  appear  from  what  age
upwards  it  was  required  ;  but  a  man  was  freed  from  the
penalties  of  celibacy  while  absent  on  state  service  and
for  a  year  thereafter,  U.  xvi,  1  and  n.  2,  while  a  woman
was  free  for  two  years  after  her  husband's  death  and
eighteen  months  after  divorce,  U.  xiv  and  note.  Though
the  statute  did  not  require  marriage  after  fifty  and  sixty
respectively,  the  Pernician  Set.  declared  that  the  penalties
of  celibacy  should  adhere  permanently  to  persons  un-
married at  those  ages,  U.  xvi,  3  and  note  ;  but  this  was
modified  by  a  Claudian  Set.,  which  provided  that  a  man
over  sixty  might  still  escape  them  by  marrying  a  woman
under  fifty,  U.  xvi,  4.  To  acquire  the  right  to  take  the
testamentary  gift,  the  celibate  had  to  marry  within  the
time  of  cretion  (see  Cretio,  2,  Jus  capiendi),  U.  xvii,  1,
xxii,  3  ;  if  he  did  not,  and  he  was  sole  heir,  the  result
was  intestacy,  G.  ii,  144,  while,  if  he  was  only  heir  ex
parte  or  a  legatee,  what  he  failed  to  take  became  caducous,
U.  xvii,  1  (see  Jus  capwndi,  Caducity).

5.  Requirement  of  children  as  the  condition  of  taking  in  full.

— In  order  to  take  in  full  under  a  testament,  men  and
women  over  twenty-five  and  twenty  respectively  were
required  to  have  at  least  one  child,  U.  xvi,  1  and  note  to

520  DIGEST.

JULIAN  AND  PAPIA-POPPAEAN  LAW  —  continued.

rubr.  of  tit.  xiii,  otherwise,  as  orM,  they  forfeited  one-
half  of  what  had  been  left  them,  G.  ii,  111,  286a.

6.  Testamentary  capacity  of  husband  and  wife   inter   se.  —  It

authorised  the  survivor  of  husband  and  wife  to  take  a
tenth  of  the  predeceaser's  estate  under  his  testament,
simply  on  the  strength  of  the  marriage,  with  addition  of
another  tenth  for  each  surviving  child  of  a  previous
marriage,  and  a  tenth  for  each  child  of  their  own  —  but
not  more  than  two  —  that,  though  deceased,  had  yet  sur-
vived its  name-day,  U.  xv,  1,  2  ;  and  he  or  she  might  take
in  addition  the  usufruct  and  in  certain  cases  the  property
of  a  third  part  of  the  predeceaser's  estate,  U.  xv,  3.  If
they  had  a  child  surviving,  or  had  lost  one  after  it  had
reached  puberty,  or  two  that  had  reached  the  age  of  three
years,  or  three  that  had  reached  their  name-days,  or  if
they  had  a  grant  of  the  jus  liberorum,  then  they  were
entitled  to  take  inter  se  in  full,  provided  their  marriage
was  unobjectionable  under  the  statute,  U.  xvi,  1,  2,  4.

7.  Eights  of  patrons  in  the  inheritances  of  their  freedmen.  —  The

statute  augmented  the  rights  of  patrons  and  their  male
children  succeeding  to  very  wealthy  freedmen,  G.  iii,  42  ;
it  required  freedwomen  it  had  released  from  tutory,  if
they  made  a  testament,  to  leave  their  patrons  a  certain
share  of  their  property,  44  and  note  ;  it  gave  a  patron's
daughter  who  had  three  children  right  of  challenge  of  a
freedman's  testament  and  of  succession  to  him  ab  intcs-
tato,  46,  47  and  n.  2,  U.  xxix,  5  ;  and  it  gave  patronesses
who  were  mothers  certain  rights  in  the  successions  of
their  freedmen  and  freedwomen,  G.  iii,  49,  50  and  notes,
52  and  note,  U.  xxix,  6,  7,  (see  Succession  to  citizen  freed-

8. Alteration  of  the  law  of  vesting.  —  The  enactment  altered  the

date  of  vesting  of  unconditional  legacies,  and  those  pay-
able at  a  fixed  date,  from  the  time  of  the  testator's  death
to  that  of  the  opening  of  his  testamentary  writings,  U.
xxiv,  31,  (see  Legacy,  11).

9.  Regulation  of  caducity.  —  Further,  it  introduced  the  doctrine

of  caducity,  —  making  everything  that  an  heir  ex  parte  or
a  legatee  failed  to  take  under  a  testament  a  lapse,  to  pass
to  other  heirs  and  legatees  who  had  children,  and  failing
them  to  the  state,  and  reserving  the  jus  antiguum  or
right  of  accretion  only  in  favour  of  descendants  and
ascendants  of  the  testator  to  the  third  degree,  G.  ii,  150,
206-208  ;  U.  i,  21,  xviii,  xix,  17,  xxiv,  12,  xxviii,  7,  (see
Caducity}.

DIGEST.  521

JULIANUS,  SALVIUS,  G.  ii,  218,  280,  an  adherent  of  the  Sabinian
school,  (see  Salinians  etc.},  and  consolidator  of  the  prae-
torian edict  in  the  time  of  Hadrian,  (see  Praetor,  2).

JUNIAN  LATINITY,  G.  i,  22-24,  28-35,  iii,  56-73 ;  U.  i,  10,  iii,  1-6.

1.  Definition. — Junian  latinity  was  the  condition  which  the

Junian  law  (see  L.  Junia)  assigned  to  persons  who,  not
being  of  bad  character,  (see  Dcd.  freedmen},  had  been
manumitted  contrary  to  or  without  due  observance  of  the
requirements  of  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  (which  see,  Nos.  2,
4) ;  under  the  latter  statute  they  were  still  de  jure  slaves,
though  protected  by  the  praetors  in  the  enjoyment  of  clc
facto  freedom  ;  the  Junian  law  declared  that  they  should
in  future  be  not  only  de  facto  but  dejure  free,  and  that
their  condition  should  be  similar  to  that  of  the  colonial
latins  (see  Col.  latinity,  1)  ;  hence  their  name  of  Junian
latins,  G.  i,  22,  iii,  56,  U.  i,  10.

2.  How  men  became  Junian  latins. — They  became  so  in  the

first  instance  by  manumission,  (which  see).  If  they
married  women  of  their  own  condition,  and  did  not  have
themselves  made  citizens,  their  children  were  also  Junian
latins,  U.  iii,  1.

3.  Their   capacity. — A   Junian    latin   had    commercium,    and

therefore  might  be  a  party  to  a  mancipation,  U.  xix,  4,
and  hold  property  on  quiritarinn  title.  He  had  testa-
mentifactio,  U.  xi,  16,  and  therefore  could  act  either  as
familiae  emptor,  libripcns,  or  witness  (see  Testament,  3,  4),
U.  xx,  8.  He  might  be  instituted  heir  in  an  ordinary
testament  or  have  a  legacy  bequeathed  to  him,  U.  xxii,  3,
though  he  could  not  take  either  while  he  continued  a
latin  (below,  No.  4)  ;  even  as  a  latin  he  could  take  a
Jideicommissum  (which  see),  G.  i,  23,  ii,  275,  U.  xxv,  7  ;
and  under  a  military  testament  (see  Testament,  25)  he  could
as  a  latin  take  either  inheritance  or  bequest,  G.  ii,  110.

4.  Tlieir  disabilities. — Though  a  Junian  latin  was  entitled  to

take  a  citizen  wife  with  a  view  to  causae  probatio  (see
Aelia-Sentian  law,  6,  7),  yet  he  had  no  conubium  with
her,  and  therefore  no  potestas  over  his  children  until
cause  had  been  proved  and  citizenship  thereby  acquired,
G.  i,  66,  76.  The  Junian  law  forbade  him  to  make  a
testament,  G.  i,  23,  U.  xx,  14 ;  did  not  allow  him  to  be
appointed  a  tutor  under  one,  G.  i,  23,  U.  xi,  16  ;  and  did
not  allow  him  to  take  an  inheritance  to  which  he  had
been  instituted  or  a  legacy  bequeathed  to  him,  G.  i,  23,
ii,  110,  275,  U.  xxv,  7,  unless  he  converted  his  latinity
into  citizenship  within  a  hundred  days,  U.  xvii,  1,  xxii,
3,  (see  Jus  capicndi}.

522  DIGEST.

JUNTAN  LATINITY — continued.

5.  Tutory  of  latins. — By  the  Junian  law  male  latins  under

puberty  and  females  of  any  age  were  in  tutelage  of  those
who  were  their  quiritarian  owners  (see  Quir.  ownership)
at  the  time  of  manumission,  whether  those  last  were  their
manumitters  or  not,  G.  i,  167,  U.  xi,  19.

6.  Disposal  of  their  estates  on  death. — See  Slice,  to  Junian  latins.

7.  How  they  could  become  citizens. — («.)  By  grant  of  citizenship

in  answer  to  a  petition  to  the  emperor,  U.  iii,  2.  It
might  be  given  salvo  jure  patroni,  which  implied  reser-
vation to  his  manumitter  of  right  to  his  estate  on  his
death,  G.  iii,  72  ;  if  given  without  the  patron's  know-
ledge or  consent,  the  latter's  right  of  succession  was  not
prejudiced,  unless  the  latin  afterwards  proved  cause
under  the  Aelia-Sentian  law,  G.  iii,  72,  73.  (&.)  Proving
cause  under  that  enactment  was  one  of  the  commonest
modes  of  acquiring  citizenship,  G.  i,  29-32a,  and  note  to
29  as  amended  in  Additions  etc.,  U.  iii,  3  ;  see  Aelia-
Sentian  laiv,  6,  7,  Causae  prob.  ex  I.  Aelia-Sentia.  (c.)
Iteration  or  renewal  of  the  manumission  when  it  had
been  irregular  or  by  a  bonitarian  owner  only,  U.  iii,  4,
G.  i,  35,  as  amended  in  Additions  etc.  (d)  Service  in
the  night  watch,  militia,  G.  i,  326,  U.  iii,  5.  (c.)  Ship-
trading,  G.  i,  32e,  U.  iii,  6.  (/.)  House-building,  G.  i,
33,  U.  iii,  1.  (#.)  Flour-milling,  G.  i,  34,  U.  iii,  1.  (h.)
Lastly  a  freeborn  latin  woman  acquired  citizenship  by
giving  birth  to  a  third  child,  U.  iii,  1.

JUPITEK,  inauguration  as  a  priest  of,  released  the  flamen  from  the
patria  potestas,  G.  i,  130,  U.  x,  5,  and  that  without  capitis
deminutio,  G.  iii,  114.  A  flamen  Dialis  required  to  be
the  offspring  of  a  farreate  marriage,  and  himself  married
confarreatione,  G.  i,  112.  Jupiter  Farreus,  ibid.;  Jupiter
Tarpeius,  U.  xxii,  6 ;  Jupiter  Dapalis,  G.  iv,  28  and  note.

Jus  had  many  significations,  and  amongst  the  most  important
those  of  (a.)  a  system  of  law  or  jurisprudence  as  a  whole,
e.g.j.  naturale,  G.  ii,  65,;'.  gentium,  i,  l,j.  civile,  ibid.,  j.
Quiritium,  ii,  40,  j.  Homanorum,  iii,  96,  praetorium,  U.
xxii,  24  ;  (6.)  the  fits  civile  as  distinguished  from  the  jus
praetorium,  e.g.  jurefactum  testamentum,  G.  ii,  146,  ipso
jure,  198,  juris  iniquitates,  iii,  25,  in  jus  conccpta  and
juris  contentio,  iv,  6U  ;  (c.)  a  particular  institution  of  the
law  in  all  its  parts  and  consequences,  e.g.  confarreatio,
G.  i,  112,  agnatio,  158,  postliminium,  129  ;  (d.)  a  parti-
cular rule  of  law,  as  in  jura  populi  Rom.,  G.  i,  2,  jura
condere,  7,  ittimur  hoc  jure,  135,  ita  jus  esto,  ii,  224  ;  (e.~)
a  right  or  congeries  of  rights  in  the  abstract,  e.g.  right

DIGEST.  523

Jus— continued.

of  succession  of  agnates,  G.  iii,  12,  child's  right  of  suc-
cession, 19,  ernendi  vendendique  jus,  U.  xix,  5  ;  (/.)  a
right  in  the  concrete,  e.g.  male  nostro  juri  uti  non  debemus,
G.  i,  53,  pristina  jura  recipiunt,  129,  jus  eundi  agcndi,
iv,  3  ;  (g.)  the  presence  of  a  magistrate,  e.g.  in  jure  cessio,
ii,  24,  in  jure  vindicare,  iv,  16,  in  jus  vocare,  183.

Jus  ANTIQUUM  used  by  Ulp.  to  denote  the  old  jus  adcrescendi  or
right  of  accretion,  whereby,  on  one  of  several  testa-
mentary heirs  failing,  the  others  took  his  share  pro  rata,
U.  i,  21  and  n.  3,  (see  Adcretio,  2).  It  was  displaced  by
the  Julian  and  Pap.  Popp.  law,  except  in  favour  of  certain
near  kinsmen  of  the  testator's,  ibid.,  U.  tit.  xviii ;  and  the
exception  was  retained  in  Caracalla's  enactment  giving
caduca  to  the  fisc,  U.  xvii,  2,  (see  Caducity,  3,  5).

Jus  BELLI,  G.  iii,  94.

Jus  CAPIENDI,  the  right  of  an  instituted  heir  or  of  a  legatee  to  take
the  testamentary  gift.  By  the  Junian  law  a  latin  could
not  take  unless  he  became  a  citizen  within  a  hundred  days,
G.  i,  23,  U.  xvii,  1,  xxii,  3.  By  the  Julian  law  a  caelebs
could  not  take  at  all  unless  he  married  within  the  same
period,  U.  xvii,  1,  xxii,  3 ;  but  it  is  not  said  that  the
orlus,  who  was  allowed  to  take  only  one-half  of  what
was  left  him,  G.  ii,  286«,  was  relieved  from  his  disability
by  birth  of  a  child  to  him  within  the  same  period.

Jus  CIVILE  is  never  employed  to  denote  the  law  of  Rome  as  a  whole,
the  jus  Romanorum,  (which  see) ;  but  in  the  texts  signifies
either  (a.)  that  part  of  it  which  wras  peculiarly  Roman,  as
distinguished  from  the  jus  gentium,  or  natural  e,  G.  i,  1,
ii,  65  ;  or  (b.)  that  which  was  the  result  of  old  tradition,
the  XII  Tables  and  their  interpretation,  and  the  legis-
lation of  the  republic,  as  distinguished  (a)  from  that
derived  from  the  praetor's  edicts,  ii,  115  and  116,  136,
iii,  71,  U.  xxii,  23,  xxiii,  6,  and  (13)  that  due  to  the  legis-
lation of  the  empire,  G.  ii,  197,  255,  U.  xxii,  19,  xxiv,  11«.

Jus  EDICENDI,  G.  i,  6 ;  see  Praetor,  1,  2.

Jus  GENTIUM,  G.  i,  1,  52,  82,  86,  iii,  93,  132 ;  see  also  Pcregrinity.

Jus  ITALICUM  was  a  special  concession  to  certain  districts  in  the
provinces,  one  of  its  features  being  that  lands  situate
within  them  might  be  held  in  property  by  private  indivi-
duals, and  that  on  quiritarian  title,  as  if  they  had  been
within  the  bounds  of  Italy,  G.  i,  120,  note  2.  Lands  so
privileged,  equally  with  those  in  Italy,  were  called  praedia
italica,  G.  i,  120,  praedia  in  italica  solo,  U.  xix,  1 ;  they
were  res  mancipi,  ibid.,  and  might  be  conveyed  either  by
mancipatio  or  injure  cessio,  G.  ii,  31.

524  DIGEST.

JUSJURANDUM,  a  form  of  contracting  that  was  almost  out  of  date  in
the  time  of  G-ai.,  G.  iii,  89,  note,  surviving  only  in  the
jurata  promissio  operarum  liberti,  96a ;  but  there  were
features  about  the  sponsio  that  seem  to  indicate  that  with
the  jusjiirandum  it  had  originally  a  close  connection,  92,
note.

JUSJURANDUM  CALUMNIAE,  oath  of  calumny,  G.  iv,  175,  176 ;  see
Vexatious  litigation.

Jus  LATH,  see  Colonial  latinity,  2.

Jus  LIBERORUM. — Statute,  and  especially  the  Julian  and  Pap.  Popp.
law,  made  paternity  and  maternity  the  condition  of
various  rights,  privileges,  and  immunities.  To  be  a
parent  of  children  was  the  necessary  qualification  of  the
Julian  law  for  taking  in  full  under  a  testament,  G.  ii,
28Qa,  and  qualified  in  addition  for  appropriating  the
caduciary  lapses  of  those  who  were  less  fortunate,  G.  ii,
206,  207,  286«,  U.  i,  21 ;  and  by  the  same  law  maternity
greatly  augmented  the  rights  of  a  patroness  in  the  suc-
cessions of  her  freedmen  and  freedwomen,  testate  and
intestate,  G.  iii,  44-47,  50,  52,  U.  xxix,  3-7.  To  be  the
mother  of  three  or  four  children,  in  the  case  of  ingenuac
and  libertae  respectively,  entitled  a  woman  to  succeed
under  the  Tertulliau.  Set.  to  an  intestate  son  or  daughter,
U.  xxvi,  8.  By  the  Julian  law  three  or  four  children
respectively  released  an  ingenua  or  a  liberta  from  tutory,
G.  i,  145,  194,  iii,  44,  U.  xxix,  3  ;  and  by  an  unknown
senatusconsult  a  freeborn  latin  woman  became  a  citizen
on  giving  birth  to  her  third  child,  U.  iii,  1.  The  jus  libero-
rum — that  at  least  which  qualified  for  taking  under  a
testament — might  be  conferred  by  the  emperor  even  in
absence  of  children,  U.  xvi,  la.

Jus  NATURALE,  G.  i,  156,  ii,  65,  70,  73  ;  see  also  Naturalis  ratio.

Jus  POSTLIMINII,  the  rule  whereby  a  citizen  who  had  been  taken
captive  by  an  enemy  reacquired  all  his  old  rights  on  re-
crossing  the  frontier,  G.  i,  129, 187,  U.  x,  4,  xxiii,  5 ;  see
Captivity  apud  hastes.

Jus  QUIRITIUM,  either  the  aggregate  of  rights  peculiar  to  a  citizen,
and  then  synonymous  with  civitas,  G.  i,  32c,  33-35,  U.
iii,  1,  (see  Citizenship) ;  or  a  citizen's  tenure  of  property
(ex  jure  Quir.  dominus,  alicujus  esse  ex  jure  Quir.~)  before
in  bonis  liabere  was  known,  and  as  distinguished  from  it
afterwards,  G.  ii,  40,  etc.,  (see  Quiritarian  ownership).

Jus  EOMANORUM. — The  phrase  was  not  common,  being  used  only
for  the  purpose  of  distinguishing  between  it  and  a  foreign
system,  as  in  G.  iii,  96a.  That  of  Kome  was  composed
partly  of  institutions  and  doctrines  peculiar  to  it,  its  jus

DIGEST.  525

Jus  ROMANORUM — continued.

civile,  and  partly  of  what  were  common  to  all  nations,—
institutions  and  doctrines  of  the  jus  gentium,  G.  i,  1.  Some
of  it  was  introduced  tacitly,  (see  Custom),  ibid.,G.ui,82,TJ.i,
4 ;  much  of  it  resulted  from  legislation,  in  the  shape  either
of  leges,  plebiscits,  senatusconsults,  or  imperial  constitu-
tions, (see  Statute,  1),  G-.  i,  2,  severally  described  in  3-5  ;
and  of  some  importance,  as  an  element  in  the  jus  civile
proper  was  the  interprctatio  of  the  old  statutory  law,
especially  the  XII  Tables,  by  the  pontiffs  and  early  jurists,
G.  i,  165,  ii,  42,  note,  iv,  30.  Next  to  statute  the  edicts
of  the  magistrates,  and  particularly  the  praetors,  were  the
largest  factor  in  the  law,  (see  Praetor,  2),  G.  i,  6  ;  and  con-
tributed to  remove  many  of  the  iniquitates  juris  civilis  —
doctrines  of  the  earlier  system  that  were  inequitable
when  tested  by  naturalis  ratio,  G.  iii,  25.  Another  factor
was  t\\QEesponsaprudentium  in  the  early  empire, — written
opinions  by  jurists  of  eminence  on  whom  the  emperor
had  conferred  the  jus  respondendi,  in  answer  to  questions
submitted  to  them  by  judices  (who  were  private  citizens,
mostly  unlearned  in  the  law),  and  which  in  many  cases
had  the  authority  of  statute,  G.  i,  7.

JUSTAE  NUPTIAE,  JUSTUM  MATRIMONIUM,  S66  Marriage,  1.

LABEO,  M.  ANTISTIUS,  founder  of  the  Proculian  school,  a  political
opponent  of  Augustus,  whose  offer  of  the  consulate  he
declined,  G.  i,  96,  note  1,  135,  138,  ii,  231,  iii,  140,  183,
iv,  59  ;  see  fiabinians  and  Proculians.

LANX  ET  LINTEUM,  G.  iii,  192  and  n.  2,  193  ;  see  TJuft,  5.

LATIN  LANGUAGE  necessary  in  a  sponsio  proper,  G.  iii,  93 ;  also  in  a
legacy,  G.  ii,  281,  U.  xxv,  9,  though  not  in  a  fideicom-
missum,  ibid.

LATINS, — those  of  Italy  and  the  lex  Minieia,  G.  i,  79  ;  colonial,  see
Colon,  latinity  ;  Junian,  see  Jun.  latinity.

LATIUM,  another  name  for  the  jus  Latii,  a  pathway  to  citizenship
for  colonial  latins,  G.  i,  95 ;  majus  and  minus  Latium
distinguished,  96  and  notes.  See  Colonial  latinity,  2.

LAW,  EOMAN,  its  sources  and  channels,  G.  i,  2-7  ;  see  Jus  Romano-
rum.

LAW,  FOREIGN,  see  Foreign  law.

LEGACY,  kgatum,  G.  ii,  191-245  ;  U.  tit.  xxiv ;  see  also  TESTA-
MENT, III.
I.  GENERAL  DOCTRINES  REGARDING  LEGACIES.

1.  Meaning  o/legatum. — A  legacy,  legatum,  was  a  testamentary
bequest  in  imperative  words,  lege,  U.  xxiv,  1,  and  required
to  be  in  the  latin  language,  G.  ii,  281,  U.  xxv,  9.

526  DIGEST.

LEGACY — continued.

I.  GENERAL  DOCTRINES  REGARDING  LEGACIES — continued.

2.  Deed  in  which  it  might  be  bequeathed. — It  might  be  left

either  in  a  testament,  U.  xxiv,  1,  or  in  a  codicil  confirmed
by  testament  (see  Codicil},  G.  ii,  270a,  though  not  in  one
that  was  unconfirmed,  ibid.,  U.  xxv,  8.

3.  On  whom  it  could  be  charged. — It  was  in   every  case   a

charge  upon  the  instituted  heir,  U.  xxiv,  21, — so  much
so  that  if  he  was  a  filiusfamilias  or  a  slave  it  could  not
be  charged  upon  his  paterfamilias  or  owner,  U.  xxv,  10  ;
to  charge  it  upon  a  legatee  was  impossible,  G.  ii,  271,
U.  xxiv,  20  ;  to  charge  it  upon  the  heir's  heir  was  equally
so,  G.  ii,  232,  U.  xxiv,  16,  xxv,  8  ;  and  so  entirely  was  it
dependent  on  the  institution  that  if  it  stood  in  the  testa-
ment before  the  latter  it  was  useless,  G.  ii,  229,  U.  xxiv,
15,  xxv,  8.

4.  To  whom  it  might  be  left. — The  legatee  was  necessarily

another  person  than  the  heir,  U.  xxiv,  22,  except  in
legatum  per  praeceptioncm  (below,  No.  28).  But  he  might
be  either  a  person  sui  juris,  or  a  stranger  alieni  juris,  in
which  case  he  acquired  for  him  to  whom  he  was  subject,
G.  ii,  87,  U.  xix,  19.

5.  Legacy  to  a  person  in  potestate  of  the  heir,  and  vice  versa. —

It  might  be  left  conditionally  to  some  one  in  potestate  of
the  heir,  and  then  its  eventual  efficacy  depended  on  the
consideration  whether  or  not  the  legatee  was  still  in  the
heir's  potestas  at  the  time  of  vesting  (see  below,  No.  11),
G.  ii,  244,  U.  xxiv,  23 ;  if  left  to  the  paterfamilias  or
owner  of  an  instituted  filiusfamilias  or  slave,  similar
considerations,  according  to  Gai.,  came  into  view,  G.  ii,
245,  while  Ulp.  held  the  legacy  invalid,  U.  xxiv,  24.

6.  Legacy  to  an  incerta  persona.  -  -  Though  a  legacy  to   an

incerta  persona  was  declared  useless  unless  sub  certa
demonstratione,  i.e.  under  limitation  to  a  specified  class,
G.  ii,  238,  U.  xxiv,  18,  and  in  particular  could  not  be
left  to  a  postumus  alienus,  G.  ii,  241,  287,  because  he  was
incerta  persona,  242,  yet  by  statute  it  might  be  bequeathed
to  a  municipality,  U.  xxiv,  8,  which  nevertheless,  as
incerta  persona,  could  not  be  instituted  heir,  xxii,  5,  except
by  one  of  its  freedmen.

7.  Legacy  to  a  peregrin  or  Junian   latin.  —  A   legacy  to  a

peregrin  was  useless,  G.  ii,  284,  285  ;  Gai.  and  Ulp.  both
say  that  a  Junian  latin  could  not  take  one,  G.  ii,  275,
U.  xxv,  7  ;  but  this  refers  to  his  jus  capiendi, — a  legacy
to  him  was  ab  initio  valid,  but  he  had  to  convert  his
latinity  into  citizenship  before  he  could  take  it,  U.  xvii,  1.

DIGEST.  527

LEGACY — continued.

I.  GENERAL  DOCTRINES  REGARDING  LEGACIES — continued.

8.  What  might  be  legated. — A  bequest  might  be  of  a  share  of

the  hereditary  estate,  partitio,  legatum  partitionis,  G.  ii,
254,  U.  xxiv,  25,  in  which  case  the  relations  between
heir  and  legatee  were  adjusted  by  stipulations  partis  ct
pro  parte,  G.  ii,  254,  U.  xxv,  15 ;  or  of  one  or  more  res
singulae,  U.  xxiv,  25  ;  or  of  a  choice  of  things,  optio
legata,  the  selection  lying  with  heir  or  legatee  according
as  the  bequest  was  by  vindication  or  damnation  (see
below,  Nos.  18,  22),  U.  xxiv,  14 ;  or  of  a  usufruct  or
quasi-usufruct,  U.  xxiv,  26,  27.

9.  Effects  of  adjuncts  in  the  words  of  bequest. — An  inaccurate

description  of  the  thing  legated,  or  a  mistake  as  to  the
cause  of  granting,  did  not  affect  the  validity  of  a  bequest,
U.  xxiv,  19 ;  an  impossible  condition  nullified  it  according
to  the  Sabinians,  but  according  to  the  Proculians  was  to
be  held  unwritten,  G.  iii,  98 ;  all  admitted  that  if  a
bequest  was  left  by  way  of  penalty,  i.e.  to  coerce  the  heir
to  do  something,  it  was  void,  G.  ii,  235,  U.  xxiv,  17.

10.  Ademtion. — Ademtion   might   take   place   either   in   the

testament  itself  or  in  a  codicil  confirmed  by  it,  U.  xxiv,  29  ;
but  the  same  form  required  to  be  observed  as  in  the
bequest,  ibid,  and  n.  1.

11.  testing. — If  a  legacy  was  unconditional,  or  unqualified  in
point  of  time,  it  vested  according  to  the  old  law  on  the
testator's  death,  but  by  the  Julian  and  Papia-Poppaeaii
law  only  on  the  opening  of  the  testament,  U.  xxiv,  31  ;
if  conditional — and  a  dies  incertus  was  regarded  in  testa-
mentary law  as  a  condition,  note  1  to  U.  xxiv,  30,  31 — it
did  not  vest  until  the  condition  was  fulfilled,  U.  xxiv,  31;
if  the  legatee  had  not  survived  the  vesting,  his  heirs  had
no  right  to  it,  U.  xxiv,  30,  and  it  became  a  lapse  (see
Caducity],  U.  xvii,  1.

12.  The  Eegula  Catoniana. — It  was  a  general  rule  in  judging

of  the  validity  of  a  legacy — the  Eegula  Catoniana — that,
if  it  would  have  been  useless  had  the  testator  died  the
moment  after  executing  his  testament,  it  could  not  be
cured  by  subsequent  change  of  circumstances,  G.  ii,  244.
II.  KESTRICTIONS  ON  INORDINATE  BEQUEST.

13.  Consequences  of  the  perfect  freedom  of  the  Twelve  Tables. —

The  Twelve  Tables  having  given  testators  unlimited
freedom  of  bequest,  they  often  left  so  much  to  legatees
that  there  remained  little  or  nothing  for  the  heir  ;  who
consequently  declined  to  enter,  thus  causing  intestacy
and  disappointing  the  legatees,  G  ii,  224.

528  DIGEST.

LEGACY — continued.

II.  RESTRICTIONS  ON  INORDINATE  BEQUEST — continued.

14.  Restrictions  of  the  Furian  law. — To  remedy  the  mischief

the  Furian  testamentary  law  forbade  legatees,  with  cer-
tain exceptions,  to  take  more  than  1000  asses  of  bequest,
under  serious  penalties  for  contravention,  G.  ii,  225,  U.  i,  2.

15.  TJie  Voconian  law. — This  law  afterwards  provided  that  no
one  should  take  as  legacy  more  than  remained  to  the
heir  or  heirs,  G.  ii,  226.

16.  The  Falcidian  law. — The  Furian  and  Voconian  laws  having
both  failed  to  accomplish  their  purpose,  the  Falcidian
law  enacted  that  a  testator  should  not  legate  more  than
three-fourths  of  his  estate,  so  that  thus  at  least  a  fourth
might  always  remain  to  the  heir,  G.  ii,  227,  U.  xxiv,  32.

III.  THE  FORMS  OF  LEGACY  AND  THEIR  PECULIARITIES.

17.  The  different  forms  of  legacy. — There  were  four  forms  of
legating, — vindication,  damnation,  permission  (leg.  sinendi
modo),  and  preception,  G.  ii,  192,  TJ.  xxiv,  2.

18.  Legacy  by  vindication. — A  legacy  by  vindication — of  which

see  styles  in  G.  ii,  193,  U.  xxiv,  3 — was  so  called  because
it  became  the  quiritarian  property  of  the  legatee,  with
right  to  sue  for  it  by  rei  vindicatio,  the  moment  the  heir
entered,  G.  ii,  194 ;  although  there  was  a  controversy
whether  the  property  could  thus  pass  to  him  against  his
will,  195,  which  seems  eventually  to  have  been  settled  in
the  negative,  ibid.

19.  What  could  be  thus  legated. — In  strictness  only  those  things
could  be  thus  legated  which  belonged  to  the  testator  in
quiritary  right  both  at  the  date  of  his  will  and  at  that
of  his  death,  G.  ii,  196,  U.  xxiv,  7,  unless  they  were
fungibles,  and  then  it  was  enough  that  they  were  his  at
the  latter  date,  ibid.

20.  Effect  of  the  Neronian  Set. — By  the  Neronian  Set.  it  was

declared  that  where  a  legacy  was  invalid  in  the  form  in
which  it  was  bequeathed,  it  should  be  regarded  as  if  left
optima  jure,  i.e.  by  damnation,  G.  ii,  197,  218,  U.  xxiv,
lla;  in  virtue  of  this  provision  a  legacy  per  vindica-
tioncm  of  what  was  only  in  bonis  of  the  testator,  or  even
of  a  res  aliena,  was  sustained  as  effectual,  ibid.

21.  Whose  was  the  property  of  a  conditional  legacy  in  this  form
pendente  coudicione  ? — This  was  a  disputed  question,  G.
ii,  200  ;  as  also  who  was  owner  of  an  unconditional  one
before  its  acceptance,  ibid.

22.  Legacy   by   damnation.  —  A  legacy   by  damnation,  G.  ii,

201,  note  1 — styles  in  201,  U.  xxiv,  4 — was  one  in  which
the  testator  imposed  an  obligation  on  his  heir  to  give

DIG'EST.  529

LEGACY — continued.

III.  THE  FORMS  OF  LEGACY,  etc. — continued.

to  the  legatee  the  thing  bequeathed,  ibid.,  and  which
afforded  the  latter  a  personal  claim  against  the  heir,  but
no  real  right  in  the  object  of  bequest,  G.  ii,  204.

23.  What  might  thus  be  legated. — As  the  legatee  got  no  real
right  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  a  testator  legating  in
this  way  anything  whatever  that  was  in  commercio,  U.
xxiv,  8,  9,  even  a  res  futura,  G.  ii,  203,  or  a  res  aliena,
202  ;  and  in  the  latter  case  the  heir  was  bound  to  acquire
and  transfer  it,  or  else  pay  its  value  to  the  legatee,  ibid.,
even  though  its  owner  refused  to  part  with  it,  262.

24.  Further  peculiarities. — There  were   these   further  peculi-

arities in  a  legacy  by  damnation, — that  if  the  thing
bequeathed  was  money,  and  the  legatee  wished  to  release
the  heir  without  actual  payment,  he  had  to  do  so  per  aes
ct  libram,  G.  iii,  175  and  note  3  ;  that  if  paid  by  mistake,
when  in  fact  not  due,  the  heir  had  no  condictio  indebiti,
G.  ii,  283, — though  Ulp.  states  the  rule  as  applying  to
legacies  generally,  xxiv,  33  ;  and  that,  if  the  legacy  was
definite  and  the  heir  disputed  it  and  rendered  action
necessary,  he  was  condemned  in  duplum  (see  Cretio  litis
infitiatione),  G.  ii,  282,  iv,  9,  171.

25.  Legacy  siuendi  modo. — A  legacy  by  permission — style,  G.  ii,

209,  U.  xxiv,  5 — was  one  in  which  the  heir  was  required
to  '  allow  the  legatee  to  take '  what  was  bequeathed,  ibid.

26.  What  tnight  be  thus  bequeathed. — Such  things  might  be
thus  legated  as  belonged  either  to  the  testator  himself  or
to  his  heir,  G.  ii,  210,  U.  xxiv,  10  ;  but  even  what  had
never  belonged  to  the  testator,  and  had  not  become  the
heir's  until  after  the  testator's  death,  might  be  claimed  by
the  legatee  in  virtue  of  the  Neronian  Set.,  G.  ii,  212.

27.  How  far  did  it   impose   obligation   on   the  heir?  —  The

legatee's  action  was  only  a  personal  one,  directed  against
the  heir,  G.  ii,  213  ;  and  though  Gai.  says  some  were  of
opinion  that  the  heir  was  not  bound  to  convey  the  object
of  the  bequest,  but  merely  to  '  allow  the  legatee  to  take '
it,  214,  this  view  is  inconsistent  with  the  fact  that  in-
terest was  due  on  a  legacy  sinendi  modo  if  the  heir  was
in  mora,  280.

28.  Legacy  by  preception. — A  legacy  by  preception — style,  G.

ii,  216,  U.  xxiv,  6 — could  in  strictness  be  bequeathed
only  to  one  of  several  heirs,  G.  ii,  217,  who  was  thereby
authorised  to  take  and  appropriate  some  particular  item
of  the  inheritance  before  it  came  to  be  divided ;  conse-
quently, with  a  single  exception,  220,  only  such  things

2L

530  DIGEST.

LEGACY — continued.

III.  THE  FORMS  OF  LEGACY,  etc. — continued.

as  belonged  to  the  testator  himself  in  quiritary  right
could  thus  be  bequeathed,  ibid.,  U.  xxiv,  11,  (though  if
a  res  aliena  the  bequest  would  still  be  valid  under  the
Neronian  Set.,  G.  ii,  220),  and  the  legacy  was  recoverable
in  an  action  for  division  of  the  inheritance,  219.

29.  The  Proculian  mew  of  it. — Such  was  the  Sabinian  view,

though  not  universally  accepted,  G.  ii,  218  ;  that  of  the
other  school  was  that  a  legacy  left  in  this  way  to  a
stranger  was  to  be  regarded  as  one  by  vindication,  and
to  be  subject  to  the  same  rules,  221,  222.

30.  Conjoint  and  disjoint  legacies  to  two  or  more  legatees. — The

same  thing  might  be  legated  to  two  or  more  legatees  either
conjointly  or  disjointly, — conjointly  when  their  names
were  coupled  in  one  and  the  same  bequest,  disjointly
when  there  was  a  separate  bequest,  though  of  the  same
thing,  to  each,  G.  ii,  199.

31.  Their  effect  at  common  law  when  left  ~by  vindication. — In  a
legacy  to  two  or  more  by  vindication,  whether  conjoint  or
disjoint,  the  rule  of  the  common  law  was  that  each  was
entitled  to  a  share,  that  of  him  who  failed  accruing  to
those  who  took,  G.  ii,  199.

32.  When  left  ly  damnation. — In  one  by  damnation  the  rule
differed  according  as  it  was  conjoint  or  disjoint :  if  con-
joint,  a  share  was  due  to  each,   and  that  of  one  who
failed  remained  in  the  inheritance  ;  if  disjoint,  the  whole
was  due  to  each,  i.e.  the  thing  itself  went  to  one,  each  of
the   others   being  entitled  to  its  equivalent  in  money,
G.  ii,  205.

33.  When  left  by  permission  or  preception. — According  to  some
the  rule  was  the  same  in  a  legacy  sinendi  modo ;  while
others  held  that  the  heir's  obligation  was  exhausted  when
he  had  allowed  any  one  of  them  to  take,  G.  ii,  215.     In
a  joint  legacy  by  preception  the  rule  was  the  same  as  in
one  by  vindication,  223.

34.  Papian  modifications. — Such  was  the  common  law  ;  but  it

was  considerably  modified  by  the  provisions  of  the  Julian
and  Papia-Poppaean  law  as  to  lapses  (see  Caducity,  3),
G.  ii,  206-208.

LEGARE,  probable  etymology,  G.  ii,  104,  note  8.

LEGES. — The  following  leges  and  pleMscita — for  the  distinction  was

not  observed  in  their  names — are  mentioned  in  the  text

and  notes,  (those   referred  to   only   in  the  latter  being

marked  with  an  asterisk)  : —

L.  Aebutia,  about  the  year  507  |  247,  introducing  the  system

DIGEST.  531

LEGES — continued.

of  procedure  per  formulas,  G.  iv,  30  and  n.  1.     See  Pro-
cedure, 2.
L.  Aelia  Sentia,  A.D.  4,  regulating  manumissions,  G.  i,  13  and

n.  1,  18,  21  (?),  2la  (?),  22  (?),  27,  29,  31,  37,  38,  40,  47,

66,  68,  70,  71,  80,  139 ;  iii,  5,  73,  74,  75 ;  U.  i,  1  (?),

11-15,  vii,  4.     See  Aelia-Sentian  law.

L.  Apuleia,  date  uncertain,  ameliorating  the  position  of  sure-
ties, G.  iii,  122  and  note.     See  Suretyship,  3.
L.   Aquilia,  probably  467  [  287,  giving  action  for  wrongful

damage  to  property,  G.  iii,  202,  210  and  note,  211-219  ;

iv,  9,  37,  76,  109.     See  Wrongful  damage,  to 'property.
L.  Atilia,  date  uncertain,  but  before  568  |  186,  empowering

magistrates  in  Koine  to  appoint  tutors,  G.  i,  185  and  n.

1,  195,  1956;  U.  xi,  18.     See  Tutory,  4,  13,  22.
*L.  Atinia,  557  |  197  (?),  prohibiting  usucapion  of  res  furtivae,

G.  ii,  45,  note  1.     See  Usucapion,  5.

L.  Bithynorum,  a  local  statute  on  tutory  of  women,  G.  i,  193.
L.    Calpurnia,  date   uncertain,   extending  the  legis  actio  per

condictionem  to  omnis  res  certa,  G.  iv,  19  and  note.     See

Legis  actiones,  4.
*L.  Canuleia,  309  |  445,  repealing  prohibition  of  intermarriage

of  patricians  and  plebeians,  G.  i,  3,  note  2.
L.  Cicereia,  probably  581  |  173,  imposing  certain  duties  upon

creditors  accepting  sureties  from  their  debtors,  G.  iii,  123.

See  Suretyship,  3.
L.  Cincia,  550  |  204,  prohibiting  inordinate  donations,  U.  i,  1

and  note  ;  G.  iii,  121,  note.
L.  Claudia,  A.D.  47,  abolishing  the  agnatic  tutory  of  women  ;

probably  a  senatusconsult,  G.  i,  157  and  n.  1,  171 ;  U.  xi,

8.     See  Tutory,  2.
*L.  Coloniae  Juliae  Genetivae,  Julius  Caesar's  charter  to  a  latin

colony  in  southern  Spain,  G.  i,  22,  note  1,  iii,  78,  note  2.
L.  Cornelia  (de  sicariis  ?),  G.  i,  128  and  n.  1.
L.  Cornelia  (de  sponsii),  date  uncertain,  in  favour  of  sureties,

G.  iii,  124  and  note.     See  Suretyship,  3.
L.  Cornelia   (de  captivis),  date  uncertain,  enacting  that  if  a

citizen  died  in  captivity,  a  testament  made  before  his

capture  should  still  be  valid,  U.  xxiii,  5.     See  Captivity

apud  hostes.
L.  Creperia  (?),  date  uncertain,  fixing  the  amount  of  the  sponsio

in  centumviral  causes  at  125  sesterces,  G.  iv,  95  and  n.  4.

See  Legis  actiones,  2.

*L.  de  imperio   Vespasiani,  G.  i,  5,  note  2.
L.  Duodecim  Tabularum.     See  Twelve  Tables.
L.  Falcidia,  714  |  40,  empowering  a  testamentary  heir  to  retain

532  DIGEST.

LEGE  s — continu  ed.

one-fourth  of  the  inheritance,  even  though  more  than
three-fourths  had  been  left  in  legacies,  G.  ii,  227  and
note,  254;  U.  xxiv,  32,  xxv,  14.  See  Legacy,  16.

L.  Fufia  Caninia,  possibly  A.D.  8,  restricting  testamentary
manumission,  G-.  i,  42  and  note,  43-46,  139  ;  ii,  228,  239  ;
U.  i,  24,  25.  See  Manumission,  11.

L.  Furia  (?),  G.  iv,  109.

L.  Furia  (de  sponsu),  date  uncertain,  ameliorating  the  position
of  sureties,  G.  iii,  121  and  note,  121a,  122 ;  iv,  22.  See
Suretyship,  3.

L.  Furia  (testamentaria),  571  |  183  (?),  restricting  legacies  to
a  certain  maximum,  G.  ii,  225  and  notes;  iv,  22-24;  U.
i,  2,  xxviii,  7.  See  Legacy,  14.

L.  Hortensia,  467  |  287,  on  authority  of  plebiscits,  G.  i,  3  and
note  1.

L.  Julia,  see  L.  Julia  et  Papia-Poppaea.

L.  Julia  caducaria,  see  L.  Julia  et  Papia-Poppaea.

L.  Julia  (de  adulteriis),  736  |  18,  inter  alia  prohibiting  aliena-
tion by  a  husband  of  his  wife's  dotal  lands,  G.  ii,  63.  See
Dowry,  3.

L.  Julia  (de  bonorum  cessione),  reign  of  Augustus  (?),  G.  iii,  78
and  n.  2.

L.  Julia  de  maritandis  ordinibus,  see  L.  Julia  et  Papia-
Poppaea.

L.  Julia  de  vi,  708  |  46,  G.  ii,  45  and  n.  2.

L.  Julia  de  mcesima  hereditatium,  A.D.  6,  imposing  a  5  per  cent,
duty  on  testamentary  successions,  G.  iii,  125  and  note.

Leges  Juliae  judiciariae,  in  reign  of  Augustus,  completing  the
work  of  the  L.  Aebutia  in  abolishing  the  procedure  per
leges  adiones,  G.  iv,  30  and  n.  2,  104  and  notes.

L.  Julia  et  Papia-Poppaea,  (under  names  of  L.  Julia,  L.  Julia
caducaria,  L.  Julia  de  maritandis  ordinibus,  L.  J.  et  P.  P.,
L.  Papia,  or  L.  Papia-Poppaea),  G.  i,  145  and  note,  178  ;
ii,  111,  144,  150,  206-208,  286,  286a;  iii,  42,  44,  46,  47,
49-53  ;  U.  i,  21 ;  xi,  20  ;  xiii,  1  ;  xiv  ;  xvi,  1-3  ;  xvii,  1 ;
xviii ;  xix,  17  ;  xxii,  3  ;  xxiv,  12,  31  ;  xxviii,  7  ;  xxix,  3,
5-7.  See  Julian  and  Papia- Poppean  law.

L.  Julia  et  Titia,  about  722  |  32,  giving  magistrates  in  the
provinces  power  to  appoint  tutors,  G.  i,  185  and  n.  2,
186,  187,  195,  1956  ;  U.  xi,  18.  See  Tutory,  4,  13,  22.

*L.  Julia  Papiria,  324  |  430,  converting  cattle  penalties  into
money  penalties,  G.  iv,  95,  note  4.

L.  Junia,  A.D.  19  (?),  defining  the  position  of  informally  manu-
mitted slaves,  previously  only  de  facto  and  not  de  jure
free,  G.  i,  22  and  n.  2,  23,  note  to  29  as  amended  in

DIGEST.  533

LEGES — continued.

Additions  etc.,  80,  167  ;  ii,  110,  275  ;  iii,  56,  57,  70 ;  U.
i,  10 ;  iii,  3 ;  xi,  16,  19 ;  xx,  14 ;  xxii,  3.  See  Junian
latinity.

L.  Junia  Vellaea,  date  uncertain,  on  testamentary  institution
and  disherison,  G.  ii,  134  and  n.  1,  as  amended  in  Additions
etc.  ;  U.  xxii,  19.

*Leges  Liciniae,  387  |  367,  inter  alia  opening  consulate  to
plebeians,  G.  i,  6,  note  1.

*L.  Malacitana,  Domitian's  charter  to  the  municipium  of
Malaga,  G.  i,  22,  note.

L.  Marcia,  402  |  352,  to  suppress  usury,  G-.  iv,  23.

L.  Minicia  (or  Mensia),  date  unknown,  on  status  of  children
born  of  parents  of  unequal  condition,  G-.  i,  78  and  note,
79  ;  U.  v,  8.  See  Status,  2.

L.  Ollinia  (?),  G.  iv,  109.

L.  Papia-Poppaea.     See  L.  Julia  et  Papia-Poppaea.

L.  Pinaria,  date  uncertain,  amending  the  law  of  sacramental
procedure,  G.  i,  15  and  n.  2.

*L.  Plaetoria,  6th  cent.  p.  u.  c.,  introducing  curatory  of  minors
in  certain  cases,  G-.  i,  197,  note.  See  Curatory,  3.

L.  Plautia  de  vi,  date  uncertain,  but  before  691  |  63,  G.  i,  45
and  n.  2.

*L.  Poetilia,  429  |  325  or  441  |  313,  probably  the  latter,  alle-
viating the  condition  of  the  nexi,  G.  iv,  21,  note  6.

L.  Publilia  (de  sponsu],  371  |  383  (?),  giving  sponsors,  who
had  paid  for  the  debtor  for  whom  they  had  become
sureties,  the  right  of  manus  injectio  against  him;  for
which  was  afterwards  substituted  an  actio  depensi  for
twice  the  amount,  G.  iii,  127,  iv,  22.  See  Suretyship,  3.

*L.  Publilia  Philonis,  415  |  339,  inter  alia  conferring  legisla-
tive powers  on  the  comitia  tributa,  G.  i,  3,  note  2.

*L.  Eubriade  Gallia  Cisalpina,\)QtwQen  705  |  49  and  712  |  42,
settling  the  constitution  of  the  province,  G.  iii,  78,  note  3.

*L.  Salpensana,  Domitian's  charter  to  the  municipium  of  Sal-
pensa  in  southern  Spain,  G.  i,  22,  note  1,  55,  note  2.

L.  Silia,  date  uncertain,  introducing  the  legis  actio  per  condic-
tionem,  G.  iv,  19  and  note.  See  Legis  actiones,  4.

L.  Titia,  see  L.  Julia  et  Titia.

*  L.  Valeria  Horatia,  305  |  449,  inter  alia  instituting  the
comitia  tributa,  G.  i,  3,  note  2.

L.  Vallia,  date  unknown,  amending  procedure  by  manus  in-
jectio, G.  iv,  25,  iii,  121,  note.  See  Legis  actiones,  5.

L.  Visellia,  A.D.  24  (?),  granting  citizenship  to  latins  after
six  years'  service  in  the  night  watch,  G.  i,  32&  and  note,
U.  iii,  5  ;  see  Junian  latinity,  7.

534  DIGEST.

LEGES — continued.

L.  Voconia,  585  |  169,  imposing  disabilities  upon  women  in
the  matter  of  succession,  and  forbidding  legatees  to  take
more  than  a  certain  amount  under  a  testament,  G.  ii,  226
and  note,  274.  See  Testament,  13,  Legacy,  15.

LEGIS  ACTIONES,  G.  iv,  11-29 ;  see  also  Procedure.

1.  Legis  actio  what? — It  included  not  only  contentious  but

also  certain  non-contentious  procedure,  such  as  in  jure
cessio  (which  see),  G.  ii,  24 ;  but  in  G.  iv,  11-29,  it  is
the  former  alone  that  is  dealt  with.  The  phrase  applied
either  to  the  mode  of  procedure,  as  leg.  actio  sacramento,
or  to  some  particular  action  proceeded  in  by  that  or  other
mode,  11,  note  ;  and  in  the  latter  sense  was  so  called
either  because  sanctioned  by  statute,  lege,  or  because  the
ipsissima  verba  of  the  law  founded  on  had  to  be  recited,
ibid.,  any  variance  causing  failure,  ibid.  There  were  five
different  modes  of  procedure  that  went  under  the  name,
— the  legis  actio  sacramenti  (or  sacramento),  13-17,  that
per  judicis  postulationem,  12,  note,  that  per  condictionem,
176-20,  that  per  manus  injectionem,  21-25,  and  tla&tper
pignoris  capionem,  26-29 ;  and,  with  exception  of  the
last,  they  could  proceed  only  in  jure,  in  the  presence  of
the  adversary,  and  on  a  lawful  day,  29.

2.  The  legis  actio  sacramento. — This  was  followed  where  no

other  was  prescribed  by  statute,  G.  iv,  13,  and  was  appli-
cable both  in  real  and  personal  actions,  ibid.,  note  1.
Its  characteristic  feature  was  that  the  parties,  after  dra-
matically stating  their  respective  contentions  before  a
magistrate,  and  originally  perhaps  a  pontiff,  each  chal-
lenged the  other  with  a  sacrament, — at  first  probably  an
oath  of  verity  backed  with  a  money-stake,  afterwards
only  the  stake.  The  direct  question  for  determination
by  the  judex  to  whom  it  was  remitted  was — whose  sacra-
ment is  just,  whose  unjust  ?  the  unjust  one  becoming  a
forfeit  for  public  uses,  the  other  being  resumed  by  the
staker.  But  its  decision  involved  a  judgment  on  the
actual  matter  of  dispute,  (followed  when  necessary  by  a
litis  aestimatio,  48,  note  3),  which  was  enforced  in  subse-
quent proceedings  by  manus  injectio,  13-17  and  notes,  21.
These  were  steps  in  the  procedure  that  were  taken  in  all
cases,  13-15.  For  those  that  were  peculiar  to  vindications,
and  in  particular  the  disposal  of  the  interim  possession
and  the  praedes  litis  et  vindiciarum,  see  16,  17  (incom-
plete), 94  ;  those  peculiar  to  personal  actions  seem  to
have  been  explained  in  15,  (also  incomplete).  The
procedure  survived  the  establishment  of  the  formular

DIGEST.  535

LEGIS  ACTIONES — continued.

system  only  in  certain  centumviral  causes,  31,  and  with
considerable  modifications,  95.

3.  That  per  judicis  postulationem. — The  account  of  it  is  lost,

G.  iv,  Via,  note  ;  but  it  appears  to  have  been  a  competent
mode  not  only  of  deciding  amicable  disputes  and  illiquid
claims,  but  also  of  trying  those  for  certa  pecunia  or  other
res  certae,  20.

4.  That  per  condictionem. — It  was  introduced  by  the  Silian

law  to  meet  the  case  of  claim  for  a  definite  sum  of
money,  certa  pecunia,  and  extended  by  the  Calpurnian
law  to  claims  for  specific  articles  generally,  omnis  res
certa,  G.  iv,  19  and  note.  It  was  so  called  because  the
pursuer  adversaria  condicebat,  cited  his  adversary,  to
appear  before  the  magistrate  on  a  certain  day  for  appoint-
ment of  a  judge,  lib,  18.  Its  advantage  over  the  actio
sacramento  was  its  simplification  of  the  procedure  in  jure,
20  and  note.

5.  That  per  manus  iujectionem. — This  was  authorised  by  the

XII  Tables  against  judgment  debtors,  and  those  indebted
damnatione  either  under  a  statute  or  a  private  deed,  G.
iv,  21  and  note,  ii,  201,  note  1.  The  creditor  was  entitled,
using  certain  words  of  style,  to  arrest  his  debtor,  and
carry  him  home  and  imprison  him  and  put  him  in
chains,  unless  he  then  and  there  provided  a  vindex  to
undertake  the  responsibility  of  his  defence, — for  he  was
not  allowed  to  say  a  word  for  himself,  G.  iv,  21  and  n.  5, 25.
Later  enactments  sanctioned  man.  inject,  pro  judicato  in  a
variety  of  cases,  of  which  one  or  two  illustrations  are
given  in  22  :  while  others  allowed  wrhat  was  called  manus

O  7

injectio  pura,  23,  whose  peculiarity  was  that  the  arrested
debtor  was  not  required  to  find  a  vindex,  but  might  de-
fend in  person,  24.  This  right  was  latterly  extended  by
a  lex  Vallia  (?)  to  all  but  judicati  and  debtors  who  failed
within  six  months  to  relieve  sponsors  (sureties)  who  had
paid  for  them,  25.  What  was  the  form  of  the  defence  is
not  explained ;  all  that  is  stated  is  that  the  debtor  was
entitled  pro  se  agere,  25,  pro  se  lege  agere,  24.

6.  That  per  pignoris  capionem. — The  proceedings  here  were

by  distress,  taking  and  selling  some  article  belonging  to
a  debtor  ;  they  were  authorised  in  a  few  cases  by  custom,
G.  iv,  27,  and  in  a  few  others  by  statute,  28.  It  was
accounted  a  legis  actio  because  the  distrainer  had  to  use
certain  words  of  style,  29 ;  but  differed  from  the  others
in  respect  that  it  did  not  proceed  before  a  magistrate,  and
was  competent  on  a  dies  nefastus,  ibid.  Under  the  later

536  DIGEST.

LEGIS  ACTIONES — continued.

system  it  was  sometimes  referred  to  in  a  formula  as  jus-
tification of  the  action  upon  which  the  formula  was
adjusted,  32.

7.  Defects  of  the  system. — Inter  alia  agency  was  not  allowed
in  a  legis  actio, — no  one  could  sue  for  another  except  pro
populo,  pro  libertate,  pro  tutela,  G.  iv,  82.  Equitable
exceptions  were  unknown,  108 ;  (was  there  any  substi-
tute ?  108,  note).  It  gradually  fell  into  discredit  because
of  its  many  pitfalls  for  unlearned  litigants,  and  was
replaced  by  the  forrnular  system,  30.

LEGIS  VICEM  OPTINERE,  G.  i,  4,  5,  83  ;  iv,  118.

LEGITIMA  COGNATIO,  G.  iii,  110  ;  legitimum  jus  agnationis,  G.  iii,  27,
U.  xxviii,  9.  See  Agnation.

LEGITIMA  MANUMISSIO,  G.  i,  17,  U.  i,  6  ;  see  Manumission,  1,  4.

LEGITIMI  HEREDES,  LEGITIMA  HEREDITAS,  agnates  and  their  succes-
sion under  the  XII  Tables ;  see  Intestate  succession,  4.

LEGITIMUM  JUDICIUM,  see  Jud.  leg.  et  imp.  cont.,  I.

LEX,  G.  i,  3,  etc.,  was  a  comitial  enactment ;  see  Statute.  The
phrase  lex  publica  occurs  once  or  twice,  (G.  ii,  104,  iii,
174)  ;  it  may  have  meant  no  more  than  lex,  but  probably
meant  the  XII  Tables.

LEX  (PRIVATA),  the  law  men  made  for  themselves  or  their  heirs,  in
contracts,  conveyances,  testaments,  etc.,  G.  ii,  104,  note
8,  U.  xxiv,  1  :  lex  mancipii,  G.  i,  140,  172  ;  lex  locationis,
G.  iii,  145,  146 ;  lex  testamenti,  U.  xxiv,  1.

LIBELLUS,  a  slanderous  writing,  G.  iii,  220.

LIBERORUM  JUS,  see  Jus  liberorum.

LIBRIPENS,  G.  i,  119,  ii,  104,  iii,  174,  (see  Aes  et  libra] ;  who  could
or  could  not  act  as  such  in  a  testament,  G.  ii,  107,  108,
U.  xx,  3-8.

LICIUM,  see  Linteum.

LIMITATION  OF  ACTIONS,  see  Actions,  9.

LINTEUM,  LANX  ET,  G.  iii,  192  and  n.  2 ;  see  TJieft,  5.

LITEM  SUAM  FACIT  was  said  of  a  judge  who,  through  error  in  point
of  form,  rendered  his  judgment  in  favour  of  a  pursuer
useless ;  the  latter  was  then  entitled  to  proceed  against
the  judge  for  damages,  fresh  action  against  his  debtor
being  excluded  by  the  novation  implied  in  litiscontesta-
tion,  G.  iv,  52  and  n.  2.

LITERAL  OBLIGATIONS,  G.  iii,  128-134;  see  also  Contract,  1.

1.  How  created. — Literal  obligations  were  created  bjtransscriptio
in  a  citizen's  codex  expensi  et  accepti,  G.  iii,  128  and  note ;
they  were  unilateral,  137,  and  the  entries  creating  them
might  be  made  by  the  creditor  in  the  absence  of  his
debtor,  138.  The  entry,  or  nomcn,  might  be  transcribed

DIGEST.  5  3

LITERAL  OBLIGATIONS — continued.

either  a  re  in  personam,  when  the  amount  of  an  already
existing  illiquid  debt  was  booked  against  the  debtor
(expensi  latioj,  129  and  note  ;  or  a  persona  in  personam
when  a  creditor  gave  his  debtor  credit  for  a  sum  standing
at  his  debit  (accepti  latio),  and  entered  it  to  the  debit  of
a  third  party  delegated  to  him  by  his  debtor  for  that
purpose,  130.  Those  nomina  were  peculiar  to  citizens,
although  the  Sabinians  were  of  opinion  that  a  peregrin
might  be  made  debtor  in  one  a  re  in  personam,  133  and
note.

2.  Nomina  arcaria,  chirographa,  and  syngraphae.  —  Nomina
arcaria  were  not  literal  obligations,  but  merely  book-
record  and  evidence  of  real  ones,  G.  iii,  131  and  note,
132.  Chirographa  and  syngraphae  were  peculiar  to  pere-
grins, and  with  them  reckoned  as  literal  obligations,  134
and  note.

LITIGIOSITY,  exception  of,  G-.  iv,  117 a.

LITIS  CONTESTATIO. — Origin  of  the  phrase,  and  how  the  contestatio
was  marked  in  process,  G.  iii,  180,  note  1.  Its  effect  was
to  extinguish  a  claim  when  sued  for  in  a  legitimum  j'udi-
cium  (see  Jud.  legitima  etc.,  1)  in  personam,  with  &  formula
in  jus  concepta  (see  Formula,  3),  G.  iii,  180  and  note  to
180  and  181,  iv,  107.  It  has  consequently  been  called
processual  novation,  note  to  G.  iii,  180  and  181  ;  for
the  defender  then  began  to  be  bound  by  his  agreement
to  refer  the  matter  to  judicial  decision,  181,  just  as  on
judgment  he  began  to  be  bound  thereby,  his  obligation
under  the  litiscontestation  being  extinguished,  ibid.
When  therefore  a  creditor  had  carried  such  an  action  as
far  as  litiscontestation,  his  right  to  sue  afresh  on  the
same  claim  was  ipso  jure  extinguished,  181.  Not  so  in  a
jud.  legit,  in  rem,  because  there  was  no  obligation  to  be
novated ;  nor  in  a  personal  one  in  factiim  concepta,  be-
cause no  obligation  was  averred ;  nor  yet  in  a  jud.  imp.
continens,  because  the  civilis  ratio  could  not  affect  the
praetorian  remedy :  but  if  an  action  of  any  of  those
classes  had  reached  litiscontestation,  and  the  pursuer
afterwards  sued  afresh  on  the  same  grounds,  he  might
be  defeated  by  an  exceptio  rei  injudicium  deductae,  G.  iii,
181,  iv,  106.  '

LOAN  OF  FUNGIBLES  (or  for  consumption),  see  Mutuum ;  of  non-
fungibles  (or  for  use),  see  Commodate.

LOCATION,  locatio  conductio,  G.  iii,  142-147 ;   see  also  Consensual

obligations.
1.  Location,  what  ? — It  was  a  consensual  contract,  G.  iii,  135,

538  DIGEST.

LOCATION — continued.

whereby  the  locator,  in  consideration  of  a  fixed  reward,
certa  merces,  142,  agreed  to  give  the  conductor  the  use  of
a  thing,  locatio  conductio  rei,  144,  145,  or  the  benefit  of
his  services  or  those  of  his  people,  loc.  cond.  operarum,
146,  147.  It  was  subject  to  much  the  same  general  rules
as  sale,  142  ;  and  the  same  questions  seem  to  have  been
raised  in  both,  in  particular  whether  there  was  location
when  the  remuneration  of  the  locator  was  left  to  be  fixed
by  a  third  party  named,  or  to  be  settled  by  parties  subse-
quently, 143 ;  as  also  whether  it  was  location  when  the
use  of  one  thing  was  given  in  exchange  for  the  use  of
another,  144,  (see  Sale,  2).

2.  The  resulting  rights  and  obligations. — The  transfer  following

on  the  contract  did  not  give  the  conductor  the  legal  pos-
session of  what  was  given  him  in  location ;  he  was  only
the  holder  for  the  locator,  who  remained  in  possession
through  him,  G.  iv,  153.  But  he  was  responsible  for  its
safe-keeping;  consequently  if  it  was  stolen,  and  he
solvent,  it  was  he  and  not  the  locator  that  had  the  actio
furti,  G.  iii,  205,  206.  Each  party  had  an  action  on  the
contract, — the  a.  locati  for  the  one,  the  a.  conducti  for  the
other;  and  both  of  them  were  bonaefidei,  G.  iv,  62.

3.  Occasional  difficulty  in  discriminating  between  location  and

sale. — In  emphyteusis,  when  lands  were  granted  to  a
man  and  his  heirs  in  perpetuity  so  long  as  they  paid
the  annual  vectigal,  it  was  long  disputed  whether  the  con-
tract was  sale  or  location;  according  to  the  prevailing
opinion  it  was  the  latter,  145.  Again,  when  an  order  was
given  to  a  manufacturer  there  was  the  same  difficulty ;  it
was  ruled  that  if  he  was  to  supply  both  material  and
workmanship  the  contract  was  one  of  sale,  but  that  if  the
material  was  furnished  him,  and  he  was  to  give  labour
only,  it  was  location,  147.  In  some  cases  it  was  held
impossible  to  determine  from  the  first  what  was  the  con-
tract, and  that  only  supervening  occurrences  could  show
whether  it  was  sale  or  location,  146.

LUNACY  incapacitated  a  man  from  doing  any  act  productive  of  jural
consequences,  G.  iii,  106  ;  not  only  could  he  not  be  a
party  to  a  contract,  ibid.,  or  make  a  testament,  U.  xx,  13,
— he  could  not  even  assist  at  the  execution  of  another
person's  testament  as  familiae  emptor,  libripens,  or  wit-
ness, U.  xx,  7.  By  the  XII  Tables  he  was  placed  under
the  curatory  of  his  agnates,  (see  Curatory,  1),  U.  xii,  2 ;
and  their  powers  were  so  extensive  that  they  could  even
alienate  his  estate,  G.  ii,  64.

DIGEST.  539

MAGISTER  (trustee)  in  bankruptcy,  G-.  iii,  79 ;  see  Emptio  lonorum.
I\!ALE  nostro  jure  uti  non  debemus,  G.  i,  53.
MANCIPATIO,  G.  i,  119-122,  U.  xix,  3-6.

1.  Mancipatio,  what  ? — In  form  it  was  an  imaginary  sale  per

aes  et  libram  (see  Aes  et  libra),  in  presence  of  five  citizens
as  witnesses,  and  a  libripens  holding  a  pair  of  scales  ;  the
party  to  whom  the  conveyance  was  being  made,  qui  man-
cipio  accipit,  having  one  hand  on  the  thing  being  con-
veyed, and  using  certain  solemn  words  of  style,  declared
it  his  by  purchase  with  an  as  (which  he  held  in  his  other
hand)  and  with  the  copper  scales ;  and  simultaneously  he
touched  the  scales  with  the  coin,  which  he  then  gave
to  the  party  conveying,  qui  mancipat,  G.  i,  119.  The
ceremony  was  the  remnant  of  the  old  procedure  when
the  price  of  a  purchase  was  so  much  copper  actually
weighed  in  the  scales,  122  ;  but  the  name  Gai.  says  was
due  to  the  fact  that  the  transferee  laid  his  hand  upon
what  was  being  mancipated,  quia  manu  res  capitur,  121.
This  was  the  case,  however,  only  with  moveables,  which
moreover  could  be  mancipated  only  one  at  a  time,  U.  xix,
6  ;  iminoveables  might  be  mancipated  in  absence  and  in
any  number,  ibid.

2.  To  what  purposes  applied. — As  a  conveyance  of  property  it

applied  properly  to  res  mancipi  (which  see),  G.  i,  120,
ii,  22,  U.  xix,  3,  including  rural  praedial  servitudes,  G.
ii,  29  ;  and  was  preferred  to  in  jure  cessio  because  of  its
greater  convenience,  G.  ii,  25.  But  free  persons  might
also  be  mancipated;  e.g.  children  in potestate  who  were
being  surrendered  ex  noxali  causa  (see  Noxal  actions),  G.
iv,  79,  or  emancipated,  G.  i,  132,  or  given  in  adoption,
134;  also  women  in  passing  in  manum  by  coemptio,  113,
(although  the  words  used  were  not  the  same  as  usual,
123),  or  in  being  released  from  it  by  reman cipation,  118,
137 a.  The  same  form,  but  with  different  words,  was
used  likewise  in  a  testament  per  aes  et  libram  (see  Testa-
ment, 4),  G.  ii,  102,  U.  xx,  2/9.

3.  To  whom  it  was  competent. — It  was  peculiar  to  citizens,  G.

i,  119,  but  competent  also,  as  a  conveyance  of  property,
to  colonial  and  Junian  latins,  and  such  peregrins  as  had
obtained  a  concession  of  commercium,  U.  xix,  4,  5  and
note.  A  slave  or  a  filiusfamilias  might  acquire  by  it,  G.
ii,  87,  iii,  167,  declaring  in  the  words  of  style  that  the
purchase  was  for  his  paterfamilias,  iii,  167.

4.  Eeservations  and  concurrent  agreements. — It  might  be  made

under  a  reservation,  as  when  lands  were  mancipated
under  deduction  of  their  usufruct,  G.  ii,  33.  Or  it  might

DIGEST.

MANCIPATIO — continued.

be  accompanied  by  some  relative  agreement,  such  as  apac-
tumfiduciae  (see  Fiducia),  G.  ii,  59,  60, 104,  note  8,  iii,  201.

MANCIPI  RES,  see  Ees  mancipi  and  nee  mancipi.

MANCIPII,  PERSONS  IN  CAUSA,  or  in  mancipio,  (the  latter  locution  be-
ing the  more  frequent  in  Gaius),  G.  i,  116-123,  138-141.

1.  Who  were  in  causa  mancipii. — A  slave  was  a  mancipium,

G.  iii,  148  ;  but  it  was  free  persons  that  were  in  mancipio
or  in  causa,  mancipii,  G.  i,  117,  118,  and  thus  servorum
loco,  G.  i,  123, 138,  viz.  filiifamilias  who  had  been  noxally
surrendered,  140,  iv,  79  ;  filiifamilias  and  filiaefamilias,
who  had  been  mancipated  with  a  view  to  emancipation
or  adoption,  but  had  not  yet  been  manumitted  in  the  one
case  (see  Emancipation,  1)  or  ceded  in  jure  in  the  other
(see  Adoption,  3),  G.  i,  132,  134;  and  women  who  had
been  remancipated  by  their  coernptionators  with  a  view
to  dissolution  of  manus,  but  were  still  unmanumitted,
118.  Except  in  the  case  of  those  mancipated  noxally,
their  condition  was  usually  a  transient  one,  and  one  rather
of  form  than  substance,  141.

2.  Their  position. — They  were  subject  generally  to  the  same

disabilities  as  other  persons  alieni  juris  (see  Alien,  jur.
personae,  2-4)  ;  only  as  they  were  not  in  possession  of  the
individual  to  whose  jus  they  were  subject,  it  was  doubted
whether  they  could  possess  and  usucapt  on  his  behalf,
G.  ii,  90.  If  a  person  in  mancipio  was  instituted  heir  or
had  a  legacy  left  him  by  the  person  in  whose  mancipium
he  was,  it  required  to  be  accompanied  with  freedom,
otherwise  he  could  not  take  it,  G.  i,  123.  Such  an
institution  made  him  a  necessary  heir ;  but  nevertheless
he  had  the  benejicium  dbstinendi  (see  Abst.potestas),  though
he  was  not  at  the  same  time  a  suus,  G.  ii,  160.  In  con-
sideration of  his  freedom  he  to  whom  he  was  subject  was
not  allowed  to  offer  him  any  indignity,  on  pain  of  an
actio  injuriarum,  G.  i,  141.

How  they  were  relieved  from  it. — They  were  relieved  from
it,  like  slaves,  by  manumission  vindicta,  censu,  or  testa-
mento  (see  Manumission,  6),  G.  i,  138  ;  but  to  their  case
the  restrictions  of  the  Aelia-Sentian  and  Eufia-Caninian
laws  did  not  apply,  139.  Except  a  filiusfamilias  sur-
rendered noxally,  or  a  child  mancipated  under  trust  for
remancipation  to  his  father  (see  Emancipation,  3),  they
might  have  their  names  recorded  in  the  censorial  register
even  against  the  will  of  the  person  to  whom  they  were
subject,  and  thus  regain  freedom  de  facto  as  well  as  de  jure
without  his  co-operation,  140.

3.

DIGEST.  541

MANDATE,  mandatum,  G.  iii,  155-162;  see  also  Consensual  obligations.

1.  Mandate,  ivhat  ? — It  was  a  consensual  contract,  G.  iii,  135,

in  which  the  mandatory  was  commissioned  by  the  man-
dant  to  do  something,  and  in  which  they  stood  mutually
obliged  according  to  principles  of  good  faith,  155.  It  was
of  necessity  gratuitous,  the  contract  being  one  of  location
if  the  mandatory  was  paid  for  his  services,  162.

2.  Nature  of  the  commission. — A  mandate  might  be  on  account

either  of  the  rnandant  or  of  a  third  party,  or  for  their
joint  benefit,  G.  iii,  155,  156  ;  but  if  solely  for  the  benefit
of  the  mandatory  it  was  regarded  merely  as  advice,  and
entailed  no  responsibility  ex  mandate,  156.  A  commission
to  do  what  was  immoral  or  unlawful  created  no  obligation,
157,  neither  did  one  to  be  performed  after  the  mandant's
death,  158.

3.  How  extinguished. — It  was  extinguished  by  revocation  or

death  of  either  party  rebus  integris,  G.  iii,  159,  160;  but
if  the  commission  was  executed  in  excusable  ignorance  of
the  mandant's  death,  the  mandatory  still  had  his  actio
mandati,  160.

4.  Mandatory  not  entitled  to  exceed  the  limits  of  his  commission.

— If  the  mandatory  exceeded  the  limits  of  his  commission
the  mandant  might  have  an  actio  mandati  against  him  for
damages ;  but  he  had  no  action  against  the  mandant,  G.
iii,  161.  The  mandatory  was  still  entitled,  however,  to
action  when  he  was  within  his  limits,  as  in  buying  at  a
lower  price  than  he  had  been  authorised  to  give,  ibid.

5.  The  actio  mandati. — The  a.  mandati,  which  was  competent

to  either  party,  G.  iii,  111,  127,  156,  161,  was  bonaejidei,
G.  iv,  62,  and  condemnation  in  it  made  the  defender  in-
famous, 182.  It  was  the  action  which  a  surety  other  than
a  sponsor  used  against  the  debtor  on  whose  behalf  he  had
paid,  G.  iii,  127;  and  a  sponsor  might  use  it  as  alternative
to  his  a.  depensi,  ibid.,  (see  Suretyship,  5).  It  was  also  em-
ployed by  a  stipulant  or  his  heirs  against  an  adstipulator
(see  Adstipulation,  2)  who  had  received  payment  from  the
common  debtor,  111.

MANES,  DII,  G.  ii,  4 ;  see  Things,  1.

MANIFESTUM  FURTUM,  see  Theft,  4,  5.

MANUMISSION,  enfranchisement  of  a  slave,  G.  i,  13-27,  U.  i,  6-25,
ii,  (see  Slavery),  or  liberation  of  a  free  person  in  causa
mancipii,  G.  i,  138-141,  (see  Mancipii  etc.}.
I.  GENERAL  DOCTRINES  REGARDING  MANUMISSION  OF  SLAVES.
1.  The  Aelia-Sentian  and  Junian   laws. — Before  the  first  of
these   enactments  only   a  quiritarian  owner   (see    Quir.
ownership)  could  legally  manumit  his  slave,  and  that  by

542  DIGEST.

MANUMISSION— continued.

I.  GENERAL  DOCTRINES  REGARDING  THAT  OF  SLAVES — continued.
one  or  other  of  the  legitimae  manumissiones,  i.e.  either
vindicta,  censu,  or  testamento  ;  the  slave  thus  manumitted
became  a  citizen,  without  reference  either  to  his  own
age  or  that  of  his  manumitter,  G.  i,  17,  18,  38.  To  check
this  increase  of  freedmen  citizens,  the  statute  inter  alia
declared  that  slaves  of  disgracefully  bad  character  should
not  on  manumission  become  or  be  capable  of  becoming
citizens,  and  introduced  restrictions  as  to  the  mode  and
conditions  of  manumission  when  a  slave  was  under  thirty
or  his  owner  under  twenty,  G.  i,  13,  18,  38,  U.  i,  11,  12,
13,  (see  Aelia-Sentian  law,  2-4).  But  it  at  the  same
time  provided  a  means  whereby  slaves  under  thirty
manumitted  by  their  quiritarian  owners  without  due
regard  of  its  directions  might  afterwards  attain  citizen-
ship, G.  i,  29  ;  which  was  extended  by  the  Junian  law
and  a  subsequent  senatusconsult  to  slaves  of  any  age
manumitted  irregularly,  or  by  those  who  were  only  their
bonitarian  owners,  G.  i,  29,  note,  as  amended  in  Additions
etc.,  31,  U.  iii,  3,  (see  Aelia-Sentian  law,  6,  7).  Those  to
whom  this  means  of  obtaining  citizenship  were  offered
got  the  name  of  Junian  latins  until  they  had  obtained  it,
G.  iii,  56,  (see  Junian  latinity,  1).

2.  How  manumission  was  influenced  by  the  condition  of  the  manu-

mitter.— Only  a  quiritarian  owner  could  by  manumission
make  his  slave  a  citizen,  G.  i,  17,  U.  i,  23  ;  a  bouitarian
owner  (see  Bon.  ownership}  could  make  him  no  more  than
a  latin,  G.  i,  22  and  note,  U.  i,  16.  An  owner  under
twenty,  even  quiritarian,  could  not  make  his  slave  a
citizen  unless  by  manumission  vindicta,  for  reasons  recog-
nised by  the  consilium  as  sufficient,  G.  i,  38-41,  U.  i,  13.
A  pupil  or  a  woman  in  tutelage  could  not  manumit  to  any
effect  without  tutorial  auctoritas,  U.  i,  17.  One  only  of
two  joint  owners  did  not  free  his  slave  by  manumission ;
the  result  was  that  his  share  accrued  to  his  socius  if  the
manumission  was  regular,  but  had  no  effect  if  irregular,
U.  i,  18.  Manumission  by  the  owner  of  a  slave  usufructed
by  a  third  party  left  him  sermis  sine  domino  while  the  usu-
fruct lasted,  U.  i,  19.  Manumission  by  any  owner  in  fraud
of  creditors  or  patron  was  null,  G.  i,  37,  47,  U.  i,  15.

3.  How  influenced   by  condition  of  the  slave. — If  he  was  of

disgracefully  bad  character  his  manumission,  except  by
an  insolvent  owner  instituting  him  as  his  heres  necessarius,
U.  i,  14,  could  make  him  no  more  than  a  deditician,  G.  i,
13,  U.  i,  11,  (see  Ded.  freedmen).  If  under  thirty,  his  manu-

DIGEST.  543

MANUMISSION— continued.

I.  GENERAL  DOCTRINES  REGARDING  THAT  OF  SLAVES — continued.
mission  otherwise  than  vindicta  apud  consilium,  and  by  his
quiritarian  owner,  made  him  only  a  latin,  G.  i.  18,  U.  i,  12.

4.  How  influenced  ly  mode  of  manumission. — Only  one  or  other

of  the  legitimae  manumissiones  could  make  a  slave  a
citizen,  G.  i,  17,  U.  i,  6-9  ;  and  if  he  were  under  thirty  or
his  owner  under  twenty  it  required  to  be  vindicta,  on
cause  approved  by  the  council,  (see  No.  2).  Any  other
mode  of  manumission  made  him  only  a  latin,  G.  i,  22  and
note,  U.  i,  10.

5.  Result. — The  slave  who  became  a  citizen  had  all  the  rights

of  a  citizen  except  as  qualified  by  his  relation  to  his
manumitter,  who  became  his  patron ;  see  Patronate,
Succession  to  citizen  freedmen.  For  the  rights  and  dis-
abilities of  a  Junian  latin,  see  Junian  latinity,  Succession
to  Junian  latins.
IT.  MANUMISSION  OF  SLAVES  BY  ACT  INTER  vivos.

6.  The  legitimae  manumissiones. — These  were  vindicta  and  cen-

sus, G.  i,  17,  U.  i,  6.  Manumission  vindicta  was  a  formal
act  before  a  magistrate,  U.  i,  7,  the  nature  of  which  is  not
explained  by  Gai.  or  Ulp.,  except  that  in  the  ordinary
case  it  could  take  place  at  any  time,  and  did  not  require
to  be  in  court,  G.  i,  20.  It  was  the  only  form  that  could
make  a  slave  a  citizen  when  he  was  under  thirty  or  his
owner  under  twenty,  G.  i,  18,  38,  U.  i,  12,  13,  arid  then
it  required  to  be  on  adequate  cause  approved  by  the
council,  ibid.  The  composition  of  the  council  and  its
times  of  sitting  are  described  in  G.  i,  20,  U.  i,  13,  (see
Consilium},  and  what  were  regarded  as  adequate  causes
enumerated  in  G.  i,  19,  39.  Manumission  censu  was
accomplished  when  a  slave,  by  order  of  his  owner,  gave  in
his  name  for  enrolment  in  the  census  list,  U.  i,  8.

7.  Informal  manumissions. — Gai.  and  Ulp.  mention  only  manu-

mission inter  amicos,  G.  i,  41,  44,  U.  i,  10,  18 ;  but  those
per  epistulam  and  per  mensam  were  very  common,  G.  i,
41,  note.
III.  MANUMISSION  OF  SLAVES  BY  TESTAMENT.

8.  Direct  manumission. — It  was  only  his  own  slave  that  a  man

could  directly  (in  contradistinction  to  fideicommissarily)
manumit  by  testament,  G.  ii,  272  ;  and  to  make  him  a
citizen  it  was  necessary  (a)  that  he  should  be  in  the
quiritarian  ownership  of  the  testator  both  when  the  latter
made  his  testament  and  when  he  died,  G.  ii,  267,  U.  i,
23,  and  (&),  except  when  instituted  necessary  heir  by  an
insolvent,  U.  i,  14,  (see  Necessarii  heredes),  that  he  should

544  DIGEST.

MANUMISSION— continued.

III.  MANUMISSION  OF  SLAVES  BY  TESTAMENT — continued.

be  over  thirty,  G.  ii,  276  ;  if  he  was  under  thirty,  or  the
testator  only  his  bonitarian  owner,  direct  testamentary
manumission  made  him  only  a  latin,  U.  i,  12,  xxii,  8.
A  direct  manumission  took  effect  the  moment  that  one
of  any  number  of  heirs  had  entered,  U.  i,  22.

9.  Requisites  in  point  of  form. — A  testamentary  manumission

might  be  conditional,  and  while  the  condition  was  pendent
the  slave  was  termed  statuliber  (which  see),  U.  ii,  1-6.  It
was  useless  if  it  stood  in  the  testament  (unless  a  military
one,  U.  i,  20)  anterior  to  the  heir's  institution,  G.  ii,  230,
U.  i,  20,  or  if  placed  between  two  institutions  and  botli
the  heirs  entered,  U.  i,  21 ;  or  if  freedom  was  given  as
from  the  day  before  or  the  day  after  the  heir's  death,  G.
ii,  232,  233  ;  or  if  it  was  given  by  way  of  penalty,  236.

10.  Indirect  or  jideicommissary  manumission. — See  Fideicom-

missum,  12,  13.

11.  Restrictions  of  the  Fufia-Caninian  law. — This  enactment

(see  L.  Fuf.  Can.)  limited,  according  to  a  sort  of  sliding
scale,  the  number  of  his  slaves  a  man  could  manumit  by
testament,  the  maximum  being  100,  however  numerous
his  establishment,  G.  i,  42,  43,  45,  ii,  228,  U.  i,  24.  If
he  manumitted  more  than  the  lawful  number,  the  enfran-
chisement was  effectual  only  for  those  within  the  number
who  were  mentioned  first,  G.  i,  45a ;  therefore  the  statute
required  that  they  should  be  named,  ibid.,  ii,  239,  U.  i,
25 ;  and  any  attempt  to  overreach  the  prohibition,  as  by
writing  the  names  in  a  circle,  was  rendered  futile  by
certain  senatusconsults,  G.  i,  46.

12.  Institution  by  an  insolvent  owner  of  one  of  his  slaves  as

heres  necessarius. — See  Aelia-Sentian  law,  5  ;  Necessarii
heredes.

IV.  MANUMISSION  OF  PEKSONS  IN  CAUSA  MANCIPII. — See  Mancipii

etc.,  3.

MANUS,  a  state  of  subjection  of  a  woman  to  a  man,  either  matri-
monii  causa  or  jiduciae  causa,  G.  i,  10S-115&,  137,  137a,
U.  tit.  ix.

1.  Manus  created  confarreatione. — Confarreatio  was  a  sacri-
ficial ceremony  in  the  presence  of  ten  witnesses,  taking
its  name  from  the  cake  of  far  or  spelt,  U.  tit.  ix,  note,
which  was  employed  in  it,  G.  i,  112,  U.  tit.  ix ;  (and  there
can  be  no  doubt  it  was  creative  at  once  of  both  marriage

G

and  manus}.  It  was  still  in  use  in  the  time  of  Gai.  and
Ulp. ;  for  no  one  could  fill  the  office  of  one  of  the  greater
flamens  or  of  the  rex  sacrorum  who  was  not  the  issue  of

DIGEST.  545

MANUS — continued.

a  farreate  marriage,  and  himself  married  in  that  way,  G-.
i,  112.  But  it  had  proved  so  difficult  to  induce  women
to  submit  to  it  that  it  had  to  be  provided  in  the  time  of
Augustus  that,  at  least  as  regarded  the  flaminica  Dialis,
it  should  in  future  infer  conventio  in  manum  only  in  so
far  as  the  sacra  were  concerned,  G.  i,  136  and  note,  and
therefore  did  not  free  her  from  her  father's  potestas,  ibid.

2.  That  created  coemptione. — Coemptio  was  a  transaction  per

aes  et  libram  (see  Acs  et  libra,  Mancipatio,  1),  in  which  it
rather  appears  that  the  parties — the  man  being  called
coemptionator,  G.  i,  115,  118,  U.  xi,  5,  etc.,  and  the
woman  quae  coemptionemfacit,  G.  i,  114, 115 — each  made
pretence  of  purchasing  the  other,  G.  i,  113  and  n.  2  ;  but
the  formal  words  used  by  them,  which  were  not  the  same
as  those  used  in  an  ordinary  mancipation,  G.  i,  123,  are
not  preserved.  When  it  was  matrimonii  causa  it  probably
was  usually  contemporaneous  with  marriage,  yet  quite
distinct ;  for  if  a  woman  performed  it  with  him  who  was
already  her  husband,  intending  only  fiduciary  manus,  yet
by  operation  of  law  matrimonial  manus  was  the  result,  G.
i,  1156;  while  by  marrying  a  man  in  whose  manus  she
already  was,  she  converted  into  matrimonial  manus  that
which  previously  had  been  only  fiduciary,  G.  ii,  139.  A
woman  who  was  sui  juris  could  not  perform  coemption
without  the  auctoritas  of  her  tutors,  G.  i,  115,  195a.

3.  That  created  usu. — Here  manus  was  superinduced  on  an

already  existing  marriage,  in  which  the  parties  had  co-
habited continuously  for  at  least  a  year,  G.  i,  111 ;  if  the
wife  desired  to  avoid  it,  she  had  periodically  to  absent
herself  for  at  least  three  nights,  trinoctialis  usurpatio,  and
thus  prevent  the  completion  by  her  husband  of  twelve
months'  possession,  ibid.  By  the  time  of  Gai.  it  was
obsolete,  ibid.

4.  Effect  of  matrimonial  manus  on  the  position  of  the  wife. — In

manum  conventio  by  use  being  no  longer  observed,  and
that  by  confarreation  being  limited  to  the  sacra,  the  old
consequences  of  it  really  survived  only  in  that  accom-
plished coemptione.  For  the  wife  it  involved  a  capitis
dcminutio,  G.  i,  162,  U.  xi,  13,  and  was  followed  by  its
usual  consequences  (see  Cap.  dem.,  3)  ;  in  particular,  if
she  was  a  filiafamilias  at  the  time,  it  put  an  end  to  her
father's  potestas,  G.  i,  136,  and,  whether  Jiliafamilias  or  sui
juris,  placed  her  in  the  position  of  a  daughter  in  relation
to  her  husband,  G.  i,  1156,  136,  ii,  139,  or  of  a  grand-
daughter in  relation  to  her  father-in-law  if  her  husband

2  M

546  DIGEST.

M  AN  us — continued.

was  himself  inpotestate,  G.i,  148,  iii,3.  Whatever  property
she  had  became  her  husband's  or  father-in-law's,  G.  ii,  98  ;
and  by  the  civil  extinction  of  her  persona  she  was  relieved
of  all  her  debts,  G.  iii,  84.  As  subject  to  a  new  family  head
she  began,  like  other  persons  alieni  juris,  to  acquire
for  him  both  property  and  claims,  G.  ii,  90,  iii,  163,  (see
Alieni  juris  personae)  ;  but  she  could  no  longer  oblige
herself,  G.  iii,  104.  Finally,  as  a  sua  heres  of  her  husband,
she  was  entitled  to  succeed  to  him  ab  intestate  along  with
her  children  in  his  potestas,  G.  iii,  3,  U.  xxii,  14,  and  en-
joyed generally  the  rights  of  suae  keredes,  (see  Sui  heredes).

5.  Its  effect  on  the  position  of  the  husband. — It  created  in  his

favour  a  universal  acquisition  of  his  wife's  estate,  G.  ii,  98,
iii,  83  ;  with  a  few  exceptions,  everything  of  hers  passed
to  him,  and  that  without  any  civil  liability  for  those  of
her  debts  that  were  not  hereditary,  84.  But  if  his  wife's
creditors  got  from  the  praetor  utiles  actiones  (see  Actions,
6),  on  the  fiction  of  caput  integrum  (see  Fiction,  3),  and
sued  her  on  her  personal  debts,  he  was  obliged  to
defend  her,  on  pain  of  seeing  the  creditors  allowed  to
sell  what  had  been  her  estate,  G.  iii,  84,  iv,  38,  80.  His
wife's  subsequent  acquisitions  were  all  his,  the  only  diffi-
culty being  as  to  whether  she  could  acquire  for  him  by
possession  and  usucapion,  G.  ii,  90.  The  reason  of  the
doubt  was  that  she  was  not  in  his  possession,  ibid.,  although
she  might  be  stolen  from  him,  G.  iii,  199.  The  in  manum
conventio,  being  quasi  agnatio  suae  heredis,  invalidated
any  testament  made  by  him  previously,  G.  ii,  139,  U.
xxiii,  3,  (see  Agnatio  sui  heredis) ;  and  in  any  subsequent
one  he  was  bound  to  institute  or  disinherit  her,  just  as  he
had  in  the  case  of  his  children  in  potentate,  (see  Testament,
10),  U.  xxii,  14.  He  was  entitled  in  his  testament  to
appoint  tutors  both  to  his  wife  in  manu  and  his  daughter-
in-law  in  manu  of  his  filiusfamilias  (see  Tutory,  10),  G.  i,
148.  Under  certain  circumstances  the  daughter-in-law
might  succeed  as  a  sua  heres,  G.  iii,  3.

6.  How  matrimonial  manus  was  dissolved. — The  relationship

was  dissolved  by  the  death  of  the  husband,  the  capitis
deminutio  media  or  maxima  (see  Cap.  dem.,  1)  of  either  of
them,  G.  i,  137,  or  the  emancipation  of  the  wife,  118,
137a.  This  she  could  demand  only  when  the  marriage
had  been  dissolved  by  divorce,  137a.  The  process  was
exactly  the  same  as  in  the  emancipation  of  a  child,  118,
119,  (see  Mancipatio,  1).  One  of  its  consequences  was
that  the  person  to  whom  she  was  mancipated,  by  manu-

DIGEST.  547

M  ANUS — continued.

mitting  her  to  make  her  sui  juris,  became  her  fiduciary
tutor,  G.i,115,166,195a,  U.  xi,  5,  (see  Tutonj,  3,  12,  21).
7.  Fiduciary  coemptio. — This  was  resorted  to  by  women  sui
juris  who  wanted  either  to  change  their  tutors,  G.  i,  115,
195a,  or  make  a  testament,  115<?,  or  be  relieved  of  the
burden  of  the  family  sacra  that  had  descended  to  them
with  an  inheritance,  114,  note  1.  Its  employment  to
enable  them  to  make  a  testament  was  probably  due  to
this, — that  whereas  they  could  not  compel  their  legitimi
tutores  to  concur,  they  bargained  for  concurrence  with  the
fiduciary  tutor  of  their  own  selection ;  but  the  device
became  unnecessary  in  consequence  of  a  Set.  of  Hadrian's,
requiring  tutors,  other  than  patrons  or  parent  manumit-
ters,  to  grant  their  auctoritas  to  the  testaments  of  their
female  wards,  G-.  i,  115a,  ii,  112,  122.  Fiduciary  coemp-
tion did  not  place  a  woman  in  the  position  of  a  daughter
to  her  coemptionator,  G.  i,  136  ;  and  if  it  operated  a  trans-
fer of  her  estate  to  him,  he  must  have  been  required  by
the  pactum  Jiduciae  to  reconvey  it  to  her  on  her  manu-
mission, otherwise  she  could  not  have  disposed  of  it  by
testament,  (see  Fiducia).

MANUS  INJECTIO,  G.  iv,  21-25 ;  see  Legis  actiones,  5.

MARRIAGE,  nuptiae,  matrimonium,  G.  i,  56-64,  U.  tits,  v,  xiii.
Nuptiae  answered  properly  to  marriage,  in  the  sense  of
entry  into  the  relationship  of  husband  and  wife,  matri-
monium being  the  state  of  matrimony,  U.  v,  2  ;  although
the  words  are  sometimes  used  more  loosely,  as  in  the
phrase  exjustis  nuptiis  concipere,  G.  i,  90,  91.

1.  Matrimonium  justum   and    nou  justum. — The   former  is

mentioned  in  G.  i,  76,  U.  v,  1,  2,  andjustae  nuptiae  in  G.

1,  56,  90,  91  ;  the  latter  in  G.  i,  87.     The  distinction  was
not  that  between  lawful  and  prohibited  marriage,  but
between  one  that  fulfilled  the  requirements  of  the  jus
civile,  so  far  as  regarded  the  creation  of  patria  potestas,
and  one  that  did  not,  G.  i,  56,  note  1.     Only  a  Eoman
citizen  could  contract  justum  matrimonium,  G.  i,  56,  U.  v,

2,  4,  and  that  only  if  he  had  conubium  (which  see)  with
the  woman  he  married,  ibid. ;  if  he  had  no  conubium  with
her,  his  marriage,  though  not  prohibited,  was  non  justum,
as  was  that  also  in  which  the  husband  was  a  peregrin,
irrespective  of  the  consideration  whether  he  had  conubium
with  his  wife  or  not,  see  passim,  G.  i,  65-81,  92.

2.  The  provisions  of  the  Julian  law  and  subsequent  senatuscon-

sults  in  reference  to  marriage. — They  absolutely  prohi-
bited certain  marriages  between  senators,  or  even  com-

548  DIGEST.

MAKPJAGE — continued.

moners  of  free  birth,  and  women  of  disreputable  character,
(see  Julian  and  Pap.  Popp.  law,  3).  Further,  they  re-
quired that  all  citizens  within  certain  ages  should  marry,
on  pain  of  forfeiture  of  provisions  left  them  by  testament ;
taking  care,  however,  that  marriage  between  persons  of
disproportionate  age  should  not  relieve  them,  (see  same
reference,  No.  4).  But  they  did  not  otherwise  interfere
with  the  law  of  marriage  or  its  conditions.

3.  Requisites  of  justae  nuptiae. — It  was  requisite  that  the  man

should  be  a  citizen  and  have  conubium  with  the  woman
he  was  marrying,  see  above,  No.  1.  Further,  it  was  neces-
sary that  they  should  both  have  reached  puberty,  U.  v,  2  ;
that  in  addition  to  their  own  consent  that  of  their  patres-
familias  should  have  been  given  if  they  were  in  potestate,
ibid. ;  and  that  there  should  be  no  impediment  of  too
close  propinquity  or  affinity,  G.  i,  58-63,  U.  v,  6.  But,
unless  in  marriage  confarreatione,  which  was  almost  out
of  date  (see  Manus,  1),  G.  i,  112,  136,  there  is  no  sugges-
tion that  any  ceremony  was  required.

4.  Propinquity  and  affinity   as   impediments. — Marriage   was

unlawful  between  ascendants  and  descendants  in  in-
finitum,  G.  i,  59,  U.  v,  6  ;  and  even  when  the  relationship
had  only  been  by  adoption  and  had  ceased,  still  the
impediment  remained,  G.  i,  59.  Between  collaterals  of
the  second  degree,  i.e.  brother  and  sister, — see  the  mode
of  computing  propinquity  in  U.  v,  6,  note  2, — it  was  un-
lawful even  though  the  relationship  was  only  adoptive,
G.  i,  61  ;  but  on  its  dissolution  the  impediment  disap-
peared, ibid.  At  one  time  the  impediment  reached  the
fourth  collateral  degree  (cousins),  U.  v,  6 ;  but  in  the
time  of  Gai.  and  Ulp.  a  man  might  marry  his  brother's
daughter,  who  was  related  to  him  in  the  third  degree,  yet
not  his  sister's,  G.  i,  62  and  notes,  U.  v,  6.  Further,  a
man  could  not  marry  his  father's  or  mother's  sister,
nor  a  woman  who  had  been  his  mother-in-law,  step-
mother, daughter-in-law,  or  step-daughter,  G.  i,  63,  U.
v,  6.

5.  Effects   of  justae  nuptiae. — As   regarded  the   parties,   see

Husband  and  wife  ;  as  regarded  their  children,  see  Patria
potestas.

6.  Effects  of  incestuous  marriages. — Incestae  nuptiae  were  those

in  which  the  parties  were  related  within  the  forbidden
degrees ;  the  woman  was  not  uxor,  and  the  children  were
in  law  as  fatherless  as  the  issue  of  a  casual  connection,
G.  i,  64,  U.  v,  7.

DIGEST.  549

MARRIAGE — continued.

7.  Effects  of  prohibited  and  unequal  marriages. — The  marriage

of  a  senator  or  man  of  free-birth  with  a  woman  of  in-
famous character  was  a  nullity,  U.  xiii,  1,  2.  But  an
unequal  marriage  between  a  woman  over  fifty  and  a  man
under  sixty  was  valid  in  itself,  though  of  no  avail  as  a
qualification  under  the  Julian  law  for  taking  an  inherit-
ance or  a  legacy,  U.  xvi,  4  ;  and  the  dos  became  caducous,
instead  of  following  the  ordinary  rules,  ibid.,  (see  Dowry,
8,  Caducity,  6).

8.  Effect  of  matrimonium   non  justum. — It  was  a  perfectly

valid  marriage,  though  not  productive  of  patria  potestas  ;
and  if  it  was  owing  to  some  mistake  on  one  side  or
other  that  it  had  failed  to  \>Q  justum,  the  defect  might  be
cured  by  erroris  causae  probatio  (which  see),  and  potestas
thus  superinduced,  G.  i,  67-75.  While  it  continued  non
justum  however,  the  issue  of  it,  being  sui  juris,  did  not
possess  the  same  rights  in  regard  to  their  father's  succes-
sion that  were  enjoyed  by  those  bom  of  justae  nuptiac,
G.  ii,  241  and  n.  2.

MARS,  priests  of,  see  Flamines  ;  Mars  in  Gallia,  U.  xxii,  6.

MATER  DEORUM  SIPYLENSIS,  U.  xxii,  6.

MATERFAMILIAS,  idea,  U.  iv,  1,  note.

MATRIMONIUM,  see  Marriage.

MAURICIANUS,  JUNIUS,  a  jurist  of  the  time  of  Ant.  Pius,  U.  xiii,  2
and  n.  1.

MAXIMUS  AND  TUBERO,  consuls  A.D  11,  authors  of  a  Set.  limiting
the  manus  of  the  Flaminica  Dialis  to  the  sacra,  G.  i,  136
and  note  ;  see  Manus,  1.

MKTUS  EXCEPTIO,  G.  iv,  117, 121 ;  see  Exception,  9.

MILITIA. — Service  for  a  certain  period  in  the  night  watch  was  one
of  the  ways  in  which  a  latin  acquired  citizenship,  G.  i,
325,  U.  iii,  5 ;  see  Junian  latinity,  7.

MINERVA  ILIENSIS,  U.  xxii,  6.

MINORITY  was  the  period  between  puberty  and  majority,  i.e.  from
twelve  and  fourteen,  for  females  and  males  respectively,
to  twenty-five,  G.  ii,  163,  iv,  57.  A  minor  was  under  com-
paratively few  disabilities,  and  had  this  great  advantage,
— that  he  could  obtain  reinstatement  by  the  praetor  when
he  had  entered  into  a  transaction  that  was  prejudicial  to
him,  and  whose  consequences  could  not  be  otherwise
avoided,  (see  In  integrum  restitutio),  ibid.  As  regards
curatory  of  minors,  see  Curatory,  3.

MINUS  QUAM  PEKFECTA  LEX,  a  law  that  imposed  penalties  on  a
contravener  without  annulling  his  act,  U.  i,  2.

MONEY  was  a  res  nee  mancipi  (see  Res  mancipi),  G.  ii,  81.

550  DIGEST.

MORA. — If  an  heir  was  in  mora  in  paying  a  jideicommissum  or  a
legacy  sinendi  modo  (see  Legacy,  20),  he  was  liable  for
interest  and  fruits  and  profits;  but  there  was  no  such
liability  in  the  case  of  other  legacies,  G.  ii,  280.  If  a  wife
died  after  divorce  her  heir  was  not  entitled  to  claim  the
dowry  unless  the  husband  had  been  in  mora  in  paying  it
to  deceased,  U.  vi,  7.

MORES,  see  Custom.

MORTIS  CAUSA  CAPIO,  G-.  ii,  225  and  n.  2.

Mucius,  QUINTUS,  G-.  iii,  149 ;  see  Scaewla,  Q.  M.

MULIER  LIBERIS  HONORATA,  see  Jus  liberorum.

MUNICIPIUM,  a,  could  not  be  instituted  heir  in  a  testament
except  by  one  of  its  own  freedmen,  U.  xxii,  5,  neither
could  its  members  collectively,  ibid. ;  but  a  trust  imposed
on  an  heir  to  make  over  an  inheritance  to  them  was
lawful,  ibid.,  while  a  legacy  might  also  be  taken  by  them,
U.  xxiv,  28.  Emphyteutic  grants  of  lands  by  a  munici-
pality are  referred  to  in  G.  iii,  145.

MUTE,  a,  could  not  be  a  party  to  a  stipulation,  G.  iii,  105,  nor
validly  execute  a  testament  per  aes  et  libram,  U.  xx,  13,
nor  assist  in  the  execution  of  another  person's  as
familiae  emptor,  witness,  or  balance-holder,  U.  xx,  7.  If
he  happened  to  be  tutor-at-law  of  a  woman,  she  was
entitled  to  have  a  substitute  to  constitute  a  dowry  for
her,  G.  i,  180,  U.  xi,  21.

MUTUUM,  loan  for  consumption,  G.  iii,  90 ;  see  also  Heal  obliga-
tions.

1.  Mutuum,  what  ? — It  was  a  real  contract, — loan  of  fungibles,

i.e.  things  passing  by  weight,  number,  or  measure,  which
were  transferred  in  property  to  the  borrower,  under  an
obligation  to  return  others  of  the  same  sort,  G.  iii,  90.
It  is  said  to  have  derived  its  name  from  the  fact  that  ex
meo  tuum  jit,  ibid. ;  consequently  it  was  not  held  to  have
been  contracted  when  there  was  incapacity  for  alienating,
and  therefore  no  transfer  of  property,  G.  ii,  80-82.

2.  Loan  by  a  woman  or  pupil  without  tutorial  auctoritas. —

Money  being  a  res  nee  mancipi,  G.  ii,  81,  and  a  woman
capable  of  alienating  things  of  that  class  without  her
tutor's  auctoritas  (see  Women,  4),  80,  she  could  quite  well
be  a  lender,  81.  But  a  pupil  had  not  that  power  of
alienation,  80 ;  therefore  when  he  lent  money  without
his  tutor's  auctoritas,  he  did  not  make  it  the  property  of
the  borrower,  and  so  there  was  no  mutuum,  82.  So  long
as  it  was  still  extant,  being  still  his,  he  might  recover  it
by  a  rei  vindicatio,  ibid. :  if  consumed,  he  recovered  it  by
a  condictio  (which  see),  ibid. ;  not,  however,  on  the  ground

DIGEST.  551

MUTUUM — continued.

of  mutuum,  but  rather  because  it  had  been  consumed  sine
causa,  ibid.,  note  4.

3.  Action  to  which  it  gave  rise. — Eepayment  was  sought  in  a
condictio  certi,  on  an  intentio — si  paret  reum  dare  oportere,
(see  Intentio,  2),  G.  iii,  91.

NATURAL  CHILDREN,  different  meanings  of  phrase,  G.  i,  19,  note  2.

NATURAL  OBLIGATIONS,  G.  iii,  119«  and  n.  1 ;  see  Obligation,  5.

NATURALIS  RATIO,  G.  i,  1,  89,  189 ;  ii,  66,  69,  79  ;  iii,  154&  and
note.  See  also  Jus  naturale.

NAVIS  FABRICATIO  was  one  of  the  ways  in  which  a  latin  could  become
a  citizen,  G.  i,  32c,  U.  iii,  6  ;  see  Junian  latinity,  7.

NECESSARII  HEREDES  were  heirs  who  became  such  by  necessity  of
law,  and  whether  they  would  or  not,  G.  ii,  153,  157,  iii,
87 ;  and  they  were  either  sui  et  necessarii  (see  Sui
heredes},  who  had  by  grace  of  the  praetors  potestas
abstinendi,  G.  ii,  158,  U.  xxii,  24,  or  simply  necessarii,
who  usually  had  no  power  of  abstaining,  G.  ii,  152.
The  simple  heres  necessarius  was  a  slave  of  a  testator's
instituted  heir  with  freedom,  G.  ii,  153.  Such  an  institu-
tion— often  in  the  shape  of  a  final  substitution  (which  see,
No.  1) — was  largely  resorted  to  by  insolvents,  who  desired
to  avoid  being  made  bankrupts  after  their  death;  by
instituting  or  substituting  a  slave  as  heres  necessarius  it
was  the  latter  that  was  made  a  bankrupt,  and  to  whom
the  consequent  disgrace  attached,  (see  Bankruptcy],  G.  ii,
154.  To  such  institutions  the  restrictions  of  the  Aelia-
Sentian  law  as  to  age  and  previous  character  of  the
slave  (see  Aelia-Sentian  law,  3,  4)  did  not  apply ;  his
heirship  and  freedom  made  him  a  citizen,  U.  i,  14.  A
person  in  causa  mancipii  (see  Mancipii  etc.}  who  was
instituted  heir  with  freedom  was  also  a  heres  necessarius,
but  had  potestas  abstinendi  like  a  suus,  G.  ii,  160.  In
presence  of  a  necessary  heir  there  could  be  no  usucapiopro
herede,  (see  Usucapion,  6),  G.  ii,  58,  iii,  201.

NEFASTUS  DIES,  a  legis  actio  could  not  proceed  upon,  G.  iv,  29.

NERVA,  M.  COCCEIUS,  grandfather  of  the  emperor  of  the  same  name,
consul  A.D.  22,  a  disciple  of  Labeo's,  and  head  of  his
school  after  his  death,  G.  i,  196,  note  1,  ii,  15,  195,  iii,
133.

NEXI  SOLUTIO  was  a  mode  of  discharging  an  obligation  without
actual  payment,  G.  iii,  173,  (although  originally  it  may
have  been  the  formal  discharge  that  accompanied  or
followed  payment).  It  was  employed  when  the  debt  to  be
discharged  had  been  created  per  aes  et  libram  (which  see),

552  DIGEST.

SOLUTIO  —  continued.

or  by  a  judgment,  or  by  damnatory  words  in  a  testament
(see  Damnas  esto)  ;  but  was  possible  only  when  what  was
due  could  be  weighed  or  counted,  and  was  of  definite
amount,  173,  175.  The  ceremony  was  itself  per  aes  et
libram  ;  the  procedure  and  the  words  of  style  are  in  174,
175  and  n.  3.

NEXUM,  a  mode  of  contracting  per  aes  et  libram,  G.  iii,  89,  note,  which
seems  almost  to  have  gone  out  of  use  before  the  time  of
Gai.  It  would  rather  appear  that  a  man  could  oblige
himself  per  aes  et  libram  (which  see)  only  for  what  could
be  weighed  or  counted,  (i.e.  money,  G.  i,  122),  and  was  of
definite  amount,  G.  iii,  175.  It  might  be  discharged  by
the  corresponding  ceremony  of  nexi  solutio,  without  actual
payment,  173.

NOMINA  AEG  ARIA,  G.  iii,  131  ;  see  Literal  obligations,  2.

NOMINA  TRANSSCEIPTICIA,  G.  iii,  128  ;    see  Literal  obligations,  1.

NOMINIS  DIES  (or  dies  lustricus),  a  child's  name-day,  survivance  of
which  augmented  its  parents'  powers  in  taking  one  under
the  testament  of  the  other,  TJ.  xv,  2  and  n.  1,  xvi,  la.

NON   NUMERATAE   PECUNIAE,  EXCEPTIO,  G.  iv,  116  ;    866  Exception,  9.

JSTosiRi  PRAECEPTORES,  a  phrase  used  by  Gai.  to  indicate  the  Sabinians,
to  whose  school  he  belonged;  see  Sabinians  and  Proculians.
NOVATION,  G.  iii,  176,  179  ;  see  also  Obligation,  3.

1.  Novation,   what  ?  —  It   was   a   mode   of  extinguishing   an

obligation  by  transmuting  it  into  a  new  one,  G.  iii,  176  ;
and  might  be  employed  even  when  the  obligation  novated
was  only  a  natural  one  (see  Obligation,  5),  G.  iii,  119a,
note  1.  It  was  effected  either  by  substitution  of  a  new
debtor  or  creditor  without  changing  the  nature  of  the
obligation,  or  by  substituting  a  new  obligation  without
change  of  debtor  or  creditor,  G.  ii,  38,  39,  iii,  176,  177.

2.  Novation  ~by  substitution  of  a  new  debtor.  —  In  such  a  case

the  novation  put  an  end  to  the  old  obligation  even  when
the  new  one  was  inoperative,  G.  iii,  176,  unless  the  in-
operativeness  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  new  debtor
was  a  slave,  ibid.,  or  a  peregrin  who  had  used  the  word
spondeo  (see  Stipulation,  2),  ibid.

3.  Novation  by  substitution  of  a  new  creditor.  —  If  the  original

creditor  authorised  a  third  party  to  take  from  the  debtor
a  stipulatory  engagement  for  the  same  debt  —  a  transac-
tion which  was  called  delegation  of  his  debtor  by  the
creditor  to  the  third  party,  G.  iii,  130  —  the  debtor  was
thereby  discharged  so  far  as  the  original  creditor  was
concerned,  and  became  bound  to  the  new  one,  G.  ii,  38,  39.

4.  Novation  by  substitution  of  a  new  obligation.  —  The  substituted

DIGEST.  553

NOVATION — continued.

obligation  was  held  to  be  new  if  anything,  such  as  a  con-
dition, a  time  of  payment,  or  a  surety,  was  superinduced
on  or  withdrawn  from  the  original  one,  G.  iii,  177 ;  Pro-
culus,  however,  denying  that  introduction  or  withdrawal
of  a  surety  had  that  effect,  178.  When  it  was  a  condition
that  was  introduced,  the  question  of  novation  was  in
suspense  until  its  fulfilment ;  for  if  it  failed,  the  original
obligation  was  recognised,  though  not  unanimously,  as
still  subsisting,  179.  Even  in  such  a  case,  however,  it
was  maintained  that  action  on  the  latter  might  be  resisted
by  an  exceptio  doli  (see  Exception,  8),  as  contrary  to  the
intent  of  parties,  ibid.

5.  Novation  in  nominatransscripticia. — See  Literal  obligations,^.

6.  Processual  novation. — See  Litis  contestatio.

NOXAL  ACTIONS,  G.  iv,  75-78,  81,  were  those  against  patresfamilias
in  respect  of  delicts  of  their  jUiifamilias  committed
against  strangers,  or  owners  in  respect  of  delicts  committed
by  their  slaves,  and  in  which  defender,  if  condemned,  had
either  to  pay  damages  or  surrender  the  wrong-doer  to  the
party  injured,  75 ;  some  of  them  being  authorised  by
statute,  others  by  the  praetor's  edict,  76.  As  the  liability
always  followed  the  delinquent,  77,  if  a  filiusfamilias
guilty  of  delict  became  sui  juris  before  action  was  raised,
the  action  ceased  to  be  noxal,  and  became  a  direct  one
against  himself,  ibid. ;  while  if  a  slave  changed  hands
after  the  delict,  the  noxal  action  lay  against  his  new
owner,  ibid.  If,  however,  the  delict  was  against  the
paterfamilias  or  slave's  owner,  as  there  was  no  action
competent  at  the  moment,  so  none  became  competent  by
transfer  of  either  to  another  person's  potestas,  or  even  by
his  becoming  sui  juris,  78  ;  but  whether  a  right  of  action
competent  in  respect  of  a  slave's  delict  was  extinguished
by  the  slave's  falling  into  the  potestas  of  the  injured  party,
or  only  suspended  till  he  again  passed  out  of  it,  was
matter  of  controversy,  ibid.

NOXAL  MANCIPIUM,  see  Mancipii  etc.,  3.

NUDUM  JUS  QUIRITIUM,  see  Quiritarian  ownership.

NUNCUPATIO,  as  an  accompaniment  of  transactions  per  aes  et  libram,
G.  ii,  104,  note  8.

NUNCUPATIO  TESTAMENTI,  see  Testament,  4.

NURUS. — A  daughter-in-law  in  manu  of  a  filiusfamilias  was  in
potestate  of  her  father-in-law  in  the  character  of  a  grand-
daughter, G.  i,  148,  ii,  159  ;  and  she  and  her  children
succeeded  him  as  sui  heredes  if  her  husband  had  prede-
ceased, G.  iii,  3,  U.  xxii,  14.

554  DIGEST.

OBLATUM  FUKTUM,  see  Theft,  4,  5.
OBLIGATION",  a  iii,  88-225.
I.  OBLIGATION  GENERALLY.

1.  Obligation  what  ? — The  word  is  not  defined  in  the  texts,  but

the  idea  left  to  be  gathered  from  the  detailed  exposition.
But  it  was  used  sometimes  to  denote  the  relation  or  bond
between  a  creditor  and  his  debtor,  G.  iii,  124,  176,  iv,  78,
etc. ;  sometimes  the  claim  or  hold  the  former  had  against
or  over  the  latter,  G.  ii,  14,  38,  etc.  ;  sometimes  the  duty
the  latter  owed  the  former,  G.  i,  192,  iii,  119,  etc.

2.  How  it  arose. — A  civil  obligation,  i.e.  one  upon  which  a

creditor  could  sue  his  debtor,  arose  either  from  contract
or  delict,  the  first  dealt  with  in  G.  iii,  89-162,  the  second
in  163-225,  (see  Contract,  Delict) ;  sometimes  it  arose
without  either  contract  or  delict,  from  facts  and  circum-
stances, 89,  note  1, 91.  An  agreement, pactum  conventum,
was  not  necessarily  a  contract ;  and  those  pacts  which
the  law  did  not  recognise  as  contracts,  though  they  might
be  binding  naturally,  and  could  be  pleaded  by  way  of
exception  to  the  effect  of  defeating  an  action  on  a  con-
tract, G.  iv,  116«,  yet  did  not  engender  civil  obligation.

3.  How  extinguished. — (a)  By  payment  of  what  was  due,  no

matter  how  the  obligation  had  arisen,  G.  iii,  168;  see  Pay-
ment. (&)  By  novation,  also  in  any  case,  176-179  ;  see
Novation,  (c)  By  acceptilation  when  the  obligation  had
been  created  by  verbal  contract,  169-172 ;  see  Acceptila-
tion. (<f)-By  written  accepti  latio  when  the  debt  had  been
created  byexpensi  latio,  G.  iii,  129, 130  ;  see  Literal  obliga-
tions, 1.  (e)  Per  aes  et  libram  when  the  debt  had  been  so
created,  or  was  upon  a  judgment  or  upon  a  legacy  per
damnationem,  173-175 ;  see  Nexi  solutio.  (/)  By  litiscon-
testationin  ajudicium  legitimum,  180, 181,  and  notes;  see
Litis  contestatio.  (g)  By  capitis  deminutio,  though  equity
gave  a  remedy,  G.  iii,  84,  iv,  38,  80 ;  see  Cap.  deminutio,
3,  4.  (A)  Claims  against  hereditary  debtors  were  extin-
guished by  in  jure  cessio  of  an  inheritance  after  entry,  G.
ii,  35,  iii,  85 ;  see  Hereditas,  15,  16.

4.  Impossibility  of  its  transfer. — Though  an  obligation  was  a

res  incorporalis,  G.  ii,  14,  yet,  unlike  other  incorporeals,  it
was  incapable  of  cession  or  transfer  in  any  way  what-
ever, G.  ii,  38  ;  for  though  a  new  creditor  or  a  new  debtor
might  be  put  in  place  of  the  original  one,  that  was  done
by  novation  (which  see),  which  was  very  different  from
transfer,  ibid.  Without,  however,  transferring  the  obli-
gation, a  creditor  could  give  a  third  party  the  beneficial
interest  in  it  by  authorising  him  to  sue  upon  it  as  his,

DIGEST.

OBLIGATION"— continued.

I.  OBLIGATION  GENERALLY — continued.

the  creditor's,  cognitor  or  procurator,  (see  Formula,  2,
Procurator!/  in  litigation,  4),  G.  ii,  39,  252.

5.  Natural  obligations  in  particular. — Natural  obligations  were

not  recognised  by  law  to  the  extent  of  its  allowing  action
upon  them,  see  above,  No.  2.  The  only  point  noticed  by
Gai.  in  reference  to  them  is,  that  they  might  be  guaran-
teed by  sureties,  as  in  the  case  of  an  obligation  by  a  slave,
G.  iii,  119a;  but  in  note  1  to  that  par.  there  is  an
enumeration  of  other  results  that  followed  them  as  vin-
cula  aequitatis.

6.  Other  varieties. — They  wrere  unilateral  or  bilateral ;  unilateral

in  the  verbal  and  literal  contracts  ;  bilateral  (or  mutual)
in  the  consensual  ones,  G.  iii,  137.  In  alternative  ones
the  election  was  with  the  debtor  unless  otherwise  ex-
pressed, G.  iv,  53  ;  and  in  generic  ones,  obi.  generis,  the
rule  was  the  same,  ibid.  Of  some  obligations  perform-
ance was  to  be  due  from  time  to  time,  as  in  the  case  of
annuities  or  other  periodical  payments ;  the  obligation,
however,  was  one  and  the  same ;  and  in  suing  for  what
had  fallen  due,  on  a  guidguid  dare  oportet  (see  Intentio,
2),  a  creditor  ran  the  risk  of  consumptio  actionis  (which
see),  unless  he  prefixed  a  limiting  prescription  to  his
formula  (see  Praescriptio),  G.  iv,  131,  131a.

II.  THE  PARTIES  TO  AN  OBLIGATION.

7.  Obligation  between  a  paterfamilias  and   his    dependants. —

There  could  be  no  civil  obligation  between  a  man  and  a
person  subject  to  his /MS,  G.  iv,  78  ;  and  &  filiusfamilias  or
slave  did  not  become  liable  to  action  merely  by  after-
wards becoming  sui  juris,  ibid.  But  the  law  did  recog-
nise the  possibility  of  natural  obligation  between  them ;
as  when  it  authorised  a  paterfamilias,  sued  in  an  actio
de  peculio  (see  Adjectician  actions,  3),  to  deduct  from
the  peculium  whatever  was  due  him  by  his  filiusfamilias
or  slave  before  settling  with  the  pursuer,  G.  iv,  73.

8.  Acquisition  of  claim  through  third  parties. — It  was  impos-

sible for  a  man  to  acquire  a  claim  through  the  contract
of  a  stranger,  whether  a  freeman  or  a  servus  alienus,  G.
ii,  95,  even  though  such  stranger  was  acting  as  his  pro-
curator or  agent  (see  Procurator),  ibid.  But  he  might
acquire  ex  contractu  through  a  person  in  his  potestas,
manus,  or  mancipium,  G.  iii,  163  ;  through  a  person,
whether  free  or  slave,  bona  fide  possessed  by  him  as  his
slave,  if  the  claim  was  acquired  by  means  of  the  pos-
sessor's funds  or  the  supposed  slave's  labour,  164  ;  or

556  DIGEST.

OBLIGATION— continued.

II.  THE  PAETIES  TO  AN  OBLIGATION — continued.

through  a  usufructed  slave  under  the  same  qualifications,
165.  If  a  slave  was  in  the  bouitarian  ownership  (which
see)  of  one  man  and  the  quiritarian  ownership  of  another,
a  claim  acquired  by  him  always  accrued  to  the  former,
unless  (?)  expressly  declared  to  be  for  the  latter,  166.
One  owned  by  two  persons  jointly  acquired  for  them^m?
rata,  unless  one  in  particular  was  named  in  the  contract,
167 ;  there  being  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  whether
the  rule  was  displaced  when  the  slave  had  acted  on  the
instructions  of  one  only,  167&.

9.  Liability  through  acts  of  third  parties. — For  the  contract
debts  of  a  stranger,  whether  a  freeman  or  a  servus  alienus,
a  man  was  liable  only  when  he  had  placed  him  in  charge
of  a  ship  or  store,  and  the  debt  had  been  contracted  on
account  thereof ;  in  such  cases  he  was  responsible  in  an
exercitorian  or  institorian  action,  as  the  case  might  be,
G.  iv,  71,  (see  those  words).  As  regards  the  liability  of
a  paterfamilias  for  the  debts  ex  contractu  or  ex  delicto  of
those  in  his  jus,  see  G.  iv,  70-78,  and  respectively  Adjec-
tician  actions  and  Noxal  actions.

10.  Liability  of  persons  alieni  juris. — A  filiusfamilias  was  the

only  person  alieni  juris  that  could  civilly  oblige  himself ;
all  others  were  incapable  of  doing  so,  G.  iii,  104,  though
they  might  be  obliged  naturally,  (see  above,  Nos.  5,  7).

11.  Rights  and   liabilities   of  heirs. — Heirs  might  sue  or  be

sued  ex  contractu,  with  two  or  three  exceptions ;  they
might  sue  ex  delicto,  except  the  a.  injuriarum  ;  but  they
were  not  liable  for  the  penalties  of  their  predecessor's
delict,  G.  iv,  112,113,  (see  Actions,  7,LTereditas,  14).  It
was  a  rule  of  law  that  an  obligation  could  not  begin  in  the
person  of  the  heir  either  of  debtor  or  creditor,  G.  iii,
100,  158  ;  a  stipulation  therefore  for  a  payment  after  the
death  of  stipulant  or  promiser  was  useless,  100  ;  so  was
a  commission  to  a  man  to  do  something  after  the  death
of  either  mandant  or  mandatory,  158  ;  and  '  the  day
before  death'  was  in  the  same  position,  as  its  arrival  and
the  commencement  of  the  obligation  could  not  be  known
until  after  death,  100.  The  reason  was,  that  though  a
man's  heir  represented  him,  and  therefore  was  entitled
to  enforce  his  claims  and  responsible  for  his  engagements,
G.  ii,  98,  yet  his  heir's  heir  did  not  represent  him.
Therefore  a  testator  could  not  charge  his  heir's  heir  with
a  legacy,  G.  ii,  232,  U.  xxiv,  16.  He  might,  however,
impose  on  his  heir's  heir  the  burden  of  performing  an

DIGEST.  557

OBLIGATION— continued.

II.  THE  PARTIES  TO  AN  OBLIGATION — continued.

obligation  which  commenced  in  the  person  of  the  heir
while  drawing  his  last  breath,  G.  ii,  232,  278,  in,  100  ;
this  was  practically  imposing  the  obligation  itself  on  the
heir's  heir  ;  and  so  in  jideicommissa,  which  were  not  tram-
melled by  the  rules  of  the  jus  civile,  (see  Fideicommissum,
1),  no  difficulty  was  made  in  admitting  the  validity  of
an  express  direction  to  the  heir's  heirs  to  denude  after
his  death  in  favour  of  a  third  party,  G.  ii,  277,  U.  xxv,  8.
12.  Obligations  of  pupils  and  women  in  tutelage. — See  Pupils,
Women,  4.

OBROGATIO  LEGIS,  alteration  of  some  of  the  provisions  of  a  statute,
U.  i,  3.

OCCUPATIO,  appropriation  of  a  res  nullius,  see  Property,  4.

OFILIUS,  AULUS,  a  jurist  of  distinction  much  trusted  by  Julius
Caesar,  and  supposed  to  have  been  his  adviser  in  his
contemplated  Code,  G.  iii,  140  and  n.  2.

OPE  EXCEPTIONIS,  see  Ipso  jure.

OPTIO  TUTORIS,  see  Tutory,  10.

OPTIONIS  LEGATUM,  U.  xxiv,  14  ;  see  Legacy,  8.

ORBI,  married  persons  who  were  childless,  were  not  allowed  by  the
Papian  law  to  take  more  than  a  half  of  what  was  left
them  in  a  testament,  G.  ii,  286ft,  (see  Julian  and  Pap.
Popp.  law,  6).  The  prohibition  did  not  extend,  however,
to  military  testaments,  G.  ii,  111  and  n.  4.

ORDO  and  GRADUS  in  succession,  distinction,  G.  iii,  27,  note  1.

OUTLAYS,  see  Impensae.

OWNERSHIP,  see  Property,  Quiritarian  ownership,  Bonitarian  owner-
ship.

PACTI  CONVENTI  EXCEPTIO,  G.  iv,  116ft,  121,  122.

PARENT  AND  CHILD,  their  jural  relation  to    each  other;  see  also

Marriage,  Status.

1.  Where  the  child  was  the  issue  o/justum  matrimonium. — For
the  nature  of  justum  matrimonium  see  Marriage,  1.
Where  it  had  been  contracted,  a  child  born  of  it  was  a
citizen  like  his  father,  G.  i,  56,  67  ;  and  if  the  latter  was
sui  juris  at  the  time  of  conception — for  it  was  that
moment  that  determined  the  status  of  legitimate  children,
G.  i,  89,  U.  v,  10 — the  child  was  in  his  potestas,  G.  i,  55,
(see  Patria  potestas}.  If  his  father  was  sui  juris,  then
the  child,  so  long  as  he  remained  in  potestate,  was  one  of
the  family  sui  heredes,  G.  ii,  156,  iii,  2,  U.  xxii,  14,  and
in  a  manner  joint-owner  with  the  father  of  the  family
estate,  G.  ii,  157  ;  the  latter,  therefore,  if  he  made  a  tes-

558  DIGEST-

PARENT  AND  CHILD — continued.

tament,  required  either  to  institute  or  disinherit  him,  G.
ii.  123  f.,  U.  xxii,  14,  (see  Testament,  10) ;  and  on  intes-
tacy he  had  the  first  right  to  the  succession,  G.  iii,  1,  U.
xxvi,  1,  (see  Intestate  succession,  3).  As  regards  the  parent's
rights  over  the  child, — and  the  parent  in  this  case  might
be  in  fact  a  grandfather  or  even  remoter  ascendant,  G.  i,
146, — see  Patria  potestas,  3  ;  and  as  regards  the  child's
capacities  and  incapacities,  see  Alieni  juris  personae,  2-4.
A  child  born  in  justo  matrimonio  within  ten  months
after  the  husband's  death  counted  as  his,  U.  xvi,  la.  The
existence  of  children  of  a  marriage  conferred  important
rights  upon  the  parents  in  reference  to  succession,  the
dowry,  release  from  tutory,  acquisition  of  citizenship,  etc.,
some  of  them  arising  whether  there  had  been  a  marriage
or  not,  see  Jus  liberorum,  Husband  and  wife,  7,  Dowry,  4, 6,
Julian  and  Pap.  Popp.  law,  2,  5,  6,  7.

2.  Where  issue  o/non  justum  matrimoniurn. — When  a  mar-

riage was  non  justum  (see  Marriage,  1)  a  child  born  of  it
was  not  on  that  account  a  bastard ;  though  by  the  jus
gentium  he  took  his  mother's  status,  G.  i,  80,  U.  v,  8, — a
rule  (see  Status,  2)  that  was  occasionally  altered  by  posi-
tive legislation, — he  was  still  Justus  Jilius  patris,  G.  i,  77,
at  least  when  his  father  was  a  peregrin.  But  he  was  not
in  his  father's  potestas,  G.  i,  87,  for  that  resulted  only  from
justae  nuptiae,  G.  i,  55  ;  consequently,  suppose  the  father
was  a  citizen  and  could  make  a  testament,  the  child
had  no  claims  upon  him  in  respect  of  it,  being  in  law  a
stranger,  extraneus,  G.  ii,  241  and  n.  2.

3.  When  issue  of  an  incestuous  or  unlawful  connection. — The

child  was  then  accounted  spurious,  just  as  if  vulgo  con-
ceptus,  G.  i,  64,  U.  v,  7 ;  see  below,  No.  5.

4.  When  issue  of  concubinage. — There  is  no  reference  to  con-

cubinage in  Gai.  or  Ulp. ;  but  the  issue  of  it  were  called
naturales,  not  spurii  or  vulgo  concepti,  G.  i,  64,  note  3,
and  in  the  later  law  had  certain  rights  in  reference  to
their  father's  succession.

5.  Wlien  issue  of  a  casual  connection  — Children  of  this  sort

were  the  spurii  or  vulgo  concepti  properly  so  called,
with  whom  incestuous  offspring  were  classed ;  they  were
regarded  as  in  law  fatherless,  G.  i,  64,  U.  iv,  2 ;  and
took  their  status  from  their  mother  as  their  only  known
parent,  ibid.,  dating  it,  not  from  the  time  of  conception  as
in  the  case  of  legitimate  children,  but  from  that  of  birth,
G.  i,  89,  U.  v,  10.  As  fatherless  they  were  of  course  sui
juris,  U.  iv,  2.

DIGEST.  559

PARTITIO  LEGATA,  G.  ii,  254,  U.  xxiv,  25  ;  see  Legacy,  8.
PARTNERSHIP,  societas,  G.  iii,  148-1 54a ;  see  also  Consensual  obliga-
tions.

1.  Societas,  what  1 — It  was  a  consensual  contract,  G.  iii,  135,

in  which  two  or  more  persons  agreed,  as  socii,  to  have  a
common  interest  either  in  the  whole  means  and  estate  of
each  or  in  some  particular  trade  or  business,  148  ;  each
contributing  something  to  the  common  stock,  either  in
money  or  kind,  or  in  personal  services,  149.

2.  Distribution  of  profit  and  loss. — After  some  hesitation  it  was

held  not  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  the  con-
tract that  a  partner  should  share  in  the  profits  yet  bear
none  of  the  loss,  if  the  importance  of  his  personal  services
or  other  circumstances  rendered  such  an  arrangement
reasonable,  G.  iii,  149.  In  the  absence  of  special  agree-
ment, the  rule  was  that  the  partners  were  entitled  to
equal  shares  of  the  profits  and  bound  for  equal  shares  of
the  loss,  150  ;  and  when  there  was  an  agreement,  but  it
was  specific  as  to  the  division  of  one  only  of  those  inci-
dents, the  law  assumed  it  the  intention  of  parties  that  the
other  should  be  shared  in  the  same  proportion,  ibid.

3.  Dissolution  of  a  partnership. — It  came  to  an  end  when  the

mutual  consent  upon  which  it  was  founded,  G.  iii,  154a,
was  at  end,  151 ;  though  fraudulent  renunciation  by  one
of  the  partners,  in  order  to  deprive  his  socii  of  some
imminent  profit,  was  not  allowed  thus  to  prejudice  them,
ibid.  It  was  dissolved  also  by  death,  capitis  deminu-
tio  minima,  confiscation,  or  bankruptcy ;  though,  in  any
of  the  three  latter  cases,  (which  were  all  civiles  rationes
for  the  dissolution  of  &  juris  gentium  relationship),  if  the
parties  desired  nevertheless  to  go  on  as  before,  a  new
partnership  was  held  to  have  commenced,  152-154&.

4.  Actions  appropriate  to  the  relationship.- — When  there  was

an  allegation  that  a  partner  had  not  fulfilled  his  obliga-
tions under  the  contract,  the  remedy  was  an  actio  pro
socio  ;  it  was  bonaefidei,  G.  iv,  62  ;  but  condemnation  in
it  rendered  the  defender  infamous,  G.  iv,  182.  When  all
that  was  wanted  was  division  of  common  property,  an  a.
communi  dividundo  (which  see)  was  resorted  to,  G.  iv,  42.

PATERFAMILIAS,  idea, U.iv,l, note;  for  his  position,  rights,  and  duties,
see  Patria  potestas,  1-4.

PATEIA  POTESTAS,  G.  i,  55-107,  127-137a ;  U.  v,  vii,  4,  viii.
I.  NATURE  OF  THE  PATRIA  POTESTAS.

1.  Its  nature  generally. — The  patria  potestas  was  the  right,  jus,
exercised  by  a  paterfamilias  over  the  Jilii  and  filiae  fami  •
lias.  It  was  an  institution  of  the  jus  civile  and  peculiar

560  DIGEST.

PATRIA  POTESTAS— continued.

I.  NATURE  OF  THE  PATRIA  POTESTAS — continued.

to  citizens,  G.  i,  55,  189  ;  although  something  closely
resembling  it  was  sometimes  found  amongst  peregrins,
55,  and  existed  in  Rome's  latin  municipia,  ibid.,  note  2.
At  the  same  time  the  law  did  not  recognise  its  dejure
possibility  amongst  any  but  citizens,  and  denied  it  in
particular  to  Junian  latins,  G.  i,  66,  and  deditician  freed-
men,  68.  It  was  only  a  paterfamilias  that  could  have  it,
— a  woman  could  not,  G.  i,  104,  ii,  161,  U.  viii,  8a.
And  it  created  such  a  community  of  interests  between
the  head  of  the  house  and  his  subject  descendants  that
they  were  in  a  manner  joint-owners  with  him  of  the
family  estate,  G.  ii,  157  ;  that  civil  obligation  between
them  was  impossible,  G.  iv,  78,  although  there  might  be  a
natural  one  (see  Obligation,  5),  G.  iv,  73  ;  and  that  they
were,  in  some  cases  at  least,  incompetent  witnesses  of  each
other's  formal  deeds,  G.  ii,  105-108,  U.  xx,  3-6.

2.  Over  whom  it  extended. — That  a  man  was  a  citizen  did  not

necessarily  give  him  potestas  over  his  children ;  for  if
they  were  the  issue  of  a  marriage  without  conubium
there  was  no  potestas,  G.  i,  56,  unless  something  super-
vened to  create  it,  (see  below,  Nos.  11,  12)  ;  while  if  they
were  the  issue  of  an  incestuous,  prohibited,  or  casual
connection,  they  were  not  even  regarded  as  his  children,
(see  Marriage,  6,  7,  Parent  and  child,  5).  When  the
potestas  existed  it  did  not  end  with  sons  and  daughters,
but  included  also  grandchildren  through  a  son,  nepotes
neptesque  ex  filio,  great-grandchildren  through  a  grand-
son who  was  issue  of  a  son,  pronepotes  proneptesque  ex
nepote  filio  nato  prognati  prognataeque,  and  even  remoter
descendants  tracing  their  descent  through  males,  if  such
existed,  G.  iii,  2 ;  but  it  did  not  include  descendants
through  females,  for  a  child  followed  his  father's,  not  his
mother's  family,  G.  iii,  71.  A  woman,  however,  might
enter  her  husband's  family  by  in  manum  conventio  ;  and
in  such  a  case,  if  he  was  in  potestate  of  his  father,  so
was  she,  but  in  the  character  of  a  granddaughter,  G.  i,
148,  ii,  159,  iii,  3,  (see  Manus,  4).

3.  Eights  it  conferred  on  the  paterfamilias. — It  entitled  him  to

emancipate  his  jiliusfamilias  and  thus  deprive  the  latter
of  the  advantages  of  the  relationship,  G.  i,  132  f.,  (see
Emancipation,  2) ;  to  give  him  in  adoption,  G.  i,  134,  (see
Adoption,  1,  3,  7) ;  or  to  disinherit  him,  G.  ii,  123,  (see
Testament,  10).  He  might,  by  withholding  his  consent,
prevent  him  contracting  justum  matrimonium,  U.  v,  2,

DIGEST.  561

PATPJA  POTESTAS— continued.

I.  NATURE  OF  THE  PATPJA  POTESTAS — continued.

(see  Marriage,  3)  ;  he  might  by  testament  appoint  a
tutor  for  him  if  on  the  death  of  the  paterfamilias  he  was
to  become  sui  juris,  G.  i,  144-146,  (see  Tutory,  1,  10) ;  he
might,  by  way  of  pupillary  substitution,  even  make  a
will  for  him  to  take  effect  in  the  event  of  his  dying
while  still  a  pupil,  G.  ii,  179,  180,  U.  xxiii,  7,  8,  (see
Substitution,  2).  Lastly,  he  was  entitled  to  all  the
acquisitions  of  his  filiusfamilias,  whether  in  the  shape  of
property,  G.  ii,  87,  or  claims  by  contract,  G.  iii,  163.

4.  Responsibilities  it  imposed  upon  him. — By  praetorian  law-

he  was  responsible  to  a  certain  extent  for  the  debts  ex
contractu  of  his  Jiliusfamilias,  G.  iv,  69-74a,  (see  Adjecti-
cian  actions) ;  and,  partly  by  the  jus  civile,  partly  by  the
edict,  he  was  noxally  responsible  for  his  delicts,  75-79,
(see  Noxal  actions}.  And  as  regarded  a  filiusfamilias
who  was  to  become  sui  juris  on  his  death,  he  was  bound,
if  he  made  a  testament,  either  to  institute  or  disinherit
him  ;  he  could  not,  by  leaving  him  unmentioned,  deprive
him  of  his  birthright  interest  in  the  family  estate,  G.  ii,
123  f.,  (see  Testament,  10).

5.  Incapacities   to  which  it  subjected  the   filiusfamilias. — See

Alicni  juris  personae,  2-4.

6.  Rights  to  which  it  entitled  him. — If  he  was  an  immediate

descendant  of  his  paterfamilias,  he  was  entitled  to  dis-
regard any  testament  made  by  the  latter  in  which  he  had
been  passed  over,  G.  ii,  123,  (see  Testament,  10)  ;  while  a
filiafamilias,  or  &  filiusfamilias  who  was  only  a  grandson
but  whose  own  father  was  dead,  was  entitled  if  un-
mentioned either  to  share  with  the  institute  by  accretion
under  the  jus  civile,  G.  ii,  124,  126,  (see  Adcretio,  3),  or
to  challenge  the  testament  and  obtain  ~bonorum  r>ossessio
under  the  edict,  G.  ii,  125,  (see  Bonor.  poss.,  6).  If  the
paterfamilias  died  intestate  those  of  his  filii  and  filiae
familias  who  became  sui  juris  had  by  the  jus  civile  the
first  place  in  his  succession,  G.  iii,  2,  (see  Intestate
succession,  3) ;  although  by  the  edict  emancipated  children
were  admitted  along  with  them,  G.  iii,  26,  (see  Bonor.
poss.,  14).

II.    HOW  IT  WAS  CREATED.

7.  By  justae  nuptiae. — See  Marriage,  1,  3.

8.  By  adoption  and  adrogation. — See  Adoption.

9.  By  jus  Latii. — This  was  a  mode  by  which  a  colonial  latin

acquired  citizenship,  and,  in  certain  cases,  not  only  for
himself  but  for  his  children,  G.  i,  96.  It  is  not  said,

2  N

562  DIGEST.

PATKIA  POTESTAS— continued.

II.  How  IT  WAS  CREATED — continued.

however,  that  potestas  accompanied  it,  and  judging  by
the  rule  in  reference  to  potestas  following  citizenship  by
imperial  grant  (below,  No.  12),  it  is  possible  that  it  did
not ;  see  Colonial  latinity,  2.

10.  By  causae  probatio  ex  lege  Aelia  Sentia. — This  applied

to  Junian  latins  ;  the  moment  cause  was  proved  potestas
was  created  as  well  as  citizenship,  G.  i,  66,  U.  vii,  4 ;
see  Cans.  prob.  ex  I.  Ael.  Sent.

11.  By  erroris  causae  probatio. — See  Error,  caus.  prob.

12.  By  imperial  grant. — It  is  not  distinctly  stated  that  the

patria  potestas  was  ever  granted  per  se.  But  it  was  a  fre-
quent accompaniment  of  a  grant  of  citizenship  to  a  man
and  his  children  ;  not,  however,  as  a  matter  of  course,
but  only  when  it  had  been  expressly  asked  for  and
expressly  granted,  G.  i,  93,  94,  ii,  135a,  iii,  20  ;  a  careful
inquiry  being  always  instituted  as  to  whether  it  was  for
the  advantage  of  the  children,  hitherto  sui  juris,  to  make
them  alieni  juris,  G.  i,  93.

III.  HOW  IT  WAS  PUT  AN  END  TO.

13.  Death  of  the  paterfamilias. — This  absolutely  relieved  from

the  potestas  a  son  or  daughter,  or  a  grandchild  whose
immediate  parent  was  dead  or  emancipated,  because  they
became  sui  juris  by  the  event,  G.  i,  127,  U.  x,  2  ;  but
as  regarded  those  whose  immediate  parent  was  alive  and
in  potentate,  they  were  not  relieved,  but  simply  passed
from  the  potestas  of  a  remoter  into  that  of  a  nearer
ascendant,  ibid.

14.  Emancipation. — See  Emancipation,  1.

15.  Adoption  and  adrogation. — If  the  paterfamilias  gave  his

child  in  adoption,  the  latter  passed  out  of  one  potestas
into  another,  G.  i,  99,  U.  viii,  1,  3  ;  while  the  same  result
followed  if  the  paterfamilias  gave  himself  in  adrogation,
for  his  adoption  carried  with  it  that  of  his  children  in
potestate,  G.  i,  107,  U.  viii,  8,  (see  Adoption,  2,  3).

16.  The  greater  capitis  deminutiones. — Emancipation,  adoption,

and  adrogation  all  involved  cap.  deminutio  minima  ;  the
potestas,  as  a  right  competent  only  to  a  citizen  over  a
citizen,  was  necessarily  ended  when  either  paterfamilias
or  filiusfamilias  underwent  one  of  the  greater  minutiones
by  losing  freedom  or  citizenship,  G.  i,  128,  131,  160,  U.
x,  3,  xi,  11,  12,  (see  Cap.  deminutio,  1).  But  where  either
was  taken  captive  by  an  enemy,  the  potestas  was  only
suspended,  and  revived  if  he  returned,  G.  i,  129,  U.  x,  4,
(see  Captivity  apud  hostes).

DIGEST.  563

PATKIA  POTESTAS-  continued.

III.  How  IT  WAS  PUT  AN  END  TO — continued.

17.  Other  ways. — A  filiusfamilias  became  sui  juris  without
capitis  deminutio  when  consecrated  a  priest  of  Jupiter,  and
a  filiafamilias  when  chosen  as  a  Vestal  virgin,  G.  i,  130,
iii,  114,  U.  x,  5.  Lastly,  a  woman  was  released  from  the
potestas  of  her  father  on  passing  in  manum  mariti  by
coemption,  G.  i,  136  ;  but  by  the  later  law  this  result  did
not  follow  manus  created  confarreatione,  ibid. ;  still  less
did  it  follow  marriage  without  manus,  U.  vi,  6,  (see
Manus,  1,  2,  4,  Husband  and  Wife,  3).

PATKONATE  was  the  relationship  that  existed  between  a  freedman,
libertus,  and  his  patronus,  i.e.  the  person  or  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  person  to  whom  he  belonged  before
manumission.

1.  Who  were  patrons. — In  the  case  of  a  freedman  who  became

a  citizen  on  manumission — and  to  become  so  he  required
to  have  been  manumitted  by  his  quiritarian  owner,  G.
i,  17,  U.  i,  16,  (see  Manumission,  2) — the  patronage,  with
its  attendant  rights,  belonged  in  all  cases  to  his  manu-
mitter,  and  passed  on  the  latter's  death  to  his  male
descendants,  even  though  not  his  heirs  but  disinherited
in  his  testament,  G.  i,  165,  iii,  48,  58.  When  the  freed-
man became  only  a  latin  on  manumission,  the  patronage,
so  far  as  its  rights  were  concerned,  might  be  split,  the
tutory  of  the  freedman  going  to  his  quiritarian  owner  at
the  time  of  manumission  and  the  latter's  male  descend-
ants as  above,  G.  i,  167,  U.  xi,  19,  but  his  estate  going  on
his  death,  if  he  died  a  latin,  to  his  manumitter  and  his
heirs,  whether  that  manumitter  had  been  his  quiritarian
or  merely  his  bonitarian  owner,  G.  iii,  58.  The  patronage
might  be  in  a  patroness  instead  of  a  patron,  though  she,
because  of  her  sex,  was  unable  to  exercise  some  of  its
rights,  e.g.  tutory,  G.  i,  195  ;  while  others,  e.g.  succession,
were  in  her  case  more  restricted  than  in  that  of  patrons,
G.  iii,  49,  52.  A  municipality  or  other  universitas  might
be  patron  of  its  freedmen,  U.  xxii,  5  ;  but  obviously  with
rights  considerably  restricted.

2.  The  patrons  rights.  —  A  patron  and    his   male  descend-

ants were  entitled  to  the  tutory  of  his  freedmen  under
puberty  and  freedwomen  of  any  age,  for  they  had  no
agnates  to  claim  it  (see  Agnation,  1)  as  in  the  case  of
persons  of  free  birth  ;  see  Tutory,  18,  19.  He  and  they
were  entitled  to  the  succession,  or  a  share  of  it,  of  a
citizen  freedman  dying  without  children  of  his  own,  (see
Succession  to  citizen  freedmen};  and  he  and  his  children

564  DIGEST.

PATEONATE — continued.

not  expressly  disinherited,  and  failing  them  his  stranger-
heirs,  took  the  estate  of  a  latin  freedman,  (see  Succession
to  Junian  latins).  If  his  freedman  was  withheld  from
him,  the  patron  had  an  exhibitory  interdict  (see  Inter-
dicts, No.  2)  for  his  production,  G.  iv,  162 ;  and  his
eventual  interest  in  his  freedman's  estate  entitled  him
under  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  to  ignore  any  manumission
by  him  by  which  he  was  defrauded,  G.  i,  37.

3.  The  freedman' s  obligations. — A  freedman,  if  a  citizen,  and

therefore  qualified  to  make  a  testament,  was  bound  to  pay
due  regard  in  it  to  the  rights  of  his  patron  ;  see  Succession
to  cit.  freedmen.  He  owed  his  patron  so  much  respect
that  he  was  forbidden  to  summon  him  in  a  litigation
without  leave  of  the  praetor,  and  if  he  did  was  liable  in
damages,  G.  iv,  46.  Finally,  he  was  bound  to  render  his
patron  certain  services,  some  of  which  it  was  the  custom
to  promise  under  oath,  G.  iii,  96a;  it  was  peculiar  to
these  last  that  the  patron  ceased  to  be  entitled  to  them
on  his  capitis  deminutio,  G.  iii,  83.

4.  How  the  relationship  was  ended. — It  is  not  said  that  the

relationship  came  to  an  end  by  capitis  deminutio  minima;
but  as  the  patron's  right  of  tutory  and  of  succession
ab  intcstato  were  legitima  jura,  they  necessarily  were
extinguished  by  cap.  dem.  of  either  party,  and  the
patronage  thus  shorn,  so  far  as  the  jus  civile  was  concerned,
of  some  of  its  most  important  prerogatives,  G.  iii,  51,  83,
U.  xi,  9.  Acquisition  of  citizenship  by  a  Junian  latin
(see  Junian  latinity,  7)  did  not  dissolve  the  relationship,
but  only  change  the  nature  of  it,  (above,  No.  1).  Yet
not  necessarily  ;  for  an  imperial  grant  might  be  salvo  jure
patroni,  G.  iii,  72,  which  reserved  to  the  patron  the  same
rights  of  succession  as  if  his  freedman  had  remained  a
latin  ;  and  if  given  without  such  reservation,  but  without
the  patron's  consent  or  knowledge,  the  result  was  the
same,  unless  the  citizen-latin  subsequently  confirmed  his
citizenship  by  causae  probatio  under  the  Aelia-Sentian  law
or  the  Set.,  (see  Ael.-Sentian  law,  6,  7),  G.  iii,  73.
PAYMENT  (including  therein  other  varieties  of  performance),  solutio,
the  commonest  mode  of  extinguishing  an  obligation,
G.  iii,  168  ;  partial  payment,  where  that  was  possible,
amounting  to  partial  extinction,  172.

1.  Was  it  payment  when  something  else  ivas  given  than  what  was
due  ? — Not  unless  with  the  creditor's  consent ;  and  even
then  it  was  a  point  of  controversy  between  the  schools
whether  the  debtor  was  ipso  jure  discharged  or  only  in  a

DIGEST.  565

PAYMENT— continued.

position  to  meet  any  further  claim  by  his  creditor  with  an
exceptio  doli,  G.  iii,  168.

2.  Did  payment  of  the  true  debt  always  imply  discharge  ? — It
did  not  if  it  was  to  another  party  than  the  creditor  or  his
representative,  G.  iii,  160,  although  excusable  error  some-
times introduced  an  exception  to  the  rule,  ibid.  Neither
did  it  if  it  was  to  a  pupil  without  his  tutor's  auctoritas
(see  Pupils),  G.  ii,  83,84;  the  money  paid  became  the
pupil's  property,  but  the  debtor  was  not  thereby  freed  ;
for  to  grant  a  discharge,  either  directly  or  by  implication,
was  to  part  with  an  item  of  his  estate,  which  it  was  not
in  the  power  of  a  pupil  to  do  without  his  tutor's  concur-
rence, ibid.  This  was  the  ipso  jure  state  of  matters  ;  but
if  the  pupil  was  the  richer  for  the  payment,  and  never-
theless claimed  it  a  second  time,  he  might  be  defeated
by  an  exceptio  doli  mali,  (see  Exception,  8),  G.  ii,  84.  A
\voman,  however,  effectually  discharged  her  debtor  by
accepting  actual  payment  from  him,  G.  ii,  85,  iii,  171  ;
because  she  was  entitled  to  alienate  her  res  nee  mancipi,
amongst  which  obligationary  claims  were  included,
without  her  tutor's  auctoritas,  G.  ii,  80,  85,  (see  Women,
4).  Payment  to  an  adstipulator  (see  Adstipuhttion]  was
as  effectual  as  to  the  principal  stipulant,  G.  iii,  111.

PECULIUM  was  a  fund  which  a  paterfamilias  entrusted  to  a  filius-
familias  or  slave,  and  of  which,  though  de  jure  it  still
belonged  to  the  granter,  they  had  had  the  administration
while  they  continued  to  possess  it,  G.  iv,  74a ;  Ulp.  says
that  a  public  slave  had  even  the  power  to  test  on  it  to
the  extent  of  a  half,  U.  xx,  16.  As  it  enabled  its  pos-
sessors to  obtain  credit  in  contracting,  the  praetors  held
it  reasonable  that  the  paterfamilias  should  be  responsible
to  the  extent  of  it  fur  their  contractual  debts,  G.  iv,
73-74a,  (see  Adjectician  actions,  3).  The  estate  of  a
Juniaii  latin  continued  by  the  Junian  law  to  be  a  quasi
peculium ;  and  on  the  latin's  death  belonged  in  that
character  to  his  manumitter  or  his  heirs,  G.  iii,  56,  (see
Succession  to  Junian  latins).

PECULIUM  CASTRENSE  was  the  separate  estate  amassed  by  &fiiius-
familias  while  on  military  service,  G.  ii,  106  and  n.  1.
He  had  greater  power  over  it  than  over  that  confided  to
him  by  his  father,  (and  which  was  often  called  profecti-
cium  to  distinguish  it  from  the  castrcnse)  ;  for  he  might
dispose  of  it  by  testament,  U.  xx,  10.  He  might  do  so
while  on  active  service  by  an  informal  testamentum  mili-
tare,  (see  Testament,  25) ;  but  if  he  did  so  per  aes  et

566  DIGEST.

PECULIUM  CASTRENSE — continued.

libram  after  his  discharge,  neither  his  paterfamilias  nor
any  one  in  the  latter's  potestas  could  assist  at  its  execu-
tion as  a  witness  or  otherwise,  G.  ii,  106.

PECUNIA  did  not  necessarily  mean  money,  G.  ii,  104  and  n.  4,  iii,
124.

PECUNIA  CKEDITA,  meaning  of,  G.  iii,  124.

PECUNIAE  NON  NUMERATAE,  EXCEPTIO,  G.  iv,  116  ;  see  Exception,  9.

PEGASUS  AND  Pusio,  consuls  in  reign  of  Vespasian,  authors  of  a
Set.  extending  the  benefit  of  causae  probatio  ex  lege  Aelia
Sentia  to  slaves  irregularly  manumitted  after  passing  the
age  of  thirty,  G.  i,  31 ;  see  Aelia-Scntian  law,  7.

PEREGRINITY,  the  condition  of  those  who,  being  free,  were  neither
citizens  nor  colonial  or  Junian  latins,  though  possibly
Roman  subjects,  G.  i,  193,  (where  the  Bithynians,  who
were  provincials,  are  expressly  spoken  of  as  peregrins).
This  seems  to  be  the  meaning  which  Gai.  usually  attaches
to  the  word  peregrini  ;  although  here  and  there  the  refer-
ence is  solely  to  independent  foreign  nations,  as  in  i,  79,
197  and  198,  iii,  94.

1.  What  meant  l>y  capacity  and  incapacity  of  peregrins. — As
the  law  of  Rome  was  a  compound  of  two  elements,  the
jus  civile  and  the  jus  gentium — that  quo  omnes  gentes
utuntur,  G.  i,  1,  so,  while  it  denied  participation  in  the
rights  and  institutions  of  the  jus  civile  to  any  but  citizens,
or  non-citizens  to  whom  it  had  specially  been  conceded,
it  freely  admitted  peregrins  to  participation  in  those  of
the  jus  gentium  ;  and  even  where  it  refused  to  recognise
participation  by  them  in  some  institution  of  the  jus  civile,
it  did  not  deny  the  possibility  of  their  having  kindred
and  corresponding  institutions  of  their  own.  Thus,  while
it  held  just  a  e  nuptiae  to  be  peculiar  to  citizens,  it  did
not  dispute  the  validity  of  marriage  of  peregrins  secundum
leges  moresque  peregrinorum,  G.  i,  92 ;  it  recognised
amongst  certain  peregrins  the  existence  of  institutions
that  closely  resembled  the  patria  potestas  and  the  tutela
mulierum  of  Rome,  G.  i,  155,  193 ;  and  while  it  declared
that  only  a  citizen  could  make  a  testament  according  to
Roman  solemnities  or  take  under  one,  it  yet  admitted
that  testamentary  disposition  was  a  practice  among  the
nations  generally,  G.  i,  189,  and  acknowledged  the  vali-
dity of  a  testament  made  by  a  peregrin  secundum  leges
civitatis  suae,  U.  xx,  14.  It  went  still  further ;  for  it
sustained  as  valid  between  peregrins  transactions  to
which  there  was  nothing  that  corresponded  between
citizens,  such  as  the  literal  obligations  by  chirographa

DIGEST.  567

PEREGEINITY— continued.

and  syngraphae,  G.  iii,  134 ;  and  sometimes  adopted  the
peregrin  rule  as  to  the  consequences  of  &  juris  gentium
contract  when  it  was  not  a  citizen  but  a  peregrin  that
had  thereby  become  bound,  G.  iii,  120.

2.  Their  capacity  in  matter  of  marriage. — They  had  no  conu-

lium  with  citizens  unless  by  special  concession,  G.  i,  56,
U.  v,  4.  A  peregrin  woman  marrying  a  citizen  with
whom  she  had  conubium  contracted  justae  nuptiae,  ibid.,
G.  i,  76 ;  but  a  peregrin  man  marrying  a  citizen  woman
under  the  same  condition  did  not, — his  marriage  was  as
much  a  peregrin  marriage  as  if  he  had  married  a  peregrin,
G.  i,  77.  If  without  conubium  a  citizen  married  a  pere-
grin wife,  the  issue  followed  the  condition  of  their
mother,  G.  i,  67,  (see  Status,  2)  ;  if,  also  without  comibium,
a  peregrin  married  a  citizen  wife,  then,  by  the  Minician
law,  though  contrary  to  the  rule  of  the  jus  gentium,  the
issue  followed  not  their  mother  but  their  father,  G.  i,  78  ;
but  if  in  either  case  there  had  been  on  either  side  a
mistaken  belief  of  the  existence  of  comibium,  the  defects
of  the  marriage  might  be  cured  by  erroris  causae  probatio,
G.  i,  75,  (see  below,  No.  8).

3.  Their  capacity  in  the  other  domestic  relations. — A  peregrin

had  no  potestas  over  his  children  in  the  Roman  sense  of
the  word,  G.  i,  55,  189  :  but  he  might  appoint  tutors  to
them,  for  such  guardianship  was/Mm  naturalis,  G.  i,  89  ;
though  whether  the  Eoman  rules  as  to  auctoritas,  etc.,
applied  to  them  may  be  doubted.  He  might  own  slaves,
G.  i,  52,  and  enfranchise  them,  (of  course  in  so  doing
making  them  only  peregrins  like  himself),  G.  i,  47 ;  but,
as  regarded  their  manumission,  he  was  not  subject  to  the
rules  of  the  Aelia-Sentian  law,  except  the  one  prohibition
of  manumission  in  fraud  of  creditors,  which  was  extended
by  senatusconsult  to  provincial  peregrins,  ibid.

4.  Their  capacity  in  matter  of  property. — They  could  hold  in

property  both  res  mancipi  and  res  nee  mancipi  (which
see),  for  they  could  own  slaves,  which  were  of  the  former
class,  G.  i,  47,  52,  U.  xix,  1 ;  but  could  not  grant  or  take
a  conveyance  of  them  by  civil  modes  unless  they  had
had  a  concession  of  commercium,  U.  xix,  4.  In  that  case
they  could  convey  or  take  by  mancipation  (which  see),
ibid. ;  and  probably  injure  cessio  and  usucapion  (see  those
words)  were  equally  competent  to  them.  But  transfer
of  a  res  mancipi  to  a  citizen  by  a  peregrin  who  had  no
commercium,  though  it  was  only  by  tradition,  gave  the
transferee  full  quiritarian  right,  U.  i,  16,  note  2,  whereas

568  DIGEST.

PEREGEINITY — continued.

between  citizens  it  would  have  made  him  only  bonitarian
owner  (see  Bon.  ownership,  2),  G.  ii,  41,  U.  i,  16.

5.  Their  capacity  in  matter  of  succession. — They  might  make

testaments  according  to  their  own  law,  U.  xx,  14;  but
not  in  the  manner  prescribed  for  citizens,  ibid.  As  they
had  no  testamenti  factio  with  citizens,  G.  ii,  218,  U.  xxii,
2,  they  could  neither  be  instituted  heirs  in  a  citizen's
testament,  G.  ii,  110,  U.  xxii,  2,  nor  appointed  legatees,
G.  ii,  218 ;  and  although  at  one  time  they  \vere  allowed
to  take  fide icommissa,  yet  by  a  Set.  of  Hadrian's  this  also
was  prohibited,  and  such  trust-gifts  confiscated,  G.  ii,  285.
As  regards  intestate  succession,  the  Eoman  rules  could
not  apply  to  them,  for  their  foundation  was  in  the  patriot,
potestas  of  the  jus  civile,  and  this  peregrins  did  not  possess  ;
above,  No.  2.

6.  Their  capacity  in  matter  of  obligations. — Most  contracts  being

juris  gentium  they  took  part  in  them  as  freely  and  fully
as  citizens, — real  contracts,  G.  iii,  132 ;  verbal  ones,  G.
iii,  93,  except  when  the  word  spondeo\?Q£  used,  ibid. ;  and
consensual  ones,  G.  iii,  154.  Even  the  literal  one  by
transscriptio  a  re  in  personam  was  competent  to  them
according  to  the  Sabinian  view,  G.  iii,  133 ;  for  it  was
but  a  novation  of  a  prior  juris  gentium  obligation  (see
Literal  obligations,  1),  and  a  peregrin  might  novate,  G.
iii,  179.  They  could  not  be  parties  to  a  transscriptio  a
persona  in  personam,  for  that  was  a  purely  civil  negotium,
G.  iii,  133 ;  but  on  the  other  hand  they  were  bound  by
chirographa  and  syngraphae,  which  were  peculiar  to  them-
selves, 134.  They  were  responsible  and  entitled  to  re-
dress for  delicts  as  much  as  were  citizens,  G.  iv,  37 ;  the
only  obstacle  arose  when  the  penalties  had  been  imposed
by  a  statute  in  terms  applicable  only  to  citizens ;  how  it
was  got  over,  see  ibid,  and  below,  No.  7.

7.  Their  capacity  in  litigation. — That  peregrins  could  litigate

before  Eoman  magistrates,  even  in  matters  arising  inter  sc,
and  that  had  to  be  settled  by  reference  to  the  jus  gentium
or  their  own  peculiar  law,  is  manifest ;  for  the  peregrine
praetorship  was  instituted  on  their  behalf,  G.  i,  6  and  n.
2,  and  the  governors  in  the  provinces  had  the  same  juris-
diction, G.  i,  6.  The  judicia  in  which  they  were  parties
were  necessarily  imperio  continentia,  (see  Jud.  Icgitirna
etc.,  2),  G.  iv,  105,  109 ;  and  they  might  themselves  act
as  indices  or  recuperators,  ibid.  There  must  occasionally
have  been  peculiarities  in  the  formulae  of  their  actions  ;
but  the  only  case  referred  to  is  that  of  a  peregrin  suing

DIGEST.  569

PEREGEINITY — continued.

or  being  sued  on  a  statute  which  in  terminis  applied  only
to  citizens,  and  then  it  was  adapted  to  him  by  interpola-
tion of  a  fiction  of  citizenship,  G.  iv,  37,  (see  fiction,  3).

8.  How  they  acquired  citizenship. — When  a  peregrin  man  had

married  a  citizen  woman,  or  a  citizen  man  had  married  a
peregrin  woman,  under  the  mistaken  belief  that  they  had
conubium,  either  of  them  who  had  laboured  under  the  mis-
take was  entitled,  on  the  birth  of  a  child, — for  the  remedy
was  intended  primarily  to  create  potestas, — to  prove  cause
of  error  ;  one  of  the  results  being  that  the  peregrin  parent
thereby  became  a  citizen,  G.  i,  67-71,  74,  (see  Erroris
causae  probatio).  The  commonest  mode  of  acquiring  it
was  imperial  grant  on  the  peregrin's  petition,  G.  i,  93,  94,
ii,  135a,  iii,  20  ;  but  it  did  not  carry  potestas  over  children
already  born  or  in  utero,  unless  applied  for  and  expressly
conceded,  (see  Patria  potestas,  12),  ibid.  It  might  also
be  acquired  by /MS  Latii  (see  Colonial  latinity,  2),  when
the  peregrin  belonged  to  a  state  to  which  that  right  had
been  granted,  (in  which  case  he  was  truly  a  colonial
latin),  G.  i,  95  and  96,  and  note.

9.  How  a  citizen  'became  a  peregrin. — The  only  cause  referred

to  in  the  texts  is  aqua  et  igni  interdictio  (which  see),  G.  i,

128  and  n.  2,  161,  U.  x,  3,  xi,  12.

PEREMPTORY  EXCEPTIONS,  G.  iv,  121  ;  see  Exception,  5,  8,  9.
PERFECTA  LEX,  a  law  that  annulled  an  act  done  in  contravention  of

it,  U.  i,  1,  note.

PERHIBERE  TESTIMONIUM,  G.  ii,  104  and  note  7.
PERMUTATIO,  barter  or  exchange,  G.  iii,  141 ;  see  Sale,  2.
PERSONS  form  the  subject-matter  of  Gaius'  first  book,  and  are  thus

classified : —

1.  Freemen  and  slaves. — This  is  Gains'  first  classification  of

persons,  G.  i,  9 ;  see  Freedom,  Slavery.  Freemen  might
be  either  ingenui,  i.e.  of  free  birth,  or  libertini,  i.e.  free  by
enfranchisement  (see  Manumission},  10,  11.  The  latter
again  might  be  either  citizens,  Junian  latins,  or  ranked
with  dediticians,  12 ;  see  Citizenship,  Junian  latinity,
Deditician  freedmen.

2.  Citizens  and  peregrins. — The  latter  class  included  not  only

foreigners,  i.e.  subjects  of  other  states,  G.  i,  197,  iii,  94,
but  also  provincial  non-citizen  subjects  of  Piome,  G.  i,
193,  and  even  Romans  who  had  forfeited  citizenship
while  retaining  freedom,  G.  i,  128,  U.  x,  3 ;  see  Citizen-
ship, Peregrinity.

3.  Persons  sui  and  alieni  juris. — Sui  juris,  not  subject  to  any

family  head,  were  paterfamilias  and  materfamilias,  U.  iv,

570  DIGEST.

PERSONS — continued.

1  and  note.  Alieni  juris  or  domestically  dependent,  G.
i,  48,  were  slaves  in  dominica  potestate  (see  Slavery},
children  in  patria  potestate  (see  Pat.  potestas),  women  in
manu  (see  Manus),  and  free  persons  in  causa  mancipii
(see  Mancipii  etc},  G.  i,  49,  52,  55,  109  f.,  116  f.  As
regards  the  capacities  and  incapacities  of  the  latter  class,
see  Alieni  juris  personae,  2-4.

4.  Persons  under  guardians. — Of  persons  sui  juris  pupils  and

in  most  cases  women  were  under  tutory ;  lunatics  and
prodigals,  and  in  many  cases  minors,  were  in  curatory,  G.
i,  142  f. ;  see  Tutory,  Curatory.

5.  Persons  unborn. — For  some  purposes  a  child  in  utero  was

regarded  as  already  born,  G.  i,  147  ;  see  Postumi.

6.  Persons  in  fact  and  persons  by  fiction  of  law  (natural  and

jurat  persons). — Personality  was  occasionally  attributed
to  other  entities  than  men ;  for  universitates,  such  as
civitates  and  municipia,  could  hold  property,  G.  ii,  11,
and  might  in  some  cases  be  instituted  as  heirs,  TJ.  xxii,
5,  and  take  legacies  and  trust-gifts,  U.  xxiv,  28 ;  the  fisc
claimed  caducous  inheritances  and  bequests,  U.  xvii,  2 ;
and  certain  divinities  might  be  made  heirs  under  a  testa-
ment, U.  xxii,  6.
PERSONAL  INJURY,  injuria,  G.  iii,  220-225  ;  see  also  Delict.

1.  Its  nature. — It  included  all  varieties  of  assault  and  insult

by  act,  speech,  or  writing,  G.  iii,  220.  It  might  be  offered
to  a  man  not  only  in  his  own  person  but  also  in  that  of
free  members  of  his  family,  entitling  him  in  the  latter
case  to  redress  both  in  their  names  and  his  own,  221.
He  might  even  suffer  it  through  his  slave,  where  some-
thing very  atrocious  was  done  to  the  latter,  obviously
meant  in  disrespect  to  his  owner,  222 ;  but  a  slave  was
never  himself  held  to  have  suffered  it,  ibid.  A  free
person  in  mancipio  might  suffer  it  at  the  hands  of  the
party  to  whose  jus  he  was  subject,  G.  i,  141.

2.  Its  penalties. — Under  the  Twelve  Tables  there  was  a  sliding

scale  of  punishments,  from  talion  down  to  a  trifling  fine,
G.  iii,  223 ;  but  the  praetor  authorised  the  sufferer —
though  not  his  heir,  the  wrong  being  so  highly  personal,
G.  iv,  112 — to  claim  damages  in  an  actio  injuriarum,  G.
iii,  224.  In  the  ordinary  case  the  judge  might  at  his
discretion  assess  them  at  any  figure  within  the  sum
claimed,  ibid.  ;  but  in  cases  of  atrox  injuria,  225,  the
praetor  taxed  the  amount  in  the  formula  (see  Con-
demnatio,  2),  and  then  the  judge  rarely  went  below  it,
224.

DIGEST.  5  VI

PICTUEA,  acquisition  of  property  by,  and  respective  rights  of  the
artist  and  of  the  owner  of  the  panuel  painted  on,  G.  ii,
78  ;  see  Property,  6.

PIGNOEIS  CAPIO,  one  of  the  legis  actiones,  G.  iv,  26-29,  31,  32  ;  see
Legis  actiones,  6.

PIGNUS,  pawn  or  pledge,  was  a  contract  between  creditor  and
debtor,  created  by  delivery  of  some  article  by  the  latter
to  the  former  in  security  of  a  debt,  and  therefore  com-
pleted re,  (see  Real  obligations)  ;  but  it  is  not  mentioned
by  Gai.  in  describing  the  real  contract,  G.  iii,  90  and
91,  note,  and  in  fact  was  not  yet  much  developed  in  his
time,  fiducia.  (which  see,  No.  2)  being  still  used  for
creation  of  a  real  security,  G.  ii,  60.  The  creditor  hold-
ing a  pignus  was  responsible  to  the  debtor  for  its  safe
custody,  G.  iii,  203,  204  ;  but  the  latter  was  not  entitled
to  take  it  away  from  the  former,  and,  if  he  did  so  sur-
reptitiously, was  held  guilty  of  theft,  200.  The  creditor's
right  to  sell  it  is  attributed  by  Gai.  to  agreement  to  that
effect  with  the  debtor,  G.  ii,  64.  The  contract  gave  rise
to  the  actio  pigneraticia ,  which  was  bonaefidei,  G.  iv,  62.

PISTKINI  EXEECITIO,  flour-milling,  was  one  of  the  modes  whereby  a  latin
attained  citizenship,  G.i,  34,  U.  iii,l ;  see  Junianlatinity,!.

PLANTATIO,  acquisition  of  property  by,  and  remedies  of  parties,  G.
i,  74,  76 ;  see  Property,  6.

PLEBISCITUM,  G.  i,  3,  and  n.  2 ;  see  Statute,  1.

PLEBS  defined,  G.  i,  3.

PLEDGE,  see  Pignus.

PLENUM  DOMINIUM,  plenum  jus  dominii,  ownership  of  a  thing  both
in  quiritarian  and  bonitarian  right,  G.  ii,  41,  iii,  80 ;  see
Property,  1.

PLUS  and  MINUS  in  obligations  depended  on  time  or  condition  as
well  as  quantity,  G.  iii,  113.

PLUS  PETITIO,  excessive  claim  by  a  party  in  the  intentio  of  a  cert  a
formula,  G.  iv,  53,  (see  Intentio,  3) ;  it  was  impossible  in  one

t  that  was  incerta,  54.  There  might  be  over-claim  either  in

respect  of  amount,  time,  place,  or  circumstances,  as  illus-
trated in  53  ;  and  the  result  was  that  the  pursuer  altogether
lost  his  cause,  53,  fresh  action  being  excluded,  G.  iii,  181.

POENA  SACEAMENTI,  G.  iv,  14,  95 ;  see  Legis  actiones,  2.

POENAE  CAUSA  INSTITUTIO,  institution  of  an  heir  to  a  share  of  an
inheritance,  not  out  of  regard  for  him,  but  as  a  means  of
coercing  his  co-heir  to  follow  a  particular  line  of  conduct ;
such  an  institution  was  useless,  G.  ii,  243,  (see  Test  am  ( ///,
9).  A  legacy  or  trust-gift  poenae  causa  relictum  was  also
ineffectual,  G.ii,235,288,U.xxiv,  I7,xxv,13,  (aeeLegacy,9,
Fideicommissum,  5).

572  DIGEST.

FONTIFICES,  their  interpretatio,  G.  ii,  42,  note  ;  their  early  functions
as  judges,  G-.  iv,  13,  note  6  ;  how  their  office  was  connected
with  pons,  ibid.

POPULTJS  defined,  G.  i,  3.

POSSESSION  could  not  be  acquired  solo  animo,  G.  iv,  153.  But  the
acquisitive  act  did  not  require  to  be  done  in  propria
persona  by  the  party  thereby  becoming  possessor ;  it
might  be  that  of  one  of  his  slaves,  of  a  filiusfamilias,
or  of  a  freeman  or  servus  alienus  bona  fide  possessed  by
him,  G.  ii,  89,  94.  While  it  was  admitted  that  possession
might  be  acquired  for  a  man  by  his  wife  in  manu,  a  free
person  in  his  mancipium,  or  a  slave  of  whom  he  had  the
usufruct,  if  property  was  acquired  along  with  it,  G.  ii,
86,  87,  yet  it  was  a  question  whether  possession  by
itself  could  be  acquired  or  held  by  them  for  him  to  whom
they  were  subject,  for  the  reason  that  they  themselves
were  not  in  his  possession,  G.  ii,  90,  94.  It  might  be
retained  for  a  man  through  a  usufructuary,  tenant,
depositary,  borrower,  or  other  party  holding  in  his  name,
G.  iv,  153,  and  in  some  cases  even  by  a  mere  effort  of
will,  ibid.  It  was  said  to  be  pro  he-rede  when  a  man
possessed  a  thing  as  and  in  the  belief  that  he  was  heir,
pro  possessore  when  he  did  not  impute  his  possession  to
any  title,  and  knew  he  had  no  right  to  it,  G.  iv,  144.  For
the  nature  and  effects  of  bonaefideipossessio,  see  that  head  ;
for  possession  in  reference  to  usucapion,  see  Usucapion ;
and  for  the  possessory  remedies,  see  Interdicts,  5-9.

POSSESSORUM  INTERDICTUM,  G.  iv,  145  ;  see  Interdicts,  5.

POSTLIMINIUM,  see  Jus  postliminii.

POSTULATIO  JUDICIS,  one  of  the  legis  actiones,  G.  iv,  12,  17«,  note,
20  ;  see  Legis  actiones,  3.

POSTUMI,  in  reference  to  a  testament,  meant  persons  born  after  its
execution ;  in  reference  to  intestacy,  persons  born  after
the  death  of  the  intestate.

1.  Postumi  sui  of  a  testator. — A  man  might  institute  a  child  un-

born as  his  heir  or  appoint  tutors  to  him,  whether  in  utero
or  not,  provided  such  child,  if  born  during  his  lifetime,
would  be  in  \\ispotestas,  G.  i,  147,  ii,  130,  U.  xxii,  15,  19.
Not  only  might  he  institute  such  a  postumus, — he  was
required  either  to  institute  or  disinherit  him  if  he  wished
to  secure  the  validity  of  his  testament,  (see  Testament,  10),
G.  ii,  130,  U.  xxii,  14,  15  ;  for  agnatio  postumi  praeteriti
of  either  sex,  provided  it  was  born  alive,  caused  ruptio,  G.
ii,  131,  U.  xxii,  18,  (see  Testament,  22).

2.  Postumi  sui  of  an  intestate. — A  child  born  after  his  father's

death,  who  M7ould  have  been  in  his  potestas  if  born  during

DIGEST.  573

POSTUMI — continued.

his  life,  took  ah  intestato  as  one  of  the  siti  heredes,  G.  iii,  4,
the  agnates  being  inadmissible  so  long  as  the  child  was
in  utero,  U.  xxvi,  3  ;  see  Intestate  succession,  3,  4.
3.  Postumi  alien!  (or  extranet). — Under  this  epithet  were
included  not  only  children  born  to  a  third  party  after  the
execution  of  a  testament  or  the  death  of  an  intestate,  but
even  the  testator's  or  intestate's  own  children  born  after
such  events  respectively,  if  they  could  not  fall  within
the  number  of  the  sui  heredes,  G.  ii,  241  ;  e.g.  a  grandchild
through  an  emancipated  son,  or  a  son  or  daughter  by  a
wife  whom  the  law  did  not  recognise  as  justa  uxor  (see
Marriage,  1),  ibid.  Such  fwstumi  were  regarded  as  in-
certae  personae,  and  could  neither  be  instituted  heirs  in  a
testament  nor  have  legacies  or  trust-gifts  left  them,  G.  i,
147,  ii,  241,  242,  287.

POTESTAS  DOMINICA,  see  Slavery.

POTESTAS  PATius  FAMILIAS,  see  Patrio,  potestas.

PEAECEPTIONEM,  LEGATUM  PEE,  see  Legacy,  28,  29,  33,  34.

PKAEDIA,  in  its  original  meaning,  lands  mortgaged  to  the  state  by
parties  contracting  with  it,  in  security  of  their  engage-
ments, G.  ii,  61  ;  in  its  later  meaning,  lands  generally,  G.
ii,  71,  72,  iii,  145,  etc.

PKAEDIATOK,  PRAEDIATUEA,  G.  ii,  61.

PEAEJUDICIUM,  G.  iv,  44 ;  see  Actions,  4.

PEAES,  an  early  name  for  a  surety,  G.  iv,  13,  16,  91,  94.

PEAESCEIPTIO,  a  clause  prefixed  to  a  formula  (which  see),  G.  iv,
132,  either  («)  to  reserve  a  right  of  action  to  the  pursuer
which  would  have  been  lost  by  consumptio  actionis
(which  see)  if  the  formula  had  been  unrestricted,  131,
131a,  the  same  purpose  being  attained  in  formulae  con-
taining a  demonstratio  (which  see)  by  limitative  words  in
that  clause,  136  ;  or  (&)  to  explain  certain  matters  of
fact  necessary  to  qualify  the  technical  meaning  of  the
words  of  tlieintentio  (which  see),  134,  135,  137.  A  third
class  of  prescriptions,  prefixed  for  the  sake  of  defenders,
had  given  place,  before  the  time  of  Gai.,  to  exceptions,  133.

PEAESTAEE,  meaning,  G.  iv,  2,  note  3.

PEAETEEITION  in  testaments,  omission  to  mention  a  person  that
the  law  required  should  be  instituted  or  disinherited ;  see
Testament,  10.

PEAETOE,  the, — his  office  and  influence.

1.  The  Praetors  office.  —  The  office  of  the  praetor  urbanus
was  established  by  or  as  an  immediate  consequence  of
the  Licinian  laws  of  387  |  367,  which  opened  the  con-
sulate to  the  plebeians ;  his  prescribed  duty  being  to

57-4  DIGEST.

PKAETOR — continued.

administer  justice  to  the  citizens,  G.  i,  6  and  n.  1.  About
507  |  247,  or  a  year  or  two  later,  a  second  praetor  was
appointed  to  administer  justice  to  non-citizens,  and  be-
tween citizens  and  non-citizens,  who  got  the  name  of
praetor  peregrinus,  G.  i,  6  and  n.  2.  They  possessed,
so  far  as  necessary  for  the  execution  of  their  office,  the
same  imperium  or  power  of  issuing  and  enforcing  com-
mands that  had  been  exercised  by  the  kings  and  was
still  exercised  by  the  consuls,  G.  i,  98,  190,  iv,  105,
etc.  ;  two  of  its  most  important  elements  being  thejuris-
dictio,  G.  iv,  110,  and  the  jus  edicendi,  G.  i,  6.  The
number  of  praetors  was  afterwards  increased,  in  order
that  some  might  be  sent  into  the  provinces  and  others
exercise  jurisdiction  in  particular  matters;  but  the  only
one  specially  referred  to  in  the  texts  is  the  praetor  fidei-
commissarius,  to  whom  all  questions  relating  to  testa-
mentary trusts  were  remitted,  G.  ii,  278  and  note,  U.  xxv,
12.  In  the  time  of  Gains  the  governors  exercised  in  the
provinces  the  same  jurisdiction  as  did  the  urban  and
peregrin  praetors  in  Rome,  G.  i,  6.

2.  The  praetor  s  edicts. — These  were  the  rules  which,  usually

on  entering  on  office,  they  announced  their  intention  to
give  effect  to  during  their  year's  tenure  of  it ;  they  were
afterwards  consolidated  by  Salv.  Julianus  in  the  reign  of
Hadrian,  and  embodied  in  a  Set,  G.  iv,  104,  note  1.
This  consolidation,  except  in  G.  i,  6  (where  the  plural  is
used),  is  what  Gai.  and  Ulp.  commonly  refer  to  under
the  singular  edictum,  G.  ii,  253,  iii,  82,  etc.,  U.  xxviii,
4,  xxix,  1,  etc. :  it  seems  to  have  been  systematically
arranged,  and  divided  into  titles,  G.  iv,  46.  The  aim  of
the  praetors  was  to  expedite,  supplement,  or  correct  the
jus  civile  as  general  utility  required,  G.  iv,  30,  note  1,
setting  themselves  to  provide  remedies  for  its  iniquitdtes,
i.e.  the  points  in  which  it  was  inconsistent  with  natural
equity,  G.  iii,  25,  41.

3.  Examples  of  the  praetors  intervention. — (a)  In  the  law  of

persons  : — maintaining  in  a  state  of  de facto  freedom  slaves
that,  because  of  the  informality,  etc.,  of  their  manumis-
sion, were  still  de  jure  slaves, — afterwards  rendered  un-
necessary by  the  Junian  law,  see  Junian  latinity,  1  ;
giving  minors  the  benefit  of  in  integrum  restitutio,  which
see  ;  compelling  tutors  in  certain  cases  to  grant  auctoritas
to  acts  of  their  female  wards  of  full  age,  see  Tutory,  23.
(6)  In  that  of  property: — recognition  of  bonitarian
ownership  (which  see)  and  bonae  fidei  possessio  (which

DIGEST.  575

PRAETOR — continued.

also  see)  as  independent  rights  tuitione  praetoris  ;  pro-
tection of  possession  by  the  possessory  interdicts,  see
Interdicts,  5-9.  (c)  In  that  of  succession  : — remodelling
the  systems  of  both  testate  and  intestate  succession  by
introduction  of  bonorum  possessio,  which  see ;  granting  to
sui  Jieredes  power  to  hold  aloof  from  their  parent's  suc-
cession when  it  was  likely  to  be  damnosa,  see  Abstinendi
potestas.  (d)  In  that  of  obligations  : — giving  creditors  a
claim  against  a  paterfamilias  in  respect  of  the  contractual
debts  of  his  filiusfamilias  or  slave,  see  Adfcctician
actions;  rendering  innocuous  the  rule  of  the  jus  civile
that  a  creditor's  claim  was  extinguished  by  his  debtor's
capitis  deminutio,  see  Fiction,  3  ;  putting  creditors  in
possession  of  the  estate  of  a  bankrupt  debtor,  with  power
of  sale,  see  Emptio  bonorum.

4.  Praetorian  remedies. — It  was  in  most  cases  by  granting
new  remedies  that  the  praetors  accomplished  the  objects
enumerated  in  No.  3.  It  may  be  added  generally  that
it  was  they  who  worked  out  the  formular  system,  see
Procedure  ;  that  they  sanctioned  agency,  see  Procuratory
in  litigation;  that  they  introduced  many  new  direct
actions,  G.  iv,  11,  of  which  it  was  a  peculiarity  that  they
were  not  granted  beyond  a  year  from  the  date  of  the
occurrence  to  which  they  referred,  unless  they  were
imitations  of  statutory  ones,  G.  iv,  110,  111  ;  that  they
invented  the  utiles  actiones  and  actiones  in  factum,  see
Actions,  6  ;  that  it  was  they  who  introduced  equitable
exceptions,  which  see ;  and  that  by  praetorian  stipula-
tions, of  which  there  is  an  example  in  G.  iv,  31,  they
endeavoured  to  guard  against  future  damage  by  antici-
patory securities.

PRECARIUM,  a  grant  during  the  pleasure  of  the  granter,  on  the
solicitation  of  the  grantee,  G.  ii,  60  ;  db  adversaria  pre-
cario  possidere  was  to  retain  possession  notwithstanding
recal  of  such  a  grant,  G.  iv,  150,  etc.

PRINCIPAL  AND  ACCESSORY. — As  regards  accessions  to  property,  see
Property,  Nos.  4,  6.  An  accessory  obligation  could  never
cover  more  than  the  principal  one,  G.  iii,  126.  Hi  quod
nullum  cst  nihil  accedere  potest,  G.  iv,  151.

PROCEDURE  IN  LITIGATION.

1.  Procedure  ly  the  legis  actiones. — Gains'  account  of  it  is

defective  ;  for  the  nature  of  it  generally,  and  the  causes
of  its  falling  into  disrepute,  see  Legis  actiones.

2.  Transition  to  the  formular  system. — Litigation  per  formulas

was  introduced  by  the  Aebutian   law  about  507  |  247,

576  DIGEST.

PROCEDURE  IN  LITIGATION — continued.

and  made  the  ordinary  procedure  by  the  Julian  judiciary
laws,  G.  iv,  30  and  notes.  The  in  rem  actio  per  sponsionem
seems  to  mark  the  transition  stage;  for  though  &  formula
was  adjusted  the  sponsio  was  almost  a  reproduction  of  the
sacramentum,  G.  iv,  93,  94.

3.  Bringing  a  defender  into  court. — See  In  jus  vocatio.

4.  Contumacious  failure  to  appear. — When  a  debtor  fraudu-

lently kept  out  of  the  way,  so  as  to  render  summons
impossible,  and  no  one  appeared  to  defend  him  in  his
absence,  his  creditor  was  entitled  to  be  put  into  possession
of  his  estate  and  bring  it  to  sale,  the  debtor  in  such  a  case
being  dealt  with  as  a  bankrupt,  G.  iii,  78  ;  see  Emptio
bonorum,  Bankruptcy.

5.  Agency. — This  was  only  exceptionally  allowed  in  procedure

per  legis  actiones,  but  was  general  under  the  formular
system  ;  see  Procuratory  in  litigation.

6.  Securities  required  from  the  parties. — See  Cautiones  in  judi-

cial procedure.

7.  Checks  on  reckless  or  vexatious  action  or  defence. — See  Vexatious

litigation.

8.  Adjustment  of  the  formula  or  issue. — This  was  the  charac-

teristic feature  of  the  system, — an  issue  prepared  by  the
magistrate,  after  hearing  the  parties  informally,  and
being  satisfied  that  there  was  a  relevant  case ;  it  was
sent  down  by  him  in  writing  to  the  judge  (judcx}  or
recuperators  who  were  to  try  the  cause,  and  contained
authority  to  them  to  condemn  or  absolve,  G.  iv,  31,  34,  43,
105  and  note ;  see  Formula.  It  was  necessary  in  a  few
cases  to  embody  in  it  a  reference  to  an  old  legis  actio,  but
in  the  vast  majority  this  was  not  required,  G.  iv,  32,  33.
For  its  ordinary  clauses,  see  Formula,  1.  By  means  of
interjected  fictions  of  citizenship,  heirship,  usucapion,  etc.,
the  magistrate  often  adapted  those  formulae  to  the  case
of  persons  who  otherwise  would  have  been  without  a
remedy,  G.  iv,  34-38,  (see  Fiction} ;  by  incorporated
exceptions  he  brought  under  the  notice  of  the  judge
matters  of  defence,  statutory  or  equitable,  which  he  would
have  to  investigate,  G.  iv,  115-119,  (see  Exception]  ;
while  by  prefixed  prescriptions  he  reserved  to  the  pursuer
future  rights  of  action  of  which  judgment  on  an  un-
restricted formula  would  have  deprived  him,  G.  iv,  130-
132,  or  made  explanations  of  importance  from  other
points  of  view,  133-137,  (see  Praescriptio}.

9.  Litiscontestation.  —  With  adjustment  of  the  formula,  which

ended  the  procedure  in  jure,  there  was  litis  contestatio,

DIGEST.  577

PROCEDURE  IN  LITIGATION — continued.

judicium  acceptum,  res  in  judicium  deducta,  G.  iii,  180,
181,  iv,  114,  131  ;  and  with  it  a  material  change  was
operated  on  the  position  of  parties,  varying  according  as
the  judicium  accepted  was  legitimum  or  imperio  continens,
G.  iii,  180,  181,  iv,  103-109,  (seeLitis  contcstatio,  Judicia
legitima  etc.}

10.  Duty  of  the  judge. — In  most  formulae  the  judge  (judex)  was

instructed  to  condemn  or  absolve  in  accordance  with  the
evidence,  G.  iv,  43,  etc. ;  where  restitution  of  a  thing  was
claimed  he  was  not  to  condemn  until  he  had  made  an
order  to  restore  and  this  had  been  disobeyed,  G.  iv,  162,
163  ;  in  some  he  was  authorised  to  divide  property  and
adjudicate  shares  to  the  parties,  G.  iv,  42 ;  in  a  few  he
was  merely  to  pronounce  a  finding,  44.  In  bonae  fidei
judicia  (which  see)  his  office  was  more  than  usually  free,
liberum  est  officium,  G.  iv,  114 :  it  was  his  duty  to  allow
set-off  of  compensatory  claims  arising  out  of  the  same
matter,  G.  iv,  61,  63,  65-68,  (see  Compensation)  ;  and  he
was  bound  to  acquit  if  the  pursuer's  demand  was  satisfied
after  issue  joined, — a  principle  which  the  Sabinians  held
should  be  extended  even  to  judicia  stricti  juris,  G.  iv,
114.  In  condemning,  which  he  was  obliged  to  do  in
money,  G.  iv,  48,  his  award  required  to  be  definite,  52.
If  the  condemnatio  (which  see)  of  the  formula  was  certa
he  could  condemn  in  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  sum
named  in  it  without  rendering  himself  liable  in  damages
to  the  pursuer,  ibid.  ;  for  the  latter  gained  nothing  by  a
judgment  in  excess  of  the  judge's  authority,  and  could
not  sue  afresh  because  his  claim  had  been  extinguished
novatione  by  the  litiscontestation,  ibid.,  note  2,  iii,  181.
Where  the  condemnatio  was  taxed  he  incurred  the  same
penalty  if  he  exceeded  the  maximum,  G.  iv,  52  ;  where  it
was  indefinite  it  was  for  him  to  fix  the  amount,  51.

11.  Ees  judicata.  —  Judgment   entitled   the   party   in   whose

favour  it  had  been  pronounced  to  an  exceptio  rei  judicatae
to  any  new  action  in  which  his  adversary  attempted  to
reopen  the  same  question,  G.  iv,  121.

12.  Execution. — See  Judicatum.

13.  Extraordinariae  cogiiitiones. — There  were  a  few  cases  in

which  the  procedure  was  not  by  formula  and  remit  to  a
judex,  but  extra  ordinem, — from  first  to  last  before  the
magistrate  ;  we  have  an  illustration  in  actions  uponfidei-
commissa,  G.  ii,  278  and  note,  U.  xxv,  12.

14.  In  integrum  restitutiones,  interdicts,  etc. — See  those  words.
PROCINCTUS,  G.  ii,  101,  U.  xx,  2 ;  see  Testament,  2.

2o

578  DIGEST.

PROCULIANS,  see  Sabinians  and  Proculians.

PROCULUS,  a  jurist  of  distinction  in  the  reigns  of  Claudius  and
Nero,  who,  on  the  death  of  the  elder  Nerva,  became  head
of  the  sect  founded  by  Labeo,  and  which  was  known  after-
wards as  that  of  the  Proculians,  G.  ii,  15.  195,  231,  iii
140,  iv,  163.

PROCURATOR, — did  his  acquisition  of  property  by  tradition  in  his
principal's  name  make  the  latter  owner  ?  G.  ii,  95  ;  what
power  had  he  of  alienating  his  principal's  property  ?  G.
ii,  64  and  n.  2.

PEOCURATORY  IN  LITIGATION,  G.  iv,  82-87.

1.  Suck  _  agency  generally.  -  -  Under   the   system  of  the  legis

actiones  (which  see)  procuratory  was  incompetent  except
pro  populo,  pro  libertate,  or  pro  tutela,  G.  iv,  82  and  n.  3  ;
but  under  that  of  the  formulae  (which  see)  a  man  might
sue  or  be  sued  either  in  person  or  by  an  agent,  such  as
a  cognitor,  procurator,  tutor,  or  curator,  G.  iv,  82.  Certain
persons,  however,  were  not  allowed  to  sue  by  a  cognitor,
and  others  were  forbidden  to  act  as  such,  G.  iv,  124.

2.  Cognitors  and  procurators  in  particular. — A  cognitor  was

formally  accredited  by  his  principal  to  the  other  party
by  word  of  mouth,  G.  iv,  83 ;  but  for  a  procurator  an
informal  mandate  was  sufficient,  and  he  was  entitled  to
act  without  it  if  he  was  in  good  faith  and  gave  the  other
side  cautio  de  redo,  i.e.  that  his  principal  would  abide  by
his  acts, — a  security  usually  required  even  when  there
was  a  mandate,  84.

3.  How  they  sued  and  were  sued. — When  it  was  the  pursuer

that  was  represented  by  an  agent,  the  latter  formulated
the  intentio  (which  see)  in  the  name  of  his  principal,  and
the  condemnatio  (which  also  see)  in  his  own  favour,  G.
iv,  86  ;  if  he  took  the  intentio  in  his  own  name,  i.e.  if  he
averred  that  he  was  owner,  or  that  it  was  to  him  the
defender  was  indebted,  he  necessarily  failed,  G.  iv,  55  ;
but  fresh  action  was  not  excluded,  there  having  been  no
consumptio  (which  see),  ibid.  If  it  was  the  defender  that
was  represented  by  an  agent,  and  the  action  a  personal
one,  the  pursuer  averred  in  the  intentio  that  the  principal
was  his  debtor,  but  in  the  condemnatio  asked  judgment
against  the  agent,  G.  iv,  87 ;  in  a  real  action  the  condem-
natio was  in  the  same  form,  but  of  course  neither  principal
nor  agent  was  named  in  the  intentio,  ibid.

4.  Procuratory  in  rem  suam. — A  claim  (dbligatio]  was  in  itself

intransferable,  but  the  right  to  sue  on  it  might  be  ceded,
(see  Obligation,  4) ;  in  such  a  case  the  cessionary  sued  as
the  creditor's  procurator,  but  on  his  own  account,  G.  ii,  39.

DIGEST.  579

PROCURATORY  IN  LITIGATION — continued.

The  same  practice  was  followed  by  the  purchaser  of  an
inheritance,  G.  ii,  252,  (see  Emptio  hercditatis).

PRODIGALS,  prodigi,  dissipating  their  patrimony  were  interdicted
the  administration  of  their  affairs,  G.  i,  53,  and  placed
under  curatory,  sometimes  of  their  agnates,  sometimes  of
persons  appointed  by  the  praetors,  U.  xii,  2,  3,  (see  Cura-
tory, 1) ;  consequently  they  were  incapable  of  making  a
testament,  U.  xx,  13.

PRO  HEREDE  POSSIDERE,  PRO  POSSESSORE  POSSIDERE,  G.  iv,  144 ;   S66

Possession,

PROMITTO,  probable  derivation,  G.  iii,  92,  note.
PROPERTY,  dominium,  G.  ii,  18-96,  U.  tit.  xix.

1.  Tenures. — Originally  the  law  knew  but  one  sort  of  property,

dominium  ex  jure  Quiritium,  G.  ii,  40  ;  but,  on  the  praetors
declaring  that  they  were  prepared  to  recognise  a  beneficial
ownership  in  a  man  whose  legal  title  failed  simply
from  defect  in  the  form  of  his  conveyance,  a  second  sort
sprang  into  existence,  called  '  having  a  thing  in  bonis,'  G.  i,
54,  ii,  40,  41,  now  usually  called  bonitarian  property,  (see
Quiritarian  ownership,  Bonitarian  ownership).  They  were
often  separated,  the  quiritarian  right  being  in  one  man,
the  bonitarian  in  another,  in  which  case  the  former  was
spoken  of  as  nudum  jus  Quiritium,  the  owner  practically
deriving  no  benefit,  G.  i,  54,  iii,  166 ;  when  both  were
combined  in  the  same  individual,  he  was  said  to  have
plenum  jus,  G.  i,  15,  ii,  41.  Bonae  jidei  possessio,  though
short  of  property,  was  a  right  much  more  valuable  than
the  nudum  jus,  G.  iii,  166,  (see  B.  f.  possessw}.

2.  Its  acquisition  generally. — Like   other  rights,  it  might  be

acquired  either  on  a  universal  or  on  a  singular  title,  G.  ii,
97 :  the  former  when  it  came  to  a  man  as  part  of  the
universum  jus  of  the  old  owner,  as  in  liereditas,  bonorum
possessio,  emptio  bonorum,  adrogation,  and  manus,  (see
those  words),  98  ;  the  latter  when  it  came  to  him  as  an
independent  and  individual  right,  97.  Of  both  modes  of
acquisition,  some  were  civil,  others  natural.

3.  Civil  modes  of  singular  acquisition. — The  most  important

were  mancipation  (which  see),  proper  to  res  mancipi
(which  also  see),  G.  ii,  22,  U.  xix,  3  ;  injure  cessio  (which
see),  applicable  alike  to  res  mancipi  and  nee  mancipi,  U.
xix,  9  ;  usucapion  (which  see),  also  applicable  to  both,  G.  ii,
41-44,  U.  xix,  8 ;  also  adjudication,  legacy,  caducum,  and
ereptorium,  (see  those  words),  U.  xix,  16, 17,  and  accretion
in  the  case  of  manumission  of  a  slave  by  one  only  of
several  joint  owners  (see  Adcretio,  5),  U.  i,  18.

o

80  -DIGEST.

PROPERTY — continued.

4.  Natural  modes    of  singular   acquisition. — Amongst   those

enumerated  are  tradition,  G.  ii,  19,  20,  65,  U.  xix,  7,  (see
below,  No.  5) ;  appropriation  of  a  thing  at  the  moment
without  an  owner,  G.  ii,  66-68 ;  capture  from  an  enemy,
69  ;  natural  accession,  as  in  the  case  of  alluvion  or  imper-
ceptible increment  to  land  by  deposit  from  a  river,  70,  71,
and  the  rising  in  a  river  of  an  island,  which  became  the
property  of  the  riparian  owner,  72 ;  artificial  accession,
as  the  result  of  building,  planting,  sowing,  painting,  or
writing,  G.  ii,  73-78,  (see  below,  No.  6)  ;  and  specifica-
tion, G.  ii,  79,  (see  below,  No.  7).

5.  Tradition  in  particular. — Tradition  or  delivery  of  res  mancipi

carried  only  a  bonitarian  right,  G.  ii,  41,  U.  i,  16,  unless
it  was  by  a  peregrin  to  a  citizen,  and  then  it  carried  the
plenum  jus,  U.  i,  16,  note  2  ;  that  of  res  nee  mancipi  carried
the  quiritarian  ownership,  G.  ii,  19-21,  U.  xix,  7.  It  was
possible  only  in  the  case  of  corporeals,  G.  ii,  19,  28  ;  and
the  conditions  upon  which  it  carried  the  property  were
(a)  that  the  tradent  was  owner,  and  (&)  that  it  proceeded
on  a  title  implying  transfer  not  only  of  custody  but  of
ownership,  such  as  sale  or  donation,  G.  ii,  20,  U.  xix,  7.

6.  Artificial  accession  in  particular. — It  was  on  the  principle

accessorium  sequitur  principals  that,  if  A  built  on  his  own
account  on  B's  ground,  the  building  became  the  pro-
perty of  B,  G.  ii,  73  ;  but  if  A  in  possession  was  sued  in
a  rei  vindicatio  by  B,  the  former,  if  he  had  built  in  good
faith,  was  entitled  to  resist  with  an  exceptio  doli  (see
Exception,  8)  until  reimbursed,  76.  Exactly  the  same
in  both  respects  was  the  rule  applied  to  plantatio  and
satio,  planting  or  sowing  in  another  person's  ground,
74-76,  with  this  qualification — that  a  plant  did  not
change  owners  until  it  had  coalesced  with  the  soil  by
striking  root  in  it,  74.  The  same  principles  were  also
applied  to  scriptura, — the  writing  of  a  treatise  by  A  on
the  parchments  of  B  ;  the  treatise  became  B's  property  by
accession  to  his  parchments,  77.  But  in  pictura  the  rule
was  different.  If  A  in  good  faith  painted  a  picture  on
B's  pannel,  the  pannel  was  held  to  cede  to  the  picture,
and  A  became  owner  of  both  ;  but  either  suing  the  other
in  possession — for  though  A  had  the  vindicatio  proper,  B
was  allowed  an  utilis  vindicatio— might  be  defeated  with
an  exceptio  doli,  if  he  did  not  first  pay  the  value  of  the
pannel  or  picture  as  the  case  might  be,  78.

7.  Specification  in  particular. — This  arose  when  A  used  the

materials  of  B,  and  out  of  them  manufactured  a  new

DIGEST.  581

PROPERTY — continued.

article,  nova  species, — wine  out  of  grapes,  or  a  vase  out  of
inetal:  the  Sabinians  held  that  the  new  species  belonged
to  the  owner  of  the  material ;  the  Proculians  that  it  be-
longed to  the  manufacturer,  who  would  be  liable  however
to  an  actio  furti  and  condictio  furtiva  (see  Theft,  6,  7)  if  he
had  used  the  material  surreptitiously,  G.  ii,  79.

8.  Through  whom  property  could  be  acquired. — Property  could

not  be  acquired  by  the  act  of  a  stranger,  though  acting
professedly  as  an  agent,  except  via  posse ssionis ;  and  even
this  was  doubtful,  G-.  ii,  95.  But  it  might  be  acquired
for  a  man  by  those  subject  to  \\isjus,  G.  ii,  86-96,  tJ.  xix,
18-21,  except  by  in  jure  cessio,  G.  ii,  96,  and,  though
Gai.  and  Ulp.  do  not  refer  to  the  matter,  by  adjudication
(because  it  was  a  step  in  a  litigation),  caduciLm  and
ereptorium.  Thus  he  might  acquire  through  his  wife  in
manu,  his  filiifamilias,  his  slaves,  free  persons  in  mancipio,
freemen  and  servi  alicni  bona  fide,  possessed  by  him,  and
slaves  of  whom  he  had  the  usufruct,  G.  ii,  86.  It  was  not
admitted,  however,  that  he  could  acquire  by  usucapion
through  the  instrumentality  of  wife  in  manu,  free  person
in  mancipio,  or  a  usufructed  slave,  because  none  of  these
were  in  his  possession,  90,  94.  As  'regarded  slaves  usu-
fructed or  only  in  bonaejidei  possession,  his  acquisitions
through  their  instrumentality  were  limited  to  those  that
were  due  to  their  labour  or  his  funds,  91,  92,  U.  xix,  21.
A  slave  in  the  bonitarian  ownership  of  one  person,  but
quiritarian  right  of  another,  always  acquired  for  the
former,  G.  ii,  88,  U.  xix,  20.  If  owned  jointly  by  several
parties,  he  acquired  ordinarily  for  all  of  them  according
to  their  respective  interests  as  his  owners,  G.  iii,  167  ;  if,
however,  in  taking  a  conveyance  by  mancipation  he  did
so  in  the  name  of  one  of  them  in  particular,  the  property
was  in  the  latter  only,  ibid.  Whether  the  general  rule
was  altered  by  the  fact  that  the  acquisition  had  been  on
the  order  of  one  of  them  in  particular  was  matter  of
dispute  between  the  schools,  167a.

9.  Alienation. — While  some  owners  could  not  alienate,  non-

owners  sometimes  could,  G.  ii,  62.  Thus  a  husband,
though  owner,  could  not  alienate  dotal  lands  without  his
wife's  consent,  63  ;  but  the  agnatic  curator  of  a  lunatic,  a
procurator  in  certain  cases,  and  a  creditor  holding  a
pledge,  could  alienate  though  not  owners,  64.  In  some
cases  alienation  was  compulsory,  as  when  a  cruel  owner
was  compelled  to  sell  his  slave,  (see  Slavery,  2),  G.  i,  53.
In  the  case  of  women  in  regard  to  their  res  mancipi,  and

5  82  DIGEST.

PEOPEETY — continued,

pupils  generally,  they  could  not  alienate  without  their
tutors'  auctoritas,  G.  i,  192,  ii,  80,  84,  85,  (see  Women,  4,
Pupils).

10.  Remedies. — Under  the  system  of  the  legis  actiones  an  owner
employed  for  vindication  of  his  property  an  actio  sacra-
menti,  G.  iv,  16,  (see  Legis  actiones,  2).  Under  the  formular
system,  if  he  had  the  quiritarian  right,  he  used  either  an
actio  per  formulam  petitoriam,  which  was  the  rei  vindicatio
properly  so  called  (see  Vindicatio},  G.  iv,  3,  91,  92,  or  an
in  rem  actio  per  sponsionem  (which  see),  G.  iv,  91,  93  ;  if
he  had  merely  a  bonitarian  right  he  employed  the  Pub-
lician  action  (which  see),  or  one  of  the  other  fictitious
actions  devised  by  the  praetors  for  those  who  had  a  thing
only  in  bonis  (see  Fiction,  1,  2),  G.  iv,  34-36.  When  he
wished  to  establish  that  his  property  was  free  from  a  servi-
tude or  other  pretended  burden,  he  used  an  actio  negatoria
(which  see),  G.  iv,  3  and  n.  1.  If  stolen  from  him,  culpably
damaged,  etc.,  he  had  claim  for  redress ;  but  the  actions
competent  were  upon  the  delict,  and  do  not  fall  under  this
head ;  see  Theft,  Wrongful  damage  to  property,  etc.

PEOPINQUITY   as   an   impediment  to  marriage,  G.  i,  59-62;    see
Marriage,  4.

PEOVINCES,  the,  were  either  popular,  otherwise  stipendiary,  governed
by  proconsuls,  or  imperial,  otherwise  tributory,  governed
by  the  emperor's  legati,  G.  i,  6  and  n.  4,  101  and  n.  1,  ii,
21.  In  all  of  them,  with  exception  of  those  portions
that  enjoyed  the  jus  Italicum  (which  see),  the  dominium
soli  was  held  to  be  in  the  state  or  emperor,  the  occupants
having  only  the  possession  or  usufruct,  G.  ii,  7.  At  the
same  time  this  idea  was  not  strictly  followed  out,  for,
while  the  land  was  not  usucaptable,  G.  ii,  46,  nor  trans-
ferable by  injure  cessio,  31,  it  was  still  said  to  be  res  ncc
mantipi  and  capable  of  transfer  by  tradition,  21.  The
governors  had  the  same  jurisdiction  in  the  provinces  as
the  urban  and  peregrin  praetors  in  Eome,  G.  i,  6  ;  in  the
popular  ones  quaestors  supplied  the  place  of  the  Koman
curule  aediles,  and  adopted  the  latter's  edicts,  ibid.  ;  but
no  such  officials  were  deputed  to  the  imperial  provinces,
ibid.  A  great  deal  of  Eome's  statutory  law  had  in  the
provinces  no  application,  G.  i,  47,  iii,  121 ;  but  particular
provisions  were  occasionally  extended  to  them  by  senatus-
consults,  G.  i,  47.

PKUDENTITJM  EESPONSA,  G.  i,  7;  see  Jus  JRomanorum,

PUBEETY,  when  attained,  G.  i,  196,  U.  xi,  28.

PUBLICAE  RES,  G.  ii,  11 ;  see  Things,  3.

DIGEST.  5  S3

PUBLICAN:,  farmers  of  the  revenue,  G.  iv,  28,  32.

PUBLICIAN  ACTION. — There  are  doubts  as  to  its  date  and  authorship,
G.  iv,  36,  note.  It  was  a  praetorian  actio  in  rem  granted
to  a  proprietor  of  a  res  mancipi  (which  see)  who  had
acquired  it  merely  by  tradition,  and  had  lost  possession
before  completing  his  quiritarian  right  by  usucapion,  G.
.  iv,  36,  (see  Bonitar.  ownership,  3)  ;  as  also  to  a  bonacfidei
acquirer  a  non  domino  in  the  same  position,  ibid.,  (see
Bonae,  fidei  possessio,  2).  Its  feature  was  the  presence  of  a
fiction  of  usucapiou  contrary  to  fact,  ibid,  (see  Fiction,  2).
See  style  of  the  formula,  ibid,  and  n.  2.

PUNISHMENT,  capital,  what  ?  G.  iii,  189  and  190,  note  1.

PUPILLAEY  SUBSTITUTION,  G.  ii,  179-184,  U.  xxiii,  7  ;  see  Substi-
tution, 2-4.

PUPILS  were  children  sui  juris,  G.  i,  142,  under  the  age  of  puberty,
G.  i,  196,  U.  xi,  1,  28.  It  was  according  to  natural  law
that  a  pupil  should  be  under  guardianship,  G.  i,  189  ;  the
guardian  was  in  Eoman  law  called  his  tutor,  (see  Tutory),
G.  i,  144,  U.  xi,  1.  With  the  auctoritas  of  this  tutor  he
might,  if  he  had  sufficient  intelligence,  be  a  party  to  any
jural  act,  G.  iii,  107,  109,  except  making  a  testament,  G.
ii,  112,  U.  xx,  12  ;  though  in  some  additional  conditions
were  insisted  in,  as  those  of  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  (which
see,  No.  2)  in  reference  to  manumissions  by  owners  under
twenty,  G.  i,  40.  Further,  he  was  held  responsible  for
delict  if  sufficiently  old  to  understand  the  nature  of  his
act,  G.  iii,  208.  Without  his  tutor's  auctoritas  he  could
not  alienate  anything  belonging  to  him, — neither  pro-
perty, G.  ii,  80,  81,  84,  U.  xi,  27,  nor  a  claim  against  a
debtor,  G.  ii,  83,  84, — nor  could  he  oblige  himself  by
contract,  G.  iii,  107.  But  as  it  was  a  general  rule  that  he
might  better  his  condition  without  auctoritas,  though  not
worsen  it,  G.  ii,  83,  this  anomaly  arose, — that  while  he
might  make  another  his  debtor  by  contract,  G.  iii,  107,
and  by  accepting  payment  of  the  debt  make  the  money
he  received  his  own  without  auctoritas,  yet  his  debtor
was  not  thereby  discharged,  G.  ii,  83,  84.  If,  however,
he  afterwards  raised  action  against  his  debtor,  the  latter
was  entitled  to  an  exceptio  doli  (see  Exception,  8),  and,
if  he  could  show  that  the  pupil  had  in  fact  benefited  by
the  payment,  thus  defeated  the  action,  84.  Eeceipt  of
an  indebitum  without  auctoritas  did  not  relieve  a  pupil
from  the  obligation  of  repayment ;  for  such  an  obliga-
tion arose  ex  re,  not  ex  contractu,  G.  iii,  91.  As  regards
the  effect  of  a  loan  by  him  without  auctoritas,  see
Mutuum,  2.

584  DIGEST.

QUADRANS  or  quarter  as,  G.  i,  122.  In  matter  of  testaments  it
was  one-fourth  of  the  hereditas,  and  in  particular  the
Falcidian  fourth,  U.  xxv,  17  ;  see  Legacy,  16.

QUAESTORS  in  the  popular  provinces  had  the  same  jurisdiction  as
the  aediles  in  Borne,  and  used  their  edicts,  G.  i,  6.

QUANTI  EA  RES  EST,  G.  iv,  163,  note  1.

QUIRITARIAN  OWNERSHIP,  dominium  ex  jure  Quiritium,  was  ori-
ginally the  only  sort  of  property  known  to  the  Eomans,
G.  ii,  40.  Its  symbol  was  a  quiris  or  hasta,  a  spear,
which  as  such  was  displayed  in  the  centumviral  court,
G.  iv,  16,  and  for  which  a  citizen,  vindicating  his  quiri-
tarian  right,  substituted  a  rod,  (vindicta  oifestuca),  ibid,
Afterwards  it  came  to  be  distinguished  from  bonitarian
property,  G.  ii,  40,  (see  Property,  1,  Sanitarian  ownership,
1)  ;  and  when  the  two  were  dissociated,  was  spoken  of
as  the  nudum  jus  Quiritium,  G.  i,  54,  iii,  166.  It  gave
its  holder  no  beneficial  interest  in  that  over  which  the
right  extended,  e.g.  no  potestas  over  a  slave,  G.  i,  54,  nor
any  right  to  his  acquisitions,  G.  ii,  88,  iii,  166,  unless
the  slave  in  acquiring  expressly  declared  that  the  acqui-
sition was  for  him,  G.  iii,  166.  At  the  same  time  it  was
only  a  quiritarian  owner  that  could  make  a  slave  a
citizen  by  manumission  (which  see,  No.  2),  G.  i,  17,  U.
i,  16  ;  and  it  was  he,  and  not  the  bonitarian  manumitter,
that  became  tutor  of  a  latin  freedman,  (see  Junian  latin-
ity,  5),  G.  i,  167,  U.  xi,  19.

QUORUM  BONORUM,  an  interdict  granted  to  a  bonorum  possessor  to
enable  him  to  obtain  any  of  the  res  hereditariae  from  an
individual  in  possession  pro  herede  or  pro  possessore,  G.
iii,  34,  iv,  144  ;  see  Interdicts,  5.

EAPINA,  see  Eollery.

BATO,  CAUTIO  DE,  see  Procuratory  in  litigation,  2.

EEAL  OBLIGATIONS,  G.  iii,  90,  91.  An  olligatio  re  contracta — not  to  be
confounded  with  an  olligatio  ex  re,  which  was  one  created
by  facts  and  circumstances  independent  of  contract,  G.
iii,  89,  note  1 — was  one  arising  out  of  a  contract  com-
pleted by  an  act  done,  G.  iii,  89  and  n.  1.  The  only  one
mentioned  by  Gai.  in  explaining  the  nature  of  such  con-
tracts is  mutuum  (which  see),  90  ;  for  the  obligation  to
refund  money  paid  by  mistake  when  not  due  (see  In-
debiti  solutio),  mentioned  by  him  in  the  same  place,
though  an  obligatio  ex  re,  yet  was  not  referable  to  con-
tract, 91.  Commodate,  deposit,  and  pledge  (see  these
words)  he  mentions  only  incidentally  in  other  places.
The  innominate  contracts  (see  Contract,  1)  were  regarded
as  real,  G.  iii,  89,  note  1.

DIGEST.  585

REAL  SECURITIES,  see  Fiducia,  Pignus,  Praedia.

RECUPERATORS,  G.  i,  20,  iv,  46,  105  and  note,  185;  U.  i,  13.

REGULA  CATONIANA,  G.  ii,  244 ;  see  Legacy,  12.

REI  VINDICATIO,  see  Vindicatio.

RELIGIOSAE  RES,  G.  ii,  4,  6,  7 ;  see  Things,  1.

REMANCIPATION  of  a  wo  man  in  manu,  G.  i,  118, 137& ;  see  Manus,  6.

REPLICATION,  Duplication,  Triplication,  etc.,  G.  iv,  126-129.
Replication  was  the  pursuer's  reply  to  an  exception
(which  see),  suggesting  facts  which,  if  proved,  would
render  it  unfair  to  him  that  the  exception  should  be
sustained,  126,  126a.  Duplication  was  the  defender's
answer  of  a  similar  nature  to  the  pursuer's  replication,
127 ;  and  the  series  might  be  continued  to  triplication
and  even  farther,  128, 129.  All  of  them  were  engrafted  on
the  formula  in  much  the  same  manner  as  the  exception,
126,  126a.

RESIDUAE,  EXCEPTIO  REI,  G.  iv,  122.

RES  JUDICATA  and  exceptio  rei  judicatae,  see  Procedure,  11.

RES  MANCIPI  AND  NEC  MANCIPI. — The  distinction  was  of  importance
in  the  matter  of  conveyance,  the  former  requiring  manci-
pation, in  jure  cessio,  or  usucapion  (see  those  words)  to
give  the  transferee  a  quiritarian  right,  while  in  the  latter
this  passed  by  simple  tradition  (see  Property,  5),  G.  i,
120,  ii,  19-23,  41,  U.  xix,  3,  7-9.  Mancipi  res  included
lands  and  houses  in  italico  solo  (see  Jus  Italicuni),  rural
praedial  servitudes,  slaves,  and  domestic  beasts  of  burden
— oxen,  horses,  mules,  and  donkeys,  G.  i,  120,  ii,  15,  17,
U.  xix,  1 ;  all  others,  including  provincial  lands  not
enjoying  italic  privilege,  G.  ii,  15,  21,  urban  servitudes
17,  and  money,  81,  were  res  nee  mancipi.  If  a  res  mancipi
was  neither  mancipated  nor  ceded,  but  only  delivered,
the  transferee  had  it  only  in  ~bonis,  i.e.  became  only  boni-
tarian  owner,  (see  Bonitar.  ownership] ;  but  by  completing
his  usucapionary  possession,  he  cured  the  defect,  G.  ii,
41,  204,  U.  i,  16,  (see  Usucapion,  2).  The  explanations  Gai.
gives  of  the  derivation  of  the  phrase  res  mancipi,  i.e.  man-
cipii,  are  various  and  inconsistent,  G.  i,  121,  ii,  22,  iv,  16.

RESPONSA  PRUDENTIUM,  G.  i,  7 ;  see  Jus  Romanorum.

RESTITUTIO  IN  INTEGRUM,  see  In  integr.  restitutio.

RETENTION,  rights  of,  competent  to  husband  in  restoring  dowry,  U.
vi,  9-17  ;  see  Dowry,  6.

REUS  and  ACTOR,  defender  and  pursuer,  G.  iv,  16,  note  4,  57,  157,
159,  160.

REX  SACRORUM,  G.  i,  112.

ROBBERY,  vis  bonorum  raptorum,  rapina,  under  the  early  law  was
dealt  with  as  theft,  but  by  the  praetors  as  a  special  offence,

586  DIGEST.

EOBBERY — continued.

punishable,  however  trifling,  in  an  a.  m  bonorum  raptorum,
with  four-fold  restitution  within  the  year,  and  single
value  afterwards,  G.  iii,  209.

EOGATIO  LEGIS,  enactment  of  a  law,  U.  i,  3.

RUPITIAS  SARCIRE,  G.  iii,  210-219,  note.

EUPTIO  TESTAMENTI,  see  Testament,  22.

EUTILIUS  EUFUS,  P.,  praetor  a.  u.  c.  636,  consul  649,  was  the  author
of  the  bankruptcy  procedure  by  eniptio  lonorum  (which
see),  and  of  the  a.  Eutiliana  granted  to  the  bonor.  emptor,
G.  iv,  35.

SABINIANS  AND  PROCULIANS,  two  schools  or  sects  of  the  jurists  in
the  early  empire,  G.  i,  196,  note  1,  iii,  71,  note,  to  a  great
many  of  whose  controversies  Gai.  alludes,  as  in  i,  196  ;
ii,  15, 37,  79, 123, 195,  200,  217-223,  231,  244 ;  iii,  87, 98,
103, 140, 141, 167«,  168, 178;  iv,  78, 79, 114.  The  founder
of  the  first,  C.  ^teius  Capito,  he  does  not  mention  ;  but
of  his  successors  he  specially  refers  to  Massurius  Sabinus\
(from  whom  the  school  took  its  name),  Caelius  Sabinus,  C.
Cassius  Longinus  (from  whom  its  other  name  of  Cassiani,
U.  xi,  28,  was  derived),  Javolenus  Prisons,  and  Salvius
Julianus.  He  usually  refers  to  the  Sabinians  as  nostriprae-
ceptores,  he  having  been  an  adherent  of  that  sect.  The  Pro-
culians  he  usually  refers  to  as  diversae  scholae  auctores ;  but
he  specially  mentions  M.  Antistius  Labeo,  their  founder,
M.  Cocceius  Nerva,  his  successor,  Proculus,  from  whom
the  school  took  its  name,  and  Pegasus  ;  and  Ulp.  mentions
Neratius  Priscus.  See  those  names  individually.

SABINUS,  CAELIUS,  consul  A.D.  69,  and  chief  of  the  Sabinian
school  after  Massurius  Sabinus  ;  quoted  in  G.  iii,  70, 141.
See  Sabinians  and  Proculians.

SABINUS,  MASSURIUS,  succeeded  Capito  (who  died  A.D.  22)  as  chief
of  his  school ;  from  him  it  got  the  name  by  which  it  is
best  known.  He  is  specially  referred  to  by  Gai.  in  ii,  79,
154,  195,  218,  244  ;  iii,  133,  161,  183 ;  iv,  79,  114.  See
Sabinians  and  Proculians.

SACRA  FAMILIAE,  G.  ii,  55 ;  coemptio  sacrorum  interimcndorum
causa,  (see  Manus,  7),  G.  i,  114,  note  1.

SACRAE  RES,  G.  ii,  3-5  ;  see  Things,  1.

SACRAMENTUM,  legis  actio  per,  G.  iv,  13-17 ;  see  Lcgis  actiones,  2.

SACRIFICE,  pignoris  capio  used  in  connection  with,  G.  iv,  28  and
notes ;  see  Legis  actiones,  6.

SALE,  emptio  venditio,  G.  iii,  139-141 ;  see  also  Consensual  obliga-
tions.
1.  Sale,  what? — It  was  a  consensual  contract,  G.  iii,  135,  con-

DIGEST.  587

SALE—  continued.

ditional  or  unconditional,  146,  whereby  the  seller,  vendit or,
undertook  to  deliver  to  the  purchaser,  emptor,  a  certain
saleable  article  in  consideration  of  a  price,  and  was  com-
plete the  moment  they  were  agreed  about  the  latter,  139  ;
earnest,  arra,  was  unnecessary,  being  merely  evidence  of
the  completion  of  the  transaction,  ibid.  Cases  sometimes
occurred  in  which  it  was  difficult  to  say  whether  the
contract  was  one  of  sale  or  location,  145-147 ;  see  some
of  them  under  Location,  3.

2.  The  price  in  particular. — It  required  to  be  definite,  cerium,

G.  iii,  140;  the  jurists  being  of  different  opinions  as  to
whether  it  was  sufficient  that  it  was  left  to  be  fixed  by  a
third  party  named,  Hid.  And  it  required  to  be  in  current
money,  141 ;  though  the  Sabinians,  differing  from  the
Proculians,  thought  otherwise,  holding  barter,  pcrmutatio,
to  be  only  a  variety  of  sale,  ibid.

3.  Sale  by  auction. — See  G.  iv,  126a  and  note.

4.  The  actions  arising  out  of  the  contract. — The  buyer  had  the

a.  empti  (or  ex  empto),  the  seller  the  a.  venditi  (or  ex
vendito),  both  of  them  bonaefidei,  G.  iv,  62.  If  the  pur-
chaser was  sued  for  the  price  before  delivery,  he  might
plead  the  exceptio  rei  nondum  traditae ;  but  the  replica-
tion was  good  that  it  was  one  of  the  conditions  of  the
sale  that  the  price  was  to  be  paid  first,  G.  iv,  126a.

SALVIANUM  INTERDICTUM,  G.  iv,  146 ;  see  Interdicts,  5.

SANCTAE  KES,  G.  ii,  8  ;  see  Things,  1.

SARCIRE  RUPITIAS,  G.  iii,  210-2i9,  note.

SATIO,  seed-sowing,  acquisition  of  property  by,  G.  ii,  75  ;  remedies,
76.  See  Property,  6.

SATISDARE,  meaning,  G.  i,  199  and  200,  note.

SCAEVOLA,  Q.  Mucius,  G.  i,  188  and  n.  4,  iii,  149,  aedile,  consul,
proconsul  in  Asia,  and  fin  ally  pontifcx  maximus,  assassi-
nated 672  |  72,  a  very  distinguished  jurist,  who  reckoned
Cicero  amongst  his  pupils.  His  writings  were  a  subject
of  comment  by  Gai.,  who  refers  to  his  treatise  on  them
in  i,  188.

SCHOLAE  JURISCONSULTORUM,  G.  i,  196,  note  1 ;  see  Sabinians  and
Proculians.

SCRIPTURA,  acquisition  of  property  by,  G.  ii,  77 ;  see  Property,  6.

SECTIO  BONORUM,  sale  of  a  confiscated  estate  per  universitatem,  G.
iv,  146.

SECTORIUM  INTERDICTUM,  G.  iv,  146  ;  see  Interdicts,  5.

SECUNDARIUM  INTERDICTUM,  G.  iv,  170 ;  see  Interdicts,  17.

SECURITY,  real,  see  Praedia,  Fiducia,  Pignus ;  personal,  see  Praes,
Cautiones,  Satisdare,  Suretyship.

588  DIGEST.

SECUTORIUM  JUDICIUM,  G.  iv,  166,  169  ;  see  Interdicts,  16.
SEMIS,  a  half  as,  G.  i,  192.

SENATORS  and  their  children  were  forbidden  by  the  Julian  law  to
marry  freedwomeii,  actresses  or  children  of  actors,  and
women  of  disreputable  character,  U.  xiii,  1,  2  ;  if  they
did,  they  and  their  wives  were  not  allowed  to  take
under  each  other's  testament,  xvi,  2.  Personal  injury
offered  to  them  was  atrox,  and  punished  with  more  than
usual  severity,  G.  iii,  225.  When  charged  criminally
they  were  entitled  to  be  tried  by  their  peers  of  the  senate,
U.  xiii,  2  and  n.  2.

SENATUSCONSULTS,  senatus  consulta,  enactments  of  the  senate,  (see
Statute,  1),  G.  i,  4.  Specially  referred  to  are  the  fol-
lowing:—

Oalvitianum  (reign  of  Nero  ?),  declaring  tha,t  marriage  between
a  man  under  sixty  and  a  woman  over  fifty  should  not
qualify  for  taking  an  inheritance,  legacy,  or  dowry,  U.
xvi,  4  and  n.  2  ;  see  Marriage,  7.

Claudianum,  on  cohabitation  of  freewomen  and  slaves,  G.  i,  84,
85  and  notes,  91,  160,  U.  xi,  8 ;  see  Claudian  Set.

Claudianum,  modifying  the  Pernician  Set.,  by  declaring  that
a  man  over  sixty  marrying  a  woman  under  fifty  should
not  be  liable  to  the  penalties  of  celibacy,  U.  xvi,  4,  and
note  to  §  3  ;  see  Julian  and  Papia-Poppaean  law,  4,  Jus
capiendi.

Hadriano  auctore.  One  or  more  regulating  birth  status  (see
Status),  G.  i,  30,  77,  80,  81,  92,  U.  iii,  3  ;  one  extending  to
peregrins  the  Aelia-Sentian  prohibition  of  manumission
in  fraud  of  creditors  (see  Aelia-Sentian  law,  1),  G.  i,  47  ;
one  allowing  women  in  tutelage  to  make  a  testament
without  fiduciary  coemption,  G.  i,  115a,  ii,  112,  (see  Testa-
ment, 8,  Manns,  7) ;  one  declaring  that  usucapio  pro
Tierede  should  be  no  bar  to  the  heir's  hereditatis  petitio,
G.  ii,  57,  (see  Usucapion,  6) ;  one  amending  the  law  of
erroris  caiisae p?*obatio  (wliichsee,  No.2),G.  ii,143  ;  one  pro-
hibiting fideicommissa  to  persons  who  were  not  allowed
to  be  instituted  as  heirs  or  to  take  legacies,  285,  287,  (see
Fideicommissum,  3) ;  one  in  favour  of  latins  who  had
obtained  a  grant  of  citizenship  without  consent  of  patrons,
G.  iii,  73,  (see  Patronate) ;  and  one  defining  the  rights  of
municipalities  as  legatees,  U.  xxiv,  28,  (see  Legacy,  6).

Largianum,  A.D.  42  (?),  amending  the  law  of  succession  to
Junian  latins,  G.  iii,  63  and  note,  64-67 ;  difficulties  in
applying  it,  69-71.  See  Succession  to  Junian  latins.

Maximo  et  Tuberone  coss.  factum,  743  [  11  (?),  declaring  that
confarreation  of  Jlaminica  Dialis  should  place  her  in

DIGEST.  589

SENATUSCONSULTS — continued.

manu  only  as  concerned  the  sacra,  G.  i,  136  and  note ;
see  Manus,  1.

Neronianum,  declaring  that  when  a  legacy  was  invalid  in  the
particular  form  in  which  it  was  bequeathed,  it  should,  if
possible,  be  sustained  as  one  optimi  juris,  i.e.  by  damna-
tion, G.  ii,  197,  198,  212,  218,  220,  222,  U.  xxiv,  lla  ;
see  Legacy,  20,  26.

Orphitianum,  A.D.  178,  giving  children  a  right  of  succession  to
their  mother,  G.  iii,  33a  and  note,  U.  xxvi,  7  and  notes ;
see  Intestate  succession,  7.

Pegasianum,in  reign  of  Vespasian,  regulating  fideicommissa,  G.
ii,  254,  258,  259,  U.  xxv,  14-16.  (A  Sctum.  Pegasianum
is  also  mentioned  in  G.  ii,  286a ;  it  is  possibly  a  mistake
for  Plancianum).  See  Fideicommissum.,  9.

Pegaso  et  Pusione  coss.  factum,  in  reign  of  Vespasian,  extending
the  benefits  of  the  Aelia-Sentian  marriage  and  causae
prolatio  to  latins  manumitted  when  over  thirty,  G.  i,  31
and  note,  iii,  5,  73,  U.  iii,  4 ;  see  Aelia-Sentian  law,  7.

Pernicianum  (?  Persicianum,  and  A.D.  34),  declaring  that  the
penalties  of  celibacy  should  adhere  permanently  to  men
and  women  who  had  not  married  before  sixty  or  fifty
respectively,  U.  xvi,  3  and  note ;  see  Julian  and  Papia-
Poppaean  law,  4.

Plancianum,  imposing  penalties  on  heirs  secretly  promising
to  convey  fideicommissa  to  persons  not  entitled  to  take
them,  U.  xxv,  17  and  notes  2  and  3.  (The  name  is  not
in  the  text,  but  obtained  from  the  Dig. ;  and  the  Set.  may
be  the  same  as  that  attributed  to  Hadrian  in  G.  ii,  285,
287).  See  Fideicommissum,  3.

Tertullianum,  in  reign  of  Hadrian,  giving  a  mother  a  right
of  succession  to  her  children,  G.  iii,  33a  and  note,  U.
xxvi,  8  ;  see  Intestate  succession,  7.

Trebellianum,  A.D.  62,  regulating  fideicommissa,  G.  ii,  253  and
n.  2,  255,  258,  U.  xxv,  14,  16 ;  see  Fideicommissum,  8.

Of  unknown  name  and  authorship. — One  introducing  erroris
causae  probatio  (which  see),  G.  i,  67-71,  ii,  142 ;  one  or
more  amending  the  law  of  tutory  of  women,  G.  i,  173, 174,
176, 177, 180,  U.  xi,  20-23,  (see  Tutory,  13,  22) ;  one  pro-
viding that  a  pupil  should  have  an  Atilian  tutor  instead
of  him  who  had  been  excused  or  removed,  G.  i,  182,  (see
Tutory,  4) ;  one  prohibiting  a  man  (not  insolvent)  to  insti-
tute as  his  heir  with  freedom  one  of  his  own  slaves
under  thirty,  G.  ii,  276  and  note,  (see  Testament,  14) ;  one
conferring  citizenship  on  a  free-born  latin  woman  on  the
birth  of  her  third  child,  U.  iii,  1  and  note,  (see  Junian

590

DIGEST.

SENATUSCONSULTS — continued.

latinity,  7) ;  one  abridging  the  period  of  service  in  the
night  watch,  as  qualifying  a  latin  for  citizenship,  to  three
years,  U.  iii,  5,  (see  Junian  latinity,  7) ;  one  allowing
municipalities  to  be  instituted  heirs  by  their  freedmen,
and  to  take  fideicommissa  from  any  quarter,  U.  xxii,  5,
(see  Testament,  13,  Fideicommissum,  3) ;  one  or  more
authorising  certain  deities  to  be  instituted  as  heirs,  U.
xxii,  6,  (see  Testament,  13)  ;  one  sanctioning  quasi-usu-
fruct  of  money,  U.  xxiv,  27,  (see  Usufruct,  2).

SERVITUDES,  servitutes,  jura  praediorum,  rights  appurtenant  to  im-
moveables,  were  either  rural  or  urban,  G.  ii,  14.  Rural
servitudes,  viz.  rights  of  way  and  aquaeduct,  G-.  ii,  31,  iv,
3,  U.  xix,  1,  were  res  mancipi  (which  see)  in  districts  of
italic  right  (see  Jus  Italicuni),  U.  xix,  1,  and  creatable
by  mancipation  or  injure  cessio  (see  those  words),  G.  ii,
29,  31 ;  in  the  provinces  generally  they  were  nee  mancipi,
and  creatable  by  pacts  and  stipulations,  31.  Urban  ones,
including  rights  of  light,  prospect,  gutter,  and  eaves-drop,
G.  ii,  14a,  31,  iv,  3,  were  everywhere  nee  mancipi,  G.  ii,
15,  17;  in  italic  lands  they  might  be  created  by  injure
cessio,  29,  and  in  the  provinces  by  pacts  and  stipulations,
31.  Either  sort  might  be  vindicated  in  an  actio  in  rem,
G.  iv,  3,  their  existence  challenged  in  an  a.  in  rem  nega-
toria,  ibid.

SERVIUS  SULPICIUS  Eurus,  sometimes  referred  to  simply  as  Servius,
G.  i,  188  and  n.  5,  ii,  244,  iii,  149,  179,  183,  consul
703  |  51,  and  one  of  the  most  distinguished  jurists  of  his
day.

SESTERCE,  the,  was  equal  to  2£  and  afterwards  4  asses,  G.  iv,  95,  note  2.

SET-OFF,  see  Compensation.

SINENDI  MODO  LEGATUM,  see  Legacy,  25-27,  33,  34.

SLAVERY,  servitus,  an  institution  of  the  jus  gentium,  G.  i,  52.

1.  How  created. — It  was  ordinarily  created  in  the  first  instance
by  capture  of  an  enemy,  G.  i,  129,  and  perpetuated  by
birth,  the  offspring  of  a  slave  mother  being  also  slave,
G.  i,  82,  U.  v,  9.  In  addition  the  Twelve  Tables  made
reduction  to  slavery  the  punishment  of  manifest  theft  by
a  freeman,  (though  a  milder  penalty  was  substituted  by
the  praetors),  G.  iv,  189.  A  citizen  evading  the  census  was
sold  as  a  slave  by  way  of  punishment,  G.  i,  160,  U.  xi,  11.
The  Claudian  Set.  (according  to  Paul,  though  only  to  be
inferred  from  Gai.)  punished  with  slavery  a  free  woman
cohabiting  with  a  man  she  knew  to  be  a  slave,  G.  i,  86,
and  visited  with  the  same  penalty  one  continuing  to
cohabit  with  a  servus  alienus  after  his  owner  had  informed

DIGEST.  591

SLAVERY — continued.

her  of  his  condition,  G.  i,  91,  160,  U.  xi,  11,  (see  Claudian
Set.}.  Further,  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  provided  that
deditician  freedmen  contravening  its  prohibition  of  resi-
dence within  a  hundred  miles  of  Rome  should  be  sold  as
slaves  on  the  same  condition,  and  never  manumitted  ;  and
that  if  they  were  manumitted  they  should  then  become
slaves  of  the  state,  G.  i,  27.

2.  Powers  of  an  owner  over  his  slave's  person. — According  to

the  jus  gentium  an  owner  had  the  power  of  life  and  death
over  his  slave,  G.  i,  52 ;  and  it  seems  to  have  been  not
uncommon  to  put  him  in  chains,  to  brand  him  or  torture
him,  and  to  give  him  up  to  fight  in  the  arena  as  a  gladi-
ator or  with  wild  beasts,  G.  i,  13.  By  Ant.  Pius,  however,
it  was  enacted  that  a  man  killing  his  own  slave  should  be
liable  to  the  same  penalties  as  for  killing  a  servus  alienus,
G.  i,  53 ;  while  if  he  causelessly  subjected  him  to  cruel
treatment  he  was  to  be  compelled  to  sell  him,  ibid.
Voluntary  sale  of  a  slave  was  of  everyday  occurrence,  G.
iv,  40,  for  he  was  an  article  of  property,  a  res  mancipi,
U.  xix,  1.  Like  other  things  of  the  same  class  (see  Res
mancipi)  he  might  be  in  in  bonis  of  one  man  and  in  the
quiritarian  right  of  another,  U.  i,  16 ;  but  it  was  the
former  that  had  potestas  over  him,  G.  i,  54.

3.  Right  of  the  owner  to  his  slaves  acquisitions. — See  Property,

8,  Obligation,  8.

4.  Effect  of  the  slaves  institution  in  a  testament. — See  Testament,

14,  Necessarii  heredes.

5.  His  peculium. — See  Peculium.

6.  Extent  of  owner's  responsibility  for  his  contracts  or  delicts. —

See  Adjectician  actions,  Noxal  actions.

7.  How  far  a  slave  could  himself  be  debtor  or  creditor. — Gai.

states  the  rule  very  broadly  that  a  slave  could  not  be
under  obligation  either  to  his  owner  or  any  other  person,
G.  iii,  104 ;  consequently  if  he  committed  a  delict  against
his  owner  the  latter  had  no  action,  G.  iv,  78  ;  and  a  new
obligation  in  which  he  was  nominal  debtor  was  so  useless
as  to  be  ineffectual  as  a  novation  of  a  previous  valid  one,
G.  iii,  177.  But  elsewhere  Gai.  admits  that  he  might  be
indebted  naturally  (see  Obligation,  5)  either  to  his  owner
or  a  third  party,  and  his  obligation  be  validly  guaranteed
by  a  surety,  G.  iii,  119«.  That  a  slave  could  not  be
creditor  is  evidenced  in  the  fact  that  his  adstipulation
(which  see)  was  null,  G.  iii,  114.

8.  Hoio  a  slave  acquired  freedom. — See  Manumission.

9.  Judicial  remedies. — An  owner  was  entitled  to  protect  his

592  DIGEST.

SLAVERY — continued.

possession  of  and  property  in  his  slaves,  just  as  in  his  other
chattels,  by  interdicts,  G.  iv,  160,  and  rei  vindicationes,  G.
iv,  41.  If  his  slave  was  stolen  from  him  he  had  an  actio
furti  and  condidio  furtiva,  see  Theft,  6,  7 ;  if  culpably
killed  or  hurt,  he  had  an  action  on  the  Aquilian  law,  G.
iii,  210,  217,  (see  Wrongful  damage  to  property,  1,  3) ;  if
intentionally  assaulted  in  such  a  way  as  to  indicate  that
insult  was  intended  to  his  owner,  the  latter  had  an  actio
inj'ttriarum,  G.  iii,  222-224,  (see  Personal  injury] ;  if  his
morals  were  debauched,  and  his  value  consequently
diminished,  he  had  an  a.  servi  corrupti,  G.  iii,  198.  If  a
controversy  arose  between  owner  and  slave  on  the  question
of  freedom,  the  latter  had  to  be  represented  by  an  adsertor
libertatis,  G.  iv,  14  and  n.  2  ;  but,  under  the  system  of
the  leg-is  actiones  (which  see,  No.  2),  out  of  favour  for
freedom,  the  sacramentum  required  from  the  adsertor  was
the  smallest  known  to  the  law,  G.  iv,  14.

SOLDIER,  a,  in  several  respects  enj  oy  ed  privileges  unknown  to  civilian  s.
While  on  service  he  might  make  a  testament  without  any
formalities,  and  make  in  it  institutions  and  bequests  that
would  have  been  ineffectual  had  he  tested  like  a  civilian
per  aes  et  libram,  G.  ii,  109-111,  114;  see  Testament,  25.
A  filiusfamilias  miles  might  test  on  his  peculium  castrense
(which  see),  and  that  either  informally  while  on  service,  or
per  aes  et  libram  after  his  discharge,  G.  ii,  106,  U.  xx,  10.
Occasionally  a  soldier  honourably  discharged  had  con-
ferred upon  him  a  sort  of  comtbium  at  large,  enabling  him
to  marry  any  peregrin  or  latin  he  pleased,  and  yet  have
his  marriage  recognised  asjitstum  matrimonium  (see  Mar-
riage, 1),  G.  i,  57.  Under  the  earlier  system  of  procedure
he  had  pignoris  capio  (see  Legis  actiones,  6)  to  recover  his
aes  militare,  equestre,  and  hordiarium,  G.  iv,  27.

SOLITARIUS  PATER,  the  father  of  but  one  child,  U.  tit.  xiii,  rubric,
was  exempt  from  the  penalties  imposed  upon  orbitas,
childlessness,  by  the  Julian  and  Papia-Poppaean  law
(which  see,  No.  5),  and  therefore  might  take  in  full  under
a  stranger's  testament,  tit.  xiii,  note.

SOLUM  ITALICUM,  see  Jus  italicum.

SPADONES  were  allowed  to  adopt,  G.  i,  103.

SPECIFICATION,  acquisition  of  property  by,  and  remedies  of  parties
prejudiced,  G.  ii,  79  ;  see  Property,  7.

SPENDTHRIFTS,  see  Prodigals.

SPONDEO,  origin  of  word,  G.  iii,  92,  note ;  it  could  not  be  used  by  a
peregrin  or  slave,  but  only  by  a  citizen,  G.  iii,  93,  119,
179.

DIGEST.  593

SPONSIO,  as  stipulation,  see  Stipulation  ;  as  a  surety's  engagement,
see  Suretyship.

SPONSIO  ET  KESTIPULATIO  were  used  in  the  interdicts  uti  possidetis  and
utrubi  to  raise  issue  for  trial  of  the  question  of  possession,
G.  iv,  166  ;  as  each  party  was  both  pursuer  and  defender,
there  were  two  sponsions  and  two  restipulations,  and  all
.  were  penal,  i.e.  their  amounts  were  exigible  by  the  suc-
cessful litigant,  166«,  167,  (see  Interdicts,  15).  They  were
used  in  the  a.  de  pecunia.  certa  credita  and  a.  de  pecunia
constitutes  to  check  precipitate  litigation,  the  sum  named
in  them  being  the  penalty  of  the  ill-founded  action  'or
defence,  G.  iv,  13, 171, 172, 180,  (see  Vexatious  litigation).
The  sponsion  in  the  in  rem  a.  per  sponsionem  (which  see)
was  used  merely  to  raise  an  issue,  G.  iv,  93  ;  being  pre-
judicial only,  and  not  penal,  there  was  no  restipulation,  94.

SPONSIONEM,  IN  REM  ACTIO  PER,  see  In  rem  a.  per  sponsionem.

SPUEII,  why  so  called,  G.  i,  64 ;  were  in  law  fatherless,  ibid.,  U.
iv,  2  ;  word  did  not  include  issue  of  a  concubine,  G.  i,  64,
note  3.  See  Parent  and  child,  5.

STATULIBER,  U.  ii,  1-6,  was  a  slave  with  conditional  testamentary
gift  of  freedom  ;  who,  if  not  alienated,  continued  to  belong
to  the  heir  till  the  condition  was  fulfilled,  G.  ii,  200,  U.  ii,
1,  2,  and  if  alienated,  carried  with  him  his  conditional
enfranchisement,  U.  ii,  3.  If  the  condition  was  defeated
by  the  act  of  the  heir  or  a  third  party  whose  co-operation
was  necessary  to  its  fulfilment,  it  was  held  as  fulfilled,
and  the  slave  was  free,  U.  ii,  6.

STATUS  of  children  on  birth,  G.  i,  65-92.

1.  Free  or  slave? — The   rule   of  the  jus  gentium   was— free

mother,  free  child  ;  slave  mother,  slave  child,  G.  i,  82,  U.
v,  9.  This  rule  was  considerably  modified  by  the  Claud.
Set,  some  of  whose  provisions  were  repealed  by  Ves-
pasian and  Hadrian,  84-86  ;  see  Claudian  Set.  But
though  a  mother  might  be  slave  at  the  time  of  concep-
tion, yet,  if  she  was  free  when  her  child  was  born,  it  also
was  free,  G.  i,  89  ;  the  rule  being  that  the  status  of  ille-
gitimate children  dated  from  their  birth,  not  from  their
conception,  ibid.,  U.  v,  10.  That  of  legitimate  children,
on  the  other  hand,  was  held  to  date  from  the  earlier
point,  ilid. ;  therefore  it  was  maintained  that  if  a  child
had  been  conceived  in  lawful  marriage,  it  was  not  the
less  free-born  because  its  mother  had  been  reduced  to
slavery  during  her  pregnancy  and  was  in  that  condition
when  delivered,  G.  i,  91.

2.  Citizen,  latin,  or  peregrin  ? — When  the  parents  were  both

of  the  same  condition  there  was  no  difficulty  about  the

2p

594  DIGEST.

STATUS — continued.

status  of  the  issue ;  when  they  were  of  different  condi-
tions the  rule  was  that  if  there  was  conubium  (which
see)  the  child  followed  the  father,  while  without  it  it
followed  its  mother,  G.  i,  56,  67,  U.  v,  8.  This  was
invariable  where  there  had  been  no  marriage,  and  the
child  was  the  issue  of  a  casual  connection,  in  law  father-
less; the  mother's  status  at  her  delivery  determined
whether  the  child  was  citizen  or  peregrin,  G.  i,  90,  92.
But  when  the  child  had  been  conceived  in  marriage,
though  without  conulium,  the  general  rule  was  qualified
by  the  Minician  law,  which  declared  that  the  issue  of
such  a  marriage  should  follow  the  status  of  the  inferior
parent,  G.  i,  78,  U.  v,  8 ;  a  provision  which  in  turn  was
modified  by  an  enactment  of  Hadrian's,  that  the  issue  of
a  latin  husband  and  Bonian  wife  should  in  every  case  be
a  citizen,  G.  i,  80.

3.  In  potestate  or  sui  juris  ? — Although  it  was  a  general  rule
that  the  issue  of  justae  nuptiae  were  in  potestate,  G.  i,  56,
yet  in  particular  cases  a  question  might  arise  whether  or
not  there  was  potestas,  of  which  an  instance  occurs  in  G.
i,  135.

STATUTE,  G.  i,  2-7,  U.  i,  1-3.

1.  The  various  forms  of  statute  law. — The  original  form  was

the  lex  or  comitial  enactment,  G.  i,  3;  the  plebiscitwii ,
passed  by  the  concilium  plebis,  was  obligatory  at  first
only  among  the  plebeians,  but  by  the  Hortensian  law
was  declared  binding  on  the  patricians  as  well,  and  thus
became  of  the  same  value  as  a  lex,  ibid,  and  n.  2.  After
some  hesitation  senatusconsults  were  also  recognised  as
having  all  the  force  of  leges,  4 ;  and  this  was  never  doubted
as  regarded  the  constitutions  principum  (which  see),  5.
The  praetors'  edicts  and  the  responses  of  the  jurispru-
dents, though  part  of  the  jus  scriptum,  are  not  said  to
have  been  regarded  as  statute- law,  6,  7,  and  the  first  are
pointedly  put  in  opposition  to  it  in  G.  iii,  32.  On  laws
perfect,  imperfect,  and  short  of  perfect,  see  TJ.  i,  1,  2.

2.  Analogical  extension  of  statute. — The  interpretatio  of  the

pontiffs  and  early  jurists  frequently  carried  the  applica-
tion of  a  statute  beyond  its  letter,  G.  ii,  42,  note.  For
instance  the  XII  Tables  conferred  on  agnates  rights  both

o  o

of  succession  and  tutory,  but  on  patrons  only  the  former ;
by  interpretation  it  was  ruled  that  they  were  entitled
also  to  the  latter,  G.  i,  165,  U.  xi,  3.  Going  a  step
further  they  held  that  &parens  manumissor  (see  Emanci-
pation, 3)  must  be  dealt  with  as  a  patron,  and  therefore

DIGEST.  595

STATUTE — continued.

was  entitled  to  both  the  tutory  and  succession  of  the
child  he  had  emancipated,  G.  i,  166,  iii,  40,  41,  U.  xxviii,
7  and  n.  1,  as  amended  in  Additions  etc.

3.  Personal  and  territorial  application. — Much  of  the  statu-
tory law  applied  directly  only  to  citizens,  e.g.  the  Twelve
Tables  and  the  much  later  Aquilian  and  Aelia-Sentian
laws,  G.  iv,  37,  i,  47  ;  if  it  seemed  reasonable  that  a  non-
citizen  should  have  the  benefit  of  or  be  ruled  by  any  of
their  provisions,  the  praetor  adjusted  &  formula  embody-
ing a  fiction  of  citizenship  (see  Fiction,  3),  G.  iv,  37.  Some
statutes  again,  such  as  the  lex  Atilia,  did  not  apply  beyond
Eome,  U.  xi,  18  ;  others  not  beyond  Italy,  such  as  the  lex
Furia  de  sponsu,  G.  iii,  121&,  122 ;  while  others,  such  as
the  lex  Apuleia,  extended  to  the  provinces  as  well,  122.

STIGMATA,  distinctive  marks  branded  on  runaway  slaves,  G.  i,  13,
U.  i,  11  and  n.  1.

STIPENDIARY  PEAEDIA,  G.  ii,  15,  21 ;  see  Provinces.

STIPULATION,  stipulatio,  G.  iii,  92-109  ;  see  also  Verbal  obligations.

1 .  Stipulation,  what  ? — It  was  a  verbal  contract  by  question

and  answer,  G.  iii,  92,  creative  only  of  a  unilateral  obli-
gation, 137.  Its  form  rendered  it  possible  only  inter
praesentes,  136,  138 ;  but  the  resulting  inconvenience
when  a  man  had  occasion  to  contract  with  a  person  at  a
distance  was  obviated  by  an  expedient  explained  in  136,
note  1.  Though  most  stipulations  were  voluntary  or
conventional,  yet  some  were  necessary,  such  as  the  cautio
judicatum  solvi  and  stipulatio  pro  praede  litis  et  vindici-
arum,  G.  iv,  91,  stipulatio  fructuaria,  166,  tribunicia
stipulatio,  U.  vii,  3,  etc.  As  none  but  verbal  obligations
could  be  extinguished  by  acceptilation  (which  see),  it
was  the  practice  when  a  creditor  was  ready  to  give  his
debtor  a  release  of  a  consensual  obligation  say,  to  substi-
tute a  novatory  stipulation,  and  then  acceptilate,  G.
iii,  170.

2.  Its  form. — There  were  certain  recognised  styles  of  question

and  answer  appropriate  to  the  contract,  G.  iii,  92  and
note.  Spondes  ?  spondeo  were  of  the  number,  ibid.  ;  but
engagement  by  the  word  spondeo  was  competent  only  to
citizens,  93,  Il9,  note  3,  and  though  derived  from  the
Greek  yet  could  not  be  rendered  by  a  Greek  equivalent,
93,  note  1.  The  other  phrases  were/zms  gentium,  com-
petent to  peregrins  as  well  as  citizens,  and  might  be
expressed  either  in  Latin  or  Greek  if  parties  understood,
93  ;  but  it  was  doubted  whether  an  answer  in  one  lan-
guage to  a  question  in  another  would  do,  95.

596  DIGEST.

STIPULATION — continued.

3.  Stipulations  that  were  useless  because  of  the  nature  of  the

undertaking ;  (see  Contract,  4). — Amongst  these  were
stipulation  for  a  thing  not  in  commercio,  G.  iii,  97,  or
that  could  have  no  existence,  97«;  stipulation  under
an  impossible  condition  (see  Condition,  3),  98 ;  stipu-
lation for  something  to  be  given,  dari,  to  the  stipulant
which  was  already  his,  99  ;  one  for  something  to  be  given
to  or  done  for  a  party  to  whose  jus  the  stipulant  was  not
subject,  103,  (but  what  if  to  or  for  the  stipulant  and  a
third  party  ?  or  the  stipulant  or  a  third  party  ?  ibid.} ;
one  to  be  performed  by  the  heir  of  the  promiser  or
to  the  heir  of  the  stipulant  (see  Obligation,  11),  100  ;
and  one  to  be  performed  '  after '  or  the  '  day  before '  the
death  of  stipulant  or  promiser,  (which  was  practically
the  same  thing  as  one  for  performance  to  or  by  their
respective  heirs),  100,  117, 119.  A  stipulation,  however,
for  a  thing  to  be  given  or  done  when  either  was  dying-
was  valid,  100  ;  and  if  a  stipulant  wanted  to  stipulate
for  payment  after  his  death,  his  proper  course  was  to
conjoin  with  himself  an  adstipulator  (see  Adstipulation},
117.

4.  Stipulations  that  were  useless  because  of  incapacity  of  party.

— A  stipulation  was  useless  between  a  paterfamilias  and
a  person  subject  to  his  jus,  G.  iii,  104.  So  was  one  in
which  either  party  was  insane,  106  ;  and  one  in  which
either  was  mute  or  deaf,  speaking  and  hearing  being
essential  to  this  particular  contract,  105.  A  pupil  old
enough  to  understand  what  he  was  doing  might  be
stipulant  even  without  his  tutor's  auctoritas,  but  without
it  could  not  be  promiser,  107,  109,  (see  Pupils) ;  and  a
woman  in  tutelage  was  in  the  same  position,  108.

5.  Stipulations  useless  because  of  defect  of  form. — It  was  neces-

sary that  the  answer  should  correspond  to  the  question  ;
therefore  if  the  stipulant  asked  ten  and  the  other  party
promised  five,  or  if  the  question  was  unconditional  and
the  answer  conditional,  the  stipulation  was  useless,  G.
iii,  102.

6.  The  actions  to  which  the  contract  gave  rise. — Where  the

promise  was  to  give  a  definite  sum  of  money  or  a  specific
thing,  the  stipulant  sued  by  a  condictio  certi,  G.  iv,  41,
(see  Condictio,  Intentio,  2c) ;  where  what  was  promised  was
incertum,  indefinite,  he  sued  by  an  actio  inccrta,  some-
times called  condictio  incerti,  and  more  frequently  actio
ex  stipulatu,  G.  iv,  136,  (see  Condictio,  Formula,  4,  In-
Although  the  contract  was  a  formal  one  (see

DIGEST.  597

STIPULATION" — continued.

Contract,  3),  and  the  promiser  ipso  jure  liable  on  the
strength  of  his  promissio,  G.  iii,  89,  note,  still  if  it  had
been  given  on  a  consideration  that  had  failed,  he  was
allowed  in  equity  to  plead  an  exccptio  doli,  G.  iv,  116.

STIPULATIONES  EMPTAE  ET  VENDITAE  HEREDITATIS,  6.  ii,  252,  257 ;
see  Emptio  hereditatis,  Mdeicommissum,  7.

STIPULATIONES  PARTIS  ET  PRO  PARTE,  G.  ii,  254,  257  and  u.  1,  U.
xxv,  15  ;  see  Legacy,  8,  Fideicommissum,  9.

STIRPES  and  CAPITA  in  succession,  G.  iii,  8, 16,  61,  U.  xxvi,  2,  4,
xxvii,  4.

SUBROGATIO  LEGIS,  adding  something  to  an  enactment,  U.  i,  3.

SUBSTITUTION,  substitutio,  was  either  ordinary,  vulgaris,  G.  ii,  174-
178,  U.  xxii,  33,  or  pupillary,  pupillaris,  G.  ii,  179-184,
U.  xxiii,  7-9 ;  see  also  Testament,  15.

1.  Ordinary  substitution. — This  was  nomination  in  a  testament

of  one  or  more  heirs  to  take  as  substitutes  in  the  event
of  the  failure  of  the  institute  or  institutes,  G.  ii,  174,
175,  U.  xxii,  33,  and  might  be  continued  indefinitely  in
a  series  of  substitutions  to  substitutes,  G.  ii,  176,  U.  xxii,
33.  The  operativeness  of  the  substitutions  depended  to
some  extent  upon  the  consideration  whether  the  institute
and  substitutes  were  nominated  with  or  without  cretion,
and  in  the  former  case  whether  it  was  perfect  or  imper-
fect, (see  Cretio,  1),  G.  ii,  174,  176-178,  U.  xxii,  33,  34.

2.  Pupillary  substitution. — This  was  nomination  of  a  substi-

tute to  take  on  the  death  in  pupillarity  of  an  institute
who  had  succeeded,  G.  ii,  179,  U.  xxiii,  7 ;  and  was  in  effect
a  testament  made  by  a  father  for  his  child,  living  or
posthumous,  G.  ii,  183,  U.  xxiii,  7,  to  take  effect  in  the
event  of  the  latter  dying  under  puberty,  G.  ii,  180,  and
before  he  could  make  one  for  himself,  G.  ii,  113,  U.  xx,  12.
It  was  not  necessary  that  the  child  should  be  instituted
as  his  parent's  heir,  for  a  man  might  so  substitute  to  his
disinherited  children,  G.  ii,  182,  U.  xxiii,  8  ;  but  it  was
necessary  that  the  substitution  should  be  in  a  testament
in  which  the  parent  had  validly  instituted  an  heir,
whether  his  child  or  a  stranger,  U.  xxiii,  9.

3.  Precautions  that  usually  accompanied  a  pupillary  substitution.

— To  obviate  any  risk  of  foul  play  towards  the  child
by  the  individual  thus  substituted  to  him,  it  was  the
practice  to  make  the  substitution  in  the  last  tablets  of
the  testament,  and  seal  them  up  by  themselves,  so  that
the  fact  should  not  be  prematurely  revealed,  G.  ii,  181.

4.  Incompetency  of  pupillary  substitution  to  a  stranger  institute.

— For  a  stranger  institute  it  was  impossible  to  make  a

598  DIGEST.

SUBSTITUTION — continued.

substitution  of  this  sort ;  but  the  same  object  might  be
attained  by  means  of  a  trust,  G.  ii,  184,  (see  Fideicom-
missum,  1).

SUCCESSIO  GKADUUM  on  intestacy  was  not  allowed  by  the  jus  civile,
G.  iii,  12,  22,  U.  xxvi,  5  ;  the  praetors  so  far  sanctioned
it  that  they  allowed  agnates  of  the  second  or  a  remoter
degree  to  come  in  as  cognates  on  failure  of  those  of  the
nearest,  G.  iii,  28,  (see  Bonor.  posscssio,  16).

SUCCESSION,  siwcessio,  in  its  widest  acceptation,  included  every  case
of  passage  of  a  man's  estate,  with  its  rights  and  liabilities,
to  another  person  per  universitatem,  G.  ii,  97,  iii,  82,  as  in
emptio  bonorum,  G.  iii,  77,  adrogation,  83,  and  in  manum
conventio,  ibid,  (see  those  words) ;  in  its  narrower  significa-
tion, however,  it  was  succession  to  the  dead,  G.  ii,  157,  iii,
33,  etc.  This  arose  either  jure  civile  in  the  case  of  an
heir  taking  an  inheritance,  hereditas,  which  was  the
creature  of  statute,  G.  iii,  32,  (see  Hereditas} ;  or  jure
honorario  in  the  case  of  an  individual  to  whom,  on  con-
siderations of  equity,  the  praetor  had  granted  possession
of  the  deceased's  estate,  putting  him  de  facto  in  the  posi-
tion of  an  heir,  G.  iii,  32,  336,  U.  xxviii,  12,  (see  Bono-
rum  possessio).  In  early  times  an  hereditas  was  held
acquirable  by  usucapion  by  one  who  had  no  title  as  heir,
but  simply  took  possession  of  the  estate  and  held  it  for  a
year, — a  doctrine  that  was  afterwards  disowned,  G.  i,  54,
(see  Usucapion,  6).  The  rules  of  succession  to  freedmen,
under  both  the  civil  and  praetorian  law,  differed  materially
from  those  of  succession  to  free-born  citizens,  and  are
digested  separately  ;  see  Succession  to  citizen  freedmen,
Succession  to  Junian  latins.

SUCCESSION  DUTY,  G.  iii,  125  and  note.

SUCCESSION"    TO    CITIZEN    FREEDMEN   AND    EKEED-
WOMEN,  G.  iii,   39-53,  U.  tits,  xxvii,  xxix ;  see  also
PATRONATE.
I.  SUCCESSION  TO  FREEDMEN.

1.  The  rides  of  the  Twelve  Tables. — By  the  Decemviral  Code  a

citizen  freedmau  was  entitled  to  make  a  testament,  and
to  pass  over  his  patron  if  he  pleased,  G.  iii,  40,  U.  xxix,  1  ;
and  on  intestacy  the  patron  was  to  succeed  only  when
the  freedman  left  no  sui  heredes,  ibid.,  U.  xxvii,  1.  But
this  right  of  the  patron  was  lost  by  his  capitis  deminutio,
G.  iii,  51,  U.  xxvii,  5.

2.  Praetorian  rules  when  the  freedman  had  made  a  testament.

— The  praetors  held  the  rules  of  the  Tables  to  be  fail-
enough  when  the  patron  was  excluded,  either  testamen-

DIGEST.  599

SUCCESSION    TO    CITIZEN    FBEEDMEN   AND    FBEED-

WOMEN — continued.
I.  SUCCESSION  TO  FREEDMEN — continued.

tarily  or  on  intestacy,  by  sui  heredes  who  were  issue  of
the  deceased,  but  not  when  he  was  excluded  by  artificial
sui  (see  Sui  heredes,  1),  such  as  a  wife  in  manu  or  an
adoptive  child,  G.  iii,  40,  U.  xxix,  1.  They  therefore
ordained  that,  if  a  freedman  in  his  testament  did  not
institute  children  of  his  own,  he  was  bound  to  leave  his
patron  at  least  one  half  of  his  estate,  the  latter  being
entitled  to  bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas  to  that  extent
(see  Bonor.  poss.,  8)  if  passed  over,  G.  iii,  41,  U.  xxix,  1.
But  this  right  of  his  was  excluded  by  a  grant  of  the  same
bonor.  possessio  to  natural  children  of  the  deceased,  even
those  who  had  been  emancipated  by  him  or  given  in
adoption  ;  though  not  by  a  grant  of  it  to  those  he  had  dis-
inherited, nor  even  by  the  institution  of  his  wife  in  manu
or  a  child  he  had  adopted,  ibid.

3.  Praetorian  rules  when  the  freedman  died  intestate. — In  this

case  the  same  principle  was  applied  as  described  in  No.
2 :  if  an  intestate  freedman  was  survived  by  children  of
his  body,  even  emancipated  or  given  in  adoption,  they
took  everything  ;  but  if  only  by  artificial  sui,  his  patron
might  claim  bonorum  possessio  ab  intestato  of  one  half  of
his  estate,  G.  iii,  41,  U.  xxix,  1.

4.  The  Julian  and  Papia-Poppaean  innovation. — This  enact-

ment provided  that  if  a  freedman  worth  not  less  than
100,000  sesterces  left  fewer  than  three  children,  then,
whether  he  died  testate  or  intestate,  his  patron  was  to
have  an  equal  share  with  them  ;  i.e.  a  half  if  only  one,  a
a  third  if  two,  but  nothing  if  more  than  two,  G.  iii,  42,
(see  Julian  and  Pap.  Pop.  law,  8).

5.  Rights  of  children  of  patrons. — If  a  patron  had  predeceased

his  freedman  the  patronate  (which  see,  No.  1)  passed  to
the  former's  children,  even  though  disinherited,  G.  iii,
48,  58,  64  ;  the  patron's  stranger  heirs  had  no  right  to  it,
or  to  the  freedman's  succession,  ibid.  By  the  old  law
both  sons  and  daughters  of  the  patron,  and  the  issue
of  sons,  had  the  same  rights  as  the  patron  himself,  G.
iii,  46,  U.  xxix.  4.  The  praetors  called  only  sous  of  the
patrons  and  their  male  descendants,  G.  iii,  46,  U.  xxix,  5.
The  Papian  law,  however,  revived  the  right  of  a  daughter
to  participate,  provided  she  had  the  jus  liberorum,  ibid.,
(see  Jus  liberorum,  Julian  and  Pap.  Popp.  law,  7).

6.  How  the  rights  of  a  plurality  of  patrons  were  adjusted. — If

the  deceased  freedman  had  more  than  one  patron  the  sue-

600  DIGEST.

SUCCESSION  TO    CITIZEN    FKEEDMEN    AND    FEEED-
WO  WEN— continued.

I.  SUCCESSION  TO  FKEEDMEN—  continued.

cession  belonged  to  them  equally,  without  regard  to  what
had  been  their  respective  interests  in  him  as  a  slave,  G.
iii,  59  ;  if  one  of  them  declined — for  they  did  not  succeed
ipso  jure,  but  had  to  enter  like  extranei  heredes  (which
see) — the  whole  succession  belonged  to  the  others,  62.  If
one  of  two  patrons  was  dead,  the  survivor  excluded  the
children  of  the  predeceaser ;  if  both  were  dead,  the  son
of  one  excluded  the  grandson  of  the  other  ;  if  both  left
children  of  the  first  degree,  one  of  them  say  two,  the
other  three,  these  took  per  capita  and  not  per  stirpes,  G.
iii,  60,  61,  U.  xxvii,  2-4.

7.  Eights  of  a  patroness  and  her  children. — Under  the  praetor-

ian rules  a  patroness  had  no  greater  right  in  the  succes-
sion of  her  freedman  than  had  been  conferred  on  a  patron
by  the  XII  Tables,  G.  iii,  49,  U.  xxix,  6.  But  the  Papian
law  gave  a  free-born  patroness  who  was  mother  of  three
children,  and  a  freedwoman  patroness  who  was  mother
of  two,  almost  the  same  rights  the  edict  had  given  to  a
patron,  G.  iii,  50  and  n.  1,  U.  xxix,  6  ;  and  to  a  free-born
patroness  it  granted  in  addition  the  same  right  it  had
itself  conferred  on  a  patron,  G.  iii,  50  and  n.  2,  U.  xxix,
7.  It  is  doubtful  what  were  the  rights  of  the  son  of  a
patroness,  G.  iii,  53  and  n.  2  ;  those  of  a  daughter  are
not  referred  to.

8.  Ulpian's  ordines. — In  xxviii,  7,  Ulp.  gives  the  heads  of  the

praetorian  order  of  succession  ab  intestato  without  any
explanation.  As  they  applied  to  freeclmen  they  seem  to
have  run  thus  : — first,  the  deceased's  descendants  of  his
body  through  males,  as  above,  No.  3  ;  second,  the  patron
and  his  children,  but  only  in  concurrence  with  artificial
sui  of  the  freedman  if  such  existed,  above,  No.  3  ;  third,
the  freedman's  cognates,  e.g.  the  children  of  a  daughter ;
fourth,  the  patron's  agnates  ;  fifth,  the  patron's  patron,  and
the  latter's  children  ;  sixth,  the  freedman's  wife,  if  she  had
not  been  in  manu,  and  so  had  not  been  admitted  in
the  second  place  ;  seventh,  the  patron's  cognates  within
certain  limits.

II.  SUCCESSION  TO  FKEEDWOMEN.

9.  Eights  of  a  patron. — A  freedwoman  by  the  old  law  could

not  make  a  testament  without  the  auctoritas  of  her
patron,  and  if  she  made  one  in  which  he  was  passed
over,  he  had  only  himself  to  blame ;  if  she  died  intes-
tate, he  took  everything,  because  she  had  no  sui  heredes,

DIGEST.  G  0 1

SUCCESSION    TO    CITIZEN"    FBEEDMEN    AND    FBEED-

WOMEN— continued.
II.  SUCCESSION  TO  FREEDWOMEN — continued.

G.  iii,  43,  U.  xxix,  2.  Upon  these  rules  of  the  Twelve
Tables  the  praetors  made  no  change,  U.  xxix,  2.  The
Papian  law,  in  liberating  freedwomen  with  four  children
from  tutory  (which  see,  No.  24),  thus  put  it  in  their
power  to  make  testaments  without  auctoritas  ;  but  it
provided  that  a  patron  should  nevertheless  be  entitled  to
a  share  of  his  freedwoman's  estate,  varying  according  to
the  number  of  children  by  whom  she  was  survived,  G.
iii,  44  and  note,  U.  xxix,  3.

10.  Rights  of  a  patroness.  —  In  the  case  of  a  freedwoman
dying  intestate  the  Papian  law  added  nothing  to  the
rights  of  her  patroness  ;  if  neither  of  them  was  capite
deminuta,  everything  went  to  the  latter,  because  there
were  no  sui  heredes ;  but  if  either  had  suffered  capitis
minutio,  then  the  freedwoman's  children  took  as  cognates,
to  the  exclusion  of  her  whose  patronage  had  ceased,  G.  iii,
51.  A  patroness,  being  unable  to  be  tutor  (see  Tutory,
22),  had  never  had  any  control  over  her  freedwoman's
testament,  52 ;  but  the  Papian  law  conferred  on  her,
provided  she  had  the  jus  liberorum  (which  see),  a  right
of  challenging  it  much  the  same  as  that  the  edict  had
given  to  a  patron  (see  above,  No.  3)  in  regard  to  the
testament  of  a  freedman,  Hid.

SUCCESSION  TO  JUNIAN  LATINS,  G.  iii,  55-71,  and  note  to  55 ;  see
also  Junian  Icdinity.

1.  Position  of  the  Junian  latin   in  reference  to  his  estate  —

Before  the  Junian  law  those  whom  it  made  latins  had
been  de  jure  slaves,  though  de  facto  free ;  their  estates
therefore  were  de  jure  only  peculia  (see  Peculiutii),  and
the  property  of  their  manumitters,  G.  iii,  56.  With
acquisition  of  de  jure  freedom  there  was  an  end  of  the
peculium  properly  so  called ;  but  the  consideration  pre-
sented itself  that  this  would  be  a  fraud  on  the  manu-
mitters, who  were  not  patrons  in  the  sense  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  and  so  were  not  entitled  to  succeed  to
their  freedmen,  ibid.  Therefore  by  the  Junian  law  itself
it  was  provided  that  the  estate  of  a  latin  should  still  con-
tinue to  belong  to  his  manumitters  as  a  quasi-peculivm ,
ibid.

2.  Right  in  it  of  the  manumitter  and  his  children  and  heirs. —

According  to  the  Junian  law  the  manumitter  was  en-
titled to  deal  with  it  testamentarily  as  part  of  his  own
estate,  even  during  the  lifetime  of  his  freedman ;  his

602  DIGEST.

SUCCESSION  TO  JUNIAN  LATINS — continued.

disinherited  children,  contrary  to  the  rule  in  reference  to
succession  to  citizen  freedrnen  (which  see),  had  no  right
to  it,  G.  iii,  63 ;  it  went  to  the  heirs,  even  strangers,
named  in  his  testament,  58,  63,  64,  or  to  a  legatee  if  he
chose  to  bequeath  it,  G-.  ii,  195.  But  the  Largian  senatus-
consult  altered  this  rule,  and  gave  it  first  to  the  manu-
mitter  himself,  next  to  his  descendants  not  expressly
disinherited,  and  only  in  the  third  place  to  his  heirs,  G.
iii,  63-71.

3.  What  if  there  had  been  more  manumitters  than  one  ? — In

such  case  they  took  pro  rata  parte, — according  to  the
interest  they  had  severally  had  in  the  latin  before  manu-
mission, G.  iii,  59  ;  the  heir  of  one  that  had  died  was  not
excluded  by  another  who  survived,  60  ;  and  if  all  were
dead  their  successors  took  not  per  capita  but  according  to
the  interests  of  the  several  manumitters  they  respectively
represented,  61.  If  one  of  a  plurality  of  manumitters,
or  his  representatives,  failed  to  take,  his  share  became
caducous  (see  Caducity,  7)  and  passed  to  the  state,  62.

4.  What  if  a  latin  had  obtained  a  grant  of  citizenship  unknown

to  his  manumitter  ? — If  such  a  grant  had  been  obtained
from  the  emperor  salvo  jure  patroni,  or  even  without  such
reservation  but  unknown  to  his  manumitter,  the  grantee
was  indeed  a  citizen  during  his  life,  but  still  a  latin  in
his  death  ;  his  children,  though  lawful,  could  not  be  his
heirs ;  his  testamentary  capacity  was  limited  to  institu-
tion of  his  patron,  with  a  substitution  (which  see,  No.  1)
in  the  event  of  his  failure,  G.  iii,  71.  So  it  was  enacted
by  Trajan ;  but  a  Set.  of  Hadrian's  afterwards  provided
that  if  a  latin  in  such  a  position  subsequently  proved
cause  under  the  Aelia-Sentian  law  or  the  senatusconsult,
(see  Causae  prob.  ex  1.  Ad.  Sent.),  he  should  be  held  to
have  acquired  citizenship  effectually,  and  be  entitled  to
dispose  of  his  estate  as  a  citizen  ireedrnan,  73.

SUCCESSOPJUM  EDICTUM,  see  Edictum  successorium.

Sui  HEKEDES,  often  called  sui  et  necessarii  heredes.

1.  Who  were  sui  heredes  ? — A  man's  sui  heredes — for  a  woman
could  have  none,  G.  iii,  51,  U.  xxvi,  7 — were  those  of
his  descendants  in  potestate,  natural  or  adoptive,  who
were  to  or  had  become  sui  juris  by  his  death,  as  also  his
wife  in  manu,  and  his  daughter-in-law  who  had  been  in
manu  of  a  deceased  son,  (see  Manus,  4),  G.  ii,  156,  159,
iii,  2,  3,  U.  xxii,  14,  xxvi,  1.  Those  postumi  (which  see)
were  included  who,  had  they  been  born  earlier,  would  have
been  in  potestate  and  become  sui  juris  by  the  parent's

DIGEST.  603

Sui  HEREDES — continued.

death,  G.  iii,  4,  U.  xxii,  15  ;  also  children  on  whose  account
there  had  been  causae  probatio  after  their  father's  death,
(see  Genus,  prob.  ex  I.  Aelia  Sentia,  3,  Erroris  caus.prob.  2),
G.  iii,  5  ;  and  a  son  manumitted  after  his  father's  death
from  a  first  or  second  mancipation  (see  Emancipation,  3),
G.  iii,  6.  In  the  law  of  succession  to  freedmen,  a  distinc-
tion was  made  between  natural  and  artificial  sui  heredes,
meaning  by  the  latter  a  wife  in  manu  or  an  adopted
child,  G.  iii,  40,  41,  U.  xxix,  1,  5.

2.  Why  called  sui. — They  were  so  called  because  they  were

domestici  heredes, — because  they  had  all  along  been  in  a
manner  owners  of  the  family  estate,  G.  ii,  157,  i.e.  ihefami-
lia  or  patrimonium,  G.  ii,  102,  and  were  thus  their  own
heirs  or  heirs  of  what  had  been  their  own.  It  was  for  this
reason  that  their  parent  making  a  testament  was  bound
either  to  institute  or  disinherit  them,  G.  ii,  123,  U.  xxii,
14,  (see  Testament,  10) ;  that  agnatio  sui  heredis  (which
see)  invalidated  a  testament  made  by  the  parent  previ-
ously, U.  xxiii,  2;  and  that  on  his  death  intestate  they
had  the  first  place  in  the  succession,  G.  ii,  157,  iii,  1,  U.
xx  vi,  1.

3.  Why  also  called  necessarii  ? — For  the  very  same  reason  for

which  they  were  called  sui, — because,  as  in  a  manner
already  owners  of  it,  'juris  necessitate  hereditati  adstrin-
guntur'  G.  iii,  87,  and  if  not  disinherited  were  heirs
whether  they  would  or  not,  G.  ii,  157,  though  by  the
praetors  permitted  to  abstain,  158  ;  see  Hereditas,  3.

Sui  JURIS  PERSONAE,  persons  not  subject  to  any  family  head,  but
themselves  patres  or  matres  familiae,  U.  iv,  1  and  note.
They  might  cease  to  be  so  by  capitis  deminutio  (which
see),  as  by  adrogation  or  in  manum  conventio,  G.  iii,  83  ;
but  so  long  as  they  were  sui  juris  they  were  their  own
masters,  except  in  so  far  as  controlled  by  tutors  or  curators
on  account  of  age,  sex,  or  infirmity,  (see  Tutory,  Curatory).

SULPICIUS  EUFUS,  SERV.,  see  Servius  Snip.  Euf.

SUPERFICIES  SOLO  CEBIT,  G.  ii,  73  ;  see  Property,  6.

SURDUS,  see  Deaf  person.

SURETYSHIP,  adpromissio,  G.  iii,  115-127.

1.  Suretyship  in  general. — The  purpose  of  every  adpromissio
was  to  secure  performance  of  an  obligation  by  a  third
party,  G.  iii,  117  ;  consequently,  as  his  undertaking  was
accessory  only,  no  surety  was  liable  for  more  than  the
principal  debtor,  though  his  liability  might  be  for  less,
126.  There  were  three  varieties  of  it,  sponsio,  fidepro-
missio,  and  fidejussio,  115,  in  all  of  which  responsibility

604  DIGEST.

SURETYSHIP — continued.

was  imposed  upon  the  surety  by  verbal  contract,  (see
Verbal  obligations),  116  ;  there  being  forms  of  question
and  answer  specially  adapted  to  each  variety,  116,  92,
note  1.

2.  Sponsio   and  fidepromissio  in  particular. — Sponsors   and

fidepromissors  could  become  accessory  only  to  verbal
obligations,  G.  iii,  119.  Their  engagement,  however,
might  be  binding  even  though  that  of  the  principal
debtor  was  not,  e.g.  that  of  a  person  who  had  promised
something  after  his  death,  or  of  a  pupil  or  a  woman  who
had  promised  without  tutorial  auctoritas,  (see  Stipulation,
3,  4),  119  ;  but  a  sponsor  could  not  be  taken  bound  for
the  engagement  by  sponsio  of  a  slave  or  peregrin,  because
they  were  not  entitled  to  use  the  word  spondco,  (see  Stipu-
lation, 2),  ibid.  The  heirs  of  sponsors  and  fidepromissors
were  not  liable,  120,  iv,  113  ;  unless  in  the  case  of  a
peregrin  fidepromissor,  whose  liability  was  recognised  by
the  law  of  his  own  state,  G.  iii,  120.

3.  Enactments  in  aid  of  sponsors  and  fidepromissors. — By  the

Furian  law,  which  did  not  apply  out  of  Italy,  G.  iii,  121«,
their  liability  was  limited  to  two  years,  121  and  note  ;  if
there  were  more  than  one,  each  was  liable  only  for  his
share,  even  though  some  might  be  insolvent  when  action
was  raised,  ibid. ;  and  if  the  creditor  had  exacted  from
one  more  than  his  proportion,  the  statute  gave  the  latter
manus  infectio  pro  judicato  (see  Legis  actiones,  5)  to  compel
its  restitution,  G.  iv,  22.  By  the  still  earlier  Apuleian
law  a  plurality  of  sponsors  or  fidepromissors  had  been
put  in  the  position  of  partners,  one  paying  more  than  his
share  being  entitled  to  relief  from  the  others,  G.  iii,  122
and  note ;  but  this  was  considered  to  have  been  tacitly
repealed  by  the  Furian  law  so  far  as  Italy  was  concerned,
122,  though  the  benefit  of  it  survived  in  the  provinces,
ibid.  By  the  Cicereian  law  certain  duties  were  imposed  on
creditors  taking  sponsors  or  fidepromissors,  whose  neglect
gave  the  latter  a  qualified  right  to  have  their  engage-
ments cancelled,  123  and  note ;  while  a  Cornelian  law,
except  in  one  or  two  special  cases,  limited  the  amount
for  which  a  sponsor  or  fidepromissor  could  become  bound,
124  and  note,  125.

4.  Fidejussio  in  particular. — A  fidejussor  might  become  acces-

sory not  merely  to  a  verbal  contract  but  to  any  sort  of  obli-
gation, whether  civil  or  natural,  and  even  to  that  of  a  slave,
G.  iii,  119«  and  n.  1,  which  in  itself  was  civilly  useless,
104;  his  heir  was  as  much  bound  as  himself,  120;  his

DIGEST.  605

SURETYSHIP — continued.

liability  was  unlimited  in  point  of  time,  121  ;  but  as  the
Cornelian  law  expressly  applied  to  him,  it  was  limited  in
amount,  124.  Where  there  was  a  plurality  of  fidejussors,
each  wras  liable  in  solidum  ;  though  when  one  only  was
sued,  he  was  entitled  to  invoke  Hadrian's  beneficium
divisionis,  and  have  action  limited  to  his  share,  121,  122.
The  provisions  of  the  Apuleian,  Furian,  and  Cicereian
laws  did  not  apply  to  a  lidejussor,  121,  123  ;  but  in
practice  he  had  the  benefit  of  the  last,  123.
5.  The  surety  s  right  of  recourse. — By  a  Publilian  law  of  the
fourth  century  of  Borne,  G.  iii,  127  and  n.  2,  a  sponsor  who
had  paid  for  the  principal  debtor  was  allowed  to  use
manus  injectio  pro  judicato  against  the  latter  if  he  did  not
relieve  his  surety  within  six  months,  G.  iv,  22,  25 ;  and
under  the  formular  system  an  actio  depensi  was  substituted,
which  was  in  duplum,  G.  iii,  127,  the  defender  being-
required  besides  to  give  cautio  judicatmn  solvi  (see
Cautiones  etc.),  G.  iv,  25,  102.  But  he  did  not  require
to  wait  the  six  months ;  for,  in  common  with  fidepromis-
sors  and  fidejussors,  he  was  entitled  to  proceed  against
the  debtor  at  once  in  an  a.  mandati,  (see  Mandate,  5),  G.
iii,  127.

SUSPENDED  RIGHTS,  examples  of.  — A  man's  rights  as  a  citizen  were
suspended  during  his  captivity  in  an  enemy's  hands,  but
revived  on  his  recrossing  the  frontier,  G.  i,  129,  187,  U.
x,  4.  The  patria  potestas  was  suspended  as  long  as  a
jiliusfamilias  was  in  a  first  or  second  mancipium,  but
revived  on  his  manumission,  G.  i,  135,  U.  xxiii,  3.
The  ownership  of  a  legacy  by  vindication  was  in  sus-
pense until  the  legatee  had  intimated  his  acceptance,
G.  ii,  200  ;  so  was  that  of  a  conditional  legacy  in  the
same  form  until  the  condition  was  fulfilled,  ibid.  The
question  whether  a  contract  was  one  of  sale  or  location
was  sometimes  in  suspense,  to  be  determined  by  sub-
sequent events,  G.  iii,  146.  When  a  novatory  obligation
was  conditional,  the  extinction  or  non-extinction  of  the
old  one  was  in  suspense  so  long  as  the  condition  was
open,  G.  iii,  179.

SYNGRAPHA,  G.  iii,  134  and  note  ;  see  Literal  obligations,  2.

TABULAE  HONESTAE  MISSIONIS,  honourable  discharges  to  soldiers,
frequently  conferring  on  them  peculiar  privileges,  G.  i,
57,  note  ;  see  Soldier.

TALIO,  G.  iii,  223  ;  see  Personal  injury,  2.

TAXATIO  CONDEMNATIONS,  G.  iv,  51 ;  see  Condemnatio,  2.

606  DIGEST.

TEMPUS  DELIBERANDI,  time  allowed  a  stranger  heir,  instituted
without  cretion,  for  considering  whether  or  not  he  would
accept  the  inheritance,  G.  ii,  162  ;  see  Hereditas,  6.

TESTAMENT,  testamentum,  G.  ii,  99-289,  U.  tits,  xx-xxv ;  see
also  HEKEDITAS.  For  definition  of  testament,  see  U.  xx,  1.
I.  HISTORY  OF  TESTAMENTS.

1.  The  testament  calatis  cotnitiis. — This  was  the  earliest  form

of  testament  known  to  the  Eomans.  Its  validity  depended
apparently  on  a  vote  of  the  legislature,  which  met  twice
a  year  to  consider  matters  of  the  sort,  G-.  ii,  101,  U.  xx,  2.

2.  The  testament  in  procinctu. — The  test,  in  calatis  comitiis

could  be  made  only  in  time  of  peace ;  to  meet  the  case
of  a  man  desiring  to  make  one  on  the  eve  of  battle,
that  in  procinctu  was  introduced,  the  army  taking  the
place  of  the  comitia,  G.  ii,  101,  U.  xx,  2.

3.  The  testament  per  aes  et  libram  in  its  original  form. — After

the  introduction  of  the  negotium  per  aes  et  libram,  which
also  was  a  public  act  in  the  presence  of  five  citizen
witnesses,  probably  the  representatives  of  the  five  Servian
classes,  and  thus  also  of  the  legislature,  G.  ii,  104,  note  8,
and  its  adaptation  to  conveyance  of  property  and  crea-
tion of  obligations  (see  Aes  et  libra),  advantage  seems  to
have  been  taken  of  it  as  suitable  also  for  mortis  causa  dis-
position. The  parties  were  the  testator  and  a  friend  who
was  to  become  his  heir,  together  with  a  libripens  and  the
five  citizens,  G.  ii,  102,  103  ;  and  the  testator  formally
mancipated  his  estate  to  his  friend,  who  hence  got  the
name  of  familiae  emptor,  purchaser  of  the  family  estate,
ibid.,  and  who  probably  gave  the  testator  a  single  coin,
nummus  unus,  as  the  price  of  the  nominal  purchase,  G.
ii,  105,  252.  It  rather  appears  that  this  was  not  a  testa-
mentary act  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  words,  but  an
absolute  transfer  of  the  estate  to  the  familiae  emptor,
who  took  it  however  subject  to  verbal  instructions  as  to
how  he  was  to  deal  with  it  on  the  death  of  the  mancipant,
G.  ii,  103.

4.  The  amended  testament  per  aes  et  libram. — After  a  time

important  changes  were  introduced, — the  will  was  re-
duced to  writing,  the  heir  ceased  to  be  a  party  to  the
mancipatio,  and  though  a  familiae  emptor  still  officiated,
he  was  there  only  for  form's  sake,  without  any  personal
interest  in  the  testament,  G.  ii,  103.  The  amended
procedure  is  described  in  G.  ii,  104  and  notes,  and
briefly  referred  to  in  U.  xx,  2.  It  consisted  of  two
distinct  parts,  the  familiae  venditio  and  the  nuncupatio
testamenti,  otherwise  testatio,  G.  ii,  104,  U.  xx,  9.  In  the

DIGEST.  607

TESTAMENT— continued.

I.  HISTORY  OF  TESTAMENTS — continued.

first  the  familiae  emptor  formally  purchased  the  univer-
sitas — not  the  individual  items — of  the  testator's  estate,
but  under  reservation  to  the  latter  of  free  power  of  disposal,
and  under  the  explanation  that  the  ceremony  was  in-
tended simply  to  give  point  and  validity  to  what  was
to  follow,  G.  ii,  104  In  the  second  the  testator,  dis-
playing his  closed  testament,  declared  it  to  contain  his
will,  and  called  upon  the  witnesses  to  grant  him  their
testimony  to  the  mmcupatio,  ibid.

5.  The  so-called  praetorian  testament. — As  a  mistake  in  or  an

omission  of  any  part  of  the  solemnities  of  a  testament
per  aes  et  libram  rendered  it  null  and  void,  G.  ii,  114,
119,  and  the  intentions  of  a  testator  were  thus  often  de-
feated, the  praetors  interfered,  declaring  they  would  give
bonor.  possessio  secundum  tabulas  to  the  heirs  nominated  in
any  testament  made  by  one  who  was  a  citizen  sui  juris  at
the  time  and  at  his  death,  and  which  bore  the  seals  of
seven  citizen  witnesses,  G-.  ii,  147,  U.  xxviii,  6,  (see  Bonor.
poss.,  10, 11).  This  is  often  called  a  praetorian  testament,
though  the  phrase  is  not  in  the  texts ;  it  did  not,  how-
ever, give  the  nominee  in  it  the  hereditas,  or  entitle  him
to  the  name  of  heir,  G.  iii,  32,  (see  Bonor.  poss.,  5).

II.  KEQUISITES  OF  A  TESTAMENT  PER  AES  ET  LIBRAM,  AND  CON-

SEQUENCES OF  THEIR  ABSENCE.

6.  Capacity  in  the   testator. — The  testator  required  to  have

testamenti  factio,  i.e.  to  be  a  citizen  and  sui  juris,  G.  ii,
114  and  n.  1,  147  ;  neither  peregrins,  U.  xx,  14,  nor
Junian  latins,  G.  i,  23,  U.  xx,  14,  nor  deditician  freed-
men,  G.  i,  25,  iii,  75,  U.  xx,  14,  could  make  a  testament,
though  a  citizen  freedmen  might,  G.  iii,  40  f.  (see  Succes-
sion to  cit.  freedmen,  1) ;  nor  could  any  person  alieni  juris
do  so,  G.  ii,  112,  except  a  filiusfamilias  dealing  with  his
peculium  castrense  (which  see),  G.  ii,  106,  or  a  public
slave,  who  could  test  on  one-half  of  his  peculium,  U.  xx,
16.  The  testator  required  further  to  have  reached  the
age  of  puberty,  fourteen  if  a  male,  twelve  if  a  female,
G.  i,  40,  ii,  113,  U.  xx,  12  ;  and  to  be  neither  insane,  nor
interdicted  as  a  prodigal,  nor  deaf  or  mute,  G.  ii,  113,
U.  xx,  13  (although  the  last  objection  may  possibly  not
have  prevented  his  testament  being  given  effect  to  as  a
praetorian  one).

7.  Observance  of  formalities. — It  was  requisite,  in  order  to  the

testament's  being  held  jure  factum,  that  the  solemnities
of  the  familiae  venditio  and  testamenti  nuncupatio  should

608  DIGEST.

TESTAMENT— continued.

II.  REQUISITES  OF  A  TESTAMENT,  etc. — continued.

be  carefully  observed,  and  that  the  familiae  emptor,  libri-
pens,  and  witnesses  should  be  properly  qualified,  G.  ii,
114,  119.  They  required  to  be  persons  with  whom  the
testator  had  testamenti  factio,  U.  xx,  2,  i.e.  persons  whom
he  might  lawfully  make  his  heirs,  G.  i,  114,  note  1  ;  a
Junian  latin  therefore  could  act  in  any  of  those  capaci-
ties, U.  xx,  8.  No  one  who  was  in  potentate  of  the  testator
or  familiae  emptor,  or  in  the  same  potestas  as  the  latter,  or
his  paterfamilias,  could  act  as  witnesses,  domestic  testi-
mony being  prohibited,  G.  i,  105-107,  U.  xx,  3-6 ;  but
the  prohibition  did  not  extend  to  those  domestically
related  to  the  heir  or  a  legatee,  although  employment  of
relatives  of  the  former  was  usually  avoided,  G.  ii,  108.
Mutes  and  deaf  persons,  lunatics,  pupils,  and  women,
were  all  incapable  of  assisting  in  the  execution  of  a
testament,  U.  xx,  7.  Omission  or  defect  of  formalities,
while  fatal  to  the  testament  jure  civili,  yet  did  not  pre-
vent its  being  given  effect  to  jure  praetorio  if  sealed  by
seven  witnesses,  see  above  "N"o.  5  ;  but  the  texts  do  not  say
whether  the  praetors  required  in  them  any  other  qualifica-
tions than  simply  citizenship,  G.  ii,  147,  U.  xxviii,  6.

8.  Tutorial  auctoritas  in  the  case  of  women  testators. — On  the

position  generally  of  women  in  tutelage,  see  Tutory,  III.,
IV.  When  a  woman  was  in  tutelage — by  the  Julian  law
some  were  free  from  it,  see  Jul.  and  Pap.  Popp.  law,  2 —
it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  the  jure  civili  validity  of
her  testament  that  she  should  have  tutorial  auctoritas,
G.  ii,  112,  118,  U.  xx,  15.  Anciently,  when  women  were
in  tutelage  of  their  agnates,  they  could  rarely  make  a
testament  without  first  performing  cocmptio  (see  Manus,  7),
and  thus  obtaining  fiduciary  tutors  with  whom  they  had
previously  bargained  for  auctoritas,  G.  i,  H5a,  ii,  112;
but  the  tutory  of  agnates  having  been  abolished  by  the
Claudianlaw,  G.i,157,l7l,U.xi,  8, the  senate,  in  the  time
of  Hadrian,  enacted  that  a  tutor  should  in  future  not  be
entitled  to  refuse  his  auctoritas  unless  he  was  the  woman's
patron  or  parens  manumissor,  G.  ii,  112, 122, — them  their
wards  could  not  compel  to  grant  it,  G.  i,  192.  In  point
of  form,  however,  it  was  still  necessary  ju re  civili;  but
its  absence  did  not  prevent  the  testament  being  given
effect  to  jure  praetorio  where  the  neglected  tutor  was
neither  patron  nor  parent,  G.  ii,  119-122.

9.  Institution  of  an  heir  or  heirs. — This  was  absolutely  essen-

tial to  the  testament  in  point  of  substance,  G.  ii,  116,

DIGEST.  609

TESTAMENT— continued.

II.  EEQUISITES  OF  A  TESTAMENT,  ETC. — continued.

284;  it  was  the  caput  et  fundamentum  of  the  whole  deed,
G.  ii,  229,  U.  xxiv,  15,  and  could  not  be  supplied  in  any
subsequent  writing,  e.g.  a  codicil,  G.  ii,  273.  It  had  to  be
made  moreover  sollemni  more,  G.  ii,  116,  i.e.  in  one  or
other  of  the  traditional  styles  enumerated  in  G.  ii,  117,
U.  tit.  xxi ;  and,  where  it  was  a  stranger  that  was  being
instituted,  usually  had  coupled  with  it  a  cretion  clause,
requiring  him  to  enter  within  a  limited  period,  G.  ii,
164  f.,  U.  xxii,  27  f.  (see  Cretid).  And  there  might  be  any
number  of  heirs  ;  a  sole  heir  being  said  to  be  instituted
ex  asse,  one  of  several  ex  parte,  G.  ii,  259.  But  if  a
co-heir  was  instituted  poenae  causae,  i.e.  with  a  view  to
coerce  him  with  whom  he  was  conjoined  to  a  particular
course  of  action,  the  penal  institution  was  useless,  G.  ii,
243.  Further  it  was  impossible  to  institute  an  individual
to  take  on  the  heir's  death,  G.  ii,  277.

10.  Institution  or  disherison  of  children. — Another  requirement
of  the  jus  civile  was  that  the  testator  should  either  in-
stitute or  disinherit  the  sui  heredes  (which  see),  G.  ii,  123,
U.  xxii,  14 ;  they  were  in  a  manner  joint-owners  with
him  of  the  family  estate,  G.  ii,  157,  and  were  not  to  be
deprived  of  their  birth-right  otherwise  than  expressly.
But  while  the  praeterition  of  a  son  in  potestate  invalidated
the  testament,  G.  ii,  123,  U.  xxii,  16, — though  the  Pro-
culians  held  this  to  be  the  case  only  if  he  survived  his
father,  G.  ii,  123, — and  entitled  the  filius  praeteritus  to
eject  the  instituted  heir,  even  when  the  latter  had  obtained
a  grant  of  honor,  possessio  secundum  tab.  (which  see,  ISTos.
1, 4),  U.  xxviii,  13,  praeterition  of  other  sui  heredes  merely
entitled  them  by  the  jus  civile  to  claim  a  share  by  accre-
tion, G.  ii,  124,  U.  xxii,  17,  (see  Adcretio,  3),  and  by  the
praetorian  law  to  honor,  possessio  contra  tabulas,  G.  ii,  125,
126,  U.  xxviii,  3,  as  corrected  in  Additions  etc.,  (see
Bonor.  poss.,  6).  It  was  necessary  also,  as  a  precaution
against  subsequent  invalidation  of  his  testament  by
agnatio  sui  heredis  (see  below,  No.  22),  for  the  testator  to
institute  or  disinherit  his  postumi  (which  see),  G.  ii,  130,
U.  xxii,  19,  21 ;  and  to  institute  or  disinherit  even  the
children  of  his  immediate  male  sui  heredes,  in  case  the
latter  should  predecease  him,  and  the  former  nullify  his
testament  by  quasi  agnation,  G.  ii,  133,  134.  The  jus
civile  did  not  require  that  emancipated  children  should  be
instituted  or  disinherited,  for  they  had  ceased  to  be  sui,
G.  ii,  135,  U.  xxii,  23 ;  but  the  praetors  made  their  iii-

2Q

610  DIGEST.

TESTAMENT— continued.

II.  KEQUISITES  OF  A  TESTAMENT,  ETC. — continued.

stitution  or  disherison  incumbent,  ibid.,  giving  them  bonor.
possessio  contra  tab.  if  passed  over,  but  only  on  condition
of  collation,  ibid.,  U.  xxviii,  2,  4,  (see  Bonor.  poss.,  7).  As
regarded  adoptive  children,  see  Adoption,  6,  7.  A  mother
making  a  testament  was  not  required  to  disinherit  children
she  did  not  institute,  for  she  had  no  sui  heredes,  G.  iii,  71.

11.  Form  of  disherison. — A  son  had  to  be  disinherited  nomi-

natim,  i.e.  by  special  reference,  G.  ii,  127,  U.  xxii,  20.
According  to  the  jus  civile  other  sui  were  sufficiently
disinherited  in  a  general  or  ceteri  clause,  G.  ii,  128  ;  but
the  praetors  required  that  males,  e.g.  grandsons,  should
be  disinherited  nomination,  129.  A  posthumous  son  had
to  be  disinherited  in  the  same  way  as  a  living  one ;  but
female  and  remoter  male  postumi  might  be  disinherited
by  the  ceteri  clause,  provided  some  trifling  legacy  was  left
them  to  show  they  had  not  been  forgotten,  G.  ii,  132,
U.  xxii,  21,  22.  Disherison  of  descendants  of  an  imme-
diate male  suus  required  to  be  in  the  same  form  as  that
of  postumi,  G.  ii,  134 ;  while  by  the  edict  that  of  eman-
cipated children  was  to  be  in  the  same  form  as  that  of
living  mi,  G.  ii,  135,  U.  xxii,  23.  The  disherison  required
to  be  in  the  testament  itself ;  if  omitted  there  it  could
not  effectually  be  supplied  in  a  codicil,  G.  ii,  273.

12.  Ulterior  consequences  of  disherison.  —  Disherison  deprived

the  disinherited  of  all  right  to  the  hereditas — they  might
still  take  legacies — under  the  testament,  yet  did  not
deprive  them  of  their  patronage  over  and  right  of  succes-
sion to  their  parent's  citizen  freedmen,  G.  iii,  58,  64,  (see
Patronate,  2,  Succession  to  citizen  freedmen,  5) ;  if  it  was
nomination  disherison,  however,  it  did  deprive  them  of
their  right  to  the  estates  of  his  Junian  latins,  58,  63,  64,
(see  Succession  to  Junian  latins,  2).  As  regarded  the
parent,  the  fact  that  he  had  disinherited  his  child  did  not
preclude  him  from  still  making  a  pupillary  substitution
on  the  child's  account,  G.  ii,  182,  (see  Substitution,  2).

13.  What  strangers  might  be  instituted. — The  general  rule  was

that  a  testator  could  institute  those  only  with  whom  he
had  testamenti  factio,  U.  xxii,  1.  This  excluded  peregrins
and  deditician  freedmen,  G.  i,  25,  but  not  Junian  latins,
U.  xxii,  3  ;  these  might  competently  be  instituted,  though
they  could  not  take  the  hereditas  unless  they  became
citizens  within  the  hundred  cretion  days,  ibid.,  (see
Jus  capiendi}.  By  the  Voconian  law  (see  G.  ii,  226,  note)
institution  of  a  woman  by  a  testator  whose  fortune

DIGEST.  611

TESTAMENT—  continued.

II.  EEQUISITES  OF  A  TESTAMENT,  ETC. — continued.

amounted  to  100,000  asses  was  prohibited,  G.  ii,  274
An  incerta  persona  (which  see)  could  not  be  instituted,
G-.  ii,  287,  U.  xxii,  4  ;  neither  could  a  postumus  alienus  (see
Postumi,  3),  G.  i,  147,  ii,  242,  because  regarded  as  an  in-
certa persona,  ibid.  A  municipality  was  incertvm  corpus,
and  could  not  be  instituted  except  by  its  freedmen,  U.
xxii,  5.  A  few  specially  favoured  divinities  might  be  in-
stituted, thanks  to  certain  senatusconsults  and  imperial
constitutions,  U.  xxii,  6.

14.  Institution  of  persons  alieni  juris. — It  was  incumbent  on
a  testator  either  to  institute  or  disinherit  those  of  his
own  filiifamilias  who  were  to  become  sui  juris  by  his
death  ;  see  above,  No.  10.  But  he  might  also  institute  a
filiusfamilias  alienus;  the  institution  being  practically
in  favour  of  the  paterfamilias,  for  whom  he  acquired,
and  without  whose  orders  he  could  not  enter,  G.  ii,  87.  A
servus  alienus  might  also  be  instituted,  provided  the  tes-
tator had  testamenti  factio  with  his  owner,  U.  xxii,  9  ;  who
would  take  under  the  institution  depended  on  the  condi-
tion of  the  institute  at  the  time  of  entry,  as  explained  in
G.  ii,  189,  190,  U.  xxii,  9,  10.  It  was  useless  for  a  man
to  institute  his  own  slave  except  with  freedom,  G.  ii,  187,
U.  xxii,  7,  12 ;  and  even  with  freedom  institution  was
impossible  if  the  testator  held  him  only  in  bonitarian
ownership  (which  see),  for  freedom  in  that  case  could
make  him  only  a  latin,  and  could  not  qualify  him  to  be
an  heir,  G.  ii,  276,  note,  U.  xxii,  8.  If  the  testator  was
insolvent,  and  instituting  his  slave  as  necessary  heir  to
save  himself  from  being  made  a  bankrupt  after  death,
the  Aelia-Sentian  law  declared  the  age  of  the  slave
immaterial,  G.  i,  21,  U.  i,  14 ;  but  in  other  circumstances
institution  with  freedom  of  a  slave  under  thirty  was
useless,  for  it  could  not  make  him  a  citizen,  and  so  could
not  qualify  him  to  enter,  G.  ii,  276,  U.  xxii,  8,  (see  Aclia-
Sentian  law,  3,  5).  The  effect  of  the  institution,  when
valid,  varied  according  as  the  slave  had  remained  in  the
same  condition  until  the  testator's  death,  or  had  been
manumitted  after  the  date  of  the  testament,  or  had  been
alienated,  G.  ii,  188  ;  in  the  first  case  he  became  free  and
necessary  heir,  in  the  second  he  might  take  the  inherit-
ance or  decline  it  as  he  pleased,  in  the  third  he  had  to  take
his  orders  from  his  new  owner  and  did  not  become  free,
ibid.,  U.  xxii,  11, 12.  Institution  of  a  person  in  causa  man-
cipii  (see  Mancipii  etc.}  by  him  to  whom  he  was  subject
for  the  time,  also  required  to  be  with  freedom,  G.  i,  123.

612  DIGEST.

TESTAMENT— continued.

III.  PROVISIONS  IN  TESTAMENTS  OVER  AND  ABOVE  THE  INSTITUTION

OF  AN  HEIR.

15.  Substitutions. — A  substitution  might  be  of  an  heir  to  take

in  the  event  of  the  failure  of  the  institute,  or  of  one  to
take  in  the  event  of  the  heir  succeeding,  he  being  one
of  the  testator's  children,  but  subsequent  death  in  pupil-
larity  ;  see  Substitution.

16.  Legacies. — See  Legacy.

17.  Trust  gifts. — See  Fideicommissa.

18.  Appointment  of  tutors  to  wife  or  children. — See  Tutor y,  1,10.

19.  Enfranchisements  of  slaves. — See  Manumission,  III.

20.  Relation  of  such  provisions  to  the  institution. — As  the  whole

value  of  a  testament  depended  on  the  institution  of  an
heir,  G.  ii,  229,  U.  xxiv,  15,  a  legacy  placed  before  it  was
useless,  G.  ii,  230,  U.  xxiv,  15,  though  the  same  rule  did
not  apply  to  jideicommissa,  U.  xxv,  8.  A  grant  of  free-
dom was  useless  if  in  the  same  position,  G.  ii,  230.  A
tutor's  appointment  could  not  become  operative  until  an
heir  had  succeeded,  G.  i,  186 ;  but  as  the  former  really
took  nothing  from  the  latter,  it  was  a  matter  of  dispute
whether  it  was  enough  to  invalidate  the  appointment
that  it  preceded  the  institution,  G.  ii,  231.

IV.  INVALIDATION  OF  A  TESTAMENT  AFTER  EXECUTION,  AND  ITS

CONSEQUENCES.

21.  Invalid  testaments  generally. — A  testament  was  said  to  be

non  jure  factum  when  it  was  ah  initio  invalid  through
absence  of  some  condition  or  requirement  of  law,  G.  ii,
146,  147.  One  that  was  jure  factum  might  be  subse-
quently invalidated,  infirmatum,  in  one  or  other  of  two
ways, — it  might  be  either  ruptum  or  irritum  factum,
G.  ii,  146,  U.  xxiii,  1-4.

22.  Euptio  testamenti. — This  occurred  when  a  testator  made

a  new  will  in  all  respects  regular,  even  though  no  one
was  in  a  position  to  take  under  it,  G.  ii,  144,  U.  xxiii,  2.
It  would  rather  appear  that  nothing  less  than  this,  (or
the  destruction  of  the  deed),  amounted  to  ruptio;  although
if  the  intention  of  the  testator  that  his  testament  should
not  stand  was  otherwise  distinctly  manifested,  and  the
heir  ab  intcstato  obtained  bonorum  possessio,  any  attempt
to  oust  him  by  the  testamentary  heirs  might  be  defeated
by  exceptio  doli,  G.  ii,  151.  There  was  ruptio  also  by
agnatio  or  quasi  agnatio  sui  heredis,  birth  or  advent  in
some  other  way,  of  a  suus  heres,  which  in  some  cases
could,  in  others  could  not,  be  prevented  by  their  testa-
mentary institution  or  disherison,  G.  ii,  138-143,  U.

DIGEST.  613

TESTAMENT—  continued.

IV.  INVALIDATION  OF  A  TESTAMENT,  ETC. — continued.

xxiii,  3  ;  see  the  cases  in  which  it  occurred  under  Agnatio
sui  hcredis.

23.  Irritancy  of  a  testament. — A  testament  was  irritated  when

the  testator  suffered  capitis  deminutio  (which  see),  G.  ii,
145,  U.  xxiii,  4.  Ulp.  adds  that  it  was  also  said  to  be
irritated  when  no  one  became  heir  under  it,  U.  xxiii,  4 ;
(but  it  was  usual  then  to  say  it  was  destitutum).

24.  Consequences  of  ruption  or  irritancy. — Though  a  testament
thereby  became    useless  jure    civili,   yet   the   praetors
granted   honor,  possessio   secundum   tabulas  to  the  heirs
nominated  in  it,  provided  the  testator  was  a  citizen  and
sui  juris  at  his  death,  and  that  no  one  claimed  the  pos-
session preferentially  contra  tabulas,  G.  ii,  147,  U.  xxiii,  6,
xxviii,  5;  (see  details  under  Bonor.  possessio,  10-12).

V.  INFORMAL  TESTAMENTARY  DEEDS.

25.  The  testamentum  militis. — A  soldier,  even  a  filiusfamilias,

U.  xx,  10,  making  his  testament  while  on  active  service
was  exempted  from  almost  all  of  the  above  requirements
and  restrictions ;  the  familiae  venditio,  nuncupatio,  and
five  witnesses  were  dispensed  with,  it  being  enough  that
he  informally  manifested  his  will,  G.  ii,  109,  U.  xxiii,  10.
Not  being  juris  civilis — though  introduced  by  imperial
enactments,  U.  xxiii,  10 — the  testator  was  free  to  insti-
tute whom  he  pleased,  and  even  a  peregrin,  G.  ii,  110 ;
latins,  caelibes,  and  orli  might  take  under  his  testament
regardless  of  the  Julian  prohibitions,  110,  111  ;  he  might
with  impunity  place  legacies  and  grants  of  freedom
before  the  institution  of  his  heir,  U.  i,  20  ;  and  might
declare  that  they  were  not  to  take  effect  until  after  the
heir's  death,  ibid.  Such  a  testament  was  valid  if  the
testator  died  in  active  service,  or  within  a  year  of  his
discharge,  U.  xxiii,  10.

26.  The  codicil. — See  Codicil.
TESTAMENT!  FACTIO  explained  in  G.  ii,  114,  note  1.
TESTIMONIUM  PERHIBERE,  G.  ii,  104  and  n.  7.
TH.E¥T,furtum,  G.  iii,  183-208  ;  see  also  Delict.

1.  What  constituted  theft. — There  could  be  no  theft  without
dolus  malus,  G.  iii,  197,  adfectus  furandi,  G.  ii,  50,  iii,
208,  belief  that  the  owner  of  the  stolen  property,  if  he
knew  of  the  thief's  act,  would  object,  G.  iii,  197.  Where
this  dole,  adfectus,  and  belief  were  present,  then,  as  a
general  rule,  any  contrectatioii  with  another  man's  pro-
perty without  his  consent  was  theft,  195, — for  if,
unknown  to  the  delinquent,  the  owner  did  consent,  it  was

614  DIGEST.

THEFT — continued.

not,  198, — as  by  taking  it  away,  195,  or  selling  and  deliver-
ing it  to  a  third  party,  G.  ii,  50,  by  using  what  had  been
deposited  with  him,  G.  iii,  196,  or  by  putting  what  had
been  borrowed  by  him  to  another  purpose  than  that  for
which  it  had  been  lent,  196, 197;  although  there  were  one
or  two  cases  in  which  a  man  might  knowingly  take  posses-
sion of  and  even  usucapt  res  alienae  without  theft,  201.

2.  What  might  be  stolen. — There  might  be  theft  not  only  of  res

alienae,  G.  iii,  195,  but  also  of  free  persons,  199,  and  even
of  the  thief's  own  property  when  lawfully  in  possession  of
a  third  party,  200.

3.  Who  were  accounted  thieves. — He  was  held  a  thief  who  had

purposely  facilitated  the  crime,  and  not  merely  the  actual
delinquent,  G.  iii,  202  ;  provided,  in  either  case,  that,  if
impuberate,  he  was  pubertati  proximus,  and  knew  what
he  was  about,  208.

4.  Varieties  of  theft. — The  law  recognised  two  varieties  of

theft,  furtum  manifestum  and  /.  non  manifestum,  G.  iii,
183-185,  there  being  some  dispute  as  to  where  one  ended
and  the  other  began,  184;  also  three  quasi  -  varieties,
/.  conceptual,  f.  oblatum,  and  /.  prohibitum,  183,  188,  or
more  properly  three  conjunctions  of  circumstances  giving
rise  to  actionesf.  concepti,  oUati,  and  prohibiti,  183.

5.  Its  penalties. — Manifest  theft,  under  the  Twelve  Tables,  was

visited  with  capital  punishment,  but  under  the  edict
with  a  fourfold  money  penalty,  G.  iii,  189 ;  non-mani-
fest, under  both  systems,  with  a  twofold  penalty,  190.
There  was  under  both  systems  a  threefold  penalty  on  a
party  in  whose  premises  stolen  goods  were  discovered  on
formal  search,  whether  the  thief  or  not,/,  conceptum,  186,
191,  192,  note  3 ;  while  the  owner  of  such  premises,  if
not  himself  the  thief,  could  in  turn  demand  a  threefold
penalty  from  the  person  who  had  feloniously  introduced
the  goods,/,  oblatum,  187,  191.  The  Twelve  Tables  dealt
with/  prohibitum — i.e.  refusal  by  a  man  to  permit  formal
search  in  his  premises,  lance  et  linteo,  for  stolen  goods — as
/.  manifestum,  the  edict  substituting  an  a.  furti  prohibiti,
with  fourfold  penalty,  188,  192,  193.

6.  The  actio  furti. — The  actio  furti — formula  in  G.  iv,  37  and

notes — was  not  in  every  case  competent  to  the  owner  of
the  stolen  property,  but  rather  to  the  party  who  was  the
direct  sufferer  by  the  loss,  G.  iii,  203 ;  as  e.g.  a  creditor
responsible  to  his  debtor  for  the  safety  of  a  pledge,  204,
a  tradesman  responsible  for  that  of  an  article  intrusted
to  him  to  repair,  205,  or  a  borrower  responsible  to  the

DIGEST.  615

THEFT — continued.

lender  for  what  had  been  given  him  in  commodate,  206  ;
but  if  any  of  these  were  insolvent,  then  the  a.  furti  was
competent  to  the  owner,  205.

7.  The  vindicatio,  condictio  furtiva,  etc. — In  addition  to  this
penal  action,  the  thief  might  be  sued  by  the  owner  in  a
mndicatio  for  recovery  of  the  stolen  property  if  extant,
G.  iv,  4,  or  in  a  condictio  furtiva  if  non-extant,  G.  ii,
79,  iv,  4.  The  thief  could  not  usucapt  it,  G-.  ii,  49  ;  nor
could  any  third  party  acquiring  from  him  so  long  as
it  continued  res  furtiva,  49,  50.

THINGS,  res, — classifications.

1.  Things  of  divine  and  human  right.  —  To   the   first   class

belonged  res  sacrae  and  religiosae,  G.  ii,  3  ;  sacrae  those
consecrated  by  statute  to  the  gods  above,  5 ;  religiosae
those  devoted  by  private  individuals  to  the  dii  Manes,  by
interment  in  them  of  their  dead,  6.  As  the  provincial
solum  belonged  in  property  either  to  the  state  or  to  the
emperor,  land  there  that  was  thus  consecrated  or  devoted
was  only  pro  sacro  or  pro  religioso,  7.  What  were  called
res  sanctae,  such  as  the  walls  or  gates  of  a  city,  were
quodammodo  divini  juris,  8.

2.  In  patrimonio  and  extra  patrimonium. — By  things  inpatri-

monio  Gai.  seems  to  mean  things  that  could  not  possibly
belong  to  an  individual,  G.  ii,  1 ;  inter  alias  things  that
were  divini  juris,  and  therefore  necessarily  and  perpetu-
ally mdlius  in  bonis,  9.  If  a  man  acquired  such  a  thing,
even  in  the  belief  that  it  was  in  patrimonio,  he  acquired
no  right,  and  no  length  of  possession  could  make  it  his,
G.  ii,  48.

3.  Public,  private,  and  unappropriated. — Public  were   those

that  belonged  to  an  universitas,  such  as  a  city,  and  were
dedicated  to  public  uses,  G.  ii,  11.  Such  things  were
also  said  to  be  mdlius  in  bonis,  in  the  sense  of  not  be-
longing, nor  being  capable  of  belonging,  to  a  private
individual,  ibid.  But  res  mdlius  meant  sometimes  no
more  than  a  thing  for  the  moment  unappropriated,  as  an
animal  running  wild,  G.  ii,  66,  or  things  belonging  to  an
inheritance  to  which  no  heir  had  yet  entered,  11.

4.  Corporeal  and  incorporeal. — Corporeal  were  such  as  were

tangible,  G.  ii,  13  ;  incorporeal  those  that  had  only  a  jural
existence,  yet  formed  elements  more  or  less  valuable  of  a
man's  estate,  such  as  the  right  to  a  succession,  a  usufruct,
a  praedial  servitude,  or  a  claim  under  an  obligation,  14.

5.  Movedble  and  immoveable. — This  distinction  was  important

in  reference  to  mancipation,  usucapion,  and  interdicts.

616  DIGEST.

THINGS — continued.

Moveables  could  be  mancipated  only  one  at  a  time,  and
when  they  were  before  the  parties ;  but  immoveables
could  be  mancipated  in  absence,  and  any  number  at  once,
U.  xix,  8,  (see  Mancipatio,  1).  Moveables  could  be
•  usucapted  by  one  year's  possession,  but  immoveables
required  two,  G.  ii,  42,  U.  xix,  8,  (see  Usucapion,'!).  It
was  the  int.  uti  possidetis  that  was  used  to  defend  pos-
session of  the  latter,  while  the  int.  utnibi  was  used  to
defend  that  of  the  former,  G-.  iv,  149,  (see  Interdicts,  7,  8).
The  phrase  res  immobiles,  though  in  Ulp.,  does  not  occur
in  Gai. ;  he  uses  instead  praedia,  resfundi,  or  res  soli,  G.
i,  121,  ii,  42,  54.

6.  Ees  mancipi  et  nee  mancipi. — See  Res  mancipi,  etc.

7.  Things  present  and  future. — By  res  futura  was  meant  a

thing  not  yet  in  existence  but  whose  appearance  might
reasonably  be  expected ;  as  the  crop  to  be  produced  from
a  particular  field,  or  the  child  to  which  a  particular  slave
was  to  give  birth;  such  things  might,  for  example,  be
bequeathed  by  damnation,  G.  ii,  203.

8.  Fungibles  and  non-fungibles. — By  fungibles  are  meant  what

in  the  texts  are  described  as  res  quae  pondere  numero
mensura  constant,  G.  iii,  90, — things  whose  value  was
generic,  not  specific,  and  which  could  be  replaced  by
others  of  the  same  sort.  It  was  only  fungibles  that  could
be  given  in  mutuum  (which  see,  No.  1),  G.  iii,  90  ;  while
non-fungibles  could  not  be  legated  by  vindication  unless
they  belonged  to  the  testator  both  at  the  times  of  be-
queathing and  at  his  death,  it  was  enough  that  fungibles
belonged  to  him  at  the  latter  date  (see  Legacy,  19),  G.  ii,
196,  U.  xxiv,  7 ;  and  while  a  husband  in  restoring  the
dowry  had  to  hand  over  non-fungibles  at  once,  he  was
a.llowed  three  years  for  returning  fungibles,  (see  Dowry,

9.  Ees  quae  in  usu  vel  abusu  consistunt. — This  distinction

was  of  importance  in  reference  to  usufruct,  (which  see  No.
1).  It  was  only  what  could  be  used  and  enjoyed  without
impairing  its  substance  that  could  strictly  speaking  be
usufructed ;  where  the  use  involved  destruction  of  or
parting  with  the  substance,  abusus,  there  could  only  be
quasi  usufruct,  U.  xxiv,  26,  27.

TRADITAE,  EXCEPTIO  REI  NONDUM,  G.  iv,  126a ;  see  Sale,  4.

TRADITIO,  delivery,  see  Property,  5.

TRANSSCRIPTICIA  NOMINA,  G.  iii,  128-130;  see  Literal  obligations,  1.

TRIPLICATION,  G.  iv,  128 ;  see  Replication.

TRUST,  MORTIS  CAUSA,  see  Fideicommissum.

DIGEST.  617

TUBERO,  Q.  AELIUS,  consul  743  |  11,  one  of  the  authors  of  a  Set.
restricting  the  effects  of  manus  created  by  confarreation,
G.  i,  136  and  note.

TUTORY,  tutela,  G.  i,  142-200,  U.  tit.  xi,  was  the  guardianship
either  of  pupils,  i.e.  persons  sui  juris  under  the  age  of
puberty,  or  of  females  sui  juris  who  had  passed  that  age.
The  first  was  justified  by  the  naturalis  ratio  of  their
imperfect  years,  G.  i,  189 ;  but  Gai.  avowed  himself
unable  to  assign  any  good  reason  for  the  second,  which  in
his  time  had  become  in  many  cases  more  nominal  than
real,  190,  while  Ulp.  attributes  it  to  the  weakness  of  the
sex  and  their  ignorance  of  law,  U.  xi,  1.
I.  TUTORY  OF  PUPILS  OF  FREE  BIRTH.

1.  Testamentary  tutory. — Testamentary  appointment  of  tutors

is  said  to  have  been  confirmed  by  the  provision  of  the
Twelve  Tables  sanctioning  testaments,  U.  xi,  14;  which
was  held  to  have  authorised  a  paterfamilias  to  appoint
tutors  to  those  of  his  children  in  potestate  who  were  to
become  sui  juris  by  his  death,  G.  i,  144,  U.  xi,  15,
including  grandchildren  who  were  not  on  that  event  to
pass  into  the  potestas  of  their  father,  G.  i,  146,  and  postumi
(which  see  No.  1),  147.  The  tutors  so  appointed  were
called  dativi,  G.  i,  154,  U.  xi,  14 ;  and  any  one  might  be
appointed  to  the  office  who  had  testamenti  factio  (which
see)  with  the  testator,  U.  xi,  16,  except  a  Junian  latin,  G.
i,  23,  U.  xi,  16.  But  he  required  to  be  named,  G.  ii,  240,
U.  xi,  14,  and  to  be  appointed  directly  by  the  testator ;  a
fideicommissary  request  to  the  heir  to  appoint  a  tutor  (see
Fideicommissum,  1)  was  useless,  G.  ii,  289.  The  usual
form  of  appointment  is  given  in  G.  i,  149  ;  it  might  be
conditional  or  ex  die,  G.  i,  186;  but,  even  when  uncondi-
tional and  immediate,  it  was  inoperative  until  an  heir  had
succeeded,  ibid.  As  in  the  case  of  other  testamentary
provisions  it  was  a  question  whether  the  appointment  was
of  any  use  if  placed  in  the  testament  before  the  heir's  insti-
tution, G.  ii,  231,  or  if  to  take  effect  after  or  the  day  before
the  heir's  death,  234,  or  if  made  by  way  of  penalty,  237.

2.  The  tutela  legitima  of  agnates  and  the  gens. — In  the  absence  of

testamentary  appointment  the  XII  Tables  gave  the  tutory
to  the  pupil's  male  agnates  (see  Agnation,  1,  2)  nearest  of
degree,  G.  i,  164,  U.  xi,  3,  hence  called  legitimi,  G.  i,  155,
U.  xi,  3 ;  but  by  the  Claudian  law  this  tutory  was
abolished  in  the  case  of  females,  whether  under  or  above
puberty,  G.  i,  157, 171,  U.  xi,  8.  Failing  agnates  it  seems
in  early  times  to  have  gone  to  the  pupil's  gens,  G.  i,  164a
and  note.

618  DIGEST.

TUTORY— continued.

I.   TUTORY  OF  PUPILS  OF  FREE  BIRTH — continued.

3.  Fiduciary  tutory. — When  a  parent   emancipated   a  child

under  puberty  (see  Emancipation,  1),  the  latter's  final
manumitter,  after  the  example  of  a  patron  (see  below,  No.
18),  became  his  tutor,  G.  i,  166,  U.  xi,  5.  It  was  the
practice  for  the  parent  to  make  it  a  condition  of  the  final
mancipation  that  the  mancipee  should  remancipate  to  him,
the  parent,  who  then  became  manumitter,  G.  i,  133,  172,
175,  and  consequently  tutor,  G.  i,  172, 175.  Such  a  tutor
was  called  fiduciary,  G-.  i,  166,  U.  xi,  5  ;  but  if  the  parent
himself  held  the  office,  he  was,  as  quasi  patron,  regarded
also  as  a  tutor-at-law,  legitimus,  G.  i,  172,  175,  though
his  unemancipated  children  succeeding  him  in  it  were
fiduciary  tutors  only,  175.

4.  Atilian  tutory. — If  a  pupil  had  no  tutor  of  any  of  the  above

classes,  the  urban  praetor  and  the  majority  of  the  ple-
beian tribunes  appointed  one  for  him,  if  he  was  in  Eome,
in  terms  of  the  Atilian  law,  while  if  he  was  in  a  province
the  governor  did  so  in  terms  of  the  Julian  and  Titian
law,  G.  i,  185,  U.  xi,  18.  A  similar  and  equally  per-
manent appointment  was  made  when  a  testamentary
tutor  or  a  tutor-at-law  had  been  excused  or  removed  as
suspect,  (see  below,  Kos.  6,  8),  G.  i,  182,  U.  xi,  23.  Tem-
porary appointments  of  the  same  sort  were  made  when  a
testamentary  one  was  conditional  or  to  begin  at  a  future
elate,  G.  i,  186,  and  while  it  remained  inoperative  through
the  heir's  delay  to  enter,  ibid.;  as  also  while  a  tutor  was
captive  in  the  hands  of  an  enemy  (see  Captivity  etc.},  187.

5.  Praetorian  tutory. — When  it  was  necessary  for  a  pupil  to

sue  his  tutor  in  a  judicium  legitimum,  as  it  was  improper
that  the  latter  should  be  auctor  in  rem  suam,  the  praetor
appointed  one  to  act  with  the  pupil  in  that  particular
matter,  G.  i,  184,  U.  xi,  24.

6.  Excuses  of  and  securities  ly  tutors. — Gai.  and  Ulp.  mention,

without  particulars,  that  a  man  was  sometimes  excused
from  undertaking  a  tutory,  G.  i,182,U.xi,23;  and  Gai.  adds
that,  with  the  exception  of  testamentary  ones,  they  had  to
give  security  by  satisdatio  for  their  administration,199,200.

7.  The  tutors  gestio  and  auctoritas. — A  tutor  either  acted  for

his  pupil  ward,  gestio,  or  with  him,  auctoritatis  interpositio,
U.  xi,  25  ;  the  latter,  however,  only  when  the  pupil  was
old  enough  to  have  some  knowledge  of  what  he  was
doing,  G.  iii,  107,  109.  If  he  had  several  tutors  the
auctoritas  had  to  be  that  of  all  of  them,  unless  they  held
office  under  a  testament,  when  that  of  one  was  sufficient,

DIGEST.  619

T  U  T  0  R  Y — continued.

I.   TUTOEY  OF  PUPILS  OF  FREE  BIRTH — Continued.

U.  xi,  26.  As  regards  the  acts  of  a  pupil  which  required
tutorial  auctoritas  to  validate  them,  see  U.  xi,  27,  and  in
more  detail  under  Pupils.  A  tutor  might  sue  for  or  defend
his  pupil,  and  in  either  case  the  condcmnatio  was  taken  in
his  name,  G.  iv,  82,  86,  87,  (see  Procurator^/  in  litigation,  3).
In  matter  of  processual  cautions  he  was  in  the  same
position  as  a  procurator,  G.  iv,  99,  (see  Cautiones  etc.).

8.  How  a  tutory  came  to  an  end. — A  tutory  came  to  an  end  ab-

solutely by  a  male  pupil's  cap.  deminutio,  e.g.  giving  himself
in  adrogation  and  thus  ceasing  to  be  sui  juris,  G.  i,  102,
U.  viii,  5,  or  by  his  attaining  the  age  of  puberty,  G.  i,
145,  196,  U.  xi,  28  ;  but  females  could  not  be  adrogated,
G.  i,  101,  U.  viii,  5,  and  on  reaching  twelve  the  tutela
impiiberis  merged  into  the  tutela  midieris,  G.  i,  145.  In
the  case  of  both  male  and  female  pupils  it  ceased
relatively,  i.e.  as  regarded  a  particular  tutor,  when  he  was
removed  as  suspect,  G.  i,  182,  U.  xi,  23  ;  when  he  was  taken
captive,  187  ;  when,  being  a  tutor  legitimus, — for  the  rule
did  not  apply  to  testamentary  tutors,  U.  xi,  17, — he
underwent  capitis  deminutio  (which  see),  G.  i,  158,  163,  U.
xi,  9  ;  or  when,  being  only  an  interim  Atiliau  or  prae-
torian tutor,  the  purpose  of  his  appointment  had  been
attained,  G.  i,  186,  187.  In  the  case  of  a  female  it  also
ceased  relatively  when  it  was  ceded  by  a  tutor-at-law  or  a
fiduciary  tutor,  G.  i,  186, — that  of  a  male  pupil  could  not
be  ceded,  because,  as  it  came  to  an  end  with  puberty,  it
was  not  so  onerous  as  that  of  a  female,  ibid., — or  when  a
testamentary  tutor  abdicated,  U.xi,17  and  n.  2,  as  amended
in  Additions  etc.

9.  The  tutelae  judicium.  —  Tutors  who  did  not  voluntarily

render  a  satisfactory  account  of  their  intromissions  011
their  wards,  whether  male  or  female,  attaining  puberty,
might  be  compelled  to  do  so  in  a  judicmm  tutelae,  G.
i,  191.  It  was  a  lonae  fidci  action,  G.  iv,  62  ;  but  con-
demnation in  it  rendered  the  tutor  infamous,  G.  iv,  182.
II.  TUTORY  OF  WOMEN  OF  FREE  BIRTH.

10.  Testamentary  tutory,  (see  also   above,  No.  1). — A  pater-
familias might  by  his  testament  appoint  tutors  to  his
daughters  in  potcstate,  no  matter  what  their    age,  and
even  though  married,  G.  i,  144 ;  as  also  to  his  wife  in
manu,   and   to   his   daughter-in-law   who  had   been   in
manu   of  a  deceased  son,  148.     There  was  this  pecu-
liarity in  the  appointment  of  a  tutor  to  a  wife  in  manu
— that   she   might   have   the   choice  of   the   individual

620  DIGEST.

TUTOEY—  continued.

II.   TUTORY  OF  WOMEN  OF  FREE  BIRTH — continued.

left  to  herself,  optio  tutoris ;  and  that,  according  to  the
form  of  words  used  by  the  testator,  her  choice  might  be
more  or  less  limited,  sometimes  going  so  far  as  to  entitle
her  to  have  a  different  tutor  for  each  piece  of  business  in
which  his  intervention  was  necessary,  150-153.  Such  a
tutor  was  called  optivus,  in  contradistinction  to  the  tutor
dativus  appointed  directly  by  the  testator,  154.  A  tutor
dativus,  in  consideration  of  the  long  duration  of  a  female
tutory,  had  the  right  to  give  it  up,  jus  abdicandi,  when  it
became  too  onerous,  U.  xi,  17  and  n.  2,  as  amended  in
Additions  etc.

11.  That  of  agnates. — It  was  introduced  by  the  Twelve  Tables,

but  abolished  by  the  Claudian  law,  G.  i,  157,  171,  U.  xi,  8,
(see  above,  No.  2).  One  of  its  peculiarities  was  that  it
might  be  ceded  by  the  agnate- tutor  to  a  third  party,  who
got  the  name  of  cessicius  tutor,  G.  i,  168,  171,  U.  xi,  6-8.

12.  Fiduciary  tutory. —  See  above,  No.  3;  this  was  the  same

as  the  fiduciary  tutory  of  pupils,  except  that  it  was  of
longer  duration.  If  it  was  the  woman's  father  that  held
this  position,  then,  as  he  was  also  tutor  legitimus  (as  quasi
patron),  he  had  the  right  to  cede  the  tutory  in  the  same
way  as  agnates  and  patrons,  G.  i,  172.  See  the  qualifica-
tions of  the  right  of  the  tutor  cessicius  in  G.  i,  170,  U.  xi,
7,  and  below,  No.  20.  A  fiduciary  tutor  other  than  a
parens  manumissor  had  no  power  of  cession,  G.  i,  172.

13.  Atilian  tutory. — The  Atilian  and  Julian  and  Titian  laws,

mentioned  above,  No.  4,  applied  to  women  as  well  as
pupils,  U.  xi,  18  ;  and  Atilian  tutoriesmust  have  become
all  the  more  necessary  when  that  of  agnates  was  abolished.
Such  an  appointment  could  be  made  on  the  woman's  own
petition,  G.  i,  173  ;  and  one  of  the  cases  in  which  it  was
authorised  was  the  absence  of  her  testamentary  or  other
tutor,  not  being  her  parens  manumissor ;  on  the  new
appointment  the  office  of  the  tutor  thus  superseded  came
to  an  end,  G.  i,  173.  Even  when  in  tutory  of  a,  parens
manumissor,  if  he  happened  to  be  abroad,  she  might  have
a  temporary  tutor  to  enable  her  to  enter  on  an  inherit-
ance, 175,  176.

14.  Praetorian  tutory.  —  This  occurred  in   the  same   circum-

stances, mutatis  mutandis,  as  described  above,  No.  5,  U.
xi,  24.

15.  Changing  tutors  T)y  coemptio. — G.  i,  115  ;  see  Manus,  7.

16.  The  tutor's  auctoritas.  —  In  the  tutela  mulierum  a  tutor

never  acted  for  his  ward,  but  only  with  her,  by  inter-

DIGEST.  621

TUTOEY— continued.

II.   TUTORY  OF  WOMEN  OF  FREE  BIRTH — continued.

poning  auctoritas,  G.  i,  190,  U.  xi,  25.  And  this  was  in
many  cases  a  mere  matter  of  form,  the  tutor,  unless  a
par  ens  manumissor,  being  often  obliged  to  grant  it  whether
he  would  or  not,  Or.  i,  190,  192.  A  parcns  manumissor
had  the  same  power  as  a  patron  of  withholding  his
auctoritas  from  certain  acts  of  his  ward's,  G.  i,  192,  and
below,  Nos.  19,  23  ;  but  other  tutors  could  be  compelled
to  grant  it  where  necessary  to  the  validity  of  a  deed,  G.  i,
190,  ii,  122.  For  enumeration  of  them  see  Women,  4.
17.  How  tutory  of  women  of  free  birth  came  to  an  end. — It  came
to  an  end  absolutely  when  the  ward  ceased  to  be  sui
juris,  as  by  passing  in  manum  of  a  husband,  U.  xi,  13  ;
when  she  had  three  children, — an  event  that  by  the
Julian  and  Papia-Poppaean  law  released  her  for  ever
from  tutelage,  G.  i,  145,  194,  U.  xi,  28a ;  or  when  she
was  made  a  Vestal  virgin,  G.  i,  145.  It  ceased  relatively
when  a  parens  manumissor  ceded  his  tutory,  G.  i,  172,
though  it  might  revert  to  him  in  certain  events,  G.  i,  170,
U.  xi,  7  ;  when  he  died,  in  which  case  his  children  became
fiduciary  tutors,  G.  i,  175  ;  when  he  and  his  children
were  all  capiti  minuti,  as  by  adrogation,  G.  i,  195&;
when  a  testamentary  tutor  died  or  abdicated,  U.  xi,  17 ;
when  an  Atilian  tutor  died,  or  when  he  had  fulfilled  the
purpose  of  his  appointment  if  only  an  interim  one,  G.
i,  181  ;  when  a  tutor  of  any  sort  was  taken  captive,  187  ;
or  when  the  woman  herself  performed  fiduciary  coemp-
tion with  a  stranger  in  order  to  have  him  as  her  tutor
after  remancipatiou,  195a.  But,  no  matter  how  the  tutory
ended,  it  was  never  followed  by  any  judicium  tutelae,  a
woman's  tutor  having  no  account  to  render,  191.
III.  TUTORY  OF  PUPIL  FREEDMEN.

18.  General  observations. —  Manumission  of  a  slave  under
puberty  was  probably  so  rare  that  we  have  very  little
explanation  of  the  nature  and  conditions  of  the  resulting
tutory.  Testamentary  appointment  and  agnatic  right
being  equally  out  of  the  question,  it  belonged  by  the
Twelve  Tables,  or  rather  by  the  interpretation  put  upon
them,  to  the  manumitting  patron  and  his  children,  G.
i,  165;  the  latter,  on  the  former's  death,  were  not  fidu-
ciary tutors,  but  tutors- at-law  as  he  had  been,  175.  In
the  case  of  a  Junian  latin  the  tutory  did  not  necessarily
belong  to  the  manumitter ;  for  if  he  had  been  only  boni-
tarian  owner  it  belonged  to  the  party  who  was  quiritarian
owner  at  the  date  of  manumission,  167.  If  the  manu-

622  .DIGEST.

TUTOEY— continued.

III.  TUTOEY  OF  PUPIL  FREEDMEN — continued.

mission  had  proceeded  from  a  woman,  then,  as  a  patroness
could  not  be  tutor,  an  Atilian  one  was  necessary,  195.

IV.  TUTORY  OF  FREEDWOMEN.

19.  The  legitima  tutela  patronorurn,  (see  also  Patronate). —
Like  male  freedrnen  under  puberty,  freedwomen  were  in
the  tutory-at-law  of  their  patron  and  of  his  children  on
his  death,  G-.  i,  165,  175  ;  the  quiritarian  owner  at  manu-
mission being  tutor  of  a  latin  freedwoman  rather  than
her   bonitarian  manumitter,  167,   (see   above,   No.    18).
This  tutory  being  really  in  the  interests  of  the  patron
himself,  it  gave  him  much  more  control  over  his  ward
than  other  tutors  possessed,  and  entitled  him  to  withhold
his  auctoritas  in  many  cases  in  which  they  were  com-
pelled to  grant  it,  G.  i,  193,  ii,  122.

20.  The   cessicia  tutela. — The  tutory  of  a  woman  being  of
indefinite  duration,  the  patron — but  no  other  tutor,  for
he  alone  had  a  legitimumjus — was  entitled  to  transfer
it  to  a  third  party  by  injure  cessio  (which  see,  No.  3),  G-.
i,  168,  U.  xi,  6.     If  the  cessicius  tutor  died  or  was  capite
minutus,  or  if  he  in  turn  attempted  to  cede  it,  it  reverted
to  the  patron,  G-.  i,  170,  U.  xi,  7  ;  while  if  it  was  the
latter  that  died  or  suffered  capitis  deminutio,  the  right  of
the  cessicius  was  equally  at  an  end,  ibid.

21.  Fiduciary   tutory. — This   arose   in   the   case   of  a  freed-

woman when,  with  auctoritas  of  her  patron-tutor,  she
performed  fiduciary  coemption  (see  Manns,  7)  with  a
third  party,  who,  according  to  agreement,  remancipated
her  to  a  fourth  party  of  her  own  selection,  who  then
manumitted  her,  and  thus  became  her  fiduciary  tutor,  G.
i,  115,  195a.  This  new  tutor  had  no  power  to  cede  his
office,  G.  i,  172.

22.  Atilian  tutory. — An  Atilian  appointment  might  be  either

permanent  or  interim.  It  was  permanent  when  made  to
supply  that  of  a  deceased  patron  who  had  no  male  chil-
dren surviving,  G.i,  19  5c;  or  to  supply  that  of  a  patron  who
along  with  his  children  had  undergone  capitis  deminutio,
1955  ;  or  that  of  a  patroness,  who,  because  of  her  sex,
could  not  be  tutor,  195 ;  or  that  of  a  fiduciary  or  Atilian
tutor  who  had  died  or  gone  abroad,  173.  A  freedwoman
could  not  thus  supersede  a  patron  who  had  gone  from
home,  174  ;  but  in  his  absence  she  might  sometimes  have
an  interim  Atilian  tutor,  as  when  she  needed  auctoritas  to
enter  upon  an  inheritance,  176, — for  such  entry  usually
required  to  be  within  a  limited  period  (see  Cretio,  1),  G.

DIGEST.  623

TUTOEY— continued.

IV.   TUTORY  OF  FREEDWOMEX — continued.

ii,  164,  165,  U.  xxii,  7.  If  her  patron  was  insane,  or  a
mute,  she  was  entitled  to  an  interim  tutor  to  aid  her  in
constituting  a  dowry,  G.  i,  180  ;  and  for  the  same  pur-
pose, or  to  authorise  her  to  take  an  inheritance,  she
might  have  an  interim  tutor  when  she  was  in  the  tutory
of  her  patron's  son,  and  he  was  a  pupil,  177-179.  But
such  occasional  appointments  did  not  affect  the  permanent
right  of  the  patron  and  his  children,  181.

23.  Tutorial  auctoritas.  —  All  other  tutors  than  patrons  and

their  children — for  these  last  were  also  legitimi  tutores,
G.  i,  175 — seem  to  have  heen  bound  to  grant  auctoritas
when  demanded,  G.  i,  190,  ii,  122.  A  patron  seems  to
have  been  bound  to  grant  it  when  his  ward  proposed  to
make  a  dotal  provision,  G.  i,  178,  180,  to  give  herself  in
manum,  115,  195a,  or  to  enter  on  an  inheritance,  176,
177  ;  but  for  the  reason  explained  above,  No.  19,  he
could  not  be  required  against  his  will  to  aid  her  in
making  a  testament,  192,  ii,  122,  or  in  alienating  her
res  mancipi  or  undertaking  an  obligation,  unless  in
either  of  those  two  cases  there  were  weighty  causes  of
justification,  G.  i,  192.  For  the  acts  of  a  woman  to
which  auctoritas  was  required,  see  Ulp.  xi,  27,  and  in
more  detail  under  Women,  4.

24.  How  the  tutela  libertae  ended. — It  ended  absolutely  by  her

passing  in  manum  mariti,  as  above,  No.  17,  and,  under
the  Julian  law,  when  she  gave  birth  to  her  fourth  child,
G.  i,  145,  iii,  44,  U.  xxix,  3.  How  it  ended  relatively  may
be  gathered  from  what  has  been  said  in  Nos.  20-22.
TWELVE  TABLES,  the,  (Lex  Duodecim  Tabularum},  the  statutory  basis
of  the  jus  civile  or  legitimum,  as  distinguished  from
the  jus  honorarium,  are  referred  to  in  G.  i,  111,  122
132,  145,  155,  157,  165,  200  ;  ii,  42,  45,  47,  49,  54,  64,
224;  iii,  1,  9,  11,  17-21,  23,  27,  28,  40,  46,  49,  51,  78,
82,  85,  189-194,  223  ;  iv,  11,  14,  21,  28,  76,  79 ;  U.  i,
9  ;  ii,  4 ;  x,  1  ;  xi,  3,  14 ;  xii,  1,  2,  3  ;  xix,  17 ;  xxvi,  1,  5,
7,  8  ;  xxvii,  5  ;  xxix,  1,  5,  6  ;  but  in  many  of  them  only
by  way  of  interpretation.  The  provisions  of  the  Tables
to  which  actual  reference  is  made  are  these : —
1.  Law  concerning  persons. — (a.)  Manus, — avoidance  of  it  by
trinoctial  interruption,  G.  i,  111.  (&.)  Emancipation, —
that  a  son  should  not  be  released  from  the  potestas  until
mancipated  thrice,  '  si  pater  filium  ter  venumduit,  a  patre
filius  liber  esto'  G.  i,  132,  and  almost  the  same  words  in
U.  x,  1.  (c.)  Manumission, — the  condition  of  statuliberi,  U.

624  DIGEST.

TWELVE  TABLES — continued.

ii,  4.  (d.)  Tutory, — authorisation  of  testamentary  tutory
in  the  words  '  uti  legassit  super  pecunia  tutelave  suae  rei,
ita  jus  esto,'  U.  xi,  14 ;  agnatic  tutelage  of  pupils,  G-.  i,
155,  U.  xi,  3  ;  agnatic  tutelage  of  women,  G.  i,  157 ;
tutory  of  patrons,  165,  U.  xi,  3  ;  freedom  of  Vestal  virgins
from  tutelage,  G.  i,  145.  (e.)  Curatory  of  lunatics  and
prodigals,  G.  ii,  64,  U.  xii,  2.

2.  Law  concerning  things. — (a.)  Usucapion, — periods  of,  G.  ii,

42,  54 ;  incapacity  for  usucapion  of  res  furtivae,  45,  49,
and  of  a  woman's  res  mancipi  delivered  without  her
tutor's  auctoritas,  47.  (&.)  Testaments  and  freedom  of
bequest, — in  the  words  '  uti  legassit  suae  rei,  ita  jus  esto,'
G.  ii,  224,  and  their  expansion  in  U.  xi,  14,  (quoted
above),  (c.)  Intestate  succession, — first  that  of  sui,  G.
iii,  1,  and  then  that  of  the  nearest  agnate,  G.  iii,  9,  11,
both  embodied  in  the  words  '  si  intestatus  moritur,  cui
suus  heres  nee  escit,  agnatus  proximus  familiam  habeto'  U.
xxvi,  1 ;  lastly  that  of  the  gens,  G.  iii,  17.  (d.)  Succes-
sion of  patrons,  G.  iii,  40,  46,  49,  51,  U.  xxix,  1,  5.  (e.)
Obligations  ex  delicto, — theft,  G.  iii,  189-192,  iv,  76 ;
wrongful  damage  to  property,  rupitiae,  G.  iii,  note  to
210-219 ;  personal  injury,  G.  iii,  223 ;  other  offences,  G.
iv,  11.

3.  Law  concerning  actions. —  (a.)  Legis  actiones, —  actio  sacra-

mento,  amount  of  the  sacramental  stake,  G.  iv,  14 ;  manus
injectio,  authorised  by  the  statute  in  proceedings  on  a
judgment,  21 ;  pignoris  capio,  cases  in  which  authorised,
28.  (5.)  Noxal  action, — sanctioned  in  case  of  theft,  76.

UNDE  vi,  INTERDICTUM,  G.  iv,  154 ;  see  Interdicts,  9.

UNIVERSAL  ACQUISITION,  see  Adquisitio  per  universitatem.

UNIVERSITAS,  a  corporation  ;  see  Persons,  6.

USUCAPION,  usucapio,  G.  ii,  41-61,  U.  xix,  8 ;  see  also  Property,  3.
1.  Usucapion,  what  ? — It  is  defined  as  acquisition  of  ownership
by  continued  possession  for  a  certain  period,  U.  xix,  8 ;
more  accurately  it  was  the  cure  by  possession  of  some
defect  of  title.  The  possession  might  be  either  by  the
party  himself  that  thereby  became  owner,  or  by  a  slave
or  filiusfamilias  on  his  behalf,  or  even  by  a  person  lona
fide  possessed  by  him  as  a  slave,  G.  ii,  89,  94;  but
apparently  that  of  his  wife  in  manu,  a  free  person  in
mancipio,  or  a  usufructed  slave  was  ineffectual,  they  not
being  themselves  in  his  possession,  90,  94.  The  period
required  is  commonly  said  to  have  been  one  year  for
moveables,  two  years  for  immoveables,  G.  ii,  42,  204,  U.

DIGEST.  625

USUCAPION — continued.

xix,  8 ;  but  the  actual  provision  of  the  Twelve  Tables  was
two  years  for  res  soli,  for  '  other  things '  one,  G.  ii,  54.

2.  Usucapion  of  a  res  mancipi  acquired  by  wrong  conveyance. —

When  a  res  mancipi  was  transferred  by  simple  tradition,
instead  of  being  conveyed  by  mancipation  or  injure  cessio,
the  legal  title  still  remained  in  the  transferor,  the  trans-
feree becoming  only  bonitarian  owner  ;  by  possession  for
the  requisite  period,  however,  he  cured  the  defect,  and
became  owner  ex  jure  Quiritium,  G.  ii,  41,  204,  U.  i,  16.
See  Property,  1.

3.  Usucapion  of  a  thing  acquired  a  non  domino. — When  a  man

acquired  a  thing,  whether  res  mancipi  or  ncc  mancipi,
from  one  who  was  not  its  owner,  again  he  might  cure
the  defect  of  his  title  by  usucapion ;  but  in  this  case  it
was  indispensable  that  he  should  have  accepted  it  in  good
faith,  i.e.  under  the  belief  that  the  transferor  was  its
owner,  G.  ii,  43,  44.  See  Bonae  fidei  possessio.

4.  Usucapion  ~by  praetorian  oioners. — A  praetorian   bonorum

possessor  did  not  at  once  become  quiritarian  owner  of  the
corporeals  included  in  the  succession  that  was  granted  to
him,  neither  did  a  bonorum  cmptor  or  purchaser  of  a
bankrupt  estate  become  quiritarian  owner  of  the  cor-
poreals that  formed  part  of  it ;  but  both  cured  the  defect
by  possession  for  the  statutory  period,  G.  iii,  80.  See
Bonorum  possessio,  5;  Emptio  lionorum,  3.

5.  Things  that  could  not  be  usucapted. — Things  not  in  patri-

monio  (see  Things,  2),  such  as  a  freeman  possessed  as  a
slave,  G.  ii,  48 ;  provincial  lands,  46,  for  they  belonged
to  the  state  or  the  emperor,  7 ;  the  res  mancipi  of  a
woman  in  tutelage  of  her  agnates,  47, — a  tutory,  however,
that  was  abolished  by  the  Claudian  law,  G.  i,  157,  171,
U.  xi,  8  ;  res  furtivae,  i.e.  moveables  that  had  been  stolen,
not,  of  course,  by  the  possessor, — for  his  bad  faith  would
have  been  a  sufficient  impediment, — but  by  some  previous
holder,  from  whom  the  possessor  derived  his  right,  G.  ii,
45,  49 ;  and  immoveables  that  had  been  taken  forcibly
by  the  party  from  whom  the  possessor  derived  them,  G.
ii,  45.  It  was  conceivable  that  a  man  might  sell  or  on
some  other  good  title  transfer  a  rnoveable  res  aliena
believing  it  his  own ;  in  such  a  case  there  was  nothing
to  prevent  usucapion  by  a  bona  fide  purchaser  or  trans-
feree, there  being  no  theft  without  intent  to  steal,  G.  ii,
50.  It  was  quite  possible  also  for  a  man  to  take  posses-
sion, without  any  violence,  of  lands  that  he  knew  were
not  his  ;  the  usucapion  of  a  bona  fide  acquirer  from  him,

2K

626  DIGEST.

USUCATION — continued.

however,  was  not  thereby  impeded ;  for  it  was  held  that
lands  could  not  be  stolen,  and  so  the  vitium  furti  did  not
attach  to  them,  51.

6.  Usucapio  pro  herede. — In  this  usucapion  bona  fides  had  no

place,  G.  ii,  52.  It  arose  when,  in  the  absence  of  a
necessary  heir, — for  if  there  was  either  a  suus  or  a  neces-

\j  *

sarius  lieres  (see  Hereditas,  3,  4)  it  was  impossible,  G-.  ii,
58,  iii,  201, — an  individual  took  possession  pro  herede,
as  heir,  of  things  belonging  to  an  inheritance  to  which
he  knew  he  had  no  title,  G.  ii,  52 ;  by  possessing  for  no
more  than  a  year,  even  though  the  things  were  immove-
able,  he  was  held  to  have  usucapted  the  inheritance
itself,  it  being  regarded  as  one  of  the  '  other  things  '  (see
above,  No.  1)  for  which,  under  the  provision  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  the  shorter  period  was  sufficient,  53,  54.
Gai.  thought  this  '  iniquitous '  usucapion  was  to  be  ex-
plained only  by  the  anxiety  of  the  early  jurists  to  ensure
as  soon  as  possible  the  presence  of  an  heir  who  would  look
after  the  family  sacra  of  the  deceased,  and  satisfy  the
claims  of  creditors,  55.  By  a  Set.  of  Hadrian's,  however,
the  true  heir  was  authorised  to  disregard  it,  and  proceed
with  his  liereditatis  petitio  as  if  there  had  been  no  such
usucapion,  57.

7.  Usureception. — Here  also  there  was  usucapion  of  what  was

known  to  be  another's,  so  far  at  least  as  legal  title  was
concerned,  G.  ii,  59.  Suppose  a  man  mancipated  a  thing
to  a  friend  for  safety's  sake,  but  under  &  pactum  fiduciae,
i.e.  an  agreement  for  its  reconveyance  on  demand  (see
Fiducia,  1) ;  if  the  mancipant  reacquired  possession  of  it
without  reconveyance,  it  became  his  again  by  usureceptio
in  a  year,  even  though  an  immoveable,  G.  ii,  59,  60.  If
the  mancipation  was  to  a  creditor  by  way  of  security
(see  Fiducia,  2),  there  was  usureception  in  a  year  if  the
debt  had  been  paid ;  if  it  had  not,  the  usureception  was
possible  only  if  the  possession  had  not  been  derived
directly  from  the  creditor  by  way  of  location  or  grant
during  pleasure,  60.  What  was  called  usureception  ex
praediatara  was  that  of  a  debtor  who  took  possession  of
lands  he  had  mortgaged  to  the  state,  and  which  had  been
sold  by  its  officials  ;  here  two  years  were  required,  61.
USUFEUCT,  ususfructus,  G.  ii,  30-33 ;  U.  xxiv,  26,  27.

1.  What,  and  how  created. — Usufruct  was  the  right  of  using
and  enjoying  the  fruits  and  profits  of  a  thing,  G.  ii,  14,
iv,  3,  U.  xxiv,  26,  the  property  the  while  belonging  to
another,  G.  ii,  33,  93.  It  might  be  created  by  reservation

DIGEST.  627

USUFRUCT — continued.

of  it  in  mancipating  lands,  G.  ii,  33  ;  but  the  appropriate
form  of  constitution  inter  vivos  was  in  jure,  cessio,  30,
competent  everywhere  as  regarded  moveables,  32,  though
as  regarded  immoveables  competent  only  in  italico  solo
(see  Jus  Ital.),  31,  a  usufruct  of  lands  in  provinciali  solo
being  created  by  pacts  and  stipulations,  ibid.  It  might
also  be  created  by  testament,  U.  xxiv,  26.
"2.  Quasi  usufruct. — Although  properly  there  could  be  usufruct
only  of  things  whose  iise  did  not  diminish  their  sub-
stance, U.  xxiv,  26,  (see  Things,  9),  there  might,  through
means  of  securities  for  eventual  restitution  of  a  like
quantity,  given  to  the  heir  or  legatee  on  whom  it  was  a
charge,  be  a  testamentary  bequest  even  of  money  or
other  things  whose  use  extinguished  them,  U.  xxiv,  27.

3.  Eights  of  a  usufructuary. — A  usufructuary  was  not  held  to

be  in  possession  of  the  thing  he  usufructed,  G-.  ii,  93,
but  only  holder  for  the  owner,  G.  iv,  153  ;  consequently
he  could  never  usucapt,  G.  iii,  93.  As  usufructuary  he
was  entitled  to  ordinary  fruits,  which,  however,  did  not
include  children  born  to  slave  women,  G.  ii,  50  ;  all
that  a  usufructed  slave  acquired  by  his  own  labour  or
with  funds  provided  by  the  usufructuary  belonged  to  the
latter,  G.  ii,  91,  iii,  165,  U.  xix,  21 ;  acquisitions  from
adventitious  sources  belonged  to  the  owner,  ibid.  Manu-
mission of  such  a  slave  by  the  owner  did  not  affect  the
usufructuary's  right, — the  slave  became  servus  sine  domino,
U.  i,  19.

4.  Extinction  of  a  usufruct. — It  was  extinguished  by  the  usu-

fructuary's death  or  capitis  deminutio  (which  see),  G.  iii,
83;  but  it  was  so  highly  personal  that  it  could  not  be  trans-
ferred to  any  one  but  the  dominus  proprietatis,  in  whose
person  the  two  rights  became  consolidated,  G.  ii,  30 —
cession  to  a  third  party  was  resultless,  ibid.

5.  Actions  peculiar  to  it. — When  disputed  it  might  be  vindi-

cated in  an  actio  in  rcm,  G.  iv,  3 ;  while  the  domin  us
proprietatis  might  challenge  it  in  an  a.  negatoria,  ibid.

USURAE,  see  Interest.

USURECEPTIO,  see  Usucapion,  7.

USURPATIO  TRINOCTIALIS,  G.  i,  111;  see  Manus,  3.

Usus  as  a  mode  of  creating  manus,  G.  i,  111  ;  see  Manus,  3.

UTI  POSSIDETIS,  INTERDICTUM,  G.  iv,  148,  149,  160 ;  see  Interdicts,
7, 13-17.

UTILES  ACTIONES,  see  Actions,  6.

UTILITAS,  G.  iii,  109,  160.

UTRUBI,  INTERDICTUM,  G.  iv,  148, 149, 160  ;  see  Interdicts,  8, 13-17.

628  DIGEST.

VADIMONIUM,  the  security  given  by  a  defender,  who  had  appeared
in  answer  to  a  summons,  for  his  reappearance  on  a  future
day,  G.  iv,  184;  resting  sometimes  on  his  own  simple
engagement,  sometimes  backed  with  an  oath  or  with
sureties,  sometimes  under  reference  to  recuperators,  185.
Its  amount  Avas  determined  according  to  certain  rules
described  in  186.

VENDITIO,  see  Sale.

VENDITIO  BONORUM,  sale  of  a  bankrupt's  estate ;  see  Emptio  bonorum.

VENTEIS  NOMINE  IN  POSSESSIONEM  MISSIO,  G.  iv,  177.

VERBAL  OBLIGATIONS,  G.  iii,  92-127  ;  see  also  Contract,  1.  Their
characteristic  was  that  a  certain  verborum  proprictas  was
necessary  in  contracting,  G.  iii,  136.  In  stipulation
(which  see)  there  was  question  and  answer,  G.  iii,  92  ;
in  dotis  dictio  (see  Dowry,  1)  there  were  words  of  style
spoken  by  one  only  of  the  parties,  96  ;  in  jurata  promissio
operarum  liberti  (see  Patronate,  3)  there  was  promise
without  antecedent  interrogatory,  but  accompanied  with
an  oath,  96«.  Varieties  of  stipulation  were  adstipulation
(which  see),  110-114,  and  the  different  forms  of  adpro-
missio,  (see  Siiretyship),  115-127.  A  verbal  obligation  was
impossible  inter  absentes,  136  ;  and  it  was  the  only  one  that
could  be  discharged  by  acceptilation  (which  see),  169, 170.

VESTAL  VIRGINS,  on  election,  were  ipso  jure  freed  from  ihepatria
potestas  if  Jiliaefamilias,  G.  i,  130,  U.  x,  5,  or  from  tutory
if  sui  juris,  G.  i,  145.

VESTING  of  an  inheritance,  see  Hereditas,  3-7  ;  of  a  legacy,  see
Legacy,  11.

VETERANS,  vcterani,  G.  i,  57  ;  see  Soldier.

VETERES,  an  epithet  applied  by  Gai.  to  the  jurists  of  the  republic,
G.  i,  144  and  n.  2,  145,  165,  188,  ii,  55,  etc.

VEXATIOUS  LITIGATION,  DEVICES  TO  PREVENT,  G.  iv,  171-182.

1.  Devices  to  restrain  dishonest  defence. — To  check  dishonest  or
reckless  defence,  the  law  in  certain  enumerated  cases  con-
demned a  man  in  double  the  amount  of  his  normal
liability,  because  of  the  temerity  of  his  denial,  G.  iv,  171,
(see  Cretio  litis  infitiatione) ;  but  this  did  not  extend  to
his  heir,  who  might  be  ignorant  of  the  circumstances,  172.
In  one  or  two  actions  the  defender  had  to  give  his  spon-
sion to  pay  a  third  or  a  half  more  than  the  sum  sued  for
by  way  of  penalty  if  judgment  went  against  him,  171, —
an  obligation  that  did  not  affect  women  or  pupils,  172.
Where  there  was  neither  cretio  litis  nor  sponsion,  an
oath  was  required  that  the  defence  was  not  vexatious  (jus-
jurandiim  calumniac),  exigible  even  from  heirs,  women,
and  pupils,  172.

DIGEST.  629

VEXATIOUS  LITIGATION,  DEVICES  TO  PEE  VENT—  continued.

2.  Devices  to  check  reckless  action. — To  cheek  vexatious  action
there  might  be  a  calumniae  judicium  or  instruction  to
the  judge  to  inquire,  in  event  of  defender's  acquittal,
whether  pursuer  knew  that  there  were  no  grounds  for  the
action,  and  if  so,  to  condemn  him  in  one-tenth  of  the  value
of  the  cause,  G.  iv,  175,  178  ;  but  defender,  if  he  pleased,
might  require  the  pursuer's  oath  of  calumny  instead  of
the  judicium,  176.  In  certain  very  special  cases  a  con-
trarium  judicium.  was  allowed,  under  which  an  unsuccess-
ful pursuer  had  to  pay  a  penalty,  sometimes  of  a  fifth,
sometimes  of  a  tenth,  if  his  action  was  judged  groundless,

177,  no  matter  though  he  had  believed  it  well  founded,

178.  Where  a  sponsion  had  been  required   from   the
defender,  there  a  restipulation  was  required  from  the
pursuer,  who,  if  he  failed,  was  condemned  to  the  defender
in  the  amount  of  it,  180,  (see  S^>onsio  et  restipulatio).    But
these  were  not  concurrent  remedies,  and  a  defender  could
have  only  one  of  them,  179,  181.

VICARIUS  SERVUS,  G.  iv,  73  and  n.  1.

VlNCULUM  AEQUITATIS,  G.  ill,  119«,  note  1.

VINDEX,  G.  iv,  21  and  n.  5  ;  see  Legis  actiones,  5.
VINDICATE,  literal  meaning,  G.  iv,  16,  note  1.
VINDICATIO  ;  see  also  Actions,  3.

1.  Vindicatio,  what  ? — Vindicatio  was  the  generic  name  for  an

actio  in  rem,  G.  iv,  5  ;  its  specific  forms  being  the  rei
vindicatio,  vindicatio  servitutis,  actio  in  ran  negativa,  G.
iv,  3,  herditatis  petitio,  G.  ii,  120,  and  others.

2.  The  rei  vindicatio  under  the  system  of  the  legis  actiones. —

It  proceeded  per  sacramcntum,  G.  iv,  16,  17,  and  notes,
(see  Legis  actiones,  2) ;  there  was  vindication  by  one  party,
counter-vindication  by  the  other,  16  and  note  4, — a  prac-
tice whose  memory  survived  in  injure  cessio,  (which  was
just  a  rei  vindicatio  arrested  in  its  first  stage  by  confessio
injure  by  one  of  the  parties  that  the  claim  of  the  other
was  well  founded),  G.  i,  134,  ii,  24,  iv,  16 ;  condemnation
was  in  the  thing  itself,  G.  iv,  48,  and  an  arbitrium  litis
aestimandae  followed,  ibid,  note  3.

3.  Under  the  formidar  system. — Leaving  out  of  view  the  in

rem  actio  per  sponsionem  (which  see),  the  formula  of  the
rei  vindicatio — except  when  an  incerta  pars  wras  claimed,
which  was  rare — contained  only  intentio  and  condemnatio
(see  those  words) ;  the  former  contained  an  averment  of
property  by  the  pursuer,  without  mention  of  the  defender,
G.  ii,  194,  iv,  41,  87  ;  the  latter  asked  expressly  for  his
condemnation,  G.  iv,  43.  And  the  judge  had  to  condemn

630  DIGEST.

VlNDlCATlO — continued.

in  money,  48,  i.e.  if  lie  readied  condemnation ;  for  that
might  be  avoided  if  the  defender,  on  a  finding  for  the
pursuer,  complied  with  the  judge's  order  to  yield  the
possession,  G.  iv,  114,  note.

4.  When  employed. — It  was  only  things  extant  that  could  be

vindicated,  G-.  ii,  79.  For  example,  if  a  pupil  lent  money
without  his  tutor's  auctoritas,  the  property  did  not  pass
to  the  borrower,  and  could  therefore  be  vindicated  so  long
as  in  his  hands  and  capable  of  identification,  82  ;  but
after  it  was  consumed,  the  pupil  had  to  be  content  with
a  condictio,  ibid.

5.  Preliminary  use  of  interdicts. — Gaius  says  that  the  interdicts

uti  passidetis  and  utrubi  (see  Interdicts,  7,  8)  were  intro-
duced in  order  to  settle  the  question  of  possession,  and
thus  determine  which  of  the  parties  was  to  stand  on  the
defensive  in  the  mndicatio,  G.  iv,  148 ;  this  makes  their
introduction  subsequent  to  the  Aebutian  law  of  507  j  247,
which  sanctioned  procedure  \)j  formula  (see  Procedure,  2);
for  under  the  earlier  system  both  parties  vindicated,  (see
above,  No.  2).

VINDICATIONEM,  LEGATUM  PER,  see  Legacy,  18-21,  31,  34.  •

VINDICIAE,  vindicias  dicer e,  G.  iv,  16  and  n.  9  ;  precedes  litis  et  vindi-
ciarum,  G.  iv,  94.

VINDICTA  or  festuca,  a  rod  which  represented  the  liasta  or  spear,  the
symbol  of  quiritarian  ownership,  G.  iv,  16  ;  its  use  in
real  actions  sacramento,  ibid. ;  in  manumissions,  G.  i,  17,
18,  38,  U.  i,  6,  7,  13.

Vis  BONORUM  RAPTORUM,  see  Robbery.

Vis  EX  CONVENTU,  vis  moribus  facta,  G.  iv,  166,  note,  with  addition
in  Additions  etc.,  170  ;  see  Interdicts,  13.

VOCATIO,  IN  jus,  G.  iv,  183  ;  see  In  jus  voca tio.

VULGAR  SUBSTITUTION,  G.  iv,  174-178  ;  see  Substitution,  1.

VULGO  CONCEPTI,  meaning,  G.  i,  64,  note  3.

WOMEN.

1.  Capacities  and  incapacities  of  women  generally. — Like  men
they  might  be  either  sui  juris  or  alieni  juris,  (see  those
words) ;  but  if  sui  juris  they  were  in  tutory  for  life,  G.
i,  144,  U.  xi,  1,  unless  freed  from  it  under  the  Julian
law,  G.  i,  145,  iii,  44,  U.  xi,  28ft,  xxix,  3,  (see  Tutory,  II.,
IV.).  They  had  this  advantage  over  men, — that  they
became  marriageable  at  twelve,  U.  v,  2,  (see  Marriage,  3),
and  if  sui  juris  might  then  make  a  testament,  G.  ii,  112,
113,  (see  Testament,  6) ;  and  if  alieni  juris  they  might  be
emancipated,  G.  i,  132,  U.  x,  1,  (see  Emancipation,  1),

DIGEST.  631

WOMEN — continued.

and  be  disinherited,  G.  ii,  129,  U.  xxii,  20,  (see  Testa-
ment, 11),  more  easily  than  males.  As  they  could  have
no  potestas  over  their  children,  G.  i,  104,  ii,  161,  U.  viii,
8a,  (see  Pat.  potestas,  1),  they  could  not  adopt,  G.  i,  104,
U.  viii,  Sa,  (see  Adoption,  4)  ;  and  as  they  could  have  no
mi  heredcs,  G.  iii,  51,  U.  xxvi,  7,  there  was  no  one  that,
in  making  a  testament,  they  required  to  institute  or  dis-
inherit, G.  iii,  71.  They  were  incompetent  to  perform
any  of  the  public  duties  of  citizens ;  consequently  they
could  not  be  tutors,  G.  i,  195,  nor  act  as  witnesses,  etc.,
in  a  mancipation,  U.  xx,  7  ;  nor  could  they  be  adrogated,
G.  i,  101,  U.  viii,  5,  for  that  implied  access  to  the  comitia,
G.  i,  99,  U.  viii,  3,  although  there  was  nothing  to  pre-
vent them  being  adopted,  G.  i,  101,  U.  viii,  5,  (see  Adop-
tion, 2,  5).  The  Voconian  law  forbade  their  institution  as
heirs  by  a  testator  worth  not  less  than  100,000  asses,  G.
ii,  274,  although  the  prohibition  might  be  avoided  by  a
trust,  ibid.  On  intestacy  they  could  not  take  as  agnates
beyond  the  consanguinean  degree,  G.  iii,  14,  23,  U.  xxvi,
6  ;  but  those  more  distantly  related  were  admitted  by
the  praetors  as  cognates,  G.  iii,  29,  (see  Intestate  succes-
sion, 2,  Bonorum  possessio,  16).

2.  Women  in  rnanu. — See  Manus.

3.  Women  who  were  married  but  not  in  manu. — See  Husband

and  wife,  3-7  ;  Intestate  succession,  7 ;  Jus  liber orum.

4.  Women  in  tutelage. — See    Tutory,  II.,  IV.      Without   the

auctoritas  of  her  tutor  a  woman  could  not  alienate  a  res
mancipi,  G.  ii,  80,  U.  xi,  27  ;  nor  could  she  allow  one  of
her  freedwomen  to  cohabit  with  a  slave,  U.  xi,  27,  for,  in
consequence  of  the  penalty  of  the  Claudian  Set.,  (which
see),  that  amounted  to  alienation ;  nor  manumit  a  slave,
U.  i,  17  ;  nor  be  a  party  to  a  legis  actio  or  a  legitimum
judicium,  U.  xi,  27  ;  nor  make  herself  a  debtor  ex  con-
tractu,  G.  iii,  108,  U.  xi,  27  ;  nor  give  herself  in  manum
by  coemptio,  G.  i,  115,  195« ;  nor  constitute  a  dowry,  G.
i,  178,  180,  U.  xi,  20-22;  nor  make  a  testament,  G.
ii,  112,  113,  U.  xx,  15;  nor  enter  to  an  inheritance  by
cretion,  G.  i,  176 ;  nor  discharge  a  debtor  by  acceptila-
tion  (which  see),  G.  ii,  85,  iii,  171  ;  nor  take  a  part  in
any  civile  negotium,  U.  xi,  27,  (of  which  most  of  the
above  are  examples).  But  she  could  competently  be
sued  in  an  indebiti  solutio  (which  see)  even  though  the
indebititm  had  been  received  by  her  without  auctoritas,
G.  iii,  91  ;  she  might  contract  as  creditor,  G.  iii,  108 ;
she  might  alienate  her  res  nee  mancipi,  G.  ii,  80  ;  and  she

632  DIGEST.

WOMEN — continued.

might  take  payment  from  a  debtor  so  as  effectually  to
discharge  him,  G.  ii,  85,  iii,  171.  And  it  rather  appears
that,  after  the  Claudian  law  had  abolished  the  tutory  of
agnates,  G.  i,  157,  171,  U.  xi,  8,  it  was  only  a  patron  or
a  parens  manumissor  that  could  any  longer  withhold
auctoritas  in  cases  where  it  was  formally  necessary,  see
Tutory,  16, 23  ;  and  that  they  could  do  so  only  when  what
was  proposed  was  alienation  of  res  mancipi,  execution  of
a  testament,  or  incurring  of  debt,  G-.  i,  192.

WRONGFUL  DAMAGE  TO  PROPERTY,  damnum  injuria  datum,  G.  iii,
210-219,  was  punished  by  the  Twelve  Tables  and  various
subsequent  enactments  (see  note  to  those  pars.)  ;  but  the
law  on  the  subject  was  amended  by  the  lex  Aguilia,  210
and  same  note.  See  also  Delict.

1.  The  first  diopter  of  the  Aquilian  law. — By  its  first  chapter

he  who  dolefully  or  culpably,  and  not  by  pure  accident,
G.  iii,  211,  killed  another  man's  slave  or  grazing  quad-
ruped was  liable  in  his  or  its  highest  value,  intrinsic  and
extrinsic,  212,  during  the  previous  twelve  months,  210,
even  though  of  less  value  when  killed,  214.

2.  Its  second  chapter. — By  this  an  adstipulator  acceptilating  in

fraud  of  the  stipulant  was  responsible  to  him  for  the  full
value,  G.  iii,  215,  and  mulcted  in  double  damages  if  he
denied  his  liability,  216.

3.  Its  third  chapter. — By  the  third  chapter  he  who  wrongfully

wounded  a  slave  or  grazing  beast,  or  killed  or  hurt  any
other  animal  belonging  to  a  third  party,  or  did  damage  to
any  inanimate  property  of  his,  G.  iii,  217,  was  liable  in
its  highest  value  during  the  preceding  thirty  days,  218.

4.  U  tiles  actiones  on  the  Aquilian  law. — To  justify  direct  action

under  the  statute  it  was  necessary  that  the  injury  should
have  been  caused  directly,  damnum  corpore  datum,  G.  iii,
219  ;  if  caused  indirectly  an  utilis  actio  (see  Actions,  6)
was  had  recourse  to,  202,  219.

5.  Alternative  remedies. — Where  a  man's  slave  was  wrong-

fully killed,  it  was  free  to  the  owner  either  to  sue  under  the
statute  for  damages  or  to  institute  a  criminal  prosecution,
G.  iii,  213.

THE  END.

LAW    BOOKS

PUBLISHED   BY

T.   &  T.   CLARK,    EDINBURGH.

Just  published,  in  Two  Volumes  royal  8vo,  price  £3,  12s.,

THE    PRACTICE

OF

THE    COURT    OF    SESSION.

Volume  I.

HISTORY,  CONSTITUTION,  AND  JURISDICTION  OF  THE  COURT,  AND
PROCEDURE  IN  ORDINARY  ACTIONS.

Volume   II.

PROCEDURE  IN  PROOF,  SPECIAL  ACTIONS,  APPEALS,  AND  OTHER
PROCESSES  OF  REVIEW,  WITH  THE  GENERAL  RULES  AS  TO
EXPENSES.

BY   £.    J.    G.    MACKAY,

ADVOCATE.

'We  must  express  high  satisfaction  with  this  work, — a  better  specimen  of  honest
labour  will  not  be  found  in  the  professional  literature  of  the  country.  .  .  .  Mr.  Mackay
is  entitled  to  the  best  .acknowledgments  of  the  profession  for  a  work  which  is  alike  an
honour  to  himself  and  to  the  Faculty  with  which  he  is  connected.' — Scotsman.

'It  is  certainly  a  work  which  no  person  who  has  anything  to  do  with  the  practice  of
our  Supreme  Courts  can  afford  to  do  without.' — Journal  of  Jurisprudence.

'  The  author  has  expressed  himself  as  much  as  possible  in  words  known  south  of  the
Tweed;  his  book  will  therefore  be  perfectly  intelligible  to  English  lawyers  ;  and  to  such
of  them  as  may  seek  to  know  something  of  the  northern  judicatures  we  heartily
commend  it.' — Saturday  Review.

'Some  people  may  fancy  that  because  the  work  is  entitled  "Practice  of  the  Court  of
Session,"  it  will  only  be  of  use  to  Edinburgh  lawyers.  This,  however,  is  an  entire
mistake,  not  only  for  the  reasons  we  have  mentioned,  but  also  because  Mr.  Mackay  has
given  a  careful  exposition  of  those  numerous  matters  in  which  the  Sheriff  Court  alouehas
jurisdiction,  or  else  one  concurrent  with  the  Court  of  Session.  The  book  is,  in  short,
one  that  every  agent  in  large  practice  will  do  well  to  have.' — Glasgow  News.

'  Professor  Mackay  has  written  a  work  which  far  surpasses  anything  of  the  kind  that
was  ever  attempted  before,  .  .  .  . — a  most  complete  and  philosophical  treatise  on  the
Court  of  Session  and  its  procedure,  as  well  as  a  monument  of  the  extensive  erudition
and  painstaking  research  of  the  learned  author.' — Courant,

Law  Books  published  hj  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.

The  Dean  of  Faculty  on  the  Law  of  Personal  and
Domestic  Relations.

In  Tivo  Volumes  royal  Svo,  Second  Edition,  price  £4,

TREATISE  ON  HUSBAND  AND  WIFE,

ACCORDING  TO  THE  LAW  OF  SCOTLAND.

BY

PATEICK    FKASEK,     LL.D.,

DEAN  OF  THE  FACULTY  OF  ADVOCATES.

1  Our  modern  legal  literature  can  show  few  books  of  similar  wealth  of  subject  and  of
treatment.' — Daily  Review.

1  Still  more  conspicuously  in  its  new  than  in  its  old  form,  the  book  furnishes  proof  of
the  learning,  the  industry,  and  the  expository  power  of  its  author,  and  it  is  not  likely
to  lose  its  place  among  the  very  highest  authorities  on  the  vast  and  complex  subject
with  which  it  deals.' — Scotsman.

'  Of  the  book  itself  it  would  be  difficult  to  speak  in  top  high  terms.  Its  merits  as  a
legal  text-book  have  been  long  ago  recognised  in  the  previous  edition,  and  we  have  here
the  result  of  the  author's  matured  reading  and  experience.'—  Courant.

'  It  is  a  book  that  will  be  necessary  to  every  practising  lawyer,  to  every  student  of
Scotch  history,  and  to  every  one  who  attempts  to  meddle  with  the  marriage  laws  of
Scotland  in  Parliamentary  or  popular  discussion.' — Glasgow  Herald.

'One  of  the  most  complete  legal  monographs  that  has  ever  been  written.'— Journal  of
Jurisprudence.

In  One  large  royal  8vo  Volume,  Second  Edition,  price  32s.,

A    TREATISE

ON  THE

LAW  OF  MASTER  AND  SERVANT,  AND
MASTER  AND  APPRENTICE.

BY  PATEICK  FEASEE,  LL.D.

'To  all  lawyers,  actual  or  amateur,  that  require  to  consider  questions  regarding
master  and  servant,  this  book  will  prove  exceedingly  useful,  and  not  to  be  dispensed
with  in  matters  of  practice.' — Scotsman.

'  Mr.  Fraser  has  done  a  public  service  in  bringing  his  long  experience  to  remove
difficulties ;  and  his  volume  should  be  found  not  only  on  the  table  of  all  magistrates  and
lawyers,  but  on  the  desk  of  every  employer  of  labour.' — Perth  Constitutional.

Law  Books  published  ly  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.
In  Two  Volumes  demy  4fo,  price  £5,  5s.,

COMMENTARIES

ON

THE    LAW    OF    SCOTLAND,

AND   ON

THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  MERCANTILE  JURISPRUDENCE.

BY  GEORGE   JOSEPH  BELL,  ESQ.,  ADVOCATE,

PROFESSOR  OF  THE  LAW  OF  SCOTLAND   IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH.

Seventh  Edition,  Being  a  re-pulUcation  of  the  Fifth  Edition,  with  additional
Notes,  adapting  the  work  to  the  present  state  of  the  Law,  and  comprising
abstracts  of  the  more  recent  English  authorities  illustrative  of  the  Law  of
Scotland.

BY  JOHN  M'LAREN,  ESQ.,   ADVOCATE,

'SHERIFF  OF  CHANCERY.

'  This  great  work  will  ever  remain  as  a  monument  of  Professor  Bell's  learning,
sagacity,  and  logical  power.  ...  Its  authority  and  reputation  have  grown
rather  than  diminished  since  his  death,  not  only  in  Scotland,  but  in  America
(being  quoted  in  the  American  Case  before  the  Geneva  Court  of  Arbitration)  ;  and
every  resort  to  it  in  order  to  solve  emerging  questions  only  tends  to  illustrate
more  strongly  the  perspicacity  and  breadth  of  his  legal  knowledge.' — Edinburgh
Review.

'  Mr.  M'Laren  seems  to  have  succeeded  in  making  the  Commentaries  a  modern
work  on  Mercantile  Law,  while  they  remain  under  his  hands  not  the  less  an
ancient  oracle.  .  .  .  His  annotations  are  throughout  useful  and  well  placed;
but  the  more  extended  notes  on  such  subjects  as  Sale,  Agency,  etc.,  display
great  research,  and  are  peculiarly  valuable.' — Courant.

'  In  the  Notes,  the  editor  displays  not  only  great  acuteness,  and  great  anxiety
to  trace  the  results  of  legal  decision  to  correct  and  definite  principles,  but  an
independence  of  thought  of  which  we  have  seen  little  in  Scotch  legal  author-
ship since  George  Brodie  laid  down  his  pen.' — Glasgow' Herald,

Law  Books  published  by  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.
Just  published,  in  demy  8vo,  price  205.,

SELECT   CASES

DECIDED  IN  THE

SHERIFF  COURTS  OF  SCOTLAND

COLLECTED    BY

WILLIAM     GUTHftlE,     ADVOCATE,

SHERIFF-SUBSTITUTE  OF  LANARKSHIRE.

'  Mr.  Guthrie  lias  done  bis  work  of  editing  with  usual  exemplary  care  and  skill.  He
has  printed  no  rubbish,  he  has  wasted  no  words,  he  has  fished  with  a  long  net,  but
classified  judiciously,  and  he  has  always  given  the  necessary  information  at  the  right
place,  keeping  a  steady  eye  to  the  readability  and  utility  of  his  compendious  compilation.'
-  -Scotsman.

'  Sheriff  Guthrie  has  selected  and  prepared  his  material  most  judiciously.' — Aberdeen
Journal.

'  It  would  indeed  be  difficult  to  overstate  the  value  of  the  service  Sheriff  Guthrie  has
done  to  the  legal  profession  by  the  issue  of  this  work — a  work  which  no  provincial
lawyer  will  be  safe  to  be  without.' — Glasgow  Neies.

'  This  volume  contains  many  decisions  which  are  of  the  greatest  moment,  and
information  respecting  which  is  not  otherwise  attainable.1 — Dundee  Advertiser.

'Sheriff  Guthrie  has  now  collected  in  a  neat  volume  the  principal  decisions  of  Sheriff
Courts  in  Scotland  as  involve  legal  principles  and  practice.  He  has  performed  his  work
in  a  truly  business  manner.  .  .  .  Not  only  will  this  volume  be  found  essential  to  the
legal  practitioner,  but  will  be  highly  interesting  and  useful  to  the  general  public.' —
Perthshire  Advertiser.

'  We  trust  the  present  volume  may  have  the  wide  circulation  amongst  Sheriffs  and
Sheriff  Court  practitioners  which  it  unquestionably  deserves.' — Journal  of  Jurisprudence

In  the  Press,  in  demy  8vo,  Neiv  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged,

SAVIGNY'S
PRIVATE   INTERNATIONAL   LAW.

THE   CONFLICT  OF  LAWS,  AND  THE  LIMITS   OF   THEIR   OPERATION
IN  RESPECT  OF  PLACE  AND  TIME.

BY

FEEDEICH  GAEL  VON  SAVIGNY.

Translated,  with  Notes,  by  WILLIAM  GUTHEIE,  Advocate.

1  Savigny,  for  the  first  time  in  modern  days,  brought  to  this  subject  original  thought.
In  Savigny's  system  of  the  Roman  Private  Law,  as  at  the  present  time,  he  devotes  a
volume  to  the  consideration  of  Private  International  Law,  in  which  he  exhibits  all  the
genius  and  power  which  have  placed  him  at  the  head  of  scientific  jurists  in  modern
days,  and  given  him  a  place  equal  to  that  occupied  in  former  times  by  Cujacius,' — Fraser1.*
Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Parent  and  Child.

Law  Books  published  by  T.  <&  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.  5

Scotch  Appeals,  1851  to  1873.

Just  published,  in  Two  Volumes  royal  8vo,  price  £5,  5s.,

REPORTS

OF

SCOTCH    APPEALS    IN   THE    HOUSE   OF   LORDS

A.D.  1851  TO  1873,
TOt'tfj  &a&les  of  all  tfye  (Eases  dtefc,  Notes,  anb  (£opt'ous  Entire.

BY  JAMES  PATEESON,  M.A.,

BARRISTER- AT-LAW,

AUTHOK  OF  '  A  COMPENDIUM  OF  ENGLISH  AND  SCOTCH  LAW,  STATING  THEIR
DIFFERENCES,'  ETC.  ETC.

'  These  volumes  may  be  relied  upon  for  a  particularly  full  and  careful  account  of  all
the  Appeal  Cases  during  the  period  which  they  embrace.  It  is,  indeed,  one  of  the  most
valuable  contributions  to  the  legal  literature  of  Scotland  of  recent  years.' — Scotsman.

'  The  name  of  Mr.  Paterson  is  itself  a  guarantee  that  the  work  is  well  done ;  nothing
seems  to  have  been  left  out  that  could  in  any  way  tend  to  the  elucidation  of  the  cases,
or  that  would  make  reference  to  them  more  easy.  The  reports  are  a  valuable  addition
to  the  case-law  of  our  country,  and  we  are  sure  that  before  long  every  practising  lawyer
will  have  them  at  his  hand.' — Journal  of  Jurisprudence.

In  One  large  Volume,  demy  8vo,  price  31s.  6d.,

MANUAL  OF  POLICE  LAW  AND  PRACTICE,

COMPRISING

AN  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  GENERAL  POLICE  AND  IMPROVEMENT

(SCOTLAND)  ACT,  1862,  WITH  NOTES  OF  DECIDED

CASES  AND  RELATIVE  STATUTES;

AND

AN     APPENDIX,

CONTAINING

THE  SCHEDULES   APPENDED   TO   THE  ACT,  FOEMS  FOE  CAEEYING  IT
INTO  OPEBATION,  INCOEPOEATED  CLAUSES  OF  OTHEE

STATUTES,  UNEEPOETED  DECISIONS,  AND

A  TABLE  OF  PAEALLEL  CLAUSES  IN  THE  ACT  AND  THE  POLICE  AND
IMPROVEMENT  (SCOTLAND)  ACT,  1850.

BY    JAMES    CAMPBELL    IRONS,     M.A.,    S.S.C.
REVISED  BY  E.  ERSKINE  HARPER,  ADVOCATE,

And  of  the  Middle  Temple  Barrister-at-Law,  Joint  Assessor- in- Law  of  the  Burgh  of  Leith.

'  To  members  of  Local  Authorities,  Burgh  Magistrates,  and  indeed  to  almost  all  who
are  personally  interested  in  our  municipal  and  local  government,  this  book  will  be  of
great  value.' — Scotsman.

'  The  work  reflects  the  highest  credit  upon  the  author  and  those  who  have  assisted
him,  being  manifestly  the  result  of  minute  and  painstaking  research,  and  of  skilful
selection  and  arrangement  of  materials.' — Glasgow  News.

'  The  fact  that  the  subject  treated  of  by  Mr.  Irons  is  a  branch  of  law  which  is  in  daily
practice  in  every  place  of  any  size,  is  of  itself  sufficient  reason  why  it  should  be  taken
up  and  dealt  with  in  an  exhaustive  way;  and  we  feel  bound  to  say  that  the  manual
under  notice  is  excellently  done.  .  .  .  We  have  not  by  any  means  exhausted  the
different  matters  dealt  with  by  Mr.  Irons  in  his  manual,  but  we  have  given  enough  to
show  the  wide  sweep  and  importance  of  the  volume.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  we
have  rarely  met  a  more  satisfactory  or  seasonable  bit  of  work.  It  testifies  to  admirable
skill  in  bringing  scattered  and,  at  times,  rather  dim  lights  to  a  clear  focus;  it  also
testifies  to  an  extensive  knowledge  of  a  branch  of  law  which  is  quite  surprising.  We
commend  the  work  to  all  who  have,  iu  whatever  respect,  to  do  with  police  law  and
practice.' — Daily  Review.

6  Law  Books  published  ~by  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.

In  the  Press,  and  shortly  will  be  published,

Clje  f  iTsiiteleg  0f  (Sams  ratr  mpbtt's

THE  FORMER  AFTER  STUDEMUND'S  APOGRAPH
OF  THE  VERONA  M.S.

With  Translation  and  Notes,  and  a  Copious  Synoptical  Index.

BY

JAMES    MUIKHEAD,

PROFESSOR  OF  ROMAN  LAW  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH.

Preparing  for  Publication
(As  a  Companion  Volume  to  the  above),

nsiitetts  0f

With  Translation  and  Notes,  and  a  Copious  Synoptical  Index.
BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR.

Just  published,  in  demy  8vo,  price  125.,

BY

JOHN   P.   COLDSTEEAM,   W.S.

'It  is  not  too  much,  to  say  that  this  is  the  clearest,  most  condensed,  and  most
practically  useful  manual  of  the  procedure  of  the  highest  Scotch  Court  that  has
appeared.  .  .  .  Throughout  the  text  is  illustrated  by  reference  to  cases,  and  the  volume
is  enriched  by  careful  indices  of  cases  and  contents.  .  .  .  To  the  judges,  the  advocates,
and  especially  to  the  law  agents,  and  to  some  extent  even  to  the  general  public  interested
in  litigation,  the  treatise  is  indispensable,  and  must  supersede  all  others.'  —  Daily  Review.

•  Evidently  been  written  with  the  view  of  supplying  students  as  well  as  practitioners
with  some  idea  of  the  business  of  the  Supreme  Courts  and  the  forms  of  procedure  in
use  therein.  .  .  .  Every  step  in  process,  and  every  form  in  practice,  is  touched  upon,  its
nature  and  object  being  explained  in  a  short  and  business-like  manner.  .  .  .  The  work
supplies,  within  reasonable  limits,  an  amount  of  information  to  which  the  professional
man  as  well  as  the  student  will  find  himself  frequently  indebted.'  —  Courant.

1  Mr.  Coldstream's  very  clear,  condensed,  and  specific  manual  will  be  invaluable  to
practitioners,  and  we  should  think  that  it  would  be  a  most  useful  vade  mccum  to  the
Edinburgh  agent  also.  There  is  no  unnecessary  disquisition  in  the  list.  The  collection
of  Procedure  Statutes  and  Acts  of  Sederunt  is  complete,  and  there  is  a  good  index.'—
Glasgow  Herald.

'  A  book  of  value  to  the  practitioner.  ...  It  seems  to  afford  the  necessary  informa-
tion in  all  ordinary  actions.'  —  Journal  nf  Jurisprudence.

Law  Books  published  ~by  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.
Just  published,  in  demy  8vo,  Third  Edition,  price  18s.,

A    DIGEST

OF

THE    LAW    OF    SCOTLAND

RELATING   TO

THE  POOR,  THE  PUBLIC  HEALTH,

BY     JOHN     GUTHRIE     SMITH,

ADVOCATE.

'The  value  of  the  work  as  an  epitome  of  all  the  statutory  provisions  with  respect  to
the  powers  and  duties  of  parochial  boards,  has  long  been  recognised.'  —  Scotsman.

'All  who  have  had  occasion  to  consult  this  admirable  compendium  of  the  law  of
Scotland,  relating  to  the  poor  and  the  public  health,  will  be  pleased  to  learn  that  it  has
just  been  issued  in  a  new  and  improved  form.'  —  Dumfries  Courier.

'  The  volume  is  in  every  respect  most  complete,  and  will  be  a  valuable  guide  to
members  of  parochial  boards,  poor's  officers,  and  others  interested  in  the  subject.'  —
Dundee  Advertiser.

'  The  book  has  become  in  its  former  editions  so  well  known  and  so  much  of  a  trusted
guide  and  authority,  and  its  author  stands  so  high  as  one  of  the  most  efficient  sheriffs  in
Scotland,  and  one  of  the  most  skilful,  judicious  lawyers  at  the  bar,  that  it  needs  no
commendation  of  ours.'  —  Glasgow  Herald.

'  This  volume  will  be  found  very  useful,  not  only  by  the  professional  lawyers,  but  by
laymen,  to  whom,  as  members  of  parochial  boards  and  inspectors,  the  administration  of
the  Poor  and  Public  Health  Law  is  entrusted.'  —  Journal  of  Jurisprudence.

Just  published,  in  croivn  8vo,  price  9s.,

A  HAND-BOOK  OF  THE  LAW  OF  SCOTLAND,

BY

JAMES    LORIMER,    ADVOCATE,    M.A.,    F.R.S.E.,

Professor  of  Public  Law  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.

FOURTH  EDITION.
BY

EUSSELL  BELT,,   ADVOCATE.

'  All  the  characteristics  which  have  from  the  first  given  value  to  this  compendium  are
retained,  while  it  has  been  brought  down  to  the  present  date.'  —  Scotsman.

'  Within  the  compass  of  576  pages,  it  presents  an  amount  of  information  far  exceeding
what  is  afforded  by  many  diffuse  and  unsystematic  works  of  thrice  its  size.'  —  Irish
Law  Times.

'  Wo  appreciate  the  care  with  which  Mr.  Bell  has  brought  the  work  abreast  of  the  law
of  the  day,  and  that  not  the  least  valuable  feature  of  the  treatise  is  the  copious  and  in-
telligent index  with  which  it  is  furnished.'  —  Glasgow  News.

'It  is  hardly  necessary,  at  this  time  of  day,  to  say  anything  about  Professor  Lorimer's
well-known  hand-book  .....  Its  size  is  extremely  convenient,  and  there  are  few  legal
works  which  contain  so  much  accurate  information  in  so  small  a  space.  -  Journal  of
Jurisprudence.

8  Law  Books  published  by  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.

In  demy  8vo,  Seventh  Edition,  much  enlarged,  price  31s.  6d.,

PRINCIPLES

OF  THE

LAW    OF    SCOTLAND.

BY    GEORGE    JOSEPH    BELL,

PROFESSOR  OF  THE  LAW  OF  SCOTLAND  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH.

THE    SEVENTH    EDITION,

BY

WILLIAM    GUTHRIE,    ADVOCATE,

SHERIFF-SUBSTITUTE  OF  LANARKSHIRE.

'  The  task  of  keeping  a  book  of  such  scope  and  magnitude  abreast  of  the  times  is  a
very  serious  one,  but  there  can  be  no  question  that  it  has  been  ably  and  thoroughly
performed  by  Sheriff  Guthrie.'  —  Daily  Review.

In  demy  8vo,  price  12s.,

THE  LAND  RIGHTS  OF  SCOTLAND:

BEING

A  COLLECTION  OF  THE  ENTAIL,  CONVEYANCING,  AND  OTHER
STATUTES  RELATING  TO  LAND  ;

WITH

INTRODUCTORY  OBSERVATIONS  AND  NOTES,

BY     HUGH     COWAN,

SHERIFF-SUBSTITUTE  OF  RENFREW  AND  BUTE.

(G5tntt0n.
REVISED  AND  BROUGHT  DOWN  TO  DATE  BY  THE  AUTHOR.

'  It  is  almost  needless  to  say  that  this  edition  fully  keeps  up  the  position  amongst  legal
books  of  commentary  and  reference  to  which  its  predecessor  attained.'  —  Couro.n1.

'We  recommend  the  book  to  students;  to  practitioners  it  will  recommend  itself.—
Daily  Review.

'  We  can  heartily  commend  the  volume  to  all  who  have  to  prepare  or  to  plead  in  the
matter  of  deeds,  securities,  or  entails.'  —  Ayr  Observer.

Law  Books  published  ly  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.  9

In  One  Volume  royal  Svo,  Second  Edition,  price  21s.,

TREATISE  ON  THE  LAW  OF  ARBITRATION

IN  SCOTLAND.

BY

JOHN   MONTGOMERY  BELL,  ESQ.,  ADVOCATE.
WITH  AN  APPENDIX  OF  FORMS.

'  Take  it  all  in  all,  it  is  one  of  the  most  honest,  accurate,  and  thorough  of  law  books.
— Scotsman.

'A  book  of  solid  and  reliable  information.' — Glasgow  Herald.

'  This  second  edition  now  given  to  the  public  has  our  unqualified  approbation.' — North
British  Daily  Mail.

'  A  treatise  which  may  be  pronounced  perfect  at  the  present  hour.' — Daily  Review.

'Mr.  Bell's  work  has  been  since  its  publication  of  the  greatest  value  to  arbiters,
whether  professional  or  non-professional,  as  in  it  every  rule  for  their  guidance  is  clearly
set  out.' — Courant.

'  In  this  work  is  contained  every  information  at  all  connected  with  arbitration.  .  .
We  have  much  pleasure  in  recommending  the  second  edition  of  this  useful  work  to  the
attention  of  the  profession.' — Journal  of  Jurisprudence.

In  demy  Svo,  price  8s.  Gd.,

FORMS    OF    PROCEEDINGS

IN

MARITIME      CAUSES

BEFORE   THE

SHERIFF   COURTS   IN   SCOTLAND.

BY

ROBERT     NEILL,

SOLICITOR  AND   NOTARY-PUBLIC,    GKEENOCK.

'Mr.  Neill's  manual  will  be  found  to  be  of  extreme  value  to  lawyers  in  every  mercantile
community  in  Scotland ;  they  will  find  in  the  text  of  the  work  a  clear  statement  of  what
the  rights  of  their  clients  are,  and  in  the  annexed  forms  a  trustworthy  example  of  how
these  may  be  enforced.' — Glasgow  News.

'We  should  say  that  any  agent  dealing  with  shipping  cases  would  find  Mr.  Neill's
volume  an  exceedingly  practical  work.' — Glasgow  Herald.

'A  remarkably  clear  manual,  setting  forth  in  detail  the  points  in  maritime  law  which
most  generally  come  under  the  practitioner's  notice.' — Courant.

'  We  can  cordially  recommend  the  work  as  one  which  should  be  in  the  hands  of  all
practitioners  in  seaport  towns.' — Dundee  Advertiser.

'  It  is  impossible  to  fail  to  recognise  in  every  page  the  observations  of  a  good  lawyer,
who  knows  the  theory  as  well  as  the  practice  in  this  branch  of  law  with  a  completeness
and  accuracy  much  beyond  what  is  common.' — Scotsman.

10          Law  Books  published  by  T.  &.  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.
In  Three  Volumes  Imperial  8vo,  price  £9,  9s.,

DIGEST    OF    CASES

DECIDED   IN  THE

SUPREME    COURTS    OF    SCOTLAND,

FROM     18OO    TO     1868;

AND,   ON  APPEAL,   BY  THE

HOUSE    OF    LORDS,

FROM     1726    TO     1868.

Being  a  New  Edition  of  the  Digest  from  1800  to  1852,  by  Mr.  SHAW;  and
from  1852  to  1862,  by  Messrs.  MACPHERSON,  BELL,  and  LAMOND,
Advocates.  Eevised,  Consolidated,  and  Continued  to  1868  by
ANDREW  BEATSON  BELL  and  WILLIAM  LAMOND,  Advocates.

'  As  this  excellently  designed  and  excellently  executed  handbook  has  already  been
the  theme  of  a  paper  in  the  leading  journal  of  Scotland,  as  remarkable  for  its  great
literary  power  as  for  its  appreciation  of  the  value  of  the  book  which  it  reviews,  it  is  less
necessary  for  us  to  encroach  on  our  scanty  space  for  the  purpose  of  criticising  the  labours
of  Messrs.  Bell  and  Lamond.  No  procurator-fiscal  can  want  it,  and  every  lawyer  en-
gaged in  criminal  practice  must  constantly  refer  to  it.  No  book  can  be  compared  to  it
for  utility  in  its  own  branch  of  the  law.' — Journal  of  Jurisprudence.

The  Article  '  CRIME  '  in  the  above  Digest  may  be  had  separately,  price  5s.

Just  published,  in  One  Volume  Imperial  8vo,  price  38s. ,
AN      ANALYTICAL

DIGEST    OF    CASES

DECIDED   IN  THE

SUPREME    COURTS    OF    SCOTLAND;

AND,    ON   APPEAL,    BY  THE

HOUSE    OF    LORDS,

FROM     JULY    2O,     1867,    TO     JULY    2O,    1877.

Compiled  from  the  Session  Cases,  with  References  to  the  Scottish  Jurist
and  Justiciary  Eeports,  by  A.  E.  HENDERSON,  DAVID  GILLESPIE,  and
HENRY  JOHNSTON,  Advocates,  assisted  by  J.  PATTEN  and  G.  E.
GILLESPIE,  Advocates.

'  We  congratulate  the  compilers  upon  having  produced,  and  the  legal  profession  iipon
now  possessing,  through  their  honest  labour,  an  anxiously  elaborate  and  complete  Digest
of  Cases  for  the  last  ten  years.' — Scotsman.

'  For  fulness,  accuracy,  clearness  of  arrangement,  and  facility  of  reference,  it  is  the  best
Digest  we  have  ever  had  in  Scotland.' — Courant.

'  Wo  _  recommend  this  well  and  carefully  executed  book  to  the  critical  attention  of  the
profession,  for  it  has  the  rare  quality  of  being  not  merely  indispensable  in  the  present,
but  an  important  step  to  the  future.' — Daily  Review.

'  It  hardly  needs'  any  words  of  ours  to  commend  a  publication  which  is  simply
indispensable  to  every  practising  lawyer.' — Journal  of  Jurisprudence.

Law  Books  published  ly  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.  11

REPORTS.

REPORTS  OF  CASES  DECIDED  IN  THE  COURT  OF  SESSION,

TEIND  COURT,  COURT  OF  EXCHEQUER,  AND

HOUSE  OF  LORDS,

SECOND  SERIES,  24  vols.     1838  to  1862.     £43,  15s.  6d.
THIRD  SERIES,  11  vols.     1862  to  1873.     £28,  8s.  6d.
FOURTH  (CURRENT)  SERIES.     This  Series  commences  with
20th  July  1873.

HOUSE    OF   LORDS.

HOUSE  OF  LORDS  REPORTS  from  1726  to  1821.  Reported  by  JOHN  CRAIGIE,
J.  S.  STEWART,  and  THOMAS  S.  PATON,  Esqs.,  Advocates.  6  vols.,  £13.

From  1821  to  1838.  By  P.  SHAW,  J.  WILSON,  C.  MACLEAN,  Esqs.  12  vols.,
£18.

From  1840  to  1841.     By  G.  ROBINSON,  Esq.     2  vols.,  £2,  10s.

THE   JUSTICIARY  COURTS,

REPORTS  OF  CASES  TRIED  IN  THE  HIGH  COURT  OF  JUSTICIARY,  from  1826  to

1830.     By  DAVID  SYME,  Esq.,  Advocate.     £1,  2s.
From  1835  to  1841.     By  ARCHIBALD  SWINTON,  Esq.,  LL.D.,  Advocate.     2  vols.

royal  8vo,  £3,  10s.
From  1841  to  1845.     By  ARCHIBALD  BROUN,  Esq.,  Advocate.     2  vols.  royal

Svo,  £3,  15s.
From  January  1846  to  December  1848.     By  PATRICK  ARKLEY,  Esq.,  Advocate.

1  vol.  8vo,  £1,  14s.  6d.
From  January  1849  to  June  1852.     By  JOHN  SHAW,  Esq.,  Advocate.     1  vol.

royal  Svo,  £1,  16s.  6d.
From  June  1852  to  December  1867.     By  A.  F.  IRVINE,  Esq.,  Advocate.     5  vols.

royal  Svo,  £10,  5s.
From  January  1868  to  May  1877.     By  C.  T.  COUPER,  Esq.,  Advocate.     3  vols.

royal  Svo,  £5,  17s.  6d.

Just  published,  demy  Svo,  price  7s.  6d.,

LEADING    ECCLESIASTICAL    CASES

DECIDED  IN  THE

COURT  OF  SESSION,  1849-1874.

REPRINTED   FROM    THE   COURT   OF   SESSION   REPORTS.

'  There  is  not  a  single  case  reported  in  this  volume  which  has  not  its  importance,  as
defining  more  or  less  distinctly  the  legal  position  of  both  Established  and  Dissenting
Churches  in  Scotland.' — -Scotsman.

'  This  volume  must  be  useful  in  the  highest  degree  to  all  engaged  in  the  discussion  of
such  questions,  or  who  have  occasion  to  refer  to  the  decisions  as  bearing  upon  the  legal
position  of  the  different  Churches.' — Glasgow  Herald.

'  It  is  altogether  a  most  useful  collection.' — Glasgow  News.

1 2          Law  Books  published  lyy  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.

In  demy  8w,  price  4s.  (per  post,  4s.  3d.),
Second  Edition,  with  Additions,

PUBLIC-HOUSES    STATUTES,

With  Notes,  Decided  Cases  in  England  and  Scotland,  and  Extracts  from
Commissioners'  Report.  Arranged  by  HUGH  BARCLAY,  LL.D.,
Sheriff-Substitute  of  Perthshire.

'  He  who  possesses  this  book  will  scarcely  need  any  other.' — Scotsman.

'  Will  be  found  eminently  serviceable  to  all  who  wish  to  know  how  matters
at  present  stand  in  regard  to  the  liquor  laws.' — Daily  Review.

'Will  be  found  extremely  useful  to  agents  as  well  as  justices.' — Fife
Advertiser.

In  demy  8vo,  price  os.  (per  post,  5s.  od.~),

MANUAL    OF    THE    PUBLIC-HOUSES
(SCOTLAND)    ACTS,

With  Decisions  thereon,  Reference  to  Cases  under  the  English
Public-Houses  Statutes,  Notes  relative  to  Appeal  and  Review
in  Scotland,  and  Appendix  containing  the  Acts  and  Relative
Forms.  By  JAMES  CAMPBELL  IRONS,  M.A.,  S.S.C.,  Edinburgh.
Revised  by  E.  ERSKINE  HARPER,  Advocate.

'  In  some  respects  this  book  may  be  of  more  general  use  than  Sheriff  Barclay's
work.' — Scotsman.

'  AVe  consider  this  little  work  a  model.  .  .  .  The  style  is  clear  and  concise,
and  the  different  points  are  put  with  much  discrimination.' — Daily  Review.

'  Will  be  found  specially  valuable  to  those  who  have  to  do  with  the  granting
of  public-house  licences.' — Courant.

In  One   Volume  8vo,  price  15s.,

A  TREATISE  ON  THE  LAW  OF  SCOTLAND
RELATING  TO  RIGHTS  OF  FISHING;

Comprising  the  Law  affecting  Sea-fishing,  Salmon-fishing,  Trout-fishing,  Oyster
and  Mussel  fishing,  etc.     With  an  Appendix  of  Statutes  and  Bye-laws.

BY  CHARLES  STEWART,

ADVOCATE.

'  It  is  a  very  complete  and  compendious  treatise,  and  contains  almost  all
the  information  that  could  be  desired  as  to  the  law  at  present  in  force.  .  .  .
The  simplicity  of  the  arrangement  adds  to  the  value  of  the  work,  making  it  easy
to  find  at  once,  even  without  the  help  of  an  index,  almost  anything  that  may
be  wanted.' — Courant.

Law  Books  published  by  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.          1 3

Fourth  Edition,  in  Preparation^

DIGEST  OF   THE   LAW  OF  SCOTLAND,  WITH  SPECIAL

Reference  to  the  Office  and  Duties  of  a  Justice  of  the  Peace.     By
HUGH  BARCLAY,  LL.D.,  Sheriff-Substitute  of  Perthshire.

'  The  Digest  will  unquestionably  come  into  very  general  use,  and  be  looked
upon  as  a  kind  of  daily  remembrancer  by  members  of  the  legal  profession  ;
and  from  its  clear  and  lucid  style,  freed  as  it  is  from  all  technicalities,  the
work  is  also  well  suited  for  the  perusal  of  Justices  of  the  Peace  and  others.'—
Dumfries  Courier.

In  One  Volume  8w,  price  16s.,

A   TEEATISE   ON   THE   LAW   OF   REPAEATION.     BY  J.

GUTHRIE  SMITH,  Advocate,  Sheriff  of  Aberdeen.

'  Mr.  Smith  writes  throughout  with  a  pithy  vigour,  conciseness,  and
clearness,  sufficiently  attesting  a  liking  for  his  subject  and  an  honest  study  of
it.  ...  Altogether,  Mr.  Smith's  book  is  one  which  we  can  confidently  recom-
mend to  professional  men.' — Glasgoio  Herald.

In  demy  8vo,  price  12s.,

CHUECH  STYLES.  STYLES  OF  WEITS  AND  FOEMS  OF
Procedure  in  the  Church  Courts  of  Scotland,  Revised  and  Adapted
to  the  Present  State  of  the  Law  of  the  Church.  By  the  late  Rev.
Dr.  COOK,  Haddington.  Fourth  Edition.

'  The  work  has  already  proved  an  almost  indispensable  guide  in  Church
Court  procedure,  and  we  can  confidently  recommend  this  edition,  as  showing
the  way  through  the  numerous  changes  and  improvements  of  recent  years.' —
Courant.

In  8w,  price  7s.  6c?.,

IRVINE'S  TEEATISE  ON  GAME  LAWS.  PRACTICAL
Treatise  on  the  Game  Laws  of  Scotland.  By  A.  F.  IRVINE,
Advocate.  Second  Edition.

'  The  latest,  fullest,  and  most  complete  collection  of  the  forest  laws  and  the
rules  of  game  in  bird  and  beast.' — Perth  Courier.

In  One  Volume  royal  8vo,  price  26s.,

SHERIFF  COURT  PRACTICE.  PRACTICAL  NOTES  ON
the  Jurisdiction  and  Forms  of  Process  in  Civil  Causes  of  the  Sheriff
Courts  of  Scotland.  By  JOHN  M'GLASHAN,  Esq.,  Solicitor  in  the
Supreme  Courts  and  Sheriff  Court  of  Edinburgh.  Fourth  Edition,
Revised,  with  Decided  Cases.  And  an  Appendix  containing  relative
Enactments,  Legislative  and  Judicial.  By  HUGH  BARCLAY,  Esq.,
LL.D.,  Sheriff-Substitute  of  Perthshire.

'  This  new  edition  will  not  discredit  the  well-deserved  reputation  of  the
work.  It  brings  down  the  notes  of  statutes  and  decided  cases  to  the  date  of
publication  ;  and  Sheriff  Barclay's  untiring  industry  is  a  sufficient  guarantee
that  these  additions  have  been  carefully  and  judiciously  made.  .  .  .  Plain,
direct  statement,  such  as  a  busy  man  would  like  to  find  in  a  practical  book
about  practice.' — Glasgow  Herald.

14          Law  Books  published  ~by  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.
In  One  -Volume  royal  8vo,  price  28s.,

A  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Bills  of  Exchange,  Promissory  Notes,

BANK  NOTES,  BANKERS'  NOTES,  AND  CHEQUES  ON  BANKERS  IN  SCOTLAND  ;
including  the  latest  English  Decisions  and  Authorities  applicable  to  the
Law  of  Scotland.  By  ROBERT  THOMSON,  Advocate.  Third  Edition,  edited
by  J.  DOVE  WILSON,  Advocate,  Sheriff-Substitute,  Aberdeen.

'  The  subject  is  treated  in  this  handsome  volume  with  severe  legal  accuracy.  Industry,
patient  consideration,  a  clear,  neat,  unambitious  style,  and  quiet,  well-balanced  common
sense,  are  disclosed  in  the  work  of  the  author  or  editor  of  this  edition.' — Scotsman.

Just  published,  in  demy  8vo,  price  7s.  6d.,

The  Erection  of  Parishes  Quoad  Sacra;  and  the  Feuing  of

Glebes,  under  Authority  of  the  Court  of  Teincls.     By  NENION  ELLIOT,
S.S.C.,  Clerk  and  Extractor  of  the  Court  of  Teinds.

'  A  thoroughly  practical  book  on  a  little-known  subject ;  and  we  have  no  doubt  that  it
will  be  of  the  greatest  assistance  to  many  agents.' — Journal  of  Jurisprudence.

'  Is  simply  indispensable  to  law  practitioners,  as  well  as  of  no  little  interest  to  parish
authorities.' — Daily  Review.

'  To  many  the  present  work  will  be  an  inestimable  boon.  It  deals  with  the  question
in  a  very  clear  and  practical  way.  The  work  is,  in  fact,  a  compendium  of  all  the  law
that  exists  upon  the  subject,  and  the  information  is  readily  accessible  by  means  of  a
copious  index.' — Glasgow  News.

In  demy  8vo,  price  7s.  6d,,

Poor-Law  Decisions.    Decisions  on  the  Poor-Law  of  Scotland

in  the  Court  of   Session,  and  Awards  by  Arbitration.      Condensed  by
WILLIAM  HAY,  Solicitor,  Dundee.

In  demy  8vo,  price  10s.  6d.,

The  Law  of  Highways  in  Scotland.    By  Hugh  Barclay,  LL.D.,

Sheriff -Substitute  of  Perthshire.

In  demy  Svo,  price  10s.  6d.,

Decisions  of  the  Supreme  Courts  of  England  and  Scotland  on

the  Liability  of  Proprietors,  Masters  and  Servants, -etc.,  for  Separation  of
Injuries  arising  from  Accidents  and  the  Negligence  of  Parties ;  including
Cases  of  Railways,  Coal  Pits,  Road  and  Harbour  Trusts,  and  Public  Cor-
porations. Condensed  and  arranged  by  WILLIAM  HAY,  Solicitor.

In  foolscap  Svo,  price  4s.,

Steele's  Manual  of  Criminal  Law:  Being  a  Summary  of  the

Powers  and  Duties  of  Juries  in  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland.     By  WILLIAM
STEELE,  Sheriff-Substitute  of  Dumbartonshire.

Law  Books  published  l>y  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.          15
In  Two  Volumes  royal  8vo,  price  £2,  5s.,

A     TREATISE

ON  THE

LAW  OF  PARTNERSHIP  AND  JOINT -STOCK  COMPANIES,  ACCORDING
TO  THE  LAI  OF  SCOTLAND;

Including  Private  Copartneries,  Common  Law  Companies,  Registered
Companies,  Chartered  Companies,  Railway  Companies,  and  Others,
formed  under  the  Consolidation  Acts.

BY  FRANCIS  WILLIAM  CLARK,

SHERIFF  OF  LANARKSHIRE.

'  It  is  a  book  which  every  practising  lawyer  will  find  it  for  his  interest  to  have  beside
him  as  a  book  of  reference.  The  author's  own  ability  and  accuracy  require  no
guarantee.' — Scotsman.

In  demy  8w,  price  16s.,

THE  LAI  AND  PRACTICE  OF  CITATION  AND  DILIGENCE,

On  the  basis  of  the  late  Mr.  Darling's  Powers  and  Duties  of  Messenger s-
at-Arms  and  other  Officers  of  the  Law.

BY  ROBERT  CAMPBELL,  M.A.,

ADVOCATE,    FELLOW   OF   TRINITY   HALL,    CAMBRIDGE.

With  a  very  copious  Collection  of  Forms.

CABINET  LIBRARY  OF  SCARCE  AND  CELEBRATED  TRACTS,

'  The  whole  of  these  rare  gems  are  recommended  by  their  neat  form  and  cheapness,
and  will  now  have  a  large  circulation.' — Monthly  Review.

1.  Sir  James  Mackintosh's  Discourse  on  the  Study  of  the  Law  of  Nature  and

Nations.     Is.  6d.

2.  Hon.  Justice  Story's  Discourse  on  the  Past  History,  Present  State,  and

Future  Prospects  of  the  Law.     Is.  6d.

3.  Sir  W.  Scott's  (late  Lord  Stowell)  Judgment  pronounced  in  the  Consistory

Court  of  London,   in  the  Case  of  Dalrymple  the  Wife   v.   Dalrymple
the  Husband.     2s.

4.  Sir  "W.  Scott's  Judgments  pronounced  in  the  Case  of — 1.  The  Maria;

2.  The  Gratitudine.     2s.

5.  Jenkinson,  Earl  of  Liverpool,  on  the  Conduct  of  the  Government  of  Great

Britain  in  respect  to  Neutral  Nations.     2s.

6.  Controversy  respecting  the  Law  of  Nations;  specially  relative  to  Prussia's

Attachment  of  British  Funds  by  way  of  Eeprisal  for  English  Captures.    2s.

7.  The  Eight  Hon.  Edmund  Burke's  Letter  to  a  Noble  Lord.     Is.  3d.

8.  Warnkonig's  Analysis  of  Savigny's  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Possession,

Is.  8d.

9.  Mittermaier  on  the  Effect  of  Drunkenness  on  Criminal  [Responsibility.

Is.  6d.

1 6          Law  Books  published  ly  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh.

'  The  ablest  organ  of  legal  cricicism  in  Scotland.'— IRISH  LAW  TIMES.

JOURNAL

OF

SCOTTISH    JURISPRUDENCE,

AND

SCOTTISH    LAW    MAGAZINE,

Published  Monthly,  Price  Is.  6d.;  Per  Annum,  18s.

The  following  is  a  selection  from  the  Articles  which  appeared

during  1878:-

Ademption — -Advocates'  Widows'  Fund — Amateur  Legislation  on  the  Eights  and  Wrongs
of  Married  Women — Liability  of  adjoining  Proprietors  for  Injury  done  by  Animals
— Correspondence  as  to  Scottish  Appeals  in  House  of  Lords — Stair  and  Argyle— -
Case  of  the  Eoyal  British  Bank — Admission  to  the  Bar  of  England  and  Ireland —
The  Eussian  Bar — Professor  Lorimer  on  the  Scottish  Bar — On  the  supposed  De-
cline in  the  Character  and  Prospects  of  the  Scottish  Bai- — Bills  of  Exchange  Act,
1878 — Building  Eestrictions — Bye-laws  of  Bail  way  Companies — The  Chantrelle
Case — Comfort  v.  Litigation — New  Form  of  Commission  of  Sheriff-Substitute —
Communio  Bonorum  in  Sweden — The  Court  of  Session  and  the  Government —
Criminal  Codes — English  and  Scottish  Criminal  Law — Eeport  of  Committee  of
Faculty  of  Advocates  on  Criminal  Law  Evidence  Amendment  Bill — Eesponsibility
in  Delirium  Tremens — Appointment  of  Deputy  Clerk  of  Court — Notes  on  Education
for  the  Service  of  the  State  in  Continental  Countries,  Eussia,  Germany,  Holland
— On  recent  Cases  under  the  Education  (Scotland)  Act,  1872 — Equity  in  Entails —
The  Glasgow  Magistrates  and  their  Procurator-Fiscal — The  '  Heathen  Chinee'  and
Naturalization — Eoman  Catholic  Hierarchy  and  the  Statutes  of  1560— Eemarkable
Case  of  Mistaken  Identity — An  Illiterate  Justice— Implied  Entry — International
Jurisdiction — Institute  of  International  Law — Judge  and  Jury — The  Science  and
Art  of  Jurisprudence — A  Laconic  Judgment — Examinations  under  Law  Agents'  Aot
—Law  Clerks'  Institute — Law  Fellowship  in  Edinburgh  University — The  Majesty
of  the  Law — Association  for  Eeform  of  Law  of  Nations — The  Press  on  Legal  Maxims
— On  certain  Principles  affecting  the  Liabilities  of  Masters  and  Servants — Liability
of  Trustees — The  Licensing  Courts — A  costly  Liquidation — Liquidators  and  Share-
holders in  Court — Eeport  of  Committee  of  Faculty  of  Advocates  on  Lord  Clerk-
Eegister  (Scotland)  Bill — The  Lunacy  Acts — -The  New  Law  of  Eegular  Marriage —
Eeport  of  Committee  of  Faculty  of  Advocates  on  Marriage  Preliminaries  (Scotland)
Bill — Notes  in  the  Inner  House — A  Hard-worked  Official — Partnership — Prison
Congress— The  Prisons  (Scotland)  Act,  1877 — Procurator-Fiscal,  what  he  was,  is,  and
will  be — Proof  before  Answer — Public  Prosecutors  and  Superintendents  of  Police —
Eailway  Companies,  Liability  of,  as  Carriers  of  Passengers'  Luggage,  The  Bye-laws
of — Eoad  Legislation — M.  Eolin-Jacquemyns — Serfdom  in  Scotland — Statistics  of
Sheriff-Commissary  and  Justice  of  Peace  Courts  for  1876 — Sheriffs  and  Sheriffs-
Substitute — Eeports  by  Solicitors  Supreme  Courts  on  Bills — Statutes  affecting
Scotland,  1878 — On  the  Taxation  imposed  on  the  Succession  to  Personal  and
Heritable  Estate — Territorial  Waters  Jurisdiction  Bill — Theft,  is  it  bailable? — On
the  Title  to  Sue — Trade  Domicile — Appointment  of  Tutor-at-law  in  a  Sheriff  Court
— SHERIFF  COURT  CASES — ENGLISH,  AMERICAN,  AND  COLONIAL  CASES.

'  The  Journal  is  accurately,  clearly,  and  elegantly  written,  which  is  all  that  can  be
expected,  and  more  than  is  often  obtained,  in  writing  on  practical  legal  subjects.  We
have  no  hesitation  in  expressing  an  opinion  that  for  legal  intelligence,  decisions  in  the
Courts  of  Session  and  Justiciai-y,  new  Statutes  passed  or  in  process,  legal  promotions
and  appointments,  etc., — in  short,  most  matters  of  the  day  that  a  professional  man  mny
require  to  know  or  be  curious  to  know, — this  periodical  is  most  essential,  and  of  a  value
not  to  be  estimated  by  many  times  its  small  cost  of  Is.  6d.  per  month.' — Scotsman.

'  This  periodical  has  now  become  indispensable  to  every  Scotch  lawyer,  and  more
especially  so  to  our  provincial  friends,  among  whom,  we  understand,  it  has  a  large
circulation.  We  strongly  recommend  those  of  our  professional  friends  who  have  not
read  the  Journal  to  become  subscribers  at  once.' — Montrose  Standard.

'  A  publication  which  ought  to  meet  with  every  measure  of  encouragement  from  the
members  of  the  legal  profession.' — Aberdeen  Journal.
