Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world’s books discoverable online. 


It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover. 


Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 


Usage guidelines 


Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 


We also ask that you: 


+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 


+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 


+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 


+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 


About Google Book Search 


Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 


atthtto: //books.gqoogle.com/ 


"ἃ ἢ ὁ ἁφὴ ἡ bb ψὸ be νὼ ὁ δὶ ὦ PO 





(ee be ἐφ δ Oe TELE HO GO Os HE TET HO! 
\* 














pb ideo ὑφ O54.4 bean ὁ γὐ αὐ ENT τ by ὑφ ἀν νύ ed ἡ 9 ιὉ Voy . wir eee petete| 
. 










pe heel ere ὁ eee epee, eee oe ΣΟΥ" ἡδιδιὸ δι δι. δὴ ϊ . 
alsieiereres jab bisietatelaieteie) bebetetebei@peiereieteiaisisne εἶ pes γα τὰ 4 ἀν γν CT eS RSC ATT a 1 ii? triste rene is ie Φιδιφίφις δ δες 
oe HL PEE S Ae she ee whe 4 αἰ Φέφισέφιίδιδιφιοι διὸ pel eleleheler@iere iets ΤΥ ΤΕ: Dat ay 
pale Phe eh Oboe Lene bet σ᾽ οἰ bebebelet ere, detete epetbleobeses se) +pelehepelelere bende Pebobetobateiatsiateleiate | ete 444 


ΜΟΥ aie sletele elepelere ΠΣ “ἰΦ ον ὁ νυν. eee ee 








ΣΝ 















“κ΄. eee © Δ othe bee ee he epee δὲν eee ~ «le efeiete 
γῇ ἡφ φυσι pele ate ered tate pener ete 
21-1¢ (erete (ele ὁ οὐν ὦ ὁ ὁ διό Ἢ. 


μὴν (Phe διδισίἰσισέοηο, ἐσ ει οι κι σι ape αήφικι εἰοηφ σι εἰσ οι οι κι φή εὐ κι elerepets κι δερή σιν ὦ ΡΥ ΥΥΨΥΜΜΥΨΨΨΥΨΕΨΨΝ 


er ee ee Φ.ἐ 

ete γε τς οὐνιοιδικ οἰ ἐσ οιίτίσι δι φίδι οόδὸ 

pate Shere pete ΦιφέσιδιειδέφὲΦ sel ehe le ere ere eye εὐ αὐ δε beh See bbe ee ee he οἰφἴδ © © ὁ ὁ ὁ Glee «“,εἾφ-: ὦ 
; 


Saimset 
eee pehe ie « 



















oe ahetetelele ehete 


συ abe e bene ὙὙΨΨΥΨΥΨΥ ΝΥΝ @leieleteretere ‘ hota beleiowe ae | " 
Bas eTyisitiateteisrsisisisteisinters ἂε γφαὐ ἃ αν Ὁ χϑυφὴν νυν kid γἱ ἡφ. 








᾿ ree sabato iste tote ere re) - ὁ ὁ 

“ jo} Φ eee > | γα ὦ beg ary plistiéetes ° Φ : ΠΥ 
“. SPRL OE te Δ ate ὁ εἰφιδιοὶ- oe ᾿ ᾿ Spee & υιφι οι οἰ Φι wheleleng δ᾽. ὁ. 

Dee he Peete ὁ ears παν εὐ be tots telat late) aderepethe tebe bebe bei erecta 1?) ΣΤΉΝ Werte γα 
piers Φέφεφίφιοι ΓΈ le) ate shel ὁ. ὁ ει Fe ee HELE] wlohe beleleletele ὁ.» ὁ wie δε 51 
+) ML wh epelelefhelereteteres t*}ere ΕΣ ΣΕ ΣΝ 
ΤΥ ote dole ΤΣ te * «ει a. See ΣΤ ΤΥ ΣΟΥ. 














ἀδικεδεκιο δ εὶς γιὸ oie betebeiet+lotete 
he oe Here e wl ebel abe ete be elena) 





pal ahebapebat 
whete wel ele relate «© 
ἐφ δι σι etebet 
ΓΤ ebe  olete (ete! 
αὐ γὺ fiefs) ot lelete 
1 @\e erelrrer ΟΣ 












“||. 
ον. “+ 
wieleletes) 
oe el aheteretote 
teltatete 





















ee tw pete pw erel 
te epee @lere! 
eprte petete 











ohotobetet 
ΡΥ Pe rH Ore eh el ele ere δ τη. 7Φ 276 7516} 
ΩΣ 

te 

















ἐφήφυνιοιειδικικισιεἰδιφι δι ὁ δι. 
Sheen ιν melee mete 
Piohete ebhetelelelebheleler 
POF Sebel e Sheba rele) elke) ele bebe pereletelete 
bebe bene ῥυφ ἐϑῳ ὁ hash He halepeleteteterenetetetetebet 
be eee ® Lore letetebe terete! @ etele 
Shel σευ beter) et eneay fae tele eleletete 
ee “ι.: 7 


f+) e © @lerete ee 
She he bel eh el abe bet ele betwee peter ee te! 

ΣΟ | Sie le ele beteleie ere : 
tote #he eisisisi} Lobe τ γηγηνηφ νι ! 

ἐσὲ τ φἰφιδι.ι jrteltetelete ' 
ere hetetatede§ tibstsisieisieteieiets tits lolSisteleispepeleteieisieteleie ehebebetetece te 
ΠΣ © ehelelsrerete Sele hepele © ele pete relate rn eee etelere! + *\ eh ΕΣ eee t oe ὁ. 
ehh διε be ley eteletete| ate feteretetete aheba lalate belelepeteletebemtete HE meh te σιν henna οι σιν etetetete “΄ 







ἥδ 
εὐ “ἐφδιφιοι 









hee. 
tel wbarepebete 
Φειφήφιθι ον ὁ. 

eet erelé 
La ne oe ee 


elererete 
ΤΥ 






“Ἰφικεσιει 







ΕΣ 
- 


ΓΤ ΣΎ ele 





ΠΤ] οἰ αι ον Bete toe 
διφυφι οι ὁ «ι΄ οὐφιοδόιο 
εἰν  διφέοίοί pelabebetetet topejstors! ἐσικιν ' 
piale« “;Ι “ιν “ὁ abe ietet te Pee LEE See Leh e melee ce heel ele ee mele) ele late betel 
behets = Abele be patter ele σὐσ εἰ διε δι resets leteleteme\e  eielelets bebe hetero διε sie eisbetelebepelepe 
miele telelersi sie oeee ere Stalole1sieierdieieis: ele patel eler@ pele pel ebe lore el ere er eee @ 
Pete Ph eh abaleleter erate! ΤῊΣ . 


































hare etetetet> 















Shele\lelelelereleretelene Prete wre ete pabelelete Pete pete: (ope erete eel ore Φ Φιφι οἰ Spel ele eteperete wien ἌΡ he, hotels tobe! 
Ἵ 4+) ‘A [opepedotersiotel stebsioaieleleiots shaletedalepatet> *{Stols eT yg reget Ot οὐ αν os Ὑτὴν Ot td ts by γι ΠΩΣ . t+ bob δι, δὰ, γδ15.»: 
pale lehepeie ee «ἰ.0.ὁ eee ere letter SHA t «.ὦ οἰφοἰδιόι eee) eo fe ete ote ὁ Pere le eB el ee pele ΤΥ ΎΕΥΤῚ ΡΎΨΥΝ ὃ 
ΕΣ Hahelelele ete tere a et ete διε οιφῶν  οὴ ἰφιοιδ δὴ εἰ φιφιδίδιδι. (ere ἰ σε ἰφιοιφίδε. ΡΥ Τ σὺν treperes αϑενούιε νυ ΟΥΤΤΥΤΎΓ Υ jereteys 
potei~ The Se Re we ee ele whale © el etee) et Φιοιφιὁ Sle heletetebetetete ele leh) Oe Oe wl eth rwe ere ere tele betn Δ... ὁ oF * © ee we wl ele © ele 
Peet) theta Pete peopel etercie +H Aleem ete ate betebetetete Siololetoiatol oi γ 1) αόγφα νην γραφαν ψ 07 γόγὰ tele stoteledsiadaiete ΕΣ 
StF) εἰφιειίφίοιόι ὁ le me whee whe hetere at Pepete le She Melee paler el ele ere lele lene sere lelerep ere abet rleteded eirhehelelele ele leleperetenetete 

hal pe lapalabatabe( steteleretere THTEEE TELS R Et atelaisiet sieht DEERE REPRE EEE EEL ER TT pete iat 
bebe polo φιφιφισι δ “κ᾿ (Peele wre per ele ete elele e abe) telelepeietele ΣΌΣ: “δικι.,». 4 ei wie habe ᾿νε σι Φιὦ ΓΤ ee 


αὖ, διὸ» 
Φινίὁ  ςἰφἰεἰαφ δια εἰσι Φιφιεἰ αἰεὐἰ. « κἰ σι σιφιφινἠ ἰφιφιφοί οἰκἰσιφνιε οὐ τιοέδιτιαι Pe εἰσι εἰσ bebe pereletetete ψὶ etere ΡΥ λυ ρον ἐν rereee oP) 
Pebe pate abe ehe ele ele miele σὴν etepe ere el etele abe be lele le ate abe wielaleleleiele ein δι. φξφι ele κει κρὴ. winfeptel alee δικοί κι semiete late 
Siete ἐἀ ε εδιφ εἰσ σι σι footasoie) opetai Stebalotoisieistotaisisiorepetetatstoissois/otobetataieie| sdoieisisesigiosereisisisistatetets)s ἡσυκισισι 
ἡ οὐτὶ . “ ἀπ ele meet ete “τς eel ehele lem lelere Φ le wie erelele σὐσι ete a ele epelete a) pe ete ale bebe rebe TPS ere le helper l ὁ σεειδι κι ὁ ers 
ἐαικι δι κι α σε σικσιει σιν αι σεκισὶσ ὦ Φιε  οἰοι εἰ δισιοι ει ὦ tatetete! 










mle pepe betel alates eet Tolciolsiol oi reretstoreetoieielateie)e whetetetet-t 

ἡ φέσι.» δικιδικι οιφι δικῖφι ΠΣ ΥΥΣΎΤΣΟΣΣ: ἐν σφ σι er ot TTS διδι. Φ εὐ ere Lebebel sleep eel e ele betel δ pete peel er 
here thpatetetel ΩΣ trl aleleferete eleretehepelerere + beebeurre: δὲ τ φ κι δ, bebetete- 

Phetele were pete l wie ete) Hele δ ele telere Φ οι φιεὶς freee lerere ΤΣ: sleielelale ee siebebei she elerele« she pehereie ἐκιφέν ete | 


pe hete le abet 
Phebe © πιφιφεδιφιδιρ οἰκί ele alee εἰὁ 
pe ει" pw pata tatatereieretele eines! teheleles 
Peri whale peletetele jel e ere Φιφιφιφιίφιίου 
τἤφἐφτι σε τ τ ἰσιί δίς σιν ἐν ᾽ν γὐγὴ ὐ γόγ᾽ ον ᾽ν ὅν. 
© Ee le lee lelebeteret ee ee eee 
tobefeletereretet ‘ 
wbhebe letetete 
te be οιφι τ ἐ τἀ ..4|-5 
[Pisis\-bepeteperetel el (etebe epetete 
ΡΥ 
ἀνε... ~patetetele οἰ δέκιφι siete 







- sioloretslsioreletel Τὴ δ ἣν 0 γὺ ψὴγὺ ψῇ 
τιν 









ἐς 4 Φ. ἐφιριδιφ,ο, διδιφ σιφιίφσοιφι 
whet apetetetegete(esetet 
Pepe heiereleletetete «) et 
petabeter *hololasete ΣΝ 
S Spepeler*iere;eiete tere * #te 
tehebircet si etereret 
eleletepelsleleteret FHP ere mele alarm, εἰδή κιδιφσι οὶ J 
Phe hrlebalatelatehetaiet«betelebeteteieye fale διε κέφι γειο σι εὐ at 
ἢ ᾿ ἐφιφιφίου tt here * whe bete ΠΣ 
, ΕΣ 
Lala pelelebeletetetel ete ote 


ΠΝ mtelete ΣΤ elope pe letere! bebedalelebeteteteher. elebet. 
leieve TiS She lete lene lelebelebelele rel eletelepe) ere ter eee 

> tm tobe pebetle shelaleleleteletetetet« ΟΣ 

“,ε1..«᾿φοἰφἰσυικίφισικίνισ «eb. 
pebeletebepeteberet-betetete 
es διά whepete eterve rer 
a tepeletere oteyert \#l- 
,..ε = elemelet. ta joletoterebe| 
peleter ἀν γα ΨΥ ἣν ΥΥ το Joteise- 
“ἰδι: * erebhetere pele 
falel@) ere ebebe) ete petebete 
ehelebet 























































































































Bist ΣΤΡ ΤΟ ἀν ΤΙ ΤῸ ΤΥ Τὴ ἀν γεν sesthibissspitarsiegeesieaticieistisieisiete rs ; 
- Ὁ 7 : ᾿ ΠΣ ἐ ; ! Γ᾿ . 
ἡ  ιοὶ... ἡ τὸν ἐγ αὐ γ γη ; Ἢ : oie! paged + op as sia bphyete Pe habs edasey ripse 
pelea tv siege ed ἀφ eo au eet el eleyel ; be αὐ tote ΤΣ πῃ ὦ rel eee ἡ 
εὐ δή οἱ οἰεε δή σεν, ἫΝ ἐν τνενεν γον 4719} ΗΝ te \ a\eh* brisdettet 
ii Se ee bal bal be yaa pay ψι eee + wlele 4.6 Ὁ ἰφὶφ ΟΣ δι ἐεύμ 
Ὁ: ὃς {1 }}}} tritissettierete ὦ ἐδιειδιφιδιδὶ εἰ ὁ ὁ, as atetel ὀιφ ει 
Dita: i sha ea yet δὲ dey teeth; +} lel eee pee ysaTasese it ABTS 
moist . ποτε δὴ tat . ciel Stelolsieisisie ΤΥ ti ιν Ἴ ὙΦ αὐ εν νν “τΦφἰφἰφ τα ὁ τ Wht hies § 
ΓΤ 4 *te + 7 ΕΣ ΣΣ ere tet. 

ct rptettvarst ὁ ξύψῳ δὴ {Ὁ γὸν εν ἐκ τὸ κοτε νὴ - Lap κἢν νὸ hy bebe ee | Sidisisintet ἐδ οίο mle tlete «διὸ ΦΉΣ Σ μγδ. : ν 
ΟΡ εκ κ be beled κἰ οιφι οὐ οὐ εἰσι εἸδεσιειδιίφ κι διεὶ φὐ δ ήοιυσιφιδσιει οὶ 
ἐδ ew babe la la διδιίδις ὁ epetert τ ti eee See ἀὐ epee - wheel δ whem wl wpe ele ele εἰ κι διείσικιφις Φιφι ὦ Φινγιδις ᾿ 
ἘΌΝ ΗΜ ΣΗΤΣ y theres " ἡφεό! ΤΩΣ ΤΥ ΤΥ eters 4! 


ΝΣ ΣΟ ΣΣ 
ἐν ϑαγύναν 


Sutin 


ΓΤ ΥΣ 














ΠΥ > ‘ ad 

ΗΝ τε τἀ ζεῖ ες οἰ Φιειφιδίὁ eteped 

Se ehehelele lee ee ιδἰφίοιφί ὦ «ὁ Φιφοιίφέδισδείοιφι 

ihishte sheleteteteiereieie foleisisiejeieie 
(ore ᾿ 


+ Pee 









* e+ . 
Ὁ Σ δν ὁ χόνν 
ἀινι διε ο etete! 


ἀλλ Ὁ 








φηγρισισιφι. 
petetere, 
wlelbeteyer 





terete ΤΟΥΣ ἐὰν ἐδ τεσσ 










































a4 Σ i ἐφ t+ ehereet 
ye bite ; } : ‘ γὴγὺ τ ἐγ jote: ΗΝ ste heittest 
“ι- ᾿ belele fee Φφιφίεῖθ elete 
esi? ’ eletnmetetet Lelsboteteterss 
ΚΣ > : > ; e φἐφίφιεφ 64, ἐΦιφέογο 
Σ δ δ σιν πα λελάνεξι Son peries i? abot eintatetelbelers;ereted eye! 
teteie'> «ve bt boha babe? fe eel erent © Sebel el ebetere ὁ εἰ Φιο δ whereler® eh ehele etereceter]etel 













ΒΟ 





. ole where ei ntet betel abecet = opel eleGe bet 
ἐν Sh) av egenrp ye ee υὐυνας fener ΣΙ “᾿τιφιδ pete bee 


φἰφίοιει. tape “4. 
: trhebeletepeleretiie 


ΤΥ ~\areiet 
eho betel late leres 


abe hele Ὑ οὐ ἐν αφεναν 


“ee * © © el etete 













εἰσεδιφέσισίσιο ὁ 





















oi Lapel ebeyetete eteretebetet 
. whetet. -bapeteleletece heres elm ie, ἐφιφνισιφιφίδι. eetet ete se\e 
epetet-bs aleletepetetete ps tet 7 sete Stoicteisisintol: ote 
a ehel δι. ~lshee ἐγ vos | «ἰδ εἰν. ap pe) ΟΣ Φ τ mele Hehe eel mere, Pee ee See. Se See ee ee 





Mhohet-| +) apepay {olets(ejeretete ale letepete sith; Shehrlale lepers eieiereied ere 






yrrere a4 Η ἐφιδι δι. δι pete be al bie ἐφ. ΟΣ ᾿ ἜΤ . ΟΣ herepere ete 
ΣῊ ΣῊ Ἡδεόζονει τὴν Stet bere b>: ivi robe! MET Στ rere ᾧ] ΘΒ ese as ies 
apetetem seh φιν δι ee ete ΡΣ ete δὲν ΠΣ (elelee ὧν ἐδιφιώ σὺδι ἐφιφ  οιφισειφοι ele te eheperes eres 


Π ἈΠΗ͂Ν ΓΕ 


- 
behest): ape οιφι εἰ σε σιοικικεφιση δι. ὁ wthelefetelsbetete 
“ἀὐὐκνὴφ. κασι σιν ἐκ σιφίσις Φιφ, αἰ διφο. «0.0«Χ4 ere, eee, ὁ γ χρῦφυν ΓΟ eS + ee eyelele +, 
te 


shoteleisteterst- as jejeisfoteteretete rere} erotet>) 
ἀφ ει Φησὶ. ape lel arate Rm pel δισι νη ete leis ΤΠ ΤῊ “ἴσοι siopeiesstei siorsteisieteisisisisieteleie) >} yet 


; ey ᾿ ἢ Ἶ -, Γ 
τφιδεέσίφιφ τὸ ἘΠΗΉΩΣ Ἰφγοἡ ἡ 



























᾿ ᾿ 4 Py? ψ' steie | potevetete ere) no ΠΥ ΣΎ elena) 

sestre Si er) ve γὺ herr αν εὐνοιο mira bersasteee tata tes apeet youd bee cong CEES STE EU ΕΨΎΤΙ Beets “ἐσσὶ shelotet “* irietetepsiers “tele otsis 

ἐφ ἀφεφέσεν eb κι γε are petepetalere ele ere ( @ehelelet relate eielates . ᾿ ee eee ee fapebeterere ei eieseleiel ee) eee) ot tor 

pepe τιν sap e display al eT Teleietelepere st etetotetes doisio} denote} teitizitctsisi> rehiiics o\ete 
PPP elm mba alma ale ee ele ὁ κι Stele el eral φιφιὼ ele pay yieiepeplasasisisisreiete 














ἡ φόσίφιφιν « ei erer 





ΠΣ ee herve) 
sl seerehebete 





rer 








᾿ ΠΡ es ty saees tee 




















“ΡΨ “er 


totrisieteteyere! whole stot 














tit 


jee elem ayes 
' 




























wie 
elelee 1 *\ey+ {1} ΓΝ } ’ 
εἰ Pept ὁ διφιδιφιόι. 4 sa petete =) ehebere, - tee 

ΔΉ ΠΗ ΕΜΠΗΤΗΣ “ἐφ᾽ οἰ οίσεσενν raj ataietoseisiaiel beer betey p weap roeeets 
tae Seb aboteiots| oi-gepetc ΠΩ εν Φιφικ ε σίσίφίφοι ἐσύ τισιν Si sheteieie! whee ete 
fermen be larel nels steleais We Sob χὺ γέ εὐ χοῦν rere pe etetet mele -““. Shere hetalere) τ Σ 
a eesbersrsevesntrs gr teertest νυν is Doe ἐπ Φέφιφι οιφι σφ tetererenereret et! 
tele pee | Ὦ pelt hws σἰφιφι αι κί φισισ οἰσίδι Pele φιοιείεἰ eye διδιδ ὁ ὁ. διδισέλεσει 
δ ο οι δ οὐ phd bb bbe be Gath εις 9 Γὰ γε τὺ γε τὸ γγο γὴν ἡ εὐ γυγθηῦυς “γεἰ σε  εἰοισιφιείφέφισιοι 
Lisieicie or sabe οὐ eel acne Sere rere by Hehepalepep ae (sre pete lara ©) eh egerere a elese) 4) Osos νὴ 
αἰεὶ τ τσ τ γιὸ Tes persb pe edie σευε οὐκ τ ἐνυανετ νυν λυνυνα νὰν εἰσι σισιόιν =rete 










ele etets clei νυ leleselelele}e.e (ores ete νη δι spe ebeleiele ere) epee 
EEE ΠΗΠ ΠΣ ΠΣ ΗΕ ELE )e,° : 
’ ΕΣ 











> mhete “τ σιν τὶν elele lehetelat 5 εἰφιφι “σφι φ' ὁ γὐξύψε νύν φῦ "ἐνὸν oh aba "- 

+ aepeyet> (δι ΕΣ able toietstclsisieletoistoletsicistelsisie jabs eretateyebebeberere stele. t 
pets ΠΥ ΤΥ ΠΥ ΤΕ ΤΥ ΠΥΤΕΤΥ ΤΣ ΣΎ ΤΟΣ ΣΤΥ ΤΕ ΕΠΥΕ ΤΕΥ ΣΎΕΣ ΤΕ ΤΕ ΤῈ 
~ ESP Lol Caleleleteter e fetepep-to rw ietefepetereteletete eo γεγθ νι gaa adits de γὐ eV eee ed bay ry ὃ ote 
ie wrtte cy | beta le ΨΥ ΥΥΥΨΥ (elerele pede lat® ©. efelere efejetetererets isle. ere) 
~\ bie babe Ἔν) ᾿ Listes reohsyg Sdhseengirpt + tent 












paeypyes 


ΣΌΣ 


: 













> 
ΠΣ Petey 
Oe ΨΦέσι. .« 















Στ] 
φογνὸ οι δοιοήοής ἠοιοιλιδὴ 
“ie ΤΟΥ ΟΝ cies 6164616 + 











Digitized by Google 





THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


EDITED BY 
CAPPS, Pa.D., LL.D. ΤΟ EB. PAGE, Litt.D. W.H. Ὁ. ROUSE, Lirr.D. 


ax | 


GALEN 
ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES 


Digitized by Google 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES 


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY’ _ 
ARTHUR JOHN BROCK, M.D. 


EDINBURGH 


LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN 
NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS 
MCMXVI 





RW 


O/o- 2-27 


PREFACE 


Tue text used is (with a few unimportant modifi- 
cations) that of Κύμη (Vol. II), as edited by Georg 
Helmreich ; Teubner, Leipzig, 1893. The numbers 
of the pages of Kiihn’s edition are printed at the side 
of the Greek text, a parallel mark (||) in the line 
indicating the exact point of division between 
Kiihn’s pages. 

Words in the English text which are enclosed in 
square brackets are supplementary or explanatory ; 
practically all explanations, however, are relegated to 
the footnotes or introduction. In the footnotes, also, 
attention is drawn to words which are of particular 
philological interest from the point of view of modern 
medicine. 

I have made the translation directly from the 
Greek ; where passages of special difficulty occurred, 
I have been able to compare my own version with 
Linacre’s Latin translation (1523) and the French 
rendering of Charles Daremberg (1854-56) ; in this 
respect I am also peculiarly fortunate in having had 
the help of Mr. A. W. Pickard Cambridge of Balliol 
College, Oxford, who most kindly went through the 

v 


90.124} 


PREFACE 


proofs and made many valuable suggestions from the 
point of view of exact scholarship. 

My best thanks are due to the Editors for their 
courtesy and for the kindly interest they have taken 
in the work. I have also gratefully to acknowledge 
the receipt of much assistance and encouragement 
from Sir William Osler, Regius Professor of Medi- 
cine at Oxford, and from Dr. J. D. Comrie, first 
lecturer on the History of Medicine at Edinburgh 
University. Professor D’Arecy W. Thompson of Uni- 
versity College, Dundee, and Sir W. T. Thiselton- 
Dyer, late director of the Royal Botanic Gardens at 
Kew, have very kindly helped me to identify several 
animals and plants mentioned by Galen. 

I cannot conclude without expressing a word of 
gratitude to my former biological teachers, Professors 
Patrick Geddes and J. Arthur Thomson. The 
experience reared on the foundation of their teaching 
has gone far to help me in interpreting the great 
medical biologist of Greece. 

I should be glad to think that the present work 
might help, however little, to hasten the coming 
reunion between the “humanities” and modern bio- 
logical science ; their present separation I believe to 
be against the best interest of both. 

A. J. B. 


22ND STATIONARY HospiTaL, ALDERSHOT. 
March, 1916. 


νὶ 








CONTENTS 


‘ PAGE 
PREPAGCE! νὸν [# Bigc eee “es Be es Se ee a Se ee Ὡ ᾧ Vv 


INTRODUCTION. 2 4% 6 8 @ 4. we ww νι νιν νον ix 
BIBLIOGRAPHY ............. 64... . ΧΙ 
SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS. . 
ΒΟΟΚῚΙ. . Ws 80 A ce he 
BOOK Πα iM cat is ee ah eee Os i νιν He Be es 115 
BOOK ΤΠ ςτὸ Ss see ἐς προ ρον τσ: 0} 


INDEX AND GLOSSARY ,.............. 9833 


Vii 


INTRODUCTION 


Ir the work of Hippocrates be taken as repre- Hip 
an 


senting the foundation upon which the edifice of 
historical Greek medicine was reared, then the work 
of Galen, who lived some six hundred years later, 
may be looked upon as the summit or apex of the 
same edifice. Galen’s merit is to have crystallised 
or brought to a focus all the best work of the Greek 
medical schools which had preceded his own time. 
It is essentially in the form of Galenism that Greek 
medicine was transmitted to after ages. 


pocrates 
Galen. 


The ancient Greeks referred the origins of medicine The Begin- 
to a god Asklepios (called in Latin Aesculapius), a cine 


thereby testifying to their appreciation of the truly 
divine function of the healing art. The emblem of 
Aesculapius, familiar in medical symbolism at the 
present day, was a staff with a serpent coiled round 
it, the animal typifying wisdom in general, and more 
particularly the wisdom of the medicine-man, with 
his semi-miraculous powers over life and death. 


“ Be ye therefore nise as serpents and harmless as doves.”’ 
ix 


in Greece. 


The Ascle- 
piea or 
Health- 
temples. 


Hippocrates 
and the 
Unity of the 
Organism. 


INTRODUCTION 


The temples of Aesculapius were scattered over 
the ancient Hellenic world. Το them the sick and 
ailing resorted in crowds. The treatment, which was 
in the hands of an hereditary priesthood, combined 
the best of the methods carried on at our present-day 
health-resorts, our hydropathics, sanatoriums, and 
nursing-homes. Fresh air, water-cures, massage, 
gymnastics, psychotherapy, and natural methods in 
general were chiefly relied on. 


Hippocrates, the “ Father of Medicine” (5th to 4th 
centuries, B.c.) was associated with the Asclepieum 
of Cos, an island off the south-west coast of Asia 
Minor, near Rhodes. He apparently revitalized the 
work of the health-temples, which had before his 
time been showing a certain decline in vigour, coupled 
with a corresponding excessive tendency towards 
sophistry and priestcraft. 

Celsus says: “ Htppocrates Cous primus quidem ex 
omnibus memoria dignis ab studio sapientiae disciplinam 
hanc separavit.”” He means that Hippocrates first gave 
the physician an independent standing, separating 
him from the cosmological speculator. Hippocrates 
confined the medical man to medicine. He did with 


medical thought what Socrates did with thought in 


general—he “ brought it down from heaven to earth.” 
His watchword was “ Back to Nature!’ 

At the same time, while assigning the physician 
his post, Hippocrates would not let him regard that 
post as sacrosanct. He set his face against any 
x 


INTRODUCTION 


tendency to mystery-mongering, to exclusiveness, to 
sacerdotalism. He was, in fact, opposed to the spirit 
of trade-unionism in medicine. His concern was rather 
with the physician’s duties than his “ rights.”’ 

At the dawn of recorded medical history Hippo- 
crates stands for the fundamental and primary 
importance of seeing clearly—that is of clinscal obser- 
vation, And what he observed was that the human 
organism, when exposed to certain abnormal con- 
ditions—certain stresses—tends to behave in a certain 
way: that in other words, each “disease” tends to 
run a certain definite course. To him a disease was 
essentially a process, one and indivisible, and thus 
his practical problem was essentially one of prognosis— 
“what will be the natural course of this disease, if 
left to itself?” Here he found himself to no small 
extent in opposition with the teaching of the neigh- 
bouring medical school of Cnidus, where a more 
static view-point laid special emphasis upon the 
minutiae of dzagnosis. 

Observation taught Hippocrates to place un- 
bounded faith in the recuperative powers of the 
living organism—in what we sometimes call nowa- 
days the vis medicatrix Naturae. His observation 
was that even with a very considerable “ ab- 
normality”’ of environmental stress the organism, 
in the large majority of cases, manages eventually 
by its own inherent powers to adjust itself to the 
new conditions. “Merely give Nature a chance,” 

, said the father of medicine in effect, “and most 
xi 


Anatomy. 


INTRODUCTION | 


diseases will cure themselves.” And accordingly 
his treatment was mainly directed towards “ giving 
Nature a chance.” 

His keen sense of the solidarity (or rather, of 
the constant interplay) between the organism and 
its environment (the “conditions” to which it is 
exposed) is instanced in his book, “ Airs, Waters, 
and Places.” As we recognise, in our popular 
everyday psychology, that “it takes two to make 
a quarrel,’ so Hippocrates recognised that in 
pathology, it takes two (organism and environment) 
to make a disease. 

As an outstanding example of his power ot 
clinical observation we may recall the facies Hip- 
pocratica, an accurate study of the countenance of 
a dying man. 

His ideals for the profession are emibodied in 
the “ Hippocratic oath.” 


Impressed by this view of the organism as a 
unity, the Hippocratic school tended in some 
degree to overlook the importance of its con- 
stituent parts. The balance was re-adjusted later 
on by the labours of the anatomical school of 
Alexandria, which, under the aegis of the en- 
lightened Ptolemies, arose in the 3rd _ century 
B.c. Two prominent exponents of anatomy be- 
longing to this school were Herophilus and Erasi- 
stratus, the latter of whom we shall frequently meet 
with in the following pages (v. p. 95 et seq.). 

xii 





INTRODUCTION 


After the death of the Master, the Hippocratic Li eee 
school tended, as so often happens with the best 
of cultural movements, to show signs itself of 
diminishing vitality: the letter began to obscure 
and hamper the spirit. The comparatively small 
element of theory which existed in the Hip- 
pocratic physiology was made the groundwork of a 
somewhat over-elaborated “system.” Against this 
tendency on the part of the “ Dogmatic” or 
“ Rationalist ” school there arose, also at Alexandria, 
the sect of the Empiricists. “It is not,” they 
said, “the cause but the cure of diseases that 
concerns us; not how we digest, but what is 
digestible.” 


Horace said “Graecia capta ferum υἱοίογέηι Greek. 
cepit.” Political domination, the occupation of in Rome. 
territory by armies, does not necessarily mean real 
conquest. Horace’s statement applied to medicine 
as to other branches of culture. 
The introducer of Greek medicine into Rome 
was Asclepiades (Ist century s.c.). A man of 
forceful personality, and equipped with a fully 
developed philosophic system of health and disease 
which commended itself to the Roman savants of 
the day, he soon attained to the pinnacle of pro- 
fessional success in the Latin capital: he is indeed 
to all time the type of the fashionable (and some- 
what “faddy”) West-end physician. His system 
v was a purely mechanistic one, being based upon 
xiii 


The 
Methodists. 


INTRODUCTION 


the atomic doctrine of Leucippus and Democritus, 
which had been completed by Epicurus and recently 
introduced to the Roman public in Lucretius’s great 
poem “ De Rerum Natura.” The disbelief of Ascle- 
piades in the self-maintaining powers of the living 
organism are exposed and refuted at considerable 
length by Galen in the volume before us. 


Out of the teaching of Asclepiades that physio- 
logical processes depend upon the particular way in 
which the ultimate indivisible molecules come 
together (ἐν τῇ ποίᾳ συνόδῳ τῶν πρώτων ἐκείνων σω- 
μάτων τῶν ἀπαθῶν) there was developed by his pupil, 
Themison of Laodicea, a system of medicine cha- 
racterised by the most engaging simplicity both of 
diagnosis and treatment. This so-called ‘“ Methodic ” 
system was intended to strike a balance between 
the excessive leaning to apriorism shown by the 
Rationalist (Hippocratic) school and the opposite 
tendency of the Enmpiricists. “A pathological 
theory we must have,” said the Methodists in 
effect, “but let it be simple.” They held that the 
molecular groups constituting the tissues were 
traversed by minute channels (πόροι, “ pores ’’) ; 
all diseases belonged to one or other of two 
classes; if the channels were constricted the 
disease was one of stasts (στέγνωσις), and if they 
were dilated the disease was one of flux (ῥύσις). 
Flux and stasis were indicated respectively by 
increase and diminution of the natural secretions ; 
xiv 





INTRODUCTION 


treatment was of opposites by opposites—of stasis 
by methods causing dilatation of the channels, and 
conversely. 

Wild as it may seem, this pathological theory or 
the Methodists contained an element of truth; in 
various guises it has cropped up once and again at 
lifferent epochs of medical history; even to-day 
there are pathologists who tend to describe certain 
alasses of disease in terms of vaso-constriction and 
vaso-dilatation. The vice of the Methodist teaching 
was that it looked on a disease too much as some- 
ching fixed and finite, an independent entity, to be 
sonsidered entirely apart from its particular setting. 
Che Methodists illustrate for us the tyranny of names. 
ἢ its defects as in its virtues this school has 
malogues at the present day; we are all acquainted 
vith the medical man to whom a name (such, let us 
‘ay, as “ tuberculosis,” “ gout,” or “intestinal auto- 
ntoxication’’) stands for an entity, one and indi- 
risible, to be treated by a definite and unvarying 
ormula. 

To such an individual the old German saying 
‘ Jedermann hat am Ende ein Bischen Tuberkulose”’ 
s simply—incomprehensible. 

* * * * * * 

All the medical schools which I have mentioned Galen. 
vere still holding their ground in the 2nd century 
.D., with more or less popular acceptance, when the 
reat Galen made his entry into the world of 
sraeco-Roman medicine. 

xv 


INTRODUCTION ? 

bow. 4 
His Nature Claudius Galenus was born at Pergamos in Asia 
Nurture. Minor in the year 131 a.v. His father was one 
Nicon, ἃ well-to-do architect of that city. “1 
had the great good fortune,’ says Galen,! “to 
have as a father a highly amiable, just, good, and 
benevolent man. My mother, on the other hand, 
possessed a very bad temper ; she used sometimes to 
bite her serving-maids, and she was perpetually 
shouting at my father and quarrelling with him— 
worse than Xanthippe with Socrates. When, there- 
fore, I compared the excellence of my father’s 
disposition with the disgraceful passions of my 
mother, I resolved to embrace and love the former 

qualities, and to avoid and hate the latter.” 

Nicon called his son Γαληνός, which means queet, 
peaceable, and although the physician eventually 
turned out to be a man of elevated character, it is 
possible that his somewhat excessive leaning towards 
controversy (exemplified in the following pages) may 
have resulted from the fact that he was never quite 
able to throw off the worst side of the maternal 
inheritance. 

His father, a man well schooled in mathematics 
and philosophy, saw to it that his son should not 
lack a liberal education. Pergamos itself was an 
ancient centre of civilisation, containing, among 
other culture-institutions, a library only second in 
importance to that of Alexandria itself; it also 
contained an Asclepieum. 


1 On the A ffections of the Mind, p. 41 (Kiihn’s ed.). 
Xvi 








[0 


INTRODUCTION 


Galen’s training was essentially eclectic: he studied 
all the chief philosophical systems of the time— 
Platonic, Aristotelian, Stoic, and Epicurean—and 
then, at the age of seventeen, entered on a course of 
medical studies; these he pursued under the best 
teachers at his own city, and afterwards, during a 
period of Wanderjahre, at Smyrna, Alexandria, and 
other leading medical centres. | 

Returning to Pergamos, he received his first 
professional appointment—that of surgeon to the 
gladiators. After four years here he was drawn by 
ambition to Rome, being at that time about thirty- 
one years of age. At Rome the young Pergamene 
attained a brilliant reputation both as a practitioner 
and as a public demonstrator of anatomy; among 
his patients he finally numbered even the Emperor 
Marcus Aurelius himself. 

Medical practice in Rome at this time was at a low 
ebb, and Galen took no pains to conceal his contempt 
for the ignorance, charlatanism, and venality of his 
fellow-practitioners. Eventually, in spite of his social 
popularity, he raised up such odium against himself 
in medical circles, that he was forced to flee the city. 
This he did hurriedly and secretly in the year 168 a.p., 
when thirty-six years of age. He betook himself to 
his old home at Pergamos, where he settled down 
once more to a literary life. 

His respite was short, however, for within a year 
he was summoned back to Italy by imperial man- 
date. Marcus Aurelius was about to undertake an 

XVil 

GALEN 


Subsequent 
History of 
Galen’s 
Works. 


Byzantine 
Medicine. 


INTRODUCTION 


expedition against the Germans, who at that time 
were threatening the northern frontiers of the 
Empire, and he was anxious that his consulting 
physician should accompany him to the front. 
‘‘ Patriotism ᾿᾿ in this sense, however, seems to have 
had no charms for the Pergamene, and he pleaded 
vigorously to be excused. Eventually, the Emperor 
gave him permission to remain at home, entrusting 
to his care the young prince Commodus. 

Thereafter we know little of Galen's history, 
beyond the fact that he now entered upon a period 
of great literary activity. Probably he died about 


the end of the century. 


Galen wrote extensively, not only on anatomy, 
physiology, and medicine in general, but also on 
logic ; his logical proclivities, as will be shown later, 
are well exemplified in his medical writings. A 
considerable number of undoubtedly genuine works 
of his have come down to us. The full importance 
of his contributions to medicine does not appear 
to have been recognized till some time after his 
death, but eventually, as already pointed out, the 
terms Galenism and Greek medicine became prac- 
tically synonymous. 

A few words may be devoted to the subsequent 
history of his writings. 


During and after the final break-up of the Roman 
Empire came times of confusion and of social re- 


XVill 





INTRODUCTION 


construction, which left little opportunity for scientific 
thought and research. The Byzantine Empire, from 
the 4th century onwards, was the scene of much in- 
ternal turmoil, in which the militant activities of the 
now State-established Christian church played a not 
inconsiderable part. The Byzantine medical scholars 
were at best compilers, and a typical compiler was 
Oribasius, body-physician to the Emperor Julian 
(4th century, a.p.); his excellent Synopsis was written 
in order to make the huge mass of the Galenic 
writings available for the ordinary practitioner. 


Greek medicine spread, with general Greek culture, 


throughout Syria, and from thence was carried by 


the Nestorians, a persecuted heretical sect, into 
Persia; here it became implanted, and hence 
eventually spread to the Mohammedan world. 
Several of the Prophet’s successors (such as the 
Caliphs MHarun-al-Rashid and Abdul-Rahman III) 
were great patrons of Greek learning, and especially 
of medicine. The Arabian scholars imbibed Aris- 
totle and Galen with avidity. A partial assimilation, 
however, was the farthest stage to which they could 
attain; with the exception of pharmacology, the 
Arabians made practically no independent additions 
to medicine. They were essentially systematizers and 
commentators. ‘ Averrois che il gran comento feo” } 


1 ἐς Averrhoés who made the great Commentary ” (Dante). 
It was Averrhoés (Kbn Roshd) who, in the 12th century, 
introduced Aristotle to the Mohammedan world, and the 
‘‘Commentary ” referred to was on Aristotle. 

xix 


6 2 


Arabian 
Medicine. 


Introduc- 
tion of 


Arabo- 
Scholastic 
Period. 


INTRODUCTION 


may stand as the type par eacellence of the Moslem 
sage. 

Avicenna (Ebn Sina), (10th to 11th century) 
is the foremost name in Arabian medicine: his 
“Book of the Canon in Medicine,’ when trans- 
lated into Latin, even overshadowed the authority | 
of Galen himself for some four centuries. Of this 
work the medical historian Max Neuburger says: 
“ Avicenna, according to his lights, imparted to 
contemporary medical science the appearance of 
almost mathematical accuracy, whilst the art of 
therapeutics, although empiricism did not wholly 
lack recognition, was deduced as a logical se- 
quence from theoretical (Galenic and Aristotelian) 
premises.” 


Having arrived at such a condition in the hands 
of the Mohammedans, Galenism was now destined 


_ to pass once more to the West. From the 11th cen- 


tury onwards Latin translations of this “Arabian” 
Medicine (being Greek medicine in oriental trap- 
pings) began to make their way into Europe; here 
they helped to undermine the authority of the one 
medical school of native growth which the West 
produced during the Middle Ages—namely the 
School of Salerno. 

- Blending with the Scholastic philosophy at the 
universities of Naples and Montpellier, the teachings 
of Aristotle and Galen now assumed a position of 
supreme authority: from their word, in matters 
XX 


INTRODUCTION 


scientific and medical, there was no appeal. In 
reference to this period the Pergamene was referred 
to in later times as the “Medical Pope of the Middle 
Ages.” 

It was of course the logical side of Galenism 
which chiefly commended it to the mediaeval School- 
men, as to the essentially speculative Moslems. 


The year 1453, when Constantinople fell into the The 
“hands of the Turks, is often taken as marking the οὐδ 
commencement of the Renascence. Among the 
many factors which tended to stimulate and awaken 
men’s minds during these spacious times was the re- 
discovery of the Greek classics, which were brought 
to Europe by, among others, the scholars who fled 
from Byzantium. The Arabo-Scholastic versions of 
Aristotle and Galen were now confronted by their 
Greek originals. A passion for Greek learning was 
aroused. The freshness and truth of these old 
writings helped to awaken men to a renewed sense 
of their own dignity and worth, and to brace them 
in their own struggle for self-expression. 

Prominent in this “ Humanist ᾿ movement was the 
English physician, Thomas Linacre (c. 1460-1524) 
who, having gained in Italy an extraordinary zeal for 
the New Learning, devoted the rest of his life, after 
returning to England, to the promotion of the 
litterae humaniores, and especially to making Galen 
accessible to readers of Latin. Thus the “De 
Naturalibus Facultatibus’’ appeared in London in 

xxi 


Paracelsus. 


The 
Renascence 
Anatomists. 


INTRODUCTION 


1523, and was preceded and followed by several 
other translations, all marked by minute accuracy 
and elegant Latinity. 

Two new parties now arose in the medical world— 
the so-called “ Greeks ” and the more conservative 
“* Arabists.””’ 


But the swing of the pendulum did not cease 
with the creation of the liberal “ Greek ’’ party ; the 
dazzling vision of freedom was to drive some to a yet 
more anarchical position. Paracelsus, who flourished 
in the first half of the 16th century, may be taken 
as typifying this extremist tendency. His one cry 
was, “Let us away with all authority whatsoever, 
and get back to Nature!’’ At his first lecture as 
professor at the medical school of Basle he sym- 
bolically burned the works of Galen and of his chief 
Arabian exponent, Avicenna. 


But the final collapse of authority in medicine 
could not be brought about by mere negativism. 
It was the constructive work of the Renascence 
anatomists, particularly those of the Italian school, 
which finally brought Galenism to the ground. 

Vesalius (1514-64), the modern “ Father of Ana- 
tomy, for dissecting human bodies, was fiercely 
assailed by the hosts of orthodoxy, including that 
stout Galenist, his old teacher Jacques Dubois 
(Jacobus Sylvius). Vesalius held on his way, how- 
ever, proving, iter alia, that Galen had been wrong 
xxii 


» 





INTRODUCTION 


in saying that the interventricular septum of the 
heart was permeable (cf. present volume, p. 321). 

Michael Servetus (1509-53) suggested that the 
blood, in order to get from the right to the left 
side of the heart, might have to pass through the 
lungs. For his heterodox opinions he was burned at 
the stake. 

Another 16th-century anatomist, Andrea Cesalpino, 
is considered by the Italians to have been a discoverer 
of the circulation of the blood before Harvey; he 
certainly had a more or less clear idea of the circula- 
tion, but, as in the case of the “ organic evolutionists 
before Darwin,’ he failed to prove his point by 
conclusive demonstration. 


Jf William Harvey, the great Englishman who founded Hacer 
modern experimental physiology and was the first to (1578-1657). 
establish not only the fact of the circulation but also 
the physical laws governing it, is commonly reckoned 
the Father of Modern Medicine. He owed his in- 
terest in the movements of the blood to Fabricio 
of Acquapendente, his tutor at Padua, who drew his 
attention to the valves in the veins, thus suggesting 
the idea of a circular as opposed to a to-and-fro 
motion. Harvey’s great generalisation, based upon a 

v long series of experiments in vivo, was considered to 
have given the coup de grace to the Galenic physiology, 
and hence threw temporary discredit upon the whole 
system of medicine associated therewith. 

Modern medicine, based upon ἃ painstaking 
xxiii 


Back to 
Galen ! 


Galen’s: 
Debt to his 
Precursors. 


INTRODUCTION 


research into the details of physiological function, 
had begun. 


While we cannot sufficiently commend the results 
of the long modern period of research-work to which 
the labours of the Renascence anatomists from Vesa- 
lius to Harvey form a fitting prelude, we yet by no 
means allow that Galen’s general medical outlook 
was so entirely invalidated as many imagine by the 
conclusive demonstration of his anatomical errors. It 
is time for us now to turn to Galen again after three 
hundred years of virtual neglect: it may be that he 
will help us to see something fundamentally impor- 
tant for medical practice which is beyond the power 
even of our microscopes and X-rays to reveal. While 
the value of his work undoubtedly lies mainly in its 
enabling us to envisage one of the greatest of the 
early steps attained by man in medical knowledge, 
it also has a very definite intrinsic value of its own. 


No attempt can be made here to determine how 
much of Galen’s work is, in the true sense of the 
word, original, and how much is drawn from the 
labours of his predecessors. In any case, there is no 
doubt that he was much more than a mere compiler 
and systematizer of other men’s work: he was great 
enough to be able not merely to collect, to digest, 
and to assimilate all the best of the work done before 
his time, but, adding to this the outcome of his own 
observations, experiments, and reflections, to present 
XXiV 














INTRODUCTION 


9 


the whole in an articulated “system” showing that 
perfect balance of parts which is the essential cri- 
terion of a work of art. Constantly, however, in his 
writings we shall come across traces of the influence 
of, among others, Plato, Aristotle, and writers of the 
Stoic school. 


, 


Although Galen is an eclectic in the best sense of Influence of 
Hippocrates 
the term, there is one name to which he pays a very on Galen. 
special tribute—that of his illustrious forerunner 
Hippocrates. Him on quite a number of occasions 
he actually calls “divine” (cf. p. 293). 

*¢ Hippocrates,” he says, “was the first known to 
us of all who have been both physicians and_philoso- 
phers, in that he was the first to recognise what nature 
does." Here is struck the keynote of the teach- 
ing of both Hippocrates and Galen; this is shown 
in the volume before us, which deals with “the 
natural faculties ’’—that is with the faculties of this 
same “ Nature’ or vital principle referred to in the 
quotation. 


΄ 


If Galen be looked on as a crystallisation of Greek ane 
medicine, then this book may be looked on as a Faculties. | 
crystallisation of Galen. Within its comparatively 
short compass we meet with instances illustrating 
perhaps most of the sides of this many-sided writer. 

The “ Natural Faculties’’ therefore forms an excel- 
lent prelude to the study of his larger and more 
specialised works. 

XXV 


Galen’s 
‘* Physio- 
logy.” 


INTRODUCTION 


What, now, is this “ Nature ”’ or biological principle 
upon which Galen, like Hippocrates, bases the whole 
of his medical teaching, and which, we may add, 
is constantly overlooked—if ‘indeed ever properly 
apprehended—by many physiologists of the present 
day? By using this term Galen meant simply that, 
when we deal with a living thing, we are dealing 
primarily with a unity, which, qud living, is not 
further divisible ; all its parts can only be understood 
and dealt with as being in relation to this principle of 
unity. Galen was thus led to criticise with consider- 
able severity many of the medical and surgical 
specialists of his time, who acted on the assumption 
(implicit if not explicit) that the whole was merely 
the sum of its parts, and that if, in an ailing organism, 
these parts were treated each in and for itself, the 
health of the whole organism could in this way be 
eventually restored. 

Galen expressed this idea of the unity of the 


organism by saying that it was governed by a Physis 


or Nature (ἡ φύσις ἧπερ διοικεῖ τὸ ζῷον), with whose 
“faculties ΟΥ̓ powers it was the province of φυσι- 
ολογία (physi-ology, Nature-lore) to deal. It was be- 
cause Hippocrates had a clear sense of this principle 
that Galen called him master. ‘“Greatest,’’ say the 
Moslems, “ is Allah, and Mohammed is his prophet.” 
“« Greatest,” said Galen, ‘“‘is the Physis, and Hippo- 
crates is its prophet.” Never did Mohammed more 
zealously maintain the unity of the Godhead than 
Hippocrates and Galen the unity of the organism. 
xxvi 








INTRODUCTION 


But we shall not have read far before we discover Galen's . 
that the term Physiology, as used by Galen, stands ἢ 
not merely for what we understand by it nowadays, 
but also for a large part of Physics as well. This is 
one of the chief sources of confusion in his writings. 
Having grasped, for example, the uniqueness of the 
process of specific selection (ὁλκὴ τοῦ οἰκείου), by which 
the tissues nourish themselves, he proceeds to apply 
this principle in explanation of entirely different 
classes of phenomena; thus he mixes it up with the 
physical phenomenon of the attraction of the lode- 
stone for iron, of dry grain for moisture, etc. It is 
noteworthy, however, in these latter instances, that 
he does not venture to follow out his comparison to 
its logical conclusion ; he certainly stops short of 
hinting that the lodestone (like a living organ or 
tissue) assimilates the metal which it has attracted ! 

Setting aside, however, these occasional half- 
hearted attempts to apply his principle of a φύσις in 
regions where it has no natural standing, we shall 
find that in the field of biology Galen moves with an 
assurance bred of first-hand experience. 


Against his attempt to “biologize’’ physics may The 
be set the converse attempt of the mechanical Physicists. 
Atomist school. Thus in Asclepiades he founda ~ 
doughty defender of the view that physiology was 
“merely” physics. Galen’s ire being roused, he is 
not content with driving the enemy out of the 
biological camp, but must needs attempt also to 
XXVil 


e 
Anatomists. 


Vv 


Character- 
istics of the 
Livin 
Organism. 


INTRODUCTION 


dislodge him from that of physics, in which he has 
every right to be. 


In defence of the universal validity of his principle, 
Galen also tends to excessive disparagement of mor- 
phological factors ; witness his objection to the view 
of the anatomist Erasistratus that the calibre of 
vessels played a part in determining the secretion 
of fluids (p. 123), that digestion was caused by the 
mechanical action of the stomach walls (p. 243), and 
dropsy by induration of the liver (p. 171). 


While combating the atomic explanation of physical 
processes, Galen of course realised. that there were 
many of these which could only be explained ac- 
cording to what we should now call “ mechanical 
laws.” For example, non-living things could be 
subjected to φορά (passive motion), they answered 
to the laws of gravity (ταῖς τῶν ὑλῶν οἰακιζόμενα 
porats, p. 126). Furthermore, Galen did not fail 
to see that living things also were not entirely 
exempted from the operation of these laws; they 
too may be at least partly subject to gravity (loc. 
cit.); a hollow organ exerts, by virtue of its cavity, 
an attraction similar to that of dilating bellows, 
as well as, by virtue of the living tissue of its walls, 
a specifically “vital” or selective kind of attraction 
(p. 325). 

As a type of characteristically vital action we 
may take nutrition, in which occurs a phenomenon 
XX Viii 





INTRODUCTION 


which Galen calls active motion (δραστικὴ κίνησις) 
or, more technically, alteration (ἀλλοίωσις). This 
active type of motion cannot be adequately stated 
in terms of the passive movements (groupings and 
re-groupings) of its constituent parts according to 
certain empirical “laws.” Alteration involves self- 
movement, a self-determination of the organism or 
organic part. Galen does not attempt to explain 
this fundamental characteristic of alleratton any 
further; he contents himself with referring his 
opponents to Aristotle’s work on the “Complete 
Alteration of Substance”’ (p. 9). 
The most important characteristic of the Physis 
or Nature is its réxvy—its artistic creativeness. In 
~ other words, the living organism is a creative artist. 
‘ye This feature may be observed typically in its primary 
'“ functions of growth and nutrition; these are de- 
pendent on the characteristic faculttes or powers, 
by virtue of which each part draws to itself what 
is proper or appropriate to it (ro οἰκεῖον) and rejects 
what is foreign (το ἀλλότριον), thereafter appro- 
priating or assimilating the attracted material; this 
assimilation is an example of the alteration (or quali- 
tative change) already alluded to; thus the food eaten 
is “altered” into the various tissues of the body, each 
of these having been provided by “ Nature”’ with its 
_ own specific faculties of attraction and repulsion. 


Any of the operations of the living part may be The Three 
Categuries. 
looked on in three ways, either (a) as ἃ δύναμις, 
XX1X 


INTRODUCTION 


faculty, potentiality ; (ὁ) as an ἐνέργεια, which is this 
δύναμις in operation ; or (c) as an ἔργον, the product 
or effect of the évépyeta.! 


1 What appear to me to be certain resemblances between 
the Galenical and the modern vitalistic views of Henri 
Bergson may perhaps be alluded to here. Galen’s vital 
principle, 4 τεχνικὴ φύσις (‘‘creative growth”), presents 
analogies with [Evolution créatricc: both manifest their 
activity in producing qualitative change (ἀλλοίωσις, change- 
ment) : in both, the creative change cannot be analysed into 
a series of static states, but is one and continuous. In Galen, 
however, it comes to an end with the development of the 
sndavidual, whereas in Bergson it continues indefinitely as 
the evolution of life. The three aspects of organic life may 
be tabulated thus :— 


δύναμις ἐνέργεια ἔργον 
Work to be done. Work being done. Work done, finished. 
Future aspect. Present aspect. Past aspect. 
Function. Structure. 
The élan vital. A ‘‘thing.” 
A changing which 
cannot be under- 


stood as a sum 
of static parts ; 
8 constant be- 
coming, never 
stopping — at 
least till the &- 
γον is reached. 


Bergson’s ‘‘teleo- Bergson’s ‘‘ philo- Bergson’s ** out- 
logical ” aspect. sophical” aspect. look of physical 
science.” 


Galen recognized ‘‘creativeness” (τέχνη) in the develop- 
ment of the individual and its parts (ontogeny) and in the 
maintenance of these, but he failed to appreciate the creative 
evolution of species (phylogeny), which is, of course, part of 
the same process. To the teleologist the possibilities (δυ- 
νάμει5) of the Physis are limited, to Bergson they are un- 


XXX 


INTRODUCTION 


Like his master Hippocrates, Galen attached Galen's 
fundamental importance to clinical observation— ies 
to the evidence of the senses as the indispensable 
groundwork of all medical knowledge. He had 
also, however, a forte for rapid generalisation from 
observations, and his logical proclivities disposed him 


limited. Galen and Bergson agree in attaching most practical 
importance to the middle category—that of Function. 

While it must be conceded that Galen, following Aristotle, 
had never seriously questioned the fixity of species, the 
following quotation from his work On Habits (chap. ii.) will 
show that he must have at least had occasional glimmerings 
of our modern point of view on the matter. Referring to 
assimilation, he says: ‘‘ Just as everything we eat or drink 
becomes altered in quality, so of course also does the altering 
factor itself become altered. ... A clear proof of the as- 
similation of things which are being nourished to that which 
is nourishing them is the change Which occurs in plants and 
seeds ; this often goes so far that what is highly noxious in 
one soil becomes, when transplanted into another soil, not 
merely harmless, but actually useful. This has been largely 
put to the test by those who compose memoirs on farming 
and on plants, as also by zoological authors who have 
written on the changes which occur according to the 
countries in which animals live. Since, therefore, not only 
is the nourishment altered by the creature nourished, but 
the latter itself also undergoes some slight alteration, thts 
alight alteration must necessarily become considerable in the 
course of time, and thus properties resulting from prolonged 
habit must come to be on a par with natural properties.” 

Galen fails to see the possibility that the ‘‘ natural ” pro- 
perties themselves originated in this way, as activities which 
gradually became habitual—that is to say, that the effects of 
nurture may become a ‘‘second nature,” and so eventually 
nature itself. 

The whole passage, however, may be commended to modern 
biologists—particularly, might one say, to those bacterio- 
logists who have not yet realised how extraordinarily rela- 
tive is the term ‘‘specificity " when applied to the subject- 
matter of their science. 


XXxi 


INTRODUCTION 


particularly to deductive reasoning. Examples of an 
almost Euclidean method of argument may be found 
in the Natural Faculties (e.g. Book III. chap. i.). While 
this method undoubtedly gave him much help in 
his search for truth, it also not unfrequently led him 
astray. This is evidenced by his attempt, already 
noted, to apply the biological principle of the φύσις 
in: physics. Characteristic examples of attempts to 
force facts to fit premises will be found in Book II. 
chap. ix., where our author demonstrates that yellow 
bile is “ virtually” dry, and also, by a process of 
exclusion, assigns to the spleen the function of clear- 
ing away black bile. Strangest of all is his attempt 
to prove that the same principle of specific attraction 
by which the ultimate tissues nourish themselves 
(and the lodestone attracts iron!) accounts for the 
reception of food into the stomach, of urine into 
the kidneys, of bile into the gall-bladder, and of 
semen into the uterus. 

These instances are given, however, without pre- 
judice to the system of generalisation and deduction 
which, in Galen’s hands, often proved exceedingly 
fruitful. He is said to have tried “to unite pro- 
fessional and scientific medicine with a philosophic 
link.” He objected, however, to such extreme 
attempts at simplification of medical science as that 
of the Methodists, to whom diseases were isolated 
entities, without any relationships in time or space 
(v. p. xv. supra). 

He based much of his pathological reasoning upon 
xxxii 





INTRODUCTION 


~“ the “humoral theory ᾿ of Hippocrates, according to 


which certain diseases were caused by one or more 
of the four humours (blood, phlegm, black and yellow 
bile) being in excess—that is, by various dyscrastae. 
Our modern conception of “ hormone”’ action shows 
certain resemblances with this theory. 

Besides observation and reasoning, Galen took his 
stand on experiment; he was one of the first of 
experimental physiologists, as is illustrated in the 
present book by his researches into the function of 
the kidneys (p. 59 et seq.). He also conducted a 
long series of experiments into the physiology of the 
spinal cord, to determine what parts controlled 
movement and what sensibility. 

As a practitioner he modelled his work largely on 
the broad and simple lines laid down by Hippocrates. 
He had also at his disposal all the acquisitions of 
biological science dating from the time of Aristotle 
five hundred years earlier, and reinforced by the 
discoveries in anatomy made by the Alexandrian 
school. To these he added a large series of re- 
searches of his own. 

Galen never confined himself to what one might 
call the academic or strictly orthodox sources of 
information ; he roamed the world over for answers 
to his queries. For example, we find him on his 
journeys between Pergamos and Rome twice visiting 
the island of Lemnos in order to procure some of 
the terra sigillata, a kind of earth which had a 
reputation for healing the bites of serpents and 

xxxiii 

GALEN c 


INTRODUCTION 


other wounds. At other times he visited the 
copper-mines of Cyprus in search for copper, and 
Palestine for the resin called Balm of Gilead. 

By inclination and training Galen was the reverse 
of a “party-man.” In the Natural Faculties (p. 55) 
he speaks of the bane of sectarian partizanship, 
“harder to heal than any itch.” He pours scorn 
upon the ignorant “ Erasistrateans’ and “ Asclepia- 
deans,’ who attempted to hide their own incom- 
petence under the shield of some great man’s name 
(cf. p. 141). 

Of the two chief objects of his censure in the 
Natural Faculties, Galen deals perhaps less rigorously 
with Erasistratus than with Asclepiades. Erasistratus 


_ did at least recognize the existence of a vital principle 


in the organism, albeit, with his eye on the structures 
which the scalpel displayed he tended frequently to 
forget it. The researches of the anatomical school 
of Alexandria had been naturally of the greatest 
service to surgery, but in medicine they sometimes 
had a tendency to check progress by diverting 
attention from the whole to the part. 


Another novel conception frequently occurring in 
Galen’s writings is that of the Pneuma (z.e. the breath, 
spiritus). This word is used in two senses, as meaning 
(1) the inspired air, which was drawn into the left 
side of the heart and thence carried all over the 
body by the arteries; this has not a few analogies 
with oxygen, particularly as its action in the tissues 
XXXiv 





INTRODUCTION 


is attended with the appearance of the so-called 
“innate heat.” (2) A vital principle, conceived as 
“being made up of matter in the most subtle 
imaginable state (s.e. air). This vital principle be- 
came resolved into three kinds: (a) πνεῦμα φυσικόν 
or spiritus naturalis, carried by the veins, and pre- 
siding over the subconscious vegetative life; this 
“natural spirit’’ is therefore practically equivalent 
to the φῦσις or “nature” itself. (6) The πνεῦμα 
ζωτικόν or spiritus vitalis; here particularly is a source 
of error, since the air already alluded to as being 
carried by the arteries tends to be confused with this 
principle of “ individuality ’’ or relative autonomy in 
the circulatory (including, perhaps, the vasomotor) 
system. (6) The πνεῦμα ψυχικόν or spiritus animals 
(anima = ψυχή), carried by longitudinal canals in the 
nerves ; this corresponds to the ψυχή. 

This view of a “vital principle’ as necessarily 
consisting of matter in a finely divided, fluid, or 
“etheric” state is not unknown even in our day. 
3elief in the fundamental importance of the Pneuma 
formed the basis of the teaching of another vitalist 
school in ancient Greece, that of the Pneumatists. 


. . ἢ . Galen and 
It is unnecessary to detail here the various ways © Girouia- 


in which Galen’s physiological views differ from those ‘ion of the 
of the Moderns, as most of these are noticed in foot- 
notes to the text of the present translation. His 
ignorance of the circulation of the blood does not 
lessen the force of his general physiological conelu- 

XXXV 


c 2 


INTRODUCTION 


sions to the extent that might be anticipated. In 
his opinion, the great bulk of the blood travelled 
with a to-and-fro motion in the veins, while a little 
of it, mixed with inspired air, moved in the same 
way along the arteries ; whereas we now know that 
all the blood goes outward by the arteries and returns 
by the veins; in either case blood is carried to the 
tissues by blood-vessels, and Galen’s ideas of tissue- 

J/ uutrition were wonderfully sound. The ingenious 
method by which (in ignorance of the pulmonary 
circulation) he makes blood pass from the right to 
the left ventricle, may be read in the present work 
(p. 321). As will be seen, he was conversant with 
the “anastomoses ” between the ultimate branches ot 
arteries and veins, although he imagined that they 
were not used under “ normal ”’ conditions. 


Galen's Galen was not only a man of great intellectual 

Character. ᾿ς 
gifts, but one also of strong moral fibre. In 
his short treatise “That the best Physician is also a 
Philosopher ”’ he outlines his professional ideals. It 
is necessary for the efficient healer to be versed in 
the three branches of “philosophy,” viz.: (a) logic, 
the science of how to think ; (6) physics, the science 
of what is—ze. of “Nature” in the widest ‘sense; 
(c) ethics, the science of what to do. The amount of 
toil which he who wishes to be a physician must 
undergo—firstly, in mastering the work of his pre- 
decessors and afterwards in studying disease at first 
hand—makes it absolutely necessary that he should 
ΧΧΧΥῚ 





INTRODUCTION 


possess perfect self-control, that he should scorn 
money and the weak pleasures of the senses, and 
should live laborious days. 

Readers of the following pages will notice that 
Galen uses what we should call distinctly im- 
moderate language towards those who ventured to 
differ from the views of his master Hippocrates 
(which were also his own). The employment of such 
language was one of the few weaknesses of his age 
which he did not transcend. Possibly also his mother’s 
choleric temper may have predisposed him to it. 

The fact, too, that his vivisection experiments (e.g. 
pp. 59, 273) were carried out apparently without any 
kind of anaesthetisation being even thought of is 
abhorrent to the feelings of to-day, but must be ex- 
cused also on the ground that callousness towards 
animals was then customary, men having probably 
never thought much about the subject. 


Galen is a master of language, using a highly Galen's 
polished variety of Attic prose with a precision which renee 
can be only very imperfectly reproduced in another 
tongue. Every word he uses has an exact and 
definite meaning attached to it. Translation is 
particularly difficult when a word stands for a 
physiological conception which is not now held; 
instances are the words anadosis, prosthesis, and 
prosphysts, indicating certain steps in the process 
by which nutriment is conveyed from the alimentary 
canal to the tissues. 

XXXVii 


INTRODUCTION 


Readers will be surprised to find how many words 
are used by Galen which they would have thought 
had been expressly coined to fit modern conceptions ; 
thus our author employs not merely such terms 
as phystology, phthists, atrophy, anastomosis, but also 
haematopoietic, anaesthesia, and even aseptic! It is 
only fair, however, to remark that these terms, 
particularly the last, were not used by Galen in 
quite their modern significance. 


Summary. To resume, then: What contribution can Galen 
bring to the art of healing at the present day? It 
was not, surely, for nothing that the great Pergamene 
gave laws to the medical world for over a thousand 
years ! 

Let us draw attention once more to: 


J (1) The high ideal which he set before the 


profession. 


(2) His insistence on immediate contact with 
‘nature as the primary condition for arriving at an 
understanding of disease; on the need for due 
consideration of previous authorities; on the need 
also for reflection—for employment of the mind’s 
eye (ἡ λογικὴ θεωρία) as an aid to the physical eye. 


(3) His essentially broad outlook, which often 
helped him in the comprehension of a phenomenon 
through his knowledge of an analogous phenomenon 
in another field of nature. 
¥XXVili 





INTRODUCTION 


(4) His keen appreciation of the unity of the 
organism, and of the inter-dependence of its parts ; 
his realisation that the vital phenomena (physiological 
and pathological) in a living organism can only be 
understood when considered in relation to the 
environment of that organism or part. This is the 
foundation for the war that Galen waged ἃ outrance 
on the Methodists, to whom diseases were things 
without relation to anything. This dispute is, un- 
fortunately, not touched upon in the present volume. 
What Galen combated was the tendency, familiar 
enough in our own day, to reduce medicine to the 
science of finding a label for each patient, and then 
treating not the patient, but the label. (This 
tendency, we may remark in parenthesis, is one 
which is obviously well suited for the standardising 
purposes of a State medical service, and is therefore 
one which all who have the weal of the profession 
at heart must most jealously watch in the difficult 
days that lie ahead.) 


(5) His realisation of the inappropriateness and 
inadequacy of physical formulae in explaining physio- 
logical activities. Galen’s disputes with Asclepiades 
over τὰ πρῶτα ἐκεῖνα σώματα τὰ ἀπαθῆ, over the dvappa 
στοιχεῖα καὶ ληρώδεις ὄγκοι, is but another aspect of 
his quarrel with the Methodists regarding their 
pathological “ units,’ whose primary characteristic 
was just this same ἀπάθεια (impassiveness to environ- 
ment, “ unimpressionability’’). We have of course 

XXX1X 


INTRODUCTION 


our Physiatric or latromechanical school at the 
present day, to whom such processes as absorption 
from the alimentary canal, the respiratory inter- 
change of gases, and the action of the renal 
epithelium are susceptible of a purely physical 
explanation.! 


(6) His quarrel with the Anatomists, which was 
in essence the same as that with the Atomists, and 
which arose from his clear realisation that that 
primary and indispensable desideratum, a view of the 
whole, could never be obtained by a mere summation 
of. partial views; hence, also, his sense of the 
dangers which would beset the medical art if it were 
allowed to fall into the hands of a mere crowd of 
competing specialists without any organising head to 
guide them. 


1 In terms of filtration, diffusion, and osmosis. 


xl 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


CopDIcEs 


Bibliothéque Nationale. Paris. No. 2267. 
Library of St. Mark. Venice. No. 275. 


TRANSLATIONS 


Arabic translations by Honain in the Escurial Library, and 
in the Library at Leyden. Hebrew translation in the 
Library at Bonn. Latin translations in the Library of 
Gonville and Caius College (MSS. ), No. 947; also by 
Linacre in editions published, London, 1523; Paris, 
1528 ; Leyden, 1540, 1548, and 1550; also by C. G. Kiihn, 
Leipzig, 1821. 


CoMMENTARIES AND APPRECIATIONS 


Nic. de Anglia in Bib. Nat. Paris (MSS.), No. 7015; J. 
Rochon, sbidem, No. 7025; J. Segarra, 1528 ; J. Sylvius, 
1550, 1560; L. Joubert, 1599; M. Sebitz, 1644, 1645; 
J. B. Pacuvius, 1554; J. C. G. Ackermann, 1821, in 
the introduction to Kiihn’s translation, p. lxxx; Ilberg 
in articles on ‘‘Die Schriftstellerei des Klaudios 
Galenos,” in Rhein. Mus., Nos. 44, 47, 51, and 52 
(years 1889, 1892, 1896 and 1897); I. von Mueller in 

Jucestiones Criticae de Galeni libris, Erlangen, 1871; 
Steinschneider in Virchow’s Archiv, No. cxxiv. for 
1891 ; Wenrich in De auctorum graecorum versionibus 
et commentariis syriacis, arabicts, armiacis, persisque, 
Leipzig, 1842. 


xli 


τὸς 


— .---Ὁ-τπἔἐΠ---π-{π- 


SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


BOOK I 


CHAPTER I 


Distinction between the effects of (a) the organism’s psyche 
or soul (δ) its physis or nature. The author proposes to 
confine himself to a consideration of the latter—the 
vegetative—aspect of life. 


CHaprTer II 


Definition of terms. Different kinds of motion. Alteration 
or qualitative change. Refutation of the Sophists’ objec- 
tion that such change is only apparent, not real. The 
four fundamental qualities of Hippocrates (later Aris- 
totle). Distinction between faculty, activity (function), 
and effect (work or product). 


Cuapter III 


It is by virtue of the four qualities that each part functions. 
Some authorities subordinate the dry and the moist 


principles to the hot and the cold. Aristotle inconsistent 
here. 


CHaprrerR IV 


We must suppose that there are facultves corresponding in 


number to the visible effects (or products) with which we 
are familiar. 


CHAPTER V 


Genesis, growth, and nutrition. Genesis (embryogeny) sub- 
divided into histogenesis and organogenesis. Growth is 
a tridimensional expansion of the solid parts formed 
during genesis. Nutrition. 


xliii 


SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


CHAPTER VI 


The process of genesis (embryogeny) from insemination 
onwards. Each of the simple, elementary, homogeneous 
parts (tissues) is produced by a special blend of the four 

rimary alterative faculties (such secondary alterative 
aculties being ostoporettc, neuropoietic, etc.). A special 
function and use also corresponds to each of these special 
tissues. The bringing of these tissues together into 
organs and the disposal of these organs is performed by 
another faculty called diaplastic, moulding, or forma- 
tsve. 


CHarrter VII 


We now pass from genesis to growth. Growth essentially a 
post-natal process; it involves two factors, expansion 
and nutrition, explained by analogy of a familiar child’s 
game. 


CuapTer VIII 
Nutrition. 


CHAPTER IX 


These three primary faculties (genesis, growth, nutrition) 
have various others subservient to them. 


CHAPTER X 


Nutrition not a simple process. (1) Need of subsidiary 
organs for the various stages of alteration, e.g., of br 
into blood, of that into bone, etc. (2) Need also of 
organs for excreting the non-utilizable portions of the 
food, e.y., much vegetable matter is superfluous. (3) Need 
of organs of a third kind, for distributing the pabulum 
through the body. 


CuHaprer XI 


Nutrition analysed into the stages of apr ceuen (prosthesis), 
adhesion (prosphysis), and assimilation. The stages 
illustrated by certain pathological conditions. Different 
shades of meaning of the term nutriment. 


xliv 








SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


Cuaprer XII 


The two chief medico-philosophical schools—Atomist and 
Vitalist. Hippocrates an adherent of the latter school— 
his doctrine of an original principle or ‘‘ nature” in 
every living thing (doctrine of the unity of the 
organism). 


CHAPTER XIII 


Failure of Asclepiades to understand the functions of kidneys 
and ureters. His hypothesis of vaporization of imbibed 
fluids is here pefuted. A demonstration of urinary secre- 
tion in the living animal; the forethought and artistic 
skill of Nature vindicated. Refutation also of Ascle- 
piades’s disbelief in the special selective action of purga- 
tive drugs. 


CHAPTER XIV 


While Asclepiades denies in toto the obvious fact of specific 
attraction, Epicurus grants the fact, although his 
attempt to explain it by the atomic hypothesis breaks 
down. Refutation of the Epicurean theory of magnetic 
attraction. Instances of specific attraction of thorns 
and animal nw medicaments, of moisture by 


corn, etc. 
APTER XV 


It now being granted that the urine is secreted by the 
kidneys, the rationale of this secretion is enquired into. 
The kidneys are not mechanical filters, but are by virtue 
of their nature possessed of a specific faculty of attrac- 
tion. 


CHAPTER XVI 


Erasistratus, again, by his favourite principle of horror vacut 
could never explain the secretion of urine by the kidneys. 
While, however, he acknowledged that the kidneys do 
secrete urine, he makes no attempt to explain this; he 
ignores, but does not attempt to refute, the Hippocratic 
doctrine of specific attraction. ‘‘Servile” position taken 
up by Asclepiades and Erasistratus in regard to this 
function of urinary secretion. 


xlv 


SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


CHAPTER XVII 


Three other attempts (by adherents of the Erasistratean 
school and by Lycus of Macedonia) to explain how the 
kidneys come to separate out urine from the blood. All 
these ignore the obvious principle of attraction. 


BOOK IL 


CHAPTER I 


In order to explain dispersal of food from alimentary canal 
vd the veins (anadosis) there is no need to invoke with 
Erasistratus, the horror vacui, since here again the prin- 
ciple of specific attraction is operative ; moreover, blood 
is also driven forward by the compressing action of the 
stomach and the contractions of the veins. Possibility, 
oe of Erasistratus’s factor playing a certain minor 
réle. 


CuaprTer II 


The Erasistratean idea that bile becomes separated out from 
the blood in the liver because, being the thinner fluid, it 
alone can enter the narrow stomata of the bile-ducts, 
while the thicker blood can only enter the wider mouths 
of the hepatic venules. 


CHaprer III 


The morphological factors suggested by Erasistratus are 
quite inadequate to explain biological happenings. 
Erasistratus inconsistent with his own statements. The 
immanence of the physis or nature; her shaping is not 
merely external like that of a statuary, but involves the 
entire substance. In genesis (embryogeny) the semen is 
the active, and the menstrual blood the passive, princi- 
ple. Attractive, alterative, and formative faculties of 
the semen. Embryogeny is naturally followed by 
growth ; these two functions distinguished. 


xlvi 





SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


CHAPTER LV 


Unjustified claim by Erasistrateans that their founder had 
associations with the Peripatetic (Aristotelian) school. 
The characteristic physiological tenets of that school 
(which were all anticipated by Hippocrates) in no way 
agree with those of Erasistratus, save that both recognize 
the purposefulness of Nature; in practice, however, 
Erasistratus assumed numerous exceptions to this prin- 
ciple. Difficulty of understanding why he rejected the 
soe Sha principle of attraction in favour of anatomical 
actors. 


CHAPTER V 


A further difficulty raised by Erasistratus’s statement 
regarding secretion of bile in the liver. 


CHAPTER VI 


The same holds with nutrition. Even if we grant that veins 
may obtain their nutrient blood by virtue of the horror 
vacus (chap. i.), how could this explain the nutrition of 
nerves? Erasistratus’s hypothesis of minute elementary 
nerves,and vessels within the ordinary visible nerves 
simply throws the difficulty further back. And is 
Erasistratus’s minute ‘‘simple” nerve susceptible of 
further analysis, as the Atomists would assume? If so, 
this is opposed to the conception of a constructive and 
artistic Neture which Erasistratus himself shares with 
Hi ates and the writer. And if his minute nerve is 
really elementary and not further divisible, then it 
cannot, according to his own showing, contain a cavity ; 
therefore the horror vacus does not apply toit. And 
how could this principle apply to the restoration to its 
original bulk of a part which had become thin through 
disease, where more matter must become attached than 
runsaway? A quotation from Erasistratus shows that he 
did acknowledge an ‘‘ attraction,” although not exactly 
in the Hippocratic sense. 


xlvii 


SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


CuHaprer VII 


In the last resort, the ultimate living elements (Erasistratus’s 

simple vessels) must draw in their food by virtue of an 

- inherent attractive faculty like that which the lodestone 

exerts on iron. Thus the process of anadosis, from 

beginning to end, can be explained without assuming a 
horror vacus 


Cuaprrer VIII 


Erasistratus’s disregard for the humours. In respect to 
excessive formation of bile, however, prevention is better 
than cure ; accordingly we must consider its pathology. 
Does blood pre-exist in the food, or does it come into 
existence in the body? Erasistratus’s purely anatomical 
explanation of dropsy. He entirely avoids the question 
of the four qualities (e.g. the importance of innate heat) 
in the generation of the humours, etc. Yet the problem 
of blood-production is no less important than that of 
oe digestion. Proof that bile does not pre-exist in the 

ood. The four fundamental qualities of Hippocrates and 

Aristotle. How the humours are formed from food taken 
into the veins: when heat is in proportionate amount, 
blood results; when in excess, bile; when deficient, 
phlegm. Various conditions determining cold or warm 
temperaments. The four primary diseases result each 
from excess of one of the four qualities. Erasistratus 
unwillingly acknowledges this when he ascribes the 
indigestion occurring in fever to smpaired function of the 
stomach. For what causes this functio laesa? Proof 
that it is the fever (excess of innate heat). 

If, then, heat plays so important a part in abnormal 
functioning, so must it also in normal (i.e. causes of 
eucrasia involved in those of dyscrasia, of physiology in 
those of pathology). A like argument explains the 
genesis of the humours. Addition of warmth to things 
already warm makes them bitter; thus honey turns to 
bile in people who are already warm; where warmth 
deficient, as in old people, it turns to useful blood. This 
" a proof that bile does not pre-exist, as such, in the 
ood. 


xlviii 





SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


CHaprTrerR ΙΧ 


The functions of organs also depend on the way in which the 
four qualities are mixed—e.g. the contracting function of 
the stomach. Treatment only possible when we know 
the causes of errors of function. The Erasistrateans 
practically Empiricists in this respect. On an apprecia- 
tion of the meaning of a dyscrasta follows naturally the 
Hippocratic principle of treating orpoaiies by opposites 
(6.0. cooling the overheated stomach, warming it when 
chilled, etc.). Useless in treatment to know merely the 
function of each organ; we must know the bodily 
condition which upsets this function. Blood is warm and 
moist. Yellow bile is warm and (virtually, though not 
apparently)dry. Phlegmis cold and moist. The fourth 
possible combination (cold and dry) is represented by 
black bile. For the clearing out of this humour from the 
blood, Nature has provided the spleen—an organ which, 
according to Erasistratus, fulfils no purpose. Proof of 
the importance of the spleen is the jaundice, toxaemia, 
etc., occurring when it is diseased. Erasistratus’s failure 
to mention the views of leading authorities on this organ 
shows the hopelessness of his position. The Hippocratic 
view has now been demonstrated deductively and in- 
ductively. The classical view as to the generation 
of the humours. Normal and pathological forms of 
yellow and black bile. Part played by the innate 
heat in their production. Other kinds of bile are 
merely transition-stages between these extreme types. 
Abnormal forms removed by liver and spleen re- 
spectively. Phlegm, however, does not need a special 
excretory organ, as it can undergo entire metabolism in 
the body. 

Need for studying the works of the Ancients care- 
fully, in order to reach a proper understanding of this 
subject. 


xlix 
GALEN d 


SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


BOOK. III 


Cuaprer I 


A recapitulation of certain points previously demonstrated. 
Every part of the animal has an attractive and an 
alterative (assimilative) faculty ; it attracts the nutrient 
juice which is proper to it. Assimilation is preceded 
by adhesion (prosphysis) and that again, by application 
(prosthesis). Application the goal of attraction. It 
would not, however, be followed by adhesion and 
assimilation if each part did not also possess a faculty 
for retaining in position the nutriment which has been 
applied. A priori necessity for this retentive faculty. 


CHAPTER II 


The same faculty to be proved a posteriori. Its corresponding 
Junction (i.e. the activation of this faculty or potentiality) 
well seen in the large hollow organs, notably the uterus 
and stomach. 


CHAPTER IIT 


Exercise of the retentive faculty particularly well seen in the 
uterus. Its object is to allow the embryo to attain full 
development ; this being completed, a new faculty—the 
expulsive—hitherto quiescent, comes into play. Char- 
acteristic signs and symptoms of pregnancy. Tight grip 
of uterus on growing embryo, and accurate closure of os 
uteri during operation of the retentive faculty. 
Dilatation of os and expulsive activities of uterus at full 
term, or when foetus dies. Prolapse from undue exercise 
of this faculty. Réle of the midwife. Accessory muscles 
in parturition. | 


CHAPTER IV 


Same two faculties seen instomach. Gurglings or borborygmi 
show that this organ is weak and is not gripping its 
contents tightly enough. Undue delay of food in a weak 





SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


stomach proved not to be due to narrowness of pylorus: 
length of stay depends on whether digestion (another 
instance of the characteristically vital process of altera- 
tton) has taken place or not. Erasistratus wrong in 
attributing digestion merely to the mechanical action of 
the stomach walls. When digestion completed, then 
pylorus opens and allows contents to pass downwards, 
just as os uteri when development of embyro completed. 


CHAPTER V 


If attraction and elimination always proceeded pars ; 
the content of these hollow organs (including gall-biadder 
and urinary bladder) would never vary in amount. A 
retentive faculty, therefore, 8180 logically needed. Its 
existence demonstrated. Expulsion determined by quali- 
tative and quantitative changes of contents. ‘‘Diarrhoea ” 
of stomach. Vomiting. 


CHaprer VI 


Every organic part has an appetite and aversion for the qualie 
ties which are appropriate and foreign to it respectively. 
Attraction necessarily leads to a certain benefit received. 
This again necessitates retention. 


Cuapter VII 


Interaction between two bodies; the stronger masters the 
weaker; a deleterious drug masters the forces of the 
body, whereas food is mastered by them; this master 
is an alteration, and the amount of alteration varies wit 
the different organs ; thus a partial alteration is effected 
in mouth by saliva, but much bees in stomach, where 
not only gastric juice, but also bile, pneuma, innate heat 
(3.e. oxidation ?), and other powerful factors are brought 
to bear on it ; need of considerable alteration in stomach 


li 


SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


as a transition-stage between food and blood; appear- 
ance of faeces in intestine another proof of great altera- 
tion effected in stomach. Asclepiades’s denial of real 
ualitative change in stomach rebutted. LErasistratus’s 
denial that digestion in any way resembles a boiling 
process comes from his taking words too literally. 


Cuarter VIII 


Erasistratus denies that the stomach exerts any pull in the 
act of swallowing. That he is wrong, however, is proved 
by the anatomical structure of the stomach—its inner 
coat with longitudinal fibres obviously acts as a vis a 
fronte (attraction), whilst its outer coat exercises through 
the contraction of its circular fibres a vis a tergo (pro- 

ulsion); the latter also comes into play in vomiting. 

he stomach uses the oesophagus as a kind of hand, to 
draw in its food with. The functions of the two coats 
proved also by vivisection. Swallowing cannot be 
attributed merely to the force of gravity. 


CHAPTER IX 


These four faculties which subserve nutrition are thus 
* apparent in many different parts of the body. 


a 


CHAPTER X 


Need for elaborating the statements of the ancient physi- 
cians. Superiority of Ancients to Moderns. This state 
of affairs can ably be rectified by a really efficient 
education of youth. The chief requisites of such an 
education. 


CHAPTER XI 


For the sake of the few who really wish truth, the argument 
will be continued. <A third kind of fibre—the oblique— 
subserves retention; the way in which this fibre is 
disposed in different coats. 


lii 





SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


Cuarrer XII 


The factor which brings the expulsive faculty into action is 
essentially a condition of the organ or its contents which 
is the reverse of that which determined attraction. 
Analogy between abortion and normal rturition. 
Whatever produces discomfort must be expelled. That 
discomfort also determines expulsion of contents from 
gall-bladder is not so evident as in the case of stomach, 
Deere ὈΡΙΒΒΕΥ bladder, etc., but can be logically demon- 
strated. 


CHaprer XIII 


Expulsion takes place through the same channel as attraction 
(e.g., in stomach, gall-bladder, uterus). Similarly the 
delivery (anadosis) of nutriment to the liver from the 
food-canal vid the mesenteric veins may have its direction 
reversed. Continuous give-and-take between different 
parts of the body ; superior strength of certain parts is 
natural, of others acquired. When liver contains abund- 
ant food and stomach depleted, latter may draw on 
former ; this occurs when animal can get nothing to eat, 
and so prevents starvation. Similarly, when one part 
becomes over-distended, it tends to deposit its excess in 
some weaker part near it; this passes it on to some still 
weaker part, which cannot get rid of it; hence deposits 
of various kinds. Further instances of reversal of the 
normal direction of anadosis from the food canal through 
the veins. Such reversal of functions would in any case 
be expected a priori. In the vomiting of intestinal 
obstruction, matter may be carried backwards all the 
way from the intestine to the mouth ; not surprising, 
therefore, that, under certain circumstances, food- 
material might be driven right back from the skin- 
surface to the alimentary canal (e.g. in excessive chilling 
of surface) ; not much needed to determine this reversal 
of direction. Action of purgative drugs upon terminals 
of veins ; one part draws from another until whole body 
participates; similarly in intestinal obstruction, each 
part passes on the irritating substance to its weaker 


11] 


SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


neighbour. Reversal of direction of flow occurs not 
merely on occasion but also constantly (as in arteries, 
lungs, heart, etc.). The various stages of normal nutri- 
tion described. Why the stomach sometimes draws 
back the nutriment it had passed on to portal veins and 
liver. A similar ebb and how in relation to the spleen. 
Comparison of the parts of the body toa lot of animals 
at ateast. The valves of the heart are a provision of 
Nature to prevent this otherwise inevitable regurgita- 
tion, though even they are not quite efficient. 


CHAPTER XIV 


The superficial arteries, when they dilate, draw in air from 


the atmosphere, and the deeper ones a fine, vaporous 
blood from the veins and heart. Lighter matter such as 
air will always be drawn in in preference to heavier ; 
this is why the arteries in the food-canal draw in prac- 
tically none of the nutrient matter contained in it. 


CHAPTER XV 


The two kinds of attraction—the mechanical attraction of 


liv 


dilating bellows and the ‘‘ physical” (vital) attraction 
by living tissue of nutrient matter which is specifically 
allied or appropriate to it. The former kind—that 
resulting from horror vacut—acts primarily on light 
matter, whereas vital attraction has no essential concern 
with such mechanical factors. A hollow organ exercises, 
by virtue of its cavity, the former kind of attraction, and 
by virtue of the living tissue of its walls, the second kind. 
Application of this to question of contents of arteries ; 
anastomoses of arteries and veins. Foramina in inter- 
ventricular septum of heart, allowing some blood to pass 
from right to left ventricle. Large size of aorta probably 
due to fact that it not merely carries the pneuma 
received from the lungs, but also some of the blood 
which percolates through septum from right ventricle. 
Thus arteries carry not merely pneuma, but also some 
light vaporous blood, which certain parts need more 








SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS 


than the ordinary thick blood of the veins. The organic 
parts must have their blood-supply sufficiently near to 
allow them to absorb it ; comparison with an irrigation 
system ἴῃ ἃ garden. Details of the process of nutrition 
in the ultimate specific tissues ; some are nourished from 
the blood directly ; in others a series of intermediate 
stages must precede complete assimilation ; for example, 
ser a is an intermediate stage between blood and 
ne. 

From the generalisations arrived at in the present work 
we can deduce the explanation of all kinds of particular 
phenomena ; an instance is given, showing the co-opera- 
tion of various factors previously discussed. 


lv 


GALEN 
ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES 


BOOK I 


K. II. 
p. 1 


rAAHNOY 
ΠΕΡῚ ΦΥΣΙΚΩΝ ATNAMEON 


Α 
I 


᾿Επειδὴ τὸ μὲν αἰσθάνεσθαί τε καὶ κινεῖσθαι 
κατὰ προαίρεσιν ἴδια τῶν ξῴων ἐστί, τὸ δ᾽ 
αὐξάνεσθαί τε. καὶ τρέφεσθαι κοινὰ καὶ τοῖς 
- a a a \ 
puree εἴη ἂν τὰ μὲν πρότερα τῆς ψυχῆς, τὰ δὲ 
εύτερα τῆς φύσεως ἔργα. εἰ δέ τις καὶ τοῖς 
ζω A 3 ἃ 
υτοῖς ψυχῆς μεταδίδωσι καὶ διαιρούμενος αὐτὰς 
\ \ 
ὀνομάζει φυτικὴν μὲν ταύτην, αἰσθητικὴν δὲ τὴν 
ς γ έ \ ἡ δ᾽ 4 ” x a λέ δ᾽ 
ἑτέραν, λέγει μὲν οὐδ᾽ οὗτος ἄλλα, τῇ λέξει 
3 [4 lal 4 , 3 3 e a 
ov πάνυ τῇ συνήθει κέχρηται. ἀλλ᾽ ἡμεῖς γε 
’ A 
μεγίστην λέξεως ἀρετὴν σαφήνειαν εἶναί πε- 
‘ 9 \ 
πεισμένοι καὶ ταύτην εἰδότες || ὑπ᾽ οὐδενὸς οὕτως 
A / 
ὡς ὑπὸ τῶν ἀσυνήθων ὀνομάτων διαφθειρομένην, 
A a \ \ 
ὡς Tots πολλοῖς ἔθος, οὕτως ὀνομάζοντες ὑπὸ μὲν 
ψυχῆς θ᾽ ἅμα καὶ φύσεως τὰ ζῷα διοικεῖσθαί 
“ > 
φαμεν, ὑπὸ δὲ φύσεως μόνης τὰ φυτὰ Kal TO ¥ 
3 4 ’ Α 4 | Μ / 
αὐξάνεσθαί τε καὶ τρέφεσθαι φύσεως ἔργα paper, 
᾽ fo) 
ov ψυχῆς.. 


ee — 


1 That is, ‘On the Natural Powers,” the powers of the 
Physis or Nature. By that Galen practically means what 
we should call the physiological or biological powers, the 
characteristic faculties of the living organism; his Physis 
is the subconscious vital principle of the animal or plant. 


2 


GALEN 
ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES! 


BOOK | 
I 


Since feeling and voluntary motion are peculiar to 
animals, whilst growth and nutrition are common to 
plants as well, we may look on the former as effects ? 
of the soul® and the latter as effects of the nature.* 
And if there be anyone who allows a share in soul 
to plants as well, and separates the two kinds of 
soul, naming the kind in question vegetative, and the 
other sensory, this person is not saying anything else, 
although his language is somewhat unusual. We, 
however, for our part, are convinced that the chief 
merit of language is clearness, and we know that 
nothing detracts so much from this as do unfamiliar 
terms; accordingly we employ those terms which 
the bulk of people are accustomed to use, and we 
say that animals are governed at once by their soul 
and by their nature, and plants by their nature 
alone, and that growth and nutrition are the effects 
of nature, not of soul. 

Like Aristotle, however, he also ascribes quasi-vital pro- 
perties to inanimate things, cf. Introduction, p. xxvii. 

2 Ergon, here rendered an effect, is literally a work or deed ; 
strictly speaking, it is something done, completed, as distin- 
guished from energeza, which is the actual doing, the activity 


which produces this ergon. cf. p. 13, and Introduction, p. xxx. 
3 Gk. psyche, Lat. anima. 4 Gk. physis, Lat. natura. 


3 
BQ? 


GALEN 


I] 


A , ’ Ν 
Καὶ ξητήσομεν κατὰ τόνδε τὸν λόγον, ὑπὸ 
τίνων γίγνεται δυνάμεων αὐτὰ δὴ ταῦτα καὶ εἰ 
’ὔ ΝᾺ 5 ΄ Ν ᾽ ΄ 
δή τι ἄλλο φύσεως ἔργον ἐστίν. 
᾿Αλλὰ πρότερόν γε διελέσθαι τε χρὴ καὶ 
μηνῦσαι σαφῶς ἕκαστον τῶν ὀνομάτων, οἷς χρη- 
4 \ , \ Ld \ 3939 o , 
σόμεθα κατὰ τόνδε τὸν λόγον, καὶ ἐφ᾽ 6 τι φέρο- 
μεν πρᾶγμα. γενήσεται δὲ τοῦτ᾽ εὐθὺς ἔργων 
φυσικῶν διδασκαλία σὺν ταῖς τῶν ὀνομάτων 
ἐξηγήσεσιν. 
Ὅταν οὖν τι σῶμα κατὰ μηδὲν ἐξαλλάττηται 
τῶν προὔπαρχόντων, ἡσυχάζειν αὐτό φαμεν" εἰ 
’ a) a 
δ᾽ ἐξίσταιτό πῃ, κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνο κινεῖσθαι. καὶ τοίνυν 
b a 9g/ “A \ 
ἐπεὶ πολυειδῶς ἐξίσταται, πολυειδῶς Kal κινη- 
7 
θήσεται. καὶ γὰρ εἰ λευκὸν ὑπάρχον μελαίνοιτο. 
καὶ εἰ μέλαν λευκαίνοιτο, κινεῖται κατὰ χρόαν, 
3 \ / e 4 8 > Ἁ a 
καὶ εἰ γλυκυ τέως νυπάρχον αὖθις || αὐστηρὸν ἢ 
ἔμπαλιν ἐξ αὐστηροῦ γλυκὺ γένοιτο, καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἂν 
a , ὃ \ \ 4 Μ 
κινεῖσθαι λέγοιτο κατὰ τὸν χυμόν. ἄμφω δε 
ταῦτά τε καὶ τὰ προειρημένα κατὰ τὴν ποιότητα 
ray , \ ᾽ , \ 
κινεῖσθαι λεχθήσεται καὶ ov μόνον ye τὰ κατὰ 
. ἃ J a \ Ν 4 4 ω ἴω. ’ 
τὴν χρόαν ἢ τὸν χυμὸν ἐξαλλαττόμενα κινεῖσθαί 
3 \ \ \ ’ 2 
φαμεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ θερμότερον ἐκ ψυχροτέρου 
γενόμενον ἢ ψυχρότερον ἐκ θερμοτέρου κινεῖσθαι 
καὶ τοῦτο λέγομεν, ὥσπερ γε καὶ εἴ τι ξηρὸν ἐξ 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, 1. 1 


II 


Tuus we shall enquire, in the course of this 
treatise, from what faculties these effects themselves, 
as well as any other effects of nature which there 
may be, take their origin. 

- First, however, we must distinguish and explain 
clearly the various terms which we are going to use 
in this treatise, and to what things we apply them ; 
and this will prove to be not merely an explanation of 
terms but at the same time a demonstration of the 
effects of nature. 

When, therefore, such and such a body. undergoes 
no change from its existing state, we say that it is 
at rest; but, if it departs from this in any respect 
we then say that in this respect it undergoes motton.! 
Accordingly, when it departs in various ways from 
its pre-existing state, it will be said to undergo 
various kinds of motion. Thus, if that which is 
white becomes black, or what is black becomes 
white, it undergoes motion in respect to colour; or 
if what was previously sweet now becomes bitter, or, 
conversely, from being bitter now becomes sweet, it 
will be said to undergo motion in respect to flavour ; 
to both of these instances, as well as to those 
previously mentioned, we shall apply the term 
qualitative motion. And further, it is not only things 
which are altered in regard to colour and flavour 
which, we say, undergo motion ; when a warm thing 
becomes cold, and a cold warm, here too we speak 
of its undergoing motion; similarly also when any- 

1 Motion (kinesis) is Aristotle’s general term for what we 


would rather call change. It includes various kinds of change, 
_ as well as movement proper. cf. Introduction, p. xxix. 


5 


GALEN 


ὑγροῦ ἢ ὑγρὸν ἐκ ξηροῦ γίγνοιτο. κοινὸν δὲ κατὰ 
τούτων ἁπάντων ὄνομα φέρομεν τὴν ἀλλοίωσιν. 

“Εν τι τοῦτο γένος κινήσεως. ἕτερον δὲ γένος 
ἐπὶ τοῖς τὰς χώρας ἀμείβουσι σώμασι καὶ τόπον 
ἐκ τόπου μεταλλάττειν λεγομένοις, ὄνομα δὲ καὶ 
τούτῳ φορά. 

ὗται μὲν οὖν αἱ δύο κινήσεις ἁπλαῖ καὶ 
πρῶται, σύνθετοι & ἐξ αὐτῶν αὔξησίς τε καὶ 
φθίσις, ὅταν ἐξ ἐλάττονός τι μεῖζον ἢ ἐκ μείζονος 
ἔλαττον γένηται φυλάττον τὸ οἰκεῖον εἶδος. ἕτεραι 
δὲ δύο κινήσεις γένεσις καὶ φθορά, γένεσις μὲν ἡ 
εἰς οὐσίαν ἀγωγή, φθορὰ δ᾽ ἡ ἐναντία. 

Πάσαις δὲ ταῖς κινήσεσι κοινὸν ἐξάλλαξις 
τοῦ ||προὐπάρχοντος, ὥσπερ οὖν καὶ ταῖς ἡσυχίαις 
ἡ φυλακὴ τῶν προὐπαρχόντων. ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι μὲν 
ἐξαλλάττεται καὶ πρὸς τὴν ὄψιν καὶ πρὸς τὴν 
γεῦσιν καὶ πρὸς τὴν ἁφὴν αἷμα γιγνόμενα τὰ 
σιτία, σνγχωροῦσιν' ὅτι δὲ καὶ κατ᾽ ἀλήθειαν, 
οὐκέτι τοῦθ᾽ ὁμολογοῦσιν οἱ σοφισταί. οἱ μὲν 
γάρ τινες αὐτῶν ἅπαντα τὰ τοιαῦτα τῶν ἡμετέρων 
αἰσθήσεων ἀπάτας τινὰς καὶ παραγωγὰς vopi- 
ζουσιν ἄλλοτ᾽ ἄλλως πασχουσῶν, τῆς ὑποκει- 
μένης οὐσίας μηδὲν τούτων, οἷς ἐπονομάζεται, 
δεχομένης" οἱ δέ τινες εἶναι μὲν ἐν αὐτῇ βούλονται 
τὰς ποιότητας, ἀμεταβλήτους δὲ καὶ ἀτρέπτους 


1 “‘Conveyance,” ‘‘transport,” ‘‘transit”; purely mechani- 
cal or passive motion, as distinguished from alteration (quali- 
tative change). 

2 «*Waxing and waning,” the latter literally phthisis, a 
wasting or ‘‘decline;” cf. Scotch dwining, Dutch verdwijnen. 
8 Becoming and perishing: Latin, generatio et corruptio. 

4 «* Ad substantiam productio seu ad formam processus ” 
(Linacre). 


6 ‘ 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. n 


thing moist becomes dry, or dry moist. Now, the 
common term which we apply to all these cases is 
alteration. 

This is one kind of motion. But there is another 
kind which occurs in bodies which change their 
position, or as we say, pass from one place to another ; 
the name of this is transference. 

These two kinds of motion, then, are simple and 
primary, while compounded from them we have growth 
and decay,? as when a small thing becomes bigger, 
or a big thing smaller, each retaining at the same 
time its particular form. And two other kinds of 
motion are genesis and destruction,’ genesis being a 
coming into existence,t and destruction being the 
opposite. 

Now, common to all kinds of motion is change from 
the pre-existing state, while common to all conditions 
of rest is retention of the pre-existing state. The 
Sophists, however, while allowing that bread in turn- 
ing into blood becomes changed as regards sight, taste, 
and touch, will not agree that this change occurs in 
reality. Thus some of them hold that all such 
phenomena are tricks and illusions of our senses ; 
the senses, they say, are affected now in one way, 
now in another, whereas the underlying substance 
does not admit of any of these changes to which the 
names are given. Others (such as Anaxagoras) will 
have it that the qualities do exist in it, but that they 


5 «¢Preformationist ” doctrine of Anaxagoras. To him the 
apparent alteration in qualities took place when a number of 
minute pre-existing bodies, all bearing the same quality, 
came together in sufficient numbers to impress that quality 
on the senses. ‘The factor which united the minute quality- 
bearers was Nous. ‘In the beginning,” says Anaxagoras, 
‘‘all things existed together—then came Nous and brought 
them into order.” 7 


GALEN 


ἐξ αἰῶνος εἰς αἰῶνα καὶ τὰς φαινομένας ταύτας 
ἀλλοιώσεις τῇ διακρίσει τε καὶ συγκρίσει γίγ- 
νεσθαί φασιν ὡς ᾿Αναξαγόρας. 

Ei δὴ τούτους ἐκτραπόμενος ἐξελέγχοιμι, μεῖζον 
ἄν μοι τὸ πάρεργον τοῦ ἔργου γένοιτο. εἰ μὲν 
γὰρ οὐκ ἴσασιν, ὅσα περὶ τῆς καθ ὅλην τὴν 
οὐσίαν ἀλλοιώσεως ᾿Αριστοτέλει τε καὶ μετ 
αὐτὸν Χρυσίππῳ γέγραπται, παρακαλέσαι χρὴ 
τοῖς ἐκείνων αὐτοὺς ὁμιλῆσαι γράμμασιν: εἰ δὲ 
γιγνώσκοντες ἔπειθ᾽ ἑκόντες τὰ χείρω πρὸ τῶν 
βελτιόνων || αἱροῦνται, μάταια δήπου καὶ τὰ 
ἡμέτερα ,»νομιοῦσιν. ὅτι δὲ καὶ Ἱπποκράτης 
οὕτως ἐγίγνωσκεν ᾿Αριστοτέλους ἔτι πρότερος ὦν, 
ἐν ἑτέροις ἡμῖν ἀποδέδεικται. πρῶτος γὰρ οὗτος 
ἁπάντων ὧν ἴσμεν ἰατρῶν τε καὶ φιλοσόφων ἀπο- 
δεικνύειν ἐπεχείρησε τέτταρας εἶναι τὰς πάσας 
δραστικὰς εἰς ἀλλήλας ποιότητας, ὑφ᾽ ὧν γίγνεταί 
τε καὶ φθείρεται πάνθ᾽, ὅσα γένεσίν τε καὶ φθορὰν 
ἐπιδέχεται. καὶ μέντοι καὶ τὸ κεράννυσθαι δι᾽ 
ἀλλήλων αὐτὰς ὅλας δι᾽ ὅλων “Ἱπποκράτης ἅπάν- 
των πρῶτος ἔγνω" καὶ τὰς ἀρχάς γε τῶν ἀπο- 
δείξεων, ὧν ὕστερον ᾿Αριστοτέλης μετεχειρίσατο; 
παρ᾽ ἐκείνῳ πρώτῳ γεγραμμένας ἔστιν εὑρεῖν. 

Ei δ᾽ ὥσπερ τὰς ποιότητας οὕτω καὶ τὰς οὐσίας 
δι ὅλων κεράννυσθαι χρὴ νομίζειν, ὧς ὕστερον 
ἀπεφήνατο Ζήνων ὁ Κιττιεύς, οὐχ ἡγοῦμαι δεῖν 
ἔτι περὶ τούτου κατὰ τόνδε τὸν λόγον ἐπεξιέναι. 
μόνην γὰρ εἰς τὰ παρόντα δέομαι γιγνώσκεσθαι 


1 «De ea alteratione quae per totam fit substantiam ” (Lin- 
acre). ? The systematizer of Stoicism and successor of Zeno. 
8 Note characteristic impatience with metaphysics. To 
Galen, as to Hippocrates and Aristotle, it sufficed to look on 


8 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, [on 


are unchangeable and immutable from eternity to 
eternity, and that these apparent alterations arc 
brought about by separation and combination. 

Now, if I were to go out of my way to confute 
these people, my subsidiary task would be greater 
than my main one. Thus, if they do not know all 
that has been written, “On Complete Alteration of 
Substance’’! by Aristotle, and after him by Chry- 
sippus,? I must beg of them to make themselves 
familiar with these men’s writings. If, however, 
they know these, and yet willingly prefer the worse 
views to the better, they will doubtless consider my 
arguments foolish also. I have shown elsewhere that 
these opinions were shared by Hippocrates, who 
lived much earlier than Aristotle. In fact, of all 
those known to us who have been both physicians 
and philosophers Hippocrates was the first who took 
in hand to demonstrate that there are, in all, four 
mutually interacting qualities, and that to the opera- 
tion of these is due the genesis and destruction of 
all things that come into and pass out of being. Nay, 
more ; Hippocrates was also the first to recognise 
that all these qualities undergo an intimate mingling 
with one another; and at least the beginnings of the 
proofs to which Aristotle later set his hand are to be 
found first in the writings of Hippocrates. 

As to whether we are to suppose that the substances 
as well as their qualstées undergo this intimate mingling, 
as Zeno of Citium afterwards declared, I do not think 
it necessary to go further into this question in the 
present treatise; for immediate purposes we only 
the qualitative differences apprehended by the senses as 
fundamental. Zeno of Citium was the founder of the Stoic 


school; on the further analysis by this school of the qualtties 
into bodies cf. p. 144, note 3. 


9 


GALEN 


τὴν δι. ὅλης τῆς οὐσίας ἀλλοίωσιν, ἵνα μή TES 
A ‘ nA ΝΜ 

ὀστοῦ Kal σαρκὸς καὶ νεύρου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων 
ἑκάστου μορίων οἱονεὶ μισγάγκειάν τινα τῷ ἄρτῳ 
νομίσῃ περιέχεσθαι κἄπειτ᾽ ἐν || τῷ σώματι δια- 
κρινόμενον ὡς τὸ ὁμόφυλον ἕκαστον ἰέναι. καίτοι 
πρό γε τῆς διακρίσεως αἷμα φαίνεται γιγνόμενος 
ὁ πᾶς ἄρτος. εἰ γοῦν παμπόλλῳ τις χρόνῳ μηδὲν 
ΕΣ 9 Ν ’ 9 A 9 
ἄλλ᾽ εἴη σιτίον προσφερόμενος, οὐδὲν ἧττον ἐν 
ταῖς φλεψὶν αἷμα περιεχόμενον ἕξει. καὶ φανερῶς 
τοῦτο τὴν τῶν ἀμετάβλητα τὰ στοιχεῖα τιθεμένων 
4 ᾽ , Ψ 4 \ ww 9 
ἐξελέγχει δόξαν, ὥσπερ οἶμαι Kal τοὔλαιον εἰς 
τὴν τοῦ λύχνου φλόγα καταναλισκόμενον ἅπαν 
καὶ τὰ ξύλα πῦρ μικρὸν ὕστερον γιγνόμενα. 

Καίτοι τό γ᾽ ἀντιλέγειν αὐτοῖς ἠρνησάμην, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἐπεὶ τῆς ἰατρικῆς ὕλης ἦν τὸ παράδειγμα καὶ 
χρήξζω πρὸς τὸν παρόντα λόγον αὐτοῦ, διὰ τοῦτ᾽ 

ld 
ἐμνημόνευσα. καταλιπόντες οὖν, ὡς ἔφην, τὴν 
πρὸς τούτους ἀντιλογίαν, «ἐνὸν; τοῖς βουλομένοις 
τὰ τῶν παλαιῶν ἐκμανθάνειν κἀξ ὧν ἡμεῖς ἰδίᾳ 
\ 3 A ϑ3 ’ ΩΝ PE . 

περὶ αὐτῶν ἐπεσκέμμεθα. 

Τὸν ἐφεξῆς λόγον ἅπαντα ποιησόμεθα ζητοῦντες 
ὑπὲρ ὧν ἐξ ἀρχῆς προὐθέμεθα, πόσαι τε καὶ τίνες 
εἰσὶν αἱ τῆς φύσεως δυνάμεις καὶ τί ποιεῖν ἔργον 


1 A rallying-ground: lit. a place where two glens meet. 

2 Thus according to Gomperz (Greek Thinkers), the hypo- 
thesis of Anaxagoras was that ‘‘the bread. . . already con- 
tained the countless forms of matter as such which the 
human body displays. Their minuteness of size would with- 
draw them from our perception. For the defect or ‘ weak- 
ness’ of the senses is the narrowness of their receptive area, 


Io 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. ἢ 


need to recognize the complete alteration of substance. 
In this way, nobody will suppose that bread repre- 
sents a kind of meeting-place ' for bone, flesh, nerve, 
and all the other parts, and that each of these 
subsequently becomes separated in the body and 
goes to join its own kind ;? before any separation 
takes place, the whole of the bread obviously becomes 
blood ; (at any rate, if a man takes no other food 
for a prolonged period, he will have blood enclosed 
in his veins all the same)? And clearly this dis- 
proves the view of those who consider the elements ¢ 
unchangeable, as also, for that matter, does the oil 
which is entirely used up in the flame of the lamp, 
or the faggots which, in a somewhat longer time, 
turn into fire. 

I said, however, that I was not going to enter into 
an argument with these people, and it was only 
because the example was drawn from the subject- 
matter of medicine, and because I need it for the 
present treatise, that I have mentioned it. We shall 
then, as I said, renounce our controversy with them, 
since those who wish may get a good grasp of the 
views of the ancients from our own personal inves- 
tigations into these matters. 

The discussion which follows we shall devote 
entirely, as we originally proposed, to an enquiry 
into the number and character of the faculties of 
Nature, and what is the effect which each naturally 
These elusive particles are rendered visible and tangible by 
the process of nutrition, which combines them.” 

3 Therefore the blood must have come from the bread. The 
food from the alimentary canal was supposed by Galen to be 
converted into blood in and by the portal veins. cf. p. 17. 

4 By ‘‘elements” is meant all homogeneous, amorphous 
substances, such as metals, &c., as well as the elementary 


tissues, 
TI 





GALEN 


ἑκάστη πέφυκεν. ἔργον δὲ δηλονότι καλῶ τὸ 
\ a 
γεγονὸς ἤδη καὶ συμπεπληϊρωμένον ὑπὸ τῆς ἐνερ- 
γείας αὐτῶν, οἷον τὸ αἷμα, τὴν σάρκα, τὸ νεῦρον" 
2) ἢ \ Ἁ \ 9 4 , N 
ἐνέργειαν δὲ τὴν δραστικὴν ὀνόμάζω κίνησιν καὶ 
τὴν ταύτης αἰτίαν δύναμιν. ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἐν τῷ τὸ 
σιτίον αἷμα γίγνεσθαι παθητικὴ μὲν ἡ τοῦ σιτίου, 
\ > e A \ [4 , e 4 
δραστικὴ δ᾽ ἡ τῆς φλεβὸς γίγνεται κίνησις, ὡσαύ- 
τως δὲ κἀν τῷ μεταφέρειν τὰ κῶλα κινεῖ μὲν ὁ 
»Ὄ-᾿σ᾿ a A \ 2 a \ \ A \ 
μῦς, κινεῖται δὲ τὰ ὀστᾶ, THY μὲν τῆς φλεβὸς καὶ 
τῶν μυῶν κίνησιν ἐνέργειαν εἶναί φημι, τὴν δὲ 
τῶν σιτίων τε καὶ τῶν ὀστῶν σύμπτωμά τε καὶ 
πάθημα: τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἀλλοιοῦται, τὰ δὲ φέρεται. 
τὴν μὲν οὖν ἐνέργειαν ἐγχωρεῖ καλεῖν καὶ ἔργον 
a ᾽ \ / \ > » \ 
τῆς φύσεως, οἷον τὴν πέψιν, THY ἀνάδοσιν, τὴν 
\ 3 
αἱμάτωσιν, οὐ μὴν τό γ᾽ ἔργον ἐξ ἅπαντος .ἐνέρ- 
γειαν" ἡ γάρ τοι σὰρξ ἔργον μέν ἐστι τῆς φύσεως, 
3 Ἁ > / U4 A * e 4 \ 
ov μὴν ἐνέργειά ye. δῆλον οὖν, ὡς θάτερον μὲν 
a > 4 A 4 4 9 2 
τῶν ὀνομάτων διχῶς λέγεται, θάτερον δ᾽ οὔ. 


ΠῚ 


Ἐμοὶ μὲν οὖν καὶ ἡ φλὲψ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων 
\ a“ : \ 
ἁπάντων ἕκαστον διὰ τὴν ἐκ τῶν τεττάρων ποιὰν 


1 Work or product. Lat. opus. cf. p. 3, note 2. 

2 Operation, activation, or functioning. Lat. actio. ¢f. loc. cit. 

3 2.6. a concomitant (secondary) or passive affection. Galen 
is contrasting active and passive ‘‘ motion.” cf. p. 6, note 1. 

4 As aveady indicated, there is no exact English equiva- 
lent for the Greek term physis, which is a principle immanent 


12 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, 1. u. -1 


produces. Now, of course, I mean by an effect ! that 
which has already come into existence and has been 
completed by the activity? of these faculties—for 
example, blood, flesh, or nerv@ And activity is the 
name I give to the active change or motion, and 
the cause of this I call a faculty. Thus, when 
food turns into blood, the motion of the food is 
passive, and that of the vein active. Similarly, 
when the limbs have their position altered, it is the 
muscle which produces, and the bones which under- 
go the motion. In these cases I call the motion of 
the vein and of the muscle an activity, and that of 
- the food and the bones a symplom or affection,’ since 
the first group undergoes alleratton and the second 
group is merely transported. One might, therefore, 
also speak of the activity as an effect of Nature *— 
for example, digestion, absorption,’ blood-production ; 
one could not, however, in every case call the effect an 
activity ; thus flesh is an effect of Nature, but it is, of 
course, not an activity. It is, therefore, clear that 
one of these terms is used in two senses, but not the 
other. | 


III 


Ir appears to me, then, that the vein, as well as 
each of the other parts, functions in such and such a 
way according te the manner in which the four quali- 


in the animal itself, whereas our term ‘‘ Nature” suggests 
something more transcendent ; we are forced often, however, 
to employ it in default of a better word. cf. p. 2, note 1. 

5 In Greek anadosis. This process includes two stages : 
(1) transmission of food from alimentary canal to liver (rather 
more than our ‘‘ absorption ”’) ; (2) further transmission from 
liver to tissues. Anadosis is lit. a yielding-up, a ‘‘ delivery ;” 
it may sometimes be rendered “dispersal.” ‘‘ Distribution ” 
(diadosis) is a further stage ; cf. p. 163, note 4. 13 


GALEN 


κρᾶσιν ὡδί πως ἐνεργεῖν δοκεῖ. εἰσὶ δὲ γε μὴν οὐκ 
ὀλέγοι τινὲς ἄνδρες | οὐδ᾽ ἄδοξοι, φιλόσοφοί TE 
καὶ ἰατροί, τῷ μὲν βρρμῷ καὶ τῷ ψυχρῷ τὸ δρᾶν 
ἀναφέροντες, ὑποβάλλοντες δ᾽ αὐτοῖς παθητικὰ 
τὸ ξηρόν τε καὶ τὸ ὑγρόν. καὶ ͵᾿ πρῶτός γ᾽ ᾿Αριστο- 
τέλης τὰς τῶν κατὰ μέρος ἁπάντων αἰτίας εἰς 
ταύτας ἀνάγειν πειρᾶται τὰς ἀρχάς, ἠκολούθησε 
δ᾽ ὕστερον αὐτῷ καὶ ὁ ἀπὸ τῆς στοᾶς ; χορός. καί- 
τοι τούτοις μέν, ὡς ἂν καὶ αὐτῶν τῶν στοιχείων 
τὴν εἰς ἄλληλα μεταβολὴν χύσεσί τέ τισι καὶ 
πιλήσεσιν ἀναφέρουσιν, εὔλογον Hv ἀρχὰς δρα- 
στικὰς ποιήσασθαι τὸ θερμὸν καὶ τὸ ψυχρόν, 
᾿Αριστοτέλει δ᾽ οὐχ οὕτως, ἀλλὰ ταῖς τέτταρσι 
ποιότησιν εἰς τὴν τῶν OTOL είων γένεσιν χρωμένῳ 
βέλτιον ἣν καὶ τὰς τῶν τ μέρος αἰτίας ἁπάσας 
εἰς ταύτας ἀνάγειν. τί δήποτ᾽ οὖν ἐν μὲν τοῖς περὶ 
γενέσεως καὶ φθορᾶς ταῖς τέττἀρσι χρῆται, ἐν δὲ 
τοῖς μετεωρολογικοῖς καὶ τοῖς »προβλήμασι καὶ 
ἄλλοθι πολλαχόθι ταῖς δύο μόναις; εἰ μὲν γὰρ 
ὡς ἐν “τοῖς ζῴοις τε καὶ τοῖς φυτρῖς μᾶλλον μὲν 
δρᾷ τι τὸ θερμὸν καὶ τὸ ψυχρόν, ἧττον δὲ τὸ ξηρὸν 
καὶ τὸ ὑγρὸν ἀποφαίνοιτό τις, ἴσως ἂν ἔχοι καὶ 
τὸν Ἱπποκράτην σύμψηφον: εἰ δ᾽ ὡσαύτως ἐν i 
ἅπασιν, οὐκέτ οἶμαι συγχωρήσειν τοῦτο μὴ ὅτι 
τὸν Ἱπποκράτην ἀλλὰ μηδ᾽ αὐτὸν τὸν ᾿Αριστοτέ- 
Any μεμνῆσθαί γε βουλόμενον ὧν ἐν τοῖς περὶ 
γενέσεως καὶ φθορᾶς OvY ἁπλῶς ἀλλὰ μετ᾽ ἀπο- 
δείξεως αὐτὸς ἡμᾶς Shaker ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν 
τούτων κἀν τοῖς περὶ κράσεων, εἰς ὅσον ἰατρῷ 


χρήσιμον, ἐπεσκεψάμεθα. 
lef. p. 9. 
14 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, 1. 1 


zest are mixed. There are, however, a considerable 
numiber of not undistinguished men— philosophers 
and physicians— who refer action to the Warm and the 
Cold, and who subordinate to these, as passive, the 
Dry and the Moist; Aristotle, in fact, was the first 
who attempted to bring back the causes of the 
various special activities to these principles, and he 
was followed later by the Stoic school. These latter, 
of course, could logically make active principles of 
the Warm and Cold, since they refer the change of 
the elements themselves into one another to certain 
diffustons and condensations.2, This does not hold 
of Aristotle, however; seeing that he employed the 
four qualities to explain the genesis of the elements, 
he ought properly to have also referred the causes of 
all the special activities to these. How is it that he 
uses the four qualities in his book ‘On Genesis and 
Destruction,” whilst in his ‘ Meteorology,’ his 
ἐς Problems,” and many other works he uses the two 
only? Of course, if anyone were to maintain that in 
the case of animals and plants the Warm and Cold 
are more active, the Dry and Moist less so, he might 
perhaps have even Hippocrates on his side ; but if he 
were to say that this happens in all cases, he would, 
I imagine, lack support, not merely from Hippocrates, 
but even from Aristotle himself—if, at least, Aristotle 
chose to remember what he himself taught us in his 
work “ On Genesis and Destruction,’ not as a matter 
of simple statement, but with an accompanying 
demonstration. I have, however, also investigated 
these questions, in so far as they are of value to a 
physician, in my work “On Temperaments.” 


2 Since heat and cold tend to cause diffusion and condensa- 
tion respectively. 


oS) 


10 


ΤΑΙ ΕΝ 


IV 


Ἢ δ᾽ οὗν δύναμις ἡ ἐν ταῖς φλεψὶν ἡ αἱματο- 
ποιητικὴ προσαγορευομένη καὶ πᾶσα δ ἄλλη 
δύναμις ἐν τῷ “πρὸς τι νενόηται" πρώτως μὲν 
γὰρ τῆς ἐνεργείας αἰτία, ἤδη δὲ καὶ τοῦ ἔργου 
κατὰ συμβεβηκός. ἀλλ᾽ εἴπερ ἡ αἰτία πρός 
τι, τοῦ γὰρ ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς γενομένου μόνου, τῶν δ᾽ 
ἄλλων οὐδενός, εὔδηλον, ὅ ὅτι καὶ ἡ ἡ δύναμις ἐ ἐν τῷ 
πρός τί. καὶ μέχρι y ἂν ἀγνοῶμεν τὴν οὐσίαν 
τῆς ἐνεργούσης αἰτίας, δύναμιν αὐτὴν ὀνομάζομεν, 
εἶναί τινα λέγοντες ἐν ταῖς φλεψὶν αἱματοποιητε- 
κήν, ὡσαύτως δὲ κἀν τῇ κοιλίᾳ πεπτικὴν κἀν τῇ 
καρδίᾳ σφυγμικὴν καὶ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον τῶν ἄλλων 
ἰδίαν τινὰ τῆς || κατὰ τὸ μόριον ἐνεργείας. εἴπερ 
οὖν “μεθόδῳ μέλλοιμεν ἐξευρήσειν, ὁπόσαι τε καὶ 
ὁποῖαί τίνες αἱ δυνάμεις εἰσίν, ἀπὸ τῶν , ἔργων 
αὐτῶν ,ἀρκτέον" ἕκαστον γὰρ αὐτῶν ὑπό τίνος 
ἐνεργείας γίγνεται καὶ τούτων ἑκάστης προηγεῖταί 
τις αἰτία. 


ν 


Ἔργα τοίνυν τῆς φύσεως ἔτι μὲν κυουμένου τε 
καὶ διαπλαττομένου τοῦ ζῴου τὰ σύμπαντ᾽ ἐστὶ 
τοῦ σώματος μόρια, γεννηθέντος δὲ κοινὸν ἐφ᾽ 
ἅπασιν ἔργον ἡ εἰς τὸ τέλειον ἑκάστῳ μέγεθος 
ἀγωγὴ καὶ μετὰ ταῦθ᾽ ἡ μέχρι τοῦ δυνατοῦ 
διαμονή. 

᾿Ενέργειαι δ᾽ ἐπὶ τρισὶ τοῖς εἰρημένοις ἔργοις 
τρεῖς ἐξ ἀνάγκης, ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστῳ μία, γένεσίς τε καὶ 


τό 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. tv.-v 


IV 


Tue so-called blood-making! taculty in the veins, 
then, as well as all the other faculties, fall within 
the category of relative concepts ; primarily because 
the faculty is the cause of the activity, but also, 
accidentally, because it is the cause of the effect. 
But, if the cause is relative to something—for it is the 
cause of what results from it, and of nothing else—it 
is obvious that the faculty also falls into the category 
of the relative ; and so long as we are ignorant of the 
true essence of the cause which is operating, we call 
it a faculty. Thus we say that there exists in the 
veins a blood-making faculty, as also a digestive? 
faculty in the stomach, a pulsatile 8 faculty in the 
heart, and in each of the other parts a special faculty 
corresponding to the function or activity of that part. 
If, therefore, we are to investigate methodically the 
number and kinds of faculties, we must begin with 
the effects; for each of these effects comes from a 
certain activity, and each of these again is preceded 
by a cause. 


V 


Tue effects of Nature, then, while the animal is 
still being formed in the womb, are all the different 
parts of its body; and after it has been born, an 
effect in which all parts share is the progress of each 
to its full size, and thereafter its maintenance of 
itself as long as possible. 

The activities corresponding to the three effects 
mentioned are necessarily three—one to each— 

1 Lit. haematopoietic. cf. p. 11, note 3. 2 Lit. peptic. 

3 Lit. sphygmic. 17 


ς 


1] 


GALEN 


αὔξησις καὶ ,θρέψις. ἀλλ᾽ ἡ μὲν γένεσις οὐχ 
ἁπλῆ τίς ἐνέργεια τῆς φύσεως, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ἀλλοι- 
ὠσεώς τε καὶ διαπλάσεώς ἐ ἐστι σύνθετος. ἵνα μὲν 
γὰρ ὀστοῦν γένηται καὶ νεῦρον καὶ λὲψ καὶ τῶν 
ἄχλων ἕκαστον, ἀλλοιοῦσθαι ρὴ τὴν ὑποβεβλη- 
μένην οὐσίαν, ἐξ ἧς γίγνεται τὸ ζῷον' ἵνα δὲ καὶ 
σχῆμα τὸ δέον καὶ θέσιν καὶ κοιλότητάς τινας 
καὶ ἀποφύσεις καὶ συμφύσεις καὶ τἄλλα || τὰ 
τοιαῦτα κτήσηται, διαπλάττεσθαι χρὴ τὴν ἀλλοι- 
ουμένην οὐσίαν, ἣν δὴ καὶ ὕλην τοῦ ξῴου καλῶν, 
ὡς τῆς νεὼς τὰ ξύλα καὶ τῆς εἰκόνος τὸν κηρόν, 
οὐκ ἂν ἃ ἁμάρτοις. 

Ἢ δ᾽ αὔξησις ἐπίδοσίς ἐστι καὶ διάστασις κατὰ 
μῆκος καὶ πλάτος καὶ βάθος τῶν στερεῶν τοῦ 
ἔφου μορίων, ὧνπερ καὶ ἡ διάπλασις ἦν, ἡ δὲ 
θρέψις πρόσθεσις τοῖς αὐτοῖς ἄνευ διαστάσεως. 


VI 


Περὶ πρώτης οὖν τῆς “γενέσεως εἴπωμεν, ἣν ἐξ 
ἀλλοιώσεώς θ᾽ ἅμα καὶ διαπλάσεως ἐλέγομεν 
γίγνεσθαι. 

Καταβληθέντος δὴ τοῦ σπέρματος εἰς ,τὴν 
μήτραν ἢ εἰς τὴν γῆν, οὐδὲν γὰρ διαφέρει, χρόνοις 
τισὶν ὡρισμένοις πάμπολλα συνίσταται μόρια 
τῆς γεννωμένης οὐσίας ὑγρότητι καὶ ξηρότητι καὶ 
ψυχρότητι καὶ θερμότητι καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἅπασιν, 





1 Genesis corresponds to the intrauterine life, or what we 
may call embryogeny. Alteration here means histogenesis 
or tissue-production ; shaping or mowding (in Greek diaplasia) 
meuns the ordering of these tissues inito organs (organogenesis). 


18 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. v.-vt 


namely, Genesis, Growth, and Nutrition. Genesis, 
however, is not a simple activity of Nature, but is com- 
pounded of alteration and of shaping.'! That is to say, 
in order that bone, nerve, veins, and all other [tissues] 
may come into existence, the underlying substance 
from which the animal springs must be altered; and 
in order that the substance so altered may acquire 
its appropriate shape and position, its cavities, out- 
growths, attachments, and so forth, it has to undergo 
a shaping or formative process.2, One would be 
justified in calling this substance which undergoes 
alteration the material of the animal, just as wood is 
the material of a ship, and wax of an image. 

Gronth is an increase and expansion in length, 
breadth, and thickness of the solid parts of the 
animal (those which have been subjected to the 
moulding or shaping process). Nutrition is an addition 
to these, without expansion. 


VI 


Let us speak then, in the first place, of Genesis, 
which, as we have said, results from alteration to- 
gether with shaping. 

The seed having been cast into the womb or into 
the earth (for there is no difference),’ then, after a 
certain definite period, a great number of parts 
become constituted in the substance which is being 
generated ; these differ as regards moisture, dryness, 
coldness and warmth,‘ and in all the other qualities 

2 of. p. 25, note 4. 

3 Note inadequate analogy of semen with fertilised seeds 
of plants (7.e. of gamete with zygote). Strictly speaking, of 
course, semen corresponds to pollen. cf. p. 130, note 2. 

ὁ 7.e. the four primary qualities ; cf. chap. iil. supra. 19 


c 2 


12’ 


13 


GALEN 


ὅσα τούτοις ἕπεται, διαφέροντα. τὰ δ᾽ ἑπόμενα 
γιγνώσκεις, εἴπερ ὅλως ἐφιλοσόφῃσάς τι περὶ 
γενέσεως καὶ φθορᾶς" αἱ λοιπαὶ γὰρ τῶν “ἁπτῶν 
ὀνομαζομένων διαφορῶν ταῖς εἰρημέναις ἕπονται 
πρῶται καὶ μάλιστα, μετὰ δὲ ταύ τας αἱ γευσταί 
τε καὶ ὀσφρηταὶ καὶ ὁραταΐ. σκληρότης μὲν οὖν 
καὶ μαλακότης καὶ γλισχρότης καὶ Kpavporns καὶ. 
κουφότης καὶ βαρύτης καὶ πυκνότης καὶ ἀραιότης" 
καὶ λειότης καὶ τραχύτης καὶ παχύτης καὶ λεπτό- 
τῆς ἁπταὶ διαφοραὶ καὶ εἴρηται περὶ πασῶν 
᾿Αριστοτέλει καλῶς. οἶσθα δὲ δήπου καὶ τὰς 
γευστάς τε καὶ ὀσφρητὰς καὶ ὁρατὰς διαφοράς. 
ὥστ᾽, εἰ μὲν τὰς πρώτας τε καὶ , στοιχειώδεις 
ἀλλοιωτικὰς δυνάμεις ξητοίης, ὑγρότης ἐστὶ καὶ 
ξηρότης καὶ ψυχρότης καὶ θερμότης: εἰ δὲ τὰς ἐκ 
τῆς τούτων κράσεως γενομένας, τοσαῦται καθ᾽ 
ἕκαστον ἔσονται ζῷον, ὅσαπερ ἂν αὐτοῦ τὰ 
αἰσθητὰ στοιχεῖα ὑπάρχῃ" καλεῖται δ᾽ αἰσθητὰ 
στοιχεῖα τὰ ὁμοιομερῆ 7 πάντα τοῦ σώματος μόρια' 
καὶ ταῦτ᾽ οὐκ ἐκ μεθόδου τινὸς ἀλλ᾽ αὐτόπτην 
γενόμενον ἐκμαθεῖν χρὴ διὰ τῶν ἀνατομῶν. 
᾿στοῦν δὴ καὶ χόνδρον καὶ νεῦρον καὶ ὑμένα 
καὶ σύνδεσμον καὶ φλέβα καὶ πάνθ᾽ ὅσα τοιαῦτα 
κατὰ τὴν πρώτην τοῦ ζῴου γένεσιν ἡ φύσις" 
ἀπεργάξεται δυνάμει χρωμένη καθόλου μὲν 
εἰπεῖν τῇ γεννητικῇ τε καὶ ἀλλοιωτικῇ, κατὰ 
μέρος δὲ θερμαντικῇ τε καὶ ψυκτικῇ καὶ Enpav- 


4 Various secondary or derivative differences in the tissues. 
Note pre-eminence of sense of touch. 

2 De Anima, ii. et seq. 

3 Lit. homoeomerous=of similar parts throughout, ‘‘ the 
same all through.” He refers to the elementary tissues, 
conceived as not being susceptible of further anflysis. 


20 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. v1 


which naturally derive therefrom.! These deriva- - 
tive qualities, you are acquainted with, if you have 
given any sort of scientific consideration to the 
question of genesis and destruction. For, first and 
foremost after the qualities mentioned come the 
other so-called tangsble distinctions, and after them 
those which appeal to taste, smell, and _ sight. 
Now, tangible distinctions are hardness and softness, 
viscosity, friability, lightness, heaviness, density, 
rarity, smoothness, roughness, thickness and_ thin- 
ness; all of these have been duly mentioned by 
Aristotle.2 And of course you know those which 
appéal to taste, smell, and sight. Therefore, if 
you wish to know which alterative faculties are 
primary and elementary, they are moisture, dry- 
ness, coldness, and warmth, and if you wish to 
know which ones arise from the combination of 
these, they will be found to be in each. animal of a 
number corresponding to its senstble elements. The 
name senstble elements is given to all the homogeneous * 
parts of the body, and these are to be detected 
not by any system, but by personal observation οὗ 
dissections.‘ 

* Now Nature constructs bone, cartilage, nerve, mem- 
brane, ligament, vein, and so forth, at the first stage 


-of the animal’s genesis,5 employing at this task a 


faculty which is, in general terms, generative and 
alterative, and, in more detail, warming, chilling, 
drying, or moistening ; or such as spring from the 


4 That is, by the bodily eye, and not by the mind’s eye. 
The observer is here called an autoptes or ‘‘ eye-witness.’ 
Our medical term autopsy thus means literally a persona 
inspection of internal parts, ordinarily hidden. 

> 2,6. ‘* alteration” is the earlier of the two stages which 
constitute embryogeny or ‘‘ genesis.” cf. p. 18, note 1. 


21 





14 


GALEN 


τικῇ καὶ ὑγραντικῇ καὶ ταῖς ἐκ τῆς τούτων 
κράσεως γενομέναις, οἷον ὀστοποιητικῇ τε καὶ 
νευροποιητικῇἢ καὶ χονδροποιητικῇ' σαφηνείας 
γὰρ ἕνεκα καὶ τούτοις τοῖς ὀνόμασι χρηστέον. 
Ἔστι γοῦν καὶ ἡ ἰδία σὰρξ τοῦ ἥπατος ἐκ 
τούτου τοῦ γένους καὶ ἡ τοῦ σπληνὸς καὶ ἡ TOY 
νεφρῶν καὶ ἡ τοῦ πνεύμονος καὶ ἡ τῆς καρδίας 
οὕτω δὲ καὶ τοῦ ἐγκεφάλου τὸ ἴδιον σῶμα καὶ 
τῆς γαστρὸς καὶ τοῦ στομάχου καὶ τῶν ἐντέρων 
καὶ τῶν ὑστερῶν αἰσθητὸν στοιχεῖόν ἐστιν ὁμοιο- 
μερές τε καὶ ἁπλοῦν καὶ ἀσύνθετον: ἐὰν γὰρ 
ἐξέλῃς ἑκάστου τῶν εἰρημένων τὰς ἀρτηρίας τε 
καὶ τὰς φλέβας καὶ τὰ νεῦρα, τὸ ὑπόλοιπον 
σῶμα τὸ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ὄργανον ἁπλοῦν ἐστι καὶ 
στοιχειῶδες ὡς πρὸς αἴσθησιν. ὅσα δὲ τῶν 
τοιούτων ὀργάνων ἐκ δνοῖν σύγκειται χιτώνων 
οὐχ ὁμοίων μὲν ἀλλήλοις, ἁπλοῦ δ᾽ ἑκατέρου, 
τούτων οἱ χιτῶνές εἰσι τὰ στοιχεῖα καθάπερ τῆς 
τε γαστρὸς καὶ τοῦ στομάχου καὶ τῶν ἐντέρων 
καὶ τῶν ἀρτηριῶν, καὶ καθ᾽ ἑκάτερόν γε τῶν 
χιτώνων ἴδιος ἡ ἀλλοιωτικὴ δύναμις ἡ ἐκ τοῦ 
παρὰ τῆς || μητρὸς ἐπιμηνίου γεννήσασα τὼ 
μόριον, ὥστε τὰς κατὰ μέρος ἀλλοιωτικὰς δυνά- 
pets τοσαύτας εἶναι καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ζῷον, ὅσαπερ 
ἂν ἔχῃ τὰ στοιχειώδη μόρια. καὶ μέν γε καὶ 
τὰς ἐνεργείας ἰδίας ἑκάστῳ τῶν κατὰ μέρος 
ἀναγκαῖον ὑπάρχειν ὥσπερ καὶ τὰς χρείας, οἷον 
καὶ τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν νεφρῶν εἰς τὴν κύστιν διηκόντων 
πόρων, of δὴ καὶ οὐρητῆρες καλοῦνται. οὗτοι 


te 


1 The terms Galen actually uses are: ostopoietic, neuro- 
novetic, chondropoietic. 


22 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. v1 


blending of these, for example, the bone-producing, 
nerve-producing, and cartilage-producing faculties ! 
(since for the sake of clearness these names must 
be used as well). 

Now the peculiar ? flesh of the liver is of this kind 
as well, also that of the spleen, that of the kidneys, 
that of the lungs, and that of the heart; so ale 
the proper substance of the brain, stomach, gullet, 
intestines, and uterus is a sensible element, of similar 
parts all through, simple, and uncompounded. That 
is to say, if you remove from each of the organs 
mentioned its arteries, veins, and nerves,’ the 
substance remaining in each organ is, from the point 
of view of the senses, simple and elementary. As 
regards those organs consisting of two dissimilar 
coats,* of which each is simple, of these organs the 
coats are the elements—for example, the coats 
of the stomach, oesophagus, intestines, and arteries ; 
each of these two coats has an alterative faculty 
peculiar to it, which has engendered it from the 
menstrual blood of the mother. Thus the special 
alterative faculties in each animal are of the same 
number as the elementary parts5; and _ further, 
the activities must necessarily correspond each to one 
of the special parts, just as each part has its special 
use—for example, those ducts which extend from 
the kidneys into the bladder, and which are called 
ureters ; for these are not arteries, since they do not 
pulsate nor do they consist of two coats ; and they 


2 As we should say, parenchyma (a term used by Erasis- 
tratus). 

3. These were all the elementary tissues that Aristotle, for 
example, had recognized ; other tissues (e.y. flesh or muscle) 
he believed to be complexes of these. 

4 Or tunica. 5 i.e, tissues, 


. 23 


‘GALEN 


γὰρ οὔτ᾽ ἀρτηρίαι εἰσίν, ὅτι μήτε σφύξουσι μήτ᾽ 
ἐκ δυοῖν χιτώνων συνεστήκασιν, οὔτε φλέβες, ὅ ὅτι 
μήθ᾽ αἷμα περιέχουσι μήτ᾽ ἔοικεν αὐτῶν ὄ χιτὼν 
κατά τι τῷ τῆς φλεβός" ἀλλὰ καὶ νεύρων ἐπὶ 
πλέον ἀφεστήκασιν ἢ ἢ τῶν εἰρημένων. 

Τί ποτ᾽ οὖν εἰσιν; ἐρωτᾷ τις, ὥσπερ ἀναγκαῖον 
ὃν ἅπαν μόριον i ἀρτηρίαν ἣ φλέβα ἢ “νεῦρον 
ὑπά χεῖν ἢ ἐκ τούτων πεπλέχθαι καὶ μὴ τοῦτ᾽ 
αὐτὸ τὸ νῦν λεγόμενον, ὡς ἴδιος ἑ ἑκάστῳ. τῶν κατὰ 
μέρος ὀργάνων ἐστὶν ἡ οὐσία. καὶ γὰρ καὶ αἱ 
κύστεις ἑκάτεραι ἥ τε τὸ οὗρον ὑποδεχομένη καὶ 


. ἡ τὴν ξανθὴν χολὴν οὐ μόνον τῶν ἄλλων ἁπάντων 


ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀλλήλων διαφέρουσι καὶ οἱ εἰς τὸ ἧπαρ 
ἀποφυόμενοι | πόροι, καθάπερ στόμαχοί τινες 
ἀπὸ τῆς χοληδόχου κύστεως, οὐδὲν οὔτ᾽ ἀρτηρίαις 
οὔτε φλεψὶν οὔτε νεύροις. ἐοίκασιν. ἀλλὰ περὶ 
μὲν τούτων ἐπὶ πλέον ἐν ἄλλοις τέ τίσι κἀν τοῖς 
περὶ τῆς “I πποκράτους ἀνατομῆς εἴρηται. 

Αἱ δὲ κατὰ μέρος ἅπασαι δυνάμεις τῆς φύσεως 
αἱ ἀλλοιωτικαὶ αὐτὴν μὲν τὴν οὐσίαν τῶν χιτώ- 
νων τῆς κοιλίας καὶ τῶν ἐντέρων καὶ τῶν ὑστερῶν 
ἀπετέλεσαν, οἵαπέρ ἐστι" τὴν δὲ σύνθεσιν αὐτῶν 
καὶ τὴν τῶν ἐμφυομένων πλοκὴν καὶ τὴν εἰς τὸ 
ἔντερον ἔκφυσιν καὶ τὴν τῆς ἔνδον κοιλότητος 
ἰδέαν καὶ τἄλλ᾽ ὅσα τοιαῦτα δύναμίς τις ἑτέρα 
διέπλασεν, ἣν διαπλαστικὴν ὀνομάξομεν, ἣν δὴ 
καὶ τεχνικὴν εἶναι λέγομεν, μᾶλλον δ᾽ ἀρίστην 
καὶ ἄ ἄκραν τέχνην καὶ πάντα τινὸς ἕνεκα ποιοῦσαν, 
ὡς μηδὲν ἀργὸν εἶναι μηδὲ περιττὸν μηδ᾽ ὅλως 





: As, for example, Aristotle had held; cf. p. 23, note 3. 
Galen added many new tissues to those described by Aristotle. 


24 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. vi 


are not veins, since they neither contain blood, nor 
do their coats in any way resemble those of veins; 
from nerves they differ still more than from the 
structures mentioned. 

_ “What, then, are they?’’ someone asks—as 
though every part must necessarily be either an 
artery, a vein, a nerve, or a complex of these,} 
and as though the truth were not what I am now 
stating, namely, that every one of the various ἡ 
organs has its own particular substance. For in fact 
the two bladders—that which receives the urine, 
and that which receives the yellow bile—not only 
differ from all other organs, but also from one 
another. Further, the ducts which spring out like 
kinds of conduits from the gall-bladder and which © 
pass into the liver have no resemblance either to 
arteries, veins or nerves. But these parts have been 
treated at a greater length in my work “On the 
Anatomy of Hippocrates,” as well as elsewhere. 

As for the actual substance of the coats of the 
stomach, intestine, and uterus, each of these has 
been rendered what it is by a special alterative 
faculty of Nature; while the bringing of these 
together,? the combination therewith of the structures 
which are inserted into them, the outgrowth into the 
intestine,* the shape of the inner cavities, and the 
like, have all been determined by a faculty which we 
call the shaping or formative faculty‘; this faculty 
we also state to be artistic—nay, the best and highest 
art—doing everything for some purpose, so that — 


3 a synthesis. 

By this is meant the duodenum, considered as an out- 
mies or prolongation of the stomach towards the in- 
testines. 

4 cf. p. 19, note 2. 
; 25 


16 


17 


GALEN 


οὕτως ἔχον, ὡς δύνασθαι βέλτιον ἑτέρως ἔχειν. 
ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν ἐν τοῖς περὶ χρείας μορίων 
ἀποδείξομεν. || 


VII 


᾿Επὶ δὲ τὴν αὐξητικὴν ἤδη μεταβάντες δύναμιν 
αὐτὸ τοῦθ᾽ ᾿ὑπομνήσωμεν πρῶτον, ὡς ὑπάρχει 
μὲν. καὶ αὐτὴ τοῖς κνουμένοις ὥσπερ καὶ ἡ θρεπ- 
τική'" ἀλλ᾽ οἷον ὑπηρέτιδές τινές εἰσι τηνικαῦτα 
τῶν προειρημένων δυνάμεων, οὐκ ἐν αὑταῖς 
ἔχουσαι τὸ πᾶν κῦρος. ἐπειδὰν δὲ τὸ τέλειον 
ἀπολάβῃ μέγεθος τὸ ζῷον, ἐν τῷ μετὰ τὴν 
ἀποκύησιν χρόνῳ παντὶ μέχρι τῆς ἀκμῆς ἡ ἡ ἡ μὲν 
αὐξητικὴ τηνικαῦτα κρατεῖ" βοηθοὶ αὐτῆς. καὶ 
οἷον ὑπηρέτιδες q τ᾽ ἀλλοιωτικὴ δύναμίς ἐστι 
καὶ ἡ θρεπτική. τί οὖν τὸ ἴδιόν ἐστι τῆς αὐ- 
ξητικῆς δυνάμεως; εἰς πᾶν μέρος ἐκτεῖναι τὰ 
πεφυκότα. καλεῖται δ᾽ οὕτω τὰ στερεὰ μόρια 
τοῦ σώματος, ἀρτηρίαι καὶ φλέβες καὶ νεῦρα καὶ 
ὀστᾶ καὶ χόνδροι καὶ ὑμένες καὶ σύνδεσμοι καὶ οἱ 
χιτῶνες ἅπαντες, οὗς στοιχειώδεις τε καὶ ὁμοιο- 
μερεῖς καὶ ἁπλοῦς ὀλίγον ἔμπροσθεν ἐκαλοῦμεν. 
ὅτ δὲ τρόπῳ τὴν εἰς πᾶν μέρος ἔκτασιν ἴσχουσιν, 
ἐγὼ φράσω παράδειγμά τι πρότερον εἰπὼν ἕνεκα 
τοῦ σαφοῦς. | 

Tas «vores τῶν ὑῶν λαβόντες οἱ παῖδες 
πληροῦσί τε “πνεύματος καὶ τρίβουσιν ἐπὶ τῆς 
τέφρας πλησίον τοῦ πυρός, ὡς ἀλεαίνεσθαι μέν, 


e 


βλάπτεσθαι δὲ μηδέν: καὶ πολλή γ᾽ αὕτη ἡ 


1 Lit. the auxetic or incremental faculty. 


26 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. vi.-vir 


there is nothing ineffective or superfluous, or capable 
of being better disposed. This, however, I shall 
demonstrate in my work “ On the Use of Parts.” 


VII 


Passinc now to the faculty of Growth! let us 
first mention that this, too, is present in the foetus 
in utero as is also the nutritive faculty, but that 
at that stage these two faculties are, as it were, 
handmaids to those already mentioned,? and do not 
possess in themselves supreme authority. When, 
however, the animal? has attained its complete size, 
then, during the whole period following its birth and 
until the acme is reached, the faculty of growth is 
predominant, ‘while the alterative and nutritive 
faculties are accessory—in fact, act as its handmaids. 
What, then, is the property of this faculty of growth? 
To extend in every direction that which has already 
come into existence—that is to say, the solid parts of 
the body, the arteries, veins, nerves, bones, cartilages, 
membranes, ligaments, and the various coats which 
we have just called elementary, homogeneous, and 
simple. And I shall state in what way they gain this 
extension in every direction, first giving an illustra- 
tion for the sake of clearness. 

Children take the bladders of pigs, fill them with 
air, and then rub them on ashes near the fire, so as to 
warm, but not to injure them. This is a common 


2 ζ,6. to the alterative and shaping faculties (histogenetic 
and organogenetic). 

δ᾽ If the reading is correct we can only suppose that Galen 
meant the embryo. 


27 


GA* 
“ ¥ 
OUT@WS Eyoa" ν 
ἀλλο ip ἔθνος τ 
uns ἐν Ig TH 
καὶ Bh OS vd PB 
€ κ « 
ay NORE, PE pte 
δ ὰ > ta 
a ral wor ν π ικ 
κὰν. ὅς We QT εἰδὰν δι τε 
«τ > Alt 1 »,κεὶ por 
διὰ 1S ἐτρῷ ὯΝ 1): 5» σ νι τ 
ae o y° 2 δ ὰ p bY mo' meV ef ι «ar 
οἱ ve€ at my ᾶ rs : ovo = ἣ © 
t Bor ra) < «Ἡ eal be «pl 5 Tot = 
ar ore cee eat δ BNO ets? ease 00 
aN. ἧς ray LR κι" ene & py wl 
10 re) a a ~~ } uy 
1 el {Oo rv εὖ 
δ ι cg {s τὰ κῇ τ παιὸ y TOs 7. λέ 
ετ OK κ Ἵ εις 
ie ov" Neel” cov ἣ Ξ qov at Me 
aves, OMT ἀνα ὦ NE. κοὐ 
οι ar€ ; Ros «α60 ~ σῷ δ a HO 5 ι" 
ene ,e «0 οὐ. EK ess 
ΚΘ ay ee θα payer” oT" “ov 
ms 6 γι θα! " po | ay ~ ει" . 
ITE a 
TOU © . 
ὀστᾶ 
χιτῶνε : 
μερεῖς ; 
“ \ 
ὅτῳ δὲ τ, 








ἐγὼ φράσ 

τοῦ σαφοῦ 
17 Tas «ve 
πληροῦσί © 
τέφρας 
βλάπ' 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. νὰ 


game in the district of Ionia, and among not a few 
other nations. As they rub, they sing songs, to a 
certain measure, time, and rhythm, and all their words 
are an exhortation to the bladder to increase in size. 
When it appears to them fairly well distended, they ᾿ 
again blow air into it and expand it further; then 
they rub it again. This they do several times, until 
the bladder seems to them to have become large 
enough. Now, clearly, in these doings of the children, 
the more the interior cavity of the bladder increases 
in size, the thinner, necessarily, does its substance 
become. But, if the children were able to bring 
nourishment to this thin part, then they would make 
the bladder big in the sane way that Nature does. 
As it is, however, they cannot do what Nature does, 
for to imitate this is beyond the power not only of 
children, but of any one soever; it is a property of 
Nature alone. 

It will now, therefore, be clear to you that nutritson 
is a necessity for growing things. For if such bodies 
were distended, but not at the same time nourished, 
they would take on a false appearance of growth, 
not a true growth. And further, to be distended 
tn all directions belongs only to bodies whose 
growth is directed by Nature; for those which are 
distended by us undergo this distension in one 
direction but grow less in the others; it is im- 
possible to find a body which will remain entire 
and not be torn through whilst we stretch it. in 
the three dimensions. Thus Nature alone has the 
power to expand a body in all directions so that it 
remains unruptured and preserves completely its 
previous form. 


29 


19 


GALEN 


Καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν ἡ αὔξησις ἄνευ τῆς ἐπιρρεούσης 
τε καὶ προσπλαττομένης τροφῆς μὴ δυναμένη 
γενέσθαι. ὩΣ 


VIII 


Καὶ τοίνυν ὁ λόγος ἥκειν ἔοικεν ὁ περὶ τῆς 
θρέψεως, ὃς δὴ λοιπός ἐστι καὶ τρίτος ὧν ἐξ 
ἀρχῆς προὐθέμεθα. τοῦ γὰρ ἐπιρρέοντος ἐν elder 
τροφῆς παντὶ || μορίῳ τοῦ τρεφομένου σώματος 

A / \ e > ἢ Bb) 
προσπλαττομένου θρέψις μὲν ἡ ἐνέργεια, θρεπτικὴ 
\ U4 e > » 2 ’ \ \ > A 
δὲ δύναμις ἡ αἰτία. ἀλλοίωσις μὲν δὴ κἀνταῦθα 
τὸ γένος τῆς ἐνεργείας, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ οἴαπερ ἡ ἐν τῇ 
γενέσει. ἐκεῖ μὲν γὰρ οὐκ ὃν πρότερον ὕστερον 
> » \ δὲ \ θ 4 a πὸ ’ 
ἐγένετο, κατὰ ὃὲ τὴν θρέψιν τῷ ἤδη γεγονότι 
συνεξομοιοῦται τὸ ἐπιρρέον καὶ διὰ τοῦτ᾽ εὐλόγως 
ἐκείνην μὲν τὴν ἀλλοίωσιν γένεσιν, ταύτην δ᾽ 
ἐξομοίωσιν ὠνόμασαν. 


ΙΧ 


᾿Επειδὴ δὲ περὶ τῶν τριῶν δυνάμεων τῆς φύσεως 
αὐτάρκως εἴρηται καὶ φαίνεται μηδεμιᾶς ἄλλης 
aA \ A Μ \ @ > [οὶ 
προσδεῖσθαι τὸ ζῷον, ἔχον γε καὶ ὅπως αὐξηθῇ 
\@ ‘A Vo Φ ’, 
καὶ ὅπως τελειωθῇ καὶ ὅπως ἕως πλείστου διαφυ- 
λαχθῇ, δόξειε μὲν ἂν ἴσως ἱκανῶς ἔχειν ὁ λόγος 
οὗτος ἤδη καὶ πάσας ἐξηγεῖσθαι τὰς τῆς φύσεως 
δυνάμεις. ἀλλ᾽ εἴ τις πάλιν ἐννοήσειεν, ὡς οὐ- 


20 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. vit.-1x 


Such then is growth, and it cannot occur without 
the nutriment which flows to the part and is worked 
up into it. 


Vill 


WE have, then, it seems, arrived at the subject 
of Nutrition, which is the third and remaining con- 
sideration which we proposed at the outset. For, 
when the matter which flows to each part of the 
body in the form of nutriment is being worked up 
into it, this activity is nutrition, and its cause is the 
nutritive faculty. Of course, the kind of activity 
here involved is also an alteration, but not an altera- 
tion like that occurring at the stage of genests.! For 
in the latter case something comes into existence 
which did not exist previously, while in nutrition the 
inflowing material becomes assimilated to that which 
has already come into existence. Therefore, the 
former kind of alteration has with reason been termed 
genesis, and the latter, assmtlation. 


IX 


Now, simce the three faculties of Nature have 
been exhaustively dealt with, and the animal would 
appear not to need any others (being possessed of 
the means for growing, for attaining completion, and 
for maintaining itself as long a time as possible), 
this treatise might seem to be already complete, and 
to constitute an exposition of all the faculties of 
Nature. If, however, one considers that it has not 


Δ 2,6. not the pre-natal development of tissue already 
described. cf. chap. vi. 


3! 


GALEN 


δενὸς οὐδέπω τῶν τοῦ ἕῴου μορίων ἐφήψατο, 
, yA 4 A 
κοιλίας λέγω καὶ ἐντέρων Kal ἥπατος καὶ τῶν 
e , 30. 4 ’ 4 » a , 
ὁμοίων, οὐδ᾽ ἐξηγήσατο τὰς ἐν αὐτοῖς δυνάμεις, 
a 80 “a Ϊ , ’ , > A θ 
αὖθις δόξειεν ἂν οἷον προοίμιόν te μόνον εἰρῆσθαι 
: a , ld \ A ’ 2 >? 
20 τῆς χρησίμου διδασκαλίας. || τὸ yap σύμπαν ὧδ 
” l4 \ Υ̓́ \ / a 
ἔχει. γένεσις καὶ αὔξησις καὶ θρέψις τὰ πρῶτα 
καὶ οἷον κεφάλαια τῶν ἔργων ἐστὶ τῆς φύσεως" 
Φ 
@OTE καὶ αἱ τούτων ἐργαστικαὶ δυνάμεις αἱ 
πρῶται τρεῖς εἰσι καὶ κυριώταται" δέονται δ᾽ εἰς 
4 
ὑπηρεσίαν, ws ἤδη δέδεικται, καὶ ἀλλήλων Kal 
ΝΜ ’ 
ἄλλων. τίνων μὲν οὖν ἡ γεννητική τε καὶ αὐξη- 
\ , ζω 
τικὴ δέονται, εἴρηται, τίνων δ᾽ ἡ θρεπτική, νῦν 
εἰρήσεται. 


Χ 


Δοκῶ γάρ μοι δείξειν τὰ περὶ τὴν τῆς τροφῆς 
οἰκονομίαν ὄργανά τε καὶ τὰς δυνάμεις αὐτῶν. 
διὰ ταύτην γεγονότα. ἐπειδὴ γὰρ ἡ ἐνέργεια 
ταύτης τῆς δυνάμεως ἐξομοίωσίς ἐστιν, ὁμοιοῦ- 
σθαι δὲ “καὶ μεταβάλλειν εἰς ἄλληλα. πᾶσι τοῖς 
οὖσιν ἀδύνατον, εἰ μή τινα ἔχοι κοινωνίαν ἤδη 
καὶ συγγένειαν ἐν ταῖς ποιότησι, διὰ τοῦτο 
πρῶτον μὲν οὐκ ἐκ πάντων ἐδεσμάτων πᾶν ξῷον 
τρέφεσθαι πέφυκεν, ἔπειτα δ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἐξ ὧν οἷόν τ᾽ 
ἐστὶν οὐδ᾽ ἐκ τούτων παραχρῆμα, καὶ διὰ ταύτην 


1 Administration, lit. ‘‘ economy.” 
2 The activation or functioning of this faculty, the faculty 
an actual operation. cf. p. 3, note 2. 


32 








ΟΝ THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. 1x.-x 


yet touched upon any of the parts of the animal (I 
mean the stomach, intestines, liver, and the like), 
and that it has not dealt with the faculties resident 
in these, it will seem as though merely a kind of in- 
troduction had been given to the practical parts of 
our teaching. For the whole matter is as follows: 
Genesis, growth, and nutrition are the first, and, so 
to say, the principal effects of Nature ; similarly also 
the faculties which produce these effects—the first 
faculties—are three in number, and are the most 
dominating of all. But as has already been shown, 
these need the service both of each other, and of 
yet different faculties. Now, these which the 
faculties of generation and growth require have 
been stated. I shall now say what ones the nutritive 
faculty requires. 


X 


For I believe that I shall prove that the organs 
which have to do with the disposal} of the nutri- 
ment, as also their faculties, exist for the sake of 
this nutritive faculty. For’ since the action of this 
faculty ? is assimslation, and # is impossible for any- 
thing to be assimilated by, and to change into 
. anything else unless they already possess a certain 
community and affinity in their qualities,’ therefore, in 
the first place, any animal cannot naturally derive 
nourishment from any kind of food, and secondly, 
even in the case of those from which it can do so, it 
cannot do this at once. Therefore, by reason ot 


3 ««Ὅῃ rapport commun et une affinité” (Daremberg). 
“ς Societatem aliquam cognationemque in quattettous’ ” (Lin- 
acre). cf. p. 36, note 2. 


33 


21 


GALEN 


τὴν ἀνάγκην πλειόνων ὀργάνων ἀλλοιωτικῶν τῆς 
τροφῆς ἕκαστον || τῶν ξῴων χρήζει. ἵνα μὲν γὰρ 
τὸ ξανθὸν ἐρυθρὸν γένηται καὶ τὸ ἐρυθρὸν ξανθόν, 
ἁπλῆς καὶ μιᾶς δεῖται τῆς ἀλλοιώσεως" ἵνα δὲ τὸ 
λευκὸν μέλαν καὶ τὸ μέλαν λευκόν, ἁπασῶν τῶν 
μεταξύ. καὶ τοίνυν καὶ τὸ μαλακώτατον οὐκ ἂν 
ἀθρόως σκληρότατον καὶ τὸ σκληρότατον οὐκ ἂν 
ἀθρόως μαλακώτατον γένοιτο, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ τὸ 
δυσωδέστατον εὐωδέστατον οὐδ᾽ ἔμπαλιν τὸ εὐω- 
δέστατον δυσωδέστατον ἐξαίφνης γένοιτ᾽ ἄν. 

Πῶς οὖν ἐξ αἵματος ὀστοῦν ἄν ποτε γένοιτο μὴ 
παχυνθέντος γε πρότερον ἐπὶ πλεῖστον αὐτοῦ καὶ 
λευκανθέντος ἢ πῶς ἐξ ἄρτον τὸ αἷμα μὴ κατὰ 
βραχὺ μὲν ἀποθεμένου τὴν λευκότητα, κατὰ 
βραχὺ δὲ λαμβάνοντος τὴν ἐρυθρότητα; σάρκα 
as yap ἐξ αἵματος γενέσθαι ῥᾷστον" εἰ γὰρ εἰς 
τοσοῦτον αὐτὸ παχύνειεν ἡ φύσις, ὡς σύστασίν 
τινα σχεῖν καὶ μηκέτ᾽ εἶναι ῥυτόν, ἡ πρώτη καὶ 
νεοπαγὴς οὕτως ἂν εἴη σάρξ' ὀστοῦν δ᾽ ἵνα γένη- 
ται, πολλοῦ μὲν δεῖται χρόνου, πολλῆς δ᾽ ἐργασίας 
καὶ μεταβολῆς τῷ αἵματι. ὅτι δὲ καὶ τῷ ἄρτῳ 
καὶ πολὺ μᾶλλον θριδαϊκίνῃ καὶ τεύτλῳ καὶ τοῖς 
ὁμοίοις παμπόλλης δεῖται τῆς ἀλλοιώσεως εἰς 
αἵματος γένεσιν, οὐδὲ τοῦτ᾽ ἄδηλον. 

a \ \ a> A \ , 

Εν μὲν δὴ τοῦτ᾽ αἴτιον τοῦ πολλὰ γενέσθαι τὰ 
περὶ τὴν τῆς τροφῆς ἀλλοίωσιν ὄργανα. δεύτερον 
δ᾽ ἡ τῶν περιττωμάτων φύσις. ὡς γὰρ ὑπὸ 
βοτανῶν οὐδ᾽ ὅλως δυνάμεθα τρέφεσθαι, καίτοι 
τῶν βοσκημάτων τρεφομένων, οὕτως ὑπὸ ῥαφανί- 





1 Lit. ‘‘ necessity”; more restrictive, however, than our 
‘law of Nature.” cf. p. 314, note 1. 

2 His point is that no great change, in colours or in any- 
thing else, can take place at one step. 


34 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. x 


this law,! every animal needs several organs for 
altering the nutriment. For in order that the yellow 
may become red, and the red yellow, one simple 
process of alteration is required, but in order that 
the white may become black, and the black white, 
all the intermediate stages are needed.? So also, a 
thing which is very soft cannot all at once become 
very hard, nor vice versa; nor, similarly can anything 
which has a very bad smell suddenly become quite 
fragrant, nor again, can the converse happen. 

How, then, could blood ever turn into bone, with- 
out having first become, as far as possible, thickened 
and white? And how could bread turn into blood 
without having gradually parted with its white- 
ness and gradually acquired redness? Thus it is 
quite easy for. blood to become flesh ; for, if Nature 
thicken it to such an extent that it acquires a 
certain consistency and ceases to be fluid, it thus 
becomes original newly-formed flesh; but in order 
that blood may turn into bone, much time is needed 
and much elaboration and transformation of the 
blood. Further, it is quite clear that bread, and, 
more particularly lettuce, beet, and the like, re- 
quire a great deal of alteration in order to become 
blood. 

This, then, is one reason why there are so many 
organs concerned in the alteration of food. A 
second reason is the nature of the superfluities.2 For, 
as we are unable to draw any nourishment from 
grass, although this is possible for cattle, similarly 
we can derive nourishment from radishes, albeit not 


3 Not quite our ‘‘ waste products,” since these are con- 
sidered as being partly synthetic, whereas the Greek peritto- 
mata were simply superfluous substances which could not be 
used and were thrown aside. 


35 
Dp 2 


GALEN 


Sos τρεφόμεθα μέν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ ὡς ὑπὸ τῶν κρεῶν. 
τούτων μὲν γὰρ ὀλίγου δεῖν ὅλων ἡ φύσις ἡμῶν 
κρατεῖ καὶ μεταβάλλει καὶ ἀλλοιοῖ καὶ χρηστὸν 
ἐξ αὐτῶν αἷμα συνίστησιν" ἐν δὲ τῇ ῥαφανίδι τὸ 
μὲν οἰκεῖόν τε καὶ μεταβληθῆναι δυνάμενον, μόγις 
καὶ τοῦτο καὶ σὺν πολλῇ τῇ κατεργασίᾳ, παντά- 
πασιν ἐλάχιστον" ὅλη & ὀλίγου δεῖν ἐστι περιτ- 
τωματικὴ καὶ διεξέρχεται τὰ τῆς πέψεως ὄργανα, 
βραχέος ἐξ αὐτῆς εἰς τὰς φλέβας ἀναληφθέντος 
αἵματος καὶ οὐδὲ τούτου τελέως χρηστοῦ. δευτέ- 
ρᾶς οὖν αὖθις ἐδέησε διακρίσεως τῇ φύσει τῶν ἐν 
ταῖς φλεψὶ περιττωμάτων. καὶ χρεία καὶ τού- 
τοῖς ὁδῶν τέ τινων ἑτέρων ἐπὶ τὰς ἐκικρίσεις αὐτὰ 
παραγουσῶν, ὡς μὴ λυμαίνοιτο τοῖς χρηστοῖς, 
ὑποδοχῶν τέ τινων οἷον δεξαμενῶν; ἐν αἷς ὅταν 
εἰς ἱκανὸν πλῆθος ἀφίκηται, τηνικαῦτ᾽ ἐκκριθή- 
σεται. 

Δεύτερον δή σοι καὶ τοῦτο τὸ γένος τῶν ἐν τῷ 
σώματι μορίων ἐξεύρηται τοῖς περιττώμασι τῆς 
τροφῆς ἀνακείμενον. ἄλλο δὲ τρίτον ὑπὲρ τοῦ 
πάντη φέρεσθαι, καθάπερ τινὲς ὁδοὶ πολλαὶ διὰ 
τοῦ σώματος ὅλου κατατετμημέναι. 

Μία μὲν γὰρ εἴσοδος ἡ διὰ τοῦ στόματος ἅπασι 
τοῖς σιτίοις, οὐχ ἕν δὲ τὸ τρεφόμενον ἀλλὰ 
πάμπολλά τε καὶ πάμπολυ διεστῶτα. μὴ τοίνυν 
θαύμαξε τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ὀργάνων, ὅσα θρέψεως 
ἕνεκεν ἡ φύσις ἐδημιούργησε. τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἀλλοι- 





1 Note ‘‘ οἱ" natures,” cf. p. 12, note 4; p. 47, note J. 

2 The term οἰκεῖος, here rendered appropriate, is explained 
on p. 33. ο΄, also footnote on same page. Linacre often 
translated it conveniens, and it may usually be rendered 
proper, peculiar, own special, or own particular in English. 
Sometimes it is almost equal to akin, cognate, related: cf. 


36 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. x 


to the same extent as from meat; for almost the 
whole of the latter is mastered by our natures! ; 
it is transformed and altered and constituted useful 
blood ; but, in the radish, what is appropriate ? and 
capable of being altered (and that only with diffi- 
culty, and with much labour) is the very smallest 
part ; almost the whole of it is surplus matter, and 
passes through the digestive organs, only a very 
little being taken up into the veins as blood—nor is 
this itself entirely utilisable blood. Nature, there- 
fore, had need of a second process of separation for 
the superfluities in the veins. Moreover, these super- 
fluities need, on the one hand, certain fresh routes to 
conduct them to the outlets, so that they may not 
spoil the useful substances, and they also need 
certain reservoirs, as it were, in which they are 
collected till they reach a sufficient quantity, and 
are then discharged. 

Thus, then, you have discovered bodily parts of a 
second kind, consecrated in this case to the [removal 
of the] superfluities of the food. There is, however, 
also a third kind, for carrying the pabulum in every 
direction; these are like a number of roads inter- 
secting the whole body. 

Thus there is one entrance—that through the 
mouth—for all the various articles of food. What 
receives nourishment, however, is not one single part, 
but a great many parts, and these widely separated ; 
do not be surprised, therefore, at the abundance of 
organs which Nature has created for the purpose of 
nutrition. For those of them which have to do with 
p. 319, note 2, With Galen’s οἰκεῖος and ἀλλότριος we may 
compare the German terms etgen and fremd used by Aber- 


halden in connection with his theory of defensive ferments in 
the blood-serum, : 


37 





24 


GALEN 


οὔντα προπαρασκευάξει τὴν ἐπιτήδειον ἑκάστῳ 
μορίῳ τροφήν, τὰ δὲ διακρίνει τὰ περιττώματα, 
τὰ δὲ παραπέμπει, τὰ δ᾽ ὑποδέχεται, τὰ δ᾽ 
ἐκκρίνει, τὰ δ᾽ ὁδοὶ τῆς πάντη φορᾶς εἰσε τῶν 
χρηστῶν χυμῶν, ὥστ᾽, εἴπερ βούλει τὰς δυνάμεις 
τῆς φύσεως ἁπάσας ἐκμαθεῖν, ὑπὲρ ἑκάστου 
τούτων ἂν εἴη σοι τῶν ὀργάνων ἐπισκεπτέον. 
᾿Αρχὴ δ᾽ αὐτῶν τῆς διδασκαλίας, ὅσα || τοῦ 
PX a V ἧς φ, 
τέλους ἐγγὺς ἔργα τε τῆς φύσεώς ἐστι καὶ μόρια 
καὶ δυνάμεις αὐτῶν. 


ΧΙ 


Αὐτοῦ δὲ δὴ πάλιν ἀναμνηστέον ἡμῖν τοῦ 
τέλους, οὗπερ ἕνεκα τοσαῦτά τε καὶ τοιαῦτα τῇ 
φύσει δεδημιούργηται μόρια. τὸ μὲν οὖν ὄνομα 
τοῦ πράγματος, ὥσπερ καὶ πρότερον εἴρηται, 
θρέψις" ὁ δὲ κατὰ τοὔνομα λόγος ὁμοίωσις τοῦ 
τρέφοντος τῷ Tpepopeve. iva δ᾽ αὕτη γένηται, 
προηγήσασθαι χρὴ πρόσφυσιν, ἵνα. ὃ ἐκείνη, 
πρόσθεσιν. ἐπειδὰν γὰρ ἐκπέσῃ τῶν ἀγγείων 
ὁ μέλλων θρέψειν ὁτιοῦν τῶν τοῦ ξῴου μορίων 

υμός, εἰς ἅπαν αὐτὸ διασπείρεται πρῶτον, 
ἔπειτα προστίθεται κἄπειτα προσφύεται καὶ 
τελέως ὁμοιοῦται. 


1 Transit, cf. p. 6, note 1. 

2 4.¢. of the living organism, cf. p. 2, note 1. 

8 αὶ 6, with nutrition. 

4 γε might perhaps say, more shortly, ‘‘ assimilation of 
food to feeder,” or, ‘‘of food to fed”; Linacre renders, 
‘“nutrimenti cum nutrito assimilatio.” 


38 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. x.-x1 


alteration prepare the nutriment suitable for each 
part; others separate out the superfluities; some 
pass these along, others store them up, others ex- 
crete them; some, again, are paths for the transit ! 
in all directions of the wtilisable juices, So, if you 
wish to gain a thorough acquaintance with all the 
faculties of Nature,? you will have to consider each 
one of these organs. 

Now in giving an account of these we must begin 
with those effects of Nature, together with their 
corresponding parts and faculties, which are closely 
connected with the purpose to be achieved.® 


XI 


Ler us once more, then, recall the actual purpose 
for which Nature has constructed all these parts. Its 
name, as previously stated, is nutrition, and the defini- 
tion corresponding to the name is: an assimilation of 
that which nourishes to that which receives nourishment.‘ 
And in order that this may come about, we must 
assume a preliminary process of adheston,®> and for 
that, again, one of presentation.® For whenever the 
juice which is destined to nourish any of the parts of 
the animal is emitted from the vessels, it is in the 
first place dispersed all through this part, next it is 
presented, and next it adheres, and becomes com- 
pletely assimilated. 


5 Lit. prosphysis, i.e. attachment, implantation. 

6 Lit. prosthesis, ‘‘apposition.” One is almost tempted to 
retain the terms prosthesis and prosphysis in translation, as 
they obviously correspond much more closely to Galen’s 
physiological conceptions than any English or semi-English 
words can. 


39 


GALEN 


Δηλοῦσι δ᾽ αἱ καλούμεναι λεῦκαι τὴν διαφορὰν 
ὁμοιώσεώς τε καὶ προσφύσεως, ὥσπερ τὸ γένος 
ἐκεῖνο τῶν ὑδέρων, ὅ τινες ὀνομάξουσιν ἀνὰ 
σάρκα, διορίξει σαφῶς πρόσθεσιν προσφύσεως. 
οὐ γὰρ ἐνδείᾳ δήπου τῆς ἐπιρρεούσης ὑγρότητος, 
ὡς ἔνιαι τῶν ἀτροφιῶν τε καὶ φθίσεων, ἡ τοῦ 
τοιούτου γένεσις ὑδέρου | συντελεῖται. φαίνεται 
γὰρ ἱκανῶς ἦ τε σὰρξ ὑγρὰ καὶ διάβροχος 
ἕκαστόν τε τῶν στερεῶν τοῦ σώματος μορίων 
ὡσαύτως διακείμενον. ἀλλὰ πρόσθεσις μέν τις 
γίγνεται τῆς ἐπιφερομένης τροφῆς, ἅτε δ᾽ ὑδατω- 
δεστέρας οὔσης ἔτι καὶ μὴ πάνυ τι κεχυμωμένης 
μηδὲ τὸ γλί / aie ἐκεῖνο καὶ κολλώδες, ὃ δὴ 
τῆς ἐμφύτου ερμασίας οἰκονομίᾳ προσγίγνεταε, 
κεκτημένης ἡ ἡ πρόσφυσις ἀδύνατός ἐστιν ἐπι- 
τελεῖσθαι πλήθει λεπτῆς ὑγρότητος ἀπέπτου 
διαρρεούσης τε καὶ ῥᾳδίως ὀλισθαινούσης ἀπὸ 
τῶν στερεῶν τοῦ σώματος μορίων τῆς τροφῆς. 
ἐν δὲ ταῖς λεύκαις πρόσφυσις μέν τις γίγνεται 
τῆς τροφῆς, οὐ μὴν ἐξομοίωσίς γε. καὶ δῆλον ἐν 
τῷδε τὸ μικρῷ πρόσθεν ῥηθὲν ὡς ὀρθῶς ἐλέγετο 
τὸ δεῖν πρόσθεσιν μὲν πρῶτον, ἐφεξῆς δὲ πρόσ- 
oe ἔπειτ᾽ ἐξομοίωσιν γενέσθαι τῷ μέλλοντι 
τρέφεσθαι. 

Κυρίως μὲν « οὖν τὸ τρέφον ἤδη τροφή, τὸ δ᾽ οἷον 
μὲν τροφή, οὔπω δὲ τρέφον, ὁποῖόν ἐστι τὸ 
προσφνυόμενον ἢ προστιθέμενον, τροφὴ μὲν οὐ 


; Lit. phthisis. cf. p. 6, note2. Now means tubercwlosis 
only. 

2 More literally, ‘‘chymified.” In anasarca the sub- 
cutaneous tissue is soft, and pits on pressure. Inthe ‘‘ white” 
disease referred to here (by which is probably meant nodular 
leprosy) the same tissues are indurated and ‘‘ brawny.” The 


49 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. x 


The so-called white [leprosy] shows the differ- 
ence between assimilation and adhesion, in the 
same way that the kind of dropsy which some people 
call anasarca clearly distinguishes presentation from 
adhesion. For, of course, the genesis of such a 
dropsy does not come about as do some of the condi- 
tions of atrophy and wasting,' from an insufficient 
supply of moisture; the flesh is obviously moist 
enough,—in fact it is thoroughly saturated,—and 
-each of the solid parts of the body is in a similar 
condition. While, however, the nutriment conveyed 
to the part does undergo presentation, it is still too 
watery, and is not properly transformed into ἃ jusce,? 
nor has it acquired that viscous and agglutinative 
quality which results from the operation of inate 
heat ;* therefore, adhesion cannot come about, since, 
owing to this abundance of thin, crude liquid, the 
pabulum runs off and easily slips away from the solid 
parts of the body. In white [leprosy], again, there 
is adhesion of the nutriment but no real assimilation. 
From this it is clear that what I have just said is 
correct, namely, that in that part which is to be 
nourished there must first occur presentation, next 
adhesion, and finally assimilation proper. 

Strictly speaking, then, nutriment is that which is 
actually nourishing, while the quast-nutriment which is 
not yet nourishing (e.g. matter which is undergoing 
adhesion or presentation) is not, strictly speaking, 
nutriment, but is so called only by an equivocation. 


principle of certain diseases being best explained as cases of 
arrest at various stages of the metabolic path is recognized 
in modern pathology, although of course the instances given 
by Galen are too crude to stand. 

3 The effects of oxidation attributed to the heat which 
accompanies it? οἷ, p. 141, note 1; p. 254, note 1. 


41 





GALEN 


κυρίως, ὁμωνύμως δὲ τροφή" τὸ δ᾽ ἐν ταῖς φλεψὶν 
ἔτι περιεχόμενον || καὶ τούτου μᾶλλον ἔτι τὸ κατὰ 
τὴν γαστέρα τῷ μέλλειν ποτὲ θρέψειν, εἰ καλῶς 

, ’ \ 3 ὰ Ν 
κατεργασθείη, κέκληται τροφή. κατὰ ταὐτὰ δὲ 


καὶ τῶν ἐδεσμάτων ἕκαστον τροφὴν ὀνομάξομεν. 


οὔτε τῷ τρέφειν ἤδη τὸ ξῷον οὔτε τῷ τοιοῦτον 
ὑπάρχειν οἷον τὸ τρέφον, ἀλλὰ τῷ δύνασθαί τε 
καὶ μέλλειν τρέφειν, εἰ καλῶς κατεργασθείη. 

Τοῦτο γὰρ ἦν καὶ τὸ πρὸς [Ἱπποκράτους 
λεγόμενον: “ Τροφὴ δὲ τὸ τρέφον, τροφὴ καὶ τὸ 
οἷον τροφὴ καὶ τὸ μέλλον." τὸ μὲν γὰρ ὁμοιού- 
μενον ἤδη τροφὴν ὠνόμασε, τὸ δ᾽ οἷον μὲν ἐκεῖνο 
προστιθέμενον ἢ προσφυόμενον οἷον τροφήν' τὸ 
δ᾽ ἄλλο πᾶν, ὅσον ἐν τῇ γαστρὶ καὶ ταῖς φλεψὶ 
περιέχεται, μέλλον. 


ΧΙ 


Οτι μὲν οὖν ἀναγκαῖον ὁμοίωσίν τιν᾽ εἶναι τοῦ 
, a / \ ” 
τρέφοντος τῷ τρεφομένῳ τὴν θρέψιν, ἄντικρυς 
n e 
δῆλον. ov μὴν ὑπάρχουσάν ye ταύτην τὴν ὁμοί- 
ΠΣ , , - 2 ει, 
ὡσιν, ἀλλὰ φαινομένην μόνον εἶναί φασιν οἱ μήτε 
τεχνικὴν οἰόμενοι τὴν φύσιν εἶναε μήτε προνοη- 
\ a / 729 et \ > 
τικὴν τοῦ ζῴου μήθ᾽ ὅλως τινὰς οἰκείας ἔχειν 
δυνάμεις, αἷς χρωμένη τὰ μὲν ἀλλοιοῖ, τὰ δ᾽ 
ΝΟΣ) / 
ἕλκει, || τὰ δ᾽ exxpiver. 
Καὶ αὗται δύο γεγόνασιν αἱρέσεις κατὰ γένος 
> 3 a \ 4 A 3 , 
ἐν ἰατρικῇ τε Kal φιλοσοφίᾳ τῶν ἀποφηναμένων 
42 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. χι- χη 


Also, that which is still contained in the veins, and 
still more, that which is in the stomach, from the fact 
that it is destined to nourish if properly elaborated, 
has been called “nutriment.’’ Similarly we call the 
various kinds of food “ nutriment,” not because they 
are already nourishing the animal, nor because they 
exist in the same state as the material which actually 
is nourishing it, but because they are able and 
destined to nourish it if they be properly elaborated. 

This was also what Hippocrates said, viz., “ Nutri- 
ment is what is engaged in nourishing, as also is 
quasi-nutriment, and what is destined to be nutri- 
ment.” For to that which is already being assimi- 
lated he gave the name of natriment; to the similar 
material which is being presented or becoming 
adherent, the name of quast-nutriment ; and to every- 
thing else—that is, contained in the stomach and 
veins—the name of destined nutriment. 


XII 


Ir is quite clear, therefore, that nutrition must 
necessarily be a process of assimilation of that which 
is nourishing to that which is being nourished. 
Some, however, say that this assimilation does not 
occur in reality, but is merely apparent ; these are 
the people who think that Nature is not artistic, that 
she does not show forethought for the animal's 
welfare, and that she has absolutely no native powers 
whereby she alters some substances, attracts others, 
and discharges others. 

Now, speaking generally, there have arisen the 
following two sects in medicine and philosophy 


43 


GALEN 


’ 3 A Ψ 3 > A ’ 
Tt περὶ φύσεως ἀνδρῶν, ὅσοι γ᾽ αὐτῶν γιγνώ- 
σκουσιν, ὅ τι λέγουσι, καὶ τὴν ἀκολουθίαν ὧν 
ὑπέθεντο θεωροῦσι θ᾽ ἅμα καὶ διαφυλάττουσιν. 
΄ \ 3 > \ “ A 2 3 e ἴω 
ὅσοι δὲ μηδ᾽ αὐτὸ τοῦτο συνιᾶσιν, GAN ἁπλῶς, 
ὅ τε ἂν ἐπὶ γλῶτταν ἔλθῃ, ληροῦσιν, ἐν οὐδετέρᾳ 
τῶν αἱρέσεων ἀκριβῶς καταμένοντες, οὐδὲ μεμ- 
νῆσθαι τῶν τοιούτων προσήκει. 

Τίνες οὖν αἱ δύο αἱρέσεις αὗται καὶ τίς ἡ τῶν 
ἐν αὐταῖς ὑποθέσεων ἀκολουθία; τὴν ὑποβεβλη- 
μένην οὐσίαν γενέσει καὶ φθορᾷ πᾶσαν ἡνωμένην 

3 Φ > fe) 4 e V4 
θ᾽ ἅμα καὶ ἀλλοιοῦσθαι δυναμένην ὑπέθετο 
θάτερον γένος τῆς αἱρέσεως, ἀμετάβλητον δὲ καὶ 
ἀναλλοίωτον καὶ κατατετμημένην εἰς λεπτὰ καὶ 
κεναῖς ταῖς μεταξὺ χώραις διειλημμένην ἡ λοιπή. 

Καὶ τοίνυν ὅσοι γε τῆς ἀκολουθίας τῶν ὑπο- 
θέσεων αἰσθάνονται, κατὰ μὲν τὴν δευτέραν 

“Ψ ΝΜ 7 5 A 207 \ ’ 
αἵρεσιν οὔτε φύσεως οὔτε ψυχῆς ἰδίαν τινὰ vopt- 
ἕουσιν οὐσίαν ἢ δύναμιν ὑπάρχειν, || ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῇ 
ποιᾷ συνόδῳ τῶν πρώτων ἐκείνων σωμάτων τῶν 
3 “ 3 a a de Ἁ ’ 
ἀπαθῶν ἀποτελεῖσθαι. κατὰ δὲ τὴν προτέραν 
εἰρημένην αἵρεσιν οὐχ ὑστέρα τῶν σωμάτων ἡ 

UA 3 \ \ / 
φύσις, ἀλλὰ πολὺ προτέρα τε καὶ πρεσβυτέρα. 
καὶ τοίνυν κατὰ μὲν τούτους αὕτη τὰ σώματα 
τῶν τε φυτῶν καὶ τῶν ξῴων συνίστησι δυνάμεις 
τινὰς ἔχουσα τὰς μὲν ἕλκτικάς θ᾽ ἅμα καὶ 

A 3 le) 
ὁμοιωτικὰς τῶν οἰκείων, τὰς δ᾽ ἀποκριτικὰς τῶν 





1 Here follows a contrast between the Vitalists and the 
Epicurean Atomists. cf. p. 153 e¢ seq. 
2 A unity or continuum, an individuum. 


44 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xu 


among those who have made any definite pronounce- 
ment regarding Nature. I speak, of course, of such 
of them as know what they are talking about, and 
who realize the logical sequence of their hypotheses, 
and stand by them ; as for those who cannot under- 
stand even this, but who simply talk any nonsense 
that comes to their tongues, and who do not remain 
definitely attached either to one sect or the other— 
such people are not even worth mentioning. 

What, then, are these sects, and what are the 
logical consequences of their hypotheses?! The one 
class supposes that all substance which is subject to 
genesis and destruction is at once continuous? and 
susceptible of alteration. The other school assumes 
substance to be unchangeable, unalterable, and sub- 
divided into fine particles, which are separated from 
one another by empty spaces. 

All people, therefore, who can appreciate the logical 
sequence of an hypothesis hold that, according to 
the second teaching, there does not exist any sub- 
stance or faculty peculiar either to Nature or to 
Soul,? but that these result from the way in which 
the primary corpuscles, which are unaffected by 
change, come together. According to the first- 
mentioned teaching, on the other hand, Nature is not 
posterior to the corpuscles, but is a long way prior to 
them and older than they; and therefore in their 
view it is Nature which puts together the bodies 
both of plants and animals; and this she does by 
virtue of certain faculties which she possesses—these 
being, on the one hand, attractive and assimilative of 
what is appropriate, and, on the other, expulsive of 


3 Lit. to the physis or the psyche; that is, a denial of the 
autonomy of physiology and psychology. 4 Lit. somata. 


45 





GALEN 


ἀλλοτρίων, Kal τεχνικῶς ἅπαντα διαπλάττει Té 
γεννῶσα καὶ προνοεῖται τῶν γεννωμένων ἑτέραις 
αὖθίς τισι δυνάμεσι, στερκτικῇ μέν tive καὶ 
προνοητικῇ τῶν ἐγγόνων, κοινωνικῇ δὲ καὶ φιλικῇ 
τῶν ὁμογενῶν. κατὰ δ᾽ αὖ τοὺς ἑτέρους. οὔτε 
τούτων οὐδὲν ὑπάρχει ταῖς φύσεσιν οὔτ᾽ ἔννοιά 
τίς ἐστι τῇ ψυχῇ σύμφυτος ἐξ ἀρχῆς οὐκ ἀκο- 
λουθίας οὐ μάχης, οὐ διαιρέσεως οὐ “συνθέσεως, 
οὐ δικαίων οὐκ ἀδίκων, οὐ καλῶν οὐκ αἰσχρῶν, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ αἰσθήσεώς τε καὶ δι᾿ αἰσθήσεως ἅπαντα 
τὰ τοιαῦθ᾽ ἡμῖν ἐγγίγνεσθαί φασι καὶ φαντασίαις 
τισὶ καὶ μνήμαις. οἰακέξεσθαι τὰ ζῷα. 

Ἔνιοι || δ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ ῥητῶς ἀπεφήναντο μηδε- 
μίαν εἶναι τῆς ψυχῆς δύναμιν, ἡ λογιξόμεθα, ἀλλ᾽ 
ὑπὸ τῶν αἰσθητῶν ἄγεσθαι παθῶν ἡμᾶς καθάπερ 
βοσκήματα πρὸς μηδὲν ἀνανεῦσαι μηδ᾽ ἀντειπεῖν 
δυναμένους. καθ᾽ οὗς δηλονότι καὶ ἀνδρεία καὶ 
φρόνησις καὶ σωφροσύνη καὶ ἐγκράτεια λῆρός 
ἐστι μακρὸς καὶ φιλοῦμεν οὔτ᾽ ἀλλήλους οὔτε τὰ 
ἔγγονα καὶ τοῖς θεοῖς οὐδὲν ἡμῶν μέλει. κατα- 
φρονοῦσι δὲ καὶ τῶν ὀνειράτων καὶ τῶν οἰωνῶν 
καὶ τῶν συμβόλων καὶ “πάσης ἀστρολογίας, ὑπὲρ 
ὧν ἡμεῖς μὲν ἰδίᾳ δι’ ἑτέρων γραμμάτων ἐπὶ πλέον 
ἐσκεψάμεθα περὶ τῶν Ασκληπιάδου τοῦ ἰατροῦ 
σκοπούμενοι δογμάτων. ἔνεστι δὲ τοῖς βουλο- 
μένοις κἀκείνοις μὲν ὁμιλῆσαι τοῖς λόγοις καὶ νῦν 
δ᾽ ἤδη σκοπεῖν, ὥσπερ τινῶν δυοῖν ὁδῶν ἡμῖν 
προκειμένων, ὁποτέραν βέλτιόν ἐστι τρέπεσθαι. 
Ἱπποκράτης μὲν “γὰρ τὴν προτέραν ῥηθεῖσαν 
ἐτράπετο, καθ᾽ ἣν ἥνωται μὲν ἡ οὐσία καὶ ἀλλοι- 
ovTat καὶ σύμπνουν ὅλον ἐστὶ καὶ σύρρουν τὸ 


46 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xn 


what is foreign. Further, she skilfully moulds every- 
thing during the stage of genesis; and she also pro- 
vides for the creatures after birth, employing here 
other faculties again, namely, one of affection and 
forethought for offspring, and one of sociability and 
friendship for kindred. According to the other 
school, none of these things exist in the natures! [of 
living things], nor is there in the soul any original 
innate idea, whether of agreement or difference, ot 
separation or synthesis, of justice or injustice, of the 
beautiful or ugly ; all such things, they say, arise in 
us from sensation and through sensation, and animals 
are steered by certain images and memories. 

Some of these people have even expressly declared 
that the soul possesses no reasoning faculty, but that 
we are led like cattle by the impression of our senses, 
and are unable to refuse or dissent from anything. 
In their view, obviously, courage wisdom, temperance, 
and self-control are all mere nonsense, we do not 
love either each other or our offspring, nor do the 
gods care anything for us. .This school also despises 
dreams, birds, omens, and the whole of astrology, 
subjects with which we have dealt at greater length 
in another work,? in which we discuss the views 
of Asclepiades the physician.* Those who wish to 
do so may familiarize themselves with these argu- 
ments, and they may also consider at this point which 
of the two roads lying before us is the better one to 
take. Hippocrates took the first-mentioned. Accord- 
ing to this teaching, substance is one and is subject 
to alteration; there is a consensus in the move- 

‘1 For ‘‘natures” in the plural, involving the idea of a 
separate nature immanent in each individual, cf. p. 36, note 1. 


A lost work. 
3 For Asclepiades v. p. 49, note 5. 


47 


GALEN 


σῶμα καὶ ἡ φύσις ἅπαντα τεχνικῶς καὶ δικαίως 
πράττει δυνάμεις ἔχουσα, καθ᾽ ἃς ἕκαστον τῶν 
’ \ 9s? ες \ Ν 3 a e “ 
μορίων ἕλκει μὲν || ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὸ τὸν οἰκεῖον ἑαυτῷ 
4 , 4 A 3 
χυμόν, ἔλξαν δὲ προσφύει τε παντὶ μέρει τῶν ἐν 
¢ A δ , > a \ \ \ 3 
αὑτῷ καὶ τελέως ἐξομοιοῖ, τὸ δὲ μὴ κρατηθὲν ἐν 
τούτῳ μηδὲ τὴν παντελῆ δυνηθὲν ἀλλοίωσίν τε 
καὶ ὁμοιότητα τοῦ τρεφομένου καταδέξασθαι δι᾽ 
ἑτέρας αὖ τινος ἐκκριτικῆς δυνάμεως ἀποτρίβεται. 


XIII 


Μαθεῖν δ᾽ ἔνεστιν οὐ μόνον ἐξ ὧν οἱ τἀναντία 
τιθέμενοι διαφέρονται τοῖς ἐναργῶς φαινομένοις, 
> @ 9 a ’ 9 , C4 Xe 
εἰς ὅσον ὀρθότητός Te καὶ ἀληθείας ἥκει τὰ Ἵππο- 
[4 I 3 3 > A a) 
κράτους δόγματα, ἀλλὰ κἀξ αὐτῶν τῶν κατὰ 
μέρος ἐν τῇ φυσικῇ θεωρίᾳ ξητουμένων τῶν τ᾽ 
ἄλλων ἁπάντων καὶ τῶν ἐν τοῖς ζῴοις ἐνεργειῶν. 
ὅσοι γὰρ οὐδεμίαν οὐδενὶ μορίῳ νομίζουσιν ὑπάρ- 
yew ἑλκτικὴν τῆς οἰκείας ποιότητος δύναμιν, 
> ’ 4 93 , 4 ων 
ἀναγκάξονται πολλάκις ἐναντία λέγειν τοῖς ἐναρ- 
γῶς φαινομένοις, ὥσπερ καὶ ᾿Ασκληπιάδης ὁ 
ἰατρὸς ἐπὶ τῶν νεφρῶν ἐποίησεν, ods οὐ μόνον 
Ἱπποκράτης ἢ Διοκλῆς ἢ ᾿Ερασίστρατος ἢ 
1 «1.9 corps tout entier a unité de souffle (perspiration et 
expiration) et unité de flux (courants, circulation des liquides)”’ 
(Daremberg). ‘‘Conspirabile et confluxile corpus esse’’ (Lin- 
acre). Apparently Galen refers to the pneuma and the various 


humours. cf. p. 293, note 2. 
2 4.e. ‘‘ appropriated”; very nearly ‘‘ assimilated.” 


48 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. χιι.- χα 


ments of air and fluid throughout the whole body ;! 
Nature acts throughout in an artistic and equitable 
manner, having certain faculties, by virtue of which 
each part of the body draws to itself the juice which 
is proper to it, and, having done so, attaches it to 
every portion of itself, and completely assimilates it ; 
while such part of the juice as has not been mastered,? 
and is not capable of undergoing complete alteration 
and being assimilated to the part which is being 
nourished, is got rid of by yet another (an expulsive) 
faculty. 


XIII 


Now the extent of exactitude and truth in the 
doctrines of Hippocrates may be gauged, not 
merely from the way in which his opponents are 
at variance with obvious facts, but also from the 
various subjects of natural research themselves—the 
functions of animals, and the rest. For those people 
who do not believe that there exists in any part of 
the animal a faculty for attracting ws onn special 
quality® are compelled repeatedly to deny obvious 
facts. For instance, Asclepiades, the physician,® 
did this in the case of the kidneys. That these are 
organs for secreting (separating out| the urine, was 
the belief not only of Hippocrates, Diocles, 


8 <¢ Attractricem convenientis qualitatis vim” (Linacre). 
cf. p. 36, note 2. 4 Lit. ‘‘obvious phenomena.” 

5 Asclepiades of Bithynia, who flourished in the first half 
of the first century B.c., was an adherent of the atomistic 
philosophy of Democritus, and is the typical representative 
of the Mechanistic school in Graeco-Roman medicine; he 
disbelieved in any principle of individuality (‘‘nature’’) in the 
organism, and his methods of treatment, in accordance with 
his pathology, were mechano-therapeutical. cf. p. 64, note 3. 


49 
E 


31 


32 


GALEN 


Πραξαγόρας ἤ ἤ τις ἄλλος ἰατρὸς ἄριστος ὄργανα 
διακριτικὰ τῶν οὔρων πεπιστεύκασιν ὑπάρχειν, 
ἀλλὰ καὶ οἱ || μάγειροι σχεδὸν ἅπαντες ἴσασιν, 
ὁσημέραι θεώμενοι τήν τε θέσιν αὐτῶν καὶ τὸν 
ἀφ᾽ ἑκατέρου πόρον εἰς τὴν κύστιν ἐμβάλλοντα, 
τὸν οὐρητῆρα καλούμενον, ἐξ αὐτῆς τῆς κατα- 
σκευῆς ἀναλογιζόμενοι τήν τε χρείαν αὐτῶν καὶ 
τὴν δύναμιν. καὶ πρό γε τῶν μαγείρων ἅπαντες 
ἄνθρωποι καὶ δυσουροῦντες πολλάκις καὶ παντά- 
πασιν ἰσχουροῦντες, ὅταν ἀλγῶσι μὲν τὰ κατὰ 
τὰς ψόας, ψαμμώδη δ ἐξουρῶσιν, νεφριτικοὺς 
ὀνομάζουσι σφᾶς αὐτούς. 

᾿Ασκληπιάδην δ᾽ οἶμαι μηδὲ λίθον οὐρηθέντα 
ποτὲ θεάσασθαι πρὸς τῶν οὕτω πασχόντων μηδ᾽ 
ὡς προηγήσατο κατὰ τὴν μεταξὺ τῶν νεφρῶν 
καὶ τῆς κύστεως χώραν ὀδύνη τις ὀξεῖα διερχο- 
μένου τοῦ λίθου τὸν οὐρητῆρα μηδ᾽ ὡς οὐρηθέντος 
αὐτοῦ τά τε τῆς ὀδύνης καὶ τὰ τῆς ἰσχουρίας 
ἐπαύσατο παραχρῆμα. TOS οὖν εἰς τὴν κύστιν 
τῷ λόγῳ παράγει τὸ οὗρον, ἄξιον ἀκοῦσαι καὶ 
αυμάσαι “τἀνδρὸς τὴν σοφίαν, ὅς καταλιπὼν 
οὕτως εὐρείας ὁδοὺς ἐναργῶς φαινομένας ἀφανεῖς 
καὶ στενὰς καὶ παντάπασιν ἀναισθήτους | ὑπέ- 
θετο. βούλεται γὰρ εἰς ἀτμοὺς ἀναλυόμενον τὸ 
πινόμενον ὑγρὸν εἰς τὴν κύστιν διαδίδοσθαι 
κἄπειτ᾽ ἐξ ἐκείνων αὖθις ἀλλήλοις συνιόντων 
οὕτως ἀπολαμβάνειν αὐτὸ τὴν ἀρχαίαν ἰδέαν καὶ 
γίγνεσθαι πάλιν ὑγρὸν ἐξ a ἀτμῶν ἀτεχνῶς ὡς περὶ 
σπογγιᾶς τίνος ἢ ἐρίου τῆς κύστεως ιανοού- 
μενος, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ σώματος ἀκριβῶς πυκνοῦ καὶ 
στεγανοῦ δύο χιτῶνας ἰσχυροτάτους κεκτημένου, 


δο 





ΟΝ THE NATURAL FACULTIES, 1. xin 


Erasistratus, Praxagoras,! and all other physicians 
of eminence, but practically every butcher is aware 
of this, from the fact that he daily observes both the 
position of the kidneys and the duct (termed the 
ureter) which runs from each kidney into the bladder, 
and from this arrangement he infers their character- 
istic use and faculty. But, even leaving the butchers 
aside, all people who suffer either from frequent 
dysuria or from retention of urine call themselves 
“ nephritics,’? when they feel pain in the loins and 
pass sandy matter in their water. 

I do not suppose that Asclepiades ever saw a stone 
which had been passed by one of these sufferers, or 
observed that this was preceded by a sharp pain 
in the region between kidneys and bladder as the 
stone traversed the ureter, or that, when the stone 
was passed, both the pain and the retention at once 
ceased. It is worth while, then, learning how his 
theory accounts for the presence of urine in the 
bladder, and one is forced to marvel at the ingenuity 
of a man who puts aside these broad, clearly visible 
routes,’ and postulates others which are narrow, in- 
visible—indeed, entirely imperceptible. His view, 
in fact, is that the fluid which we drink passes into 
the bladder by being resolved into vapours, and that, 
when these have been again condensed, it thus 
regains its previous form, and turns from vapour into 
fluid. He simply looks upon the bladder as a sponge 
or a piece of wool, and not as the perfectly com- 
pact and impervious body that it is, with two very 

1 Diocles of Carystus was the chief representative of the 
Dogmatic or Hippocratic school in the first half of the fourth 
century B.c. Praxagoras was his disciple, and followed him in 


the leadership of the school. For Erasistratus, cf. p. 95 et seg. 
2 Sufferers from kidney-trouble. ὃ The ureters. 


SI 


E 2 


39 


GALEN 


δι’ ὧν εἴπερ διέρχεσθαι φήσομεν τοὺς ἀτμούς, τί 
δήποτ᾽ οὐχὶ διὰ τοῦ περιτοναίου καὶ τῶν φρενῶν 
διελθόντες ἐνέπλησαν ὕδατος τό τ᾽ , ἐπιγάστριον 
ἅπαν καὶ τὸν θώρακα; ἀλλὰ παχύτερος, φησίν, 
ἐστὶ δηλαδὴ καὶ TTEYAVOTEPOS ὁ περιτόναιος 
χιτὼν τῆς κύστεως kal διὰ τοῦτ᾽ ἐκεῖνος μὲν 
ἀποστέγει τοὺς ἀτμούς, ἡ δὲ κύστις παραδέ εταῖι. 
ἀλλ᾽ εἴπερ ἀνατετμήκει ποτέ, τάχ᾽ ἂν ἠπίστατο 
τὸν μὲν ἔξωθεν χιτῶνα τῆς κύστεως ἀπὸ τοῦ 
περιτοναίου πεφυκότα τὴν αὐτὴν ἐκείνῳ φύσιν 
ἔχειν, τὸν δ᾽ ἔνδοθεν τὸν αὐτῆς τῆς κύστεως ἴδιον 
πλέον ἢ διπλάσιον ἐ ἐκείνου τὸ πάχος ὑπάρχειν. 
᾿Αλλ᾽ ἴσως οὔτε πὸ i πάχος οὔθ᾽ ἡ λεπτότης 
τῶν χιτώνων, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ θέσις τῆς κύστεως αἰτία τοῦ 
φὲ εσθαι τοὺς ἀτμοὺς εἰς αὐτήν. καὶ μὴν εἰ καὶ 

Φ τἄλλα πάντα πιθανὸν ἦν αὐτοὺς ἐνταυθοῖ 
συναθροίξεσθαι, τό γε τῆς θέσεως μόνης αὔταρκες 
κωλῦσαι. κάτω μὲν γὰρ ἡ κύστις κεῖται, τοῖς δ᾽ 
ἀτμοῖς σύμφυτος ἡ πρὸς τὸ μετέωρον φορά, ὥστε 
πολὺ πρότερον ἂν ἔπλησαν ἅπαντα τὰ κατὰ τὸν 
θώρακά τε καὶ τὸν πνεύμονα, πρὶν ἐπὶ τὴν κύστιν 
ἀφικέσθαι. 

Καίτοι τί θέσεως κύστεως καὶ περιτοναίου καὶ 
θώρακος μνημονεύω; διεκπεσόντες γὰρ “δήπου 
τούς τε τῆς κοιλίας καὶ τῶν ἐντέρων χιτῶνας οἱ 
ἀτμοὶ κατὰ τὴν μεταξὺ χώραν αὐτῶν τε τούτων 
καὶ τοῦ περιτοναίου συναθροισθήσονται καὶ ὑ ὑγρὸν 
ἐνταυθοῖ γενήσονται, ὥσπερ καὶ τοῖς ὑδερικοῖς ἐ ἐν 
τούτῳ τῷ χωρίῳ τὸ πλεῖστον ἀθροίζεται τοῦ 





1 Unless otherwise stated, ‘‘ peritoneum” stands for pari- 
etal peritoneum alone. 


52 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xin 


strong coats. For if we say that the vapours pass 
through these coats, why should they not pass through 
the peritoneum! and the diaphragm, thus filling 
the whole abdominal cavity and thorax with water? 
“ But,” says he, “of course the peritoneal coat is 
more impervious than the bladder, and this is why 
it keeps out the vapours, while the bladder admits 
them.”” Yet if he had ever practised anatomy, he 
might have known that the outer coat of the bladder 
springs from the peritoneum and is essentially the 
same as it, and that the inner coat, which is peculiar 
to the bladder, is more than twice as thick as the 
former. 

Perhaps, however, it is not the thickness or thin- 
ness of the coats, but the sttuation of the bladder, 
which is the reason for the vapours being carried 
into it? On the contrary, even if it were probable 
for every other reason that the vapours accumulate 
there, yet the situation of the bladder would be 
enough in itself to prevent this. For the bladder is 
situated below, whereas vapours have a natural 
tendency to rise upwards; thus they would fill all 
the region of the thorax and lungs long before they 
came to the bladder. 

But why do I mention the situation of the bladder, 
peritoneum, and thorax? For surely, when the vapours 
have passed through the coats of the stomach and 
intestines, it is in the space between these and 
the peritoneum ? that they will collect and become 
liquefied (just as in dropsical subjects it is in this 
region that most of the water gathers). Otherwise 
the vapours must necessarily pass straight forward 


2 In the peritoneal cavity. 
8 Contrast, however, anasarca, p. 41]. 


53 


35 


GALEN 


ὕδατος, ἢ πάντως αὐτοὺς χρὴ φέρεσθαι πρόσω 
διὰ πάντων τῶν ὁπωσοῦν ὁμιίλούντων καὶ μηδέ- 
ποθ᾽ ἵστασθαι. ἀλλ᾽. εἰ καὶ τοῦτό τις ὑπόθοιτο, 
διεκπεσόντες ἂν οὕτως οὐ τὸ περιτόναιον μόνον 
ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ ἐπιγάστριον, εἰς τὸ περιέχον σκε- 
δασθεῖεν ἢ πάντως ἂν ὑπὸ τῷ δέρματι || συν- 
αθροισθεῖεν. 

᾿Αλλὰ καὶ πρὸς ταῦτ᾽ ἀντιλέγειν οἱ νῦν 
᾿Ασκληπιάδειοι πειρῶνται, καΐτοι πρὸς ἁπάντων 
ἀεὶ τῶν παρατυγχανόντων αὐτοῖς, ὅταν περὶ 
τούτων ἐρίξωσι, καταγελώμενοι. οὕτως ἄρα 
δυσαπότριπτόν τι κακόν ἐστιν ἡ περὶ τὰς αἱρέσεις 
φιλοτιμία καὶ δυσέκνιπτον ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα καὶ 
ψώρας ἁπάσης δυσιατότερον. 

Τῶν γοῦν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς τις σοφιστῶν τά τ᾽ ἄλλα 
καὶ περὶ τοὺς ἐριστικοὺς λόγους ἱκανῶς συγκε- 
κροτημένος καὶ δεινὸς εἰπεῖν, εἴπερ τις ἄλλος, 
ἀφικόμενος ἐμοί ποθ’ ὑπὲρ τούτων εἰς "λόγους, 
τοσοῦτον ἀπέδει τοῦ δυσωπεῖσθαι πρός τίνος 
τῶν εἰρημένων, ὥστε καὶ θαυμάζειν ἔφασκεν 
ἐμοῦ τὰ σαφῶς φαινόμενα λόγοις ληρώδεσιν 
ἀνατρέπειν ἐπιχειροῦντος. ἐναργῶς γὰρ ὁ ὁσημέραι 
θεωρεῖσθαι τὰς κύστεις ἁπάσας, εἴ τις αὐτὰς 
ἐμπλήσειεν ὕδατος ἢ ἀέρος, εἶτα δήσας τὸν 
τράχηλον πιέξοι πανταχόθεν, οὐδαμόθεν μεθιεί- 
σας οὐδέν, ἀλλ’ ἀκριβῶς ἅπαν ἐντὸς ἑαυτῶν 
στεγούσας. καίτοι γ᾽ εἴπερ ἦσάν τινες ἐκ τῶν 
νεφρῶν εἰς αὐτὰς ἥκοντες αἰσθητοὶ καὶ μεγάλοι 
πόροι, πάντως ἄν, ἔφη, δι ἐκείνων, ὥσπερ εἰσῇει 
τὸ || ὑγρὸν εἰς αὐτάς, οὕτω καὶ θλιβόντων 
ἐξεκρίνετο. ταῦτα καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτ᾽ εἰπὼν ἐξαίφνης 


54 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xu 


through everything which in any way comes in con- 
tact with them, and will never come to a standstill. 
But, if this be assumed, then they will traverse not 
merely the peritoneum but also the epigastrium, and 
will become dispersed into the: surrounding air ; 
otherwise they will certainly collect under the skin. 

Even these considerations, however, our present- 
day Asclepiadeans attempt to answer, despite the 
fact that they always get soundly laughed at by all 
who happen to be present at their disputations on 
these subjects—so difficult an evil to get rid of is 
this sectarian partizanship, so excessively resistant 
to all cleansing processes, harder to heal than any 
itch ! 

Thus, one of our Sophists who is a thoroughly 
hardened disputer and as skilful a master of language 
as there ever was, once got into a discussion with me 
on this subject; so far from being put out of 
countenance by any of the above-mentioned con- 
siderations, he even expressed his surprise that I 
should try to overturn obvious facts by ridiculous 
arguments! “For,” said he, “one may clearly 
observe any day in the case of any bladder, that, if 
one fills it with water or air and then ties up its neck 
and squeezes it all round, it does not let anything out 
at any point, but accurately retains all its contents. 
And surely,” said he, “if there were any large and 
perceptible channels coming into it from the kidneys 
the liquid would run out through these when the 
bladder was squeezed, in the same way that it 
entered?” !°. Having abruptly made these and 

1 Regurgitation, however, is prevented by the fact that 
the ureter runs for nearly one inch obliquely through the 


bladder wall before opening into its cavity, and thus an 
efficient valve is produced. 
99 





GALEN 


ἀπταίστῳ καὶ σαφεῖ τῷ στόματι τελευτῶν 
ἀναπηδήσας amr jet καταλιπὼν ἡμᾶς ὡς οὐδὲ 
πιθανῆς τινος ἀντιλογίας εὐπορῆσαι δυναμένους. 
Οὕτως οὐ μόνον ὑγιὲς οὐδὲν ἴσασιν οἱ ταῖς 
αἱρέσεσι δουλεύοντες, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ μαθεῖν ὑπο- 
μένουσι. δέον γὰρ ἀκοῦσαι τὴν αἰτίαν, δι᾽ ἣν 
εἰσιέναι μὲν δύναται διὰ τῶν οὐρητήρων εἰς τὴν 
κύστιν τὸ ὑγρόν, ἐξιέναι δ᾽ αὖθις ὀπίσω τὴν 
αὐτὴν ὁδὸν οὐκέθ᾽ οἷόν τε, καὶ θαυμάσαι τὴν 
τέχνην τῆς φύσεως, οὔτε μαθεῖν ἐθέλουσι καὶ 
λοιδοροῦνται προσέτι μάτην ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς ἄλλα τε 
πολλὰ καὶ τοὺς ν apne γεγονέναι φάσκοντες. 
εἰσὶ δ᾽ ot καὶ dey ῆναι, παρόντων αὐτῶν τοὺς 
ἀπὸ τῶν νεφρῶν εἰς τὴν κύστιν ἐμφυομένους 
οὐρητῆρας ὑπομείναντες ἐτόλμησαν εἰπεῖν οἱ μέν, 
ὅτι μάτην καὶ οὗτοι “γεγόνασιν, οἱ δ᾽, ὅτι σπερ- 
ματικοί τινές εἰσι πόροι καὶ διὰ τοῦτο κατὰ τὸν 
τράχηλον αὐτῆς, οὐκ εἰς τὸ κῦτος ἐμφύονται. 
δείξαντες οὖν ἡμεῖς αὐτοῖς τοὺς ὡς ἀληθῶς 
σπερματικοὺς πόρους κατωτέρω τῶν οὐρητήρων | 
ἐμβάλλοντας εἰς τὸν τράχηλον, νῦν γοῦν, εἰ καὶ 
μὴ πρότερον, φήθημεν ἀπάξειν τε τῶν ψευδῶς 
ὑπειλημμένων ἐπί τε τἀναντία μεταστήσειν 
αὐτίκα. οἱ δὲ καὶ πρὸς τοῦτ᾽ ἀντιλέγειν ἐτόλμων 
οὐδὲν εἶναι θαυμαστὸν εἰπόντες, ἐν ἐκείνοις “μὲν 
ὡς ἂν ,“στεγανωτέροις οὖσιν ἐπὶ πλέον ὑπομένειν 
τὸ σπέρμα, κατὰ δὲ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν νεφρῶν ὡς ἂν 
ἱκανῶς ἀνευρυσμένους ἐκρεῖν διὰ ταχέων. ἡμεῖς 


? On the τέχνη (artistic or creative skill) shown by the 
ὙΠΕΡ. organism (φύσις) v. pp. 25, 45, 47; Introduction, Ρ. xxix. 
irect denial of Aristotle’s dictum that ‘‘ Nature does 
nothing in vain.” We are reminded of the view of certain 


56 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xin 


similar remarks in precise and clear tones, he con- 
cluded by jumping up and departing—leaving me 
as though I were quite incapable of finding any 
plausible answer ! 

The fact is that those who are enslaved to their 
sects are not merely devoid of all sound know- 
ledge, but they will not even stop to learn! In- 
stead of listening, as they ought, to the reason 
why liquid can enter the bladder through the 
ureters, but is unable to go back again the same way, 
—instead of admiring Nature’s artistic skill !—they 
refuse to learn ; they even go so far as to scoff, and 
maintain that the kidneys, as well as many other 
things, have been made by Nature for no purpose ! 3 
And some of them who had allowed themselves to 
be shown the ureters coming from the kidneys and 
becoming implanted in the bladder, even had the 
audacity to say that these also existed for no purpose ; 
and others said that they were spermatic ducts, and 
that this was why they were inserted into the neck 
of the bladder and not into its cavity. When, there- 
fore, we had demonstrated to them the real sper- 
matic ducts? entering the neck of the bladder lower 
down than the ureters, we supposed that, if we had 
not done so before, we would now at least draw 
them away from their false assumptions, and convert 
them forthwith to the opposite view. But even this 
they presumed to dispute, and said that it was not to 
be wondered at that the semen should remain longer 
in these latter ducts, these being more constricted, 
and that it should flow quickly down the ducts 
which came from the kidneys, seeing that these were 
modern laboratory physicians and surgeons that the colon is 
a ‘‘useless” organ. c/. Erasistratus, p. 143. 


® The vasa deferentia. 57 


37 


GALEN 


οὖν ἠναγκάσθημεν αὐτοῖς τοῦ λοιποῦ δεικνύειν 
εἰσρέον τῇ κύστει διὰ τῶν οὐρητήρων τὸ οὖρον 
ἐναργῶς ἐπὶ ξῶντος ἔ ἔτι τοῦ ζῴου, μόγις ἂν οὕτω 
ποτὲ τὴν φλυαρίαν αὐτῶν ἐπισχήσειν ἐλπίζοντες. 

O δὲ τρόπος τῆς δείξεώς ἐ ἐστι τοιόσδε. διελεῖν 
χρὴ τὸ πρὸ τῶν οὐρητήρων περιτόναιον, εἶτα 
βρόχοις αὐτοὺς ἐκλαβεῖν κἄπειτ᾽ ἐπιδήσαντας 
ἐᾶσαι τὸ ζῷον" οὐ γὰρ ἂν οὐρήσειεν ἔτι. μετὰ 
δὲ ταῦτα λύειν μὲν τοὺς ἔξωθεν δεσμούς, δεικνύναι 
δὲ κενὴν μὲν τὴν κύστιν, μεστοὺς δ᾽ ἱκανῶς καὶ 
διατεταμένους τοὺς ᾿οὐρητῆρας καὶ κινδυνεύοντας 
ῥαγῆναι κἄπειτα τοὺς βρόχους αὐτῶν ἀφελόντας 
ἐναργῶς ὁρᾶν ἤδη πληρουμένην οὔρου τὴν 
κύστιν. 

Ἔπὶ δὲ τούτῳ φανέντι, πρὶν οὐρῆσαι τὸ 
ζῷον, βρόχον αὐτοῦ περιβαλεῖν χρὴ τῷ αἰδοίῳ 
κἄπειτα θλίβειν πανταχόθεν τὴν κύστιν. οὐδὲ 
γὰρ ἂν οὐδὲν ἔ ἔτι διὰ τῶν οὐρητήρων ἐπανέλθοι 
πρὸς τοὺς ved ovs. κἀν τούτῳ δῆλον γίγνεται 
τὸ μὴ μόνον ἐπὶ τεθνεῷτος ἀλλὰ καὶ περιόντος ἔτι 
τοῦ ζῴου κωλύεσθαι μεταλαμβάνειν αὖθις ἐ ἐκ τῆς 
κύστεως τοὺς οὐρητῆρας τὸ οὖρον. ἐπὶ τούτοις 
ὀφθεῖσιν ἐπιτρέπειν ἤδη τὸ ζῷον οὐρεῖν λύοντας 
αὐτοῦ τὸν ἐπὶ τῷ αἰδοίῳ βρόχον, εἶτ᾽ αὖθις 
ἐπιβαλεῖν μὲν θατέρῳ τῶν οὐρητήρων, ἐᾶσαι δὲ 
τὸν ἕτερον εἰς τὴν κύστιν συρρεῖν καί τινα διαλι- 
πόντας όνον ἐπιδεικνύειν ἤδη, πῶς ὁ μὲν ἕτερος 
αὐτῶν ὃ εδεμένος μεστὸς καὶ διατεταμένος. κατ 
τὰ πρὸς τῶν νεφρῶν μέρη φαίνεται, ὁ δ᾽ ἕτερος 
ὁ λελυμένος αὐτὸς μὲν χαλαρός ἐστι, πεπλήρωκε 
δ᾽ οὔρου τὴν κύστιν. fr αὖθις διατεμεῖν πρῶτον 
μὲν τὸν πλήρη καὶ δεῖξαι, πῶς ἐξακοντίξεται τὸ 


58 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. x 


well dilated. We were, therefore, further compelled 
to show them in a still living animal, the urine 
plainly running out through the ureters into the 
bladder ; even thus we hardly hoped to check their 
nonsensical talk. 

Now the method of demonstration is as follows. 
One has to divide the peritoneum in front of the 
ureters, then secure these with ligatures, and next, 
having bandaged up the animal, let him go (for he 
will not continue to urinate). After this one loosens 
the external bandages and shows the bladder empty 
and the ureters quite full and distended—in fact 
almost on the point of rupturing ; on removing the 
ligature from them, one then plainly sees the bladder 
becoming filled with urine. 

When this has been made quite clear, then, before 
the animal urinates, one has to tie a ligature round 
his penis and then to squeeze the bladder all over; still 
nothing goes back through the ureters to the kidneys. 
Here, then, it becomes obvious that not only in a 
dead animal, but in one which is still living, the 
ureters are prevented from receiving back the urine 
from the bladder. These observations having been 
made, one now loosens the ligature from the animal’s 
penis and allows him to urinate, then again ligatures 
one of the ureters and leaves the other to discharge 
into the bladder. Allowing, then, some time to elapse, 
one now demonstrates that the ureter which was 
ligatured is obviously full and distended on the side 
next to the kidneys, while the other one-——that from 
which the ligature had been taken—is itself flaccid, 
but has filled the bladder with urine. Then, again, 
one must divide the full ureter, and demonstrate how 


59 


GALEN 


οὖρον ἐξ αὐτοῦ, καθάπερ ἐν ταῖς φλεβοτομίαις 
τὸ αἷμα, μετὰ ταῦτα δὲ καὶ τὸν ἕτερον αὖθις 
διατεμεῖν κἄπειτ᾽ ἐπιδῆσαι τὸ ξῷον ἔξωθεν, ἀμ- 
aes διῃρημένων, | εἶθ᾽ ὅταν ἱκανῶς ἔχειν 
οκῇ, λῦσαι τὸν δεσμόν. εὑρεθήσεται γὰρ ἡ μὲν 
κύστις κενή, πλῆρες δ᾽ οὔρου τὸ μεταξὺ τῶν 
ἐντέ ὧν Te καὶ τοῦ περιτοναίου χωρίον ἅπαν, 
ὡς v εἰ καὶ ὑδερικὸν ἣν τὸ ζῷον. ταῦτ᾽ οὖν εἴ 
τις αὐτὸς καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν βουληθείη βασανίζειν ἐπὶ 
ζῴου, μεγάλως μοι δοκεῖ καταγνώσεσθαι τῆς 
᾿Ασκληπιάδου προπετείας. εἰ δὲ δὴ καὶ τὴν 
αἰτίαν μάθοι, δι᾿ ἣν οὐδὲν ἐκ τῆς κύστεως εἰς 
τοὺς οὐρητῆρας ἀντεκρεῖ, πεισθῆναι ἄ ἄν μοι δοκεῖ 
καὶ διὰ τοῦδε τὴν εἰς τὰ Cha πρόνοιάν τε καὶ 
τέχνην τῆς φύσεως. 

“Ἱπποκράτης “μὲν οὖν ὧν ἴσμεν ἰατρῶν τε καὶ 
φιλοσόφων “πρῶτος ἁπάντων, ὡς ἂν καὶ πρῶτος 
ἐπιγνοὺς τὰ τῆς φύσεως ἔργα, θαυμάξει τε καὶ 
διὰ παντὸς αὐτὴν ὑμνεῖ δικαίαν ὀνομάζων καὶ 
μόνην ἐξαρκεῖν εἰς ἅπαντα τοῖς ζῴοις “φησίν, 
αὐτὴν ἐξ αὑτῆς ἀδιδάκτως πράττουσαν ἅπαντα 
τὰ δέοντα' τοιαύτην δ᾽ οὖσαν αὐτὴν εὐθέως 
καὶ δυνάμεις ὑπέλαβεν ἔχειν. ἑλκτικὴν μὲν τῶν 
οἰκείων, ἀποκριτικὴν δὲ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων καὶ 
τρέφειν τε καὶ αὔξειν αὐϊτὴν τὰ Cpa καὶ κρίνειν 
τὰ “νοσήματα; καὶ διὰ τοῦτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς σώμασιν 
ἡμῶν σύμπνοιάν τε μίαν εἶναί φησι καὶ σύρροιαν 
καὶ πάντα συμπαθέα. κατὰ δὲ τὸν ᾿Ασκληπιάδην 





1 “Ὡς Phabileté et de la prévoyance de la nature 4 V’égard 
des animaux” (Daremberg). cf. p. 56, note 1. 
2 of. p. 36, note 2. 


60 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xm 


the urine spurts out of it, like blood in the operation 
of venesection ; and after this one cuts through the 
other also, and both being thus divided, one bandages 
up the animal externally. Then when enough time 
seems to have elapsed, one takes off the bandages ; 
the bladder will now be found empty, and the 
whole region between the intestines and _ the 
peritoneum full of urine, as if the anima] were 
suffering from dropsy. Now, if anyone will but test 
this for himself on an animal, I think he will strongly 
condemn the rashness of Asclepiades, and if he also 
learns the reason why nothing regurgitates from the 
bladder into the ureters, I think he will be persuaded 
by this also of the forethought and art shown by 
Nature in relation to animals.! 

Now Hippocrates, who was the first known to 
us of all those who have been both physicians and 
philosophers inasmuch as he was the first to re- 
cognize what Nature effects, expresses his admira- 
tion of her, and is constantly singing her praises 
and calling her “just.” Alone, he says, she suffices 
for the animal in every respect, performing of 
her own accord and without any teaching all that is 
required. Being such, she has, as he supposes, cer- 
tain faculties, one attractive of what is appropriate,” 
and another eliminative of what is foreign, and she 
nourishes the animal, makes it grow, and expels its 
diseases by crisis.2 Therefore he says that there 
is in our bodies a concordance in the movements 
of air and fluid, and that everything is in sympathy. 
According to Asclepiades, however, nothing is 


3 The morbid material passed successively through the 
stages of ‘‘crudity,” ‘‘ coction ” (pepsis), and ‘‘ elimination” 
(crisis). For ‘‘ critical days” cf. p. 74, note 1. 


61 


GALEN 


οὐδὲν οὐδενὶ συμπαθές ἐστι φύσει, διῃρημένης τε 
καὶ κατατεθραυσμένης εἰς ἄναρμα στοιχεῖα καὶ 
ληρώδεις ὄγκους ἁπάσης τῆς οὐσίας. ἐξ ἀνάγκης 
οὖν ἄλλα TE μυρία τοῖς ἐναργῶς φαινομένοις 
ἐναντίως ἀπεφήνατο καὶ τῆς φύσεως ἠγνόησε 
τήν τε τῶν οἰκείων ἐπισπαστικὴν δύναμιν καὶ 
τὴν τῶν ἀλλοτρίων ἀποκριτικήν. ἐπὶ μὲν οὖν 
τῆς ἐξαιματώσεώς τε καὶ ἀναδόσεως ἐξεῦρέ Twa 
ψυχρὰν ἀδολεσχίαν' εἰς δὲ THY τῶν περιττωμάτων 
κάθαρσιν οὐδὲν ὅλως εὑρὼν εἰπεῖν οὐκ ὥκνησεν 
ὁμόσε χωρῆσαι τοῖς φαινομένοις, ἐπὶ μὲν τῆς 
τῶν οὔρων διακρίσεως ἀποστερήσας μὲν τῶν τε 
νεφρῶν καὶ τῶν οὐρητήρων τὴν ἐνέργειαν, ἀδήλους 
δέ τινας πόρους εἰς τὴν κύστιν ὑποθέμενος" τοῦτο 
γὰρ ἦν δηλαδὴ μέγα καὶ σεμνὸν ἀπιστήσαντα 
τοῖς φαινομένοις πιστεῦσαι τοῖς ἀδήλοις. 

‘Ent || δὲ τῆς ξανθῆς χολῆς ἔτει μεῖζον αὐτῷ 
καὶ νεανικώτερόν ἐστι τὸ τόλμημα: γεννᾶσθαι 
γὰρ αὐτὴν ἐν τοῖς χοληδόχοις ἀγγείοις, οὐ δια- 
κρίνεσθαι λέγει. 

Πῶς οὖν τοῖς ἰκτερικοῖς ἅμ᾽ ἄμφω συμπίπτει, 
τὰ μὲν διαχωρήματα μηδὲν ὅλως ἐν αὑτοῖς 
ἔχοντα χολῆς, ἀνάπλεων αὐτοῖς γιγμόμενον 
ὅλον τὸ σῶμα; ληρεῖν πάλιν ἐνταῦθ᾽ ἀναγκάξεται 
τοῖς ἐπὶ τῶν οὔρων εἰρημένοις παραπλησίως. 

εἴ δ᾽ οὐδὲν ἧττον καὶ περὶ τῆς μελαίνης χολῆς 
δ τοῦ σπληνὸς οὔτε τί ποθ᾽ ὑφ᾽ Ἱπποκράτους 
εἴρηται συνιεὶς ἀντιλέγειν τ᾽ ἐπιχειρῶν οἷς οὐκ 
οἷδεν ἐμπλήκτῳ τινὶ καὶ μανικῷ στόματι. 


1 This was the process by which nutriment was taken u 
from the alimentary canal; ‘‘absorption,” ‘‘ dispersal ; ” of. 


62 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xin 


naturally in sympathy with anything else, all 
substance being divided and broken up into in- 
harmonious elements and absurd “ molecules.” 
Necessarily, then, besides making countless other 
statements in opposition to plain fact, he was ignorant 
of Nature’s faculties, both that attracting what is 
appropriate, and that expelling what is foreign. Thus 
he invented some wretched nonsense to explain 
blood-production and anadosis,! and, being utterly 
unable to find anything to say regarding the 
clearing-out? of superfluities, he did not hesitate 
to join issue with obvious facts, and, in this matter of 
urinary secretion, to deprive both the kidneys and 
the ureters of their activity, by assuming that there 
were certain invisible channels opening into the 
bladder. It was, of course, a grand and impressive 
thing to do, to mistrust the obvious, and to pin one’s 
faith in things which could not be seen ! 

Also, in the matter of the yellow bile, he makes 
an even grander and more spirited venture; for he 
says this is actually generated in the bile-ducts, not 
merely separated out. 

How comes it, then, that in cases of jaundice two 
things happen at the same time—that the dejections 
contain absolutely no bile, and that the whole body 
becomes full of it? He is forced here again to talk 
nonsense, just as he did in regard to the urine. He 
also talks no less nonsense about the black bile and 
the spleen, not understanding what was said by 
Hippocrates; and he attempts in stupid—I might 
say insane—language, to contradict what he knows 
nothing about. 

p. 13, note 5. The subject is dealt with more fully in 
chap. xvi. 


2 Lit. catharsis. 6 
3 


4] 


GALEN 


Ti δὴ τὸ κέρδος ἐκ τῶν τοιούτων δογμάτων͵ εἰς 
τὰς θεραπείας ἐκτήσατο; μήτε ve ριτικόν τι 
νόσημα δύνασθαι θεραπεῦσαι μήτ ἰκτερικὸν 
μήτε μελαγχολικόν, ἀλλὰ καὶ περὶ τοῦ πᾶσιν 
ἀνθρώποις οὐχ Ἱπποκράτει μόνον ὁμολογουμένου 
τοῦ καθαίρειν τῶν φαρμάκων ἔ ἔνια μὲν τὴν ξανθὴν 
χολήν, ἔνια δὲ τὴν μέλαιναν, ἄλλα δέ τινα φλέγμα 
καί τινα τὸ λεπτὸν καὶ ὑδατῶδες περίττωμα, 
μηδὲ περὶ τούτων συγχωρεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν 
τῶν φαρμάκων γίγνεσθαι λέγειν τοιοῦτον ἕκαστον 
τῶν κενουμένων, ὥσπερ ὑπὸ τῶν χοληϊδόχων 
πόρων τὴν χολήν" καὶ μηδὲν διαφέρειν κατὰ τὸν 
θαυμαστὸν ᾿Ασκληπιάδην ἢ ὑδραγωγὸν διδόναι 
Tots ὑδεριῶσιν ἢ χολαγωγὸν φάρμακον' ἅπαντα 
γὰρ ὁ ὁμοίως κενοῦν καὶ συντήκειν τὸ σῶμα καὶ τὸ 
σύντηγμα τοιόνδε τι φαίνεσθαι ποιεῖν, μὴ πρότε- 
ρον ὑπάρχον τοιοῦτον. 

"Ap οὖν οὐ μαίνεσθαι “νομιστέον αὐτὸν ἢ 
παντάπασιν ἄπειρον εἶναι τῶν ἔργων τῆς τέχνης; 
τίς γὰρ οὐκ οἶδεν, ὡς, εἰ μὲν φλέγματος ἀγωγὸν 
δοθείη φάρμακον τοῖς ἰκτεριῶσιν, οὐκ ἂν οὐ ὲ 
τέτταρας κυάθους καθαρθεῖεν: οὕτω δ᾽ οὐδ᾽ εἰ 


τῶν ὑδραγωγῶν τι" χολαγωγῷ δὲ φαρμάκῳ 


_ πλεῖστον μὲν ἐκκενοῦται χολῆς, αὐτίκα δὲ 


καθαρὸς τοῖς οὕτω καθαρθεῖσιν ὁ χρὼς γίγνεται. 
πολλοὺς γοῦν ἡμεῖς μετὰ τὸ θεραπεῦσαι τὴν ἐν 
τῷ ἥπατι διάθεσιν ἅπαξ καθήραντες ἀπηλλάξα- 
μεν τοῦ παθήματος. οὐ μὴν οὐδ᾽ εἰ φλέγματος 
ἀγωγῷ καθαίροις φαρμάκῳ, πλέον ἄν τι δια- 
πράξαιο. 


1 2. 6. urine. 2 On use οὗ κενόω v. p. 67, note 9. 
3 4.e. bile and phlegm had no existence as such before the 


64 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xm 


And what profit did he derive from these opinions 
from the point of view of treatment? He neither 
was able to cure a kidney ailment, nor jaundice, nor 
a disease of black bile, nor would he agree with the 
view held not merely by Hippocrates but by all men 
regarding drugs—that some of them purge away 
yellow bile, and others black, some again phlegm, 
and others the thin and watery superfluity!; he held 
that all the substances evacuated 5 were produced by 
the drugs themselves, just as yellow bile is produced 
by the biliary passages! It matters nothing, accord- 
ing to this extraordinary man, whether we give a 
hydragogue or a cholagogue in a case of dropsy, for 
these all equally purge? and dissolve the body, and 
praduce a solution having such and such an appear- 
ance, which did not exist as such before ! 8 

Must we not, therefore, suppose he was either mad, 
or entirely unacquainted with practical medicine ? 
For who does not know that if a drug for attracting 
phlegm be given in a case of jaundice it will not 
even evacuate four cyathi* of phlegm? Similarly 
also if one of the hydragogues be given. A chola- 
gogue, on the other hand, clears away a great 
quantity of bile, and the skin of patients so treated 
at once becomes clear. I myself have, in many 
cases, after treating the liver condition, then removed 
the disease by means of a single purgation ; whereas, 
if one had employed a drug for removing phlegm 
one would have done no good. 


drugs were given ; they are the products of dissolved tissue. 
Asclepiades did not believe that diseases were due to a 
materia peccans, but to disturbances in the movements of 
the molecules (ὄγκοι) which constitute the body; thus, in 
opposition to the humoralists such as Galen, he had no use for 
drugs. cf. p.49,note5. “4 About 40z., of one-third of a pint. 


65 
F 


GALEN 


Καὶ ταῦτ᾽ οὐχ [Ἱπποκράτης μὲν οὕτως olde 
γιγνόμενα, τοῖς δ᾽ ἀπὸ τῆς ἐμπειρίας μόνης ὁρμω- 
42 μένοις ἑτέρως ἔγνωσται, ἀλλὰ κἀκείνοις ὡσαύτως 
καὶ πᾶσιν ἰατροῖς, οἷς μέλει τῶν ἔργων τῆς τέχ- 
νης, οὕτω δοκεῖ πλὴν ᾿Ασκληπιάδον. προδοσίαν 
γὰρ εἶναι νενόμικε τῶν στοιχείων ὧν ὑπέθετο τὴν 
ἀληθῆ περὶ τῶν τοιούτων ὁμολογίαν. εἰ γὰρ 
ὅλως εὑρεθείη τε φάρμακον ἑλκτικὸν τοῦδέ τινος 
τοῦ χυμοῦ μόνου, κίνδυνος κρατεῖν δηλαδὴ τῷ 
λόγῳ τὸ ἐν ἑκάστῳ τῶν σωμάτων εἶναί τινὰ 
δύναμιν ἐπισπαστικὴν τῆς οἰκείας ποιότητος. διὰ 
τοῦτο κνῆκον μὲν καὶ κόκκον τὸν κνίδιον καὶ 
ἱπποφαὲς οὐχ ἕλκειν ἐκ τοῦ σώματος ἀλλὰ ποιεῖν 
τὸ φλέγμα φησίν' ἄνθος δὲ χαλκοῦ καὶ λεπίδα 
καὶ αὐτὸν τὸν κεκαυμένον χαλκὸν καὶ χαμαίδρυν 
καὶ χαμαιλέοντα εἰς ὕδωρ ἀναλύειν τὸ σῶμα καὶ 
τοὺς ὑδερικοὺς ὑπὸ τούτων οὐ καθαιρομένους ὀνί- 
νασθαι ἀλλὰ κενουμένους συναυξόντων δηλαδὴ τὸ 
πάθος. εἰ γὰρ οὐ κενοῖ τὸ περιεχόμενον ἐν τοῖς 
σώμασιν ὑδατῶδες ὑγρὸν ἀλλ αὐτὸ γεννᾷ, τῷ 
νοσήματι προστιμωρεῖται. καὶ μέν γε καὶ ἡ 
σκαμμωνία πρὸς τῷ μὴ κενοῦν ἐκ τοῦ σώματος 
τῶν ἰκτερικῶν τὴν χολὴν ἔτι καὶ τὸ χρηστὸν αἷμα 
43 χολὴν ἐργαζομένη || καὶ συντήκουσα τὸ σῶμα καὶ 
τηλικαῦτα κακὰ δρῶσα καὶ τὸ πάθος ἐπαύξουσα 
κατά γε τὸν ᾿Ασκληπιάδου λόγον. 
Ὅμως ἐναργῶς ὁρᾶται πολλοὺς ὠφελοῦσα. 
vai, φησίν, ὀνίνανται μέν, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτῷ μόνῳ τῷ 





1 The Empiricists. ¢f. Introduction, p. xiii. 

2 His ὄγκοι or molecules, 

5 He does not say ‘‘organized” or “‘living” body ; inanimate 
things were also thought to possess ‘‘natures”’ ; cf. p. 2, note 1. 


66 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xu 


Nor is Hippocrates the only one who knows this to 
be so, whilst those who take experience alone as their 
starting-point ! know otherwise ; they, as well as all 
physicians who are engaged in the practice of 
medicine, are of this opinion. Asclepiades, how- 
ever, is an exception ; he would hold it a betrayal of 
his assumed “ elements” 2 to confess the truth about 
such matters. For if a single drug were to be dis- 
covered which attracted such and such a humour 
only, there would obviously be danger of the opinion 
gaining ground that there is in every body 8 a faculty 
which attracts its own particular quality. He there- 
fore says that safflower,t the Cnidian berry,’ and 
Hippophaes,§ do not draw phlegm from the body, but 
actually make it. Moreover, he holds that the 
flower and scales of bronze, and burnt bronze itself, 
and germander,’ and wild mastich® dissolve the 
body into water, and that dropsical patients derive 
benefit from these substances, not because they are 
purged by them, but because they are rid of sub- 
stances which actually help to increase the disease ; 
for, if the medicine does not evacuate 9 the dropsical 
fluid contained in the body, but generates it, it 
aggravates the condition further. Moreover, scam- 
mony, according to the Asclepiadean argument, not 
only fails to evacuate ® the bile from the bodies of 
jaundiced subjects, but actually turns the useful 
blood into bile, and dissolves the body ; in fact it 
does all manner of evil and increases the disease. 

And yet this drug may be clearly seen to do good 
to numbers of people! “ Yes,” says he, “ they derive 


4 Carthamus tinctorius. δ᾽ Daphne Gnidium. 
6 Euphorbia acanthothamnos. 7 Teucrium chamaedrys. 
8 Atractylis gummifera, 9. On use of xevdw cf. p. 98, note 1. 


67 
F 2 


GALEN 


’ A ’ A \ 3 4 3 
λόγῳ τῆς κενώσεως. καὶ μὴν εἰ φλέγματος uyo- 
γὸν αὐτοῖς δοίης φάρμακον, οὐκ ὀνήσονται. καὶ 
τοῦθ᾽ οὕτως ἐναργές ἐστιν, ὥστε καὶ οἱ ἀπὸ μόνης 
τῆς ἐμπειρίας ὁρμώμενοι γιγνώσκουσιν αὐτό. 
Kaitos τούτοις γε τοῖς ἀνδράσιν αὐτὸ δὴ τοῦτ᾽ 
ἔστι φιλοσόφημα, τὸ μηδενὶ λόγῳ πιστεύειν ἀλλὰ 
μόνοις τοῖς ἐναργῶς φαινομένοις. ἐκεῖνοι μὲν οὖν 

le) 2 Ul 4 a 
σωφρονοῦσιν' ᾿Ασκληπιάδης δὲ παραπαίει ταῖς 

2 , ec a 3 δι / ” δ 
αἰσθήσεσιν ἡμᾶς ἀπιστεῖν κελεύων, ἔνθα τὸ φαι- 
νόμενον ἀνατρέπει σαφῶς αὐτοῦ τὰς ὑποθέσεις. 
καίτοι μακρῷ γ᾽ ἣν ἄμεινον οὐχ ὁμόσε χωρεῖν 

“A A > 3. 3 4 3 , Ν A 
τοῖς φαινομένοις ἀλλ᾽ ἐκείνοις ἀναθέσθαι τὸ πᾶν. 

"Ap οὖν ταῦτα μόνον ἐναργῶς μάχεται τοῖς 
3 ΄ L4 A \ [4 A 
Ασκληπιάδου δόγμασιν ἢ καὶ τὸ θέρους μὲν 

, δι Ἁ Ἁ \ e N a 
πλείονα κενοῦσθαι τὴν ξανθὴν χολὴν ὑπὸ τῶν 
αὐτῶν φαρμάκων, χειμῶνος δὲ τὸ φλέγμα, καὶ 

’ \ ’ ᾿ 4 ’ A Ν 
νεανίσκῳ μὲν πλείονα τὴν χολήν, πρεσβύτῃ δὲ τὸ 
φλέγμα; φαίνεται || γὰρ ἕκαστον ἕλκειν τὴν 
οὖσαν, οὐκ αὐτὸ γεννᾶν τὴν οὐκ οὖσαν. εἰ γοῦν 
ἐθελήσαις νεανίσκῳ τινὶ τῶν ἰσχνῶν καὶ θερμῶν 
σ- J ’ 9 3 n ’ 4.9 9 
ὥρᾳ θέρους μήτ᾽ ἀργῶς βεβιωκότι μήτ᾽ ἐν πλησ- 

A 9 Ἁ A ᾽ὔ 93 ’ὕ 
μονῇ φλέγματος ἀγωγὸν δοῦναι φάρμακον, ὀλί- 
ylotov μὲν καὶ μετὰ βίας πολλῆς ἐκκενώσεις τοῦ 
χυμοῦ, βλάψεις δ᾽ ἐσχάτως τὸν ἄνθρωπον" ἔμπα - 
λιν δ᾽ εἰ χολωγωγὸν δοίης, καὶ πάμπολυ κενώσεις 
καὶ βλάψεις οὐδέν. 

7A > 2 a ΝΜ A \ 3 a 

p ἀπιστοῦμεν ἔτι τῷ μὴ οὐχ ἕκαστον τῶν 
φαρμάκων ἐπάγεσθαι τὸν οἰκεῖον ἑαυτῷ χυμόν; 





1 Empiricist physicians. 


68 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xin 


benefit certainly, but merely in proportion to the 
evacuation.” . . . But if you give these cases a drug 
which draws off phlegm they will not be benefited. 
This is so obvious that even those who make ex- 
perience alone their starting-point | are aware of it; 
and these people make it a cardinal point of their 
teaching to trust to no arguments, but only to 
what can be clearly seen. In this, then, they show 
good sense; whereas Asclepiades goes far astray in 
bidding us distrust our senses where obvious facts 
plainly overturn his hypotheses. Much better would 
it have been for him not to assail obvious facts, but 
rather to devote himself entirely to these. 

Is it, then, these facts only which are plainly 
irreconcilable with the views of Asclepiades? Is 
not also the fact that in summer yellow bile is 
evacuated in greater quantity by the same drugs, 
and in winter phlegm, and that in a young man more 
bile is evacuated, and in an old man more phlegm? 
Obviously each drug attracts something which 
already exists, and does not generate something pre- 
viously non-existent. Thus if you give in the summer 
season a drug which attracts phlegm to a young man 
of a lean and warm habit, who has lived neither idly 
nor too luxuriously, you will with great difficulty 
evacuate a very small quantity of this humour, and 
you will do the man the utmost harm. On the 
other hand, if you give him a cholagogue, you will 
produce an abundant evacuation and not injure him 
at all. 

Do we still, then, disbelieve that each drug attracts 
that humour which ts proper to it? Possibly the 


2 Note that drugs also have ‘‘ natures ” ; cf. p. 66, note 3, 
and pp. 83-84. 


69 


GALEN 


ἴσως φήσουσιν οἱ ἀπ᾽ ᾿Ασκληπιάδου, μᾶλλον δ᾽ 
οὐκ ἴσως, ἀλλὰ πάντως ἀπιστεῖν ἐροῦσιν, ἵνα μὴ 
προδῶσι τὰ φίλτατα. ΄ 


XIV 


Πάλιν οὖν καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐφ᾽ ἑτέραν μεταβῶμεν 
ἀδολεσχίαν' οὐ γὰρ ἐπιτρέπουσιν οἱ σοφισταὶ 
τῶν ἀξίων τι ζητημάτων προχειρίξεσθαι καΐτοι 
παμπόλλων ὑ ὑπαρχόντων, ἀλλὰ κατατρίβειν a avay- 
κάζουσι τὸν χρόνον εἰς τὴν τῶν σοφισμάτων, ὧν 
προβάλλουσι, λύσιν. 

Τίς οὖν ἡ. ἀδολεσχία ; ἡ ἔνδοξος αὕτη καὶ 
πολυθρύλητος λίθος ἡ ἡ τὸν σίδηρον | ἐπισπωμένη. 
τάχα γὰρ ἂν αὕτη ποτὲ τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτῶν ἐπι- 
σπάσαιτο πιστεύειν εἶναί τινας ἐν ἑκάστῳ τῶν σω- 
μάτων ἑλκτικὰς τῶν οἰκείων ποιοτήτων a 

᾿Επίκουρος μὲν οὖν καίτοι παραπλησίοις ᾿Ασ- 
κληπιάδῃ. στοιχείοις πρὸς τὴν φυσιολογίαν χρώ- 
μένος ὅμως ὁμολογεῖ, πρὸς μὲν τῆς ἡρακλείας 
λίθου τὸν σίδηρον ἕλκεσθαι, πρὸς δὲ τῶν ἠλέκ- 
τρων τὰ κυρήβια καὶ πειρᾶταί γε καὶ τὴν αἰτίαν 
ἀποδιδόναι τοῦ φαινομένου. τὰς yap a ἀπορρεούσας 
ἀτόμους ἀπὸ τῆς λίθου ταῖς ἀπορρεούσαις ἀπὸ 
τοῦ σιδήρου τοῖς σχήμασιν οἰκείας εἶναί φησιν, 
ὥστε περιπλέκεσθαι ῥᾳδίως. προσκρουούσας οὖν 
αὐτὰς τοῖς συγκρίμασιν ἑκατέροις τῆς τε λίθου 
καὶ τοῦ σιδήρου κἄπειτ᾽ εἰς τὸ μέσον ἀποπαλ- 


λομένας οὕτως ἀλλήλαις τε περιπλέκεσθαι καὶ 


1 Punhere. συ Lit. physiology, t.e. nature-lore, almost 
r ‘‘ Natural Philosophy ” ; cf. Introduction, p. xxvi. 


ο 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xi.—x1v 


adherents of Asclepiades will assent to this—or 
rather, they will—not possibly, but certainly—de- 
clare that they disbelieve it, lest they should betray 
their darling prejudices. . 


XIV 


Ler us pass on, then, again to another piece of 
nonsense ; for the sophists do not allow one to engage 
in enquiries that are of any worth, albeit there are- 
many such; they compel one to spend one’s time in 
dissipating the fallacious arguments which they bring 
forward. 

What, then, is this piece of nonsense? It has to 
do with the famous and far-renowned stone which 
draws iron [the lodestone]. It might be thought 
that this would draw! their minds to a belief that 
there are in all bodies certain faculties by which 
they attract their own proper qualities. 

Now Epicurus, despite the fact that he employs in 
his Physics ? elements similar to those of Asclepiades,$ 
yet allows that iron is attracted by the lodestone,* 
and chaff by amber. He even tries to give the cause 
of the phenomenon. His view is that the atoms 
which flow from the stone are related in shape to 
those flowing from the iron, and so they become 
easily interlocked with one another; thus it is that, 
after colliding with each of the two compact masses 
(the stone and the iron) they then rebound into the 
middle and so become entangled with each other, 


3 The ultimate particle of Epicurus was the ἄτομος or atom 
(lit. ‘‘non-divisible”), of Asclepiades, the ὄγκος or molecule. 
Asclepiades took his atomic theory from Epicurus, and he 
again from Democritus; cf. p. 49, note 5. 

4 Lit. Herculean stone. 2 γι 





46 


47 


GALEN 


συνεπισπᾶσθαι τὸν σίδηρον. τὸ μὲν οὖν τῶν 
ὑποθέσεων εἰς τὴν αἰτιολογίαν ἀπίθανον ἄντικρυς 
A e σ΄ e 
δῆλον, ὅμως δ᾽ οὖν ὁμολογεῖ τὴν ὁλκήν. Kal οὕτω 
γε καὶ κατὰ τὰ σώματα τῶν ζῴων φησὶ γίγνεσθαι 
τάς τ᾽ ἀναδόσεις καὶ τὰς διακρίσεις τῶν περιτ- 
τωμάτων καὶ τὰς τῶν καθαιρόντων φαρμάκων 
ἐνεργείας. 
"A λ ὃ ὃ) “A bd , > / 
σκληπιάδης δὴ τό TE τῆς εἰρημένης αἰτίας 
9 ’ e ’ / ΝΜ) 3 
ἀπίθανον || ὑπιδόμενος καὶ μηδεμίαν ἄλλην ἐφ 
οἷς ὑπέθετο στοιχείοις ἐξευρίσκων πιθανὴν ἐπὶ τὸ 
> of ᾽ e Ἁ Ἃ Ἁ 
μηδ᾽ ὅλως ἕλκεσθαι λέγειν ὑπὸ μηδενὸς μηδὲν 
3 [4 3 if 3 245 > 4 
ἀναισχυντήσας ἐτράπετο, δέον, εἰ μήθ᾽ ols *Eni- 
κουρος εἶπεν ἠρέσκετο μήτ᾽ ἄλλα βελτίω λέγειν 
εἶχεν, ἀποστῆναι τῶν ὑποθέσεων καὶ τήν τε φύσιν 
εἰπεῖν τεχνικὴν καὶ τὴν οὐσίαν τῶν ὄντων ἑνου- 
μένην τε πρὸς ἑαυτὴν ἀεὶ καὶ ἀλλοιουμένην ὑπὸ 
τῶν ἑαυτῆς μορίων εἰς ἄλληλα δρώντων τε καὶ 
πασχόντων. εἰ γὰρ ταῦθ᾽ ὑπέθετο, χαλεπὸν οὐδὲν 
« an 
ἣν τὴν τεχνικὴν ἐκείνην φύσιν ὁμολογῆσαι δύνα- 
pets ἔχειν ἐπισπαστικὴν μὲν τῶν οἰκείων, ἀπο- 
Ά Ἁ δὰ 3 ’ 3 9. Ν a, 
κριτικὴν δὲ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων. οὐ γὰρ δι’ ἄλλο τί 
y ἦν αὐτῇ τὸ τεχνικῇ T εἶναι καὶ τοῦ ζῴου 
διασωστικῇ καὶ τῶν νοσημάτων κριτικῇ παρὰ τὸ 
προσίεσθαι μὲν καὶ φυλάττειν τὸ οἰκεῖον, ἀπο- 
κρίνειν δὲ τὸ ἀλλότριον. 
"ANN ᾿Ασκληπιάδης κἀνταῦθα τὸ μὲν ἀκόλου- 
θον ταῖς ἀρχαῖς αἷς ὑπέθετο συνεῖδεν, οὐ μὴν τήν 
\ a A 3 / 
γε πρὸς TO φαινόμενον ἐναργῶς ἠδέσθη μάχην, 
e ἴω 4 a 
ἀλλ᾽ ὁμόσε || χωρεῖ καὶ περὶ τούτου πᾶσιν οὐκ 


ἰατροῖς μόνον ἀλλ᾽ ἤδη καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἀνθρώποις 


"1 Lit. actiology. 2 Anadosis ; cf. p. 62, note 1, 
72 ΄ 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xiv 


and draw the iron after them. So far, then, as his 
hypotheses regarding causation! go, he is perfectly 
unconvincing ; nevertheless, he does grant that 
there is an attraction. Further, he says that it is 
on similar principles that there occur in the bodies of 
animals the dispersal of nutriment ? and the discharge 
of waste matters, as also the actions of cathartic 
drugs. 

Asclepiades, however, who viewed with suspicion 
the incredible character of the cause mentioned, 
and who saw no other credible cause on the basis 
of his supposed elements, shamelessly had recourse 
to the statement that nothing is in any way attracted 
by anything else. Now, if he was dissatisfied with 
what Epicurus said, and had nothing better to say 
himself, he ought to have refrained from making 
hypotheses, and should have said that Nature 
is a constructive artist and that the substance of 
things is always tending towards unity and also 
towards alteration because its own parts act upon 
and are acted upon by one another.® For, if he had 
assumed this, it would not have been difficult to allow 
that this constructive nature has powers which 
attract appropriate and expel alien matter. For in 
no other way could she be constructive, preservative 
of the animal, and eliminative of its diseases,* unless 
it be allowed that she conserves what is appropriate © 
and discharges what is foreign. 

But in this matter, too, Asclepiades realized: the 
logical sequence of the principles he had assumed ; 
he showed no scruples, however, in opposing plain 
fact; he joins issue in this matter also, not merely 
with all physicians, but with everyone else, and 


3 of. p. 45. 4 The vis conservatrix et medicatrix Naturae. 


73 


48 


GALEN 


οὔτε κρίσιν εἶναί τινα λέγων οὔθ᾽ ἡμέραν κρίσιμον 
οὔθ᾽ ὅλως οὐδὲν ἐπὶ σωτηρίᾳ τοῦ ζῴου πραγμα- 
τεύσασθαι τὴν φύσιν. ἀεὶ γὰρ τὸ μὲν ἀκόλουθον 
φυλάττειν βούλεται, τὸ δ᾽ ἐναργῶς φαινόμενον 
ἀνατρέπειν ἔμπαλιν ᾿Επικούρῳ. τιθεὶς γὰρ ἐκεῖνος 
ἀεὶ τὸ φαινόμενον αἰτίαν αὐτοῦ ψυχρὰν ἀποδίδωσι. 
τὰ γὰρ ἀποπαλλόμενα σμικρὰ σώματα τῆς ἡρα- 
κλείας λίθου τοιούτοις ἑτέροις περιπλέκεσθαι μο- 
ρίοις τοῦ σιδήρου κἄπειτα διὰ τῆς περιπλοκῆς 
ταύτης μηδαμοῦ φαινομένης ἐπισπᾶσθαι βαρεῖαν 
οὕτως οὐσίαν οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅπως ἄν τις πεισθείη. καὶ 
γὰρ εἰ τοῦτο συγχωρήσομεν, τό γε τῷ σιδήρῳ 
πάλιν ἕτερον προστεθέν τι συνάπτεσθαι τὴν 
αὐτὴν αἰτίαν οὐκέτι προσίεται. 

Τί γὰρ ἐροῦμεν; ἢ δηλαδὴ τῶν ἀπορρεόντων 
τῆς λίθου μορίων ἔνια μὲν προσκρούσαντα τῷ 
σιδήρῳ πάλιν ἀποπάλλεσθαι καὶ ταῦτα μὲν εἶναι, 
δι᾿ ὧν κρεμάννυσθαι συμβαίνει τὸν σίδηρον, τὰ δ᾽ 
εἰς αὐτὸν εἰσδυόμενα διὰ τῶν || κενῶν πόρων δι- 
εξέρχεσθαι τάχιστα κἄπειτα τῷ παρακειμέν 
σιδήρῳ προσκρούοντα μήτ᾽ ἐκεῖνον διαδῦναι δύ- 
νασθαι, καίτοι τόν γε πρῶτον διαδύντα, παλινδρο- 
μοῦντα δ᾽ αὖθις ἐπὶ τὸν πρότερον ἑτέρας αὖθις 
ἐργάξεσθαι ταῖς προτέραις ὁμοίας περιπλοκάς; 

"Evapyas γὰρ ἐνταῦθα τὸ ληρῶδες τῆς αἰτίας 
ἐλέγχεται. γραφεῖα γοῦν οἷδά ποτε σιδηρᾶ πέντε 
κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀλλήλοις συναφθέντα, τοῦ πρώ- 
του μὲν μόνου τῆς λίθου ψαύσαντος, ἐξ ἐκείνου 





1 of. p. 61, note 3. The crisis or resolution in fevers was 
observed to take place with a certain regularity; hence 
arose the doctrine of ‘‘ critical days.” 


74 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xiv 


maintains that there is no such thing as a crisis, 
or critical day,} and that Nature does absolutely 
nothing for the preservation of the animal. For 
his constant aim is to follow out logical conse- 
quences and to upset obvious fact, in this respect 
being opposed to Epicurus; for the latter always 
stated the observed fact, although he gives an in- 
effective explanation of it. For, that these small 
corpuscles belonging to the lodestone rebound, and 
become entangled with other similar particles of 
the iron, and that then, by means of this entangle- 
ment (which cannot be seen anywhere) such a heavy 
substance as iron is attracted—I fail to understand 
how anybody could believe this. Even if we admit 
this, the same principle will not explain the fact that, 
when the iron has another piece brought in contact 
with it, this becomes attached to it. 

For what are we to say? That, forsooth, some of 
the particles that flow from the lodestone collide 
with the iron and then rebound back, and that it is 
by these that the iron becomes suspended? that 
others penetrate into it, and rapidly pass through it by 
way of its empty channels ?? that these then collide 
with the second piece of iron and are not able to 
penetrate it although they penetrated the first 
piece? and that they then course back to the first 
piece, and produce entanglements like the former 
ones ? 

The hypothesis here becomes clearly refuted by 
its absurdity. As a matter of fact, I have seen five 
writing-stylets of iron attached to one another in a 
line, only the first one being in contact with the 


2 These were hypothetical spaces or channels between the 
atoms; cf. Introduction, p. xiv. 


75 


49 


GALEN 


δ᾽ εἰς τἄλλα τῆς δυνάμεως διαδοθείσης" καὶ οὐκ 
ἔστιν εἰπεῖν, ὡς, εἰ μὲν τῷ κάτω τοῦ γραφείου 
πέρατι προσάγοις ἕτερον, ἔ ἔχεταί τε καὶ συνάπτε- 
ται καὶ κρέμαται τὸ προσενεχθέν" εἰ δ᾽ ἄλλῳ τινὶ 
μέρει τῶν πλαγίων προσθείης, οὐ συνάπτεται. 
πάντη γὰρ ὁ ὁμοίως ἡ τῆς λίθου διαδίδοται δύναμις, 
εἰ μόνον ἅψαιτο κατά τι τοῦ “πρώτου γραφείου. 
καὶ μέντοι. κἀκ τούτου πάλιν εἰς τὸ δεύτερον ὅλον 
ἡ δύναμις ἅ ἅμα νοήματι διαρρεῖ κἀξ ἐ ἐκείνου πάλιν 
εἰς τὸ τρίτον ὅλον. εἰ δὴ νοήσαις σμικράν τινα 
λίθον ἡρακλείαν ἐν οἴκῳ τινὶ κρεμαμένην, εἶτ᾽ ἐν 
κύκλῳ apatovra πάμπολλα σι pla κἀκείνων 
πάλιν ἕτερα κἀκείνων ἄλλα καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἄχρι πλεί- 
ovos, ἅπαντα | δήπου πίμπλασθαι δεῖ τὰ σιδήρια 
τῶν ἀπορρεόντων τῆς λίθου σωμάτων. καὶ κινδυ- 
νεύει διαφορηθῆναι τὸ σμικρὸν ἐκεῖνο λιθίδιον εἰς 
τὰς ἀπορροὰς διαλυθέν. καΐτοι, κἂν εἰ μηδὲν 
παρακέοιτ' αὐτῷ σιδήριον, εἰς τὸν ἀέρα σκεδάννυ- 
ται, μάλιστ' εἰ καὶ θερμὸς ὑ ὑπάρχοι. 

Nai, φησί, σμικρὰ γὰρ᾽ αὐτὰ χρὴ πάνυ νοεῖν, 
ὥστε τῶν ἐμφερομένων τῷ ἀέρι ψηγμάτων τού- 
τῶν δὴ τῶν σμικροτάτων ἐκείνων ἔνια μυριοστὸν 
εἶναι μέρος. εἶτ᾽ ἐξ οὕτω σμικρῶν τολμᾶτε λέγειν 
κρεμάννυσθαι βάρη τημικαῦτα σιδήρου ; εἰ γὰρ 
ἕκαστον αὐτῶν μυριοστόν ἐστι μέρος τῶν ἐν τῷ 
ἀέρι φερομένων ψηγμάτων, πηλίκον χρὴ νοῆσαι 
τὸ πέρας αὐτῶν τὸ ἀγκιστροειδές, ᾧ περιπλέκεται 
πρὸς ἄλληλα; πάντως γὰρ δήπου τοῦτο σμικρό- 
τατόν ἐστιν ὅλου τοῦ ψήγματος. 


1 He means the specific drawing power or faculty of the 
lodestone. 2 cf. our modern ‘‘ radium-emanations.” 


76 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. χιν 


lodestone, and the power ! being transmitted through 
it to the others. Moreover, it cannot be said that if 
you bring a second stylet into contact with the lower 
end of the first, it becomes held, attached, and sus- 
pended, whereas, if you apply it to any other part of 
the side it does not become attached. For the power 
of the lodestone is distributed in all directions; it . 
merely needs to be in contact with the first stylet at 
any point; from this stylet again the power flows, as 
quick as a thought, all through the second, and from 
that again to the third. Now, if you imagine a small 
lodestone hanging in a house, and in contact with it 
all round a large number of pieces of iron, from them 
again others, from these others, and so on,—all these 
pieces of iron must surely become filled with the 
corpuscles which emanate from the stone; therefore, 
this first little stone is likely to become dissipated by 
disintegrating into these emanations.? Further, even 
if there be no iron in contact with it, it still disperses 
into the air, particularly if this be also warm. 

“Yes, says Epicurus, “but these corpuscles must 
be looked on as exceedingly small, so that some 
of them are a ten-thousandth part of the size of 
the very smallest particles carried in the air.” Then 
do you venture to say that so great a weight of iron 
can be suspended by such small bodies? If each of 
them is a ten-thousandth part as large as the dust 
particles which are borne in the atmosphere, how big 
must we suppose the hook-like extremities by which 
they interlock with each other? to be? For of 
course this is quite the smallest portion of the whole 
particle. 


3 cf. Ehrlich’s Late of ‘‘receptors” in explanation of 
the “affinities ” of animal cells. 


77 


GALEN 


Εἶτα μικρὸν μικρῷ, κινούμενον κινουμένῳ περι- 
πλακὲν οὐκ εὐθὺς ἀποπάλλεται. καὶ γὰρ δὴ καὶ 
ἄλλ᾽ ἄττα πάντως αὐτοῖς, τὰ μὲν ἄνωθεν, τὰ δὲ 

4 N \ » \ > + 
κάτωθεν, καὶ τὰ μὲν ἔμπροσθεν, τὰ δ᾽ ὄπισθεν, 

4 4 A A 4 3 A 3 A 
τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν δεξιῶν, τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν ἀριστερῶν || 


2 ’ ’ \ , \ ᾽ . 
δ0 ἐκρηγνύμενα σείει τε καὶ βράττει καὶ μένειν οὐκ 


δ] 


A \ / \ a > ον» 
ἐᾷ. καὶ μέντοι καὶ πολλὰ χρὴ νοεῖν ἐξ ἀνάγκης 

»“ a 54 
ἕκαστον ἐκείνων τῶν σμικρῶν σωμάτων ἔχειν 

4 a , > e VN A A 3 VA 
ἀγκιστρώδη πέρατα. δι᾽ ἑνὸς μὲν yap ἀλλήλοις 
συνάπτεται, δι’ ἑτέρου δ᾽ ἑνὸς τοῦ μὲν ὑπερκει- 
μένου τῇ λίθῳ, τοῦ δ᾽ ὑποκειμένου τῷ σιδήρῳ. 
εἰ γὰρ ἄνω μὲν ἐξαφθείη τῆς λίθου, κάτω δὲ τῷ 


σιδήρῳ μὴ συμπλακείη, πλέον οὐδέν. ὥστε τοῦ 


μὲν ὑπερκειμένου τὸ ἄνω μέρος ἐκκρέμασθαι χρὴ 
τῆς λίθου, τοῦ δ᾽ ὑποκειμένου τῷ κάτω πέρατι 
συνῆφθαι τὸν σίδηρον. ἐπεὶ δὲ κἀκ τῶν πλαγίων 
ἀλλήλοις περιπλέκεται, πάντως που κἀνταῦθα 
ἔχει τὰ ἄγκιστρα. καὶ μέμνησό μοι πρὸ πάντων, 
ὅπως ὄντα σμικρὰ τὰς τοιαύτας καὶ τοσαύτας 
ἀποφύσεις ἔχει. καὶ τούτου μᾶλλον ἔτι, πῶς, ἵνα 
τὸ δεύτερον σιδήριον συναφθῇ τῷ πρώτῳ καὶ τῷ 
δευτέρῳ τὸ τρίτον κἀκείνῳ τὸ τέταρτον, ἅμα μὲν 
διεξέρχεσθαι χρὴ τοὺς πόρους ταυτὶ τὰ σμικρὰ 
καὶ ληρώδη ψήγματα, ἅμα δ᾽ ἀποπάλλεσθαι τοῦ 
μετ᾽ αὐτὸ || τεταγμένου, καίτοι κατὰ πᾶν ὁμοίου 
τὴν φύσιν ὑπάρχοντος. 

Οὐδὲ γὰρ ἡ τοιαύτη πάλιν ὑπόθεσις ἄτολμος, 
ἀλλ᾽, εἰ χρὴ τἀληθὲς εἰπεῖν, μακρῷ τῶν ἔμπροσ- 
θεν ἀναισχυντοτέρα, πέντε σιδηρίων ὁμοίων ἀλλή- 
78 | 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xiv 


Then, again, when a small body becomes en- 
tangled with another small body, or when a body 
in motion becomes entangled with another also in 
motion, they do not rebound at once. For, further, 
there will of course be others which break in upon 
them from above, from below, from front and rear, 
from right and left, and which shake and agitate 
them and never let them rest. Moreover, we must 
perforce suppose that each of these small bodies has 
a large number of these hook-like extremities. For 
by one it attaches itself to its neighbours, by another 
—the topmost one—to the lodestone, and by the 
bottom one to the iron. For if it were attached to 
the stone above and not interlocked with the iron 
below, this would be of no use.!_ Thus, the upper part 
of the superior extremity must hang from the lode- 
stone, and the iron must be attached to the lower 
end of the inferior extremity ; and, since they inter- 
lock with each other by their sides as well, they 
must, of course, have hooks there too. Keep in 
mind also, above everything, what small bodies these 
are which possess all these different kinds of out- 
growths. Still more, remember how, in order that 
the second piece of iron may become attached to the 
first, the third to the second, and to that the fourth, 
. these absurd little particles must both penetrate the 
passages in the first piece of iron and at the same 
time rebound from the piece coming next in the 
series, although this second piece is naturally in 
every way similar to the first. 

Such an hypothesis, once again, is certainly not 
lacking in audacity ; in fact, to tell the truth, it is far 
more shameless than the previous ones; according 


1 2,6. from the point of view of the theory. 


79 


δ2 


GALEN 


λοις ἐφεξῆς τεταγμένων διὰ τοῦ πρώτου διαδυό- 
μενα ῥᾳδίως τῆς λίθου τὰ μόρια κατὰ τὸ δεύτερον 
ἀποπάλλεσθαι καὶ μὴ διὰ τούτου κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν 
τρόπον ἑτοίμως διεξέρχεσθαι. καὶ μὴν ἑκατέρως 
ἄτοπον. εἰ μὲν γὰρ ἀποπάλλεται, πῶς εἰς τὸ 
τρίτον ὠκέως διεξέρχεται; εἰ δ᾽ οὐκ ἀποπάλλεται, 
πῶς κρεμάννυται τὸ δεύτερον ἐκ τοῦ πρώτου; τὴν 
γὰρ ἀπόπαλσιν αὐτὸς ὑπέθετο δημιουργὸν τῆς 
ὁλκῆς. 

᾿Αλλ᾽, ὅπερ ἔφην, εἰς ἀδολεσχίαν ἀναγκαῖον 
ἐμπίπτειν, ἐπειδάν τις τοιούτοις ἀνδράσι διαλέγη- 
ται. σύντομον οὖν τινα καὶ κεφαλαιώδη λόγον 
εἰπὼν ἀπαλλάττεσθαι βούλομαι. τοῖς ᾿Ασκλη- 
πιάδου γράμμασιν εἴ τις ἐπιμελῶς ὁμιλήσειε, τήν 
τε πρὸς τὰς ἀρχὰς ἀκολουθίαν τῶν τοιούτων 
δογμάτων ἀκριβῶς ἂν ἐκμάθοι καὶ τὴν πρὸς τὰ 
φαινόμενα μάχην. ὁ μὲν οὖν ᾿Εἰπίκουρος τὰ 
φαινόμενα φυλάττειν βουλόμενος ἀσχημονεῖ || φι- 
λοτιμούμενος ἐπιδεικνύειν αὐτὰ ταῖς ἀρχαῖς ὅμο- 
λογοῦντα' ὁ δ᾽ ᾿Ασκληπιάδης τὸ μὲν ἀκόλουθον 
ταῖς ἀρχαῖς φυλάττει, τοῦ φαινομένον δ᾽ οὐδὲν 
αὐτῷ μέλει. ὅστις οὖν βούλεται τὴν ἀτοπίαν 
ἐξελέγχειν τῶν ὑποθέσεων, εἰ μὲν πρὸς ᾿Ασκλη- 
πιάδην ὁ λόγος αὐτῷ γίγνοιτο, τῆς πρὸς τὸ 
φαινόμενον ὑπομιμνησκέτω μάχης" εἰ δὲ πρὸς 
᾿Επίκουρον, τῆς πρὸς τὰς ἀρχὰς διαφωνίας. αἱ 
δ᾽ ἄλλαι σχεδὸν αἱρέσεις αἱ τῶν ὁμοίων ἀρχῶν 
ἐχόμεναι τελέως ἀπέσβησαν, αὗται δ᾽ ἔτει μόναι 
διαρκοῦσιν οὐκ ἀγεννῶς. καίτοι τὰ μὲν ᾿Ασ- 
κληπιάδον Μηνόδοτος ὁ ἐμπειρικὸὲ ἀφύκτως 
ἐξελέγχει, τήν τε πρὸς τὰ φαινόμενα μάχην ὑπο- 
μιμνήσκων αὐτὸν καὶ τὴν πρὸς ἄλληλα' τὰ δ᾽ 
8ο | 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xiv 


to it, when five similar pieces of iron are arranged 
in a line, the particles of the lodestone which easily 
traverse the first piece of iron rebound from the 
second, and do not pass readily through it in the 
same way. Indeed, it is nonsense, whichever alter- 
native is adopted. For, if they do rebound, how then 
do they pass through into the third piece? And if 
they do not rebound, how does the second piece 
become suspended to the first? For Epicurus him- 
self looked on the rebound as the active agent in 
attraction. 

But, as I have said, one is driven to talk nonsense 
whenever one gets into discussion with such men. 
Having, therefore, given a concise and summary 
statement of the matter, I wish-to be done with it. | 
For if one diligently familiarizes oneself with the 
writings of Asclepiades, one will see clearly their logi- 
cal dependence on his first principles, but also their 
disagreement with observed facts. Thus, Epicurus, 
in his desire to adhere to the facts, cuts an awkward 
figure by aspiring to show that these agree with his 
principles, whereas Asclepiades safeguards the se- 
quence of principles, but pays no attention to the 
obvious fact. Whoever, therefore, wishes to expose 
the absurdity of their hypotheses, must, if the argu- 
ment be in answer to Asclepiades, keep in mind his 
disagreement with observed fact; or if in answer to 
Epicurus, his discordance with his principles. Almost 
all the other sects depending on similar principles 
are now entirely extinct, while these alone maintain 
a respectable existence still. Yet the tenets of 
Asclepiades have been unanswerably confuted by 
Menodotus the Empiricist, who draws his attention 
to their opposition to phenomena and to each other ; 


81 
G 


53 


GALEN 


᾿Επικούρου πάλιν ὁ ᾿Ασκληπιάδης ἐχόμενος ἀεὶ 
τῆς ἀκολουθίας, ἧς ἐκεῖνος οὐ πάνυ τι φαίνεται 
φροντίξων. 
3 > e A Ν \ \ ’ 
Αλλ᾽ οἱ νῦν ἄνθρωποι, πρὶν καὶ ταύτας 
ἐκμαθεῖν τὰς αἱρέσεις καὶ τὰς ἄλλας τὰς 
A a 4 
βελτίους κἄπειτα χρόνῳ πολλῷ κρῖναί τε καὶ 
βασανίσαι τὸ καθ᾽ ἑκάστην αὐτῶν ἀληθές τε καὶ 
A 4 Ἁ 3 \ @ ’ e ’ 
εῦὗδος, οἱ μὲν ἰατροὺς ἑαυτούς, οἱ δὲ φιλοσόφους 
ὀνομάζουσι μηδὲν' εἰδότες. || οὐδὲν οὖν θαυμαστὸν 
ἐπίσης τοῖς ἀληθέσι τὰ ψευδῆ τετιμῆσθαι. ὅτῳ 
γὰρ ἂν ἕκαστος πρώτῳ περιτύχῃ διδασκάλῳ, 
τοιοῦτος ἐγένετο, μὴ περιμείνας μηδὲν ὅτι παρ᾽ 
wv: a Ν᾽ 3 > A 3 Ἁ , 
ἄλλον μαθεῖν. ἔνιοι δ᾽ αὐτῶν, εἰ καὶ πλείοσιν 
3 3 
τι Saad ἀλλ᾽ οὕτω γ᾽ εἰσὶν ἀσύνετοί τε καὶ 
βραδεῖς τὴν διάνοιαν, ὥστε καὶ γεγηρακότες οὔπω 
A ’ 
συνιᾶσιν ἀκολουθίαν λόγου. πάλαι δὲ τοὺς τοιού- 
> δ \ 4 3 , / > \ 
τους ἐπὶ τὰς βαναύσους ἀπέλυον τέχνας. ἀλλὰ 
ταῦτα μὲν ἐς ὅ τι τελευτήσει θεὸς οἶδεν. 
Ἥ “Ὁ δ᾽ 3 ὃ [4 [4 7 3 4 
μεῖς δ᾽ ἐπειδή, καίτοι φεύγοντες ἀντιλέγειν 
τοῖς ἐν αὐταῖς ταῖς ἀρχαῖς εὐθὺς ἐσφαλμένοις, 
ὅμως ἠναγκάσθημεν ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς τῶν πραγμάτων 
na > a A 
τῆς ἀκολουθίας εἰπεῖν τινα καὶ διαλεχθῆναι πρὸς 
αὐτούς, ἔτι καὶ τοῦτο προσθήσομεν τοῖς εἰρη- 
μένοις, ὡς οὐ μόνον τὰ καθαίροντα φάρμακα 
’ ζω 
πέφυκεν ἐπισπᾶσθαι τὰς οἰκείας ποιότητας ἀλλὰ 
Ρ A 
καὶ Ta τοὺς σκόλοπας avdyovta καὶ Tas TOV 
A > » 2 Ἁ 4 Ν 3 
βελῶν ἀκίδας εἰς πολὺ βάθος σαρκὸς ἐμπεπαρ- 
, 4 4 “A 
μένας ἐνίοτε. καὶ μέντοι καὶ ὅσα τοὺς ἰοὺς τῶν 
/ A Ἁ a 
θηρίων ἢ τοὺς ἐμπεφαρμαγμένους τοῖς βέλεσιν 
, A A 
ἀνέλκει, καὶ ταῦτα τὴν αὐτὴν ταῖς ἡρακλείαις 
’ 7 
λίθοις ἐπιδϑιδείκννται δύναμιν. ἔγωγ᾽ οὖν οἷδά ποτε 
καταπεπαρμένον ἐν ποδὶ νεανίσκου σκόλοπα τοῖς 


δ2 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xiv 


and, again, those of Epicurus have been confuted by 
Asclepiades, who adhered always to logical sequence, 
about which Epicurus evidently cares little. 

Now people of the present day do not begin by 
getting a clear comprehension of these sects, as well 
as of the better ones, thereafter devoting a long time 
to judging and testing the true and false in each of 
them ; despite their ignorance, they style themselves, 
some “ physicians’’ and others “ philosophers.” No 
wonder, then, that they honour the false equally with 
the true. For everyone becomes like the first teacher 
that he comes across, without waiting to learn any- 
thing from anybody else. And there are some of 
them, who, even if they meet with more than one 
teacher, are yet so unintelligent and slow-witted that 
even by the time they have reached old age they are 
still incapable of understanding the steps of an argu- 
ment. . . . In the old days such people used to be 
set to menial tasks. . . . What will be the end of it 
God knows ! 

Now, we usually refrain from arguing with people 
whose principles are wrong from the outset. Still, 
having been compelled by the natural course of 
events to enter into some kind of a discussion with 
them, we must.add this further to what was said— 
that it is not only cathartic drugs which naturally 
attract their special qualities, but also those which 
remove thorns and the points of arrows such as some- 
times become deeply embedded in the flesh. Those 
drugs also which draw out animal poisons or poisons 
applied to arrows all show the same faculty as does 
the lodestone. Thus, I myself have seen a thorn 
which was embedded in a young man’s foot fail to 


1 of. p. 69, note 2. 
83 
a 2 


δὅ 


GALEN 


μὲν δακτύλοις ἕλκουσιν ἡμῖν βιαίως οὐκ ἀκολου- 
θήσαντα, φαρμάκου δ᾽ ἐπιτεθέντος ἀλύπως τε καὶ 
διὰ ταχέων ἀνελθόντα. καίτοι καὶ πρὸς τοῦτό 
τινες ἀντιλέγουσι φάσκοντες, ὅταν ἡ φλεγμονὴ 
λυθῇ τοῦ μέρους, αὐτόματον ἐξιέναι τὸν σκόλοπα 
πρὸς οὐδενὸς ἀνελκόμενον." ἀλλ᾽ οὗτοί γε πρῶ- 
τον μὲν ἀγνοεῖν ἐοίκασιν, ὡς ἄλλα μέν ἐστι 

λεγμονῆς, ἄλλα δὲ τῶν οὕτω καταπεπαρμένων 
ἑλκτικὰ φάρμακα' καΐτοι γ᾽ εἴπερ ἀφλεγμάντων 
γενομένων ἐξεκρίνετο τὰ παρὰ φύσιν, ὅ ὅσα φλεγ- 
μονῆς ἐστι λυτικά, ταῦτ᾽ εὐθὺς ἂν ἦν κἀκείνων 
ἑλκτικά. 

Δεύτερον δ᾽, ὃ καὶ μᾶλλον ἄν τις θαυμάσειεν, 
ὡς οὐ μόνον ἄλλα μὲν τοὺς σκόλοπας, ἄλλα δὲ 
τοὺς ἰοὺς ἐξάγει φάρμακα, ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτῶν τῶν 
τοὺς ἰοὺς ἑλκόντων τὰ μὲν τὸν τῆς ἐχίδνης, τὰ δὲ 
τὸν τῆς τρυγόνος, τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλου τινὸς ἐπισπᾶται 
καὶ σαφῶς ἔστιν ἰδεῖν τοῖς φαρμάκοις ἐπικει- 
μένους αὐτούς. ἐνταῦθ᾽ οὖν ᾿Επίκουρον μὲν 
ἐπαινεῖν χρὴ τῆς πρὸς | τὸ φαινόμενον αἰδοῦς, 
μέμφεσθαι δὲ τὸν λόγον τῆς αἰτίας. ὃν γὰρ 
ἡμεῖς ἕλκοντες τοῖς δακτύλοις οὐκ ἀνηγάγομεν 
σκόλοπα, τοῦτον ὑπὸ τῶν σμικρῶν ἐκείνων ἀνέλ.- 
κεσθαι ψηγμάτων, πῶς οὐ παντάπασιν ἄτοπον 
εἶναι χρὴ νομίξειν; 

ἾΑρ᾽ οὖν ἤδη πεπείσμεθα τῶν ὄντων ἑκάστῳ 
δύναμίν τιν᾽ ὑπάρχειν, ἧ τὴν οἰκείαν ἕλκει 
ποιότητα, τὸ μὲν μᾶλλον, τὸ δ᾽ ἧττον; 

Ἢ καὶ τὸ τῶν πυρῶν ἔτι παράδειγμα προ- 


1 That is to say, the two properties should go together in 
all cases—which they do not. 2 Trygon pastinaca. 


84 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. χιν 


come out when we exerted forcible traction with 
our fingers, and yet come away painlessly and rapidly 
on the application of a medicament. Yet even to 
this some people will object, asserting that when the 
inflammation is dispersed from the part the thorn 
comes away of itself, without being pulled out by 
anything. But these people seem, in the first place, 
to be unaware that there are certain drugs for 
drawing out inflammation and different ones for 
drawing out embedded substances ; and surely if it 
was on the cessation of an inflammation that the 
abnormal matters were expelled, then all drugs which 
disperse inflammations ought, :pso facto, to possess the 
power of extracting these substances as well.! 

And secondly, these people seem to be unaware of 
a still more surprising fact, namely, that not merely 
do certain medicaments draw out thorns and others 
poisons, but that of the latter there are some which 
attract the poison of the viper, others that of the 
sting-ray,? and others that of some other animal ; we 
can, in fact, plainly observe these poisons deposited 
on the medicaments. Here, then, we must praise 
Epicurus for the respect he shows towards obvious 
facts, but find fault with his views as to causation. 
For how can it be otherwise than extremely foolish to 
suppose that a thorn which we failed to remove by 
digital traction could be drawn out by these minute 
particles ? 

Have we now, therefore, convinced ourselves that 
everything which exists ὃ possesses a faculty by which 
it attracts its proper quality, and that some things do 
this more, and some less? 

Or shall we also furnish our argument with the 


> of. p. 66, note 3. 
85 


δθ 


GALEN 


χειρισόμεθα τῷ λόγῳ; φανήσονται yap οἶμαι 
καὶ τῶν ͵ γεωργῶν αὐτῶν , ἀμαθέστεροι περὶ τὴν 
φύσιν οἱ μηδὲν ὅλως ὑπὸ “μηδενὸς ἕλκεσθαι 
συγχωροῦντες" ὡς ἔγωγε πρῶτον μὲν ἀκούσας 
τὸ γιγνόμενον ἐθαύμασα. καὶ αὐτὸς ἠβουλήθην 
αὐτόπτης αὐτοῦ καταστῆναι. “μετὰ ταῦτα δέ, 
ὡς καὶ τὰ τῆς πείρας ὡμολόγει, τὴν αἰτίαν 
σκοπούμενος ἐν παμπόλλῳ χρόνῳ κατὰ πάσας 
τὰς αἱρέσεις οὐδεμίαν ἄλλην εὑρεῖν οἷός τ᾽ ἣν 
οὐδ᾽ ἄχρι τοῦ πιθανοῦ προϊοῦσαν ἀλλὰ κατα- 
γελάστους τε καὶ σαφῶς ἐξελεγχομένας τὰς ἄλλας 
ἁπάσας πλὴν τῆς τὴν ὁλκὴν πρεσβενούσης. 
Ἔστι δὲ τὸ γιγνόμενον τοιόνδε. κατακομί- 
ζοντες οἱ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν γεωργοὶ τοὺς || ἐκ τῶν ἀγρῶν 
πυροὺς εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἐν ἁμάξαις τισίν, ὅταν 
ὑφελέσθαι βουληθῶσιν, ὥστε μὴ φωραθῆναι, 
κεράμε ἄττα πληρώσαντες ὕδατος μέσοις αὐτοῖς 
ἐνιστᾶσιν. ἕλκοντες οὖν ἐκεῖνοι διὰ τοῦ κεραμίου 
τὸ ὑγρὸν εἰς αὑτοὺς ὄγκον “μὲν καὶ βάρος 
προσκτῶνται, κατάδηλοι δ᾽ οὐ m avy γίγνονται τοῖς 
ὁρῶσιν, εἰ μή τις προπεπυσμένος ἤδη περιεργό- 
τερον ἐπισκοποῖτο. καίτοι γ᾽ εἰ βουληθείης ἐν 
ἡλίῳ καταθεῖναι πάνυ θερμῷ ταὐτὸν ἀγγεῖον, 
ἐἔλά ἰστον παντελῶς εὑρήσεις τὸ δαπανώμενον 
ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστης ἡμέρας. οὕτως ἄρα καὶ τῆς ἡλιακῆς 
θερμασίας τῆς σφοδρᾶς ἰσχυροτέραν οἱ πυροὶ 
δύναμιν ἔ ουσιν ἕλκειν εἰς ἑαυτοὺς τὴν πλησιά- 
ἕουσαν ρότητα. λῆρος οὖν ἐνταῦθα ρὸς 
ἡ πρὸς τὸ λεπτομερὲς φορὰ τοῦ περιέχοντος 
ἡμᾶς ἀέρος καὶ μάλισθ᾽ ὅταν ἱκανῶς 4 θερμός, 





1 The way that corn can attract moisture. 


86 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xiv 


illustration afforded by corn?! For those who refuse 
to admit that anything is attracted by anything else, 
will, I imagine, be here proved more ignorant re- 
garding Nature than the very peasants. When, for 
my own part, 1 first learned of what happens, I was 
surprised, and felt anxious to see it with my own 
eyes. Afterwards, when experience also had con- 
firmed its truth, I sought long among the various 
sects for an explanation, and, with the exception 
of that which gave the first place to attraction, I 
could find none which even approached plausibility, 
all the others being ridiculous and obviously quite 
untenable. 

What happens, then, is the following. When our 
peasants are bringing corn from the country into the 
city in wagons, and wish to filch some away without 
being detected, they fill earthen jars with water and 
stand them among the corn; the corn then draws 
the moisture into itself through the jar and acquires 
additional bulk and weight, but the fact is never 
detected by the onlookers unless someone who knew 
about the trick before makes a more careful inspec- 
tion. Yet, if you care to set down the same vessel in - 
the very hot sun, you will find the daily loss to be 
very little indeed. Thus corn has a greater power 
than extreme solar heat of drawing to itself the 
moisture in its neighbourhood.2, Thus the theory 
that the water is carried towards the rarefied part of 
the air surrounding us?* (particularly .when that is 
distinctly warm) is utter nonsense ; for although it is 


2 Specific attraction of the ‘‘ proper” quality; οἱ p. 85, 
note 3. 

8 Theory of evaporation insufficient to account for it. ¢f. 
p. 104, note 1. 


87 


57 


GALEN 


πολὺ μὲν ὑπάρχοντος ἢ κατὰ TOUS πυροὺς NET TO- 
μερεστέρου, δεχομένου δ᾽ οὐδὲ τὸ δέκατον μέρος 
τῆς εἰς ἐκείνους μεταλαμβανομένης ὑγρότητος. 


XV 


"Evel δ᾽ ἱκανῶς ἠδολεσχήσαμεν οὐχ ἑκόντες, 
ἀλλ᾽, ὡς ἡ παροιμία φησί, μαινομένοις ἀναγ- 
κασθέντες συμμανῆναι, πάλιν ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν οὔρων 
ἐπανέλθωμεν διάκρισιν, ἐν 4 τῶν μὲν ᾿Ασκλη- 
πιάδου λήρων ἐπιλαθώμεθα, μετὰ δὲ τῶν πε- 
πεισμένων διηθεῖσθαι τὰ οὖρα διὰ τῶν νεφρῶν, 
τίς ὁ τρόπος τῆς ἐνεργείας ἐστίν, ἐπισκεψώμεθα" 
πάντως γὰρ ἢ ἐξ αὑτῶν ἐπὶ τοὺς νεφροὺς φέρεται 
τὰ οὖρα τοῦτο βέλτιον εἶναι νομίζοντα, καθάπερ 
ἡμεῖς, ὁπόταν εἰς τὴν ἀγορὰν ἀπίωμεν" ἤ; εἰ τοῦτ᾽ 
ἀδύνατον, ἕτερόν τι χρὴ τῆς φορᾶς αὐτῶν ἐξευρεῖν 
αἴτιον. τί δὴ τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν; εἰ γὰρ μὴ τοῖς νεφροῖς 
δώσομέν τινα δύναμιν ἑλκτικὴν τῆς τοιαύτης 
ποιότητος, ὡς Ἱπποκράτης ἐνόμιζεν, οὐδὲν ἕτερον 
ἐξευρήσομεν. ὅτι μὲν γὰρ ἤτοι τούτους ἕλκειν 
αὐτὸ προσῆκεν ἢ τὰς φλέβας πέμπειν, εἴπερ γε μὴ 
ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ φέρεται, παντί που δῆλον. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν 
αἱ φλέβες περιστελλόμεναι προωθοῖεν, οὐκ ἐκεῖνο 
μόνον, ἀλλὰ σὺν αὐτῷ καὶ τὸ πᾶν αἷμα τὸ 
περιεχόμενον ἐν ἑαυταῖς εἰς τοὺς νεφροὺς ἐκ- 
θλίψουσιν: εἰ δὲ τοῦτ᾽ ἀδύνατον, ὡς δείξομεν, 
λείπεται τοὺς νεφροὺς ἕλκειν. 


88 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. χιν.--χν 


much more rarefied there than it is amongst the corn, 
yet it does not take up a tenth part of the moisture 
which the corn does, 


XV 


Since, then, we have talked sufficient nonsense— 
not willingly, but because we were forced, as the 
proverb says, “ to behave madly among madmen ”’— 
let us return again to the subject of urinary secretion. 
Here let us forget the absurdities of Asclepiades, 
and, in company with those who are persuaded that 
the urine does pass through the kidneys, let us con- 
sider what is the character of this function. For, 
most assuredly, either the urine is conveyed by its 
own motion to the kidneys, considering this the 
better course (as do we when we go off to market! 4), 
or, if this be impossible, then some other reason for 
its conveyance must be found. What, then, is this? 
If we are not going to grant the kidneys a faculty 
for attracting this particular quality,? as Hippocrates 
held, we shall discover no other reason. For, surely 
everyone sees that either the kidneys must attract 
the urine, or the veins must propel it—if, that is, it 
does not move of itself. But if the veins did exert 
a propulsive action when they contract, they would 
squeeze out into the kidneys not merely the urine, 
but along with it the whole of the blood which they 
contain.* And if this is impossible, as we shall show, 
the remaining explanation is that the kidneys. do 
exert traction. 

1 Playful suggestion of free-will in the urine. 


3 Specific attraction. cf. p. 87, note 2. 
3 2,6. there would be no selective action. 


δ8 


59 


GALEN 


Πῶς οὖν ἀδύνατον τοῦτο; τῶν νεφρῶν ἡ θέσις 
ἀντιβαίνει. οὐ γὰρ δὴ οὕτω γ᾽ ὑπόκεινται τῇ 
κοίλῃ φλεβὲ || καθάπερ τοῖς ἐξ ἐγκεφάλου 
περιττώμασιν ἔν τε τῇ ῥινὶ καὶ κατὰ τὴν ὑπερῴαν 
οἱ τοῖς ἠθμοῖς ὅμοιοι πόροι, ἀλλ᾽ ἑκατέρωθεν 
αὐτῇ παράκεινται. καὶ μήν, εἴπερ ὁμοίως τοῖς 
ἠθμοῖς ὅσον ἂν ἦ λεπτότερον καὶ τελέως ὀρρῶδες, 
τοῦτο μὲν ἑτοίμως διαπέμπουσι, τὸ δὲ παχύτερον 
ἀποστέγουσιν, ἅπαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἰέναι χρὴ τὸ 
αἷμα τὸ περιεχόμενον ἐν τῇ κοίλῃ φλεβί, καθάπερ 
εἰς τοὺς τρυγητοὺς ὁ πᾶς οἶνος ἐμβάλλεται. καὶ 
μέν γε καὶ τὸ τοῦ γάλακτος τοῦ τυρουμένου 
παράδειγμα σαφῶς ἄν, ὃ βούλομαι λέγειν, 
ἐνδείξαιτου καὶ γὰρ καὶ τοῦτο πᾶν ἐμβληθὲν 
εἰς τοὺς ταλάρους οὐ πᾶν διηθεῖται, ἀλλ᾽ ὅσον 
μὲν ἂν ἦ λεπτότερον τῆς εὐρύτητος τῶν πλοκά- 
μων, εἰς τὸ κάταντες φέρεται καὶ τοῦτο μὲν 
ὀρρὸς ἐπονομάξεται' τὸ λοιπὸν δὲ τὸ παχὺ τὸ 
ued nov ἔσεσθαι τυρός, ὡς ἂν οὐ παραδεχομένων 
αὐτὸ τῶν ἐν τοῖς ταλάροις πόρων, οὐ διεκπίπτει 
κάτω. καὶ τοίνυν, εἴπερ οὕτω μέλλει διηθεῖσθαι 
τῶν νεφρῶν ὁ τοῦ αἵματος ὀρρός, ἅπαν ἐπ᾽ 
αὐτοὺς ἥκειν χρὴ τὸ αἷμα καὶ μὴ τὸ μὲν ναί, τὸ 
δ᾽ ov. || | 

Πῶς οὖν ἔχει τὸ φαινόμενον ἐκ τῆς ἀνατομῆς; 

Τὸ μὲν ἕτερον μέρος τῆς κοίλης ἄνω πρὸς τὴν 
καρδίαν ἀναφέρεται, τὸ λοιπὸν δ᾽ ἐπιβαίνει τῇ 
ῥάχει καθ᾽ ὅλης αὐτῆς ἐκτεινόμενον ἄχρι τῶν 
σκελῶν, ὥστε τὸ μὲν ἕτερον οὐδ᾽ ἐγγὺς ἀφικνεῖται 


1 Nasal mucus was supposed to be the non-utilizable part 
of the nutriment conveyed to the brain. ο΄. p. 214, note 3. 


96 


a4 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xv 


And how is propulsion by the veins impossible ? 
The situation of the kidneys is against it. They 
do not occupy a position beneath the hollow vein 
[vena cava] as does the sieve-like [ethmoid] passage 
in the nose and palate in relation to the surplus 
matter from the brain;! they are situated on both 
sides of it. Besides, if the kidneys are like sieves, 
and readily let the thinner serous [whey-like] portion 
through, and keep out the thicker portion, then 
the whole of the blood contained in the vena cava 
must go to them, just as the whole of the wine 
is thrown into the filters. Further, the example 
of milk being made into cheese will show clearly 
what I mean. For this, too, although it is all 
thrown into the wicker strainers, does not all 
percolate through; such part of it as is too fine in 
proportion to the width of the meshes passes down- 
wards, and this is called whey [serum] ; the remaining 
thick portion which is destined to become cheese 
cannot get down, since the pores of the strainers will 
not admit it. Thus it is that, if the blood-serum has 
similarly to percolate through the kidneys, the whole 
of the blood must come to them, and not merely one 
part of it. . 

What, then, is the appearance as found on dis- 
section ὃ 

One division of the vena cavais carried upwards 3 
to the heart, and the other mounts upon the spine 
and extends along its whole length as far as the legs ; 
thus one division does not even come near the 

2 He means from ite origin in the liver (i.e. in the three 
hepatic veins). His idea was that the upper division took 
nutriment to heart, lungs, head, etc., and the lower division 


to lower part of body. On the relation of right auricle to 
vena cava and right ventricle, cf. p. 321, notes 4 and 5. 


OI 


GALEN 


τῶν νεφρῶν, TO λοιπὸν δὲ πλησιάζει μέν, οὐ μὴν 
εἰς αὐτούς γε καταφύεται. ἐχρῆν δ᾽, εἴπερ 
ἔμελλεν ὡς δι’ ἠθμῶν αὐτῶν καδαρόήσεσθαι τὸ 
αἷμα, πᾶν ἐμπίπτειν εἰς αὐτοὺς κἄπειτα κάτω 
μὲν φέρεσθαι τὸ λεπτόν, ἴσχεσθαι δ᾽ ἄνω τὸ 
παχύ. νυνὶ δ᾽ οὐχ οὕτως ἔχει' πλάγιοι γὰρ 
ἑκατέρωθεν τῆς κοίλης φλεβὸς οἱ νεφροὶ κεῖνται. 
οὔκουν ὡς ἠθμοὶ διηθοῦσι, πεμπούσης μὲν ἐκείνης, 
αὐτοὶ δ᾽ οὐδεμίαν εἰσφερόμενοι δύναμιν, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἕλκουσι δηλονότι" τοῦτο γὰρ ἔτι λείπεται. 

Πῶς οὖν ἕλκουσιν; εἰ μέν, ὡς ᾿Επίκουρος οἴεται 
τὰς ὁλκὰς ἁπάσας γίγνεσθαι κατὰ τὰς τῶν 
ἀτόμων ἀποπάλσεις τε καὶ περιπλοκάς, ἄμεινον 
ἦν ὄντως εἰπεῖν αὐτοὺς μηδ᾽ ἕλκειν ὅλως" πολὺ 
γὰρ ἂν οὕτω γε τῶν ἐπὶ τῆς ἡρακλείας λίθου 
μικρῷ πρόσθεν εἰρημένων ὁ λόγος ἐξεταζόμενος 
εὑρεθείη γελοιότερος: ἀλλ᾽ ὡς Ἱπποκράτης ἠβού- 
λετο. λεχθήσεται δὲ σαφέστερον ἐπὶ προήκοντι 
τῷ λόγῳ. νυνὶ γὰρ οὐ τοῦτο πρόκειται διδάσκειν, 
ἀλλ᾽ ὡς οὔτ᾽ ἄλλο τι δυνατὸν εἰπεῖν αἴτιον εἶναι 
τῆς τῶν οὔρων διακρίσεως πλὴν τῆς ὁλκῆς τῶν 
νεφρῶν οὔθ᾽ οὕτω γίγνεσθαι τὴν ὁλκήν, ὡς οἱ 
μηδεμίαν οἰκείαν διδόντες τῇ φύσει δύναμιν 
οἴονται γίγνεσθαι. 

Τούτου γὰρ ὁμολογηθέντος, ὡς ἔστιν ὅλως τις 
ἐν τοῖς ὑπὸ φύσεως διοικουμένοις δύναμις ἑλκτική, 
ληρώδης νομίζοιτ᾽ ἂν ὁ περὶ ἀναδόσεως τροφῆς 
ἄλλο τι λέγειν ἐπιχειρῶν. 





1 We arrive at our belief by excluding other possibilities. 
2 4.e. the mechanistic physicists. cf. pp. 45-47. 
3 cf. p. 85, note 8, 


92 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xv 


kidneys, while the other approaches them but is cer- 
tainly not inserted into them. Now, if the blood 
were destined to be purified by them as if they were 
sieves, the whole of it would have to fall into them, 
the thin part being thereafter conveyed downwards, 
and the thick part retained above. But, as a matter 
of fact, this is not so. For the kidneys lie on either 
side of the vena cava. They therefore do not act 
like sieves, filtering fluid sent to them by the vena 
cava, and themselves contributing no force. They 
obviously exert traction ; for this is the only remain- 
ing alternative. 

How, then, do they exert this traction? If, 
as Epicurus thinks, all attraction takes place by 
virtue of the rebounds and entanglements of atoms, 
it would be certainly better to maintain that the 
kidneys have no attractive action at all; for his 
theory, when examined, would be found as it stands 
to be much more ridiculous even than the theory of 
the lodestone, mentioned a little while ago. Attrac- 
tion occurs in the way that Hippocrates laid down ; 
this will be stated more clearly as the discussion 
proceeds ; for the present our task is not to demon- 
strate this, but to point out that no other cause of 
the secretion of urine can be given except that of 
attraction by the kidneys,! and that this attraction 
does not take place in the way imagined by people 
who do not allow Nature a faculty of her own.? 

For if it be granted that there is any attractive 
faculty at all in those things which are governed by 
Nature,? a person who attempted to say anything 
else about the absorption of nutriment* would be 
considered a fool. 


4 The subject of anadosis is taken up in the next chapter. 
cf. also p. 62, note 1. 
93 


61 


GALEN 


XVI 


3 ’ δ᾽ > tO Φ ς / / 

Ερασίστρατος ὃ οὐκ 010 ὅπως ἑτέραις μέν τισι 
δόξαις εὐήθεσιν ἀντεῖπε διὰ μακρῶν, ὑπερέβη δὲ 
τελέως τὴν Ἱπποκράτους, οὐδ᾽ ἄχρι τοῦ μνημονεῦ- 
σαι μόνον αὐτῆς, ὡς ἐν τοῖς περὶ καταπόσεως 
ἐποίησεν, ἀξιώσας. ἐν ἐκείνοις μὲν γὰρ ἄχρι 
τοσούτου φαίνεται μνημονεύων, ὡς τοὔνομ᾽ 
εἰπεῖν τῆς ὁλκῆς μόνον ὧδέ πως γράφων" 

“Ὁλκὴ μὲν οὖν τῆς κοιλίας οὐδεμία φαίνεται 
4 39 A ? ᾽ “ 
εἶναι" περὶ δὲ τῆς || ἀναδόσεως τὸν λόγον ποι- 
ovpevos οὐδ᾽ ἄχρι συλλαβῆς μιᾶς ἐμνημόνευσε 
τῆς ἹἽπποκρατείον δόξης. καίτοι γ᾽ ἐπήρκεσεν 
ἂν ἡμῖν, εἰ καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἔγραψε μόνον, ὡς 'ἵππο- 
κράτης εἰπὼν “ Σάρκες ὁλκοὶ καὶ ἐκ κοιλίης καὶ 
é θ 3) "ὃ ὲ Ν᾽ \ > “A ὔ “ 9 
ξωθεν " ψεύδεται' οὔτε γὰρ ἐκ τῆς κοιλίας οὔτ 

54 4, > \ @o@ / 
ἔξωθεν ἕλκειν δύνανται. εἰ δὲ καὶ ὅτι μήτρας 
αἰτιώμενος ἄρρωστον αὐχένα κακῶς εἶπεν “Οὐ 
γὰρ δύναται αὐτέης ὁ στόμαχος εἰρύσαι τὴν γονήν," 
a 3 ’ ~ ΝΥ , e 9 [4 
ἢ εἰ καὶ TL τοιοῦτον ἄλλο γράφειν ὁ Epaci- 
στρατος ἠξίωσε, τότ᾽ ἂν καὶ ἡμεῖς πρὸς αὐτὸν 
ἀπολογούμενοι εἴπομεν" 

Ὦ, γενναῖε, μὴ ῥητορικῶς ἡμῶν κατάτρεχε 
χωρὶς ἀποδείξεως, ἀλλ᾽ εἰπέ τινα κατηγορίαν 
τοῦ δόγματος, ἵν’ ἣ πεισθῶμέν σοι ὡς καλῶς 
ἐξέλεγχοντι τὸν παλαιὸν λόγον ἢ μεταπείσωμεν 
Δ On Erasistratus v. Introd. p. xii. His view that the 


stomach exerts no holké, or attraction, is dealt with more 
fully in Book IIL., chap. viii. 2 


94 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xvi 


XVI 


Now, while Erasistratus ! for some reason replied at 
great length to certain other foolish doctrines, he 
entirely passed over the view held by Hippocrates, 
not even thinking it worth while to mention it, 
as he did in his work “On Deglutition”’; in that 
work, as may be seen, he did go so far as at least to 
make mention of the word attraction, writing some- 
what as follows: 

“ Now, the stomach does not appear to exercise 
any attraction.”! But when he is dealing with ana- 
dosts he does not mention the Hippocratic view even 
to the extent of a single syllable. Yet we should 
have been satisfied if he had even merely written 
this : “ Hippocrates lies in saying ‘ The flesh? attracts 
both from the stomach and from without,’ for it 
cannot attract either from the stomach or from with- 
out.” Or if he had thought it worth while to state 
that Hippocrates was wrong in criticizing the weak- 
ness of the neck of the uterus, “seeing that the 
orifice of the uterus has no power of attracting 
semen,’ 3 or if he [Erasistratus] had thought proper 
to write any other similar opinion, then we in our 
turn would have defended ourselves in the following 
terms : 

“My good sir, do not run us down in this 
rhetorical fashion without some proof; state some 
definite objection to our view, in order that either 
you may convince us by a brilliant refutation of the 
ancient doctrine, or that, on the other hand, we may 
convert you from your ignorance.’ Yet why do I 


2 2,6. the tissues. 3 of. p. 291. 
95 


62 


GALEN 


ὡς ἀγνοοῦντα. καίτοι Ti λέγω ῥητορικῶς; μὴ 
7 4 ὃ 4 “A 4« 7 a 4 9 Ἰὃ 
γάρ, ἐπειδὴ τινες τῶν PNTOPWY, ἃ μάλιστ ἀδυνα- 
A A 9 
τοῦσι διαλύεσθαι, ταῦτα διαγελάσαντες οὐδ 
ἐπιχειροῦσιν ἀντιλέγειν, ἤδη που τοῦτο καὶ ἡμεῖς 
e , 9 4 Ἁ e A Ἁ \ 4 ~ 
ἡγώμεθ᾽ εἶναι TO ῥητορικῶς" τὸ yap διὰ λόγου 
πιθανοῦ ἐστι τὸ || ῥητορικῶς, τὸ δ᾽ ἄνευ λόγου 
βωμολοχικόν, οὐ ῥητορικόν. οὔκουν οὔτε ῥητο- 
A A nw e 
ρικῶς οὔτε διαλεκτικῶς ἀντεῖπεν ὁ ᾿᾽Ερασίστρατος 
ἐν τῷ περὶ τῆς καταπόσεως λόγῳ. τί γάρ φησιν; 
“ὍὉλκὴ μὲν οὖν τῆς κοιλίας οὐδεμία φαίνεται 
εἶναι." πάλιν οὖν αὐτῷ Tap ἡμῶν ἀντιμαρτυρῶν 
e > A ’ 3 ’ \ 
ὁ αὐτὸς λόγος ἀντιπαραβαλλέσθω' περιστολὴ 
μὲν οὖν τοῦ στομάχου οὐδεμία φαίνεται εἶναι. 
καὶ πῶς οὐ φαίνεται; τάχ᾽ ἂν ἴσως εἴποι τις τῶν 
ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ" τὸ γὰρ ἀεὶ τῶν ἄνωθεν αὐτοῦ μερῶν 
συστελλομένων διαστέλλεσθαι τὰ κάτω πῶς οὐκ 
ἔστι τῆς περιστολῆς ἐνδεικτικόν; αὖθις οὖν ἡμεῖς, 
καὶ πῶς οὐ φαίνεται, φήσομεν, ἡ τῆς κοιλίας 
ὁλκή; τὸ γὰρ ἀεὶ τῶν κάτωθεν μερῶν τοῦ 
στομάχου διαστελλομένων συστέλλεσθαι τὰ ἄνω 
An vw e A 
TOS οὐκ ἔστι τῆς ὁλκῆς ἐνδεικτικόν; εἰ δὲ 
σωφρονήσειέ ποτε καὶ γνοίη τὸ φαινόμενον τοῦτο 
μηδὲν μᾶλλον τῆς ἑτέρας τῶν δοξῶν ὑπάρχειν 
4 Ἁ 9 9 9 J lA a 
ἐνδεικτικὸν ἀλλ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων εἶναι κοινόν, οὕτως 
‘4 3 “A -f@ay nA ry 
ἂν ἤδη δείξαιμεν αὐτῷ. τὴν ὀρθὴν ὁδὸν τῆς τοῦ 
ἀληθοῦς εὑρέσεως. 
᾿Αλλὰ περὶ μὲν τῆς κοιλίας αὖθις. ἡ δὲ τῆς 
τροφῆς ἀνάδοσις οὐδὲν δεῖται || τῆς πρὸς τὸ κενού- 
9 ’ὔ @ A e A 4 
μενον ἀκολουθίας ἅπαξ γε τῆς ἑλκτικῆς δυνάμεως 
96 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xvi 


say “rhetorical δ For we too are not to suppose 
that when certain rhetoricians pour ridicule upon that 
which they are quite incapable of refuting, without 
any attempt at argument, their words are really 
thereby constituted rhetoric. For rhetoric proceeds 
by persuasive reasoning ; words without reasoning are 
buffoonery rather than rhetoric. Therefore, the 
reply of Erasistratus in his treatise “ On Deglutition ”’ 
was neither rhetoric nor logic. For what is it 
that he says? “Now, the stomach does not appear 
to exercise any traction.” Let us testify against 
him in return, and set our argument beside his in the 
same form. Nom, there appears to be nd peristalsis} of 
the gullet. ‘ And how does this appear ?”’ one of his 
adherents may perchance ask. “ For is it not indica- 
tive of peristalsts that always when the upper parts of 
the gullet contract the lower parts dilate?” Again, 
then, we say, “ And in what way does the attraction 
of the stomach not appear? For is it not indicative 
of attraction that always when the lower parts of the 
gullet dilate the upper parts contract?” Now, if 
he would but be sensible and recognize that this 
phenomenon is not more indicative of the one than 
of the other view, but that it applies equally to both,” 
we should then show him without further delay the 
proper way to the discovery of truth. 

We will, however, speak about the stomach again. 
And the dispersal of nutriment [anadosis] need not 
make us have recourse to the theory regarding the 

1 Peristalsis may be used here to translate Gk. peristolé, 
meaning the contraction and dilation of muscle-fibres circu- 
larly rounda lumen. ο΄. p. 263, note 2. 

2 For a demonstration that this phenomenon is a conclusive 


roof neither of peristolé nor of real vital attraction, but is 
ound even in dead bodies v. p. 267. 


97 





GALEN 


4 AN A na e 4 / 4 
ἐπὶ τῶν νεφρῶν ὡμολογημένης, ἣν καίτοι πάνυ 
σαφῶς ἀληθῆ γιγνώσκων ὑπάρχειν ὁ ‘Epact- 
στρατος οὔτ᾽ ἐμνημόνευσεν οὔτ᾽ ἀντεῖπεν οὔθ᾽ 
Φ 3 7 49 Mf ὃ ς \ a a 
ὅλως ἀπεφήνατο, τίν᾽ ἔχει δόξαν ὑπὲρ τῆς τῶν 
οὔρων διακρίσεως. 

Ἢ διὰ τί προειπὼν εὐθὺς κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς τῶν Kal 
ὅλον λόγων, ὡς ὑπὲρ τῶν φυσικῶν ἐνεργειῶν ἐρεῖ, 
πρῶτον τίνες τ᾽ εἰσὶ καὶ πῶς γίγνονται καὶ διὰ 
τίνων τόπων, ἐπὶ τῆς τῶν οὔρων διακρίσεως, ὅτι 
μὲν διὰ νεφρῶν, ἀπεφήνατο, τὸ δ᾽ ὅπως γίγνεται 

4 φ tC a ὶ ὶ A ’ 
παρέλιπε; μάτην οὖν ἡμᾶς καὶ περὶ τῆς πέψεως 
ἐδίδαξεν, ὅπως γίγνεται, καὶ περὶ τῆς τοῦ χολώ- 
δους περιττώματος διακρίσεως κατατρίβει. ἤρκει 
γὰρ εἰπεῖν κἀνταῦθα τὰ μόρια, δι ὧν γίγνεται, τὸ 
δ᾽ ὅπως παραλιπεῖν. ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν ἐκείνων εἶχε 
λέγειν, οὐ μόνον δι’ ὧν ὀργάνων ἀλλὰ καὶ καθ᾽ 
ὅντινα γίγνεται τρόπον, ὥσπερ οἶμαι καὶ περὶ τῆς 
ἀναδόσεως: οὐ γὰρ ἤρκεσεν εἰπεῖν αὐτῷ μόνον, 
Ψ \ A > A > A Ψ a 
ὅτι διὰ φλεβῶν, ἀλλὰ καὶ πῶς ἐπεξῆλθεν, ὅτι τῇ 
πρὸς || τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθίᾳ: περὶ δὲ τῶν 
οὔρων τῆς διακρίσεως, ὅτι μὲν διὰ νεφρῶν γίγνε- 
ται, γράφει, τὸ δ᾽ ὅπως οὐκέτι προστίθησιν. 

3 a \ \ ’ 3 ’ 
οὐδὲ γὰρ οἶμαι τῇ πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθίᾳ 
qv εἰπεῖν. οὕτω γὰρ ἂν οὐδεὶς ὑπ᾽ ἰσχουρίας 
> 4 90. \ / ᾽ὔ 3 
ἀπέθανεν οὐδέποτε μὴ δυναμένου πλείονος ἐπιρ- 





1 This was Erasistratus’s favourite principle, known in 
Latin as the ‘“‘horror vacui” and in English as ‘‘ Nature’s 
abhorrence of a vacuum,” although these terms are not an 
exact translation of the Greek. τὸ xevodpevoy probably means 


98 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xvi 


natural tendency of a vacuum to become refilled,) when 
once we have granted the attractive faculty of 
the kidneys. Now, although Erasistratus knew that 
this faculty most certainly existed, he neither 
mentioned it nor denied it, nor did he make any 
statement as to his views on the secretion of urine. 
Why did he give notice at the very beginning of 
his “ General Principles”’ that he was going to speak 
about natural activities—firstly what they are, how 
they take place, and in what situations—and then, 
in the case of urinary secretion, declared that this 
took place through the kidneys, but left out its 
method of occurrence? It must, then, have been for 
no purpose that he told us how digestion occurs, or 
spends time upon the secretion of biliary super- 
fluities ;? for in these cases also it would have been 
sufficient to have named the parts through which. the 
function takes place, and to have omitted the method. 
On the contrary, in these cases he was able to tell us 
not merely through what organs, but also in what 
. way it occurs—as he also did, I think, in the case of 
anadosis; for he was not satisfied with saying that 
this took place through the veins, but he also con- 
sidered fully the method, which he held to be from 
the tendency of a vacuum to become refilled. Con- 
cerning the secretion of urine, however, he writes 
that this occurs through the kidneys, but does not 
add in what way it occurs. I do not think he could 
say that this was from the tendency of matter to fill 
a vacuum, for, if this were so, nobody would have 
ever died of retention of urine, since no more can 
the vacuum, not the matter evacuated, although Galen else- 
where uses κενόω in the latter (non-classical) sense, e.g. pp. 67, 


215. Akolouthia is a following-up, a sequence, almost a con- 
sequence. 2 v. p. 128. 8. ef. Book II., chap.i. > - 


H 2 


99, :..: 
tt ὡς 
" " ΝΣ 
Pa a4 


65 


GALEN 


punval ποτε παρὰ τὸ Kevovpevov' ἄλλης γὰρ 


«αἰτίας μηδεμιᾶς προστεθείσης, ἀλλὰ μόνης τῆς 


πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθίας ποδηγούσης τὸ 
συνεχές, οὐκ ἐγχωρεῖ πλέον ἐπιρρυῆναί ποτε τοῦ 
κενουμένου. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἄλλην τινὰ προσθεῖναι 
πιθανὴν αἰτίαν εἶχεν, ὡς ἐπὶ τῆς ἀναδόσεως τὴν 
ἔκθλιψιν τῆς γαστρός. GAN αὕτη γ᾽ ἐπὶ τοῦ 
κατὰ τὴν κοίλην αἵματος ἀπωλώλει τελέως, οὐ 
τῷ μήκει μόνον τῆς ἀποστάσεως ἐκλυθεῖσα, ἀλλὰ 
καὶ τῷ τὴν καρδίαν ὑπερκειμένην ἐξαρπάξειν 
αὐτῆς σφοδρῶς καθ᾽ ἑκάστην διαστολὴν οὐκ 
ὀλίγον αἷμα. 

Μόνη δή τις ἔτι καὶ πάντων ἔρημος ἀπελείπετο 
τῶν σοφισμάτων ἐν τοῖς κάτω τῆς κοίλης ἡ πρὸς || 
τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθία, διά τε τοὺς ἐπὶ ταῖς 
ἰσχουρίαις ἀποθνήσκοντας ἀπολωλεκυῖΐα τὴν πι- 
θανότητα καὶ διὰ τὴν τῶν νεφρῶν θέσιν οὐδὲν 
ἧττον. εἰ μὲν γὰρ ἅπαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἐφέρετο τὸ 
αἷμα, δεόντως ἄν τις ἅπαν ἔφασκεν αὐτὸ καθαίρ- 
εσθαι. νυνὶ δέ, οὐ γὰρ ὅλον ἀλλὰ τοσοῦτον 
αὐτοῦ μέρος, ὅσον at μέχρι νεφρῶν δέχονται 
φλέβες, ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς ἔρχεται, μόγον ἐκεῖνο καθαρ- 
θήσεται. καὶ τὸ μὲν ὀρρῶδες αὐτοῦ καὶ λεπτὸν 
οἷον δι’ ἠθμῶν τινων τῶν νεφρῶν διαδύσεται" τὸ 
δ᾽ αἱματῶδές τε καὶ παχὺ Πρ τι τὰς φλέβας ὑπο- 
μένον ἐμποδὼν στήσεται τῷ κατόπιν ἐπιρρέοντι. 
παλινδρομεῖν οὖν αὐτὸ πρότερον ἐπὶ τὴν κοίλην 
ἀναγκαῖον καὶ κενὰς οὕτως ἐργάζεσθαι τὰς ἐπὶ 
τοὺς νεφροὺς ἰούσας φλέβας, al δεύτερον οὐκέτι 


1 Vital factor necessary over and above the mechanical. 
2 of. p. 119, note 2. 3 pp. 91, 93. 


- “TOO 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xv: 


flow into a vacuum than has run out. For, ifno other 
factor comes into operation ! save only this tendency 
by which a vacuum becomes refilled, no more could 
ever flow in than had been evacuated. Nor could 
he suggest any other plausible cause, such, for 
example, as the expression of nutriment by the 
stomach 2 which occurs in the process of anadosis ; 
this had been entirely disproved in the case of 
blood in the vena cava;* it is excluded, not merely 
owing to the long distance, but also from the fact 
that the overlying heart, at each diastole, robs the 
vena cava by violence. of a considerable quantity 
of blood. 

In relation to the lower part of the vena cava‘ 
there would still remain, solitary and abandoned, 
the specious theory concerning the filling of a 
vacuum. This, however, is deprived of plausibility 
by the fact that people die of retention of urine, 
and also, no less, by the situation of the kidneys. 
For, if the whole of the blood were carried to 
the kidneys, one might properly maintain that it 
all undergoes purification there. But, as a matter 
of fact, the whole of it does not go to them, 
but only so much as can be contained in the veins 
going to the kidneys; 5 this portion only, therefore, 
will be purified. Further, the thin serous part of 
this will pass through the kidneys as if through a 
sieve, while the thick sanguineous portion remaining 
in the veins will obstruct the blood flowing in from 
behind ; this will first, therefore, have to run back 
to the vena cava, and so to empty the veins going to 
the kidneys; these veins will no longer be able to 


3.2.6. the part below the liver; cf. p. 91, note 2. 
5 Renal veins. 


IOI 


66 


67 


GALEN 


παρακομιοῦσιν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἀκάθαρτον αἷμα" κατ- 
εὐληφότος γὰρ αὐτὰς τοῦ “προτέρου πάροδος 
οὐδεμία λέλειπται. τίς οὖν ἡμῖν ἡ δύναμις ἀπά- 
ξει πάλιν ὀπίσω τῶν νεφρῶν τὸ καθαρὸν αἷμα; 
τίς δὲ τοῦτο μὲν διαδεξαμένη κελεύσει πάλιν πρὸς 
τὸ κάτω μέρος ἰέναι τῆς κοίλης, ἑτέρῳ δ᾽ ἄνωθεν 
ἐπιφερομένῳ προστάξει, πρὶν || ἐπὶ τοὺς νεφροὺς 
ἀπελθεῖν, μὴ φέρεσθαι κάτω; 

Ταῦτ᾽ οὖν ἅπαντα συνιδὼν ὁ ᾿Ερασίστρατος 
ἀποριῶν μεστὰ καὶ μίαν μόνην δόξαν εὔπορον 
εὑρὼν ἐν ἅπασι τὴν τῆς ὁλκῆς, οὔτ᾽ ἀπορεῖσθαι 
βουλόμενος οὔτε τὴν Ἱπποκράτους ἐθέλων λέγειν 
ἄμεινον ὑπέλαβε σιωπητέον εἶναι περὶ τοῦ τρό- 
που τῆς διακρίσεως. 

"AAD εἰ κἀκεῖνος ἐσίγησεν, ἡμεῖς οὐ σιωπήσο- 
μεν' ἴσμεν γάρ, ὡς οὐκ ἐνδέχεται παρελθόντα 
τὴν Ἱπποκράτειον δόξαν, εἶθ᾽ ἕτερόν TL περὶ 
νεφρῶν ἐνεργείας εἰπόντα μὴ οὐ καταγέλαστον 
εἶναι παντάπασι. διὰ τοῦτ᾽ ᾿'Ερασίστρατος μὲν 
ἐσιώπησεν, ᾿Ασκληπιάδης δ᾽ ἐψεύσατο παραπλη- 
σίως οἰκέταις λάλοις μὲν τὰ πρόσθεν τοῦ βίου 
καὶ πολλὰ πολλάκις ἐγκλήματα διαλυσαμένοις 
ὑπὸ περιττῆς πανουργίας, ἐπ᾽ αὐτοφώρῳ δέ ποτε 
κατειλημμένοις, εἶτ᾽ οὐδὲν ἐξευρίσκουσι σόφισμα 
κἄπειτ᾽ ἐνταῦθα τοῦ μὲν αἰδημονεστέρου σιωπῶν- 
τος, οἷον ἀποπληξίᾳ τινὶ κατειλημμένου, τοῦ δ᾽ 
ἀναισχυντοτέρου κρύπτοντος μὲν ἔθ᾽ ὑπὸ μάλης 
τὸ ,ξητούμενον, ἐξομνυμένου δὲ καὶ μηδ᾽ ἑωρακέναι 
πώποτε φάσκοντος. οὕτω γάρ τοι καὶ ὁ ᾿Ασκλη- 
πιάδης || ἐπιλειπόντων αὐτὸν τῶν τῆς πανουργίας 
σοφισμάτων καὶ μήτε τῆς πρὸς τὸ λεπτομερὲς 


102 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xv 


conduct a second quantity of unpurified blood to the 
kidneys—occupied as they are by the blood which 
had preceded, there is no passage left. What power 
have we, then, which will draw back the purified 
blood from the kidneys? And what power, in the 
next place, will bid this blood retire to the lower 
part of the vena cava, and will enjoin on another 
quantity coming from above not to proceed down- 
wards before turning off into the kidneys? 

Now Erasistratus realized that all these ideas were 
open to many objections, and he could only find one 
idea which held good in all respects—namely, that 
of attraction. Since, therefore, he did not wish either 
to get into difficulties or to mention the view of 
Hippocrates, he deemed it better to say nothing at 
all as to the manner in which secretion occurs. 

But even if he kept silence, I am not going to 
do so. For I know that if one passes over the 
Hippocratic view and makes some other pronounce- 
ment about the function of the kidneys, one cannot 
fail to make oneself utterly ridiculous. It was 
for this reason that Erasistratus kept silence and 
Asclepiades lied ; they are like slaves who have had 
plenty to say in the early part of their career, and 
have managed by excessive rascality to escape many 
and frequent accusations, but who, later, when caught 
in the act of thieving, cannot find any excuse; the 
more modest one then keeps silence, as though 
thunderstruck, whilst the more shameless continues 
to hide the missing article beneath his arm and 
denies on oath that he has ever seen it. For it was 
in this way also that Asclepiades, when all subtle 
excuses had failed him and there was no longer any 
room for nonsense about “conveyance towards the 


103 


68 


GALEN 


popas ἐχούσης ἔτι χώραν ἐνταυθοῖ ληρεῖσθαι 
μήθ᾽ ὡς ὑπὸ τῶν “εφρῶν γεννᾶται τουτὶ τὸ περίτ- 
τωμα, καθάπερ ὑπὸ τῶν ἐν ἥπατι πόρων ἡ χολή, 
δυνατὸν ὃν εἰπόντα μὴ οὐ μέγιστον ὀφλεῖν γέλ- 
WTA, ἐξόμνυταί τε καὶ ψεύδεται «φανερῶς, οὐ 
διήκειν λέγων ἐπὶ τοὺς νεφροὺς τὸ οὖρον ἀλλ᾽ 
ἀτμοειδῶς εὐθὺς ἐκ τῶν κατὰ τὴν κοίλην μερῶν 
εἰς τὴν κύστιν ἀθροίξεσθαι. 

Οὗτοι μὲν οὖν τοῖς ἐπ᾽ αὐτοφώρῳ “κατείλημ- 
μένοις οἰκέταις ὁμοίως ἐκπλαγέντες ὁ μὲν ἐσιώπη- 
σεν, ὁ δ' ἀναισχύντως ψεύδεται. 


XVII 


Τῶν δὲ νεωτέρων ὅσοι τοῖς τούτων ὀνόμασιν 
ἑαυτοὺς ἐσέμνυναν ᾿Ερασιστρατείους τε καὶ ᾽Ασ- 
κληπιαδείους ἐπονομάσαντες, ὁμοίως τοῖς ὑπὸ τοῦ 
βελτίστου “Μενάνδρου κατὰ τὰς κωμῳδίας εἰσαγο- 
μένοις οἰκέταις, Δάοις τέ τισι καὶ Τέταις, οὐδὲν 
ἡγουμένοις σφίσι πεπρᾶχθαι γενναῖον, εἰ μὴ τρὶς 
ἐξαπατήσειαν τὸν δεσπότην, οὕτω καὶ αὐτοὶ κατὰ 
πολλὴν σχολὴν ἀναίσχυντα σοφίσματα συνέθε- 
σαν, οἱ μέν, ἵνα μηδ᾽ ὅλως «ἐξελεγχθείη ποτ᾽ | 
᾿Ασκληπιάδης ψευδόμενος, οἱ δ᾽, ἵνα κακῶς εἴπω- 
σιν, ἃ καλῶς ἐσιώπησεν ᾿Ερασίστρατος. 

᾿Αλλὰ τῶν μὲν ᾿Ασκληπιαδείων ἅλις. οἱ δ᾽ 
“Ερασιστράτειοι λέγειν ἐπιχειροῦντες, ὅπως οἱ 
νεφροὶ διηθοῦσι τὸ οὖρον, ἅπαντα δρῶσί τε καὶ 





5 cf. p. 87, note 3. 


2 κοίλην : the usual reading is κοιλίαν, which would make 


ἴο4 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xvi.-xvn 


rarefied part [of the air],”1 and when it was im- 
possible without incurring the greatest derision to 
say that this superfluity (i.e. the urine] is generated 
by the kidneys as is bile by the canals in the liver— 
he, then, I say, clearly lied when he swore that the 
urine does not reach the kidneys, and maintained 
that it passes, in the form of vapour, straight from 
the region of the vena cava,? to collect in the 
bladder. 

Like slaves, then, caught in the act of stealing, 
these two are quite bewildered, and while the one 
says nothing, the other indulges in shameless lying. 


XVII 


Now such of the younger men as have dignified 
themselves with the names of these two authorities 
by taking the appellations “ Erasistrateans”’ or 
“ Asclepiadeans”’ are like the Davi and Getae—the 
slaves introduced by the excellent Menander into 
his comedies. As these slaves held that they had 
done nothing fine unless they had cheated their 
master three times, so also the men I am discussing 
have ‘taken their time over the construction of 
impudent sophisms, the one party striving to prevent 
the lies of Asclepiades from ever being refuted, and 
the other saying stupidly what Erasistratus had the 
sense to keep silence about. 

But enough about the Asclepiadeans. The Erasi- 
strateans, in attempting to say how the kidneys let 
the urine through, will do anything or suffer anything 


it “‘from the region of the alimentary canal.” cf. p. 118, 
note 1. 


105 


69 


GALEN 


πάσχουσι καὶ παντοῖοι γίγνονται πιθανὸν ἐξευ- 
ρεῖν τι ξητοῦντες αἴτιον ὁλκῆς μὴ δεόμενον. 

Οἱ μὲν δὴ πλησίον ρασιστράτου τοῖς χρόνοις 
γενόμενοι τὰ μὲν ἄνω τῶν νεφρῶν μόρια καθαρὸν 
αἷμα λαμβάνειν φασί, τῷ δὲ βάρος ἔχειν τὸ 
ὑδατῶδες περίττωμα βρίθειν τε καὶ ὑπορρεῖν 

4 ’ > 3 A \ \ 
κάτω" διηθούμενον δ᾽ ἐνταῦθα κατὰ τοὺς νεφροὺς 
αὐτοὺς χρηστὸν οὕτω γενόμενον ἅπασι τοῖς κάτω 
τῶν νεφρῶν ἐπιπέμπεσθαι τὸ αἷμα. 

Καὶ μέχρι γέ τινος εὐδοκίμησεν ἧδε ἡ δόξα καὶ 
” \ 3 \ 3 ’ , > ᾧ 
ἤκμασε καὶ ἀληθὴς ἐνομίσθη" χρόνῳ δ᾽ ὕστερον 
καὶ αὐτοῖς τοῖς ᾿Ερασιστρατείοις ὕποπτος ἐφάνη 
καὶ τελευτῶντες ἀπέστησαν αὐτῆς. αἰτεῖσθαι 
γὰρ ἐδόκουν δύο ταῦτα μήτε συγχωρούμενα πρός 

9 > 2Q9 9 A 4 a 
τινος ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἀποδειχθῆναι δυνάμενα, πρῶτον 
μὲν τὸ βάρος τῆς ὀρρώδους ὑγρότητος ἐν τῇ 

, \ [4 Φ 3 9 3 n 
κοίλῃ || φλεβὲ γεννώμενον, ὥσπερ οὐκ ἐξ ἀρχῆς 
ὑπάρχον, ὁπότ᾽ ἐκ τῆς κοιλίας εἰς ἧπαρ ἀνεφέρετο. 
τί δὴ οὖν οὐκ εὐθὺς ἐν ἐκείνοις τοῖς χωρίοις 
e 4 [4 A 3 A , 3 4 
ὑπέρρει κάτω; πῶς δ᾽ ἄν τῳ δόξειεν εὐλόγως 

3. A cal > A 3 lA ee , 
εἰρῆσθαι συντελεῖν εἰς THY avddocw ἡ ὑδατώδης 
ὑγρότης, εἴπερ οὕτως ἐστὶ βαρεῖα; 

Δεύτερον δ᾽ ἄτοπον, ὅτι κἂν κάτω συγχωρηθῇ 
φέρεσθαι πᾶσα καὶ μὴ κατ᾽ ἄλλο χωρίον ἢ τὴν 
κοίλην φλέβα, τίνα τρόπον εἰς τοὺς νεφροὺς 
ἐμπεσεῖται, χαλεπόν, μᾶλλον δ᾽ ἀδύνατον εἰπεῖν, 
μήτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς κάτω μέρεσι κειμένων αὐτῶν τῆς 

A , 
φλεβὸς GAN ἐκ τῶν πλαγίων μήτ᾽ ἐμφυομένης 

3 3 ‘ “A / ty 3 3 9 ’ ’ 
εἰς αὐτοὺς τῆς κοίλης ἀλλ ἀποφυσιν τινὰ μόνον 


106 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xvn 


or try any shift in order to find some plausible ex- 
planation which does not demand the principle of 
attraction. 

Now those near the times of Erasistratus maintain 
that the parts above the kidneys receive pure blood, 
whilst the watery residue, being heavy, tends to run 
downwards ; that this, after percolating through the 
kidneys themselves,.is thus rendered serviceable, and 
is sent, as blood, to all the parts below the kidneys. 

For a certain period at least this view also found 
favour and flourished, and was held to be true; after 
a time, however, it became suspect to the Erasi- 
strateans themselves, and at last they abandoned it. 
For apparently the following two points were 
assumed, neither of which is conceded by anyone, 
nor is even capable of being proved. The first is the 
heaviness of the serous fluid, which was said to be 
produced in the vena cava, and which did not exist, 
apparently, at the beginning, when this fluid was 
being carried up from the stomach to the liver. 
Why, then, did it not at once run downwards when 
it was in these situations? And if the watery fluid 
is so heavy, what plausibility can anyone find in the 
statement that it assists in the process of anadosts? 

In the second place there is this absurdity, that 
even if it be agreed that all the watery fluid does fall 
downwards, and only when it is in the vena cava,! 
still it is difficult, or, rather, impossible, to say through 
what means it is going to fall into the kidneys, 
seeing that these are not situated below, but on 
either side of the vena cava, and that the vena cava 
is not inserted into them, but merely sends a branch ? 


1 Not at an earlier stage, when it is still on its way from 
the alimentary canal to the liver. 2 3,6. a renal vein. 


107 


10 


71 


GALEN 


εἰς ἑκάτερον πεμπούσης, ὥσπερ καὶ εἰς τἄλλα 
πάντα μόρια. 

Τίς οὖν ἡ διαδεξαμένη ταύτην δόξα κατα- 
γνωσθεῖσαν; ἐμοὶ μὲν dled Epa μακρῷ φαίνεται 
τῆς προτέρας. ἤκμασε ὃ οὖν καὶ αὕτη ποτέ. 
φασὶ γάρ, εἰ κατὰ τῆς γῆς ἐκχυθείη μεμιγμένον 
ἔλαιον ὕδατι, διάφορον ἑ ἑκάτερον ὁδὸν βαδιεῖσθαι 
καὶ ῥνήσεσθαι τὸ μὲν τῇδε, τ τὸ δὲ τῇδε. θαυμαστὸν 
οὖν οὐδὲν εἶναί φασιν, εἰ τὸ μὲν ὑδατῶδες ὑ ὑγρὸν 
εἰς τοὺς νεφροὺς ῥεῖ, τὸ δ᾽ αἷμα διὰ τῆς κοίλης 
φέρ €TaL κάτω. κατέγνωσται οὖν ἤδη καὶ ἦδε 
ἡ ἰδόξα. διὰ τί γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς κοίλης μυρίων 
ἐκπεφυκυιῶν φλεβῶν αἷμα μὲν εἰς τὰς ἄλλας 
ἁπάσας, ἡ δ᾽ ὀρρώδης ὑγρότης εἰς τὰς ἐπὶ τοὺς 
νεφροὺς φερομένας ἐκτρέπεται; τοῦτ᾽ αὐτὸ τὸ 
ξητούμενον οὐκ εἰρήκασιν, ἀλλὰ τὸ γιγνόμενον 
εἰπόντες μόνον οἴονται τὴν αἰτίαν ἀποδεδωκέναι. 

Πάλιν οὖν, τὸ τρίτον τῷ σωτῆρι, τὴν χειρίστην 
ἁπασῶν δόξαν ἐξευρημένην νῦν ὑπὸ Λύκου τοῦ 
Μακεδόνος, εὐδοκιμοῦσαν δὲ διὰ τὸ καινὸν ἤδη 
λέγωμεν. ἀπεφήνατο γὰρ δὴ ὁ Λύκος οὗτος, 
ὥσπερ ἐξ ἀδύτου τινὸς χρησμὸν ἀποφθεγγόμενος, 
περίττωμα τῆς τῶν νεφρῶν θ ρέψεως εἶναι τὸ 
οὖρον. ὅτι μὲν οὖν αὐτὸ τὸ πινόμενον ἅπαν 
οὖρον γίγνεται, πλὴν εἴ τι μετὰ τῶν διαχωρη- 
μάτων ὑπῆλθεν ἢ εἰς ἱδρῶτας. ἀπεχώρησεν ἢ εἰς 
τὴν ἄδηλον διαπνοήν, ἐναργῶς ἐνδείκνυται τὸ 
πλῆθος τῶν καθ᾽ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν οὐρουμένων. 
ἐν χειμῶνι δὲ μάλιστα μαθεῖν ἔστιν ἐπὶ τῶν 
ἀργούντων͵ μέν, κωθωνιξομένων δέ, καὶ μάλιστ᾽ 


εἰ λεπτὸς ὁ οἶνος εἴη καὶ πόριμος. οὐροῦσι | yap 


108 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xvi 


into each of them, as it also does into all the other 
parts. 

What doctrine, then, took the place of this one ᾿ 
when it was condemned? One which to me seems far 
. more foolish than the first, although it also flourished 
at one time. For they say, that if oil be mixed with 
water and poured upon the ground, each will take a 
different route, the one flowing this way and the 
other that, and that, therefore, it is not surprising 
that the watery fluid runs into the kidneys, while 
the blood falls downwards along the vena cava. 
Now this doctrine also stands already condemned. 
For why, of the countless veins which spring from 
the vena cava, should blood flow into all the others, 
and the serous fluid be diverted to those going to the 
kidneys? They have not answered the question which 
was asked; they merely state what happens and 
imagine they have thereby assigned the reason. 

Once again, then (the third cup to the Saviour !),} 
let us now speak of the worst doctrine of all, lately 
invented by Lycus of Macedonia,? but which is popular 
owing to its novelty. This Lycus, then, maintains, as 
though uttering an oracle from the inner sanctuary, 
that urine is residual matter from the nutrition of the 
kidneys!® Now, the amount of urine passed every day 
shows clearly that it is the whole of the fluid drunk 
which becomes urine, except for that which comes 
away with the dejections or passes off as sweat or 
insensible perspiration. This is most easily recognized 
in winter in those who are doing no work but are 
carousing, especially if the wine be thin and diffusible; 

1 In a toast, the third cup was drunk to Zeus Sdétér (the 
Saviour). 

2 An anatomist of the Alexandrian school. 

3 ¢f. nasal mucus, p. 90, note 1. 


109 


72 


GALEN 


οὗτοι διὰ ia rd ὀλίγου δεῖν, ὅσονπερ καὶ 
πίνουσιν. δὲ καὶ ὁ ᾿Ερασίστρατος οὕτως 
ἐγίγνωσκεν. οἱ τὸ πρῶτον ἀνεγνωκότες αὐτοῦ 
σύγγραμμα τῶν καθόλου λόγων ἐπίστανται. ὥσθ᾽ 
ὁ Λύκος οὔτ᾽ ἀληθῆ φαίνεται λέγων οὔτ᾽ Ἔρασι-" 
στράτεια, δῆλον δ᾽ ὡς οὐδ᾽ ᾿Ασκληπιάδεια, πολὺ 
δὲ μᾶλλον οὐδ᾽ Ἱπποκράτεια. ,λευκῷ τοίνυν κατὰ 
τὴν παροιμίαν ἔοικε κόρακι μήτ᾽ αὐτοῖς τοῖς κόρα- 
ξιν ἀναμιχθῆναι δυναμένῳ διὰ τὴν χρόαν μήτε 
ταῖς περιστεραῖς διὰ τὸ μέγεθος, ἀλλ, οὔτι που 
τούτου γ᾽ ἕνεκα παροπτέος" ἴσως γάρ τι λέγει 
θαυμαστόν, ὃ μηδεὶς τῶν ἔμπροσθεν ἔ ἔγνω. 

To μὲν οὖν ἅπαντα τὰ τρεφόμενα μόρια ποιεῖν 
TL περίττωμα συγχωρούμενον, τὸ δὲ τοὺς νεφροὺς 
μόνους, οὕτω σμικρὰ σώματα, χόας ὅλους τέτ- 
Tapas ἢ καὶ πλείους ἴσχειν ἐνίοτε περιττώματος 
οὔθ᾽ ὁμολογούμενον οὔτε λόγον ἔχον" τὸ γὰρ 
ἑκάστου τῶν μειξόνων σπλάγχνων περίττωμα 
πλεῖον ἀναγκαῖον ὑπάρχειν. οἷον αὐτίκα τὸ τοῦ 
πνεύμονος, εἴπερ ἀνάλογον τῷ μεγέθει τοῦ 
σπλάγχνου γίγνοιτο, πολλαπλάϊσιον ἔσται δή- 
που τοῦ κατὰ τοὺς νεφρούς, ὥσθ᾽ ὅλος μὲν ὁ 
θώραξ ἐμπλησθήσεται, πνιγήσεται δ᾽ αὐτίκα τὸ 
ξῷον. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ ἴσον φήσει τις γίγνεσθαι τὸ καθ᾽ 
ἕκαστον τῶν ἄλλων μο ίων περίττωμα, διὰ ποίων 
κύστεων ἐκκρίνεται; εἰ γὰρ οἱ νεφροὶ τοῖς κωθω- 
νιξομένοις τρεῖς ἢ ,τέτταρας ἐνίοτε χόας ποιοῦσι 
περιττώματος, ἑκάστου τῶν ἄλλων σπλάγχνων 
πολλῷ πλείους ἔσονται καὶ πίθον τινὸς οὕτω 
μεγίστου δεήσει τοῦ δεξομένου τὰ πάντων περιτ- 

1 «Sur Ensemble des Choses”’ (Daremberg). 
110 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xvn 


these people rapidly pass almost the same quantity as 
they drink. And that even Erasistratus was aware of 
this is known to those who have read the first book of 
his “ General Principles.” 1 Thus Lycus is speaking 
neither good Erasistratism, nor good Asclepiadism, 
far less good Hippocratism. He is, therefore, as the 
saying is, like a white crow, which cannot mix with 
the genuine crows owing to its colour, nor with the 
pigeons owing to its size. For all this, however, he is 
not to be disregarded; he may, perhaps, be stating 
some wonderful truth, unknown to any of his pre- 
decessors. 

Now it is agreed that all parts which are un- 
dergoing nutrition produce a certain amount of 
residue, but it is neither agreed nor is it likely, 
that the kidneys alone, small bodies as they are, 
could hold four whole congi,2 and sometimes 
even more, of residual matter. For this surplus 
must necessarily be greater in quantity in each 
of the larger viscera; thus, for example, that of 
the lung, if it corresponds in amount to the size of 
the viscus, will obviously be many times more than 
that in the kidneys, and thus the whole of the thorax 
will become filled, and the animal will be at once 
suffocated. But if it be said that the residual matter 
is equal in amount in each of the other parts, where 
are the bladders, one may ask, through which it is 
excreted? For, if the kidneys produce in drinkers 
three and sometimes four congw of superfluous 
matter, that of each of the other viscera will be 
much more, and thus an enormous barrel will be 
needed to contain the waste products of them all. 

2 About twelve quarts. This is about five times as much 


as the average daily excretion, and could only be passed if a 


very large amount of wine were drunk. 
1111 


78 


GALEN 


, / a? 4 v 4 3 ’ 
τώματα. καίτοι πολλάκις, ὅσον ETLE τις, OALYOU 
δεῖν οὔρησεν ἅπαν, ὡς ἂν ἐπὶ τοὺς νεφροὺς φερο- 
μένου τοῦ πόματος ἅπαντος. 

"R φ ε XN [4 > ἴω φ 9 

οιἰκεν οὖν ὁ τὸ τρίτον ἐξαπατῶν οὗτος οὐδὲν 
)». » 3 > fA A , \ / 
ἀνύειν ἀλλ᾽ εὐθὺς γεγονέναι κατάφωρος Kal μένειν 
ἔτι τὸ ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἄπορον ᾿Ερασιστράτῳ τε καὶ τοῖς 
ἄλλοις ἅπασι πλὴν Ἱπποκράτους. διατρίβω δ᾽ 
ἑκὼν ἐν τῷ τόπῳ σαφῶς εἰδώς, ὅτι μηδὲν εἰπεῖν 
ἔχει μηδεὶς ἄλλος περὶ τῆς τῶν νεφρῶν ἐνεργείας, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀναγκαῖον ἢ τῶν μαγείρων ἀμαθεστέρους 
/ > ὦ a 9 ar, 1 4 
φαίνεσθαι pnd ὅτε διηθεῖται δι’ αὐτῶν τὸ οὖρον 
ὁμολογοῦντας ἢ || τοῦτο συγχωρήσαντας μηδὲν 
ἔτ᾽ ἔχειν εἰπεῖν ἕτερον αἴτιον τῆς διακρίσεως 
πλὴν τῆς ὁλκῆς. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ εἰ μὴ τῶν οὔρων ἡ φορὰ τῇ πρὸς τὸ 

Uf 3 ’ / A € 2Q9 ς 
κενούμενον ἀκολουθίᾳ γίγνεται, δῆλον, ὡς οὐδ᾽ ἡ 
τοῦ αἵματος οὐδ᾽ ἡ τῆς χολῆς ἢ εἴπερ ἐκείνων καὶ 
τούτου: πάντα γὰρ ὡσαύτως ἀναγκαῖον ἐπιτε- 
λεῖσθαι καὶ κατ᾽ αὐτὸν τὸν Ἐξρασίστρατον. 

Εἰρήσεται δ᾽ ἐπὶ πλέον ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν ἐν τῷ μετὰ 
ταῦτα γράμματι.. 


112 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, I. xvu 


Yet one often urinates practically the same quantity 
as one has drunk, which would show that the whole 
of what one drinks goes to the kidneys. 

Thus the author of this third piece of trickery 
would appear to have achieved nothing, but to have 
been at once detected, and there still remains the 
original difficulty which was insoluble by Erasistratus 
and by all others except Hippocrates. I dwell 
purposely on this topic, knowing well that nobody 
else has anything to say about the function of the 
kidneys, but that either we must prove more foolish 
than the very butchers! if we do not agree that the 
urine passes through the kidneys; or, if one ac- 
knowledges this, that then one cannot possibly give 
any other reason for the secretion than the principle 
of attraction. 

Now, if the movement of urine does not depend 
on the tendency of a vacuum to become refilled,? 
it is clear that neither does that of the blood nor 
that of the bile ; or if that of these latter does so, 
then so also does that of the former. For they 
must all be accomplished in one and the same way, 
even according to Erasistratus himself. 

This matter, however, will be discussed more fully 
in the book following this. 


1 of. p. 51. 2 Horror vacui. Note analogical reasoning ; © 
cf. p. 289, note 1. 


113 


Digitized by Google 


BOOK II 


74 


75 


B 


I 


Ὅ \ φ 3 al 3 3 3 
TL μὲν οὖν ἀναγκαῖόν ἐστιν οὐκ ᾽Ερασι- 
’ὔ Me 3 Ἁ a Ν σ΄ μή 
στράτῳ μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἅπασιν, ὅσοι 
’ a) 

μέλλουσι περὶ διακρίσεως οὔρων ἐρεῖν τι χρη- 
e A al 

στόν, ὁμολογῆσαι δύναμίν tw ὑπάρχειν τοῖς 


a 4 
νεφροῖς ἕλκουσαν εἰς ἑαυτοὺς ποιότητα τοιαύτην, 


οἵα ἐν τοῖς οὔροις ἐστί, διὰ τοῦ πρόσθεν ἐπιδέ- 
δεικται γράμματος, ἀναμιμνησκόντων ἅμ᾽ αὐτῷ 
καὶ τοῦθ᾽ ἡμῶν, ὡς οὐκ ἄλλως μὲν εἰς τὴν κύστιν 
φέρεται τὰ οὖρα διὰ τῶν νεφρῶν, ἄλλως δ᾽ εἰς 
ἅπαντα τοῦ ζῴου τὰ μόρια τὸ αἷμα, Kar ἄλλον 
δέ τινα τρόπον ἡ ξανθὴ χολὴ διακρίνεται. Sety- 
θείσης τὰ ἐναργῶς ἐφ᾽ ἑνὸς || οὑτινοσοῦν ὀργάνον 
τῆς ἑλκτικῆς τε καὶ ἐπισπαστικῆς ὀνομαζομένης 
δυνάμεως οὐδὲν ἔτε χαλεπὸν ἐπὶ τὰ λοιπὰ μετα- 
φέρειν αὐτήν" οὐ γὰρ δὴ τοῖς μὲν νεφροῖς ἡ φύσις 
ἔδωκέ τινα τοιαύτην δύναμιν, οὐχὶ δέ γε καὶ τοῖς 
τὸ χολῶδες ὑγρὸν ἕλκουσιν ἀγγείοις οὐδὲ τούτοις 
μέν, οὐκέτι δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων μορίων ἑκάστῳ. 
καὶ μὴν εἰ τοῦτ᾽ ἀληθές ἐστι, θαυμάξειν χρὴ τοῦ 
᾿Ερασιστράτου ψευδεῖς οὕτω λόγους "ἄγ ἀνα- 


1 of. p. 89. 2 This term is nowadays limited to the 


drawing action of a blister. cf. p. 223. 
116 


BOOK II 


I 


In the previous book we demonstrated that not 
only Erasistratus, but also all others who would say 
anything to the purpose about urinary secretion, 
must acknowledge that the kidneys possess some 
faculty which attracts to them this particular quality 
existing in the urine.! Besides this we drew atten- 
tion to the fact that the urine is not carried through 
the kidneys into the bladder by one method, the 
blood into parts of the animal by another, and the 
yellow bile separated out on yet another principle. 
For when once there has been demonstrated in 
any one organ, the drawing, or so-called eptspastsc ? 
faculty, there is then no difficulty in transferring 
it to the rest. Certainly Nature did not give a 
power such as this to the kidneys without giving 
it also to the vessels which abstract the biliary 
fluid, nor did she give it to the latter without 
also giving it to each of the other parts. And, 
assuredly, if this is true, we must marvel that 
Erasistratus should make statements concerning the 
delivery of nutriment from the food-canal‘* which are 


3 The radicles of the hepatic ducts in the liver were sup- 
pose to be the active agents in extracting bile from the 
leod. cf. pp. 145-149. 4 Anadosis; cf. p. 13, note 5. 


117 


76 


GALEN 


δόσεως τροφῆς εἰπόντος, ὡς μηδ᾽ ᾿Ασκληπιάδην 
λαθεῖν. καίτοι γ᾽ οἴεται παντὸς μᾶλλον ἀληθὲς 
ὑπάρχειν, ὡς, εἴπερ ἐκ τῶν φλεβῶν ἀπορρέοι 
τί, δυοῖν θάτερον ἢ κενὸς ἔσται τόπος ἀθρόως ἢ 
τὸ συνεχὲς ἐπιρρνήσεται τὴν βάσιν ἀναπληροῦν 
τοῦ κενουμένου. ἀλλ᾽ & γ᾽ ᾿Ασκληπιάδης οὐ 
δυοῖν θάτερόν φησιν, ἀλλὰ τριῶν ἕν τι χρῆναι 
λέγειν ἐπὶ τοῖς κενουμένοις ἀγγείοις ἕπεσθαι ἢ 
κενὸν ἀθρόως τόπον ἢ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀκολουθήσειν ἢ 
συσταλήσεσθαι τὸ ἀγγεῖον. ἐπὶ μὲν γὰρ τῶν 
καλάμων καὶ τῶν αὐλίσκων τῶν εἰς τὸ ὕδωρ 
καθιεμένων ἀληθὲς εἰπεῖν, ὅτε κενουμένον τοῦ 
περιεχομένου κατὰ τὴν || εὐρυχωρίαν αὐτῶν ἀέρος 
ἢ κενὸς ἀθρόως ἔσται τόπος ἢ ἀκολουθήσει τὸ 
συνεχές" ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν φλεβῶν οὐκέτ᾽ ἐγχωρεῖ, δυνα- 
μένου δὴ τοῦ χιτῶνος αὐτῶν εἰς ἑαυτὸν συνιζάνειν 
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο καταπίπτειν εἰς τὴν ἐντὸς εὐρυ- 
χωρίαν. οὕτω μὲν δὴ ψευδὴς ἡ περὶ τῆς πρὸς 
τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθίας οὐκ ἀπόδειξις μὰ Δί 
εἴποιμ᾽ ἂν ἀλλ᾽ ὑπόθεσις ᾿Ερασιστράτειος. 

Καθ᾿ ἕτερον δ᾽ αὖ τρόπον, εἰ καὶ ἀληθὴς εἴη, 
περιττή, τῆς μὲν κοιλίας ἐνθλίβειν ταῖς φλεψὶ 
δυναμένης, ὡς αὐτὸς ὑπέθετο, τῶν φλεβῶν δ᾽ αὖ 
περιστέλλεσθαι τῷ ἐνυπάρχοντι καὶ προωθεῖν 
αὐτὸ. τά τε γὰρ ἄλλα καὶ πλῆθος οὐκ ἂν ἐν τῷ 
σώματι γένοιτο, τῇ πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθίᾳ 
μόνῃ τῆς ἀναδόσεως ἐπιτελουμένης. εἰ μὲν οὖν 


ἡ τῆς γαστρὸς ἔνθλιψις ἐκλύεται. προϊοῦσα καὶ 


1 The term κοιλία is used both specifically for the stomach 
roper and also (as probably here) in a somewhat wider sense 
or the stomach region, including the adjacent part of the 

small intestine; this was the part of the alimentary canal 


118 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. 1 


so false as to be detected even by Asclepiades. Now, 
Erasistratus considers it absolutely certain that, if 
anything flows from the veins, one of two things 
must happen: either a completely empty space will 
result, or the contiguous quantum of fluid will run 
in and take the place of that which has been 
evacuated. Asclepiades, however, holds that not 
one of two, but one of three things must be said 
to result in the emptied vessels: either there will 
be an entirely empty space, or the contiguous 
portion will flow in, or the vessel will contract. For 
whereas, in the case of reeds and tubes it is true to 
say that, if these be submerged in water, and are 
emptied of the air which they contain in their 
lumens, then either a completely empty space will 
be left, or the contiguous portion will move onwards ; 
in the case of veins this no longer holds, since their 
coats can collapse and so fall in upon the interior 
cavity. It may be seen, then, how false this 
hypothesis—by Zeus, I cannot call it a demonstra- 
tion !—of Erasistratus is. 

And, from another point of view, even if it were 
true, it is superfluous, if the stomach ! has the power 
of compressing the veins, as he himself supposed, and 
the veins again of contracting upon their contents and 
propelling them forwards.? For, apart from other 
considerations, no plethora ὃ would ever take place in 
the body, if delivery of nutriment resulted merely 
from the tendency of a vacuum to become refilled. 
Now, if the compression of the stomach becomes 
weaker the further it goes, and cannot reach to an 
from which nutriment was believed to be absorbed by the 
mesenteric veins ; ¢f. p. 309, note 2. 


3 of. p. 100, note 2; p. 167, note 2. 
3 A characteristic “lesion” in Erasistratus’s pathology. 


Ἵ19 


11 


GALEN 


μέχρι παντὸς ἀδυνατός ἐστιν ἐξικνεῖσθαι καὶ διὰ 
τοῦτ᾽ ἄλλης τινὸς δεῖ μηχανῆς εἰς τὴν πάντη 
φορὰν τοῦ αἵματος, ἀναγκαία μὲν ἡ πρὸς τὸ 
κενούμενον ἀκολουθία προσεξεύρηται" πλῆθος δ᾽ 
ἐν οὐδενὶ τῶν μεθ᾽ ἧπαρ ἔσται || μορίων, ἤ, εἴπερ 
ἄρα, περὶ τὴν καρδίαν τε καὶ τὸν πνεύμονα. μόνη 
γὰρ αὕτη τῶν μεθ᾽ ἧπαρ εἰς τὴν δεξιὰν αὑτῆς 
κοιλίαν ἕλκει τὴν τροφήν, εἶτα διὰ τῆς φλεβὸς 
τῆς ἀρτηριώδους ἐκπέμπει τῷ πνεύμονι' τῶν γὰρ 
ἄλλων οὐδὲν οὐδ᾽ αὐτὸς ὁ ᾿Ερασίστρατος ἐκ καρ- 
δίας βούλεται τρέφεσθαι διὰ τὴν τῶν ὑμένων 
ἐπίφυσιν. εἰ δέ γ᾽, ἵνα πλῆθος γένηται, φυλάξομεν 
ἄχρι παντὸς τὴν ῥώμην τῆς κατὰ τὴν κοιλίαν 
ἐνθλίψεως, οὐδὲν ἔτι δεόμεθα τῆς πρὸς τὸ κενού- 
μενον ἀκολουθίας, μάλιστ᾽ εἰ καὶ τὴν τῶν φλεβῶν 
συνυποθοίμεθα περιστολήν, ὡς αὖ καὶ τοῦτ᾽ αὐτῷ 


πάλιν ἀρέσκει τῷ ᾿Ερασιστράτῳ. 


II 


᾿Αναμνηστέον οὖν αὖθις αὐτόν, κἂν μὴ Bov- 
ληται, τῶν νεφρῶν καὶ λεκτέον, ὡς ἔλεγχος 
οὗτοι φανερώτατος ἁπάντων τῶν ἀποχωρούντων 
A e A 3 QA w 9 4 
τῆς ὁλκῆς" οὐδεὶς γὰρ οὐδὲν οὔτ᾽ εἶπε πιθανόν, 
3 3 3 0.9 3 a 4 3 3 4 ὔ ς 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἐξευρεῖν εἶχε κατ᾽ οὐδένα τρόπον, ὡς 
1 A certain subordinate place allowed to the horror vacui. 
2 z.e. the parts to which the veins convey blood after it 


leaves the liver—second stage of anadosis; cf. p. 91, note 2 ; 
p. 13, note 5. ° 


120 





ON THE NATURAL ΕΑΟΌΙΧΖΤΊΙΕΒ, II. 1.-n 


indefinite distance, and if, therefore, there is need 
of some other mechanism to explain why the blood 
is conveyed in all directions, then the principle of 
the refilling of a vacuum may be looked on as a 
necessary addition ;! there will not, however, be a 
plethora in any of the parts coming after the liver,? 
or, if there be, it will be in the region of the 
heart and lungs; for the heart alone of the parts 
which come after the liver draws the nutriment 
into its right ventricle, thereafter sending it through 
the arterioid vein® to the lungs (for Erasistratus 
himself will have it that, owing to the membranous 
excrescences,‘ no other parts save the lungs receive 
nourishment from the heart). If, however, in order 
to explain how plethora comes about, we suppose 
the force of compression by the stomach to persist 
indefinitely, we have no further need of the principle 
of the refilling of a vacuum, especially if we assume 
contraction of the veins in addition—as is, again, 
agreeable to Erasistratus himself. 


II 


Let me draw his attention, then, once again, even 
if he does not wish it, to the kidneys, and let me 
state that these confute in the very clearest manner 
such people as object to the principle of attraction. 
Nobody has ever said anything plausible, nor, as we 
previously showed, has anyone been able to discover, 

5 What we now call the pulmonary artery. Galen believed 
that the right ventricle existed for the purpose of sending 
nutrient blood to the lungs. 


4 Lit. owing to the ongrowth (epiphysis) of membranes ; 
he means the tricuspid valve ; cf. p. 314, note 2 ; Ὁ. 321, note 4. 


121 


78 


79 


GALEN 


ἔμπροσθεν ἐδείκνυμεν, ἕτερον αἴτιον οὔρων δια- 
’ 3 > 93 a“ a 4 a > 
κρίσεως, ἀλλ᾽ ἀναγκαῖον ἢ μαίνεσθαι δοκεῖν, εἰ 
φήσαιμεν ἀτμοειϊδῶς εἰς τὴν κύστιν ἰέναι τὸ οὖρον 
ἡ ἀσχημονεῖν τῆς πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθίας 
μνημονεύοντας, ληρώδους μὲν οὔσης κἀπὶ τοῦ 
αἵματος, ἀδυνάτου δὲ καὶ ἠλιθίον παντάπασιν 
ἐπὶ τῶν οὔρων. 
ἃ Ἁ A “A lA lad 9 4 fo! 
Εν μὲν δὴ τοῦτο σφάλμα τῶν ἀποστάντων τῆς 
ὁλκῆς" ἕτερον δὲ τὸ περὶ τῆς κατὰ τὴν ξανθὴν 
A ὃ , > δὲ δ 3 δ᾽ 9 a , 
χολὴν διακρίσεως. OVOE γὰρ OVO ἐκεῖ παραρρέ- 
οντος τοῦ αἵματος τὰ στόματα τῶν χοληδόχων 
2 , 2 A 4 \ a“ 
ἀγγείων ἀκριβῶς διακριθήσεται τὸ χολῶδες 
’ \ \ , , 2 \ 
περίττωμα. καὶ μὴ διακρινέσθω, φασίν, ἀλλὰ 
συναναφερέσθω τῷ αἵματι πάντη τοῦ σώματος. 
2 3 φ , A a / 
ἀλλ᾽, ὦ σοφώτατοι, προνοητικὴν τοῦ ζῴου καὶ 
τεχνικὴν αὐτὸς ὁ ᾿Ερασίστρατος ὑπέθετο τὴν 
3 Ἁ “a e \ Ν 
φυσιν. ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ χολῶδες ὑγρὸν ἄχρηστον 
εἶναι πανταπάσι τοῖς ζῴοις ἔφασκεν. οὐ συμ- 
βαίνει & ἀλλήλοις ἄμφω ταῦτα. πῶς γὰρ ἂν 
ἔτι προνοεῖσθαι τοῦ ξῴου δόξειεν ἐπιτρέπουσα 
συναναφέρεσθαι τῷ αἵματι μοχθηρὸν οὕτω χυμόν; 
᾿Αλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν σμικρά" τὸ δὲ μέγιστον καὶ 
, 7 3 af) e lA \ \ 
σαφέστατον πάλιν ἐνταῦθ᾽ ἁμάρτημα καὶ δὴ 
φράσω. εἴπερ γὰρ δι᾽ οὐδὲν ἄλλ᾽ ἢ ὅτι παχύτερον 
μέν ἐστι τὸ αἷμα, λεπτοτέρα δ᾽ ἡ || ξανθὴ χολὴ 
\ \ a ΄“ > » 4 
καὶ τὰ μὲν τῶν φλεβῶν εὐρύτερα στόματα, τὰ 


122 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. π 


by any means, any other cause for the secretion of 
urine ; we necessarily appear mad if we maintain 
that the urine passes into the kidneys in the form of 
vapour, and we certainly cut a poor figure when we 
talk about the tendency of a vacuum to become 
refilled ;1 this idea is foolish in the case of blood, 
and impossible, nay, perfectly nonsensical, in the 
case of the urine.? 

This, then, is one blunder made by those who 
dissociate themselves from the principle of attraction. 
Another is that which they make about the secretion 
of yellow bile. For in this case, too, it is not a fact 
that when the blood runs past the mouths [stomata | 
of the bile-ducts there will be a thorough separation 
out [secretion] of biliary waste-matter. “ Well,’ 
say they, “let us suppose that it is not secreted but 
carried with the blood all over the body.”” But, you 
sapient folk, Erasistratus himself supposed that Nature 
took thought for the animals’ future, and was work- 
manlike in her method; and at the same time he 
maintained that the biliary fluid was useless in 
every way for the animals. Now these two things 
are incompatible. For how could Nature be still 
looked on as exercising forethought for the animal 
when she allowed a noxious humour such as this to 
be carried off and distributed with the blood? .. . 

This, however, is a small matter. I shall again 
point out here the greatest and most obvious error. 
For if the yellow bile adjusts itself to the narrower 
vessels and stomata, and the blood to the wider ones, 
for no other reason than that blood is thicker and 
bile thinner, and that the stomata of the veins are 


1 Horror vacui. 2 But Erasistratus had never upheld 
this in the case of urinary secretion. cf. p. 99. 


123 


GALEN 


δὲ τῶν χοληδόχων ἀγγείων στενότερα, διὰ τοῦθ᾽ 
ἡ μὲν χολὴ τοῖς στενοτέροις ἀγγείοις τε καὶ 
στόμασιν ἐναρμόττει, τὸ δ᾽ αἷμα τοῖς εὐρυτέροις, 
δῆλον, ὡς καὶ τὸ ὑδατῶδες τοῦτο καὶ ὀρρῶδες 
περίττωμα τοσούτῳ πρότερον εἰσρυήσεται τοῖς 
χοληδόχοις ἀγγείοις, ὅσῳ λεπτότερόν ἐστι τῆς 
χολῆς. πῶς οὖν οὐκ εἰσρεῖ; ὅτι παχύτερόν ἐστι 
νὴ Δία τὸ οὖρον τῆς χολῆς" τοῦτο γὰρ ἐτόλμησέ 
τις εἰπεν τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς Ἐρασιστρατείων 
ἀποστὰς δηλονότι τῶν αἰσθήσεων, αἷς ἐπίστευσεν 
ἐπί τε τῆς χολῆς καὶ τοῦ αἵματος. εἴτε γὰρ 
ὅτι μᾶλλον ἡ χολὴ τοῦ αἵματος ῥεῖ, διὰ τοῦτο 
λεπτοτέραν αὐτὴν ἡμῖν ἐστι νομιστέον, εἴθ᾽ ὅτι 
δι’ ὀθόνης ἢ ῥάκους ἤ τινος ἠθμοῦ ῥᾷον διεξέρχεται 
καὶ ταύτης τὸ ὀρρῶδες περίττωμα, κατὰ ταῦτα 
τὰ γνωρίσματα παχυτέρα τῆς ὑδατώδους ὑγρό- 
τητος καὶ αὕτη γενήσεται. πάλιν γὰρ οὐδ᾽ 
ἐνταῦθα λόγος οὐδείς ἐστιν, ὃς ἀποδείξει λεπτο- 
τέραν τὴν χολὴν τῶν ὀρρωδῶν περιττωμάτων. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ ὅταν τις ἀναισχυντῇ περιπλέκων τε καὶ 
μήπω καταπεπτωκέναι συγχωρῶν, || ὅμοιος ἔσται 
τοῖς ἰδιώταις τῶν παλαιστῶν, οὗ καταβληθέντες 
ὑπὸ τῶν παλαιστρικῶν καὶ κατὰ τῆς γῆς ὕπτιοι 
κείμενοι τοσούτου δέουσι τὸ πτῶμα γνωρίζειν, 
ὥστε καὶ κρατοῦσι τῶν αὐχένων αὐτοὺς τοὺς 
καταβαλόντας οὐκ ἐῶντες ἀπαλλάττεσθαι, κἀν 
τούτῳ νικᾶν ὑπολαμβάνουσι. 





1 This was the characteristically ‘“‘ anatomical ” explanation 
of bile-secretion made by Erasistratus. cf. p. 170, note 2. 


I24 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, Π0π 


wider and those of the bile-ducts narrower,! then it 
is clear that this watery and serous superfluity,? too, 
will run out into the bile-ducts quicker than does the 
bile, exactly in proportion as it is thinner than the 
bile! How is it, then, that it does not run out? “Be- 
cause,’ it may be said, “ urine is thicker than bile!” 
This was what one of our Erasistrateans ventured to 
say, herein clearly disregarding the evidence of his 
senses, although he had trusted these in the case of 
the bile and blood. For, if it be that we are to look 
on bile as thinner than blood because it runs more, 
then, since the serous residue 2 passes through fine 
linen or lint or a sieve more easily even than does 
bile, by these tokens bile must also be thicker than 
the watery fluid. For here, again, there is no 
argument which will demonstrate that bile is thinner 
than the serous superfluities. 

But when a man shamelessly goes on using circum- 
locutions, and never acknowledges when he has had 
a fall, he is like the amateur wrestlers, who, when 
they have been overthrown by the experts and are 
lying on their backs on the ground, so far from 
recognizing their fall, actually seize their victorious 
adversaries by the necks and prevent them from 
getting away, thus supposing themselves to be the 
winners ! - 


Why, then, says Galen, does not urine, rather than bile, enter 
the bile-ducts ? 2 Urine, or, more exactly, blood-serum. 


125 


8] 


GALEN 


ΠῚ 


Λῆρος οὖν μακρὸς ἅπασα πόρων ὑπόθεσις εἰς 
φυσικὴν ἐνέργειαν. εἰ μὴ γὰρ δύνα μίς τις σύμ- 
φυτος ἑκάστῳ τῶν ὀργάνων ὑπὸ τῆς φύσεως 
εὐθὺς ἐξ ἀρχῆς δοθείη, διαρκεῖν οὐ δυνήσεται τὰ 
ἕῷα, “μὴ ὅτι τοσοῦτον ἀριθμὸν ἐτῶν ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ 
ἡμερῶν ὀλεγίστων' ἀνεπιτρόπευτα γὰρ ἐάσαντες 
αὐτὰ καὶ τέχνης καὶ προνοίας ἔρημα μόναις ταῖς 
τῶν ὑλῶν οἰακιξόμενα fi ῥοπαῖς, οὐδαμοῦ δυνάμεως 
οὐδεμιᾶς τῆς μὲν ἑλκούσης τὸ προσῆκον ἑαυτῇ, 
τῆς δ᾽ ᾿ἀπωθούσης τὸ ἀλλότριον, τῆς δ᾽ ἀλλοιούσης 
τε καὶ προσφυούσης τὸ θρέψον, οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅπως οὐκ 

ν εἴημεν καταγέλαστοι περί τε τῶν φυσικῶν 
ἐνεργειῶν διαλεγόμενοι καὶ πολὺ μᾶλλον ἔ ἔτι περὶ 
τῶν ψυχικῶν καὶ || συμπάσης γε τῆς ξωῆς. 

Οὐδὲ γὰρ ζῆν οὐδὲ διαμένειν οὐδενὶ τῶν ξῴων 
οὐδ᾽ εἰς ἐλάχιστον χρόνον ἔσται δυνατόν, εἰ 
τοσαῦτα κεκτημένον ἐν ἑαυτῷ μόρια καὶ οὕτω 
διαφέροντα μήθ᾽ ἑλκτικῇ τῶν οἰκείων χρήσεται 
δυνάμει μήτ᾽ ἀποκριτικῇ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων μήτ 
ἀλλοιωτικῇ τῶν θρεψόντων. καὶ μὴν εἰ ταύτας 
ἔχοιμεν, οὐδὲν ἔτι πόρων μικρῶν ἢ μεγάλων ἐξ 
ὑποθέσεως ἀναποδείκτου λαμβανομένων εἰς οὔρου 
καὶ χολῆς διάκρισιν δεόμεθα καί τινος ἐπικαίρου 
θέσεως, ἐν ᾧ μόνῳ σωφρονεῖν ἔοικεν ὁ ᾿Ἐρασί- 
στρατος ἅπαντα καλῶς τεθῆναί τε καὶ διαπλασ - 


1 Or ducts, canals, conduits, 1.6. morphological factors. 

? Or artistic skill, “artistry.” οἷ, Book I., chap. xii. 

3 “Only”; of. Introd., p. xxviii. 

+ Note how Galen, although he has not yet clearly differ- 


126 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IT. πὶ 


ΠΙ 


Tuus, every hypothesis of channels! as an explana- 
tion of natural functioning is perfect nonsense. For, 
if there were not an inborn faculty given by Nature 
to each one of the organs at the very beginning, then 
animals could not continue to live even for a few 
days, far less for the number of years which they 
actually do. For let us suppose they were under no 
guardianship, lacking in creative ingenuity 2 and fore- 
thought ; let us suppose they were steered only by 
material forces? and not by any special facultses 
(the one attracting what is proper to it, another 
rejecting what is foreign, and yet another causing 
alteration and adhesion of the matter destined to 
nourish it); if we suppose this, I am sure it would 
be ridiculous for us to discuss natural, or, still more, 
psychical, activities—or, in fact, life as a whole.* 

For there is not a single animal which could live 
or endure for the shortest time if, possessing within 
itself so many different parts, it did not employ facul- 
ties which were attractive of what is appropriate, 
eliminative of what is foreign, and alterative of what 
is destined for nutrition. On the other hand, if we 
have these faculties, we no longer need channels, 
little or big, resting on an unproven hypothesis, for 
explaining the secretion of urine and bile, and the 
conception of some favourable situation (in which 
point alone Erasistratus shows some common sense, 
since he does regard all the parts of the body as 
entiated physiological from physical processes (both are 
‘‘natural”) yet separates them definitely from the psychical. 


cf. p. 2, footnote. <A psychical function or activity is, in 
Latin, actio animalss (from anima = psyche). 


127 


GALEN 


θῆναι τὰ μόρια τοῦ σώματος ὑπὸ τῆς φύσεως 
οἰόμενος. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ εἰ παρακολουθήσειεν ἑαυτῷ φύσιν ὀνο- 
μάξοντι τεχνικήν, εὐθὺς μὲν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἅπαντα 
καλῶς διαπλάσασάν τε καὶ διαθεῖσαν τοῦ ζῴου 
τὰ μόρια, μετὰ δὲ τὴν τοιαύτην ἐνέργειαν, ὡς 
οὐδὲν ἔλειπεν, ἔτι προαγαγοῦσαν εἰς φῶς αὐτὸ 
σύν τισι δυνάμεσιν, ὧν ἄνευ ζῆν οὐκ ἠδύνατο, καὶ 
μετὰ ταῦτα κατὰ βραχὺ προσαυξήσασαν ἄχρι 
τοῦ πρέποντος μεγέθους, οὐκ olda πῶς ὑπομένει 
πόρων σμικρότησιν || ἢ μεγέθεσιν ἤ τισιν ἄλλαις 
οὕτω ληρώδεσιν ὑποθέσεσι φυσικὰς ἐνεργείας 
᾿ἐπιτρέπειν. ἡ γὰρ διαπλάττουσα τὰ μόρια φύσις 
ἐκείνη καὶ κατὰ βραχὺ προσαύξουσα πάντως 
δήπου δι’ ὅλων αὐτῶν ἐκτέταται" καὶ γὰρ ὅλα δι᾽ 
ὅλων οὐκ ἔξωθεν μόνον αὐτὰ διαπλάττει τε καὶ 
τρέφει καὶ προσαύξει. ἸΠραξιτέλης μὲν γὰρ ἢ 
Φειδίας ἤ τις ἄλλος ἀγαλματοποιὸς ἔξωθεν μόνον 
ἐκόσμουν τὰς ὕλας, καθὰ καὶ ψαύειν αὐτῶν ἠδύ- 
ναντο, τὸ βάθος δ᾽ ἀκόσμητον καὶ ἀργὸν καὶ 
ἄτεχνον καὶ ἀπρονόητον ἀπέλιπον, ὡς ἂν μὴ 
δυνάμενοι κατελθεῖν εἰς αὐτὸ καὶ καταδῦναι καὶ 
Ovyety ἁπάντων τῆς ὕλης τῶν μερῶν. ἡ φύσις δ᾽ 
οὐχ οὕτως, ἀλλὰ τὸ μὲν ὀστοῦ ΠΣ ἅπαν ὀστοῦν 
ἀποτελεῖ, τὸ δὲ σαρκὸς σάρκα, τὸ δὲ πιμελῆς 
πιμελὴν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἕκαστον" οὐδὲν γάρ ἐστιν 
ἄψαυστον αὐτῇ μέρος οὐδ᾽ ἀνεξέργαστον οὐδ᾽ 
ἀκόσμητον. ἀλλὰ τὸν μὲν κηρὸν ὁ Φειδίας οὐκ 
ἠδύνατο ποιεῖν ἐλέφαντα καὶ χρυσόν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ 
τὸν χρυσὸν κηρόν' ἕκαστον γὰρ αὐτῶν μένον, οἷον 
ἣν ἐξ ἀρχῆς, ἔξωθεν μόνον ἠμφιεσμένον εἶδός τι 


128 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, 11. πὶ 


having been well and truly placed and shaped by 
Nature). 

But let us suppose he remained true to his own 
statement that Nature is “artistic’’-—this Nature 
which, at the beginning, well and truly shaped 
and disposed all the parts of the animal,! and, after 
carrying out this function (for she left nothing 
undone), brought it forward to the light of day, 
endowed with certain faculties necessary for its very 
existence, and, thereafter, gradually increased it 
until it reached its due size. If he argued con- 
sistently on this principle, I fail to see how he can 
continue to refer natural functions to the smallness 
or largeness of canals, or to any other similarly 
absurd hypothesis. For this Nature which shapes 
and gradually adds to the parts is most certainly 
extended throughout their whole substance. Yes 
indeed, she shapes and nourishes and increases them 
through and through, not on the outside only. For 
Praxiteles and Phidias and all the other statuaries 
used merelyto decorate their material on the outside, 
in so far as they were able to touch it; but its inner 
parts they left unembellished, unwrought, unaffected 
by art or forethought, since they were unable to 
penetrate therein and to reach and handle all 
portions of the material. It is not so, however, with 
Nature. Every part of a bone she makes bone, every 
part of the flesh she makes flesh, and so with fat and 
all the rest; there is no part which she has not 
touched, elaborated, and embellished. Phidias, on the 
other hand, could not turn wax into ivory and gold, nor 
yet gold into wax: for each of these remains as it was 
at the commencement, and becomes a perfect statue 


1 The stage of organogenesis or diaplasis ; cf. p. 25, note 4. 


129 
K 


83 


84 


GALEN 


\ [οὶ , Ν , / e 
Kal σχῆμα τεχνικὸν, ἄγαλμα τέλειον || γέγονεν. ἢ 
4 3 3 “ ” , a e a A 
φύσις δ᾽ οὐδεμιᾶς ἔτι φυλάττει τῶν ὑλῶν τὴν 

3 ᾽ὔ 207 φ e/ 
ἀρχαίαν ἰδέαν: αἷμα yap ἂν ἦν οὕτως ἅπαντα 
τοῦ ζῴου τὰ μόρια, τὸ παρὰ τῆς κυούσης ἐπιρ- 
ρέον τῷ σπέρματι, δίκην κηροῦ τινος ὕλη μία καὶ 
μονοειδὴς ὑποβεβλημένη τῷ τεχνίτῃ. γίγνεται 
δ᾽ ἐξ αὐτῆς οὐδὲν τῶν τοῦ ζῴου μορίων οὔτ᾽ ἐρυθ- 
ρὸν οὕτως οὔθ᾽ ὑγρόν. ὀστοῦν γὰρ καὶ ἀρτηρία 
καὶ φλὲψ' καὶ νεῦρον καὶ χόνδρος καὶ πιμελὴ καὶ 
2 OVX e \ N Ν ¥ / 3 Ψ 
ἀδὴν καὶ ὑμὴν καὶ μνελὸς ἄναιμα μέν, ἐξ αἵματος 
δὲ γέγονε. 

Τίνος ἀλλοιώσαντος καὶ τίνος πήξαντος καὶ 

/ 4 3 , Ν \ 9 4 
τίνος διαπλάσαντος ἐδεύμην av μοι tov ’Epaci- 
στρατον αὐτὸν ἀποκρίνασθαι. πάντως γὰρ ἂν 
εἶπεν ἤτοι τὴν φύσιν ἢ τὸ σπέρμα, ταὐτὸν μὲν 

4 > Ἐς 4 ’ > 9 ὔ ς 
λέγων καθ᾽ ἑκάτερον, διαφόροις δ᾽ ἐπινοίαις ἑρμη- 
νεύων" ὃ γὰρ ἦν πρότερον σπέρμα, τοῦθ᾽, ὅταν 
δ 4 \ a A A 4 
ἄρξηται φύειν τε καὶ διαπλάττειν τὸ ζῷον, φύσις 
τις γίγνεται. καθάπερ γὰρ ὁ Φειδίας εἶχε μὲν τὰς 
δυνάμεις τῆς τέχνης καὶ πρὶν ψαύειν τῆς ὕλης, 
ἐνήργει δ᾽ αὐταῖς περὶ τὴν ὕλην---ὥπασα yap 
δύναμις ἀργεῖ ἀποροῦσα τῆς οἰκείας ὕλης---, οὕτω 
καὶ τὸ σπέρμα τὰς μὲν || δυνάμεις οἴκοθεν ἐκέκτητο, 


“τὰς δ᾽ ἐνεργείας οὐκ ἐκ τῆς ὕλης ἔλαβεν, ἀλλὰ 


Ἁ Ὁ 3 ’ 
περὶ τὴν ὕλην ἐπεδείξατο. 
‘ Ἁ > a“ bd A 
Kat μὴν εἰ πολλῷ μὲν ἐπικλύξοιτο τῷ αἵματι 
ἃ A / > Ν > > Ὁ , / 
τὸ σπέρμα, διαφθείροιτ᾽ ἄν' εἰ δ᾽ ὅλως ἀποροίη 





1 The spermatozoon now becomes an ‘‘ organism” proper. 
2 Galen attributed to the sperma or semen what we should 


130 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. m1 


simply by being clothed externally in a form and 
artificial shape. But Nature does not preserve the 
original character of any kind of matter; if she did 
so, then all parts of the animal would be blood—that 
blood, namely, which flows to the semen from the 
impregnated female and which is, so to speak, like 
the statuary’s wax, a single uniform matter, subjected 
to the artificer. From this blood there arises no part 
of the animal which is as red and moist [as blood is], 
for bone, artery, vein, nerve, cartilage, fat, gland, 
membrane, and marrow are not blood, though they 
arise from it. 

I would then ask Erasistratus himself to inform 
me what the altering, coagulating, and shaping 
agent is. He would doubtless say, “ Hither Nature 
or the semen,’ meaning the same thing in both 
cases, but explaining it by different devices. For 
that which was previously semen, when it begins 
to procreate and to shape the animal, becomes, so to 
say, a special nature.1 For in the same way that 
Phidias possessed the faculties of his art even before 
touching his material, and then activated these in con- 
nection with this material (for every faculty remains 
inoperative in the absence of its proper material), so it 
is with the semen: its faculties it possessed from the 
beginning,” while its activities it does not receive 
from its material, but it manifests them in connection 
therewith. 

And, of course, if it were to be overwhelmed 
with a great quantity of blood, it would perish, 
while if it were to be entirely deprived of blood 
to the fertilized ovum: to him the maternal contribution is 

urely passive—mere food for the sperm. The epoch-making 


vum Theory was not developed till the seventeenth century. 
cf. p. 19, note 3. 


131 
κ 2 


8ὅ 


GALEN 


παντάπασιν ἀργοῦν, οὐκ ἂν ,Ὑένοιτο φύσις. ἵν᾽ 
οὖν μῆτε φθείρηται καὶ γίγνηται, φύσις ἀντὶ 
σπέρματος, ὀλίγον ἐπιρρεῖν ἀναγκαῖον αὐτῷ τοῦ 
αἵματος, μᾶλλον δ᾽ οὐκ ὀλίγον λέγειν χρή, ἀλλὰ 
σύμμετρον τῷ πλήθει τοῦ σπέρματος. τίς οὖν 
ὁ μετρῶν αὐτοῦ τὸ ποσὸν τῆς ἐπιρροῆς; τίς ὁ 
κωλύων ἰέναι πλέον; τίς ὁ προτρέπων, ἵν᾽ ἐνδε- 
έστερον μὴ ἴῃ; τίνα ξητήσομεν ἐνταῦθα τρίτον 
ἐπιστάτην τοῦ ζῴου τῆς γενέσεως, ὃς χορηγήσει 
τῷ σπέρματι τὸ σύμμετρον αἷμα; τί ἂν εἶπεν 
᾿Ερασίστρατος, εἰ Cov ταῦτ᾽ ἠρωτήθη; τὸ σπέρμα 
αὐτὸ δηλονότι" τοῦτο γάρ ἐστιν ὁ τεχνίτης ὁ ὃ ἀνα- 
λογῶν τῷ Φειδίᾳ, τὸ δ᾽ αἷμα τῷ κηρῷ προσέοικεν. 

Οὔκουν πρέπει τὸν κηρὸν αὐτὸν ἑαυτῷ τὸ 
μέτρον ἐξευρίσκειν, ἀλλὰ τὸν Φειδίαν. ἕλξει δὴ 
τοσοῦτον αἵματος ὄ τεχνίτης εἰς ἑαυτόν, ὁπόσου 
δεῖται. ἀλλ᾽ ἐνταῦθα χρὴ προσέχειν ἤδη τὸν 
νοῦν καὶ σκοπεῖν, μή TOS λάθωμεν τῷ σπέρματι 
λογισμόν τινα καὶ νοῦν χαρισάμενοι' οὕτω γὰρ 
ἂν οὔτε σπέρμα ποιήσαιμεν οὔτε φύσιν ἀλλ᾽ ἤδη 
ζῷον αὐτό. καὶ μὴν εἰ φυλάξομεν ἀμφότερα, 
τήν θ᾽ ὁλκὴν τοῦ συμμέτρου κα τὸ χωρὶς 
λογισμοῦ, δύναμίν τινα, καθάπερ ἡ λίθος ἐλκτι- 
κὴν εἶχε τοῦ σιδήρου, καὶ τῷ σπέρματι φήσομεν 
ὑπάρχειν αἵματος ἐπισπαστικήν. ἠναγκάσθημεν 
οὖν πάλιν κἀνταῦθα, καθάπερ ἤδη πολλάκις 
ἔμπροσθεν, ,ἑλκτικήν τινα δύναμιν ὁμολογῆσαι 
κατὰ τὸ σπέρμα. 





1,6. we should be talking psychology, not biology; φῇ 
stomach, p. 307, note 3. 
2 Attraction now described not merely as qualstative but 


also as quantitative. cf. p. 85, note 3. 


132 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. m 


it would remain inoperative and would not turn 
into a nature. Therefore, in order that it may not 
perish, but may become a nature in place of semen, 
there must be an afflux to it of a little blood—or, 
rather, one should not say a little, but a quantity 
commensurate with that of the semen. What is it 
then that measures the quantity of this aflux? What 
prevents more from coming? What ensures against 
a deficiency? What is this third overseer of animal 
generation that we are to look for, which will furnish 
the semen with a due amount of blood? What 
would Erasistratus have said if he had been alive, 
and had been asked this question? Obviously, the 
semen itself. This, in fact, is the artificer analogous 
with Phidias, whilst the blood corresponds to the 
statuary’s wax. 

Now, it is not for the wax to discover for itself 
how much of it is required; that is the business 
of Phidias. Accordingly the artificer will draw to 
itself as much blood as it needs. Here, however, 
we must pay attention and take care not unwit- 
tingly to credit the semen with reason and _ in- 
telligence ; if we were to do this, we would be. 
making neither semen nor a nature, but an actual 
living animal.! And if we retain these two princi- 
ples—that of proportionate attraction? and that of the 
non-participation of intelligence—we shall ascribe to 
the semen a faculty for attracting blood similar to 
that possessed by the lodestone for iron.2 Here, 
then, again, in the case of the semen, as in so many 
previous instances, we have been compelled to 
acknowledge some kind of attractive faculty. 


8 He still tends either to biologize physics, or to physicize 
biology—whichever way we prefer to look at it. ¢f Book I., 
chap. xiv. 133 


86 


GALEN 


Τί δ᾽ ἦν τὸ σπέρμα; ἡ ἀρχὴ τοῦ ζῴου δηλονότι 
ἡ δραστική' ἡ γὰρ ὑλικὴ τὸ καταμήνιόν ἐστιν. 
εἶτ᾽ αὐτῆς τῆς ἀρχῆς πρώτῃ ταύτῃ τῇ δυνάμει 
χρωμένης, ἵνα γένηται τῶν ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς τι δεδη- 
μιουργημένων, ἄμοιρον εἶναι τῆς οἰκείας δυνάμεως 
οὐκ «δέχεται. πῶς οὖν ᾿Ερασίστρατος αὐτὴν 
οὐκ o δεν, εἰ δὴ πρώτη μὲν αὕτη τοῦ σπέρματος 
ἐνέργ ta τὸ σύμμετρον αἵματος ἐπισπᾶσθαι πρὸς 
ἑαυτό; σύμμετρον δ᾽ ἂν εἴη τὸ λεπτὸν οὕτω καὶ 
ἀτμῶδες, ὥ ὥστ᾽ εὐθὺς εἰς πᾶν μόριον ἑλκόμενον τοῦ 
σπέρματος δροσοειδῶς μηδαμοῦ τὴν Ι ἑαυτοῦ 
παρεμφαίνειν ἰδέαν. οὕτω γὰρ αὐτοῦ καὶ κρατή- 
σει ῥᾳδίως τὸ ᾿ σπέρμα καὶ ταχέως ἐξομοιώσει καὶ 

τροφὴν ἑαυτῷ ποιήσεται κἄπειτ᾽ οἶμαι δεύτερον 
ἐπισπάσεται καὶ τρίτον, ὡς ὄγκον ἑαυτῷ καὶ 
πλῆθος ἀξιόλογον ἐργάσασθαι τραφέντι. καὶ 
μὴν ἤδη καὶ ἡ ἡ ἀλλοιωτικὴ δύναμις ἐξεύρηται pnd 
αὐτὴ πρὸς ᾿Ερασιστράτου γεγραμμένη. τρίτη 

ἂν ἡ διαπλαστικὴ φανείη, καθ᾽ ἣν πρῶτον μὲν 
οἷον ἐπίπαγόν τινα λεπτὸν ὑμένα περιτίθησιν 
ἑαυτῷ τὸ σπέρμα, τὸν ὑφ᾽ Ἱπποκράτους ἐπὶ τῆς 


ἑκταίας γονῆς, ἣν ἐκπεσεῖν ἔλεγε τῆς μουσουργοῦ, 
\ 


τῷ TOV WOV εἰκασθέντα χιτῶνι" μετὰ € τοῦτον 
Bn καὶ τἄλλ᾽, ὅσα πρὸς ἐκείνου λέγεται διὰ τοῦ 
περὶ φύσιος παιδιοῦ συγγράμματος. 

AAD εἰ τῶν διαπλασθέντων ἕκαστον οὕτω 
μείνειε σμικρόν, ὡς ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐγένετο, τί ἂν εἴη 
πλέον; αὐξάνεσθαι τοίνυν αὐτὰ χρή. πῶς οὖν 


1 Aristotelian and Stoic duality of an active and a passive 
principle. 

? Note that early embryonic development is described as a 
process of nutrition. cf. Ὁ. 130, note 2. 


134 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IL. πὶ 


And what is the semen? Clearly the active prin- 
ciple of the animal, the material principle being the 
menstrual blood.! Next, seeing that the active prin- 
ciple employs this faculty primarily, therefore, in order 
that any one of the things fashioned by it may come 
into existence, it [the principle] must necessarily be 
possessed of its own faculty. How, then, was Erasis- 
tratus unaware of it, if the primary function of the 
semen be to draw to itself a due proportion of blood? 
Now, this fluid would be in due proportion if it were 
so thin and vaporous, that, as soon as it was drawn 
like dew into every part of the semen, it would 
everywhere cease to display its own particular 
character ; for so the semen will easily dominate and 
quickly assimilate it—in fact, will use it as food. It 
will then, I imagine, draw to itself a second and a 
third quantum, and thus by feeding it acquires for 
itself considerable bulk and quantity.? In fact, the 
alterative faculty has now been discovered as well, 
although about this also Erasistratus has not written a 
word. And, thirdly the shaping? faculty will become 
evident, by virtue of which the semen firstly sur- 
rounds itself with a thin membrane like a kind of 
superficial condensation ; this is what was described 
by Hippocrates in the sixth-day birth, which, ac- 
cording to his statement, fell from the singing- 
girl and resembled the pellicle of an egg. And 
following this all the other stages will occur, such as 
are described by him in his work “On the Child’s 
Nature.”’ 

But if each: of the parts formed were to remain 
as small as when it first came into existence, of what 
use would that be? They have, then, to grow. 


3 On the alterative and shaping faculties cf. p. 18, note 1. 
135 


87 


88 


GALEN 


3 / VA , bud \ 
αὐξηθήσεται; πάντη διατεινόμενα 0 ἅμα καὶ 
τρεφόμενα. καί μοι τῶν ἔμπροσθεν εἰρημένων 
ἐπὶ τῆς κύστεως, ἣν οἱ παῖδες ἐμφυσῶντες ἔτρι- 
βον, ἀναμνησθεὶς μαθήσῃ μᾶλλον || κἀκ τῶν νῦν 
ῥηθησομένων. 

ἮἘ , a δ} δ δί . A a 

ννόησον yap δὴ τὴν καρδίαν οὕτω μὲν μικρὰν 
εἶναι κατ᾽ ἀρχάς, ὡς κέγχρου μηδὲν διαφέρειν ἤ, 

3 4 , Ψ 3, 
εἰ βούλει, κυάμου, καὶ ζήτησον, ὅπως ἂν ἄλλως. 
αὕτη γένοιτο μεγάλη χωρὶς τοῦ πάντη διατεινο- 
μένην τρέφεσθαι δι᾽ ὅλης ἑαυτῆς, ὡς ὀλίγῳ πρόσ- 
θεν ἐδείκνυτο τὸ σπέρμα τρεφόμενον. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ 
τοῦτ᾽ ‘Epaciotpatos οἷδεν ὁ τὴν τέχνην τῆς 
φύσεως ὑμνῶν, adr οὕτως αὐξάνεσθαι τὰ ξῴα 
νομίζει καθάπερ τινὰ ΤΡ (α! ἢ σειρὰν ἢ σάκκον 
ἢ τάλαρον, ὧν ἑκάστῳ κατὰ τὸ πέρας ἐπιπλεκο- 
μένων ὁμοίων ἑτέρων τοῖς ἐξ ἀρχῆς αὐτὰ συντι- 
θεῖσιν ἡ πρόσθεσις γίγνεται. 

᾿Αλλὰ τοῦτό γ᾽ οὐκ αὔξησίς ἐστιν ἀλλὰ γένε- 
σις, ὦ σοφώτατε' γίγνεται γὰρ ὁ θύλακος ἔτι καὶ 
ὁ σάκκος καὶ θοἰμάτιον καὶ ἡ οἰκία καὶ τὸ πλοῖον 
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἕκαστον, ὅταν μηδέπω τὸ προσ- 
ἤκον εἶδος, οὗ χάριν ὑπὸ τοῦ τεχνίτου δημιουρ- 
γεῖται, συμπεπληρωμένον ἡ. πότ᾽ οὖν αὐξάνεται; 
Ψ Ξ᾿ ’ e 4 e ΝΜ , 
ὅταν ἤδη τέλειος ὧν ὁ τάλαρος, ὡς ἔχειν πυθμένα 
τέ τινα καὶ στόμα καὶ οἷον γαστέρα καὶ τὰ 
τούτων μεταξύ, μείζων ἅπασι τούτοις γένηται. 
καὶ πῶς || ἔσται τοῦτο; φήσει τις. πῶς δ᾽ ἄλλως 

3 A 3 la a Ἁ e έ ς a 
ἢ εἰ ζῷον ἐξαίφνης ἢ φυτὸν ὁ τάλαρος ἡμῖν 
γένοιτο; μόνων γὰρ τῶν ξώντων ἡ αὔξησις. σὺ 
δ᾽ ἴσως οἴει τὴν οἰκίαν οἰκοδομουμένην αὐξάνε- 


» 


136 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. πὶ 


. Now, how will they grow? By becoming extended 
in all directions and at the same time receiving 
nourishment. And if you will recall what I previously 
said about the bladder which the children blew up 
and rubbed,! you will also understand my meaning 
better as expressed in what I am now about to say. 

Imagine the heart to be, at the beginning, so 
small as to differ in no respect from a millet-seed, 
or, if you will, a bean; and consider how otherwise 
it is to become large than by being extended in all 
directions and acquiring nourishment throughout its 
whole substance, in the way that, as I showed a short 
while ago, the semen is nourished. But even this 
was unknown to Erasistratus—the man who sings the 
artistic skill of Nature! He imagines that animals 
grow like webs, ropes, sacks, or baskets, each of 
which has, woven on to its end or margin, other 
material similar to that of which it was originally 
composed. 

But this, most sapient sir, is not growth, but 
genesis! For a bag, sack, garment, house, ship, or 
the like is said to be still coming into existence 
[undergoing genesis] so long as the appropriate form 
‘for the sake of which it is being constructed by the 
artificer is still incomplete. Then, when dbes it 
grow? Only when the basket, being complete, with 
a bottom, a mouth, and a belly, as it were, as well 
as the intermediate parts, now becomes larger in all 
these respects. “And how can this happen?” some- 
one will ask. Only by our basket suddenly becoming 
an animal or a plant; for growth belongs to living 
things alone. Possibly you imagine that a house 
grows when it is being built, or a basket when being 


1 pp. 27-29. 
137 


GALEN 


σθαι καὶ τὸν τάλαρον πλεκόμενον καὶ θοἰμάτιον 
e / 3 3 3 ΦΩ͂ ν a \ \ 
ὑφαινόμενον. ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ ὧδ exe TOU μὲν yap 
ἤδη συμπεπληρωμένου τ τὴ τὸ εἶδος ἡ αὔξησις, 
τοῦ δ᾽ ἔτι γιγνομένου ἡ εἰς τὸ εἶδος ὁδὸς οὐκ 
αὔξησις ἀλλὰ γένεσις ὀνομάξεται" αὐξάνεται μὲν 
γὰρ τὸ ὄν, γίγνεται δὲ τὸ οὐκ ὄν. 


IV 


Kal ταῦτ᾽ ᾿Ερασίστρατος οὐκ οἶδεν, ὃν οὐδὲν 
λανθάνει, εἴπερ ὅλως ἀληθεύουσιν οἱ ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ 
φάσκοντες ὡμιληκέναι τοῖς ἐκ τοῦ περιπάτου 

’ 3 , ¥ \ φ “Ὁ)Ἤ A 4 
φιλοσόφοις avtov. ἄχρι μὲν οὖν τοῦ τὴν φύσιν 
ὑμνεῖν ὡς τεχνικὴν κἀγὼ γνωρίζω τὰ τοῦ περι- 
πάτου δόγματα, τῶν δ᾽ ἄλλων οὐδὲν οὐδ᾽ ἐγγύς. 
εἰ γάρ τις ὁμιλήσειε τοῖς ᾿Αριστοτέλους καὶ 
Θεοφράστου ypappact, τῆς Ἱπποκράτους ἂν 

2A / / e , a 
αὐτὰ δόξειε φυσιολογίας ὑπομνήματα συγκεῖσθαι, 

Ν Ν \ ἃ Ν \ \ \ 
τὸ θερμὸν καὶ τὸ ψυχρὸν || καὶ τὸ ξηρὸν καὶ τὸ 
ς ἃ > MM: A Ἁ 4 N 
ὑγρὸν εἰς ἄλληλα δρῶντα καὶ πάσχοντα καὶ 
τούτων αὐτῶν δραστικώτατον μὲν τὸ θερμόν, 
δεύτερον δὲ τῇ δυνάμει τὸ ψυχρὸν Ἱπποκράτους 
ταῦτα σύμπαντα πρώτου, δευτέρου δ᾽ ᾿Αριστο- 
τέλους εἰπόντος. τρέφεσθαι δὲ δι᾽ ὅλων αὑτῶν 

\ , , > 4 δ 
τὰ τρεφόμενα καὶ κεράννυσθαι dv ὅλων τὰ 
κεραννύμενα καὶ ἀλλοιοῦσθαι δι’ ὅλων τὰ ἀλλοι- 
ούμενα, καὶ ταῦθ᾽ Ἱπποκράτειά θ᾽ ἅμα καὶ 
᾿Αριστοτέλεια. καὶ τὴν πέψιν ἀλλοίωσίν τιν᾽ 


1 ¢f. Introduction, p. xxvi. 2 of. p. 15. 
138 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IT. 111.-1v 


plaited, or a garment when being woven? It is not 
so, however. Growth belongs to that which has 
already been completed in respect to its form, whereas 
the process by which that which is still becoming 
attains its form is termed not growth but genesis. 
That which ts, grows, while that which ἐς zot, 
becomes. 


IV 


Tus also was unknown to Erasistratus, whom 
nothing escaped, if his followers speak in any way 
truly in maintaining that he was familiar with the 
Peripatetic philosophers. Now, in so far as he 
acclaims Nature as being an artist in construction, 
even I recognize the Peripatetic teachings, but in 
other respects he does not come near them. For if 
anyone will make himself acquainted with the 
writings of Aristotle and Theophrastus, these will 
appear to him to consist of commentaries on the 
Nature-lore [physiology]! of Hippocrates—according 
to which the principles of heat, cold, dryness and 
moisture act upon and are acted upon by one another, 
the hot principle being the most active, and the 
cold coming next to it in power; all this-was stated 
in the first place by Hippocrates and secondly by 
Aristotle.2 Further, it is at once the Hippocratic 
and the Aristotelian teaching that the parts which 
are being nourished receive that nourishment 
throughout their whole substance, and that, similarly, 
processes of mingling and alteration involve the entire 
substance. Moreover, that digestion is a species of 


8 For definitions of alteration and mingling (crasts, ‘‘ tem- 
perament ”’) cf. Book I., chaps. ii. and iii. 


139 


GALEN 


ὑπάρχειν καὶ μεταβολὴν τοῦ τρέφοντος εἰς τὴν 
οἰκείαν τοῦ τρεφομένου ποιότητα, τὴν δ᾽ ἐξαι- 
μάτωσιν ἀλλοίωσιν εἶναι καὶ τὴν θρέψιν ὡσαύτως 
καὶ τὴν αὔξησιν ἐκ τῆς πάντη διατάσεως καὶ 
θρέψεως γίγνεσθαι, τὴν δ᾽ ἀλλοίωσιν ὑπὸ τοῦ 
θερμοῦ μάλιστα συντελεῖσθαι καὶ διὰ τοῦτο καὶ 
τὴν πέψιν καὶ τὴν θρέψιν καὶ τὴν τῶν χυμῶν 
ἁπάντων γένεσιν, ἤδη δὲ καὶ τοῖς περιττώμασι 
τὰς ποιότητας ὑπὸ τῆς ἐμφύτου θερμασίας ἐγγί- 
γνεσθαι, ταῦτα σύμπαντα καὶ πρὸς τούτοις ἕτερα 
πολλὰ τά τε τῶν προειρημένων δυνάμεων καὶ 
τὰ I τῶν νοσημάτων τῆς γενέσεως καὶ τὰ τῶν 
ἰαμάτων τῆς εὑρέσεως Ἱπποκράτης μὲν πρῶτος 
ἁπάντων ὧν ἴσμεν ὀρθῶς εἶπεν, ᾿Αριστοτέλης δὲ 
δεύτερος ὀρθῶς ἐξηγήσατο. καὶ μὴν εἰ ταῦτα 
σύμπαντα τοῖς ἐκ τοῦ “περιπάτου δοκεῖ, καθάπε 
οὖν δοκεῖ, μηδὲν δ᾽ αὐτῶν ἀρέσκει τῷ ᾿Ερασιστρά- 
τῳ, τί ποτε βούλεται τοῖς ᾿Ερασιστρατείοις ἡ 
προς τοὺς φιλοσόφους ἐκείνους τοῦ τῆς αἱρέσεως 
αὐτῶν ἡγεμόνος ὁμιλία; θαυμάζουσι μὲν γὰρ 
αὐτὸν ὡς θεὸν καὶ πάντ᾽ ἀληθεύειν νομίζουσιν. 
εἰ δ᾽ οὕτως ἔχει ταῦτα, πάμπολυ δήπου τῆς 
ἀληθείας ἐσφάλθαι χρὴ νομίξειν τοὺς ἐκ τοῦ 
περιπάτου φιλοσόφους, οἷς μηδὲν ὧν ᾽Ἔρασί- 
στρᾶτος ὑπελάμβανεν ἀρέσκει. καὶ μὴν ὥσπερ 
τιν᾽ εὐγένειαν αὐτῷ τῆς φυσιολογίας τὴν πρὸς 
τοὺς ἄνδρας ἐκείνους συνουσίαν ἐκπὸ ἰξουσι. 
Πάλιν οὖν ἀναστρέψωμεν τὸν λόγον ἑτέρως ἢ 
ὡς ὀλέγῳ πρόσθεν ἐ ἐτύχομεν εἰπόντες. εἴπερ γὰρ 
οἱ ἐκ τοῦ περιπάτου καλῶς ἐφυσιολόγησαν, 
οὐδὲν ἂν εἴη ληρωδέστερον ᾿Ερασιστράτου καὶ 
δίδωμι τοῖς ᾿Ερασιστρατείοις αὐτοῖς τὴν αἵρεσιν" 


140 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. tv 


alteration—a transmutation of the nutriment into 
the proper quality of the thing receiving it; that 
blood-production also is an alteration, and nutrition 
as well; that growth results from extension in all 
directions, combined with nutrition; that alteration 
is effected mainly by the warm principle, and that 
therefore digestion, nutrition, and the generation of 
the various humours, as well as the qualities of the 
surplus substances, result from the inate heat ; 1 all 
these and many other points besides in regard to the 
aforesaid faculties, the origin of diseases, and the 
discovery of remedies, were correctly stated first by 
Hippocrates of all writers whom we know, and were 
in the second place correctly expounded by Aristotle. 
Now, if all these views meet with the approval of 
the Peripatetics, as they undoubtedly do, and if none 
of them satisfy Erasistratus, what can the Erasi- 
strateans possibly mean by claiming that their leader 
was associated with these philosophers? The fact 
is, they revere him as a god, and think that every- 
thing he says is true. If this be so, then we must 
suppose the Peripatetics to have strayed very far 
from truth, since they approve of none of the ideas 
of Erasistratus. And, indeed, the disciples of the 
latter produce his connection with the Peripatetics 
in order to furnish his Nature-lore with a respectable 
pedigree. 

Now, let us reverse our argument and put it in a 
different way from that which we have just employed. 
For if the Peripatetics were correct in their teaching 
about Nature, there could be nothing more absurd 
than the contentions of Erasistratus. And, I will 
leave it to the Erasistrateans themselves to decide ; 


1 7.e. are associated with oxidation? cf. p. 41, note 3. 


141 


GALEN 


91 ἢ yap τὸν πρότερον λόγον ἢ τοῦτον || προσήσονται. 
λέγει δ᾽ ὁ μὲν πρότερος οὐδὲν ὀρθῶς ἐγνωκέναι 
περὶ φύσεως τοὺς περιπατητικούς, ὁ δὲ δεύτερος 
᾿Ἐρασίστρατον. ἐμὸν μὲν οὖν ὑπομνῆσαι τῶν 
δογμάτων τὴν μάχην, ἐκείνων δ᾽ ἡ αἵρεσις. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ οὐκ ἂν ἀποσταῖεν τοῦ θαυμάξειν ᾿᾽Ερασί- 
στρατον' οὐκοῦν σιωπάτωσαν περὶ τῶν ἐκ τοῦ 
περιπάτου φιλοσόφων. παμπόλλων γὰρ ὄντων 
δογμάτων φυσικῶν περί τε γένεσιν καὶ φθορὰν 
τῶν ξῴων καὶ ὑγίειαν καὶ νόσους καὶ τὰς θερα- 
melas αὐτῶν ἕν μόνον εὑρεθήσεται ταὐτὸν Ἔρασι- 
στράτῳ κἀκείνοις τοῖς ἀνδράσι, τό τινος ἕνεκα 
πάντα ποιεῖν τὴν φύσιν καὶ μάτην μηδέν. 

᾿Αλλὰ καὶ αὐτὸ τοῦτο μέχρι λόγου κοινόν, 
ἔργῳ δὲ μυριάκις ᾿Ερασίστρατος αὐτὸ διαφθείρει" 
μάτην μὲν γὰρ ὁ σπλὴν ἐγένετο, μάτην δὲ τὸ 
ἐπίπλοον, μάτην δ᾽ αἱ εἰς τοὺς νεφροὺς ἀρτηρίαι 
καταφυόμεναι, σχεδὸν ἁπασῶν τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς 
μεγάλης ἀρτηρίας ἀποβλαστανουσῶν οὖσαι 
μέγισται, μάτην & ἄλλα μυρία κατά ye τὸν 
᾿Ερασιστράτειον λόγον: ἅπερ εἰ μὲν οὐδ᾽ ὅλως 
γιγνώσκει, βραχεῖ μαγείρου σοφώτερός ἐστιν ἐν 
ταῖς ἀνατομαῖς, εἰ δ᾽ εἰδὼς οὐ λέγει τὴν χρείαν 

92 αὐτῶν, οἴεται || δηλονότι παραπλησίως τῷ σπληνὶ 
μάτην αὐτὰ: γεγονέναι. καίτοι τί ταῦτ᾽ ἐπεξ.- 
έρχομαι τῆς περὶ χρείας μορίων πραγματείας 
ὄντα μελλούσης ἡμῖν ἰδίᾳ περαίνεσθαι; 





1 ἐς Useless” organs; cf. p. 56, note 2. For fallacy of 
Erasistratus’s view on the spleen v. p. 205. 


142 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IT. 1 


they must either advance the one proposition or the 
other. According to the former one the Peripatetics 
had no accurate acquaintance with Nature, and 
according to the second, Erasistratus. It is my task, 
then, to point out the opposition between the two 
doctrines, and theirs to make the choice. . 

But they certainly will not abandon their reverence 
for Erasistratus. Very well, then; let them stop 
talking about the Peripatetic philosophers. For 
among the numerous physiological teachings regard- 
ing the genesis and destruction of animals, their 
health, their diseases, and the methods of treating 
these, there will be found one only which is common 
to Erasistratus and the Peripatetics—namely, the 
view that Nature does everything for some purpose, 
and nothing in vain. 

But even as regards this doctrine their agree- 
ment is only verbal; in practice Erasistratus makes 
havoc of it a thousand times over. For, according 
to him, the spleen was made for no purpose, as 
also the omentum ; similarly, too, the arteries which 
are inserted into kidneys!—although these are 
practically the largest of all those that spring from 
the great artery [aorta]! And to judge by the 
Erasistratean argument, there must be countless 
other useless structures; for, if he knows nothing 
at all about these structures, he has little more 
anatomical knowledge than a butcher, while, if he is 
acquainted with them and yet does not state their 
use, he clearly imagines that they were made for no 
purpose, like the spleen. Why, however, should I 
discuss these structures fully, belonging as they do 
to the treatise “On the Use of Parts,’ which I am 
personally about to complete? 


143 


93 


GALEN 


Πάλιν οὖν ἀναλάβωμεν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον 
εἰπόντες τέ τι βραχὺ πρὸς τοὺς ᾿Ερασιστρατείους 
ἔτι τῶν ἐφεξῆς ἐχώμεθα. δοκοῦσι γάρ μοι μηδὲν 
ἀνεγνωκέναι τῶν ᾿Αριστοτέλους οὗτοι συγγραμ- 
μάτων, ἀλλ᾽ ἄλλων ἀκούοντες, ὡς δεινὸς ἦ ἦν περὶ 
φύσιν ὁ ἄνθρωπος καὶ ὡς οἱ ἀπὸ τῆς στοᾶς κατ᾽ 
ἰχνη τῆς ἐκείνου φυσιολογίας βαδίζουσιν, εἶθ᾽ 
εὑρόντες ἕν τε τῶν περιφερομένων δογμάτων 
κοινὸν αὐτῷ πρὸς ᾿Ερασίστρατον ἀναπλάσαι τινὰ 
συνουσίαν αὐτοῦ πρὸς ἐκείνους τοὺς ἄνδρας. 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι μὲν τῆς ᾿Αριστοτέλους φυσιολογίας 
οὐδὲν ᾿Ερασιστράτῳ μέτεστιν, ὁ κατάλογος τῶν 
προειρημένων ἐνδείκνυται δογμάτων, ἃ πρώτου 
μὲν Ἱπποκράτους ἦν, δευτέρου δ᾽ ᾿Αριστοτέλους, 
τρίτων δὲ τῶν Στωϊκῶν, ἑ ἑνὸς μόνου μετατιθεμένου 
τοῦ τὰς ποιότητας εἶναι σώματα. 

Taxa δ᾽ ἂν τῆς λογικῆς ἕνεκα θεωρίας ὧμιλη- 
κέναι φαῖεν τὸν ᾿Ερασίστρατον τοῖς ἐκ τοῦ 
περιπάτου φιλοσόφοις, οὐκ εἰδότες, ὡς ἐκεῖνοι 
μὲν ψευδεῖς καὶ ἀπεράντους οὐκ ἔγραψαν λόγους, 
τὰ ὃ ᾿Ερασιστράτεια βιβλία παμπόλλους ἔχει 
τοὺς τοιούτους. 

Tax’ ἂν οὖν ἤδη τις θαυμάζοι καὶ διαποροίη, 
τί παθὼν ὁ ᾿Ερασίστρατος εἰς τοσοῦτον τῶν 
Ἱπποκράτους δογμάτων ἀπετράπετο καὶ διὰ 
τί τῶν ἐν ἥπατι πόρων τῶν χοληδόχων, ἅλις 
γὰρ ἤδη νεφρῶν, “ἀφελόμενος τὴν ἑλκτικὴν 
δύναμιν ἐπίκαιρον αἰτιᾶται θέσιν καὶ στομάτων 


1 The Stoics. 2 The Peripatetics (Aristotelians). 

3 Aristotle regarded the qualitative differences apprehended 
by our senses (the cold, the warm, the moist, and the dry) as 
fundamental, while the 'Stoics held the four corporeal elements 


144 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. tv 


Let us, then, sum up again this same argument, 
and, having said a few words more in answer to 
the Erasistrateans, proceed to our next topic. The 
fact is, these people seem to me to have read none 
of Aristotle’s writings, but to have heard from 
others how great an authority he was on “ Nature,” 
and that those of the Porch! follow in the steps of 
his Nature-lore ; apparently they then discovered a 
single one of the current ideas which is common to 
Aristotle and Erasistratus, and made up some story 
of a connection between Erasistratus and these 
people.2. That Erasistratus, however, has no share in 
the Nature-lore of Aristotle is shown by an enumera- 
tion of the aforesaid doctrines, which emanated first 
from Hippocrates, secondly from Aristotle, thirdly 
from the Stoics (with a single modification, namely, 
that for them the qualities are bodies).3 

Perhaps, however, they will maintain that it was 
in the matter of logic that Erasistratus associated 
himself with the Peripatetic philosophers? Here 
they show iggorance of the fact that these philoso- 
phers never brought forward false or inconclusive 
arguments, while the Erasistratean books are full of 
them. 

So perhaps somebody may already be asking, in 
some surprise, what possessed Erasistratus that he 
turned so completely from the doctrines of Hippo- 
crates, and why it is that he takes away the at- 
tractive faculty from the biliary * passages in the 
liver—for we have sufficiently discussed the kidneys 
—alleging [as the cause of bile-secretion] a favour- 
able situation, the narrowness of vessels, and a 


(earth, air, fire, and water) to be still more fundamental. 
cf. p. 8, note 3. 4 Lit. bile-receiving (choledochous). 


145 
L 


94 


GALEN 


στενότητα Kal χώραν τινὰ κοινήν, εἷς ἣν παρ- 
άγουσι μὲν αἱ ἀπὸ τῶν πυλῶν τὸ ἀκάθαρτον αἷμα, 
μεταλαμβάνουσι δὲ πρότεροι μὲν οἱ πόροι τὴν 
χολήν, δεύτεραι δ᾽ αἱ ἀπὸ τῆς κοίλης φλεβὸς 
τὸ καθαρὸν αἷμα. πρὸς γὰρ τῷ μηδὲν ἂν βλα- 
βῆναι τὴν ὁλκὴν εἰπὼν ἄλλων μυρίων ἔμελλεν 
ἀμφισβητουμένων ἀπαλλάξεσθαι λόγων. 


V 


‘Os viv ye πόλεμος οὐ σμικρός ἐστι τοῖς 
᾿Ερασιστρατείοις οὐ πρὸς τοὺς ἄλλους μόνον 
ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους, οὐκ ἔχουσιν, ὅπως 
ἐξηγήσωνται τὴν ἐκ τοῦ πρώτου τῶν καθόλου 
λόγων λέξιν, ἐν ἦ φησιν" “ His τὸ || αὐτὸ δ᾽ ἀνε- 
στομωμένων ἑτέρων δύο ἀγγείων τῶν T ἐπὶ τὴν 
χοληδόχον τεινόντων καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ τὴν κοίλην 
φλέβα συμβαίνει τῆς ἀναφερομάνης ἐκ τῆς 
κοιλίας τροφῆς τὰ ἐναρμόξζοντα ἑκατέροις τῶν 
στομάτων εἰς ἑκάτερα τῶν ἀγγείων μετα- 
λαμβάνεσθαι καὶ τὰ μὲν ἐπὶ τὴν χοληδόχον 
φέρεσθαι, τὰ δ᾽ ἐπὶ τὴν κοίλην φλέβα περαιοῦ- 
σθαι. τὸ γὰρ “εἰς τὸ αὐτὸ ἀνεστομωμένων;,᾽" 
ὃ κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς τῆς λέξεως γέγραπται, τί ποτε χρὴ 
νοῆσαι, χαλεπὸν εἰπεῖν. ἤτοι γὰρ οὕτως εἰς 
ταὐτόν, ὥστε τῷ τῆς ἐν τοῖς σιμοῖς φλεβὸς 
πέρατι συνάπτειν δύο ἕτερα πέρατα, τό τ᾽ ἐν τοῖς 
1 Jecoris portae, the transverse fissure, by which the portal 
vein enters the liver. 


146 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. tv.-v 


common space into which the veins from the gate- 
way [of the liver]+ conduct the unpurified blood, and 
from which, in the first place, the grout passages 
take over the bile, and secondly, the arumee of 
the vena cava take over the purified blood. For it 
would not only have done him no harm to have 
mentioned the idea of attraction, but he would there- 
by have been able to get rid of countless other dis- 
puted questions. 


V 


At the actual moment, however, the Erasi- 
strateans are engaged in a considerable battle, not 
only with others but also amongst themselves, and so 
they cannot explain the passage from the first book 
of the “General Principles,” in which Erasistratus 
says, “ Since there are two kinds of vessels opening 5 
at the same place, the one kind extending to the 
gall-bladder and the other to the vena cava, the 
result is that, of the nutriment carried up from the 
alimentary canal, that part which fits both kinds of 
stomata is received into both kinds of vessels, some 
being carried into the gall-bladder, and the rest 
passing over into the vena cava.”’ For it is difficult 
to say what we are to understand by the words 
“opening at the same place’’ which are written 
at the beginning of this passage. Either they mean 
there is a junctton® between the termination of 
the vein which is on the concave surface of the 
liver? and two other vascular terminations (that 
of the vessel on the convex surface of the liver 


2 Lit. “‘anastomosing.” ὃ More literally, ‘‘ synapse.” 
4 The portal vein. 5 The hepatic vein or veins. 


147 
L 2 


9ὅ 


GALEN 


κυρτοῖς καὶ τὸ τοῦ χοληδόχου πόρου, ἤ, εἰ μὴ 
οὕτω, χώραν τινὰ κοινὴν ἐπινοῆσαι χρὴ τῶν 
τριῶν ἀγγείων οἷον δεξαμενήν τινα, πληρουμένην 
μὲν ὑπὸ τῆς κάτω φλεβός, ἐκκενουμένην δ᾽ εἴς τε 
τοὺς χοληδόχους πόρους καὶ τὰς τῆς κοίλης 
ἀποσχίδας" καθ᾽ ἑκατέ αν δὲ τῶν ἐξηγήσεων 
ἄτοπα πολλά, περὶ ὧν εἰ πάντων λέγοιμι, λάθοιμ᾽ 
ἂν ἐμαντὸν ἐξηγήσεις ᾿Ερασιστράτου γράφων, 
οὐχ, ὅπερ ἐξ ἀρχῆς προὐθέμην, περαίνων. κοινὸν 
δ᾽ ἀμφοτέραις ταῖς ἐξηγήσεσιν ἄτοπον τὸ μὴ il 
καθαίρεσθαι πᾶν τὸ αἷμα. χρὴ γὰρ ὡς εἰς 
ἠθμόν τινα τὸ χοληδόχον ἀγγεῖον ἐμπίπτειν 
αὐτό, οὐ παρέρχεσθαι καὶ παραρρεῖν ὠκέως εἰς 
τὸ μεῖζον στόμα τῇ ῥύμῃ τῆς ἀναδόσεως φερό- 
μενον. 

ἾΑρ᾽ οὖν ἐν τούτοις μόνον ἀπορίαις ἀφύκτοις ὁ 
᾿Ερασιστράτου λόγος ἐνέχεται μὴ βουληθέντος 
χρήσασθαι ταῖς ἑλκτικαῖς δυνάμεσιν εἰς μηδέν, ἢ 
σφοδρότατα μὲν ἐν τούτοις καὶ σαφῶς οὕτως, ὡς 
ἂν μηδὲ παῖδα λαθεῖν; 


VI . 


Ei δ᾽ ἐπισκοποῖτό τις ἐπιμελῶς, οὐδ᾽ ὁ περὶ 
θρέψεως αὐτοῦ λόγος, ὃν ἐν τῷ δευτέρῳ τῶν 
καθόλου λόγων διεξέρχεται, τὰς αὐτὰς ἀπορίας 
ἐκφεύγει. τῇ γὰρ πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθίᾳ 
συγχωρηθέντος ἑνὸς λήμματος, ὡς πρόσθεν 
ἐδείκνυμεν, ἐπέραινέ τι περὶ φλεβῶν μόνων καὶ 


τοῦ κατ᾽ αὐτὰς αἵματος. ἐκρέοντος γάρ τίνος 


1 The portal vein. 2 cf. p. 120, note 1. 
148 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. v.-v1 


and that of the bile-duct), or, if not, then we must 
suppose that there is, as it were, a common space 
for all three vessels, which becomes filled from the 
lower vein,! and empties itself both into the bile- 
duct and into the branches of the vena cava. Now, 
there are many difficulties in both of these explana- 
tions, but if I were to state them all, I should find 
myself inadvertently writing an exposition of the 
teaching of Erasistratus, instead of carrying out my 
original undertaking. There is, however, one diffi- 
culty common to both these explanations, namely, 
that the whole of the blood does not become 
purified. For it ought to fall into the bile-duct as 
into a kind of sieve, instead of going (running, in 
fact, rapidly) past it, into the larger stoma, by virtue 
of the impulse of anadosis. 

Are these, then, the only inevitable difficulties in 
which the argument of Erasistratus becomes involved 
through his disinclination to make any use of the 
attractive faculty, or is it that the difficulty is greatest 
here, and also so obvious that even a child could not 
avoid seeing it? 


VI 


Anp if one looks carefully into the matter one 
will find that even Erasistratus’s reasoning on the 
subject of xutrittion, which- he takes up in the 
second book of his “General Principles,’ fails to 
escape this same difficulty. For, having conceded 
one premise to the principle that matter tends to fill 
a vacuum, as we previously showed, he was only 
able to draw a conclusion in the case of the veins 
and their contained blood.? That is to say, when 


149 


96 


97 


GALEN 


κατὰ τὰ στόματ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ διαφορουμένου καὶ 
μήτ᾽ ἀθρόως τόπου κενοῦ δυναμένου γενέσθαι 
μήτε τῶν φλεβῶν συμπεσεῖν, τοῦτο γὰρ ἣν τὸ 
παραλειπόμενον, ἀναγκαῖον ἦν ἕπεσθαι τὸ συνεχὲς 
ἀναπληροῦν τοῦ κενουϊμένου τὴν βάσιν. αἱ μὲν 
δὴ φλέβες ἡμῖν οὕτω θρέψονται τοῦ περιεχομένου 
κατ᾽ αὐτὰς αἵματος ἀπολαύουσαι' τὰ δὲ νεῦρα 
πῶς; οὐ γὰρ δὴ κἀν τούτοις ἐστὶν αἷμα. πρό- 
χεῖρον μὲν yap ἣν εἰπεῖν, ἕλκοντα παρὰ τῶν 
φλεβῶν: ἀλλ᾽ οὐ βούλεται. τί ποτ᾽ οὖν κἀν- 
ταῦθα ἐπιτεχνᾶται; φλέβας ἔχειν ἐν ἑαυτῷ 
καὶ ἀρτηρίας τὸ νεῦρον ὥσπερ τινὰ σειρὰν ἐκ 
τριῶν ἱμάντων διαφερόντων τῇ φύσει πεπλεγ- 
μένην. ῳήθη γὰρ ἐκ ταύτης τῆς ὑποθέσεως 
ἐκφεύξεσθαι τῷ λόγῳ τὴν ὁλκήν' οὐ γὰρ ἂν ἔτι 
δεήσεσθαι τὸ νεῦρον ἐν ἑαυτῷ περιέχον αἵματος 
ἀγγεῖον ἐπιρρύτον τινὸς ἔξωθεν ἐκ τῆς παρα- 
κειμένης φλεβὸς τῆς ἀληθινῆς αἵματος ἑτέρου, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἱκανὸν αὐτῷ πρὸς τὴν θρέψιν ἔσεσθαι 
τὸ κατεψευσμένον ἀγγεῖον ἐκεῖνο τὸ λόγῳ θεω- 
ρητόν. : 

᾿Αλλὰ κἀνταῦθα πάλιν αὐτὸν ὁμοία τις ἀπορία 

μοία τις ἀπορ 

διεδέξατο. τουτὶ γὰρ τὸ σμικρὸν ἀγγεῖον ἑαυτὸ 
μὲν θρέψει, τὸ παρακείμενον μέντοι νεῦρον ἐκεῖνο 
τὸ ἁπλοῦν ἢ τὴν ἀρτηρίαν οὐχ οἷόν τ᾽ ἔσται 
τρέφειν ἄνευ τοῦ σύμφυτόν τιν᾽ ὑπάρχειν αὐτοῖς 
ὁλκὴν τῆς τροφῆς. || τῇ μὲν γὰρ πρὸς τὸ κενού- 
μενον ἀκολουθίᾳ πῶς ἂν ἔτι δύναιτο τὴν τροφὴν 
ἐπισπᾶσθαι τὸ ἁπλοῦν νεῦρον, ὥσπερ αἱ φλέβες 


1 of. p. 272, note 1. 
2 2,6. one might assume an attraction. 


150 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. vi 


blood is running away through the stomata of 
the veins, and is being dispersed, then, since an 
absolutely empty space cannot result, and the veins 
cannot collapse (for this was what he overlooked), 
it was therefore shown to be necessary that the 
adjoining quantum of fluid should flow in and fill 
the place of the fluid evacuated. It is in this way 
that we may suppose the veins to be nourished ; 
they get the benefit of the blood which they contain. 
But how about the nerves?! For they do not also 
contain blood. One might obviously say that they 
draw their supply from the veins.2. But Erasistratus 
will not have it so. What further contrivance, then, 
does he suppose? He says that a nerve has within 
itself veins and arteries, like a rope woven by 
Nature out of three different strands. By means of 
this hypothesis he imagined that his theory would 
escape from the idea of attraction. For if the nerve 
contain within itself a blood-vessel it will no 
longer need the adventitious flow of other blood 
from the real vein lying adjacent; this fictitious 
vessel, perceptible only in theory,® will suffice it for 
nourishment. 

But this, again, is succeeded by another similar 
difficulty. For this small vessel will nourish itself, 
but it will not be able to nourish this adjacent 
simple nerve or artery, unless these possess some 
innate proclivity for attracting nutriment. For how 
could the zerve, being simple, attract its nourishment, 
as do the composite veins, by virtue of the tendency 


3 2,6. visible to the mind’s eye as distinguished from 
the bodily eye. cf. p. 21, note 4. Theoreton without quali- 
fication means merely visible, not theoretic. cf. p. 205, 
note 1. 


151 


98 


GALEN 


αἱ σύνθετοι; κοιλότης μὲν γάρ τίς ἐστιν ἐν αὐτῷ 
κατ᾽ αὐτόν, GAN οὐχ αἵματος αὕτη y ἀλλὰ 
πνεύματος ψυχικοῦ μεστή. δεόμεθα δ᾽ ἡμεῖς 
οὐκ εἰς τὴν κοιλότητα “ταύτην εἰσάγειν τῷ λόγῳ 
τὴν τροφὴν ἀλλ᾽ εἰς τὸ περιέχον αὐτὴν ἀγγεῖον, 
εἴτ᾽ οὖν τρέφεσθαι μόνον εἴτε καὶ αὔξεσθαι δέοιτο. 
πῶς οὖν εἰσάξομεν; οὕτω γάρ ἐστι σμικρὸν ἐκεῖνο 
τὸ ἁπλοῦν ἀγγεῖον καὶ μέντοι καὶ τῶν ἄλλων 
ἑκάτερον, ὥστ᾽, εἰ τῇ λεπτοτάτῃ βελόνῃ νύξειάς 
TL μέρος, ἅμα διαιρήσεις τὰ τρία. τόπος οὖν 
αἰσθητὸς ἀθρόως κενὸς. οὐκ ἄν ποτ᾽ ἐν αὐτῷ 
γένοιτο' λόγῳ δὲ θεωρητὸς τόπος κενούμενος οὐκ 
ἦν ἀναγκαστικὸς τῆς τοῦ συνεχοῦς ἀκολουθίας. 
Ἠβουλόμην δ᾽ αὖ πάλιν μοι κἀνταῦθα τὸν 
᾿Ερασίστρατον αὐτὸν ἀποκρίνασθαι περὶ τοῦ 
στοιχειώδους ἐ ἐκείνου νεύρου τοῦ σμικροῦ, πότερον 
ἕν τι καὶ συνεχὲς ἀκριβῶς ἐστιν ἢ ἐκ πολλῶν 
καὶ σμικρῶν σωμάτων, ὧν ᾿Επίκουρος καὶ Λεύ- 
KUT TOS Kal Δημόκριτος ὑπέθεντο, σύγκειται. 
καὶ γὰρ καὶ περὶ τούτου τοὺς ᾿Ερασιστρατείους 
ὁρῶ διαφερομένους. οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἕν τι καὶ συνεχὲς 
αὐτὸ νομίζουσιν ἢ ἢ οὐκ ἂν ἁπλοῦν εἰρῆσθαι πρὸς 
αὐτοῦ φασι" τινὲς δὲ καὶ τοῦτο διαλύειν εἰς ἕτερα 
στοιχειώδη τολμῶσιν. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν ἕν τι καὶ 
συνεχές ἐστι, τὸ κενούμενον ἐξ αὐτοῦ κατὰ τὴν 
ἄδηλον ὑπὸ τῶν ἰατρῶν ὀνομαζομένην διαπνοὴν 





1 According to the Pneumatist school, certain of whose 
ideas were accepted by Erasistratus, the air, breath, pneuma, 
or spirit was brought by inspiration into the left side of the 
heart, where it was converted into natural, vital, and 
psychic pneuma ; the latter then went to the brain, whence 
it was distributed through the nervous system ; practically 


152 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. vi 


of a vacuum to become refilled? For, although 
according to Erasistratus, it contains within itself 
a cavity of sorts, this is not occupied with blood, but 
with psychic pneuma,! and we are required to imagine 
the nutriment introduced, not into this cavity, but 
into the vessel containing it, whether it needs 
merely to be nourished, or to grow as well. How, 
then, are we to imagine it introduced? For this 
simple vessel [i.e. nerve] is So small—as are also the 
other two—that if you prick it at any part with 
the finest needle you will tear the whole three ot 
them at once. Thus there could never be in it a 
perceptible space entirely empty. And an emptied 
space which merely existed in theory could not 
compel the adjacent fluid to come and fill it. 

At this point, again, I should like Erasistratus 
himself to answer regarding this small elementary 


ἣν nerve, whether it is actually one and definitely con- 


tinuous, or whether it consists of many small bodies, 
such as those assumed by Epicurus, Leucippus, and 
Democritus.? For I see that the Erasistrateans are at 
variance on this subject. Some of them consider it 
one and continuous, for otherwise, as they say, he 
would not have called it semple; and some venture 
to resolve it into yet other elementary bodies. But 
if it be one and continuous, then what is evacuated 
from it in the so-called znsenstble transpiration of the 


this teaching involved the idea of a psyche, or conscious vital 
principle. ‘‘Psychic pneuma” is in Latin epiritus animalis 
(anima = psyche); cf. p. 126, note 4. Introduction, p. xxxiv. 

2 Observe that Erasistratus’s “ simple nerve » may be 
almost looked on as an anticipation of the cell. The question 
Galen now asks is whether this vessel is a ‘‘ unit mass of 
living matter,” or merely an agglomeration of atoms subject 
to mechanical law. cf. Galen’s ‘‘ fibres,” p. 329. 


153 


GALEN 


οὐδεμίαν ἐν ἑαυτῷ καταλείψει “χώραν κενήν. 
οὕτω γὰρ οὐχ ὃν ἀλλὰ πολλὰ γενήσεται, διειργό- 
μενα δήπου ταῖς κεναῖς χώραις. εἰ δ᾽ ἐκ πολλῶν 
σύγκειται, τῇ κηπαίᾳ κατὰ τὴν παροιμίαν πρὸς 
᾿Ασκληπιάδην ἀ ἀπε ὡρήσαμεν ἄναρμά τινα στοι- 
χεῖα τιθέμενοι. πάλιν οὖν ἄτεχνος ἡμῖν ἡ φύσις 
λεγέσθω" τοῖς γὰρ τοιούτοις στοιχείοις ἐξ ἀνάγ- 
κης τοῦθ᾽ ἕπεται. . 

Διὸ δή μοι καὶ δοκοῦσιν ἀμαθῶς πάνυ τὴν εἰς 
τὰ τοιαῦτα στοιχεῖα τῶν ἁπλῶν ἀγγείων εἰσάγειν 
διάλυσιν ἔνιοι τῶν ᾿Ερασιστρατείων. ἐμοὶ γοῦν 
οὐδὲν διαφέρει. καθ᾽ ἑκατέρους γὰρ ἄτοπος ὁ 
τῆς θρέψεως ἔσται “λόγος, ἐκείνοις τοῖς ἁπλοῖς 
ἀγγείοις τοῖς σμικροῖς τοῖς συντιθεῖσι τὰ μεγάλα || 
τε καὶ αἰσθητὰ νεῦρα κατὰ μὲν τοὺς συνεχῆ 
φυλάττοντας αὐτὰ μὴ δυναμένης γενέσθαι τῆς 
πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθίας, ὅ ὅτε μηδὲν ἐν τῷ 
συνεχεῖ γίγνεται κενόν, κἂν ἀπορρέῃ τι" συνέρ- 
χεται γὰρ πρὸς ἄλληλα τὰ «καταλειπόμενα μόρια, 
καθάπερ ἐπὶ τοῦ ὕδατος ὁρᾶται, καὶ πάλιν ἕν 
γίγνεται πάντα τὴν χώραν τοῦ διαφορηθέντος 
αὐτὰ καταλαμβάνοντα" κατὰ δὲ τοὺς ἑτέρους, 
ὅτι τῶν στοιχείων ἐκείνων οὐδὲν δεῖται τῆς πρὸς 
τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθίας. ἐπὶ γὰρ τῶν αἰσθητῶν 
μόνων, οὐκ ἐπὶ τῶν λόγῳ θεωρητῶν ἔχει δύναμιν, 
ὡς αὐτὸς ὁ ᾿Ερασίστρατος ὁμολογεῖ διαρρήδην, 
οὐ περὶ τοῦ τοιούτου κενοῦ φάσκων ἑκάστοτε 
ποιεῖσθαι τὸν λόγον, ὃ κατὰ βραχὺ παρέσπαρται 
τοῖς σώμασιν, ἀλλὰ περὶ τοῦ σαφοῦς καὶ αἰσθητοῦ 
καὶ ἀθρόον καὶ μεγάλου καὶ ἐναργοῦς καὶ ὅπως 
ἂν ἄλλως ὀνομάζειν ἐθέλῃς. ᾿Ερασίστρατος μὲν 
γὰρ αὐτὸς αἰσθητὸν ἀθρόως οὔ φησι δύνασθαι 


154 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. νι 


physicians will leave no empty space in it; other- 
wise it would not be one body but many, separated 
by empty spaces. But if it consists of many bodies, 
then we have “escaped by the back door,’ as the 
saying is, to Asclepiades, seeing that we have 
postulated certain inharmontous elements. Once again, 
then, we must call Nature ‘‘inartistic’’; for this 
necessarily follows the assumption of such elements. 

For this reason some of the Erasistrateans seem to 
- me to have done very foolishly in reducing the simple 
vessels to elements such as these. Yet it makes no 
difference to me, since the theory of both parties 
regarding nutrition will be shown to be absurd. For 
in these minute simple vessels constituting the large 
perceptible nerves, it is impossible, according to the 
theory of those who would keep the former con- 
tinuous, that any “refilling of a vacuum” should 
take place, since no vacuum can occur in a con- 
tinuum even if anything does run away; for the 
parts left come together (as is seen in the case 
of water) and again become one, taking up the 
whole space of that which previously separated them. 
Nor will any “refilling’’ occur if we accept the 
argument of the other Erasistrateans, since none of 
their elements need it. For this principle only holds 
of things which are perceptible, and not of those 
which exist merely in theory; this Erasistratus 
expressly acknowledges, for he states that it is 
not a vacuum such as this, interspersed in small 
portions among the corpuscles, that his various 
treatises deal with, but a vacuum which is clear, 
perceptible, complete in itself, large in size, evident, 
or however else one cares to term it (for, what 
Erasistratus himself says is, that “ there cannot be a 


155 


GALEN 


γενέσθαι κενόν" ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἐκ περιουσίας εὐπορήσας 
ὀνομάτων ταὐτὸν δηλοῦν ἔν γε τῷ νῦν προκειμένῳ 
λόγῳ δυναμένων καὶ τἄλλα “προσέθηκα. 

100 Κάλλιον οὖν μοι δοκεῖ καὶ || ἡμᾶς τι συνεισενέγ- 
κασθαι τοῖς ᾿Ερασιστρατείοις, ἐπειδὴ κατὰ τοῦτο 
γεγόναμεν, καὶ συμβουλεῦσαι τοῖς τὸ πρῶτον 
ἐκεῖνο καὶ ἁπλοῦν ὑπ᾽ Ερασιστράτου καλούμενον 
ἀγγεῖον εἰς ἕτερ᾽ ἄττα σώματα στοιχειώδη 
διαλύουσιν ἀποστῆναι τῆς ὑπολήψεως, ὡς πρὸς 
τῷ μηδὲν ἔχειν πλέον ἔτι καὶ διαφερομένοις 
᾿Ερασιστράτῳ. ὅτι μὲν οὖν οὐδὲν ἔχει πλέον, 
ἐπιδέδεικται σαφῶς" οὐδὲ γὰρ ἠδυνήθη διαφυγεῖν 
τὴν περὶ τῆς θρέψεως ἀ ἀπορίαν ἡ ὑπόθεσις" ὅτι 
οὐδ᾽ ᾿Ερασιστράτῳ σύμφωνός ἐστιν, ὃ ἐκεῖνος 
ἁπλοῦν κα πρῶτον ὀνομάξει, σύνθετον ἀπο- 
φαίνουσα, καὶ τὴν τῆς φύσεως τέχνην ἀναιροῦσα, 
πρόδηλον καὶ τοῦτ᾽ εἶναί μου, δοκεῖ. εἰ μὴ γὰρ 
κἀν τοῖς ἁπλοῖς τούτοις ἕνωσίν τινα “τῆς οὐσίας 
ἀπολείψομεν, ἀλλ᾽ εἰς ἄναρμα καὶ ἀμέριστα 
καταβησόμεθα στοι χεῖα, παντάπασιν ἀναιρήσομεν 
τῆς φύσεως τὴν τέχνην, ὥσπερ καὶ πάντες οἱ ἐκ 
ταύτης ὁρμώμενοι τῆς ὑποθέσεως ἰατροὶ καὶ 
φιλόσοφοι. δευτέρα γὰρ τῶν τοῦ ἕῴου μορίων 
κατὰ τὴν τοιαύτην ὑπόθεσιν ἡ φύσις, οὐ πρώτη 

101 γίγνεται. διαπλάττειν δὲ || κα δημιουργεῖν οὐ 
τοῦ δευτέρου γεγονότος, ἀλλὰ τοῦ προὔπάρχοντός 
ἐστιν; ὥστ᾽ ἀναγκαῖόν ἐστιν εὐθὺς ἐκ σπερμάτων 
ὑποθέσθαι τὰς δυνάμεις τῆς φύσεως, αἷς δια- 


1 cf. Book 1., chap. xii. 
2 2,6. in biology we must begin with living substance— 
with something which is specifically alive—here with the 
‘**unit mass of living matter.” cf. p. 73, note 3. 


156 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IL. νι 


perceptible space which is entirely empty” ; while I, 
for my part, being abundantly equipped with terms 
which are equally elucidatory, at least in relation to 
the present topic of discussion, have added them 
as well). , 

Thus it seems to me better that we also should 
help the Erasistrateans with some contribution, since 
we are on the subject, and should advise those who 
reduce the vessel called primary and simple by 
Erasistratus into other elementary bodies to give 
up their opinion ; for not only do they gain nothing 
by it, but they are also at variance with Erasistratus 
in this matter. That they gain nothing by it has 
been clearly demonstrated; for this hypothesis 
could not escape the difficulty regarding nutritton. 
And it also seems perfectly evident to me that this 
hypothesis is not in consonance with the view ot 
Erasistratus, when it declares that what he calls 
‘simple and primary is composite, and when it destroys 
the principle of Nature’s artistic skill.! For, if we do 
not grant a certain untty of substance* to these simple 
structures as well, and if we arrive eventually at 
inharmonious and indivisible elements, we shall most 
assuredly deprive Nature of her artistic skill, as do all 
the physicians and philosophers who start from this 
hypothesis. For, according to such a hypothesis, 
Nature does not precede, but is secondary to the 
parts of the animal.‘ Now, it is not the province of 
what comes secondarily, but of what pre-exists, to 
shape and to construct. Thus we must necessarily 
suppose that the faculties of Nature, by which she 


3 <* Ad elementa quae nec coalescere possunt nec in partes 
dividi”’ (Linacre). On the two contrasted schools cf. p. 45. 
4 cf. loc. cit. 


157 


GALEN 


πλάττει τε καὶ αὐξάνει καὶ τρέφει τὸ ζῷον' 
ἀλλ᾽’ ἐκείνων τῶν σωμάτων τῶν ἀνάρμων καὶ 
ἀμερῶν οὐδὲν ἐν ἑαυτῷ διαπλαστικὴν ἔχει δύνα- 
μιν ἢ αὐξητικὴν ἢ θρεπτικὴν ἢ ὅλως τεχνικήν'" 
ἀπαθὲς γὰρ καὶ ἀμετάβλητον ὑπόκειται. τῶν δ᾽ 
εἰρημένων οὐδὲν ἄνευ μεταβολῆς καὶ ἀλλοιώσεως 
καὶ τῆς δι’ ὅλων κράσεως γίγνεται, καθάπερ καὶ 
διὰ τῶν ἔμπροσθεν ἐνεδειξάμεθα. καὶ διὰ ταύτην 
τὴν ἀνάγκην οὐκ ἔχοντες, ὅπως τὰ ἀκόλουθα τοῖς 
στοιχείοις, οἷς ὑπέθεντο, φυλάττοιεν, οἱ ἀπὸ τῶν 
τοιούτων αἱρέσεων ἅπαντες ἄτεχνον ἠνωγκάσθη- 
σαν ἀποφήνασθαι τὴν φύσιν. καίτοι ταῦτά γ᾽ 
οὐ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν ἐχρῆν μανθάνειν τοὺς Ἔρασι- 
στρατείους, ἀλλὰ παρ αὐτῶν τῶν φιλοσόφων, 
οἷς μάλιστα δοκεῖ πρῶτον ἐπισκοπεῖσθαι τ 
στοιχεῖα τῶν ὄντων ἁπάντων. 
Οὔκουν οὐδ᾽ ’Epaciotparov ἄν τις ὀρθῶς ἄχρι 
τοσαύτης ἀμαθίας νομίζοι προήκειν, ὡς μηδὲ 
102 ταύτην γνωρίσαι δυνηθῆναι τὴν ἀκολουθίαν, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἅμα μὲν ὑποθέσθαι τεχνικὴν τὴν φύσιν, 
ἅμα & εἰς ἀπαθῆ καὶ ἄναρμα καὶ ἀμετάβλητα 
στοιχεῖα καταθραῦσαι τὴν οὐσίαν. καὶ μὴν 
εἰ δώσει τιν᾽ ἐν τοῖς στοιχείοις ἀλλοίωσίν τε 
καὶ μεταβολὴν καὶ ἕνωσιν καὶ συνέχειαν, ἕν 
ἀσύνθετον αὐτῷ τὸ ἁπλοῦν ἀγγεῖον ἐκεῖνο, 
καθάπερ καὶ αὐτὸς ὀνομάζει, γενήσεται. ἀλλ᾽ 
ἡ μὲν ἁπλῆ φλὲψ ἐξ αὑτῆς πὰ τὸ 
νεῦρον δὲ καὶ ἡ ἀρτηρία παρὰ τῆς φλεβός. 





1 ἐς Auxetic.” of. p. 26, note 1. 
2 “*At corporum quae nec una committi nec dividi 
possunt nullum in se formatricem, auctricem, nutricem, aut 


158 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IL. νι 


shapes the animal, and makes it grow and receive 
nourishment, are present from the seed onwards; 
whereas none of these inharmonious and non-partite 
corpuscles contains within itself any formative, 
incremental,! nutritive, or, in a word, any artistic 
power; it is, by hypothesis, unimpressionable and 
untransformable,?, whereas, as we have previously 
shown,’ none of the processes mentioned takes place 
without transformation, alteration, and complete 
intermixture. And, owing to this necessity, those who 
belong to these sects are unable to follow out the 
consequences of their supposed elements, and they are 
all therefore forced to declare Nature devoid of art. 
It is not from us, however, that the Erasistrateans 
should have learnt this, but from those very 
philosophers who lay most stress on a preliminary 
investigation into the elements of all existing things. 

Now, one can hardly be right in supposing that 
Erasistratus could reach such a pitch of foolishness 
as to be incapable of recognizing the logical con- 
sequences of this theory, and that, while assuming 
Nature to be artistically creative, he would at the 
same time break up substance into insensible, in- 
harmonious, and untransformable elements. If, how- 
ever, he will grant that there occurs in the elements 
a process of alteration and transformation, and that 
there exists in them unity and continuity, then that 
simple vessel of his (as he himself names it) will turn 
out to be single and uncompounded. And the simple 
vein will receive nourishment from itself, and the 
nerve and artery from the vein. How, and in what 


in summa artificem facultatem habet; quippe quod im- 
patibile esse immutibileque praesumitur ” (Linacre). 
8 Book I., chaps. v.—xi. 


159 


GALEN 


πῶς καὶ τίνα τρόπον; ἐν τούτῳ γὰρ δὴ καὶ 
πρόσθεν γενόμενοι τῷ λόγῳ τῆς τῶν ᾿Ερασιστρα- 
τείων διαφωνίας ἐμνημονεύσαμεν, ἐπεδείξαμεν δὲ 
καὶ καθ᾽ ἑκατέρους μὲν ἄπορον εἶναι τὴν τῶν 
ἁπλῶν ἐκείνων ἀγγείων θρέψιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ κρῖναι 
τὴν μάχην αὐτῶν οὐκ ὠκνήσαμεν καὶ τιμῆσαι τὸν 

ασίστρατον εἰς τὴν βελτίονα μεταστήσαντες 
αἵρεσιν. 

Αὖθις οὖν ἐπὶ τὴν ὃν ἁπλοῦν ἡνωμένον ἑαυτῷ 
πάντη τὸ στοιχειῶδες ἐκεῖνο νεῦρον ὑποτιθε- 
μένην αἵρεσιν 0 λόγος μεταβὰς ἐπισκοπείσθω, 
πῶς τραφήσεται' τὸ γὰρ εὑρεθὲν ἐνταῦθα κοινὸν 
ἂν ἤδη καὶ τῆς Ἱπποκράτους αἱρέσεως γένοιτο. 

1093 Κάλλιον δ᾽ ἄν pot δοκῶ τὸ ξητούϊμενον ἐπὶ 
τῶν νενοσηκότων καὶ σφόδρα καταλελεπτυσ- 
μένων βασανισθῆναι. πάντα γὰρ τούτοις ἐναρ- 
γῶς φαίνεται τὰ μόρια τοῦ σώματος ἄτροφα 
καὶ λεπτὰ καὶ πολλῆς προσθήκης τε καὶ ἀναθρέ- 
‘pews δεόμενα. καὶ “Τοίνυν καὶ τὸ νεῦρον τοῦτο 
τὸ αἰσθητόν, ἐφ᾽ οὗπερ ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐποιησάμην 
τὸν λόγον, ἰσχνὸν μὲν ἱκανῶς γέγονε, δεῖται δὲ 
θρέψεως. ἔχει δ᾽ ἐν ἑαυτῷ μέρη πάμπολλα 
μὲν ἐκεῖνα τὰ πρῶτα καὶ ἀόρατα νεῦρα τὰ σμικρὰ 
καί τινας ἀρτηρίας ἁπλᾶς ὀλίγας καὶ φλέβας 
ὁμοίως. ἅπαντ᾽ οὖν αὐτοῦ τὰ νεῦρα τὰ στοι- 
χειώδη καταλελέπτυνται δηλονότι καὶ αὐτά, mh, 
εἰ μηδ ἐκεῖνα, οὐδὲ τὸ ὅλον. καὶ τοίνυν καὶ 
θρέψεως οὐ τὸ μὲν ὅλον δεῖται νεῦρον, ἕκαστον δ᾽ 
ἐκείνων οὐ δεῖται. καὶ μὴν εἰ δεῖται μὲν ἀναθρέ- 
spews, οὐδὲν δ᾽ ἡ πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθία 


160 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. νι 


way? For, when we were at this point before, we 
drew attention to the disagreement among the 
Erasistrateans,! and we showed that the nutrition of 
these simple vessels was impracticable according to 
the teachings of both parties, although we did not 
hesitate to adjudicate in their quarrel and to do 
Erasistratus the honour of placing him in the better 


᾿ gect.2 


Let our argument, then, be transferred again ‘to 
the doctrine which assumes this elementary nerve® to 
be a single, simple, and entirely unified structure, 
and let us consider how it is to be nourished; for 
what is discovered here will at once be found to be 
common also to the school of Hippocrates. 

It seems to me that our enquiry can be most rigor- 
ously pursued in subjects who are suffering from 
illness and have become very emaciated, since in these 
people all parts of the body are obviously atrophied 
and thin, and in need of additional substance and 
feeding-up; for the same reason the ordinary 
perceptible nerve, regarding which we originally 
began this discussion, has become thin, and requires 
nourishment. Now, this contains within itself various 
parts, namely, a great many of these primary, 
invisible, minute nerves, a few simple arteries, and 
similarly also veins. Thus, all its elementary nerves 
have themselves also obviously become emaciated ; 
for, if they had not, neither would the nerve as a 
whole; and of course, in such a case, the whole 
nerve cannot require nourishment without each of 
these requiring it too. Now, if on the one hand 
they stand in need of feeding-up, and if on the 

1 cf. p. 153. 

2 On account of his idea of a simple tissue not susceptible of 
further analysis. 3 Or ‘‘cell”; οὗ p. 153, note 2. ape 


M 


GALEN 


βοηθεῖν αὐτοῖς δύναται διά τε τὰς ἔμπροσθεν 
εἰρημένας ἀπορίας καὶ διὰ τὴν ὑπόγνιον ἰσχνό- 
τητα, καθάπερ δείξω, ξητητέον ἡμῖν ἐστιν ἑτέραν 
αἰτίαν θρέψεως. 

Πῶς οὖν ἡ πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθία 
τρέφειν ἀδύνατός ἐστι τὸν οὕτω διακείμενον; 
4 ce) 3 “ 3 LA a 

104 ὅτε τοσοῦτον ἀκολουθεῖν || ἀναγκάζει τῶν συν- 
εχῶν, ὅσον ἀπορρεῖ. τοῦτο δ᾽ ἐπὶ μὲν τῶν 

3 ’ e 4 3 Ἁ ’ »ν 
εὐεκτούντων ἱκανόν ἐστιν εἰς τὴν θρέψιν, ἴσα 
γὰρ én’ αὐτῶν εἶναι χρὴ τοῖς ἀπορρέουσι τὰ 
προστιθέμενα' ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν ἐσχάτως ἰσχνῶν καὶ 
πολλῆς ἀναθρέψεως δεομένων εἰ μὴ πολλαπλά- 
σιον εἴη τὸ προστιθέμενον τοῦ κενουμένου, τὴν 
ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἕξιν ἀναλαβεῖν οὐκ ἄν ποτε δύναιντο. 
δῆλον οὖν, ὡς ἕλκειν αὐτὰ δεήσει τοσούτῳ 

a ef a / > ’ 
πλεῖον, ὅσῳ καὶ δεῖται πλείονος. ᾿Ερασίστρατος 
δὲ κἀνταῦθα πρότερον ποιήσας τὸ δεύτερον οὐκ 
οἶδ᾽ ὅπως οὐκ αἰσθάνεται. διότι γάρ, φησί, 
πολλὴ πρόσθεσις εἰς ἀνάθρεψιν γίγνεται τοῖς 
νενοσηκόσι, διὰ τοῦτο καὶ ἡ πρὸς ταύτην ἀκολου- 
θία πολλή. πῶς δ᾽ ἂν πολλὴ πρόσθεσις γένοιτο 
\ 4 2 / a ? \ 
μὴ προηγουμένης avaddcews δαψιλοῦς; εἰ δὲ 
τὴν διὰ τῶν φλεβῶν φορὰν τῆς τροφῆς ἀνάδοσιν 
καλεῖ, τὴν δ᾽ εἰς ἕκαστον τῶν ἁπλῶν καὶ ἀοράτων 
ἐκείνων νεύρων καὶ ἀρτηριῶν μετάληψιν οὐκ 
3 ᾽ 3 tA [4 4 LA 
ἀνάδοσιν ἀλλὰ διάδοσιν, ὥς τινες ὀνομάζειν 

106 ἠξίωσαν, εἶτα || τὴν διὰ τῶν φλεβῶν μόνῃ τῇ 


1 The horror vacut. 
2 Prosthesis of nutriment ; cf. p. 39, note 6. 
162 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IT. vi 


other the principle of the refilling of a vacuum! can 
give them no help—both by reason of the difficulties 
previously mentioned and the actual thinness, as I 
shall show—-we must then seek another cause for 
nutrition. 

How is it, then, that the tendency of a vacuum 
to become refilled is unable to afford nourishment 
to one in such a condition? Because its rule is 
that only so much of the contiguous matter should 
succeed as has flowed away. Now this is sufficient 
for nourishment in the case of those who are in 
good condition, for, in them, what is presented? 
must be equal to what has flowed away. But in 
the case of those who are very emaciated and who 
need a great restoration of nutrition, unless what 
was presented were many times greater than what 
has been emptied out, they would never be able to 
regain their original habit. It is clear, therefore, that 
these parts will have to exert a greater amount of 
attraction, in so far as their requirements are greater. 
And I fail to understand how Erasistratus does not 
perceive that here again he is putting the cart before 
the horse. Because, in the case of the sick, there 
must be a large amount of presentation? in order to 
feed them up, he argues that the factor of “ re- 
filling ’’? must play an equally large part. And how 
could much presentation take place if it were not 
preceded by an abundant delivery? of nutriment? 
And if he calls the conveyance of food through 
the veins delivery, and its assumption by each 
_of these simple and visible nerves and arteries not 
delivery but distributton,t as some people have 
thought fit to name it, and then ascribes conveyance 


3 Anadosia, ‘‘absorption” ; cf. p.13,note 5. 4 Lit. dtadosts. 


163 
M 2 


GALEN 


πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθίᾳ φησὶ γίγνεσθαι, 
τὴν εἰς τὰ “λόγῳ θεωρητὰ μετάληψιν “ἡμῖν ἐξηγη- 
σάσθω. ὅτι μὲν γὰρ οὐκέτ᾽ ἐπὶ τούτων ἡ πρὸς 
τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθία λέγεσθαι δύναται καὶ 
μάλιστ᾽ ἐπὶ τῶν ἐσχάτως ἰσχνῶν, ἀποδέδεικται. 
τί δέ φησιν ἐπ᾿ αὐτῶν ἐν τῷ δευτέρῳ τῶν 
καθόλου λόγων ὃ ᾿Ερασίστρατος, ἄξιον ἐπακοῦ- 
σαι τῆς λέξεως" “ Τοῖς δ᾽ ἐσχάτοις τε καὶ ἁπλοῖς, 
λεπτοῖς τε καὶ στενοῖς οὖσιν, ἐκ τῶν παρακει- 
μένων ἀγγείων ἡ πρόσθεσις συμβαίνει εἰς τὰ 
κενώματα τῶν ἀπενεχθέντων κατὰ τὰ πλάγια 
τῶν ἀγγείων ἑλκομένης τῆς τροφῆς καὶ κατα- 
χωριζομένης." ἐκ ταύτης τῆς λέξεως πρῶτον 
μὲν τὸ κατὰ τ πλάγια προσίεμαί τε καὶ 
ἀποδέχομαι" κατὰ μὲν γὰρ αὐτὸ τὸ στόμα τὸ 
ἁπλοῦν νεῦρον οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο δεχόμενον τὴν 
τροφὴν οὕτως εἰς ὅλον ἑαυτὸ διανέμειν" ἀνάκειται 
γὰρ ἐκεῖνο τῷ ψυχικῷ πνεύματι" κατὰ δὲ τὸ 
πλάγιον ἐκ τῆς παρακειμένης φλεβὸς τῆς ἁπλῆς 
ἐγχωρεῖ λαβεῖν αὐτό. δεύτερον δ᾽ ἀποδέχομαι 
τῶν ἐκ τῆς ᾿Ερασιστράτου λέξεως ὀνομάτων τὸ 


106 γεγραμμένον ἐφεξῆς τῷ κατὰ τὰ πλάγια. | τί 


γάρ φησι; δὲ Κατὰ τὰ πλάγια τῶν ἀγγείων ἑλκο- 

νης τῆς τροφῆς." ὅτι μὲν οὖν ἕλκεται, καὶ ἡμεῖς 
ὁμολογοῦμεν, ὅτε δ᾽ οὐ τῇ πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον 
ἀκολουθίᾳ, δέδεικται πρόσθεν. 


VII 


᾿Εξεύρωμεν οὖν κοινῇ, πῶς ἕλκεται. πῶς δ᾽ 
ἄλλως ἢ ὡς ὁ σίδηρος ὑπὸ τῆς ἡρακλείας λίθου 





1 ἢ, 6. let him explain the diadoszs. 
164 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. vi.-vir 


through the veins to the principle of vacuum- 
refilling alone, let him explain to us the assumption 
of food by the hypothetical elements.'! For it 
has been shown that at least in relation to these 
there is no question of the refilling of a vacuum 
being in operation, and especially where the parts 
are very attenuated. It is worth while listening 
to what Erasistratus says about these cases in 
the second book of his ‘‘ General Principles’: “ In 
the ultimate simple [vessels], which are thin and 
narrow, presentation takes place from the adjacent 
vessels, the nutriment being attracted through the 
sides of the vessels and deposited in the empty spaces 
left by the matter which has been carried away.” 
Now, in this statement firstly I admit and accept 
the words “ through the sides.”’ For, if the simple 
nerve were actually to take in the food through its 
mouth, it could not distribute it through its whole 
substance; for the mouth is dedicated to the 
psychic pneuma.? It can, however, take it in through 
its sides from the adjacent simple vein. Secondly, 
I also accept in Erasistratus’s statement the expression 
which precedes “through the sides.” What does 
this say? “The nutriment being attracted through 
the sides of the vessels.” Now I, too, agree that 
it is attracted, but it has been previously shown that 
this is not through the tendency of evacuated 
matter to be replaced. 


VII 


Ler us, then, consider together how it is attracted. 
How else than in the way that iron is attracted by 
2 “ὁ Spiritus animalis” ; ¢f. p. 152, note 1. The nutriment 


was for the walls of the vessels, not for their cavities. cf. 
p. 319, note 3. 165 


GALEN 


δύναμιν ἐχούσης ἑλκτικὴν τοιαύτης ποιότητος; 
ἀλλ᾽ εἰ τὴν μὲν ἀρχὴν τῆς ἀναδόσεως ἡ τῆς 
’ Ν ’ Ἁ \ δι 
κοιλίας ἔνθλεψις παρέχεται, τὴν δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα 
φορὰν ἅπασαν ai τε φλέβες περιστελλόμεναι καὶ 
προωθοῦσαι καὶ τῶν τρεφομένων ἕκαστον ἐπισπώ- 
μενον εἰς ἑαυτό, τῆς πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον ἀκο- 
λουθίας ἀποστάντες, ὡς οὐ πρεπούσης ἀνδρὶ 
τεχνικὴν ὑποθεμένῳ τὴν φύσιν, οὕτως ἂν ἤδη 
καὶ τὴν ἀντιλογίαν εἴημεν πεφευγότες τὴν 
᾿Ασκληπιάδου μὴ δυνάμενοί γε λύειν αὐτήν. τὸ 
9 Α 9 Ul ὔ A 
yap eis τὴν ἀπόδειξιν παραλαμβανόμενον λῆμμα 
τὸ διεζευγμένον οὐκ ἐκ δυοῖν ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ τριῶν ἐστι 
A \ bd , 7, 3 Ἁ φ 
κατά γε τὴν ἀλήθειαν διεζευγμένον. εἰ μὲν οὖν 
107 ὡς ἐκ δυοῖν αὐτῷ χρη σαίμεθα, ψεῦδος ἔσται τι 
τῶν εἰς τὴν ἀπόδειξιν παρειλημμένων" εἰ δ᾽ ὡς ἐκ 
τριῶν, ἀπέραντος ὁ λόγος γενήσεται. 


VIII 


Kai ταῦτ᾽ οὐκ ἐχρῆν ἀγνοεῖν τὸν ᾿Ερασίστρα- 
τον, εἴπερ κἂν ὄναρ ποτὲ τοῖς ἐκ τοῦ περιπάτου 
συνέτυχεν, ὥσπερ οὖν οὐδὲ τὰ περὶ τῆς γενέσεως 
τῶν χυμῶν, ὑπὲρ ὧν οὐδὲν ἔχων εἰπεῖν οὐδὲ 
μέχρι τοῦ μετρίου πιθανὸν οἴεται παρακρούεσθαι 
σκηπτόμενος, ὡς οὐδὲ χρήσιμος ὅλως ἐστὶν ἡ 
τῶν τοιούτων ἐπίσκεψις. εἶτ᾽, ὦ πρὸς θεῶν, 
ὅπως μὲν τὰ σιτία κατὰ τὴν γαστέρα πέττεται 
χρήσιμον ἐπίστασθαι, πῶς δ᾽ ἐν ταῖς φλεψὶν ἡ 


166 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. vu.-vm 


the lodestone, the latter having a faculty attractive 
of this particular quality [existing in iron]?! But if 
the beginning of anadosis depends on the squeezing 
action of the stomach,? and the whole movement 
thereafter on the peristalsis and propulsive action of 
the veins, as well as on the traction exerted by each 
of the parts which are undergoing nourishment, then 
we can abandon the principle of replacement of 
evacuated matter, as not being suitable for a man 
who assumes Nature to be a skilled artist; thus we 
shall also have avoided the contradiction of Asclepi- 
ades® though we cannot refute it: for the disjunctive 
argument used for the purposes of demonstration 
is, in reality, disjunctive not of two but of three 
alternatives ; now, if we treat the disjunction as a 
disjunction of two alternatives, one of the two 
propositions assumed in constructing our proof must 
be false ; and if as a disjunctive of three alternatives, 
no conclusion will be arrived at. 


VIII 


Now Erasistratus ought not to have been ignorant 
of this if he had ever had anything to do with the 
Peripatetics—even in adream. Nor, similarly, should 
he have been unacquainted with the genesis of the 
humours, about which, not having even anything 
moderately plausible to say, he thinks to deceive us 
by the excuse that the consideration of such matters 
is not the least useful. Then, in Heaven’s name, is it 
useful to know how food is digested in the stomach, 
but unnecessary to know how Odile comes into existence 


. 1 Specific attraction ; c/. Book I., chap. xiv. 


2 of. p. 100, note 2. In Book .» chap. i. 167 


GALEN 


χολὴ γίγνεται, περιττόν; Kal τῆς κενώσεως ἄρα 
φροντιστέον αὐτῆς μόνης, ἀμελητέον δὲ τῆς 
γενέσεως; ὥσπερ οὐκ ἄμεινον ὑπάρχον μακρῷ 
τὸ κωλύειν εὐθὺς ἐξ ἀρχῆς γεννᾶσθαι πλείονα 
τοῦ πράγματ᾽ ἔχειν ἐκκενοῦντας. θαυμαστὸν δὲ 
καὶ τὸ διαπορεῖν, εἴτ᾽ ἐν τῷ σώματι τὴν γένεσιν 
αὐτῆς ὑποθετέον εἴτ᾽ εὐθὺς ἔξωθεν ἐν τοῖς σιτίοις 
περιέχεσθαι φατέον. εἰ γὰρ δὴ τοῦτο καλῶς 
ἠπόρηται, τί οὐχὶ καὶ περὶ τοῦ αἵματος ἐπισκε- 
108 ψόμεθα, πότερον ἐν τῷ σώματι || λαμβάνει τὴν 
γένεσιν ἢ τοῖς σιτίοις παρέσπαρται, καθάπερ οἱ 
τὰς ὁμοιομερείας ὑποτιθέμενοί. φασι; καὶ μὴν 
πολλῷ γ᾽ ἦν χρησιμώτερον ζητεῖσθαι, ποῖα τῶν 
σιτίων ὁμολογεῖ τῇ τῆς αἱματώσεως ἐνεργείᾳ καὶ 
ποῖα διαφέρεται, τοῦ ζητεῖν, τίνα μὲν τῇ τῆς 
γαστρὸς ἐνεργείᾳ νικᾶται ῥᾳδίως, τίνα δ᾽ ἀντι- 
βαίνει καὶ μάχεται. τούτων μὲν γὰρ ἡ ἔκλεξις 
εἰς πέψιν μόνην, ἐκείνων δ᾽ εἰς αἵματος στοῦ 
διαφέρει γένεσιν. οὐδὲ γὰρ ἴσον ἐστὶν ἢ μὴ 
καλῶς ἐν τῇ γαστρὶ χυλωθῆναι τὴν τροφὴν ἢ 
μὴ χρηστὸν αἷμα γεννηθῆναι. πῶς δ᾽ οὐκ αἰδεῖται 
τὰς μὲν τῆς (μη ὦ τὼ ἀποτυχίας διαιρούμενος, 
ὡς πολλαί τ᾽ εἰσὶ καὶ κατὰ πολλὰς γέγνονται 
προφάσεις, ὑπὲρ δὲ τῶν τῆς αἱματώσεως σφαλ- 
μάτων οὐδ᾽ ἄχρι ῥήματος ἑνὸς οὐδ᾽ ἄχρι συλλαβῆς 
μιᾶς φθεγξάμενος; καὶ μὴν εὑρίσκεταί γε καὶ 
παχὺ καὶ λεπτὸν ἐν ταῖς φλεψὶν αἷμα καὶ τοῖς 
μὲν ἐρυθρότερον, τοῖς δὲ ξανθότερον, τοῖς δὲ 
μελάντερον, τοῖς δὲ φλεγματωδέστερον. εἰ δ᾽ ὅτε 





1 Prevention better than cure. 
2 e.g. Anaxagoras ; cf. p. 7, note 5; p. 20, note 3. 
3 Lit. haematoass, 4 of. p. 174, note 4. 


168 


ON THE NATURAL FACOLTIES, II. vin 


in the veins? Are we to pay attention merely to 
the evacuation of this humour, and not to its genesis ? 
As though it were not far better to prevent its 
excessive development from the beginning than to 
give ourselves all the trouble of expelling it!! And 
it is a strange thing to be entirely unaware as to 
whether its genesis is to be looked on as taking 
place in the body, or whether it comes from without 
and is contained in the food. For, if it was right to 
raise this problem, why should we not make 
investigations concerning the blood as well—whether 
it takes its origin in the body, or is distributed 
through the food as is maintained by those who 
postulate homceomeries?? Assuredly it would be much 
more useful to investigate what kinds of food -are 
suited, and what kinds unsuited, to the process of 
blood-production® rather than to enquire into 
what articles of diet are easily mastered by the 
activity of the stomach, and what resist and contend 
with it. For the choice of the latter bears reference 
merely to digestion, while that of the former is of 
importance in regard to the generation of useful 
blood. For it is not equally important whether the 
aliment be imperfectly chylified 4 in the stomach or 
whether it fail to be turned into useful blood. 
Why is Erasistratus not ashamed to distinguish all 
the various kinds of digestive failure and all the 
occasions which give rise to them, whilst in reference 
to the errors of blood-production he does not utter a 
single word—nay, not a syllable? Now, there is 
certainly to be found in the veins both thick and 
thin blood; in some people it is redder, in others 
yellower, in some blacker, in others more of the 
nature of phlegm. And one who realizes that it 


169 


GALEN 


καὶ δυσῶδες οὐχ ἕνα τρόπον ἀλλ᾽ ἐν πολλαῖς 
109 πάνυ διαφοραῖς ἀρρήτοις μὲν λόγῳ, σαϊφεστάταις 
δ᾽ αἰσθήσεσι φαίνεται γιγνόμενον, εἰδείη τις, οὐκ 
ἂν οἶμαι μετρίως ἔτι καταγνώσεσθαι τῆς ᾽Ερα- 
σιστράτου ῥᾳθυμίας αὐτὸν οὕτω γ᾽ ἀναγκαίαν 
εἰς τὰ ἔργα τῆς τέχνης θεωρίαν παραλιπόντος. 
"Evapyn γὰρ δὴ καὶ τὰ περὶ τῶν ὑδέρων ἁμαρ- 
τήματα τῇ ῥᾳθυμίᾳ ταύτῃ κατὰ λόγον ἠκολουθη- 
κότα. τό τε γὰρ τῇ στενοχωρίᾳ τῶν ὁδῶν 
κωλύεσθαι νομίζειν πρόσω τοῦ ἥπατος ἰέναι τὸ 
αἷμα καὶ μηδέποτ᾽ ἂν ἄλλως ὕδερον δύνασθαι 
συστῆναι πῶς οὐκ ἐσχάτην ἐνδείκνυται ῥᾳθυμίαν; 
τό τε μὴ διὰ τὸν σπλῆνα μηδὲ δι’ ἄλλο τι μόριον, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀεὶ διὰ τὸν ἐν τῷ ἥπατι σκίρρον ὕδερον 
οἴεσθαι γίγνεσθαι τελέως ἀργοῦ τὴν διάνοιαν 
ἀνθρώπου καὶ μηδενὶ τῶν ὁσημέραι γιγνομένων 
παρακολουθοῦντος. ἐπὶ μέν ye χρονίαις aipop- 
py τὸν ἐπισχεθείσαις ἢ διὰ κένωσιν ἄμετρον εἰς 
ψῦξιν ἐσχάτην ἀγαγούσαις τὸν ἄνθρωπον οὐ 
ἅπαξ οὐδὲ δὶς ἀλλὰ πολλάκις ἤδη τεθεάμεθα 
συστάντας ὑδέρους, ὥσπερ γε καὶ γυναιξὶν ἥ τε 
τῆς ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστῳ μηνὶ καθάρσεως ἀπώλεια παν- 
τελὴς καὶ ἄμετρος κένωσις, ὅταν αἱμορραγήσωσί 
110 ποθ᾽ ai μῆτραι σφοδρῶς, ἐπεκαλέσαντο πολλάκις 
ὕδερον καί τισιν αὐτῶν καὶ ὁ γυναικεῖος ovopa- 
ζόμενος ῥοῦς εἰς τοῦτ᾽ ἐτελεύτησε τὸ πάθος, ἵνα 


1 Erasistratus held the spleen to be useless. cf. p. 143. 

2 Induration : Gk. skirros, Lat. scirrhus. The condition is 
now commonly known by Laénnec’s term cirrhosis, from 
Gk. kirros, meaning yellow or tawny. Here again we have an 
example of Erasistratus’s bias towards anatomical or structural 
rather than functional explanationsof disease. cf. p. 124, note 1. 


170 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IL. vm 


may smell offensively not in one way only, but in a 
great many different respects (which cannot be put 
into words, although perfectly appreciable to the 
senses), would, 1 imagine, condemn in no measured 
terms the carelessness of Erasistratus in omitting 
a consideration so essential to the practice of our 
art. 
Thus it is clear what errors in regard to the 
subject of dropstes logically follow this carelessness. 
For, does it not show the most extreme carelessness 
to suppose that the blood is prevented from going 
forward into the liver owing to the narrowness of the 
passages, and that dropsy can never occur in any 
other way? For, to imagine that dropsy is never 
caused by the spleen! or any other part, but always by 
induration of the liver,? is the standpoint of a man 
whose intelligence is perfectly torpid and who is 
quite out of touch with things that happen every 
day. For, not merely once or twice, but frequently, 
we have observed dropsy produced by chronic 
haemorrhoids which have been suppressed,’ or 
which, through immoderate bleeding, have given 
the patient a severe chill; similarly, in women, the 
complete disappearance of the monthly discharge,‘ 
or an undue evacuation such as is caused by 
violent bleeding from the womb, often provoke 
dropsy ; and in some of them the so-called female 
flux ends in this disorder. I leave out of account 


3 On therisks which were supposed to attend the checking 
of habitual bleeding from piles cf. Celsus (De Re Med. VI. 
xvili, 9), ““ Atque in quibusdam parum tuto as Seales: qui 
sanguinis pronivie imbecilliores non fiunt; habent enim 

urgationem hanc, non morbum.” (i.e. the habit was to be 
ooked on as a periodical cleansing, not as a disease. ) 

4 Lit. catharsis. 


171 


111 


GALEN 


TOUS amo τῶν κενεώνων ἀρχομένους ἢ ἄλλου τινὸς 
τῶν ἐπικαίρων μορίων ὑδέρους παραλίπω, σαφῶς 
μὲν καὶ αὐτοὺς ἐξελέγχοντας τὴν ᾿Ερασιστράτειον 
ὑπόληψιν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ οὕτως ἐναργῶς ὡς οἱ διὰ 
κατάψυξιν σφοδρὰν τῆς ὅλης EWS ἀποτελού- 
μενοι. πρώτη γὰρ αὕτη γενέσεως ὑδέρων αἰτία 
διὰ τὴν «ἀποτυχίαν τῆς αἱματώσεως γιγνομένη 
τρόπον ὁμοιότατον ταῖς ἐπὶ Th τῶν σιτίων ἀπε- 
ψίᾳ διαρροίαις. οὐ μὴν ἐσκίρρωταί γέ κατὰ τοὺς 
τοιούτους ὑδέρους οὐδ᾽ ἄλλο τι σπλάγχνον οὐδὲ 
τὸ ἧπαρ. 
᾿Αλλ᾽ ᾿Ερασίστρατος ὁ σοφὸς ὑπεριδὼν καὶ 
καταφρονήσας, ὧν οὔθ᾽ “Ἱπποκράτης οὔτε Διο- 
κλῆς οὔτε Πραξαγόρας οὔτε Φιλιστίων ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ 
τῶν ἀρίστων φιλοσόφων οὐδεὶς κατεφρόνησεν 
οὔτε Πλάτων οὔτ᾽ ᾿Αριστοτέλης οὔτε Θεόφραστος, 
ὅλας ἐνεργείας ὑπερβαίνει καθάπερ τί “σμικρὸν 
καὶ τὸ τυχὸν τῆς τέχνης παραλιπὼν μέρος οὐδ᾽ 
ἀντειπεῖν ἀξιώσας, εἴτ᾽ ὀρθῶς εἴτε Καὶ μὴ} σύμ- 
παντες οὗτοι θερμῷ καὶ ψυχρῷ καὶ ξηρῷ καὶ 
ὑγρῷ, τοῖς μὲν ὡς δρῶσι, τοῖς δ ὡς πάσχουσι, 
τὰ κατὰ τὸ σῶμα τῶν ξῴων ἁπάντων διοικεῖσθαί 
φασι καὶ ὡς τὸ θερμὸν ἐ ἐν αὐτοῖς εἴς τε τὰς ἄλλας 
ἐνεργείας καὶ μάλιστ᾽ εἰς τὴν τῶν χυμῶν γένεσιν 
τὸ πλεῖστον δύναται. ἀλλὰ τὸ μὲν μὴ πείθε- 
σθαι τοσούτοις τε καὶ τηλικούτοις ἀνδράσι καὶ 
πλέον αὐτῶν οἴεσθαί τι γιγνώσκειν ἀνεμέσητον, 
τὸ δὲ μήτ᾽ ἀντιλογίας ἀξιῶσαι μήτε μνήμης οὕτως 
ἔνδοξον δόγμα θαυμαστήν τινα τὴν ὑπεροψίαν 
ἐνδείκνυται. 





1 Apparently some form of anaemia. 
172 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IT. vin 


the dropsy which begins in the flanks or in any 
other susceptible part; this clearly confutes Erasi- 
stratus's assumption, although not so obviously as 
does that kind of dropsy which is brought about 
by an excessive chilling of the whole constitution ; 
this, which is the primary reason for the occurrence 
of dropsy, results from a failure of blood-production,! 
very much like the diarrhoea which follows im- 
perfect digestion of food; certainly in this kind of 
dropsy neither the liver nor any other viscus 
becomes indurated. 

The learned FErasistratus, however, overlooks— 
nay, despises—what neither Hippocrates, Diocles, 
Praxagoras, nor Philistion ? despised, nor indeed any © 
of the best philosophers, whether Plato, Aristotle, or 
Theophrastus; he passes by whole functions as 
though it were but a trifling and casual department 
of medicine which he was neglecting, without 
deigning to argue whether or not these authorities 
are right in saying that the bodily parts of all 
animals are governed by the Warm, the Cold, the 
Dry and the Moist, the one pair being active and the 
other passive, and that among these the Warm has 
most power in connection with all functions, but 
especially with the genesis of the humours.? Now, 
one cannot be blamed for not agreeing with all these 
great men, nor for imagining that one knows more 
than they; but not to consider such distinguished 
teaching worthy either of contradiction or even 
mention shows an extraordinary arrogance. 


2 Philistion of Locri, a contemporary of Plato, was one of 
the chief representatives of the Sicilian school of medicine. 
For Diocles and Praxagoras see p. 51, note 1. 

3 cf. Book I., chap. iii. 


173 


GALEN 


Kal μὴν σμικρότατός ἐστι τὴν γνώμην καὶ 
ταπεινὸς ἐσχάτως ἐν ἁπάσαις ταῖς ἀντιλογίαις ἐν 
μὲν τοῖς περὶ τῆς πέψεως λόγοις τοῖς σήπεσθαι 

’ , , 3 3 \ 

Ta σιτία νομίζουσι φιλοτίμως ἀντιλέγων, ἐν δὲ 
τοῖς περὶ τῆς ἀναδόσεως τοῖς διὰ τὴν παράθεσιν 
τῶν ἀρτηριῶν ἀναδίδοσθαι τὸ διὰ τῶν φλεβῶν 
αἷμα νομίξουσιν, ἐν δὲ τοῖς περὶ τῆς ἀναπνοῆς 
τοῖς περιωθεῖσθαι τὸν ἀέρα φάσκουσιν. οὐκ 
ὥκνησε δ᾽ οὐδὲ τοῖς ἀτμοειδῶς εἰς τὴν κύστιν 
ἰέναι τὰ οὖρα νομίζουσιν ἀντειπεῖν οὐδὲ τοῖς εἰς || 

XN a , XN 4 Ψ Ψ 

112 τὸν πνεύμονα φέρεσθαι τὸ ποτόν. οὕτως ἐν ἅπασι 
τὰς χειρίστας ἐπιλεγόμενος δόξας ἀγάλλεται δια- 

’ὔ 2 ἢ) 9 A 3 ὔ 3 a 
τρίβων ἐπὶ πλέον ἐν ταῖς ἀντιλογίαις" ἐπὶ δὲ τῆς 
τοῦ αἵματος γενέσεως οὐδὲν ἀτιμοτέρας οὔσης τῆς 
ἐν τῇ γαστρὶ χυλώσεως τῶν σιτίων οὔτ᾽ ἀντειπεῖν 
τινι τῶν πρεσβυτέρων ἠξίωσεν οὔτ᾽ αὐτὸς εἰση- 
γήσασθαί τιν᾽ ἑτέραν γνώμην ἐτόλμησεν, ὁ περὶ 
πασῶν τῶν φυσικῶν ἐνεργειῶν ἐν ἀρχῇ τῶν καθό- 
λου λόγων ὑποσχόμενος ἐρεῖν, ὅπως τε γίγνονται 
καὶ δι ὧντινων τοῦ ζῴου μορίων. ἢ τῆς μὲν 
πέττειν τὰ σιτία πεφυκυίας δυνάμεως ἀρρωστού- 
σης ἀπεπτήσει τὸ ζῷον, τῆς δ᾽ αἱματούσης τὰ 

᾽ὔ 450 "Ν Ν lA Ἁ 4 3 3 
πεφθέντα οὐδὲν ἔσται πάθημα τὸ παράπαν, ἀλλ, 
ἀδαμαντίνη τις ἡμῖν αὕτη μόνη καὶ ἀπαθής ἐστιν; 
ἢ ἄλλο τι τῆς ἀρρωστίας αὐτῆς ἔκγονον ὑπάρξει 





' Gk. pepsis; otherwise rendered coction. 

2 cf. p. 13, note 5. 3 e.g. Asclepiades. 

4 Lit. chylosts; cf. Ὁ. 238, note 2. 

5 That is to say, the haematopoietic function deserves 


174 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. vin 


Now, Erasistratus is thoroughly small-minded and 
petty to the last degree in all his disputations— 
when, for instance, in his treatise “On Digestion,” ἢ 
he argues jealously with those who consider that 
this is a process of putrefaction of the food ; and, 
in his work “On Anadosis,” 2 with those who think 
that the anadosis of blood through the veins results 
from the contiguity of the arteries; also, in his 
work “QOn Respiration,” with those who maintain 
that the air is forced along by contraction. Nay, 
he did not even hesitate to contradict those who 
maintain that the urine passes into the bladder in a 
vaporous state,’ as also those who say that imbibed 
fluids are carried into the lung. Thus he delights 
to choose always the most valueless doctrines, and 
to spend his time more and more in contradicting 
these ; whereas on the subject of the ortgin of blood 
(which is in no way less important than the chylifi- 
cation * of food in the stomach) he did not deign to 
dispute with any of the ancients, nor did he himself 
venture to bring forward any other opinion, despite 
the fact that at the beginning of his treatise on 
“ General Principles ”’ he undertook to say how all the 
various natural functions take place, and through 
what parts of the animal! Now, is it possible that, 
when the faculty which naturally digests food is 
weak, the animal’s digestion fails, whereas the 
faculty which turns the digested food into blood 
cannot suffer any kind of impairment?® Are we to 
suppose this latter faculty alone to be as tough as 
steel and unaffected by circumstances? Or is it 
that weakness of this faculty will result in some- 


peepee rie as much as the digestive processes which pre- 
cede it. 


175 


GALEN 


Α 3 a “a = 3 “A > 4» 
καὶ οὐχ ὕδερος; δῆλος οὖν ἐναργῶς ἐστιν ὁ Epa- 
σίστρατος ἐξ ὧν ἐν μὲν τοῖς ἄλλοις οὐδὲ ταῖς 
age το ταις δόξαις ἀντιλέγειν ὥκνησεν, ἐνταυθοῖ 

᾿ οὔτ᾽ ἀντειπεῖν τοῖς πρόσθεν οὔτ᾽ αὐτὸς εἰπεῖν 
τι καινὸν ἐτόλμησε, τὸ σφάλμα τῆς ἑαυτοῦ γνωρί- 
ζων αἱρέσεως. 

Τί γὰρ ἂν καὶ λέγειν ἔσχεν ὑπὲρ αἵματος || 

118 ἄνθρωπος εἰς μηδὲν τῷ συμφύτῳ θερμῷ χρώ- 
μενος; τί δὲ περὶ ξανθῆς χολῆς ἢ μελαίνης ἢ 
φλέγματος; ὅτι νὴ Δία δυνατόν ἐστιν ἀναμεμιγ- 
μένην τοῖς σιτίοις εὐθὺς ἔξωθεν παραγίγνεσθαι 
τὴν χολήν. λέγει γοῦν ὧδέ πως αὐτοῖς ὀνόμασι" 
“ Πότερον δ᾽ ἐν τῇ περὶ τὴν κοιλίαν κατεργασίᾳ 
τῆς τροφῆς γεννᾶται τοιαύτη ὑγρασία ἢ μεμιγ- 
μένη τοῖς ἔξωθεν προσφερομένοις παραγίγνεται, 
οὐδὲν χρήσιμον πρὸς ἰατρικὴν ἐπεσκέφθαι." καὶ 
μήν, ὦ γενναιότατε, καὶ κενοῦσθαι χρῆναι φάσ- 
κεις ἐκ τοῦ ξῴου τὸν χυμὺὴν τοῦτον καὶ μεγάλως 
λυπεῖν, εἰ μὴ κενωθείη. πῶς οὖν οὐδὲν ἐξ αὐτοῦ 
χρηστὸν ὑπολαμβάνων γίγνεσθαι τολμᾷς ἄχρη- 
στον λέγειν εἰς ἰατρικὴν εἶναι τὴν περὶ τῆς γενέ- 
σεως αὐτοῦ σκέψιν; 

Ὑποκείσθω γὰρ ἐν μὲν τοῖς σιτίοις περι- 
ἔχεσθαι, μὴ διακρίνεσθαι δ᾽ ἀκριβῶς ἐν ἥπατι: 
ταῦτα γὰρ ἀμφότερα νομίξεις εἶναι δυνατά. καὶ 
μὴν οὐ σμικρὸν ἐνταῦθα τὸ διαφέρον ἢ ἐλαχίστην 
ἢ παμπόλλην χολὴν ἐν ἑαυτοῖς περιέχοντα 
προσάρασθαι σιτία. τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἀκίνδυνα, τὰ δὲ 
παμπόλλην περιέχοντα τῷ μὴ δύνασθαι πᾶσαν 


1 2,6. Erasistratus could obviously say nothing about any 
of the humours or their origins, since he had not postulated 


176 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. νπὶ 


thing else than dropsy? The fact, therefore, that 
Erasistratus, in regard to other matters, did not 
hesitate to attack even the most trivial views, whilst 
in this case he neither dared to contradict his 
predecessors nor to advance any new view of his 
own, proves plainly that he recognized the fallacy 
of his own way of thinking.} 

For what could a man possibly say about blood 
who had no use for innate heat? What could he say 
about yellow or black bile, or phlegm? Well, of 
course, he might say that the bile could come 
directly from without, mingled with the food! Thus 
Erasistratus practically says so in the following 
words : “It is of no value in practical medicine to 
find out whether a fluid of this kind? arises from 
the elaboration of food in the stomach-region, or 
whether it reaches the body because it is mixed with 
the food taken in from outside.’’ But, my very good 
Sir, you most certainly maintain also that this 
humour has to be evacuated from the animal, and 
that it causes great pain if it be not evacuated. 
How, then, if you suppose that no good comes from: 
the bile, do you venture to say that an investigation 
into its origin is of no value in medicine? 

Well, let us suppose that it is contained in the 
food, and not specifically secreted in the liver (for 
you hold these two things possible). In this case, 
it will certainly make a considerable difference 
whether the ingested food contains a minimum or 
a maximum of bile; for the one kind is harmless, 
whereas that containing a large quantity of bile, 
owing to the fact that it cannot be properly purified ὃ 


the four qualities Hh aaa the Warm—that is, innate 
heat). 2 te. 3 2,6. deprived of its bile. 

177 

N 


GALEN 


114 αὐτὴν ἐν |] ἥ ἥπατι καθαρθῆναι καλῶς αἴτια κατα- 
στήσεται τῶν τ᾽ ἄλλων παθῶν, ὧν αὐτὸς ὁ 
᾿Ερασίστρατος ἐπὶ πλήθει χολῆς γίγνεσθαί φησι, 
καὶ τῶν ἰκτέρων οὐχ ἥκιστα. πῶς οὖν οὐκ 
ἀναγκαιότατον ἰατρῷ γιγνώσκειν, πρῷτον μέν, 
ὡς ἐν τοῖς σιτίοις αὐτοῖς ἔξωθεν ἡ χολὴ περι- 
ἐχεται, δεύτερον δ᾽, ὡς τὸ μὲν τεῦτλον, εἰ τύχοι, 
παμπόλλην, ὁ δ᾽ ἄρτος ἔλα ίστην καὶ τὸ μὲν 
ἔλαιον πλείστην, ὁ δ᾽ οἶνος ὀλιγίστην ἕκαστόν 
τε τῶν ἄλλων ἄνισον τῷ πλήθει “περιέχει τὴν 
χολήν; πῶς γὰρ οὐκ ἂν εἴη γελοιότατος, ὃς ἂν 
ἑκὼν αἱρῆται τὰ πλείονα χολὴν ἐν ἑαυτοῖς περι- 
ἔχοντα πρὸ τῶν ἐναντίων; 

Τί δ᾽ εἰ μὴ περιέχεται μὲν ἐν τοῖς σιτίοις ἡ 
χολή, γίγνεται δ᾽ ἐν τοῖς τῶν ζῴων σώμασιν; ἢ 
οὐχὶ καὶ κατὰ τοῦτο χρήσιμον ἐπίστασθαι, τίνι 
μὲν καταστάσει σώματος ἕπεται πλείων αὐτῆς ἡ 
γένεσις, τίνι δ᾽ ἐλάττων; ἀλλοιοῦν γὰρ δήπου καὶ 
μεταβάλλειν οἷοί T ἐσμὲν καὶ τρέπειν ἐπὶ τὸ 
βέλτιον ἀεὶ τὰς “μοχθηρὰς καταστάσεις τοῦ σώ- 
ματος. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὴ γιγνώσκοιμεν, καθότι μοχθηραὶ 
καὶ ὅπῃ τῆς δεούσης ἐξίστανται, πῶς ἂν αὐτὰς 

11ὅ ἐπανάγειν οἷοί τ᾽ εἴημεν ἐπὶ τὸ || κρεῖττον; 

Οὔκουν ἄχρηστόν ἐστιν εἰς τὰς ἰάσεις, ὡς 
᾿Ερασίστρατός φησιν, ἐπίστασθαι τἀληθὲς αὐτὸ 
περὶ γενέσεως χολῆς. οὐ μὴν οὐδ᾽ ἀδύνατον οὐδ᾽ 
ἀσαφὲς ἐξευρεῖν, ὅτι μὴ τῷ πλείστην ἐν ἑαυτῷ 
περιέχειν τὸ μέλι τὴν ξανθὴν χολὴν ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ 
σώματι μεταβαλλόμενον εἰς αὐτὴν ἀλλοιοῦταί TE 
καὶ τρέπεται. πικρόν τε γὰρ ἂν ἦν γενομένοις, 
εἰ χολὴν ἔξωθεν εὐθὺς ἐν ἑαυτῷ περιεῖχεν ἅπασί 
T ἂν ὡσαύτως τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἴσον αὐτῆς ἐγέννα 


178 


» 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. var 


in the liver, will result in the various affections— 
particularly jaundice—which Erasistratus himself 
states to occur where there is much bile. Surely, 
then, it is most essential for the physician to know 
in the first place, that the bile is contained in the 
food itself from outside, and, secondly, that for 
example, beet contains a great deal of bile, and 
bread very little, while olive oil contains most, and 
wine least of all, and all the other articles of diet 
different quantities. Would it not be absurd for 
any one to choose voluntarily those articles which 
contain more bile, rather than those containing less? 
What, however, if the bile is not contained in the 
food, but comes into existence in the animal’s body ? 
Will it not also be useful to know what state of the 
body is followed by a greater, and what by a smaller 
occurrence of bile?! For obviously it is in our 
power to alter and transmute morbid states of the 
body—in fact, to give them a turn for the better. 
But if we did not know in what respect they were 
morbid or in what way they diverged from the 
normal, how should we be able to ameliorate them? 
Therefore it is not useless in treatment, as 
Erasistratus says, to know the actual truth about 
the genesis of bile. Certainly it is not impossible, 
or even difficult to discover that the reason why 
honey produces yellow bile is not that it contains a 
large quantity of this within itself, but because it 
[the honey] undergoes change, becoming altered 
and transmuted into bile. For it would be bitter 
to the taste if it contained bile from the outset, 
and it would produce an equal quantity of bile 


1 Here it is rather the living organism we consider than 
the particular food that is put into it. 


179 
N 2 


GALEN 


TO πλῆθος. GAN οὐχ ὧδ᾽ Eyer τἀληθές. ἐν μὲν 
γὰρ τοῖς ἀκμάζουσι καὶ μάλιστ᾽ εἰ φύσει θερμό- 
τεροι καὶ βίον εἶεν βιοῦντες ταλαίπωρον, ἅπαν 
εἰς ξανθὴν χολὴν μεταβάλλει τὸ μέλε τοῖς 
γέρουσι δ᾽ ἱκανῶς ἐστιν ἐπιτήδειον, ὡς ἂν οὐκ εἰς 
χολὴν ἀλλ᾽ εἰς αἷμα τὴν ἀλλοίωσιν ἐν ἐκείνοις 
λαμβάνον. "Epaciotparos δὲ πρὸς τῷ μηδὲν 
τούτων γιγνώσκειν οὐδὲ περὶ τὴν διαίρεσιν τοῦ 
λόγου σωφρονεῖ, πότερον ἐν τοῖς σιτίοις ἡ χολὴ 
περιέχεται εὐθὺς ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἢ κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῇ 
κοιλίᾳ κατεργασίαν ἐγένετο, μηδὲν εἶναι χρήσι- 

116 pop εἰς ἰατρικὴν ἐπεσκέφθαι λέγων. ἐχρῆν || γὰρ 
δήπου προσθεῖναί τι καὶ περὶ τῆς ἐν ἥπατι καὶ 
φλεψὶ γενέσεως αὐτῆς, ἐν τοῖσδε τοῖς ὀργάνοις 
γεννᾶσθαι τὴν χολὴν ἅμα τῷ αἵματι τῶν παλαιῶν 
ἰατρῶν τε καὶ φιλοσόφων ἀποφηναμένων. ἀλλὰ 
τοῖς εὐθὺς ἐξ ἀρχῆς σφαλεῖσι καὶ διαμαρτάνουσι 
τῆς ὀρθῆς ὁδοῦ τοιαῦτά τε ληρεῖν ἀναγκαῖόν ἐστι 
καὶ προσέτε τῶν χρησιμωτάτων εἰς τὴν τέχνην 
παραλιπεῖν τὴν ζήτησιν. 

Ἡδέως δ᾽ ἂν ἐνταῦθα τοῦ λόγον γεγονὼς 
ἠρόμην τοὺς ὁμιλῆσαι φάσκοντας αὐτὸν ἐπὶ 
πλεῖστον τοῖς ἐκ τοῦ περιπάτου φιλοσόφοις, εἰ 
γιγνώσκουσιν, ὅσα περὶ τοῦ κεκρᾶσθαι τὰ σώμαθ᾽ 
ἡμῶν ἐκ θερμοῦ καὶ ψυχροῦ καὶ ξηροῦ καὶ ὑγροῦ 
πρὸς ᾿Αριστοτέλους εἴρηταί τε καὶ ἀποδέδεικται, 
καὶ ὡς τὸ θερμὸν ἐν αὑτοῖς ἐστι τὸ δραστικώτατον 
καὶ ὡς τῶν ζῴων ὅσα μὲν θερμότερα φύσει, ταῦτα 
πάντως ἔναιμα, τὰ δ᾽ ἐπὶ πλέον ψυχρότερα 
πάντως ἄναιμα καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τοῦ χειμῶνος ἀργὰ 


18ο 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. vir 


in every person who took it. The facts, however, 
are not 80.1 For in those who are in the prime 
of life, especially if they are warm by nature and 
are leading a life of toil, the honey changes entirely 
into yellow bile. Old people, however, it suits well 
enough, inasmuch as the alteration which it under- 
goes is not into bile, but into blood. Erasistratus, 
however, in addition to knowing nothing about this, 
shows no intelligence even in the division of his 
argument ; he says that it is of no practical impor- 
tance to investigate whether the bile is contained 
in the food from the beginning or comes into exist- 
ence as a result of gastric digestion. He ought 
surely to have added something about its genesis in 
liver and veins, seeing that the old physicians and 
philosophers declare that it along with the blood is 
generated in these organs. But it is inevitable that 
people who, from the very outset, go astray, and 
wander from the right road, should talk such 
nonsense, and should, over and above this, neglect 
to search for the factors of most practical importance 
in medicine. 

Having come to this point in the argument, I 
should like to ask those who declare that Erasistratus 
was very familiar with the Peripatetics, whether 
they know what Aristotle stated and demonstrated 
with regard to our bodies being compounded out of 
the Warm, the Cold, the Dry and the Moist, and 
how he says that among these the Warm is the most 
active, and that those animals which are by nature 
warmest have abundance of blood, whilst those that 
are colder are entirely Jacking in blood, and con- 
sequently in winter lie idle and motionless, lurking 

1 Supreme importance of the ‘“‘soil.” ς΄ Introduction, 
pp. xii. and xxxi. 181 


GALEN 


καὶ ἀκίνητα κεῖται ᾿φωλεύοντα δίκην νεκρῶν. 
εἴρηται δὲ καὶ περὴ τῆς χροιᾶς τοῦ αἵματος οὐκ 
᾿Αριστοτέλει μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ Πλάτωνι. καὶ 
117 ἡμεῖς νῦν, ὅπερ ἤδη καὶ πρόσθεν εἶπον, || οὐ τὰ 
καλῶς ἀποδεδειγμένα τοῖς παλαιοῖς λέγειν οὐ- 
θέμεθα, μήτε τῇ γνώμῃ μήτε τῇ λέξει τοὺς Pals 
ἐκείνους ὑπερβαλέσθαι δυνάμενοι" τὰ δ᾽ ἤτοι 
χωρὶς ἀποδείξεως ὦ ὡς ἐναργῆ πρὸς αὐτῶν εἰρημένα 
διὰ τὸ μηδ᾽ ὑπονοῆσαι μοχθηροὺς οὕτως ἔσεσθαί 
τινας σοφιστάς, οἱ καταφρονήσουσι τῆς ἐν αὐτοῖς 
ἀληθείας, ἢ καὶ “παραλελειμμένα τελέως ὑπ᾽ 
ἐκείνων ἀξιοῦμεν εὑρίσκειν τε καὶ ἀποδεικνύναι. 
Περὶ δὲ τῆς τῶν χυμῶν γενέσεως οὐκ οἶδ᾽, εἰ 
ἔχει τις ἕτερον προσθεῖναι “σοφώτερον dy Ἱππὸ3 
κράτης εἶπε καὶ ᾿Αριστοτέλης καὶ Tlpafayopas 
καὶ Φιλότιμος καὶ ἄλλοι πολλοὶ τῶν παλαιῶν. 
ἀποδέδεικται γὰρ ἐκείνοις τοῖς ἀνδράσιν ἀλλοιου- 
μένης τῆς τροφῆς ἐν ταῖς φλεψὴὶν ὑ ὑπὸ τῆς ἐμφύτου 
θερμασίας αἷμα μὲν ὑπὸ τῆς συμμετρίας τῆς κατ᾽ 
αὐτήν, οἱ δ᾽ ἄλλοι χυμοὶ διὰ τὰς ἀμετρίας γί- 
γνόμενοι" καὶ τούτῳ τῷ λόγῳ πάνθ᾽ ὁμολογεῖ τὰ 
φαινόμενα. καὶ γὰρ τῶν ἐδεσμάτων ὅσα μέν ἐστι 
θερμότερα φύσει, χολωδέστερα, τὰ δὲ ψυχρότερα 
φλεγματικώτερα" καὶ τῶν ἡλικιῶν ὡσαύτως χο- 
118 λωδέστεϊραι μὲν αἱ θερμότεραι φύσει, φλεγμα- 
τωδέστεραι δ᾽ αἱ ψυχρότεραι: καὶ τῶν ἐπιτηδευ- 
μάτων δὲ καὶ τῶν χωρῶν καὶ τῶν ὡρῶν καὶ πολὺ 
δὴ πρότερον ἔτι τῶν φύσεων αὐτῶν αἱ μὲν ψυ- 
χρότεραι φλεγματωδέστεραι, χολωδέστεραι δ᾽ αἱ 


1 Aristotle, Hist. Animal., iii. xix.; Plato, Timaeus, 80 Ε. 
182 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IL. vi 


in holes like corpses. Further, the question of the 
colour of the blood has been dealt with not only by 
Aristotle but also by Plato. Now I, for my part, 
as I have already said, did not set before myself 
the task of stating what has been so well demon- 
strated by the Ancients, since I cannot surpass 
these men either in my views or in my method of 
giving them expression. Doctrines, however, which 
they either stated without demonstration, as being 
self-evident (since they never suspected that there 
could be sophists so degraded as to contemn the 
truth in these matters), or else which they actually 
omitted to mention at all—these I propose to dis- 
cover and prove. 
Now in reference to the genesis of the humours, I 
do not know that any one could add anything wiser 
than what has been said by Hippocrates, Aristotle, 
Praxagoras, Philotimus 5 and many other among the 
Ancients, These men demonstrated that when the 
nutriment becomes altered in the veins by the innate 
heat, blood is produced when it is in moderation, 
and the other humours when it is not in proper 
proportion. And all the observed facts ὃ agree with 
this argument. Thus, those articles of food, which 
are by nature warmer are more productive of bile, 
while those which are colder produce more phlegm. 
Similarly of the periods of life, those which are 
naturally warmer tend more to bile, and the colder 
more to phlegm. Of occupations also, localities and 
seasons, and, above all, of natures ‘ themselves, the 
colder are more phlegmatic, and the warmer. more 


3 Philotimus succeeded Diocles and Praxagoras, who were 
successive leaders of the Hippocratic school. ο΄ p. 51, note 1. 

8 Lit. phenomena. 

4 4,¢, living organisms; cf. p. 47, note 1, 


183 


GALEN 


θερμότεραι' καὶ νοσημάτων τὰ μὲν ψυχρὰ τοῦ 
φλέγματος ἔκγονα, τὰ δὲ : θερμὰ τῆς ξανθῆς χολῆς" 
καὶ ὅλως οὐδὲν ἔστιν εὑρεῖν τῶν πάντων, ὃ μὴ τούτῳ 
τῷ λόγῳ μαρτυρεῖ. πῶς δ᾽ οὐ μέλλει; διὰ γὰρ τὴν 
ἐκ τῶν τεττάρων. ποιὰν κρᾶσιν ἑκάστου τῶν μορίων 
ὧδί πως ἐνεργοῦντος ἀνάγκη πᾶσα καὶ διὰ τὴν 
βλάβην αὐτῶν ἢ διαφθείρεσθαι τελέως ἢ ἐμπο- 
δίξεσθαί γε τὴν ἐνέργειαν καὶ οὕτω νοσεῖν τὸ 
ζῷον ἢ ὅλον ἢ κατὰ τὰ μόρια. 
τὰ πρῶτά γε καὶ γενικώτατα νοσήματα 
τέτταρα τὸν ἀριθμὸν ὑπάρχει θερμότητι καὶ 
ψυχρότητι καὶ ξηρότητι καὶ ὑ ὑγρότητι διαφέροντα. 
τοῦτο δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ ᾿Ἐρασίστρατος ὁμολογεῖ 
καΐτοι μὴ βουλόμενος. ὅταν γὰρ ἐν τοῖς πυρετοῖς 
χείρους τῶν σιτίων τὰς πέψεις γίγνεσθαι λέγῃ, 
119 μὴ διότε τῆς ἐμφύτου I θερμασίας ἡ συμμετρία 
διέφθα ται, καθάπερ οἱ πρόσθεν ὑπελάμβανον, 
ἀλλ᾽ ore περιστέλλεσθαι καὶ τρίβειν ἧ γαστὴρ 
οὐχ ὁμοίως δύναται βεβλαμμένη τὴν ἐνέργειαν, 
ἐρέσθαι δίκαιον αὐτόν, ὑπὸ τίνος ἡ τῆς γαστρὸς 
ἐνέργεια βέβλαπται. 

Γενομένου γάρ, εἰ τύχοι, βουβῶνος ἐπὶ προσ- 
πταίσματι, πρὶν μὲν πυρέξαι τὸν ἄνθρωπον, 
οὐκ ἂν χεῖρον ἡ γαστὴρ πέψειεν. οὐ γὰρ 
ἱκανὸν ἦν οὐδέτερον αὐτῶν οὔθ᾽ ὁ βουβὼν 
οὔτε τὸ ἕλκος ἐμποδίσαι τι καὶ βλάψαι τὴν 
ἐνέργειαν τῆς κοιλίας" εἰ δὲ πυρέξειεν, εὐθὺς μὲν 
αἱ ,πέψεις γίγνονται, χείρους, εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ τὴν 
ἐνέργειαν τῆς γαστρὸς βεβλάφθαι φαμὲν ὀρθῶς 
λέγοντες. ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ τίνος ἐβλάβη, προσθεῖναι 


1 Erasistratus rejected the idea of innate heat; he held 
that the heat of the body was introduced from outside. 


184 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. vin 


bilious. Also cold diseases result from phlegm, and 
warmer ones from yellow bile. There is not a single 
thing to be found which does not bear witness to 
the truth of this account. How could it be other- 
wise? For, seeing that every part functions in its 
own special way because of the manner in which 
the four qualities are compounded, it is absolutely 
necessary that the function [activity] should be 
either completely destroyed, or, at least hampered, 
by any damage to the qualities, and that thus the 
animal should fall ill, either as a whole, or in certain 
of its parts. 

Also the diseases which are primary and most 
generic are four in number, and differ from each 
other in warmth, cold, dryness and moisture. Now, 
Erasistratus himself confesses this, albeit uninten- 
tionally ;1 for when he says that the digestion of food 
becomes worse in fever, not because the innate heat 
has ceased to be in due proportion, as people pre- 
viously supposed, but because the stomach, with its 
activity impaired, cannot contract and triturate as 
before—then, I say, one may justly ask him what 
it is that has impaired the activity of the stomach. 

Thus, for example, when a bubo develops following 
an accidental wound? gastric digestion does not 
become impaired until after the patient has become 
fevered; neither the bubo nor the sore of itself 
impedes in any way or damages the activity of the 
stomach. But if fever occurs, the digestion at 
once deteriorates, and we are also right in saying 
that the activity of the stomach at once be- 
comes impaired. We must add, however, by what 


2 As a bubo is a swelling in the groin, we must suppose that 
the wound referred to would be in the leg or lower abdomen. 


185 


GALEN 


χρὴ τῷ λόγφ. τὸ ) μὲν γὰρ ἕλκος οὐχ οἷόν T ἦν 
αὐτὴν βλάπτειν, ὥσπερ οὐδ᾽ ὁ βουβών'" ὴ γὰρ ἂν 
ἔβλαψε καὶ πρὸ τοῦ πυρετοῦ. εἰ δὲ μὴ ταῦτα, 
δῆλον, ὡς ἡ τῆς θερμασίας πλεονεξία. δύο γὰρ 
ταῦτα προσεγένετο τῷ βουβῶνι, ἡ ἣ τῆς κατὰ τὰς 
ἀρτηρίας’ τε καὶ τὴν καρδίαν κινήσεως ἀλλοίωσις 
καὶ ἡ τῆς κατὰ φύσιν θερμασίας πλεονεξία. 
ἀλλ᾽ ἡ μὲν τῆς κινήσεως ἀλλοίωσις οὐ μόνον οὐδὲν 
120 βλάψει τὴν ἐνέργειαν τῆς γαστρός, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
ΐπ οσωφελήσει κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνα τῶν ζῴων, ἐν οἷς εἰς 
τὴν πέψιν ὑπέθετο πλεῖστον δύνασθαι τὸ διὰ τῶν 
ἀρτηριῶν εἰς τὴν κοιλίαν ἐμπῖπτον πνεῦμα. διὰ 
λοιπὴν οὖν ἔτι καὶ μόνην τὴν ἄμετρον θερμασίαν 
ἡ βλάβη τῆς ἐνεργείας τῇ γαστρί. τὸ μὲν γὰρ 
πνεῦμα σφοδρότερόν τε καὶ συνεχέστερον καὶ 
πλέον ἐμπίπτει νῦν ἢ πρότερον. ὥστε ταύτῃ 
μὲν μᾶλλον πέψει τὰ διὰ τὸ πνεῦμα καλῶς 
πέττοντα ζῴα, διὰ λοιπὴν δ᾽ ἔτι τὴν παρὰ φύσιν 
θερμασίαν ἀ ἀπεπτήσει.. τὸ γὰρ καὶ τῷ πνεύματι 
φάναι τιν᾽ ὑπάρχειν ἰδιότητα, καθ᾽ ἣν πέττει, 
κἄπειτα ταύτην πυρεττόντων διαφθείρεσθαι καθ᾽ 
ἕτερον τρόπον ἐστὶν ὁμολογῆσαι τὸ ἄτοπον. 
ἐρωτηθέντες γὰρ αὖθις, ὑπὸ τίνος ἠλλοιώθη τὸ 
πνεῦμα, μόνην ἕξουσιν ἀποκρίνεσθαι τὴν παρὰ 
φύσιν θερμασίαν καὶ μάλιστ᾽ ἐπὶ τοῦ κατὰ τὴν 


1 te. fever as a cause of disease. 

2 As we should say, “circulatory” changes. 

3 This is the ‘‘vital spirit” or pneuma which, according 
to Erasistratus and the Pneumatist school, was elaborated in 
the left ventricle, and thereafter carried by the arteries all 
over the body, there to subserve circulatory processes. It 


186 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. vm 


it has been impaired. For the wound was not 
capable of impairing it, nor yet the bubo, for, if they 
had been, then they would have caused this damage 
before the fever as well. If it was not these that 
caused it, then it was the excess of heat! (for these 
two symptoms occurred besides the bubo—an altera- 
tion in the arterial and cardiac movements? and an 
excessive development of natural heat). Now the 
alteration of these movements will not merely not 
impair the function of the stomach in any way: it 
will actually prove an additional help among those 
animals in which, according to Erasistratus, the 
pneuma, which is propelled through the arteries and 
into the alimentary canal, is of great service in 
digestion ;° there is only left, then, the dispropor- 
tionate heat to account for the damage to the gastric 
activity. For the pneuma is driven in more vigorously 
and continuously, and in greater quantity now than 
before ; thus in this case, the animal whose digestion 
is promoted by pneuma will digest more, whereas 
the remaining factor—abnormal heat—will give them 
indigestion. For to say, on the one hand, that the 
pneuma has a certain property by virtue of which it 
promotes digestion, and then to say that this property 
disappears in cases of fever, is simply to admit the 
absurdity. For when they are again asked what it 
is that has altered the pneuma, they will only be 
able to reply, “the abnormal heat,” and particularly 
if it be the pneuma in the food canal which is in 


has*some analogy with oxygen, but this is also the case with 

the ‘‘ natural spirit” or pneuma, whose seat was the liver 

and which was distributed by the veins through the body ; it 

rea over the more vegetative processes. cf. p. 152, note 1; 
ntroduction, p. xxxiv. 


187 


GALEN 


κοιλίαν' οὐδὲ yap πλησιάξει κατ᾽ οὐδὲν τοῦτο τῷ 
βουβῶνι. 

Καίτοι τί τῶν ζῴων ἐκείνων, ἐν οἷς ἡ τοῦ πνεύ- 
ματος ἰδιότης μέγα δύναται, μνημονεύω, παρὸν 
ἐπ᾿ ἀνθρώποις, ἐν οἷς ἢ οὐδὲν ἢ παντάπασιν 

12] ἀμυϊδρόν te καὶ μικρὸν ὠφελεῖ, ποιεῖσθαι τὸν 
λόγον; ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι μὲν ἐν τοῖς πυρετοῖς οὗτοι κακῶς 
πέττουσιν, ὁμολογεῖ καὶ αὐτὸς καὶ τήν γ᾽ αἰτίαν 
προστιθεὶς βεβλάφθαι φησὶ τῆς γαστρὸς τὴν 
ἐνέργειαν. οὐ μὴν ἄλλην γέ τινα πρόφασιν τῆς 
βλάβης εἰπεῖν ὄχει πλὴν τῆς παρὰ φύσιν 
θερμασίας. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ βλάπτει τὴν ἐνέργειαν ἡ 
παρὰ φύσιν θερμασία μὴ κατά τι συμβεβηκός, 
ἀλλὰ διὰ τὴν αὑτῆς οὐσίαν τε καὶ δύναμιν, ἐκ 
τῶν πρώτων ἂν εἴη νοσημάτων: καὶ μὴν οὐκ 
ἐνδέχεται τῶν πρώτων μὲν εἶναι νοσημάτων τὴν 
ἀμετρίαν τῆς θερμασίας, τὴν δ᾽ ἐνέργειαν ὑπὸ τῆς 
εὐκρασίας μὴ γίγνεσθαι. οὐδὲ γὰρ δι’ ἄλλο τι 
δυνατὸν γίγνεσθαι τὴν δυσκρασίαν αἰτίαν τῶν 
πρώτων νοσημάτων ἀλλ᾽ ἢ διὰ τὴν εὐκρασίαν 
διαφθειρομένην. τῷ γὰρ ὑπὸ ταύτης γίγνεσθαι 
τὰς ἐνεργείας ἀνάγκη καὶ τὰς πρώτας αὐτῶν 
βλάβας διαφθειρομένης γίγνεσθαι. 

“Ὅτι μὲν οὖν καὶ κατ᾽ αὐτὸν τὸν ᾿Ερασίστρα- 
τον ἡ εὐκρασία τοῦ θερμοῦ τῶν ἐνεργειῶν αἰτία, 
τοῖς θεωρεῖν τὸ ἀκόλουθον δυναμένοις ἱκανῶς 
ἀποδεδεῖχθαι νομίξω. τούτου δ᾽ ὑπάρχοντος 

122 ἡμῖν οὐδὲν ere χαλεπὸν || ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστης ἐνεργείας 


1 Even leaving the pneuma out of account, Galen claims 
that he can still prove his thesis. . 

2 In other words: if dyscrasia is a first principle in path- 
ology, then eucrasia must be a first principle in physiology. 


188 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. vin 


question (since this does not come in any way near 
the bubo). 

Yet why do I mention those animals in which the 
property of the pneuma plays an important part, 
when it is possible to base one’s argument upon 
human beings, in whom it is either of no importance 
at all, or acts quite faintly and feebly?1 But 
Erasistratus himself agrees that human beings digest 
badly in fevers, .adding as the cause that the activity 
of the stomach has been impaired. He cannot, how- 
ever, advance any other cause of this impairment 
than abnormal heat. But if it is not by accident 
that the abnormal heat impairs this activity, but by 
virtue of its own essence and power, then this 
abnormal heat must belong to the primary diseases. 
But, indeed, if dsproportion of heat belongs to the 
primary diseases, it cannot but be that a proportionate 
blending [eucrasia] of the qualities produces the 
normal activity.2. For a disproportionate blend 
[dyscrasia] can only become a cause of the primary 
diseases through derangement of the eucrasia. That 
is to say, it is because the [normal] activities arise 
from the eucrasia that the primary impairments of 
these activities necessarily arise from its derange- 
ment. 

I think, then, it has been proved to the satis- 
faction of those people who are capable of seeing 
logical consequences, that, even according to Erasi- 
stratus’s own argument, the cause of the normal 
functions is eucrasia of the Warm.’ Now, this being 
so, there is nothing further to prevent us from saying 


3 The above is a good instance of Galen’s ‘‘logical” method 
pee to medical questions; an appeal to those who are 
e of following ‘‘ logical sequence.” cf. p. 209, note 1. 


189 


as & 
capa 


GALEN 


τῇ μὲν evxpacia τὸ βέλτιον ἕπεσθαι λέγειν, τῇ 
δὲ δυσκρασίᾳ τὰ χείρω. καὶ τοίνυν εἴπερ ταῦθ᾽ 
οὕτως ἔχει, τὸ μὲν αἷμα τῆς συμμέτρου θερ- 
μασίας, τὴν δὲ ξανθὴν χολὴν τῆς ἀμέτρου vope- 
στέον ὑπάρχειν ἔγγονον. οὕτω “γὰρ καὶ ἡμῖν 
ἔν τε ταῖς θερμαῖς ἡλικίαις καὶ τοῖς θερμοῖς 
χωρίοις καὶ ταῖς ὥραις τοῦ ἔτους ταῖς θερμαῖς 
καὶ ταῖς θερμαῖς καταστάσεσιν, ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ 
ταῖς θερμαῖς κράσεσι τῶν ἀνθρώπων καὶ τοῖς 
ἐπιτηδεύμασί τε καὶ τοῖς διαιτήμασι καὶ τοῖς 
νοσήμασι τοῖς θερμοῖς εὐλόγως ἡ ξανθὴ χολὴ 
πλείστη φαίνεται γιγνομένη. 

Τὸ δ᾽ ἀπορεῖν, εἴτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς σώμασι τῶν ἀνθρώ- 
πων ὁ χυμὸς οὗτος ἔχει τὴν γένεσιν εἴτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς 
σιτίοις περιέχεται, μηδ᾽ ὅτι τοῖς ὑγιαίνουσιν 
ἀμέμπτως, ὅταν ἀσιτήσωσι παρὰ τὸ ἔθος ὑπό 
τενος περιστάσεως πραγμάτων ἀναγκασθέντες, 
πικρὸν μὲν τὸ στόμα γίγνεται, χολώδη δὲ τὰ 
οὗρα, δάκνεται ἡ γαστήρ, ἑωρακότος ἐστὶν 
ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ ἐξαίφνης νῦν εἰς τὸν κόσμον ἔλη- 
"λυθότος καὶ μήπω τὰ Kar’ αὐτὸν φαινόμενα 
γιγνώσκοντος. ἐπεὶ τίς οὐκ οἶδεν, ὡς ἕκαστον 
τῶν ἑψομένων ἐπὶ πλέον ἁλυκώτερον μὲν τὸ 

128 πρῶτον, ὕστερον || δὲ πικρότερον γίγνεται; κἂν 
εἰ τὸ μέλι βουληθείης αὐτὸ τὸ πάντων γλυκύτα- 
τον ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ἕψειν, ἀποδείξεις καὶ τοῦτο 
πικρότατον" ὃ γὰρ τοῖς ἄλλοις, ὅσα μὴ φύσει 
θερμά, παρὰ τῆς ἑψήσεως ἐγγίγνεται, τοῦτ᾽ ἐκ 
φύσεως ὑπάρχει τῷ μέλιτι. διὰ τοῦτ᾽ οὖν ἑψό- 
μενον οὐ γίγνεται γλυκύτερον" ὅσον γὰρ ἐχρῆν 
εἶναι θερμότητος εἰς γένεσιν γλυκύτητος, ἀκριβῶς 
αὐτῷ τοῦτο πᾶν οἴκοθεν ὑπάρχει. ὃ τοίνυν 


190 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IT. vin 


that, in the case of each function, eucrasia is followed 
by the more, and dyscrasia by the less favourable 
alternative. And, therefore, if this be the case, we 
must suppose blood to be the outcome of propor- 
tionate, and yellow bile of disproportionate heat. So 
we naturally find yellow bile appearing in greatest 
quantity in ourselves at the warm periods of life, in 
warm countries, at warm seasons of the year, and 
when we are in a warm condition; similarly in 
people of warm temperaments, and in connection 
with warm occupations, modes of life, or diseases. 
And to be in doubt as to whether this humour has 
its genesis in the human body or is contained in the 
food is what you would expect from one who has—I 
will not say failed to see that, when those who are 
perfectly healthy have, under the compulsion of 
circumstances, to fast contrary to custom, their 
mouths become bitter and their urine bile-coloured, 
while they suffer from gnawing pains in the stomach— 
but has, as it were, just made a sudden entrance 
into the world, and is not yet familiar with the 
phenomena which occur there. Who, in fact, 
does not know that anything which is overcooked 
grows at first salt and afterwards bitter? And if 
you will boil honey itself, far the sweetest of all 
things, you can demonstrate that even this becomes 
quite bitter. For what may occur as a result of 
boiling in the case of other articles which are not 
warm by nature, exists naturally in honey; for this 
reason it does not become sweeter on being boiled, 
since exactly the same quantity of heat as is needed 
for the production of sweetness exists from before- 
hand in the honey. Therefore the external heat, 


191 


GALEN 


ἔξωθεν τοῖς ἐλλιπῶς θερμοῖς ἦν ὠφέλιμον, τοῦτ᾽ 
ἐκείνῳ βλάβη τε καὶ ἀμετρία γίγνεται καὶ διὰ 
τοῦτο θᾶττον τῶν ἄλλων ἑψόμενον ἀποδείκνυται 
πικρόν. δι’ αὐτὸ δὲ τοῦτο καὶ τοῖς θερμοῖς 
φύσει καὶ τοῖς ἀκμάζουσιν εἰς χολὴν ἑτοίμως 
μεταβάλλεται. θερμῷ γὰρ θερμὸν πλησιάξον 
εἰς ἀμετρίαν κράσεως ἑτοίμως ἐξίσταται καὶ 
φθάνει χολὴ γιγνόμενον, οὐχ αἷμα. δεῖται τοί- 
νυν ψυχρᾶς μὲν κράσεως ἀνθρώπου, ψυχρᾶς δ᾽ 
ἡλικίας, ἵν᾽ εἰς αἵματος ἄγηται φύσιν. οὔκουν 
ἄπο τρόπου συνεβούλευσεν “Ἱπποκράτης τοῖς 
φύσει πικροχόλοις μὴ προσφέρειν τὸ μέλε, ὡς 
124 ἂν θερμοτέρας || δηλονότι κράσεως ὑπάρχουσιν. 
οὕτω δὲ καὶ τοῖς νοσήμασι τοῖς πικροχόλοις 
πολέμιον εἶναι τὸ μέλει καὶ τῇ τῶν γερόντων 
ἡλικίᾳ φίλιον οὐχ Ἱπποκράτης μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ 
πάντες ἰατροὶ λέγουσιν, οἱ μὲν ἐκ τῆς φύσεως 
αὐτοῦ τὴν δύναμιν ἐνδειξαμένης εὑρόντες, οἱ δ᾽ 
ἐκ τῆς πείρας μόνης. οὐδὲ γὰρ οὐδὲ τοῖς ἀπὸ 
τῆς ἐμπειρίας ἰατροῖς ἕτερόν τι παρὰ ταῦτα᾽ 
τετήρηται γιγνόμενον, ἀλλὰ χρηστὸν μὲν γέροντι, 
νέῳ δ᾽ οὐ χρηστόν, καὶ τῷ μὲν φύσει πικροχόλῳ 
βλαβερόν, ὠφέλιμον δὲ τῷ φλεγματώδει: καὶ 
τῶν νοσημάτων ὡσαύτως τοῖς μὲν πικροχόλοις 
ἐχθρόν, τοῖς δὲ φλεγματώδεσι φίλιον: ἑνὶ δὲ 
λόγῳ τοῖς μὲν θερμοῖς σώμασιν ἢ διὰ ede ἢ διὰ 
νόσον ἢ Se ἡλικίαν ἢ δι’ ὥραν ἢ διὰ χώραν 7 
δι᾿ ἐπιτήδευμα χολῆς γεννητικόν, αἵματος δὲ τοῖς 
ἐναντίοις. 
Καὶ μὴν οὐκ ἐνδέχεται ταὐτὸν ἔδεσμα τοῖς μὲν 
χολὴν γεννᾶν, τοῖς δ᾽ αἷμα μὴ οὐκ ἐν τῷ σώματι 


192 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. vin 


which would be useful for insufficiently warm 
substances, becomes in the honey a source of damage, 
in fact an excess; and it is for this reason that honey, 
when boiled, can be demonstrated to become bitter 
sooner than the others. For the same reason it is 
easily transmuted into bile in those people who are 
naturally warm, or in their prime, since warm when 
associated with warm becomes readily changed into 
a disproportionate combination and turns into bile 
sooner than into blood. Thus we need a cold tem- 
perament and a cold period of life if we would have 
honey brought to the nature of blood.! Therefore 
Hippocrates not improperly advised those who were 
naturally bilious not to take honey, since they were 
obviously of too warm a temperament. So also, not 
only Hippocrates, but all physicians say that honey 
is bad in bilious diseases but good in old age ; some 
of them having discovered this through the indications 
afforded by its nature, and others simply through 
experiment,? for the Empiricist physicians too have 
made precisely the same observation, namely, that 
honey is good for an old man and not for a young 
one, that it is harmful for those who are naturally 
bilious, and serviceable for those who are phlegmatic. 
In a word, in bodies which are warm either through 
nature, disease, time of life, season of the year, 
locality, or occupation, honey is productive of bile, 
whereas in opposite circumstances it produces blood. 

But surely it is impossible that the same article of 
diet can produce in certain persons bile and in others 
blood, if it be not that the genesis of these humours is 


1 The aim of dietetics always being the production of 
moderate heat—i.e, blood. 
2 Note contrasted methods of Rationalists and Empiricists. 


193 


oO 


GALEN 


τῆς γενέσεως αὐτῶν ἐπιτελουμένης. εἰ γὰρ δὴ 
οἴκοθέν γε καὶ map ἑαυτοῦ τῶν ἐδεσμάτων 
ἕκαστον ἔχον καὶ οὐκ ἐν τοῖς τῶν ζῴων. σώμασι I 

125 μεταβαλλόμενον ἐγέννα τὴν χολήν, ἐν ἅπασιν 
ἂν ὁμοίως αὐτὴν τοῖς ,σώμασιν ἐγέννα καὶ τὸ 
μὲν πικρὸν ἔξω γευομένοις ἣν ἂν οἶμαι χολῆς 
ποιητικόν, εἰ δέ τι γλυκὺ καὶ χρηστόν, οὐκ ἂν 
οὐδὲ τὸ βραχύτατον ἐξ αὐτοῦ χολῆς ἐ ἐγεννᾶτο. καὶ 
μὴν οὐ τὸ μέλι μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἕ ExacTOV 
τῶν γλυκέων τοῖς προειρημένοις σώμασι τοῖς δι᾽ 
ὁτιοῦν τῶν εἰρημένων θερμοῖς οὖσιν εἰς χολὴν 
ἑτοίμως ἐξίσταται. 

Καίτοι ταῦτ᾽ οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅπως ἐξηνέχθην εἰπεῖν 
οὐ προελόμενος ἀλλ᾽ ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς τοῦ λόγου τῆς 
ἀκολουθίας ἀναγκασθείς. εἴρηται δ᾽ ἐπὶ πλεῖ- 
στον ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν ᾿Αριστοτέλει τε καὶ I ραξαγόρᾳ 
τὴν Ἱπποκράτους καὶ Πλάτωνος γνώμην ὀρθῶς 


ἐξηγησαμένοις. 
ΙΧ 


Μὴ τοίνυν ὡς ἀποδείξεις ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν εἰρῆσθαι 
νομίζειν τὰ τοιαῦτα μᾶλλον ἢ περὶ τῆς τῶν 
ἄλλως γιγνωσκόντων ἀναισθησίας ἐνδείξεις, οἱ 
μηδὲ τὰ πρὸς ἁπάντων ὁμολογούμενα καὶ καθ᾽ 
ἑκάστην ἡμέραν φαινόμενα γιγνώσκουσιν' τὰς 
δ᾽ ἀποδείξεις αὐτῶν τὰς κατ᾽ ἐπιστήμην ἐξ 
ἐκείνων χρὴ λαμβάνειν τῶν ἀρχῶν, ὧν ἤδη 

126 καὶ πρόσθεν || εἴπομεν, ὡς τὸ δρᾶν καὶ πάσχειν 
εἰς ἄλληλα τοῖς σώμασιν ὑπάρ εἰ κατὰ τὸ 
θερμὸν καὶ ψυχρὸν καὶ ξηρὸν καὶ ὑγρόν. καὶ 


1 Lit. anaesthesia. Linacre renders it indocilitas. 


194 


ΟΝ THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IJ. vut.-1x 


accom plished in the body. For if all articles of food 
contained bile from the beginning and of themselves, 
and did not produce it by undergoing change in the 
animal bedy, then they would produce it similarly 
in all bodies; the food which was bitter to the taste 
would, I take it, be productive of bile, while that 
which tasted good and sweet would not generate 
even the smallest quantity of bile. Moreover, not 
only honey but all other sweet substances are readily 
converted into bile in the aforesaid bodies which are 
warm for any of the reasons mentioned. 

Well, I have somehow or other been led into this 
᾿ discussion,—not in accordance with my plan, but 
compelled by the course of the argument. This 
subject has been treated at great length by Aristotle 
and Praxagoras, who have correctly expounded the 
view of Hippocrates and Plato. 


IX 


For this reason the things that we have said 
are not to be looked upon as proofs but rather as 
indications of the dulness! of those who think 
differently, and who do not even recognise what is 
agreed on by everyone and is a matter of daily 
observation. As for the scientific proofs of all this, 
they are to be drawn from these principles of which 
I have already spoken ?—namely, that bodies act 
upon and are acted upon by each other in virtue of 
the Warm, Cold, Moist and Dry. And if one is 

2 p. 15. | 


195 
o 2 


ec poe 


oC eee 


r 
crrre 


GALEN 


εἴτε φλέβας εἴθ᾽ ἧπαρ εἴτ᾽ ἀρτηρίας εἴτε καρδίαν 
εἴτε κοιλίαν εἴτ᾽ ἄλλο τι μόριον ἐνεργεῖν τις 
φήσειεν ἡντινοῦν ἐνέργειαν, ἀφύκτοις ἀνάγκαις 
ἀναγκασθήσεται διὰ τὴν ἐκ τῶν τεττάρων ποιὰν 
κρᾶσιν ὁμολογῆσαι τὴν ἐνέργειαν ὑπάρχειν αὐτῷ. 
διὰ τί γὰρ ἡ γαστὴρ περιστέλλεται τοῖς σιτίοις, 
διὰ τί δ᾽ αἱ φλέβες αἷμα γεννῶσι, παρὰ τῶν 
᾿Ερασιστρατείων ἐδεόμην ἀκοῦσαι. τὸ yap ὅτι 
περιστέλλεται μόνον αὐτὸ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ γιγνώσκειν 
οὐδέπω χρηστόν, εἰ μὴ καὶ τὴν αἰτίαν εἰδείημεν" 
οὕτω γὰρ ἂν οἶμαι καὶ τὰ σφάλματα θερα- 
πεύσαιμεν. οὐ μέλει, φασίν, ἡμῖν οὐδὲ πολυ- 
πραγμονοῦμεν ἔτι τὰς “τοιαύτας αἰτίας: ὑπὲρ 
ἰατρὸν γάρ εἶσε καὶ τῷ φυσικῷ προσήκουσι. 
πότερον οὖν οὐδ᾽ ἀντερεῖτε τῷ φάσκοντι τὴν μὲν 
εὐκρασίαν τὴν κατὰ φύσιν αἰτίαν εἶναι τῆς ἐνερ- 
γείας ἑκάστῳ τῶν ὀργάνων, τὴν δ᾽ αὖ δυσκρασίαν 


_ 127 νόσον τ᾽ ἤδη καλεῖσθαι καὶ πάντως ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς 


βλάπτεσθαι τὴν ἐνέργειαν; ἢ πεισθήσεσθε ταῖς 
τῶν παλαιῶν ἀποδείξεσιν; ἢ τρίτον τι καὶ μέσον 
ἑκατέρου τούτων πράξετε μήθ᾽ ὡς ἀληθέσι τοῖς 
λόγοις ἐξ ἀνάγκης πειθόμενοι μήτ᾽ ἀντιλέγοντες 
ὡς ψευδέσιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀπορητικοί τινες ἐξαίφνης καὶ 
Πυρρώνειοι γενήσεσθε; καὶ μὴν εἰ τοῦτο δράσετε, 
τὴν ἐμπειρίαν ἀναγκαῖον ὑμῖν προστήσασθαι. τῷ 
γὰρ ἂν ἔτι τρόπῳ καὶ τῶν ἰαμάτων εὐποροίητε 
τὴν οὐσίαν ἑκάστου τῶν νοσημάτων ἀγνοοῦντες; 
τί οὖν οὐκ ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐμπειρικοὺς ὑμᾶς αὐτοὺς 
ἐκαλέσατε; τί δὲ πράγμαθ᾽ ἡμῖν παρέχετε φυ- 

1 Tatros: lit. ‘‘ healer.” 

2 Lit. “physicist” or ‘‘ physiologist,” the student of the 





physis. cf. p. 70, note 2. 


196 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. 1x 


speaking of any activity, whether it be exercised by 
vein, liver, arteries, heart, alimentary canal, or any 
part, one will be inevitably compelled to acknowledge 
that this activity depends upon the way in which the 
four qualities are blended. Thus I[ should like to 
ask the Erasistrateans why it is that the stomach 
contracts upon the food, and why the veins generate 
blood. There is no use in recognizing the mere fact 
of contraction, without also knowing the cause ; if we 
know this, we shall also be able to rectify the failures 
of function. “This is no concern of ours,” they say ; 
“we do not occupy ourselves with such causes as 
these ; they are outside the sphere of the practstioner,} 
and belong to that of the scientific investigator.” 2 Are 
you, then, going to oppose those who maintain that 
the cause of the function of every organ is a natural 
eucrasia,? that the dyscrasia is itself known as a 
disease, and that it is certainly by this that the 
activity becomes impaired? Or, on the other hand, 
will you be convinced by the proofs which the 
ancient writers furnished? Or will you take a 
midway course between these two, neither perforce 
accepting these arguments as true nor contradicting 
them as false, but suddenly becoming sceptics— 
Pyrrhonists, in fact? But if you do this you will 
have to shelter yourselves behind the Empiricist 
teaching. For how are you going to be successful 
in treatment, if you do not understand the real 
essence of each disease? Why, then, did you not 
call yourselves Empiricists from the beginning? 
Why do you confuse us by announcing that you are 


8 That is, a blendeng of the four principles in their natural 
proportion ; Lat. temperies. Dyscrasia=intemperies, ‘‘ dis- 
temper.” 


197 


GALEN 


\ 9 ὔ 3 ‘ “~ > ἢ 
σικᾶς ἐνεργείας ἐπαγγελλόμενοι ζητεῖν ἰάσεως 
ἕνεκεν; εἰ γὰρ ἀδύνατος ἡ γαστήρ ἐστί τινι 

’ ζω 
περιστέλλεσθαι καὶ τρίβειν, πῶς αὐτὴν εἰς τὸ 
A , 
κατὰ φύσιν ἐπανάξομεν ἀγνοοῦντες τὴν αἰτίαν 
a / 
τῆς ἀδυναμίας; ἐγὼ μέν φημι τὴν μὲν ὑπερτεθερ- 
4 a 
μασμένην ἐμψυκτέον ἡμῖν εἶναι, τὴν δ᾽ ἐψυγ- 
4 
μένην θερμαντέον" οὕτω δὲ καὶ τὴν ἐξηρασμένην 
e [4 A > ¢ , > \ 
ὑγραντέον, τὴν & ὑγρασμένην ξηραντέον. ἀλλὰ 

Α , 3 ’ ζω \ 4 

128 καὶ || κατὰ συξυγίαν, εἰ θερμοτέρα τοῦ κατὰ φύσιν 
ἅμα καὶ ξηροτέρα τύχοι γεγενημένη, κεφάλαιον 
εἶναι τῆς ἰάσεως ἐμψύχειν θ᾽ ἅμα καὶ vypaive- 

’ 

εἰ δ᾽ αὖ ψυχροτέρα τε καὶ ὑγροτέρα, θερμαίνειν 
Ἁ / > ΄- ” e , e 9 

τε καὶ ξηραίνειν κἀπὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὡσαύτως" οἱ ὃ 
3 

ἀπ᾿ ᾿Ἐρασιστράτου τί ποτε καὶ πράξουσιν οὐδ 
ὅλως ζητεῖν τῶν ἐνεργειῶν τὰς αἰτίας ὁμολογοῦν- 
τες; ὁ γάρ τοι καρπὸς τῆς περὶ τῶν ἐνεργειῶν 
ζητήσεως οὗτός ἐστι, τὸ τὰς αἰτίας τῶν δυσκρα- 

“ a / 
σιῶν εἰδότα εἰς TO κατὰ φύσιν ἐπανάγειν αὐτάς, 
ὡς αὐτό γε μόνον τὸ γνῶναι τὴν ἑκάστου τῶν 
ὀργάνων ἐνέργειαν ἥτις ἐστὶν οὔπω χρηστὸν εἰς 
τὰς ἐάσεις. 

3 ’ δέ “a \ > NX a 9 

Epaciotpatos δέ μοι δοκεῖ καὶ αὐτὸ τοῦτ 
9 ΄- ς Ψ Ἅ 3 A“ , ᾽ 4 
ἀγνοεῖν, ὡς, ἥτις ἂν ἐν τῷ σώματι διάθεσις Bra- 

\ 3 έ \ 4 N ? a 
πτῇ THY ἐνέργειαν μὴ κατά TL συμβεβηκὸς ἀλλ, 

\ , 
πρώτως τε Kal καθ᾽ ἑαυτήν, αὕτη τὸ νόσημά 
ἐστιν αὐτό. πῶς οὖν ἔτι διαγνωστικός τε καὶ 
3 δ ΝΜ “" 3 ΄“ Ψ 3 
ἰατικὸς ἔσται τῶν νοσημάτων ἀγνοῶν ὅλως αὐτὰ 
τίνα τ᾽ ἐστὶ καὶ πόσα καὶ ποῖα; κατὰ μὲν δὴ τὴν 
κ᾿ / 

γαστέρα τό ye τοσοῦτον ᾿Ερασίστρατος ἠξίωσε 
198 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. τχ 


investigating natural activities with a view to treat- 
ment? Ifthe stomach is, in a particular case, unable 
to exercise its peristaltic and grinding functions, how 
are we going to bring it back to the normal if we 
do not know the cause of its disability? What I 
say is! that we must cool the over-heated stomach 
and warm the chilled one; so also we must moisten 
the one which has become dried up, and conversely ; 
so, too, in combinations of these conditions; if the 
stomach becomes at the same time warmer and drier 
than normally, the first principle of treatment is at 
once to chill and moisten it; and if it become 
colder and moister, it must be warmed and dried; 
so also in other cases. But how on earth are the 
followers of Erasistratus going to act, confessing as 
they do that they make no sort of investigation 
into the cause of disease? For the fruit of the 
enquiry into activities is that by knowing the 
causes of the dyscrasiae one may bring them back 
to the normal, since it is of no use for the purposes 
of treatment merely to know what the activity of 
each organ is. 

Now, it seems to me that Erasistratus is unaware 
of this. fact also, that the actual disease is that 
condition of the body which, not accidentally, but 
primarily and of itself, impairs the normal function. 
How, then, is he going to diagnose or cure diseases 
if he is entirely ignorant of what they are, and of 
what kind and number? As regards the stomach, 
certainly, Erasistratus held that one should at least 


1 This is the orthodox Hippocratic treatment, that of 
opposites by opposites. Contrast the homocopathic principle 
which is the basis of our modern methods of immuntsation 
(stmilia similibus curentur, Hahnemann). 


199 


GALEN 


129 ζητεῖσθαι τὸ πῶς πέττεται τὰ σιτία" || τὸ δ᾽ ἥτις 
πρώτη τε καὶ ἀρχηγὸς αἰτία τούτου, πῶς οὐκ 
ἐπεσκέψατο; κατὰ δὲ τὰς φλέβας καὶ τὸ αἷμα 
καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ πῶς παρέλιπεν. 

"AAN οὔθ᾽ Ἱπποκράτης οὔτ᾽ ἄλλος τις ὧν 
ὀλίγῳ πρόσθεν ἐμνημόνευσα φιλοσόφων ἢ ἰατρῶν 
ἄξιον φετ᾽ εἶναι παραλιπεῖν' ἀλλὰ τὴν κατὰ 
φύσιν ἐν ἑκάστῳ ἕῴῳ θερμασίαν εὔκρατόν τε καὶ 
μετρίως ὑγρὰν οὖσαν αἵματος εἶναί φασι γεννη- 
τικὴν καὶ Ot αὐτό γε τοῦτο καὶ τὸ αἷμα θερμὸν 
καὶ ὑγρὸν εἶναί φασι τῇ δυνάμει χυμόν, ὥσπερ 
τὴν ξανθὴν χολὴν θερμὴν καὶ ξηρὰν εἶναι, εἰ 
καὶ ὅτι μάλισθ᾽ ὑγρὰ φαίνεται. διαφέρειν γὰρ 
αὐτοῖς δοκεῖ τὸ κατὰ φαντασίαν ὑγρὸν τοῦ κατ 
δύναμιν. ἢ τίς οὐκ οἶδεν, ὡς ἅλμη μὲν καὶ 
θάλαττα ταρυχεύει τὰ κρέα καὶ ἄσηπτα διαφυ- 
λάττει, τὸ δ᾽ ἄλλο πᾶν ὕδωρ τὸ πότιμον ἑτοίμως 
διαφθείρει τε καὶ σήπει; τίς δ᾽ οὐκ οἶδεν, ὡς 
ξανθῆς χολῆς ἐν τῇ γαστρὶ περιεχομένης πολλῆς 
ἀπαύστῳ δίψει συνεχόμεθα καὶ ὡς ἐμέσαντες 
αὐτὴν εὐθὺς ἄδιψοι γιγνόμεθα μᾶλλον ἢ εἰ 

180 πάμπολν ποτὸν προσηράμεθα; || θερμὸς οὖν 
εὐλόγως ὁ “χυμὸς οὗτος εἴρηται καὶ ξηρὸς κατὰ 
δύναμιν, ὥσπερ γε καὶ τὸ φλέγμα ψυχρὸν 
καὶ ὑγρόν. ἐναργεῖς γὰρ καὶ περὶ τούτου 
πίστεις Ἵ πποκράτει τε καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις εἴρηνται 
παλαιοῖς. 

Πρόδικος δ᾽ ἐν τῷ περὶ φύσεως ἀνθρώπου 
γράμματι τὸ συγκεκαυμένον καὶ οἷον ὑπερωπτη- 
μένον ἐν τοῖς χυμοῖς ὀνομάζων φλέγμα παρὰ τὸ 
πεφλέχθαι τῇ λέξει μὲν ἑτέρως χρῆται, φυλάττει 


200 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IT. 1x 


investigate how it digests the food. But why was not 
investigation also made as to the primary originative 
cause of this? And, as regards the veins and the 
blood, he omitted even to ask the question “ how ?”’ 

Yet neither Hippocrates nor any of the other 
physicians or philosophers whom I mentioned a 
short while ago thought it right to omit this; 
they say that when the heat which exists naturally 
in every animal is well blended and moderately 
moist it generates blood ; for this reason they also 
say that the blood is a virtually warm and moist 
humour, and similarly also that yellow bile is warm 
and dry, even though for the most part it appears 
moist. (For in them the apparently dry would seem 
to differ from the virtually dry.) Who does not know 
that brine and sea-water preserve meat and keep it 
uncorrupted,! whilst all other water—the drinkable 
kind—readily spoils and rots it? And who does not 
know that when yellow bile is contained in large 
quantity in the stomach, we are troubled with an un- 
quenchable thirst, and that when we vomit this up, 
we at once become much freer from thirst than if we 
had drunk very large quantities of fluid? Therefore 
this humour has been very properly termed warm, 
and also virtually dry. And, similarly, phlegm has 
been called cold and moist ; for about this also clear 
proofs have been given by Hippocrates and the other 
Ancients. 

Prodicus? also, when in his book “On the Nature 
of Man” he gives the name “phlegm” (from the verb 
πεφλέχθαι) to that element in the humours which has 
been burned or, as it were, over-roasted, while using 

1 Lit. aseptic. 

2 Prodicus of Ceos, a Sophist, contemporary of Socrates. 


201 


GALEN 


μέντοι TO πρᾶγμα κατὰ ταὐτὸ τοῖς ἄλλοις. τὴν 
δ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ὀνόμασι τἀνδρὸς τούτου καινοτομίαν 
ἱκανῶς ἐνδείκνυται καὶ Πλάτων. ἀλλὰ τοῦτό 
γε τὸ πρὸς ἁπάντων ἀνθρώπων ὀνομαζόμενον 
φλέγμα τὸ λευκὸν τὴν χρόαν, ὃ βλένναν ὀνομάζει 
Πρόδικος, ὁ ψυχρὸς καὶ ὑγρὸς χυμός ἐστιν οὗτος 
καὶ πλεῖστος τοῖς τε γέρουσι καὶ τοῖς ὁπωσδή- 
ποτε ψυγεῖσιν ἀθροίζεται καὶ οὐδεὶς οὐδὲ μαινό- 
μενος ἂν ἄλλο Te ἢ ψυχρὸν καὶ ὑγρὸν εἴποι ἂν 
αὐτόν. 

4 Α > 4 θε \ , , 3 αἱ e \ υ Ν 

p οὖν θερμὸς μέν τὶς ἐστι καὶ ὑγρὸς χυμὸς 
καὶ θερμὸς καὶ ξηρὸς ἕτερος καὶ ὑγρὸς καὶ 
ψυχρὸς ἄλλος, οὐδεὶς δ᾽ ἐστὶ ψυχρὸς καὶ ξηρὸς 
τὴν δύναμιν, ἀλλ’ ἡ τετάρτη συζυγία τῶν κρά- 

131 σεων || ἐν ἅπασι τοῖς ἄλλοις ὑπάρχουσα μόνοις 
τοῖς χυμοῖς οὐχ ὑπάρχει; καὶ μὴν ἧ γε μέλαινα 
χολὴ τοιοῦτός ἐστι χυμός, ὃν οἱ σωφρονοῦντες 
ἰατροὶ καὶ φιλόσοφοι πλεονεκτεῖν ἔφασαν τῶν 
μὲν ὡρῶν τοῦ ἔτους ἐν φθινοπώρῳ μάλιστα, 
τῶν δ' ἡλικιῶν ἐν ταῖς μετὰ τὴν ἀκμήν. οὕτω 
δὲ καὶ διαιτήματα καὶ χωρία καὶ καταστάσεις 
καὶ νόσους τινὰὲ ψυχρὰς καὶ ξηρὰς εἶναί 
φασιν: οὐ γὰρ δὴ χωλὴν ἐν ταύτῃ μόνῃ τῇ 
συζυγίᾳ τὴν φύσιν εἶναι νομίξουσιν GAN ὥσπερ 
τὰς ἄλλας τρεῖς οὕτω καὶ τήνδε διὰ πάντων 
ἐκτετάσθαι. 

Ηὐξάμην οὖν κἀνταῦθ᾽ ἐρωτῆσαι δύνασθαι τὸν 
᾿Ερασίστρατον, εἰ μηδὲν ὄργανον ἡ τεχνικὴ φύσις 
ἐδημιούργησε καθαρτικὸν τοῦ τοιούτου χυμοῦ, 
ἀλλὰ τῶν μὲν οὔρων ἄρα τῆς διακρίσεώς ἐστιν 
ὄργανα δύο καὶ τῆς ξανθῆς χολῆς ἕτερον οὐ 


202 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. 1x 


a different terminology, still keeps to the fact just 
as the others do; this man’s innovations in nomencla- 
ture have also been amply done justice to by Plato.1 
Thus, the white-coloured substance which everyone 
else calls phlegm, and which Prodicus calls blenna 
[mucus],? is the well-known cold, moist humour 
which collects mostly in old people and in those who 
have been chilled? in some way, and not even a 
lunatic could say that this was anything else than 
cold and moist. 

If, then, there is a warm and moist humour, and 
another which is warm and dry, and yet another 
which is moist and cold, is there none which is virtually 
cold and dry? Is the fourth combination of tempera- 
ments, which exists in all other things, non-existent 
in the humours alone? No; the black bile is such a 
humour. This, according to intelligent physicians 
and philosophers, tends to be in excess, as regards 
seasons, mainly in the fall of the year, and, as regards 
ages, mainly after the prime of life. And, similarly, 
also they say that there are cold and dry modes of 
life, regions, constitutions, and diseases. Nature, 
they suppose, is not defective in this single combina- 
tion; like the three other combinations, it extends 
everywhere. 

At this point, also, I would gladly have been able 
to ask Erasistratus whether his “artistic ’’ Nature 
has not constructed any organ for clearing away a 
humour such as this. For whilst there are two 
organs for the excretion of urine, and another of 
considerable size for that of yellow bile, does the 

1 Plato, Timaeus, 83-86, passim. 

2 of. the term blennorrhoea, which is still used. 

S cf. the Scotch term ‘“‘colded” for ‘‘affected with a 
cold”; Germ. erkdltet. 

203 


GALEN 


σμικρόν, ὁ δὲ τούτων κακοηθέστερος χυμὸς 
ἀλᾶται διὰ παντὸς ἐν ταῖς φλεψὶν ἀναμεμιγ- 
μένος τῷ αἵματι. καίτοι “ Avoevtepin,” φησί 
που Ἱπποκράτης, “ἣν ἀπὸ χολῆς μελαίνης ἄρξη- 

132 ται, θανάσιμον, οὐ μὴν Gy ἀπὸ τῆς ξαυθῆς 
χολῆς ἀρχομένη πάντως ὀλέθριος, ἀλλ᾽ οἱ πλείους 
ἐξ αὐτῆς διασῴζονται. τοσούτῳ κακοηθεστέρα 
τε καὶ δριμυτέρα τὴν δύναμιν ἡ μέλαινα χολὴ 
τῆς ξανθῆς ἐστιν. ἄρ᾽ οὖν οὔτε τῶν ἄλλων 
ἀνέγνω τι τῶν τοῦ Ἱπποκράτους γραμμάτων ὁ 
᾿Ἐρασίστρατος οὐδὲν οὔτε τὸ περὶ φύσεως ἀνθρώ- 
που βιβλίον, ἵν᾽ οὕτως ἀργῶς παρέλθοι τὴν περὶ 
τῶν χυμῶν ἐπίσκεψιν, ἢ γιγνώσκει μέν, ἑκὼν 
δὲ παραλείπει καλλίστην τῆς τέχνης θεωρίαν; 
ἐχρῆν οὖν αὐτὸν μηδὲ περὶ τοῦ σπληνὸς εἰρη- 
κέναι τι μηδ᾽ ἀσχημονεῖν ὑπὸ τῆς τεχνικῆς φύ- 
σεως ὄργανον τηλικοῦτον μάτην ἡγούμενον κατε- 
σκευάσθαι. καὶ μὴν οὐχ ἹἽἽπποκράτης μόνον 
ἢ Πλάτων, οὐδέν τι χείρους ᾿Ἔ) ἢΠΡασιστράτου περὶ 
φύσιν ἄνδρες, ἕν τε τῶν καθαιρόντων τὸ αἷμα 
καὶ τοῦτ᾽ εἶναί φασι τὸ σπλάγχνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
μυρίοι σὺν αὐτοῖς ἄλλοε τῶν παλαιῶν ἰατρῶν 
τε καὶ φιλοσόφων, ὧν ἁπάντων προσποιησάμενος 
ὑπερφρονεῖν ὃ γενναῖος "Epacitotparos οὔτ᾽ ἀν- 
τεῖπεν οὔθ᾽ ὅλως τῆς δόξης αὐτῶν ἐμνημόνευσε. 
καὶ μὴν ὅσοις γε τὸ σῶμα θάλλει, τούτοις ὁ 
σπλὴν φθίνει, φησὶν Ἵπποκράτης, καὶ οἱ ἀπὸ 

138 τῆς || ἐμπειρίας ὁρμώμενοι πάντες ὁμολογοῦσιν 
ἰατροί. καὶ ὅσοις y av μέγας καὶ ὕπουλος 
204 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. ix 


humour which is more pernicious than these wander 
about persistently in the veins mingled with the 
blood ? Yet Hippocrates says, “ Dysentery is a fatal 
condition if it proceeds from black bile” ; while that 
proceeding from. yellow bile is by no means deadly, 
and most people recover from it; this proves how 
much more pernicious and acrid in its potentialities 
is black than yellow bile. Has Erasistratus, then, 
not read the book, “On the Nature of Man,” any 
more than any of the rest of Hippocrates’s writings, 
that he so carelessly passes over the consideration of 
the humours? Or, does he know it, and yet volun- 
tarily neglect one of the finest studies! in medicine? 
Thus he ought not to have said anything about the 
spleen,? nor have stultified himself by holding that 
an artistic Nature would have prepared so large an 
organ for no purpose. As a matter of fact, not only 
Hippocrates and Plato—who are no less authorities 
on Nature than is Erasistratus—say that this viscus 
also is one of those which cleanse the blood, but there 
are thousands of the ancient physicians and philoso- 
phers as well who are in agreement with them. Now, 
all of these the high and mighty Erasistratus affected 
to despise, and he neither contradicted them nor 
even so much as mentioned their opinion. Hippo- 
crates, indeed, says that the spleen wastes in those 
people in whom the body is in good condition, and 
all those physicians also who base themselves on ex- 
perience 8 agree with this. Again, in those cases in 
which the spleen is large and is increasing from 

1 The word theéria used here is not the same as our theory. 
It is rather a ‘‘ contemplation,” the process by which a 
theory is arrived at. οἷ p. 226, note 2. 


2 Erasistratus on the uselessness of the spleen. gf. p. 143. 
3 The Empirical school. cf. p. 193. 


205 


GALEN 


αὐξάνεται, τούτοις καταφθείρει Te Kal κακόχυμα 
τὰ σώματα τίθησιν, ὡς καὶ τοῦτο πάλιν οὐχ 
Ἱπποκράτης μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ Πλάτων ἄλλοι τε 
πολλοὶ καὶ οἱ ἀπὸ τῆς ἐμπει ίας ὁμολογοῦσιν 
ἰατροί. καὶ οἱ ἀπὸ σπληνὸς δὲ κακοπραγοῦντος 
intepot μελάντεροε καὶ τῶν ἑλκῶν αἱ οὐλαὶ 
μέλαιναι. καθόλου γάρ, ὅταν ἐνδεέστερον ἢ 
προσῆκεν εἰς ἑαυτὸν ἕλκῃ τὸν μελαγχολικὸν 
χυμόν, ἀκάθαρτον μὲν τὸ αἷμα, κακόχρουν δὲ 
τὸ πᾶν γίγνεται σῶμα. πότε δ᾽ ἐνδεέστερον 
ἕλκει; ἢ δῆλον ὅτι κακῶς διακείμενος; ὥσπερ 
οὖν τοῖς νεφροῖς ἐνεργείας οὔσης ἕλκειν τὰ 
οὖρα κακῶς ἕλκειν ὑπάρχει κακοπραγοῦσιν, 
οὕτω καὶ τῷ σπληνὶ ποιότητος μελαγχολικῆς 
ἑλκτικὴν ἐν ἑαυτῷ δύναμιν ἔχοντι σύμφυτον 
ἀρρωστήσαντί ποτε ταύτην ἀναγκαῖον ἕλκειν 
κακῶς κἀν τῷδε παχύτερον ἤδη καὶ μελάντερον 
γίγνεσθαι τὸ αἷμα. 
Ταῦτ᾽ οὖν ἅπαντα πρός τε τὰς διαγνώσεις 
τῶν νοσημάτων καὶ τὰς ἰάσεις μεγίστην παρεχό- 
134 μενα χρείαν || ὑπερεπήδησε τέλέως ὁ Ἔρασί- 
στρατὸς καὶ καταφ ονεῖν προσεποιήσατο τήλι- 
κούτων ἀνδρῶν ὁ μηδὲ τῶν τυχόντων καταφρονῶν 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀεὶ φιλοτίμως ἀντιλέγων ταῖς ἠλιθιωτάταις 
δόξαις. ᾧ καὶ δῆλον, ὡς οὐδὲν ἔχων οὔτ᾽ 
ἀντειπεῖν τοῖς πρεσβυτέροις ὑπὲρ ὧν ἀπεφήναντο 
περὶ σπληνὸς ἐνεργείας τε καὶ χρείας οὔτ᾽ αὐτὸς 
ἐξευρίσκων τι καινὸν εἰς τὸ μηδὲν ὅλως εἰπεῖν 
LpiKETO. ἀλλ᾽ ἡμεῖς γε πρῶτον μὲν ἐκ τῶν 
αἰτίων, οἷς ἅπαντα διοικεῖται, τὰ κατὰ τὰς 


1 Enlargement and suppuration (?) of spleen associated 
with toxaemia or ‘‘cacochymy.”  ? Lit. ‘‘ melancholic.” 


206 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IL. τχ 


internal suppuration, it destroys the body and fills it 
with evil humours ;! this again is agreed on, not only 
by Hippocrates, but also by Plato and many others, 
including the Empiric physicians. And the jaundice 
which occurs when the spleen is out of order is 
darker in colour, and the cicatrices of ulcers are 
dark. For, generally speaking, when the spleen is 
drawing the atrabiliary ? humour into itself to a less 
degree than is proper, the blood is unpurified, and 
the whole body takes on a bad colour. And when 
does it draw this in to a less degree than proper? 
Obviously, when it [the spleen] is in a bad condition. 
Thus, just as the kidneys, whose function it is to 
attract the urine, do this badly when they are out 
of order, so also the spleen, which has in itself a 
native power of attracting an atrabiliary quality, if 
it ever happens to be weak, must necessarily exercise 
this attraction badly, with the result that the blood 
becomes thicker and darker. 

Now all these points, affording as they do the 
‘greatest help in the diagnosis and in the cure of 
disease were entirely passed over by Erasistratus, 
and he pretended to despise these great men—he 
who does not despise ordinary people, but always 
jealously attacks the most absurd doctrines. Hence, 
it was clearly because he had nothing to say against 
the statements made by the ancients regarding the 
function and utility of the spleen, and also because 
he could discover nothing new himself, that he 
ended by saying nothing at all. I, however, for my 
part, have demonstrated, firstly from the causes by 
which everything throughout nature is governed (by 


3 i.e. the combination of sensible qualities which we call 
black bile. cf. p. 8, note 3. 


207 


GALEN 


φυσεις, τοῦ θερμοῦ λέγω καὶ ψυχροῦ καὶ ξηροῦ 
καὶ ὑγροῦ, δεύτερον δ᾽ ἐξ αὐτῶν τῶν ἐναργῶς 
φαινομένων κατὰ τὸ σῶμα ψυχρὸν καὶ ξηρὸν 
εἶναί τινα χρῆναι χυμὸν ἀπεδείξαμεν. ἑξῆς δ᾽, 
ὅτε καὶ μελαγχολικὸς οὗτος ὑπάρχει καὶ τὸ 
καθαῖρον αὐτὸν σπλάγχνον ὁ σπλήν ἐστιν, διὰ 
βραχέων ὡς ἔνε μάλιστα τῶν τοῖς παλαιοῖς ἀπο- 
δεδευγμένων ἀναμνήσαντες ἐπὶ τὸ λεῖπον ἔτι τοῖς 
παροῦσι λόγοις ἀφιξόμεθα. 

Τί δ᾽ ἂν εἴη λεῖπον ἄλλο γ᾽ ἢ ἐξηγήσασθαι 


135 σαφῶς, οἷόν τι βούλονταί τε || καὶ ἀποδεικνύουσι 


περὶ τὴν τῶν χυμῶν γένεσιν οἱ παλαιοὶ συμ- 
βαίνειν. ἐναργέστερον δ᾽ ἂν γνωσθείη διὰ παρα- 
δείγματος. οἶνον δή μοι νόει γλεύκινον οὐ πρὸ 
πολλοῦ τῶν σταφυλῶν ἐκτεθλιμμένον ζέοντά τε 
3 ’ e Ν “Ὁ 9 A , 

καὶ ἀλλοιούμενον ὑπὸ τῆς ἐν αὐτῷ θερμασίας" 
ἔπειτα κατὰ τὴν αὐτοῦ μεταβολὴν δύο γεννώμενα 
περιττώματα τὸ μὲν κουφότερόν τε καὶ ἀερω- 
δέστερον, τὸ δὲ βαρύτερόν τε καὶ γεωδέστερον, 
ὧν τὸ μὲν ἄνθος, οἶμαι, τὸ δὲ τρύγα καλοῦσι. 

4 a ς / \ \ / A 9 
τούτων τῷ μὲν ἑτέρῳ τὴν ξανθὴν χολήν, τῷ ὃ 
e \ lh > 4 b e , 3 
ἑτέρῳ τὴν μέλαιναν εἰκάζων οὐκ ἂν ἁμάρτοις, οὐ 
τὴν αὐτὴν ἐχόντων ἰδέαν τῶν χυμῶν τούτων ἐν 
τῷ κατὰ φύσιν διοικεῖσθαι τὸ Cov, οἵαν καὶ 

’ ” 3 a 4 

παρὰ φύσιν ἔχοντος ἐπιφαίνονται πολλάκις. 
ἡ μὲν γὰρ ξανθὴ λεκιθώδης γίγνεται" καὶ γὰρ 
ὀνομάζουσιν οὕτως αὐτήν, ὅτι ταῖς τῶν ὠῶν 
λεκίθοις ὁμοιοῦται κατά τε χρόαν καὶ πάχος. 
ἡ δ᾽ αὖ μέλαινα κακοηθέστερα μὲν πολὺ καὶ 


208 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. 1x 


the causes I mean the Warm, Cold, Dry and Moist) 
and secondly, from obvious bodily phenomena, that 
there must needs be a cold and dry humour.! And 
having in the next place drawn attention to the fact 
that this humour is black bile [atrabiliary] and that 
the viscus which clears it away is the spleen—having 
pointed this out by help of as few as possible of the 
proofs given by ancient writers, I shall now proceed 
to what remains of the subject in hand. 

What else, then, remains but to explain clearly 
what it is that happens in the generation of the 
humours, according to the belief and demonstration 
of the Ancients? This will be more clearly under- 
stood from a comparison. Imagine, then, some new 
wine which has been not long ago pressed from the 
grape, and which is fermenting and undergoing 
alteration through the agency of its contained heat.? 
Imagine next two residual substances produced 
during this process of alteration, the one tending to 
be light and air-like and the other to be heavy and 
more of the nature of earth; of these the one, as I 
understand, they call the flower and the other the 
lees. Now you may correctly compare yellow bile to 
the first of these, and black bile to the latter, 
although these humours have not the same appear- 
ance when the animal is in normal health as that 
which they often show when it is not so; for then 
the yellow bile becomes vitelline,® being so termed 
because it becomes like the yolk of an egg, both in 
colour and density; and again, even the black bile 
itself becomes much more malignant than when in 

1 Thus Galen has demonstrated the functions of the spleen 
both deductively and inductively. For another example of 
the combined method cf. Book III., chaps. i. and ii. ; of also 
Introd. p. xxxii. 2 3,6. its innate heat. 8.10, lecithord. 

209 
P 


GALEN 


αὕτη τῆς κατὰ φύσιν' ὄνομα δ᾽ οὐδὲν ἴδιον κεῖται 
τῷ τοιούτῳ χυμῷ, πλὴν εἴ πού τινες ἢ ξυστικὸν 

ἢ ὀξώδη κεκλήκασιν αὐτόν, ὅτι καὶ δριμὺς ὁμοίως 

136 ὅξει γίγνεται καὶ I Ever γε τὸ σῶμα τοῦ , ζῴου 
καὶ τὴν γῆν, εἰ κατ᾽ αὐτῆς ἐκχυθείη, καί τινα 
μετὰ πομφολύγων οἷον ζύμωσιν τε καὶ ζέσιν 
ἐργάζεται, σηπεδόνος ἐπικτήτου προσελθούσης 
ἐκείνῳ τῷ κατὰ φύσιν ἔχοντι χυμῷ τῷ μέλανι. 
καί μοι δοκοῦσιν οἱ “πλεῖστοι τῶν παλαιῶν 
ἰατρῶν αὐτὸ μὲν τὸ κατὰ φύσιν ἔ ἔχον τοῦ τοιούτου 
χυμοῦ καὶ διαχωροῦν κάτω καὶ “πολλάκις ἐπι- 
πολάξον ἄ ἄνω μέλανα καλεῖν χυμόν, οὐ μέλαιναν 
χολήν, τὸ δ᾽ ἐκ συγκαύσεώς τινος καὶ σηπεδόνος 
εἰς τὴν ὀξεῖαν “μεθιστάμενον ποιότητα μέλαιναν 
ὀνομάξειν χολήν. ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τῶν ὀνομά- 
τῶν οὐ χρὴ διαφέρεσθαι, τὸ δ᾽ ἀληθὲς ὧδ᾽ ἔχον 
εἰδέναι. 

Κατὰ τὴν τοῦ αἵματος γένεσιν ὅσον ἂν ἱκανῶς 
παχὺ καὶ γεῶδες ἐκ τῆς τῶν σιτίων φύσεως 
ἐμφερόμενον͵ τῇ τροφῇ μὴ δέξηται καλῶς τὴν 
ἐκ τῆς ἐμφύτου θερμασίας ἀλλοίωσιν, ὁ σπλὴν 
εἰς ἑαυτὸν ἕλκει τοῦτο. τὸ δ᾽ ὀπτηθέν, ὡς ἄν 
τις εἴποι, καὶ συγκαυθὲν τῆς τροφῆς, εἴη δ᾽ ἂν 
τοῦτο τὸ θερμότατον ἐν αὐτῇ καὶ γλυκύτατον, 
οἷον τό τε μέλι καὶ ἡ πιμελή, ξανθὴ γενόμενον 
χολὴ διὰ τῶν χοληδόχων ὀνομαξομένων ἀγγείων 

137 ἐκκαθαίρεται. | λεπτὸν δ᾽ ἐστὶ τοῦτο καὶ ὑγρὸν 
καὶ ῥυτὸν οὐχ ὥσπερ ὅταν ὀπτηθὲν ἐσχάτως 
ξανθὸν καὶ πυρῶδες καὶ παχὺ γένηται ταῖς τῶν 


1 Note that there can be ‘‘ normal”’ black bile. 
2 The term food here means the food as introduced into 
the stomach; the term nutriment (trophé) means the same 


210 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. τχ 


its normal condition,! but no particular name _ has 
been given to [such a condition of] the humour, 
except that some people have called it corrosive or 
acetose, because it also becomes sharp like vinegar 
and corrodes the animal’s body—as also the earth, if 
it be poured out upon it—and it produces a kind of 
fermentation and seething, accompanied by bubbles— 
an abnormal putrefaction having become added to 
the natural condition of the black humour. It seems 
to me also that most of the ancient physicians give 
the name black humour and not black bile to the 
normal portion of this humour, which is discharged 
from the bowel and which also frequently rises to the 
top [of the stomach-contents|; and they call black 
ble that part which, through a kind of combustion 
and putrefaction, has had its quality changed to acid. 
There is no need, however, to dispute about names, 
but we must realise the facts, which are as follow :— 
In the genesis of blood, everything in the nutri- 
ment which belongs naturally to the thick and 
earth-like part of the food,? and which does not 
take on well the alteration produced by the innate 
heat—all this the spleen draws into itself. On the 
other hand, that part of the nutriment which is 
roasted, so to speak, or burnt (this will be the 
warmest and sweetest part of it, like honey and 
fat), becomes yellow bile, and is cleared away 
through the so-called biliary® vessels; now, this 
is thin, moist, and fluid, not like what it is 
when, having been roasted to an eacessive degree, it 
becomes yellow, fiery, and thick, like the yolk of 
food in the digested condition, as it is conveyed to the 
tissues. cf. pp. 41-43. Note idea of imperfectly oxidized 

material being absorbed by the spleen. c/. p. 214, note 1. 

8 Lit. choledochous, bile-receiving. 

211 


GALEN 


ὠῶν ὅμοιον λεκίθοις. τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ ἤδη παρὰ 
φύσιν' θάτερον δὲ τὸ πρότερον εἰρη νον κατὰ 
φύσιν ἐστίν' ὥσπερ γε καὶ τοῦ μέλανος χυμοῦ 
τὸ μὲν μήπω τὴν οἷον ζέσιν τε καὶ ζύμωσιν τῆς 
γῆς ἐργαζόμενον κατὰ φύσιν ἐστί, τὸ δ᾽ εἰς 
τοιαύτην μεθιστάμενον. ἰδέαν τε καὶ δύναμιν ἤδη 
παρὰ φύσιν, ὡς ἂν τὴν ἐκ τῆς συγκαύσεως τοῦ 
παρὰ φύσιν θερμοῦ προσειληφὸς δριμύτητα καὶ 
οἷον τέφρα τις ἤδη “γεγονός. ὧδέ πως καὶ ἡ 
κεκαυμένη τρὺξ τῆς ἀκαύστου διήνεγκε. θερμὸν 
γάρ τι χρῆμα αὕτη γ᾽ ἱκανῶς ἐστιν, ὥστε καίειν 
τε καὶ τήκειν καὶ διαφθείρειν τὴν σάρκα. τῇ δ᾽ 
ἑτέρᾳ τῇ μήπω κεκαυμένῃ τοὺς ἰατροὺς ἔστιν 
εὑρεῖν χρωμένους εἰς ὅσαπερ καὶ τῇ γῇ τῇ καλου- 
μενῇῃ κεραμίτιδι καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις, ὅσα ξηραίνειν θ᾽ 
ἅμα καὶ ὕχειν πέφυκεν. 

Εἰς τὴν τῆς οὕτω συγκαυθείσης μελαίνης 
χολῆς ἰδέαν καὶ ἡ λεκιθώδης ἐκείνη μεθίσταται 
πολλάκις, ὅταν καὶ αὐτή ποθ᾽ οἷον ὀπτηθεῖσα 

138 τύχῃ πυρώδει θερμασίᾳ. τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλα ἢ τῶν χολῶν 
ε δὴ σύμπαντα τὰ μὲν ἐκ τῆς τῶν εἰρημένων 
κράσεως γίγνεται, τὰ δ᾽ οἷον ὁδοί τινές εἰσι τῆς 
τούτων γενέσεώς τε καὶ εἰς ἄλληλα μεταβολῆς. 
διαφέρουσι δὲ τῷ τὰς μὲν ἀκράτους εἶναι καὶ 
μόνας, τὰ δ᾽ οἷον ὁ ὀρροῖς τισιν ἐξυγρασμένας. ἀλλ᾽ 
οἱ μὲν ὀρροὶ τῶν χυμῶν ἅπαντες περιττώματα 
καὶ καθαρὸν αὐτῶν εἶναι δεῖται τοῦ ζῴου τὸ σῶμα. 
τῶν δ᾽ εἰρημένων χυμῶν ἐστί Tis χρεία τῇ φύσει 
καὶ τοῦ παχέος καὶ τοῦ λεπτοῦ καὶ καθαίρεται 
πρός τε τοῦ σπληνὸς καὶ τῆς ἐπὶ τῷ ἥπατι 
κύστεως τὸ αἷμα καὶ ἀποτίθεται τοσοῦτόν τε καὶ 
τοιοῦτον ἑκατέρου μέρος, ὅσον καὶ οἷον, εἴπεο εἰς 


212 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IT. 1x 


eggs; for this latter is already abnormal, while the 
previously mentioned state is natural. Similarly 
with the black humour: that which does not yet 
produce, as I say, this seething and fermentation on 
the ground, is natural, while that which has taken 
over this character and faculty is unnatural; it has 
assumed an acridity owing to the combustion caused 
by abnormal heat, and has practically become trans- 
formed into ashes. In somewhat the same way 
burned lees differ from unburned. The former is a 
warm substance, able to burn, dissolve, and destroy 
the flesh. The other kind, which has not yet under- 
gone combustion, one may find the physicians 
employing for the same purposes that one uses the 
so-called potter's earth and other substances which 
have naturally a combined drying and chilling action. 

Now the vitelline bile also may take on the appear- 
ance of this combusted black bile, if ever it chance 
to be roasted, so to say, by fiery heat. And all the 
other forms of bile are produced, some from a blend- 
ing of those mentioned, others being, as it were, 
transition-stages* in the genesis of these or in their 
conversion into one another. And they differ in 
that those first mentioned are unmixed and unique, 
while the latter forms are diluted with various kinds 
of serum. And all the serums in the humours are 
waste substances, and the animal body needs to be 
purified from them. There is, however, a natural 
use for the humours first mentioned, both thick and 
thin; the blood is purified both by the spleen and 
by the bladder beside the liver, and a part of each of 
the two humours is put away, of such quantity and 


1 Thus over-roasting—shall we say excessive oxidation ?— 
_ produces the abnormal forms of both black and yellow bile. 


213 


GALEN 


ὅλον ἠνέχθη τοῦ Cdov τὸ σῶμα, βλάβην av tw 
εἰργάσατο. τὸ γὰρ ἱκανῶς παχὺ καὶ γεῶδες καὶ 
τελέως διαπεφευγὸς τὴν ἐν τῷ ἥπατι μεταβολὴν 
ὁ σπλὴν εἰς ἑαυτὸν ἕλκει" τὸ δ᾽ ἄλλο τὸ μετρίως 
παχὺ σὺν τῷ κατειργάσθαι πάντη φέρεται. δεῖται 
γὰρ ἐν πολλοῖς τοῦ ζῴου μορίοις παχύτητός τινος 

139 τὸ αἷμα καθάπερ οἶμαι καὶ “τῶν || ἐμφερομένων 
ἰνῶν. καὶ εἴρηται μὲν καὶ Πλάτωνι περὶ τῆς 
χρείας αὐτῶν, εἰρήσεται δὲ καὶ ἡμῖν ἐν ἐκείνοις 
τοῖς γράμμασιν, ἐν οἷς ἂν τὰς χρείας τῶν μορίων 
διερχώμεθα: δεῖται δ᾽ οὐχ ἥκιστα καὶ τοῦ ξανθοῦ 
χυμοῦ τοῦ μήπω πυρώδους ἐσχάτως γεγενημένου 
τὸ αἷμα καὶ τίς αὐτῷ καὶ ἡ παρὰ τοῦδε χρεία, 
δι’ ἐκείνων εἰρήσεται. 

Φλέγματος δ᾽ οὐδὲν ἐποίησεν ἡ φύσις ὄργανον 
καθαρτικόν, ὅτι ψυχρὸν καὶ ὑγρόν ἐστι καὶ οἷον 
ἡμίπεπτός τις τροφή. δεῖται τοίνυν οὐ κενοῦσθαι 
τὸ τοιοῦτον ἀλλ ἐν τῷ σώματι μένον ἀλλοιοῦσθαι. 
τὸ δ᾽ ἐξ ἐγκεφάλου καταρρέον περίττωμα τάχα 
μὲν ἂν οὐδὲ φλέγμα τις ὀρθῶς ἀλλὰ βλένναν τε 
καὶ κόρυζαν, ὥσπερ οὖν καὶ ὀνομάζεται, καλοίη. 
εἰ δὲ μή, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε γε τῆς τούτου κενώσεως ὀρθῶς 
ἡ φύσις προὐνοήσατο, καὶ τοῦτ' ἐν τοῖς περὶ 
χρείας μορίων εἰρήσεται. καὶ γὰρ οὖν καὶ τὸ 
κατά τε τὴν γαστέρα καὶ τὰ ἔντερα συνιστάμενον 
φλέγμα ὅπως ἂν ἐκκενωθῇ καὶ αὐτὸ τάχιστά τε 
καὶ κάλλιστα, τὸ παρεσκευασμένον τῇ φύσει 
μηχάνημα δι’ ἐκείνων εἰρήσεται καὶ αὐτὸ τῶν 

1 φῇ, p. 277, note 2. 

2 Timaeus, 82 c-D. 

3 of. p. 90, note 1. The term ‘‘catarrh” refers to this 
“ὁ running down,” which was supposed to take place through 


214 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. 1x 


quality that, if it were carried all over the body, it 
would do a certain amount of harm. For that which 
is decidedly thick and earthy in nature, and has 
entirely escaped alteration in the liver, is drawn by 
the spleen into itself!; the other part which is only 
moderately thick, after being elaborated [in the 
liver], is carried all over the body. For the blood in 
many parts of the body has need of a certain amount 
of thickening, as also, I take it, of the fibres which 
it contains. And the use of these has been discussed 
by Plato,? and it will also be discussed by me in such 
of my treatises as may deal with the use of parts. 
And the blood also needs, not least, the yellow 
humour, which has as yet not reached the extreme 
stage of combustion; in the treatises mentioned it 
will be pointed out what purpose is subserved by this. 

Now Nature has made no organ for clearing away 
phlegm, this being cold and moist, and, as it were, 
half-digested nutriment; such a substance, there- 
fore, does not need to be evacuated, but remains in 
the body and undergoes alteration there. And per- 
haps one cannot properly give the name of phlegm 
to the surplus-substance which runs down from 
the brain,? but one should call it mucus [blenna]| 
or coryza—as, in fact, it is actually termed; in any 
case it will be pointed out, in the treatise “On the 
Use of Parts,’ how Nature has provided for the 
evacuation of this substance. Further, the device 
provided by Nature which ensures that the phlegm 
which forms in the stomach and intestines may be 
evacuated in the most rapid and effective way 
_ possible—this also will be described in that com- 


the pores of the cribriform plate of the ethmoid into the 
nose. 


215 


GALEN 


140 ὑπομνημάτων. ὅσον οὖν ἐμφέρεται ταῖς φλεψὶ 
φλέγμα χρήσιμον ὑπάρχον τοῖς ζῴοις, οὐδεμιᾶς 
δεῖται κενώσεως. προσέχειν δὲ χρὴ κἀνταῦθα 
τὸν νοῦν καὶ γιγνώσκειν, ὥσπερ τῶν χολῶν 
ἑκατέρας τὸ μέν τι χρήσιμόν ἐστι καὶ κατὰ φύσιν 
τοῖς ζῴοις, τὸ δ᾽ ἄχρηστόν τε καὶ παρὰ φύσιν, 
οὕτω καὶ τοῦ φλέγματος, ὅσον μὲν ἂν ἢ γλυκύ, 
χρηστὸν εἶναι τοῦτο τῷ Cow καὶ κατὰ φύσιν, ὅσον 
δ᾽ ὀξὺ καὶ ἁλμυρὸν ἐγένετο, τὸ μὲν ὀξὺ τελέως 
ἠπεπτῆσθαι, τὸ δ᾽ ἁλμυρὸν διασεσῆφθαι. τελείαν 
δ᾽ ἀπεψίαν φλέγματος ἀκούειν χρὴ τὴν τῆς 
δευτέρας πέψεως δηλονότι τῆς ἐν φλεψίν" οὐ 
γὰρ δὴ τῆς γε πρώτης τῆς κατὰ τὴν κοιλίαν" 
ἢ οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἐγεγένητο τὴν ἀρχὴν χυμός, εἰ καὶ 
ταύτην διεπεφεύγει. 

Ταῦτ᾽ ἀρκεῖν μοι δοκεῖ περὶ γενέσεώς τε καὶ 
διαφθορᾶς χυμῶν ὑπομνήματ᾽ εἶναι τῶν Ἵππο- 
κράτει τε καὶ Πλάτωνι καὶ ᾿Αριστοτέλει καὶ 
Πραξαγόρᾳ καὶ Διοκλεῖ καὶ πολλοῖς ἄλλοις τῶν 
παλαιῶν εἰρημένων: οὐ γὰρ ἐδικάίωσα πάντα 
μεταφέρειν εἰς τόνδε τὸν λόγον τὰ τελέως ἐκείνοις 
γεγραμμένα. τοσοῦτον δὲ μόνον ὑπὲρ ἑκάστου 

141 εἶπον, ὅσον ἐξορμήσει τε τοὺς || ἐντυγχάνοντας, 
εἰ μὴ παντάπασιν εἶεν σκαιοί, τοῖς τῶν παλαιῶν 
ὁμιλῆσαι γράμμασι καὶ τὴν εἰς τὸ ῥᾷον αὐτοῖς 
συνεῖναι βοήθειαν παρέξει. γέγραπται δέ που 
καὶ δι’ ἑτέρου λόγου περὶ τῶν κατὰ Πραξαγόραν. 
τὸν Νικάρχου χυμῶν. εἰ γὰρ καὶ ὅτε μάλιστα. 


216 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, II. 1x 


mentary. As to that portion of the phlegm which 
is carried in the veins, seeing that this is of service 
to the animal it requires no evacuation. Here too, 
then, we must pay attention and recognise that, 
just as in the case of each of the two kinds of bile, 
there is one part which is useful to the animal and 
in accordance with its nature, while the other part 
is useless and contrary to nature, so also is it with 
the phlegm ; such of it as is sweet is useful to the 
animal and according to nature, while, as to such of 
it as has become bitter or salt, that part which is 
bitter is completely undigested, while that part 
which is salt has undergone putrefaction. And the 
term “ complete indigestion” refers of course to the 
second digestion—that which takes place in the 
veins ; it is not a failure of the first digestion—that 
in the alimentary canal—for it would not have 
become a humour at the outset if it had escaped 
this digestion also. 

It seems to me that I have made enough reference 
to what has been said regarding the genesis and 
destruction of humours by Hippocrates, Plato, Aris- 
totle, Praxagoras, and Diocles, and many others 
among the Ancients; I did not deem it right to 
transport the whole of their final pronouncements 
into this treatise. I have said only so much regard- 
ing each of the humours as will stir up the reader, 
unless he be absolutely inept, to make himself 
familiar with the writings of the Ancients, and will 
help him to gain more easy access to them. In 
another treatise! I have written on the humours 
according to Praxagoras, son of Nicarchus ; although 
this authority makes as many as ten humours, not 


1 Now lost. 
217 


GALEN 


δέκα ποιεῖ χωρὶς τοῦ αἵματος, ἑνδέκατος yap ἂν 
εἴη χυμὸς αὐτὸ τὸ αἷμα, τῆς Ἱπποκράτους οὐκ 
ἀποχωρεῖ διδασκαλίας. ἀλλ’ εἰς εἴδη τινὰ καὶ 
διαφορὰς τέμνει τοὺς ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνου πρώτου πάντων 
ἅμα ταῖς οἰκείαις ἀποδείξεσιν εἰρημένους χυμούς. 
ἜἘπαινεῖν μὲν οὖν χρὴ τούς τ᾽ ἐξηγησαμένους 
\ a“ 3 ’ Ἁ ᾿ / 
τὰ καλῶς εἰρημένα καὶ τοὺς εἴ TL παραλέλειπται 
4 3 4 Ἃ 3. \N Ν , 
προστιθέντας" ov yap οἷόν τε τὸν αὐτὸν ἄρξασθαί 
τε καὶ τελειῶσαι: μέμφεσθαι δὲ τοὺς οὕτως 
> ’ e e ’ A A 
ἀταλαιπώρους, ὧς μηδὲν ὑπομένειν μαθεῖν τῶν 
ὀρθῶς εἰρημένων, καὶ τοὺς εἰς τοσοῦτον φιλοτί- 
μους, ὥστ᾽ ἐπιθυμίᾳ νεωτέρων δογμάτων ἀεὶ 
πανουργεῖν te καὶ σοφίξεσθαι, τὰ μὲν ἑκόντας 
παραλιπόντας, ὥσπερ ᾿Ἐξραασίστρατος ἐπὶ τῶν 
142 χυμῶν ἐποίησε, τὰ δὲ πανούργως ἀντιλέγοντας, 
ὥσπερ αὐτός θ᾽ οὗτος καὶ ἄλλοι πολλοὶ τῶν 
νεωτέρων. 
᾿Αλλ᾽ οὗτος μὲν ὁ λόγος ἐνταυθοῖ τελευτάτω, 
τὸ δ᾽ ὑπόλοιπον ἅπαν ἐν τῷ τρίτῳ προσθήσω. 


218 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IT. 1x 


including the blood (the blood itself being an 
eleventh), this is not a departure from the teaching 
of Hippocrates; for Praxagoras divides into species 
and varieties the humours which Hippocrates first 
mentioned, with the demonstration proper to each. 

Those, then, are to be praised who explain the 
points which have been duly mentioned, as also 
those who add what has been left out; for it is not 
possible for the same man to make both a begin- 
ning and an end. Those, on the other hand, deserve 
censure who are so impatient that they will not wait 
to learn any of the things which have been duly 
mentioned, as do also those who are so ambitious 
that, in their lust after novel doctrines, they are 
always attempting some fraudulent sophistry, either 
purposely neglecting certain subjects, as Erasistratus 
does in the case of the humours, or unscrupulously 
attacking other people, as does this same writer, as 
well as many of the more recent authorities. 

But let this discussion come to an end here, and I 
shall add in the third book all that remains. 


219 


BOOK III 


r 


I 


143 “Ore μὲν οὖν ἡ θρέψις ἀλλοιουμένου τε καὶ 
ὁμοιουμένου γίγνεται τοῦ τρέφοντος τῷ τρεφο- 
μέν καὶ ὡς ἐν ἑκάστῳ τῶν τοῦ ζῴου μορίων 
ἐστί τις δύναμις, ἣν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐνεργείας ἀλλοιω- 
τικὴν μὲν κατὰ γένος, ὁμοιωτικὴν δὲ καὶ θρε- 
πτικὴν κατ᾽ εἶδος ὀνομάζομεν, ἐν τῷ πρόσθεν 
δεδήλωται λόγῳ. τὴν δ᾽ εὐπορίαν τῆς ὕλης, ἣν 
τροφὴν é ἑαυτῷ ποιεῖται τὸ τρεφόμενον, ἐξ ἑτέρας 
τινὸς ἔχειν ἐδείκνυτο δυνάμεως ἐπισπᾶσθαι 
᾿πεφυκυίας τὸν οἰκεῖον χυμόν, εἶναι δ᾽ οἰκεῖον 

144 ἑκάστῳ τῶν μορίων χυμόν, ὃς ap || ἐπιτήδειος 
εἰς τὴν ἐξομοίωσιν ἦ, καὶ τὴν ἕλκουσαν αὐτὸν 
δύναμιν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐνεργείας ἑλκτικήν τέ τινα καὶ 
ἐπισπαστικὴν ὀνομάξεσθαι. δέδεικται δὲ καΐ, ὡς 
πρὸ μὲν τῆς ὁμοιώσεως ἡ πρόσφυσίς ἐστιν, 
ἐκείνης δ᾽ ἔμπροσθεν ἡ ἡ πρόσθεσις γίγνεται, τέλος, 
ὡς ἂν εἴποι τίς, οὖσα τῆς κατὰ τὴν ἐπισπαστικὴν 
δύναμιν ἐ ἐνεργείας. αὐτὸ μὲν γὰρ τὸ παράγεσθαι 
τὴν τροφὴν ἐκ τῶν φλεβῶν εἰς ἕκαστον τῶν 
μορίων τῆς ἑλκτικῆς ἐνεργούσης γίγνεται δυνά- 


1 “Of a to feeder,” ze. of the environment to the 
organism. pe 39, chap. xi. 
Set Drawing” ; cf. p. 116, note 2. 


222 





BOOK Π 


I 


Ir has been made clear in the preceding discussion 
that nutrition occurs by an alteration or assimilation of 
that which nourishes to that which receives nourish- 
ment,! and that there exists in every part of the animal 
a faculty which in view of its activity we call, in 
general terms, alterative, or, more specifically, asstms- 
lative and nutritive. It was also shown that a sufficient 
supply of the matter which the part being nourished 
makes into nutriment for itself is ensured by virtue 
of another faculty which naturally attracts its proper 
juice [humour] that that juice is proper to each part 
which is adapted for assimilation, and that the faculty 
which attracts the juice is called, by reason of its 
activity, attracitve or epispastic.? It has also been 
shown that assimilation is preceded by adhesion, 
and this, again, by presentation,’ the latter stage 
being, as one might say, the end or goal of the 
activity corresponding to the attractive faculty. 
For the actual bringing up of nutriment from the 
veins into each of the parts takes place through 
the activation of the attractive faculty,* whilst to 

3 For these terms (prosthesis and prosphysis in Greek) ¢/f. 
p. 39, notes 5 and 6. 

4 Lit. ‘‘through the energizing (or functioning) of the 


attractive faculty” ; the faculty (δύναμι5) tn operation is an 
activity (ἐνέργεια). of. p. 3, note 2. 


223 


GALEN 


Ἁ 3. ν lo ’ὔ ’ 
μεως, τὸ δ᾽ ἤδη παρῆχθαί τε καὶ προστίθεσθαι 
τῷ μορίῳ τὸ τέλος ἐστὶν αὐτό, δι᾽ ὃ καὶ τῆς τοιαύ- 
2 ’ 3 a [οὶ 
τῆς ἐνεργείας ἐδεήθημεν: ἵνα γὰρ προστεθῇ, διὰ 
τοῦθ᾽ ἕλκεται. χρόνου δ᾽ ἐντεῦθεν ἤδη πλείονος 

> A 4 φι , δι e A 
εἰς THY θρέψειν τοῦ Cou Set ἑλχθῆναι μὲν yap 
καὶ διὰ ταχέων τι δύναται, προσφῦναι δὲ καὶ 
ἀλλοιωθῆναι καὶ τελέως ὁμοιωθῆναι τῷ τρεφο- 
μένῳ καὶ μέρος αὐτοῦ γενέσθαι παραχρῆμα μὲν 
οὐχ οἷόν τε, χρόνῳ δ' ἂν πλείονι συμβαίνοι 

“a bd 9 3 VA Ν / e 
καλῶς. GAN εἰ μὴ μένοι κατὰ TO μέρος ὁ προσ- 
τεθεὶς οὗτος χυμός, εἰς ἕτερον δέ τι μεθίσταιτο 
καὶ παραρρέοι διὰ παντὸς ἀμείβων τε καὶ ὑπαλ- 

145 λάττων τὰ χωρία, κατ᾽ οὐδὲν αὐτῶν || οὔτε πρόσ- 
φυσις οὔτ᾽ ἐξομοίωσις ἔσται. δεῖ δὲ κἀνταῦθά 
τίνος τῇ φύσει δυνάμεως ἑτέρας εἰς πολυχρόνιον 
μονὴν τοῦ προστεθέντος τῷ μορίῳ χυμοῦ καὶ 

4 3 ΝΜ / 3 A 3 3 9 
ταύτης οὐκ ἔξωθέν ποθεν ἐπιρρεούσης ἀλλ᾽ ἐν 

3 - fo! lA 3 Ν “ 
αὐτῷ τῷ θρεψομένῳ κατῳκισμένης, ἣν ἀπὸ τῆς 
ἐνεργείας πάλιν οἱ πρὸ ἡμῶν ἠναγκάσθησαν ὀνο- 
μάσαι καθεκτικήν. 

‘O μὲν δὴ λόγος ἤδη σαφῶς ἐνεδείξατο τὴν 
ἀνάγκην τῆς γενέσεως τῆς τοιαύτης δυνάμεως καὶ 
ὅστις ἀκολουθίας σύνεσιν ἔχει, πέπεισται βε- 
βαίως ἐξ ὧν εἴπομεν, ὡς ὑποκειμένου τε καὶ 
προαποδεδειγμένου τοῦ τεχνικὴν εἶναι τὴν φύσιν 
καὶ τοῦ gov κηδεμονικὴν ἀναγκαῖον ὑπάρχειν 
αὐτῇ καὶ τὴν τοιαύτην δύναμιν. 


224 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. 1 


have been finally brought up and presented to the 
part is the actual end for which we desired such 
an activity ; it is attracted in order that it may be 
presented. After this, considerable time is needed 
for the nutrition of the animal; whilst a thing may 
be even rapidly attracted, on the other hand to 
become adherent, altered, and entirely assimilated to 
the part which is being nourished and to become a 
part of it, cannot take place suddenly, but requires a 
considerable amount of time. But if the nutritive 
juice, so presented, does not remain in the part, but 
withdraws to another one, and keeps flowing away, 
and constantly changing and shifting its position, 
neither adhesion nor complete assimilation will take 
place in any of them. Here too, then, the [animal’s] 
nature has need of some other faculty for ensuring a 
prolonged stay of.the presented juice at the part, and 
this not a faculty which comes in from somewhere 
outside but one which is resident in the part which 
is to be nourished. This faculty, again, in view of 
its activity our predecessors were obliged to call 
retentive. 

Thus our argument has clearly shown! the neces- 
sity for the genesis of such a faculty, and whoever 
has an appreciation of logical sequence must be 
firmly persuaded from what we have said that, if it 
be laid down and proved by previous demonstration 
that Nature is artistic and solicitous for the animal’s 
welfare, it necessarily follows that she must also 
possess a faculty of this kind. 

1 This chapter is an excellent example of Galen’s method 
of reasoning a priori. The complementary inductive method, 


however, is employed in the next chapter. cf p. 209, 
note 1. 


225 


GALEN 


Il 


"AAN ἡμεῖς od τούτῳ μόνῳ τῷ γένει τῆς ἀπο- 
δείξεως εἰθισμένοι χρῆσθαι, προστιθέντες δ᾽ αὐτῷ 
καὶ τὰς ἐκ τῶν ἐναργῶς φαινομένων ἀναγκαζούσας 
τε καὶ βιαξομένας πίστεις ἐπὶ τὰς τοιαύτας καὶ 
νῦν ἀφιξόμεθα καὶ δείξομεν ἐπὶ μέν τινων μορίων 
τοῦ σώματος οὕτως ἐναργῆ τὴν καθεκτικὴν δύ- 

146 ναμιν, ὡς αὐταῖς ταῖς αἰσθήσεσι | διαγιγνώ- 
σκεσθαι τὴν ἐνέργειαν αὐτῆς, ἐπὶ δέ τινων ἧττον 
μὲν ἐναργῶς ταῖς αἰσθήσεσι, λόγῳ δὲ κἀνταῦθα 
φωραθῆναι δυναμένην. 

᾿Αρξώμεθ' οὖν τῆς διδασκαλίας ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τοῦ 
τέως. πρῶτον μεθόδῳ τινὶ προχειρίσασθαι pope’ 
ἄττα τοῦ σώματος, ep ὧν ἀκριβῶς ἔστι βασανί- 
σαι TE καὶ ζητῆσαι τὴν καθεκτικὴν δύναμιν ὁποία 
ποτ᾽ ἐστίν. 

"Ap οὖν ἄμεινον ἄν τις ἑτέρωθεν ἢ ἀπὸ τῶν 
μεγίστων τε καὶ κοιλοτάτων ὀργάνων ὑπάρξαιτο 
τῆς ζητήσεως; ἐμοὶ μὲν οὖν οὐκ ἂν δοκεῖ βέλτιον. 
ἐναργεῖς γοῦν "εἰκὸς ἐπὶ τούτων φανῆναι τὰς ἐνερ- 
γείας διὰ τὸ μέγεθος" ὡς τά γέ σμικρὰ τάχ᾽ ἄν, 
εἰ καὶ σφοδρὰν ἔ ἔχει τὴν τοιαύτην δύναμιν, ἀλλ᾽ 
οὐκ αἰσθήσει γ᾽ ἑτοίμην διαγιγνώσκεσθαι τὴν 
ἐνέργειαν αὐτῆς. 

"AAN ἔστιν ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα κοιλότατα καὶ μέ- 
γιστα τῶν τοῦ ζῴου μορίων ἥ τε γαστὴρ, καὶ <ai> 
μῆτραί τε καὶ ὑστέραι καλούμεναι. τί οὖν κωλύει 
ταῦτα πρῶτα ᾿προχειρισαμένους ἐπισκέψασθαι 
τὰς ἐνεργείας αὐτῶν, ὅσαι μὲν καὶ πρὸ τῆς ἀνατομῆς 


1 The deductive. 
2 The logos is the argument or ‘‘ theory ” arrived at by the 


226 











> 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. u 


I] 


Since, however, it is not our habit to employ 
this kind of demonstration! alone, but to add 
thereto cogent and compelling proofs drawn from 
obvious facts, we will also proceed to the latter kind 
in the present instance: we will demonstrate that in 
certain parts of the body the retentive faculty is so 
obvious that its operation can be actually recognised 
by the senses, whilst in other parts it is less obvious 
to the senses, but is capable even here of being 
detected by the argument.? 

Let us begin our exposition, then, by first dealing 
systematically for a while with certain definite parts 
of the body, in reference to which we may accurately 
test and enquire what sort of thing the retentive 
faculty is. 

Now, could one begin the enquiry in any better 
way than with the largest and hollowest organs? 
Personally I do not think one could. [1 is to be ex- 
pected that in these, owing to their size, the 
activities will show quite clearly, whereas with 
respect to the small organs, even if they possess a 
strong faculty of this kind, its activation will not at 
once be recognisable to sense. 

Now those parts of the animal which are especially 
hollow and large are the stomach and the organ 
which is caJled the womb or uterus.2 What prevents 
us, then, from taking up these first and considering 
their activities, conducting the enquiry on our own 
process of λογικὴ θεωρία or ‘‘ theorizing” ; cf. p. 151, note 3; 
p. 205, note 1. 

ὃ The Greek words for the uterus (métrae and hysterae) 
probably owe their plural form to the belief that the organ 
was bicornuate in the human, as it is in some of the lower 
species. 227 

Q 2 


GALEN 


δῆλαι, τὴν ἐξέτασιν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν αὐτῶν ποιουμένους, 
ὅσαι δ᾽ ἀμυδρότεραι, τὰ | παραπλήσια διαιροῦντας 

147 ἀνθρώπῳ ζῷα, Ι οὐχ ὡς οὐκ ἂν ἱκανῶς τό ye 
καθόλου περὶ τῆς ξητουμένης δυνάμεως καὶ τῶν 
ἀνομοίων ἐνδειξομένων, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἵν᾽ ἅμα τῷ κοινῷ 
καὶ τὸ ἴδιον ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν αὐτῶν ἐγνωκότες εἴς τε τὰς 
διαγνώσεις τῶν νοσημάτων καὶ τὰς ἰάσεις εὐ- 
ἠδ ρων γιγνώμεθα. 

Περὶ μὲν οὖν ἀμφοτέρων τῶν ὀργάνων ἅμα 
λέγειν ἀδύνατον, ἐν βέῤει δ ὑπὲρ ἑκατέρου 
ποιησόμεθα τὸν λόγον ἀπὸ τοῦ σαφέστερον 
ἐνδείξασθαι δυναμένου τὴν “καθεκτικὴν δύναμιν 
ἀρξάμενοι. κατέχει μὲν γὰρ καὶ ἡ γαστὴρ τὰ 
σιτία, μέχρι περ ἂν ἐκπέψῃ, κατέχουσι δὲ καὶ 
αἱ μῆτραι τὸ ἔμβρυον, ἔ ἔστ᾽ ἂν τελειώσωσιν' ἀλλὰ 
πολλαπλάσιός ἐστιν ὁ τῆς τῶν ἐμβρύων τελειώ- 
σεως χρόνος τῆς τῶν σιτίων πέψεως. 


ΠῚ 


Εἰκὸς οὖν καὶ τὴν δύναμιν ἐναργέστερον ἐν 
ταῖς μήτραις φωράσειν ἡμᾶς τὴν καθεκτικήν, 
ὅσῳ καὶ πολυχρονιωτέραν τῆς γαστρὸς τὴν 
ἐνέργειαν κέκτηται. μησὶ γὰρ ἐννέα που ταῖς 
πλείσταις τῶν γυναικῶν ἐν αὐταῖς τελειοῦται 
τὰ κυήματα, μεμυκυίαις μὲν ἅπαντι τῷ αὐχένι, 
περιε οὔσαις δὲ πανταχόθεν αὐτὰ σὺν τῷ Nope. | 

148 καὶ πέρας ye τῆς τοῦ στόματος μύσεως καὶ τῆς 
τοῦ κυουμένου κατὰ τὰς μήτρας μονῆς ἡ χρεία 
τῆς ἐνεργείας ἐστίν: οὐ γὰρ ὡς ἔτυχεν οὐδ᾽ 
ἀλόγως ἱκανὰς περιστέλλεσθαι καὶ κατέχειν τὸ 


228 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIL. 1-1 


persons in regard to those activities which are obvious 
without dissection, and, in the case of those which 
are more obscure, dissecting animals which are near 
to man;! not that even animals unlike him will 
not show, in a general way, the faculty in question, 
but because in this manner we may find out at once 
what is common to all and what is peculiar to our- 
selves, and so may become more resourceful in the 
diagnosis and treatment of disease. 

Now it is impossible to speak of both organs at 
once, so we Shall deal with each in turn, beginning 
with the one which is capable of demonstrating the 
retentive faculty most plainly. For the stomach 
retains the food.until it has quite digested it, and 
the uterus retains the embryo until it brings it to 
completion, but the time taken for the completion of 
the embryo is many times more than that for the 
digestion of food. 


Ii! 


We may expect, then, to detect the retentive 
faculty in the uterus more clearly in proportion to 
the longer duration of its activity as compared with 
that of the stomach. For, as we know, it takes nine 
months in most women for the foetus to attain 
maturity in the womb, this organ having its neck 
quite closed, and entirely surrounding the embryo 
together with the chorion. Further, it is the utility 
of the function which determines the closure of the os 
and the stay of the foetus in the uterus. For it is 
not casually nor without reason that Nature has made 


1 Note this expression. For Galen’s views on the origin 
of species, cf. Introduction, p. xxxi., footnote. 229 


GALEN 


ἔμβρυον ἡ φύσις ἀπείργασατο τὰς ὑστέρας, ἀλλ᾽ 
iv’ εἰς τὸ πρέπον ἀφίκηται μέγεθος τὸ κυούμενον. 
ὅταν οὖν, οὗ χάριν ἐνήργουν τῇ καθεκτικῇ δυνά- 
pet, συμπεπληρωμένον ἦ, ταύτην μὲν ἀνέπαυσάν 
τε καὶ εἰς ἠρεμίαν ἐπανήγαγον, ἀντ αὐτῆς ὃ 
ἑτέρᾳ χρῶνται τῇ τέως ἡσυχαξζούσῃ, τῇ προωσ- 
τικῇ. ἦν δ᾽ ἄρα καὶ τῆς ἐκείνης ἡσυχίας ὅρος ἡ 
χρεία καὶ τῆς γ᾽ ἐνεργείας ὡσαύτως ἡ χρεία" 
καλούσης μὲν γὰρ αὐτῆς ἐνεργεῖ, μὴ καλούσης δ᾽ 
ἡσυχάζξει. 

Καὶ χρὴ πάλιν κἀνταῦθα καταμαθεῖν τῆς 
φύσεως τὴν τέχνην, ὡς οὐ μόνον ἐνεργειῶν χρη- 
σίμων δυνάμεις ἐνέθηκεν ἑκάστῳ τῶν ὀργάνων, 
ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ τῶν ἡσυχιῶν τε καὶ κινήσεων 
καιροῦ προὐνοήσατο. καλῶς μὲν γὰρ ἁπάντων 
γιγνομένων τῶν κατὰ τὴν κύησιν ἡ ἀποκριτικὴ 
δύναμις ἡσυχάξει τέλέως ὥσπερ οὐκ οὖσα, κα- 
κοπραγίας δέ τινος γενομένης ἢ περὶ τὸ χορίον ἢ 

149περί τινα τῶν ἄλλων || ὑμένων ἢ περὶ τὸ κυού- 
μενον αὐτὸ καὶ τῆς τελειώσεως αὐτοῦ παντάπασιν 
ἀπογνωσθείσης οὐκέτ᾽ ἀναμένουσι τὸν ἐννεάμηνον 
αἱ μῆτραι χρόνον, GAN ἡ μὲν καθεκτικὴ δύναμις 
αὐτίκα δὴ πέπαυται καὶ παραχωρεῖ κινεῖσθαι τῇ 
πρότερον ἀργούσῃ, πράττει δ᾽ ἤδη τι καὶ πραγμα- 
τεύεται χρηστὸν ἡ ἀποκριτική τε καὶ προωστική" 
καὶ γὰρ οὖν καὶ ταύτην οὕτως ἐκάλεσαν ἀπὸ τῶν 
ἐνεργειῶν αὐτῇ τὰ ὀνόματα θέμενοι καθάπερ καὶ 
ταῖς ἄλλαις. 

Καί πως ὁ λόγος ἔοικεν ὑπὲρ ἀμφοτέρων 
ἀποδείξειν ἅμα" καὶ γάρ τοι καὶ διαδεχομένας 
αὐτὰς ἀλλήλας καὶ παραχωροῦσαν ἀεὶ τὴν 
ἑτέραν τῇ λοιπῇ, καθότι ἂν ἡ χρεία κελεύῃ, καὶ 
230 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III im 


the uterus capable of contracting upon, and of re- 
taining the embryo, but in order that the latter may 
alrive at a proper size. When, therefore, the object 
for which the uterus brought its retentive faculty 
into play has been fulfilled, it then stops this faculty 
and brings it back to a state of rest, and employs 
instead of it another faculty hitherto quiescent—the 
propulsive faculty. In this case again the quiescent 
and active states are both determined by utility ; 
when this calls, there is activity; when it does 
not, there is rest. 

Here, then, once more, we must observe well 
the Art [artistic tendency] of Nature—how she has 
not merely placed in each organ the capabilities 
of useful activities, but has also fore-ordained the 
times both of rest and movement. For when every- 
thing connected with the pregnancy proceeds pro- 
perly, the eliminative faculty remains quiescent as 
though it did not exist, but if anything goes wrong 
in connection either with the chorion or any of 
the other membranes or with the foetus itself, and 
its completion is entirely despaired of, then the 
uterus no longer awaits the nine-months period, but 
the retentive faculty forthwith ceases and allows the 
heretofore inoperative faculty to come into action. 
Now it is that something is done—in fact, useful 
work effected—by the eliminative or propulsive faculty 
(for so it, too, has been called, receiving, like the 
rest, its names from the corresponding activities). 

Further, our theory can, I think, demonstrate both 
together ; for seeing that they succeed each other, 
and that the one keeps giving place to the other 
according as utility demands, it seems not unreason- 


231 


GALEN 


τὴν διδασκαλίαν κοινὴν οὐκ ἀπεικός ἐστι δέχε- 
σθαι. τῆς μὲν οὖν καθεκτικῆς δυνάμεως ἔ ἔργον 
περιστεῖλαι τὰς μήτρας τῷ κυουμένῳ πανταχό- 
θεν, ὥστ᾽ εὐλόγως ἁπτομέναις μὲν ταῖς μαιευ- 
τρίαις τὸ στόμα μεμυκὸς αὐτῶν φαίνεται, ταῖς 
κυούσαις δ᾽ αὐταῖς κατὰ τὰς πρώτας ἡμέρας καὶ 
μάλιστα κατ᾽ αὐτὴν ἐκείνην, ἐν ἧπερ ἂν ἡ τῆς 
γονῆς σύλληψις γένηται, κινουμένων τε καὶ συν- 


160 τρεχουσῶν εἰς ἑαυτὰς τῶν ὑστερῶν αἴσθησις γί- 


γνεται καὶ ἢν ἄμφω ταῦτα συμβῇ, μῦσαι μὲν τὸ 
στόμα χωρὶς φλεγμονῆς ἤ τινος ἄλλου παθή- 
ματος, αἴσθησιν δὲ τῆς κατὰ τὰς μήτρας κινή- 
σεως ἀκολουθῆσαι, πρὸς αὑτὰς ἤδη τὸ σπέρμα 
τὸ παρὰ τἀνδρὸς εἰληφέναι τε καὶ κατέχειν αἱ 
γυναῖκες νομίζουσι. 

Ταῦτα δ᾽ οὐχ ἡμεῖς, νῦν ἀναπλάττομεν ἡμῖν 
αὐτοῖς, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ μακρᾶς πείρας δοκιμασθέντα 
πᾶσι γέγραπται σχεδόν τι τοῖς περὶ τούτων 
πραγματευσαμένοις. Ἡρόφιλος μέν γε καὶ ὡς 
οὐδὲ πυρῆνα ᾿“μήλης ἂν “δέχοιτο τῶν μητρῶν τὸ 
στόμα, πρὶν ἀποκυεῖν τὴν γυναῖκα, καὶ ὡς οὐδὲ 
τοὐλάχιστον ἔτι διέστηκεν, ἢ ἢν ὑπάρξηται κύειν, 
καὶ ὡς ἐπὶ πλέον ἀναστομοῦνται κατὰ τὰς τῶν 
i ai aa φοράς, οὐκ ὦκνησε γράφειν" συνομο- 
λογοῦσι δ' αὐτῷ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι πάντες οἱ mpl 
τούτων πραγματευσάμενοι καὶ πρῶτός γ᾽ ἁπάντων 
ἰατρῶν τε καὶ φιλοσόφων Ἱπποκράτης ἀπεφήνατο 
μύειν τὸ στόμα τῶν ὑστερῶν ἔν τε ταῖς κυήσεσὲ 
καὶ ταῖς φλεγμοναῖς, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν μὲν ταῖς κυήσεσιν 
οὐκ ἐξιστάμενον τῆς φύσεως, ἐν δὲ ταῖς φλεγμοναῖς 


ϑΑΛΊρΟν γιγνόμενον. 


232 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIT. m 


able to accept a common demonstration also for both. 
Thus it is the work of the retentive faculty to make 
the uterus contract upon the foetus at every point, 
so that, naturally enough, when the midwives palpate 
it, the os is found to be closed, whilst the pregnant 
women themselves, during the first days—and par- 
ticularly on that on which conception takes place— 
experience a sensation as if the uterus were moving 
and contracting upon itself. Now, if both of these 
things occur—if the os closes apart from inflammation 
orany other disease, and if this is accompanied by a 
feeling of movement in the uterus—then the women 
believe that they have received the semen which 
comes from the male, and that they are retaining it. 

Now we are not inventing this for ourselves: one 
may say the statement is based on prolonged ex- 
perience of those who occupy themselves with such 
matters. Thus Herophilus! does not hesitate to 
state in his writings that up to the time of labour 
the os uteri will not admit so much as the tip of a 
probe, that it no longer opens to the slightest degree 
if pregnancy has begun—that, in fact, it dilates more 
widely at the times of the menstrual flow. With 
him are in agreement all the others who have applied 
themselves to this subject ; and particularly Hippo- 
crates, who was the first of all physicians and 
philosophers to declare that the os uteri closes 
during pregnancy and inflammation, albeit in preg- 
nancy it does not depart from its own nature, whilst 
in inflammation it becomes hard. . 


1 Herophilus of Chalcedon (circa 300 B.c.) was, like 
Erasistratus, a representative of the anatomical school of 
Alexandria. His book on Midwifery was known for cen- 
turies. cf. Introduction, p. xii. 


233 


GALEN 


Ἐπὶ δέ γε τῆς ἐναντίας τῆς ἐκκριτικῆς ἀνοί- 
γνυται μὲν τὸ στόμα, προέρχεται δ᾽ ὁ πυθμὴν 1 
15] ἅπας ὅσον οἷόν τ᾽ ἐγγυτάτω τοῦ στόματος 
ἀπωθούμενος ἔξω τὸ ἔμβρνον, ἅμα δ᾽ αὐτῷ καὶ 
τὰ συνεχῆ μέρη τὰ οἷον πλευρὰ Τοῦ παντὸς 
ὀργάνου συνεπιλαμβανόμενα τοῦ ἔργου θλίβει 
τε καὶ προωθεῖ πᾶν ἔξω τὸ ἔμβρυον. καὶ πολλαῖς 
τῶν γυναικῶν ὠδῖνες βίαιοι τὰς μήτρας ὅλας 
ἐκπεσεῖν ἠνάγκασαν ἀμέτρως χρησαμέναις τῇ 
τοιαύτῃ δυνάμει, παραπλησίου τινὸς γιγνομένου 
τῷ πολλάκις ἐν πάλαις τισὶ καὶ φιλονεικίαις 
συμβαίνοντι, ὅ ὅταν ἀνατρέψαι τε καὶ καταβαλεῖν 
ἑτέρους σπεύδοντες αὐτοὶ συγκαταπέσωμεν. 
οὕτω γὰρ καὶ αἱ μῆτραι τὸ ἔμβρυον ὠθοῦσαι 
συνεξέπεσον ἐ ἐνίοτε καὶ μάλισθ᾽, ὅταν οἱ πρὸς τὴν 
ῥάχιν αὐτῶν σύνδεσμοι χαλαροὶ φύσει τυγχάνωσιν 
ὄντες. 

Ἔστι δὲ καὶ τοῦτο θαυμαστόν τι τῆς φύσεως 
σόφισμα, τὸ ζῶντος μὲν τοῦ κυήματος ἀκριβῶς 
πάνυ μεμυκέναι τὸ στόμα τῶν μητρῶν, ἀπο- 
θανόντος δὲ παραχρῆμα διανοίγεσθαι τοσοῦτον, 
ὅσον εἰς τὴν ἔξοδον αὐτοῦ διαφέρει. καὶ μέντοι 
καὶ αἱ μαῖαι τὰς τικτούσας οὐκ εὐθὺς ἀνιστᾶσιν 
οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ τὸν δίφρον καθίζουσιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἅπτονται 

152 πρότερον ἀνοιγομένου τοῦ στόματος Ι κατὰ βραχὺ 
καὶ πρῶτον μέν, ὥστε τὸν μικρὸν δάκτυλον 
καθιέναι, διεστηκέναι φασίν, ἔπειτ᾽ ἤδη καὶ 
μεῖξον καὶ κατὰ βραχὺ δὴ πυνθανομένοις ἡμῖν 
ἀποκρίνονται. τὸ μέγεθος τῆς διαστάσεως ἐπαυ- 
ξανόμενον. ὅταν δ᾽ ἱκανὸν a πρὸς τὴν τοῦ 
κυουμένου δίοδον, ἀνιστῶσιν αὐτὰς καὶ καθίξουσι 


234 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. in 


In the case of the opposite (the eliminative) 
faculty, the os opens, whilst the whole fundus ap- 
proaches as near as possible to the os, expelling the 
embryo as it does so; and along with the fundus the 
contiguous parts—which form as it were a girdle 
round the whole organ—co-operate in the work ; 
they squeeze upon the embryo and propel it bodily 
outwards. And, in many women who exercise such 
a faculty immoderately, violent pains cause forcible 
prolapse of the whole womb; here almost the same 
thing happens as frequently occurs in wrestling-bouts 
and struggles, when in our eagerness to overturn and 
throw others we are ourselves upset along with them; 
for similarly when the uterus is forcing the embryo 
forward it sometimes becomes entirely prolapsed, and 
particularly when the ligaments connecting it with 
the spine happen to be naturally lax.! 

A wonderful device of Nature’s also is this—that, 
when the foetus is alive, the os uteri is closed with 
perfect accuracy, but if it dies, the os at once opens 
up to the extent which is necessary for the foetus to 
make its exit. The midwife, however, does not make 
the parturient woman get up at once and sit down on 
the [obstetric] chair, but she begins by palpating the 
os as it gradually dilates, and the first thing she says 
is that it has dilated “enough to admit the little 
finger,’ then that “it is bigger now,’ and as we 
make enquiries from time to time, she answers that 
the size of the dilatation is increasing. And when 
it is sufficient to allow of the transit of the foetus, 
she then makes the patient get up from her bed and 


1 Relaxation of utero-sacral ligaments as an important pre- 
disposing cause of prolapsus uteri. 
2 That is, at the end of the first stage of labour. 


235 


GALEN 


καὶ προθυμεῖσθαι κελεύουσιν ἀπώσασθαι τὸ 
παιδίον. ἔστι δ᾽ ἤδη τοῦτο τὸ ἔργον, ὃ παρ᾽ 
ἑαυτῶν αἱ κύουσαι προστιθέασιν, οὐκέτι τῶν 
ὑστερῶν, ἀλλὰ τῶν κατ᾽ ἐπιγάστριον μυῶν, οἵ 
πρὸς τὴν ἀποπάτησίν τε καὶ τὴν οὔρησιν ἡμῖν 
συνεργοῦσιν. 


IV 


Οὕτω μὲν ἐπὶ τῶν μητρῶν ἐναργῶς ai δύο 
φαίνονται δυνάμεις, ἐπὶ δὲ τῆς γαστρὸς ὧδε. 
πρῶτον μὲν τοῖς κλύδωσιν, οἵ δὴ καὶ πεπίστευνται 
τοῖς ἰατροῖς ἀρρώστου κοιλίας εἶναι συμπτώματα 
καὶ κατὰ λόγον πεπίστευνται" ἐνίοτε μὲν yap 
ἐλάχιστα προσενηνεγμένων οὐ γίγνονται περι- 
στελλομένης ἀκριβῶς αὐτοῖς τῆς γαστρὸς καὶ 
σφιγγούσης πανταχόθεν, ἐνίοτε δὲ μεστὴ μὲν ἡ 

153 γαστήρ ἐσσιν, οἱ κλύϊδωνες δ᾽ ὡς ἐπὶ κενῆς 
ἐξακούονται. κατὰ φύσιν μὲν γὰρ ἔχουσα καὶ 
χρωμένη καλῶς τῇ περισταλτικῇ δυνάμει, κἂν 
ὀλίγον ἦ τὸ περιεχόμενον, ἅπαν αὐτὸ περι- 
λαμβάνουσα χώραν οὐδεμίαν ἀπολείπει κενήν, 
ἀρρωστοῦσα δέ, καθότι ἂν ἀδυνατήσῃ περιλαβεῖν 
ἀκριβῶς, ἐνταῦθ᾽ εὐρυχωρίαν τιν᾽ ἐργαζομένη 
συγχωρεῖ τοῖς περιεχομένοις ὑγροῖς κατὰ τὰς 
τῶν σχημάτων μεταλλαγὰς ἄλλοτ᾽ ἀλλαχόσε 
μεταρρέουσι κλύδωνας ἀποτελεῖν. 

Εὐλόγως οὖν, ὅτε μηδὲ πέψουσιν ἱκανῶς, οἱ ἐν 
τῷδε τῷ συμπτώματι γενόμενοι προσδοκῶσιν" οὐ 
yap ἐνδέχεται πέψαι καλῶς ἄρρωστον γαστέρα. 
τοῖς τοιούτοις δὲ καὶ μέχρι πλείονος ἐν αὐτῇ 


236 





~ 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIL. u1-1v 


sit on the chair, and bids her make every effort to 
expel the child. Now, this additional work which 
the patient does of herself is no longer the work 
of the uterus but of the epigastric muscles, which 
also help us in defaecation and micturition. 


IV 


Tuus the two faculties are clearly to be seen in the 
case of the uterus; in the case of the stomach they 
appear as follows :—Firstly in the condition of gurgling, 
which physicians are persuaded, and with reason, to 
“be a symptom of weakness of the stomach; for 
sometimes when the very smallest quantity of food 
. has been ingested this does not occur, owing to the 
fact that the stomach is contracting accurately upon 
the food and constricting it at every point ; some- 
times when the stomach is full the gurglings yet 
make themselves heard as though it were empty. 
For if it be in a natural condition, employing its con- 
tractile faculty in the ordinary way, then, even if its 
contents be very small, it grasps the whole of them 
and does not leave any empty space. When it is 
weak, however, being unable to lay hold of its con- 
tents accurately, it produces a certain amount of 
vacant space, and allows the liquid contents to flow 
about in different directions in accordance with its 
changes of shape, and so to produce gurglings. 

Thus those who are troubled with this symptom 
expect, with good reason, that they will also be 
unable to digest adequately; proper digestion can- 
not take place in a weak stomach. In such people 
also, the mass of food may be plainly seen to remain 


237 


GALEN 


φαίνεται παραμένον τὸ βάρος, ὡς ἂν καὶ βραδύ- 
τερον πέττουσι. καὶ μὴν θαυμάσειεν ἄν τις ἐπ᾽ 
αὐτῶν τούτων μάλιστα. τὸ πολυχρόνιον τῆς ἐν τῇ 
γαστρὶ διατριβῆς οὐ τῶν σιτίων μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ 
τοῦ πόματος" οὐ γάρ, ὅπερ ἂν οἰηθείη τίς, ὡς τὸ 
τῆς γαστρὸς στόμα τὸ κάτω στενὸν ἱκανῶς 
ὑπάρχον οὐδὲν παρίησι πρὶν ἀκριβῶς λειωθῆναι, 
τοῦτ᾽ αἴτιον ὄντως ἐστί. πολλὰ γοῦν πολλάκις 

154 ὁπωρῶν ὀστᾶ μέγιστα καταπίνουσι I πάμπολλοι 
Kai τις δακτύλιον χρυσοῦν ἐν τῷ στόματι φυ- 
λάττων ἄκων κατέπιε καὶ ἄλλος τις νόμισμα καὶ 
ἄλλος ἄλλο τι σκληρὸν καὶ δυσκατέργαστον, 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅμως ἅπαντες οὗτοι ῥᾳδίως ἀπεπάτησαν, ἃ 
κατέπιον, οὐδενὸς αὐτοῖς ἀκολουθήσαντος συμ- 
πτώματος. εἰ δέ Y: ἡ στενότης τοῦ πόρου τῆς 
γαστρὸς αἰτία τοῦ μένειν ἐπὶ πλέον ἦν τοῖς 
ἀτρίπτοις σιτίοις, οὐδὲν ἂν τούτων ποτὲ διεχώ- 
ρησεν. ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ τὰ Tomar’ αὐτοῖς ἐν τῇ 
γαστρὶ παραμένειν ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ἱκανὸν ἀπάγειν 
τὴν ὑπόνοιαν τοῦ πόρου τῆς στενότητος" ὅλως 
γάρ, εἴπερ ἣν ἐν τῷ κεχυλῶσθαι τὸ θᾶττον 
ὑπιέναι, τά τε  ῥοφήματ' ἂν οὕτω καὶ τὸ γάλα καὶ 
ὃ τῆς πτισάνης χυλὸς αὐτίκα διεξήει πᾶσιν. 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ ὧδ᾽ ἔχει: τοῖς μὲν γὰρ ἀσθενέσιν ἐπὶ 
πλεῖστον ἐμπλεῖ ταῦτα καὶ κλύδωνας ἐργάξεται 
παραμένοντα καὶ θλίβει καὶ βαρύνει τὴν γαστέρα, 
τοῖς δ᾽ io υροῖς οὐ μόνον τούτων οὐδὲν συμβαίνει, 
ἀλλὰ καὶ πολὺ πλῆθος ἄρτων καὶ κρεῶν ὑπο- 
χωρεῖ ταχέως. 


1 The pylorus. 
2 «*Chylosis,” chylification. cf. p. 240, note 1. 


238 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. iv 


an abnormally long time in the stomach, as would be 
natural if their digestion were slow. Indeed, the 
chief way in which these people will surprise one is 
in the length of time that not food alone but even 
fluids will remain in their stomachs. Now, the 
actual cause of this is not, as one would imagine, 
that the lower outlet of the stomach,! being fairly 
narrow, will allow nothing to pass before being 
reduced to a fine state of division. There are a 
great many people who frequently swallow large 
quantities of big fruit-stones ; one person, who was 
holding a gold ring in his mouth, inadvertently 
swallowed it; another swallowed a coin, and various 
people have swallowed various hard and indigestible 
objects; yet all these people easily passed by the 
bowel what they had swallowed, without there being 
any subsequent symptoms. Now surely if narrow- 
ness of the gastric outlet were the cause of untritu- 
rated food remaining for an abnormally long time, 
none of these articles I have mentioned would ever 
have escaped. Furthermore, the .fact that it is 
liquids which remain longest in these _ people’s 
stomachs is sufficient to put the idea of narrowness 
of the outlet out of court. For, supposing a rapid 
descent were dependent upon emulsification,? then 
soups, milk, and barley-emulsion® would at once pass 
along in every case. But as a matter of fact this is 
not so. For in people who are extremely asthenic it 
is just these fluids which remain undigested, which 
accumulate and produce gurglings, and which oppress 
and overload the stomach, whereas in strong persons 
not merely do none of these things happen, but even a 
large quantity of bread or meat passes rapidly down. 


8 Lit. barley-‘‘ chyle,” i.e. barley-water. 
239 


GALEN 


3 , 3 “A 7 \ “ 
. Οὐ μόνον δ᾽ ἐκ τοῦ περιτετάσθαι τὴν γαστέρα 
155 καὶ βαρύνεσθαι || καὶ μεταρρεῖν ἄλλοτ᾽ εἰς ἄλλα 
μέρη μετὰ κλύδωνος τὸ παραμένειν ἐπὶ πλέον ἐν 
αὐτῇ πάντως τοῖς οὕτως ἔχουσι τεκμήραιτ᾽ ἄν 
3 3 “A > / Ν > a 

τις ἀλλὰ κἀκ τῶν ἐμέτων' ἔνιοι yap ov μετ 
τρεῖς ὥρας ἢ τέτταρας ἀλλὰ νυκτῶν ἤδη μέσων 
παμπόλλου μεταξὺ χρόνου διελθόντος ἐπὶ ταῖς 

ξ΄ 3 / 3 “Ὁ σ΄ \ 26 
προσφοραῖς ἀνήμεσαν ἀκριβῶς ἅπαντα τὰ édn- 

δεσμένα. 

Καὶ μὲν δὴ καὶ Sov ὁτιοῦν ἐμπλήσας ὑγρᾶς 
τροφῆς, ὥσπερ ἡμεῖς πολλάκις ἐπὶ συῶν ἐπειρά- 
θημεν ἐξ ἀλεύρων μέθ᾽ ὕδατος οἷον κυκεῶνά τινα 
δόντες αὐτοῖς, ἔπειτα μετὰ τρεῖς που καὶ τέτταρας 
ὥρας ἀνατεμόντες, εἰ οὕτω καὶ σὺ πράξειας, 
εὑρήσεις ἔτι κατὰ τὴν γαστέρα τὰ ἐδηδεσμένα"' 
πέρας γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἐστι τῆς ἐνταῦθα μονῆς οὐχ ἡ 

lA > Ἁ v 4 / 
χύλωσις, ἣν καὶ ἐκτὸς ETL ὄντων μηχανήσασθαι 
δυνατόν ἐστιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ πέψις, ἕτερόν τι τῆς χυλώ- 

φ 4 e / ’ [4 
σεως οὖσα, καθάπερ αἱμάτωσίς τε καὶ θρέψις. 
ς \ 3 a δέδ / A 
ὡς yap κἀκεῖνα δέδεικται ποιοτήτων μεταβολῇ 
γιγνόμενα, τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον καὶ ἡ ἐν τῇ γαστρὶ 
πέψις τῶν σιτίων εἰς τὴν οἰκείαν ἐστὶ τῷ τρεφο- 
156 μένῳ ποιότητα || μεταβολὴ καὶ ὅταν γε πεφθῇ 
τελέως, ἀνοίγνυται μὲν τηνικαῦτα τὸ κάτω στόμα, 
διεκπίπτει δ᾽ αὐτοῦ τὰ σιτία ῥᾳδίως, εἰ καὶ 
πλῆθός τι μεθ᾽ ἑαυτῶν ἔχοντα τύχοι λίθων ἢ 
3 “ A A Ψ Ν 
ὀστῶν ἢ γιγάρτων ἤ τινος ἄλλον χυλωθῆναι 
μὴ δυναμένου. καί σοι τοῦτ᾽ ἔνεστιν ἐπὶ ζῴου 
240 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIL. 1v 


And itis not only because the stomach is distended 
and loaded and because the fluid runs from one part 
of it to another accompanied by gurglings—it is not 
only for these reasons that one would judge that 
there was an unduly long continuance of the food in 
it, in those people who are so disposed, but also from 
the vomiling. Thus, there are some who vomit up 
every particle of what they have eaten, not after 
three or four hours, but actually in the middle of the 
night, a lengthy period having elapsed since their 
meal. 

Suppose you fill any animal whatsoever with liquid 
food—an experiment I have often carried out in pigs, 
to whom I give a sort of mess of wheaten flour and | 
water, thereafter cutting them open after three or 
four hours ; if you will do this yourself, you will find 
the food still in the stomach. For it is not chylifica- 
tton 1 which determines the length of its stay here— 
since this can also be effected outside the stomach ; 
the determining factor is digestion? which is a differ- 
ent thing from chylification, as are blood-production 
and nutrition. For, just as it has been shown ® that 
these two processes depend upon a change of qualtties, 
similarly also the digestion of food in the stomach 
involves a transmutation of it into the quality proper 
to that which is receiving nourishment.t Then, 
when it is completely digested, the lower outlet 
opens and the food is quickly ejected through it, 
even if there should be amongst it abundance of 
stones, bones, grape-pips, or other things which can- 
not be reduced to chyle. And you may observe this 


1 ὦ 6. not the mere mechanical breaking down of food, but 
a distinctively vital action of ‘‘ alteration.” . 
2 Pepsis. 3. Book I., chaps. x.,xi. +4 cf. p. 222, note 1. 
241 
R 


GALEN 


θεάσασθαι στοχασαμένῳ τὸν καιρὸν τῆς κάτω 
διεξόδου. καὶ μέν γε καὶ εἰ σφαλείης ποτὲ τοῦ καὶ- 
ροῦ καὶ μηδ ν μήπω κάτω παρέρχοιτο πεττομένων 
ἔτι κατὰ τὴν γαστέρα τῶν σιτίων, οὐδ᾽ οὕτως 
ἄκαρπος ἡ ἀνατομή σοι γενήσεται" θεάσῃ γὰρ 
ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν, ὅπερ ὀλίγῳ πρόσθεν ἐλέγομεν, ἀκρι- 
βῶς μὲν μεμυκότα τὸν πυλωρόν, ἅπασαν δὲ τὴν 
ἀστέρα περιεσταλμένην τοῖς σιτίοις τρόπον 
ὁμοιότατον, οἷόνπερ καὶ αἱ μῆτραι τοῖς κυου- 
μένοις. οὐ γὰρ ἔστιν οὐδέποτε κενὴν εὑρεῖν 
χώραν οὔτε κατὰ τὰς ὑστέρας οὔτε κατὰ τὴν 
κοιλίαν οὔτε κατὰ τὰς κύστεις ἀμφοτέρας οὔτε 
κατὰ τὴν οληδόχον ὀνομαζομένην οὔτε τὴν 


ἑτέραν' ἀλλ᾽ εἴτ᾽ ὀλίγον εἴη τὸ περιεχόμενον ἐν. 


αὐταῖς εἴτε πολύ, μεσταὶ καὶ πλήρεις αὐτῶν αἱ 
κοιλίαι ; φαίνονται περιστελλομένων ἀεὶ τῶν χιτώ- 


νων τοῖς περιεχομένοις, ὅταν γε κατὰ φύσιν ἔχῃ 


τὸ ζῷον. || 
157 "Epaciorparos δ᾽ οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅπως τὴν περιστολὴν 
τῆς γαστρὸς ἁπάντων αἰτίαν ἀποφαίνει καὶ ,τῆς 
λειώσεως τῶν σιτίων καὶ τῆς τῶν περιττωμάτων 
ὑποχωρήσεως καὶ τῆς τῶν κεχυλωμένων ἀνα- 
δόσεως. 

᾿Εγὼ μὲν γὰρ μυριάκις ἐπὶ ζῶντος ἔ ἔτι τοῦ ζῴου 
διελὼν τὸ περιτόναιον εὗρον ἀεὶ τὰ μὲν ἔ ἔντερα 
πάντα περιστελλόμενα τοῖς ἐνυπάρχουσι, τὴν 
κοιλίαν δ᾽ οὐχ ἁπλῶς, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ μὲν ταῖς ἐδωδαῖς 
ἄνωθέν τε καὶ κάτωθεν αὐτὰ καὶ πανταχόθεν axpt- 





1 Choledochous. 32 More exactly peristolé ; cf. p. 97, note 1. 
3 Neuburger says of Erasistratus that ‘ dissection had 
taught him to think in terms of anatomy.” It was chiefly 


242 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. rv 


yourself in an animal, if you will try to hit upon the 
time at which the descent of food from the stomach 
takes place. But even if you should fail to discover 
the time, and nothing was yet passing down, and the 
food was still undergoing digestion in the stomach, 
still even then you would find dissection not without 
its uses. You will observe, as we have just said, 
that the pylorus is accurately closed, and that the 
whole stomach is in a state of contraction upon the 
food very much as the womb contracts upon the 
foetus. For it is never possible to find a vacant 
space in the uterus, the stomach, or in either of the 
two bladders—that is, either in that called bile- 
receiving! or in the other; whether their contents 
be abundant or scanty, their cavities are.seen to be 
replete and full, owing to the fact that their coats 
contract constantly upon the contents—so long, at 
least, as the animal is in a natural condition. ᾿ 

Now Erasistratus for some reason declares that it 
is the contractions? of the stomach which are the 
cause of everything—that is to say, of the softening 
of the food,’ the removal of waste matter, and the 
absorption of the food when chylified [emulsified]. 

Now I have personally, on countless occasions, 
divided the peritoneum of a still living animal 
and have always found all the intestines contracting 
peristaltically 4 upon their contents. The condition 
of the stomach, however, is found less simple; as 
regards the substances freshly swallowed, it had 
grasped these accurately both above and below, in 
fact at every point, and was as devoid of movement 
the gross movements or structure of organs with which he 
concerned himself. Where an organ had no obvious function, 
he dubbed it ‘‘ useless”; e.g. the spleen (cf. p. 143). 


4 2,6. contracting and dilating; no longitudinal movements 
involved ; cf. p. 263, note 2. 243 


Β 2 


GALEN 


Bas περιειληφυΐαν ἀκίνητον, ὡς δοκεῖν ἡνῶσθαι 
καὶ περιπεφυκέναι τοῖς σιτίοις" ἐν δὲ τούτῳ καὶ 
τὸν πυλωρὸν εὕρισκον ἀεὶ μεμυκότα καὶ κεκλεισ- 
μένον ἀκριβῶς ὥσπερ τὸ τῶν ὑστερῶν στόμα 
ταῖς ἐγκύμοσιν. 

Ἐπὶ μέντοι ταῖς πέψεσι συμπεπληρωμέναις 
ἀνέῳκτο μὲν ὁ πυλωρός, ἡ γαστὴρ δὲ “τερίσταλτι- 
‘KOS ἐκινεῖτο παραπλησίως τοῖς ἐντέροις. 


Vv 


“Απαντ᾽ οὖν ἀλλήλοις ὁμολογεῖ ταῦτα καὶ τῇ 
γαστρὶ καὶ ταῖς ὑστέραις καὶ ταῖς κύστεσιν εἶναί 
τινᾶς ἐμφύτους δυνάμεις καθεκτικὰς μὲν τῶν 

158 οἰκείων ποιοτήτων, Ι ἀποκριτικὰς δὲ τῶν ἀλλο- 
τρίων. ὅτι μὲν yap ἕλκει τὴν χολὴν εἰς ἑαυτὴν ἡ 
ἐπὶ τῷ ἥπατι κύστις, ἔμπροσθεν δέδεικται, ὅ ὅτι δὲ 
καὶ ἀποκρίνει καθ᾽ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν εἰς τὴν 
γαστέρα, καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἐναργῶς φαίνεται. καὶ μὴν εἰ 
διεδέχετο τὴν ἑλκτικὴν δύναμιν ἡ ἐκκριτικὴ καὶ 
μὴ μέση τις ἀμφοῖν ἣν ἡ καθεκτική, διὰ παντὸς 
ἐχρῆν ἀνατεμνομένων τῶν ξῴων ἴσον πλῆθος 
χολῆς εὑρίσκεσθαι κατὰ τὴν κύστιν: οὐ μὴν 
εὑρίσκεταί γε. ποτὲ μὲν γὰρ ᾿πληρεστάτη, ποτὲ 
δὲ κενοτάτη, ποτὲ δὲ τὰς ἐν τῷ μεταξὺ διαφορὰς 
ἔχουσα θεωρεῖται, καθάπερ καὶ ἡ ἡ ἑτέρα κύστις ἡ 
τὸ οὖρον ὑποδεχομένη. ταύτης μέν γε καὶ πρὸ 
τῆς ἀνατομῆς αἰσθανόμεθα, πρὶν. ἀνιαθῆναι τῷ 
πλήθει βαρυνθεῖσαν ἢ τῇ δριμύτητι δηχθεῖσαν, 


1 cf. p. 282, note 1. 2 Book II., chaps. ii. and viii. 
244 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIL. 1v.-v 


as though it had grown round and become united 
with the food.!. At the same time I found the 
pylorus persistently closed and accurately shut, like 
the os uteri on the foetus. 

~ In the cases, however, where digestion had been 
completed the pylorus had opened, and the stomach 
was undergoing peristaltic movements, similar to 
those of the intestines. 


V 


Tuus all these facts agree that the stomach, 
uterus, and bladders possess certain inborn faculties 
which are retentive of their own proper qualities 
and eliminative of those that are foreign. For it 
has been already shown? that the bladder by the 
liver draws bile into itself, while it is also quite 
obvious that it eliminates this daily into the stomach. 
Now, of course, if the eliminative were to succeed 
the attractive faculty and there were not a retentive 
faculty between the two, there would be found, 
on every occasion that animals were dissected, an 
equal quantity of bile in the gall-bladder. This 
however, we do not find. For the bladder is some- 
times observed to be very full, sometimes quite 
empty, while at other times you find in it various 
intermediate degrees of fulness, just as is the case 
with the other bladder—that which receives the 
urine; for even without resorting to anatomy we 
may observe that the urinary bladder continues to 
collect urine up to the time that it becomes uncom- 
fortable through the increasing quantity of urine or 
the irritation caused by its acidity—the presumption 


245 


- 


GALEN 


ἀθροιζούσης ἔτι τὸ οὖρον, ὡς οὔσης τινὸς κἀνταῦθα 
δυνάμεως καθεκτικῆς. 

Οὕτω δὲ καὶ ἡ γαστὴρ ὑπὸ δριμύτητος πολ- 
λάκις δηχθεῖσα πρωιαίτερον τοῦ δέοντος ἄπεπτον 
ἔτι τὴν τροφὴν ἀποτρίβεται. αὖθις δ᾽ ἄν ποτε 
τῷ πλήθει βαρυνθεῖσα ἢ καὶ κατ᾽ ἄμφω συνελ- 
θόντα κακῶς διατεθεῖσα διαρροίαις ἑάλω. καὶ 
μέν γε καὶ οἱ ἔμετοι, τῷ πλήθει βαρυνθείσης || 

169 αὐτῆς ἢ τὴν ποιότητα τῶν ἐν αὐτῇ σιτίων τε καὶ 
περιττωμάτων μὴ φερούσης, ἀνάλογόν τι ταῖς 
διαρροίαις πάθημα τῆς ἄνω γαστρός ἐστιν. ὅταν 
μὲν γὰρ ἐν τοῖς κάτω μέρεσιν αὐτῆς ἡ τοιαύτη 
γένηται διάθεσις, ἐρρωμένων τῶν κατὰ τὸν στό- 
μαχον, εἰς διαρροίας ἐτελεύτησεν, ὅταν δ᾽ ἐν τοῖς 
κατὰ τὸ στόμα, τῶν ἄλλων εὐρωστούντων, εἰς 
; 
ἐμέτους. 


VI 


Ἔνεστι δὲ καὶ τοῦτο πολλάκις ἐναργῶς ἰδεῖν 
ἐπὶ τῶν ἀποσίτων' ἀναγκαζόμενοι γὰρ ἐσθίειν 
οὔτε καταπίνειν εὐσθενοῦσιν οὔτ᾽, εἰ καὶ βιάσαιντο, 
κατέχουσιν, ἀλλ᾽ εὐθὺς ἀνεμοῦσι. καὶ οἱ ἄλλως 
δὲ τῶν ἐδεσμάτων πρὸς ὁτιοῦν δυσχεραίνοντες 
βιασθέντες ἐνίοτε προσάρασθαι ταχέως ἐξεμοῦσιν, 
ἢ εἰ κατάσχοιεν βιασάμενοι, ναυτιώδεις τ᾽ εἰσὶ 
καὶ τῆς γαστρὸς ὑπτίας αἰσθάνονται καὶ σπευ- 
δούσης ἀποθέσθαι τὸ λυποῦν. 

Οὕτως ἐξ ἁπάντων τῶν φαινομένων, ὅπερ ἐξ 
ἀρχῆς ἐρρέθη, μαρτυρεῖται τὸ δεῖν ὑπάρχειν τοῖς 
τοῦ Saou μορίοις σχεδὸν ἅπασιν ἔφεσιν μέν τινα 


246 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. v.-vi 


thus being that here, too, there is a retentive 
faculty. : 

Similarly, too, the stomach, when, as often happens, 
it is irritated by acidity, gets rid of the food, although 
still undigested, earlier than proper ; or again, when 
oppressed by the quantity of its contents, or dis- 
ordered from the co-existence of both conditions, it 
is seized with diarrhoea. Vomtting also is an affec- 
tion of the upper [part of the] stomach analogous 
to diarrhoea, and it occurs when the stomach is over- 
loaded or is unable to stand the quality of the food 
or surplus substances which it contains. Thus, when 
such a condition develops in the lower parts of the 
stomach, while the parts about the inlet are normal, 
it ends in diarrhoea, whereas if this condition is in 
the upper stomach, the lower parts being normal, it 
ends in vomiting. 


VI 


- Tuts may often be clearly observed in those who 
are disinclined for food; when obliged to eat, they 
have not the strength to swallow, and, even if they 
force themselves to do so, they cannot retain the 
food, but at once vomit #t up. And those especially 
who have a dislike to some particular kind of food, 
sometimes take it under compulsion, and then 
promptly bring it up; or, if they force themselves to 
keep it down, they are nauseated and feel their 
stomach turned up, and endeavouring to relieve itself 
of its discomfort. 

Thus, as was said at the beginning, all the observed 
facts testify that there must exist in almost all parts 
of the animal a certain inclination towards, or, so to 


247 


GALEN 


καὶ οἷον ὄρεξιν τῆς οἰκείας ποιότητος, ἀποστροφὴν 

160 δέ τινα || καὶ οἷον μῖσός τι τῆς ἀλλοτρίας. ἀλλ᾽ 
ἐφιέμενα μὲν ἕλκειν εὔλογον, ἀποστρεφόμενα δ᾽ 
ἐκκρίνειν. 

Κἀκ τούτων πάλιν ἥ θ᾽ ἑλκτικὴ δύναμις 
ἀποδείκνυται καθ᾽ ἅπαν ὑπάρχουσα καὶ ἡ προ- 
ὡστική. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ εἴπερ ἔφεσίς τέ τίς ἐστι καὶ ἕλξις, εἴη ἄν 
τις καὶ ἀπόλαυσις: οὐδὲν γὰρ τῶν ὄντων ἕλκει τι 
δ αὐτὸ τὸ ἕλκειν, GAN ἵν’ ἀπολαύσῃ τοῦ διὰ 
τῆς ὁλκῆς εὐπορηθέντος. καὶ μὴν ἀπολαύειν οὐ 
δύναται μὴ κατασχόν. κἀν τούτῳ πάλιν ἡ 
καθεκτικὴ δύναμις ἀποδείκνυται τὴν γένεσιν 
ἀναγκαίαν ἔχουσα σαφῶς γὰρ ἐφίεται μὲν τῶν 
οἰκείων ποιοτήτων ἡ γαστήρ, ἀποστρέφεται δὲ 
τὰς ἀλλοτρίας. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ εἴπερ ἐφίεταί τε καὶ ἕλκει καὶ ἀπολαύει 
κατέχουσα καὶ περιστελλομένη, εἴη ἄν τι καὶ 
πέρας αὐτῇ τῆς ἀπολαύσεως κἀπὶ τῷδ᾽ ὁ καιρὸς 
ἤδη τῆς ἐκκριτικῆς δυνάμεως ἐνεργούσης. 


Φ 


VII 


᾿Αλλ᾽ εἰ καὶ κατέχει καὶ ἀπολαύει, KaTa- 

A” \ A 
χρῆται πρὸς ὃ πέφυκε. πέφυκε δὲ τοῦ προσ- 
161 ήκοντος ἑαυτῇ κατὰ ποιότητα καὶ οἰκείου 





1 Note use of psychological terms in biology. cf. also 
p. 133, note 3. 
2 «In everything.” cf. p. 66, note 3. 


248 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. vi.-vun 


speak, an appetite for their own special quality, and 
an aversion to, or, as it were, a hatred 1 of the foreign 
quality. And it is natural that when they feel an 
inclination they should attract, and that when they 
feel aversion they should expel. 

From these facts, then, again, both the attractive 

_and the propulsive faculties have been demonstrated 
to exist in everything.” 

But if there be an inclination or attraction, there 
will also be some benefit derived; for no existing 
thing attracts anything else for the mere sake of 
attracting, but in order to benefit by what is acquired 
by the attraction. And of course it cannot benefit 

-by it if it cannot retain it. Herein, then, again, 
the retentive faculty is shown to have its necessary 
origin: for the stomach obviously inclines towards 
its own proper qualities and turns away from those 
that are foreign to it.® 

But if it aims at and attracts its food and benefits 
by it while retaining and contracting upon it, we 
may also expect that there will be some termination 
to the benefit received, and that thereafter will come 
the time for the exercise of the eliminative faculty. 


VII 


Bur if the stomach both retains and benefits by its 
food, then it employs it for the end for which it [the 
stomach] naturally exists. And it exists to partake 
of that which is of a quality befitting and proper to 

8 Galen confuses the nutrition of organs with that of the 


ultimate living elements or cells; the stomach does not, of 
course, feed itself in the way a cell does. cf. Introduction, 


Ῥ. ΧΧΧΙΪ. 249 


GALEN 


μεταλαμβάνειν. ὥσθ᾽ ἕλκει τῶν σιτίων ὅσον 
χρηστότατον ἀτμωδῶς τε καὶ κατὰ βραχὺ καὶ 
τοῦτο τοῖς ἑαυτῆς χιτῶσιν ἐναποτίθεταί τε καὶ 
προστίθησιν. ὅταν δ᾽ ἱκανῶς ἐμπλησθῇ, καθά- 
περ ἄχθος τι τὴν λοιπὴν ἀποτίθεται τροφὴν 
ἐσχηκυΐάν τί χρηστὸν ἤδη καὶ αὐτὴν ἐκ τῆς π ὃς 
τὴν γαστέρα κοινωνίας" οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐνδέχεται δύο 
σώματα δρᾶν καὶ πάσχειν ἐπιτήδεια συνελθόντα 
μὴ οὐκ ἤτοι πάσχειν Oa ἅμα καὶ δρᾶν ἢ θάτερον 
μὲν δρᾶν, θάτερον δὲ πάσχειν. ἐὰν μὲν γὰρ 
ἰσάξῃ ταῖς δυνάμεσιν, ἐξ ἴσου δράσει τε καὶ 
πείσεται, ἂν δ' ὑπερέχῃ πολὺ καὶ κρατῇ θάτερον, 
ἐνεργήσει περὶ τὸ πάσ ΟΡ" ὥστε δράσει μέγα 
μέν τι καὶ αἰσθητόν, αὐτὸ δ᾽ ἤτοι σμικρόν τι καὶ 
οὐκ αἰσθητὸν ἢ παντάπασιν οὐδὲν πείσεται. ἀλλ᾽ 
ἐν τούτῳ δὴ καὶ μάλιστα διήνεγκε, φαρμάκου 
δηλητηρίου τροφή" τὸ μὲν γὰρ κρατεῖ τῆς ἐν τῷ 
σώματι δυνάμεως, ἡ δὲ κρατεῖται. 
Οὔκουν ἐνδέχεται τροφὴν μὲν εἶναί τι τῷ ζῴῳ 
προσήκουσαν, οὐ μὴν καὶ κρατεῖσ αἱ γ᾽ ομοίως 
162 πρὸς τῶν || ἐν τῷ Sow ποιοτήτων" τὸ κρατεῖσθαι 
δ᾽ ἣν ἀλλοιοῦσθαι. ἀλλ᾽ ἐπεὶ τὰ μὲν ἰσχυρότερα 
ταῖς δυνάμεσίν ἐστι μόρια, τὰ δ᾽ ἀσθενέστερα, 
κρατήσει μὲν πάντα τῆς οἰκείας τῷ ζῴῳ τροφῆς, 
οὐχ ὁμοίως δὲ πάντα' κρατήσει δ᾽ ἄρα καὶ ἡ 
γαστὴρ καὶ ἀλλοιώσει μὲν τὴν τροφήν, οὐ μὴν 
ὁμοίως ἥπατι καὶ φλεψὶ καὶ ἀρτηρίαις κα 
καρδίᾳ. 
Πόσον οὖν ἐστιν, ὃ ἀλλοιοῖ, καὶ δὴ θεασώμεθα: 
πλέον μὲν ἢ κατὰ τὸ στόμα, μεῖον δ᾽ ἢ κατὰ τὸ 


1 ¢f. Asclepiades’s theory regarding the urine, p. 51. 
2 The process of application or prosthesis. ef. Ὁ. 223, note 3. 


250 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. vir 


it. Thus it attracts all the most useful parts of the 
food in a vaporous! and finely divided condition, 
storing this up in its own coats, and applying? it to 
them. And when it is sufficiently full it puts away 
from it, as one might something troublesome, the rest 
of the food, this having itself meanwhile obtained some 
profit from its association with the stomach. For it 
is impossible for two bodies which are adapted for 
acting and being acted upon to come together with- 
out either both acting or being acted upon, or else 
one acting and the other being acted upon. For if 
their forces are equal they will act and be acted 
upon equally, and if the one be much superior in 
strength, it will exert its activity upon its passive 
neighbour ; thus, while producing a great and appre- 
ciable effect, it will itself be acted upon either little 
or not at all. But it- is herein also that the main 
difference lies between nourishing food and a dele- 
terious drug; the latter masters the forces of the 
body, whereas the former is mastered by them.3 

There cannot, then, be food which is suited for the 
animal which is not also correspondingly subdued by 
the qualities existing in the animal. And to be 
subdued means to undergo alteration.4 Now, some 
parts are stronger in power and others weaker ; 
therefore, while all will subdue the nutriment which 
is proper to the animal, they will not all do so 
equally. Thus the stomach will subdue and alter its 
food, but not to the same extent as will the liver, 
veins, arteries, and heart. 

We must therefore observe to what extent it does 
alter it. The alteration is more than that which 


+ Mutual influence of organism and environment. 
+ Qualitative change. cf. Book I., chap. ii. 


251 


GALEN 


ἧπάρ te καὶ τὰς φλέβας. αὕτη μὲν yap ἡ 
’ , ἢ Ψ ,) Ν) \ / 
ἀλλοίωσις εἰς αἱματος οὐσιαν ἄγει THY τροφὴν, 
A / A 
ἡ δ᾽ ἐν τῷ στόματε μεθίστησι μὲν αὐτὴν ἐναργῶς 
εἰς ἕτερον εἶδος, οὐ μὴν εἰς τέλος γε μετακοσμεῖ. 
4 3 > δ Δ 3 7 A 
μάθοις δ᾽ ἂν ἐπὶ τῶν ἐγκαταλειφθέντων ταῖς 
διαστάσεσι τῶν ὀδόντων σιτίων καὶ καταμεινάν- 
> of / ww \ ” 9 a ς 
tov δι’ ὅλης νυκτός" οὔτε γὰρ ἄρτος ἀκριβῶς ὁ 
bd bd / 3 \ \ / 3 > ΓΝ Ἁ 
ἄρτος οὔτε κρεᾶς ἐστὶ TO κρέας, ἀλλ ὄξει μὲν 
τοιοῦτον, οἷόνπερ καὶ τοῦ ζῴου τὸ στόμα, δια- 
λέλυται δὲ καὶ διατέτηκε καὶ τὰς ἐν τῷ Cow τῆς 
σαρκὸς ἀπομέμακται ποιότητας. ἔνεστι δέ σοι 
4 \ ’ nA 9 A / A 
163 θεάσασθαι τὸ μέγεθος τῆς ἐν τῷ στόματι || τῶν 
σιτίων ἀλλοιώσεως, εἰ πυροὺς μασησάμενος 
᾽ ’ὔ 3 / A 4 \ 3 Ἁ 
ἐπιθείης ἀπέπτοις δοθιῆσιν: ὄψει γὰρ αὐτοὺς 
τάχιστα μεταβάλλοντάς τε καὶ συμπέττοντας, 
οὐδὲν τοιοῦτον, ὅταν ὕδατι φυραθῶσιν, ἐργάσα- 
σθαι δυναμένους. καὶ μὴ θαυμάσῃς" τὸ γάρ τοι 
“ 
φλέγμα τουτὶ τὸ κατὰ τὸ στόμα καὶ λειχήνων 
ἐστὶν ἄκος καὶ σκορπίους ἀναιρεῖ παραχρῆμα καὶ 
πολλὰ τῶν ἰοβόλων θηρίων τὰ μὲν εὐθέως 
ἀποκτείνει, τὰ δ᾽ ἐς ὕστερον: ἅπαντα γοῦν 
’ 
βλάπτει μεγάλως. ἀλλὰ τὰ μεμασημένα σιτία 
a ol , 
πρῶτον μὲν τούτῳ τῷ φλέγματι βέβρεκταΐ τε 
καὶ πεφύραται, δεύτερον δὲ καὶ τῷ χρωτὶ τοῦ 
, 
στόματος ἅπαντα πεπλησίακεν, ὥστε πλείονα 
Ἁ ἴω ΄΄ὸὦ , la) 
μεταβολὴν εἴληφε τῶν ἐν ταῖς κεναῖς χώραις τῶν 
ὀδόντων ἐσφηνωμένων. 
> 
Αλλ᾽ ὅσον τὰ μεμασημένα τούτων ἐπὶ πλέον 
/ “A / 
ἠλλοίωται, τοσοῦτον ἐκείνων τὰ καταποθέντα. 


252 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIT. vi 


occurs in the mouth, but less than that in the liver 
and veins. For the latter alteration changes the 
nutriment into the substance of blood, whereas that in 
the mouth obviously changes it into a new form, but \ 
certainly does not completely transmute it. This 
you may discover in the food which is left in the 
intervals between the teeth, and which remains there: 
all night; the bread is not exactly bread, nor the 
meat meat, for they have a smell similar to that of 
the animal’s mouth, and have been disintegrated and, 
dissolved, and have had the qualities of the animal’s! 
flesh impressed upon them. And you may observe 
the extent of the alteration which occurs to food in 
the mouth if you will chew some corn and then 
apply it to an unripe [undigested] boil: you will see 
it rapidly transmuting—in fact entirely digesting— 
the boil, though it cannot do anything of the kind if 
you mix it with water. And do not let this surprise 
you ; this phlegm [saliva] in the mouth is also a cure 
for lichens!; it even rapidly destroys scorpions ; 
while, as regards the animals which emit venom, 
some it kills at once, and others after an interval ; 
to all of them in any case it does great damage. 
Now, the masticated food is all, firstly, soaked in and 
mixed up with this phlegm; and secondly, it is 
brought into contact with the actual skin of the 
mouth; thus it undergues more change than the 
food which is wedged into the vacant spaces between 
the teeth. 

But just as masticated food is more altered than 
the latter kind, so is food which has been swallowed 
more altered than that which has been merely 


1 Apparently skin-diseases in which a superficial crust 
(resembling the lichen on a tree-trunk) forms—e.g. psoriasis. 


253 


GALEN 

μὴ yap οὐδὲ παραβλητὸν ἦ τὸ τῆς ὑπερβολῆς, 
εἰ τὸ κατὰ τὴν κοιλίαν ἐννοήσαιμεν Cee καὶ 
χολὴν καὶ πνεῦμα καὶ θερμασίαν καὶ ὅλην τὴν 
οὐσίαν τῆς γαστρός. εἰ δὲ καὶ συνεπινοήσαις 
164 αὐτῇ τὰ παρακείμενα || σπλάγχνα καθάπερ τινὶ 
λέβητι μεγάλῳ πυρὸς ἑστίας πολλάς, ἐκ Sek viv 
μὲν τὸ ἧπαρ, ἐξ ἀριστερῶν δὲ τὸν σπλῆνα, τὴν 
καρδίαν δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν ἄνω, σὺν αὐτῇ δὲ καὶ τὰς 
pe aiwpovpévas τε καὶ διὰ παντὸς κινουμένας, 
φ᾽ ἅπασι δὲ τούτοις σκέπον τὸ ἐπίπλοον, ἐξαί- 
σιόν τινα πεισθήσῃ τὴν ἀλλοίωσιν γίγνεσθαι τῶν 

εἰς τὴν γαστέρα καταποθέντων σιτίων. 
᾿ Πῶς ὃ ἂν ἠδύνατο ῥᾳδίως αἱματοῦσθαι μὴ 
προπαρασκευασθέντα τῇ τοιαύτῃ μεταβολῇ; δέ- 
δεικταε γὰρ οὖν καὶ πρόσθεν, ὡς οὐδὲν εἰς τὴν 
ἐναντίαν ἀθρόως μεθίσταται ποιότητα. πῶς οὖν 
ὁ ἄρτος αἷμα γίγνεται, πῶς δὲ τὸ τεῦτλον ἢ ὁ 
κύαμος ἤ τι τῶν ἄλλων, εἰ μὴ πρότερόν Tw ἑτέραν 
ἀλλοίωσιν ἐδέξατο; πῶς δ᾽ ἡ κόπρος ἐν τοῖς 
λεπτοῖς ἐντέροις ἀθρόως γεννηθήσεται; τί γὰρ ἐν 
τούτοις cob pérepor εἰς ἀλλοίωσίν ἐστι τῶν κατὰ 
τὴν γαστέρα; πότερα τῶν χιτώνων τὸ πλῆθος ἢ 
τῶν γειτνιώντων σπλάγχνων ἡ περίθεσις ἢ τῆς 
μονῆς ὁ χρόνος ἢ σύμφυτός τις ἐν τοῖς ὀργάνοις 
θερμασία; καὶ μὴν κατ᾽ οὐδὲν τούτων πλεονεκτεῖ 
τὰ ἔντερα τῆς γαστρός. τί ποτ᾽ οὖν ἐν μὲν τῇ 
106 γαστρὶ νυκτὸς || ὅλης πολλάκις μείναντα τὸν 
ἄρτον ἔτι φυλάττεσθαι βούλονται τὰς ἀρχαίας 
διασῴζοντα ποιότητας, ἐπειδὰν δ᾽ ἅπαξ ἐμπέσῃ 
1 Note especially pneuma and innate heat, which practi- 


cally stand for oxygen and the heat poner in oxidation. 
* of. p. 41, note 8. 3 k I., chap. x. 


254 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. vn 


masticated. Indeed, there is no comparison between 
these two processes ; we have only to consider what 
the stomach contains—phlegm, bile, pneuma, [in- 
nate] heat,! and, indeed the whole substance of the 
stomach. And if one considers along with this the 
adjacent viscera, like a lot of burning hearths around | 
a great cauldron—to the right the liver, to the left 
the spleen, the heart above, and along with it the 
diaphragm (suspended and in a state of constant 
movement), and the omentum sheltering them all— 
you may believe what an extraordinary alteration it 
is which occurs in the food taken into the stomach. 
How could it easily become blood if it were not 
previously prepared by means of a change of this 
kind? It has already been shown? that nothing is 
altered all at once from one quality to its opposite. 
How then could bread, beef, beans, or any other 
food turn into blood if they had not previously 
undergone some other alteration? And how could 
the faeces be generated right away in the small 
intestine? For what is there in this ergan more 
potent in producing alteration than the factors in the 
stomach? [5 it the number of the coats, or the way 
it is surrounded by neighbouring viscera, or the time 
that the food remains in it, or some kind of innate 
heat which it contains? Most assuredly the intestines 
have the advantage of the stomach in none of these 
respects. For what possible reason, then, will ob- 
jectors have it that bread may often remain a whole 
night in the stomach and still preserve its original 
qualities, whereas when once it is projected into the 
ὃ That is to say, faeces are obviously altered food. This 
alteration cannot have taken place entirely in the small 


intestine: therefore alteration of food must take place in the 
stomach. 
255 


GALEN 


τοῖς ἐντέροις, εὐθὺς γίγνεσθαι κόπρον; εἰ μὲν 

e fe! La > 4 3 fal 9 Ὁ» Ὁ 
γὰρ ὁ τοσοῦτος γρόνος ἀδύνατος ἀλλοιοῦν, οὐδ᾽ ὁ 
βραχὺς ἱκανός" εἰ δ᾽ οὗτος αὐτάρκης, πῶς οὐ 

‘ “A id , φ 9 a 9 ~ ΑἉ 
πολυ μᾶλλον ὁ μακρος; ἂρ οὖν ἀλλοιοῦται μὲν 
ἡ τροφὴ κατὰ τὴν κοιλίαν, ἄλλην δὲ τιν᾽ ἀλλοίω- 
σιν καὶ οὐχ οἵαν ἐκ τῆς φύσεως ἴσχει τοῦ μετα- 
βάλλοντος ὀργάνου; ἢ ταύτην μέν, οὐ μὴν τήν 
γ᾽ οἰκείαν τῷ τοῦ. ξώου σώματι; μακρῷ τοῦτ᾽ 
3 ’ ‘ b>] Ἁ Ἁ > Ν 3. 4 .« 
ἀδυνατώτερόν ἐστι. καὶ μὴν οὐκ ἄλλο γ᾽ ἦν ἡ 

’ a ? , 3 ‘ > , “A 4 
πέψις ἢ ἀλλοίωσις εἰς THY οἰκείαν τοῦ τρεφομένου 
ποιότητα. εἴπερ οὖν ἡ πέψις τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι καὶ ἡ 
τροφὴ κατὰ τὴν γαστέρα δέδεικται δεχομένη 

’ A ; A x » 4 ? 
ποιότητα τῷ μέλλοντι πρὸς αὐτῆς θρέψεσθαι ζῴῳ 
προσήκουσαν, ἱκανῶς ἀποδέδεικται τὸ πέττεσθαι 
κατὰ τὴν γαστέρα τὴν τροφήν. 

Καὶ γελοῖος μὲν ᾿Ασκληπιάδης οὔτ᾽ ἐν ταῖς 
ἐρυγαῖς λέγων ἐμφαίνεσθαί ποτε τὴν ποιότητα 
τῶν πεφθέντων σιτίων οὔτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ἐμέτοις οὔτ᾽ 

166 ἐν ταῖς ἀνα τομαῖς: αὐτὸ yap δὴ τὸ τοῦ σώματος 
ἐξόζξειν αὐτὰ τῆς κοιλίας ἐστὶ τὸ πεπέφθαι. ὁ δ᾽ 

Ψ 3 N > / Lf 3 3 \ A ~ 
οὕτως ἐστὶν εὐήθης, ὥστ᾽, ἐπειδὴ τῶν παλαιῶν 
ἀκούει λεγόντων ἐπὶ τὸ χρηστὸν ἐν τῇ γαστρὶ 

4 \ ΄ / a 3 Ν 
μεταβάλλειν τὰ σιτία, δοκιμάζει ξητεῖν οὐ τὸ 
κατὰ δύναμιν ἀλλὰ τὸ κατὰ γεῦσιν χρηστόν, 
ὥσπερ ἢ τοῦ μήλου μηλωδεστέρου---χρὴ yap 
οὕτως αὐτῷ διαλέγεσθαι---γιγνομένου κατὰ τὴν 
κοιλίαν ἢ τοῦ μέλιτος μελιτωδεστέρου. 





1 cf. p. 39. 
2 Asclepiades held that there was no such thing as real 


256 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. vir 


intestines, it straightway becomes ordure? For, if 
such a long period of time is incapable of altering it, 
neither will the short period be sufficient, or, if the 
latter is enough, surely the longer time will be much 
more so! Well, then, can it be that, while the 
nutriment does undergo an alteration in the stomach, 
this is a different kind of alteration and one which is 
not dependent on the nature of the organ which 
alters it? Or if it be an alteration of this latter 
kind, yet one perhaps which is not proper to the 
body of the animal? This is still more impossible. 
Digestion was shown to be nothing else than an 
alteration to the quality proper to that which is 
receiving nourishment.! Since, then, this is what 
digestion means and since the nutriment has been 
shown to take on in the stomach a quality appro- 
priate to the animal which is about to be nourished 
by it, it has been demonstrated adequately that 
nutriment does undergo digestion in the stomach. 

And Asclepiades is absurd when he states that 
the quality of the digested food never shows itself 
either in eructations or in the vomited matter, or on 
dissection.2, For of course the mere fact that the 
food smells of the body shows that it has undergone 
gastric digestion. But this man is so foolish that, 
when he hears the Ancients saying that the food is 
converted in the stomach into something “ good,” he 
thinks it proper to look out not for what is good in 
its possible effects, but for what is good to the taste: 
this is like saying that apples (for so one has to argue 
with him) become more apple-like {in flavour] in the 
stomach, or honey more honey-like ! 


qualitative change ; the food was merely broken up into its 
constituent molecules, and absorbed unaltered. cf. p. 49, 
note 5. 257 


GALEN 


Πολὺ δ᾽ εὐηθέστερός ἐστι καὶ γελοιότερος ὁ 
᾿Ερασίστρατος ἢ μὴ νοῶν, ὅπως εἴρηται πρὸς τῶν 
παλαιῶν ἡ πέψις ἑψήσει παραπλήσιος ὑπάρχειν, 
ἢ ἑκὼν σοφιζόμενος ἑαυτόν. ἑψήσει μὲν οὖν, 
φησίν, οὕτως ἐλαφρὰν ἔχουσαν θερμασίαν οὐκ 
εἰκὸς εἶναι παραπλησίαν τὴν πέψιν, ὥσπερ ἢ τὴν 
Αἴτνην δέον ὑποθεῖναι τῇ γαστρὶ ἢ ἄλλως αὐτῆς 
ἀλλοιῶσαι τὰ σιτία μὴ δυναμένης ἢ δυναμένης 
μὲν ἀλλοιοῦν, οὐ κατὰ τὴν ἔμφυτον δὲ θερμασίαν, 
ὑγρὰν οὖσαν δηλονότι καὶ διὰ τοῦθ᾽ ἕψειν οὐκ 
ὀπτᾶν εἰρημένην. 

Ἐχρῆν δ᾽ αὐτόν, εἴπερ περὶ πραγμάτων ἀντι- 
λέγειν ἐβούλετο, πειραθῆναι δεῖξαι μάλιστα μὲν 

167 καὶ || πρῶτον, ὡς οὐδὲ μεταβάλλει τὴν ἀρχὴν οὐδ᾽ 
ἀλλοιοῦται κατὰ ποιότητα πρὸς τῆς γαστρὸς τὰ 
σιτία, δεύτερον δ᾽, εἴπερ μὴ οἷός τ᾿ ἦν τοῦτο 
πιστώσασθαι, τὸ τὴν ἀλλοίωσιν αὐτῶν ἄχρηστον 
εἶναι τῷ Cap εἰ δὲ μηδὲ τοῦτ᾽ εἶχε διαβάλλειν, 
ἐξελέγξαι τὴν περὶ τὰς δραστικὰς ἀρχὰς ὑπό- 
Any καὶ δεῖξαι τὰς ἐνεργείας ἐν τοῖς μορίοις οὐ 
διὰ τὴν ἐκ θερμοῦ καὶ ψυχροῦ καὶ ξηροῦ καὶ 
ὑγροῦ ποιὰν κρᾶσιν ὑπάρχειν ἀλλὰ δι’ ἄλλο τι" 
εἰ δὲ μηδὲ τοῦτ᾽ ἐτόλμα διαβάλλειν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε γε 
μὴ τὸ θερμόν ἐστιν ἐν τοῖς ὑπὸ φύσεως διοικου- 
μένοις τὸ τῶν ἄλλων δραστικώτατον. ἢ εἰ μήτε 
τοῦτο μήτε τῶν ἄλλων τι τῶν ἔμπροσθεν εἶχεν 
ἀποδεικνύναι, μὴ ληρεῖν ὀνόματι προσπαλαίοντα 





1 4.e. denial of forethought in the Physis. 
258 








ΟΝ THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. vu 


Erasistratus, however, is still more foolish and 
absurd, either through not perceiving in what sense 
the Ancients said that digestion is similar to the 
process of bozling, or because he purposely confused 
himself with sophistries. It is, he says, inconceivable 
that digestion, involving as it does such trifling 
warmth, should be related to the boiling process. 
This is as if we were to suppose that it was necessary 
to put the fires of Etna under the stomach before it 
could manage to alter the food ; or else that, while it 
was capable of altering the food, it did not do this 
by virtue of its innate heat, which of course was 
moist, so that the word bot! was used instead of 
bake. 

What he ought to have done, if it was facts that he 
wished to dispute about, was to have tried to show, 
first and foremost, that the food is not transmuted or 
altered in quality by the stomach at all, and secondly, 
if he could not be confident of this, he ought to 
have tried to show that this alteration was not of any 
advantage to the animal.) If, again, he were unable 
even to make this misrepresentation, he ought to 
have attempted to confute the postulate concerning 
the active princtples—to show, in fact, that the functions 
taking place in the various parts do not depend on the 
way in which the Warm, Cold, Dry, and Moist are 
mixed, but on some other factor. And if he had not 
the audacity to misrepresent facts even so far as this, 
still he should have tried at least to show that the 
Warm is not the most active of all the principles 
which play a part in things governed by Nature. But 
if he was unable to demonstrate this any more than 
any of the previous propositions, then he ought not to 
have made himself ridiculous by quarrelling uselessly 


259 
s 2 


! 


| 


GALEN 


’ . > a b ΝΜ 3 
μάτην, ὥσπερ οὐ σαφῶς ᾿Αριστοτέλους ἔν τ 
4 a) 9 lo! , a 
ἄλλοις πολλοῖς κἂν τῷ τετάρτῳ τῶν μετεωρολογι- 

A e e / e 4 , 4 
κῶν ὅπως ἡ πέψις ἑψήσει παραπλήσιος εἶναι 
λέγεται, καὶ ὅτι μὴ πρώτως μηδὲ κυρίως ὀνομα- 
ζόντων, εἰρηκότος. 

᾿Αλλ᾽, ὡς ἤδη λέλεκται πολλάκις, ἀρχὴ τούτων 

- ἅπάντων ἐστὶ μία τὸ περὶ θερμοῦ καὶ ψυχροῦ καὶ 
ξηροῦ καὶ ὑγροῦ διασκέψασθαι, καθάπερ Αριστο- 
τέλης ἐποίησεν ἐν τῷ δευτέρῳ περὶ γενέσεως καὶ 
A 3 lA e , A ’ 
168 φθορᾶς, ἀποδείξας ἁπάσας τὰς κατὰ τὰ σώματα 
3 , e Ν ’ ’ὔ 

μεταβολὰς καὶ ἀλλοιώσεις ὑπὸ τούτων γίγνεσθαι. 
3 3.2 ’ ΝΜ ’ἤ ΜΝ 35 Ν 
ἀλλ᾽ ᾿Ερασίστρατος οὔτε τούτοις οὔτ᾽ ἄλλῳ τινὶ 
τῶν προειρημένων ἀντειπὼν ἐπὶ τοὔνομα μόνον 
ἐτράπετο τῆς ἑψήσεως. 


VIII 


Ἐπὶ μὲν οὖν τῆς πέψεως, εἰ καὶ τἄλλα πάντα 
παρέλιπε, τὸ γοῦν ὅτι διαφέρει τῆς ἐκτὸς ἑψήσεως 
ἡ ἐν τοῖς ζῴοις πέψις, ἐπειράθη δεικνύναι, περὶ 
δὲ τῆς καταπόσεως οὐδ᾽ ἄχρι τοσούτου. τί γάρ 
φησιν; 

“Ὁ λκὴ μὲν οὖν τῆς κοιλίας οὐδεμία φαίνεται 
εἶναι." 

Καὶ μὴν δύο χιτῶνας ἡ γαστὴρ ἔχει πάντως 
ἕνεκά του γεγονότας καὶ διήκουσιν οὗτοι μέχρι 
τοῦ στόματος, ὁ μὲν ἔνδον, οἷός ἐστι κατὰ τὴν 
γαστέρα, τοιοῦτος διαμένων, ὁ δ᾽ ἕτερος ἐπὶ τὸ 


26ο 














ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, ΠῚ. vit.-—virr 


with a mere name—as though Aristotle had not 
clearly stated in the fourth book of his “ Meteoro- 
logy,” as well as in many other passages, in what 
way digestion can be said to be allied to boiling, 
and also that the latter expression is not used in 
its primitive or strict sense. 

But, as has beén frequently said already,! the one 
starting-point of all this is a thoroughgoing enquiry 
into the question of the Warm, Cold, Dry and Moist ; 
this Aristotle carried out in the second of his books 
“On Genesis and Destruction,” where he shows that 
all the transmutations and alterations throughout 
the body take place as a result of these principles. 
Erasistratus, however, advanced nothing against these 
or anything else that has been said above, but 
occupied himself merely with the word “ boiling.” 


VIII 


Tuus, as regards digestion, even though he neglected 
everything else, he did at least -attempt to prove his 
point—namely, that digestion in animals differs from 
boiling carried on outside ; in regard to the question 
of deglutstion, however, he ‘did not go even so far as 
this. What are his words? 

“ The stomach does not appear to exercise any 
traction.” 2 

Now the fact is that the stomach possesses two 
coats, which certainly exist for some purpose ; they 
extend as far as the mouth, the internal one remaining 
throughout similar to what: it is in the stomach, and 
the other one tending to become of a more fleshy 


1 y. p. 9, et passim. 2 cf. p. 97. 
261 


GALEN 


σαρκωδέστερον ἐν TH στομάχῳ τρεπόμενος. ὅτε 
ν οὖν ἐναντίας ἀλλήλαις τὰς ἐπιβολὰς τῶν 
ἰνῶν ἔχουσιν οἱ χιτῶνες οὗτοι, τὸ φαινόμενον 
αὐτὸ μαρτυρεῖ. τίνος δ᾽ ἕνεκα τοιοῦτοι γεγό- 
νασιν, Ἐρασίστρατος μὲν οὐδ᾽ ἐπεχείρησεν εἰπεῖν, 
ἡμεῖς δ᾽ ἐροῦμεν. 
Ὁ μὲν ἔνδον εὐθείας ἔχει τὰς ivas, ὁλκῆς γὰρ 
169 ἕνεκα γέγονεν: ὁ δ᾽ ἔξωθεν ἐγκαρσίας ὑπὲρ τοῦ 
κατὰ κύκλον περιστέλλεσθαι' ἑκάστῳ γὰρ τῶν 
κινουμένων ὀργάνων ἐν τοῖς σώμασι κατὰ τὰς 
τῶν ἰνῶν θέσεις αἱ κινήσεις εἰσίν. ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν δὲ 
πρῶτον τῶν μυῶν, εἰ βούλει, βασάνισον τὸν 
λόγον, ἐφ᾽ ὧν καὶ αἱ ives ἐναργέσταται καὶ at 
κινήσεις αὐτῶν ὁρῶνται διὰ σφοδρότητα. μετὰ 
δὲ τοὺς μῦς ἐπὶ τὰ φυσικὰ τῶν ὀργάνων ἴθι καὶ 
πάντ᾽ ὄψει κατὰ τὰς ἷνας κινούμενα καὶ διὰ τοῦθ᾽ 
ἑκάστῳ μὲν τῶν ἐντέρων στρογγύλαι καθ᾽ ἑκά- 
τερον τῶν χιτώνων αἱ ivés εἰσι" περιστέλλονται 
γὰρ μόνον, ἕλκουσι δ᾽ οὐδέν. ἡ γαστὴρ δὲ τῶν 
ἰνῶν τὰς μὲν εὐθείας ἔχει χάριν ὁλκῆς, τὰς δ᾽ 
ἐγκαρσίας ἕνεκα πέριστολῆς" ὥσπερ γὰρ ἐν τοῖς 
μυσὶν ἑκάστης τῶν ἰνῶν τεινομένης τε καὶ πρὸς 
τὴν ἀρχὴν ἑλκομένης αἱ κινήσεις γίγνονται, κατὰ 
τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον κἀν τῇ γαστρί: τῶν μὲν οὖν 
ἐγκαρσίων ἰνῶν τεινομένων ἔλαττον ἀνάγκη γί- 





1 It appears to me, from comparison between this and other 
passages in Galen’s writings (notably Use of Parts, iv., 8), 
that he means by the ‘‘two coats” simply the mucous and 
the muscular coats. In this case the ‘‘straight” or ‘‘longi- 
tudinal” fibres of the inner coat would be the γέρας; the 
‘‘cireular” fibres of the inner intestinal coat would be the 
valvulae conniventes. 


262 














ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. vin 


nature in the gullet. Now simple observation will 
testify that these coats have their fibres inserted in © 
contrary directions... And, although Erasistratus did 
not attempt to say for what reason they are like this, 
I am going to do so. , 

The inner coat has its fibres straight, since it exists 
for the purpose of traction. The outer coat has 
its fibres transverse, for the purpose of peristalsis.? 
In fact, the movements of each of the mobile organs 
of the body depend on the setting of the fibres. 
Now please test this assertion first in the muscles 
themselves; in these the fibres are most distinct, and 
their movements visible owing to their vigour. And 
after the muscles, pass to the physical organs,? and 
you will see that they all move in correspondence 
with their fibres. This is why the fibres throughout 
the intestines are circular in both coats—they only 
contract peristaltically, they do not exercise traction. 
The stomach, again, has some of its fibres longitudinal 
for the purpose of traction and the others transverse 
for the purpose of peristalsis.2 For just as the 
movements in the muscles‘ take place when each of 
the fibres becomes tightened and drawn towards its 
origin, such also is what happens in the stomach ; 
when the transverse fibres tighten, the breadth of 


2 The term here rendered peristalsis is peristolé in Greek ; 
it is applied only to the intermittent movements of muscles 
placed circularly round a lumen or cavity, and comprehends 
systolé or contraction and diastolé or dilatation. In its 
modern significance, peristalsis, however, also includes the 
movements of longitudinal fibres. cf. p. 97, note 1. 

3 2,6. those containing non-striped or ‘‘ involuntary” muscle. 
fibres; organs governed by the ‘‘natural” pneuma; cf. 
p- 186, note 3. 

* By this term is meant only what we should call the 
‘* voluntary ” muscles. 


263 


GALEN 


γνεσθαι τὸ εὗρος τῆς περιεχομένης ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν 
KOLNOTNTOS, τῶν δ᾽ εὐθειῶν ἑλκομένων τε καὶ εἰς 
ἑαυτὰς συναγομένων οὐκ ἐνδέχεται μὴ οὐ συναι- 

170 ρεῖσθαι τὸ μῆκος. ἀλλὰ μὴν || ἐναργῶς γε φαίνεται 
καταπινόντων συναιρούμενον καὶ τοσοῦτον ὁ 
λάρυγξ ἀνατρέχων, ὅσον ὁ στόμαχος κατασπᾶ- 
ται, καὶ ὅταν γε συμπληρωθείσης τῆς ἐν τῷ 
καταπίνειν ἐνεργείας ἀφεθῇ τῆς τάσεως ὁ στόμα- 
χος, ἐναργῶς πάλιν φαίνεται, καταφερόμενος ὁ 
λάρυγξ' ὁ γὰρ ἔνδον χιτὼν τῆς γαστρὸς ὁ τὰς 
εὐθείας ἶνας ἔ ἔχων ὁ καὶ τὸν στόμαχον ὑπαλείφων 
καὶ τὸ στόμα τοῖς ἐντὸς μέρεσιν ἐπεκτείνεται τοῦ 
λάρυγγος, ὥστ᾽ οὐκ ἐνδέχεται κατασπώμενον 
αὐτὸν ὑπὸ τῆς κοιλίας μὴ οὐ συνεπισπᾶσθαι καὶ 
τὸν λάρυγγα. 

“Ὅτι δ᾽ αἱ περιφερεῖς ives, als περιστέλλεται 
τά T ἄλλα μόρια καὶ 0 γαστήρ, οὐ συναιροῦσε 
τὸ μῆκος, ἀλλὰ συστέλλουσι καὶ στενοῦσι τὴν 
εὐρύτητα, καὶ Tap αὐτοῦ λαβεῖν ἔστιν ὁμολογού- 

᾿ μενον ᾿Ερασιστράτου" περιστέλλεσθαι “γάρ φησι 
τοῖς σιτίοις τὴν γαστέρα κατὰ τὸν τῆς πέψεως 
ἅπαντα χρόνον. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ περιστέλλεται μέν, 
οὐδὲν δὲ τοῦ μήκους ἀφαιρεῖται τῆς κοιλίας, οὐκ 
ἔστι τῆς “περισταλτικῆς κινήσεως ἴδιον τὸ κατα- 
σπᾶν κάτω τὸν στόμαχον. ὅπερ γὰρ αὐτὸς ὁ 
᾿Ερασίστρατος εἶπε, τοῦτο μόνον αὐτὸ συμ- 
171 βήσεται τὸ τῶν ἄνω συστελ]λομένων διαστέλ- 
λεσθαι τὰ κάτω. τοῦτο δ᾽ ὅτι, κἂν εἰς νεκροῦ τὸν 
στόμαχον ὕδατος ἐγχέῃς, φαίνεται γιγνόμενον, 
οὐδεὶς ἀγνοεῖ. ταῖς γὰρ τῶν ὑλῶν διὰ στενοῦ 


1 cf, p. 97. : 
264 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. vin 


the cavity contained by them becomes less; and 
when the longitudinal fibres contract and draw in 
upon themselves, the length must necessarily be 
curtailed. This curtailment of length, indeed, is 
well seen in the act of swallowing: the larynx is 
seen to rise upwards to exactly the same degree that 
the gullet is drawn downwards; while, after the pro- 
cess of swallowing has been completed and the gullet 
is released from tension, the larynx can be clearly 
seen to sink down again. This is because the inner 
coat of the stomach, which has the longitudinal fibres 
and which also lines the gullet and the mouth, 
extends to the interior of the larynx, and it is thus 
impossible for it to be drawn down by the stomach 
without the larynx being involved in the traction. 

Further, it will be found acknowledged in Erasi- 
stratus’s own writings that the circular fibres (by 
which the stomach as well as other parts performs 
its contractions) do not curtail its length, but con- 
tract and lesson its breadth. For he says that the 
stomach contracts peristaltically round the food 
during the whole period of digestion. But if it 
contracts, without in any way being diminished in 
length, this is because downward traction of the 
gullet is not a property of the movement of circular 
peristalsis. For what alone happens, as Erasistratus 
himself said, is that when the upper parts contract 
the lower ones dilate.1_ And everyone knows that this 
can be plainly seen happening even in a dead man, 
if water be poured down his throat; this symptom 2 
results from the passage of matter through a narrow 

2 For ‘‘ symptom,” cf. p. 13, and p. 12, note 8. ‘‘ Transitum 
namque materiae per angustum corpus id accidens consequi- 
tur” (Linacre). Less a ‘‘result” or ‘‘ consequence ” than an 
‘* accompaniment.” 


265 


GALEN 


σώματος ὁδοιπορίαις ἀκόλουθόν ἐστι TO σύμ- 
πτωμα' θαυμαστὸν γάρ, εἰ διερχομένου τινὸς 
αὐτὸν ὄγκου μὴ διασταλήσεται. οὐκοῦν τὸ μὲν 
τῶν ἄνω συστελλομένων διαστέλλεσθαι τὰ κάτω 
κοινόν ἐστι καὶ τοῖς νεκροῖς σώμασι, δι’ ὧν 
ὁπωσοῦν τι διεξέρχεται, καὶ τοῖς ζῶσιν, εἴτε 
περιστέλλοιτο τοῖς διερχομένοις εἴθ᾽ ἕλκοιτο. 

Τὸ δὲ τῆς τοῦ μήκους συναιρέσεως ἴδιον τῶν 
τὰς εὐθείας ivas ἐχόντων ὀργάνων, ἵν᾿ ἐπισπά- 
σωνταί τι. ἀλλὰ μὴν ἐδείχθη κατασπώμενος ὁ 
στόμαχος, οὐ γὰρ ἂν εἷλκε τὸν λάρυγγα: δῆλον 
οὖν, ὡς ἡ γαστὴρ ἕλκει τὰ σιτία διὰ τοῦ 
στομάχου. 

Καὶ ἡ κατὰ τὸν ἔμετον δὲ τῶν ἐμουμένων ἄχρι 
τοῦ στόματος φορὰ πάντως μέν που καὶ αὐτὴ τὰ 
μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀναφερομένων διατεινόμενα μέρη 
τοῦ στομάχου διεστῶτα κέκτηται, τῶν πρόσω δ᾽ 
ὅ τι ἂν ἑκάστοτ᾽ ἐπιλαμβάνηται, τοῦτ᾽ ἀρχόμενον 

172 διαστέλλεταε, τὸ δ᾽ || ὄπισθεν καταλείπει δηλονότι 
συστελλόμενον, ὥσθ᾽ ὁμοίαν εἶναι πάντη τὴν 
διάθεσιν τοῦ στομάχου κατά γε τοῦτο τῇ τῶν 
καταπινόντων' ἀλλὰ τῆς ὁλκῆς μὴ παρούσης τὸ 
μῆκος ὅλον ἴσον ἐν τοῖς τοιούτοις συμπτώμασι 
διαφυλάττεται. 

Διὰ τοῦτο δὲ καὶ καταπίνειν ῥᾷόν ἐστιν ἢ ἐμεῖν, 
ὅτε καταπίνεται μὲν ἀμφοῖν τῆς γαστρὸς τῶν 
χιτώνων ἐνεργούντων, τοῦ μὲν ἐντὸς ἕλκοντος, τοῦ 
δ᾽ ἐκτὸς περιστελλομένου τε καὶ συνεπωθοῦντος, 
ἐμεῖται δὲ θατέρου μόνου τοῦ ἔξωθεν ἐνεργοῦντος, 


' a.e. this is a purely mechanical process. 


266 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. vin 


channel ; it would be extraordinary it the channel 
did not dilate when a mass was passing through it.! 
Obviously then the dilatation of the lower parts 
along with the contraction of the upper is common 
both to dead bodies, when anything whatsoever is 
passing through them, and to living ones, whether 
they contract peristaltically round their contents or 
attract them.? 

Curtailment of length, on the other hand, is 
peculiar to organs which possess longitudinal fibres 
for the purpose of attraction. But the gullet was 
shown to be pulled down; for otherwise it would 
not have drawn upon the larynx. It is therefore 
clear that the stomach attracts food by the gullet. 

Further, in vomiting, the mere passive conveyance 
of rejected matter up to the mouth will certainly 
itself suffice to keep open those parts of the oeso- 
phagus which are distended by the returned food ; 
as it occupies each part in front [above], it first 
dilates this, and of course leaves the part behind 
[below] contracted. Thus, in this respect at least, the 
condition of the gullet is precisely similar to what it 
is in the act of swallowing. But there being no 
traction, the whole length remains equal in such 
cases. 

And for this reason it is easier to swallow than 
to vomit, for deglutition results from both coats 
of the stomach being brought into action, the inner 
one exerting a pull and the outer one helping by 
peristalsis and propulsion, whereas emesis occurs 
from the outer coat alone functioning, without there 


2 z.e. this phenomenon is a proof neither of peristolé nor 
of attraction. cf. p. 97, note 2. 
3 Contraction and dilatation of course being reversed. 


267 


GALEN 


οὐδενὸς ἕλκοντος εἰς τὸ στόμα. οὐ γὰρ δὴ ὦ ὥσπερ 
ἡ τῆς γαστρὸς ὄρεξις προηγεῖτο τοῦ καταπίνειν 
τὰ σιτία, τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον κἀν τοῖς ᾿ἐμέτοις 
ἐπιθυμεῖ τι τῶν κατὰ τὸ στόμα μορίων τοῦ γιγνο- 
μένου παθήματος, ἀλλ᾽ ἄμφω τῆς γαστρὸς αὐτῆς 
εἰσιν ἐναντίαι διαθέσεις, ὀρεγομένης μὲν καὶ 
προσιεμένης τὰ χρήσιμά τε καὶ οἰκεῖα, δυσχεραι- 
νούσης δὲ καὶ ἀποτριβομένης τὰ ἀλλότρια. διὸ 
καὶ τὸ καταπίνειν αὐτὸ τοῖς μὲν ἱκανῶς ὀρεγο- 
μένοις τῶν οἰκείων ἐδεσμάτων τῇ γαστρὶ τάχιστα 
γίγνεται, σαφῶς ἑλκούσης αὐτὰ κα κατασπώσης 
πρὶν ἢ ἢ μασηθῆναι, τοῖς δ᾽ ,ἦτοι φάρμακόν τι κατ᾽ 
173 ἀνάγκην πίνουσιν ἢ σιτίον ἐν χώρᾳ φαρμάκου 
προσφερομένοις ἀνιαρὰ καὶ μόγις ἡ κατάποσις 
αὐτῶν ἐπιτελεῖται. 

Δῆλος οὖν ἐστιν ἐκ τῶν εἰρημένων ὁ μὲν ἔνδον 
χιτὼν τῆς “γαστρὸς ὁ τὰς εὐθείας ἔ ἔχων ἶνας τῆς 
ἐκ τοῦ στόματος εἰς αὐτὴν ὁλκῆς ἕνεκα γεγονὼς 
καὶ διὰ τοῦτ᾽ ἐν ταῖς καταπόσεσι μόναις ἐ ἐνεργῶν, 
ὁ δ᾽ ἔξωθεν ὁ τὰς ἐγκαρσίας ἔχων ἕνεκα μὲν τοῦ 
περιστέλλεσθαι τοῖς ἐνυπάρχουσι καὶ προωθεῖν 
αὐτὰ. τοιοῦτος ἀποτελεσθείς, ἐνεργῶν δ᾽ οὐδὲν 
ἧττον ἐν τοῖς ἐμέτοις ἢ ταῖς KATAT OG ES LY. ἐναρ- 
γέστατα δὲ μαρτυρεῖ τῷ λεγομένῳ καὶ τὸ κατὰ 
τὰς χάννας τε καὶ τοὺς συνόδοντας γιγνόμενον' 
εὑρίσκεται γὼρ ἐνίοτε τούτων ἡ γαστὴρ ἐν τῷ 
στόματι καθάπερ καὶ ὁ ᾿Αριστοτέλης ἐν ταῖς περὶ 





1 The channa is a kind οὗ sea-perch; ‘‘a species of Ser- 
ranus, either S. scriba or S. cabrilla” (D’Arcy . Thompson). 
cf. Aristotle’s Nat. Hist. (D’Arcy Thompson’s edition, Ox- 
ford, 1910), IV., xi., 538 4, 20. The synodont ‘‘is not to be 
identified with certainty, but is supposed to be Dentex vul- 


268 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. vin 


being any kind of pull towards the mouth. For, 
although the swallowing of food is ordinarily pre- 
ceded by a feeling of desire on the part of the 
stomach, there is in the case of vomiting no cor- 
responding desire from the mouth-parts for the 
experience ; the two are opposite dispositions of the 
stomach itself; it yearns after and tends towards 
what is advantageous and proper to it, it loathes and 
rids itself of what is foreign. Thus the actual 
process of swallowing occurs very quickly in those 
who have a good appetite for such foods as are 
proper to the stomach; this organ obviously draws 
them in and down before they are masticated ; 
whereas in the case of those who are forced to take 
a medicinal draught or who take food as medicine, 
the swallowing of these articles is accomplished 
with distress and difficulty. 

From what has been said, then, it is clear that the 
inner coat of the stomach (that containing longitudinal 
fibres) exists for the purpose of exerting a pull from 
mouth to stomach, and that it is only in deglutition 
‘that it is active, whereas the external coat, which 
contains transverse fibres, has been so constituted in 
order that it may contract upon its contents and 
propel them forward ; this coat furthermore, functions 
in vomiting no less than in swallowing. The truth 
of my statement is also borne out by what happens 
in the case of the channae and_ synodonts!; the 
stomachs of these anjmals are sometimes found in 
their mouths, as also Aristotle writes in his History 
garis,” that is, an edible Mediterranean perch. ‘‘It is not the 
stomach,” adds Prof. Thompson, ‘‘ but the air-bladder that 
gets everted and hangs out of the mouth in fishes, especially 


when they are hauled in from a considerable depth.” οἱ, 
H. A., VIIL, ii., 591 8, 5. 


269 


GALEN 


ξῴων ἔγραψεν ἱ ἱστορίαις καὶ προστίθησί γε τὴν 
αἰτίαν ὑπὸ λαιμαργίας αὐτοῖς τοῦτο συμβαίνειν 
άσκων. 

Ἔχει γὰρ be κατὰ τὰς σφοδροτέρας ὀρέξεις 
ἄνω προστρέχει πᾶσε τοῖς ζῴοις ἡ ἡ γαστήρ, ὥστε 
τινὲς τοῦ πάθους αἴσθησιν ἐναργῆ σχόντες 
ἐξέρπειν αὑτοῖς φασι τὴν κοιλίαν, ἐ ἐνίων δὲ μασω- 

174 μένων ἔτι καὶ μήπω ᾿ καλῶς ἐν τῷ στόματι 
τὰ σιτία κατεργασαμένων ἐξαρπάζξει φανερῶς 
ἀκόντων. ἐφ᾽ ὧν οὖν ζῴων φύσει ,"λαιμάργων 
ὑπαρχόντων ἥ τ᾽ εὐρυχωρία τοῦ στόματός ἐστι 
δαψιλὴς ἥ τε τῆς γαστρὸς θέσις ἐγγύς, ὡς ἐπὶ 
συνόδοντός τε καὶ χάννης, οὐδὲν θαυμαστόν, ὅ ὅταν 
ἱκανῶς πεινάσαντα διώκῃ TL τῶν μικροτέρων 
ξῴων, εἶτ᾽ ἤδη ,»πλησίον ἧ τοῦ συλλαβεῖν, ava- 
τρέχειν ἐπειγούσης τῆς ἐπιθυμίας εἰς τὸ στόμα 
τὴν γαστέρα. γενέσθαι δ᾽ ἄλλως ἀμήχανον τοῦτο 
μὴ οὐχ ὥσπερ διὰ χειρὸς τοῦ στομάχου τῆς 
γαστρὸς ἐπισπωμένης εἰς ἑαυτὴν τὰ σιτία. καθά. 
περ γὰρ καὶ ἡμεῖς ὑπὸ προθυμίας ἐ ἐνίοτε τῇ χειρὶ 
συνεπεκτείνομεν ὅλους ἡμᾶς αὐτοὺς ἕνεκα τοῦ 
θᾶττον ἐπιδράξασθαι τοῦ προκειμένου σώματος, 
οὕτω καὶ ἡ γαστὴρ οἷον χειρὶ τῷ στομάχῳ 
συνεπεκτείνεται. καὶ διὰ τοῦτ᾽ ep ὧν ξῴων ἅμα 
τὰ τρία ταυτὶ συνέπεσεν, é eats τε σφοδρὰ τῆς 
τροφῆς ὅ τε στόμαχος μικρὸς ἦ τ᾽ εὐρυχωρία τοῦ 
στόματος δαψιλής, ἐπὶ τούτων ὀλίγη ῥοπὴ τῆς 
ἐπεκτάσεως εἰς τὸ στόμα τὴν κοιλίαν ὅλην ἀνα- 
φέρει. 

Ἤρκει μὲν οὖν ἴσως ἀνδρὶ φυσικῷ Tap αὐτῆς 

175 μόνης τῆς κατασκευῆς τῶν ὀργάνων τὴν ἔνδειξιν 
τῆς ἐνεργείας λαμβάνειν. οὐ γὰρ δὴ μάτην γ᾽ 


270 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. vim 


of Animals ; he also adds the cause of this: he says 
that it is owing to their voracity. 

The facts are as follows. In all animals, when the 
appetite is very intense, the stomach rises up, so that 
some people who have a clear perception of this 
condition say that their stomach “creeps out” of 
them ; in others, who are still masticating their food 
and have not yet worked it up properly in the mouth, 
the stomach obviously snatches away the food from 
them against their will. In those animals, therefore, 
which are naturally voracious, in whom the mouth 
cavity is of generous proportions, and the stomach 
situated close to it (as in the case of the synodont and 
channa), it is in no way surprising that, when they 
are sufficiently hungry and are pursuing one of the 
smaller animals, and are just on the point of catching 
it, the stomach should, under the impulse of desire, 
spring intothe mouth. And this cannot possibly take 
place in any other way than by the stomach drawing 
the food to itself by means of the gullet, as though by 
a hand. In fact, just as we ourselves, in our eager- 
ness to grasp more quickly something lying before us, | 
sometimes stretch out our whole bodies along with 
our hands, so also the stomach stretches itself forward 
along with the gullet, which is, as it were, its hand. 
And thus, in these animals in whom those three 
factors co-exist—an excessive propensity for food, a 
small gullet, and ample mouth proportions—in these, 
any slight tendency to movement forwards brings 
the whole stomach into the mouth. 

Now the constitution of the organs might itself 
suffice to give a naturalist an indication of their 
functions. For Nature would never have purpose- 


271 


GALEN 


ἂν ἡ φύσις ἐκ δυοῖν χιτώνων ἐναντίως ἀλλήλοις 
ἐχόντων ἀπειργάσατο τὸν οἰσοφάγον, εἰ μὴ καὶ 
διαφόρως ἑ ἑκάτερος αὐτῶν ἐνεργεῖν ἔμελλεν. ἀλλ᾽ 
ἐπεὶ πάντα μᾶλλον n τὰ τῆς φύσεως ἔργα δια- 
γιγνώσκειν οἱ περὶ τὸν ᾿Ερασίστρατόν εἰσιν 
ἱκανοί, φέρε κἀκ τῆς τῶν ζῴων ἀνατομῆς ἐπει- 
δείξωμεν αὐτοῖς, ὡς ἑκάτερος τῶν χιτώνων ἐνεργεῖ 
τὴν εἰρημένην ἐνέργειαν. εἰ δή τί λαβὼν Spor, 
εἶτα γυμνώσας αὐτοῦ τὰ περικείμενα τῷ στομάχῳ 
σώματα χωρὶς τοῦ διατεμεῖν τινα τῶν νεύρων ἢ 
τῶν ἀρτηριῶν ἢ τῶν φλεβῶν τῶν αὐτόθι τεταγ- 
μένων ἐθέλοις ἀπὸ τῆς γένυος ἕως τοῦ θώρακος 
εὐθείαις τομαῖς διελεῖν τὸν ἔξω χιτῶνα τὸν τὰς 
ἐγκαρσίας lvas ἔχοντα κἄπειτα τῷ Sow τροφὴν 
προσενέγκοις, ὄψει καταπῖνον αὐτὸ καίτοι τῆς 
περισταλτικῆς ἐνεργείας ἀπολωλυίας. εἰ δ᾽ αὖ 
πάλιν ἐφ᾽ ἑτέρου ζῴου διατέμοις ἀμφοτέρους τοὺς 
χιτῶνας τομαῖς ἐγκαρσίαις, θεάσῃ καὶ τοῦτο 
καταπῖνον οὐκέτ᾽ ἐνεργοῦντος τοῦ ἐντός. ᾧ δῆλον, 
ὅτι καὶ διὰ θατέρου μὲν αὐτῶν καταπίνειν οἷόν 
116 τ᾽ ἐστίν, || ἀλλὰ χεῖρον ἢ δι᾽ ἀμφοτέρων. πρὸς 
γὰρ αὖ τοῖς ἄλλοις καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι θεάσασθαι 
σαφῶς ἐπὶ τῆς εἰρημένης ἀνατομῆς, ὡς ἐν τῷ 
καταπίνειν ὑποπίμπλαται πνεύματος ὁ στόμαχος 
τοῦ συγκαταπινομένου τοῖς σιτίοις, ὃ περιστελλο- 
μένου μὲν τοῦ ἔξωθεν χιτῶνος ὠθεῖται ῥᾳδίως 
εἰς τὴν γαστέρα σὺν τοῖς ἐδέσμασι, μόνου δὲ τοῦ 
ἔνδον ὑπάρχοντος ἐμποδὼν ἵσταται τῇ φορᾷ τῶν 





1 Under the term ‘‘neura,” tendons were often included 
as well as nerves. Similarly in modern Dutch the word 
zenuw (‘‘sinew’”’) means both a tendon and a nerve; zenuww- 
achtig = ‘* nervous.’ 


272 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIT. vin 


lessly constructed the oesophagus of two coats with 
contrary dispositions ; they must also have each been 
meant to have a different action. The Erasistratean 
school, however, are capable of anything rather than 
of recognizing the effects of Nature. Come, therefore, 
let us demonstrate to them by animal dissection as 
well that each of the two coats does exercise the 
activity which I have stated. Take an animal, then ; 
lay bare the structures surrounding the gullet, without 
severing any of the nerves,! arteries, or veins which 
are there situated ; next divide with vertical incisions, 
from the lower jaw to the thorax, the outer coat of the 
oesophagus (that containing transverse fibres) ; then 
give the animal food and you will see that it still swal- 
lows although the peristaltic function has been abol- 
ished. If, again, in another animal, you cut through 
both coats 2 with transverse incisions, you will observe 
that this animal also swallows although the inner coat 
is no longer functioning. From this it is clear that 
the animal can also swallow by either of the two 
coats, although not so well as by both. For the 
following also, in addition to other points, may be 
distinctly observed in the dissection which I have 
described—that during deglutition the gullet be- 
comes slightly filled with air which is swallowed 
along with the food, and that, when the outer coat is 
contracting, this air is easily forced with the food 
into the stomach, but that, when there only exists 
an inner coat, the air impedes the conveyance of 


2 Rather than the alternative reading, τὸν ἔσωθεν χιτῶνα. 
Galen apparently supposes that the outer coat will not be 
damaged, as the cuts will pass between its fibres. These cuts 
would be, presumably, short ones, at various levels, no single 
one of them involving the whole circumference of the gullet. 


273 
T 


GALEN 


σιτίων διατεῖνόν τ᾽ αὐτὸν καὶ τὴν ἐνέργειαν 
ἐμποδίξον. 

᾿Αλλ’ οὔτε τούτων οὐδὲν ᾿Ερασίστρατος εἶπεν 
οὔθ᾽ ὡς ἡ σκολιὰ θέσις τοῦ στομά ου διαβάλλει 
σαφῶς τὸ δόγμα τῶν νομιζόντων ὑπὸ τῆς ἄνωθεν 
. βολῆς μόνης ποδηγούμενα μέχρι τῆς γαστρὸς 
ἰέναι T καταπινόμενα. μόνον ὃ ὅτι πολλὰ τῶν 
μακροτραχήλων ζῴων ἐπικεκυ ότα καταπίνει, 
καλῶς εἶπεν. ᾧ δῆλον, ὅτι τὸ φαινόμενον οὐ 
τὸ πῶς καταπίνομεν ἀποδείκνυσιν, ἀλλὰ τὸ πῶς 
οὐ καταπίνομεν' ὅτι γὰρ μὴ διὰ μόνης τῆς ἄνωθεν 
βολῆς, ἐκ τούτου δῆλον' οὐ μὴν εἴθ᾽ ἑλκούσης 
τῆς κοιλίας εἴτε TapdryovTos αὐτὰ τοῦ στομάχου, 

177 δῆλον ἤδη πω. ἀλλ᾽ , ἡμεῖς γε! πάντας τοὺς 
λογισμοὺς εἰπόντες τούς τ᾽ ἐκ τῆς «κατασκευῆς 
τῶν ὀργάνων ὁρμωμένους καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν ἄλλων 
συμπτωμάτων τῶν τε πρὸ τοῦ γυμνωθῆναι τὸν 
στόμαχον καὶ γυμνωθέντος, ὡς ὀλίγῳ πρόσθεν 
ἐλέγομεν, ἱκανῶς ἐνεδειξάμεθα τοῦ μὲν ἕλκειν 
ἕνεκα τὸν ἐντὸς χιτῶνα, τοῦ δ᾽ ἀπωθεῖν τὸν ἐκτὸς 
γεγονέναι. 

Προὐθέμεθα μὲν οὖν ἀποδεῖξαι τὴν καθεκτικὴν 
δύναμιν ἐν ἑκάστῳ τῶν ὀργάνων οὖσαν, ὥσπερ 
ἐν τῷ πρόσθεν λόγῳ τὴν ἑλκτικήν τε καὶ προσέτι 
τὴν ἀλλοιωτικήν. ὑπὸ δὲ τῆς ἀκολουθίας τοῦ 
λόγου τὰς τέτταρας ἀπεδείξαμεν ὑ ὑπαρχούσας τῇ 
γαστρί, τὴν ἑλκτικὴν μὲν ἐν τῷ καταπίνειν, τὴν 
καθεκτικὴν δ᾽ ἐν τῷ. πέττειν, τὴν ἀπωστικὴν δ᾽ ἐν 
τοῖς EMETOUS Kal ταῖς τῶν πεπεμμένων σιτίων εἰς 
τὸ λεπτὸν ἔντερον ὑποχωρήσεσιν, αὐτὴν δὲ τὴν 
πέψιν ἀλλοίωσιν ὑπάρχειν. 


274 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIT. vi 


food, by distending this coat and hindering its 
action. 

But Erasistratus said nothing about this, nor did 
he point out that the oblique situation of the gullet 
clearly confutes the teaching of those who hold that 
it is simply by virtue of the impulse from above that 
food which is swallowed reaches the stomach. The 
only correct thing he said was that many of the long- 
necked animals bend down to swallow. Hence, 
clearly, the observed fact does not show how we 
swallow but how we do not swallow. For from this ob- 
servation it is clear that swallowing is not due merely 
to the impulse from above; it is yet, however, not clear 
whether it results from the food being attracted by 
the stomach, or conducted by the gullet. For our 
part, however, having enumerated all the different 
considerations—those based on the constitution of the 
organs, as well as those based on the other symptoms 
which, as just mentioned, occur both before and after 
the gullet has been exposed—we have thus sufficiently 
proved that the inner coat exists for the purpose of 
attraction and the outer for the purpose of propulsion. 

Now the original task we set before ourselves 
was to demonstrate that the retentive faculty exists 
in every one of the organs, just as in the previous 
book we proved the existence of the attractive, and, 
over and above this, the alterative faculty. Thus, 
in the natural course of our argument, we have de- 
monstrated these four faculties existing in the 
stomach—the attractive faculty in connection with 
swallowing, the retentive with digestion, the expul- 
sive with vomiting and with the descent of digested 
food into the small intestine—and digestion itself 
we have shown to be a process of alteration. 


275 
T 2 


GALEN 


Ix 


Οὔκουν ἔτ᾽ ἀπορήσομεν οὐδὲ περὶ τοῦ TTANVOS, 
εἰ ἕλκει μὲν TO οἰκεῖον, amoKpiver δὲ TO ἀλλότριον, 
ἀλλοιοῦν δὲ καὶ κατέχειν, ὅσον ἂν ἐπισπάσηταε, 
πέφυκεν, οὐδὲ περὶ ἥπατος ἢ φλεβὸς ἢ ἀρτηρίας 

178 ἢ καρδίας ἢ ἢ τῶν || ἄλλων τινός' ἀναγκαῖαι γὰρ 
ἐδείχθησαν αἱ τέτταρες αὗται δυνάμεις ἅπαντι 
μορίῳ τῷ μέλλοντι θρέψεσθαι καὶ διὰ τοῦτ᾽ αὐτὰς 
ὑπηρέτιδας εἶναι θρέψεως ἔφαμεν' ὡς γὰρ τὸ τῶν 
ἀνθρώπων ἀποπάτημα τοῖς κυσὶν ἥδιστον, οὕτω 
καὶ τὰ τοῦ ἥπατος περιττώματα τὸ μὲν τῷ 
σπληνί, τὸ δὲ τῇ χοληδόχῳ κύστει, τὸ δὲ τοῖς 
νεφροῖς οἰκεῖον. 


χ᾽ 


Καὶ λέγειν ἔτι περὶ τῆς τούτων γενέσεως οὐκ 
ἂν ἐθέλοιμι μεθ᾽ Ἱπποκράτην καὶ ἸΙΪλάτωνα καὶ 
᾿Αριστοτέλην καὶ Διοκλέα καὶ Πραξαγόραν καὶ 
Φιλότιμον" οὐδὲ γὰρ οὐδὲ περὶ τῶν δυνάμεων 
εἶπον ἄν, εἴ τις τῶν ἔμπροσθεν ἀκριβῶς ἐξειργά- 
σατο τὸν ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν λόγον. 

"Emel δ᾽ οἱ μὲν παλαιοὶ καλῶς ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν 
ἀποφηνάμενοι παρέλιπον ἀγωνίσασθαι τῷ λόγῳ, 
μηδ᾽ ὑπονοήσαντες ἔσεσθαί τινας εἰς τοσοῦτον 
ἀναισχύντους σοφιστάς, ὡς. :ἀντιλέγειν ἐπιχειρῆ- 
σαι τοῖς ἐναργέσιν, οἱ νεώτεροι δὲ τὸ μέν τι 





1 of. p. 205. 
276 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, ITI. 1x.-x 


IX 


ConcerntnG the spleen, also, we shall therefore have 
no further doubts ! as to whether it attracts what is 
proper to it, rejects what is foreign, and has a 
natural power of altering and retaining all that it 
attracts; nor shall we be in any doubt as to the liver, 
veins, arteries, heart, or any other organ. For these 
four faculties have been shown to be necessary for 
every part which is to be nourished ; this is why we 
have called these faculties the handmaids of nutrition. 
For just as human faeces are most pleasing to dogs, 
so the residual matters from the liver are, some of 
them, proper to the spleen,? others to the gall-bladder, 
and others to the kidneys. 


X 


I sHouLp not have cared to say anything further as’ 
to the origin of these [surplus subtances] after Hip-' 
pocrates, Plato, Aristotle, Diocles, Praxagoras, and 
Philotimus, nor indeed should I even have said 
anything about the facultes, if any of our predecessors 
had worked out this subject thoroughly. 

While, however, the statements which the Ancients 
made on these points were correct, they yet omitted 
to defend their arguments with logical proofs; of 
course they never suspected that there could be 
sophists so shameless as to try to contradict obvious 
facts. More recent physicians, again, have been 


* Thus Galen elsewhere calls the spleen a mere emunctory 
(ἐκμαγεῖον) of the liver. cf. p. 214, note 1. 


277 


GALEN 


νικηθέντες ὑπὸ τῶν σοφισμάτων ἐπείσθησαν 
αὐτοῖς, τὸ δέ τι καὶ ἀντιλέγειν ἐπιχειρήσαντες 
ἀποδεῖν μοι πολὺ τῆς τῶν παλαιῶν ἔδοξαν δυνά- 
\ ay? -¢ 2 , 2 Aa ¥ v9 
179 pews, || διὰ τοῦθ᾽, ὡς ἂν ἐκείνων αὐτῶν, εἴπερ ἔτ 
ἦν τις, ἀγωνίσασθαί μοι δοκεῖ πρὸς τοὺς ἀνατρέ- 
aA 4 > δ ΦΨ 
ποντας τῆς τέχνης τὰ κάλλιστα, καὶ αὐτὸς οὕτως 
3 “4 i A Ἁ ’ 
ἐπειράθην συνθεῖναι τοὺς λόγους. 

Ὅτι δ᾽ ἢ οὐδὲν ἢ παντάπασιν ἀνύσω τι σμικ- 

, 3 3 A UA e 7 ’ 
ρόν, οὐκ ἀγνοῶ: πάμπολλα γὰρ εὑρίσκω τελέως 
μὲν ἀποδεδειγμένα τοῖς παλαιοῖς, οὔτε δὲ συνετὰ 
τοῖς πολλοῖς τῶν νῦν δι’ ἀμαθίαν ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ 
ἐπιχειρούμενα γιγνώσκεσθαι διὰ ῥᾳθυμίαν, οὔτ᾽, 
εἰ καὶ γνωσθείη τινί, δικαίως ἐξεταζόμενα. 

Χρὴ γὰρ τὸν μέλλοντα γνώσεσθαί τι τῶν πολ- 
λῶν ἄμεινον εὐθὺς μὲν καὶ τῇ φύσει καὶ τῇ πρώτῃ 
διδασκαλίᾳ πολὺ τῶν ἄλλων διενεγκεῖν" ἐπειδὰν 
δὲ γένηται μειράκιον, ἀληθείας τινὰ σχεῖν ἐρω- 
τικὴν μανίαν, ὥσπερ ἐνθουσιῶντα καὶ μήθ᾽ ἡμέρας 
μήτε νυκτὸς διαλείπειν σπεύδοντά τε καὶ συντε- 
ταμένον ἐκμαθεῖν, ὅσα τοῖς ἐνδοξοτάτοις εἴρηται 

a a > >» 9 4 ’ > A 
τῶν παλαιῶν' ἐπειδὰν δ᾽ ἐκμάθῃ, κρίνειν αὐτὰ 

, f ’ A 
καὶ Bacavitew χρόνῳ παμπόλλῳ καὶ σκοπεῖν, 
πόσα μὲν ὁμολογεῖ τοῖς ἐναργῶς φαινομένοις, 

180 πόσα δὲ διαφέρεται, || καὶ οὕτω τὰ μὲν αἱρεῖσθαι, 
4 9 / A \ ’ 7 

τὰ δ᾽ ἀποστρέφεσθαι. τῷ μὲν δὴ τοιούτῳ πάνυ 

σφόδρα χρησίμους ἤλπικα τοὺς ἡμετέρους ἔσε- 


278 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. x 


partly conquered by the sophistries of these fellows 
and have given credence to them ; whilst others 
who attempted to argue with them appear to me to 
lack to a great extent the power of the Ancients. 
For this reason I have attempted to put together my 
arguments in the way in which it seems to me the 
Ancients, had any of them been still alive, would have 
done, in opposition to those who would overturn the 
finest doctrines of our art. 

I am not, however, unaware that I shall achieve 
either nothing at all or else very little. For I find 
that a great many things which have been conclu- 
sively demonstrated by the Ancients are unintelli- 
gible to the bulk of the Moderns owing to their 
ignorance—nay, that, by reason of their laziness, 
they will not even make an attempt to comprehend 
them ; and even if any of them have understood 
them, they have not given them impartial examina- 
tion. 

The fact is that he whose purpose is to know any- 
thing better than the multitude do must far surpass 
all others both as regards his nature and his early 
training. And when he reaches early adolescence 
he must become possessed with an ardent love for 
truth, like one inspired ; neither day nor night may 
he cease to urge and strain himself in order to learn 
thoroughly all that has been said by the most illus- 
trious of the Ancients. And when he has learnt 
this, then for a prolonged period he must test and 
prove it, observing what part of it is in agreement, 
and what in disagreement with obvious fact ; thus 
he will choose this and turn away from that. To 
such an one my hope has been that my treatise 
would prove of the very greatest assistance... . 


279 


GALEN 


σθαι λόγους" elev δ᾽ ἂν ὀλίγοι παντάπασιν οὗτοι" 
τοῖς δ᾽ ἄλλοις οὕτω γενήσεται τὸ γράμμα περιτ- 
τόν, ὡς εἰ καὶ μῦθον ὄνῳ τις λέγοι.. 


ΧΙ 


᾿Συμπεραντέον οὖν ἡμῖν τὸν λόγον ἕνεκα τῶν 
τῆς ἀληθείας ἐφιεμένων ὅσα λείπει κατ᾽ αὐτὸν 
ἔτι προσθεῖσιν. ὡς γὰρ ἡ γαστὴρ ἕλκει μὲν 
ἐναργῶς καὶ κατασπᾷ τὰ σιτία τοῖς σφόδρα 
πεινώδεσι, πρὶν ἀκριβῶς ἐν τῷ στόματι λειω- 
θῆναι, δυσχεραίνει δὲ καὶ ἀπωθεῖται τοῖς ἀποσί- 
τοις τε καὶ “πρὸς ἀνάγκην ἐσθίουσιν, οὕτω καὶ 
τῶν ἄλλων ὀργάνων ἕκαστον ἀμφοτέρας ἔχει τὰς 
δυνάμεις, τήν τε τῶν οἰκείων ἑλκτικὴν καὶ τὴν 
τῶν ἀλλοτρίων ἀποκριτικήν. καὶ διὰ τοῦτο, κἂν 
ἐξ ἑνὸς ἦ χιτῶνος ὄργανόν τι συνεστώς, ὥσπερ 
καὶ αἱ κύστεις ἀμφότεραι καὶ αἱ μῆτραι καὶ αἱ 
φλέβες, ἀμφότερα τῶν ἰνῶν ἔχει τὰ γένη, τῶν 
εὐθειῶν τε καὶ τῶν ἐγκαρσίων. 

Καὶ μέν γε καὶ τρίτον τι || γένος ἰνῶν ἐστι 
«τῶν» λοξῶν, ἔλαττον πολὺ τῷ πλήθει τῶν 
προειρημένων δύο γενῶν. εὑρίσκεται δ᾽ ἐν μὲν 
τοῖς ἐκ δυοῖν χιτώνων συνεστηκόσιν ὀργάνοις 
ἐν θατέρῳ μόνῳ ταῖς εὐθείαις ἰσὶν ἀναμεμεγμένον, 
ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἐξ ἑνὸς ἅμα τοῖς ἄλλοις δύο γένεσι. 
συνεπιλαμβάνουσι δ᾽ αὗται μέγιστον τῇ τῆς καθ- 
εκτικῆς ὀνομασθείσης δυνάμεως ἐνεργείᾳ" δεῖται 
γὰρ ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ πανταχόθεν ἐσφίγχθαι 
καὶ περιτετάσθαι τοῖς ἐνυπάρχουσι τὸ μόριον, ἡ 


1 of. p. 269. 
280 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIT. x.-x1 


Still, such people may be expected to be quite few 
in number, while, as for the others, this book will be 
as superfluous to them as a tale told to an ass. 


XI 


For the sake, then, of those who are aiming at 
truth, we must complete this treatise by adding 
what is still wanting in it. Now, in people who 
are very hungry, the stomach obviously attracts or 
draws down the food before it has been thoroughly 
softened in the mouth, whilst in those who have no 
appetite or who are being forced to eat, the stomach 
is displeased and rejects the food.1_ And in a similar 
way each of the other organs possesses both faculties 
—that of attracting what is proper to it, and that of 
rejecting what is foreign. Thus, evenif there be any 
organ which consists of only one coat (such as the 
two bladders,? the uterus, and the veins), it yet 
possesses both kinds of fibres, the longitudinal and 
the transverse. 

But further, there are fibres of a third kind—the 
oblique—which are much fewer in number than the 
two kinds already spoken of. In the organs con- 
sisting of two coats this kind of fibre is found in 
the one coat only, mixed with the longitudinal 
fibres ; but in the organs composed of one coat it is 
found along with the other two kinds. Now, these 
are of the greatest help to the action of the faculty 
which we have named retentive. For during this 
period the part needs to be tightly contracted and 
stretched over its contents at every point—the 


2 The urinary bladders of pigs (such as Galen dissected) are — 
thin, and appear to have only one coat. 281 


GALEN 


pev γαστὴρ ἐν τῷ τῆς πέψεως, αἱ μῆτραι δ᾽ ἐν 
τῷ τῆς κυήσεως όνῳ παντί. 

Ταῦτ᾽ ἄρα καὶ ὁ τῆς φλεβὸς χιτὼν εἷς ὧν ἐκ 
πολυειδῶν ὦ ἰνῶν ἐγένετο καὶ τῶν τῆς ἀρτηρίας ὁ 
μὲν ἔξωθεν ἐκ τῶν στρογγύλων, ὁ δ᾽ ἔσωθεν ἐκ 
μὲν τῶν εὐθειῶν πλείστων, ὀλέγων δέ τινων σὺν 
αὐταῖς καὶ τῶν λοξῶν, ὥ ὥστε τὰς μὲν φλέβας ταῖς 
μήτραις καὶ ταῖς κύστεσιν ἐοικέναι κατά γε τὴν 
τῶν ἰνῶν σύνθεσιν, εἰ καὶ τῷ πάχει λείπονται, 
τὰς δ᾽ ἀρτηρίας τῇ γαστρί. μόνα δὲ πάντων ὁρ- 
γάνων ἐκ δυοῖν θ᾽ ἅμα καὶ ἀμφοτέρων ἐγκαρσίας 
ἐχόντων τὰς ἷνας ἐγένετο τὰ ἔντερα. τὸ 8 ὅτι 
dry ἦν || τῶν τ᾿ ἄλλων ἑκάστῳ τοιούτῳ τὴν 
φύσιν ὑπάρχειν, οἷόνπερ καὶ νῦν ἐστι, τοῖς T 
ἐντέροις ἐκ δυοῖν “ὁμοίων χιτώνων συγκεῖσθαι, τῆς 
περὶ χρείας μορίων πραγματείας ἐστίν. οὔκουν 
νῦν χρὴ ποθεῖν a ἀκούειν ) περὶ τῶν τοιούτων, ὥσπερ 
οὐδὲ διὰ τί περὶ τοῦ πλήθους τῶν χιτώνων 
ἑκάστου τῶν ὀργάνων διαπεφώνηται τοῖς ἀνατο- 
μεκοῖς ἀνδράσιν. ὑπὲρ μὲν γὰρ τούτων αὐτάρκως 
ἐν τοῖς περὶ τῆς ἀνατομικῆς διαφωνίας εἴρηται" 
περὶ δὲ τοῦ διότι τοιοῦτον ἕκαστον ἐγένετο τῶν 
ὀργάνων, ἐν τοῖς περὶ χρείας μορίων εἰρήσεται. 


XII 


Nuvi δ᾽ οὐδέτερον τούτων πρόκειται λέγειν, 
ἀλλὰ τὰς φυσικὰς δυνάμεις μόνας ἀποδεικνύειν ἐ ev 
ἑκάστῳ τῶν ὀργάνων τετταρᾶς ὑπαρχούσας. ἐπὶ 
τοῦτ᾽ οὖν πάλιν ἐπανέλθοντες ἀναμνήσωμέν τε 

1 cf. p 
3 My” cag Ba is that Galen refers to (1) the mucous 
282 


ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. x1.-—x11 


stomach during the whole period of digestion,! and 
the uterus during that of gestation. 

Thus too, the coat of a vein, being single, consists 
of various kinds of fibres; whilst the outer coat of 
an artery consists of circular fibres, and its inner 
coat mostly of longitudinal fibres, but with a few 
oblique ones also amongst them. Veins thus re- 
semble the uterus or the bladder as regards the 
arrangement of their fibres, even though they are 
deficient in thickness; similarly arteries resemble 
the stomach. Alone of all organs the intestines 
consist of two coats of which both have their fibres 
transverse.2, Now the proof that it was for the best 
that all the organs should be naturally such as they 
are (that, for instance, the intestines should be com- 
posed of two coats) belongs to the subject of the use 
of parts®; thus we must not now desire to hear about 
matters of this kind nor why the anatomists are at 
variance regarding the number of coats in each 
organ. For these questions have been sufficiently 
discussed in the treatise “On Disagreement in 
Anatomy.” And the problem as to why each organ 
has such and such a character will be discussed in 
the treatise “On the Use of Parts.” 


7 


XII 


It is not, however, our business to discuss either 
of these questions here, but to consider duly the 
natural faculties, which, to the number of four, exist 
in each organ. Returning then, to this point, let us 
coat, with its valvulae conniventes, and (2) the muscular coat, 


of which the chief layer is made up of circular fibres. οἱ 
p- 262, note 1. 8 Or εἰν. 283 


GALEN 


τῶν ἔμπροσθεν εἰρημένων ἐπιθῶμέν τε κεφαλὴν 
ἤδη τῷ λόγῳ παντὶ τὸ λεῖπον ἔτι προσθέντες. 
ἐπειδὴ γὰρ ἕ ἕκαστον τῶν ἐν τῷ ζῴῳ μορίων ὅλκειν 
εἰς ἑαυτὸ τὸν οἰκεῖον χυμὸν ἀποδέδεικται καὶ 
πρώτη σχεδὸν αὕτη τῶν φυσικῶν ἐστι δυνάμεων, 

188 ἐφεξῆς I ἐκείνῳ γνωστέον, ὡς οὐ πρότερον ἀπο- 
τρίβεται τὴν ἑλχθεῖσαν «τροφὴν; ἤ ἤτοι σύμπασαν 
ἢ καί τι περίττωμα αὐτῆς, πρὶν ἂν εἰς ἐναντίαν 
μεταπέσῃ διάθεσιν ἢ ἢ αὐτὸ τὸ ὄργανον ἢ καὶ τῶν 
περίε ομένων ἐν αὐτῷ τὰ πλεῖστα. ἡ μὲν οὖν 
γαστήρ, ἐπειδὰν μὲν i ἱκανῶς ἐμπλησθῇ τῶν σιτίων 
καὶ τὸ χρηστότατον αὐτῶν εἰς τοὺς ἑαυτῆς ιτῶ- 
νας ἐναπόθηται βδάλλουσα, τηνικαῦτ᾽ i ῃ TO 
λοιπὸν ἀποτρίβεται καθάπερ ἄχθος ἀλλότριον" 
αἱ κύστεις δ᾽, ἐπειδὰν ἕ ἕκαστον τῶν ἑλχθέντων ἢ ἢ 
τῷ πλήθει διατεῖνον ἢ τῇ ποιότητι δάκνον a ἀνιαρὸν 
γένηται. 

Τῷ δ᾽ αὐτῷ τρόπῳ καὶ αἱ μῆτραι" ἤτοι γάρ, 
ἐπειδὰν μηκέτι φέρωσι διατεινόμεναι, τὸ λυποῦν 
ἀποθέσθαι σπεύδουσιν ἢ ἢ τῇ ποιότητι “δακνόμεναι 
τῶν ἐκχυθέντων εἰς αὐτὰς ὑγρῶν, ἑκάτερον δὲ 
τῶν εἰρημένων γίγνεται μὲν καὶ βιαίως ἔ ἔστιν ὅτε 
καὶ a βλώσκουσι τηνικαῦτα, γίγνεται δ᾽ ὡς τὰ 
πολλὰ καὶ προσηκόντως, ὅπερ οὐκ ἀμβλώσκειν 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀποκυΐσκειν τε καὶ τίκτειν ὀνομάξεται. τοῖς 
μὲν οὖν ἀμβλωθριδίοις φαρμάκοις ἤ ἢ τισιν ἄλλοις 

184 παθήμασι διαφθείρουσι τὸ “ἔμβρυον ἤ ἤ τινας τῶν 
ὑμένων αὐτοῦ ῥηγνύουσιν αἱ ἀμβλώσεις ἕ ἕπονται, 
οὕτω δὲ κἀπειδὰν ἀνιαθῶσί ποθ᾽ αἱ μῆτραι κακῶς 
ἔχουσαι τῇ διατάσει, ταῖς δὲ τῶν ἐμβρύων αὐτῶν 
κινήσεσι ταῖς σφοδροτάταις οἱ τόκοι, καθάπερ 
καὶ τοῦθ᾽ “Ἱπποκράτει καλῶς εἴρηται. κοινὸν δ᾽ 


284 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. χα 


recall what has already been said, and set a crown 
to the whole subject by adding what is still wanting. 
For when every part of the animal has been shewn 
to draw into itself the juice which is proper to it 
(this being practically the first of the natural faculties), 
the next point to realise is that the part does not 
get rid either of this.attracted nutriment as a whole, 
or even of any superfluous portion of it, until either 
the organ itself, or the major part of its contents 
also have their condition reversed. Thus, when the 
stomach is sufficiently filled with the food and has 
absorbed and stored away the most useful part of it 
in its own coats, it then rejects the rest like an alien 
burden. The same happens to the bladders, when 
the matter attracted into them begins to give trouble 
either because it distends them through its quantity 
or irritates them by its quality. 

And this also happens in the case of the uterus ; for 
it is either because it can no longer bear to be 
stretched that it strives to relieve itself of its 
annoyance, or else because it is irritated by the 
quality of the fluids poured out into it. Now both 
of these conditions sometimes occur with actual 
violence, and then miscarriage takes place. But for 
the most part they happen in a normal way, this 
being then called not miscarriage but delivery or 
parturition. Now abortifacient drugs or certain other 
conditions which destroy the embryo or rupture 
certain of its membranes are followed by abortion, 
and similarly also when the uterus is in pain from 
being in a bad state of tension; and, as has been 
well said by Hippocrates, excessive movement on the 
part of the embryo itself brings on labour. Now 


285 


GALEN 


ἁπασῶν τῶν διαθέσεων ἡ ἀνία καὶ ταύτης αἴτιον 
τριττὸν ἢ ὄγκος περιττὸς ἤ τι βάρος ἡ δῆξις" 
ὄγκος μέν, ἐπειδὰν μηκέτι φέρωσι διατεινόμεναι, 
βάρος δ᾽, ἐπειδὰν ὑπὲρ τὴν ῥώμην αὐτῶν ἡ τὸ 
περιεχόμενον, δῆξις δ᾽, ἐπειδὰν ἤτοι τὰ πρότερον 
ἐν τοῖς ὑμέσιν ὑγρὰ στεγόμενα ῥαγέντων αὐτῶν 
εἰς αὐτὰς ἐκχυθῇ τὰς μήτρας ἢ καὶ σύμπαν 
ἀποφθαρὲν τὸ κύημα σηπόμενόν τε καὶ διαλυό- 
μενον εἰς μοχθηροὺς ἐ ἰχῶρας ¢ οὕτως ἐρεθίξῃ τε καὶ 
δάκνῃ τὸν χιτῶνα τῶν , ὑστερῶν. 

᾿Ανάλογον οὖν ἐν ἅπασι τοῖς ὀργάνοις ἕκαστα 
τῶν T ἔργων αὐτῶν τῶν φυσικῶν καὶ μέντοι τῶν 
παθημάτων τε καὶ νοσημάτων φαίνεται γυγνό- 
μενα, τὰ μὲν ἐναργῶς καὶ σαφῶς οὕτως, ὡς 
ἀποδείξεως δεῖσθαι μηδέν, τὰ δ᾽ “ἧττον μὲν ἐναρ- 

185 yas, οὐ μὴν ἄγνωστά γε παντάπασι τοῖς || ἐθέ- 
λουσι προσέχειν τὸν νοῦν. 

Ἐπὶ μὲν οὗν τῆς γαστρὸς αἴ τε δήξεις ἐ ἐναργεῖς, 
διότι πλείστης αἰσθήσεως μετέχει, τά τ᾽ ἄλλα 
παθήματα τά τε ναυτίαν ἐμποιοῦντα καὶ οἱ 
καλούμενοι καρδιωγμοὶ σαφῶς ἐνδείκνυνται τὴν 
ἀποκριτικήν τε καὶ ἀπωστικὴν τῶν ἀλλοτρίων 
δύναμιν, οὕτω δὲ κἀπὶ τῶν ὑστερῶν τε καὶ τῆς 
κύστεως τῆς τὸ οὖρον ὑποδεχομένης" ἐναργῶς γὰρ 
οὖν καὶ αὕτη φαίνεται μέχρι τοσούτου τὸ ὑγρὸν 
ὑποδεχομένη τε καὶ ἀθροίζουσα, ἄχρις ἂν ἤτοι 
πρὸς τοῦ πλήθους αὐτοῦ διατεινομένη μηκέτι 
φέρῃ τὴν ἀ ἀνίαν ἢ πρὸς τῆς “ποιότητος δακνομένη" 
χρονίξον γὰρ ὅκαστον τῶν περιττωμάτων ἐν τῷ 
σώματι σήπεται δηλονότι, τὸ μὲν ἐλάττονι, τὸ δὲ 
πλείονι χρόνῳ, καὶ οὕτω δακνῶδές τε καὶ δριμὺ 
καὶ ἀνιαρὸν τοῖς περιέχουσι γίγνεται. οὐ μὴν 


286 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. xm 


pain is common to all these conditions, and of this 
there are three possible causes—either excessive 
bulk, or weight, or irritation ; bulk when the uterus 
can no longer support the stretching, weight 
when the contents surpass its strength, and irritation 
when the fluids which had previously been pent up 
in the membranes, flow out, on the rupture of these, 
into the uterus itself, or else when the whole foetus 
perishes, putrefies, and is resolved into pernicious 
ichors, and so irritates and bites the coat of the 
uterus. 

In all organs, then, both their natural effects and 
their disorders and maladies plainly take place on 
analogous lines,! some so clearly and manifestly as to 
need no demonstration, and others less plainly, 
although not entirely unrecognizable to those who 
are willing to pay attention. 

Thus, to take the case of the stomach: the irrita- 
tion is evident here because this organ possesses most 
sensibility, and among its other affections those 
producing nausea and the so-called heartburn clearly 
demonstrate the eliminative faculty which expels 
foreign matter. So also in the case of the uterus 
and the urinary bladder; this latter also may be 
plainly observed to receive and accumulate fluid until 
it is so stretched by the amount of this as to be 
incapable of enduring the pain; or it may be the 
quality of the urine which irritates it; for every super- 
fluous substance which lingers in the body must 
obviously putrefy, some in a shorter, and some in a 
longer time, and thus it becomes pungent, acrid, and 
burdensome to the organ which contains it. This 


1 Relationship between physiology and pathology again 
emphasized. c/. p. 188, note 2. 


287 


GALEN 


ἐπί γε τῆς ἐπὶ TO ἥπατι κύστεως ὁμοίως ἔχει" 

ᾧ δῆλον, ὅτε νεύρων ἥκιστα μετέχει. χρὴ δὲ 
κἀνταῦθα τόν γε φυσικὸν ἄνδρα τὸ ἀνάλογον 
ἐξευρίσκειν. εἰ γὰρ ἕλκειν τε τὸν οἰκεῖον ἀπε- 
δείχθη χυμόν, ὡς φαίνεσθαι πολλάκις μεστήν, 

186 ἀποκρίϊνειν τε τὸν αὐτὸν τοῦτον οὐκ εἰς μακράν, 
ἀναγκαῖόν ἐστιν αὐτὴν ἢ διὰ τὸ πλῆθος βαρυνο- 
μένην ἣ τῆς ποιότητος μεταβαλλούσης ἐπὶ τὸ 
δακνῶδές τε καὶ δριμὺ τῆς ἀποκρίσεως ἐφίεσθαι. 
οὐ γὰρ δὴ τὰ μὲν σιτία τὴν ἀρχαίαν ὑπαλλάττει 
ποιότητα ταχέως οὕτως, ὥστ᾽, ἐπειδὰν ἐμπέσῃ 
τοῖς λεπτοῖς ἐντέροις, εὐθὺς εἶναι κόπρον, ἡ χολὴ 
δ᾽ οὐ πολὺ μᾶλλον ἢ τὸ οὗρον, ἐπειδὰν ἅπαξ 
ἐκπέσῃ τῶν φλεβῶν, ἐξαλλάττει τὴν ποιότητα, 
τάχιστα μεταβάλλοντα καὶ σηπόμενα. καὶ μὴν 
εἴπερ ἐπί τε τῶν κατὰ τὰς ὑστέρας καὶ τὴν 
κοιλίαν καὶ τὰ ἔντερα καὶ προσέτι τὴν τὸ οὖρον 
ὑποδεχομένην κύστιν ἐναργῶς φαίνεται διάτασίς 
τις ἢ δῆξις ἢ ἄχθος ἐπεγεῖρον ἕκαστον τῶν 
ὀργάνων εἰς ἀπόκρισιν, οὐδὲν χαλεπὸν κἀπὶ 
τῆς χοληδόχου κύστεως ταὐτὸ τοῦτ᾽ ἐννοεῖν ἐπί 
τε τῶν ἄλλων ἁπάντων ὀργάνων, ἐξ ὧν δηλονότι 
καὶ αἱ ἀρτηρίαι καὶ αἱ φλέβες εἰσίν. 


XITI 


Οὐ μὴν οὐδὲ τὸ διὰ τοῦ αὐτοῦ πόρου τήν θ᾽ 

ς Q 4 \ > , > , 

ολκὴν γίγνεσθαι Kal τὴν ἀπόκρισιν ἐν διαφέ- 

187 ρουσι || χρόνοις οὐδὲν Ere χαλεπὸν ἐξευρεῖν, εἴ ye 
~ e 

καὶ τῆς γαστρὸς ὁ στόμαχος οὐ μόνον ἐδέσματα 


288 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. xu.—xi 


does not apply, however, in the case of the bladder 
alongside the liver, whence it is clear that it possesses 
fewer nerves than do the other organs. Here too, 
however, at least the physiologist! must discover 
an analogy.. For since it was shown that the gall- 
bladder attracts its own special juice, so as to be often 
found full, and that it discharges it soon after, this 
desire to discharge must be either due to the fact 
that it is burdened by the quantity or that the bile 
has changed in quality to pungent and acrid. For 
while food does not change its original quality so 
fast that it is already ordure as soon as it falls into 
the small intestine, on the other hand the bile even 
more readily than the urine becomes altered in 
quality as soon as ever it leaves the veins, and 
rapidly undergoes change and putrefaction. Now, 
if there be clear evidence in relation to the uterus, 
stomach, and intestines, as well as to the urinary 
bladder, that there is either some distention, irri- 
tation, or burden inciting each of these organs to 
elimination, there is no difficulty in imagining this in 
the case of the gall-bladder also, as well as in the 
other organs,—to which obviously the arteries and 
veins also belong. 


ΧΙΠ 


Nor is there any further difficulty in ascertaining 
that it is through the same channel that both attrac- 
tion and discharge take place at different times. For 
obviously the inlet to the stomach does not merely 

1 Or physicist—the investigator of the Physis or Nature. 
cf. p. 196, note 2. Note here the use of analogical reasoning. 
cf. p. 1138, note 2. 289 


U 


GALEN 


καὶ πόματα παράγων εἰς αὐτήν, ἀλλὰ κἀν ταῖς 
ναυτίαις τὴν ἐναντίαν ὑπηρεσίαν ὑπηρετῶν ἐναρ- 
γῶς φαίνεται, καὶ τῆς ἐπὶ τῷ ἥπατι κύστεως 
ὁ αὐχὴν εἷς ὧν ἅμα μὲν πληροῖ δι’ αὑτοῦ τὴν 
κύστιν, ἅμα δ᾽ ἐκκενοῖ, καὶ τῶν μητρῶν ὁ 
στόμαχος ὡσαύτως ὁδός ἐστιν εἴσω μὲν τοῦ 
σπέρματος, ἔξω δὲ τοῦ κυήματος. 

᾿Αλλὰ κἀνταῦθα πάλιν ἡ μὲν ἐκκριτικὴ δύναμις 
ἐναργής, οὐ μὴν ὁμοίως γ᾽ αὐτῇ σαφὴς τοῖς 
πολλοῖς ἡ ἑλκτική" ἀλλ᾽ Ἱπποκράτης μὲν ἀρρώ- 
στου μήτρας αἰτιώμενος αὐχένα φησί: “ Οὐ γὰρ 
δύναται αὐτέης ὁ στόμαχος εἰρύσαι τὴν γονήν." 

᾿Ερασίστρατος δὲ καὶ ᾿Ασκληπιάδης εἰς τοσοῦ- 
τον ἥκουσι σοφίας, ὥστ᾽ οὐ μόνον τὴν κοιλίαν καὶ 
τὰς μήτρας ἀποστεροῦσι τῆς τοιαύτης δυνάμεως 
ἀλλὰ καὶ τὴν ἐπὶ τῷ ἥπατι κύστιν ἅμα τοῖς 
νεφροῖς. καίτοι γ᾽ ὅτι μηδ᾽ εἰπεῖν δυνατὸν ἕτερον 
αἴτιον ἢ οὔρων ἢ χολῆς διακρίσεως, ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ 
δέδεικται λόγῳ. 

Καὶ μήτραν οὖν καὶ γαστέρα καὶ τὴν ἐπὶ 


188 τῷ ἥπατι κύστιν de ἑνὸς καὶ ταὐτοῦ στομάχου 


V4 3 e Ἁ \ 3 ’ e » 
τὴν θ᾽ ὁλκὴν καὶ τὴν ἀπόκρισιν εὑρίσκοντες 
ποιουμένας μηκέτι θαυμάξωμεν, εἰ καὶ διὰ τῶν 
φλεβῶν - ἡ φύσις ἐκκρίνει πολλάκις εἰς τὴν 
γαστέρα περιττώματα. τούτου δ᾽ ἔτι μᾶλλον 
3 ᾿Ὶ , 3 4 Φ 3 > 4 
ov χρὴ θαυμάζειν, εἰ, δι᾿ ὧν εἰς ἧπαρ ἀνεδόθη 
φλεβῶν ἐκ γαστρός, αὖθις εἰς αὐτὴν ἐξ ἥπατος 
ἐν ταῖς μακροτέραις ἀσιτίαις ἕλκεσθαί τις δύνα- 
Tat τροφή. τὸ yap τοῖς τοιούτοις ἀπιστεῖν 





1 ef p. 95. 2 J. xiti. ; IL. ii. 
3 Galen’s idea is that if reversal of the direction of flow 


290 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, ITI. xm 


conduct food and drink into this organ, but in the 
condition of nausea it performs the opposite service. 
Further, the neck of the bladder which is beside the 
liver, albeit single, both fills and empties the bladder. 
Similarly the canal of the uterus affords an entrance 
to the semen and an exit to the foetus. 

But in this latter case, again, whilst the eliminative 
faculty is evident, the attractive faculty is not so 
obvious to most people. It is, however, the cervix 
which Hippocrates blames for inertia of the uterus 
when he says :—“ Its orifice has no power of attract- 
ing semen.” ! | 

Erasistratus, however, and Asclepiades reached 
such heights of wisdom that they deprived not 
merely the stomach and the womb of this faculty but 
also the bladder by the liver, and the kidneys as well. 
I have, however, pointed out in the first book that it 
is impossible to assign any other cause for the secretion 
of urine or bile.? . 

Now, when we find that the uterus, the stomach 
and the bladder by the liver carry out attraction and 
expulsion through one and the same duct, we need 
no longer feel surprised that Nature should also 
frequently discharge waste-substances into the 
stomach through the veins. Still less need we be 
astonished if a certain amount of the food should, 
during long fasts, be drawn back from the liver 
into the stomach through the same veins? by 
which it was yielded up to the liver during ab- 
sorption of nutriment.* To disbelieve such things 


can occur in the primae viae (in vomiting), it may also be 
expected to occur in the secundae viae or absorptive channels. 

For this “delivery,” ‘‘ up-yield,” or anadosis, v. Ὁ. 13, 
note 5. 


201 


GALEN 


ὅμοιόν ἐστε δήπου τῷ μηκέτι πιστεύειν pnd 
ὅτι τὰ καθαίροντα φάρμακα διὰ τῶν αὐτῶν 
στομάτων ἐξ ὅλου τοῦ σώματος εἰς τὴν γαστέρα 
τοὺς οἰκείους ἐπισπᾶται χυμούς, δι’ ὧν ἔμπρο- 
σθεν ἡ ἀνάδοσις ἐγένετο, ἀλλ᾽ ἕτερα μὲν ξητεῖν 
ἀναδόσεως, Erepa δὲ καθάρσεως στόματα. καὶ 
μὴν εἴπερ ὃν καὶ ταὐτὸ στόμα διτταῖς ὑπηρετεῖ 
δυνάμεσιν, ἐν διαφόροις χρόνοις εἰς τἀναντία 
τὴν ὁλκὴν ποιουμέναις, ἔμπροσθεν μὲν τῇ κατὰ 
τὸ ἧπαρ, ἐν δὲ τῷ τῆς καθάρσεως καιρῷ τῇ 
τοῦ φαρμάκου, τί θαυμαστόν ἐστι διττὴν ὑπη- 
ρεσίαν τε καὶ χρείαν εἶναι ταῖς φλεψὶ ταῖς 
ἐν τῷ μέσῳ τεταγμέναις ἥπατός τε καὶ τῶν 
κατὰ τὴν κοιλίαν, ὥσθ᾽, ὁπότε μὲν ἐν τούτοις 
ἄφθονος εἴη περιεχομένη τροφή, διὰ τῶν εἰρη- 

189 μένων εἰς || ἧπαρ ἀναφέρεσθαι φλεβῶν, ὁπότε δ᾽ 
εἴη κενὰ καὶ δεόμενα τρέφεσθαι, διὰ τῶν αὐτῶν 
αὖθις ἐξ ἥπατος ἕλκεσθαι; 

Πᾶν γὰρ ἐκ παντὸς ἕλκειν φαίνεται καὶ παντὶ 
μεταδιδόναι καὶ μία τις εἶναι σύρροια καὶ σύμ- 
πνοια πάντων, καθάπερ καὶ τοῦθ᾽ ὁ θειότατος 
Ἱπποκράτης εἶπεν. ἕλκεϊ μὲν οὖν τὸ ἰσχυρότερον, 
ἐκκενοῦται δὲ τὸ ἀσθενέστερον. 

ἸΙσχυρότερον δὲ καὶ ἀσθενέστερον ἕτερον ἑτέρου 
μόριον ἢ ἁπλῶς καὶ φύσει καὶ κοινῇ πᾶσίν ἐστιν 
ἢ ἰδίως τῷδέ τινι γίγνεται. φύσει μὲν καὶ κοινῇ 
πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις θ᾽ ἅμα καὶ ζῴοις ἡ μὲν καρδία 
τοῦ ἥπατος, τὸ δ᾽ ἧπαρ τῶν ἐντέρων τε καὶ τῆς 
γαστρός, αἱ δ᾽ ἀρτηρίαι τῶν φλεβῶν ἑλκύσαι τε 
τὸ χρήσιμον ἑαυταῖς ἀποκρῖναί τε τὸ μὴ τοιοῦτον 





1 The mesenteric veins. 
292 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. xm 


would of course be like refusing to believe that 
purgative drugs draw their appropriate humours from 
all over the body by the same stomata through 
which absorption previously takes place, ar@l to look 
for separate stomata for absorption and purgation 
respectively. As a matter of fact one and the same 
stoma subserves two distinct faculties, and these 
exercise their pull at different times in opposite 
directions—first it subserves the pull of the liver 
and, during catharsis, that of the drug. What is 
there surprising, then, in the fact that the veins 
situated between the liver and the region of the 
stomach ! fulfil a double service or purpose? Thus, 
when there is abundance of nutriment contained in 
the food-canal, it is carried up to the liver by the 
veins mentioned ; and when the canal is empty and 
in need of nutriment, this is again attracted from the 
liver by the same veins. 

For everything appears to attract from and to go 
shares with everything else, and, as the most divine 
Hippocrates has said, there would seem to be a con- 
sensus in the movements of fluids and vapours.? 
Thus the stronger draws and the weaker is evacu- 
ated. 

Now, one part is weaker or stronger than another 
either absolutely, by nature, and in all cases, or else 
it becomes so in such and such a particular instance. 
Thus, by nature and in all men alike, the heart is 
stronger than the liver at attracting what is service- 
able to it and rejecting what is not so; similarly the 
liver is stronger than the intestines and stomach, and 

* Linacre renders: ‘‘Una omnium confluxio ac conspira- 


tio”; and he adds the marginal note ‘‘Totum corpus nostrum 
est conspirabile et confluxile per meatus communes.” cf. 


Ῥ. 48. 
293 


GALEN 


ἰσχυρότεραι. καθ᾽ ἕκαστον δ᾽ ἡμῶν ἰδίως ἐν μὲν 
τῷδε τῷ καιρῷ τὸ ἧπαρ ἰσχυρότερον ἕλκειν, ἡ 
γαστὴρ ry ἐν τῷδε. πολλῆς μὲν γὰρ ἐν τῇ κοιλίᾳ 
sis ota rid τροφῆς καὶ σφοδρῶς ὀρεγομένου τε 
χρήξοντος τοῦ ἥπατος, πάντως ἰσχυρότερον 
βίαι τὸ σπλάγχνον' ἔμπαλιν δὲ τοῦ μὲν ἥπατος 
190 ἐμπεπλησμένου τε καὶ δια!τεταμένου, τῆς γαστρὸς 
δ᾽ ὁ ὀρεγομένης καὶ κενῆς ὑπαρχούσης ἡ τῆς ὁλκῆς 
ἰσχὺς εἰς ἐκείνην μεθίσταται. 

‘Os γάρ, εἰ κἂν ταῖς χερσί τινα σιτία κατ- 
ἔχοντες ἀλλήλων ἁρπάζοιμεν, εἰ μὲν ὁ ὁμοίως εἴημεν 
δεόμενοι, περιγίγνεσθαι τὸν ἰσχυρότερον εἰκός, εἶ 
δ᾽ οὗτος μὲν ἐμπεπλησμένος εἴη καὶ διὰ τοῦτ᾽ 
ἀμελῶς κατέχων τὰ περιττὰ ἢ καί τινι μετα- 
δοῦναι ποθῶν, ὁ δ᾽ ἀσθενέστερος ὀρέγοιτο δεινῶς, 
οὐδὲν ἂν εἴη κώλυμα τοῦ μὴ πάντα λαβεῖν αὐτόν, 
οὕτω καὶ ἡ γαστὴρ ἐκ τοῦ ἥπατος ἐπισπᾶται 
ῥᾳδίως, ὅταν αὐτὴ μὲν ἱκανῶς ὀρέγηται τροφῆς, 
ἐμπεπλησμένον δ᾽ ἦ τὸ σπλάγχνον. καὶ τοῦ γε 
μὴ πεινῆν ἐνίοτε τὸ Cov ἡ περιουσία τῆς ἐν 
ἥπατι τροφῆς αἰτία" κρείττονα γὰρ ἔχουσα καὶ 
ἑτοιμοτέραν ἡ γαστὴρ τροφὴν οὐδὲν δεῖται τῆς 
ἔξωθεν: εἰ δέ γέ ποτε δέοιτο μέν, ἀποροίη δέ, 
πληροῦται περιττωμάτων. ἰχῶρες δέ τινές εἶσι 
ταῦτα χολώδεις τε καὶ φλεγματώδεις καὶ ὀρρώδεις, 
ods μόνους ἑλκούσῃ μεθίησιν αὐτῇ τὸ ἧπαρ, ὅταν 
ποτὲ καὶ αὐτὴ δέηται τροφῆς. 

“Ὥσπερ οὖν ἐξ ἀλλήλων ἕλκει τὰ μόρια || 

191 τροφήν, οὕτω καὶ ἀποτίθεταί ποτ᾽ εἰς ἄλληλα 
294 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIT. xin 


the arteries than the veins. In each of us person- 
ally, however, the liver has stronger drawing power 
at one time, and the stomach at another. For when 
there is much nutriment contained in the alimentary 
canal and the appetite and craving of the liver is vio- 
lent, then the viscus! exerts far the strongest traction. 
Again, when the liver is full and_ distended and the 
stomach empty and in need, then the force of the 
traction shifts to the latter. 

Suppose we had some food in our hands and were 
snatching it from one another; if we were equally 
in want, the stronger would be likely to prevail, but 
if he had satisfied his appetite, and was holding what 
was over carelessly, or was anxious to share it with 
somebody, and if the weaker was excessively desirous 
of it, there would be nothing to prevent the latter 
from getting it all. In a similar manner the stomach 
easily attracts nutriment from the liver when it [the 
stomach] has a sufficiently strong craving for it, 
and the appetite of the viscus is satisfied. And 
sometimes the surplusage of nutriment in the liver 
is a reason why the animal is not hungry; for when 
the stomach has better and more available food it 
requires nothing from extraneous sources, but if ever 
it is in need and is at a loss how to supply the need, 
it becomes filled with waste-matters; these are 
certain biliary, phlegmatic [mucous] and serous fluids, 
and are the only substances that the liver yields in 
response to the traction of the stomach, on the 
occasions when the latter too is in want of nutriment. 

Now, just as the parts draw food from each other, 
so also they sometimes deposit their excess substances 


1 The alimentary canal, as not being edible, is not con- 
sidered a splanchnon or viscus. 


295 


GALEN 


τὸ περιττὸν καὶ ὥσπερ ἑλκόντων ἐπλεονέκτει τὸ 
ἰσχυρότερον, οὕτω καὶ ἀποτιθεμένων καὶ τῶν γε 
καλουμένων ῥευμάτων ἦδε ἡ πρόφασις. ἕκαστον 
γὰρ τῶν μορίων ἔχει τινὰ τόνον σύμφυτον, ᾧ 
διωθεῖται τὸ περιττόν. ὅταν οὖν ὃν ἐξ αὐτῶν 
ἀρρωστότερον γένηται κατὰ δή τινα διάθεσιν, ἐξ 
ἁπάντων εἰς ἐκεῖνο συρρεῖν ἀνάγκη τὰ περιττώ- 
ματα. τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἰσχυρότατον ἐναποτίθεται 
τοῖς πλησίον ἅπασιν, ἐκείνων δ᾽ αὖ πάλεν 
ἕκαστον εἰς ἕτερ᾽ ἄττα τῶν ἀσθενεστέρων, εἶτ᾽ 


αὖθις ἐκείνων ἕκαστον εἷς ἄλλα καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἐπὶ" 


πλεῖστον γίγνεται, μέχρι περ ἂν ἐξ ἁπάντων 
ἐλαυνόμενον τὸ περίττωμα Kal’ ἕν τι μείνῃ τῶν 
ἀσθενεστάτων' ἐντεῦθεν γὰρ οὐκέτ᾽ εἰς ἄλλο 
δύναται μεταρρεῖν, ὡς ἂν μήτε δεχομένου τινὸς 
αὐτὸ τῶν ἰσχυροτέρων μήτ᾽ ἀπώσασθαι δυναμένου 
τοῦ πεπονθότος. 

᾿Αλλὰ περὶ μὲν τῶν παθῶν τῆς γενέσεως καὶ 
τῆς ἰάσεως αὖθις ἡμῶν ἐπιδεικνύντων ἱκανὰ κἀξ 
ἐκείνων ἔσται λαβεῖν μαρτύρια τῶν ἐν τῷδε τῷ 


192 λόγῳ παντὶ || δεδειγμένων ὀρθῶς. ὃ δ᾽ ἐν τῷ 


πα όντι δεῖξαι προὔκειτο, πάλιν ἀναλάβωμεν, ὡς 
οὐ ὲν θαυμαστὸν ἐξ ἥπατος ἥκειν τινὰ τροφὴν 
ἐντέροις τε καὶ γαστρὶ διὰ τῶν αὐτῶν φλεβῶν, 
δι᾿ ὧν ἔμπροσθεν ἐξ ἐκείνων εἰς ἧπαρ ἀνεδίδοτο. 
καὶ πολλοῖς ἀθρόως τε καὶ τελέως ἀποστᾶσιν 
ἰσχυρῶν γυμνασίων ἤ τι κῶλον ἀποκοπεῖσιν 
αἵματος διὰ τῶν ἐντέρων γίγνεται κένωσις ἔκ 
τινων περιόδων, ὥ ὥς που καὶ Ἱπποκράτης ἔλεγεν, 
οὐδὲν μὲν ἄλλο λυποῦσα, καθαίρουσα. δ᾽ ἀξέως τὸ 
πᾶν σῶμα καὶ τὰς πλησμονὰς ἐκκενοῦσα, διὰ τῶν 


296 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, ITI. xin 


in each other, and just as the stronger prevailed 
when the two were exercising traction, so it is also 
when they are depositing; this is the cause of the 
so-called fluxions,! for every part has a definite inborn 
. tension, by virtue of which it expels its superfluities, 
and, therefore, when one of these parts,—owing, of 
course, to some special condition—becomes weaker, 
there will necessarily be a confluence into it of the 
superfluities from all the other parts. The strongest 
part deposits its surplus matter in all the parts near 
it; these again in other parts which are weaker ; 
these next into yet others; and this goes on for a 
long time, until the superfluity, being driven from 
one part into another, comes to rest in one of the 
weakest of all; it cannot flow from this into another 
part, because none of the stronger ones will receive 
it, while the affected part is unable to drive it away. 
When, however, we come to deal again with the 
origin and cure of disease, it will be possible to find 
there also abundant proofs of all that we have 
correctly indicated in this book. For the present, 
however, let us resume again the task that lay before 
us, 2.6. to show that there is nothing surprising in 
nutriment coming from the liver to the intestines and 
stomach by way of the very veins through which it 
had previously been yielded up from these organs 
into the liver. And in many people who have 
suddenly and completely given up active exercise, or 
who have had a limb cut off, there occurs at certain 
periods an evacuation of blood by way of the in- 
testines—as Hippocrates has also pointed out some- 
where. This causes no further trouble but sharply 
purges the whole body and evacuates the plethoras ; 


1 Lit. rhewms ; hence our term rheumatism. 


297 


GALEN 


αὐτῶν δήπου φλεβῶν τῆς φορᾶς τῶν περιττῶν ἐπι- 
τελουμένης, de ὧν ἔμπροσθεν ἡ ἡ ἀνάδοσις ἐ ἐγίγνετο. 

Πολλάκις δ᾽ ἐν νόσοις ἡ φύσις διὰ μὲν τῶν 
αὐτῶν δήπου φλεβῶν τὸ πᾶν ἐκκαθαίρει ζῷον, οὐ 
μὴν αἱματώδης Ὑ ἡ κένωσις αὐτοῖς, ἀλλὰ κατὰ 
τὸν λυποῦντα γίγνεται χυμόν. οὕτω δὲ κἀν ταῖς 
χολέραις ἐκκενοῦται τὸ πᾶν σῶμα διὰ τῶν εἰς 
ἔντερά τε καὶ γαστέρα καθηκουσῶν φλεβῶν. 

Τὸ δ᾽ οἴεσθαι μίαν εἶναι ταῖς ὕλαις φορὰν 

198 τελέως ἀγνοοῦντός ἐστι τὰς φυσικὰς ll δυνάμεις 
τάς T ἄλλας καὶ τὴν ἐκκριτικὴν ἐναντίαν οὖσαν 
τῇ ἑλκτικῇ: ταῖς γὰρ ἐναντίαις δυνάμεσιν ἐ ἐναντίας 
κινήσεις τε καὶ φορὰς τῶν ὑλῶν ἀναγκαῖον 
ἀκολουθεῖν. ἕκαστον γὰρ τῶν μορίων, ὅταν 
ἑλκύσῃ τὸν οἰκεῖον υμόν, ἔπειτα κατάσχῃ καὶ 
ἀπολαύσῃ, τὸ περιττὸν ἅπαν ἀποθέσθαι σπεύδει, 
καθότι μάλιστα δύναται τάχιστά θ᾽ ἅμα καὶ 
κάλλιστα, κατὰ τὴν τοῦ περιττοῦ ῥοπήν. 

Ὅθεν ἡ γαστὴρ τὰ μὲν ἐπιπολάξοντα τῶν 
περιττωμάτων ἐμέτοις ἐκκαθαίρει, τὰ δ᾽ δ᾽ ὑφιστά- 
μενα διαρροίαις. καὶ τό γε ναυτιῶδες γίγνεσθαι 
τὸ C@ov τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν ὁρμῆσαι τὴν γαστέρα κενω- 
θῆναι δι ἐμέτου. οὕτω δὲ δή τι βίαιον καὶ 
σφοδρὸν ἡ ἐκκριτικὴ δύναμις ἔχει, ὥστ' ἐν τοῖς 
εἰλεοῖς, ὅ ὅταν ἀποκλεισθῇ τελέως ἡ κάτω διέξοδος, 
ἐμεῖται κόπρος. καίτοι πρὶν διελθεῖν. τό τε λεπ- 
τὸν ἔντερον ἅπαν καὶ τὴν νῆστιν καὶ τὸν πυλωρὸν 
καὶ τὴν γαστέρα καὶ τὸν οἰσοφάγον οὐχ οἷόν τε 
διὰ τοῦ στόματος ἐκπεσεῖν οὐδενὶ τοιούτῳ περιτ- 
τώματι. τί δὴ θαυμαστόν, εἰ κἀκ τῆς ἐσχάτης 





1 Here Galen apparently indicates that vital functions are 


298 


























ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIL. xin 


the passage of the superfluities is effected, of course, 
through the sameveins by which absorption took place. 

Frequently also in disease Nature purges the 
animal through these same veins—although in this 
case the discharge is not sanguineous, but corresponds 
to the humour which is at fault. Thus in cholera the 
entire body is evacuated by way of the veins leading 
to the intestines and stomach. 

To imagine that matter of different kinds is carried 
in one direction only would characterise ἃ man who 
was entirely ignorant of all the natural faculties, and 
particularly of the eliminative faculty, which is the 
opposite of the attractive. For opposite movements 
of matter, active and passive, must necessarily follow 
opposite faculties ; that is to say, every part, after it 
has attracted its special nutrient juice and has 
retained and taken the benefit of it hastens to get 
- rid of all the surplusage as quickly and effectively as 
possible, and this it does in accordance with the 
mechanical tendency of this surplus matter.} 

Hence the stomach clears away by vomiting those 
superfluities which come to the surface of its contents,” 
whilst the sediment it clears away by diarrhea. 
And when the animal becomes sick, this means that 
the stomach is striving to be evacuated by vomiting. 
And the expulsive faculty has in it so violent and 
forcible an element that in cases of ¢leus [volvulus], 
when the lower exit is completely closed, vomiting 
of faeces occurs; yet such surplus matter could not 
be emitted from the mouth without having first 
traversed the whole of the small intestine, the 
jejunum, the pylorus, the stomach, and the oesophagus. 
What is there to wonder at, then, if something 


at least partly explicable in terms of mechanical law. ¢/. 
Introduction, p. xxviii. 2 of. pp. 211, 247. 299 


GALEN 


ἐπιφανείας τῆς κατὰ τὸ δέρμα μέχρι τῶν ἐντέρων 

194 τε καὶ τῆς γαστρὸς ἀφικνοῖτό τι || μεταλη cr 
μενον, ὡς καὶ τοῦθ᾽ Ἱπποκράτης ἡμᾶς ἐδίδ afer, 
ov πνεῦμα μόνον ἢ περίττωμα φάσκων ἀλλὰ καὶ 
τὴν τροφὴν αὐτὴν ἐκ τῆς ἐσχάτης ἐπιφανείας 
αὖθις ἐπὶ τὴν ἀρχήν, ὅθεν ἀνηνέχθη, ,καταφέρε- 
σθαι. ἐλάχισται γὰρ ῥοπαὶ κινήσεων τὴν 
ἐκκριτικὴν ταύτην οἰακίξουσι δύναμιν, ὡς ἂν διὰ 
τῶν ἐγκαρσίων μὲν ἰνῶν γιγνομένην, ὠκύτατα δὲ 
διαδιδομένην ἀπὸ τῆς κινησάσης ἀρχῆς ἐπὶ τὰ 
καταντικρὺ πέρατα. οὔκουν ἀπεικὸς οὐδ᾽ ἀδύ- 
νατον ἀήθει ποτὲ ψύξει τὸ πρὸς τῷ δέρματι 
μόριον ἐξαίφνης πιληθὲν ἅμα μὲν ἀρρωστότερον 
αὐτὸ γενόμενον, ἅμα δ᾽ οἷον ἄχθος τι μᾶλλον ἢ 
παρασκευὴν θρέψεως ἔ xov τὴν ἔμπροσθεν ἀλύπως 
αὐτῷ παρεσπαρμένην ὑγρότητα καὶ διὰ τοῦτ᾽ 
ἀπωθεῖσθαι σπεῦδον, ἅμα δὲ τῆς ἔξω φορᾶς 
ἀποκεκλεισμένης τῇ πυκνώσει, πρὸς τὴν λοιπὴν 
ἐπιστραφῆναι καὶ οὕτω βιασάμενον εἰς τὸ 
παρακείμενον αὐτῷ μόριον ἀθρόως ἀπώσασθαι 
τὸ περιττόν, ἐκεῖνο δ᾽ αὖ πάλιν εἰς τὸ μετ᾽ αὐτό, Ι 

196 καὶ τοῦτο μὴ παύσασθαι γιγνόμενον, ἄχρις ἂν ἡ 
μετάληψις ἐπὶ τὰ ἐντὸς πέρατα τῶν φλεβῶν 
τελευτήσῃ. 

Αἱ μὲν δὴ τοιαῦται κινήσεις θᾶττον ἀπο- 
παύονται, αἱ δ᾽ ἀπὸ τῶν ἔνδοθεν διερεθιξόντων, 
ὡς ἔν τε τοῖς καθαίρουσι φαρμάκοις καὶ ταῖς 
χολέραις ἰσχυρότεραι τε πολὺ καὶ μονιμώτεραι 
γίγνονται καὶ διαμένουσιν, ἔστ᾽ ἂν καὶ ἡ περὶ 
τοῖς στόμασι τῶν ἀγγείων διάθεσις, ἡ τὸ πλησίον 





1 See p. 298, note 1. 
300 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. xin 


should also be transferred from the extreme skin- 
surface and so reach the intestines and stomach ? 
This also was pointed out to us by Hippocrates, who 
maintained that not merely pneuma or excess-matter, 
but actual nutriment is brought down from the outer 
surface to the original place from which it was taken 
up. For the slightest mechanical movements ! deter- 
mine this expulsive faculty, which apparently acts 
through the transverse fibres, and which is very . 
rapidly transmitted from the source of motion to the 
opposite extremities. It is, therefore, neither unlikely 
nor impossible that, when the part adjoining the skin 
becomes suddenly oppressed by an unwonted cold, it 
should at once be weakened and should find that the 
liquid previously deposited beside it without dis- 
comfort had now become more of a burden than a 
source of nutrition, and should therefore strive to put 
it away. Finally, seeing that the passage outwards 
was shut off by the condensation [of tissue], it would 
turn,to the remaining exit and would thus forcibly 
expel all the waste-matter at once into the adjacent 
part; this would do the same to the part following 
it; and the process would not cease until the 
transference finally terminated at the inner ends of 
the veins.” 

Now, movements like these come to an end fairly 
soon, but those resulting from internal irritants (e.g., 
in the administration of purgative drugs or in cholera) 
become much stronger and more lasting ; they per- 
sist as long as the condition of things® about the 
mouths of the veins continues, that is, so long as 


3 The ends of the veins in the alimentary canal from which 
absorption or anadosis had originally taken place. 
3 Diathests. 


301 


GALEN 


4 [4 A A . Ἁ 
ἕλκουσα, ,“παραμένῃ. αὕτη μὲν γὰρ τὸ συνεχὲς 
ἐκκενοῖ μόριον, ἐκεῖνο δ᾽ αὖ τὸ μετ᾽ αὐτὸ καὶ τοῦτ 
οὐ παύεται μέχρι τῆς ἐσχάτης ἐπιφανείας, ὥστε 
διαδιδόντων τῶν ἐφεξῆς ἀεὶ μορίων ἑτέρων ἑτέροις 
τὸ πρῶτον πάθος ὠκύτατα διικνεῖσθαι μέχρι τῶν 
ἐσχάτων. οὕτως οὖν ἔχει κἀπὶ τῶν εἰλεῶν. αὐτὸ 
μὲν γὰρ τὸ φλεγμαῖνον ἔντερον οὔτε τοῦ βάρους 
οὔτε τῆς δριμύτητος ἀνέχεται τῶν περιττωμάτων 
καὶ διὰ τοῦτ᾽ ἐκκρίνειν αὐτὰ σπεύδει καὶ ἀπω- 

a , 
θεῖσθαι πορρωτάτω. κωλυόμενον δὲ κάτω ποι- 
A \ , Ψ 3 La) A ’ 
εἶσθαι τὴν δίωσιν, ὅταν ἐνταυθοῖ ποτε τὸ σφοδρό- 
τατον ἦ τῆς φλεγμονῆς, εἰς τὰ πλησιάξοντα τῶν 
ὑπερκειμένων ἐντέρων ἀπωθεῖται. καὶ οὕτως ἤδη 
196 κατὰ || τὸ συνεχὲς τὴν ῥοπὴν τῆς ἐκκριτικῆς 
δυνάμεως ἄνω ποιησαμένης ἄχρι τοῦ στόματος 

ἐπανέρχεται τὰ περιττώματα. 
Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν δὴ κἀν τοῖς τῶν νοσημάτων 
a > \ A 4 / \ > 9 Ν 
λογισμοῖς ἐπὶ πλέον εἰρήσεται. τὸ δ᾽ ἐκ παντὸς 
εἰς πᾶν φέρεσθαί τι καὶ μεταλαμβάνεσθαι καὶ" 
μίαν ἁπάντων εἶναι σύμπνοιάν τε καὶ σύρροιαν, 
ὡς Ἱπποκράτης ἔλεγεν, ἤδη μοι δοκῶ δεδεῖχθαι 
A > ΓΥ̓ 3 > \ 3 ΄ 
σαφῶς καὶ μηκέτ᾽ ἄν τινα, μηδ᾽ εἰ βραδὺς αὐτῷ 
νοῦς ἐνείη, περὶ τῶν τοιούτων ἀπορῆσαι μηδενός, 

\ 

οἷον ὅπως ἡ γαστὴρ ἢ τὰ ἔντερα τρέφεται καὶ 

A ’ 

τίνα τρόπον ἐκ τῆς ἐσχάτης ἐπιφανείας εἴσω τι 
a a a, 
διικνεῖται. πάντων yap τῶν μορίων ἕλκειν μὲν 
a , 
τὸ προσῆκόν τε καὶ φίλιον, ἀποκρίνειν δὲ τὸ 
“ ὃ 4 3 , ὃ 4 ὑδὲ θ 
βαρῦνον ἢ δάκνον ἐχόντων δύναμιν οὐδὲν θαυ- 
μαστὸν ἐναντίας συνεχῶς γίγνεσθαι κινήσεις ἐν 


302 








ON. THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. xm 


these continue to attract what is adjacent. For this 
condition ' causes evacuation of the contiguous part, 
and that again of the part next to it, and this never 
stops until the extreme surface is reached; thus, as 
each part keeps passing on matter to its neigh- 
bour, the original affection? very quickly arrives at 
the extreme termination. Now this is also the case 
.in tleus; the inflamed intestine is unable to support 
either the weight or the acridity of the waste sub- 
stances and so does its best to excrete them, in fact 
to drive them as far away as possible. And, being 
prevented from effecting an expulsion downwards 
when the severest part of the inflammation is there, it 
expels the matter into the adjoining part of the 
intestines situated above. Thus the tendency of the 
eliminative faculty is step by step upwards, until.the 
superfluities reach the mouth. 

Now this will be also spoken of at greater length 
in my treatise on disease. For the present, however, 
I think I have shewn clearly that there is a universal 
conveyance or transference from one thing into 
another, and that, as Hippocrates used to say, there 
exists in everything a consensus in the movement of 
air and fluids. And I do not think that anyone, 
however slow his intellect, will now be at a loss to 
understand any of these points,—how, for instance, 
the stomach or intestines get nourished, or in what 
manner anything makes its way inwards from the 
outer surface of the body. Seeing that all parts 
have the faculty of attracting what is suitable or 
well-disposed and of eliminating what is troublesome 
or irritating, it is not surprising that opposite move- 
ments should occur in them consecutively—as may 


1 Drathesis. 2 Pathos. 
303 





GALEN 


αὐτοῖς, ὥσπερ ἐπί τε τῆς καρδίας ὁ ὁρᾶται σαφῶς 
καὶ τῶν ἀρτηριῶν ἁπασῶν καὶ τοῦ θώρακος καὶ 
τοῦ πνεύμονος. ἐπὶ μέν γε τούτων ἁπάντων 
μόνον οὐ καθ᾽ ἑκάστην καιροῦ ῥοπὴν τὰς ἐναντίας 
κινήσεις θ᾽ ἅμα τῶν ὀργάνων καὶ φορὰς τῶν 

197 ὑλῶν I ἐναργῶς ἔστιν ἰδεῖν γιγνομένας. εἶτ᾽ ἐπὶ 
μὲν τῆς τραχείας ἀρτηρίας οὐκ ἀπορεῖς ἐναλλὰξ 
ποτὲ μὲν εἴσω παραγούσης εἰς τὸν πνεύμονα τὸ 
πνεῦμα, ποτὲ δ᾽ ἔξω, καὶ τῶν κατὰ τὰς ῥῖνας 
πόρων καὶ ὅλου τοῦ στόματος ὡσαύτως οὐδ᾽ εἶναί 
σοι δοκεῖ θαυμαστὸν οὐδὲ παράδοξον, εἰ, δι οὗ 
μικρῷ πρόσθεν εἴσω παρεκομίξετο τὸ πνεῦμα, διὰ 
τούτου νῦν ἐκπέμπεται, περὶ δὲ τῶν ἐξ ἥπατος 
εἰς ἔντερά τε καὶ γαστέρα καθηκουσῶν φλεβῶν 
ἀπορεῖς καί σοι θαυμαστὸν εἶναι “φαίνεται, διὰ 
τῶν αὐτῶν ἀναδίδοσθαί θ ἅμα τὴν “τροφὴν εἰς 
ἧπαρ ἕλκεσθαί τὴ ἐξ ἐκείνου πάλιν εἰς γαστέρα; 
διόρισαι δὴ τὸ ἅμα τοῦτο “ποτέρως λέγεις. εἰ μὲν 
γὰρ κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν όνον, οὐδ᾽ ἡμεῖς τοῦτό γέ 
φαμεν. ὥσπερ γὰρ εἰσπνέομεν ἐν ἑτέρῳ χρόνῳ 
καὶ αὖθις πάλιν ἐν ἑτέρῳ ἀντεκπνέομεν, οὕτω καὶ 
τροφὴν ἐν ἑτέρῳ μὲν “χρόνῳ τὸ ἧπαρ ἐκ τῆς 
γαστρός, ἐν ἑτέρῳ ἡ γαστὴρ ἐκ τοῦ ἥπατος 
ἐπισπᾶται. εἰ δ᾽ ὅτι καθ᾽ ἕν καὶ ταὐτὸ ξῷον. ἐν 
ὄργανον ἐναντίαις φοραῖς ὑλῶν ὑπηρετεῖ, τοῦτό 
σοι βούλεται δηλοῦν τὸ ἅμα καὶ τοῦτό σε ταράτ- 

198 TeL, τήν T ἢ! εἰσπνοὴν idé καὶ τὴν ἐκπνοήν. πάν- 
τῶς που καὶ αὗται διὰ μὲν τῶν αὐτῶν ὀργάνων 
γίγνονται, τρόπῳ δὲ κινήσεώς τε καὶ φορᾶς τῶν 
ὑλῶν διαφέρουσιν. 


1 He means, not only under the stress of special circum- 
stances, but also normally. 


304 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, Il. xi 


be clearly seen in the case of the heart, in the 
various arteries, in the thorax, and lungs. In all 
these! the active movements of the organs and 
therewith the passive movements of [their contained ] 
matters may be seen taking place almost every 
second in opposite directions. Now, you are not 
astonished when the trachea-artery? alternately 
draws air into the lungs and gives it out, and when 
the nostrils and the whole mouth act similarly; nor 
do you think it strange or paradoxical that the air is 
dismissed through the very channel by which it was 
admitted just before. Do you, then, feel a difficulty 
in the case of the veins which pass down from the 
liver into the stomach and intestines, and do you 
think it strange that nutriment should at once be 
yielded up to the liver and drawn back from it into 
the stomach by the same veins? You must define 
what you mean by this expression “at once.” If 
you mean “ at the same time” this is not what we 
ourselves say ; for just as we take in a breath at one 
moment and give it out again at another, so at one 
time the liver draws nutriment from the stomach, 
and at another the stomach from the liver. But if 
your expression “at once”’ means that in one and 
the same animal a single organ subserves the trans- 
port of matter in opposite directions, and if it is this 
which disturbs you, consider inspiration and expiration. 
For of course these also take place through the same 
organs, albeit they differ in their manner of move- 
ment, and in the way in which the matter is conveyed 
through them. 

2 Lit. ‘‘rough artery.” The air-passages as well as the 
arteries ae er were supposed by the Greeks to carry air 

> Gil 


(pneuma astole of arteries was, like expansion of the 
chest, a movement for drawing in air. c/. p. 317, note 1. 


305 
Χ 


GALEN 


‘O πνεύμων μὲν οὖν καὶ ὁ θώραξ καὶ ἀρτηρίαι 
αἱ τραχεῖαι καὶ αἱ λεῖαι καὶ καρδία. καὶ στόμα 
καὶ ῥῖνες ἐν ἐλαχίσταις χρόνου ῥοπαῖς εἰς ἐναν- 
τίας κινήσεις αὐτά τε μεταβάλλει καὶ τὰς ὕλας 
μεθίστησιν. αἱ δ᾽ ἐξ ἢ ἥπατος εἰς ἔντερα καὶ γασ- 
τέρα καθήκουσαι φλέβες οὐκ ἐν οὕτω βραχέσι 
χρόνου μορίοις ἀλλ᾽ ἐν πολλαῖς ἡμέραις ἅπαξ 
ἐνίοτε τὴν ἐναντίαν κινοῦνται κίνησιν. 

Ἔχει γὰρ ὧδε τὸ σύμπαν. ἕκαστον τῶν ὀρ- 
γάνων εἰς ἑαυτὸ τὴν πλησιάζουσαν ἐπισπᾶται 
τροφὴν ἐκβοσκόμενον αὐτῆς ἅπασαν τὴν χρηστὴν 
νοτίδα, μέχρις ἂν ἱκανῶς κορεσθῇ, καὶ ταύτην, 
ὡς καὶ πρόσθεν ἐδείκνυμεν, ἐναποτίθεται ἑαυτῷ 
καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα προσφύει τε καὶ ὁμοιοῖ, τουτ- 
έστι τρέφεται. διώρισται γὰρ ἱκανῶς ἔμπρο- 
σθεν ἕτερόν τι τῆς θρέψεως ἐξ ἀνάγκης αὐτῆς 
προηγούμενον ἡ πρόσφυσις ὑπάρχειν, ἐκείνης δ᾽ 

199 ἔτι πρότερον ἡ πρόσ εσις. ὥσπερ οὖν || τοῖς 
ζῴοις αὐτοῖς ὅρος ἐστὶ τῆς ἐδωδῆς τὸ πληρῶσαι 
τὴν γαστέρα, κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον ἑκάστῳ 
τῶν μορίων ὅρος ἐστὶ τῆς προσθέσεως ἡ ἢ πλήρωσις 
τῆς οἰκείας ὑγρότητος. ἐπεὶ τοίνυν ἅπαν μόριον 
τῇ γαστρὶ ὁμοίως ὀρέγεται τρέφεσθαι, καὶ περι- 
πτύσσεται τῇ τροφῇ καὶ οὕτω σφίγγει παντα- 
χόθεν αὐτὴν ὡς ἡ γαστήρ. ἕπεται δ᾽ ἐξ a ἀνάγκης 
τούτῳ, καθάπερ καὶ πρόσθεν ἐρρέθη, τὸ πέττεσθαι 
τοῖς σιτίοις, τῆς γαστρὸς οὐ διὰ τοῦτο περι- 
στελλομένης αὐτοῖς, iy’ ἐπιτήδεια τοῖς ἄλλοις 
ἐργάσηται μορίοις" οὕτω γὰρ ἂν οὐκέτι φυσικὸν 


1 cf. p. 39, chap. xi. 
2 Lit. orexis. 


306 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. xin 


Now the lungs, the thorax, the arteries rough and ~ 
smooth, the heart, the mouth, and the nostrils re- 
verse their movements at very short intervals and 
change the direction of the matters they contain. 
On the other hand, the veins which pass down from 
the liver to the intestines and stomach reverse the 
direction of their movements not at such short in- 
tervals, but sometimes once in many days. 

The whole matter, in fact, is as follows :—Each of 
the organs draws into itself the nutriment alongside 
it, and devours all the useful fluid in it, until it is 
thoroughly satisfied ; this nutriment, as I have already 
shown, it stores up in itself, afterwards making it 
adhere and then assimilating it—that is, it becomes 
nourished by it. For it has been demonstrated with 
sufficient clearness already 1 that there is something 
which necessarily precedes actual nutrition, namely 
adhesion, and that before this again comes presenta- 
tion. Thus as in the case of the animals themselves 
the end of eating is that the stomach should be 
filled, similarly in the case of each of the parts, the 
end of presentation is the filling of this part with its 
appropriate liquid. ‘ Since, therefore, every part has, 
like the stomach, a craving? to be nourished, it too 
envelops its nutriment and clasps it all round as the 
stomach does. And this [action of the stomach], as 
has been already said, is necessarily followed by the 
digestion of the food, although it is not to make it 
suitable for the other parts that the stomach con- 
tracts upon it; if it did so, it would no longer be a 
physiological organ,® but an animal possessing reason 


8. Lit. a ‘“‘ physical” organ; that is, a mere instrument or 
organon of the Physis,—not one of the Psyche or conscious 
personality. cf. semen, p. 132, note 1. 


307 
x 2 


GALEN 


ὄργανον ἀλλὰ ζξῴόν τι γύγνοιτο λογισμόν τε καὶ 
νοῦν ἔχον, ὡς αἱρεῖσθαι τὸ βέλτιον. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ αὕτη μὲν περιστέλλεται τῷ τὸ πᾶν 

σῶμα δύναμιν ἑλκτικήν τινα καὶ ἀπολαυστικὴν 
κεκτῆσθαι τῶν οἰκείων ποιοτήτων, ὡς ἔμπροσθεν 
ἐδείκνυτο" συμβαίνει δ᾽ ἐν τούτῳ τοῖς σιτίοις 
ἀλλοιοῦσθαι. καὶ μέντοι καὶ πληρωθεῖσα τῆς 
ἐξ αὐτῶν ὑγρότητος καὶ κορεσθεῖσα βάρος ἡ ἡγεῖται 
τὸ λοιπὸν αὐτά. τὸ περιττὸν οὖν εὐθὺς ἀπο- 
200 τρίβεταί τε καὶ ὠθεῖ κάτω πρὸς || ὅτερον ἔργον 
αὐτὴ τρεπομένη, τὴν πρόσφ υσιν. ἐν δὲ τούτῳ 
τῷ χρόνῳ διερχομένη τὸ ἔντερον ἅπαν ἡ τροφὴ 
ta τῶν εἰς αὐτὸ καθηκόντων ἀγγείων ἀναρπά- 
ξεται, πλείστη μὲν εἰς τὰς φλέβας, ὀλίγη δέ τις 
εἰς τὰς a ἀρτηρίαρ, ὡς μικρὸν ὕστερον ἀποδείξομεν. 
ἐν τούτῳ δ᾽ αὖ τῷ χρόνῳ καὶ τοῖς τῶν ἐντέρων 
χιτῶσι προστίθεται. 

Καί μοι τεμὼν ἤδη τῷ λογισμῷ τὴν τῆς τροφῆς 
οἰκονομίαν ἅπασαν εἰς τρεῖς μοίρας χρόνων, ἐν 
μὲν τῇ πρώτῃ νόει μένουσάν θ᾽ ἅμα κατὰ τὴν 
κοιλίαν αὐτὴν καὶ πεττομένην καὶ προστιθεμένην 
εἰς κόρον τῇ γαστρὶ καί τι καὶ τῷ ἥπατι παρ᾽ 
αὐτῆς ἀναφερόμενον. 

Ἔν δὲ τῇ δευτέρᾳ διερχομένην τά τ᾽ ἔντερα 
καὶ προστιθεμένην εἰς κόρον αὐτοῖς τε τούτοις καὶ 
τῷ ἥπατι καί τι βραχὺ μέρος αὐτῆς πάντη τοῦ 
σώματος φερόμενον" ἐν δὲ δὴ τούτῳ τῷ Kapp 

τὸ προστεθὲν ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ χρόνῳ προσφύεσθαι 
νόει τῇ γαστρί. 


Κατὰ δὲ τὴν τρίτην μοῖραν τοῦ χρόνου "τρέ- 


1 of. p. 317, note 2; p. 319, chap. xv. 
308 














ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. xm 


and intelligence, with the power of choosing the 
better [of two alternatives]. 

But while the stomach contracts for the reason 
that the whole body possesses a power of attracting 
and of utilising appropriate qualities, as has already 
been explained, it also happens that, in this process, 
the food undergoes alteration; further, when filled 
and saturated with the fluid pabulum from the food, 
it thereafter looks on the food as a burden ; thus it 
at once gets rid of the excess—that is to say, drives 
it downwards— itself turning to another task, namely 
that of causing adhesion. And during this time, 
while the nutriment is passing along the whole 
length of the intestine, it is caught up by the vessels 
which pass into the intestine ; as we shall shortly 
demonstrate,! most of it is seized by the veins, but 
a little also by the arteries; at this stage also it 
becomes presented to the coats of the intestines. 

Now imagine the whole economy of nutrition divided 
into three periods. Suppose that in the first period 
the nutriment remains in the stomach and is digested 
and presented to the stomach until satiety is reached, 
also that some of it is taken up from the stomach to 
the liver.? 

During the second period it passes along the 
intestines and becomes presented both to them and to 
the liver—again until the stage of satiety—while a 
small part of it is carried all over the body.? During 
this period, also imagine that what was presented to 
the stomach in the first period becomes now adherent 
to it. 

During the third period the stomach has reached 

* Note that absorption takes place from the stomach as well 
as the intestines. cf p. 118, note 1. 


399 


GALEN 


φεσθαι μὲν ἤδη τὴν κοιλίαν ὁμοιώσασαν ἑαυτῇ 
τελέως τὰ προσφύντα, πρόσφυσιν δὲ τοῖς ἐντέ- 
pos καὶ τῷ ἥπατι γίγνεσθαι τῶν προστεθέντων, 
ἀνάϊδοσιν δὲ πάντη τοῦ σώματος καὶ πρόσθεσιν. 
εἰ μὲν οὖν ἐπὶ τούτοις εὐθέως τὸ ζῷον λαμβάνοι 
τροφήν, ἐν ᾧ πάλιν ἡ γαστὴρ χρόνῳ πέττει τε 
ταύτην καὶ ἀπολαύει προστιθεῖσα πᾶν ἐξ αὐτῆς 
τὸ χρηστὸν τοῖς ἑαυτῆς χιτῶσι, τὰ μὲν ἔντερα 
τελέως ὁμοιώσει τὸν προσφύντα χυμόν, ὡσαύτως 
δὲ καὶ τὸ ἧπαρ. ἐν ὅλῳ δὲ τῷ σώματι πρόσφυσις 
τῶν προστεθέντων τῆς τροφῆς ἔσται μορίων. 
εἰ δ᾽' ἄσιτος ἀναγκάξοιτο μένειν ἡ γαστὴρ ἐν 
τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ, παρὰ τῶν ἐν μεσεντερίῳ τε καὶ 
ἥπατι φλεβῶν ἕλξει τὴν τροφήν" οὐ γὰρ ἐξ αὐτοῦ 
γε τοῦ σώματος τοῦ ἥπατος. λέγω δὲ σῶμα τοῦ 
ἥπατος αὐτήν τε τὴν ἰδίαν αὐτοῦ σάρκα πρώτην 
καὶ μάλιστα, μετὰ δὲ τήνδε καὶ τῶν ἀγγείων 
ἕκαστον τῶν κατ᾽ αὐτό. τὸν μὲν γὰρ ἐν ἑκάστῳ 
τῶν μορίων ἤδη περιεχόμενον χυμὸν οὐκέτ᾽ 
εὔλογον ἀντισπᾶν ἑτέρῳ μορίῳ καὶ μάλισθ᾽ ὅταν 
ἤδη πρόσφυσις ἢ ἐξομοίωσις αὐτοῦ γίγνηται. τὸν 
δ᾽ ἐν ταῖς εὐρυχωρίαις τῶν φλεβῶν τὸ μᾶλλον 
ἰσχύον θ᾽ ἅμα καὶ δεόμενον ἀντισπᾷ μόριον. 

202 Οὕτως οὖν καὶ ἡ γαστὴρ ἐν || ᾧ χρόνῳ δεῖται 
μὲν αὐτὴ τροφῆς, ἐσθίει δ᾽ οὐδέπω τὸ ζῷον, ἐν 
τούτῳ τῶν κατὰ τὸ ἧπαρ ἐξαρπάζει φλεβῶν. 
ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ τὸν σπλῆνα διὰ τῶν ἔμπροσθεν 
ἐδείκνυμεν ὅσον ἐν ἥπατι παχύτερον ἕλκοντα 


20 


—_ 





1 That is, among the ultimate tissues or cells. 
310 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, ITI. xm 


the stage of receiving nourishment ; it now entirely 
assimilates everything that had become adherent to 
it : at the same time in the intestines and liver there 
takes place adhesion of what had been before 
presented, while dispersal [anadosis] is taking place 
to all parts of the body,! as also presentation. 
Now, if the animal takes food immediately after 
these [three stages] then, during the time that the 
stomach is again digesting and getting the benefit 
of this by presenting all the useful part of it to 
its own coats, the intestines will be engaged in final 
assimilation of the juices which have adhered to 
them, and so also will the liver: while in the various 
parts of the body there will be taking place adhesion 
of the portions of nutriment presented. And if the 
stomach is forced to remain without food during this 
time, it will draw its nutriment from the veins in 
the mesentery and liver ; for it will not do so from 
the actual body of the liver (by body of the kver I 
mean first and foremost its flesh proper, and after 
this all the vessels contained in it), for it is irrational 
to suppose that one part would draw away from 
another part the juice already contained in it, 
' especially when adhesion and final assimilation of 
that juice were already taking place; .the juice, 
however, that is in the cavity of the veins will be 
abstracted by the part which is stronger and more in 
need. 

It is in this way, therefore, that the stomach, 
when it is in need of nourishment and the animal 
has nothing to eat, seizes it from the veins in the 
liver. Also in the case of the spleen we have shown 
in a former passage 2 how it draws all material from 


2 Pp, 205-9. 
211 


GALEN 


κατεργάξεσθαί τε καὶ μεταβάλλειν ἐπὶ τὸ xen- 
στότερον, | οὐδὲν οὐδ᾽ ἐνταῦθα θαυμαστὸν ἕλκεσθαί 
τι κἀκ τοῦ σπληνὸς εἰς ἕκαστον τῶν κοινωνούν- 
των αὐτῷ κατὰ τὰς φλέβας ὀργάνων, οἷον εἰς 
ἐπίπλοον καὶ μεσεντέριον καὶ λεπτὸν ἔντερον καὶ 
κῶλον καὶ αὐτὴν τὴν γαστέρα: κατὰ δὲ τὸν αὐτὸν 
τρόπον ἐξερεύγεσθαι μὲν εἰς τὴν γαστέρα τὸ 
περίττωμα καθ᾽ ὅτερον χρόνον, αὐτὸν δ᾽ αὖθις 
ἐκ τῆς γαστρὸς ὅλκειν τι τῆς οἰκείας τροφῆς ἐν 
ἑτέρῳ καιρῷ. 

Καθόλου δ᾽ εἰπεῖν, ὃ καὶ πρόσθεν ἤδη λέλεκται, 
πᾶν ἐκ παντὸς ἕλκειν τε καὶ πέμπειν ἐγχωρεῖ 
κατὰ διαφέροντας χρόνους, ὁμοιοτάτου γιγνομένου 
τοῦ συμβαίνοντος, ὡς εἰ καὶ ζῷα νοήσαις πολλὰ 
τροφὴν ἄφθονον ἐν κοινῷ κατακειμένην, εἰς ὅσον 
βούλεται, προσφερόμενα. καθ᾽ ὃν γὰρ ἤδη πέ- 
παυται χρόνον ἕτερα, κατ τοῦτον εἰκὸς ἐσθίειν 

203 ἕτερα, καὶ μέλλειν γε τὰ μὲν || παύεσθαι, τὰ δ᾽ 
ἄρχεσθαι, καί τινα μὲν συνεσθίοντα, τὰ δ᾽ ἀνὰ 
μέρος ἐσθίοντα καὶ ναὶ μὰ Δία γε; τὸ ἕτερον ἁρπά- 
ἕξειν θατέρου πολλάκις, εἰ τὸ μὲν ἕτερον ἐπιδέοιτο, 
τῷ δ᾽ a θόνως “παρακέοιτο. καὶ οὕτως οὐδὲν 
θαυμαστὸν οὔτ᾽ ἐκ τῆς ἐσχάτης ἐπιφανείας εἴσω 
τι πάλιν ὑποστρέφειν οὔτε διὰ τῶμ αὐτῶν ἀγ- 
γείων ἐξ ἥπατός τε καὶ σπληνὸς εἰς κοιλίαν 
ἀνενεχθῆναί τί, δι ὧν ἐκ ταύτης εἰς ἐκεῖνα 
πρότερον ἄνην θη. 

Κατὰ μὲν αὐγήν τὰς ἀρτηρίας ἱκανῶς ἐναργὲς τὸ 
τοιοῦτον, ὥσπερ καὶ κατὰ τὴν καρδίαν τε καὶ τὸν 
θώρακα καὶ τὸν πνεύμονα. τούτων γὰρ ἃ ἁπάντων 
διάστελλομένων τε καὶ συστελλομένων ἐναλλὰξ 
ἀναγκαῖον, ἐξ ὧν εἱλκύσθη τι πρότερον, εἰς ταῦθ᾽ 


312 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIL. xm 


the liver that tends to be thick, and by working it 
up converts it into more useful matter. There is 
nothing surprising, therefore, if, in the present 
instance also, some of this should be drawn from the 
spleen into such organs as communicate with it by 
veins, e.g. the omentum, mesentery, small intestine, 
colon, and the stomach itself. Nor is it surprising 
that the spleen should disgorge its surplus matters 
into the stomach at one time, while at another time 
it should draw some of its appropriate nutriment from 
the stomach. ' 

For, as has already been said, speaking generally, 
everything has the power at different times of 
attracting from and of adding to everything else. 
What happens is just as if you might imagine a 
number of animals helping themselves at will to a 
plentiful common stock of food; some will naturally 
be eating when others have stopped, some will be on 
the point of stopping when others are beginning, 
some eating together, and others in succession. Yes, 
by Zeus ! and one will often be plundering another, 
if he be in need while the other has an abundant 
supply ready to hand. Thusit isin no way surprising 
that matter should make its way back from the 
outer surface of the body to the interior, or should 
be carried from the liver and spleen into the stomach 
by the same vessels by which it was carried in the 
reverse direction. 

In the case of the arteries! this is clear enough, as 
also in the case of heart, thorax, and lungs; for, 
since all of these dilate and contract alternately, 
it must needs be that matter is subsequently dis- 
charged back into the parts from which it was 


1 By this term, of course, the air-passages are also meant ; 


cf. p- 305. 313 


GALEN 


ὕστερον ἐκπέμπεσθαι. καὶ ταύτην ἄρα τὴν avay- 
Knv ἡ φύσις προγυγνώσκουσα τοῖς ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ 
στόμασι τῶν ἀγγείων ὑμένας ἐπέφυσε κωλύ- 
σοντας εἰς τοὐπίσω φέρεσθαι τὰς ὕλας. ἀλλ᾽ 
ὅπως μὲν τοῦτο γίγνεται καὶ καθ᾽ ὅντινα τρόπον, 
ἐν τοῖς περὶ χρείας μορίων εἰρήσεται δεικνύντων 
ἡμῶν τά τ᾽ ἄλλα καὶ ὡς ἀδύνατον οὕτως ἀκριβῶς 

204 κλείεσθαι τὰ στόματα τῶν ἀγγείων, ὡς vl μηδὲν 
παλινδρομεῖν. εἰς μὲν γὰρ τὴν ἀρτηρίαν τὴν 
φλεβώδη, καὶ γὰρ καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἐν ἐκείνοις δειχθή- 
σεται, πολὺ πλέον ἢ διὰ τῶν ἄλλων στομάτων 
εἰς τοὐπίσω πάλιν ἀναγκαῖον ἐπανέρχεσθαι. τὸ 
δ᾽ εἰς τὰ παρόντα χρήσιμον, ὡς οὐκ ἐνδέχεταί τι 
τῶν αἰσθητὴν καὶ μεγάλην ἐχόντων εὐρύτητα 
μὴ οὐκ ἤτοι διαστελλόμενον ἕλκειν ἐξ ἁπάντων 
τῶν πλησίον ἢ ἐκθλίβειν αὖθις εἰς ταῦτα συ- 
στελλόμενον ἔκ τε τῶν,ἤδη προειρημένων ἐν τῷδε 
τῷ λόγῳ σαφὲς ἂν εἴη κἀξ ὧν ᾿Βρασίστρατός τε 
καὶ ἡμεῖς ἑτέρωθι περὶ τῆς πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον 
ἀκολουθίας ἐδείξαμεν. 


XIV 


᾿Αλλὰ μὴν καὶ ὡς ἐν ἑκάστῃ τῶν ἀρτηριῶν 
ἐστί τις δύναμις ἐκ τῆς καρδίας ἐπιρρέουσα, καθ᾽ 
ἣν διαστέλλονταί τε καὶ συστέλλονται, δέδεικται 
δι᾿ ἑτέρων. 

Εἴπερ οὖν συνθείης ἄμφω τό τε ταύτην εἶναι 
τὴν κίνησιν αὐταῖς τό τε πᾶν τὸ διαστελλόμενον 


1 of. p. 34, note 1. 2 of. p. 121, note 4. 
: Pulmonary vein, or rather, left faabicle: Galen means a 
reflux through the mitral orifice; the left auricle was looked 


314 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. xm1.—x1v 


previously drawn. Now Nature foresaw this ne- 
cessity,! and provided the cardiac openings of the 
vessels with membranous attachments,? to prevent 
their contents from being carried backwards. How 
and in what manner this takes place will be stated 
in my work “On the Use of Parts,’ where among 
other things I show that it is impossible for the 
openings of the vessels to be closed so accurately 
that nothing at all can run back. Thus it is in- 
evitable that the reflux into the venous artery® (as 
will also be made clear in the work mentioned) 
should be much greater than through the other 
openings. But what it is important for our present 
purpose to recognise is that every thing possessing a 
large and appreciable cavity must, when it dilates, 
abstract matter from all its neighbours, and, when it 
contracts, must squeeze matter back into them. 
This should all be clear from what has already been 
said in this treatise and from what Erasistratus and I 
myself have demonstrated elsewhere respecting the 
tendency of a vacuum to become refilled.* 


XIV 

Anp further, it has been shown in other treatises 
that all the arteries possess a power which derives 
from the heart, and by virtue of which they dilate 
and contract. 

Put together, therefore. the two facts—that the 
arteries have this motion, and that everything, when 
on rather as the termination of the pulmonary veins than as 
a part of the heart. cf. p. 323, note 4. He speaks here of a 


kind of ‘‘ physiological” mitral incompetence. 
* Horror vacui. 


315 


GALEN 


ἕλκειν ἐκ τῶν πλησίον εἰς ἑαυτό, θαυμαστὸν 
οὐδέν σοι φανεῖται τὰς ἀρτηρίας, ὅσαι μὲν εἰς τὸ 
δέ μα περαίνουσιν αὐτῶν, ἐπισπᾶσθαι τὸν ἔξωθεν 
ἀέρα διαστελλομένας, 6 ὅσαι δὲ κατά τι πρὸς τὰς Ι! 
206 φλέβας ἀνεστόμωνται, τὸ λεπτότατον ἐν. αὐταῖς 
καὶ ἀτμωδέστατον ἐπισπᾶσθαι τοῦ αἵματος, doar 
δ᾽ ἐγγὺς τῆς καρδίας εἰσίν, ἐξ αὐτῆς ἐκείνης ποιεῖ- 
σθαι τὴν ὁλκήν. ἐν yap τῇ πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον 
ἀκολουθίᾳ τὸ κουφότατόν τε καὶ λεπτότατον 
ἕπεται πρῶτον τοῦ βαρυτέρου τε καὶ παχυτέρου" 
κουφότατον δ᾽ ἐστὶ καὶ λεπτότατον ἁπάντων τῶν 
κατὰ τὸ ,σῶμα πρῶτον μὲν τὸ πνεῦμα, Sevres ov 
δ᾽ ὁ ἀτμός, ἐπὶ τούτῳ δὲ τρίτον, ὅσον ἂν ἀκριβῶς 
ἦ κατειργασμένον τε καὶ λελεπτυσμένον αἷμα. 
Ταῦτ᾽ οὖν εἰς ἑαυτὰς ἕλκουσιν αἱ ἀρτηρίαι 
πανταχόθεν, αἱ μὲν εἰς τὸ δέρμα καθήκουσαι τὸν 
ἔξωθεν ἀέρα: πλησίον TE yap αὐταῖς οὗτός ἐστι 
καὶ “κουφότατος ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα' τῶν δ᾽ ἄλλων 
ἡ μὲν ἐπὶ τὸν ,τράχηλον ἐκ τῆς καρδίας ἀνιοῦσα 
καὶ ἡ ἡ κατὰ ῥάχιν, ἤδη δὲ καὶ ὅσαι τούτων ἐγγὺς 
ἐξ αὐτῆς μάλιστα τῆς καρδίας" ὅσαι δὲ καὶ τῆς 
καρδίᾶς πορρωτέρω καὶ τοῦ δέρματος, ἕλκειν 
ταύταις ἀναγκαῖον ἐκ τῶν φλεβῶν τὸ κουφό- 
τατον τοῦ αἵματος" ὥστε καὶ τῶν εἰς τὴν γαστέρα 
τε καὶ τὰ ἔντερα καθηκουσῶν a ἀρτηριῶν τὴν 
ὁλκὴν ἐν τῷ διαστέλλεσθαι γίγνεσθαι παρά τε 
206 τῆς || καρδίας αὐτῆς καὶ τῶν παρακειμένων αὐτῇ 
φλεβῶν παμπόλλων οὐσῶν. οὐ γὼρ δὴ ἔκ γε τῶν 
ἐντέρων καὶ τῆς κοιλίας τροφὴν οὕτω παχεῖάν τε 
καὶ βαρεῖαν ἐν ἑαυτοῖς ἐχόντων δύνανταί τι 
μεταλαμβάνειν, ὅ ὅ τι καὶ ἄξιον λόγου, φθάνουσαι 
πληροῦσθαι τοῖς κουφοτέροις. οὐδὲ γὰρ εἰ καθεὶς 


416 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. x1v 


it dilates, draws neighbouring matter into itself—and 
you will find nothing strange in the fact that those 
arteries which reach the skin draw in the outer air 
when they dilate, while those which anastqmose at 
any point with the veins attract the thinnest and 
most vaporous part of the blood which these contain, 
and as for those arteries which are near the heart, 
it is on the heart itself that they exert their traction. 
For, by virtue of the tendency by which a vacuum . 
becomes refilled, the lightest and thinnest part obeys 
the tendency before that which is heavier and 
thicker. Now the lightest and thinnest of anything 
in the body is firstly pneuma, secondly vapour, and 
in the third place that part of the blood which has 
been accurately elaborated and refined. - 

These, then, are what the arteries draw into 
themselves on every side; those arteries which 
reach the skin draw in the outer air! (this being 
near them and one of the lightest of things); as 
to the other arteries, those which pass up from the 
heart into the neck, and that which lies along the 
spine, as also such arteries as are near these—draw 
mostly from the heart itself; and those which are 
further from the heart and skin necessarily draw the 
lightest part of the blood out of the veins. So also ᾿ 
the traction exercised by the diastole of the arteries 
which go to the stomach and intestines takes place 
at the expense of the heart itself and the numerous 
veins in its neighbourhood ; for these arteries cannot 
get anything worth speaking of from the thick 
heavy nutriment contained in the intestines and 
stomach,? since they first become filled with lighter 
elements. For if you let down a tube into a vessel 


1 cf. p. 305, note 2. 5 of. p. 308, note 1. 
317 


GALEN 


αὐλίσκον εἰς ἀγγεῖον. ὕδατός τε καὶ ψάμμου πλῆρες 
ἐπισπάσαιο τῷ στόματι τὸν ἐκ τοῦ αὐλίσκου 
ἀέρα, δύναιτ᾽ ἂν ἀκολουθῆσαί σοί πρὸ τοῦ ὕδατος 
ἡ ψάμμος" ἀεὶ γὰρ ἐν τῇ πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον 
ἀκολουθίᾳ τὸ κουφότερον ἕπεται πρότερον. 


XV 


Οὔκουν χρὴ θαυμάζειν, εἰ παντελῶς ὀλίγον ἐκ 
τῆς κοιλίας, ὅσον ἂν ἀκριβῶς ἦ κατειργασμένον, 
εἰς τὰς ἀρτηρίας παραγίγνεται, φθανούσας πλη- 
ροῦσθαι τῶν “κουφοτέρων, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνο γιγνώσκειν, 
ὡς δύ᾽ ἐστὸν ὁλκῆς εἴδη, τὸ μὲν τῇ πρὸς τὸ 
κενούμενον ἀκολουθίᾳ, τὸ δ᾽ οἰκειότητι ποιότητος 
γιγνόμενον' ἑτέρως μὲν γὰρ εἰς τὰς φύσας 0 ἀήρ, 
ἑτέρως δ᾽ ὁ σίδηρος ὑ ὑπὸ τῆς ἡρακλείας. ἐπισπᾶται 
λίθου: καὶ ὡς ἡ μὲν πρὸς τὸ κενούμενον ἀκο- 


207 λουθία ll τὸ κουφότερον ἕλκει | πρότερον, ἡ΄ δὲ 


κατὰ τὴν τῆς ποιότητος οἰκειότητα πολλάκις, 
εἶ οὕτως ἔτυχε, τὸ βαρύτερον, ἂν τῇ φύσει συγ- 
γενέστερον ὑπάρχῃ. καὶ τοίνυν καὶ ταῖς ἀρτη- 
ρίαις τε καὶ τῇ καρδίᾳ, ὡς μὲν κοΐλοις τε καὶ 
διαστέλλεσθαι δυναμένοις ὀργάνοις, ἀεὶ τὸ κου- 
φότερον ἀκολουθεῖ “πρότερον, ὡς δὲ τρέφεσθαι 
δεομένοις, εἰς αὐτοὺς τοὺς χιτῶνας, οἵ δὴ. τὰ 
σώματα τῶν ὀργάνων εἰσίν, ἕλκεται τὸ οἰκεῖον. 
ὅσον ἂν οὖν εἰς τὴν κοιλότητα διαστελλομένων 
αὐτῶν αἵματος μεταληφθῇ, τούτου τὸ οἰκειότατόν 





1 The ‘‘ mechanical” principle of horror vacu: contrasted 
with the ‘‘physical” or semi-physiological principle of 
specific attraction. Appropriateness here might almost be 
rendered affinity or kinship. cf. note 2, infra. 


318 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. x1v.-xv 


full of water and sand, and suck the air out of the 
tube with your mouth, the sand cannot come up to 
you before the water, for in accordance with the 
principle of: the refilling of a vacuum the lighter 
matter is always the first to succeed to the evacua- 
tion. 


XV 


Ir is not to be wondered at, therefore, that only 
a very little Nears matter] such, namely, as has 
been accurately elaborated—gets from the stomach 
into the arteries, since these first become filled 
with lighter matter. We must understand that there 
are two kinds of attraction, that by which a vacuum 
becomes refilled and that caused by appropriateness 
of quality ;1 air is drawn into bellows in one way, and 
iron by the lodestone in another. And we must also 
understand that the traction which results from 
evacuation acts primarily on what is light, whilst 
that from appropriateness of quality acts frequently, 
it may be, on what is heavier (if this should be 
naturally more nearly related”). Therefore, in the 
case of the heart and the arteries, it is in so far as 
they are hollow organs, capable of diastole, that they 
always attract the lighter matter first, while, in so 
far as they require nourishment, it is actually into 
their coats (which are the real bodies of these organs) 
that the appropriate matter is drawn.® Of the blood, 
then, which is taken into their cavities when they 
dilate, that. part which is most proper to them and 


2 “ Related,” ‘‘akin.” cf. p. 36, note 2. 
3 The coats exercise the vital traction, the cavities the 
merely mechanical. cf. p. 165, note 2. 


319 


GALEN 


τε καὶ μάλεστα τρέφειν δυνάμενον οἱ χιτῶνες 

αὐτοὶ τῶν. ἀγγείων ἐπισπῶνται. 

Τοῦ δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν φλεβῶν. εἰς τὰς ἀρτηρίας μετα- 
λαμβάνεσθαί τί πρὸς τοῖς εἰρημένοις ἱκανὸν καὶ 
τοῦτό γε τεκμήριον. εἰ πολλὰς καὶ μεγάλας 
ἀρτηρίας ιατεμὼν ἀποκτεῖναι τὸ ζῷον βου- 
ληθείης, εὑρήσεις αὐτοῦ τὰς φλέβας ὁμοίως ταῖς 
ἀρτηρίαις ἐκκενουμένας, οὐκ ἂν τούτου ποτὲ 
γενομένου χωρὶς τῶν πρὸς ἀλλήλας αὐταῖς 
ἀναστομώσεων. ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ κατ᾽ αὐτὴν τὴν 
καρδίαν ἐ ἐκ τῆς δεξιᾶς κοιλίας εἰς τὴν ἀριστερὰν 

208 ἕλκεται τὸ λεπτό ϊτατον ἔχοντός τινα τρήματα 
τοῦ μέσου διαφράγματος αὐτῶν, ἃ μέχρι μὲν 
πλείστου δυνατόν ἐ ἐστιν ἰδεῖν, οἷον βοθύνους τινὰς 
ἐξ εὐρυτέρου στόματος ἀεὶ καὶ μᾶλλον εἰς στενό- 
τερον π ἰόντας. οὐ μὴν αὐτά γε τὰ ἔσχατα 
πέρατα υνατὸν ἔτι θεάσασθαι διά τε σμικρότητα 
καὶ ὅτι τεθνεῶτος ἤδη τοῦ ζῴου κατέψυκταί τε 
καὶ πεπύκνωται πάντα. ἀλλ᾽ ὁ λόγος κἀνταῦθα 
πρῶτον μὲν ἐκ τοῦ μηδὲν ὑπὸ τῆς φύσεως 
γίγνεσθαι μάτην ὁρμώμενος ἐξευρίσκει τὰς 
ἀναστομώσεις ταύτας τῶν κομῶν τῆς καρδίας" 
οὐ γὰρ δὴ εἰκῇ γε καὶ ὡς ἔτυχεν οἱ ἐς στενὸν οὕτω 
τελευτῶντες ἐγένοντο βόθυνοι. 

“Δεύτερον. δὲ κἀκ τοῦ δυοῖν ὄντοιν στομάτοιν ἐν 
τῇ δεξιᾷ τῆς καρδίας κοιλίᾳ τοῦ μὲν εἰσάγοντος 
τὸ αἷμα, τοῦ δ᾽ ἐξάγοντος πολὺ μεῖζον εἶναι τὸ 
εἰσάγον. ὧς γὰρ οὐ παντὸς τοῦ αἵματος, ὅσον ἡ 
κοίλη prey δίδωσι τῇ καρδίᾳ, πάλιν ἐξ ἐκείνης 

1. Chap. xi 


2 These ποιὰ were hasta the recesses between the 
columnae carneae. gos cf. p. 398, note 2. 


320 














ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. xv 


most able to afford nourishment is attracted by their 
actual coats. 

Now, apart from what has been said,! the following 
is sufficient proof that something is taken over from 
the veins into the arteries. If you will kill an animal 
by cutting through a number of its large arteries, you 
will find the veins becoming empty along with the 
arteries: now, this could never occur if there were 
not anastomoses between them. Similarly, also, in 
the heart itself, the thinnest portion of the blood is 
drawn from the right ventricle into the left, owing 
to there being perforations in the septum between 
them: these can be seen for a great part [of their 
length]; they are like a kind of fossae [pits] with 
wide mouths, and they get constantly narrower ; it 
is not possible, however, actually to observe their 
extreme terminations, owing both to the smallness 
of these and to the fact that when the animal is dead 
all the parts are chilled and shrunken.? Here, too, 
however, our argument,’ starting from the principle 
that nothing is done by Nature in vain, discovers 
these anastomoses between the ventricles of the 
heart; for it could not be at random and by chance 
that there occurred fossae ending thus in narrow 
terminations. 

And secondly [the presence of these anastomoses 
has been assumed] from the fact that, of the two 
orifices in the right ventricle, the one conducting 
blood in and the other out, the former‘ is much 
the larger. For, the fact that the insertion of 
the vena cava into the heart5 is larger than the 


+ He means the tricuspid orifice. cf. p. 121, note 4. 
5 The right auricle was looked on less as a part of the 
heart than.as an expansion or ‘‘ insertion” of the vena cava. 
321 
¥ 


GALEN 


ἐκπεμπομένου τῷ πνεύμονι, μείζων ἐστὶν ἡ ἀπὸ 
τῆς κοΐλης εἰς αὐτὴν ἔμφυσις τῆς ἐμφνομένης εἰς 
209 τὸν “πνεύμονα φλεβός. οὐδὲ ll γὰρ τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν 
εὐπεῖν, ὡς ἐδαπανήθη τι τοῦ α ἵματος εἰς τὴν αὐτοῦ 
τοῦ σώματος τῆς καρδίας θρέψιν. ἑτέρα γάρ 
ἐστι φλὲψ ἡ εἰς ἐκεῖνο κατασχιξζομένη μήτε τὴν 
γένεσιν ἐκ τῆς καρδίας αὐτῆς μήτε τὴν τοῦ 
αἵματος ἔ ἔχουσα μετάληψιν. εἰ δὲ καὶ δαπανᾶταί 
τι, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ τοσοῦτόν γε μείων ἐστὶν ἡ εἰς τὸν 
πνεύμονα prey ἄγουσα τῆς εἰς τὴν καρδίαν 
ἐμφνομένης, ὅσον εἰκὸς εἰς τὴν τροφὴν ἀνηλῶσθαι 
τῆς καρδίας, ἀλλὰ πλέον πολλῷ. δῆλον οὗν, 
ὡς εἰς τὴν ἀριστεράν. τί μεταλαμβάνεται, κοιλίαν. 
Καὶ γὰρ οὖν καὶ τῶν κατ᾽ ἐ ἐκείνην ἀγγείων δυοῖν 
ὄντων ἔλαττόν ἐ ἐστι πολλῷ: τὸ ἐκ τοῦ πνεύμονος εἰς 
αὐτὴν εἰσάγον τὸ πνεῦμα τῆς. ἐκ νομένης ἀρτηρίας 
τῆς μεγάλης, ἀφ᾽ ἧς αἱ κατὰ τὸ “σῶμα σύμπασαε 
πεφύκασιν, ὡς ἂν μὴ μόνον ἐκ τοῦ πνεύμονος πνεῦ- 
μα μεταλαμβανούσης αὐτῆς, ἀλλὰ κἀκ τῆς δεξιᾶς 
κοίλίας αἷμα διὰ τῶν εἰρημένων ἀναστομώσεων. 
"Ore δ᾽ ἄμεινον ἦν τοῖς τοῦ σώματος μορίοις 
τοῖς μὲν ὑπὸ καθαροῦ καὶ λεπτοῦ καὶ ἀτμώδους 
αἵματος τρέφεσθαι, τοῖς δ᾽ ὑπὸ παχέος καὶ 
θολεροῦ καὶ ὡς οὐδ᾽ ἐνταῦθά τι παρεώραται τῇ 
210 φύσει, τῆς Il. περὶ χρείας μορίων πραγματείας 
ἐστίν, ὥστ᾽ οὐ χρὴ νῦν ὑπὲρ τούτων ἔτι λέγειν, 
1 This ‘‘ vein” (really the pulmonary artery) was supposed 
to be the channel by which the lungs received nutriment 
from the right heart. cf p. 121, note ὃ. 
2 The coronary vein. 
3 Galen’s conclusion, of course, is, 80 far, correct, but he 


has substituted an imaginary direct communication between 
the ventricles for the actual and more roundabout pulmonary 


322 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, IIT. xv 


vein which is inserted into the lungs! suggests 
that not all the blood which the vena cava gives 
to the heart is driven away again from the heart 
to the lungs. Nor can it be said that any of the 
blood is expended in the nourishment of the actual 
body of the heart, since there is another vein? 
which breaks up in it and which does not take its 
origin nor get its share of blood from the heart 
itself. And even if a certain amount is so expended, 
still the vein leading to the lungs is not to such a 
slight extent smaller than that inserted into the 
heart as to make it likely that the blood is used as 
nutriment for the heart: the disparity is much too 
great for such an explanation. It is, therefore, clear 
that something is taken over into the left ventricle.® 

Moreover, of the two vessels connected with it, 
that which brings pneuma into it from the lungs * 
is much smaller than the great outgrowing artery ὃ 
from which the arteries all over the body originate ; 
this would suggest that it not merely gets pneuma 
from the lungs, but that it also gets blood from the 
right ventricle through the anastomoses mentioned. 

Now it belongs to the treatise “On the Use of 
Parts’ to show that it was best that some parts of 
the body should be nourished by pure, thin, and 
vaporous blood, and others by thick, turbid blood, 
and that in this matter also Nature has overlooked 
nothing. Thus it is not desirable that these matters 
should be further discussed. Having mentioned, 
circulation, of whose existence he apparently had no idea. 
His views were eventually corrected by the Renascence 
anatomists. cf. Introduction, pp. xxii.—xxiii. 

* He means the left auricle, considered as the termination 
of the pulmonary “arteries”; οὗ p. 314, note 3. 


5 The aorta, its orifice being circular, appears bigger than 
the slit-like mitral orifice. 323 


y 2 


GALEN 


ἀλλ᾽ ὑπομνήσαντας, ὡς δύο ἐστὸν ὁλκῆς εἴδη, τῶν 
μὲν εὐρείαις ὁδοῖς ἐν τῷ διαστέλλεσθαι τῇ πρὸς 
τὸ κενούμενον ἀκολουθίᾳ τὴν ἔλξιν ποιουμένων, 
τῶν δ᾽ οἰκειότητι ποιότητος, ἐφεξῆς λέγειν, ὡς τὰ 
μὲν πρότερα καὶ πόρρωθεν ἕλκειν τι δύναται, τὰ 
δὲ δεύτερα ἐκ τῶν ἐγγυτάτω μόνων. αὐλίσκον 
μὲν γὰρ ὅτι μήκιστον εἰς ὕδωρ ἔνεστι καθέντα 
ῥᾳδίως ἀ ἀνασπᾶν εἰς τὸ στόμα δι᾿ αὐτοῦ τὸ ὑγρόν" 
οὗ μὴν εἴ γ᾽ ἐπὶ πλέον “ἀπαγάγοις τῆς ἡρακλείας 
λίθου τὸν σίδηρον ἢ ἢ τοὺς πυροὺς τοῦ κεραμίου --- 
καὶ γὰρ καὶ τοιοῦτόν τι πρόσθεν ἐλέγετο παρά- 
ὑγμα---δύναιτ᾽ ἂν ἔ ἔτι γενέσθαι τις ὁλκή. 

“Σαφέστατα δ᾽ ἂν αὐτὸ μάθοις ἐπὶ τῶν ἐν τοῖς 
κήποις ὀχετῶν" ἐκ τούτων γὰρ εἰς μὲν τὰ παρα- 
κείμενα καὶ πλησίον ἅπαντα διαδίδοταί τις ἰκμάς, 
εἰς δὲ τὰ πορρωτέρω προσελθεῖν οὐκέτι δύναται, 
καὶ διὰ TOUT ἀναγκάζονται πολλοῖς ὀχετοῖς 
μικροῖς ἀπὸ τοῦ μεγάλου τετμημένοις εἰς ἕκαστον 
μέρος τοῦ κήπου τὴν ἐπίρρυσιν τοῦ ὕδατος ἐπι- 
211 τεχνᾶσθαι" καὶ τηλικαῦτά γε τὰ | μεταξὺ δια- 
στήματα τούτων τῶν μικρῶν ὀχετῶν ποιοῦσιν, 
ἡλίκα μάλιστα νομίζουσιν ἀρκεῖν εἰς τὸ ἱκανῶς 
ἀπολαύειν ἕλκοντα τῆς ἑκατέρωθεν αὐτοῖς ἐπερ- 
ρεούσης ὑγρότητος. οὕτως οὖν ἔχει κἀν τοῖς τῶν 
ἕῴων σώμασιν. ὀχετοὶ πολλοὶ κατὰ πάντα τὰ 
μέλη διεσπαρμένοι παράγουσιν αὐτοῖς αἷμα καθά.- 
περ ἐν κήποις ὑδρείαν τινά. καὶ τούτων τῶν 
ὀχετῶν τὰ μεταξὺ διαστήματα θαυμαστῶς ὑπὸ 
τῆς φύσεως εὐθὺς ἐξ ἀρχῆς διατέτακται πρὸς τὸ 
μήτ᾽ ἐνδεῶς “χορηγεῖσθαι τοῖς μεταξὺ μορίοις 
ἕλκουσιν εἰς ἑαυτὰ τὸ αἷμα μήτε κατακλύζεσθαί 


324 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, ITI. xv 


however, that there are two kinds of attraction, 
certain bodies exerting attraction along wide chan- 
nels during diastole (by virtue of the principle by 
which a vacuum becomes refilled) and others exert- 
ing it by virtue of their appropriateness of quality, 
we must next remark that the former bodies can 
attract even from a distance, while the latter can 
only do so from among things which are quite close 
to them ; the very longest tube let down into water 
can easily draw up the liquid into the mouth, but 
if you withdraw iron to a distance from the lodestone 
or corn from the jar (an instance of this kind has 
in fact been already given!) no further attraction can 
take place. 

This you can observe most clearly in connection 
with garden conduts. For a certain amount of 
moisture is distributed from these into every part 
lying close at hand but it cannot reach those lying 
further off: therefore one has to arrange the flow of 
water into all parts of the garden by cutting a 
number of small channels leading from the large 
one. The intervening spaces between these small 
channels are made of such a size as will, presum- 
ably, best allow them [the spaces] to satisfy their 
needs by drawing from the liquid which flows to 
them from every side. So also is it in the bodies of 
animals. Numerous conduits distributed through 
the various limbs bring them pure blood, much like 
the garden water-supply, and, further, the intervals 
between these conduits have been wonderfully 
arranged by Nature from the outset so that the 
intervening parts should be plentifully provided for 
when absorbing blood, and that they should never 


1 p. 87. 
325 


GALEN 


ποτ᾽ αὐτὰ πλήθει περιττῆς ὑγρότητος ἀκαίρως 
ἐπιρρεούσης. 
‘O γὰρ δὴ τρόπος τῆς θρέψεως αὐτῶν τοιόσδε 
γὰρ δὴ τρ fis Op 
τίς ἐστι. TOU συνεχοῦς ἑαυτῷ σώματος, olovirep 
τὸ ἁπλοῦν ἀγγεῖον Epaciotpatos ὑποτίθεται, τὰ 
μὲν ἐπιπολῆς μέρη πρῶτα τῆς ὁμίλούσης ἀπο- 
λαύει τροφῆς" ἐκ δὲ τούτων αὖ μεταλαμβάνει 
κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἕλκοντα τὰ τούτων ἑξῆς, εἶτ᾽ ἐξ 
ἐκείνων αὖθις ἕτερα καὶ τοῦτ᾽ οὐ παύεται γι- 
γνόμενον, ἄχρις ἂν εἰς ἅπαντ᾽ αὐτοῦ διαδοθῇ τὰ 
μόρια τῆς τρεφούσης οὐσίας ἡ ποιότης. ὅσα δὲ 
212 τῶν μορίων ἐπὶ πλέον || ἀλλοιουμένου δεῖται τοῦ 
μέλλοντος αὐτὰ θρέψειν χυμοῦ, τούτοις ὥσπερ τι 
ταμιεῖον ἡ φύσις παρεσκεύασεν ἤτοι κοιλίας ἢ 
σήραγγας ἤ τι ταῖς σήραγξιν ἀνάλογον. αἱ μὲν 
γὰρ σάρκες ai τε τῶν σπλάγχνων ἁπάντων al τε 
τῶν μνῶν ἐξ αἵματος αὐτοῦ τρέφονται βραχεῖαν 
ἀλλοίωσιν δεξαμένου. τὰ δ᾽ ὀστᾶ παμπόλλης ἐν 
τῷ μεταξὺ δεῖται τῆς μεταβολῆς, ἵνα τραφῇ, καὶ 
ἔστιν οἷόνπερ τὸ αἷμα ταῖς σαρξί, τοιοῦτος ὁ 
μυελὸς τοῖς ὀστοῖς ἐν μὲν τοῖς μικροῖς τε καὶ 
ἀκοιλίοις κατὰ τὰς σήραγγας αὐτῶν διεσπαρ- 
μένος, ἐν δὲ τοῖς μείξοσί τε καὶ κοιλίας ἔχουσιν ἐν 
ἐκείναις ἠθροισ μένος. 
A > ’ 
Ὥς γὰρ καὶ διὰ τοῦ πρώτου γράμματος ἐδεί- 
κνυτο, τοῖς μὲν ὁμοίαν ἔχουσι τὴν οὐσίαν εἰς 
ἄλληλα μεταβάλλειν ἐγχωρεῖ, τοῖς δὲ πάμπολυ 
διεστῶσιν ἀμήχανον ἀλλήλοις ὁμοιωθῆναι χωρὶς 
τῶν ἐν μέσῳ μεταβολῶν. τοιοῦτόν τι καὶ τοῖς 


1 Or we may render it ‘‘corpuscle”; Galen practically 
means the cell. cf. p. 153, note 2. 


326 











ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. xv 


be deluged by a quantity of superfluous fluid running 
in at unsuitable times. 

For the way in which they obtain nourishment is 
somewhat as follows. In the body! which is continu- 
ous throughout, such as Erasistratus supposes his stmple 
vessel to be, it is the superficial parts which are the 
first to make use of the nutriment with which they 
are brought into contact; then the parts coming 
next draw their share from these by virtue of their 
contiguity ; and again others from these; and this 
does not stop until the quality of the nutrient sub- 
stance has been distributed among all parts of the 
corpuscle in question, And for such parts as need 
the humour which is destined to nourish them to be 
altered still further, Nature has provided a kind of 
storehouse, either in the form of a central cavity or 
else as separate caverns,? or something analogous to 
caverns. Thus the flesh of the viscera and of the 
muscles is nourished from the blood directly, this 
having undergone merely a slight alteration ; the 
bones, however, in order to be nourished, require 
very great change, and what blood is to flesh marrow 
is to bone; in the case of the small bones, which 
do not possess central cavities, this marrow is dis- 
tributed in their caverns, whereas in the larger 
bones which do contain central cavities the marrow 
is all concentrated in these. 

For, as was pointed out in the first book,® things 
having a similar substance can easily change into one 
another, whereas it is impossible for those which are 
very different to be assimilated to one another with- 
out intermediate stages. Such a one in respect to 


2 ¢f. the term ‘‘ cavernous tissue.” 


3 J. x. 
327 


GALEN 


4 9 " , A Q n~ 
χόνδροις ἐστὶ τὸ περικεχυμένον μυξῶδες Kal τοῖς 
συνδέσμοις καὶ τοῖς ὑμέσι καὶ τοῖς νεύροις τὸ 
παρεσπαρμένον ἐν αὐτοῖς ὑγρὸν γλίσχρον' ἕκα- 

ΦἸϑστον γὰρ || τούτων ἐξ ἰνῶν σύγκειται πολλῶν, 
e A 

αἵπερ opotopepets τ᾽ εἰσὶ καὶ ὄντως αἰσθητὰ 

στοιχεῖα. κατὰ δὲ τὰς μεταξὺ χώρας αὐτῶν ὁ 

οἰκειότατος εἰς θρέψιν παρέσπαρται χυμός, ὃν 

εἵλκυσαν μὲν ἐκ τῶν φλεβῶν τοῦ αἵματος, ὅσον 

’ > 4 3 7 Ἁ 4 3 
οἷόν τ᾽ ἦν ἐκλεξάμεναι τὸν ἐπιτηδειότατον, ἐξ- 
ομοιοῦσι δὲ κατὰ βραχὺ καὶ μεταβάλλουσιν εἰς 
τὴν ἑαυτῶν οὐσίαν. 

“Απαντ᾽ οὖν ταῦτα καὶ ἀλλήλοις ὁμολογεῖ καὶ 
τοῖς ἔμπροσθεν ἀποδεδειγμένοις ἱκανῶς μαρτυρεῖ 
καὶ οὐ χρὴ μηκύνειν ἔτε τὸν λόγον" ἐκ γὰρ τῶν 
εἰρημένων ἔνεστιν ἑκάστῳ τὰ κατὰ μέρος ἅπαντα 

7 
καθ᾽ ὅντινα γίγνεται τρόπον ἐξευρίσκειν ἑτοίμως, 
ὥσπερ καὶ διὰ τί πολλοῖς κωθωνιξομένοις πάμ- 
4 3 ld N ’ > Ca 
πολυ τάχιστα μὲν ἀναδίδοται τὸ ποθέν, οὐρεῖται 
δ᾽ ὀλίγου δεῖν ἅπαν ἐντὸς οὐ πολλοῦ χρόνου. καὶ 
A Aa A / 
yap κἀνταῦθα TH τε τῆς ποιότητος οἰκειότητι Kal 
τῇ τῆς ὑγρότητος λεπτότητι καὶ τῇ τῶν ἀγγείων 
τε καὶ τῶν κατ᾽ αὐτὰ στομάτων εὐρύτητι καὶ τῇ 
τῆς ἑλκτικῆς δυνάμεως εὐρωστίᾳ τὸ τάχος συν- 
a a 3 f a , A 
τελεῖται τῆς avaddcews, τῶν μὲν πλησίον τῆς 
, 
κοιλίας τεταγμένων μορίων οἰκειότητι ποιότη- 
ς A σ ς f Ν ΄-“ ᾽ 
214 τος || ἑαυτῶν ἕνεκα εἐλκοντῶν TO πόμα, τῶν ὃ 


228 





ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. xv 


cartilage is the myxoid substance which surrounds it, 
and in respect to ligaments, membranes, and nerves 
the viscous liquid dispersed inside them ; for each of 
these consists of numerous fibres, which are homo- 
geneous !—in fact, actual sensible elements; and in the 
intervals between these fibres is dispersed the humour 
most suited for nutrition; this they have drawn 
from the blood in the veins, choosing the most 
appropriate possible, and now they are assimilating 
it step by step and changing it into their own sub- 
stance. 

All these considerations, then, agree with one 
another, and bear sufficient witness to the truth of 
what has been already demonstrated ; there is thus 
no need to prolong the discussion further. For, 
from what has been said, anyone can readily discover 
in what way all the particular [vital activities] come 
about. For instance, we could in this way ascertain 
why it is that in the case of many people who are 
partaking freely of wine, the fluid which they have 
drunk is rapidly absorbed 2 through the body and 
almost the whole of it is passed by the kidneys 
within a very short time. For here, too, the rapidity 
with which the fluid is absorbed depends on appro- 
priateness of quality, on the thinness of the fluid, on 
the width of the vessels and their mouths, and on 
the efficiency of the attractive faculty. The parts 
situated near the alimentary canal, by virtue of their 
appropriateness of quality, draw in the imbibed food 
for their own purposes, then the parts next to them 


1 Lit. homoeomerous, i.e. ‘‘the same all through,” of 
similar structure throughout, the elements of living matter. c/. 
p. 20, note 3, and cf. also the ‘‘ cell” of Erasistratus, p. 153. 

2 “Delivered,” ‘‘ dispersed ” ; cf. p. 13, note 5. 


329 


GALEN 


ἑξῆς τούτοις ἐξαρπαζόντων καὶ αὐτῶν εἰς ἑαυτὰ 
κἄπειτα τῶν ἐφεξῆς πάλιν ἐκ τούτων μετάλαμ- 
βανόντων, ἄχρις ἂν εἰς τὴν κοΐλην ἀφίκηται 
φλέβα, τοὐντεῦθεν δ᾽ ἤδη τῶν νεφρῶν τὸ οἰκεῖον 
ἐπισπωμένων. ὥστ᾽ οὐδὲν θαυμαστὸν οἶνον μὲν 
ὕδατος ἀναλαμβάνεσθαι θᾶττον οἰκειότητι ποιό- 
τητος, αὐτὸν δὲ τὸν οἶνον τὸν μὲν λευκὸν καὶ 
καθαρὸν ἑτοίμως ἀναδίδοσθαι διὰ λεπτότητα, τὸν 
δ᾽ av μέλανα καὶ θολερὸν ἴσχεσθαί τε κατὰ τὴν 
ὁδὸν καὶ βραδύνειν ὑπὸ πάχους. 

Ein δ᾽ ἂν ταῦτα καὶ τῶν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀρτηριῶν 
ἔμπροσθεν εἰρημένων « οὐ σμικρὰ μαρτύρια. παν- 
ταχοῦ γὰρ ὅσον οἰκεῖόν τε καὶ λεπτὸν αἷμα τοῦ 
μὴ τοιούτον ῥᾷον ἕπεται τοῖς ἕλκουσιν. ἀτμὸν 
οὖν ἕλκουσαι καὶ «πνεῦμα καὶ λεπτὸν αἷμα κατὰ 
τὰς διαστάσεις αἱ ἀρτηρίαι τῶν κατὰ τὴν κοιλίαν 
καὶ τὰ ἔντερα περιεχομένων χυμῶν ἢ οὐδ᾽ ὅλως ἢ 
παντάπασιν ἐπισπῶνται βραχύ. 


339 








ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES, III. xv 


in their turn snatch it away, then those next again 
take it from these, until it reaches the vena cava, 
whence finally the kidneys attract that part of it 
which is proper to them. Thus it is in no way 
surprising that wine is taken up more rapidly than 
water, owing to its appropriateness of quality, and, 
further, that the white clear kind of wine is absorbed 
more rapidly owing to its thinness, while black turbid 
wine is checked on the way and retarded because 
of its thickness. 

These facts, also, will afford abundant proof of 
what has already been said about the arteries ; 
everywhere, in fact, such blood as is both specifically 
appropriate and at the same time thin in consist- 
ency answers more readily to their traction than 
does blood which is not so; this is why the arteries 
which, in their diastole, absorb vapour, pneuma, and 
thin blood attract either none at all or very little of 
the juices contained in the stomach and intestines. 


331 


INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


~The numbers refer to the pages of the present edition; fuller references 
will be found in the footnotes.) 


Abortifacient drugs, 285 

Abortion, 281, 285 

Absorption from digestive tract 
(v. Anadosis) 

Acidity of urine, 245, 287 

Activity (function), 13 

Adhesion (prosphysis) of nutriment 
to tissues, 39 

reel 33 

limentary canal, 119, 309 

— coats of, 23, "263 

Allopathic treatment, 199 

Alteration (qualitative change), 
7, 9, 241, 251 

Anadosis (ebeorption from digestive 
tract), 63 

Anemia, 178 

Anasarca (dropsy), 41 

Anastomoses eee pee eer oe be- 
tween arteries and veins), 8 

Anaxagoras, “ Sol emeusnist 
doctrine of, 7 

Ancient writers, value of, 279 

Animal life, 

Animals (Ὁ. is History, Natural) 

- -- cold-blooded, 181 

—— long-necked, 275 

Anorexia (want of appetite), 247 

more (main artery of body), 143, 

Appetite, ef 

Aristotle, 9 et passim (v. also Pert- 
patetic School) 

oe drugs for extracting heads 


as fet "οἵ Nature (i.¢. of the living 
organism), 57 

Arteries, structure of, 283 

— to-and-fro motion in, 313 

——— attraction of air by, through 
skin, 317 

Artery, pulmonary, 121, 823 


GALEN 


Artificer, 133 
Asclepiades, 49, et passim 
Anopsis (absence of corruption), 201 
on 
Asthenia (weakness), 239 
Atomist School in Medicine, 45 
Auebilary (melancholic) humour 


Attraction (v. also ΒΟΟΣ vacui) 
— puymolom cal, 6 
—- a ot 
pune eft, οἱ Ἰὰς 815 

cb fk ht, of heart, $21 
Autho ty, value of, 279 
Aversion, 249 


Baking, 259 

Beauty, 47 

Bile, yellow 63, ,123, 177, 191, 289 

— * vitelline,’? 209 

— black, 203 (v. also Melancholic 
humour) 

Bile-passages, mechanical blocking 
of, 171 

Biliousness, 198 

Biology, repudiation of, by Atomist 
School, 45 

Bladder, ‘urinary, 51, 53, δὲ passim 

—— for bile (v. Gall-bladder) 

piper breducuon, 17, 169, 183, 191, 


Boiling, 259 

Boils, 253 

Bone, steht pes 327 
Bone-marrow, 

ΟΣ ΠΟΡΥΒΤΩΙ ΤΠ ξὼ in stomach, 


Bread, constitution of, 11 
Bubo (wollen lymphatic glands in 


groin), 185 
Butchers [85 the primitive anatom- 


335 


INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


eeaee (corpse), experiment on, 


Cartilage (gristie), 829 
Catarrh (mucous discharge), 215 
Cattle Τὶ typifying ‘‘ herd - moral- 


** Cell,’ of animal tissues, 153 

—— nutrition of, 327 

Change, qualitative (v. Alteration) 
Channels (v. Morphological hypo- 


Cheas. rising: 91 

Childbirth, 231 ἘΝ 

hildren’s ‘game, 28 

Chill, 171, 203 (Ὁ. also Cold) 
Cholagogues (drugs that draw off 


Choler3, 299 

Chorion’ woubrane enclosing un- 
Gee a 

Chile ar et ed ΒΡ of stom- 
ach), (v. B 

Cirrhosis ‘indaratlon) of | ver, 171 

Coats (tunics), 23 

Cold, action of, on skin, 3 

Cold-in-the-head, 215 (v. a Chill) 

Colon (large intestine), 313 

Colour, 5 

Conception, of semen, 233 

Congius (measure), 111 

Con ΤΆΓΠΟΙΒ (υ. Peristalsis) 

Corn: ileect 

Corn ractive power of, 87 

Coryza (mucous discharge : 
** cold ’’), 215 

Crisis, 75 

Cyathus (measure), 65 


now a 


Decay, 7 

Deductive reasoning, 227 

Deglutition (swallowing), 
265, 273 

Democritus, 153 

Deposits (in tissues), 297 

Desire (appetite), 249, 269 

Destruction (act of perishing), 7 

Diaphragm (midriff), 255 

Diarrhea, 247, 299 

Diet, 35, 179, 255 

Digestion, cause of, 243 

impairment of, 185, 217, 237 

Digestive tract, action on food, 251, 


et 8 
---- ΤΥΘΒΡΊΗΝΙ (υ. Alimentary Canal) 
336 


95, 261, 





Diocles, 51 

Disease, definition of, 197 

Diseases, the four primary, 185 

Disjunctive argument, 167 

Distribution (diadosis) of nutriment 
to tissues, 163 

Droney 41 67, 171 

Drugs 5, 285, 298 (v. also Potsons) 

ie τ (abnormal blending of 
the four qualities), 189 

Dysentery, 205 

Dyspepsia Ὄ. Indigestion) 


Education, 279 
Effect ( hana work done), 18 
Emaciation, 1 
Emanations, 7 
Embryo ΥΩ 
Emesis ὠ. Vomiti 
Empiricist phrsllane, 69, 193 
Emulsification, 239 
Epicurus, 71 
Epigastric muscles, 237 
Epispastic (attractive), 117 
Erasistratus, 95 
Erasistrateans, 105 
Etna, 259 
Eucrasia ἉΡΙΟΡΟΣ ao blending of the 
four qualities), 18 
Evaporation, 51, 87 351 
arene (υ. Empiricist phy- 


Expulsive faculty, 231 


Faculty (potentiality), 18 

Feces (ordure from bowel), 255 
Fermentation, 209 

Fever as a cause of indigestion, 185 
Fibres, 329 

— of blood, 215 

—— circular and longitudinal, 268 
-—— oblique, 281 

Filtration, 91 

Fish, voraciousness of, 269 
Flavour, 5 

Fluxions, 297 

Fotus (unborn child), 233 

——- death of, 287 

Forced-feeding, 247 

Forces, mate 127, 301 
Function (activity), cause of, 197 


Gall-bladder, 147, 245 
—— absence of nerves in, 289 
Gardens, irrigation of, 325 


“ 








INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


Genesis ( Govetopment ofembryo), 19 

Germander (dru 

Gestation Cana: of embryo by 
mother), 229 

Give-and-take between organs, 295 

Gravity (explaining secretion of 
urine), 107 

Greediness, 271 

Growth, 27, 137 

Gullet, 563 

use of, by stomach, 271 

— function of its two coats, 278 

Gurgling in stomach, 287 


Habit of body, 6 

Hemorr  iatestival, 297 

Hemorrho a3 (o. Piles) 

Heartburn, 287 

Heat, innate, 41, 141, 185 

Hepatic veins (entering vena cava 
from liver), 147 

Herophilus, 238 

Hippocrates, 9, et passim 

Histogenesis abc ae aneeen), 21 

ry, natural, 269 

Homoomeries (similar ), 169 

peta ts 199, Νο 

Honey, 179, 191 

Horror vacui (sf penne: τ abhorrence 
of a vacuum ”’), 99 

Humours, the four, rain of, 167, 

H aie si (dru that ἕω Υ 
ydragogues gs a ὃ 
water out of the system), 65 


Ileus volvulus (obstruction of 
bowels), 299, 303 

Tilusions, sensory, 7 

Indigestion, 185, 217, 237 

Inductive reasoning, 227 
Inflammation, 85, 233 

Interaction of vee το bodies, 361 

Intestine, small, 2 

Intestines, ature of, 288 

—— movements of, 248 

Ionia, ἮἯ 

Iron, 7 

irrigation of gardens and tissues, 





Jaundice, 179, 207 
Jejanum (part of small intestine), 


Kidneys, 49, 89 


GALEN 


Labour (v. Childbirth) 

Larynx (voice-box), involved in 
swallowing, 265 

Leprosy, 41 

Leucippus, 153 

Lichen (a skin-disease), 258 

Liver, proper tissue of, 811 

—~— transverse fissure of, 147 

—— induration of, 171 

----- give-and-take between it and 
stomach, 291 

Lodestone, 71 


Love, 
Timea ΗΕΒΒΕΣ cavity of a vessel), 
Lycus, 109 


Magnetism, 7 

Marrow of hones: 827 
Mastication, 253 

Material forces, 127 
Medicine, taking of, 269 (v. 


Drugs) 
Melancholic (v. Atrabilieary 
Membranes, fetal, 281, 28 με (9. also 


Chorion) 
Menander, 105 
Menodotus, 81 
Menstrual blood, 181, 171 
ae diseases of, 41 


Mis . Abortion) 

Molecules (of Asclepiades), 68 

Morphological hypothesis of bile- 
secretion, 125, 147 

Motion, active and passive, 57 

Mouth, lining of, 261 

— digestion in, 258 

Mucus, 203, 215 

Muscles, voluntary, 268 


“ Nature,”’ 2; its “ Art,’ 67 
Nature-lore (v. Physiology) 
Nausea, 287 


1 
Nutrition, 31, 149 


Obstetric chair, 285 

Obstruction of bowels, 299, 808 

Csophagus (¢. 

Omentum (an apron- fold of fat, 
oats the intestine), 148, 255, 


337 


INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


Organism, unity of, 61 
Organs, nutrition of, 307 

Os uteri (mouth of womb), 229 
Ovum, human, 135 

Oxidation, 211 

Oxygen (v. Pneuma) 


Pain, 287 
Parturition, 231 
ταν relation to Physiology, 


Perch (υ 
etry ac (Aristotelian) Sohool, 


Peristalsis (contraction and dilata- 
tion), 97, 243, 263 

Peritoneum 53 

Phidias, 199 

Philistion, 173 

Philotimus, 183 

Phliegm, 67, 201, 215 

Phlegmatic ‘temperament, 193 

“* Physiology,’ 139 

Piles, 171 

Plant-life, 3 

Plato, 178, 208, 215 

Plethora (congestion), 11 

Pneuma (as a vital De ncipley, 158; 
tos oxygen), 1 

ns, action of, 251 

Porch, ἢ the (Stoie School), 145 
“Pores ” (vo. Channels) 

Portal vein, 147 

Potter’s earth, 218 

Practitioner, 197 

Praxagoras, 51 

Praxiteles, 129 

‘“Preformationist ” doctrine of 
Anaxagoras 

Presentation (prosthesis) of nutri- 
ment to tissues, 3 

Prevention and Cure, 169 

Principles, the four fundamental 


(v. ities) 
Prodicus, 201 
Prolapse of uterus, 235 


Propulsive faculty, 231 
Prosphysis (v. 4 heston) 
Prosthesis (v. Presentation) 

Psyche, 3, 153 

Psychology, αἱ Sear a of, by 
chool, 

Pulmonary ee 4 

Pylorus (outlet of torial: 239 


338 


Pylorus, regurgitation through, 289 
Pyrrhonists (typical sceptics), 197 


ΘΌΔΗΜΘΘῚ the four fundamental, 9, 
—— denvatite: 21 


Relativity, 17 

Renal veins, 107 
Respiration, 175, 305 
Retentive faculty, 225 
Rhetoric, 97 


Safflower ΓΕ) of 
aliva, action of, 
Scammony (arug) 67 
pence: two contrasted, in Medicine, 


Scientist, 197 

Scorpions, 253 

Sculpture, ae 

Sectarianism, 5 

Sects, medical " Schools) 

Self-control, 47 

Self-education, 279 

Semen, 131, 233 

Sensation, 4 47 

Septum, perforated, between ven- 
ricles of heart, 321 

Serum (watery part of blood or 


, 91, 213 
Shaping (development of organs), 19 
Sieves, 91 
Skin “diseases, 253 (v. also Leprosy 
and Lichens) 
Slaves, 108 
Sociability, 47 
Sophistry, 219, 279 
Sophists, 7 
Soul, 45 
Specific selection of nutriment by 
tissues (ev. Attraction, physio- 


logical) 
Spermatic ducts, 57 
Spirit (v. Pneuma) 
Spleen, function and diseases of, 205 
—— “‘ uselessness ”’ of, 143 
ἘΚ ὦ an emunctory of the liver, 
Statues, 129 
Sting-ray (fish), bite of, 85 
Stoics, 15, 145 
peomects function of, 197, 237, 251, 


55 
—— coats of, 261 














INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


Substance, 9 
Sapernutes (waste-substances), 85, 


91 
Swallowing (v. Deglutition) 
Symptoms, 13 
Synapse, 147 


Teeth, 253 
Temperament (crasis, mixture of 
eromoutery: principles), 15, 139, 


Temperance, 47 

Theophrastus, 139 

Thorns, drugs for extracting, 83 

Tissues, development of, 21 

their jon producing 
humours, 179, 195 

Trachea (windpipe), 305 

Transference (passive motion), 7 

Transpiration, 153 

Treatment, principles of, 199 

Tricuspid orifice of heart, 321 

Tubes, rigid, 119, 317, 326 


Unity of organism, 61 

Ureters, 23, 51 

Urine, 61 

a Useless ᾿ organs (Erasistratus), 


Uterus (womb), 227 





Vacuum, tendency to refill (v. 
Horror vacui) 

Valves of heart, 121, 815 

Vaporisation (9. Evaporation) 

Vegetable diet, 35, 179 

Vegetative life, 3 

Veins, glee of, ie pei 

—_— * ” (0. monary 
artery) 

—— coronary, 323 

—— hepatic, 147 

—— mesenteric, 293, 305 

—— portal, 14 

— renal, 107, 148 

sar vena cava (chief vein of body), 


—— collapse of, 119 
Ventricles of heart, communication 
between, 321 ‘ 


pe 85 

Vi t School in Medicine, 45 
Vivisection, 59, 241, 273 
Voluntary motion, 3 

Volvulus (intestinal obstruction). 


299, 303 
Vomiting abe? 267 


Wounds, 186 
Wrestling, 125 


Zeno, of Citium, 9 


339 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
RicHarp ΟΥΑΥ anv Sons, Limirzp, 
BRUNSWICK STREET, STAMFORD STRERT, 8.Ε., 
AND BUNGAY, SUFFOLK. 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL 
LIBRARY. 


VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED. 








Latin Authors. 


APULEIUS. The Golden Ass. (Metamorphoses.) Trans. by 
W. Adlington (1566). Revised by S. Gaselee. 1 Vol. 

CAESAR: CIVIL WARS. Trans. by A. G. Peskett. 1 Vol. 

CATULLUS. Trans. by F. W. Cornish; TIBULLUS. 
Trans. by J. P. Postgate; PERVIGILIUM VENERIS. 
Trans. by J. W. Mackail. 1 Vol. 


CICERO: DE FINIBUS. Trans. by H. Rackham. 1 Vol. 
CICERO: DE OFFICIIS. Trans. by Walter Miller. 1 Vol. 


CICERO: LETTERS TO ATTICUS. Trans. by E. O. 
Winstedt. Vols I and II. 


CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTINE. Trans. by W. Watts 
(1631). 2 Vols. 


HORACE: ODES AND EPODES. Trans. by C. E. Bennett. 
1 Vol. 


OVID: HEROIDES AND AMORES._ Trans. by Grant 
Showerman. 1 Vol. 


OVID: METAMORPHOSES. Trans. by F. J. Miller. 
2 Vols. 


PETRONIUS. Trans. by M. Heseltine; SENECA: APOCO- 
LOCYNTOSIS. Trans. by W. H. D. Rouse. 1 Vol. 


PLAUTUS. Trans. by Paul Nixon. Vol. I. 


PLINY: LETTERS. Melmoth’s Translation revised by 
W. M. L. Hutchinson. 2 Vols. 


PROPERTIUS. Trans. by H. E. Butler. 1 Vol. 
SUETONIUS. Trans. by J. C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. 


TACITUS: DIALOGUS. Trans. by Sir Wm. Peterson ; 
AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA,_ Trans, by Maurice 
Hutton. 1 Vol. 


TERENCE. Trans. by John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols. 


I 





Greek Authors. 


APOLLONIUS RHODIUS. Trans. by R. C. Seaton. 1 Vol. 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS. Trans. by Kirsopp Lake. 
2 Vols. 


APPIAN’S ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by Horace White. 
4 Vols. 


DAPHNIS AND CHLOE. Thornley’s Translation revised 
ΤΉΝΕ Edmonds; PARTHENIUS. Trans. by S. Gaselee. 
1 Vol. 


DIO CASSIUS: ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by E. Cary. 
Vols. I, II, III, IV, and V. 


EURIPIDES. Trans. by A. S. Way. 4 Vols. 


THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY. Trans. by W. R. Paton. 
Vols. I, II, and ITI. 


THE GREEK BUCOLIC POETS (THEOCRITUS, BION, 
MOSCHUS). Trans. by J. M. Edmonds. 1 Vol. 


HESIOD AND THE HOMERIC HYMNS. Trans. by 
H. G. Evelyn White. 1 Vol. 


JULIAN. Trans. by Wilmer Cave Wright. Vols. I and II. 
LUCIAN. Trans. by A, M. Harmon. Vols. I and IT. 
MARCUS AURELIUS. Trans. by C. R. Haines. 1 Vol. 


PHILOSTRATUS: THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS OF 
TYANA. Trans. by F. C. Conybeare. 2 Vols. 


PINDAR. Trans. by Sir J. E. Sandys. 1 Vol. 


PLATO: EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CRITO, PHAEDO, 
PHAEDRUS. Trans. by H. N. Fowler. 1 Vol. 


PLUTARCH: THE PARALLEL LIVES. Trans. by B. 
Perrin. Vols. I, II, III, and IV. 


PROCOPIUS. Trans. by H. B. Dewing. Vols. I and II. 
QUINTUS SMYRNAEUS. Trans. by A. 5. Way. 1 Vol. 
SOPHOCLES. Trans. by F. Storr. 2 Vols. 


ST. JOHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND IOASAPH. 
Trans. by the Rev. G. R. Woodward and Harold Mattingly. 
1 Vol. 


XENOPHON : CYROPAEDIA. Trans. by Walter Miller. 
2 Vols. 





IN PREPARATION. 





Greek Authors. 


AESCHINES, C. D. Adams, of Dartmouth College. 

AESCHYLUS, H. W. Smyth, of Harvard University. 

ARISTOPHANES, J. W. White, of Harvard University. 

ARISTOTLE, THE NICOMACHEAN ETHICS, Michael 
Heseltine, of New College, Oxford. 

ARISTOTLE, THE POLITICS anp ATHENIAN CON- 
STITUTION, Edward Capps, of Princeton University. 

ARRIAN, W. K. Prentice, of Princeton University. 

ATHENAEUS, C. B. Gulick, of Harvard University. 

CALLIMACHUS, A. W. Mair, Professor of Greek in the 
University of Edinburgh ; ARATUS, G. R. Mair, of Gonville 
and Caius College, Cambridge. 

CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA, Rev. G. W. Butterworth, 
of the University of Leeds. 

DIO CHRYSOSTOM, W. E. Waters, New York University. 

EUSEBIUS, Kirsopp Lake, of Harvard University. 

GREEK LYRICS, J. M. Edmonds, of Jesus College, Cam- 
bridge. 

HOMER, ILIAD, W. F. Harris, of Harvard University. 

HOMER, ODYSSEY, A. T. Murray, of Stanford University. 

IAMBIC AND ELEGIAC POETS, E. D. Perry, of Columbia 
University. 

ISAEUS, R. J. Bonner, of the University of Chicago. 

ISOCRATES, G. Norlin, of the University of Colorado. 

MANETHO, S. de Ricci. 

MENANDER, F. G. Allinson, of Brown University. 

PAUSANIAS, W. H. S. Jones, of St. Catherine’s College, 
Cambridge. 

PHILOSTRATUS, IMAGINES, Arthur Fairbanks, Boston 
Museum of Fine Arts. 

PLATO, LYSIS AND GORGIAS, W. R. Lamb, of Trinity 
College, Cambridge. 

PLATO, REPUBLIC, Paul Shorey, University of Chicago. 

PLUTARCH, MORALIA, Ἐς C. Babbitt, of Trinity College, 
Hartford. 

POLYBIUS, W. R. Paton. 

THUCYDIDES, C. F. Smith, of the University of Wisconsin. 

XENOPHON, ANABASIS anp HELLENICA, C. W. 
Brownson, of the College of the City of New York. 


3 


Latin Authors. 


AMMIANUS, C. U. Clark, of Yale University. 

AULUS GELLIUS, C. B. Platner, of Western Reserve 
University. 

AUSONIUS, H. G. Evelyn White, of Wadham College, 
Oxford. 


CICERO, AD FAMILIARES, E. Ο. Winstedt, of Magdalen 
College, Oxford. 


CICERO, DE ORATORE, ORATOR, BRUTUS, Charles 
Stuttaford. 

FRONTINUS, DE AQUIS, C. Herschel, of New York. 

FRONTO, C. R. Haines, of St. Catherine’s College, Cam- 
bridge. 

HORACE, EPISTLES anv SATIRES, W. G. Hale, of the 
University of Chicago, and G. L. Hendrickson, of Yale 
University. 

JUVENAL AnD PERSIUS, 6. G. Ramsay, of Trinity College, 
Oxford, and late of Glasgow University. 

LIVY, B. O. Foster, of Stanford University. 

LUCAN, S. Reinach, Member of the Institute of France. 


OVID, TRISTIA anp EX PONTO, A. L. Wheeler, of Bryn 
Mawr College. 


SALLUST, J. C. Rolfe, of the University of Pennsylvania. 


SENECA, EPISTULAE MORALES, R. M. Gummere, of 
Haverford College. 


SENECA, MORAL ESSAYS, J. W. Basore, of Princeton 


University. 


pra US, ANNALS, John Jackson, of Queen’s College, 

xford. 

VALERIUS FLACCUS, A. F. Scholfield, of King’s College, 
Cambridge. 

VELEIUS PATERCULUS, F. W. Shipley, of Washington 
University. 

VITRUVIUS, F. W. Kelsey, of the University of Michigan. 


DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION. 


London = »e WILLIAM HEINEMANN. 
New Yorke = « G P. PUTNAM’S SONS. 


οπὉ 10 1924 











Digitized by Google 





3 9015 01 7345 





‘ - διει. a\ere +) ΜΕΝ γδιδὲ tote ἐπι κά τὺ κί φικεδεφσιν hetero ΣΎ ΣΕΥ “4 δὰ 
ἘΣΣΊ ἘΣ ΤΉΝ - fe helelerepeteteteleiere ιν κικσι κι κ᾽ τ᾽:  οις ἱνουνιου νυ i) 
bel δι φέσι σιν TT: -“....« διδηδην ΝΥ tele lee ele ele eheleteltinpelaie le) ere) ate fey. yee" 
miele sel ebe κι Φφιείσ abet Haletapetatey ami eieberere: peel pye Fees bey =leret ΕΣ Ὁ τφεῤ loses - δ δι ΔἸ δλοιφ δι διοιδιδ᾽οιδι δὺς betotisteteiei-jeitis: 
jain je geis is) a wm lepwleteletelele ebeleletete Φ ehelelet- οἰῶ Φιφθ δ) isle jeleiebeietsi-jericis! wl thebepetele σφι κιφσιφισι . φορηο σι. οὗ 
lawl mleloleseie: jolotstsleletereleieisiels|eisiojei io) ἐγεχύέαν et ΑΥ 59 eg ψόχοϊ "αι φικίκι κι σι» epeleletet si sleteletetet- TATED & nyt ~~ tir e 

wtlele melee jepeletere #0 tote! etl eleletetele ἐσσι σιφιφ perenele eter oF : 
ΟΣ τυ thelete ernmie i. = melee pele botege eter λῆς 
je tleleieleberete behelererele ot oboe 
te| ete “\* tose tole Sitisi- Had ree 
mint Tittle tt went wheelie ee ee 
















“+ 





















betelever 













. 
ἐγ ὁ γν ele ΓΙ wlhele 


* 7? al | 
ee whale el ele sheidie} +! ie) 





































lelbeletepeteiel= [eth eeT PTS ‘ 

: Pr wlelereteterete: asst ΕΣ eee ΠΌΘΏΘΗΝ tet ropoleisieioic] ste δ ἐπε δ οἰ εν athe *}sleleisieiere, Ἰφγφγοφν 
ΤΥ ὁ αὐ ν χύνϑὴ διδιφικοι σις ele σίδισι. δΦιφιφιῤι σφ Φίσίφις fie Me lstetot delete wlele) κι σι σι κι «Ὁ νύ τὸ ἐφαὐ αν ἐφιριν κεἰ σισει ΧΗΣ 
wleleint st beta ΤΣ stolertitisieiote iss ote pashey seen “᾽ “᾽σ τσὶ. ἘΣΣΙ - eee etitatst t@lelel- ae ἐσσι ΠΩΣ ὀδιόδ' κὲ 

εἰσι σι σι εἰ διφι σι κι σφ ἰφιδιφέφί θα « ΣΙ ΣΣΎΣΝΣ οἰδιόμδ᾽. he eee) ir jayate i. ᾿ ἰφιφ οί διεε»ι οιφι δ εἱ be heteine. : 

tete\shetetet- > beberle oheteleperereiel> - ; ΠΣ ἐφέφιοὶ jsteteieteispes +e 4 : 
oat αν ἐπι δι κ mle lw lel ele petee a, ole tle to} i whee whet σι ειφικιδέφισι, εἷς sie 
lebele . abt hates ” - ἡσἩνισισισιν me ete wlehetebe telebeleletetetetetete 
sietele fee σι. ele pelere tele ete be ele ΠΣ ' , \* oje\sle stmberete oe hete 

abel, ἡ νλειοισσιλῤιί eter step eirieiehy he pore) ei areter ΤΥ δὰ ἡ φγῦν νὴ ἀφι 1? ΠΣ ΕΣ beberetet νον ρυθὶ 

LP Sheleseletele.ete late le tebe tele sibahatsiabsiatesetes beter TIP Lele miele ete σι κι ee 

wofeleiel? ᾿ palmer σὺν γ᾽. delete σφίσι» we «“ἰ“«. ΣΝ γυνειοικιρικ tate ὶ σιν οι ἐφ φιοι σ᾽ σἰφιριδσιεί el» te-tele. ἰῷ ΠΗ 
πἰσικὶοὺ σι σι εἰσ διει σι εἰσέσιοίσι. αἰ'᾽οίσιοι ει οί οι οἰ κεἰ αἰ οἰφισ pele etelele ὦ hehe ete ele rete κι εὐ δι κικιφ ele οἰεῖσ φύσιν δι σὲ εἰδιο δὶ. ope 


ἡ γϑηφυψγηνν νὐ αὐ ὴν ἡν σύγο γφὴφ ὺ ψὺ οὐ δ shebelebelebepelsiepeleler ech Biereielsirtelererebetabeleinnniel ete sieietelepeieielere δ Υ ὑγεντιν οἰοὐ σ᾿ ie 

ei elelcreteiei ete . ΟΣ a Lee Shere pete|stelete ert ere wlet ne ΤΣ ΣΣΣ τῶ ᾽ν οἰδιῤισισ φισιεισι σιΦ. t 

ei “εὐ ι τς a totes lahelelels|eleteleletetet eee  Ξ γύν bs where the tereiere slete sieteietsiefeteletelatetelsleletete - 
obewtes sholoreiaiobsisie stele ΤῊΝ ταν, lel etehapetetes wie lwlewlete 
































ibistabeba totat ἀντ ΡΥ ΎΎΝ 
olebeleleletetede belwle ro ἀνα} ΠΥ ΣΌΣ 
Φνονν ΣΌΣ ἐπι: mint Στ δ εὐ’ χϑὶ ΤΥ “᾿ ΕΣ eisie 
alate letetwreteabe oie erelere raheistotete dete pa Sebete lhe reer “δ ele) eheiens abe bate: 7 eleleve aTsity es 
ΤΣ ὐ γυνθα δὶς in ΝΥΝ Pol sreleletelere  ererete, δι δι 2 thet pele ere tete ΠΝ be petelel a ere phy: ΠΥ * “lt tet. 
: oho pohelereiete Pele bebe where lee Lele) ee ele a telete rete lela. stele + where ee heehee wn: ἐν γγεν whe wt « Φενκί,  ἀἴς “|ςε| ΣΤ re, 


λό Σηῤὴς τέ πισιλι ale lebepeteteteete Φιἰει οι σεὺ {a[theteleteteres ἡφιφι δὶ ἐσσι ο σεκ σι σέφιφι jets ἐν 
ψυφ γεν νυν φῦ τῇ ὐχφ αν (ἢ αγν}. pelelatetelereteleie 

oe oie isicisie) sielolelote ls leleleherel e cfeletelet 
ric mpetet ͵ “Ἰοιφιφισι κι εἰφίσέκέδιοιν Ὁ 


εεσιν τ Κ ἀγυτ αν αὐ αν υν εὐτἐνὰ he ΤῊΣ κὰν bets 
[tl tlelele late ee leretetereterebepetetete terete σφι» ΣΎ ete “ἰὖ οἱ 
ἐφ᾿ κι δέκικι κι κι δι σι κ σρδισι ἐκ σφισι κίε ῖσ ΓΗ πες κι σιν σι κι εισὶ» <iebes. 
SRN UMHE tte εὐ. ᾽ν ehemeteirie ele ᾿ whe σ᾿ εἴν οἱ 






















᾿ te ‘ Lapel διε ἔφυν», tahetepet | 1 Α o\she 
ἧ αὐ τ αὐ νι hi oleioteioirien reer § ΠΣ δ ΣΉ siege rel Σ ΤῊ : Tita Titi Ψ ΤΗΝ ᾿ “i te\oh αν 
ἐκ σι. oity εἸπἰφιφισιεκικείῤι κι κι ole wlalete sehete miele A istisesy! ε΄- vies a εἰσί οι 





ΠΣ wes Lele hetepere abet bebebelere wteivte «΄ ξὸ ὑχν γε ἀφ αν ἐφ υνὰ " eer δι. οἱ, 
" ᾿ 
fe\eye ta keh yotsie een τ" sisie as wi wbelabeletapepetelere: ΓΤ ele WEEE LT yey) t+) ἘΣΤΟΝ δὴ» “ἧς τή ψί σι 
Lbabe mliwtete rit =17 atele\. δὶ joie) Oo ee ee ee ee ὁ miniehelepe: Pie lalePeteletereiepetefetere whelelele epee reel] κι. ὁ Φ΄ δ, ΡΥΡΟῚ shel. 
γύην γφυψηναν νι peleheiete). ἐν Α“ισιοέφιό, οὐδὲ bord ἐφηφϑόγφ γώ. γὸ αὐ τὰν γον ἀνὰ Setelstsi sis ον etsieht te petetetelaret “ἡ ᾽ν αν '- ἘΣ ΉΣΜΣΗ τ σή σι 
Ἂ ΜΗ beat art at ates oe, otesets ΤΥ ele elerelebele ie, . ἶ ΡΥΡΎΤΣ : sisisics : sinh 
-. sleiele sd thabstabaiatetetorehitcicioioiabelareheni tens yee sisitien! sisitjeitieie py p-i sie Pete) ete) *bejpes 
*i5i9 Pisis ky t ete ΓΝ ; L $4 ; ! ; } ! { : : ν ! ᾿ | , ὶ μ { ὶ } ΝΣ i πε ἐμ ΕΣ hi! thee 


where ΣΌΣ ΣΕΥ ele 
































oie 





te Shalaisiajetele +} letereia ὦ ἐν seas} ohal 
satel pay wtelerete) ‘ . ἐλ ἔύϑα 
εἰσι. thistateteis te κιϑι σι. weleteielabele. κι 
τι, 





ΠΣ αὐγὰ Φιε σίφιδιεὶ joie tely rer 
. jsfeleleleieieie) ΠΣ ἼλῊ τὴ7 1Ὰ: 
ἐφιφιοιδιφιφιφι οἰ ere) elecere Relate ΠΥ" 





protect) π᾿ κοι κι ate eleleteres= 
ἐσ  οισι σι εις οἸφιί εἰσί σις ste ὙΥ 
eee ye pel mre he retere le ehetete 






wlel minim patobet 
PUES ΠΥ 
γε διε, 

















leteleteiohfateteteiait}ejei’ pelsleintoielatetele: χε αὐ τὺ καὶ ἀγὰ ψΊ να “ξἰ ebelateve εἰ ἐχύ χύ γεν χοῦ χυαφὰ να ᾿ 
ον λρ)υοιυνονυ ιν όφούος ste lale mle mete bel ete ey Sishticlerelstetetets jase othe by lr ote sd bel 
[thelet at ate pe el eA ϑὰν oad bv ay χα bole : φούατν ὁ 7 heh 
φᾷ. reine ἡ ἀφ φ αν, bebe by erst tele > ie} . ΡΥ Σ 
Oiitit: ololajey ἐσ σι κιφι οὐ Spieietei wletaperes icerte whetet re 
Pelee ele lete an lete bebeteleleieier helete vetiay Tis roreiors tote abe lhete ie 6 et 
ΣΤ yebepeiehete i@iniet=t He bepwtebebetbethe «het 


ΠΗ Ὑὐα αὐ ΨῪν αὐ γοα δον ἀν χν γὺ νι . 
“ἰοἰφισσιίκσι ὦ εἰσιφ σι ικιφὶ ἐπι hele σιεἰφινισίνι κικ lw tehelepereret the διε 
ois shrlebelers alee εἰσ ον. τ τὴο τη γ 5157} ι. ττ ει ΣΧ ΣΤΤΉ ΣΕ ΠΤ erie 99 a4 wintete jeleletebe? iy ΠΣ ΣΎ ΟΣ 
οὐκ σι οιφι ele lel ele letelele bene κ᾿ sisleieletssisialaiciaisleietsieieieisiole(sisrele, ἀνα τὰν ἀγα φ θυ eit 
tabepeteletepere τῇ steer τ ype Pole here ml abel ele σι κι κι: ast αὐγὴν trhete sititielet t- ΠΕΣ ΡΥ 
H@leheteleieie) se sole oleieloiciet tere! ht ΕΝ ΕΣ ΣΣΣ ἡϑὴ ἐν vie 
le 







Pisisiohsiersetetes vate 

















































tobe letes 323 ΤΑΣ ao bao | baleen Bit +! eee ἘΣ ΡΥ ΨΥΨΎΡΥΝΥ ΠῚ ιΦ 
ole ΣῊ εἸδιφιίεκι. teh jeleisiaiete . κι κι ἐγ σιν σι ει σιν Seta pe tere isteleteieietetete ‘eh 
it joteloiehetele) ἡ] eres efeietalerete) tetrpebe “Ἰο)δι»)9) onetels) ΡΥ 
alate " 1: fete  σἰφι φἰφικιεῖοὶ " wehbe teletetebebete Sats wielelete stele leleheie ehetere ὁ ὁ: 
eheiel ἘΩ͂ ese tes ΣΤ late alee heheh $4 6 os bry: Pee ὐ ee εὐ ls b δ, γδηογδ᾽ν “δι. isigiotslt rp ΤῊ sine states iaieies ed | rt 
\rhetete, reise slete αὐ τα τὴ ἐὰ ἐγ ἣν ΤΥ τς γον νογοννοι ΠΟΣῚ pelereieieie): ΠΕΣ shel eletete te τε γα χοῦ heed heaped 
*) ἐμῷ νῷ ἂν δ᾿ eietetelete wleret trioieteieloioie rete itis eperetereretetet- 2.5} ΕΣ ἡὐγύ ει \* vo ad hl τ pete iit lrbeletstatere '- > ΠΣ 
ΤῊ: ἐξ εχοὶ ΠΗ ΠΡ ΜΙ ἘΠ] } 2) 19}. a {oie iet Uh. POE ey τι τὲ ashe ΠΤ gt *ifeit ΚΕ ΣΟ eisizis Plate myth “6 
; " yy Sere 
{oreo poroicioie ΠΗ { 1: τὸ αὐ ἀν αὐ ον υἱ ἡ ἡ ν ppp ee κὸ εχ τὸ oh EEL “ιν δ. ἐξ φερε τὶ reGehs ee δ᾽ - 
sie οὐλὴν ΤΉ beeen ele ti i Se ieisheisciciaiei earls τ {eis} riitit 7 yp ie eeee +t. nee a vp ἐφ 9] 
te δ atte iy toi + ities PEELE ETS sit ieielot _. At hiss te it ἐγ) Tie ἐ- 
iiss meets ἀγα γυφὰν ΣῊ Rs tets te ἸΦῚ δὴ διὰ siete Sprinisteterst gags itieit ih ith peesletolsdsiabstetese heist ree δὴν ον 
belelererel=) ἰὴ lehebejeie tial wmialeletebebeLereleleteietetere rf ἐγ ey ee < ΠΥ iashsagtsrstrts γφν “14 
witieyeisiett - at οἰκί σὺν, sie δὴ Στ ν - Hehehe κεν τ ἐ φιφιδισιφιδιὶ σἰοιΦιψιφιφ νι φιειί σφισι σφι. Byatcsahase γε γα 16 }.}5 +) 
yates (oistet: ΣΉ be ele) “: bere κεφ διφδι κι κι ἐν Ὁ ἀνε ιὶζ τ pepclaletepeleretoberelelepetetel« i τ} ἡεγει δ δ σι. 
ity slelete b : , ΗΠ ἐφιοιφιφὶ Pisletaletetetetele me ; jtimpoleleiehabeleteltleteielelereteretel Ἰφ ον ἢ shiv aed 
, i μ 





ἘΠῊΝ {15 2 9}} φἰόϊοϊ εἰ διῤιονοὶκις 


1 ὐγύα νυν ee ele 





ae 
ἐξ 


pistes aie ie i+ bet ὧν baba! ποὺ τι irtetsioierers iy mic ertat aye! it ti; 
: 4 oleae > » ps  “1» 
Shaibtaitasey ΟΝ Listaesteiais Anti iti Teistsisteletebeissis paasicteiete ἘΝ ΩΣ 


siaintetetetetsrste: ibieisioteat lel ateteteletete re shabsiopate sieve ΣῊ belie lone tehelel stele, ΠΣ ἘΜΉΝ οἰσιφισικιδι δικίσιφι. οἷς 
1s κιφιφιφιφιηφηνιοισ οἰ οἰ σἰΦιφηειοιφ κεἰ»: ΣΝ ΠΒΣΜΌΣΗ ἀφισιφήφισικισι νη ἐσ κι κι σιδίνις εἰσ... tots “ἰσ σιν ΠΠΌΤΤΗ “ἐσ δ᾽ο +t 
ΠῚ 






































Lahde baka el tae peloton Shale eer@leleteleleieleteletere peel ere) ere, ΚΗ v9 Seay bp hy LOIS ere p ele pepetetere heist eh pete topes 
ΣΎ ΤΣ lw heletetebetetetere κι σφ φίφι Φ etelerere ere, * CEUPEEEEY ΠΣ 15:2} 1} 432 ~ besa ΡΥ 
ἀπ ΠΗ ΠΗ ΠΙΠΤΤΗ αὐ εὐ γι ἐν τοϑ ἐχόχν eRe etey eyes eleie Si5358 rl. ΉΤΑΝ ΕΣ ὁ δ γδ4ηδὴ “ ἐν hl ts + 2 let εἰσι φιφόφοι κι σ. “Ὁ 
ΣῈ abs ebb ory otha Us Gees be isi sieis ἐσ ἡ κ δι δεσὶ 255 tebe ote le| ere) ot ΠΣ ἘΣ ΗΤοῖ “' tn aris i> ΠΉΡΗ ΤΠ ν sietehen οἱ 
ΣΤΣΥ͂Σ ΠΌΣΟΥΣ “ιν as OF EST HERG ἐφ ἀφ 86 Ay γι etsescstststst ΠΟΙ Siete ele ethene ph “ι i? yeie 4218 72 4 
Py isis εὐ ξὺ ὅν oye | Heap ath wlerete ἘΦΥΣΥΣΗΥΣ ἀν ἜΤ St yates Seay! rth Aled bea title sheretelet- EET tele de itisict γ 
1 ΠΌΣΙΣ ΠῚ] pe ΠΥ te} he lepeberelelelerebelerebeiers tele 7! te pouty tet whew κεῖσ ΤῊΝ ἐφ whe le mle \e\* bie εὐχὺ γὺψ oh 
eheie teeter ἐν ale δὴ ἯΙ - ΤΡΉΜΊΣΙΣ bith sheterey jriste] iicig ΜῈ “1ο'» 5} ὙΣΊ δὴ δὴν 1. heheh 1} ἐν baa 84 bs ὁ ἣν ΗΝ ΔΩ͂Σ v6 ye be tel * 
yr ‘ie . “᾿ ΠΝ mire der dic ieisieh rieisi eee Oberere siete it te ote) ht - Vike ἜΠΗ ie +. 
im) ea νην “ἐσ τη διό) δι ΣΉ ΣΉ νι yeast ΤΣ #19) ey “ὦ al "i ἜΣ resrsty +i fete ἘΠΈΕΣΣΙ 
* ib δ beteled betereteye ΤῊ wtaretelele, {oisioloroielereieie εν tet? - brobete toasts ist iti se ltle εἰδἰοι εἰ διφι σὺ ont τι jeleltele : > 
“19 ΠΗ Sites a2 {zit baba! {eisieisistes {oteleisicicis perm σ᾽ ει σι κι ieysisiessie Ἢ ieieloie " "τὶ shel Gish 4" sbraiehatats ea 
ys ἩΠΉΜΗΣ ἘΣΤΕ ΕΠ ΣΎΝ ΉΠΉΜΗΝ tiesto elites Petite PEPE ETE Ἵ 
4 > - » tet - le. 
ἔν τε αὐ αν, σι σφ». ijt: ete Mtiiit ris Sat st wlerete τις φφ» element r at ih +h thy nh seit > 
te igitied it: εἰσισι κι διοίεἰφιοὶ ὑψὰ PA οἷς ΣΝ τα le re isiete 4] ‘ ΗΝ οἰ εἰσ tenet εἰ Σ1 1}. ie) tie “ἐδινι δι, 
> doteisis Pit ithste je tiele τὴ lel wl erate φγδιοὴ ΟΣ ἐδ οἡ οὶ 4 oes ΣΎ ΣΉ ΦΡΣ ysl oh ba ὯΙ ΠΣ ΕΣ 
εὐ haterenetet Ἰδέ δι νην δὲ ἐοὴν a bes έν ἀν τη εν ἐς δ τὰ δὲ ἐὰ τὰν ἐφὰ γῆ φὰς οὐ τι Strep esriren stats 5 lotebetetebe sieiegticytt ε bo beiemebetetey 
ePavbsyrutevtdad granny yy ype ryT an yea ΗῚ διδιφ φ ώιοι ere Φέφ  Ψψἠεἰφισίεἰφις ἐριδιφ} Sr Sbhcisioteie bes clei: 


peisist “γι ele aah aicaeis eict 
ae heleletelelerelelelebelebe si ret ἡδηδηδὴδ ταύ ὅν ΤῈ ΓΟ ee ΠΣ [519 yet 
*\* yeizieiere ts Visisreieis) Τὰν Tis vere ye ke) te) jeherelererereiete ἐφιφέφιφιφ, ἐγ τόν " ‘ 

. 





ΠῚ beep ἣν πσέφι a ee οι» !. 
δὼ ΤΩΣ Ἰφιφιφισιφιο a% tris ἐφ χε αὐ ΤΣ Ι \* 






















































“.»Κ. 

rhe bye elele bepetejpe ret - ἀρ. δ γ δὴ δ γ 7 δ 97 πιο. eee Peele Hel elebetetete ee yy! δι: jaiele cia @ieiateteb-tetereie: > ἐλ αὐ st i ᾿ 
ΟΣ ΠΗ͂Σ ἀππτοϑ ΠΗ ΛΠ ΗΜΗΣΝ ΨΥ Not ΠΡ lahatateisicbebet δ ὁ οὐ ὰ ὁ ξύν λα ΕΣ iisitisibfeleinieieie ite 
Aled foley ΕΣ τ στ. et? γ᾽» , teteisttteths - γε ἡ αὐ γεν ye) sft ole sat " τὴ γύγεχᾷ oh behobetese - Bibs be bo οι δὶ ΠΩ͂Σ 
9. BES SITITIT epee inet ti! iii Ritts 19] ἡφέφι οὶ 5). ᾿ trisis) 171?) ithete 

ad wi ve vengeg. ΠΣ tht tele aie) “t ish be} whe ἜΤΠΠΠΗΣΙ White a\s}eieis . ei) 

pre ere lel Pretetale he page ' ot “4 whet ΟΝ pelelabet> ἘΠΊΗΙ: ee ἐδ τς Te 
shel slel ere gielerer pitas st ὙΦ 0 1218 ἐ ἐν αι shejoicies ι: “,εἡ διὸν 1° φ, δι ὸ sididia 
tel yoteieley abit ry \*) joer <i: ὁ oe oe ἘΣ ΜΗΊ1 φῆ σιν eke 4 yeh ba δέν 
jeleiece ht, ΤΣ tial + isistebeisiaier te jaystalereisee Ε ἐφιδιόι ὁ 

>! [ΠῚ lites ἘΠΈΒΗ te eee ΤΑ by i- . reat! titeeiatt «Ιἰφινέφι» 

veers eis ἯΙ σιν} ΜΉ} ΝΣ ise ΦΎΓΗΙ ᾿- sie - =) tek se 

hele. - staid yet te ih erp eeeta >) 1o,ensbeie 

jeotele) oat τ ὁ υϑὸν » hs it} “σι sth δ: εἰ Φ τὸ χὰ γἱ ᾿ 

Ὶ ret pit } γυναι Ὁ: sit uel \ ' jeheneyer> 

jet. 2} hele telat. oF hy Abela lala eretereteie! 


telmletel ite ele elel 
ΠΗ whem reed 
vere 1997) 4}}} αι κι δι σιφι 
“ἰκίφιτι 


ΣΝ 
eth ΤΣ Σ 
τ 1515} Sita si epee, 7123 4 
sbtisis dete bbe be ΣΦ 2) 
























ἀνεὶς ΤῊ iatsdeieisisasiensisie is: 
whale ΟΣ ΣΕ SESE ETE TST ἐ- 1} 9 }5 19} et ke weed 
ἐς. ΤΣ ΕΣ 3 biptittaeiait yyy: “tmte)stele - ; 
oitied. a fetayossiat δὴν γε ὁ δὶ 1} ate tibet 2 
ἡ φιέφοιδίοιο γγέαν ἀφυόενι ΠΝ ἐἐαεζεὶ ee - rt Paelelereieiebete 





> 
ΣΎ or pojelereret tei ts! 


Bet 


t* isis 


hops wie Rist obo φηγθὴς opste) letelaie;. ΤΣ 
bike btedathvewae! tet-tey ne et “ιν 
mle lepetel svayaety Lei iatebeleisisieies 

re by ‘ sit “᾽ν: ΠΗ s)ahetepe! -\ t= ἘΜΉΗΡΕ 









iste 
berets ih 





δ ἢ 
(el eleleler 


9 τὲ ἀν Gat Ott ισι ris rea ἐν ΓΤ 

I bv byes sisi tite sate a ARERR 
ΕΙΣ atehele ele, -_ - pated! hele Sas; 

tity ον pete 2 atttet tent ate ἐφὰ BG EG | Stehetete tot patie bg ag by patties δὶ» 





' 
ὶ - ᾽ » 
per Sree bss bee κέν 
















ΕΣ 



















bejpote) Hitt «1 
Hm Sele ape tele) ete! ΣΌΣ νδιοιδιοιοιοιο δ᾽) φΦ.» ἐσιφιφι σι νυ ἐν οἰοηφὶς ΟΣ ΤῊ tebhey- 

σι σι! τ. states [ritistels shih sis) beletelel« εἴ δ᾽ εις shaisistsheietersttieiate. bi sios Ritter tt bey - 
rieleles 44 ὺ.» sed ya ΠῚ ter lw lelabebaleletepe el. sorspotetoreisieitigis ici) be letel weeps +19) s\* νὸν ᾿φιψῆσι οι, ais se] 
Ag Uy bs th sabi est ἀρ δα ὐ ἘΙΠΠΗΤΗ τς $643 04 ‘bdaghdedha! reat pat evaded ot αν slere Ahr lelepeteretetereret ish ae ot 

= Ψ ele ee ew lele . whete mle : Ἵ 

ibiefehbeie peed ἐταιμντ yay ἐὐ ἔν, +het- a Bao hg) ydieleisizietes 448 aisisisisbejejcrate reatneter atte 4 ΡΣ : 
“1. persisisditsisistsieletstotetes-ic). ΗΜ ΜΉ Jolsicielepeletepeietesepetetielelele) ἐδ σι κσι ΣΥΝ ore hs ecag ed SOLES τὺ τοις 









ἘΦ }}}} ΠΗ͂Σ Bhs Stritieisieicisieisis sete. ὦ ἀλλο τ ει τ τι τα τιν" PEELE HE SPoeh oat τἠοιδιδην 2 τ ἀνε linh ie 





























poleteieiciclspeicieis ΠΣ poi lee eponbies shots tele = tie bele ll aheletetere wl etele opel etey 
ΠΣ “' ἐφ τισι Teobsbatetat i ἐκ ἐξέ κὐὰ φισέ σις. st bey Ty eoe ese sl pists peseiese rates rth es bb sesosiventsyy 
ΟΣ ort ᾽ν ater Ἢ be κι κισκικι κι lsharchobshaisisistebsisiote ἐν δ ἐττῦ «τα ied belied belied ει edd ed edited κι κὶ οὗ 
{olstsietet cies jeiete att stebetepetelepere yh γε κι σις ΣΣΥΈ στα Στ ΤΈΣ ΕΣ Φ)2]6) it NERO ReeMee heen Hit 
φιφϑισ rte ep Roh ἡ ὁ ον ' ἘΣ ΕΣ τἰδιδίνι. eletere a χεδὶ πὴ δ ΤΙΝΙ “ἰού σφισιν κι. =r 
ἔφεεισι teletieiec Ὁ eit οι teres ptt ἐφ οινι σ᾽ ἡ οὐ. ahetet +24 μ ate tit διοιφ οἰ διοη οὶ κιφιοὶ οἰ op ep-boteter. γὴν εἰν 
SLEEPER EES ἔνι. σἰτἰσίφιφισὶ tore!s isi lel eieletetere apes et : sith ἐφ σις test she pete σι. ΜῊΝ stele 
Ὑ αν 1: ΤΎΡΟΥ Εν ΟΣ ἸΌΝ ἐνόν sieRt? sheletelehetoteeperete yelete - pots Abs ¢ be pele lene he) φῖδεσι 7) tre σἴκσι 
aes pe bead ρα δ ον Legh susest shehie sh i δὲ rat 5 ΠΗ ὙΣΤΟΣΣΤ ΣΉ ΉΟΤΣΊ τὸ ἐξ οῤεὐῆν, ΠΗ oF pate hehe epee bay Ges sehere pes h bse bs ties beual 
ele wlele ehotebetet-+ Phelhetele Sisistebsisisioieclit - el. l= = =\* - - 
ΠΣ: ' wee jotetes tristst ἀξ sag ey ie ‘* + Citi ; 54 : i: i trite PTT Te 









ταῦτ ᾿ Ἷ “15 > 
(ere ήτο. ‘ site ya ri otiied ΣΥΣΤΤΗΣ hit 
> se wleltoene > 
ἰφή νιν ἡ οι». ain if - 
1}  Plebelelepeletebedeiciea. wheietapeisinpeysicpaporey dy 









jeteperebetetets)- TUlseetsisrelersiorele pehesei siete. 

“ι late Ἵ -.-.- 
beeaya eae a deere geesaree ΤῊΣ pte ΣΤΥ ΣῪ ΤΥ ests tet δ] 
re 


- 
PSS αν LOS τ" οὐφιίογδ νον.
