The White Monkey (John Galsworthy, 1924)
========================================
Fleur's marriage and Soames's decline. Public domain. Internet Archive (1924).

; rN
MODERN COMEDY
if
Lhe While Monkey

A Silent Wooing


bie


s Com


Ett


Mote


- THE WORKS OF JOHN GALSWORTHY
GROVE EDITION


Volume 19
A MODERN COMEDY


VOLUME I
THE WHITE MONKEY
A SILENT WOOING


gt sede”
yaa fo yazan A


Neraneiad


rate Mov a) saat


. _ THAVIOM TI qaT
DMOOW Tada eo .


A MODERN COMEDY


By
JOHN GALSWORTHY


VOLUME 1
THE WHITE MONKEY
A SILENT WOOING


“No retreat, no retreat ;
They must conquer or die
Who have no retreat |”


Mr. Gay,


LONDON
WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD,


FIRST PUBLISHED
1924
REPRINTED 1924, 1925
UNIFORM EDITION 1926
REPRINTED 1927
POPULAR 3s. 6d. EDITION
1926
REPRINTED 1926, 1927
CHEAP 2s. EDITION
1927
FIRST PRINTED IN
THE GROVE
EDITION
1928
REPRINTED 1929 (TWICE)


1930, 1931, 1933, 1934
1935


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT
THE WINDMILL PRESS, KINGSWOOD
SURREY


TO
MAX BEERBOHM


ies te ee
ia y 5
iy f Wale
i k f ak ine g =” aki
tin Be ath fe Oe ae Aad i
} ; 7
\s 4 he
} Nh, i
4


rl Ne  MAOHAAY
: is SPUN ete gine Sid
; i : Phen 278) i ae A Lait


ost d if


CHAPTER


Il.
III.


CONTENTS


PART I


PROMENADE
HOME

MUSICAL

DINING

EVE

* OLD FORSYTE ” AND “ OLD MONT ”
“OLD MONT ”’ AND “* OLD FORSYTE ”
BICKET

CONFUSION

PASSING OF A SPORTSMAN

VENTURE

FIGURES AND FACTS

TENTERHOOKS


PART II


THE MARK FALLS
VICTORINE

MICHAEL WALKS AND TALKS
FLEUR’S BODY

FLEUR’S SOUL


PAGE


vill CONTENTS


CHAPTER PAGE
VI. MICHAEL GETS “ WHAT-FOR ” 177
vil. “THE ALTOGETHER ” 188

VIII. SOAMES TAKES THE MATTER UP 197
IX. SLEUTH 207
X. FACE . 217
XI. COCKED HAT 221

XII. GOING EAST 228

PART HUI
I. BANK HOLIDAY 233
II. OFFICE WORK 241
mz. “ AFTERNOON OF A DRYAD” 252
Iv. AFTERNOON OF A BICKET 258
V. MICHAEL GIVES ADVICE 264
VI. QUITTANCE 273

VII. LOOKING INTO ELDERSON 277

VIII. LEVANTED 284
IX SOAMES DOESN’ GIVE A DAMN 295
X. BUT TAKES NO CHANCES 301
XI. WITH A SMALL “n” 310

XII. ORDEAL BY SHAREHOLDER 316

XIII. SOAMES AT BAY 329

XIV. ON THE RACK 340
XV. CALM 346


A SILENT WOOING 351


THE WHITE MONKEY


Pica veh


’ aw iont ;
a A) AWA Diente SN bre
r Wi ‘one STR RL

Ab is TOGA MAINS va OUR oo


a


the ae r RAM 4 i


Het eat


iene a sian nyt
oy omiandl: ad baad tye


PART !


CHAPTER I


PROMENADE


Comtnc down the steps of Snooks’ Club, so well worn
by the apostles of things as they were, on that moment-
ous mid-October afternoon of 1922, Sir Lawrence
Mont, ninth baronet, set his fine nose towards the east
wind, and moved his thin legs with speed. Political
by birth rather than by nature, he reviewed the revolu-
tion which had restored his Party to power with a
detachment not devoid of humour. Passing the
Remove Club, he thought: ‘Some sweating into shoes,
there |! No more confectioned dishes. A woodcock—
without trimmings, for a change ! ’

The captains and the kings had departed from
Snooks’ before he entered it, for he was not of “ that
catch-penny crew, now paid off, no, sir; fellows who
turned their tails on the land the moment the war was
over. Pah!” But for an hour-he had listened to
echoes, and his lively twisting mind, embedded in
deposits of the past, sceptical of the present, and of al]
political protestations: and pronouncements, had re-
corded with amusement the confusion of patriotism and
personalities left behind by the fateful gathering. Like
most landowners, he distrusted doctrine. If he had a
political belief, it was a tax on wheat; and so far as
he could see, he was not alone in it—but then he was
not seeking election; in other words, his principle was
not in danger of extinction from the votes of those who


3


4 THE WHITE MONKEY


had to pay for bread. Principles—he mused—ag
fond were pocket; and he wished the deuce people
wouldn’t pretend they weren’t! Pocket, in the deep
sense of that word, of course, self-interest as member of
a definite community. And how the devil was this
definite community, the English nation, to exist, when
all its land was going out of cultivation, and all its
ships and docks in danger of destruction by aeroplanes ?
He had listened that hour past for a single mention
of the land. Not one! It was not practical politics |
Confound the fellows ! They had to wear their breeches
out—keeping seats or getting them. No connection
between posteriors and posterity! No, by George!
Thus reminded of posterity, it occured to him rather
suddenly that his son’s wife showed no signs as yet.
Two years! Time they were thinking about children.
It was dangerous to get into the habit of not having
them, when a title and estate depended.. A smile
twisted his lips and eyebrows which resembled spinneys
of dark pothooks. A pretty young creature, most
taking ; and knew it, too! Whom was she not getting
to know ? Lions and tigers, monkeys and cats—her
house was becoming quite a menagerie of more or less
celebrities: There’ was a certain unreality about that
sort of thing! And opposite a British lion in Trafalgar
Square Sir Lawrence thought : ‘She’ll be getting these
to her house next! She’s got the collecting habit.
Michael must look out—in a collector’s house thete’s
always a lumber room for old junk, and husbands are
liable to get into it. That reminds me: I promised her
a Chinese Minister. Well, she must. wait now till
after the General Election.’

Down Whitehall, under the grey easterly sky, the
towers of Westminster came for a second into view.


PROMENADE $


* A certain unreality in that, too,’ he thought. ‘ Michael
and his fads! Well, it’s the fashion—Soacialistic princi-
ples and a rich wife. Sacrifice with safety! Peacé with
plenty! Nostrums—ten a penny!’

Passing the newspaper hubbub of Charing Cross,
frenzied by the political crisis, he turned up to the left
towards Danby and Winter, publishers, where his son
was junior partner. A new theme fora book had just
begun to bend a mind which had already produced a
* Life of Montrose,” “Far Cathay,” that work. of
Eastern travel, and a fanciful conversation between the
shades of Gladstone and Distaeli—entitled “ Duet.”
With every step taken, from Snooks’ eastward, his
erect thin figure in Astrakhan-collared coat, his thin
grey-moustached face, and tortoise-shell rimmed
monocle under the lively dark eyebrow, had seemed
more rare. It became almost a phenomenon in this
dingy back street, where carts stuck like winter flies,
and persons went by with books under their arms, as
if educated.

He had nearly reached the door of Danby’s when he
encountered two young men. One of them was
clearly his son, better dressed since his marriage, and
smoking a cigar—thank goodness—instead of those
eternal cigarettes; the other—ah! yes—Michael’s
sucking poet and best man, head in air, rather a sleek
head under a velour hat! He said:

** Ha, Michael ! ”

“ Hallo, Bart! You know my governor, Wilfred ?
Wilfred Desert. ‘Copper Coin ’—some poet, Bart,
T tell you. You must read him. We’re going home.
Come along!”

Sir Lawrence went along.

“ What happened at Snooks’ ?”


6 THE WHITE MONKEY


“ Le roi est mort. Labour can start lying, Michael—
election next month.”

“Bart was brought up, Wilfred, in days that knew
not Demos.”

“Well, Mr. Desert, do you find reality in politics
now ?”

“Do you find reality in anything, sir?”

“Tn income tax, perhaps.”

Michael grinned. ‘‘ Above knighthood,” he said,
“there’s no such thing as simple faith.”

“ Suppose your friends came into power, Michael—
in some ways not a bad thing, help ’em to grow up—
what could they do, eh? Could they raise national
taste? Abolish the cinema? Teach English people to
cook ? Prevent other countries from threatening war ?
Makeus grow our own food ? Stop the increase of town
life ? Would they hang dabblers in poison gas ? Could
they prevent flying in war-time ? Could they weaken
the possessive instinct—anywhere? Or do anything
in fact, but alter the incidence of possession a little:
All party politics are top dressing. We’re ruled by the
inventors, and human nature ; and we live in Queer
Street, Mr. Desert.”

“Much my sentiments, sir.”

Michael flourished his cigar.

“Bad old men, you two!”

And, removing their hats, they passed the Ceno-
taph.

“Curiously symptomatic—that tning,” said Sir
Lawrence; “ monument to the dread of swank—most
characteristic. And the dread of swank

“ Go on, Bart,” said Michael.

“The fine, the large, the florid—all off! No far-
sighted views, no big schemes, no great principles, no


PROMENADE y


great religion, or great art—estheticism in cliques and
backwaters, small men in small hats.”

“ As panteth the heart after Byron, Wilberforce, and
the Nelson Monument. My poor old Bart! What
about it, Wilfrid ? ”

“Yes, Mr. Desert—what about it?”

Desert’s dark face contracted.

“Tt’s an age of paradox,” he said. “ We all kick
up for freedom, and the only institutions gaining
strength are Socialism and the Roman Catholic Church.
We're frightfully self-conscious about art—and the only
art development is the cinema. We’re nuts on peace—
and all we’re doing about it is to perfect poison gas,”

Sir Lawrence glanced sideways at a young man so
bitter.

“ And how’s publishing, Michael ? ” ?

“ Well, ‘Copper Coin’ is selling like hot cakes;
and there’s quite a movement in ‘A Duet.’ What
about this for a new ad.: ‘A Duet, by Sir Lawrence
Mont, Bart. The most distinguished Conversation
evet held between the Dead.’ That ought to get the
psychic. Wilfrid suggested ‘G.O.M. and Dizzy—
broadcasted from Hell.? Which do you like best ? ”

They had come, however, to a policeman holding up
his hand against the nose of a van horse, so that every-
thing marked time. The engines of the cars whirred
idly, their drivers’ faces set towards the space withheld
from them; a girl on a bicycle looked vacantly about
her, grasping the back of the van, where a youth sat
sideways with his legs stretched out towards her. Sir
Lawrence ylanced again at young Desert. A thin,
pale-dark face, good-looking, but a hitch in it, as if
not properly timed; nothing owfré in dress or manner,
and yet socially at large ; less vivacious than that lively


8 THE WHITE MONKEY


rascal, his own son, but as anchorless, and mote sceptica}
—might feel things pretty deeply, though! Thr
policeman lowered his arm.

“ You were in the war, Mr. Desert ?”

“ Ch, yes.”

“ Air service 2?”

* And line. Bit of both.”

“Hard on a poet.”

“ Notatall. Poetry’s only possible when you may be
blown up at any moment, or when you live in Putney.”

Sir Lawrence’s eyebrow rose. “* Yes?” ;

“ Tennyson, Browning, Wordsworth, Swinburne-—
they could turn it out; és vivaient, mais si pen.”

“Is there not a third condition favourable ? ”

“* And that, sir?”

’ “ How shall I express it—a certain cerebral agitation

in connection with women?”

Desert’s face twitched, and seemed to darken.

Michael put his latchkey into the lock of his front
door.


CHAPTER I


HOME


Tre house in South Square, Westminster, to which the
young Monts had come after their Spanish honeymoon
two years before, might have been called “ emanci«
pated.” It was the work of an architect whose dream
was a new house perfectly old, and an old house per-
fectly new. It followed, therefore, no recognised
style or tradition, and was devoid of structural pre-
judice ; but it soaked up the smuts of the metropolis
with such special rapidity that its stone already re-
spectably resembled that of Wren. Its windows and
doors had gently rounded tops. The high-sloping
roof, of a fine sooty pink, was almost Danish, and two
* ducky little windows’ looked out of it, giving ax
impression that very tall servants lived up there. There
were rooms on each side of the front door, which was
wide and set off by bay trees:in black and gold bindings.
The house was thick through, and the staircase, of a
broad chastity, began at the far end of a hall which had
room for quite a number of'hats and coats and cards,
There were four bathrooms; and not even a cellar
underneath. The Forsyte instinct for a house had
co-operated, in its acquisition. Soames had picked it
up for his daughter, undecorated at that psychological
moment when the bubble of inflation was pricked,
and the air escaping from the balloon of the world’s
trade. Fleur, however, had established immediate
contact with the architect—an element which Soames


9


Io THE WHITE MONKEY


himself had never quite got over—and decided not to
have more than three styles in her house: Chinese,
Spanish, and her own. The room to the left of the
front door, running the breadth of the house, was
Chinese, with ivory panels, a copper floor, central
heating, and cut glass lustres. It contained four
pictures—all Chinese—the only school in which her
father had not yet dabbled. The fireplace, wide and
open, had Chinese dogs with Chinese tiles for them to
stand on. The silk was chiefly of jade green. There
were two wonderful old black tea chests, picked up
with Soames’ money at Jobson’s—not a bargain.
There was no piano, partly because pianos were too
uncompromisingly occidental, and partly because it
would have taken up much room. Fleur aimed at
space—collecting people rather than furniture or
bibelots. ‘The light, admitted by windows at both ends,
was unfortunately not Chinese. She would stand
sometimes in the centre of this room, thinking—how
to “bunch” her guests, how to make her room more
Chinese without making it uncomfortable; how to
seem to know all about literature and politics; how
to accept everything her father gave her, without making
him aware that his taste had no sense of the futute ;
how to keep hold of Silby Swan, the new literary
star, and to get hold of Gurdon Minho, the old; of
how Wilfrid Desert was getting too fond of her; of
what was really her style in dress; of why Michael
had such funny ears; and sometimes she stood not
thinking at all—just aching a little.

When those three came in she was sitting before a red
lacquer tea-table, finishing a very good tea. She
always had tea brought in rather early, so that she could
have a good quiet preliminary “ tuck in ” all by herself,


HOME I!


because she was not quite twenty-one, and this was her
hour for remembering her youth. By her side Ting-a-
ling was standing on his hind feet, his tawny forepaws
on a Chinese foot-stool, his snubbed black and tawny
muzzle turned up towards the fruits of his philosophy.

“That'll do, Ting. No more, ducky! No
more!”

The expression of Ting-a-ling answered:

“Well, then, stop, too! Don’t subject me to tor-
ture!”

A year and three months old, he had been bought by
Michael out of a Bond Street shop window on Fleur’s
twentieth birthday, eleven months ago.

Two years of married life had not lengthened het
short dark chestnut hair; had added a little more
decision to her quick lips, a little more allurement to
her white-lidded, dark-lashed hazel eyes, a little more
poise and swing to her carriage, a little more chest and
hip measurement; had taken a little from waist and
calf measurement, a little colour from cheeks a little less
round and a little sweetness from a voice a little more
caressing.

She stood up behind the tray, holding out her white
round arm without a word. She avoided unnecessary
greetings or farewells. She would have had to say
them so often, and their purpose was better served by
look, pressure, and slight inclination of head to one
side.

With a circular movement of her squeezed hand, she
said:

“Draw up. Cream, sir? Sugar, Wilfrid? Ting has
had too much—don’t feed him! Hand things, Michael.
Pve heard all about the meeting at Snooks’. You're
not going to canvass for Labour, Michael—canvassing’s


12 THE WHITE MONKEY


so silly. If any one canvassed me, I should vote the
other way at once.”

“Yes, darling ; but you’re not the average elector.”

Fleur looked at him. Very sweetly put ! Conscious
of Wilfrid biting his lips, of Sir Lawrence taking that
in, of the amount of silk leg she was showing, of her
black and cream teacups, she adjusted these matters.
A flutter of her white lids—Desert ceased to bite his
lips; a movement of her silk legs—Sir Lawrence
ceased to look at him. Holding out her cups, she said:

*T suppose I’m not modern enough ? ”

Desert, moving a bright little spoon round in his
magpie cup, said without looking up:

“ As much more modern than the moderns, as you
are more ancient.” :

“?Ware poetry |” said Michael.

But when he had taken his father to see the new
cattoons by Aubery Greene, she said:

“ Kindly tell me what you meant, Wilfrid.”

Desert’s voice seemed to leap from restraint.

“ What does it matter. I don’t want to waste time
with that.”

“But I want to know. It sounded like a sneer”

“A sneer? From me? Fleur!” :

“ Then tell me.”

“1 meant that you have all their restlessness and
practical get-thereness: but you have what they
haven’t, Fleur—power to turn one’s head. And mine
is turned. You know it.”

““ How would Michael like that—from you, his best
man?”

Desert moved quickly to the windows.

Fleur took Ting-a-ling on her lap. Such things had
been said to her before; but from Wilfrid it was serious.


HOME 13


Nice to think she had his heart, of course! Only, where
on earth could she put it, where it wouldn’t be seen
except by her? He was incalculable—did strange
things ! She was a little afraid—not of him, but of that
quality in him. . He came back to the hearth, and said :

“ Ugly, isn’t it? Put that dam’ dog down, Fleur; I
can’t see your face. If you were really fond of Michael
—I swear I wouldn’t; but you’re not, you know.”

Fleur said coldly:

“ You know very little ; I aw fond of Michael.”

Desert gave his little jerky laugh.

“Oh yes ; not the sort that counts.”

Fleur looked up.

“It counts quite enough to make one safe.”

“A flower that I can’t pick.”

Fleur nodded.

* Quite sure, Fleur? Quite, quite sure?”

Fleur stared; her eyes softened a little, her eyelids,
so excessively white, drooped over them ; she nodded.
Desert said slowly :

“The moment I believe that, I shall go East.”

“‘Bast p<?

“Not so stale as going West, but much the same—
you don’t come back.”

Fleur thought: ‘The East? I should love to know
the East! Pity one:can’t manage that, too, Pity!’

“You won’t keep me in your Zoo, my dear. I
shan’t hang around and feed on crumbs. You know
what I feel—it means.a smash of some sort.”

“Tt hasn’t been my fault, has it 2?”

“Yes; you’ve poblected me, as you collect evety-
body that comes near you.”

“I don’t know what you mean.”
» Desert bent down, and dragged her hand to his lips.


J


14 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Don’t be riled with me; I’m too unhappy.”

Fleur let her hand stay against his hot lips.

* Sorry, Wilfrid.”

* All right, dear. T’ll go.”

* But you’re coming to dinner to-morrow ?.”

Desert said violently :

“ To-morrow ? Good God—no! What d’you think
I’m made of ?”

He flung her hand away.

“T don’t like violence, Wilfrid.”

“ Well, good-bye; I'd better go.”

The words “And you’d better not come again”
trembled up to her lips, but were not spoken. Part
from Wilfrid—life would lose a little warmth! She
waved her hand. He was gone. She heard the door
closing. Poor Wilfrid !—nice to think of a flame at
which to warm her hands! Nice but rather dreadful!
And suddenly, dropping Ting-a-ling, she got up and
began to walk about the room. To-morrow! Second
anniversary of her weding-day ! Still an ache when she
thought of what it had not been. But there was little
time to think—and she made less. What good in
thinking ? Only one life, full of people, of things to do
and have, of things wanted—a life only void of—one
thing, and that—well, if people had it, they never had it
long! On her lids two tears, which had gathered, dried
without falling. Sentimentalism! No! The last
thing in the world—the unforgivable offence. Whom
should she put next whom to-morrow? And whom
should she get in place of Wilfrid, if Wilfrid wouldn’t
come—silly boy! One day—one night—what differ-
ence? Who should sit on her right, and who on her
left? Was Aubrey Greene more distinguished, or
Sibley Swan? Were they either as distinguished as


a ee


HOME 15


Walter Nazing or Charles Upshire ? Dinner of twelve,
exclusively literary and artistic, except for Michael
and Alison Charwell. Ah! Could Alison get her
Gurdon Minho—just one writer of the old school,
one glass of old wine to mellow effervescence? He
didn’t publish with Danby and Winter; but he fed out
of Alison’s hand. She went quickly to one of the old
tea chests, and opened it. Inside was a telephone.
“Can I speak to Lady Alison—Mrs. Michael Mont
... Yes... That you, Alison? ... Fleur speak-
ing. Wilfrid has fallen through to-morrow night.
...Is there any chance of your bringing Gurdon
Minho? I don’t know him, of course; but he might
be interested: You'll try? .. That'll be ever so
delightful. Isn’t the Snooks’ Club meeting rather ex-
citing? Bart says they'll eat each other now they’ve
split... About Mr. Minho. Could you let me
know to-night ? Thanks—thanks awfully! . . . Good-
bye!”
piaiing Minho, whom ? Her mind hovered over the
names in her address book. At so late a minute it
must be some one who didn’t stand on ceremony ; but
except Alison, none of Michael’s relations would be
safe from Sibley Swan or Nesta Gorse, and their sub-
versive shafts ; as to the Forsytes—out of the question ;
they had their own sub-acid humour (some of them),
but they were not modern, not really modern. Besides,
she saw as little of them as she could—they dated,
belonged to the dramatic period, had no sense of life
without beginning or end. No! If Gurdon Minho
was a frost, it would have to be a musician, whose
works were hieroglyphical with a dash of surgery ; or,
better perhaps, a psycho-analyst. Her fingers turned
the pages till she came to those two categories. Hugo


16 THE WHITE MONKEY


Solstis ?, A possibility ; but suppose he wanted to play
them something recent? There was only Michael’s
upright Grand, and that would mean going to his study.
Better Gerald Hanks—he and Nesta Gorse would get
off together on dreams ; still, if they did, there would be
no actual loss of life. Yes, failing Gurdon Minho,
Gerald Hanks ; he would be free—and put him between
Alison and Nesta... She closed ‘the book, and, going
back to her jade-green settee, sat gazing at Ting-a-ling,
The little dog’s prominent round eyes gazed back;
bright, black, very old. Fleur thought : ‘I don’t want
Wilfrid to drop off” Among all the crowd who came
and went, here, there and everywhere, she cared for
nobody. Keep up with them, keep up with everything,
ofcourse! It was all frightfully amusing, frightfully
necessary |. Only—only—what ?

Voices ! Michael and Bart coming back. Bart had
noticed Wilfrid. He was a noticing old Bart. She
was never very comfortable when he was about—
lively and twisting, but with something settled and
ancestral in him, a little like Ting-a-ling—something
judgmatic, ever telling her that she was fluttering and
new. He was anchored, could only move to the length
of his old-fashioned cord, but he could drop on to
things disconcertingly. Still, he admired her, she felt—
oh! yes.

Well! What had he thought of the cartoons ? Ought
Michael to publish them, and with letterpress or with-
out? Didn’t he think thatthe cubic called “ Still Life’’—
of the Government, too frightfully funny—especially
the “ old bean” representing the Prime? For answer
she was conscious of a twisting, rapid noise: Sir
Lawrence was telling her of his father’s collection of
electioneering cartoons. She did wish Bart would


HOME 17


not tell about his father; he had been so distinguished,
and he must have been so dull, paying all his calls on
horseback, with trousers strapped under his boots. He
and Lord Charles Cariboo and the Marquis of Forfar
had been the last three “callers ” of that sort. If only
they hadn’t, they’d have been clean forgot. She had
that dress to try, and fourteen things to see to, and
Hugo’s concert began at eight-fifteen |. Why did people
of the last generation always have so much time ? And,
suddenly, she looked down. Ting-a-ling was licking
the copper floor. She took him up: “Not that,
darling; nasty!” Ah! the spell was broken! Bart
was going, teminiscent tothe last. She waited at the
foot of the stairs till Michael shut the door on him; thén
flew. Reaching her room, she turned on all the lights.
Here was her own style—a bed which did not look like
one, and many mirrors. The couch of Ting-a-ling
occupied a corner, whence he could see himself in three.
She put him down, and said: “‘ Keep quiet, now |”
His attitude to the other dogs in the room had long
become indifferent; though of his own breed and
precisely his colour, they had no smell and no licking
power in their tongues—nothing to be done with
them, imitative creatures, incredibly unresponsive.
Stripping off her dress, Fleur held the new frock under
her chin.
“May I kiss you?” said a voice, and there was
Michael’s image behind her own reflection in the
lass.
ae My dear boy, there isn’t time ! Help me with this.”
She slipped the frock over her head. ‘“‘ Do those three
top hooks. How do you like it? Oh! and Michael !
Gurdon Minho may be coming to dinner to-morrow—
Wilfrid can’t. Have you read his things P Sit downand


18 THE WHITE MONKEY


tell me something about them. All novels, aren’t
they ? What sort?”

“Well, he’s always had something to say. And his
cats are good. He’s a bit romantic, of course.”

* Oh! Have I made a gaff? ”

*‘ Not a bit; jolly good shot. | The vice of out lot is,
they say it pretty well, but they’ve nothing to say.
They won’t last.”

“ But that’s just why they will last. They won’t
date.”

“Won't they? My gum!”

“ Wilfrid will last.” '

“Ah! W_lfrid has emotions, hates, pities, wants ;
at least, sometimes; when he does, his stuff is jolly
good. Otherwise, he just makes a song about nothing |
—like the rest.”

Fleur tucked in the top of her undergarment.

“ But, Michael, if that’s so, we—I’ve got the wrong
lot.”

Michael grinned,

_ “ My dear child! The lot of the hour is always right ;
only you’ve got to watch it, and change it quick
enough.”

“But d’you mean to say that Sibley isn’t going to
live ?”

saoipir word nol!) s

“ But he’s so perfectly sure that almost everybody
else is dead or dying. Surely he has critical genius |”

“Tf I hadn’t more judgment than Sib, I’d go out of
publishing to-mortow.”

* You—more than Sibley Swan?”

“ Of course, ’'ve more judgment than Sib. Why!
Sib’s judgment is just his opinion of Sib—common or
garden impatience of any one else. He doesn’t even


HOME 19


read them. He’ll read one specimen of every author
and say: ‘Oh! that fellow! He’s dull, or he’s moral,
or he’s sentimental, or he dates, or he drivels "—I’ve
heard him dozens of times. That’s if they’re alive.
Of course, if they’re dead, it’s different. He’s always
digging up and canonising the dead; that’s how he’s
got his name. There’s always a Sibinliterature. He’s
a standing example of how people can get taken at
their own valuation. But as to lasting—of course he
won't; he’s never creative, even by mistake.”

Fleur had lost the thread. Yes! It suited her—quite
a nice line! Off with it! Must write those three notes
before she dressed |

Michael had begun again.

“Take my tip, Fleur. The really big people don’t
talk—and don’t bunch—they paddle their own canoes
in what seem backwaters. But it’s the backwaters that
make the main stream. By Jove, that’s a wot, or is it
a bull; and are bulls mots or mors bulls 2?”

* Michael, if you were me, would you tell Frederic
Wilmer that he’ll be meeting Hubert Marsland at
lunch next week ? Would it bring him or would it put
him off 2”

“« Marsland’s rather an old duck, Wilmet’s rather an
old goose—I don’t know.”

“Oh! do be serious, Michael—you never give me
any help in arranging—No! Don’t maul my shoulders,

lease.”

“Well, darling, I don’t know. TPve no genius for
such things, like you. Marsland paints windmills,
cliffs aud things—I doubt if he’s heard of the future.
He’s almost a Mathew Maris for keeping out of the
swim. If ve» think he’d like to meet a Vertiginist


20 THE WHITE MONKEY


“J didn’t ask you if he’d like to meet Wilmer; I
asked you if Wilmer would like to meet him.”

“Wilmer will just say: ‘I like little Mrs. Mont,
she gives deuced good grub ’—and so you do, ducky.
A Vertiginist wants nourishing, you know} or it
wouldn’t go to his head.”

Fleur’s pen resumed its swift strokes, already becom-
ing slightly illegible. She murmured:

“1 think Wilfrid would help—you won’t be there;
one—two—three. What women?”

“ For painters—pretty and plump; no intellect. *

Fleur said crossly :

“ T can’t get them plump ; they don’t go about now.”
And her pen flowed on:


“Dear WILFRID,—Wednesday—lunch; Wilmer,
Hubert Marsland, two other women. Do help me live it
down.

* Yours ever,
“ FLEUR.”


“Michael, your chin is like a bootbrush.” :

* Sorry, old thing ; your shoulders shouldn’t be so
smooth. Bart gave Wilfrid a tip as we were coming
along.”

“ Fleur stopped writing. “Oh!”

“Reminded him that. the state of love was a good
stunt for poets.”

“A propos of what?”

“ Wilfrid was complaining that he couldn’t turn it
out now.”

“Nonsense! His last things are his best.”

“ Well, that’s what I'think. Perhaps he’s forestalled
the tip. Has he, d’you know?”


HOME 21


Fleur turned her eyes towards the face behind her
shoulder. No, it had its native look—frank, irres-
ponsible, slightly faun-like, with its pointed ears, quick
lips, and nostrils.

She said slowly :

“Tf you don’t know, nobody does.”

A snuffle interrupted Michael’s answer. ‘Ting-a-ling,
long, low, slightly higher at both ends, was standing
between them, with black muzzle upturned. ‘“‘ My
pedigree is long,” he seemed to say: “ but my legs are
short—what about it?”


CHAPTER Hi


MUSICAL


AccorDING to a great and guiding principle, Fleur and
Michael Mont attended the Hugo Solstis concert, not
because they anticipated pleasure, but because they
knew Hugo. They felt, besides, that Solstis, an
Englishman of Russo-Dutch extraction, was one of
those who were restoring English music, giving to it a
wide and spacious freedom from melody and rhythm,
while investing it with literary and mathematical
charms. Andone never could go toa concert given by
any of this school without using the word “ interesting ”
as one was coming away. To sleep to this restored
English music, too, was impossible. Fleur, a sound
sleeper, had never even tired. Michael had, and com-
plained afterwards that it had been like a nap in Liége
railway station. On this occasion they occupied those
gangway seats in the front row of the dress circle of
which Fleur had a sort of natural monopoly. There
Hugo and the rest could see her taking her place in the
English restoration movement. It was easy, too, to
escape into the corridor and exchange the word “ inter-
esting ” with side-whiskered cognoscenti; or, slipping
out a cigarette from the little gold case, wedding present
of Cousin Imogen Cardigan, geta whiff or two’s repose.
To speak quite honestly, Fleur had a natural sense of
rhythm which caused her discomfort during those long
and “interesting” passages which evidenced, as it
were, the composer’s rise and fall from his bed of
a2


MUSICAL 23


thorns.. She secretly loved a turn, and the impossibility
of ever confessing this without losing hold of Solstis,
Baff, Birdigal, MacLewis, Clorane, and other English
restoration composers, sometimes taxed to its’ limit
a nature which had its Spartan side. » Even to Michael
she would not “confess”; and it was additionally
trying when, with his native disrespect of persons,
accentuated by life in the trenches, and a publisher’s
office, he would mutter: “Gad! Get on with it! ”
or: “Cripes! Ain’t he took’ bad!” especially as’she
knew that Michael was really putting up with it better
than herself, having a more literary he and
a less dancing itch in his toes.

The first movement of the new Solstis composition—
*Phantasmagoria Piemontesque””—to which they
had especially come to listen, began with some drawn-
out chords.

“What oh!” said Michael’s voice in her ear:
“Three pieces of furniture moved simultaneously ona
parquet floor!”

In Fleur’s involuntary smile was the whole sectet of
why her matriage had not been intolerable. ‘After all,
Michael was a dear! Devotion and mercury—jesting
and loyalty—combined, they piqued and touched even
a heart given away. before it was bestowed on him.
“Touch”. without | “ pique”? would. have bored;
“ pique ” without “ touch” would have irritated. At
this moment he was at peculiar advantage | Holding on
to his knees, with his ears standing up, eyes glassy from
loyalty to Hugo, and tongue in cheek, he was listening
to that opening in a way which evoked Fleur’s admira-
tion. The piece would be “ interesting ”—she fell into
the state of outer observation and inner calculation very
usual with her nowadays. Over there was L.S.D., the

B


24 THE WHITE MONKEY


great dramatist ; she didn’t know him—yet. Helooked
rather frightening, his hair stood up so straight. And
her eye began picturing him on her copper floor against
a Chinese picture. And there—yes! Gurdon Minho!
Imagine dis coming to anything so modern! His
profile was rather Roman—of the Aurelian period |
Passing on from that antique, with the pleased thought
that by this time to-morrow she might have collected it,
she quartered the assembly face by face—she did not
want to miss any one important.

“ The furniture ” had come to a sudden standstill.

“Interesting |”? said a voice over her shoulder.
Aubrey Greene! Illusive, rather moonlit, with “his
silky fair hair brushed straight back, and his’ greenish
eyes—his smile always made her feel that he was
“ getting”? at her. But, after all, he was a cartoonist |

ss VES suisngtatir,

He curled away. He might have stayed a little
longer—there wouldn’t be time for any one else before
those songs of Birdigal’s ! Here came the singer Charles
Powls!, How stout and efficient he looked, dragging
little Birdigal to the piano.

Charming accompaniment—tippling, melodious |

The stout, efficient man began 'to sing. How
different from the accompaniment! The song hit every
note just off the solar plexus, it mathematically pre-
vented her from feeling pleasure. Birdigal must have
written it in horror of some one calling it “ vocal.”
Vocal! Fleur. knew how catching the word was;
it would run like a measle round the ring, and Birdigal
would be no more! Poor Birdigal! But this was
“interesting.” Only, as Michael was saying: “O
my Gawd!”

Three songs! Powls was wonderful—so loyal,


MUSICAL 23


Never one note hit so that it rang ouc like music! Her
mind fluttered off to Wilfrid. To him, of ‘all the
younger poets, people accorded the right to say some-
thing ; it gave him such a position—made him seem to
come out of life, instead of literature. Besides, he had
done things in the war, was a son of Lord Mullyon,
would get the Mercer Prize probably, for “ Copper
Coin.” If Wilfrid abandoned her, a star. would fall
from the firmament above her copper floor. He had no
right to leave her in the lurch. He must learn not to be
violent—not to think physically. No! she couldn’t
let’ Wilfrid slip away ; nor could she have any mote
sob-stuff in her life, searing passions, cu de sacs, after-
maths. Shehad tasted of that; a dull ache still warned
her.

Birdigal was bowing, Michael saying: “Come out
for a whiff! The next thing’s adud!” Oh! ah! Beet-
hoven. Poor old Beethoven !. So out of date—one did
rather enjoy him |!

The corridor, and refectory beyond, were swarming
with the restoration movement. Young men and
women with faces and heads of lively and distorted
character, were exchanging the word “ interesting.”
Men of more massive type, resembling sedentary
matadors, blocked all circulation. Fleur and Michael
passed a little way along, stood against the wall, and
lighted cigarettes. Fleur smoked hers delicately—a
very little one ina tiny amber holder. . She had the air
of admiring blue smoke rather than of making it;
there were spheres to consider beyond this sort of crowd
—one never knew who might be about |—the sphere,
for instance, in which Alison Chartwell moved, politico-
literary, catholic in taste, but, as Michael always put it,
* Convinced, like a sanitary system, that it’s the only


26 THE WHITE MONKEY


sphere in the world; look at the way they all write books
of reminiscence about each other!” They might, she
always felt, disapprove of women smoking in public
halls. Consorting delicately with inconoclasm, Fleur
never forgot that her feet were in two worlds at least.
Standing there, observant of all to left, and right, she
noted against the wall one whose face was screened by
his programme. ‘ Wilfrid,’ she thought, and doesn’t
mean to see me!’ Mortified, as a child from whom a
sixpence is filched, she said:
o There’s Wilfrid! Fetch him, Michael ! ”

Michael crossed, and touched his best man’s sleeve ;
Desert’s face emerged, frowning. She saw him shrug
his shoulders, turn and walk into the throng. Michael
came back.

“ Wilfrid’s got the hump to-night ; says he not fit for
human society—queer old son! ”

How obtuse men were! Because Wilfrid was his pal,
Michael did not see; and that was lucky! So Wilfrid
really meant to avoid her! Well, she would see! And
she said: “I’m tired, Michael); let’s go home.”

His hand slid round her arm,

“ Sorry, old thing ; comealong |”

They stood a moment in a neglected doorway,
watching Woomans, the conductor, launched towards
his orchestra.

* Look at him,” said Michael; “ guy hung out of a an
Italian window, legs and arms all stuffed and flying!
And look at the Frapka and her pinot ae $ atur-
bulent union |

There was a strange sound.

“ Melody, by George!” said Michael. .

An attendant muttered in their ears: “ Now, sir,
I’m going to shut the door.” Fleur had a fleeting view


MUSICAL 47


of L.S.D. sitting upright as his hair, with closed eyes.
The door was shut—they were outside in the hall.

** Wait here, darling: Pll nick a rickshaw.”

Fleur huddled her chin in her fur. It was easterly
and cold.

A voice behind her said:

“Well, Fleur, am 1 going East?”

Wilfrid 1 His collar up to his ears, a cigarette between
his lips, hands in pockets, eyes devouring.

“You're very silly, Wilfrid 1.”

“Anything you like; am I going Hast ?”

“No; Sunday morning—eleven o’clock at the
Tate. We'll talk it out.”

“* Convenu 1”? And he was gone.

Alone suddenly, like that,'Fleur felt the first shock of
reality. Was Wilfrid truly going to be unmanageable?
A taxicab ground up ; Michael beckoned; Fleur stepped
in. Passing a passionately lighted oasis of young ladies
displaying to the interested Londoner the acme of
Parisian undress, she felt Michael incline towards her.
If she were going to keep Wilfrid, she must be nice to
Michael. Only:

“ You needn’t kiss me in Piccadilly Circus, Michael |”

“Sorry, duckie! It’s a little previous—I meant to
get you opposite the Partheneum.”

Fleur remembered how he had slept on a Spanish
sofa for the first fortnight of their honeymoon; how
he always insisted that she must not spend anything
on him, but must always let him give her what he
liked, though she had three thousand a year and he
twelve hundred; how jumpy he was when she had
a .old—and how he always came home to tea. Yes,
he ‘was a dear! But would she break her heart if he
went East or West to*morrow ?


28 THE WHITE MONKEY


Snuggled against him, she was surprised at her own
cynicism.

A telephone message written out, in the hall, ran:
“Please tell Mrs. Mont ’ve got Mr. Gurding Minner.
Lady Alison.”

It was restful. A real antique! She turned on
the lights in her toom, and stood for a moment ad-
miring it. Truly pretty! A slight snuffle from the
cotnet—Ting-a-ling, tan on a black cushion, lay
like a Chinese lion in miniature; pure, remote, fresh
from evening communion with the Square railings.

* I see you,” said Fleur.

Ting-a-ling did not stir; his round black eyes
watched his mistress undress. When she returned
from the bathroom he was curled into a ball. Fleur
thought: ‘Queer! How does’ he know Michael
won't be coming?’ » And slipping into her well-
warmed bed, she too curled herself up and slept. |

But in the night, contrary to her custom, she awoke.
A cry—long, weird, trailing, from somewhere—the
tiver—the slums at. the» back—rousing memoty—
poignant, aching—of her honeymoon—Granada, its
roofs ‘below, jet, ivory, gold; the watchman’s cry,
the lines in Jon’s letter:


“ Voice in the night crying, down in the old sleeping
Spanish city darkened under her white stars.
What says the voice—its clear, lingering anguish ?
Just the watchman, telling his dateless tale of safety?
Just a road-man, flinging to the moon his song?
No! ’Tis one deprived, whose lover’s heart is weeping,
Just his cry: * How long??”


A cry, or had she dreamed it? Jon, Wilfrid,
Michael! No use to havea heart |


CHAPTER IV


DINING


Lapy ALIson CHARWELL, born Heathfield, daughter
of the first Earl of Campden, and wife to Lionel Char-
well, K.C., Michael’s somewhat young uncle, was
a delightful Englishwoman brought up in a set ac-
cepted as the soul of society. Full of brains, energy,
taste, money, and tinctured in its politico-legal ancestry
by blue blood, this set was linked to, but apart from
Snooks’ and the duller haunts of birth and privilege.
It was gay, charming, free-and-easy, and, according to
Michael, “Snobbish, old thing, zsthetically and in-
tellectually, but they'll never see it. They think
theyre the top notch—quick, healthy, up-to-date,
well-bred, intelligent; they simply can’t imagine
their equals. But you see their imagination is de-
ficient. Their really creative energy would go into
a pint pot. Look at their books,—they’re always: on
something—-philosophy, spiritualism, poetry, fishing,
themselves; why, even their sonnets dry up before
they’re twenty-five. They know everything—except
mankind outside their own set. Oh! they work—
they run the show—they have to; there’s no one else
with their brains, and energy, and taste. But they
run it round and round in their own blooming circle.
It’s the world to them—and it might be worse.
They’ve patented their own golden age; but it’s a
trifle flyblown since the war.”

Alison Charwell—in and of this world, so spryly

29


30 THE WHITE MONKEY


soulful, débonnaire, free, and cosy—lived within a
stone’s throw of Fleur, in a house pleasant, architec-
turally, as any in London. Forty years old, she had
three children and considerable beauty, wearing a little
fine from mental and bodily activity. Something of
an enthusiast, she was fond of Michael, in spite of his
strange criticisms, so that his matrimonial venture had
piqued her from the start. Fleur was dainty, had
quick natural intelligence—this new niece was worth
cultivation. But»though adaptable and assimilative,
Fleur had) remained curiously unassimilated; she
continued to whet the curiosity of Lady Alison,
accustomed to the close borough of choice spirits, and
finding a certain poignancy in contact with the New
Age, on Fleur’s copper floor, She met with an
irreverence there, which, not taken too seriously,
flipped: her mind. On that floor she almost felt a back
number. It was stimulating. |

Receiving Fleur’s telephonic enquiry about Gurdon
Minho, she had rung up the novelist. She knew him,
if not well. Nobody seemed to know him well;
amiable, polite, silent, rather dull and austere; but
with a disconcerting smile, sometimes ironical, some-
times friendly. His books were now caustic, now
sentimental. |On both counts it was rather the fashion
to run him down, though he still seemed to exist.

She rang him up. Would he come to a dinner to-
morrow at her young nephew, Michael Mont’s, and
meet the younger generation? His answer came,
rather high-pitched :

“Rather! Full fig, or dinner jacket ?” .

» “How awfully nice of you! they'll be ever se
pleased. Full fig, I believe. It’s the second anniver-
sary of their wedding.” She hung up the receiver


DINING 31


with the thought : ‘ He must be writing a book about
them |”

Conscious of responsibility, she arrived early.

It was a grand night at her husband’s Inn, so that
she brought nothing with her but the feeling of ad-
‘venture, pleasant after a day spent in fluttering over
the decision at Snook’s. She was received only ‘by
Ting-a-ling, who had his back to the fire, and took no
notice beyond a stare. Sitting down on the jade green
settee, she said:

“Well, you funny little creature, don’t you know me
after all this time ? ”

Ting-a-ling’s black shiny gaze seemed saying:
* You recur here, I know; most things recur. There
is nothing new about the future.”

Lady Alison fell into a train of thought: The new
generation! Did she want her own girls to be of it ?
She would like to talk to Mr. Minho about that—they
had had a very nice talk down at Beechgroves before
the War. Nine years ago—Sybil only six, Joan only
four then! Time went, things changed!. A: new
generation! And what was the difference? <1
think we had more tradition!” she said to. herself
softly.

A slight sound drew her eyes up from contéamnplatiée’
of her feet. Ting-a-ling was moving his tail from side
to side on the hearthrug, as if applauding. Fleutr’s
voice, behind her, said:

“Well, darling, I’m awfully late. It was good of
you to get me Mr. Minho. I do hope they'll all
behave. He’ll be between you andime, anyway ;) I’m
sticking him at the top, and Michael at the bottom,
between Pauline Upshire and Amabel Nazing. . You'll
have Sibley on your left, and Vl have Aubrey on my.


32 THE WHITE MONKEY


right, then Nesta Gorse and Walter Nazing ; opposite
them Linda Frewe and Charles Upshire. Twelve.
You know them all. Oh! and you mustn’t mind if
the Nazings and Nesta smoke between the courses.
Amabel will do it. She comes from Virginia—it’s the
reaction. I do hope she'll have some clothes on;
Michael always says it’s a mistake when she has; but
having Mr. Minho makes one a little nervous. Did
you see Nesta’s skit in ‘The Bouquet’? Oh, too
frightfully amusing—clearly meant for L.S.D.! Ting,
my Ting, are you going to stay and see all these people ?
Well, then, get up here or you'll be trodden on. Isn’t
he Chinese ? He does so round off the room.”

Ting-a-ling laid his nose on his paws, in the centre
of a jade green cushion.

“ Mr. Gurding Minner ! ”

The well-known novelist looked pale and composed.
Shaking the two extended hands, he gazed at Ting-a-
ling, and said :

“How nice! How are you, my little man?”

Ting-a-ling did not stir. “You take me for a
common English dog, sir!” his silence seemed to say.

“Mr. and Mrs. Walter Nazon, Miss Lenda Frow.”

Amabel Nazing came first, clear alabaster from her
fair hair down to the six inches of gleaming back above
her waist-line, shrouded alabaster from four inches
below the knee to the gleaming toes of her shoes ; the
eminent novelist mechanically ceased to commune
with ‘Ting-a-ling. ;

Walter Nazing, who followed along way up above
his wife, had a tiny line of collar emergent from
swathes of black, and a face, cut a hundred years ago,
that slightly resembled Shelley’s. His literary pro-
ductions were sometimes felt to be like the poetry of


DINING 33


that bard, and sometimes like the prose of Marcel
Proust. “ What oh!” as Michael said.

Linda Frewe, whom Fleur at once introduced to
Gutdon Minho, was one about whose work no two
people in her drawing-room ever agreed. »Her works
* Trifles ” and ‘‘ The Furious‘Don”’ had quite divided
all opinion. Genius according to some, drivel accord-
ing to others, those books always roused an interesting
debate whether a slight madness enhanced or
diminished the value of art. She herself paid ‘little
attention to criticism—she produced.

“ The Mr. Minho? How iinteresting! I’ve never
read anything of yours.”

Fleur gave a little gasp.

“ What—don’t you know Mr. Minho’s cats? But
they’re wonderful. Mr. Minho, I do want: Mts.
Walter Nazing to know you. Amabel—Mr. Gurdon
Minho.”

“Oh! Mr. Minho—how perfectly lovely! I’ve
wanted to know you ever since my cradle.”

Fleur heard the novelist say quietly :

“T could, wish it had been longer” ; and passed on
in doubt to greet Nesta Gorse and Sibley Swan, who
came in, as) if they lived together, quarrelling over
L.S.D., Nesta upholding him because of his “‘ panache,”
Sibley maintaining that wit had died with the Restora-
tion; this fellow was alive!

Michael followed with the Upshires and Aubrey
Greene, whom he had encountered in the hall. .The
party was complete,

Fleur loved perfection, and that evening was some-
thing of a nightmare. Was it a success? Minho was
so clearly the least brilliant person there; even Alison
talked better, And yet he had such a fine skull. She


34 THE WHITE MONKEY


did hope he would not go away early. Some one
would be almost sure to say: “ Dug up!” or “ Thick
and bald!” before the door closed behind him. He
was pathetically agreeable, as if trying to be liked, or, at
least, not despised too much. And there must, of
course, be more in him than met the sense of hearing.
After the crab soufflé he did seem to be talking to
Alison, and all about youth. Fleur listened with one
ear.

“Youth feels.. .. main stream of life .. . not
giving it what it wants. Past and future getting
haloes . . . Quite! Contemporary life no earthly
just now... No... Only comfort for us—we’ll
be antiquated, some day, like Congreve, Sterne, De-
foe . . . have our chance again... Why? What is
driving them out of the main current? Oh! Prob-
ably surfeit .. . newspapers. . . photographs
Don’t see life itself, only reports . . . reproductions
of it; all seems shoddy, lurid, commercial . . . Youth
says ‘ Away with it, let’s have the past or the future |?”

He took some salted almonds, and Fleur saw his
eyes stray to the upper part of Amabel Nazing. Down
there the conversation was like Association football
—no one kept the ball for more than one kick.” It
shot from head to head. And after every set of passes
some one would reach out and take a cigarette, and
blow a blue cloud across ‘the unclothed ‘refectory
table. Fleur enjoyed the glow of her Spanish room—
its tiled floor, richly coloured fruits in porcelain, its
tooled leather, copper articles, and Soames’ Goya
above a Moorish divan. She headed the ball promptly
when it came her way, but initiated nothing. Her
gift’ was to be aware of everything at once. “ Mrs.
Michael Mont presented ”’ the brilliant irrelevancies of


DINING ‘$5


Linda Frewe, the pricks and stimulations of Nesta
Gorse, the moonlit sliding innuendoes of Aubrey
Greene, the upturning strokes of Sibley Swan, Amabel
Nazing’s little cool American audacities, Charles Up-
shire’s curious bits of lore, Walter Nazing’s subver-
sive contraditions, the critical intricacies of Pauline
Upshire; Michael’s happy-go-lucky slings and
arrows, even Alison’s knowledgeable quickness, and
Gurdon Minho’s silences—she presented them all,
showed them off, keeping hen eyes and ears on the ball
of talk lest it should touch earth and rest. Brilliant
evening ; but—a success P

On the jade green settee, when the last of them had
gone and Michael was seeing Alison home, she thought
of Minho’s “ Youth—not getting what it wants.”
No! Things didn’t fit. “They don’t fit, do they,
Ting?” But Ting-a-ling was tired, only the tip of
one ear quivered. Fleur leaned back and sighed.
Ting-a-ling uncurled himself, and putting his forepaws
on her thigh, looked up in her face. “‘ Look at me,”
he seemed to say, “I’mall right. I get what I want,
and I want what I get. At present I want to go to
bed.”

* But I don’t,” said Fleur, without moving.

“ Just take me up!” said Ting-a-ling.

“Well,” ‘said Fleur, “I suppose— It’s a nice
person, but not the right person, Ting.”

Ting-a-ling settled himself on her bare arms.

“It’s all right,” he seemed to say. “‘ There’s a great
deal too much sentiment and all that, out of China.
Come on!”


CHAPTER V


EVE


Tue Honourable Wilfrid Desert’s rooms were opposite
a picture gallery off Cork Street. The only male
member of the aristocracy writing verse that any one
would print, he had chosen them for seclusion rather
than for comfort. His “junk,” however, was not
devoid of the taste and luxury which overflows from
the greater houses of England. Furniture from the
Hampshire seat of the Cornish nobleman, Lord Mullyon,
had oozed into. two vans, when Wilfrid settled in.
He was seldom to be found, however, in his nest, and
was felt to be a rare bird, owing his rather, unique
position among the younger writers partly to his
migratory: reputation. He himself hardly, perhaps,
knew where he spent his time, or did his wotk, having
a sort of mental claustrophobia, a dtead of being
hemmed-in by people. When the war broke out he
had just left Eton; when the war was over he was
twenty-three, as old a young man as ever turned a
stave. His friendship with Michael, begun in hospital,
had languished and tenewed itself suddenly, when in
1920 Michael joined Danby and Winter, publishers,
of Blake Street, Covent Garden. The scattery enthu-
siasm of the sucking publisher had been roused by
Wilftid’s verse. Hob-nobbing lunches over the poems
of one in need of literary anchorage, had been capped
by the firm’s surrender to Michael’s insistence. The
mutual intoxication of the first book Wilfrid had written


36


EVE 37


and the first book Michael had sponsored was crowned
at Michael’s wedding. Best man! Since then, so far
as Desert could be tied to anything, he had been tied
to those two; nor, to do him justice, had he realised
till a month ago that the attraction was not Michael,
but Fleur. Desert never spoke of the war, it was not
possible to learn from his own mouth an effect which
he might have summed up thus: “I lived so long
with horror and death; I saw men so in the raw;
I put hope of anything out of my mind so utterly, that
I can never more have the faintest respect for theories,
promises, conventions, moralities and principles. I have
hated too much the men who wallowed in them while
I was wallowing in mud and blood. Illusion is off.
No religion and no philosophy will satisfy me—words,
all words. I have still my senses—no thanks to them ;
am still capable—I find—of passion; can still grit
my teeth and grin; have still some feeling of trench
loyalty, but whether real or just a complex, I don’t yet
know. Iam dangerous, but not so dangerous as those
who trade in words, principles, theories, and all manner
of fanatical idiocy to be worked out in the blood and
sweat of other men. The war’s done one thing for
me—conyerted life to comedy. Laugh at it—there’s
nothing else to do!”

Leaving the concert hall on the Friday night, he had
walked straight home to his rooms. And lying down
full length on a monk’s seat of the fifteenth century,
restored with down cushions and silk of the twentieth,
he crossed his hands behind his head and delivered
himself to these thoughts: ‘I.am not going on like
this. She has bewitched me. It doesn’t mean any-
thing to her. But it means hell tome. Ill finish with
it on Sunday—Petsia’s a good place. Arabia’s a good


38 THE WHITE MONKEY


place—plenty of blood and sand! She’s incapable of
giving anything up.. How has she hooked herself
into me! By trick of eyes, and hair, by her walk, by
the sound of her voice—by trick of warmth, scent,
colour. Fling her cap over the windmill—not she!
What then? Am I to hang about her Chinese fireside
and her little Chinese dog ; and have this ache and this
fever because I can’t be kissing her? I'd rather be
flying again in the middle of Boche whiz-bangs |!
Sunday! How women like to drag out agonies!
It’ll be just this afternoon all over again. ‘“ How
unkind of you to go, when your friendship is so
precious tome! Stay and be my tame cat, Wilfrid |”
No, my dear, for once you’re up against it! And—
_soamI, by the Lord! ...’

When in that gallery which extends asylum to British
art, those two young people met so accidentally on
Sunday morning in front of Eve smelling at the flowers
of the Garden of Eden, there were present also six
mechanics in vatious' stages of decomposition, a
custodian ‘and a couple from the provinces, none of
whom seemed capable of observing anything whatever.
And, indeed, that meeting was inexpressive. Two
young people, of the disillusioned class, exchanging
condemnations of the past. Desert with his off-hand
speech, his smile, his well-tailored informality, sug-
gested no aching heart. Of the two Fleur was the
paler and more interesting. Desert kept saying to
himself: “‘ No ‘melodrama—that’s all it would be!”
And Fleur was thinking: ‘If I can keep him ordinary
like this, I shan’t lose him, because he’ll never go away
without a proper outburst.’

It'was not until they found themselves a second time
kafore the Eve, that he said;


EVE 39


“I don’t know why you asked me to come, Fleur.
It’s playing the goat for no eatthly reason. I quite
understand your feeling. I’m a bit of ‘Ming’ that
you don’t want to lose. But it’s not good enough, my
dear; and that’s all about it.”

' “ How horrible of you, Wilfrid ! ”

“Well! Here we part! Give us your flipper.”

His eyes—tather beautiful—looked dark and tragic
above the smile on his lips, and'she said stammering :

* Wilfrid—I—I don’t know. I want time. I can’t
bear you to be unhappy. Don’t go away! Perhaps
I—I shall be unhappy, too ; I—I don’t know.”

Through Desert passed the bitter thought: ‘She
cawt let go—she doesn’t know how.’ But he said
quite softly: “ Cheer up, my child; you’ll be over all
that in a fortnight. I’ll send you something to make
up. Why shouldn’t I make it China—one place is as
good as another? I'll send you a bit of real ‘ Ming,’
of a better period than this.”

Fleur said passionate.) :

“ You’re insulting! Don’t!”

“T beg your pardon, I don’t want to leave you
angry.”

“ What is it you want of me?”

“Oh! no—come! This is going over it twice.
Besides, since Friday I’ve been thinking. I want
nothing, Fleur, except a blessing and your hand. Give
it me! Come on!”

Fleur put her hand behind her back. It was too
mortifying! Hetook her fora cold-blooded, collecting
little cat—clutching and playing with mice that she
didn’t want to eat |

“You think I’m made of ice,” she said, and her
teeth caught her upper lip: “ Well, ’m not!”


4° THE WHITE MONKEY


Desert looked at her; his eyes were very wretched.
“T didn’t mean to play up your pride,” he said. “ Let’s
drop it, Fleur. It isn’t any good.”

Fleur turned and fixed her eyes on the Eve—rum-
bustious-looking female, care-free, avid, taking her fill
of flower perfume! Why not be care-free, take any-
thing that came along? Not so much love in the
world that one could afford to pass, leaving it unsmelled,
unplucked. Runaway! Gotothe East! Of course,
she couldn’t do anything extravagant like that! But,
perhaps What did it matterP—one man of
another, when neither did you really love!

From under her drooped, white, dark-lashed eyelids
she saw the expression on his face, and that he was
standing stiller than the statues. And suddenly she
said: “ You will be a fool to go. Wait!” And
without another word or look, she walked away,
leaving Desert breathless before the avid Eve.


CHAPTER VI


? “sc


“OLD FORSYTE ” AND “OLD MONT”
Movinc away, in the confusion of her mood, Fleur
almost trod on the toes of a too-familiar figure standing
before an Alma Tadema with a sort of grey anxiety,
as if lost in the mutability of market values.

“Father! You up in town? Come along to
lunch, I have to get home quick.”

Hooking his arm and keeping between him and Eve,
she guided him away, thinking: ‘Did he see us?
Could he have seen us ?’”

“ Have you got enough on ?” muttered Soames.

peieags: |. 2?

“That’s what you women always say. East wind,
and your neck like that! Well, I don’t know.”

“No, dear, but I do.”

The grey eyes appraised her from head to foot.

“What are you doing here Pp” he said. And Fleur
theught: ‘Thank God he didn’t see. He’d never
have asked if he had.’ And she answered :

“| take an interest in art, darling, as well as you.”

* Well, ’'m staying with your aunt in Green Street.
This east wind has touched my liver. How’s your—
how’s Michael ? ”

“Oh, he’s all right—a little cheap. We had a
dinner last night.”

_ Anniversary! The realism of a Forsyte stirred in
him, and he looked under her eyes. Thrusting his
hand into his overcoat pocket, he said ;


6i


42 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Twas bringing you this.”

Fleur saw a flat substance wrapped in pink tissue
paper.

* Darling, what is it ?”

Soames put it back into his pocket.

“We'll see later. Anybody to lunch?”

* Only Bart.”

“Old Mont! Oh, Lord!”

“Don’t you like Bart, dear?”

** Like him ?» He and I have nothing in common.”

“T thought you fraternised rather over the state of
things.”

“ He’s a reactionary,” said Soames.

“And what are you, ducky ? ”

\ “1? What should J be?” With these words he
affirmed that policy of non-commitment which, the
older he grew, the more he perceived to be tne only
attitude for a sensible man.

* How is Mother?”

“Looks well. I see nothing of her—she’s got her
own mother down—they go gadding about.”

He never alluded to Madame Lamotte as’ Fleur’s
grandmother—the less his daughter had to do with her
French side, the better.

“Oh!” ‘said Fleur. “ There’s Ting and a cat!”
Ting-a-ling, out for a breath of air, and tethered by
a lead in the hands of a maid, was snuffling horribly
and trying to climb a railing whereon was perched
a black cat, all hunch and eyes.

“Give him to me, Ellen. Come with Mother,
darling |”

Ting'a-ling came, indeed, but only because he’
couldn’t go, perpen and snuffling and turning ‘his
head back.


** OLD FORSYTE”’ AND ‘‘ OLD MONT”? 43


*“ T like to see him natural,” said Fleur.

“Waste of money, a dog like that,” Soames com-
mented. “You should have had a bull-dog and let
him sleep in the hall. No end of burglaries.. Your
aunt had her knocker stolen.”

“TI wouldn’t part with Ting for a hundred
knockers.”

“One of these days you'll be having him stolen—
fashionable breed.”

Fleur opened her front door.» “Oh!” she said,
** Bart’s here, already |”

A shiny hat was reposing on a marble coffer, present
from Soames, intended to hold coats and discourage
moth. Placing his hat alongside the other, Soames
looked at them. They were too similar for words,
tall, high, shiny, and with the same name inside. He
had resumed the “ tall hat” habit after the failure of
the general and coal strikes in 1921, his instinct having
told him that revolution would be at a discount for
some considerable period.

“ About this thing,” he said, taking out the pink
parcel, “I don’t know what you'll do with it, but here
it is.”

‘It was a curiously carved and coloured bit of opal
ina ring of tiny brilliants.

~“ Oh!” Fleur cried: “‘ What a delicious thing |”

“Venus floating on the waves, or something,”
murmured Soames. “ Uncommon. You, want a
strong light on it.”

» “ But it’s lovely. I shall put ite on at once.’

Wenus | If Dad had known! She put; her arms
rovnd his neck to disguise her sense of 2,propos. Soames
re.eived the rub of her cheek against his own well-
skaved face with his usual stillness. Why demonstrate


44 THE WHITE MONKEY


when they were both aware that his affection was
double hers ?

* Put it on then,” he said, “ and let’s see.”

Fleur pinned it at her neck before an old lacquered
mirror. “It’s a jewel. Thank you, darling! Yes,
your tie is straight. I like that white piping. You
ought always to wear it with black. Now, come
along!” And she drew him into her Chinese room,
It was empty.

“‘ Bart must be up with Michael, talking about his
new book.”

“ Writing at his age ? ” said Soames.

“Well, ducky, he’s a year younger than you.”

“I don’t write. Not such a fool. Got a more
new-fangled friends ? ”

** Just one—Gurdon Minho, the novelist.”

“ Another of the new school ?”

“Oh, no dear! Surely you’ve heard of Gurdon
Minho ; he’s older than the hills.”

“ They’re all alike to me,” muttered Soames. “Is
he well thought of P ”

*‘T should think his income is larger than yours.
He’s almost a classic—only waiting to die.”

*“T’ll get one of his books and read it. What name
did you say ?”

“ Get ‘Big and Little Fishes,’ by Gurdon Minho.
You can remember that, can’t you? Oh! here they
are! Michael, look at what Fathet’s given me.”

Taking his hand, she put it up to the opal at her
neck, ‘Let them both see,’ she thought, ‘ what good
terms we’re on.’ Though her father had not seen her
with Wilfrid in the gallery, her conscience still said:
“ Strengthen your respectability, you don’t quite know
how much support you'll need for it in future.”


* OLD FORSYTE’’ AND *‘ OLD MONT” 45


And out of the corner of her eye she watched those
two. The meetings between “Old Mont” and “ Old
Forsyte ”’—as she knew Bart called her father when
speaking of him to Michael—always made her want to
laugh, but’she never quite knew why. Bart knew
everything, but his knowledge was beautifully bound,
strictly edited by a mind tethered to the “ eighteenth
century.” Her father only knew what was of advantage
to him, but the knowledge was unbound, and subject
to no editorship. If he was late Victorian, he was not
above profiting if necessary by even later periods.
“Old Mont”? had faith in tradition; “ Old Forsyte ”
none. Fleur’s acuteness had long perceived a difference
which favoured her father. Yet “Old Mont’s ” talk
was so much more up to date, rapid, glancing, garrulous,
redolent of precise information ; and “ Old Forsyte’s ”
was constricted, matter-of-fact. Really impossible to
tell which of the two was the better museum specimen ;
and both so well-preserved |

They did not precisely shake hands; but Soames
mentioned the weather. And almost at once they all
four sought that Sunday food which ‘by a sustained
effort of will Fleur had at last deprived of reference
to the British character. They partook, in fact, of
lobster cocktails, and a mete risotto of chickens’ livers,
an omelette au rhum, and dessett trying to look as
Spanish as it could.

“ve been in the Tate,” Fleur said; “I do think
it’s touching.”

“ Touching ? ” queried Soames with a sniff.

“Fleur means, sir, that to see so much old English
art together is like looking at a baby show.”

“TI don’t follow,” said Soames stiffly. “ There’s
some very good work there,”


46 THE WHITE MONKEY


“ But not, grown-up, sit.”

“Ah! You young people mistake all this crazy
cleverness for maturity.”

“ That’s not what Michael means, Father. . It’s quite
true that English painting has no wisdom teeth. You
can see the difference in a moment, between it and any
Continental painting.”

“And thank God for it!” broke in Sir Lawrence.
“The beauty of this country’s art is its innocence.
We're the oldest country in the world politically, and
the youngest esthetically.. What do you say, Forsyte? ”

“Turner is old and wise enough for me,” said
Soames curtly. “Are you coming to the P.P.R.S.
Board on Tuesday ?”

“ Tuesday ? We were going to shoot the spinneys,
weren’t we, Michael ? ”

Soames grunted. “I should let them wait,” he said.
“We settle the report.”

It was through “ Old Mont’s ” influence that he hac
received a seat on the Board of that flourishing concern,
the Providential. Premium Reassurance Society, and,
truth to tell, he was not sitting very easily init. Though,
the law of averages was, perhaps, the most reliable
thing in the world, there were circumstances which
had begun to cause him disquietude. He looked round
his nose. Light weight, this narrow-headed, twisting-
eyebrowed baronet of a chap—like his son before him |
And he added suddenly: “‘I’mnoteasy. IfI’d realised
how that chap Elderson ruled the roost, I doubt if
I should have come on to that Board.”

Dne side of “Old Mont’s ”’ face seemed to try to
leave the other.

““Elderson!” he said. “His grandfather was my
gtandfather’s parliamentaty agent: at the time’ of the


ce


‘© OLD FORSYTE’? AND *‘ OLD MONT” 47


Reform Bill; he put him through the most corrupt
election ever fought—bought every vote—used to kiss
all the farmers’ wives. Great days, Forsyte, great
days |”

“And over,” said Soames. “I don’t believe in
trusting a man’s judgment as far as we trust Elderson’s ;
I don’t like this foreign insurance.”

“ My dear Forsyte—first-rate head, Elderson; I’ve
known him all my life, we were at Winchester together.”

Soames uttered a deep sound. In that answer of
“Old Mont’s ” lay much of the reason for his dis-
quietude. On the Board they had all, as it were, been
at Winchester together! It was the very deuce! They
were all so honourable that they dared not scrutinise
each other, or even their own collective policy. Worse
than their dread of mistake or fraud was their dread
of seeming to distrust each other. And this was
natural, for to distrust each other was an immediate
evil. And, as Soames knew, immediate evils are those
which one avoids. Indeed, only that’ tendency,
inherited from his father, James, to lie awake between
the hours of two and four, when the chrysalis of faint
misgiving, becomes so readily the butterfly of panic,
had developed his uneasiness. ‘The P.P.R.S. was so
imposing a concern, and he had been connected with it
so short a time, that it seemed presumptuous to smell
a tat; especially as he would have to leave the Board
and the thousand a year he earned on it if he raised smell
of tat without rat or reason. But what if there were
a tat? That was’the trouble! And here sat “ Old
Mont” talking of his spinneys and his grandfather.
The fellow’s head was too small! And visited by the
cheerless thought: ‘ There’s nobody hete, not even my
own daughter, capable of taking a thing seriously,’ he


48 THE WHITE MONKEY


kept silence. A sound at his elbow roused him. That
matmoset of a dog, on a chair between him and his
daughter, was sitting up! Did it expect him to give
it something ? Its eyes would drop out one of these
days. And he said: “ Well, what do you want?”
The way the little beast stared with those boot-buttons }
“ Here,” he said, offering it a salted almond. “ You
don’t eat these.”

Ting-a-ling did.

“He has a passion for them, Dad. Haven’t you,
darling ? ”’

Ting-a-ling turned his eyes up at Soames, through
whom a queer sensation passed. ‘Believe the little
brute likes me,’ he thought, ‘ he’s always looking at
me.’ He touched the dog’s nose with the tip of his
finger. ‘Ting-a-ling gave it a slight lick with his curly
blackish tongue.

“Poor fellow |” muttered Soames involuntarily, and
turned to “ Old Mont.”

“ Don’t mention what I said.”

“ My dear Forsyte, what was that ? ”

Good Heavens! And he was on a Board with
a man like this! What had made him come on, when
he didn’t want the money, or any more worries—good-
ness knew. As soon as he had become a director,
Winifred and others of his family had begun to acquire
shares to neutralise their income tax—seven per cent.
preference—nine per cent. ordinary—instead of the
steady five they ought to be content with. There it
was, he couldn’t move without people following him.
He had always been so safe, so perfect a guide in the
money maze! To be worried at his time of life! His
eyes sought comfort from the opal at his daughter’s
aeck—pretty thing, pretty neck! Well! She seemed


** OLD FORSYTE’’ AND “f OLD MONT”? 49


happy enough—had forgotten her infatuation of two
years ago! ‘That was something to be thankful for.
What she wanted now was a child to steady her in all
this modern scrimmage of twopenny-ha’penny writers
and painters and musicians. A loose lot, but she had
a good little head on her. If she had achild, he would
put another twenty thousand into her settlement.
That was one thing about her mother—steady in money
matters, good French method. And Fleur—so far as
he knew—cut her coat according to her cloth. What
was that? ‘The word “Goya” had caught his ear.
New life of him coming out? H’m! That confitmed
his slowly growing conviction that Goya had reached
top point again.

“Think I shall part with that,” he said, pointing to
the picture. “‘ There’s an Argentine over here.”

“Sell your Goya, sir?” It was Michael speaking.
* Think of the envy with which you’re now regarded ! ”

** One can’t have everything,” said Soames.

“That reproduction we’ve got for ‘ The New Life’
has turned out first-rate. ‘Property of Soames
Forsyte, Esquire.’ Let’s get the book out first, sir,
anyway.”

“‘ Shadow or substance, eh, Forsyte ?”

Nartow-headed baronet chap—was he mocking ?

““TP’ve no family place,” he said.

“ No, but we have, sir,” murmured Michael; “ ei
could leave it to Fleur, you know.”

“Well,” said Soames, “ we shall see if that’s worth
while.” And he looked at his daughter.

Fleur seldom blushed, but she picked up Ting-a-ling »
and rose from the Spanish table. Michael followed suit.
“* Coffee in the other room,” he said. “ Old Forsyte”
and ‘Old Mont” stood up, wiping their moustaches.


CHAPTER VII


2?


“ OLD-MONT” AND “ OLD! FORSYTE ”

Tue offices of the P.P.R.S. were not far from the College
of Arms. Soames, who knew: that “three dexter
buckles ona sable ground gules”? and a “ pheasant
proper” had been obtained there at some expense by
his Uncle Swithin in the ’sixties of the last century, had
always pooh-poohed the building, until, about a year
ago, he had been struck by the name Golding in a book
which he had absently taken up at the Connoisseurs’
Club. The affair purported to. prove that William
Shakespeate: was really Edward de) Vere, Earl of
Oxford. The mother of the earl was a Golding—so
was the mother of Soames!» \The coincidence struck
him; and he went on reading. The tome left him
with judgment suspended over the main» issue, but
adistinct curiosity as to whether he was not of the same
blood as Shakespeare. Even if the earl were not the
bard, he felt that the connection could only be <tedit-
able, though, so-far as he could make out; Oxford
was a shady fellow. Recently appointed on the Board
of ‘the P.P.R.S., so that he passed the college every
other Tuesday, he had thoight: * Shan’t go spending
a lot of money on it, but might look in one day.’
Having looked in, it was ‘astonishing’ how taken he
had been by the whole thing. Tracing his mother
had been quite like a criminal investigation, nearly as
ramified and fully as expensive.. Having begun, the
tenacity of a Forsyte could hs rdly bear to stop short of


5°


** OLD MONT”? AND '*f OLD FORSYTE”’ 51


the mother of Shakespeare de Vere, even though’ she
would be collateral; unfortunately, he could not get
past a certain William Gouldyng, Ingerer—-whatever
that might be, and he was almost afraid to enquire—of
the time of Oliver Cromwell. There.were still’ four
generations to be unravelled, and he was losing money
and the hope of getting anything for it. This it was
which caused him to gaze askance at the retired building
while passing it on his way to the Board:on the Tuesday
after the lunch’ at Fleur’s.. ‘Two more wakeful early
mornings had screwed him to the pitch of bringing his
dovSts to a head and knowing where he:stood in the
matter of the P.P.R.S.; and this. sudden reminder
that he was spending money here, there and everywhete,
when there was a possibility, however remote, of
financial liability somewhere else, sharpened the edge
of a nerve already stropped by misgivings. Neglecting
the lift and walking slowly up the two flights of stairs,
he “ went over” his fellow-directors for the fifteenth
time. Old Lord Fontenoy was there for his name, of
coutse; seldom attended, and was what’ they called
—“a,dud ”—h’m |—nowadays ; the chairman, Sir Luke
Sharman, seemed always to be occupied in not being
taken fora Jew. \, His nose was straight, but his eyelids
gave cause for doubt.. His surname was impeccable
but his Christian dubious ; his voice was reassuringly
roughened, but his clothes hada suspicious tendency
towards gloss. Altogether a man who, though shrewd,
could not be trusted—Soames felt—to be giving his
whole-mind to other business. As for “ Old Mont”
—whax was the good of a ninth baronet on a Board?
Guy Meyricke, King’s Counsel, last of the three who
had been “ together,” was a:good man ‘in court, no
doubt, but with no time for business and no real sense


$2 THE WHITE MONKEY


of it! Remained that converted Quaker, old Cuthbert
Mothergill—whose family name had been a by-word
for successful integrity throughout the last century,
so that people still put Mothergills on to boards almost
mechanically—rather deaf, nice clean old chap, and
quite bland, but nothing more. A perfectly honest lot,
no doubt, but perfunctory. None of them teally
giving their minds to the thing! In Elderson’s pocket,
too, except perhaps Sharman, and he on the wobble.
And Elderson himself—clever chap, bit of an artist,
perhaps; managing director from the start, with
everything at his finger-tips! Yes! That ‘was the
mischief! Prestige of superior knowledge, and years
of success—they all kow-towed to him, and no wonder !
Trouble with a man like that was that if he once
admitted to having made a mistake he destroyed the
legend of his infallibility. Soames had enough
infallibility of his own to realise how powerful was its
impetus towards admitting nothing. Ten months ago,
when he had come on to the Board, everything had
seemed in full sail; exchanges had reached bottom,
so they all thought—the “ reassurance of foreign con-
tracts” policy, which Elderson had initiated about
a year before, had seemed, with rising exchanges,
perhaps the brightest feather in the cap of possibility.
And now, a twelvemonth later, Soames suspected darkly
that they did not know where they were—and the.
general meeting only six weeks off! Probably not even
Elderson knew; or, if he did, he was keeping know-
ledge which ought to belong to the whole directorate
severely to himself.

He entered the board room without a smile. “All
there—even Lord Fontenoy and “ Old Mont ”—given
up his spinneys, had he! Soames took his seat at the


** OLD MONT” AND ‘OLD FORSYTE” 53


end on the fireside. Staring at Elderson, he saw, with
sudden clearness, the strength of the fellow’s position;
and, with equal clearness, the weakness of the P.P.R.S.
With this rising and falling currency, they could nevet
know exactly their liability—they were just gambling:
Listening to the minutes and other routine business,
with his chin clasped in his hand, he let his eyes move
from face to face—old Mothergill, Elderson, Mont
opposite ; Sharman at the head; Fontenoy, Meyricke,
back to himself—decisive board of the year. He
could not, must not, be placed in any dubious position |
At his first general meeting on this concern, he must
not face the shareholders without knowing exactly
where he stood. He looked again at Hlderson—
sweetish face, bald head rather like Julius Czsar’s,
nothing to suggest irregularity or excessive optimism
—in fact, somewhat resembling that’ of old Uncle
Nicholas Forsyte, whose affairs had been such an
example to the last generation but one. ‘The managing
director having completed his exposition, Soames
directed his gaze at the pink face of dosey old Mother-
gill, and said:

“Tm not satisfied that these accounts disclose our
true position, I want the Board adjourned to this day
week, Mr. Chairman, and during the week I want every
member of the Board furnished with exact details of
the foreign contract commitments which do #of mature
during the present financial year. I notice that those
are lumped under a general estimate of liability. Iam
not satisfied with that. They ought to be separately
treated.” Shifting his gaze past Elderson to the face
of “ Old Mont,” he went on: “‘ Unless there’s a material
change for the better on the Continent, which I don’t
anticipate (quite the contrary), I fully expect those


54 THE WHITE MONKEY


commitments will, put us in Queer Street next
year.”

The scraping of feet, shifting of legs, clearing of
throats which accompany a slight sense of outrage
greeted the words “Queer Street”; and a sort of
satisfaction swelled in Soames; he had rattled their
complacency, made them feel a touch of the misgiving
from which he himself was suffering.

“We have always treated our commitments under
one general estimate, Mr. Forsyte.”

Plausible chap !

* And to my mind wrongly. This foreign contract
business is a new policy. For all I can tell, instead of
paying a dividend, we ought to be setting this year’s
ptofits against a certain loss next year.”

Again that scrape and rustle.

** My dear sir, absurd | ”

The bulldog in Soames snuffed.

“So you say!” he said. “Am I to have those
details ? ””

‘“* The Board can have what details it likes, of course.
But permit me to remark on the general question that
it can only be a matter of estimate. A conservative
basis has always been adopted.”

“ That is a matter of opinion,” said Soames; “and
in my view it should be the Boatd’s opinion after very
careful discussion of the actual figures.”

“Old Mont ” was speaking.

“‘ My dear Fotsyte, to go into every contract would
take us a week, and then get us no further; we can
but average it out.”

“What we have not got in these accounts,” said
Soames, ‘is the relative proportion of foreign risk to
home tisk—in the present state of things a vital matter.”


** OLD MONT’? AND *° OLD FORSYTE”’ 44


The Chairman spoke.

“ There will be no difficulty about that, I imagine,
Elderson. But in any case, Mr. Forsyte, we should
hardly be justified in penalising the present year for
_ the sake of eventualities which we hope will not arise.”

“T don’t know,” said Soames. ‘“ We are here to
decide policy according to our common sense, and we
must have the fullest opportunity of exercising it.
That is my point. We have not enough information.”

That “ plausible chap ” was speaking again:

“ Mr. Forsyte seems to be indicating a lack of confid-
ence in the management.” Taking the bull by the
horns—was he?

“ Am I to have that information ?”

The voice of old Mothergill rose cosy in the silence.

“The Board could be adjourned, perhaps, Mr.
Chairman; I could come up myself at a pinch. Possibly
we could all attend. The times are very peculiar—
we mustn’t take any unnecessary risks... The policy of
foreign contracts is undoubtedly somewhat new to us.
We have no reason so far to complain of the results.
And I am sure we have the utmost confidence in the
judgment of our managing director. Still,’ as Mr.
Forsyte has asked for this information, I think perhaps
we ought to have it. What do you say, my lord?”

“T can’t come up next week. Jagree with the chair-
man that on these accounts we couldn’t burke’ this
year’s dividend. No good getting the wind up before
we must. When do the accounts go out, Elderson ?”

“ Normally at the end of this week.”

“ ‘These are not normal times,” said Soames. ‘“ To
be quite plain, unless I have that information I must
tender my resignation.” He saw very well what was
passing in their minds. A newcomer making himself


c


36 THE WHITE MONKEY


a nuisance—they would take his resignation readily—
only it would look awkward just before a general
meeting unless they could announce “ wife’s ill-
health” or something satisfactory, which he would
take very good care they didn’t.

The chairman said coldly :

“ Well, we will adjourn the Board to this day week ;
you will be able to get us those figures, Elderson ?”

“ Certainly.”

Into Soames’ mind flashed the thought: ‘ Ought
to ask for an independent scrutiny.? But he looked
round. Going too far—perhaps—if he intended to
remain on the Board—and he had no wish to resign—
after all, it was a big thing, and a thousand a year!
No! Mustn’t overdo it |

Walking away, he savoured his triumph doubtfully,
by no means sure that he had done any good. His
attitude had only closed the “all together” attitude
round Elderson. The weakness of his position was
that he had nothing to go on, save an uneasiness, which
when examined was found to be simply a feeling that
he hadn’t enough control himself. And yet, there
couldn’t be two managers—you must trust ane
manager |

A voice behind him tittupped: “ Well, Forsyte, you
gave us quite a shock with your alternative. First
time I remember anything of the sort on that Board.”

“ Sleepy hollow,” said Soames.

“ Yes, I generally have a nap. It gets very hot in
there. Wish I’d stuck to my spinneys. They come
high, even as early as this.”

Incurably frivolous, this tittupping baronet !

“ By the way, Forsyte, I wanted to say: With all
this modern birth control and the rest of it, one gets


** OLD MONT” ‘AND “* OLD FORSYTE”’ 57


uneasy. We're not the royal family; but don’t you
feel with me it’s time there was a movement in
heirs?”

Soames did, but he was not going to confess ta
anything so indelicate about his own daughter.

“ Plenty of time,” he muttered.

“TI don’t like that dog, Forsyte.”

Soames stared.

“Dog!” he said. “ What’s that to do with it?”

“TI like a baby to come before a dog. Dogs and
poets distract young women. My grandmother had
five babies before she was twenty-seven. She was
a Montjoy; wonderful breeders,:you remember them
—the seven Montjoy sisters—all pretty. .Old Mont-
joy had forty-seven grandchildren. You don’t get it
nowadays, Forsyte.”

“ Country’s over-populated,” said Soames grimly.

“By the wrong sort—less of them, more of our-
selves. It’s almost a matter for legislation.”

“ Talk to your son,” said Soames.

* Ah] but they think us fogeys, you know. If we
could. only point to a reason for existence. But it’s
difficult. Forsyte, it’s difficult.”

“ They’ve got everything they want,” said Soames.

“Not enough, my dear Forsyte, not enough; the
condition of the world is ‘on the nerves of the young.
England’s dished, they say, Europe’s dished. Heaven’s
dished, and so is Hell! No future in anything but the
air. You can’t breed in the air; at least, I doubt it
—the difficulties are considerable.”

Soames sniffed.

“ Tf only,the journalists would hold their confounded
pens,” he said; for, more and mote of late, with the
decrescendo of scare in the daily Press, he was regaining


58 THs WHITE MONKEY


the old sound Forsyte feeling of security. “We've
only to keep clear of Europe,” he added.

“ Keep clear and keep the ring! Forsyte, I believe
you've hit it. Good friendly terms with Scandinavia, ~
Holland, Spain, Italy, Turkey—all the outlying countries
that we can get at by sea. And let the others dree

‘their weirds. It’s an idea!” How the chap rattled
on |

“Tm no politician,” said Soames.

“ Keep the ring! The new formula. It’s what
we've been coming to unconsciously !_ And as to trade
—to say we can’t do without trading with this country
or with that—bunkum, my dear Forsyte. The world’s
large—we can.” ‘

“JT don’t know anything about that,” said Soames.
“T only know we must drop this foreign contract
assurance.”

“ Why not confine it to the ring countries? Instead
of ‘ balance of power,’ ‘ keep the ring’! an it’s
an inspiration |”

Thus charged with inspiration, Soames said hastily :

** I leave you here, I’m going to my daughter’s

“ Ah! I’m going to my son’s. Look at thede! poor
devils |”

Down by the Embankment at Blackfriars a band of
unemployed were trailing dismally with money-boxes.

“ Revolution in the bud! There’s one thing that’s
always forgotten, Forsyte, it’s a great pity.’

““ What’s thatP” said Soames, with gloom. The
fellow would tittup all the way to Fleur’s |

“Wash the working-class, put them in clean,
pleasant-coloured jeans, teach *em to speak like you
and me, and there’d be an end of class feeling. It’s
all a matter of the-senses. Wouldn’t you rather share


“OLD MONT” AND “‘ OLD FORSYTE” 39


a bedroom with a clean, neat-clothed plumber’s
assistant who spoke and smelled like you than with
a profiteer who dropped his aitches and reeked of
opoponax? Of course you would.”

“ Never tried,” said Soames, “so don’t know.”

“Pragmatist! But believe me, Fotsyte—if the
working class would concentrate on baths and accent
instead of on their political and economic tosh, equality
would be here in no time.”

“T don’t want equality,” said Soames, taking: his
ticket to Westminster.

The “tittupping ” voice pursued him entering the
tube lift.

“ Fésthetic equality, Forsyte, if we had it, would
remove the wish for any other. Did you ever catch
an impecunious professor wishing he was the King? ”

“No,” said Soames, opening his paper,


CHAPTER VII


BICKET


BENEATH its veneer of cheerful irresponsibility, the
character of Michael Mont had deepened during two
years of anchorage and continuity. He had been
obliged to think of others ; and his time was occupied.
Conscious, from the fall of the flag, that he was on
sufferance with Fleur, admitting as whole the half-
truth: “I/ _y @ toujours un qui baise, et l'autre qui tend
la joue,”’ he had. developed real powers of domestic
consideration; and yet he did not seem to redress
the balance in his public or publishing existence. He
found the human side of his business too strong for
the monetary. Danby and Winter, however, were
bearing up against him, and showed, so far, no signs
of the bankruptcy prophesied for them by Soames on
being told of the principles which his son-in-law in-
tended to introduce. No more in publishing than in
any other walk of life was Michael finding it possible
to work too much on principle. The field of
action was so strewn with facts—human, vegetable
and mineral.

On this same Tuesday afternoon, having long tussled
with the price of those vegetable facts, paper and linen,
he was listening with his pointed ears to the plaint of
a packer discovered with five copies of “ Copper Coin ”
in his overcoat pocket, and the too obvious intention
of converting them to his own use.

Mr. Danby had “ given him the bird ”—he didn’t

ro)


BICKET 61


deny that he was going to sell them, but what would
Mr. Mont have done? He owed rent—and his wife
wanted nourishing after pneumonia—wanted it bad.
‘Dash it!’ thought Michael, ‘I’d snoop an edition
' to nourish Fleur after pneumonia |’

* And I can’t live on my wages with prices what
they are. I can’t, Mr. Mont, so help me!”

Michael swivelled. ‘But look here, Bicket, if we
let you snoop copies, all the packers will snoop copies ;
and if they do, where are Danby and Winter? In the
cart. And, if they’re in the cart, where are all of you ?
In the street. It’s better that one of you should be in
the street than that all of you should, isn’t it 2?”

* Yes, sit, I quite see your point—it’s reason; but
I can’t live on reason, the least thing knocks you out,
when you’re on the bread line. Ask Mr. Danby to
give me another chance.”

“Mr. Danby always says that a packer’s work is
particularly confidential, because it’s almost impossible
to keep a check onit.”

“Yes, sir, I should feel that in futute; but with all
this unemployment and no reference, [Il never get
another job. What about my wife?”

To Michael it was as if he had said “ What about
Fleur?” He began to pace the room; and the young
man Bicket looked at him with large dolorous eyes.
Presently he came to a standstill, with his hands deep
plunged into his pockets and his shoulders hunched.

“Tllask him,” he said; ‘* but I don’t believe he will ;
he’ll say it isn’t fair on the others. | You had five copies ;
it’s ptetty stiff, you know—means you’ve had ’em
before, doesn’t it? What?”

“Well, Mr. Mont, anything that’ll give me a chance,
I don’t mind confessin’. I have ’ad a few previous,


62 THE WHITE MONKEY


and it’s just about kept my wife alive. You’ve no idea
what that pneumonia’s like for poor people.”

Michael pushed his fingers through his hair.

“* How old’s your wife?”

“ Only a girl—twenty.”

Twenty! Just Fleur’s age!

“Tl tell you what I'll do, Bicket; Tl put it up to
Mr. Desert; if he speaks for you, perhaps it may move
Mr. Danby.”

“ Well, Mr. Mont, thank you—you’re a gentleman
we all say that.”

“Oh! hang it! But look here, Bicket, you were
reckoning on those five copies. Take this to make up,
and get your wife what’s necessary. Only for good-
ness’ sake don’t tell Mr. Danby.”

“Mr. Mont, I wouldn’t deceive you for the world—
I won’t sy a word, sir. And my wife—well! ”

A sniff, a shuffle—Michael was alone, with his hands
plunged deeper, his shoulders hunched higher. And
suddenly he laughed. Pity! Pity was pop! It was
all dam’ funny. Here he was rewarding Bicket for
snooping “ Copper Coin!” A sudden longing pos-
sessed him to follow the little packer and see what he
did with the two pounds—see whether “the pneu-
monia ”’ was real or a figment of the brain behind those
dolorous eyes. Impossible, though! Instead he must
ring up Wilfrid and ask him to put in a word with old
Danby. His own word was no earthly. He had put
itin too often! Bicket! Little one knew of anybody,
life was deep and dark, and upside down! What was
honesty? Pressure of life versus power of resistance—
the result of that fight, when the latter won, was
honesty! But why resist? Love thy neighbour as
thyself—but not mote! And wasn’t it a darned sight


BICKET 63


harder for Bicket on two pounds a week to love him,
than for him on twenty-four pounds a week to love
Bicket? ...

“Hallo! ... That you, Wilftid? ... Michael
speaking . ... One of our packers has been snooping
copies of ‘ Copper Coin.’ He’s ‘ got the bird "—poor
devil! I-wondered if you’d mind putting in a word
for him—old Dan won’t listen to me... yes, got
a wife—Fleur’s age ;; pneumonia, so he says. Won't
do it again with yours anyway, insurance by common
gtatitude—what |... Thanks, old: man, awfully
good of you—will you bob in, then? We can go
tound home together... Oh! Well! You'll bob
in anyway. Aurev!”

Good chap, old Wilfrid! Real good chap—under-
neath! Underneath—what ?

Replacing the receiver, Michael saw a sudden great
cloud of sights and scents and sounds, so foreign ’to the
principles of his firm that he was in the habit of rejecting
instantaneously every manuscript which dealt with them.
The war might be “ off”; but it was still “on” within
Wilfrid, and himself. Taking up a tube, he spoke:

“Mr. Danby in his room? Right! If he shows
any signs of flitting, let me know at once.” ...

Between Michael and his senior partner a gulf was
fixed, not less deep than that between two epochs,
though partially filled in by Winter’s middle-age and
accommodating temperament. Michael had almost
nothing against Mr. Danby except that he was always
right—Philip Norman Danby, of Sky House, Campden
Hill, man of sixty and some family, with a tall fore-
head, a preponderance of body to leg, and an expression
both steady and reflective. His eyes were perhaps
rather close together, and his nose rather thin, but he


c*


64 THE WHITE MONKEY


looked a handsome piece in his well-proportioned room.
He glanced up from the formation of a correct judgment
on a matter of advertisement when Wilfrid Desert
came in.

“Well, Mr. Desert, what can I do for you? Sf
down |”

Desert did not sit down, but looked at the engravings,
* at his fingers, at Mr. Danby, and said:

“Fact is, I want you to let that packer chap off,
Mr. Danby.”

“ Packer chap. Oh! Ah! Bicket. Mont told you,
I suppose ?”

“Yes; he’s got a young wife down with pneu-
monia.”

“« They all go to our friend Mont with some tale or
other, Mr. Desert—he has a very soft heart. But I’m
afraid can’t keep this man. It’s a most insidious thing.
We've been trying to trace a leak for some time.”

Desert leaned against the mantelpiece and stared into
the fire.

* Well, Mr. Danby,” he said, “ your generation may
like the soft in literature, but you’re precious hatd in
life. Ours won’t look at softness in literature, but
we're a deuced sight less hard in life.”

**I don’t think it’s hard,” said Mr. Danby, “ only
just.”

“* Are you a judge of justice 2?”

“I hope so.”

“ Try four years’ hell, and have another go.” _

TT really don’t see the connection. ‘The experience
you’ve been through, Mr. Desert, was bound to be
warping.”

Wilfrid turned and stared at him.

“Forgive my saying so, but sitting here and being


BICKET 65


just is much more warping. Life is pretty good
purgatory, to all except about thirty per cent. of
grown-up people.”

Mr. Danby smiled.

We simply couldn’t conduct our business, my
dear young man, without scrupulous honesty in every-
body. ‘To make no distinction between honesty and
dishonesty would be quite unfair. You know that
perfectly well.”

“1 don’t know anything perfectly well, Mr. Danby ;
and I mistrust those who say they do.”

“ Well, let us put it that there are rules of the game
which must be observed, if society is to function at
all.”

Desert smiled, too: “Oh! hang rules! Do it
as a favour to me. I wrote the rotten book.”

No trace of struggle showed in Mt. Danby’s face ;
but his deep-set, close-together eyes shone ‘a little.

“T should be only too glad, but it’s a matter—well,
of conscience, if you like. I’m not prosecuting the
man. He must leave—that’s all.”

Desert shrugged his shoulders.

“ Well, good-bye!” and he went out.

On the mat was Michael in two minds.

* Well 2”

“No go. The old blighter’s too just.”

Michael stivered his hair.

“ Wait in my room five minutes while I let the poor
beggar know, then Pll come along.”

“No,” said Desert, “ I’m going the other way,”

Not the fact that Wilfrid was going the other way—
he almost always was—but something in the tone of
his voice and the look on his face obsessed Michael’s
imagination while he went downstairs to seck Bicket,


66 THE WHITE MONKEY


Wilftid was a rum chap—he went “dark” so
suddenly !

In the nether regions he asked :

“ Bicket gone ?”

“No, sit, there he is.”

There he was, in his shabby overcoat, with his pale
narrow face, and his disproportionately large eyes, and
his sloping shoulders.

“Sorry, Bicket, Mr. Desert has been in, but it’s no
go.”

“No, sir?”

“Keep your pecker up, you’ll get something.”” ©

“Tm afryde not, sir. Well, I thank you very
’eartily; and I thank Mr. Desert. Good-night, sir;
and good-bye | ”

Michael watched him down the corridor, saw him
waver into the dusky street.

“ Jolly!” he said, and laughed... .

The natural suspicions of Michael and his senior
partner that a tale was being pitched were not in fact
justified. Neither the wife nor the pneumonia had
been exaggerated ; and waveting away in the direction
of Blackfriars Bridge, Bicket thought not of his turpi-
tude nor of how just Mr. Danby had been, but of what
he should say to her. He should not, of course, tell
her that he had been detected in stealing ; he must say
he had “ got the bird for cheeking the foreman” ;
but what would she think of him for doing that, when
everything as it were depended on his not cheeking
the foreman? This was one of those melancholy
cases of such affection that he had been coming to his
work day after day feeling as if he had “ left half his
guts ” behind him in the room where she lay, and when
at last the doctor said to him:


BICKET 67


* She’ll get on now, but it’s left her very run down—
you must feed her up,” his anxiety had hardened into
a tesolution to have no more.. In the next three weeks
he had “ snooped ” eighteen “‘ Copper Coins,” including
_ the five found in his overcoat. He had only “ pitched
on” Mr. Desert’s book because, it was “easy sold,”
and he was sorty now that he hadn’t pitched on some
one else’s. Mr. Desert had been very decent. He
stopped at the corner of the Strand, and went over
his money. With the two pounds given him by
Michael and his wages he had seventy-five shillings in
the world, and going into the Stores he bought a meat
jelly and a tin of Benger’s food that could be made
with water. With pockets bulging he took a ’bus,
which dropped him at the corner of his little street on
the Surrey side. His wife and he occupied the two
ground floor rooms, at eight shillings a week, and he
owed for three. ‘ Better py that |,’ he thought, ‘ and
have a roof until she’s well.’ It would help him over
the news, too, to show her a teceipt for the rent and
some good food. How lucky they had been careful
to have no baby! He sought the basement. His
landlady was doing the week’s washing. She paused,
in sheer surprise at such full and molsiateey payment,
and inquired after his wife.

“Doing nicely, thank you.”

“ Well, I’m glad-of that, it must be a relief to your
mind.”

“Tt is,” said Bicket.

The landlady thought: ‘He’s a thread-paper—
reminds me of a shrimp before you bile it, with those

es.”
ee Here’s your receipt, and thank you. Sorry to
"ave seemed nervous about it, but times are ard.”


68 THE WHITE MONKEY


“They are,” said Bicket. “Solong!” |

With the receipt and the meat jelly in his left hand,
he opened the door of his front room.

His wife was sitting before a very little fire. Her
bobbed black hair, crinkly towards the ends, had grown
during her illness ; it shook when she turned her head
and smiled. To Bicket—not for the first time—that
smiled seemed queer, “ pathetic-like,”’ mysterious—as
if she saw things that one didn’t see oneself. Her
name was Victorine, and hesaid: “‘ Well, Vic.? This
jelly’s a bit of all right, and I’ve pyde the rent.” He
sat on the arm of the chair and she put her hand on his
knee—her thin arm emerged blue-white from the dark
dressing-gown.

“Well, Tony ? *

Her face—thin and pale with those large dark eyes
and beautifully formed’ eyebrows—was one that
“looked at you from somewhere ; and when it looked
at you—well! it got you right inside!”

It got him now, and he said: “‘ How’ve you been
breathin’ ?””

“ All right—much better. [ll soon be out now.”

Bicket twisted himself round and joined his lips to
hers. The kiss lasted some time, because all the feelings
which he had not been able to express during the past
three weeks to her or to anybody, got into it. He sat
up again, “ sort of exhausted,” staring at the fire, and
said: “‘ News isn’t bright—lost my job, Vic.”

“Oh! Tony! Why?”

Bicket swallowed.

“Fact is, things are slack and they’re reducin’.”

There had surged into his mind the certainty that
sooner than tell her the truth he would put his head
under the gas'!


BICKET 69


“Oh! dear! What shall we do, then?”

Bicket’s voice hardened.

“Don’t you worry—I’ll get something”; and he
whistled.

“ But you liked that job.”

“Did I? I liked some o’ the fellers; but as for
the job—why, what was it? Wrappin’ books up in
a bysement all dy long. Let’s have something to eat
and get to bed early—I feel as if I could sleep for a
week, now I’m shut of it.”

Getting their supper ready with her help, he carefully
did not look at her face for fear it might “ get him
agyne inside!” They had only been married a year,
having made acquaintance on a tram, and Bicket often
wondered what had made her take to him, eight years
her senior and C3 during the war! And yet she must
be fond of him, or she’d never look at him as she did.

“ Sit down and try this jelly.”

He himself ate bread and margarine and drank cocoa,
he seldom had any particular appetite.

* Shall I tell you what I’d like?” he said; “I'd like
Central Austrylia. We had a book in there about it;
they sy there’s quite a movement. I’d like some sun.
I believe if we ’ad sun we’d both be twice the size we
are. Td like to see colour in your cheeks, Vic.”

** How much does it cost to get out there?”

“A lot more than we can lay hands on, that’s the
trouble. But I’ve been thinkin’. England’s about
done. There’s too many like me.”

“No,” said Victorine; “‘ there aren’t enough.”

Bicket looked at her face, then quickly at his plate,

“ What myde you take a fancy to me?”

‘Because you don’t think first of yourself, that’s


why.”


7 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Used to before I knew you. But I’d do anything
for you, Vic.”

“Have some of this jelly, then, it’s awful good.”

Bicket shook his head.

“If we could wyke up in Central Austrylia,” he said.
“But there’s only one thing certain, we'll wyke up in
that blighted little room. Never mind, I'll get a job
and earn the money yet.”

** Could we win it on a race?”

** Well, I’ve only got forty-seven bob all told, and if
we lose it, where’ll you be? You've got to feed up,
yoa know. No, I must get a job.”

“ They’ll give you a good recommend, won’t
they?”

Bicket rose and heaped his plate and cup.

“They would, but that job’s off—overstocked.”

Tell her the truth? Never! So help him!

In their bed, one of those just too wide for one and
just not wide enough for two, he lay, with her hair
almost in his mouth, thinking what to say to his Union,
and how to go to work to get a job. And in his
thoughts as the hours drew on he burned his boats,
To draw his unemployment money he would have to
tell his’ Union what the trouble was. Blow the
Union! He wasn’t going to be accountable to them |
He knew why he’d sneaked the books; but it was
nobody else’s business, nobody else could understand
his feelings, watching her so breathless, pale and thin,
Strike out for himself! And a million and a half out
o’ work! Well, he had a fortnight’s keep, and some-
thing would turn up—and he might risk a bob or two
and win some money, you never knew. She turned in
her sleep. ‘ Yes,’ he thought, ‘I’d do it agyne .. .”

Next day, after some hours on foot, he stood under


BICKET 71


the grey easterly sky in the grey street, before a plate-
glass window protecting an assortment of fruits, and
sheaves of corn, lumps of metal, and brilliant blue
butterflies, in the carefully golden light of advertised
Australia. To Bicket, who had never been out of
England, not often out of London, it was like standing
outside Paradise. The atmosphere within the office
itself was not so golden, and the money required con-
siderable; but it brought Paradise nearer to take
away pamphlets which almost burned his hands, they
were so warm.

Later, he and she, sitting in the one armchair—ad-
vantage of being thin—pored over these alchemised
pages and inhaled their glamour.

* D’you think it’s true, Tony?”

“Tf it’s thirty per cent. true it’s good enough for me.
We just must get there somehow. Kiss me.”

From around the corner in the main road the rum-
bling of the trams and carts, and the rattling of their
window-pane in the draughty dry easterly wind in-
creased their feeling of escape into a gas-lit Paradise.


CHAPTER IX


CONFUSION


Two hours behind Bicket, Michael wavered towards
home. Old Danby was right as usual—if you couldn’t
trust your packers, you might shut up shop! Away
from Bicket’s eyes, he doubted. Perhaps the chap
hadn’t a wife at all! Then Wilfrid’s manner usurped
the place of Bicket’s morals. Old Wilfrid had been
abrupt and queer the last three times of meeting. Was
he boiling-up for verse ?

He found Ting-a-ling at the foot of the stairs in a
conservative attitude. “I am not going up,” he
seemed saying, “ until some one carries me—at the
same time it is later than usual! ”

** Where’s your mistress, you heraldic little beast ?”

Ting-a-ling snuffed. “I could put up with it,” he
implied, “if you carried me—these stairs are labori-
ous |” ;

Michael took him up. “ Let’s go and find her.”

Squeezed under an arm harder than his mistress’,
Ting-a-ling stared as if with black-glass eyes; and the
plume of his emergent tail quivered.

In the bedroom Michael dropped him so absent-
mindedly that he went to his corner plume pendent,
and couched there in dudgeon.

Nearly dinner time and Fleur not in! Michael went
over his sketchy recollection of her plans. To-day
she had been having Hubert Marsland and that Verti-
ginist—what was his name ?—to lunch. There would


G2


CONFUSION 73


have been fumes to clear off. Vertiginists—like milk
—made carbonic acid gas in the lungs! Still! Half-
past seven! What was happening to-night? Weren’t
they going to that play of L.S.D.’s ? No—that was
to-motrow! Was there conceivably nothing? If so,
of course she would shorten her unoccupied time as
much as possible. He made that reflection humbly.
Michael had no illusions, he knew himself to be com-
monplace, with only a certain redeeming liveliness,
and, of course, his affection for: her. He even re-
cognised that his affection was a weakness, tempting
him to fussy anxieties, which on principle he restrained.
To enquire, for instance, of Coaker or Philps—their
man and their maid—when she had gone out, would
be thoroughly against that principle. The condition
of the world was such that Michael constantly won-
dered if his own affairs were worth paying attention
to; but then the condition of the world was also such
that sometimes one’s own affaits seemed all that were
wotth paying attention to. And yet his affairs were,
practically speaking, Fleur; and if he paid too much
attention to them, he wa3 afraid of annoying her.

He went into his dressing-room and undid his waist-
coat.

‘But no!” he thought; ‘If’she finds me ‘ dressed’?
already, it’ll put too much point on it.” So he did up
his waistcoat and went downstairs again. Coaker was
in the hall.

“Mr. Forsyte and Sir Lawrence looked in about
six, sir. Mrs. Mont was out.» What time shall I serve
dinner 2?” HO diana" s

“Oh! about a quarter past eight. I don’t ‘think
we're going out.”

He went into the drawing-room and passing down


74 THE WHITE MONKEY


its Chinese emptiness, drew aside the curtain. The
square looked cold and dark and draughty; and he
thought: ‘ Bicket—pneumonia—I hope she’s got her
fur coat.’ .He took out a cigarette and put it. back,
If she saw him at the window she would think him
fussy ; and he went up again to see if she had put on
her fur!

Ting-a-ling, still couchant, greeted him plume
dansetti arrested as at disappointment. Michael
opened a wardrobe. She had! Good!..He was
taking a sniff round, when Ting-a-ling passed him
trottant, and her voice said: “ Well, my darling!”
Wishing that he was, Michael emerged from behind
the wardrobe door. Heaven! She looked pretty,
coloured by the wind! He stood rather wistfully
silent.

“ Hallo, Michael! D’m rather late. Been to the
Club and walked home.”

Michael had a quite unaccountable feeling that there
was suppression in that statement. Healso suppressed,
and said: “‘I was just looking to see that you’d got
your fur, it’s beastly cold... Your-dad and Bart have
been and went away fasting.”

Fleur shed her coat and dropped into a chair. “Tm
tired. Your ears are sticking up so nicely to-night,
Michael.”

Michael went on his knees and joined his hands
behind her waist. Her eyes had a strange look, a
scrutiny which held him in suspense, a little startled.

“If you got: pneumonia,” he said, “T should go
clean out of curl.”

“Why on earth should I?”

“You don’t know the connection—never be it
wouldn’t interest you. We’re not going out, are we?”


CONFUSION 73


“ Of course we are. It’s Alison’s monthly.”

“Oh! Lord! If yor’re tired we could cut that.”

a My dear | Impos.! She’s got all sorts of ie}
toming.”

Stifling a disparagement, he sighed out: “ Ribhte l
War-paint P”

“Yes, white waistcoat. I like you in white waist-
coats.”

Cunning little wretch! He squeezed her waist and
rose. Fleur laid a light stroke on his hand, and he
went into his dressing-room comforted. . .

But Fleur sat still for at least five minutes—not pre-
cisely “‘a prey to conflicting emotions,” but the victim
of very considerable confusion. Two men within the
last hour had done this thing—knelt at her knees and
joined their fingers behind her waist. Undoubtedly
she had been rash to go to Wilfrid’s' rooms. The
moment she got there she had perceived how entirely
unprepared she really was to commit herself to what
was physical. True he had done no more than Michael.
But—Goodness |—she had seen the fire she was play-
ing with, realised what torment he was in. She had
strictly forbidden him to say a word to Michael, but
intuitively she knew that in his struggle between
loyalties she could rely on nothing. Confused,
startled, touched, she could’not help a pleasant warmth
in being so much loved by two men at once, nor an
itch of curiosity about the upshot. And she sighed.
She had added to her collection of experiences—but
how to add further without breaking up the collection,
and even perhaps the collector, she could not see.

After her words to Wilfrid before the Eve: “ You
will be a fool to go—wait |” she had known he would
expect something before long. Often he had asked


76 fHE WHITE MONKEY


her to come and pass judgment on his “junk.” A
month, even a week, ago she would have gone without
thinking more than twice about it, and discussed his
“junk”? with Michael afterwards! But now she
thought it over many times, and but for the fumes of
lunch, and the feeling, engendered by the society of the
“ Vertiginist,” of Amabel Nazing, of Linda Frewe, that
scruples of any kind were “ stuffy,” sensations of all
sorts “ the thing,” she would probably still have been
thinking it over now. When they departed, she had
taken a deep breath and her telephone receiver from the
Chinese tea chest.

If Wilfrid were going to be in at half-past five, she
would come and see his “ junk.”

His answer: “My God! Will you?” almost gave
her pause. But dismissing hesitation with the thought :
‘I will be Parisian—Proust |’ she had started for her
Club. Three-quarters of an hout, with’! no more
stimulant than three cups of Chinese tea, three back
numbers of the “ Glass of Fashion,” three back views
of country members “‘ dead in chairs,” had sent her
forth a careful quarter of an hour behind her time.

On the top floor Wilfrid was standing in his open
doorway, pale as a soul in purgatory. He took her
hand gently, and drew her in. Fleur thought with a
little thrill: ‘Is this what it’s like? Dw coté de chez
Swann |’ Freeing her hand, she began at once to flutter
round the “‘ junk,” clinging to it piece by piece.

Old English “ junk ” rather manorial, with here and
there an eastern or First Empire bit, collected by some
bygone Desert, nomadic, or attached to the French
court. She was afraid to sit down for fear that he
might begin to follow the authorities; nor did she want
to resume the intense talk of the Tate Gallery. “ Junk”


CONFUSION 77


was safe, and she only looked at him in those brief
intervals when he was not looking at her. She knew
she was not playing the game according to “ La Gar-
gonne ” and Amabel Nazing; that, indeed, she was in
danger of going away without having added to her
sensations. And she couldn’t help being: sorry for
Wilfrid; his eyes yearned after her, his lips were bitter
to look at. When at last from sheer exhaustion of
“junk” she sat down, he had flung himself at her feet.
Half hypnotised, with her knees against his chest, as
safe as she could hope for, she really felt the tragedy of
it—his horror of himself, his passion for herself. It was
painful, deep ; it did not fit in with what she had been
led to expect ; it was not in the period, and how—how
was she to get away without more pain to him and to
herself ? When she had got away, with one kiss received
but not answered, she realised that she had passed
through a quarter of an hour of real life, and was not at
all sure that she liked it. . ... But now, safe in her
own room, undressing for Alison’s monthly, she felt
curious as to what she would have been feeling if
things had gone as far as was proper according to the
authorities. Surely she had not experienced one-
tenth of the thoughts or sensations that would have
been assigned to her in any advanced piece of literature |
It had been disillusioning, or else she was deficient, and
Fleur could not bear to feel deficient. And, lightly
powdering her shoulders, she bent her thoughts
towards Alison’s monthly.


Though Lady Alison enjoyed an occasional encounter
with the younger generation, the Aubrey Greenes and
Linda Frewes of this life were not conspicuous by
their presence at her gatherings. Nesta Gorse, indeed,


78 THE WHITE MONKEY


had once attended, but one legal and two literary
politicos who had been in contact with her, had com-
plained of it afterwards. She had, it seemed, rent little
spiked holes in the garments of their self-esteem. Sibley
Swan would have been welcome, for his championship
of the past, but he seemed, so far, to have turned up
his nose and looked down it. So it was not the
intelligentsia, but just intellectual society, which was
gathered there when Fleur and Michael entered, and the
conversation had all the sparkle and all the ‘‘ savoir
faire’’ incidental to talk about art and letters by those
who—as Michael put it—“‘ fortunately had not to
faire.”

‘* All the same, these are the guys,”’ he muttered in
Fleut’s ear, “ who make the names of artists and writers.
What’s the stunt, to-night ? ”

It appeared to be in the London début of a lady who
sang Balkan folk songs. But in a refuge to the right
were four tables set out for bridge. They were
already filled... Among those who still stood listening,
were, here and there, a Gurdon Minho, a society
painter and his wife, a sculptor looking for a job.
Fleur, wedged between Lady Feynte, the painter’s
wife, and Gurdon Minho himself, began planning an
evasion. There—yes, there was Mr. Chalfont! At
Lady Alison’s, Fleur, an excellent judge of “ milieu,”
never wasted her time on artists and writers—she could
meet them anywhere. Here she intuitively picked out
the biggest “ bug,” politico-literary, and waited to pin
him. Absorbed in the idea of pinning Mr. Chalfont,
she overlooked a piece of drama passing without.

Michael had clung to the top of the stairway, in no
mood for talk and skirmish; and, leaning against the
balustrade, wasp-thin in his long white waistcoat, with


CONFUSION 79


hands deep thrust into his trousers’ pockets, he watched
the turns and twists of Fleut’s white neck, and listened
to the Balkan songs, with a sort of blankness in his
brain. The word: “ Mont!” startled him. Wilfrid
“was standing just below. .Mont! He had: not been
that to Wilfrid for two years | %

“ Come down here.”

On that half-landing was a bust of Lionel Charwell,
K.C., by Boris Strumolowski, in the genre he had
cynically adopted when June Forsyte gave up supporting
his authentic but unrewarded genius. It had been
almost indistinguishable from any of the other busts
in that year’s Academy, and was used by the young
Charwells to chalk moustaches on.

Besides this object Desert leaned against the wall
with his eyes closed. His face was a study to Michael.

“What’s wrong, Wilfrid?” i

Desert did not move. “ You’ve got to know—I’m
in love with Fleur.”

66 What ] 2?

“Tm not going to play the snake. You're up against
me. Sorry, but there itis! You can let fly!” His face
was death-pale, and its muscles twitched. In Michael,
it was the mind, the heart that twitched. Whata very
horrible, strange, “too beastly’? moment! His best
friend—his best'man? Instinctively he dived for his
cigarette case—instinctively handed it to Desert. In-
stinctively they both took cigarettes, and lighted each
other’s. Then Michael said:

“ Bleur—knows 2?”

Desert nodded: “She doesn’t know I’m telling
you—wouldn’t have let me. You’ve nothing against
her—yet.”” And, still with closed eyes, he added:
*T couldn’t help it.”


Bo THE WHITE MONKEY


It was Michael’s own subconscious thought!
Natural! Natural! Fool not to see how natural! Then
something shut-to within him, and he said: “ Decent
of you to tell me ; but—aren’t you going to clear out ?”

Desert’s shoulders writhed against the wall.

“T thought so; but it seems not.”

“Seems ? I don’t understand.”

“Tf I knew for certain I’d no chance—but I don’t,”
and he suddenly looked at Michael: “ Look here, it’s
no good keeping gloves on. I’m desperate, and Pll
take her from you if I can.”

“Good God!” said Michael.  “ It’s the limit | ”

“Yes! Rub it in! But, I tell you, when I think of
you going home with her, and of myself,” he gave a
dreadful little laugh, “‘ I advise you vot to rub it in.”

“ Well,” said Michael, “as this isn’t a Dostoievsky
novel, I suppose there’s no more to be said.”

Desert moved from the wall and laid his hand on the
bust of Lionel Charwell.

* You realise, at least, that I’ve gone out of my way
—perhaps dished myself—by telling you. Pye not
bombed without declaring war.”

“ No,” said Michael dully.

*“ You can chuck my books over to some other
publisher.” Michael shrugged.

“ Good-night, then,” said Desert. “Sorry for
being so primitive.”

Michael looked straight into his “ best man’s ” face.
There was no mistaking his expression of bitter despair.
He made a half-movement with his hand, uttered half
the word “ Wilfrid,” and, as Desert went down, he
went upstairs.

Back in his place against the balustrade, he tried to
realise that life was a laughing matter, and couldn’t.


CONFUSION 81


His position required a serpent’s cunning, a lion’s
courage, a dove’s gentleness ; he was not conscious of
possessing such proverbial qualities. If Fleur had
loved him as he loved her, he would have had for Wilfrid
a real compassion. It was so natural to fall in love
with Fleur! But she didn’t—oh! no, she didn’t!
Michael had one virtue—if virtue it be—a moderate
opinion of himself, a disposition to think highly of his
friends. And had thought highly of Desert; and—
odd !—he still did not think lowly of him. Here was
his friend trying to do him mortal injury, to alienate the
affection—more honestly, the toleration—of his wife ;
and yet he did not think him a cad. Such leniency,
he knew, was hopeless ; but the doctrines of free-will,
and free contract, were not to him mere literary con-
ceptions, they were part of his nature. ’To apply duress,
however desirable, would not be on his cards. And
something like despair ravaged the heart of him, watch-
ing Fleur’s ingratiating little tricks with the great
General Chalfont. If she left him for Wilfrid!’ But
surely—no—her father, her house, her dog, her friends,
her—her collection of —of—she would not—could not
give themup? But suppose she kept everything, Wil-
frid included!) No, no! She wouldn’t! Only for a
second did that possibility blur the natural loyalty of
his mind.

Well, what todo? Tell her—talk the thing out? Or
wait and watch? For what? Without deliberate
spying, he could not watch. Desert would come to
their house no more.» No! Either complete frankness ;
or complete ignoring—and that meant living with the
sword of Damocles above his head! No! Complete
frankness! And not do anything that seemed like
laying atrap! He passed his hand across a forehead that


$2 THE WHITE MONKEY


was wet. If only they were at home, away from that
squalling and these cultivated jackanapes! Could he
go in and hook her out? Impossible without some
reason! Only his brain-storm for a reason! He must
just bite on it. The singing ceased... Fleur was look-
ing round: Now she would beckon! On the contrary,
she cameitowards him. He could not help the cynical
thought: ‘ She’s hooked old Chalfont |? He loved her,
but he knew her little weaknesses. She came up and
took hold of his sleeve.

“ve had enough,: Michael, let’s slip off; d’you
mind?”

** Quick 1” he said, “before they spot us |”

In the cold air outside he thought: ‘ Now? Or in
her room ??

“J think,” said Fleur, “ that Mr. Chalfont is over-
rated—he’s nothing but a mental yawn. He’s coming
to lunch to-morrow week.”

Not now—in her room |

* Whom do you think to meet him, besides Alison ? ”

“ Nothing jazzy.”

* Of course not ; but it must be somebody intriguing,
Michael. Bother! sometimes I think it isn’t worth it.”

Michael’s heart stood still. Was that a portent—
sign of “ the primitive ” rising within his adored practi-
tioner of social arts ? An hour ago he would have said:

“ You're tight, old dear; it jolly well isn’t!”. But
now—any sign of change was ominous! He slipped
his arm in hers.

“Don’t worry, we'll dig up the just-right cuckoos,
somehow ”

“A Chinese Minister would be. perfect,” mused
Fleur, “with Minho and Bart—four men—two women
cosy. I'll talk to Bat.”


CONFUSION > 83


Michael had opened their front door. She passed
him; he lingered to see the stars, the plane trees, a
man’s figure motionless, collared to the eyes, hatted
down to them, ‘ Wilfrid!’ he thought; ‘Spain!
Why Spain? And all poor devils who are in distress—
the heart—oh! darn the heart!’ He closed the door.

But soon he had another to open, and never with less
enthusiasm. Fleur was sitting on the arm of a chair,
in the dim lavender pyjamas she sometimes wore just
to keep in with things, staring at the fire. Michael stood,
looking at her and at his own reflection beyond in one
of the five mirrors—white and black, the pierrot
pyjamas she had bought him.‘ Figures in a play,’
he thought, ‘ figures in a play! Is it real 2’? He moved
forward and sat on the chair’s other arm.

“Hang it!”? he muttered. “ Wish I were Anti-
nous!” And he slipped from the arm into the chair, to
be behind her face, if she wanted to hide it from him.

“ Wilfrid’s been telling me,” he said, quietly.

Off his chest! What now? He saw the blood come
flushing into her neck and cheek.

“Oh! What business—how do you mean ‘ telling
you ? ? >

“ Just that he’s in love with you—nothing more—
there’s nothing more to tell, is there?” And drawing
his feet up on to the chair, he clasped his hands hard
round his knees. Already—already he had asked a
question! Bite onit! Bite onit ! And he shut his eyes.

“Of course,” said Fleur, very slowly, “ there’s
nothing more. If Wilfrid chooses to be so silly.”

Chooses! The word seemed unjust to one whose
own “silliness” was so recent—so enduring! And
—curious |—his heart wouldn’t bound. Surely it
ought to have bounded at her words !


84 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Ts that the end of Wilfrid, then?”

“The end? I don’t know.”

Ah! Who knew anything—when passion was
about |

“Well,” he said, holding himself hard together,
“ don’t forget I love you awfully ! ”

He saw her eyelids flicker, her shoulders ‘shrugging.

“ Am I likely to?”

Bitter, cordial, simple—which ? Suddenly her hands
came round and took him by the ears. Holding them
fast she looked down at him, and laughed. And
again his heart wou/d not bound. If she did not lead
him by the nose, she ! But he clutched her to
him in the chair. Lavender and white and black
confused—sh¢; returned his kiss. But from the heart ?
Who knew? Not Michael.


CHAPTER X


PASSING OF A SPORTSMAN


Soames, disappointed of his daughter, said: “Tl
wait,” and took his seat in the centre of the jade green
settee, oblivious of Ting-a-ling before the fire, sleeping
off the attentions of Amabel Nazing, who had found
him “just too cunning.” Grey and composed, with
one knee over the other, and a line between his eyes, he
thought of Elderson and the condition of the world,
and of how there was always something. And the
more he thought, the more he wondered why he had
ever been such a flat as to go on to a Board which had
anything to do with foreign contracts. All the old
wisdom that in the nineteenth century had consolidated
British wealth, all the Forsyte philosophy of attending
to one’s own business, and taking no risks, the close-
‘fibted national individualism which refused to commit
the country to chasing this wild goose or that, held
within him silent demonstration. Britain was on the
wrong tack politically to try and influence the
Continent, and the P.P.R.S. on the wrong tack mone-
tarily to insure business outside Britain. The special
instinct of his breed yearned for resumption of the
straight and private path. Never meddle with what
you couldn’t control! “Old Mont” had said:
Keep “the ring!” Nothing of the sort: Mind one’s
own business! That was the real “formula.” He
became conscious of his calf—Ting-a-ling was sniffing
at his trousers.
8


86 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Oh!” said Soames. “It’s you!”

Placing his forepaws against the settee, Tiny-a-ling
licked the air.

“ Pick you up P”’ said Soames, “ You're too long.”
And again he felt that faint warmth of being liked.

‘ There’s something about me that appeals to him,’
he thought, taking him by the scruff and lifting him on
to a cushion. “You and I,” the little dog seemed
saying with his stare—Chinese little object! The
Chinese knew what they were about, they had minded
their own business for five thousand years |

‘I shall resign,’ thought Soames. But what about
Winifred, and Imogen, and some of the Rogers and
Nicholases who had been putting money into this
thing because he was a director? He wished they
wouldn’t follow him like alot of sheep! He rose from
the settee. It was no good waiting, he would walk on
to Green Street and talk to Winifred at once. She
would have to sell again, though the shares had dropped
a bit. And without taking leave of Ting-a-ling, he
went out.

All this last year he had almost enjoyed life. Having
somewhere to come and sit and receive a certain sym-
pathy once at least a week, as in old days at Timothy’s,
was of incalculable advantage to his spirit. .In going
from home Fleur had taken most of his heart with her ;
Soames had found it almost an advantage to visit his
heart once a week rather than to have it always about.
There were other reasons conducing tolight-heartedness.
That diabolical foreign chap, Prosper Profond, had
long been gone he didn’t know where, and his wife
had been decidedly less restive and sarcastic ever since.
She had taken up a thing they called Coué, and grown
stouter. She used the car a great deal. Altogether


PASSING OF A SPORTSMAN 37


she was more domestic. Then, too, he had become
reconciled to Gauguin—a little slump in that painter
had convinced him that he was still worth attention,
and he had bought three more. Gauguin would rise
_ again! Soames almost regretted his intuition of that
second coming, for he had quite taken to the chap.
His colour, once you got used to it, was very attractive.
One picture, especially, which meant nothing, so far
as he could see, had a way of making you keep your
eyes on it. He even felt uneasy when. he thought of
having to part with the thing at an enhanced price.
But, most of all, he had been feeling so well, enjoying
a recrudescence of youth in regard to Annette, taking
more pleasure in what he ate, while his mind dwelt
almost complacently on the state of money. The
pound going up in value; Labour quiet! And now
they had got rid of that Jack-o’-lantern, they might
look for some years of solid Conservative administra-
tion. And to think, as he did, stepping across’ St.
James’ Park towards Green Street, that he had gone
and put his foot into a concern which he could not
control, made him feel—well, as if the devil had been
in it!

In Piccadilly he moused along on the Park side,
taking his customary look up at the Iseeum Club. The
curtains were drawn, and chinks of light glowed, long
and cosy. And that reminded him—some one had
said George Forsyte was ill. Certainly he had not seen
him in the bay window for months past. Well,
George had always eaten and drunk too much. He
crossed over and passed beneath the Club; and a sud-
den feeling—he didn’t know what—a longing for his
own past, a sort of nostalgia—made him stop and
mount the steps,


Bb THE WHITE MONKEY


* Mr. George Forsyte in the Club? ”

The janitor stared, a grey-haired, long-faced chap,
whom he had known from away back in the ’eighties.

“Mr. Forsyte, sir,” he said, “is very ill indeed.
They say he won’t recover, sir.”

“ What?” said Soames. ‘ Nobody told me that.”

“* He’s very bad—very bad indeed. It’s the heart.”

‘“The heart! Where is he 2?”

“ At his rooms, sit; just round the corner. They
say the doctors have given him up. He wi// be missed
here. Forty years ’'ve known him. One of the old
school, and a wonderful judge of wine and horses. We
none of us last for ever, they say, but I never thought
to see him out. Bit too full-blooded, sir, and that’s
a fact.”

With a slight» shock Soames realised that he had
never known where George lived, so utterly anchored
had he seemed to that bay window above.

* Just give me the number of his rooms,” he said.

“ Belville. Row—No. 11, sir; I’m sure, I hope
you'll find him better. I shall miss his jokes—I shall
indeed.”

Turning the corner into Belville Row, Soames made
a rapid calculation. George was sixty-six, only one
year younger than himself! If George was really in
extremis it would be quite unnatural! ‘Comes of
not leading a careful life,’ he thought; ‘always
rackety—George ! When was it I made his will?’
So far as he remembered, George had left his money
to his brothers and sisters—no one else to leave it to.
The feeling of kinship stirred in Soames, the instinct
of family adjustment. George and he had never got
on—opposite poles of temperament—still he would
have to be buried, and who would see to it if not


PASSING OF A SPORTSMAN 89


Soames, who had seen to so many Forsyte burials in
his time? He recalled the nickname George had once
given him, “the undertaker!” H’m! Here was
poetical justice! Belville Row! Ah! No. r1—
regular bachelor-looking place! And putting his
hand up to the bell, he thought: ‘ Women!” What
had George done about women all his life ?

His ring was answered by a man in a black cut-away
coat with a certain speechless reticence.

“My cousin, Mr. George Forsyte? How is he?”

The man compressed his lips.

“ Not expected to last the night, sir.”

Soames felt a little clutch beneath his Jaeger
vest.

** Conscious ? ”

Sa Vesrsiti2?

“Could you show him my card? He might
possibly like to see me.”

“ Will you wait in here, sir?” Soames passed into
a low room panelled up to the level of a man’s chest,
and above that line decorated with prints. George—
a collector!) Soames had never supposed he had it in
him! On\those walls, wherever the eye roved, were
prints coloured and uncoloured, old and new, depicting
the sports of racing and prize-fighting! Hardly an
inch of the red wall space visible! About to examine
them for marks of value, Soames saw that he was not
alone. A woman—age uncertain in the shaded light—
was sitting in a very high-backed chair before the fire
with her elbows on the arm of it, and a handkerchief
held to her face. Soames looked at her, and his
nostrils moved in a stealthy sniff. ‘Not a lady,’ he
thought. ‘Ten to one but there’ll be complications.’
The muffled voice of the cut-away man said:


90 THE WHITE MONKEY


“T’m to take you in, sir.” Soames passed his hand
over his face and followed.

The bedroom he now entered was in curious con-
trast. The whole of one wall was occupied by an
immense piece of furniture, all cupboards and drawers.
Otherwise there was nothing in the room but a dressing-
table with silver accoutrements, an electric radiator
alight in the fireplace, and a bed opposite. Over the
fireplace was a single picture, at which Soames glanced
mechanically. What! Chinese! “A large whitish
sidelong monkey, holding the rind of a squeezed fruit
in its outstretched paw. Its whiskered face looked
back at him with brown, almost human eyes. What
on earth had made his inartistic cousin buy a thing like
that and put it up to face his bed? He turned and
looked at the bed’s occupant. “The only sportsman
of the lot,” as Montague Dattie in his prime had called
him, lay with his swollen form outlined beneath a thin
quilt. It gave Soames quite a turn to see that familiar
beef-coloured face pale and puffy as a moon, with dark
corrugated circles round eyes which still had their
japing stare. A voice, hoarse and sib F but oa
the old Forsyte timbre, said:

“Hallo, Soames! Come to measure me for my
coffin?”

Soames put the suggestion away with a movement of
his hand; he felt queer, looking at that travesty of
George. They had never got on, but !

And in his flat, unemotional voice he said :

“Well, George! You'll pick up yet. You’re no
age. Is there anything I can do for you?”

A grin twitched George’s pallid lips.

“Make me a codicil. You'll find paper im the
dressigg-table drawer.”


PASSING OF A SPORTSMAN 91


Soames took outa sheet of Iseeum Club notepaper.
Standing at the table, he inscribed the opening words of
a codicil with his stylographic pen, and looked round
at George. The words came with a hoarse relish.

“My three screws to young. Val Dartie, because he’s
the only Forsyte that knows a horse from a donkey.”
A throaty chuckle sounded ghastly in the ears of
Soames. ‘“ What have you said?”

Soames read: “I hereby leave my three racehorses
to my kinsman, Valerius Dartie, of Wansdon, Sussex,
because he has special knowledge of’ horses.”

Again the throaty chuckle. “ You’re a dry file,
Soames. Goon. To Milly Moyle, of 12, Claremont
Grove, twelve thousand pounds, free of legacy duty.”

Soames paused on the verge of a whistle.

The woman in the next room |

The japing in George’s eyes had turned to brooding
gloom.

** It’s a lot of money,” Soames could not help saying.

George made a faint choleric sound.

* Write it down, or I'll leave her the lot.”

Soames wrote. “Is that all?”

“Yes. jRead it!”

Soames read. “Again he heard that throaty chuckle,

“ That’s a pill, You won’t let that into the papers,
Get that chap in, and you and he can witness.”

Before Soames reached the door, it was opened and
the man himself came in.

“ The—er—vicar, sir,’ he said in a deprecating
voice, “ has called. He wants to know if you would
like to see him.”

George turned his face, his fleshy grey eyes rolled.

“ Give him my compliments,” he)said, “and say Pll
see him at the funeral.”


gz THE WHITE MONKEY


With a bow the man went out, and there was
silence.

“Now,” said George, “ get him in again. I don’t
know when the flag’ll fall.”

Soames beckoned the man in. When the codicil
was signed and the man gone, George spoke :

“ Take it, and see she gets it. I can trust you, that’s
one thing about you, Soames.”

Soames pocketed the codicil with a very queer
sensation.

** Would you like to see her again ? ” he said.

George stared up at him a long time before he
answered,

“No. What’s the good? Give mea cigar from
that drawer.”

Soames opened the drawer.

“ Ought. you?” he said.

George grinned. “Never in my life done what
I ought; not going to begin now. Cut it for
me.”’ =

Soames nipped the end of the cigar. ‘Shan’t give
him a match,’ he thought. ‘Can’t take the responsi-
bility.’ But George did not ask for a match. He
lay quite still, the unlighted cigar between his pale lips,
the curved lids down over his eyes.

** Good-bye,” he said, “Pm going to have a
snooze.”

“Good-bye,” said Soames. “I—I hope—you—
you'll soon 7
' George reopened his eyes—fixed, sad, jesting, they
seemed to quench the shams of hope and consolation.
Soames turned hastily and went out. He felt bad,
and almost unconsciously turned again into the sitting-
room. The woman was still in the same attitude;


PASSING OF A SPORTSMAN 93


the same florid scent was in the air. Soames took up
the umbrella he had left there, and went out.

“This is my telephone number,” he said to the
servant waiting in the corridor; “let me know.”

The man bowed.

Soames turned out of Belville Row. Never had he
left George’s presence without the sense of being
laughed at. Hadhe been laughed at now? Was that
codicil George’s last joke? If he had not gone in this
afternoon, would George ever have made it, leaving
a third of his property away from his family to that
florid woman in the high-backed chair? Soames was
beset. by a sense of mystery. How could a man joke
at death’s door? It was, in a way, heroic. Where
would he be buried ? Somebody would know—Francie
or Eustace. And what would they think when they
came to know about that woman in the chair—twelve
thousand pounds! ‘If I can get hold of that white
monkey, I will,’ he thought suddenly. ‘It’s a good
thing.’ The monkey’s eyes, the squeezed-out fruit—
was life alla bitter jest and George deeper than himself ?
He rang the Green Street bell.

Mrs. Dartie was very sorry, but Mrs. Cardigan had
called for her to dine and make a fourth at the
lay.
: sp went in to dinner alone. At thé polished
board below which Montague Dartie had now and
again slipped, if not quite slept, he dined and brooded.
“T can trust you, that’s one thing about you, Soames.”
The words flattered and yet stung him. The depths
of that sardonic joke! To give him a family shock
and trust him to carry the shock out! George had
never cared twelve thousand pounds for a woman who
smelled of patchouli. No! It was a final gibe at his


94 THE WHITE MONKEY


family, the Forsytes, at Soames himself! Well! one
by one those who had injured or gibed at him—Trene,
Bosinney, old and young Jolyon, and now George,
had met their fates. Dead, dying, ot in British Col-
umbia! He saw again his cousin’s eyes above that
unlighted cigar, fixed, sad, jesting—poor devil! He
got up from the table, and nervously drew aside the
cuttains. The night was fine and cold. What
happened to one—after? George used to say that he
had been Charles the Second’s cook in a former exist-
ence! But reincarnation was all nonsense, weak-
minded theorising! Still; one would be glad to hold
on if one could, after one was gone. Hold on, and be
neat Fleur! What noise was that? Gramophone
going in the kitchen! When the cat was away, the
mice | People were all alike—take what they
could get, and give as little as they could for it. Well]
he would smoke a cigarette. Lighting it at a candle—
Winifred dined by candle-light, it was the “ mode”
again—he thought : ‘ Has he still got that cigar between
his teeth?’ A funny fellow, George—all his days
a funny fellow! He watched a ring of smoke he had
made without intending to—very blue, he never
inhaled! Yes! + George had lived too fast, or he
would not have been dying twenty years before his
time—too fast! Well, there it was, and he wished he
had a cat to talk to! He took a little monster off the
mantelboard. Picked up by his nephew Benedict in
an Eastern bazaar the year after the War, it had green
eyes—‘ Not emeralds,’ thought Soames, ‘some cheap
stone |”

““ The telephone for yo, sir.”

He went into the hall and took up the receiver.

ee Yes ? >?


PASSING OF A SPORTSMAN 95


“Mr. Forsyte has passed away, sit—in his sleep, the
doctor says.’

“Oh!” said Soames: “ Had he a 2) Sale Many
thanks.” He hung up the receiver.

Passed away! And, with a nervous movement, he
felt for the codicil in his breast pocket,


CHAPTER XI


VENTURE


For a week Bicket had seen “ the job,” slippery as an
eel, evasive as a swallow, for ever passing out of reach.
A pound for keep, and three shillings invested on
a horse, and he was down to twenty-four bob. The
weather had turned sou’-westerly and Victorine had
gone out for the first time. That was something off
his mind, but the cramp of the unemployed sensation,
that fearful craving for the means of mere existence,
a protesting, agonising anxiety, was biting into the
very flesh of his spirit. If he didn’t get a job within
a week or two, there would be nothing for it but the
workhouse, or the gas. ‘The gas,’ thought Bicket,
‘if she will, Iwill. P’mfedup. After all, what is it ?
In her arms I wouldn’t mind.’ Instinct, however,
that it was not so easy as all that to put one’s head under
the gas, gave him a brain-wave that Monday night.
Balloons—that chap in Oxford Street to-day! Why
not? He still had the capital for a flutter in them, and
no hawker’s licence needed. His brain, working like
a squirrel in the small hours, grasped the great, the
incalculable advantage of coloured balloons over all
other forms of commerce, You couldn’t miss the
man who sold them—there he was for every eye to see,
his many radiant circumferences dangling in front of
him! Not much profit in them, he had gathered—
a penny on a sixpenny globe of coloured air, a penny
on evety three small twopenny globes; still their —

96


VENTURE 97


salesman was alive, and probably had pitched him a poor
tale for fear of making his'!profession seem too attractive.
Over the Bridge, just where the traffic—no, up by St.
Paul’s! He knew a passage whete he could stand back
_ ayard or two, like that chap in Oxford Street! But to
the girl sleeping beside him he said nothing. No word
to her till he had thrown the die. It meant gambling
with his last penny. For a bare living he would have
to sell —why, three dozen big and four dozen small
balloons a day would only be twenty-six shillings a week
profit, unless that chap was kidding. Not much
towards “ Austrylia”” out of that! And not a career
—Victorine would have a shock! But it was neck or
nothing now—he must try it, and in off hours go on
~ looking for a job.

Our thin capitalist, then, with four dozen big and
seven dozensmall ona tray, two shillings in his pocket,
and little in his stomach, took his stand off St. Paul’s
at two o’clock next day. Slowly he blew up and tied
the necks of two large and three small, magenta, green
and blue, till they dangled before him. Then with
the smell of rubber in his nostrils, and protruding eyes,
he stood back on the kerb and watched the stream go by.
It gratified him to see that most people turned to look
at him. But the first person to address him was a
policeman, with :

*“‘T’m not sure you can stand there.”

Bicket did not answer, his throat felt too dry. He
had heard of the police. Had he gone the wrong way
to work? Suddenly he gulped, and said: “‘ Give us
a chance, constable; I’m right on my bones. If I’m
in the way, I’ll stand anywhere you like. This is new
to me, and two bob’s all I’ve got left in the world
besides a wife.”


98 THE WHITE MONKEY


The constable, a big man, looked him up and down,
“ Well, we'll see. Ishan’t make trouble for you if no
one objects.”

Bicket’s gaze deepened thankfully.

“ T’m much obliged,” he said; “‘ tyke one for your
little girl—to please me.”

“Tl buy one,” said the policeman, “and give you
a start. I go off duty in an hour, you ’ave it ready—
a big one, magenta,”

He moved away. Bicket could see him watching.
Edging into the gutter, he stood quite still; his large
eyes clung to every face that passed; and, now and
then, his thin fingers nervously touched his wares.
If Victorine could see him! All the spirit within him
mounted. By Golly! he would get out of this some-
how into the sun, into a life that was a life |

He had been standing there nearly two hours, shifting
from foot to unaccustomed foot, and had sold four big
and five small—sixpenny worth of profit—when
Soames, who had changed his route to spite those
fellows who couldn’t get past William Gouldyng
Ingerer, came by on his way to the P.P.R.S. board.
Startled by a timid murmur: ‘Balloon, sir—best
quality,” he looked round from that contemplation of
St. Paul’s which had been his lifelong habit, and stopped
in heer surprise.

“ Balloon!” he said. “ What should I want with
a balloon?”

Bicket smiled. Between those green and blue and
orange globes and Soames’ grey self-containment there
was incongruity which even he could appreciate.

“Children like *em—no weight, sir, waistcoat
pocket.”

““T daresay,” said Soames, “ but I’ve no children,”


VENTURE 99


* Grandchildren, sir.”

** Not any grandchildren.”

“ Thank you, sir.”

Soames gave him one of those rapid glances with
which he was accustomed to gauge the character of the
impecunious. “‘ A» poor, harmless little rat!’ he
thought. “Here, give me two—how much?”

“A shilling, sir, and much obliged.”

“You can keep the change,” said Soames hurriedly,
and passed on, astonished. Why on earth he had
bought the things, and for more than double their
price, he could not conceive. He did not recollect
such a thing having happened to him before. Ex-
tremely peculiar! And suddenly he realised why.
The fellow had been humble, mild—to be encouraged,
in these days of Communistic bravura. After all, the
little chap was—was on the side of Capital, had invested
in those balloons! Trade! And raising his eyes
towards St, Paul ’s again, he stuffed the nasty-feeling
things down into his overcoat pocket. Somebody
would be taking them out, and wondering what was
the matter with him! Well, he had other ii to
think of! .

Bicket, Bowaver stared) after him, elated. Two
hundred and fifty odd per cent. profit on those two—
that was something like. Thefecling, that not enough
women were passing him here, became less poignant—
after all, women knew the value of money, no extra
shillings out of them! If only some more of these
shiny-hatted old millionaires would come along !

At six o’clock, with a profit of three and eightpence,
to which Soames had contributed just half, he began to
add the sighs of deflating balloons to his own; untying
them with passionate care he watched his coloured


100 THE WHITE MONKEY


hopes one by one collapse, and stored them in the
drawer of his tray. Taking it under his arm, he moved
his tired legs in the direction of the Bridge. In a full
day he might make four to five shillings—Well, it
would just keep them alive, and something might turn
up! He was his own master, anyway, accountable
neither to employer nor to union. That knowledge
gave him a curious lightness inside, together with the
fact that he had eaten nothing since breakfast.

‘Wonder if he was an alderman,’ he thought;
‘ they say those aldermen live on turtlesoup.’ Nearing
home, he considered nervously what to do with the
tray? How prevent Victorine from knowing that he
had joined the ranks of Capital, and spent his day in
the gutter? Ill luck! She was at the window! He
must put a good face on it. And he went in whistling.

““What’s that, Tony?” she said, pointing to the
tray. —

* Ah! ha! Great stunt—this! Look ’ere!”

Taking a balloon out from the tray, he blew. He
blew with a desperation he had not yet put into the
process. They said the things would swell to five feet
in circumfezence. He felt somehow that if he could
get it to attain those proportions, it would soften
everything. Under his breath the thing blotted out
Victorine, and the room, till there was just the globe
of coloured air. Nipping its neck between thumb and
finger, he held it up, and said :

“There you are; not bad value for sixpence, old
girl!” and he peered round it. Lord, she was crying !
He let the “ blymed” thing go; it floated down, the
air slowly evaporating till a little crinkled wreck rested
on the dingy carpet. Clasping her heaving shoulders,
he said desperately :


VENTURE 101


“ Cherio, my dear, don’t quarrel with bread and
butter. I shall get a job, this is just to tide us over.
Pd do a lot worse than that for you. Come on, and
get my tea, I’m hungry, blowin’ up those things.”

She stopped crying, looked up, said nothing—
mysterious with those big eyes! You’d say she had
thoughts! But what they were Bicket could not tell.
Under the stimulus of tea, he achieved a certain bravado
about his new profession. To be your own master !
Go out when you liked, come home when you liked—
lie in bed with Vic if he jolly well pleased. A lot in
that! And there rose in Bicket something truly
national, something free and happy-go-lucky, resenting
regular work, enjoying a spurt, and a laze-off, craving
independence—something that accounted for the
national life, the crowds of little shops, of middlemen,
casual workers, tramps, owning their own souls in their
own good time, and damning the consequences—
something inherent in the land, the race, before the
Saxons and their conscience and their industry came in
—something that believed in swelling and collapsing
coloured air, demanded pickles and high flavours
without nourishment—yes, all that something exulted
above Bicket’s kipper and his tea, good and strong.
He would rather sell balloons than be a packer any day,
and don’t let Vic forget it! And when she was able
to take a job, they would get on fine, and not be long
before they’d saved enough to ger out of it to where
those blue butterflies came from. And he spoke of
Soames. A few more aldermen without children—
say two a day, fifteen bob a week outside legitimate
trade. Why, in under a year they’d have the money !
And once away, Vic would blow out like one of those
balloons; she’d be twice the size, and a colour in her


rOR THE WHITE MONKEY


cheeks to lay over that orange and magenta. Bicker
became full of air. And the girl, his wife, watched
with her large eyes and spoke little; but she did not
cry again, or, indeed, throw any water, warm or co.d,
on him who sold balloons,


CHAPTER XIf


FIGURES AND FACTS


Wir the exception of old Fontenoy—in absence as in
ptesence ornamental—the Board was again full;
Soames, conscious of special ingratiation in the manner
of “that chap” Elderson, prepared: himself for the
worst. The figures were before them; a somewhat
colourless show, appearing to disclose a state of things
which would pass muster, if within the next six months
there were no further violent disturbances of currency
exchange. The proportion of foreign business to
home business was duly expressed in terms of two. to
seven; German business, which constituted the bulk
of the foreign, had been lumped—Soames noted—in
the middle section, of countries only half bankrupt,
and taken at what might be called a conservative
estimate. |

During the silence which reigned, while each member
of the Board digested the figures, Soames perceived ~
more clearly than ever the quandary he was in. Cer-
tainly, these figures would hardly justify the foregoing
of the dividend earned on the past year’s business. But
suppose there were another Continenta] crash and they
became liable on the great bulk of their foreign business
it might swamp all profits on home business next year,
and more besides. And then his uneasiness about
Elderson himself—founded he could not tell on what,
intuitive, perhaps silly.

103


104 THE WHYrws MONKEY


“Well, Mr. Forsyte,” the chairman was speaking ;
“ there are the figures. Are you satisfied ?”

Soames looked up; he had taken a resolution.

“I will agree to this year’s dividend on condition
that we drop this foreign business in future, lock, stock
and barrel.’ The manager’s eyes, hard and bright,
met his, then turned towards the chairman.

“That appears to savour of the panicky,” he said;
“the foreign business is responsible for a good thitd
of our profit this year.”

The chairman seemed to garner the expressions of
his fellow-directors, before he said :

“There is nothing in the foreign situation at the
moment, Mr. Forsyte, which gives particular cause for
alarm. I admit that we should watch it closely

“You can’t,” interjected Soames. “ Here we are
four yeats from the Armistice, and we know no more
where we stand than we did then. If Id realised our
commitment to this policy, I should never have come
on the Board. We must drop it.”

“ Rather an extreme view. And hardly a matter we
can decide in a moment.”

The murmur of assent, the expression, faintly ironical,
of “that chap’s ” lips, jolted the tenacity in Soames.

“Very well! Unless you’re prepared to tell the
shareholders in the report that we are dropping foreign
business, you drop me. I must be free to raise the
question mysélf at the general meeting.” He did not
miss the shift and blink in the manager’s eyes. That
shot had gone home!

The Chairman said :

“You put a pistol to our heads.”

‘Iam responsible to the shareholders,” said Scunhddt
**and I shall do my duty by them.”


FIGURES AND FACTS 10


~ So we all are, Mr. Forsyte; and I hope we shall
all do our duty.”

** Why not confine the foreign business to the small
countries—their currency is safe enough?”

“Old Mont,” and his precious “ ring 1”

*“ No,” said Soames, “ we must go back to safety.”

** Splendid isolation, Forsyte ? ”’

** Meddling was all very well in the war, but in peace
—politics or business—this half-and-half interference
is no good. We can’t control the foreign situation.”

He looked around him, and was instantly conscious
that with those words he had struck a chord. ‘I’m
going through with this!’ he thought.

“I should be glad, Mr. Chairman ”—the manager
was speaking—“if I might say a word. The policy
was of my initiation, and I think I may claim that it has
been of substantial benefit to the Society so far. When,
however, a member of the Board takes so strong a view
against its continuance, I certainly don’t press the
Board to continue it. The times are uncertain, and
atisk, of course, is involved, however conservative our
estimates.’

‘ Now why ?’ thought Soames: ‘ What’s he ratting
fogs? 3th ui%

“That’s very handsome of you, Elderson; Mr.
Chairman, I think we may say that is very hatdepine of
our manager.”

Old Dosey Cosey! Handsome! The old woman!

The Chairman’s rather harsh voice broke a silence.

“This is a very serious point of policy. I should
have been glad to have Lord Fontenoy present.”

“If 1 am to endorse the report,” said Soames shortly,
“it must be decided to-day. I have made up my mind.
Bug please yourselves,”


106 ‘HE WHITE MONKEY


He threw in those last three words from a sort of
fellow feeling—it was unpleasant to be dragooned!
A moment’s silence, and then discussion assumed that
random volubility which softens a decision already
forced on one. A quarter of an hour thus passed
before the Chairman said :

“We are agreed then, gentlemen, that the report
shall contain the announcement that, in view of
Continental uncertainty, we are abandoning foreign
risks for the present.”

Soames had won. | Relieved and puzzled, he walked
away alone.

He had shown character; their respect for him had
gone up, he could see; their liking for him down, if
they’d ever had any—he didn’t know! But why had
Elderson veered round? He recalled the shift and
blink of the fellow’s steely eyes at the idea of the
question being raised at the general meeting.

That had done it! But why! Were the figures
faked? Surely ‘not! That would be too difficult,
in the face of the accountants. If Soames had faith;
it was in chartered accountants. Sandis and Jevon
wete tip-top people. Itcouldn’t bethat! He glanced
up from the pavement. The dome of St. Paul’s wag
dim already in evening sky—nothing to be had out of
it! He felt badly in need of some one to talk to;
but there was nobody; and he quickened his pace
among the hurrying crowd. His hand, driven deep
into his overcoat pocket, came into sudden contact
with some foreign sticky substance. ‘Gracious!’ he
thought: ‘those things!” Should he drop them in
the gutter? If only there were a child he could take
them home to! He must get Annette to speak to
Fleur. He knew what came of bad habits from jis


FIGURES AND FACTS 107


own experience of long ago. Why shouldn’t he speak
to her himself? He was staying the night there!
But there came on him a helpless sense of ignorance.
These young people! What did they really think and
feel? Was old Mont right? Had they given up
interest in everything except the moment, abandoned
all belief in continuity, and progress P True enough
that Europe was in Queer Street. But look at the
state of things after the Napoleonic Wars. Hecouldn’t
remember his grandfather “ Superior Dosset,” the old
chap had died: five years before he was born, but he
perfectly remembered how Aunt Ann, born in 1799,
used to talk about “ that dreadful Bonaparte—we used
to call him Boney, my dear” ;_ of how her father could
get eight or ten per cent. for his money ; and of what
-an impression “those Chartists ?’? had made on Aunts
Juley and Hester, and that was long afterwards. Yet,
in spite of all that, look at the Victorian era—a golden
age, things worth collecting, children worth having!
Why not again ? Consols had risen almost continuously
since Timothy died. Even if Heaven and Hell had
gone, they couldn’t be the reason; none of his uncles
had believed in either, and yet had all made fortunes,
and all had families, except Timothy and Swithin. No]
It couldn’t be the want of Heaven and Hell! What,
then, was the reason of the change—if change there
really were? And suddenly it was revealed to Soames.
They talked too much—too much and too fast! They
got to the end of interest in this and that and the other.
They ate life and threw away the rind, and—and
By the way, he must buy that picture of George’s!] . . .
Had these young folk more mind than his own genera-
tion? And ifso—why? Was it diet? That lobster
cocktail Fleur had given him the Sunday before last.


108 THE WHITE MONKEY


He had eaten the thing—very nasty! But it hadn’t
made him want to talk: No! He didn’t think it
could be diet. Besides—Mind! Where were the
minds now that equalled the Victorians—Darwin,
Huxley, Dickens, Disraeli, even old Gladstone?
Why, he remembered judges and advocates who seemed
giants.compared with those of the present day, just as
he remembered that the judges of James his father’s
youth had seemed giants to James compared with those
of Soames’ prime. According to that, mind was
steadily declining. It must be something else. There
was a thing they called psycho-analysis, which so far
as he could understand attributed people’s action not
to what they ate at breakfast, or the leg they got out
of bed with, as in the good old days, but to some shock
they had received in the remote past and entirely
forgotten. The subconscious mind! Fads! Fads
and microbes! The fact was this generation had no
digestion. His father and his uncles had all complained
of liver, but they had never had anything the matter with
them—no need of any of these vitamins, false teeth,
mental healing, newspapers, psycho-analysis, spiritual-
ism, birth control, osteopathy, broadcasting, and what
not. ‘Machines!’ thought Soames. ‘That’s it—
I shouldn’t wonder!” How could you believe in
anything when everything was going round so fast ?
When you couldn’t count your chickens—they ran
aboutso ? But Fleur had gota good little head on her |
‘Yes,’ he mused, ‘and French teeth, she can digest
anything. Two years! I’ll speak to her before she
gets the habit confirmed. Her mother was quick
enough about it |’

And perceiving the ‘Connoisseurs’ Club in front of
him, he went in.


FIGURES AND FACTS 109


The hall porter came out of his box. A gentleman
was waiting.

“ What gentleman ?”’ said Soames, sidelong.

**I think he’s your nephew, sir, Mr. Dartie.’

“Val Dartie! H’m! Where?”

“In the little room, sir.”

The little room—all the accommodation considered
worthy of such as were not Connoisseurs—was at the
end of a passage, and in no taste at all, as if the Club
were saying: “ See what it is not to be one of us!”
Soames entered it, and saw Val Dartie smoking a cigar-
ette and gazing with absorption at the only object of
interest, his own reflection in the glass above the fire.

He never saw his nephew without wondering when
he would say: “ Look here, Uncle Soames, I’m up
a stump.” Breeding race horses! There could only
be one end to that !

* Well?” he said, “ how are you?”

The face in the glass turned round, and became the
back of a clipped sandyish head.

“Oh! bobbish, thanks! Yow look all right, Uncle
Soames. I just wanted to ask you: Must I take these
screws of old George Forsyte’s? They're dashed
bad.”

* Gift horse in the mouth ?)’’ said Soames.

“Well,” said Val, “ but they’re so dashed bad; by
the time I’ve paid legacy duty, boxed them to a sale,
and sold them, there won’t be a sixpence. One of
them falls down when you look at it. And the other
two are broken-winded. The poor old boy kept
them, because he couldn’t get rid of them. They’re
about five hundred years old.”

“Thought you were fond of horses,” said Soames.

€Can’t you turn them out P”


IIo THE WHITE MONKEY


“Yes,” said Val, drily; ‘ but ’ve got my living to ©
make. I haven’t told my wife, for fear she should
suggest that. I’m afraid I might see them in my
dreams ifI sold them. ‘They’re only fit for the kennels.
Can I write to the executors and say I’m not rich enough
to take them ? ”

“You can,” said Soames, and the words: ‘‘ How’s
your wife ? ” died unspoken on his lips. She was the
daughter of his enemy, young Jolyon. That fellow
was dead, but the fact remained. \.

“IT will, then,” said Val. \“‘ How did his funeral go
off 2”

“ Very simple affair—I had nothing to do with it.”
The days of funerals were over. No flowers, no
horse, no plumes—a motor hearse, a couple of cars or
so, was all the attention paid nowadays to the dead.
Another sign of the times |

rg iat. staying the night at Green Street,” said Val.
“I suppose you’re not there, are you 2”

“No,” said Soames, and did not miss the relief
in his nephew’s countenance.

“Oh! by the way, Uncle Gacdcaegt sade you advise
me to buy P.P.R.S. shares 2?”

“Onthecontrary. I’m going to advise your mother
tosell. Tell her I’m coming in to-morrow.”

“Why? I thought

“* Never mind my reasons |” said Soames Bhoriis

** So long, then |”

Exchanging a chilly hand-shake, he ‘vasiihiod his
nephew withdraw.

So long! \ An expression, old.as the Boer war, that
he had never got used to—meant nothing so far as he
could see! He entered the reading-room. A number
of Connoisseurs were sitting and standing about, and


FIGURES AND FACTS iit


Soames, least clubbable of men, sought the solitude
of an embrasured window.’ He sat there polishing
the nail of one forefinger against the back of the other,
and chewing the cud of life. After all, what was the
point of anything? There was George! He had
had an easy life—never done any work!’ And here
was himself, who had done a lot of work |!) Andsooner
ot later they would bury him too, with a motor heatse
probably! And there was his son-in-law, young Mont,
full of talk about goodness knew what—and that thin-
cheeked chap who had sold him the balloons this
afternoon. And old Fontenoy, and that waiter over
there; and the out-of-works and the in-works ; and
those chaps in Parliament, and the parsons in their
. pulpits—what were they all for? There was the old
gardener down at Mapledurham pushing ‘his foller
over and over the lawn, week after week, and if he:
didn’t, what would the lawn be like? That was life—
gardener rolling lawn! Put it that there was another
life—he didn’t believe it, but for the sake of argument
—that life must be just the same. Rolling lawn—to
keep it lawn! ‘What point in lawn? Conscious of
pessimism, he rose. He had better be getting back to
Fleur’s—they dressed for dinner! He supposed there
was something in dressing for dinner, but it was like
lawn—you came unrolled—undtessed again, and so it
went on! Over and over and over to keep up to
a pitch, that was—ah! what was the pitch for ?

Turning into South Square, he cannoned into a
young man, whose head was craned back as if looking
after some one he had patted from. Uncertain
whether to apologise to or wait for an apology, Soames
stood still.

The young man said abruptly: “Sorry, sit,” and


112 THE WHITE MONKEY


moved on; dark, neat-looking chap with a hungry
look obyiously unconnected with his stomach. Mut-
muring: “ Not at all!’ Soames moved forward and
rang his daughter’s bell. She opened to him herself.
She was in hat and furs—just in. The young man re-
curred to Soames. Had he left her there? What
a pretty face it was! He should certainly speak to her.
If she once took to gadding about !

He put it off, however, till he was about to say
“ Good-night ”—Michael having gone to the political
meeting of a Labour candidate, as if he couldn’t find
something better to do |!

“Now you’ve been married two years, my child,
Isuppose you'll be looking towards the future. There’s
a great deal of nonsense talked about children. The
whole thing’s much simpler. I hope you feel that.”

Fleur was leaning back among the cushions of the
settee, swinging her foot. Her eyes became a little
restless, but her colour did not change.

“ Of course!” she said; “only there’s no hurry,
Dad.”

“ Well, I don’t know,” Soames murmured. ‘“‘ The
French and the royal family have a very sound habit of
getting it over early. There’s many a slip, and it keeps
them out of mischief. You're very attractive, my girl
—I don’t want to see you take too much to gad-about
ways. You've got all sorts of friends.”

“ Yes,” said Fleur.

“You get on well with Michael, don’t you?”

pO bAvyess7):

“Well, then, wny not? You must remember that
your som will be a what-you-call-it.”

In those words he compromised with his instinctive
dislike of titles and flummery of that nature,


FIGURES AND FACTS Il3


“Tt mightn’t be a son,” said Fleur.

* At your age that’s easily remedied.”

“Oh, I don’t want a lot, Dad. One, perhaps, ot
two.”

“ Well,” said Soames, “I should almost prefer a
' daughter, something like—well, something like you.”

Her softened eyes flew, restive, from his face to her
foot, to the dog, all over the room.

“1 don’t know, it’s a tie—like digging your own
grave ina way.”

'. “T shouldn’t put it as high as that,” murmured
Soames, persuasively.

“No man would, Dad.”

“ Your mother wouldn’t have got on at all without
you,” and recollection of how near her mother had been
to not getting on at all with her—of how, but for him,
she would have made a mess of it; reduced him to silent
contemplation of the restive foot.

“ Well,” he said, at last, “I thought I’d mention it..
I—I’ve got your happiness at heart.”

Fleur rose and kissed his forehead.

“T know, Dad,” she said: “Dm a selfish pig. Pll
think about it. In fact, I—I have thought about it.”

“ That’s right,” said Soames; “ that’s right!
You’ve a good head on you—it’s a great consolation to
me. Good-night, my dear!”

And he went up to his bed. If there was point in
anything, it was in perpetuation of oneself, though, of
course, that begged the question. ‘ Wonder,’ he
thought, ‘if I ought to have asked her whether that
young man 1’ But young people were best left
alone. ‘The fact was, he didn’t understand them. His
eye lighted on the paper bag containing those—those
things he had bought. He had brought them up from


114 THE WHITE MONKEY


his overcoat to get rid of them—but how? Put
into the fire, they would make a smell. He stood at
his dressing-table, took one up and looked at it.
Good Lord! And, suddenly, rubbing ¢he mouth-
piece with his handkerchief, he began to blow the thing
up. He blew until his cheeks were tired, and then,
nipping the aperture, took a bit of the dental cotton he
used on his teeth every night and tied it up. There
the thing was! With a pettish gesture he batted the
balloon. Off it flew—purple and extravagant, alighting
on his bed. H’m! He took up the other, and did the
same to it. Purple and green! The deuce! If any
onecameinandsaw! Hethrew up the window, batted
them, balloon after balloon, into the night, and shut
the window down. There they’d bein the dark, float-
ing about. His lips contracted in a nervous grin.
People would see them in the morning. Well! What
else could you do with things like that P


CHAPTER XII


TENTERHOOKS


MicuaEt had gone to the Labour candidate’s meet-
ing partly because he wanted to, and partly out of
fellow feeling for “ old Forsyte,” whom he was always
conscious of having robbed. His father-in-law had
been very decent about Fleur, and he liked the “ old
man” to have her to himself when he could.

In a constituency which had much casual and no
trades-union labour to speak of, the meeting would be
one of those which enabled the intellectuals of the
Party to get it “off their chests.” Sentiment being
“slop,” and championship mere condescension, one
might look for sound economic speeches which left
out discredited factors, such as human nature. Michael
was accustomed to hearing people disparaged for de-
precating change because human nature was constant ;
he was accustomed to hearing people despised for feeling
compassion; he knew that one ought to be purely
economic. And anyway that kind of speech was
preferable to the tub-thumpings of the North or of the
Park, which provoked a nasty underlying class spirit
in himself.

The meeting was in full swing when he arrived, the
candidate pitilessly exposing the fallacies of a  capi-
talism which, in his view, had brought on the war.
For fear that it should bring on another, it must be
changed for a system which would ensure that nations

11g


116 THE WHITE MONKEY


should not want anything too much. ‘The individual
—said the candidate—was in every respect superior to
the nation of which he formed a part; and the problem
before them was to secure an economic condition which
would enable the individual to function freely in his
native superiority. In that way alone, he said, would
they lose those mass movements and emotions which
imperilled the sanity of the world. He spoke well;
Michael listened, purring almost audibly, till he found
that he was thinking of himself, Wilfrid and Fleur.
Would he ever function so freely in a native superiority
that he did not want Fleur too much? And did he
wish to? He did not. That seemed to introduce
human nature into the speaker’s argument. Didn’t
everybody want something too much? Wasn’t it
natural? And if so, wouldn’t there always be a collec-
tive wanting too much—poolings of primary desire,
such as the desire of keeping your own head above
water? The candidate’s argument seemed to him
suddenly to leave out heat, to omit friction, to be that
of aman inan armchair after a poorlunch. He looked
attentively at the speaker’s shrewd, dry, doubting face.
‘No juice!’ he thought. And when “the chap ” sat
down, he got up and left the hall.

This Wilfrid business had upset him horribly. Try
as he had to put it out of his mind, try as he would to
laugh it off, it continued to eat into his sense of security
and happiness, Wife and best friend! A hundred
times a day he assured himself that he trusted. Fleur.
Only, Wilfrid was so much more attractive than him-
self, and Fleur deserved the best of everything. Be-~
sides, Wilfrid was going through torture, and it was
not a pleasant thought! How end the thing, restore
peace of mind to himself, to him, to her? He had


TENTERHOOKS 117


heard no more; and it simply was impossible to ask:
No way even of showing his anxiety! The whole
thing was just “ dark,” and, so far as he could see,
would have to stay so; nothing to be done but screw
the lid on tighter, be as nice as he could to her, try not
to feel bitter about him, Hades !

He turned down Chelsea Embankment. Here the
the sky was dark and wide and streaming with stars. .
The river wide, dark and gleaming with oily rays from
the Embankment lamps. The width of it all gave him
relief. Dash the dumps! A jolly, queer, muddled,
sweet and bitter world; an immensely intriguing game
of chance, no matter how the cards were falling at the
moment. In the trenches he had thought: ‘ Get out
of this, and I'll never mind anything again!’ How
seldom now he remembered thinking that! The
human body renewed itself—they said—in seven years.
In three years’ time his body would not be the body of
the trenches, but a whole-time peace body with a
fading complex. If only Fleur would tell him quite
openly what she felt, what she was doing about Wilfrid,
for she must be doing something! And Wilfrid’s
verse? Would his confounded passion—as Bart
suggested—-flow in poetry! And, if so, who would
publish it? A miserable business! Well, the night
was beautiful, and the great thing not to be a pig.
Beauty and not being apig! Nozhing much else to it—
except laughter—the comic side! Keep one’s sense of
humour, anyway! And Michael searched, while he
strode beneath plane trees half-stripped of leaves and
plume-like in the dark, for the fun in his position. He
failed to find it. There seemed absolutely nothing
funny about love. Possibly he might fall out of love
again some day, but not so long as she kept him dn het


118 THE WHITE MONKEY


tenterhooks. Did she do it on purpose? Never!
Fleur simply could not be like those women who kept
their husbands hungry and fed them when they wanted
dresses, furs, jewels. Revolting !

He came in sight of Westminster.. Only half-past
ten! Suppose he took a cab to Wilfrid’s rooms, and
tried to have it out with him. It would be like trying to
. make the hands of a clock movebackwards to its ticking.
What use in saying: “ You love Fleur—well, don’t!”
or in Wilftid saying it to him? ‘After all, I was first
with Fleur,’ he thought. Pure chance, perhaps, but
fact! Ah! wasn’t that just the danger? He was no
longer a novelty to her—nothing unexpected about him
now ! And he and she had agreed times without number
that novelty was the salt of life, the essence of interest
and drama. Novelty now lay with Wilfrid! Lord!
Lord! Possession appeared far from being nine points
of the law! He rounded-in from the Embankment
towards home—jolly part of London, jolly Square;
everything jolly except just this infernal conplication.
Something, soft as a large leaf, tapped twice against his
eat. He turned, astonished ; he was in empty space,
no tree near. Floating in the darkness, a round
thing—he grabbed, it bobbed. What? A child’s
balloon! He secured it between his hands, took it
beneath a lamp-post—green, ;he judged. Queer!
He looked up. Two: windows lighted, one of them
Fleur’s! Was this the bubble of his own happiness
expelled ? Morbid! Silly ass | Some gust of wind—
a child’s plaything lodged and loosened! He held
the balloon gingerly. He would take it in and show it to
her. He put his latch-key in the door. Dark in the
hall—gone up | He mounted, swinging the balloon on
his finger. Fleur was standing before a mirror.


TENTERHOOKS 119


“« What on eatth’s that ?”’ she said.

The blood returned to Michael’s heart. Curious
how he had dreaded its haying anything to do with her !

“Don’t know, darling; fell on my hat—must be-
long to heaven.” And he batted it.

The balloon floated, dropped, bounded twice, wob-
bled and came to rest.

“You are a baby, Michael. I believe you bought
ls
Michael came closer, and stood quite still.

“My hat! What a misfortune to be in love!”

*You think so!”

<< I] y a toujours un qui baise, et l'autre qui ne tend pas la
foue.””

** But Ido.”

* Fleur!”

Fleur smiled.

** Baise away.”

Embracing her, Michael thought: ‘ She holds me—
does with me what she likes ; I know nothing of her |”

And there arose a small sound—from Ting-a-ling
smelling the balloon.


PART Il
CHAPTER I


THE MARK FALLS


Tue state of the world had been getting more and more
on Soames’ nerves ever since the general meeting of
the P.P.R.S. It had gone off with that fatuity long
associated by him with such gatherings—a watertight
rigmarole from the chairman ; butter from two reliable
shareholders ; vinegar from shareholders not so reliable;
and the usual “ gup ” over the dividend. He had gone
there glum, come away glummer. From a notion once
taken into his head Soames parted more slowly than a
cheese parts from its mites. T'wo-sevenths of foreign
business, nearly all German! And the mark falling!
It had begun to fall from the moment that he decided
to support the dividend. And why? What was in the
wind ? Contrary to his custom, he had taken to sniffing
closely the political columns of his paper. The French
—he had always mistrusted them, especially since his
second marriage—the French were going to play old
Harry, if he was not greatly mistaken! Their papers, he
noticed, never lost a chance of having a dab at English
policy; seemed to think they could always call the
tune for England to pipe to! And the mark and the
franc, and every other sort of money, falling. And
though in Soames was that which rejoiced in the
thought that one of his country’s bits of paper could buy
a great quantity of other countries’ bits of paper, there
was also that which felt the whole thing silly and unreal,


3490


THE MARK FALLS Za


with an ever-growing consciousness that the P.P.R.S.
would pay no dividend next year. The P.P.R.S. was a
big concern; no dividend would be a sign, no small
one, of bad management. Assurance was one of the
_ few things on God’s earth which could and should
be conducted without real risk. But for that he would
never have gone on the Board. And to find assurance
had not been so conducted and that by himself, was—
well! He had caused Winifred to sell, anyway, though
the shares had already fallenslightly.. ‘“‘ Ithought it was
such a good thing, Soames,” she had said plaintively :
“it’s rather a bore, losin’ money on the shares.”? He
had answered without mercy: “ If you don’t sell, you’ll
lose more.” And she had done it. If the Rogers and
Nicholases who had followed him into it hadn’t sold
too—wellit was theirlook out! He had made Winifred
watn them. As for himself, he had nothing but his
qualifying shares, and the missing ofa dividend or two
would not hurt one whose director’s fees more than
compensated. It was not, therefore, private uneasiness
so much as resentment at a state of things connected
with foreigners and the slur on his infallibility.
Christmas had gone off quietly at Mapledurham. He
abominated Christmas, and only observed it because his
wife was French, and her national festival New Year's
Day. One could not go so far as to observe that,
encouraging a foreign notion. But Christmas with no
child about—he still remembered the holly and snap-
dragons of Park Lane in his own childhood—the family
parties ; and how disgusted he had been if he got any-
thing symbolic—the thimble or the ring—instead of
the shilling. They had never gone in for Santa Claus
at Park Lane, partly because they could see through the
old gentleman, and partly because he was not at al] a


122 THE WHITE MONKEY


late thing. Emily, his mother, had seen to that.
Yes ; and, by the way, that William Gouldyng, Ingerer,
had so stumped those fellows at the Heralds’ College,
that Soames had. dropped the enquiry—it. was just
encouraging them to spend his money for a sentimental
satisfaction which did not materialise. That narrow-
headed chap, ‘Old Mont,” peacocked about his
ancestry ; all the more reason for having no ancestry
topeacockabout. The Forsytes andthe Goldings were
good English country stock—that was what mattered.
And if Fleur and her child, if one came, had French
blood in them—vwell, he couldn’t help it now.

In regard to the coming of a grandchild, Soames
knew no more than in October. Fleur had spent
Christmas with the Monts; she was promised to him,
however, before long, and her mother must ask her a
question or two |!

The weather was extremely mild; Soames had even
been out in a punt fishing. In heavy coat he trailed
a line for perch and dace, and caught now and then a
roach—precious little good, the servants wouldn’t
<at them, nowadays! His grey eyes would brood
over the grey water under the grey sky; and in his
mind the mark would fall. It fell with a bump on
that eleventh of January when the French went and
occupied the Ruhr. He said to Annette at breakfast :
“Your country’s cracked! Look at the mark now!”

“* What do I care about the mark P ” she had answered
over her coffee, ‘‘ Icare that they shall not come again
into my country. Ihope they will suffer a little what we
have suffered.”

“ You,” said Soames ; “‘ you never suffered anything.

Annette put her hand where Soames sometimes
doubted the existence of a heart.


THE MARK FALLS 123


“ ¥ suffered here,” she said.

*T didn’t notice it. You never went without butter,
What do you suppose Europe’s going to be like now
for the next thirty years ? How about British trade ?”

“We French see before our noses,” said Annette
with warmth. “‘ We see that the beaten must be kept
the beaten or he will take revenge. You English
are so sloppy.”

“ Sloppy, are we P” said Soames, “‘ You’re talking
like a child. Could a sloppy people ever have reached
our position in the world ?”

* That is your selfishness. You are cold and selfish.”

“ Cold, selfish and sloppy—they don’t go together.
Try again.”

“Your slop is in your thought and your talk; it is
your instinct that gives you your success, and your
English instinct is cold and selfish, Soames. You are
a mixture, all of you, of hypocrisy, stupidity and
egoism.”

Soames took some marmalade.

“Well,” he said, “and what are the French )—~
cynical, avaricious and revengeful. And the Germans
are sentimental, heady and brutal. We can all abuse
each other! ‘There’s nothing for it but to keep clear.
And that’s what you French won’t do.”

Annette’s handsome person stiffened.

** When you are tied to a person, as I am tied to you,
Soames, or as we French are tied to the Germans, it
is necessary to be top dog, or to be bottom dog.”

Soames stayed his toast.

“Do you suppose yourself top dog in this house ? ”

“ Yes, Soames.”

“Oh! Thenyou can go back to France to-motrow.”

Anneite’s eyebrows tose quizzically.


124 THE WHITE MONKEY


“T would wait a little longer, my friend; you are
' still too young.”

But Soames had already regretted his remark;
he did not wish any such disturbance at his time of life,
and he said more calmly :

“Compromise is the essence of any reasonable
existence between individuals or nations. We can’t
have the fat thrown into the fire every few years.”

“That is so English,” murmured Annette. “ We
others never know what you English will do. You
always wait to see which way the cat jumps.”

However deeply sympathetic with such a reasonable
characteristic, Soames would have denied it at any ordin-
aty moment—to confess to temporising was not, as
it were,done, But, with the mark falling like a cartload
of bricks, he was heated to the point of standing by his
nature.

** And why shouldn’t we? Rushing into things that
you'll have to rush out of! I don’t want to argue.
French and English never did get on, and never will.”

Annette rose. “ You speak the truth, my friend.
Entente, mais pas cordiale. What are you doing
to-day ?”

*“ Going up to town,” said Soames glumly. “ Your
precious Government has put business into Queer
Street with a vengeance.”

“Do you stay the night ? ”

“TI don’t know.”

“* Adieu, then, jusqu’ au revoir!” And she got up-

Soames temained brooding above his marmalade—»
with the mark falling in his mind—glad to see the last
of her handsome figure, having no patience at the
moment for French tantrums. An irritable longing
to say to somebody “ I told you so ” possessed him. He


THE MARE FALLS 125


would have to wait, however, till he found somebody
to say it to.

A beautiful day, quite warm ; and, taking his umbrella
as an assurance against change, he set out for the
station.

In the carriage going up they were talking about
the Ruhr. Averse from discussion in public, Soames
listened from behind his paper. The general sentiment
was surprisingly like his own. In so far as it’ was
unpleasant for the Huns—all right; in so far as it was
unpleasant for British trade—all wrong; in so far as
love of British trade was active and hate of Huns now
passive—more wrong than tight. A Francophil
remark that the French were justified in making them-
selves safe at all costs, was coldly received. At
Maidenhead a man got in whom Soames connected
automatically with disturbance. He had much grey hair,
a sanguine face, lively eyes, twisting eyebrows, and
within five minutes had asked in a breezy voice
whether any one had heard of the League of Nations.
Confirmed in his estimate, Soames looked round the
corner of his paper. Yes, that chap would go off on
some hobby-horse or other! And there he went!
The question—said the newcomer—was not whether
the Germans should get one in the eye, the British
one in the pocket, or the French one in the heart, but.
whether the world should get peace and goodwill.
Soames lowered his paper. If—this fellow said—
they wanted peace, they must sink their individual
interests, and think in terms of collective interest. The
good of all was the good of one! Soames saw the flaw
at once, That might be, but the good of one was
not the good of all. He felt that if he did not take
care he would be pointing this out, The man was


126 THE WHITE MONKEY


a perfect stranger to him, and no good ever came of
argument. Unfortunately his silence amid the general
opinion that the League of Nations was “ no earthly,”
seemed to cause the newcomer to regard him as a
sympathiser; the fellow kept on throwing his eye-
brows at him! To put up his paper again seemed too
pointed, and his position was getting more and more
false when the train raninat Paddington. He hastened
toacab. A voice behind him said:

“ Hopeless lot, sir, eh! Glad to see you saw my
point.” ;

* Quite!” said Soames. ‘‘ Taxi!”

“Unless the League of Nations functions, we’re all
for Gehenna.”

Soames turned the handle of the cab door.

“ Quite!” he said again. “ Poultry!” and got in.
He was not going to be drawn, The fellow was clearly
a firebrand |

In the cab the measure of his disturbance was revealed.
He had said “ Poultry,” an address that “ Forsyte,
Bustard and Forsyte” had abandoned two-and-twenty
years ago when, merged with “ Cuthcott, Holliday and
Kingson,” they became “Cuthcott, Kingson and
Forsyte.” Rectifying the error, he sat forward,
brooding. Fall of the mark! The country was
sound about it, yes—but when they failed to pay the
next dividend, could they rely on resentment against
the French instead of against the directors ? Doubtful!
The directors ought to have seen it coming! ‘That
might be said of the other directors, but not of himself
—here was a policy that he personally never would
have touched. If only he could discuss the whole
thing with some one—but old Gradman would be out
of his depth in a matter of this sort, And, on arrival


THE MARK FALLS 127


at his office, he gazed with a certain impatience at that
changeless old fellow, sitting in his swivel chair.

* Ah! Mr. Soames, I was hopin’ you might come in
this morning. There’s a young man been round to see
you from the P.P.R.S. Wouldn’t give his business,
said he wanted to see you privately. Left his number
on the ’phone.”

* Oh! ” said Soames.

** Quite a young feller—in the office.”

** What did he look like P ”

* Nice, clean young man. I was rather favourably
impressed—name of Butterfield.”

“Well, ring him up, and let him know I’m here.”
And going over to the window, he stood looking out
on to a perfectly blank wall.

Suited to a sleeping partner, his room was at the back,
free from disturbance. Young man! ‘The call was
somewhat singular! And he said over his shoulder :
‘Don’t go when he comes, Gradman, I know nothing
of him.”

The world changed, people died off, the mark fell,
but Gradman was there—embodiment, faithful and
grey, of service and integrity—an anchor.

Gradman’s voice, grating, ingtatiating, rose.

“This French news—it’s not nice, Mr. Soames.
They’re a hasty lot. I remember your father, Mr.
James, coming into the office the morning the Franco-
Prussian war was declared—quite in his prime then,
not more than sixty, I should say. Why, I recall his
very words: ‘ There,’ he said, ‘I told them so.” And
here they are—at it still. The fact is, they’re cat and
dog.”

Be els who had half turned, resumed his contem-
plation of a void. Poor old Gradman dated! What


R®


128 THE WHITE MONKEY


would he say when he heard that they had been insuring
foreign business ? Stimulated by the old-time quality
of Gradman’s presence his mind ranged with sudden
freedom. He himself had another twenty years, per-
haps. What would he see in that time? Where
would old England be at the end of it? ‘In spite of
the papers, we’re not such fools as we look,’ he thought.
“Tf only we can steer clear of flibberty-gibberting, and
pay our way!”

“Mr. Butterfield, sir.” H’m! The young man
had been very spry. Covered by Gradman’s bluff and
greasy greeting, he “ took a lunar,” as his Uncle Roger
used to call it. The young fellow, in a neat suit,
a turndown collar, with his hat in his hand, was a
medium modest-looking chap. Soames nodded.

“You want to see me?”

* Alone, if I might, sir.”

** Mr. Gradman here is my right-hand man.”

Gradman’s voice purred gratingly: “ You can state
your business. Nothing goes outside these walls,
young man.’

“T’m in the office of the P.P.R.S., sir. The fact is,
accident has just put some information in my hands,
and I’m not easy in my mind. Knowing you to be
a solicitor, sir, I preferred to come to you, rather than
go to the chairman. As a lawyer, would you tell me:
Is my first duty to the Society, being in their
employ ?”

“ Certainly,” said Soames.

“T don’t like this job, sir, and I hope you'll ondae
stand that I’m not here for any personal motive—it’s
just because I feel I ought to.”

Soames regarded him steadily. Though large and
xather swimming, the young man’s eyes impressed


THE MARK FALLS 12g


him-by their resemblance to a dog’s. ‘“* What’s it all
about ? ”’ he said. i

The young man moistened his lips.

“ The insurance of our German business, sir.”

Soames pricked his ears, already slightly pointed by
Nature. |

“It’s a very serious matter,” the young man went
on, “ and I don’t know how it’ll affect me, but the fact
is, this morning I overheaxd a private conversation.”

“Oh!” said Soames.

“Yes, sir. I quite underseand your tone, but the
very first words did it. Isimply couldn’t make myself
known after hearing them. I think you'll agree, sir.”

““ Who were the speakers ? ”

“ The manager, and a man called Smith—I fancy by
his accent his name’s a bit more foreign—who’s done
most of the agenting for the German business.”

“* What were the words ?” said Soames.

“Well, sir, the manager was speaking, and then this
Smith said: ‘ Quite so, Mr. Elderson, but we haven’t
paid you a commission on all this business for nothing ;
if the mark goes absolutely phut, you will have to see
that your Society makes it good for us’ !:”

The intense longing, which at that moment came on
Soames to emit a whistle, was checked by sight of
Gradman’s face. The old fellow’s mouth had opened
in the nest of his grizzly short beard; his eyes stared
puglike, he uttered a prolonged: “ A-ow!”

“Yes,” said the young man, “ it was a knock-out |”

“Where were you P” asked Soames, sharply.

“In the lobby between the managet’s room and the
board room. I’d just come from sorting some papers
in the board room, and the manager’s door was open
aninchorso. Of course | know the voices well.”


130 THE WHITE MONEEY


“ What after P”

“T heard Mr. Elderson say, ‘H’ssh! Don’t talk
like that!” and I slipped back into the board room.
Td had more than enough, sir, I assure you.”

Suspicion and surmise clogged Soames’ thinking
apparatus. Was this young fellow speaking the truth 2
A man like Elderson—the risk was monstrous! And,
if true, what was the directors’ responsibility ? But
proof—proof? He stared at the young man, who
looked upset and pale enough, but whose eyes did not
waver, Shake himifhe could! And he said sharply:

“Now mind what you’re saying! This is most
serious |”.

“JT know that, sir. If I’d consulted my own interest,
I'd never have come here. I’m nota sneak.”

The words rang true, but Soames did not drop his
caution.

** Ever had any trouble in the office 2”

“No, sir, you can make enquiry. Pve nothing
against Mr. Elderson, and he’s nothing against me.”

Soames thought suddenly: ‘Good heavens! He’s
shifted it on to me, and in the presence of a witness |
And I supplied the witness | ”

“« Have you any reason to suppose,” he said, “ that
they became aware of your being there ?”

“ They couldn’t have, I think.”

The implications of this news seemed every second
more alarming. It was as if Fate, kept at bay all his
life by clever wrist-work, had suddenly slipped a thrust
under his guard. No good to get rattled, however
—oust think it out at leisure |

“ Are you prepared, if necessary, to repeat this to the
Board ?”

The youny man pressed his hands together


THE MARK FALLS 131


“Well, sir, ’'d much rather have held my tongue;
but if you decide it’s got to be taken up, I suppose
T must go through with it now. I’m sure I hope you'll
decide to leave it alone; perhaps it isn’t true—only
why didn’t Mr. Elderson say: ‘ You ruddy liar!’ ?”

Exactly! Why didn’t he? Soames care grunt
of intense discomfort.

“ Anything more?” he said.

noINO; sit???

“Very well. You’ve not told any one?”

™ No, sir.”

“Then don’t, and leave it to me.”

“Tl be only too happy to, sir. Good-morning.”

“ Good-morning |”

No—very bad morning! No satisfaction whatever
in this sudden fulfilment of his prophetic feeling about
Elderson. None!

“ What d’you think of that young fellow, Gradman ?
Ts he lying ?”

Thus summoned, as it we.e, from stupor, Gradman
thoughtfully rubbed a nose both thick and shining.

“Tt’s one word against another, Mr. Soames, unless
you get more evidence. But I can’t see what the young
man has to gain by it.”

“Nor I; but you never know. The trouble will
be to get more evidence. Can I act without it?”

“Tt’s delicate,” said Gradman. And Soames knew
that he was thrown back on himself. When Gtadman
said a thing was delicate, it meant that it was the sort
of matter on which he was accustomed to wait for
orders—presumptuous even to hold opinion! But
had he got one? Well, one would never know! The
old chap would sit and rub his nose over it till Kingdom
Come.


132 THE WHITE MONKEY


*‘T shan’t act in a hurry,” he said, almost angrily :
“TI can’t see to the end of this.”

Every hour confirmed that statement. At lunch the
tape of his city club showed the mark still falling—to
unheard-of depths! How they could talk of golf,
with this business on his mind, he could not imagine |!

“I must go and see that fellow,” he said to himself.
“T shall be guarded. He may throw some light.”
He waited until three o’clock and repaired to the
P.P.R.S.

Reaching the office, he sought the Board room. The
chairman was there in conference with the manager.
Soames sat down quietly to listen ; and while he listened
he watched that fellow’s face. It told him nothing.
What nonsense people talked when they said you could
tell character from faces! Only a perfect idiot’s face
could be read like that. And here was a man of
experience and culture, one who knew every rope of
business life and polite society. The hairless, neat
features exhibited no more concern than the natural
mottification of one whose policy had met with such
a nasty knock. The drop of the mark had already
wiped out any possible profit on the next half-year.
Unless the wretched thing recovered, they would be
catrying a practically dead load of German insurance.
Really it was ctiminal that no limit of liability had been
fixed! How on earth could he ever have overlooked
that when he came on the Board? But he had only
known of it afterwards. And who could have foreseen
anything so mad as this Ruhr business, or realised the
slack confidence of his colleagues in this confounded
fellow? The words “gross negligence” appeared
‘close up’ before his eyes. What if an action lay
against the Board! Gross negligence! At his age


THE MARK FALLS 133


and with his reputation! Why! ‘The thing was plain
as a pikestaff; for omitting a limit of liability this
chap had got his commission! ‘Ten per cent. prob-
ably, on all that business—he must have netted thous-
ands! A man must be in Queer Street indeed to take
a risk like that! But conscious that his fancy was
running on, Soames rose, and turned his back. The
action suggested another. Simulate anger, draw some
sign from that fellow’s self-control! He turned again,
and said pettishly: “‘ What on earth were you about,
Mr. Manager, when you allowed these contracts to go
through without limit of liability? A man of your
experience! What was your motive ?”

A slight narrowing of the eyes, a slight compression
of the lips. He had relied on the word “ motive,”
but the fellow passed it by.

“For such high premiums as we have been getting,
Mr. Forsyte, a limited liability was not possible. This
is a most outrageous development, and I’m afraid it
must be considered just bad luck.”

“Unfortunately,” said Soames “there’s no such
thing as luck in properly regulated assurance, as we
shall find, or I’m much mistaken. I shouldn’t be
surprised if an action lay against the Board for gross
negligence |”

That had got the chairman’s goat !|—Got his goat?
What expressions they used nowadays! Or did it
mean the opposite? One never knew! But as for
Elderson—he seemed to Soames to be merely counter-
feiting 2 certain flusteration. Futile to attempt to
spring anything out of a chap like that, & the thing
were true, the fellow must be entirely aesperate, pre-
pared for anything and everything. And since from
Soames the desperate side of life—the real holes, the


134 THE WHITE MONKEY


impossible positions which demand a gambler’s thtow
—had always been carefully barred by the habits of
a prudent nature, he found it now impossible to
imagine Elderson’s state of mind, or his line of conduct.
if he were guilty. For all he could tell, the chap might
be carrying poison about with him; might be sitting
on a revolver like a fellow on the film. The whole
thing was too unpleasant, too worrying for words.
And without saying any more he went away, taking
nothing with him but the knowledge that their total
liability on this German business, with the mark
valueless, was over two hundred thousand pounds.
He hastily reviewed the fortunes of his co-directors,
Old Fontenoy was always in low water; the chairman
a dark horse; Mont was in land, land right down in
value, and mortgaged at that; old Cosey Mothergill
had nothing but his name and his director’s fees ;
Meyrticke must have a large income, but light come,
light go, like most of those big counsel with irons in
many fires and the certainty of a judgeship. Not
a really substantial man among the lot, except himself |
He ploughed his way along, head down. Public
companies! Preposterous system! You had to trust
somebody, and there you were! It was appalling |

“ Balloons, sir—beautiful colours, five feet circum-
ference. ‘Take one, gentleman |”

“Good gad!” said Soames. As if the pricked
bubble ut German business were not enough |


CHAPTER TI


VICTORINE


Aut through December balloons had been slack—hardly
any movement about them, even in Christmas week,
and from the Bickets Central Australia was as far as
ever. The girl Victorine, restored to comparative health,
had not regained her position in the blouse department
of Messrs. Boney Blayds & Co. ‘They had given her
some odd sewing, but not of late, and she had spent
much time trying. to get work less uncertain. Hex
trouble was—had always been—her face. It was un-
usual. People did not know what to make of a girl
who looked like that. Why employ one who without
qualification of wealth, rank, fashion, or ability (so
far as they knew), made them feel ordinary? For—
however essential to such as Fleur and Michael—
dramatic interest was not primary in the manufacture
or sale of blouses, in the fitting-on of shoes, the address-
ing of envelopes, making-up of funeral wreaths, or the
other ambitions of Victorine. Behind those large
dark eyes and silent lips; what went onP It worried
Boney Blayds & Co., and the more wholesale forms of
commerce. The lurid professions—film-super, ot
mannequin—did not occur to one, of self-deprecating
nature, born in Putney.

When Bicket had gone out of a morning with his
tray and his balloons not yet blown up, she would
stand biting her finger, as though to gnaw her way to
some escape from this hand-to-mouth existence which


135


136 THE WHITE MONKEY


kept her husband thin as a rail, tired as a rook, shabby
as a tailless sparrow, and, at the expense of all caste
feeling, brought them in no more than just enough to
keep them living under a roof. It had long been
clear to them both that there was no future in balloons,
just a cadging present. And there smouldered in the
silent, passive Victorine a fierce resentment. She
wanted better things for herself, for him, chiefly tor
him.

On the morning when the mark was bumping down,
she was putting on her velveteen jacket and toque
(best remaining items of her wardrobe), having taken
a resolve, Bicket never mentioned his old job, and
his wife had subtly divined some cause beyond the
otdinary for his loss of it. Why not see if she could
get him taken back? He had often said: ‘Mr.
Mont’s a gent and a sort o” socialist ; been through the
wat, too; no high-and-mighty about dim.” If she
could “get at” this phenomenon! With the flush
of hope and daring in her sallow cheeks, she took stock
of her appearance from the window-glasses of the
Strand. Her velveteen of jade-green always pleased
one who had an eye for colour, but her black skirt—
well, perhaps the wear and tear of it wouldn’t show if
she kept behind the counter. Had she brass enough
to say that she came about a manuscript? And she
rehearsed with silent lips, pinching her accent:
** Would you ask Mr. Mont, please, if I could see him ;
it’s about a manuscript.” Yes! and then would
come the question: “‘ What name, please?” “ Mrs.
Bicket?” Never! ‘‘ Miss Victorine Collins?” All
authoresses had maiden names. Victorine—yes! But
Collins! It didn’t sound like. And no one would
know what her maiden name had been. Why not


VICTORINE 137


choose one? They often chose. And she searched.
Something Italian, like—like Hadn’t their land-
lady said to them when they came in: “Is your wife
Eyetalian?”? Ah! Manuelli! That was certainly
Ttalian—the ice-cream man in Little Ditch Streethad it.
She walked on practising beneath her breath. If only
she could get to see this Mr. Mont !

She entered, trembling. All went exactly as fore-
seen, even to the pinching of her accent, till she stood
waiting for them to bring an answer from the speaking
tube, concealing her hands in their very old gloves.
Had Miss Manuelli an appointment? There was no
manuscript.

“No,” said Victorine, “I haven’t sent it yet. I
wanted to see him first.” The young man at the
counter was looking at her hard. He went again to
the tube, then spoke.

*‘ Will you wait a minute, please—Mr. Mont’s lady
sectetaty is coming down.”

Victorine inclined her head towards her sinking
heart. A lady secretary! She would never get there
now! And there came on her the sudden dread of
false pretences. But the thought of Tony standing at
his corner, ballooned up to the eyes, as she had spied
out more than once, fortified her desperation.

A girtl’s voice said: “‘ Miss Manuelli? Mr. Mont’s
secretary, perhaps you could give me a message.”

A fresh-faced young woman’s eyes were travelling
up and down her.

Pinching her accent hard, she said: “Oh! I’m
afraid I couldn’t do that.”

The travelling gaze stopped at her face. “ If you’ll
come with me, I’ll see if he can see you.” »

Alone in a small waiting-room, Victorine sat without


’


138 THE WHITE MONKEY


movement, till she saw a young man’s face poked
through the doorway, and heard the words :

Will you come in?”

She took a deep breath, and went. Once in the
ptesence, she looked from Michael to his secretary
and back again, subtly daring his youth, his chivalry,
his sportsmanship, to refuse her a- private interview.
Through Michael passed at once the thought : ‘ Money,
I suppose. But what an interesting face!’ The
secretary drew down the corners of her mouth and
left the room.

“ Well, Miss—er—Manuelli p ”

“Not Manuelli, please—Mrs. Bicket; my husband
used to be here.”

“What!” The chap that had snooped “ Copper
Coin!” Phew! Bicket’s yarn—his wife—pneu-
monia! She looked as if she might have had it.

“ He often spoke of you, sir. And, please, he hasn’t
any work. Couldn’t you find room for him again, sir ?”

Michael stood silent. Did this terribly interesting-
looking girl know about the snooping ?

“ He just sells balloons in the street now; I can’t
bear to see him. Over by St. Paul’s he stands, and
there’s no money in it; and we'do so want to get out
to Australia. I know he’s very nervy, and gets wrong
with people. Butifyouco#/d take him back here. . . .”

No! she did not know !

“Very sorty, Mrs. Bicket. I remember your
husband well, but we haven’t a place for him. Are you
all right again 2”

“Oh! yes. Except that I can’t get work again
either.”

What a face for wrappers! Sort of Mona L.isa-ish.
Storbert’s novel! Ha!


VICTORINE 139


** Well, Pll havea talk with your husband. Isuppose
you wouldn’t like to sit to an artist fora book-wrapper ?
Tt might lead to work in that line if you want it. You’re
just the type for a friend of mine. Do you know
Aubrey Greene’s work ?”

“No, sir.”

“It’s pretty good—in fact, very good in a decadent
way. You wouldn’t mind sitting P”

“T wouldn’t mind anything to save some money.
But I'd rather you didn’t tell my husband Id been to see
you. He might take it amiss.”

* All right! Tl see him by accident. Near St.
Paul’s, you said? But there’s no chance here, Mrs.
Bicket. Besides, he couldn’t make two ends meet on
this job, he told me.”

¢ When I was ill, sir.”

**Of course, that makes a difference.”

HiVies* siry’

Well, let me write you a note to Mr. Greene,
Will you sit down a minute ?”

He stole a look at het while she sat waiting. Really,
her sallow, large-eyed face, with its dead-black, bobbed
frizzy-ended hair, was extraordinarily interesting—
a little too refined and anemic for the public; but,
dash it all! the public couldn’t always have its Reckitt’s
blue eyes, corn-coloured hair, and poppy cheeks.
“She’s not a peach,” he wrote, “on the main
tree of taste; but so striking in her way that she
really might become a type, like Beardsley’s or
Dana’s.”

When she had taken the note and gone, he rang for
his secretary.

“No, Miss Perren, she didn’t take anything off me.


S09


But some type, eh ?


140 THE WHITE MONKEY


I thought you’d like to see her. She wasn’t an
authoress, was she ?”

“ Far from it.”

“‘ Well, I hope she got what she wanted.”

Michael grinned. “Partly, Miss Perren—partly.
You think Pm an awful fool, don’t you ?”

“Tm sute I don’t; but I think you're too ‘soft-
hearted.”

Michael ran his fingers through his hair.

“Would it surprise you to hear that I’ve done a
stroke of business P”

“Yes, Mr. Mont.”

* Then I won’t tell you what it is. When you’ve
done pouting, go on with that letter to my father
about ‘ Duet’: ‘ Weare sorry to say that in the present
state of the trade we should not be justified in reprinting
the dialogue between those two old blighters; we
have already lost money by it!’ You must translate,
of course. Now can we say something to cheer the
old boy up? How about this? ‘ When the French
have recovered their wits, and the birds begin to sing—
in short, when spring comes—we hope to reconsider
the matter in the light of—of’—er—what, Miss
Perren 2?”

“The experience we shall have gained.’ Shall
T leave out about the French and the birds ? ”

“Excellent! ‘ Yours faithfully, Danby and Winter.’
Don’t you think it was a scandalous piece of nepotism
bringing the book here at all, Miss Perren ? ”

** What is ‘ nepotism’ ?”

“Taking advantage of your son. He’s never made
a sixpence by any of his books.”

“ He’s a very distinguished writer, Mr. Mont.”

** And we pay for the distinction. Well, he’s a good


VICTORINE 141


old Bart. That’s all before lunch, and mind you have
a good one. That girl’s figure wasn’t usual either,
wasit? She’s thin, but she stands up straight. .There’s
a question I always want to ask, Miss Perren; Why do
modern girls walk in a curve with their heads poked
forward? ‘They can’t all be built like that.”

The secretary’s cheeks brightened.

** There #s a reason, Mr. Mont.”

“Good! What is it?”

The secretary's cheeks continued to brighten.
“T don’t really know whether I can ie

“Oh! sorry. Ill ask my wife. Only she’s quite
straight herself.”

“Well, Mr. Mont, it’s this, you see: They aren’t
supposed to have anything be—behind, and, of course,
they have, and they can’t get the proper effect unless
they curve their chests in and poke: their heads
forward. . It’s the fashion-plates and mannequins that
do it.”

*T see,” said Michael; “‘thank you, Miss Perren ;
awfully good of you. It’s the limit, isn’t it?”

“ Yes, I don’t hold with it, myself.’

“No, quite!”

The sectetary lowered her eyelids and withdrew.

Michael sat down and drew a face on his blotting
paper. It was not Victorine’s....


Armed with the note to Aubrey Greene, Victorine
had her usual lunch, a cup of coffee and a bit of heavy
cake, and took the tube towards Chelsea. She had not
succeeded, but the gentleman had been friendly and she
felt cheered.

At the studio door was a young man inserting a key—
very elegant in smoke-grey Harris tweeds, a sliding


142 THE WHITE MONKEY


young man with no hat, beautifully brushed back
bright hair, and a soft voice.

** Model?” he said.

* Yes, sir, please. I have a note for you from Mr.
Mont.”

“* Michael! Come in.”

Victorine followed himin. It was ‘ not half’ sea-
green in there; a high room with rafters and a top
light, and lots of pictures and drawings on the walls,
and as if they had slipped off on to the floor. A picture
onan easel of two ladies with their clothes sliding down
troubled Victorine. She became conscious of the
gentleman’s eyes, sea-green like the walls, sliding up and
down her.

** Will you sit for anything ?”’ heasked.

Victorine answered mechanically: ‘“ Yes, sir.”

“Do you mind taking your hat off?”

Victorine took off the toque, and shook out her hair.

* Ah!” said the gentleman. “I wonder.”

Victorine wondered what.

** Just sit down on the dais, will you ?”

Victorine looked about her, uncertain. A smile
seemed to fly up his forehead and over his slippery
bright hair.

* This is your first shot, then ? ”

SY CSiSitany

** All the better.” And he pointed to a small plat-
form.

Victorine sat down on it in a black oak chair.

“You look cold.”

re WES, sinc?”

He went to a cupboard and returned with two small
glasses. of a brown fluid.

“Have a Grand Marnier ?”


VICTORINE 143


She noticed that he tossed his off in one gulp, and did
the same. It was sweet, strong, very nice, and made
her gasp.

“Take a cigarette.”

Victorine took one ftom a case he handed, and put it
between her lips. Helitit. And again a smile slid up
away over the top of his head.

“You draw it in,” he said. ‘‘ Where were you
born P”

“Tn Putney, sir.”

“That’s very interesting. Just sit still a minute.
It’s not as bad as having a tooth out, but it takes longer.
The great thing is to keep awake.”

maves, sit.”

He took a large piece of paper and a bit of dark stuff,
and began to draw.

“Tell me,” he said, “* Miss——”

“ Collins, sir—-Victorine Collins.” Some instinct
made her give her maiden name. It seemed somehow
more professional.

“Are you at larger” He paused, and again the
smile slid up over his bright hair: “ Or have you any
other occupation ?”

“Not at present, sir. Pm married, but nothing
else.”

For some time after that the gentleman was silent.
It was interesting to see him, taking a look, making a
stroke on the paper, taking anotherlook. Hundreds of
looks, hundreds of strokes. At last he said: “ All
right! Now we'll havea rest. Heaven sent your here,
Miss Collins, Come and get warm.”

Victorine approached the fire.

“Do you know anything about expressionism ?”

* No. sit.”


144 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Well, it means not troubling about the outside
except in so far as it expresses the inside. Does that
convey anything to you?”

(Noy siti?

* Quite! I think you said you’d sit for the—er—
altogether ?”

Victorine regarded the bright and sliding gentleman.
She did not know what he meant, but she felt that he
meant something out of the ordinary.

** Altogether what, sir?”

“« Nude.”

“Oh!” She cast her eyes down, then raised them
to the sliding clothes of the two ladies. “Like
that ?”

““ No, I shouldn’t be treating you cubistically.”

A slow flush was burning out the sallow in her cheeks.
She said slowly :

“* Does it mean mote money |”

“ Yes, half as much again—more perhaps. I don’t
want you to if you’d rather not. You can think it over
and let me know next time.”

She raised her eyes again, and said: “Thank you,
** Righto! Only please don’t ‘ sir’ me.”

Victorine smiled. It was the first time she had
achieved this functional disturbance, and it seemed to
haveastrangeeffect. Hesaid hurriedly : “ By George!
When you smile, Miss Collins, I see you smpression-
istically. If you’ve rested, sit up there again.”

Victorine went back.

The gentleman took a fresh piece of paper.

“Can you think of anything that will keep you
smiling!”

She shook her head. That was a fact.


sir


VICTORINE 14§


* Nothing comic at all? I suppose you’re not in
love with your husband, for instance P”

Ohde yes.”

“Well, try that.”

Victorine tried that, but she could only see Tony
selling his balloons.

“That won’t do,” said the gentleman. ‘ Don’t
think of him! Did you ever see ‘ L’apres midi d’un
Faune’?”

“No, sir.”

“Well, Pve got an idea. ‘L’apres midi d’une
Dryade.’ About the nude you really needn’t mind. It’s
quite impersonal. Think of art, and fifteen bob a day.
Shades of Nijinsky, I see the whole thing | ”

All the time that he was talking his eyes were sliding
off and on to her, and his pencil offand on to the paper.
A sort of infection began to ferment within Victorine.
Fifteen shilling a day! Blue butterflies |

There was profound silence. His eyes and hand slid
off and on. A faint smile had come on Victorine’s
face—she was adding up the money she might earn.

At last his eyes and hand ceased moving, and he
stood looking at the paper.

“That’s all for to-day, Miss Collins. I’ve got to
think it out. Will you give me your address ? ”

Victorine thought rapidly.

** Please, sir, will you write to me at the post office.
I don’t want my husband to know that Pm—I’m. re

“ Affiliated to art? Well? Name of post office ?”

Victorine gave it and resumed her hat.

** An hour and a half, five shillings, thank you. And
to-morrow, at half-past two, Miss Collins—not ‘ sir.’ ”

* Yes, s—, thank you.”

Waiting for her ’bus in the cold January air, the


146 THE WHITE MONKEY


altogether appeared to Victorine improbable. To sit
in front of a strange gentleman in her skin! If Tony
knew! The slow flush again burned up the sallow in
her cheeks. She climbed into the ’bus. But fifteen
shillings! Six days a week—why, it would be four
pound ten! In four months she could earn their passage
out. Judging by the pictures in there, lots must be
doing it. Tony must know nothing, not even that she
was sitting for her face. He was all nerves, and that
fond of her! He would imagine things; she had
heard him say those artists were just like cats. But
that gentleman had been very nice, though he did seem
as if he were laughing at everything. She wished he
had shown her the drawing, Pethaps she would see
herself in an exhibition some day. But without—oh |!
And suddenly she thought: ‘If I ate a bit more, ’'d
look nice like that, too!’ And as if to escape from the
dating of that thought, she stared up into the face
opposite. It had two chins, was calm and smooth and
pink, with light eyes staring backat her. People had
thoughts, but you couldn’t tell what they were! And
the smile which Aubrey Greene desired crept out on
his model’s face,


CHAPTER Id


MICHAEL WALKS AND TALKS


Tue face Michael drew began by being Victorine’s, and
ended by being Fleur’s. If physically Fleur stood up
straight, was she morally as erect ? This was the specula-
tion for which he continually called himself a cad. He
saw no change in her movements, and loyally refrained
from enquiring into the movements he could not see.
But his aroused attention made him more and more
awate of a certain cynicism, as if she were continually

registering the belief that all values were equal and none
of much value.

Wilfrid, though still in London, was neither visible nor
spoken of. “ Out of sight and hearing, out of mind,”
seemed to be the motto. It did not work with Michael
—Wilfrid was constantly in his mind. If Wilfrid were
not seeing Fleur, how could he bear to stay within such
tantalising reach of her? If Fleur did not want Wilfrid
to stay, why had she not sent him away ? He was find-
_ ing it difficult, too, to conceal from others the fact that _
Desert and he were no longer pals. Often the impetus
to go and have it out with him surged up and was
beaten back. Hither there was nothing beyond what
he already knew, or there was something—and Wilfrid
would say there wasn’t. Michael accepted that without
cavil; one did not givea woman away! But he wanted
to hear no lies from a War comrade. Between Fleur
and himself no word had passed; for words, he felt,
would add no knowledge, merely imperil a hold weak


147


148 THE WHITE MONKEY


enough already. Christmas at the ancestral manor of
the Monts had been passed in covert-shooting. Fleur
had come and stood with him at the last drive on the
second day, holding Ting-a-ling onalead. The Chinese
dog had been extraordinarily excited, climbing the
air every time a bird fell and quite unaffected by the
noise of guns. Michael, waiting to miss his birds—
he was a poor shot—had watched her eager face emerg-
ing from grey fur, her form braced back against Ting-a-
ling. Shooting was new to her; and under the
stimulus of novelty she was always at her best. He had
loved even her ‘“‘Oh, Michaels!” when he missed.
She had been the success of the gathering, which meant
seeing almost nothing of her except a sleepy head ona
pillow; but, at least, down there he had not suffered
from lurking uneasiness.

Putting a last touch to the bobbed hair on the blotting
paper, he got up. St. Paul’s, that girl had said. He
might stroll up and havea squint at Bicket. Something
might occur to him. Tightening the belt of his blue
overcoat round his waist, he sallied forth, thin and
sprightly, with a little ache in his heart.

Walking east, on that bright, cheerful day, nothing
struck him so much as the fact that he was alive, well,
and in work. So very many were dead, ill, or out of a
job. He entered Covent Garden. Amazing place!
A human nature which, decade after decade, could put
up with Covent Garden was not in danger of extinction
from its many ills. A comforting place—one needn’t
take anything too seriously after walking through it.
On this square island were the vegetables of the earth
and the fruits of the world, bounded on the west by
publishing, on the east by opera, on the north and
south by rivers of mankind. Among discharging


MICHAEL WALKS AND TALKS 149


carts-and litter of paper, straw and men out of drawing,
Michael walked and sniffed. Smell of its own, Covent
Garden, earthy and just not rotten! He had never seen
—even in the War—any place that so utterly lacked
form. Extraordinarily English! Nobody looked as if
they had anything to do with the soil—drivers, hangers-
on, packers, and the salesmen inside the covered
markets, seemed equally devoid of acquaintanceship with
sun, wind, water, earth or air—town types all! And—
Golly !|—how their faces jutted, sloped, sagged and
swelled, in every kind of featural disharmony. What
was the English type amongst all this infinite variety
of disproportion ? There just wasn’t one! He came on
the fruits, glowing piles, still and bright—foreigners
from the land of the sun—globes all the same size and
colour. ‘They made Michael’s mouth water.  ‘ Some-
thing in the sun,” he thought ; ‘there really is.’ Look
at Italy, at the Arabs, at Australia—the Australians
came from England, and see the type now! Never-
theless—a Cockney for good temper ! The more regular
a person’s form and features, the more selfish they were |
Those grape-fruit looked horribly self-satisfied, com-
pared with the potatoes |

He emerged still thinking about the English. Well!
They were now one of the plainest and most distorted
faces of the world; and yet was there any race to com-
pare with them for good temper and for “ guts ” ?
And they needed those in their smoky towns, and their
climate—remarkable instance of adaptation to environ-
ment, the modern English character! ‘I could pick
out an Englishman anywhere,’ he thought, ‘and yet,
physically, there’s no general type now!’ Astounding
people! So ugly in the mass, yet growing such
flowers of beauty, and such strange sprigs—like that


1§o THE WHITE MONKEY


little Mrs. Bicket; so unimaginative in bulk, o2t with
such a blooming lot of poets ! How would old Danby
like it, by the way, when Wilfrid took his next volume
tosome other firm; or rather what should he—Wilftid’s
particular friend |—say to old Danby ? Aha! He knew
what he should say :

“Yes, sit, but you should have let that poor blighter
off who snooped the ‘ Copper Coins.’ Desert hasn’t
forgotten your refusal.” One for old Danby and his
eternal in-the-rightness! “ Copper Coin” had done
uncommonly well. Its successor would probably do
uncommonly better. The book was a proof of what’
he—Michael—was always saying: The “ cockyolly- _
bird period” was passing. People wanted life again.
Sibley, Walter Nazing, Linda—all those who had noth-
ing to say except that they were superior to such as
had—were already measured for their coffins. Not that
they would know when they were in them; not
blooming likely! They would continue to wave their
noses and look down them !

‘I’m fed-up with them,’ thought Michael. ‘If
only Fleur would see that looking down your nose is a
sure sign of inferiority!’ And, suddenly, it came to
him that she probably did. Wilfrid was the only one
of the whole lot she had ever been thick with; the
others were there because—weli, because she was
Fleur, and had the latest things about her. When, very
soon, they were no longer the latest things, she would
drop them. But Wilfrid she would not drop. No,
he felt sure that she had not dropped, and would not
drop Wilfrid.

He looked up. Ludgate Hill!. “ Near St. Paul’s—
sells balloons ?” And there—sure enough—the poor
beggar was f


MICHAEL WALKS AND TALES Igi


Bicket was deflating with a view to going off his
stand for a cup of cocoa. Remembering that he had
come on him by accident, Michael stood for a moment
preparing the tones of surprise. Pity the poor chap
couldn’t blow himself into one of those coloured shapes
and float over St. Paul’s to Peter. Mournful little cuss
he looked, squeezing out the air! Memory tapped
sharply onhis mind. Balloon—in the square—Novem-
ber the first—joyful night! Special! Fleur! Perhaps
they brought luck. He moved and said in an astonished
voice: “ You, Bicket ? Is this your stunt now ?”

The large eyes of Bicket regarded him over a puce-
coloured sixpennyworth.

“Mr, Mont! Often thought I'd like to see you again,


>
.


Sit

“Same here, Bicket. If you’re not doing anything,
come and have some lunch.”

Bicket completed the globe’s collapse, and, closing
his tray-lid, said: “‘ Reelly, sir ?.”

** Rather | I was just going into the fish place.”

Bicket detached his tray.

“Tl leave this with the crossing-sweeper.” He did
so, and followed at Michael’s side.

* Any money in it, Bicket ?”

“ Bare livin’, sir.”

** How about this place ? We'll have oysters.”

A little saliva at the corner of Bicket’s mouth was
removed by a pale tongue.

At a small table decorated with white oilcloth and a
cruet stand, Michael sat down.

“Two dozen oysters, and all that; then two good
soles, and a bottle of Chablis. Hurry up, please.”

When the white-aproned fellow had gone about it,
Bicket said simply: “My Gawd!”


1g2 THE WHITE MONKEY


“ Yes, it's a funny world, Bicket.”

“Tt zs, and that’s a fact. This lunch’ll cost you a
pound, I shouldn’t wonder. If I take twenty-five bob
a week, it’s all I do.”

“You touch it there, Bicket. I eat my conscience
every day.”

Bicket shook his head.

“No, sit, if you’ve got money, spend it. I would. —
Be ’appy if you can—there yn’t too many that are.”

The white-aproned fellow began blessing them with
oysters. He brought them fresh-opened, three at a
time. Michael beardedthem; Bicket swallowed them
whole, Presently above twelve empty shells, he said :

“ That’s where the Socialists myke their mistyke, sir.
Nothing keeps me going but the sight of other people
spendin’ money. It’s what we might all come to
with a bit of luck. Reduce the world to a level of a
pound a dy—and it won’t even run to that, they sy |
It’s not good enough, sir. Td rather ’ave less with
the ’ope of more. Take away the gamble, and life’s
a frost. Here’s luck!”

“ Almost thou persuadest me to be a capitalist,
Bicket.”

A glow had come up in the thin and large-eyed face
behind the greenish Chablis glass.

* T wish to Gawd I had my wife here, sir. I told
you about her and the pneumonia. She’s all right
agyne now, only thin. She’s the prizeI drew. Idon’t
want a world where you can’t draw prizes. If it were
all bloomin’ conscientious an’ accordin’ to merit, I’d
never have got her. See?”

‘Me, too,’ thought Michael, mentally drawing that
face again,

““ We've all got our dreams; mine’s blue butterflies


MICHAEL WALKS AND TALKS E53


—Central Austrylia. The Socialists won’t ’elp me to
get there. Their ideas of ’eaven don’t run beyond
Europe.”

“ Cripes |” said Michael. “ Melted butter, Bicket ?”

“ Thank you, sir.”

Silence was not broken for some time, but the soles
were.

“ What made you think of balloons, Bicket ? ”

*“ You don’t ’ave to advertise, they do it for you.”

* Saw too much of advertising with us, eh?”

“Well, sir, I did use to read the wrappers. As-
tonished me, I will sy—the number of gryte books.”

Michael ran his hands through his hair.

“ Wrappers ! The same young woman being kissed
by the same young man with the same clean-cut jaw.
But what can you do, Bicket? They w#// have it. I
tried to make a break only this morning—lI shall see
what comes of it.” ‘And I hope you won’t!’ he
thought: ‘ Fancy coming on Fleur outside a novel |”

**I did notice a tendency just before I left,” said
Bicket, “to ’ave cliffs or landskips and two sorts of
dolls sittin’ on the sand or in the grass lookin’ as if
they didn’t know what to do with each other.”

“ Yes,”? mumured Michael, “ we tried that. It was
supposed not to be vulgar. But we soon exhausted
the public’s capacity. What’ll you have now~—
cheese ?”

“ Thank you, sir; I’ve had too much already, but I
won't say ‘ No.’”

“ Two Stiltons,” said Michael.

* How’s Mr. Desert, sir ? ”

Michael reddened.
“Oh! He’s all right.”
Bicket had reddened alos -


154 THE WHITE MONKEY


“ T wish—I wish you'd let him know that it was quite
a—an accident my pitchin’ on his book. I’ve always
regretted it.”

“Tt’s usually an accident, I think,” said Michael
slowly, “‘ when we snoop other people’s goods. We
never want to.”

Bicket looked up.

“No, sit, [don’tagree. ”Alf mankind’s predytory—
only, I’m not that sort, myself.”

In Michael loyalty tried to stammer “Nor is he.”
He handed his cigarette case to Bicket.

** Thank you, sir, I’m sure.”

His eyes were swimming, and Michael thought:
‘ Dash it! This is sentimental. Kiss me good-bye and
go!’ He beckoned up the white-aproned fellow.

“Give us your address, Bicket. If integuments are
any good to you, I might have some spare slops.”

Bicket backed the bill with his address and said,
hesitating : “I suppose, sir, Mrs. Mont wouldn’t ’ave
anything to spare. My wife’s about my height.”

“TL expect she would. We’ll send them along.” He
saw the little snipe’s lips quivering, and reached for his
overcoat. “If anything blows in, P’ll remember you.
Good-bye, Bicket, and good luck.”

Going east, because Bicket was going west, he
repeated to himself the maxim ; “ Pity is tripe—pity is
tripe!” Then getting on a *bus, he was borne back
past St. Paul’s. Cautiously “ taking a lunar ”’—as old
Forsyte put it—he saw Bicket inflating a balloon; little
was visible of his face or figure behind that rosy cir-
cumference. Nearing Blake Street, he developed an
invincible repugnance to work, and was carried on to
Trafalgar Square. Bicket had stirred him up. The
world was sometimes almost unbearably jolly. - Bicket,


MICHAEL WALKS AND TALES 155


Wiltrid, and the Ruhr! “Feeling is tosh! Pity is
tripe!’ He descended from his ’bus, and passed the
lions towards Pall Mall. Should he go into Snooks’
and ask for Bart ? No use—he would not find Fleur
there. That was what he really wanted—to see Fleur
in the daytime. But—where ? She was everywhere to
be found, and that was nowhete. ’

She was restless. Was that his fault? If he had
been Wilfsid—would she be restless ? ‘ Yes,’ he thought
stoutly, ‘ Wilfrid’s restless, too.” They were all restless
—all the people he knew. Atleast all the young ones—
in life and in letters. Look at their novels! Hardly
one in twenty had any repose, any of that quality which
made one turn back to a book as a corner of refuge.
They dashed and sputtered and skidded and rushed by
like motor cycles—violent, oh! and clever. How
tired he was of cleverness! Sometimes he would take
a manuscript home to Fleur for her opinion. He
remembered her saying once: “ This is exactly like life,

- Michael, it just rushes—it doesn’t dwell on anything
long enough to mean anything anywhere. Of course
the author didn’t mean it for satire, but if you publish
it, ladvise you to put: ‘ This awful satire on modern
life’ outside the cover.” And they had. At least,
they had put “ This wonderful satire on modern life.”
Fleur was like that! She could see the hurry, but, like
the author of the wonderful satire, she didn’t know that

_ she herself veered and hurried, or—did she know ?

Was she conscious of licking at life, like a flame
at air?

He had reached Piccadilly, and suddenly he remem-
bered that he had not called on her aunt forages. That
was a possible draw. He bent his steps towards Green
Street.


156 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Mrs. Dartie at home?”

Ves! sir.”

Michael moved his nostrils. Fleur used—but
he could catch no scent, except incense. Winifred
burnt joss-sticks when she remembered what a dis-
tinguished atmosphere they produced.

“What name ?p”

““Mr. Mont. My wife’s not here, I suppose ?”

“No, sir. Only Mrs. Val Dartie.”

Mrs. Val Dartie! Yes, he remembered, nice woman
—but not a substitute for Fleur! Committed, however,
he followed the maid.

In the drawing-room Michael found three people,
one of them his father-in-law, who had a grey and
brooding aspect, and, from an Empire chair, was
staring at blue Australian butterflies’ wings under glass
on a round scatlet table. Winifred had jazzed the
Empire foundations of her room with a superstructure
more suitable to the age. She greeted Michael with
fashionable warmth. It was good of him to come when
he was so busy with all these young poets. “I thought
“Copper Coin,’ ”’ she said—“ what a nice title |—such
an intriguing little book. I do think Mr. Desert is
clever! What is he doing now?”

Michael said: “ I don’t know,” and dropped on toa
settee beside Mrs. Val. Ignorant of the Forsyte family
feud, he was unable to appreciate the relief he had
brought in with him.’ Soames said something about .
the French, got up, and went to the window ; Winifred
joined him—their voices sounded confidential.

“‘ How is Fleur?” said Michael’s neighbour,

“ Thanks, awfully well.”

“ Do you like your house P”

* Oh, fearfully. Won’t you come and see it | ”


MIGHAEL WALKS AND TALKS 157


“T don’t know whether Fleur would——? ”

“Why not?”

“Oh! Well!”

*She’s frightfully accessible.”

She seemed to be looking at him with more interest
than he deserved, to be trying to make something out
from his face, and he added :

“You're a relation—by blood as well as marriage,
aren’t you?”

“ce Yes.”’

“Then what’s the skeleton?”

“Oh! nothing. Ill certainly come. Only—she
has so many friends.”

Michael thought: ‘I like this woman!’ “ As a
matter of fact,” he said, “I came here this afternoon
thinking I might find Fleur. I should like her to know
you. With all the jazz there is about, she’d appreciate
somebody restful.”

“ Thank you.”

“You’ve never lived in London?”

** Not since I was six.”

“I wish she could get a rest—pity there isn’t a
d-desett handy.” He had stuttered; the word was not
pronounced the same—still ! He glanced, disconcerted,
at the butterflies. “I’ve just been talking to’ a little
Cockney whose S.O.S. is ‘Central Austrylia.’ But
what do you say—Have we got souls to save?”

“T used to think so, but now I’m not so sure—
something’s struck me lately.”

“What was that ?”

“Well, I notice that any one at all out of proportion,
or whose nose is on one side, or whose eyes jut out, or
even have a special shining look, always believes in the
soul; people who are in proportion, and have no pro-


158 THE WHITE MONKEY


minent physical features, don’t seem to be really intere
ested.”

Michael’s ears moved.

“By Jove!” he said; “some thought! Fleur’s
beautifully proportioned—she doesn’t seem to worry.
I’m not—and I certainly do. The people in Covent
Garden must have lots of soul. You think ‘the
soul’s ’ the result of loose gearing in the organism—
sort of special consciousness from not working in
one piece.”

“ Yes, rather like that—what’s called psychic power
is, I’m almost sure.”

“TI say, is your life safe ? According to your theory,
though, we’re in a mighty soulful era. I must think
over my family. How about yours P”

“The Forsytes!_ Oh, they’re quite too well-pro-
portioned.”

“Tl agree, they haven’t any special juts so far as I’ve
seen. [he French, too, are awfully close knit. It
really is an idea, only, of course, most people see it the
other way. They’d say the soul produces the dis-
proportion, makes the eyes shine, bends the nose, and
all that ;. where the soul is small it’s not trying to get
out of the body, whence the barber’s block. Pll
think about it. Thanks for the tip. Well, do come and
see us. Good-bye! I don’t think Pll disturb them in
the window. Would you mind saying I had to scoot ?””
Squeezing a slim, gloved hand, receiving and returning
a smiling look, he slid out, thinking ‘ Dash the soul,
where’s her body ?’


CHAPTER IV


FLEUR’S BODY


Freur’s body, indeed, was at the moment in one of
those difficult positions which continually threatened
the spirit of compromise. It was in fact in Wilfrid’s
arms ; sufficiently, at least, to make her say :

“No, Wilfrid—you promised to be good.”

It was a really remarkable tribute to her power of
skating on thin ice that the word “ good ” should still
have significance. For eleven weeks exactly this young
man had danced on the edge of fulfilment, and was even
now divided from her by two clenched hands pressed
firmly against his chest, and the word “good”; and
this after not having seen her for a fortnight.

When she said it, he let her go, with a sort of violence,
and sat down on a piece of junk. Only the sense of
damnable iteration prevented him from saying; “It
can’t go on, Fleur.” She knew that! And yet it did!
This was what perpetually amazed him. How a poor
brute could hang on week after week saying to her and
to himself: ‘“‘ Now or never!” when it wasn’t either P
Subconsciousness, that, until the word “‘ now” had
been reached, Fleur would not know her own mind,
alone had kept him dancing. His own feelings were so
intense that he almost hated her for indecision. And he
was unjust. It was not exactlyin decision. Fleur
wanted the added richness and excitement which
Wilfrid’s affection gave to life, but without danger and
without loss. How natural! His frightful passionate-

159


Phed


160 THE WHITE MONKEY


ness was making all the trouble. Neither by her wish
nor through her fault, was he passionate! And yet—it
was both nice and proper to inspire passion; and, of
course, she had the lurking sense that she was not “in
the mode ” to cavil at a lover, especially since life owed
her one.

Released, she smoothed herself and said: “ Talk of
something sensible ; what have you been writing ?”

iii This.”

Fleur read. Flushing and biting her lips, she
said :

“It’s frightfully bitter.”

“It’s frightfully true. Dots be ever ask you now
whether you see me?”

Never.”

ee Why 2? ”

I don’t know.”

“* What would you answer if he did ?”

Fleur shrugged her shoulders.

Desert said quietly: “‘ Yes, that’s your attitude. It
can’t last, Fleur.” He was standing by the window.
She put the sheets down on his desk and moved towards
him. Poor Wilfrid! Now that he was quiet she was
sorry.

He said suddenly: “Stop! Don’t move! He’s
down there in the street.”

Recoiling, she gasped: ‘‘ Michael! Oh! But how—
how could he have known?”

Desert said grimly: “Do you only know him as
little as that ? Do you suppose he’d be there if he knew
you were here?”

Fleur winced.

** Why zs he there, then ?”

“He probably wants to see me. He looks as if he


FLEUR S$ BODY 161


couldn’t make up his mind. Don’t get the wind up,
he won't be let in.”

Fleur sat down; she felt weak in the legs. The ice
seemed suddenly of an appalling thinness—the water
appallingly cold.

“* Has he seen you ?” she said.

ee No.”

The thought flashed through him : ‘ If I were a black-
guard, I could force her hand, by moving one step and
crooking my finger.’ Pity one wasn’t a blackguard—
at all events-not to that point—things would be so
much simpler |

“ Where is he now ?”” asked Fleur.

“ Going away.”

In profound relief, she sighed out :

“ But it’s queer, isn’t it, Wilfrid P”

“You don’t suppose he’s easy in his mind, do you ?”

Fleur bit her lips. He was jeering, because she
didn’t or couldn’t really love either of them. It was
unjust. She cow/d have loved—she had loved! Wilfrid
and Michael—they might go to the deuce |

“I wish 1 had never come here,” she said suddenly ;
“and Pll never come again!”

He went to the door, and held it open.

“You are right.”

Fleur stood quite still, her chin on the collar of her
fur, her clear, glancing eyes fixed on his face, her lips
set and mutinous.

“You think ’ma heartless beast,” she said slowly.
“So lam—now. Good-bye!”

He neither took her hand nor spoke, he only bowed.
His eyes were very tragic. Trembling with mortifica-
tion, Fleur went out. She heard the door closed,
while she was going down the stairs. At the bottom


162 THE WHITE MONKEY


she stood uncertain. Suppose Michael had come back |
Almost opposite was the gallery where she had first
met him and—Jon. Slip across in there! If he were
still hovering round the entrance of the little street, she
could tell him with a good conscience where she had
been. She peeped. Not in sight! Swiftly she slid
. across into the doorway opposite, They would be
closing in a minute—just on four o’clock! She put
down a shilling and slipped in. She must see—in
case! She stood tevolving—one man show, the man—
Claud Brains! She put down another shilling for a
catalogue, and read as she went out. “No.7. Woman
getting the wind up.” It told her everything; and
with a light heart she skimmed along, and took a
taxi. Get home before Michael! She felt relieved,
almost exhilarated. So much for skating on thin ice]!
It wasn’t good enough. Wilfrid must go. Poor
Wilfrid! Well, he shouldn’t have sneered—what did
he know of her P- Nobody knew anything of her! She
was alone in the world. She slipped her latch key into
the hall door. No Michael. She sat down in the
drawing-room before the fire, and took up Walter
Nazing’s last. She read a page three times. It meant
no more with every treading—it meant less ; he was
the kind of author who must be read at a gallop, and
given away lest a first impression of wind in the hair be
lost in a sensation of wind lewer down; but Wilfrid’s
eyes came between her and the words. Pity! Nobody
pitied her; why, then, should she pity them? Besides,
pity was “ pop,” as Amabel would say. The situation
demanded cast iron sense. But Wilfrid’s eyes! Well
—she wouldn’t be seeing them again! Beautiful eyes
when they smiled or when—so much more often—
they looked at ber with longing, as now between her


FLEUR’S BODY 163


and the sentence: “Solemnly and with a delicious
egoism he more than awfully desired her who snug
and rosy in the pink shell of her involuted and so
petulant social periphrasis ” Poor Wilfrid! Pity
was “ pop,” but there was pride! Did she choose that
he should go away thinking that she had “ played him
up ” just out of vanity, as Walter Nazing said American
women did? Did sher Would it not be more in the
mode, really dramatic—if one “went over the deep
end,” as they said, just once? Would that not be
something they could both look back on—he in that
Hast he was always talking of, she in this West ? The
proposition had a momentary popularity in that
organism called Fleur too finely proportioned for a
soul, according to the theory which Michael was
thinking over. Like all popularities, it did not last.
First : Would she like it ?. She did not think she would;
one man, without love, was quite enough. ‘Then there
was the danger of passing into Wilfrid’s power. He was
a gentleman, but he was passionate; the cup once
sipped, would he consent to put it down? But more
than all was a physical doubt of the last two or three
weeks which awaited verification, and which made her
feel solemn. She stood up and passed her hands all
over her, with a definite recoil from the thought of
Wilfrid’s hands doing the same. No! To have his
friendship, his admiration, but not at that price. She
viewed him, suddenly, as a bomb set on her copper
floor; and in fancy ran and seized and flung him out
into the Square—poor Wilfrid! Pity was “pop”!
But one might be sorry for onese/f, losing him; losing
too that ideal of modern womanhood expounded to
her one evening by Marjorie Ferrar, pet of the “ pan-
joys,” whose red gold hair excited so much admiration :


7.


164 THE WHITE MONKEY


“My ambition—old thing—is to be the perfect wife
of one man, the perfect mistress of another, and the
perfect mother of a third, all at once. It’s perfectly
possible—they do it in France.”

But was it really so perfectly possible—even if pity
was posh ?, How be perfect to Michael, when the slight-
est slip might reveal to him that she was being perfect to
Wilfrid; how be perfect to Wilfrid, when every time
she was perfect to Michael would bea dagger in Wilfrid’s
heart? And if—-if her physical doubt should mature
into certainty, how be perfect mother to the certainty,
when she was either torturing two men, or lying to
them like a trowperess ? Not so perfectly possible as
all that! ‘If onty I were all French!’ thought
Hleur! sare).

The clicking door startled her—the reason that she
was not all French was coming in. He looked very
grey, as if he had been thinking too much. He kissed
her, and sat down moodily before the fire.

** Have you come for the night, Dad ?”

“If I may,” murmured Soames. ‘‘ Business.”

“ Anything unpleasant, ducky ?”

Soames looked up as if startled.

*« Unpleasant ? Why should it be unpleasant ?.”

“TI only thought from your face.”

Soames grunted. “This Ruhr!” he said. “I’ve
brought you a picture. Chinese!”

“Oh, Dad! How jolly!”

“Tt isn’t,” said Soames; “it’s a monkey eating
fruit.”

* But that’s perfect! Where is it—in the hall ?”

Soames nodded.

Stripping the coverings off the picture, Fleur brought
it in, and setting it up on the jade-green settee stood


FLEUR’S BODY 165


away and looked at it. The large white monkey with
its brown haunting eyes, as if she had suddenly wrested
its interest from the orange-like fruit in its crisped paw,
the grey background, the empty rinds all round—
bright splashes in a general ghostliness of colour,
impressed her at once.

“But, Dad, it’s a masterpiece—I’m sure it’s of -a
frightfully good period.”

“T don’t know,” said Soames, ‘I must look up the
Chinese.”

“ But you oughtn’t to give it to me, it must be worth
any amount. You ought to have it in your collection.”

“ They didn’t know its value,” said Soames, and a
faint smile illuminated his features. “I gave three
hundred for it. It'll be safer here.”

** Of course it’ll be safe. Only why safer?”

Soames turned towards the picture.

“T can’t tell. Anything may come of this,”

“Of what, dear?”

“Is ‘Old Mont’ coming in to-night ? ”

“No, he’s at Lippinghall still.”

“Well, it doesn’t matter—he’s no good.”

Fleur took his hand and gave it a squeeze.

“Tell me!”

Soames’ tickled heart quivered. Fancy her wanting
to know what was troubling him! But his sense of the
becoming and his fear of giving away his own alarm
forbade response.

“ Nothing you’d understand,” he said. “‘ Where are
you going to hang it ?”

“ There, I think; but we must wait for Michael.”

Soames grumbled out :

“Tsaw him just now at your aunt’s. Is that the way
he attends to business ?”


166 THE WHITE MONKEY


* Perhaps,’ thought Fleur, ‘ he was only on his way
back to the office. Cork Street 7s more or less between,
If he passed the end of it, he would think of Wilfrid, he
might have been wanting to see him about books.’

“* Oh, here’s Ting! Well, darling!”

The Chinese dog, let in, as it were, by Providence,
secing Soames, sat down suddenly with snub upturned
and eyes brilliant. “The expression of your face,”
he seemed to say, “pleases me. We belong to the
past and could sing hymns together, old man,”

“Funny little chap,” said Soames; “he always
knows me.”

Fleur lifted him. ‘“*‘ Come and see the new monkey,
ducky.”

* Don’t let him lick it.”

Held rather firmly by his jade-green collar and con-
fronted by an inexplicable piece of silk smelling of the
past, Ting-a-ling raised his head higher and higher to

- correspond with the action of his nostrils, and his little
tongue appeared, tentatively savouring the emanation
of his country.

“Tt’s a nice monkey, isn’t it, darling ?”

“No,” said Ting-a-ling, rather clearly. “ Put me
down!”

Restored to the floor, he sought a patch where the
copper came through between two rugs, and licked it
quietly.

“Mr. Aubrey Greene, ma’am |”

*H’m!”> said Soames.

The painter came gliding and glowing in; his bright
hair slipping back, his green eyes sliding off.

“Ah!” he said, pointing to the floor. “ That’s
what I’ve come about.”

Fleur followed his finger in amazement.


FLEUR’S BODY 167


“Ting!” she said severely, “ stop it! He will lick
the copper, Aubrey.”

“ But how perfectly Chinese! They do everything
we don’t.”

“‘ Dad—Aubrey Greene, My father’s just brought
me this picture, Aubrey—isn’t it a gem?”

The painter stood quite still, his eyes ceased sliding
off, his hair ceased slipping back.

“Phew!” he said.

Soames rose. He had waited for the flippant; but
he recognised in the tone something reverential, if not
aghast.

*“ By George,” said Aubrey Greene, “ those eyes!
Where did you pick ut up, sir ?”

“Tt belonged to a cousine of mine—a racing man.
It was his only picture.”

** Good for him! He must have had taste.”

Soames stared. The idea that George should have
had taste almost appalled him.

“No,” he said, with a flash of inspiration: “ What
he liked about it was that it makes you feel uncomfort-
able.”’

* Same thing! I don’t know where I’ve seen a more
pungent satire on human life.”

“I don’t follow,” said Soames dryly.

“ Why, it’s a perfect allegory, sir! Eat the fruits of
life, scatter the rinds, and get copped doing it. When
they’re still, a monkey’s eyes are the human tragedy
incarnate. ._Lookatthem! He thinks there’s something
beyond, and he’s sad or angry because he can’t get at
it. That picture ought to be in the British Museum,
sir, with the label; ‘ Civilisation, caught out.’ ”

_ “Well, it won’t be,” said Fleur. “It'll be here,
labelled ‘ The White Monkey.’ ”


168 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Same thing.”

“* Cynicism,” said Soames abruptly, “ gets you no-
where. If you’d said ‘ Modernity caught out” ”

“T do, sir; but why be narrow ? You don’t seriously
suppose this age is worse than any other ?”

“Don’t 1?” said Soames. ‘ In my belief the world
reached its highest point in the eighties, and will never
reach it again.”

The painter stared.

“ That’s frightfully interesting. I wasn’t born, andI
suppose you were about my age then, sir. You believed
in God and drove in diligences.”

Diligences | The word awakened in Soames a memory
which somehow seemed appropriate.

“Yes,” he said, “‘ and I can tell you a story of those
days that you can’t match in these. When I was a
youngster in Switzerland with my people, two of my
sisters had some black cherries. When they'd eaten
about half a dozen they discovered that they all had
little maggots in them. An English climber there saw
how upset they were, and ate the whole of the rest of
the cherries—about two pounds—maggots, stones and
all, just to show them. That was the sort of men they
were then,”

“Oh! Father!”

“Gee! He must have been gone on them.”

“No,” said Soames, “ not particularly. His name
was Powley; he wore side whiskers.”

“Talking of God and diligences; I saw a hansom
yesterday.”

‘More to the point if you’d seen God,’ thought
Soames, but he did not say so; indeed, the thought
surprised him, it was not the sort of thing he had ever
seen himself.


FLEUR’S BODY 169


“You mayn’t know it, sit, but there’s more belief
now than there was before the war—they’ve discovered
that we’re not all body.”

“Oh!” said Fleur. “That reminds me, Aubrey.
' Do you know any mediums ? Could I get one to come
here? On our floor, with Michael outside the door,
one would know there couldn’t be any hanky. Do the
dark séance people ever go out ?>—they’re much more
thrilling, they say.”

“Spiritualism!” said Soames. ‘“H’mph!” He
could not in half an hour have expressed himself more
clearly.

Aubrey Greene's eyes slid off to Ting-a-ling. “TU
see what I can do, if you’ll lend me your Peke for an
hour or so to-morrow afternoon. Id bring him back
on a lead, and give him every luxury.”

“ What do you want him for?”

“ Michael sent me a most topping little model to-day.
But, you see, she can’t smile.”

“* Michael ?”

“Yes. Something quite new; and Ive got a
scheme. Her smile’s like sunlight going off an Italian
valley ; but when you tell herto,she can’t. I thought
your Peke could make her perhaps.”

“May I come and see ?” said Fleur.

“ Yes, bring him to-morrow ; but, if I can persuade
her, it'll be in the ‘ altogether.’”

“Oh! Will you get me a séance, if I lend you
Ting 2”

“T will.”

“Hmph!” said Soames again. Séances! Italian
sunlight, the “altogether!” It was time he got back
to Elderson, and what was to be done now, and left
this fiddling while Rome burned.


i7o THE WHITE MONKEY


“‘ Good-bye, Mr. Greene,” he said; “Tye got no
time.”

“ Quite, sir,” said Aubrey Greene.

* Quite |” mimicked Soames to himself, going out.

Aubrey Greene took his departure a few minutes later,
crossing a lady in the hall who was delivering her name
to the manservant.

Alone with her body, Fleur again passed her hands
all over it. The “altogether ”’—was a reminder of the
dangers of dramatic conduct.


CHAPTER V


FLEUR’S SOUL


* Mrs. Vat Dartiz, ma’am.”

A name which could not be distorted even by
Coaker affected her like a finger applied suddenly to the
head of the sciatic nerve. Holly! Not seen since the
day when she did not marry Jon. Holly! A flood of
remembrance—Wansdon, the Downs, the gravel pit,
the apple orchard, the river, the copse at Robin Hill!
No! It was not a pleasant sensation—to see Holly and
she said: “ How awfully nice of you to come ! ”

“T met your husband this afternoon at Green Street ;
he asked me. What a lovely room! ”

“Ting! Come and be inttoduced! This is Ting-a-
ling ; isn’t he perfect ? He’s a little upset because of the /
new monkey. How’s Val, and dear Wansdon? It
was too wonderfully peaceful.”

“It’s a nice backwater. I don’t get tired of it.”

s* And. ” said Fleur, with a little hard laugh,
ee Jon ? 2?

“ He’s growing peaches in North Carolina. British
Columbia didn’t do.”

* Oh! Is he married ?”

“e No.”

*I suppose he’ll marry an American,”

* He isn’t twenty-two, you know.”

“Good Lord!” said Fleur: “ Am Ionly twenty-
one! I feel forty-eight.”

17%


172 THE WHITE MONKEY


* That’s living in the middle of things and seeing so
many people A

“ And getting to know none.”

“But don’t you?”

“No, itisn’t done. I mean weall call each other by
our Christian names ; but apres. 4

** T like your husband very much.”

“Oh! yes, Michael’s a dear, How’s June?”

“I saw her yesterday—she’s got a new painter, of
course—Claud Brains. I believe he’s what they call a
Vertiginist.”

Fleur bit her lips.

“Yes, they’re quitecommon. Isuppose June thinks
he’s the only one,”

* Well, she thinks he’s a genius.”

* She’s wonderful.”

** Yes,” said Holly, “the most loyal creature in ihe
world while it lasts. It’s like poultry farming—once
they’re hatched. You never saw Boris Strumolowski?”

“e No. >>

““ Well, don’t.”

“I know his bust of Michael’s uncle. It’s rather
sane.”

“Yes. June thought it a pot-boiler, and he never
torgave her. Of course it was. As soon as her swan
makes muney, she looks round for another. She’s a
darling.”

“Yes,” murmured Fleur; “ [liked June.”

Another flood of remembrance—from a tea-shop,
from the river, from June’s little dining-room, from
where in Green Street she had changed her wedding
dress under the upward gaze of June’s blue eyes. She
seized the monkey and held it up.

“Isn't it a picture of ‘life’ ?”? Would she have said


FLEUR’S SOUL 173


that if Aubrey Greene hadn’t ? Still it seemed very true
at the moment.

“Poor monkey!” said Holly. “I’m always
frightfully sorry for monkeys. But it’s marvellous, I
think.”

“Yes. I’m going to hang it here. IfIcan get one
more, I shall have done in this room; only people
have so got on to Chinese things. This was luck—
somebody died—George Forsyte, you know, the racing
one.”

“Oh!” said Holly softly. She saw again her old
kinsman’s japing eyes in the church when Fleur was
being married, heard his throaty whisper, “ Will she
stay the course ?”? And was she staying it, this pretty
filly? “‘ Wish she could geta rest, If only there were
a desert handy!” Well, one couldn’t ask a question
so personal, and Holly took refuge in a general remark.

“ What do all you smart young people feel about life,
nowadays, Fleur >—when one’s not of it and has lived
twenty years in South Africa, one still feels out of it.”

“Life! Oh! well, we know it’s supposed to be
a riddle, but we’ve given it up. We just want to have
a good time because we don’t believe anything can last.
But I don’t think we know how to have it. We just
fly on, and hope for it. Of course, there’s art, but
most of us aren’t artists; besides, expressionism—
Michael says it’s got no inside. We gas about it, but
I suppose it hasn’t. I see a frightful lot of writers
and painters, you know; they’re supposed to be
amusing,”

Holly listened, amazed. Who would have thought
that this girl sew? She might be seeing wrong, but
anyway she saw |

“ Surely,” she said, “ you enjoy yourselves ? *


174 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Well, I like getting hold of nice things, and inter-
esting people; I like seeing everything that’s new and
worth while, or seems so at the moment. But that’s
just how it is—nothing lasts. You see, I’m not of the
‘Pan-joys,’ nor of the ‘ new-faithfuls.’ ”

“ The new-faithfuls ? ”

“Oh! don’t you know—it’s a sort of faith-healing
done on oneself, not exactly the old ‘ God-good, good-
God!’ sort; but a kind of mixture of will-power,
psycho-analysis, and belief that everything will be all
right on the night if you say it will. You must
have OPAG HAGLORS them. They’re frightfully in
earnest.”

“I know,” said Holly; “ their eyes shine.”

“IT daresay. I don’t believe in them—I dale
believe in anyone; or anything—much. How can
one ?”

“ How about simple people, and hard work ? ”

Fleur sighed. “I daresay. I will say for Michael
—te's not spoiled. Let’s have tea? Tea, Ting?”
and turning up the lights, she rang the bell.

When her unexpected visitor had gone, she sat very
still before the fire. To-day, when she had been so
very nearly Wilfrid’s! So Jon was not married]
Not that it made any odds! Things did not come round
as they were expected to in books. And anyway
sentiment was swosh! Cut it out! She tossed back
her hair; and, getting hammer and nail, proceeded to
hang the white monkey. Between the two tea-chests
with their coloured pearl-shell figures, he would look
his best. Since she couldn’t have Jon, what did it
matter—Wilfrid or Michael, or both, or neither ?
Eat the orange in her hand, and throw away the rind |
And suddenly she became aware that Michael was ia


FLEUR’S SOUL 175


the room. He had come in very quietly and was
standing before the fire behind her. She gave him
a quick look and said:

“T’ve had Aubrey Greene here about a model you
sent him, and Holly—Mrs. Val Dartie—she said she’d
seen you. Oh! and father’s brought us this. Isn’t
it perfect ?”

Michael did not speak. .

** Anything the matter, Michael P”

*“No, nothing.” He went up to the monkey.
From behind him now Fleur searched his. profile.
Instinct told her of a change. Had he, after all, seen
her going to Wilfrid’s—coming away ?

“Some monkey!” he said. “ By the way, have you
any spare clothes you could give the wife of a poor
snipe—nothing too swell P”

She answered mechanically: “ Yes, of course”
while her brain worked furiously.

“Would you put them out, then? I’m going to
make up a bunch for him myself—they could go
together.”

Yes! He was quite unlike himself, as if the spring
in him had run down. A sort of mataise overcame her, |
Michael not cheerful! It was like the fire going out
on a cold day. And, perhaps for the first time, she
was conscious that his cheerfulness was of real import-
ance to her, She watched him pick up Ting-a-ling
and sit down. And going up behind him, she bent
over till her hair was against his cheek. Instead of
rubbing his cheek on hers, he sat quite still, and her
heart misgave her.

* What is it P” she said, coaxing.

“ Nothing | ”

She took hold of his ears.


176 THE WHITE MONKEY


“But there is. I suppose you know somehow that
I went to see Wilfrid.”

He said stonily : “ Why not?”

She let go, and stood up straight.

“Tt was only to tell him that I couldn’t see him
again.” :

That half-truth seemed to her the whole.

He suddenly looked up, a quiver went over his face;
he took her hand.

“Tt’s all right, Fleur. You must do what you like,
you know. ‘That’s only fair. I had too much lunch.”

Fleur withdrew to the middle of the room.

** You’re rather an angel,” she said slowly, and went
out.

Upstairs she looked out garments, confused in her
soul,


CHAPTER V1


MICHAEL GETS “ WHAT-FOR ™”


Arter his Green Street quest Michael had wavered
back down Piccadilly, and, obeying one of those
impulses which make people hang around the centres
of disturbance, on to ‘Cork Street. He stood for
a minute at the mouth of Wilfrid’s backwater.

‘No,’ he thought, at last, ‘ten to one he isn’t in;
and if he is, twenty to one that I get any change except
bad change ! ’

He was moving slowly on to Bond Street, when
a little light lady, coming from the backwater, and
reading as she went, ran into him from behind.

“Why don’t you look where you’re going! Oh!
You? Aren’t you the young man who married Fleur
Forsyte? I’m her cousin, June. I thought I saw her
just now.” She waved a hand which held a catalogue
with a gesture like the flirt of a bird’s wing. “ Op-
posite my gallery. She went into a house, or I should
have spoken to her—I’d like to have seen her again.”

Into a house! Michael dived for his cigarette-case.
Hard-grasping it, he looked up. The little lady’s blue
eyes were sweeping from side to side of his face with
a searching candour.

** Are you happy together ?” she said. <

A cold sweat broke out on his forehead. A sense
of general derangement afflicted him—hers, and his
own.

“J beg your pardon ?”’ he gasped.

177


178 THE WHITE MONKEY


“IT hope you are. She ought to have married my
‘little brother—but I hope you are. She’s a pretty
child.”

In the midst of a dull sense of stunning blows, it
staggered him that she seemed quite unconscious of

‘ inflicting them, He heard his teeth gritting, and said
dully: “ Your little brother, who was he ?”

“ What! Jon—didn’t you know Jon? He was too
young, of course, and so was she. But they were head
over—the family feud stopped that. Well! it’s all
past. I was at your wedding. I hope you’re happy.
Have you seen the Claud Brains show at my gallery ?
He’s a genius. I was going to have a bun in here;
will you join me? You ought to know his work.”

She had paused at the door of a confectionet’s,
‘Michael put his hand on his chest.

* Thank you,” he said, “I have just had a bun—two,
in fact. Excuse me!”

The little lady grasped his other hand.

“Well, good-bye, young man! Glad to have met
you. You’re not a beauty, but I like your face,
Remember me to that child. You should go and see
Claud Brains. He’s a real genius.”

Stock-still before the door, he watched her turn and
enter, with a scattered motion, as of flying, and a dis-
turbance among those seated in the pastry-cook’s,
Then he moved on, the cigarette unlighted in his mouth,
dazed, as a boxer from a blow which knocks him sides
ways, and another which knocks him straight again.

_ Fleur visiting Wilfrid—at this moment in his rooms
up there—in his arms, perhaps! He groaned. A
_ well-fed young man in a new hat skipped at the sound.
Never! He could never stick that! He would have
to clear out! He had believed Fleur honest | A double


MICHAEL GETS  WHAYI-FOR ™ 179


life! The night before last she had smiled on him.
Oh! God! He dashed across into Green Park.
Why hadn’t he stood still and let something go over
him? And that lunatic’s little brother—John—
family feud? Himself—a pis aller, then—taken with-
out love at all—a makeshift! He remembered now
her saying one night at Mapledurham: “ Come again
when I know I can’t get my wish.” So that was the
wish she couldn’t get! A makeshift! ‘ Jolly,’ he
thought: ‘Oh! jolly!’ No wonder, then! What
could she care? One man or another! Poor little
devil! She had never let him know—never breathed
awotd! Was that decent of her—or was it treachery ?
* No,’ he thought, ‘ if she had told me, it wouldn’t have
made any difference—I’d have taken her at any price.
It was decent of her not to tell me.’ But how was it
he hadn’t heard from some one? Family feud?
The Forsytes ! Except “ Old Forsyte,” he never saw
them; and “Old Forsyte” was closer than a fish.
Well! he had got what-for! And again he groaned,
in the twilight spaces of the Park. Buckingham
Palace loomed up unlighted, huge and dreary. Con-
scious of his cigarette at last, he stopped to strike a
match, and drew the smoke deep into his lungs with
the first faint sense of comfort.

“You couldn’t spare us a cigarette, Mister ? ”

A shadowy figure with a decent sad face stood beside
the statue of Australia, so depressingly abundant |

* Of course!” said Michael; “‘ take the lot.” He
emptied the case into the man’s hand. “ Take the
case too— present from Westminster ’—you’ll get
thirty bob for it. Good luck!” He hurried on,
A faint: “Hi, Mister!” pursued him unavailingly.
Pity was pulp! Sentiment was bilge! Was he going


180 THE WHITE MONKEY


home to wait till Fleur had—finished and come back.
Not he! He turned towards Chelsea, batting along
as hard as he could stride. Lighted shops, gloomy
great Eaton Square, Chester Square, Sloane Square,
the King’s Road—along, along! Worse than the
trenches—far worse—this whipped and scorpioned
sexual jealousy! Yes, and he would have felt even
worse, but for that second blow. Less painful to
know that Fleur had been, still might be, in love with
that cousin, and Wilfrid, too, perhaps, nothing to her.
Poor little wretch! ‘ Well, what’s the game now ?” he
thought. The game of life—in bad weather, in stress P
What was it? Inthe war—what had a fellow done ?
Somehow managed to feel himself not so dashed
important; reached a condition of acquiescence,
fatalism, “* Who dies if England live” sort of sob-stuff
state. The game of life? Was it different?
“ Bloody but unbowed ” might be tripe; still—get up
when you were knocked down! The whole was big,
oneself was little! Passion, jealousy, ought they
properly to destroy one’s sportsmanship, as Nazing
and Sibley and Linda Frewe would have it? Was the
word “ gentleman” a dud? Was it? Did one keep
one’s form, or get down to squealing and kicking in
the stomach ?

“TI don’t know,’ he thought, ‘I don’t know what
1 shall do when I see her—I simply don’t know.’
Steel-blue of the fallen evening, bare plane-trees, wide
river, frosty air! He turned towards home, He
opened his front door, trembling, and trembling went
into the drawing-room... .

When Fleur had gone upstairs and left him with
Ting-a-ling he didn’t know whether he believed her or
not. If she had kept that other thing from him all


MICHAEL GETS ‘‘ WHAT-FOR ”” 181


this time, she could keep anything! Had she under-
stood his words: ‘‘ You must do as you like, that’s
only fair?’’ He had said them almost mechanically,
but they were reasonable. If she had never loved him,
even a little, he had never had any right to expect
anything; he had been all the time in the position of
one to whom she was giving alms. And nothing
compelled one to go on taking them—except—the
ache of want, the ache, the ache)

“You little Djinn! You lucky little toad! Give
me some of your complacency—you Chinese atom! ”
Ting-a-ling turned up his boot-buttons. “ When you
have been civilised as long as I,” they seemed to say :
“In the meantime, scratch my chest.”

And scrattling in that yellow fur Michael thought :
* Pull yourself together! Man at the South Pole with
the first blizzard doesn’t sing: “‘ Want to go home!
Want to go home | ”’—he sticks it. Come, get going !’
He placed Ting-a-ling on the floor, and made for his
study. Here were manuscripts, of which the readers
to Danby and Winter had already said: “ No money
in this, but a genuine piece of work meriting considera-
tion.” It was Michael’s business to give the con-
sideration; Danby’s to turn the affair down with
the words: “ Write him (or her) a civil letter, say we
were greatly interested, regret we do not see our way
—hope to have the privilege of considering next effort,
and so forth. What!”

He turned up his adie vaca and pulled out a
manuscript he had already begun.


“* No retreat, no retreat; they must conquer or die who have
mo retreat;

“< No retreat, no retreat; they must conquer or die who have
wo vetreat |”’


182 THE WHITE MONKEY


The black footmen’s refrain from “ Polly ” was all
that happened in his mind. Dash it! He must read
the thing! Somehow he finished the chapter. He
remembered tiow. The manuscript was all about
a man who, when he was a boy, had been so greatly
impressed by the sight of a maid-servant changing het
clothes in a room over the way, that his married life
was a continual struggle not to be unfaithful with his
wife’s maids. ‘They had just discovered his complex,
and he was going to have it out. The rest of the
manuscript no doubt would show how that was done.
It went most conscientiously into all those precise
bodily details which it was now so timorous and Vic-
torian to leave out. Genuine piece of work, and waste
of time to go on with it! Old Danby—Freud bored
him stiff; and for once Michael did not mind old
Danby being in the right. He put the thing back into
the drawer. Seven o’clock! Tell Fleur what he had
been told about that cousin? Why? Nothing
could mend ¢hat ! If only she were speaking the truth
about Wilfrid! He went to the window—stars above,
and stripes below, stripes of courtyard and back
gatden. “No retreat, no retreat; they must conquer
or die who have no retreat!”

A voice said:

** When will your father be up ?”

Old Forsyte! Lord! Lord!

“To-morrow, I believe, sir. Comein! You don’t
know my den, I think.”

“No,” said Soames. “Snug! Caricatures. You
go in for them—poor stuff | ”

“ But not modern, sir—a revived art.”

*Queering your neighbours—I\ never cared for
them. _They only flourish when the world’s in a mess


MICHAEL GETS | WHAT-FOR”’ 183


and people have given up looking straight before
them.”

“ By Jove!” said Michael; “‘ that’s-good. Won't
you sit down, sir?”

Soames sat down, crossing his knees in his ac-
customed manner. Slim, grey, close—a sealed book,
neatly bound! What was dis complex? Whatever
it was, he had never had it out. One could not even
imagine the operation,

“J shan’t take away my Goya,” he said very unex-
pectedly; “consider it Fleur’s. In fact, if I only
knew you were interested in the future, I should make
more provision. In my opinion death duties will be
prohibitive in a few years’ time.”

Michael frowned. “I'd like you to know, sir, once
for all, that what you do for Fleur, you do for Fleur.
I can be Epicurus whenever I like—bread, and on
feast days a little bit of cheese.”

Soames looked up with shrewdness in his glance.
7 know that,” he said, “ I always knew it.”

Michael bowed.

“With this land depression your father’s hard hit,
I should think.”

“ Well, he talks of being on the look out for soap or
cats; but I shouldn’t be surprised if he mortgages
again and lingers on.”

“A title without a place,” said Soames, “is not
natural. He’d better wait for me to go, if I leave
anything, thatis. Butlistentome: I’ve been thinking.
Aren’t you happy together, you two, that you don’t
have children ?”

Michael hesitated.

“T don’t think,” he said slowly, “ that we have ever
had a scrap, or anything like it. I have been—I am—

G


184 THE WHITE MONKEY


terribly fond of her, but you have known better than
I that I only picked up the pieces.”
* Who told you that ? ”
. “ To-day—Miss June Forsyte.”

“ That woman!” said Soames. “She can’t keep
her foot out of anything. A boy and girl affair—over
months before you married.”

** But deep, sir,” said Michael gently.

“Deep—who knows at ihat ageP Deep?”
Soames paused: “ You’re a good fellow—I always
knew. Be patient—take a long view.”

“ Yes, sit,” said Michael, very still in his chair, “ if
I can.”

“She’s everything to me,” muttered Soames
abruptly.

** And to me—which doesn’t make it easier.”

The line between Soames’ brows deepened.

** Perhaps not. But hold on! As gently as you like,
but hold on! She’s young. She’ll flutter about;
there’s nothing in it.”

‘Does he know about the other thing P’” thought
Michael.

“T have my own wotties,” went on Soames, “ but
they’re nothing to what I should feel if anything went
wrong with her.”

Michael felt a twinge of sympathy, unusual towards
that self-contained grey figure.

“I shall try my best,” he said quietly; “but ’'m
not naturally Solomon at six stone seven.”

*‘T’m not so sure,”’ said Soames, “‘ I’m not so sure.
Anyway, a child—well, a child would be—a—sort of
insur ”” He baulked, the word was not pre-
cisely: |

Michael froze.


MICHAEL GETS ** WHAT-FOR ”* 185


** As to that, I can’t say anything.”

Soames got up.

* No,” he said wistfully, “I suppose not. It’s time
to dress.”

To dress—to dine, and if to dine, to sleep—to sleep,
to dream! And then what dreams might come!

On the way to his dressing-room Michael encount-
ered Coaker; the man’s face was long.

* What’s up, Coaker ? ”

“The little dog, sir, has been sick in the drawing-
room.”

** The deuce he has |”

“Yes, sir; it appears that some one left him there
alone. He makes himself felt, sir. I always say:
He’s an important little dog. . . .”

During dinner, as if visited by remorse for having
given them advice and two pictures worth some
thousands of pounds, Soames pitched a tale like those
of James in his palmy days. He spoke of the French
—the fall of the mark—the rise in Consols—the
obstinacy of Dumetrius, the picture-dealer, over
a Constable skyscape which Soames wanted and Dume-
trius did not, but to which the fellow held on just for
the sake of a price which Soames did not mean to pay.
He spoke of the trouble which he forsaw with the
United States over their precious Prohibition. They
were a headstrong lot. They took up a thing and ran
their heads against a stone wall. He himself had never
drunk anything to speak of, but he liked to feel that
he could. The Americans liked to feel that he couldn’t,
that was tyranny. They were overbearing. He
shouldn’t be surprised if everybody took to drinking
over there. As to the League of Nations, a man that
morning had palavered it up. That cock wouldn’t


186 THE WHITE MONKEY


fight—spend money, and arrange things which would
have arranged themselves, but as for anything import-
ant, such as abolishing Bolshevism, or poison gas,
they never would, and to pretend it was all-me-eye-and-
Betty-Martin. It was almost a record for one habitu-
ally taciturn, and deeply useful to two young people
only anxious that he should continue to talk, so that
they might think of other things. The conduct. of
Ting-a-ling was the sole other subject of consideration,
Fleur thought it due to the copper floor. Soames
that he must have picked up something in the Square
—dogs were always picking things up. Michael
suggested that it was just Chinese—a protest against
there being nobody to watch his self-sufficiency. In
China there were four hundred million people to watch
each other being self-sufficient. What would one
expect of a Chinaman suddenly placed in the Gobi
Desert? He would certainly be sick.

“No retreat, no retreat; they must conquer or die
who have no retreat | ”

When Fleur left them, both felt that they could not
so soon again bear each other’s company, and Soames
said: “Tve got some figures to attend to—I’ll go to
my room.”

Michael stood up. ‘‘ Wouldn’t you like my den,
sir?”

_ “No,” said Soames, “I must concentrate, Say
good-night to Fleur for me.”

Michael remained smoking above the porcelain
effigies of Spanish fruits, That white monkey couldn’t
eat those and throw away the rinds! Would the fruits
of his life be porcelain in future? Live in the same
house with Fleur, estranged? Live with Fleur as
now, feeling a stranger, even an unwelcome stranger ?


MICHAEL GETS “* WHAT-FOR ” 187


Clear out, and join the Air Force, or the “ Save the
Children” corps? Which of the three courses was
least to be deplored? The ash of his cigar grew long,
dropped incontinent, and grew again; the porcelain
fruits mocked him with their sheen and glow; Coaker
put his head in and took it away again. (The Govenor
had got the hump—good sort, the Govenor!)
D&cision waited for him, somewhere, somewhen—
Fleur’s, not his own. His mind was too miserable
and disconcerted to be known; but she would know
hers. She had the information which alone made
decision possible about Wilfrid, that cousin, her own
actions and feelings. Yes, decision would come, and
would it matter in a world where pity was punk and
only a Chinese philosophy of any use ?

But not be sick in the drawing-room, try and keep
one’s end up, even if there were no one to see one
being important! ...


He had been asleep and it was dark, or all but, in his
bed-dressing-room. Something white by his bed.
A fragrant faint warmth close to him; a voice saying
low: “It?s only me. Let me come in your bed,
Michael.” “Like a child—like a child! Michael
reached out his arms. The whiteness and the warmth
came intothem. Curls smothered his mouth, the voice
said in his ear: “I wouldn’t have come, would I, if
there’d—if there’d been anything?” Michael’s heart,
wild, confused, beat against hers.


CHAPTER VIE


“THE ALTOGETHER ”


Tony Bicxer, replete, was in vein that fine afternoon ;
his balloons left him freely, and he started for home in
the mood of a conqueror.

Victorine, too, had colour in her cheeks. She re-
quited the story of his afternoon with the story of hers.
A false tale for a true—no word of Danby and Winter,
the gentleman with the sliding smile, of the Grand
Marnier, or “ the altogether.”” She had no compunc-
don. It was her secret, her surprise; if, by sitting
in or out of “the altogether,” not yet decided, she
could make their passage money—well, she should
tell him she had won it on a horse. That night she
asked :

“Am Tso very thin, Tony?” more than once,
“I do so want to get fat.”

Bicket, still troubled that she had not shared that
lunch, patted her tenderly, and said he would soon
have her as fat as butter—he did not explain how.

They dreamed together of blue butterflies, and awoke
to chilly gaslight and a breakfast of cocoa and bread-
and-butter. Fog! Bicket was swallowed up before
the eyes of Victorine ten yards from the door. She
returned to the bedroom with anger in her heart.
Who would buy balloons in a fog? She would do
anything rather than let Tony go on standing out
there all the choking days! Undressing again, she
washed herself intensively, in case ! She had not

188


°° THE ALTOGETHER ” 189


fong finished when her landlady announced the
presence of a messenger boy. He bore an enormous
parcel entitled “ Mr. Bicket.”

There was a note inside. She read:


“ Dear Bivket,—Here are the togs. Hope they’ll
be useful.— Yours, MicHAEL Mont.


In a voice that trembled she said to the boy :

“ Thank you, it’s O.K. Here’s twopence.”

When his rich whistle was heard writhing into the
fog, she flung herself down before the “togs” in
ecstasy. The sexes were divided by tissue paper.
A blue uit, a velour hat, some brown shoes, three pairs
of socks with two holes in them, four shirts only
a little frayed at the cuffs, two black-and-white ties,
six collars, not too new, some handkerchiefs, two vests
beautifully thick, two pairs of pants, and a brown over-
coat with a belt and just two or three nice little
stains. She held the blue suit up against her arms
and legs, the trousers and sleeves would only need
taking-in about two inches. She piled them in a
pyramid, and turned with awe to the spoil beneath the
tissue paper. A brown knitted frock with little clear
yellow buttons—unsoiled, uncreased. How could
anybody spare a thing like that! A brown velvet
toque with a little tuft of goldeny-brown feathers.
She put iton. A pair of pink stays ever so little faded,
with only three inches of bone above the waist, and five
inches of bone below, pink silk ribbons, and suspenders
—a perfect dream. She could not resist putting them
onalso. Two pairs of brown stockings ; brown shoes ;
two combinations, a knitted camisole. A white silk
jumper with a hole in one sleeve, a.skirt of lilac linen.


190 THE WHITE MONEEY


that had gone a little in the wash ; a pair of pallid pink
silk pants ; and underneath them allan almost black-
brown coat, long and warm and cosy, with great jet
buttons, and in the pocket six small handkerchiefs,
She took a deep breath of sweetness—geranium |

Her mind leaped forward. Clothed, trousseaued,
fitted out—blue butterflies—the sun! Only the money
for the tickets waiting. And suddenly she saw herself
with nothing on standing before the gentleman with
sliding eyes. Whocared! The money!

For the rest of the morning she worked feverishly,
shortening Tony, mending the holes in his socks,
turning the fray of his cuffs. She ate a biscuit, drank
another cup of cocoa—it was fattening, and went for
the hole in the white silk jumper. One o’clock. In
panic she stripped once more, put on a new com-
bination, pair of stockings, and the stays, then paused
in superstition. No! Her own dress and hat—like
yesterday! Keep the rest until | She hastened
to her *bus, overcome alternately by heat and cold.
Perhaps he would give her another glass of that lovely
stuff. If only she could go swimmy and not care for
anything !

She reached the studio as two o’clock was striking,
and knocked. It was lovely and warm in there, much
watmer than yesterday, and the significance of this
struck her suddenly. In front of the fire was a lady
with a little dog.

** Miss Collins—Mrs. Michael Mont; she’s lending
us her Peke, Miss Collins,”

The lady—only her own age, and ever so pretty—
held out her hand. Geranium! This, then, was she
whose clothes |

She took the hand, but could not speak. If this lady


** THE ALTOGETHER ”? 191


were going to stay, it would be utterly impossible.
Before het—so pretty, so beautifully-covered—oh !
no!

“Now, Ting, be good, and as amusing as you can.
Good-bye, Aubrey! Good luck to the picture!
Good-bye, Miss Collins; it ought to be wonderful.”

Gone! The scent of geranium fading; the little
dog snuffling at the door. The sliding gentleman had
two glasses in his hands.

‘Ah!’ thought Victorine, and drank hers at a gulp.

“Now, Miss Collins, you don’t mind, do you!
You'll find everything in there. It’s really nothing.
I shall want you lying on your face just here with your
elbows on the ground and your head up and a little
turned this way; your hair as loose as it can be, and
your eyes looking at this bone. You must imagine
that it’s a faun or some other bit ofall right. The dog’ll
help you when he settles down to it. F-a-u-n, you
know, not f-a-w-n.”

Yes,” said Victorine faintly,

** Have another little tot?”

“Oh! please.”

He brought it.

“I quite understand; but you know, really, it’s
absurd. You wouldn’t mind with a doctor. That’s
tight. Look here, I’ll put this little cow-bell on the
ground. When you’re in position, give it a tinkle,
and I’ll come out. That'll help you.”

Victorine murmured :

* You are kind.”

“Not at all—it’s natural. Now will you start in?
The light won’t last for ever. Fifteen bob a day, we
said.”

_ Victorine saw him slide away behind a screen, and


o*


192 THE WHITE MONKEY


looked at the little cow-bell. Fifteen bob! And
fifteen job! And fifteen bob! Many, many fifteen
bobs before ! But not more times of sitting than
of Tony’s standing, from foot to foot, offering balloons.
And as if wound up by that thought, she moved like
clockwork off the dais, into the model’s room. Cosy
in there, too; warm, a green silk garment thrown on
a chair. She took off her dress. The beauty of the
pink stays struck her afresh. Perhaps the gentleman
would like—no, that would be even worse !
A noise reached her—from Ting-a-ling complaining
of solitude. If she delayed, she never would !
Stripping hastily, she stood looking at herself in a glass.
If only that slim, ivory-white image could move out
on to the dais and she could stay here! Oh! It
was awful—awful! She couldn’t—no! she couldn’t |
She caught up her final garment again. Fifteen bob!
But fifteen bob! Before her eyes, wild and mournful,
came a vision: Of a huge dome, and a tiny Tony,
with little, little balloons in a hand held out! Some-
thing cold and steely formed over her heart as icicles
form on a window. If that was all they would do for
him, she would do better! She dropped the garment ;
and, confused, numb, stepped forth in the “ altogether.”
Ting-a-ling growled at her above his bone. She.
reached the cow-bell and lay down on her face as she:
had been told, with feet in the air, crossed. Resting:
her chin on one hand, she wagged the bell. It made:
a sound like no bell she had ever heard; and the little:
dog barked—he did look funny !

“ Perfect, Miss Collins! Hold that!”

Fifteen bob! and fifteen bob |

“Just point those left toes a bit more. That’s
tight! ‘The flesh tone’s perfect! My God, why must.


** THE ALTOGETHER ” 193


one walk before one runs! Drawing’s a bore, Miss
Collins; one ought to draw with a brush only; a
sculptor draws with a chisel, at least when he’s a
Michelangelo. How old are you?”

“Twenty-one,” came from lips that seemed to
Victorine quite far away.

“Tm thirty-two. They say our generation was
born so old that it can never get any older. Without
illusions. Well! I never had any beliefs that I can
remember. Had you?”

Victorine’s wits and senses were astray, but it did not
matter, for he was rattling on:

“We don’t even believe in our ancestors. All the
same, we're beginning to copy them again. D’you
know a book called ‘The Sobbing Turtle’ that’s
made such a fuss ?—sheer Sterne, very well done;
but sheer Sterne, and the author’s tongue in his cheek,
That’s it in a nutshell, Miss Collins—our tongues are
in our cheeks—bad sign. Never mind; I’m going
to out-Piero Cosimo with this. Your head an inch
higher, and that curl out of your eye, please. Thanks |
Hold that! By the way, have you Italian blood?
What was your mother’s name, for instance ?”

* Brown.”

“Ah! You can never tell with Browns. It may
have been Brune—or Brino—but very likely she was
Iberian. Probably all the inhabitants of Britain left
alive by the Saxons were called Brown. As a fact,
that’s all tosh, though. Going back to Edward the
Confessor, Miss Collins—a mere thirty generations—
we each of us have one thousand and seventy-four
million, five hundred and seventy-three thousand,
nine hundred and eighty-four ancestors, and the
population of this island was then well under a million,


494 THE WHITE MONKEY


We're as inbred as racehorses, but not so nice to look
at, are we? I assure you, Miss Collins, you’re some-
thing to be grateful for. So is Mrs. Mont. Isn’t she
pretty? Look at that dog?”

Ting-a-ling, indeed, with forelegs braced, and
wrinkled nose, was glaring, as if under the impression
that Victorine was another bone.

“ He’s funny,” she said, and again her voice sounded
far away. Would Mrs. Mont lie here if he’d asked
her? She would look pretty! But she didn’t need
the fifteen bob ! ;

“ Comfortable in that position 2?”

In alarm, she murmured :

Oh! yes, thank you!”

"Warm enough ? ”

“Oh! yes, thank you!”

“ That’s good. Just a little higher with the head.”

Slowly in Victorine the sense of the dreadfully
unusual faded.. Tony should never know. If he
never knew, he couldn’t cate. She could lie like
this all day—fifteen bob, and fifteen bob! It was easy.
She watched the quick, slim fingers moving, the blue
smoke from.the cigarette. She watched the little dog.

“Like a rest? You left your gown; I'll get it for

ou.”
In that green silk gown, beautifully padded, she sat
up, with her feet on the floor over the dais edge.

“Cigarette? I’m going to make some Turkish
coffee. You'd better walk about.”

Victorine obeyed.

* You’re out of a dream, Miss Collins. I shall have
to do a Mathew Maris of you in that gown.”

The coffee, like none she had ever tasted, gave her
a sense of well-being. She said:


“THE ALTOGETHER ”* 595


“It’s not like coffee.”

Aubrey Greene threw up his hands.

* You have said it. The British are a great race—
nothing will ever do them in. If they could be
destroyed, they must long ago have perished of their
coffee. Have some more?” .

“ Please,” said Victorine. ‘There was such a little
in the cup.

“ Ready, again?”

She lay down, and let the gown drop off.

“That’s right! Leave it there—you’re lying in
long grass, and the green helps me. Pity it’s winter;
I'd have hired a glade.”

Lying in long grass—flowers, too, perhaps. She did
love flowers. As a little girl she used to lie in the grass,
and make daisy-chains, in the field at the back of her
grandmother’s lodge at Norbiton. Her grandmother
kept the lodge. Every year, for a fortnight, she had
gone down there—she had liked the country ever so,
Only she had always had something on. It would be
nicer with nothing. Were there flowers in Central
Australia? With butterflies there must be! In the
sun—she and Tony—like the Garden of Eden! ...

“ Thank you, that’s all for to-day. Half a day—ten
bob. To-morrow morning at eleven. You're a first-
tate sitter, Miss Collins.”

Putting on the pink stays, Victorine had a feeling
of elation. She had done it! Tony should never
know! The thought that he never would gave her
pleasure. And once more divested of the “ altogether,”
she came forth.

Aubrey Greene was standing before his handiwork.

* Not yet, Miss Collins,” he said; “I don’t want to
depress you. That hip-bone’s too high. We'll put


296 THE WHITE MONKEY


it right to-morrow. Forgive my hand, it’s all chalk.
Ax revoir! Eleven o'clock. And we shan’t need
this chap. No, you don’t |”

For Ting-a-ling was showing signs of accompanying
the larger bone. Victorine passed out smiling.


CHAPTER VIII


SOAMES TAKES THE MATTER UP


Soames had concentrated, sitting before the fire in his
bedroom till Big Ben struck twelve. His reflections
sum-totalled in a decision to talk it over with “ old
Mont” after all. Though light-brained, the fellow
was a gentleman, and the matter delicate. He got into
bed and slept, but awoke at half-past two. There it
was! ‘I won’t think of it,’ he thought; and instantly
began to. In a long life of dealings with money, he
had never had such an experience. Perfectly straight-
forward conformity with the law—itself so often far
from perfectly straightforward—had been the sine
qua non of his career. Honesty, they said, was the
best policy. But was it anything else? A perfectly
honest man couldn’t keep out of a perfect penitentiary
for a week. But then a perfect penitentiary had no
relation to prison, or the Bankruptcy Court. The
business of working honesty was to keep out of those
two institutions. And so far he had never had any
difficulty. What, besides the drawing of fees and the
drinking of tea, were the duties of a director? ‘That
was the point. And how far, if he failed in them, was
he liable! It was a director’s duty to be perfectly
straightforward. But if a director were perfectly
straightforward, he couldn’t be a director. That was
clear. In the first place, he would have to tell his
shareholders that he didn’t anything like earn his fees.
For what did he do on his Boards ? Well, he sat and


197


198 THE WHITE MONKEY


signed his name and talked a little, and passed that
whicb the general trend of business decided must be
passed. Did he initiate? Once ina blue moon. Did
he calculate? No, he tread calculations. Did he
check payments out andin? No, the auditors did that.
There was policy! A comforting word, but—to be
perfectly straightforward—a director’s chief business
was to let the existing policy alone. Take his own
case! (If he had done his duty, he would have stopped
this foreign insurance business which he had instinc-
tively distrusted the moment he heard of it—withia
a month of sitting on the Board, or, having failed in
doing so, resigned his seat. But he had not. Things
had been looking better! ’,“t was not the moment,
and so forth! If he had done his duty as a perfectly
straightforward director, indeed, he would never have
become a director of the P.P.R.S., because he would
have looked into the policy of the Society much more
closely than he had before accepting a position on the
Board... But what with the names, and the prestige,
and not looking a gift horse too closely in the mouth
—there it had been! To be perfectly straightforward,
he ought now to be circularising the shareholders,
saying: ‘‘ My Jaissex-faire has cost you two hundred
odd thousand pounds. I have lodged this amount
in the hands of trustees for your benefit, and am suing
the rest of the directors for their quotas of the amount.”
But he was not proposing to do so, because—well—
because it wasn’t done, and the other directors wouldn’t
like it. In sum: You waited till the shareholders
found out the mess, and you hoped they wouldn’t.
In fact, just like a Government, you confused the issues,
and made the best case you could for yourselves. With
a sense of comfort Soames thought of Ireland: The


SOAMES TAKES THE MATTER UP 199


late Government had let the country in for all that mess
in Ireland, and at the end taken credit’for putting an
end to what need never have been! The Peace, too,
and the Air Force, and Agriculture, and Egypt—the
five most important issues they’d had to deal with—
they had put the chestnuts into the fire in every case !
But had they confessed to it? Not they. One didn’t
confess. One said: “ The question of policy made it
imperative at the time.” Or, better still, one said
nothing ; and trusted to the British character. With
his chin resting on the sheet, Soames felt a momentary
relief, The late Government weren’t sweating into
their sheets—not they—he was convinced of it!
Fixing his eyes on the dying embers in the grate, he
reflected on the inequalities and injustices of existence,
Look at the chaps in politics and business, whose whole
lives were passed in skating on thin ice, and getting
knighted for it, They never turned a hair. And look
at himself, for the first time in forty years on thin ice
and suffering confoundedly. There was a perfect
cult of hoodwinking the public, a perfect cult of
avoiding |the consequences of administrative acts ;
and here was he, a man of the world, a man of the law,
ignorant of those cults, and—and glad of it. From
engrained caution and a certain pride, which had in it
a touch of the fine, Soames shrank from that coarse-
grained standard of honesty which conducted the
affairs of the British public. In anything that touched
money he was, he always had been, stiff-necked, stiff-
kneed. Money was money, a pound a pound, and
there was no way of pretending it wasn’t and keeping
your self-respect. He got up, drank some water,
took a number of deep breaths, and stamped his feet.
Who was it said the other day that nothing had ever


200 THE WHITE MONKEY


lost him five minutes’ sleep. The fellow must have
the circulation of an ox, or the gift of Baron Mun-
chausen. He took up a book. But his mind would
only turn over and over the realisable value of his
resources. Apart from his pictures, he decided that
he could not be worth less than two hundred and fifty
thousand pounds, and there was only Fleur—and she
already provided for,more or less. His wife had her
settlement, and could live on it perfectly well in France.
As fot himself—what did he care? A room at his
club near Fleur—he would be just as happy, perhaps
happier! And suddenly he found that he had reached
a way out of his disturbance and anxiety. By imagining
the far-fetched, by facing the loss of his wealth he had
exorcised the demon. The book, “The Sobbing
Turtle,” of which he had not read one word, dropped
from his hand; he slept... .

His meeting with “ Old Mont ” took place at Snooks’
directly after lunch. The tape in the hall, at which he
glanced on going in, recorded.a further heavy drop in
the mark. Just as he thought: The thing was getting
valueless |

Sitting there, sipping coffee, the baronet looked to
Soames almost .offensively spry. Two to one mn
had realised nothing! ‘ Well!’ thought Soames, ‘
old Uncle Jolyon used to say, I shall astonish his weak
nesves |?

And without preamble he began.

"How are you, Mont? This mark’s valueless,
You realise we’ve lost the P.P.R.S. about a quarter of
a million by that precious foreign policy of Elderson’s.
I’m not sure an action won’t lie against us for taking
unjustifiable risk. But what I’ve come to see you
about is this.” He retailed the interview with the


SOAMES TAKES THE MATTER UP 201


clerk, Butterfield, watching the eyebrows of his listener,
and finished with the words : “ What do you say ?”

Sir Lawrence, whose foot was jerking his whole body,
fixed his monocle.

“ Hallucination, my dear Forsyte! Tve known

'Elderson all my life. We were at Winchester
together.”

Again! Again! Oh! Lord! Soames said slowly:
“You can’t tell from that. A man who was at
Marlborough with me tan away with his mess fund
and his colonel’s wie, and made a fortune in Chili
out of canned tomatoes. The point is this: If the
young man’s story’s true, we’re in the hands of a bad
hat. It won’t do, Mont. Will you tackle him, and
see what he says to it? You wouldn’t like a story of
that sort about yourself. Shall we both go?”

“Yes,” said Sir Lawrence, suddenly. “ You’re
right. We'll both go, Forsyte. I don’t like it, but
we'll both go. He ought to hear it.”

“Now ?.”

“Now.”

With solemnity they assumed top hats, and issued.

“ T think, Forsyte, we’ll take a taxi.”

Staviess72 said Soames.

The cab ground its way slowly past the lions, then
dashed on down to the Embankment. Side by side
its occupants held their noses steadily before them.

“ Hé was shooting with me'a month ago,” said Sir
Lawrence. “Do you know the hymn ‘O God, our
help in ages past’? It’s very fine, Forsyte.”

Soames did not answer. The fellow was beginning
to tittup |

* We had it that Sunday,” went on Sit Lawrence.
“ Elderson used to have a fine voice—sang solos. It’s


202 THE WHITE MONKEY


a foghorn now, but a good delivery still.” He gave
his little whinnying laugh.

“Is it possible,’ thought Soames, ‘ for this chap to be
serious Pp’ and he said:

“If we find this is true of Elderson, and conceal it,
we could all be put in the dock.”

Sir Lawrence refixed his monocle. “The deuce!”
he said.

* Will you do the. talking,” said Soames, “ or shall
I ? >

*¢ I think you had better, eer ought we to have
the young man in a %

“ Wait and see,” said Soames.

They ascended to the offices of the P.P. R. S. and
entered the Board Room. There was no fire, the
long table was ungarnished; an old clerk, creeping
about like a fly on a pane, was filling inkstands out of
a magnum.

Soames addressed him ;

** Ask the manager to be so kind as to come and see
Sir Lawrence Mont and Mr. Forsyte.”

The old clerk blinked, put down the magnum, and
went out.

“ Now,” said Soames in a low voice; “we must keep
our heads. He’ll deny it, of course.’

“T should hope so, Forsyte; ; I should hope so.
Elderson’s a gentleman.”

“* No liar like a gentleman,” muttered Soames, below
his breath.

After that they stood in their overcoats before the
empty grate, staring at their top hats placed side by
side on the table.

“‘ One minute | ” said Soames, suddenly, and crossing
the room, he opemed a door opposite. There, as the


SOAMES TAKES THE MATTER UP 203


young clerk had said was a sort of lobby between
Board Room and Manager’s Room, with a door at the
end into the main corridor. He stepped back, closed
the door, and, rejoining Sir Lawrence, resumed his
contemplation of the hats.

“ Geography correct,” he said with gloom.

The entrance of the manager was marked by Sir
Lawrence’s monocle dropping on to his coat-button
with a tinkle. In cutaway black coat, clean-shaven,
with grey eyes rather baggy underneath, a pink colour,
every hair in place on a rather bald egg-shaped head,
and lips alternately pouting, compressed, or smiling,
the manager reminded Soames ridiculously of old
Uncle Nicholas in his middle period. Uncle Nick
was a clever fellow—‘cleverest man in London,”
some one had called him—but none had ever impugned
his honesty. A pang of doubt and disinclination went
through Soames. This seemed a monstrous thing to
have to put to a man of his own age and breeding.
But young Butterfield’s eyes—so, honest and doglike |
Invent a thing like that—was it possible? He said

‘abruptly :

“Is that door shut ?”

Yes; do you feel a draught ?” said the manager.
* Would you like a-fire ?”

“No, thank you,” said Soames. “The fact is,
Mr. Elderson, a young man in this office came to me
yesterday with a very queer story. Mont and I think
you should hear it.”

Accustomed to watching people’s eyes, Soames had
the impression of a film (such as passes over the eyes
of parrots) passing over the eyes of the manager. It
was gone at once, if, indeed, it had ever been.

_“ By all means.”


204 THE WHITE MONKEY


Steadily, with that power he had over his nerves
when it came to a point, and almost word for word,
Soames repeated a story which he had committed to
heart in the watches of the night. He concluded
with :

* You'd like him in, no doubt. His name is Butter-
field.”

During the recital Sir Lawrence had done nothing
but scrutinise his finger nails; he now said:

** You had to be told, Elderson.”

“ Naturally.”

The manager was crossing to the bell. The pink
in his cheeks looked harder; his teeth showed, they
had a pointed look. ~

“ Ask Mr. Butterfield to come here.”

There followed a minute of elaborate inattention
to each other. Then the young man came in, neat,
commonplace, with his eyes on the manager’s face.
Soames had a moment of compunction. This young
fellow held his life in his hands, as it were—one of the
great army who made their living out of self-suppression
and respectability, with a hundred ready to step into’
his shoes at his first slip. What was that old tag of
the provincial actor’s declamation—at which old Uncle
Jolyon used to cackle so? “ Like a pale martyr with
his shirt on fire.”

“So, Mr. Butterfield, you have been good enough
to exercise your imagination in my regard.”

ENO, Site,

“ You stick to this fantastic story of eavesdropping ? ”

er Y@S, sits”

“We have no further use for your services then,
Good morning!”

The young man’s eyes, doglike, sought the face of


SOAMES TAKES THE MATTER UP 20§


Soames; a string twitched in his throat, his lips
moved without a sound. He turned and went
out.

“So much for that,” said the manager’s voice;
* he'll never get another job.”

The venom in those words affected Soames like the
smell of Russian fat. At the same moment he had the
feeling: This wants thinking out. Only if innocent,
or guilty and utterly resolved, would Elderson have
been so drastic. Which was he ?

The manager went on.

“T thank you for drawing my attention to the matter,
gentlemen. Ihave had my eye on that young man for
some time. A bad hat all round.”

Soames said glumly:

** What do you make out he had to gain?”

“Foresaw dismissal, and thought he would get in
first.”

“T see,” said Soames. But he did not. His mind
was back in his own office with Gradman rubbing his
nose, shaking his grey head, and Butterfield’s: “ No,
sir, ’ve nothing against Mr. Elderson, and he’s nothing
against me.”

‘Ishall require to know more about that young man,’
he thought.

The manager’s voice again cut through.

*T’ve been thinking over what you said yesterday,
Mr. Forsyte, about an action lying against the Board for
negligence. There’s nothing in that; our policy has
been fully disclosed to the shareholders at two general
meetings, and has passed without comment. The share-
holders are just as responsible as the Board.”

* H’m!” said Soames, and took up his hat. “ Are
you coming Mont ?”


206 THE WHITE MONKEY


As if summoned from a long distance, Sir Lawrence
galvanitically refixed his monocle.

“It’s been very distasteful,” he said; “ you must
forgive us, Elderson. You had to be told. I don’t
think that young man can be quite all there—he had a
peculiar look; but we can’t have this sort of thing, of
course. Good-bye, Elderson.”

Placing their hats on their heads simultaneously the
two walked out. They walked some way without
speaking. Then Sir Lawrence said:

* Butterfield? My brother-in-law has a head
gardener called Butterfield—quite a good fellow.
Ought we to look into that young man, Forsyte ?”

“Yes,” said Soames, “leave him to me.”

“T shall be very glad to. The fact is, when one has
been at school with a man, one has a feeling, don’t you
know.”

Soames gave vent to a sudden outburst.

** You can’t trust any one nowadays, it seems to me,”
he said. “It comes of—well I don’t know what it
comes of. But I’ve not done with this matter yet.”


CHAPTER IX


SLEUTH


THE Hotch-potch Club went back to the eighteen-
sixties. Founded by a posse of young sparks, social
and political, as a convenient place in which to smoulder,
while qualifying forthe hearths of Snooks’, The Remove,
The Wayfarers, Burton’s, Ostrich Feather, and other
more permanent resorts, the Club had, chiefly owing
to a remarkable chef in its early days, acquired a stability
and distinction of its own. It still, however, retained
a certain resemblance to its name, and this was its
attraction to Michael—all sorts of people belonged.
From Walter Nazing, and young semi-writers and
patrons of the stage, who went to Venice, and talked
of being amorous in gondolas, or of how so-and-so
ought to be made love to; from such to bottle-brushed
demi-generals, who had sat on courts-martial and
shot men out of hand for the momentary weaknesses
of human nature ; from Wilfrid Desert (who never came
there now) to Maurice Elderson, in the card-room, he
could meet them all, and takethe temperature of modern-
ity. He was doing this in the Hotch-potch smoking-
room, the late afternoon but one after Fleur had come
into his bed, when he was informed: ,

* A Mr. Forsyte, sir, in the hall for you. Not the
member we had here many years before he died;
his cousin, I think.”

Conscious that his associates at the moment would
not be his father-in law’s “‘ dream,” mor he theirs,

207


208 THE WHITE MONKEY


Michael went out, and found Soames on the weighing
machine.

“I don’t vary,” he said, looking up. “ How’s
Fleur ? ”

* Very well, thank you sir.”

“ mat Green Street. Istayed up abouta young man.
Have you any vacancy in your office for a clerk—used
to figures. I want a job for him.”

*‘ Come in here, sir,” said Michael, entering a small
room.

Soames followed and looked round him.

** What do you call this 2 ” he said.

* Well, we call it ‘the grave’; it’s nice and quiet.
Will you have a sherry ?”

“Sherry |” repeated Soames. “ You young people
think you’ve invented sherry; when I was a boy no
one dreamed of dining without a glass of dry sherry with
his soup, and a glass of fine old sherry with his sweet.
Sherry | ”

“I quite believe you, sir. There really is nothing
mew. Venice, for instance—wasn’t that the fashion,
too; and knitting, and royalties? It’s all cyclic.
Has your young man had the bird 2”

Soames stared. “‘I know nothing about a bird.
His name is Butterfield; he wants a job.”

“ That’s frightfully rife; we get applications every
day. I don’t want to be swanky, but ours is a rather
specialised business. It has to do with books.”

“ He strikes me as capable, orderly and civil ; Idon’t
see what more you want inaclerk. He writes a good
hand, and, so far as I can see, he tells the truth.”

“‘ That’s important, of course,” said Michael; “ but
is he a good liar as well? I mean, there’s more likely
te be something in the travelling line; selling special


SLEUTH 209


editions, and that kind of thing. Could you open
up about hima bit? Anything human is to the good—
I don’t say old Danby would appreciate that, but he
needn’t know.”

“Hm! Well—he—er—did his duty—quite against
his interest—in fact, it’s ruination for him. He seems
to be married and to have two children.”

“Ho,ho! Jolly! IfI got hima place, would he—
would he be doing his duty again, do you think ? ”

“Tam serious,” said Soames ; “ the young man is on
my mind.”

* Yes,” said Michael, ruminative, “ the first thing in
such a case is to get him on to some one else’s,
sharp. Could I see him ?”

“T told him to step round and see you to-night after
dinner. I thought you’d prefer to look him over in
private before considering him for your office.”

“Very thoughtful of you, sir! There’s just one
thing. Don’t you think I ought to know the duty he
did—in confidence? I don’t see how I can avoid
putting my foot into my mouth without, do you?”

Soames stared at his son-in-law’s face, where the
mouth was\wide; for the #th time it inspired in him a
certain liking and confidence; it looked so honest.

“ Well,” he said, going to the door and ascertaining
that it was opaque, “‘ this is matter fora criminal slander
action, so for yout own sake as well as mine you will
keep it strictly to yourself” ; and in a low voice he
retailed the facts.

“ As I expected,” he unded, “ the young man came to
me again this morning. He is naturally upset. I
want to keep my hand on him. Without knowing
more, I can’t make up my mind whether to go further
ot not. Besides ”? Soames hesitated; to claim a


210 THE WHITER MONKEY


good motive was repulsive to him: “ I—it seems hard
onhim, He’s been getting three hundred and fifty.”

“Dashed hard!” said Michael. “I say, Elder-
son’s a member here,”

Soames looked with renewed suspicion at the door—
it still seemed opaque, and he said; “ The deuce he is |
Do you know him?”

I’ve played bridge with him,” said Michael ; “ he’s
taken some of the best off me—snorting good player.”

“ Ah!” said Soames—he never played cards him-
self. “‘I can’t take this young man into my own firm
for obvious reasons ; but I can trust you.”

Michael touched his forelock.

“ Frightfully bucked, sir. Protection of the poor—
some sleuth, too. I'll see him to-night, and let you
know what I can wangle.”

Soames’ nodded. ‘Good Gad!’ he patie oy 4

“what j jargon i

The interview derved Michael the good turn of taking
his thoughts off himself. Temperamentally he sided
already with the young man Butterfield ; and, lighting a
cigarette, he went into the card-room. Sitting on the
high fender, he was impressed—the room was squate,
and within it were three square card tables, set askew
to the walls, with three triangles of card players.

‘If only,’ thought Michael, “the fourth player sat
under the table, the pattern would be complete. It’s
having the odd player loose that spoils the cubes.” And
with something of a thrill he saw that Elderson was a
fourth player | Sharp and impassive he was engaged in
applying a knife to the end of a cigar, Gosh! what
sealed books faces were | Each with pages and pages of
private thoughts, interests, schemes, fancies, passions,
hopes and fears; and down came death—splosh |—


SLEUTH aii


and a creature wiped out, like a fly ona wall, andnobody
any more could see its little close mechanism working
away for its own ends, in its own privacy and its own
importance; nobody any more could speculate on
whether it was a clean ora dirty little bit of work. Hard
to tell! They ran in all shapes | Elderson, for instance
—was he a nasty mess, or just a lamb of God who didn’t
look it ? “‘ Somehow,’ thought Michael, ‘I feel he’s a
womaniser. Now why?’ He spread his hands out
behind him to the fire, rubbing them together like a fly
that has been in treacle. If one couldn’t tell what was
passing in the mind of one’s own wife in one’s own
house, how’on eatth could one tell anything from the
face of a stranger, and he one of the closest bits of
mechanism,in the world—an English gentleman of
business! If only life were like “ The Idiot ” or ‘* The
Brothers Karamozov,” and everybody went about
turning out their inmost hearts’ at the tops of their
voices | If only club cardrooms hada dash of epilepsy in
their composition! . But—nothing! Nothing! The
world was full of wonderful secrets which everybody
kept to themselves without captions or close-ups to
give them away |

A footman came in, looked at the fire, stood a moment
expressionless as a stork, waiting for an order to ping
out, staccato, through the hum, turned and went
away.

Mechanism ! Everywhere—-mechanism! Devices for
getting away from life so complete that there seemed no
life to get away from.

‘It’s all,’ he thought, ‘ awfully like a man meant a
registered ‘letter to himself.. And perhaps it’s just as
well, Is “life” a good thing—is it? Do I want to
see “life”? raw again?’


212 THE WHITE MONKEY


Eldetson was seated now, and Michael had a perfect
view of the back of his head. It disclosed nothing.

‘Pm no sleuth,’ he thought; ‘there ought to be
something in the way he doesn’t part his hair behind.’
And, getting off the fender, he went home.

At dinner he caught oneof his own looks at Fleur and
didn’t like it. Sleuth! And yet how not try to know
what were the real thoughts and feelings of one who
held his heart, like an accordion, and made it squeak
and groan at pleasure !

“T saw the model you sent Aubrey yesterday,” she
said. “She didn’t say anything about the clothes, but
she looked ever so! What a face, Michael! Where did
you come across her ?”

Through Michael sped the thought: ‘ Could I make
her jealous ?”’ And he was shocked at it. A low-down
thought—mean and ornery! “‘ She blew in,” he said.
* Wife of a little packer we had who took to snooping
—er—books. Hesells balloons now ; they want money
badly.”

“Tsee. Did you know that Aubrey’s going to paint
her in the nude P”

“Phew! No! I thought she’d look good on a
wrappet. Isay! Ought I to stop that?”

Fleur smiled. “It’s more money and her look-out.
It doesn’t matter to you, does it ?”

Again that thought; again the recoil from it!

* Only,” he said, “ that her husband is a decent little
snipe for a snooper, and I don’t want to be more sorry
for him.”

** She won’t tell him, of course.”

She said it so naturally, so simply, that the words
disclosed a whole attitude of mind. One didn’t tell
one’s mate what would tease the poor brute! He saw


SLEUTH 213


by the flutter of her white eyelids that she also realised
the give-away. Should he follow it up, tell her what
June Forsyte had told him—have it all out—all out ?
But with what purpose—to what end? Would it
change things, make her love him? Would it do any-
thing but harass her a little more; and give him the
sense that he had lost his wicket trying to drive her
to the pavilion? No! Better adopt the principle of
secrecy she had unwittingly declared her own, bite on it,
and grin. He muttered:

“Tm aftaid he'll find her rather thin.”

Her eyes were bright and steady ; and again he was
worried by that low-down thought: ‘ Could he make
her a

*<T’ve only seen her once,” he added, “‘ and then she
was dressed.”

“Tm not jealous, Michael.”

‘No,’ he thought, ‘I wish to heaven you were!’

The words: “A young man called Butterfill to see
you, sir,” were like the turning of a key ina cell door.

In the hall the young man “ called Butterfill ” was
engaged in staring at Ting-a-ling.

‘ Judging by his eyes,’ thought Michael, ‘ he’s more
of a dog than that little Djinn |’

* Come up to my study,” he said, “it’s cold down
here. My father-in-law tells me you want a job.”

“ Yes, sir,” said the young man, following up the
stairs.

“Take a pew,” said Michael; “and a cigarette.
Now then! I know all about the turmoil. From your
moustache, you were in the war, I suppose, like me ?
_ As between fellow-sufferers : Is your story O.K. ?”

“ God’s truth, sir; I only wish it wasn’t. I’d
nothing to gain and everything to lose. I’d have done


214 THE WHITE MONKEY


better to hold my tongue... It’s his word against mine,
and here lamin the street. That was my first job since
the war, so I can whistle for a reference.”

“ Wife and two children, I think ? ”

“Yes, and I’ve put them in the cart for the sake of
my conscience! It’s the last time I’ll do that, I know.
What did it matter to me, whether the Society was
cheated ? My wife’s quite right, I was a fool, sir.”

“ Probably,” said Michael. “Do you know any-
thing about books.”

“Yes, sir; I’m a good book-keeper.”

* Holy Moses! Our job is getting rid of them. My
firm are publishers. We were thinking of putting on
an extra traveller. Is your tongue persuasive P”

The young man smiled wanly.

*T don’t know, sir.”

** Well, look here,” said Michael, carried away by
the look in his eyes, “it’s all a question of a certain
patter. But, of course, that’s got to be learned. I
gather that you’re not a reader.”

“ Well, sir, not a great reader.”

“That, perhaps, is fortunate. What you would
have to do is to impress on the poor brutes who sell
books that every one of the books on your list—say
about thirty-five—is necessary in large numbers to his
business, It’s lucky you’ve just chucked your con-
science, because, as a matter of fact, most of them won’t
be. I’m afraid there’s nowhere you could go to get
lessons in persuasion, but you can imagine the sort of
thing, and if you like to come here for an hour or two
this week, Pll put you wise about our authors, and
ready you up to go before Peter.”

** Before Peter, sir?”

* The Johnny with the keys ; luckily it’s Mr. Winter,


SLEUTH 215


not Mr. Danby ; I believe I could get him to let you in
for a month’s trial.”

“Sir, Pll try my very best. My wife knows about
books, she could help mealot. Ican’t tell you what I
think of your kindness. The fact is, being out of a
job has put the wind up me properly. Ive not been
able to save with two children; it’s like the end of the
world.”

“ Right-o, then! Come here to-morrow evening at
nine, and I’ll stuff you. 1 believe you’ve got the face
for the job, if you can get the patter. Only one book in
twenty is a necessity really, the rest are luxuries. Your
stunt will be to make them believe the nineteen are
necessaries, and the twentieth a luxury that they need.
- It’s like food or clothes, or anything else in civilisation.”

“ Yes, sir, I quite understand.”

“ All right, then. Good-night,.and good luck!”

Michael stood up and held out his hand. The young
man took it with a queer reverential little bow. A
minute later he was out in the street; and Michael in
the hall was thinking: ‘ Pity is tripe] Clean forgot I
was a sleuth!’


CHAPTER X


FACE


Wuen Michael rose from the refectory table, Fleur had
tisen, too. ‘Two days and more since she left Wilfrid’s
rooms, and she had not recovered zest. ‘The rifling of
the oyster Life, the garlanding of London’s rarer
flowers which kept colour in her cheeks, seemed stale,
unprofitable. Those three hours; when from shock
off Cork Street she came straight to shocks in her own
drawing-room, had dislocated her so that she had settled
to nothing since. The wound re-opened by Holly
had nearly healed again. Dead lion beside live donkey
cuts but dim figure. But she could not get hold-again
of—what ? That was the trouble: What? For two
whole days she had been trying. Michael was still
strange, Wilfrid still lost, Jon still buried alive, and
nothing seemed novel under the sun. ‘The only object
that gave her satisfaction during those two dreary,
disillusioned days was the new white monkey, The
more she looked at it, the more Chinese it seemed.
It summed up the satirical truth of which she was
perhaps subconscious, thatall her little modern veerings
and flutterings and rushes after the future showed that
she believed in nothing but the past. The age had
overdone it and must go back to ancestry for faith.
Like a little bright fish out of a warm bay, making a
splash in chill, strange waters, Fleur felt a subtle
nostalgia.

In her Spanish room, alone with her own feelings,

216


FACE 217


she stared at the porcelain fruits. They glowed, cold,
unestable! She took one up. Meant for a passion
fruit? Alas! Poor passion! She dropped it with a
dull clink on to the pyramid, and shuddered a little.
Had she blinded Michael with her kisses ? Blinded him
to—what? To her incapacity for passion ?

‘But I’m not incapable,’ she thought; ‘I’m not.
Some day I'll show him; I'll show them all.?. She
looked up at “the Goya” hanging opposite. What
gripping determination in the painting—what intensity
of life in the black eyes of a rather raddled dame! She
would know what she wanted, and get it, too! No
compromise and uncertainty there—no capering round
life, wondering what it meant, and whether it was worth
while, nothing but hard living for the sake of living |

Fleur put her hands where her flesh ended, and her
dress began. Wasn’t she as warm and firm—yes, and
ten times as pretty, as that fine and evil-looking Spanish
dame, with the black eyes and the wonderful lace ?
And, turning her back on the picture, she went into the
hall. Michael’s voice and another’s! They were
coming down! She slipped across into the drawing-
room and took up the manuscript of a book of poems,
on which she was to give Michael her opinion. She sat,
not reading, wondering if he were coming in. She
heard the front door close. No! He had gone out!
A relief, yet chilling ! Michael not warm and cheerful
in the house—if it were to go on, it would be wearing,
She curled herself up and tried to read. Dreary poems—
free verse, blank, introspective, all about the author’s
inside! Wo lift, no lilt! Duds! She seemed to have
read them a dozen times before. She lay quite still—
listening to the click and flutter of the burning logs! If
the light were out she might go to sleep. She turued it


218 THE WHITE MONKEY


off, and came back to the settee. She could see herself
sitting there, a picture in the firelight ; see how lonely
she looked, pretty, pathetic, with everything she wished
for, and—nothing |» Her lip curled. She could even
see her own spoiled-child ingratitude. And what was
worse, she could see herself seeing it—a triple-distilled
modern, so subtly arranged in life-tight compartments
that she could not be submerged. If only something
would blow in out of the unkempt cold, out of the
waste and wilderness of a London whose flowers she
plucked. The firelight—soft, uncertain—searched out
spots and corners of her Chinese room, as on a stage
in one of those scenes, seductive and mysterious, where
one waited, to the sound of tambourines, for the next
moment of the plot. She reached out and took a
cigarette. She could see herself lighting it, blowing out
the smoke—her own half-curled fingers, her parted lips,
her white rounded arm. She was decorative! Well,
and wasn’t that all that mattered? To be decorative
and make little decorations ; to be pretty in a world
that wasn’t pretty! In ‘“‘ Copper Coin” there was a
poem of a flicker-lit room, and a spoiled: Columbine
before the fire, and a Harlequin hovering without, like
“the spectre of the rose.” And suddenly, without
warning, Fleut’s heart ached. It ached definitely,
rather horribly, and, slipping down on to the floor
before the fire, she snuggled her face against Ting-a-
ling. The Chinese dog raised his head—his black
eyes lurid in the glow.

He licked her cheek, and turned his nose away.
Huf! Powder! But Fleur lay like the dead. And she
saw herself lying—the curve of her lip, the chestnut
glow in her short hair; she heard the steady beat of
her heart. Get up! Go out! Do something! But


PACE 219


what—what was worth doing ? What had any meaning
in it? She saw herself doing—extravagant things ;
nursing sick women; tending pale babies; making a
speech in Parliament; ride a steeplechase; hoeing
turnips in knickerbockers—decorative.. And she lay
perfectly still, bound by the filaments of her self-vision.
So long as she saw hetself she would do nothing——she
knew it—for nothing would be worth doing! And it
seemed to her, lying there so still, that not to see her-
self would be worse than anything. And she felt that
to feel this was to acknowledge: herself caged for ever.

Ting-a-ling growled, turning his nose towards the
windows. “In here,” he seemed to say, “we are
cosy; we think of the past. We have no use for any-
thing outside. Kindly go away—whoever it is out
there! ”? And again he growled—a low, continuous
sound.

** What is it, Ting ? ”

Ting-a-ling rose on his fore-legs, with muzzle pointed
at the window.

“Do you want your walk P ”

“No,” said the growl.

Fleur picked him up. “ Don’t be so silly!” And
she went to the window. The curtains were closely
drawn; rich, Chinese, lined, they excluded the night.
Fleur made a chink with one hand, and started back.
Against the pane was a face, the forehead pressed
against the glass, the eyes closed, as if it had been there
along time. Inthe dark it seemed f.atureless, vaguely
pale. She felt the dog’s body stiffen under her arm—
she felt his silence. Her heart pumped. It was
ghastly—face without body.

Suddenly the forehead was withdrawn, the eyes
opened. She saw—the face of Wilfrid. Could he


a2¢6 THE WHITE MONKEY


see in—see her peering out from the darkened room ?
Quivering all over, she let the curtains fall to. Beckon?
Let him in? Go out to him? Wave him away? Her
heart beat furiously. How long had he been out
there—like a ghost ? What did he want of her? She
dropped Ting-a-ling with a flump, and pressed het
hands to her forehead, trying to clear confusion from
her brain. And suddenly she stepped forward and
flung the curtains apart. No face! Nothing! He was
gone! The dark, draughty square—not a soul in it!
Had he ever been—or was the face her fancy? But
Ting-a-ling ! Dogs had no fancies. He had gone back
to the fire and settled down again.

‘It’s not my fault,’ she thought passionately. ‘ It’s
not! I didn’t want him to love me. I only wanted
his—his |’? Again she sank down before the fire.
“ Oh!‘ Ting, have a feeling heart!” But the Chinese
dog, mindful of the flump, made no response. . . «


CHAPTER XI


COCKED HAT


Arter missing his vocation with the young man
Butterfield, Michael had hesitated in the hall. . At last
he had not gone upstairs again, but quietly out. He
walked past the Houses of Parliament and up Whitehall.
In Trafalgar Square, it occurred to him that he had a
father. Bart might be at Snooks’, The Coffee House,
The Aeroplane; and, with the thought, ‘He’d be
restful,’ he sought the most modern of the three.

“Yes, Sir Lawrence Mont is in the lounge, sir.”

He was sitting with knees crossed, anda cigar between
his finger-tips, waiting for some one to talk to.

“ Ah! Michael! Can you tell me why I come here 2?”

“To wait for the end of the world, sir ? ”

Sir Lawrence sniggered. “An idea,” he said.
© When the skies are wrecking civilisation, this will be
the best-informed tape in London. The wish to be in
at the death is perhaps the strongest of our passions,
Michael. I should very much dislike being blown up, *
especially after dinner; but I should still more dislike
missing the next show, if it’s to be a really good one.
The air raids were great fun, after all.”

Michael sighed.

“Yes,” he said, “ the war got us used to thinking of
the millennium, and then it went and stopped, and left
the millennium hanging over us. Now we shall never
be happy till we get it. CanI take one of your cigars,
sip?”

’ 223


222 THE WHITE MONKEY


“* My dear fellow! I’ve been reading Frazer again.
Extraordinary how remote all superstition seems, now
that we’ve reached the ultimate truth; That enlighten-
ment never can prevail.”

Michael stopped the lighting of his cigar.

“Do you really think that, sir P’

“ What else can one think? Who can have any
reasonable doubt now that with the aid of mechanics
the headstrong part of man must do him in? It’s an
unavoidable conclusion from all recent facts. ‘ Per
ardua ad astra, ‘Through hard knocks we shall see
stars.’ ”

“ But it’s always been like that, sir, and here we are
alive?”

“ They say so; but I doubt it. I fancy we’re really
dead, Michael. I fancy we’re only living in the past.
I don’t think—no, I don’t think we can be said to
expect a future. We talk of it, but I hardly think we
hope for one. Underneath our: protestations we sub-
consciously deduce. From the mess we’ve made of it
these last ten years, we can feel the far greater mess
we shall make of it in the next thirty. Human nature
can argue the hind leg off a donkey, but the donkey will

be four-legged at the end of the discussion.”
* | Michael sat down suddenly and said:

* You’re a bad, bold Bart.”

Sir Lawrence smiled.

*T should be glad to think that men really believed in
humanity, and all that, but you know they don’t—they
believe in novelty and getting their own way. With
tare exceptions they’re still monkeys, especially the
scientific variety; and when you put gunpowder
and a lighted match into the paws of monkeys,
they blow themselves up to see the fun. Monkeys


COCKED HAT 223


are only safe when deprived of means to be other.
wise.”

“ Lively, that !”’ said Michael.

“Not livelier than the occasion warrants, my deat
boy. Tve been thinking. We’ve got a member here
who knows a trick worth twenty of any played in the
wat—an extraordinarily valuable fellow. The Govern-
ment have got their eye on him. He’ll help the other
valuable fellows in France and Germany and America
and Russia to make history. Between them, they’ll do
something really proud—something that’ll knock all
the other achievements of man into a cocked hat. By
the way, Michael, new device of ‘ Homo sapiens— the
cocked. hat.”

“Well,” said Michael, “ what are you going to do
about it P”

Sir Lawrence’s eyebrows sought his hair.

“Do, my dear fellow? What should Ido? Can I
go out and grab them and the Government by the slack
of their breeches ; yes, and all the valuable fellows and
Governments of the other countries? No! All I can
do is to smoke my cigar and say : ‘ God rest you, merry
gentlemen, let nothing you dismay!’ By hook or crook
they will come into their own, Michael; but in the
normal course of things I shall be dead before they do.”

“<I shan’t,” said Michael.

“No, my dear; but think of the explosions, the
sights, the smells. By Jove, you’ve got something to
live for, yet. Sometimes I wish I were your age.
And sometimes,” Sir Lawrence relighted his cigar,
“‘T don’t. Sometimes I think I’ve had enough of our
pretences, and that there’s nothing left but to die like
gentlemen.”

“‘ Some Jeremiad, Dad! ”


H*


*


224 THE WHITE MONKEY


Well,” said Sir Lawrence, with a twirl of his little
gtizzled moustache, “I hope ’m wrong. But we’re
driving fast to a condition of things when millions can
be killed by the pressing of a few buttons. What
teason is there to suppose that our bumps of benevo-
lence will increase in time to stop our using these great
new toys of destruction, Michael P”

““<« Where you know little, place terrors.’ ”

“Very nice; where did you get that ?”

“ Out of a life of Christopher Columbus.”

* Old C.C.! I could bring myself to wish sometimes
that he hadn’t been so deucedly inquisitive. We were
snugger in the dark ages. There was something to be
said for not discovering the Yanks.”

“Well, said Michael,” “J think we shall pedal
through yet. By the way, about this Elderson stunt :
I’ve just seen the clerk—he doesn’t look to me the
sort that would have made that up.”

“ Ah! That! Butif Elderson could do sucha thing,
well—teally, anything might happen. It’s a complete
stumper. He was such a pretty bat, always went in
first wicket down. He and I put on fifty-four against
Eton. I suppose old Forstye told you?”

** Yes, he wanted me to find the chap a job.”

“Butterfield. Ask him if he’s related to old Butter.
field the gardener ? It would be something to go on.
D’you find old Forsyte rather trying P”

Loyal to Fleur, Michael concealed his lips, ‘“* No,
I get on very well with him.”

“ He’s straight, I admit that.”

* Yes,” said Michael, “ very straight.”

“« But somewhat reticent.”

* Yes,” said Michael.

On this conclusion they were silent, as though


COCKED HAT 225


terrors had been placed beyond it. And soon Michael
rose.

“ Past ten, I’d better go home.”

Returning the way he came, he could think of nothing
but Wilfrid. What wouldn’t he give to hear him say :
“Tt’s all right, old man; I’ve got over it!”—to
wring him by the hand again. Why should one catch
this fatal disease called love? Why should one be
driven half crazy by it? They said love was Nature’s
provision against Bart’s terrors, against the valuable
fellows. An insistent urge—lest the race die out.
Prosaic, if true! Not that he cared whether Fleur had
children. Queer how Nature camouflaged her schemes
—leery old bird! But overreaching herself a bit,
wasn’tshe? Children might yet go clean out of fashion
if Bart was right. A very little more would do it; who
would have children for the mere pleasure of seeing
them blown up, poisoned, starved to death? A few
fanatics would hold on, the rest of the world go barren.
The cocked hat! Instinctively Michael straightened
his own, teady for crossing under Big Ben. He had
reached the centre of Parliament Square, when a
figure coming towards him swerved suddenly to its
left and made in the direction of Victoria. Tall, with
a swing in its walk. Wilfrid! Michael stood still.
Coming from—South Square! And suddenlv he
gavechase. He did not run, but he walked his hardest.
The blood beat in his temples, and he felt confused to
a pitch past bearing. Wilfrid must have seen him,
or he wouldn’t have swerved, wouldn’t be legging it
away like a demon. Black!—black! He was not
gaining, Wilfrid had the legs of him—to overtake him,
he must run! But there rose in Michael a sort of
exaltation. His best friend—his wife! There was a


226 THE WHITE MONKEY


limit. One might be too proud to fight that. Let him
go his ways! He stood still, watched the swift
figure disappear, and slowly, head down under the now
cocked hat, turned towards home. He walked quite
quietly, and with a sense of finality. No use making a
song about it! No fuss, but no retreat: | In the few
hundred yards before he reached his Square he was
chiefly conscious of the tallness of houses, the shortness
of men. Such midgets to have made this monstrous
pile, lighted it so that it shone in an enormous glittering
heap whose glow blurred the colour of the sky |_| What
a vast business this midget activity! Absurd to think
that his love for another midget mattered! | He turned
his key in the lock, took off his cocked hat and went
into the drawing-room. Unlighted—empty? No.
She and Ting-a-ling were on the floor before the fire |
He sat down on the settee, and was abruptly conscious
that he was trembling and sweating as if he had smoked
atoo strong cigar. Fleur had raised herself, cross-legged
and was staring up at him. He waited to get the better
of his trembling: Why didn’t she speak? Why was
she sitting there, in the darkP ‘She knows’; he
thought: * we both know this is the end. O God, let
me behave like a sport!” He took a cushion, put it
behind him, crossed his legs, and leaned back. His
voice surprised him suddenly :

** May I ask you something, Fleur? And wiil you
please answer me quite truly ?”

BL Yess:

“It’s this: I know you didn’t love me when you
married me. I don’t think you love me now. Do
you want me to clear out ?”

A long time seemed to pass,

“No.”


COCKED HAT aRr7z


Pes


“Do you mean that

“es Yes.”

6 Why ? 2

“ Because I don’t.”

Michael got up.

“ Will you answer one thing more?”

se Yes.”

“Was Wilfrid here to-night ?”

“Yes—no. That is Bs

His hands clutched each other ; he saw het eyes fix on
them, and kept them still.

* Fleur, don’t |”

“Tm not. He came to the window there. I saw
his face—that’s all. His face—it—Oh! Michael,
don’t be unkind to-night | ”

Unkind! Unkind! Michael’s heart swelled at that
strange word.

“It’s all right,” he stammered: “So long as you
tell me what it is you want.”

Fleur said, without moving :

“I want to be comforted.”

Ah! She knew exactly what to say, how to say it!
And going on his knees, he began to comfort her.


|


CHAPTER Xi


GOING EAST


He had not been on his knees many minutes before
they suffered from reaction. To kneel there comfosting
Fleur brought him a growing discomfort. He believed
her to-night, as he had not believed her for months
past. But what was Wilfrid doing ? Where wander-
ing? The face at the window—face without voice,
without attempt to reach her. Michael ached in that
illegitimate organ the heart. Withdrawing his arms,
he stood up.

“Would you like me to have a look for him? If
it’s all over—he might-——I might ff

Fleur, too, stood up. She was calm enough now.

“Yes, ’ll goto bed.” With Ting-a-ling in her arms,
she went to the door; her face, between the dog’s
chestnut fur and her own, was very pale, very still.

“ By the way,” she said, “this is my second no go,
Michael ; I suppose it means as

Michael gasped. Currents of emotion, welling, ebb-
ing, swirling, rendered him incapable of speech.

“The night of the balloon,” she said: “Do you
mind P”

“Mind? Good God! Mind!”

“That’s all right then. Idon’t. Good-night!”

She was gone. Without reason, Michael thought:
*In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God.’ And he stood, as
if congealed, overcome by an uncontrollable sense of

228


GOING EAST 229


solidity. A child coming! It was as though the
barque of his being, tossed and drifted, suddenly rode
tethered—anchor down. He turned and tore at the
curtains. Night of stars!. Wonderful world! Jolly
—jolly! And—Wilfrid! He flattened his face against
the glass. Outside there Wilfrid’s had been flattened.
He could see it if he shut his eyes. Not fair! Dog
lost—man lost! $,O.8. He went into the hall, and
from the mothless marble coffer rived his thickest coat.
He took the first taxi that came by.

“ Cork Street! Get along!” Needle in bundle of
hay! Quarter past eleven by Big Ben! The intense
telief of his whole being in that jolting cab seemed to
him brutal. Salvation! It was—he had a strange
certainty of that as though he saw Fleur suddenly “ close
up” in a very strong light, concrete beneath her
graceful veerings. Family! Continuation!, He had
been unable to anchor her, for he was not of her] But
her child could and would! And, perhaps, he would
yet come in with the milk. Why did he love her so—
it was not done! Wilfrid and he were donkeys—out
of touch, out of tune with the times |

** Here you are, sir—what number ?.”

* Allright! Cool your heels and wait forme! Have
a cigarette |”

With one between his own lips which felt so dry, he
went down the backwater.

A light in Wilfrid’s rooms! He rang the bell. The
door was opened, the face of Wilfrid’s man looked forth.

GAY eS sitio

“Mr. Desert in P”

“No, sir. Mr. Desert has just started for the East,
His ship sails to-morrow.”

* Oh!” said Michael, blankly: “‘ Where from?”


230 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Plymouth, sir. His train leaves Paddington at
midnight. You might catch him yet.”

“It’s very sudden,” said Michael, “he never 3

“No, sir. Mr. Desert is a sudden gentleman.”

* Well, thanks ; I’ll try and catch him.”

Back in the cab with the words: “ Paddington—
flick her along!” hethought: ‘ A sudden gentleman |”
Perfect! He renyembered the utter suddenness of that
little interview beside the bust of Lionel Charwell.
Sudden their friendship, sudden its end—sudden even
Wilfrid’s poems—ofispring of a sudden soul! Staring
from window to window in that jolting, rattling cab,
Michael suffered from St. Vitus’s dance. Was he a
fool? Could he not let well alone? Pity was posh!
And yet! With Wilfrid would go a bit of his heart,
and in spite of all he would like him to know that.
Upper Brook Street, Park Lane! Emptying streets,
cold night, stark plane trees painted-up by the lamps
against a bluish dark. And Michael thought: ‘ We
wander! What’s the end—the goal? To do one’s
bit, and not worry! But what is my bit? What’s
Wittid’s ? Where will he end up now ?’ ;

The cab rattled down the station slope and drew up
under cover. Ten minutes to twelve, and a long heavy
train on platform one!

‘What shall I do?’ thought Micheal: ‘It’s so
darned crude! Must I go down—catriage by carriage ?
** Couldn’t let you go, old man, without ”—blurb |”

Bluejackets !: If not drunk—as near as made no
matter. Hight minutes still! He began slowly walk-
ing along the train. He had not passed four windows
before he saw his quarry. Desert was sitting back to
the engine in the near corner of an empty first. An
unlighted cigatette was in his mouth, his fur collar


GoInG EAST 241


turned up to his eyes, and his eyes fixed on an unopened
paper on his lap. He sat without movement; Michael
stood looking at him. His heart beat fast. He struck
a match, took two steps, and said:

“ Light, old boy ? ”

Desert stared up at him.

“ Thanks,” he said, and took the match. By its
flare his face was dark, thin, drawn; his eyes dark,
deep, tired. Michael leaned in the window. Neither
spoke.

“ Take yout seat, if you’re going, sir.”

*T’m not,” said Michael. His whole inside seemed
tufning over.

* Where are you going, old man?” he said suddenly.

* Jericho.”

“ God, Wilfrid, ’'m sorry |”

Desert smiled.

peeutitiout f7

“Yes, 1 know! Shake hands?”

Desert held out his hand.

Michael squeezed it hard.

A whistle sounded.

Desert rose suddenly and turned to the rack above
him. He took a parcel from a bag. “ Here,” he said,
“these wretched things! Publish them if you like.”

Something clicked in Michael’s throat.

“Thanks, old man! That’s great! Good-bye!”

A sort of beauty came into Desert’s face.

“So long!” he said.

The train moved. Michael withdrew his elbows ;
quite still, he stared at the motionless figure slowly
borne along, away. Carriage after carriage went by
him, full of bluejackets leaning out, clamouring,

singing, waving handkerchiefs and bottles. Guard’s


232 THE WHITE MONKEY


van now—the tail light—all spread—a crimson blur=«
setting East—going—going—gone |

And that was all—was it ? He thrust the parcel into
his coat pocket. Back to Fleur, now! Way of the
world—one man’s meat, anothet’s poison! He passed
his hand over his eyes. The dashed things were full
of—blurb }


PART III
CHAPTER 1


BANK HOLIDAY


WuitsuntIDE Bank Holiday was producing its seasonal
invasion of Hampstead Heath, and among the ascending
Swatm were two who meant to make money in the
morning and spend it in the afternoon.

Tony Bicket, with balloons and wife, embarked
early on the Hampstead Tube.

“ You'll see,” he said, “Pll sell the bloomin’ lot
by twelve o’clock, and we'll go on the bust.”

Squeezing his arm, Victorine fingered, through her
dress, a slight swelling just above her right knee. It
was caused by fifty-four pounds fastened in the top of
her stocking. She had little feeling, now, against
balloons. They afforded temporary nourishment, till
she had the few more pounds needful for their passage-
money. Tony still believed he was going to screw
salvation out of his blessed balloons: he was ‘that
hopeful—Tony,’ though their heads were only just
above water on his takings. And she smiled. With
her secret she could afford to be indifferent now to the
stigma of gutter hawking. She had her story pat.
From the evening paper, and from communion on ’buses
with those interested in the national pastime, she had
acquired the necessary information about racing. She
even talked of it with Tony, who had street-corner
knowledge. Already she had prepared chapter and
verse of two imaginary coups ; a sovereign made out of


333


234 THE WHITE MONKEY


stitching imaginary blouses, invested on the winner
of the Two Thousand Guineas, and the result on the
dead-heater for the Jubilee at nice odds; this with a
third winner, still to be selected, would bring her
imaginary winnings up to the needed sixty pounds odd
she would so soon have saved now out of ‘ the alto-
gether.’ This tale she would pitch to Tony in a week
or two, reeling off by heart the wonderful luck she had
kept from him until she had the whole of the money.
She would slip her forehead against his eyes if he looked
at her too hard, and kiss his lips till his head was no
longer clear. And in the morning they would wake
up and take their passages. Such was the plan of
Victorine, with five ten-pound and four one-pound fiotes
in her stocking, attached to the pink silk stays.

** Afternoon of a Dryad” had long been finished,
and was on exhibition at the Dumetrius Gallery, with
other works of Aubrey Greene. Victorine had paid a
shilling to see it; had stood some furtive minutes
gazing at that white body glimmering from among
grass and spiky flowers, at the face, turned as if saying :
“T know a secret |”

“ Bit of a genius, Aubrey Greene—that face is jolly
good!” Scared, and hiding the face, Victorine
had slipped away.

From the very day when she had stood shivering
outside the studio of Aubrey Greene she had been in
full work. He had painted her three times—always
nice, always polite, quite the gentleman! And he had
given her introductions. Some had painted her in
clothes, some half-draped, some in that “ altogether,”
which no longer troubled her, with the money swelling
her stocking and Tony without suspicion. Not
every one had been “ nice” ; advances had been made


BANK HOLIDAY 235


to her, but she had nipped them in the bud. It would
have meant the money quicker, but—Tony! Ina
fortnight now she could snap her fingers at it all. And
often on the way home she stood by that plate-glass
window, before the fruits and the corn, and the blue
butterfiess.".)%

In the packed railway carriage they sat side by side,
Bicket, with tray on knee, debating where he had best
stand.

“I fyvour the mokes,” he said at last, “ up by the
pond. People’ll have more money than when they
get down among the swings and cocoa-nuts; and
you can go and sit in a chair by the pond, like the
seaside—I don’t want you with me not till I’ve sold
out.” ,

Victorine pressed his arm.

Along the top and over on to the heath to north and
south the holiday swarms surged, in perfect humour,
carrying paper bags. Round the pond children, with
thin, grey-white, spindly legs, were paddling and
shrilly chattering, too content to smile. Elderly couples
crawled slowly by, with jutting stomachs, and faces
discoloured by the unaccustomed climb. Girls and
young men were few, for they were dispersed already
on the heath, in search of a madder merriment. On
benches, in chairs of green canvas or painted wood,
hundreds were sitting, contemplating their feet, as
if imagining the waves of thesea. Now and again three
donkeys would start, urged from behind, and slowly
tittup their burdens along the pond’s margin. Hawkers
cried goods. Fat dark women told fortunes. Police-
men stood cynically near them. A man talked and
talked and took his hat round.

Tony Bicket unslung his tray. His cockney voice,


236 THE WHITE MONKEY


wheedling and a little husky, offered his coloured airs
without intermission. This was something like! It
was brisk! And now and again he gazed through the
throng away across the pond, to where Victorine
would be seated ina canvas chair, looking very different
from every one he knew.

“ Fine balloons—fine balloons! Sixforabob! Big
one, Madam? Only sixpence. See the size! Buy,
buy! Tyke one for the little boy!”

No “alderman ” up here, but plenty in the mood to
spend their money on a bit of brightness |

At five minutes before noon he snapped his tray to—
not a bally balloon left! With six Bank Holidays a
week he would make his fortune! Tray under arm,
he began to tour the pond. The kiddies were all right,
but—good Lord—how thin and pale! If he and Vic
had a kid—but not they—not till they got out there |
A fat brown kid, chysin’ blue butterflies, and the sun
oozin’ out of him! Rounding the end of the pond, he
walked slowly along the chairs. Lying back, elegant
with legs crossed, in brown stockings showing to the
knees, and neat brown shoes with the flaps over
My! she looked a treat—in a world of her own, like
that! Something caught Bicket by the throat. Gosh!
He wanted things for her |

* Well, Vic! Penny!”

“Twas thinkin’ of Australia.”

“Ah! It’s a gaudy long wait. Never mind—
T’ve sold the bally lot. Which shall we do, go down
among the trees, or get to the swings, at once!”

* The swings,” said Victorine.

The Vale of Health was in thapsodic mood.. The
crowd flowed here in a slow, speechless stream, to the
cries of the booth-keepets, and the owners of swings and


BANK HOLIDAY 237


cocoanuts. “ Roll—bowl—or pitch! Now for the
milky ones! Pennyashy!... Who’s for the swings ?
que tlces: © 515, ices!) ei Biney bananas’

On the giant merry-go-round under its vast umbrella
the thirty chain-hung seats were filled with gitls and
men. Round to the music—slowly—faster—whirling
out to the full extent of the chain, bodies bent back,
legs stuck forward, laughter and speech dying, faces
solemn, a little lost, hands gripping the chains hard.
Faster, faster; slowing, slowing to a standstill, and
the music silent.

“My word!” murmured Victorine. ‘Come on,
Tony!”

They entered the enclosure and took their seats.
Victorine, on the outside, locked her feet, instinctively,
one over the other, and tightening her clasp on the
chains, curved her body to the motion. Her lips
parted:

“Lor, Tony!”

Faster faster—every nerve and sense given to that
motion! O-o-h! It way a feeling—flying round like
that above the world! Faster—faster! Slower—slow,
and the descent to earth.

“ Tony—it’s ’eaven |”

“ Queer feelin’ in yer inside, when you’re swung
right out!” “I'd like it level with the top. Let’s
go once more |”

“ Righto |”

Twice more they went—half his profit on balloons |
But who cared? He liked to see her face. After
that, six shies at the milky ones without a hit, an
ice apiece ; then arm-in-arm to find a place to eat their
lunch. That was the time Bicket enjoyed most, after
the ginger-beer and sandwiches; smoking his fag,


238 THE WHITE MONKEY


with his head on her lap, and the sky blue. Along time
like that ; till at last she stirred.
“  “ Tet’s go and.see the dancin’! ”

In the grass enclosure ringed by the running path,
some two dozen couples were jigging to a band.

Victorine pulled at his arm. “I wox/dlove a turn!”

“Well, let’s ’ave a go,” said Bicket. “This one-
legged bloke’ll ’old my tray.”

‘They entered the ring.

“ Hold me tighter, Tony!”

Bicket obeyed. Nothing he liked better ; and slowly
their feet moved—to this side and that. They made
little way, revolving, keeping time, oblivious of
appearances.

“You dance all right, ‘Tony.”

“ You dance a treat |” gasped Bicket.

In the intervals, panting, they watched over the one-
legged man; then to it again, till the band ceased for
good,

“ My word!” said Victorine. “They dance on
board ship, Tony | ”

Bicket squeezed her waist.

“Tl do the trick yet, if I ’ave to tob the Bank.
There’s nothin’ I wouldn’t do for you, Vic.”

But Victorine smiled. She had done the trick already.

The crowd with parti-coloured faces, tired, good-
humoured, frowsily scented, strolled over a battlefield
thick-strewn with paper bags, banana peel, and news-’
papers.

“ Let’s ’ave our tea, and one more swing,” said
Bicket; “ then we'll get over on the other side among
the trees.”

Away over on the far side were many couples. The
sun went very slowly down. ‘Those two sat under a


BANK HOLIDAY 239


bush and watched it go. A faint breeze swung and
rustled the birch leaves. There was little human sound
out here. All seemed to have come for silence, to be
waiting for darkness in the hush. Now and then some
stealthy spy would pass and scrutinise.

“ Foxes |” said Bicket. “‘Gawd!' I'd like to rub
their noses in it!”

Victorine sighed, pressing closer to him.

Some one was playing on a banjo now; a voice
singing. It grew dusk, but a moon was somewhere
rising, for little shadows stole out along the ground.

They spoke in whispers. It seemed wrong to raise
the voice, as though the grove were underaspell. Even '
their whisperings were scarce. Dew fell, but they paid
no heedtoit. With hands locked, and cheeks together,
they sat very still. Bicket had a thought. This was
poetry—this was! Darkness now, with a sort of faint
and silvery glow, a sound of drunken singing on the
Spaniard’s Road, the whirr of belated cars returning
from the north—and suddenly an owl hooted.

“ My!” murmured Victoring, shivering : “ Anowl!
Fancy! I used to hesr one at Norbiton. I ’ope it’s
not bad luck!”

Bicket rose and stretched himself.

“Come on!” he said: ‘we've ’ad a dy. Don’t
you go catchin’ cold!”

Arm-in-arm, slowly, through the darkness of the
birch-grove, they made their way upwards—glad of
the lamps, and the street, and the crowded station, as
though they had taken an overdose of solitude,

Huddled in their carriage on the Tube, Bicket idly
turned the pages of a derelict paper. But Victorine sat
thinking of so much, that it was as if she thought of
nothing. The swings and the grove in the darkness,


240 THE WHITE MONKEY


and the money in her stocking. She wondered Tony
hadn’t noticed when it crackled—there wasn’t a safe
place to keep it in! What was he looking at, with
his eyes so fixed? She peered, and read: “*After-
noon of a Dryad.’ The striking picture by Aubrey
Greene, on exhibition at the Dumetrius Gallery.”

Her heart stopped beating. .

“ Cripes |”? said Bicket. “ Ain’t that like you?”

“Like me? Nol”

Bicket held the paper closer. “Its. It’s like you
all over. I'll cut that out. I’d like to see that picture.”

The colour came up in her cheeks, released from a
heart beating too fast now.

“°Tisn’t decent,” she said.

Dunno about that; but it’s awful like you. It’s
even got your smile.”

Folding the paper, he began to tear the sheet. Vic-
torine’s little finger pressed the notes beneath her
stocking.

“ Funny,” she said slowly, “ to think there’s people
in the world so like each other.”

“IT never thought there could be one like you.
Charin’ Cross ; we gotta change.”

Hurrying along the rat-runs of the Tube, she slipped
her hand into his pocket, and soon some scraps of
torn paper fluttered down behind her following him
in the crush. If only he didn’t remember where the
picture was |

Awake in the night, she thought:

‘I don’t care; I’m going to get the rest of the money
—that’s all about it.’

But her heart moved queerly within her, like that of
one whose feet have trodden suddenly the quaking
edge of a bog.


CHAPTER Ii


OFFICE WORK


MicHAzLt sat correcting the proofs of “ Counterfeits ”
—the book left by Wilfrid behind him.

“ Can you see Butterfield, sir ?”

ee I can.”

In Michael the word Butterfield excited an uneasy
pride. The young man fulfilled wifh increasing
success the function for which he had been engaged, on
trial, four months ago. The head traveller had eves
called him “a find.” Next to “Copper Coin” he
was the finest feather in Michael’s cap. The Trade
were not buying, yet Butterfield was selling books, or
so it was reported; he appeared to have a natural gift
of inspiring confidence where it was not justified.
Danby and Winter had even entrusted to him the
private marketing of that vellum-bound “‘ Limited ”
of “ Duet,” by which they were hoping to recoup their
losses on the ordinary edition. He was now engaged
in working through a list of names considered likely to
patronise the little mastetpiece. This method of
private approach had been suggested by himself.

“You see, sir,” he had said to Michael: “I know
a bit about Coué. Well, you can’t work that on the
Trade—they’ve got no capacity for faith. What can
you expect? Every day they buy all sorts of stuff,
always basing themselves on past sales. You can’t
find one in twenty that’ll back the future. But with
private gentlemen, and especially private ladies, you

241


242 THE WHITE MONKEY


can leave a thought with them like Coué does—put it
into them again and again that day by day in every
way the author’s gettin’ better and better; and ten to
one when you go round next, it’s pot into their sub-
conscious, especially if you take ’em just after lunch or
dinner, when they’re a bit drowsy. Let me take my
own time, sir, and I’l] put that edition over for you.”

“ Well,” Michael had answered, “if you can inspire
confidence in the future of my governor, Butterfield,
you'll deserve more than your ten per cent.”

“T can do it, sir; it’s just a question of faith.”

* But you haven’t any, have you?”

“ Well, not, so to speak, in the author—but I’ve got
faith that I can give them faith in'‘him; that’s the real
point.”

‘I see—the three-card stunt ; inspire the faith you
haven’t got, that the card is there, and they'll take it.
Well, the disillusion is not immediate—you’ll probably
always get out of theroomintime. Goahead, then |”

The young man Butterfield had smiled.

The uneasy part of the pride inspired in Michael by
the name was due to old Forsyte’s continually saying
to him that he didn’t know—he couldn’t tell—there
was that young man and his story about Elderson, and
they got no further. ...

“Good morning, sit. Can you spare me five
minutes 2”

“ Come in, Butterfield. Bunkered with ‘ Duets? ?”

“No, sit. Pe placed forty already. It’s another
matter.” Glancing at the shut door, the young man
came closer.

“I’m working my list alphabetically. Yesterday
I was in the E’s.” His voice dropped. “ Mr. Elder-
son.”


OFFICE WORK 243


“Phew!” said Michael. “ You can give sim the
go-by.”

“* As a fact, sir, I haven’t.”

“What! Been over the top?”

“Yes, sir. Last night.”

“Good for you, Butterfield! What happened ?”

“I didn’t send my name in, sir—just the firm’s
card.”

Michael was conscious of a very human malice in
the young man’s voice and face.

“Well?”

“Mr. Elderson, sir, was at his wine. Id thought it
out, and I began as if ’d never seen him before. What
struck me was—he took my cue! ”

“ Didn’t kick you out ?”

“ Far from it sir. He said at once: ‘ Put my name
down for two copies.’ ”

Michael grinned. “ You both had a nerve.”

“No, sit; that’s just it. Mr. Elderson got it be-
tween wind and water. He didn’t like it a little bit.”

*T don’t twig,” said Michael.

“My being in this firm’s employ sir. He knows
you’re a partner here, and Mr. Forsyte’s son-in-law,
doesn’t he ?”

“ He does.”

“Well, sir, you see the connection—two directors
believing me—not hiv. That’s why I didn’t miss him
out. I fancied it’d shake him up. I happened to see
his face in the sideboard glass as I went out. He’s got
the wind up all right.”

Michael bit his forefinger, conscious of a twinge of
sympathy with Elderson, as for a fly with the first
strand of cob-web round his hind leg.

“ Thank you, Butterfield,” he said.


244 THE WHITE MONKEY


When the young man was gone, he sat stabbing his
blotting-paper with a paper-knife. What curious
* class ”’ sensation was this ? Or was it merely fellow-
feeling with the hunted, a tremor at the way things
found one out? For, surely, this was real evidence,
and he would have to pass it on to his father, and “ Old
Forsyte.” Elderson’s nerve must have gone phut, or
he’d have said: ‘‘ You impudent young scoundrel—
get out of here!” That, clearly, was the only right
greeting from an innocent, and the only advisable
greeting from a guilty man. Well! Nerve did fail
sometimes—even the best. Witness the very proof-
sheet he had just corrected :


THe Court MARTIAL


** See ’ere 1 I’m myde o’ nerves and blood
The syme as you, not meant to be
Froze stiff, up to me ribs in mud.
You try it, like I’ave, an’ see l


s< Aye, you snug beauty brass hats, when
You stick what I stuck out that d’y,

An’ keep yer ruddy ’earts up—then
You'll learn, maybe, the right to s’y :


“<< Take abt an’ shoot ’im in the snow,
Shoot *im for cowardice! ’E who serves

His King and Country's got to know
There’s no such bloody thing as nerves.’ ””


Good old Wilfrid.
Yes, Miss Perren ?
* The letter to Sir James Foggart, Mr. Moat 3 you


OFFICE WORK 245


told me to remind you. And will you see Miss
Manuelli? ”

“Miss Manu Oh! Ab! Yes.”

Bicket’s girl wife, whose face they had used on Stor-
bert’s novel, the model for Aubrey Greene’s !
Michael rose, for the girl was in the room already.

“J remember that dress!’ he thought: ‘Fleur
nevet liked it.’

“What can I do for you, Mrs. Bicket? How’s
Bicket, by the way ?”

“Fairly, sir, thank you.”

* Still in balloons ?”

“ Yes.”

“Well, we all are, Mrs. Bicket,”

“ Beg pardon? ”

“In the air—don’t you think? But you didn’t
come to tell me that ?”

CoNOp sitet

A slight flush in those sallow cheeks, fingers con-
cerned with the tips of the worn gloves, lips uncertain ;
but the eyes steady—really an uncommon girl |

“You remember givin’? me a note to Mr. Greene,
Binnie

“Ido; and I’ve seen the result ; it’s topping, Mrs.
Bicket.”

“Yes. But it’s got into the papers—my husband
saw it there last night; and, of course, he doesn’t
know about me.”

Phew! For what had he let this girl in ?

“Tve made a lot of money at it, sir—almost enough
for our passage to Australia; but now I’m frightened.
“Isn’t it like you P’ he said to me. I tore the paper up,
but suppose he remembers the name of the Gallery and
goes to see the picture! That’s even much more like


246 THE WHITE MONKEY


me! He might go on to Mr. Greene. So would you
mind, sir, speaking to Mr. Greene, and beggin’ him to
say it was some one else, in case Tony did go ? ”

“Not a bit,” said Michael. ‘But do you think
Bicket would mind so very much, considering what
it’s done for you? It can be quite a respectable pro-
fession.”

Victorine’s hands moved up to her breast.

“Yes,” she said, simply. “I have been quite
respectable. And I only did it because we do so want
to get away, and I couldn’t bear seein’ him standin’ in
the gutter there sellin’ those balloons in the fogs.
But I’m ever so scared, sir, now.”

Michael stared.

“* My God!” he said; “ money’s an evil thing |”

Victorine smiled faintly. “The want of it is, I
know.”

“ How much more do you need, Mrs. Bicket ?”

“Only another ten pound, about, sir.”

*T can let you have that.”

“Oh! thank you; but it’s not that—I can easy
earn it—I’ve got used to it; a few more days don’t
matter,”

“But how are you going to account for having the
money ?”

** Say I won it bettin’.”

“ Thin!” said Michael. “ Look here! Say you
came to me and I advanced it. If Bicket repays it
from Australia, I can always put it to your credit again
at a bank out there. [ve got you into a hole, ina way,
and I'd like to get you out of it.”

“Oh! no, sir; you did mea service. I don’t want
to put you about, telling falsehoods for me.”

“Tt won’t worty me a bit, Mrs. Bicket. I can lie to


OFFICE WORK 247


the umteenth when there’s no harm in it. The great
thing for you is to get away sharp. Are there many
other pictures of you?”

“Oh! yes, a lot—not that you’d recognise them,
I think, they’re so square and funny.”

“ Ah! well—Aubrey Greene has got you to the
life |”

“Yes ; it’s like me all over, Tony says.”

“Quite. Well, Pll speak to Aubrey, I shall be
seeing him at lunch. Here’s the ten pounds! That’s
agreed, thenP You came to me to-day—see? Say
you had a brain wave. I quite understand the whole
thing. You’d do a lot for him; and he’d do a lot for
you. It’s all right—don’t cry!”

Victorine swallowed violently. Her hand in the
worn glove returned his squeeze.

“Td tell him to-night, if I were you,” said Michael,
“and I’ll get ready.”

When she had gone he thought: ‘Hope Bicket
won't think I received value for that sixty pounds!’
And, pressing his bell, he resumed the stabbing of his
blotting-paper.

“Yes, Mr. Mont 2?”

* Now let’s get on with it, Miss Perren.”

“© DzEAR Sir JAMES FoGGART,—We have given the
utmost consideration to your very interesting—er—
production. While we are of opinion that the views
so well expressed on the present condition of Britain
in relation to the rest of the world are of great value
to all—er—thinking persons, we do not feel that there
are enough—er—thinking persons to make it possible
to publish the book, except at a loss, The—er—
thesis ¢hat Britain should now look for salvation
through adjustment of markets, population, supply


I


248 THE WHITE MONKEY


and demand, within the Empire, put with such exceed-
ingly plain speech, will, we are afraid, get the goat of
all the political parties; nor do we feel that your plan
of emigrating boys and girls in large quantities before
they are spoiled by British town life, can do otherwise
than irritate a working-class which knows nothing of
conditions outside its own country, and is notably
averse to giving its children a chance in any other,’ ”

“Am I to put that, Mr. Mont?”

“Yes; but tone it ina bit. Er

** Finally, your view that the land should be used

. to grow food is so very unusual in these: days, that we
feel your book would have a hostile Press except from
the Old Guard and the Die-hard, and a few folk with
vision.’ ”

* Yes, Mr. Mont ?”

“*TIn a petiod of veering.—er—transitions ’—keep
that, Miss Perren—‘and the airy unreality of hopes
that have long gone up the spout ’—almost keep that
—‘any scheme that looks forward and defers harvest
fot twenty years, must be extraordinarily unpopular.
For all these reasons you will see how necessary it is
for you to—er—seek another publisher. In short, we
are not taking any.

“ < With—er—’ what you like—‘ dear Sir James
Foggart,


“ «We are yout obedient servants,
* © DANBY AND WINTER.’ ”

** When you’ve translated that, Miss Perren, bring it
in, and I'll sign it.”

“Yes. Only, Mr. Mont—I thought you were
a Socialist. This almost seems—forgive my asking ?”

‘Miss Perren, it’s struck me lately that labels are
‘ off” How can a man be anything at a time when


OFFICE WORK 249


evetything’s in the air? Look at the Liberals. They
can’t see the situation whole because of Free Trade;
nor can the Labour Party because of their Capital levy ;
nor can the Tories because of Protection; they’reall
hag-ridden: by catchwords! Old Sir James Foggart’s
jolly well right, but nobody’s going to listen to him.
His book will be waste paper if anybody ever publishes
it. The world’s unreal just now, Miss Perren; and
of all countries we’re the most unreal.”

‘Why, Mr. Mont ?”

-“ Why? Because with the most stickfast of all the
national temperaments, we’re holding on to what’s
gone more bust for us than for any other country.
Anyway, Mr. Danby shouldn’t have left the letter to
me, if he didn’t mean me to enjoy myself. Oh! and
while we’re about it—I’ve got to refuse Harold
Mastet’s new book. It’s.a mistake, but they won’t
have. it.”

“Why not, Mr. Mont? The Sobbing Turtle was such
a success | ”

*“ Well, in this new thing Master’s got hold of an
idea which absolutely forces him to say something.
Winter says \those who hailed The Sobbing Turtle as
such a wotk of art, are certain to be down on this for
that; and Mr. Danby calls the book an outrage on
human nature. So there’s nothing for it.’ Let’s have
a shot:


*¢ My Dear Masrser,—In the exhilaration of your
subject it has obviously not occurred to you that you’ve
bust up the show. In The Sobbing Turtle you were
absolutely in tune:with half the orchestra, and that—er
—the noisiest half: You were charmingly archaic,
and securely cold-blooded. But now, what have you


250 THE WHITE MONKEY


gone and done? Taken the last Marquesan islander
for your hero and put him down in London town!
The thing’s a searching satire, a real criticism of life.
I’m sure you didn’t mean to be contemporary, or want
to burrow into reality; but your subject has run off
with you. Cold acid and cold blood are very different
things, you know, to say nothing of your having had
to drop the archaic. Personally, of course, I think
this new thing miles better than The Sobbing Turile,
which was a nice little affair, but nothing to make
asong about. But I’m not the public, and I’m not the
critics. The young and thin will be aggrieved by
your lack of modernity, they'll say you’re moralising ;
the old and fat will call you bitter and destructive ; and
the ordinary public will take your Marquesan seriously,
and resent your making him superior to themselves.
The prospects, you see, are not gaudy. How d’you
think we’re going to ‘ get away’ with such a book?
Well, we’re not! Such is the fiat of the firm. I don’t
agree with it. I’d publish it to-morrow; but needs
must when Danby and Winter drive. So, with every
personal regret, I return what is really a masterpiece.
“* Always yours,
“* MicHAEL Monr.’”


“ D’you know, Miss Perren, I don’t think you need
translate that ?”

“Tm afraid it would be difficult.”

“ Right-o, then; but do the other, please. I’m
going to take my wife out to see a picture; back by
four. Oh! and if a little chap called Bicket, that we
used to have here, calls any time and asks to see me,
he’s to come up; but I want warning first. Will roa
let them know downstairs ?.”


OFFICE WORK 251


“Yes, Mr. Mont. Oh! didn’t—wasn’t that Miss
Manuelli the model for the wrapper on Mr. Storbert’s
novel ?”

“* She was, Miss Perren; alone I found her.”

“ She’s very interesting-looking, isn’t she ? ”

“ She’s unique, I’m afraid.”

She needn’t mind that, I should think.”

“That depends,” said Michael; and stabbed his

olotting-paper.


CHAPTER It


** AFTERNOON OF A DRYAD”


Fieur was still gracefully concealing most of what
Michael called “‘ the eleventh baronet,” now due in
about two months’ time. She seemed to be adapting
herself, in mind and body, to the quiet and persistent
collection of the heir. Michael knew that, from the
first, following the instructions of her mother, she had
been influencing his sex, repeating to herself, every
evening before falling asleep, and every morning on
waking, the words: “ Day by day, in every way, he is
getting more and more male,” to infect the subconscious
which, everybody now said, controlled the course of
events; and that she was abstaining from the words :
“*I will have a boy,” for this, setting up a reaction,
everybody said, was liable to produce a girl. Michael
noted that she turned more and more to her mother, as
if the French, or more naturalistic, side of her, had taken
charge of a process which had to do with the body.
She was frequently at Mapledurham, going down in
Soames’ car, and her mother was frequently in South
Square. Annette’s handsome presence, with its ten-
dency to black lace, was always pleasing to Michael,
who had never forgotten her espousal of his suit in
days when it was a forlorn hope. Though he still felt
only on the threshold of Fleur’s heart, and was preparing
to play second fiddle to “ the eleventh baronet,” he was
infinitely easier in mind since Wilfrid had been gone.
And he watched, with a sort of amused adoration, the
252


** AFTERNOON OF A DRYAD ”’ 253


way in which she focussed her collecting powers on
an object that had no epoch, a process that did not
date.

Personally conducted by Aubrey Greene, the expedi-
tion to view his show at the Dumetrius Gallery left
South Square after an early lunch.

“Your Dryad came to me this morning, Aubrey,”
said Michael in the cab. “ She wanted me to ask you
to put up a barrage if by any chance her husband blows
round to accuse you of painting his wife. It seems he’s
seen a reproduction of the picture.”

Umm!” murmured the painter: “ Shall I, Fleur?”

“ Of course you must, Aubrey |”

Aubrey Greene’s smile slid from her to Michael.

* Well, what’s his name?”

“ Bicket.”

Aubrey Greene fixed his eyes on space, and murmured
slowly:


“ An angry young husband called Bicket
Said: * Turn yourself round and V'll kick it 3
You have painted my wife
In the nude to the life,
Do you think, Mr. Greene, it was cricket ?.??


“Oh! Aubrey!”

“Chuck it!” said Michael, “I’m serious.  She’s
a most plucky little creature. She’s made the money
they wanted, and remained respectable.”

“So far as ’m concerned, certainly.”

- Well, I should think so.”

“ Why, Fleur?”

“You’re not a vamp, Aubrey!”

“ As a matter of fact, she excited my esthetic sense.”


254 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Muc®. that’d save her from some esthetes!”
muttered Michael.

“ Also, she comes from Putney.”

“There you have a real reason. Then, you wé// put
up.a barrage if Bicket blows in?”

Aubrey Greene laid his hand on his heart. “ And
here we are!”

For the convenience of the eleventh baronet Michael
had chosen the hour when the proper patrons of
Aubrey Greene would still be lunching. A shock-
headed young man and three pale-green girls alone
wandered among the pictures. The painter led the
way at once to his masterpiece ; and for some minutes
they stood before it in a suitable paralysis. To speak
too soon in praise would never do; to speak, too late
would be equally tactless; to speak too fulsomely
would jar; to mutter coldly: “‘ Very nice—very nice
indeed |” would blight. To say bluntly: “‘ Well, old
man, to tell you the truth, I don’t like it a little bit!”
would get his goat.

At last Michael pinched Fleur gently, and she said:

“Tt really is charming, Aubrey; and awfully like—
at least <

“ So fat as one can tell. But really, old man, you’ve
done it in once. I’m afraid Bicket will think so,
anyway.”

“Dash that!” muttered the painter. “ How do
you find the colour values ? ”

* Jolly fine; especially the flesh; don’t you think
so, Fleur ? ”

“Yes; only I should have liked that shadow down
the side a little deeper.”

“Yes P”? murmured the painter: ‘ Perhaps |”

“ You’ve caught the spirit,” said Michael. “ But


°° AFTERNOON OF A DRYAD ” 255


I tell you what, old man, you’re for it—the thing’s got

meaning. I don’t know what the critics will do to
ou.”

: Aubrey Greene smiled. “‘ That was the worst of

her. She led me on. To get an idea’s fatal.”

“ Personally, I don’t agree to that; do you, Fleur?”

* Of course not; only one doesn’t say so.”

“Time we did, instead of kow-towing to the Café
Crrillon. I say, the hair’s all right, and so are the toes
—they curl as you look at ’em.”

“ And it 7s a relief not to get legs painted in streaky
cubes. ‘The asphodels rather remind one of the flowers
in Leonardo’s ‘ Virgin of the Rocks,’ Aubrey.”

“ The whole thing’s just a bit Leonardoish, old man.
You'll have to live that down.”

“Oh! Aubrey, my father’s seen it. I believe he’s
biting. Something you said impressed him—about
our white monkey, d’you remember P ”

Aubrey Greene threw up his hands. “Ah! That
white monkey—to have painted that! at the fruit
and chuck the tinds around, and ask with your eyes
what it’s all about.”

“A moral!” said Michael: ** Take care, old man!
Well! Our taxi’s running up. Come along, Fleur ;
we'll leave Aubrey to his conscience.”

Once more in the cab, he took her arm.

“That poor little snipe, Bicket! Suppose I’d come
on _you as he’ll come on his wife! ”

** T shouldn’t have looked so nice.”

“Oh! yes; much nicer; though she looks nice
enough, I must say.”

“Then why should Bicket mind, in these — of
emancipation ? ”

“Why? Good Lord, ducky! You don’t suppose


i*


256 THE WHITE MONKEY


Bicket ! I mean, we emancipated people have
got into the habit of thinking we’re the world—well !
we aten’t; we're an excrescence, small, and noisy.
We talk as if all the old values and prejudices had gone ;
but they’ve no more gone, really, you know, than the
rows of villas and little grey houses.”

* Why this outburst, Michael ?”

“Well, darling, I’m.a bit fed-up with the attitude of
our crowd. If emancipation were true, one could
stick it; but it’s not. There isn’t ten per cent.
difference between now and thirty years ago.”

* How do you know? You weren’t alive.”

“No; but I read the papers, and talk to the man in
the street, and look at people’s faces. Our lot think
they’re the tablecloth, but they’re only the fringe.
D’you know, only one hundred and fifty thousand
people in this country have ever heard a Beethoven
Symphony ? How many, do you suppose, think old
B. a back number? Five thousand, perhaps, out of
forty-two millions. _How’s that for emancipation ? ”

He stopped, observing that her eyelids had
drooped.

“T was thinking, Michael, that I should like to
change my bedroom curtains to blue. I saw the exact
colour yesterday at Harton’s. They say blue has an
effect on the mind—the present curtains really are too
jazzy.”

The eleventh baronet |!

“ Anything you like, darling. Have a blue ceiling
if it helps.”

“Oh, no! But I think Pll change the carpet, too;
there’s a lovely powder blue at Harton’s.”

“Then get it. Would you like to go there now ?
I can take the Tube back to the office.”


‘AFTERNOON OF A DRYAD ” 257


“ Yes, I think I’d better. I might miss it.”

Michael put his head out of the window. “ Har-
ton’s, please!” And, replacing his hat, he looked at
her. Emancipated |


CHAPTER IV


AFTERNOON OF A BICKET


Jusr about that moment Bicket re-entered his sitting-
room and deposited his tray. All the morning under
the shadow.of St. Paul’s he had re-lived Bank Holiday.
Exceptionally tired in feet and legs, he was also itching
mentally. He had promised himself a refreshing look
from time to time at what was almost like a photo of
Vic herself. And he had lost the picture! Yet he had
taken nothing out of his pockets—just hung his coat
up. Had it joggled out in the crush at the station,
or had he missed his pocket opening and dropped it in
the carriage? And he had wanted to see the original,
too. He remembered that the Gallery began with
a “ D,” and at lunch-time squandered a penny-halfpenny
to look up the names. Foreign, he was sure—the
picture being naked. “ Dumetrius”? Ah!

Back at his post, he had a bit of luck. ‘ That alder-
man,’ whom he had not seen for months, came by.
Intuition made him say at once: “ Hope I see you well,
sir. Never forgotten your kindness.”

The “alderman,” who had been staring up as if he
saw a magpie on the dome of St. Paul’s, stopped as
though attacked by cramp.

“Kindness P” he said; ‘“‘ what kindness? Oh,
balloons! They were no good to me!”

“No, sir, I’m sure,” said Bicket humbly.

“ Well, here you are!” muttered the “ alderman ” ;
“ don’t expect it again.”

258


AFTERNOON OF A BICKET 259


Half-a-crown!. A whole half-a-crown! Bicket’s
eyes pursued the hastening form. “Good luck!”
he said softly to himself, and began putting up his tray.
“T’ll go home and rest my feet, and tyke Vic to see
that picture. It’ll be funny lookin’ at it together.”

But she was notin. He sat down and smoked a fag.
He felt aggrieved that she was out, this the first after-
noon he had taken off. Of course she couldn’t stay
in all day! Still ! He waited twenty minutes,
then put on Michael’s suit and shoes.

‘Til go and see it alone,’ he thought. ‘It'll cost
half as much... They charge you sixpence, I expect.’

They charged him a shilling—a shilling! One
fourth of his day’s earnings, to see a picture! He
entered bashfully. There were ladies who smelled of
scent and had drawling voices, but not a patch on Vic
for looks. One of them, behind him, said :

“See! There’s Aubrey Greene himself! And
that’s the picture they’re talking of—‘ Afternoon of a
Dryad.’ ”

They passed him and moved on. Bicket followed.
At the end of the room, between their draperies and
catalogues, he glimpsed the picture. A slight sweat
broke out on his forehead... Almost life-size, among
the flowers and spiky, grasses, the face smiled round at
him—very image of Vic! Could some one in the
world be as like her as all that? The thought offended
him, as a collector is offended finding the duplicate of
an unique possession.

“It’s a wonderful picture, Mr. Greene, What
a type!”

A young man without hat, and fair hair sliding back,
answered :

“* A find, wasn’t she P ”


260 THE WHITE MONKEY °


“Oh! perfect |—the very spirit of a wood te
so mysterious | ”

The word that belonged to Vic! It was unholy.
There ‘she lay for all to look at, just’ because some
beastly woman was made like her! A kind of rage
invaded Bicket’s throat, caused his cheeks to burn;
and with it came a queer physical jealousy. That
painter! What business had he to paint a woman so’
like Vic as that—a woman that didn’t mind lyin’ like
that! They and their talk about cahryscuro, and
paganism, and a bloke called Leneardo! Blast their
drawling and their tricks! He tried to move away,
and could not, fascinated by that effigy, so uncannily
resembling’ what he had thought belonged to himself
alone. Silly 'to feel so bad over a “ coincidence,” but
he felt like smashing the glass and cutting the body up
into little bits. The ladies and the painter passed on,
leaving him alone before the picture. Alone, he did
not mind so much. The face was mournful-like, and
lonely, and—and teasing, with its smile. It sort of
haunted you—it did! ‘Well!’ thought Bicket,
‘Pll get home to Vic. \ Glad I didn’t bring her, after .
all, to see herself-like. If I was'an alderman, I’d
buy the blinkin’ thing, and burn it!’

And there, in the entrance-lobby, talking to a “ dago,”
stood—his very own “alderman”! Bicket paused in
sheer amazement.

“It’s a rithing name, Mr. Forthyte,” he heard the
Dago say: “ hith prithes are going up.”

“That’s all very well, Dumetrius, but it’s not every-
body’s money in these days—too highly-finished,
altogether | ””

“ Well, Mr. Forthyte, to you I take off ten per thent.’

“ Take off twenty and I'll buy it.”


AFTERNOON OF A BICKET 261


That Dago’s shoulders mounted above his hairy ears
—they did; and what a smile |

“ Mithter Forthyte! Fifteen, thir!”

“Well, you’re doing me; but send it round to my
daughter’s in South Square—you know the number.
When do you close ?”

“ Day after to-morrow, thir.”

So! The counterfeit of Vic had gone to that “ alder-

man,” hadit? Bicket uttered a savage little sound, and
slunk out.
. He walked with a queer feeling. Had he got un-
necessary wind up? After all, it wasn’t her. But to
know that another woman could smile that way, have
frizzy-ended short black hair, and be all curved the
same! And at every 'woman’s passing face he looked
—so different, so utterly unlike Vic’s |

When he reached home she was standing in the middle
of the room, with her lips toa balloon. All around her,
on the floor, chairs, table, mantelpiece, were the blown:
out shapes of his stock; ‘one by one they had floated
from her lips and selected their own resting-places :
puce, green, orange, purple, blue, enlivening with their
colour the dingy little space. All his balloons blown
up! And there, in her best clothes, she stood smiling,
queer, excited.

“ What in thunder! ” said Bicket.

Raising her dress, she took some crackling notes
from the top of her stocking, and held them out to him.

“See! Sixty-four pounds, Tony! I’ve got it all.
We can go.”

* What!”

“T had a brain wave—went to tnat Mr. Mont who
gave us the clothes, and he’s advanced it. We can
pay it back, some day. Isn’t it a marvel?”


262 HE WHITE MONKEY


Bicket’s eyes, startled like a rabbit’s, took in het
smile, her excited flush, and a strange feeling shot
through all his body, as if they were taking him in!
She wasn’t like Vic! No! Suddenly he felt her
arms round him, felt her moist lips on his. She clung
so tight, he could not move. His head went round.

“ Atlast! Atlast! Isn’tit fine? Kiss me, Tony!”

Bicket kissed; his vertigo was real, but behind it,
for the moment stifled, what sense of unreality! .. .

Was it before night, or in the night, that the doubt
first came—ghostly, tapping, fluttering, haunting—then,
in the dawn, jabbing through his soul, turning him rigid.
The money—the picture—the lost paper—that sense of
unreality! This story she had told him! Were such
things possible ? Why should Mr. Mont advance that
money? She had seen him—that was certain; the
toom, the secretary—you couldn’t mistake her descrip-
tion of that Miss Perren. Why, then, feel this jabbing
doubt? The money—suchalotof money! Not with
Mr. Mont—never—he was a gent! Oh! Swine
that he was, to have a thought like that—of Vic! He
turned his back to her and tried to sleep. But once you
got a thought like that—sleep ? No! Her face among
the balloons, the way she had smothered his eyes and
turned his head—so that he couldn’t think, couldn’t
go into it and ask her questions! A prey to dim doubts,
achings, uncertainty, thrills of hope, and visions of
“ Austrylia,” Bicket arose haggard.

“Well,” he said, over their cocoa and margarined
bread: ‘‘I must see Mr. Mont, that’s certain.” And
suddenly he added: “ Vic?” looking straight into
her face. i

She answered his look—straight, yes, straight. Oh]
he was a proper swine! ...


AFTERNOON OF A BICKET 263


When he had left the house Victorine stood quite
still, with hands pressed against her chest. She had
slept less than he. Still as a mouse, she had turned and
turned the thought: ‘Did I take him ir? Did I?’
And if not—what ? She took out the notes which had
bought—or sold?—their happiness, and counted
them once more. And the sense of injustice burned
within her. Had she wanted to stand like that before
men? Hadn’t she been properly through it about
that? Why, she could have had the sixty pounds three
months ago from that sculptor, who was wild about
her; or—so he said! But she had stuck it; yes, she
had. Tony had nothing against her really—even if he
knew it all. She had done it for him—Well! mostly
—for him selling those balloons day. after day in all
weathers! But for her, they would still be stuck, and
another winter coming, and unemployment—so they
said in the paper—to be worse and worse! Stuck in
the fogs and the cold, aga'n! Ugh! Her chest was
still funny sometimes; and he always hoarse. And
this poky little room, and the bed so small that she
couldn’t stir without waking him. Why should Tony
doubt her? For he did—she had felt it, heard it in
his “ Vic?” Would Mr. Mont convince him? Tony
was shatp! Her head drooped. The unfairness of
it all! Some had everything to their hand, like that
ptetty wife of Mr. Mont’s! And if one tried to find
a way and get out to a new chance—then—then—this |
She flung her hair back. Tony must believe—he should |
‘If he wouldn’t, let him look out. She had done nothing
to be ashamed of! No, indeed! And with the long-
ing to go in front and lead her happiness along, she
got out her old tin trunk, and began with careful
method to put things into it.


CHAPTER .V


MICHAEL GIVES ADVICE


MicwHaez still sat, correcting the proofs of “ Counter-
feits.” Save “ Jericho,” there had been no address to
send them to. The East was wide, and Wilfrid had
made no sign. Did Fleur ever think of Wilfrid now ?
He had the impression that she did not. And Wilfrid
—well, probably he was forgetting her already. Even
passion required a little sustenance.

“A Mr. Forsyte to see you, sir.”

Apparition in bookland |

*“ Ah! Show him in.”

Soames entered with an ait of suspicion.

“This your place?” he said. ‘I’ve looked in to
tell you that I’ve bought that picture of young Greene’s,
Have you anywhere to hang it 2”

“I should think we had,” said Michael. “ Jolly
good, sir, isn’t it ?”

“ Well,” muttered Soames, “for these days, yes.
He’ll make a name.”

“ He’s an intense admirer of that White Monkey you
gave us.”

“Ah! I’ve been looking into the Chinese. If I go
on buying ’? Soames paused.

“They are a bit of an antidote, aren’t they, sit?
That ‘Earthly Paradise’! And those geese—they
don’t seem to mind your counting their feathers, do
they ?”

Soames made no reply; he was evidently thinking:

64


MICHAEL GIVES ADVICE 265


* How on earth I missed those things when they first
came on the market!’ Then, raising his umbrella
and pointing it as if at the book trade, he asked:

“ Young Butterfield—how’s he doing ?”

“Ah! Iwas going to let you know, sir. He came
in yesterday and told me that he saw Elderson two days
ago. He went to sell him a copy of my father’s
‘Limited’; Elderson said nothing and bought two.”

** The deuce he did!”

“Butterfield got the impression that his visit put
the wind up him. Elderson knows, of course, that
Tm in this firm, and your son-in-law.”

Soames frowned. ‘‘?’m not sure,” he said, “ that
sleeping dogs ! Well, ’'m on my way there now.”
. “ Mention the book, sir, and see how Elderson takes
it. Would you like one yourself? You’re on the
list. E, F—Butterfield should be reaching you to-day.
It'll save you a refusal. Here it is—nice get-up. One
guinea.”

*<* Duet,’ tread. Soames. “ What’s it about?
Musical ? ” .

** Not precisely. A sort of cat-calling between the
ghosts of the G.O.M. and Dizzy.”

“T’m not a reader,” said Soames, He pulled out
anote. ‘‘ Why didn’t you make it a pound? Here’s
the shilling.”

“« Thanks awfully, sir ;: I’m sure my father’ll be fright-
fully bucked to think you’ve got one.”

“Will he?” said Soames, with a faint smile.
* D’you ever do any work here ? ”

“ Well, we try to turn a doubtful penny.”

* What d’you make at it?”

“ Personally, about five hundred a iain

* That all °”


266 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Yes, but I doubt if I’m worth more than
three.”

“H’m! I thought you’d got over your Socialism.”

“T fancy I have, sir. It didn’t seem to go with my,
position.”

“ No,” said Soames.  “‘ Fleur seems well.”

“Yes, she’s splendid. She does the Coué stunt,
you know.”

Soames stared. “* That’s her mother,” he said; “I
can’t tell. Good-bye! Oh! I wantto know; what’s
the meaning of that expression ‘ got his goat’ ?”

“* Got his goat?’ Oh, raised his dander, if you
know what that means, it was before my time,” :

** Isee,” said Soames ; “Ihadit right, then. Well!”
He turned. His back was very neat and real. It
vanished through the doorway, and with it seemed to
go the sense of definition.

Michael took up the proofs, and read two poems.
Bitter as quinine! The unrest in them—the yearning
behind the words! Nothing Chinese there! After
all, the ancients—like Old Forsyte, and his father in
a very different way—had an anchor down. ‘ What is
it?’ thought Michael. ‘ What’s wrong with us?
We're quick, and clever, cocksure, and dissatisfied.
If only something would enthuse us, or get our goats |
We’ve chucked religion, tradition, property, pity;
and in their place we put—what? Beauty? Gosh!
See Walter Nazing, and the Café C’rillon! And yet
—we must be after something! Better world?
Doesn’t look like it. Future life ?. Suppose I ought
to “look into spizitualism,” as Old Forsyte would say.
But—half in this world, half in that—deuced odd if
spirits are less restive than we are!’ .

To what—to what, then, was it all moving ?


MICHAEL GIVES ADVICE 267


“Dash it!’ thought Michael, getting up, ‘Tl try
dictating an advertisement |! ’

“Will you come in, please, Miss Perren? For the
new Desert volume—Trade Journals: ‘Danby and
Winter will shortly issue Counterfeits, by the author of
Copper Coin, the outstanding success of the last publish-
ing season.’ I wonder how many publishers have
claimed that, Miss Perren, for how many books this
year? ‘These poems show all the brilliancy of mood,
and more than the technical accomplishment of the
young author’s first volume.? How’s that?”

_ “ Brilliancy of mood, Mr. Mont? Do you think ?”

“No. But what amItosay? ‘All the pangs and
pessimism ?” ”

“Oh, no! But possibly: ‘ All the brilliancy of
diction, the strangeness and variety of mood.’ ”

“Good. But it'll cost more. Say: ‘All the
brilliant strangeness’; that'll ring their bells in once.
We’re nuts on ‘ the strange,’ but we’re not getting it-—
the ovtré, yes, but not the strange.”

“ Surely Mr. Desert gets ff

* Yes, sometimes ; but hardly any one else. To be
strange, you’ve got to have guts, if you'll excuse the
phrase, Miss Perren,”

** Certainly, Mr. Mont. That young man Bicket is
waiting to see you.”

“ He is, is he ?” said Michael, taking out a cigarette.
“ Give me time to tighten my belt, Miss Perren, and
ask him up.”

* The lie benevolent,’ he thought’; ‘ now for it!”

The entrance of Bicket into a room where his last
appearance had been so painful, was accomplished with
a certain stolidity. Michael stood back to the hearth,
smoking; Bicket, back to a pile of modern novel, with


268 THE WHITE MONKEY


the words “ This) great new novel” on it.. Michael
nodded.

“ Hallo, Bicket |”

Bicket nodded.

“ Hope you’re keeping well, sir?”

“ Frightfully well, thank you.” And there was
silence.

“ Well,” said Michael, at last, “I suppose you’ve
come about that little advance to your wife. It’s quite
all right; no hurry whatever.”

While saying this he had become conscious that the
“little snipe ” was dreadfully disturbed. His eyes had
a most peculiar look, those large, shrimp-like eyes,
which seemed, as it were, in advance of the rest of him,
He hastened on:

“T believe in Australiaymyself.. I think you’re per-
fectly right, Bicket, and the sooner you go, the better.
She doesn’t look too strong.”

Bicket swallowed.

** Sir,” he said, “ you’ve been a gent to me, and it’s
hard to say things.”

“Then don’t.”

Bicket’s cheeks became suffused with blood: queer
effect in that pale, haggard face.

“It isn’t what you think,” he said: “I’ve come to
ask you to tell me the truth.” Suddenly he whipped
from his pocket what Michael perceived to be a
crumpled novel-wrapper.

“T took this from a book on the counter as I came
by, downstairs. There! Is that my wife?” He
stretched it out.

Michael beheld with consternation the wrapper of
Storbert’s novel. One thing to tell the lie benevolent
already determined on—quite another to deny this |


MICHAEL GIVES ADVICE 269


Bicket gave him little time.

**T see it is, from your fyce,” he said. ‘* What’s it
all mean? I want the truth—I must ’ave it! I’m
gettin’ wild over all this. If that’s ’er fyce there, then
that’s ’er body in the Gallery—Aubrey Greene; it’s
the syme nyme. What’s it all mean?” His face had -
become almost formidable; his cockney accent very
broad. “ What gyme ’as she been plyin’? . You
gotta tell me before I go aht of ’ere.”

Michael’s heels came together. He said quietly:

“ Steady, Bicket.”

“Steady! You'd be steady if your wife——! All
that money! You never advanced it—you never give
it °er—never! Don’t tell me you did!”

Michael had taken his line. No lies!

“T lent her ten pounds to make a round sum of it—
that’s all; the rest she earned—honourably; and you
ought to be proud of her.”

Bicket’s mouth fell open. “ Proud? And how’s she
earned it? Proud! My Gawd!”

Michael said coldly :

“ As a model. I myself gave her the introduction
to my friend, Mr. Greene, the day you had lunch with
me. You’ve heard of models, I suppose ?”

Bicket’s hands tore the wrapper, and the pieces fell
to the floor. “Models!” he said: “ Pynters—yes,
Pye ’eard of ’em—Swines | ”

* No more swine than you are, Bicket. Be kind
enough not to insult my friend. Pull yourself together,
man, and take a cigarette.”

Bicket dashed the proffered case aside.

“ J—I—was struck on her,” he said passionately,
“and she’s put this up on me!” A sort of sob came
eut of his lungs,


270 THE WHITE MONKEY


** You were struck on her,” said Michael; his voice
had sting in it. “‘ And when she does her best for
you, you turn her down—is that it? Do you suppose
she liked it 2?”

Bicket covered his face suddenly.

“* What should I know ?” he muttered from behind
his hands.

A wave of pity flooded up in Michael. Pity! Blurb!

He said drily: “‘ When you’ve quite done, Bicket.
D’you happen to remember what you did for her?”

Bicket uncovered his face and stared wildly.
“ You’ve never told her that?”

“No; but I jolly well will if you don’t pull yourself
together.”

““ What do I care if you do, now—lyin’ like that, for
allthe meninthe world! Sixty pound! Honourably!
D’you think I believe that?” His voice had desola-
tion in it.

“ Ah!” said Michael. “ You don’t believe simply
because you’re ignorant, as ignorant as the swine you
talk of. A girl can do what she did and be perfectly
honest, as I haven’t the faintest doubt she is. You’ve
only to look at her, and hear the way she speaks of it.
She did it because she couldn’t bear to see you selling
those balloons. She did it to get you out of the gutter,
and give you both a chance. And now you've got the
chance, you kick up like this. Dash it all, Bicket, be
a sport! Suppose I tell her what you did for her—
d’you think she’s going to squirm and squeal? Not
she! It was damned human of you, and it was -
damned human of her; and don’t you forget it |”

Bicket swallowed violently again.

It’s all very well,” he said, sullenly; “it ’asn t
appened to you.”


MICHAEL GIVES ADVICE 271


Michael was afflicted at once. No! It hadn’t
happened to him! And all his doubts of Fleur in the
days of Wilfrid came hitting him.

* Look here, Bicket,” he said, “do you doubt your

wife’s affection ? The whole thing is there. I’ve
only seen her twice, but I don’t see how you can. If
she weren’t fond of you, why should she want to go to
Australia, when she knows she can make good money
here, and enjoy herself if she wants ? I can vouch for
my friend Greene. He’s dashed decent, and I know
he’s played cricket.”

But, searching Bicket’s face, he wondered: Were
all the others she had sat to as dashed decent ?

“Look here, Bicket! We all get up against it
sometimes ; and that’s the test of us. You’ve just go¢
to believe in her; there’s nothing else to it.” _

“ ‘To myke a show of herself for all the world to see | ”
The words seemed to struggle from the skinny throat.
“1 saw that picture bought yesterday by a ruddy alder-
man,”

Michael could not conceal a grin at this description.
of “ Old Forsyte.”

“ As a matter of fact,” he said, “it was bought by
my own father-in-law as a present to us, to hang in our
house. And, mind you, Bicket, it’s a fine thing.”

“ Ah!” cried Bicket, “it 7s a fine thing! Money!
It’s money bought her. Money’ll buy anythizg.
It'll buy the ’eart out of your chest.”

And Michael thought: ‘I can’t get away with it
a bit! What price emancipation? He’s never heard
of the Greeks | And if he had, they’d seem to him a lot
of loose-living foreigners. I must quit.? And. sud-
denly, he saw tears came out of those shrimp’s eyes,
and trickle down the hollowed cheeks,


272 fHE WHITE MONKEY


Very disturbed, he said hastily :

“When you -get out there, you'll never think of it
again. Hang it all, Bicket, bea man! She did it for
the best. If I were you, I’d never let on to her that
I knew. That’s what she’d do if I told her how you
snooped those Copper Coins.”

Bicket clenched his fists—the action went curiously
with the tears ; then, without a word, he turned and
shuffled out.

‘ Well,’ thought Michael, * giving advice is clearly not
my stunt! Poor little snipe!’


CHAPTER VI


QUITTANCE


Bicxer stumbled, half-blind, along the Strand.
Naturally good-tempered, such a nerve-storm made him
feel ill, and bruised in the brain. Sunlight and motion
slowly restored some power of thought. He had got
the truth. But was it the whole and nothing but the
truth 2 Could: she: have made all that money with-
out ? If he could believe that, then, perhaps—
out of this country where people could see her naked
for a shilling—he might forget. But—all that money!
And even if all earned “ honourable,” as Mr. Mont had
put it, in how many days, exposed to the eyes of how
many men? He groaned aloud in the street. The
thought of going home to her—of a scene, of what he
might learn if there were a scene, was just about un-
bearable. And yet—must do it, he supposed. He
could have borne it better under St. Paul’s, standing
in the gutter, offering his balloons.» A man of leisure
for the first time in his life, a blooming “ alderman ”
with nothing to do but step in and take'a ticket to the
ruddy butterflies! And he owed that leisure to what
a man with nothing to take his thoughts off simply
could not bear! He would rather have snaffled the
money out of a shop till. Better that on his soul, than
the jab of this dark fiendish sexual jealousy. ‘Be a
man!’ Easy said! ‘Pull yourself ‘together! She
did it for you!’ He would a hundred times rather
she had not. Blackfriars Bridge!- A dive, and an


373


274 THE WHITE MONKEY


end in the mud down there? But you had to rise
three times ; they would fish you out alive, and run
you in for it—and nothing gained—not even the
pleasure of thinking that Vic would see what she had
done, when she came to identify the body. Dead was
dead, anyway, and he would never know what she felt
post-mortem! He trudged across the bridge, keeping
his eyes before him. Little Ditch Street—how he
used to scuttle down it, back to her, when she had
pneumonia! Would he never feel like that again?
He strode past the window, and went in.

Victorine' was still bending over the brown tin
trunk. She straightened herself, and on her face came
a cold, tired look.

“ Well,” she said, “ I see you know.”

Bicket had but two steps to take in that small room.
He took them, and put his hands on her shoulders.
His face was close, his eyes, so large and strained,
searched hers.

“I know you’ve myde'a show of yerself for all
London to see; what I want to know is—the rest | ”

Victorine stared back at him.

“The rest!” she said—it was not a question, just
a repetition, in a voice that seemed to mean nothing.

“ Ah!” said Bicket hoarsely ; “ The rest—Well ? *

“If you think there’s a ‘ rest,’ that’s enough.”

Bicket jerked his hands away.

*“ Aoh! for the land’s sake, daon’t be mysterious.

m ’alf orf me nut |.”

“T see that,” said Victotine; “and I see this: You
aren’t what I thought you. D?’you think I liked doing
it?” She raised her dress and took: out the notes.
“There you are! You can go to Australia without
me,”


QUITTANCE 275


Bicket cried hoarsely: “And leaye you to the
blasted pynters Pp.”

“ And leave me to meself. Take them! ”

But Bicket recoiled against the door, staring at the
_ motes with horror. “‘ Not me!”

» “Well, I can’t keep ’em. I earned them to get you
out of this.”

There was a long silence, while the notes lay between
them on the table, still crisp if a little greasy—the long-
desired, the dreamed-of means of release, of happiness
together in the sunshine. There they lay; neither
would take them! What then?

“Vic,” said Bicket at last, in a hoarse whisper,
** sweat you never let em touch you!”

“Yes, I can swear that.”

And she could smile, too, saying it—that smile of
hers. How believe her—living all these months,
keeping it from him, telling him a lie about it in the
end! He sank into a chair by the table and laid his
head on his arms.

Victorine turned and began pulling an old cord
round the trunk. He raised his head at the tinny
sound. ‘Then she really meant to go away! He saw
his life devastated, empty as a cocoanut on Hampstead
Heath; and all defence ran melted out of his cockney
spirit. Tears rolled from his eyes.

* When you were ill,” he said, “I stole for you. 1
got the bird for it.”

She spun round. “ Tony—you never told me!
What did you steal ?”

“Books. All your extra feedin’ was books.”

For a long minute she stood looking at him, then
stretched out her hands without a word. Bicket
seized them.


276 THE WHITE MONKEY


“1 don’t care about anything,” he gasped, “ so ’elp
me, so long as you’re fond of me, Vic!”

“And I don’t neither. Oh! let’s get out of this,
Tony !—this awful little room, this awful. country.
Let’s get out of it all!”

“ Yes,” said Bicket; and put her hands to his eyes.


CHAPTER VII


LOOKING INTO ELDERSON


Soamzs had left Danby and Winter divided in thought
between Elderson and the White Monkey. As
Fleur surmised, he had never forgotten Aubrey Greene’s
words concerning that bit of salvage from the wreck
of George Forsyte. “‘ Eat the fruits of life, scatter
the rinds, and get copped doing it.” His application
of them tended towards the field of business,

The country was still living on its capital. With
the collapse of the carrying trade and European markets,
they were importing food they couldn’t afford to pay
for. In his opinion they would get copped doing
it, and that before long. British credit was all very
well, the wonder of the world and that, but you couldn’t
live indefinitely on wonder. With shipping idle,
concerns making a loss all over the place, and the un-
employed in swarms, it was a pretty pair of shoest
Even insurance must suffer before long. Perhaps
that chap Elderson had foreseen this already, and
was simply feathering his nest in time. If one was ta
be copped in any case, why bother to be honest ? This
was cynicism so patent, that all the Forsyte in Soames
rejected it; and yet it would keep coming back. Ina
general bankruptcy, why trouble with thrift, far-sight-
edness, integrity? Even the Conservatives were tre-
fusing to call themselves Conservatives again, as if
there were something ridiculous about the word, and
they knew there was really nothing left to conserve.


277


278 THE WHITE MONKEY


“ Rat the fruit, scatter the rinds, and get copped doing
it.” That young painter had said a clever thing—yes,
and his picture was clever, though Dumetrius had done
one over the price—as usual! Where would Fleur
hang it ? In the hall, he shouldn’t be surprised—good
light there ; and the sort of people they knew wouldn’t
jib at the nude. Curious—where all the nudes went
to! You never saw a nude—no more than you saw
the proverbial dead donkey | Soames had a momentary
vision of dying donkeys laden with pictures of the nude,
stepping off the edge of the world. Refusing its
extravagance, he raised his eyes, just in time to see St.
Paul’s, as large as life. That little beggar with: his
balloons wasn’t there to-day! Well—he’d nothing for
him! At a tangent his thoughts turned towards the
object of his pilgrimage—the P.P.R.S. and its half
year’s accounts. At his suggestion, they were writing
off that German business wholesale—a dead loss of
two hundred and thirty thousand pounds. There
would be no interim dividesd, and even then they would
be carrying forward a debit towards the next half-year.
Well! better have a rotten tooth out at once and done
with; the shareholders would have six months to
get used to the gap before the general meeting. He
himself had got used to it already, and so would they
in time. Shareholders were seldom nasty unless
stattled—a long-suffering lot |

In the board room the old clerk was still filling his
inkpots from the magnum.

“Manager in P” .

saves; sir/?

** Say I’m here, will you ?”

The old clerk withdrew. Soames looked at the
clock. Twelve! A little shaft of sunlight slanted


LOOKING INTO ELDERSON 279


down the wainscotting and floor. There was nothing
else alive in the room save a bluebottle and the tick of
the clock ; not evena daily paper. Soames watched the
bluebottle. He remembered how, as a boy, he had
preferred bluebottles and greenbottles to the ordinary
fly, because of their bright colour. It wasalesson. The
showy things, the brilliant people, were the dangerous.
Witness the Kaiser and that precious Italian poet—
what was his name! And this Jack-o’-lantern of their
own! He shouldn’t be surprised if Elderson were
brilliant in private life. Why didn’t the chap come?
Was that encounter with young Butterfield giving him
pause? The bluebottle crawled up the pane, buzzed
down, crawled up again; the sunlight stole inward
along the floor. All was vacuous in the board room,
as though embodying the principle of insurance:
“Keep things as they are.”

*Can’t kick my heels here for ever,’ thought Soames,
and moved to the window. In that wide street leading
to the river, sunshine illumined a few pedestrians and
a brewer’s dray, but along the main artery at the end the
traffic streamed and rattled. London! A monstrous
place! And all insured! ‘ What’ll it be like thirty
years hence?” hethought. To think that there would
be London, without himself to see it! He felt sorry for
the place, sorry for himself. Even old Gradman would
be gone. He supposed the insurance societies would
look after it, but he didn’t know. And suddenly he
became aware of Elderson.. Ihe fellow looked quite
jaunty, in a suit of dittoes and a carnation.

“‘ Contemplating the future, Mr. Forsyte?”

“No,” said Soames. How had the fellow guessed
his thoughts ?

“T’m glad you’ve come in. It gives me a chance to


sass


280 THE WHITE MONKEY


say how grateful I am for the interest you take in the
concern. It’s rare. A manager has a lonely job.”

Was he mocking ? He seemed altogether very spry
and uppish. Light-heartedness always made Soames
suspicious—there was generally some reason for it.

“Tf every director were as conscientious as you, one
would sleep in one’s bed. I don’t mind telling you that
the amount of help I got from the Board before you
came on it was—well—necligible.”

Flattery! The fellow must be leading up to some-
thing |

Elderson went on:

“T can say to you what I couldn’t say to any of the
others: I’m not at all happy about business, Mr
Forsyte. England is just about to discover the state
she’s really in.”

Faced with this startling confirmation of his own
thoughts, Soames reacted.

“No good crying out before we’re hurt,” he said,
“the pound’s still high. We’re good stayers.”

“In the soup, I’m afraid. If something drastic
isn’t done—we shall stay there... And anything drastic,
as you know, means disorganisation and lean years
before you reap reward.”

How could the fellow talk like this, and look as
bright and pink as a new penny? It confirmed the
theory that he didn’t care what happened, And, sud-
denly, Soames resolved to try a shot.

Talking of lean years—I came in to say that I
think we must call a meeting of the shareholdets over
this dead loss of the German business.” He said it to
the floor, and looked quickly up. The result was dis-
appointing. The manager’s light-grey eyes met his
without a blink.


LOOKING INTO ELDERSON 281


“Pye been expecting that from you,” he said.

“The deuce you have!’ thought Soames, for it had
but that moment come into his mind.

“By all means call one,” went on the manager;
| “ but Pm afraid the Board won’t like it.”

Soames refrained from saying: “ Nor do I.”

“Nor the shareholders, Mr. Forsyte. In a long
experience I’ve found that the less you rub their noses
in anything unpleasant, the better for every one.”

“ That may be,” said Soames, stiffening in contratiety,
* but it’s all a part of the vice of not facing things.”

“T don’t think, Mr. Forsyte, that you will accuse me
of not facing things, in the time to come.”

Time to come. Now, what on earth did the fellow
mean by that ?

“ Well, I shall moot it at the next Board,” he said.

* Quite | ” said the manager. “ Nothing like bring-
ing things toa head, is there ?”

Again that indefinable mockery, as if he had some-
thing up his sleeve. Soames looked mechanically at
the fellow’s cufts—beautifully laundered, with a blue
stripe; at his holland waistcoat and his bird’s-eye tie—
a regular dandy. He would give him a second barrel !

“By the way,” he said, “ Mont’s written a book.
Pve taken a copy.”

Nota blink! A little more show of teeth, perhaps—
false, no doubt !

“T’ve taken two—poor, dear Mont!”

Soames had a sense of defeat. This chap was
armoured like a crab, varnished like a Spanish table.

“Well,” he said, “I must go.”

The manager held out his hand.

** Good-bye, Mr. Forsyte. I’m so grateful to you.”

The fellow was actually squeezing his hand. . Soames


282 THE WHITE MONKEY


went out confused. To have his hand squeezed was so
rare! It undermined him. And yet, it might be the
crown of a consummate bit of acting. He couldn’t
tell. _He had, however, less intention even than before
of moving for a meeting of the shareholders. No, no!
That had just been a shot to get a rise ; and it had failed.
But the Butterfield shot had gone home, surely!
If innocent, Elderson must certainly have alluded to
the impudence of the young man’s call. And yet such
a cool card was capable of failing to rise, just to tease
you! No! Nothing doing—as they said nowadays.
He was as far as ever from a proof of guilt; and to
speak truth, glad of it. Such a scandal could serve no
purpose save that of blackening the whole concern,
directors and all. People were so careless, they never
stopped to think, or apportion blame where it was due.
Keep a sharp eye open and go on as they were! No
good stirring hornet’s nests! He had got so far in
thought and progress, when a voice said :

“ Well met, Forsyte! are you going my way?”

“ Old Mont,” coming down the steps of Snooks’ |

“1 don’t know,” said Soames.

“I’m off to the Aeroplane for lunch.”

“ That new-fangled place ? ”

“ Rising, you know, Forsyte—rising.”

“T’ve just been seeing Elderson. He’s bought two
copies of your book.”

“Dear me! Poor fellow!”

Soames smiled faintly. ‘“‘ That’s what he said of you |
And who d’you think sold them to him? Young
Butterfield.”

“Ts he still alive ?”

“ He was, this morning,”

Sir Lawrence’s face took on a twist: is) oat


LOOKING INTO ELDERSON 283


“Yve been thinking, Forsyte. They tell me
Elderson keeps two women.”

Soames stared. The idea was attractive; would
account for everything.

“ My wife says it’s one too many, Forsyte. What do
you say?”

“I?” said Soames. “I only know the chap’s as
cool asa cucumber. I’m going in here. Good-bye!”

One could get no help from that baronet fellow; he
couldn’t take anything seriously. Two women! At
Elderson’s age! What a life! There were always men
like that, not content with one thing at a time—living
dangerously. It was mysterious to him. You might
look and look into chaps like that, and see nothing.
And yet, there they were! He crossed the hall, and
went into the room where connoisseurs were lunching.
Taking down the menu at the service table, he ordered
himself a dozen oysters; but, suddenly remembering
that the month contained no “r,” changed them to a
fried sole,


CHAPTER VII


LEVANTED


**'No, dear heart, Nature’s ‘off? ]”

* How d’you mean, Michael ?”

* Well, look at the Nature novels we get. Sedulous
stuff pitched on Cornish cliffs or Yorkshire moors—
ever’ been on a Yorkshire moor ?—it comes off on
you; and the Dartmoor brand. Gosh! Dartmoor,
where the passions come from—ever been on Dartmoor?
Well, they don’t, you know. And the South Sea
bunch! Oh, la, la! And the poets, the splash-and-
splutter school don’t get within miles of Nature. The
village idiot school is a bit better, certainly. After all,
old Wordsworth made Nature, and she’s a bromide,
Of course, there’s raw nature with the small ‘n’;
but if you come up against that, it takes you all your
time to keep alive—the Nature we gas about is licensed,
nicely blended and bottled. She’s not modern enough
for contemporary style.”

“Oh! well, let’s go on the river, anyway, Michael.
We can have tea at ‘ The Shelter.’ ”

They were just reaching what Michael always called
‘this desirable residence,’ when Fleur leaned forward,
and, touching his knee, said :

“I’m not half as nice to you as you deserve,
Michael.”

“ Good Lord, darling! I thought you were.”

“IT know I’m selfish; especially just now.”

* It’s only the eleventh baronet.”

284


LEVANTED 285


‘Yes; it’s a great responsibility. I only hope he’ll
be like you.”

Michael slid in to the landing-stage, shipped his
sculls, and sat down beside her.

*“If he’s like me, I shall disown him. But sons
take after their mothers.”

“I meant in character. I want him frightfully to be
cheerful and not restless, and have the feeling that
life’s worth while.” :

Michael stared at her lips—they were quivering ;
at her cheek, slightly browned by the afternoon’s
sunning; and, bending sideways, he put his own
against it.

“ He'll be a sunny little cuss, I’m certain.”

Fleur shook her head.

“JT don’t want him greedy and self-centred; it’s in
my blood, youknow. Icansee it’s ugly, but I can’t help
it. How do you manage not to be?”

Michael ruffled his hair with his free hand.

“ The sun isn’t too hot for you, is it ducky?”

“No. Seriously, Michael—how ?”

* But I av. Look at the way I want you. Nothing
will cure me of that.”

A slight pressure of her cheek on his own was hearten-
ing, and he said :

“Do you remember coming down the garden.one
night, and finding me ina boat just here? When you’d
gone, I stood on my head, to cool it. I was on my
uppers; I didn’t think I’'d got an earthly——” He
stopped. No! He would not remind her, but that
was the night when she said: “Come again when I
know I can’t get my wish!” The unknown cousin |

Fleur said quietly:

“JT was a pig to you, Michael, but I was awfully


286 THE WHITE MONKEY


unhappy. That’s gone. It’s gone at last; there’s
nothing wrong now, except my own nature.”

Conscious that his feelings betrayed the period,
Michael said :

“Oh! if that’s all] What price tea ?”

They went up the lawn arm-in-atm. Nobody was
at home—Soames in London, Annette at a garden party.

“We'll have tea on the verandah, please,” said
Fleur,

Sitting there, happier than he ever remembered being,
Michael conceded a certain value to Nature, to the sun-
shine stealing down, the scent of pinks and roses, the
sighing of the aspens. Annette’s pet doves wete
cooing; and, beyond the quietly-flowing river, the
spires of poplar trees rose along the further bank.
But, after all, he was only enjoying them because of
the girl beside him, whom he loved to touch and look
at, and because, for the first time, he felt as if she did
not want to get up and flutter off to some one or some-

thingelse. Curious that there could be, outside oneself,
a being who completely robbed the world of its import-
ance, “‘ snooped,” as it were, the whole “ bag of tricks ”
—and she one’s own wife! Very curious, considering
what one was! He heard her say:

“* Of course, mother’s a Catholic; only, living with
father down here, she left off practising. She didn’t
even bother me much. I’ve been thinking, Michael—
what shall we do about him p”

* Let him rip.”

“1 don’t know. He must be taught something,
because of going to school. The Catholics, you know,
really do get things out of their religion.”

“Yes; they go it blind; it’s the only logical way
now.”


LEVANTED 287


“1 think having no religion makes one feel that
fothing matters.”

Michael suppressed the words: “‘ We could bring him
up as a sun-worshipper,” and said, instead :

“Tt seems to me that whatever he’s taught will

‘only last till he can think for himself; then he’ll settle
down to what suits him.”

“But what do you think about things, Michael ?
You're as good as any one I know.”

“ Gosh!” murmured Michael, strangely flattered :
“Is that so?”

“What do you think? Be serious!”

“Well, darling, doctrinally nothing—which means,
of course, that I haven’t got religion. I believe one has
to play the game—but that’s ethics.”

“ But surely it’s a handicap not to be able to rely on
anything but oneself? If there’s something to be had
out of any form of belief, one might as well have it,”

Michael smiled, but not on the surface.

“You're going to do just as you like about the
eleventh baronet, and I’m going to abet you. But
considering his breeding—I fancy he’ll be a bit of a
Sceptic.”

“But I don’t want him to be. I'd rather he were
snug, and convinced and all that. Scepticism only
makes one restless.”

“No white monkey in him? Ah! I wonder:
It’s in the air, I guess. The only thing will be to
teach him a sense of other people, as young as possible,
with a slipper, if necessary.”

Fleur gave him a clear look, and laughed.

*“ Yes,”’ she said: “ Mother used to try, but fathet
wouldn’t let her.”

They did not reach home till past eight o’clock.


Kx*


288 THE WHITE MONKEY


“ Hither your father’s here, or mine,” said Michael,
in the hall; “ there’s a prehistoric hat.”

“It’s Dad’s. His is grey inside. Bart’s buff.”

In the Chinese room Soames indeed was discovered,
with an opened letter, and Ting-a-ling at his feet. He
held the letter out to Michael without a word.

There was no date, and no address ; Michael read :


“Dear Mr. Forsyre,—Perhaps you will be good
enough to tell the Board at the meeting on Tuesday
that lam on my way to immunity from the consequences
of any peccadillo I may have been guilty of. By the
time you receive this, I shall be there. I have always
held that the secret of life, no less than that of business,
is to know when not to stop. It will be no'use to
proceed against me, for my person will not be attach-
able, as I believe you call it in the law, and I have left
no property behind. If your object was to corner
me, I cannot congratulate you on your tactics. If,
on the other hand, you inspired that young man’s visit
as a warning that you were still pursuing the matter, I
should like to add new thanks to those which I expressed
when I saw you a few days ago.

“ Believe me, dear Mr. Forsyte,
“ Faithfully yours,
“ RoBERT ELDERSON.”


Michael said cheerfully :

“ Happy release! Now you'll feel safer, sir.”

Soames passed his hand over his face, evidently
wiping off its expression. ‘“‘ We’ll discuss it later,” he
said. “‘ This dog’s been keeping me company.”

Michael admired him at that moment. He was
obviously swallowing his ‘‘ grief,” to save Fleur.


LEVANTED 289


* Fleur’s a bit tired,” he said. ‘‘ We’ve been on the
river, and had tea at the ‘ Shelter? ; Madame wasn’t
in. Let’s have dinner at once, Fleur.”

Fleur had picked up Ting-a-ling, and was holding
her face out of reach of his avid tongue.

“Sorry you’ve had to wait, Dad,” she murmured,
behind the yellow fur; “‘ I’m just going to wash; shan’t
change.”

When she had gone, Soames reached for the letter.

“A pretty kettle of fish!” he muttered. “ Where
it'll end, I can’t tell!”

* But isn’t this the end, sir 2”

Soames stared. These young people! Here he
was, faced with a public scandal, which might lead
to he didn’t know what—the loss of his name in the
city, the loss of his fortune, perhaps; and they took it
as if- ! They had no sense of responsibility—none |!
All his father’s power of seeing the worst, all James’
nervous pessimism, had come to the fore in him during
the hour since, at the Connoisseurs’ Club, he had been
handed that letter. Only the extra ‘form’ of the
generation that succeeded James saved him, now that
Fleur was out of the room, from making an exhibition
of his fears.

* Your father in town?”

**T believe so, sir.”

“Good!” Not that he felt relief. That baronet
chap was just as irresponsible—getting him to go on
that Board! It all came of mixing with people
brought up in a sort of incurable levity, with no real
feeling for money.

“ Now that Elderson’s levanted,” he said, “‘ the whole
thing must come out. Here’s his confession in my
hand——-”


290 THE WHITE MONKEY


“Why not tear it up, sir, and say Elderson has
developed consumption P”

The impossibility of getting anything serious from
this young man afflicted Soames like the eating of
heavy pudding.

“You think that would be honourable?” he at
grimly.

“ Sorry, sir!” said Michael, sobered. “ Can I help
at all?”

“Yes; by dropping your levity, and taking care
to keep wind of this matter away from Fleur.”

“T will,” said Michael, earnestly: “I promise you.
Tl Dutch-oyster the whole thing. What’s your line
going to be?”

““ We shall have to call the shareholders together and
explain this dicky-dealing. They'll very likely take
it in bad part.”

“T can’t see why they should. How could you
have helped it ?”

Soames sniffed.

“'There’s no connection in life between reward and
your deserts. If the war hasn’t taught you that,
nothing will.”

“ Well,” said Michael. “ Fleur will be down directly.
If you’ll excuse me a minute; we'll continue it in our
next.””

Their next did not occur till Fleur had gone to bed.

“ Now, sit,” said Michael, “I expect my governot’s
at the Aeroplane, He goes there and meditates on the
end of the world. Would you like me to ting him up,
if your Board meeting’s to-morrow ?”

Soames nodded. He himself would not sleep a
wink—why should ‘ Old Mont’

Michael went to the Chinese tea chest.


LEVANTED 291


‘Bart ? This is Michael. Old For my father-
in-law is here; he’s had a pill... . No; Elderson.
Could you blow in by any chance and hear? ... . He’s
coming, sir. Shall we stay down, or go up to my
study?”

“Down,” muttered Soames, whose eyes were fixed
on the white monkey. “I don’t know what we’re
all coming to,” he added, suddenly.

“If we did, sit, we should die of boredom.”

“Speak for yourself. All this unreliability! I
can’t tell where it’s leading.”

“Perhaps there’s somewhere, sir, that’s. neither
heaven nor hell.”

“A man of dis age!”

“Same age as my dad; it was a bad vintage, I
expect. If you’d been in the war, sir, it would have
cheeted you up no end.”

“Indeed!” said Soames.

“Tt took the linch-pins out of the cart—admitted ;
but, my Lord! it did give you an idea of the
grit there is about, when it comes to being up
against it.”

Soames stared. Was this young fellow reading him
a lesson against pessimism ?

* Look at young Butterfield, the other day,” Michael
went on, “ going over the top, to’ Elderson! Look
at the girl who sat for ‘ the altogether’ in that picture
you bought us! She’s the wife of a packer we had,
who got hoofed for snooping books. She made
quite a lot of money by standing for the nude, and never
lost her wicket. They’re going to Australia on it.
Yes, and look at that little snooper himself ; he snooped
to keep her alive after pneumonia, and came down to
selling balloons.”


292 THE WHITE MONKEY


I don’t know what you’re talking about,” said
Soames.

“ Only grit, sir. You said you didn’t know what we
were coming to. Well, look at the unemployed!
Is there a country in the world where they stick it
as they dohere PI get awfully bucked at being English
every now and then. Don’t you?”

The words stirred something deep in Soames;
but, far from giving it away, he continued to gaze
at the white monkey. The restless, inhuman, and yet
so human, angry sadness of the creature’s eyes! ‘No
whites to them!’ thought Soames: ‘ that’s what does
it, I expect!’ And George had liked that picture
to hang opposite his bed! Well, George had grit—
joked with his last breath: very English, George]
Very English, all the Forsytes! Old Uncle Jolyon,
and his way with shareholders; Swithin, upright, puffy,
huge in a too-little arm-chair at Timothy’s ; ‘ All these
small fry!’ he seemed to hear the words again; and
Uncle Nicholas, whom that chap Elderson reproduced
as it were unworthily, spry and all there, and pretty
sensual, but quite above suspicion of dishonesty. And
old Roger, with his crankiness, and German mutton |
And his own father, James—how he had hung on,
long and frail as a reed; hung on and on! | And
Timothy, preserved in Consols, dying at a hundred |
Grit and body in those old English boys, in spite of
their funny ways. And there stirred in Soames a sort
of atavistic will-power. He would see, and they would
see—and that was all about it | ’

The grinding of a taxi’s wheels brought him) back
from. reverie. Here came “Old Mont,” tittuppy,
and light in the head as ever, no doubt. And, instead
of his hand, he held out Elderson’s letter.


LEVANTED 293


“Your precious schoolfellow’s levanted,” he said.
Sir Lawrence read it through, and whistled.
“What do you think, Forsyte—Constantinople ?”

* More likely Monte Carlo,” said Soames gloomily.
“ Secret commission—it’s not an extraditable offence.”

The odd contortions of that baronet’s face were giving
him some pleasure—the fellow seemed to be feeling it,
after all.

“ Tshould think he’s really gone to escape his women,
Forsyte.”

The chap was incorrigible! Soames shrugged his
shoulders almost violently.

* You'd better realise,” he said, “ that the fat is in
the fire.”

* But sutely, my dear Tocsies it’s been there ever
since the French occupied the Ruhr. Elderson has cut
his lucky ; we appoint some one else... What more is
there to it?”

Soames had the peculiar feeling of having overdone
his own honesty. If an honourable man, a) ninth
baronet, couldn’t see the implications of Elderson’s
confession, were they really there? Was any fuss and
scandal necessary ? Goodness knew, de didn’t want it |
He said heavily :

“We now have conclusive evidence of a fraud;
we know Elderson was illegally paid for putting through
business by which the shareholders have suffered a
dead loss. How can we keep this knowledge from
them P”

“But the mischief’s done, Forsyte. How will the
knowledge help them ?”

Soames frowned.

“ We're in a fiduciary position. I’m not prepared to
run the risks of concealment. If we conceal, we’re


294 THE WHITE MONKEY


accessoty after the fact. The thing might come out
at any time.” If that was caution, not honesty, he
couldn’t help it.

“T should be glad to spare Elderson’s name. We
were at ra

“Tm aware of that,” said Soames, drily.

“ But what risk is there of its coming out, Forsyte ?
Elderson won’t mention it; nor young Butterfield,
if you tell him not to. Those who paid the commission
certainly won’t. And beyond us three here, no one
else knows. It’s not as if we profited in any way.”

Soames was silent. The argument was specious.
Entirely unjust, of course, that he should be penalised
for what Elderson had done!

“No,” he said suddenly, “it won’t do. Depart
from the law and you can’t tell where it’l] end. The
shareholders have suffered this loss, and they have the
right to all the facts within the director’s knowledge.
There might be some means of restitution they could
avail themselves of. We can’t judge. It may be
they’ve a remedy against ourselves.”

“If that’s so, Forsyte, I’m with you.”

Soames felt disgust. Mont had no business to put
it with a sort of gallantry that didn’t count the cost;
when the cost, if cost there were, would fall, not on
Mont, whose land was heavily mortgaged, but on him-
self, whose property was singularly realisable.

“Well,” he said coldly, ‘ reraember that to-morrow.
I’m going to bed.”

At his open window upstairs he felt no sense of
virtue, but he enjoyed a sort of peace. He had taken
his line, and there it was |


CHAPTER IX


SOAMES DOESN’T GIVE A DAMN


Durinc the month following tr receipt of Eldetson’s
letter, Soames aged more than thirty days. He had
forced his policy of disclosure on a doubting Board,
the special meeting had been called, and, just as,
twenty-three years ago, pursuing divorce from Irene,
he had to face the public eye, so now he suffered day and
night in dread of that undiscriminating optic. The
French had a proverb: “ Les absents ont toujours tort |”
but Soames had grave doubts about it. Elderson would
be absent from that meeting of the shareholders, but—
unless he was much mistaken—he himself, who would
be present, would come in for the blame. The French
wete not to be relied on. What with his anxiety
about Fleur, and his misgivings about the public eye,
he was sleeping badly, eating little and feeling below
par. Annette had recommended him to see a doctor.
That was probably why he did not. Soames had faith
in doctors for other people; but they had never—he
would say—done anything for im, possibly because,
so far, there had not been anything to do.

Failing in her suggestion, and finding him every day
less sociable, Annette had given him a book on Coué.
After running it through, he had meant to leave it in
the train, but the theory, however extravagant, had
somehow clung to him. After all, Fleur was doing it ;
and the thing cost you nothing: there might be some-
thing in it! Thete was. After telling himself that


295


296 THE WHITE MONKEY


night twenty-five times that he was getting better and
better, he slept so soundly that Annette, in the next
room, hardly slept at all.

“Do you know, my friend,” she said at breakfast,
* you were snoring last night so that I could not hear
the cock crow.”

“ Why should you want to ? ” said Soames.

“ Well, never mind—if you hada good night. Was
it my little Coué who gave you that nice dream ?”

Partly from fear of encouraging Coué, and partly
from fear of encouraging her, Soames avoided a reply ;
but he had a curious sense of power, as if he did not
cate what people said of him,

*Tll do it again to-night,’ he thought.

“You know,” Annette went on, “ you are just the
temperament for Coué, Soames. When you cure your-
self of worrying, you will get quite fat.”

** Fat |”? said Soames, looking at her curves, “Id
as soon grow a beard.”

Fatness and beards were associated with the Frerch.
He would have to keep an eye on himself, if he went
on with this—er—what was one to call it p--Tom-
foolery was hardly the word to conciliate the process,
even if it did require you to tie twenty-five knots ina
bit of string: very French, that, like telling your beads!
He himself had merely counted on his fingers. The
sense of power lasted all the way up to London; he
had the conviction that he could sit in a draught if
he wanted to, that Fleur would have her boy all right ;
and as to the P.P.R.S.—ten to one he wouldn’t be
mentioned by name in any report of the proceedings.

After an early lunch and twenty-five more assurances
over his coffee, he set out for the city.

This Board, held just a week before the special meet-


SOAMES DOESN’T GIVE A DAMN 297


ing of the shareholders, was in the nature of a dress
tehearsal. The details of confrontation had to be
arranged, and Soames was chiefly concerned with seeing
that a certain impersonality should be preserved. He
was entirely against disclosure of the fact that young
Butterfield’s story and Elderson’s letter had been
confided to himself. The phtase to be used should
be a “member of the Board.” He saw no need for
anything further. As for explanations, they would
fall, of course, to the! chairman and the senior director,
Lord Fontenoy. He found, however, that the Board
thought he himself was the right person to. bring the
matter forward. Noone. else—they said—could
supply the personal touch, the necessary conviction ;
the chairman should introduce the matter briefly, then
call on Soames to giveithe evidence within his know-
ledge. Lord Fontenoy was emphatic.

“It’s up to you, Mr. Forsyte. If it hadn’t been for
you, Elderson would be sitting there to-day. From
beginning to end you put the wind up him; and I
wish the deuce you hadn’t. »The whole thing’s a
confounded nuisance. He was a vety clever fellow,
and we shall miss him. _Our new man isn’t a patch
on him. If he did take a few thou. under the rose, he
took ’em off the huns.”’

Old guinea-pig! Soames replied acidly :

“ And the quarter of a million he’s lost the share-
holders for the sake of those few thou.? Bagatelle,
T suppose ?”

“ Well, it might have turned out a winner; for the
first year it did. We all back losers sometimes.”

Soames looked from face to face. They did not
support this blatant attitude, but in them all except
perhaps “ Old Mont’s,” he felt a grudge against himself.


298 THE WHITE MONKEY


Their expressions seemed to say: “ Nothing of this sort
ever happened till you came’on the Board.” He had
disturbed their comfort, and they disliked him for it.
They were an unjust lot! He said doggedly:

“ You leaveit tome, do you? Very well!”

What he meant to convey, or'whether he meant to
convey anything, he did not know; but even that
“ old guinea-pig ” was more civil afterwards. He came
away from the Board, however, without any sense of
power at all. There he would be on Tuesday next,
bang in the public eye.

After calling to enquire after Fleur, who was lying
down rather poorly, he returned home with a feeling
of having been betrayed. It seemed that he could not
rely, after all, on this fellow with his twenty-five knots.
However much better he might become, his daughter,
his reputation, and possibly his fortune, were not
apparently at the disposition of his subconscious self.
He was silent at dinner, and went up afterwards to his
picture gallery, to think things over. For half an hour
he stood at the open window, alone with the summer
evening; and the’ longer he stood there, the more
clearly ‘he perceived that the three were really one.
Except for his daughter’s sake, what did he care for
his reputation or his fortune? His reputation! Lot
of fools—if they couldn’t see that he was careful and
honest so far as had lain within his reach ; so much the
worse for them! His fortune—well, he had better
make another settlement on Fleur and her child at
once, in case of accidents; another fifty thousand.
Ah! if she were only through her trouble! It was
time Annette went up to her for good; and there was
a thing they called: twilight sleep. ‘To have her suffering
was not to be thought of |


SOAMES DOESN’T; GIVE A’ DAMN 299


Theevening lingered out ; the sun went down behind
familiar trees; Soames’ hands, grasping the window-
ledge, felt damp with dew; sweetness of grass and
river stole up into his nostrils. The sky had paled, and
now began to darken; a scatter of stars came out, He
had lived here a long time, through all Fleur’s childhood
—best years of his life ; still, it wouldn’t break his heart
to sell, His heart was up in London. Sell? That was
to run before the hounds with a vengeance. . No—no!
—it wouldn’t come to shat /, He left the window. and,
turning up the lights, began the thousand and first
tour of his pictures. He had made some good. pur-
chases since Fleur’s marriage, and without wasting his
money on fashionable favourites. He had made some
good sales, too. The pictures in this gallery, if he
didn’t mistake, were worth from seventy to a hundred
thousand pounds; and, with the profits on his sales
from time to time, they stood him in at no more than
five-and-twenty thousand—not a bad result from a life’s
hobby, to say nothing of the pleasure! Of course,
he might have taken up something else—bursies,
photography, archxology, or first editions; sonn
other sport in which you backed your judgment against
the field, ard collected the results; but he had never
regretted choosing pictures. Not he! More to show
for your money, more kudos, more profit, and more
tisk! The thought startled him a little; had he
really taken to pictures because of the risk? A risk
had never appealed to him; at least, he hadn’t realised
it, so far. Had his “ subconscious ” some part in the
matter? He suddenly sat down and closed hie eyes,
Try the thing once more; very pleasant feeling, that
morning of not “giving a damn”; he never remem-
beted having it before! He had always felt it necessary


300 THE WHITE MONKEY


to worry—kind of insurance against the worst; but
worty was wearing, no doubt about it, wearing. Turn
out the light! They said in that book, you had to
relax. In the now dim and shadowy room, with the
starlight, through many windows, dusted over its
reality, Soames, in his easy chair, sat very still. A
faint drone rose on the words: “fatter and fatter”
through his moving lips. ‘No, no,’ he thought:
‘that’s wrong!” And he began the drone again. The
tips of his fingers ticked it off; on and on—he would
give it a good‘chance. If only one needn’t worry!
On and on—“ better and better!” — If only: ! His
lips stopped moving; his grey head fell forward into
the subconscious. And the stealing starlight dusted
over him, too, a little unreality.


CHAPTER X


BUT TAKES NO CHANCES


MicHaEL knew nothing of the City; and, in the
spirit of the old cartographers: “‘ Where you know
nothing, place terrors,” made his way through the pur-
lieus of the Poultry, towards that holy of holies, the
offices of Cuthcott, Kingson and Forsyte. His mood
was attuned to meditation, for he had been lunching
with Sibley Swann at the Café C’rillon. :He had known
all the guests—seven chaps even more modern than old
Sib—save only a Russian'so modern that he knew no
French and nobody could talk to him. Michael had
watched them demolish everything, and the Russian
closing his eyes, like a sick baby, at mention of any
living name. . . . ‘Carry on!’ he thought, several of
his favourites having gone down in the me/ée. ‘ Stab
and bludge! Importance awaits you at the end of the
alley.’ But he had restrained his irreverence till the
moment of departure.

“ Sib,” he said, rising, “all these chaps here are dead
—ought they to be about in this hot weather ? ”

“ What’s that ?” ejaculated Sibley Swan, amidst the
almost painful silence of the chaps.

“IT mean—they’re alive—so they must be damned!”
And avoiding a thrown chocolate which hit the Russian,
he sought the door.

Outside, he mused: ‘ Good chaps, really | Not half
so darned superior as they think they are. Quite a


gor


302 THE WHITE MONKEY


human touch—getting that Russian on the bcko,
Phew! It’s hot!’

On that first day of the Eton and Harrow match all
the forfeited heat of a chilly summer had gathered and
shimmered over Michael on the top of his Bank *bus ;
shimmered over straw hats, and pale, perspiring faces,
over endless other ’buses, business men, policemen,
shopmen at their doors, sellers of newspapers, places,
jumping toys, endless carts and cabs, letterings and
wires, all the confusion of the greatest conglomeration in
the world—adjusted almost to a hair’s-breadth, by an
unseen instinct. Michael stared and doubted. Was it
possible that, with everyone pursuing his own business,
absorbed in his own job, the thing could work out ? An
ant-heap was not busier, or more seemingly confused.
Live wires crossed and crossed and crossed—inexttic-
able entanglement, you’d say; and yet, life, the order
needful to life, somehow sutviving! ‘No slouch of
a miracle!’ he thought, ‘ modern town life!’ And
suddenly it seemed to cease, as if demolished by the
tuthless. dispensation of some super Sibley Swann;
for he was staring down a cul-de-sac. On both sides,
flat houses, recently re-buffed, extraordinarily alike;
at the end, a flat buff house, even more alike, and down
to it, grey virgin pavement, unstained by horse or
petrol; no cars, cats, carts, policemen, hawkers, flies,
ot bees. No sign of human life, except the names of
legal firms to right and left of each open doorway.

“* Cuthcott, Kingson and Forsyte, Commissioners
for Oaths: First Floor.”

‘Rule Britannia |’ thought Michael, ascending wide
stone steps

Entering the room to which he had been usherea, he
saw an old and pug-faced fellow with a round grizzled


a


BUT TAKES NO CHANCES 303


beard, a black alpaca coat, and a roomy holland. waist-
coat round his roomy middle, who rose from a swivel
chair.

* Aoh!” he said, “ Mr. Michael Mont, I'think. I’ve
been expecting you. We shan’t be long about it, after
Mr. Forsyte comes. He’s just stepped round the corner.
Mts. Michael well, I hope?”

“ Thanks ; as well as

“Ye-es; it makes you anxious. Takeaseat. Per-
haps you’d like to read the draft ?”

Thus prescribed for, Michael took some foolscap
from a pudgy hand, and sat down opposite. With
one eye on the old fellow, and the other on the foolscap,
he read steadily.

* It seems to mean something,” he said at last.

He saw a gape, as of a frog at a fly, settle in the beard ;
and hastened to repair his error.

“Calculating what’s going to happen if something
else doesn’t, must be rather like being a bookmaker.”

He felt at once that he had not succeeded. There was
a grumpy mutter :

“We don’t waste our time, ere. Excuse me, I’m
busy.”

Michael sat, compunctious, watching him tick down
a long page of entries. He was like one of those old
dogs which lie outside front doors, keeping people off
the premises, and notifying their fleas. After less than
five minutes of that perfect silence Soames came in,

** You’re here, then?” he said.

** Wes, sir; I thought it best to come at the time you
mentioned. What a nice cool room!”

“ Have you tead thic?” asked Soames, pointing
to the draft.

Michael nodded.


32>


304 THE WHITE MONKEY


“ Did you understand it ?”

“Up to a point, I think.”

“The interest on shis fifty thousand,” said Soames,
“is Fleur’s until her eldest child, if it’s a boy, attains
the age of twenty-one, when the capital becomes his
absolutely. If it’s a girl, Fleur retains half the income
for life, the rest of the income becomes payable to the
girl when she attains the age of twenty-one or matties,
and the capital of that half goes to her child or children
lawfully begotten, at majority or marriage, in equal
shares. The other half of the capital falls into Fleur’s
estate, and is disposable by her will, or follows the -
laws of intestacy.”

“ You make it wonderfully clear,” said Michael.

** Wait,” said Soames. ‘If Fleur has no children

Michael started.

“ Anything is possible,” said Soames gtavely, “and
my experience is that the contingencies not provided
for are those which happen. In sucha case the income
of the whole is hers for life, and the capital hers at death
to do as she likes with. Failing that, it goes to the
next of kin. There are provisions against anticipation
and so forth.”

“ Ought she to make a fresh will ?”? asked Michael,
conscious of sweat on his forehead.

** Not unless she likes. Her present will covets it.”

* Have I to do anything ?”

“No. I wanted you to understand the purport before
I sign; that’s all. Give me the deed, Gradman, and
get Wickson in, will you?”

Michael saw the old chap produce from a drawer a
fine piece of parchment covered with copper-plate
writing and seals, look at it lovingly, and place it before


BUT TAKES NO CHANCES 305


Soames. When he had left the room, Soames said in a
low voice:

“This meeting on Tuesday—I can’t tell! But,
whatever happens, so far as I can see, this ought to

_ stand.”

“It’s awfully good of you, sir.”

Soames nodded, testing a pen.

“Tm afraid I’ve got wrong with your old clerk,”
said Michael; “I like the look of him frightfully, but
T accidently compared him to a bookmaker.”

Soames smiled. ‘‘|\Gradman,” he said, “is a
‘ character.’?. There aren’t many, nowadays,”

Michael was wondering: Could one bea ‘ character’
under the age of sixty >—when the ‘ character’ returned,
with a pale man in dark clothes.

Lifting his nose sideways, Soames said at once:

“ This is a post-nuptial settlement on my daughter,
I deliver this as my act and deed,”

He wrote his name, and got up.

The pale person and Gradman wrote theirs, and the
former left the room. There was a silence as of reple-
tion. ‘‘Do you want me any more?” asked Michael.

“Yes. I)want you to see me deposit it at the bank
with the marriage settlement. Shan’t come back,
Gradman |”

“Good-bye, Mr. Gradman.”

Michael heard the old fellow mutter through his
beard half buried ina drawer to which he was returning
the draft, and followed Soames out.

“ Here’s where I used to be,” said Soames as they
went along the Poultry; “and my father before me.”

“More genial, perhaps,” said Michael.

“The trustees are meeting us at the bank; you
remember them ?”


306 THE WHITE MONKEY


“ Cousins of Fleur’s, weren’t they, sir?”

** Second cousins ; young Roger’s eldest, and young
Nicholas’, I chose them youngish. Very young
Roger was wounded in the war—he does noses
Very young Nicholas is at the Bar.”

Michael’s eats stood up. ‘‘ What about the next
lot, sir? Very very young Roger would be almost
insulting, wouldn’t it ?”

“ There won’t be one,” said Soames, “ with taxation
where it is. He can’t afford it; he’s a steady chap.
What are you going to call your boy, if it7s one ?”

“We think Christopher, because of St. Paul’s and
Columbus. Fleur wants him solid, and I want him.
enquiring.”

“Hm! And if it’s a girl P”

“ Oh |—f it’s a girl—Anne.”

“Yes,” said Soames: “ Very neat. Here they are! ”

They had reached the bank, and in» the entrance
Michael saw two Forsytes between thirty and forty,
whose chinny faces he dimly remembered. Escorted
by a man with bright buttons down his front, they all
went to a room, where a man without buttons produced
a japanned box. One of the Forsytes opened it with
a key; Soames muttered an incantation, and deposited
the deed. When he and the chinnier Forsyte had
exchanged a few remarks with the manager on the
question of the bank rate, they all went back to the lobby
and parted with the words: “ Well, good-bye.”

“ Now,” said Soames, in the din and hustle of the
street, ‘he’s provided for, so far as I can see. When
exactly do you expect it ?”

“It should be just a fortnight.”

**Do you believe in this—this twilight sleep ?”

* T should like to,” said Michael, conscious again of


BUT TAKES NO CHANCES 307


sweat on his forehead. ‘‘ Fleur’s wondezfully calm ;
she does Coué night and morning.”

“That!” said Soames. He did not mention that
he himself was doing it, thus giving away the state of
his nerves. “If you’re going home, I’ll come, too.”

* Good!” said Michael.

He found Fleur lying down with Ting-a-ling on the
foot of the sofa.

“Your father’s here, darling. He’s been anointing
the future with another fifty thou. I expect he’d like
to tell you all about it.”

Fleur moved restlessly.

“Presently. If it’s going on as hot as this, it’ll be
rather a bore, Michael.”

“Oh! but it won’t, ducky.» Three days and a
thunderstorm.”

Taking Ting-a-liny by the chin, he turned his face up.

“And how on earth is your nose going to be put
out of joint, old man! There’s no joint to put.”

“* He knows there’s something up.’

“ He’s a wise little brute, aren’t you, old son?”

Ting-a-ling sniffed.

“ Michael!”

“Yes, darling ?”

saad don’t seem to care about anything now—it’s
a funny feeling.”

“ That’s the heat.”

“No. I think it’s because the whole business is
too long. Everything’s ready, and now it all seems
rather stupid.. One more person in the world or one
more out of it—what does it matter?”

“Don’t! It matter’s frightfully !”

“One more gnat to dance, one more ant to run
about |”


308 THE WHITE MONKEY


Anguished, Michael said again:

“Don’t, Fleur! That’s just a mood.”

“Is Wilftid’s book out ?”

“Tt comes out to-morrow.”

“Tm sorry I gave you such a bad time, there. I
only didn’t want to lose him.”

Michael took her hand.

“Nor did I—goodness knows ! ” he said.

“ He’s never written, I suppose ?”

“ce No.”

“Well, I expect he’s all right by now. Nothing lasts.”

Michael put her hand to his cheek.

“TI do, I’m afraid,” he said. $

The hand slipped round over his lips.

** Give Dad my love, and tell him I'll be down to tea.
Oh! Tm so hot!”

Michael hovered a moment, and went out. Damn
the heat, upsetting her like this |

He found Soames standing in front of the white
monkey.

“ Tshould take this down, if I were you,” he muttered,
until it’s over.”

“Why, sir?” asked Michael, in surprise.

Soames frowned.

** Those eyes |”

Michael went up to the picture. “Yes! He was a
haunting kind of brute!

“ But it’s such top-hole work, sir.”

Soames nodded.

* Artistically, yes. But at such times you can’t be
too careful what she sees.”

“T believe you’re right. Let’s have him down.”

“Tl bold him,” said Soames, taking hold of the
bottom of the picture.


BUT TAKES NO CHANCES 309


“Got him tight? Right-o. Now!”

* You can say I wanted an opinion on his period,”
said Soames, when the picture had been lowered to the
floor.

“There can hardly be a doubt of that, sir—the
present |”

Soames stared. “ What? Oh! You mean P
Ah! H’m! Don’t let her know he’s in the house.”

“No. Tlllock himup.” Michael lifted the picture.
*D’you mind opening the door, sir?”

“T’ll come back at tea-time,” said Soames. ‘* That’ll
look as if I’d taken him off. You can hang him again,
later.”

“Yes. Poor brute!” said Michael, bearing the
monkey off to limbo.


CHAPTER XI


<< 30


WITH A SMALL “N
On the night of the Monday following, after Fleur had
gone to bed, Michael and Soames sat listening to the
mutter of London coming through the windows of
the Chinese room opened to the brooding heat.

“They say the war killed sentiment,” said Soames
suddenly : “Is that true?”

“In a way, yes, sir. We had so much reality that
we don’t want any more.”

“I don’t follow you.”

“TI meant that only reality really makes you feel. So
if you pretend there és no reality, you don’t have to feel.
It answers awfully well, up to a point.”

“ Ah!” said Soames. ‘“‘ Her mother comes up to-
morrow morning, to stay. This P.P.R.S. meeting of
mine is at half-past two. Good-night!”

Michael, at the window, watched the heat gathered
black over the Square. A few tepid drops fell on his
outstretched hand. A cat stole by under a lamp-post,
and vanished into shadow so thick that it seemed
uncivilised.

Queer question of “ Old Forsyte’s”’ about senti-
ment; odd that he should ask it! ‘Up to a point!
But don’t we all get past that point?’ he thought.
Look at Wilfrid, and himself—after the war they had
deemed it blasphemous to admit that anything mattered
except eating and drinking, for to-morrow they died;
even fellows like Nazing, and Master, who were never

310


66


WITH A SMALL


in the war, had felt like that ever since. Well, Wilfrid
had got it in the neck; and he himself had got it in the
wind; and he would bet that—barring one here and
there whose blood was made of ink—they would all
get it in the neck or wind soon or late. Why, he
would cheerfully bear Fleur’s pain and risk, instead of
her! But if nothing mattered, why should he feel
like that ?

Turning from the window, he leaned against the
lacquered back of the jade-green settee, and stated
at the wall space between the Chinese tea-chests.
Jolly thoughtful of the “old man” to have that white
monkey down! The ‘brute was potent—symbolic
of the world’s mood: beliefs cancelled, faiths with-
drawn! And, dash it! not only the young—but
the old—were in that temper! “Old Forsyte,” or he
would never have been scared by that monkey’s eyes ;
yes, and his own governor, and Elderson, and all the
rest. Young and old—no real belief in anything!
And yet—trevolt sprang up in Michael, with a whirr,
like a covey of partridges. It did matter that some
person or some principle outside oneself should be
more precious than oneself—it dashed well did!
Sentiment, then, wasn’t dead—nor faith, nor belief,
which were the same things. They were only shedding
shell, working through chrysalis, into—butterflies,
perhaps. Faith, sentiment, belief, had gone under-
ground, possibly, but they were there, even in “Old
Forsyte ” and himself. He had a good mind to put
the monkey up again. No use exaggerating his im-
portance! ... By George! Some flare! A jagged
streak of vivid light had stripped darkness off the night.
Michael crossed, to close the windows. A shattering
peal of thunder blundered overhead; and down came


L


nN” 311


312 THE WHITE MONKEY


the rain, slashing and sluicing. He saw a man running,
black, like a shadow across a dark blue screen; saw
him by the light of another flash, suddenly made lurid
and full of small meaning, with face of cheerful anxiety,
as if he were saying: “‘ Hang it, ’m getting wet!”
Another frantic crash |

‘Fleur!’ thought Michael; and clanging the last
window down, he ran upstairs.

She was sitting up in bed, with a face all round, and
young and startled.

‘ Brutes !’ he thought—guns and the heavens con-
founded in his mind: ‘ They’ve waked her up ! ’

“It’s all right, darling! Just another little summer
kick-up! Were you asleep?”

“JT was dreaming!” He felt her hand clutching
within his own, saw a sudden pinched look on her face,
with a sort of rage.. What infernal luck!

“ Where’s Ting 2?”

No dog was in the corner.

** Under the bed—you bet! Would you like him
u ? 2?

Pa No. Let him stay; he hates it.”

She put her head against his arm, and Michael curled
his hand round her other ear.

“I never liked thunder much!” said Fleur, “ re
now it—it hurts!”

High above her hair Michael’s face underwent the
contottions of an overwhelming tenderness. One of
those crashes which seem just overhead sent her face
burrowing against his chest, and, sitting on the bed,
he gathered her in, close.

“IT wish it were over,” came, smothered, from her
lips,
ve It will be directly, darling; it came. on so


WITH A SMALL “SN” 313


suddenly!” But he knew she didn’t mean the
storm.

“Tf I come through, I’m going to be quite different
to you, Michael.”

Anxiety was the natural accompaniment of such
events, but the words, “If { come through ” turned
Michael’s heart right over. Incredible that one so
young and pretty should be in even the remotest danger
of extinction; incredibly painful that she should be in
fear of it! He hadn’t realised. She had been so calm,
so matter-of-fact about it all.

“Don’t!” he mumbled; “ of course you’ll come
through.”

Tm aftaid.”

The sound was small and smothered, but the words
hurt horribly. Nature, with the small “n,” forcing
fear into this girl he loved so awfully! Nature kicking
up this godless din above her poor little head !

“Ducky, you'll have twilight sleep and know
nothing about it; and be as right as rain in no
time.”

Fleur freed her hand.

* Not if it’s not good for him. Is it?”

“I expect so, sweetheart; Tl find out. What
makes you think Pi

“ Only that it’s not natural. I want to do it properly.
Hold my hand hard, Michael., I—I’m not going to be
a fool. Oh! Some one’s knocking—go and see.”

Michael opened the door a crack. Soames was
there—unnatural—in a blue dressing gown and scarlet
slippers |

“Is she all right ?”” he whispered.

“Yes, yes.”

“In this hobbery she oughtn’t to be left.”


314 THE WHITE MONKEY


“No, sit, of course not. I shall sleep on the
sofa.”

* Call me, if anything’s wanted.”

“T will.”

Soames’ ‘eyes slid past, peering into the room. A
string worked in his throat, as if he had things to say
which did not emerge. He shook his head, and turned.
His slim figure, longer than usual, in its gown, receded
down the corridor, past the Japanese prints which he
‘had given them. Closing thesdoor again, Michael
stood looking at the bed. Fleur had settled down;
her eyes were closed, her lips moving. He stole back
on tiptoe. The thunder, travelling away south,
blundered and growled as if regretfully. Michael saw
her eyelids quiver, her lips stop, then move again.
*Coué!’ he thought.

He lay down on the sofa at the foot of the bed,
whence, without sound, he could raise himself and see
her. Many times he raised himself. She had dropped
off, was. breathing quietly. The thunder was faint
now, the flashes imperceptible. Michael closed his
eyes.

" faint last mutter roused him to look at her once
more, high on her pillows by the carefully shaded light.
Young—young! Colourless, like a flower in wax!
No scheme in her brain, no dread—peaceful! If only
she could stay like that and wake up with it all over!
He looked away. And there she was at the far end,
dim, reflected in a glass ; and there to the right, again.
She lay, as it were, all round: him in the pretty room,
the inhabiting spirit—of his heart.

It was quite still now. Through a chink in those
powder-blue curtains he could see some stars. Big
Ben chimed one.


WITH A SMALL “Nn” $15


He had slept, perhaps, dozed at least, dreamed a little.
Asmall sound woke him. A very little dog, tail down,
yellow, low and unimportant, was passing down the
room, trailing across it to the far corner. ‘Ah!’

thought Michael, closing his eyes again: * Yon !?


CHAPTER XI


ORDEAL BY SHAREHOLDER


REPAIRING, next day, to the Aeroplane Club, where,
notably spruce, Sir Lawrence was waiting in the
lounge, Michael thought: ‘ Good old Bart! he’s got
himself up for the guillotine all right!’

“That white piping will show the blood ! ” he said.
** Old Forsyte’s neat this morning, but not so gaudy.”

*“ Ah! How is ‘ Old Forsyte?’ In good heart 2?”

“One doesn’t ask him, sir. How do you feel
yourself ? ”

“* Exactly as I used to before the Eton and Win-
chester match. I think I shall have shandy-gaff at
lunch.”

When they had taken their seats, Sir Lawrence went
on:

“IT remember seeing a man tried for murder in
Colombo; the poor fellow was positively blue. I
think my favourite moment in the past, Michael, is
Walter Raleigh asking for a second shirt. By the way,
it’s never been properly settled yet whether the courtiers
of that day were lousy. What are you going to have,
my dear fellow ?”

“ Cold beef, pickled walnuts, and gooseberry tart.”

* Excellent for the character. I shall have curry;
they. give you a very good Bombay duck here. I
rather fancy we shall be fired, Michael. ‘ Nous sommes
trabis 1’ used to be the prerogative of the French, but

316.


ORDEAL BY SHAREHOLDER BiG


I'm afraid we’re getting the attitude, too, The Yellow
Press has made a difference.”

Michael shook his head.

“We say it, but we don’t act on'it; the climate’s
‘too uncertain.”

“That sounds deep. This looks very good curry—
will you change your mind ? Old Fontenoy sometimes
comes in here; he has no inside. It'll be serious for
him if we’re shown the door.”

' “ Deuced. rum,” said Michael suddenly, “* how titles
still go: down. There can’t be any belief in their
business capacity.”

“Character, my dear fellow—the good old English
gentleman. After all, there’s something in it.”

“TI fancy, sir, it’s more a case of complex in the
shareholders. Their parents show them a lord when
they’re young.”

“ Shareholders,’ said Sit Lawrence; “the word
is comprehensive. Who are they, what are they, when
are they ?”

“This afternoon,” said Michael, “‘ and I shall have
a good look at them.”

“They won’t let you in, my dear.”

“No? 22!

“ Certainly not.”

Michael frowned.

“ What paper,” he said, “is sure not to be repre-
sented ?.”

Sir Lawrence gave his whinnying laugh.

* The Field,” he said; ‘‘ The Horse and Hound; The
Gardener’s Weekly.”

“T’ll slide in on them.”

 “ You'll see us die game, I hope,” said Sir Lawrence,
with sudden gravity.


318 THE WHITE MONKEY


They took a cab together to the meeting, but
separated before reaching the door of the hotel.

Michael had thought better of the Press, and took
up a position in the passage, whence he could watch for
a chance. Stout men, in dark suits, with a palpable
look of having lunched off turbot, joints, and cheese,
kept passing him. He noticed that each handed the
janitor a paper. ‘I'll hand him a paper, too,’ he
thought, ‘and scoot in.’ Watching for some even
stouter men, he took cover between two of them, and
approached the door, with an announcement of
Counterfeits in his left hand. Handing it across a
neighbouring importance, he was quickly into a seat.

He saw the janitor’s face poked round. the door.

‘No, my friend,’ thought Michael, ‘if you could tell
duds from. shareholders, you wouldn’t be in that
job!’
He found a report before him, and holding it up,
looked at other things. The room seemed to him to
have been got by a concert-hall out of a station waiting-
room. It had a platform with a long table, behind
which were seven empty chairs, and seven inkpots,
with seven quill pens upright in them. ‘ Quills!’
thought Michael; ‘symbolic, I suppose—they’ll all
use fountain-pens ! ’

Back-centre of the platform was a door, and in front,
below it, a table, where four men were sitting, fiddling
with notebooks. ‘ Orchestra,’ thought Michael. He
turned his attention to the eight or ten rows of snare-
holders. They looked what they were, but he could
not tell why. Their faces were cast in an infinity of
moulds, but all had the air of waiting for something
they knew they would not get. What sort of lives did
they lead, or did their lives lead them? Nearly all


ORDEAL BY SHAREHOLDER $19


wore moustaches. His neighbours to tight and lerr
were the same stout shareholders between whom he had
slipped in; they both had thick lobes to their ears, and
necks even broader than the straight broad backs of
their heads. He was a good deal impressed. Dotted
here and there he noticed a woman, ora parson. There
was practically no conversation, from which he sur-
mised that no one knew his neighbour. He had a
feeling that a dog somewhere would have humanised
the occasion. He was musing on the colour scheme
of green picked out with chocolate and chased with
gold, when the door behind the platform was thrown
open, and seven men in black coats filed in, and with
little bows took their seats behind the quills. They
reminded him of people getting up on horses, or about
to play the piano—full of smali adjustments. That——
on the Chairman’s right—would be old Fontenoy, with
a face entirely composed of features. Michael had an
odd conceit : a little thing in a white top-hat sat inside
the brain, driving the features eight-in-hand. Then
came a face straight from a picture of Her Majesty’s
Government in 1850, round and pink, with a high nose,
a small mouth, and little white whiskers; while at
the end on the right was a countenance whose jaw and
eyes seemed boring into a conundrum beyond the wali
at Michael’s back. ‘Legal!’ hethought. His scrutiny
passed back to the Chairman. Chosen? Was he—
or was he not P= A bearded man, a little behind on the
Chairman’s left, was already reading from a book, in
a rapid monotonous voice. That must be the secretarv
letting off his minute guns. And in front of him was
clearly the new manager, on whose left Michael ob-
served his own father. The dark pothooks over Sir
Lawrence's tignt cye were slightly raised, and his


L*


$20 THE WHITE MONKEY


mouth was puckered under the cut line of his small
moustache. He looked almost Oriental, quick but
still. His left hand held his tortoiseshell-rimmed
monocle between thumb and finger. ‘Not quite in
the scene!’ thought Michael; ‘ poor old Bart!’ He
had come now to the last of the row. ‘‘ Old Forsyte”
was sitting precisely as if alone in the world; with one
corner of his mouth just drawn down, and one nostril
just drawn up, he seemed to Michael quite fascinatingly
detached; and yet not out of the picture. Within
that still neat figure, whereof only one patent-leather
boot seemed with a slight movement to be living, was
intense concentration, entire respect for the proceed-
ings, and yet, a queer contempt for them; he was like
a statue of reality, by one who had seen that there was
precious little reality in it. ‘He chills my soup,’
thought: Michael, ‘ but—dash it |—I can’t help half
admiring him |’

The Chairman had now risen. ‘ He 7s’—thought
Michael; ‘no, he isn’t—yes—no—I can’t tell!’ He
could hardly attend to what the Chairman said, for
wondering whether he was chosen or not, though well
aware that it did not matter at all. The Chairman kept
steadily on. Distracted, Michael caught words and
words: “ European  situation—misguided policy—
French—totally unexpected—position disclosed—
manager—unfortunate circumstances shortly to be
explained to you—future of this great concern—no
reason to doubt ‘@

“Oil, thought Michael, ‘ he is—and yet it

*T will now ask one of your directors, Mr, Forsyte,
to give you at first hand an account of this painful
patter.”

Michael saw Soames, pale and deliberate, takeva piece


ORDEAL BY SHAREHOLDER 321


of paper from his oc ppae pa and rise. Was it to
the occasion P

“Twill give you the facts shortly,” he said in a voice
which reminded Michael of a dry, made-up wine.
On the eleventh of January last I was visited by a clerk
in the employ of the Society: mk

Familiar with these details, Michael paid them little
attention, watching the shareholders for signs of
reaction. He saw none, and it was suddenly borne in
on him why they wore moustaches: They could not
trust their mouths! . Character was in the mouth.
Moustaches had come in when people no longer went
about, like the old Duke, saying: “ Think what you
damned well like of my character!” Mouths had
tried to come in again, of course, before the war; but
what with majors, shareholders, and the working
classes, they now’had little or no chance! He heard
Soames say: “In these circumstances we came to the
conclusion that there was nothing for it but to wait and
see.” Michael saw a sudden quiver pass over the
moustaches, as might wind over grass.

‘Wrong phrase,’ he thought ; ‘ we all do it, but we
can’t bear being reminded of it.’

** Six weeks ago, however,” he heard Soames intone,
“an accidental incident seems to have warned your
late manager that Sir Lawrence and I still entertained
suspicions, for I received a letter from him practically
admitting that he had taken this secret commission on
the German business, and asking me to inform the
Board that he had gone abroad and left no property
behind him. This statement we have been at pains to
verify. In these circumstances we had no alternative
but to call you together, and lay the facts before you.”

The voice, which had not varied an iota, ceased its


322 THE WHITE MONKEY


recital; and Michael saw his father-in-law return to
his detachment—stork on one leg, about to apply beak
to parasite, could have inspired no greater sense of
loneliness. ‘ Too like the first account of the battle of
Jutland!” he thought: ‘He mentioned all the losses,
and never once struck the human note.’

A pause ensued, such as occurs before an awkward
fence, till somebody has found a gate. Michael rapidly
reviewed the faces of the Board. Only one showed
any animation. It was concealed in a handkerchief.
The sound of the blown nose broke the spell. Two
shareholders rose to their feet at once—one of them
Michael’s neighbour on the right.

“Mr. Sawdry,” said the Chairman, and the other
shareholder sat down.

With a sonorous clearing of the throat, Michael’s
neighbour turned his blunt red face towards Soames.

“TY wish to ask you, sit, why you didn’t inform the
Board when you first ’eard of this ?”

Soames rose slightly.

“ You are aware, I presume, that such an accusation,
unless it can be fully substantiated, is a matter for
ctiminal proceedings P”

“No; it would ha’ been privileged.”

“« As between members of the Board, perhaps; but
any leakage would have rendered us liable. It was
a mere case of word against word.”

“Perhaps Sir Lawrence Mont will give us ’is view of
that 2”

Michael’s heart began to beat. ‘There was an air of
sprightliness about his father’s standing figure.

“You must remember, sir,” he said, “that Mr.
Elderson had enjoyed our complete confidence for
many years; he was a gentleman, and, speaking for


ORDEAL BY SHAREHOLDER 323


myself, an old school-fellow of his, I preferred, in com-
mon loyalty, to give his word preference, while—er—
keeping the matter in mind.”

“Oh!” said Michael’s neighbour: ‘ What’s the
Chairman got to say about bein’ kept in the dark ? ”

“ We are all perfectly satisfied, sir, with the attitude
of our co-directors, in a very delicate situation. You
will kindly note that the mischief was already done
over this unfortunate assurance, so that there was no
need for undue haste.”

Michael saw his neighbour’s neck grow redder.

“TI don’t agree,” he said. “‘ Wait and see °—We
might ’ave ’ad that commission out of him, if he’d been
tackled promptly.” And he sat down.

He had not reached mahogany before the thwarted
shareholder had started up.

“Mtr. Botterill,” said the Chairman.

Michael saw a lean and narrow head, with two
hollows in a hairy neck, above a back slightly bent
forward, as of a doctor listening to a chest.

“T take it from you, then, sir,” he said, “‘ that these
two directors represent the general attitude of the
Boatd, and that the Board were content to allow a
suspected person to remain manager. The gentleman
on your extreme left—Mr. Forsyte, I think—spoke of
an accidental incident. But for that, apparently, we
should still be in the hands of an unscrupulous in-
dividual. The symptoms in this case are very dis-
quieting, There appears to have been gross over-
confidence; 2 recent instance of the sort must be in
all our minds. The policy of assuring foreign business
was evidently initiated by the manager for his own ends.
We have made a severe loss by it. And the question
for us shareholders would seem to be whether a Board


324 THE WHITE MONKEY


who placed confidence in such a person, and continued
it after their suspicions were aroused, are the right
people to direct this important concern.”

Throughout this speech Michael had grown very
hot. ‘“ Old Forsyte” was ‘right,’ he thought;
‘they’re on their uppers after all.’

There was a sudden creak from his neighbour on the
left.

“Mr. Tolby,” said the Chairman.

“It’s a serious matter, this, gentlemen. I propose
that the Board withdraw, an’ leave us to discuss it.”

“T second that,” said Michael’s neighbour on the
right.

Searching the vista of the Board, Michael saw re-
cognition gleam for a second in the lonely face at the
end, and grinned a greeting.

The Chairman was speaking.

“If that is your wish, gentlemen, we shall be happy
to comply with it. Will those who favour the motion
hold up their hands ? ”

All hands were held up, with the exception of
Michael’s, of two women whose eager colloquy had
not permitted them to hear the request, and of one
shareholder, just in front of Michael, so motionless
that he seemed to be dead.

“ Carried,” said the Chairman, and rose from his
seat.

Michael saw his father smiling, and speaking to
“ Old Forsyte ” as they both stood up. They all filed
out, and the door was closed.

‘ Whatever happens,’ Michael thought, ‘I’ve got to
keep my head shut, or I shall be dropping a brick.’

“Perhaps the Press will kindly withdraw, too,” he
heatd some one say.


ORDEAL BY SHAREHOLDER 325


With a general chinny movement, as if enquiring
their rights of no one in particular, the four Pressmen
could be seen to clasp their notebooks, When their
pale reluctance had vanished, there was a stit among
_ the shareholders, like that of ducks when a.dog comes
up behind. Michael saw why, at once. They had
their backs to each other. A shareholder said :

“Perhaps Mr. Tolby, who proposed the withdrawal,
will act as Chairman.”

Michael’s left-hand neighbour began breathing
heavily.

“ Right-o!” he said. “Any one who wants to
speak, kindly ketch my eye.”

Every one now began talking to his neighbour, as
though to get at once a quiet sense of proportion,
before speaking. Mr. Tolby was breathing so heavily
that Michael felt a positive draught.

“Ere, gentlemen,” he said suddenly, “this won’t
do! We don’t want to be too formal, but we must
preserve some order. I'll open the discussion myself.
Now I didn’t want to ’urt the feelin’s of the Board by
plain speakin’ in their presence. But, as Mr. What’s-
*is-name there, said: The public. ’as got to protect
itself against sharpers, and against slackness. We all
know what ’appened the other day, and what’ll ’appen
again in other concerns, unless we shareholders look
after ourselves. In the first place, then, what I say is:
They ought never to ’ave touched anything to do with
the "Uns. In the second place, I say they showed bad
judgment. And in the third place I say they were too
thick together. In my opinion, we should propose
a vote of no confidence.”

Cries of : “‘ Hear, hear! ” mixed with indeterminate
sounds, were broken sharply by a loud: “ No!” from


Lizz


326 THE WHITE MONKEY


the shareholder who had seemed dead. Michael’s
heart went out to him, the more so as he still seemed
dead. The negative was followed by the rising of
a thin, polished-looking shareholder, with a small grey
moustache.

“Tf you'll forgive my saying so, sir,” he began,
“your proposal seems to me very rough-and-ready
justice. Ishould be interested to know how you would
have handled such a situation if you had been on the
Board. It is extremely easy to condemn other people | ”

“ Hear, hear!” said Michael, astonished at his own
voice.

“It is all very well,” the polished shareholder went
on, “when anything of this sort happens, to blame
a directorate, but, speaking as a director myself, I
should be glad to know whom one is to trust, if not
one’s manager. As to the policy of foreign insurance,
it has been before us at two general meetings ; and we
have pocketed the profit from it for nearly two years.
Have we raised a voice against it ?”

The dead shareholder uttered a “ No!” so loud that
Michael almost patted his head.

The shareholder, whose neck and back were like
a doctor’s, rose to answer.

“T differ from the last speaker in his diagnosis of the
case. Let us admit all he says, and look at the thing
more widely. The proof of pudding is in the eating.
Whena Government makes a bad mistake of judgment,
the electorate turns against it as soon as it feels the
effects. This is a very sound check on administration ;
it may be rough and ready, but it is the less of two evils.
A Board backs its judgment; when it loses, it should
pay. Ithink, perhaps, Mr. Tolby, being our informal
Chairman, was out of order in proposing a vote of no


ORDEAL BY SHAREHOLDER 327


confidence; if that be so, I should be happy to do so,
myself.”

The dead shareholder’s “ No!” was so resounding
this time that there was a pause for him to speak; he
remained, however, without motion. Both of
Michael’s neighbours were on their feet. They bobbed
at each other over Michael’s head, and Mr. Tolby sat
down.

Mr. Sawdry,” he said.

“Look ’ere, gentlemen,” said Mr. Sawdry, “ and
ladies, this seems to me a case for compromise. The
Directors that knew about the manager ought to go;
but we might stop at that. The gentleman in front of
me keeps on saying ‘ No.’ Let ’im give us ’is views.”

“ No,” said the dead shareholder, but less loudly.

“Ifa man can’t give ’is views,” went on Mr. Sawdrty,
nearly sitting down on Michael, “’e shouldn’t interrupt,
in my opinion.” :

A shareholder in the front row now turned com-
pletely round so that he faced the meeting.

*T think,” he said, “ that to prolong this discussion
is to waste time ; we are evidently in two, if not three,
minds. The whole of the business of this country is
now conducted on a system of delegated trust ; it may
be good, it may be bad—but there it is. You’ve got
to trust somebody. Now, as to this particular case,
we’ve had no reason to distrust the Board, so far; and,
as | take it, the Board had no previous reason to distrust
the late manager. I think it’s going too far, at present,
to propose anything definite like a vote of no con-
fidence; it seems to me that we should call the Board
in and hear what assurances they have to give us against
a repetition of anything of the sort in the future.”

The sounds which greeted this moderate speech were


328 THE WHITE MONYEY


so inextricable that Michael could not get the sense of
them. Not so with the speech, which followed. It
came from a shareholder on the right, with reddish
hair, light eyelashes, a clipped moustache, and a
scraped colour.

“I have no objection whatever to having the Board
in,” he said in a rather jeering voice, “and passing
a vote of no confidence in their presence. ‘There is
a question, which no one has touched on, of how far, if
we turn them out, we could make them liable for this
loss. .The matter is not clear, but there is a good
sporting chance, if we like to take it. Whereas, if we
don’t turn them out, it’s obvious we can’t take it, even
if we wish.”

The impression made by this speech was of quite
a different order from any of the others. It was
followed by a hush, as though something important
had been said at last. Michael stared at Mr. Tolby.
The stout man’s round, light, rather prominent eye
was extraordinarily reflective. ‘Trout must look like
that,’ thought Michael, ‘when they see a mayfly.’
Mt. Tolby suddenly stood up.

* All right,” he said, “’ave ’em in! ”

“Yes,” said the dead shareholder. There was no
dissent.

Michael saw some one rise and ascend the platform.

* Let the Press know!” said Mr. Tolby.


CHAPTER XIII


SOAMES AT BAY


Wen the door had closed behind the departing
directors, Soames sought a window as far as possible
from the lunch eaten before the meeting.

“Funeral baked meats, eh, Forsyte?” said a voice
in his ear, ‘‘ Our number’s up, I think. Poor old
Mothergill’s looking very blue. I think he ought to
ask for a second shirt | ”

Soames’ tenacity began wriggling within him.

“The thing wants tackling,” he grumbled; “the
Chairman’s not the man for the job!” Shades of old
Uncle Jolyon!. He would have made short work of
this! It wanted a masterful hand.

“‘ Warning to us all, Forsyte, against loyalty! It’s
not in the period. Ah! Fontenoy!”

Soames became conscious of features rather above
the level of his own.

“Well, Mr. Forsyte, hope you’re satisfied? A
pretty damned mess! If P’'d been the Chairman, Id
never have withdrawn. Always keep hounds under
your eye, Mont. Take it off, and they'll go for you!
Wish I could get among ’em with a whip; Id give it
those two heavy pug-faced chaps—they mean busi-
ness! Unless you’ve got something up your sleeve,
Mr. Forsyte, we’re dished.”

“‘ What should I have up my sleeve P” said Soames
coldly.

* Damn it, sir, you put the chestnuts in the fire; it’s


329


$30 THE WHITE MONKEY


up to you to pull ’em out. I can’t afford to lose these
feesli7

Soames heard Sir Lawrence murmur: “ Crude, my
dear Fontenoy |!” and said with malice :

“You may lose more than your fees | ”

“Can't! They may have Eaglescourt to-morrow,
and take a loss off my hands.” A gleam of feeling
burned up suddenly in the old eyes: “ The country
drives you to the wall, skins you to the bone, and
expects you to give ’em public service gratis. Can’t
be done, Mont—can’t be done!”

Soames turned away; he had an utter disinclination
for talk, like one standing before an open grave, watch-
ing a coffin slowly lowered. Here was his infallibility
going—going! He had no illusions. It would all be
in the papers, and his reputation for sound judgment
gone forever! Bitter! No more would the Forsytes
say: “‘ Soames says ”” No more would old Grad-
man follow him with eyes like an old dog’s, grudging
sometimes, but ever submitting to infallibility. It
would be a nasty jar for the old fellow. His business
acquaintances—after all, they were not many, now!
—would no longer stare with envious respect. He
wondered if the reverberations would reach Dumetrius,
and the picture market! The sole comfort was:
Fleur needn’t know. Fleur! Ah! If only her
business were safely over! Fot a moment his mind
became empty of all else. Then with a rush the present
filled it up again. Why were they all talking as if
there were a corpse in the room? Well! There was
—the corpse of his infallibility! As for monetaty
loss—that seemed secondary, remote, incredible—like
a future life. Mont had said something about loyalty.
He didn’t know what loyalty had to do withit! But if


SOAMES AT BAY $31


they thought he was going to show any white feather,
they were extremely mistaken. Acid courage welled
up into his brain. Shareholders, directors—they might
howl and shake their fists; he was not going to be
dictated to. He heard a voice say :

* Will you come in, please, gentlemen?”

Taking his seat again before his unused quill, he
noticed the silence—shareholders waiting for directors,
directors for shareholders. “‘ Wish I could get among
"em with a whip!” Extravagant words of that “ old
guinea-pig’s,” but expressive, somehow |

At last the Chairman, whose voice always reminded
Soames of a raw salad with oil poured over it, said
ironically :

“Well, gentlemen, we await your pleasure.”

That stout, red-faced fellow, next to Michael, stood
up, opening his pug’s mouth.

“To put it shortly, Mr. Chairman, we’re not at all
satisfied ; but before we take any resolution, we want
to *ear what you’ve got to say.”

Just below Soames, some one jumped up and added :

“We'd like to know, sit, what assurances you can
offer us against anything of this sort in the future.”

Soames saw the Chairman smile—no real backbone
in that fellow!

“In the nature of things, sir,” he said, “ none what-
ever! You can hardly suppose that if we had known
our manager was not worthy of our confidence, we
should have continued him in the post for a moment |”

Soames thought: ‘That won’t do—he’s gone back
on himself!’ Yes, and that other pug-faced chap had
seen it]

“ That’s just the point, sir,” he was saying: “Two
of you did know, and yet, there the fellow was for


332 THE WHITE MONKEY


months afterwards, playin’ ’is own ’and, cheatin’ the
Society for all he was worth, I shouldn’t wonder.”

One after another, they were yelping now:

“ What about your own words ? ”

“You admitted collective responsibility.”

“You said you were perfectly satisfied with the
attitude of your co-directors in the matter.” Regular

ack |
: Soames saw the Chairman incline his head as if he
wanted to shake it; old Fontenoy muttering, old
Mothergill blowing his nose, Meyricke shrugging his
sharp shoulders. Suddenly he was cut off from view
of them—Sir Lawrence was standing up between,

* Allow me a word! Speaking for myself, I find it
impossible to accept the generous attempt of the Chair-
man to shoulder a responsibility which clearly rests on
me. IfI made a mistake of judgment in not disclosing
our suspicions, I must pay the penalty; and I think it
will clear the—er—situation if I tender my resignation
to the meeting.”

Soames saw him give a little bow, place his monocle
in his eye, and sit down.

A murmur greeted the words—approval, surprise,
deprecation, admiration? It had been gallantly done.
Soames distrusted gallantry—there was always a dash
of the peacock about it. He felt curiously savage,

“I, apparently,” he said, rising, “‘ am the other in-
criminated director. Very good! Iam not conscious
of having done anything but my duty from beginning
to end of this affair. I am confident that I made no
mistake of judgment. And I consider it entirely unjust
that I should be penalised. I have had worry and
anxiety enough, without being made a scapegoat by
shareholders who accepted this policy without a mut-


SOAMES AT) BAY 333


mur, before ever I came on the Board, and are now
angry because they have lost by it. You owe it to me
that the policy has been dropped: You owe it to me
that you have no longer a fraudulent person for a
manager. And you owe it to me that you were called
together to-day to pass judgment on the matter. I have
no intention whatever of singing small. But there is
another aspect to this affair. 1am not prepared to go
on giving my services to people who don’t value them.
I have no patience with the attitude displayed this
afternoon. If any one here thinks he has a grievance
against me, let him bring an action. Ishall be happy to
carry it to the House of Lords, if, necessary. I have
been familiar with the City all my life, and I have not
been in the habit of meeting with suspicions and
ingratitude. If this is an instance of present manners
I have been familiar with the City long enough.
I do not tender my resignation to the meeting;
I resign.”

Bowing to the Chairman, and pushing back his
chair, he walked doggedly to the door, opened it and
passed through.

He sought his hat. . He had not the slightest doubt
but that he had astonished their weak nerves! Those
pug-faced fellows had their mouths open! He would
have liked to see what he had left behind, but it was
hardly consistent with dignity to open the door again,
He took a sandwich instead, and began to eat it with
his back to the door and his hat on. He felt better
than he had for months. A voice said:

«© And the subsequent proceedings interested nim no
more!’ Pd noidea, Forsyte, you were such an orator |
You gave it’em between the eyes! Never saw a meet-
ing so knocked out! Well, you’ve saved the Board


234 THE WHITE MONKEY


by focussing their resentment entirely on yourself.
It was very gallant, Forsyte!”

Soames growled through his sandwich:

“Nothing of the sort! Are you out, too?”

“Yes. I pressed my resignation. That red-faced
fellow was proposing a vote of confidence in the
Board when I left—and they’ll pass it, Forsyte—they’ll
pass it! Something was said about financial liability,
by the way!”

“Was there?” said Soames, with a grim smile:
“That cock won’t fight. Their only chance was to
claim against the Board for initiating foreign assurance
ultra vires; if they’re re-affirming the Board, after
the question’s been raised in open meeting, they’re
dished. Nothing’ll lie against you and me, for not
disclosing our suspicions—that’s certain.”

* A relief, I confess,” said Sir Lawrence, with a
sigh. “It was the speech of your life, Forsyte |”

Perfectly well aware of that, Soames shook his head.
Apart from the horror of seeing himself in print, he was
beginning to feel that he had been extravagant. It was
always a mistake to lose your temper! A bitter little
smile came on his lips. Nobody, not even Mont,
would see how unjustly he had been treated.

“ Well,” he said, “I shall go.”

“TJ think I shall wait, Forsyte, and hear the
upshot.”

“Upshot ? They’ll appoint two other fools, and
slaver over each other. Shareholders! Good-bye!”
He moved to the door.

Passing the Bank of England, he had a feeling of
walking away from his own life. His acumen, his
judgment, his manner of dealing with affairs—aspersed I
They didn’t like it; well—he would leave it! Catch


SOAMES AT BaY 335


him meddling in future! It was all of a piece with the
modern state of things. Hand to mouth, and the steady
men pushed to the wall! The men to whom a pound
was a pound, and not a mess of chance and paper. The
men who knew that the good of the country was the
strict, straight conduct of their own affairs. ‘They were
not wanted. One by one, they would get the go-by—
as he had got it—in favour of Jack-o’-lanterns, revolu-
tionaries, restless chaps, or clever, unscrupulous
fellows, like Elderson. It was inthe air. No amount
of eating your cake and wanting to have it could take
the place of common honesty.

He turned into the Poultry before he knew why he
had come there. Well, he might as well tell Gradman
at once that he must exercise his own judgment in the
future. At the mouth of the backwater he paused for
a second, as if to print its buffness on his brain. He
would resign his trusts, private and all! He had no
notion of being sneered at in the family. But a sudden
wave of remembrance almost washed his heart into his
boots. What a tale of trust deeds executed, leases re-
newed, houses sold, investments decided on—in that
back room up there ;, what a mint of quiet satisfaction
in estates well managed! Ah! well! He would
continue to manage his own. As for the others, they
must look out for themselves now. And a precious
time they’d have of it, in face of the spirit there was
about !

He mounted the stone steps slowly.

In the repository of Forsyte affairs, he was faced by
the unusual—not Gradman, but, on the large ripe table,
a large ripe melon alongside a straw bag. Soames
sniffed. The thing smelled delicious, He held it
to the light. Its greeny yellow tinge, its network of


336 THE WHITE MONKEY


threads—quite Chinese! Was old Gradman going to
throw its rind about, like that white monkey ?

He was still holds it when a voice said ;

* Aoh!. I wasn’t expecting you to-day, Mr. Sqamiesh
I was going early; my wife’s got a little party.”

“So I see!” said Soames, restoring the melon to
the table. “‘ There’s nothing for you to do at the
moment, but I came in to tell you to draw my resigna-
tions from the Forsyte trusts.”

The old chap’s face was sucha study that he could not
help a smile.

“You can keep me in Timothy’s ; but the rest must
go. Young oper can attend to them. He’s a0
nothing to do.”

A gruff and deprecating: “Dear me! They won’t
like it |” irritated’ Soames.

“ Then they must lump it! I-want a rest.”

He did not mean to enter into the reason—Gradmau
could read it for himself in the Financial News, ot what-
ever he took in.

“ Then I shan’t be seeing you so often, Mr. Soames ;
there’s never anything in Mr. Timothy’s. Dear me!
Tm quite upset. Won’t you keep your sister’s 2”

Soames looked at the old fellow, and compunction
stirred within him—as ever, at any sign that he was
appreciated.

“ Well,” he said, “ keep me in hese ; I shall be in
about my own affairs, of course. Good afternoon,
Gradman. That’s a fine melon.”

He waited for no more words, The old chap! He
couldn’t last much longer, anyway, sturdy as he looked !
Well, they would find it hard to match him |

On reaching the Poultry, he decided to go to Green
Street and see Winifred—queerly and suddenly home-


SOAMES AT BAY 337


sick for the proximity of Park Lane, for the old secure
days, the efflorescent privacy of his youth under the
wings of Jamesand Emily. Winifred alone represented
for him now, the past; her solid nature never varied,
however much she kept up with the fashions.

He found her, a little youthful in costume, drinking
Chinese tea, which she did not like—but what could one
do, other teas were “common!” She had taken toa
parrot. Parrots were coming in again. The bird
made a dreadful noise. Whether under its influence or
that of the Chinese tea—which, made in the English way
of a brand the Chinese grew for foreign stomachs, always
upset him—he was soon telling her the whole story.

When he had finished, Winifred said comfortably :

“Well, Soames, I think you did splendidly; it
serves them right!”

Conscious that his narrative must have presented the
truth-as it would not appear to the public, Soames
muttered :

“That’s all very well; you'll find a very different
version in the financial papers.”

“Oh! but nobody reads them. I shouldn’t worry.
Do you do, Coué? Such a comfortable little man,
Soames ; I went to hear him. It’s rather a bore some-
times, but it’s quite the latest thing.”

Soames became inaudible—he never confessed a
weakness.

“And how,” asked Winifred, “is Fleur’s little
affair 2”

“¢ Little affair!’ echoed a voice above his head.
That bird! It was clinging to the brocade curtains,
moving its neck up and down.

“ Polly!” said Winifred: “don’t be naughty!”

“© Soames |” said the bird.


338 THE WHITE MONKEY


“ve taught him that. Isn’t he rather sweet ?”

“No,” said Soames. “I should shut him up;
he’ll spoil your curtains.”

The vexation of the afternoon had revived within
him suddenly. What was life, but parrotry ? » What
did people see of the real truth? They just repeated
each other, like a lot of shareholders, or got their
precious sentiments out of The Daily Liar. For one
person who took a line, a hundred followed on, like
sheep |

* You'll stay and dine, dear boy!” said Winifred.

Yes! he would dine. Had she a melon, by any
chance ?. He’d no inclination to go and sit opposite
his wife at South Square. ‘Tento one Fleur would not
be down. And as to young Michael—the fellow had
been there that afternoon and witnessed the whole
thing ; he’d no wish to go over it again.

He was washing his hands for dinner, when a maid,
outside, said:

* You’re wanted on the ’phone, sir.”

Michael’s voice came over the wire, strained and
husky :

“That you, sir?”

*“Yes. What is it?”

“Fleur. It began this afternoon at three. I’ve been
trying to reach you.”

“What P” cried Soames. “How? Quick!”

“ They say it’s all normal. But it’s so awful. ‘They
say quite soon now.” The voice broke off.

“My God!” said Soames. “ My hat!”

By the front door the maid was asking: “ Shall you
be back to dinner, sir ? ”

“ Dinner |” muttered Soames, and was gone.

He hurried along, almost running, his eyes searching


SOAMES AT BAY 339


for a cab. None to be had, of course! None to be
had! Opposite the Iseeum Club he got one, open in
the fine weather after last night’s storm. That storm!
He might have known. Ten days before her time.
Why on earth hadn’t he gone straight back, or at least
telephoned where he would be? All that he had been
through that afternoon was gone like smoke. Poor
child! Poor little thing! And what about twilight
sleep? Why hadn’t he been there ? He might have—
nature! Damn it! Nature—as if it couldn’t leave
her alone |

* Get on! ” he said, leaning out: “ Double fare!”

Past the Connoisseurs, and the Palace, and Whitehall ;
past all preserves whence nature was excluded, deep
in the waters of primitive emotion Soames sat, grey,
breathless. Past Big Ben—eight o’clock | Five hours !
Five houts of it |

** Let it be over!” he muttered aloud: “ Let it be
over, God!”


CHAPTER XIV


ON THE RACK


Wuen his father-in-law bowed to the Chairman and
withdrew, Michael had restrained a strong desire to
shout: “Bravo!” Who'd have thought the “old
man” could let fly like that? He had “ got their
goats ” with a vengeance. Quite an interval of fine
mixed vociferation followed, before his neighbour,
Mr. Sawdry, made himself heard at last.

“ Now that the director implicated has resigned, I
shall ’ave pleasure in proposing a vote of confidence
in the rest of the Board.”

Michael saw his father rise, a little finicky and smiling,
and bow to the Chairman. “I take my resignation as
accepted also; if you permit me, I will join Mr. Forsyte
in retirement.”

Someone was saying :

“T shall be glad to second that vote of confidence.”

And brushing past the knees of Mr. Sawdry, Michael
sought the door. From there he could see that nearly
every hand was raised in favour of the vote of confidence
and with the thought: ‘ Thrown to the shareholders |”
he made his way out of the hotel. Delicacy prevented
him from seeking out those two. They had saved
their dignity ; but the dogs had had the rest.

Hurrying west, he reflected on the rough ways of
justice. The shareholders had a grievance, of course;
and some one had to get it in the neck to satisfy their
sense of equity. They had pitched on Old Forsyte, who,

340


ON THE RACK 341


of all, was least to blame; for if Bart had only held
his tongue, they would certainly have lumped him into
the vote of confidence. All very natural.and illogical ;
—and four o’clock already |

“Counterfeits” ! The old feeling for. Wilfrid
was strong in him this day of publication, One must
do everything one could for his book—poor old son!
There simply must not be a frost.

After calling in at two big booksellers, he made for
his club, and closeted himself in the telephone booth.
In old days they “ took cabs and went about.” . Ringing
up was quicker—was it? With endless vexations, he
tracked down Sibley, Nazing, Upshire, Master, and
half-a-dozen others of the elect. Hestrucka considered
note likely to move. them... The book—he said—was
bound to “ get the goat of the old guard ” and the duds
generally ; it would wanta bit of drum-beating from
the cognoscenti. To each of them he appealed as
the only one whose praise really mattered. “If you
haven’t reviewed the book, old chap, will you? It’s
you who count, of course.” And to each he added:
1 don’t care two straws whether it sells, but I do
want old Wilfrid to get his due.” And he meant it.
The publisher in Michael was dead during that hour in
the telephone booth, the friend alive and kicking hard.
He:came out with sweat running down his forehead,
quite exhausted ; and it was half-past five.

‘ Cup of tea—and home!’ he thought. _ He reached
his door at six. Ting-a-ling, absolutely unimportant,
was cowering in the far corner of the hall.

“ What’s the matter, old man?”

A sound from above, which made his blood run cold,
answered—a long, low moaning.

“Oh, God!” he gasped, and ran upstairs.


342 THE WHITE MONKEY


Annette met him at the door. He was conscious of
her speaking in French, of being called “ mon cher,” of the
words “‘ vers trois heures. . . . The doctor says one must
not worry—all goes for the best.” Again that moan,
and the door shut in his face; she was gone. Michael
remained standing on the rug with perfectly cold sweat
oozing from him, and his nails dug deep into his palms.

‘ This is how one becomes a father!’ he thought :
* This is how I became a son!’ That moaning! He
could not bear to stay there, and he could not bear to go
away. It might be hours, yet! He kept repeating
to himself : “‘ One must not worry—must not worry |”
How easily said! How meaningless! His brain, his
heart, ranging for relief, lighted on the strangest relief
which could possibly have come to him. Suppose
this child being born, had not been his—had been—
been Wilfrid’s ; how would he have been feeling, here,
outside this door? It might—it might so easily have
been—since nothing was sacred, now! Nothing
except—yes, just that which was dearer than oneself—
just that which was in there, moaning. He could not
bear it on the rug, and went downstairs. Across and
across the copper floor, a cigar in his mouth, he strode
in vague rebellious agony. Why should birth be
like this? And the answer was: It isn’t—not in
China! To have the creed that nothing mattered—
and then run into it like this! Something born at
such a cost, must matter, should matter. One must
see to that! Speculation ceased in Michael’s brain;
he stood listening terribly. Nothing! He could not
bear it down there, and went up again. No sound at
first, and then another moan! This time he fled into
his study, and ranged round the room, looking at the
cartoons of Aubrey Greene. He did not see a single


ON THE RACK 343


» oue, and suddenly bethought him of “ Old Forsyte.”
’ He ought to be told !

He rang up the “ Connoisseurs,” the “ Remove,” and
his own father’s clubs, in case they might have gone
there together after the mecting. He drew blank
everywhere. It was half-past seven. How much longer
was this going on? He went back to the bedroom
door; could hear nothing. Then down again to the
hall. Ting-a-ling was lying by the front door, now.
*Fed-up!’ thought Michael, stroking his back, and
mechanically clearing the letter-box. Just one letter
—Wilfrid’s writing! He took it to the foot of the
Stairs, and read it with half his brain, the other half
wondering—wandering up there.


“ Dzar Mont,—I start to-morrow to try and cross
Arabia. I thought you might like a line in case Arabia
crossesme. I have recovered my senses. The air here
is too clear for sentiment of any kind; and passion in
exile soon becomes sickly. Iam sorry I made you so
much disturbance. It was a mistake for me to go back
to England after the war, and hang about writing drivel
for smart young women and inky folk to read. Poor
old England—she’s in for a bad:time. Give her my
love; the same to yourselves.

“ Yours ever,
““ WILFRID. Desert,

“ P.S.—If you’ve published the things I left behind,
send any royalties to me care of my governor.—W. D.”


Half Michael’s brain thought: ‘ Well, that’s that !
And the book coming out to-day!’ Queer! Was
Wilfrid right—was it all a blooming gaff—the inky
stream? Was one just helping on England’s sickness ?


M


344 THE WHITE MONKEY


Ought they all to get on camels and ride the sun down ?
And yet, in books were comfort and diversion ; and
they were wanted! England had to go on—go on!
‘No tetreat, no retreat, they must conquer or die who
have no retreat!’ ... God! There it was again!
Back he flew upstairs with his ears covered, and his
eyes wild. ‘The sounds ceased; Annette came out to
him.
“ Her father, won cher ; try to find her father

“JT have—I can’t!” gasped Michael.

'T'ry Green Street—Mrs. Dartie. Courage! Allis
normal—it will be quite soon now.”

When he had rung up Green Street and been answered
at last, he sat with the door of his study open, waiting
for “ Old Forsyte” to come. Half his sight remarked
a round hole burnt in his trouser leg—he hadn’t even
noticed the smell ; hadn’t even realised that he had been
smoking. He must pull himself together for the “ old
man.” He heard the bell ring, and ran down to open.

Well?” said Soames.

“Not yet, sir. Come up to my study. It’s nearer.”

They went up side by side. That trim grey head,
with the deep furrow between the eyes, and those eyes
staring as if at pain behind them, steadied Michael.
Poor old chap! He was “for it,” too! They were
both on “ their uppers ” !

“ Have a peg, sir? I’ve got brandy here.”

“Yes,” said Soames. “ Anything.”

With the brandies in their hands, half-raised, they
tistened—jerked their hands up, drank. They were
automatic, like two doll figures worked by the same
string.

“ Cigarette, sir ?” said Michael.

Soames nodded.


liee


ON THE RACK 345


With the lighted cigarettes just not in their mouths,
they listened, put them in, took them out, puffed
smoke. Michael had his right arm tight across his
chest. Soames his left. They formed a pattern,
thus, side by side.

“ Bad to stick, sir. Sorry!”

Soames nodded. His teeth were clenched. Suddenly
his hand relaxed.

“Listen! ” he said. Sounds—different—confused |

Michael’s hand seized something, gripped it hard ;
it was cold, thin—the hand of Soames. ‘They sat thus
hand in hand, staring at the doorway, for how long
neither knew.

Suddenly that doorway darkened; a figure in. grey
stood there—Annette |

“Tt is all r-right! A son!”


CHAPTER XV


CALM


On waking from deep sleep next morning, Michael’s
first thought wes ‘ Fleur is back!’ He then remem-
bered.

To his:  “O.K.?” whispered at her door, he
received an emphatic nod from the nurse.

In the midst of excited expectation he retained enough
modernity to think: ‘No more blurb! Go and eat
your breakfast quietly ! ”

In the dining-room Soames was despising the broken
egg before him. He looked up as Michael entered,
and buried his face in his cup. Michael understood
perfectly ; they had sat hand in hand! He saw, too,
that the journal opened by his plate was of a financial
nature.

“ Anything about the meeting, sir? Your speech
must read like one o’clock ! ”

With a queer little sound Soames held out the paper.
The headlines ran: ‘Stormy meeting—resignation
of two directors—a vote of confidence.” Michael
skimmed down *# he came to:

“ Mr. Forexsc, the director involved, in a speech of :
some lengtn, said he had no intention of singing
small. He deprecated the behaviour of the share-
holders; he had not been accustomed to meet with
suspicions. He tendered his resignation.”

Michael dropped the sheet.

346


CALM 347


“By Jove!” he said—* ‘ Involved—suspicions.’
They’ve given it a turn, as though ie

“ The papers | ” said Soames, and resumed his egg.

Michael sat down, and stripped the skin off a banana,
*“ Nothing became him like his death,” he thought;
© Poor old boy!’

“Well, sir,” he said, “I was there, and all I can say
is: You and my father were the only two people who
excited my respect.”

“That ! ” said Soames, putting down his spoon.

Michael perceived that he wished to be alone, and
swallowing the banana, went to his study. Waiting
for his summons, he rang up his father.

“None the worse for yesterday, sir?”

Sir Lawrence’s voice came clear and thin, rather high.

“Poorer and wiser. What’s the bulletin ?”

“ Top-hole.”

“Our love to both. Your mother wants to know
if he has any hair?”

** Haven't seen him yet. [Pm just going.”

Annette, indeed, was beckoning him from the door-
way.

“She wants you to bring the little dog, mon cher.’’

With Ting-a-ling under his arm, and treading on
tiptoe, Michael entered. The eleventh baronet! He
did not seem to amount to much, beneath her head
bent over him. And surely her hair was darker! He
walked up to the bed, and touched it reverently.

Fleur raised her head, and revealed the baby sucking
vigorously at her little finger. “Isn’t he a monkey ?”
said her faint voice.

Michael nodded. A monkey clearly—but whether
white—that was the question |

* And you, sweetheart |”


348 THE WHITE MONKEY


“ All right now, but it was ”? She drew her
breath in, and her eyes darkened : “ Ting, look!”

The Chinese dog, with nostrils delicately moving,
drew backward under Michael’s arm. His whole
demeanour displayed a knowing criticism. ‘“ Puppies,”
he seemed to say, “we do it in China. Judgment
reserved |”

“What eyes!” said Michael: “ We needn’t tell
him that this was brought from Chelsea by the doctor.”

Fleur gave the tiniest laugh.

** Put him down, Michael.”

Michael put him down, and he went to his corner.

“IT mustn’t talk,” said Fleur, “ but I want to, fright-
fully ; as if ’'d been dumb for months.”

* Just as I felt,’ thought Michael, ‘she’s been away,
away somewhere, utterly away.’

“Tt was like being held down, Michael. Months of
not being yourself.”

Michael said softly: “Yes! the process is behind
the times! Has he got any hair? My mother wants
to know.”

Fleur revealed the head of the eleventh baronet,
covered with dark down.

“Like my grandmother’s; but it'll get lighter.
His eyes are going to be grey. Oh! and, Michael, about
god-parents ? Alison, of coutse—but men?”

Michael dwelled a little before answering :

“JT had a letter from Wilfrid yesterday. Would
you like him? He’s still out there, but I could hold
the sponge for him in church.”

“Is he all right again ?”

“ He says so.”

He could not read the expression of fier eyes, put her
lips were pouted slightly.


CALM $49


“ Ycs,” she said: “ and I think one’s enougn, don’t
you? Mine never gave me anything.”

“ One of mine gave me a bible, and the other gave
meawigging. Wilfrid,then.” And he bent over her.
__ Her eyes seemed to make him a little ironic apology
He kissed her hair, and moved hurriedly away.

By the door Soames was standing, awaiting his turn.

*« Just a minute only, sir,” the nurse was saying.

Soames walked up to the bedside, and stood looking
at his daughter.

“* Dad, dear ! ” Michael heard her say.

Soames just touched her hand, nodded, as if implying
approval of the baby, and came walking back, but, in a
mirror, Michael saw his lips quivering.

On the grwund floor once more, he had the most
intense desire to sing. It would not do; and, entering
the Chinese room, he stood staring out into the sunlit
square. Gosh! It was good to be alive! Say what
you liked, you couldn’t beat it! They might turn their
noses up at life, and look down them at it; they might
bolster up the future and the past, but—give him the
present !

‘Tl have that white monkey up again!’ he thought.
‘T’ll see the brute further before he shall depress me!”

He went out to a closet under the stairs, and, from
beneath four pairs of curtains done up in moth-
preserver and brown paper, took out the picture. He
held it away from him in the dim light. The creature’s
eyes! It was all in those eyes |

‘Never mind, old son!” he said: “ Up you go!”
And he carried it into the Chinese room.

Soames was there.

*T’m going to put him up again, sir.”

Soames nodded.


350 THE WHITE MONKEY


“ Would you hold him, while I hook the wire ? *

Soames held the picture.

Returning to the copper floor, Michael said:

“ All right, sir!” and stood back.

Soames joined him. Side by side they contemplated
the white monkey.

“ He won’t be happy till he gets it,” said Michael, at
last: “The only thing is, you see, he doesn’t know
what i is,”


A SILENT WOOING


a Ate


Ak i et wich ae ba neat) 8


ba ‘eit: it a abs


Ma


A SILENT WOOING


On the first of February, 1924, Jon Forsyte, con-
valescing from the “flu, was sitting in the lounge of
an hotel at Carden, South Carolina, with his bright
hair slowly rising on his scalp. He was reading about
a lynching.

A voice behind him said:

“ Will you join our picnic over at those old-time
mounds to-day ?”

Looking up, he saw a young acquaintance called
Francis Wilmot, who came from further south.

“Very glad to. Who’s going?”

“Why, just Mr. and Mrs. Pulmore Hurrison, and
that English novelist, Gurdon Minho, and the Blair
Girls and their friends, and my sister Anne andI. You
could ride over horseback, if you want exercise.”

“ All right; they’ve got some new horses in this
morning from Columbia.”

“Why, that’s fine! My sister and I'll ride horse-
back too, and some of the Blair girls. The Hurrisons
can take the others.”

“TI say,” said Jon, “this is a pretty bad case of
lynching.”

The young man to whom he spoke leaned in the
window. Jon admired his face, as of ivory, with dark
hair and eyes, and narrow nose and lips, and his lissom
free attitude.

« All you Britishers go off the deep-end when you
read ofalynching. You haven't got the negro problem

533


354 A SILENT WOOING


up where you are at Southern Pines. They don’t have
it any to speak of in North Carolina.”

“No, and I don’t profess to understand it. But I
can’t see why negroes shouldn’t be tried the same as
white men. There may be cases where you’ve got to
shoot at sight; but I don’t see how you can defend
mob law. Once you catch a man, he ought to be tried
properly.”

“We're not taking any chances with that particular
kind of trouble.”

“But if a man isn’t tried, how can you tell he’s
guilty 2”

“ Well, we'd sooner do without an innocent darkie
now and again than risk our women.”

“J should have thought killing a man for a thing
he hadn’t done was worse than anything.”

“ Maybe, in Europe. But not here. Things are in
the large, still.”

““ What do they think about lynching in the north ? ”

“They squeal a bit, but they've no call to, If
we’ve got negtoes, they’ve got the Reds, and they
surely have a wholesale way with them.”

Jon Forsyte tilted back his rocking-chair, with a
puzzled frown.

“I reckon there’s too much space in this country
still,” said Francis Wilmot ; “‘ a man has all the chances
to get off. So where we feel strong about a thing,
we take the law into our own hands.”

“Well, every country to its own fashions. What
are these mounds we’re going to?”

“Old Indian remains that go way back thousands
of years, they say. You haven’t met my sister? She
only came last night.”

“No. What time do we start ?”


A SILENT WOOING 355


“Noon; it’s about an hour’s tide by the
woods.”

At noon then, in riding kit, Jon came out to the
five horses, for more than one of the Blair girls had
‘elected to ride. He started between them, Francis
Wilmot going ahead with his sister.

The Blair girls were young and pretty with a
medium-coloured, short-faced, well-complexioned,
American prettiness, of a type to which he had become
accustomed during the two and a half years he had
spent in the United States. They were at first extremely
silent, and then extremely vocal. They rode astride,
and very well. Jon learned that they, as well as the
givers of the picnic, Mr. and Mrs. Pulmore Hurrison,
inhabited Long Island. They asked him many ques-
tions about England, to which Jon, who had left it at
the age of nineteen, invented many answers. He
began to look longingly between his horse’s ears at
Francis Wilmot and his sister, cantering ahead in a
silence that, from a distance, seemed extremely restful.
Their way led through pine woods—of trees spindly
and sparse, and over a rather sandy soil; the sunlight
was clear and warm, the air still crisp. Jon rode a
single-footing bay horse, and felt as one feels on the
first day of recovered health.

The Blair girls wished to know what he thought of
the English novelist—they were dying to see a real
highbrow. Jon had only read one of his books, and
of the characters therein could only remember a cat.
The Blair girls had read none; but they had heard that
his cats were “just too. cunning.”

Francis Wilmot, reining up in front, pointed at a
large mound which certainly seemed to be unnaturally
formed. They all reined up, looked at it for two


356 A SILENT WOOING


‘


minutes in silence, judged it was “ very interesting,”
and tode on. Ina hollow the occupants of two cats
were disembarking food. Jon led the horses away to
tether them alongside the horses of Wilmot and his
sister.

“My sister,” said Francis Wilmot,

“Mr. Forsyte,” said the sister.

She looked at Jon, and Jon looked at her. She was
slim but distinctly firm, in a long dark-brown coat and
breeches and boots; her hair was bobbed and dark
under a soft brown felt hat. Her face was pale, rather
browned, and had a sort of restrained eagerness—the
brow broad and clear, the nose straight and slightly
sudden, the mouth unreddened, rather wide and pretty.
But what struck Jon were her eyes, which were exactly
his idea of a water nymph’s. They slanted a little,
and were steady and brown and enticing; whether
there was ever such a slight squint in them he could
not tell, but if there were it was an improvement. He
felt shy. Neither of them spoke.

Francis Wilmot remarked, “I reckon I’m hungry,”
and they walked side by side towards the eatables.

Jon said suddenly to the sister :

** You’ve just come then, Miss Wilmot ? ”

Yes, Mr. Forsyte.”

“* Where from ?.””’

“From Naseby. It’s way down between Charleston
and Savannah.”

“Oh, Charleston! I liked Charleston.”

** Anne likes Savannah best,” said Francis Wilmot.

Anne nodded. She was not talkative, it seemed,
though her voice had sounded pleasant in small
quantities.

“It’s kind of lonely where we live,” said Francis.


A SILENT WOOING 357


“ Mostly darkies. Anne’s never seen an Englishman
to speak to.” :

Anne smiled. Jon also smiled. Neither pursued
the subject. They arrived at the eatables, spread in a

manner calculated to give the maximum of muscular
and digestive exertion. Mrs. Pulmore Hurrison, a
lady of forty or so, and of defined features, was seated
with her feet turned up; next to her, Gurdon Minho,
the English novelist, had his legs in a more reserved
position; and then came quantities of seated girls,
all with pretty unreserved legs ; Mr. Pulmore Hurrison,
somewhat apart, was pursing a small mouth over the
cork of a large bottle. Jon and the Wilmots also sat
down. ‘The picnic had begun.

Jon soon realised that everybody was expecting
Gurdon Minho to say something beyond “ Yes,”
“Really !”, “ Ah! ”, “ Quite!” This did not occur.
The celebrated novelist was at first almost painfully
attentive to what everybody else said, and then seemed
to gointoacoma. Jon felt a patriotic disappointment,
for he himself was, if anything, even more silent. He
could see that, among the three Blair girls and their two
girl friends, a sort of conspiracy was brewing, to quiz
the silent English in the privacy of the future. Francis
Wilmot’s speechless sister was a comfort to him; he
felt that she would neither be entitled nor inclined to
join that conspiracy. He took refuge in handing
victuals and was glad when the period of eating on
constricted stomachs was over. Picnics were like
Christmas Day, better in the future and the past than
in the present. After the normal period of separation
/into genders, the baskets were repacked, and all resorted
to their vehicles. ‘The two cars departed for another
mound said to be two miles off. Francis Wilmot and


358 A SILENT WOOING


the two Blair girls judged they would get back and
watch the polo. Jon asked Anne Wilmot which she
wished to do. She elected to see the other mound.

They mounted and pursued a track through the
woods in silence, till Jon said:

“Do you like picnics ?”

“I certainly do not.”

“Nor do I. But riding?”

“I just adore it more than anything in the
world.”

“More than dancing ? ”

“ Surely. Riding and swimming ?

“Ah! I thought. ”? And he was silent.

“ What did you think ?”

“Well, I thought somehow you were a good
swimmer.”

ce Why ? ”?

Jon said with embarrassment :

“ By your eyes i

“ What! Are they fishy ?”

Jon laughed.

“Not exactly. They’re like a water nymph’s.”

“I don’t just know if that’s a compliment,”

“ OF course it is.”

“TI thought nymphs weren’t respectable.”

“Oh! Water nymphs—very! Shy, of course.”

“Do you have many in England?”

“No. As a matter of fact I’ve never seen one
before.”

“Then how do you know ?”

“ Just a general sense of what’s fitting.”

“I suppose you had a classical education, Don’t
you all have that in England?”

“ Far from it,”


A SILENT WOOING 359


“ And how do you like America, Mr. Forsyte ?”

“Very much, I get homesick sometimes.”

“T’d love to travel.”

“You never have?”

_ She shook her head. “I just stay at home and look
after things. But I reckon we’ll have to sell the old

home—cotton doesn’t pay any more.”

“I grow peaches near Southern Pines, you know,
up in North Carolina; that’s paying at present.”

“Do you live there alone ?”

“No; with my mother.”

“Ts she English ? ”

ce Yes.”

“‘ Have you a father?”

“‘ He died four years ago.”

“ Francis and I have been orphans ten years.”

“TI wish you’d both come and stay with us some
day; my mother would be awfully glad.”

“Is she like you?”

Jon laughed.

“No. She’s beautiful.”

The eyes regarded him gravely, the lips smiled
faintly. |

“T’d just love to come, but Francis and I can’t ever
be away together.”

“ But,” said Jon, ‘‘ you’re both here.”

“‘ We go back to-morrow ; I wanted to see Camden.”
The eyes resumed their steady consideration of Jon’s
face. ‘“ Won’t you come back with us and see our
home—it’s old? Francis would like to have you
come.”

“Do you always know what yout brother would
like?”

“ Surely.”


360 A SILENT WOOING


“That must be jolly. But do you zeally mean you
want me?”

“T certainly do.”

“Td enjoy it awfully ; I hate hotels. I mean—well,
you know: ”” But as be didn’t, he was not so sure
that she did.

She touched her horse, and the single-footing animal
broke into a canter.

Along the alleys of the eternal pinewood the sun
was in their eyes; a warmed scent rose from pine
needles, gum and herbs; the going was sandy and
soft ; the horses in good mood. Jonfelt happy. This
gitl had strange eyes, enticing; and she rode better
even than the Blair girls.

“T suppose all the English ride well?” she said.

“‘ Most do, when they ride at all; but we don’t ride
much nowadays.”

“Td love to see England; our folk came from
England in 1700—Worcestershire. Where is that ?”

“It’s our middle west,” said Jon. ‘But as unlike
as ever you can imagine. It’s a fruit-growing country
—vety pretty; white timbered houses, pastures,
orchards, woods, green hills. I went there walking
one holiday with a school friend.”

“Tt sounds just lovely. Our ancestors were Roman
Catholics. They had a place called Naseby; that’s
why we call ours Naseby. But my grandmother was
French Creole, from Louisiana. Is it true that in
England they think Creoles have negro blood in
them ? ”

“We're very ignorant,” said Jon. “I know the
Creoles are the old French and Spanish families. You
both look as if you had French blood.”

Francis does. Do you think we’ve passed that


A SILENT WOOING 361


mound? We've come all of four miles, and I thought
it was only two.”

“Does it matter? The other mound was rather
over-rated.”

The lips smiled; she didn’t ever quite laugh, it
seemed.

“‘ What Indians hereabouts ? ” asked Jon.

*T’m.not too sure; Seminoles, if any, I think. But
Francis says these mounds would be from way back
before the present tribes. What made you come to
America, Mr. Forsyte ?”

Jon bit his lip. To give the reason—family feud—
broken love affair—was not exactly possible.

“‘T went first to British Columbia; but I didn’t get
on too well. Then I heard of peaches in North
Carolina.”

“But why did you leave England ?”

I suppose I just wanted to see the world.”

Yes,” she said. It was a quiet but comprehending
sound; Jon was the more gratified, because she had
not comprehended. The image of his first love did
not often haunt him now—had not for a year or more,
He had been so busy with his peaches. Besides, Holly
had written that Fleur had a boy. He said suddenly :
“T think we ought to turn, Look at the sun!” The
sun, indeed, was well down behind the trees.

“ec My—yes | 22

Jon turned his steed. “ Let’s gallop, it'll be down
in half an hour; and there’s no moon till late.”

They galloped back along the track. .The sun went
down even faster than he had thought, the air grew
cold, the light grey. Jon reined up suddenly.

“T’m awfully sorry; I don’t believe we're on the
track we came by from the picnic. I feel we’ve gone


562 A SILENT WOOING


off to the right. The tracks ate all alike and these
horses only came in from Columbia yesterday ; they
don’t know the country any more than we do.”

The girl laughed.

“We'll be lost.”

“M’m! That'll be no joke in these woods. Don’t
they ever end ? ”

“T reckon not, in these parts. It’s an adventure.”

“Yes; but you’ll catch cold. It’s jolly cold at
night.”

“And you’ve had ’flu! ”

“Oh! That’s all right. Here’s a track to the left.
Shall we go on, or shall we take it ? ”

sf Dake? it,7?

They cantered on. It was too datk now for
galloping, and soon too dark for cantering. And the
track wound on and on.

“This is a pretty business,” said Jon. “I am
sorry.” He peered towards her riding beside him,
and could just see her smile.

“Why! It’s lots of fun.”

He was glad she thought so, but he could not see it.

“I have been an ass. Your brothet’ll be pretty sick
with me.”

“He'll know I’m with you.”

“If we only had a compass. We may be out all
night at this rate. Here’s another fork ! Gosh, it is
going to be dark.”

And, almost as he spoke, the last of the light failed
he could barely see her five yards away. He came uj
close alongside, and she touched his sleeve.

“ Don’t worry,” she said; “ that spoils it.”

Shifting his reins, he gave her hand a squeeze,

“You're splendid, Miss Wilmot,”


A SILENT WOOING 363


* Oh! do call me Anne. Surnames seem kind of
chilly when you’re lost.”

“Thank you very much. Myname’s Jon. Without
an h, you know—short for Jolyon.”

“ Jolyon—Jon ; I like it.”

“ Anne’s always been my favourite name. Shall we
stop till the moon rises, or ride on?”

* When will the moon rise ?.””

“ About ten, I think, judging from last night. . And
it'll be nearly full. But its hardly six yet.”

“* Let’s ride on and leave it to the horses.”

“Right! Only if they make for anywhere I’m
pretty sure it'll be towards Columbia, which must be
miles and miles.”

They pursued the narrow track at a foot’s pace. It
was teally dark now. Jon said: “ Are you cold?
You’d be warmer walking. I'll go ahead; stick close
enough to see me.”

He went ahead, and soon dismounted, feeling cold
himself ; there was utter silence.among unending trees
and no light.

“Tm cold now,” said the voice of Anne. “T’ll get
off too.” |

They had trailed on perhaps half an hour like this,
leading their horses, and almost feeling their way,
when Jon said: “Look! There’s some sort of a
clearing here! And what’s that blackness on the
left 77?

“It’s a mound.”

“Which mound, I wonder? The one we saw, or
the other, or neither ? ”

“1 reckon we'd better stop here till the moon rises,
then maybe we'll see which it is, and know our way.”

* You're right. There'll be swamps, I expect. T’ll


364 A SILENT WOOING


tether the horses to leeward, and we'll try to find a
nook. It és cold.”

He tethered the horses out of the wind, and, turning
back, found her beside him.

“It’s creepy here,” she said.

“We'll find a snug place, and sit down.”

He put his hand through her arm, and they moved
round the foot of the mound.

“ Hete,” said Jon suddenly ; “ they’ve been digging.
This’ll be sheltered.” - He felt the ground—dry enough.
“ Let’s squat here and talk.”

Side by side, with their backs to the wall of the
excavated hollow, they lighted cigarettes, and sat
listening to the silence. But for a snuffle or soft stamp
now and then from the horses, there wasn’t a sound.
Trees and wind, both, were too sparse for melody, and
nothing but their two selves and their horses seemed
alive A sprinkle of stars in a very dark sky and the
deeper blackness of the pine stems was all they could
see. Ah! ‘and the glowing tips of theit cigarettes,
and each other’s faces vaguely illumined, now and then,
thereby.

“I don’t expect you'll ever forgive me for this,”
said Jon gloomily.

“Why! I’m just loving it.”

“Very sweet of you to say so; but you must be
awfully cold. Look here—have my coat!”

He had begun to take it off when she said: “If you
do that I'll run out into the woods and get teally
lost.”

Jon resumed his coat.

“It might have been one of those Blair girls,” he
said.

© Would you tather?”


A SILENT WOOING $05


“For your sake, of course. Not for my own—no,
indeed |”

They were looking round at each other so that the
tips of their cigarettes were almost touching. Just
able to see her eyes, he had a very distinct impulse to
put his arm round her. It seemed the natural and
proper thing to do, but of course it was not “done”!

“ Have some chocolate,” she said.

Jon ate a very little. The chocolate should be
reserved for her !

“This is a real adventure. It és black. I’d have
been scared alone—seems kind of spooky here.”

“ Spirits of the old Indians,” muttered Jon. “ Only
I don’t believe in spirits.”

“You would if you’d had a coloured nanny.”

“Did you have one?”

“Surely, with a voice as soft as mush melon. We
have one old darkie still, who was a slave as a boy.
He’s the best of all the negroes round—nearly eighty,
with quite white hair.”

“Your father couldn’t have been in the Civil War,
could he?”

“No; my two grandfathers and my great-grand-
father.”

“ And how old are you, Anne? ”

“ Nineteen.”

*“T’m twenty-three.”

“Tell me about yout home in England.”

“JT haven’t one now.” He began an expurgated
edition of his youth, and it’ seemed to him that she
listened beautifully. He asked for her story in return;
and, while she was telling it wondered whether he
liked her voice or not. It dwelled and slurred, but
was soft and had great flavour- When she had finished


366 A SILENT WOOING


her simple tale, for she had hatdly been away from
home, there was silence, till Jon said:

“Tt’s half-past seven only. I'll go and see that the
horses are all right; then perhaps you could get a
snooze.”

He moved round the foot of the mound till he came
to the horses, and stayed a little talking to them and
stroking their noses. A feeling, warm and protective,
stirred within him. This was a nice child, and a brave
one. A face to remember, with lots behind it. Sud-
. denly he heard her voice, low and as if pretending not
to call: “Jon, oh, Jon!” He felt his way back
through the darkness.. Her hands were stretched out.

“Tt is so spooky! That funny rustling! Ive got
creeps down my back!”

“The wind’s got up a bit. Let’s sit back to back
—it’ll keep you warm. Or, look here, I’ll sit against
the wall; if you lean up against me you could go to
sleep. It’s only two hours now—we can tide on by
moonlight.”

They took up the suggested postures, her back
against this side, and her head in the hollow of his arm
and shoulder.

“ Comfy P ”

“Surely. It stops the creeps. Am I too heavy?”

““ Not a bit,” said Jon.

‘They smoked and talked a little more. ‘The stars
were brighter now, and their eyes more accustomed to
the darkness. And they were grateful for each other’s
warmth. Jon enjoyed the scent, as of hay, that rose
from her hair not far below his nose. Then came a
long silence, while the warm protective feeling grew
and grew within him. He would have liked to slip
his.arms round and hold her closer. But of course he


A SILENT WOOING 367


did not, It was, however, as much as he could do to
remain a piece of warmth impersonal enough for her
to recline against. ‘This was the very first time since
he left England that he had felt an inclination to put
| his arms round anyone, so badly burnt had he been in
that old affair. The wind rose, talked in the trees, died
away again; the stillness was greater than ever. He
was very wide awake, and it seemed curious to him
that she should sleep, for, surely, she was asleep—so
still. The stars twinkled, and he gazed up at them.
His limbs began to ache and twitch, and suddenly he
realised that she was no more asleep than he. She
slowly turned her head till he could see her eyes, grave,
enticing.

I’m too heavy,” she said, and raised herself; but
his arm restored her.

“Not a bit; so long as you’re warm and comfy.”

Her head settled in again; and the vigil was resumed.
They talked a little now, of nothing important, and he
thought: ‘It’s queer—one could live months knowing
people and not know them half so well as we shall
know each other now.’
' Again a long silence fell; but this time his arm was
round her, it was more comfortable so, for both of
them. And Jon began to have the feeling that it
would be inadvisable for the moon to rise. Had she
that feeling too? He wondered. But if she had, the
moon in its courses paid no attention. For suddenly
he became conscious that it was there, behind the trees
somewhere lurking, a curious kind of stilly glimmer
creeping about the air, along the ground, in and out
of the tree-stems.

“The moon!” he said. She did not stir, and his
heart beat rather fast. Sol She did not want the


308 A SILENT WOOING


moon to rise any more than he! And slowly the
creeping glimmer became light, and, between the tree-
stems, stole, invading their bodies till they were visible.
And still they sat, unstirring, as if afraid to break a
spell. The moon gained power and a cold glory, and
rose above the trees; the world was alive once more.
Jon thought, ‘ Could I kiss her ?? and at once recoiled.
As if she would want! But, as though she divined
his thought, she turned her head, and her eyes looked
into his. He said:

“Tm in charge of you!”

Her answer was a little sigh, and she got up. They
stood, stretching, gazing into the whitened mysterious
» wood.

“Look, Anne! It #s the mound. There’s the path
down to the hollow where we had the picnic. Now
we can find the way all right.”

“Yes ”—a sound he could not interpret. But they
went towards the horses, untethered them, and mounted.
Between them, they would remember the way now;
and they set forth. They rode side by side.

Jon said : “ Well, that’ll be something to remember.”

“ Yes, I shall always remember it.”

They said no more, except to consult about the
way; but this was soon clear, and they cantered. They
came out on the polo ground close to the hotel.

“You go in and relieve your brother’s mind. Til
take the horses round, and then come in.”

When he entered the hotel lounge Francis Wilmot,
still in riding clothes, was alone. His expression was
peculiar, not exactly hostile, but certainly not friendly.

** Anne’s gone up,” he said. “I reckon you haven’t
much bump of locality. You surely had me scared.”

“Tm awfully sorry,” said Jon humbly, “I forgot
the horses were new to the country.”


A SILENT WOOING 369


“Well!” said Francis Wilmot, and shrugged his
shoulders. Jon looked at the young man steadily.

“You don’t think that I got bushed on purpose ?
Because you look as if you do.”

Again Francis Wilmot shrugged his shoulders.

“ Forgive me,” said Jon, “ but aren’t you forgetting
that your sister’s a lady, and that one doesn’t behave
like a cad with a lady ?”

Francis Wilmot did not answer; he went to a
window and stood looking out. Jon felt very angry.
He sat down on the arm of a long chair, suddenly
extremely tired. He sat there looking at the ground,
and frowning heavily. Damn the fellow! Had he
been bullying Anne? If he had ! A voice behind
him said: ‘I reckon I didn’t mean it. I certainly am
sorry. It was just the scare. Shake hands!”

Jon stretched out his own impulsively, and. they
shook hands, looking straight into each othet’s eyes,

“ You must be about through,” said Francis Wilmot.
“Come on to my room; I’ve gotten a flask. [ve
given Anne a dram already.”

They went up. Jon sat in the only chair, Francis
Wilmot on the bed.

“«« Anne tells me she’s asked you to come home with
us to-morrow. I surely hope you will.”

“1 should simply love to.”

“That’s fine!”

They drank, talked a little, smoked.

“ Good-night,” said» Jon suddenly, “or I shall go
to sleep here.”

They shook hands again, and Jon staggered to his
room. He fell asleep at once.

They travelled next day, all three, through Columbia
and Charleston, to the Wilmots’ place. It stood in


370 A SILENT WOOING


the bend of a red river, with cotton fields atound, and
swampy ground where live oaks grew, melancholy,
<estooned with Florida moss. The old slave quarters,
disused except as kennels, were still standing; the
two-storied house had flights of wooden steps running
up on each side, on to the wide wisteria-covered porch,
and needed a coat of paint; and, within, rooms ran
one into the other, hung with old portraits of dead
Wilmots and de Frevilles; and darkies wandered
around and talked their soft drawled speech.

Jon was happier than he had been since he landed
in the New World three and a half years ago. In the
mornings he sauntered with the dogs in the sunlight
or tried to write poetry—for the two young Wilmots
were busy. After the midday meal he rode with them
ot with Anne alone. In the evening he learned from
her to play the ukulele before a wood fire lighted at
sundown, or heard about cotton culture from Francis,
with whom, since that moment of animosity, he was
on the best of terms.

Between Anne and himself there was little talk ;
they had, as it were, resumed the silence which had
fallen when they sat in the dark under the old Indian
mound. But he watched her; indeed, he was always
trying to catch the grave enticing look in her dark
eyes. More and more she seemed to him unlike any
girl he had ever known; quicker, more silent, and
with more “sand.” The days went on, in warm sun,
and the nightly scent of wood smoke ; and his holiday
drew to an end. He could play the ukulele now, and
they sang to it—negro spirituals, songs from comic
operas, and other immortal works. The last day came,
and dismay descended on Jon. To-morrow, early, he
was going back to his peaches at Southern Pines


A SILENT WOOING 371


That afternoon, riding with her for the last’ time, the
silence was almost unnatural, and she did not even
look at him. Jon went up to change, with panic in
his heart. He knew now that he wanted to take her
| back with him, and he thought he knew that she did
not want to come. How he would miss watching for
those eyes to be fixed on him. He was thirsty with
the wish to kiss her. He went down moodily, and
sat in a long chair before the wood fire, pulling a
spaniel’s ears and watching the room darken. Perhaps
she wouldn’t even come for a last sing-song. Perhaps
there would be nothing more but dinner and an
evening @ frois; not even a chance to say he loved
her and be told that she didn’t love him. And he
thought miserably: “It’s my fault—I’m a silent fool;
I’ve missed all my chance.” The room darkened till
there was nothing but firelight, and the spaniel went
to sleep. Jon, too, closed his eyes. It was as if he
could wait better, thus—for the worst. When he
opened them she was standing in front of him with
the ukuleles in her hands.

“Do you want to play, Jon?”

“Yes,” \said Jon, “‘let’s play. It’s the last time” ;
and he took his ukulele.

She sat down on the rug befote the fire, and began
to tune hers. Jon slipped down beside the spaniel and
began to tune his. The spaniel got up and went away.

“What shall we sing?”

“T don’t want to sing, Anne. You sing; I'll just
accompany.”

She didn’t look at him! She would not look at
him! It was all up! What a fool he’d been!

Anne sang. She sang a crooning phrase—a call over
the mountains of Spain. Jon plucked his strings, and


372 A SILENT WOOING


the tune plucked his heart. She sang it through. She
sang it again, and her eyes slid round. God? She
was looking at him. She mustn’t see that he knew
she was! It was too good—that long dark look over
the ukulele. Between him and her were her ukulele
and his own. He dropped the beastly thing. And,
suddenly shifting along the floor, he put his arm round
her. Without a word she drooped her head against
his shoulder, as when they sat under the Indian mound.
He bent his cheek down to her hair. It smelled, as
it had then, of hay. And, just as she had screwed her
face round in the moonlight, she turned it to him now.
But this time Jon kissed her lips.


es ab ihe! pune
it bets, ip tt


X f " ie Mi he at ait seth os
AOE Sates ki Eat yooh em ie et
A i de Sin :


Syne x


ety we as in
