A Journey to the Earth's Interior; or, Have the Poles Really Been Discovered? (Marshall B. Gardner, 1920)
=========================================================================================================
Marshall B. Gardner — A Journey to the Earth's Interior, revised edition (Aurora, Illinois, 1920). Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (journeytoearthsi0000mars).

help 


edge ha 


Lionas ata Bar Hn i/o i 


Piven ti 


Pre FAAS Ne = 


preien 


ehnees ot SPD es ears 


saMuadtaruas=rthes 4pasby alae pda facapigen® pg 


aR ip eto m 


DORE ree ee LUNIA GY tre Hr aaa an Coeetir ohiarna eenoubieahebebed icant Een eee 
seinansasirsts sipny alan yranied sy auniesy corm bemire teapot eSB ba 4 MASA salah RAG 


Nawsand Brera nde, 


yah nivtes 


DREW Ai bsp NAG bark pepe 


: eae Diet atongasiny aia guianigsGarBimen 


WA Wehpdd tpno-ob ited eeees 


NIVERSITY 


7 THE : | 
T. E. HANLEY | 
| COLLECTION Jj 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/journeytoearthsi0000mars 


tT aa 


A Journey to the Earth’s Interior 


A Journey to the Farth’s 
Interior 


Have the Poles Really 
Been Discovered 


y 


By os ‘ 
MARSHALL B’ GARDNER 


Revised and Enlarged 
Profusely Illustrated 


PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR AT 
AURORA, ILLINOIS 
1920 


CopyRIGHT, 1913 
REVISED AND ENLARGED 
COPYRIGHT, 1920 
BY 
MarsHaLti B. GARDNER 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


DEDICATED TO THE CON- 

TINUED PROGRESS OF 

SCIENCE AND THE SERV- 

ICE THAT IT CAN RENDER 
TO HUMANITY 


133730 


SS 
\4 


Oo 
Do 


UTHOR OF THE THEORY OF A CENTRAL SUN WITHIN 
THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CONTENTS 


CHAPACERS I: 


INTRODUCTORY 


A New Idea and a plea for its fair hearing —The trained sci- 
entist and the average reader.—Old ideas about the Consti- 
tution of the Earth—Cranky ideas are not in the same class 
with reasoned and scientific ones.—Where our evidence 
comes from.—Our theory in a nutshell—Observing the 
planets.—Observing conditions on our own planet, the 
Earth.—Peary and the polar orifice.—The fact of gravitation 
and our theory.—Facts which we have gathered together in 
one volume for the first time in the history of scientific 
petite Wt tile ndittal tests... ciais aceite He Se Gre wins es Sous 


CHAP TERI: 


THE NEBULA AND Our THEORY 


Che nebula, astronomy’s most important concept.—How celes- 
tial bodies are derived from nebulae.—The Milky Way and 
Andromeda.—George F. Chambers quoted.—Are nebulae 
stellar or gaseous ?—The Spectroscope supplies the answer.— 
Simon Newcomb on Laplace’s theory.—Professor Moulton 
criticises Laplace.—Telescopic observation of nebulae.— 
Garrett P. Serviss quoted.—Do the nebulae point to a new 
theory ?—Sir Robert Ball quoted.—The Spiral Nebule in 
Canes Venatici—The Great Nebula in Orion.—The Ring 
Nebula in Lyra.—The Dumb-bell Nebula——The evident 
evolution of nebula.—Professor Moulton quoted.—A. M. 
Clerke quoted—Burham’s observation on central nuclei.— 
Dr. Scheiner’s photographs.—A prophetic sentence.—A. M. 
Clerke on planetary nebule.—All planetary nebule are hol- 
low.—Have a central sun and polar openings.—Professor 
Chant on early observations of nebula.—The number of 
nebule in the visible heavens.—The shell-like structure and 
the central star.—Condensation and _ rotation.—Professor 
See quoted.—Garett P. Serviss on Laplace—Our answer to 
Mr. Serviss’s challenge-——What we can actually see going 
on.—Moulton’s and Chamberlain’s theories——Why not a 
Planet ?—Our theory of the evolution of the nebula.—Re- 


Kern] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


ferring to the Dumb-bell nebula.—Detailed proofs prom- 
ised—The comet.—Professor Moulton’s “Descriptive As- 
tronomy” quoted.—On the occurence of cellular structure 
throughout the umivessesigas 4 aa acres ee re es ae 36 


CHAPTERSIT: 
Mars 


Coming closer to absolute proof—From Mars to the Earth.— 
A general survey of Mars.—The atmosphere of Mars.— 
The circular polar caps.—The alleged canals.—Scientists do 
not advance in their knowledge of the planet—Some new 
facts—Great extremes of temperature-—Astronomers con- 
fused—Comparing the two planets.—Star-like flashes in 
the midst of the polar cap.—An earlier but similar observa- 
tion.—Edward §. Morse quoted.—Lowell is confused by 
what he sees—The beam from Mars was yellow, showing 
it to be direct light——Brilliant light from the polar caps.— 
Comparing these observations—A gleam from the central 
sun of Mars.—Observations versus explanations.——Professor 
Denning quoted.—J. Norman Lockyer quoted.—A direct 
source of light—Water vapor in the atmosphere of Mars. 
—The spectrum of the light from Mars.—Polar caps are 
not carbon-dioxide-—How the astronomers are misled.— 
Corroborative facts from Venus.—E. Walter Maunder 
quoted.—Polar caps of Venus and Mars ought to have 
common explanation.—Hector MacPherson quoted.—Pro- 
fessor Proctor ons lercury. cctsemeuen neers oe ee See 65 


CHAP EERILY, 


Earty PoLar EXPLORATION 


Our theory convincing if polar facts support it says eminent 
English scientist—-We now proceed to show that those 
facts do so.—A word in advance as to Peary’s exploits.— 
Evidences of warmth near the pole—Hon. D. Barrington’s 
treatise on the possibility of approaching the north pole— 
Some of the facts he adduces.—Barrington controverts the 
notions current in his day.—Reports to the Royal Society, 
England’s premier scientific body.—Actual ice conditions in 
the far north.—Ice only from fresh water—Within five 
and a half degrees of the pole-—What Barrington thought 
the actual conformation of the polar regions was like.—Ob- 
servations of a Dutch sea captain.—The northwest passage. . 10 


[8 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAPTER V. 
FuRTHER Arctic ExpLORATION 


Sir John Franklin begins the brilliant work of the nineteenth 
century in polar exploration.—The expeditions in search of 
him.—Observations of Lieutenant McClintock and Dr. 
Kane.—Kane finds that ice melts as he gets further north.— 
Plenty of game in the far north.—An open northern sea.— 
Other explorers had postulated an open polar basin—Traces 
of the Esquimaux very far north.—Kane speaks of the diffi- 
culty of determining one’s location in the Arctic.—Observa- 
tion of Dr. I. I. Hayes, Kane’s companion.—Hayes finds 
mild temperatures at Cape Alexander.—Hayes finds warmth 
where he had expected greater cold——He is astonished at 
“unusual phenomena.’—A warm sledge journey.—He stands 
upon the edge of the polar basin and finds open sea.—He sees 
birds flying north—What Hayes really points out is the dis- 
covery which will be made through our theory.—The tem- 
peratures of the polar regions.—Sir David Brewster’s guess. 
—Hayes’ observations which support our theory are in agree- 
ment with those of Wrangell—Esquimaux tells Hayes there 
are other tribesmen far to the north.—Animal life around 
OS USI og what aS CRN OR ene 


CHAPPER Vi. 
GREELY'S EXPLORATION 
The preface to “Three Years of Arctic Service.”—He admits 
that what one finds in polar exploration is contrary to accept- 
ed ideas.—The “Crimson Cliffs” of Sir John Ross.—T races 
of the musk-ox.—Lockwood’s observations.—Complete conif- 
erous trees.—Butterflies and bees—A flower of unknown 
species—An Esquimaux encampment.—The temperature 
rises considerably.—Greely’s general results —Hunting 
plentiful —Esquimaux remains.—Where did these Esqui- 
maux go?—Whale and other animals and their winter quar- 
ters. —Why do herbivorous bears go north?—The Ross 
gull.—Greely tells of his discoveries—The farther north 
the warmer.—His observations on the tidal flows.—Open 
water and warmer near the polar orifice..........---+--- 


CHAPTER VII. 
NoRDENSKIOLD’S VOYAGES 


Adolf Erik Nordenskiold spends twenty-one years of his life as 
an Arctic exolorer. —-His observations of bird and insect life 


em 


A) JOURNEY: TO*THE EARTH s*INTERIOR 


in the far north— Animal! observations confirmed in voyage 
after voyage.—Explorers unnecessarily afraid of the ice he 
says.—Esquimaux go naked—Warm weather comes with 
winds irom nortin*:: aoeeee eo ee ee ee ee 15‘ 


CHAPTER VIII 


Witu NANSEN IN [THE NorTH 


Scientific world ridicules Nansen when he announces his plans. 
—How the wreckage of the Jeannette had drifted through 
the Arctic regions—Greely does not think that Nansen can 
succeed.—But Nansen is successful in his first voyage-—He 
observes mosquitos in Greenland.—His success suggests plan 
for exploring region around pole.—He notices that with wind 
from north comes warmth.—Meeting a walrus.—The sun 
is unexpectedly seen——May it not have been a reflection of 
the interior sun?—Nansen says Arctic ice is not the result 
of excessive cold weather.—Sounding the polar sea —Num- 
erous Arctic birds—Nansen finds it impossible to locate his 
position—He admits that he is lost—Foggy weather and 
inaccuracy of maps.—Nansen finds that ice is of fresh water. 
—He finds that both his latitude and longitude are impossi- 
ble of determination—His observations puzzle him pro- 
foundly.—Conclusive proof that Arctic exploration is large- 
ly a matter of guess work.—Where did this fox come from? 
—Nansen can hardly sleep for the heat-—The whole mat- 
ter of location is a riddle to him, says Nansen—Even when 
he reaches land Nansen cannot identify it—Location is in- 
comprehensible, he says——It must be a land hitherto un- 
known, he thinks.—Payer’s map does not help him.—What 


CHAPTER IX 


Was THE NortH Pore DIscoveRep ? 


Our theory and the alleged discovery of the poles——Cook 
made first claim.—Peary’s rivalry—Admiral Melville says 
Cook’s proofs are crazy.—Dr. Tittman of the Coast Survey 
prepares the way for our theory.—Swedish academy fails to 
endorse Cook.—Cook himself admits that he did not actually 
reach any point that could be called the pole—Peary’s 
proofs just as indefinite as Cook’s—Peary was not substan- 
tiated by any witnesses.—Hon. J. Martin Miller quoted.— 
Peary figures of his rate of travel are self-contradictory— 


[ 10 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


Miller thinks question insoluble—But suppose there were no 
pole to be discovered.—Quotations from Peary’s own book 
show him to be inaccurate.—Statement of Matthew Hen- 
son.—Congress is placed in a dilemma.—Investigation a year 
after clamor had died down brings in verdict that Peary 
did not prove claims.—Summing up of the lessons of this 
controversy.—A note following the news of Peary’s death. .190 


CHAPTER XxX: 


Two CoNGRESSIONAL OPINIONS ‘ON PEARY AND Cook 
Hon H. T. Helgesen of North Dakota tells why Peary could 


not have discovered pole——AlIl his other claims to Arctic 
discoveries have been proved false—Peary’s own self-contra- 
dictions.—His “‘discoveries” eliminated from official maps.— 


Peary and his missing ‘“‘data.”—Dr. Tittman’s adverse testi- 

mony.—Hon. §. D. Fess of Ohio on Cook’s claims.—He de- 

PUD SINGS: Calm eine OT tg lars ge a a 211 
CHAPTER -XI:. 


THE MammMotH 


From where does this animal come?—J. W. Buel quoted.— 
Remains of tropical animals.—A tremendous elephant in a 
state of perfect preservation—Another writer describes the 
same find and corroborates the story — Whole islands of sand 
and elephant remains.—George W. Melville quoted.—Nor- 
denskiold’s views——A puzzle to the geologist.—In the New 
Siberian Islands—Edwin S. Grew tells of similar discover- 
ies—The carcass of the fresh mammal.—Cannot be a “pri- 
meval” monster.—Must come from a warm climate.—Sup- 
pose they were a million years old—Contradictions in that 
view.—Other similar discoveries.—Another description.— 
Freezing was instantaneous.—The interior of the earth the 
habitat of the Mammoth—The Mastodon.—The Mam- 
moth banquet.—A description of the fresh meat.—D’An- 
nunzio tastes it and entertains his friends with it......... 220 


CHAPTER XII. 


Tue Lire oF JHE ARCTIC 


A general view of Arctic animal life—No new observations 
but phenomena as old as the memory of man.—Immense 


shoals of fish—Where do they winter—The seal——The 
se 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR | 


reindeer—Musk-oxen.—Swans, geese and other fowls.— 
Even the Eskimos did not know where they bred.—Drift- 
wood and seeds of plants.—More about reindeer.— Millions 
of birds——The only place where certain birds could migrate. 
—For instance, there is the sand-piper—The “Arctic High- 
landers.” —Animal life more abundant in the Arctic than 
in the tropics.——A veritable paradise... ca... 0). cose wal « 247 


CHAP ETER TAI: 


OTHER INTERESTING ANIMALS OF JHE INTERIOR 


Robert S. Cook’s observations.—An unknown animal, the arcla. 
—Curious remains in the Antarctic—The Mylodon.—An 
Eskimec tradition wap, i ate a es Wea eee Re eee 265 


CHAPLER XIV? 


: THE AURORA 


What the Aurora looks like.—Is it continuous or spasmodic ?— 
Greely quoted.—Nansen also describes it.——Our explana- 
tion.—Not caused by electricity.—Clouds in the interior.— 
Payer’s observations.—Greely says magnet is not disturbed 
by Aurora.—Further evidence on that point.—Professor 
Bruce on the Aurora in Venus.—Other evidence that the 
Aurora is due to the interior sun.—Its light continuous dur- 
ing Arctic night—The nearer the vole the better the au- 
roral display.—The sun’s corona and the Aurora seem sim- 
ilar.—E earlier scientists have seen similiaritv between auroral 
and sun light.—Ditference of behavior between Aurora light 
and electric: light? oc. Uehtale nee oes eens ene ree a te Ze 


CHAPTER XV 
THE Eskimo 


From where did-the Eskimo come?—Nansen quoted.— 
Nearer to the Chinese than te any other race.—Their origin 
is a puzzle.—Scientific ignorance on the subject.—The Es- 
kimo must have come from the north.—Their means of 
transport.—But they found poorer hunting when they got 
too far south.—Early Norwegian ideas on the Eskimo.— 
An early Norwegian legend about a visit to the interior of 
the earth.—These Norse ideas are very significant.—T races 
of their tools found at sea.—Fresh immigration from the 
north.— Dr. Nicholas Senn’s observations of the Eskimo and 


[12] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


Chinese type—Eskimo ideas as to their origin and home.— 
Their faith that the stock of their ancestors still survives 


CAV GIS SAG EY CE Oe gy Se ee ee a 292 


CHAPTER XVI. 


EVIDENCE IN THE ANTARCTIC 


Not so voluminous as that from the Arctic but very conclusive. 
—A gap in scientific knowledge.—A possible lost Antarctic 
~ continent.—Shifting the location of the Garden of Eden.— 
A common birthplace of many widely distributed animal spe- 
cies.—The interior of the earth fulfills this description.— 
An Antarctic mystery that only our theory will solve— 
Where did these human beings come from ?—A race in the 
SOME em PTs Se. AN eG SUS Bask ed 648k we be SS es 


CHAPTER XVII 


THE JOURNEY TO THE EarTH’s INTERIOR 


Suppose we were to set off on an expedition, what should we 
see ?—QOur start—Getting into warmer water.—Landing in 
the interior.—Some vegetation that is new to us.—A spongy 
and peaty soil.—Fernlike and parasitic plants.—Insect and 
animal life—How the Mammoth is trapped.—Are there 
people in this country.—No changes of light or season.— The 
interior sun and radium.—The geologist will find iron ore. 
—Animals, birds and insects—The Irish elk.—Mineral 
wealth.—-Pmerging at thevother end... 2.022.262. ee nee’ 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


THE FORMATION OF THE EARTH 


How scientists disagree on this subject.—The old liquid-inter- 
ior idea-—What causes volcanoes ?—-What would happen if 
the earth had a liquid interior—Volcanoes are surface man- 
ifestations—An ocean 7900 miles in every direction, includ- 
ing depth.—The earth does not weigh enough to be solid.— 
Actual observations contradict idea that earth is solid as well 
as idea that it is liquid—Was the earth ever molten ?—Dr. 
N. Herz on the alleged solidity of the. earth.—Let us leave 
theories and see what the facts are.-—Sir G. H. Darwin's 
observations and exveriments.—The earth trembles like the 
surface of a soap bubble.—Its crust is constantly in vibra- 
tion.—Earthquakes are not so important from standpoint of 
adding to our knowledge as is this ceaseless trembling.—A 


[13] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


confession of scientific bankruptcy.—The earth does not get 
hotter the farther one penetrates; that is true only up to a 
certain point near the surtace.....eacme ee ne ee 341 


CHAPTER XIX. 


How Our THEeEoryY Dirrers From THAT oF SYMMES 


Symmes’ theory is unlike ours in both method of proving and 
result of argument.—He believes in concentric spheres; we 
do not.—He has his own theory about gravity—He thinks 
the outer sun is hollow.—He postulates five hollow. spheres 
as forming the earth.—His idea of polar openings is an alto- 
gether different one from ours.—Our theory has, therefore, 
nothing in common with his.—His idea of double-shelled 
spheres inhabited on inner as well as outer surfaces.— 
Symmes’ theory cannot be taken seriously—Symmes would 
explain polar caps of planets and planetary rings by re- 
fraction.—But this idea will not hold water—Symmes on 
sun-spots.—A synopsis of our own theory showing how ut- 
terly different:it is fron that of Symmes... ..5-->-4. 8 358 


CHART ERaX xk: 


THE Moon 


The moon was not hurled off from the revolving earth—The 
“capture” theory.—Scientists admit that the moon is hollow. 
—The moon’s weight in relation to that of earth shows that 
both are: hollow: .......1o<<tod amie sa eeaeretee serene antes sean 373 


CHAPTER -XXT. 


A Note on GRAVITATION 


Gravitation and centrifugal force——The gravitational pull in 
thie vintenloriitiG . akklc saioh ek eRe is eae eee eee 377 


CHAPTER XXII: 


How Our THeEory Has BEEN RECEIVED 


What we expected when the first draft of our theory was pub- 
lished.—But we met with a much better reception than is 
usually given such a revolutionary idea—Professors in Eu- 
ropean universities proved much more open-minded than in 
our own universities—A letter from His Majesty, the King 
of Sweden.—The King and Queen of Italy express their 
gratification.—F rom a celebrated Swedish scholar.—He ad- 


[14] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR. 


mits the originality of our theory—But an American sci- 
entist tries to ridicule our theory without any basis in argu- 
ment.—He misrepresents it and we challenge him to prove 
his point—Dr. Arthur Conan Doyle writes us in regard to 
our theory and the alleged discovery of the poles.—His let- 
ter ought to carry weight with American scientists.—Profes- 
sors Moulton of Chicago and Barrell of Yale on our theory. 
—Contrast with their half-heartedness or open opposition the 
tone of a letter from a famous Russian geologist —German 
scientist recommends us to Austrian explorer but war pre- 
vents expedition.—Practical men take kindly to our theory. 
—Mr. H. M. Chance quoted.—A scientist who tried to 
confute us and his signal defeat—What many private indi- 
viduals have to say.—A question as to the Central Sun.— 
Chicago woman greets our theory as one that will solve 
many puzzles.—A prominent Canadian physician on our the- 
ory.—A librarian who totally misunderstands our theory and 
confuses it with that of Symmes.—The “Scientific Ameri- 
can” compares us to Jules Verne-——A Chicago Daily News 
reviewer is either ignorant or attempting to be facetious.— 
The San Antonio Express admits that we have discredited 
the orthodox school-day teachings of astronomy.—A note 
on comparisons with Jules Verne; he dealt in fancies, we 
deal in facts—A great religious leader endorses our theor.. 
—Western woman student cf cosmogony thinks we are cn 


AME ee rn ay I a 4Le ote Fis Grew Niegssdie 380 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


Our Controversy WitH DOoMINIAN 


Dominian’s main objections to our argument.—‘“Cause for Red 
Snow.” — A continental mass. — The Pittsburgh Leader 
thinks it has disposed of us.—But it prints our reply to Do- 
minian.—The Constitution of the Earth—he argument 
from the mammoth.—The Red Snow.—Mr. Dominian as- 
traddle of a floating log—A few points Mr. Dominian for- 
got to mention.—We never heard from him again........ 424 


CHAPTER XXIV 


Our CouNTRY AND Our THEORY 


A world of inconceivable riches.—It ought to be discovered by 
the United States—Will America grasp her opportunity ?_- 
But we must not delay.—A benefit to mankind.......... 434 


[15] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAPTERAXXYV. 


In CONCLUSION 


Scientists who dispute our theory should answer some questions. 
—If our theory be not true why has Venus permanent polar 
caps ?’—-How other than on our theory is the Aurora to be 
explained ?>—How do those who deny our theory explain the 
red pollen of the far north?—-What have the orthodox sci- 
entists to say in regard to the Mammoth ?—-How, aside from 
our theory, could those human remains in the Antarctic be 
explained ?—And why cannot the orthodox scientists agree 


aboutsthe Genesis O1- te MOOI! «ae career me eee 442 
ILLUSTRATIONS 

Porteattots the Author... 02 4. eeu eh ee een ae facing 6 
The Earth Showing North Polar Opening.......... facing 24 
A Photographic View of Ring Nebula and Spiral 

INE bythe .ootess uwsoed ice reel se eres ee enna na ee facing 36 
Photograph of a Drawing Showing the Head of 

Doneitis: Comet.as seen ity 1559 etek eee facing 62 
Enlarged: tew ofa Mars ses cea ee ete facing 68 
Photographic Views of Mars, Showing Circular White 

Spot Extended Above the Planet’s Surface..... = «1 fAClig Beat 
Discovery of the Mammoth Incased in Ice.......... facing 222 
The Central Sun as it Would Appear to an Explorer. .facing 284 
Diagram Showing the Earth as a Hollow Sphere. “a facing 322 
The Earth Bisected Showing Central Sun.......... facing 326 
A Sectional View of the Earth’s Interior........... facing 34¢ 
The Earth Bisected Showing Concentric Spheres Ac- 

cording-to Symmiesie b heoryerr areca ae facing 364 


[ 16 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


PREFACE 


HE MAN whose acquaintance with cos- 

mongy and physiography is confined to what 

he learned in school, and, perhaps, afterward 
read in popular publications, has certain very defi- 
nite notions about the shape of the earth and the con- 
struction of its interior. These notions, he thinks, 
are based upon the proven discoveries, or the im- 
pregnable theories of the scientists, and so he accepts 
them in blind faith. But the scientists themselves 
do not rest under the impression that they have 
solved every mystery that is buried in the bowels of 
the earth. While they hold to a general theory about 
the shape and constitution of the earth, that it is a 
rigid solid—a theory which is now beginning to 
supersede the older theory that it was a shell with a 
liquid interior—they admit that there are many 
questions raised by recent observations of facts that 
cannot be explained by their present theory. 

To the scientist then, and also to the layman whose 
interest and encouragement may do much for scien- 
tific advancement, when he sees in what direction 
it is tending and what results it may have, are the 
following pages addressed. In them will be found 
a recital of certain well known and fuly authenti- 
cated facts of geography, exploration, and astrono- 


[17] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


my which have not been satisfactorily explained by 
any of the theories of the shape and constitution 0! 
the earth so far held. Then, on the basis of thes« 
facts, a new theory is presented which I claim doe: 
explain them; does make them fit in with the accept 
ed results of scientific investigation, and which doe: 
not conflict with any other relative facts in the world 
but unites them all in an intelligible manner. 


WANTED—A FAIR HEARING 


In any such attempt as this two tendancies have 
to be overcome before an author can secure a fai 
hearing. ‘The first is the conservatism of scientist 
who do not care to revise their theories—and espe 
cially when that revision is made necessary by 
discoveries which are made independently of th 
great universities. I think, however, that the array 
of confirmatory evidence which I have brought t 
bear upon my position will be sufficient to counter 
act this conservatism and induce scientists to give m’ 
theory a respectful hearing and full discussion. Th 
second adverse tendency which must be overcome i 
the erroneous notion of the general public that | 
scientific theory or hypothesis is, in reality, a fina 
truth that must not be denied. The layman imagine 
that the scientists have some mysterious means o 
discovering the actual truth, and that once dis 
covered it is final. In this matter of the compositio: 
and shape of the earth, for instance, he thinks tha 


[ 18 ] 


ma JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the scientists actually know that the earth is a ball 
of a certain density and composition. Only a short 
time ago, however, the scientists thought that the 
earth was a solid shell with a liquid interior —and 
any layman would have sworn this was true just be- 
cause the scientists imagined it. Now the real fact 
of the matter is—and any scientist will admit it—that 
a scientific theory, such as either of the two just men- 
tioned, does not represent an ultimate truth. It is 
simply an essay of the imagination to weld certain 
facts, which are not apparently related, into some 
sort of connection. For instance, we have the facts 
of gravitation, electricity and light, all acting thru 
great spaces—and all having what are apparently 
common properties. To explain their action the scien- 
tists build up theories of wave motion through the 
ether. Now the layman accepts the luminiferous 
ether as a finality. But the scientist might discover 
some fact tomorrow which could not be explained 
on that assumption of a universal ether, and so he 
would have to construct a new theory more compre- 
hensive than his former one, and which would make 
room for the new fact. I do not imply that such a 
theory is either likely or possible, but I simply give 
this as a convenient example of the same thing which 
I have done in the domain of cosmogony. And my 
point is, that a theory is good so long as it gives us 
such a view of the mattér as will enable us to dis- 
cover new facts, but good for that purpose only. 


eee 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 
AN ADVANCE ON COPERNICUS 


The copernican system of astronomy was a step 
in advance of the Ptolemaic system just because i! 
enabled scientists to discover many new facts 
about the solar system which the error of the 
old view had hidden from their gaze. My own 
theory adds to the valuable results gained by 
the Copernican system, not by subverting it—fo1 
I imagine that no sane person would now try to dc 
that—but by accepting it fully, and adding to it ¢ 
different theory of the evolution of the several plan. 
ets from their nebulz, and from this new theory o' 
evolution deducting certain presumptions about the 
interior of the earth. These presumptions I have 
supported by a wealth of facts discovered by the 
telescopic observations of astronomers of nebule anc 
our sister planets, Mars, Venus and Mercury, anc 
made by explorers of the most fascinating parts o: 
our own planet—the polar regions. 

In conclusion I would ask the reader to rcnenind 
that I do not write as a scientist or claim to be ; 
scientist. I simply claim to have applied the lesson 
of common sense to these problems. I do claim t 
have studied all the material, to have gathered mi 
facts carefully. But there is nothing in my book tha 
the layman cannot understand. It is written by | 
layman for him. It is to his common sense that i 


appeals. The Author. 
Aurora, Illinois. 


[ 20 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


y~ 


CHA GEER | 
INTRODUCTORY 


An author who puts forth a new idea must 
expect to meet with opposition and be ready 
to defend his idea vigorously. He knows that 
the great mass of people is very conservative, especi- 
ally in its habits of thought and that it is inclined to 
take many things—the shape of the earth, for exam- 
ple—as proven once and for all. But he also knows 
that the great reading public even more than the 
specialist in science is open minded and willing to 
give a fair hearing. He will expect some opposi- 
tion and some misunderstanding but he may also ex- 
pect a slow, perhaps, but sure volunteering of sup- 
port. 

A NEW IDEA AND A PLEA FOR ITS 
FAIR HEARING 

The author of the present work has set forth in 
it a theory which is not only new—that in itself 
would not necessarily cause opposition in a world 
which is always hungering for some new thing— 
but it is a theory which involves the denial of a 
number of ideas which are old and widely held and 
often held by people who do not understand their 
bearing. These people will defend them with such 
weapons as ridicule or perhaps misrepresentation. 


[21] 


A JOURNEY TO THE. EARTH’S INTERIOR 


THE TRAINED SCIENTIST AND THE 
AVERAGE READER 
From trained scientists on the other hand the au- 
thor expects to meet with greater prejudice than 
from the public, but he does expect that any criticism 
they may have to make upon this theory will be 
made from a purely scientific standpoint, that his 
idea will not be dismissed simply because he is not 
a professional explorer or astronomer. Unfortunately 
scientists often do this. They have their professional 
freemasonry. If you are not one of them they do 
not want to listen to your theories. 


But to the man in the street the author wishes 
to say this: there is not in the whole course 
of this book a single statement that is not backed 
up by the actual experiments, observations, dis- 
coveries and reports of these same scientists. ‘They 
cannot claim that the theory expounded in this book 
is an unscientific theory, for every bit of it is solidly 
based upon their own findings. Our theory may be 
untrue, but if it 1s, then the findings of Nansen and 
every other Arctic explorer, of Sir Robert Ball, 
Percival Lowell and every other astronomer, are 
wrong. For upon the work done by these men and 
upon no other considerations whatsoever than those 
of pure scientific knowledge are the ideas in this 
book built. 

Let us then address our first words to the average 
reader whose support we wish to gain because pub- 


[ 22 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


lic opinion will move in time even the most conser- 
vative of scientists; because public opinion is the 
court of last resort in every case; because the public 
will demand a fair hearing when the orthodox sci- 
entist would tend to ignore this as in the past they 
have ignored many beneficial discoveries and ideas 
until they were forced to accept them. 

Most members of this public to whom we would 
appeal have very definite notions about the shape 
and constitution of the earth, but unfortunately these 
notions are not as accurate as they are definite, being 
the fruit usually of what was learned in school some 
years ago or of what has been read in popular and 
inaccurate text-books or magazine articles. 


OED ADEAS ABOUT THE CONSTITUTION 
OFTHE BAR EH 

Now as a matter of fact the scientists themselves 
no longer hold the ideas about the constitution of the 
earth that were taught in all text books only a few 
years ago. The notion that the earth is a great ball 
of material which has hardened into a shell or crust 
on the outside but which is full of molten material 
within, getting hotter and hotter as we reach the cen- 
ter—that notion is now no longer generally held. 
And no other theory has quite taken its place. Some 
scientists think that the earth is a rigid solid—we 
shall see later how both schools have explained vol- 
canoes—but others disagree with them, and think 
that while the earth may have a solid center that it 


[ 23 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


does have a liquid hot layer somewhere between its 
center and its surface. But into these rival theories 
we need not go now. We only adduce them to show 
the reader that there is room for another theory; that 
the field is open and explanations of the constitution 
of the earth are really called for—for none of the the- 
ories up to the present have explained all the facts. 

Of course it is very easy for anyone to deny ali the 
facts of science and get up some purely private ex- 
planation of the formation of the earth. The man 
who does that is a crank. Unfortunately the man in 
the street does not always discriminate between a 
crank and a scientist. At one time Orville and Wil- 
bur Wright were called cranks because they admit- 
ted that they were trying to do something new, some- 
thing that had never been done before. Many scien- 
tists said that flying was an impossibility for human 
beings; that they were not meant to fly and never 
would fly. The Wright Brothers did not retort by 
saying that science was wrong, and then do a lot of 
silly and unscientific experiments. Had they done 
that they would have injured themselves. On the 
contrary they opposed their better and more thor- 
ough science to this old-fashioned and reactionary 
science. So we meet the objections which the older 
scientists bring against our theory with better and 
more up to date science. In that way, although we 
deny that the usual idea of the formation of the earth 
is correct we are not in the same class with a number 


[ 24 ] 


The earth as it would appear if viewed from space showing the north 
polar opening to the planet’s interior which is hollow and contains a 
central sun instead of an ocean of liquid lava. 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


of other people who have denied it. There is one 
man who has stated that the earth is an immense hol- 
low sphere and that mankind and the land and oceans 
and even the stars are all on the inside of it. But he 
is a crank for he has simply taken his private notion, 
evolved within his own brain and has made a relig- 
ion of it. We beg the reader that he will not con- 
fuse us with any of that sort of theorizing. If the 
reader says, ‘““You believe in a hollow earth—oh yes, 
that is what Koresh taught,” he is doing us a grave 
injustice, even though it be true that we claim the 
earth to be hollow. 


CRANKY IDEAS ARE NOT IN SAME CLASS 
WITH SCIENTIFIC ONES 

It will also be an injustice to us if the reader con- 
fuse our idea of a hollow earth as presented in this 
book with one or two theories which have been put 
out in the past and which only bear a superficial rela- 
tion to ours. For instance, nearly one hundred years 
ago in America a theory was put forth that the earth 
consisted of a number of concentric spheres one with- 
in the other. Now that could hardly be called a 
scientific theory. It was based on a supposition, and 
the author argued from his supposition down to what 
the facts ought to be. He said in effect, “According 
to my principle there ought to be within the earth a 
series of spheres each one inside the other”. But he 
did not know, and he never went down to see. 


[ 25 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


WHERE OUR EVIDENCE COMES FROM 


We take the opposite course. We begin with the 
facts. We claim that the earth is a hollow body with 
an immense opening at each polar axis—an open- 
ing about fourteen hundred miles in diameter—and 
that there is in the interior of the earth a sun which 
warms it and gives it light. But we do not say this 
in the first place and then say that it follows that 
there is warmth in the polar regions where the scien- 
tist has told us it is cold. On the contrary what we 
do is quote every Arctic explorer from the fishermen 
of a hundred years ago to Franklin, Kane, Nansen 
and Peary, to the effect that there is warmth at the 
polar extremities of the earth. We state that this for- 
mation of a hollow shell around a centrai sun, with 
polar openings, is not alone the formation of the earth 
but of every planetary body throughout the stellar 
universe. Why do we say that? Because we think 
it ought to be? Because we wish to impose our own 
idea on to the facts? No, but because we can see 
those polar openings and occasionally the gleam of 
that central sun as we look at Mars or Venus through 
a telescope. And so it goes. In every assertion we 
make, we first gather up all the available facts, and 
the theory of which we write is not so much a theory 
that we put forth as it is a theory which the facts put 
forth to us when we examined them. We did not 
set.out with our theory full blown. We set out with 
a great desire to understand the facts of astronomy 


[ 26 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


and of the earth’s formation. We had read this and 
that about it and were struck by the uncertainty of 
what we had read. We asked ourselves whether, if 
we knew all the facts, we would still be puzzled, as 
we were, by accounts of warm currents flowing from 
the North Pole and other contradictions of accepted 
science. Having asked ourselves that, we set out to 
ascertain all the facts that had any bearing on the 
case, just as the Wright brothers set out to ascertain 
all the facts that would bear on their problem. And 
it was the facts in the case, the inexorable and unal- 
terable facts, that made our theory for us. 

So we ask any reader, especially any scientific 
reader, who does not believe our theory upon reading 
this book, not merely to make fun of it, not merely to 
deny its possibility, but to produce facts which will 
prove it wrong, and then—supposing he can do that 
which we doubt—to explain all the facts put forth in 
this book, to explain all of them, we say, by the light 
of any other theory. It might be easy enough to ex- 
plain one or two of our facts in some other way. But 
to explain them all is impossible on any other theory 
than ours. 

OUR THEORY IN A NUTSHELL 

That the reader may get our theory in a nutshell, 
that he may comprehend before he undertakes to read 
the whole book how widely we have searched for 
the material of our foundation we shall briefly re- 
capitulate here the main outlines of our theory. As 


[27 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


already stated we hold that the earth is neither solid 
nor fluid inside but that it is a hollow shell of a 
thickness which, provisionally, we should estimate 
to be 800 miles, with an opening at each polar extre- 
mity of approximately fourteen hundred miles 
across. ‘The interior sun which warms this inner 
earth may possibly be 600 miles in diameter, al- 
though we have of course no means of actually mea- 
suring it as yet. Why do we postulate such a sun? 
The answer is the key to our whole theory. As the 
reader may know, the orthodox astronomer explains 
the evolution of this earth by saying that the earth, the 
other planets which revolve around its sun and that 
sun itself were all once intermingled gas in a white- 
hot or incandescent condition, whirling around at an 
enormous rate. As this mass whirled it gradually be- 
came a vast spiral owing to the play of centrifugal 
forces pushing it away from its center or nucleus and 
gravitational forces holding it within the influence of 
that center. This went on, according to the scien- 
tists, until the gas arranged itself in a series of con- 
centric rings around that center. Then each ring 
broke and formed into a sphere which gradually 
cooled off until it liquefied and then solidified on the 
outside, forming a planet while the central nucleus 
became a sun. ‘This is known as the nebular hypo- 
thesis of the evolution of the solar system. But for 
many reasons, which will be taken up in detail later, 
our observations lead us to put forth a different the- 


[ 28 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


ory. Briefly our theory is that the original nebula 
did not break up into a solar system but condensed 
into one planet. From observations of nebule which 
are at this moment in various stages of their evolu- 
tion we are forced to the conclusion that the rotating 
mass of gas, breaking off from its central nucleus 
forms an envelope of a roughly spherical shape 
which afterwards solidifies, leaving the central nu- 
cleus still in the center to form an inner sun. Why 
there should be the two polar openings will: be ex- 
plained in the chapter in which the foregoing asser- 
tions are proven. 


OBSERVING THE PLANETS 

The next step in the proof of our theory is to scan 
the planets to see if indeed they do have this forma- 
tion, and as Mars is the most easily observed of them 
we look at that first. Mars does have two polar 
openings—although up to the present time they have 
most often been called ice or snow caps. But when 
we find the scientists themselves quarreling over that 
appelation and some of them proving that the polar 
caps of Mars cannot be of ice or snow at all, we be- 
gin to think that perhaps our theory is the correct 
one. But we do not have to rest satisfied with think- 
ing so. When the late Professor Lowell, the astron- 
omer who spent much of his life studying Mars— 
when this great authority states that he has seen 
gleams of light coming out through the so-called 
polar cap of Mars, then we know that it cannot be 


[29] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


an ice-cap and that those gleams must be from the 
interior sun of Mars. 

And if further proof be needed—and our policy 
is to overlook no scrap of available proof—we have 
‘only to observe Venus and Mercury to have our pre- 
vious observations confirmed in the case of those 
planets also. 


OBSERVING CONDITIONS ON THE EARTH 


Bearing those very significant facts in mind we 
next come down to our own earth. If our facts are to 
be the same for every planet we shall find the same 
conditions here as there, on earth as on Mars. That 
actual solid poles have never been discovered in the 
earth’s Arctic and Antarctic regions we shall prove 
in another chapter. Here we shall briefly summar- 
ize our evidence. It is to the effect that as explorers 
go north of about 80 degrees north latitude, they find 
that the water instead of becoming colder in the same 
ratio in which it had been getting colder as they left 
the temperate zone, gradually begins to get warm 
again, and they find that this warmth is brought down 
from the so-called frozen north in a warm current 
flowing from the polar regions. Furthermore they 
find that birds and animals migrate to the north to 
feed and breed instead of to the south. In fact when 
they.get into really high latitudes, explorers find a 
greater wealth of animal and vegetable life than they 
do in the lower latitudes of the arctic and sub-arctic 


[ 30 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


regions. And as they are sailing to these northern 
regions they find, scattered on the icebergs and gla- 
ciers, the red pollen of plants that grow—where? 
Only in the interior of the earth. And they find logs 
and other debris of the land washed down in those 
warm currents just spoken of. But this is not all. In 
our chapter on the mammoth and mastodon we shall 
adduce evidence to show that the mammoth still 
lives in the interior—in fact we shall exhibit case 
after case where the mammoth has floated out from 
the interior incased in glaciers and bergs and has 
been frozen in crevasses in the interior near the polar 
openings, and then carried over the lip by glacial 
movements into Siberia. 

Other evidence we shall give in abundance but we 
shall not summarize it here because we imagine that 
the reader is already bristling with objections to what 
we have already said, and we wish to answer such of 
these as can be answered in advance of our main ar- 
gument. If we mistake not the reader is more willing 
to accept our evidence drawn from the nebule and 
Mars than he is to accept that drawn from the earth. 
For the first two regions are but little known to him, 
as he has never possessed the high-power telescopes 
that are necessary to explore the nebule and the pla- 
nets; but he has read the newspapers and maga- 
zines and “knows” that Peary—or Cook—dis- 
covered the Pole (to say nothing of Antarctic explor- 


ations). 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


PEARY AND THE POLAR ORIFICE 


Why, says the reader, did Peary not discover that 
immense orifice at the polar extremity of the earth 11 
it was therer 

The reason is very simple and can best be explainec 
by asking another question. 

Why did not man discover by looking arounc 
him, that he was living on the surface of what is 
practically speaking, an immense sphere (to be exac 
spheroid)? And why did man for centuries think 
that the earth was flat? Simply because the sphere 
was so large that he could not see its curvature bu 
thought it was a flat surface, and that he should bs 
able to move all over the surface of it appeared s¢ 
natural that, when scientists first told him it was < 
sphere he began to wonder why he did not fall off, o1 
at least, if he lived in the northern hemisphere, he 
wondered why the Australians did not fall ofi—fo: 
he had no conception of the law of gravity. 

Now, in the case of the polar explorers the same 
thing is true. ‘They sail up to the outer edge of the 
immense polar opening, but that opening is so vast— 
remember that the crust of the earth over which i 
curves is eight hundred miles thick—that the down 
ward curvature of its edge is not perceptible to them 
and its diameter is so great—say 1400 miles—that it 
other side is not visible to them. So that if an ex 
plorer went far enough he could sail right over tha 
edge, down over the seas of the inner world and ou 


[ 32 ] 


\ 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


through the Antarctic orifice, and all that would 
show him what he had done, would be that as soon as 
he got inside he would see a smaller sun than he was 
accustomed to—only to him it might look larger ow- 
ing to its closeness—and he would not be able to take 
any observations by the stars because there would be 
neither stars nor even a night in which to see them. 

So let the reader have no misgivings that any rash 
explorer will “fall into” this aperture. 

But, says the reader, would not the force of grav- 
ity pull the explorer who got inside the orifice away 
from the surface into the central sun; for does not 
gravity pull everything to the center of the earth? 


GRAVITATION AND OUR THEORY 


The answer to this is, that in gravitational pull it 
is not the geometrical position that counts. Center, 
in the geometrical sense of the word, does not apply. 
It is the mass that attracts. And if the great mass of 
the earth is in its thick shell, it is the mass of that shell 
that will attract, and not a mere geometrical point 
which is not in the shell at all, but 2900 miles away 
from it, as that is the approximate distance be- 
tween the central sun and the inner surface of the 
earth. Asa matter of fact it is the equal distribution 
of the force of gravity all through the shell that keeps 
the sun suspended in the spot which is equidistant 
from every part of that shell. When we are on the 
outside of the shell it is the mass of the shell that at- 


[ 33 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


tracts us to its surface. When we go over to the in- 
side of the shell that same force will still keep our 
feet solidly planted on the inner side. 


FACTS. NOW GATHERED FOR THE FIRST TIME 

These, we think, are the chief objections which 
people are likely to raise when they first learn of our 
theory, and it will be noted that they are based on 
misconceptions of the theory. For this reason we 
urge every reader to follow all our argument if he 
wishes to understand it. He will find that the facts 
which we adduce in support of it, are in themselves 
very interesting. We have nowhere indulged in too 
technical language, and all the authorities we have 
quoted are trained, reliable scientists whose word 
may be taken, whose word, in fact, is always backed 
by actual discovery and experiment. As a result the 
reader will not only learn the true formation of the 
earth and be able to follow with interest and under- 
standing the explorations which will before long un- 
doubtedly be made by airship, but he will learn some 
of the fascinating truths of astronomy and will have 
a picture before him of actual conditions in the Arc- 
tic regions. In fact, apart from the new theory here 
explained for the first time, we know of no other book 
which brings to the non-scientific reader so many 
facts which are not to be obtained elsewhere in book 
form. For, unfortunately, the text-books never keep 
up with the new discoveries. Books printed some 


[ 34 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


years ago in which the earth is represented as a mass 
of molten lava contained in a thin crust, are still cir- 
culating when scientists have given up that concep- 
tion. Such facts as we have gathered about the mam- 
moth and other animals are also not yet incorporated 
into the books that the average man reads. To every 
reader then, we can promise not only our theory but a 
large range of the most interesting facts about the 
world he dwells in and the worlds that circle around 
in the heavens that he gazes upon in wonder and 
speculation. And we ask of the reader a patient read- 
ing without prejudice, and that he follow it by 
thought and speech—to the end that, if he be con- 
vinced by our reasoning, he may pass on the word 
and help to find an audience for this new idea that 
sufficient interest may be aroused to turn the idea 
speedily into an ascertained fact by the simple pro- 
cess of exploring the polar land we have depicted, 
and putting our theory to the test. 


THE FINAL TEST 


That it will stand this test; that the interior of the 
earth will be opened up to our exploration and traf- 
fic and observation as we have in this book opened it 
up to thought, is our confident belief. 


[35 ] 


A JOURNEY TO: THE EAR CHS INTERIOR 


CHEAP TERS: 


THE NEBULA AND ITS EVOLUTION 


Probably the most important concept in the whole 
realm of astronomy is that of the nebula; for it was 
only when the idea of the nebula as the original ma- 
terial of planetary evolution was advanced, that as- 
tronomy could be put upon a really scientific basis. 
Until the actual genesis of solar systems and planets 
could be accounted for in some measure, astronomy 
was merely descriptive. The credit for stating the 
nebular hypothesis goes to Kant and Laplace, who, 
however, based their speculations upon the law of 
gravity only. Since that day the nebular hypothesis 
has undergone many modifications, as actual observa- 
tion of the heavens through telescopes and later 
through photographic means, to say nothing of our 
general knowledge of physics, has progressed. 

HOW CELESTIAL BODIES ARE DERIVED 
FROM NEBULAE 

The latest modification of the theory of how other 
celestial bodies are derived from nebule is the one 
proposed in this book. That the reader may under- 
stand both the original theory and the chain of logic 
and observation by which this new theory grows out 
of it, we shall briefly summarize the older ideas, giv- 
ing the scientific authorities for them, and showing 


[ 36] 


‘yourjd Mou 
B OUT FTAs} aAjoAs Aypeuy [PA yorysA ‘uns 
jetjuao pue Suruado aejod ayy Ssutmoys ‘193 
-JeW snojNnqeau JO SasseUl WOIf PdA[OAD SBAr 
BIAT UL R[NQGeu [[aYs MOT]OY IO Burt ayy, 


‘ejnqau Suir ev yo uoNonpoidas surdued 
-W0I9R 9} UI UMOYS A]IBa]D SB ‘ApOg [BAJUdD SITY} PUNOoIe 
JBM IO Sulit ev swAOf YOTYM J9}eU SNO[NqauU Fo sasseuL 
sunoaford snajonu [eajua0 3y} SurMoys elnqeu |eirds vy 


ZIOL ‘€ Adenuerl *A1oyeALasqO saxJoX We padvis0y 


AJOJWAIISAO AT I poydessoy 


S 
ASS 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


how these authorities have gradually worked to a 
point, without knowing it, of course, where our the- ° 
ory and ours alone, fits all their facts and draws them 
together in a consistent explanation of what is actu- 
ally happening in the heavens as the stars form and 
go through their immensely long life-cycles. 


THE MILKY WAY AND ANDROMEDA 

But the reader will first wish to get a very general 
idea of the field we are to discuss in this chapter. 
Probably to most people the word nebula conveys an 
idea almost as hazy as the Milky Way to the naked 
eye. In fact many people think that the Milky Way 
is a nebula and let it go at that. Others think that 
nebule are merely clusters of very distant stars—such 
as we do see in the Milky Way. But as a matter of 
fact there is only one nebula in the whole sky that can 
be seen without the aid of a telescope, and that is 
the so-called “Great Nebula in Andromeda’. Of 
this nebula, George F. Chambers, in his little book, 
“The Story of the Stars,” says: 

“There is one elliptic nebula which stands out be- 
yond all the rest, yet its great size, brilliancy, and 
peculiar features forbid its being regarded as a typi- 
cal elliptic nebula. I am here alluding to the ‘Great 
Nebula in Andromeda,’ Messier’s 31st. Its elliptic- 
ity is considerable; it is likewise very long, and has 
a bright central condensation which renders it readily 
discoverable by the naked eye on a clear night.” 

Of course, with the naked eye we cannot see any 


[ 37 ] 


A‘ JOURNEY TO THE FARTH’s INFERIOR 


details, but with the telescope this nebula is found to 
have a well defined structure, and all other nebule 
are found to have certain structural characteristics in 
common, the nearer ones giving every evidence, as 
we shall see later on, that they are not clusters of stars 
at all—that idea having been absolutely exploded. 


ARE NEBULAE STELLAR OR GASEOUS? 

We need to accentuate that last point because it 1s 
still overlooked in many of the more popular books. 
Thus in Mr. Chamber’s book just referred to, the 
author begins his chapter on nebule by saying that 
“many or most are probaby stellar in their constitu- 
tion, though some of them, however, may be not such 
but gaseous.” As a matter of fact a few of the early 
discoveries of glowing masses in the sky were thought 
to be nebule but later research has shown them to be 
extremely distant star-clusters, so far away that only 
the highest power telescopes would resolve them, 
some so far away that we cannot resolve them at all 
into their constituent stars. Then how, asks the 
reader, can you tell that all nebulze are not stars? 


THE SPECTROSCOPE SUPPLIES THE ANSWER 

The answer is, by the spectroscope. Later on in 
this chapter we shall see astronomers referring to 
this instrument and its discoveries more than once—in 
fact on it depends our whole theory in a way, for if 
the nebule were really stars our theory would fall to 
the ground. So a word here may not be amiss. 


[ 38 J 


AVJOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


The spectroscope is simply a prism with a sort of 
small telescope at one side of it, through which is led, 
by suitable means, the light from any object from a 


candle flame to a star. At the other side is a barrel 


containing other lenses which act more as a micro- 
scope and magnify and define the ray of light which 
has been led into the prism. Now a ray of white light 
is split up by the prism into the seven colors of the 
rainbow, and the light of a candle flame is split up in- 
to its constituents. Also when any chemical substance 
is burned and the incandescence from its burning is 
analysed in this way, we can read by the colors of the 
broken up light just what elements are present in the 
chemical substance. In this way we can identify the 
elements in the sun and in other burning or incandes- 
cent heavenly bodies. And the light from bodies like 
the stars gives one sort of “spectrum,” as the colored 
band of broken light in the prism is named. And the 
light from nebule gives an altogether different sort 
of effect, due to the presence of luminous gasses. 
Thus the spectroscope has proven absolutely that the 
neubla is not made up of stars. 


SIMON NEWCOMB ON LAPLACE’S THEORY 
As Simon Newcomb summarizes the matter in his 
“Popular Astronomy,” Laplace observed that the 
planets moved around the sun—of our solar system— 
in the same direction in which the sun rotates on its 
axis, and in the same plane. Laplace explained this 


[ 39 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


uniformity of motion by assuming that once the at- 
mosphere of the sun had occupied all the space now 
occupied by the planets of the solar system. From 
mechanical laws he knew that the sum total of rotary 
motion must at all times be the same in the same sys- 
tem. In the beginning, therefore, he assumed, the 
sun with its immense fiery atmosphere had a slow ro- 
tation upon its axis. The mass, being extremely hot, 
would cool off and as it did so would contract toward 
the center. But as it contracted its velocity of rota- 
tion would increase—that is a fundamental law of 
physics—so that at a certain time the mass would be 
whirling so rapidly that the centrifugal force due to 
the rotation—the force, that is, that causes a weight 
whirled at the end of a string to fly away when one 
releases the string —would counterbalance the at- 
tractive force of the central mass. ‘Then those outer 
portions would be left as a ring, rotating around the 
center, while the inner portions would continue to 
contract until in their turn their velocity caused them 
to stay on a circular course of their own, forming 
an inner ring. In this way a succession of rings 
would be formed, revolving around the common 
center in the same direction. 

Soon, however, these rings would begin to cool off, 
and as their denser materials would cool sooner than 
the others and begin to condense; then the denser 
parts would attract the less dense parts, by gravita- 
tion, and at last we should have a single solid mass 


[ 40 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


surrounded by vapor, revolving around the sun at the 
same distance and in the same plane in which the 
ring had revolved from which it was derived. La- 
place thus accounted for the evolution of a whole 
solar system from a nebula, and in the same way he 
accounted for the formation of the satellites that sur- 
round the planets in some cases as the planets sur- 
round the sun. In the case of the planet Saturn, he 
observed that the gas of the rings was so uniform in 
density that none of it had cooled in advance of the 
rest, and so the ring has remained as we see it today 
through our telescopes. 


PROFESSOR MOULTON CRITICIZES LAPLACE 

But there were weak places in Laplace’s hypothe- 
sis. If we turn to Professor Forest Ray Moulton’s 
“An Introduction to Astronomy””’, page 454, we shall 
find these objections summarized. ‘The author, in col- 
laboration with Chamberlin in 1900, studied the pro- 
blem from actual observations tested by the princi- 
ples of dynamics, and found a number of phenomena 
that contradicted the hypothesis. We need not enter 
into all of these, but one or two of them are very im: 
portant from our standpoint. For instance, if a ring 
were formed as Laplace supposed, “it woud be so 
widely extended that the mutual gravitation of its 
parts would be very feeble, and according to the ki- 
netic theory of gases’—which describes how their 
particles repel one another and states the laws govern- 


at) 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


ing that repulsion—‘“the lighter elements would es- 
cape. But the lightest known element, hydrogen, is 
abundant on the earth, though it is now in chemical 
combination with other elements”. It is also very 
doubtful, according to Moulton, whether the rings 
would condense into masses in the way Laplace as- 
sumes. And Moulton further thinks that the theory 
is rendered quite untenable by the fact that the 
amount of rotation which the whole nebula originally 
had, and which in its present evolved form it still 
ought to have (according to the law of the conser- 
vation of energy) is only one two-hundredth of what 
it ought to be. So Mouton dismisses the Laplacean 
hypothesis and then goes on to discuss its successor, 
Chamberlin’s Planetesimal hypothesis or Spiral hy- 
pothesis, in which it is assumed that the solar system 
is evolved from a spiral nebula. 


TELESCOPIC OBSERVATION OF NEBULAE 


But before going into that, let us see what the ne- 
bule are actually like when studied by telescope and 
telescopic photograph. Let us see what a spiral ne- 
bula is and what other forms beside the spiral they 
take. One of the best general descriptions of the 
various forms of nebule will be found in “Curiosi- 
ties of the Sky” by Garrett P. Serviss, chapter VI. 
In 1899, Garrett tells us, Professor Keeler discov- 
ered, by photographing them, that the majority of 
nebule were not only glowing masses of gaseous mat- 


[ 42 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


ter, but had definite forms. They were, for the most 
part, spiral with a central nucleus, and while there 
are other forms of nebula, the “ring” and the “plan- 
etary,” it is a question, says Serviss, whether every 
nebula has not at least a tendency to be spiral. But 
at least, Serviss says the ring and planetary ne- 
bul serve, insofar as they exist at all, to support La- 
place’s theory, while the spiral nebule apparently 
play into the hands of Professor Chamberlin and his 
planetesimal hypothesis. 


DO THE NEBULAE POINT TO A NEW THEORY? 


If now we approach the nebula with more detailed 
examination, can we see anything common to all 
forms of nebula, something which might lead to a 
theory which is neither that of Laplace nor of Cham- 
berlin. ‘To answer this question let us turn to a very 
detailed description of the nebula, that of the great 
English astronomer, Sir Robert Ball, given in his 
wonderfully illustrated volume, “A Popular Guide 
to the Heavens”. Here is his description, accom- 
panied by a plate, of “The Spiral Nebula in Canes 
menatici’’: 


THE SPIRAL NEBULA IN CANES VENATICI 
“This, the most famous of the Spiral Nebula, had 
its true character first recognized by Lord Rosse 
with his great reflector at Parsonstown in’ Ireland. 
We are so happily situated with respect to it that we 
get a fair view of it, and can trace in considerable de- 


[ 43 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


tail how its branches are interlaced and studded with 
condensations which look as if they are on the way to 
become stars. Recent photographic work has shown 
that a large proportion of the nebule, both known 
and hitherto unknown, are spirals, and this form 
must now be considered almost the rule instead of 
the exception”. 

Our only observation here would be that the con- 
densed portions are certainly not destined to become 
stars or planets but that they are destined to become 
central suns of planets. 


THE GREAT NEBULA IN ORION 


Of “The Great Nebula in Orion” Professor Ball 
Says: 

‘““,. And in this, as in many nebule, we find black 
holes with edges surprisingly sharp which are very 
hard to explain, except upon the highly speculative 
assumption that they represent dark material struc- 
tures of some kind interposed between us and the 
shining nebula.” 

The observation there, is a most interesting one. Its 
explanation may be rendered unnecessary by our own 
further consideration of the matter. 


THE RING NEBULA IN LYRA 


But here is Professor Ball’s most interestig des- 
cription, that of “The Ring Nebula in Lyra”: 

“The central star which is so conspicuous in the 
photograph, is barely visible in the largest telescopes. 


re 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


It is much brighter photographically than visibly, 
probably because its light is composed chiefly of 
those rays of short wave length to which the plate is 
sensitive but the eye nearly insensitive. 

“The photograph shows quite plainly that the ring 
is not uniformly bright; there are even some indica- 
tions that it is composed of several inter-lacing or 
overlapping rings, and it is remarkable how the ring 
thins out at the ends of its longest diameter. With 
longer exposures the center of the ring fills up, and 
the nebula becomes a disc. It follows that the ring- 
like appearance is in a sense deceptive; that the real 
shape of the nebula is something like a hollow shell 
of gas. Of which the border looks brighter, perhaps, 
because one is then looking through a greater depth 
of the shining matter; but this is at best a conjecture.” 


THE DUMB-BELL NEBULA 


Professor Ball also describes the nebula which was 
discovered to be whirling around the star Nova Per- 
sei in 1901 in which the existence of the nebula was 
unnoticed until it was illuminated by a burst of light 
from the star. But perhaps the most remarkable 
photograph of a nebula in his book is that of “The 
Dumb-Bell Nebula,” in which the spherical charac- 
ter of the nebula with the two large and not well 
formed openings at the two ends of a diameter— 
that is at opposing poles—are plainly seen. And 
Professor Ball himself recognises the kinship of this 


[45 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


nebula with that of “The Ring in Lyra” described 
previously, for he says: 

“Tt is a striking illustration of the power of pho- 
tography in depicting nebulz, that it has brought out 
a distinct resemblance between the Dumb-Bell in 
Vulpecula and the Ring in Lyra which could hardly 
have been suspected from the visual appearance of 
these objects. If we imagine the nebulosity, which 
exists inside the ring, to shine a little more brightly, 
so that it fills up the Ring, and at the same time im- 
agine the tendency towards thinning out at the ends 
of the longest diameter to be a little more pro- 
nounced, we shall see how easily the ring might be 
transformed into the Dumb-Bell. Both are gaseous 
and both have a central star. It is difficult to resist 
the conclusion that the two nebulz are closely related 
in kind.” 

THE EVIDENT EVOLUTION OF NEBULAE 

What does that mean but that the nebule are evol- 
ving toward a certain form? Toward a form that is 
roughly suggested by the last described nebula with 
its spherical skin broken at two opposite poles and 
its central star, or, why not call it its central sun? 

Sir Robert Ball then gives us a link between an 
annular and what may be called a planetary nebula. 
Fortunately we are able to pursue the subject a 
little further. Writing in the Scientific American 
Supplement, Vol. XXXIV, page 13909, Miss A. M. 
Clerke tells about the advances in observing plane- 


[ 46 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


tary nebule made possible through photography. By 

photography the lines in the nebular spectrum can be. 
examined and the central nuclei are seen to be masses 
of luminous gas, on its progress toward condensation. 
It will have been noticed that some of the investiga- 
tors quoted, refer to these nuclei as stars. If 
they had really been stars seen through the haze of the 
nebula itself, then good-bye to our theory. But here 
Professor Moulton may be quoted in corroboration: 


“All the nebule except the spirals have bright- 
line spectra instead of dark-line spectra like those of 
the sun and stars. This shows, in accordance with 
the principle of spectrum analysis, that the nebulas 
are masses of incandescent gas rather than luminous 
solids or liquids shining through cooler gases. Be- 
fore these results were obtained by the spectroscope 
it was supposed that perhaps the nebule were other 
galaxies of stars so far away that their individual 
members were not separately visible. ‘The spectro- 
scope, however, proves they are gaseous and this con- 
clusion is in harmony with other considerations re- 
garding the evolution of suns.” —Descriptive Astron- 
omy. 

But to return to Miss Clerke. She, too, refers to 
the nebula in Lyra whose description by Ball we have 
quoted. When it was photographed by a French 
astronomer, M. Trepied, it was found that the differ- 
ence between its type and that of the planetary nebu- 


Kee 


A JOURNEY -TO°THE EARTHS INTERIOR 


le was more apparent to the eye than real by the test 
of the camera. And in fact, she goes on: 

“The distinction between annular and planetary 
nebulz has been to a great extent abolished by the use 
of improved optical appliances. Each kind seems to 
be made up of three essential parts: a faintly shining 
disc—or globe projected into a disc—a ring-like con- 
densation near its outer margin, and a central nucleus 
presenting the appearance of a star. The last fea- 
ture is often seen only with extreme difficulty, but 
there is reason to believe that it always exists. Mr. 
Burnham, who has measured a large number of these 
objects with the 36-inch Lick, for the purpose of pro- 
viding a standard of comparison for the determina- 
tion of their possible future movements, goes so far 
as to suggest that the presence of a central star should 
be regarded as the criterion of classification for pla- 
netary nebule.” 


BURNHAM IN CENTRAL NUCLEI 

Miss Clerke then quotes Burnham to the effect that 
he considers these central nuclei to be true stars, that 
is to say, stars already formed irrespective of the 
gasses that surround them; and she goes on to show, 
through photographic data that they are not true 
stars at all. She gives Professor Holden’s descrip- 
tion of the nebula in Aquarius which was a pale blue 
with a white nucleus and with “interior arrange- 
ments” which were “evidently extremely intricate.” 
She goes on: 


[ 48 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


“A strikingly similar object is situated in the con- 
stellation Andromeda. Imperfectly seen at first as 
a uniform, greenish blue disc, an interior vacuity 
detected at Parsonstown betrayed its true nature to 
be rather annular than simply planetary. Nor is the 
ting it includes by any means symetrically shaped. 
Lassell considered it to be bi-annular. Professor Vo- 
gel was impressed with the: warped and twisted as- 
pect of what may conceivably prove to be a multi- 
ple combination of rings thrown off in various planes. 
Closely wound spiral branches, and a central star 
were observed with the Ross reflector, 


DR. SCHEINER’S PHOTOGRAPHS 


“The photographic study of these two nebule 
lately set on foot by Dr. Scheiner at Potsdam, may be 
expected to add much and rapidly to our knowledge 
of their nature and conformation. ‘The images ob- 
tained of them, although only half a millemetre in 
diameter, show a considerable amount of detail. They 
confirm the annular shape attributed to them on the 
warrant of telescopic observations, and bring out, 
with singular strength the central nuclei which the 
best telescopes have not always availed to display. 
In the photographs these are, nevertheless, the bright- 
est parts of each conformation. Yet they are mere 
irregular condensations with no pretentions to a stel- 
lar nature. The superiority of their actinic power 
repeats the phenomenon first brought into notice by 


R421 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


photographs of the Lyra nebula, and seems to point 
to a general law. Dr. Scheiner thinks it can only be 
accounted for by supposing a predominant quantity 
of some peculiar gas emitting, in the main a highly 
refrangible light, to be collected in the central re- 
gions of planetary nebulae, yet the resulting nuclei, 
when they can be seen at all, shine with a white light, 
bear a star-like aspect, and probably give continuous 
spectra. The problem of their real constitution is 
thus far from easy to solve: But whatever the secret 
of their photographic effectiveness, it is already tol- 
erably evident that they play a part of fundamental 
importance in primary seats of the forces by which 
these ee ae objects are moulded into Sue eoiee 
istic shapes. . 


A PROPHETIC SENTENCE 


There is something prophetic about the last sen- 
tence quoted. Coming as it does after the remarks 
upon the light emitting powers of the nuclei—a sug- 
gestion, it will be noticed, that they may be small 
suns, certainly lurks in those remarks about the action 
of the nucleus 'on the camera plate—coming after 
those remarks, that last sentence, although its author 
does not seem to recognize it, plainly hints at the 
planetary and annular nebulz as systems in which a 
central sun not only illuminates but controls (the 
“primary seats of the forces,” etc.) the outer rings 
or discs—that is, holds them by gravity. 


[50] 


A JOURNEY TO THE ‘EARTH’S INTERIOR 
CONCERNING PLANETARY NEBULAE 


But before pursuing this further we may as well 
obtain more evidence—for there is plenty of it. Miss 
Clerke, in an article in the Scientific American Sup- 
plement, Vol. LVIII, page 24122, remarks that in 
all planetary nebule the nuclear star “appears to act 
as the pivot of the surrounding vaporous structure.” 
But she admits that “the question, however, is still 
open as to the real nature of the connection between 
the planetaries and their central star.” She mentions 
a theory that the central star is “fed” by the outer 
nebula, but she admits that there are not enough 
facts to back it up. She discusses the centripetal 
tendency which would cause the central star in every 
case gradually to attract and incorporate the larger 
outside shell, but she reminds us that repulsive forces 
are active in such systems as well as concentrative 
ones, and she admits that as far as orthodox astrono- 
my is concerned the riddles of nebula formation are 
not solved. *, 

EARLY OBSERVATIONS OF NEBULAE 


It is interesting to note that the central star, al- 
though its observation has been made much more 
detailed by photographic methods, was clearly seen 
by the earliest investigators. According to Professor 
C. A. Chant,'writing in the Scientific American Sup- 
plement, Vol. LXXV, page 88, Simon Marius made 
the first of such observations in 1612, two years after 
Galileo ‘had invented the: telescope.’ Marius’ des- 


[51] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


cription of the nebular nucleus is very suggestive; 
he compares it to “the flame of a candle seen through 
a transparent horn.” Many years later Hershel ob- 
serving this same nebula—it is the Great Nebula in 
the Constellation of Andromeda—notices that the 
central point “though very much brighter than the 
rest, is decidedly not a star.” 


NUMBER OF NEBULA IN THE VISIBLE 
HEAVENS 

Russell Sullivan, writing in the Scientific Amert- 
can Supplement, Vol. LXXIX, page 287, on the 
planetary nebule, remarks that their number is very 
small compared with the spirals, the known ones be- 
ing counted by the score, while it has been calculated 
that there are over 500,000 nebulz in the heavens as 
we know them. He notes that there is “often” a cen- 
tral star or haze,—really always, as we have seen— 
so that the nebula is not, as Herschell had supposed, 
a mere hollow sphere. It is, however, hollow, often 
presenting an elliptical appearance. 


THE SHELL-LIKE STRUCTURE AND 
THE CENTRAL STAR 
That the typical nebula has a remarkable shell- 
like structure and a central star—which together 
form the basis of the evolution of every planet ac- 
cording to our theory—is well brought out in a re- 
markable series of observations described by Dr. 
Heber D. Curtis of the Astronomical Society of the 


[ 52] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


Pacific, briefly reported in the Scientific American 
of October 14, 1916. The report follows: 

“Fifty of these nebule have been studied photo- 
praphically with the Crosly reflector, using different 
lengths of exposure in order to bring out the struct- 
ural details of the bright central portions as well as 
of the fainter, outlying parts. Most planetary nebu- 
le show a more or less regular ring or shell structure 
generally with a central star.” 

A paper by Messrs. Campbel and More presented 
at the same meeting gave the results of a search made 
with a spectrograph and the Lick 36-inch telescope 
for rotation effects in 33 planetary nebule. Definite 
evidence of rotation was found in 16 and suspected 
in five others. 

CONDENSATION AND ROTATION 

There it will be seen are evidences of all the phe- 
nomena which we claim are associated with the be- 
ginnings of planets, a separation of the nebulous mass 
into a central star or sun and an outer envelope whose 
inner walls are probably repelled in some degree at 
least by the light from the central star—as light has 
been proved to exert a small but definite pressure— 
and the rotation of the whole affair which causes it 
to take the form which later condenses into the plan- 
ets as we know them. It may also be noted here 
that in planetary nebule a greenish color is always 
noticeable showing that condensation has preceded 
further than the purely incandescent stage. 


[53] 


A JOURNEY TO:,THE; EARTH’S INTERIOR 


_ But the orthodox astronomer pays less attention to 
the shell-like nebule than -he does to the spiral, and 
as we have seen, Chamberlin would derive the evo- 
lution of our solar system from a spiral nebula. Pro- 
fessor T. J. J. See writes about this in the Scientific 
American Supplement, Vol. LXIII, page 26,008. 
He points out that we have no proof as yet that ‘the 
nebule do form stars or systems of stars. (Our sun 
is a star; the earth is not.) He says that speculation 
on the spiral nebula has gone wild and that it is time 
to call a halt. 

“There is not the slightest probability that our 
solar system was ever part of a spiral nebula, and 
such a suggestion is simply misleading and mis- 
chievous. The great circularity of the planetary 
orbits shows the absurdity of such a hypothesis, and 
this leading characteristic of our system as bearing 
on its mode of origin was carefully considered by 
Leplace more than a century ago. 

“At present we must frankly admit that the nature 
of the spiral nebule is quite unknown. And while 
we cannot be sure that nebule develop into stars we 
may justly hold that the stars are outgrowths of grav- 
itational condensation of matter which was once 
dark? 

In other words, whatever spiral nebule developed 
into, according to See they do not develop into stars 
or suns. We doubt, he says, “whether the forms of 
the nebule can be expected to disclose the processes 
of stellar evolution.” 


[ 54] 


A JOURNEY TO ‘THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


_ But there is certainly evolution going on in them, 
If it be not the evolution of suns or stars, may it not 
be the evolution of planets? 


SERVISS ON LAPLACE 


But if the reader wishes more detailed criticism 
of the idea so opposed by See, let him turn to Garrett 
P. Serviss’ “Curiosities of the Sky”. Mr. Serviss 
points out that it is much easier to criticize Laplace’s 
theory of nebular evolution than it is to replace it. 
He pictures the great whirling nebula observed by 
Lord Rosse with its striking “appearance of violent 
whirling motion,” and its apparent tearing up by cen- 
trifugal force—which is apparent only, as further ob- 
servation shows that the masses apart from the center 
are not being hurled off but have definite orbits. 
There is there, says Serviss, no confirmation of the 
Laplacean hypothesis, but, he asks, ‘““What hypothe- 
sis will fit the facts?” 


OUR ANSWER TO THIS CHALLENGE 


Let us endeavor to answer him. 

The foregoing observations may have seemed to 
the reader who is unacquainted with astronomy to 
be tedious and to lead nowhither. But they have been 
necessary and we will now proceed to draw the 
threads together. What have we really discovered? 
We have discovered, in the first place that there are 
large gaseous bodies in the sky with glowing nuclei 
and shell-like or spiral outer boundaries, and that in 


[55] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


some way planets come from these. But neither La- 
place’s theory or Chamberlin’s theory of how this 
evolution comes about fits the facts. We have read 
admissions from more than one astronomer that the 
facts they observe cannot be fitted into any coherent 
theory of planetary evolution. We have adduced 
abundant evidence from the best sources that any 
one force, centrifugal or otherwise, cannot account 
for what we see. 


WHAT WE ACTUALLY SEE GOING ON 


Now what is it that we actually do see? In the 
first place a very large number of spiral nebule; in 
the second place a much smaller number of nebule 
which look either annular or pianetary shaped to the 
eye, but which Sir Robert Ball tells us, in the quota- 
tion given before, are related and tend to have a shell- 
like circumference and always have a central nucleus 
which is not a star. We remember also the quotation 
from the Scientific American in which Dr. Heber 
Curtis told the Astronomical Society of the Pacific 
that recent observations of planetary nebule showed 
them to have a shell-like structure and a central nu- 
cleus. Now there is no way of telling by looking at 
these nebule which are the oldest, the spirals or the 
shells. To tell that, we have to make an inference, 
but it is a very obvious one. Evolution is always 
from the relatively unorganized and chaotic to the 
relatively organized and orderly. Obviously, if there 


[56] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


is any evolution at all, it must be from the wildly 
whirling, chaotic spiral nebule to the shell form 
with its relatively stable exterior and its nucleus 
within. In other words the spiral nebula is the first 
stage; the shell-like nebula is the second. What is 
the third? 


MOULTON AND CHAMBERLIN’S THEORIES 


The usual answer is: a solar system. But Moul- 
ton has shown the impossibility of this in his criticism 
of the Laplacean theory. The reader will remember 
that, among other things, he argued that all the 
lighter elements such as hydrogen would fly off first 
and be present only in the outer planets of the so- 
evolved solar system, while we know that that has 
not been the case in our own—there is hydrogen on 
earth and even in the sun. And Chamberlin’s theory 
on the other hand can only successfully deal with the 
spiral nebule; it ignores the evolution of the spiral 
into a shell-like nebula; to say nothing of the fact 
that Serviss in the book already referred to in this 
chapter, criticised that theory in a number of details. 
The Laplacean theory, he says, is infinitely simpler, 
“and with proper modifications could probably be 
made more consonant with existing facts in our solar 
system than that which is offered to replace it. Even 
as an explanation of the spiral nebula, not as solar 
systems in process of formation, but as the birth- 
places of stellar clusters, the Planetesimal Hypothe- 


[57] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


sis would be open to many objections. Granting its 
assumptions, it has undoubtedly a strong mathemati- 
cal framework, but the trouble is not with the mathe- 
matics but with the assumptions...... 


WHY NOW A PLANET? 


But supposing the final stage in the evolution of 
a nebula is not a sun or a solar system but a single 
planet? We should then be able to explain the evo- 
lution of the nebula satisfactorily but we should have 
to revise our notion of the structure of the typical 
planet. But that is precisely what we are willing 
to do, because we have all sorts of evidence, in vary- 
ing fields, that the actual structure of the earth, 
Mars, and Venus,—and hence, we may assume of 
every planet throughout the stellar universe, is just 
what we should expect from the period of their 
evolution that is open to our discovery in the obser- 
vation of the nebula. 


QUR: THEORY OFTHE EVOLUTION OF 
THE NEBULA 


In short, we hold that the shell-like structure so 
well described by Sir Robert Ball, grows more and 
more definite as the nebula cools, until it solidifies. 
We hold that the central sun which holds it by gra- 
vitational contraction in its spherical circumference 
also cools and contracts but keeps its relative posi- 
tion. And we further hold that the black apertures 
which Ball also describes (and pictures) as char- 


[58 ] 


A: JOURNEY TO.:\THE: EARTH’S: INTERIOR 


acterizing the Dumb-bell Nebula are typical of the 
two openings which are always left when the nebula 
cools into a planet. Owing to: the. fact that the 
planets are not spherical but are oblate. spheroids, 
that is to say having their greatest circumference at 
the equator, and owing, too, to such force-factors as _ 
the varying centrifugal force due to the unequal 
sphericity of the orb and the oscillation of the outer 
envelope around its axis, the two polar openings 
which are so distinctly shown in the Dumb-bell 
nebula are gradually formed. 


REFERRING TO THE DUMB-BELL NEBULA 


If the reader refer to any book on astronomy— 
preferably Ball’s—which contains a picture of this 
nebula he will readily see how this occurs. ‘The 
nebula is so called because the two larger polar 
openings form two scooped-out spaces in what would 
otherwise be a spherical, or more exactly spheroidal 
body. Imagine an apple with two very large bites 
taken out of opposite sides, the center of each bite 
being one end of a diameter, and you have a very 
clear representation of this particular nebula. But 
why, the reader may ask, should this particular shap- 
ing take place rather than any other. Why should 
this whirling motion and differentiation of parts end 
in the formation of planets with two polar openings, 
one at each terminus of the axis of rotation? ‘The 
answer is simple. We know that the earth is not a 


[oP] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


spherical body but an oblate spheroid, that is to say 
it is a body whose equatorial diameter is greater than 
its polar diameter; in other words, the polar axis is 
shorter—the poles are flattened. This is the case 
in all planets we can observe with the telescope. 
That it would naturally be the case follows from the 
nature of the centrifugal force. If a spindle is 
revolved very rapidly, and water thrown upon it, 
the water is hurled away again, in a direction away 
from the spindle, at right angles to its axis of rota- 
tion. INow, in the case of the nebula that became the 
earth—or we can substitute the case of any other pla- 
net—we have the force of gravity holding the whole 
envelope of the nebula in a clustered mass around 
the central nucleus; we have the centrifugal force 
throwing it off in an envelope and always tending 
to throw off the outer portions of it away from its 
axis of rotation and more toward the equator than 
toward the poles—for that is the direction in which 
the centrifugal force acts—so that the equatorial dia- 
meter would be established as soon as the centrifu- 
gal force and the gravitational force balanced, and 
the attraction of the greater mass of the envelope 
for the very thin part of the envelope at the poles 
would cause the opening gradually to define itself. 
As soon as the very thin vapor at the actual poles 
was attracted a little toward the equator it would 
come within the play of the centrifugal force and 
would then also be pushed out a little so that the 


[ 60 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


lips of the polar opening would gradually be defined, 
as indeed, in the Dumb-bell nebula we see them 
gradually getting defined. Then, as the mass lique- 
fied and ultimately hardened, the inner sun would 
also have shrunk, and the light that once shone 
through the outer envelope would now be illumina- 
ting its inner side and only escaping through the 
polar openings. And from that point the evolution 
of the surface of the planet goes on in the way that 
has so often been described, with constant upheavels 
at first, with the separation of land and water after 
the planet has cooled to the point where water can 
form, and who can doubt that some similar sort of 
evolution has gone on in the inside and hidden por- 
tion of the planet? 


DETAILED PROOFS WILL FOLLOW 


The reader who is astonished at the idea of such 
an evolution as this must remember that in the suc- 
ceeding pages we shall give detailed proofs from 
the observations of such near planets as Mars, Mer- 
cury and Venus, and from explorations of the earth 
itself to support this theory. But before consider- 
ing the planets let us here consider another body 
met with in the heavens—the comet. 


THE COMET EXPLAINED 


Our theory explains the comet, and the comet 
agrees with the other celestial bodies in illustrating 
our theory. A comet is a body, coming from outer 


[61] 


W JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


space across our skies, with a relatively small solid 
or fused head, and with an enormous gaseous tail 
streaming behind. Whether some travel in orbits 
which are not closed curves—and so will never bring 
them back to our sky—or whether they do have ex- 
tremely eccentric but closed orbits is a mooted ques- 
tion. Many of them, however, do return, but it is 
known that when the comet approaches the head 
contracts and a nucleus is clearly seen, a nucleus 
which alone is solid or fused while all the rest of the 
comet is gaseous. 


The mystery of the comet lies in its tail. Serviss 
quotes Herschell as declaring that a profound secret 
lay there. But if we suppose that the nucleus of a 
comet is the same as the nucleus of a planet, does it 
not follow that the tail of exceedingly imponderable 
and scattered matter is the remains of what had once 
been an outer shell. In other words a comet is a 
planet which has died. Either through coming into 
the orbit of some immensely greater planet or into 
that of a sun, it has been torn from its own orbit, 
brought into an area of contending forces, possibly 
even has collided with another planet, had its outer 
shell broken up and sublimated by the great heat 
into the most tenuous sort of a gas which trails after 
the nucleus which was once central but which now 
heads the strange celestial procession of matter that 
we calla comet. | | 


[62] 


A PHOTOGRAPHIC REPRODUCTION OF A DRAWING SHOWING THE HEAD OF 
DONATI’s COMET AS SEEN IN 1853 


Nothing could more strikingly support our theory than the above illus- 
tration. It is taken from a drawing of Donati’s Comet, as seen from 
Cambridge Observatory on October Ist, 1853. The central nucleus is very 
plainly seen, surrounded by a sphere of glowing gases, and enclosed by an 
outer envelope. The comet is passing through an area of conflicting forces, 
and this, and perhaps the excessive heat of the body has caused the great 
split which extends through the envelope to the central sun itself. A 
comet is simply a planet which is disintegrating, and this photograph 
shows us the disintegration taking place, and just far enough advanced 
so that we can see the inner structure of the planet. And that structure 
is precisely what our theory says is the actual structure of all planets, 
our earth included. As the reader continues in this book let him bear this 
picture in mind, and he will be more and more struck by the happy man- 
ner in which the theory is verified by the structure here shown. And 
let him remember that this picture was not made up to support our theory, 
for it was made many years before our theory was promulgated. 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


MOULTON ON COMETS ; 

How closely this view fits may be seen from Moul- 
ton’s “Descriptive Astronomy” in which he tells us 
that while the head with its “small bright nucleus” 
measures from ten thousand to a million miles and 
the tail may stream away 100,000,000 miles, the 
actual nucleus itself only measures a few hundred 
miles in diameter, varying “in an irregular fashion”. 
But that is precisely what we should expect if the 
nucleus had once been an interior sun, for a few 
hundred miles or to the most a few thousand would 
be just the dimensions which we should expect the 
interior suns to have—varying, of course, with the 
size of the planets. And-here is still more remark- 
able testimony. Hector MacPherson tells us in his 
book, “The Romance of Modern Astronomy” that 
the great comet of 1811, with a tail stretching for a 
hundred million miles behind and fifteen million 
miles in breadth, had a nucleus that according to 
measurements by Hehschell was only 428 miles in 
diameter. The comet of Donati, detected from a Flor- 
ence observatory in 1858, had a nucleus which “shone 
with a brilliance equal to that of the Polar Star” and 
which was 630 miles in diameter. MacPherson also 
tells us how comets tend to break up into showers of 
meteors. They are “not lasting” bodies but “even in 
the short period of man’s life comets have been seen 
to break up and disappear”. Surely that fact coupled 
with the size of the average nucleus shows us that.a 


[ 63 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


comet is in very truth the last state of a planet after 
it had been broken up, and before its last vestige— 
the central sun—in its turn is broken into fragments. 


CELLULAR STRUCTURE THRUOUT THE 
UNIVERSE 

It is perhaps aside from our main argument, but 
the likeness between the cellular structure of the 
living body, the cellular structure of the atom, which 
is now thought to be a highly complex thing, and 
the supposed cellular structure of the heavenly bodies 
has not hitherto been pointed out. But only if our 
theory be true are the heavens really filled with 
cellular bodies. If our theory be true, the planet is 
seen to be a body very like the protoplasmic sell of 
the living animal or plant, which has its outer enve- 
lope and its central nucleus. And we must remember 
too, that the atom, as modern science views it, is a 
system of tiny particles which form a sort of envelope 
around a pivotal point. At all events the analogy is 
a striking one although we do not wish to push it too 
far or to deduce anything from it. After all, there 
is so much direct evidence from every angle to sup- 
port this theory that we can afford to leave severely 
alone all mere reasoning from analogy and fantastic 
comparison. | 


[ 64 J 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAPTERS: 
MARS 


If the theory as outlined were correct it ought 
to be possible to make it more and more probable 
and at last prove it without a shadow of a doubt by 
making closer and closer observations. We have 
made it sound plausible by examining celestial bod- 
ies which are very far off—the nebule. Let us now 
proceed to make it sound much more reasonable— 
perhaps we may even be able to prove it absolutely 
by applying it to the observation of a body that is 
much nearer us—and therefore susceptible of much 
closer obesrvation—than the nebula, and that is the 
planet Mars. When we bring the telescope to bear 
on Mars, the planet, especially its polar regions, 
is brought so near that Percival Lowell has even 
remarked that we know more of the Martian polar 
regions than we have hitherto known about our own 
earthly ones. We shall observe Mars in detail then, 
following our observations with a brief glance at 
Venus so that we may check up on what Mars shows 
us. Then we shall take the final step that proves our 
theory up to the hilt. 

FROM MARS TO EARTH 
For there is a planet that we may inspect with 


even greater detail than we can inspect Mars—and 


[ 65 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


that is our own. With the knowledge gained from 
inspecting Mars we can read the answers to certain 
riddles of Polar exploration that have hitherto baf- 
fled both the scientists and the explorers who found 
the scientists’ theories inadequate to guide them 
when they actually reached polar regions. We shall 
then have traversed the solar universe from the far- 
thest nebula to the very ground under our own feet. 
If in that survey we find no facts that contradict our 
theory but numbers of facts which contradict every 
other theory; if those facts all line up and fit into 
our theory and ours alone; we shall rest satisfied that 
we have actually discovered the true structure of the 
bodies which revolve in space. And, knowing the 
structure of our earth truly for the first time, it is but 
a step to utilize our knowledge in ways undreamed 
of hitherto—but that is to anticipate. 


A GENERAL SURVEY OF MARS 


Let us first attain a general idea of the planet Mars 
as it is revealed to us by the telescope and explained 
by the orthodox astronomers. For this Moulton is 
as good a guide as anyone. In his “Introduction to 
Astronomy” he gives all the necessary elementary 
knowledge of the planet. Its orbit is the next beyond 
that of the earth—the sun being the center, while the 
orbit of Venus is nearest to the earth on the inner side. 
Its mass and volume are considerably less than the 
earth—and it is this relative closeness to the earth in 


[ 66 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


position that has made Mars so favorite a location 
for those people who speculate on the possibility of 
life on other planets. For they argue that conditions 
on Mars should be very similar to conditions on the 
earth. Mars has two small satellites, much smaller 
and nearer than our moon, and the period of the 
rotation of the planet is about thirty-eight minutes 
longer than our own day of twenty-four hours. An- 
other similarity with the earth is that the inclination 
of the plane of the equator to the orbit of Mars is 
about 24 degrees, so that its days and seasons would 
be very much like those of the earth. 


THE ATMOSPHERE OF MARS 


Fortunately for the astronomer who wishes to 
observe its surface Mars has very little atmosphere. 
The amount of atmosphere is calculated by noticing 
—through the aid of proper apparatus and calcula- 
tions—the amount of light received by the planet 
and the amount reflected from it. The ratio between 
those two is called the albedo. Clouds reflect more 
light than earth surfaces do—for the light is absorbed 
by the atmosphere in part before it reaches the sur- 
face and the light reflected from the surface is again 
subject to tribute by atmospheric absorption before 
it gets clear from the planet—and so the small 
amount of light reflected from the surface of Mars 
shows us that it has but little atmosphere. Other 
observations support this—the fact, for instance, that 


[ 67 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


when a star is hidden or “occulted” by Mars there 
is no gradual hiding due to a rare and then denser 
atmosphere intervening as the paths of Mars and the 
star cross, but a sudden blotting out of the star. We 
lay stress on this point here, for it is in apparent 
contradiction to the phenomena of the light from the 
polar caps of Mars—which the older astronomers 
thought were ice caps reflecting light through what 
must have been an atmosphere as the light certainly 
rose above the surface of the planet. 


THE CIRCULAR POLAR CAPS 


In appearance Mars is a reddish planet to the 
naked eye, but the telescope reveals a surface of 
variegated color. There are many dark patches in 
the surface and they are fixed—but at each pole is 
a large circular white cap which at its apparent max- 
imum extends from 25 to 35 degrees from the pole 
and which diminishes in size in the spring season 
until it sometimes disappears totally. But the reader 
should not jump to the conclusion that that diminish- 
ing in spring indicates that the cap is composed of 
snow orice. The astronomers themselves have begun 
to doubt that. For the cap does not diminish gra- 
dually as it would if it were gradually melting ice. 
It does it by sudden jumps—but we shall return to 
that in detail later on. 


Moulton notes these facts, remarks that some of 
the appearances of the caps are such as to indicate 


[ 68 ] 


View of Mars, showing the circular white spot which is an entrance 
to this planet’s interior, instead of the so-called polar ice cap, thus prov- 
ing that Mars, the earth, and al! other planetary bodies are hollow and 
contain a central sun. (Photographed by F. A. A. Talbott, Beighton, 
England.) For optical reasons all astronomical photographs are inverted. 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


that they might be snow, but he immediately adds 
that we cannot account for the warm climate that 
would be necessary to cause the melting of the caps 
if they really were of snow. 


THE CANALS 


The next thing we notice on the surface of the 
planet is the so-called system of canals. These were 
first seen in 1877 by Schiaparelli who called them 
by the Italian word “canali” which meant not canals 
but channels. As they are from twenty to sixty miles 
wide it is obvious that the later English designation 
of canals is a little unfortunate, even though Pro- 
fessor Lowell thinks that they are artificial construc- 
tions. These channels extend along the arcs ot 
immense circles, and measure in length from a few 
hundred up to four thousand miles. Often they 
intersect in dark so called ‘“‘water-areas” or “lakes”. 
Lowell claims that the junctions of the canals are 
always supplied with lakes and that there are no 
lakes except at the junctions of canals. In 1882 
Schiaparelli discovered that many of the canals were 
double, two running parallel to each other at a dis- 
tance apart of 200 to 400 miles. Later observations 
confirm this although the apparent doubling was 
found to depend on the season. But what the canals 
mean Moulton does not know. They may, he says, 
be due to some kind of vegetation, they may be due 
to optical illusion. “The doctors disagree,” Moulton 


[ 69 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


admits. That the planet’s outside surface is the 
abode of life, as held by Professor Lowell, has been 
questioned on the ground that it would be too cold 
to support life. But Moulton doubts if the planet 
is as cold as the application to its supposed conditions 
of certain mathematical formule would indicate. 
And how uncertain the scientists are on this point 
may be seen from the fact that some of them have 
thought the polar caps are of snow while others have 
thought they consisted of frozen carbon dioxide gas 
which only solidifies at 109 degrees Farenheit. 
NO ADVANCE IN KNOWLEDGE OF THE 
PLANET 

In his “Descriptive Astronomy” written six years 
later than the book we have just been referring to, 
in 1912, Moulton has no advance to record in know- 
ledge of the planet. Again he points out that the 
small amount of water on the planet would render 
the polar ice cap theory untenable. And if there 
were water, he adds, it is not at all certain that it 
would be raised in clouds, transferred from one 
region to another, and precipitated as snow. Mars 
only receives from the sun less than half the amount 
of light and heat that the earth does, and so its tem- 
perature is much less than that at which snow would 
alternately form and melt, and to the suggestion that 
it is frozen carbon-dioxide that forms the polar cap, 
Mr. Moulton opposed the fact that carbon-dioxide 
in an atmosphere, by its absorptive power, tends to 


[ 70 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


produce a high mean temperature, and so would 
prevent any such phenomenon as the freezing of a 
gas at the poles. And so Moulton concludes: 


“At the present time we are not justified in draw- 
ing any positive conclusion about the meaning of the 
polar cap or the climatic condition of Mars.” 


SOME NEW FACTS 


Such is the general impression of Mars and our 
knowledge about it that is gained from elementary 
text-books and that was once held by all astronomers. 
But there are some curious facts that do not seem to 
have been noted by Moulton before he wrote these 
two books—or if noted they did not seem to him ‘to 
be important—and these facts are at once very im- 
portant and easily explained in the light of the pre- 
sent theory. Let us, therefore, see what those writers 
have to say who deal more in detail with this one 
planet. 

E. Walter Maunder, F. R.-A. S., in his little book, 
‘Are the Planets Inhabited?” goes into some details 
regarding the presence of water on the planet. He 
puts the question whether the so-called canals are 
artificial or natural formations. If they are artificial 
it would certainly seem as if some intelligent inhabi- 
tants had made them for a purpose, and as they wax 
and wane with the seasons it would seem as if Lowell 
were right when he claimed that what we saw when 
they waxed in the spring was the mass of vegetation 


C2 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


growing by means of their irrigation, while the dry- 
ing up of the vegetation in the winter would signal- 
ize the fact that the water supply had given out On 
the other hand if we found them to be not artificially _ 
created canals at all, then Lowell’s theory of the 
utilization of water from the poles would be invalid- . 
ated, and we would be left just where Moulton’s two 
books left us—in sheer ignorance of the whole matter. 

But Mr. Maunder has a lot to urge against Pro- 
fessor Lowell’s theory. Mars, he tells us, is much 
more like the moon in its conditions than it is like 
the earth. After studying in detail the temperature 
of Mars, Mr. Maunder concludes: 

“The size of Mars taught us that we have in it 
a planet with an atmosphere of but one half the 
density of that prevailing on the top of our highest 
mountain; the distance of Mars from the sun showed 
us that it may have a mean temperature close to that 
of freezing mercury. What chance would there be 
for life on a world the average condition of which 
would correspond to that of a terrestrial mountain 
top, ten miles high and in the heart of the polar 
regions? But Mars, in the telescope, does not look 
like a cold planet. As we look at it and note its 
bright color, the small extent of the white caps pre- 
sumed to be snow, and the high latitudes in which 
the dark markings—presumed to be water or vege- 
tation—are seen, it seems difficult to suppose that the 
mean temperature is lower than that of the earth. 


[ 72] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


In the summer, the white polar caps of Mars 
diminish to a far greater extent than the snow and 
ice caps of the Earth; indeed, one of the Martian 
_ caps has been known to disappear completely. 


GREAT EXTREMES OF TEMPERATURE 


The contradiction between this calculated very low 
mean temperature and the observations he has just 
made, Mr. Maunder finds in the fact that the 
extremes of temperature are very great on Mars. 
The maximum temperature of the planet, he thinks, 
is above the freezing point of water, but normally 
the water on the planet is frozen: “Mars is essentially 
a frozen planet; and the extremes of cold experi- 
enced there, not only every year but every night, 
far transcend the bitterest extremes of our own polar 
regions.” 

For that reason, he says, it is very unlikely that 
there is any vegetation on Mars, except possibly some 
of the very lowest type. But here is a very interest- 
ing point regarding the patches that have been 
thought to be water: 

“Some of the so-called seas may possibly be of the 
_latter class (stretches of vegetation) but that there 
must be expanses of water on the planet is clear, for 
if there were no water surfaces there would be no 
evaporation; and if there were no evaporation, from 
whence would come the supply of moisture that 
builds up the winter pole cap?’” 


[ 73 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


“But we thought astronomers had given up the idea 
that the polar caps could be proved to be of snow,” 
the reader may exclaim. 


ASTRONOMERS ARE CONFUSED 


Well, the quotation just given shows the confusion 
on the subject in the minds of the orthodox astrono- 
mers. For right after saying that, Mr. Maunder 
quotes Professor Newcomb as remarking: 


“There is no evidence that snow like ours ever 
formed around the poles of Mars. It does not seem 
possible that any considerable fall of such snow could 
take place, nor is there any necessity of supposing 
actual snow or ice to account for the white caps.” 

But Professor Newcomb does not go as far as the 
reader is, perhaps, expecting him to go. For snow he 
only substitutes a hoar-frost formed of extremely 
fine particles of water vapor (how, in such a low 
temperature they came to be vaporized and brought 
to the pole before re-freezing, he does not say.) And 
after quoting that, Mr. Maunder himself says, a 
little later on, that Mars is always a frozen planet, 
frozen except on its mere’surface when this is exposed 
to the full rays of the sun. 

In other words the surface of the planet would be 
more or less uniformly bright if this were the case. 
Certainly hoar-frost at the poles would not be such 
a different surface from all the rest of the planet as 
to give us the characteristic appearance of the polar 


[74] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


caps; and those caps would never disappear by whole- 
sale bounds as they have been observed to do in actual 
fact. 

No, the astronomers who try to theorize on the 
basis of polar snow caps are simply getting sto 
selves into logical trouble. 

In his book entitled “Mars”, Lowell says, in pre- 
senting a map of what he thinks is the “‘ice cap” of 
the southern Martian pole: 

“Tt will be seen from it how much farther advanced 
is our knowledge of the Martian south pole and the 
regions about it than is our knowledge of either of 
our own.” 

What a significant admission that is, and not so 
much out of date at the present time as most people 
imagine who have taken all their knowledge of our 
earthly poles at second hand and never examined 
into it. 

An ‘English astronomer, E. 8. Grew, in his text 
book, “The Growth of a Planet,” remarks that polar 
conditions on Earth and on Mars cannot be compared 
because the meteorological conditions are quite differ- 
ent in the two planets. 

But supposing what we see can be explained only 
by conditions which are not meteorological? Then 
the two planets, perhaps, can be compared. It is 
because our theory points to something permanent 
in the structure of the planet as the explanation of 
polar phenomena, and not to mere meteorological 


[75 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


changes, that we can compare the two planets and 
show similar agencies at work on each of them, testi- 
fying to a structure which is the same in the one as 
in the other—and as in all others indeed. 

But let us turn to an observation of Professor 
Lowell of the utmost value. On page 86 of his book, 
“Mars”, Professor Lowell records: 

“Meanwhile an interesting phenomenon occured 
in the cap on June 7 (this was in 1894). On that 
morning at about a quarter to six (or, more precisely, 
on June 8, | hour, 17 minutes, G. M. T.), as I was 
watching the planet, I saw suddenly two points like 
stars flash out in the midst of the polar cap. Dazz- 
lingly bright upon the duller white background of 
the snow, these stars shone for a few moments and 
then slowly disappeared. The seeing at the time was 
very good. It is at once evident that the other-world 
apparitions were—not the fabled signal lights of the 
Martian folk, but the glint of ice-slopes flashing for 
a mornent earthward as the rotation of the planet 
turned the slope to the proper angle. ...But though 
no intelligence lay behind the action of these lights 
they were none the less startling for being Nature’s 
own flash-lights across one hundred million miles 
of space.” 

These star-like points had, however, been seen 
before, and Lowell goes on to check up his observa- 
tions with those of others: 

“Calculation showed the position of the star points 


[ 76 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S. INTERIOR 


to be in longitude 280 degrees and 290 degrees, and 
in latitude 76 degrees south. At this place on the 
planet then there was a range of slopes sufficiently 
tilted to reflect the sun from their ice-clad sides. On 
comparing its position with Green’s map of his 
observations upon the cape of (Maderira) in 1877, it 
appeared that this was the identical position of the 
spot where he had seen star-points then, and where 
Mitchell had seen them in 1846, to whom they had 
suggested the same conclusion. Green Christened 
them the ‘Mitchell Mountains.’ At the time both 
these observers saw them, they were detached from 
the rest of the cap. We shall see that they eventually 
became islands, just as Green saw them, and that the 
observation in June marked an earlier stage in their 
history.” - 

Now it is important to note in the above exactly 
what was seen—far more important, to do that than 
to pass it over and listen to Lowell’s ideas, merely, 
about what he saw. And the definite thing that 
Lowell plainly saw, and was astonished by, and 
specifically mentioned, was ‘“‘two points like stars 
flash out in the midst of the polar cap.” 

_ And let us also note that Green saw, many years 
earlier, two spots and that Mitchell saw, as far back 
as 1846, something similar but with a difference— 
which we shall come to presently. But meanwhile 
let us see how inadequate is Professor Lowell’s ex- 
planation of what he saw—so that we may keep dis- 


[77 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


tinct the actual thing and the mere theory which was 
made up to account for it. 

In the first place, Edward S. Morse, in his “Mars 
and Its Mystery”, a book which warmly supports 
Lowell’s theories about life on Mars, on page 138, 
tells of photographs taken by Professor Pickering of 
the polar regions of Mars in which a vast area of 
white appeared around the pole in the amazingly 
short space of twenty four hours. In that time an 
area nearly as large as the United States was visible 
as a white cap, and then it gradually disappeared. 

And yet Professor Lowell asks us to believe—if 
this is really ice at the poles—that it is so permanent 
that two very steep slopes—so steep as to reflect light 
direct to Earth—should keep their size and shape and 
positions from 1846, when Mitchell saw them, until 
the present day. And we remember, also, Professor 
Newcomb’s explanation that there is no snow or ice 
at the Martian poles but only immensely fine hoar 
frost—-which could not possibly pile up into steep 
cliffs and reflect light to us in the way described. 
And even Professor Lowell himself, in his other 
book, ‘Mars as the Abode of Life,” admits that it 
would be very hard to prove that the polar caps were 
composed of snow or hoar-frost, and that he could 
not have—to his satisfaction—proved it if it had 
not been that around the polar area was to be seen 
a band of dark blue which he took to be water from 
the melting ice of the snow-cap (page 81). But 


[ 78 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


later on in the same book he speaks (page 140) of 
the well-known total disappearance of the one cap 
and the almost entire extinction of the other, showing 
how each summer melts what the winter had depo- 
sited, and that in both cases that is nearly the sum 
total of the cap. 


But if both caps are thus depleted by each summer, 
how could a great ice cliff—again we ask the same 
question—remain since 1846 to reflect to us the light 
that Lowell saw? 

No, there are too many contradictions there. Ice 
cliffs, if they formed in the polar regions of Mars, 
would form at so many different angles and in so 
many different relative positions that flashes would 
be constantly sent over to us. There would be a 
display as continuous as that of heliograph signal- 
ing. As a matter of fact, what Lowell really did see 
was a direct beam—two direct beams at the same 
moment—flashing from the central sun of Mars out 
through the aperature of the Martian pole—does not 
the blue rim around that area to which Lowell has 
referred indicate the optical appearance of the 
reflecting surface of the planet gradually curving 
over to the interior so that at a certain part of the 
curve it begins to cease reflecting the light?—and 
the fact that it is not seen often simply shows that 
it is only when Mars is in a certain position with 
relation to the earth that we are able to penetrate the 


ioe] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


mouth of the polar opening and catch the dircct 
beam. 
BEAM OF LIGHT WAS YELLOW 

That it was a direct beam of light that Lowell 
saw, and not mere reflection may easily be proved. 
He particularly said, in writing about his discovery, 
that the light from the Martian cap was yellow when 
it was viewed at night. What does that imply? 

The reader'can best answer after making a simple 
observation. Let him go out any night and look into 
a lighted window from a distance. ‘The flood of 
light coming from the window will be yellow. The 
reader will also find that all artists paint lighted 
windows seen through the night as being yellow. We 
may go close up to the window and see that the 
source of the light is an incandescent electric light 
bulb which may be dazzlingly white and yet the 
light at a little distance is just as yellow as if the 
window were illuminated with yellow-flamed can- 
dles. 

Also the reader may try something else. Let him, 
after looking at the window from a short distance, 
as we have suggested, move away to one side, so that 
he no longer looks directly into the window, but 
sees it from a very great angle. The light from the 
window will then be seen to extend out beyond the 
window to a certain extent. 

We may now apply this to Mars. It proves that 
the light from the polar region of Mars is a direct 


[ 80 ] 


Views of Mars taken at the Yerkes observatory, Sept. 28, 1902, show- 
ing the white circle or so-called snow-cap, projected beyond the planet’s 
surface, which precludes all possibility of its being snow or ice. 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


illuminant from within the planet, because that light, 
seen at night, is yellow. Any other sort of light, a 
reflection from a snowy surface, for instance, or a 
reflection from sand or mountain surfaces, would be 
white. 

And if the reader will refer to our photograph 
of Mars on page 82 he will notice that the light 
from the polar openings extends in a spreading mist 
of luminosity of a very definite form which cannot 
be mistaken and which is obviously many miles above 
the surface of the planet. Now let the reader com- 
pare that with what he saw when he looked through 
the night at a lighted window at an angle—it is the 
same sort of extension of light. So that again proves 
that the Martian light.is coming from a direct source 
and illuminating the section of the Martian atmos- 
phere just above the polar opening. 


BRILLIANT LIGHT FROM POLAR CAPS 

Mitchell, whom Lowell quotes in the above 
extract, has some very interesting points to make. He 
speaks of the brilliant light of the polar caps—a 
light more brilliant than that of the other surfaces 
which are supposed to be covered with ice. Then 
comes his description of the beam of light which we 
hold to come direct from the central sun of Mars: 

“On the evening of the 30th of August (1845), I 
observed, for the first time, a small bright spot, nearly 
or quite round, projecting out of the lower side of 


[81] 


A JOURNEY TO, THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


the polar spot. In the early part of the evening the 
small bright spot seemed to be partly buried in the 
large one.....,. After theslapse of an hour onpmore, 
my attention was again directed to the planet, when 
I was astonished to find a manifest change in the 
position of the small bright spot.....In the course 
of a few days the small spot Buediatls faded from 
the phe and was not seen at any subsequent observa- 


tone” 
COMPARING THESE OBSERVATIONS 


It will be noticed that Lowell speaks as if what he 
saw was the same gleam and glint that Green saw, 
and the same thing that Mitchell saw. But if it were 
really a permanent ice-cliff, why did Lowell and 
Green see the two flashes and Mitchell one flash? 
And why did something so permanent that both 
Green and Lowell saw it many years apart, why did 
it prove so impermanent when Mitchell saw it? Why 
was it only one gleam then, and not two, and why 
did it fade away? 


A GLEAM FROM CENTRAL SUN OF MARS 


Obviously it was a gleam from the central sun of 
Mars that Mitchell saw, and the reason it faded was 
because cloudy weather gradually obscured the 
interior atmosphere of Mars. And when Green and 
Lowell saw it a small cloud had passed over the face 
of the interior sun and that broke the gleam into 
‘two prejecting beams with this opacity between them, 


[ 82 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


so that to Lowell two separated parts of the area of 
the Martian sun were visible and each sent its rays 
of light direct into his telescope. 


OBSERVATIONS VERSUS EXPLANATIONS 


It is very interesting to read Lowell’s account of 
these observations and to note how his observations 
all fit into one another and are accurate and how his 
explanations fail to account really for what he sees. 
In this same part of his book, ‘Mars’, he speaks of 
a fellow observer, Mr. Douglass, who detected “rifts” 
in the cap—-which sounds suspiciously as if this 
observer has seen clouds in the interior of the planet 
passing across the face of the polar opening. And 
Lowell adds, “On June 13 I noticed that behind the 
bright points the snow (he calls it) fell off shaded 
to this rift” —which again sounds as if clouds were 
gathering near the bright spots. He continues: 

“Bright spots continued to be seen at various points 
to the westward round the cap..... Throughout these 
days the cap was wont to appear shaded on the 
terminator side.” 

The last sentence surely suggests that cloud forma- 
tions were coming into the field of view and that 
wherever they thinned the bright spots from the 
central sun could be seen between them. 

We may note, in-passing, that Proctor, the English 
astronomer, also refers, in his “Other Worlds than 
Ours,” to the brightness of the polar regions although 


[ 83 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


he does not have the correct explanation of it. 

That more attention should be paid to this bright- 
ness of the polar regions of Mars, is emphasized by 
an English astronomer, W. E. Denning, who contri- 
buted to the English scientific periodical, Nature, 
an article on the physical appearance of the planet 
from observations made in 1886. He says: 

“During the past few months the north polar cap 
of Mars has been very bright, sometimes offering a 
startling contrast to those regions of the surface more 
feebly reflective. .. These luminous regions of Mars 
require at least as much careful investigation as the 
darker parts, for it is probably in connection with 
them that physical changes (if at-present operating 
on the planet’s surface) may be definitely observed. 
In many previous drawings and descriptions of Mars, 
sufficient weight has not been accorded to these 
white spots.” 

Earlier writers, however, had noticed that the spots 
were brighter than the other surfaces of Mars, an 
astronomer, writing in the Scientific American Sup- 
plement as early as 1879, in effect, having made that 
observation. But this writer was not aware of the 
real nature of the light. In 1892 the celebrated Eng- 
lish astronomer, J. Norman Lockyer, repeated in a 
periodical a number of obeservations he had made 
thirty years before and had then communicated to 
the Royal Astronomical Society of England. Here 
is a significant quotation: 


[ 84 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


“The snow-zone was at times so bright that, like 
the crescent of the young moon, it appeared to pro- 
ject beyond the planet’s limb. This effect of irra- 
diation was frequently visible; on one occasion the 
snow spot was observed to shine like a nebulous star 
when the planet itself was obscured by clouds, a 
phenomenon noticed by Messrs. Beer and Madler, 
recorded in their valuable work, ‘Fragments sur les 
Corps Celestes.’ The brightness, however, seemed 
to vary very considerably, and at times, especially 
when the snow zone was near its minimum, it was 
by no means the prominent object it generally is 
upon the planet’s disc.” 


é A DIRECT SOURCE OF LIGHT 
No one who reads the above in the light of our 


theory can fail to see how it fits into it. A snow cap 
would not reflect light with so much more vividness 
than the other surfaces of the planet, and only direct 
beams of light coming from a central sun could give 
that luminous effect above the surface of the planet 
and varying as the atmosphere in the interior or 
above it was clouded or clear. Had it been a mere 
ice cap there would not have been this luminosity 
and, in particular, there would have been no lumi- 
nosity when the planet was covered with clouds as 
Lockyer says it was. Furthermore, that luminosity 
is precisely what our own aurora borealis would look 
like if our planet was viewed from a great distance. 
And the light is the same in both cases. 


[ 85 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


From that early date we jump to 1905 and find 
Percival Lowell again telling of a bright white 
“kernel” which he observed at the Southern end of 
the Martian north polar cap. 

That, then, is the situation. All the evidence 
points to the fact that it is light, and direct light at 
that, that causes what we have called the Martian 
ice-caps but which we ought to call the Martian 
polar openings. But perhaps the reader is still not 
convinced. He may recall that the writers who treat 
this aspect of Mars, whether or not they belive in 
the ‘‘canals” seem to have no doubt of the fact that 
at the poles we have snow or ice. We have already 
pointed out some inconsistencies in this view. Here 
are some other considerations that help to dispel that 
idea, and then, by turning to the planet Venus, we 
shall demonstrate absolutely that the polar circles 
are not snow, or ice, or even hoar-frost caps, but 
simply aperatures leading to the inner and illumi- 
nated surface of the planet. 


WATER VAPOR IN THE ATMOSPHERE OF MARS 

A writer, evidently well posted, in the New York 
Sun, in 1909, summed up the arguments for and 
against the canal theory and the water-determination 
theories of Mars, and came to these conclusions: 

“If the water vapor in the Martian atmosphere is 
sufficient in amount to yield an ice cap at the polar 
bright spots, the tension over the rest of the planet 


[ 86 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


must be such that canals will not be needed because 
of a sufficient precipitation; if the water vapor con- 
tent is so slight that the polar caps are nothing but 
frost, no amount of engineering skill could cope 
with the tension which would evaporate whatever 
water may have started in the canals. Under terres- 
trial conditions these two extremes are well repre- 
sented by the Hudson which never runs dry, and 
those rivers of the arid West which are greatest at 
the source and dwindle on their course until they 
end in a damp spot with bone-dry edges.” 

By the tension, of course, is meant the proportion 
of water vapor in the atmosphere which determines, 
in relation to the temperature, the amount of evapora- 
tion that will go on. 


THE SPECTRUM OF MARTIAN LIGHT 


This same writer goes on to tell how the spectro- 
scope was invoked to solve the problem: 

“Fortunately we are not without appliances which 
may deal with this fundamental problem. ‘The spec- 
troscope yields a record of every sort of light which 
it dissolves, and the bands corresponding to water 
vapor have all been plotted on the spectrum. If 
these bands show at all, it is irrefragible evidence 
of the presence of water vapor, and in like manner 
the pronouncement of their definition gives a mea- 
sure of the amount of such water vapor. If then, com- 
parative observations are made simultaneously of an 


[ 87 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


illuminated object whose water vapor content is well 
established and of Mars, in which it is yet to estab- 
lish that factor, the comparison of the bands in the 
two spectra will give a measure of the results in 
Mars. 

“At the very favorable opposition in September 
(1909), the whole resource of the Lick Observatory 
staff was devoted to making this comparison. 

“Tn order to avoid as much as possible of the water 
vapor content of the earth’s atmosphere, greatest in 
its lowest levels, the observing station was equipped 
on the summit of Mount Whitney in the Sierras at 
an elevation of 14,501 feet and in a horizon markedly 
ATIC gel 

“For purposes of the astronomical comparison the 
“moon was taken as the standard. A long series of 
eclipse observations has shown that whatever atmos- 
phere may persist about our satellite is optically 
indiscernable. Similar series of spectroscopic ob- 
servations have shown that the water vapor at the 
moon is wholly inappreciable by the most delicate 
tests. If the spectrum of Martian light photo- 
graphed under the same terrestrial conditions shows 
no more water vapor bands than appear in the pho- 
tographed spectrum of lunar light the conclusion is 
warrantable that water vapor on Mars is of such 
extreme tenuity as not to be made available for cul- 
tural purposes. 

“The complete results of the Mount Whitney 


[ 88 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


observations have not yet been worked out, but 
Director Campbell authorizes the preliminary report 
that the comparison of a simultaneous Martian and 
lunar spectra proves that Mars has no more water 
about it than has the moon. He is concerned in the 
determination of this one fact in physics. The rest 
follows in its train of inexorable logic. If Mars has 
no more water than the moon the polar bright areas 
cannot be ice, snow, or hoar-frost; the most reason- 
able suggestion is that they are solidified carbon 
dioxide, the heaviest constituent of an atmosphere 
and the longest to linger over a dead world, itself 
a mantle of death and the shroud of animal life.” 


POLAR CAPS NOT CARBON-DIOXIDE 


Now we are very grateful to this writer for his 
account of actual observations—in which we heart- 
ily concur—but in spite of the eloquence of his 
closing thoughts—no longer observations, the reader 
will notice, but mere speculation—we cannot follow 
him. We fear that his eloquent periods are here 
wasted, for if the reader remembers what we said a 
few pages back it is quite impossible that carbon 
dioxide is the constituent of the poles. For that 
constituent twinkles, glints, and again is clouded 
over—it can be nothing else than an aperture giving 
out light from a central sun and ever and anon 
clouded over. For whether there is water vapor on 
the exterior of Mars or not, there is certainly water 


[ 89 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


vapor on the inside. : It is this water vapor that 
causes the interior clouds that have been observed to 
cut off the light of the interior sun. It is this sun 
itself that sends those periodical messages—glints of 
direct light that could never come from an inert mass 
of frozen carbon-dioxide or from a thin film of hoar- 
frost that is said to evaporate. 


HOW THE ASTRONOMERS ARE MISLED 


And let the reader note how this fundamentally 
false idea of the structure of the planet is misleading 
the orthodox astronomers all the time. Starting 
from a wrong basis they naturally attain to wrong 
results, and so instead of all their theories and ob- 
servations fitting into one another and leading them 
nearer and nearer to agreement until they come to- 
gether in the recognition of the truth, they cannot 
agree on a single thing. First, they tell us the tem- 
perature of Mars is relatively high, then it is so 
low that carbon dioxide freezes at the poles—in 
spite of the fact that at certain seasons of the year 
the poles of Mars are the warmest part of the planet _ 
—and then we are told that there is vegetation on 
the planet and again that there could not be because 
there is no water—and so on in a continual disagree- 
ment which widens with the lapse of time and the 
procession of the arguments instead of decreasing as 
it would if the astronomers were on the right track. 

But if the growing and declining of the alleged 


[ 90 ] 


A JOURNEY: TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


polar ice-caps be interpreted as due to a melting and 
freezing of either water or carbon dioxide, how do 
those who hold to the idea explain the polar caps of 
Venus and Mercury? 


CORROBORATIVE FACTS FROM VENUS 


Let us take Venus first.. It is our nearest neighbor 
on the side nearer the sun, just as Mars is on the side 
farther from the sun. It is slightly less than the 
earth in size and has almost the same length of day. 

F. W. Henkel, an English astronomer, writing in 
The English Mechanic and World of Sctence, 
remarks that: 

‘When Venus is near the sun, distinct evidence of 
the existence of an extensive atmosphere, twice as 
dense as our own, is obtained, and the spectroscope 
shows the presence of water vapor in some abun- 
dance. ‘The dark portion of the planet’s disc (that 
turned away from the sun) is occasionally seen faint- 
ly illuminated, (says Professor Young), recalling the 
aurora and other electrical manifestations on earth.” 

We shall have a good deal more to say about the 
aurora later on but for the moment we must let that 
point pass. 

To continue Mr. Henkel’s summary: 

“The distance of Venus from the sun is only about 
three-quarters that of the earth, or about 67,000,000 
miles, so that any area of its surface must receive 
about twice the amount of light and heat that an 


por] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


equal area on the earth receives; but as we have 
already said, the presence of a more extensive atmos- 
phere may to a considerable extent mitigate this, 
to our ideas, excessive amount.” 

And yet the author of this article immediately 
goes on to quote Professor Young to the effect that 
“air, water, lands, continents, mountains, polar 
snows, etc., all seem to be present.” 

Polar snows in a sun-drenched planet? That 
seems curious, and we begin to inquire what other 
astronomers have to say in the matter. 

Not only does H. W. Warren, in his “Recreations 
in Astronomy,” speak of the fact that the tropic zones 
of Venus extend nearly to the poles—on account of 
the great inclination of the axis of the planet’s rota- 
tion—but a later authority, E. Walter Maunder, in 
his very authoritative book, “Are the Planets Inhab- 
ited’”, has this to say—after describing the tempera- 
tures on the planet—about the climate of Venus: 

“Here then is the sufficient explanation why the 
topography of Venus is concealed. ‘The atmosphere 
will always be abundantly charged with water-vapor, 
and an almost unbroken screen of clouds will be 
spread throughout its upper regions. Such a screen 
will greatly protect the planet from the full scorch- 
ing of the sun, and tend to equalize the temperature 
of day and night, of summer and winter, of equator 
and poles. The temperature range will be slight, 
and there will be no wide expanses of polar ice.” 


[ 92 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


POLAR CAPS OF VENUS AND MARS OUGHT TO 
HAVE SAME EXPLANATION 

When we think of that, especially in consideration 
with the statement that the polar markings of Venus 
have never been seen to contract and expand at differ- 
ent times, it is obvious that these marks at the poles, 
in the case of Venus, are nothing less than the aper- 
tures through which light streams from a central 
sun. 

But the astronomers, lacking this explanation, are 
hard put to it to account for what they see. On 
general principles one would imagine that similar 
phenomena should always be explained by similar 
causes. If, for instance, you once see an eclipse of 
the moon, and its cause is explained to you, you will 
at once recognize the next time you see an eclipse, 
that the same cause is at work. You would laugh 
at anyone who said that one eclipse was caused by 
the shadow of the earth being thrown on the moon, 
another eclipse by the flight of a huge body between 
the earth and the moon, and so on. 


Yet the astronomers observing apertures at the 
poles of Mars explain them in one way when they 
observe similar apertures at the poles of Venus— 
they ought to explain those in the same manner. But 
they cannot do it, for they have postulated frozen 
water or frozen carbon dioxide as the cause of the 
polar caps of Mars, and they know there is nothing 
like that on Venus. So what do they say? Let 


[ 93 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


Hector MacPherson answer in his book on “The 
Romance of Modern Astronomy”: 

“Polar caps’, hé ‘says, in his chapter em Venus, 
“have been observed, supposed by some to be some- 
what similar to those on our own planet and on Mars. 
Some astronomers, however, do not regard them as 
snow; the drawings of Schiaparaelli represent them 
as separated by a dark shadow, which suggests that 
they represent two mighty mountain systems.” 


MAC PHERSON’S EXPLANATION INADEQUATE 


Before going on to a very remarkable observation, 
we may be permitted to criticize this idea in more 
than one way. In the first place, as we have said, it 
is absurd to explain one thing—a polar cap or area— 
by invoking snow in one planet or an open polar sea, 
and in another planet mountains. Why should 
mountains on Venus imitate a polar ice cap on Mars, 
Or an ice cap on Mars look like and be placed just 
like a mountain range on Venus? It is scientific 
lunacy to argue in any such fashion. And we may 
be permitted to say also that Mr. MacPherson’s 
language is too vague here. Is he trying to say that 
each so-called “mountain range” is separated from 
the surrounding surface of the planet by a shadow, 
or does he mean that one dark mountain range is 
separated from the other by a darker shadow—which 
in that case would lie all over the planet?’ We hope 
that nothing said in this book is said in such a manner 


por) 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


as will leave the reader in doubt as to which of two 
possible things we may mean. 

But to follow Mr. MacPherson a little further. 
He quotes a French astronomer, Trouvelet, who in 
1878, found the polar spots distinctly visible: 

‘Their surface,” he wrote, “is irregular, and seems 
like a confused mass of luminous points, separated 
by comparatively sombre intervening spaces. This 
surface is undoubtedly very broken, and resembles 
that of a mountainous district studded with numer- 
ous peaks, or our polar regions with numerous ice- 
needles brilliantly reflecting the sunshine.” 

Our readers will at once recognize those luminous 
points for what they are—gleams from the central 
sun. Trouvelet, not knowing this, involves himself 
‘In a mass of error in trying to explain what he saw. 
It is obvious that he observed the polar aperture 
during very cloudy weather and the gleams from the 
central sun were just struggling through the clouds 
at various points—he saw those and what he took to 
be sombre mountain masses were really the cloud 
banks through which the beams were breaking and 
which, of course, looked very sombre by contrast. It 
could not have been anything else, for, as we have 
just seen, the cloudy atmosphere of Venus, which is 
dense and never lifted, would never permit any light 
from the sun or other outer source to reach the sur- 
face and be reflected as this French astronomer as- 
sumes it was. And even if the light could reach the 


[95:1 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


polar cap of Venus it is admitted that that polar cap 
is not made of ice and so there would be no such 
ice-like reflection as the astronomer describes. 


Here again we have a case in which the observed 
facts are explained by our theory, in which no other 
theory can be made to explain them, and in which, 
lacking our theory, the astronomers confusedly con- 
tradict each other when they try to reduce what they 
see to any rational explanation. 


PROFESSOR PROCTOR ON MERCURY 


And just to show the reader how universally our 
theory works, let us refer to another planet on which 
observations can be made of the polar openings. It 
is Mercury—the planet which is so near the sun that 
it circles around it in eighty-eight days. Of this 
planet Richard A. Proctor, one of the best known 
astronomers of the nineteenth century, says: 

“Tt may be mentioned in passing that one phen- 
omenon of Mercury, if real, might fairly be regarded 
as indicating Vulcanian energies compared with 
which those of our own earth . .. . would be as the 
puny forces of a child compared with the energies 
of a giant. It has been supposed that a certain 
bright spot seen in the black disc of Mercury when 
the planet is in transit, indicates some sort of illum- 
ination either of the surface of the planet or in its 
atmosphere. In its atmosphere it can scarcely be; 
nor could any auroral streamers on Mercury be sup- 


[ 96 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


posed to possess the necessary intensity of lustre. If 
the surface of Mercury were glowing with the light 
thus supposed to have been seen, then it can readily 
be shown that over hundreds of thousands of square 
miles, that surface must glow with an intensity of 
lustre compared with which the brightness of the 
lime-light would be as darkness. In fact, the lime- 
light is absolute blackness compared with the in- 
trinsic lustre of the sun’s surface; and the bright 
spot supposed to belong to Mercury has been seen 
when the strongest darkening-glasses (or other ar- 
rangements for reducing the sun’s light). have been 
employed. But there can be no manner of doubt 
that the bright spot is an optical phenomenon only.” 


JUST LIKE SUNLIGHT 


Again we agree with the observation but not with 
the inference. Here is a spot of light, plainly seen 
through a telescope, so bright that the observer com- 
pares it to the incandesence of a sun. It is a much 
brighter light than any mere reflection could pos- 
sibly give. But we must remember that to Proctor 
such an appearance must have been staggering in 
the extreme. He was not only not expecting it but 
he was utterly unprepared to see such a phenomenon. 
And so he is utterly unable to explain it. And it is 
a safe rule that when you cannot explain a thing 
you can make what looks like an explanation by giv- 
ing the thing another name. So Proctor calls this 


por 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


light “an optical phenomenon only.” Well of course, 
it is an optical phenomenon, but why does he say 
“only?” Everything we see is an optical phenom- 
enon, but we usually try to explain the optical 
phenomena. A man who saw optical phenomena 
that were without explanation or cause would be in > 
a very dubious position. People would say he was 
“seeing things’—and their meaning would not be 
complimentary. But we cannot assume that Proc- 
tor’s eyes had played hima trick. He was a trained 
astronomical observer. So what he saw must have 
had some explanation or cause behind it. He can- 
not have seen a “myth” as he himself asserts. 

Now it is obvious to .us that what he saw was the 
central sun of Mercury beaming directly through 
the polar aperture, and as Mercury is a small 
planet the interior sun would be rather near the 
aperture, certainly there would not be an aqueous 
atmosphere with clouds to darken its beams, and so 
that sun would shine with exceeding brightness. 
And it is notable that their beams did put Proctor 
in mind of the beams from the sun that shines in our 
heavens upon all the planets. 

What more could be wanted than this to show 
that Mercury as well as the other planets has a cen- 
tral sun, that such a sun is to be met with univer- 
sally? 

Is it not significant that beginning with observa- 
tions on Mars we are able to go on to Venus and 


[ 98 ] 


a JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


Mercury, apply the same tests, and get the same re- 
sults? ‘The tests, direct observation or photographic 
observation. The results, the invariable appearance 
of a central sun. 


[99] 


193730 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAP LER TEV. 


EARLY POLAR EXPLORATION 


One of the most prominent writers in England, 
a man, too, who had had a scientific education, was 
given a sketch of the main arguments in support of 
our theory, and he replied that our presentation of 
the facts would have absolutely convinced him if it 
were not for one thing—that the poles had actually 
been discovered. Perhaps this is the objection which 
is most often heard on the lips of people to whom our 
theory has been presented, and who do not agree 
with it. But that objection is fully considered and 
answered in the pages that will follow. What has 
actually been discovered by polar explorers? ‘That 
is the question we shall ask of them, and the answers 
will always be in their own words, the records of 
their own observations, the findings of their own in- 
struments and calculations. 


A WORD IN ADVANCE ON PEARY 


We shall follow the history of polar exploration 
from the earliest days in which real progress was 
made right through to the discoveries of Peary— 
and we shall see that what Peary discovered was not 
an actual polar point of solid ice at the apex of the 
world, but rather a point which he identified by the 


[ 100 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


compass needle—which it should be remembered 
points to the magnetic and not to the geographical 
pole—and we shall further prove, from Peary’s own 
recorded observations, from the statements he has 
made over his own signature, that in the actual polar 
regions there is every evidence of warm currents 
coming up from the interior, and that there is even 
stronger evidence than warm currents that the in- 
terior is open to the exterior in that region, and that 
the opening is what we have said it is and leads to 
what we have claimed it leads to. But that is to 
anticipate more than one of the chapters that follow. 
For the present we will follow the Arctic explorers, 
and, distinguishing between what they actually ob- 
serve—which is dependable—and what they merely 
think—which is subject to error—we shall see all 
their testimony converging toward the establishment 
of what we have already set forth. 


HOW WE CONVINCE SUCH CRITICS AS 
THE ONE ABOVE QUOTED 

It is of course obvious that if our theory be true, 
the actual region of each pole will be warmed by 
the seas of the inner surface of the earth, and that 
these, warmed by the interior sun, will cause the 
climate around the polar openings to be a very mild 
one. The sea around the polar opening will be an 
open one. At some point on the arctic voyage the ice 
barriers will be passed and the voyagers will enter 


[101] 


A JOURNEY TO THE .EARTH’S, INTERIOR 


a region that grows warmer and warmer as they sail 
up to the polar opening and then over it and on into 
the interior of the earth. They would only know 
that they had actually passed over the lip by the 
peculiar behavior of the magnetic needle and by the. 
fact that they would see above them—as above 
would then mean toward the actual center of the 
earth—the interior sun which of course would be 
shining whether the voyagers came under its in- 
fluence during the day or during the arctic night. 

That is what would happen if our theory were 
true. The question is, then, has anything like that 
been actually observed? ‘The answer is that every 
arctic navigator from the beginning has made obser- 
vations which more and more agree with that view 
the further north the abservers go. To show how 
unanimous this testimony is let us go back a good 
distance. A 

BARRINGTON’S IMPORTANT BOOK 

In 1818 there was published in New York an 
American edition of a book entitled, ‘““The Possibil- 
ity of Approaching the North Pole Asserted,” by 
the Hon. D. Barrington: A new edition with an 
appendix containing Papers on the same Subject 
and on a North-west Passage, by Colonel Beaufoy,: 
F. R. S. Barrington, as well as Beaufoy, was a Fel- 
low of the Royal Society, the greatest English scien- 
tific body, and he was convinced that the voyage to 
the North Pole was a possibility. In order to con- 


[ 102 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


vince his colleagues in the Royal Society of this, he 
read a number of papers containing information that 
he had gathered from whalers and other voyagers in 
the Arctic. Here are some of the facts he deduced. 
In 1751 a Captain Mac-Callam, commanding a 
whaler, during a lull in the usual business of the 
voyage, thought he would make a dash for the North 
Pole. He reached a latitude of 834 degrees and he 
found in front of him no further ice, but clear wa- 
tere in fact “they had not seen atspeck:of icé for the 
last three degrees.” But he had to abandon his voy- 
age as he. did not wish to incur the displeasure of his 
owners. ‘The author then cites another voyage, de- 
scribed to him by a Dr. Dallie of Holland who 
made a voyage on a Dutch war-ship in supervision 
of the Greenland fisheries, on which voyage a lati- 
tude of 88 degrees was reached: “when the weather 
was warm, the sea perfectly free from ice, and roll- 
ing like the Bay of Biscay. Dallie now pressed the 
captain to proceed; but he answered that he had al- 
ready gone too far by having neglected his station 

BARRINGTON COMBATS-IDEAS OF ‘THE DAY 

Before citing further from Barrington let’ us re- 
mind the reader that he is not arguing in support of 
our theory. He is simply calling to the attention of 
his contemporaries actual facts which he has col- 
lected and which seem to him to make the voyage 
to the pole more feasible than it was thought to be 


[ 103 ]: 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


at the time-—when of course the means of navigation 
were so much poorer than they are at present. At 
that time, too, it was the generally received notion 
that there was a perpetual barrier of ice whose 
boundaries correspended more or less with a latitude 
of 804 and that any discovery of the regions north 
of that would have to be made by a sort of wind- 
propelled sled, a mechanism actually used for travel- 
ing over the ice by the Dutch. 


HIS “REPORT TO THE ROY AU SOCIETY: 


This idea Barrington combatted. He recalled to 
the Royal Society that as early as 1663 its secretary 
at that time had examined a traveler lately returned 
from Greenland, and that this traveler had told of 
a Hollander captain who claimed that he had come 
within half a degree of the pole, and corroborated it 
by showing his journal, the entries being attested by 
his mate. Now in view of later explorations it does 
not matter just how accurate that sailor was—the 
point is simply that even in those early days it was 
possible to get much nearer the pole than was sup- 
posed at the time, and simply for the reason that the 
water was open as one went north. 

But Barrington has instance after instance of the 
same kind. He mentions in particualr two Hol- 
lander whalers who—in the seventeenth century— 
sailed to 89 degrees and found no ice but “a free and 
open sea.” 


[ 104 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


SOME OF THE FACTS HE ADDUCES 

It is also interesting to note that Barrington quotes 
a passage from the Philosophical Transactions for 
1675 which says: 

“For it is well known to all that sail Northward, 
that most of the Northern coasts are frozen up many 
leagues, though in the open sea it is not so, no, nor 
under the Pole itself, unless by accident.” 

Barrington, of course, was trying to show that the 
idea of a perpetually ice-bound pole was simply a 
bogy to frighten explorers away from the attempt to 
gain the pole, and so he devotes himself next to a 
consideration of the actual ice-conditions in the far 
north, and what he says is so sensible and to the 
point, that we may as well settle the question as far 
as the ice is concerned, by quoting from his pages. 
The popular idea, doubtless, is that it is so cold at 
the actual pole that the sea water there is frozen. 
But this is not the case at all. The ice we see in 
pictures taken in polar regions is not frozen sea- 
water at all. It is frozen fresh water. Here is a 
description of the actual character of Artcic ice 
which Barrington translates from a “Dissertation of 
Michel Lomonosoff, translated from the Swedish 
Transactions of 1752, entitled ‘De l’Origine des 
Monts de Glace dans la Mer du Nord’: 


ICE CONDITIONS IN THE NORTH 
“There are three kinds of ice in the Northern 


Seas. The first is like melted snow, which is become 


[ 105 ] 


-ASJOURNEY TOSTHE: BARDEHS INTERIOR 


partly hardened, is more: easily broken into pieces, 
less transparent, is seldom more than six inches thick, 
and, when dissolved, is found to be intermixed with 
salt. This first sort of ice is the only one which is 
ever formed from sea water. 


ICE ONLY FROM FRESH WATER 


“Tf a certain quantity of water, which contains as 
much salt as sea water is exposed to the greatest de- 
gree of cold, it never becomes firm and pure ice, but 
resembles tallow or suet, whilst it preserves the taste 
of salt, so that the sweet transparent ice can never 
be formed in ‘the séa.- If" the ce of the Sea viscle: 
therefore, confined in a small vessel without any 
motion, cannot thus become true ice, much less can 
it do so in a deep and agitated ocean.” 


And Barrington adds: “The author hence infers 
that all the floating ice in the Polar Seas comes from 
the Tartarian Rivers and Greenland.” 


It would be tedious to recount the many other in- 
stances of sailors reaching latitudes from 80 to 89 
degrees given. by Barrington, but the notable thing 
about his instances is that they reveal the fact that 
the sailors of those early days, the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, all believed that the way to the 
pole was more or less open, and they believed it be- 
cause the further north they actuaily reached the less 
ice they met with. 


[ 106 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S. INTERIOR 


WITHIN FIVE AND A HALF DEGREES 
OF THE. POLE 


But Barrington has some other very interesting 
observations. He quotes a memorandum from the 
Astronomer Royal of England to the effect that a 
Mr. Stephens, sailing on a Dutch ship in 1754, was 
driven into latitude 84% or within 53 degrees of the 
pole. Vhey “did not find the cold excessive, and 
used little more than common clothing; met with 
but little ice, and the less the farther they went to 
the Northward. . . It is always clear weather with 
a North wind, and thick weather with a Southerly 
wind. . . Says he has often tasted the ice when the 
sea water has been let to run or dry off it, and always 
found it fresh.” 

The author then goes on to cite many instances of 
warm weather near the poles—warmer weather in 
fact than the observers had experienced at points 
many degrees further south. He sums up by say- 
ing: 

‘‘All our accounts agree that in very high latitudes 
there is less ice.” 

THE CONFORMATION OF THE POLAR 
BASIN 

-But although Barrington had no suspicion of the 
actual shape of the earth as our theory shows it to 
be, he did suspect that there was a depression of the 
earth’s surface at the polar circle. In fact he cites 
an experiment of Sir Isaac Newton based on the 


[ 107 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


swinging of a pendulum at various points on the 
earth’s surface—the time of swing would vary ac- 
cording to the distance of the pendulum from the 
earth’s center—and also the actual measuring of a 
degree at the Equator and at the Arctic Circle. “This 
last evidently proved the depression of the earth’s 
surface towards the pole, which no doubt gradually 
increases.” 

We have only two more observations to make 
about Mr. Barrington’s examples, before leaving his 
book for those of later explorers and writers—who 
will be found to corroborate his observations at every 
point. Then we shall leave him for the present but 
return to him in connection with some very inter- 
esting observations concerning actual evidence of an 
unexplored country which are found floating on the 
arctic seas. 

REMARKABLE STATEMENT OF DUTCH 
CAPTAIN 

Those two observations are from a Dutch sea cap- 
tain and an English clergyman, then stationed at Pet- 
ersburgh, respectively. The Dutch captain makes 
the remarkable statement that the most open sea to 
the northward—when in latitude 80, was not in sum- 
mer as might be expected if the Pole were really 
solid ice, but “generally happens in the month of 
September” and this is in spite of the fact that the 
Arctic night is beginning then—in which surely we 
should expect the maximum of cold if the outer sun 


[ 108 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


were the only factor in melting the ice, as the ordin- 
ary scientists have assumed it to be. The other ob- 
servation, made by the English clergyman may be 
quoted in full as Barrington gives it: 

‘Mr. Tooke hath been assured by several persons 
who have passed the winter at Kola in Lapland, that 
in the severest weather, whenever a Northerly wind 
blows, the cold diminishes instantly, and that, if it 
continues, it always brings on a thaw as long as it 
lasts. 

“Fle hath also been informed . . . that the sea- 
men who go out from Kola upon the whale and 
morse fisheries early in March (for the sea never 
freezes there) throw off their winter garments as 
soon as they are from fifty to a hundred wersts (three 
wersts make two miles) from land, and continue 
without them all the time they are upon the fishery, 
during which they experience no inconvenience from 
the cold, but that, on their return, (at the end of 
May) as they approach land, the cold increases to 
such a severity, that they suffer greatly from it. 

“This account agrees with that of Barentz, whilst 
he wintered in Nova Zembla, and of the Russians in 
Maloy Brun; the North wind cannot therefore, dur- 
ing the coldest seasons of the year, be supposed to 
blow over ten degrees of ice. 

THE NORTH-WEST PASSAGE 

“Governor Ellis indeed, whose zeal in prosecut- 
ing the attempt of discovering the North-west pas- 


[ 109°] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


sage through Hudson’s Bay is so well known, hath 
suggested to me an argument which: seems to prove 
the absolute impossibility of a perpetual barrier of 
ice from 804 degrees to the pole. 

“Tf such a tract hath existed for centuries, the in- 
crease, in point of height, must be amazing in a 
course of years, by the snow, which falls during the 
winter, being changed into ice, and which must have 
formed consequently a mountain perhaps equal to 
the Peak of Tenneriffe. Now the ice which some- 
times packs to the northward of Spitzbergen, is said 
commonly not to exceed two yards in height.” 

The reader may think this is a very old argument 
to be reproducing a hundred and forty years after it 
was first made. But we do so because the argument 
is as good today as when it was first made, and we 
wish to show that even in those days observations 
were made which have been corroborated and en- 
larged right down to the present day—all pointing 
irresistibly to one conclusion. 


[110] 


‘A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


if 
the 
“1 


CHAPTER V. 


FURTHER ARCTIC EXPLORATION 


Arctic Exploration in the nineteenth century 
opened out with the brilliant expeditions of Sir John 
Franklin, beginning in 1818, and when he was lost 
with 129 companions and the two ships which had 
been fitted out in 1844, a tremendous effort on the 
part of Great Britain, with the co-operation, too, of 
private individuals in the United States, was made 
to find him. Of course these explorers also made 
many general observations during their several ex- 
peditions, and it is from these that we will now pro- 
ceed to quote many facts that lead to the conclusion 
that there is not only an open polar sea, as Barrington 
contended, but a fertile land beyond it. 


EXPEDITIONS IN SEARCH OF FRANKLIN 


Among these expeditions was that of Lieutenant 
McClintock of the Royal Navy in the steam yacht 
“Fox” owned by Lady Franklin. This navigator 
makes three very interesting observations from our 
point of view. He met with Esquimaux living upon 
the east coast of Greenland as far north as latitude 
76 degrees, and it could not be ascertained how much 
farther north they lived. It is noticeable that they 
were separated from the South Greenlanders by 


C111] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


hundreds of miles of ice-bound coasts and impassible 
glaciers. He comments on this to the eftect that 
many centuries before a milder climate might have 
existed, and that that might have rendered the mi- 
gration north possible, but he himself doubts if that 
can be the correct explanation. We, however, shall 
have more to say on that question a little later. 


OBSERVATIONS OF McCLINTOCK . 
AND KANE 

But the observations of McClintock were nothing 
like as voluminous or detailed as those of the other - 
explorers of the day. Dr. Elisha Kent Kane sailed 
as surgeon and as scientific observer with the “Ad- 
vance” which left America with the “Rescue” the 
ships being supplied by a wealthy New York man, 
Mr. Henry Grinnell, and the expedition sailing in 
1852. Dr. Kane kept an exhaustive journal of his 
observations, which he published in two volumes 
upon his return. An open polar sea was one of the 
subjects of search of the expedition. 

From the time the party reached the polar regions 
Dr. Kane was astonished by the unexpected phon- 
omena met with. Where the climate was expected 
to grow colder—as they approached the pole—it 
grew warmer. At that same latitude of 80 degrees, 
of which we have seen Barrington’s records, Kane 
found indications of “north water all the year 
round” as one of his party reported. Another party, 


[172] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


later, in practically the same latitude while explor- 
_ ing the Greenland coast reported that: 


KANE FINDS LESS ICE THAN HE EXPECTED 


“The wind blew strongly from the north, and con- 
tinued to do so for three days, sometimes blowing a 
gale, and very damp, the tops of the hills becoming 
fixed with dark foggy clouds. The damp falling 
mist prevented them seeing any distance. Yet they 
saw no ice borne down from the northward all this 
time; and, what was more curious, they found, on 
their return south, that no ice had been sent down 
during the gale.” Mr. Morton, one of the members 
of this party, describes this journey—which was 
northward from Cache Island (see Chapter XXIII 
of Kane’s first volume). ‘The party reached Ken- 
nedy Channel after another gale from the north and 
again there was no ice except what had come up 
from the south. Ultimately this party reached 
Mount Parry which was at that time, “the most re- 
mote northern land known upon our globe.” After 
quoting many other details of this northern trip Dr. 
Kane comments on it as follows, and his comment is 
a reiteration of what Mr. Barrington had claimed 
many years earlier, and points to what are the facts 
in the case—although Mr. Kane has difficulty when 
he tries to explain them: 

“Tt will be seen by the abstract of our ‘field-notes’ 
in the appendix, as well as by an analysis of the re- 


113] 


A JOURNEY.TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


sults which I have here rendered nearly in the very 
words of Mr. Morton, that, after traveling due 
north over a solid area choked with bergs and frozen 
fields, he was startled by the growing weakness of 
the ice; its surface became rotten and the snow wet 
and pulpy. His dogs, seized with terror, refused to 
advance. Then for the first time the fact broke upon 
him, that a long dark band seen to the north beyond 
a protruding cape—Cape Andrew Jackson—was 
water. With danger and difficulty he retraced his 
steps, and, reaching sound ice, made good his land- 
ing on a new coast. 

“The journeys which I had made myself, and 
those of my different parties, had shown that an un- 
broken surface of ice covered the entire sea to the 
east, west, and south. From the southernmost ice, 
seen by Dr. Hayes only a few weeks before, to the 
region of this mysterious water, was, as the crow 
flies, one hundred and six miles. But for the un- 
usual sight of birds and the unmistakeable giving 
way of the ice beneath them, they would not have 
believed in the evidence of eyesight. Neither Hans 
nor Morton was prepared for it. 

““Tanding on the cape and continuing their ex- 
plorations, new phenomena broke upon them. They 
were on the shores of a channel so open that a frigate 
or a fleet of frigates might have sailed up it. The 
ice, already broken and’ decayed formed a sort of 
horse-shoe shaped beach, against which thé waves 


I {14} 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


broke in surf. As they traveled north, this channel 
expanded into an iceless area; ‘for four or five small 
pieces’—lumps—were all that could be seen over the 
entire surface of its white caped waters. Viewed 
from the cliffs, and taking thirty-six miles as the 
mean radius open to reliable survey, this sea had a 
justly-estimated extent of more than four thousand 
square miles. 
PLENTY OF GAME IN FAR NORTH 

“Animal life, which had been so long a stranger 
to us to the south, now burst upon them. At Renseler 
Harbor, except the Netsik seal or a rarely encount- 
ered Harelda, we had no life available for the hunt. 
But here the Brent goose, the eider, and the king 
duck, were so crowded together that our Eskimos 
killed two at a shot with a single rifle ball. 

“The Brent goose had not been seen before since 
entering Smith’s Straits. It is well known to the 
Polar traveler as a migratory bird of the American 
continent. Like the others of the same family it feeds 
upon vegetable matter, generally on marine plants 
with their adherent molluscous life. It is rarely or 
never seen in the interior and from its habits may be 
regarded as singularly indicative of open water. The 
flocks of this bird, easily distinguished by their 
wedge-shaped line of flight, now crossed the water 
obliquely, and disappeared over the land to the 
north and east. I had shot these birds on the coast 
of Wellington Channel in latitude 74 degrees, 50 


iS] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


minutes, nearly six degrees to the south: they were 
then flying in the same direction.” 

That is to say the birds were then flying north as 
they were now flying north from a latitude of ap- 
proximately 80 degrees, 50 minutes, and the question 
at once rises in the mind, why were they flying north? 
If these birds were dependent upon living sea-plants 
with living molluscous life on them for their food, 
and if they are, therefore, always to be found in open 
water, they could only be flying north for one reason 
and that reason is that there was open water north, 
and there could only be open water if there were a 
more temperate climate than the severe climate to 
the south that Kane has just described. 

Kane goes on: 

“The rocks on shore were crowded with sea-swal- 
lows, birds whose habits require open water.” 

As the party left the land marine birds also ap- 
peared, no less than four kinds of gulls being seen, 
and as Kane says, “it was a picture of life all round.” 
Morton, he further tells us, had also seen a large 
number of flowers in his explorations. 

Kane then proceeds: 

“Tt is another remarkable fact that as they con- 
tinued their journey the land-ice and snow, which 
had served as a sort of pathway for the dogs, crum- 
bled and melted, and at last ceased altogether; so 
that, during the final stages of their progress, the 
sledge was rendered useless, and Morton found him- 


[ 116 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


self at last toiling over rocks and along the beach of 
a sea, which, like the familiar waters of the south, 
dashed in waves at his feet. 

“Here for the first time he noticed the Arctic Pet- 
tel, a fact which shows the accuracy of his observa- 
tion, though he was then unaware of its importance. 
This bird had not been met with since we left the 
North Water of the English whalers, more than two 
hundred miles south of the position on which he 
stood. Its food is essentially marine, the acalesphe, 
etc., etc.; and it is seldom seen in numbers except in 
the highways of open water frequented by the whale 
and the larger representatives of ocean life. They 
were in numbers, flitting and hovering over the 
crests of the waves, like their relatives of milder 
climates, the Cape of Good Hope Pigeons, Mother 
Carey’s Chickens, and the petrels everywhere else. 


AN OPEN NORTHERN SEA 

“Tt must have been an imposing sight, as he stood 
at this termination of his journey (past Sir John 
Franklin Island), looking out upon the great waste 
of waters before him. Not a ‘speck of ice,’ to use 
his own words, could be seen. There, from a height 
of four hundred and eighty feet, which commanded 
an horizon of almost forty miles, his ears were glad- 
dened with the novel music of dashing waves; and 
a surf; breaking in among the rocks at his feet, 
stayed his further progress. 


[117] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


“Beyond this cape all is surmise. The high ridges 
to the north-west dwindled off into low blue knobs, 
which blended finally with the air. Morton called 
the cape, which baffled his labors, after his com- 
mander; but I have given it the more enduring name 
of Cape Constitution.” 

Dr. Kane goes on to say that this observation of 
open water to the north harmonized with the obser- 
vations of all the other members of the expediticn. 
He admits that he cannot explain it, and adds the 
following comment: 


OTHER EXPLORERS HAD POSTULATED 
OPEN BASIN 

‘“‘An open sea near the pole, or even an open polar 
basin, has been the topic of theory for a long time, 
and has been shadowed forth to some extent by ac- 
tual or supposed discoveries. As far back as the 
days of Barentz, in 1596, without referring to the 
earlier and more uncertain chronicles, water has 
been seen to the eastward of the northernmost cape 
of Nova Zembla; and until its limited extent was 
defined by direct observation it was assumed to be 
the sea itself. The Dutch fishermen above and 
around Spitzbergen pushed their adventurous 
cruises through the ice into open spaces varying in 
size and form with the season and the winds; and 
Dr. Scoresby, a venerated authority, alludes to such 
vacancies in the floe as pointing in argument to a 


[ 118 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


freedom of movement from the north, inducing open 
water in the neighborhood of the pole. Baron Wran- 
gell, when forty miles from the coast of Arctic Asia, 
saw, as he thought, a ‘vast illimitable ocean’ 

So, still more recently, Captain Penny proclaimed 
a sea in Wellington Sound . . . Unlike the oth- 
ers, however, that which I have ventured to call an 
open sea has been traveled for many miles along its 
coast, and was viewed from an elevation of five 
hundred and eighty feet, still without a limit, moved 
by a heavy swell, free of ice, and dashing in surge 
against a rock-bound shore. 

“Tt is impossible in reviewing the facts which con- 
nect themselves with this discovery,—the melted 
snow upon the rocks, the crowds of marine birds, the 
limited but still advancing vegetable life, the rise of 
the thermometer in the water,—not to be struck by 
their bearing on the question of a milder climate near 
the pole. To refer them all to the modification of 
temperature induced by the proximity of open water 
is only to change the form of the question; for it 
leaves the inquiry unsatisfied—What is the cause of 
the open water?r” 

Dr. Kane was not only impressed by the warmer 
climate toward the pole, however, but he records 
that in a large indentation in Dallas Bay they found 
the remains of an Eskimo village, surrounded by 
bones of seals, walrus and whale. And furthermore: 


[119] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 
TRACES OF THE ESKIMO 


“Tn impressive connection with the same facts, 
showing not only the former extension of the Es- 
kimo race to the higher north, but the climatic 
changes which may still be in progress there, is the 
sledge runner that Morton saw on the shores of Mor- 
ris Bay, in latitude 81 degrees. It was made of the 
bone of a whale and worked out with skillful labor.” 

That is not the first time the Eskimos have been 
mentioned by the explorers quoted in this chapter, 
and every time the mention of them is connected with 
the north rather than with the south. We shall find 
more of this sort of evidence as we go along. 


HARD TO DETERMINE HIS LOCATION 


To the claims of both Cook and Peary that they 
have reached the north pole we shall give detailed 
answers shortly. But there is one paragraph in Dr. 
Kane’s record which we may as well quote while we 
are dealing with his observations, and it throws some 
light on the later claims made by some Arctic ex- 
plorers and the doubts as to their locations expressed 
by others (Nansen, for instance, in one place frankly 
admits that he was lost in the Arctic and had no way 
of knowing where he was). Here is the passage, 
which refers to the difference between Kane’s pro- 
jection of the coast around Cape Isabell and that 
made by Captain Inglefield: 


“The difference between our projection of this 


[ 120 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


coast and Captain Inglefield’s refers itself naturally 
to the differing circumstances under which the two 
were framed. The sluggishness of the compass and 
the ‘eccentricities of refraction in the Arctic seas, are 
well fitted to embarass and mislead a navigator... .” 

It is interesting, too, to see that, in a note subse- 
quently appended to these observations, Dr. Kane 
makes some other observations upon the distribution 
of the polar ice, and remarks: “I do not see how 

this state of facts could be explained without 

supposing an iceless area to the farther north. 

‘How far this may extend,—whether it does or 
does not communicate with a polar basin,—we are 
without facts to determine.” 

But by following the observations of other and 
later explorers we shall endeavor to supply the facts 
whose absence left Dr. Kane so puzzled. 


OBSERVATIONS OF DR. HAYES 


We may now turn to the observations of one of 
Dr. Kane’s companions, Dr. I. I. Hayes, who took 
a prominent part in the expedition and who wrote 
his account of it under the significant title, “The 
Open Polar Sea.” Dr. Hayes went up Kennedy 
Channel, along the coast of Grinnell Land almost 
as far north as 82 degrees. Long before he had 
reached that point, however, he began to notice the 
strange contradictions that the arctic regions present. 
He passed into the Arctic circle on July 30, and was 


[121] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


soon in the middle of a vast field of ice-bergs. He 
says of this experience: 

“The air was warm almost as a summer’s night at 
home, and yet there were the ice-bergs and the bleak 
mountains, with which the fancy, in this land of 
- green hills and waving forests [that is to say, Amer- 
ica], can associate with nothing but cold repulsive- 
ness. The sky was bright and soft, and strangely 
inspiring as the skies of Italy. The bergs had wholly 
lost their chilly aspect.” 

That is sufficiently remarkable—surely indicating, 
according to what other explorers have already told 
us, in these pages, that the \vind must have been from 
the north for the few days previous that would have 
brought some of the mildness from the actual polar 
regions down. If the reader is not yet convinced of 
that let him watch Dr. Hayes as he proceeds further 
toward that region. Conviction will follow. 


MILD TEMPERATURES FOUND 


By November 2, Drv Hayes had weached. Cape 
Alexander, on the Greenland Coast (Grinnell Land 
forms the other coast of Kennedy Channel which the 
explorers will soon reach) at a latitude of a little 
over 78 degrees. Here they were hit by a gale, 
strong enough to break up the ice and send it scud- 
ding away southwest. But Dr. Hayes is surprised 
by two things: Although the gale is from the north 
east, the temperature has all the time been very mild 


pi22. 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


—in fact it has never been below zero, and more- 
over, when the gale had driven the ice away there 
was no more ice from the north to take its place. 


WARMTH WHERE COLD WAS EXPECTED 


By November 13th the party has proceeded a lit- 
tle further north, and Dr. Hayes, believing as he did 
that the pole was a solid ice-cap, is sorely puzzled by 
the actual phenomena with which he is met. Here 
is his diary, the first entry, “Worse and worse,” re- 
ferring to the fact that snow had been falling, which 
made it very disagreeable on the ship: 


“November 13: Worse and worse. The temper- 
ature has risen again, and the roof over the upper 
deck gives us once more a worse than tropic shower. 
The snow next the ice grows more slushy, and this I 
am more than ever puzzled to understand, since I 
have found today that the ice, two feet below the 
surface, has a temperature of twenty degrees; at the 
surface it is nineteen degrees, and the snow in con- 
tact with it is eighteen degrees. The water is twenty- 
nine degrees. 

“November 14. The wind has been blowing for 
nearly twenty-four hours from the northeast, and yet 
the temperature holds on as before. At ten o’clock 
this evening it was four and a half degrees. I have 
done with speculation. A warm wind from the ‘mer 
de glace,’ and this boundless reservoir of Greenland 
frost, makes mischief with my theories, as facts have 


[123 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


heretofore done with the theories of wiser men. As 
long as the wind came from the sea I could find ex- 
cuse for the unseasonable warmth.” 

It is a pity that the open-minded spirit shown 
there is not more evident among other scientists. Dr. 
Hayes would have tried to explain that warmth if 
he could possibly have done so. But when the wind 
that brought it came no longer from a sea that was 
itself above freezing point but came from a land 
that was covered with ice, he was simply at his wits’ 
end and frankly acknowledged that he could not ac- 
count for the phenomenon. So he left it an open 
question. And it has really been an open cues 
ever since—but it is at last closed. 

Let us, however, follow Dr. Hayes still further 
north. By the end of November the Arctic night 
has set in. The voyagers are by now a little farther 
north. And yet here is the sort of thing that hap- 
pens to the temperatures: 

“The temperature had been strangely mild, a cir- 
cumstance at least in part accounted for by the open 
water, and to this same cause was due no doubt the 
great disturbance of the air, and the trequency of 
the gales. I have mentioned in the last chapter a 
very remarkable rise in the thermometer which oc- 
curred early in November (see above) ; but a still 
greater elevation of temperature followed a few 
weeks later, reaching as high as 32 degrees. In con- 
sequence of this sudden and unaccountable event, the 


[124] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


thaw was renewed, and our former discomfort aris- 
ing from the dampness on deck and in our quarters 
was experienced in an aggravated degree. . .” 

Then snow began to fall, and Dr. Hayes was still 
more astonished—for this was above the line where 
snow usually falls—when it was followed by a 
shower of rain. He also noticed that the snow came 
in very beautiful and perfectly formed crystals, 
which is always, he says, a sign that the snow was 
formed in a temperature that is quite mild. “TI have 
not observed them when the thermometer ranged 
below zero.” 

But by January 13 quite a good deal more snow 
had fallen, and in spite of the fact that there had 
been terrific storms the air had never been really cold. 
(The party were wintering at Port Foulke.) The 
explorer notes these high winds and high temper- 
atures, and snow, and says: 


UNUSUAL PHENOMENA 

“All these unusual phenomena are, as has been 
hitherto observed, doubtless due to the proximity of 
the open sea. How extensive the water may be is of 
course unknown, but its limits cannot be very small 
to produce such serious atmospheric disturbance. It 
seems, indeed, as if we were in the very vortex of the 
north winds. The poet has told us that the north 
winds 

‘Are cradled far down in the depths that yawn 

Beneath the Polar Star,’ 


[125] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


and it appears very much as if we had got into those 
yawning depths, and had come not only to the place 
where the winds are cradled, but where they are 
born.” 

We might say here that if the open sea really ac- 
counted for the high temperatures it follows that 
there must be a still greater source of heat to account 
for the open sea. And we should remember, too, 
that Dr. Hayes observed the same high temperatures 
when the northeast wind was coming across the 
frozen surface of Greenland. 

And let us also say that if the poet imagined a 
great space where the winds are born, beneath the 
Polar Star, the fact may again turn out to be more 
wonderful than the fiction—the depths may yet be 
plumbed. In fact we have indubitable proof that 
they can be plumbed and explored. But that we 
will discuss later. 

At last the Arctic winter began to wear away. One 
of the first signs of the change in season was the ap- 
pearance of a flock of birds, which, curiously enough, 
“warmed their feet in the water which the winds 
wouid not let freeze.” The explorer was surprised 
to find these birds—the Dovekie of Southern Green- 
land—‘‘denizens of the Arctic night so near the 
Pole.” But there again we must reserve comment 
until later. 

A WARM SLEDGE JOURNEY 

When the sun did arise the explorer left his ship 

and undertook a sledge journey whose object was to 


[ 126 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


cross the frozen sound to Cape Sabine on its other 
side (just south of Grinnell Land). As a matter of 
fact he had to strike for a point north of that on ac- 
count of the ice hummocks. Before long the ex- 
plorer finds that although the sea is now frozen over 
so that he can cross it in this manner, the air is quite 
warm. ‘The warmth, he thinks, is “unseasonable,” 
and it must have indeed felt so, for the party wished 
to take off their coats and could not as the added 
weight of the coats on the sledges would have been 
an unfair handicap for the dogs. At one time the 
members of the party wondered whether the ice was 
going to melt under them, and kept a watchful eye 
in the direction of Port Foulke. The author notes 
that along the entire coast of Grinnell Land, which 
could be seen in the distance, there were no glaciers, 
which he noted as being in striking contrast with the 
Greenland coast. At this point in Dr. Hayes’ jour- 
ney he had reached a point somewhat to the north- 
ward of that reached by Morton, the member of Dr. 
Kane’s expedition whose observations we have al- 
ready noted, being in fact at a point, “sixty miles to 
the northward and westward of Cape Constitution.” 
He pushed on, and was soon stopped by bad ice. Re- 
turning to the Grinnell coast and climbing an eleva- 
tion, the author made the following observations 
which had better be given in his own words: 

“The icé-was everywhere in the same condition 
as in the mouth of the bay, across which I had endea- 


[ 127] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


vored to pass. A broad crack, starting from the 
middle of the bay, stretched over the sea, and uniting 
with other cracks as it meandered to the eastward, it 
expanded as the delta of some mighty river discharg- 
ing into the ocean, and under a water sky, which 
hung upon the eastern and northern horizon, it was 
lost in the open sea. 


ON THE EDGE OF THE POLAR BASIN 


“Standing against the dark sky at the north, there 
was seen, in dim outline, the white, sloping summit 
of a noble headland—the most northern land upon 
the globe. I judged it to be in latitude 82 degrees, 
30 minutes, or four hundred and fifty miles from the 
North Pole. . Nearer, another bold cape stood forth; 
and nearer still the headland, for which I had been 
steering my course the day before, rose majestically 
from the sea.... There was no land visible except 
the coast upon which I stood. 

‘“The sea beneath me was a mottled sheet of white 
and dark patches, these latter being soft, decaying 
ice or places where the ice had wholiy disappeared. 

“T reserve to another chapter all discussion of the 
value of the observations which I made from this 
point. Suffice it here to say that all the evidences 
showed that I stood upon the shores of the Polar 
Basin, and that the broad ocean lay at my feet; that 
the land upon which I stood, culminating in the 
distant cape before me, was but a point of land pro- 


[ 128 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


jecting far into it, like the Ceverro Vostochnoi Noss 
of the opposite coast of Siberia; and that the little 
margin of ice which lined the shore was being stead- 
ily worn away; and within a month, the whole sea 
would be as free from ice as I had seen the north 
water of Baffin Bay,—interrupted only by a moving 
pack, drifting to and fro at the will of the winds 
and currents.” 
BIRDS FLYING NORTH 

_ Dr. Hayes was, of course, unable to proceed any 
further, as the ice was rapidly vanishing and rotten 
where it was exposed outside the bay. But before 
planting his flag and other evidences of his discovery 
and returning to his base at Port Foulke, he was 
surprised to note again those small birds, a flock of 
Dovekie. He expresses surprise at seeing them 
so far north so early in the season. He also saw a 
number of burgomaster-gulls which, significantly 
enough, were “making their way northward, seeking 
the open water for their feeding grounds and sum- 
mer haunts.” Rather curious, is it not, that these 
birds should be flying toward the North Pole in 
search of summer haunts and open water and food? 


A PROPHETIC VISION OF OUR THEORY 


And Dr. Hayes evidently felt to the full the 
strangeness of his situation and the possibilities that 
were hidden in that stretch of polar sea which he 
could not explore. Something of a prophetic vision 


[129] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


would almost seem to be behind the following words 
with which he ends this chapter in his record: 

“But I quit the place with reluctance. It pos- 
sessed a fascination for me, and it was with no ordi- 
nary sensations that I contemplated my situation, 
with one solitary companion in that hitherto untrod- 
den desert; while my nearness to the earth’s axis, 
_ the consciousness of standing upon land far beyond 
the limits of previous observations, the reflections 
which crossed my mind respecting the vast ocean 
which lay spread out before me, the thought that 
these ice-girdled waters might lash the shores of 
distant islands where dwell human beings of an 
unknown race, were cicumstances calculated to 
invest the very air with mystery, to deepen the curi- 
osity, and to strengthen the resolution to persevere 
in my determination to sail upon this sea and to 
explore its furthest limits; and as I recalled the 
struggles which had been made to reach this sea— 
through the ice and across the ice—by generations 
of brave men, it seemed as if the spirits of these 
Old Worthies came to encourage me, as their experi- 
ence had already guided me; and I felt that I had 
within my grasp ‘the great and notable thing’ which . 
had inspired the zeal of sturdy Frobisher, and that 
I had achieved the hope of matchless Parry.” 

We can understand those feelings. Often a vision 
of achievement like that has led men to make great 
efforts and those efforts have resulted in achieving 


[ 130 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


not what they saw in the vision but something even 
better. It was not reserved for Hayes to discover 
what he thought might possibly be found. And he 
might think it a strange thing if he could revisit the 
earth and see that the first actual discovery of what 
is really at the “ends of the earth” is made not by 
an explorer with ships and sleds and dogs, but by 
an explorer of the facts which observations have 
gradually given us. It is not the actual explorer, 
Colcctorot tacts, or in’ an army, the actual, scout, 
who wins the victories of science or of war. It is 
the philosopher who puts the facts together and 
draws inferences; it is the general who puts together 
the isolated tidings brought in by scouts. And so 
in this case. Kane and Hayes, Greely, Nansen and 
Peary, have indeed gathered in many a fact and 
observation. But the very nearness of these men to 
their own actual problems has perhaps prevented 
them from seeing the whole field at a glance. By 
taking all their results and comparing them with 
what the astronomers tell us of other polar regions 
and of the evolution of planets—in this way only 
can the actual visions of men like Hayes be turned 
into the concrete reality of scientific knowledge. 
And then, once having achieved that, the task of 
the explorer is rendered much more easy and more 
fruitful, for he is guaranteed a definite goal, and 
knows just at what he is aiming. 


[ 131] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


But to return to Hayes. In a very interesting 
chapter he summarizes the available knowledge of 
the open polar sea. He first draws the reader’s 
attention to the fact that the north coasts of Green- 
land and Grinnell Land are about the only bound- 
aries of this sea which have not been well defined 
along their northern coasts. He also makes special 
note of the fact that while the boundaries of the 
Open Polar Sea are all within the line of perpetual 
frost, the sea itself is open and all the serious attempts 
of polar explorers have had to reckon with this fact. 
For their difficulty has been to break through the 
ice barriers and to reach the open sea. He, himself, 
of course did reach this open sea but as he had come 
to it by sledge he was unable to take advantage of 
his discovery. Had he been able to get a ship up 
to that point all would have been easy—he might 
well have been the discoverer of the so-called “pole”. 


THE TEMPERATURES OF THE POLAR 
REGIONS 

In this chapter Hayes prints a very interesting 
note about the temperature of the polar regions. 
If the pole is what it has always been supposed to 
be—namely a sheet of solid ice, the coldest part of 
the world,—it would follow that the closer we 
approached to it the lower the temperature would 
be. And even if the equator were not the parallel 
of maximum heat (for as a matter of fact that is 


[132 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


only an approximation, and the actual parallel of 
maximum heat departs from the line of the equator) 
it would still be true that at, or very near, the place 
which has always been called the pole, there would 
be a spot where the temperature reached a perpetual 
minimum. But as early as the first serious attempts 
to get to the pole, it became evident that this was not 
the case—that the polar region was warmer than 
the regions immediately surrounding it. As early 
as 1821, Sir David Brewster, knowing that explora- 
tion pointed to a higher temperature at the poles 
wrote a paper in which he put forth the theory that 
figuring from the mean heat of the globe, compared 
with actual heat measurements on various parts of 
it, it might be found that the heat at the pole was 
ten degrees higher than at other points in the Arctic 
circle. 
THE EARTH’S HEAT AND BREWSTER’S 
GUESS 

But if we admit that Sir David Brewster’s guess 
is right—and it is remarkable that, on the evidence 
available in his day he should have hit upon. this 
idea—what can possibly cause that rise in tempera- 
ture? If the poles were solid, or at least if they had no 
source of heat such as our theory predicates, how 
could they possibly reach that higher temperature? 
Where could the heat come from? Only if there 
were such an inner source as we indicate could this 
take place. And if there were such an inner source, 


[ 133] 


A JOURNEY. TO THE EARTH’S: INTERIOR 


Sir David Brewster’s guess might prove to be remark- 
ably accurate. For the heat coming from the interior 
of the earth would not make the whole polar basin 
into an ice-free region. As we shall show later, there 
are icebergs and glaciers on the inner lip of the polar 
orifice. We shall show how mammoths have been 
entrapped in the crevasses of these glaciers and car- 
ried into Siberia in a freshly frozen condition. The 
polar ice of the external surface would be sufficient 
to cover the whole pole as well as the region which 
we speak of as the ice basin, if the polar region were 
solid. As it is not solid but communicates with a 
warmer region, we have the ice from the outside 
forming a barrier around that region and also form- 
ing into ice-fields and glaciers on the inner rim, 
these latter, however, being prevented from becoming 
one solid mass by the warm currents from the hotter 
parts of the interior. It might well be, although 
we do not say this dogmatically, that the resulting 
mean temperature in the region that we may call 
the “lip” of the polar orifice would be found to be 
on the whole about ten degrees higher than the tem- 
perature further south, just as Sir David Brewster 
thought. But that actual temperature is a matter, 
for actual observation by an expedition, Here we 
merely call attention to the curious fact that without 
knowing of this polar orifice a scientist was led. to: 
postulate such a relatively high. and with difficulty: 


[134 } 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


explained temperature at- what was thought to be 
the solid pole. 


HAYES AGREES WITH WRANGEL 


Before leaving Hayes, however, we may briefly 
note a number of interesting observations he makes 
all of which go to support our explanation of the 
true nature of the polar regions. Lest it be thought 
that the foregoing accounts of open water were sim- 
ply due to temporary conditions it may be noted— 
on Hayes’ authority—that as early as the time when 
Baron Wrangel, then a young lieutenant in the 
Russian navy made his polar attempts it was clearly 
proved that the open water to the north was always 
open whatever the time of year. He also quotes 
Dr. Kane’s findings, whose explorations, preceded 
his own and. have been already described, here. It 
may be noted that Wrangel found the open polar 
sea from an almost opposite point in the polar.circle 
while Parry discovered it. to be open, froma point 
above Spitzbergen. eye es 

One of the most interesting a ie avant of 
servations of Hayes, . however, : deals. -withi: :th 
Eskimo. An Eskimo to whom he:spoke before o 
dash for the polar circle told him:that he would find 
the tribesmen as far north ashe. could go), Dir. Hayes 
did find traces of them “‘up to the.very face of tum- 
boldt glazier” and as far noxth: as ee Point: :,.Dr: 
Elaves:c0es on) tosayer ois) Sargenonerene 3 

L132} 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


ESKIMO SAYS THERE ARE TRIBESMEN 
IN FAR NORTH 

“The simple discovery of traces of Eskimos on 
the coast of Grinnell Land was not altogether satis- 
factory to Kalutunah, for he had confidently ex- 
pected that I would find and bring back with me 
some living specimens of them; but he was still gra- 
tified to have his traditions confirmed, and he de- 
-clared that I did not go far enough or I should have 
found plenty of natives; for, he said, in effect, 
‘There are good hunting grounds at the north, plenty 
of musk-ox (oomemak), and wherever there are 
good hunting grounds, there the Eskimo will be 
found. 

ANIMAL LIFE AROUND THE POLE 


The importance of that point will readily be seen. 
Good hunting grounds means vast tracts of land that 
will support the animals, in which they can not only 
find food but opportunity for breeding. It means, 
in short, a salubrious climate. But to that point 
we shall return later, fortified with a vast mass of 
positive evidence. 

That musk-ox is not the only animal to be found 
where we should hardly expect it is evident from 
another entry in Hayes’ diary. When he was in 
latitude 78 degrees, 17 minutes, early in July, he says 
“T secured a yellow-winged butterfly, and—who 
would believe it—a mosquito. And these I add to 
an enthomological collection which already numbers 


[136 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


ten moths, three spiders, two bumble-bees, and two 
flies’. One wonders where they all came from, 
especially the butterfly and the mosquito which have 
been known to find even the American climate too 
cold for them. But here again we shall not press the 
subject until we come to treat it in greater detail, for 
we have other explorers to follow and other eviden- 
ces to record drawn from their experiences in look- 
ing for that pole which does not exist. 


[1377 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHARTERS Vas 


GREELY’S EXPLORATIONS, 


We now come to the many and valuable obser- 
vations made by General A. W. Greely, who as a 
young lieutenant in 1881 began his “Three Years of 
Arctic Service” (as he calls his book) by setting off 
on the “Lady Franklin Bay Expedition” one of the 
objects of which was to attain the old goal “farthest 
north”. 

A REMARKABLE PREFACE 

In the preface to this book in which he recounts 
his experiences, General Greely tells us that the 
wonders of the Arctic regions are so great that he 
modified his actual notes made at the time, and 
under-stated them rather than lay himself open to 
the suspicion of exaggerating. ‘That the Arctic re- 
gions are so full of life and strange evidences of 
a life further north that an explorer cannot tell them 
all without being accused of exaggeration is surely 
a very strange thing if those regions only lead to a 
barren pole of everlasting ice. 

But let us see what those actual wonders are. Let 
us take Greely’s own account of them noticing how 
perfectly it agrees with the accounts of earlier 
explorers. He proceeded along the coast of Green- 
land to Melville Bay. 


[ 138 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


THE CRIMSON CLIFFS .- 


By August first he had reached a point near the 
Petowik glacier which lies just northward of the 
“Crimson Cliffs” of Sir John Ross. This is so called 
from the fact that on the snow-clad cliffs and gla- 
cier surfaces at this point Sir John Ross, in 1818, dis- 
covered a red deposit which had fallen about and 
mixed with the snow, giving it a reddish color which 
was pretty widely distributed. What was it? For 
a long time this was a mystery, but it was at last 
proven to be of vegetable origin: now, the point— 
to be taken up in detail later—is simply this: where 
could any vegetable matter, either a pollen from lar- 
ger plants or a very humble sort of red mossy or spore 
like growth, come from? There is no other casein 
the whole realm of botany that would justify us in 
assuming that a plant can grow on ice-bergs or on 
snow. A plant requires certain elements and cer- 
tain temperatures. Evidently, somewhere those fac- 
tors must be in existence. Where, we shall see later:: 


ARCTIC TEMPERATURES 


Greely’s next observation of interest to us is that 
any errors in the reporting of arctic temperatures. 
are likely to be on the side of making them too low.. 
So that in case any readers have doubted the accu- 
racy of previous explorers they may set their, minds. 
AL TEStiia) poy ty! 7 

When part of Greely’s party had gone almost as 


[139 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


far north on the Greenland coast as Newman’s Bay, 
Sergeant Brainard made this rather remarkable dis- 
covery: 

THE MUSK-OX 

“Just before going into camp, Sergeant Brainard 
discovered on that winter’s snow the dung of a musk- 
ox, which he thought could scarcely be a week 
dropped. He well says: ‘This should be positive 
proof that the animal does not migrate south with 
the sun and return the following year as the sun 
advances, as many assume to be his habit, but remains 
in some well sheltered valley or ravine during the 
winter darkness, subsisting on whatever comes his 
way.’ This incident (Greely adds) and my personal 
experience, as well as that of the British expedition, 
leaves no doubt that the musk-ox is a regular inhabi- 
tant of Grinnell Land and Northern Greenland the 
entire year. 

We admit the above proves that the ox does not 
migrate to the south. For we have seen already 
other instances where the trend of animal and bird 
migration was not to the south. But in our other 
cases there was a migration. But it was to the 
north. It is absurd to suppose that the musk-ox, 
which is certainly not an eater of birds cr a hunter 
of fishes, could live on “what came its way” in ra- 
vines, even sheltered ones during the Arctic winter. 
What would be wandering about the ravines or 
valleys of the bleak lands here mentioned, during 


[ 140 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the long Arctic night, anyway? No, the musk-ox 
goes for his winter where he can find food in abun- 
_ dance. And that is north—over the lip of the polar 
orifice. 
LOCKWOOD’S OBSERVATIONS 

One of Greely’s assistants, Lieutenant Lockwood, 
explored the Greenland coast to a point ninety-five 
miles beyond the farthest ever seen by his prede- 
cessors. Among the results of his journey were 
observations of tidal and ice effects which convinced 
him that “open water spaces exist in the Polar Ocean, 
and its main ice moves the whole winter.” This 
main ice, it will be remembered is the ice that forms 
the barrier to further sledge travel toward the north. 
That it is moving all the time proves conclusively 
that there is warmer open water to the north of it 
which is constantly breaking it up and keeping it 
from encroaching any further north. In this obser- 
vation of his assistant General Greely concurs fully, 
and he gives additional data to prove that the polar 
pack ice is not unified and continuous “even in the 
early spring when the floe-ice is most solid”. 

General Greely also says that the depth of the sea 
at this high point augurs the inconsiderable exten- 
sion of Greenland to the northward. He thinks it 
may extend to the eighty-fifth parallel and that deep 
sea will be found after that. That would certainly 
indicate that any land suitable for animal breeding 
and feeding—such as we have seen there must be—is 


[ 141 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


still farther north, on the other side of that deep sea, 
in other words, over the lip of the polar orifice. 


COMPLETE CONIFEROUS TREES 


Greely then gives us an account of some of his own 
explorations in Grinnell Land in the summer—Fort 
Conger being his base. Among his interesting dis- 
coveries were two complete coniferous trees in a 
ravine near Lake Heintzelman, embedded for two 
thirds of their length in the ground. “It seemed 
evident from their position that they must have been 
brought there as driftwood, and gradually covered 
up by the earth washing down from the adjacent hill 
side”. Now the only explanation Greely could make 
of their drifting to that spot—it was twenty feet 
above the level of the nearby lake—was that “within 
a tolerably recent period this valley has been an arm 
of the sea”. But that explanation hardly holds water. 
The trees were not fossilized and were partly ex- 
posed to air which, as Greely goes on to tell us—but 
without seeing how it invalidates his idea—was quite 
warm. Now in such circumstances the wood of the 
trees would soon rot away. Certainly warming and 
wetting and freezing and warming again due to 
being exposed in such a climate would soon finish 
any wood—much sooner than the time required for 
the valley once near the sea to be left many miles 
away from it. No, it would seem as if those trees 
must have been carried from some other source. 


[ 142 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


And to regard them as carried by some glacial move- 
ment from the northern orifice would seem a much 
simpler explanation. It is interesting to note that 
this whole valley, by the way, was free from snow 
and covered with luxuriant vegetation. And, as was 
indeed the case generally in these explorations, there 
was an abundance of animal life observed. 


BUTTERFLIES AND BEES, 


A little later Greely passed to the other side of 
this valley and found that he had reached the water 
shed of this part of Grinnell Land, the other side 
of the ridge draining into Lake Hazen. Here he 
did actually see a glazier on the north side of that 
lake—which ought to have given him a hint about 
the two trees he had so recently discovered. He also 
caught, at that point, a butterfly, and saw three shuas, 
two bumble bees and many flies. A little later a 
member of his party saw two tern and a long-tailed 
duck. What was even more remarkable, they next 
came across a flock of twelve to fifteen birds which 
resembled snipe but were unlike any actual species 
ofthat bird he had ever-seen or read of. . Other 
ducks were also seen and nine musk-oxen. Incident- 
ally, a few nights the party were unable to obtain 
much sleep owing to the large number of flies which 
bothered them incessantly. The temperature was as 
high as 50 degrees Farenheit, and never went below 
47 degrees and there was always enough dead willow 


[ 143 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


around for fuel. As the days went on, more musk- 
oxen were seen, a great variety of birds, and quite a 
little reindeer moss—although it was considered that 
it mever grew as far north as Discovery Harbor. 
Near Lake Hazen a deserted Eskimo encamp- 
ment was found, its surroundings “marked by luxur- 
iant vegetation of grass, sorrel, poppies, and other 
plants. Some specimens of the sorrel in this locality 
must have been eight to ten inches in height, and 
they grew in such quantities that we plucked them 
by the handful. 

“A short distance beyond the encampment the 
party were enlivened by the appearance of a young 
hare, which we concluded to catch..-.These exer- 
tions caused profuse perspiration which saturated 
our clothing.” At the junction of Lake Hazen and 
Ruggles River, the air was so balmy, the sky so 
blue—flecked with true cumulus clouds so rare in 
the Arctic, and the poppies and other flowers so gaily 
blooming that Greely said he could well imagine 
himself in the “roaring forties” instead of in this 
high latitude—eight degrees from the pole. He 
goes on: ; 

‘“T examined carefully the surroundings of the 
camp. ‘The flora appeared to be the same as that 
existing in the vicinity of Discovery Harbor, with 
the exception of two flowers which were different 
from any others I had seen. Specimens were pro- 
cured and carefully arranged, but unfortunately 


[ 144] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


were spoiled during my trip by being soaked beyond 
recognition while fording the many streams.” 


A FLOWER OF UNKNOWN SPECIES 


“Tt is to be regretted that I paid but little attention 
to the Arctic flora, and in the press of other matters 
neglected to make a description of these plants. Ano- 
ther plant, of the heath family, was found in large 
quantities, one or two specimens of which were sent 
back to Conger.” 

Yes, we regret too, that that plant, so strange that 
Greely could not even approximately place its family, 
was not preserved. It might have shown us that there 
are other places from which plants may come as well 
as those regions which we know so well that all the 
plants that grow in them are identified and classified. 


AN ESKIMO ENCAMPMENT 


the mnext interesting discovery was of Eskimo 
inhabitants in which the explorers found a variety 
of articles including “several articles of worked bone 
whose use I could not surmise, and the character of 
which were unknown to our own Eskimo. ‘The 
bone articles were of walrus, narwhal, and whale- 
bone, the first being the predominating material, 
from which small articles had been made.” 

That is a very interesting point, for this reason. 
The same tribes living under the same circumstances 
would naturally have the same tools. The fact that 


[ 145 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


these long departed people whose habitations were 
now being explored had tools the use of which could 
not be guessed by the Eskimo with the party shows 
that they were a tribe who had not been in communi- 
cation with any of the Eskimo tribes we know, 
but who had developed along their own lines and 
made their own tools for their own purposes. Is it 
not quite possible that they had come up from the 
land the other side of the orifice at some time long 
paste 

This supposition is strengthened by the fact that 
their houses showed no sign either of having been 
covered with stones or uf having stones around 
them to secure the skin coverings as they are secured 
by the Greenland Eskimos. Either they covered 
their houses in some way peculiar to themselves or 
they never covered them at all. In any event here 
was a peculiarity which set them off from the ordi- 
nary Eskimos. ‘The explorers searched diligently 
to see if the remains of any of these people were to 
be found.. They had left so much apparently valu- 
able material that it looked as if they might have 
died there. But with the most diligent searching, not 
a bone could be found—and Greely adds that not 
even the bone of a dog was visible although the camp 
looked as if the people had lived there for at least 
two years. He adds, by the way that bones of musk- 
oxen or other animals are very rarely found in Grin- 


[ 146 J 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


nell Land. And that can surely only mean that there 
is some way by which these animals can leave Grin- 
nell Land. 


TEMPERATURE RISES CONSIDERABLY 


At about this time, by the way, the temperature 
had gone up to 74 degrees Farenheit—a very high 
summer temperature which made marching uncom- 
fortable. And even on hills two thousand feet high 
there was not a trace of snow. 


GENERAL RESULTS OF EXPEDITION 


Greely ends the account of these summer explora- 
tions by telling the general results obtained by him- 
self and his party. He says he has ascertained beyond 
any doubt that the interior of North Grinnell Land 
is not what it had always been supposed, but was a 
fertile land, filled with rich pasturage for musk-oxen, 
and that, like it, Greenland, was also only an ice-girt 
and not an ice-covered land; that—in conjunction 
with other explorers’ observations—it was safe to say 
that in north Greenland also there was abundant 
pasturage and fertility. Such fertility, he adds, Nor- 
denskiold had looked for, but he had looked seven 
hundred miles too far south. In other words Nor- 
denskiold found only the icy desolation which is 
usually thought to characterize the poles, but he 
found it not because he got too near the pole but 
because he was not near enough. 


[147 J 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


HUNTING WAS GOOD 

So ends the first volume of Greely’s account of his 
three years in the Arctic regions. ‘The second vol- 
ume opens with his account of his second winter 
there. Throughout that period there was plenty of 
hunting, birds of many species being shot and owls 
caught and kept in captivity, as well as a white fox. 
Before proceeding to describe his further explora- 
tions Greely sums up his ideas regarding physical 
conditions to the north of Greenland. Of course he 
believed in a polar area which was not open to the 
interior—but all the same he is sure that that sup- 
posed area is “washed by a sea which, from its size 
and consequent high temperature....can never be 
entirely ice-clad”’. He also states that Nordenskiold 
believes the polar sea to be open. ‘That ships in the 
ice during Arctic winters nevertheless drifted—along 
with the ice—to the northward he thinks is confirm- 
atory evidence of such an open sea. And yet he 
hesitates to say much about the matter himself as he 
thinks that the ice-belt which cuts off the far northern 
regions may be very thick and hard to get through. 
This makes him think that “the water space to the 
northward can only be entered in extremely favor- 
able years by the Spitzbergen route.” But the great 
point is that Greely admits there is a water space to 
the north. 

We now pass on to the observations in ethnology 
and natural history which Greely made during these 


[ 148 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


explorations. How far north did he find evidence of 
human life? He quotes the explorers in the British 
Polar expedition of 1875 as finding such evidences 
in 80 degrees, 25 minutes north, and proceeds: 


ESKIMO REMAINS 


“Our own discoveries of Eskimo remains to the 
northward of the eighty-first parallel were numerous 
_and interesting. Evidences of temporary or perma- 
nent occupation noted at Cape Baird, at the head of 
Ella Bay, at numerous points in the vicinity of Fort 
Conger, in Black Rock Vale, on the shores of Sun 
Bay, on both sides of Chandler Fiord, and in the 
valleys in the south side of Lake Hazen. Many of 
these remains were in the interior of Grinnel Land 
at distances from the sea varying from fifty to one 
hundred miles by the route necessarily followed.” 

The reader will remember the detailed description 
of one of these discoveries which we have already 
quoted. He goes on: 

“The remains indicate that these natives possessed 
dogs, sledges, coniferous wood in considerable quan- 
tity, stone lamps, iron in small quantities, the bone of 
the narwhal and walrus. The presence of combs 
proves that they were accompanied by women. The 
ornamentation of the combs, and an elaborately 
worked ivory cap for the top of an upstander, show 
that these people were above the lowest levels of 
savage life.” 


[149] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


We have already noted the fact that some of these 
houses indicated permanent residence but that there 
were no graves, showing that the Eskimos had access 
to some unknown localities. And here is some more 
evidence bearing upon that very interesting point: 


WHERE DID THE ESKIMO GO? 


~ “Much as I could have wished to find evidences 
of long continued occupancy of these lands by the 
Eskimo, yet I was forced to a contrary conclusion. 
The lack of graves only is quite conclusive on this 
point. I opine that favorable years and the migration 
of the reindeer and musk-oxen gradually led these 
natives northward along the coast of Grinnell Land, 
and later into its interior. Of the many abandoned 
encampments in Grinnell Land only two evidenced 
other than temporary: occupancy, and these, juaging 
from the surroundings, of but few years.” 

Seeing, however, that these discoveries were made 
so far north it immediately occurs to us to wonder 
why Greely supposes that these Eskimos must have 
come up from the south and then disappeared into 
the north. If the northern lands past the ice-barrier 
are so fertile that these Eskimos were gradually led 
to explore them and settle there—for we have no 
evidence of their ever retracing their steps—is it 
not just as sensible to suppose that they came from 
there in the first place, and that the encampments 
Greely saw represented these people’s “furthest 


[ 150 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


south” rather than a northern adventure. And the 
fact that they differed so much from the Eskimos 
with whom Greely was acquainted—the reader will 
remember the tools whose uses he could not make 
out—certainly strengthens this view. In fact Greely 
admits that one other explorer, Fielden of the Bri- 
tish expedition, who thinks that a section of the 
Eskimo race known as the Arctic Highlanders did 
come from the north. 


WHALE AND OTHER ANIMALS 


Now as to natural history notes. Greely saw the 
white whale in Smith Sound as far north as 81 de- 
grees, thirty-five minutes, and a school of narwhal 
was seen at the same time. Perry, he says, in 1827 
saw a white whale five minutes further on. He 
makes further notes on the presence of the narwhal 
and says that there is evidence to show that this 
creature “reaches even the polar sea to the north of 
Grinnell Land, as a horn was picked up near Floe- 
berg Beach in 82 degrees, 27 minutes, by Lieutenant 
Last’ 

We now turn to the musk-ox. We have already 
seen traces of this animal described by Greely. In 
these notes he tells us some very remarkable things 
about their distribution. It seems that there was 
hardly an island among those he visited in the far 
north where there were not traces of musk-oxen. He 
thinks they must have crossed Smith Sound at one 


[151] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


time, as their skulls have been found in Inglefield 
Land north of the seventy-eighth parallel. Members 
of his party discovered them as far north as 83 de- 
grees, 3 minutes north. Where did they come from? 
While Greely does not know he makes one valuable 
statement. He found out by actual trial that the 
musk-ox will not travel over ice: “both from obser- 
vation of our musk-calves who could not be driven on 
it, and from the tracks of adults, which followed 
carefully in places the rough, rugged shore of Rug- 
gles River rather than cross snow-covered ice by a 
shorter route.” 

So it is obvious that these animals must have some 
permanent and all year round northern habitat from 
which they emerge at times for breeding purposes, 
and this habitat can hardly be other than the com- 
paratively warm polar area which communicates 
with both the outer and the inner surfaces of the 
earth. 

Coming to smaller animals we find that the ringed 
lemming, a member of the rat family, is found in 
great numbers in the extreme north of Grinnell Land 
and in Greenland as far as 84 degrees, 24 minutes 
north, and although the animal loves to wander but 
hates to travel on ice, it is not found further to the 
south—showing that all its freedom of movement 
is toward the north. The polar hare has also been 
found in latitude 83 degrees, ten minutes, and both 
in Greenland and Grinnell Land. Also it has been 


[ 152 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


proved, by Greely and others that the lemming and 
hare do not hibernate in these latitudes. 

In connection with the polar bear Greely makes 
these interesting statements: 


WHY DO HUBIVOROUS BEARS GO NORTH? 


“Lieutenant Lockwood, in May, 1882, noticed bear 
tracks (going northeast) on the north coast of Green- 
land, near Cape Benet in 83 degrees, 3 minutes, the 
highest latitude in which the animal has ever been 
known. . . . Fresh bear tracks were seen in Sep- 
tember and October, 1883, near Cape Sabine, com- 
ing from and returning in the direction of Bache 
Island. 

“With Feilden I cannot understand why the bear 
ever leaves the rich hunting-field of the ‘North 
Water’ (the name of a land or district) for the deso- 
late shores of the northward. Nordenskiold has 
pointed out that the bear is sometimes a herbivorous 
animal, but vegetation and animal life are equally 
scanty to the northward from Cape Sabine.” 

Had Greely been in possession of the facts laid 
bare in this book he would not have wondered. 
Naturally he and the other explorers mentioned 
above were considerably astonished when they saw 
that bears went away off north apparently to no- 
where, but the bears must certainly have known 
where they were going. 

Greely then goes on to give instance after instance 


felts 3e] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


of the appearance of the fox in these latitudes, as 
well as of the wolf and the ermine. He next takes 
up the ornithology of the region. After mentioning 
a number of other birds seen in latitudes above 80, 
he has this very remarkable observation: 


A BIRD THAT LOVES THE ARCTIC 


“Ross? Gull. . . The observations of Murdoch at 
Point Barrow show that this bird, in thousands, pas- 
ses over that point to the northeast in October, none 
of which were seen to return. He says, “They ap- 
peared to come in from the sea to the west or north- 


west, and travel along the coast to the northeast.’ ” 


If these birds never returned south, where did they 
gor Our theory supplies the only possible answer. 

We will leave Greely’s observations on the Aurora 
Borealis—which can only be fully explained by our 
theory—for a separate chapter. 


GREELY TELLS OF-HIS DISCOVERIES 


After Greely had been rescued and brought back 
to civilization there was naturaily a great deal of 
discussion as to the extent and value of his observa- 
tions. Perhaps the most important announcement 
that Greely himself made—although it might not 
have been considered so at the time, for it was not 
understood—was that before the British Association 
for the Advancement of Science. That body met in 
Montreal in 1884, and Greely addressed them. Here 


[ 154 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


is part of what he had to say, taken from a report 
of the meeting printed at the time in “The Scientific 
American” and which was reprinted in many places. 

Greely remarked that one of the surprises of the 
journey was his discovery that the further north he 
went the greater was the depth to which the ground 
thawed. While Lieutenant Ray took observations 
at the point where his station was established—where 
he waited while Greely went on to the north—Greely 
took similar observations ten degrees further north 
than Ray, and he found that at almost his northern- 
most point the ground thawed for a depth of twenty 
to thirty feet. On the other hand, Ray did not find 
the thaw extending to anything like that depth—at 
ten degrees further south. 


THE FARTHER NORTH, THE WARMER 

Now that is proof positive that the further north, 
after a certain point one goes, the warmer it becomes. 
Other evidences of warmth at the Arctic have been 
derived from observations of the temperature of 
water and air currents, but it is very interesting to 
have this additional testimony based on the tempera- 
ture of the earth itself. 


TIDAL FLOW OBSERVATIONS 


But that was not the most startling thing Greely 
had to say. The report from which we quote goes on: 


“In a subsequent speech he (Greely) took occa- 


[ 155 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


sion to say that a fact had surprised him. It was the 
discovery that when the tide was flowing from the 
north pole it was found by his observations that the 
water was warmer than when flowing in the oppo- 
site direction. He took the trouble to have prepared 
an elaborate set of observations showing this won- 
derful phenomenon, which would eventually be pub- 
lished. To him these peculiarities were unexplain- 
able, and he hoped that the observations would be 
studied by his hosts, and some explanation found in 
regard to the thermometric observations of the ex- 
pedition.” 

About the same time as the above meeting took 
place, Mr. George Kennan of Washington, D. C., 
who took a prominent part in the relief of Greely’s 
expedition, was asked about the importance of his 
discoveries. (See Dieck’s Wonders of the Polar 
World). Mr. Kennan said: 

“Lieutenant Greely has not only taken away from 
Commander Markham of the British Navy the ‘blue 
ribbon of Arctic discovery’ for the highest latitude 
ever attained in any part of the world, but he has 
greatly extended the limits of the Nares explorations 
both in Greenland and Grinnell Land, and has given 
a severe blow to Captain Nares’ palaeocrystic ice, 
and the theories which the latter founded upon it. 
The fact that two of Greely’s sledge parties were 
stopped by open water in the polar basin, and that 
both were at times adrift in strong currents which 


[ 156 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


threatened to carry them helplessly away northward, 
would seem to show that the polar basin is not the 
solid sea of ancient, immovable ice which Nares 
described, and which he declared was ‘never navi- 
gable.” 
OPEN WATER AND WARMER 

Now there is testimony of the most unimpeach- 
able character and it is as plain as it is unimpeach- 
able. There is no misunderstanding it. We find 
Greely ten degrees farther north than Lieutenant 
Ray, finding not merely that the winds and waters 
were warmer than further south but that this warmth 
was so constant that the ground thawed to a depth 
of thirty feet. We find that whenever water flowed 
from the north pole it was warmer than when it 
flowed from the south. We find that there is no sea 
of “ancient ice” as Nares and explorers before him 
thought but that there is an open polar basin with 
strong currents. Now if that open water that stopped 
Greely were only a small sea that did not extend very 
far, there would be no such currents in it as are 
described above. ‘Those currents testify to the fact 
that here is a sea which does extend to the northern 
regions. Of course Greely could not imagine how 
those warm currents could come from the north and 
he could not account for the strong currents in the 
sea. But our reader, who remembers the conforma- 
tion of the polar regions, can easily see how these 
things would be. The water inside the polar orifices, 


es 


A JOURNEY TO THE: EARTH’S INTERIOR 


warmed by the inner sun, would naturally form a 
very strong current as it met the cooler waters of the 
outside polar regions. Quite as naturally that water 
would keep clear from ice the great polar sea. Ice 
from the south could only come up to a certain 
point—the point where Greely and other discoverers 
found “open water’—and after that the sea would 
get warmer and warmer. It is interesting to note 
that one of the people interviewed in regard to the 
Greely discoveries at the same time as the other 
speeches and interviews were made, which we have 
quoted, said that further Arctic exploration had better 
be postponed until air ships could be built with which 
to undertake it. Well, at the time that may not have 
sounded like a practical suggestion, but it is now a 
thing of the very near future. And we shall see then 
just what one would expect from the observations 
made by Greely. For there is only one possible ex- 
planation for them and that is the explanation given 
in this book. 


[ 158 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


(Came eo) hi as uaa 


NORDENSKIOLD’S VOYAGES 

The next Arctic explorer whom we shall follow 
in his voyages is Adolf Erik Nordenskiold whose 
experiences in the Arctic extended over twenty-one 
years. Nordenskiold was a Finnish professor, and 
on all his expeditions he was accompanied by a staff 
of scientists. So the following observations are no 
mere pieces of unsupported guess-work but the find- 
ings of a man whose name has been made known the 
world over by the brilliant and thorough-going na- 
ture of the discoveries he made. 


TWENTY-ONE YEARS’ WORK 

Nordenskiold’s Arctic expeditions were made un- 
der the auspices of the Swedish government. His 
first serious attempt at a polar voyage was made in 
1861, starting out from ‘Tromsoe for a comprehensive 
_ survey of Spitzbergen. ‘The party had just passed 
Amsterdam Island, according to Alexander Leslie 
who prepared the book, “The Arctic Voyages of 
Adolf Erik Nordenskiold,”’ when a very interesting 
observation was made. Here is the account of it: 


BIRD AND INSECT LIFE 
“During the whole voyage no birds had been seen 
but auks and black guillemots, on their way north- 


[159] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


ward in immense flocks to revisit their old breeding 
grounds. The same night, however, (23rd May), 
great numbers of barnacle geese (Anser bernicla) 
were seen flying towards the northwest, perhaps to 
some land more northerly then Spitzbergen. ‘The 
existence of such a land is considered quite certain 
by the walrus-hunters, who state that at the most 
northerly point hitherto reached such flocks of birds 
are seen steering their course in rapid flight yet far- 
ther toward the north.” 

Passing over Nordenskiold’s notes on the abun- 
dance of insect and other life in Spitzbergen, we note 
his surprise at the sudden way in which summer 
heat set in. In July the ice suddenly began to break 
up especially where it had been undermined by the 
waves—which would also sound as if the water of 
the sea had already reached a fairly high tempera- 
ture. He was also surprised at the immense number 
of auk which he found as soon as he began his sum- 
mer expeditions. ‘Between Dym Point and Cape 
Fanshawe the Swedes passed the greatest auk-fell 
they had hitherto seen... .The air is darkened by the 
number of fowl flying out of such a fell when a gun 
is fired, without it being possible to distinguish any 
diminution in consequence in the number of those 
which sit still so quietly that some, which had made 
their nests, could be reached from the boat and taken 
with the hand.” 

“The party next entered Lomme Bay and after 


[ 160 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


landing found a grassy terraced slope on which they 
killed three deer. The party could hardly believe 
them to be the same species of deer that they had 
seen at Treurenbery bay four weeks before. Then 
they were as lean as if they had consisted entirely of 
skin, bones, and sinew; these, on the contrary, might 
have competed as fat stock... .” 


VOYAGE AFTER VOYAGE CONFIRMS 
OBSERVATIONS 

Now it is interesting to note that these observations 
were confirmed and extended by Nordenskiold’s fur- 
ther researches, and eleven years later we find him 
making similar discoveries and having this to say 
about them (this observation being made when he 
was on Parry Island) : 

“Numerous traces and remains showed that even 
these islands lying in the neighborhood of $1 degrees 
are inhabited in great numbers by very large animals, 
which, if the facility of procuring the necessaries of 
life were the only condition of their choice of habitat, 
ought to betake themselves to far more southerly 
regions. Numerous foot-prints of bears, often fol- 
lowing the traces of the reins for long distances, 
showed that a dangerous enemy to the reindeer lives 
in this neighborhood.” 

A little later the explorer notices that the reindeer 
they shoot are, as he had once noticed before, much 


[ 161] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


fatter than those shot in his southerly journeyings. 

Now those facts are sufficiently remarkable, but 
we will not dwell upon them now because we have 
further evidence along the same line that will be 
developed later in this book and that simply explains 
once and for all the reason of these observations 
which puzzled this great scientist. 


More in line with the sort of evidence which we 
are now particularly considering are Nordenskiold’s 
observations upon the actual character of the north- 
ern lands. We first note that his views coincide with 
the other authorities we have quoted as to the ice 
only reaching to a certain latitude and then ending. 
Here is what he says on that subject: 


EXPLORERS TOO AFRAID .OF ICE, HE SAY3 


“Of this inland ice the natives entertain a super- 
stitious fear, an awe or prejudice, which has, in some 
degree, communicated itself to such Europeans as 
have resided long in Greenland. It is only thus that 
the curious fact that in the whole thousand years 
during which Greenland has been known, so few 
efforts have been made to pass over the ice farther 
into the country can be explained. There are many 
reasons for believing that the inland ice merely forms 
a continuous ice frame, running parallel with the 
coast, and surrounding a land free from ice, perhaps 
even wooded in its southern parts, which might, per- 


[ 162 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


haps, be of great economical importance to the rest 
of Greenland.” 


ESKIMOS GO NAKED 

Again, some years later than the time at which the 
above observation was made, the explorer on his 
“North-east passage expedition” noticed that at cer- 
tain points which he was enabled to visit along the 
northeastern coast of Siberia, the absence of what 
geologists call “erratic blocks” or blocks of earth and 
rock moved by glaciers. ‘This absence proved to 
him that there does not exist “in the sea to the north- 
ward any such glacial land as Greenland.” He also 
made an observation which is very interesting taken 
in connection with our note in the last chapter about 
the Eskimos. ‘The women of the Eskimo tribes with 
whom he came in contact on this voyage, whenever 
they are in their inner tents, “go quite naked, with 
the exception of a narrow girdle, probably a rem- 
iniscence of the dress the people wore when they 
lived in a milder climate.” 

It will be noticed that between the Eskimo 
memories of a milder climate and all the evidence 
of a milder climate provided by the abundance of 
animal life—always going to the north to feed or 
breed we are having quite a lot of warmth in our 
polar explorations. And Nordenskiold noted on 
this same voyage that the north seemed to be the 
source of heat. He says in one place: 


age [1637] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


WARM WEATHER COMES WITH 
WIND FROM NORTH 


“The wind had now changed from west to north 
and northwest. The temperature became milder and 
the weather rainy, a sign that there must have been 
great stretches of open water to the north and north- 
west.” 


[ 164 } 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAPTER: V IL: 


WITH NANSEN IN THE NORTH 

Nothing can illustrate better how really ignorant 
the scientists have been concerning the real consti- 
tution of the polar regions than the ridicule which 
many arctic explorers, and especially Greely, who 
seemed to believe in his later years that the pole was 
really a solid sheet of ice, cast upon Nansen when he 
annnounced his plans for a polar expedition. 


SCIENTISTS LAUGH AT NANSEN 
It was in the spring of 1888 that Fridtjof Nansen | 
startled the scientific world “by announcing his deter- 
mination to cross the ice-dome of Greenland”. Nan- 
sen’s idea was that instead of starting to explore 
Greenland from the west coast, leaving behind stores 
and a refuge that could be turned back to in case of 
failure, to start from the barren east coast and make 
toward the west where there were settlements and 
help. Thus if he got half way across and found 
great difficulties the natural thing would not be to 
turn back—as was the temptation when food and 
shelter were behind and only further hardship in 
advance. It was on the expedition so planned that 
Nansen observed ‘“‘a teeming current on the east 
coast of Greenland, piling the floes into the south” ; 
he had found the same on the west side. 


[165 J 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


HOW THE JEANNETTE DRIFTED 

“He had learned that wreckage from the Jeannette 
had drifted through the polar sea and to Julianehaab 
in the southern part of Greenland; also that Siberian 
larch and other woods indigenous to northern Europe 
had been found on the Greenland shores... .”—as his 
story is summed up in D. M. Edwards’ “The Toll 
of the Arctic Seas.” So, arguing from these facts, 
he further startled the scientific world by announcing 
that it would be possible to build a ship strong 
enough to withstand all the ice buffeting and drift 
in it across the polar sea. He was not trying to find 
the exact mathematical point that formed the earth’s 
extremity, he said, but “to investigate the great un- 
known regions that surrounded the Pole.” 


GREELY IS SKEPTICAL 

Greely denied that the wreckage which had been 
found was that of the Jeannette—she was the ship 
on which De Long sailed for the Arctic in 1879—and 
he did not think that the Fram—as Nansen’s ship 
was called—could stand the pressure of the Arctic 
ice. It is a curious thing that Greely should have, 
after all his arctic experience, gone back to such 
old-fashioned ideas as he seemed to have, but he 
painted a picture of what the ship would have to 
endure which was quite falsified by events—and in 
fact, Greely admitted, after Nansen came back, that 


[ 166 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


he had been wrong. So much for scientific infalli- 
bility. 

Let us now follow Nansen upon his two explora- 
tions—that across Greenland and that which at- 
tempted the pole, and see what a lot of evidence he 
gathers which all points in one direction. 


NANSEN IS SUCCESSFUL 

On the Greenland expedition-—which was quite 
successful, even to fulfilling practically every plan 
which Nansen has scheduled—he found evidence 
that while the lower part of Greenland was covered 
with an immense ice dome, rising to approximately 
8,000 feet above sea-level, there was every evidence 
of fertility and warmth further north and a more 
open sea along the coast of Greenland as the party 
skirted it to the north in the small boats which they 
had carried overland with them. 


MOSQUITOES IN GREENLAND 

While they were still on the east coast, traveling 
north, a swarm of mosquitoes attacked the party one 
morning and made life miserable for them. ‘They 
were so thick that the explorers could not get their 
food into their mouths before it was covered with 
the insects. And Nansen adds that Greenland is, 
as a matter of fact one of the worst countries in the 
world for that pest. The east coast was also found 
prolific in sea-fowl, including gulls, guillemots, and 
eider-duck. Ina fresh water tarn in a meadow they 


[ 167] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


found a new species of fish. Sorrel grew in abun- 
dance. On some nights it was too warm to sleep in 
the tent. In talking to the Eskimo and in reading 
accounts of earlier explorers, Nansen constantly heard 
legends and rumors of the fertile land to the north— 
behind the ice barrier. Nansen also tells of a dust 
on the ice which was observed by Nordenskiold and 
which he thought came from some other planet. 
Nansen, however, thinks that it is simply dust from 
some mountains that are not covered with ice and 
that it is blown over to the Greenland ice sheet. But 
it seems as if the quantities were too great to assume 
that it comes from any of the mountains known to 
explorers in those regions. We would be inclined 
to think that it comes from the other side of the 
polar ice-ring—from the land to which this book 
gives us the key. He also recounts, on the authority 
of Nordenskiold, the appearance to that explorer 
when in Greenland, of two ravens flying from the 
north: pretty good evidence that there was land 
there that was not covered with ice. After Nansen 
had penetrated the interior for some distance he was 
visited by a snow-bunting which was flying north— 
thus strengthening the evidence supplied by the two 
ravens. 


SUCCESS LEADS TO FURTHER PLANS 


But the chief importance of Nansen’s first expedi- 
tion was that it led him to think he could reach 


[ 168 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the north pole, and it is on this second journey that 
he really begins to make remarkable observations. 
By the beginning of 1894, Nansen was between 79 
and 80 degrees north, not making very rapid progress 
as they were shut in by the ice and dependent on the 
drift. And then Nansen noticed that whenever the 
wind blew from the north the temperature rose con- 
siderably. He says: | 


WARMTH WITH NORTHERN WINDS 


“Tt is curious that there is almost always a rise of 
the thermometer with these stronger winds....A 
south wind of less velocity generally lowers the tem- 
perature, and a moderate north wind raises it. 
Payer’s explanation of this raising of the temperature 
by strong winds is that the wind is warmed by passing 
over large openings in the ice. This can hardly be 
correct, at any rate in our case, for we have few or 
no openings.” 

Nansen’s own idea was that the heat was caused by 
winds from the higher reaches of the atmosphere 
where it had not been cooled by contact with the ice. 
But in trying to explain the high temperatures in 
this way he forgot that-it was only the north winds 
which raised the temperatures and not the south 
winds. And where would the higher air get its 
heat from in any case? The heat must come from a 
definite source and in the far north the only possible 
source is the one which we have pointed out. 


[ 169 ] 


A JOURNEY TO.THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


MEETING A WALRUS 


The explorers had reached 79 degrees, 41 minutes 
when suddenly one day on the ice they observed a 
large walrus. Nansen—who was out on the ice— 
rushed back to get a harpoon but by the time he 
secured it the animal had disappeared. ‘There were 
no openings apparently in the ice, but the animal 
had vanished. He regrets that they were not pre- 
pared to capture it, but adds: 


“But who expects to meet a walrus on close ice in 
the middle of a wild sea of a thousand fathoms’ 
depth, and that in the heart of winter? None of us 
ever heard of such a thing before; it is a perfect 
mystery.” 

SUN UNEXPECTEDLY SEEN 

When the party reached 80 degrees, 1 minute, a 
remarkable observation was made which may be 
explained in more than one way: 


‘“.... about midday we saw the sun, or, to be more 


correct, an image of the sun, for it was only a mirage. 
A peculiar impression was produced by the sight of 
that glowing fire lit just above the outermost edge 
of the ice. According to the enthusiastic descriptions 
given by many Arctic travelers of the first appear- 
ance of this god of life after the long winter night, 
the impression ought to be one of jubilant excite- 
ment; but it was not so in my case. We had not 
expected to see it for some days yet, so that my 


[170] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


feeling was rather one of pain—of disappointment, 
that we must have drifted farther south than we 
thought. So it was with pleasure I soon discovered 
that it could not be the sun itself. The mirage was 
at first like a flattened-out, glowing red streak upon 
the horizon; later there were two streaks, the one 
above the other, with a dark space between; and 
from the main-top I could see four, or even five, 
such horizontal lines directly over one another, and 
all of equal length, as if one could only imagine a 
square dull-red sun, with horizontal streaks across 
its 
COULD IT BE REFLECTION FROM 
INTERIOR? 


Now it is quite a question whether the mirage that 
Nansen saw at this time was a mirage of the sun in 
our sky or whether it might not have been some sort 
of a reflection of the sun of the interior of the earth. 
Certainly he was not expecting to see the solar light 
at that time. 

Two or three days later this mirage of whichever 
sun it might have been was seen again. 

By spring the party had reached 80 degrees, 20 
minutes, and Nansen was surprised to find how warm 
the water was at a great depth. He remarks that on 
the surface the temperature of the water of the East 
Greenland current is just about the ordinary freezing 
point, while usually—at lower latitudes—the water 
falls as you get below the surface, so that at depths 


eer le] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


greater than a hundred fathoms it is from one to 
two Centigrade degrees cooler—but of course it does 
not freeze owing to the greater pressure and other 
factors. But here, on the contrary, in 80 degrees 
instead of from 60 to 70 degrees; he found that the 
deeper he took soundings the warmer the water was. 
He did not know where this warm water came from, 
but we can suspect. 


ARCTIC ICE NOT FROM COLD WEATHER 


In July, Nansen made a number of observations 
on the formation of ice and came to the conclusion 
that the thickness of the arct’c ice is not attained by 
direct freezing as a result of cold weather. Only a 
little ice is formed at a time, and the great hummocks 
and floes of which we read are simply formed by the 
ice packing and mass after mass being frozen up 
into great aggregates. 


SOUNDING THE POLAR SEA 


The next job Nansen set himself was deep sea 
sounding. He had expected the polar seas to be 
shallow and none of his lead-lines were long enough 
to touch bottom. So he sacrificed one of the Fram’s 
steel cables, unraveled it, and twisted two of the 
strands into a lead line of 2700 fathoms in length. 
With this he touched bottom at depths ranging from 
1800 to 2100 fathoms. He says: 


“This was a remarkable discovery, for, as I have 


fee] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


frequently mentioned, the unknown polar basin has 
always been supposed to be shallow, with numerous 
unknown lands and islands. . . .” 

From this assumption of a shallow polar sea it 
was concluded that the regions about the pole had 
formerly been covered with an extensive tract of 
land, of which the existing islands are simply the 
remains. ‘This extensive tract of polar land was 
furthermore assumed to have been the nursery of 
many of our animals and plant forms, whence they 
had found their way to lower latitudes. These con- 
jectures now appear to bear upon a somewhat infirm 
basis. 

The importance of those remarks is obvious. If 
the Polar sea in these latitudes is not shallow and if 
the land which is spoken of above never really existed 
in more extended form than the present islands where 
was that “nursery of many of our plant and animal 
forms’? If Nansen had only guessed it was not so 
very far away from the locality which has been 
assigned to it. Not the land that these explorers and 
scientists thought arose out of that shallow Polar 
sea, but a land just a little further away—the other 
side of the immense polar aperture. 

Meanwhile Nansen kept up his records of tem- 
peratures at various depths, and always found that 
while the temperatures fluctuated at various depths, 
they rose when very deep water was reached. 


meal 


A JOURNEY TO; THE “EARTH'S INTERIOR 
NUMEROUS ARCTIC BIRDS 


Numbers of birds visited the explorers from early 
summer on, including ice-mews, kittiwakes, fulmars, 
blue and herring gulls, black guillemot, skua, and 
snow-bunting. But these visits were eclipsed in inter- 
est by the following, which Nansen tells under date 
of August 3rd, 1894: , 

“On August 3rd a remarkable occurance took 
place: we were visited by the Arctic ross-gull. I 
wrote as follows about it in my diary: ‘Today my 
longing has at last been satisfied. I have shot Ross’s 
gull, three specimens in one day. This rare myster- 
ious inhabitant of the unknorvn north, which is only 
occassionally seen, and of which no one knows 
whence it cometh or whither it goeth, which belongs 
exclusively to the world to which the imagination 
aspires, 1s what, from the first moment I saw these 
tracts, I had always hoped to discover as my eyes 
roamed over the lonely plains of ice. And now it 
came when I was least thinking of it. I was out for 
a little walk on the ice by the ship, and as I was 
sitting down by a hummock my eye wandered north- 
ward and lit on a bird hovering over the great pres- 
sure-mound away to the northwest. At first I took 
it to be a kittiwake, but soon discovered it rather 
resembled the skua by its swift flight, sharp wings 
and pointed tail. When I had got my gun there 
were two of them together flying round and round 
the ship. I now got a closer view of them and dis- 


[ 174 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


covered that they were too light colored to be skuas. 
They were by no means shy, but continued flying 
about close to the ship. On going after them on the 
ice I soon shot one of them (and was not a little 
surprised on picking it up, to find it was a little bird 
about the size of a snipe; the mottled back, too, 
reminded me also of that bird. Soon after this I shot 
the other] Later. in the day there came another 
which was also shot....Some few days afterwards 
some more of these birds were shot, making eight 
specimens in all.’ ” 

Is it not a remarkable thing that these ross-gulls 
should have no known habitat as Nansen points out 
in the above paragraph? ‘They must live and breed 
somewhere, and as these specimens—the first two at 
all events—were actually seen to come from the north 
it is only reasonable to suppose that they came from 
that land which we assert is to be found on the other 
side of the ice barrier, in the interior of the earth. 


NANSEN GETS LOST 


The observations quoted above, the constant noting 
by Nansen that the weather is warmer than he had 
expected, the soundings of the sea, are all important 
but they are not so important, from the standpoint 
of making the reader understand Arctic voyaging, 
as what follows. The following words of Nansen 
have been picked out of page after page of his 
journals. And they all refer to one fact: that he 


[175] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


could not tell where he was. Before we quote these 
let us see just what they imply. When we read of 
Arctic explorers moving from point to point and 
calculating their whereabouts we are apt to forget 
that what sounds so simple when expressed on the 
page—such expressions as ‘‘We were now in so many 
degrees latitude and such and such a longitude’”—we 
are apt to forget that those figures may have been 
obtained under great difficulties or guessed at, and 
that they are often mere approximations. Unknown 
currents and other factors may make what is known 
as “dead reckoning” quite useless in the Arctic, and 
the unusual compass variaticns and the impossibility 
at times of making observations of the sun or stars 
lead the Arctic explorer very far astray. Now if 
the reader does not bear that in mind he is apt to 
think that Peary’s statement that he actually found 
the Pole knocks out our theory. But if he does bear 
that in mind and if he remembers, too, that Peary did 
not figure on the actual conformation of the polar 
region as we have pointed it out, he will readily see 
that Peary was mistaken in his assertion. And, apart 
entirely from the fact that there is no solid pole to 
discover, he will see how easily Peary could be 
wrong by noticing how far wrong Nansen is con- 
stantly getting. Only Nansen does not feel any hesi- 
tation about admitting it. And the fact that this 
competent explorer with all the science of navigation 
at his command has so much difficulty in finding 


[ 176 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


his way around in the polar regions shows how little 
is really known about them. Suppose that Peary 
made one such miscalculation as some of these that 
Nansen confesses to, and suppose that he used that 
calculation as a basis from which to make others: 
the error would be multiplied, and Peary might 
claim to find the Pole or anything else without being 
able to prove anything as to his exact location. 


HE 1S QUITE UNABLE TO LOCATE HIMSELF 


But here is the sort of thing which is constantly 
happening to Nansen. In the course of the voyage 
of the Fram through the Kara Sea in 1893, while 
they were still as far south as seventy-six degrees, 
two minutes north latitude: “or about 14 miles from 
what is marked as the mainland on Nordenskiold’s 
or Bove’s map”, we find: “It was hardly to be ex- 
pected that these should be correct, as the weather 
seems to have been foggy the whole time the explor- 
ers were here’”’. 

Right there we see two chances for error: foggy 
weather and the inaccuracy of maps—itself due to 
previous foggy weather or to any other cause. 

Nansen then proceeds: 

“Nor were we successful in finding Hovgaard’s 
Islands as we sailed north. When I supposed that 
we were off them, just on the north side of the 
entrance to Taimur Strait, I saw, to my surprise, a 
high mountain almost directly north of us, which 


eae] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


seemed as if it must be on the mainland. What 
could be the explanation of this? I began to have 
a growing suspicion that this was a regular labyrinth 
of islands we had got into. We were hoping to 
investigate and clear up the matter when thick wea- 
ther with sleet and rain, most inconveniently came 
on, and we had to leave this problem for the future 
to solve.” 
HE IS STILL LOST 

That is just one illustration of the uncertainties of 
Arctic travel. But it is by no means the only one. 
Here are a number of others taken from the records 
which Nansen made after ie had proceeded much 
further north. In February, 1895, Nansen left Sver- 
drup in charge of the Fram and started out on a 
northward sledge journey which he hoped would 
take him to the pole and from there to Spitzbergen 
by way of Franz Joseph Land. The start was made 
from latitude 83 degrees, fifty minutes north. Nan- 
sen was accompanied by Johansen and had six sled- 
ges well equipped, including an instrument which 
registered the mileage covered. One or two false 
starts were made, but at last the party got under way 
and by Friday, March 22nd, had reached a latitude 
of 85 degrees, 9 minutes north. One very interesting 
observation which was made at this point was of a 
“large frozen pool” which looked almost like a large 
lake. Nansen says “It is wonderful that these pools 
can form up there at that time of year.” 


[178 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 
FINDS ICE IS FROM FRESH WATER 


It is also noteworthy that the ice over which the 
party traveled was fresh: JNansen found that it was 
quite possible to quench the thirst by sucking it. By 
March 29, we began to get the sort of observation 
which we promised the reader: the observation 
which showed that the explorer could not determine 
his whereabouts. On that date, for instance, Nansen 
took an observation which showed him to be in 
latitude 85 degrees, 30 minutes. He says: “I could 
not understand this; thought that we must be in 
latitude 86 degrees, and, therefore, supposed there 
must be something wrong with the observation.” In- 
cidentally he also noticed other fresh water pools. 

By the time Nansen had reached a latitude of 
more than 86 degrees he found the temperature rising, 
and was far more comfortable than he had been 
further south. By April 14th, Easter Day, Nansen 
took the opportunity of being halted by lanes to make 
extensive observations, as he had allowed the watches 
to run down and wished to calculate the time from 
his observations. He had also determined not to 
try to get any further north on that trip and had 
shaped his course for Cape Fligely. But he was 
puzzled by his observations. He says: 

“T have calculated our previous latitudes and long- 
itudes over again, to see if I can discover any mistake 
in them. I find that we should yesterday have come 
farther south than 86 degrees, 5.3 minutes north; but 


F172] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


according to our reckoning, assuming that we covered 
fifty miles during the three days we should have come 
down to 85 degrees and fifty odd minutes.” 


NEITHER LATITUDE OR LONGITUDE 
IS RIGHT 

Meanwhile, he was also in doubt about his longi- 
tude. He assumed that it was 86 degrees East but 
adds in a footnote, “I felt convinced that we could 
not have reached such a westerly longitude, but as- 
sumed this for the sake of certainty, as | would rather 
come down on the east side of Franz Josef Land 
than on the west side. Should we reach the latitude 
of Petermann’s Land or Prince Rudolf Land without 
seeing them, I should in the former case be certain 
that we had them on our west, and could look out 
for them in that direction, whereas in the event of 
our not finding land and being uncertain whether 
we were too far east or too far west, we should not 
then know in what direction we ought to look for it.” 


PROOF THE ARCTIC EXPLORATION IS 
LARGELY GUESS WORK 


Now, we ask the reader if that passage does not 
prove conclusively that finding one’s position in the 
Arctic region is largely a matter of guess work and 
approximation and luck? Is it not possible that this 
difficulty is due to the downward curvature of the 
earth’s surface? 

Meanwhile, the explorer had sunshiny, mild and 


[ 180 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


balmy weather. On April 16th, in fact, the sun 
scorched quite unpleasantly. The tent was pitched 
in broiling sun, and for days after the atmosphere 
was equable and stagnant. 


WHERE DID THIS FOX COME FROM? 


On April 26th, Nansen has something very signi- 
ficant to report: 

“T was not a little surprised yesterday morning 
when I suddenly saw the track of an animal in the 
snow. It was that of a fox, came about W. S. W. 
true, and went in an easterly direction. The trail 
was quite fresh. What in the world was the fox 
doing up here? There were also unequivocal signs 
that it had not been without food. Were we in the 
vicinity of land? I looked around for it, but the 
weather was thick all day yesterday, and we might 
have been near it without seeing it. In any case, a 
warm-blooded mamal in the eighty-fifth parallel. 
We had not gone far before we came across another 
fox-track; it went in about the same direction as the 
other, and followed the trend of the lane which had 
stopped us and by which we had been obliged to 
camp. It is incomprehensible what these animals 
live on up here, but presumably they are able to snap 
up some crustaceans in the open water ways. But 
why do they leave the coasts? ‘That is what puzzles 
me most. Can they have gone astray? There seems 
little probablity of that.” 


[181 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


Well, this is not the first animal whose presence 
in the remote Arctic has startled explorers, and as 
we shall see it is by no means the last. They are so 
abundant in those supposedly bleak and inhospit- 
able regions that there is only one possible explana- 
tion of their presence: they must come from the inter- 
ior. They could not possibly have come from the south 
for, as we have seen it is further south than where 
they have been found that the Arctic explorer finds 
most of his difficulties. No, these animals and birds 
have their homes and breeding places in the interior 
of the earth, near the polar orifice, and it is from 
there they come and thither do they go. Have we 
not the explorers’ testimony time after time that 
these animals and birds have actually been seen on 
their way north? 


NANSEN CAN HARDLY SLEEP FOR HEAT 

“On May 4th, the explorer is again found comment- 
ing on the mild weather. One night, he says, he 
could hardly sleep for heat. In the day time he can 
lie in the tent basking in the heat from the sun. “Last 
night,” runs another entry, “it was almost too warm 
to sleep”. 

About May 19th, Nansen is again off his bearings: 

‘We can hardly be far from 83 degrees, 10 min- 
utes, North, and should have gained Petermann’s 
Land if it be where Payer supposed. Either we must 
be unconscionably out of our bearings, or the coun- 


[ 182 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


try very small. Meanwhile, I suppose, the east wind 
is driving us westward, out to sea, in the direction of 
Spitzbergen. Heaven alone knows what the velocity 
of the drift may be here.” 

A few days later he writes: 


“We ought to have latitude 83 degrees behind us, 
but as yet no sight of land. This is becoming rather 
exciting.” 

On May 27th he writes: 

“We are in latitude 82 degrees, 30 minutes, North, 
perhaps even a minute or two farther south. But 
it is growing more and more remarkable that we 
see no sign of land. I cannot explain it in any other 
“way than that we are some degrees farther east than 
Wwe suppose.” 

By May 3lst we find him saying “It is impossible 
that we can have far to go now.” But there is “still 
no glimpse of land; this is becoming more and more 
of an enigma.” 


CONFESSES LOCATION IS A RIDDLE 
TOoaIM 


. On June Sth, he has still the same story to tell. He 
wishes for a “final solution of this riddle which is 
constantly before me”. But by June 11th there is 
still no sign of land and Nansen says, “We do not 
know where we are, and we do not know when this 


will end.” 
A few days later he says: “I have calculated and 


[ 183 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


calculated and thought and thought, but can find no 
mistake of any importance, and the whole thing is 
a riddle to me. I am beginning seriously to doubt 
that we may be too far west after all. I simply can- 
not conceive that we are too far east.” 

On July 19th Nansen notes the large number of 
Ross’s gulls, which strike his attention as he cannot 
imagine where they can come from. He is still 
completely lost. 


LAND, BUT WHAT LAND? 


It is only on July 24th that he catches his first 
glimpse of land, which he had really seen a little time 
betore but had mistaken for clouds on the horizon. 
The two explorers made incredibly slow progress in 
their attempt to reach it. After traveling day after 
day and having to fight a bear that had followed 
them, they actually reached it early in August. After 
traveling on the land for a few days, Nansen makes 
this startling entry: 

‘This land grows more of a problem, and I am 
more than ever at a loss to know where we are.” 

Certainly, one would think that even if the explorer 
were lost as long as he was on the ice he would 
instantly find his bearings when he reached solid and 
permanent land. But as a matter of fact Nansen 
admits that he does not know even whether he is 
on the west coast of the archipelago of Franz Josef 
Land or whether he has fetched up on some other 


[ 184 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


coast altogether. He keeps on going, however, and 
a few days later writes: 


INCOM PREHENSIBLE 


“Where we are is becoming more and more incom- 
prehensible. There appears to be a broad sound 
west of us, but what is it?...... 

‘We must have come to a new land in the western 
part of Franz Josef Land or Archipelago, and so far 
west that we had seen nothing of the countries dis- 
covered by Payer, but so far west that we had not 
even seen anything of Oscar’s Land, which ought 
to be situated in 82 degrees, North, and 52 degrees 
East.” This was, indeed, incomprehensible, but 
was there any other explanation? 

A few days later Nansen notices that red snow on 
the glaciers which has been such a puzzle to explor- 
ers but which can only come from the interior of 
Epesearth, 

It may sound incredible, but in February, 1896, 
Nansen and Johansen have still not succeeded in 
discovering their whereabouts. They were specu- 
lating about getting home, and as to whether the 
Fram would reach Norway before them, and Nan- 
sen writes: 


MUST BE A HITHERTO UNKNOWN LAND 


“But where were we? And how great was the 
distance we had to travel? Over and over again I 
reckoned out our observations of the autumn and 


[ 185 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


summer and spring, but the whole matter was a 
perpetual puzzle. It seemed clear, indeed, that we 
must be lying somewhere far to the west, perhaps 
off the west coast of Franz Josef Land, a little north 
of Cape Lofley, as I had conjectured in the autumn. 
But, if that were so, what could be the lands which 
we had seen to the northward? And what was the 
land to which we had first come? From the first 
group of islands which I had called White Land to 
where we now lie, we had passed about 7 degrees 
of longitude—that our observations proved conclu- 
sively. But if we were now in the longitude of 
Cape Fligely, these islands must lie on a meridian 
so far east that it must fall between King Oscar’s 
Land and Crown Prince Rudolf Land; and yet, we 
had been much farther east and had seen nothing of 
these lands. How was this to be explained?....No 
we could not have been near any known land.... 
There were other things, too, that greatly puzzled 
me. If we were on a new land near Spitzbergen, 
why were the ross-gulls never seen there, while we 
had found them in flocks here to the north? And 
then there was the great variation of the compass. . 
The whole thing was, and remained, an insoluble 
Fraley 

The reader will at once see how the question of 
the presence of the ross-gulls only added to Nan- 
sen’s perplexity, as he could not know of the real 
facts: that these gulls were seen to the north because 


[ 186 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


they came from the north. And the extreme vari- 
ation of the compass in the arctic regions is not due 
to the fact that the magnetic pole does not coincide 
with the north pole, but is due to the peculiar con- 
formation of the region. In calculating the mag- 
netic pole’s position, geographers have not allowed 
for the actual shape of the earth at the polar regions. 
But that is a matter which belongs in another 
chapter. 

How Nansen gradually made his way south until 
he came to land that he knew and found his way to 
Cape Flora, where he met white men, does not con- 
cern us here. Suffice it to say that he could not even 
then discover, with all the maps at his disposal, just 
where he had spent the previous summer and win- 
ter, Ele-says: 


PAYER’S MAP DOES NOT HELP 


“Much of Payer’s map I found to coincide well 
enough with our own observations. But the enigma 
over which we had pondered the whole winter still 
remained unsolved. Where was Dove Glacier and 
the whole of Wilczek Land? Where were the is- 
lands which Payer had named Braun Island, Hoff- 
mann Island, and Freden Island? ‘The last might, 
no doubt have been identified with the southermost 
island of White Land but the others had completely 
disappeared. I pondered for a long time over the 
question how such a mistake could have crept into 


[ 187 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


a map by such a man as Payer—an experienced 
topographer, whose maps, as a rule, bear the stamp 
of great accuracy and care, and a polar traveler for 
whose ability I have always entertained a high 
respect”. 
WHAT NANSEN’S EXPERIENCE PROVES 

No further argument ought to be necessary to con- 
vince the reader that the polar regions are not as well 
known as we are given to suppose. Here is Nansen 
admitting that even with the maps before him, he 
cannot identify the mysterious land which he found 
after making a sledge voyage in which he did not 
once know just what his bearings were. And here 
is his pronouncement that lands which were defi- 
nitely marked on the map of one of the best known 
explorers and a man used to map making simply 
did not exist. Surely from those significant facts 
the reader can draw his own conclusion: that the 
statements of Arctic travelers relative to reaching 
the pole and discovering this land or that land, must 
be taken with a great deal of reserve. When in the 
near future an eroplane or dirigible shall actually 
travel over all these regions, the observers thereon 
will see much that no Arctic explorer has ever told 
us about, and they will fail to see some things which 
Arctic explorers have claimed they found. Such 
observers will see the great barrier of northern ice 
come to an end at the edge of a great polar ocean, 
and they will sail high over that ocean until they see,’ 


[188 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


even though it be in the midst of the Arctic winter, 
a sun that is shining all the time. And then they 
will know that they have followed the curve of that 
great ocean surface as it dipped out of sight of our 
horizon and began to wash the shores of the inner 
surface of the world, a surface divided even as the 
outer one is, into land and water, both steeped in 
perpetual but cloud-engirt sunshine, and both the 
abode of animal and vegetable life. There will be 
found the home of the ross-gull and the haunt of 
Arctic bear and fox. And beyond that polar orifice 
they will not only find those animals roaming and 
breeding, but they may see the mammoth alive there 
that is so often found dead in the Siberian ice. But 
to that immense animal, long thought extinct, we shall 
devote a later chapter. 


[ 189 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


GHAPTER IS 


WAS THE NORTH POLE DISCOVERED? 


Some people have said. that they would consider 
our theory triumphantly demonstrated if it were not 
for the fact that the North Pole had actually been 
discovered. What we have already said about the 
difficulty of finding one’s way about in the Arctic— 
and the same applies to the Antarctic—would suffice 
to cast some doubt upon the feat, but as the point 
is such an important one we will consider it in fur- 
ther detail, and show that neither Peary nor Cook 
was able to prove that he had reached the pole and 
that the scientific societies which considered their 
claims—especially the committee of his fellow coun- 
trymen who examined Peary’s proofs—agreed that 
in neither case could it be said authoratively that 
the explorer had reached the pole. 


THE FIRST CLAIM TO THE. POLE 

The first claim, of course, was made by Dr. Fred- 
erick A. Cook, who announced that he had reached 
the North Pole on-April 21, 1908. Then, within 
a few days of this announcement and the general 
acceptance of Cook’s claim by the world—although 
there were a few dissenting voices—there came a 
despatch from Peary to the effect that he had dis- 


[ 190 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


covered the Pole, reaching it, as he claimed, on April 
6, 1909, nearly a year after Cook’s alleged discovery. 
As Cook was the first to make the claim we will 
consider his claim first, noting, however that the 
difficulties of making proper observations, owing to 
the fact that in April the sun was only a few degrees 
above the horizon, applied to Peary as well as to 
Cook. Both were in a position where it was im- 
possible to make very accurate observations. 


PEARY’S RIVALRY 


The general acceptance of Cook’s claim was based 
on his prediction that he could establish by field 
notes and mathematical observations the truth of his 
claim. But on one excuse or another he never did 
produce all the notes he said he would. He claimed 
that Peary caused some of this data to be buried, 
which may be true. But at any rate it was not long 
before the first faith in Cook was succeeded by a very 
general skepticism. ‘This skepticism may have been 
started by Peary’s denial of Cook’s claim, a denial 
which was made promptly and vigorously in no 
uncertain or diplomatic language. But it was un- 
doubtedly fed by Cook’s own policy of not giving 
the world proper scientific data. In fact Peary’s 
sharp way of criticising Cook and the facts which 
soon after came out tending to show that Peary 
thought he owned both the polar regions and the 
Eskimos, and that he had taken some of the stores 


f 191] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


which Cook had cached pending his return from the 
north—all that created a great prejudice against 
Peary, and Cook seemed to have things all his own 
way. But he never submitted real proofs. 


‘MELVILLE IS SKEPTICAL 


And his despatches about the pole did not sound 
convincing to men who knew of conditions in the 
north. Rear-Admiral Melville, of the United States 
Navy, himself an old time arctic explorer said in 
an interview: 

“Tt was the crazy despatches purporting to have 
come from Dr. Cook about the conditions he found 
there, and other things, that caused a doubt in my 
mind about Cook’s having found the pole.” 

The London Daily Mail said: 

“The long message in which Cook recounted his 
journey was by general consent pronounced uncon- 
vincing, and the further particulars which he com- 
municated since landing at Copenhagen have not 
removed all ground for doubt...... A large section 
of the public still entertains doubts and asks why 
it is he has not brought with him his journal and 
detailed observations to establish the truth of his 
statements.” 


TITTMAN’S REMARKS LEAD DIRECTLY 
1LO-OUR THEORY 


Dr. George Tittman, head of the coast and geo- 
detic survey at Washington was asked if Cook’s claim 


[ 192] 


oJ OWRNEY TO: THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


to have been at the pole could be checked up by com- 
paring it with what scientists knew would be the 
conditions at that spot. His answer was in itself 
almost an admission that the time was ripe for our 
own theory to be given to the world. For what he 
did was to acknowledge the bankruptcy of science 
when it came to having knowledge of that region. 
He said: 

“There are really no scientific theories as to what 
is immediately around the pole. There are some 
theorists who think that there is an open sea and 
some who think that a fertile spot is there. Scien- 
tific men are inclined to think that there may be 
little difference in immediate conditions close to the 
pole from those in the Arctic regions miles from 
EneTe,. 

That is really a remarkable admission from a 
scientist. For, if the orthodox scientific idea about 
the polar regions is right, it ought to be colder there 
than anywhere else. And yet Dr. Tittmann admits 
that practically all scientists agree that this is not 
the fact. Some, he says, think there is an open sea 
there and others say there is fertile land. We can 
see why some of them think there is open sea there 
because, as we have already seen, all explorers who 
have gone far enough north have found an open sea. 
But why should any scientists think there is fertile 
land at the pole? It seems impossible on their own 
theories of a solid earth with increasing cold as you 


[ 193 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


go north. Even if the cold at the poles was not 
enough to freeze the sea up, how could it be warm 
enough to produce fertility? The answer is, that the 
scientists who say that are simply men who are honest 
enough to follow all the evidence. They have seen 
the evidence already cited in this book of animal 
life and vegetation in the north, but they had no 
idea of our theory which alone explains that life. 
But they went as far as they could. It is the scien- 
tists who have gone that far already, who try to find 
room in the north for fertile land—as the only ex- 
planation of the facts which we have already cited— 
it is these scientists, we say who will be the first to 
give their adherence to our theory. For it alone 
gives a logical explanation of the facts which they 
admit but cannot explain. 

But at any rate, Dr. Tittmann had no light to throw 
on Cook’s claim except insofar as Cook reported 
neither open water nor fertile land, and in view of 
the unanimous discovery by explorers of open water 
in the regions of the polar orifice, it is very clear 
that Cook did not go as far north as he thought he 
went. 

THE ACADEMY DESERTS COOK 

And as a matter of fact when the Swedish Academy 
of Sciences and University of Copenhagen went over 
his alleged proofs they decided that he had not 
proved that he reached the pole. Of course, they 
were not in a position to state positively that he had 


[ 194 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


not reached the pole, and Cook made much of the 
fact that their verdict was what he called “neutral”. 
But the fact remains that they did not support him. 

And finally, we may note that in the book which 
Cook wrote to substantiate his claims, the book which 
he said would contain his case for the public’s judg- 
ment, his final word, he himself admitted that he did 
not actually reach what is usually called the pole, 
but only approximated it. He says: 


COOK ADMITS HE DID NOT GET THERE 


SDiaslvactuallysreach the North Poler When’ I 
returned to civilization and reported that the boreal 
Center had been attained, [ believed that I- had 
reached the spot toward which valiant men had 
stramied ton more than three hundred years... ./. If 
I was mistaken in approximately placing my feet 
upon the pin-point about which this controversy has 
raged, I maintain that it is the inevitable mistake 
any man must make. To touch that spot would be 
ame accidents, 5s. Mr. Peary’s case rests upon three 
observations of sun altitude so low that, as proof of 
a position, they are worthless.” 


PEARY’S PROOF WORTHLESS 


We may now glance at the sort of proof that Peary 
brought forward to substantiate his claim. In the 
first place, it is notable that he did not lose a minute 
in trying to discredit Cook. He had no sooner 


[1959 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


reached Labrador than he telegraphed home as | 
follows: 

“Cook was not at the North Pole on April 21, 1908, 
or at any other time. This statement is made 
advisedly.” 

“Delayed by gale. Don’t worry about Cook. 
Eskimos say Cook never left sight of land. Tribe 
confirms.” 

And to the Associated Press he wired: 

‘“‘Cook’s story should not be taken too seriously. 
The two Eskimos who accompanied him say he went 
no distance north, and not out of sight of land. Other 
members of the tribe commemorate their story.” 

And later: 


‘Do not trouble about Cook’s story or attempt to 
explain any discrepancies in his statements. ‘he 
affair will settle itself. 

‘He has not been at the pole on April 21st or any 
other time. He has simply handed the public a gold 
brick. 

‘These statements are made advisedly and I have 
proof of them. When he makes a full statement of 
his journey over his signature to some geographical 
society or other reputable body, if that statement 
contains the claim that he has reached the pole, I 
shall be in a position to furnish material that may 
prove distinctly interesting reading for the public. 

‘ROBERT E. PEARY.” 


[ t96is 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 
PEARY ALSO LACKED WITNESSES 


Of course one trouble with Cook’s claim was that 
he had no witnesses of his deeds. The testimony of 
the Eskimos was worthless for they knew nothing: 
about making observations. But what was the sur- 
prise of the public to learn soon after this that Peary 
had no witnesses either. 

In that interesting and very fair book on the sub- 
ject of the polar controversy, “The Discovery of the 
North Pole,” being both Cook’s and Peary’s stories 
with an introduction by General Greely, edited by the 
Honorable J. Martin Miller, the editor says: 

“Like Cook, Peary stood practically alone amid 
the desolation of ‘farthest north’. Cook had with 
him two Eskimos who, as described by him, were 
panic-stricken and prayed to their deity. They were 
in no sense sharers of the emotion of their white mas- 
ter. And so it was with Peary, with the difference 
that his colored personal attendant was there to wit- 
ness the triumph. One Eskimo—who was there— 
Egingwah by name—no doubt, looked on rather 
eymicallyat-Peary sdeeds. . 2... 

“That Peary sent back all his white companions 
and pushed on alone to the pole caused a little sur- 
prise when first it became known. Yet it was recog- 
nized as just that the leader and inspirer of it should 
have all the glory. His were the risks; then why 
not his the honor? So, with bitter disappointment, 
perhaps, yet with unquestioning obedience to orders, 


[ 197] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


the faithful companions of Peary stopped, one by 
one, within a few days’ march of the pole and let 
him go ahead with his one swarthy companion.” 

Now we cannot share the editor’s sympathy with 
Peary in this matter. Not only had his companions 
shared his risks and thereby earned a part in the 
glory, but if Peary were not generous enough to 
acknowledge that, he ought to have seen the value 
of their corroborative evidence of his achievement. 
If Cook merely camped around for a few days barely 
out of reach of land, and then came back with a big 
claim, what was to prevent Peary simply going on a 
few miles ahead of his companions and then making 
a few observations, with nobody to verify them or 
check them up, and then come back and make any 
announcement he pleased? 

Then Peary came back to civilization and it was 
found that several things about Cook’s story which 
made it sound dubious were equally characteristic 
of Peary’s story. He had taken even fewer obser- 
vations of his alleged position at the Pole than Cook 
had done. Where Cook was doubted when he said 
he made fifteen miles a day in sledge traveling, 
Peary claimed to have made over twenty. As the 
Honorable Mr. Miller says: 

‘Peary was the only white man in his party to 
peaciithe poles. a. He alone made observations and 
reckonings at the pole. None of the men with him 
knew anything about determining latitudes or long- 


[ 198 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


itudes. They could not have known they had reached 
the pole unless Peary told them. Like Cook, Peary 
brought back practically his own word alone to sup- 
port his claim that he had attained the earth’s apex. 


PEARY’S FIGURES SELF-CONTRADICTING 


“When we come to rate of travel, Cook’s fifteen 
miles a day seems modest in comparison with the 
distance Peary covered. When near the eighty- 
eighth parallel, Peary decided to attempt to reach 
the pole in five days’ marches. According to his 
story, he made twenty-five miles on the first day, 
twenty on the second, twenty on the third, twenty- 
five on the fourth and forty—yes, forty—on the fifth. 
On these last five days he traveled at an average rate 
of twenty-six miles a day. | 

“And on the return trip from the pole to Cape 
Columbia he made even better time. He tried, he 
says, on the return trip, to make double the distance 
he covered on his dash to the pole. ‘As a matter of 
fact, he declares, ‘we nearly did this, covering regu- 
larly on our return journey five outward marches 
in three return marches.’ 

“Tt is easy to figure out .the average rate of speed 
he made on his return trip. He started back from 
the pole, he says, on April 7th and reached Cape 
Columbia on April 23, covering the 450 miles in 
sixteen days. This is a daily rate of 28.12 miles 
a day. 


[ 199] 


A. JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


“Will the Arctic experts who declared it impossi- 
ble for Cook to make fifteen miles a day charge 
Peary with falsehood when he says he made forty?” 

One day, it will be remembered Peary actually 
claims to have made forty miles. Any reader who 
has been on a walking tour and knows what it is to 
walk forty miles a day on good roads with an inn to 
rest in at times, can tell what that would mean. Here 
was Peary, with his dogs to look after, his camp to 
make at night, his observations to make, his cooking 
to do, and certainly some repair work occasionally, 
making from twenty to forty miles a day. Oh but, 
the reader may exclaim, the dogs carried him along 
much faster than walking. But as a matter of fact 
they did not. Peary admitted that his pace was 
slower than walking—only he admitted it when he 
was not thinking of the bearing of the admission. 
It was when the newspaper men were interviewing 
him in Labrador. One of them, who did not know 
much about Arctic traveling asked: 

“Did you ride?” 

“Rider” inquired the undaunted Peary, aston- 
ished. “Sir, in Arctic expeditions a man is lucky if 
he is able to walk without pushing his sledge. Usu- 
ally he may grip the rear and thrust it ahead. It is 
like guiding a breaking plow drawn by oxen. You 
must also expect at any moment that the sledge may 
strike some pressure ridge that will wrench you off 
your, feet 


[ 200 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


So it comes to this: that in order to reach the 
so-called north pole a man must be able to do some- 
thing as arduous as—and quite similar to—pushing 
a breaking plow drawn by oxen through arctic ice 
at speeds varying from twenty to forty miles a day, 
and keep it up for eight days, after doing almost 
equally arduous work for months. 


MILLER THINKS QUESTION INSOLUBLE 

Is it any wonder that the Honorable Mr. Miller, 
after giving all this data sadly concludes that: 

“The question whether Cook or Peary discovered 
the North Pole may never be solved. It bids fair 
to become one of history’s conundrums, and to re- 
main a matter of one man’s word against another.” 

Du aitereall Wir Willer, if there is no’ polé“to 
be discovered it is obvious that neither of your two 
heroes discovered it. The question will become 
relatively unimportant when we state it in its real 
form: Which of these men got furthest north? 
Surely that will not matter so much when we really 
explore the polar regions and find that what each 
man was after was simply a myth. 

Now any doubt that we have thrown upon Peary’s 
achievements by our words above is not a doubt 
raised by us alone. When Peary came to submit his 
proofs to investigation, the committee that went into 
the matter, afterwards acknowledged in congress that 
Peary had not, any more than Cook, proved his 


point. 
[201 J 


A JOURNEY ‘TO-THE PARTHS, INTERIOR 


PEARY’S OWN QUOTATIONS SHOW 
HIM UP 

How far he was from being able to prove it we 
may see by comparing some of his own statements. 
The following quotations were taken from Mr. 
Peary’s own book, “The North Pole: Its Discovery, 
1909”. We reproduce both the quotations and some 
comments that were made on them at the time the 
book was published: 

“We turned our backs upon the pole at about 
four o’clock of the afternoon of April 7th.’ 

‘“According to a statement made on page 304, Mr. 
Peary took time on his return trip to make a sound- 
ing of the sea five miles from the pole. 

“On page 305 Mr. Peary says: ‘Friday, Apri! 9th, 
was a mild day. Ali day long the wind blew strong 
from the north-northeast, increasing finally to a 
gale. And on page 306, ‘We camped that night 
at eighty-seven degrees, forty-seven minutes.’ 

“Mr. Peary thus claims to have traveled from the 
pole to this point, a distance of 133 nautical miles, 
or 153 statute miles, in a little over two days. This 
would average 76.5 statute miles a day. Could a 
pedestrian make such speed? During this time Mr. 
Peary camped twice, to make tea, eat lunch, feed 
the dogs, and rest—several hours in each camp. 

“On page 310 Mr. Peary says: ‘We were coming 
down from the North Pole hill in fine shape now, 
and another double march, April 16-17, brought us 


P2029 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


to our eleventh upward camp at eighty-five degrees, 
eight minutes, one hundred and twenty miles from 
Cape Columbia.’ 

“According to this, Mr. Peary covered the distance 
from eighty-seven degrees, forty-seven minutes, on 
April 9th, to eighty-five degrees, eight minutes, on 
April 17—a distance of 149 nautical miles in eight 
days. This averaged twenty miles a day. 

“On page 316 he says: ‘It was almost exactly 
six o’clock on the morning of April 23rd when we 
reached the igloo of Crane City at Cape Columbia 
and the work was done’. 

“Mr. Peary left eighty-five degrees, eight min- 
utes, on April 17th, according to his statement, and 
travelled 120 miles to Cape Columbia in six days, 
arriving on April 23rd. This last stretch was at the 
rate of twenty miles a day. To sum up he traveled 
from the North Pole according to his statements, 
to land, as follows: 

“The first 133 nautical miles southward in two 
days, at the rate of 66 nautical miles, or 76.5 statute 
miles, a day; the last 279 nautical miles in fourteen 
days, an average of twenty miles a day. 

“According to Peary’s book, Bartlett left him at 
eighty-seven degrees, forty-six minutes, and Mr. 
Peary started on his final spurt to the pole, a little 
after midnight on the morning of April 2nd. By 
arriving at the point where he left Bartlett on the 
evening of April 9th, he would have made the dis- 


[ 203 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


tance of 270 miles to the pole from this point and 
back, in a little over seven days.” 


MATHEW HENSON’S STATEMENTS 

“In the New York World, of October 3rd, 1910, 
page 3, column 6, Mathew Henson makes the fol- 
lowing statement: ‘On the way up we had to break 
a trail, and averaged only eighteen to twenty miles 
a day. On the way back we had our own trail to 
within one hundred miles of land, and then Captain 
Bartlett’s trail. We made from twenty to forty miles 
a day.’ 

‘At the rate of twenty miles a day on the way up, 
which Henson claims was made, it would have taken 
six days of twenty-four and eighteen hours to cover 
the distance of 135 miles from eighty-seven degrees, 
forty-seven minutes, to the pole. Adding the thirty 
hours Mr. Peary claims he spent at the pole for 
observations, eight days would have elapsed before 
they started back. Peary says the round trip of 270 
miles from eighty-seven degrees, forty-seven minutes 
North to the pole, and the return to the same latitude, 
was done in seven days and a few hours. 

“Why has Mr. Peary never been asked to explain 
his miraculous speed, and the discrepancy between 
his statement and Henson’s?” 


CONGRESS IN A DILEMMA 
Well one may answer that by saying that as the 
Cook business had created one great international 


[ 204 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


scandal, neither the authorities at Washington nor 
the American press were anxious to have another. 
One American had claimed that he had reached the 
pole. Foreign kings and princes had congratulated 
him, foreign universities had showered honors on 
him, only to find out afterward that there was a great 
probability that they had been duped. If, following 
that, another American, an officer in the navy, had 
made a similar claim and that claim had been proved 
fraudulent, this country would not only have been 
the laughing-stock of the world but our national 
honor had been tarnished. Every American after 
that would have been regarded with suspicion. 
American scientists would be distressed. The United 
States would have been placed in an intolerable 
situation. Other nations would have pointed the 
finger of scorn at us, and our prestige would have 
been lowered all over the world. 


INVESTIGATIONS A YEAR LATER 


No, Congress could not afford to make any public 
statement that Peary had played false or that he had 
even been honestly mistaken in his claim, for even 
a “mistake” would have been made a matter of ridi- 
cule in the foreign press. So what was actually 
done? First a committee of the National Geogra- 
phical Society was formed which rendered a favor- 
able verdict after a cursory examination of Peary’s 


[ 205 1 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


field notes, and it was hoped that nothing more would 
happen. But something did happen. That verdict 
was challenged on the floor of Congress. A con- 
gressional investigation was held a year later—when 
the clamor had died down—and its verdict was that 
Peary’s proofs did not prove; that his achievement 
rested wholly upon his assertion—an assertion not 
backed up by a single white witness. 

And the end of the story is just as significant. 
Great efforts were made by various parties to have 
the whole matter threshed out, following the verdict 
of “not proven” by the Congressional committee. 
But Congress and the goveri.ment were afraid to act. 
Peary, significantly enough, never asked for an inves- 
tigation and never replied to some very damaging 
charges brought against him not only by Cook but by 
independent societies. It was known that he wished 
to end his career after the polar exploit by retiring 
with the rank of Rear-Admiral—which carried a 
pension with it of $6,000. Friends of Peary brought 
into Congress, a bill so retiring him. One would 
think that before such a reward was granted the 
charges would be pressed and Peary’s claimed find- 
ing of the pole confirmed. But such was not to be. 
No inquiry was ordered. It is interesting to note 
that Professor Moore, president of the National 
Geographical society which was financially inter- 
ested in Peary’s exploits, was one of the most active 


[ 206 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


men in lobying for this bill, and that he has since 
been dismissed from his position in the government 
service. 
SUMMING UP THE LESSON OF THIS 
CONTROVERSY 

And what is the significant end to this story? It 
is that although the bill was signed it was changed 
before the signing took place, and the false assump- 
tion of Peary’s “Discovery of the Pole” was stricken 
out. ‘That means that the government officially re- 
fused to endorse Peary although it could not afford 
to accuse him of anything that would lower us in 
the eyes of the world. 


And there the matter rests. Neither Peary nor 
Cook has been able to prove that he reached the pole. 
Owing to the notorious difficulty of finding one’s 
way around in a neighborhood where observations 
from the sun are not possible in winter—and the sun 
was barely above the horizon when both explorers 
were there—where distances are deceptive, where 
the compass is useless, where even Nansen admits 
he was adsolutely lost—owing to all these difficulties 
we must not be astonished at the failure of these two 
men to find out where they really were. We need 
not even impute to them bad faith; both may have 
been honest in their claims although Peary’s attacks 
on Cook and his failure to answer Cook’s charges 
do reflect on him. But we cannot help noticing the 


[ 207 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


difference in the reports of Arctic conditions which 
these two men make and those made by all previous 
explorers. Every, previous investigator, who got 
really far north, found out the truth about the open 
polar sea and the rise of temperature as he neared 
the pole. The case for those two truths is bullet 
proof. Only Peary and Cook failed to see those two 
great facts, and in that failure we read the truth of 
their journeys—that they were not in the neighbor- 
hood of the polar orifice but at points further south 
than that. Had they gone further they would have 
found open water and increasing temperatures. Had 
they then possessed boats they could have launched 
on that sea and the way to the goal and to the truth 
would have been clear. They would have seen the 
earth’s central sun shining even in the winter, shin- 
ing all of the twenty-four hours and all of the year, 
and they would have discovered new continents and 
oceans, a new world of land and water and of forms 
of life some of which have vanished from the outside 
of the globe. 


But it was not to be. The discovery of that new 
land was left to those who, following the theory out- 
lined in this book, and using such safe means of 
Arctic traveling as the aeroplane or dirigible, will 
fly over the eternal barrier of ice to the warmer sea 
beyond and over that until they come into the realm 
of perpetual sunlight. 


[ 208 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


AMUNDSEN IN THE ARCTIC REGIONS 

Since the above was written there have appeared 
despatches in the newspapers from Nome and Copen- 
hegen to the effect that Captain Roald Amundsen 
is making an attempt to reach what is generally 
known as the North Pole. As Amundsen thinks he 
discovered the “South Pole” it will be very inter- 
esting to watch his progress in the north. Quite pro- 
bable he may discover the polar opening and thereby 
prove that he did not discover the South Pole. 

According to these despatches, Captain Amundsen 
was on the shore of the Bering Sea, at a Russian 
trading post called Anadir, late in April. Details 
were not forthcoming. Captain Bartlett, who com- 
manded the Roosevelt on Peary’s expedition, thinks 
the fact that Amundson has come to that point means 
that something has gone wrong with his plans. 
Meanwhile Captain Ejnar, an Arctic explorer, takes 
issue with what Nansen has said about Amundsen’s 
expedition, namely, that it is possible for him to 
reach his objective—the so-called pole—by drifting 
with the ice from Point Barrow. Captain Nikkel- 
son thinks that Amundsen has either given up his 
attempt or has come to this trading post to get new 
supplies in order that he may make another attempt. 
The latter would seem to us to be the true expla- 
nation, as Amundsen is a persevering explorer, and 
after his experiences in the Antarctic, it is not likely 
that he would fail in his northern explorations. So 


[ 209 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE TPARTH’S IN TERIOR 


the polar opening may be discovered sooner that 
most people expect. 

To Amundsen may go the credit of being the first 
man to verify our theory—supposing that he has the 
proper equipment which certainly ought to include 
some form of eroplane. 


[210 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CEUA A Rex 
TWO CONGRESSIONAL OPINIONS ON 
PEARY AND’ COOK 
To back up what we have just said of the claims 
of Messrs. Peary and Cook to have discovered the 
poles, let us briefly quote from two members of the 
United States House of Representatives on the claims 
of these men. These remarks were made by capable 
thinkers after earnest study of the question and they 
ought to have a good deal of weight. Their speeches 
were reprinted in the Chicago Examiner, September 


24th, 1916. 
HELGESEN ROASTS PEARY 


The Honorable Henry T. Helgesen, representa- 
tive from North Dakota, said: 

“T am satisfied that Peary did not discover the 
pole, for two reasons: 

“1. For all the talk there has been about scientific 
data brought back by him and furnished as evidence, 
the fact is that his claim to the discovery in question 
is backed by his unsupported word, and by nothing 


else. 
AbL OPRHER® PRPARY CLAIMS DISPROVED 


“2. All of the other claims to discoveries in the 
Arctic regions by Peary have been proven false. 
Why, then, should we'accept as true his unsupported 
statement that he arrived at the pole? 


[211] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


“So much for my reasons for believing that Peary 
did not reach the pole. Now it remains for me to 
prove that these reasons are based on facts, and not 
on mistakes or personal prejudices. 

‘Peary claims to have discovered the Peary Chan- 
nel—an alleged northern boundary of Greenland— 
and, therefore, to have been first to establish the fact 
that Greenland is an island. 

‘That discovery alone, if a true one, would be suffi- 
cient to establish for Peary a reputation as an explo- 
rer. But, unfortunately for him, it has been proved 
by explorations subsequent to his that no such chan- 
nel exists. | 

“The Peary discovery of the channel was made 
incidentally to his expedition of 1901-1902. Five 
years later the Danish explorer, Mylius Erichsen, 
looked in vain for this interesting geographical fea- 
ture. 

“In 1912 the denial of its existence was verified by 
another explorer, Knud Rasmussen, who reported 
that he found, where the channel was alleged by 
Peary to be, no water at all, but ‘an ice-free upland, 
abounding in game’. 


PEARY “DISCOVERIES” ERASED FROM MAPS 


“Tn view of this and other evidence, Peary Chan- 
nel has been struck off the maps of our navy Depart- 
ment and off the charts of the Coast Survey. 

“The Peary Channel was alleged to open at one 


£2123] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


end into a great body of water, which Peary called 
the East Greenland Sea. This sea was mapped by 
Peary in 1901-1902 as extending from 82 degrees, 
ten minutes north latitude and 31 degrees west longi- 
tude to about 12 degrees west longitude. Here, 
undeniably was another and very important geogra- 
phical discovery. But again, unfortunately, the 
Mylius Erichsen expedition, five years later, ascer- 
tained definitely that the vast water-space in question 
was, all of it, dry land. 

“This was verified by the later expeditions of 
Mikkelsen and Rasmussen. Consequently the East 
Greenland Sea has been removed from our Govern- 
ment maps. 

“But the Navy Department charts of the Arctic 
still show, to the northwest of Grant Land, an unde- 
fined land mass named Crocker Land, which Peary 
claims to have discovered in 1906. ‘To geographers, 
Crocker Land offered an obvious and tempting invi- 
tation; and, accordingly, in 1913, an expedition was 
sent out by the American Museum of Natural His- 
tory to explore it. The expedition got back not long 
ago, with the report that ‘there was no such place’. 
The site of the alleged Crocker Land was wholly 
occupied by a broad expanse of polar sea. 

“So Crocker Land, like other Peary discoveries, 
must vanish from the Government and other maps. 

“In 1900, Captain Otto Sverdrup, a Norwegian 
explorer, discovered a big island off the coast of 


[ 213-] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


Greenland which he mapped under the name of 
Axel Heiberg Land. Subsequently, Peary declared 
that he had ‘seen it first’ two years earlier, and gave 
it the name of Jesup Land. It was put down that 
way on our government maps. 

“Peary, in his book, ‘Nearest the Pole’, published 
in 1907, says (page 202) that in July, 1898, he saw 
this land mass from ‘the heights of the Ellesmere 
Land ice-cap.’ ; 

“This statement is really rather remarkable; for 
on pages 296-297 of the same book, Peary says that 
he spent all the time from July 4th to August 13th 
of that year in making the trip from New York to 
Cape York, and in ‘hunting walrusses and assem- 
bling my party of natives’ in the immediate neigh- 
borhood of the latter place. 

‘Fle was thus simultaneously in two places separ- 
ated from each other by 300 miles. But, even though 
gifted with supernatural: vision, he could hardly 
have seen Axel Heiberg Land (alias Jesup Land) 
where he locates it descriptively, because it is much 
further south and a good deal farther west. 

“Evidence in this case being deemed ample, the 
Government maps and the maps of the National Geo- 
graphical Society have eliminated Jesup Land and 
have put Axel Reiberg Land in quite another place, 
the Geographical Society giving Sverdrup full credit 
for the discovery. 

‘Peary Channel being proved a myth it follows 


[214] 


A JOURNEY TO! THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


that Peary is wrongly credited with having discov- 
ered that Greenland is an island. Undoubtedly, 
Greenland is an island. The fact, however, was not 
proved by Peary. It was satisfactorily determined 
by the Greely expedition of 1882—ten years before 
Peary. 

“Inasmuch as Peary’s other so-called discoveries 
have, each and every one been disproved, how can 
his latest claim to the discovery of the Pole be 
accepted on his unsupported word, which is all he has 
to back him up? 

“Peary himself says that an explorer’s proof must 
fundamentally be based upon his past record. But 


“Certainly he has offered no proof. ‘Two secre- 
taries of the Navy, (the service in which he was 
employed), have said that they have never received 
any data from Peary to substantiate his statement 
that herreached’ the Pole. 


PEARY’S MISSING DATA 

“Peary claimed that all his data were given to 
the Coast Survey. 

“The only proofs received from Peary by the 
Coast Survey were a set of tidal observations al! made 
at coast points and none of them made on the sledge 
expedition en route to or returning from the place 
Peary chose to call the Pole. In addition to these 
there was only a set of alleged soundings, respecting 


[ 215 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


which the story he tells is so contradictory as to dis- 
credit them prima facie. 

“At a Congressional ‘hearing’, Mr. Tittman, then 
Superintendent of the Coast Survey was asked: 
‘What evidence is there that this party consisting of 
Peary and others, reached within striking distance 
of the, Poler? 


‘EITTMAN WILL NOT SUPPORT PEARY 


“Mr. Tittman replied: ‘I have no evidence of 
that, except the line of soundings under Peary’s sig- 
nature’. 

“Peary brought back nothing—no witnesses, no 
worthwhile scientific proof, nothing but nis unsup- 
ported word to back up his claim to have discovered 
the pole. But, inasmuch as his reputation for vera- 
city has been completely shattered by the fact that 
every other claim of discovery made by him has 
proven false, there is nothing that the world can 
accept as demonstrating that at any time he has been 
anywhere near the Pole.” 


FESS ROASTS COOK 


And here is what the Honorable S. D. Fess, repre- 
sentative from Ohio has to say about Cook’s claim: 

“Tt is well for us to remember that the forum 
selected by Dr. Cook for the determination of his 
claims was the University of Copenhagen. He sent 
it what he declared were his proofs of his alleged 
discovery of the North Pole. 


[ 216 ] 


Mae mn 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


“The committee’s final verdict and the verdict of 
the university consistory is expressed formally in the 
finding of the latter: 

‘“ “The documents handed the university for exam- 
ination do not contain observations and information 
which can be regarded as proof that Dr. Cook 
reached the North Pole on his recent expedition.’ 

“Rasmussen, a noted Arctic explorer, who has . 
favored Dr. Cook’s claim, was called in as an expert 
by the university’s committee; he is reported as say- 
ing: 

‘“*When I saw the observations I realized that it 
was a scandal. The documents which Dr. Cook sent 
to the university are most impudent. It is the most 
childish sort of attempt at cheating.’ ” 


DEMOLISHING HIS CLAIMS 


And the Congressman quotes other authorities to 
the same effect and reviews Cook’s methods, both in 
other matters and after he had returned from the 
north. But we do not need to follow him into those 
details. We have quoted enough already to serve the 
purpose of showing that the skepticism which we 
expressed in the last chapter about the claims of 
Peary and Cook is fully justified and held generally 
by intelligent men who have looked into the matter. 

The above was written some months before the 
death of Rear-Admiral Peary, and had it been writ- 
ten either after his death or while he was in danger of 


[217] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


death its controversinal tone might have been modi- 
fied «tn ‘deference toethe man) For atlas *not! the 
personality of Peary which we are discussing but the 
scientific results of his voyages. He was a brave 
man, a devoted scientist, and an explorer of the 
first rank. Dedicating himself to Arctic exploration 
at an early age, making dash after dash to the far 
northern regions as well as many quite successful 
surveying and mapping trips during which the actual 
discovery of the so-called pole was not his objective, 
his whole life is an example of which his countrymen 
may well be proud. That he worked on a theory of 
the polar regions which this book shows to be false, 
is not to his discredit. He had to take the data and 
deductions of science as he found them. His job was 
not to theorize so much as it was to explore. This 
he did to the best of his ability—and that ability was 
great. If we have seemed in the foregoing pages to 
impuen his results we would here stress the fact that 
we regard him not in any way as an untrustworthy 
witness but simply as the victim of a false idea of 
the nature of the earth. Had he worked in the light 
of our theory his results would have been different. 
To say, as we have said in the preceding pages, that 
his observations and reports are self-contradictory 
is not to dishonor Peary. Does not Nansen also say 
the same thing of his observations? As long as we 
have Nansen’s own confession that he could not find 
his way, had no idea where he was, and actually 


[218 ] 


DIOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


found that his observations were quite out of keeping 
with the facts—as long as we have this confession 
from Nansen there is certainly no imputation of 
either incompetency or dishonesty in saying that 
Peary was likewise misled. 

We say this in justice to the memory of a brave 
man who, had he lived, would have undoubtedly 
been one of the fairest-minded critics of our own 
theory and who would have been the first to take an 
interest in any attempt to place it among the cer- 
tainties of science by the method of actual explora- 
tion. 


[ 219 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAP THK USE 


THE MAMMOTH 

This is not the longest chapter in this book, but 
to anyone who wishes to prove our theory “in a 
hurry” it may be commended, for it brings proof 
to bear so startling, so incontrovertible, that we won- 
der how these observations could have been made by 
the regular scientists and their significance been over- 
looked. But then the regular scientists had a theory 
of the earth’s composition in their minds before they 
made these observations. And the theory being 
there first would not budge to make room for the 
truth. 


FROM WHERE DOES THE MAMMOTH 
COME? 


These observations concern the presence in the 
polar regions of the mammoth. That scientists should 
find old tusks and remains of this animal is perhaps 
surprising, though it could be explained in some 
way or other; but they also find perfectly fresh 
bodies of these animals. They reason that these 
fresh bodies were preserved in that condition in the 
ice for hundreds, perhaps thousands of centuries, 
but we shall show that this is not the case. But let 
us marshal our evidence gradually. 

The reader will remember that the mammoth and 
the mastodon are two elephant-like animals but 


[ 220] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


much larger than our elephant of the tropics. They 
were vegetarian animals and, like the elephant, inha- 
bitants of a warm country. When their remains 
were first discovered in the polar regions, therefore, 
it was.thought that at one time the polar regions had 
been very warm, with plenty of vegetation, and that 
owing to the gradual change of the earth’s axis, the 
area which was once hot had gradually been brought 
into positions where it grew colder until at last the 
mammoth and mastodon were frozen out. Let us 
see whether this idea fits all the facts in the case. 
But first let us see what those facts are. 

In J. W. Buel’s ““The World’s Wonders” we read: 

“The farther north we penetrate, in greater abun- 
dance are found vestiges of elephants, tortoises, cro- 
codiles, and other beasts and reptiles of a tropical 
climate. These are found in greatest abundance 
along the banks of rivers flowing from the north, 
seeming to prove that there is, somewhere beyond 
the frozen belt not yet penetrated by man, a warm 
country, with climate and productions similar to 
those of the tropics. Along the borders of Siberia, 
the remains of tropical animals are so commonly 
found as to constitute a considerable source of com- 
merce. In Asiatic Russia there is not a single stream 
or river on the banks or in the bed of which are 
not found bones of elephants, or other animals equally 
strange to that climate. In 1799, a fisherman of Ton- 
goose, named Schumachoff, discovered a tremen- 


i221] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


dous elephant—perfect as when thousands of years 
before, death had arrested its breath—encased in 
a huge block of ice, clear as crystal. This man, like 
his neighbors, was accustomed, at the end of the 
fishing season, to employ his time in hunting for 
elephant tusks along the banks of the Lena River, 
for the sake of the bounty offered by the government; 
and while so employed, in the ardor of his pursuit, 
he passed several miles beyond his companions when 
suddenly there appeared before his wondering eyes 
the miraculous sight above alluded to. But this 
man was ignorant and superstitious, and instead of 
hastening to announce his wonderful discovery for 
the benefit of science, he stupidly gazed upon it in 
awe and wonder, not daring to approach it. For 
several successive seasons from the time when he 
first discovered it, did Schumachoff make stealthy 
journeys to his crystallized monster, never finding 
courage sufficient to approach it closely, but sim- 
ply standing at a distance, once more to feast his 
eyes on the wonder, and to carry away in his thick 
head enough of terror to guarantee him a nightmare 
for a whole month of nights. At last he found the 
imprisoned carcass stranded on a convenient sand- 
bank, and boldly attacked it, broke the glittering 
casing, and roughly despoiling the great beast of its 
splendid tusks, hurried home and sold them for fifty 
roubles, leaving the well preserved bulk of elephant 
meat, thousands of years old; yet juicy and without 


een 


Da, 
S 


KR 
6 


— 


Ups: 


DISCOVERY OF THE MAMMOTH ENCASED IN ICE 


aed 


aa 
ea 
e 


B- JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


taint, to be devoured by wolves and bears or hacked 
to bits by natives as food for their dogs.” 


IN PERFECT PRESERVATION 

Pveslextturn dot Li D: INorthtop.s. Marth: 
Sky, and Sea”’, where we find some later information 
about this same case. It seems that after the fisher- 
man had left the mammoth carcass he told of its 
whereabouts and a party set out to examine it: 

“For some time the flesh of this animal was cut off 
for dog-meat by people around, and bears, wolves, 
gluttons, and foxes, fed upon it till the skeleton was 
nearly cleared of its flesh. About three-fourths of 
the skin, which was of a reddish-gray color, and 
covered with reddish wool and black hairs about 
eight inches long, was saved, and such was its weight, 
that it required ten men to remove it; the bones of 
the head, with the tusks, weighed four hundred and 
sixteen pounds. ‘The skeleton was taken to St. Peters- 
burg, where it may still be seen in the Museum of 
Natural History. The animal must have been twice 
the ordinary size of the existing elephant, and it 
must have weighed at least twenty-thousand pounds.” 


REMAINS OF TROPICAL ANIMALS 

This same author goes on to say: 

“Every year in the season of thawing (in Northern 
Asiatic Russia) the vast rivers, which descend to the 
Frozen Ocean in the north of Siberia, sweep down 
with their waters innumberable portions of the banks 


pease 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


and expose to view the bones buried in the soil and 
excavations left by the rushing waters. It is curious 
that the more we advance toward the north of Rus- 
sia, the more numerous do the bone depositaries 
become. In spite of the undoubted testimony often 
repeated, of numerous travelers, we can scarcely 
credit the statements made respecting some of the 
islands of the glacial sea near the poles, situated 
opposite the mouths of the Lena and of the Indi- 
girska. 

“All the islands nearest to the mainland, which 
is about thirty-six leagues in length, except three or 
four small rocky mountains, are a mixture of sand 
and ice, so that when the thaw sets in and their banks 
begin to fall, many mammoth bones are found. All 
the isle is formed of the bones of this extraordinary 
animal, of the horns and skulls of buffaloes, or of 
an animal which resembles them, and of some rhino- 
ceros horns. 

WHOLE ISLAND OF REMAINS 

“New Siberia and the Isle of Lachon are for the 
most part only a mass of sand, of ice, and of ele- 
phant’s teeth. At every tempest the sea casts ashore 
new quantities of mammoth’s tusks, and the inhabi- 
tants of Siberia carry on a profitable trade in this 
fossil ivory. Every year during the summer innu- 
merable fishermen’s barks direct their course towards 
this isle of bones, and during winter immense cara- 
vans take the same route, all the convoys drawn by 


[ 224] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


dogs, returning laden with the tusks of the mammoth, 
weighing each from 150 to 200 pounds. The isle of 
bones has served as a quarry of this valuable mater- 
ial for export to China for five hundred years, and 
it has been exported to Europe for upwards of a 
hundred. But the supply from these strange mines 
remains undiminished.” 

All we have to say to those last statements is that 
the supply must be replemished right along or such 
a thing could not be so everlasting. And we think 
there can be no doubt that these supplies of remains 
have been and are being replemished right to the 
present moment. 

In his book, “In the Lena Delta”, George W. 
Melville, the United States naval officer and explo- 
rer, also tells of the immense tusks, in this case stained 
black by being buried in peat bogs, which he saw in 
that country. In some cases they measured nine feet 
along the curve, and were thirty inches in circum- 
ference at the end near the skull. He saw one train 
of thirty sleighs laden with the tusks on its way to 
China. 

Our next witness is Nordenskiold who tells in his 
“Arctic Voyages” of the trafic in mammoth tusks 
along the river Yennssej to China and Russia. A 
little later he says: 

“Tn the Siberian Polar Sea, the animal and vege- 
table types, so far as we can judge beforehand, ex- 
clusively consist of survivals from the Glacial period 


[ 225] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


which next preceded the present, which is not the 
case in the Polar Sea where the Gulf Stream distri- 
butes its waters and whither it thus carries types from 
more southerly regions.” 

It is evident that Nordenskiold has forgotten that 
the currents which he thinks carry southerly types 
to the polar sea, really come from the north, from 
the polar regions. And we shall show that these 
animals which are apparently survivals from the 
glacial period are really inhabitants of the interior 
of the earth which, owing to its climatic conditions, 
is now the home of animals and vegetable species 
which flourished on the outer surface of the earth in 
the carboniferous era of giant ferns, mammoths, and 
other species characteristic of that period of damp, 
steamy, warm climate. 


A.PUZZLE TO THE GEOLOGIST 


But Nordenskiold admits that the finding of mam- 
moth bones, etc., in the Siberian “tundras” or im- 
mense plains of sand drifts, is a puzzle to the ortho- 
dox geologist. For these drifts were formed quite 
recently, and yet they contain remains of animals 
which the orthodox scientist believes to be thousands 
of years old and no longer existing. He says: 

“The tundra has been formed under climatical 
conditions very similar to the present, which is fur- 
ther confirmed by the geognostic formation of the 
strata. It has, therefore, long been difficult of expla- 


[ 226 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


nation for the geologist that just in those sandy 
strata is found a large number of remains of mam- 
moths, rhinoceroses, etc., that is to say, of animal 
types which for the present live only in tropical or 
sub-tropical climates. Collections from these re- 
gions have a peculiar interest from the remarkable 
circumstance that in the frozen soil of the tundra are 
found, not only skeletons, but also flesh, hide, hair, 
and entrails of animal forms which died out many 
thousands of centuries ago. Among our collections 
may be mentioned, large pieces of mammoth hide 
found along with some fragments of bone where the 
Mesenkin falls into the Yenissej, the skull of a musk- 
ox, remarkable for its size, found with fragments 
of mammoth bones in another tundra valley south of 
Orlovskoj, a very rich collection of sub-fossil shells 
found principally between Orlovskoj and Gostinoi.” 

Now that is a very clear statement of the difficulty 
in which the orthodox scientist finds himself. Here 
is a new formation—the tundra—and in it he finds 
skins and bones and entrails of animals which are 
supposed to be some thousands of centuries old. It 
is obvious that they cannot be as old as that, or else 
they would not be there. And the fact that parts of 
hides and entrails are found—not fossilized but sim- 
ply frozen—and that semi-fossilized shells are also 
found, shows that the shells are older than the hides 
and bones. For in thousands of centuries the hides 
and entrails would certainly have disintegrated and 


(2274 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


left nothing but fossil imprints. A little later Nor- 
denskiold says? 

“Few scientific discoveries have so powerfully cap- 
tivated the interest both of the learned and unlearned 
as that of the colossal remains of elephants, sometimes 
well preserved with hair and flesh in the frozen soil 
of Siberia. Such discoveries have more than once 
formed the object of scientific expeditions and care- 
ful researches by eminent men, but there is still much 
that is enigmatical with respect to a number of cir- 
cumstances connected with the Mammoth period of 
Siberia, which perhaps was contemporaneous with 
our Glacial period. Specially is our knowledge of the 
animal and vegetable types, which lived at the same 
time as the mammoth, exceedingly incomplete, al- 
though we know that in the northernmost parts of 
Siberia, which are also most inaccessible from land, 
there are small hills covered with the bones of the 
mammoth and other contemporaneous animals... .” 


IN THE NEW SIBERIAN ISLAND 


A little later Nordenskiold sailed for the New 
Siberian Islands: 


“These islands are very remarkable from a scien- 
tific point of view, being very rich in the remains of 
the mammoth and other animals of the same period, 
which are found in greater abundance among them 
than on the tundra of the mainland. Some of the 
sand-banks on their shores are so full of the bones 


[ 228 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


and tusks of the mammoth that the ivory collectors 
who for a series of years traveled every year from 
the mainland to the islands in dog-sledges, used to 
return in autumn when the sea was again covered 
with ice, with a rich harvest. According to Heden- 
strom, the only educated person who has examined 
these islands in summer, there are besides in the 
interior hills which are covered with the remains of. 
the mammoth, the rhinoceros, horse, aurochs, bison, 
sheep; etc.” 

Special collections were made by Nordenskiold 
of specimens that would aid him in determining 
what he admitted was a “difficult problem”: how 
it was possible for the progenitors of the Indian 
elephant to live in the ice deserts of Siberia. 

Yes the problem is difficult when you do not know 
all the facts, but when we know that the mammoth 
still lives in the interior, then we can easily under- 
stand the situation. | 

Perhaps the reader says, ‘“‘But you have not actually 
proved that yet”. But let the reader wait until all 
the evidence is in. We wish to put the matter beyond 
the shadow of a doubt, and so we call upon every 
witness who has seen these remains, but we shall 
leave the most remarkable case until the last. 


OTHER SIMILAR DISCOVERIES 


In Edwin S. Grew’s “The Romance of Modern 
Geology” we read of the finding of mammoth re- 


[e229%] 


A JOURNEY TO’ THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


mains in France including a tusk which is carved 
with a rough but clever picture of amammoth. That 
proves that the animal still existed on the outer sur- 
face of the earth when mankind had come upon the 
scene. Mr. Grew also confirms the facts we have 
told above of the finding of the complete mammoth 
in the ice by the Russian fisherman in Siberia. He 
adds that Mr. Adams of the St. Petersburg Museum 
was sent by the Czar to examine the carcass and 
found it in a still fresh condition. 


He tells us that: 


“The Yakuts of the neighborhood had cut off the 
flesh, with which they hac fed their dogs; wild 
beasts, such as white bears, wolves, wolverines, and 
foxes had also fed upon it, and traces of their foot- 
steps were seen around. The skeleton almost cleared 
of flesh, remained whole, with the exception of one 
foreleg. ‘The spine of the back, one scapula, the 
pelvis, and other three limbs were still held together 
by the ligaments and by parts of the skin; the other - 
scapula was found not far off. The head was covered 
with a dry skin; one of the ears was furnished with 
a tuft of hairs; the balls of the eyes were still dis- 
tinguishable; the brain still occupied the cranium 
but seemed dried up; the point of the lower lip had 
been gnawed and the upper lip had been distroyed 
so as to expose the teeth; the neck was furnished 
with a long flowing mane; the skin, of a dark-grey 


[ 230 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


color, covered with black hairs and a reddish wool, 
was so heavy that ten persons found great difficulty 
in transporting it to shore. 


THE CARCASS OF THE MAMMOTH 


“There was collected, according to Mr. Adams, 
more than thirty-six pounds weight of hair and wool 
which the white bears had trod into the ground while 
devouring the flesh. This mammoth was a male, so 
fat and well fed, according to the assertion of the 
Tungusian chief, that its belly hung down below the 
joints of its knees. Its tusks were nine feet, six inches 
in length, measured along the curve, and its head 
without the tusks weighed four hundred and four- 
teen pounds avoirdupols.”’ 

But Mr. Grew has something even more remark- 
able than this corroborative testimony to tell us, and 
we shall quote other writers to confirm him. He goes 
on in this same book to tell of: 

“A very curious example of the Siberian Mam- 
moth was discovered only a few years ago by a 
Lamut of one of the Arctic Villages, and through 
the energy of Dr. Herz was eventually removed in 
prcccstOvoL, Petersburg. .io0 2. It was sunk in frozen 
ground, and this cold storage treatment had pre- 
served it in an extraordinary manner. If the Siber- 
ian natives who had discovered it partially buried 
in alluvial deposit had not uncovered it, so that the 
sun was able to play on the carcass and produce 


[ 231-] 


A JOURNEY TO: THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


decay, this wonderful primeval monster might almost 
have been got out whole. As it was, the frozen 
ground had so kept the remains that Dr. Herz had 
found well-preserved fragments of food between the 
teeth, and the remains of a hearty meal in the sto- 
mach. There is no doubt that the Mammoth fell 
into the crevice or pit and damaged himself so much 
in the tall that he could not crawl out, 9.07% % 


COULD NOT-BE “PRIMEVAL? 


The reader will notice that Mr. Grew refers to 
this mammoth as a “primeval” monster. And that 
is an example of the sort of thinking that has set all 
the scientists wrong on these questions regarding the 
polar regions. Instead of studying the actual facts 
as we have done in this book they come to the facts 
with certain fixed ideas in their heads, and they can 
only undertsand as many of the facts as fit into their 
ideas. Everything else they pass by as being of no 
importance. The reader will see that Mr. Grew has 
read in his previous studies that the mammoth was 
a primeval animal—which is true enough as far as 
it goes. It was a very early animal, and in all the 
outer world is now extinct. But when he hears of 
a perfectly fresh carcass being discovered, it never 
occurs to Mr. Grew—nor to Dr. Herz nor to Nor- 
denskiold nor to any other explorer, to think anything 
else than what he has always thought. They still 
think of the animal as extinct although its fresh car- 


[2324 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


cass is before them, and they try to explain the fresh- 
ness of the carcass by saying that it was preserved 
by the ice. 
COMES FROM WARM CLIMATE 

But the mammoth and mastodon are inhabitants, 
as we have seen, of warm climates, and if the animal 
we have just read about fell into that crevice when 
he and his fellows still roamed on what must then 
have been the much warmer climate of Siberia than 
the present one, it follows that it was many years 
before the ice came and froze the animal in its grave. 

We claim, it will be seen, that if these animals 
lived in a certain climate—whatever the climate of 
Siberia happened to be in the days when scientists 
claim that the mammoth lived—either one of two 
things must have happened. If the climate gra- 
dually grew colder they would be driven off by the 
inclemency of the change. If it did not change they 
would be living in Siberia still. But there are no 
mammoths in Siberia now. So they were driven 
somewhere by the growing cold. We claim that 
they took refuge in the interior of the earth—from 
whence, for all science can prove to the contrary, 
they may have come in the first place. We further 
claim that the fresh remains of their bodies which 
have been found in Siberia are those of mammoths 
which in their wanderings came a little further 
south than usual—for the climate around the polar 
openings would be quite warm enough for them, and 


(e2son| 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


that these animals fell in to ice crevasses in places 
from which they were carried to the present situa- 
tions by the movements of the ice—by those great 
glaciers which have from time to time been referred 
to in accounts of Greenland. 
SUPPOSING THEY WERE A MILLION 
YEARS OLD. 

For consider the alternative supposition. Sup- 
pose the mammoth referred to above had really 
fallen into a pit or water hole a million or so years 
ago. Suppose that almost immediately afterwards 
the climate became so cold that the body was frozen 
in; and climate never does change so quickly. Even 
in that short interval the tood in the stomach and 
between the teeth would have decomposed. Food 
begins to break up the minute it reaches the stomach 
and is acted on by the gastric juice. The heat and 
moisture of the mouth is such that all food not 
washed away from the teeth immediately after eating 
begins to decompose. It would not take a preten- 
tiously educated scientist or veteran Arctic explorer, 
it would take no more scientifically equipped man 
than. any dentist to tell that when a carcass is found 
frozen with fresh food between its teeth, that car- 
cass was frozen either immediately after death or 
even frozen to death. 

CONTRADICTIONS IN THAT VIEW 

No, there is no getting away from the fact that 

the mammoth was alive after the ice was formed, 


[ 234 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


and in some manner fell into a crevasse and was fro- 
zen. And the only place the mammoth could come 
from to meet such a fate is the interior of the earth, 
because the interior of the earth and possibly all the 
land around the polar lips is the only climate in the 
north where he could survive. When the Siberian 
climate became cold the means of escape to the south 
was shut off. If it had not been, the mammoth might 
have migrated south and been alive in the warmer 
regions today. But we have seen that the ross-gull 
and other birds as well as the foxes and bears go 
north when the winter sets in, and the mammoth 
either came from the interior of the earth in the first 
place or else he sought it for a refuge when the 
Siberian wilds became too cold for him. 


OTHER DISCOVERIES 


Apart from that there is no explanation of these 
remains at all. RK. Lyddeker, a, British biologist, 
writing in Knowledge for 1892 says: 

“Along the borders of the Arctic Ocean for hun- 
dreds of miles mammoth remains are met with in 
increditable quantities; and it is still one of the 
puzzles of geology to account adequately and satis- 
factorily for the manner in which these creatures 
perished, and how their bodies were buried beneath 
the frozen soil before decomposition had begun its 
work, for it is hardly possible to believe that they 


[2357] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


lived in a climate so rigorous that their bodies would 
have been frozen on the ground immediately after 
death.” 
FREEZING INSTANTANEOUS 

The same writer in Knowledge for 1892, tells 
of the many discoveries of mammoth flesh in fresh 
condition and mentions that the natives of Siberia 
as well as their dogs have eaten of the flesh—another 
striking proof of its freshness. But perhaps the most 
remarkable testimony of this sort is the fact that an 
actual banquet has been served from the flesh of this 
supposedly extinct animal. Readers may remember 
the newspaper reports of that banquet, several years 
ago, in Petrograd, at which the flesh of the mammoth, 
wheat from Egyptian tombs, and other preserved 
products from the remains of Pompeii and Hercu- 
laneum were among the items served, the idea being 
to serve only those things which were thousands of 
years old. Unfortunately, the scientists had not gone 
into the history of the mammoth as profoundly as 
they might, or they would have seen the inconsis- 
tencies in their theories which we have pointed out 
above. And then they would have had to omit the 
mammoth steak, or at least admit that it was not as 
old as the other viands they served at this scientific 
banquet. 

But perhaps the reader is not willing to see a 
whole argument based on what he may consider the 
one isolated example of a mammoth found with fresh 


[ 236 ] 


A JOURNEY TO SHECEARTE’S-INTERIOR 


food between its teeth. He may say one witness is 
not enough in an important case like this. Very 
well; let us cite another witness. In June, 1894, 
Dr. Stephen Bower, one of the foremost American 
geologists, contributed a long article on extinct ani- 
mals to the Scientific American Supplement. Of 
course, like other scientists, he thought that the mam- 
moth was extinct, but he knew that its flesh had 
been eaten by man—in fact his reference to that fact 
may be caused by his knowledge of the banquet at 
Petrograd to which we have referred above. In 
any case he begins his remarks about the mammoth 
as follows: 

“While the monsters we have described perished 
many ages before man appeared on the earth, and 
,have never been seen by him alive, the monster of 
which we are now about to write has been seen by 
man and its flesh eaten by him. That, however, was 
after it had been entombed for untold ages in the 
ice of Arctic regions. The remains of the mammoth 
are widely diffused over the earth. They have been 
found in great abundance not only in North America, 
but also in the frozen regions of Siberia, and indeed 
all over Asiatic Russia....As far back as the tenth 
century an active trade has been carried on in fossil 
ivory. It is estimated that during the past two cen- 
turies more than two hundred pairs of fossil tusks 
have come into the market annually, and the locali- 
ties where found are far from being exhausted. After 


[ 237 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


more than forty thousand pairs have been obtained 
from northern regions the traveler finds them in- 
creasing as he approaches toward the north pole. It 
is said that the soil of Bear Island and Liachoff 
Island, New Siberia, consists of sand and ice with 
such quantities of Mammoth remains that they ap- 
pear as if they were made up of bones and tusks.” 

Let us break off just a moment to remind the read- 
er how the above corroborates what we have said 
as to the greater frequency of life and the remains 
of life as we approach the north polar regions—even 
the mammoth bones tell the same tale as the gulls 
and foxes and bears. 

Dr. Bowers then proceeds to verify once again 
the facts we have already heard of: 

“But not only have the fossil remains of the Mam- 
moth been found all over the arctic lands as far as 
man has penetrated, but their bodies, as we have inti- 
mated, have been found intact, frozen and preserved 
in the ice. In the year 1800, the entire body of a 
mammoth was discovered in a vast stratum of ice on 
the banks of the river Lena. Afterwards it became 
disengaged from its icy matrix and white bears, 
wolves, foxes and dogs fed off its flesh. It was a 
male and had a long mane on its neck.” 


ANOTHER INSTANCE 


And Dr. Bowers gives once more the details which 
we already know. He goes on, however, to tell of 


[ 238 ] 


A-JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


another instance which other writers have also men- 
tioned: 

“A young Russian engineer, named Benkendorf, 
in the employ of his government, ascended the Indi- 
girka in a steamer in 1846. The season was unusually 
warm for Siberia, and the country was flooded with 
water. ‘The stream, which was greatly swollen, cut 
new channels in many places, melting the ice and 
frozen soil. In one of these newly cut channels he 
discovered a mammoth in an upright position, where 
it had been overwhelmed, probably thousands of 
years before. As its head and trunk rose and fell 
with the surging waters he discovered that it was 
still fastened in the ice and frozen soil by its hind 
feet. he monster was secured by throwing ropes 
and chains over its tusks and head, and after its 
hind feet were released it was safely landed by the 
aid of more than fifty men and horses. It proved to 
be of gigantic size, and the whole body was in a fine 
state of preservation. In its stomach was found the 
food that had formed its last repast, which consisted 
of young shoots of the fir and pine, also young fir 
cones. On the shoulders and along the back grew 
stiff hairs about a foot long. The hair was dark 
brown and coarsely rooted. Under the outer hairs 
there appeared everywhere a soft, warm and thick 
wool of a fallow brown color.” 

Dr. Bowers can only account for this surprising 
freshness by supposing that the freezing of the animal 


[ 239 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


was instantaneous, and his own theory is that there 
was a sudden change in the climate which he puts 
at about the lateness of what he calls the ““Noahian 
deluge”. But that is very unscientific, as we know 
now that changes in climate are gradual, and in 
serious scientific discussions it is not usual to bring 
in Noah and the biblical account of the deluge. But 
in spite of the difficulties, Dr. Bowers makes the most 
generous acknowledgement of the absolute freshness 
of this and other specimens found. He even says: 

“Many of the animals, as the mammoth, rhino- 
ceros, etc., remain undecayed. Even the capillary 
blood vessels still retain their contents, showing that 
there was not the slightest decomposition or breaking 
down of the tissues, but the catastrophe which over- 
whelmed them was sudden.” 

Of the mammoth, therefore, we have the mass of 
evidence cited to show that the interior of the earth 
is its habitat. The scientists who have not had this 
theory to work with have confessed that they cannot 
explain the phenomenon. But once supply the link 
which our theory gives and the whole sequence is 
complete. The mammoth is wandering today in the 
interior of the earth. When he ventures too near 
the polar orifice—it must be remembered that the 
mammoth and mastodon and elephant are all char- 
acterized by a tendency to wander widely—he be- 
comes stranded on a breaking ice floe and carried over 
from the interior regions, to the outer regions or per- 


[ 240 ] 


AAOURNEY DOVTHE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


haps falls in a crevasse in ice which afterwards be- 
gins to move in some great glacial movement. In 
these ways the bodies are carried over to Siberia 
and left where we have seen them discovered. 
That such a process has been going on for 
thousands of years is seen from the abundance 
of remains. Evidently the migratory ‘instinct, 
which does not change for thousands of years 
even when the conditions which started it do change, 
is still working in these animals. And so we have 
from time to time their silent testimony to the exist- 
ence and mild climate and vegetation of that interior 
land which supports them, and which has been giving 
this and other testimony for so many years without 
any of our learned scientists as much as once corre- 
lating and putting together the evidence—evidence 
which they alone among us have had the opportunity 
of collecting but which they collected piece meal, 
unaware if its importance, puzzled by it, occassion- 
ally admitting that they were puzzled, but which 
they never faced squarely with minds free from 
preconception. But at last all this evidence has been 
gathered together. More of it will undoubtedly be 
forthcoming. And, not for the first time in the 
history of thought, the orthodox scientists will have 
to admit that they were wrong in their interpreta- 
tion of the facts of polar research, and that there is 
really something new to be found out. 


[241 J 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


THE MAMMOTH BANQUETS 


We have referred to the eating of mammoth flesh 
by scientists and their guests at a banquet, and this 
evidence of the freshness of the meat of the animal 
is so remarkable that our readers may well wish to 
know all the details. As a matter of fact the eating 
of mammoth flesh by human beings has occurred 
more than once according to recent reports in news- 
papers, and, of course, there may be hundreds of 
cases among the Eskimos or inhabitants of Siberia 
where some of the carcasses have been found in a 
fresh condition. 

The most talked about mammoth banquet was 
that given by Professor Herz, of the Imperial Aca- 
demy of Science of St. Petersburg—as it was then— 
who had been leader of the expedition into Siberia 
which unearthed and transported the mammoth in 
question to the Imperial Museum. Only the bones 
and the skin were needed for mounting in the mu- 
seum, and as the professor had kept the whole car- 
cass in cold storage it suddenly occurred to him that 
it would be quite possible to eat the flesh. Of course 
he was under the impression that this flesh was over 
20,000 years old, an idea which we have already 
shown to be quite wrong, and he asked scientists in 
other parts of the world to contribute other ancient 
foods—such as corn dug up from the ruins of Egyp- 
tian cities. As the mammoth flesh was not old at 
all we need not speak of the other and older items 


[ 242 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


of this feast. What does concern us is what the 
guests thought of the meat. But the account of the 
banquet says that the banquet was a triumph: “par- 
ticularly the course of mammoth steak, which all 
the learned guests declared was agreeable to the taste, 
and not much tougher than some of the sirloin fur- 
nished by butchers of today.” 

Another mammoth meal was eaten by an American 
traveler and author, Mr. James Oliver Curwood, 
who was exploring in the far north when his Eskimo 
fellow travelers found the body of a mammoth 
exposed by the falling of a cliff-side. . Before quot- 
ing Mr. Curwood we should like to point out how 
little the scientists really know about such matters 
by contrasting what he gives as the animal’s age with 
what Professor Herz gave. Herz put it at 20,000 
years; Curwood, quoted in The Chicago Tribune for 
Jv'y 7th, 1912, puts it at 50,000 to 100,000 years. As 
we have already shown, Herz is nearer the truth 
than Curwood. But at that he is about 20,000 years 
wrong. However, here is what Mr. Curwood has 
to say: 

THE FRESH MEAT 

“The flesh was of a deep red or mahogony color, 
and I dined on a steak an inch and a half thick.... 
The flavor of the meat was old—not unpleasant—but 
simply old and dry. That it had lost none of its life- 
sustaining elements was shown by the fact that the 
dogs throve upon it.” 


[ 243 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


What Mr. Curwood calls an old flavor—really 
there could be no such thing any more than there 
could. be a yellow or a blue flavor—is simply the 
strong flavor due to the character of the animal. 
Anyone who has eaten bear steak or even venison and 
contrasted thé flavor with beef or mutton will know 
just what Mr. Curwood is really trying to say. 

But there is on record of at least one more mam- 
moth banquet, this time given by Gabrielle D’ Annun- 
zio from the flesh of another mammoth, the bones of 
which repose in a Paris Museum. Here is part of 
the story as cabled to the Chicago Examiner some 
years ago: 

‘Paris, Jan. 31—Meat between forty and fifty thou- 
sand years old was the star dish at a banquet given 
by Gabriele D’Annunzio, the Italian dramatist and 
poet, at the Hotel Carlton last evening. 

“D’Annunzio obtained the flesh from Russia 
where it was cut from the carcass of a mammoth 
which was dug out of the ice around the Liakoff 
Islands, north of Siberia, by Count Stembock Fer- 
mer. ‘The count has presented the pachydern to the 
Paris Museum of Natural History, where it is about 
to be exhibited. 

‘The body embedded in the eternal ice was in per- 
fect condition, at the time of its discovery, a large 
quantity of the flesh was kept in cold storage and 
shipped to St. Petersburg. 

“This fifty thousand year old frozen meat is being 


[ 244 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


treasured in Russia, but after repeated efforts, D’An- 
nunzio, through influential friends, succeeded in 
obtaining several pounds of this rare food-stuff. 


D’ANNUNZIO’S BANQUET 


“Yesterday’s sensational dinner was preliminary to 
the competition for the Fontenoy Cup, awarded by 
the French Greyhound Club, of which the poet is 
one of the most enthusiastic members. His guests 
were five fellow members of the club and covers 
were also laid for the favorite hounds of the guests. 
Describing the banquet afterward to the Examiner 
correspondent, D’Annunzio said: 

““Tt was the most successful dinner I ever gave. 
The elephant meat exceeded my highest expecta- 
tions. In flavor it was like tortoise flesh, but it was, 
well—a little tough...... I had it broiled and served 
with six different kinds of sauce.’ ” 

Of course the reader will notice that D’Annunzio 
like everyone else thinks the mammoth flesh was 
much older than it is—in this case forty thousand 
years is mentioned as a possible age as well as fifty 
thousand. Now what do the scientists mean by say- 
ing a thing is forty thousand years old, then fifty 
thousand, and then a hundred thousand years? Does 
not that mean that the whole thing is a guess? Other- 
“wise, the man who said it was forty thousand years 
old would have some reason for that estimate and 
that reason ought to convince the man who says it is 


[ 245] 


A JOURNEY TO*THE EPARTH’S INTERIOK 


fifty thousand years and him who says 100,000 years. 
Or else the 100,000 year old theory ought to convince 
the other fellows. Some of them, at least, ought to - 
have some actual evidence on which to base their 
figures. But as there is no evidence at all, we find 
guesses all the way from 20,000 to 100,000 years for 
the age of the mammoth and we find nothing except 
these guesses, not a single cogent argument. ‘That 
being the case, it ought to be obvious that a theory 
such as ours, which explains the actual facts of the 
case, must supplant these wild guesses. The reason 
the scientists who say 20,000 or 50,000 or 100,000 
years cannot agree is that none of them is right. If 
any one of them were right he would be able to con- 
vince the others by some actual proof or argument. 
But as all are wrong—almost equally wrong, one 
might say, although their errors differ by a few thou- 
sand years—no one man can convince the other. Our 
own pointing out of the actual facts in the case at 
once clears away the fog and explains everything 
in a clear and satisfactory manner. 


[ 246 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHA Pile RX I. 


THE LIFE’OF THE ARCTIC 

In describing the voyages of different explorers 
we have spoken more than once of their observations 
of living creatures in the Arctic and Anarctic regions 
—creatures which could find no sustenance if there 
were not warmth and fertility in those regions. Per- 
haps the reader was inclined to think that the first 
few instances we adduced were exceptional, but as 
he found explorer after explorer making the same 
observation we are sure that he became more and 
more impressed. 

But in order to show the full weight of this evi- 
dence we shall bring it all together in the present 
chapter, arranging it according to the various species 
observed, so that a complete picture of arctic animal 
and plant life will be spread before the reader—and 
that picture when viewed as a whole is a complete 
proof of our theory—for the number and variety of 
animals and plants which figure in it is so great that 
their occurrence in any but a region where they had 
a firm and abundant basis for their life—such as the 
interior of the earth supplies—would be absolutely 
impossible. 

GENERAL VIEW OF ARCTIC ANIMAL LIFE 

Let us first remind the reader that these birds and 

animals and flowers of the Arctic regions are no new 


[ 247 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


feature of them but have been there as far as the 
memory of man goes back. We have seen how the 
Eskimos have old traditions of them. When we come 
to later times we find the animals and plants still 
there. Some of the earliest testimony about them, 
the earliest testimony of modern times, that is, has 
been collected by the scholar whom we have aiready 
quoted, the Hon. Daines Barrington, in his book “On 
the Possibility of Approaching the North Pole.” He 
tells us not only that driftwood is driven on the north 
coast of Iceland which could come from no other 
quarter than the north, but that among other fresh 
pieces whole trees were found which yet had their 
buds on them, something wnich would have been ab- 
solutely impossible if this wood had drifted long 
distances from southern climes. It is obvious that a 
very few months in salt water would kill the buds, 
but here were trees which had evidently been grow- 
ing only a short time before. And he further tells 
us that observers in Spitzbergen have always noticed 
that in spring, just before the hatching season, the 
wild ducks, geese, and other birds, fly in a northernly 
direction. There is also a heavy fall migration to 
the north. 

PHENOMENA OLD: AND WELL ESTABLISHED 

Another early modern writer has this to say of the 
animals and fish of the north: 

“Tt is a fact well attested by whalers and fishers 
in the northern seas, and one that almost every au- 


[ 248 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


thor who adverts to the northern fisheries confirms, 
that innumerable and almost incredible numbers of 
whales, mackerel, herring, and other migratory fish 
annually come down in the spring season of the year, 
from the arctic seas toward the equator. Some au- 
thors describe the shoals of herring alone to be equal 
in surface to the island of Great Britain. Besides 
these, innumerable shoals of other fish also come 
down. These fish when they first come from the 
north in the spring, are in their best plight and fat- 
test condition; but as the season advances and they 
move on to the southward, they become poor; so 
much so that, by the time they get to the coast of 
France or Spain, as fishermen say, they are scarce 
worth catching. 
IMMENSE SHOALS OF FISH 

“The history of the migratory fish affords strong 
grounds to conclude that the shoals which come 
from the north are like swarms of bees from the 
mother hive, never to return. They are not known 
to return in shoals; and it is doubted by some writers 
whether any of them ever return north again. Si 

To that we would simply add that a source of life 
so prolific and never failing that it is likened to a 
hive, a place where the fish breed and from which 
they come in shoal after shoal, is just what one might 
expect to find in the well warmed interior of the 
earth. One could never imagine such a place under 
a sea of solid ice. But our authority proceeds: 


[ 249 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


“Pinkerton, in his voyages, states that the Dutch, 
who at various periods got detained in the ice and 
were compelled to winter in high northern latitudes, 
could find but few fish to subsist on during the 
winter; which proves that the migrating fish do not 
winter amongst or on this side of the ice.” 


WHERE DO THESE: FISH WINTER? 

It follows from that, that there must be immense 
fish-breeding grounds on the other side of the so- 
called polar ice, for only in a favorable location 
could these shoals live and breed—and it must be 
remembered that they would require an immense 
quantity of food, and only in a very temperate sea 
would enough food grow. 


THE SEAL 

To quote a little further: 

“The seal, another animal found in cold regions, 
is also said to migrate north twice each year; going 
once beyond the icy circle to produce their young, 
and again to complete their growth, always return- 
ing remarkably fat—an evidence that they find 
something more than snow and ice to feed on in the 
country to which they migrate.” 

In “Ree’s Encyclopedia” there is one of the early 
articles descriptive of Hudson’s Bay, and it is there 
stated that reindeer “‘are seen in the spring season 
of the year, about the month of March or April, 
coming down from the north, in droves of eight or 


2504 


BOURNEY TO;THE-EARTH’S INTERIOR 


ten thousand, and that they are known to return 
northward in the month of October, when the snow 
becomes deep.” The account goes on to say: 


THE REINDEER 


“We are informed by Professor Adams, of St. 
Petersburg, that on the northern coast of Asia, every 
autumn the reindeer start northeastwardly from the 
river Lena, and return again in the spring in good 
condition.” 

Short of such a hospitable country as is afforded 
_ by the interior of the earth, where could these ani- 
mals possibly find warmth and nutriment? 


MUSK-OXEN 


Among early nineteenth century accounts of north- 
ern explorations, ‘““Hearne’s Journal” is one of the 
most interesting. In its pages we may read that large 
droves of musk-oxen abound in the arctic regions, as 
many as several herds each aggregating seventy to 
eighty head being seen by Hearne in one day. Few 
of them ever came as far south as the Hudson’s Bay 
settlements. He also states that polar white bears 
are rarely seen in the winter and that their winter 
habitat is a mystery. But in the spring they suddenly 
appear from some unknown place having their young 
with them. 

Hearne goes on to tell us that white foxes are ex- 
ceedingly plentiful some years, and that they always 


E2515] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


come from the north; that the animals which appear 
do not go again to the north, so that the supply from 
there must be inexhaustible. Other species of ani- 
mals and fish, he tells us, are plentiful some years - 
and very scarce in other years, which would indi- 
cate, perhaps, that under certain conditions of 
weather they migrate within the interior of the earth 
instead of coming over the ice barriers to the exter- 
ior. 
VARIOUS WILD FOWL 

Hearne has also some very interesting observations 
about the large numbers of swans, geese, brants, 
ducks, and other wild water-fowl which are so num- 
erous about Hudson’s Bay. Of geese alone there are 
ten different species, several of which he says—par- 
ticularly the snow goose, the blue goose, the brent 
goose, and the horned wavy goose—lay their eggs 
and raise their young in some country which to 
Hearne was unknown—as indeed it has been to all 
explorers, for that country is no other than the inter- 
ior of the earth. Even the Indians or Eskimos who 
had explored all the habitable countries in those 
regions, could never tell where these fowl! bred, and 
it was well known that they never migrated to the 
south, and as many of these fowl moulted in the sea- 
son when they were visible in Hudson’s Bay it was 
certain that they did not breed there for a moulting 
bird cannot sit on the nest—the moulting and the 
breeding seasons being always separated. 


[ 252 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


DRIFTWOOD AND SEEDS OF PLANTS 

Now let us follow in further detail the evidences 
of these various forms of life in the Arctic. We have 
already spoken of driftwood being found where it 
could only have come from the interior of the earth. 
This is such a common occurrence that every ex- 
plorer almost that we have followed has had some- 
thing to say about it. But occasionally even stranger 
things than trees with green buds on them are found 
in the Arctic seas. Seeds of unknown species as well 
as of tropical species have been found, drifted down 
in northern currents. One very interesting find of 
this nature was the seed of the entada bean, a tropical 
seed measuring two and and a quarter inches across. 
This remarkable find was made by a Swedish expe- 
dition under Otto Torell near Trurenberg Bay, and 
it is obvious that this seed must have come from the 
interior of the earth for it is of a tree that only grows 
under tropical conditions, and it would have been 
disintegrated had it been drifting all over the world 
for many months, as would be the case if it had come 
up from the tropical regions of the exterior of the 
planet. 

W. J. Gordon, who recounts this find in his 
“Round About the North Pole” also adduces evi- 
dence that in the past there was a great variety of 
vegetation in Greenland, including magnolia, maple, 
poplar, lime, walnut, water-lily, myrica, smilax, 
aralia, sedges and grasses, conifers and ferns. And 


25on 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTHS INTERIOR 


it is obvious that these plants were not migrants into 
Greenland from the south. They could not pass 
oceans and icy coasts. They must have come over 
to Greenland from the warm interior. 


MORE ABOUT REINDEER 


Gordon also corroborates what we have just read 
from Ree’s old time but accurate observations about 
reindeer. Hewxtells, us that. one jof- the earnestees- 
plorers to find this animal in very large numbers, 
and on its way from some unknown land in the 
north, was Liakhoff, after whom Jiakhoff Island 
was named, who saw a “mighty crowd” of them, and 
ascertained that their tracks were all from the north. 

Gordon also tells us of Sverdrup’s finding of so 
many hares around latitude 81 degrees that one inlet 
was actually called Hare Fiord. There was also 
enough other game to keep the whole exploring 
party well fed on fresh meat. 

Another author who throws much light on this 
subject is Epes Sargent who, in collaboration with 
W. H. Cunnington, has written “The Wonders of 
the “Arctic World” _ In -describite the: wonton 
Buchan and Franklin, he tells us that one observer 
in their party, Captain Beechey, saw reindeer graz- 
ing on the west coast of Spitzbergen at an elevation 
of fifteen hundred feet. Meanwhile, there were so 
many birds that the place reverberated with their 
cries from dawn till dark, and the little auk were so 


[ 254 ] 


ASJOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


numerous that uninterrupted lines of them would 
extend all over the bay where the party was resting, 
and so close together that sometimes thirty fell at 
one shot. ‘The living column was six yards broad 
and as many deep, and allowing sixteen birds to a 
cubic yard, there would be four million of them on 
the wing at the same time. While, Captain Beechey 
adds, that number appears very large, the little rot- 
ges rise in such numbers as to darken the air, and 
their chorus is distinctly audible at a distance of 
four miles. Meanwhile, the islands were thickly 
populated with eider-down ducks, and the ‘‘sea about 
Spitzbergen is as much alive as the land, from the 
multitude of burgomasters, stront-jaggers, malmouks, 
kittiwakes, and the rest of the gull tribe, while the 
amphibious animals and fish enliven both the ice and 
the water, from the huge whale to the minute clio 
on which it feeds, swallowing, perhaps, a million at . 
a mouthful.” 

Later in this book Sargent tells us that Franklin’s 
second expedition saw large numbers of geese mi- 
grating to the unknown north, as well as many other 
birds—sure indication of land to the north. Still 
later he mentions “innumerable flocks of Arctic and 
blue gulls, besides almost a dozen other species.” He 
also notes the fact that no matter how far north the 
human explorer goes-he always finds that the polar 
bear is a little ahead of him, and no matter how far 


[255] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


north these bears are met with they are always on 
their way further north. 

Speaking of Dr. Kane’s voyages this same author 
says: 

“Tt was found that animal life abounded. Musk- 
oxen were shot at intervals throughout the winter 

Wolves, bears, foxes, and other animals were 
repeatedly observed. Geese, ducks, and other water- 
fowl including plover and other wading birds, were 
very plentiful during the summer . . . there were 
large numbers of ptarmigan or snow partridge .. . 
The waters were found to be filled to an extraordin- 
ary degree with marine invertebrata, including jelly- 
fish and shrimps. Seals were very abundant. Num- 
erous insects were observed also, especially several 
species of butterfly, flies, bees, and insects of like 
character. Quite an extensive and varied collection 
of specimens was secured.” 

—and those observations were made north of lati- 
tude 82. 

Cunnington also tells of the finding of much drift- 
wood by the McClure expedition, some of which in 
the opinion of the ship’s carpenter had not been sub- 
ject to a very long immersion in the water. McClure 
himself reports on this expedition that his men saw 
reindeer and killed musk-oxen on the shores of 
Prince of Wales strait, and he adds that it is pretty 
evident that during the whole winter animals may 
be found in these straits, and that the want of suffi- 


[ 256 ] 


Re OURNEY FO LHE? EARTH’S INTERIOR 


cient light alone prevents our larder being stored 
with fresh food. And Commander Osborne adds to 
this testimony the following remarkable admission: 
‘Subsequent observation has completely overthrown 
the idea that the reindeer, musk-oxen, or other ani- 
mals inhabiting the archipelago of island north of 
America migrate southward to avoid an Arctic win- 
ter.’ Later Commander McClure explored Bank’s 
Land and found immense quantities of trees thrown 
in layers by glacier action evidently that had brought 
them from the north. Sometimes they protruded 
fourteen feet from the ground in which they were 
embedded. One ravine showed along one side a mass 
of trees tightly packed to a height of forty feet from 
the bottom of the declivity. The ground around the 
trees was formed of sand and shingle, showing that 
the trees had not grown there but had been carried 
there from some other spot. While some of the wood 
was petrified much of it was very recent, showing 
that this process of the trees being carried down had 
been going on for a great many thousands of years. 
And Cunnington adds: 

“At a subsequent period Lieutenant Mecham met 
with a similar kind of fossil forest in Prince Patrick 
Island, nearly one hundred and twenty miles further 
north.” | 

And yet in the actual latitudes where these trees 
are found nothing larger than a stunted willow 


[ 257 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


grows. No wonder the people who think the earth 
is solid are hard put to it to explain where these trees 
come from. | 

Nansen himself is puzzled to account for it. In 
the second volume of his “Farthest North” he speaks 
of this driftwood which is being continually found 
on the Greenland coast and whose presence, he says, 
has caused geographers to doubt if there can pos- 
sibly be a solid polar ice cap—for if there were 
where could this wood come from? He says that 
even as far north as latitude 86 degrees he found 
such driftwood. 


BIRDS AND THEIR MIGRATIONS 


In an English work entitled “The Arctic World: 
Its Plants, Animals and Natural Phenomena” we 
find further corroborative evidence. ‘The author 
urges further exploration of the Unknown Region, 
as he terms it, as the only means of solving the rid- 
dles which it presents and which are quite unex- 
plainable according to the orthodox theories. He 
says: 

“There are questions connected with the mi- 
grations of birds which can be elucidated only by an 
exploration of the Unknown Region. Miultitudes, 
which annually visit our shores in the winter and 
spring return in summer to far north. This is their 
regular custom and obviously would not have become 
a custom unless it had been found beneficial. There- 


[ 258 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


fore, we may assume that in the zone they frequent 
they find some water which is not always frozen; 
some land on which they can rest their weary feet; 
and an adequate supply of nourishing food.” 


THE SAND-PIPER IS A PUZZLE 


From Professor Newton we adopt, in connection 
with this consideration, a brief account of the move- 
ments of one class of migratory birds—the Knots. 


“The knot or sand-piper is something half-way be- 
tween a snipe and a plover. It is a very aetive and 
graceful bird, with rather long legs, moderately long 
wings, and a very short tail. It swims admirably but 
is not often seen in the water, preferring to assemble 
with its fellows on the sandy sea-shores, where it 
gropes in the sand for food or fishes in the rock pools 
for some crustaceans . . . Now, in the spring the 
knot seeks our island (England) in immense flocks, 
and after remaining on the coasts for about a fort- 
night, can be traced proceeding gradually north- 
wards, until finally it takes leave of us. It has been 
noticed in Iceland and Greenland, but not to stay; 
the summer there would be too rigorous for its lik- 
ing, and it goes further and further north. Whither? 
Where does it build its nest and hatch its young? 
We lose all trace of it for some weeks. What be- 
comes of it? 

“Toward the end of summer back it comes to us 
in larger flocks than before, and both old birds and 


[ 259 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


young birds remain upon our coasts until Novem- 
ber, or, in mild seasons, even later. Then it wings 
its flight to the south, and luxuriates in blue skies 
and balmy airs until the following spring, then it 
resumes the order of its migration.” 

Commenting upon these facts, Professor Newton 
infers that the lands visited by the knot in the middle 
of summer are less sterile than Iceland or Green- 
land; for certainly it would not pass over these 
countries, which are known to be the breeding places 
for swarms of water-birds, to resort to regions not 
so well provided with supplies of food. The food, 
however, chiefly depends on the climate. - Where- 
fore we conclude that beyond the northern tracts al- 
ready explored lies a region enjoying in summer a 
climate more genial than they possess. 

This is a very remarkable corroboration of our 
theory. Here is a well known bird whose migrations 
are known in every particular except one—where 
does it go when it departs for the north? That has 
been an insoluble question, but at any rate a ques- 
tion which suggests that the far north is not what 
the scientists have supposed it to be—a _ barren 
waste. And when we add to this testimony the 
fact that animals also disappear in that direction 
in the winter, we begin to see how certain it is that 
there is not only a land of mild summer there but 
of perpetual summer. 


[ 260 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


MIGRATIONS OF MEN 

Our author goes on to say: 

“Do any races of men with which we are now 
unacquainted inhabit the Unknown region? Mr. 
Markham observes that although scarcely one-half 
of the Arctic world has been explored, yet numerous 
traces of former inhabitants have been found in 
wastes which are at present abandoned to silence and 
solitude. Man would seem to migrate as well as 
the inferior animals, and it is possible that tribes 
may be dwelling in the mysterious inner zone be- 
tween the Pole and the known Polar regions.” 

Well, our chapter on the Eskimo would have 
been read with interest by the author of this work. 
He shows every evidence of having an open mind, 
and we know that any scientists of today, who are 
as open to conviction as this writer evidently is, will 
eagerly embrace our demonstration that the so-called 
“pole” does not exist at all. 


This author also refers to the presence of the 
“Arctic Highlanders” in the most inaccessible re- 
gions of the north and repeats their evidence that 
there are herds of musk-oxen frequenting lands far 
to the north situated in an iceless sea. He also refers 
to traces of these animals actually found by Euro- 
pean explorers in Greenland, and also the presence 
of Eskimos who were met with by one captain and 
found by a later one to have gone north when the 


[ 261 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


climate was so severe that their southern route was 
absolutely blocked. 

The late Dr. Nicholas Senn, the well known Chi- 
cago surgeon, who is quoted in this book on the sub- 
ject of the Eskimo, also corroborates the fact of birds 
migrating to the farthest north. He adds that even 
in cases of birds breeding in Greenland, the migra- 
tion nevertheless takes place. 


MORE ANIMAL LIFE THAN IN TROPICS 


In J. W. Buel’s “The World’s Wonders’—in 

which there is a very comprehensive summary of the 
~ state of our knowledge of. the Arctic regions—we 
are told, “It is a fact that animal life is greater in 
the Arctic than in the tropical seas. Portions of the 
Arctic ocean are even colored by the abundance of 
small creatures that swim therein.” 

And Herman Dieck, in his “Marvelous Wonders 
of the Polar World,” tells us of Lieutenant Lock- 
wood’s frequent observations in the highest latitudes 
he attained with Schley. ‘These observations inclu- 
ded signs of foxes, hares, lemmings and ptarmigans. 
Hundreds of musk-oxen, too, were seen by Greely in 
Grinnell Land. In fact, Dieck goes so far as to say 
that as the explorers went north they found an “Arctic 
Paradise” and that the ever increasing fertility of 
the country would almost justify the acceptance of 
Symmes’ “eccentric theory,” as he calls it. Of course 
Symmes’ theory was eccentric because it was merely 


[ 262] 


) 


A JOURNEY TO OTHE PARTA’S INTERIOR 


a piece of speculation. It did not really account 
for the actual conformation of the earth. But at 
least Symmes had enough sense to be dissatisfied with 
the orthodox scientific theory of his day. And had 
Mr. Dieck known of the theory expounded in this 
book he could not have failed to see in the unanimous 
testimony of explorers that the further north you go 
the more animal life there is, a complete proof that 
there is in the far north a great asylum of refuge 
where every creature can breed in peace and with 
plenty of food. And from that region must come also 
those evidences of vegetable life that explorers have 
repeatedly seen, the red pollen of plants that drifts 
out on favorable breezes and colors whole ice bergs 
and glacier sides with a ruddy tinge, those seeds and 
buds and branches, and, most impressive of all, those 
representatives of races of animals that yet live on 
in the interior although they have disappeared from 
the outside of the earth. 


A PARADISE OF LIFE 


What a veritable paradise of animal and vegetable 
life that must be! And perhaps for some sort of 
human life also it is a land of perpetual ease and 
peace. The Eskimo people who are probably 
still living there will have been modified from the 
type that we see on the outer surface. Their life 
will be easier, they will have no cold climates and 
food scarcities to contend with. Like the inhabi- 


[ 263 J 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


tants of some of our tropical islands they will reflect 
the ease of their lives in easy-going and lovable 
temperaments. They will be hunters and fishers 
and also eaters of many fruits and other vegetable 
products unknown to us. When we penetrate their 
lands we shall find growing almost to the inner edge 
of the polar opening those trees of which we have 
seen so many drifting trunks and branches. We shall 
find, nesting perhaps in those trees, perhaps in the 
rocks around the inner polar regions the knots and 
swans and wild geese and ross-gulls that we have so 
often seen in the preceding pages, flying to the north 
to escape the rigors of climate which we in our 
ignorance have for so long supposed to be worse in 
the north than elsewhere. 

We shall see all that when we explore the Arctic 
in earnest, as we shall easily be able to do with the 
aid of airships. And when once we have seen it we 
shall wonder why it was that for so long we were 
blind to evidence which, as is shown in this book, 
has been before men’s eyes for practically a whole 
century and over. 


[ 264 | 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAP PER XITI; 


OTHER INTERESTING ANIMALS 
OF THE INTERIOR 


The mammoth and mastodon, while giving us 
our chief evidence that there is habitable land within 
the interior of the globe, are not the only animals 
which may be studied in this connection. There are 
records of other animals living in that land whose 
like has never been seen on any portion of the outside 
globe, only their fossilized or semi-fossilized remains 
telling their story. 


OBSERVATIONS OF ANIMALS 


Robert B. Cook, writing in Knowledge for 1884, 
tells of the remains not only of mammoths but of 
hairy rhinoceros, reindeer, hippopotamus, lion, and 
hyena, found in northern glacial deposits, and he 
claims that these animals, which are not able to 
endure cold weather, must either have been summer 
visitors during the severity of the glacial period or 
have been permanent residents while the country 
had—as he thinks—a milder climate. But as the 
reindeer, lion, and hyena are present day forms of 
life and not as old as the mammoth (at least in the 
form in which we know them today and in which 
these remains show them to have been when they 


[ 265 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


were alive), it is evident that these animals visited 
the spots where their remains were found not from 
southerly climates during early glacial epochs, but 
that they are remains of visitors from the land of 
the interior. Otherwise these present day forms 
would not be found alongside those of the mammoth 
which we have shown to be a present day inhabitant 
ox the interior of the earth. Not knowing this, Mr. 
Cook has great difficulty in explaining the occurence 
together of these forms which in his view are earlier 
and later forms of life. But when we see that they 
are really contemporaneous the difficulty vanishes. 


THE “ARCLA,” A HITHERTO UNKNOWN 
ANIMAL 

That some of the animal denizens of the interior 
world are species quite unknown to us will not seem 
at all strange when we think of the conditions that 
obtain there, and if that were the case it would not 
be so very strange if at times a specimen of some 
kind of these unknown creatures wandered out over 
the lip, perhaps carried by a glacier, and was seen 
by some inhabitant of the far northern regions. As 
a matter of fact there is just such a case recorded 
by J. W. Buel in his survey of scientific and explora- 
tory progress entitled “The World’s Wonders”. He 
quotes Captain Hall, who lived among the Eskimos 
for five years, who says that this and similar 
stories are worthy of credence because strange things 


[ 266 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


that the Eskimos have told on other occasions have 
been verified afterwards. 

It seems that the Eskimos often described to 
Captain Hall an animal which they called the arcla: 
“but which is not mentioned in any book of natural 
history, nor did he ever see a specimen himself... .” 
The natives speak of this animal as being larger than 
the bear, and as very ferocious and as much more 
difficult to be killed. It has grayish hair, a long 
tail, and short thick legs, its forefeet being divided 
into three parts, like the partridge’s, its hind feet 
are like a man’s heels. When resting it sits upright 
like a man. A Neitchille Innuit, crawling into a 
hole for shelter, in the night, had found one asleep 
and quickly despatched it with his knife. It may 
be added here that Ebierbing, who was Hall’s inter- 
preter, now residing in the United States, confirms 
such accounts of the arcla, and says that the animal 
once inhabited his native country on Cumberland 
Sound. 

CURIOUS ANIMALS IN THE FAR SOUTH 


There is another curious fact that could be ex- 
plained easily on the ground of our theory but that 
otherwise is very puzzling. When Nordenskiold 
was exploring the Antarctic regions he visited Pata- 
gonia, the most southern of inhabited lands. When 
there he explored a large cave in which he found 
a large piece of skin covered with greenish brown 
hair, and studded on the inner side with little knobs 


[ 267 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


of bone. He identified it as the skin of a prehistoric 
animal called the mylodon, although along with the 
remains of the mylodon—for further exploration 
discovered no less than twenty specimens—there were 
found many bones, teeth, and horny hoofs of a long 
extinct animal of the horse family, and as Mr. Edwin 
S. Grew says in his “Romance of Modern Geology” 
(where he recounts the episode), the whole thing 
is very puzzling (to the orthodox scientist, that is) : 

“Tt was supposed that the mylodon, like all the 
peculiar gigantic animals of South America, had 
become extinct as long ago as the mammoth or as 
the wooly rhinoceros. All these extinct South Amer- 
ican animals were distinguished by peculiarly shaped 
teeth, and had no teeth at all in front. They are 
called, therefore, Edentata, and their representatives 
today are much smaller.” 


THE MYLODON 
So there is no doubt that the animal which Dr. 


Nordenskiold discovered was a prehistoric form. 
But on the other hand there was a very remarkable 
circumstance: 

“The skin was dry but sound. When it was placed 
in water it gave out a smell which, though unplea- 
sant was very interesting, for it showed that the 
animal which had worn it could not have been dead 
thousands or even hundreds of years. It was in fact, 
evidently a piece of the skin of a mylodon, which 
had survived in this region until modern times. 


[ 268 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


“Further explorations were made in the cavern 
by Dr. Moreno of La Plata, and other naturalists, 
and an immense quantity of bones was obtained, and 
more portions of the skin of the mylodon with the 
hair on. The cavern had been inhabited probably 
several centuries ago by Indians, for human bones 
and weapons were obtained. 

“The remains of as many as twenty mylodons 
have been obtained from the cavern, and many of the 
bones are cut or broken in a way which leads us to 
suspect that the human inhabitants of the cave cut 
up the dead mylodons for food, and split their bones 
to obtain the marrow. 

“Some of the mylodon bones, skulls, jaw-bones, 
leg-bones, etc., are smeared with blood and have | 
pieces of cartilage and tendon attached. There are 
other evidences which go to show that the Indians 
may have kept the mylodons alive in the cave and 
fed them with hay brought from the outside. 

“Besides the relics of the mylodon and of man 
the cavern has yielded bones and teeth, and many 
horny hoofs belonging to a kind of extinct horses; 
and this constitutes one of the puzzling things about 
fais. cave treasure... 254 

“The bones that were found are not buried in 
lime or any preserving stone; but lie in sand where 
one would expect them to have perished long ago 
if they had been of any great age. Yet side by side 
with them are the bones of a long extinct horse; and 


[ 269 J 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


there is no tradition among the Indians today of any 
huge beast corresponding to the mylodon....... 
Possibly, though it does not seem very likely, the 
mylodon is still living in similar caverns in this 
region, as yet unvisited by man.” 

Now the above is very interesting in the light of 
our theory. The fact that the mylodon was not a 
relic of untold ages ago is beyond dispute: the 
relative freshness of its skin proves that, to say noth- 
ing of the fact that it was alive when Indians who 
knew how to domesticate animals were in the land— 
and that is very recent in the scale of time in which 
the mastodon and mylodon figure. But the fact that 
the bones of a long extinct horse-like animal were 
found alongside those of the mylodon, showing that 
the mylodon, an animal known to be very old and 
yet, in this case, proved also to be very recent, and 
the horse-like creature were contemporary. That 
means that the horse-like animal is not so old as 
we think. 

Where, then, could either one of them have come 
from? Although the country has been explored 
since Mr. Grew’s book was written no mylodons 
have been found as he suggests they might be. Evi- 
dently these were the remains of some specimens that 
in some way had wandered from the interior over 
the Antarctic polar lip and either through being 
caught on a floe or carried by a glacier they drifted 
on to some land which connects with Pantagonia. 


[ 270 ] 


APJOURNEY; TO?) THEAEARTH’S, INTERIOR 


That the Indians, whose bones were found in the 
cave, died on the same spot as that in which they had 
lived and where they kept these animals, might al- 
most prove that they were among the last of their 
kind. Otherwise as soon as their supply of food was 
exhausted these Indians would have gone forth in 
search of more and their bones would not have been 
found beside their banquet board. 


AN ESKIMO TRADITION 


It may be well to add at this point that the Eskimos 
have a well defined tradition that the mammoth lives 
underground. Two writers in the Scientific dmert- 
can Supplement independently make this assertion, 
and while the Eskimos are wrong, of course, in think- 
ing that a large animal like the mammoth could bur- 
row like a mole, the very fact that they have this idea 
shows that they are accustomed to seeing the mam- 
moth at intervals and then lose sight of it for some 
time, the animal suddenly appearing again. If we al- 
low that the mammoth has its present habitat in the 
interior of the earth, it is quite easy to see how this 
idea arose. 


eee] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


CHAP TERY. 


THE AURORA 


Every reader of this book has heard of the Aurora 
Borealis, or Northern Lights, and the Aurora Aus- 
tralis, or Southern Lights. Some readers may have 
visited Norway and gone far enough to catch a 
glimpse of this mysterious phenomenon. We say 
mysterious because scientists have never been able to 
explain it, although they usually try to do so by 
saying something indefinite about the carth’s elec- 
tricity and magnetism. We claim, on the basis of 
our theory, to explain definitely what causes the 
auroral lights: that the central sun, flashing its 
beams through the polar openings, is the cause. To 
enforce this claim we shall first describe. in the words 
of competent observers, just what these lights look 
like and how they behave. We shall then show— 
also on the best scientific evidence—that they are 
not and could not be caused by electricity or mag- 
netism; we shall refute many fallacies on that sub- 
ject. And then we shall give abundant evidence 
proving that the reflection of the rays of the central 
sun by the earth’s atmosphere, modified by the con- 
ditions, cloudy or otherwise, of the atmosphere of 
the interior of the earth, is what causes these wonder- 
ful displays of light. 


[ 272 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


WHAT THE AURORA LOOKS LIKE 

We shall have more than one description of the 
aurora in the following chapter, but perhaps it will 
be interesting to start our enquiry from a rather old 
but very good book—to which we have referred 
before. In Honorable Daines Barrington’s ‘“Possi- 
bility of Approaching the North Pole” he asks a 
correspondent about the aurora and is assured that 
it “is commonly seen most strong in the north and 
is*very red and fiery.” 


IS TT CONTINUOUS? 

Grecly in his “Three Yeats of Arctic Service” 
says anumber of interesting things. He remarks that 
there is always a feeble auroral light even when there 
is not a brilliant display. Soon after that remark 
we find him observing a perfectly circular aurora 
which he calls a mock sun. It had burning colors 
of blue, yellow and red with bars of white. A few 
days after, he witnessed an aurora which had a beau- 
tiful corona or crown of light around it. It had 
numerous and brilliant streamers. Then here ig 
another description of an aurora: 

“A beautiful and brilliant arch about three degrees 
wide, formed of twisted, convoluted bands of light, 
similar to twisted ribbons, extended from the south- 
west through the zenith to the north-eastern horizon. 
Occasionally, well-marked and clearly defined 
patches of light detached themselves, as puffs of 
smoke from a pipe, and drifted fading to the north- 


[2732] 


A JOURNEY TO ‘THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


west. The arch seemed to be continually renewing 
itself from the southwest to fade at the opposite end. 
Perhaps a better idea of this peculiar formation may 
be conveyed by likening the display to an arch hav- 
ing the appearance of an endless, revolving screw. 
This formation was by no means infrequent, but I 
have never seen it elsewhere or known it to be de- 
scribed.” 

Again Greely writes: 

‘““A particularly fine aurora, like a pillar of glow- 
ing fire, from horizon to horizon through the zenith, 
showing at times a decidedly rosy tint.” 

It will at once strike the reader how well these 
observations fit in with our theory that the aurora 
is the reflection of the beams of the inner sun coming 
through the polar orifice, when he remembers the 
extraordinary differences there will be in the condi- 
tions which from time to time modify those reflec- 
tions. ‘There may be clouds between the inner sun 
and the polar orifice, and these may be diffused or 
in heavy dense masses. The atmosphere may be 
moister or dryer at one time than another and this 
will modify the reflections. The earth’s outer atmos- 
phere may vary as well as its inner one. Hence all 
the differences which are described in the succeeding 
pages. 

NANSEN DESCRIBES AURORA 

Let us now take the testimony of Fridtjof Nansen 

on the subject of the aurora. In “Farthest North” 


[ 274] 


| 


| 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


he describes many appearances of this marvel. Here 
is part of one of his descriptions: 

“A lovely aurora this evening. A brilliant corona 
encircled the zenith with a wreath of streamers in 
several layers, one outside the other; then larger and 
smaller sheaves of streamers over the sky...... All 
of them, however, tended upward toward the corona, 
which shone like a halo. Every now and then I could 
discern a dark patch in its middle, at the point where 
all the rays converged. It lay a little south of the 
pole star, and approached Cassiopeia in the position 
it then occupied. But the halo kept smouldering 
and shifting just as if a gale in the upper strata of 
the atmosphere were playing the bellows to it. Pres- 
ently fresh streamers shot out of the darkness out- 
side the inner halo, followed by other bright shafts 
of light in a still wider circle, and meanwhile the 
dark space in the middle was clearly visible; at other 
times it was completely covered with masses of light. 
Then it appeared as if the storm abated, and the 
whole turned pale, and glowed with a faint whitish 
hue for a little while, only to shoot wildly up once 
more and to begin the same dance over again. Then 
the entire mass of light around the corona began to 
rock to and fro in large waves over the zenith and 
the dark central ‘point, whereupon the gale seemed 
to increase and whirl the streamers into an inextric- 
able tangle, till they merged into a luminous vapor 


2757 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


that enveloped the corona and drowned it in a deluge 
of light, so that neither it nor the streamers, nor the 
dark centre could be seen—nothing, in fact, but a 
chaos of shining mist.” 


OUR EXPLANATION 


Now it is obvious that the real explanation of this 
phenomenon is to be found in those words which 
Nansen uses without seeing their real bearing on the 
problem: “it appeared as if the storm abated” and 
“the gale seemed to increase”. As a matter of fact 
the light from the central sun was being reflected 
from the higher reaches of the earth’s atmosphere 
and the reflection was interfered with by a violent 
storm in the interior of the earth. Clouds were 
rapidly being formed and being dissipated in that 
part of the interior near the polar opening. Thus 
the rays of the central sun were one moment permit- 
ted to pass without obstruction; then the opening 
would be clouded up, at first perhaps by one dense 
cloud giving the central dark spot in the reflection of 
which Nansen speaks; then there would be a general 
filming over of the aperture and the result would 
be a diffused reflection. 

Not only is it true that no other explanation fits 
the facts of the rapid changes without apparent cause, 
but Nansen himself acknowledges that he was quite 
ignorant of the cause of the phenomenon. He says: 


“O thou mysterious radiance! What art thou and 


[ 276 ] 


| 

| 

whence comest thour Yet why ask?...... What 

would it profit if we could say that it is an electric 
discharge or currents of electricity through the upper 
regions of the air, and were able to describe in minu- 
test detail how it all came to be?” 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


NOT CAUSED/BY ELECTRICITY 


The reader will notice that Nansen does not com- 
mit himself to the popular view that the aurora is 
caused by electricity. In that he shows his wisdom, 
for we shall now deduce evidence to show that elec- 
tricty has nothing whatever to do with the aurora. 

If, as some people think, the earth’s magnetism or 
electricity at the polar regions or around the earth’s 
magnetic poles were the cause of the aurora, there 
would be a constant relation between its displays 
and the different instruments which have been 
constructed to tell the presence of magnetism 
and electricity—the compass would be affected and 
the electrometer would be affected. And there 
would certainly not be the irregularity about these 
displays that Nansen describes above. So now let 
us take the testimony of other observers. Payer who 
entered the Arctic circle on the “Tegetthoff” during 
the years 1872-1874, has a whole chapter devoted to 
the aurora. He says that it is very difficult to char- 
acterise the forms of this phenomenon, not only be- 
cause they are manifold but because they are con- 
stantly changing. Sometimes there are brillant 


C2774 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


bands and patches of light upon the sky, sometimes 
there are appearances like “glowing balls of light”. 
He further says: 


CLOUDS IN THE INTERIOR 


“The movement of the waves of light gave the 
impression that they were the sports of winds, and 
their sudden and rapid rise resembled the uprisings 
of whirling vapors, such as the geysers might send 
POLO as In many cases the aurora much resembled 
a flash of summer lightning conceived as permanent”. 


Now that description precisely fits in with what 
we have described as the reflection of the light of 
the central sun, that light being by turns cut off in 
one part and then another, here and there a gleam 
breaking through, as the atmosphere of the interior 
changed. That the appearance was “the sport of 
winds,” as Payer says, is literally true, only the winds 
were those shifting the clouds in the atmosphere on 
the inner side of the polar orifice. And it may be 
noted that a magnetic display could not be the sport 
of winds, for wind does not effect the ether in which 
medium along magnetic lines of force and electrical 
light from discharges work. If the aurora were 
caused by electrical lines of force discharging them- 
selves in light, it would not be so capricious as de- 
scribed above. It would be a more or less steady 
appearance. 


[ 278 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


WHATSPAYER HAS: TO. SAY OF 
THE AURORA 

Payer goes on to say that often after a brilliant 
aurora there would be bad weather—which certainly 
sounds as if the storm clouds from which it was 
reflected from the inner sun were breaking, or per- 
haps a storm starting in the interior was coming over 
the lip and running its course in the Arctic circle. 
He adds that none of the theories current at the time 
explain the phenomenon. He thinks, however, that 
vapors rather than electricity may play a part in the 
phenomenon, especially on account of its “indefi- 
nite form’”—which, as we have pointed out above, 
is only explicable on our showing that the aurora is 
the reflection of the central sun and not due to any 
electrical discharge. A member of Payer’s expedi- 
tion, Lieutenant Weyprecht, describes one form of 
the aurora as an arch of light, looking as if “it were 
the upper limit of acsegment of a circle and’ it is 
often thrice the breath of a rainbow. Often as it 
rises other arches follow it, all rising toward the 
zenith.’ Now we know that a rainbow is caused 
by the sun that lights the earth, and it is only natural 
that when the conditions are calm the reflection of 
the inner sun should also take this form—the cir- 
cularity of the arch of the aurora simply being the 
reflection of the circular outline of that inner sun’s 
diameter. Payer quotes Parry as saying that there 
was no magnetic disturbance when the aurora was 


[ 2/9. ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


seen. He, himself, is not able to make any connection 
between variations of the magnetic instruments and 
the presence of the aurora, although he tries hard to 
do so. As the final result of his observations he 
writes as follows: 

“No pencil can draw it, no colors can paint it, and 
no words can describe it in all its magnificence. And 
here below stand we poor men and speak of know- 
ledge and progress, and pride ourselves on the under- 
standing with which we extort from Nature her 
mysteries. We stand and gaze on the mystery which 
Nature has written for us in flaming letters on the 
dark vault of night, and ultimately we can only 
wonder and confess that, in truth, we know nothing 
of it.” 

Now some day that will appear very pessimistic, 
for we are making progress in knowledge, and about 
this very subject. After the enthusiastic description 
which Payer gives of the beauties of the aurora, 
might it not have occurred to him that magnetic or 
electrical discharges could not produce such grandeur 
because electrical flashes are only bright when the 
electricity is at a very high tension. But as soon as 
the tension of the electricity in the atmosphere be- 
comes great enough we have a thunder storm, and 
we all know just how bright the lightning flash is. 
But how about these marvelous colors, this sea of 
flames of which Payer says “is that sea red, white 
or green? Who can say?” And Payer admits that 


[ 280 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


it is even impossible to tell whether the “rays shoot 
from above downward or from below upward.” 
Such colors could not possibly be produced by elec- 
tricity; they are the colors of the interior sun partly 
split up like the rainbow by their breaking up as 
they pass from stratum to stratum of the atmosphere 
at length to be reflected back to us. 

But we have denied that these displays have any 
effect on the magnetic needle or the electrometer. 
Let us verify that assertion by evidence more power- 
ful than Payer’s. Greely says in the book from 
which we have already quoted that “it seems to be 
the experience here that the magnet is undisturbed 
during the prevalence of colorless auroras” although 
he did observe in a few cases he reports that magnetic 
storms took place at about the same time as there 
were auroral displays. In these cases, however, it 
is certain that the conditions which produced the 
stormy and colored appearance of the aurora—due 
to its refraction through damp air—also produced the 
magnetic storms, just as in our own latitudes an 
electrical storm is accompanied by a great deal of 
moisture in the air. While in ordinary weather, the 
atmosphere being uniform throughout, the auroral 
reflection is uncolored because it is not broken up 
into a spectrum and at the same time in such uni- 
formly dry air there is nothing to cause a magnétic 
storm. But it by no means follows, from the fact 
that Greely saw these magnetic storms upon one or 


[281 ] 


A JOURNEY TO*PHE EARTHS INTERIOR 


two occasions, that they always accompany colored 
auroras, for as a matter of fact they do not, as our 
further testimony shows. 

But there is one important preliminary point. If 
the aurora is a reflection of the inner sun, it will 
only be on the rare occasions when the whole polar 
orifice is covered with cloud—and how rare such a 
condition would be, even in the damp atmosphere 
of the interior—that the aurora will be absent. The 
sun is always there, the orifice is always there, and 
the earth’s atmosphere above the polar regions will 
always be dense enough to reflect some light, though 
not of course dense enough to reflect the wonderful 
lights that it sometimes does. So, if our theory be 
true, there ought always to be some auroral light at 
the pole. And we have the testimony of the celebra- 
ted French astronomer, Camille Flammarion, that 
this is so. In one place in his book, “The Atmos- 
phere”, he says: “Nearly every night there is a more 
or less brilliant display of these auroral lights”. And 
later in the same book he says: “This light of the 
earth, the emission of which toward the poles is 
almost continuous...... ' 


NOTHING TO DO WITH MAGNETISM 


And now for the alleged disturbance of the mag- 
net‘or other instruments. In Sargent and Cunning- 
ham’s “Wonders of the Arctic World,” which is a 
carefully written account of the earlier expeditions, 


[ 282 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


it is recorded that during the Second Land Expedi- 
_ tion of Franklin, enough observations of the aurora 
were made with specially designed instruments and 
recorded to establish the fact that no disturbances of 
the magnetic needle accompanied the displays. 
(Page 164.) 

We may corroborate this testimony by referring 
to “Wonders of the Polar World”, by Herman 
Dieck, M. A., another work in which the main 
results of polar exploration are summarized. Mr. 
Dieck quotes a description of an aurora seen by Gree- 
ly’s men, in which the arch form which we have 
already described was very prominent, and also the 
prismatic colors showing that the aurora was colored 
through the breaking up of sunlight, just as in the 
case of the rainbow. And he adds that there was no 
noise—-this is important, as electrical discharges are 
always accompanied by a crackling noise—and there 
was no disturbance of the compass. Later, Lieu- 
tenant Greely set up an electrometer, an instrument 
which records the presence of very small amounts 
of electricity, but “to his astonishment” there was not 
a trace of electrical disturbance. Greely also noticed 
that there were no crackling sounds in connection 
with the display. 

BRUCE ON THE AURORA 

It is often the case that once the real explanation 
of anything is found out, we get corroborative evi- . 
dence from the most unexpected sources, and the 


[ 283 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


reader who turns to a very recent and most depend-_ 
able work in the Home University Library, that of 
William S. Bruce, leader of the Scottish National 
Antarctic Expedition, called “Polar Exploration”, 
will find just such testimony. Professor Bruce says 
that the phenomenon occurs in other planets than 
our own and that it has been notably observed in 
Venus—which of course would be the case as the 
reader will remember that Venus occasionally shows 
us her central sun, and so we would naturally expect 
also to see its reflection in Venus’ atmosphere. Pro- 
fessor Bruce also tells us that the early Norwegians 
held that the aurora was due to “fires which surround 
the sea to the north”. Now that is very interesting 
because it suggests that perhaps these people had 
had in some way communication with the interior 
of the earth, and they might easily have thought that 
the central sun was some sort of fire. In fact some 
of them thought that the aurora was simply “a reflec- 
tion of the sun when it is below the horizon” and that 
suggests that they had actually got far enough north 
to see the interior sun for a short time, perhaps, and 
that they afterwards saw its reflection in the sky in 
the form of an aurora, and remembering that they 
had just left the sun behind, they guessed that the 
two had this connection. | 

On the other hand, Professor Bruce quotes the 
observations of a British Antarctic Expedition to 
the effect that: 


[ 284 ] 


i) qeioaet dIOM SUOTIT oO otraydsowy} 2 J we 3 Pp 
12 oy T A Wail 231 ¢ 
Ty pu a) 
aq} U } } 3 y y y Y Pp 3 I 
” I . 
(0) TOI101L 0. rE ¢ aloo 2) ou0e oI } U BL Awe Y 
d =) eB (3 LOM se uns JeijU90 9 
Pp e pe 
A d y ouM JOIO;ax a6 10} 2) 1) 
pu dd 
q pee) 
«A 


cy 
\Z 


NZ 


UU 
Y, 


— 


7 


SZ 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


“The observations of atmospheric electricity taken 
during the displays reveal no special effect due to 
the aurora.” 

There are some other considerations which show 
that the aurora is really due to the interior sun. Dr. 
Kane, in his account of his explorations, tells us that 
the aurora is brightest when it is white. That shows 
that when the reflection of the sun is so clear that the 
total white light is reflected, we get a much brighter 
effect than when the light is cut up into prismatic 
colors. In the latter case the atmosphere is damp 
and dense—that being the cause of the rainbow 
effect—and through such an atmosphere one cannot 
see so much. Hence the display is not so bright as 
it is when the atmosphere is clear and the light not 
broken up. 

HES NEARER=LHE POLE, THE BETTER 
AEE DISPEAyY 

Again, if the aurora is the reflection of the central 
sun, we should expect to see it fully only near the 
polar orifice, and see only faint glimpses of its outer 
edges as we went further south. And that is precisely 
What is the actual fact ofthe matter. Says Dr. 
INieholas Senn in his book “In the Heart of the 
A TCtICS ¢ 

“The aurora, which only occasionally is seen in 
our latitudes, is but the shadow of what is to be seen 
in the polar regions.” 


[ 285 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE ©ARTH’S INTERIOR 


And in “Earth, Sea, and Sky,” by H. D. Northrop, 
we read: 

“As we retire from the pole, the phenomenon 
becomes a rare occurence, and is less perfectly and 
distinctly developed.” 

Regarding the two quotations just made a word of 
explanation is necessary. When Dr. Senn speaks of 
the aurora being only a “shadow” when it is seen 
some distance south he does not mean that it is a 
shade. He simply means that it is much fainter than 
when it is seen in the north. Now what is the reason 
of this? It is well known that certain laws of refrac- 
tion of light cause a very bright rainbow to cast 
another rainbow, similar to itself at a distance from 
itself in the sky. Sometimes when the rainbow is 
very bright there is enough light being refracted so 
that two reflections are formed, and then the first 
reflection is paler than the original rainbow and the 
second reflection is still paler. Similarly, the auroral 
light is refracted in part so that a faint image of it 
or “shadow” is seen rather far to the south, sometimes 
as far south as the latitude of Illinois. But it is well 
known that no aurora or reflection of an aurora is 
ever seen at the equator, and as the aurora which is 
seen some distance from the north is only a shadow 
or reflection of the real aurora it is only occasionally, 
when the atmosphere happens to be right for it, that 
we see this phenomenon. 


[ 286 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


THE DISPLAY IS CONTINUOUS 


H. D. Northrop further notes that the light of the 
aurora is continuous during the Arctic night, and he 
says that the arch which we have already mentioned 
as being such a prominent feature of the aurora is 
only “part of a ring of light which is elevated con- 
siderably above the surface of our globe, and whose 
center is situated in the vicinity of the pole.” 

And that is precisely what we should expect when 
we remember that it is the reflection of the rays com- 
ing through the polar orifice which causes the pheno- 
menon. Northrop points out that a person looking 
at this ring from a point very far north would ima- 
gine that the aurora was to the south of him simply 
because the ring was so far spread out overhead. 

This point is corroborated by the author of “The 
Arctic World” who says the same thing about the 
aurora. Meanwhile we find that William Denovan 
in his scientific reference work, ‘The Phenomena of 
Nature”, makes the statement that: 

“Tn temperate regions the aurora does not present 
such grand forms as in the extreme north.” 


JUST LIKE THE SUN’S CORONA 


The same author also makes another interesting 
point that supports our contention. It is that the 
corona or crown of light surrounding the sun is very 
like the light that the aurora gives us, and Nansen, in 
the second volume of his ““Farthest North,” speaks of 


[ 287 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


an aurora in which there was a reflection that looked 
very like a corona. But, the reader may say, that 
is only a chance resemblance. It might be thought 
so, but exact observation confirms the idea that the 
light is the same in both cases. Taylor Reed, writing 
in Popular Astronomy for 1895, describes the spectro- 
scopic observation of the sun’s corona and compares 
the result with the examination of the earth’s aurora. 
He says: 

“Both have their beautiful streams. Each has a 
characteristic form in the neighborhood of the pole 
of its sphere. Apply the spectroscope to each and the 
analogy is continued. Each gives in the spectrum 
an unidentified bright line, with fainter companions. 
Each shows a faint continuous spectrum. 

We cannot imagine what further proof than the 
above anybody could need. If the two sorts of light 
give precisely the same spectroscopic appearances 
they must come from precisely similar sources. That 
is to say, if the corona is light caused by a sun, the 
aurora must also be light caused by a sun. And that 
is what we claim. 


OBSERVATIONS BY EARLIER SCIENTISTS 


Let us, before concluding, however, give one or 
two more citations to show that the evidence already 
adduced is not only to be had in isolated instances but 
is agreed with by all observers at all times. In the 
first place, verification of the fact that Greely ob- 


[ 288 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


tained no results when he set up his electrometer 
during a display of the aurora when he was on his 
northern expedition, will be found in the interview 
which he gave the Associated Press and which was 
published all over the country and is to be found in 
the Sctentific American Supplement for September 
6, 1884. Again, Nordenskiold gave a correspondent 
of the New York Herald an account of his explora- 
tions in the Arctic in the course of which he made 
this very important announcement: 

“Whenever the sky was clear, and there was no 
sun or moon, he saw constant in the northeast hori- 
zon, and almost always in the same exact spot, a 
faintly luminous arc so motionless as to be suscep- 
tible of accurate measurement. ‘This phenomenon, 
Nordenskiold concludes, comes from an actual aure- 
ole, or ring of light, surrounding the northern por- 
tion of the globe.” 

It is notable that Nordenskiold also says that there 
were no very brilliant displays that year. Evidently 
the weather was calm, there were no storms to make 
rapidly changing reflections, and as the air in the 
interior was probably laden with moisture the dis- 
play was not brilliant. But the fact it was circular 
and steady shows that it was a reflection of a body 
that was also circular and steady, and reflected 
through a circular opening, and that body was no 
less than the interior sun. 

It is interesting to note that ihe idea that the 


[ 289 | 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


aurora is a reflection of sunlight is not confined to 
those old Norwegians we have spoken of. In an 
article translated from “La Lumiere Electrique” by 
the Scientific American Supplement for February 
17, 1883, we are told that Descartes, Ellis, Frobisher, 
Franklin, Raspail and Wolfert, all thought that the 
aurora was from sunlight. They were near the truth, 
but they did not know what sun it really was that 
caused the light. In this same article we are told 
that the aurora is only seen at the pole and that any 
celestial light seen in the skies at lower latitudes— 
such as the zodiacal light—is not due to the aurora 
at all. 

In Nature, the volume of 1878, will be found an 
account of the eclipse of the sun as observed by the 
astronomer royal of Great Britain wherein it is stated 
that Professor Bass observed steadily for the whole 
period one part of the sun’s corona, and he found 
that it pulsated in just the same manner as the 
aurora does. 

THE AURORA AND THE ELECTRIC 
LIGHT CONTRASTED 

And in conclusion we may repeat the observation 
of Payer, quoted also by W. J. Gordon in his book 
“Round About the North Pole”, that it is impossible 
to discover whether the rays of the aurora shoot 
upward or downward. If those rays were electrical 
discharges they would all be going in the same 
direction, like the lines of force from a magnet. But 


[ 290 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the very fact that these rays are confused and seem 
to go now one way and now another, shows that they 
are light reflections which cross one another and 
appear and disappear as the reflecting surface—the 
upper layers of the atmosphere—varies. Thus we 
have one more item of the cumulative proof that the 
aurora is not a magnetic or electrical disturbance 
but simply a dazzling reflection from the rays of the 
_central sun. And our next task is to see if there are 
not evidences of life in the land that is warmed by 
that sun. For if it warms continents and waters in 
the interior of the earth, if, as we have seen, birds 
have their feeding and breeding grounds there, if 
an occassional log or seed or pollen like dust is seen 
in the Arctic that come from some such unknown 
place as we have described, it ought to be possible to 
obtain enough evidence of such life as would prove 
up to the hilt the contention of this book. 


b2o1 | 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAPTER xy. 


THE ESKIMO 


Throughout this book there have been many refer- 
ences to the Eskimos who live nearer to the north 
polar orifice of the earth than any othér people but 
who are not found near the south polar orifice. Of 
people in that region, people who in our opinion 
undoubtedly were Eskimos we shall have some- 
thing to say in the next chapter. Or rather we will 
let other people say it—for the finding of people in 
the Antarctic was a unique occurrence which has 
never been explained before. It has simply been 
recorded and wondered at. Ours is the only expla- 
nation, and this chapter is the necessary preparation 
for that explanation. The question that this chap- 
ter will answer is, “Who are the Eskimos and 
whence do they comer” That it is necessary to pose 
the question is shown by what Nansen has to say 
on the subject. For Nansen tells in the second 
volume of his authoritative work, “In Northern 
Mists,” all that has been previously discovered about 
the Eskimos and one is astonished to see that it 
all ends in a question mark. In other words only a 
little is known about the Eskimos, and as to their 
origin nothing is known. 


[ 292 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 
NANSEN ON THE ESKIMO 


And yet the Eskimo must have come from 


somewhere to his present habitat, for as Nansen says 


“his world is that of sea-ice and cold, for which 
nature had not intended human beings”—implying, 
of course that the Arctic regions were not the origi- 
nal home of this race. 

He goes on: 

‘As men of the white race pushed northward to 
the ‘highest latitudes’ they found traces of this 
remarkable people, who had already been there in 
times long past; and it is only in the last few decades 
that anyone has succeeded in penetrating farther 
north than the Eskimo, partly by learning from him 
or enlisting his help. In these regions, which are 
his own, his culture was superior to that of the white 
race, and from no other people has the arctic navi- 
gator learned so much. 


A PUZZLE 


“The north coast of America and the islands to 
the north of it, from Bering Strait to the east coast 
@i Greenland, is. the territorycof the Hskimo.... .. 
Within these limits the Eskimos must have developed 
into what they now are. In their anthropological 
race-characteristics, in their sealing and whaling- 
culture, and in their language they are very different 
from all other known peoples, both in America and 
Asia, and we must suppose that for long ages, ever 


[ 293 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTHS INTERIOR 


since they began to to fit themselves for their life 
along the frozen shores, they have lived apart, separ- 
ated from others, perhaps for a long time as a small 
tribe. They all belong to the same race; the cerebral 
formation, for instance, of all real Eskimos, from 
Alaska to Greenland, is remarkably homogenous; 
but in the far west they may have been mixed with 
Indians and others, and in Greenland they are now 
mixed with Europeans. ‘They are pronouncedly 
dolichocephalic; but have short, broad faces, and by 
their features and appearance are easily distinguished 
from other neighboring peoples. Small, slanting 
eyes; the nose small and flat, narrow between the 
eyes and broad below; cheeks, broad, prominent and 
round; the forehead narrowing comparatively above; 
the lower part of the face broad and powerful; black, 
straight hair. The color of the skin is a pale brown. 
The Eskimos are not, as is often supposed, a small 
people on an average; they are rather of middle 
height, often powerful, and sometimes quite tall, 
although they are a good deal shorter, and weaker 
in appearance, than average Scandinavians. In 
appearance and also in language they come nearest 
to some of the North American Indian tribes.” 


VERY LIKE THE CHINESE 


We shall find later, however, that other observers 
think the Eskimos are nearer in type to the Chinese 
than to any other race. 


[ 294 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


Nansen admits that he is puzzled—in common 


_ with other enquirers, no two of whom agree—over 


the origin of the Eskimo race. The central point 
of their culture, he says, is seal-hunting, “especially - 
with the harpoon, sometimes from the kayak in open 
water and sometimes from the ice. We cannot 
believe that this sealing, especially with the kayak, 
was first developed in the central part of the regions 
they now inhabit; there the conditions of life would 
have been too severe, and they would not have been 
able to support themselves until their sealing culture 
had attained a certain development. Just as in 
Europe we met with the ‘Finnish’ sea-fishing on a 
coast that was connected with milder coasts further 
south, where seamanship was first able to develop, 
so we must expect that the Eskimo culture began on 


coasts with similar conditions...... vy 


Dr. Nansen then discusses the various possible 
mild coasts on which the Eskimo might have learned 
his sealing and navigation, but he cannot come to 
any satisfactory conclusion and says that the ques- 
tion will have to be left open. 


The fact that the question cannot be settled in any 
other way naturally impresses us with the proba- 
bility that it will be settled through the application 
of our theory. The coasts near the polar orifice on 
the inner side of the earth would afford the ideal 
conditions for the earliest habitat of the Eskimo race, 


[295° | 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


and, as we shall see later, there are other facts which 
make us certain that the Eskimo race as we know it 
today is an overflow from settlements on the borders 
of the polar orifice. Not only shall we show later 
that there has actually been communication between 
the Eskimos of the north and the Antarctic region— 
we shall show that that uninhabited part of the world 
has been visited by Eskimos or similar people coming 
through the interior of the earth—but many things 
in Eskimo history and tradition point to their com- 
ing from the interior. 


THEY CAME FROM THE NORTH 


First, however, let us nove that Nansen lists quite 
a number of scientists all holding “‘various views as 
to the origin of the Eskimo”, which, however, are 
all different from the idea set forth by Nansen that 
they must have come from a milder climate than 
their present one. Nansen notes that on the Amer- 
can Arctic islands the Eskimos no longer live as 
far north as they once did-—as where older traces 
of them are found. It is evident in this case that they 
began north and gradually made their way south. 
But that beginning was not only north but was in the 
interior. And in many other cases we shall see that 
the farther north one goes the more one sees traces 
of Eskimos and we shall also find it true that all 
their traditions point to the north, and even to a 
condition of things which can only be explained on 


[ 296 ] 


MIOURNEY HOVLHE BARTH’S INTERIOR 


the theory that they once lived in a land of perpetual 
sunshine—which the interior of the earth is. 


As further illustrating scientific ignorance about 
these people, we may see further what Nansen has 
to say: 

HOW THEY TRAVEL 

“How early the Eskimo appeared, and came to 
the most northern regions, we have as yet no means 
of determining. All we can say is that, as they are 
so distinct in physical structure, language and culture 
from all other known races except the Aleutians, 
we must assume that they have lived for a very long 
period in the northern regions apart from other 
peoples. It would be of special interest here if we 
could form any opinion as to the date of their immi- 
gration into Greenland. It has become almost an 
historical dogma that this immigration on a larger 
scale did not take place until long after the Nor- 
wegian Icelanders had setteld in the country, and 
that it was chiefly the hordes of Eskimos coming 
from the north that put an end, first to the Western 
Settlement and then to the Eastern. But this is in 
every respect misleading, and conflicts with what 
may be concluded with certainty from several facts; 
moreover, the whole Eskimo way of life and depen- 
dence on sealing and fishing forbids their migration 
in hordes; they must travel in small scattered groups 
in order to find enough game to support themselves 


P2971 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


and their families, and are obliged to make frequent 
halts for sealing. They will, therefore, never be 
able to undertake any migration on a large scale.” 

The above strengthens our position very mater- 
ially, for all the migrations of peoples with which 
history deals have been on a large scale, whole tribes 
staying together and moving in concert along defi- 
nite routes. But if the Eskimos had come to the 
north from more southerly climates or even if they 
had come from so far away as China, or from the 
wilds of North America, they must either have come 
up all together—which Nansen tells us is impossible 
—or they must have scattered themselves over a much 
wider territory than they now occupy. In other 
words large numbers of them have become “‘lost” 
as far as any particular route is concerned. Nansen 
gives a map of their present and past distribution 
in his book, and it practically proves alone, without 
further evidencé, that» the Eskimos: ‘came? from 
the north, for they only occupy the north coast of 
America, and the islands to the north of it, from 
Behring Strait to the east coast of Greenland, and 
that marks the limit of their territory. Now how 
could small groups at different times, starting out 
at points far away from this, all converge to that 
one small field of distribution? Why did not many 
of them stop at favorable parts on the way? Why 
did they not mix with and modify other tribes whom . 
they met on the way, leaving traces that the anthro- 


[ 298 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


| pologist could note and trace down? No, the map 

_ of the distribution of the Eskimos shows that they 
came from the north, from over the lip of the polar 
orifice, and settled upon the first suitable land that 
they reached. 

That the Eskimos left the interior of the earth 
very early—perhaps when the northern climate was 
milder than it is now and therefore more attractive 
to them—seems probable. Nansen says: 

‘There can be no doubt that the Eskimo arrived 
in Greenland ages before the Norwegian Icelanders. 
The rich finds referred to among others by Dr. H. 
Rink, of Eskimo whaling and sealing weapons and 
implements of stone from deep deposits in North 
Greenland show that the Eskimos were living there 
far back in prehistoric times.” 

And in a note appended to this statement Nansen 
adduces evidence to show that in those prehistoric 
times the Eskimos lived more to the north than 
they do at the present time—a very significant thing 
to admit, seeing that it points to a northern and not 
a southern origin and starting point. 

But the Eskimos had learned a number of 
things, that is to say they were not a new tribe emerg- 
ing from savagery but had a history behind them, 
when they did take up their abodes on the northern 
shores of the outer world. Nansen remarks that 
they: “must have had at the time of their first immi- 
gration much the same culture in the main as now, 


[299 | 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


since otherwise they would not have been able to sup- 
port themselves in these northern regions.” 


THEIR MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION 


He further tells us that: 

‘“ Their means of transport were the kayak and the 
woman’s boat in open water, and the dog-sledge on 
the ice. Their whaling and sealing were conducted 
in kayaks in summer, but with dog-sledges in winter, 
when they hunted the seal at its breathing-holes in 
the ice, the walrus, narwhale and white whale, in the 
open leads, and pursued the bear with their dogs. 
In winter they usually keep to one place, living in 
houses of stone or snow, but in summer they wander 
about with their boats and tents of hides to the best 
places for kayak fishing.” 

That sounds as though it were the pursuit of seals, 
whales, etc., which gradually brought the Eskimos 
out of the interior polar regions into those of 
the exterior in the first place, and as Nansen goes 
on we see that he constantly emphasizes the fact that 
they moved further south. And although it was more 
temperate after they had passed the very cold region 
which is just south of the polar inland sea, they “no 
longer found the same conditions of life as before, 
the ice was for the most part absent, the walrus be- 
came more difficult in the open sea, and winter fish- 
ing from the kayak was not very safe.” 


[ 300 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 
POORER HUNTING IN THE SOUTH 


That quotation answers any reader who may won- 
_der why the Eskimos emigrated from the interior 
| in the first place, where the climate is mild, out into 
| the regions of North Greenland where it is harder. 
The answer is that the Eskimo is by nature a 
hunter and fisher, just as some tribes of the earth are 
naturally agricultural and stay fixed in one spot, while 
others are nomads and roam. The Eskimos were 
hunters and fishers of whale, narwhale, seal, etc., 
and they pursued their prey gradually over the polar 
lip. As long as they had sought these creatures in 
open water they had great difficulty in catching 
them. When they came to an ice-bound region, 
which they would do after they had come down past 
the region of warm currents and open sea around 
the poles, they found it easier to catch their prey. 
When they went too far south, so that the sea became 
warm and open again, they could no longer do this 
so easily, and so, as Nansen points out they remained 
in the localities where the winter meant ice: 

“Southern Greenland, therefore, had no great 
attraction, so long as there was room enough further 
north.” 

In other words the Eskimo who came too far 
south found out what we have seen that the polar 
explorers from our own countries found out—a 
greater abundance of life further north. 

That the Eskimo came from the interior of 


[301] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the earth, that is to say, from a location which they 
could not easily explain to the Norwegians who 
might have asked them where they originally came 
from, is shown by the fact that the early Norwegians 
regarded them as a supernatural people, a species 
of fairy. Whén we remember that in the efforts of 
these Eskimos to tell where they came from they 
would point to the north and describe a land of per- 
“petual sunshine, it is easy to see that the Norwegians 
who associated the polar regions with the end of the 
world, certainly not with a new world, would won- 
der at the strange origin thus indicated. They would 
naturally assume that these were supernatural beings 
who came from some region under the earth—as that 
was always considered to be the abode of fairies, 
gnomes, and similar creatures. 


EARLY NORWEGIAN IDEAS ON THE 
ESQUIMAUX 
And according to Nansen this is precisely what 
happened. Ele says: 


‘“T have already stated that the Norse name ‘Skrael- 
ing’ for Eskimo must have originally been used as a 
designation of fairies or mythical creatures. Further- 
more there is much that would imply that when the 
Icelanders first met with the Eskimo in Greenland 
they looked upon them as fairies; they, therefore, 
called them ‘trolls,’ an ancient common name for var- 
ious sorts of supernatural beings. This view persist- 


[ 302 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


ed more or less in after times. Every European who 
has suddenly encountered Eskimos in the ice-covered 
wastes of Greenland, without ever having seen them 
before, will easily understand that they must have 
made‘such an impression on people who had the 
slightest tendency toward superstition. Such an idea 
must, from the very beginning, have influenced the 
relations between the Norsemen and the natives, 
and is capable of explaining much that is curious in 
the mention of them, or rather the lack of mention of 
them, in the sagas, since they were supernatural be- 
ings of whom it was best to say nothing.” 

Nansen then goes on to tell us that when these 
Skraelings were mentioned in Latin writings the 
word was always translated by ‘‘Pygmaei’”’ which 
meant “short, undergrown people of supernatural 
aspect’’—-that is like fairies; and it was precisely that 
sort of being who had always, in the middle ages and 
as far back as classical times, been supposed to inhabit 
Thule—Thule being the ultimate land beyond the 
north, being in fact, no doubt a conception really 
based on what is the actual fact, as proved in this 
book. It is seldom that there is not a basis in fact for 
the myths and ideas of antiquity, and this belief in a 
land beyond the poles inhabited by a strange people 
was very widely distributed. In fact Nansen 
tells us that from St. Augustine the knowledge of 
these pygmies “reached Isidore; and from him the 
knowledge was disseminated over the whole of med- 


[ 303 ] 


A JOURNEY TO:*THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


iaeval Europe—partly in the same sense, that of a 
more or less fabulous people from the uttermost parts 
of the earth; and partly in the sense of a fairy peo- 
ple. Supported by popular belief in various coun- 
tries, the latter meaning soon became general. Of 
this Moltke Moe gives a remarkable example from 
the Welshman, Walter Mapes (latter half of the 
twelfth century) who in his curious collection of an- 
ecdotes, etc., (called ‘De Nugis Curialium’), has a 
tale of a prehistoric king of the Brittons called Her- 
la. Mi 
EARLY NORWEGIAN LEGENDS 


‘ Nansen then goes on to repeat the tale which repre- 
sents this king as meeting with Skraelings or Eskimos, 
and being taken by them beneath the earth. Of 
course in the form in which it is given by this Welsh- 
man of the twelfth century it 1s only a fairy tale. But 
may there not be a basis in truth for such a tale? It 
is remarkable how many early legends represent peo- 
ple as going under the earth or into an utterly strange 
realm, and when we remember what feats of naviga- 
tion the early Norsemen could perform—we must 
remember that they first discovered America — it 
looks as if they might have penetrated to the interior 
and so made a basis in fact for these very frequent 
tales of people finding a supernatural realm and stay- 
ing there for a long time but at last coming back. In 
this connection we may mention the fact that the 
early Irish had a legend of a land far beyond the 


[ 304 ] 


| 


| 


| 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


sea where the sun always shone and it was always 


summer weather. They even thought that some of 
their early heroes had gone there and returned— 


never to be quite satisfied with their own country 
again. 

A thirteenth century Norwegian authority is quot- 
ed by Nansen to show that the Eskimos were 
known then as a supernatural people, small in stat- 
ure, who “have a complete lack of the metal iron; 
they use the tusks of marine animals for missiles and 
sharp stones for knives.” 

And Nansen adds: 

‘The curiously correct mention of the Skraelings’ 
Weapons must be derived from a- well-informed 
source, and the statement established the fact that the 
Norsemen met with the Eskimos of Greenland at 
any rate in the thirteenth century.” 

We may also add that the fact that the Norsemen 
knew them as well as this and yet thought that they 
were supernatural people who “‘when these are struck 
while alive by weapons their wounds turn white with- 
out blood’”—the fact that they really knew them and 
yet had ideas like that about them, shows that they 
did not regard them as ordinary human beings. And 
only the fact that the Eskimos came from some 
strange land, thought to be supernatural, would ac- 
count for such strange ideas being held. 

The early Norsemen did, however, wonder where 
these people could possibly come from, and Nansen 


[ 305 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


tells us that whenever they went north they took par- 
ticular notice of any abandoned Eskimo dwell- 
ings that they might happen to see. He says further: 

“Tn an account of the voyage to the north, about 
1276, we read that at the farthest point north there 
were found some old Skraeling dwelling places, 
while farther south, on some islands, were found 
some inhabited ones. In agreement with this it is 
stated of the men who came from the north in 1266 
that they saw no ‘Skraelingja vistir’ (dwelling 
places) except farther north than in Kroksfjardar- 
heidr, and therefore it is thought that they must by 
that way have the shortest distance to travel wherever 
they came from. Thus we see that the Skraelings 
were found in and in the neighborhood of Kroksfjord 
but on the other hand not in the extreme north where 
only old sites left by them were found.” 


THESE IDEAS ARE SIGNIFICANT 


In other words, one first met the Skraelings, then 
as one went farther north one met their deserted 
dwellings, showing that their progress was from the 
direction of the north. And Nansen adds in a foot- 
note that these ancient observations are quite in con- 
formity with later seas and therefore: to be 
given full credence. 


TRACES FOUND AT SEA 


Nansen also gives us another remarkable fact, a 
piece of direct evidence of the Eskimos’ having 


[ 306 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


_ lived in the interior of the earth. He mentions the 

_ finding “out at sea” in 1226 of “pieces of driftwood” 
shaped with “small axes’—which he thinks may 
mean stone axes—and adzes (the Eskimo form 
of axe) and these pieces of wood had “wedges of 
bone imbedded in them.” 

Now we have already seen that driftwood from 
the interior of the earth is a common phenomenon in 
the Arctic regions. That they were not from a point 
near land is shown by the fact that the Norwegians 
who found them were much impressed and spoke of 
them in a way which showed that they thought the 
discovery something very much out of the common 
and something “‘not due to Norsemen.” 

Nansen also quotes an archbishop in 1520 who re- 
fers to the Eskimos as being very unlike other peo- 
ples, coming, as he says, from “the north-northwest 
of Finmark” and he seems to think that they live in 
underground houses—which again may be a remin- 
iscence of the idea of their living under the surface 
of the earth or in its interior. 


FRESH IMMIGRATION FROM THE NORTH 


And Nansen also says that these Eskimo set- 
tlemenis were not only increased by the tribe growing 
but by “fresh gradual immigration from the north”— 
which clearly points to further additions from the in- 
terior of the earth. 

That the present day Eskimo is not quite like 


ESO7| 


A JOURNEY“T OGRE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the type described above, Nansen attributes to Scan- 
dinavian intermixture after Norwegian communica- 
tion with the Greenland colonies had been cut off in 
the fourteenth century—due to internal troubles in 
Norway—and the larger race had been forced to 
amalgamate with the smaller Eskimos from whom 
they had previously kept aloof. So the Eskimo race 
as we know it today is not the same in physical ap- 
pearance as the race that ordinarily came out of the 
interior of the earth. 
DR. SENN ON ESKIMO AND CHINESE 
LIKENESS 

We have mentioned that the Eskimo has been com- 
pared in appearance and type to the Chinese. The 
authority who does this is the late Dr. Nicholas Senn, 
professor of surgery at the University of Chicago, 
who has made an Arctic trip and written some very 
interesting things about it. He says: 

“The Mongolian type of the Eskimo is pro- 
nounced” and again: “The affinity of the Eskimo for 
the Chinese was well demonstrated by the actions of 
a little Eskimo girl that Mrs. Peary took home with 
her in 1894. The first thing that attracted her serious 
attention was a Chinaman she saw on the street, while 
the many new things she saw in the great city of New 
York that usually interest children made little im- 
pression on her.” 

Now it is quite possible that the Eskimos are not 
descended from any tribes driven out of China as that . 


[ 308 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


might imply, but that the Chinese as well as the Es- 
kimos originally came from the interior of the 
earth. 

ESKIMOS HAVE OWN IDEA OF ORIGIN 

That they originally came from a land of constant 
sunshine, from a country away past the northern ice- 
barrier is the tradition of the Eskimos themselves, and 
it is a tradition which must be given full weight, for 
it could not have arisen among them in the first place 
without good cause. On this point Dr. Senn says: 

‘When questioned” —as to the land of their origin 
—“they invariably point north without having the 
faintest perception of what this means.” 

Naturally the Eskimos do not know that the earth 
is hollow and that ages ago they lived in its interior, 
but they have clung to that one simple fact—they 
came from the north. Dr. Senn denies that they 
have any characteristics in common with the North 
American Indian and thinks that they are the rem- 
nant of “the oldest inhabitants of the western hemi- 
sphere.” In this attributing of great antiquity to 
them he may be right—at least he there agrees with 
Nansen. But the interior of the earth and not the 
western hemisphere is evidently the place of their or- 
iginal abode. 

THEIR FAITH IN THIS ORIGINAL HOME 

As for the land of perpetual sunshine, the Eskimo, 
of course, does not remember that as something he 
himself has seen, for it is very questionable if any of 


[ 309 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the Eskimos of the present generation have ever 
penetrated to the interior. But it is a well known fact 
that every race has its idea of a “golden age” or para- 
dise which is generally composed of the elements 
which are handed down in its stories and myths as 
being characteristic of its earliest home. Thus the 
Eskimo legends handed down generation after gen- 
eration, tales of the interior land with its ever shining 
sun, and what could be more natural than when the 
Eskimo came to build in fancy a paradise for him- 
self and his loved ones after they should die, that he 
should reconstruct this first home of which he had 
heard only in dim legends? That, at any rate is just 
what he has done. Dr. Senn, discussing their relig- 
ion, says: 

“They believeiin.a future;world;; 2 <: Thesoul 
descends beneath the earth into various abodes— -the 
first of which is somewhat in the nature of a purga- 
tory: but the good spirits passing through it find that 
the other mansions improve till at a great depth they 
reach that of perfect bliss, where the sun never sets, 
and where by the side of large lakes that never freeze, 
the deer roam in large herds and the seal and the wal- 
rus always abound in the waters.” 

That paradise might serve as almost a literal de- 
scription of the land in the interior of the earth, and 
the way in which the Eskimo indicates a preliminary 
purgatory before it can be reached may well be the 
reflection of a memory handed down in the tribe of 


[ 310 ] 


| 


| 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


_ the great hardships and difficulties of the ice barrier 
_ between that wonderful home and the present situa- 


_ tion of the Eskimo on the southern side of that great 
_ natural obstacle. 


stis also interesting to note that when the Eskimo 
first saw Peary’s effort to get further north than the 
great ice-cap of Greenland — beyond which they 
themselves had no ambition to explore—htey imme- 
diately thought that the reason for his trying to get 
further north was to get into communication with 
other tribes there. That idea would hardly have oc- 
curred to them if it were not for the fact that they 
had traditional or other evidence of people in the 
supposedly unpopulated north. 

With such a weight of evidence all pointing one 
Way it is very hard to resist the conclusion that in the 
Eskimo we find a type, changed now and mixed with 
other types, but still something of a type of human 
being that has inhabited or very likely still inhabits 
the interior of the earth. We can certainly find no 
origin for them that explains their present situation. 
And their legends admit of no other explanation 
either. For those legends certainly point to the same 
sort of land as every chapter in this book has pointed 
to—a land of perpetual sun and mild climate, a land 
corresponding to the “Ultima Thule” of ancient leg- 
end and that may sooner than the skeptic expects, be 
opened up once more to those who go properly 
equipped to seek it. 


ann | 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAPTER x2V 1. 


EVIDENCE IN THE ANTARCTIC 


The Antarctic has not been so thoroughly explored 
as the Arctic polar region, and so our evidence from 
that end of the globe is not so voluminous, but it is 
startling in its conclusiveness. One point, in fact, will 
doubtless be admitted by the reader to be almost as 
distinct a proof of our theory as was the occurrence 
of the mammoth in Siberia in a perfectly fresh con- 
dition. 

A LAP IN SCIENTILIC KNOWLEDGE 

Before coming to this startling direct evidence, 
however, let us briefly show how scientists themselves, 
in their effort to explain the evolution of the higher 
mammals, are driven to suppose the existence of a lost 
continent upon which a number of “missing links” 
between different grades of animal species would be 
found were that continent ever discoverable. As these 
scientists had no conception of a continent on the in- 
terior surface of the earth they were driven to sup- 
pose that during certain stages in the evolution of life 
this continent moved about on the earth’s surface by 
the tilting up of one coast line above the waves while 
the other coast line was gradually submerging. This 
ingenius idea was put forward by Huxley. Other 
scientists thought that there was a vast Antarctic con- 


nee | 


| A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


 tinent, but if the polar regions were the solid ice that 
scientists supposed this continent could not have pro- 
duced the species that the scientists claim lie hidden 
—that is in fossil form—somewhere, nor could mi- 
gration have taken place to other climes. 


A POSSIBLE LOST CONTINENT 


To show how important this is let us quote from 
an article in the Scientific American Supplement for 
October 8, 1892, by Dr. E. Murray Aaron. It seems, 
according to him that there is a gap in evolution be- 
tween the animals of the Mesozoic era and the higher 
mammals, the placental mammalia as they are called, 
including the apes, cats, dogs, bears, horses, and oxen. 
From the Mesozoic forms to these forms is a big 
jump and one that is apparently very suddenly made. 
But how did these higher forms evolve? ‘They could 
not have come full fledged upon the earth for nature 
never takes such a big leap. The opponents of evo- 
lution make the best of this gap and challenge the 
evolutionists to fill it. Obviously there must have 
been some intermediate forms, and the question is, 
where did they live and where are their remains to 
be found. Dr. Aaron proceeds: 


SHIFTING THE.GARDEN OF EDEN 
“Fuxley’s ‘Lemuria,’ a vast continent long lost be- 
neath the water of the Pacific, the original ‘Eden’ of - 
many latter day ethnologists, may be the region whose 
subsidence has buried its much sought for treasures 


ais 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


beneath fathoms of water, but, however that may be, 
the discovery of new forms of animal and plant life 
and the discovery of fossil remains as already point- 
ed out, cannot fail to shed a flood of light upon this, 
one of the most engrossing problems of the study of 
geographical distribution as it effects organic evolu- 
tion. In fact, already is enough known of the mate- 
rial derivable from the Antarctic region to warrant 
Mr. Blanford, in a recent address before the Geo- 
graphical Society of London in stating that ‘a grow- 
ing acquaintance with the biology of the world leads 
naturalists to a belief that the placental mammalia 
and other higher forms of terrestrial life originated 
during the Mesozoic period still further to the south- 
ward—that is to say, in the lost Antarctic continent.’ 
>) 

The author then quotes from a paper on Antarctic 
exploration read by Mr. G. S. Griffiths, F. G. S., be- 
fore the Bankers’ Institute of Australasita—who had 
himself quoted the above words—to the effect that: 


A COMMON BIRTHPLACE 


“Tt almost necessarily follows that wherever the 
mammalia were developed there also man had his 
birthplace, and if these speculations should prove to 
be well founded we may have to shift the location of 
the Garden of Eden from the northern to the south- 
ern hemisphere.” 


And Dr. Aaron adds: 
[ 314 ] 


AWOURNEY TT O;THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


“What a vista of results even to the production of 
fossilized primitive man and his immediate prede- 


~ cessors and the harmonizing of this corrected geolog- 


ical account with the Mosaic cosmogony, would open 
up, it may be left to the imagination of the reader to 
conjecture.” 

The paper by Mr. Griffiths which Dr. Aaron re- 
fers to above was printed in Nature late in the year 
1890 and from it some other interesting particulars 
may be gained. He says that if there were not such 
a continent as the one he supposed to have been lost 
there would not have been any chance for the migra- 
tion of the animals and plants which are now found 
on such widely separated parts of the globe as South 
Africa and Australia. He says: 

“We are told by Professor Hutton of Christchurch 
that forty-four per cent of the New Zealand flora is 
of Antarctic origin. New Zealand and South Amer- 
ica have three flowering plants in common, also two 
fresh water fishes, five seaweeds, three marine crust- 
aceans, one marine mollusk and one marine fish.” 

He then cites a number of other instances where 
widely separated lands have the very same species 
of animals, fish and plants: 

“Yet the lands which have these plants and animals 
in common are so widely separated from each other 
that they could not possibly now interchange their in- 
habitants. Certainly toward the equator they ap- 
proach each other rather more, but even this fact fails 


Peis | 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


to account for the present distribution. . . Yet 
there must have been some means of communication 
in the past and it appears certain that it took the form 
of a common fatherland for the various common 
forms from which they spread to the northern hemi- 
sphere.” 
THE INTERIOR OF THE EARTH FULFILLS 
THIS CONDITION 

We claim that this common fatherland is none 
other than the interior of the earth which by its 
warmth and luscious vegetation—remember that its 
sun is shining all the time and evaporating the water 
to form a very damp atmosphere—is just adapted to 
those large forms of life that hold the missing links 
spoken of above. By drifting from this common land 
on glaciers and icebergs these animals were gradually 
distributed. 

A GREAT MYSTERY THAT ONLY OUR 
THEORY WILL SOLVE 

That this distribution is perfectly possible and may 
still be going on to some extent, is proved by the fact 
that an Antarctic voyager some years since saw a 
large iceberg covered with earthy matter, rocks and 
stones, showing that it came from land and not from 
barren ice as the orthodox scientists would have us 
think covers the polar regions. ial 


But there was something else on this iceberg and it 
forms such a remarkable proof of our theory that it 
alone might have suggested some such theory as ours 


[ 316 ] 


| 
| 
| ASJOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


_to anyone who pondered it sufficiently. Before stat- 


ing the facts which form such a mystery to the sci- 
entist let us remind the reader that while the Arctic 
regions are inhabited by the Eskimos of whom we 
have already read, there have never been discovered 
any traces of human life either near or within the 
Antarctic circle. Penguins and seals and fish prac- 
tically are alone in those regions. No Antarctic ex- 
plorer has ever met a native tribe or put up for the 
winter in a native village. Man in the Antarctic is 
an unknown species. 

How then does the reader explain the facts in the 
following statements taken from the nautical maga- 
zine for 1893. The statements occur in the course of 
an article devoted to reports of icebergs in the Ant- 
arctic seas: 

Bthe Gladys, Captin, i. B..Hatteld,. .... 4 was 
completely embayed by icebergs (43 degrees S., 33 
West) and did not get clear of fog and ice until July 
4 in 40 degrees South, 30 West. At four p. m. of the 
latter date, signs of human beings having lived for 
some time on one of the icebergs in sight were well in 
evidence. On the northwest side was a beaten track, 
a place of refuge formed in a sheltered nook on the 
summit, and apparently five dead men lay on differ- 
ent parts of the berg. 

“There were no indications of life, but the wicked 
weather precluded any attempt at further search and 
the Gladys was kept on her course.” 


Pain] 


A: JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S: IN EERIOR 


Now let the reader remember two things. Dr. 
Cook, surgeon to the Belgian Antarctic expedition, 
writing in the Scientific American Supplement for 
June 23, 1900, gives the unanimous scientific verdict 
when he says that: 

FROM WHERE DID THESE HUMAN 
BEINGS COME? 

“Indeed in the great sweep of the earth’s surface, 
which surrounds the south pole and extends far north- 
ward into the temperate zone comprising one quarter 
of the entire terrestrial area, there has not been found 
the footprint of man.” 

And let the reader remember also that these were 
no shipwrecked sailors, for the iceberg was coming 
from the south at the time; subsequently inquiry did 
not reveal the loss of any ship in the Antarctic prior 
to this discovery; and if these had been civilized men 
cast astray they would have put up a flag or some 
similar signal. 

Other ships in this vicinity sighted icebergs with 
sand and earth on them proving that they came from 
a land source. And it was undoubtedly from this 
land source that this berg, which had earth on it as 
well as the five dead men, came. But, the reader says, 
you have just quoted an authority to prove that there 
are no men resident in the Antarctic regions. Where, 
then, did these five unfortunate castaways come from? 
From the interior continent the other side of the 
southern polar orifice, and we have no doubt that the 


[ 318 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


Eskimos and these men are connected. For -the 
Eskimo has not been able to leave his northern 
home and come south on the outside of the earth be- 
cause that involved navigation in ships. But on the 
inside of the earth there is a milder climate and a dif- 
ferent land formation, and there would be nothing to 
prevent such of the Eskimo tribes as penetrated 
over the northern Arctic lip, or what is more likely 
were born there—from where they emigrated to the 
outer surface through the north—there is nothing to 
prevent them, we say, from going south along the in- 
terior surface of the earth and coming to the other 
polar orifice and out over it into the inhospitable Ant- 
arctic regions whence they drifted on this iceberg to 
the place where they were seen by Captain Hadfield. 


As a speaker before the Sixth International Geo- 
graphical Congress held in London, Mr. C. E. Borch- 
grevink, said, after reciting the discovery told of 
above: 

“This earthy matter, rocks and stones, together 
with signs of human life, all found upon one of these 
visitants from that unknown region; this is surely a 
strong presumption in favor of the existence of races 
that answer to the Eskimos of the north.” 


A RACE LIVING IN THE INTERIOR 


Yes, we reply, it is a strong presumption, but it is 
not a presumption that these races live on the ex- 
terior of the planet, for they have never been met 


SnOo] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


with. But the presumption is that they live in the in- 
terior or at least that they have visited that part of 
the interior from time to time. 

This same scientist also stated that on his own voy- 
age to the Antarctic he noted that many of the seals 
had remarkable scars upon their bodies which indi- 
cated that they had been hunted. But no hunters from 
the north had been in that neighborhood and there 
was no seal industry. Is it not possible that tribes 
in the interior corresponding to the Eskimo of 
the north had hunted these seals? 

Altogether the reader must admit that this evi- 
dence from the Antarctic is very important.. Only 
such a land as we describe within the interior of the 
earth will relieve the scientists of their puzzle in ex- 
plaining the distribution of animals. Only such a 
land makes it possible to explain the character of the 
earth-covered icebergs seen in those southern regions, 
and only such a land with a clear communication 
with the north through the interior of the earth makes 
it possible to explain the presence of those five dead 
men slowly traveling from the extreme south from a 
region which all the scientists told us does not give 
shelter or food to any human beings. 


| 320 } 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CREAT TEREX VT 


THE JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


Having actually established the facts in the case 
we shall, in this chapter, use those facts in an imag- 
inative and constructive way to show the reader what 
an actual journey into the interior of the earth would 
be like. We shall not invent any new facts or ““make 
up” any mere tale of fancy, but we shall simply use 
the facts we have already gathered in a new way, 
grouping them together in the order in which an ac- 
tual traveler would observe them. 

ON AN EXPEDITION, WHAT SHOULD 
WE SEE? 

In the first place, if the writer of this book and a 
company of readers were setting off on this expedi- 
tion, we should take with us not only the usual equip- 
ment of an Arctic explorer but we should also pro- 
vide for travel in very warm regions, for we know in 
advance that we are going to find a very warm and 
damp climate after we have braved the rigors of 
the cold weather to be found before we get to what 
are usually called the polar regions. And we should 
take more instruments for scientific observations than 
have usually been taken on polar explorations be- 
cause we know from the experiences of former ex- 
plorers how difficult it is to make the ordinary ob- 


[ 321 ] 


A JOURNEY. TO THE EARTH'S’ INTERIOR 


servations in the northern regions, and how important 
it is that everything possible be noted and compared 
with those observations which have already been 
made. We should not only have the ordinary instru- 
ments of navigation but delicate apparatus for mak- 
ing observations. When the auroral light was shin- 
ing we should use a spectroscope to analyse it, and 
show that it was really the same as sunlight in its 
composition. We should have microscopes for ex- 
amining botanical and biological specimens. And 
we should certainly have a trained geologist along, 
for we should wish his expert observations on the 
geology of the interior. 


OUR START | 
Thus equipped we should leave some nothern port, 


we may suppose it to be St. Johns, Newfoundland. 
In a little over a week we have arrived at Godhaven, 
Greenland. Here we would pick up a number of 
Eskimo helpers, some sleds and dogs, and other 
necessities for the voyage. We would then proceed 
up the coast of Greenland to about 82 or 83 degrees, 
which could be done without very much trouble. But 
by the time we have reached that far we will have 
noticed several surprising things. We will find that 
whenever there is a wind from the north the weather 
is much warmer than when the wind is from the 
south. And we shall notice that ever since we passed 
the latitude of say 75 degrees the average tempera- 
ture has not been growing any colder. Furthermore 


(3208 


yy 


an ----- 2900 Mi----* 3.600. +-----2900 MI------ 


iS 


SOUTH POLE. 
OF GRAVITY 1 


SOUTHERN 
ENTRANCE 


E e 


Diagram showing the earth as a hollow sphere with its polar open- 
ings and central sun. The letters at top and bottom of diagram indicate 
the various steps of an imaginary journey through the planet’s interior. 
At the point marked “D” we catch our first glimpse of the corona of the 
central sun; at the point marked “E” we can see the central sun in its 


entirety. 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


| we shall notice that there is a steady warm current of 


_ water coming from the north. From time to time 

_ we see birds in the air, and if our trip is being made 
at all late in the season—and knowing what we do 
know we shall not be afraid of some delays, for it is a 
hospitable country to which we are going and not a 
land of perpetual ice—if, we say, our trip is being 
made rather late in the season we shall see many of 
these birds flying north. Suppose we were to leave 
our ship at any point along the coast of Greenland 
and carrying gasoline launches in sections on our 
sledges were to go overland until we came to the open 
polar sea which Dr. Hayes discovered. In that case 
we should have to camp every so often, and we would 
find plenty of game along our route and comfortable 
temperatures for sleeping in our tents. If it were 
during the summer weather, mosquitoes would be 
quite a nuisance. While our friends at home were 
picturing us as freezing with cold we would as a mat- 
ter of fact be sweating with the exertions of moving 
camp and similar activities. ‘Traveling in this way 
we could come to the coast of Grant Land or of 
Peary Land, and then going out on the ice-surface 
for a little we should come at last to the open polar 
sea. Then, let us suppose, we were able to set up the 
gasoline launches which we had brought with us in 
parts, loaded on the sledges, launch them, with a 
good supply of fuel on each, and start on the last lap 
of our journey. 


[ 323 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 
GETTING INTO WARMER WATER 


As we proceed the water rapidly becomes warmer, 
all trace of ice is left behind, the flocks of seabirds 
thicken, and perhaps we run into an immense shoal 
of herring going to or from their breeding grounds 
which are to the north of us. Our first night on the 
water we shall be surprised to see, after the setting 
of the sun, a glow in the sky which gradually defines 
itself as a ring covering the whole visible horizon 
while long streamers of light wave in fantastic pat- 
terns overhead. ‘The Aurora, for such it is, is now 
no longer only to the north of us, as it would be if we 
saw it from a lower latitude, but it is directly over 
our heads and even to the south of us because we are 
almost on the edge of the aperture, and the reflections 
from the central sun come from higher strata of the 
atmosphere which are illuminated for an immense 
area by the diverging rays of the central sun coming 
through this immense aperture. As we proceed these 
auroral displays become ever more bright and steady 
and symmetrical. And the sun we have been accus- 
tomed to seeing in the heavens is each day a little 
nearer the horizon. At last there comes a time when 
we cannot make any more observations by it, and one 
day when we wake up—or rather, perhaps are awak- 
ened by the members of our crew who have been 
keeping watch, we find an extraordinary thing has 
taken place. It is apparently daylight when, per- 
haps, by the checking up of our time pieces it ought 


[ 324] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


to be dark. Only it is a peculiar daylight. It is the 
sort of light which usually precedes a storm, an angry 
reddish light with a heavy atmosphere. If we were 
unprepared we would think that some terrible at- 
mospheric disturbance was about to take place. But 
if we are prepared we know now that we have sailed 
far enough over the rim of the earth’s aperture so 
that the sun we see is no longer the sun of the outer 
firmament but the inner sun which never sets. And 
even if our feelings did not, our instruments do tell 
us of a great increase in the temperature of the water 
and the temperature and humidity of the air. We 
take off some of our outer clothing. Perhaps we 
find that we are in one of those currents from the 
north which we met with before we began to sail 
across the edge of the aperture. If so we may find 
it a great deal stronger and the water a great deal 
warmer at this point. 

As we proceed two things forcibly strike our at- 
tention: one in the “sky” as it still appears to be, and 
one in the water. The first is that the sun is no longer 
moving. It is stationary in the sky, for the small 
distances that we are able to traverse will only cause 
a very slight apparent motion of the sun, so slight 
that it would take a great deal more than a day’s jour- 
ney to make it appreciable. ‘The other thing is that 
the water is fairly alive with organisms of one sort or 
another. Perhaps we shall see immense shoals of 
herring. It may be that in pursuit of them are crea- 


sy 


A JOURNEY TO-THE EARTH S*INTERIOR 


tures the like of which we have only seen illustrated 
in books on geology. When we come to very shallow 
water we shall certainly see species of shell fish that 
we have previously only seen in their fossilized con- 
dition in our museums. 


LANDING IN THE INTERIOR 


But we are approaching land and all eyes are 
strained to see what lies ahead. Perhaps it will turn 
out to be a lowlying beach, and we make for it and 
quickly disembark, pull up our boats, take out our 
tents and prepare to make our first camp. We will 
naturally want fresh water, and as we are now no 
longer in a region where i: is to be obtained from ice 
or snow, for it is almost too hot for us here, unac- 
customed as we have been by the previous journey 
north to warm weather. So we look around and per- 
haps we are lucky enough to find that we have 
camped near astream. After due rest and the neces- 
sary preparations we prepare to follow its meander- 
ings and explore the new territory. 


VEGETATION. THAT Is NEWa LO. 

Very soon we come to vegetation. But it is of a 
kind that is either quite new to us or at least only re- 
minds us of similar forms that we have seen on the 
outside of the earth. Immense trunks, of a sort of 
plant which geologists and botanists call gymno- 
sperms, tower above the stream and stretch as far as 
the eye can reach on either side of its banks. -They 


[ 326] 


‘ZOL9601T ‘ON ‘FI6I ‘ZI ABN Pauaed “ZI6T ‘royne ayy Aq apeyA 
(‘japou Suryiom yo ydesZojoyd wo1z paonperday)  ‘suvas0 pue s}U9UT}UOD TOLOWUT ot} pue uns [ev1}Ua0 ay} FO MATA 
Ieajo eB Burars ‘10jenba ay} 0} se[sue yyst1 ye pue ssutuedo rejod ay} Yysnory} A[[erj}UId peayastq YB dU} SuUIMOYS 


ri 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


remind us of the trees which we call conifers—such 
as the pine. They are covered with spinelike leaves 
which cling to both trunk and branches and they 
have no flowers. The air is warm and steamy, and 
dragon-flies and mosquitoes are hovering over the 
water of the stream and over the vegetation. Below 
these large conifer-like trees are species of fern, 
somewhat like the ferns we know but more solid and 
much larger, in many cases the fern clusters rising 
from the top of a very thick trunk, almost half the 
length of the larger trees, and really constituting 
what we would call a fern-tree and not merely a fern. 
Over the ground are studded great masses of Lyco- 
pods or club mosses, and green stretches of smaller 
mosses cover the ground. As long as the land on 
which we are traveling is low and near the water sur- 
face this is the predominating strain of vegetation. 
Later when we reach higher ground, we shall find 
that vegetation more like that of our own tropics has 
found a home. We shall see some flowers that we 
can recognize and we shall see some that are new to 
us. One very common flower will be the original 
starting place of that red pollen which, as we have 
seen, is deposited on the ice cliffs of the outer world. 
Judging from the quantities of that pollen we have 
seen on the ice cliffs of the exterior of the planet we 
shall not be surprised when we see, that the flower it- 
self is one which grows in immense banks or areas 


PA 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


covering the whole ground, so that the moss or grass 
between the different plants is invisible. And when 
a strong breeze blows over these immense areas we 
shall see how the pollen is carried so far for it is a 
very light, fine, powdery pollen, and the very air is 
colored as the wind blows it toward the polar open- 
ing. Our clothes are covered with it, if we happen 
to be in the path of the wind, and for a time it hangs 
in the air and is even breathed in by us as we inhale 
the air. 
A SPONGY AND PEATY SOIL 

If we dig into the soil of this low-lying land we 
shall find that it is a spongy and peaty soil, formed 
of the debris of the vegetable matter which towers 
above our heads. Owing to the heat and the mois- 
ture this vegetable growth is not only rank and lux- 
uriant, but it grows four times as rapidly as the veg- 
etable matter on the earth’s outer surface. They do not 
stop growing as our outer plants do, because there is 
no setting of the sun, and they do not pause in their 
growth in the winter because there is no winter. This 
rapid growth means that they are spongy and weak 
in their texture. They keep expanding all the time, 
and so do not consolidate themselves as plants in the 
outer world do which grow more slowly and build 
their cells together more compactly. And as these 
plants grow quickly so do they decay quickly. Each 
plant soon reaches its limit, and, lying in a damp 
earth, its roots being spongy rather than firm, it is 


[328] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


soon ready to topple over when a wind storm comes 
along. It topples and rots and soon is reduced to 
humus again, and in this humus of rotten leaves and 
branches, half buried and decaying. trunks, other 
plants spring from the myriad seeds which are scat- 
tering around all the time. By and by the weight of 
these further growths on the soil pushes the old hu- 
mus down and compresses it more and more, and were 
we to dig down a little into this soil we should find 
the same thing that they burn in the cabins in Ireland 
—peat, that mass of vegetable matter which may be 
called coal in the making. If we were to dig a little 
lower still we would undoubtedly find natural gas, 
for it is a well known geological fact that a layer of 
peat seven inches deep will give off enough gas dur- 
ing its decomposition, that by the time it is ready 
to turn into actual coal that layer will no longer be 
seven but only one inch deep. 


FERN-LIKE AND PARASITE PLANTS 


We next notice a tree that is thirty feet or so in 
height but which reminds us of a very small plant 
we have observed on the outside and called Mare’s 
Tail. We should hardly think of calling this tree 
anything so undignified for it branches out in a most 
amazing fashion and its main trunk is thick and 
sturdy looking, but we find upon close examination 
that the two are identical in all but size. ‘This tree 
has the same jointed branches looking like a collec- 


[329.4 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


tion of immense fishing poles, and each branch is 
covered with a coat of flinty roughness, due to the 
silica with which it covers itself in minute spicules. 
We can pull the branches off very easily because they 
are jointed together in detachable bits, but we shall 
probably cut our hands if we do so and very pain- 
fully—just as in our childhood days we have often 
cut our hands on certain rough grasses. 


Looking up we see parasitic fern-like plants and 
some with flowers like orchids drape themselves all 
over the larger vegetation, and these are a very ac- 
tive cause in its early downfall, as they quickly sap 
these trees not equipped tc offer much ;esistance to 
such a process. Further away from the water we 
should find seed-bearing trees like our own of the 
tropics, and small plants of every description up to 
many of our common varieties of temperate climates, 
but all growing here in a ranker and more luxuriant 
fashion. 

INSECT AND ANIMAL LIFE 


We should be amazed at the abundance of insect 
life.. On the water would be water flies of various 
kinds and sizes. Newt-like forms would be scramb- 
ling from water to land or sunning themselves in the 
pools. Occasionally under the dense undergrowth 
we should espy a serpent or serpent-like creature 
wending its silent way. Probably we would find 
that these were amphibious creatures. 


[ 330 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 
HOW THE MAMMOTH IS TRAPPED 


A longer journey into the land would disclose to 
us animals which it were well to avoid meeting un- 
less we were well armed. Certainly before long we 
should see herds of mammoths or at least small 
groups, perhaps a male and female and a young one 
—whom both would savagely defend if we gave any 
cause to suspect us as enemies. Doubtless these crea- 
tures would be met with very early in our journey, 
for they are fond of wandering, are not afraid, even, 
as we have seen, to venture to the very icebound limit 
of their confines; in fact their character, and prob- 
ably; the fact that they need certain elements in their 
diet given by foliage of trees that grow only near the 
lip, seem to cause them to wish to cover a very wide 
range of territory, and it is very probable that be- 
tween their breeding seasons—during which time 
they would be further inland—they venture out into 
the relatively colder lands of the interior near the 
lip. In this part of the interior there would, of 
course be glaciers, owing to the influence of the cold 
coming from the outerworld, and it is a well known 
fact that such continuous cold is enough to form 
glaciers even though the actual temperature be al- 
most as high as the melting point of ice. One-sci- 
entist tells us how, in Switzerland, he has stood on 
the surface of a glacier and plucked ripe cherries 
from off the branches of a cherry tree. We might 
see these mammoths walking along the surfaces of 


[ 331] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


glaciers, perhaps lured on by edible pine-needles 
growing on the high ground. Very often they will 
fall into crevasses, perhaps concealed from them by 
snow, and the moment they fall in they will be cov- 
ered by the snow and snow-water from above and 
hermetically sealed. That would account for the 
fresh condition in which they are found after these 
glaciers have gradually worked their way over the 
lip and out into the Siberian wastes where the mam- 
moth is found in perfectly eatable conditicn. 


ARE THERE HUMAN INHABITANTS? 


Would we find any people in this strange land? 
While we cannot speak with certainty here it is well 
to remember that the Eskimo, as we have shown 
in another chapter, always point to this part of the 
earth as their ancestrial abode. Andi it is also note- 
worthy that there is a great deal of uncertainty as to 
the origin of the Chinese, and that it has been thought 
by some that the Chinese and Eskimo had a com- 
mon origin. It is therefore likely that we would 
meet tribes here with. a resemblance to both those 
races, ‘That there is that common resemblance is 
shown by Peary’s tale of the Eskimo girl he 
brought to New York with him, who would take no 
notice of the people around her but was filled with 
excitement when she met a Chinese in the street, and 
who wished at once to make friends with him. And 
here is another point that the reader may think spec- 


[ 332 ] 


PJOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


ulative, but at all events it is suggestive: From where 
comes the up and outward position of the eye that 
We associate with the Chinese? May it not be a mod- 
ification of the ordinary eye position induced by the 
fact that in the interior the sun is always in the ze- 
nithp 

Certainly these tribes if we found them would find 
it easy living in the interior. Besides the huge plants 
of very early origin which we have described, the 
seeds of many of our own plants could have been 
carried to the interior by ocean currents or by birds 
in their crops, and we should expect to see vines and 
fruits of all kinds. Perhaps these tribes would have 
learned to cultivate them. Certainly the more in- 
terior parts of the countries we traversed would be 
wonderful sights from a botanical point of view. The 
plants which give the red pollen would, alone, prob- 
ably cover areas of acres and acres in extent, judging 
from the amount of pollen that drifts as far away as 
the latitudes in which it has been seen to cover whole 
cliff sides and glaciers. Over these lands would roam 
immense herds of deer and other animals, the tribes 
would certainly be numerous and prosperous owing 
to the easy living conditions, although we might ex- 
pect to find them very lazy, being so well provided 
for. 

We should also find here the explanation of the 
dust which Nansen and other explorers have re- 
marked about in the Arctic—dust which undoubted- 


[ 333 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


ly had a volcanic source. Here are the volcanoes from 
which that dust comes, and this is the first time its 
presence in the Arctic has been explained. 

We shall also have a physicist in the party, and he 
will be very much interested in the interior sun. It 
never rises and sets, and hence there is no night but 
one continuous day in the interior, and there are no 
changes of season. The country lies in a perpetual 
drowsy summer, the sunlight only being tempered 
by the dampness of the climate and the cold that en- 
ters from each end and makes the interior of the earth 
have a climate ranging from very cold at the actual 
polar lips, what might be called Alpine, with glac- 
iers, and quite tropical as we pass the Alpine section 
and get really into the interior. 

It is very probable that our scientists will find that 
what keeps up the heat of the interior sun, for it is a 
very small one and would doubtless have cooled 
much more quickly than the exterior sun, is its sup- 
ply.of radium. In fact it is radium that is thought 
now to have so much to do with the upkeep of energy 
of our exterior sun, and so it will not be at all sur- 
prising if we find that in the interior many interest- 
ing observations are to be made relative to the part 
that radium plays in solar radiation of heat. 

If we have a geologist with the expedition he will 
be very anxious to excavate as much as possible, for 
he has always associated iron ore with coal seams, 
and knows that an abundance of carbonic acid gas in 


[ 334] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the air (such as there is in the interior, for it is the 
gas exhaled by plants) always means that iron will . 
be combined with it as ferrous carbonate and depos- 
ited in close connection with coal deposits. In fact 
we will even predict that if he does find iron ore it 
will be the kind called “black band ore” which is 
iron ore closely mixed with carbonaceous matter. 

If after this trip of exploration we go back to the 
shore we shall find myriads of shells cast up once in- 
habited by various kinds of Brachyopods; clinging 
to the rocks will be crinoids and perhaps trilobites— 
creatures which we have never seen alive before, but 
recognize from geologists’ descriptions. 


Suppose that after this we penetrate our new world 
a little more systematically. Before we have been in 
it long we shail see that ranging from the plants an 
amphibious animals and shell fish which we have just ™ 
described there are to be found here representatives 
of every group of animals and vegetables which we 
have seen since the beginning of the carboniferous 
epco as occupying successive land surfaces on the 
outside of our globe. Always when great climatic 
changes took place—which of course happened slow- 
ly, giving gradual warning—or when _ geological 
changes wiped out a species on the exterior—always 
there was this world of refuge within the globe. Here 
the climate was equable all through, so that except- 
ing for any volcanic or other changes there was no 
destructive agency to blot out a whole species. And 


[ 335] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


so here we shall find not one missing link—for which 
the man in the street has always asked when he read 
about organic evolution—but many missing links. 
Certainly that animal described by the Eskimo 
and named by them the arcla, may well be a repre- 
sentative of one of the cretaceous animals with a gen- 
eral outline somewhat after that of the kangaroo. 
These animals were reptiles, however, feeders on 
vegetable matter and with teeth set in several rows 
like a tesselated pavement. As birds are well fitted 
to escape from both geological upheavels and cli- 
matic changes by their power of flight we should 
doubtless find in this refuge some of the very earliest 
species of birds, such as those with lizard-like beaks 
in which many teeth were set, birds entirely different 
from any existing orders on the outside of the globe. 
If we have an entomologist with the party he will be 
kept busy collecting insects. ‘There will be the most 
gorgeous and large butterflies, all sorts of dragon 
flies, ants of several species, and in fact there will be 
several thousands of species of insects many of which 
are not known to exist on the earth today. 


THE IRISH ELK AND OTHER ANIMALS 


Among mammals, besides the mammoth already 
mentioned, we shall find Carnivores, Insectovores, 
Herbivores, and Primates, and many representives 
of each class. Prominent among them will be an 
animal like our tapir or ant-eater, but his form will 


[ 336] 


| 
; 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


have more of a resemblance, anatomically, to the 
horse than it will to the actual tapir with which we 
are acquainted. We shall find animals which have 
affinities with the marsupials of Australia but which 
have the long proboscis of the elephant. Our geol- 
ogist will tell us that until we saw these animals all 
that mankind knew about them was based on a few 
fossil remains which had been discovered in a rich 
deposit of fossils near the base of the Himalayas and 
later in a few places in Europe, and named Dinothe- 
rium and Sivatherium. Of the first named of those 
fossil animals the head alone was five feet long, but 
it does not follow that under the much easier condi- 
tions of life in the interior the animal has kept its 
formidable dimensions. In all evolution, variations 
are always taking place, and perhaps under the con- 
ditions in the interior of the earth a smaller animal 
had a better chance of life owing to greater ease in 
getting about. In that case the smaller animal would 
survive. We should find here, too, the species of an- 
imal which once lived in Europe and Ireland but 
died out largely because it was not adapted anatom- 
ically to its environment. ‘This was the Great Irish 
Elk, and numbers of their skeletons have been taken 
from Irish peat-bogs. ‘The head and antlers of this 
animal were so disproportionately developed that it 
bent over to drink from the bog only at a considerable 
risk. And the fact that its remains are found in these 
bogs is pretty good evidence of the main cause of 


[ 337 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


death among these animals after the countries in 
which they lived became swampy or boggy. And it 
is certain that the changed conditions in the interior 
of the earth will have had effects upon these earlier 
types of animals which we cannot forecast. But they 
will be there in their main features and an enormous 
number of distinct species will have survived—spe- 
cies so different that no inter-breeding will have tak- 
en place, and so different too that one will not have 
entirely killed off another, for the extent to which 
one class of animals preys on another is limited. 


We must also be prepared to greet early represent- 
atives of the cat and dog families. The sabre-toothed 
tiger goes back as far as the Quaternary epoch on the 
outside of the globe, and it is quite possible that we 
shall also meet him on the inside. 


MINERAL WEALTH 


It is a remarkable fact that in the mines on the sur- 
face of the earth some metals are very common and 
others are extremely rare, found only in such small 
fragments and thin veins that they are available for 
use as standards of value. Both gold and platinum 
have been used as standard of value metals because 
their supply is not variable. We know that there 
will not be much more gold in the world tomorrow 
than there is today. But it is quite likely that the 
veins of gold and platinum which are so meagre on 
our side of the earth’s surface may be plentiful on the 


[ 338 ] 


| 


| 


/ 
) 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


inner side. At all events there is rock formation there 
that will yield us metals as well as swampy land that 
will yield us coal in the making, and petroleum and 
gas. And we shall make all haste to explore the 
rocky parts of the surface—although it is very im- 
probable that any of the rocky land will be exposed, 
for vegetation is so rank everywhere—and the 
chances are that we shall find many interesting min- 
erals. In fact when we consider that when our outer 
earth was hot enough to fuse carbon into the brilliant 
diamond it is quite likely that at some time not far 
removed, the inner sun, which at that time would be 
enormously hot, could fuse the carbon of the interior 
surface in a like manner. Of course that would be 
when the earth was. just beginning to cool, when 
probably its whole outer envelope was still hot 
enough to be plastic—for diamonds are only crystal- 
lized at a tremendously high temperature and pres- 
sure—but it is a safe speculation at any rate. And 
while that discovery would be of sensational interest 
because diamonds are so sought after, other discov- 
eries of even greater scientific interest would be 


made. 
EMERGING AT THE OTHER POLAR 
OPENING 
Finally, if our expedition were well enough 
equipped with ships we could sail through the oceans 
of this interior world, explore its coasts, sail up its 
rivers, and finally, come out on the outer side. Here, 


[ 339 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


however, we would need every aid that the Antarc- 
tic explorer has to have, for the journey from the 
Antarctic polar lip to the nearest civilization would 
be a far more arduous one than is the similar journey 
in the north. But if we had taken our aeroplanes 
through the interior with us, success would doubtless 
crown our flight and we should return to civilization 
having explored the last part of the earth that is left 
to explore and having added nearly as much again to 
the area and resources of the lands on which life may 
flourish and from which may be dug or taken by 
cultivation. We should be hailed as the greatest ex- 
plorers in the history of the world. We should be 
honored by republics and by kings; by scientists and 
by magnates of commercial enterprise. 

And so we leave this part of our subject, hoping 
that we have fired the ambition of the reader to see 
within a very short time this work of exploration un- 
dertaken. Our country has the men, the aeroplanes, 
the enterprise, and the capital. Let our country go 
ahead with this great work. Or if our country hangs 
back let private citizens earn the glory that will be 
theirs if they assume the glorious task of opening up 
this new and teeming realm. It is the greatest priv- 
ilege that has ever been offered to an expiorer, and 
we are very sure that there will be many explorers 
eager to grasp it and certain to succeed when they 
have grasped it. 


[ 340 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CH we Rex VL. 


THE FORMATION OF THE EARTH 


We shall now proceed to explain the shape and the 
formation of the earth which has resulted from the 
evolution of our planet from the nebula, a shape 
which we are quite ready to understand after our 
study of Mars and the other planets. For conven- 
lence of description we have assumed certain meas- 
urements to be true. Of course we do not pretend 
that we have actually made these measurements, for 
no one is yet in a position to make them. But basing 
them upon the relative proportions of the polar cap 
of Mars and upon other considerations, we put them 
forward as the most likely approximations. The 
polar openings then, we should put at not less than 
1400 miles across in each case. And it is probable 
that the crust of the earth is 800 miles thick. This 
means that when a ship sails over the lip of the polar 
orifice it is sailing over what may be compared to 
the circumference of a circle whose diameter is 800 
miles. That means that the curvature would be just 
as imperceptible as the ordinary curvature of the 
surface of the earth—which indicates how absurd 
are some of the notions which our critics have of the 
nature of the aperture. The interior sun may be 
supposed to be 600 miles in diameter, so that the dis- 


[ 341 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


tance between it and any point on the inner surface 
which it warms is 2900 miles, and these figures added 
give us 8,000 miles which, as we know, is the diam- 
eter Of the earth: 


HOW PEOPLE:DISAGREE ON THIS SUBJECT 


Now if we asserted that this was the shape of the 
earth and had no evidence drawn from other planets 
or from polar exploration, we should be laughed at 
but the laughter would come from two sets of people 
each one of which may also laugh at the other set. 
So, if they disagree among themselves it looks all 
the more likely that neither may be right. 

These people are the old fogies who believe that 
the earth is a solid shell enclosing a vast seething 
mass of molten matter which occasionally breaks out 
of the shell in the form of volcanoes, and the newer 
thinkers who claim that the earth is the most rigid 
of solids it is possible to conceive. We shall now pro- 
ceed to show how both of these theories fail. 


THE OLD LIQUID INTERIOR IDEA 


Of the old liquid-interior people it is not necessary 
to say very much. Their day is over. Scientists 
no longer put any credence in that notion—it is 
only in school books that it survives. If the earth had 
been a thin shell over a liquid interior it never would 
have survived in the form which these people 
allege. For just as the moon attracts the tides of the 
water on the surface, so it would have attracted the 


[ 342 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


_ liquid interior which would have pushed through the 


_ crust at whatever point the moon happened to be, as 


fast as that crust was formed. 


WHAT CAUSES VOLCANOES? 
What, then, says the reader, causes volcanoes and 


earthquakes? Let us ask the scientists. In Edwin 
S. Grew’s, “The Romance of Modern Geology,” we 
are told that the earth is continually indulging in 
small shivers—a thing which can much more easily 
be explained on our theory than if we suppose it to 
be a rigid solid. These are probably due to the fact 
that the crust is seamed with great cracks, and occas- 
sionally there is a sort of cave-in which will send a 
tremor throughout the whole shell. . When these 
cracks are on a very large scale we get a chain of 
volcanoes as is the case in South America. Here is 
what Grew says about it: 

“The volcanoes of the great chains of the Andes 
lie along a straight crack reaching from Southern 
Peru to Terra del Fuego, 2500 miles in length. The 
volcanoes of the Aleutian islands lie along a curved 
track equally long. Other shorter lines of volcanoes 
are very numerous, and since countless others ex- 
isted in former times the cracks in the earth’s crust 
must be exceedingly numerous. There is one crack 
which comes to the surface in various places in East- 
ern Asia and Western Africa, and stretching from 
the Dead Sea to Lake Nyassa, reaches the enormous 
length of 3500 miles.” 

. [ 343 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF INTERIOR 
WERE LIQUID? 

Now it is obvious that with such surface flaws as 
that, a molten interior would break through upon 
any such attraction as that of the moon, and if the 
break once started it would extend all along those 
vast territories just mentioned. 


SURFACE MANIFESTATIONS 


That both earthquakes and volcanoes are phe- 
nomena of the surface of the earth only and do not go 
deep, is further shown by Mr. Grew in the volume 
from which we have already quoted. Many of them 
he lays to the existence of what are called, in Eng- 
land, “pot-holes,” which are deep and ramifying 
caverns in the earth which may extend to a depth of 
nearly a thousand feet, disclosing to the explorer 
vast chambers hundreds of feet high, connected by 
smaller passages. Obviously where the earth is thus 
honeycomed a subterranean landslide may take place 
at any time, due, perhaps, to water erosion in the 
caverns, and the result would be a local earthquake. 

It is also interesting to note that, if the earth were 
a thin crust covering a center of molten lava, in any 
earthquake or volcano in which that lava came to 
the surface, the solid rocks of the surface being 
heavier than the molten material, would sink until 
they came to rest at the center, and this process would 
soon eat up the whole surface of the earth, and that 


[ 344 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


process would have begun to take place as soon as 
the earth began to cool. For as soon as any part of 
the crust solidified it would sink. It is impossible to 
suppose that the whole exterior of the earth solidified 
at one moment and so imprisoned forever the molten 
material underneath. But merely to state this theory 
is to show how ridiculous it is. As one critic puts it: 

‘These savants have managed somehow to keep 
those raging fires burning from the very earliest peri- 
ods of even the sun’s history, without any abatement 
or cessation, and they tell us it is now raging with 
inconceivable fury in the bowels of our own earth 
and within all the planets, and, in accordance with 
their ideas, it seems likely to continue burning on 
forever. They conclude by computation that this 
fire occupies more than thrity-five out of thirty-six 
parts of this globe, and in some inexplicable manner, 
they have been enabled to keep this positive element 
in active operation, without furnishing one particle 
of combustible material to replenish its exhausted 
resources. This, we must admit, is the most astound- 
ing feat that philosophy has ever performed in the 
whole range of celestial and terrestrial mechanics, 
if it has been successfully accomplished.” 

And here is a point which renders the igneous 
theory of the earth’s interior quite unnecessary to ac- 
count for volcanoes: 

‘Professor Denton remarks that . . . coal'may 
exist in layers or stratifications alternately with shales 


[ 345 J 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


and underclays for ‘more than eight miles,’ or even 
a greater distance. Now, if we look about us we 
think we may find a sufficiency of explosive and com- 
bustible materials, to produce all those volcanic and 
thermal phenomena, without resorting to a vast in- 
terior fire globe for the original cause.” 

That volcanoes are purely surface manifestations 
is shown by the fact that on many occasions it has 
been proved that the cause of a volcanic eruption was 
the access of sea water through one or more fissures 
to the hot base of the mountain. The procf of this 
is the presence of compounds formed by the salt of 
the sea water in the lava which was ejected. 

But nowadays the scientists themselves admit that 
this igneous theory is an impossible one. Grew, in his 
“The Romance of Modern Geology,” in fact, gives 
the whole case away when he says: 

“The earth is not so solid as it looks and not so 
solid as it feels.” 


AN IMPOSSIBLE OCEAN 


And furthermore he supports us in what we have 
said of the impossibility of a molten interior being 
held in by aycrust: 

“For that would leave a molten ocean more than 
7900 miles across any way in which it was measured: 
7900 miles deep, 7900 miles broad, 7900 miles long 
if we take 8000 miles to be the diameter of the earth. 
We all know what great tides the sun and moon by 


[ 346 ] 


“AIOIYI [BIIBOT]I ATaA ynq paidadov A][e1a 
-us8 OJIIYITY IY} 0} Surpsoooe ‘yydap ur sa[iwM QOZ s1aydsoune ue Aq papuNOLINns pu YoTYy} so[Iu OOT ISNIO pst we UTYITM 
pasopous ‘1aj3auIeIp UT sayru QOs*Z AjazeuTxo1dde BA] UAa}]OU FO UBIO UL SL IOIIO}JUT S,YIIBI JY} SMOYS MATA STY T, 


*20BJINS dy} TeaU pa}eo 
-O] [BI1a}eW Ua}]OW FO 
SOye] [[BwWSs Ur a}eUIsI 
-10 S20URd[OA 3eY} BUI 
-MOYS ‘[]AYS S.Y}Iea ay} 
JO MOIA [BUOTIOIS VY 


*AIO9YI [BOT 
-Soy]t AraA ynq pjo aya 
0} SUIpIos0e BART pin 
-biy JO ueva00 [euUrazUT 
yeais ay} WO1y pay sul 
-9q OUBD[OA B SUTMOYS 
‘IOII9}JUL S,Y}ABI ay} 
JO MOdIA [BUOT}IS VY 


a 
qe 


= he 
i, 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


their attractions raise in the earth’s outer ocean of 
water. Think what tides they would raise in this 
inner ocean of molten rock and metal. The earth’s 
crust would not be able to hold such tides in. The 
molten stuff would always be breaking through the 
flimsy thirty miles of outer solid rock as if it were 
egg-shell. Twice a day there would be outbreaks 
of lava vast enough to submerge continents.” 

He then quotes Lord Kelvin to the effect that the 
heat of the earth’s crust does not continue the fur- 
ther down we go, as had always been supposed, but 
that that increase only holds for a short distance, and 
then ceases. And then what? 

EARTH DOES NOT WEIGH ENOUGH 
TO BE SOLID 

Grew does not know, and the scientists don’t 
know, but Grew does make this very significant con- 
fession: 

“We know that the earth cannot be solid all 
through because it does not weigh enough.” He then 
gives a number of conflicting theories as to what is 
to be found in the further interior—whether solids, 
liquids or gases. The fact that scientists conflict at 
this point shows that they have not sufficient data to 
build a consistent theory that will not conflict with 
the facts. And they never will be able to reconcile 
their conflicting views until they accept all the evi- 
dence—and that has been given for the first time in 
the present book. 


[ 347 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


OBSERVATIONS CONTRADICT 
SCIENTIFIC THEORIES 


Now as a matter of fact the actual observations 
made by scientists contradict both the usual scientific 
theories. We have spoken of the idea that the earth is 
molten in its interior. When we say that one writer in 
the Scientific American Supplement for January, 
1909, lays it down as proven thatthe crust of the earth 
is so thin that it can only be called a “scum” formed 
by the oxidizing of the metals and other elements of 
the earth—just as a scum of oxide is formed when air 
comes in contact with the surface of molten lead. 
When this scientist claims, furthermore, that this 
scum is only twenty miles in depth, the reader will 
readily see how ridiculous the idea is on the face of 
it. As we have said, the attraction of the mcon for the 
molten tides underneath would burst that scum as 
fast as it could form. It was the recognition of such 
absurdity that threw scientific opinion over to the 


other extreme—to-wit, that the earth was a very rigid 
solid. 


WAS THE EARTH EVER MOLTEN? 

Of course there are varieties of this theory. One 
variety 1s that which says that the earth was once mol- 
ten but is now entirely solid. But some scientists hold 
another variety of the theory: that the earth never 
was molten. Dr. Arthur Holmes who has analyzed 
rocks and meteors for their radium content thinks 
that the earth as a whole never was molten but that 


[ 348 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


when it was a nebulous gas it attracted and caught 
what he calls “planetesimals’”—which were solid, and 
so built itself up. Probably, dear reader, you did not 
know that scientists disagreed among themselves to 
that extent, did your 

In fact scientists have been so puzzled because 
their observations of the behavior of the earth’s crust 
under various strains and attractions, did not agree 
with their theories that, some years ago, the cele- 
brated Professor Geikie, one of the world’s greatest 
geologists, was forced to admit that the problems aris- 
ing from consideration of the evolution of the surface 
of the earth were still in a state where no solution 
was visible. And to escape the difficulties propound- 
ed by Professor Geikie, Professors Le Conte and 
Shaller suggested that the earth was neither a solid 
spheroid nor a shell with a liquid interior but that it 
consisted of an outer, solid crust, then, inside of that, 
a liquid or viscous stratum, and then a solid core in- 
side of that again. What strange theories the sci- 
entists are reduced to when they ignore the facts! 


DR. HERZ ON EARTH’S SOLIDITY 
As for the theory that the earth is a solid, rigid 
body with its rigidity equal to that of steel, here is 
what Dr. N. Hertz has to say about the idea: 
“All the calculations which give the earth a rigid- 
ity as high as that of steel are based upon the erron- 
eous assumption that the great pressure existing in 


[ 349 J 


A- JOURNEY TO THE EARTHS INTERIOR 


the interior of the earth (the pressure at the earth’s 
center is estimated to be about three and one-fourth 
million atmospheres) is a true measure of the rigidity 
of the earth. This is as incorrect as an assumption 
that the pressure of 800 atmospheres which exists at 
the sea bottom, five miles below the surface, is a true 
measure of the rigidity of the water at that point. In 
either case the pressure is the hydrostatic pressure 
due to the weight of the mass above, and the compar- 

atively very thin solid crust of the earth is as suscep- 
 tible to deformation by centrifugal forces as a shell of 
solid elastic material, sixteen inches in diameter and 
1-30th of an inch thick would be.”’ 

Here we see is more contradiction. We agree with 
Dr. Herz that it is absurd to speak of the enormous 
pressure down at the center of the earth. But the 
earth is certainly not to be compared to his globe full 
of water—that we have already shown. 

While, then, these scientific theories all conflict, 
what scientifically observed facts are there that will 
help us to the true solution? 


LET US LEAVE THE THEORIES FOR FACTS 

Let us ask those scientists who have been observing 
instead of theorizing. 

First we will call to the witness stand Professor A. 
EK. H. Love who wrote for the Science Progress, Vol- 
ume of 1912, a review of the third edition of Sir G. 
H. Darwin’s book, “The Tides and Kindred Phe- 


[ 350 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


momena of the Solar System.” He notes that Sir G. 
H. Darwin is the world’s greatest authority on this 
subject and he also notes that in this third edition of 
his celebrated book one-quarter is either added or re- 
written—showing that what seemed true only a few 
years ago has been superseded by new ideas. This 
ought to warn us against the dogmatism of clinging 
to the older.ideas about the earth’s constitution. For 
this book in the reader’s hands is simply a step in ad- 
vance of the orthodox scientists of today, and tomor- 
row they may change their ideas and accept ours. 


G. H. DARWIN’S OBSERVATIONS 


Now, as a result of his observations, Sir G. H. Dar- 
win comes to the conclusion that: 

“The body of the earth, on which the oceans rest, 
cannot be absolutely rigid. No body is. It must be 
deformed more or less by the attractions of the Sun 
and Moon.” So he will try, he says, to find out just 
how those changes can be observed. His first attempt 
was to find out the “actual height of the so-called 
fortnightly tide.” By fortnightly tide is meant “a 
minute inequality in the tide-height, having a period 
of about a fortnight, depending upon the inclination 
of the moon’s orbit to the plane of the equator. 
Now the amount which the fortnightly oceanic tide 
would have if the Earth were absolutely rigid can 
be calculated.” But the results show that the earth 
is not absolutely rigid and they also show that it is 


Paoia 


A JOURNEY TO:-THE EARTH SsINTERIOR 


not as far from rigid as it would be if it were a shell 
surrounding a liquid center. In other words the shape 
of the earth does yield to some extent under the force 
of the moon’s attraction, and the yielding is not small 
enough to justify us in saying that the earth is practi- 
cally rigid and it is not large enough to suggest that 
the earth is a viscous mass. The reviewer goes on to 
say: 

“Tt is true that Lord Kelvin proved long ago that, 
if the earth were homogeneous and incompressible, it 
would have to be as rigid as steel to make the observ- 
able height of the fortnightly tide as much as that 
calculated from other data, before the actual observa- 
tion was made.” But, the reviewer goes on to say, 
other experiments show that the earth is not a rigid 
solid, among them being the experiments with a pen- 
dulum conducted by Prof. O. Hecker in Potsdam 
who showed that the actual movements of a pendul- 
um, compared over a long time, are not as great as 
they would be if the earth were a solid body. 

Now if the earth is not a solid, rigid body on the 
one hand or a shell-encrusted viscous or fluid body 
on the other hand—and as we have seen scientists can 
prove neither the one thing nor the other—there is 
left only one possibility—that the earth is hollow, 
and that is the possibility which every page in this 
books shows to be the actuality. 

And here are further scientific observations that 
make this more certain still, from the actual observa- 


[ 352 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


tion of the earth itself. (For, of course, it is abso- 
lutely certain from the other standpoints already dis- 
cussed.) ‘The most interesting of these observations 
are along the line of earth tremors. Some of these 
observations were made as early as 1882 when a writ- 
er in the London Times described how he felt the 
earth shake when a party of friends were ascending 
a hill on whose crest he was lying at full length. This 
observation, he said, made him quite ready to under- 
stand the statements made by George H. Darwin— 
quoted above in another connection—and Horace 
Darwin, at a meeting of the British Association for 
the Advancement of Science—when they described 
how the earth was in a constant state of tremor. Ex- 
periments carried on by the two brothers showed 
that the earth was in a constant condition of vibra- 
tion, not discernible to us, of course, but clearly 
shown by the pendulum and other delicate apparatus 
by which the tremors were magnified and recorded. 
The writer goes on to say: 


EARTH TREMBLES LIKE A SOAP BUBBLE 


“When regular series of observations are made it 
is found that the pendulum is hardly ever steady. 
Some days it may be more quiet than others and 
generally there is evidence of distinct durnal per- 
iods, but the minor zig-zags constantly interrupt and 
sometimes reverse for an hour together the slower 
march northward or southward.” 


[.353¢] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


Now it is evident that a solid globe of great rigid- 
ity would not behave in this way, but if the reader re- 
members how a curved sounding board to a violin or 
other musical instrument vibrates he can easily see 
how the lunar, solar and other attractions bearing 
upon the earth and constantly changing—the earth 
tides in short—would cause just such tremors. 

J. Milne, writing in Nature in 1894 also speaks of 
these and larger vibrations. He says: 

EARTHQUAKES SCIENTIFICALLY 
UNIMPORTANT 

“Earthquake observations, although still capable 
of yielding much that is new, are for the present rel- 
egated to a subordinate position, while the study of 
the tide-like movements of the surface of our earth, 
which have been observed in Japan and Germany, 
earth tremors and a variety of other movements, 
which we are assured are continually happening be- 
neath our feet, are to take their place. Only in a few 
countries do earthquakes occur with sufficient fre- 
quency to make them worthy of serious attention. ... 
The new movements to which we are introduced are 
occurring at all times and in all countries. : 
Great cities like London and New York are often 
rocked to and fro; but these world-wide movements 
which may be utilized in connection with the deter- 
mination of physical constants relating to the rigidity 
of our planet’s crust, because they are so gentle, have 
escaped attention. 


[ 354] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CRUST IN CONSTANT VIBRATION 


“That the earth is breathing, that the tall buildings 
upon its surface are continually being moved to and 
fro, like the masts of ships upon an ocean, are, at pres- 
ent, facts which have received but little recognition. 

It seems desirable that more should be done 
to advance our knowledge of the exact nature of all 
earth movements, by establishing seismological ob- 
servations, or at least preventing those in existence 
from sinking into decay.” 


But the usual scientific theories to account for 
these tremors are very confused and contradictory. 
Thus Abbe T. H. Moreux, writing in Cosmos, 1907, 
says that the tremors’ which precede earthquakes 
travel through the earth so quickly that they must 
be generated under conditions which are not found 
in any solid. He then goes on to try to prove that 
the earth’s interior is fluid but under exceedingly 
high pressure. He argues strenuously for this view, 
but as we have seen, it is an outworn view. 


CONFESSION OF SCIENTIFIC BANKRUPTCY 

For instance, writing even before the scientist 
quoted above, a reviewer of scientific progress says: 

“Gradually the very existence of the molten nu- 
cleus of our planet became more and more problem- 
atical. Already the mathematical investigations of 
Fourier and Poisson had shown that, owing to our 


[353] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


very imperfect knowledge of the physical aspects of 
the question, we are reduced to mere conjectures as 
regards the state of the inner parts of our globe. 
Later on the admirable investigations of Sir William 
Thomson, G. H. Darwin, Mellard Reade, Osmond 
Fisher, R. S. Woodward, and others rendered the ex- 
istence of a molten nucleus surrounded by a thin, 
solid crust, less and less probable. And the geologist 
had to conclude that, as long as physics would not 
supply more reliable data for a mathematical investi- 
gation, he had better leave the question as to the phys- 
ical state of the inner parts of the earth unsolved, 
and study the dyrnamic processes which are going on 
in the superficial layers of the planet.” 

Now if that is not a confession of the bankruptcy 
of orthodox science in this realm we do not know 
what would be so considered. The problem is frank- 
ly and totally given up. Does not that justfy a man, 
who is not a scientist but who has observed the facts, 
to enter the field and propound a theory, especially 
when the theory shows just why the problem has to 
be given up by the scientists: because it concerns 
something which does not exist—the constitution of 
the material of the earth below the “superficial 
layers.” That part of the earth is neither solid nor 
liquid because it is filled for the most part with the 
earth’s atmosphere covering an earth surface very 
like our own. 


[ 356 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


EARTH IS NOT HOTTER AS ONE PENE- 
TRATES TOWARD CENTER 

Let us refer to one more point. Every reader is 
acquainted with the fact, as reported by miners and 
other observers, that the further’one digs into the 
earth the hotter it gets. It was that idea that led peo- 
ple to believe that if they dug far enough they would 
come to a depth where it was so hot that everything 
would be in a molten condition. But that idea, too, 
must go, as being no longer in accordance with the 
evidence. Prof. Mohr of Bonn has written a very 
important paper on thermometric investigations of a 
4,000 feet boring at Speremberg who finds that 
while there is an increase of temperature as we go 
down, the rate of that increase gets less and less all 
the time, so that soon it will be nil; that is to say 
there will no longer be any increase, and the point 
at which the heat would cease to increase would be 
about 13,550 feet. 

Well, we could quote other scientists who disagree 
one with the other but it would simply be a repeti- ° 
tion of what we have already said. So let us simply 
take their confessions of ignorance and ask them to 
investigate our claim to have dispelled that ignor- 
ance by a theory which cuts clear from all their con- 
tradictory ideas and goes to the root of the matter and 
is capable of the direct proof of observation. 


Pear | 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


COUP RE Ra Toss 


HOW OUR THEORY DIFFERS FROM 
THAT OF SYMMES 
Some very unintelligent readers have accused us 
of putting forward a theory that is not new but mere- 
ly a rehash of Symmes theory of Concentric Spheres. 
To show how utterly foolish and misguiding this idea 
is, we shall give a short account of Symmes’ Theory 
from the one authoritative text book in which it has 
been recorded, and we shall then briefly recapulate 
the main features of our own theory. Ard the reader 
will see that they are so far apart that there is no ex- 
cuse whatever for confusing the two. 


UNLIKE IN METHOD AND IN RESULT 


The very first article of Symmes’ shows how wide- 
ly different it is from ours, and shows also how it is 
_even worked out by another method of thinking than 
ours. We take the facts first and ask what they 
teach us. Symmes deduces his theory from what he 
thinks is a universal principle, and then gives us a 
few facts to back it up. But here isthe first: ace 
ticle in the Symmes creed: 


HIS CONCENTRIC SPHERES 


‘According to Symmes’ theory the earth, as well 
as all the celestial orbicular bodies existing in the 


[ 358 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE. EARTH’S INTERIOR 


universe, visible and invisible, which partake in any 
degree of a planetary nature, from the greatest to the 
smallest, from the sun down to the most minute blaz- 
ing meteor or falling star, are all constituted, in a 
greater or less degree, of a collection of spheres, more 
or less solid, concentric with each other, and more or 
less open at their poles; each sphere being separated 
from its adjoining compeers by space replete with 
aerial fluids; that every portion of infinite space, ex- 
cept what is occupied with spheres, is filled with an 
aerial elastic fluid, more subtle than common atmo- 
spheric air; and constituted of innumerable small 
concentric spheres, too minute to be visible to the or- 
gan of sight assisted by the most perfect microscope, 
and so elastic that they continually press on each oth- 
er, and change their relative positions as often as the 
position of any piece of matter in space may change 
its situation: thus causing a universal pressure, which 
is weakened by the intervention of other bodies. . .” 


HissOWN IDEA ABOUT GRAVITY 


Well, we need not quote any further from that be- 
cause Symmes here goes off into a theory of his own 
regarding the law of gravity; but we should like to 
point out that what he says above is very different 
from anything we have ever said. Let the reader no- 
tice that although his concentric spheres are “more 
or less solid” still they have open polar orifices, which 
are however, only “more or less open” again. ‘Thus 


isos] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S *IN FERIOR 


Symmes is very indefinite about the real constitution 
of his planets. And the reader will also notice that 
he includes the sun of our own solar system and all 
other suns as being built in the same way. But how 
could a sun whose structure is the same as the plan- 
ets, and which must, therefore, be like the planets in 
age as well as in other characteristics—how could 
such a sun have enough heat to warm all the planets? 
We know by actual observation of our own sun that 
the heat on its surface is so great as to vaporize the 
solid elements and even make the gaseous elements 
incandescent. In such a sun all concentric spheres 
would be melted down. Such a constitution is impos- 
sible. And yet people conipare Symmes’s theory to 
our own theory and say they are the same. ~ 


FIVE HOLLOW SPHERES FORM HIS EARTH 


The exposition of Symmes’ theory from which we 
are quoting goes on to describe his idea of the form 
of the earth: 

“According to him, the planet which has been des- 
ignated the Earth is composed of at least five hollow 
concentric spheres, with spaces between each, an at- 
mosphere surrounding each; and habitable as well 
upon the concave as the convex surface. The north 
polar opening of the sphere we inhabit is believed to 
be about four thousand miles in diameter, and the 
southern about six thousand. The planes of these 
polar openings are inclined to the plane of the eclip- 


[ 360 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


tic at an angle of about twenty degrees; so that the 
real axis of the earth, being perpendicular to the 
plane of the equator, will form an angle of twelve de- 
grees with a line passing through the sphere at right 
angles with the plane of the polar openings; conse- 
quently the verge of the polar openings must ap- 
proach several degrees nearer to the equator on one 
side than on the other. The highest north point, or 
where the distance is greatest from the equator to the 
verge of the opening in the northern hemisphere, will 
be found either in the northern sea, ‘near the coast of 
Lapland, on a meridian passing through Spitzber- 
gen, in about latitude eighty-six degrees, or some- 
what more easterly in Lapland; and the verge would 
become apparent, to the navigator proceeding north, 
in about latitude 90 degrees.” 
HIS POLAR OPENINGS ALTOGETHER 
DIFFERENT 

Now see how differently Symmes goes about his 
task. He simply assumes this, that and the other to 
be the case. He assumes that the southern polar 
opening is two thousand miles greater in diameter 
than the northern one. Why? Wedonot know. He 
assumes certain inclinations of the planes of the polar 
openings to the plane of the ecliptic. He tells us 
where the highest northern point will be found— 
only as he is really not sure he gives two possible 
locations. We decline to give any data in advance of 
actual exploration. If we say that the openings into 


[ 361 J 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the interior of the earth are at such and such a point 
we are simply making an approximation based upon 
the actual evidence of navigators. We have done 
much exploring since Symmes wrote, but even with 
the newer discoveries in mind it is not safe to in- 
dulge in a lot of very definite figures and anticipa- 
tions. We prefer to stick to the actual facts as navi- 
gators have found them. 
HIS DOUBLE SHELLED SPHERES INHAB- 
ITED INSIDE AND OUT 

Now here is ‘another point in which Symmes’ 
theory differs radically from our own: 

‘Fach of the spheres composing the earth, as well 
as those constituting the other planets throughout 
the universe, is believed to be habitable both on the 
inner and outer surface; and lighted and warmed 
according to those general laws which communicate 
light and heat to every part of the universe. The 
light may not, indeed, be so bright, nor the heat so 
intense, as-is indicated in high northern latitudes 
(about where the verge is supposed to commence) by 
the paleness of the sun and the darkness of the sky; 
facts which various navigators who have visited those 
regions confirm; yet they are, no doubt, sufficiently 
lighted and warmed to promote the propagation and 
support of animal and vegetable.life. 

‘The different spheres constituting our planet, and 
the other orbs in creation, most probably do not re- 
volve on axes, parellel to each other, nor perform 


[ 362 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


their revolutions in the same period of time, as is in- 
dicated by the spots on the belts of Jupiter, which 
move faster on one belt than another.” 

It was because he had noticed the belts of Jupiter 
that Symmes was led in the first place to suppose that 
the planets might be composed of concentric shells, 
and he explains these belts—or tries to—by talking of 
the reflection of light from the different verges of the 
shells which compose Jupiter. By why does he sup- 
pose that the earth should have at least five of these 
shells? 

THEORY CANNOT BE-TAKEN SERIOUSLY 


It will be noticed that Symmes has no coherent 
theory, or at least no observed facts which will clear- 
ly show how the spaces between the verges are lighted 
and warmed. ‘This is perhaps the point where the 
theory breaks down most disastrously. We have 
shown that there is more heat in the interior of the 
earth than there is outside of that realm, not less. 
And we have shown it from observed facts—Symmes 
depends on theory, and he is wrong. 

Symmes also claims that: 

“The atmosphere surrounding the sphere is prob- 
ably more dense on the interior surface than on the 
exterior, the increased pressure of which must in- 
crease the force of gravity; as the power of gravity 
must iicrease in proportion as we approach nearer 
the pole. Clouds formed in the atmosphere of the 
convexity of the sphere; probably float in through 


[ 363 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the polar openings, and visit the interior in the form 
of rain and snow. wv 
This, it will be seen, is the very opposite of our 
theory. There is no snow in the interior of the earth, 
except near the polar openings. 
_ Symmes’ theory differs from ours too, in that 
Symmes thinks there are in each sphere cavities in 
the center of the matter composing it, and that these 
cavaties are filled with a very rarefied gas or elastic 
substance, something, he says, like hydrogen. ‘These 
mid-plane spaces, as he calls them, tends, he claims, 
to give the sphere ‘“‘a degree of lightness and buoy- 
ancy.” He also thinks that other interstices exist 
nearer the surface of each sphere and of quite limited 
extent. The gas, his chronicler states, “escaping from 
these spaces -is, no doubt, the cause of earthquakes; 
and supplies the numerous volcanoes. This gas, be- 
coming rarefied and escaping, must occasion most 
of these great revolutions and phenomena in nature, 
which we know to have occurred in the geology of 
the earth. This erial fluid with which the mid-plane 
spaces or cavities are filled, may possibly be adapted 
to the support of animal life; and the interior sur- 
faces of the spheres formed by them may abound 
with animals, with organs only adapted to the med- 
ium in which they are destined to inhabit.” 

Now it is obvious that this is not to be taken ser- 
iously. ‘To compare such thought as that to our 
theory is patently absurd. Instead of studying the 


[ 364 ] 


As so many people have thought our theory was in some way like that 
of Symmes we present herewith a diagram, of the sort of earth that 
Symmes supposed to be under our feet. A study of this diagram will 
show at once the absurdity of thinking our theory is in any way like 
Symmes’. Each of the five shells represented above is, according to 
Symmes, revolving on its own axis at a rate differing from the rate at 
which any other shell is revolving. In the interior of each individual 
shell there are great hollow spaces or cavities and in each of these large 
spaces there is life, as well as there being life on the surface of each of 
the shells. Besides thes immense spaces in each shell there are smaller 
spaces or gas pockets. And it should be noticed that on Symmes’ theory 
there is no central sun. And as there is no central sun there can be no 
light in the interior except the very little that reaches the outer surface 
of the spheres by filtering through the openings from the outer sun. Not 
only would that be a very inadequate amount of light and heat—not 
enough to maintain life, but there is absolutely no provision at all for 
lighting the inner spaces or cavity of the spheres—although Symmes 
claims they are inhabited. We simply ask the reader to imagine such a 
collection of whirling spheres, each with its great hollows which can 
neither be entered or left, and yet each supporting life, and put to him- 
self the question how such a conglomeration as that could ever be evolved 
from a nebula. And yet some people read about our theory and then 
state that our theory is related to Symmes’ ideas. How absurd. 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


facts as we have done, Symmes simply makes up a 
new idea to explain away each fact as it hit him in 
the face. He had to account in some way for vol- 
canoes, so he made each of his spheres not only a 
hollow ball with another sphere inside it, but he 
gave it a double shell with mid-plane spaces or 
cavity between the two shells and other interstices 
in which there was a gaseous and elastic fluid. Why 
that fluid should sometimes burst forth as volcanoes 
or earthquakes he does not say. ‘There does not seem 
any reason why, once imprisoned, it should not stay 
there forever. If it were. going to burst forth at all 
it ought to have done so while the spheres were rel- 
atively hot, before they had cooled down to the rig- 
idity which as a matter of fact overtakes all planets 
when they solidify. And then why does he go ahead 
and postulate the existence of animals in his mid- 
plane spaces? As these are not, like the spheres 
themselves, open at any place, there would have to 
be a separate creation of the animals in each one. 
How uncalled for is any such fantastic notion as 
that! 

Symmes also argues for the hollowness of his con- 
centric spheres by asserting that hollowness is a prin- 
ciple of nature—that the stalk of wheat is hollow, 
that the bones of animals and birds are hollow and 
the hairs of our head are hollow. 

But in each of those cases the hollowness is there 
for a purpose. In the case of the bones it is there as 


[ 365 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


a chamber to hold the marrow. The birds have very 
light bones, with large hollows, because the species 
with the lightest bones have been able to fly better 
and so have survived in the struggle for existence. 
If we were to assert that the earth must be solid be- 
cause all pebbles on the beach are solid, because 
the trunks of trees are solid and the tusks of elephants 
solid we would be using the same sort of argument 
that Symmes is using—arguing from apparent anal- 
ogies—and we would be quite wrong, because, as a 
matter of fact, and as we have shown in this book 
the earth is not solid. 

But we prove that it is not solid by facts. Symmes 
tries to prove his ascertions by remarks such as the 
above. 

Of course it is true that everything in the universe 
tends to assume the cellular form. That we admit 
and have commented on. But there is always a rea- 
son for the particular kind of shape and composition 
of the cell, whether it be-a vegetableccell in a tearm 
a cell of the protoplasm of an animal, or the huge 
cell, open at both ends, with a nucleus or a central 
sun, which forms the earth. And in every case the 
reasons for those formations must be found in the 
study of the body itself, and not in making far 
fetched comparisons between that and other bodies 
far removed from it in character and purpose and 
composition. 


[ 366 ] 


A-JOURNEY TO: THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


WOULD EXPLAIN POLAR CAPS AND PLANETARY 
RINGS BY REFRACTION 


Symmes also tries to explain the appearance of the 
other planets besides Jupiter as being due to refrac- 
tions of light as the different verges of the spheres 
were turned toward us, but he does not by this method 
succeed in clearly stating just how such appearances 
could account for what we observe. He says, for in- 
stance, that the belts of Jupiter: “would be produced 
by the shadow cast on the space between the polar 
opening of one sphere and the adjoining one; that 
is, a portion of the sunshine would be reflected from 
the verges of the spheres on which it fell; and an- 
other portion would appear to be swallowed by the 
intervening space. And if refraction bends the rays 
of vision between and under his spheres as it bends 
a portion of the rays of the sun, so as to produce the 
apparent belts of comparative shade, then a very 
complete solution of those appearances, heretofore 
considered wonderful, would be afforded. The varia- 
tion which has been observed in their number, shape, 
and dimensions, can in no better way be accounted 
for, than by concluding the planet is constituted of 
a number of concentric spheres, of different breadths, 
revolving on different axes and with different veloc- 
ities, so as sometimes to present to our view the verge 
of one sphere, and sometimes that of another; and 
the rays of the sun falling on the parts of the verges 


[ 367 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


present to us, would occasion the diversified appear- 
ances which we discover.” 

Well, he goes on a little further along that line 
but we need not follow him, for it is obvious that his 
explanation does not work. 

Take Mars, for example. If our theory were 
wrong and Symmes were right, the polar caps of 
Mars would be made invisible every so often because 
some inner sphere, revolving at its own rate on its 
own axis, would cover up the polar opening on the 
outer surface. But the polar caps of Mars are al- 
ways bright, with certain variations, and what is 
more, we see direct gleams of light from the Martian 
interior sun penetrate through the aperature and 
strike directly into our telescopes. This could not 
possibly happen on Symmes’ theory, for there would 
be no interior sun from which light could come. 

And yet people say that our theory is the same as 
Symmes’ theory. 

SYMMES ON SUN SPOTS 

Symmes also tries to explain the spots on the sun 
by his theory. He thinks they are vast holes or 
fractures in the outer surface or crust through which 
the inner crust appears. But as we have already 
stated the sun is not made on that plan and could 
not be. That Symmes took no account of the great 
heat of the sun shows that he elaborated his theory 
largely out of his own mind. He did not get the 
facts first and trim his theory to fit the facts. He 


[ 368 ] 


A-JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


_ first thought out the theory and then only took cog- 


nizance of those few facts which fitted it. Other 
facts he ignored. This is just the opposite of what 
we have done. We have taken every fact into ac- 
count as the list of authorities which we have con- 
sulted abundantly shows. 

Now let the reader contrast that whole theory with 
our array of facts. Just because matter tends to take 
the spherical shape, when no outside forces interfere 
with it, and because he has seen appearances when 
observing Jupiter that suggest that the rings round 
that planet may be optical delusions, not rings at all, 
but outer shells, Symmes builds up the theory that 
all planets and suns are composed of concentric 
spheres. Why these spheres revolve on different 
axes and at different speeds he does not tell us, and 
on all those points of his theory that are most doubt- 
ful and need the most cogent arguments to prove 
them, he is most vague. 

SYNOPSIS OF OUR OWN THEORY AS 
CONTRASTED WITH SYMMES 

How different is the theory outlined in this book. 
When we say that the earth is a hollow body with 
polar openings and an interior sun, we back up the 
statement by referring to nebulas in many stages of 
evolution in which the gradual forming of the outer 
envelope of the future planet and the interior sun, 
and even the beginnings of the polar openings, are 
all clearly visible in their different stages. Then we 


[ 369 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


point to the actual constitution of the planets, Mars, 
Venus, and Mercury, and we show just what the 
polar openings are like. We show that they are not 
ice caps, because direct light has been seen to come 
from them. We show also that the light from these 
openings extends in an immense dome, reflected from 
the Martian atmosphere, high above the surface of 
the planet. And then we show, in connection with 
the aurora of the earth, that the auroral light, so 
called, is precisely the same thing. —Then we demon- 
strate conclusively that the earth, like Mars and the 
other planets, has its polar openings, too, because the 
polar regions are much warmer than the northern lat- 
itudes through which one travels to reach them. We 
show how warm currents come from these regions 
and how animal life takes refuge in them as breeding 
and feeding grounds. The picture of the earth that 
we draw is not an imaginative construction, like 
Symmes’ with such things as “mid-plane spaces’— 
whose existance is not backed up by any observed 
fact. No, our picture of the earth is one which is 
all through based on observations. The light and 
warmth of the interior regions we claim to come 
from the central sun whose rays stream out and form 
the aurora and whose heat warms the water that 
comes over the lip of the orifice in the life-giving 
current that every Arctic explorer has observed and 
marveled at. From this warm interior, too, come 
the mammoth and other animals and birds which the 


[ 370 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


explorers have noticed with such wonderment. From 
there come the mysterious pollen of unknown plants 
and the seeds of tropical trees—for it is tropical 
vegetable life that we shall find in that hot, moist 
interior. ‘This picture of the earth fits in with every 
scientific fact which has ever been discovered, and 
there are no scientific facts which contradict it. 
Could Symmes say as much for his ideas? 

After all, where Symmes made deductions about 
the law of gravity and the nature of things in general 
—things about which even now, almost a hundred 
years later than Symmes we know very little—all we 
do is ask people to use their eyes. Every point that 
establishes our theory rests on something that can be 
seen. with the eye. The appearance of the nebulas 
can be seen, and the progress from one stage of 
evolution to the next can be compared. The light 
from the Martian interior sun has actually been seen 
and recorded. The animals of the north have actu- 
ally been observed traveling north. The warm cur- 
rent from the North is tested for its temperature by 
the thermometer; its direction checked by the com- 
pass. The mammoth is not only seen but its freshness 
is tested by eating. And so it goes..-Such mere 
arguing as Professor Dominian brought to bear 
against our theory will never refute it because our 
theory does not rest on argument; it rests on observed 
facts. The only way scientists can refute our theory 
is by answering in a way fully as conclusive as ours 


[37f] 


A JOURNEY TO,THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


and free from self-contradiction, all the questions 
which we ask them in our concluding chapter. As 
these questions never have been answered satisfac- 
torily by scientists, as the efforts to answer one involve 
theories which are contradicted by the efforts to 
answer another, it is obvious that the scientists are 
baffled, and they will remain baffled as long as they 
ignore the guiding principle or guiding fact—call 
it whichever you will—that binds all these appear- 
ances together and makes them agree one with the 
other. 

And between this carefully based picture of the 
earth and the planets as close observation reveals 
them to us, between this sober and scientific theory, 
and the fantastic theory of Symmes there is nothing 
in common. Only ignorance and prejudice or sheer 
dishonesty could ever make out that our theory was 
a rehash of Symmes’ theory. For in truth they are 
different in their inceptions, in their methods of 
argument, and in their final results. 


Bre 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAPDER XX. 


THE MOON AND OUR THEORY 


How on our theory do we account for the moon 
and what do we claim to be its structure? We may 
answer those questions wholly in the words of the 
orthodox scientists and the aswer will show how 
inevitably all real research into the structure of the 
heavenly bodies fits into the facts as we have dis- 
covered them—and this fitting in of every separate 
fact is the conclusive demonstration of the soundness 
of our ideas. Many theories fit some of the facts. 
Almost any theory is thought to be true as long as 
there are no facts to contradict it. But that is not 
enough. If a theory be true, every fact that can 
possibly be discovered will fit in with it. 


WAS THE MOON HURLED OFF? 


Now it would be quite possible that in the rotation 
of the hollow nebula which afterwards condensed 
to the planet Earth a nebulous mass might have 
been hurled off, perhaps owing to the attraction 
exercised upon it by a passing comet of large dimen- 
sions. Scientists, in fact, have said, in the past, that 
the hurling off of the moon from the earth—which 
they thought took place when the earth was in a 
fluid or plastic condition—that this hurling off was 


ied 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


responsible for the depression in the earth’s surface 
that formed the earliest ocean. But since that time 
astronomers are tending to abandon that theory and 
to give their allegiance to the “capture” theory. 
Professor See is the proposer of the capture theory, 
and by that expression he means that the earth cap- 
tured the moon by its attraction; that the moon was 
a very small planet which came very near the earth 
and was deflected out of its path and caused to revolve 
around the earth instead. An article on Professor 
See’s researches which appeared ‘in the Scientific 
American Supplement for February 15, 1910, says: 


THE CAPTURE THEORY 


“Our moon, likewise, was originally a planet which 
neared the earth and was finally captured and made 
a satellite. It was no part of the terrestrial globe 
detached by rapid rotation, as has been generally 
believed since the time of Anaxagoras, B. C. 500-428, 
and more recently taught by LaPlace, Lord Kelvin, 
Sir George Darwin, Poincare, Pickering, and other 
eminent writers.” ; 

Of course this is not absolutely proven, but astron- 
omers base the conclusion on certain calculations 
which show, or seem to show, that the rotation of the 
earth was not of such a speed that a body the size 
we know the moon to be, would be thrown off. 

We do not wish to decide that question, however, 
but simply to point out to the reader that if the moon 


[ 374] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


is a captured small planet it ought—if it is true that 
a planet is a hollow body as we have contended—it 
ought, we say, to be hollow. 

Now if the scientists themselves—not those who 
know of our theory, but men who wrote before our 
theory was published to the world—if these men, 
quite independently of us, were to say that the moon 
was hollow, would not that be a very remarkable 
confirmation of our theory? Would not any candid 
reader have to admit that we had scored a very 
strong point, all the stronger because we do not argue 
it ourselves but simply set down what the orthodox 
scientists are saying, and let it speak for itself. 


SCIENTISTS ADMIT, THE MOON HOLLOW 


Very well, then. Let the reader turn to page 123 
of Edwin S. Grew’s “The Romance of Modern 
Geology”. There he quotes from a book that Mr. 
Wells wrote about the moon. Mr. Wells made it 
the scene of a story but he wished to have a really 
scientific background for this tale, and, as Grew 
says, he “has gathered together all the more reasoned 
speculations on the subject”. And the result of these 
speculations is that Mr. Wells came to the conclusion 
that there was not only some atmosphere on the 
moon but: 

“There are gases of some kind on the moon. There 
must be gases, for example, shut up in the moon’s 
rocks; there may be gases in the moon’s interior. 


rears 


A JOURNEY TO THE-HARTH’S INTERIOR 


Mr. Wells imagined that there was a good deal of 
gas inside the moon; indeed he went so far as to 
suppose that the moon was partly hollow.” 

And then Mr. Grews himself goes on to say that 
only in case Mr. Wells were right, only indeed if 
the moon were hollow could he explain what is 
known to be a fact that the moon is very much lighter 
in proportion to its size than the earth. Not only 
that but it is lighter, he says, “than we should expect 
it to be.” 

Why is that? Simply because. being a much 
smaller spheroid than the earth its shell is propor- 
tionally thinner. 


RELATIVE WEIGHTS OF EARTH AND MOON 


It is obvious that if the earth and the moon were 
both solid bodies as the astronomers have thought, 
they would be of proportionately equal weights, for 
both being made up of the same substances the spe- 
cific gravity of the one would be approximately 
equal to the specific gravity of the other. 

Only on our theory that both moon and earth are 
hollow can this difference be explained. 

And so whatever facts of astronomy or cosmogny 
the reader wishes to bring forward it will be seen 
that our theory fits them fully and links them up 
into one consistent body of knowledge. 


[ 376 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAPTER XT: 


A NOTE ON GRAVITATION 


It has been objected against our theory that the 
weight of the earth is known and that it is much 
heavier than would be the case if it were hollow as 
we have claimed. At first glance that might sound 
like a plausible objection, but a moment’s thought 
will dispel it. After all, weight is a purely relative 
matter. ‘The same object weighs more at the polar 
oriflce than it does at the equator because the pull 
of gravity upon it differs. Weight, the reader will 
remember is due to the attraction of the force of 
gravity and it varies according to the distance there 
may be between the object and the center of the 
force of gravity which is pulling on it. And as the 
force with which the earth attracts objects is the 
original unit upon which the whole idea of weight 
is based, it follows that we cannot use that unit to 
measure itself—we have to take it for granted. What 
scientists actually did when they “weighed the earth” 
was to assume, first of all that it was a more or less 
homogenous sphere. They then observed the force 
with which it exerted attractions on various bodies. 
But the amount of attraction which the earth exerts, 
say, on a pendulum, bringing it to rest in a certain 
time, is a fact which is not altered by showing that 


fesrera) 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the earth is hollow. All we can say is that a lesser 
mass of earth than we had supposed 1s after all able 
to affect the pendulum. Or we can put it this way. 
We had supposed in the past that it took the gravi- 
tational force of a solid or semi-solid sphere the size 
of the earth to hold us on its surface against the 
centrifugal force which would tend to throw us 
off the surface of the earth owing to its fast rate of 
revolution. Now some people argue as if the truth of 
our theory would reduce the gravity of the earth 
so that that centrifugal force would throw us all off 
the earth. But that is not so. All we have to do 
is to admit that the pulling force of the earth is 
greater than we had thought, for now it appears that 
a globe which is not solid but hollow—however, 
having a very thick shell—is sufficient to hold us by 
gravity against the push of the centrifugal force. 


GRAVITATIONAL PULL IN THE INTERIOR 


And one correspondent has even asked why the 
inhabitants, human or animal, of the interior would 
not be pulled into the central sun by the force of 
its gravitational pull. The answer is of course, easy. 
In the first place the central sun is a very small body 
and its gravitational pull is therefore counteracted 
by the gravitational pull of the shell of the earth. 
And again, in the interior of the earth the centri- 
fugal force tends to hold things down to the ground, 
because it is always directed from the center out at 


[ 378 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


right angles, and its direction is therefore the same 
whether one is on the outside or the inside of the 
shell of the earth. When we are on the outside we 
are held down against its pull by the combined gravi- 
tational pull of the whole earth—shell and interior 
sun. If we were on the inside of the earth we should 
be held by the balance of the forces, the interior sun 
exerting a force of gravity on us which, if unopposed 
would pull us into itself, the gravitational pull of 
the earth’s shell pulling us the other way, and the 
centrifugal force of the whirling earth adding to 
that pull by pressing us against the inner surface. 
For that reason if a man on the interior of the earth 
dug a hole—which would point the opposite way 
to a hole which we would dig on our surface, he 
would be likely to fall up, if he were careless, 
as we are to fall down a hole if we do not take 
precautions. 


P37] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAPTER XAT: 


HOW OUR THEORY HAS BEEN RECEIVED 


Before telling about the actual reception which 
greeted our theory when it was first propounded we 
wish to lay stress upon one particular point. Before 
the reader can intelligently accept or reject our 
theory he must make up his mind whether he is going 
to believe anything he is told as long as it comes 
from a scientific source—so-called—or whether he 
is going to claim the privilege of using his own 
commonsense. In other words, he has to decide 
this question: “Is a thing true just because it is 
supposed to be scientific?” 

Some people worship science and believe every- 
thing that is said in its name, and if we rub counter 
to science they will have nothing to do with us or 
our theory. One of our critics, ina letter, said: “The 
fabric of our modern conception of the universe has 
grown too slowly and painfully to be overthrown at 
a blow”. 

And a professor of geology writes that “scientific 
men who are competent to deal with the subject.... 
will tell you that the book is a great joke.” 

Here is a third expression of the same point of 
view; from a celebrated American astronomer: 
“Mr. Gardner seems to me to have no conception 


[ 380 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


whatever of the thoroughness with which scientific 
men work or of the requirements of proof of a theory 
before it may find acceptance. His theory runs 
counter to many of the foundations of mechanics 
which are as thoroughly established as anything we 
know, and in my judgment cannot possibly be true.” 

Now those opinions certainly sound as if scientists 
were so thorough and careful that they never made a 
mistake and as if what they said had to be accepted 
by the layman without any attempt to criticise it. 
But I shall proceed to show that scientists do not 
live up to those pretentions at all. They are just as 
much in the dark, just as much at loggerheads, one 
with another, just as apt to err—sometimes more apt 
—as the rest of us. 

What, for instance, do they really know about the 
constitution of the earth? What is their latest word 
on the matter? Do they all agree about it, as those 
letters just quoted would imply that scientists agree? 

Well, here, taken at random from the latest pro- 
nouncements of scientists are three views of the 
constitution of the earth which certainly do not agree 
with one another and which some people would 
say differed from one another, among other differ- 
ences, by one being more ridiculous than another. 
Of course there are many other scientific theories, 
different again from these. They are mentioned in 
other parts of this book. But we select these for 
mention simply because they are the latest, and show 


f3sh] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


that the scientists are not getting any nearer a funda- 
mental agreement. 

Here is theory one. Professor Louis Rabourdin 
of France has recently said that the crust of the earth 
is very thin, and is especially thin at the bottom 
of the sea: 

“Suppose,” he says, in a recent despatch, “that 
following an extraordinary twisting movement, due 
to a retreat of the central mass, a large mass of the 
sea bottom, should give way, and, falling suddenly, 
should let in the mass of the ocean’s waters upon 
the incandescent interior matter. The water would 
be decomposed by the heat, the hydrogen would 
burn, and it would burn more as it had access to 
more oxygen.” 

And the pessimistic professor goes on to picture 
the whole world being burned up in a flash, and 
appearing to other worlds in space as a momentarily 
blazing star. 

Well, it has not happened yet, and we fear that if 
the professor is looking forward to such a very expen- 
sive proof of his theory as the burning up of the 
whole world, including all the people who would 
have been Leaneed by the Becta Ng ae fear 
that he has a long time to wait. 

But if that prospect alarms the reader he may have 
another theory with a little bit. more hope of 
stability in it. For here comes an American pro- 
fessor, Dr: A.C. Lane of “Putts College sand say, 


[582s] 


AMJOURNEY- TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


that the earth is not a simple envelope of crust 
containing a fluid interior as this French scientist 
evidently thinks, but that it is, in constitution, very 
much like a butter-nut. (And yet some people call 
our theory rediculous!) But professor Lane’s earth 
at least has the advantage that a break in the shell 
does not cause a complete world conflagration, as 
the reader will see from the following words: 

“The outermost layer of the earth’s crust, as pro- 
fessor A. C. Lane, of Tufts College, says, is but a 
thin wrinkled shell like the outer husk of a butter- 
nut. The viscous layer just beneath this corresponds 
to the fleshy layer in the butter-nut; the earth’s inner 
crust to the butternut’s hard shell, and the gaseous 
center of the earth to the kernel of the butternut. 

“In this butternut-like structure of the earth les 
the reason why from time to time are collapses of 
the viscous layer of the earth, leading to elevations 
of portions of the outer crust. ‘These collapses are 
what have produced the mountains...... ele 

Does the reader see the difference.between the two 
theories? That extra crust that gives such an air 
of safety to Professor Lane’s earthr And yet the 
scientists object when we appear with a theory and 
tell us that no new theory is wanted as they are all 
in agreement and making good without us. 

But after all there are some things about the earth 
that looking at a butternut will not explain, and 
along comes Professor Garrett P. Serviss, and tries 


[ 383 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


his hand at a better theory still. In an article widely 
printed throughout the country in 1915, Professor 
Serviss begins his consideration of the subject by 
asserting that in the days of primitive man the Great 
Polar basin or depression was his home, and that 
at that time the polar regions were tropic. Of course 
he is led to say this on account of the finding of 
mammoths in Siberia—something which we have 
already explained. He next points out that the Ant- 
arctic continent is very high, some of the highest 
mountains in the world, he points out, being in the 
Antarctic regions. Why, he then asks, should there 
be this depression at the north pole and this high 
land at the south pole? (He forgets that phenomena 
of animal life, pointing, to a polar opening, having 
also been found at the southern extremity of the 
earth.) 

Now the reader may gasp at what comes next, but 
Professor Serviss actually supposes that the whole 
central core or axle of the earth slipped out of posi- 
tion—just as a piece of loose lead might slip out of 
a stub of pencil—leaving a great depression at the 
north polar basin and sticking up from the surround- 
ing surface of the globe at the southern extremity! 
One reason he gives for this strange theory is that 
the center of gravity is not fixed but that the earth 
‘“wabbles” in its rotation in a manner that would 
suggest that the center of gravity is no longer in the 
center of the sphere but that it is moving up and 


[ 384 ] 


PAJOURNEY TOUTHE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


down in the north and south axis. Of course the 
truth of the matter is, that these scientists study the 
question of gravity without knowing the exact facts 
and so they do not get the results they expect. And 
so in order to explain the lack of definite results that 
would fit in with their previous ideas they are forced 
to tell us that the central core of the earth is slipping 
out, by way of the south! What an idea! Here is 
what Serviss actually says about the matter: 

| I hescentralecore Of. the earth’ is the densest: part 
of the globe. It has been thought that it may be 
composed almost entirely of heavy metalic substan- 
ces, mostly iron. Slight vibratory motions of this 
dense core would produce a corresponding shift of 
Pmemeenter. Ofeoravity ix... 22 

“The depression around the North Pole, produced 
by the retreat of the underlying support, and the 
corresponding uplift about the South Pole would 
leave the Earth’s crust at these spots practically as 
itis today.” 

The propounder of the theory admits that: 

“A weakness of the theory is that it offers no 
explanation to account for the shifting of the earth’s 
central mass along the line of the axis. But it may 
be pointed out that the same difficulty applies to 
the known variations in the location of the center of 
gravity. An attempt (which does not appear satis- 
factory) has been made to explain the latter as due 
to annual alterations in the amount of snow and ice 


exe 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


accumulated around the Poles. But the main cause 
remains hidden.” 

Now that sounds pretty weak. First, the theory 
is most far fetched, and then it assumes things about 
the interior of the earth that other scientists deny— 
as we have already seen—and then it admits that it 
cannot explain all the facts but gives the excuse that 
it is no worse than many other theories in that regard. 

And yet these scientists keep a straight face before 
the public, never openly laugh at each other, but 
always laugh at an outsider who ventures to show 
up their inconsistencies and proposes better theories, 
backed up with more facts, than theirs. 

We will give two more examples. The celestial 
body nearest the earth is the Moon, and one would 
think that the scientists ought to be able to agree, 
in the main at least, about its character and the forces 
which caused it to be where it is. Let us see how 
well and thoroughly they have solved the riddle of 
the moon and how closely they agree about it. 

First let us call upon Messrs. Nasmyth and Car- 
penter whose book, “The Moon Considered as a 
Planet, a World, anda Satellite,” is one of the stand- 
ard English works on the subject. The first thing 
they have to tell us only concerns the moon. incident- 
ally, but it shows how scientists guess to obtain 
their results. Buffon, before LaPlace, wondered 
how the solar system was formed, and he guessed 
that comets used to hit the sun obliquely in passing 


[ 386 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


it, and that each comet knocked a piece off the sun 
which thereupon became a planet and began to 
revolve around the sun. He then assumed that in 
some cases the stroke was so oblique that not only the 
planet but one -to two or three small pieces were 
knocked off which became satellites to the planet, 
and that is how he accounted for the origin of the 
moon. Pure guess work, and they are still guessing. 

But how about the present state of the moon? 
These authors tell us that by the study of the refrac- 
tion of light that is reflected from the moon’s surface 
it has been established that there is practically no 
atmosphere on the moon’s surface. There is some 
but it is so slight that its pressure would be only 
one-half of the pressure of the air that is left in a 
vessel which has been exhausted by one of our best 
vacuum pumps—that is to say an atmosphere two 
thousand times rarer than our own. And, he goes 
on to say, if there is no air on the moon there can 
be no water, for if there were the water would 
vaporize and give an atmosphere of water vapor. 

Well, the reader may say, that sounds reasonable. 
So it does, but listen to this. It is an account from 
Boston, Mass., of the latest theories of Professor 
Pickering of Harvard—-a world-wide authority. 
It says: 

“According to Professor William H. Pickering of 
Harvard, who recently made a study of the moon 
from an observatory in Kingston, Jamaica, there 


esl 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


are evidences of the existence of a race of superior 
beings on the moon. 

‘Professor Pickering asserts a careful study reveals 
vegetation in spots on the moon’s surface. 

“This vegetation appears to spread along what 
looks exactly like two twin artificial canals, similar 
in character and appearance to those on Mars called 
man-made by the late Professor Perceival Lowell. 

“These moon canals, Professor Pickering points 
out, are not less artificial in appearance than those 
on Mars.” 

So, dear reader, if you are going to believe the 
scientists you will have to try hard to think at the 
same time that there is no air and no water on the 
moon but that there are a very superior race there 
who indulge in truck gardening along the banks of 
artificial canals. ‘They would certainly have to be 
a “superior race” to do that. Perhaps if we could 
get a few of them down to earth they could raise 
watermelons on the Sahara desert. But perhaps it 
is only artificial flowers that they grow along the 
waterless canals in a land where the vegetation is 
never injured by storms because there is not any 
air to create winds. 

And yet these scientists always keep their faces 
straight and never appear to laugh except at pre- 
sumptuous outsiders. 

Well, perhaps our last example will cause the 
reader—just for the sake of turning the tables—to 


[ 388 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


laugh at the scientists. Have you ever been sun- 
burned, gentle reader? In all probability you have. 
And if so you have certainly made some remarks 
about the heat of the sun. You have certainly been 
brought up—have you not?—in the idea that the 
sun was about the hottest thing we know of in our uni- 
verse? 

Well you may be surprised to learn that as late as 
the nineteenth century Sir William MHerschell 
thought that there might be people living on the sun. 
He thought it was a cold body—a dark orb surround- 
ed by fire-emitting clouds. Now why, if the clouds 
are white hot the sun itself should be cold, is a ques- 
tion that Herschell being no longer among the liv- 
ing, cannot answer. Of course, it was the sun-spot 
which caused him to think that the sun was dark and 
cold—the black sun-spot showing through a rift in 
the incandescent envelope. But it does not seem to 
have occurred to him that there could be any other 
explanation and that a white hot cloud envelope 
would very soon heat the sun almost to its own tem- 
perature, and quickly kill off any life that there 
might be on its surface. Herschell’s answer to this 
objection was a flimsy one. He said that there were 
two layers of cloud, “the outer,” says Proctor in dis- 
cussing the matter, “self-luminous and constituting 
the true solar photosphere, the inner reflecting the 
light received from the outer layer, and so shielding 


[ 389 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE. EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the real surface of the sun from the intense light and 
heat which it would otherwise receive.” 

Proctor goes on to say (in his book, “Other Worlds 
than Ours”) that later discoveries shake Herschell’s 
theory very much, that while later scientists admit his 
theory about cloud envelopes, they do not admit that 
the sun is cool, but explain the dark spots by saying 
that it is the very height of the temperature, so much 
above anything we can conceive of, that causes them 
to be black—because those are spots which do not 
part with their heat at all, and so no radiation comes 
from them to us. At least that is the present expla- 
nation of the matter, but how long will it be before 
scientists give us some other explanation? 

Nobody knows, for what science will say next 
depends a great deal on the imagination of the scien- 
tist, and one can never predict the next direction of 
the human imagination. 

But here is the point: What passes for scientific 
certainty is really a mass of guesses some of which 
have been verified by experiment but a large number 
of which have not been so verified and which have 
no real standing whatever. As soon as an outsider 
comes along with a new theory the scientists are so 
anxious to defend themselves against this ‘‘non-union” 
intrusion that they forget that they are only guessing 
half the time, and exclaim: “We have proved this, 
or that”. Well the above quotations show that a 
good deal of the time they do not prove things at 


[ 390 } 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


all. ‘They make a guess and then hope that some 
observation or experiment will be made to support 
it. Sometimes they guess luckily and sometimes they 
do not. But the talk about great accuracy and laying 
foundations which can never be overturned is all 
a bluff. The foundations of science are constantly 
being altered. Like the foundations of a house they 
settle sometimes and then something has to be done 
to keep the house from falling to one side. 

It is reason whose foundations are never upset. 
And we claim that our theory is reasonable. Whe- 
ther the scientists are always reasonable or not the 
reader probably has already determined after read- 
ing the above extracts. And now we may pass on 
to the main question of this chapter: “How Our 
theory has been received”. 

Whenever a new and revolutionary idea is 
launched upon the world it is received with ridicule, 
misrepresentation, distrust, and unbelief. Columbus 
was thought to be a fool; Galileo was persecuted, 
great liberators of the people have been mobbed by 
the people they sought to help; in short, all those who 
have helped to save mankind have first been vilified 
and sometimes killed, and then, years after, statues 
have been erected to their memories. 


WHAT WE EXPECTED 


The above general law of human life is known 
to every reader and we need not bother him with any 


[391 J 


A* JOURNEY TO THE- EARL Saint ERIOR 


further instances of it. When, therefore, we put forth 
the preliminary presentation of our theory in a much 
smaller book than the present one, with only the 
outstanding pieces of evidence set forth, we awaited 
with what calmness we might, the public responce 
to our challenge. We knew that we had accused 
the whole body of astronomers, geologists, explorers 
and naturalists of being on the wrong track; we knew 
that we had thrown down a challenge to science, and 
we knew that the presumption of a layman in doing 
so would be resented by all the scientists and that 
the newspapers, taking their cue from these men and 
interviewing them, would print many an article in 
which endeavors would be made to pick our work 
to pieces. 
OUR ACTUAL RECEPTION 

Our theory did begin to attract attention, and the 
attention was of such a nature that it is reasonably 
certain that had the European War not turned the 
attention of Europe from every other subject of 
human interest and concentrated it upon that of 
slaughter—it is certain that if that had not been so 
our theory would by this time have been proved. 

For what happened? Were we ridiculed and mis- 
represented and then ignored? Did we receive only 
adverse criticism or contemptuous silence? From 
One source or another we may have received ridicule. 
Some people have tried to misrepresent our theory. 
But when we look over ali the response we have re- 


[ 392 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


ceived to our efforts we are simply amazed by the 
generally open-minded and fair way in which our 
theory has been received. It would seem from this 
reception that the time is ripe for just the discovery 
we have made. Even the monarchs of European 
countries, generally supposed to stand only for what 
is accepted and conservative, have expressed inter- 
est in our work and read it with open mind. 


EUROPE MORE OPEN-MINDED THAN 
AMERICA 

Professors in the universities of Europe, especially 
those where interest in Arctic studies is a feature of 
the intellectual life, have written us in terms of great 
interest. It is only in America that the university 
professors adopt.a dogmatic attitude of denial of our 
theory. Of course many of our correspondents are 
- kept from full acceptance of the theory only because 
they believe that the poles have actually been dis- 
covered. But when they read this enlarged work 
they will have that stumbling block removed, for as 
we have conclusively shown Peary and Cook did not 
reach the North Pole and the methods of observa- 
tion are so unsuited to navigation in the Arctic that 
any position on the surface of the curve of the orifice 
is likely to be mistaken for a polar position. 

We will now proceed to give a few out of the 
many replies we have had to our ideas and comment 
briefly upon some of them. 


[ 393 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


THE KING OF SWEDEN 

From His Majesty, the King of Sweden, we re- 
ceived the following letter: 

“Secretariat du Roi. 
“Stockholm, Nov. 17th, 1913. 
ane.: 

“His Majesty, the King of Sweden, has directed 
me to thank you for your letter of October 20th inst. 
and for the book, ‘A Journey to the Earth’s Interior 
or, Have the Poles Really Been Discovered?’ for- 
warded with the same, and which His Majesty has 
had much pleasure in receiving. 

“Sincerely yours, 
“W. Bostrom, 
“Private Secretary to the King.” 


THE KING AND QUEEN /OFSITALY 


From the “Consolato di S. M. il Re D’Italia”— 
the Italian consulate in Chicago, we received the fol- 
lowing letter: 

“December 12,1915: 
“Mr. Marshall B. Gardner, 
“Aurora, Illinois. 
“Wearssin 

“The Ministry of the Royalty has written this of- 
fice acknowledging receipt of your publication, ‘A 
Journey to the Earth’s Interior, or, Have the Poles 
Really Been Discovered?’ 

‘Their majesties wish to express to you their sin- 


[ 394 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


cerest thanks for your homage, assuring you that the 
book will be read with much interest. 
“Very truly yours, 
“G. Butignini, 
PRoyal® Italian <Gonsuly’ 


A CELEBRATED SWEDISH SCHOLAR 


From one of the foremost Swedish scholars, Pro- 
fessor Hj. Sjogren of the Riks Museum of Stock- 
holm, we received the following letter: 

“Stockholm, 9 Februari, 1914. 
“Dewey Publishing Company, 

eAutora lll. i SA. 
pear Sir: 

“T had the pleasure to receive a copy of Marshall 
B. Gardner’s book ‘A Journey to the Earth’s Inter- 
101, ECC: 

“T must say I was struck by the originality and 
audacity of the Gardner theory and will read the 
book with great pleasure. 

“Yours very truly, 
DP rie ologcen.- 


ADMITS OUR ORIGINALITY 


We wish particularly to point out that Professor 
Sjogren admits the originality of our theory as sev- . 
eral people in our own country have apparently read 
our book so carelessly that they confuse our ideas 
with the purely speculative ones of Symmes or the 
mystical writings of Koresh. But such an endorse- 


[ 395 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


ment as this from so eminent a scholar should at least 
settle the question of our originality. For Professor 
Sjogren at least knows all the history of the different 
theories regarding the conformation of the earth. 
And while we do not expect instant conversion on 
the part of every scholar who reads our preliminary 
book, we do think it fair to point out to our less dis- 
tinguished and usually less considerate critics that 
the tone of admiration for our work and respect for 
our thought which this courteous letter shows is suf- 
ficient warrant for other people at least doing us 
justice and not confusing us with a totally different 
order of people. Our theory is to be judged by scien- 
tific standards and not merely dismissed as a dream. 


AN AMERICAN SCIENTIST 

Now let us contrast the open-mindedness and scien- 
tific fairness of this Stockholm scientist with the sort 
of thing that we receive from our own countrymen. 
We shall take up in detail later an attempt by an 
American scientist to shatter our theory, and we shall 
show how easily his own arguments are shattered. 
But this instance is not of an attempt to out-argue us 
—that we would welcome, but of sheer narrow- 
mindedness and misrepresentation. The letter is from 
The Lick Observatory of the University of Cali- 
fornia: 

“Mount Hamilton, Nov. 18, 1913. 

‘Wear oir 

“Answering your inquiry of November 11th, I beg 


[ 396 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


to say that your book, ‘A Trip to the Earth’s Interior’ 
which you sent as a gift to the Lick Observatory, was 
duly received. 

“It may be a disappointment to you to learn that 
we are placing your book in the class which con- 
tains pamphlets which we perennially receive on 
Such subjects as “Ihe Earth is Flat,’ etc. It is sur- 
prising how many of these contributions there are 
which ignore, with apparent deliberation, the great 
body of modern scientific knowledge. 

“Yours truly, 


“W.W. Campbell, Director.” 


SHEER MISREPRESENTATION 


If that is not a sheer attempt to misrepresent our 
theory we should like to see one. But why the Di- 
rector of the Lick Observatory thinks he can misrep- 
resent the theory to the very man who is responsible 
for it is a matter that we cannot begin to explain. 
He must himself have ignored with “apparent delib- 
eration” all of our book except the title page. In 
that book we did not give as great a volume of evi- 
dence as we have now collected but every bit of it 
was composed of “scientific knowledge.” We chal- 
lenge Mr. Campbell to point out anything in that 
book that is not based on science or that ignores 
scientific results. We quoted Percival Lowell. Is 
he not a scientist or is the director of the Lick Ob- 
servatory jealous of him? Are not all the Arctic 


[ 397 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


explorers from the earliest days scientists? But why 
trouble further about a man so narrow-minded that: 
he does not even read a book before condemning it? 
Let us pass on and leave Mr. Campbell to his library 
of pamphlets on “The Earth is Flat,” etc. 


SIR ARTHUR CONAN. DOYLE 

Although he is not a scientist by profession one of 
the most scientifically-minded men in England is Dr. 
Arthur Conan Doyle. Although best known as a 
novelist Dr. Doyle is a trained medical man—which 
means that he has had years of scientific discipline. 
He has also studied the laws of evidence in many of 
his investigations into psychological subjects, and he 

has read widely along geological lines in his search 
for material for some of his romances. If anyone 
could detect any flaws in the evidence for our theory 
Dr. Conan Doyle would be the man, for his whole 
series of Sherlock Holmes detective stories is based 
upon the application of logical processes to the study 
of facts—and he has told us that he learned the 
methods from an old medical teacher. Dr. Conan 
Doyle was the recipient of a copy of our preliminary 
book, and he immediately wrote to us in highly flat- 
tering terms. The one objection he raises to our 
theory has already been dealt with in the course of 
this book, and so we need not refer to it again. But, 
that objection apart, does it not seem absurd for peo- 
ple like the Director of the Lick Observatory to dis- 
miss our theory without reading about it when a man 


[ 398 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


of the international reputation of Dr. Conan Doyle 
writes as follows: 


“Dear Sir: 


“T read your little book (and big theory) with 
great interest. It is so very original and actually ex- 
plains so many facts, that if it were not that both 
poles had actually been attained, I should be a con- 
vert. But I must thank you none the less for a most 
interesting exposition. 

“Yours sincerely, 


“Conan Doyle.” 
WEIGHT OF OPINION 


Surely a letter like that will cause some of our un- 
critical opponants to think again. Let us merely 
point out that the only test of a theory such as ours is 
“Does it explain the facts?” and Dr. Conan Doyle 
answers that it does explain very many facts—mean- 
ing facts which have hitherto not been explained. 
Now we have never heard that such theories as the 
one that the earth is flat explained any facts. They 
are simply notions. And here is a direct admission 
by a competent witness that actual facts are explained 
by our theory. Such recognition as this is all we ask. 
Simply a square deal and the acknowledgement of 
the impression that our theory makes on the reader’s 
mind and reasoning faculties. But from people who 
dismiss our theory before reading it we are not par- 
ticularly anxious to hear. We welcome constructive 


[ 399 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERTOR 


criticism. But mere fault-finding will do no good. 
Our ideas must be answered by their opponents or 
those opponents will simply show themselves up for 
narrow-minded people who refuse to think outside 
their own ruts. 


TWO AMERICAN PROFESSORS 


As we have indicated, the professors in those coun- 
tries nearer to the Arctic regions, countries from 
which expeditions have set out from the earliest 
times, are far more hospitable to our claims than are 
American scientists. 

Professor Joseph Barrell of Yale—who has evi- 
dently not read us—says that our preliminary book 
is “absurd” and in a class with “those which contend 
that the sun is inhabited and the moon likewise.” 
That, of course, is an utter misrepresentation of our 
theory and method of proving it. Even this ultra- 
conservative scientist is impressed with the work, 
however, for he says it is “interesting as an effort of 
the imagination.” That very sentence, however, 
shows that he has not understood our work, for there 
is nO imagination in it but only reasoning. Had we 
simply invented a theory as Symmes did, imagin- 
ation would be a good word to apply to it. But where 
every step is taken only on the basis of ascertained 
fact it is absurd to talk about imagination and to 
compare ours with books regarding inhabitants in the 
moon and sun. 


[ 400 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CONTRAST THIS FAMOUS RUSSIAN 
GEOLOGIST 

Now contrast with the absolute misrepresentations 
of Professor Barrell, the tone of a letter which we 
have received from Professor Bugdanovitch, who in 
1914 was professor of geology in St. Petersburg. He 
did not profess conversion to our theories—and this 
we would not expect to be universal and instantan- 
eous,.but he wrote us complimenting us not only upon 
the “beautiful style” of our work which he compared 
to the writings of Jules Verne, but upon the fact that 
it was written very logically. And he also admitted | 
that we had caused him to realize the many un- 
answered or unsolved questions that the orthodox 
scientific view of the earth had left unsolved and 
that were made soluble on the basis of our theory. 

And at this point it may be well to say also that 
Professor Dr. A. Schmidt, Secretary of the Hofrath, 
and Professor and Director of the Central Meteor- 
ological Station, Stuttgart—a world wide authority 
on the sciences relating to the earth—writes us that 
“after having read it with enthralled interest I find 
that in it a very weighty physical hypothesis was 
Stated). 2 andthe professor ends his letter by a 
wish to discuss the theory further in the future. 

But we may be pardoned for stressing what he has 
said on his first reading of the preliminary book; 
that our hypothesis is weighty and is a physical one— 
that is to say is a scientific one based on observation, 


[ 401 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


and not a mere speculation. It is this fact, that ours 
is a physical or scientific hypothesis, that we have 
such a hard time to make the American professors 
see. Just because they have heard of cranks who 
have thought the earth was flat they assume that any 
theory coming from a layman, no matter how well 
supported, is in the same class. We should think 
that Professor Barrell of Yale, if he ever reads this 
letter from Professor Schmidt, would blush at his 
own absence of tolerance and courtesy. 


EXPLORER WOULD HAVE TESTED THEORY 

But one of the most startling communications we 
received was from Prefessor J. Bohm of Berlin, and 
it indicated that the author meant to put our theory 
to the actual test of exploration. But he wrote to us 
on the subject just before the Great War broke out, 
and naturally that put a stop to all European activity 
along exploring lines. 

Professor Bohm thanks us for the copy of our pre- 
liminary book, tells us that our theory is clearly and 
logically presented, that the illustrations aid in 
making clear just what the constitution of the earth 
is. And he would like to point out, he goes on to tell 
us, that there is a splendid chance to prove our theory 
through an Antartic expedition which is shortly to 
set out from Austria under the leadership of Herr 
Dr. Felix Konig. He informs us that Dr. Konig 
lives in Vienna and urges us to get into immediate 
touch with him. 


[ 402 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


But before we could take advantage of this the 
World War had started. We made no effort to com- 
municate with Dr. Konig because we knew that it 
would be quite useless. It is certain that no Austrian 
exploring expeditions will sail anywhere for a long 
time to come. But our readers will certainly agree 
that the fact that a well known scientist should be 
enough interested in our theory to suggest such proof 
of it is an important point. It shows how seriously 
our theory is taken by the scientists of Europe. We 
hope that the scientists of our own country will soon 
learn to give it as serious attention. 


FROM THE PRACTICAL MEN 


It is interesting to note that the practical men, that 
is, the men who use science as well as merely know it 
—engineers rather than professors, are more apt to 
take kindly to our theory than the men who are not 
miactical. For instance, Mir. H-.M. Chance, the 
consulting engineer of Philadelphia, Pa., says: 

“Mr. Gardner is, in my opinion, justly entitled to 
much credit for having conceived and elaborated 
such a theory. . .” although the writer admits that 
he does not feel “competent to express an opinion on 
many of the features of the theory he elaborates” —a 
modesty which is entirely wanting in nearly all the 
American university professors who seem to know 
so much that they can dismiss our theory in a few 
dozen words. 


[ 403 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 
A SCIENTIST WHO TRIES TO CONFUTE US 


As a matter of fact there is a very good reason for 
this attitude on their part. One of the representative 
scientists tried the other way—to refute our theory 
in detail. He was the only one of the whole profes- 
sional fraternity who came out in print and tried to 
demolish our theory. He had all the facts of science 
to draw upon. He-had access to all the scientific 
works in our university libraries, and he was an ex- 
pert in geographical and similar questions. His de- 
feat was so final that no other scientist has come out 
into the open and criticised our preliminary book. 
It was Dr. L. Dominiani of Pittsburgh, of the staff 
of the National Geographical Society, who answered 
us on behalf of orthodox science, and we shali give 
his attack in full and our reply to it in a chapter to 
themselves — which will follow immediately after 
this one. 

But in the present chapter we wish to show the gen- 
eral tone of the reception which was accorded our 
theory not only by the people already mentioned but 
by private individuals and by the press. 


WHAT PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS SAY 
Correspondence from private individuals reveals 
a general tendency to accept our theory except for 
the one point that these individuals make about the 
poles actually having been discovered. In the pres- 
ent work we take up that point at length, and we meet 
fully that objection. 


[ 404 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE CENTRAL SUN 


Other individuals write us for further information 
on points that we could not possibly know anything 
about. In fact, to read some of these letters one might 
imagine that our correspondents thought that we had 
actually been in the interior in person and had had 
the latest scientific instruments with us. For instance, 
one man wants to know how the inner sun keeps up 
its heat, and what its temperature is. To take the 
latter point first, all we can say is that its tempera- 
ture is such that the interior as a whole, is, on its sur- 
face, of a warmth sufficient to support tropical vege- 
tation. We know that, not because we have been able 
to measure the heating power of the central sun, but 
simply because we know that the vegetation exists; 
we have seen it, as the pages preceding bear witness; 
we have seen where it comes from, and we know what 
are the approximate conditions under which it will - 
grow. That being the fact the question of how hot 
the interior sun is and that of how it maintains its 
heat can well be allowed to rest until direct observa- 
tions are made. But, says the reader, may the central 
sun not cool to the temperature of the surface of the 
earth and so fail to warm the interior any more? The 
answer is that such is not necessarily the case. At one 
time scientists thought that all suns would eventually 
cool off and so all planets some day fail to receive 
their quota of light and heat. But it is now thought 
that suns are kept alive—so to speak—by their supply 


[ 405 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S “INFERIOR 


of radio-active elements which decompose and give 
out energy all the time and so keep up the tempera- 
ture of the suns. And this may well be the case with 
the central sun. But the reader must remember that 
we are not trying to dogmatize about the matter. In 
the past pages we have told nct what the central sun is 
like in all its details, but simply what it does. It 
warms the interior of the earth and we have abundant 
proof of its action. That is all that can be required 
of us at this stage in our study of the matter. When 
we actually penetrate to the interior there will be 
another tale to tell. 


A CHICAGO WOMAN GREETS OUR THEORY 

On the other hand we have a letter from Mrs. 
Maude L. Howard, of Chicago, which voices another 
interesting reaction to our theory. Mrs. Howard says 
she felt, when she read our preliminary statement, as 
if something had been said which explained and 
cleared up matters and appealed to independent 
thinkers. She was so interested in our view that she 
wrote encouraging us to push our investigations fur- 
ther, and gave us her own views on the possibility of 
the interior being inhabited by a race of people, per- 
haps further advanced in evolution than we should 
expect. ‘That, of course, is a matter of speculation, 
but it is such suggestions as this, coming from people 
who do their own thinking, that will gradually raise 
general discussion of our theory and get the puuis 
at large interested. 


[ 406 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


And whether people agree with us in every detail 
or differ from us, we are equally glad to hear from 
them. We want the common sense of mankind to 
join us in this matter and to aid in solving the many 
questions that can only be solved when adequate ex- 
peditions go into the interior. And the more discus- 
sion there is about our theory the sooner that will be. 


A PROMINENT CANADIAN PHYSICIAN 


Dr. L. Secord, a prominent Canadian physician, 
writes us that he read our book with interest, and 
speaks not only of the ingenuity of our theory but of 
the necessity for receiving it with an open mind. “It 
does not do for us,” he says, “‘to set aside a proposi- 
tion without giving it due weight and consideration” 
in these days when so many wonderful discoveries 
are being made every day. Headds: 

“There is many a world within a world even with- 
in our own bodies, the truths of which science 1s 
gradually unfolding.” 


A LIBRARIAN CONFUSES US WITH SYMMES 


Of course we have also received some letters which 
show a very great lack of intelligence. One was from 
the librarian of a Massachusetts library who had 
bought a copy of our preliminary work and wrote in 
to the publisher that the book was not what it pre- 
tended to be. He went on to explain at great length 
that our theory was simply a restatement of Symmes’ 
Theory of Concentric Spheres, as if we had never 


[ 407 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


heard of that theory before he explained it tous. Of 
course we knew all about Symmes Theory and of 
course it is nothing like our theory either in its for- 
mulation or in its method of proof. But that point 
we have discussed elsewhere in this book and so we 
need not repeat ourselves here. But we hope that our 
readers will keep the distinction clear between our 
scientifically proven theory and Symmes’ purely 
speculative and imaginery account. 

An open-minded scholar who has received our 
theory without prejudice is Professor J. W. Searson, 
of the Kansas State Agricultural College. Perhaps 
the most valuable point in Professor Searson’s letter 
is that he deals with the question of originality. We 
take especial pleasure in quoting this letter, so that 
an independent witness may vouch for the fact that 
our theory is an original one, standing on its own feet 
and honestly built up on the facts—not a copy of any- 
one else’s theory. Here, then, is Professor Searson’s 
letter ; 

Kansas State Agricultural College, 
Manhattan, Kansas, March 22, 1917. 

Dear Mr. Gardner: Permit me to express to you 
my sincere appreciation of your kindness in present- 
ing me a copy of “A Journey to the Earth’s Interior.” 
I have read the book with keenest interest and con- 
fess that it is the most unique discussion of the com- 
position and shape of the earth that I have ever seen. 
I used to be greatly interested in the theories of Fer- 


[ 408 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


guson and many similar discussions. I have found 
your book intensely interesting, cleverly written, and 
absolutely original from beginning to end. I have 
worked so long in another field that your entire dis- 
cussion is absolutely new to me. I appreciate it, how- 
ever, and am very grateful to you for giving me this 
opportunity to read so unique a discussion. 
Very gratefully yours, 
J. W. SEARSON. 


Many of our correspondents have endorsed our 
theory to some extent but have met certain difficulties 
in thinking the matter out and have written to us for 
further particulars. Among these, for example is 
R. M. Keminski of Chicago, who, after seeing the . 
preliminary book about our theory, wrote in a num- 
ber of questions which showed intelligent thought in 
regard to the matter. Our correspondent will find 
that all those questions have been covered in the pres- 
ent work and convincing answers given to them. 


THE “SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN” COMPARES 
JULES VERNE 
When the preliminary account of our theory was 
published it attracted a great deal of attention in the 
press, although all of the attention was not of the 
most intelligent kind. We were gratified to find that 
the foremost American scientific journal, The Scten- 
tific American, treated us with a great deal of respect, 
although its editors did not take upon themselves the 


[ 409 ] 


A JOURNEY TO “THE, FART HS 7IN TERIOR 


responsibility of committing their paper to the new 
theory. The reviewer of our book in the columns 
of that journal gave a very fair summary of our the- 
ory, and of its presentation he had this to say: 

“The sheer ingenuity of his arguments makes the 
little book worthy of the Jules Verenean reader.” 
And he praised us for the “wealth of details” with 
which we worked out our ideas. 

Another very appreciative review from the scien- 
tific standpoint was printed by the Buffalo Medical 
Journal, one of the oldest and best known medical 
periodicals in the country. The reviewer says, among 
other things: 

“Mr. Gardner’s hypothesis is so alluring in many 
ways, practical as well as theoretic, that we are in- 
clined to express the hope that the discoveries of the 
poles will prove incorrect.” 

Now that is precisely what we show in this book 
—that Peary and Cook have both been absolutely 
proved incorrect on their own showings. And we 
shall await with interest what the Buffalo Medical 
Journal has to say when its reviewer reads our proof 
in the present volume. 


A WRITER ON THE CHICAGO: DAILY NEWS 

Among the less intelligent reviewers was a writer 
on the Chicago Datiy News who gave a summary of 
‘Our views and then suggested that any explorers of 
the interior would need to take plenty of heavy 
clothes, as “the weather is a bit chilly in the polar 


[ 410 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


regions at certain seasons of the year.” Evidently he 
did not read our book with much care. For we have 
shown that the worst weather in the Arctics is that 
experienced some distance south. When the explor- 
er reaches the regions of the polar orifice he finds that 
the weather becomes warmer. Once one was in the 
interior one would wear just the clothes that one 
wears in the tropics. 

But this reviewer makes up for the inadequacy of 
that remark, however, by adding: 

“Seriously, Mr. Gardner’s theory offers some ex- 
‘planations of certain phenomena, as the Aurora 
Borealis, the Aurora Australis, the magnetic poles, 
the dip of the needle, etc., that are as plausible and 
satisfactory as those that are offered by sober sci- 
enece 

But if that is so, O scribe of the Daily News, why 
is our theory not just as “sober” as the science whose 
equal you admit that it is when it really comes to ex- 
plaining things? 

AN ADMISSION AND A DEMURRER 

The San Antonio Express, like the Scientific Amer- 
ican compares our book to the writings of Jules 
Verne for interest. ‘The reviewer in that paper does 
us the justice to say that a reading of our book will 
convince the reader that: 

“Schoolday teachings of the earth’s being a body 
with a crust for the surface and a molten mass for the 
interior, were wrong.” 


[411] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


And the writer goes on to summarize our theory, 
although he misunderstands one point. He seems to 
think that we have not explained how the polar aper- 
tures were formed and he speaks of the possibility 
that the Northern and Southern Oceans might dis- 
appear in whirlpools through the respective aper- 
tures. If he understood the enormous size of these 
apertures and the fact that the curvature of their lips 
was so gradual that one sails over it without noticing 
anything out of the ordinary, he would never think of 
the oceans’ disappearing. 


THESE COMPARISONS WITH JULES VERNE 

But since these and other critics and writers of let- 
ters are so apt to compare us with Jules Verne let us 
ask what such a comparison means. Jules Verne was 
the greatest scientific romance writer who has ever 
Jived. He predicted the aeroplane; he wrote about 
things which at the time were believed impossible 
but which have since come to pass. He described sub- 
marines which were capable of crossing the Atlantic 
at a time when there were no practicable submarines 
working at all. And since then they have crossed 
the Atlantic. Now how did he do that? In the first © 
place he had a wonderfully fertile and strong imag- 
ination. ‘Through its fertility he planned out won- 
drous conceptions, and through its strength he super- 
imposed logical progression upon those conceptions, 
so that when once you took the first step with him, 
everything else followed in logical order, and the 


[412] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


reader was kept interested by the logic. As long as 
he was immersed in the tale it sounded probable and 
he did not have any feeling of disbelief. A weaker 
man might have dreamed some of the dreams of Jules 
Verne but he would not have been able to sustain the 
logic of the unfolding. 

Now then, let the reader ask himself: “Why our 
book caused nearly everyone who has expressed an 
opinion on it to compare it to the works of Jules 
Verner’ 

There are only two answers. Either the author 
of this book is a great imaginative writer like Jules 
Verne or, if he is not, the power of his book must 
lie in the fact that he is telling the truth. 

Now we make no claim to be of great imaginative 
and literary power. If we were we would doubtless 
be writing all sorts of romances just as Jules Verne 
did. Why then does our book cause people to com- 
pare us to Verne? It is simply. because truth is al- 
ways stranger than fiction, when you really study it. 
And we have told the truth in this book, the truth 
revealed by actual observation. Either the facts sup- 
plied the interest in our book or else an imagination 
like unto Jules Verne’s did it. We deny having any 
such imagination. Let the reader think over all he 
has read. Was it not all composed of facts? Did 
we not just link up one fact with another? Did we 
supply any “imagination” or invention? Did we say 
anything that was not backed up with evidence? 


[ 413] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


And yet the total result is a book that reminds peo- 
ple of the work of Jules Verne because it is so inter- 
esting. Could anyone who was not a trained writer 
of romance compete with Jules Verne in his own 
field? Of course not. The fact that our book can 
compete with Verne is simply because it called on 
facts.to make its interest. It is the truth that we 
found by thinking and comparing the facts which ex- 
plorers discovered that makes our book interesting. 
We do not wish to be given credit for any other fac- 
ulty except the plain, old-fashioned faculty of logic. 
We are willing to leave imagination and invention to 
the novelists and romance writers. All we ask the 
reader to decide 1s “Are we logical?” Do we present 
facts to support our conclusions? If we do, if the 
conclusions do not outrun the facts, if we have said 
anything that does not have a solid fact behind it, 
then our theory should be put to the test of actual 
exploration. 

But one thing is certain. If the actual facts in the 
case did not all point to the one thing, we could cer- 
tainly not have made up a lot of reasons for our say- 
ing what we do. And as we did not make up the rea- 
sons but found them, all we ask for is credit for logic 
and intelligence, not for imagination. We are not 
competing with Jules Verne but with the scientists. 

And the reader who wishes to see how the scientists 
compete with us need only read the next chapter. 


[ 414 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 
A RELIGIOUS LEADER’S ENDORSEMENT 


We would like to call special attention to the open- 
minded manner in which one American thinker has 
received our theory. As he is the leader of a religious 
denomination, and as such men are usually supposed 
to be more interested in the progress of their own 
work—and quite naturally—than in the advance of 
other people’s ideas, it is with peculiar gratification 
that we record the open-mindedness and fairness with 
which Mr. Thomas Shelton of Denver, Colorado, 
has endorsed our effort to bring about a more reason- 
able view of the earth’s formation. Mr. Shelton is 
the editor of Christian, a monthly magazine which 
is in the order of an advanced branch of religion, and 
he devoted two long leading articles to our theory 
when it was first brought to his attention. 

In the first of them he says in part: 

“Flere comes another scientist saying that the earth 
is hollow.” | 

He says “another” because, as he explains later, a 
Dr. Teed once taught that the earth was a hollow 
sphere and that we live in its interior. But Teed’s 
theory, of course, is nothing like ours, and does not 
have the same sort of a basis. It is more a religious 
cult than a scientific theory, and we hope that we 
shall never be confused with Teed. 


Mr. Shelton goes on: 
“Tt sounds sensible to me. This scientist, Marshall 
B. Gardner, Aurora, Illinois, making the earth an 


[ 415 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


almost living creature, breathing the breath of life in 
its interior, like all other living beings, and a sun at 
its heart always and forever shining with vibrations 
like radium. 

“Why haven’t we found the North and South Poles 
while searching for the poles? Because they are pro- 
tected by ice caps which explorers have never been 
able to cross. If Peary had gone a little farther he 
would have been going South and would have gone 
through the earth and come out at the South pole or 
hole. If Scott could have gone on he would have 
come out at the North pole or hole. 

“These holes or openings are fourteen hundred 
miles across; so these explorers could have gradually 
entered the openings and have gone through the earth 
~ without ever knowing that they had left the outside 
of the earth. ‘The central sun of the earth is so sit- 
uated that when approached it would have looked 
like a rising sun; and when left behind, like a setting 
sun; and yet it never rises or sets, but remains forever 
fixed in the center of the earth, surrounded by a cor- 
ona of ample depth. 

“Of course there is no night in the center of the 
earth and the temperature is kept in an equable con- 
dition. The great ice-caps at the North and South. 
openings keep the air purified as it flows through the 
interior of the earth. The central sun is light and 
life, and the anchor of the planet. Keeping it for- 
ever in its orbit as it sails around the great central 


[ 416 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


sun on the outside. Nature is uniform in all of her 
laws, creates everything for the use and joy of living. 
The universe is alive and a light as a unit of units. . . 

“The Bible and the ancients made the underworld 
hell. Maybe they had the whole thing reversed. . .” 

Mr. Shelton then goes on to develop the suggestion 
that there may be a race of superior people in the un- 
derworld, and he also goes so far as to say that the 
people on the outside of the earth have some charac- 
teristics of a race of outcasts. But we do not wish to 
appear as claiming to know more than we do know, 
and we hope no reader who may have first heard 
about us through Mr. Shelton’s kindly notice will fail 
to discriminate between what we really do claim and 
any further suggestions which Mr. Shelton may make 
on his own responsibility. 

Of course there is some evidence—see our chapter 
on finding men in the Antarctic and also our chapter 
on the Eskimo traditions of ancestors in the far 
away north—that there are men in the interior. And 
it may be that owing to the equable and warm climate 
and the abundance of food, that they are a superior 
race. But on the other hand they may simply be a 
different race with altogether different ways and liv- 
ing and thinking and so not to be compared to us. 
So we must leave the question open, especially as it 
will not have to be left open for long. Exploration 
will soon settle the matter one way or another. 

Mr. Shelton then goes on to say that the author is 


[417 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


one of the three men whose works have helped him 
most in his own thought during the year in which he 
writes, and he ends his article with these pregnant 
words: 

“Tf you laugh at Gardner, don’t laugh too loud, for 
since writing the above, Russian ships report the dis- 
covery of a new continent, and, beloved, there are 
other continents undiscovered. Some of these may 
be inside the earth. Sit tight, but don’t be too cock- 
sure that you are right.” 

In a later issue Mr. Shelton tells of the great in- 
terest his first article aroused—of people writing in 
to him about it—and says again that the author of 
this book has given ‘“‘a new thought, and it is good 
to think new thoughts about new things.” 

He adds that we have written scientifically: 

“Gardner declares that all worlds are the same hol- 
low spheres with a sun on the inside of each world. 
He speaks in scientific terms and gives his arguments 
as a scientist, and not as a mere speculation.” 

On another page of this same number of Chris- 
tian a correspondent writes to the editor saying that 
the clipping from which Mr. Shelton first heard of 
our theory was sent by him, being clipped from the 
San Francisco Chronicle, and he adds that he agrees 
with the theory. 

Some weeks after that correspondence in the col- 
umns of Mr. Shelton’s paper, we received a letter 
from an old lady, for many years known throughout 


418 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the northwest as a student and advance thinker, tell- 
ing us that she had read of our theory as outlined by 
Dr. Shelton and that she would be glad to examine 
our views. We sent her a copy of the first outline 
which we had prepared of our work, and asked her to 
criticise it frankly. | 

In her reply, this lady, Mrs. Sarah Gifford of 
Ferry County, Washington, says that it is quite evi- 
dent that our theory is not merely a variation of some 
other idea such as the Koreshan cosmogony by Dr. 
Teed, and continues: “The Gardner theory is not 
something to be laughed at—it is a theory presented 
on scientific principles.” 

And she ends her letter by stating her belief that 
the theory may very shortly be “proven to the world 
Sea Pach. 

Will other readers of our theory do as so many of 
these friends have done—send accounts of it to edi- 
tors of the papers which they read, and which they 
know are likely to give us a fair hearing? In that 
way the news of our theory will be disseminated much 
more quickly than if the reader simply says to him- 
self that he agrees with us and then settles back to 
watch our progress in converting the rest of the 
world. If every reader did that our progress would 
be slow indeed. But let every reader remember that 
this book propounds a practical question as well as a 
theoretical one. If we had written a book which 
applied only to the planet Mars, it would be all right 


[419 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


to read it and simply add the new knowledge to one’s 
memory and then let the matter drop. Only the pro- 
fessional astronomers would really be enough inter- 
ested in the matter to discuss it at length and too in- 
corporate it in their teaching. But the reader should 
remember that this book concerns his own life be- 
cause it tells of a land, a whole new world, which his 
own country may explore, and which may render 
vast supplies of all natural products to the people 
who explore it. It is for this reason that we ask the 
active support of every reader, that no time may be 
lost in disseminating our information and discussing 
it. It will be the big subject of discussion when 
plans really get started for exploring parties, and 
every reader who wishes to be abreast of the times, 
who likes to be “in on” whatever is uppermost in con- 
temporary interest, will do what this reader of Mr. 
Shelton’s magazine did—write to his favorite paper 
about our theory. And will not every reader not only 
do that but think about it and communicate to us any 
ideas which he may have on the subject? If there is 
some fact that is not made clear, or if you see a fur- 
ther argument either for or against our theory, let us 
know. We already have letters from the foremost 
scientists of Europe and some in America, and we 
have letters from people who are not scientists but 
who know how to bring their common sense to bear 
ona problem. Let us add you to the list. We have 
letters and cards from every quarter of the globe, 


[ 420 ] 


“A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


hundreds of them, in fact, coming even from far-off 
China and Japan. 
WHAT THE WORLD’S GREATEST 
NEWSPAPER SAYS 

One of the most sympathetic accounts of our theory 
when it was first propounded appeared in the Chi- 
cago Sunday Tribune of August 3, 1913. That paper 
devoted a whole page with illustrations to our first 
announcement of the idea that the earth is not what 
scientists have always taught, and we reproduce here- 
_ with a few of their remarks on the subject: 

“Can it be possible that down in the middle of this 
earth there is another earth? That a few hundred 
miles or so away, separated from us by ground and 
rock and vapor and such things, there is a great coun- 
try inhabited by a great race? . 

“Scientists innumerable have discovered life, veg- 
etable and animal upon other planets. Long ago the 
seers and wise men peopled the heavens. Explora- 
tion has stretched out toward the truth in all direc- 
tions save this one. It remains for an I[llinoisan to 
lead us—in theory—in that direction, down, down 
into the earth’s uttermost recesses and the wonders 
thereof. 

“Marshall B. Gardner of Aurora, the scientist in 
question, does not say in so many words that people 
live in the middle of the world. But he makes a cir- 
cumstantial case to that effect. It is his belief that 
there is a big sun in the earth’s interior, that there 


eae 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


are immense holes where the poles are supposed to 
be, and that the phenomena of the aurora borealis: 
and the aurora australis are the result of the interior 
sun shining out through the polar holes. 


SAYS THE EARTH IS HOLLOW 

“The Aurora man who has spent twenty years in 
studying out his theory, asserts that the earth’s inter- - 
ior, instead of being’a molten mass of lava, as has 
been claimed by scientists for ages, is hollow and con- 
tains a central nucleus or material sun of about 600 
miles in diameter. He says this sun is surrounded by 
a corona of ample depth which is enclosed within 
an envelope of atmosphere; that this atmosphere is 
surrounded by a vacuum, and that between this vac- 
uum and the interior surface of the earth’s crust 
there is another envelope of atmosphere the thickness 
or depth of which is approximately 200 miles, thus 
making the diameter of the earth between its two in- 
terior surfaces a distance of 6,400 miles. 

‘By adding to this amount 1,600 miles, or twice the 
thickness of the earth’s crust, the diameter of the 
earth as measured from its exterior surfaces would 
be 8,000 miles. 

“The author of this remarkable theory declares 
that instead of a north and south pole there is at each 
of these imaginary points an entrance to the earth’s in- 
terior 1,400 miles in diameter, or a space sufficiently 
large when combined to provide an area ample for 
keeping the interior temperature of the earth in an 


[ 422 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


equable condition. He says that all other planetary 
bodies are substantially of the same general form as 
is the earth.” 


[ 423 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


CHAPTER“ XIE 


OUR CONTROVERSY WITH DOMINIAN 


One of the first newspapers to recognize the impor- 
tance of our contribution to the world’s knowledge 
was the Pittsburgh Leader. In their issue of Decem- 
ber 28, 1913, they devoted a whole page to an expo- 
sition of our theory, with illustrations of the earth 
and a portrait of the writer of this book. They saw 
that if our idea was to be accepted it must stand the 
acid test of discussion, and so they picked out the 
most expert man they could find among scientists to 
examine the theory critically and to demolish it if 
he could. The scientist to whom this task was given 
was Dr. Leon Dominian, of the staff of the Ameri- 
can Geographical Society. So in his article on our 
_ theory we have what is in effect the official answer 
of the scientists of the country, and especially of those 
most interested, the geographers, to our ideas. If 
there are any scientific arguments that go counter to 
our theory Dr. Dominian knows them. If he fails to 
demolish our theory it may be taken as proved, for 
there are no secrets in science, what one man discov- 
ers is communicated to all other scientists through 
their periodicals and societies, and when it comes to 
a matter of generally accepted principles one scien- 
tist can talk for the whole body just as well as an- 


[ 424] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR © 


other can. Science rests upon a body of accepted 
doctrine, and when Leon Dominian speaks against 
our theory he is not uttering private objections to it, 
but is voicing the objections which all scientists 
would hold. And also when we answer Dr. Domin- 
ian we answer not an individual but the concerted 
voice of orthodox science. We will now proceéd to 
give in full Dr. Dominian’s attempt to demolish our 
theory, and after that we will give, word for word, 
our reply—a reply which crushed Dr. Dominian, 
fon-nemever canie back’-at, all. Llere, then; are his 
objections to our arguments. He begins by discuss- 
ing the mammoth: | 


DR. DOMINIAN’S MAIN OBJECTIONS 


“The matter of the presence of remains and of 
whole mastodons in the Arctic ice has been known 
to the world for more than a hundred years. It is 
acknowledged by all authorities in the subject that 
the region of the poles was at one time in the earth’s 
history a tropical zone. It is believed that some dis- 
turbance caused the axis of the earth toward the equa- 
torial circle of the universe to change suddenly and 
to turn the tropical regions of the poles into their 
present conditions of a world of snow and ice. The — 
mastodon were caught and preserved by the change, 
death coming instantly to those that have been found 
‘as whole bodies. Anyone who is not familiar with 
this explanation has not had much training in glacial 
theories. 

[ 425 ] 


A JOURNEY YO*THE EARTH S INTERION 
CAUSE FOR RED SNOW 


“Ms for the ‘red snow’ it is believed to be carried to 
those northern cliffs of ice from a great distance just 
as the yellow sands of the interior of the Desert of 
Sahara are swept through the air to Egypt where it 
covers monuments and buildings at times with a coat 
of yellow. All Southern Europe feels something of 
this same thing when the African simoon becomes the 
French mistral with its sand-laden air that comes 
from the Sahara across the Mediterranean to plague 
the people of the Midi. 

“There is no special significance in finding the 
trunk of a tree from the Temperate zone in the Arc- 
tic Sea. The vagaries of floating objects are too com- 
mon for that find to excite anyone’s suspicions or 
cause such an incident to create a theory of 2 new 
world. As for the south-going current observed by 
Nansen, that may be due to the one questionable point 
in our knowledge of the polar regions — that is, 
whether there really exists a continental mass south 
and west of Peary’s route to the Pole. 


A CONTINENTAL MASS 


‘From observation of the tidal currents the scien- 
tists of the United States government believe that such 
a continental mass exists. If it exists its outposts may 
be Peary’s Crocker Land of 1896, Keenan Land, the 
questionable Sanikov Land and the latest land sight- 
ed by the Russians as reported a few weeks ago. It 


[ 426 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


is to discover the existence of such a continental mass 
that Stefansson has gone into the polar seas under the 
patronage of the Canadian Government. 


“Roughly speaking, this continental mass is sup- 
posed to be north of Siberia and Alaska, and it is the 
only portion of the Polar regions that has not been 
explored. If Stefansson finds it some of the few ‘pop- 
ular’ mysteries of the Polar regions may be explained 
away, but none of them is likely to be found to come 
out of the center of the earth. The discoveries of 
Peary, Amundsen, and Scott at the two poles do not 
seem to have been taken into account by Mr. Gard- 
ner” 

WEZARE NOT THUS. DISPOSED OF 

The Piitsburgh Leader thought that was a very 
conclusive answer to our argument, and it added on 
its own account a paragraph to the effect that all our 
arguments had been met by the studies which scien- 
tists had been carrying on “for years and years’ —as 
if we did not know all about those very studies and 
quote them in our book. Also they played. up in 
larger type a statement by Dr. Dominian to this ef- 
TOCL: 

“Geographers know two things about the poles to- 
day. 

“The North Pole is within an area of open sea. 
Peary proved this. 

“The South Pole is on a continental mass of rock 
and ice. Amundsen and Scott proved this. 


[ 427 ] 


.A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


“Scientists accept these discoveries as the final 
word-in Polar exploration, so far as the general con- 
ditions existing at the poles are concerned.” 


As the official answer of science to our claims, the 
above remarks strike us as being very weak indeed. So 
let us now reprint the answer which we made at the 
time to Dr. Dominian’s assertions—for they are asser- 
tions of belief rather than arguments. Our answer 
was printed in a prominent manner in the Pittsburgh 
Leader for February 8, 1914, as follows: 


CONSTITUTION OF DH RAR THE 

‘““A Reply to Leon Deminian by Marshall B. Gard- 
ner, author of ‘A Journey to the Earth’s Interior, or 
Have the Poles Really been Discovered.’ 

“When I sent out my little book I expected some 
very drastic criticism at the hands of scientists. I 
knew that the great majority of scientific men would 
not believe as I have come to believe in this matter. 
I also thought that they would not only express that 
disbelief, but back it up with arguments, and modify 
some of the details in my theory, or at least. find more 
suitable ways of expressing its essential facts. 

“May I say at the outset of my answer to the mem- 
ber of the American Geographical Society’s staff who 
has written about my book in the Leader that if his 
position on the staff of that society means that he 
speaks with the authority cf orthodox science and as 
a representative of that science, then I am astonished 


[ 428 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


at the feeble resistance to the new idea which ortho- 
dox science is putting up. That feebleness I shall 
now proceed to point out by taking up Mr. Domin- 
ian’s points in order and answering them. I shall 
then mention a thing or two that he has apparently 
been quite unable to answer and has left unanswered, 
although his doing so robs his reply of all claim to be 
a really comprehensive answer to my arguments. 


THE MAMMOTH 


“First: Mr. Dominian first attacks my evidence 
based on the finding of the mastodon in a state of per- 
fect preservation. He says these animals are found 
imbedded in polar ice because once upon a time the 
polar lands, where their bodies are now found, were 
tropical. In those tropical lands they lived and had 
their being, then all of a sudden some disturbance 
caused the axis of the earth toward the equatorial 
circle of the universe to change suddenly and turn 
the tropical regions of the poles into their present 
conditions of a world of snow and ice, and that the 
mastodons were caught and preserved by this change, 
death coming instantly to those that have been found 
as whole bodies. 

‘Well, I do not pretend to understand all of the 
above, especially that phrase, ‘the equatorial circle of 
the universe,’ my common sense judgment tells me 
that it is highly improbable. In the first place we 
note that Mr. Dominian only believes this—he does 


[ 429 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


not prove it. Now the only theory of a sudden change 
in the earth’s axis for which scientists have ever 
claimed to have a shadow of proof is that change 
which they assert took place when the moon was sep- 
arated from the surface of the earth. I doubt very 
much if that ever took place because the depths of 
the oceans on earth are hardly enough to account for 
the tearing away from the earth’s surface of such a 
body as the moon. But even if that sudden change 
did take place it occurred many million years before 
there were any mammoths. ‘Oh, well,’ Mr. Domin- 
ian may reply, ‘There was another sudden change 
after life had reached the point where the mammoths 
did inhabit the northern region.’ Well, suppose 
there was. Why, then, are the mammoths alone pre- 
served, and not the tropical vegetation and surround- 
ings in which they were when the sudden change 
came? If the mammoth which I described in my 
book, which was caught while it was eating, was pre- 
served so well that the very food between its teeth was 
identifiable, then why was not the food also preserved 
which had not yet been lifted from the ground—why 
was none of the surrounding foliage preserved? It 
is quite obvious that Mr. Dominian’s belief of a sud- 
den change fails altogether to meet my point. 


THE RED SNOW 
“Second: My critic’s next point is that the red 
snow did not come from the interior of the earth, but 
was pollen. He admits that it was blown from other 


[ 430 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


places, just as the sand of the Sahara is blown across 
the Mediterranean to Southern Europe. 

‘Now this is an interesting comparison, but it is 
not a complete parallel. In the first place Mr. Do- 
minian knows where the sand comes from, but he 
does not pretend to say where the red pollen comes 
from. And what is more, if he did try to say where 
it came from he would solve the problem of its or- 
igin—and that has not yet been accomplished. But 
suppose we agree with him that it comes from a great 
distance, then why should it have such a strange affin- 
ity for the polar regions? Why should it not be blown 
to Southern Europe or Pittsburgh? Strange—that 
magnetic attraction of the polar regions from a mys- 
terious and great distance. 


ASTRADDLE A FLOATING LOG 

“Three: With my critic’s next objection I have less 
fault to find. In fact it is the most logical in his whole 
paper. He says that there is no special significance 
in finding the trunk of a tree from the temperate zone 
floating in the Arctic Sea, the vagaries of floating 
objects being too common for that find to create a 
theory of a new world. 

“Now isn’t that true? Don’t we just have to bow 
down before Mr. Dominian and assure him that he 
has indeed proved for all time that anyone who 
founds a theory of the world on a floating log is in- 
deed a fool? Logic so compels us, and we do. Even 
Newton would hasten to deny that he founded the 


[ 431 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


are immense holes where the poles are supposed to 
be, and that the phenomena of the aurora borealis: 
and the aurora australis are the result of the interior 
sun shining out through the polar holes. 


SAYS THE EARTH IS HOLLOW 

“The Aurora man who has spent twenty years in 
studying out his theory, asserts that the earth’s inter- 
ior, instead of being-a molten mass of lava, as has 
been claimed by scientists for ages, is hollow and con- 
tains a central nucleus or material sun of about 600 
miles in diameter. He says this sun is surrounded by 
a corona of ample depth which is enclosed within 
an envelope of atmosphere; that this atmosphere is 
surrounded by a vacuum, and that between this vac- 
uum and the interior surface of the earth’s crust 
there is another envelope of atmosphere the thickness 
or depth of which is approximately 200 miles, thus 
making the diameter of the earth between its two in- 
terior surfaces a distance of 6,400 miles. 

“By adding to this amount 1,600 miles, or twice the 
thickness of the earth’s crust, the diameter of the 
earth as measured from its exterior surfaces would 
be 8,000 miles. 

“The author of this remarkable theory declares 
that instead of a north and south pole there is at each 
of these imaginary points an entrance to the earth’s in- 
terior 1,400 miles in diameter, or a space sufficiently 
large when combined to provide an area ample for 
keeping the interior temperature of the earth in an 


[ 422 ] 


AS JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


equable condition. He says that all other planetary 
bodies are substantially of the same general form as 
is the earth.” 


[ 423 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAPTER Ty, 


OUR COUNTRY. AND OUR THEORY 


We have opened the road to a new world in our 
theory and it must be a world of inconceivable rich- 
ness. When we think of the untapped richness of 
mineral resources that must exist in such a region, of 
the untouched veins of gold that may run down from 
the scanty traces which we painfully mine on our out- 
er surface—which we dig out so slowly that, work 
away for years as we do, the visible supply of gold 
never gets much beyond the consumption so that for 
thousands and thousands of years it has been a prec- 
ious metal and a standard for money values—when 
we consider that those scanty veins may be but the 
outermost traces of what in the interior are immense 
deposits; when we think of the other precious metals 
whose fields are so strictly limited on the outer sur- 
face; when we think of the decreasing deposits of dia- 
monds and other precious stones which may be sup- 
plemented by those of the interior the imagination is 
staggered. And those are only the most obvious 
sources of wealth. It is little recognized, but true, 
that iron deposits and rich sources of fuel and food 
are just as much treasure trove as gold and precious 
stones. We do not know what new food products be- 
side the mammal and many species of fish we may 


[ 434 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


find in the interior but there must be many. As a 
land it must more than teem with milk and honey. 

It must be alive at every point with animal and veg- 
—etable life. Its seas must also teem with creatures 
that are not known to us at the present day on the 
outer surface although we do see the fossil remains. 
These creatures are undoubtedly edible as they are 
so closely related to forms of present day life that are 
edible. ‘The vegetation of the interior of the earth is 
practically the same in all probability as the outer- 
earth vegetation used to be in the Carboniferous per- 
‘10d—the vegetation which, fossilized, gives us our 
coal measures today. Now this vegetation has been 
growing in the interior for hundreds of thousands of 
years, perhaps, certainly for tens of thousands, of 
years, and its successive growths and decays have un- 
doubtedly formed vast peat bogs similar to those in 
Ireland and other countries that yield much fuel to- 
day. These peat bogs are really the first stage in the 
formation of coal beds, and if we could get to those 
on the interior today we should have all the coal or 
near coal that we wanted, enough to supply the wants 
of the world for years to come—for years after our 
present coal mines were exhausted. The richness of 
that one item in the wealth of the interior of the 
world must be incalculable. 


UP TO THE UNITED STATES 
For economic reasons, then, as well as for the ad- 
vancement of science and the glory of discovery, it 


[ 435 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


is of the utmost importance that the interior of the 
earth should be explored. 

And let the reader note well that the interior will, 
by international law, belong to the country which first 
penetrates it and plants its flag there. 

The real discovery of the interior has been made 
by a citizen of the United States—has been made in 
this book. But that fact will cut very littie figure 
if another country gets its flag in first. And the sci- 
entists of all the civilized countries in the globe have 
read our theory. To be sure they read it in war-time. 
Europe and Japan were both busy. No time or men 
could be spared to take advantage of this opportunity. 
But the war is, at length, over. Things are becoming 
normal again. European countries are fully awake, 
more so than ever before, to the need for territory— 
they are nearly enough bankrupt so that any chance 
to recuperate their fortunes is not to be-turned down 
without hesitation. And their hesitation will be brief 
when they realize that all they have to do is to equip 
an expedition consisting of two or even one ship and 
a couple of zroplanes, and fit them out for much less 
than a year’s voyage. The ship will carry the sup- 
plies and the zroplanes as far north as practicable. 
Then the aviators will put forth, flying so quickly 
over the cold barrier that they will hardly suffer from 
it at all. And once they reach the interior the thing 
is done. The flag is planted. The land is claimed, 
and America’s chance at it is gone forever. And who 


[ 436 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


can doubt that if America gets this land, America 
with her high civilization, her free institutions, her 
humanity—for there may be native population to 
deal with—her generosity—who can doubt but that 
if my country is first in this new land the outlook for 
the greatest benefits from it is most bright? Do we 
want one of the autocratic countries of Europe to 
perpetuate in this new world all the old evils of 
colonial oppression and exploitation? 

No, let the world that an American has discovered 
be opened to the rest of the world by American enter- 
prise. In that way its benefits will be to all the world 
and not to a few, not to a privileged nation or class. 


WILL AMERICA GRASP HER OPPORTUNITY? 

But will America grasp her opportunity? In that 
question, reader, lies something for you to ponder. 
While we live in a great and enterprising country, a 
free and enlightened country, our greatness and en- 
lightenment and initiative reside more in ourselves 
as individuals than in our government. ‘The nations 
of Europe are used to have their governments do this 
and that for them. We have relied more on our own 
efforts, and consequently our government does not ° 
have the quality of initiative that other governments 
have. We have spoken of what some European or 
even Asiatic governments may do. Is our own ad- 
ministration likely to do it first? ‘The answer is not 
until public opinion makes it take action. Unless 
some private citizens club together to form an expe- 


[ 437 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


dition—as in the past they have supported several 
Arctic exploring expeditions—unless they do this, the 
government is hardly likely to undertake it of its own 
initiative. The only way in which the government 
could be made to do it would be the agitation of the 
subject in congress, and if that were undertaken by 
enlightened senators or representatives the govern- 
ment could then, through the navy or some other de- 
partment, appropriate money and select men to carry 
on the expedition. 

But there is one danger to guard against here. We 
have a habit in our legislatures of discussing things 
at wearisome length before we get any action on them. 
And the very conservative among our legislators 
would likely enough disapprove of any such pro- 
gramme as we have outlined. There is always a lot 
of unintelligent opposition to scientific research 
among our senators and representatives. Now the 
discussion of this matter in congress would be report- 
ed all over the world, and the moment the European 
nations saw that we intended to explore the interior 
of the earth they would get in ahead of us. 

WE MUST NOT DELAY 

So it is obvious that however we go about this mat- 
ter of exploration we must not delay. Opportunity 
knocks once in many cases, and never knocks again if 
she is not admitted. We already know enough of 
the Arctic regions so that the expedition could start 
without much preliminary investigation. The best 


[ 438 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


approaches are known. What we should need in sup- 
plies is known. We know roughly what to expect 
when we reach the interior. We know that it is pos- 
sible to cover even such a distance as the Atlantic 
flight in a plane. So we know how powerful a plane 
would be needed and how much fuel for this relative- 
ly short voyage. A first voyage, of course, would be 
only exploratory and designed to get information 
upon which a more detailed and heavy expedition 
and survey could be made. The chief thing would 
be to verify those discoveries and get the flag planted. 
After that one of the largest exploring expeditions 
in the history of the world would be called for. And 
it would be immediately followed by the establish- 
ment of regular freight routes and the organization 
of means of exploiting the resources of the new world. 

But may the author beg his readers to regard this 
from a patriotic standpoint and to do their level best 
to see that their country is not left behind in the mat- 
ter? We would like to have letters from all who 
sympathize with our endeavors to have this new 
world explored. 

It may be objected that the present is no time to 
burden our already over-burdened government with 
fresh enterprises and our tax payers with new appro- 
priations. But that is a very superficial objection. 
If the government authorized an expedition it could 
be undertaken by the regular naval or coast survey 
forces already enrolled in government service and on 


[ 439 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


the government pay roll. The ships and aeroplanes 
required are also already paid for. The only extra ex- 
pense would be for supplies. And the actual results 
of a successful expedition would far outweigh even 
the largest possible expenditures. A new territory 
almost as vast as that which the world occupies now 
would be opened to mankind. How much of it 
America could claim is problematical but she could 
certainly claim a tremendous area. The minute we 
began to take the riches of this area from the interior 
to our Own country our national wealth would in- 
crease tremendously. In fact the whole burden of 
poverty would be lifted. There would be new ca- 
reers for all who wished them. A new world would 
mean the disappearance of most of the woes of the 
present half-world on which we dwell, ignorantly 
taking it to be the whole world. 


A BENEFIT TO MANKIND 

Such is the opportunity that confronts us as a na- 
tion. Every patriot who is also intelligent must see 
that to help realize this opportunity is in itself to be 
a patriot just as much as if he were helping on the 
field of battle. In fact everyone who helps in this 
enterprise will be helping on a field of battle—the 
battle for subsistence, for plenty, for progress, for 
supremacy, for all that makes life worth living. For 
this discovery would add the most glorious page yet 
written to the annals of the United States. It would 
place us first among the nations in intellectual glory; 


[ 440 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


it would even enhance the supremacy which we al- 
ready enjoy in the material sphere. We talk of help- 
ing to feed Europe. Once we have made this dis- 
covery in actual physical fact—as it is already made 
in reason and thought—feeding Europe would be a 
mere bagatelle. We could feed the world and have 
an unlimited plenty left over. We not only could 
feed the world but we would transform the world. 
A new and glorious chapter in the history of the hu- 
man race would have opened. 


[ 441 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


CHAPTER. XXV: 


IN CONCLUSION 

We have now stated a theory of the constitution of 
the earth and of all the other planets, and this theory 
seems to account for every fact that scientists have 
recorded as a result of their observations. This the- 
ory either represents the truth of the matter or it does 
not. But if it does not represent the truth what is 
the truth? What the orthodox scientists have told 
us? Any time that the orthodox scientists will ex- 
plain to us the following phenomena as fully as our 
theory explains them, we will be willing to abandon 
our theory. But until they can explain them in a 
consistant way—that is to say not merely explain 
one thing by an argument that is overthrown by some 
other thing, for instance not explain the polar cap of 
Mars by some explanation which has to be aband- 
oned when they come to that of Venus—until they 
can do that we are fully justified in claiming that — 
our theory is the only one that explains all the ob- 
served facts of the planetary universe. 


QUESTIONS THE SCIENTISTS MUST ANSWER 

And so any scientist who wishes to dispute our the- 
ory ought to be able to solve the following mysteries 
—for mysteries these things are and always have been 
to orthodox science. 


[ 442 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


WHY POLAR CAPS ON VENUS? 


First: Why does the hot planet Venus have polar 
caps like those of Mars if the Martian caps are real- 
ly composed either of ice, snow or frozen carbon-di- 
oxide? Also, why do the polar caps of Venus and 
Mercury not wax and wane as those of Mars are said 
to dor And why are the polar caps of Mars seen to 
throw a mass of light many miles above the surface 
of the planet when they are seen in a side view if 
they are only of ice? How could they be so lumin- 
ous in the first place—more luminous than snow is 
when seen under similar circumstances? And how 
could Lowell see direct gleams of light from the caps 
if there were not beams from a direct light source? 

Furthermore, how do scientists account for the 
fact, noted also by Professor Lowell, whose observa- 
tions on Mars all seem to support our theory, that 
when the planet is viewed through the telescope at 
night that its light is yellow and not white, as the 
light from snow caps would be? The central sun is 
an incandescent mass, and just as the glowing of an 
incandescent electric light looks yellow when seen 
from a distance through darkness, so the direct light 
of the Martian sun would appear yellow—but if this 
lignt were reflected from a solid white surface it 
would certainly appear white. But it does not, and 
so it is up to the scientists to tell us just why it does 
not. But so far as we know they have not succeeded 
in doing this. 

[ 443 ] 


A JOURNEY TO CHE EARTH’S INTERIOR 
PLANETARY NEBULAE ARE HOLLOW 


And why have scientists never really considered 
the problem of the shape of the planetary nebula? 
They know from actual observation and photographs 
that the planetary nebula takes the form of a hollow 
shell open at the poles and having a bright central 
nucleus or central sun at its center. Why have they 
never thought what that must imply? It is evidently 
one stage in the evolution of the nebula. Why have 
scientists never asked themselves what that confor- 
mation must logically lead to? Why do they ignore it 
altogether? Is it not because they cannot explain it 
without too great a disturbance of their own theories? 
But our theory shows how that stage in the evolution 
of a nebula is reached and how it is passed, we show 
what precedes it in the history of the nebula and 
what follows it. We show a continuous evolution 
passing through that stage to further stages in which 
those polar openings are fixed, the shell solidified, 
the nebula reduced to a planet. And it must be re- 
membered that while the original nebula was incom- 
parably greater than a planet in size, measuring even 
millions of miles across perhaps, at the same time 
that nebula is composed of gases so attenuated and so 
expanded by their immense heat that when they sol- 
idify they only make one planet. : 


HOW EXPLAIN THE AURORA? 
Why have scientists never compared the facts of 
the light cap of Mars with the light that plays over 


[ 444 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


our own polar regions? Do they forget that the au- 
roral display has been observed to take place without 
any reference to the changing of the magnetic nee- 
dle? And if the aurora is shown to be independent 
of magnetic conditions what else can it be due to than 
a source of light? Is not the reflection of the aurora 
light from the higher reaches of the ‘atmosphere conr- 
parable to the projection of the light of the Maritian 
caps into the higher reaches of the Martian atmo- 
sphere? And how do scientists explain the fact that 
the aurora is only distinctly seen in the very far north 
and only seen in a fragmentary way when we get fur- 
ther south? 

How do scientists explain the fact that when we 
go north it becomes colder up to a certain point and 
then begins to get warm? How do they explain the 
further fact that the source of this warmth is not any 
influence from the south but a series of currents of 
warm water and of warm winds from the north— 
supposed to be a land of solid ice? Where can these 
currents come from? How could they come from 
anything else but an open seaP And why should 
there be a warm open sea at the very place where 
scientists expect to find eternal ice? Where could 
this warm water possibly come fromr 


FROM WHERE DOES THE. RED 
POLLEN COME? 


Why also should explorers find the inhospitable 


y+4 


ice cliffs of the far north covered in large areas wit): 


[ 445 ] 


A JOURNEY TO: THE EARTHS INTERIOR 


the red pollen of an unknown plant? And why 
should they find the seeds of tropical plants floating 
in these waters—when they are not found in more 
southern waters? How should logs and branches 
of trees, sometimes with fresh buds on them be found 
in these waters, all being borne down by the warm 
currents from the northe 

Why should the northern parts of Greenland be 
the world’s greatest habitat of the mosquito, an insect 
which is only found in warm countries? How could 
it have got to Greenland if zt came from the 
southe Where do all the foxes and hares go which 
were seen traveling north in Greenland? Where did 
the bears go? Was it possible that such large crea- 
tures as bears could find sustenance on plains of eter- 
nal ice? 

HOW ABOUT THE MAMMOTH? 


Scientists admit that the mammoth lived on the 
outside surface of the earth somewhere around 100,- 
000 years ago. That being the case, why are mam- 
moth carcasses found in Siberia which are perfectly 
fresh? If they were killed by their climate changing 
from semi-tropical to frigid 100,000 years ago, would 
not their freezing be so gradual that they would de- 
compose before it took place? Is not the fact that 
fresh grass is found between their teeth proof posi- 
tive that they were frozen immediately? Does it not 
prove that they were alive and eating one minute, 
precipitated into an ice cleft the next minute and 


[ 446 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


frozen just as fast as the ice could do it? And if 
these tropical animals were alive and in the neigh- 
borhood of ice crevasses does it not mean that they 
were traveling and that they had a base from which 
to travel, or a habitat, which was not itself icy but 
tropical, seeing that this animal is a tropical and not 
an arctic animale Have scientists ever given any 
consideration of those facts, or have they been afraid 
of them? 

How do scientists explain the Eskimo traditions of 
other strange animals in the Arctic, for instance, the 
animal which the Eskimos call the arcla, and which 
they described to Captain Hall? And how do they 
explain the remains, in good condition, of such a sup- 
posedly prehistoric animal as the mylodon which 
was found in the Antarctic by Nordenskiold, and 
which is known to be a type of animal that lives in a 
warm country? 


WHENCE THE HUMAN REMAINS IN 
DHE ANTARCTIC? 


And how do scientists explain the actual finding 
of human remains in the Antarctic? So far as we 
know they have not even tried to explain it, but the 
remains were found and no doubt has ever been cast 
upon the integrity of those who found them. And 
as we have shown in our chapter on the Antarctic, 
much of the fauna and flora of the southern islands 
comes originally from the Antarctic, and only on our 
theory can an original starting place be assigned to 


TG 
[ 447 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


How do scientists explain the fact that practically 
every competent explorer from the earlier days down 
to Nansen has admitted that when he got to the far 
North his theories of what he should find failed to 
work and his methods of finding his positions also 
failed to work? How do scientists explain those 
passages from Nansen which we have quoted, show- 
ing that he was absolutely lost in the Arctic regions? 

How do scientists explain the migrations of those 
birds which appear in England and other northern 
countries one part of the year, in the tropics another 
part of the year, but disappear entirely in the win- 
ter? How do they explain the fact that neither Peary 
nor Cook was able to prove the claim of reaching 
the north pole? Even supposing both men to have 
acted in good faith is it not obvious that both were 
lost? How else explain the discrepancies in Peary’s 
own narrative which we have exposed in a previous 
chapter? 

THE PUZZLE OF THE MOON 


And here is another puzzle which the scientists 
might well be asked to solve before they disdain the 
contributions of one who is not a member of their 
guild or union. Some scientists, for example, Proc- 
tor, say that the moon was originally a free planets- 
mal body which has been captured by the earth. 
Other scientists—among them  Pickering—have 
claimed that the moon was thrown off from the 
earth’s surface in an early stage of the history of the 


[ 448 ] 


APJOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


planet. They point to the Pacific coast bed as the 
depression that was left. But as the mass of the moon 
is about one-eightieth of the mass of the earth and 
the total of all the ocean beds a mere infinitesimal 
fraction of the earth’s mass it hardly looks as if this 
theory were correct. At any rate the scientists have 
not yet succeeded in settling the matter to their own 
satisfaction. One more example, we should say, of 
the fallibility of science. 

In short, how do scientists explain the whole gen- 
eral situation put up to us by the discrepancies be- 
tween actual findings in the polar regions and their 
theories? ‘The answer is that they do not try to ex- 
plain these things because they are quite unexplain- 
able on their scientific basis. 

And so the scientists cannot tell just what to do 
with our theory. One policy is to ridicule us. For 
instance one professor of geology said that our book 
was “a great joke.” Perhaps it is, but the joke will be 
found to be on the scientists. 

This does not mean, however, that our theory is not 
scientific, and that we do not believe in the work of 
scientists. On the contrary it is on scientific observa- 
tion that our theory is built. The people whom we 
quote in substantiation of our theory are themselves 
scientists. Many scientists, as we have shown in an- 
other chapter, view our theory with sympathy. Our 
criticisms of the scientists, therefore, are confined to 
those among them who neither accept our theory on 


[ 449 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


the one hand nor give any real reason for not accept- 
ing it on the other hand. From these men who are 
no longer really scientists because they do not display 
that spirit of fair-minded openness to conviction that 
really makes the scientific spirit—from these men we 
appeal to those others who really deserve the name 
of scientists because they are still alert and open to 
conviction and able to change their minds whenever 
the evidence makes it necessary. 

And so our last word to the scientists is this: We 
are not prejudiced against science and have not tried 
to make good our theory by any other way except . 
that of collecting indubitable evidence—that is by 
the scientific method. Further, we are very anxious 
to have scientists of everv shade of opinion try to up- 
set our theory if they can or verify it if they can. But 
we do not want any scientists to make mere vague ob- 
jections, siinply saying, as some have done, “There 
are many reasons why this theory cannot be true.” 
Perhaps there are, but what are those reasons? That 
is the question we want them to answer. We have 
asked for specific objections to our theory, we have 
tried hard to get at these reasons, and every scrap of 
objection that the scientists of the world—not of Am- 
erica only—have been able so far to advance against 
our theory, every, scrap "or such objection is to .be 
found set down in this book—and answered. Let the 
reader turn again to the chapter in which we refer to 
these objections. Is it not surprising that they are so 


[ 450 ] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


few? Is it not amazing that the great intellects—at 
least we would suppose them to be such—which dom- 
inate Our universities and teach our youth, and plan 
our explorations and turn telescopes upon the stars, 
is it not amazing, we repeat, that these people have 
not been able to muster up any stronger reply to us 
that that? And we have given them every facility, 
we have written them, showed them our arguments, 
and have had some of their replies for years, before 
publishing this book. 

Well, they have had all that opportunity and this 
is the best that they have been able to do in reply. 

So now let us suggest that they try to help our the- 
ory, since they cannot demolish it. Let us ask them 
to turn their arguments and make observations in 
support of our theory. For we wish to have the co- 
operation of science in discovering and opening up 
this great new world, and we are sure that public 
opinion will get behind us and aid us in calling upon 
the scientists to take a stand definitely upon our chal- 
lenge—for it is a challengé that we throw down to 
the scientific world—a challenge to disprove our the- 
ory if it can, and failing that to admit frankly that 
this theory is a step in advance of the scientific con- 
ceptions of the present day. And such admission 
would not be a blow to the prestige of science. On 
the contrary it is the glory of true science ever to ad- 
vance, ever to welcome new truths, and we have con- 


[451] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


fidence that the publication of these arguments will 
cause some at least of the scientists of today to rally 
to our side. 


Wiere ier EION ON the Hellou 
ae \_\ LA 
E Aren ¥ NORGE ( \Y a ; 1 \ Ee ac\ X \ fac 7 y 
Serding an  sASE cc! 


ee oe i> 
Ct) Ce Ay a Pm Ny 
\ ae ey } n & HES 
\ > fe 


[ 452 ] 


8 


A JOURNEY ‘TO ‘(THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


BIBEIOGRAPHY. 


Only the principal works consulted and found to contain valid 
contributions to the solution of the problem of the earth’s interior. 
Bat, Sir Rogpert Stowe, LL. D., F. R. S., Lowndean Pro- 

fessor cf Astronomy in the University of Cambridge. 4 Popular 

Guide to the Heavens. New York. D. Van Nostrand Com- 

pany. 1904. 

BARRINGTON, THE Hon. D. anp Coronet Beauroy, F. R. S., 
The Possibility of Approaching the North Pole Asserted. New 
York. James Eastburn & Company. 1818. 

Bruce, WitiraM S., LL.D., F. R. S. E. Polar Exploration. New 
York. Henry Holt and Company. 1911. 

Bue, J. W. The World’s Wonders as Seen by the Great Trop- 
ical and Polar Explorers. St. Louis, Mo., and Philadelphia, 
Pa., Historical Publishing Company. 1884. 

CHAMBERLAIN, THOMAS CHROWDER, head of the department of 
geology, the University of Chicago. The Origin of the Earth. 
Chicago. University of Chicago Press. 1916. 

CHAMBERS, GEORGE F., F. R. A. S. Stories of the Universe: the 
Stars. New York, Review of Reviews Company. 1909. 

Coox, Dr. FReperick A., My Attainment of the Pole. New 

~ York and London, Mitchell Kennerley. 1913. 

Davenport, Henry, D.D., Earth, Sea and Sky or the Marvels 
of the Universe. 

Denovan, WiLurAM, Editor, (author of “The Laws of Nature’) 
Story of the World’s Wonders. 1897. 

Dick, Herman, A. M., The Marvellous Wonders of the Polar 
World. Richmond, Va., B. F. Johnson & Co. 

Epwarops, Deutus. M., The Toll of the Arctic Seas. New York, 
Henry Holt & Company. 1910. 

FLAMMERION, CAMILLE, translated from the French and edited 
by James Glaisher, F. R. S., The Atmosphere. New York, 
Harper & Brothers. 1873. 

Gipson, CHarves, F. R. S. E., The Romance of Scientific Dis- 
covery. London, Seeley Service & Co. 1914. 

Gipson, Cuarwes, F. R. S. E., The Great Ball on Which We 
Live. London, Seely Service & Co. 1915. 


[ 453 ] 


A JOURNEY TO: THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


Gorpvon, W. J., Round About the North Pole. New York., E 
P. Dutton & Company. 1907. 

GREELY, ADoLPHUS W., Three Years of Arctic Service, An Ac- 
count of the Lady Franklin Bay Expedition of 1881-1884 and 
the Attainment of the Farthest North. New York. Charles 
Scribner’s Sons. 1886. 

Grew,-Epwin SHarPE, M. A., The Growth of a Planet. New 
York. The Macmillan Company. 1911. 

Grew, E. S., M. A., editor of “Knowledge.” The Remance of 
Geology. London. Seely & Co. 1911. 

Hayes, Dr. I.I., The Open Polar Sea: a Narrative of a Voyage 
of Discovery Towards the North Pole in the Schooner United 
States. New York. Hurd & Houghton. 1867. 

Kane, ExrsHa Kent, M. D., U.S. N. Arctic Explorations in the 
Years 1853-54-55. Philadelphia. J. B. Lippincott & Company. 
1856. 

Kane, ExvisHa Kent, M.D., U. S. N., Arctic Explorations in 
Search of Sir John Franklin. 1853-5455. Philadelphia. J. B. 
Lippincott & Company. 1856. 

Le ContTE, JosepH.. Elements of Geology. New York. D. Ap- 
pleton & Company. 1909. 

NoRDENSKIOLD, Dr. N. Otto G. and Dr. JOHANN GUNNAR 
ANDERSON, Antarctic: or Two Years Amongst the Ice of the 
South Pole. London, Hurst & Blacket. New York, The Mac- 
millan Company. 1905. 

NoRDENSKIOLD, ADOLF ERIK, The Arctic Voyage of 1858-1879. 
London, Macmillan & Company. 1879. 

Payer, JULIUS, one of the commanders of the expedition, New 
Lands Within the Arctic Circle. New York. A. Appleton & 
Company. 1877. 

PHIN, JOHN, The Seven Follies of Science, a Popular Account of 
the Most Famous Scientific Impossibilities. New York. OD. 
Van Nostrand Company. 1912. 

PoucuetT, F. A., M. D., The Universe or the Infinitely Great 
and the Infinitely Little. Charles Scribner & Co. 1870. 

Proctor, RicHarp A., Our Place Among Infinities: A Series of 
Essays Contrasting Our Little Abode in Space and Time With 
the Infinities Around Us. New York. D. Avpleton & Com- 
pany. 1881. 

Proctor, RicHarp A., B. A. Camb. F. R. A. S., Light Science 
i Leisure Hours. New York. D. Appleton & Company. 

Fl, 


[ 454] 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR 


Proctor, RicHarp A., The Poetry of Astronomy. London. 
Longmans, Green & Co. 1880. 

Recius, Extsezr. The Earth: A Descriptive History of the Life 
of the Globe. New York. Harper & Brothers. 1872. 

SARGENT, Epes. Perils and Escapes Among Icebergs: the Won- 
ders of the Arctic World: A History of All the Researches and 
Discoveries in the Frozen Regions of the North From the Ear- 
liest Times. Philadelphia, John E. Potter & Company. 1873. 

Scott, O. FirtH, The Romance of Polar Exploration. London. 
Seeley Service & Co. 1915. 

Lowe tu, PrrcivaL, A. B., LL. B. Mars. Boston and New 
York. Houghton Mifflin Company. 1894. 

Lowe ti, Percivar. Mars as the Abode of Life. New York. 
The Macmillan Company. 1910. 

Lowe Lt, PercivaL. The Evolution of Worlds. New York. The 
Macmillan Company. 1910. 

McCuintock, Captain, R. N., LL.D. A Narrative of the Dis- 
covery of the Fate of Sir John Franklin and His Companions. 
New York. J. T. Lloyd. 1860. 

MacruHerson, Hector, Jr. The Romance of Modern Astron- 
omy. London. Seely, Service & Co. 1913. 

Maunper, E. Wa ter, F. R. A. S., Superintendent of the Solar 
Department, Royal Greenwich Observatory. dre the Planets 
Inhabited? London and New York. Harper & Brothers. 1913. 

MELvILLe, Georce W., Chief Engineer, U.S. N. A Narrative 
of the Search for Lieutenant-Commander De Long, Followed 
by an Account of the Greely Relief Expedition. Boston. Hough- 
ton Mifflin Company. 1892. 

Miurr, Hon. J. Martin, editor. Discovery of the North Pole: 
Dr. Frederick Cook’s Own Story of How He Reached the 
North Pole, April 21, 1908, and the Story of Commander 
Peary’s Discovery of April 6, 1909. 1909. 

MircHett, O. M., LL.D. Director of the Cincinnati and Dud- 
ley Observatories. A Concise Elementary Treatise on the Sun, 
Planets, Satellites, and Comets. New York, Phinney, Blakeman 
& Mason. 1860. 

Merse, Epwarp S., Member National Academy of Science. Mars 
and Its Mystery. Boston. Little, Brown & Co. 1906. 

Movutton, Forrest Ray, A. B., Ph. D. Professor of Astron- 
omy at the University of Chicago. Descriptive Astronomy. Chi- 
cago. American School of Correspondence. 1912. 


[455 J 


A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR 


Movutton, F. R. An Introduction to Astronomy. New York. 
The Macmillan Company. 1906. 


NANSEN; Fripryor, Go C. VO; Du Se, DC. L,, Pao De Pree 
fessor of Oceanography in the University of Christiana, etc. 
In Northern Mists, Arctic Exploration in Early Times. 2 vols. 
London. William Heinemann. 1911. 

NaNSEN, Friptyor, The First Crossing of Greenland. 2 vols. 
London. Longsmans, Green & Co. 1899. 

NaANnSEN, Dr. FriptjoF, Farthest North: Being the Record of a 
Voyage of Exploration of the Ship Fram 1893-1896 and of a 
Fifteen Months Sleigh Journey by Dr. Nansen and Lieut. John- 
son. 2 vols). New York and London. Harper & Brothers. 
1898. 

NansEN, Dr. Friptyjor, Farthest North. 2 vols. New York 
and London. Harper & Brothers. 1879. 

Newcomes, Sron, L. L. D., Superintendent American Nautical 
Almanac. Popular Astronomy. New York. Harper & Brothers. 
1882. 

Newcoms, Simon, LL. D., Astronomy for High Schools and Col- 
leges. New York. Henry Holt & Company. 1883. 

Newcomes, Sron, LL. D., Professor of U. S. Naval Observa- 
tory. Popular Astronomy. Harper & Brothers. 1879. 

SENN, Dr. NicHotas, M. D., Ph. D., C. M., In the Heart of the 
Arctics. Chicago. W. B. Conkey Company. 1907. 

SERVISS, GARRETT P., Curiosities of the Sky: dA Popular Presenta- 
tion of the Great Riddles and Mysterics of Astronomy. New 
York and London. Harper & Brothers. 1909. 

STEFANSSON, VILHJALMER, My Life With the Eskimo. New 
York. The Macmillan Company. 1913. | 

Symmes’ Theory of Concentric Spheres, by A Citizen of the 
United States. Morgan Lodge & Fisher. 1826. 

Topp, Davin, M. A., Ph. D., New Astronomy. New York and 
Chicago. American Book Company. 1897. 

WILuiaMs, Henry, Editor and compiler, Curious Facts Relating 
to Almost Anything Under the Sun. New York. A. L. Burt 
Company. 1903. 


PERIODICALS 


Scientific American, published by Munn & Co., New York. 
Scientific American Supplement. Munn & Co., New York. 


[ 456 ] 


c 136s 


Sc5eGeeJd 1920 HC 


ee EIS TSB Ib 


ees 


SPNEHFLINS er aye, 4, 
elaitans 
PAIR gc es 


PSE i, 


Pepa cloner: 
Perveccantes 


SPESP HK ibe, 
Deerinrted 


tt 
CER MANBU Kas eh ny 

Salata tape Niea 
Le PUNE Ahi t 
Nias sy 
SseatetatTe fi 


se 
PYEGhUNae 
SPURNS) 
reste emielilen tee 
PERCE Ra GS Riess 
Lsiea 
thee 


Lrssyrt foe 
AE ANGE hey 

Hoiaeeen te 

linteparnac 

WPawyiege 

egy 


ie 
PNED Fee re 
ep Earey nega Eee Py 
Rei 

Gas iaemenc ru 
Hie rane mH 

PH OP FetLecer ny rl neo? athe 

PS.P0like, OARS Bape? aR 

S7LMy aL MOR Gidea 
it < bree 


NM Uk 
ShORL Cites 


sai ESL 

es fc Ape Stee tie REE 

SIS ba Em mance oe isin rn aneaans i 
apex 


rents ; ; SEAS Src 


yeaa at) 
eMinwer<ya pans 
Soba bu saMts 
Sh pase he yi 
Haicurangvenepes eS 
Mise 


\ 


Sig 


Paenents 
Paltet ead al 


f 
DOVES AL oy 
ahs Sis ifm, Oe 
LEU PAE URC Hy 
oti 
PAW ORS Pel 


SVS pig 
Boban 


DYN: 


ine 


Haveli os 
hen 


ROSNY a 


aston nt pees 


2 
Mts
