==============================================================================
The Sword of Moses (Harba de-Moshe)
Anonymous (ed. and trans. Moses Gaster, 1856-1939) (1896)
Edition staged: London: David Nutt, 1896. First edition: introduction, English translation, Hebrew text, index of mystical names, and facsimile. Internet Archive scan.
Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/the-sword-of-moses-an-ancient-book-of-magic-translated-by-moses-gaster
Rights: Public Domain. Published 1896, before 1930; editor/translator Moses Gaster died 1939. The newer critical edition (Harari 1997 / English trans. 2012) is in copyright.
Language: English (with Hebrew text)
Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library (antarctic-labs.com).
Ancient Jewish book of magic (text possibly as early as the first centuries CE; Gaster's manuscript 13th/14th c.): 136 sections of magical names with ritual uses. Complete.
==============================================================================

THE SWORD OF MOSES 


AN ANCIENT BOOK OF MAGIC 


MOSES GASTER 


THE SWORD OF 
MOSES 


AN ANCIENT BOOK OF MAGIC 


Dr. Moses Gast 


HOLMES PUBUISENG GROUP 


Editing & corrections in THe Soa oF Moses are 
‘Copyright © 1992, 2000, 2006 by Holmes Publishing 
Group LLC. All rights reserved. No part of this 
‘book may be reproduced or urilced in any form or 
bby any means, electronic of mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording or by any information 
‘storage and retrieval system, without permission in, 
‘writing from Holmes Publishing Group LLC, 


ISBN. 1-55818-163-6 


‘un DEMON, 
save 
— 2006 — 


Homes Pusat Gaovr LLC 
PostaL Box 2370 
‘Segui WA 98382 USA 


Move bas exeraed the deepest inflence epon mankind 
{ream reste antigay unto ur own daye. It eter fred 
tart of the religion ofthe cowie, on it wan the case in 
hcieatHgypt and Babylon and a ti now i wae forme 
Daldhism (Tbe), ot lived an iadepeadeat fo edo 
the recognine religion, Th wwe intanece 

tclersa or rendered Iw ebaoxous, by » ocular 
‘eblivion into white or bea wo Disk or el map, 
(was dowaright perectal. Wherever we oy however 
sd expecially if we tara to the popula Velie thet rule 
{be walled ied natony, we all always aad eery> 
ard «ue pn germ ad 


Derseected by the Church, and 
Uctuccntions agin the werk ofthe Evil One. Moreover, 


Stoll also in the adoption of Magi, aod in the opisiteal 
interpretation with which they inverted the forme and 
orwulas of Magic. ‘The adhereats of the various tenchingn 
of the Groton, and eapeially thove that lived in Frit 
td Paletin, adopted all the ideas that were floating about 
tie tranaferred ben into their system of superior Oneal. 


lw 
thno means which they wanted to defend themselves 
taginat the atlicks of wascen evil apieita, sod to the more 

lative minds it afd a eluo to the mystery of the 
‘iver, Tt gave them the means to aabloe and to pat 
to thelr vervice the unknows forces of nature, Thi lie 
At the root of the general acceptance of magio formales 
‘and enchantments and gives to this practice the popalarty 
which it still retaon. 

Being the mort frseidable seta that awamed an 
‘anti-Chrition character, although some are anterior 10 
Christianity, the Gnoatcn were tho frat to be stacked by 
the Father of the Chareh. Most of the ancient writings of 
the Fathers are filled with polemics aqainat hertic, of 


‘which then are the foremost, ‘The reelt of this campaign, 
‘which lustod for ceatariey, has been the abvelute destruction 
of all the writings of the Growtce Sparse and incoberent 
fragmenta only bare come down to uy snd wo are row 
‘compelled to atady their aystama and supentitiony if vo 
saay call them oo, from the writings of their antagonists, 


second or fourth costery. 
(0 a later stage in the development of the Gnosis, as it 
contains some of the later ideas, Tt bas come down to us 
in a very bad state of preservation. 

‘Within the last fow years tho wil of Egypt has rendered 
some more fragments of this kind of litestare, en magio 
Papyri bave now enriched out hitherto vory scanty slack 
fof geasine ancient Utersture, Taene beloog to the wecond 


idea Tt in fact that wothing is v0 stable acd constant 
than this kind of mystic literntare, The very ature 
‘t's raatic forma proves it from over being radically 
‘changed. As there ino other reuon for ite eflcacy than 
the farm in which it in pretended to have been fixal or 
revealed to the Select by the Divinity itll, aay change 
of tht form would ieedintly destroy ita efficacy. Dread 
preserved the form intact, at It at lng asthe practioner 
‘ood wader tho feflence of thor diviitien whow power 
Ine iavoked fr protetcn, et along as be Believed in the 


wet ‘dean, which in the 
factor. Dut with the change of religion 
also undergo clunges, not io the foros bat 


the nance of the divinities iovckal, and thowe bring 
ther ebangen with them. To take a malern example, the 
chara agaioat the Evil yo will eootaia the name of Christ 
ref a Sunt in Christian charm, the name of Mubammed 
in the Muhammedsn, snd that of ax angel or s myserisos 


fn tracing tho change 
introduce in the magical formulas of the Christian era 
It we trnco the first impalsa of these changes to the 
Goostion, wo must at once muocinte it with the sects of 
asenss and Theruspeate that swarmed in Egypt and 
Palatine, and with the moat important sect of Grostice 
which produced the greatest impremion, i, that re- 
Prowated by Veleatin.. His ie the one aguiowt whom 
Twoat of the palewics of the Fathers of the Church were 
Aliretrd. the acthor of the most prefeund and 
r Was the tmovt inflaental and tho tent 
Known, of the Gnontic aystece Me was probably of 
‘acd be derived hie material 
sgination, from Oriental and Greek 
speculations, and from Chelatian ideaat In his aysters 
fotered also the mystical combinations of letters and siges 
Known uoder the mame of eabbalstic formulas and be 
moreover favoured the pe 
letters to express divi 
‘we owe the theory of Alone and the Syzygio, or divie 
" ‘the two fit form together the 
T Bellove thie to be the Groatie 
counterpart of the sscred “Totragrammateo,” and not, as 
be hitherto been aasamed by others, the Tetraktys of the 
Pythagorean, For one ean tee td taore 09 
in the myuteal pat of it, the direct inornce of the Jewish 
‘pecultions of the time. Valentin lived, moreover, 
fn Palestine, and nothing would ssit him better than to 


1 PS, A Nine Cty” eh p02. 


smasiplate that myvic, Teeltble Name of God, rosnd 
Which a whole ape bad besa evolvod in the service of 
the Teopla Angellogy and mysterious samen of God 
sod His angels are, moreover, itiwatly vated wih the 
Aorementioond sete 

‘The mysterious Toetible Name of the dvisty which 
in invoked sccm to be the centre of tort of the anclnt 
sod even molera Magia. Dy knowing that Name, which 
la auaed to be the name by means of which the world 
seen cred, the roan exorcinr in, Egypt preeoded to 
Coasimia the gul to obey bis wishen and. give eflct 
to bia icvocation if called by hie true name; whilat In 
Chaldon th awe was coosidered « real od 
divine being, who had a pernocal exintene, and therefore 
‘aclasive power over the otber gots of « let elevated rath, 
‘er natare and tho world of spirit Tn Haypan magic, 
‘even if the exorisere did not soderstand the lageage from 
Thich the Name was borrowed they considered it peewary 
Xo retain it fate primitive form, ae another word woald 
ot have the same virus, ‘The auibor of the treatin om 
the Bypian myserieeatribated to Jasbichus taint 
that the burkaroos ame taken from the dialects of Rgypt 
‘od Anyria have « mysterious and ielble vitwe ca 
ecoont of the great astigity of thew language ‘Tho 
‘oe of wwch wniatligitla words ean be trated in Bgypt 
to a very great antiquity! 

1 ie venemary 10 point out thew things in order to 
woderstaod the character of the new formules which take 
‘ow the place of the old. To the eld ad in tine utterly 
‘elntelligile waren, new ames were sither added ot 
fsbaitate, andthe common saree of many of thew 
ames is Jonich mytial speculation. The Tnuftle Name 
of God aod the fear of pronousciog it can be ted 
to  onmpartivaly remote aatigety. We find in thom 
sacient wriingy that ve felaied the traditions of the 
‘cntaron before the common er, the idea of form ef the 


Lemma, Caden Magi” 104 


Incfable Namo composed of 22, 42, er 72 parts, or words, 
for letters of which that ecorsting of 72 was tho most mered. 
Te fe till doubtful what thou 22, 42, and 72 were— 
clther “different words exproming the various attribates 
of God, oF Liters in a mystical combination; bat what~ 
ver thee may bave been they took the place of the 
Treble mystical name and were credited with the 
selfsame astounding powers. Dy means of thoue every 

imele could be done and everytbiog could be achieved. 
‘All the powers of ature, all tho apirita and demons coal 
te sobdaed, nd ia fact thero was 20 barvicr to bomen 
‘aplration. "The heavens ware moreover peopled at a very 
ferly age with numberlew angela arranged ins hier 
Acblcal onder and cach endowed with a epecial Name the 
Knowledge of which was no low dasinble for working 
tmireclon I need coly allude to Dicaysiue Arcopagita 
to havo mentionad » complete trvatie of auch « divize 
eeooomy recognized by the Church, bet we ean go mach 
Digher up and (lod these divisions and sublivialons of the 
cnlodial hosts recorded in book that beloag to the secosd 


1 Yoog lst of| 
(Of which has been differently put, tbe names of angels are 
Mill more nuueroas, to which there are added also various 
tamer of God. The book ia qomtien pretends to be 
fe vision of tho High Priest Tenasl, and ie a description 
‘of the heavenly Halla, Modern sebolare who knew nothin 
tf the Gnostic and other heretic iteratare pat it as late 
the sinth century, simply and solely because they coald 
tot find ealy traces of it in the old literatary, and because 
{it aocmed to appear Bret ia those tines, A comparison 
tho Ascensio Tetaae, and till more with = 

chapter in tho Pistia Sophia,” easily convinces us, however, 
ff the fact that absolately similar treatina were known at 
terly as the firt centuries after Christ if they were net, 
jn fact, later remakings of till more ancient texte. The 
Greck Papyrt already alloted to have ao this poeliarity 
th these texts, that they sboend ia similar 


lists of names of angels and demont borrowed from 
Rigyptian, Christian, and Jewish sources. Among 
vee fod also numerous form of the Nae of God consisting 
luo of a number of letters 7, 27, and others! and alo 
twort eurises combinations af letters 

"The Jewish iden of a roystical Name of God rests thus 
‘upon the interpretation of the Tetragrusmaton, or tbe word 
(JUV, tot stan for God in the Hebrew text, which from 
‘ery ancient times the prieate frat aud then the whale peopla 
nfruined from prooouuciog in the way it was written, 
A sslmitate was found for it, 00 a4 to avoid a powiblo 
profination of the sacred Name. Tut it is an object of 
‘alllenary specalation what that wubatituto really was. As 
already remarked, it is represented by 
fof elemeatn etter of words. The origival minsculous, 
powerfal Name, however, was the Tetragramtaton kaown, 
fo the “Shem h-weforash.” This word bas presented 
Broat difalties to the fllowing generations. Tt ean 
Be translated ither a+ oeaning explicit, the “explc 
Namo of God, whilat the others are merely oa 
cor wperste, toe waroe which is wrod exclusively for 

0 designation ef tho Divinity, Thevo two are the 
Vout Known aud wmoat widely accepted interpretations 
cof the “Shem ba-meforash.” In the light, however, of 
four atdy it will appear that another translation will 
henceforth be found 10 be the ely true one, at any 


‘presion was lt, and one or the other of the firw-mentioned 
Philological translations was adopted. So we find in the 


Testament of Sclomon, eg, the angel cult Aphopb, whieh 
in interpreted ax Rafael” [Thin expromion proven that 
ft fe bused upon = Mebrow criginal, and that the werd 
“peruih” wae taken to moan “iuterpeetation") Cos: 
sidering What this name was believed 19 be the anly trae 
Name of Gol, the all-powerful name which was never 
pronounced, “Shem heeformh” ean only mean the 
Tnrfable, an wo Gnd it also in the “Pistia Sophie,” and all 
A Di Abram 1K Payre ee 


throoghout the ancieat tradition. It is an eupbersen; 
inated of saying? it ix tho *Tncfible™ unotterble zame, 
they waed the word which meant: it i the “explicit” name, 
just as Chey eld for a bind” man—be i full of light 
ther examples can be euily addocod. Tn this way an 
Scent mystery and « stambling-beek for the translater 
ff week texte diaappenry 
AAs the Tetragremmaton, of “Shem havmeforash” wae the 
‘nefable Name, and could by no means ever be wttered, 
‘others were watitated and wore used by the pricat when 
Blenting the. people. Those alm were endowed with » 
special sanctity, nnd were revealed aly to the initiated. 
‘These wubntltuton were considered to te no leet eflctive 
for miracles, wod the knowledge of these wysterious Namen 
‘wan po leat desirable than that of the true Tetragrammaten, 
Tor they wore believed to represent the exact procunciatien 
of the forbidden worl, and thus to cootain part if ot 
‘with which the Tetragrammaton 


these substituted names, 
of forty-two elements (Tr. Kiddusbin, fel. 71a): "That this 
Name ls to bo revealed ouly to a man who slande in the 


nd mere expecially of that 


‘middle of his life, who ie pious and modest, who sever 
fives way to anger and to drink, who is not obstinate 
Whoever knows that Nama and preserves it in purity ie 
beloved i heaven and beloved upon earth; is well eco- 
tiered by man aod inberits both wore”! What thew 
forty-two may have Leen bas thus far been the ebject of 
tpeculation, When comparing the ancient tradition with 
the new teats in the Papye, and im the mystical tex 
of Hebrew literature, there can no lenger be any dovlé that 
the Name of forty-two, of mote or lem, elementa could not 
have been originally anything else but words comsisting of 
that womber of ktters, which were aubetitated in the peblie 
pronunciation for the Tuefatle Name consisting of coe word 
id ealy four lttere—the Tetrogrammatent In time thee 


1 of ce, Aga 2 Balaton mee” 1, 1K 


rowsisien were ano toro, or not drag, andthe 
reso a serine of now sobuitsina snd varntione fr the 
vine Name’ Thare won le the fer of profing the 
ame of Gal when wring i down in the way it ect 
isthe Bibl, and here they roto to msl deviet 
nthe eve hand ln wold poole pronation, and oa the 
ther to stain scr myerions aabaiates for the 
Tcitle Same 

“Another clement that cae within the purview of tia 
sctvty of 


Palestine and Egypt. ‘The angels bad to bo provided with 
‘appropriate and powerful names, acd the authors resorted to 
the aime devices, of which T mention the 
find which are the otuse of many of the barbaroos forme 
fund names that abound in the magical rites and formulas 
and in the so-called prectical Cabbulah The biblical 
names of Michael, Gnbriel, and others with the termination 
stleGol, verved na a wore for tome of the new angels, such 
tan in the Book of Enoch and in ether similar writings. Tho 
first part was, an a rule, takes from the charscteriatio 
attribute eorseeted with the activity of that now angel: 40 
opharlesthe bealiog angel in the Book of Tobit; esi 


ines 
Upon of perme of te ls of the ln nae 
he ton pl ue td ued wench 
Sout eatiady vor be eng Oe ple ee 
Siete 6 Sie ater ard os Ge plas 
SP Ate vo haw han Ge diet yuna Oe 
Sat dtu ox omens het he ea oer 
‘of the alpbabet stands for tbe first (A-t; bi, O'S NX, 
Spt ee ahead he toes Lacey pay 
San That orth eg sd eat ser 
first, and so on (A-b-t t'-a, JED OR), or first and 
fvah are taerdagale (Aly bem, B38) Ove 
Sey os tow rely Gs oe tes eal 
See ck eageged oo onl LS 


itn Sis siping ily aks ti 
To Tureganes oar fer ihr TOD, 
orm of PPD wt BOO, ele The somber f ch 
poruwce ol nanos fo nt Unlid boere 
Tree ber ace somerd) try we neem 
tia sos lope to fal bey forall et 
ite apa eng py an 
Oar as ecpigd be ts Saye of Song ewe 
sstslas tol pet hor he med san, bie 
Dae toy las dae wen Oe cian as 
ts ts’ony af eM one eu ed noes tod St 
Sern eat butte Inter ote tre vor ae 
ineingd' i coh’ s ance ae me nay soy 
te Sniper enn cumple whch han Mtr ot 
Koon corto, we howe sively ta the Tend,” The 
Tigh Prot Tamale nil to bee sn nb SHOPS 
Udtvud inthe Temple, Th wort, hich dander 
ihe‘myserean mane of Gn lo ning stn te 
Cemtisaan ofthe tw weds ND KirsGrovn and i 
Sow Tish nay 1 In the ten wich T pe bors 
ws kan ho nae tntplp Pietaray Sai tal pn, 
Tush, eet” Romer vee father freed ty 
apes Ines et Oo Dagenontes 
‘aol seu of the Oly te play 
‘dng tard the pony ot penta 
ike poe tan tthe dan ee begat heey 
joni ope sc Ts Os mene Os hes 
he Tp tn deren 298 
eal" Lord” (lp mf ah lth 
om es fre tte dite 
haan the moral A Ia the snned non On tee 
satioe araip nae ere oor’ ton: Ges 
ced 
(te Spat 
({r,siaee nko ed Upbened God wor baht ele 
So hige Tie ge ot On shane be pee Oe 


Blanphemy uttered by the socused, and they my, instead of 
reaticniog the Dirine Name, the words *D? PaO} M3, 
which may have cbisioed this form in our printed texte 
through popalar etymology, meaning “Jone beat dow |” 
ot criginally wo have bere clearly the Tetragrammaton 
WT, and a strange letter inserted aftr each letter of that 


from the thirtecnth or foarteath century cowards a 
change bas taken placo in the eystem of the fermation of 
‘howe mysterious words, considered to be 10 ffealons 
in ameleta The initials of the words of « Bibtial verse 


‘combined into a new word without any meaning, or 


the letters of a verse are s0 arranged ax to form uniform 
wonls of three letters without meaning, tho commencement 
of cach of these worde being the letters of the Hebrew 
words arranged consecutively. The mot celobrated example 
is the wee to which Exodus av, 19-21 bas been put for 


‘socint myatial literature, and alwo sot ia our teat, 

If wo should apply these principles to the Greek Papy 
there ie mo doubt that a ey tight bo found for’ the 
innamerable carious namce which erowd these fragments 
of a literatare that at one time mast have been very rich, 
‘Traces of it we find also in the * Pistia Sophia,” where 
special strea is lad upon that Tnedable Name, communicated 
aly tothe isitited. "The knowledge which a man acquirer 
through the Nomen Inelsile”™” te described at some 
leagth (pp. 191-153). In another place wa read that Jeros 
spoke the Great Neme orer the disciples whilt preaching 
to them, and Bw afterwards into thir eyon, by which they 
rere made to wee a great light (p. 233). Tho mysterioas 
‘names of God and of the Powers are eoumeraled oa pp. 223, 
‘and 201-5, whilet the following pasage explains the power 
fof that Nemo:—"There is no greater mystery thas thin 
Tt leads your woul to the ight of lights, to the places 
‘of truth sod goodneny to the region of the most hely, to 


the place whore there is neither man nor woman nor any 
Genite shape, bat a constant and inexpremible Tight 
Nothing higher existe than theve myvterioe after which 
{ye seck. Theor are the myuteren af the seven voices and 
ine Powers, and their number, sod pe tame 

is seperior to thst Namo in which all the other amex 
tro contained, and all the Lights, and all the Powera If 
‘inyene knows that Name when be gocs oat of the material 
indy, neither emeke nor datknes, ether Arckoa, angel, 
cr archangel, would bo able to hurt the soal which Knows 
that Name. And if it be spoken by anyone going out 
from the world pnd aad tothe fie, i will be extingeished ; 
fand to tho darknoay, and (twill dinppenrs and i€ it be ald 
tothe demons and to the satellites of the external darkees, 
to ita Avchona and to ite lords and powers, they will all 
ish, and thede laze will burn ther so that they exclae 
holy, the Holy of all the Holy." 


pe 
"Tha art holy, Tooe 


‘And if that Namo ie said to the judges of the wicked, and 
to thee lords nnd all their powers and to Harbelo and the 
invisible Ged, and eo the three Gola of triple power, a= 


toon as that Name is sttered fa those regions they will fll 
fore upon the other, 40 that being devtroyed they perish 
cod enelaims ‘Tight of all the Lights, who art in the 
finite light, have merey epon sand party ux!" This ie 
tlwovt Montieal with the mying of Rab, with the diference 
‘hat in tho " Pitis Sophia” the Fgrption inuence is not 
(yet wholly obliterated These examples efie to show the 
Tharscier of the central point in the new Magic adopted 
by the Gnosiien, vit, the mysterious Divine Navoo and 
ite substitutes derived from the mystinl speculations of 


of Magic which heaeeforth 

‘upon the imagination and belief of the rations of 

From that period, then, wp to the twelfth or thirtenth 

eatery there i # ap which neither Prllas nor the 

Testament of Solomea Sil vaficietly. All thove ancient 
1 Pia Sila” ob. bear. 26. 


spiel tok Being declared the work of the wil aii 
‘rreacenfly bested ep and Ssroyet. "The fk wish 
nds the Utrtae ofthe mend half ef a Sd Ager 
wit the put is ining, rd e Bind wareivn fen foo 
‘> ca with the proton wheter a book tht appear ater 
tha pri io Yecent gi, or Ina teint el ore 

Tas madod "Sach n bok in for enact ns 
Sel Seur asi or the tek dvr to adam Dy th 

il Rast shorty fer be bad let Part of 
{emp characte, bat there ia b9 eterna the ng 
the componeat para The trl of thin wert 
that i tar be tried to Te Bloat, of Wermy ai 
lived tot the middle af the thirtenth eatery.” On 
caunot, however, sey which potion ie dav to ia own 
tngeeity nod wich way bw doc to ancient teat wed 
Uhm Tooling repr of ls 
oi soma to be the primary sonren fr many « mail 

yer itm eld nov, eile bok of in Mille 
Spon Tithsiag the autor of "Fao Hesleewang 
‘Aeipps and many mee are eopy indeed tote Bask 
fermuny of hr Uvoraton sad rjarton thong tay 
tout have bed bss sar bok a tet dipole 
Ubi aan the Cail Belowonin the Great Orioyr a 

tat sl maton ove more fegmetay rl af thet 
tr i in fe net 
‘ith Arweaia feeipioes These bo 
te he Leeann, and av ether exemple of he ser 
taney of thr formtan for eeterit thw rena alc 
Stchinged, od sven tn tir nit frm have reall 
{end wumber of dameta fv the ealeat retype: 

Tee happened, then, tht aman laqeatve mee ing 
in. Krona, im the ‘orth of Aft shoud addr 
Setter te the thee head of 
Taye Gaon (1057), log 
topes coneced wid api ter ad the iaclon port 
scribed to the Ineffable Name. I give here the gist of 
sine of thr quero, which det therctre ms te 
trom! af of "ie tenth the commenrewect of tbe 


eventh eontury. They ask frst, what it ie about that 
Teeible Name and other similar mysterioos Names of 
sngela throngh the means of which people can make 
themselves Invisible or te the hand of robbers as they bad 
Ibeard from pious men from Palestine and Tyzuntiam that 
‘writen upon loaves of rea (Papyri!) or of clive trne 
the face of roblers woul pruduce that lect; 

fon a pouberd and throws into the sea, ale 
+ or placad upon 1 eorpa, quickens it to life; and, further, 
that i abortans the way 40 that man exo travel imimeens 
dlstances in no time, They have also books with these 


terrible, awe-inspiring Names, and with the an of tho 
cclstial powers of which they are terviSed ; as they keow 
‘that the use of these mysterious Name, without dae and 


questions the Gaon gives 
‘ribo and philosophic reply, warning them, in the frt 


pretend to have seen, bot to try sed seo 
yen Then he goes ea to tall thee that 
och books with matical names wre alo to be found ia 
hie college, and that one of his predecerors wat known to 
ave been addfetod to theve studi, and to the writing of 
sleta and the knowledge of ineantations, bat, be adda 
‘only a foul belioves everything.” As for the books with 
formula, ho goes on to may: “We havo « wumaber of ther, 
such as the book called *Sefer be-Yaahar,” and the book 
called *The Saunt of Mote,’ which commences with the 
words, ‘Four angele are appointed to tho Sunt aud there 
fare in it exalted and mirsculoun things; there i, further, 
the book called ‘The Great Mystery,’ besides the iminor 
treatises, whieh are ianurerable 

in vain t2 Aid out the truth of these things’ 
ounce of his reply Hays touches so epon the Inefable 
Name and tho name of seventy-two (elements), which, 
nccording to him, was the rewlt of the combination ef 
threo Uibliealversee (of above, p11, where reference i 
made to Exodus xiv, 18-21), but be neither knows which 


they are nor how they ware uttered; a8 to the other of 
forty-two, he says that it coaslated of forty-two letter 
the pronunciation of which wan, however, dosbifal, rating. 


‘erly upon tradition, This name commenced, according 
to bis, with the letters YIDN Absit, and finished with 
NPE Sivpit. He mentions farther the booke—"The 
Great and the Small Heavesly Halls” and “Toe Lord of 


thowe before them had shrunk, let they 
‘be paniabed for incautions want 

‘These abutracta slice 19 abow thatthe mystical literate 
‘bad not come to an end with the third or fourth century, 
bbat had contiaued to grow aed to exercise ite inlecn 
throoghost the whole intervening period. The reas 
‘why to litte is mestiened in the contemporary literature 
in, that each period hes ite own prodiletions, axbjecta 
which absorb alsont exclusively the general interest, and 
aro therefore prominently represented by tho literature cf the 
time, whilst otber things, though in existence, aro relegated 
to an obscure place. ‘The beat exemple wo have is the 
modern folklore literature, that bax amumed each large 
‘proportions, no ene pretending thatthe rabjet did not exint 
hroughout the eentaricg, altbouzh neglected by scholars 
Tt mutt aio net be forgotten that we have only fragments 
of the literatare that fouriahed ia Paleting tod among 
the Jews in the Byzuotine empire, to which countries this 
mystical lteratare belongs. Christina literature Ieaves ue 
lo in the dark for this period, for the reasons slated above 
foaly Syrise might mist us somehow to fll up that pup, 
‘bat as far as T am aware very litte je to bo expected frees 
that quarter, ax in the whole mageigeeat collection of the 
British Masearm I have not found a single MS. of charms 
‘or magical recipes, except one single, rather modern, Mandaic 
text. Two very eaall, and also rather modern, Syriac MSS. 
‘of charme are in the pouemion of the Rey. HL. Gollancs, 

Of these books sow mentioned by Hays Gaon is his 
Tam Za, bh 


reply—all of which, by the way, soem to bare been irre 
frievably Tont—I bere had the good fortune to discover 
on, vis, that called "The Siord of Aon," of which be 
iBives os the Ast words, From the acewer of Hays it ie 
(evident that he oocsidered this beck to be eld and to be 
the most important, for he ia not stiied with merely 
priving the ttle ax he doce with the other books, tat he 
faker an exeeptin for this to indicate the commencement 
tod to. ald that it contained “exalted and wooderfel 
hinge” "A glance at the contents of the newly-discorered 
text will july the jedgmeat of Hay, for it in a complete 
peyelopartia of mystical names, of eackatological teachings, 
fd of twagieal recipes. 

‘Before alating tho contents T must fint give a abort 
Aovcription of this MS, now Cod. Habr, Guster, 178. 
‘Thin text has come to mo with a mam of other leaves 
full’ of magia formalag all ina very bod state of 
provrvation and apparently hopelealy mized up. Happily 
there were custoles at the onde ef the leaves, and by 
their moana T was coabled, ater a long toil and careful 
Iaandling of leaves falling to pose en seeount of old age 
tind decayed throagh dampnen, to recover « good portion 
Of the tigioal MS. aod the whole of thie text, which 
‘ecapion twolve tall quarto loves. The nauaber of lives 
‘arien. The writing belooge to the thirteenth or fourteenth 
Centery, abd ie in Syrian Wabbinieal ebarnctors. It ie 
Crideatly a copy from a more ancient text, and tho eopyist 
than not beea very carefal ia the transcript be made. Many 
fs letter_ie written wrongly, having been mistaken for 
ftoother similar, auch as 7 (D) for % (B) and D (20) for 
(8). En many » place there are evident Isean, and the 
Cepyiat has often not understood the text. The language 

‘aixtare of Hebrew and Arszaic, Hebrew prevailing 
fist pert, which I call the Introdectory or historia, 
tu it giver the explanation of the heavenly erigin of this 
text, and deale with all the preliminary iecidents connected 
‘withthe mode of using the text ia a proper and eficacioes 
‘manner. Ia the las, which I call the theargical or magical 


‘park Aramaic promaile. All the divas are mentioned fo 
the laageage of the eaja, and wo alan all the planta and 
Jette and the atber direction are ab inthe nme lnogunge, 
To no Language, if T may may vo, Belongs the midile part, 
which i the real text of the “Sword” This costa of 
pamter of dviso and mpsterioas Namoy, « goad sumber 
(of which are the ouleoee of ll thon modee of manip 
Tati withthe Tetore briey fndleated abowe. Tt would 
be a hopes tank (o try abd decipher the ames, and to 
tranaiterate them into the original forme of which they 
ae the trvaformatioos and mystical equivaleate. To thie 
section we ean revognte besiles tho unchangeable chanslor 
(of some of the magic formolan What 1 aid before of 
he Exyptison, who would wot change any sacred. Nese, 
however barbaroay Itty sound, for far of destroying ite 
fica, belts good alo for ence numberof Nats found 
here ia'a bewildering varity. Almont every reigivo mast 
Lave contributed t tho list that maker up the "Sword? 
Felecia would bo mild word or thi proce of 
feocral cborptio, that tas made the Sword” thes fur 
the most complete ext of magical mysterious Names which 
Ione come down to ut A small encyclopedia ef « similar 
character is the Greck Papyran of tho Brida Museum, 
No. casi, sod the Leyden, Papyroe (J. $06), with which 
coor text shows great stuart, bat those Pepyrt mark 
Ss were the fit stages of thin process of growth by tho 
Ssimilation of various clemeats and eoubisntion into one 
‘ingle comple ralourenn for the magician or eoujeer. 

‘the "Sword we havo the fell development of that 
recent, which must havo run its coure al a very carly 
Petod 

‘Nothing is more fallacious then to try olymologien of 
proper natn The onion or addon of ane later by 
Seareeas copyat safices to lead us complaely axing. 
Th, therefore, diffcalt to advance say interpretation of 
‘even'a few of the ramen found in this text that havo 
Cir eppearacce. If wo wero sure of the reading, we 
sight reogalze amoug thow ia Na. 6, Idi (Apranis, 


Veronica), OF 
youarked, uch sa Hlentifcation might easly lead at 
‘erny, and the coincidences might ealy te the remlt of 
mere chance, No doabt ean, however, be en! - 


t 


Componenta of the divine -t (Now, 102-94), More starting 
Ulli a List of mupponed name of heavealy powers that are 
represented a1 ont of otbar powern. Theve are undoabediy 
Gerived from many sources, the author welding smaller 
{eats aod liste {nto one comprebecsive list. ‘The thint 
prt contains the directions for the application of thee 
Yarioss Names, ‘These are also arrinzed eccording to 
ertnin aystem, The diseases follow, at any rate in the 
fit portion, tho order of the members is the buman body, 
commencing with the head and ite parts, thea demeoding 
to the lower members; alter which follow recipe for 
tiltents of w diferent nature, to be fallowet by the diree- 
tions for performing miracles and otber remarkable fata 
"Each of these 198 itema (numbered by 
with certain portion of Part 
mystical, Names of thone portions in Part IT being the 
aus words tht alone were th proper to bare the 
apected magical revull, Tn order to facilitate research, 
Tinve subdivided Part IT nto nich corresponding portions 
to which I give the mame number. There is thes an. 
beete perlleliam between the two parte—coo the text 
fund the other its magical application. We sco that 
the back has been very methodically arranged by one who 
fntended to prepare as completa a magical beok as poasible. 
Hy thin patullalits, and by the partial repetition of the 
mysterious words in Part IIT, we have the means to aatisfy 
uncives os to the accuracy of the copyit, who does mot 


come out very salinfutorly from thie teat. Tk may be 
‘that the criginal from which ho copied was already 
partly corrapt, and che fear which rach books iaapired pre- 
‘veoted him from attempting to correct what arv obvi 
‘mistakes ia the spoling ef those Namox It not seldom 
Ihappees that the sane Name is written ia two or three 


tho fact that he giver ia many placer what ate latent 
to be diferent readings. He warts his copy with the 
smargical note, unfortanately half gone, the paper being 
destroyed fa that place, tat “there aro diference ol 
‘opinion as tothe readingn of the text wad of the Namen’ 
ofan I would interpret this wutlated lone the marginal 
readings ore sori teton”” Fe, infact, there ae 
‘amber of marginal plomce throaghout Parta T and Il 
‘There alm are me iy Part TH, bat theo are of a totally 
different character. They are purely philological, and furnish 
‘ne powerfcl proof more both forthe antquly of the text 
‘wih which wo are doaliog and for tho country where the 
HIS, ine teen copied, Mont, if sot ll, the flower are, 
namely, Arstic tranalatioon of the Aranaio words of the 
Srigina, ‘Dy the tistaee tQat” have ert ino. then 
“Arabi glomen, itis evident that they have not been added 
2b the expyist, who wuraly would have known how to write 
sown traaaton, but who weeld wake mistakes when 
copying sonther MS., especialy if it were in aay way badly 
frites or bad eufered fa commucsco of agu. ‘Tha tase 
Teton further proves that th orginal was written 
‘when Aramaic was the language of the people, a 
1 certain tne when tho copy was made from which this 
BGS. fx » transcript the language of the crginal bad bees 
to be forgetten and required © trasalatioy which, by the 
tray, i oot always exact, The Aramaie of this text i in 
fact, ot cary to woderstands there oscar init many words 


a 


plants end dieses whi 
Aliconary in eastenee and many ofthe grammatical forma 
prewat cilia ilectialvrlatony which plato Paling 
{the original home of oar text, and dacrve a apeial sted. 
“lero again we have to lament the fact that we del wth 4a 
que reanucrpt aod have no ase to teat the accaacy 
Gf the text, Bat even oo {ty thi text wll prove a 
txtremely valuable contribution to Semiie philetogy, and 
‘would evich even Lows bok oo Aramaic names of fants 
There T have in rin seoebed for the pamen and words 
our text. [have therfore add «transi, 
Mowever in some placa, dave wot pretend to be wore 
emp to erople with » very reliant txt. 
‘The Ute of the bak acema to bo rived from the last 
swords spoken by Monee befor is death. Tf cnacldes 
Bis Blating of the Chitin of Tera with these wonde 
(eater, aes, 29): “Who fe tke wsto thee, » pple 
faved by the Lord, the sbield of thy bepy and that fa the 
werd of thy exclieney" cr “thy exellent Suord.” "The 
figurative" Bnord” apeken of ere mast have been taken 
st a later timo to signify more than = figure of rpecch. 
Under the infecase ef the mystical interpettizn 
Aerptar Hournbing at «very surly peri, ft wee taken to 
denote «peculiar form of the divine Name, excellent asd 
Allpowerfl, which served an abild and. protection. 
Tt therefore could. to mado to serve this purpae in 
mmagieal Incantationg which ld not appeal to the auitance 
of dewotn but tothe heavenly Bata cheying the commaod 
of the Master of that “Bword” Therein bo wouler then, 
that it nme to be connect with the aia of Mor, the 
tery man who opeke ef lk, and whone lat worde were of 
Lat “Sword” Inthe Greck Papye, Mowe is mentioned oe 
mysteries (Drit. fon, Pap. alr, of 
tary, line 100 fe. Rengen, in Calo, 
and agai, tm another 
Popyron xxi, of the thi century (2at p. 108, 1. 619 
and pete), « rlernon o one of the iagicl hoks secribek 
fe Mowe, allel "The Crown of Mone” Dot what it 


I bare not found fo say 


than, 


perant il, the Leyden Pupyras calla itl the 
‘Book of Moses Tt roeablea very moch oar tax, 
‘be dh proved the eld ace by which many of 
‘Dietrich, who pablahed the 
1601), losks to Orphio 

ion and lays too great 


‘that me 
‘trem ex the Comogoay in it, In the light of our text 
it will become evident that theve go all back to exe common 
source, vis. to the mystical speculations of hove sooty 
‘which be himself enamerates (pp. 136{0); and the “Logoe 


tvsigued in theee texts to the “holy Name" eosssting of 
‘8 cumber of deters, and the took calling Hac! “The Work, 
of Mow on the Holy Name" jostify us in seiog in it 
fen exact parallel to the Hetrew taxt, recovered now by 
roe. There is much internal similarity betwoca the Hebrew 
“Sword” and the Grock Papyri Tho order of sabjecta 
in similar; all commence with an eschatological part, which 
in the Greek in more in the natare of a Coamogeay, fa 
the Hebrew that of the deseripticn of the heavealy bier 
farchy. Tn both follows the * Nazi" and after that a lst 


“Say the Nase!" Here the Netzo ia otllsinploy 
Tiebrow text it ia represented by the rich variety which T 
Ihave poiated out, but an intimate connection between these 
various teats cannot be doubted. 

‘There existe besides another wall treatise (B), who zaigee, 
hat goot under the same name ax “Tho Sword of Monee” 
(Col. Oxford, 1031, 0). It in a short fragment of 
different recension, and han caly a remote resemblance 
with the fint text (A). It ovosite of lst of mystio 
ames, diferent in their form from the other tert, 
sd he ely ater rcp, ohh donot corpond 
with portions only of the Sint part, but, ax 
Tayiee Topas the elle of thir was to Ye. rpeied 


a 


after cach recipe Immediately pon this short text 
follows en invocation of the beavesly Chiefs, stsibated 
to Tnnacl, the High Priest, the reputed author of 
the “Heavenly Halle” This’ eilition correspeods to 
f certain extent with the fret part of the Sword” (A). 
Ta none, but very few excuptions, of B ia there any trace 
‘of Aramaic, and a totally different spirit pervades the wbele 
test. Tt ie in the frst place doabsfal whether we ba 

bere the whole of it or merely a frogmeat, In two places 
wwe find tho letters 33 (NG) and 7) (ND), which taken ax 
rumerals mean 63 and 54. If they stand for woch, then 
wo bave hero only the lat two or thre portions of « loag 
text, of which the preceding 52 are miming, Agala, on 
the other hand, as it in regulssly recommended to repeat 
the whale of the "Namo" after each recipe, an operation 
‘that would bo wellnigh imponibe fr the inordinate length 
of that text, those NG and ND may sot wand ax numbers 
cof paragraphs, This text presents besides many more 
peculiar trata that wake it rather remarkable. We Gnd 
here thus fur the oly trace in Hebrew literatero of the 


‘The Neely Powers mentioned in the = 
the fora of tone of other Powers, pot alin to the mane 
‘ster of Bardennes of whom Ephreca Syros ald: Hl 
{vested malo and female beings, goda and thei children.” 
Tio may havo takea these ideas from older sour How 
it may be, this coincidence ia bone th lon rrarhabla 
We God further angels with double eames, the ne of 
which T trazalated “Konya,” ke the proper mame, and 
the ether the cept, Ln Jorfoble easton nama, 
toreapocing early with thot of the Tostameat of 
Sclanes, where we God “tho angel ilal Apbarop ate. 
preted Raphael” (vp eahowniry Apepi, 5 dpporieras 
Pagaid.—Orient, 1844, ek 747) 
EL Rope yp 3628. Ln, © Apr Apmis 
oneal 


Ta the Guostis prayer from the Acts of the Apostle 
‘Thomas, the Sophia is spoken of as the one “who knows 
the mpsterie af the Chosen,” or, according to the Syriae 
‘ersios, “revealor of the mysteries of the Ohoven among 
the Propheta” With thie the pamogo in the Icbrow 
text (I) may bo compared, where the mme iden 
‘enunciated; and one feels almost tempted to 
inexplicable word [3p (“Kin ") the Groek “ Koinda, 
companion or jartaker of the mystery altbough it some 
rather siraage to fod the very word in the Hebrew text 
ut there are many words that have » peculiar appearance in 
this text, and they look Ike tranliterntons of Greek words 
in Hebrew characters, auch a4 “Charts Hieratibeo,” ete 
T have added, therefor, this second toxt alto, making thus 
the pablication of the “Sword” as completo ex pomible, 
‘mcend Appendix T have added two conjarations 
the MS. of the “Srord” (A), both in Aramufe, 
land extremely interesting als for their similarity with the 
Ieriptioes inside the bowls brooght from Aesyria 
Babylon. A detailed stedy of seme of these magic bowls 
‘aod ther inscriptions has been published Ly BI, Schwab 
T have reproduced all theve teate ax eloely and accurately 
5s poms, without aitemptig any corrections or emend 
tious, exocpt ia the one of obvious mistakes, which are 
pointed oot by me a corrections. The gloases are given ax 
corrections of obvious mistaken, I havo 
0 ineriptions on Grosti gers sod 
find “phesia grammata” amilat to thowe 
Sword (A) and to some of Appeedix T, 
tnd to the magical formulas in the terra-cota bola, which, 
ty with sume portions off “The 
Sword." Ove cannot exhaust a subject of this kind, and i 
cmp to do isto place au ample a taterial 
‘a pomible at the disponl of those who maka the stody of 
Magio and theurgy aad of the so-called practical Cabtela 
the ebject of eial enquiry. I have limited myself to 


9 Pe BAL Anes, 109, 08-38, 


Arve sttetion to the ralation that existe beirecn then, 
{he Greek Poppe, and the Hebrew teta which Tobit 
Here forth fie! ine, od to pint oot the portant fact 
{it we have wow at lat ovo Sod date fom which to art, 
fee enquiry of a sabject in which dates and tim ave 
thos Gr ten very doubfl, It ln moroer,  contibaton 
to Romie pllelogy, aed by the titi af « faesinle of 
the tnt pagywcontbatio to Seite palzography. 

“Tho eign of the “Sword” ie noon the lene tomebat 
difetc fa. From the letter of Haye Gaon fin evident 
that it mst have evn a lent «few ceatarien older than 
Bistine (enh centary). Dut it unt bo meh elder etl 
‘Rr the Leyden Popyre tlongy atthe Tae (othe third 
eutury, and thove ofthe Brish Mascam tothe think ct 
fourth century, we are jotied in sang tothe Sint 
fear centareg the Christan eu the origin af ovr ateew 
feat which thors wo vivid ight open thone remands of 
(Ore Mapie buried bitora in the wl of yp Herein 
Tia abo ene side of the tnportance of our. tet, tat 
Hows how the eonseton betwen antiqelty nad the 
later byt wat mintained. ‘The Oreck texts had become 
Inncctbla and rectally Tat to the wer whit the 
Tlebeee text, itn na language which wus eoxldered 
fuer, the knowledge ef which was ever allowed to be 
Ringuibed, proweved Uo ancirt’ magical texts ith 
thee curious yet samen and formelan and carid 
them sera’ the entariey Keng ep the ld tradition, 
tol aforing om ow = linge its « pecline slate f the 
Topalar nod of thn rarhale meas The carl ted 
Uva Greek fret sida by wide with the Hebrew will 
Set very malrally in the wodevaediog lo of Cone 
‘then very secure tents aad iN the cy Troms te marrow 
frovve fa which Haw Mtberto een hept by the amie 
isle who. have deretd. ther attention reealy to 
thea. Tevll alo belp usin Deying tare the fousaioe 
from which owed the whole of the Magical ala of the 
Midae Agen 


Tn tho name of the mighty and holy 

Pour angels are appointed tothe “Swerd” given by the 
Lard, the Mater of mysterien, and whey aro appalled to 
the Law, and they we with peceration the myserioa from 
shore aed below; aod thowe are thelr samea—SKD NUZI, 
MMOIOTAL, VEDRZIOLO, TOTRISI. Aud over thew 
fre Gro other holy and mighty, who meditate on the 
fmyeterion of God in the world for soven Bours every day, 
find they ace appointed to thouande of thousands, ead 10 
Imyriade of thounnde of Chariot, ready to do the will of 
{edr Creator, X,' the Land of Lords andthe hotoured 
(Ged; thea are their eamee—X. And the Maser of each 
Carat epoa which Uhey are appointed wonders aod supe! 
Te there any number ef his arma?” And the last 
of nse Chariots Ia ord td aster over thane. (bore) 
four, And over Chess are three chits of the Lous of 
the Tord, whe make every dey tremble and sake Tlie 
‘ight all and they bave the power over every creature 
Under thea stand n double nuster of Chariot, aod the 
Iuet of them it Tord ad rouser overall the abuve Chiefs 
(ole); ad these are their sames—X. And the name of 
Ue Lard aod Ling te X, who alty and all the bavealy 
Yonte Koos acd prostrate thenselves before His daily 
before leaving X, who is the Lard overall 

‘And when hea coojare him be will nla Mimslf to 
thee, avi caus the other five Chiels and thei Chariots 
ted the lords that stand under them to atiach themselves 
to thee just as they were ordered to atach throu to 
Mosca won of Aram, and to atch to him all te lerde 
that stand ender them; end they will ot terry in their 
beimnce, x28 will not withbold fem giving authority to 


1 sane tg he mp non, WA Bae at en tae 
stor eamestins ple sis cana 


the man who utters the conjaration over thie “Sword,” ite 
mysteries and hidden powern, ite glory and might, and 
they wil not refuse to do ft it & the command of God 
Xo ‘Yo shall not refuse to obey « mortal who 
fonjares you, or should you be diferent to him from 
what you were to Motes, om of Amram, when you were 
commanded 19 do 10, for he is conjuring you with My 
Tnefable names, and you reader heaoer to My name and 
rot to him, If you stould refuse I will barn you for 
you have not honoured 3 

Tinh Srv bed seventies Olen) 
‘8 propitious foe the proper time. Them 
(words) areal worde of the ving Gall aad King of the 
Universe, and they said to him 

“If thou wishest to tse this "Sword and to tranmit 
1 Wo the following generations, (Uhea know) that the man 
who decides to use it must Airat free himself three daye 
previooaly from sceidental pollution and from everything 
unclean, eat and driok once every evening, and must 
the bread from « pure man or wash his hands frst ia 

ely water; and 20 coe it to koe 


mysterca of the Universe, and they are practised ealy 
ot communicated bat to the chaste 
first day when you retire from (the 
world) tathe once sod no more, and pray threo times 
dally, and aftr cach prayer recite the following Bleing: 
“lewd art thou, O Lord our God, King ofthe Universe, 
who opnaest the gaten of the Fast and clenvont 
of the femament of the Orient, end givet 
whole world and ia inhabitant, with the malitade of His 
mercies, with His mysterion and secrets, and teacheet Tay 
people Tarsel Thy secrets and mysterig, and hast revealed 
‘unto thew the Sword” used by the world; and Thou sagest 
unto them: "IP anyone is desirous of using this *Sword, 
2h every wish is fallld and every secret revealed, 
marvel, and prodigy are performed, then 
the following manner, rad before Me this 


EB 


hat, and conjure in ach and gach a wise, and T will 
instantly be prevaled upon and be well diepovod towards 
you, and T will give you aathority over thin Sword, by 
to fall all that you desir, and the Chicts will be 
Fert ep by you, tod my ly men 
posed towards you and they wil fuldl instantly your wis 
‘and will deliver to you way merota und roveal to you my 
‘mysterieg and iny worde they wll each you aad wy woaders 
‘they wil manifest to yoo, and they will isten and servo you 
‘as papil bis master, and your eyes will be ilaminated 
and your beart will sco and behold all that i biden, and 
{your size will bo increased.” Unto The Teall, X, Lord of 
Universe. Thou art He who is called X, 
Universe, Thou art called X, merciful king. Thou art 
called X, gracious king. Thos art ealled X, living king, 
‘Thou art called X, humble King. Thou art callol X, 
Highteous king. Thou art called X, lofty Ring. Thos 
fart called X, perfeot king. Thou art callel X, upright 
ing. ‘Thon art ealled X, plorioae king. ‘Thou at called 
X, Jouthfal king. hoa ‘art eallal X, ploamct king, 
Thou art called X, and hoa liteueat’ to my prayer, 
for Tooa hearkenest unto prayer; and attach unto mo 
the lords of the “Sword,” for Thou a 
their King, acd fuldl my deve, for everything is in Thy 
Ihende, at it ie written: “Thou openrat thine Basd and 
satinfat every living being with favour.” 

““T conjare yeu, Aalie called X ; T conjure you, Arc ealled 
X, Tefaniel called X, Tafel called X, and the meat glorious 
of thes Yofel Mitton called X, the glory from above, 
With the permimion of my king (I coujure) Yalicl 
called X, Rafaiel called X, Haniel called X, Hania ealled 
X, Asracl callat X, Yioriet called X, A’shach called X, 
‘Armubael called X, and Avrect called you attach 
Yourselves to me and surrender the " Sword to mo, so that 
T may use it according to my desire, and that I find shelter 

det the shadow of oar Land ia heaven in the glorious 
Name, the mighty and awe-inepring X, the twenty-four 
letters from the Crown; that you deliver unto me with thie 


‘*Swont™ the wwerets from abore sod below, the mysteries 
from above and below, and my wish be fullled and my 
‘words heaskenod unto, and my prayer (eapplication) received 
throogh the conjaration with the Inedable name of God 
which is glorified in the world, throagh which sll the 
‘eavenly howta are tied and bound; and thie fe the TnedsMo 
Namo—X, bleaod be be! (I conjure you) that you aball 
not refase mo nor hart ms, nor frighten and alarm me, ia 
the tremendous Name of your king, the terror of whom 
rroste upon you, and who i called X- Palfl fo ms every 
thing that T hive been conjuring you for, and serve mn 
for T have conjured you act with the name of one who ie 
{ret among you but with that of the Lond overall, whose 
‘ame tes and binds and Keeps and fastens all the beavesly 
Toute And if you should refuse me, T will band you ever 
to the Tart God and to bie Incffale mame, whono wrath 
‘and anger and fio are kindled, who bonours his erestaree 
with one letter of his vame, and is called X40 that if you 
refao bo will destroy yoa, and you will not be found when 
searched after. And yeu preserve me frm shortness of spit 
snd weaknow of body is the nase of X, che guardian of 
Inrael. Blewod art Thou, who undersandent the secrete 
tnd revealet the mysteren and art king of the Univers?” 
‘A.voice was heard in the heavens, the voice of the Lard of 
heavens, saying: “I want a ight (ewift) mewenger (to 50) 
to man, and if ho fulfils my mewage my sone will become 
proud of the #8; hich T band over to them, which 
Is tho bead of all the mysterio of which alin my seers 
sro spoken, that thus will my word be, as it is as 
"Tu pot ray word liko as Gre saith the Lord" (ler. xa, 
). Thee spoke X, the lord of heaven and eatth; and 
1, Avi Avisih ond Apragsib, the light (ewift) mesenger, 
who am pleased with my teenmger and delighted with my 
sending, sended before Him, and the Lond over all 
‘commanded me: “Go and make this knows to men who aro 
plows anf good and pare and righloous and faithfl, whos 
Ieart is not divided and in whote mouth ix no duplicity, 
vwho do not lie with their tongues and do not deceive with 


x» 


‘heir ipa, who do not grasp with their bands and are not 
Jestfal with their eyes, who do not run after evil, keep 


svvet melody, end aay 
of oly mame; the whole earth ia 
to not refuse me, in the name of 


Universe ullar (this mama) aleo ia a diferent menser, 
thur—X. You evift menenger, do not tary and do aot 
{eighea mo, but come and do all ey wante fa the mame 
at 'X, the great One, who soot and is aot wen, ALIVE, 
‘whose Talal Nemo ia reveals to the Beavenly bots 
{dT conjure you by this Tnfablo Namo, nach a8 it wae 
foveal to Mons by the mouth of the Lael over al, X. 
te Lord Ssbuath is His namn. Blamed art thoa, O God, 
lord at mighty acts, who knowowt all the mywerian™ 

"And which are the Teter which X communicated to 
Mow? “He wi t kim: I thoa wishet to get wie 
tad to wwe the ’Seord’ call me, aod conjure tn, ad 
strengthen ms, and fortify me, and say: *X, wth the great, 
hay, wonterfal, pare, precious gleriun and ameianpcing 
scetot Namo X, with thee ltr conjare theo to warrender 
{© mo anil make me ‘wise and altach t9 me the angele 
‘whieh tisster to the" Sword,” i the name of the Reveier 
ot mpateien Area." 

Write with fok eo Teather and carry sbout wi 
during the thre Jay of puriteaton, ta ateke taare 
tnd alter prayer the following Nemes communicated to 
Mons by Mrgiel, X, by Trotrmi, X. ete. (the 13 Chefs 
rmentioed at the beginning, and a lsog aring of ether 
tmyiteriout “names which aro maid to have been ome 
tmunicated to Mons). And they have not biden frm bi 
Any of these sacred Tneble namen or letters, and have not 
friven ito ivtead the Subalitater f any ef thow mered 
Ietiers, for thon were they ordered by the Lard of all 

te foi this *Swory” with these 


‘say the following blewing prior to their 
prayer, lst they bo swept away by the fre": ‘Dleal art 
‘Theo, X, who wast with Movot; be alo with me, Thos, 


‘Whoever in desiroas of using this “Sword” mast recite bis 


‘ual prayer and at the pamaze'"Thou hearkenest to prnyor"™ 
say: *T conjare you four princes, X, xervante of Hadirion, 
Xi that you roenive my invocation before T pray, and my 
‘pplication befor I eta, and fal ll my wishes throu 
thie *Sword,’ an you have dove to Money, in the glorioas and 
vrondertal nae of the Lord of wonders, which i interpreted 
thus" Ho must thea eall the 


‘ton as T conjure you, and you attach to m0 those four 
Dison aed all the hesta of Chariots over whieh you pres 
fll all my wishes throagh this “Sword” by this beloved 
name X." He must then eall the three angels that aro 
‘euperior t» thew, and wy: “T coajare you, X, the beloved 
‘of X, who is Hadirrio, that you attach yoormves tome 

fttach to me X, who are standing under your rule, to 
{lft all my wlahos Hhrough this *Sword' by’ this uniquo 
‘maroe X."" And thon he sau ly held of tho highest Chit 
‘overall and say: * T conjure thee, X, sirong ani. prverful 
‘Chet overall the heavenly honts, that thou atachest thyself 
to me, thea and not 1 od 


yeaa, 
{Chins tht are withthe, fal sny wiser throegh the 


‘mysteries, Lord of th 
‘And he ie not to toueh thi 


TL. This ie the * Seon" 


[Is consite of a saree of mysterious name of God ot 
angela, to which the recipes in Part III refer. The frat 
Tist commences with Toba, Tab, ete (1-5). ‘These numbers 
‘are added by toe to make the formales ron parallel with 
‘heir magical applications in Part II a already explained 
fn the Tatrodectin. T refor to them an they break up this 


ry 


‘part in convenient smaller portions, and are eaily dacersite, 
After thes follow the words]: “With these your Names, 
tnd with tho powers you pote, to which thers is wombere 
suything like (T coajare you) to show me aad to march 
ta, and to bring me X to do all my bidding in the name 
of X2" and, nen, that have no special 
charsctersto in common. Nou. 20-24 are all wamee com- 
rmencing with JJ; some of thoso Gaish with JIL. 24-95 
all then names have the wont Sobish attached to then. 
To AAT HIVIT in edded. Prom Nox 51-95 all the names 
they appear e+ names of son, the name 
‘Hed to cach of these, clove upon 160 
names, 49.1 Sania, on of Srgia; Sega, won of “Araaie: 
Atuni, son of atari; Abu, 
fon of Abkmf, te. Every na 
of thie port Ginishee with -c, ser which follow varying 
syllables and words: some sre only JU or JY” (Sou 102 
105), or a word commeseing with "A- and Galshing 
“JH (Sea 100-11). Now 112-121 are followed by 
AMIVAL, whilt 122-127 =JUVILI, and Noa 128-104 
HVSIL' They eoneluce with the following words: “Ye 
‘mered angela princes of the hosts of X, who stand ape 
the thrones prepared for them before Hiss to watch over 
tnd to minister t9 the *Sword’ to fulél by itll the 
wants by the namo of the Master over all; you Chiefs 
ll the angela in the world, X, in the name of X the seal 
of heaven and earth, mi 
throagh you I sce X in the world you are lording over 
me in all the placo of the Master over all: T pray of you 
to do everything that I am atklog of yoo, ax you have the 
power to do ererythiog in heaven and upoa earth in the 
rune of X, at it is writen in the Law, "I am tho Lerd, 
this ia My samo! **" 


mm. 


1. If at fall moon (%) » man wishes to unite 
with » man that they should be as ene to one another, 


to devtroy winds (spirit), demons, and aatens, and to stop 
f ship, and to freo a man from prison, and for every other 
thing, site on a red. bow! from Tobur, ete. (Na. 1)— 
2. To break mountains and hills to pam dryshod through 
the water, to eater the fr, to appoint and to depose kings, 
to blind the yen, to atop the mouth, and to speak to the 
dead, and to kill the living, to bring down and to eend 
od to conjure angel to bearlen 

all the mysteries of the world, write Noa 1 
saucer of a eup and pat in it the root of genip-tree (pepe). 
— Aguiet a epiit that roores in the body 

Plate No. S—4. Agaloet « opiet that burma write No. 4, 
<8. Against a spirit in the whole body write No. 5.—6, 
‘Againat = demon (oid) write No. 0.—7. Agaiast shingle 
‘write No 7.8 Against quizay (erysipelae#) aay the words 
of No. 8 over oil of roses and put it over his faee— 
8, For paine in the ear whisper in tho painful car No, 9.— 
10, For aches in the eye say the words No. 10 over water 
‘ree days running ia the morning, and wash the eye with 
iLL For eataract any the words of No. 11 over 


ht for three mornings 13. Hor blood that rane 
‘ead whisper No. 13 myer the head carly in the 
morning for three days, when you wash your hands before 
felting ost of bol.—U4. For paralysia uy voven times over 
yenel fall of water and seven tier over seume-il the 
‘words Na. 14, “that it should move away and leave NN, 
‘Kinen, Ameo, Selah"; a throw the pail of water over his 
hhead end ancint him with the oil, and do this for three 
days; then write an amulet with the words from, “I 
‘cajere you" tl" Amen, Selah" and hang it round his neck, 
10. For paisa in ove balf of the bead (ncurngiat) and 
fer bad singing in the ear, write No. 18 and bang it round 
the neck —I6. Fer the tad deafening (of tho eur) write 
No. 10 and bang it round the veck—17. For painn in the 
‘ar say info the left car the words No. 17 Dackwarde— 
18. For deafoom say over hemp water, whilst mixing it 


s 


with ol of Idi" (same), tho words of No. 18, and pat 
‘into his er an soon anit bas become 1 little dimalved (or 
vwarm).—19. For seaby, alcery, itches, mange, shingles, ete, 
‘hat befall mankind, aay over olive oll Na. 19 and anoint 
‘with the left hand.—20. For jaundice aay the words No. 20 
fver water in which radish haa been soaked, and 
rink it—21. For pains in the note and for the sprit in 
the nose ay No. 21 orer ail of "Tdi" Gomme?) and pet it 
into bie noutrila—22. Por paine ia the stomach (ht. 
heart) and in the bowels my No. 22 over water, and 
Arak it 28, For bot fever «ay No. 23 over water in 
‘which ros-laurels are soaked, and he is to bathe ia it— 
A For tamory ete, my No. 24 once over them and 
‘once over clive oil, and anoint them for three days, bet 
ao not Tet any water come near then—25. For an evil 
‘occurrence (P) my No, 23 over seven white cups of wats 
filled from the river, and throw them over the bead — 
20. For wloor (diphtheria?) spit out before him, and may over 
1s mouth, and over a eup of strong drink, No. 20, and make 
Tim driak, and watch what ts coming ost of his moat — 
27, For a man bitten by a anake or by anetber () polsoooas 
insect, he must aty over the place ofthe bite or eve the palatal 
spot No. 27 and drink its the samo be isto da whenever hart 
dy any creeping thing —28. For a woman who has seen 
‘ood before the time ny No 28 over an evtrich ogg, thea 
Yura it, and she bo smoked with it—29. For pains in the 
‘mouth say No, 29 over risen floar, aod pat it upon his 
mouth —30. For quicay (croup) end for painn in. the 
‘shoulder, tay No. 00 over wine and dvck—3I. For « 
No. 3L on a sorall and opeak these 
cil, and rub some of it oa the aeroll and 
smear it over the paiafal spot and hang the amulet round 
Mia neck —J2, For atooe say over « cup of wine No 32, 
and drink it—4, For hemorrhoids take tow and pet salt 
on it and mix it with oi, anying over it No. 23, and sit oa 
it—94. For a man who wallet from enelling and from 
‘venereal diseae(F), eis to may No. 31 over water in which 
radishes aro soaked, and driak.—35. For sprains, either 


you take « plate and write upon it No. 35 and pat it upon 
{he place, and all around it will bo ealed; or you take ball 
of wool and dip it in ol of (seaumo?), and say those words 
‘upon it and pat it upon the sprain —6, When injured ot 
hhurt by ives, and for every blow that it uhoold not fester, 
say No, 36 over white naphtha and rab it over the place of 
the blow. —37. For (camps?) and for pains of heart my over 
spinach end oll No. 37, and drink it—38, For the gall and 
the bowels take the water in which rusina have been ssked, 
saying over it No. $8, and drink {t—39, For the epoied 
liver take (« drink) a sixth measure of water-leatile and 
say No. 99, end avallow it slowly (7).40, For the milt 
say No. 40 over wine-loce and drink it, and repeat it for 
‘three days—AL. For the spirit who rests on the wom, ty 
No, 41 ox camphor oll and put iton it with n bal of wo. 
42, Fora worsan who has a miscarriage, uy No, 4200.8 cup 
of wine, or atrung drink, or water, and let her drisk it for 
seven days; and even if she should see blod and sho repenta 
wer a cap of wine, the child will liv, —43. For « man, 
ald, aay No. 43 over at-il and anoint with it— 
44, To coojure a apirit write on w Inurcl-leaf: “I conjure 
‘thee, prince whone name i Abrakaas, in tho name of (No. 44) 
that thou comeat to ane and revealet to mo all chat Task 
of theo, end thoa shalt not tarry." And the one bound by 
‘theo will come down and reveal hell 0 thee.—43. To 
remove a rich tas from hie riches, any No. 43 upon the 
dust of an ant-hll and throw it into bis faoa—40. To heal 
leprosy, take the patient to the side of tho river and say to 
bhi: “I conjere thee, leprosy, in the nate of (No. 40) 
to diappear aad to vanish, and to pase 
Ameo, Amen, Selah”; and he isto go down and dip seven 
timon in the river, and when he comes oat write an amet 
with the words “I conjure—Selah,” and hang it round hie 
eck —A7, For diarzbase write Na. 47 on red copper 
snd bog it round bis neck.—48. If thoa wishes that the rain 
should not fall upon thy garden, write cut No. 4840. If 
‘thea wishest to nce the mun (l) take .. «from & male tree 
‘sid stand in front of the aun and say | | which art called 


con the .. called... and the ear of barley (P) the words 
‘of No. 49; and be will appear unto thee ia the form of 
f tan drewed in white and be will answer thee eon 
‘everything that thos askost him, and ke will eves bring 
1b woman after thee—i0. Whosever wishes to cater = 
faroace is wo write No. 80 on a silver plate and bang 
it upon his hadnch—S1. If thow acest a King or a ruler 
nd thoa wishest that he follow thes, tke a basin of water 
‘and put to it the rot of geaip-trm, and the root of 
purslane, and the root of (Artibebia), and way No, 51, and 
sce it on fery cols in a white earthen veal and throw 
‘upoa them leaves of olivetroe, and whatever thou decrecst 
ill bring unto the, even a woman thou canateommacd. 

1 you wish to overuwe them, take water from the 
‘ay upon it No, 82 and throw it into their fan. 

= 58, For loaning (suy chara) say over water No. 69 aed 
throw it over bim asd write it as an amulet and bang it 
round hie neck, and alio for freeing» man from pris. — 
4. To catch fab, take a whito potaberd, and 
loaves of olivestce aay over them No. 64 at the side of the 
river-—55. If thou wlabet « wowan to follow thee, take 
thy Wool and write ber name upon a newly laid egg and 
ny towands hor No, 5.—86. Ifa man ie to fellow thee, 
take a new potuberd acd dip it ia black myreh (gall) 
and prosounce over his name the words of No. 86, and 
walk’ on without looking backwanle—87. For « tree that 
doce not prodtace frais, write the words No. 67 pou 
Jew potsberd and bury it under the rot of the fesitees 
tee, at water all the trees and these alao which do ot 
produce the frult—88. Per illness (dog) ia the frult write 
‘on a new potaherd No. $8 and bary it in the cistern 
(eateing-place), and say these words also over wate, ashes, 
‘and salt, and water the earth with it—89. For a ssckliog 
abe write ou an onyx slab No. 69 and whisper it into ite 
fears three times, spiting oat after the whisperiog; then 
repeat chem over a cuptal of water 70 times and. give i 
the ebild to drlak—00, For one bitten by» rabid dog, 


"Toe hing pay mining ee 


write Na 60 on the balter of an aan and Jet the am go; 
then repeat these words over seu cil and let him anoint 
Dime with i end pat oo new clothes and bang that 
Ialier @) roaad him—1. Fer fever and small fever, writo 
‘ea the akin of the brane of a rum or « goat No. Ol, and 
Shang it roand bis meck—62. If anyone lose bis way ho 
to say No. 62 over the four corners of hin bal ().—03. 
It thea wisbert to ask anything of thy neighbour, any 


No, 63 over oil of somme or of... or of... OL. If 
‘hea wishes: that a woman is to follow thes writo thy 
name and ber namo with thy blood upon ber door, and 
the sare wpon thy door, and repeat the words of No. G4— 
105. If thea wisheat to kuow whether thy journey will bo 


{tnd ence tothe prison (P) hoate—67. To congoer (collet), 
fake dost from thy bouse and aay orer it sevea times 
in the road of the town the words of No, 67, and then take 
dust from the road and do likewise and throw it into thy 
‘house. —68. If you wiah to Bill & mt, take mod from the 
‘eo aides of the river aod form i 
‘acd write upon it the name ef the perio, and 
branches from seven strong pal-tree and rik 
reed (7) with the string of hore-inem, and place the image 
faa hollow, acd stretch the bow and shoot with it, and at 
cach branch (chet) aay the words of No. 68; and may NN be 
Gestroyed . « —69. To send plagocs, take (parings) from 
‘even men sed pat them [nto a new potsherd, and. go out to 
the cemetery and say there No, (9, and bury it in a place 
that ia not trodden by horses, and afterwards take the 
eat from this potsberd and blow it into his face or upon 
the lintel of Bie house —70. To send dreams to your 
‘neighbours, write Na. 70 apan a plate of allyer and place 
i fa the mouth (%) of « cock and Laill it when it hos gone 


down its mouth, and take it out from the mouth and pet 
it Between ita loge and bury it at the end of a wall, and 
‘put thy foot upon that apot and say thas: ‘Tn the pame 
CCX, a evilt mencagee {a to go and torment NN 

rib."—T1. If a make 


follows thee sy No. 7h 
boat in the sea, aay No, 72 over  putsherd or on 
S ronded lintatone and throw it agsinet it into the wa. 
7a To loowen it (rom the charm), say No. 73 over dost 
for m clod of earth and throw it into the wate, end ax 
ft gota five to go—T4. If thou wishest to 
Tarnace of pot from becoming destroyed 
of Uhrow it over them — 


tnd say No. 76, and they will boil—76. If thou wishest 
to pore drysbol through the sea, xy epon the four cormere 
the bead-dreas (tarkan) No, 70, and take one corner 
fn thy band and the other ie?) to precede thea—77. If 
thou wishest {0 cure anyon, may in the “Kighteen, bene 
tina’ No, 77, in the name of X.=78. To epeak with 
the deed, whisper No. 71 into hie left ear and throw into 
their Beles (}—TP, To kill « lion, bear, an adder, or 
iy ether hurtfol animal, take the dust from under’ tho 
right foot, aay over it No. 79, and throw it into their 
fora —80, To eatch ther, take the deat from under your 
eft fect, mying No. 80, and throw it into their facma— 
81. To open & door, take the root of Ioton reed and place 
it under tho tongue and my No. SI sgaicst the door — 
62, To bill an ox or asother beast, say into ite ear 
Ne. 82—S0, To indame his heart, my No. 83 over a pices 
‘of raw meat, and give it to him t2 eat —Si 
fool of ene, say No. Bt over an egg and place it in bie 
Thenda—85, To destroy the howe of thy neighbour, my 
No. #5 over a new potuberd and throw it into bis howe. 
$6. To expose) your neighbour, say No. 88 over oil 
OF... and sacar i at the botion of hie jug (?) 87. To 
tmake your neighbour diaiked, take blood frem phlebotomy, 
tay upon it No, 87, and throw it upon bis lintel —88. To 


© 


towards you he will Live; if away, he will die—O1, To 
‘each a lion by the ear, may No 91 and mak veven knols 
Jn the fringes of thy girdle and repeat these werds with 
teach oot, end you will catch him—02. To make thy 
Fenowa go throaghoat the world, write No. 92 as an 
fivelet aod bary it in thy home—03. To shorten the way, 
fey No 93 over » single lowe reol—O4, To cure 
Ihemerrboids, take Kernele of dates... and barn them 
in Gre and say No, 04, and mix it with oil of clivor and 
place it a an amulet over it, and it will be good.—09. For 
{trery spirit write upon 1 bowl No, 95 aod hang it roud 
he peck. —96. For subtle poison, an cuminaced and 
‘calamint, write Na 00 vpon an ogg and put it into wine, 
Sind repeat over it the astpe words and then drisk it— 
(7. For the thander that comes from hoaren, take a ring 
(round piece) of fron and lead, and hang it on the spot 
{you wish (Jo protect), anid ay over it No, 07.—08, To go 
tefore kieg ot lord, any No. 98 over a piece of lica's akin 
Aippe in Mack hemp(®) and pure wine, and take it with 
‘hee —09, Fer Bight, i it happen, take a sinew and soak 
‘tin turnip juice in the night from Wedaenday to Thursday, 
and say No. 99 over it; on the mcerow spriokle that water 
forer tho Seld—100. If the fruit gets wormcaten, take 
f2 worm from the mod and pat it into a tube and sy 
Na. 100 over it; then close the tube and bury it in that 
place —10L. To free « man from prisco ( shame), say over 

rig dates No. 101, and give 
field that doce not produce 
faite, take eight cups from eight hoaxes nd fl thera 
‘vith water from eight rivers, and. pat salt into them from 
ight bowen and my over thee No. 102 eight times, and 
[Pour out two cape at each corner, and break them on eight 
Patha—103. If one door not koow what a man in ailing 


a 


from, soak mullein (cerbaucum) in water, and ay over it 
‘No, 103, and Iot him drink it when be is thimty—104. To 
make war, tke the dust from under the lel foot aay over 
it No 104, and throw it into the (enema) face, aad there 
vill appear Knights with weapons in their hands who will 
fight for thee—105, To throw thy fear pon mankind, write 
No. 103 upon a led plato and bury it oa the west cite of 
the Syaugogue—08, To have always light in the darken, 
‘write No. 106 upon « chart (paper) and carry it always with 
thee-—107, To eatch (blind) the eye, write No. 107 upon 
1 scroll and expose it is a wicker-buvket to the stary bat 
you rant not speak when writiog.—10S. To send sword 
‘which should fight for theo, aay No. 108 over «new knife 
‘wholly of iron, and throw it into their face —108. If thea 
wishet that they Kill ene another, say No. 109 over a pew 
Tevife wholly of iron and bury it with your heel into the 
arth, and keep the beet upon it in the earth, and they will 
Jill ene another, until you take it oat from the earth — 
110. To make them pause, take the dast from under the 
right foot, and, saying the aamo words again backwards, 
throw it into their fece, and they will stop—IIL. If ax 
‘corny has got hold of thee and wishes to kill thee, beed 
the litle Ginger of the left hand and aay No, 111, and 
he will run away from thee like ose who rune say 
from bie murderer —112. To catch the eye (tind), may 
No. L12 over tho skin of « Iion and carry it with thee, 
tnd no xe will be able to vee thee—1I3. If thow falest 
{nto x (?) and wishert to come oat, my No. 113, end thow 
wilt come out in peace—II4. If thoa faleat into a deep 
pit, say fa thy fall No. 114, and nothing will hurt thee — 
118, When theu fallest into a deep river may No. 115, and 
thou wilt como out in peace—I10. If aay burden or weight 
falle upon thee, aay No 116, end thou wilt be saved — 
IIT Af the ‘King’s servante lay bold em thee, bend 
the little Gager of the left band and my No 117 
before ing eF judge, and ho will Lill theae people who 
ave laid banda ca thee—HI8 If a beat bas sar 
rounded thes, tam thy face towards the west and say 


Na. 115 before king or judge, and they will be like unto 
‘ones and will not move—119. TE thoa wishest to release 
them, tara thy face towards he cast and repeat these 
‘words tackwarda—120. If thos walkeat in vale oF on tho 
oountaiee and bast no water to drink, lift thine eyes to 
Meaven sad say No, 120, end a fountain of water will bo 
opened ete tee 12, if cou ner it i 

rea aad spread Gut thine armas and say No. 121, 
opti il acd belre thee end brag the bed nd 
tmert.—122. If thou wishest to call the angel (prince) of 
roan, my over thy mantle (2) No. 122, and the angel bound 
by thee will come to thee end will tell thee whatev 
‘thou wishest (10 know)—-123. If thou wishest to et bim 
{ge (dopart), say before him the same words backward, and 
Yo will depart —124, If thon wishest tbat any heavenly. 
prioce is to come to theo and teach thee, ay No. 124 and 
coojare him ia the thind hoar of the night from: 
‘name of the Lord over the bely ones (No. 196) tothe ead of 
‘the ‘Sword and “Bend him to me that he reveal unto me 
and tench we all chat in in hie power," and he will thea dire 
‘appear (!) 125. To walk wpon the water without wetting the 
‘eet, take « leaden plate and write opon it No, 125 and place 
it in thy gindle, and then you can walk —120, To become 
‘wing, remember for three months running, from the new 
rmocn of Nissan eawards, the words of No, 126, aod add 
in tha "Righteen benedictions': * May the gates of wisdom 
be epened to me a0 that I should meditate in them’ 
147. To remember immedisiely all thou 
fens newlaid egg No, 127, then 
strong wine easly in the tmorving and drink it, and do 
not eat anything for three hoare.—-128. To make another 
forget what ke bas learned, write No. 128 in his mame oa 
lore-eaves and. bary thewn wader hie lintel 129, To 
‘sad an evil sprit against thy neighbour, take a green 
(grambopper aod may over it No. 129, and! bury it ia an 
‘crth-bill and jemp over it—190. To sead « plague, take 
‘the bone of « dead man and dust from under Mim in a pot 
fend Gio it sp im a wores rag with alive, and aay upon it 


s 


release them, say No. 132, and ‘at of the 
fcar—I33. To guard thy hoase from thieves, say No. 133 
‘over a cup of waler aod pour it out round thy roof, Thos 
flee to geand » hoase—194. ‘To guard « house from bose 
(robbers), tale earth from an ant-hll and strew it round the 
tof, repeating the words of No, 191.—138. To guard thysalf 
* Nou 1-8" may 1,83, 
‘pest in peace and not ia hurt.” Tbe mme must be dove 
to excommunicate thes when you meet them.—196. For 
that bas not been mectioned sy, No. 196 

Sonik” 
‘And. upon every amulet that you write from thie 
5: Ta the naine of the Lord of all the 


lord of it approach to verre 16, 


Bowes, the son of Amram, perfoct from bis Gol and no 
iharm befalling him!" If he will not act scconlingly the 
‘angela of wrath, ire fury, and rage will come near hin to 
‘ister to bin, and they will lord over hia, and strangle 
‘Nim, std plage him all over. And these are the names 
the leader of the angels of wrath is 
‘Mrpopiamial; the name of the leader of the angels of ire 
tho vame of the Inder of the angels of 
fury in Kio'ppghiel ; the samo of the leader of the angele 
of rage ia N'mionnikitiel. And the angels that stand under 
them ste numberlem, asd these all will bave power over 
Im, wed will make his body like unto a denghill 
‘May the Lord preserve you from every evil Amen! 
od of the “Sword,” with the aistacce of God feared 
fn the council of the boly ene. End, eod. 


APPENDIX 1. 


Tn the mame of the Lord. The Srond of Mose 


I. [A ong let of mystical asooe thon follows :) and the 
‘over the animals, whove namo is Itslaiama; and 


deep waters and over the mountaine 
Rampel; aad the angel over the trees, Makti 

fangel over the awort-amlling herby, 

ver the garden fruite (vegetable), Bali 


«+ oars ars proper for man to peny 


fand to aak for merey upon ena, be it for gool or evil; and 
it ie said that every howr is proper for mun to pray, but 
axing the thre frst hours in the ror is to pray. 


‘and 10 mention the hundred ssered naince and the migh 
‘ones, who num amounts to thee hundred and four, Amod 
‘Sab! 


=X give me healing « . 

Which isthe great light? All the 5... X, T conjure 
you, wother of the (whether?) tale and mother of tho (or) 
feanale, you, the “Twing’" I coojure you, the hard (son) 
spirits, in the usm of God, the mighty hero, the living oma 
[Michiel], ia the name of God [Gabriel], . Raphael 
(are) me from the Lions the powerful ones (Archon 
od the Trion _Teonjure you, strong epirite n the sane 
of God, the mighty hero, IH, IHVH, TIVIL, 1, N, son 
oN. 

TE Verily, this fa the ("Sword of Moses" 
‘be accomplished is miracles and mighty deeds, and 
Aestroyed sll kid of witcheraft; it had bean revealed to 
‘Moses in the both, when the great and glorious Name wan 
Aelivered to bim. Take care of it aod it will take care 
fof thea. If thou approacheat fir, i will not burn thee, 
fod it will preserve thee from erery evil in tho world — 
LL Af thos wisest to try it take a thick (green) branch and 


which 


6 


alter tha Sword" ovr i tines a ear, ad fw 
Sry sp-2 To eich Eb tke sand fom these an the 
test ot te date (re) for the Keel othe da) tnd 
‘epee "Srord vert tnd te wl coe to he 
tet where thor theres the mad 3 To well om the 
‘Tere of the tn take the wooden halve of 2am, bre 
"tae through iy pow © ted treed ios fy aod Ge 
{hen tothy he then repeat the won of tha ™ Sor 
tel ten Jou may pad, ch ia poet To rem 
tidy Gh write he "Seord™ om Chars Mration™ 

fev srtvnware py and Tt thee 

foe aad they wil be vee 
To beak Ih, write te "Bord cn a at o error 
Uhprioen) nad pot tas and ny will be broine— 
{To maton « woman, wit with the Wood of thy Band 


sod may this 
7. To make thywalf praised fa the community, take in thy 
eft band porret-eed and utter over it the “Sword,” acd 
throw it tetween them,' and dewend (2) antil the san 
ety aod he will cary tee wherever thou wishes, and fast 
for threo days, and burn incense and the exaoko of whi 
Blower, and repeat the "Sword in the morning and the 
‘evening, and ho will emme iastantly and ypeak to thee and 
do thy bidding.—8. To get information through « dream, 
take balm and write upoa “Ohartis ierstikeo,” and repeat 
the "Sword in front of « light, and pat oot the Fight with 
flick of stivo-wood, and He down. —9. If thou wishest 
to go to a great man, tke rool wed repeat the “Sword ™ 
lover the cil and anoint thy bande and face with it, and be 
I hearken tnlo then —I0. To roake strife in the com 
munity, take the left and fll of mustard, speak the 
‘rend over it, and throw it amongst them, and they 
will Kil one ancther—I1. To separate a roto from 
wife, take aun's meat ia thy hand and say over it the 
“Sword,” and no haem will befall thee (%.—12. To destroy 
| Thee eso oly mining ere 


‘hy enemy, take a Ieaden plate and some of his hale a 
clothes, and aay the * Sword over thom, snd bry them 
ft deerted house aod be will fall down.—13. To walk in the 


perfumes, and soot, and smoke thywlf wi 
the beart of a foxy and say the “Sword, aod go out in 
the street. If yoa are on the sca and the storm rogey, 
stand up azaioet the waver and my the “Sword” to them, 
tad they will go downs thea write on a plate, or potsberd, 
fora piece of wood, and bang it in front of the abip, and 
it will wot founder—15. To break an nem), write the 
‘Sword’ upon a polsherd that has not yet boen baroed, 
asd plaster it over, and throw it into his hoasa—16. To 
‘bin anything thou likes, take into thy right band 
Wormwood, and say over it the Sword” facing the 
‘tan, aod everything will be falélled, and parfy thyself 
for seveu days, and. thou wilt prosper in eversthing, Do 
ind donde to thy friends, take heed not to take an oath, 
tard walk modestly, and thos thou wilt prosper. 

‘Write X upon the pala of thy left hand, tako then « 
new Tamp and GUL it with olive-oil and naphithe, and put 
fon pew clean clothes, and sleep in a clean house, and the 
Singel will come at once and wake thee, and reveal unto 
theo orerything that thon wishes 

TR. Akita aakod TL, Eliezer the greats “Ifow can one 
make the Angel of the Presence descend upon earth to reveal 
to man the mvterce from above and beneath, and the 
speculations of the foundations of heavenly and earthly 
thing, aod the teeanares of window, canning, and help?” 
Tle mid therespon to me: “My son! I onco made him 
come down, and he nearly destroyed the whole word, for 
be in mighty prince and greater than any in the heavenly 
‘cohort, and he ministers continaally before the King of the 
Ueiverse, with parity aod separation, and with four and 
dread of the glory of his Muster, because the Shekinah 
ia always with Bim” And be said to him: “My mater, 
ty the glory which thou hast besowed spon me, I conjure 
thee to inatroct me how to attack him to me!” (And be 


a 


replied): “Tn that hoar whoa Trish to attach him to me 
Tait and fast on that very day bat 


titers the conjuraton he rust Grat say? "T cxajere p08, 
ltngeleof dred, far, and cbaking, who are appointed to hart 
the who are not pure ard clean and desire the services 
of my beaerlysorvate-T eonjute you a the same of X, 
tho fe mighty over al, and talon over all, and every: 
‘bing ie fa His Baods, that you do not hart me, nor tery 
toe, nor frighten maj verily, ia the name of the powsrfel 
fad of." -Afor thin he may eommesce his cor= 
Garin, fr now bo ba forttel hinelf acd bas sated 
Kimealf with the ane of God of 42 eters, before which 
weable and are frightens, and the 

heavenly hots are terrorstruck. Te roast then ngsin 
oi "Yeh, wbo of ll the dasroying angule 
{3 the tne hertfl wad burniog, with thi Nas i 
ay Leal thee AVZIITA, angel of the Prewnce, youthfal 
Insiner before the King ofthe Universe, whe art price 
ed chie ofthe boarealy hate; Teanjue thee and decree 
ron theo that thoa atacbest thyself to me to flél my 
wa and to accept the decree of ray cxnjarntion and to 
Tecomplish' my devires and full my wishes aod do not 
frighten me, nor terrify me, tor everame we, ad do not 
make my frime bako nd my fect vacillae, nor cane 
tay speech to be perverted; but may T be foriied and 
Atrvogtbened, asd may the conjuration bo efctive and 
the (erred) Nome ater properly by my throat, and may 
fw vacilein tak Bold of te od no trembling of the foot 
ty thy ministering angela confe me and orerae me, and 
weaken my Bandy and may I rot be overcome by the 
Gre and fae of the storm and whicivind which precedes 
thee, O wonderful and exalted oot, whoo Inefble mame 
ofS, of whowe wrath the earth trombley and sething com 


“ 


‘withatand his anger, twice Masa. Again T oonjore thee 
ty thy 16() names by which thoa didst reveal thyvelf to 
ty propbete and scr to placa in their mutha sweet works 
fof prophecy and to etter pleasat words; and thew are 
the Teele nasea aod their voreames (Kunye): Spirit 
Piatoont, kenya, Xt Atlnoo, kanya, Xz Pion (2, 
agro, kanya, X Senigron, Kanye, Xt Mi, kenya, X; 
Moboe, hanya, Xj Asta hanya, X; Skim, konyy, Ny 
Those, Kanga, Xs Totel, kanya, X3 Senalish, kanye, 
X; Kogisish, Keays, Xj Zabdic, kunys, XT eonjarn 
srith thee fourteen naa, by whioh al be scree and 
tmysariea and signs aro vad and accompliaed, and whi 
tre the ocadations of heaven sud earth. Four of theo are 
ograved open the heads of the Hayoth (Holy Gresture), 
ftatmly—Xy the lord of powers; X, master of mimclos 
Xi, matter of purity; and X, rnser of the yoke, And four 
fare eagraved upon the foar sides of the Throoe,nainely— 
X thre ter oly: X, Adie, Adi, Adir, ete the king 
ef Kings. Avd four are engraved upon the four rows of 
‘the Olan (wheels) that stand againt the Holy Creatures, 
eit ined: "When thon went, thee went. and when 
‘hose wood, hove sood " (Enek. i, 21); and those they are 
AX, who is the mightlnt over all; X, who rule over all 
the fahabitaate of the height (?), and in whose bands every~ 
{Blog i And two are eograred spon the erowa of tho 
toon exalted aed high King, and thee they are—X, before 
thom every Koce tends and every mouth ullere praises; 
Xi. testes ion there is 39 Gol and helper. With thou 
fumes T conjure thee, and Graly decree upon thee to 
Gesceed quickly 10m, N, won of N, thou and cot thy 
teenager, And when thoa comet down do not tara my 
tind, bat reveal wnto me all the wocrel mystrin from 
hors end beoesth, andthe hidden storia from store 
tod benoath, and all the seret of wintom and the eenaing 
(Cf belpfolocay, jest ana ean speaks to hie neighboar, For 
Lave conjared the with these Numos, that are great aod 
taighty and wooderfal and aweinypriog, and! proved and 
imaged is proper order, through which the lariat 


° 


throne has been established and the Beautiful sat of 
‘Most High, boas been wonderfully wroaght, 
‘before thou and the Beavealy hosts hed been 
“While as yot Ho bad not mada the earth nor the 
and the inhabitants of the earth and the creatures thervi 
(Prov. vil, 28), 

“«T call theo further by (the power) of the & 
selected! Names, to which only one is saperar, and this 
their form—X. T conjure thee by these fire 
which correspond to th God, 


i 
e 


Fy 


i 


ie 


fare written on burning fire, rowed the 
throws of lot Ascending, 
to that the angels of the Prosence should not bebeld them, 


the wih of 
tot Mf thou tarticat I will push theo into. the fery 
river Tigayon and place another ia thy stead” Do it, 
re, for ia Name, and core quiekly to me, N, son 
ror, and not ia fear, not with Gory 
foals, not with hailstone, and not with’ the slot and 
nd not with the howling ef the storm, 
ith the provinces of the whistwind that woually 
secompany theo, anil do my bidding and fal6t ray desi, 
for everything ie in thy hand by the perminion of thy 
Ged, the musier overall and thy lord, and with His Namea 
1 conjure theo to attach thyself quickly to me; come and 
{ull toy wish, ad do not tary. 
“*T farther call thee with the greatest of thy Names, the 
pleasant and beled one, which is the same ax that of thy 
created and formed 
cverything, and which He placed as a eal upon all the 
‘work of Hite hand ; avd this ia it equivalent—X, and the 


‘other in the language of party (permatations of the letters 
Yod, Hs) is read ss—X. I conjure thee with the right 
and of sanctity and with His beloved Name, ia whose 
Ihonoar everything hae been created, and ll sre terror 
strack by Hi raighty arm, and all the none of the fateraal 
heavenly cobort (tcrvants) tremble and shake of His fear, 
which ia X, and fia equivalent by mease of JHVI is X. 
‘Blemed be the narme of His glorious kingdom for ever and 
‘ever. And all praine and extal thy Nam, for they lore thee, 
Teonjare thee, and decree upon thee firzaly, not to disobey 
‘my words, and not to alter my deeree and my decision 
‘with which T conjured the, and decreed upon thes, and 
‘viabinbed fn peace. In tho Name X, blewed be the name 
of His glorious kingdom for ever and ever, depart in peace, 
sod do tot frighten me in the hour of thy departere ; in 
the name X, Lord, most high and oly, in the name of 
the Lord of fost, the God of Iarsel’s battalions; in the 
name of tho boly living Creatures, and ia the name of the 
‘Wheels of the Chariot, and in the name of the river of fire, 
Th, Zi, Zi, aod all His ministers, and in the name of Hf, 


shty, which darken 
turn the sca, ad rvs. 
T conjure you, spite, 


disappear from X, won of N. 


APPENDIX TI. 


L. Apsiut a caeny.—T call thee, evil spirit, erul sprit 
smercileas apiit. I call thee, bad spirit, who sittest in the 
cemetery and takes away healing from man, Go end place 
ts Keot in NN's bead, in bis eyes, in bis mouth, in bis 
tongue, in bis throat, in his windpipe ; put poisonous water 
fin hia belly. If you do not go and put water ia bia belly, 
T will send agsisat you the evil angele Puril, Gari, 


st 


adie, Pree T call thee aod thom siz Knota that you go 

‘wicly to NN acc pot poaorar water fn bs bay sod 
LLNS whom T tena (or, becuse T with it), Aen, 
Amen. Sash. 

TL. point an enemy. Write upon a new-sid ogg on 
1 Nazarene cemetery: "Tcoajre yon loufotin of anes 
fad earth ae the Renrase re sparsed fey the eat no 
separate tod divide NN from Nie wife NN, and wprste 
‘Shem trom ene another, an life ia separated frum deh, 
tit seu from dry Iaod, and water fru Ge, and tountain 
{rom vale and night from day, aod Hight frm darkness, 
tod the ean from the moon: San separate BW from NN 
ia wife and separate them om one seater inthe ane 
of the twelve bears of the day and the thre waichen @) 
of the night, wod the ssven Zaye of tho week, andthe 
{irty days of the mouth, andthe seven years of Shomitta, 
snd the fly yest o€ Jalil, on every day, inthe name 
of tho evil angel Tamael, and in the en’ of the angel 
Tabiel, nd fn the same of te angel Dremil, end in the 
name of tho angel Zahbok, acd in the name of the eagel 
‘Ataf, and fa ‘the nama of the angel Zbnned, and inthe 
tame of the 


For « Cowptete List oF Puauicanons, 
Purase noes: 
Hotes Puntsannc Grour ite 
Postat. Box 2370 
‘Sequiae WA 98382 


OTHER TITLES AVAILABLE FROM HOLMES. 


WISDOM OF THE CHALDEANS 
Moses Gaster 


SECRET GRIMOIRE OF TURIEL 
Alsth Century Manuscript 


MITHRAIC PATH OF ENLIGHTENMENT 
Julius Evola 


THE SECRET OF THE EMERALD TABLET 
DrGottliebLatz 


‘THEBLACKPULLET. 
The Science of Magical Talismans 


CHYMICAL WEDDING OF ROSENKREUTZ 
Johann Valentin Andrae 


BANDLETOF RIGHTEOUSNESS 
EA Wallis Budge 


‘A PARACELSIAN LEXICON 
Waite/Hartmann 


AKABBALAH READER 
RC Abel 


TE HERMETICAL TRIUMPH, 
Patrick Smith 


we G 


ISBN 1-55818.163.6, 


‘Sword of Moses ~ pp. 26-30 


Page 3 of 7 


INDEX OF THE MYSTICAL NAMES." 


am 
‘en 
mw 
™ 
10,23 wen '3 ne 
™M ot 
a4 oprexent 
Dan mn paps 
a4 orem 
8 worwie 
Sumoneen 

. 1, 12 Scone 

15, & 10 sone 


%4 mann] 8, 6. 15, 24.26 DIN 


* The Nombers refer to page and line. 


file:/Desoteric\solomon'sw26_30.htm 


611972009 


~ 


‘Sword of Moses ~ pp. 26-30 


a4 ope 
10, 4 wepw1 3 wenn 
17,18 Ram vere 
8, 28 Swenpe 
15, 31 ypomumpe 

‘w99 '3 DMIpK 


5, 20 AnopK 
10, 20. Tenn '3.5wpK 
15, 16 ‘wanpe 
4,20 Suptpnpe 
16, 8 [121] banpr 

‘ut 

pm 


24 00d HD IE 


31 ‘aewn 
10, 22 yana'3 prwe 
12,5 a binoanee 

say Sank 

smn span 
2,91 mnt 
15, 16.18 ‘pina 
9, 21, 26 vonnwa 73 ‘Dina 
uy 1 on been 
8, 12 rn 
au one 


file:/Desoterie\solomonisw26_30. 


10, 11 


weneen 3 HOR. 


15, 10 [127] sew 
ma neadn 3 ene 


21. 23 yx 
11,2 smpw 3 OR 
8, 34 mAMIT'D ‘UNDER 
9, 346—5 DYdDD'S UdeR 
8 15 wwhDn 
14, 13.14 DR 
9,314, 11 '3 DIUDK 
a8 pink 


hom 


Poge 4 of7 
XXVIII 
joe 
wenn 
"2 mo 
wm ‘3 DoODK 
10, 28—9 
7 ne 
47 DID'NIN 
4,11 min Sanh 
9, 7.:14,17. 18 oR 
15,33, 18,2 DuTdH 
10,1 ‘aoe '3 ohn 
10,9 Bow ‘3 *BhN 
8, 32 "3 7ophe 
ny 12 Swonbn 
a DK 
8, 34. 13, 31, 92, 33 
%3 "ston 
10, 85 RANI '3 DIOR 
4,18 Sworn 
8,2 wom 

5 Yoon 
10,3 ‘B03 "2 “200H 
U1, a7 ne Seon 

pave 
26 [+6 W3 281) 

17 Suopane 
8,21 AnH 
a7 ‘Seenopne 
i,t sin bene 
1,34 oy 
1, 23 "4 Sewn 
4, 33 wont 
15, 14 sone 


‘Sword of Moses - pp. 26-30 


XXIX 


17, 16. 18 


napa 
nae 


10, 82 oyowR'S TAT 


8, 
4,33 
4,32 
10, 24 


pm 


10, 78 baer ’3 “NEON 
woa2o2BBT '2 TON 


10, 10 novme "3 DNA 


4,82 


15,3 
63 
15, 5 


14, 16 any Swansea 
52 ‘spre 
9, 20 wo 
}10, 21 onew 3 ppins 
min “Duna 

1) Seespna 


14, 17 Ar yy deaDpra 


opp bea 


| 10, 32—3 
1 13, 29 nD 
| fos) 


8, 20, 13, 27 [202] 


etl 


202 
10, 2—3 waN® "3 W302 
16, 29 ‘peo 
10,14 BPM "3 BoD 


17 OR OR oom 


filez/:\esoterie\solomon'sw26_30.htm 


Page S of? 


44, 16.37 pnw 
10, 17 mypr '3 DpH 
96 wepophn 
m2 ‘powermt 
1,7 rien ‘01H 
2, 33 Penk PAR 
10, 5 orerbe '3 Dann 
9,20 na 
15, 5.8 0 
9,18 bas 
ayy deme 

41, 20—a1 
Jenene °3 ‘oN 

10, 22—23 
115 op 


12,6 am Sennppbn 
10, 20—1 nya3 ‘2 yW713 
16 0 mame ws 
10, 24 ANA 'D Va 
‘3 


‘Sword of Moses ~ pp. 26-30 Page 6 of 7 


8, 18.13, 9 von]? 8.117 mn 
82 pea brow 
7,34 reopyen 
U1, 5.17, 24.26 yen 


6, 30 mom 
10, $0—81 “onW’3 D'aI0 
10,19 moe “3 MND 


file:/D:esoteric\solomon\sw26_30.htm 611972009
