Mademoiselle de Maupin (Théophile Gautier, 1835)
==========================================================
The manifesto of 'art for art's sake' — the preface is the founding document of aestheticism. Public domain. Source note: Internet Archive scan (1900mademoisellede00gaut).



mM


>.V^Jï?t


\  ^  0  0


aasg

.M3I3
1900
SMRS


MADEMOISELLE
DE  MAUPIN

BY

THÉOPHILE  GAUTIER


"With  the  wind  of  Qod  in  her
vesture,  proclaiming  the  deathless,
tvcr-ioaringspiritof  Tiuin/'— Locke


J.  H.  SEARS  y  COMPANY,  Inc

PUBLISHERS
NEW  YORK


Set  up,  Printed  and   Bound  at  the
KINGSPORT      PRESS
KiNGSPORT       Tennessee
United  States  of  America


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


CHAPTER  I


You  complain,  old  friend,  of  the  rarity  of  my  letters.  What
would  you  have  me  tell  you,  besides  the  fact  that  I  am  in
good  health,  and  that  I  still  have  the  same  affection  for  you?
These  are  facts  you  know  perfectly  well,  and  they  are  so
natural  to  my  own  age  and  the  fine  qualities  you  possess  that
it  seems  almost  ridiculous  to  make  a  miserable  bit  of  paper
travel  a  hundred  miles  to  convey  nothing  more.  I  have
sought  in  vain,  for  I  have  nothing  worth  telling;  my  life
is  the  most  uninteresting  in  the  world,  and  nothing  occurs  to
break  its  monotony.  To-day  introduces  to-morrow,  just  as
yesterday  ushered  in  to-day;  and  without  being  so  fatuous  as
to  call  myself  a  prophet,  I  can  safely  predict  in  the  morning
all  that  will  happen  to  me  in  the  evening.

I  spend  my  day  like  this:  I  get  up,  that  being  the  in-
dispensable commencement  of  every  day;  I  breakfast,  exer-
cise, go  out,  return  home,  dine,  pay  a  few  calls  or  do  a  little
reading;  then  I  retire  to  rest  precisely  as  I  did  the  night
before;  I  go  to  sleep,  and  my  imagination,  not  being  excited
by  fresh  objects,  merely  furnishes  me  with  dreams  as  hack-
neyed and  monotonous  as  my  real  life.  That  is  not  very
amusing,  you  will  observe.  But  I  am  accommodating  myself
better  to  this  sort  of  existence  than  I  should  have  done  six
months  ago.  I  am  bored,  it  is  true,  but  in  a  tranquil  and
resigned  fashion  not  entirely  lacking  in  sweetness,  and  com-
parable in  some  respects  to  those  warm  and  pallid  autumn
days  in  which  we  find  a  secret  charm  after  the  summer's
excessive  heat.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


This  life,  although  I  have  in  appearance  accepted  it,  is
scarcely  made  for  me,  or  at  least  is  very  far  from  resembling
the  existence  of  which  I  dream,  and  for  which  I  feel  myself
designed.  Perhaps  I  am  mistaken,  and  am  only  fit  for  such
a  life;  but  it  is  difficult  for  me  to  come  to  that  conclusion,
for  if  it  were  my  real  destiny  I  should  more  easily  fit  into  it,
nor  should  I  have  been  sorely  wounded  by  its  corners  in  so
many  places.

You  know  what  an  all-powerful  attraction  unusual  ad-
ventures have  for  me,  how  I  adore  anything  strange,  exces-
sive, or  dangerous,  and  vjith  what  avidity  I  devour  novels  and
stories  of  travel;  perhaps  there  is  not  upon  the  earth  a  wilder
or  more  vagrant  fantasy  than  mine.  Ah  well,  I  know  not
by  what  fatality  that  comes  about,  for  I  have  never  had  an
adventure,  nor  have  I  ever  made  a  journey.  For  me,  the
circumnavigation  of  the  world  is  the  tour  of  the  town  in
which  I  dwell;  I  touch  my  horizon  on  every  side;  I  jostle
with  reality.  My  life  is  that  of  the  shell-fish  on  the  sand-
bank, of  the  ivy  around  the  tree,  of  the  cricket  on  the  hearth.
Truly  I  am  astonished  that  my  feet  have  not  yet  taken  root.

Love  is  painted  with  a  bandage  over  the  eyes  ;  Destiny  in-
stead should  be  pictured  like  that.

I  have  as  my  servant  a  dull,  stupid  peasant,  who  has  trav-
veled  as  far  as  the  North  Wind;  he  has  been  to  the  Devil,
and  I  don't  know  where  besides;  he  has  seen  with  his  eyes
the  things  of  which  I  form  such  beautiful  ideas,  and  he  takes
as  much  account  of  them  as  of  a  glass  of  water;  he  has  found
himself  in  the  strangest  of  places,  he  has  experienced  the
most  astonishing  adventures  it  is  possible  to  have.  I  some-
times make  him  talk,  and  I  become  enraged  at  the  thought
that  all  these  fine  things  have  happened  to  a  booby,  who  is
incapable  of  either  feeling  or  reflection,  and  who  is  good  for
nothing  but  his  own  duties,  the  brushing  of  clothes  and  clean-
ing of  boots.

It  is  clear  that  this  rascal's  life  ought  to  have  been  mine.
On  his  part,  he  thinks  I  should  be  very  happy,  and  displays
the  greatest  astonishment  at  seeing  how  sad  I  am.

All  this  is  not  very  interesting,  poor  friend,  and  is  hardly
worth  the  trouble  of  writing,  is  it?     But,  as  you  absolutely


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


desire  me  to  write  to  you,  I  must  tell  you  my  thoughts  and
impressions,  and  give  you  the  history  of  my  ideas  for  lack  of
events  or  actions  to  narrate.  There  will  not,  perhaps,  be
much  novelty  or  continuity  in  what  I  have  to  tell;  but  for
that  you  must  blame  yourself.    You  have  asked  for  it.

You  are  the  friend  of  my  youth,  I  was  brought  up  with
you;  for  a  long  while  we  lived  the  same  life,  and  we  are
used  to  the  exchange  of  our  inmost  thoughts.  I  can  there-
fore tell  you,  without  blushing,  all  the  nonsense  which  enters
my  empty  head;  I  will  not  add  a  word,  I  will  not  keep  back
a  word,  for  I  have  no  self-respect  where  you  are  concerned.
I  shall  be  absolutely  exact,  even  in  trifling  and  not  very
creditable  matters  ;  for  certainly  you  are  not  the  person  from
whom  I  ought  to  conceal  my  feelings.

Beneath  that  shroud  of  nonchalant  and  depressed  boredom
of  which  I  spoke  to  you  just  now  there  sometimes  moves  a
thought  which  is  rather  torpid  than  dead,  and  I  have  not
always  that  feeling  of  sweet,  sad  calm  which  produces  mel-
ancholy. I  have  relapses  into  my  former  state  of  mental
disturbance.  Nothing  in  the  world  is  so  fatiguing  as  these
motiveless  whirlwinds  and  endless  impulses  of  the  mind.  On
days  like  these,  although  I  have  no  more  to  do  than  on  other
days,  I  rise  very  early,  before  sunrise,  so  busy  do  I  seem  to
be  and  without  the  necessary  time  at  my  disposal;  I  dress
myself  in  great  haste,  as  if  the  house  were  on  fire,  putting
on  my  clothes  haphazard  and  grieving  over  a  minute  wasted.
Any  one  who  saw  me  would  think  that  I  was  going  to  a
lover's  rendezvous  or  on  a  search  for  gold.  Not  at  all.  I
do  not  even  know  where  I  am  going,  but  I  must  go,  and  I
should  consider  my  safety  compromised  were  I  to  remain.
I  seem  to  hear  some  one  calling  me  from  outside,  to  see  my
destiny  passing  in  the  street  at  that  moment,  and  to  realize
that  the  question  of  my  life  is  about  to  be  decided.

I  go  out  with  a  surprised  and  bewildered  air,  my  clothing
in  disorder  and  my  hair  badly  arranged;  the  passers-by  turn
and  laugh  as  they  proceed,  thinking  that  I  am  a  young  rake
who  has  passed  the  night  at  his  club  or  elsewhere.  I  am,
in  fact,  intoxicated,  although  I  have  drunk  nothing,  and  I
display  all  the  symptoms,  even  to  an  uncertain  walk,  some-


t MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

times  slow,  sometimes  fast.  I  go  from  street  to  street  like
a  dog  that  has  lost  its  master,  looking  everywhere,  very
anxious  and  wide  awake,  turning  round  at  the  slightest  sound,
c^diding  into  every  group,  without  noticing  the  rebuffs  of  the
people  I  jostle,  and  staring  all  about  with  a  clearness  of
vision  I  do  not  possess  at  other  times.  Then  suddenly  it  is
made  clear  to  me  that  I  am  mistaken,  that  I  must  go  further
afield,  the  other  end  of  the  town  perhaps.  Once  more  I
start  off  as  if  the  Devil  himself  were  after  me.  I  touch  the
ground  only  with  the  tips  of  my  toes,  and  do  not  weigh  an
ounce.  I  must  indeed  look  strange  with  my  furious  and  be-
wildered expression,  and  my  waving  arms  as  I  utter  inarticu-
late cries.  When  I  think  of  it  all  in  cold  blood  I  laugh
heartily  in  my  own  face,  but  please  believe  that  does  not
prevent  me  from  doing  it  again  on  the  next  occasion.

If  I  were  asked  the  reason  of  my  rushing  hither  and  thither
in  this  fashion,  I  should  certainly  be  very  puzzled  to  give  an
answer.  I  am  not  in  haste  to  reach  my  destination,  as  I  have
none.  I  am  not  afraid  of  being  late,  as  I  have  no  appointment
to  keep.    Nobody  expects  me,  nor  have  I  any  reason  to  hasten.

Is  it  a  love  affair,  an  adventure,  a  woman,  an  idea,  or  a
fortune,  a  something  lacking  in  my  own  life,  which  I  am
unwittingly  seeking,  urged  on  by  a  dim  instinct?  Is  it  my
own  existence  which  desires  to  be  completed?  Is  it  a  long-
ing to  leave  my  home  and  change  my  personality,  or  ennui
at  my  own  position  and  desire  for  a  change?  It  is  something
of  all  that,  perhaps  all  of  it  together.  Still  it  is  always  a
very  unpleasant  state  of  mind,  a  febrile  irritation  which  is
usually  succeeded  by  the  most  languid  debility.

I  often  have  the  impression  that  if  I  had  started  an  hour
earlier,  or  doubled  my  speed,  I  should  have  arrived  in  time;
or  that  while  I  traversed  one  street,  the  person  I  sought  passed
along  tlie  next,  and  that  a  block  in  the  traffic  had  sufficed  to
make  my  pursuit  futile.  You  cannot  imagine  into  what  sor-
row and  despair  I  sink  when  I  see  that  it  all  ends  in  failure,
that  my  youth  is  passing  without  any  perspective  opening  up
before  me;  then  all  my  disengaged  passions  mutter  sullenly
in  my  heart,  and,  lacking  other  food,  devour  each  other  like
the  animals  of  a  menagerie  when  their  keeper  has  forgotten


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


to  feed  them.  In  spite  of  my  daily  suppressed  disappointments,
there  is  something  in  me  which  resists  and  does  not  wish  to
die.  I  have  no  hope,  for  to  hope  a  desire  is  needed,  as  w^ell
as  a  certain  propensity  to  wish  events  to  shape  themselves
in  one  way  rather  than  another.  I  do  not  desire  anything,
for  I  desire  everything;  I  do  not  hope,  or  rather  I  have  ceased
to  hope;  it  is  absolutely  the  same  to  me  whether  a  thing  is
or  is  not.  I  wait  for — what?  I  do  not  know,  but  I  still
expect.

Mine  is  a  fluttering  state  of  expectancy,  full  of  impatience»
interrupted  by  starts  and  nervous  motions,  like  the  condition
of  a  lover  waiting  for  his  mistress.  Nothing  happens;  I
return  home  in  a  rage  or  burst  into  tears.  I  am  waiting  for
the  heavens  to  open,  for  an  angel  to  descend  and  make  a
revelation  to  me  that  a  revolution  is  in  progress  and  offers
me  a  throne,  that  a  Raphael  virgin  is  stepping  out  of  her
canvas  and  coming  to  embrace  me,  that  relations  of  mine —
who  do  not  exist — have  died  and  left  me  wealth  enough  to
float  my  fantasies  upon  a  river  of  gold,  or  that  a  hippogriff
has  seized  me  and  borne  me  away  to  an  unknown  land.  But
whatever  it  is  I  expect,  it  is  most  certainly  nothing  ordinary
or  usual.

This  feeling  even  goes  so  far  that,  when  I  return  home,  I
never  fail  to  say,  ''Has  any  one  been  here  ?  Is  there  any  letter
for  me,  or  anything  fresh?"  I  know  perfectly  well  there  is
nothing,  there  can  be  nothing.  All  the  same,  I  am  still  very
surprised  and  disappointed  when  I  receive  the  usual  answer  :
"No,  sir,  absolutely  nothing.''

Sometimes,  on  rare  occasions,  the  idea  îs  more  precise.  It
becomes  condensed  into  a  beautiful  w^oman,  whom  I  do  not
know,  and  who  does  not  know  me,  though  we  have  met  at  the
theater  or  in  church,  where  she  may  not  have  taken  the  least
bit  of  notice  of  me.  I  traverse  the  w^hole  house,  and  till  I
have  opened  the  door  of  the  last  room — I  dare  hardly  tell
you  this,  so  mad  does  it  seem — I  hope  she  has  come,  and  is
there.  It  is  not  conceit  on  my  part.  I  am  so  little  self-
conscious  that  several  women  are  very  favorably  disposed
towards  me,  so  I  hear  from  others,  women  whom  I  consid-


« MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

cred  quite  indifferent  to  me,  and  never  particularly  impressed
with  my  conversation.

When  I  am  not  stupefied  by  ennui  and  discouragement,
my  soul  awakens  and  resumes  all  its  former  vigor.  I  hope,
love,  desire,  and  my  desires  are  so  violent  that  I  think  they
must  attract  like  a  magnet  of  great  power.  That  is  why  I
await  the  things  I  desire,  instead  of  going  to  seek  them,  and
I  often  enough  neglect  facilities  which  seem  favorable  to
my  hopes.  Another  person  would  write  a  loving  note  to  the
divinity  of  his  heart,  or  seek  an  opportunity  to  approach  her.
I  ask  the  messenger  for  an  answer  to  a  letter  I  have  not
written,  and  spend  my  time  in  creating  in  my  head  the  most
wonderful  situations  in  which  to  present  myself  to  the  woman
I  love  in  the  most  unusual  and  favorable  light.  The  plans
I  devise  for  introducing  myself  to  her  and  laying  bare  my
passion  would  make  a  larger  and  more  ingenious  book  than
the  strategems  of  Polybious.  It  would  often  suffice  for  me
to  say  to  one  of  my  friends,  ^'Present  me  to  that  lady,''  and
then  complete  the  acquaintance  with  a  mythological  compli-
ment punctuated  with  glances.

After  hearing  all  this,  you  will  think  me  a  suitable  subject
for  restraint;  I  am,  however,  a  reasonable  enough  fellow,  and
I  have  not  converted  many  of  my  foolish  ideas  into  actions.
All  that  takes  place  in  the  hollow  of  my  mind,  and  all  these
absurd  ideas  are  very  carefully  hidden  away;  from  outside
nothing  is  visible,  and  I  have  the  reputation  of  being  a  cool
and  quiet  young  man,  not  fond  of  women,  and  indifferent  to
the  pleasures  of  m}'  age;  now  this  reputation  is  as  far  from
the  truth  as  are  usually  the  judgments  of  the  world.

But,  in  spite  of  all  my  rebuffs,  some  of  my  desires  have
been  realized,  and  from  the  small  amount  of  joy  their  accom-
plishment has  caused  me,  I  have  come  to  fear  the  realization
of  the  others.  You  remember  the  childish  ardor  with  which  I
desired  to  possess  a  horse  of  my  own?  Just  lately  my  mother
has  given  me  one.  He  is  black  as  ebony  with  a  little  white
star  on  his  forehead,  a  mane,  shining  coat,  and  fine  limbs,  just
as  I  desired.  When  I  first  received  him  I  had  such  a  shock
that  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  I  was  quite  pale  ;  then  I  mounted,
and  without  saying  a  word,  I  w^ent  for  a  good  gallop  across


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


country,  which  lasted  more  than  an  hour,  in  a  state  of  rap-
ture hard  to  imagine.  I  did  the  same  every  day  for  more  than
a  week,  and  I  really  do  not  know  how  I  failed  to  lame  or
break  him  down.  But  bit  by  bit  my  eagerness  abated.  I
trotted  my  horse,  then  walked  him,  and  then  I  got  to  ride
him  so  nonchalantly  that  he  often  stopped  without  my  noticing
it;  pleasure  became  converted  into  habit  much  more  quickly
than  I  could  have  believed  possible.  As  for  Farragus,  that
is  the  name  I  gave  him,  he  is  the  most  charming  animal  in
the  world,  fleet  as  a  stag  and  gentle  as  a  lamb.  You  shall
have  the  pleasure  of  a  gallop  on  him  when  you  come  here.
And  although  my  passion  for  riding  has  decreased,  I  am  still
very  fond  of  him,  for  he  is  a  horse  of  a  fine  disposition,  and
I  infinitely  prefer  him  to  most  people.  If  you  knew  how  joy-
fully he  neighs  when  I  go  to  see  him  in  his  stable  and  with
what  intelligent  eyes  he  looks  at  me!  I  admit  that  I  am
touched  by  these  marks  of  affection,  and  I  put  my  arms
round  his  neck  and  kiss  him  as  tenderly  as  if  he  were  a
beautiful  girl.

I  had,  too,  another  desire,  more  keen,  burning,  ever  present,
and  cherished,  upon  which,  in  my  soul,  I  had  built  a  delightful
castle  of  cards  and  palace  of  fancies,  one  often  destroyed,  but
always  rebuilt  with  despairing  persistence.  It  was  a  desire  to
have  a  mistress,  a  mistress  quite  my  own,  like  the  horse.  I  do
not  know  if  the  realization  of  this  dream  would  have  as
promptly  found  me  cold  as  did  the  realization  of  the  other  ;  I
doubt  it.  But  perhaps  I  am  wrong,  and  should  have  quickly
wearied  of  her.  Through  my  curious  disposition,  I  desire  so
frantically  what  I  do  desire,  without  doing  anything  to  pro-
cure it,  that  if  by  chance,  or  in  any  other  way,  I  attain  my
object,  I  have  so  great  a  moral  lassitude,  and  am  so  harassed,
that  I  suffer  from  exhaustion,  and  have  no  longer  the
strength  to  enjoy  it.  So  things  which  come  to  me  without  any
longing  on  my  part  for  them  usually  give  me  more  pleasure
than  those  I  have  most  earnestly  desired.

I  am  twenty-two  ;  I  am  not  an  innocent.  Alas  !  nobody  is
nowadays  at  that  agç,  either  in  body  or  in  heart,  which  is
worse.  Besides  those  women  who  provide  pleasure  for  pay-
ment, and  who  no  more  count  than  an  evil  dream,  I  have


8  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

enjoyed  here  and  there,  in  some  out-of-the-way  spot  or  an-
other, a  few  honest,  or  ver>'  nearly  honest  women,  neither
beautiful  nor  ugly,  neither  young  nor  old,  taking  advantage  of
the  opportunities  which  present  themselves  to  easy-going
young  fellows  whose  hearts  are  free.  With  a  little  good-
will and  a  large  dose  of  romantic  illusions,  a  fellow  calls  one
of  them  a  mistress  if  he  pleases.  But  in  my  case  that  is
impossible,  for  I  might  have  a  thousand  of  that  sort,  and  I
should  still  consider  my  desire  as  far  from  fulfillment  as
ever.

I  have  not  yet  had  a  mistress,  and  my  great  desire  is  to
have  one.  It  is  an  idea  which  strangely  worries  me  !  it  is
neither  the  effervescence  of  temperament,  hot  blood,  nor  the
first  burst  of  puberty.  It  is  not  the  woman  I  desire,  it  is  a
w^oman,  a  mistress.  I  desire  one  and  I  will  have  one;  if  I  do
not  succeed,  I  must  admit,  my  failure  will  have  a  discour-
aging influence  on  the  rest  of  my  life.  I  should  consider
myself  a  failure  in  one  direction,  incomplete,  and  deformed
in  mind  or  heart;  for  my  demand  is  a  just  one,  and  nature
owes  it  to  every  man.  If  I  were  not  to  succeed  in  my  object,
I  should  look  upon  myself  as  a  child,  and  I  should  lack  the
self-confidence  I  ought  to  possess.  A  mistress  to  me  is  the
same  thing  as  the  toga  virilis  was  to  a  young  Roman.

I  see  so  many  men,  w^ho  are  ignoble  in  every  respect,  with
beautiful  wives  whose  lackeys  they  are  hardly  worthy  to  be,
that  a  blush  mounts  to  my  cheek  for  them,  and  also  for
myself.  It  gives  me  a  contemptible  opinion  of  women,  to
see  them  infatuated  with  cads  who  despise  and  deceive  them,
rather  than  give  themselves  to  some  sincere  and  loyal  young
fellow,  who  would  consider  himself  very  fortunate,  and  adore
them  on  his  bended  knees — myself,  for  example.  It  is  quite
true  that  the  former  are  the  men  who  haunt  drawing-rooms,
strut  about  or  loll  over  the  back  of  a  couch,  while  I  stay  in-
doors with  my  forehead  against  the  window-pane,  watching
the  mist  rise  from  the  river,  as  I  silently  raise  up  in  my  heart
the  perfumed  sanctuary,  the  marvelous  temple  in  which
lodge  the  future  idol  of  my  soul.  It  is  a  chaste  and  poetic  oc-
cupation, but  one  for  which  women  have  the  least  possible
liking.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  9


Women  have  very  little  taste  for  the  contemplative  and  a
singular  regard  for  those  who  turn  their  ideas  into  actions.
After  all,  they  are  not  far  wrong.  Obliged  by  their  educa-
tion and  social  position  to  keep  silent  and  wait,  they  nat-
urally prefer  men  who  come  to  them  and  speak,  for  they
rescue  them  from  a  false  and  awkward  position.  I  see  all
that;  but  never  in  my  life  could  I  take  upon  myself,  as  I  see
many  men  do,  to  get  up  from  my  seat,  walk  across  a  drawing-
room,  go  up  suddenly  to  a  woman  and  say,  '*Your  dress  is
quite  angelic,"  or  "Your  eyes  are  wonderfully  bright  to-
night."

But  all  that  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  a  mistress  is
necessary  to  me.  I  do  not  know  who  she  is  to  be,  but  I  do
not  see,  among  the  women  I  know,  one  who  could  properly
fill  that  dignified  position.  In  them  I  find  only  too  few
of  the  qualities  I  require.  Those  who  are  young  enough  are
neither  sufficiently  beautiful  nor  accomplished;  those  who  are
young  and  beautiful  are  ignoble  and  repulsive  in  their  vice,
or  else  lack  the  necessary  liberty;  and  then  there  is  always
some  brother,  some  husband,  or  some  aunt  with  large  eyes
and  ears,  to  be  coaxed  or  thrown  out  of  the  window.  Every
rose  has  its  thorn,  every  woman  her  crowd  of  relatives  to  be
cleared  away,  if  a  man  desires  one  day  to  pluck  the  fruit
of  her  beauty.  Even  the  second  cousins  in  the  country,  whom
one  has  never  seen,  wish  to  maintain,  in  all  its  whiteness,  the
immaculate  purity  of  their  dear  cousin.  That  is  nauseous,
and  I  should  never  have  the  patience  necessary  to  uproot  all
the  weeds  and  cut  away  all  the  briars  which  fatally  obstruct
the  approaches  to  a  pretty  woman.

I  do  not  like  mothers,  and  I  like  little  girls  less.  I  must
also  admit  that  married  women  have  only  a  very  mild  attrac-
tion for  me.  There  is  something  revolting  to  me  in  a  love
affair  with  a  woman  who  has  a  husband.  The  woman  who
has  a  husband  and  a  lover  is  a  courtesan  to  one  of  the  two,
and  often  to  both;  and  besides,  I  could  not  consent  to  yield
my  place  to  another.  My  natural  pride  would  not  know  how
to  bow  to  such  humiliation.  I  would  never  go  because  an-
other man  was  expected.  Even  were  the  woman  to  be  com-
promised and  lost,  and  the  two  men  to  fight  with  knives,  each


10  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

with  a  foot  upon  her  body,  I  would  remain.  Secret  stairs,
wardrobes,  closets,  and  all  the  appliances  of  adultery  would
be  a  poor  expedient  to  me.

I  am  very  little  attracted  by  what  is  called  virgin  candor,
innocence,  purity  of  heart,  and  the  other  charming  things
which  have  such  a  beautiful  effect  in  verse;  I  call  all  that
nonsense,  ignorance,  imbecility,  or  hypocrisy.  That  virgin
candor  which  consists  of  sitting  on  the  edge  of  a  couch  with
the  arms  pressed  against  the  body,  the  eye  upon  the  point
of  the  corset,  and  speaking  only  after  obtaining  permission
from  grandparents  ;  the  innocence  which  has  the  monopoly  of
straight  hair  and  white  dresses,  the  pureness  of  heart  which
wears  high  corsages  because  the  beauty  of  the  neck  and
shoulders  is  not  yet  developed,  do  not  really  give  me  great
pleasure.

I  do  not  care  for  them  sufficiently  to  spell  the  alphabet  of
love  to  the  little  simpletons.  I  am  neither  old  enough  nor
corrupt  enough  to  take  much  pleasure  in  them;  besides,  I
should  meet  with  very  little  success,  for  I  have  never  been
able  to  expound  a  subject,  even  one  with  which  I  am  well
acquainted,  to  any  one.  I  prefer  women  who  read  fluently,
for  then  the  end  of  the  chapter  is  reached  all  the  more
quickly;  and  in  all  things,  in  love  most  of  all,  the  end  is  the
thing  most  worthy  of  consideration.  In  this  respect  I  am
something  like  those  people  who  read  a  book  backwards,
turning  first  of  all  to  the  end,  and  then,  if  necessary,  going
back  to  the  beginning.  This  fashion  of  reading  and  loving
has  its  charm.  The  reader  enjoys  details  better  when  his
mind  is  easy  as  to  the  end  of  the  story;  reversing  the  order
leads  to  the  unexpected.

Now  little  girls  and  married  women  have  been  excluded
from  the  category.  Therefore,  our  divinity  must  be  selected
from  among  the  widows.  Alas  !  I  am  very  much  afraid,
although  it  is  the  last  resort,  that  I  shall  not  yet  find  what  I
seek  among  them.

If  I  were  to  love  one  of  those  pale  narcissi,  bathed  in  a
warm  dew  of  tears,  who  lean  with  melancholy  grace  upon  the
new  marble  tomb  of  a  husband  happily  and  recently  deceased,
I  should  most  certainly  and  in  a  very  short  time  be  as  un-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  11

happy  as  the  defunct  spouse  in  his  lifetime.  Widows,  how-
ever young  and  charming  they  may  be,  have  one  great  draw-
back which  other  wives  have  not.  Should  any  small  cloud
appear  in  the  sky  of  love,  they  tell  you  at  once,  with  a  super-
latively contemptuous  air:  ''Ah,  to-day  you  are  just  like  my
late  husband  used  to  be;  when  we  quarreled  he  used  to  say
just  the  same;  it  is  very  strange  that  you  should  have  a
similar  tone  in  your  voice  and  the  same  look;  when  you  lose
your  temper  you  would  not  believe  how  you  resemble  my
late  husband;  there  is  quite  a  terrifying  likeness.''  That  is
a  pleasant  sort  of  thing  to  be  told  to  one's  face  !  There  are
some  even  who  extend  their  impudence  as  far  as  to  praise
the  departed  in  the  manner  of  an  epitaph,  and  to  extol  his
heart  and  limbs  at  the  expense  of  your  own.  At  least,  in  the
case  of  wives  who  have  only  had  one  or  several  lovers,  a
husband  has  the  inestimable  advantage  of  never  hearing  his
predecessor  mentioned,  and  that  is  no  slight  consideration.
Women  have  too  great  a  regard  for  the  proprieties  not  to
remain  scrupulously  silent  under  such  circumstances,  and  all
such  affairs  are  relegated  to  obscurity  as  soon  as  possible.  It
is  quite  understood  that  a  man  is  always  a  woman's  first  lover.
I  do  not  think  that  there  is  any  argument  to  oppose  to
such  a  well-founded  aversion.  It  is  not  that  I  find  widows
without  any  attraction  when  they  are  young  and  pretty,  and
have  not  left  off  their  mourning.  They  have  little  languish-
ing airs,  ways  of  letting  their  arms  droop,  bending  their
necks,  and  bridling  up  like  a  dove  bereft  of  its  mate;  a
number  of  charming  mannerisms  are  softly  veiled  beneath
crape's  transparency,  such  as  the  coquetry  of  despair,  sighs
adroitly  uttered,  and  tears  which  fall  so  opportunely,  and
leave  the  eyes  so  bright!  Truly,  next  to  wine,  even  if  not
before  it,  the  liquor  I  love  best  to  drink  is  a  beautiful  tear,
clear  and  limpid,  trembling  upon  the  tip  of  blonde  or  dark
lash.  What  resistance  can  be  opposed  to  it?  None;  besides,
black  suits  women  so  well  !  The  white  skin,  a  poesy  apart,
turns  to  ivory,  snow,  milk,  and  alabaster.  Mourning  is  good
fortune  to  a  woman,  and  the  reason  I  shall  never  marry  is
for  fear  my  wife  may  have  to  wear  mourning  for  me.  There
are  women,  of  course,  who  do  not  know  how  to  make  the  best


12  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


of  their  grief,  and  weep  so  that  they  make  their  noses  red,
and  distort  their  features.  That  is  a  great  danger.  A  woman
requires  much  charm  and  art  to  weep  agreeably;  without  it
she  runs  the  risk  of  being  long  without  consolation.  But,
however  great  may  be  the  pleasure  of  making  some  Arte-
misia unfaithful  to  the  shade  of  her  Mausolus,  I  shall  not
choose  from  among  the  host  of  the  bereft  a  woman  to  ask
for  her  heart  in  exchange  for  mine.

I  can  almost  hear  you  say,  ''Who  then  will  you  have?  You
will  neither  have  young  girls,  married  women,  nor  widows.
You  do  not  like  mothers,  so  I  presume  you  have  no  great
affection  for  grandmothers.  Whom  do  you  really  love?"  Up
till  now  I  have  never  loved  any  woman,  but  I  have  loved  and
still  love  "Love."  Although  I  have  not  had  a  mistress,  and
the  women  with  w^hom  I  have  had  love  affairs  have  only
inspired  me  with  desire,  I  have  felt  and  I  can  recognize  real
love.  I  did  not  love  this  woman  or  that,  one  rather  than  the
other,  but  some  one  I  have  never  seen,  though  she  must  exist
somewhere,  whom  I  shall  find,  please  God.  I  know  very
well  what  she  is  like,  and  w^hen  I  meet  her  I  shall  recognize
her.

I  have  very  often  pictured  to  myself  the  place  where  she
dwells,  the  costume  she  wears,  her  eyes  and  hair.  I  can
hear  her  voice  ;  I  shall  recognize  her  walk  in  a  thousand,  and
if  by  chance  her  name  is  spoken  I  shall  turn;  it  is  impossible
for  her  not  to  have  one  of  the  five  or  six  names  I  have  given
her  in  my  dreams.

She  wi!l  be  twenty-six,  neither  more  nor  less.

She  will  not  be  innocent,  nor  yet  blasé.  That  is  a  charming
age  for  love-making  without  puerility  or  licentiousness.  She
will  be  of  medium  height;  I  do  not  care  for  giants  or  dwarfs.
I  wish  to  be  able  to  bear  my  beauty  from  the  sofa  to  the
bed  ;  but  it  would  displease  me  to  find  her  there.  Her  mouth,
when  she  stands  on  tiptoe,  must  be  within  reach  of  my  kiss.
She  must  have  a  good  figure,  rather  plump  than  thin.  I  have
somewhat  Turkish  ideas  on  that  point,  and  I  should  not  care
to  meet  a  bone  where  I  expected  a  curve;  a  woman's  skin
should  be  full,  and  her  flesh  hard  and  firm  like  an  imripc
peach;  that  is  exactly  how  the  mistress  I  shall  have  will  be


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  13

made.  She  will  be  fair  with  black  eyes,  fair  as  a  blonde  and
dark  as  a  brunette,  with  something  red  and  sparkling  in  her
smile.  Her  lower  lip  will  be  a  little  full,  her  throat  small
and  round,  her  wrists  fine,  her  hands  long  and  plump,  her
walk  undulating  like  a  snake  poised  upon  its  tail,  her  hips
strong  and  mobile,  her  shoulders  broad,  and  the  back  of  her
neck  covered  with  down.  She  will  be  a  sort  of  beauty  at  the
same  time  fine  and  strong,  elegant  and  vivacious,  poetic  and
real,  a  Rubens  picture.

I  would  not  adorn  her  with  a  ring  or  a  bracelet  Her
dress  must  be  literally  velvet  or  brocade;  I  could  hardly
permit  her  to  descend  to  satin.  I  prefer  to  rumple  a  silk
skirt  rather  than  a  cloth  one,  and  to  make  fall  from  a  head
pearls  or  feathers  rather  than  natural  flowers  or  a  simple
bow.  I  know  that  the  lining  of  the  cloth  skirt  is  often  as
appetizing  as  that  of  the  silk  one;  but  I  prefer  the  silk
skirt.  So,  in  my  dreams,  I  have  given  myself  as  mistresses,
many  queens,  empresses,  princesses,  sultanas,  and  celebrated
courtesans,  but  never  poor  women  or  shepherdesses;  and  in
my  most  vagabond  desires  I  have  never  thought  of  the  green
sward  of  the  bed  of  poverty.  I  consider  beauty  a  diamond  to
be  mounted  and  encased  in  gold.  I  cannot  conceive  a  beau-
tiful woman  without  carriages,  horses,  servants,  and  all  the
attributes  of  wealth;  there  is  harmony  between  beauty  and
riches.  One  demands  the  other;  a  pretty  foot  calls  for  a
beautiful  shoe,  and  that,  in  turn,  needs  a  handsome  carpet,  a
carriage,  and  their  attributes.  A  beautiful  woman  with  poor
clothes  in  an  ugly  house  is,  to  my  mind,  the  most  painful
spectacle  it  is  possible  to  behold,  and  I  could  have  no  love
for  her.  It  is  only  the  rich  and  beautiful  who  can  be  amorous
without  being  ridiculous  or  pitiable.  On  this  reckoning  few
people  would  have  the  right  to  be  lovers.  I  myself  should
first  of  all  be  excluded  ;  still,  that  is  my  opinion.

We  shall  meet  for  the  first  time  in  the  evening,  at  the
time  of  a  beautiful  sunset;  the  sky  will  have  those  orange
yellow  and  pale  green  tints  sometimes  seen  in  pictures  by  the
great  masters  of  the  past;  there  will  be  a  fine  avenue  of
chestnut  trees  in  flower,  and  ancient  elms,  the  home  of  the
wood-pigeon,   beautiful   trees   of   fresh  dark  green,  casting


14  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAIJPIN


shadows  full  of  mystery  and  moisture;  that,  with  a  few
statues,  some  marble  vases  standing  out  from  the  green  back-
ground with  the  whiteness  of  snow,  a  sheet  of  water  where
the  familiar  swan  disports  itself,  and,  right  in  the  distance,
a  mansion  of  brick  and  stone,  of  the  Henry  IV  period,  with
a  roof  of  pointed  slates,  lofty  chimneys,  a  weathercock  on
every  gable,  and  long  narrow  windows,  will  complete  the
scene.  At  one  of  these  windows  will  sorrowfully  lean  on  the
balcony  the  queen  of  my  soul  in  the  attire  I  have  just  de-
scribed ;  behind  her  will  stand  a  little  negro  boy  holding  her
fan  and  parrot.  You  see  there  is  nothing  lacking,  and  it
is  all  perfectly  absurd.  The  beauty  will  drop  her  glove;  I
shall  pick  it  up,  kiss  it,  and  restore  it  to  her.  A  conversa-
tion will  ensue;  I  shall  display  all  the  cleverness  I  do  not
possess;  I  shall  utter  charming  phrases  and  receive  suitable
replies;  the  conversation  will  become  a  luminous  shower  of
dazzling  words.  In  short,  I  shall  be  adorable  and  adored.
As  the  time  for  supper  approaches  I  shall  be  invited  to  share
the  meal  ;  I  shall  accept.  What  a  supper,  my  old  friend,  and
what  a  menu  my  imagination  has  supplied  !  Wine  will
sparkle  in  the  glasses,  a  white  and  gold  pheasant  will  smoke
upon  a  crested  dish.  The  meal  will  be  prolonged  far  into
the  night,  and  you  may  imagine  I  shall  not  be  the  person  to
bring  it  to  an  end.  Is  not  that  a  fine  effort  of  the  imagina-
tion? Nothing  in  the  world  is  more  simple,  and  really  it  is
very  surprising  that  it  has  not  happened  ten  times  rather
than  once.

Sometimes  the  scene  is  laid  in  a  mighty  forest.  The  hunt
is  passing  ;  the  horn  is  heard,  the  pack  give  tongue  and  cross
the  ride  like  a  flash  of  lightning;  the  beautiful  Amazon  is
mounted  upon  a  Turkish  horse,  white  as  milk  and  frisky.
Although  she  is  an  excellent  horsewoman,  her  mount  rears,
prances,  and  she  has  the  greatest  difficulty  in  the  world  in
controlling  him;  he  takes  the  bit  between  his  teeth  and
gallops  straight  towards  a  precipice.  I  drop  from  the  clouds
at  exactly  the  right  moment;  I  stop  the  horse,  catch  in  my
arms  the  fainting  princess,  I  restore  her  to  consciousness,
and  escort  her  back  to  her  mansion.  What  well-born  woman
would  refuse  her  heart  to  a  man  who  risked  his  life  for  her.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  15

None  ;  and  gratitude  îs  a  cross  road  which  very  quickly  leads
to  love.

You  will  agree  that  when  I  romance  I  do  not  do  so  by
halves,  and  that  I  am  as  mad  as  it  is  possible  to  be.  That  is
so,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  world  more  disagreeable  than
reasonable  madness.  You  must  also  admit  that  when  I  write
letters  they  are  more  like  volumes  than  simple  notes.  In
everything  I  love  the  unusual.  That  is  why  I  love  you.
Don't  laugh  too  loudly  at  all  the  nonsense  I  have  written  to
you;  I  have  cast  aside  the  pen  for  action,  for  I  have  got
back  to  my  original  text.  I  desire  a  mistress.  I  am  not
aware  whether  she  will  be  the  lady  of  the  park  or  the  lady
of  the  balcony,  but  I  bid  you  good-by  to  go  in  search  of  her.
My  mind  is  made  up.  Wherever  she  may  conceal  herself
I  shall  find  her  out.  I  will  let  you  know  the  success  or  non-
success  of  my  enterprise.  I  hope  I  shall  be  successful:  let
me  have  your  good  wishes,  old  friend.  I  have  dressed  in  my
best,  and  made  up  my  mind  to  go  out  and  not  come  back
without  a  mistress  to  suit  my  taste.  I  have  dreamed  enough  ;
now  for  action.

P.  S. — Let  me  have  news  of  little  D.  What  has  become
of  him?  No  one  here  knows  anything  of  him;  give  my  com-
pliments to  your  worthy  brother  and  all  the  family.


CHAPTER   II


Well,  old  friend,  I  have  returned  home  after  my  wander-
ings, but  I  must  admit  that  I  am  still  without  a  mistress.
After  taking  myself  by  the  hand  and  swearing  that  I  would
go  to  the  end  of  the  world,  I  have  only  been  to  the  end  of  the
town.

I  must  tell  you  the  story  of  my  expedition,  for  it  is  well
worth  narrating.  I  spent  two  long  hours  over  my  toilet,
and  really  did  not  look  at  all  bad.  So,  after  carefully  in-
specting myself  in  the  mirror  in  various  lights,  to  see  if  I


16  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

was  good-looking  enough  and  had  a  sufficient  gallant  air,
I  resolutely  sallied  forth  with  my  head  in  the  air,  wearing
the  real  conquering  manner.

I  was  like  a  second  Jason  setting  forth  to  the  conquest  of
a  golden  fleece.  But  alas  !  Jason  was  more  fortunate  than  I  ;
he  made  the  conquest  of  a  beautiful  princess  as  well  as  the
^ecce,  while  I  did  neither.

I  went  through  the  streets  gazing  at  the  women  and  exam-
ining them  more  closely,  if  they  seemed  worth  the  trouble.
Some  assumed  an  exceedingly  virtuous  air  and  passed  by
without  lifting  their  eyes.  Others  seemed  astonished  at  first,
and  then,  if  they  had  beautiful  teeth,  smiled.  Some  turned
round  after  a  time  to  look  at  me,  when  they  thought  I  was
no  longer  watching  them,  and  blushed  as  our  eyes  met.  The
weather  w^as  fine,  there  was  a  crowd  upon  the  promenade.
But  I  must  admit,  in  spite  of  all  the  respect  I  bear  that  half
of  the  human  race  entitled  the  "fair  sex,"  that  the  majority
of  them  are  devilishly  ugly;  hardly  one  in  a  hundred  is
passable.  What  expressions  too,  of  envy,  evil  curiosity,
greed,  and  coquetry,  were  to  be  seen  upon  their  faces  !  For
a  woman  who  is  not  beautiful  is  more  ugly  than  a  man  who
is  not  handsome  !

I  saw  no  one  pretty,  except  a  few  grisettes;  but  as  they
were  not  of  the  ''silk  skirt'*  class  I  had  no  concern  with  them.
In  sooth,  I  think  that  man,  including  woman,  is  the  ugliest
animal  on  earth.  A  lion  and  tiger  are  more  beautiful  than
man,  and  in  their  species  many  individual  animals  attain  to
all  possible  beauty.

I  am  very  much  afraid,  old  friend,  I  shall  never  be  able
to  attain  my  ideal,  although  there  is  nothing  extraordinary
or  unnatural  about  it.  It  is  an  ideal  almost  plebeian  in  its
simplicity,  and  I  think  that  with  a  bag  or  two  of  piastres
I  should  find  it  quite  realizable  in  the  first  bazaar  I  came
across  in  Constantinople  or  Smyrna;  it  would  probably  cost
me  less  than  a  horse  or  well-bred  dog;  but  the  thought  that
I  shall  not  succeed,  for  that  is  my  opinion,  is  very  annoying,
and  I  returned  home  in  a  very  fine  rage  against  fate.

You,  who  are  not  as  mad  as  I,  are  happy,  for  you  have
^accepted  your  life  and  take  things  as  you  find  them.    You  have


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  17


not  sought  happiness,  and  it  has  come  to  find  you;  you  are
loved  and  you  love.  I  do  not  envy  you;  at  least  don't  think
that;  but  I  find  myself  less  glad  in  thinking  of  your  happiness
than  I  ought  to  be,  and  I  tell  myself  with  a  sigh  that  I  should
like  to  enjoy  similar  felicity.

Perhaps  my  happiness  passed  me  by,  and,  blind  that  I  am,
I  did  not  see  it;  perhaps  the  voice  spoke,  but  the  noise  of
my  own  tempest  drowned  it.

Perchance  I  have  been  loved  obscurely  by  a  humble  heart
which  I  have  misinterpreted  or  broken;  perhaps  I  have  been
the  ideal  of  another,  the  dream  of  a  night  and  the  thought
of  a  day.  If  I  had  looked  down,  perhaps  I  should  have
seen  a  beautiful  Madeleine,  with  moistened  hair  and  a  vessel
of  perfume.  I  may  have  passed  w^ith  my  arms  lifted  up  to
heaven  in  an  endeavor  to  capture  the  gleaming  stars  which
evaded  me,  and  disdained  to  pluck  the  little  daisy  which  opened
its  heart  of  gold  amid  the  dew  and  grass.  I  have  committed
a  great  fault.  I  have  asked  love  for  something  else  than
love,  and  for  a  thing  it  cannot  give.  I  have  forgotten  that
love  is  naked,  and  I  have  not  realized  the  sense  of  this  mag-
nificent symbol.  I  have  demanded  brocade  dresses,  feathers,
diamonds,  a  sublime  intelligence,  knowledge,  poesy,  beauty,
youth,  and  supreme  power,  things  quite  apart;  for  love  can
only  offer  itself,  and  the  persons  who  desire  to  draw  aught
else  from  it  are  not  worthy  of  being  loved.

Without  a  doubt  I  am  too  hasty;  my  time  is  not  yet  come.
God  who  has  loaned  me  life  will  not  snatch  it  away  before
I  have  lived.  What  use  to  a  poet  is  a  lyre  without  strings,
to  man  a  life  without  love?  God  cannot  commit  such  an
inconsistency,  and,  without  a  doubt,  at  the  desired  moment
He  will  put  upon  my  path  the  woman  I  must  love  and  by
whom  I  shall  be  loved.  But  why  has  love  come  to  me  before
the  mistress  !  Why  am  I  thirsty  without  having  a  fountain
at  which  to  quench  my  thirst?  or  why  cannot  I  fly,  like  the
birds  of  the  desert,  to  the  place  where  water  is  to  be  found  ?
The  world  to  me  is  a  Sahara  without  wells  and  date  palms.
I  have  not  in  my  life  a  single  shady  comer  in  which  to
shelter  from  the  sun;  I  suflfer  all  the  ardor  of  passion  without
its  ecstasy  and  ineffable  delight;  I  know  its  torments,  but  I


18  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

do  not  enjoy  its  pleasures.  I  am  jealous  of  that  which  does
not  exist;  I  shed  tears  which  fall  to  the  earth  without
being  wiped  away;  I  give  to  the  wind  kisses  which  are  not
returned  to  me;  I  wait  for  that  which  does  not  come,  and  I
anxiously  count  the  hours  as  if  I  had  a  rendezvous.

Whatever  you  may  be,  angel  or  demon,  virgin  or  courte-
san, shepherdess  or  princess,  whether  you,  the  woman  I  do
not  know  and  love,  come  from  the  North  or  the  South,  do
not  keep  me  waiting  any  longer,  or  the  flame  will  burn  the
altar,  and  you  will  find  in  place  of  my  heart  nothing  but  a
piece  of  cold  cinder  !  Come,  woman  whom  I  am  to  love,
that  I  may  enclose  you  in  my  arms,  which  have  been  open
so  long  !

If  you  come  too  late,  my  ideal,  I  shall  no  longer  have  the
strength  to  love  you  ;  my  soul  is  like  a  dovecote  full  of  doves.
At  every  hour  of  the  day  some  desire  flies  away  from  it.  The
doves  return  to  the  dovecote,  but  desires  do  not  return  to
the  heart.  Hasten  your  footsteps,  my  dream,  or  all  that  will
remain  in  the  empty  nest  will  be  the  feathers  of  the  departed
birds.

Old  friend,  companion  of  my  youth,  you  are  the  only  one
to  whom  I  can  tell  these  things.  Write  to  me  that  you  pity
me  and  do  not  consider  me  splenetic  ;  console  me,  for  I  have
never  before  had  such  need  of  it;  how  much  to  be  envied
are  those  who  have  a  passion  they  can  satisfy  !  The  drunkard,
the  sensualist,  and  the  gambler  can  all  assuage  their  pas-
sions or  distract  themselves,  but  in  my  case  either  is  quite
impossible.

This  idea  has  so  taken  possession  of  me  that  I  have  ceased
to  regard  art,  and  poetry  has  little  charm  for  me  now;  my
former  delights  make  the  least  impression  upon  me  now.

I  begin  to  think  that  I  am  not  in  my  right  senses,  and  am
asking  of  nature  and  society  more  than  they  can  give.  The
object  of  my  search  may  not  exist,  and  I  must  not  complain
because  I  cannot  find  it.  But  if  the  woman  of  whom  I  dream
is  not  of  flesh  and  blood,  why  is  it  that  I  love  her,  and  not
others,  since  I  am  a  man,  and  my  instinct  ought  to  direct  me
in  an  unmistakable  way  ?  Who  has  given  me  the  idea  of  this
imaginary  woman?     What,  then,  is  this  abstract  beauty  I


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  19

feel  and  cannot  define?  Why,  in  the  presence  of  a  woman
often  quite  charming,  do  I  sometimes  say  that  she  is  beauti-
ful, while  I  think  her  very  ugly?  Where  then  is  the  model,
the  type,  the  internal  pattern  which  serves  me  as  a  com-
parison? For  beauty  is  not  an  absolute  idea,  and  can  only
be  appreciated  by  contrast.  Have  I  seen  it  in  the  sky,  in  a
star,  at  a  ball,  under  a  mother's  wing,  in  Italy  or  Spain,
here  or  there,  yesterday  or  long  ago?  Is  she  the  beloved
courtesan,  the  famous  singer,  or  the  princess?  Is  it  Raphael
who  painted  the  face  which  pleases  me,  or  Cleomenes  who
has  polished  the  marble  I  adore?  Is  the  mistress  a  Madonna
or  a  Diana?    Is  the  ideal  an  angel,  a  sylph,  or  a  woman?

Alas  !  the  ideal  is  a  little  of  them  all  ;  but  how  can  a  real
woman,  eating  and  drinking,  rising  in  the  morning  and  going
to  bed  at  night,  however  graceful  and  adorable  she  may
be,  bear  comparison  with  such  a  creature  !  It  is  not  reason-
able to  hope  she  can  do  so,  but  while  we  hope  we  seek.  What
strange  blindness  it  is  !  It  is  either  sublime  or  absurd.  How
I  pity  and  admire  those  who  pursue  through  it  all  the  reality
of  their  dream,  and  die  content  provided  that  once  they  have
kissed  their  chimera  upon  the  mouth  !  But  what  a  frightful
fate  is  that  of  the  lover  who  has  not  found  his  mistress  !

Ah,  if  I  were  a  poet,  it  is  to  those  whose  existence  has
been  a  failure,  whose  arrows  have  not  reached  their  mark,
who  have  died  without  uttering  the  words  they  had  to  say
and  without  pressing  the  hand  destined  for  them,  to  all  who
have  loved  without  being  loved,  who  have  suflFered  without
being  pitied,  that  I  would  consecrate  my  verses;  it  would  be
a  noble  task.

Now  all  this  is  very  far  from  our  subject,  old  friend,  but
the  story  is  such  a  poor  one  that  I  am  forced  to  have  re-
course to  digressions  and  reflections.  I  hope  that  it  will
not  be  always  thus,  and  that  before  long  the  history  of  my
life  will  be  more  entangled  and  complicated  than  a  Spanish
imbroglio.

After  wandering  from  street  to  street,  I  made  up  my  mind
to  call  on  a  friend  who  would  introduce  me  to  a  house  where,
I  had  been  told,  all  the  pretty  women  were  to  be  seen;  a
collection  of  ideals  in  real   life  sufiScient  to  satisfy  twenty


20  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

poets.  There  are  beauties  to  suit  all  tastes,  for  the  house  is
a  real  seraglio  without  the  eunuchs.  My  friend  tells  me  that
he  has  already  had  five  or  six  love  affairs  there,  but  I  am
afraid  that  I  shall  not  have  similar  success,  though  my  friend
pretends  I  shall,  and  even  be  more  favored  than  I  desire.  I
have,  according  to  him,  but  one  fault  in  society,  which  age
will  correct,  and  that  is  thinking  too  much  of  the  woman
and  not  enough  of  women.  There  may  be,  too,  some  truth
in  it.  He  says  I  shall  be  perfectly  lovable  when  I  have  got
rid  of  this  little  failing.  May  it  be  so  !  It  is  necessary  for
women  to  feel  that  I  despise  them;  for  a  compliment  they
would  consider  charming  and  adorable  from  the  mouth  of
another  angers  and  displeases  them  from  mine  as  much  as  the
most  biting  epigram.  That,  probably,  has  some  connection
with  my  friend's  reproaches.

My  heart  beat  as  I  ascended  the  staircase,  and  I  had
hardly  mastered  my  emotion  when  my  friend,  nudging  me
with  his  elbow,  brought  me  face  to  face  with  a  woman  of
about  thirty,  who  was  passably  good-looking  and  dressed
luxuriously,  though  with  an  extremely  pretentious  and  child-
ish simplicity,  which  did  not  prevent  her  from  being  plastered
with  red  like  a  carriage-wheel.    She  was  the  lady  of  the  house.

C,  assuming  the  mocking  and  shrill  voice,  so  different
from  his  usual  tones,  which  he  uses  in  society  when  he  wishes
to  pose  as  a  charmer,  began  with  a  great  show  of  ironical
respect,  through  which  the  most  profound  contempt  could
be  discerned,  half  aloud,  half  in  a  whisper  :  'This  is  the  young
man  I  mentioned  to  you  the  other  day,  a  fellow  of  great
attainments  ;  he  is  well  bred,  and  I  feel  sure  you  will  be  glad
to  welcome  him;  that  is  the  reason  I  have  taken  the  liberty
of  bringing  him."

''Certainly,  sir,  you  have  done  quite  right,"  the  lady  replied,
simpering  in  a  most  extravagant  fashion.  Then  she  turned
to  me,  and  after  looking  me  up  and  down,  out  of  the  corner
of  her  eye,  in  a  way  that  made  me  blush  up  to  my  ears,  said,
*'You  can  consider  yourself  as  invited  once  and  for  all,  sir,
and  come  as  often  as  you  have  an  evening  to  spare."

I  bowed,  awkwardly  enough,  and  murmured  a  few  inco-
herent words,  not  likely  to  give  her  a  great  idea  of  my  abil-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  21

ities;  then,  other  people  arriving,  I  was  delivered  from  the
boredom  inseparable  from  presentation.  C.  drew  me  into  a
corner  by  the  window  and  began  to  instruct  me.

"Well,  you  are  a  fine  fellow  !  You  will  compromise  me.
I  described  you  as  a  mental  phenomenon,  a  man  with  a  fren-
zied imagination,  a  lyrical  poet  of  the  most  transcendent  and
passionate  order,  and  you  stand  there  like  a  blockhead  without
uttering  a  word  !  What  a  poor  effort  !  I  thought  you  were  a
little  more  prolific.  Come,  let  loose  the  bridle  of  your  tongue;
babble  something.  There  is  no  need  to  make  sensible  and
judicious  remarks — on  the  other  hand,  they  would  be  detri-
mental to  you;  but  it  is  quite  essential  to  talk;  say  a  great
deal  and  make  it  last;  attract  attention  to  yourself;  cast  aside
all  fear  and  modesty;  get  well  into  your  head  the  fact  that
all  present  are  fools,  or  almost,  and  do  not  forget  that  an
orator  who  wants  to  succeed  cannot  despise  his  audience  too
much.  What  do  you  think  of  the  mistress  of  the  house  ?"

'*She  displeases  me  considerably,  already;  and  although  I
spoke  to  her  for  barely  a  minute,  I  was  almost  as  bored  as  if  I
had  been  her  husband."

"Ah  !  is  that  your  opinion  of  her  ?"

"Yes."

''So  your  dislike  to  her  is  quite  insurmountable?  So  much
the  worse;  it  would  have  been  the  correct  thing  for  you  to
have  been  her  lover  for  at  least  a  month,  and  a  young  man
cannot  be  better  launched  into  society  than  by  her."

"Ah  well  !  I  will  make  the  best  of  it,"  I  replied  in  pitiful
tones,  "since  it  is  necessary;  but  must  I  also  pretend  to  be
in  earnest?"

"Alas,  yes;  that  is  quite  indispensable,  and  I  will  explain
the  reason.  Madame  de  Thémines  is  now  in  the  fashion;
she  has  all  the  mannerisms  of  the  day  to  a  superior  degree
and  sometimes  those  of  to-morrow,  but  never  those  of  yes-
terday; she  is  quite  up-to-date.  People  wear  what  she  wears,
but  she  never  wears  what  has  been  worn.  Besides,  she  is  rich,
and  her  carriages  are  in  the  best  of  taste.  She  has  no  mind,
but  a  great  deal  of  chatter;  she  has  very  vigorous  tastes  and
little  passion.  She  can  be  pleased,  but  not  touched,  for  her
heart  is  cold,  though  she  has  a  licentious  head.    As  for  her


22  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

soul,  if  she  has  one,  which  is  doubtful,  it  is  very  black,  and
there  is  no  spite  and  unkindness  of  which  she  is  not  capable;
but  she  is  extremely  clever,  and  preserves  appearances  so  far
as  it  is  necessary,  so  that  nothing  can  be  proved  against  her.
For  that  reason  she  will  have  a  love  affair  with  a  man  though
she  will  not  write  him  the  simplest  of  notes.  On  this  account,
her  enemies  most  familiar  with  her  ways  can  find  nothing  to
say  against  her  except  that  she  puts  on  her  rouge  too  thickly,
and  that  certain  parts  of  her  person  are  not  actually  as  round
as  they  appear  to  be — that  is  false/'

**How  do  you  know?''

*'What  a  question!  How  do  we  find  out  such  things,
except  by  personal  observation  ?'*

^'So  you  have  been  her  lover  ?*'

"Certainly  !  Why  not  ?  It  would  have  been  most  unseemly
of  me  not  to  have  done  so.  She  has  done  me  great  services,
and  I  am  very  grateful  to  her.'*

*'I  do  not  understand  the  kind  of  services  she  can  have
rendered  you?''

''Are  you  really  a  fool?"  C.  then  said,  looking  at  me  with
a  most  comical  expression.  *'I  am  beginning  to  think  so;
must  I  then  tell  you  everything?  Madame  de  Thémines
professes,  and  quite  rightly  so,  to  have  special  information
from  certain  places,  and  a  young  man  whom  she  has  taken
under  her  wing  for  a  time  can  boldly  present  himself  any-
where, and  be  quite  sure  that  he  will  not  be  long  without  a
love  affair,  and  often  have  two  rather  than  one.  Beyond  this
outstanding  advantage,  another  almost  as  great  is  that  when
society  women  see  that  you  are  the  acknowledged  lover  of
Madame  de  Thémines,  even  if  they  have  not  the  slightest
liking  for  you,  they  look  upon  it  as  a  pleasure  and  a  duty
to  take  you  away  from  a  fashionable  woman  like  her,  and
instead  of  having  to  make  advances  and  overtures,  you  will
have  quite  an  embarrassing  choice,  and  become  the  target
of  every  possible  encouragement  and  attention.  But  if  she
inspires  you  with  such  repugnance,  do  not  attempt  the  con-
quest. You  are  not  precisely  obliged  to  do  so,  though  it
would  have  been  polite  and  expedient  to  have  done  so.  But
quickly   make   a   choice  and   lay  siege  to  the  heart   of   the


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  23

woman  who  pleases  you  most,  or  seems  to  offer  the  greatest
facilities,  for,  if  you  do  not,  you  will  lose  the  benefit  of
novelty  and  the  advantage  that  gives  you  for  a  few  days  over
all  the  other  suitors  here.  All  these  ladies  have  no  concep-
tion of  passions  born  in  intimacy,  and  developed  slowly  in
respect  and  silence.  They  are  fonder  of  lightning  wooings
and  occult  sympathies,  and  these  are  marvelously  well  de-
signed to  do  away  with  the  boredom  of  resistance,  and  all
those  repetitions  and  delays  which  sentiment  introduces  into
the  romance  of  love,  and  which  only  serve  to  unnecessarily
postpone  its  consummation.  These  ladies  are  very  economi-
cal with  their  time,  and  it  appears  to  them  so  precious  that
they  would  be  in  the  depths  of  despair  were  a  single  moment
of  it  to  be  left  unemployed.  They  have  a  longing  to  oblige
mankind  which  cannot  be  too  highly  praised,  and  they  love
their  neighbor  as  themselves — another  perfectly  gospel-like
and  meritorious  trait  ;  they  are  very  charitable  creatures,  who
would  not  on  any  account  cause  the  death  of  a  man  through
despair.

'Three  or  four  of  them  already  seem  to  be  favorably  im-
pressed by  you,  and  I  should,  in  a  friendly  way,  advise  you
to  press  home  the  attack,  instead  of  amusing  yourself  by
standing  chattering  to  me  at  a  window,  for  that  will  not
advance  your  position  much,"

*'But,  my  dear  C,  I  am  quite  new  to  all  this,  and  have  not
the  ability  to  distinguish  at  a  glance  whether  a  woman  is
favorably  impressed  with  me  or  not;  and  I  might  commit
some  curious  blunders,  if  you  did  not  assist  me  with  your
experience."

''Really,  you  are  unutterably  primitive,  and  I  would  not
have  thought  it  possible  for  a  man  to  be  so  pastoral  and
bucolic  in  the  century  in  which  we  are  privileged  to  live  !
What  use  do  you  make  of  your  pair  of  big  black  eyes,  which
would  have  a  most  killing  effect  if  you  only  knew  how  to  use
them  properly.  Look  at  the  little  woman  in  red  in  the  corner
near  the  fire  place,  playing  with  her  fan.  She  has  been
ogling  you  for  the  last  quarter  of  an  hour  with  significant
intensity.  She  has  such  a  superior  way  of  being  indecent,  and
displays   such    noble   effrontery.      She   displeases   the   other


24  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


women  very  much,  for  they  despair  of  reaching  the  lofty
pinnacle  of  impudence  that  she  has  attained;  but,  on  the  other
liand,  she  is  a  great  favorite  with  the  men,  who  find  that
she  possesses  all  the  piquancy  of  a  courtesan.  Her  depravity
is  really  very  charming,  for  she  is  clever,  spirited,  and
capricious.  She  is  an  excellent  mistress  for  a  young  man
with  prejudices.  In  a  week  she  will  rid  your  conscience  of
every  scruple  and  corrupt  your  heart  so  that  you  will  never
again  be  ridiculous  or  elegiac.  She  has  on  all  subjects  in-
expressibly positive  ideas;  she  goes  to  the  root  of  things
with  quite  astonishing  rapidity  and  certainty.  This  litde
woman  is  algebra  incarnate;  she  is  just  the  thing  for  a
dreamer  and  an  enthusiast.  She  will  soon  correct  your  lazy
idealism,  and,  in  so  doing,  will  render  you  a  great  service.
She  will  do  it,  too,  with  the  greatest  of  pleasure,  for  the  dis-
enchantment of  poets  is  an  instinct  with  her."

My  curiosity  being  aroused  by  C.'s  description,  I  left  my
retreat,  and  making  my  way  between  the  various  groups,  ap-
proached the  lady  and  took  careful  stock  of  her.  She  was
about  twenty-five  or  twenty-six.  She  was  short,  but  well
proportioned,  although  somewhat  inclined  to  plumpness;  she
had  a  white,  fat  arm,  and  a  fine  hand,  with  a  pretty,  though
not  too  tiny,  foot;  her  shoulders  were  plump  and  gleaming,
and  her  throat  was  small,  but  very  satisfying,  and  giving  a
good  idea  of  the  rest  of  her  person.  Her  hair  was  of  an
extremely  brilliant  blue-black,  like  the  wings  of  a  jay;  her
nose  was  small,  with  the  nostrils  wide  open,  her  mouth
moist  and  sensual,  and  she  had  a  little  line  upon  her  lower
lip.  With  it  all  was  a  life,  animation,  health,  strength,  and
something  of  an  expression  of  luxury,  cleverly  tempered  by
coquetry  and  intrigue,  which  made  her  a  most  desirable
creature,^  and  justified,  or  more  than  justified,  the  passions
she  had  inspired  and  did  arouse  every  day.

I  liked  her,  but  I  nevertheless  realized  that  this  woman,
agreeable  though  she  was,  would  not  realize  my  desire  and
make  me  say.    "At  last  I  have  a  mistress  !"

I  went  back  to  C.  and  said,  "The  lady  pleases  me,  and
perhaps  I  may  come  to  an  understanding  with  her.  But  before
committing  myself,  I  should  be  greatly  obliged  if  you  would


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  25

point  out  to  me  the  other  indulgent  beauties  who  did  me
the  honor  to  be  favorably  impressed  with  me,  so  that  I  may
make  my  choice.  It  will  be  doing  me  a  great  favor  if,  as
you  are  my  instructor  here,  you  will  add  a  short  notice  of
each,  mention  their  faults  and  good  qualities,  instruct  me  in
the  way  I  should  attack  them  and  the  tone  I  should  adopt
with  them,  so  that  I  may  not  appear  too  much  like  a  pro-
vincial or  a  literary  man."

*1  am  quite  agreeable,"  C.  replied.  "Do  you  see  that
beautiful,  sorrowful  swan,  bending  her  neck  so  harmoni-
ously and  moving  her  sleeves  like  wings  ;  she  is  modesty  per-
sonified, and  everything  chaste  and  virginal  in  the  world;  she
has  a  forehead  of  snow,  a  heart  of  ice,  the  glances  of  a
Madonna,  the  smile  of  an  Agnes,  a  white  robe,  and  a  soul  of
the  same  color;  she  wears  in  her  hair  nothing  but  orange  blos-
soms or  water-l'ly  leaves,  and  is  only  kept  down  to  earth
by  a  thread.  She  has  never  had  a  bad  thought,  and  is  pro-
foundly ignorant  of  the  way  in  which  a  man  differs  from
a  woman.  The  Holy  Virgin  is  a  Bacchante  compared  with
her,  but  that  does  not  prevent  her  from  having  more  lovers
than  any  woman  I  know,  and  really  that  is  not  saying  a
little.  Examine  the  discreet  lady's  throat;  it  is  a  little
masterpiece,  and  really  it  is  difficult  to  show  as  much  while
hiding  more;  tell  me  if,  with  all  her  restrictions  and  prudery,
she  is  not  ten  times  more  indecent  than  the  good  lady  on
her  left,  who  bravely  displays  two  hemispheres  which,  if  they
were  joined  together,  would  form  a  globe  of  the  natural  size,
or  the  other  on  her  right,  with  her  dress  cut  so  low  that  she
is  displaying  her  person  with  charming  intrepidity.  This
virginal  creature,  unless  I  am  very  much  mistaken,  has  already
calculated  in  her  head  the  promises  of  love  and  passion  in
your  pallor  and  black  eyes  ;  and  the  reason  I  have  for  saying
so  is  that  she  has  not  once  looked  in  your  direction — ^at  least,
not  to  all  appearances,  for  she  can  use  her  eyes  so  skilfully,
and  look  out  of  the  corners  so  cleverly,  that  nothing  escapes
her;  you  would  think  she  could  see  out  of  the  back  of  her
head,  for  she  knows  quite  well  what  is  going  on  behind  her.
She  is  a  female  Janus.  If  you  w^ant  to  succeed  with  her,  you
must  eschew   a   familiar,   overbearing  manner.     You   must


26  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

speak  to  her  without  looking  at  her,  without  a  movement,  in
a  contrite  attitude,  and  in  respectful  and  subdued  tones;  in
this  way  you  can  tell  her  what  you  please,  provided  that  it  is
well  glossed  over,  and  then  she  will  allow  you  the  greatest
liberty  in  words  and  afterwards  in  actions.  Take  care  to
roll  your  eyes  tenderly  when  she  has  her  breasts  lowered,
and  speak  to  her  of  the  delights  of  platonic  love  and  the
commerce  of  souls,  whilst  employing  the  most  unplatonic  and
least  ideal  pantomime  possible  !  She  is  very  sensual  and  very
susceptible;  kiss  her  as  much  as  you  please;  but  in  the  most
intimate  of  relations  do  not  forget  to  call  her  Madam  at
least  three  times  in  every  sentence;  she  quarreled  with  me
because  of  my  familiarity,  though  I  was  her  lover.  Well,  a
woman  is  not  honorable  for  nothing/'

'*I  have  not  a  great  inclination,  after  what  you  have  told
me,  to  chance  the  adventure.  A  prudish  Messaline!  the
combination  is  novel  and  monstrous/'

"Old  as  the  world,  my  dear  fellow  !  Instances  are  to  be
found  every  day,  and  nothing  is  more  common.  You  are
wrong  not  to  attach  yourself  to  her.  Her  great  attraction
is  that  with  her  one  always  appears  to  be  committing  a  mortal
sin,  and  the  tiniest  kiss  appears  quite  damnable;  while  with
others  it  hardly  seems  like  a  venial  offense,  and  often  even
none  at  all.  That  is  the  reason  I  retained  her  longer  than  any
otJier  mistress.  I  should  still  have  her,  if  she  had  not  left
of  her  own  accord;  she  is  the  only  w^oman  who  has  fore-
stalled me,  and  I  have  a  certain  respect  for  her  on  that  ac-
count. She  possesses  certain  of  the  most  delicate  refinements
of  pleasure,  and  the  great  art  of  appearing  to  allow  the
favors  she  grants  so  freely  to  be  wrested  from  her,  and  this
gives  to  each  one  the  charm  of  a  rape.  You  will  find  in
society  ten  of  her  lovers  who  will  swear  to  you  that  she  is  the
most  virtuous  creature  in  the  world.  She  is  precisely  the
opposite.  To  dissect  this  virtue  upon  a  pillow  is  a  curious
study.  As  you  are  forewarned  you  run  no  risk,  and  you  will
not  be  foolish  enough  to  become  really  enamored  of  her."

"How  old  is  this  adorable  person?''  I  asked  C,  for  it  was
impossible  to  determine  her  age  even  after  a  most  careful
scrutiny.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  27

"Ah  !  that  is  a  mystery.  I,  who  pride  myself  on  being  able
to  tell  a  woman's  age  almost  to  a  minute,  have  never  been
able  to  discover  hers.  Approximately,  I  should  think  she
is  between  twenty-eight  and  thirty-six.  I  have  seen  her
dressed  and  undressed,  and  I  have  learned  nothing;  my  ex-
perience is  quite  at  fault;  she  seems  most  like  eighteen,  but
that  cannot  be  her  age.  She  has  the  body  of  a  virgin  with
the  soul  of  a  courtesan,  and  to  become  so  thoroughly  corrupt
requires  time  or  genius  ;  it  needs  a  heart  of  bronze  in  a  breast
of  steel;  she  has  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  For  that
reason  I  think  she  is  thirty-six,  but,  after  all,  I  am  quite  in
the  dark."

'*Has  she  no  intimate  friend  who  could  enlighten  you  ?"

''No,  she  appeared  here  two  years  ago.  She  came  from  the
provinces  or  abroad,  I  don't  know  which,  and  that  is  an  ad-
mirable position  for  a  woman  who  knows  how  to  profit  by  it
With  a  face  like  hers  she  can  give  herself  any  age  she  pleases,
and  only  date  from  the  day  she  came  here."

He  pointed  out  several  others  who,  according  to  him,
would  favorably  receive  any  request  it  might  please  me  to
address  to  them,  and  would  treat  me  with  quite  exceptional
philanthropy.  But  the  woman  in  red  in  the  corner  of  the
fireplace  and  the  modest  dove  who  served  as  her  antithesis
were  incomparably  better  than  all  the  others,  and  if  they  had
not  all  the  qualities  I  demanded,  they  had  some  of  them  at
least  in  appearance.

I  talked  all  the  evening  to  them,  especially  the  latter,  and
I  took  care  to  cast  my  ideas  in  a  most  respectful  mold;  al-
though she  hardly  looked  at  me,  I  thought  I  sometimes  saw
her  eyes  glisten  beneath  the  curtain  of  her  brows,  and  a  slight
rosy  tint  appear  beneath  her  skin  at  some  rather  pronounced
gallantries,  well  veiled  though  they  were,  upon  which  I  ven-
tured. Her  replies  generally  were  serious  and  guarded,  but
still  keen  and  full  of  point,  and  provided  food  for  thought
rather  than  actual  expressions.  Her  talk  was  interspersed
with  reticences,  half-words,  and  indirect  allusions,  of  which
each  syllable  had  its  intention,  each  silence  its  meaning;
nothing  in  the  world  could  be  more  diplomatic  or  charming.
Yet,  however  great  the  momentary  pleasure  of  such  a  con-


28  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

versation,  I  could  not  endure  it  long.  It  was  necessary  to
be  continually  on  the  watch  and  on  guard,  whereas  in  a  con-
versation, familiarity  and  confidence  are  the  qualities  I  pre-
fer. We  talked  of  music,  then  the  conversation  naturally
drifted  to  the  opera,  and  afterwards  to  women  and  love,  the
easiest  subject  of  all  in  which  to  pass  from  generality  to
specialty.  I  would  not  have  believed  myself  capable  of  such
a  display  of  patlios  and  nonsense.  It  was  the  evening  of  my
life,  when  I  assumed  my  most  virtuous  air,  while  all  the
time  my  mind  was  filled  wûth  the  most  opposite  intentions.
My  expression  of  face  would  have  lulled  the  suspicions  of  a
mother  most  solicitous  of  her  daughter's  honor,  and  any
husband  would  have  intrusted  his  wife  to  my  care.  I  thought
it  was  more  difiicult  than  that  to  be  a  hypocrite  and  to  say
things  one  did  not  mean.  But  it  must  be  easy  enough,  or  very
much  according  to  my  inclination,  or  else  I  should  not  have
been  so  successful  at  my  first  attempt.

As  for  the  lady,  she  entered  into  many  details  which,  in
spite  of  her  candid  manner,  proved  her  extensive  experience;
it  is  not  possible  to  give  any  idea  of  the  subtlety  of  her  dis-
tinctions. From  her  way  of  speaking,  too,  it  was  impossible
to  believe  that  she  had  even  the  shadow  of  a  body,  there  being
something  of  the  immaterial,  vaporous,  and  ideal  about  her;
and  if  C.  had  not  warned  me  of  her  behavior,  I  should  most
certainly  have  despaired  of  the  success  of  my  attentions  and
held  myself  pitifully  aloof.  How,  too,  can  one,  after  a
woman  has  talked  in  the  most  unconcerned  fashion  possible
for  two  hours  about  love  existing  only  on  privation  and  sac-
rifice, and  other  beautiful  things  of  this  nature,  decently  hope
to  persuade  her  one  day  to  take  pity  on  oneself.

Briefly  we  were  great  friends  when  we  parted,  congratu-
lating each  other,  as  we  did  so,  on  the  purity  and  loftiness
of  our  sentiments.

My  conversation  with  the  other  lady,  as  you  may  imagine,
w^as  of  quite  a  different  character.  We  laughed  as  often  as
we  spoke.  We  made  fun  of  all  the  woman  present,  in  a  very
clever  fashion;  when  I  say  we  made  fun  of  all  the  women,
I  mean  that  she  did  so,  for  a  man  never  ridicules  a  woman.
I  listened  and  applauded,  for  hers  was  the  most  curious  gal-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  29


lery  of  caricatures  I  have  ever  seen.  In  spite  of  their  exag-
geration, the  truth  underlying  her  pictures  was  apparent.  C.
was  quite  right;  this  woman's  mission  was  to  disenchant
poets.  She  had  about  her  an  atmosphere  of  prose  in  which  a
poetic  idea  could  not  live.  She  was  charming  and  sparklingly
clever,  and  yet,  at  her  side,  ignoble  and  vulgar  thoughts  were
the  only  ones  which  came  into  one's  head  ;  as  I  talked  to  her,
I  felt  a  number  of  incongruous  and  at  the  time  impracticable
desires  enter  my  mind.  I  felt  a  longing  for  wine  with  which
to  become  intoxicated,  I  wished  to  drop  down  on  one  knee
and  kiss  her  throat,  to  raise  the  hem  of  her  dress  to  see  if
her  garter  was  above  or  below  the  knee,  to  sing  a  vulgar  song
at  the  top  of  my  voice,  to  smoke  a  pipe  or  break  the  windows.
All  the  animal  part,  the  brute,  rose  to  the  surface  in  me;  I
would  most  willingly  have  spat  upon  Homer's  Iliad,  and  I
would  have  knelt  down  before  a  ham.  I  now  understand
perfectly  the  allegory  of  the  companions  of  Ulysses  who  were
turned  into  swine  by  Circe.  Circe  was  probably  lively,  like
the  little  woman  in  red.

I  am  ashamed  to  confess  that  I  experienced  a  great  delight
in  feeling  m.yself  overwhelmed  by  brutishness.  I  offered  no
opposition,  but  aided  with  all  my  strength,  so  natural  is  cor-
ruption to  man,  and  so  much  mud  is  there  in  the  clay  from
which  he  is  molded.

But  I  had  a  slight  fear  of  this  gangrene  which  was  gaining
possession  of  m.e,  and  I  wished  to  leave  the  corruptress  ;  but
I  seemed  to  be  chained  to  my  seat.

In  the  end  I  tore  myself  away  from  her,  and  it  being  very
late,  I  returned  home  in  great  perplexity,  very  disturbed  in
my  mind,  and  hardly  knowing  what  to  do.  I  hesitated  be-
tween prudery  and  gallantry.  I  found  pleasure  in  the  one
and  piquancy  in  the  other;  and  after  a  long  and  profound
examination  of  conscience,  I  realized  not  that  I  loved  them
both,  but  that  I  liked  them,  one  as  much  as  the  other.

From  all  appearances,  old  friend,  I  shall  make  love  to  one
of  these  women,  perhaps  both,  and  yet  that  will  only  half
satisfy  me;  it  is  not  because  they  are  not  pretty,  but  at  the
sight  of  them  nothing  cried  out  in  me,  palpitated,  or  said,
'These  are  the  women.''     I  did  not  recognize  them.     Still,  I


30  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPLN

don't  think  I  shall  meet  any  one  better  on  the  score  of  breed-
ings and  beauty,  so  I  will  follow  C/s  advice,  and  one  or  the
other  shall  by  my  mistress;  but  in  the  depths  of  my  heart  a
secret  voice  reproaches  me  with  being  false  to  my  love,  and
halting  like  this  at  the  first  smile  of  a  woman  I  do  not  love,
instead  of  tirelessly  searching  through  the  world,  in  cloisters
and  in  slums,  in  palaces  and  in  taverns,  for  the  woman  who
was  made  for  me,  whom  God  destined  for  me,  whether  she
be  princess  or  servant,  nun  of  courtesan.

Then  I  told  myself  that  I  was  full  of  fancies,  and  after  all,
what  did  it  matter  whether  it  was  one  woman  or  another,  that
the  earth  would  still  pursue  its  path  and  the  seasons  succeed
one  another.  But  it  was  in  vain  that  I  reasoned  like  that,
for  I  was  neither  easier  in  my  mind  nor  more  resolute.

That  is  perhaps  the  result  of  my  living  very  much  by  ray-
self,  for  the  tiniest  details  in  such  a  monotonous  life  as  mine
assume  great  importance.  I  listen  too  much  to  myself  living
and  thinking.  I  hear  the  throbbing  of  my  arteries,  the  pulsa-
tions of  my  heart.  I  disentangle  my  most  elusive  ideas  from
the  vapor  in  which  they  float  and  I  give  them  a  body.  If  I
acted  more  I  should  not  see  all  these  little  things,  and  I  should
not  have  the  time  to  examine  my  own  soul  under  the  micro-
scope, as  I  do  all  day.  The  sound  of  action  would  dissipate
the  host  of  idle  thoughts  w^hich  flutter  through  my  head  and
stupefy  me  with  the  buzzing  of  their  wings.  Instead  of  pur-
suing phantoms  I  should  struggle  with  realities;  I  should
ask  w^omen  for  what  they  could  give,  pleasure,  and  I  should
not  try  to  embrace  some  fantastic  ideal  adorned  with  shadowy
perfections.  This  fierce  tension  of  the  eye  of  my  soul  towards
an  invisible  object  falsifies  my  sight.  I  am  deprived  of  the
ability  to  see  what  exists  through  looking  at  what  does  not,
and  my  eye,  so  piercing  where  the  ideal  is  concerned,  is
quite  short-sighted  when  confronted  with  the  real;  thus  I
have  known  women  whom  all  the  world  called  delightful,  yet
I  did  not  think  them  so.  I  have  greatly  admired  pictures
which  were  considered  by  most  people  bad,  and  strange  and
unintelligible  verses  have  given  me  more  pleasure  than  the
finest  eflforts.  I  should  not  be  surprised,  after  addressing  so
many  sighs  to  the  moon,  gazing  so  long  at  the  stars,  com-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  31

I

posing  so  many  sentimental  elegies  and  apostrophes,  if  I
were  to  fall  in  love  with  an  ignoble  courtesan  or  an  old  and
ugly  woman;  it  would  be  a  fitting  conclusion.  Or  perhaps,
being  unable  to  find  anything  in  the  world  worthy  of  my
love,  I  shall  end  by  adoring  myself.  To  protect  myself  from
so  great  a  misfortune  I  gaze  into  all  the  mirrors  and  streams
I  see.  Really,  through  my  reveries  and  aberrations,  I  have
an  enormous  fear  of  falling  into  the  monstrous  and  unnat-
ural. That  is  serious,  and  must  be  carefully  avoided.  Good-
by,  old  friend.  I  am  going  to  see  the  lady  in  red,  so  that
I  may  avoid  my  usual  contemplation.  I  do  not  think  spir-
itualism will  occupy  much  of  our  time,  although  she  is  a  very
''spiritual"  creature.  I  am  carefully  putting  on  one  side  my
ideal,  so  as  not  to  contrast  her  with  it.  I  wish  to  quietly
enjoy  the  beauty  and  merits  she  has.  It  is  a  wise  resolution,
but  I  do  not  know  whether  I  shall  keep  to  it.  Once  more,
good-by.


CHAPTER  III


I  AM  the  lover  of  the  lady  in  red;  it  is  almost  a  state,  an
obligation,  and  it  gives  a  stability  to  the  world.  I  have  no
longer  the  appearance  of  a  schoolboy  seeking  an  adventure
among  the  grandmothers,  and  not  daring  to  recite  a  madrigal
to  a  woman  unless  she  be  a  hundred.  I  can  see  since  my
installation  that  I  am  esteemed  a  great  deal  more  highly,  that
all  the  women  speak  to  me  in  a  jealously  coquettish  fashion
and  make  great  advances  to  me.  The  men,  on  the  other
hand,  put  more  coldness  into  the  few  words  we  exchange,  and
there  is  something  hostile  and  constrained  in  their  manner.
They  feel  that  they  already  have  in  me  a  dangerous  rival,
and  one  who  may  become  even  more  so.  I  recall  how  severely
they  criticized  my  attire  and  the  way  I  arrange  my  hair,  but
all  the  ladies  look  upon  me  as  a  model  of  good  taste  and


32  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


appreciate  the  compliment  I  pay  them  by  the  elegance  of  my
attire.

The  lady  of  the  house  at  first  seemed  a  little  piqued  at  my
choice,  which  she  considered  ought  to  have  fallen  upon  her-
self, and  for  a  few  days  she  maintained  some  amount  of
asperity  to  her  rival,  though  to  myself  she  has  always  been
the  same.  She,  however,  confined  herself  to  the  thousand
and  one  little  unfriendly  observations  which  women  make
to  one  another  when  the  opportunity  presents  itself,  consist-
ing generally  of  a  criticism  of  their  dress,  their  coiflfure  or
their  appearance.  But  soon  another  object  attracted  the  at-
tention of  the  slighted  woman,  the  little  war  of  words  ceased,
and  everything  pursued  its  normal  course.

Though  I  have  told  you  that  I  am  the  lover  of  the  lady  in
red,  I  suppose  that  will  not  satisfy  you;  you  will  want  to
know  her  name.  I  shall  not,  however,  tell  you  her  real  name,
but  will  call  her  Rosette,  which  is  a  pretty  enough  name.

Your  love  of  precision  in  affairs  of  the  sort  will  lead  you
to  desire  to  know  the  story  of  my  love  affair  with  this  lady
step  by  step,  and  the  way  in  which  I  passed  from  the  general
to  the  particular,  and  from  the  rôle  of  spectator  to  that  of
actor.    I  will  satisfy  your  wishes  with  the  greatest  of  pleas-
ure.   There  is  nothing  sinister  in  our  romance,  everything  is
couleur  de  rose,  and  the  only  tears  shed  are  those  of  pleasure;
there  are  no  delays  or  rebuffs,  and  everything  progresses  with
the  haste  and  rapidity  so  commended  by  Horace — just  like  a
French  novel.    Still,  do  not  tliink  I  carried  the  citadel  at  the
first  assault.     The  princess,  though  very  human  to  her  sub-
jects, is  not  as  prodigal  of  her   favors  as  at   first  seemed
probable;  she  knows  too  well  their  value  not  to  exact  their
full  value;  she  also  knows  the  advantages  of  a  proper  delay
and  a  partial  resistance,  so  she  will  not  surrender  herself  to
a  man  at  first,  however  strong  a  liking  she  may  have  for  him.
But  to  tell  the  story  from  the  time  of  our  first  meeting.    I
met  her  once,  twice,  or  even  three  times  at  the  same  place,
then  she  asked  me  to  call  upon  her;  I  did  not  wait  to  be
entreated,  you  may  imagine;  I  went  discreetly  at  first,  then
a  little  more  often,  then  oftener  still,  and  then  every  time  I
felt  so  disposed,  which,  I  must  admit,  was  often  three  or  four


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUFIN  83

times  a  day.  The  lady,  after  I  had  been  absent  a  few  hours,
received  me  as  if  I  had  just  returned  from  the  East  Indies;
I  was  not  insensible  to  this,  and  felt  obliged  to  show  my
gratitude  in  a  manner  marked  by  the  utmost  gallantry,  and
she  responded  to  the  best  of  her  ability.

Rosette,  as  we  have  agreed  to  call  her,  is  a  very  clever
woman,  understanding  the  male  sex  in  the  most  admirable
fashion;  although  she  delayed  for  some  time  the  end  of  the
chapter,  I  never  once  became  angry  with  her — really  a  very
wonderful  thing,  for  you  know  how  angry  I  become  when  my
desires  are  thwarted,  and  when  a  woman  exceeds  the  time
I  have  allotted  her  in  my  mind.  I  do  not  know  how  she  did
it;  but  from  our  first  meeting  she  made  me  understand  that
she  would  be  mine,  and  I  was  more  certain  of  her  than  if  I
held  her  promise  signed  and  sealed  in  my  hand.  It  might,
perhaps,  be  urged  that  the  familiarity  of  her  manners  left  a
free  field  for  the  temerity  of  hope.  I  do  not  think  that  was
the  real  reason.  I  have  seen  some  women  whose  extraordi-
nary freedom,  though  it  excluded  every  shadow  of  a  doubt,
did  not  produce  this  effect  upon  me,  and  I  have  been  nervous
and  anxious  in  their  presence.

Generally,  I  am  less  amiable  to  women  I  like  than  to  those
who  are  indifferent  to  me,  and  the  cause  of  it  is  my  pas-
sionate watchfulness  and  my  uncertainty  as  to  success;  these
things  make  me  gloomy,  and  cast  me  into  a  reverie  which  de-
prives me  of  my  abilities  and  presence  of  mind.  When  I  see
the  hours  I  had  destined  for  another  occupation  pass  one  by
one,  anger  overcomes  me  in  spite  of  myself,  and  I  cannot
help  making  biting  and  satirical  remarks,  which  sometimes  are
quit  brutal,  and  hinder  terribly  my  project.  With  Rosette  I
never  had  that  feeling;  even  when  she  resisted  the  most
strongly,  I  never  gained  the  impression  she  desired  to  escape
my  love.  I  allowed  her  to  quietly  display  her  coquetries,  I
accepted  patiently  the  delays  it  pleased  her  to  impose  upon
my  passion.  There  was  something  smiling  in  her  firmness
which  consoled  me  as  far  as  possible,  and  in  her  cruelty
there  was  visible  a  human  undercurrent  which  removed  all
cause  for  serious  alarm.  Honorable  women,  even  when  they
are  so  to  the  least  possible  extent,  have  a  reluctant  and  dis-


34  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

dainful  manner  which  is  quite  unbearable  to  me.  They  seem
to  be  always  on  the  point  of  ringing  and  having  one  turned
out  by  their  servants;  and  it  seems  to  me  that  a  man  who
takes  the  trouble  to  make  love  to  a  woman  (and  that  is  not
so  agreeable  as  people  would  have  you  believe)  does  not  de-
serve to  be  looked  at  in  that  way.

Dear  Rosette  has  no  glances  of  that  sort;  I  can  assure
you  she  profits  by  the  fact.  I  have  made  the  best  of  my
cleverness,  and  by  the  fire  and  smartness  of  her  answers  she
has  caused  me  to  excel  myself.  It  is  true  that  I  have  not  been
poetic,  but  that  is  hardly  possible  with  her.  Still  she  has
her  poetic  side,  in  spite  of  all  that  C.  has  told  me;  but  she
is  so  full  of  life,  force,  and  movement,  she  has  the  appear-
ance of  being  so  happy  in  her  surroundings,  that  one  has  no
wish  to  see  her  leave  them  to  ascend  into  the  clouds.  She
occupies  real  life  so  agreeably,  and  makes  it  so  amusing  for
herself  and  for  others,  that  reverie  has  nothing  better  to  offer.

Rosette  has  the  best  disposition  in  the  world,  as  far  as
men  are  concerned  be  it  understood,  for  with  women  she  is
an  incarnation  of  evil;  she  is  gay,  lively,  alert,  ready  for
anything,  quite  original  in  her  way  of  speaking,  and  she
always  has  some  charming  and  unexpected  witticism  to  tell.
She  is  a  delightful  companion  rather  than  mistress;  and  if
I  were  a  few  years  older,  and  had  a  few  less  romantic  ideas,
that  would  be  quite  sufficient  for  me,  and  I  should  consider
myself  the  most  fortunate  individual  in  the  world.  But — oh,
that  word  of  ill  omen  ! — I  am  an  imbecile,  idiot,  a  real  goose  ;
never  satisfied,  always  looking  for  midday  at  two  o'clock;
and  instead  of  being  perfectly  happy  I  am  only  half.  Of
course,  that  is  a  great  deal  for  this  world,  but  still  I  find  it
not  enough.

In  the  eyes  of  the  world  I  have  a  mistress  whom  several
desire  and  envy  me,  and  whom  no  one  would  disdain.  In
appearance,  then,  my  object  is  fulfilled,  and  I  have  no  longer
any  right  to  quarrel  with  fate.  Yet  I  do  not  seem  to  have  a
mistress,  and  if  any  one  were  to  unexpectedly  ask  me  if  I
had  one,  I  believe  I  should  say  "no/'  The  possession,  how-
ever, of  a  woman  who  has  beauty,  youth,  and  intelligence
constitutes  what  in  every  country  and  age  is  called  a  mis-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  36

tress,  and  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  other  way.  That  does
not  prevent  me  from  having  the  strangest  doubts  on  this
score,  and  they  go  so  far  that,  if  several  persons  agreed  to
maintain  that  I  am  not  Rosette's  favored  lover,  in  spite  of  the
palpable  evidence  to  the  contrary,  in  the  end  I  should  believe
them.

Do  not  think,  after  what  I  have  told  you,  that  I  do  not  love
her,  or  that  she  displeases  me  in  any  way.  On  the  contrary,  I
love  her  very  dearly,  and  find  her,  like  everybody  else,  a  pretty,
piquant  creature.  I  simply  do  not  feel  that  she  belongs  to
me,  that  is  all.  One  of  her  kisses,  the  most  chaste  of  her
caresses,  makes  me  quiver  to  the  soles  of  my  feet,  and
makes  my  blood  rush  to  my  heart.  Although  I  admit  that,  the
fact  still  stands  as  I  have  told  you.  But  man's  heart  is  full
of  such  absurdities;  and  if  it  were  necessary  to  reconcile  all
the  contradiction  it  contains,  that  would  be  a  heavy  task.
What  is  their  origin?    Truly  I  do  not  know.

I  see  her  all  day,  and  at  all  times  if  I  wish.  Her  com-
plaisance is  inexhaustible;  she  enters  perfectly  into  all  my
caprices,  however  strange  they  may  be.

I  am  very  unfortunate  not  to  be  able  to  acquire  the  moral
certainty  of  a  thing  of  which  I  have  the  physical  proof.  The
opposite  is  usually  the  case,  and  it  is  the  fact  which  proves
the  idea  ;  I  should  like  to  prove  the  fact  by  the  idea.  I  cannot
do  so;  strange  though  it  seems,  it  is  nevertheless  true.  Up
to  a  certain  point  the  possession  of  a  mistress  depends  upon
myself;  but  I  cannot  make  myself  believe  that  I  have  one
in  her.  If  I  have  not  the  necessary  faith  for  so  obvious  a
thing,  it  is  as  impossible  for  to  believe  in  a  simple  fact  as  it
is  for  others  to  believe  in  the  Trinity.  Faith  is  not  acquired,
it  is  a  pure  gift,  a  special  grace  from  Heaven.

Never  has  any  one  desired  as  much  as  I  have  to  live  some
one  else's  life  and  to  assimilate  another  nature;  no  one  has
ever  succeeded  so  badly.  Whatever  I  do,  other  men  are  to
me  but  phantoms,  and  I  do  not  realize  their  existence;  it  is
not,  however,  the  desire  to  find  out  their  life  and  participate
in  it  that  I  lack.  It  is  the  power  of  real  sympathy.  The
existence  or  non-existence  of  a  thing  or  person  does  not
sufficiently  interest  me  to  affect  me  in  a  sensible  and  con-


36  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

vincing  manner.  The  sight  of  a  woman  or  a  man  appearing
to  me  in  real  life  does  not  leave  upon  my  mind  stronger  traces
than  a  dream's  fantastic  vision;  around  me  moves  a  pale
world  of  shadows,  of  false  or  true  apparitions,  flitting  hither
and  thither,  in  the  midst  of  which  I  find  myself  as  perfectly
alone  as  possible,  for  they  have  no  influence  upon  me  for
good  or  evil,  and  they  seem  of  quite  a  different  nature  to
myself.  If  I  speak  to  them,  and  they  give  an  almost
common-sense  reply,  I  am  as  surprised  as  if  my  dog  or  cat
suddenly  found  its  tongue  and  joined  in  the  conversation;
the  sound  of  their  voices  always  astonishes  me,  and  I  would
gladly  believe  that  they  are  only  fugitive  appearances,  of
which  I  am  the  object  mirror.  Whether  inferior  or  superior,
I  am  most  certainly  not  of  their  species.  There  are  times
when  I  only  recognize  God  above  me,  and  others  when  I
consider  myself  hardly  the  equal  of  the  wood-louse  or  the
mollusc  upon  its  sand-bank;  but  in  whatever  state  of  mind  I
am,  high  or  low,  I  have  never  been  able  to  persuade  myself
that  men  are  really  like  myself.  When  I  am  called  "sir,"
or  spoken  of  as  ''this  gentleman,''  I  think  it  very  strange.
Even  my  name  seems  an  imaginary  title,  and  not  my  real
name  ;  but  however  low  it  is  spoken,  in  the  midst  of  the  loudest
uproar,  I  turn  quickly,  with  a  convulsive  and  febrile  rapidity
for  which  I  have  never  been  able  to  account.  Is  it  the  fear  of
finding  an  antagonist  or  enemy  in  the  man  who  knows  my
name,  and  to  whom  I  am  no  longer  one  of  the  crowd?

In  particular,  when  I  have  lived  with  a  woman,  I  have
most  clearly  realized  what  an  invincible  repulsion  my  nature
has  to  any  alliance  of  mixture.  I  am  like  a  drop  of  oil  in  a
glass  of  water.  However  much  you  shake  the  glass,  the  oil
will  never  mix  with  the  water;  but  the  former  will  split  up
into  a  hundred  thousand  little  globules,  which  will  rejoin  and
rise  to  the  surface  as  soon  as  the  shaking  ceases;  the  drop
of  oil  and  the  glass  of  water  sum  up  my  history.  Even
pleasure,  the  diamond  chain  which  unites  all  beings,  the
devouring  fire  which  melts  the  rocks  and  metals  of  the  soul,
and  makes  them  dissolve  into  tears,  just  as  real  fire  in  its
omnipotence  dissolves  iron  and  granite,  has  never  been  able
to  subdue  or  soften  me.    Yet  I  have  the  keenest  of  sensibili-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  37

ties  ;  but  my  soul  is  at  enmity  with  my  body,  and  the  unhappy
couple,  like  any  possible  pair,  legal  or  illegal,  live  in  a  state
of  perpetual  warfare.  The  arms  of  a  woman,  which,  it  is
said,  bind  all  that  is  best  on  earth,  are  to  me  the  weakest  of
bonds,  and  I  was  never  further  from  my  mistress  than  when
she  pressed  me  to  her  heart.  I  was  stifled,  that  was  all.  How
many  times  have  I  been  enraged  with  myself  !  How  many
efforts  have  I  made  to  be  different!  How  have  I  exhorted
myself  to  be  tender,  amorous,  passionate,  without  success!
How  often  have  I  tried  to  involve  my  soul  in  my  love  affairs  !
But  what  a  punishment  it  must  be  for  my  poor  soul  to  assist
at  the  debauchery  of  my  body,  and  to  perpetually  sit  down  at
feasts  where  it  has  nothing  to  eat  !

With  Rosette,  I  have  made  up  my  mind  once  for  all  to
determine  whether  I  am  not  decidedly  unsociable,  and  prove
whether  I  can  take  sufficient  interest  in  another's  existence  to
believe  in  it.  I  have  exhausted  myself  with  my  tests,  without
setting  my  doubts  at  rest.  With  her  my  pleasure  is  so  keen
that  the  soul  is,  often  enough,  if  not  touched  at  least  distracted,
and  that  deprives  observations  of  a  great  deal  of  their  exact-
ness. After  all  I  recognized  that  it  was  only  skin  deep,  and
that  I  only  had  surface  enjoyment  in  which  out  of  curiosity
alone  did  the  soul  participate.  I  enjoyed  a  certain  amount
of  pleasure  because  I  am  young  and  passionate  ;  but  the  pleas-
ure came  from  myself,  and  not  from  another.  Its  cause  is  in
myself  rather  than  in  Rosette.

I  have  tried  in  vain,  for  I  have  not  succeeded  in  emerging
from  myself  for  a  moment.

I  am  the  same  as  before,  a  very  bored  and  wearisome
person,  who  displeases  me  very  much.  I  have  not  succeeded
in  introducing  into  my  brain  some  other  person's  ideas,  into
my  soul  another  person's  sentiments,  or  into  my  body  the
sorrow  or  enjoyment  of  another.  I  am  a  prisoner  in  myself,
and  invasion  is  quite  impossible.  The  prisoner  desires  to
escape,  the  walls  ask  nothing  better  than  to  crumble,  the  gates
to  open  to  let  him  go;  I  know  not  what  fatality  retains  every
stone  in  its  place  and  every  bolt  in  its  socket;  it  is  quite  as
impossible  to  admit  some  one  else  into  myself  as  to  transfer
myself  to  another;  I  know  not  how  to  pay  or  receive  visits,


;j8  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

and  I  live  în  the  most  melancholy  isolation  in  the  midst  of
the  crowd.  My  bed  cannot  belong  to  a  widower,  but  my
heart  does  always.

Ah  !  to  be  imable  to  increase  myself  by  a  single  particle,
by  a  single  atom;  to  be  unable  to  make  the  blood  of  another
flow  in  my  veins)  to  see  always  with  my  own  eyes,  neither
more  clearly  nor  more  distantly  than  before;  to  listen  to
sounds  with  the  same  ears  and  emotion;  to  touch  with  the
same  fingers,  to  be  condemned  to  the  same  tones  of  the
voice,  the  same  phrases  and  words,  and  to  be  unable  to  flee
from  myself  and  take  refuge  in  some  unapproachable  corner;
to  be  forced  to  remain  with  myself  forever,  to  dine  and
sleep,  to  be  the  same  man  for  twenty  different  women;  to
drag  into  the  strangest  situations  of  the  drama  of  life  a
person  whose  part  you  know  by  heart;  to  think  the  same
things,  to  have  the  same  dreams  :  what  punishment,  what  bore-
dom it  all  is.

I  have  desired  the  heart  of  the  brothers  Tangut,  the  hat  of
Fortunatus,  the  wand  of  Abaris,  the  ring  of  Gyges.  I  would
have  sold  my  soul  to  snatch  the  magic  ring  from  some  fairy's
hand:  but  I  have  never  desired  an}lJiing  so  much  as,  like
Tiresias  the  soothsayer,  to  meet  in  the  mountains  those  ser-
pents which  bring  about  the  change  of  sex,  and  the  attri-
butes I  envy  most  in  the  monstrous  and  curious  gods  of  India
are  their  countless  transformations.

I  began  by  desiring  to  be  another  man;  then  reflecting  that
I  could,  by  analogy,  almost  foresee  what  I  should  feel,  and
so  not  experience  tlie  surprise  and  expected  change,  I
should  have  preferred  to  be  a  woman.  That  idea  has  always
come  to  me  when  I  had  a  mistress  who  was  not  ugly;  for
an  ugly  woman  is  a  man  to  me,  and  in  moments  of  pleasure
I  would  willingly  exchange  my  part,  for  it  is  very  annoying
not  to  have  a  consciousness  of  the  effect  one  produces,  and
only  be  able  to  judge  of  the  enjoyment  of  others  by  one's
own.  These  thoughts  and  many  others  have  often  given  me,
at  times  when  it  was  very  much  out  of  place,  a  dreamy  and
meditative  air  which  has  caused  me,  quite  wrongly,  to  be
accused  of  coolness  and  infidelity,

Rosette,  who  does  not  know  all  this,  fortunately  considers


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  39

me  the  most  amorous  man  on  earth;  she  takes  my  impotent
fury  for  passion,  and  lends  herself  to  all  the  experimental
caprices  which  come  into  my  head.

I  have  done  everything  possible  to  convince  myself  of  her
reality.  I  have  tried  to  descend  into  her  heart,  but  I  have
always  halted  at  the  first  step,  at  her  skin  or  her  mouth.
In  spite  of  our  relations,  I  know  very  well  there  is  nothing
common  to  both  of  us.  Never  has  an  idea  similar  to  mine
imfurled  its  wings  in  her  pretty,  good-tempered  head;  never
has  her  heart,  full  of  life  and  fire,  the  motive  power  of  a
breast  so  pure  and  firm,  beaten  in  unison  with  my  own.  My
soul  has  never  united  with  her  soul.  Cupid,  the  god  with
wings,  did  not  kiss  Psyche  upon  her  beautiful  ivory  brow.
No  !  this  woman  is  not  my  mistress.

If  you  only  knew  all  I  have  done  to  force  my  soul  to  share
my  body's  love  !  With  what  fury  have  I  fastened  my  mouth
to  her  mouth,  buried  my  arms  in  her  hair,  and  clasped  her
round  and  supple  waist.  I  have  drunk  her  breath  and  the  warm
tears  trickling  from  the  overflowing  cup  of  her  eyes.  The
more  we  embraced  the  less  I  loved  her.  My  soul  sadly  looked
on  at  this  deplorable  hymen  to  v/hich  it  was  not  invited  with
an  air  of  pity,  or  else  retired  in  disgust  to  weep  silently  apart.
It  seems  that  I  really  do  not  love  Rosette,  worthy  though  she
be  of  my  affection,  and  great  though  my  desire  to  bestow  it.

To  rid  myself  of  the  idea  that  I  am  myself,  I  have  con-
jured up  strange  surroundings  in  which  it  was  quite  im-
probable I  should  recognize  myself,  and  I  have  tried,  being
unable  to  cast  aside  my  individuality,  to  make  it  quite  un-
recognizable. I  have  met  with  very  little  success  in  this,
and  the  devil  of  myself  obstinately  pursues  me;  there  is  no
way  of  defeating  him;  I  am  not  in  a  position  to  make  the
excuse  as  to  other  unwelcome  visitors — that  I  am  not  at
home,  or  have  gone  into  the  country.

I  have  taken  my  mistress  to  bathe,  and  I  have  played  the
part  of  Triton  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  the  sea  being  a  large
marble  basin,  where  the  water,  transparent  though  it  was,
seemed  to  conceal  a  part  of  the  Nereid's  exquisite  beauty.  At
night,  by  moonlight  we  have  sailed  together  in  a  gondola  to


40  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

the   accompaniment   of    music;    common   though    this    is    in
Venice,  it  is  a  novelty  here.

We  have  galloped  through  the  darkness  together  in  her
carriage.  I  have  climbed  through  her  window,  though  I  have
had  the  key  of  the  door  in  my  pocket.  I  have  made  her  call
upon  me  in  broad  daylight,  and  compromised  her  so  thor-
oughly that  no  one  now,  with  the  exception  of  myself,  doubts
that  she  is  my  mistress.

In  spite  of  all  these  extravagances,  which,  were  I  not  so
young,  would  seem  like  the  resources  of  a  worn-out  libertine,
Rosette  adores  me  more  than  any  one.  She  sees  in  them  the
ardor  of  a  petulant  and  uncontrollable  love,  which  is  always
the  same  in  spite  of  a  difference  of  time  and  place.  She  sees
in  them  the  never-ceasing  effect  of  her  charm  and  the  triumph
of  her  beauty,  and  really  I  would  she  were  right,  for  in  al!
justice  it  is  neither  her  fault  nor  mine  that  she  is  not.

The  only  thing  I  have  against  her  is  that  I  am  myself.
If  I  were  to  tell  her  so,  she  would  quickly  answer  that  in
her  eyes  this  was  ray  greatest  merit,  a  reply  which  would
be  more  polite  than  sensible.

Once,  at  the  commencement  of  our  liaison,  I  thought  I
had  attained  my  object,  for  a  moment  I  believed  that  I
loved  her.  Old  friend,  that  moment  was  the  only  one  I  have
lived,  and  if  that  minute  had  been  an  hour,  I  should  have
become  a  god  We  were  riding  together,  I  upon  Ferragus,
she  upon  a  snow-white  mare  that  looked  like  a  unicorn,  so
slender  were  her  legs  and  slim  her  neck.  We  were  traversing
a  great  avenue  of  elms  of  tremendous  height;  the  sun  de-
scended upon  us  warm  and  bright,  though  tempered  by  the
foliage;  in  a  mackerel  sky  long  lines  of  pale  blue  stretched
across  the  edges  of  tlie  horizon,  and  changed  into  an  ex-
tremely soft  apple-green  when  they  met  the  orange  tints  of
the  sunset.  The  appearance  of  the  sky  was  charming  and
singular;  the  breeze  bore  a  most  delightful  odor  of  wild
flowers.  From  time  to  time  a  bird  rose  in  front  of  us  and
burst  into  song  as  it  crossed  the  avenue.  The  bell  of  a
village  we  could  not  see  softly  rang  out  the  Angelus,  and
its  silver  tones,  softened  by  distance,  was  infinitely  sweet.
Our  mounts  walked  side  by  side  at  exactly  the  same  pace.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  41


My  heart  dilated  and  my  soul  overflowed  înto  my  body.  I
had  never  been  so  happy.  Neither  I  nor  Rosette  spoke,  and  yet
never  before  had  we  so  well  understood  one  another.  We  were
so  close  together  that  my  leg  touched  Rosette's  mare.  I
leaned  towards  her  and  put  my  arm  around  her  waist;  she
made  a  similar  movement  and  leaned  her  head  upon  my
shoulder.  Our  mouths  joined  in  a  chaste  and  most  delightful
kiss!  Our  horses  walked  on  with  their  bridles  on  their
necks.  I  felt  Rosette's  arm  relax,  and  her  body  bend  more
and  more.  I  myself  became  weak  and  was  ready  to  faint.
I  can  assure  you,  at  that  moment  I  hardly  considered  whether
I  was  myself  or  some  one  else.  We  had  reached  the  end
of  the  avenue  like  this,  when  the  sound  of  footsteps  made
us  quickly  resume  our  proper  positions;  it  was  a  mounted
patrol  who  saluted  us.  If  I  had  been  provided  with  pistols
I  believe  I  should  have  fired.

I  assumed  a  furious  and  threatening  air  which  must  have
seemed  very  strange.  After  all,  I  was  wrong  to  become  so
angry,  for  I  had  been  rendered  a  great  service  by  the  un-
witting interruption  of  my  pleasure  at  a  point  when  by  its
own  intensity  it  was  becoming  painful  and  would  collapse
under  its  own  violence.  To  stop  in  time  is  a  science  which  is
not  always  regarded  with  all  the  respect  it  deserves.  Some-
times when  you  put  your  arm  around  a  woman's  waist,  at
first  you  experience  a  great  pleasure  at  the  touch  of  her
warm  flesh.  If  the  beauty  goes  to  sleep  in  this  amorous  and
charming  position  her  muscles  relax,  and  then  your  arm  is
more  heavily  weighted;  you  begin  to  realize  that  she  is  a
woman,  not  a  sylph.  You  would  not  remove  your  arm  for
anything  on  earth  for  many  reasons,  one  of  them  being  that
it  is  dangerous  to  wake  a  woman  from  her  sleep;  another
that  by  asking  her  to  raise  herself  so  that  you  may  withdraw
your  arm  you  tell  her  in  an  indirect  fashion  that  she  is
heavy  and  tires  you,  or  else  you  make  her  think  you  are  weak
or  weary,  and  that  has  a  mxost  humiliating  and  harmful  effect
in  her  mind  as  far  as  you  are  concerned.  The  third  reason
is  that  once  having  had  pleasure  in  that  position,  there  is
a  mistaken  idea  that  in  retaining  the  position  the  pleasure
will  recur.    The  poor  arm  is  helpless  under  the  weight  which


42  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

weighs  it  down,  the  blood  stops  flowing,  the  nerves  are  dis-
turbed, and  the  numbing  gives  you  the  feeling  of  being  pricked
with  thousands  of  needles.  Day  comes  at  last  and  delivers
you  from  your  martyrdom,  and  you  leap  from  the  rack  with
more  haste  than  ever  husband  made  in  descending  from  the
nuptial  scaffold.

This  is  the  history  of  many  passions  and  all  pleasures.  In
spite  of  the  interruption,  or  on  its  account,  I  never  before
experienced  such  pleasure.  I  felt  that  I  was  really  another
person.  Rosette's  soul  had  entirely  entered  into  my  body.
My  soul  had  left  me  and  had  occupied  her  heart  as  her  soul
had  done  mine.  Without  a  doubt  they  met  on  the  way  in  the
long  kiss  we  exchanged  (our  ''equestrian*'  kiss,  as  Rosette  has
since  dubbed  it),  and  had  been  interchanged  and  intermingled
as  closely  as  the  souls  of  two  mortal  creatures  could  upon  a
grain  of  perishable  clay.

Assuredly  angels  must  embrace  like  that,  and  true  para-
dise is  not  in  heaven,  but  upon  the  mouth  of  the  beloved.

I  have  waited  in  vain  for  a  similar  moment,  and  I  have
unsuccessfully  tried  to  provoke  its  return.  We  have  often
ridden  through  the  avenues  of  the  forest  at  sunset;  the  trees
had  the  same  verdure,  the  birds  sang  similar  songs,  but  we
found  the  sun  dimmed  and  the  foliage  dull,  while  the  notes  of
the  birds  seemed  harsh  and  discordant,  for  harmony  was  no
longer  in  us.  We  slackened  our  horses  to  a  walk  and  at-
tempted a  similar  kiss.  Alas  !  our  lips  alone  joined,  and  it
was  but  the  specter  of  the  former  kiss.  The  beautiful,
sublime,  divine  kiss,  the  only  real  kiss  I  have  given  and
received  in  my  life,  had  departed  for  ever.  From  tliat  day
I  have  always  returned  from  the  wood  with  a  fund  of  in-
expressible sadness.  Rosette,  gay  and  frolicsome  though  she
usually  is,  cannot  escape  from  this  impression,  and  her  reverie
is  betrayed  by  a  little,  delicately  puckered  pout,  which  is  at
least  as  charming  as  her  smile.

Only  the  fumes  of  wine  and  brilliant  lights  can  rid  me  of
these  melancholy  thoughts.  We  drink  like  people  condemned
to  death,  in  silence,  glass  for  glass,  till  we  have  imbibed  the
requisite  quantity;  then  we  begin  to  laugh  and  jest  with  the
utmost  heartiness  at  what  we  describe  as  our  sentimentality.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  43

We  laugh  because  we  cannot  weep.  Ah  !  what  could  draw
a  tear  from  my  exhausted  eyes?

Why  had  I  so  much  pleasure  that  evening?  It  would  be
difficult  for  me  to  say.  Yet  I  was  the  same  man  and  Rosette
the  same  woman.  It  was  not  the  first  occasion  we  had
ridden  together.  We  had  previously  seen  the  sun  set,  and
the  spectacle  had  no  more  touched  us  than  the  sight  of  an
admirable  picture  with  its  brilliant  colors.  There  is  more
than  one  avenue  of  elms  and  chestnut  trees  in  the  world  and
that  was  not  the  first  occasion  we  had  traversed  it;  what
then  caused  us  to  discover  such  a  sovereign  charm,  which
transformed  dead  leaves  into  topaz  and  green  foliage  into
emerald,  which  gilded  all  these  fluttering  fragments,  and
changed  into  pearl  all  the  drops  of  water  scattered  over  the
green-sward, -which  gave  such  sweet  harmony  to  the  sounds
of  a  usually  discordant  bell  and  to  the  chirps  of  all  kinds  of
little  birds?  There  must  have  been  most  penetrating  poetry
in  the  air,  since  even  our  steeds  seemed  to  feel  its  effects.

Nothing  in  the  world,  however,  could  have  been  simpler
and  more  pastoral:  a  few  trees,  clouds,  five  or  six  branches
of  foliage,  a  woman,  and  a  ray  of  sunshine  falling  upon  a
scene  like  a  golden  chevron  upon  a  coat  of  arms.  Nor  did  I
have  any  feeling  of  surprise  or  astonishment.  I  well  remem-
ber it  all.  I  never  afterwards  visited  that  spot  without  per-
fectly recollecting  the  shape  of  the  foliage,  the  position  of
the  clouds,  the  white  pigeon  which  crossed  the  sky  flying  in
the  same  direction;  the  little  silvery  bell  I  then  heard  for
the  first  time  had  often  tinkled  in  my  ear,  and  its  voice
seemed  to  me  like  that  of  a  friend;  I  had,  without  ever  going
there,  traversed  that  avenue  many  times  with  princesses
mounted  upon  unicorns;  the  most  voluptuous  of  my  dreams
had  been  located  there  every  evening,  and  my  desires  had
there  exchanged  kisses  just  like  the  one  I  exchanged  with
Rosette.  That  kiss  had  nothing  new  to  me  in  it,  for  it  was
just  as  I  thought  it  would  be.  It  was  perhaps  the  only  time
in  my  life  that  I  was  not  disappointed,  when  the  reality
appeared  to  me  as  beautiful  as  the  ideal.  If  I  could  find  a
woman,  a  landscape,  a  building,  something  answering  to  my
inmost  desires  as  perfectly  as  that  moment  agreed  with  the


44  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAIJPIN

minute  of  my  dreams,  I  should  have  no  cause  of  envy  against
the  gods,  and  I  would  most  willingly  give  up  my  seat  in  Para-
dise. But,  in  reality,  I  do  not  think  that  a  man  of  flesh  and
blood  could  resist  for  an  hour  such  penetrating  pleasure  ;
two  kisses  like  that  would  comprise  an  entire  existence,  and
would  create  a  complete  void  in  soul  and  body.  That  con-
sideration would  not  stop  me;  for  being  unable  to  prolong
my  life  indefinitely,  death  is  of  no  concern  to  me,  and  I
should  prefer  to  die  of  pleasure  than  of  age  or  ennui.

But  this  woman  does  not  exist.  If  she  exists,  I  am  perhaps
only  separated  from  her  by  a  partition.  I  have  perhaps
touched  her  in  passing,  either  yesterday  or  to-day.

How  does  Rosette  differ  from  such  a  w^oman?  My  belief
that  she  is  the  woman  is  all  that  is  lacking.  What  fatality
is  it  that  always  makes  me  have  love  affairs  wnth  women  I  do
not  love?  Her  neck  is  polished  for  the  most  beautiful  neck-
laces, her  fingers  are  sufficiently  tapered  to  do  honor  to  the
richest  and  most  beautiful  rings,  rubies  would  blush  with
pleasure  at  being  allowed  to  gleam  at  the  pink  tip  of  her
beautiful  ear,  her  waist  would  do  honor  to  the  cestus  of
Venus;  but  it  is  Love  alone  who  knows  how  to  fasten  his
mother's  sash.

All  Rosette's  merit  is  in  herself.  I  have  lent  her  nothing.
I  have  not  thrown  over  her  beauty  that  veil  of  perfection
with  which  love  envelops  the  person  of  the  beloved;  the
veil  of  Isis  is  transparency  by  the  side  of  it.  Satiety  is  the
only  thing  which  can  lift  the  corner  of  it.

I  do  not  love  Rosette  ;  at  least,  the  love  I  have  for  her,  if  I
have  any,  does  not  resemble  the  idea  that  I  am  made  for
love.  After  all  my  idea  is  not  perhaps  right.  I  dare  decide
nothing.  Still,  it  makes  me  quite  insensible  to  the  charms
of  other  women,  and  I  have  thought  of  no  one  else  since  I
have  known  her.  If  she  has  cause  for  jealousy,  it  is  only  of
phantoms,  and  they  are  unlikely  to  cause  her  much  uneasi-
ness; my  imagination  is  her  most  dangerous  rival,  though,
with  all  her  cleverness,  she  will  probably  never  perceive  it.

If  women  knew  that  !  How  many  infidelities  the  least
flightly  lover  commits  against  his  most  beloved  mistress  !  It
is  to  be  presumed  that  women  do  likewise,  or  even  worse;


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  45

but,  like  us,  they  say  nothing.  A  mistress  îs  like  an  ordinary
theme,  which  usually  disappears  beneath  flourish  and  improvi-
zation.  Often  the  kisses  she  receives  are  not  for  her;  it  is
the  idea  of  another  woman  that  is  kissed  in  her  person,  and
she  benefits  more  than  once  (if  it  can  be  called  a  benefit)
by  thoughts  inspired  by  others.  Ah  !  poor  Rosette,  how  many
times  have  you  served  as  the  incarnation  for  my  dreams  and
given  a  reality  to  your  rivals;  of  how  many  infidelities  have
you  unwittingly  been  the  accomplice!  If  you  could  have
thought  at  the  moment  my  arms  embraced  you  so  tightly,
when  my  mouth  was  pressed  against  your  own,  that  your
beauty  and  love  were  of  no  value,  that  your  features  were
a  thousand  miles  away  from  my  thoughts;  if  you  had  been
told  that  those  eyes,  veiled  with  amorous  languor,  were  cast
down  in  order  not  to  see  you,  and  not  to  dispel  the  illusion
that  you  only  served  to  complete,  and  that  you  were  only  an
efifort  of  my  imagination,  a  means  of  deceiving  a  desire  im-
possible of  realization  !

O  heavenly  creatures,  beautiful  virgins,  frail  and  diapha-
nous, who  droop  your  eyes  and  clasp  your  HI)'  hands  upon  the
golden-framed  pictures  of  the  old  German  masters,  you  saints
in  stained-glass  windows,  you  martyrs  from  the  missals  who
smile  so  gently  in  the  midst  of  scrolls  of  arabesques,  and
who  emerge  so  blonde  and  fresh  from  the  bell  of  flowers  !
O  you  beautiful  courtesans,  reclining  upon  beds  strewn  with
roses,  beneath  large  purple  curtains,  with  your  bracelets  and
necklaces  of  great  pearls,  your  fan  and  your  mirrors,  in
which  the  setting  sun  is  reflected  amid  the  shadows!  dark
daughters  of  Titian,  who  display  your  beautiful  figures  so
voluptuously  !  ancient  goddesses  whose  white  phantoms  hover
'neath  the  shades  of  the  garden,  you  are  all  part  of  my
seraglio;  I  have  adored  you  all  in  turn.  Saint  Ursula,  I  have
kissed  your  hands  in  Rosette's  beautiful  hands;  I  have  played
with  the  dark  hair  of  Muranese,  and  never  before  had  Rosette
so  much  difficulty  in  rearranging  her  hair.  Virgin  Diana,  I
have  been  your  admirer  more  than  Actseon,  and  I  have  not
been  changed  into  a  stag;  I  it  was  who  replaced  your  beauti-
ful  Endymion!     How   many   unsuspected   rivals   there   are,


4G  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


against  whom  no  revenge  is  possible  !  But  still  are  they  not
always  painted  or  sculptured  !

Women,  when  you  see  your  lover  become  more  tender  than
usual  and  clasp  you  in  his  arms  with  extraordinary  emotion  ;
when  he  raises  his  head  to  gaze  upon  you  with  humid  and
wandering  eyes;  when  enjoyment  only  serves  to  increase
his  tenderness,  and  he  drowns  your  voice  beneath  his  kisses,
as  if  he  feared  to  listen  to  it,  be  sure  that  he  is  not  aware
of  your  presence;  that  he  is  keeping  an  appointment  with  a
chimera  which  you  render  palpable  by  playing  its  part.  Many
cliambermaids  have  profited  by  the  love  inspired  by  queens.
Many  women  have  profited  by  the  love  inspired  by  goddesses,
and  a  commonplace  reality  has  often  served  as  the  pedestal
for  the  ideal  idol.  That  is  why  poets  usually  have  such
commonplace  love-aflfairs.  There  is  the  story  of  many  great
geniuses  whose  ignoble  and  obscure  relations  have  made  the
world  astonished.

I  have  only  been  unfaithful  to  Rosette  after  this  fashion.
I  have  only  deceived  her  with  pictures  and  statues,  and  she
has  contributed  a  half  to  my  treachery.  I  have  not  upon  my
conscience  the  tiniest  material  transgression  with  which  to
reproach  myself.  I  am,  in  this  respect,  as  white  as  the
snow  upon  the  Jungfrau,  and  yet  without  being  amorous  of
any  one,  I  desire  to  be  so.  I  do  not  look  for  an  oppor-
tunity, nor  should  I  be  angry  if  it  presented  itself;  if  it  came,
perhaps  I  should  not  make  use  of  it,  for  I  have  an  inner
conviction  that  it  would  be  just  the  same  with  another;  now,
in  this  woman  I  have  at  least  a  pretty  and  witty  comrade,  and
one  most  agreeably  demoralized,  and  tliat  consideration  is  not
one  of  the  least  of  the  ties  which  bind  me  to  her,  for  in  losing
the  woman,  I  should  be  in  despair  at  the  loss  of  the  friend.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  47


CHAPTER  IV

Do  you  know  that  for  five  months,  which  seem  like  five
eternities,  I  have  been  Madam  Rosette's  devoted  admirer?
That  is  very  fine.  I  should  not  have  believed  myself  so
faithful,  nor  would  she,  I  would  wager.  We  are  indeed  a
pair  of  turtle-doves  in  our  affection.

It  has  been  a  five-months'  tête-à-tête  for  we  meet  every
day,  and  almost  every  evening,  with  the  doors  closed  against
other  visitors.  Ah,  well,  one  thing  I  must  say  to  the  glory
of  the  incomparable  Rosette,  I  am  not  greatly  bored,  and  this
time  will,  no  doubt,  be  the  most  agreeable  of  my  life.  I  do
not  think  it-  possible  for  any  woman  to  occupy  in  a  more
constant  and  amusing  fashion  a  man  without  passion,  and
God  knows  what  a  terrible  disenchantment  is  that  produced
by  an  empty  heart  !  I  can  give  you  no  idea  of  this  woman's
resources.  She  began  by  taking  them  from  her  mind,  and
ended  by  doing  so  from  her  heart,  for  she  loves  me  to  adora-
tion. With  what  art  does  she  profit  by  the  tiniest  spark,  and
how  she  can  make  it  flame!  How  skillfully  she  directs  the
tiniest  movements  of  the  soul  !  How  she  can  convert  languor
into  tender  reverie!  and  by  how  many  devious  methods  can
she  bring  back  to  herself  the  mind  which  is  far  away!  It
is  wonderful  !  I  admire  her  as  one  of  the  greatest  geniuses
who  has  ever  lived.

I  have  before  now  visited  her  in  a  very  bad  temper,  with
the  object  of  a  quarrel.  I  do  not  know  how  the  witch  has
managed  it,  but  at  the  end  of  a  few  minutes  she  has  forced
me  to  pay  her  compliments,  although  I  had  not  the  least  desire
to  do  so,  to  kiss  her  hands  and  laugh  with  all  my  might,
although  I  was  in  a  terrible  rage.  Can  you  form  an  idea
of  such  tyranny?  But  however  clever  she  may  be,  our  tête-
à-tête  cannot  be  prolonged  much  further,  and  during  the  last
fortnight  I  have  done  a  thing  I  never  did  before,  I  have
picked  up  a  book  from  her  table  and  read  a  few  lines  during
the  gaps  in  the  conversation.  Rosette  has  noticed  it  with  a
feeling  of  terror  she  has  been  unable  to  conceal,  and  she  has


48  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


removed  all  books  from  her  boudoir.  I  must  admit  that  I
regret  their  absence,  though  I  cannot  ask  for  them.  The
other  day  (a  terrible  symptom)  some  one  came  while  we
were  together,  and  instead  of  flying  into  a  rage  as  I  used  to
do  I  felt  almost  glad.  I  was  nearly  amiable,  and  maintained
the  conversation  which  Rosette  tried  to  make  flag  so  that
the  gentleman  would  go,  and  when  he  had  gone  I  even  re-
marked that  he  was  a  clever  fellow  and  good  company.
Rosette  reminded  me  that  two  months  before  I  considered
him  stupid  and  the  greatest  fool  on  earth,  and  to  this  I  could
make  no  reply,  for  I  had  indeed  said  so;  and  I  was  quite
right,  in  spite  of  the  apparent  contradiction;  for  on  the  first
occasion  he  had  disturbed  a  charming  conversation,  and  on
the  second  he  had  come  to  the  rescue  of  a  worn-out  and
languishing  (on  one  side,  at  any  rate)  talk,  and  was  the
means  of  sparing  me,  for  that  day,  at  any  rate,  my  fatiguing
part  in  a  love  scene.

That  is  the  state  of  affairs;  the  position  is  a  serious  one,
especially  when  one  of  the  two  is  still  in  love  and  clinging
desperately  to  the  remnants  of  the  other's  affection.  I  am  in
a  position  of  great  perplexity.  Although  I  am  not  in  love
witli  Rosette,  I  have  a  great  affection  for  her,  and  would
not  like  to  do  anything  to  cause  her  pain.  I  want  her  to
believe  as  long  as  possible  that  I  love  her.

Out  of  gratitude  for  all  those  hours  she  has  made  pass  so
quickly,  out  of  gratitude  for  the  love  she  has  given  me,  in
return  for  pleasure,  I  desire  it.  I  will  deceive  her;  for  is
not  an  agreeable  deception  better  than  a  painful  truth — and  I
shall  never  have  the  heart  to  tell  her  I  do  not  love  her.  The
vain  shadow  of  love  on  which  she  feasts  appears  so  adorable
and  dear  to  her,  she  embraces  the  pale  specter  with  so  much
intoxication  and  effusion,  that  I  dare  not  make  it  vanish:
yet  I  am  afraid  in  the  end  she  will  perceive  that  it  is  only
a  phantom.  This  morning  we  had  a  talk,  which  I  will  report
in  dramatic  form  for  greater  fidelity,  and  which  makes  me
fear  that  I  shall  not  be  able  to  prolong  our  liaison  much
further.

"Do  not  yawn  like  that" — Rosette  is  addressing  me — "or
I  will  not  kiss  you  for  a  week/'


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  49


^Well  !"

"You  don't  seem  sir,  to  place  much  value  upon  my  kisses/*

*'0n  the  contrary/'

''You  say  that  in  a  very  unconcerned  fashion.  Very  well,
sir,  you  can  be  sure  that  for  a  week  I  will  not  touch  you
with  my  lips.  To-day  is  Tuesday,  so  not  till  next  Tuesday."
.    ''Bahr

"Why  bah?"

"Yes,  bah!  You  will  kiss  me  before  this  evening  or  I
shall  die."

"You  will  die  !  What  a  coxcomb  you  are  !  I  have  spoiled
you,  sir."

"I  shall  live.  I  am  not  a  coxcomb,  and  you  have  not  spoiled
me;  quite  the  reverse.  First  of  all,  I  demand  the  suppres-
sion of  the  'sir';  I  have  known  you  long  enough  for  you
to  call  me  by  name."

"I  have  spoiled  you,  Albert."

''Good.    Now  bring  your  mouth  nearer."

"No,  Tuesday  next."

"Come  !  do  we  now  embrace  calendar  in  hand  ?  We  are  both
of  us  a  little  too  young  for  that.  Your  mouth,  my  child,
or  I  shall  get  a  stiff  neck."

"No."

"Ah  !  you  want  me  to  steal  my  kiss,  lîttle  one  ;  it  shall  be
done.  The  thing  is  feasible,  though  perhaps  it  has  not  yet
been  done."

"Saucy  fellow!"

"Notice,  my  beautiful  one,  that  I  was  gallant  enough  to
put  in  a  'perhaps';  that  is  very  honorable  on  my  part.  But
we  are  wandering  from  our  subject.  Lean  your  head.  Come,
What  is  the  matter,  my  favorite  sultana?  How  cross  you
look  !    I  want  to  kiss  a  smile,  not  a  pout."

"How  can  you  expect  me  to  laugh  ?"  Rosette  replies  as  she
leans  forward  to  be  kissed.    "You  speak  so  unkindly  to  me  !"

"My  intention  is  to  utter  the  most  loving  words.  Why  da
you  think  I  am  unkind  to  you  ?"

"I  do  not  know  ;  but  you  are."

"You  mistake  for  unkindness  meaningless  jokes."

"Do  you  call  that  meaningless?    Trifles  mean  so  much  in


60  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

love.     I  would  rather  you  beat  me  than  laugh  as  you  are
doing/'

*'Do  you  want  to  see  me  weep?"

"You  always  go  from  one  extreme  to  the  other.  You  are
not  asked  to  weep,  but  to  talk  reasonably,  and  to  drop  that
quizzing  tone  which  suits  you  so  badly."

*'It  is  impossible  for  me  to  talk  reasonably  and  not  to  quiz;
so  I  will  beat  you,  as  you  prefer  it."

"Go  on."

"I  would  rather,"  I  say,  as  I  give  her  a  few  taps  on  the
shoulders,  "cut  off  my  own  head  than  spoil  your  lovely  little
body  and  mar  the  whiteness  of  your  charming  back.  My
goddess,  whatever  pleasure  there  may  be  in  your  being  beaten,
it  shall  not  fall  to  your  lot."

"You  don't  love  me  any  longer."

"That  does  not  follow  at  all  directly  from  what  has  pre-
ceded it;  that  is  almost  as  logical  as  saying,  'It  rains,  so
don't  give  me  my  umbrella,'  or  'It  is  cold,  open  the  window.'  "

"You  do  not  love  me,  you  have  never  loved  me."

"Ah!  things  are  becoming  more  complicated:  'You  do
not  love  me,  you  have  never  loved  me.'  That  is  passably
contradictory.  How  can  I  cease  to  do  a  thing  I  have  never
done?  You  see,  my  little  queen,  you  do  not  know  what  you
are  talking  about,  and  all  you  say  is  perfectly  absurd."

"I  have  such  a  desire  to  be  loved  by  you  that  I  have  helped
to  delude  myself.  It  is  easy  to  believe  what  one  desires  to
believe;  but  now  I  can  clearly  see  I  am  mistaken.  You  have
deceived  yourself;  you  have  acquired  a  taste  for  love,  and  a
desire  for  passion.  The  same  thing  happens  every  day.  I
will  not  have  it:  it  is  not  your  fault  you  have  not  loved  me;
it  is  due  to  the  poorness  of  my  charms.  I  ought  to  be  more
beautiful,  more  sprightly,  more  coquettish;  I  ought  to  try
and  ascend  to  your  level,  my  poet,  instead  of  desiring  to
make  you  descend  to  mine.  I  have  feared  to  lose  you  in  the
clouds,  and  I  am  afraid  that  your  head  has  stolen  away  your
heart  from  me.  I  have  imprisoned  you  in  my  love,  and  I
believed,  in  surrendering  myself  to  you,  that  you  would  retain
something."


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  51


'^Rosette,  move  a  little  further  away  from  me;  your  flesh
bums  me,  you  are  like  a  hot  coal."

"If  I  bore  you,  I  will  go  away.  Ah  !  heart  of  rock,  drops
of  water  penetrate  stone,  but  my  tears  cannot  penetrate
you.''     (She  weeps.)

'If  you  weep  like  that,  you  will  change  the  place  into  a
bathroom,  or  rather,  the  ocean.     Can  you  swim,  Rosette?''

'Wretch  !"

''Come,  why  am  I  a  wretch?  You  flatter  me,  Rosette;  I
have  not  that  honor.  I  am  a  careless  citizen,  alas  !  I  have  not
committed  the  smallest  of  crimes;  I  have  perhaps  done  a
foolish  thing  in  loving  you  to  distraction,  that  is  all.  Do  you
desire  with  all  your  strength  to  make  me  repent  of  my  love?
I  have  loved  you,  and  I  love  you  to  the  utmost  extent  of
my  power.  Since  I  have  been  your  lover  I  have  always
walked  in  your  shadow.  I  have  consecrated  all  my  time  to
you,  my  days  and  my  evenings.  I  have  not  used  long
phrases  to  you,  because  I  only  like  them  when  they  are  writ-
ten ;  but  I  have  given  you  a  thousand  proofs  of  my  affection.
I  will  not  mention  my  scrupulous  fidelity,  that  is  understood;
what  more  would  you  have  of  me?  I  am  with  you  to-day,
as  I  was  yesterday,  and  shall  be  to-morrow.  Is  this  the
way  a  man  behaves  to  a  woman  he  does  not  love?  I  do  all
you  wish  me  to  do.  You  say,  'Let  us  go,'  I  go;  'let  us
stay,'  and  I  remain;  it  seems  to  me  that  I  am  the  most  ad-
mirable lover  in  the  world."

"That  is  precisely  my  complaint;  in  truth,  you  are  the
most  perfect  lover  in  the  world."

"With  what  have  you  to  reproach  me?"

"Nothing,  and  I  should  prefer  to  have  to  complain  of
you."

"This  is  a  strange  quarrel."

"It  is  much  worse.  You  do  not  love  me.  I  can  do  noth-
ing; nor  can  you.  What  would  you  do  under  these  circum-
stances? Most  certainly  I  should  prefer  to  have  some  fault
to  pardon.  I  should  scold  you;  you  would  do  your  best  to
excuse  yourself,  and  we  should  make  it  up."

'That  would  be  to  your  advantage.  For  the  greater  the
crime,  the  greater  would  the  reparation  be."


52  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


*'You  know  very  well,  sir,  that  I  am  not  yet  reduced  to
that  extreme,  and  that  if  I  wished  now,  although  you  do  not
love  me,  and  we  were  to  quarrel     .     .     ."

**Yes,  I  admit  it  is  the  result  of  pure  clemency  on  your  part.
Then  spare  me  a  little;  that  would  be  better  than  arguing  in
the  way  we  are  doing/*

"You  wish  to  cut  short  a  conversation  which  embarrasses
you;  but,  if  you  please,  my  fine  friend,  we  will  be  content
with  talking/'

'That  is  not  a  very  extravagant  luxury.  I  assure  you  that
you  are  wrong  ;  you  are  ravishingly  pretty,  and  I  have  a
great  affection  for  you/'

''Which  you  shall  express  to  me  on  a  future  occasion/'

"Well,  my  love,  are  you  really  a  little  Hyrcanian  tigress?
Your  cruelty  is  unparalleled  !  Has  a  longing  to  make  yourself
a  vestal  taken  possession  of  you  ?  The  caprice  would  be  quite
original/'

"Why  not?  Stranger  things  have  happened;  but  most
certainly  I  shall  be  as  far  as  you  are  concerned.  Learn,
sir,  that  I  only  love  those  who  love  me,  or  whom  I  believe
do  so.     You  are  in  neither  class.     Allow  me  to  leave  you/'

*'Let  me  go!"

"No,  I  will  not."

''Madam,  I  assure  you,  I  will  not/'

"Ah,  well  !  I  will  remain."  Rosette  has  not  realized  that
she  is  the  weaker  of  the  two.     "You  arc  hurting  my  arm/'

"I  think  you  know  quite  well  without  me  telling  you;  be-
sides, it  is  a  little  late  to  capitulate  when  the  enemy  has
already  captured  the  citadel/'

Here,  old  friend,  I  think  it  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  con-
clude the  dialogue,  for  the  remainder  of  it  can  hardly  be
reported.

After  lunching  together,  as  it  was  a  bright,  sunny  day,  we
went  for  a  long  country  ramble.  The  clearness  of  the  air,
the  splendor  of  the  countryside,  and  the  aspect  of  joyful
nature  introduced  into  the  soul  enough  sentimentality  and
tenderness  to  make  Rosette  admit  that  my  heart,  was  the  same
as  another  person's.

Have  you  ever  noticed  how  the  shade  of  the  woods,  the


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  53

murmur  of  the  waterfalls,  the  song  of  the  birds,  and  the
odor  of  the  foliage  and  flowers  exercise  over  us,  however
depraved  we  may  be,  an  occult  power  which  it  is  impossible
to  resist?  I  will  confide  in  you,  under  a  vow  of  the  greatest
secrecy,  that  I  quite  recently  surprised  myself  by  displaying
the  most  provincial  emotion  at  the  song  of  the  nightingale.
It  was  in  a  garden;  the  sky,  though  it  was  night,  had  a
clearness  almost  equal  to  that  of  the  brightest  day  ;  it  was  so
profound  and  transparent  that  one's  gaze  penetrated  almost
to  God.  One  could  seem  to  see  fluttering  the  folds  of  angels'
robes  upon  the  white  curves  of  the  way  of  Saint  Jacques.
The  moon  was  up,  but  entirely  hidden  by  a  tree;  it  riddled
the  black  foliage  with  thousands  of  little  luminous  holes,  giv-
ing it  more  sparkles  than  ever  had  any  Marquise's  fan.  Al-
though I  could  see  only  the  bluey  light  of  the  moon,  I  seemed
to  be  surrounded  by  a  population  of  unknown  but  beloved
phantoms,  and  I  did  not  feel  alone,  though  I  was  the  only
person  upon  the  terrace.  I  did  not  think,  I  did  not  dream,
I  was  bewildered  by  the  nature  surrounding  me,  I  felt  myself
rustle  with  the  foliage,  shimmer  with  the  water,  and  blossom
with  the  flowers;  I  was  nothing  more  than  the  trees,  the
water,  and  the  beauty  of  the  night  I  was  all  that,  and  I
do  not  think  it  possible  to  be  further  from  myself  than  I
was  at  that  moment.  Suddenly,  as  if  something  extraordinary
were  about  to  happen,  the  leaves  were  still  upon  the  branches,
the  drops  of  water  from  the  fountain  remained  suspended
in  the  air  and  did  not  complete  their  fall.  The  silver  rays
of  the  moon  still  fell  upon  the  earth;  my  heart  also  beat
so  loudly  that  it  seemed  to  fill  the  gardens  with  sound.  Then
my  heart  ceased  to  throb,  and  there  was  a  great  silence  amid
which  I  could  hear  the  grass  grow  and  a  whisper  two  hun-
dred leagues  away.  Instantly  the  nightingale,  probably  await-
ing such  a  moment  to  commence  his  song,  hurled  forth  from
his  little  throat  a  note  so  shrill  and  clear  that  I  heard  it  in
my  breast  as  much  as  through  my  ears.  The  music  suddenly
filled  the  crystal  sky  void  of  sound,  and  made  a  harmonious
atmosphere,  in  which  the  other  notes  as  they  followed  hov-
ered as  if  upon  wings.  I  understood  as  perfectly  what  the
songster  was  saying  as  if  I  had  mastered  the  secret  of  the


54  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

birds'  language.  It  was  the  story  of  loves  I  have  missed
the  nightingale  was  telling.  Never  was  a  story  more  exact
or  truthful.  He  did  not  omit  the  tiniest  detail  or  the  smallest
shade  of  expression.  He  told  me  what  I  had  not  been  able
to  tell  myself,  he  explained  to  me  what  I  had  not  been  able
to  understand;  he  g:ave  a  voice  to  my  reverie,  and  gained
an  answer  from  the  phantom  which,  up  to  that  time,  had
been  mute.  I  knew  that  I  was  loved,  and  his  most  languorous
roulade  told  me  that  I  should  soon  be  happy.  I  seemed  to
see  amid  the  trills  of  his  song,  and  beneath  the  rain  of  notes,
in  a  ray  of  moonlight,  the  white  arms  of  my  well-beloved
outstretched  towards  me.  She  appeared  gradually,  with  the
perfume  of  the  heart  of  a  hundred-leaved  rose.  I  will  not
try  to  describe  to  you  her  beauty.  It  was  of  the  sort  words
refuse  to  depict.  How  can  I  utter  the  unutterable,  how
pvaint  that  which  has  neither  form  nor  color,  or  how  note  a
voice  without  tone  or  words?  Never  before  have  I  had  so
much  love  in  my  heart;  I  would  have  clasped  Nature  to  my
breast  I  pressed  the  void  between  my  arms  as  if  it  were
a  virgin's  waist;  I  gave  kisses  to  the  air  as  it  passed  by  my
lips.  Ah  !  if  Rosette  had  been  there,  how  happy  should  I
have  been!  But  women  never  appear  at  the  right  time.
The  nightingale  ceased  to  sing;  the  moon,  unable  longer  to
refrain  from  sleep,  drew  over  her  eyes  a  nightcap  of  clouds,
and  I  left  the  garden  ;  for  the  chill  of  the  evening  had  begim
to  affect  me.

My  mistress  and  I  still  have  agreeable  moments,  but  they
have  to  be  brought  about  and  prepared  by  some  external  cir-
cumstance, like  the  nightingale's  song;  and  yet,  in  the  begin-
ning, I  had  no  need  to  excite  my  imagination  by  looking  at
the  moon  and  listening  to  the  nightingale  to  enjoy  all  the
pleasure  possible  to  a  person  not  really  in  love.

Rosette,  who  is  still  in  love,  does  what  she  can  to  com-
bat these  disadvantages.  Unfortunately,  there  are  two  things
in  the  world  which  cannot  be  commanded:  love  and  ennui.
On  my  part  I  make  superhuman  efforts  to  overcome  the  som-
nolence which  attacks  me  in  spite  of  myself,  and,  like  the
country  folk  who  begin  to  nod  at  ten  o'clock  in  a  fashionable
drawing-room,  I  keep  my  eyes  as  wide  open  as  possible  and


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  55

lift  up  my  eyelids  with  my  fingers  !  but  it  is  all  of  no  avail.

The  dear  child,  who  the  other  day  hit  upon  a  rural  scheme,
took  me  into  the  country  yesterday.

It  would  perhaps  be  as  well  for  me  to  give  you  a  descrip-
tion of  the  aforesaid  country,  for  it  is  pretty  enough  in  its
way;  it  will  also  brighten  up  a  little  all  my  metaphysics,  and
besides  I  need  a  background  for  the  persons,  as  figures  can-
not stand  out  from  a  void  or  from  that  vag^e  brown  color
with  which  painters  fill  up  their  canvas.

The  approaches  are  very  picturesque.  Along  a  high  road,
bordered  with  trees,  a  spot  is  reached  where  several  paths
meet,  and  here  stands  a  stone  obelisk  surmounted  by  a  bowl
of  gilded  copper.  Five  paths  converge;  then  there  is  a
sudden  dip  in  the  ground.  The  high  road  plunges  down  into
a  narrow  valley,  the  bottom  of  which  is  occupied  by  a  stream,
which  it  crosses  by  means  of  a  single-arch  bridge,  then
ascends  steeply  the  opposite  slope,  where  a  village  is  situated,
the  church  tower  of  which  can  be  seen  peeping  between  the
thatchd  roofs  and  the  rounded  tops  of  the  apple  trees.  The
horizon  is  not  very  vast,  for  it  is  bounded  on  two  sides
by  the  crest  of  the  hill,  but  it  is  pleasant  and  restful  to  the
eye.  By  the  side  of  the  bridge  there  is  a  mill,  and  a  red
sandstone  building  in  the  form  of  a  tower;  an  almost  con-
tinuous barking  and  the  presence  of  a  few  hounds  and  sev-
eral young  dachshunds  lying  in  the  sun  before  the  door  would
inform  one  that  here  lives  the  gamekeeper,  if  the  buzzards
and  weasels  nailed  to  the  shutters  could  leave  any  doubt  on
the  subject.  Here  an  avenue  of  mountain  ashes  begins,  the
scarlet  berries  of  which  attract  flocks  of  birds.  As  the
passers-by  are  few  there  is  a  white  track  in  the  middle  of
the  road;  all  the  rest  is  covered  with  a  short,  fine  moss,  and
in  the  double  cart-track  little  frogs  as  green  as  lizards  croak
and  jump.  After  a  considerable  walk  we  come  to  an  iron
gate,  which  was  once  gilt  and  painted,  and  the  sides  of  which
are  ornamented  with  spiked  railings.  Then  the  road  winds
towards  the  château,  which  is  not  yet  visible,  for  it  is  hidden
away  in  the  foliage  like  a  bird's  nest,  often  turning  aside
to  visit  a  stream  or  a  fountain,  an  elegant  kiosk,  or  a  spot
from  which  a  beautiful  view  is  obtainable,  and  crossing  and


56  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


recrossîng  the   river  over   Chinese  or   rustic  bridges.     The
hilly  nature  of  the  ground  and  the  dams  made  for  the  mill
cause  the  river  in  several  places  to  fall  a  distance  of  four
or  five  feet,  and  nothing  is  more  pleasant  than  to  hear  all
these   cascades   purling  close   at   hand,  very   often   without
being  able  to  see  them,  for  the  rushes  and  osiers  form  an
almost  impenetrable  screen.     But  all  this  part  of  the  park
is  in  some  respects  but  the  ante-room  of  the  rest;  a  high
road  which  passes  through  the  estate  unfortunately  divides
it  into  two  parts,  but  this  inconvenience  has  been  remedied
in  a  very  ingenious  way.    Two  high  walls,  with  battlements
full  of  loopholes  in  imitation  of  a  ruined  fortress,  stand  one
on  either  side  of  the  road;  a  tower  to  which  giant  ivy  clings
on  the  chateau  side  drops  with  iron  chains  upon  the  bastion
opposite  a  real  drawbridge,  and  this  bridge  is  let  down  every
morning.     Through  a  beautiful  archway  one  can  pass  into
the  interior  of  the  dungeon,  and  thence  into  the  second  do-
main, where  the  trees,  which  have  not  been  cut  for  a  century,
are  of  extraordinary  height,  and  having  their  gnarled  trunks
covered  by  parasite  plants,  are  the  strangest  and  most  beau-
tiful I  have  ever  seen.     Some  have  leaves  only  at  the  tops,
which  are  umbrella-shaped;  others  taper  in  tufts;  others,  on
the  contrary,  have  not  far  from  their  roots  a  large  clump,
from  which  the  bare  trunk  rises  to  the  sky  like  a  second
tree  planted  in  the  first;  such  curious   deformity  do  they
display,   that  they   seem  like  the  drawings   of   an   artificial
landscape  or  theatrical  scenery;  ivy  which  trails   from  one
to  the  other  mingles  its  dark  foliage  with  tlie  green  leaves,  of
which  it  seems  to  be  the  shadow.     Nothing  in  the  world  is
more   picturesque.     The    river   widens   out   at   this    spot   to
form  a  small  lake,  and  its  shallowness  makes  visible  through
the   transparent   water    the    beautiful   aquatic    plants    which
carpet  its  bed.    The  château  is  on  the  other  side,  but  a  little
boat,  painted  apple-green  and  bright  red,  will  save  a  long
detour  in  search  of  the  bridge.    The  mansion  is  a  collection
of  buildings  erected  at  different  periods,  with  irregular  gables
and  a  number  of  little  bell-turrets.

In  spite  of  a  lack  of  regularity,  or  rather  because  of  it,
the  appearance  of  the  building  is  charming;  at  least  it  can-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  57


not  all  be  seen  at  once;  there  is  plenty  of  choice,  and  always
something  fresh  to  notice.  This  mansion,  which  I  did  not
know,  for  it  is  twenty  leagues  away,  at  once  took  my  fancy,
and  I  realized  at  once  Rosette's  perfect  taste  and  triumphant
idea  in  selecting  such  a  nest  for  our  love.

We  reached  it  at  nightfall,  and,  as  we  were  tired,  after
a  hearty  supper  we  had  nothing  better  to  do  than  to  go  to
bed,  for  we  intended  to  have  a  good  night's  rest.

My  dreams  were  of  a  rose-colored  nature,  full  of  flowers,
perfumes,  and  birds,  when  I  felt  a  warm  breath  upon  my
forehead  and  a  kiss  descend  upon  my  lips.  The  sound  of
the  kiss  and  a  sweet  moisture  upon  my  lips  made  me  realize
that  I  was  not  dreaming;  I  opened  my  eyes,  and  the  first
thing  I  saw  was  Rosette's  fresh  white  neck  as  she  leant  over
the  bed  to  embrace  me.  I  put  my  arm  around  her  waist,  and
returned  her  kiss  more  lovingly  than  I  had  done  for  a  long
time.

She  drew  back  the  curtain  and  opened  the  window,  and
then  sat  down  upon  the  edge  of  my  bed,  holding  my  hand  in
hers  and  playing  with  my  rings.  Her  attire,  which  was  most
coquettish  in  its  simplicity,  made  me  regret  that  I  was  already
her  lover,  and  had  not  still  to  become  so.

My  dream  at  the  moment  she  awakened  me  in  such  an
agreeable  fashion  was  not  far  removed  from  reality.  My
room  looked  out  upon  the  little  lake  I  described  just  now.
Jessamine  encircled  my  window,  and  shed  its  blossoms  in  a
silver  rain  upon  my  floor;  large  foreign  flowers  blossomed
upon  my  balcony;  a  sweet,  faint  perfume,  composed  of  a
thousand  different  scents,  penetrated  as  far  as  my  bed,  from
which  I  could  see  millions  of  drops  of  water  shimmer  and
sparkle  ;  the  birds  sang  and  twittered,  there  was  a  harmony  of
confused  sounds  like  the  noise  at  a  fair.  Facing  me  upon  a
hillside  lit  up  by  the  sun  stretched  a  meadow  of  a  golden
green,  where  a  few  oxen  in  the  care  of  a  small  boy  grazed
here  and  there.  Higher  up  and  further  away  were  visible  im-
mense patches  of  woods  of  a  darker  green,  from  which  as-
cended in  spirals  the  bluey  smoke  of  charcoal-burners'  fires.

The  entire  landscape  was  calm,  fresh,  and  smiling,  and
wherever  I  turned  my  eyes,  everything  looked  young  and


58  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

beautiful.  My  room  was  hung  with  tapestry  and  had  mats
upon  the  floor,  while  blue  Japanese  vases,  large  in  the  body
with  slim  necks,  full  of  strange  flowers,  were  artistically  ar-
ranged upon  the  shelves  and  marble  mantelpiece;  there  were
pictures,  too,  representing  pastoral  and  rural  scenes,  and  sofas
and  divans  in  every  corner  ;  then,  last  of  all,  there  was  a  young
and  beautiful  woman,  all  in  white,  whose  flesh  delicately
tinted  her  transparent  garment  at  the  places  where  it  touched
her.  Nothing  could  be  imagined  more  conducive  to  the  pleas-
ure of  the  soul  as  well  as  the  eye.

So  my  delightful  eye  travelled  with  equal  pleasure  from  a
magnificent  vase,  decorated  with  dragons  and  mandarins,  to
Rosette's  slippers,  and  from  there  to  the  corner  of  her  shoul-
der shining  beneath  the  cambric;  it  rested  upon  the  trembling
blossoms  of  the  jasmine  and  the  willows  on  the  river-bank,
passed  over  the  water  and  explored  the  hillside,  and  then  re-
turned into  the  room  to  become  fixed  upon  the  rose-colored
knots  of  a  shepherdess's  long  corset.

Through  the  gaps  in  the  foliage  the  sky  showed  thousands
of  blue  specks  ;  the  water  babbled  gently  ;  and  I  gave  way  to
the  appreciation  of  all  this  joy  in  silence,  plunged  in  a  tranquil
ecstasy,  with  my  hand  still  clasped  in  Rosette's  little  hands.

The  expression  that  happiness  is  red  and  white  is  a  fine
one;  it  can  hardly  be  represented  otherwise.  Tender  colors
suit  it  well.  There  are  only  upon  its  palette  a  water-green,
sky-blue,  and  a  straw-colored  yellow;  its  pictures  are  all  in
the  light,  like  those  of  Chinese  painters.  Flowers,  light  per-
fumes, a  silky  and  soft  skin  touching  your  own,  veiled  har-
mony, coming  from  you  know  not  where,  these  things  are
quite  enough  for  happiness  ;  there  is  no  dififerent  way  of  being
happy.  I,  who  have  a  horror  of  the  commonplace,  who  dream
of  nothing  but  strange  adventures,  violent  passions,  delirious
ecstasies,  strange  and  difficult  situations,  am  supremely  happy
in  this  fashion,  and,  with  all  my  efiforts,  I  have  been  unable
to  find  any  other.

I  must  ask  you  to  believe  that  I  did  not  then  make  any  of
these  reflections  ;  afterwards,  when  writing  to  you,  they  have
come  into  my  head;  at  that  moment  I  was  entirely  wrapped


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  69

up  in  my  enjoyment — ^the  only  occupation  of  a  reasonable
man.

I  will  not  describe  to  you  the  life  we  lead  here;  you  can
easily  imagine  it.  There  are  walks  in  the  great  woods,  violets
and  wild  strawberries,  kisses  and  little  blue  flowers,  picnics
on  the  grass,  reading  and  books  forgotten  beneath  the  trees;
excursions  on  the  water  with  the  end  of  a  scarf  or  a  white
hand  trailing  in  the  stream,  lengthy  songs  or  peals  of  laughter
re-echoed  by  the  bank;  we  lead  the  most  Arcadian  life  it  is
possible  to  imagine.

Rosette  overwhelms  me  with  caresses  and  attentions  ;  more
loving  than  a  dove  in  the  month  of  May,  she  winds  herself
around  my  heart,  and  entwines  me  in  her  coils;  she  tries
to  prevent  me  breathing  any  other  atmosphere  than
her  breath,  or  seeing  any  other  horizon  than  her  eyes;  she
besieges  me  very  closely,  and  allows  nothing  to  enter  or  leave
without  permission;  she  has  built  a  little  fortress  by  the  side
of  my  heart,  from  which  she  watches  night  and  day.  She
uses  the  most  loving  expressions  to  me;  she  sings  love-songs
to  me;  she  sits  upon  my  knees,  and  behaves  in  my  presence
like  a  humble  slave  in  the  presence  of  her  lord  and  master.
Now  this  pleases  me,  for  I  love  such  submissive  ways,  as  I
have  an  inclination  towards  Oriental  despotism.  She  does  not
take  the  slightest  step  without  asking  my  advice,  and  seems
to  have  made  a  complete  abnegation  of  her  own  fancies  and
her  own  will;  she  tries  to  guess  my  thoughts  and  anticipate
them;  her  tenderness  and  complaisance  is  absolutely  weary-
ing; she  is  perfection  personified.  How  shall  I  be  able  to
leave  such  an  adorable  woman  without  seeming  like  a  mon-
ster ?    It  will  always  be  a  discredit  to  my  heart.

Oh!  how  I  should  like  to  find  her  out  in  a  fault  or  a  mis-
take !  How  impatiently  I  wait  for  an  opportunity  to  quarrel  !
But  there  is  no  fear  of  the  wretch  giving  me  the  chance  !
When,  to  provoke  an  altercation,  I  speak  to  her  sharply,  she
answers  me  in  such  gentle  tones,  with  such  a  silvery  voice,
with  eyes  so  moist,  an  air  so  sad  and  so  loving,  that  I  seem  to
myself  more  like  a  tiger  or  a  crocodile,  and,  though  in  a  rage,
I  am  forced  to  beg  her  pardon.

She  literally  assassinates  me  with  love.     She  probably  de-


m  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

sires  to  make  me  tell  her  that  I  detest  her,  that  she  bores  me  to
death,  and  that  if  she  does  not  leave  me  alone  I  will  strike
her  in  the  face  with  a  whip.  She  will  reduce  me  to  this,  if
she  continues  to  be  so  amiable,  and  it  will  not  take  long.

In  spite  of  all  this  beautiful  outward  appearance,  she  is  sur-
feited of  me  as  I  am  of  her;  but,  as  she  has  committed  the
most  egregious  follies  for  me,  she  does  not  desire,  in  the  eyes
of  the  honorable  corporation  of  sensible  women,  to  put  herself
in  the  wrong  by  a  rupture.  Every  grand  passion  pretends  to
be  eternal,  and  it  is  very  advantageous  to  reap  the  benefit  of
this  eternity  without  having  to  endure  its  discomforts.  Ros-
ette argues  like  this  :  ''Here  is  a  young  man  who  has  only  a
slight  taste  remaining  for  me,  and  as  he  is  naive  and  good-
natured,  he  does  not  dare  openly  to  show  it,  and  does  not
know  of  what  wood  to  make  the  arrow;  it  is  obvious  that  I
bore  him,  but  he  will  rather  die  of  ennui  than  take  upon  him-
self to  leave  me.  As  he  is  something  of  a  poet,  he  has  a  head
full  of  beautiful  phrases  on  love  and  passion,  and  believes
himself  obliged  in  his  conscience  to  be  a  Tristan  or  an  Am-
adis.  Now,  as  nothing  in  the  world  is  more  unbearable  than
the  caresses  of  a  person  for  whom  one's  love  has  ceased  (and
to  cease  to  love  a  woman  is  to  hate  her  violently),  I  am  going
to  lavish  my  favors  upon  him  so  as  to  satiate  him  in  every
way,  or  force  him  either  to  send  me  away  or  return  to  his
former  love  for  me,  and  the  latter  he  will  carefully  refrain
from  doing.

Nothing  could  be  better  planned.  Is  it  not  charming  to
play  the  part  of  the  forlorn  Ariadne  ?  She  is  pitied  and  ad-
mired, while  there  are  not  sufficient  imprecations  in  the  world
to  bestow  upon  the  wretch  who  has  been  monstrous  enough
to  abandon  sucli  an  adorable  creature.  The  lady  assumes  a
sorrowful  and  resigned  air,  puts  her  hand  beneath  her  chin
and  her  elbow  on  her  knee  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  the  pretty
blue  veins  upon  her  wrist  stand  out.  Her  hair  is  arranged  in
a  more  subdued  fashion,  and  for  a  time  she  wears  dresses  of  a
darker  shade.  The  wretch's  name  is  studiously  avoided,  but
roundabout  allusions  are  made  to  him  to  an  accompaniment  of
admirably  modulated  sighs.

A  woman  so  good,  so  beautiful,  and  so  passionate,  who  has


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  61

made  such  great  sacrifices,  who  is  absolutely  without  reproach,
a  pearl  of  love,  a  polished  mirror,  a  drop  of  milk,  a  white
rose,  an  ideal  essence  to  perfume  a  life  ;  a  woman  who  ought
to  be  worshipped  on  bended  knee,  and,  after  death,  should  be
cut  up  into  small  pieces  as  holy  relics  !  How  can  a  man
desert  such  a  one  basely,  fraudulently,  and  ungratefully?  A
pirate  could  not  do  worse  !  It  is  like  striking  her  a  death-
blow !  for  she  will  most  certainly  die.  A  man  must  have  a
stone  in  the  place  of  a  heart  to  behave  in  such  a  way.

0  men  !  men  !

1  say  to  myself:    "But  perhaps  it  is  not  true."

Great  comediennes  though  women  are  by  nature,  I  can
hardly  believe  them  as  great  as  that,  and  after  all,  are  Ros-
ette's demonstrations  the  exact  expression  of  her  sentiments
for  me?  Whatever  the  case  may  be,  the  continuation  of  our
tête-à-tête  is  no  longer  possible,  and  the  beautiful  Lady  of  the
Manor  has  at  least  issued  invitations  to  her  neighbors.  We
are  engaged  in  preparing  for  the  reception  of  these  wortliy
country-folk.    Good-by,  old  friend.


CHAPTER  V


I  WAS  mistaken.  My  wicked  heart,  incapable  of  love,  im-
agined the  reason  to  free  itself  from  the  weight  of  a  gratitude
it  did  not  wish  to  bear;  I  had  joyfully  seized  upon  that  idea
to  excuse  myself  in  my  own  eyes;  I  clung  to  it,  but  nothing
in  the  world  was  more  false.  Rosette  was  not  playing  a  part,
and  if  ever  a  woman  was  true,  she  is  that  one.  Ah  well!  I
am  almost  angry  with  her  for  the  sincerity  of  her  passion,  for
it  is  one  more  tie,  and  renders  a  rupture  even  more  difficult
and  less  excusable;  I  would  prefer  that  she  were  false  and
flighty.  What  a  singular  position  to  be  in  !  I  should  like  to
go  away,  yet  I  stay  ;  I  should  like  to  say,  '1  hate  you"  ;  yet  I
say,  "I  love  you.*'  My  past  pushes  me  forward,  and  prevents
me  from  turning  back  or  from  stopping.    I  am  faithful,  with


62  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

regrets  for  being  so.  I  do  not  know  what  sort  of  shame  it
is  which  entirely  prevents  my  engaging  in  other  love  aflfairs,
and  compels  me  to  enter  into  a  composition  with  myself;  I
give  to  one  all  that  I  can,  while  maintaining  appearances,
steal  from  the  other;  the  time  and  opportunities  of  meeting,
which  formerly  arose  so  naturally,  now  only  occur  with  diffi-
culty. I  begin  to  remember  that  I  have  important  business.
Such  a  situation  as  the  above  is  very  painful,  but  is  not  as
bad  as  the  one  I  am  in.  When  a  new  friendship  attracts  one
from  the  old  it  is  easier  to  free  oneself.  Hope  smiles  sweetly
at  a  man  from  the  threshold  of  the  house  containing  his  young
love.  An  illusion,  fairer  and  more  rosy,  hovers  with  white
wings  over  the  freshly  closed  tomb  of  a  sister  just  dead  ;  an-
other flower,  more  beautiful  and  scented,  upon  which  trembles
a  heavenly  tear,  has  suddenly  blossomed  from  among  the
dead  petals  of  the  old  bouquet;  beautiful  azure  perspectives
open  before  one;  moist  and  quiet  avenues  stretch  away  to  the
horizon  ;  there  are  gardens  with  pale  statues,  or  benches
standing  near  an  ivy-covered  wall,  meadows  studded  with
marguerites,  narrow  balconies  where  people  lean  and  gaze  at
the  moon,  shady  nooks  intersected  by  furtive  lights,  drawing-
rooms  with  the  daylight  excluded  by  their  ample  curtains;  all
the  darkness  and  isolation  sought  by  the  love  which  dare  not
display  itself  is  there.  A  feeling  like  a  new  youth  comes.
There  is  something  else  besides  the  change  of  places,  habits,
and  persons;  there  is  a  feeling  of  remorse.  But  the  desire
which  hovers  around  one's  head,  like  a  bee  in  the  spring,  pre-
vents its  voice  from  being  heard  ;  the  void  in  the  heart  is  filled,
and  memories  are  effaced  by  impressions.  But  in  this  case
it  is  not  the  same  thing;  I  love  no  one,  and  it  is  only  out  of
weariness  and  ennui  of  myself  rather  than  of  her  that  I  wish
to  break  with  Rosette.

My  former  ideas,  which  had  been  somewhat  allayed,  have
become  more  pronounced  than  before.  I  am,  as  formerly,
tormented  with  a  desire  to  have  a  mistress,  and,  as  before,
even  in  Rosette's  arms,  I  doubt  whether  I  have  ever  had  one.
I  see  again  the  fair  dame  at  her  window  in  her  park  in  the
days  of  Louis  XIII,  and  the  lady  following  the  chase  on  her
white  horse  at  a  gallop  through  the  forest  rides.     My  idea!


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  63

r

beauty  smiles  at  me  from  the  clouds,  while  I  think  I  can  recog-
nize her  voice  in  the  song  of  the  birds  and  the  murmur  of  the
foliage;  I  seem  to  be  called  on  all  sides,  and  the  daughters
of  the  air  appear  to  brush  my  face  with  their  invisible
scarves.  Just  as  in  the  days  of  my  agitation,  I  think  that  if
I  set  off  at  once  and  go  somewhere  far  away,  and  very  quickly,
I  shall  reach  a  place  where  something  is  taking  place  which
concerns  me  and  where  my  destiny  is  decided.  I  feel  that  I
am  impatiently  expected  in  some  corner  of  the  earth,  I  know
not  where.  A  suffering  soul  eagerly  calls,  and  dreams  of  me
without  being  able  to  come  to  me  ;  that  is  the  cause  of  my  un-
easiness and  the  reason  I  am  unable  to  remain  in  my  place  ;  I
am  violently  attracted  outside  my  center.  My  nature  is  not
one  of  those  which  lead  others,  one  of  those  fixed  stars  around
which  the  other  lights  revolve;  I  must  wander  through  the
firmament  like  an  irregular  meteor,  till  I  meet  the  planet
whose  satellite  I  am  designed  to  be,  the  Saturn  to  whom  I
must  add  my  ring.  Oh,  when  will  this  hymen  take  place?
Till  then  I  cannot  hope  for  rest  or  my  proper  position,  and  I
shall  be  like  the  needle  of  a  compass  seeking  its  pole.

I  thought  I  could  fly  away  from  this  treacherous  birdlime
with  the  loss  of  a  feather  or  two,  and  I  hoped  to  be  able  to
take  wing  when  I  chose.  Nothing  is  more  difficult;  I  find  that
I  am  covered  by  an  imperceptible  net,  more  difficult  to  break
than  the  one  forged  by  Vulcan,  and  its  meshes  are  so  fine  that
escape  is  impossible.  The  net,  too,  is  large,  and  I  can  move
about  inside  it  with  what  appears  to  be  perfect  freedom;  it  is
scarcely  noticeable  till  I  try  to  break  it;  but  then  it  resists,
and  becomes  as  solid  as  a  brass  wall.

What  time  have  I  wasted,  O  my  ideal,  without  making  the
slightest  effort  towards  your  realization!  How  have  I  in
cowardly  fashion  accepted  my  passing  pleasure,  and  how  little
do  I  deserve  to  meet  you  !

Sometimes  I  think  of  forming  another  liaison,  but  I  have
no  one  in  view;  more  often  I  propose,  if  I  should  succeed  in
breaking  my  bonds,  to  never  again  become  entangled  in  such
ties,  and  yet  nothing  justifies  that  resolution,  for  this  affair
has  apparently  been  very  happy,  and  I  have  not  the  slightest
complaint  in  the  world  to  make  against  Rosette.    She  has  al-


64  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


ways  been  good  to  me,  and  no  one  could  have  behaved  better  ;
her  fidelity  has  been  exemplary,  and  has  not  even  given
ground  for  suspicion;  the  most  observant  and  suspicious  jeal-
ousy could  have  found  nothing  to  arouse  distrust.  Jealousy
could  only  be  possible  with  regard  to  the  past  then,  it  is  true,
there  would  be  very  good  grounds  for  it.  But  a  jealousy  of
this  sort  is  a  delicacy  fortunately  rare,  and  there  is  usually
enough  in  the  present  without  searching  among  the  relics  of
old  passions  to  extract  phials  of  poison  and  cups  of  bitterness.
What  woman  could  a  man  love  if  he  thought  of  all  that?  In
a  confused  fashion  a  man  knows  that  a  woman  has  had  sev-
eral lovers  before  him;  but  he  tells  himself— such  tortuous
windings  and  coils  has  a  man's  pride,  that  he  is  the  first  she
has  really  loved,  and  it  was  by  a  combination  of  fatal  circum-
stances she  became  entangled  with  persons  unworthy  of  her,
or  else  that  hers  was  the  vague  desire  of  a  heart  which  sought
to  satisfy  itself,  and  which  changed  because  the  desire  was
not  realized.

Perhaps  it  îs  only  possible  to  really  love  a  virgin  both  in
body  and  in  mind,  a  frail  bud  which  has  not  been  caressed  by
any  zephyr,  whose  locked  breast  has  neither  received  a  rain-
spot  nor  a  dewdrop,  a  chaste  flower,  which  only  displays  its
white  robe  for  one  alone,  a  beautiful  lily  with  a  silver  bell,
where  desire  has  never  yet  dwelt,  which  has  only  been  gilded
by  one  sun,  swayed  by  one  breath,  and  watered  by  one  hand.
The  brightness  of  midday  is  not  so  beautiful  as  the  divine
pallor  of  the  dawn,  and  all  the  ardor  of  an  experienced  soul,
well  knowing  life,  yields  to  the  celestial  ignorance  of  a  young
heart  awakening  to  love.  Ah  !  how  bitter  and  painful  is  the
thought  that  one  is  wiping  away  the  kisses  of  another,  that
there  is,  perhaps,  no  spot  upon  that  brow,  upon  those  lips,
upon  that  throat,  upon  those  shoulders,  upon  the  whole  of  that
body  now  one's  own,  which  has  not  been  reddened  and  marked
by  the  lips  of  others  ;  that  those  divine  murmurs  which  come
to  the  tongue's  aid  when  words  fail  have  already  been  heard  ;
that  those  emotional  senses  have  learned  from  another  their
ecstasy  and  delirium,  and  that  deep  down,  far  away  in  a  re-
mote comer  of  that  soul,  an  inexorable  memory  watches  and
compares  the  pleasures  of  the  past  with  those  of  to-day.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  65

Although  my  natural  nonchalance  leads  me  to  prefer  high
roads  to  unbeaten  tracks,  and  the  public  drinking- fountain  to
the  mountain  spring,  I  must  absolutely  endeavor  to  love  some
virginal  creature  as  white  as  the  snow  and  as  tremulous  as  the
sensitive  plant,  one  who  only  knows  how  to  blush  and  lower
her  eyes;  perhaps  from  this  limpid  stream  into  which  no
diver  has  yet  descended  I  shall  obtain  a  pearl  of  the  first
water,  a  worthy  companion  to  Cleopatra's  gem  ;  but  to  do  so  I
must  break  the  tie  which  binds  me  to  Rosette,  or  it  is  prob-
ably not  with  her  that  I  shall  realize  this  desire,  and  that  I  do
not  feel  to  have  the  strength  to  do.

Then  too,  if  I  must  admit  it,  there  is  in  my  mind  a  secret
and  shameful  motive  which  dare  not  be  seen  in  broad  day-
light, but  one  which  I  must  tell  you,  as  I  have  promised  to
conceal  nothing,  and  also  for  the  reason  that  a  confession  to
be  meritorious  must  also  be  complete;  this  motive  is  of  con-
siderable moment  in  my  uncertainty.  If  I  break  with  Rosette,
some  time  must  of  necessity  elapse  before  I  can  replace  her,
however  indulgent  the  class  of  women  may  be  among  whom
I  shall  seek  a  successor,  and  I  have  acquired  with  her  a  habit
of  pleasure  which  it  will  be  painful  for  me  to  suspend.  It  is
quite  true  that  there  are  courtesans,  and  formerly  I  loved
them;  but  to-day  they  disgust  me  horribly  and  give  me  a
nausea.  So  that  alternative  is  out  of  the  question,  and  I  am
so  enervated  by  pleasure,  the  poison  has  become  so  deeply  in-
sinuated into  my  bones,  that  I  cannot  bear  the  idea  of  being
one  or  two  months  without  a  mistress.  That  is  egoism  of  the
worst  sort;  but  I  think,  if  they  would  be  straightforward,  the
most  virtuous  could  confess  to  things  of  a  similar  character.

That  is  the  strongest  tie  of  all,  and  but  for  it  Rosette  and  I
would  have  parted  long  ago.  Then,  too,  it  is  such  a  wearisome
business,  making  love  to  a  woman,  that  I  do  not  feel  equal  to
it.  To  begin  over  again  all  the  charming  nothings  I  have
uttered  so  often;  to  write  and  reply  to  billets-doux;  to  see
beauties  home  in  the  evening,  perhaps  miles  away  from  one's
own  dwelling;  to  get  cold  feet  and  catch  a  chill  at  a  window
watching  a  beloved  form  ;  to  calculate  upon  a  sofa  how  many
overlying  tissues  separate  me  from  my  goddess;  to  be  the
bearer  of  bouquets  and  a  frequenter  of  balls  in  order  to  reach


66  IVrADE:\rOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

the  position  I  am  in  at  present,  all  this  will  be  labor  indeed  !
It  is  as  well  to  remain  in  one's  groove  as  to  emerge  from  it
and  after  much  agitation  and  trouble  to  return  to  another
precisely  similar  one.  If  I  were  in  love  matters  would  ar-
range themselves,  and  it  would  all  appear  delightful  to  me;
but  I  am  not,  although  I  have  the  greatest  possible  desire  to
be;  for  after  all,  love  is  the  only  thing  in  the  world;  and  then,
if  pleasure  which  is  only  its  shadow  has  so  much  allurement
for  us,  what  must  the  reality  be?  In  what  ocean  of  inefifable
ecstasy,  in  what  lake  of  pure  delight  must  those  swim  who
have  been  struck  by  one  of  the  gold-tipped  arrows  and  burn
with  the  ardor  of  love  !

I  feel  by  Rosette's  side  that  flat  calm,  that  idle  comfort
which  results  from  the  satisfaction  of  the  senses,  but  nothing
more,  and  it  is  not  enough.  Often  the  voluptuous  dullness
turns  to  torpor  and  the  tranquillity  to  ennui  ;  I  then  drift  into
objectless  distractions  and  all  sorts  of  insipid  dreams  which
fatigue  and  exhaust  me;  it  is  a  state  from  which  I  must
emerge  at  any  cost.

Oh  !  If  I  could  be  like  some  of  my  friends,  who  kiss  an
old  glove  with  rapture,  who  are  quite  happy  with  a  clasp  of
the  hand,  who  would  not  exchange  for  a  sultana's  casket  of
jewels  a  few  faded  flowers  half  dried  by  the  heat  of  the  ball,
who  cover  with  tears  and  sew  into  their  shirt  next  their  heart
a  stupid  and  commonplace  note,  who  adore  women  with  large
feet  and  make  the  excuse  for  it  that  they  have  beautiful  souls  !
If  I  could  follow,  trembling  with  excitement,  the  folds  of  a
dress,  wait  for  a  door  to  open  in  order  to  see  a  beloved  form
pass  in  a  flood  of  light;  if  a  word  whispered  quite  low  made
me  change  color;  if  I  had  the  virtue  of  sacrificing  my  dinner
in  order  to  reach  a  rendezvous  earlier;  if  I  were  capable  of
stabbing  a  rival,  or  of  fighting  a  duel  with  a  husband;  if,  by
Heaven's  special  grace,  it  were  given  to  me  to  consider  the
ugly  women  clever,  and  the  ugly  and  stupid  women  good;  if
I  could  decide  to  dance  the  minuet,  and  to  listen  to  sonatas
played  by  young  people  on  the  harpsichord  or  on  the  harp  ;  in
short,  if  I  were  a  man  and  not  a  poet,  I  should  certainly  be
much  happier  than  I  am;  I  should  be  less  bored  and  less
wearisome.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  67


I  have  never  asked  of  women  but  one  thing,  beauty  ;  I  v^ill-
ingly  pass  over  the  soul  and  mind.  To  me  a  woman  who  is
beautiful  is  always  clever;  she  has  the  mind  to  be  beautiful,
and  I  do  not  know  how  much  that  is  worth.  It  requires  many
brilliant  phrases  and  scintillating  flashes  of  wit  to  equal  the
glances  from  a  beautiful  eye.  I  prefer  a  pretty  mouth  to  a
well-turned  phrase,  and  a  well-modelled  shoulder  to  a  virtue,
even  a  theological  virtue;  I  would  give  fifty  souls  for  a  tiny
foot,  and  all  the  poesy  and  poets  for  the  hand  of  Jeanne
d'Aragon  or  the  forehead  of  the  Virgin  of  Foligno.  I  adore
above  all  things  beauty  of  form;  beauty  to  me  is  visible  Di-
vinity, palpable  happiness,  it  is  heaven  come  down  to  earth.
There  are  certain  undulating  contours,  a  certain  beauty  of  the
lips,  an  inclination  of  the  head  which  delight  me  beyond  all
expression  and  take  my  attention  for  hours  at  a  time.

Beauty,  the  only  thing  which  cannot  be  acquired,  always
inaccessible  to  those  who  do  not  have  it  from  the  first;  an
ephemeral  and  fragile  flower  which  grows  without  being
sown,  a  pure  gift  from  Heaven  !  O  beauty  !  the  most  radiant
diadem  with  which  chance  can  crown  a  brow,  you  are  admi-
rable and  precious  like  everything  at  man's  door,  like  the
azure  of  the  firmament,  like  the  gold  of  a  star,  like  the  per-
fume of  the  seraphic  lily  !  A  man  can  exchange  his  labor  for
a  throne;  he  may  conquer  the  world — many  have  done  it;
but  who  would  not  kneel  down  before  you,  were  you  the  pure
personification  of  the  thought  of  God?

I  only  demand  beauty,  it  is  true  ;  but  I  require  such  perfect
beauty  that  I  shall  probably  never  meet  with  it.  I  have
here  and  there  seen  in  a  few  women  admirable  parts  only
moderately  accompanied,  and  I  have  loved  them  for  their
special  beauty,  ignoring  the  rest;  at  all  times  it  is  a  painful
and  grievous  task  to  in  this  way  suppress  half  of  a  mistress,
and  make  a  mental  amputation  of  all  that  is  ugly  or  common
about  her,  by  concentrating  the  eyes  upon  her  beautiful
points.  Beauty  is  harmony,  and  a  person  equally  ugly
everywhere  is  often  less  disagreeable  to  look  at  than  a
woman  who  is  unequally  beautiful.  Nothing  gives  me  so
much  pain  as  to  see  an  uncompleted  masterpiece  and  a  beauty


68  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

which  lacks  something;  an  oil-stain  is  less  obvious  upon  a
common  drugget  than  upon  rich  cloth.

Rosette  is  not  bad.  She  might  even  pass  as  beautiful,
but  she  is  far  from  realizing  my  dream.  She  is  a  statue,
several  bits  of  which  are  very  clearly  developed.  The  others
are  not  so  striking;  some  parts  are  modelled  with  much
skill  and  charm,  while  others  are  done  in  a  more  careless
and  loose  fashion.  To  the  ordinary  observer  the  statue
appears  quite  finished  and  complete  in  its  beauty  ;  but  a  more
careful  scrutiny  soon  discovers  spots  where  the  work  is  not
concise  enough,  and  contours  which,  to  attain  the  purity
proper  to  them,  need  the  passing  and  repassing  of  the
sculptor's  finger  many  times.

Besides,  I  do  not  confine  beauty  within  this  or  that  sinu-
osity of  lines.  The  manner,  gestures,  walk,  breath,  color,
sound,  perfume,  in  fact  everything  of  which  life  consists,
with  me  enters  into  the  composition  of  beauty;  everything
which  scents,  sings,  or  gleams  belongs  to  it  by  right.  I  love
rich  brocades,  splendid  stuflfs,  with  their  stifif,  ample  folds;  I
love  large  flowers,  and  their  perfumes,  the  transparence  of
running  water,  and  the  glittering  glory  of  beautiful  weapons,
thoroughbred  horses,  and  those  great  white  dogs  we  see  in  the
pictures  of  Paul  Veronese.  I  am  a  real  pagan  on  this  point,
and  I  do  not  love  the  gods  who  are  badly  made.  Although
I  am  not  at  heart  what  might  be  called  irreligious,  no  one  in
truth  is  a  worse  Christian  than  I  am.  I  do  not  understand
the  mortification  of  matter  which  is  the  essence  of  Christi-
anity; I  consider  it  is  a  sacrilegious  act  to  injure  God's
work,  and  I  cannot  believe  that  the  flesh  is  evil,  since  He  has
fashioned  it  with  His  fingers  in  His  own  imiage.  I  have
little  esteem  for  the  long,  dark-colored  garments  from  which
only  the  head  and  two  hands  emerge,  and  those  pictures
where  everything  is  buried  in  shadow  except  a  gleaming
forehead.  I  want  the  sun  to  enter  everywhere,  so  that  there
may  be  the  greatest  possible  amount  of  light  and  the  least
possible  shadow.  I  like  the  sparkle  of  color,  waving  lines,
the  proud  display  of  nudity,  and  no  concealment  of  the
existence  of  matter,  since,  like  the  mind,  it  is  an  eternal
hymn  in  praise  of  God.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  69

I  can  perfectly  understand  the  mad  enthusiasm  of  the
Greeks  for  beauty;  and  on  my  own  account  I  see  nothing
absurd  in  the  law  which  obliged  judges  only  to  hear  advo-
cates' speeches  in  the  dark,  for  fear  that  their  handsome  ap-
pearance, the  grace  of  their  gestures  and  attitudes  should
prejudice  the  judges  in  their  favor,  and  bias  their  judgment.

I  would  not  purchase  anything  from  a  merchant  who  was
ugly;  I  give  more  freely  to  beggars  whose  rags  and  poverty
are  picturesque.  There  is  a  little  restless  Italian,  sharp  as  a
citron,  with  great  black  and  white  eyes  which  take  up  half
his  face,  who  always  receives  from  me  a  penny  more  than
the  others.  I  would  never  hit  a  beautiful  horse  or  fine  dog,
and  I  should  not  care  for  a  friend  or  servant  unless  of  agree-
able appearance.  It  is  a  real  punishment  to  me  to  see  un-
pleasant things  or  ugly  persons.  A  building  in  bad  taste  or
an  ill-shaped  piece  of  furniture  prevent  me  from  being
pleased  in  a  house,  however  comfortable  or  attractive  it  may
be  in  other  respects.  The  best  champagne  seems  to  me  almost
like  the  commonest  wine  in  an  ill-shapen  glass,  and  I  must
confess  that  I  prefer  the  most  Lacedaemonian  broth  in  a
china  plate  to  the  finest  dish  in  an  earthenware  platter.  Out-
side appearances  have  always  had  great  weight  with  me,  and
and  that  is  the  reason  I  always  avoid  the  company  of  the
aged;  they  sadden  me  and  disagreeably  affect  me  because
they  are  wrinkled  and  deformed,  though  some  have  a  special
beauty;  and  in  the  pity  I  feel  for  them  there  is  much  dis-
gust: of  all  the  ruins  in  the  world,  the  ruin  of  man  is  cer-
tainly the  saddest  to  contemplate.

If  I  were  a  painter  (and  I  have  always  regretted  that  I
am  not)  I  would  only  people  my  canvases  with  goddesses,
nymphs.  Madonnas,  cherubim,  and  Cupids.  The  consecration
of  one's  brushes  to  the  painting  of  portraits,  unless  of  good-
looking  people,  appears  to  me  to  be  a  crim.e  against  art;  and
far  from  desiring  to  copy  ugly  or  ignoble  faces,  vulgar  or
insignificant  heads,  I  would  prefer  to  cut  off  the  originals.
The  ferocity  of  a  Caligula  devoted  in  this  direction  would  al-
most seem  to  me  praiseworthy.

The  only  thing  in  the  world  I  have  envied  is  to  be  beautiful.
I  mean  the  beauty  of  a  Paris  or  an  Apollo.     Not  to  be  de-


70  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

formed,  the  possession  of  somewhat  regular  features,  that  is
to  say  with  a  nose  in  the  middle  of  the  face,  neither  flat-
nosed  nor  crooked-nosed,  eyes  neither  red  nor  bloodshot,  and
a  mouth  of  the  proper  size,  is  not  beauty.  If  it  were  I  should
be  beautiful,  and  yet  I  find  myself  as  far  from  my  ideal  of
manly  beauty  as  if  I  were  one  of  those  figures  which  strike
the  hours  upon  bells;  I  should  have  a  mountain  upon  each
shoulder,  the  twisted  legs  of  a  dachsTiund,  and  the  nose  and
muzzle  of  the  monkey  I  should  so  much  resemble.  Many
times  have  I  looked  at  myself  in  a  mirror  for  hours  at  the
time,  with  a  fixity  and  attention  impossible  to  imagine,  to  see
if  any  improvement  has  taken  place  in  my  face.  I  still  hope
that  some  spring  or  another  I  shall  get  rid  of  my  present
appearance,  like  a  snake  shedding  its  old  skin.  To  think  that
it  would  take  so  little  to  make  me  handsome,  and  yet  I  never
shall  be.  What  difference  would  it  make  to  the  atoms  com-
posing me  if  they  were  crystallized  in  some  other  way?
What  difference  would  it  make  to  a  curve  if  it  were  altered,
and  where  was  the  necessity  for  me  as  I  am  and  not  other-
wise? Really,  if  I  were  to  hold  Fate  by  the  throat,  I  think
I  should  show  no  mercy.  Because  it  pleased  a  miserable
parcel  of  something  to  fall  somewhere  and  clumsily  coagulate
into  the  ugly  face  I  possess,  I  shall  be  eternally  unhappy!
Is  it  not  the  most  foolish  and  miserable  fate  in  the  world?
How  does  it  come  to  pass  that  my  soul,  with  the  ardent  de-
sire which  consumes  it,  cannot  let  fall  the  poor  carrion  which
it  holds  upright,  and  animate  one  of  those  statues  whose
exquisite  beauty  saddens  and  delights  it?  There  are  two
or  three  persons  whom  I  would  gladly  murder,  taking  care
not  to  disfigure  them,  if  I  possessed  the  secret  of  trans-
ferring a  soul  from  one  body  to  the  other.  It  has  always
seemed  to  me  that  to  do  w^hat  I  desire  (and  I  do  not  know
what  that  is)  I  need  a  great  and  perfect  beauty,  and  I  imagine
that  if  I  possessed  it  my  life,  w^hich  is  so  entangled  and  so
worried,  w^ould  have  been  complete.

So  many  beautiful  faces  are  to  be  seen  in  pictures.  Why
is  not  mine  one  of  them?  There  are  so  many  charming  heads
which  disappear  beneath  the  dust  and  smoke  of  time  in  the


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  71

old  galleries  !  Would  it  not  be  better  for  them  to  leave  their
frames  and  come  to  rest  upon  my  shoulders?

My  first  sensation  before  one  of  those  marvelous  heads,
whose  painted  gaze  seems  to  penetrate  one  and  extend  into
infinity,  is  a  feeling  of  admiration  not  unaccompanied  by
terror;  my  eyes  become  moist,  my  heart  beats;  then,  when
I  am  a  little  familiarized  with  the  picture,  and  have  entered
more  deeply  into  the  secret  of  its  beauty,  I  tacitly  compare
it  to  myself.  Jealousy  writhes  deep  down  in  my  soul  in
knots  more  twisted  than  a  viper,  and  I  have  the  greatest
difficulty  in  preventing  myself  from  rushing  at  the  canvas
and  tearing  it  to  bits.

To  be  beautiful  is  to  have  in  yourself  a  charm  which
makes  every  one  smile  upon  you  and  receive  you;  before
you  speak  everybody  is  already  prejudiced  in  your  favor
and  disposed  to  be  of  your  opinion  ;  you  have  only  to  pass
along  a  street  or  show  yourself  upon  a  balcony  to  create
in  the  crowd  friends  or  mistresses.  Not  to  require  to  be
amiable  to  be  loved,  to  be  spared  all  the  expenditure  of
cleverness  and  complaisance  to  which  ugliness  obliges  you,
and  of  those  thousand  moral  qualities  it  is  necessary  to  have
to  supply  the  place  of  bodily  beauty,  prove  what  a  splendid
and  magnificent  gift  beauty  is.

What  could  a  man  desire  more  than  to  combine  with
extraordinary  beauty  supreme  strength,  to  conceal  beneath
the  skin  of  Antinous  the  muscles  of  Hercules?  I  am  sure
that  with  those  two  things  and  the  soul  I  have,  in  less  than
three  years  I  should  be  Emperor  of  the  World!  Another
thing  I  have  desired  almost  as  much  as  beauty  and  strength
is  the  gift  of  transporting  myself  as  quickly  as  thought
from  one  place  to  another.  With  an  angel's  beauty,  a  tiger's
strength,  and  an  eagle's  wings,  I  should  begin  to  find  that
the  world  is  not  as  badly  organized  as  I  at  first  believed
it  to  be.  A  beautiful  mask  to  seduce  and  fascinate  the  pre^,
wings  to  pounce  upon  it  and  carry  it  off,  and  talons  to  tear
it;  till  I  have  those  three  things  I  shall  be  unhappy.

Every  passion  and  taste  I  have  felt  has  only  been  a  form
of  one  of  these  three  desires.  I  have  loved  arms,  horses,
and  women:  arms  to  replace  the  nerves  I  do  not  possess;


72  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

horses  to  serve  as  wings  ;  women  to  possess  at  least  in  some
one  the  beauty  I  myself  lack.  I  sought  out  from  preference
weapons  which  were  most  ingeniously  deadly  and  those
whose  wounds  were  incurable.  I  have  never  had  occasion
to  make  use  of  any  of  these  creeses  or  yataghans,  yet  I  love
to  have  them  around  me.  I  draw  them  from  the  sheath
with  a  feeling  of  security  and  inexpressible  strength,  I
thrust  and  parry  with  them  most  energetically,  and  if  by
chance  I  catch  sight  of  my  face  in  a  mirror  I  am  astonished
at  its  ferocious  expression.  As  for  horses,  I  override  them
so  that  they  die.  If  I  had  not  given  up  riding  Farragus  he
would  have  been  dead  long  ago,  and  that  would  have  been
a  pity,  for  he  is  a  fine  animal.  What  Arab  steed  could
have  legs  as  swift  and  supple  as  my  desire?  With  women
I  have  only  sought  the  exterior,  and  as  up  to  the  present
those  I  have  seen  are  very  far  from  approaching  my  idea
of  beauty,  I  have  fallen  back  on  pictures  and  statues,  which,
after  all,  is  a  pitiable  expedient  when  a  person  has  such
inflamed  sensibilities  as  mine.  Still  there  is  something  great
and  beautiful  in  loving  a  statue,  for  one's  love  is  perfectly
disinterested,  and  neither  the  satiety  nor  the  disgust  of
victory  is  to  be  feared,  nor  can  one  reasonably  expect  a  second
prodigy  like  the  story  of  Pygmalion.  The  impossible  has
always  pleased  me.

Is  it  not  strange  that  I  who  am  still  in  the  fairest  months
of  youth,  who  far  from  abusing  everything  have  not  even
used  the  simplest  things,  have  come  to  such  a  degree  of
ennui  as  to  be  only  gratified  by  the  strange  or  difficult?
Satiety  follows  pleasure,  that  is  a  natural  and  quite  in-
telligible law.  For  a  man  who  has  feasted  to  be  no  longer
hungry,  and  to  seek  to  arouse  his  palate  by  spices  of  irritant
wines,  is  easy  of  explanation  ;  but  for  a  man  who  sits  down
to  table,  but  hardly  tastes  the  first  course,  to  be  seized  with
such  superb  disgust  as  to  be  unable  to  touch  the  finest  dishes
without  vomiting,  is  a  phenomenon  which  can  only  arise
from  a  particular  organization;  it  is  like  a  child  six  months
old  finding  its  nurse's  milk  insipid  and  only  wishing  to  par-
take of  brandy.  I  am  as  weary  as  if  I  had  accomplished  all
the  marvels  of  Sardanapalus,  and  yet  my  life  has  been  very


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  73

chaste  and  tranquil  in  appearance.  It  is  a  mistake  to  think
that  possession  is  the  only  road  which  leads  to  satiety.  De-
sire too  has  the  same  effect,  and  abstinence  exhausts  more
than  excess.  A  desire  like  mine  is  more  fatiguing  than  pos-
session. Its  gaze  surveys  and  penetrates  the  object  it  wishes
to  have  more  promptly  and  profoundly  than  if  it  were
actually  touched.  What  more  would  practice  teach?  What
experience  can  equal  such  constant  and  passionate  contempla-
tion?

I  have  engaged  in  so  many  pursuits  though  I  have  not
traveled  far,  and  it  is  only  the  steepest  peaks  which  tempt
me  now.  I  am  attacked  by  that  malady  which  comes  upon
powerful  men  in  the  old  age:  the  impossible.  Everything
I  can  do  has  not  the  least  charm  for  me.  Tiberius,  Caligula,
and  Nero,  mighty  Romans  of  the  Empire,  you  who  have  been
so  greatly  misunderstood,  and  whom  the  pack  of  rhetoricians
pursued  with  their  yelps,  I  suffer  from  your  malady,  and  I
pity  you  with  all  the  pity  I  have  remaining  in  me!  I  too
would  like  to  build  a  bridge  across  the  sea  and  pave  the
waves;  I  have  dreamt  of  the  burning  of  cities  to  illuminate
my  feasts;  I  have  desired  to  be  a  woman  to  experience  fresh
pleasures.  Your  golden  house,  Nero,  is  but  a  dirty  stable
compared  with  the  palace  I  have  built  for  myself;  my  ward-
robe is  better  equipped  than  yours,  Heliogabalus,  and  splendid
in  a  different  fashion.  My  circuses  are  more  noisy  and
bloodstained  than  yours,  my  perfumes  stronger  and  more
penetrating,  while  my  slaves  are  more  numerous  and  better
built;  I  too  have  attached  to  my  chariot  naked  courtesans,
and  I  have  walked  upon  men  with  a  tread  as  disdainful  as
yours.  Colossus  of  the  ancient  world,  there  beats  within  my
weak  frame  a  heart  as  great  as  yours,  and  had  I  been  in  your
place  I  should  have  done  the  same,  and  perhaps  more.  How
many  Babels  have  I  heaped  up  one  upon  the  other  to  reach
heaven,  to  strike  the  stars  and  spit  down  upon  creation!
Why  then  am  I  not  God,  since  I  cannot  be  a  man?

Oh!  I  think  I  shall  require  a  hundred  thousand  centuries
of  oblivion  to  rest  me  from  the  fatigues  of  my  twenty  years
of  life.  God  of  heaven,  what  stone  will  You  roll  upon
me,  in  what  shadow  will  You  plunge  me,  at  what  Lethe  will


74  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

You  make  me  drink,  beneath  what  mountain  will  You  inter
the  Titan?  Am  I  destined  to  turn  my  mouth  into  a  vol-
cano, and  when  I  turn  over  be  the  cause  of  earthquakes  ?

When  I  think  of  it,  and  that  I  was  born  of  a  sweet,  re-
signed mother,  with  such  simple  tastes  and  habits,  I  am  sur-
prised that  she  can  have  contained  me.  How  has  it  happened
that  none  of  her  calm,  pure  thoughts  have  been  transferred
to  my  body  with  the  blood  she  gave  me?  Why  am  I  the  son
of  her  flesh  only,  not  of  her  mind?  The  dove  has  brought
forth  a  tiger,  desiring  the  w^hole  of  creation  as  its  prey.

I  have  lived  in  the  calmest  and  most  chaste  environment.
It  is  difficult  to  dream  of  an  existence  enshrined  with  such
purity  as  mine.  My  years  were  spent  under  a  mother's  wing
with  my  little  sisters  and  the  house  dog.  I  only  saw  around
me  the  good  and  gentle  faces  of  the  servants  who  had  grown
grey  in  a  service  which  was  often  hereditary,  relatives  or
friends,  grave  and  thoughtful,  dressed  in  black,  who  placed
their  gloves  one  by  one  beside  their  hats;  I  had  a  few  aunts
of  uncertain  age,  plump,  neat,  discreet,  with  spotless  linen,
grey  skirts,  net  mittens,  and  their  hands  upon  their  waist-
belts  like  people  of  a  religious  turn  of  mind;  the  furniture
of  plain  oak  was  so  severe  as  to  be  almost  mournful,  the
hangings  were  of  leather,  the  whole  comprising  just  such  a
somber  and  stifling  interior  as  certain  Flemish  masters  paint.
The  garden  was  damp  and  dark;  the  box  which  divided  it
into  sections,  the  ivy  covering  the  walls,  and  a  few  fir  trees
were  charged  with  the  representation  of  verdure,  and  suc-
ceeded badly  enough  ;  the  brick  house,  with  a  very  high  roof,
although  spacious  and  in  good  condition,  had  something
mournful  and  drowsy  about  it.  Really,  nothing  could  be
more  suitable  to  a  separate,  austere,  and  melancholy  life  than
such  a  dwelling.  It  seemed  impossible  for  all  the  children
brought  up  in  such  a  house  not  to  become  priests  and  nuns.
Oh  well,  in  this  atmosphere  of  purity  and  repose,  in  this
shadow  and  seclusion,  I  rotted  bit  by  bit,  without  giving  any
outward  sign,  like  a  medlar  on  the  straw.  In  the  bosom
of  this  honest,  pious,  and  holy  family  I  attained  to  a  horrible
degree  of  depravity.  It  was  not  the  contact  of  the  world,
because  I  had  not  seen  life,  nor  the  fire  of  passion,  since  I


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  75

was  paralyzed  under  the  cold  sweat  which  oozed  from  the
strong  walls.  The  maggot  had  not  gone  from  the  heart  of
another  fruit  to  my  heart.  It  had  hatched  of  itself,  and
nothing  from  outside  showed  and  warned  me  that  I  was
spoiled.  I  had  neither  blemish  nor  hole;  but  I  was  quite
hollow  within.  Is  it  not  an  inexplicable  thing  that  a  child
born  of  virtuous  parents,  brought  up  with  care  and  discretion,
kept  far  away  from  all  bad  influence,  can  be  perverted  to
such  an  extent  and  reach  the  state  of  mind  I  have  done?  I
am  sure  that  even  by  going  back  to  the  sixth  generation
it  would  not  be  possible  to  find  among  my  ancestors  a  single
atom  like  those  of  which  I  am  composed.  I  am  not  a  member
of  my  family;  I  am  not  a  branch  of  the  noble  trunk,  but  a
poisonous  fungus  which  sprang  up  one  stormy  night  from
amid  its  mossy  roots.  And  yet  no  one  has  had  more  aspira-
tions and  impulses  towards  the  beautiful  than  I,  no  one  has
tried  more  resolutely  to  unfold  his  wings;  but  each  attempt
has  made  me  fall  further,  and  that  which  ought  to  have
been  my  salvation  has  been  my  ruin.

Solitude  is  worse  for  me  than  life,  though  I  desire  the  first
rather  than  the  other.  Everything  which  takes  me  out  of
myself  is  beneficial;  society  bores  me,  but  drags  me  from
my  empty  reverie.  For  that  reason,  since  our  tête-à-tête
is  disturbed,  and  there  are  people  here  with  whom  I  am
forced  to  restrain  myself  a  little,  I  am  less  subject  to  giving
way  to  my  black  humors,  and  I  am  less  tortured  by  those
unreasonable  desires  which  fasten  upon  my  heart  like  a  flock
of  vultures  as  soon  as  I  am  idle  for  a  moment.  There  are  one
or  two  rather  pretty  women,  and  one  or  two  gay  and  jolly
fellows;  but  among  all  these  country-folk  the  one  who
pleases  me  most  is  a  young  gentleman  who  arrived  two  or
three  days  ago;  he  pleased  me  from  the  first,  and  I  opened
my  heart  to  him  as  I  watched  him  dismount  from  his  horse.
It  is  impossible  to  be  more  graceful;  he  is  not  very  tall,  but
slender  and  well  developed;  there  is  something  soft  and
undulating  in  his  gait  and  gestures,  which  could  not  possibly
be  more  agreeable;  while  many  women  would  envy  him  his
hands  and  feet.  His  only  fault  is  being  too  good-looking  and
having  too  delicate  features  for  a  man.    He  is  blessed  with


76  RÎADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

a  pair  of  the  blackest  and  most  beautiful  eyes  in  the  world,
with  an  indefinable  expression  in  thera  and  a  look  hard  to
bear;  but  as  he  is  young  and  has  no  sign  of  a  beard,  the
softness  and  perfection  of  the  lower  part  of  his  face  temper
a  little  the  vivacity  of  his  eagle  eyes;  his  brown  shining  hair
hangs  upon  his  neck  in  big  curls,  which  give  his  head  a
particular  character.  Here  then  is  one  of  the  types  of
beauty  of  which  I  dreamed  realized  and  walking  in  my
presence!  What  a  pity  that  he  is  a  man,  or  that  I  am  not
a  woman  !  This  Adonis,  who  with  his  good-looking  face
has  a  keen  and  far-reaching  intelligence,  enjoys  the  advan-
tage of  having  at  the  disposal  of  his  wit  a  silvery  and  pene-
trating voice  which  it  is  difficult  to  hear  without  emotion.
He  is  really  perfect.  It  seems  that  he  shares  my  taste  for
beauty,  for  his  clothes  are  very  rich  and  elaborate,  and  his
horse  is  a  very  frisky  and  well-bred  animal  ;  and,  to  complete
the  picture,  he  was  followed,  mounted  on  a  pony,  by  a  page,
fourteen  or  fifteen  years  of  age,  fair,  rosy,  and  pretty  as  a
seraph,  who  was  half  asleep  and  so  tired  by  his  ride  that  his
master  was  obliged  to  lift  him  from  the  saddle  and  carry
him  to  his  room  in  his  arms.  Rosette  gave  him  a  most
hearty  reception,  and  I  think  she  has  planned  to  make  use  of
him  to  arouse  my  jealousy,  and  thus  fan  into  flame  the
smouldering  ashes  of  my  dying  passion.  Very  dangerous
though  such  a  rival  must  be,  I  am  but  little  disposed  to  be
jealous,  and  I  feel  so  drawn  towards  him  that  I  would
willingly  desist  from  my  love  to  have  his  friendship.


CHAPTER   VI

Here,  if  the  easy-going  reader  will  permit,  we  will  for  a
time  abandon  to  his  reveries  the  worthy  person  who  up  to
this  time  has  occupied  the  stage  by  himself  and  spoken  for
himself,  and  return  to  the  ordinary  form  of  story,  without
preventing  its  taking  the  dramatic  form  where  necessary,


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUFIN  77

and  reserving  to  ourself  the  right  of  again  borrowing  the
sort  of  epistolary  confession  that  the  above  young  man  ad-
dressed to  his  friend.

The  little  page  was  so  weary  that  he  slept  in  his  master's
arms,  and  his  little  head  wagged  to  and  fro  as  if  he  were
dead.  It  was  some  distance  from  the  door  to  the  room
destined  for  the  new  arrival,  and  the  servant  who  conducted
him  offered  to  carry  the  child;  but  the  young  fellow,  who
did  not  seem  to  feel  the  weight  of  his  burden,  thanked  him
without  accepting  his  offer;  he  put  the  child  gently  down
upon  the  couch,  taking  a  thousand  precautions  not  to  awaken
him;  a  mother  could  not  have  done  more.  When  the  servant
had  retired  and  the  door  was  shut,  he  dropped  down  upon  his
knees  and  tried  to  remove  his  boots;  but  the  little  tired  and
swollen  feet  rendered  this  operation  difficult,  and  from  time
to  time  the  pretty  sleeper  uttered  vague  and  inarticulate
cries,  like  a  person  about  to  awaken;  then  the  young  fellow
stopped  and  waited  till  he  had  gone  to  sleep  again.  At  last
the  boots  yielded,  and  then  the  stockings  made  but  a  poor
resistance.  After  this  operation  the  master  took  the  child's
two  feet  and  placed  them  side  by  side  upon  the  velvet  of
the  sofa;  they  were  the  two  most  adorable  feet  in  the  world,
white  as  new  ivory  and  somewhat  rosy  from  the  pressure  of
the  boots  which  had  imprisoned  them  for  seventeen  hours;
they  were  too  tiny  feet  even  for  a  woman,  and  seemed  never
to  have  walked;  the  visible  part  of  the  leg  was  round,  plump,
polished,  transparent,  veined,  and  of  the  most  exquisite  deli-
cacy ;  a  leg  worthy  of  the  foot.

The  young  man,  still  on  his  knees,  contemplated  the  two
little  feet  with  amorous  admiration;  he  leant  over,  took  the
left  and  kissed  it,  and  then  the  right  ;  and  then,  kiss  by  kiss,
he  ascended  the  leg  as  far  as  the  clothing.  The  page  opened
his  eyes,  and  gave  his  master  a  tired  and  grateful  glance,
which  betrayed  no  surprise.  ''My  sash  hurts  me,'*  he  said,
as  he  put  his  finger  under  the  ribbon  and  then  fell  fast
asleep.  The  master  unfastened  the  sash,  raised  the  page's
head  with  a  cushion,  and  touching  his  feet,  which  were  be-
coming a  little  cooler,  carefully  wrapped  them  in  his  cloak,
took  a  chair,  and  sat  down  as  near  the  sofa  as  possible.    Two


78  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

hours  passed  in  this  way,  the  young  man  watching  the  child
sleep,  and  following  upon  his  forehead  the  shadows  of  his
dreams.  The  only  sound  in  the  room  was  the  regular  breath-
ing and  the  tick  of  the  clock.

It  was  certainly  a  very  pleasing  picture.  In  the  contrast
of  these  two  sorts  of  beauty  there  was  an  effect  of  which
a  clever  painter  would  have  made  the  greatest  use.  The
master  was  as  beautiful  as  a  woman,  the  page  as  a  young
girl.  The  round  and  rosy  head  amid  its  hair  was  like  a
peach  in  its  leaves;  it  had  the  freshness  and  softness,  al-
though the  fatigue  of  the  journey  had  taken  away  some  of  its
usual  brilliance;  the  half-open  mouth  showed  little  milk-
white  teeth,  and  beneath  the  full  shining  temples  a  network
of  azure  veins  appeared;  the  eyelashes,  like  the  threads  of
gold  around  the  virgins'  heads  in  a  missal,  came  almost  to
the  middle  of  the  cheeks;  his  long  and  silky  hair  had  at  the
same  time  gold  and  silver  tints  in  it — gold  in  the  shadow
and  silver  in  the  light;  his  neck  was  at  once  fat  and  frail,
and  had  nothing  of  the  sex  indicated  by  the  clothes  about
it;  two  or  three  buttons  of  the  undershirt,  undone  to
facilitate  respiration,  gave  a  glimpse  of  a  square  of  plump
and  chubby  flesh  of  admirable  whiteness,  and  the  beginning
of  a  certain  curve  difficult  to  explain  on  the  breast  of  a  boy;
on  looking  closely,  it  might  have  been  also  observed  that
the  hips  were  a  little  too  pronounced.  The  reader  can  think
what  he  pleases;  these  are  simply  conjectures,  for  we  know
no  more  about  it  than  he  does,  but  we  hope  to  learn  more
shortly,  and  we  faithfully  promise  to  make  him  aware  of  our
discoveries.

The  gentleman  was  pale,  but  it  was  a  golden  pallor,  full
of  strength  and  life;  his  blue  eyes  and  his  straight,  slender
nose  gave  to  his  profile  marvelous  pride  and  vigor  ;  his  mouth
at  certain  times  had  the  sweetest  of  smiles,  but  usually  it
was  curved  at  the  comers,  just  as  on  those  heads  to  be  seen
in  the  paintings  of  some  of  the  old  Italian  masters,  rather
within  than  without;  the  effect  of  this  was  to  give  an
adorably  disdainful  expression,  and  an  air  of  childish  pout-
ing and  ill  humor,  very  strange  and  very  charming.

What  were  the  ties  which  united  the  master  to  the  page


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  79

and  the  page  to  the  master?  Assuredly  there  was  more  be-
tween them  than  the  affection  existing  between  master  and
servant.  Were  they  two  friends  or  two  brothers?  Then
why  this  disguise  ?  It  would  have  been  difficult  for  any  one
who  saw  the  scene  we  have  just  described  to  believe  that
these  two  persons  were  what  they  appeared  to  be.

''How  the  dear  angel  sleeps,"  said  the  young  man  in  a
low  voice  "I  don't  believe  he  ever  traveled  so  far  before.
Twenty  leagues  on  horseback;  I  am  afraid  it  will  make
him  ill  with  fatigue,  for  he  is  so  delicate.  No,  by  to-morrow
all  trace  will  have  departed;  he  will  have  recovered  his
healthy  color,  and  be  fresher  than  a  rose  after  the  rain.
How  beautiful  he  is.  If  I  were  not  afraid  of  waking  him
I  would  eat  him  up  with  caresses.  What  an  adorable  dimple
he  has  on  his  chin  !  How  fine  and  white  his  skin  is  !
Sleep  well,  my  treasure.  Ah  !  I  am  really  jealous  of  your
mother,  and  I  should  like  to  have  known  her.  Is  he  ill?
No;  his  breathing  is  regular  and  he  does  not  move.  I
think  there  was  a  knock  at  the  door."

In  reality  there  had  been  two  taps,  as  gentle  as  possible,
at  the  door.

The  young  man  got  up  and,  fearing  he  was  mistaken,  be-
fore opening  the  door  waited  for  another  knock.  Two  other
taps,  a  little  louder,  sounded,  and  a  sweet  woman's  voice
whispered,  *'It  is  I,  Theodore.''

Theodore  opened  the  door,  but  with  less  alacrity  than  a
young  man  usually  displays  in  opening  to  a  woman  whose
voice  is  sweet  and  who  has  come  mysteriously  to  tap  at  his
door  towards  nightfall.  The  door  opened  to  admit  Rosette
in  person,  more  rosy  than  her  name,  with  as  fluttering  a
heart  as  a  woman  ever  had  on  entering  the  room  of  a  good-
looking  gentleman.

"Theodore,"  Rosette  said.

Theodore  raised  a  finger,  placing  it  to  his  lips  like  a  statue
of  silence,  and,  pointing  to  the  sleeping  child,  led  her  into
the  next  room.

'Theodore,"  Rosette  resumed,  appearing  to  find  singular
pleasure  in  repeating  the  name.  "Theodore,"  she  repeated,
still  holding  the  hand  the  young  man  had  offered  her  as  he


80  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

conducted  her  to  a  seat,  "have  you  come  back  at  last?  What
have  you  been  doing  all  this  time?  Where  have  you  been?
Do  you  know  it  is  six  months  since  I  saw  you  last?  Ah!
Theodore,  that  is  not  right;  you  owe  to  a  person  who  loves
you,  though  you  do  not  love  her,  a  little  regard  and  pity/*

"What  have  I  done?"  he  replied.  "I  hardly  know.  I
have  been  away  and  come  back,  I  have  slept  and  watched,
sung  and  wept,  I  have  been  hungry  and  thirsty,  I  have  been
too  hot  and  too  cold,  I  have  been  bored,  I  have  less  money
and  am  six  months  older;  I  have  lived,  that  is  all.  And
what  have  you  been  doing?'*

"I  have  loved  you,"  Rosette  answered.

"Is  that  all  you  have  done?'*

"Absolutely,  yes.  I  have  employed  my  time  badly,  have  I
not?*'

"You  might  have  employed  your  time  better,  my  poor
Rosette;  for  example,  by  loving  some  one  who  could  return
your  love.**

"I  am  disinterested  in  love,  as  in  everything  else,**  Rosette
retorted.  "I  do  not  let  out  my  love  on  loan;  I  make  a  pure
gift  of  it.'*

"In  that  you  have  a  very  rare  virtue,  one  only  born  in  a
chosen  soul,**  Theodore  replied.  "I  have  very  often  wished
to  be  able  to  love  you,  at  least  as  you  desire  but  there  is  be-
tween us  an  insurmountable  obstacle  which  I  cannot  let  you
know.  Have  you  had  another  lover  while  I  have  been
away  ?*'

"I  have  one  still.**

"What  sort  of  a  man  is  he?**

"A  poet.**

"What  sort  of  a  poet  is  he,  and  what  has  he  done?'*

"I  hardly  know,  a  sort  of  volume  no  one  understands,
which  I  tried  to  read  one  evening.*'

"So  you  have  an  unpublished  poet  for  a  lover.  That
should  be  curious.  Is  he  out  at  elbow?  Does  he  wear
dirty  linen?**

"No,  he  dresses  well,  washes  his  hands,  and  has  no  ink-
spots  at  the  end  of  his  nose.  He  is  a  friend  of  C,  whom  I
met  at  Madame  de  Thémine's  house;  you  know  her,  a  big


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  81

woman  who  affects  childish  ways  and  gives  herself  little
innocent  airs."

''May  I  be  allowed  to  ask  the  name  of  this  glorious
person?"

*'Yes,  certainly.     He  is  the  Chevalier  d'Albert."

"Surely  that  was  the  young  man  who  was  on  the  balcony
when  I  dismounted?"

''Quite  right."

"Who  looked  at  me  so  attentively."

"The  same."

"He  is  a  good-looking  fellow.  So  he  has  not  made  you
forget  me?"

"No.  Unfortunately,  you  are  not  the  sort  of  person  one
forgets."

"No  doubt  he  loves  you  very  dearly?"

"I  can  hardly  say.  There  are  times  when  one  would  think
he  loved  me  very  dearly;  but  at  heart  he  does  not  love  me,
and  he  is  not  far  off  hating  me.  He  has  done  just  as
several  other  more  experienced  people:  he  has  acquired  a
keen  appetite  for  passion,  and  has  been  very  surprised  and
disappointed  when  his  love  has  been  assuaged.  It  is  a  mis-
take to  think  that  because  people  are  lovers  they  adore  one
another."

"What  do  you  propose  doing  with  this  so-called  lover  who
does  not  love?"

"Just  the  same  as  is  done  with  last  year's  fashions.  He  is
not  strong  enough  to  leave  me  first,  and  although  he  does
not  love  me  in  the  real  sense  of  the  word,  he  clings  to  me
from  a  habit  of  pleasure,  and  those  ties  are  the  most  difficult
to  break.  If  I  do  not  help  him,  he  is  capable  of  conscienti-
ously staying  with  me  till  the  Judgment  Day,  and  even  be-
yond that;  for  he  has  the  germ  of  every  noble  quality,  and  the
flowers  of  his  soul  only  need  expanding  in  the  sunshine  of
eternal  love.  Really  I  am  annoyed  at  not  being  that  sun-
light to  him.  Of  all  the  lovers  I  have  not  loved,  he  is  the
one  I  have  loved  most;  and  if  I  were  not  as  good  as  I  am,  I
should  not  restore  his  liberty,  and  I  should  still  keep  him.
That  I  will  not  do;  I  have  just  finished  making  use  of  him."

"How  much  longer  will  it  last?"    Theodore  asked.


82  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

"A  fortnight  or  three  weeks,  but  certainly  less  than  it
would  have  lasted  if  you  had  not  come.  I  know  that  I  shall
never  be  your  mistress.  There  is,  you  say,  an  unknown
reason,  to  which  I  should  submit  if  you  were  allowed  to  dis-
close it  to  me.  So  although  all  hope  in  that  direction  is
forbidden,  I  cannot  decide  to  be  the  mistress  of  another  when
you  are  here;  it  seems  to  me  like  profanity,  and  makes  me
think  that  I  no  longer  have  the  right  to  love  you.*'

**Keep  him  for  the  love  of  me."

''If  it  will  give  you  pleasure,  I  will  do  so.  Ah  !  if  you
could  have  been  mine,  how  different  my  life  would  have
been  !  The  world  has  a  very  false  idea  of  me,  and  I  should
have  passed  out  of  sight  without  any  one  suspecting  what
I  was,  except  you,  Theodore,  the  only  one  who  has  under-
stood me  and  treated  me  cruelly.  I  have  never  desired  any
one  but  you  for  my  lover,  and  you  I  have  not  had.  If  you
had  loved  me,  Theodore,  I  should  have  been  virtuous  and
chaste,  I  should  have  been  worthy  of  you;  instead  of  that
I  shall  leave  (if  any  one  at  all  recollects  me)  a  reputation
for  gallantry,  as  a  sort  of  courtesan,  who  only  differed  from
the  rest  because  of  my  rank  and  wealth.  I  was  born  with  the
most  noble  inclinations;  but  nothing  depraves  a  person  as
much  as  not  being  loved.  Those  despise  me  who  do  not  know
what  I  have  suffered  in  reaching  my  present  state.  Sure
of  never  belonging  to  the  man  I  preferred  above  all  others,
I  let  myself  go  with  the  stream,  I  have  not  taken  the  trouble
to  defend  a  body  which  could  not  belong  to  you.  No  one
has  had  my  heart,  or  ever  will.  It  is  yours,  although  you
have  broken  it;  and,  different  from  most  women  who  call
themselves  honorable,  provided  they  have  not  gone  too  far,
I  have  ahvays  been  faithful  in  heart  and  soul  to  the  thought
of  you.  At  least  I  shall  have  made  a  few  happy;  I  shall
have  made  white  illusions  dance  around  a  few  pillows.  I
have  innocently  deceived  more  than  one  noble  heart;  I  have
been  so  miserable  at  being  repulsed  by  you,  that  I  have
always  been  terrified  at  the  idea  of  inflicting  a  similar
punishment  on  some  one  else.  That  is  the  sole  motive  of  many
of  the  adventures  which  have  been  attributed  to  a  mere  spirit
of  licentiousness.    Licentiousness  in  me!    If  you  knew,  Theo-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  83

dore,  how  profoundly  painful  it  is  to  feel  that  one's  life  has
been  a  failure,  that  happiness  has  passed  by  on  one  side,  to
see  that  people  misunderstand  without  its  being  possible  to
change  their  opinion,  that  one's  most  beautiful  qualities  are
converted  into  vices  and  purest  essences  into  black  poisons,
that  one's  evil  side  has  been  the  only  one  viewed;  to  have
found  the  door  always  open  for  one's  vices  and  always  closed
for  the  virtues,  and  to  be  unable  to  bring  to  perfection,
among  so  many  weeds,  a  single  lily  or  rose!  You  do  not
know  how  painful  it  is,  Theodore  !"

'Alas  !  alas  !  Rosette,  your  words  are  the  history  of  the
whole  world;  the  better  part  of  us  is  the  part  remaining  in
us,  which  we  cannot  produce.  Poets  are  like  that.  Their
most  beautiful  verses  are  the  ones  they  have  not  written;
they  carry  more  poems  to  their  grave  than  they  leave  in  their
library."

"I  shall  bear  my  poem  with  me."

"And  so  shall  I;  who  have  not  composed  one  in  my  life.
Who  is  so  happy  or  wretched  as  not  to  have  created  one  in
his  heart?"

"Yes  !  I  could  have  white  roses  placed  upon  my  tomb.  I
have  had  ten  lovers,  but  my  heart  is  virgin,  and  will  remain.
Man)''  maidens  upon  whose  graves  there  is  a  never-ending
shower  of  jasmine  and  orange  blossoms  were  veritable
Messalinas."

"I  know  what  you  are  worth.  Rosette."

"You  alone  in  the  world  know'  what  I  am,  Theodore,  for
you  have  seen  me  beneath  the  shock  of  a  love  which  is  deep
and  true,  since  it  is  without  hope;  and  he  who  has  not  seen
a  woman  in  love  cannot  say  what  she  is;  that  is  what  con-
soles me  in  my  bitterness."

"What  do  you  think  of  this  young  man  who,  in  the  eyes
of  the  world,  is  your  lover?"

"A  lover's  thoughts  are  deeper  than  the  ocean,  and  it  is
very  hard  to  say  what  there  is  at  the  heart  of  a  man.  The
lead  might  be  attached  to  a  hundred  thousand  fathoms  of
line  without  touching  bottom.  Yet  I  have  touched  bottom  in
a  few  places,  and  the  sounding  apparatus  has  brought  up
sometimes  mud,  sometimes  beautiful  shells,  but  more  often


84  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

mud  and  bits  of  coral  mixed  together.  His  opinion  of  me
has  varied  very  much;  he  has  begun  where  others  left  off,
he  despised  me;  young  fellows  with  vivid  imaginations  are
subject  to  that.  There  is  always  an  enormous  fall  in  the
first  step  they  take,  and  the  passing  from  their  chimera  to
reality  cannot  happen  without  a  shock.  He  despised  me  and
I  amused  him;  now  he  esteems  me  and  I  bore  him.  In  the
early  days  of  our  liaison  he  only  saw  the  banal  side  of  me,
and  I  think  the  certainty  of  not  encountering  resistence  was
of  great  weight  in  his  determination.  He  appeared  extremely
anxious  to  have  a  love  affair,  and  I  at  first  thought  his  was
one  of  those  plenitudes  of  the  heart  which  only  seek  an  out-
let; one  of  those  vague  loves  youth  has  in  the  month  of
May,  which  are  such  that,  failing  women,  arms  would  go
round  the  trunks  of  trees,  and  kisses  be  showered  upon  the
flowers  and  grass  in  the  meadows.  But  it  was  not  that;  it
passed  through  me  to  reach  another  end.  I  was  a  path  for
him  and  not  an  end.  Beneath  the  freshness  of  his  twenty
years  of  age,  beneath  his  youtliful  mustache,  he  concealed  a
profound  corruption.  He  was  punctured  in  the  heart;  he
was  like  a  fruit  containing  nothing  but  ashes.  In  his  young
and  vigorous  body  a  soul  as  old  as  Saturn  was  at  work.  I
admit,  Theodore,  that  I  was  frightened,  and  vertigo  almost
overcame  me  as  I  leant  over  the  black  depths  of  this  exist-
ence. Your  sorrows  and  mine  are  as  nothing  compared  to
them.  If  I  had  loved  him  more  I  should  have  killed  him.
Something  attracts  and  imperatively  calls  him,  something
which  is  not  of  or  in  this  world,  and  he  can  have  no  rest
day  or  night.  He  is  one  of  the  men  whose  souls  have  not
been  dipped  completely  enough  in  the  waters  of  Lethe  be-
fore being  attached  to  the  body,  for  it  retains  of  the  sky
from  whence  it  comes,  memories  of  eternal  beauty  which
work  and  torment  it,  and  remembers  that  it  once  had  wings
and  has  now  only  feet.  If  I  were  God,  I  would  deprive  of
poetry  for  two  eternities  the  angel  guilty  of  such  negligence.
I  was  no  match  for  this,  I  appeared  not  to  have  understood,
and  I  let  him  crawl  upon  his  wings  and  seek  a  peak  from
which  to  launch  himself  into  space.  He  thinks  that  I
noticed  nothing  of  all  that,  because  I  lent  myself  to  all  his


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  85

caprices  without  appearing  to  suspect  the  object.  I  wished,
being  unable  to  cure  him — I  hope  that  it  will  be  one  day-
taken  into  account  before  God — to  give  him  at  least  the
happiness  of  thinking  he  had  been  passionately  loved.  He
inspired  me  with  sufficient  interest  and  pity  to  be  easily
able  to  adopt  a  tone  and  manners  tender  enough  to  deceive
him.  I  played  my  part  like  a  consummate  actress;  I  was
gay  and  sad,  sensible  and  voluptuous  by  turns;  I  feigned  un-
easiness and  jealousy;  I  shed  false  tears,  and  Ï  summoned  to
my  lips  a  host  of  pleasant  smiles.  I  arrayed  this  manikin  of
love  in  the  most  gorgeous  attire;  I  made  him  walk  in  the
avenues  of  my  park;  I  invited  all  my  birds  to  sing  as  he
passed,  and  all  my  flowers  to  bend  their  heads  in  saluta-
tion ;  I  made  him  cross  my  lake  upon  the  silvery  back  of  my
beloved  swan;  I  hid  myself  within,  and  I  lent  him  my  voice,
my  mind,  my  beauty,  my  youth,  and  I  gave  him  so  seductive
an  appearance,  that  the  reality  was  not  equal  to  my  sham.
When  the  time  comes  to  shatter  the  hollow  statue,  I  shall  do
it,  in  order  to  spare  him  remorse,  in  such  a  way  that  he  will
believe  that  all  the  fault  is  on  my  side.  I  shall  be  the  one
to  make  the  hole  through  which  the  gas  filling  the  balloon
may  escape.  Is  it  not  a  holy  deception  and  honorable  fraud  ?
I  have  in  a  crystal  urn  a  few  tears  I  gathered  just  as  they
were  about  to  fall.  That  is  my  casket  of  jewels  and  dia-
monds, and  I  will  present  them  to  the  angel  who  comes  to
take  me  into  the  presence  of  God."

"They  are  more  beautiful,''  Theodore  answered,  ''than
those  which  gleam  at  any  woman's  neck.  A  queen's  orna-
ments are  not  their  equal.  For  myself,  I  think  that  the  liquid
Magdalene  poured  upon  the  feet  of  Christ  was  composed  of
the  tears  of  those  she  had  consoled,  and  I  also  think  that
with  such  tears  is  sprinkled  the  path  of  St.  James,  and  not,
as  it  has  been  suggested,  with  drops  of  the  milk  of  Juno.
Who  will  do  for  you  what  you  have  done  for  him  ?"

"No  one,  alas,  since  you  cannot."

"O  dear  soul  !  it  is  impossible  !  But  do  not  lose  hope.
You  are  beautiful,  and  still  very  young.  You  have  many
avenues  of  limes  and  flowering  acacias  to  traverse  before
reaching  that  moist   road,   bordered  by  bushes  and  leafless


86  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

trees,  which  leads  from  the  tomb  of  porphyry,  where  your
beautiful  dead  years  will  be  interred,  to  the  mossy  stone
sepulcher  where  your  remains  will  be  hastily  bestowed,  with
the  wrinkled  and  tottering  specters  of  the  days  of  your  old
age.  There  is  much  left  of  the  mountain  of  life  for  you  to
cHmb,  and  it  will  be  a  long  while  before  you  reach  the  zone
of  perpetual  snow.  You  are  only  in  the  sphere  of  aromatic
plants,  of  limpid  cascades  where  the  iris  hangs  in  multi-
colored arches,  of  beautiful  green  oaks  and  sweet-smelling
larches.  Climb  still  a  little  higher,  and  from  that  point,  in
the  wider  horizon  outstretched  before  you,  you  will  perhaps
see  the  bluish  smoke  rising  from  the  roof  which  covers  the
man  who  will  love  you.  One  must  not  from  the  first  despair
of  life;  it  always  opens  in  this  fashion  in  our  destiny  with
visions  of  the  unexpected.  The  life  of  man  has  often  made
me  think  of  a  pilgrim  who  ascends  the  winding  stair  of  a
Gothic  tower.  The  long  granite  serpent  twines  in  the  dark-
ness its  coils,  each  scale  of  which  is  a  step.  After  a  few
turns,  the  gleam  of  daylight  coming  from  the  doorway  is
blotted  out.  The  shadow  of  the  houses,  not  yet  overtopped,
does  not  allow  the  airholes  to  admit  the  sun;  the  walls  are
black  and  humid;  it  is  more  like  descending  into  a  dungeon
never  again  to  emerge,  than  ascending  a  tower  which  from
the  earth  appears  so  lofty  and  slender,  and  with  its  carving
and  tracery,  as  if  it  is  in  holiday  dress.  The  ascent  is  made
hesitatingly,  so  depressing  is  its  damp  darkness.  A  few
more  turns  of  the  staircase,  and  more  frequent  lights  outline
the  golden  trefoils  upon  the  opposite  wall.  The  jagged
gables  of  the  houses,  the  carving  of  the  entablatures,  and  the
strange  shapes  of  the  chimneys  come  into  view;  a  few  steps
further,  and  the  eye  looks  down  upon  the  entire  city;  it  is
a  forest  of  pinnacles,  spires,  and  towers,  which  bristle  on  all
sides.  The  domes  and  cupolas  are  rounded  like  the  breasts
of  a  giantess  or  the  skulls  of  Titans.  The  blocks  of  houses
and  palaces  are  separated  by  bright  or  shady  streets.  A
few  steps  more  and  you  will  be  on  the  platform;  then  you
will  see  beyond  the  environs  of  the  city  the  green  of  the
pastures,  the  blueness  of  the  hills,  and  the  white  veil  over
the    river.      Dazzling    sunlight    overwhelms    you,    and    the


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  87


swallows  pass  and  repass  close  at  hand,  uttering  little  joy-
ful cries.  The  far-off  sound  of  the  city  comes  to  you  like  a
friendly  murmur  or  the  buzzing  of  a  hive  of  bees  ;  the  breeze
bears  to  you  the  odors  of  the  neighboring  forest  and  the
flowers  on  the  mountain  ;  there  is  nothing  but  light,  harmony,
and  perfume.  If  you  had  become  weary  and  had  remained
seated  upon  a  lower  step,  or  had  turned  back,  this  view
would  have  been  entirely  lost  to  you.  Sometimes  the  tower
has  but  a  single  opening  in  the  middle  or  at  the  top.  The
tower  of  our  life  is  built  in  that  way;  then  it  requires  more
obstinate  courage  and  more  desperate  perseverance  to  cling
in  the  darkness  to  the  projections  of  the  stones,  to  obtain
a  view  of  the  surrounding  country;  or  else  the  loopholes
have  been  filled  up,  or  perhaps  they  have  been  forgotten
altogether,  and  then  it  is  necessary  to  climb  to  the  summit;
but  the  higher  in  the  darkness,  the  more  immense  does  the
horizon  seem  and  the  greater  the  surprise  and  pleasure."

"Oh,  Theodore,"  Rosette  replied,  "God  grant  that  I  may
soon  reach  the  place  where  the  window  is  !  Long  have  I
climbed  the  spiral  staircase  in  the  blackest  darkness;  but
I  fear  the  opening  has  been  filled  up  and  I  must  climb  to
the  summit;  and  suppose  this  staircase  with  its  never-ending
steps  terminates  in  nothing  but  a  walled-up  doorway  or  an
arched  stone  roof?"

"Don't  say  that,  Rosette;  do  not  even  think  it.  What
architect  would  construct  a  staircase  with  no  outlet?  Why
suppose  the  peaceful  designer  of  the  world  to  be  more  stupid
or  shortsighted  than  an  ordinary  architect?  God  makes  no
mistakes  and  forgets  nothing.  It  is  impossible  to  believe
that  it  would  amuse  Him  to  enclose  you  in  a  long  stone  tube
without  outlet  or  opening.  Why  do  you  think,  poor  mice
that  we  are,  He  will  grudge  us  a  miserable  minute's  happi-
ness. He  would  feel  the  ferocity  of  a  tiger  or  a  judge;  and
if  we  displease  Him  so  much,  He  has  only  to  tell  a  comet
to  turn  a  little  from  its  course,  and  strangle  us  with  a  hair  of
its  tail.  Courage,  Rosette,  courage!  If  you  are  out  of
breath,  stop  a  while  to  recover,  and  then  continue  your
ascent;  you  have  perhaps  only  twenty  steps  to  ascend  to
reach  the  embrasure  from  which  you  will  see  your  happiness."


88  I\f  ADEMOISELT.E  DE  MAUPr>f

'*Never,  oh,  never!  and  if  I  reach  the  top  of  the  tower  it
will  only  be  to  throw  myself  from  it/'

''Drive  away,  poor  sufferer,  these  sinister  ideas  which
hover  around  you  like  bats  and  cast  the  dark  shadow  of  their
Avings  over  your  beautiful  forehead.  If  you  want  me  to  love
you,  be  happy  and  do  not  weep."

He  drew  her  to  him  and  kissed  her  upon  the  eyes  as  he
said  this.

"What  a  misfortune  for  me  to  have  met  you!'*  Rosette
replied;  "and  yet,  wxre  I  to  have  my  time  over  again  I
should  wish  to  know  you.  Your  harshness  has  been  sweeter
to  me  than  other  men's  passion  ;  and  although  you  have  made
me  suffer  greatly,  all  my  pleasure  has  come  from  you;
through  you  I  have  caught  a  glimpse  of  what  I  might  have
been.  You  have  been  a  light  in  my  darkness,  and  you  have
lit  up  many  of  the  dark  places  in  my  soul;  you  have  opened
up  new  vistas  in  my  life.  I  owe  to  you  the  fact  that  I  have
known  love — an  unhappy  love,  it  is  true;  but  there  is  in
loving  without  being  loved  a  profound  and  melancholy
charm,  and  it  is  beautiful  to  call  to  mind  those  who  forget  us.
It  is  a  form  of  happiness  to  be  able  to  love  even  when  one
is  alone  in  that  love,  and  many  die  without  it,  so  that  often
the  most  to  be  pitied  are  not  those  who  love."

'They  suffer  and  feel  the  pain  of  their  wounds,  but  they
at  least  live;  they  have  something  to  tliink  of;  they  have  a
star  around  which  they  gravitate,  an  axis  around  which  to
revolve.  They  have  something  to  desire;  they  can  say  to
themselves,  'If  I  succeed,  if  I  have  that  I  shall  be  happy.'
They  suffer  frightful  agony,  but  at  death  they  can  at  least
say,  *I  die  for  him.'  Death  like  that  is  rebirth.  The  real,
the  only  irreparably  unfortunate  are  tliose  whose  mad  embrace
clasps  the  whole  universe,  those  who  want  everything  and
nothing,  and  if  an  angel  or  fairy  were  to  descend  and  suddenly
say  to  them,  'Desire  something  and  you  shall  have  it/  they
would  remain  silent  and  embarrassed."

"If  the  fairy  were  to  come,"  Rosette  interposed,  'T  know
what  I  should  ask  for."

"You  know,  Rosette,  and  in  that  particular  you  are  happier
than  I  am,  for  I  do  not  know.  In  me  there  are  many  vague
desires  which  mingle  together  and  produce  others,  only  after-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  89

wards  to  be  devoured  by  them.  My  desires  are  like  a  flock
of  bîrds  which  wheel  and  hover  without  an  object;  your
desire  is  an  eagle  with  its  eyes  fixed  on  the  sun,  and  only
prevented  by  a  lack  of  air  from  rising  to  it  on  its  outstretched
wings.  Ah!  if  I  could  only  know  what  I  desire;  if  the  idea
which  pursues  me  only  stood  out  clear  and  distinct  from  the
mist  surrounding  it;  if  the  favorable  or  fatal  star  appeared
in  my  heaven;  if  the  ray  of  light  I  ought  to  follow  shone
through  the  night,  whether  perfidious  will-o'-the-wisp  or
hospitable  beacon;  if  my  pillar  of  fire  preceded  me  across  the
desert  without  manna  or  springs  of  water;  would  that  I  only
knew  where  I  was  going,  even  were  the  end  to  be  a  preci-
pice. To  live  like  this  is  an  occupation  like  that  of  those
horses  which,  with  blindfold  eyes,  turn  the  wheel  of  a  shaft
and  travel  thousands  of  miles  without  seeing  anything  or
changing  position.  I  have  turned  for  a  long  time,  and  the
cage  ought  soon  to  be  at  the  top.*'

'There  are  many  points  of  resemblance  between  you  and
Albert,  and  when  you  speak  it  sometimes  seems  to  me  that  he
is  speaking.  I  am  quite  sure  that  when  you  know  him  better
you  will  become  great  friends;  you  cannot  fail  to  suit  one
another.  He  is  tormented,  just  as  you  are,  with  these  endless
impulses;  he  loves  immensely,  without  knowing  what;  he
would  like  to  soar  up  into  the  sky,  for  the  earth  appears  to
him  hardly  a  footstool  for  one  of  his  feet,  and  he  has  more
pride  than  Lucifer  before  his  fall.'*

*1  at  first  feared,"  Theodore  replied,  "that  he  was  one
of  those  poets,  and  there  are  so  many  of  them,  who  have
driven  poetry  from  the  earth,  one  of  those  who  string  to-
gether false  pearls,  and  when  they  have  rhymed  a  few  simple
words  conscientiously  cross  their  arms  and  legs,  and  allow
the  spheres  to  complete  their  revolution/'

''He  is  not  one  of  that  sort.  His  verses  are  beneath  him,
and  do  not  contain  him.  From  his  efforts  quite  a  false  idea
of  his  personality  would  be  gathered;  his  real  poem  is  him-
self, and  I  do  not  know  whether  he  will  ever  write  another.
He  has,  deep  down  in  his  soul,  a  seraglio  of  beautiful  ideas,
which  he  surrounds  with  a  triple  wall,  and  he  is  more  jealous
of  them  than  ever  a  Sultan  was  of  his  odalisques.    He  only


90  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

puts  into  his  verses  the  ideas  he  does  not  care  for,  or  with
which  he  is  disheartened,  and  it  is  the  door  from  which  he
expels  them,  and  the  world  only  has  what  he  no  longer
requires."

**I  understand  such  jealousy  and  shame.  In  the  same  way
many  persons  do  not  appreciate  the  love  they  have  had  till
they  have  lost  it,  and  their  mistresses  till  they  are  dead.''

**I  love  those  silent  people  who  carry  their  ideas  to  their
grave  and  will  not  leave  them  to  the  dirty  kisses  and  the
shameless  contacts  of  the  crowd.  Those  lovers  please  me
who  do  not  write  their  mistresses'  name,  who  do  not  entrust
it  to  any  echo,  and  who,  while  sleeping,  are  pursued  by  the
fear  that  a  dream  will  make  them  pronounce  it.  I  am  of  a
similar  nature;  I  have  never  uttered  my  thoughts,  and  none
shall  know  my  love.  But  it  is  nearly  eleven,  my  dear  Theo-
dore, and  I  am  keeping  you  from  a  rest  of  which  you  must
be  sadly  in  need.  When  I  have  to  leave  you  I  always  ex-
perience a  sinking  at  my  heart,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  it
will  be  the  last  time  I  shall  see  you.  I  put  it  off  as  long
as  possible;  but  the  end  must  come  at  last.  Copie,  good-by,
for  I  am  afraid  Albert  will  be  looking  for  me.  Good-by,
dear  friend."

Theodore  put  his  arm  around  her  waist,  and  accompanied
her  to  the  door  like  that;  there  he  stopped,  and  for  a  while
looked  after  her.  The  corridor  was  pierced  here  and  there  by
little  square  windows,  now  illuminated  by  the  moon,  thus  pro-
ducing alternative  patches  of  light  and  shadow,  fantastic  in  ap-
pearance. At  each  window  Rosette's  white  and  pure  form
gleamed  like  a  silver  phantom  ;  then  it  disappeared,  to  appear
even  more  brilliant  a  little  further  on;  at  last  she  entirely
disappeared.

Theodore,  buried  in  profound  thought,  remained  motion-
less for  a  few  moments  with  his  arms  folded,  then  he  passed
his  hand  across  his  brow,  and  throwing  back  his  hair  by  a
movement  of  the  head,  returned  to  the  bedroom,  and  after
kissing  the  forehead  of  the  page,  who  was  still  asleep,  he
retired  to  rest.


I


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  91


CHAPTER  VII

As  soon  as  ît  was  daylight  d'Albert  paid  Rosette  a  visit
with  an  eagerness  quite  unusual  as  far  as  he  was  concerned.

"Well,  you  have  come  as  early,"  Rosette  said,  "as  possible;
so  as  a  recompense  for  your  gallantry  I  will  give  you  my
hand  to  kiss."

She  drew  from  beneath  the  lace-trimmed  bed-clothes  the
prettiest  little  hand  ever  seen  at  the  end  of  a  round,  plump
arm.

D'Albert  kissed  it  with  compunction.  **And  the  other  one,
her  little  sister,  shall  I  not  kiss  her  too?"

"Oh,  yes  ;  nothing  is  more  permissible.  I  am  in  my  Sunday
humor;  here."  She  took  her  other  hand  out  of  bed,  and
lightly  tapped  him  on  the  mouth  with  it.  "Am  I  not  the  most
obliging  woman  in  the  world?"

"You  are  grace  personified,  and  you  ought  to  have  white
marble  temples  erected  in  your  honor  amid  groves  of  myrtle.
Really,  I  am  very  much  afraid  what  happened  to  Psyche  will
happen  to  us,  and  Venus  will  become  jealous  of  you,"  d'Al-
bert said,  as  he  joined  the  two  beautiful  hands  and  raised  them
to  his  lips.

"How  you  retail  all  that  in  a  single  breath  !  It  seems  to  be
a  phrase  you  have  learned  by  heart,"  Rosette  said,  with  a  de-
licious little  pout.

"No,  you  are  quite  worthy  of  having  phrases  turned  ex-
pressly in  your  honor,  and  you  are  made  to  cull  the  first  fruits
of  poesy,"  d'Albert  replied.

"Oh,  yes,  decidedly  ;  but  who  has  spurred  you  on  to-day  ?  Is
it  because  you  are  ill  that  you  are  so  gallant?  I  am  afraid
you  are  going  to  die.  Do  you  know  that  when  a  person  sud-
denly changes  his  character  without  apparent  reason  it  is  a
very  bad  sign?  Now  it  is  proved,  in  the  eyes  of  all  the
women  who  have  taken  the  trouble  to  love  you,  that  you  are
usually  somewhat  sulky,  and  it  is  none  the  less  certain  that
you  could  not  possibly  be  more  charming  at  this  moment,  and
your  amiability  is  quite  inexplicable.    But  really  you  are  very


92  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

pale,  poor  d'Albert  ;  give  me  your  arm,  so  that  I  can  feel  your
pulse";  and  she  lifted  his  sleeve  and  counted  the  pulsations
with  comic  gravity.  **No,  you  are  quite  well,  and  you  have
not  the  slightest  symptoms  of  fever.  Then  I  must  be  furiously
pretty  this  morning  !  Come,  give  me  my  mirror,  so  that  I  may
see  how  you  are  right  or  wrong."

D'Albert  picked  up  a  little  mirror  from  the  dressing-table
and  placed  it  on  the  bed.

'^Really,"  Rosette  said,  "you  are  not  quite  wrong.  Why  do
you  not  write  a  sonnet  to  my  eyes.  Sir  Poet?  You  ought  to
do  so.  How  unfortunate  I  am  !  To  have  eyes  like  mine  and
a  poet  like  yourself,  and  yet  to  be  without  sonnets,  just  as  if
I  were  blind  and  had  a  porter  for  my  lover  !  You  do  not  love
me,  sir,  you  have  not  even  composed  an  acrostic  sonnet.  And
what  do  you  think  of  my  mouth  ?  Still,  I  have  kissed  you  with
tliis  mouth,  and  may  do  so  again;  and,  really,  it  is  a  favor
you  scarcely  deserve  (this  does  not  apply  to  to-day,  for  to-day
you  are  worthy  of  anything)  ;  but,  to  change  the  subject  from
myself,  this  morning  your  beauty  and  freshness  is  unequaled,
you  are  like  a  brother  of  Aurora  and  although  it  is  hardly
daylight,  you  are  dressed  as  if  you  are  going  to  a  ball.  Per-
chance you  have  designs  upon  me,  or  upon  my  virtue  ?  Would
you  like  to  make  a  conquest  of  me  ?  But  I  forget,  tliat  is  all
over  and  ancient  history.''

''Rosette,  don't  joke  like  that;  you  know  very  well  that  I
love  you."

'*Ah,  that  depends.    I  am  not  so  sure;  and  you?"

''Most  perfectly,  and  so  much  so  that,  if  you  were  good
enough  to  close  your  door  against  me,  I  should  try  to  prove
it  to  you,  and,  I  venture  to  flatter  myself,  in  an  unmistakable
fashion."

"No  ;  however  much  I  should  like  to  be  convinced,  my  door
will  remain  open;  I  am  too  pretty  to  hide  myself;  the  sun
shines  for  the  whole  world,  and  to-day  my  beauty  will,  if  you
please,  take  the  place  of  the  sun."

'Tn  reality,  I  am  not  at  all  pleased;  but  act  as  if  I  were.  I
am  your  most  humble  slave,  and  I  lay  my  will  at  your  feet."

"That  could  not  be  improved  ;  remain  of  the  same  mind  and
this  evening  leave  the  key  in  your  room  door."


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  93


"The  Chevalier  Theodore  de  Sérannes/'  announced  the
large  head  of  a  smiling  and  fat-faced  negro  as  it  appeared
in  the  doorway,  *'begs  to  be  allowed  to  pay  his  respects  to  you,
and  prays  that  you  may  deign  to  receive  him."

"Show  in  the  Chevalier,''  said  Rosette,  as  she  replaced  the
bed-clothes  right  up  to  her  chin.

Theodore  first  turned  towards  Rosette's'  bed,  and  made  her
a  very  deep  and  graceful  bow,  which  she  acknowledged  with
a  friendly  nod,  and  afterwards  turned  to  d'Albert,  whom  he
greeted  in  a  genial  and  courteous  fashion.  "Where  were
you?"  Theodore  asked.  "Perhaps  I  interrupted  an  interest-
ing conversation;  please  resume,  and  in  a  few  words  put  me
'au  fait/  ''

"Oh  no  !"  Rosette  answered,  with  a  malicious  smile.  "We
were  talking  business."

Theodore  sat  down  at  the  foot  of  Rosette's  bed,  for  d'Al-
bert had  taken  his  place  near  the  head  by  virtue  of  being  the
first  comer;  the  conversation  for  some  time  flitted  from  one
subject  to  another  in  a  very  clever,  gay,  and  lively  fashion,
and  for  that  reason,  it  shall  not  be  reproduced  ;  besides,  I  am
afraid  it  would  lose  too  much  through  transcription.  The  air,
tone,  and  fire  of  the  words  and  gestures,  the  thousand  and  one
fashions  of  pronouncing  a  word,  and  all  their  cleverness,  like
the  sparkle  of  champagne  which  fizzes  and  evaporates  at  once,
are  things  it  is  impossible  to  fix  and  reproduce.  It  is  a  hiatus
we  leave  the  reader  to  fill,  and  he  will  assuredly  acquit  him-
self better  than  we  should;  so  let  the  reader  here  imagine  five
or  six  pages  full  of  the  finest,  most  capricious,  most  curiously
fantastic,  most  elegant  and  sparkling  conversation.

We  know  very  well  that  we  are  here  making  use  of  an
artifice  which,  in  some  respects,  recalls  that  of  Timanthes,
who,  despairing  of  being  able  to  reproduce  the  face  of  Aga-
memnon, threw  a  drapery  over  the  head;  we  prefer  to  be  timid
rather  than  imprudent.

It  would  not  perhaps  be  out  of  place  to  inquire  into  the
motives  which  caused  d' Albert's  early  rising,  and  find  out
what  motive  had  driven  him  to  visit  Rosette  as  early  as  if  he
had  still  loved  her.  In  appearance,  it  was  a  little  display  of
unconfessed  jealousy.     Certainly  he  was  not  very  fond  of


94  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUFIN

Rosette,  and  he  would  have  parted  from  her,  but  at  least  he
desired  the  rupture  to  come  from  him,  and  not  from  her,  for
in  the  latter  case  a  man's  pride  is  always  deeply  wounded,
however  dead  his  love  may  be.  Theodore  was  such  a  ladies'
man  that  it  was  difficult  to  see  him  appear  in  the  course  of  a
liaison  without  fearing  that  (and  it  had  already  happened
many  times)  all  eyes  would  turn  in  his  direction,  and  hearts
would  follow  the  eyes;  and,  strange  to  say,  although  he  had
appropriated  many  women,  no  lover  had  felt  that  long-
standing resentment  against  him  which  is  usually  the  experi-
ence of  the  supplanter.  He  had,  in  all  his  moods,  such  an
invincible  charm,  such  a  natural  grace,  something  so  gentle  and
proud  that  even  men  were  sensible  to  its  influence.  D'Albert,
who  had  visited  Rosette  with  the  desire  to  speak  very  sharply
to  Theodore  if  he  met  him,  was  very  surprised  at  not  experi-
encing in  his  presence  any  feeling  of  anger,  and  at  replying
with  so  much  facility  to  the  advances  made  by  him.  After
half  an  hour  you  would  have  said  they  were  two  old  school
chums,  and  yet  d'Albert  was  inwardly  convinced  that  if  Ro-
sette were  ever  to  love  this  would  be  the  man,  and  that  he
would  have  good  grounds  for  jealousy  in  the  future  at  least,
though  for  the  present  he  had  as  yet  no  suspicion  ;  what  would
he  have  thought  if  he  had  seen  the  beauty  in  her  white  wrap-
per glide  like  a  moth  upon  a  moonbeam  into  the  handsome
young  man's  room,  and  not  emerge  till  three  or  four  hours
later,  and  then  with  mysterious  precautions  ?  He  would  per-
haps have  considered  himself  more  unhappy  that  he  really
was,  for  it  does  not  often  happen  that  a  pretty  and  amorous
woman  leaves  a  gentleman's  room  just  as  pretty  as  she  entered
it.

Rosette  listened  to  Theodore  most  attentively,  as  a  woman
sometimes  listens  to  her  lover;  but  his  conversation  was  so
amusing  and  varied  that  her  attention  was  quite  natural,  and
quite  easily  comprehensible.  So  d'Albert  did  not  take  um-
brage. Theodore's  tone  to  Rosette  was  polite  and  friendly,
but  nothing  more.

''What  shall  we  do  to-day,  Theodore  ?"  Rosette  said  ;  ''shall
we  go  out  in  a  boat? — ^will  that  suit  you?  Or  shall  we  go
hunting?"


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  95

'*Let  us  go  out  hunting,  that  is  less  melancholy  than  gliding
upon  the  water  side  by  side  with  a  bored  swan,  and  parting
the  water-lily  leaves  right  and  left;  don't  you  think  so,
d'Albert?"

"I  would,  perhaps,  just  as  soon  drift  with  the  stream  in  a
boat  as  gallop  madly  in  pursuit  of  a  poor  animal  ;  but  where
you  go  I  will  follow;  it  is  now  only  a  question  of  allowing
Madame  Rosette  to  get  up  and  don  a  suitable  costume.*'  Ro-
sette made  a  sign  of  assent,  and  rang  the  bell  for  her  maid  to
come  and  dress  her.  The  two  young  fellows  went  off  arm  in
arm,  and  it  was  not  easy  to  guess,  seeing  them  such  good
friends,  that  one  was  the  lover  and  the  other  the  sweetheart
of  the  same  person.

Every  one  was  soon  ready.  DAlbert  and  Theodore  were
already  mounted  in  the  courtyard,  when  Rosette,  in  her  riding-
habit,  appeared  on  the  steps.  She  had  a  lively  and  resolute
manner  which  suited  her  admirably.  She  jumped  into  the
saddle  with  her  usual  nimbleness  and  gave  her  horse  a  cut
with  her  riding  whip  which  sent  him  off  like  an  arrow.  D'Al-
bert with  a  touch  of  the  spur  soon  joined  her,  while  Theodore
allowed  them  to  get  a  short  distance  ahead  of  him,  being  sure
of  overtaking  them  when  he  pleased.  He  seemed  to  expect
something,  and  often  turned  round  in  the  direction  of  the
château.

'Theodore  !  Theodore  !  Come  along  !  Are  you  riding  a
wooden  horse  ?"  Rosette  called  out  to  him.

Theodore  put  his  horse  into  a  gallop,  and  decreased  the
distance  which  separated  him  from  Rosette,  without  quite
overtaking  her.

He  again  looked  towards  the  château,  which  was  now  al-
most out  of  sight;  a  little  cloud  of  dust,  in  which  something
not  yet  visible  was  moving  very  quickly,  appeared  at  the  end
of  the  road.  In  a  few  minutes  the  cloud  of  dust  was  by  Theo-
dore's side,  and  out  of  it  emerged  the  fresh  and  rosy  face  of
the  mysterious  page.

"Theodore,  come  along  !"  Rosette  called  out  a  second  time.
'*Spur  your  tortoise  and  rejoin  us."

Theodore  gave  the  horse  his  head,  and  in  a  few  seconds  he
had  passed  d'Albert  and  Rosette.


9C  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

**He  who  loves  me  follows  me,"  said  Theodore,  as  he
jumped  a  gate  four  feet  high.  *'Ah  well!  Sir  Poet,'*  he
said,  when  he  had  landed  on  the  other  side,  '*do  you  not  jump?
Yet  your  steed  is  winged,  so  it  is  said."

"Well,  I  prefer  to  go  round;  I  have  only  one  head  to  break,
after  all;  if  I  had  several  I  would  try,"  d*Albert  replied,  with
a  smile.

''Nobody  loves  me  as  nobody  follows  me,"  Theodore  said,
dropping  more  than  usual  the  curved  corners  of  his  mouth.
The  little  page  fixed  his  large  blue  eyes  on  him  with  a  look
of  reproach  and  dug  his  heels  into  his  horse's  sides.

The  horse  gave  a  tremendous  leap.

'*Yes,  some  one  does,"  he  said  from  the  other  side  of  the
gate.

Rosette  cast  a  strange  glance  at  the  child  and  blushed  up
to  her  eyes;  then,  giving  her  mare  a  sharp  cut,  she  jumped
over  the  wooden  barrier  which  crossed  the  ride.

"Do  you  think,  Theodore,  that  I  don't  love  you  as  well?"

The  child  cast  a  sidelong  glance  at  her  from  under  his  eye-
lashes and  drew  near  Theodore.

D'Albert  was  already  half-way  along  the  ride  and  saw  no-
thing of  this;  for  from  time  immemorial  fathers,  husbands,
and  lovers  have  had  the  privilege  of  being  blind.

"Isnabel,"  Theodore  said,  "you  are  a  fool,  and  you,  Rosette,
as  well  !  Isnabel,  you  did  not  take  room  enough  to  jump,  and
you,  Rosette,  only  just  missed  catching  your  dress  in  the  post.
You  might  have  killed  yourself."

"What  does  it  matter?"  Rosette  answered  in  a  voice  so
sad  and  melancholy  that  Isnabel  forgave  her  for  jumping  the
barrier.

They  proceeded  some  distance  further,  and  reached  the
clearing  where  the  meet  was  to  take  place.  Six  rides,  cut
through  the  depths  of  the  forest,  met  at  a  signpost  a  little
stone  tower.  The  trees  were  so  tall  that  they  seemed  to  wish
to  touch  the  fleecy  clouds  which  a  moderate  breeze  was  speed-
ing over  their  tops,  while  the  long  grass  and  thick  bushes
provided  cover  for  the  game,  and  sport  promised  to  be  good.
It  was  a  real  old-world  forest,  with  oaks  of  more  than  a  hun-
dred years  old,  such  as  we  never  see  in  these  days  when  trees


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  97

are  no  longer  planted  and  people  have  not  the  patience  to  wait
for  those  already  planted  to  grow;  it  was  an  hereditary  forest,
planted  by  the  great-grandfathers  for  the  fathers,  by  the
fathers  for  the  grandsons,  with  avenues  of  prodigious  width,
an  obelisk,  surmounted  by  a  head,  a  rockwork  fountain,  the
usual  lake,  and  the  powdered  gamekeepers  in  yellow  leather
breeches  and  sky-blue  coats.  A  multitude  of  dogs'  tails,  like
bill-hooks,  waved  hither  and  thither  in  a  cloud  of  dust.  The
signal  was  given,  the  straining  dogs  were  uncoupled,  and  the
sport  commenced.  We  shall  not  describe  with  exactness  the
stag's  course  through  the  forest;  we  do  not  even  know  if  it
was  a  full-grown  stag  or  not,  and  our  inquiries  have  not  sat-
isfied us  on  that  point,  painful  though  it  is  to  have  to  admit
it.  Yet  we  think  that  in  a  forest  so  ancient,  shady,  and
princely  there  ought  only  to  be  full-grown  stags,  and  we  do
not  see  why  the  one  after  which  galloped  upon  different-
colored  horses  the  four  principal  characters  of  this  story
should  not  be  one  too.

The  stag  traveled  like  a  champion,  and  the  fifty  dogs  he
had  at  his  heels  were  no  slight  spur  to  his  natural  speed.  The
run  was  so  sharp  that  the  dogs  only  gave  tongue  occasionally.

Theodore,  being  the  best  mounted  and  the  most  accom-
plished horseman,  with  wonderful  dash  kept  at  the  heels  of
the  pack.  D'Albert  was  close  behind.  Rosette  and  the  little
page  Isnabel  followed,  separated  from  the  others  by  an  ever-
increasing  gap.

The  gap  was  soon  so  large  that  it  was  quite  hopeless  for
them  to  recover  the  lost  ground.

"Suppose  we  stop  for  a  little  while  to  give  the  horses  a
breather.  The  chase  is  going  in  the  direction  of  the  lake,  and
I  know  a  crosspath  by  which  we  can  get  there  as  soon  as  the
others."

Isnabel  on  her  little  mountain  pony  drew  rein,  and  her
mount  dropped  his  head  and  began  to  scatter  the  sand  with
his  hoofs.

The  pony  formed  the  most  perfect  contrast  possible  to  Ro-
sette's mare;  he  was  black  as  night,  while  the  mare  was  of
the  whiteness  of  satin.  He  was  shaggy  and  unkempt,  while
the  mare  had  her  mane  plaited  with  blue  ribbon  and  her  tail


98  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

combed  and  tied  up.  One  was  like  a  unicorn,  the  other  a
poodle.

The  same  contrast  was  noticeable  between  the  riders  as
between  their  steeds.  Rosette's  hair  was  as  black  as  IsnabeFs
was  fair;  her  eyelashes  were  very  clearly  and  distinctly
marked;  the  page's  were  scarcely  discernible  from  the  skin,
and  were  very  much  like  the  bloom  upon  the  peach.  The
color  of  one  was  strong  and  solid  like  the  light  at  midday,
while  the  tints  of  the  other  contained  the  transparencies  and
shades  of  early  dawn.

''Shall  we  now  try  and  fall  in  with  the  hunt?''  Isnabel
asked  Rosette  ;  ''the  horses  have  got  their  wind."

*'Come  along  then!"  the  pretty  Amazon  replied,  as  she  set
off  at  a  gallop  along  the  narrow  crosspath  leading  to  the
lake;  the  two  horses,  side  by  side,  took  up  almost  the  entire
width  of  the  ride.

On  Isnabel's  side  a  gnarled  and  knotted  tree  extended  a
thick  branch  like  an  arm  and  seemed  to  be  shaking  its  fist  at
the  riders.  The  child  did  not  see  it.  'Take  care,"  Rosette
cried  ;  ''stoop  low  in  your  saddle  or  you  will  be  off."

The  warning  was  too  late  ;  the  bough  struck  Isnabel  in  the
middle  of  the  body.  The  violence  of  the  contact  caused  him
to  lose  his  stirrups,  and  as  his  pony  continued  its  gallop  and
the  branch  was  too  strong  to  break,  he  was  lifted  out  of  the
saddle  and  fell  heavily  to  the  ground.

The  child  lost  consciousness.  Rosette,  greatly  frightened,
jumped  from  her  horse  and  hastened  to  the  page,  who  gave
no  sign  of  life.

His  cap  had  fallen  oft*  and  his  beautiful  fair  hair  was
spread  upon  the  sand.  His  little  open  hands  were  like  wax,
so  pale  were  they.  Rosette  knelt  by  his  side  and  tried  to  re-
store him.  She  had  neither  flask  nor  smelling  salts  with  her,
and  was  greatly  distressed.  At  last  she  saw  a  deep  rut  in
which  the  rain  water  had  collected,  she  dipped  her  fingers  in
it,  to  the  great  terror  of  a  little  frog,  the  naiad  of  this  pool,
and  shook  a  few  drops  upon  the  young  page's  temples.  He
did  not  seem  to  feel  it,  and  the  drops  of  water  trickled  down
his  white  cheeks  like  the  tears  of  a  sylph  upon  a  lily  leaf.
Rosette,  thinking  that  his  clothes  were  too  tight,  undid  his  belt


I


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  99

and  unbuttoned  his  jersey  so  that  his  chest  might  have  freer
play.  Rosette  then  saw  something  which  to  a  man  would
have  been  one  of  the  most  agreeable  surprises  in  the  world,
but  which  did  not  seem  to  afford  her  much  pleasure,  for  her
brows  contracted  and  her  upper  lip  trembled  slightly.  She
saw  a  very  white  throat,  still  unformed,  but  giving  the  most
admirable  promise  and  already  very  beautiful,  and  a  round,
polished,  ivory  bosom,  delightful  to  see,  more  delightful  to
kiss.

*'A  woman,"  she  said.     *'A  woman  !     Ah,  Theodore  !"

Isnabel,  for  we  will  call  him  by  that  name  though  it  was
not  his,  began  to  breathe  a  little  and  languidly  raised  his  long
eyelashes  ;  he  was  not  hurt  in  any  way,  simply  stunned.  He
soon  recovered  and  with  Rosette's  help  remounted  his  pony,
which  had  stopped  as  soon  as  it  lost  its  rider.

They  were  quite  close  to  the  lake,  where  they  fell  in  with
the  rest  of  the  field.  Rosette  told  Theodore  in  a  few  words
what  had  happened.  The  latter  changed. color  several  times
during  Rosette's  story  and  all  the  rest  of  the  day  rode  by  the
side  of  Isnabel.

They  got  back  to  the  château  early.  The  day  begun  so
joyfully  had  ended  in  a  sorrowful  fashion.

Rosette  was  dreamy,  and  dAlbert  seemed  deep  in  reflection.
The  reader  will  soon  know  the  reason.


CHAPTER  Vni

No,  my  dear  Silvo,  I  have  not  forgotten  you  ;  I  am  not  one
of  those  persons  who  go  through  life  without  ever  casting  a
glance  behind;  my  past  follows  me,  and  encroaches  upon  the
present,  and  almost  upon  the  future.  Your  friendship  is  one
of  the  sunny  spots  which  stand  out  most  clearly  from  the  blue
horizon  of  my  latter  years  ;  in  fact,  I  often  turn  back  to  con-
template it  with  a  sentiment  of  ineffable  melancholy.

Oh  !  what  a  fine  time  it  was  !     How  angelically  pure  we


100  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

were  !  Our  feet  hardly  touched  the  earth  ;  we  seemed  to  have
wings  on  our  shoulders,  our  desires  carried  us  away,  and  the
spring  breeze  made  the  blond  halo  of  youth  quiver  around
our  brows.

Do  you  remember  that  little  island  planted  with  poplars  at
the  spot  where  the  river  forked?  To  reach  it  we  had  to  cross
a  long,  narrow  plank  w^hich  bent  very  much  in  the  middle  ;  a
real  goats'  bridge,  in  fact,  hardly  good  enough  for  them;  it
was  delightful.  Short,  close  turf,  a  yellow  path  like  a  girdle
to  the  island's  green  dress,  enclosing  it  at  the  waist,  and  an
ever-moving  shade  of  aspens  and  poplars,  were  not  the  least
attractive  parts  of  this  paradise.  There  were  great  pieces  of
linen  which  the  women  spread  out  to  whiten  in  the  dew;  they
looked  like  squares  of  snow;  and  the  little  girl,  dark  and  sun-
burnt, whose  big  wild  eyes  shone  so  brilliantly  beneath  the
locks  of  her  hair,  who  ran  after  the  goats,  threatening  them,
and  waving  her  osier  switch,  when  they  made  an  attempt  to
walk  upon  the  linen  of  which  she  had  charge;  do  you  recollect
her?  and  the  saffron-colored  butterflies  with  their  unsteady
flight,  and  the  kingfisher  we  so  often  tried  to  catch,  with  its
nest  in  the  alder  thicket.  How  limpid  and  gleaming  was  the
water,  showing  the  golden  gravel  at  the  bottom  of  the  stream;
what  pleasure  we  found  in  sitting  on  the  bank  and  dangling
our  toes  in  the  stream  !  The  w^ater  lilies,  with  their  golden
flowers  gracefully  unfolded,  looked  like  green  tresses  floating
upon  the  agate  back  of  some  nymph  in  her  bath.  The  sky
gazed  upon  itself  in  this  mirror  with  azure  smiles  and  the
most  ravishing  pearl-grey  transparencies,  and  at  all  hours  of
the  day  there  were  turquoises,  spangles,  whiteness,  and  waves
of  inexhaustible  variety.  How  I  loved  those  squadrons  of
little  ducks  w^ith  emerald  necks,  w^hich  swam  ceaselessly  from
one  bank  to  the  other  and  made  a  few  ripples  upon  that  liquid
mirror  !

How  \vell  fitted  we  were  to  be  the  figures  in  such  a  land-
scape !  How  we  suited  tliat  gentle,  restful  nature  and  how
easily  we  harmonized  with  it  !  Spring  was  without,  youth
within,  the  sun  upon  the  grass,  a  smile  upon  the  lips,  a  snow
of  blossoms  upon  all  the  bushes,  white  illusions  spreading  in
our  souls,  a  blush  of  shame  upon  our  cheeks  and  upon  the


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  101


dog-rose,  poetry  singing  in  our  hearts,  hidden  birds  whistling
in  the  trees,  and  there  was  light,  cooing,  perfume,  a  thousand
confused  sounds,  a  beating  heart,  the  water  moving  a  pebble,
a  blade  of  grass  of  a  half- formed  thought,  a  drop  of  water
trickling  along  a  flower,  a  tear  trembling  upon  an  eyelid,  a
sigh  of  love,  and  the  rustic  of  the  leaves.  What  evenings  we
spent  there  strolling  so  near  the  edge  that  we  often  walked
with  one  foot  in  the  water  and  the  other  on  the  bank.

Alas  !  that  did  not  last  long,  in  my  case  at  least,  for  when
you  acquired  man's  knowledge  you  kept  your  childish  candor.
The  germ  of  corruption  in  me  developed  very  quickly,  and  the
gangrene  ate  up  all  that  was  pure  and  holy.  The  only  good
thing  I  had  left  was  my  friendship  for  you.

I  am  used  to  hiding  nothing  from  you,  neither  actions  nor
thoughts.  I  have  laid  bare  to  you  the  most  secret  fibers  of  my
heart;  however  strange,  ridiculous,  or  eccentric  are  the
movements  of  my  soul,  I  must  describe  them  to  you;  but
really  my  experiences  of  late  are  so  strange  that  I  hardly  dare
acknowledge  them  to  myself.  I  told  you  somewhere  that  I
was  afraid  that,  from  seeking  the  beautiful  and  making  efforts
to  obtain  it,  I  should  in  the  end  reach  the  impossible  or  mon-
strous. I  have  almost  got  to  that  stage.  When  shall  I  emerge
from  all  these  currents  which  drift  me  hither  and  thither?
When  will  the  bridge  of  my  vessel  cease  to  tremble  beneath
my  feet  and  to  be  swept  away  by  the  waves  of  all  these
storms  ?  Where  shall  I  find  a  harbor  in  which  to  drop  anchor
and  an  immovable  rock  out  of  the  waves,  where  I  can  dry
myself  and  wring  the  foam  from  my  hair?

You  know  how  ardentiy  I  have  sought  for  physical  beauty,
what  importance  I  attach  to  the  external  form,  and  what  love
I  have  for  the  visible  world;  it  must  be  that  I  am  too  blasé
or  corrupt  to  believe  in  moral  beauty  and  pursue  it  with  some
result.  I  have  completely  lost  the  knowledge  of  good  and
evil,  and  through  depravity  have  almost  returned  to  the  ig-
norance of  the  savage  and  the  child.  Really  nothing  seems
to  me  praiseworthy  or  blameable,  and  the  strangest  actions
surprise  me  but  little.  My  conscience  is  deaf  and  dumb.
Adultery  seems  to  me  the  most  innocent  thing  in  the  world  ;
it  is  probable  I  should  betray  my  friends  without  the  least


102  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

remorse,  and  I  should  have  no  scruple  about  pushing  with
my  foot  over  a  precipice  people  who  bored  me,  if  I  were
walking  with  them  at  its  edge.  I  should  watch  in  cold  blood
the  most  atrocious  scenes,  and  there  is  in  the  suffering  and
misfortune  of  humanity  something  which  does  not  displease
me.  I  should  feel  at  the  sight  of  some  terrible  calamity  over-
taking the  world  the  same  bitter  pleasure  a  man  experiences
when  he  takes  revenge  for  a  former  insult.

O  world,  what  have  you  done  for  me  to  hate  you  like  this  ?
What  has  turned  me  against  you?  What  did  I  expect  of  you
to  retain  so  much  hatred  at  being  deceived?  What  lofty  hope
have  you  brought  to  naught?  What  eagle's  wings  have  you
clipped?  What  doors  ought  you  to  have  opened  which  re-
mained closed,  and  which  of  the  two  of  us  has  failed  the
other?

Nothing  touches  me,  nothing  moves  me;  I  no  longer  feel
on  hearing  the  story  of  heroic  actions  those  sublime  tremors
which  formerly  used  to  traverse  me  from  head  to  foot.  All
that  sort  of  thing  seems  to  me  somewhat  foolish.  No  accent
is  penetrating  enough  to  bite  the  distended  fibers  of  my  heart
and  make  them  vibrate  :  I  watch  tears  flowing  from  the  eyes
of  my  fellows  with  the  same  feeling  that  I  watch  the  rainfall,
unless  the  water  of  which  they  are  composed  is  beautiful,  or
the  light  reflects  in  them  in  a  picturesque  way,  or  they  flow
down  a  beautiful  cheek.  They  are  but  animals  for  whom  I
feel  a  slight  remnant  of  pity.  I  would  allow  a  peasant  or
servant  to  be  unmercifully  beaten,  though  I  would  not  stand
by  and  see  a  horse  or  dog  suffer  similar  treatment,  and  yet  I
am  not  evil.  I  have  done  no  harm  to  any  one  in  the  world,
nor  shall  I  probably  ever  do  so.  I  abhor  the  whole  world  in
mass,  and  from  its  numbers  I  only  consider  one  or  two  worthy
of  special  hatred.  The  hatred  of  à  person  causes  just  as  great
a  feeling  of  anxiety  as  love;  it  is  the  distinction,  the  isolation
of  one  out  of  the  crowd;  it  produces  a  state  of  violence  on  his
account  ;  it  means  the  thought  of  him  by  day,  dreams  by  night.
What  more  does  a  person  do  for  the  one  he  loves?  Would
the  trouble  and  precautions  taken  to  destroy  an  enemy  be  de-
voted to  a  mistress's  pleasure?  I  doubt  it,  for  to  really  hate
some  one,  it  is  necessary  to  love  another.    A  great  hate  serves


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  103


as  a  counterpoise  to  a  great  love  ;  and  whom  should  I  hate,  I
who  love  nothing?

My  hatred  is  like  my  love,  a  confused  and  general  senti-
ment which  seeks  to  cling  to  something  and  cannot.  I  have
in  me  a  treasure  o£  hate  and  of  love  which  I  do  not  know  how
to  use  and  which  weighs  upon  me  horribly.  If  I  do  not  find
a  means  of  bestowing  one  or  the  other  or  both,  I  shall  burst,
like  a  bag  too  full  of  money.  Oh  !  if  I  could  only  hate  some
one,  if  one  of  the  stupid  fellows  with  whom  I  live  could  only
insult  me,  so  as  to  make  my  blood  boil  in  my  veins,  and  arouse
me  from  my  mournful  somnolence.  If  the  last  heartbeat  of
an  enemy  writhing  beneath  my  feet  could  make  a  delightful
tremor  run  through  me,  and  if  the  smell  of  his  blood  could  be-
come more  pleasant  to  my  nostrils  than  the  scent  of  flowers,
oh  how  willingly  I  would  renounce  love,  and  how  happy  I
should  consider  myself  !

I  love  nothing,  I  have  said.  Alas!  I  am  now  afraid  of
loving  some  one.  It  would  be  a  thousand  times  better  to  hate
than  to  love  like  that  !  I  have  met  the  type  of  beauty  I  have
dreamed  about  for  so  long.  I  have  discovered  the  body  of
my  phantom;  I  have  seen  and  we  have  spoken  ;  I  have  shaken
hands  with  my  chimera.  I  knew  very  well  that  I  could  not
be  mistaken  and  that  my  presentiments  never  lied.  Yes,  Sil-
vio, I  am  by  the  side  of  my  life's  dream;  my  room  is  here,
hers  is  there.  I  can  see  from  here  the  curtain  of  her  window
shake  and  the  light  of  her  lamp.  Her  shadow  has  just  passed
across  the  curtain:  in  an  hour  we  shall  sup  together.

The  beautiful  Turkish  eyelids,  the  limpid  and  profound
glance,  the  warm  color  of  pale  amber,  the  long  and  shining
black  hair,  the  fine,  haughty  nose,  the  small  slender  hands
and  feet,  the  sinuous  delicacy,  and  the  oval  purity  which  give
so  much  distinction  and  such  aristocratic  appearance  to  a
head,  in  fact,  the  whole  of  my  desire  is  complete;  all  that  I
should  have  been  fortunate  to  find  scattered  among  five  or
six  persons  is  combined  in  a  single  one.

The  thing  I  adore  most  in  the  world  is  a  beautiful  hand.
If  you  only  saw  its  perfection,  its  whiteness,  the  softness  of
the  skin  and  its  penetrating  moisture  ;  the  far-famed  hands  of
Anne  of  Austria  were  rough  compared  with  them.    What  art


104  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

and  grace  there  is  in  the  slightest  movement  of  such  a  hand  !
The  thought  of  the  hand  alone  makes  me  quite  mad,  and
causes  me  to  tremble  and  my  lips  to  burn.  I  close  my  eyes
to  shut  out  the  sight  of  it;  but  the  ends  of  its  delicate  fingers
seize  my  lashes  and  lift  up  my  eyelids,  causing  a  thousand
visions  of  ivory  and  snow  to  pass  through  my  mind.

Ah  !  without  a  doubt  Satan's  claw  is  covered  by  such  a
skin;  some  jesting  demon  is  playing  with  me;  it  is  sorcery.
The  thing  is  too  monstrously  impossible.

As  for  the  hand,  I  am  going  to  travel  to  Italy  to  see  the
works  of  the  great  masters,  to  study,  compare,  draw,  and  in
fact  become  a  painter  in  order  to  be  able  to  reproduce  it  as
it  is,  as  I  see  it,  as  I  realize  it;  that  will  perhaps  be  a  way  of
getting  rid  of  this  sort  of  obsession.

I  desired  beauty;  I  did  not  know  what  I  asked.  It  was  like
a  wish  to  look  at  the  sun  without  eyes,  or  to  touch  a  flame.
I  suffer  horribly.  To  be  unable  to  assimilate  such  perfection,
to  be  unable  to  pass  into  it  and  absorb  it  into  oneself,  to  have
no  way  of  reproducing  it  !  When  I  see  something  beautiful,
I  should  like  to  touch  tt  with  my  entire  self,  everywhere  at
the  same  time.  I  would  like  to  sing  its  praises,  to  paint  it,  to
be  loved  by  it  as  I  love  it;  I  should  like  something  which  can-
not and  will  never  be.

Your  letter  has  pained  me  very  much,  forgive  me  for  say-
ing so.  All  the  calm,  pure  happiness  you  enjoy,  the  walks  in
the  reddening  woods,  the  long  talks,  so  tender  and  confiden-
tial, which  end  in  a  chaste  kiss  upon  the  forehead;  the  serene
detached  life;  the  days  so  quickly  passed  that  the  night  seems
to  advance  towards  one,  make  the  internal  agitation  in  which
I  live  seem  even  more  tempestuous.  So  you  are  to  be  married
in  two  months;  all  obstacles  are  swept  away;  you  are  sure
now  of  belonging  to  one  another  for  ever.  Your  present  hap-
piness increases  your  future  felicity.  You  are  happy  and  you
are  sure  of  soon  being  happier.  What  a  fortunate  lot  is
yours!  Your  love  is  beautiful,  but  it  is  not  the  dead  and
palpable  beauty  in  her  you  adore,  the  material  beauty;  it  is
the  invisible  and  eternal  beauty,  the  beauty  which  never  grows
old,  the  beauty  of  the  soul.  She  is  full  of  grace  and  candor;
she  loves  you  in  the  way  such  souls  know  how  to  love.    Oh,


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  105


Silvio  !  how  rare  are  the  hearts  contented  with  love  pure  and
simple,  which  neither  desire  of  hermitage  in  the  forest  nor  a
garden  on  an  island  of  Lake  Maggiore.

If  I  had  courage  to  tear  myself  away  from  this  spot,  I
would  spend  a  month  with  you;  perhaps  I  should  become
purified  in  the  air  you  breathe,  perhaps  the  shade  of  your
avenues  would  restore  a  little  freshness  to  my  burning  brow  ;
but  it  is  a  paradise  in  which  I  must  not  set  foot.  Hardly  am
I  permitted  to  look  from  a  distance  over  the  wall  at  the  two
beautiful  angels  walking  there  hand  in  hand,  gazing  into  each
other's  eyes.  The  demon  can  only  enter  into  Eden  in  the  form
of  a  serpent,  and  my  dear  Adam,  for  all  the  joy  of  heaven  I
would  not  like  to  be  the  serpent  of  your  Eve.

What  frightful  havoc  is  it  which  has  been  wrought  in  my
soul  of  late?  Who  has  turned  my  blood  and  changed  it  into
poison  ?  I  wished  to  love.  I  was  like  a  madman  calling  and
mocking  love;  I  writhed  with  rage  under  the  feeling  of  my
own  impotence;  I  fired  my  blood,  I  dragged  my  body  to  the
quagmires  of  pleasure.  I  have  ferociously  pressed  against
my  empty  heart  a  young  and  beautiful  woman  who  loved  me;
I  have  run  after  passion  and  it  eluded  me.  I  have  prostituted
myself,  and  I  have  been  like  a  virgin  who  went  into  a  brothel
hoping  to  find  a  lover  among  those  driven  there  by  debauch-
ery, instead  of  waiting  patiently  in  discreet  silence  and
shadow  till  the  angel  reserved  by  God  for  me  appeared  in  a
radiant  glow,  a  flower  from  heaven  in  his  hand.  All  the  years
I  have  lost  in  childish  agitation,  in  running  hither  and  thither,
in  wishing  to  force  nature  and  time,  I  ought  to  have  passed
in  solitude  and  meditation,  in  trying  to  render  myself  worthy
of  being  loved;  that  would  have  been  a  wise  course;  but  I
had  scales  upon  my  eyes  and  I  walked  straight  to  the  preci-
pice. I  have  already  one  foot  suspended  over  the  abyss,  and
I  think  I  shall  soon  lift  the  other.  Resistance  is  vain,  and  I
feel  that  I  must  fall  to  the  bottom  of  this  new  abyss  which
has  just  opened  in  front  of  me.

When  I  am  about  to  enter  the  drawing  room  we  are  in  the
habit  of  using,  I  feel  all  the  symptoms  of  love  described  by
the  poets;  my  heart  beats  with  such  violence  that  it  can  al-
most be  seen  through  my  clothes,  and  I  am  obliged  to  com-


106  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

press  it  with  my  two  hands  to  prevent  its  escape.  If  I  see
my  ideal  at  the  end  of  an  avenue  in  the  park,  distance  is  at
once  effaced,  and  I  do  not  know  where  the  road  leads;  the
devil  must  convey  one  of  us,  or  I  must  have  wings.  Nothing
can  distract  me  :  when  I  read  the  image  is  interposed  between
the  book  and  my  eyes;  I  ride  on  horseback,  but  all  the  while
I  seem  to  feel  the  long  hair  mingling  with  mine  and  the  warm
breath  fanning  my  cheek.  The  image  obsesses  me  and  follows
me  every  where,  and  I  never  see  it  more  clearly  than  when
it  is  not  present.

You  have  pitied  me  for  not  loving,  now  do  so  for  loving,
and  especially  for  loving  the  person  I  do  love.  What  a  mis-
fortune it  is,  what  a  blow  from  an  ax  to  fall  upon  my  already
shattered  life  !  What  mad,  culpable,  and  odious  passion  has
taken  possession  of  me  !  The  blush  of  shame  on  its  account
will  never  leave  my  face.  It  is  the  most  deplorable  of  all  my
aberrations.  I  cannot  imagine  nor  understand  anything  con-
cerning it;  everything  in  me  is  confused  and  reversed.  I  no
longer  know  who  I  am  or  who  the  others  are  ;  I  doubt  whether
I  am  woman  or  man.  I  have  a  horror  of  myself,  I  experience
strange  and  inexplicable  movements,  and  there  are  moments
when  it  seems  that  my  reason  is  departing  and  when  the  con-
sciousness of  my  existence  quite  abandons  me.  For  a  long
while  I  could  not  believe  it;  I  observed  myself  attentively.  I
tried  to  unravel  the  confused  skein  which  is  entangled  in  my
soul.  At  last  through  all  the  veils  enveloping  it  I  discovered
the  frightful  truth.  Silvio,  I  am  in  love.  Oh,  no;  I  shall
never  be  able  to  tell  you.    I  am  in  love  witli  a  man  !


CHAPTER  IX


I  LOVE  a  man,  Silvio.  I  have  long  sought  to  delude  myself;
I  have  given  a  different  name  to  the  sentiment  I  feel  ;  I  have
dressed  it  in  the  habit  of  pure  and  disinterested  friendship;
I  thought  it  was  only  the  admiration  I  feel   for  handsome


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  107

persons  and  beautiful  things;  I  wandered  for  several  days  in
the  smiling  and  treacherous  pathways  which  surround  the
birthplace  of  a  passion;  but  I  now  recognize  the  steep  and
terrible  road  on  which  I  have  embarked.  There  is  no  con-
cealment: I  have  thoroughly  examined  myself,  I  have  coldly
weighed  all  the  circumstances;  I  have  gone  into  every  detail;
I  have  ransacked  my  soul  in  every  direction  with  the  certainty
which  the  habit  of  self  study  gives.  I  blush  to  think  and
write  about  it  !  It  is  quite  certain  that  I  love  this  young  man
not  with  friendship,  but  with  love;  yes,  with  love.

You  whom  I  have  loved  so  much,  Silvio,  my  good,  my  only
comrade,  you  have  never  given  me  any  such  impression,  and
yet  if  under  heaven  there  was  any  close  friendship,  if  ever
two  souls,  although  different,  perfectly  understood  one  an-
other, it  was  our  friendship  and  our  two  souls.  What  fleeting
hours  we  passed  together  !  What  endless  talks  we  had,  and
yet  they  seemed  to  end  too  soon.  We  had  in  our  hearts  for
each  other  that  window  which  Momus  would  have  liked  to
open  in  man's  flank.  How  proud  I  was  to  be  your  friend,  I
who  am  younger  than  you,  yet  so  mad  while  you  are  so
reasonable  !

My  feeling  for  this  young  man  is  really  incredible;  never
has  a  woman  created  such  an  impression  on  me.  The  sound
of  his  clear  and  silvery  voice  gets  upon  my  nerves  and  agi-
tates me  in  a  strange  fashion;  my  soul  hangs  upon  his  lips,
like  a  bee  on  a  flower,  to  drink  in  the  honey  of  his  words.  I
cannot  brush  against  him  in  passing  without  trembling  from
head  to  foot,  and  in  the  evening  when  we  separate,  as  he
holds  out  his  soft  and  satiny  hand,  all  my  life  wells  towards
the  spot  he  has  touched,  and  an  hour  afterwards  I  can  still
feel  the  pressure  of  his  fingers.

This  morning  I  watched  him  for  a  long  time  without  his
seeing  me,  I  was  concealed  behind  my  curtain.  He  was  at
his  window,  which  was  precisely  opposite  mine.  This  part
of  the  château  was  built  at  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Henry  IV  ;
it  is  half  brick,  half  rubble,  according  to  the  fashion  of  the
period;  the  window  is  long  and  narrow  with  a  stone  lintel
and  balcony.  Theodore,  for  without  a  doubt  you  have  guessed
it  is  he,  was  leaning  sadly  upon  the  balcony  and  appeared  to


108  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

he  in  a  deep  reverie.  Drapery  of  red  damask  with  large
flowers  half  raised  fell  in  large  folds  behind  him  and  served
as  a  background.  How  good-looking  he  was,  and  how  his
dark,  pale  head  stood  out  from  its  background.  Two  big
locks  of  black,  gleaming  hair,  like  bunches  of  grapes,  hung
gracefully  upon  his  cheeks  and  enclosed  in  charming  fashion
the  fine,  regular  oval  of  his  beautiful  face.  His  round,  plump
neck  was  entirely  bare,  and  he  had  a  sort  of  large-sleeved
dressing  gown  which  was  rather  like  a  woman's  dress.  He
held  in  his  hand  a  yellow  tulip  which  he  pitilessly  dismem-
bered in  his  reverie  and  cast  the  fragments  to  the  winds.

The  sun  shone  upon  him  as  he  stood  with  the  breeze  gently
moving  his  long  hair,  w^hile  with  his  bare,  marble-like  neck,
with  his  dressing  gown  fastened  at  the  waist,  with  his  slender
hands  emerging  from  the  sleeves  like  a  flower's  pistils  from
the  midst  of  the  petals,  he  did  not  appear  to  be  the  best  look-
ing of  men,  but  a  most  beautiful  woman,  and  I  said  to  myself
in  my  heart,  'Theodore  is  a  w^oman  !"  Then  I  suddenly  recol-
lected a  bit  of  foolishness  I  wrote  to  you  a  long  while  ago —
you  remember — concerning  my  ideal  and  the  way  in  which  I
should  most  certainly  meet  her:  the  beautiful  lady  in  the  Louis
Xni  park,  the  red  and  white  château,  the  terrace,  the  ave-
nues of  ancient  chestnuts,  and  the  conversation  at  the  win-
dow; I  gave  you  previously  all  those  details.  This  is  indeed
tlie  precise  realization  of  my  dream.  It  was  the  same  style
of  architecture,  tlie  same  effect  of  light  and  shade,  the  sort
of  beauty,  the  color  and  character  I  had  desired;  there  was
nothing  lacking  except  the  fact  that  the  lady  was  a  man  :  but
I  must  admit  I  had  then  entirely  forgotten  that  circumstance.

Theodore  must  be  a  woman  in  disguise;  otherwise  the
thing  is  impossible.  This  beauty,  excessive  even  for  a  woman,
is  not  the  beauty  of  a  man,  even  an  Antinous  the  friend  of
Hadrian,  or  an  Alexis  the  companion  of  Virgil.  Theodore
is  a  woman,  and  I  am  very  foolish  to  be  so  tormented  in  my
mind.  Therefore  everything  is  explained  quite  naturally,  and
I  am  not  the  monster  I  believed  myself  to  be.

Would  God  put  silken  lashes  so  long  and  dark  around  a
man's  eyes?  Would  He  tint  with  such  bright  and  tender
carmine  our  ugly  and  hairy  mouths?     Our  bones  are  not


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  109


worthy  of  a  covering  of  such  white  and  delicate  flesh;  our
skulls  are  not  made  to  be  covered  with  waves  of  such  beauti-
ful hair.

0  beauty  !  we  are  only  created  to  love  and  adore  you  on  our
bended  knees  if  we  find  you,  or  else  to  seek  you  forever
throughout  the  world  if  that  happiness  is  not  vouchsafed  to
us;  but  to  possess  you,  to  be  beautiful,  that  is  only  possible
to  angels  and  women.  Lovers,  poets,  painters,  and  sculptors,
we  all  seek  to  raise  an  altar  to  you — the  lover  in  his  mistress,
the  poet  in  his  song,  the  painter  in  his  canvas,  the  sculptor  in
his  marble  but  our  eternal  despair  is  our  inability  to  make
palpable  the  beauty  we  perceive,  and  the  fact  that  we  are  en-
veloped in  a  body  which  does  not  realize  our  ideal.

1  have  before  now  seen  a  young  man  who  has  stolen  the
form  which  ought  to  have  been  mine.  The  wretch  was  just
as  I  should  have  liked  to  be.  He  had  the  beauty  of  my  ugli-
ness, and  by  his  side  I  was  like  a  rough  copy  of  him.  He  was
of  my  height,  but  stronger  and  more  slender  than  I  ;  his  ap-
pearance resembled  mine,  but  with  an  elegance  and  nobility  I
lacked.  His  eyes  were  of  the  same  color  as  mine,  but  they
had  a  look  and  brilliancy  mine  will  never  possess.  His  nose
had  been  cast  in  the  same  mold  as  mine,  only  his  seemed  to
have  been  finished  by  the  chisel  of  a  skillful  sculptor;  the
nostrils  were  more  open  and  passionate.  There  was  some-
thing heroic  in  him  which  is  entirely  lacking  in  me;  it  was
just  as  if  I  had  tried  to  make  a  perfected  model  of  myself.  I
seemed  to  be  the  rough  copy  of  a  thought  of  which  he  was  the
fair  copy.  When  I  saw  him  walk,  stop,  greet  the  ladies,  and
sit  down  with  a  perfect  grace,  the  result  of  the  beauty  of  his
proportions,  I  was  filled  with  sadness  and  frightful  jealousy,
such  as  must  be  felt  by  the  clay  cast  which  dries  and  cracks
in  a  dark  corner  of  the  studio,  while  the  noble  marble  statue,
which  without  it  w^ould  not  exist,  stands  proudly  upon  its
carved  pedestal  and  attracts  the  attention  and  eulogy  of
visitors.  Now  this  fellow  was  merely  myself  a  little  more
successfully  cast  in  less  wayward  bronze  which  had  run  with
more  exactness  into  all  the  crevices  of  the  mold.  I  consid-
ered him  very  bold  to  strut  about  w^ith  my  form  and  put  on
airs  as  if  he  were  an  original  type:  after  all,  he  was  only  my


110  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

copy,  for  I  was  bom  before  him,  and  without  me  Nature
would  not  have  conceived  the  idea  of  making  him  as  he  was.
When  the  women  praised  his  good  looks  and  the  agreeable-
ness  of  his  person,  I  had  the  greatest  desire  to  get  up  and  say,
"How  fooHsh  you  are;  praise  me  at  once,  for  this  gentleman
is  myself,  and  it  is  a  useless  dodge  to  give  him  what  really
belongs  to  me/'  This  young  man  besides  was  stupid,  still  he
was  more  successful  on  that  account.  But  sometimes  I  envied
his  stupidity  more  than  his  good  looks.  Now  although  Theo-
dore is  very  handsome,  I  have  no  desire  for  his  beauty;  I
prefer  it  to  belong  to  him  rather  than  to  me.

Those  strange  loves,  of  which  the  elegies  of  the  ancient
poets  are  full,  which  surprise  us  so  much,  and  which  we  can-
not conceive,  are  therefore  likely  and  possible.  In  our  trans-
lations we  substitute  the  names  of  women  for  those  already
there.  Juventius  ends  as  Juventia,  while  Alexis  becomes
lanthe.  Handsome  boys  become  good-looking  girls,  and  in
this  way  we  reconstruct  the  monstrous  seraglio  of  Catullus,
Tibullus,  Martial,  and  Virgil.  It  is  a  bold  task,  which  shows
how  little  we  understand  the  ancient  genius.

I  am  a  man  of  Homeric  times;  the  world  in  which  I  live
is  not  mine,  and  I  do  not  understand  the  society  which  sur-
rounds me.  I  am  as  pagan  as  Alcibiades  and  Phidias.  I  find
earth  as  beautiful  as  heaven,  and  I  consider  that  correctness
of  form  is  virtue.  Spirituality  is  not  my  share;  I  prefer  a
statue  to  a  phantom,  and  the  midday  sunlight  to  the  dawn.
Three  things  please  me:  gold,  marble,  and  purple — brilliance,
solidity,  and  color.  My  dreams  are  made  of  them,  and  all
the  palaces  I  build  in  my  mind  are  constructed  of  these  mate-
rials. Sometimes  I  have  other  dreams  ;  visions  of  long  caval-
cades of  white  horses,  without  bridles  and  trappings,  ridden
by  handsome  youths  quite  naked,  defiling  upon  a  blue  ground,
or  of  bands  of  young  girls  crowned  with  fillets,  wearing  tunics
with  straight  folds  and  carrying  ivory  fans  who  seem  to  circle
around  an  immense  vase.  Never  is  there  any  fog  or  vapor
in  them,  never  anything  uncertain  or  floating.  My  heaven  has
no  clouds,  or  if  so  they  are  solid  hewn  clouds  made  of  the
fragments  of  marble  fallen  from  the  statue  of  Jupiter.
Mountains  with  high  peaks   indent  its  edges,   and  the  sun,


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  111

resting  upon  one  of  the  loftiest  heights,  opens  wide  a  yellow
eye  with  its  gilded  lion-like  pupils.  The  grasshopper  creaks,
the  ears  of  corn  rustle;  the  shade,  overwhelmed  and  unable
to  withstand  the  heat,  contracts  and  is  concentrated  at  the
foot  of  the  trees  ;  everything  is  shining,  gleaming,  and  sunlit.
The  smallest  detail  assumes  distinctness  and  is  boldly  accent-
uated; each  object  puts  on  a  robust  form.  There  is  no  place
in  it  for  the  visionary  softness  of  Christian  art.  That  world
is  mine.  The  streams  of  my  landscapes  fall  in  the  waves  of  a
carved  urn  ;  between  the  great  reeds  can  be  seen  gleaming  the
round  silvery  thigh  of  some  naiad  with  glaucous  hair.  In  the
dark  oak  forest  is  to  be  found  Diana  wearing  her  interlaced
buskins,  with  her  case  of  arrows  upon  her  back  and  her  loos-
ened sling.  She  is  followed  by  her  pack  of  hounds  and  her
nymphs  with  harmonious  names.  My  pictures  are  painted  in
four  colors,  like  those  of  the  primitive  painters,  and  often
they  are  only  colored  bas-reliefs,  for  I  love  to  touch  with  my
finger  what  I  see,  and  pursue  the  curving  contours  to  their
most  secret  folds.  I  have  looked  upon  love  in  the  light  of  the
ancients  and  as  a  bit  of  more  or  less  perfect  sculpture.  How
is  the  arm?  Well  enough.  The  arms  do  not  lack  delicacy.
What  do  you  think  of  this  foot?  I  think  that  the  ankle  has
no  nobility  about  it,  and  the  heel  is  common.  But  the  throat
is  well  placed  and  of  good  shape,  the  line  of  the  figure  is
waving  enough,  the  shoulders  are  fat  and  of  beautiful  char-
acter. This  woman  would  be  a  passable  model  and  it  would
be  possible  to  sketch  several  parts  from  her.    Let  us  love  her.

I  have  always  been  like  that.  I  have  for  women  a  sculp-
tor's eye  rather  than  a  lover's.  I  have  all  my  life  been  critical
of  the  shape  of  the  fllagon  rather  than  of  the  quality  of  its
contents.  If  I  were  to  have  the  box  of  Pandora  in  my  hands
I  think  I  should  not  open  it.

I  look  upon  woman  according  to  the  ancient  manner  as  a
beautiful  slave  destined  for  our  pleasures.  Christianity  has
not  rehabilitated  her  in  my  eyes.  She  is  to  me  always  some-
thing unlike  and  inferior  to  myself,  something  to  be  adored
and  enjoyed,  a  plaything  more  intelligent  than  if  it  were  of
ivory  or  gold,  with  the  power  of  getting  up  without  assist-
ance if  dropped  upon  the  ground.     I  have  been  told,  on  that


112  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

account,  that  I  thought  ill  of  women;  on  the  contrary,  I  con-
sider that  I  think  very  well  of  them.

I  really  do  not  know  why  women  have  such  a  desire  to  be
considered  men.  I  can  imagine  a  person  desiring  to  be  a
serpent,  lion,  or  an  elephant  ;  but  it  passes  my  comprehension
how  any  one  can  desire  to  be  a  man.  If  I  had  been  at  the
Council  of  Trent  when  the  important  matter  of  whether  a
woman  was  a  man  was  discussed  I  should  certainly  have  in-
clined towards  the  negative  view.

I  have  in  my  life  written  a  few  amorous  verses,  or  at  least
stanzas  which  pretended  to  be  such.  I  have  just  reread  some
of  them.  The  sentiment  of  modern  love  is  entirely  absent
from  them.  If  they  were  written  in  Latin  distiches  instead
of  French  rhyme  they  might  be  mistaken  for  the  work  of  a
bad  poet  of  the  days  of  Augustus.  I  am  surprised  that  the
women  to  w^hom  they  were  written,  instead  of  being  charmed
with  them,  were  not  seriously  angered.  It  is  quite  true  that
women  no  more  understand  poetry  than  do  the  flowers  or
vegetables,  and  is  quite  natural  and  explicable,  seeing  that
they  themselves  are  poetry,  or  at  least  its  best  instruments;
the  flute  neither  hears  nor  understands  the  air  played  upon  it.

In  these  verses  nothing  but  the  gold  or  ebony  of  the  hair,
the  miraculous  fineness  of  the  skin,  the  roundness  of  the  arms,
the  little  feet,  and  the  delicate  shape  of  the  hand  is  mentioned,
and  they  all  end  in  a  humble  supplication  to  the  divinity  to
grant  as  quickly  as  possible  the  enjoyment  of  all  these  beauti-
ful things.  In  the  passages  of  triumph  there  are  only  gar-
lands hung  at  the  threshold,  a  rain  of  flowers,  burning
perfumes,  kisses,  white  and  charming  nights,  quarrels  with  the
dawn,  with  injunctions  to  the  dawn  to  return  to  its  hiding
place  behind  the  saffron  curtains  of  old  Pithonus;  it  is  an
explosion  without  heat,  a  sonority  without  vibration.  The
lines  are  exact  and  polished,  but  through  all  their  refinement
and  veils  of  expression  can  be  heard  the  sharp,  hard  voice  of
the  master  which  he  tries  to  soften  when  speaking  to  his
slave.  It  is  not,  as  in  the  erotic  poetry  composed  since  the
Christian  era,  a  soul  asking  another  soul  to  love  because  it
loves;  it  is  not  an  azure  and  smiling  lake  inviting  a  stream
to  vanish  into  its  bosom,  so  that  together  they  may  reflect  the


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  113

stars  in  the  sky;  it  is  not  a  couple  of  doves  opening  their
wings  at  the  same  time  to  fly  to  the  same  nest.

**Cinthia,  you  are  beautiful;  hasten.  Who  knows  if  you  will
live  till  to-morrow?  Your  locks  are  darker  than  the  glossy
skin  of  an  Ethiopian  virgin.  Hasten;  a  few  years  hence
silver  threads  will  appear  in  those  thick  tresses.  These  roses
smell  sweetly  to-day;  to-morrow  they  will  have  the  odor  of
death  and  will  only  be  the  corpses  of  flowers.  Let  us  breathe
your  roses,  for  they  are  so  like  your  cheeks  ;  let  us  kiss  your
cheeks,  for  they  are  so  like  your  roses.  When  you  are  old,
Cinthia,  no  one  will  desire  you,  not  even  the  lictor's  servants
when  you  pay  them,  and  you  will  run  after  me  whom  you
now  repulse.  Wait  till  Saturn  has  ruled  with  his  nail  that
pure  and  shining  brow,  and  you  will  see  how  your  threshold,
now  so  besieged  and  sprinkled  with  tears  and  flowers,  will  be
shunned,  cursed,  and  overgrown  with  grass  and  briars.
Hasten,  Cinthia;  the  tiniest  wrinkle  may  serve  as  the  grave
of  the  greatest  passion."

It  is  in  this  brutal  and  imperious  formula  that  the  ancient
elegy  is  summed  up  ;  it  always  returns  to  that  ;  it  is  its  great-
est and  strongest  reason,  and  the  Achilles  of  its  arguments.
After  that  there  is  little  more  to  be  said,  and  when  a  robe
and  a  necklace  of  well-matched  pearls  have  been  promised,  a
man  is  at  his  wits'  end.  That,  too,  is  what  I  find  most  con-
clusive in  similar  circumstances.  I  do  not,  however,  always
strictly  adhere  to  this  program,  and  I  embroider  my  meager
canvas  here  and  there  with  a  few  threads  of  different  colored
silks.  But  these  bits  are  short  or  else  knotted  twenty  times
and  badly  fastened.  I  talk  elegantly  enough  about  love  be-
cause I  have  read  may  beautiful  essays  on  the  subject.  That
does  not  require  the  actor's  talent.  With  many  women  the
appearance  suffices.  The  habit  of  writing  and  imagining
guarantees  that  I  do  not  stop  short  in  these  matters,  and  any
mind  with  a  Httle  application  will  easily  obtain  the  same  re-
sult ;  but  I  do  not  feel  a  word  of  what  I  say,  and  I  repeat  in
low  tones  like  the  ancient  poet,  ^'Cinthia,  hasten.'*

I  have  often  been  charged  with  being  crafty  and  deceitful.
No  one  in  the  world  would  like  as  well  to  speak  freely  and
empty  his  heart.     But  as  I  have  not  one  idea  or  sentiment


114  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

like  those  of  the  people  who  surround  me,  as  at  the  first  true
word  I  let  fall  there  would  be  an  hurrah  and  a  general  out-
cry, I  have  preferred  silence,  or  if  I  speak,  to  only  repeat  the
commonplaces  I  have  heard.  I  should  soon  be  in  the  ladies'
bad  graces  were  I  to  tell  them  what  I  have  just  written  to  you.
I  do  not  think  they  would  appreciate  my  way  of  looking  at
and  viewing  love.  As  to  the  men,  the  best  I  can  say  for  them
is  that  they  ought  to  walk  on  all  fours,  and  I  can  hardly  tell
them  that;  I  have  no  desire  to  cause  a  quarrel  with  every
word  I  utter.  It  does  not  matter  what  I  think  or  what  I  do
not  think;  whether  I  am  sad  when  I  seem  to  be  gay,  or  joyful
when  I  seem  to  be  melancholy.  I  am  not  blamed  because  I  do
not  go  about  naked.  Can  I  not  dress  my  face  as  I  do  my
body?  Why  should  a  mask  seem  more  reprehensible  than
clothes,  and  a  lie  than  a  corset?

Alas  !  the  earth  turns  round  the  sun  roasted  on  one  side  and
frozen  on  the  other.  A  battle  is  fought  in  which  600,000  men
hack  one  another  to  pieces.  Still  the  weather  is  beautiful  and
the  flowers  display  unparalleled  coquetry,  for  they  boldly  open
their  luxuriant  blossoms  even  under  the  horses'  hoofs.  To-
day a  fabulous  number  of  good  actions  have  been  performed  ;
yet  it  pours  with  rain,  snows  and  thunders,  with  lightning
and  hail;  it  seems  as  if  the  end  of  the  world  is  approaching.
The  benefactors  of  humanity  have  mud  up  to  their  waists,
and  are  splashed  like  dogs  unless  they  have  a  carriage.  Crea-
tion mocks  pitilessly  at  the  creature  and  fires  off  at  him  deadly
sarcasms  every  minute.  Every  one  is  indifferent  to  every  one
else,  and  each  thing  lives  or  vegetates  by  its  own  love.  What
does  it  matter  to  the  sun,  the  beet  roots,  or  even  to  men
whether  I  do  this  or  that,  whether  I  live  or  die,  whether  I
suffer  or  enjoy,  whether  I  dissimulate  or  am  quite  open?  A
bit  of  straw  falls  upon  an  ant  and  breaks  the  third  leg  at  the
second  articulation;  a  rock  falls  upon  a  village  and  crushes
it.  I  do  not  think  one  of  these  accidents  draws  more  tears
than  the  other  from  the  golden  eyes  of  the  stars.  You  are
my  best  friend,  if  that  phrase  is  not  as  hollow  as  a  bell.  But
is  there  one  of  my  friends  or  mistresses  who  will  remember
my  name  twenty  years  hence,  and  will  recognize  me  in  the


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  115

Street  if  I  meet  them  and  am  out  at  elbow?  Oblivion  and
nothingness,  that  is  man  in  his  entirety.

I  feel  that  I  am  as  perfectly  alone  as  it  is  possible  to  be,
and  all  the  threads  connecting  me  with  other  persons  and  ob-
jects have  been  broken  one  by  one.  There  are  few  instances
of  a  man  who,  having  preserved  a  knowledge  of  the  move-
ments taking  place  in  himself,  has  reached  such  a  state  of
brutishness.  I  am  like  one  of  those  flasks  of  liquors,  left
standing  up,  from  which  in  consequence  the  strength  has  com-
pletely evaporated.  The  liquid  has  the  same  color  and  appear-
ance, but  taste  it  and  you  will  find  it  as  insipid  as  water.

When  I  think  of  it,  I  am  terrified  at  the  rapidity  of  this  de-
composition; if  it  continues  I  shall  have  to  be  salted,  or  else
I  shall  inevitably  rot,  and  the  worms  will  attack  me  when  I
have  lost  my  soul,  for  that  comprises  the  only  difference  be-
tween a  body  and  a  corpse.  A  year  ago,  not  more,  I  had  still
something  human  about  me;  I  bestirred  myself,  I  sought.
I  had  one  thought  more  cherished  than  all  the  others,
a  sort  of  aim,  an  ideal  :  I  wished  to  be  loved,  I  dreamed  the
dreams  customary  at  that  age,  less  vaporous  and  chaste,  it  is
true,  than  those  of  an  ordinary  young  fellow,  but  still  con-
fined within  reasonable  bounds.  Little  by  little  the  incor-
poreal was  detached  and  dissipated,  and  there  only  remained
in  me  a  deep  bed  of  thick  slime.  The  dream  became  a  night-
mare, and  the  chimera  a  succubus  ;  the  world  of  the  soul  has
shut  its  ivory  gates  in  my  face.  I  only  realize  now  what  I
touch  with  my  hands;  I  have  dreams  of  stone;  everything  is
condensed  and  solidified  around  me  ;  nothing  floats  or  wavers  ;
there  is  no  air,  no  breath  ;  matter  oppresses,  overwhelms,  and
crushes  me.  I  am  like  a  pilgrim  who  one  summer's  day  fell
asleep  with  his  feet  in  the  river  and  awoke  in  the  winter  to
find  them  encased  in  the  ice.  I  no  longer  desire  the  love  or
friendship  of  any  one  ;  even  glory,  that  brilliant  halo  I  used  to
so  much  desire  for  my  brow,  has  ceased  to  give  me  the  least
longing.  There  is,  alas,  now  but  one  desire  which  palpitates
in  me,  the  horrible  passion  which  bears  me  towards  Theo-
dore. To  this  level  have  all  my  notions  of  morality  sunk;
that  which  is  physically  beautiful  is  good,  but  everything
which  is  ugly  is  evil.     If  I  saw  a  beautiful  woman  whom  I


116  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

knew  had  a  very  evil  soul,  perhaps  an  adultress  and  a
poisoner,  I  must  admit  that  would  be  of  no  consequence  to
me,  and  would  in  no  way  prevent  her  from  pleasing  me  if  I
found  the  shape  of  her  nose  becoming.

I  picture  to  myself  supreme  happiness  like  this.  It  is  a
great  square  building  without  windows  on  the  outside  ;  a  great
courtyard  surrounded  by  a  colonnade  of  white  marble,  having
a  crystal  fountain  in  the  center  with  a  quicksilver  stream  after
the  Arabian  fashion,  and  groves  of  orange  trees  and  pome-
granates, placed  alternately,  stands  beneath  the  bluest  of  blue
sk>'  in  the  very  yellow  sunlight;  big  greyhounds  with  pointed
noses  sleep  here  and  there;  from  time  to  time  negroes  with
bare  feet  and  golden  circlets  about  their  legs,  and  beautiful
servants  white  and  slender,  dressed  in  rich  and  fanciful  attire,
pass  between  the  arches  with  baskets  on  their  arms  or  pitchers
on  their  heads.  I  am  reclining  motionless  and  silent  beneath
a  magnificent  dais  surrounded  by  piles  of  cushions,  with  a
great  tame  lion  at  my  elbow,  and  the  bare  throat  of  a  young
slave  under  my  foot  as  a  footstool  as  I  smoke  opium  from  a
great  jade  pipe.

I  do  not  picture  Paradise  any  différent  from  that;  and  if  it
is  God's  will  that  I  go  there  after  death  He  will  have  built
for  me  in  a  corner  of  some  star  a  little  kiosk  after  that  pat-
tern. Paradise,  as  it  is  usually  depicted,  seems  to  me  much
too  musical,  and  I  confess  in  all  humility  that  I  am  quite  in-
capable of  enduring  a  sonata  lasting  even  ten  thousand  years.

**You  see  what  my  Eldorado,  my  promised  land,  is  like;  it
is  a  dream,  like  everything  else,  but  it  has  this  speciality  about
it,  that  I  never  introduce  a  familiar  figure  into  it;  no  one  of
my  friends  has  ever  crossed  the  threshold  of  tliis  palace  of  the
imagination;  no  woman  I  have  ever  loved  has  sat  by  my  side
upon  its  velvet  cushions;  I  am  there  alone  in  the  midst  of
shadows.  All  the  women's  faces,  all  the  graceful  shadows  of
young  girls  with  which  I  people  it  I  have  never  had  any
thought  of  loving;  I  have  never  supposed  them  to  be  in  love
with  me.  In  this  fantastic  seraglio  I  have  created  no  favorite
sultana.  There  are  négresses,  mulattoes,  Jewesses  with  blue
skins  and  red  hair,  Greeks  and  Circassians,  Spaniards  and
English  women  ;  but  they  are  only  to  me  symbols  of  color  and


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  117

line,  and  I  have  them  just  as  a  man  keeps  all  sorts  of  wine  in
his  cellar  and  all  sorts  of  humming  birds  in  his  aviary.  They
are  pleasure  machines,  pictures  which  need  no  frame,  statues
which  come  if  they  are  called  when  the  fancy  takes  their
master  to  look  at  them  from  close  quarters.  A  woman  has
over  a  statue  this  incomparable  advantage:  she  turns  of  her
own  accord  in  the  desired  direction,  instead  of,  as  in  the  case
of  the  statue,  having  to  be  turned  and  placed  by  oneself  at  the
right  angle;  that  is  fatiguing.

You  can  see  that  with  such  ideas  I  am  out  of  place  in  this
century  and  world,  for  a  man  cannot  subsist  like  that  outside
time  and  space.    I  must  discover  some  other  way.

Thinking  like  this,  such  a  conclusion  is  both  simple  and
logical.  As  only  the  satisfaction  of  the  eye,  the  perfection  of
form  and  purity  of  line  is  sought,  they  arc  accepted  wherever
they  are  met.  That  is  the  explanation  of  the  strange  aberra-
tions of  ancient  love.

Since  Christ  no  single  statue  of  man  has  been  created  in
which  youthful  beauty  has  been  idealized  and  reproduced
with  that  care  which  characterized  the  ancient  sculptors.
Woman  has  become  the  symbol  of  moral  and  physical  beauty  ;
from  that  day  man  has  really  declined.  Woman  is  the  queen
of  creation;  stars  unite  to  form  a  crown  for  her  head,  the
cresent  of  the  moon  considers  it  glorious  to  act  as  a  circle
beneath  her  feet,  the  sun  gives  up  its  purest  gold  to  make  her
jewels,  painters  who  wish  to  flatter  the  angels  give  them
women's  faces,  and  I  am  not  the  person  to  blame  them  for  it.
Before  the  Christian  era  it  was  quite  different.  The  gods  or
heroes  artists  desired  to  make  seductive,  were  not  feminized;
they  had  a  type,  vigorous  and  delicate  at  the  same  time,  but
always  masculine,  however  amorous  were  their  contours,  how-
ever bright  and  devoid  of  muscles  were  their  legs  and  glorious
arms.  Female  beauty  is  more  easily  adapted  to  these  char-
acteristics. The  shoulders  are  broadened,  the  hips  reduced  in
size,  the  throat  is  made  more  protruding,  while  the  coupling
of  the  arms  and  thighs  is  more  strongly  marked.  There  was
hardly  any  difference  between  Paris  and  Helen.  In  this  way
the  hermaphrodite  is  one  of  the  most  ardently  caressed  chim-
erae  of  ancient  idolatry.


118  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

This  son  of  Hermes  and  Aphrodite  is  one  of  the  most  pleas-
ant creations  of  pagan  genius.  Nothing  more  delightful  can
be  imagined  than  the  harmonious  blending  together  of  two
such  perfect  bodies,  of  these  two  beauties  so  equal  and  yet  so
different,  to  form  one  being  superior  to  both,  because  of  their
tempering  influence  upon  each  other.  To  an  exclusive  lover
of  form  is  there  any  more  pleasurable  uncertainty  than  that
into  which  he  is  thrown  by  the  sight  of  that  back,  those  doubt-
ful thighs,  and  those  fine  strong  legs  which  he  hardly  knows
whether  to  attribute  to  Mercury  ready  for  flight  or  Diana
emerging  from  her  bath?  The  torso  is  a  combination  of  the
most  charming  monstrosities.  To  the  plump  and  full  breast  of
the  youth  with  strange  grace  the  throat  of  a  young  virgin  is
attached.  Theodore  would  certainly  be  an  excellent  model
for  that  type  of  beauty,  though  I  think  the  feminine  part  is
in  the  ascendant  in  his  case.

The  strange  thing  is  that  I  no  longer  think  of  his  sex,  but
love  him  with  perfect  security.  Sometimes  I  try  to  persuade
myself  that  this  love  is  abominable,  and  I  use  the  most  severe
expressions  about  myself  ;  but  that  only  comes  from  the  lips  ;
it  is  an  argument  I  create  myself  and  do  not  feel.  It  seems
to  me  that  my  love  is  the  most  ordinary  thing  in  the  world,
and  that  any  one  else  in  my  place  would  do  the  same.

I  see  him,  I  listen  to  him  talking  or  singing,  for  he  sings
admirably,  and  I  take  an  unutterable  pleasure  in  so  doing.  He
has  the  effect  of  a  woman  so  strongly  upon  me  that  one  day
in  the  heat  of  conversation  I  called  him  "Madam,"  making
him  laugh  by  so  doing,  though  his  laugh  seemed  to  me  some-
what forced.

If  he  is  a  woman,  what  can  his  motive  be  for  disguising
himself  in  this  way?  I  cannot  offer  any  explanation  of  it.
For  a  young,  handsome,  and  beardless  youth  to  disguise  him-
self as  a  woman  is  conceivable:  it  opens  a  thousand  doors
which  w^ould  otherwise  remain  closed,  and  may  lead  him  into
a  complication  of  adventures  quite  pleasant  and  amazing.  In
that  way  a  closely  guarded  woman  can  be  reached,  and  the
result  of  her  surprise  may  be  the  man's  happiness.  But  I  do
not  know  what  advantage  there  can  be  in  a  beautiful  woman
going  about  tlie  country  dressed  as  a  man.    She  can  only  ruin


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUTIN  119

herself  by  it.  A  woman  must  in  this  way  renounce  the  pleas-
ure of  being  courted,  serenaded,  and  adored;  she  would  rather
forfeit  her  life  than  that,  and  she  is  right,  for  what  is  a  wom-
an's life  without  it?  Nothing,  or  something  worse  than  death.
I  am  always  surprised  that  women  of  thirty  or  those  who  are
pitted  by  smallpox  do  not  jump  from  the  top  of  a  tower.  In
spite  of  it  all  something  stronger  than  argument  cries  out  to
me  that  Theodore  is  a  woman,  the  woman  of  my  dreams,  she
whom  alone  I  can  love  and  who  will  love  me.  Yes,  Theodore
is  the  goddess  with  the  glance  of  an  eagle,  and  the  beautiful
royal  hands  which  condescendingly  beckon  to  me  from  her
throne  of  clouds.  She  has  presented  herself  to  me  in  this  dis-
guise to  prove  me,  to  see  if  I  shall  recognize  her,  if  my  amor-
ous glance  will  penetrate  the  veil  in  which  she  has  enveloped
herself,  just  as  in  fairy  tales  the  fairies  first  appear  in  the
guise  of  beggars  and  then  suddenly  rise  resplendent  in  gold
and  precious  stones.

I  recognized  you,  my  love  !  At  the  sight  of  you  my  heart
leapt  in  my  breast  ;  a  bright  light  appeared  in  the  sky  ;  I  smelt
something  like  the  odor  of  the  divine  ambrosia;  I  perceived  at
your  feet  the  trail  of  fire,  and  I  at  once  realized  that  you  were
not  an  ordinary  mortal.

Ah,  I  see  it  all  now  ;  previous  to  this  time  I  have  been  but
a  dead  man;  now  I  am  rid  of  my  shroud  and  stretching  out
of  my  grave  two  feeble  hands  towards  the  sunlight;  my  blue
and  spectral  color  has  left  me.  My  blood  flows  rapidly
through  my  veins.  The  terrible  silence  which  reigned  around
me  is  at  last  broken.  The  opaque  and  black  vault  which
weighed  upon  my  forehead  is  illuminated.  A  thousand  myste-
rious voices  whisper  in  my  ear;  beautiful  stars  twinkle  above
me  and  light  up  the  windings  of  my  path;  the  marguerites
softly  laugh  at  me,  and  the  bells  murmur  my  name  with  their
swinging  tongues.  I  understand  a  number  of  things  I  never
realized  before,  I  discover  marvelous  sympathies  and  affinities,
I  listen  to  the  song  of  the  roses  and  the  nightingales,  and  I
now  fluently  read  the  book  which  before  I  could  not  even
spell.  I  realize  that  I  have  a  friend  in  the  old  oak  with  its
mistletoe,  and  that  the  frail  and  languorous  periwinkle  with  its
great  blue  eye  always  on  the  verge  of  tears  has  for  a  long


120  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

while  cherished  for  me  a  discreet  and  reserved  affection.  It
is  love  which  has  opened  my  eyes  and  solved  the  enigma  for
me.  Love  has  descended  to  the  bottom  of  the  vault  where  lay
my  covering  somnolent  soul  ;  he  has  taken  it  by  the  hand  and
helped  it  up  the  narrow  stair  leading  to  daylight.  All  the
doors  of  the  prison  house  have  opened,  and  for  the  first  time
this  poor  Psyche  has  emerged  from  her  prison.

My  life  has  become  different.  I  breatlie  through  the  lungs
of  another,  and  the  blow  which  wounds  him  will  kill  me.
Before  this  hour  I  was  like  one  of  those  melancholy  Japanese
idols  which  have  their  eyes  always  fixed  upon  their  bellies.  I
was  the  spectator  of  myself,  the  audience  of  the  comedy  I  was
playing;  I  watched  myself  live,  and  I  listened  to  the  beating
of  my  heart  as  to  the  ticking  of  a  clock.  That  is  all.  The
images  appeared  to  my  unseeing  eyes;  sounds  struck  my  in-
attentive ears;  but  nothing  from  the  outer  world  reached  my
soul.  I  even  doubted  whetlier  there  was  any  other  existence
than  mine,  and  I  am  scarcely  yet  convinced.  It  seemed  to  me
that  I  was  alone  in  the  midst  of  tlie  universe,  and  that  all  the
other  people  were  only  smoky  images,  vain  illusions,  fugitive
shapes  destined  to  people  this  nothingness.  What  a  difference  !

Yet  if  my  presentiment  has  deceived  me;  if  Theodore  is
really  a  man,  as  the  world  belives  him  to  be  !  Marvelous
beauty  such  as  he  possesses  is  sometimes  seen.  Youth  lends
itself  to  this  illusion.  But  that  is  a  thought  I  must  not  en-
courage, for  it  will  make  me  mad;  the  seed  which  yesterday
fell  upon  the  sterile  rock  of  my  heart  has  already  penetrated;
it  has  taken  deep  root  and  is  now  impossible  to  pluck  out.  It
is  already  a  green  flowering  tree  with  strong  and  twisted
roots.  Even  if  I  were  to  find  out  with  certainty  that  Theo-
dore is  not  a  woman,  alas,  I  do  not  know  whetlier  I  should  not
love  him  still.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  121


CHAPTE'R  X

My  beautiful  friend,  you  were  quite  right  to  try  and  dis-
suade me  from  the  project  I  conceived  of  seeing  men,  and
studying  them  thoroughly,  before  giving  my  heart  to  any  one
of  them.  I  have  had  all  love  extinguished  in  me,  and  even
all  possibility  of  love.

Poor  young  girls  that  we  are;  brought  up  with  such  care,
so  chastely  surrounded  by  a  triple  w^all  of  precautions  and
reticences,  allowed  to  hear  and  suspect  nothing,  while  our
principal  accomplishment  is  to  know  nothing,  in  what  strange
errors  do  we  live,  and  what  curious  visions  take  us  in  their
arms!

Ah  !  Graciosa,  thrice  cursed  be  the  minute  when  the  idea  of
this  disguise  came  to  me  ;  what  horrors,  infamy,  and  vulgarity
I  have  been  forced  to  witness  or  hear  !  What  a  treasure  of
chaste  and  precious  ignorance  I  have  dissipated  in  so  short  a
time!

It  was  a  beautiful  moonlight  night,  do  you  remember?  We
were  walking  together  at  the  end  of  the  garden,  in  that
mournful  and  little-frequented  avenue  with  a  statue  of  a  fawn
playing  the  flute  at  one  end  (the  statue  had  lost  its  nose  and
was  covered  with  thick  dark  moss),  and  at  the  other  an  arti-
ficial view  painted  on  the  wall,  which  had  been  half  effaced
by  the  rain.  Through  the  thin  foliage  of  the  grove  the  stars
were  visible.  A  smell  of  young  shoots  and  fresh  plants  came
to  us  from  the  flower  beds  on  the  wings  of  a  slight  breeze  ;  a
bird  from  his  hiding  place  whistled  a  strange  and  languorous
song.  We,  as  young  girls  always  do,  talked  of  love,  suitors,
marriage,  and  of  the  fine  gentlemen  we  had  seen  at  Mass  ;  we
put  together  the  few  notions  of  the  world  we  possessed;  we
turned  over  in  a  hundred  different  w^ays  a  phrase  w^e  had  over-
heard, the  meaning  of  which  was  not  clear  to  us;  we  asked
one  another  the  thousand  absurd  questions  which  perfect  in-
nocence alone  could  imagine.  How  primitive  was  the  poetry,
how  adorable  the  foolishness  we  two  little  schoolgirls  ex-
changed !


122  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

You  desired  as  a  lover  a  brave  and  proud  young  man  with
black  hair  and  mustache,  large  spurs,  great  feathers,  and  a
mighty  sword,  in  fact  a  sort  of  amorous  bully,  and  you  sur-
rendered to  the  heroic  and  triumphant.  You  only  dreamt  of
duels,  escalades,  and  miraculous  devotion,  and  you  would
gladly  have  cast  your  glove  into  the  lion's  den,  so  that  your
Spaniard  might  recover  it  for  you.  It  was  very  comic  to  see
a  little  girl  as  you  then  were,  blonde,  blushing  and  starting  at
the  slightest  sound,  uttering  such  generous  tirades  in  a  breath
with  the  most  martial  air  in  tlie  world.

Though  I  w^as  but  six  months  older  than  you,  I  w^as  six
years  less  romantic.  One  thing  caused  me  the  greatest
anxiety,  and  that  was  to  find  out  what  men  said  to  one  an-
other and  w^hat  they  did  when  they  left  drawing  rooms  and
theaters.  I  foresaw  in  their  life  many  defective  and  obscure
sides,  carefully  veiled  from  our  eyes,  which  it  was  very  im-
portant for  us  to  find  out.  Sometimes,  hidden  behind  a  cur-
tain, I  spied  from  a  distance  upon  the  gentlemen  w^ho  came  to
the  house,  and  there  then  seemed  to  be  something  ignoble  and
cynical  mixed  with  their  attractiveness,  a  gross  recklessness
or  preoccupation  which  I  did  not  find  in  them  w^hen  they
entered,  and  which  they  seemed  to  discard  as  if  by  enchant-
ment on  the  threshold  of  the  room.  Every  one,  young  as  well
as  old,  appeared  to  me  to  have  uniformly  adopted  the  mask
of  convention,  sentiments  of  convention,  and  conventional
conversation,  when  they  were  in  the  presence  of  w^omen.
From  the  corner  of  the  drawing-room  where  I  sat  up  straight
without  leaning  back  on  my  seat,  twisting  my  bouquet  in  my
fingers,  I  listened  and  watched;  my  eyes  were  lowered,  but
still  I  saw  all  that  was  going  on  to  the  right  and  left  of  me,
before  and  behind  me;  like  the  fabulous  eyes  of  the  lynx  mine
pierced  walls,  and  I  could  have  told  all  that  was  taking  place
in  the  next  room.

I  also  noticed  a  remarkable  diflference  in  the  way  in  which
the  married  women  were  treated;  discreet  and  polite  phrases,
like  those  addressed  to  myself  and  my  companions,  were  not
used,  but  a  more  familiar  humor  was  employed,  manners  less
sedate  and  more  loose  were  in  vogue,  while  the  obvious  reti-
cences and  the  brief  subterfuges  of  a  corruption  which  knows


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  123


that  it  has  a  like  corruption,  opposed  to  it  were  in  evidence.  I
realized  that  between  them  there  was  a  common  element
which  did  not  exist  between  us,  and  I  would  have  given  all
I  possessed  to  know  what  that  element  was.

With  what  anxiety  and  curious  fury  did  I  follow  with  eye
and  ear  the  chattering  and  laughing  groups  of  young  people,
and  the  couples  who  exchanged  ambiguous  glances  as  they
strolled  about.  Incredulous  sneers  were  on  their  disdainful
lips;  they  seemed  to  be  laughing  at  what  they  had  just  said,
and  to  be  retracting  the  compliments  and  adulation  they  had
just  bestowed  upon  us.  I  did  not  hear  their  words;  but  I
understood  by  the  movement  of  their  lips  that  they  were  pro-
nouncing words  in  a  tongue  unknown  to  me,  and  one  which
had  never  been  used  in  my  presence.  Even  those  who  had  the
most  modest  and  humble  air  raised  their  heads  with  a  quite
visible  air  of  revolt  and  boredom  ;  a  sigh  of  breathlessness  like
that  of  an  actor  who  had  just  come  to  the  end  of  a  long
speech  unwittingly  escaped  them,  and  when  they  left  us  they
made  a  half  turn  on  the  heel  in  a  quick  and  hurried  fashion
which  betokened  internal  satisfaction  at  being  delivered  from
their  onerous  duty  of  being  honorable  and  gallant.

I  would  have  given  a  year  of  my  life  to  have  heard,  without
being  seen,  an  hour  of  their  conversation.  Often  I  gathered
from  certain  attitudes,  gestures  and  oblique  glances  that  I
myself  was  under  discussion,  either  as  regards  my  age  or  my
appearance.  Then  I  was  upon  tenter  hooks  ;  the  few  indistinct
words,  the  few  scraps  of  a  phrase  which  reached  me  at  in-
tervals roused  my  curiosity  to  its  highest  pitch  without  power
to  satisfy  it,  and  I  was  involved  in  strange  doubts  and  perplex-
ities.

Very  often  the  remarks  seemed  to  be  complimentary,  and
that  was  not  what  disturbed  me.  I  cared  little  enough  whether
I  was  considered  beautiful,  but  the  observations  whispered  in
the  ear,  and  almost  always  followed  by  long  titters  and  winks,
were  what  I  should  have  liked  to  overhear,  and  for  one  of
those  phrases  uttered  in  an  undertone,  behind  a  curtain  or  in
a  doorway,  I  would  have  sacrificed  without  regret  the  most
flowery  and  perfumed  conversation.

If  I  had  had  a  lover,  I  should  have  delighted  in  knowing


124  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

how  he  spoke  of  me  to  other  men,  and  in  what  terms  he
boasted  of  his  good  fortune  to  his  boon  companions,  with  a
little  wine  in  his  head  and  his  elbows  upon  the  tablecloth.

Now  I  know,  and  the  knowledge  angers  me.  It  is  always
thus.

My  idea  was  a  mad  one,  but  what  is  done  is  done,  and  I
cannot  unlearn  what  is  learned.  I  did  not  listen  to  you,  my
dear  Graciosa;  I  repent  it;  but  one  does  not  always  listen  to
reason,  especially  when  it  comes  from  such  a  pretty  mouth
as  yours,  for  I  do  not  know  why  it  is  not  possible  to  think  ad-
vice good  unless  it  proceeds  from  an  old  grayhead.  Just  as  if
being  stupid  for  sixty  years  can  make  a  person  clever.

But  that  desire  tormented  me  too  much,  and  I  could  not
contain  myself.  I  burned  in  my  little  skin  like  a  chestnut  on
the  stove.  The  fatal  apple  hung  in  the  boughs  above  my
head,  and  in  the  end  I  had  to  bite  it,  sure  of  being  able  to
throw  it  away  afterwards  if  the  taste  seemed  bitter.

I  did  as  the  blonde  Eve,  my  very  dear  grandmother,  did,  I
bit  it.

The  death  of  my  uncle,  my  only  remaining  relative,  leaving
me  free  to  act  as  I  chose,  I  put  into  execution  the  plan  of
which  I  had  so  long  dreamed.  My  precautions  were  taken
with  the  greatest  care,  so  that  no  one  should  suspect  my  sex.
I  had  learned  to  fence  and  shoot  ;  I  rode  a  horse  perfectly,  and
with  a  boldness  of  which  few  riders  were  capable;  I  studied
the  way  to  wear  the  clothes,  and  in  a  few  months  I  made  of  a
pretty  girl  a  much  finer  cavalier,  the  only  thing  lacking  being
the  mustache.  I  realized  my  property  and  left  the  town,  deter-
mined not  to  return  till  I  had  the  fullest  experience.

It  was  the  only  way  of  setting  at  rest  my  doubts;  lovers
would  have  taught  me  nothing,  or  at  least  I  should  only  have
received  an  incomplete  insight,  and  I  wished  to  study  man
completely,  to  dissect  him  fiber  by  fiber,  with  an  inexorable
scalpel,  and  stretch  him  alive  and  palpitating  upon  my  operat-
ing table;  for  that  it  was  necessary  to  see  him  alone,  at  his
ease,  to  follow  him  in  his  walks  and  in  his  orgies.  In  my
disguise  I  could  go  everj'where  without  being  noticed;  nothing
was  hidden  from  me,  all  constraint  and  reserve  were  put
aside  in  my  presence;  I  received  confidences,  and  made  false


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  126

ones  to  invite  the  true.  Alas  !  woman,  you  have  only  read
man's  romance  not  his  history  !

It  is  a  frightful  thing  to  think  how  profoundly  ignorant
we  are  of  the  life  and  conduct  of  those  who  appear  to  love  us
and  whom  we  marry.  Their  real  existence  is  as  perfectly  un-
known to  us  as  if  they  were  the  inhabitants  of  Saturn,  or  of
some  other  planet  a  hundred  million  miles  away  from  our
sphere;  they  seem  to  be  of  another  species,  and  there  is  not
the  slightest  intellectual  bond  between  the  two  sexes  ;  the  vir-
tues of  the  one  make  the  vices  of  the  other,  and  that  which
makes  the  man  admired  makes  the  woman  honored.

Our  life  is  clear  and  can  be  seen  at  a  glance.  It  is  easy  to
follow  us  from  the  home  to  the  school  and  from  the  school  to
the  home  ;  our  actions  are  a  mystery  to  nobody.  Our  sonatas
and  romances  are  executed  with  the  most  desirable  coldness.
We  are  well  and  duly  fastened  to  our  mother's  apron  strings,
and  at  nine  o'clock,  or  ten  o'clock  at  the  latest,  we  retire  to
our  little  white  beds  in  our  clean  and  retired  bedchambers,
where  we  are  virtuously  locked  till  the  next  morning.  The
most  wide-awake  and  jealous  susceptibility  would  find  nothing
in  that.

The  most  limpid  crystal  is  not  as  transparent  as  such  a  life.

The  man  who  takes  us  knows  what  we  have  done  from  the
moment  we  were  weaned  and  even  before,  if  he  cares  to
carry  his  inquiries  so  far.  Our  life  is  not  a  life,  it  is  a  sort
of  vegetation,  like  that  of  mosses  and  flowers.  The  glacial
shadow  of  the  maternal  trunk  overhangs  us  poor  stifled  rose-
buds, who  dare  not  open  our  blossoms.  Our  principal  busi-
ness is  to  hold  ourselves  upright,  to  be  well  corseted,  keep  our
eyes  discreetly  lowered,  and  to  surpass  in  immobility  manikins
and  spring  dolls.

We  are  forbidden  to  enter  into  conversation,  other  than  to
reply  ''yes"  or  "no,"  if  we  are  asked.  Immediately  the  talk
becomes  interesting,  we  are  sent  away  to  practice  on  our  harp
or  harpsichord,  and  our  music  masters  are  sixty  at  least  and
are  horribly  addicted  to  tobacco.  The  models  suspended  in  our
chambers  are  very  vague  and  sketchy  in  their  anatomy.

Through  the  desire  to  prevent  us  becoming  romantic,  we
are  turned  into  idiots.     The  days  of  our  education  are  spent


126  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

not  in  teaching  us  an>thing,  but  in  preventing  us  from
learning.

We  are  really  prisoners  in  body  and  mind;  but  how  can
the  young  man  with  full  liberty  of  action,  who  goes  out  one
morning  and  does  not  return  till  the  next,  who  has  money,
and  can  spend  it  as  he  pleases,  justify  the  employment  of  his
time?  What  man  would  like  to  tell  his  beloved  what  he  has
done  during  the  day  and  the  night?  Not  one,  even  of  those
reputed  the  most  pure.

I  sent  my  horse  and  my  clothes  to  a  little  farm  belonging
to  me,  some  way  from  the  town.  I  dressed  myself,  mounted,
and  started,  not  without  a  sinking  at  the  heart.  I  had  no  re-
grets, I  leît  nothing  behind,  neither  relations  nor  friends,  not
a  dog  nor  cat,  and  yet  I  w^as  sad,  I  almost  had  tears  in  my
eyes;  this  farm,  which  I  had  only  visited  five  or  six  times,
had  nothing  about  it  to  make  it  dear  to  me,  but  I  turned  round
two  or  three  times  to  watch  from  a  distance  the  bluey  smoke
rising  through  the  trees.

There,  with  my  dresses  and  skirts,  I  had  left  my  claim  to
womanhood;  into  the  room  where  I  dressed  were  crowded
twenty  years  of  my  life  which  no  longer  counted  nor  con-
cerned me.  Upon  the  door  might  have  been  written  **Here
lies  Madelaine  de  Maupin'*  ;  for  really  I  was  no  longer  Mad-
elaine  de  Maupin,  but  Theodore  de  Sérannes,  and  no  one
would  again  call  me  by  the  sweet  name  Madelaine.

The  drawer  which  contained  my  now  useless  dresses  ap-
peared to  me  like  the  shroud  of  my  white  illusions  ;  I  was  a
man,  or  at  least  I  appeared  to  be;  the  young  girl  was  dead.

When  the  tops  of  the  chestnut  trees  which  surrounded  the
farm  were  out  of  sight,  it  seemed  to  me  that  I  was  no  longer
myself,  but  some  one  else,  and  I  remembered  my  former
actions  as  if  they  were  the  acts  of  a  stranger  at  which  I  was
present,  or  the  beginning  of  a  story  the  reading  of  which  I
had  not  finished.

I  recalled  a  thousand  little  details,  the  childish  naïveté  of
which  brought  a  slightly  mocking  and  indulgent  smile  to  my
lips  like  that  of  a  young  libertine  as  he  listened  to  the  confid-
ences of  a  boy  in  the  third  form  ;  and  at  the  moment  I  was  for
ever  severing  myself,  all  my  childish  girlish  actions  seemed

i


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  127

to  be  running  along  by  the  side  of  the  road  making  a  thousand
signs  of  friendship  to  me  and  throwing  me  kisses.

I  spurred  my  horse  to  rid  myself  of  tliese  enervating  emo-
tions; the  trees  flew  rapidly  by  on  my  right  and  left;  but  I
still  seemed  to  hear  my  name  being  called  from  the  roadside  :
**Madelaine  !  Madelaine  !"

I  went  on  my  way;  in  the  sound  of  the  breeze  I  seemed  to
recognize  the  last  phrase  of  the  sonata  I  had  learned  for  my
uncle's  birthday,  and  as  I  passed  a  house  I  saw,  hanging  at  a
window,  the  phantom  of  my  curtains.  All  my  past  seemed  to
cling  to  me  to  prevent  me  from  going  forward  and  reaching
a  fresh  future.

I  hesitated  two  or  three  times,  and  I  turned  my  horse's
head  in  the  opposite  direction.

But  curiosity  with  its  insidious  words  whispered  in  my  ear,
"Gk)  on,  Theodore  ;  the  opportunity  for  finding  out  is  a  good
one;  if  you  do  not  learn  to-day  you  will  never  know.  Then,
too,  you  will  give  your  noble  heart  to  the  first  comer  who
appears  honorable  and  passionate.  Men  conceal  extraordinary
secrets  from  us,  Theodore!"

I  resumed  my  gallop.  The  breeches  were  on  my  body,  not
my  spirit;  I  felt  uneasiness  and  a  tremor  of  fear — ^to  give
it  its  correct  name — at  a  dark  spot  in  the  forest  ;  a  shot  from
a  poacher  nearly  made  me  faint.  If  it  had  been  a  thief  the
pistols  in  my  holsters  and  my  formidable  sword  would  not
have  been  much  use.  But,  bit  by  bit,  I  hardened  myself,  and
paid  no  further  attention  to  my  fears.

The  sun  sunk  slowly  down  below  the  horizon  like  the  luster
of  a  theater  after  the  performance  is  over.  Hares  and  pheas-
ants crossed  the  road  from  time  to  time  ;  the  shadows  length-
ened and  distant  objects  were  tinted  with  red.  Some  parts  of
the  sky  were  of  a  very  soft  and  subdued  lilac,  others  were  of
lemon  and  orange  tints.  The  night  birds  began  their  song,
and  a  number  of  strange  sounds  issued  from  the  wood.  The
little  remaining  light  vanished,  and  darkness  became  complete,
increased  as  it  was  by  the  shadows  of  the  trees.  I,  who  had
never  gone  out  alone  at  night,  was  in  the  midst  of  a  great
forest  at  eight  o'clock  at  night!  Imagine  it,  Graciosa!  I,
who  nearly  died  of  fright  at  the  end  of  the  garden!     Fear


128  MADEMOISRIJ.E  DE  MAUPIN

took  possession  of  me  ;  my  heart  beat  terribly.  It  was,  I  must
admit,  with  great  satisfaction  that  I  espied  the  Hghts  of  the
town  I  was  bound  for.  As  soon  as  I  saw  the  httle  points  of
light  like  tiny  terrestrial  stars,  my  fear  completely  disap-
peared. It  seemed  to  me  that  the  lights  were  the  eyes  of  so
many  friends  watching  for  me.

My  horse  was  no  less  pleased  than  I  was,  and  scenting  to
him  the  most  agreeable  smell  of  a  stable,  he  went  straight  to
the  hotel  Lion  Rouge.

A  light  shone  through  the  inn  windows.  I  left  my  horse  in
charge  of  an  ostler  and  went  into  the  inn  kitchen.

An  enormous  fireplace  opened  at  the  back  its  red  and  black
jaws,  which  swallowed  a  fagot  at  each  mouthful,  and  on  each
side  of  the  firedogs,  two  dogs,  as  big  as  men,  sat  with  the
greatest  unconcern,  only  raising  their  paws  a  little  and  utter-
ing a  sort  of  sigh  when  the  heat  became  too  intense;  most
certainly  they  would  rather  have  been  burnt  to  a  cinder  than
retire  a  step.

My  arrival  did  not  seem  to  please  them,  and  it  was  in  vain
that,  in  order  to  become  acquainted,  I  patted  them  several
times  ;  they  looked  at  me  in  a  way  which  boded  no  good.  That
astonished  me,  for  animals  usually  come  to  me  of  their  own
accord.

The  innkeeper  came  to  inquire  what  I  would  have  for
supper.

He  was  a  big-bellied  man  with  a  red  nose,  a  wall  eye,  and
an  expansive  smile.  At  each  word  he  uttered  he  displayed  a
double  row  of  pointed  teeth,  far  apart  like  an  ogre's.  The
big  kitchen  knife  which  hung  by  his  side  gave  him  a  doubtful
appearance,  and  seemed  to  be  able  to  be  used  for  several  pur-
poses. When  I  told  him  what  I  wanted  he  gave  one  of  the
dogs  a  kick.  The  animal  got  up  and  made  for  a  sort  of  wheel,
which  he  entered  with  a  reluctant  and  pitiful  air,  casting  a
reproachful  glance  at  me  as  he  did  so.  At  last,  seeing  there
w^as  no  hope  of  a  respite  he  began  to  turn  his  wheel,  and  at
the  same  time  the  fowl  upon  which  I  was  to  sup  revolved.  I
made  up  my  mind  to  reward  him  for  his  trouble  with  the  bits,
and  while  waiting  for  my  supper  began  to  look  around  the
kitchen.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  129


Large  oak  joists  crossed  the  ceiling,  blistered  and  blackened
by  the  smoke  from  the  fireplace  and  candles.  Upon  the
dressers  gleamed  in  the  shadow  pewter  dishes  brighter  than
silver  and  blue  and  white  crockery.  Along  the  walls  were
rows  of  w^eJl-scoured  saucepans,  not  unlike  the  ancient  shields
which  used  to  hang  in  a  row  along  the  sides  of  the  Greek  or
Roman  triremes  (forgive  me,  Graciosa,  for  the  epic  magnifi-
cence of  this  comparison).  One  or  two  big  servants  moved
around  a  large  table  and  arranged  crockery  and  knives  and
forks,  producing  music  most  pleasing  to  the  hungry,  for  then
the  hearing  of  the  stomach  is  keener  than  the  ear.  To  sum
up,  in  spite  of  the  host's  appearance,  the  inn  itself  had  an
honest  and  pleasant  enough  look;  and  however  unattractive
the  innkeeper  had  been,  the  rain  began  to  beat  upon  the  win-
dows and  the  wind  to  howl  in  a  way  which  would  have  re-
moved any  désire  on  the  traveler's  part  to  go  further,  for  I
know  nothing  more  mournful  than  such  sounds  on  a  dark  and
stormy  night.

A  thought  came  to  me  w^hich  made  me  smile  ;  it  was  that  no
one  in  the  world  would  look  for  me  there.  Really,  who  would
have  suspected  that  little  Madelaine,  instead  of  being  asleep
in  her  warm  bed,  with  her  lamp  by  her  side,  a  novel  under
her  pillow,  and  her  maid  in  the  next  room  ready  to  run  to  her
side  at  the  least  sound,  was  sitting  upon  a  straw  chair  in  a
country  inn  twenty  leagues  from  home,  with  her  feet  on  the
firedogs  and  her  little  hands  buried  in  her  pockets  ?

Yes,  Madeline  did  not  remain,  like  her  schoolfellows,  with
her  elbows  idly  resting  on  the  edge  of  the  balcony  between
the  convolvulus  and  the  jasmine  at  the  window,  gazing  over
the  plain  at  the  violet  fringes  of  the  horizon,  or  at  some  little
rose-colored  cloud  rounded  by  the  breeze.  She  had  not  built
in  her  imagination  a  palace  in  which  to  lodge  her  chimerae;
she  had  not,  like  you  beautiful  dreamers,  clothed  some  hollow
phantom  with  all  imaginable  perfections.  She  desired  to  know
men  before  giving  herself  to  a  man;  she  left  everything — ^her
beautiful  dresses  of  bright-colored  velvets  and  silks,  her  neck-
laces, her  bracelets,  her  birds,  and  her  flowers  ;  she  voluntarily
renounced  adoration,  gallantry,  bouquets  and  madrigals,  even
the  pleasure  of  being  considered  more  beautiful  and  better


180  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

dressed  than  yourself,  her  sweet  woman's  name,  and  every-
thing which  comprised  her  life,  and  the  brave  girl  went  away
quite  alone  to  obtain  throughout  the  world  a  knowledge  of
life.

If  it  were  known  people  would  say  Madelaîne  was  mad.
You  said  so  yourself,  my  dear  Graciosa;  but  the  real  mad
women  are  those  who  cast  their  souls  to  the  wind,  and  sow
their  love  haphazard  upon  stone  and  rock,  without  knowing
whether  a  single  seed  will  take  root.

O  Graciosa  !  this  is  a  thought  I  never  had  without  terror  ;
to  love  some  one  who  was  unworthy  !  To  lay  bare  my  soul
to  impure  eyes,  and  allow  an  unbeliever  to  penetrate  into  the
sanctuar}''  of  my  heart  !  To  mingle  for  a  time  the  limpid
waters  with  a  muddy  stream  !  However  perfectly  they  might
be  separated,  some  of  the  mud  would  be  sure  to  remain  and  the
stream  would  never  recover  its  former  transparency.

To  think  a  man  had  kissed  and  touched  you;  had  seen  your
body;  that  he  could  say,  "She  is  just  so;  she  has  such  a  mark
in  a  certain  place;  she  has  such  a  shadow  in  her  soul;  she
laughs  because  of  this  and  w^eeps  for  that  ;  her  dream  is  come
to  pass  ;  this  ring  is  plaited  with  her  hair  ;  a  bit  of  her  heart
is  folded  in  this  letter;  she  caressed  me  in  such  a  way,  and
that  was  her  usual  loving  greeting."

Ah  !  Cleopatra,  I  now  understand  w^hy  you  had  killed  in  the
morning  your  lover  of  the  night.  Sublime  cruelty  it  seemed,
for  which  I  used  to  lack  sufficient  imprecations  !  Great  god-
dess of  pleasure,  how  deep  was  your  knowledge  of  human
nature,  and  what  penetration  there  was  in  that  barbarity!
You  did  not  desire  any  living  creature  to  divulge  the  secrets
of  your  bed;  the  words  of  love,  snatched  from  your  lips,  must
never  be  repeated.  You  thus  retained  your  pure  illusion.  Ex-
perience did  not  come  to  despoil  bit  by  bit  this  charming  phan-
tom you  had  nursed  in  your  arms.  You  preferred  to  be  sep-
arated from  it  by  a  quick  blow  of  the  ax  rather  than  by
slow-moving  disgust.  What  punishment  it  must  be  to  a  woman
to  see  the  man  she  has  chosen  lie  every  minute  with  the  idea
that  she  is  enamored  of  him;  to  discover  in  his  character  a
thousand  unsuspected  meannesses  ;  to  see  that  the  thing  which
has  appeared  so  beautiful  through  the  prism  of  love  is  really


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  131

very  ugly,  and  that  the  man  who  has  been  taken  for  a  real
hero  of  romance  is  only  a  prosaic  citizen,  wearing  slippers
and  a  dressing  gown  !

I  have  not  Cleopatra's  power,  and  if  I  possessed  it  I  should
certainly  not  have  the  strength  to  use  it.  So,  being  unable
and  unwilling  to  cut  off  the  heads  of  my  lovers  when  they  leave
my  bed,  and  also  being  unwilling  to  bear  what  other  women
endure,  I  must  of  necessity  look  twice  before  taking  a  lover  ;
that  is  what  I  shall  do  three  times  rather  than  twice  if  I  feel
so  inclined,  though  I  doubt  it  very  much,  after  what  I  have
seen  and  heard,  unless  I  meet  in  some  happy  land  a  heart  like
my  own,  as  the  novelists  say,  a  pure  and  virgin  heart  which
has  never  loved,  though  capable  of  love  in  the  true  sense  of
the  word  ;  but  that  is  not  an  easy  thing  to  find.

Several  gentlemen  entered  the  inn  ;  the  storm  and  the  dark-
ness had  prevented  them  from  continuing  their  journey.  They
were  all  young,  the  eldest  being  certainly  not  more  than
thirty.  Their  clothes  betokened  that  they  belonged  to  the
upper  classes,  and  so  did  their  insolent  manners.  One  or  two
of  them  had  interesting  faces;  the  others  all  had,  in  a  more
or  less  marked  degree,  that  sort  of  brutal  joviality  and  care-
less good-fellowship  which  men  display  among  themselves,  but
of  which  they  entirely  rid  themselves  when  they  are  in  our
presence.

If  they  had  suspected  that  the  slender  young  fellow,  half
asleep  upon  his  chair  in  the  chimney  corner,  was  indeed  a
young  girl  (a  morsel  fit  for  a  king,  is  the  expression  they
use),  certainly  they  would  very  quickly  have  changed  their
tone,  they  would  have  bridled  up  and  spread  out  their  feathers.
They  would  have  approached  with  elaborate  politeness,  their
legs  straight,  their  elbows  squared,  a  smile  in  their  eyes,  on
their  lips,  in  fact  all  over  them;  they  would  have  carefully
selected  the  words  they  uttered,  only  making  use  of  phrases
of  velvet  and  satin;  at  the  slightest  movement  on  my  part
they  would  have  seemed  to  be  ready  to  lie  down  and  take  the
place  of  a  carpet,  so  that  my  delicate  feet  should  not  be  of-
fended by  the  inequalities  of  the  floor;  their  hands  would  have
been  outstretched  to  support  me;  the  most  comfortable  seat


132  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

would  have  been  placed  for  me  in  the  best  position;  but  I
looked  like  a  handsome  boy,  not  a  pretty  girl.

I  admit  I  almost  regretted  my  skirts  when  I  saw  how  little
attention  they  paid  me.  I  was,  for  a  moment,  quite  mortified  ;
for  from  time  to  time  I  forgot  that  I  was  dressed  as  a  man,
and  I  was  obliged  to  think  or  I  should  have  become  quite
cross.

I  was  sitting  there  in  silence,  with  my  arms  folded,  my  at-
tention apparently  fixed  upon  the  fowl,  which  was  gradually
assuming  a  darker  tint,  and  the  unfortunate  dog  I  had  so
unluckily  disturbed.

The  youngest  of  the  party  gave  me  a  tap  on  the  shoulder,
hurting  me  a  little  and  causing  me  to  utter  a  litde  involun-
tary cry,  and  asked  me  if  I  would  not  prefer  to  sup  with  them
rather  than  alone,  inasmuch  as  a  man  could  drink  more  in
company.  I  replied  that  it  was  a  pleasure  I  had  not  dared  to
expect,  and  that  I  would  gladly  do  so.  The  supper  was  laid
at  one  table,  and  we  took  our  places.

The  panting  dog,  after  lapping  up  in  a  moment  an  enor-
mous bowl  of  water,  resumed  his  seat  opposite  the  other  dog,
which  had  made  no  more  movement  than  if  it  had  been  carved
out  of  stone,  the  new  comers  not  having  ordered  a  fowl  by  a
fortunate  chance.

I  learned  from  a  few  phrases  they  let  fall  that  they  were

bound  for  the  Court,  which  was  then  at  ,  where  they

were  to  join  several  friends.  I  told  them  I  was  a  young  fel-
low who  had  just  left  the  university,  and  who  was  returning
to  his  relatives  in  the  provinces  by  the  scholars'  usual  route,
the  longest  way  he  could  find.  That  made  them  laugh,  and
after  a  few  observations  upon  my  candid  and  innocent  air
they  asked  me  if  I  had  a  mistress.  I  replied  that  I  did  not
know,  and  they  laughed  more  loudly  still.  The  glasses  fol-
lowed one  another  with  great  rapidity;  although  I  took  care
to  nearly  always  leave  mine  full,  I  became  a  little  excited,
and  never  losing  sight  of  my  idea,  I  managed  to  turn  the
conversation  on  to  the  subject  of  women.  It  was  not  a  diffi-
cult matter,  for  after  theology  and  aesthetics  it  is  the  subject
men  most  willingly  discuss  when  they  are  intoxicated.

The  friends  were  not  precisely  intoxicated,  for  they  carried


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  133


their  wine  too  well  for  that;  but  they  began  never-ending
moral  discussions  and  unceremoniously  put  their  elbows  on  the
table.  One  of  them  put  his  arm  round  the  ample  waist  of
one  of  the  servants  and  fondled  her  most  amorously  ;  another
swore  that  he  would  place  a  kiss  upon  each  of  Jeanette's  fat
red  cheeks.  Jeanette  gave  way  with  a  good  grace,  and  did
not  even  stop  a  hand  w^hich  audaciously  found  its  way  be-
tween the  folds  of  her  neckerchief,  into  the  moist  valley  of
her  throat,  badly  protected  as  it  was  by  a  little  gold  cross,  and
it  Vr^as  only  after  a  short  conversation  in  an  undertone  that
he  let  her  go  to  change  the  dishes.

They  were  fashionable  folk,  and  certainly  unless  I  had  actu-
ally seen  it  I  should  never  have  accused  them  of  such  famili-
arities w^ith  inn  servants.  It  is  probable  that  they  had  just
left  charming  mistresses,  to  whom  they  had  made  the  most
beautiful  vows;  for  really  I  should  never  have  thought  of  tell-
ing m.y  lover  not  to  soil  lips  where  I  had  placed  mine.

The  fellow  seemed  to  take  as  much  pleasure  in  this  kiss  as
if  he  had  embraced  Phillis  or  Oriane;  it  was  a  resounding
smack,  heavily  and  solidly  applied,  leaving  tw^o  little  white
marks  upon  the  cheek,  the  traces  of  which  the  girl  removed
with  the  back  of  her  hand  as  she  was  washing  the  dishes.  I  do
not  believe  he  had  ever  given  so  tender  a  one  to  the  pure  deity
of  his  heart.  That  was  apparently  his  own  thought,  for  he
said  in  an  undertone  with  a  disdainful  movement  of  the  elbow  :

'To  the  devil  wûth  thin  women  and  noble  sentiments."
This  moral  appeared  to  the  taste  of  the  part>',  and  all  nodded
their  heads  as  a  sign  of  assent.

/'Really,"  the  other  one  said,  following  out  his  idea,  *'I  am
always  unlucky.  Gentlemen,  I  must  tell  you,  under  a  bond
of  secrecy,  that  I  have  at  this  moment  a  passion  !

"She  is  an  honorable  woman,  gentlemen.  You  must  not
laugh,  for  why  should  she  not  be  an  honorable  woman  ?  Have
I  said  anything  ridiculous?  Stop,  or  if  you  do  not  I  will
throw  the  house  at  your  head."

"Ah  well!     What  next?"

*'She  is  madly  in  love  with  me.  Hers  is  the  most  beautifu*
soul  in  the  world;  I  am  as  good  a  judge  of  souls  as  I  am  of
horses,  and  I  can  guarantee  her  soul  is  first  quality.    There


18é  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUFIN

is  in  ît  elevation,  ecstasy,  devotion,  sacrifice,  and  refined
tenderness,  in  fact  everything  imaginable  ;  but  she  has  hardly
any  figure,  like  that  of  a  girl  of  fifteen.  She  is  pretty,  too;
her  hand  is  fine,  her  foot  small  ;  she  has  too  much  mind,  and
not  enough  flesh.  I  am  very  unfortunate.  Pity  me,  friends."
Made  maudlin  by  the  wine  he  had  drunk,  he  burst  into  tears.

"Jeanette  will  console  you  for  your  misfortunes,''  his
neighbor  said  as  he  poured  him  out  a  bumper;  **her  soul  is
so  thick  it  could  provide  other  persons  with  bodies,  and  she
has  enough  flesh  to  clothe  the  carcasses  of  three  elephants."

O  pure  and  noble  woman!  if  you  knew  what  was  said  of
you  at  an  inn  in  tlie  presence  of  strangers  by  the  man  you  love
best  in  the  world,  for  whom  you  have  sacrificed  everything!
How  he  shamelessly  exposed  you  and  betrayed  you  to  the  in-
toxicated glances  of  his  comrades,  while  you  in  your  sorrow,
with  your  chin  resting  in  your  hand,  were  waiting  with  eyes
fixed  upon  the  road  by  which  he  would  return.

If  any  one  had  told  you  that  your  lover,  twenty-four  hours
perhaps  after  leaving  you,  had  made  love  to  a  common  serv-
ant, and  kissed  her,  you  would  have  maintained  that  such  a
thing  was  quite  impossible  and  you  would  not  have  believed
it;  you  would  hardly  have  credited  your  own  eyes  and  cars.
Still,  there  it  was.

The  conversation  lasted  for  some  time,  and  was  the  most
foolish  and  licentious  possible;  but  through  all  the  clownish
exaggeration  and  filthy  jokes  was  visible  a  real  and  profound
sentiment  of  entire  contempt  for  woman,  and  I  learned  more
in  that  evening  than  in  reading  twenty  cartloads  of  the  works
of  moralists.

The  more  heinous  and  extraordinary  things  I  heard  gaVe
my  face  an  expression  of  sadness  and  severity  which  the  other
guests  noticed  and  about  which  they  twitted  me  ;  but  my  gayety
did  not  return.  I  had  suspected  that  men  were  not  just  as
they  appeared  before  us,  but  I  did  not  believe  them  so  differ-
ent from  the  masks  they  wore,  and  my  surprise  equaled  my
disgust.

It  would  only  require  one  half-hour  of  such  conversation
to  correct  the  romantic  tendencies  of  any  young  girl;  that
would  be  a  better  remedy  than  all  maternal  remonstrance.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  135

Some  boasted  of  their  conquests,  and  the  ease  and  rapidity
with  which  they  were  made;  others  communicated  recipes
for  obtaining  mistresses,  or  discoursed  upon  the  tactics  to  be
employed  in  the  seige  of  virtue;  some  turned  into  ridicule
the  women  whose  lovers  they  were,  and  thus  proclaimed
themselves  to  be  the  greatest  imbeciles  on  earth  for  being  cap-
tivated by  such  sluts.    They  all  made  love  very  cheap.

Such  then  are  the  thoughts  concealed  beneath  some  hand-
some exteriors  !  Who  would  believe  it  when  seeing  these  men
so  humble,  so  servile,  and  so  obliging  ?  Ah,  how  boldly  after
conquest  do  they  raise  their  heads,  and  insolently  put  the
heels  of  their  boots  upon  the  face  they  adored  from  afar  on
bended  knees  !  What  revenge  they  take  for  their  temporary
debasement  !  How  dearly  do  they  make  the  women  pay  for
their  politeness  !  What  frantic  brutality  of  language  and
thought  is  theirs;  what  inelegance  of  manners  and  deport-
ment !  It  is  a  complete  change,  certainly  not  to  their  advan-
tage. Though  my  suspicions  had  been  considerable,  they  fell
far  short  of  the  reality.

At  last  the  supper  ended  and  it  was  time  to  retire  for  the
night;  but  as  the  number  of  sleepers  was  double  that  of  the
beds,  it  naturally  followed  that  it  was  necessary  to  sleep  one
after  the  other  or  else  two  together.  It  was  a  simple  enough
matter  for  the  rest  of  the  company,  but  not  so  for  me,  par-
ticularly with  regard  to  certain  curves  and  protuberances
which,  though  concealed  well  enough  by  the  jacket  and  doub-
let, would  be  obvious  enough  beneath  a  shirt  alone,  and  really
I  did  not  feel  disposed  to  violate  my  incognito  in  favor  of
any  of  those  gentlemen,  who  just  then  appeared  to  me  to  be
real  naïve  monsters,  although  I  have  since  decided  that  they
were  very  good  comrades,  and  at  least  as  good  as  their
fellows.

The  one  whose  bed  I  had  to  share  was  reasonably  drunk.
He  threw  himself  upon  the  bed  with  an  arm  and  leg  upon  the
floor,  and  went  off  to  sleep  at  once,  not  the  sleep  of  the  just,
but  such  a  deep  sleep  that  the  angel  of  the  last  judgment
would  have  required  to  blow  the  trump  in  his  ear  and  then
perhaps  would  not  have  awakened  him.  This  sleep  very  much
simplified  matters;  I  merely  took  off  my  jacket  and  boots,


136  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

stepped  over  the  sleeper's  body,  and  lay  down  next  the  wall.

So  I  was  sleeping  in  the  same  bed  as  a  man  !  That  was
not  a  bad  beginning  !  I  confess  that  in  spite  of  all  my  assur-
ance I  was  strangely  troubled  and  disturbed.  The  situation
was  so  strange,  so  novel,  that  I  could  hardly  admit  it  was  not
a  dream.  My  bedfellow  slept  soundly,  while  I  did  not  close
an  eye  all  night.

He  was 'a  young  man  of  about  twenty- four,  good-looking,
with  black  eyelashes,  almost  a  blond  mustache,  and  long  black
hair;  a  slight  flush  was  upon  his  pale  cheeks,  and  his  parted
lips  wore  a  vague  and  languishing  smile.

I  raised  myself  upon  my  elbow,  and  I  remained  for  some
time  gazing  at  him  in  the  flickering  light  of  an  expiring
candle.

We  were  some  distance  apart.  He  was  on  the  extreme  out-
side of  the  bed,  while  I  lay  as  a  matter  of  precaution  on  the
other  edge.

Certainly  all  that  I  had  heard  was  not  of  the  nature  to  pre-
dispose me  to  tenderness  and  voluptuousness.  I  had  a  horror
of  men.  Still  I  was  very  disturbed  and  more  uneasy  than  I
ought  to  have  been  ;  my  body  did  not  share  the  repugnance
of  my  mind  as  much  as  it  ought.  My  heart  beat  fast,  I  was
warm,  and  turn  into  whatever  position  I  would,  I  could  not
go  to  sleep.

The  most  profound  silence  reigned  throughout  the  inn;  only
in  the  distance  could  be  heard  the  dull  thud  made  by  a  horse's
hoof  in  the  stable,  or  the  sound  of  a  spot  of  water  dropping
on  the  ashes.    The  candle  went  out.

The  blackest  darkness  rose  between  us  like  a  curtain.  You
cannot  imagine  the  effect  produced  upon  me  by  the  sudden
disappearance  of  the  light.  It  seemed  to  me  that  everything
was  finished,  and  that  I  could  no  longer  see  my  own  life
clearly.  One  moment  I  felt  a  desire  to  get  up  ;  but  what  could
I  have  done?  It  was  only  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the
lights  were  all  out,  and  I  could  not  wander  like  a  ghost  about
a  strange  house.  I  was  force'd  to  stay  where  I  was  and  wait
for  daylight.

I  was  there  upon  my  back,  my  hands  clasped,  trying  to
think  of  something,   but  always   reverting  to  the   one   fact.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  137

that  I  was  sleeping  in  the  same  bed  as  a  man.  I  even  felt  a
desire  for  him  to  awaken  and  discover  that  I  was  a  woman.
Without  a  doubt  the  wine  I  had  drunk,  though  but  a  small
quantity,  was  to  some  extent  responsible  for  these  extrava-
gant ideas,  but  I  could  not  help  reverting  to  them.  I  was  in
the  act  of  stretching  out  my  arm  to  awaken  him,  when  a  ridge
in  the  bedclothes  stopped  me;  that  gave  me  time  to  reflect,
and  while  I  freed  my  arm  my  lost  senses  returned,  if  not  alto-
gether, at  least  sufficiently  to  restrain  me.

I  certainly  did  not  love  the  man  who  caused  me  this  strange
agitation.  His  only  charm  was  that  he  was  not  a  woman,  and
in  my  state  of  mind  that  was  enough  !  A  man  !  that  myster-
ious creature  from  whom  we  are  shielded  with  such  great
care,  the  strange  animal  of  whose  history  we  know  so  little,
the  god  or  demon  who  alone  can  realize  all  the  dreams  of
vague  pleasure  with  which  the  spring  cradles  our  sleep,  and
the  only  thought  a  girl  has  after  she  is  fifteen  !

A  man  !  The  confused  idea  of  pleasure  floated  in  my
heavy  head.  The  little  I  knew  still  inflamed  my  desire.  An
ardent  curiosity  urged  me  to  satisfy  once  and  for  all  the
doubts  which  embarrassed  me  and  continually  returned  to  my
mind.  The  solution  of  the  problem  was  behind  the  page;  it
only  required  turning  and  the  book  was  at  my  side.  A  good-
looking  fellow,  a  narrow  bed,  a  dark  night!  a  young  girl
with  a  few  glasses  of  champagne  in  her  head  !  What  a  sus-
picious combination  !  But  all  that  resulted  in  a  most  honor-
able nothing.

Upon  the  wall  where  I  kept  my  eyes  fixed  as  the  darkness
decreased  I  began  to  distinguish  the  window;  the  panes  be-
came less  opaque,  and  the  gray  morning  light  as  it  gradually
appeared  through  them  made  them  transparent;  the  sky
brightened  bit  by  bit:  it  was  daylight.  You  cannot  imagine
the  pleasure  given  me  by  the  pale  dawn  as  it  revealed  the
green  serge  hangings  which  surrounded  the  glorious  field  of
battle  on  which  my  virtue  had  triumphed  over  my  desire  !  It
seemed  to  me  that  it  was  my  crown  of  victory.

As  for  my  bedfellow,  he  had  slipped  right  down  to  the
floor.

I  got  up,  dressed  myself  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  hastened


138  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAL^PIN

to  the  window  ;  I  opened  it  and  the  morning  breeze  refreshed
me.  To  arrange  my  hair  I  went  to  the  mirror,  and  I  was
astonished  to  find  my  face  so  pale  when  I  believed  it  to  be
purple.

The  others  came  in  to  see  whether  we  were  still  asleep,  and
with  their  feet  aroused  their  friend,  who  did  not  appear  to  be
at  all  surprised  at  his  position.

The  horses  were  saddled  and  we  resumed  our  journey.

But  that  is  enough  for  to-day;  my  pen  refuses  to  write,  and
I  do  not  want  to  take  a  new  one.  I  will  tell  you  the  rest  of
my  adventures  another  time.  Meanwhile,  love  me  as  I  love
you.  Graciosa  the  well  named,  and  after  what  I  have  just
told  you  do  not  have  too  poor  an  opinion  of  my  virtue.


CHAPTER  XI


Many  things  are  tiresome  :  it  is  a  nuisance  to  have  to  repay
borrowed  money  which  one  has  come  to  regard  as  a  gift;  it  is
a  trouble  to  caress  to-day  the  woman  one  loved  yesterday  ;  it
is  a  bore  to  call  at  a  house  at  dinner  time  and  find  that  the
owner  has  gone  into  the  country  for  a  month  ;  it  is  trouble-
some to  write  a  novel,  and  more  so  to  read  one  ;  it  is  a  bore
to  have  a  pimple  on  one's  nose  when  one  pays  a  visit  to  the
hearths  idol  ;  it  is  annoying  to  wear  a  pair  of  humorous  boots,
which  smile  at  the  pavement  through  all  the  holes  in  them;
it  is  a  bore  to  be  a  porter,  to  be  an  emperor,  to  be  oneself  or
even  some  one  else  ;  winter  is  a  nuisance  because  of  the  frost,
summer  because  of  the  heat  ;  but  surely  the  most  troublesome
thing  on  earth,  in  hell,  or  in  heaven  is  a  tragedy,  unless  it  be
a  comedy  or  a  drama.

That  really  makes  me  sick  at  heart!  What  can  there  be
more  silly  or  stupid  than  those  great  tyrants  with  the  voices
of  bulls  who  pace  the  stage,  in  flesh-colored  tights,  waving
their  arms  like  the  sails  of  a  windmill  ?  Are  they  not  sorry
parodies  of  Bluebeard  and  the  Bogey  Man  ?    Their  rodomon-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  139

tades  would  make  any  one  able  to  keep  awake  roar  with
laughter.

Unfortunate  lovers  are  no  less  ridiculous.  It  is  quite  di-
verting to  see  them  advance,  wearing  either  black  or  white,
with  their  hair  falling  upon  their  shoulders,  sleeves  weeping
over  their  hands,  and  the  body  ready  to  burst  from  their  cor-
sets like  a  nut  pressed  between  the  fingers  ;  all  the  while  they
seem  to  be  dragging  the  stage  after  them  by  the  soles  of  their
satin  shoes,  and  in  moments  of  great  passion  they  thrust  their
trains  behind  them  with  a  little  motion  of  the  heel.  The  dia-
logue, entirely  composed  of  an  *'oh  !''  and  "ah  !''  which  they
cluck  as  they  strut  about,  is  really  an  agreeable  dish  and  one
easy  of  digestion.  Their  princes,  too,  are  very  charming;
they  are  just  a  little  gloomy  and  melancholy,  though  this  does
not  prevent  them  being  the  best  comrades  in  this  world  or
elsewhere.

As  for  comedy,  which  ought  to  correct  manners,  and  happily
does  its  duty  badly,  I  find  that  the  father's  sermons  and
uncle's  twaddle  are  as  soporific  on  the  stage  as  in  real  life.  I
am  not  of  the  opinion  that  the  number  of  fools  is  doubled  by
representing  them  on  the  stage  ;  there  are  quite  enough,  thank
God,  without  that,  and  the  race  is  in  no  danger  of  dying  out
Where  is  the  necessity  to  give  a  representation  of  some  one
with  the  snout  of  a  pig  or  the  muzzle  of  an  ox,  and  to  listen
to  the  twaddle  of  an  idiot  who  would  be  thrown  out  of  the
window  if  he  came  to  one's  house?  The  part  of  a  snob  is  quite
as  uninteresting  as  the  snob  himself,  and  being  seen  through  a
mirror  he  is  none  the  less  a  snob.  An  actor  who  could  suc-
ceed in  imitating  with  exactness  the  poses  and  manners  of  a
cobbler  would  be  no  more  amusing  than  a  real  cobbler.

But  it  is  the  fantastic,  extravagant,  and  impossible  theater
I  love,  where  the  honest  public  would  pitilessly  hiss  after  the
first  scene,  having  failed  to  understand  a  word  of  it.

That  is  a  strange  theater.  Glow  worms  take  the  place  of
the  footlights;  a  scarab  beating  time  with  his  antennae  is  at
the  conductor's  desk.  The  cricket  takes  his  part;  the  night-
ingale is  first  flute;  little  sylphs  from  the  flower  of  the  peas
hold  violincellos  of  lemon  peel  between  their  legs,  which  are
whiter  than  ivory,  and  flourish  with  plenty  of  energy  their


140  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

bows,  made  of  one  of  Titania's  lashes,  upon  strings  of  cob-
web; the  little  wig  which  the  scarab,  leader  of  the  orchestra,
wears  trembles  with  pleasure,  and  sheds  around  a  luminous
dust,  so  sweet  is  the  harmony  and  well  played  the  overture  !

A  curtain  of  butterflies'  wings,  finer  than  the  inner  pellicle
of  an  egg,  rises  slowly  after  the  regulation  three  taps.  The
house  is  filled  with  the  souls  of  poets  sitting  in  the  mother-of-
pearl  stalls,  who  watch  the  performance  through  drops  of  dew
mounted  upon  the  golden  pistils  of  lilies.  Their  opera  glasses
are  like  that.

The  scenery  is  not  like  any  known  scenery;  the  landscape
it  represents  is  more  unknown  than  was  America  before  its
discovery.  The  palette  of  the  richest  painter  has  not  half  the
shades  displayed  in  it.  Everything  is  painted  in  strange  and  sin-
gular colors  ;  green,  blue,  yellow,  and  red  are  lavished  upon  it.

The  sky,  of  a  greenish  blue,  is  striped  with  wide  bands  of
Hght  and  fawn;  little  thin  and  delicate  trees  in  the  back-
ground display  foliage  of  a  dried-rose  tint;  the  horizon,  in-
stead of  fading  away  in  an  azure  mist,  is  of  the  most  beautiful
apple  green,  with  here  and  there  spirals  of  golden  smoke  rising
from  it.  A  wandering  ray  of  light  rests  upon  the  frontal  of
a  ruined  temple  or  upon  the  spire  of  a  tower.  Towns  full  of
towers,  pyramids,  domes,  arcades,  and  declivities  are  located
upon  hills  and  cast  their  reflections  into  crystal  lakes  ;  mighty
trees  with  great  leaves,  deeply  indented  by  the  chisels  of  the
fairies,  inextricably  intermingle  their  trunks  and  branches  to
make  the  wings.  The  clouds  in  the  sky  heap  themselves  up
one  above  the  other  like  snowflakes,  and  scintillating  in  the
spaces  between  them  can  be  seen  the  eyes  of  gnomes  and
dwarfs,  while  their  twisted  roots  plunge  into  the  earth  like
the  finger  of  a  giant's  hand.  The  green  woodpecker  taps  them
in  tune  with  his  hard  beak,  and  emerald  lizards  warm  them-
selves in  the  sun.

The  mushroom  watches  the  comedy  with  his  hat  on  his
head,  like  the  insolent  fellow  he  is  ;  the  tiny  violet  rises  upon
tiptoe  between  two  blades  of  grass,  and  opens  wide  its  blue
eyes  to  see  the  hero  pass.

The  bullfinch  and  the  linnet  sit  at  the  end  of  the  branches
to  whisper  to  the  actors  their  parts.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  141

Through  the  deep  undergrowth  tall  purple  thistles  and  bur-
docks with  velvet  leaves  wind  like  silver  snakes.  Streams
composed  of  the  tears  of  stags  at  bay  sparkle;  here  and  there
are  to  be  seen  gleaming  in  the  grass  anemones  like  drops  of
blood,  and  marguerites  wearing  upon  their  heads  coronets  of
pearls,  like  real  duchesses.

The  characters  are  of  no  period  nor  land  ;  they  come  and  go
without  the  spectators  knowing  why  or  how;  they  neither  eat
nor  drink,  they  stay  nowhere  and  have  no  profession;  they
possess  neither  land,  income,  nor  dwelling.  Sometimes  they
carry  under  their  arms  a  little  case  of  diamonds  as  large  as
pigeons'  eggs  ;  as  they  walk  they  do  not  dislodge  a  single  dew-
drop  from  the  flowers,  nor  do  they  raise  a  single  grain  of
dust  on  the  highway.

Their  clothes  are  the  most  extravagant  and  fantastic  pos-
sible. They  wear  pointed  hats  with  borders  as  large  as  a
Chinese  parasol,  and  tremendous  plumes  from  the  tail  of  the
bird  of  paradise  or  the  phoenix.  Their  capes  are  striped  with
brilliant  colors;  their  doublets  of  velvet  and  brocade  display
vests  of  satin  or  silver  cloth  through  the  gold  lace;  their  hose
are  puffed  out  and  distended  like  balloons;  while  scarlet
stockings,  embroidered  shoes  with  high  heels  and  large  ro-
settes, little  slender  swords,  points  in  the  air,  hilts  in  the  hand,
loops  and  ribbons  complete  the  men's  equipment.

The  women  are  no  less  curiously  attired.  The  drawings  of
Delia  Bella  and  Romain  de  Hooge  give  some  idea  of  their
apparel  ;  they  wear  stuffed  and  undulating  dresses,  with  great
folds  which  glisten  like  the  throats  of  turtledoves  and  reflect
all  the  changing  tints  of  the  iris;  large  sleeves  from  which
other  sleeves  emerge;  ruffs  of  lace,  rising  higher  than  the
head,  for  which  they  serve  as  a  frame;  corsets  covered  with
bows,  embroidery,  aiguillettes,  strange  jewels,  aigrettes  of
heron  plumes,  and  necklaces  of  large  pearls;  they  carry  fans
of  peacocks'  tails  with  mirrors  in  the  middle  of  them  and  are
equipped  with  everything  necessary  for  a  visit  to  the  theater.

It  is  a  taste  which  is  not  quite  English,  German,  French,
Turkish,  Spanish,  nor  Tartar,  though  having  something  of
each,  taking  in  the  most  graceful  and  characteristic  part
from   each    country.     Actors   attired   in   this   way   can   say


142  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

anything  they  please  without  making  it  appear  incongruous.

How  amusing  and  charming  are  their  speeches  !  These  are
not  the  sort  of  actors  to  twist  their  mouths  and  make  their
eyes  start  from  their  heads  in  a  search  after  effect;  at  least
they  do  not  give  the  impression  of  being  workers  at  their
task,  or  yoked  oxen  in  haste  to  finish  their  journey;  they  are
not  plastered  with  powder  and  rouge  to  the  depth  of  half  an
inch;  they  do  not  wear  daggers  of  tin,  nor  do  they  keep  in
reserve  beneath  their  cloaks  a  bladder  of  blood;  they  do  not
wear  the  same  oil-stained  rags  for  entire  acts.

They  speak  without  haste,  without  shouting,  like  well-bred
persons  who  do  not  attach  much  importance  to  what  they  are
saying.  The  lover  makes  his  declaration  to  his  mistress  with
the  most  unconcerned  air  in  the  world;  while  talking  he  flicks
his  thigh  with  the  end  of  his  white  gloves.  The  lady  non-
chalantly shakes  the  dew  from  her  bouquet;  the  lover  makes
little  effort  to  spften  her  cruelty,  his  principal  business  is  to
let  fall  from  his  lips  the  pearls  and  sow  with  lavish  hand  the
precious  stones  of  poesy;  often  even  he  quite  effaces  himself
and  allows  the  author  to  court  his  mistress  for  him.  Jealousy
is  not  his  failing,  and  he  is  of  a  most  accommodating  humor.
With  uplifted  eyes  he  complacently  waits  till  the  poet  has
finished  to  resume  his  part  and  fall  down  upon  his  knees.

Everything  winds  and  unwinds  itself  with  admirable  care-
lessness; the  effects  have  no  cause,  and  the  causes  have  no
effect.  The  cleverest  person  is  tlie  one  who  makes  the  most
foolish  remarks;  the  most  foolish  persons  say  the  cleverest
things;  young  girls  converse  in  a  way  which  would  make  old
courtesans  blush  ;  courtesans  give  utterance  to  moral  maxims.
The  most  extraordinary  adventures  succeed  each  other  with-
out any  explanation;  the  noble  father  arrives  posthaste  from
China  in  a  bamboo  junk  to  recognize  a  long-lost  daughter;  the
gods  and  fairies  descend  to  earth  and  ascend  to  heaven  again.
The  action  plunges  into  the  sea  beneath  the  topaz  dome  of  the
waves  and  traverses  the  bed  of  the  ocean  through  forests  of
coral  and  madrepores,  or  ascends  to  heaven  upon  the  wings  of
the  lark  or  the  griffon.  The  dialogue  is  universal.  The  lion
contributes  to  it  with  a  vigorous  '*ugh  !''  the  wall  speaks
through  its  crevices  ;  and  provided  that  it  has  a  point,  a  rebus,


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  143

or  a  pun,  each  is  free  to  interrupt  the  most  interesting  scene  ;
the  ass's  head  of  Bottom  is  as  welcome  as  Ariel's  fair  face.
The  spirit  of  the  author  is  displayed  in  every  form;  and  all
these  contradictions  are  like  so  many  facets  which  reflect  its
different  aspects,  while  adding  the  colors  of  the  prism.

This  pell-mell  and  apparent  disorder  depict  real  life  under
its  fantastic  appearance  more  exactly  than  the  most  minutely
studied  drama  of  manners.  Every  man  encloses  in  himself
entire  humanity,  and  in  writing  whatever  enters  his  head  he
succeeds  better  than  in  copying  with  a  magnifying  glass  the
objects  placed  about  him.

Of  this  theater,  written  for  the  fairies,  there  is  a  piece
which  ought  to  be  performed  in  the  moonlight  and  delights
me  greatly;  it  is  a  play  so  inconsequent,  the  plot  of  which  is
so  airy  and  the  characters  so  strange,  that  the  author  himself,
not  knowing  what  title  to  give  it,  called  it  "As  You  Like  It"
— an  elastic  name  which  answers  for  anything.

In  reading  this  strange  play  you  feel  yourself  transported
into  an  unknown  world  of  which  a  vague  reminiscence  lin-
gers ;  a  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  you  are  dead  or  alive,  wak-
ing or  sleeping;  gracious  faces  smile  sweetly  upon  you,  and
give  you  a  friendly  greeting  as  they  pass.  You  feel  moved
and  troubled  at  the  sight  of  them,  as  if  suddenly,  at  a  turn  of
the  road,  you  are  about  to  meet  your  ideal,  or  the  forgotten
phantom  of  an  old  mistress  will  rise  up  unexpectedly  before
you.  Springs  flow  with  a  half -audible  murmur;  the  wind
sways  with  tender  sighs  the  old  trees  of  the  ancient  forest
above  the  head  of  the  aged  exiled  duke  ;  and  when  James  the
melancholy  utters  to  tlie  stream  of  water  his  sorrowful  phi-
losophy, it  seems  as  if  you  are  yourself  speaking,  and  as  if  the
most  secret  and  obscure  thought  of  your  heart  is  being  re-
vealed and  illuminated.

O  young  son  of  the  brave  chevalier  Rowland  of  the  Woods,
so  ill-treated  by  fortune  !  I  cannot  help  being  jealous  of  you;
you  have  still  one  faithful  follower,  Adam,  whose  age  is  so
green  beneath  his  white  hair.  You  are  banished,  but  at  least
you  have  first  struggled  and  triumphed;  your  evil  brother
carries  off  all  your  possessions,  but  Rosalind  gives  you  the
necklace  from  her  throat.    You  are  poor,  but  you  are  loved  ;


144  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

you  leave  your  own  country,  but  the  daughter  of  your  perse-
cutor follows  you  beyond  the  seas.

The  black  Ardennes  open  their  great  leafy  arms  to  receive
and  conceal  you;  the  kind  forest  gathers  in  its  grottos  the
softest  moss  for  your  bed;  it  inclines  its  arches  above  your
head  to  protect  you  from  rain  and  sun;  it  pities  you  with  the
tears  of  its  springs  and  the  sighs  of  its  fawns  and  deer;  it
turns  its  rocks  into  willing  desks  for  your  love  letters  ;  it  lends
the  thorns  of  its  bushes  to  suspend  them,  and  orders  the  satin
bark  of  its  aspens  to  yield  to  the  point  of  your  pen  when  you
wish  to  write  to  Rosalind.

If  one  could,  young  Orlando,  have  like  you  a  mighty  and
shady  forest  into  which  to  withdraw  and  isolate  oneself  in
sorrow,  and  if  at  the  turn  of  a  path  one  were  to  meet  tlie
woman  one  sought,  recognizable  though  disguised  !  But,  alas,
the  world  of  the  soul  has  no  leafy  Ardennes,  and  it  is  only  in
the  garden  of  poesy  that  the  little  wild  and  capricious  flowers,
whose  perfume  makes  one  forget  everything,  grow.  In  vain
do  we  shed  tears,  they  do  not  form  those  beautiful  silvery
cascades;  in  vain  we  sigh,  no  pitying  echo  answers  us.  In
vain  do  we  attach  sonnets  to  the  tliorns  of  the  brambles,  for
Rosalind  does  not  gather  them,  and  it  is  of  no  avail  for  us
to  cover  the  bark  of  the  trees  with  words  of  love.

Birds  of  the  sky,  each  one  lend  me  a  feather,  the  swallow
as  well  as  the  eagle,  so  that  I  may  construct  a  pair  of  wings
with  which  to  fly  high  and  quickly  to  unknown  lands,  where
I  shall  find  nothing  to  recall  to  me  tlie  city  of  the  living,  where
I  can  forget  that  I  am  myself,  and  live  a  life  strange  and  new
— further  off  than  America,  further  than  Africa,  further  than
Asia,  further  than  the  remotest  island  in  the  world,  by  the
sea  of  ice  beyond  the  pole  were  the  Aurora  Borealis  flashes,
in  the  impalpable  realm  w^hither  the  divine  creations  of  the
poets  and  types  of  suprenie  beauty  wing  their  way.

How  is  a  person  to  endure  the  ordinary  drawing-room
chatter  after  hearing  sparkling  Mercutio  talk,  whose  every
phrase  bursts  into  a  rain  of  gold  and  sliver,  like  a  firework
bomb  beneath  a  sky  studded  with  stars?  What  women  do
not  seem  ugly  by  the  side  of  your  Vcnuses,  ancient  sculptors,
poets  with  marble  strophes?


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  145

Ah,  in  spite  of  the  furious  embrace  with  which  I  wished  to
envelop  the  material  world  failing  the  other,  I  feel  that  I  am
ill-born,  that  life  is  not  made  for  me  and  that  it  repels  me.
I  cannot  mix  in  anything;  whatever  path  I  follow  I  lose  my
way;  the  level  road,  the  rocky  path  equally  lead  me  to  the
abyss.  If  I  wish  to  take  my  flight,  the  air  condenses  around
me,  and  I  remain  in  captivity  with  extended  wings,  unable
to  close  them.  I  can  neither  walk  nor  fly;  the  sky  attracts
me  when  I  am  on  earth,  the  earth  when  I  am  in  the  sky;  in
the  air  the  north  wind  plucks  my  feathers  from  me  ;  on  earth
the  stones  hurt  my  feet.  I  have  too  tender  soles  to  walk  upon
real  bits  of  glass  ;  too  narrow  an  expanse  of  wing  to  soar  in
the  air,  to  rise  and  circle  in  the  profound  azure  of  mysticism
to  the  inaccessible  heights  of  eternal  love.  I  am  the  most  un-
fortunate hippogrifif,  the  most  miserable  collection  of  hetero-
geneous morsels  that  has  ever  existed  since  the  Ocean  loved
the  Moon  and  women  have  deceived  men;  the  monstrous
Chimera  put  to  death  by  Bellerophon,  with  its  maiden's  head,
its  lion's  claws,  its  goat's  body,  and  dragon's  tail,  was  an
animal  of  simple  composition  compared  with  me.

In  my  frail  breast  dwell  together  the  violet-strewn  dreams
of  the  blushing  maid  and  the  mad  passion  of  the  courtesan;
my  desires  come  like  lions,  sharpening  their  claws  in  the
shade  and  seeking  something  to  devour;  my  thoughts,  more
restless  and  uneasy  than  goats,  hang  from  the  most  dangerous
ridges;  my  hate,  steeped  in  poison,  twists  into  inextricable
knots  its  scaly  folds  and  drags  its  length  in  the  ruts  and
ravines.

My  soul  is  a  strange  land,  flourishing  and  splendid  in  ap-
pearance, but  more  saturated  with  putrid  and  deleterious  mi-
asmas than  the  country  of  Batavia.  The  slightest  sunshine
upon  the  slime  there  hatches  the  reptiles  and  spreads  abroad
the  mosquitoes;  the  large  yellow  tulips  and  the  angsoka
flowers  pompously  veil  shameful  carrion.  The  amorous  rose
opens  its  scarlet  lips,  and  smiling  shows  its  little  teeth  of  dew
to  the  gallant  nightingales  who  recite  madrigals  and  sonnets
to  it.  Nothing  is  more  charming;  but  it  is  a  hundred  to  one
that  in  the  grass  beneath  the  bush  a  dropsical  toad  is  crawling
upon  its  unsteady  feet  and  leaving  its  track  of  slime.


146  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

There  are  springs  clearer  and  more  limpid  than  the  finest
diamond;  but  it  would  be  better  to  drain  the  stagnant  water
of  the  morass  beneath  its  covering  of  rotted  rushes  and  dead
dogs  than  to  dip  the  drinking  cup  in  these  pools.  A  serpent
is  hidden  in  their  depths  which  moves  with  frightful  rapidity
and  disgorges  its  venom.

If  you  plant  wheat,  asphodel,  henbane,  tares,  and  hemlock
spring  up.  Instead  of  the  root  you  plant  you  will  be  very
surprised  to  see  rise  from  the  earth  the  rough  and  twisted
limbs  of  the  black  mandrake.

If  you  leave  a  souvenir  there  and  come  some  time  later  to
recover  it,  you  will  find  it  more  mossy  and  covered  with  wood
lice  and  disgusting  insects  than  a  stone  placed  upon  the  damp
earth  of  a  cellar.

Do  not  try  to  cross  its  darkening  forests;  they  are  more
impracticable  than  the  virgin  forests  of  America  and  the
jungles  of  Java.  Creepers  strong  as  cables  hang  from
tree  to  tree  ;  plants  bristling  and  pointed  like  spear  heads  ob-
struct all  the  paths  ;  the  earth  itself  is  covered  with  a  burning
growth  like  the  nettle.  In  the  arches  of  the  foliage  hang  by
their  claws  gigantic  bats  of  the  vampire  species;  beetles  of
enormous  size  wave  threatening  horns  and  beat  the  air  with
their  fourfold  wings;  monstrous  and  fantastic  animals,  like
those  we  see  in  nightmares,  advance  painfully,  breaking  the
reeds  before  them.  There  are  herds  of  elephants  which  crush
flies  between  the  wrinkles  of  their  dry  skin  or  rub  their  flanks
against  stones  and  trees,  there  is  the  rhinoceros,  with  its  rug-
ged armor,  and  the  hippopotamus  with  its  inflated  muzzle  and
bristling  hair,  which  knead  the  mud  and  the  débris  of  the
forest  with  their  huge  feet.

In  the  clearings,  where  a  ray  of  the  sun  penetrates  through
the  humid  atmosphere,  at  the  spot  where  you  would  have  liked
to  sit  down,  you  will  always  find  some  family  of  tigers  non-
chalantly lying  and  sniffing  up  the  air  through  their  nostrils,
blinking  their  sea-green  eyes,  and  dressing  their  velvet  fur
with  blood-red  tongues  covered  with  papillae  ;  or  else  there  is
a  group  of  boa  contsrictors  half  asleep  as  they  digest  the  last
ox  they  have  swallowed.


1


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  147

Fear  everything;  the  grass,  fruit,  water,  air,  shade,  and
sunlight — everything  is  deadly.

Close  your  ears  to  the  chatter  of  the  little  parrakeets  witli
golden  beaks  and  emerald  necks,  v^hich  come  down  from  the
trees  and  settle  upon  your  fingers  with  fluttering  wings;  for
though  they  have  golden  beaks  and  emerald  necks,  they  will
end  by  gently  pecking  out  your  eyes  at  the  moment  you  stoop
to  fondle  them.

The  world  does  not  require  me  ;  it  repulses  me  like  a  specter
escaped  from  the  tombs;  my  pallor  is  almost  of  that  nature;
my  blood  refuses  to  believe  that  I  am  alive,  and  will  not  color
my  skin  ;  it  trails  slowly  through  my  veins  like  stagnant  water
in  an  overgrown  canal.  My  heart  does  not  beat  for  anything
a  man's  heart  should.  My  sorrows  and  joys  are  not  those  of
my  fellows.  I  have  violently  desired  that  which  no  man  de-
sires ;  I  have  disdained  the  things  most  sought  after  by  men.
I  have  loved  women  when  they  did  not  love  me,  and  I  have
been  loved  when  I  would  rather  have  been  hated;  it  has  always
been  either  too  soon  or  too  late,  never  just  right.  I  have
either  not  arrived  or  been  too  far  away.  I  have  cast  my  life
from  the  windows  or  concentrated  it  too  much  upon  a  single
point;  and  from  the  restless  activity  of  the  busybody  I  have
come  to  the  mournful  somnolence  of  the  Stylite  upon  his
column.

My  deeds  always  have  the  appearance  of  a  dream;  my
actions  seem  rather  the  result  of  somnambulism  than  of  a  free
will;  something  is  in  me — I  feel  it  obscurely  very  deep  down
— which  makes  me  act  without  my  own  participation  and  al-
ways outside  common  laws;  the  simple  and  natural  side  of
things  is  only  revealed  to  me  last  of  all,  and  I  first  of  all
seize  upon  the  bizarre  and  eccentric.  However  little  the  line
slants,  I  will  soon  make  it  into  a  spiral  more  twisted  than  a
serpent;  the  contours,  if  they  are  not  fixed  in  the  most  precise
fashion,  waver  and  lose  their  shape.  Faces  take  a  super-
natural appearance  and  look  at  me  with  terrifying  eyes.

So,  by  a  sort  of  instinctive  reaction,  I  am  always  despair-
ingly clinging  to  the  material,  to  the  external  silhouette  of
things,  and  in  art  I  have  given  the  plastic  a  very  prominent
place.     I  perfectly  understand  a  statue,  but  I  do  not  under-


148  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

stand  a  man;  where  life  begins  I  stop  and  recoil  in  terror  as
if  I  have  caught  sight  of  the  head  of  the  Medusa.  The  phe-
nomenon of  life  causes  me  an  astonishment  of  which  I  cannot
rid  myself.  I  shall  without  a  doubt  make  an  excellent  corpse,
for  I  am  a  poor  enough  mortal,  and  the  feeling  of  my  ex-
istence completely  escapes  me.  The  sound  of  my  own  voice
surprises  me  to  an  unthinkable  extent,  and  sometimes  I  feel
tempted  to  take  it  for  the  voice  of  another.  When  I  desire
to  stretch  out  my  arm,  and  my  arm  obeys  me,  that  appears  to
me  quite  wonderful,  and  a  feeling  of  the  most  profound  stupe-
faction overcomes  me.

To  sum  up,  Silvio,  I  perfectly  understand  the  unintelligible;
the  most  extravagant  gifts  seem  to  me  quite  natural  and  I
enter  into  them  with  singular  facility.  I  can  easily  follow  the
windings  of  the  most  capricious  and  disordered  nightmare.
That  is  the  reason  the  kind  of  plays  I  mentioned  just  now
pleases  me  more  than  any  other.

We,  Theodore,  Rosette,  and  myself,  have  great  arguments
on  this  subject.  Rosette  has  little  taste  for  my  choice,  she  is
in  favor  of  realism:  Theodore  gives  the  poet  more  latitude
and  admits  the  truth  of  convention  and  illusion;  I  myself
maintain  that  it  is  necessary  to  give  the  author  an  absolutely
clear  field  where  fantasy  can  hold  entire  sway.

Many  persons  of  the  company  relied  principally  upon  the
argument  that  such  plays  were  generally  unsuitable  for  the
conditions  of  the  theater  and  could  not  be  performed.  I  re-
plied that  it  was  true  in  one  sense  and  false  in  another,  just
as  is  almost  everything,  and  that  the  ideas  held  of  the  pos-
sibilities and  impossibilities  of  the  stage  seemed  to  me  to
lack  precision  and  savor  more  of  prejudice  than  of  reason,
and  I  said  among  other  things  that  the  play  "As  You  Like
It"  was  certainly  quite  actable,  especially  to  fashionable
people  unaccustomed  to  other  parts.

That  gave  me  the  idea  of  performing  it.  The  season  îs
getting  on,  and  every  form  of  amusement  is  exhausted;  we
are  weary  of  the  chase,  of  riding  and  boating  parties,  while
the  luck  of  cards,  however  varied  it  may  be,  is  not  sufficient
to  occupy  the  evenings,  so  the  proposal  was  enthusiastically
received.


Vi


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  149


A  young  man  who  could  paint  offered  to  do  the  scenery;
he  is  now  working  at  it  most  energetically  and  in  a  few  days
will  have  finished.  The  theater  is  fitted  up  in  the  orangery,
which  is  the  largest  room  of  the  château,  and  I  think  all  will
be  well.  I  shall  take  the  part  of  Orlando.  Rosette  had  in
justice  to  her  to  be  cast  for  the  part  of  Rosalind;  as  my  mis-
tress and  the  lady  of  the  house  the  part  is  hers  by  right;  but
she  did  not  wish  to  disguise  herself  as  a  man,  through  some
caprice  very  strange  in  one  in  whom  prudery  is  not  a  failing.
If  I  had  not  been  sure  of  the  contrary,  I  should  have  thought
she  had  badly  shaped  legs.  Really  none  of  the  ladies  of  the
company  wished  to  appear  less  scrupulous  than  Rosette,  and
that  fact  nearly  wrecked  the  play;  but  Theodore,  whose  part
is  that  of  James  the  melancholy,  offered  to  replace  her,  con-
sidering that  as  Rosalind  is  almost  alw^ays  dressed  as  a  man
except  in  the  first  act,  where  she  appears  as  a  woman,  he  could
with  make-up,  a  corset,  and  a  dress  look  the  part  well  enough,
as  he  has  no  beard  and  a  very  slender  waist.

We  are  engaged  in  learning  our  parts,  and  it  is  very  curious
to  see  us.  In  all  the  lonely  corners  of  the  park  you  are  sure
to  come  upon  some  one  book  in  hand  mumbling  plirases  in
an  undertone,  with  eyes  raised  to  heaven  and  then  suddenly
lowered,  and  seven  or  eight  times  repeating  the  same  gesture.
If  it  were  not  known  that  we  were  to  play  the  comedy,  assur-
edly we  should  be  taken  for  a  house  full  of  lunatics  or  poets
(which  is  almost  exactly  the  same  thing).

I  think  we  shall  soon  know  enough  to  have  a  rehearsal.  I
am  expecting  something;  very  curious  at  it.  Perhaps  I  am
mistaken.  I  was  for  a  time  afraid  that  our  actors,  instead
of  performing  by  inspiration,  would  attempt  to  imitate  the
poses  and  vocal  inflections  of  some  fashionable  comedian;
but  happily  they  are  not  ardent  enough  theater  goers  to  make
this  mistake,  and  it  is  likely  that  they  will  display,  amid  the
bashfulness  of  people  who  have  never  before  acted,  precious
gleams  of  naturalness,  and  those  charming  naïvetés  which  the
most  consummate  talent  cannot  imitate.

Our  young  painter  has  really  done  wonders  :  it  is  impossible
to  give  a  stranger  appearance  to  the  old  tree  trunks  and  the
i\'y  entwining  them  than  he  has  done;  he  has  taken  as  his


150  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

model  the  trees  in  the  park,  accentuating  and  exaggerating
them  in  the  manner  necessary  for  scenery.  Everything  is
touched  with  admirable  pride  and  caprice:  the  stones,  rocks,
and  clouds  are  mysteriously  threatening  in  shape;  gleaming
reflections  are  thrown  upon  the  moving  waters,  and  the  usual
coldness  of  the  foliage  is  marvelously  relieved  by  the  saffron
tints  introduced  into  it  by  the  touch  of  autumn;  the  forest
varies  from  emerald-green  to  purple  ;  the  warmest  and  fresh-
est tones  mingle  harmoniously,  and  the  sky  itself  extends  from
the  most  tender  blue  to  the  most  fiery  red.

He  has  designed  all  the  costumes  from  my  sketches;  they
are  most  beautiful  in  character.  At  first  the  cry  was  that  they
could  not  be  translated  into  silk  and  velvet  nor  any  known
material,  and  the  moment  almost  came  for  the  troubadour
costume  to  be  generally  adopted.  The  ladies  said  that  the
glaring  colors  would  dim  their  eyes.  To  this  we  replied  that
their  eyes  were  unquenchable  stars,  and  that,  on  the  other
hand,  their  eyes  would  dull  the  colors,  and  even  the  footlights,
the  luster,  and  the  sun.  They  had  no  reply  to  make  to  that;
but  there  were  other  objections  which  rejected  in  a  body
bristled  like  the  hydra  of  Lerna;  no  sooner  was  the  head  of
one  cut  off  than  another,  more  obstinate  and  more  stupid,  took
its  place.

*'How  can  you  expect  that  to  fasten?  It  is  all  right  on
paper,  but  quite  a  different  matter  to  wear.  I  shall  never
come  on  wearing  that  !  My  skirt  is  at  least  four  inches  too
short;  I  shall  never  dare  to  appear  like  this  !  This  ruff  is  too
high  ;  I  look  as  if  I  am  humpbacked  and  without  a  neck.  This
head  dress  ages  me  terribly.''

With  starch,  pins,  and  good  temper  everything  was
smoothed  over.  "You  must  be  joking!  A  waist  like  yours,
more  slender  than  a  wasp's,  which  would  pass  through  the
ring  on  my  little  finger  !  I  will  wager  twenty-five  pounds  to
a  kiss  that  the  corsage  will  have  to  be  taken  in.  Your  skirt
is  far  from  being  too  short,  and  if  you  could  only  see  what
an  adorable  leg  you  have,  you  would  certainly  be  of  my  opin-
ion. Quite  the  contrary,  your  neck  stands  out,  and  is  admir-
ably outlined  in  its  halo  of  lace.  This  head  dress  does  not  age
you  at  all,  and  even  if  you  were  to  appear  a  few  years  older,


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  151

you  are  so  excessively  young  that  it  would  be  a  matter  of  no
consequence  to  you;  really  you  would  give  us  strange  sus-
picions, if  we  did  not  know  where  the  bits  of  your  last  doll
were/'

You  cannot  imagine  the  amount  of  flattery  we  were  com-
pelled to  use  to  persuade  our  ladies  to  put  on  the  charming
costumes  which  suited  them  so  well.

What  a  terrible  taste  women  have  !  What  titanic  obstinacy
is  possessed  by  a  feather-brained  little  woman  who  thinks  that
yellow  suits  her  better  than  the  jonquil  or  the  rose.  I  am
sure  that  if  I  had  applied  to  public  business  half  the  ruses  and
intrigues  that  I  have  employed  to  get  a  red  feather  placed  on
the  left  side  instead  of  the  right,  I  should  be  a  minister  or
even  an  emperor.

What  pandemonium!  What  an  enormous  and  inextri-
cable mob  must  a  real  theater  be  !

Since  acting  the  comedy  was  first  mentioned  everything
here  has  been  in  a  complete  state  of  disorder.  All  the  drawers
are  open,  all  the  cupboards  empty  ;  it  has  been  a  real  pillage.
The  tables  and  couches  are  all  crowded,  there  is  hardly  room
to  step;  prodigious  quantities  of  dresses,  cloaks,  veils,  skirts,
capes,  and  hats  trail  through  the  house  ;  and  when  it  is  taken
into  consideration  that  they  are  all  for  the  bodies  of  seven  or
eight  persons,  one  cannot  help  unwittingly  recollecting  those
clowns  at  the  fairs  who  wear  eight  or  ten  coats  one  over  the
other,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  realize  that  out  of  this  great
mass  only  one  costume  for  each  person  will  emerge.

The  servants  run  hither  and  thither;  there  are  always  two
or  three  of  them  on  the  way  from  the  château  to  the  town,  and
if  this  sort  of  thing  continues  all  the  horses  will  become
broken  winded.

A  stage  manager  has  no  time  to  be  melancholy,  and  I  have
hardly  been  sad  for  some  time.  I  am  so  stupified  and  plagued
that  I  begin  to  lose  my  grip  of  the  play.  As  I  fill  the  part  of
the  impresario  as  well  as  that  of  Orlando,  my  task  is  a  double
one.  When  a  difficulty  arises  I  am  consulted,  and  my  decision
not  being  always  regarded  as  an  oracle  interminable  dis-
cussions ensue.

If  life  consists  of  being  always  on  one's  feet  answering


152  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

twenty  persons  at  once,  ascending  and  descending  staircases,
and  not  having  a  moment  to  think  during  the  day,  I  have
never  Hved  so  much  as  during  this  last  week;  I  do  not,  how-
ever, take  as  great  a  part  in  the  movement  as  you  might
imagine.  The  agitation  is  only  skin-deep,  and  life  does  not
penetrate  me  as  easily  as  that;  although  I  seem  to  be  acting
and  mixing  in  all  that  is  going  on,  I  am  at  the  same  time
living  the  least  of  all.  Action  stupifies  and  fatigues  me  to
an  extent  it  is  imposible  to  realize  ;  when  I  do  not  act  I  am
thinking,  or  at  least  I  am  dreaming,  and  that  is  a  mode  of
existence.

Up  to  the  present  time  I  have  done  nothing,  and  I  am  not
aware  if  I  ever  shall  do  anything.  I  do  not  know  how  to  con-
trol my  brains,  and  that  comprises  the  difference  between  the
man  of  talent  and  the  man  of  genius;  it  is  a  never-ending
effervescence,  wave  following  wave  ;  I  cannot  master  the  kind
of  internal  jet  which  mounts  from  my  heart  to  my  head  and
which  drowns  all  my  thoughts  for  lack  of  outlets.  I  cannot
produce  anything,  not  from  sterility,  but  through  super-
abundance ;  my  ideas  are  so  strong  and  numerous  that  they  arc
stifled  and  cannot  mature.  Never  can  execution,  however
rapid,  attain  such  velocity.  When  I  write  a  phrase  the
thought  it  conveys  is  as  far  away  from  me  as  if  a  century
had  elapsed  instead  of  a  second,  and  often  it  happens  that  I
unconsciously  mingle  an  idea  w^ith  the  one  succeeding  it.

That  is  why  I  do  not  know  how  to  live,  either  as  a  poet  or
as  a  lover.  I  can  only  reproduce  the  ideas  I  have  ceased  to
possess  ;  I  only  gain  the  affections  of  women  when  I  have  for-
gotten them  and  love  others  ;  man,  how  can  I  let  my  mind  be
seen,  since  however  much  I  hate  myself,  I  have  no  longer
the  consciousness  of  what  I  am  doing,  and  I  act  only  accord-
ing to  a  full  reminiscence?

Take  a  thought  from  one's  brain;  let  it  be  first  of  all  as
unpolished  as  a  block  of  marble  roughhewn  from  the  quarry  ;
place  it  before  oneself,  and  from  morning  till  evening,  chisel
in  one  hand  and  mallet  in  the  other,  tap,  carve,  and  scrape;
that  is  a  method  I  could  never  adopt.

In  imagination  I  can  easily  evolve  the  slender  face  from  the
rough  block,  and  I  can  see  it  ver>»  clearly;  but  there  are  so


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  153

many  corners  to  remove,  so  many  chips  to  detach,  so  many
taps  of  the  mallet  to  be  delivered  before  the  right  shape  is
attained  and  the  correct  contour  reached,  that  my  hands  be-
come blistered  and  I  let  fall  my  chisel.

If  I  persist  the  fatigue  becomes  so  intense  that  my  inner
sight  is  totally  obscured,  and  I  cannot  see  through  the  opaque
marble  the  white  divinity  concealed  in  its  depths.  Then  I
pursue  it  haphazard,  as  if  by  a  sense  of  touch;  I  cut  too
deeply  in  one  place,  and  not  far  enough  forv^^ard  in  another.
I  take  away  what  ought  to  be  the  leg  or  arm,  and  I  have  a
compact  mass  where  a  space  ought  to  be;  in  place  of  a  goddess
I  make  an  ape,  and  sometimes  not  even  that,  and  the  magnifi-
cent block,  obtained  at  such  enormous  expense  and  tremen-
dous labor  from  the  entrails  of  the  earth,  carved,  hewn,  and
worked  in  every  way,  seems  rather  to  have  been  gnawed  and
pierced  by  the  polyps  to  make  a  hive,  than  carved  by  a  sculp-
tor on  a  given  design.

How  did  you,  Michael  Angelo,  cut  the  marble  into  slices
like  a  child  carving  a  marrow?  Of  what  steel  were  your
invincible  chisels  fashioned?  What  robust  strength  your  pro-
lific artists  and  workers  must  have  possessed,  a  strength  which
no  material  could  resist,  to  turn  your  entire  dream  into  color
or  bronze?

It  is  an  innocent  and  to  some  extent  permissible  vanity  after
my  cruel  remarks  about  myself,  Silvio,  and  I  know  you  are
not  the  one  to  blame  me  for  it,  for  me  to  say  that  although
the  universe  will  never  be  aware  of  the  fact,  and  my  name  is
destined  from  the  first  for  oblivion,  I  am  a  poet  and  a  painter  !
I  have  ideas  more  beautiful  than  any  poet  in  the  world.  I
have  created  types  as  pure  and  divine  as  those  most  greatly
admired  of  the  old  masters.  I  see  them  there,  before  me,  as
clearly  and  distinctly  as  if  they  were  really  painted,  and  if  I
could  open  a  hole  in  my  skull  and  insert  a  glass  for  others
to  view,  it  would  be  the  most  marvelous  gallery  of  pictures
ever  seen.  No  king  on  earth  can  boast  of  the  possession  of
such  a  one  ;  the  pictures,  which  are  in  a  style  peculiar  to  my-
self, would  not  be  disdained  by  any  one.  I  know  it  seems
strange  for  me  to  say  this,  and  that  I  must  appear  intoxicated
with  the  most  foolish  self-conceit;  but  it  is  so,  and  nothing


154  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

will  shake  my  conviction.  No  one,  without  a  doubt,  will  share
it  with  me.

I  have  sometimes  even  a  difficulty  in  concealing  my  thoughts
on  this  subject;  it  often  happens  that  I  speak  with  too  great
familiarity  of  these  lofty  geniuses  whose  lines  one  ought  to
adore,  and  whose  statues  one  ought  to  contemplate  from  a
distance  on  bended  knee.  Once  I  so  far  forgot  myself  as  to
include  myself  with  them.  Fortunately  it  was  to  a  person
who  took  no  notice,  or  I  should  have  obtained  the  reputation
of  being  the  most  tremendous  coxcomb  who  ever  lived.

Am  I  not,  Silvio,  a  poet  and  a  painter?

It  is  a  mistake  to  think  that  all  persons  who  obtained  the
reputation  of  genius  were  really  greater  men  than  otliers.  It
is  impossible  to  say  how  many  pupils  and  obscure  painters
Raphael  employed  on  the  works  which  contributed  to  his  re-
putation ;  he  lent  his  signature  to  the  imagination  and  talents
of  several,  that  is  all.

A  great  painter,  a  great  writer  occupy  and  fill  by  them-
selves alone  an  entire  century  ;  their  most  anxious  desire  is  to
dabble  in  all  sorts  of  art  and  literature,  so  that  if  rivals  arise
they  can  be  the  first  to  accuse  them  of  plagiarism  and  stop
them  upon  the  first  rung  of  the  ladder  of  fame;  these  are
well-known  tactics  and  though  not  new  are  successful  every
day.

It  sometimes  happens  that  an  already  famous  man  has  pre-
cisely the  same  sort  of  talent  that  you  yourself  would  have
had;  to  avoid  passing  for  his  imitator  you  are  obliged  to  divert
your  natural  inspiration  into  a  different  channel.

For  this  reason  many  noble  minds  are  forced  to  take  a
route  which  is  not  their  own,  and  to  perpetually  skirt  their
own  domain  from  which  they  are  banished,  still  happy  to  be
able  to  cast  a  furtive  glance  over  the  hedge  and  see  open  in
the'  sunlight  the  beautiful  variegated  flowers,  the  seeds  of
which  they  possess,  but  cannot  sow  for  lack  of  ground.

In  my  own  case  I  do  not  know  whether  I  should  have  made
any  great  mark  in  the  world,  for  I  lack  the  degree  of  stupid-
ity necessary  to  become  what  is  absolutely  called  a  genius,
and  the  enormous  obstinacy  afterwards  deified  by  the  beauti-
ful name  of  will,  when  the  great  man  has  reached  the  glorious


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  156

summit  of  the  mountain,  and  which  is  indispensable  to  reach
that  spot.  I  know  too  well  how  hollow  all  such  things  are,
containing,  as  they  do,  but  putrefaction,  to  attach  myself  for
too  long  to  any  one  and  pursue  it  ardently.

Men  of  genius  are  very  narrow-minded,  that  is  the  cause  of
genius.  Their  lack  of  intelligence  prevents  their  seeing  the
obstacles  which  separate  them  from  the  object  they  wish  to
reach  ;  they  start,  and  in  two  or  three  strides  cover  the  inter-
vening space.  As  their  mind  remains  obstinately  closed  to
certain  currents,  and  they  only  see  the  things  most  immedi-
ately concerned  with  their  own  projects,  they  attain  their
object  with  the  least  possible  expenditure  of  thought  and
action.  Nothing  distracts  them,  nothing  turns  them  aside;
they  act  rather  by  instinct  than  in  any  other  way,  and  several
of  them,  when  removed  from  their  particular  sphere,  display
an  incapacity  it  is  difficult  to  understand.

Certainly  it  is  a  rare  and  charming  gift  to  write  verses
well;  few  people  please  themselves  more  than  I  do  with
poetry;  but  still  I  do  not  desire  to  bound  and  circumscribe  my
life  within  the  twelve  feet  of  an  alexandrine;  there  are  a  thou-
sand things  which  disturb  me  as  much  as  a  hemistich,  though
not  the  state  of  society  and  the  reforms  it  would  be  necessary
to  make.  I  care  little  enough  whether  the  peasants  learn  to
read  or  not,  or  whether  men  eat  bread  or  browse  on  grass;
but  there  pass  through  my  head  in  one  hour  more  than  a
hundred  thousand  visions  which  have  not  the  slightest  con-
nection with  rests  and  rhymes,  and  that  is  the  reason  I  pro-
duce so  little  while  having  more  ideas  than  certain  poets  who
ought  to  be  burnt  with  their  own  works.

I  adore  beauty  and  perceive  it  ;  I  can  utter  it  as  well  as  the
most  statuary  lovers  can  convey  it,  yet  I  am  not  a  sculptor.
The  ugliness  and  imperfection  of  a  rough  sketch  annoys  me  ;
I  cannot  wait  till  the  work  comes  by  dint  of  polishing  and
repolishing  to  perfection  ;  and  if  I  could  make  up  my  mind  to
allow  certain  things  in  what  I  do,  either  in  verse  or  painting,
I  should  perhaps  end  by  creating  a  poem  or  picture  which
would  make  me  famous,  and  those  who  love  me  (if  there  is
any  one  in  the  world  who  takes  that  trouble)  would  not  be
compelled  to  take  my  word,  and  would  have  a  triumphant


156  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

answer  to  the  sardonic  sneers  of  the  detractors  of  that  great
unknown  genius,  myself.

As  it  is,  I  cannot  even  succeed  in  writing  a  letter  as  I  should
like.  I  often  say  things  quite  different  from  what  I  intend;
some  parts  swell  quite  out  of  proportion  to  the  rest,  while
others  shrink  to  vanishing  point,  and  very  often  the  idea  I
had  to  communicate  is  not  even  to  be  found  in  the  postscript.

When  I  sat  dow^n  to  write  to  you,  I  certainly  had  no  in-
tention of  telling  you  half  of  w^hat  I  have  written.  I  simply
wanted  to  let  you  know  that  w^e  were  going  to  perform  the
comedy;  but  a  word  leads  to  a  phrase,  one  parenthesis  pro-
duces another,  which  again  gives  birth  to  others.  There  is
no  reason  why  this  letter  should  not  extend  to  two  hundred
volumes,  but  that  would  most  certainly  be  too  much.

As  soon  as  I  pick  up  my  pen  there  is  a  buzzing  and  rus-
tling of  wings  in  my  head,  as  if  multitudes  of  cockchafers
had  been  liberated  there.  The  sound  knocks  upon  the  walls
of  my  cranium,  turns,  descends,  and  rises  with  a  horrible  din  :
it  is  the  noise  of  my  thoughts  which  desire  to  fly  away  and
seek  an  outlet  ;  they  all  try  to  emerge  at  once  ;  more  than  one
is  injured.  Sometimes  the  doorway  is  so  blocked  that  not
one  can  cross  its  threshold  and  reach  paper.

That  is  the  way  I  am  made — not  a  good  way,  certainly —
but  still  it  cannot  be  helped  !  The  fault  is  with  the  gods,
not  with  me,  a  poor  devil  who  has  no  alternative.  I  have  no
need  to  claim  your  indulgence,  Silvio;  it  is  granted  me  in
advance,  and  you  are  good  enough  to  read  to  the  end  my  il-
legible scrawls,  and  my  dreams  without  head  or  tail  ;  however
disjointed  and  absurd  they  may  be,  they  always  interest  you,
because  they  come  from  me,  and,  I,  bad  as  I  am,  still  have
some  value  in  your  eyes.

I  can  show  you  that  which  annoys  an  ordinary  man  most:
a  sincere  pride.  But  a  truce  to  all  these  fine  things,  and  since
I  am  waiting  to  you  about  our  play,  I  will  say  a  little  more
about  it.

The  rehearsal  took  place  to-day;  never  in  my  life  was  I  so
agitated,  not  because  of  the  natural  embarrassment  in  reciting
in  the  presence  of  a  number  of  persons,  but  for  another
reason.    We  were  in  costume  and  ready  to  begin;  Theodore


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  157

was  not  yet  present  ;  a  messenger  was  sent  to  his  room  to  see
what  detained  him;  he  sent  word  that  he  was  just  ready  and
was  coming  down.

He  came;  I  heard  his  footsteps  in  the  corridor  before  he
appeared,  and  yet  no  one  on  earth  has  a  lighter  tread  than
Theodore;  but  the  sympathy  I  feel  for  him  is  so  strong  that
I  to  some  extent  divine  his  movements  through  the  walls,  and
when  I  realized  that  he  w^as  about  to  place  his  hand  upon  the
handle  of  the  door,  a  trembling  seized  me,  and  my  heart  beat
horribly.  It  seemed  to  me  that  some  important  event  in  my
life  was  about  to  be  decided,  and  that  the  solemn  and  long-
expected  moment  had  arrived.

The  door  opened  and  closed  again  slowly.  There  was  a
general  cry  of  admiration.  The  men  clapped,  the  women
became  scarlet.  Rosette  alone  turned  very  pale  and  leant
against  the  wall,  as  if  a  sudden  revelation  had  come  to  her;
she  made  in  the  reverse  way  the  same  movement  that  I  did.
I  always  suspected  her  of  loving  Theodore.

Without  a  doubt,  at  that  moment  she  believed  as  I  did  that
the  sham  Rosalind  was  no  less  than  a  young  and  beautiful
woman,  and  the  frail  house  of  cards  of  her  hope  suddenly
collapsed,  while  mine  rose  upon  its  ruins  ;  at  least  that  is  what
I  thought;  perhaps  I  am  mistaken,  for  I  was  scarcely  in  the
state  to  make  exact  observations.

There  were,  without  counting  Rosette,  three  or  four  pretty
women  present;  they  appeared  revoltingly  ugly.  By  the
side  of  the  sun,  the  star  of  their  beauty  was  suddenly  eclipsed,
and  every  one  asked  himself  how  it  was  they  only  seemed
passable.  Men  who  previously  had  esteemed  themselves  very
fortunate  to  have  them  for  mistresses  would  now  have  hardly
taken  them  as  servants.

The  image  which  up  to  that  time  had  only  been  vaguely
outlined  in  indistinct  contours,  the  adored  but  vainly  pursued
phantom,  was  there  before  my  eyes  alive,  palpable,  no  longer
in  the  twilight  and  mist,  but  bathed  in  white  light  ;  not  in  an
ineffective  disguise,  but  in  real  dress  ;  not  in  the  derisive  shape
of  a  young  man,  but  with  the  features  of  a  most  charming
woman.

I  had  a  feeling  of  enormous  happiness,  as  if  a  mountain


158  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

or  two  had  been  removed  from  my  chest.  I  felt  the  horror
I  had  of  myself  vanish,  and  I  was  delivered  from  the  bore-
dom of  looking  upon  myself  as  a  monster.  I  returned  to  the
pastoral  opinion  of  myself,  and  all  the  violets  of  spring  blos-
somed in  my  heart

He,  or  rather  she  (for  I  want  to  forget  that  I  was  stupid
enough  to  take  her  for  a  man)  remained  for  a  moment  stand-
ing at  the  door,  and  as  if  to  allow  time  for  the  audience  to
utter  its  first  exclamation.  A  bright  light  illuminated  her
from  head  to  foot.  Her  long  brown  hair,  ornamented  with
rows  of  big  pearls,  fell  in  natural  curls  upon  her  beautiful
shoulders  !  Her  shoulders  and  breast  were  bare,  and  never
have  I  seen  any  so  beautiful;  the  most  noble  marble  does  not
approach  that  exquisite  perfection.  How  the  life  can  be  seen
through  its  shadowy  transparence  !  How  white  and  colored
at  the  same  time  such  flesh  is  !  How  such  fair  and  harmo-
nious tints  make  the  most  of  the  transition  from  the  skin  to
the  hair  !  What  ravishing  poems  there  are  in  the  soft  un-
dulation of  those  contours,  more  supple  and  velvety  than  the
swan's  neck  !  If  there  were  words  adequate  to  describe  what
I  feel,  I  would  write  you  a  fifty-page  description;  but  lan-
guages have  been  made  by  bunglers  who  have  never  gazed
attentively  at  a  woman's  breast  or  back,  and  not  half  the  in-
dispensable terms  exist.

I  am  decidedly  of  opinion  that  I  must  become  a  sculptor;
for  after  seeing  such  beauty,  to  be  unable  to  reproduce  it  in
one  way  or  another  is  enough  to  drive  a  man  mad.  I  have
written  twenty  sonnets  upon  those  shoulders,  but  that  is  not
enough.  I  should  like  something  which  I  could  touch  with
my  finger,  and  which  was  exactly  like  the  original.  Verses
only  an  appearance.  Sculpture  has  all  the  reality  a  thing  com-
The  painter  arrives  at  a  more  exact  appearance,  but  still  it  is
only  an  appearance.  Sculpture  has  all  the  reality  a  thing  com-
pletely  false  can  have;  it  has  the  multiple  aspect,  produces  a
shadow  and  can  be  touched.  Your  sculptured  figure  only
difiFers  from  the  real  in  being  a  little  harder  and  unable  to
talk  :  two  very  slight  defects.

Her  dress  was  made  of  a  material  which  changed  color,
it  was  azure  in  the  light  and  gold  in  the  shadow;  a  neat


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  159

buskin  enclosed  a  foot  which  did  not  need  it  to  appear  too
tiny,  and  scarlet  silk  stockings  clung  amorously  around  her
well-turned  and  seductive  legs;  her  arms  were  bare  to  the
elbows,  and  they  emerged  plump  and  white  from  a  round
cluster  of  lace  with  the  splendor  of  burnished  silver  and  a
delicacy  of  contour  quite  inconceivable;  her  hands,  loaded
with  rings,  gently  waved  a  large  fan  of  variegated  feathers
of  strange  tints,  which  looked  like  a  little  pocket  rainbow.

She  advanced  into  the  room,  her  face  slightly  tinged  with
a  red  which  was  not  rouge,  and  every  one  was  enraptured  and
excitedly  talking  as  they  asked  one  another  if  it  were  possible
that  this  was  Theodore  de  Sérannes,  the  bold  rider,  the  fa-
mous duelist,  the  determined  sportsman,  and  if  they  were  per-
fectly certain  this  was  not  his  twin  sister.

Theodore  looked  as  if  he  had  never  worn  any  other  cos-
tume in  his  life  !  He  was  not  the  least  bit  in  the  world  em-
barrassed in  his  movements,  he  walked  very  well,  and  was  not
encumbered  by  his  train  ;  he  ogled  and  played  with  his  fan  to
perfection.  What  a  fine  figure  he  had  !  His  waist  could  be
spanned  by  one's  fingers  !  It  is  wonderful,  it  is  inconceivable  !
The  illusion  was  as  complete  as  possible  ;  he  almost  gave  the
impression  of  a  breast  with  his  fat  and  bulging  chest;  and
then,  too,  there  was  not  a  hair  on  his  face,  and  his  voice  was
so  soft!  Oh,  beautiful  RosaHnd,  who  would  not  be  your
Orlando  ?

Yes,  who  would  not  be  Orlando  to  this  Rosalind,  even  to
endure  the  torments  I  have  suffered?  To  love  as  I  loved  with
a  monstrous  and  inadmissible  love,  which  could  not  be  up-
rooted from  the  heart;  to  be  condemned  to  keep  the  most
profound  silence,  and  not  to  dare  to  make  use  of  words  the
most  discreet  and  respectful  lover  would  utter  without  fear
to  the  most  severe  and  prudish  of  women;  to  feel  oneself
devoured  by  passions  considered  mad  and  inexcusable  in  the
most  libertine  eyes  ;  what  are  ordinary  passions  by  the  side  of
that  one,  shameless  in  itself,  without  hope,  while  its  improb-
able success  would  be  a  crime  and  make  one  die  of  shame?
To  be  reduced  to  a  desire  for  failure,  to  fear  favorable
chances  and  opportunities,  and  avoid  them  as  another  person
would  seek  them,  that  was  my  lot.


160  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

The  deepest  discouragement  had  taken  hold  upon  me;  I
looked  upon  myself  with  horror  mingled  with  surprise  and
curiosity.  The  most  revolting  tiling  to  me  was  to  think  that
I  had  never  loved  before,  and  that  in  my  case  it  was  the  first
effervescence  of  youth,  my  springtime  of  love.

This  monstrosity  in  my  case  took  the  place  of  the  fresh  and
shamefaced  illusions  of  that  beautiful  age.  At  times  when  I
felt  myself  most  strongly  attracted  towards  Theodore  I  took
refuge  in  affright  in  Rosette's  arms,  although  she  was  dis-
tasteful to  me;  I  tried  to  interpose  her  between  him  and  my-
self like  a  barrier  and  a  shield,  and  I  felt  a  secret  satisfaction
in  doing  so  from  the  thought  that  she  was  at  least  a  real
woman,  and  if  I  no  longer  loved  her,  she  still  loved  me  enough
for  the  liasion  not  to  degenerate  into  intrigue  and  debauchery.

Still  I  felt  in  my  heart  through  it  all  some  sort  of  regret  at
thus  being  unfaithful  to  the  idea  of  my  impossible  passion;  I
desired  it,  and  although  I  was  aware  that  I  should  never  pos-
sess the  object  of  my  love,  I  was  displeased  with  myself,  and
my  coldness  with  Juliette  was  continued.

The  rehearsal  was  much  better  than  I  expected;  Theodore
in  particular  was  admirable.  It  was  also  discovered  that  I
acted  very  well.  It  is  not  that  I  have  the  qualities  necessary
for  a  good  actor,  and  it  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  suppose
me  capable  of  taking  other  parts  with  the  same  success;  but
by  a  strange  chance  the  words  I  had  to  utter  so  well  suited  my
own  state  that  they  seemed  to  me  more  like  words  invented
by  myself  than  learned  from  a  book.  Memory  would  have
failed  me  in  some  places  had  I  not  unhesitatingly  filled  the
gap  with  an  improvised  phrase.  Orlando  was  myself  at  least
as  much  as  I  was  Orlando,  and  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  more
marvelous  coincidence.

In  the  scene  where  Theodore  detached  the  chain  from  his
neck  and  presented  it  to  me  he  threw  me  a  glance  so  gently
languishing,  so  full  of  promise,  and  uttered  the  words  with
such  grace  and  nobility  of  phrase,  '*Brave  knight,  wear  this
in  memory  of  me,  of  a  young  girl  who  would  give  you  more
if  she  had  more  to  offer,'*  I  was  really  agitated,  and  it  was
only  with  difficulty  that  I  could  continue,  '*What  passion  thus
weighs  upon  my  tongue  and  fetters  it?     I  cannot  speak  to


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  161


her,  and  yet  she  desires  to  talk  with  me.    O  poor  Orlando  !"

In  the  third  act  Rosalind,  dressed  as  a  man  and  in  the  name
of  Ganymede,  reappears  with  her  cousin  Celia,  who  has
changed  her  name  for  that  of  Aliéna.

That  scene  made  a  disagreeable  impression  upon  me,  for  I
was  already  so  used  to  the  woman's  dress,  which  gave  my
desires  some  hope,  and  which  maintained  me  in  a  perfidious
but  seductive  error!  One  uses  oneself  very  quickly  to  look
upon  desires  as  reality  upon  the  faith  of  the  most  fugitive  ap-
pearances, and  I  became  quite  gloomy  when  Theodore  re-
appeared in  man's  dress,  more  gloomy  than  I  was  before  ;  for
joy  only  serves  to  emphasize  sorrow,  the  sun  only  shines  to
make  the  horrors  of  darkness  better  understood,  and  the  gayety
of  the  white  only  has  for  its  object  the  making  of  all  the  sad-
ness of  the  black  stand  out  more  clearly.

His  dress  was  the  most  gallant  and  coquettish  possible,  of
an  elegant  and  capricious  cut,  ornamented  with  ribbons  al-
most in  the  style  of  the  exquisites  at  the  Court  of  Louis  XIII  ;
a  pointed  hat  of  felt  with  a  long  feather  shaded  his  beautiful
curls,  and  a  Damascus  blade  peered  from  beneath  his  travel-
ing cloak.

Still  he  wore  his  manly  habits  in  such  a  way  as  to  suggest
that  they  had  feminine  counterparts;  they  were  larger  about
the  hips  and  fuller  at  the  chest,  with  somewhat  more  wavy
lines  than  clothes  assume  upon  a  man's  body,  leaving  only
slight  doubts  as  to  the  person's  sex.

His  manner  was  half  deliberate,  half  timid,  and  with  infin-
ite art  he  gave  himself  the  air  of  being  embarrassed  in  a  cos-
tume familiar  to  him,  while  he  had  seemed  quite  at  ease  in  the
costume  not  his  own.

My  serenity  somewhat  returned,  and  I  persuaded  myself
once  more  that  Theodore  was  a  woman.  I  recovered  sufficient
sang-froid  to  suitably  continue  my  part.

Do  you  know  the  play  ?  Perhaps  not.  During  the  fortnight
in  which  I  have  done  nothing  but  read  and  recite  it  I  have
learned  it  entirely  by  heart,  and  I  can  hardly  realize  that
every  one  is  not  as  familiar  with  it  as  I  am.  It  is  a  common
mistake,  which  I  often  make,  to  think  that  when  I  am  intox-
icated the  whole  of  creation  is  so  too,  and  beating  the  walls  ;


162  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

and  if  I  knew  Hebrew  it  is  certain  I  should  ask  my  servant  in
Hebrew  for  my  dressing  gown  and  slippers,  and  be  very  sur-
prised he  did  not  understand  me.  You  shall  read  it  if  you
please;  I  shall  proceed  as  if  you  have  read  it,  and  only  touch
upon  the  parts  which  refer  to  my  situation.

Rosalind,  walking  in  the  forest  with  her  cousin,  is  very
surprised  to  find  the  bushes  bearing,  instead  of  mulberries
and  sloes,  madrigals  in  her  praise.  It  was  a  strange  crop
such  as  fortunately  is  not  usually  found  upon  the  hedgerows,
for  when  one  is  thirsty  it  is  better  to  find  good  mulberries  on
the  branches  than  bed  sonnets.  She  is  very  anxious  to  know
who  has  in  this  way  spoiled  the  bark  of  the  young  trees.
Celia,  who  has  already  met  Orlando,  tells  her,  after  long  en-
treaty, that  the  rhymer  is  none  other  than  the  conqueror  of
Charles  the  Duke's  wrestler.

Soon  Orlando  himself  appears,  and  Rosalind  enters  into
conversation  by  asking  him  the  time.  That  truly  is  a  most
simple  beginning;  nothing  in  the  world  could  be  more  com-
monplace. But  have  no  fear.  From  that  vulgar  and  ordinary
phrase  you  will  see  at  once  arise  a  number  of  unexpected
conceits,  full  of  flowery  and  singular  comparisons,  as  from
the  most  fertile  land.

After  a  few  lines  of  sparkling  dialogue,  in  which  every
word,  falling  upon  the  phrase,  makes  millions  of  sparks  fly
right  and  left  like  a  hammer  upon  a  bar  of  red-hot  iron,  Rosa-
lind asks  Orlando  if  by  any  chance  he  knows  the  man  who
hangs  odes  upon  the  hawthorn  and  elegies  upon  the  briars,
and  who  seems  to  be  attacked  daily  by  a  love  malady,  one  she
knows  perfectly  well  how  to  cure.  Orlando  confesses  that  he
is  the  man  so  tortured  by  love,  and  since  he  has  boasted  of
several  prescriptions  to  cure  the  malady,  will  he  be  good
enough  to  tell  him  one.  *'You  a  lover?''  Rosalind  replies.
*'You  have  none  of  the  symptoms  by  which  a  lover  is  recog-
nized; you  have  neither  thin  cheeks  nor  black-rimmed  eyes;
your  stockings  do  not  hang  down  about  your  heels,  your
sleeves  are  not  unbuttoned,  and  the  bow  of  your  shoes  is  tied
with  much  grace;  if  you  are  in  love  with  any  one  it  is  cer-
tainly with  your  own  person  and  you  have  no  use  for  my
remedies."


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  163

It  was  not  without  real  emotion  that  I  gave  the  reply  in
these  words  :

''Handsome  young  fellow,  I  would  like  to  be  able  to  make
you  believe  I  love  you/'

This  strange  and  unexpected  reply,  which  is  not  brought
about  by  anything,  and  which  seemed  to  have  been  written
expressly  for  me  as  if  by  the  poet's  prescience,  had  a  great
effect  upon  me  when  I  uttered  it  to  Theodore,  whose  divine
lips  were  still  slightly  distended  by  the  ironical  expression  of
the  phrase  he  had  just  uttered,  while  his  eyes  smiled  with
inexpressible  sweetness,  and  a  clear  ray  of  kindness  gilded
the  upper  part  of  his  young  and  beautiful  face.

*1  believe  it?  It  is  easy  enough  to  persuade  the  woman
who  loves  you,  and  yet  she  will  not  readily  admit  she  loves
you,  and  that  is  one  of  the  subjects  on  which  women  always
give  their  conscience  the  lie  ;  but  in  all  sincerity  are  you  the
person  who  fastened  to  the  bushes  all  those  beautiful  eulogies
of  Rosalind,  and  why  should  you  actually  need  a  remedy  for
your  folly?''

When  she  is  quite  certain  that  it  is  he,  Orlando,  and  no
other,  who  has  written  these  admirable  verses  which  walk
upon  so  many  feet,  beautiful  Rosalind  consents  to  tell  him
her  remedy.  This  is  what  it  comprises:  she  is  to  pretend  to
be  the  sufferer's  beloved,  and  he  is  obliged  to  make  love  to  her
as  to  his  real  mistress,  and  to  disgust  him  of  his  passion  she
gives  way  to  the  most  extravagant  caprices;  sometimes  she
weeps,  sometimes  she  laughs  ;  one  day  she  receives  him  kindly
another  badly  ;  she  scratches  him  and  spits  in  his  face  ;  she  is
not  for  a  moment  like  her  real  self;  she  is  simpering,  flighty,
prudish,  and  languorous  in  turn,  and  all  the  outrageous
fancies,  boredom,  hysterics,  and  blue  devils  can  produce  in  the
empty  head  of  a  mistress  the  poor  fellow  has  to  endure.  An
imp,  monkey,  and  lawyer  united  would  not  have  invented  more
spite.  This  miraculous  treatment  did  not  fail  to  produce  its
result;  the  lovesick  man  fell  from  excess  of  love  into  a  state
of  madness,  which  caused  him  to  acquire  a  horror  of  the
whole  world,  and  he  ought  to  have  ended  his  days  in  a  mo-
nastic retreat — a,  not  very  satisfactory  though  likely  conclu-
sion.


164  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

Orlando,  as  can  well  be  believed,  did  not  care  to  return  to
health  by  such  means;  but  Rosalind  insisted  and  wished  to
undertake  the  cure.  She  used  this  phrase,  "I  would  cure  you  if
you  would  only  consent  to  call  me  Rosalind  and  visit  me  every
day  in  my  hut,"  with  such  marked  and  obvious  intent  and  such
a  strange  glance,  that  it  was  impossible  not  to  attach  to  it  a
wider  meaning  than  the  mere  words  conveyed,  and  not  to  see
in  it  an  indirect  warning  against  declaring  my  real  sentiments.
WTien  Orlando  replied,  "Willingly,  amiable  young  man,"  she
gave  her  answer  in  a  still  more  significant  tone,  ''No,  no,  you
must  call  me  Rosalind/'

Perhaps  I  was  mistaken,  and  thought  I  saw  something
which  did  not  really  exist;  but  it  seemed  to  me  that  Theodore
had  perceived  my  love,  although  certainly  I  had  never  be-
trayed it  by  a  single  word.  It  was  quite  impossible  for  a
woman  as  clever  as  she  must  be,  and  who  had  seen  as  much
life,  not  to  have  understood  what  was  passing  in  my  soul.
Without  words  my  eyes  and  my  trouble  were  sufficient  evi-
dence, and  the  veil  of  ardent  friendship  which  I  had  thrown
over  my  love  was  not  so  impenetrable  but  that  an  attentive
and  interested  observer  could  easily  see  through  it.  The  most
innocent  and  unsophisticated  maiden  would  not  have  been  de-
ceived for  a  moment.

Some  important  reason  unknown  to  me  without  a  doubt
compelled  this  cursed  disguise,  the  cause  of  all  my  torment.
Without  it  everything  would  have  been  easy;  I  should  have
been  able  to  give  way  with  sweet  security  to  the  most  varied
amorous  reveries,  and  take  in  my  own  the  little  white  and  silky
hand  of  my  divinity  without  a  shudder  of  horror,  and  without
recoiling  twenty  paces,  as  if  I  had  touched  a  red-hot  iron  or
felt  the  talons  of  the  real  Beelzebub.

Instead  of  despairing  and  acting  like  a  real  maniac,  of  beat-
ing my  breast  with  remorse  and  bewailing,  I  should  have  told
myself  with  a  satisfied  conscience,  *T  am  in  love" — a  phrase
as  agreeable  to  utter  in  the  morning  with  one's  head  upon  a
soft  pillow  in  a  warm  bed  as  any  other  imaginable  phrase  of
three  words,  except  the  one  "I  have  money."

After  getting  up  I  could  have  taken  up  a  position  in  front
of  my  mirror  and  looked  at  myself  with  a  sort  of  respect,


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  165

and  I  should  have  been  moved  by  my  own  poetic  pallor  as  I
arranged  my  hair.  Then  I  should  have  breakfasted  with
gravity  and  contrition  in  order  to  feed  this  dear  body,  this
precious  box  of  passion.

After  breakfast  I  should  have  interwoven  a  few  rhymes
into  a  sonnet  in  honor  of  my  princess.  After  the  sonnet  had
been  finished  and  transcribed  upon  glazed  and  perfumed
paper  I  should  have  experienced  the  feeling  that  I  was  a  hun-
dred cubits  high,  and  must  stoop  lest  my  head  should  reach
up  into  the  sky  and  become  entangled  in  the  clouds  (a  wise
precaution),  and  I  should  have  to  retail  my  new  production  to
all  my  friends,  to  all  my  enemies,  then  to  children  at  the
breast  and  to  their  nurses,  then  to  horses  and  donkeys,  and
finally  to  walls  and  trees,  to  find  out  the  opinion  of  creation
upon  my  latest  effort.

At  receptions  I  should  have  adopted  a  doctorial  tone  with
the  women,  and  sustained  discussions  on  sentiment  in  grave
and  measured  tones,  like  a  man  who  knew  much  more  than
he  cared  to  say  about  the  particular  subject,  and  who  had  not
obtained  his  knowledge  from  books;  such  a  pose  never  fails
to  produce  a  marvelous  effect  and  fainting  fits  among  the
women  present,  who  cease  their  idle  chatter.

I  could  have  led  the  happiest  life  possible — stepped  on  a
pet  dog's  tail  without  making  its  mistress  cry  out,  overturned
stands  of  old  china,  and  at  meals  eaten  the  choice  bits  without
leaving  them  for  the  rest  of  the  company;  it  would  all  have
been  excusable  on  the  score  of  a  lover's  well-known  distrac-
tion; and  as  they  saw  me  swallow  everything  with  a  be-
wildered expression  peolple  would  have  said,  "Poor  fellow."

Then  with  a  dreamy  and  mournful  manner  how  untidy  I
might  have  been,  how  I  could  have  traversed  the  avenues  in
the  park  sometimes  with  huge  strides,  sometimes  with  a  minc-
ing step,  like  a  man  whose  reason  had  completely  departed!

But  the  gods  ordered  otherwise.

I  am  enamored  of  a  beauty  in  doublet  and  boots,  of  a  proud
woman  who  disdains  the  habits  of  her  sex,  and  one  who  leaves
me  at  times  in  a  sea  of  perplexity  ;  her  features  and  body  are
a  woman's,  but  her  mind  is  undoubtedly  a  man's.

My  beloved  is  skillful  wnth  the  foils;  she  has  fought  several


166  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

duels  and  killed  or  wounded  three  of  four  persons;  she  is  dar-
ing on  horseback,  and  is  like  an  old  gamekeeper  when  out
shooting.  They  are  strange  qualities  for  a  sweetheart,  but  I
am  the  only  person  to  whom  such  a  thing  would  happen.

I  laugh,  but  certainly  without  reason,  for  I  have  never
suffered  so  much,  and  the  last  two  months  have  seemed  two
years,  or  rather  two  centuries.  There  has  been  in  my  head
an  ebb  and  flow  of  uncertainty  enough  to  stupefy  the  strongest
mind;  I  have  been  so  violently  agitated  and  worried  in  every
way,  and  I  fiave  suffered  such  furious  outbursts,  such  mourn-
ful debility,  such  extravagant  hopes  and  such  profound  de-
spair, that  I  do  not  know  how  I  have  survived  it  all.  This
idea  has  occupied  and  filled  my  mind  so  that  I  have  been  as-
tonished; it  was  not  visible  through  my  body  like  a  candle  in
a  lantern,  and  I  have  been  in  a  state  of  mortal  dread  lest  any
one  discovered  the  object  of  my  mad  affection.  Moreover,
Rosette  being  the  person  who  was  most  interested  in  over-
looking the  movements  of  my  heart,  has  not  appeared  to
notice  anything;  I  believe  she  has  been  too  much  engaged  in
loving  Theodore  to  pay  any  attention  to  my  cooling  affection
for  her;  or  else  I  am  a  past  master  in  dissimulation,  and  I  am
not  fatuous  enough  to  believe  that.  Theodore  has  not  shown
that  he  has  the  least  suspicion  of  the  state  of  my  soul,  and  he
has  always  spoken  to  me  in  a  familiar  and  friendly  way,  as  a
well-bred  fellow  talks  to  a  friend  of  the  same  age,  but  nothing
more.  His  conversation  with  me  has  turned  upon  all  sorts
of  subjects — ^art,  poetry,  and  the  like;  but  there  has  been
nothing  confidential  or  definite  in  it  in  relation  to  either  of  us.

Perhaps  the  motives  for  his  disguise  no  longer  exist  and  he

will  soon  resume  his  proper  attire.  I  am  quite  ignorant  on
the  subject.  Still  Rosalind  uttered  certain  words  with  par-
ticular inflections,  and  in  a  very  marked  fashion  accentuated
all  the  passages  in  the  part  which  had  an  ambiguous  signifi-
cance or  could  be  construed  into  ambiguity.

In  the  scene  of  the  meeting,  from  the  moment  she  re-
proaches Orlando  for  not  arriving  two  hours  earlier  like  a
real  lover,  but  being  two  hours  late,  to  the  grievous  sigh
which,  frightened  at  the  depth  of  her  passion,  she  utters  as
she  throws  herself  into  Aliénais  arms,  "O  cousin!   cousin!


1


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  167

my  pretty  little  cousin!  if  you  knew  how  deeply  I  am  im-
mersed in  the  abyss  of  love!"  she  displayed  miraculous  talent.
It  was  a  mixture  of  tenderness,  of  melancholy  and  irresistible
love;  her  voice  trembled  with  emotion,  and  behind  the  laugh
one  felt  that  the  most  violent  love  was  ready  to  explode  ;  add
to  that  the  piquancy  and  strangeness  of  the  transposition
and  the  novelty  in  seeing  a  young  man  making  love  to  his  mis-
tress, whom  he  takes  for  a  man  and  who  appears  to  be  one.
Expressions  which  would  have  appeared  ordinary  and  com-
monplace in  other  circumstances  now  assumed  particular
prominence,  and  all  the  lover's  comparisons  and  protestations
which  took  place  upon  the  stage  seemed  to  be  recoined  with
a  fresh  stamp;  besides,  had  the  thoughts,  instead  of  being  as
charming  and  choice  as  they  were,  been  worn  threadbare,  the
way  in  which  they  were  uttered  would  have  imbued  them  with
the  most  marvelous  cleverness  and  best  possible  taste.

I  have  forgotten  to  mention  that  Rosette,  after  declining
the  part  of  Rosalind,  had  good-naturedly  taken  the  small  part
of  Phebe.  Phebe  is  a  shepherdess  of  the  forest  of  the  Ar-
dennes, devoutly  adored  by  the  shepherd  Sylvius,  whom  she
cannot  endure  and  treats  with  the  utmost  harshness.  Phebe  is
as  cold  as  the  moon  ;  she  has  a  heart  of  snow  which  does  not
melt  at  the  fire  of  the  most  ardent  sighs,  while  its  icy  cover-
ing increases  more  and  more  in  thickness  and  becomes  as  hard
as  the  diamond  ;  but  as  soon  as  she  sees  Rosalind  in  the  clothes
of  the  handsome  page  Ganymede  the  ice  melts  into  tears  and
the  diamond  becomes  softer  than  wax.  The  proud  Phebe  who
laughed  at  love  is  herself  in  love;  now  she  suffers  the  tor-
ments she  made  others  endure.  Her  pride  evaporates,  she
makes  all  the  advances,  and  she  sends  by  poor  Sylvius  to
Rosalind  an  ardent  letter  which  contains  the  confession  of
her  passion  in  the  most  humble  and  suppliant  terms.  Rosa-
lind, touched  with  pity  for  Sylvius,  and  having  the  most  ex-
cellent reasons  for  not  reciprocating  Phebe's  love,  makes  her
endure  the  harshest  of  treatment  and  jeers  at  her  with  un-
paralleled cruelty  and  fury.  Phebe,  however,  prefers  this
treatment  to  the  most  passionate  and  delicate  madrigals  of
her  unhappy  shepherd;  she  follows  the  beautiful  unknown
everywhere,  and  the  sweetest  admission  she  can  obtain  by  her


168  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


importunity  is  the  promise  that  if  ever  he  marries  a  woman
she  shall  certainly  be  the  one.  Meanwhile  he  instructs  her  to
treat  Sylvius  kindly,  and  not  to  cherish  too  pleasant  hopes.

Rosette  plays  her  part  with  sorrowful  and  caressing  grace
in  a  voice  the  sad  and  resigned  tones  of  which  touch  the
heart;  and  when  Rosalind  says  to  her,  *'l  would  love  you  if
I  could/'  the  tears  stand  in  her  eyes  and  she  can  hardly  keep
them  back,  for  the  story  of  Phebe  is  her  own  story  just  as
Orlando's  is  mine,  with  the  difference  that  there  is  a  happy
ending  for  Orlando,  while  Phebe,  deceived  in  her  love,  is
deprived  of  the  charming  ideal  she  wishes  to  embrace  and
is  destined  to  marry  Sylvius.  Life  is  thus  ordered,  one  per-
son's happiness  is  of  necessity  another's  sorrow.  It  makes
me  very  happy  to  think  that  Theodore  is  a  woman  ;  it  is  very
unfortunate  for  Rosette  that  Theodore  is  not  a  man,  and  she
is  now  involved  in  the  amorous  impossibilities  from  which  I
have  escaped.

At  the  end  of  the  play  Rosalind  leaves  off  her  disguise  as
tlie  page  Ganymede,  and  in  the  garments  of  her  own  sex  is
recognized  by  the  Duke  as  his  daughter  and  by  Orlando  as
his  mistress.  The  god  Hymen  arrives;  three  weddings  take
place.  Orlando  marries  Rosalind,  Phebe  weds  Sylvius,  and
Touchstone  the  clown  espouses  the  naïve  Audrey.  Then
comes  the  epilogue  and  the  curtain  falls.

The  play  occupied  and  extremely  interested  us  all.  There
was  to  some  extent  a  play  within  a  play,  a  drama,  invisible
and  unknown  to  the  other  spectators,  which  we  acted  for
ourselves  alone,  and  which  in  symbolical  words  summed  up
our  whole  lives  and  expressed  our  most  secret  desires.  With-
out Rosalind's  strange  expedient  I  should  have  been  more
suffering  than  ever,  without  even  a  hope  of  a  future  cure,
and  I  should  have  continued  to  wander  sadly  through  the
oblique  paths  of  the  dark  forest.

Still  I  have  only  a  moral  certainty  ;  I  lack  proof,  and  I  can
remain  no  longer  in  this  state  of  uncertainty;  I  must  speak
to  Theodore  in  a  more  definite  fashion.  I  have  approached
him  twenty  times  with  a  phrase  ready,  without  being  able  to
utter  it;  I  dare  not.  I  have  many  opportunities  to  talk  to
him  privately  in  the  park,  in  my  room,  or  in  his  chamber,  for


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  169


he  cornes  to  see  me  and  I  go  to  see  him,  but  I  let  them  pass
without  making  use  of  them,  although  a  moment  afterwards  I
have  a  feeling  of  terrible  regret  and  am  greatly  enraged  with
myself.  I  open  my  mouth,  and  unwittingly  other  words  take
the  place  of  those  I  wish  to  utter  ;  instead  of  declaring  my  love
I  talk  of  the  rain  and  the  fine  weather  or  some  other  similar
stupidity.  But  the  season  will  soon  be  over,  and  people  will
go  back  to  the  city.  The  opportunities  I  have  here  will  not
occur  elsewhere;  we  shall  perhaps  lose  sight  of  one  another,
and  streams  will  without  a  doubt  bear  us  away  in  opposite
directions.

The  liberty  of  the  country  is  so  charming  and  convenient  !
Even  the  trees  in  the  autumn  with  their  dropping  leaves  offer
delightful  shades  to  the  reveries  of  a  newborn  love!  It  is
difficult  to  resist  the  environment  of  beautiful  nature — ^the
birds  with  their  languorous  songs,  the  flowers  with  their  in-
toxicating perfumes,  and  the  slopes  of  the  hills  with  their
golden  and  silky  verdure!  Solitude  inspires  a  thousand  vo-
luptuous thoughts  which  the  bustle  of  the  world  will  disperse
or  scatter  here  and  there,  and  the  instinctive  movement  of  two
beings  who  can  hear  their  hearts  beat  in  the  silence  of  a
deserted  country,  is  to  entw^ine  their  arms  more  closely  and
lean  one  upon  the  other  as  if  they  are  the  only  two  living
persons  left  in  the  world.

I  went  for  a  walk  this  morning;  the  weather  was  warm
and  damp,  and  there  was  no  sign  of  blue  in  the  sky;  yet  it
was  neither  somber  nor  threatening.  Two  or  three  tones  of
pearl-gray  harmoniously  blended  completely  covered  the
heavens,  and  over  this  background  slowly  passed  woolly  clouds
like  great  pieces  of  cotton;  they  were  driven  by  a  gentle
breeze  hardly  strong  enough  to  move  the  tops  of  the  aspens  ;
clouds  of  mist  arose  between  the  chestnuts  and  indicated  the
course  of  the  river.

The  horizon  was  so  enveloped  in  mist  that  it  was  hardly
possible  to  see  the  exact  point  where  the  sky  began  and  the
earth  ended.  Through  this  curtain  the  willows  looked  more
like  the  specters  of  trees  than  real  trees;  the  outlines  of  the
hills  were  more  like  the  undulations  of  a  cloud  bank  than
solid  earth.


170  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


As  I  walked  I  thought  that  the  autumn  had  also  come  for
me,  and  that  a  brilliant  summer  had  passed  never  to  return;
the  tree  of  my  soul  was  perhaps  still  more  leafless  than  the
trees  in  the  forest;  there  hardly  remained  on  its  loftiest  branch
one  little  green  leaf  quivering  with  sorrow  at  the  loss  of  its
fellows.

Remain  upon  the  tree,  little  leaf  of  the  color  of  hope;  cling
to  the  branch  with  all  the  strength  of  nerves  and  fibers;  be
not  frightened  by  the  whistling  of  the  wind,  good  little  leaf  !
For  when  you  have  left  me,  who  will  be  able  to  distinguish
whether  I  am  a  living  or  a  dead  tree,  and  what  will  prevent  the
woodman  from  felling  me  with  his  ax  and  making  my
branches  into  fagots?  It  is  not  yet  time  for  the  trees  to
shed  their  leaves,  and  the  sun  can  still  dissipate  the  surround-
ing fog.

The  sight  of  the  dying  season  made  a  great  impression  upon
me.  I  thought  that  time  was  fleeting  quickly,  and  that  I
might  die  without  pressing  my  ideal  to  my  heart.

On  going  indoors  I  made  a  resolution.  As  I  could  not
make  up  my  mind  to  speak  I  wrote  my  destiny  upon  a  sheet
of  paper.  It  is  perhaps  ridiculous  to  write  to  a  person  who
lives  in  the  same  house,  whom  one  can  see  every  day  at  any
hour;  but  I  was  not  in  a  state  to  consider  its  ridiculousness.

I  sealed  my  letter  not  without  trembling  and  changing  color;
then  selecting  a  moment  when  Theodore  had  gone  out,  I
placed  it  on  the  middle  of  the  table  and  fled  in  as  much  agita-
tion as  if  I  had  committed  the  most  disgraceful  action  pos-
sible.


CHAPTER  XII

I  PROMISED  you  the  rest  of  my  adventures  ;  but  really  I  am
so  lazy  where  the  writing  of  letters  is  concerned,  that  I  must
love  you  as  the  apple  of  mine  eye  and  know  you  to  be  more
curious  than  Eve  or  Psyche,  to  settle  down  at  a  table  with  a


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  171

pile  of  white  paper  which  has  to  be  made  black,  and  an  ink
bottle  deeper  than  the  sea,  every  drop  from  which  ought  to
turn  into  thoughts,  or  at  least  something  like  them,  without
suddenly  resolving  to  mount  and  cover  at  full  speed  the  eighty
enormous  leagues  which  separate  us  to  recount  to  you  with
my  own  voice  what  I  am  about  to  write,  so  that  I  shall  not
be  frightened  by  its  bulk.

To  think  that  eighty  leagues  separate  me  from  the  person
I  love  best  in  the  whole  world  !  I  have  a  great  mind  to  tear
up  the  letter  and  saddle  my  horse.  But  it  is  out  of  the  ques-
tion, for  dressed  as  I  am  I  could  not  approach  you  and  re-
sume the  familiar  life  we  led  together  when  we  were  naïve
and  innocent  little  girls.  If  ever  I  resume  my  skirts  it  will
assuredly  be  with  that  object.

I  left  off,  I  think,  at  my  departure  from  the  inn  where  I
spent  such  a  droll  night  and  where  my  virtue  was  almost  ship-
wrecked on  leaving  the  harbor.  We  all  set  off  together  in
the  same  direction.  My  companions  were  loud  in  their
praises  of  my  horse,  which  was  well-bred  and  fast  ;  that  raised
me  considerably  in  tlieir  estimation,  and  they  added  to  my  own
merit  that  of  my  steed.  They  were,  however,  afraid  my
mount  was  too  frisky  and  mettlesome  for  me.  I  told  them  they
could  allay  their  fears,  and  to  show  them  there  was  no  danger
I  made  several  curvets,  jumped  a  high  hedge,  and  had  a  gallop.

The  party  vainly  endeavored  to  follow  me.  I  drew  rein
when  I  had  gone  far  enough,  and  came  back  to  meet  them  at
full  speed;  when  I  was  close  to  them  I  reined  up  sharp  and
stopped  short.

From  esteem  they  passed  into  a  state  of  profound  respect
for  me.  They  did  not  suspect  that  a  young  student  who  had
recently  left  the  university  was  so  good  a  horseman.  Their
discovery  had  more  effect  than  if  they  recognized  in  me  all
the  theological  and  cardinal  virtues.  Instead  of  treating  me
like  a  big  boy  they  spoke  to  me  in  a  tone  of  obsequious  famil-
iarity which  gave  me  great  pleasure.

When  I  doffed  my  female  attire  I  did  not  also  discard  my
pride.  Being  no  longer  a  woman,  I  wished  to  be  quite  a
man,  and  was  not  content  with  having  the  external  appear-
ance of  one.    I  decided  to  attain  the  success  as  a  cavalier  I


172  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

could  no  longer  attain  as  a  woman.  My  greatest  anxiety
was  to  know  how  to  manage  to  have  sufficient  courage;  for
courage  and  skill  in  bodily  exercises  are  the  means  by  which
a  man  most  easily  lays  the  foundation  of  a  reputation.  I  am
not  timid  for  a  woman,  and  I  have  not  that  imbecile  faint-
heartedness found  in  so  many;  but  that  is  a  long  step  from  the
careless  and  ferocious  brutality  which  is  man's  glory,  and  my
intention  w^as  to  become  a  little  bully,  a  swaggerer,  so  as  to
put  myself  upon  a  sound  footing  in  society  and  enjoy  all  the
advantages  of  my  metamorphosis.

Soon  I  discovered  that  nothing  was  easier,  and  that  the
recipe  was  a  very  simple  one.

I  will  not  narrate,  as  the  custom  of  travelers  is,  that  I
covered  so  many  leagues  on  such  a  day,  that  I  went  to  this  or
that  place,  that  the  roast  I  had  at  the  "White  Horse"  or  the
*'Iron  Cross"  was  underdone  or  burnt,  that  the  wine  was  sour,
and  will  omit  all  such  important  details  which  should  be  pre-
served for  posterity;  for  on  this  occasion  posterity  must  be
disappointed.  You  must  resign  yourself  to  remaining  ig-
norant of  the  number  of  courses  of  which  my  dinner  con-
sisted, and  also  of  how  I  slept  during  the  night.  Nor  will  I
give  you  an  exact  description  of  the  different  countries,  the
wheat  fields,  forests,  various  cultivated  lands  and  hills  with
hamlets  on  their  slopes  which  passed  before  my  eyes  in  suc-
cession. That  is  easy  to  imagine:  take  a  little  land,  plant  a
few  trees  and  shrubs,  daub  behind  them  a  little  bit  of  gray  or
pale  blue  sky,  and  you  will  have  a  very  good  idea  of  the
changing  background  to  our  cavalcade.  If  in  my  first  letter
I  entered  into  a  few  details  of  this  nature  excuse  me,  and  I
will  not  again  fall  into  tlie  same  error.  As  I  had  never  gone
out,  the  slightest  thing  seemed  to  me  of  enormous  importance.

One  of  the  horsemen,  my  bedfellow,  was  seized  with  quite
a  passion  for  me,  and  rode  by  my  side  all  the  time.

With  the  exception  that  I  would  not  have  liked  him  for  a
lover,  even  had  he  brought  me  the  most  beautiful  ring  in  the
world,  he  was  not  otherwise  displeasing  to  me;  he  was  well-
read,  and  was  not  lacking  in  cleverness  or  good-humor.  Only
when  he  spoke  of  women  he  did  so  in  a  tone  of  contempt  and
irony  for  which  I  would  have  gladly  torn  the  two  eyes  from


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  173


his  head,  the  more  so  as  there  was,  beneath  his  exaggeration,
in  what  he  said  many  cruel  truths,  the  justice  of  which  my
period  of  disguise  had  made  me  recognize.

He  invited  me  in  so  pressing  a  way  and  so  often  to  come
and  visit  with  him  one  of  his  sisters,  a  widow  now  at  the  end
of  her  mourning,  who  was  living  at  an  old  mansion  with  an
aunt,  that  I  could  not  refuse.  I  raised  a  few  objections  for
form's  sake,  for  really  it  was  a  matter  of  no  consequence
whether  I  went  there  or  elsewhere,  and  I  could  just  as  well
attain  my  object  in  that  way  as  in  any  other;  and  as  he  told
me  that  I  should  annoy  him  very  much  if  I  did  not  spare  him
at  least  a  fortnight,  I  replied  that  I  was  agreeable,  and  the
matter  was  arranged.

At  a  fork  in  the  road  my  comrade,  pointing  to  the  right,
said  to  me,  'That  is  our  way."  The  rest  of  the  party  shook
hands  and  went  in  the  other  direction.

After  a  few  hours'  journey  we  reached  our  destination.

A  broad  moat  which  was  full  of  tufts  of  grass  instead  of
water  separated  the  high  road  from  the  park  ;  the  facing  was
of  hewn  stone,  and  in  the  angles  stood  gigantic  artichokes  and
iron  thistles  which  seemed  to  have  sprung  up  like  natural
plants  between  the  disjointed  blocks  of  the  wall.  A  little
single-arch  bridge  crossed  the  moat  and  provided  access  to
tlie  gate.

A  lofty  avenue  of  elms  trimmed  in  the  old  style  first  came
into  view,  and  after  walking  some  distance  along  it  we
emerged  into  an  open  space.

The  trees  seemed  out  of  date  rather  than  old;  they  gave
the  impression  that  they  had  wigs  and  were  powdered  with
white;  there  had  only  been  left  a  little  tuft  of  foliage  at  the
summit  ;  all  the  rest  was  carefully  lopped,  so  that  they  looked
like  enormous  plumes  planted  at  intervals.

After  crossing  the  open  space,  which  was  covered  with  fine
grass  and  had  been  carefully  rolled,  it  was  still  necessary  to
pass  beneath  a  curious  arcli  of  foliage.  A  large  flower  garden
in  the  French  style  stretched  before  the  chateau;  all  the
divisions  were  traced  with  bushes  and  holly  with  the  most
rigid  symmetry;  it  looked  more  like  a  carpet  than  a  garden.
Great  flowers  in  ball  dress  with  majestic  bearing  and  serene


174  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

faces,  like  duchesses  preparing  to  dance  a  minuet,  made  a
slight  inclination  of  the  head  as  we  passed.  Others,  ap-
parently less  polite,  held  themselves  stiff  and  motionless  like
tapestry  dowagers.  Shrubs  in  every  possible  shape,  if  we  ex-
cept their  natural  one,  round,  square,  pointed,  triangular,
seemed  to  walk  in  procession  along  the  great  avenue,  and
lead  us  by  the  hand  to  the  bottom  of  the  steps.

A  few  turrets,  half  absorbed  in  more  recent  building,  broke
the  line  of  the  building.  The  windows  of  the  middle  block
all  opened  on  to  a  balcony  ornamented  with  a  balustrade  of
wrought  iron  of  great  richness,  and  tlie  others  were  sur-
rounded by  stone  ledges  witli  carved  figures  and  knots.

Four  or  five  great  dogs  ran  barking  and  jumping  to  meet
us.  They  gamboled  around  the  horses  and  jumped  up  in
front  of  them;  they  seemed  particularly  glad  to  see  my  com-
panion's horse,  one  they  had  probably  often  followed  and
visited  in  the  stable.

At  all  this  noise  a  servant,  half  groom,  half  laborer,  ap-
peared, took  our  steeds  by  their  bridle  and  led  them  aw^ay.  I
had  seen  no  person  yet,  save  a  little  peasant  girl,  as  wild
and  startled  as  a  doe,  who  fled  at  our  approach  and  crouched
in  a  trench,  although  we  called  her  several  times  and  did
all  we  could  to  reassure  her.

No  one  appeared  at  the  windows;  it  seemed  as  if  the  château
were  eitlier  uninhabited  or  else  the  home  of  spirits;  for  not
the  slightest  sound  could  be  heard  from  without.

We  were  beginning  to  ascend  the  steps,  clanking  our  spurs,
for  our  legs  were  weary,  when  we  heard  from  within  the
sound  of  doors  opening  and  closing  as  if  some  one  was
hastening  to  meet  us.

A  young  woman  appeared  upon  the  top  of  the  steps,
traversed  the  space  which  separated  her  from  my  com-
panion at  a  bound,  and  fell  upon  his  neck.  He  kissed  her
most  affectionately,  and  putting  his  arm  around  her  waist,  al-
most lifted  her  up  and  carried  her  like  that  to  the  top.

"Do  you  know  you  are  very  loving  and  gallant  for  a
brother,  Alcibiades?  It  is  not  quite  unnecessary  for  me  to
tell  you  that  he  is  my  brother,  is  it,  sir?"  the  young  woman
said,  turning  to  me.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  175


My  reply  was  to  the  effect  that  it  was  possible  to  be  mis-
taken, and  that  it  was  to  some  extent  a  misfortune  to  be  her
brother  and  thus  be  excluded  from  the  number  of  her  lovers  ;
that  I,  personally,  in  his  place  should  become  at  the  same  time
the  happiest  and  most  unhappy  knight  on  earth.  This  made
her  smile  sweetly.

While  talking  like  this  we  entered  a  low  hall,  the  walls
of  which  were  decorated  with  a  Flemish  tapestry.

"Alcibiades,  I  am  going  to  tell  your  aunt  of  your  arrival."

"Oh,  that  is  not  a  very  urgent  matter,  sister;  let  us  sit
down  first  and  have  a  chat.  Allow  me  to  present  to  you  a
gentleman,  Theodore  de  Sérannes,  who  will  stay  here  a  little
while.  I  have  no  need  to  ask  you  to  give  him  a  hearty  wel-
come; he  is  his  own  recommendation"  (I  am  repeating  his
words;  do  not  impetuously  accuse  me  of  fatuity).

The  beauty  made  a  slight  motion  of  the  head  as  if  to  assent,
and  we  talked  of  other  things.

While  joining  in  the  conversation  I  looked  at  her  carefully
and  examined  her  more  attentively  than  I  had  done  before.

She  was  about  twenty-three  or  four,  and  her  mourning
suited  her  to  perfection;  to  tell  the  truth,  she  did  not  seem
at  all  sorrowful  or  downcast.  I  do  not  know  whether  she
had  shed  many  tears  for  her  departed  spouse;  if  she  had
done  so  there  was  no  sign  of  them,  and  the  pretty  cambric
handkerchief  she  held  in  her  hand  was  as  dry  as  possible.

Her  eyes  were  not  red,  on  the  contrary  they  were  the  most
clear  and  brilliant  in  the  world,  and  it  was  waste  of  time  to
look  upon  her  cheeks  for  the  groove  down  which  the  tears
had  flowed  ;  the  only  things  visible  there  were  two  little
dimples  fashioned  by  her  habit  of  smiling,  and  for  a  widow
it  must  be  admitted  that  one  could  very  frequently  see  her
teeth  ;  it  certainly  was  not  a  disagreeable  sight,  for  they  were
pretty  and  even.  I  esteemed  her  first  of  all  for  not  feeling
herself  obliged,  because  her  husband  had  died,  to  darken  her
eyes  and  make  her  nose  violet.  I  also  looked  upon  it  as  good
taste  for  her  not  to  assume  some  little  sorrowful  mannerism,
and  to  speak  naturally  in  her  cheery  and  sonorous  voice,  with-
out drawling  her  words  or  intersecting  her  phrases  by  virtu-
ous sighs.


176  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

Ail  that  appeared  to  me  to  be  in  very  good  taste.  I  looked
upon  her  as  a  clever  woman,  and  I  was  quite  correct  in  my
estimate.

She  was  well  made,  with  aristocratic  feet  and  hands;  her
black  dress  was  arranged  as  coquettishly  as  possible,  and  so
gayly  that  tlie  mournfulness  of  the  color  completely  disap-
peared, and  she  might  have  gone  to  a  ball  as  she  was  with-
out appearing  out  of  place.  If  ever  I  marry  and  am  left  a
widow  I  shall  ask  her  for  a  pattern  of  her  dress,  for  it  suited
her  to  perfection.

After  a  chat  we  went  upstairs  to  see  the  aunt.

We  found  her  sitting  in  a  large  easy-chair,  with  her  feet
upon  a  footstool,  and  by  her  side  an  old  dog,  sullen  and  blind,
which  lifted  his  black  head  at  our  approach  and  received  us
with  an  unfriendly  growl.

I  have  never  gazed  upon  an  old  woman  without  a  feeling
of  horror.  My  mother  died  quite  young;  without  a  doubt  if
I  had  seen  her  slowly  age  and  her  features  gradually  lose
their  shape  by  imperceptible  stages,  I  should  have  become
accustomed  to  the  change.  In  my  youth  I  was  surrounded  by
young  and  laughing  faces  only,  so  that  I  retained  an  un-
bearable antipathy  for  old  folk.  Therefore  I  shuddered  when
the  beautiful  widow  touched  with  her  pure  red  lips  the
dowager's  yellow  forehead.

Still  the  old  lady  had  retained  a  few  simple  and  majestic
traces  of  her  former  beauty,  which  prevented  her  from  fall-
ing into  that  ugliness  of  the  baked-apple  order,  which  is  the
fate  of  women  who  have  only  been  pretty  or  fresh  colored.
Her  eyes,  though  terminating  in  wrinkles  at  their  corners
and  covered  by  large,  loose  lids,  had  retained  a  few  sparks  of
their  former  fire,  and  it  was  obvious  that  in  the  reign  of
another  king  they  had  launched  dazzling  and  passionate
glances.  Her  small,  slender  nose,  slightly  arched  like  the
beak  of  a  bird  of  prey,  gave  to  her  profile  an  appearance  of
severe  grandeur,  which  tempered  tlie  indulgent  smile  of  her
lips,  still  carmine  tinted  according  to  the  fashion  of  the  last
century.

Her  costume  was  old-fashioned  without  being  ridiculous,
and  harmonized  perfectly  with  her  face.    She  had  as  a  head-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  177

dress  a  mob  cap  with  a  little  lace;  her  long,  slender  hands,
which  seemed  once  to  have  been  very  beautiful,  were  in  mit-
tens, while  a  dark  dress  embroidered  with  flowers,  a  black
shawl,  and  an  apron  completed  her  attire.

Old  ladies  should  always  dress  like  that,  and  thus  respect
their  approaching  death  by  not  adorning  themselves  with
feathers,  garlands  of  flowers,  ribbons  of  tender  colors,  and
the  thousand  trinkets  which  only  suit  extreme  youth.  It  is  in
vain  for  them  to  make  advances  to  life,  for  life  is  not  willing.

The  old  lady  received  us  with  that  ease  and  exquisite  polite-
ness which  is  the  privilege  of  members  of  the  old  nobility,
and  grows  rarer  day  by  day  like  so  many  other  secrets,  and
spoke  in  a  voice  which,  although  broken  and  tremulous,  was
still  very  sweet.

I  seemed  to  please  her  greatly,  and  she  looked  at  me  long
and  attentively  with  a  very  tender  expression.  A  tear  formed
in  the  corner  of  her  eye  and  trickled  slowly  down  one  of  her
wrinkles  till  it  disappeared.  She  begged  me  to  excuse  her
and  told  me  that  I  was  very  much  like  her  son  who  had  been
killed  in  battle.

All  the  time  I  stayed  at  the  château,  because  of  this  likeness,
real  or  imaginary,  I  was  treated  by  the  old  lady  with  ex-
traordinary and  maternal  kindness.  I  found  this  more  charm-
ing than  I  believed  possible,  for  the  greatest  kindness  as  a
rule  aged  persons  can  do  me  is  to  never  speak  and  to  depart
when  I  arrive.

I  shall  not  tell  you  in  detail  and  day  by  day  what  I  did
at  R.  If  I  have  been  a  little  prolix  at  the  beginning,  and  have
sketched  with  some  care  the  two  or  three  persons,  it  is  be-
cause strange  though  quite  natural  things  have  happened  to
me  there,  events  which  I  ought  to  have  anticipated  when  I
assumed  male  attire.

My  natural  thoughtlessness  led  me  into  an  imprudence
which  I  bitterly  repent,  for  it  has  brought  a  trouble  to  a  good
and  beautiful  soul  which  I  cannot  allay  without  making  known
who  I  am  and  seriously  compromising  myself.

To  play  the  part  of  a  man  perfectly  and  amuse  myself,  I
found  nothing  better  to  do  than  to  make  love  to  my  friend's
sister.    It  seemed  to  me  very  funny  to  go  down  on  all  fours


178  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

when  she  dropped  her  glove  and  restore  it  to  her  with  a  pro-
nounced obeisance,  to  lean  over  tlie  back  of  her  chair  with
a  languorous  air  and  to  pour  into  her  ear  a  thousand  and  one
of  the  most  charming  madrigals.  When  she  wished  to  go
from  one  room  to  the  other  I  gracefully  offered  her  my  arm  ;
if  she  mounted  her  horse  I  held  the  stirrup;  and  when  walk-
ing I  was  always  at  her  side.  In  the  evening  I  read  to  her
or  sang  with  her;  in  short  I  played  the  part  of  a  suitor  with
scrupulous  exactness.

I  imitated  all  the  gestures  I  had  seen  lovers  make,  much
to  my  own  amusement,  for  alone  in  my  chamber  I  laughed
like  a  madman  when  I  thought  of  all  the  impertinences  I  had
uttered  in  the  most  serious  tone  in  the  world.

Alcibiades  and  the  old  Marquis  appeared  to  view  the  in-
timacy with  pleasure  and  left  us  very  often  together.  I
sometimes  regretted  I  was  not  really  a  man,  to  profit  better
by  the  opportunity;  if  I  had  been  my  suit  would  have  been
successful,  for  the  charming  widow  seemed  to  have  entirely
forgotten  her  late  husband,  or  else  if  she  remembered  him
she  would  have  gladly  been  unfaithful  to  his  memory.

After  beginning  in  this  fashion  I  could  scarcely  draw  back
with  honor,  and  it  was  very  difficult  to  conduct  a  retreat  with
arms  and  baggage.  I  could,  however,  refrain  from  over-
stepping a  certain  mark  and  restrict  my  amiability  to  words
alone.  I  hoped  in  this  way  to  reach  the  end  of  the  month  I
was  to  spend  at  R.  and  go  away  promising  to  return.  I
thought  that  on  my  departure  the  beauty  w^ould  console  her-
self, and  not  seeing  me  again  would  soon  forget  me.

But  in  my  sport  I  had  awakened  a  serious  passion,  for  mat-
ters turned  out  differently,  and  that  brings  to  mind  the  well-
known  truism  that  it  is  never  advisable  to  play  with  fire  or
love.

Before  seeing  me  Rosette  knew  nothing  of  love.  Married
very  young  to  a  man  much  older  than  herself,  she  only  had  a
sort  of  filial  affection  for  him;  without  a  doubt  she  had  been
courted,  but,  extraordinary  though  it  may  seem,  she  had
never  had  a  lover;  either  the  gallants  who  had  made  love  to
her  were  not  very  seductive,  or  more  likely  her  hour  had  not
yet  come.     The  country  suitors  were  not  to  her  liking,  and


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  179

her  virtue  had  not  been  sorely  tried  to  resist  their  assaults.
Besides,  her  natural  gayety  and  humor  were  a  sufficient  de-
fence against  love,  that  soft  passion  which  has  such  a  hold
upon  dreamers  and  the  sorrowful;  the  idea  her  old  Tithonus
had  been  able  to  give  her  of  love  must  have  been  such  a  poor
one  that  she  was  not  greatly  tempted  to  try  again,  and  she
enjoyed  the  pleasure  of  being  a  widow  at  so  early  an  age  and
of  still  having  so  many  years  of  beauty  before  her.

But  at  my  arrival  all  that  changed.  I  at  first  thought  that
if  I  had  maintained  with  her  a  cold  and  exact  politeness  she
would  not  have  paid  any  attention  to  me;  but  I  was  obliged
to  admit  that  I  was  mistaken.

Rosette's  destiny  is  to  love  only  once  in  her  life,  an  im-
possible love  ;  she  must  realize  it  and  she  will  do  so.

I  have  been  loved,  Graciosa!  It  is  a  sweet  thing,  though
it  is  only  by  a-  woman,  and  in  an  irregular  affection  like  that
there  is  something  painful  which  is  not  found  in  another.
Oh,  it  is  a  very  sweet  thing  !  When  one  wakes  in  the  night,
and  sits  up  to  say,  "Some  one  is  thinking  or  dreaming  of  me;
some  one  is  concerned  in  my  life;  a  movement  of  my  eyes  or
mouth  brings  joy  or  sorrow  to  another  creature;  a  word  I
have  dropped  by  chance  is  gathered  with  care,  commented
upon,  and  examined  for  hours  together;  I  am  the  star  by
which  an  anxious  lover  steers  ;  my  eyes  are  a  sky,  my  mouth
a  paradise  more  desired  than  the  real  one;  were  I  to  die,  a
soft  rain  of  tears  would  warm  my  ashes,  my  grave  would  be
more  adorned  with  flowers  than  a  bridal  ;  if  I  were  in  danger
some  one  would  rush  between  the  point  of  the  sword  and  my
breast  in  sacrifice  for  me  !"  It  is  beautiful  ;  and  I  do  not
know  anything  one  can  desire  moie  in  the  world.

This  thought  gave  me  a  pleasure  with  which  I  reproached
myself,  for  after  all  I  had  nothing  to  give,  and  I  was  in  the
position  of  the  poor  person  accepting  presents  from  a  rich
and  generous  friend,  without  the  hope  of  ever  being  able  to
make  any  return.  It  charmed  me  to  be  so  adored,  and  at
times  I  accepted  the  situation  with  strange  complaisance.
Through  hearing  every  one  call  me  "Sir"  and  treat  me  as  if
I  were  a  man,  I  insensibly  forgot  I  was  a  woman;  my  dis-


180  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

guise  seemed  to  me  my  natural  attire,  and  I  did  not  recollect
wearing  any  other.

Many  men  are  more  womanly  than  I  am.  I  have  only  a
woman's  throat,  a  few  curved  lines,  and  delicate  hands;  the
skirt  is  around  my  thighs,  not  in  my  mind.  It  often  happens
that  the  sex  of  the  soul  is  not  that  of  the  body,  and  it  is  a
contradiction  which  cannot  fail  to  produce  great  disorder.
If,  for  example,  I  had  never  taken  my  apparently  foolish  but
in  reality  very  wise  resolution  to  renounce  the  attire  of  a  sex
which  is  only  materially  mine  by  chance,  I  should  have  been
very  unhappy.  I  love  horses,  fencing,  violent  exercises,  and
I  am  delighted  to  run  and  climb  like  a  boy  ;  it  bores  me  to  sit
still  with  my  feet  close  together  and  my  elbows  at  my  sides,
to  modestly  drop  my  eyes,  to  talk  in  a  soft,  flute-like,  and
honeyed  voice,  and  to  pass  a  bit  of  cotton  ten  million  times
through  the  holes  in  a  piece  of  cloth;  I  do  not  care  for
obedience  the  least  bit  in  the  world,  and  the  word  I  use  most
often  is  "I  want."  Beneath  my  smooth  forehead  and  silky
hair  strong  and  virile  thoughts  are  at  work;  all  the  precious
trifles  which  usually  seduce  women  have  ever  had  but  little
charm  for  me,  and,  like  Achilles  when  disguised  as  a  girl,
I  would  willingly  discard  the  mirror  for  a  sword.  The  only
thing  about  women  which  pleases  me  is  their  beauty;  in  spite
of  its  inconvenient  results,  I  would  not  readily  renounce  my
form,  badly  though  it  is  suited  to  the  mind  it  envelops.

There  was  something  new  and  piquant  in  an  intrigue  of
the  sort,  and  I  should  have  been  greatly  amused  by  it,  if  it
had  not  been  taken  seriously  by  poor  Rosette.  She  set  herself
to  love  me  with  admirable  naïveté  and  conscientiousness,  and
all  the  strength  of  her  good  and  beautiful  soul,  with  the  love
men  do  not  understand  and  have  only  a  dim  idea,  delicately
and  ardently,  just  as  I  should  desire  to  be  loved,  and  as  I
should  love  if  I  met  the  reality  of  my  dream.  What  a  beauti-
ful lost  treasure;  what  white,  transparent  pearls,  such  as
the  divers  could  never  bring  up  from  the  depths  of  the  ocean  !
What  fragrant  breaths,  what  sweet  sighs  were  dispersed  in
the  air,  which  might  have  been  gathered  by  pure  and  loving
lips!

This  love  might  have  made  a  young  man  so  happy!     So


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUFIN  181

many  unhappy  men,  handsome,  charming,  and  wealthy,  full
of  courage  and  intellect,  have  vainly  worshiped  on  bended
knees  insensible  and  dejected  idols  !  So  many  good  and
tender  souls  have  in  despair  thrown  themselves  into  the  arms
of  courage  and  intellect,  have  vainly  worshiped  on  bended
sepulchers,  though  they  would  have  been  saved  from  debauch-
ery and  death  by  a  sincere  love  !

What  a  strange  thing  is  human  destiny!  What  a  great
jester  is  chancel

That  for  which  so  many  others  had  ardently  longed  came
to  me,  to  the  person  who  did  not  and  could  not  desire  it,  A
capricious  young  girl  has  a  fancy  to  travel  dressed  as  a  man
to  find  out  a  little  about  her  future  lovers;  she  sleeps  at  an
inn  with  a  worthy  brother  who  takes  her  to  his  sister,  and
the  latter  has  nothing  better  to  do  than  to  fall  in  love  like  a
cat  or  a  dove. ,  It  is  quite  evident  that  if  I  had  been  a  young
man,  and  her  love  had  been  of  advantage  to  me,  it  would
have  been  quite  different  and  the  lady  would  have  had  a  hor-
ror of  me.  Fortune  is  very  fond  of  giving  slippers  to  those
who  have  wooden  legs,  and  gloves  to  those  who  are  without
hands  ;  the  legacy  which  would  have  enabled  a  person  to  live
in  comfort  usually  comes  to  them  on  the  day  of  their  death.

Î  went  sometimes,  though  not  as  often  as  she  would  have
liked,  to  see  Rosette  in  her  chamber;  although  she  usually
received  after  she  was  up,  that  rule  was  waived  in  my  favor.
Many  other  favors  would  also  have  been  granted  me,  had  I
wished;  but  the  most  beautiful  girl  can  only  give  what  she
has,  and  how  could  I  tell  poor  Rosette.

She  gave  me  her  little  hand  to  kiss;  I  confess  I  did  not
kiss  it  without  some  pleasure,  for  it  was  very  soft,  white,  ex-
quisitely perfum.ed,  and  made  tender  by  its  slight  moisture;
I  felt  it  tremble  and  contract  under  my  lips,  the  pressure  of
which  I  maliciously  prolonged.  Then  Rosette,  with  a  sup-
pliant air,  turned  to  me  her  almond  eyes,  full  of  passion  and
inundated  with  a  humid  and  transparent  light,  before  drop-
ping back  upon  the  pillow  her  pretty  head,  which  she  had
slightly  raised  to  receive  me.  I  saw  beneath  the  clothes
her  throat  heave  and  a  tremor  run  through  the  whole  of  her
body.     Truly  any  one  who  was  in  a  position  to  dare  might


182  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

have  ventured  far,  and  would  certainly  have  met  no  opposi-
tion to  his  temerity,  and  then  several  chapters  of  the  story
would  have  had  to  omitted.

I  stayed  there  for  an  hour  or  two  with  her,  without  letting
go  her  hand,  which  was  upon  the  coverlet  ;  we  had  charming
and  never-ending  talks,  for  although  Rosette  was  greatly  con-
cerned with  her  love,  she  believed  herself  too  certain  of  suc-
cess not  to  retain  almost  all  her  liberty  and  gayety  of  mind.
From  time  to  time  her  passion  threw  upon  her  gayety  a  trans-
parent veil  of  sweet  melancholy  which  rendered  her  still  more
piquant.

Actually,  it  would  have  been  an  unheard-of  thing  for  a
young  fellow,  as  I  appeared  to  be,  not  to  consider  himself  very
fortunate  and  take  advantage  of  his  good  fortune  to  the  ut-
termost. Rosette  was  not  used  to  harsh  treatment  and  being
unaware  of  my  position,  she  reckoned  upon  the  effect  of  her
own  charms  and  my  youth,  even  though  my  love  was  not  hers.

But  as  this  situation  began  to  be  prolonged  beyond  its
natural  limits  she  became  uneasy,  and  I  had  a  difficulty,  even
with  an  increase  of  my  flattering  phrases  and  beautiful  pro-
testations, to  restore  her  former  confidence.  Two  things
astonished  her  in  me,  and  she  noticed  in  my  conduct  con-
tradictions she  could  not  reconcile — tlie  warmth  of  my  words
and  the  coldness  of  my  actions.

You  know  better  than  any  one,  my  dear  Graciosa,  that  my
friendship  has  all  the  characteristics  of  a  passion  ;  it  is  sudden,
ardent,  and  exclusive,  even  to  jealousy,  and  I  had  for  Rosette
a  friendship  almost  equal  to  my  friendship  for  you.  It  was
possible  to  be  mistaken.  Rosette  was  all  the  more  deceived
because  the  clothes  I  wore  hardly  allowed  her  to  have  any
other  idea.

As  I  have  not  yet  loved  a  man,  the  excess  of  my  affection  is
to  some  extent  poured  out  in  my  friendship  with  young  girls
and  women;  I  put  into  it  the  same  zeal  and  exaltation  I  dis-
play in  everything  I  undertake,  for  it  is  impossible  for  me  to
be  moderate  in  an)rthing,  especially  when  it  concerns  the  heart.
There  are  in  my  eyes  two  classes  of  people,  those  I  love  and
those  I  hate;  other  persons  are  to  me  as  if  they  never  ex-
isted, and  I  would  ride  my  horse  over  them  as  if  they  were


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  183

a  high  road;  they  do  not  differ  in  my  mind  from  paths  and
rails.

I  am  naturally  expansive,  and  I  have  most  caressing  ways.
Sometimes,  forgetting  the  import  such  demonstrations  had,
while  walking  with  Rosette  I  passed  my  arm  around  her
body,  as  I  used  to  do  when  you  and  I  walked  together  along
the  lonely  walk  at  the  end  of  my  uncle's  garden;  or  else,
leaning  over  the  back  of  her  chair  as  she  was  engaged  upon
her  embroidery,  I  rolled  around  my  fingers  the  downy  hair
upon  her  round,  plump  neck,  or  polished  with  the  back  of  my
hand  the  beautiful  tresses  fastened  by  her  comb  and  added  to
their  luster,  or  else  I  brought  into  play  some  other  of  the
pretty  ways  with  which  you  know  it  is  usual  for  me  to  favor
my  dear  friends.

She  took  care  not  to  attribute  these  caresses  to  simple
friendship.  Friendship,  as  it  is  usually  understood,  does  not
go  so  far;  but  seeing  I  went  no  further  she  was  inwardly
surprised  and  did  not  know  what  to  think;  she  came  to  the
conclusion  that  it  was  timidity  on  my  part,  arising  from  my
extreme  youth  and  inexperience  in  love  affairs,  and  that  she
must  encourage  me  by  all  sorts  of  advances  and  kindness.

Consequently  she  took  care  to  give  me  plenty  of  oppor-
tunities for  iête-à-tctes  in  suitable  places  in  order  to  embolden
me  by  their  solitude,  freedom  from  noise  and  interruption;
she  made  me  take  several  walks  in  the  great  woods,  to  try
whether  the  voluptuous  reverie  and  amorous  desires  inspired
in  tender  souls  by  the  leafy  and  inviting  shade  of  the  forest
could  not  be  turned  to  her  advantage.

One  day,  after  making  me  wander  for  a  long  while
through  a  picturesque  park  which  extended  far  behind  the
château,  and  which  except  the  part  near  the  house  was  quite
strange  to  me,  she  led  me  by  a  little  winding  path  bordered
with  elders  and  nut  trees  to  a  rustic  house,  a  sort  of  charcoal-
burner's  hut,  built  of  round  pieces  of  wood  placed  crossways,
with  a  thatched  roof,  and  a  door  roughly  made  of  five  or  six
bits  of  wood  roughhewn,  the  crevices  of  which  were  filled
with  moss  and  wild  plants;  at  the  side,  between  the  green
roots  of  the  mighty  ashes  with  their  silver  bark,  and  black
patches  here  and  there,  a  large  spring  flowed  and  a  few  steps


18i  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

further  on  fell  down  two  marble  steps  into  a  pool  full  of
emerald-green  watercress.  At  the  spots  which  were  free
from  foliage  a  fine  sand,  white  as  snow,  was  visible;  this
water  was  as  transparent  as  crystal  and  cold  as  ice;  spring-
ing from  the  earth,  and  never  being  in  contact  with  the
tiniest  ray  of  sunlight  in  these  impenetrable  shades,  there  was
no  opportunity  for  it  to  be  stirred  up  or  warmed.  In  spite
of  their  crudity  I  love  spring  waters,  and  seeing  this  one  was
so  limpid,  I  could  not  resist  a  desire  to  drink;  I  leant  down,
and  several  times  drank  from  the  hollow  of  my  hand,  having
no  other  vessel  at  my  disposal.

Rosette  also  expressed  a  desire  to  drink  to  quench  her
thirst,  and  begged  me  to  procure  her  a  few  drops,  not  daring,
so  she  said,  to  lean  down  far  enough  to  reach  the  water  her-
self. I  plunged  my  two  hands,  clasped  together  as  closely  as
possible,  into  the  clear  stream,  lifted  them  like  a  cup  to
Rosette's  lips,  and  held  them  there  till  she  had  exhausted  the
water  they  held,  which  did  not  take  long,  for  there  was  but
little  after  it  had  trickled  through  my  fingers,  tightly  though
they  were  clasped;  we  made  a  pretty  group,  and  w^ould  that
a  sculptor  had  been  present  to  make  a  sketch.

When  she  had  nearly  finished,  having  my  hand  near  her
lips,  she  could  not  help  kissing  it,  in  such  a  way,  however,
that  I  might  think  it  was  an  inhalation  to  extract  the  last  drop
of  water  from  my  palms;  but  I  was  not  deceived,  and  the
charming  blush  which  suddenly  spread  over  her  face  be-
trayed her.

She  took  my  arm  again  and  we  set  off  towards  the  hut.  The
beauty  walked  as  close  to  me  as  possible,  and  leant  over  as
we  talked,  so  that  her  throat  rested  entirely  upon  my  sleeve  :
an  extremely  clever  position  it  was  for  her  to  assume,  and
one  capable  of  disturbing  many  others  besides  myself;  I  could
perfectly  feel  her  firm  and  pure  throat  and  gentle  warmth  ;
besides  I  could  notice  a  hurried  undulation  which,  whether
real  or  afifected,  was  none  the  less  flattering  and  attractive.

We  arrived  in  this  fashion  at  the  door  of  the  hut,  which
I  pushed  open  with  my  foot.  I  did  not  certainly  expect  the
sight  which  presented  itself  to  my  eyes.     I  thought  the  hut


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  185


would  be  carpeted  with  rushes,  having  the  ground  for  its  floor
and  a  few  stools  to  rest  upon.    Not  at  all.

It  was  a  boudoir,  furnished  with  every  imaginable  elegance.
The  bottom  of  the  doors  and  the  mirrors  represented  the  most
gallant  scenes  from  the  metamorphoses  of  Ovid:  Salmacis
and  Hermaphrodite,  Venus  and  Adonis,  Apollo  and  Daphne,
and  other  love  scenes  from  ancient  mythology;  the  piers
were  made  of  roses,  most  delicately  carved,  and  little  mar-
guerites, only  the  hearts  of  w^hich  were  gilded  and  the  leaves
silvered.  A  silver  edging  bordered  all  the  furniture  and
relieved  a  color  scheme  of  the  softest  blue  it  is  possible  to
imagine,  and  at  the  same  time  one  marvelously  adapted  to
make  the  whiteness  and  glory  of  the  skia  stand  out;  a  thou-
sand charming  curiosities  loaded  the  mantelshelf,  the  tables
and  whatnots,  and  there  was  a  regal  luxury  in  the  long  chairs
and  sofas  which  was  sufficient  evidence  that  this  retreat  was
not  destined  for  austere  occupations,  and  that  one  would  not
be  uncomfortable  there.

A  beautiful  marble  clock  standing  upon  a  richly  encrusted
pedestal  faced  a  large  Venetian  mirror,  in  which  it  was  re-
flected with  strange  and  brilliant  effect.  Besides  it  had
stopped,  as  if  the  marking  of  the  hours  was  a  superfluity  in
a  place  destined  to  forget  them.

I  told  Rosette  that  this  refined  luxury  delighted  me,  that  I
considered  it  very  good  taste  to  conceal  the  greatest  refine-
ment under  an  appearance  of  simplicity,  and  that  I  approved
very  strongly  of  a  woman  wearing  embroidered  skirts  and
lace-trimmed  chemises  beneath  a  simple  linen  overall  ;  it  was
a  delicate  attention  to  the  lover  she  had  or  would  have  for
which  he  could  not  be  too  grateful,  for  surely  it  was  better  to
put  a  diamond  in  a  nut  than  a  nut  in  a  golden  box.

Rosette,  to  prove  to  me  that  she  was  of  the  same  opinion,
raised  her  skirt  a  little,  and  showed  me  the  border  of  an
underskirt  richly  embroidered  with  flowers  and  foliage;  it
only  rested  with  myself  then  to  have  been  admitted  into  the
secrets  of  her  most  magnificent  wear;  but  I  did  not  ask  to  see
if  the  splendour  of  the  chemise  was  equal  to  that  of  the  skirt,
though  it  is  probable  that  its  luxuriousness  was  no  less.
Rosette  let  fall  her  skirt,  surprised  at  my  indifference.     Still


186  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

this  exhibition  had  served  to  display  the  beginning  of  a
perfectly  turned  calf  and  to  give  the  utmost  promise  for  the
upper  part.  The  leg  she  stretched  out  the  better  to  display
her  underskirt  was  really  of  miraculous  fineness  and  graceful-
ness in  its  pearl-gray  silk  stocking,  tight  and  well-fitting,  and
the  little  heeled  slipper  ornamented  with  a  bow  at  the  toe  was
like  a  real  Cinderella's  shoe.  I  paid  her  the  most  sincere
compliments,  and  I  told  her  that  I  did  not  know  a  prettier  leg
or  smaller  foot,  and  that  I  did  not  think  it  possible  for  any
to  be  more  shapely.  To  this  she  replied  with  a  frankness  and
ingenuousness  quite  charming  and  clever:

"Quite  true.''

Then  she  went  to  a  panel  in  the  wall,  and  took  out  a  flask
or  two  of  liqueurs  and  a  few  plates  of  biscuits  and  sweets,
placed  them  all  upon  a  little  table,  and  sat  down  by  me  upon
a  little  easy  chair,  so  narrow  that  in  order  not  to  be
too  crowded  I  was  obliged  to  put  my  arm  round  her  waist.
As  she  had  two  hands  free,  and  I  only  had  my  left  of  any  use
to  me,  she  poured  out  the  wine  and  helped  me  to  biscuits;
soon  noticing  that  I  was  rather  clumsy,  she  said,  "Come,  never
mind;  I  will  feed  you,  dear  child,  as  you  cannot  feed  your-
self." Then  she  raised  the  food  to  my  mouth,  and  forced  me
to  swallow  it  more  quickly  than  I  liked  by  pushing  it  in  with
her  pretty  fingers,  absolutely  in  the  way  birds  are  fed  when
they  are  being  crammed,  and  that  made  her  laugh  very  much.
I  could  hardly  help  returning  to  her  fingers  the  kiss  she  had
given  just  before  to  the  palm  of  my  hand,  and  as  if  to  prevent
me,  but  really  to  furnish  me  with  an  opportunity  to  better
place  my  kiss,  she  patted  my  mouth  two  or  three  times  with
the  back  of  her  hand.  We  had  a  glass  or  two  of  Canary  wine,
not  much  certainly,  but  enough  to  excite  two  women  only
used  to  water.  Rosette  leant  back  upon  my  arm  very
lovingly.  She  had  taken  off  her  cloak,  and  I  could  see  the
commencement  of  the  throat,  which  was  tense  and  still  in
her  bent  position:  its  tint  w^as  ravishingly  delicate  and
transparent  ;  its  shape  was  slender  and  at  the  same  time  mar-
velously  solid.  I  contemplated  her  for  some  time  with
indefinable  emotion  and  pleasure,  and  the  thought  came  into
my  mind  that  men  were  more  favored  than  we  were  in  their


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  187

love  affairs,  that  we  gave  them  possession  of  the  most  charm-
ing treasures,  and  they  had  nothing  like  them  to  offer  us.
What  pleasure  there  must  be  in  traversing  with  the  lips  such
fine  polished  skin  and  such  rounded  contours,  which  seem  to
come  to  meet  the  kiss  and  provoke  it!  This  satiny  flesh,
these  undulating  lines  running  one  into  the  other,  the  hair
so  silky  and  soft  to  the  touch;  what  inexhaustible  incentives
they  are  for  delicate  pleasures  which  men  cannot  offer  us!
Our  caresses  can  hardly  be  but  passive,  and  yet  there  is  more
pleasure  in  giving  than  in  receiving.

Most  certainly  I  should  not  have  made  such  remarks  a  year
ago,  and  I  could  have  looked  at  all  the  throats  and  shoulders
in  the  world  without  interest  as  to  whether  they  were  of  good
or  bad  shape  ;  but  since  I  have  discarded  the  attire  of  my  sex
and  live  with  young  men,  a  sentiment  quite  unknown  has
developed  in  me — the  sentiment  of  beauty.  Women  are
usually  deprived  of  it.  I  know  not  why,  for  at  first  they  seem
better  judges  of  it  than  men;  but  though  there  are  some  who
possess  it,  yet  the  knowledge  of  oneself  is  the  most  difficult
of  all  knowledge,  and  it  is  therefore  not  surprising  they  do
not  understand  it.  Usually  if  a  woman  thinks  another  woman
very  pretty  one  may  be  sure  the  latter  is  very  ugly,  and  no
man  will  notice  her.  In  return,  all  women  whose  beauty  and
grace  are  noted  by  the  men  are  unanimously  considered
abominable  and  affected  by  the  skirted  brigade;  they  raise
endless  comment.  If  I  were  what  I  appear  to  be,  I  would
take  no  other  guide  in  my  choice,  and  woman's  disapprobation
would  be  a  sufficient  certificate  of  beauty  for  me.

Now  I  love  and  know  beauty;  the  clothes  I  wear  separate
me  from  my  sex  and  take  away  all  rivalry;  I  am  even  in  a
better  position  to  judge  than  any  one  else.  I  am  no  longer
a  wom.an,  but  not  yet  a  man,  and  desire  will  never  blind  me
into  taking  lay  figures  for  idols  ;  I  see  coldly  and  without  prej-
udice either  for  or  against,  and  my  position  is  as  perfectly
disinterested  a  one  as  possible.

The  length  and  fineness  of  the  lashes,  the  transparence  of
the  temples,  the  modeling  of  the  ear,  the  tone  and  quality  of
the  hair,  the  well-bred  appearance  of  the  feet  and  hands,  the
coupling  more  or  less  loosely  of  the  legs  and  wrists,  a  thou-


188  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

sand  things  which  I  did  not  notice,  and  which  constitute  real
beauty  and  prove  good  breeding,  guide  me  in  my  appreciation
and  hardly  admit  of  a  mistake.  I  believe  any  man  might
accept  with  their  eyes  shut  a  woman  of  whom  I  had  said,
**Really,  she  is  not  bad."

Consequently  I  am  a  much  better  judge  of  pictures  than
formerly,  and  although  I  have  only  a  very  superficial  smatter-
ing of  art,  it  would  be  difficult  to  make  me  pass  a  bad  work
as  a  good  one;  I  find  a  strange  and  profound  charm  in  this
study,  for,  as  in  ever>thing  else,  moral  or  physical  beauty  re-
quires to  be  studied,  and  cannot  be  grasped  at  once.

But  to  return  to  Rosette;  from  this  subject  to  her  the
transition  is  not  a  difficult  one,  and  they  are  two  ideas  which
invite  companionship.

As  I  have  said,  the  beauty  was  leaning  back  upon  my  arm
witli  her  head  against  my  shoulder  ;  emotion  tinted  her  beauti-
ful cheeks  a  delicate  rose  color,  which  admirably  set  ofif  the
deep  black  of  a  coquettishly  placed  beauty  spot;  her  teeth  j
gleamed  through  her  smile  like  raindrops  in  the  heart  of  a
poppy,  and  her  half -lowered  lashes  still  further  increased  the
humid  brilliancy  of  her  great  eyes;  a  ray  of  sunlight  produced
a  thousand  gleams  upon  her  silky  hair,  several  curls  of  which
had  escaped  and  hung  in  repentance  upon  her  plump,  round
neck,  setting  ofif  its  whiteness;  a  few  little  tresses  more  un-
ruly than  the  otliers  having  become  detached  from  the  rest,
were  twisted  in  capricious  spirals,  and  gilded  by  strange  re-
flections, which  in  the  light  assumed  all  the  colors  of  the
prism  ;  these  threads  of  gold  were  like  the  halos  which  in  the
old  pictures  surround  the  heads  of  virgins.  We  were  both
silent,  and  I  amused  myself  by  following,  beneath  the  pearly
transparence  of  her  temples,  her  little  azure  veins,  and  the
tapering  of  the  down  at  the  extremity  of  her  brows.

The  beauty  seemed  to  retire  within  herself  and  cradle  her-
self in  dreams  of  infinite  pleasure;  her  arms  hung  down  at
her  sides  as  undulating  and  soft  as  loose  sashes;  her  head
leant  further  and  further  backward,  as  if  the  muscles  which
sustained  it  had  been  cut  or  were  too  weak  to  support  it.  She
had  withdrawn  her  two  little  feet  beneath  her  skirt,  and  had
succeeded  in  entirely  retiring  into  the  corner  of  the  easy  chair


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  189

I  occupied,  so  that  although  ît  was  very  narrow  there  was  an
empty  space  on  the  other  side.

Her  yielding  and  supple  body  was  modeled  upon  mine  like
wax,  and  took  its  external  contour  with  the  greatest  possible
exactness  ;  water  could  not  have  filled  the  curves  more  closely.
Thus  leaning  against  my  side,  she  was  like  the  double  outline
which  painters  add  to  their  subjects  on  the  shadow  side,  to
make  them  look  fatter  and  better  fed.  Only  an  amorous
woman  could  have  such  undulations  and  enlacements.  In
comparison  ivy  was  far  behind  her.

The  gentle  warmth  of  her  body  penetrated  through  her
clothing  and  my  own;  a  thousand  magnetic  streams  vibrated
around  her;  her  entire  life  seemed  to  have  passed  into  me
and  to  have  left  her  completely.  Moment  by  moment  she
languished,  expired,  and  bent  more  and  more.  A  light  per-
spiration stood  upon  her  shining  forehead;  her  eyes  moistened,
and  two  or  three  times  she  made  a  movement  as  if  to  raise
her  hands  to  hide  them;  but  halfway  her  weary  arms  fell
back  upon  her  knees,  and  she  did  not  succeed;  a  large  tear
overflowed  from  her  eyes  and  trickled  down  her  burning
cheeks,  where  it  was  soon  absorbed.

My  position  became  very  embarrassing  and  passably  ridicu-
lous; I  felt  that  I  must  appear  enormously  stupid  and  that
annoyed  me  extremely,  although  I  had  no  power  to  alter  it.
Enterprise  was  forbidden  me,  and  certainly  that  was  the  only
method  which  would  please  her  now.  I  was  too  sure  of  not
receiving  any  resistance  to  run  the  risk,  and  really  I  did  not
know  of  what  wood  to  make  an  arrow.  The  use  of  gallant
phrases  and  madrigals  was  satisfactory  in  the  beginning,  but
nothing  would  appear  more  insipid  at  this  stage;  to  get  up
and  go  out  would  have  been  the  greatest  rudeness  ;  and  besides,
I  am  not  sure  that  Rosette  would  not  have  played  the  part
of  Potiphar's  wife,  and  have  detained  me  by  the  corner  of
my  cloak.  I  should  have  had  no  virtuous  motive  in  resisting
her;  and  then,  to  my  shame,  I  must  admit  that  this  scene,
though  equivocal  in  its  character  to  me,  was  not  without  a
certain  charm  which  restrained  me  longer  than  necessary  ;  my
ardent  love  was  kindled  at  her  flame,  and  I  was  really  angry
at  my  unfortunate  position;  I  even  desired  to  be  a  man  as


190  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


effectively  as  I  appeared,  to  return  her  love,  and  I  regretted
very  much  that  Rosette  was  mistaken.  My  breathing
quickened,  I  felt  the  blushes  mount  to  my  face,  and  I  was
scarcely  less  troubled  than  my  poor  sweetheart.  The  idea  of
the  similarity  of  our  sexes  gradually  disappeared,  leaving  only
a  vague  sense  of  pleasure;  my  glances  were  veiled,  my  lips
trembled,  and  if  Rosette  had  been  a  cavalier,  instead  of  being
what  she  was,  how  happy  should  I  have  been.

In  the  end,  being  unable  to  contain  herself,  she  got  up
quickly,  making  a  sort  of  spasmodic  movement,  and  began
to  rapidly  pace  the  room;  then  she  stopped  in  front  of  the
mirror  and  rearranged  a  few  strands  of  her  hair.  During
this  time  I  cut  a  poor  figure,  and  I  hardly  knew  what
demeanor  to  assume.

She  stopped  in  front  of  me  and  seemed  to  reflect.

She  thought  that  a  mad  timidity  alone  restrained  me,  and
that  I  was  more  of  a  schoolboy  than  she  had  at  first  believed.
Excited  by  her  love,  she  wished  to  make  a  supreme  effort,
and  risk  the  loss  of  the  part  to  gain  the  whole.

She  came  to  me  and  quicker  than  lightning  sat  down  upon
my  knees,  passed  her  arms  around  my  neck,  clasped  her  hands
behind  my  head,  and  her  mouth  seized  mine  in  a  furious  em-
brace; I  felt  her  bare  throat  in  revolt  against  my  breast,  and
her  entwined  fingers  twitched  in  my  hair.  A  tremor  ran
through  the  whole  of  my  body.

Rosette  did  not  leave  my  mouth;  her  lips  enveloped  my
lips,  her  teeth  touched  my  teeth,  our  breaths  were  intermingled.
I  drew  back  for  an  instant,  and  turned  my  head  two  or  three
times  to  avoid  her  kisses;  but  an  invincible  attraction  made
me  turn  back,  and  I  returned  them  to  her  almost  as  ardently
as  I  had  received  them.  I  hardly  know  what  would  have
happened  if  a  loud  barking  had  not  sounded  outside  the  door
with  a  noise  of  scratching  feet.  The  door  gave  way  and  a
beautiful  white  greyhound  entered  the  hut,  yelping  and
jumping.

Rosette  got  up  quickly  and  ran  to  the  end  of  the  room.  The
beautiful  white  greyhound  leapt  with  joy  around  her  and
tried  to  reach  her  hands  to  lick  them;  she  was  so  troubled


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  191

that  she  had  great  diffictdty  in  readjusting^  her  cloak  on  her
shoulders.

This  greyhound  was  the  favorite  dog  of  her  brother
Alcibiades;  the  animal  never  left  him,  and  when  the  dog  ap-
peared it  was  certain  that  the  master  was  not  far  away  ;  that
was  the  reason  poor  Rosette  was  so  frightened.

A  moment  later  Alcibiades  himself,  booted  and  spurred,
came  in  whip  in  hand.  'Ah,  here  you  are  then,"  he  said.  "I
have  been  looking  for  you  for  more  than  an  hour,  and  I  should
never  have  found  you  if  my  good  dog  Smug  had  not
discovered  your  hiding-place."  He  cast  a  half-serious,  half-
joking  glance  at  his  sister,  which  made  her  blush  up  to  the
white  of  her  eyes.  ''You  had  apparently  some  very  thorny
subjects  to  discuss  to  retire  to  such  profound  solitude?  You
doubtless  were  talking  of  theology  and  the  double  nature  of
the  soul  ?"

''Oh,  no!  Our  occupation  was  hardly  as  sublime  as  that;
we  were  eating  sweets  and  talking  fashions,  that  is  all."

"I  don't  think  so.  You  seemed  to  me  to  be  profoundly
buried  in  some  sentimental  dissertation;  but  to  distract  you
after  your  vaporous  conversation,  I  think  it  would  be  a  good
idea  for  you  to  take  a  turn  on  horseback  with  me.  I  have  a
new  mare  I  want  to  try.  You  shall  ride  her  too,  Theodore,
and  we  will  see  what  she  is  like."

We  all  three  went  out  together,  Alcibiades  giving  me  his
arm,  while  I  gave  mine  to  Rosette.  The  expressions  on  our
faces  were  strangely  varied:  Alcibiades  had  a  pensive  look,
I  was  quite  at  my  ease,  while  Rosette  seemed  exceedingly  an-
noyed.

Alcibiades  had  arrived  just  at  the  right  time  for  me,  but
very  inopportunely  for  Rosette,  who  lost,  or  thought  she  had
done  so,  by  it,  the  reward  of  her  attacks  and  ingenious  tactics.
She  had  to  begin  again;  had  he  been  a  quarter  of  an  hour
later,  I  am  sure  I  do  not  know  what  the  upshot  of  this  ad-
venture would  have  been;  I  see  no  possible  ending.  Perhaps
it  would  have  been  better  if  Alcibiades  had  not  intervened
precisely  at  the  crucial  moment;  the  situation  must  have
reached  a  climax  in  one  way  or  another.  During  this  scene
I  was  two  or  three  times  on  the  point  of  confessing  to  Rosette


192  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

who  I  was;  but  the  fear  of  being  taken  for  an  adventuress
and  of  seeing  my  secret  divulged  kept  back  from  my  lips  the
words  which  they  were  ready  to  utter.

Such  a  state  of  things  could  not  last.  My  departure  was
the  only  way  of  cutting  short  this  purposeless  intrigue,  so  at
dinner  I  announced  that  I  was  leaving  the  following  day.
Rosette,  who  was  sitting  by  my  side,  nearly  fainted  on  hear-
ing my  statement  and  dropped  her  glass.  Pallor  suddenly
overspread  her  beautiful  face;  she  cast  me  a  sorrowful  glance,
full  of  reproach,  which  made  me  as  agitated  and  disturbed  as
she  was  herself.

The  aunt  raised  her  wrinkled  hands  in  a  movement  of
pained  surprise,  and  in  her  shrill  and  quavering  voice,  which
now  trembled  more  than  usual,  said,  "Surely,  my  dear  Theo-
dore, you  are  not  going  to  leave  us  like  that?  It  is  not  kind
of  you;  yesterday  you  showed  not  the  slightest  inclination  to
go.  The  post  has  not  come,  so  you  have  received  no  letters,
and  have  no  excuse.  You  promised  us  another  fortnight  and
now  you  are  going  to  disappoint  us;  it  is  not  right  of  you
to  do  so  ;  you  cannot  go  back  on  your  word.  See  what  a  face
Rosette  is  making  at  you,  and  how  glad  she  will  be  for  you
to  stay.  I  warn  you  that  I  desire  it  as  much  as  she  does,  and
that  I  shall  pull  just  as  long  a  face,  and  at  sixty-eight  that  is
a  great  deal  more  terrible  than  at  twenty-three.  See  to  what
you  are  voluntarily  exposing  yourself:  to  the  anger  of  the
aunt  and  niece,  and  all  for  some  caprice  which  has  suddenly
seized  you  between  the  cheese  and  the  dessert.'*

Alcibiades  swore,  giving  the  table  a  heavy  blow  with  his
fist,  that  he  would  barricade  the  gates  of  the  château  and  ham-
string my  horse  rather  than  let  me  go.

Rosette  threw  me  another  glance  so  sad  and  supplicating
that  it  would  have  needed  the  ferocity  of  a  famished  tiger,
one  without  food  for  a  week,  not  to  have  been  touched.  I  did
not  resist,  and  although  it  considerably  annoyed  me  to  do  so,
I  gave  a  solemn  promise  to  stay.  Dear  Rosette  would  gladly
have  clung  to  my  neck  and  kissed  me  for  my  kindness  ;  Alci-
biades grasped  my  fingers  in  his  huge  hand  and  shook  my
arm  so  violently  that  he  nearly  dislocated  my  shoulder,  bent
my  rings  oval,  and  cut  my  fingers  rather  deeply.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  193


Still  Rosette  did  not  quite  recover  her  spirits  ;  the  idea  that
I  could  go  away  and  that  I  desired  to  do  so,  an  idea  that  had
not  before  been  brought  clearly  to  her  mind,  threw  her  into
a  profound  reverie.  The  color  the  news  of  my  departure  had
chased  from  her  cheeks  did  not  come  back  as  quickly  as
formerly;  she  was  still  pale  of  face,  with  an  anxious  feeling
in  her  heart.  My  conduct  towards  her  surprised  her  more
and  more.  After  the  pronounced  advances  she  had  made  me,
she  did  not  understand  the  motives  which  led  me  to  exercise
so  much  restraint  in  my  relations  with  her.  Her  desire  was,
before  my  departure,  to  lead  me  into  a  definite  engagement,
not  doubting  that  after  that  it  would  be  easy  to  retain  me  as
long  as  she  wished.

In  that  she  was  right,  and  had  I  not  been  a  woman  her
calculation  would  have  been  correct,  for  although  the  satiety
of  pleasure  and  the  disgust  w^iich  usually  follows  it  is  talked
of,  any  man  whose  heart  is  in  the  right  place,  and  who  is  not
miserably  and  incurably  blasé,  feels  his  love  grow  with  his
happiness,  and  very  often  the  best  way  for  a  woman  to  keep
a  lover  who  is  ready  to  break  loose  is  to  give  herself  to  him
with  entire  abandon.

Rosette  had  the  intention  of  leading  me  into  something  de-
finite before  my  departure.  Knowing  how  difficult  it  is  later
on  to  resume  a  liaison  at  the  point  where  it  is  broken  off,  and
besides  never  being  sure  of  meeting  me  again  under  such
favorable  circumstances,  she  neglected  no  opportunity  which
arose  of  putting  me  in  a  position  to  speak  clearly  and  to  quit
the  evasive  style  in  which  I  took  refuge.  As  I  had  on  my
side  the  formal  and  determined  intention  to  avoid  any  en-
counter like  that  in  the  rustic  pavilion,  and  still  could  not
without  attracting  ridicule  display  too  much  coolness  to
Rosette  and  introduce  childish  prudery  into  our  relations,  I
hardly  knew  what  attitude  to  adopt,  and  I  tried  to  always
manage  to  have  a  third  person  in  our  company.  Rosette,  on
the  contrary,  tried  all  she  could  to  be  alone  with  me,  and  she
often  enough  succeeded,  the  château  being  some  distance  from
the  town  and  not  much  frequented  by  the  gentry  of  the
neighborhood.  This  secret  resistance  saddened  and  surprised
her;  occasionally  there  arose  in  her  mind  doubts  and  hesi-


194.  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

tancy  as  to  the  power  of  her  charms,  and  seeing  how  little
she  was  loved,  she  was  not  at  times  far  ofif  the  belief  that  she
was  ugly.  Then  she  doubled  her  attentions  and  coquetry,  and
although  her  mourning  did  not  allow  her  to  employ  the  aids
of  the  toilette  to  their  fullest  extent,  she  still  succeeded  in
adorning  herself  and  varying  her  dress  so  that  every  day  she
was  two  or  three  times  more  charming  than  on  the  previous
day,  and  that  is  not  saying  a  little.  She  tried  everything.  She
was  jolly,  melancholy,  tender,  passionate,  obliging,  coquettish,
and  even  simpering;  she  assumed  one  after  another  all  those
masks  which  suit  women  so  well,  that  it  is  impossible  to  decide
whether  tliey  are  masks  or  real  faces;  she  arrayed  herself  in
eight  or  ten  contrasted  individualities  in  succession  to  see
which  would  please  me  and  to  j5x  upon  that  one.  In  herself
alone  she  provided  me  with  a  complete  seraglio,  and  all  I  had
to  do  w^as  to  throw  the  handkerchief  ;  but  on  her  part  nothing
succeeded.

The  lack  of  success  of  all  these  stratagems  caused  her  to
fall  into  a  profound  stupor.  Days  passed  and  she  made  no
progress.  She  was  visibly  affected  by  it;  an  expression  of
uneasy  sadness  had  taken  the  place  of  the  fresh  smile  upon  her
lips;  the  corners  of  her  mouth,  which  had  been  so  gayly
curved,  had  drooped  appreciably,  and  formed  a  firm  and
serious  line;  a  few  little  veins  became  more  marked  in  her
tender  eyes;  her  cheeks,  formerly  so  peachlike  had  only  re-
tained their  imperceptible  bloom.  Often  from  my  window  I
saw  her  cross  the  garden  in  her  morning  wrapper  ;  she  walked
hardly  raising  her  feet,  as  if  she  slid,  with  her  two  arms
crossed  upon  her  breast,  her  head  bowed,  more  bent  than  a
willow  bough  hanging  in  the  water,  and  with  an  undulating
and  heavy  motion  like  that  of  drapery  which  was  too  long
and  trailed  upon  the  ground.  At  these  times  she  looked  like
one  of  those  ancient  lovers,  a  victim  of  Venus's  rage  whom
the  pitiless  goddess  had  furiously  attacked.  I  could  picture
to  myself  Psyche  like  that  after  she  had  lost  Cupid.

The  days  when  she  did  not  force  herself  to  overcome  my
coolness  and  hesitation  her  love  had  a  simple  and  primitive
charm  which  fascinated  me  ;  then  hers  was  a  silent  and  trust-
ing  abandonment,   a   chaste    facility    for    caresses,    and    an


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  195

inexhaustible  abundance  and  plenitude  of  heart,  in  fact  all  the
treasures  of  a  beautiful  nature  bestowed  without  reserve.  She
was  free  from  the  pettiness  and  meanness  so  common  in  even
the  best  of  women;  she  did  not  attempt  any  disguise,  but
allowed  me  to  see  the  extent  of  her  love.  Her  self-respect  did
not  revolt  for  an  instant  because  I  did  not  respond  to  her  ad-
vances, for  pride  leaves  the  heart  the  day  love  enters,  and  if
ever  any  one  were  truly  loved  it  was  I.  She  suffered,  but
without  complaint  or  bitterness,  and  she  only  attributed  the
lack  of  success  of  her  efforts  to  herself.  Yet  her  pallor  in-
creased every  day,  for  the  lilies  and  roses  had  joined  battle
upon  her  cheeks,  and  the  roses  had  been  decisively  routed  ;  it
pained  me  to  see  this,  but  I  was  as  powerless  as  any  one  else.
The  more  gently  and  affectionately  I  spoke  to  her,  the  more
caressing  were  my  ways,  the  deeper  I  buried  the  barbed  arrow
of  impossible  love  in  her  heart.  In  consoling  her  to-day  I
prepared  for  her  a  much  more  terrible  despair  in  the  future  :
my  remedies  poisoned  her  wound  while  seeming  to  stanch  it.  I
repented  to  some  extent  of  all  the  agreeable  things  I  had  said,
and  I  should  have  liked,  because  of  my  extreme  friendship
for  her,  to  discover  a  way  to  make  her  hate  me.

I  tried  two  or  three  times  to  speak  unkindly  to  her,  but  I
quickly  returned  to  the  madrigal,  for  I  was  less  afraid  of  her
smile  than  her  tears.  On  these  occasions,  although  the
loyalty  of  the  intention  fully  absolved  me  in  my  conscience,
I  was  more  touched  than  I  need  have  been,  and  I  experienced
something  not  far  removed  from  remorse.  A  tear  can  hardly
be  dried  any  other  way  but  by  a  kiss,  and  one  cannot  with
decency  leave  such  a  task  to  a  handkerchief,  though  it  be  of
the  finest  cambric  in  the  world;  I  undid  what  I  had  done,
the  tear  was  quickly  forgotten,  more  quickly  than  the  kiss,
and  my  embarrassment  was  afterwards  doubled.

Rosette,  who  sees  that  I  am  going  to  escape  her,  clings
obstinately  and  sadly  to  the  remnants  of  her  hope,  and  my
position  is  becoming  more  and  more  complicated.  The
strange  sensation  I  experienced  in  the  little  hut,  and  the  in-
conceivable agitation  into  which  I  was  thrown  by  the  ardor
of  the  caresses  of  my  beautiful  sweetheart,  have  been  several
times  renewed,  though  with  less  violence;  and  often  when


196  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

sitting  near  Rosette  hand  in  hand,  and  listening  to  her  cooing
voice,  I  imagine  that  I  am  a  man,  as  she  beHeves  me  to  be,
and  that  if  I  do  not  respond  to  her  love  it  is  pure  cruelty  on
my  part.

One  evening,  by  some  accident,  I  was  alone  in  the  green
room  with  the  old  lady;  she  had  in  her  hand  a  piece
of  tapestry,  for  in  spite  of  being  sixty-eight  she  was  never
idle,  wishing,  so  she  said,  to  finish  before  her  death  a  piece  of
work  she  had  begun  and  labored  upon  for  a  very  long  time.
Feeling  a  little  tired,  she  put  down  her  work  and  leant  back
in  her  armchair.  She  looked  at  me  very  attentively  and  her
gray  eyes  sparkled  through  her  spectacles  with  strange  vi-
vacity; she  passed  two  or  three  times  her  dry  hand  over  her
wrinkled  forehead  and  appeared  to  be  thinking  deeply.  The
recollection  of  the  past  and  her  regrets  gave  her  face  an
expression  of  melancholy  affection.  I  was  silent  for  fear  of
disturbing  her  thoughts,  and  the  silence  lasted  for  some
moments;  at  last  she  broke  it.

'They  are  Henry's  eyes,  my  dear  Henry's  ;  the  same  humid
and  brilliant  glance,  the  same  carriage  of  the  head,  the  same
gentle  though  proud  face;  you  are  just  like  him.  You  cannot
imagine  how  great  the  likeness  is,  Theodore  ;  when  I  look  at
you,  I  cannot  believe  that  Henry  is  dead  ;  I  think  he  can  only
have  been  on  a  long  journey  and  returned  at  last.  You  have
caused  me  great  pleasure  and  great  pain,  Theodore;  pleasure
in  recalling  to  my  mind  my  poor  Henry,  pain  in  showing  me
how  great  my  loss  has  been  ;  sometimes  I  have  taken  you  for
his  spirit.  I  cannot  reconcile  myself  to  the  idea  that  you  are
going  to  leave  us.  It  seems  to  me  that  I  am  again  losing  my
dear  Henry."

I  told  her  that  if  it  were  really  possible  for  me  to
stay  longer  I  would  do  so  with  pleasure,  but  that  my  stay  had
already  extended  beyond  its  proper  limits  ;  that  besides  I  pro-
posed to  return,  and  the  château  would  leave  me  with
memories  too  agreeable  to  be  quickly  forgotten.

"However  angry  I  may  be  at  your  departure,  Theodore,"
she  went  on,  following  out  her  idea,  ''there  is  some  one  who
will  be  more  so.  You  understand  my  meaning.  I  do  not  know
what  we  shall  do  with  Rosette  after  you  have  gone.    Now  this


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  197

old  château  is  very  melancholy.  Alcibiades  îs  always  engaged
in  some  kind  of  sport,  and  for  a  young  woman  the  society  of
a  poor  invalid  like  me  is  not  very  cheerful."

'If  any  one  ought  to  regret,  it  is  not  you,  madam,
nor  Rosette,  but  myself;  you  lose  little,  I  much;  you  will
easily  find  more  charming  society  than  mine,  but  it  is  more
than  doubtful  if  I  can  ever  replace  Rosette's  and  yours."

'*I  do  not  desire  to  quarrel  with  your  modesty,  my  dear  sir,
but  I  know  what  I  know,  and  I  am  speaking  from  my
knowledge.  It  is  probable  that  we  shall  not  see  Madam
Rosette  in  a  good  temper  for  a  long  time,  for  it  is  you  now
who  cause  the  rain  and  the  fine  weather  upon  her  cheeks.
Her  period  of  mourning  is  over,  and  it  will  be  very  un-
pleasant for  her  to  take  off  her  gayety  with  her  last  black
garment  ;  that  would  be  a  very  bad  example  and  quite  contrary
to  the  ordinary  rule.  Now  you  can  prevent  that  without  much
trouble,  and  you  must  do  so,"  the  old  lady  said,  laying  great
stress  on  the  last  few  words.

"Certainly  I  will  do  my  best  so  that  your  niece  may  retain
her  gayety,  since  you  credit  me  with  such  influence  over  her.
Still,  I  hardly  see  how  I  am  to  do  it."

"Oh,  you  hardly  see!  What  use  are  your  beautiful  eyes?
I  did  not  know  you  were  so  shortsighted.  Rosette  is  free,
she  has  an  income  of  eighty  thousand  francs  in  her  own  right,
and  that  would  make  women  twice  as  ugly  as  she  is  very
pretty.  You  are  young,  well  made,  and,  I  believe,  unmarried  ;
it  seems  to  me  to  be  the  simplest  thing  in  the  world,  unless
you  have  an  insupportable  horror  of  Rosette,  and  that  is  hard
to  believe."

"That  is  not,  and  cannot  be;  for  her  soul  is  equal  to  her
body,  and  she  is  one  of  those  women  who  could  be  ugly  with-
out its  being  noticeable  or  thought  desirable  for  them  to  be
otherwise."

"She  could  be  ugly  with  impunity  and  she  is  charming  ;  that
is  a  double  reason.  I  do  not  doubt  your  word,  but  she  has
taken  the  wiser  alternative.  On  her  part  I  would  willingly
answer  that  there  are  a  thousand  persons  she  hates  more  than
she  does  you,  and  that  if  she  were  asked  several  times  she
would  perhaps  end  by  admitting  that  you  did  not  exactly  dis-


198  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

please  her.  You  have  on  your  finger  a  ring  which  would  fit
her  to  perfection,  for  your  hand  is  nearly  as  small  as  hers,
and  I  am  almost  certain  she  would  accept  it  with  pleasure."

The  good  lady  stopped  for  a  few  moments  to  see  the  eflfect
her  words  produced  upon  me,  and  I  do  not  know  whether  she
was  satisfied  by  the  expression  of  my  face.  I  was  terribly
embarrassed,  and  I  did  not  know  what  reply  to  make.  From
the  commencement  of  the  conversation  I  had  seen  the  tendency
of  her  insinuations,  and  although  I  almost  expected  the  words
she  had  just  uttered,  I  remained  surprised  and  abashed.  My
only  course  was  a  refusal,  but  what  probable  motive  could  I
advance  for  such  a  refusal  ?  I  had  none,  except  that  I  was  a
woman.  That  was,  it  is  true,  an  excellent  reason,  but  exactly
the  one  I  did  not  care  to  state.

I  could  hardly  fall  back  upon  ferocious  and  ridiculous  re-
lations; all  the  relatives  in  the  world  would  have  accepted
such  a  union  with  enthusiasm.  Had  Rosette  not  been  what
she  was,  good,  beautiful,  and  well-born,  the  income  of  eighty
thousand  francs  would  have  swept  aside  all  obstacles.

To  say  that  I  did  not  love  her  would  be  neither  true  nor
honorable,  for  I  really  loved  her  dearly,  much  more  than  a
woman  loves  a  woman.  I  was  too  young  to  pretend  to  be
already  engaged.  My  best  plan  seemed  to  be  to  give  her  to
understand  that,  being  the  youngest  member  of  the  family,
the  interests  of  the  house  required  me  to  join  the  Order  of
Malta,  and  did  not  permit  me  to  think  of  marriage,  and  that
it  caused  me  the  greatest  grief  since  I  had  seen  Rosette.

This  reply  was  not  worth  a  rap,  and  I  quite  realized  that
fact.  The  old  lady  was  not  duped  and  did  not  look  upon  it
as  definite;  she  thought  I  had  made  use  of  it  to  give  myself
time  to  reflect  and  to  consult  my  relatives.  In  reality  such  an
alliance  was  so  advantageous  and  unexpected  on  my  side  that
it  was  impossible  for  me  to  refuse,  even  had  I  loved  Rosette
but  little  or  not  at  all;  it  was  a  piece  of  good  fortune  not  to
be  neglected.

I  do  not  know  whether  the  aunt  made  the  overtures  at  the
niece's  instigation,  yet  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Rosette  had
nothing  to  do  with  it.  She  loved  me  too  simply  and  ardently
to   think    of    anything   but    my    immediate    possession,    and


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  199

marriage  would  assuredly  have  been  the  last  method  she  would
have  employed.  The  dowager,  who  must  have  noticed  our
intimacy,  and  without  a  doubt  believed  it  to  be  greater  than  it
really  was,  had  arranged  the  little  plan  in  her  head  to  keep
me  with  her,  and  as  much  as  possible  replace  her  dear  son
Henry,  killed  in  the  war,  to  whom  she  considered  I  bore  such
a  striking  likeness.  She  had  delighted  in  the  idea  and  profited
by  that  moment  of  solitude  to  have  an  explanation  with  me.  I
saw  by  her  manner  that  she  did  not  consider  herself  beaten,
and  that  she  soon  proposed  to  return  to  the  charge,  and  that
vexed  me  considerably.

Rosette  on  her  part  on  the  same  night  made  a  last  effort,
which  had  such  serious  results  that  I  must  make  a  special
story  of  it,  for  I  cannot  include  it  in  this  letter,  which  is  al-
ready of  unreasonable  length.  You  will  see  for  what  strange
adventures  Lwas  predestined,  and  how  Heaven  had  before-
hand designed  me  for  a  heroine  of  romance.  I  hardly  know
what  morality  could  be  drawn  from  all  this,  but  existences
are  not  like  fables,  each  chapter  has  not  at  its  end  a  rhymed
sentence.  Very  often  the  sensation  of  life  is  that  it  is  not
death.  That  is  all.  Good-by,  dear.  I  kiss  your  beautiful
eyes.  You  will  receive  directly  the  continuation  of  my
triumphant  biography.


CHAPTER  XHI

Theodore — Rosalind — for  I  know  not  which  name  to  call
you — I  come  from  seeing  you  just  now  and  I  write  to  you —
that  I  would  know  your  woman's  name  !  It  must  be  as  the
honey,  and  hover  on  the  lips  more  sweet  and  more  harmonious
than  poesy!

I  have  never  dared  to  say  that  to  you,  and  yet  I  shall  die
of  my  silence.  No  one  knows  nor  will  understand  what  I
have  suffered.  Myself,  I  am  not  able  to  give  a  feeble  idea;
words  fail  to  tell  of  such  agonies.     I  appear  to  have  turned


200  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

niy  sentence  to  pleasure,  being  driven  hard  to  say  some  things
new  and  singular  and  giving  the  most  extravagant  exag-
gerations, when  I  depict  what  I  have  proved  with  pictures
sufficiently  troublesome.

O  Rosalind  !  I  love  you  !  I  adore  you  !  There  is  no
stronger  word  to  express  my  feelings!  I  have  never  loved,
I  have  never  adored  any  one  but  you.  I  prostrate  myself,  I
humble  myself  before  you,  and  I  would  force  all  creation  to
bend  the  knee  before  my  idol  ;  you  are  to  me  more  than  all
nature,  more  than  myself,  more  than  God.  It  appears  strange
to  me  that  God  has  not  come  down  from  heaven  to  be  your
slave.  Where  you  are  not  all  is  desert,  all  is  death,  all  is  black-
ness; you  alone  people  the  world  for  me;  you  are  tlie  life,
the  sun — you  are  all.  Your  smile  makes  the  day,  your  sadness
the  night;  the  spheres  follow  the  movements  of  your  body,
and  the  celestial  harmonies  rule  over  you.  O  my  dear  queen  !
O  my  beautiful  real  dream!  You  are  clothed  in  splendor,
and  you  swim  without  ceasing  in  floods  of  radiance.

It  is  hardly  three  months  since  I  first  met  you.  But  I  have
loved  you  for  a  very  long  time.  Before  seeing  you  I  lan-
guished of  love  for  you;  I  called  you,  I  sought  you,  and  I
despaired  of  you  ever  crossing  my  path,  for  I  knew  that  I
should  never  be  able  to  love  another  woman.  Many  times
have  you  appeared  to  me  at  the  window  of  the  mysterious
castle  leaning  sadly  on  the  balcony  and  casting  to  the  winds
the  petals  of  some  flower — or  else,  petulant  Amazon,  on  your
Turkish  steed  whiter  than  snow,  traversing  at  a  gallop  the
somber  paths  of  the  forest.  How  charming  you  were,  with
your  eyes  confiding  and  soft,  your  transparent  hands,  your
beautiful  wavy  hair  and  your  half-smile,  so  adorably  disdain-
ful. Only  you  were  less  handsome,  for  the  most  ardent  and
unbridled  imagination  of  a  painter  or  a  poet  may  not  attain
to  the  sublime  poesy  of  the  reality.  There  is  in  you  a  spring
of  inexhaustible  grace,  a  fountain  always  gushing  forth  ir-
resistible seduction  ;  you  are  an  ornament  of  the  most  precious
pearls,  and  in  your  least  movements,  in  your  gestures  there
is  forgetfulness,  as  well  as  in  your  most  abandoned  poses.
You  include  in  each  instance,  with  a  royal  profusion,  some
inestimable  treasure  of  beauty.    If  the  outlines  of  a  figure,  if


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  201

the  fugitive  lines  of  an  attitude  were  able  to  be  fixed
conserved  in  a  mirror,  the  glasses  before  which  you  have
passed  might  be  mistaken,  as  some  public-house  signs  are,
for  the  most  divine  paintings  of  Raphael.  Each  gesture,  each
toss  of  the  head,  each  different  aspect  of  your  beauty  is  graven
on  the  mirror  of  my  soul  with  a  diamond  point,  and  nothing
in  the  world  shall  have  power  to  efface  the  profound
impression.  I  know  in  which  place  was  the  shadow  and  which
place  was  the  light;  the  flat  that  brightened  the  rays  of  the
day  and  the  place  where  the  reflection  wandered  so  melting
with  the  more  softened  complexion  of  the  neck  and  the  cheeks.
Absent  I  delineate  you;  your  ideal  pose  is  always  before  me.
As  a  child  I  remained  for  entire  hours  upright  before  the
pictures  of  the  old  masters,  and  searched  with  avidity  the  dark
depths,  gazing  at  the  beautiful  figures  of  saints  and  of
goddesses,  the  flesh  of  which,  of  the  whiteness  of  ivory  or  of
wax,  stood  out  so  marvelously  from  the  dark  background.  I
admire  the  simplicity  and  the  magnificence  of  their  figures,
the  strange  grace  of  their  hands  and  their  feet,  the  pride  and
the  fine  character  of  their  features,  at  the  same  time  so  fine
and  so  firm,  the  grandeur  of  the  draperies  that  cling  about
their  divine  forms,  the  purplish  folds  of  which  appear  to
lengthen  and  embrace  their  fine  bodies.  By  dint  of  stubbornly
plunging  my  eyes  into  the  canvas  thickly  smoked  by  age,  my
view  so  disturbed  the  outlines,  some  objects  losing  their  pre-
cision, and  one  species  of  live  motionless  and  dead  animated
all  these  pale  phantoms  of  vanished  beauty.  I  ended  by
discovering  these  figures  had  a  vague  resemblance  to  the
beautiful  unknown  I  adored  to  the  bottom  of  my  heart.  I
sighed  and  thought  the  one  I  must  love  was  perhaps  one  of
them,  and  had  perhaps  been  dead  these  three  hundred  years.
That  idea  affected  me  often  to  the  point  of  shedding  tears,
and  I  railed  against  myself  in  great  anger  for  not  being  born
in  the  sixteenth  century,  when  all  these  beauties  had  lived.
I  found  it  was  on  my  part  now  a  want  of  skill  and  unpardon-
able blunder.  As  I  grew  older  the  sweet  phantom  beset  me  yet
more  closely;  I  was  seeing  continually  between  myself  and
the  women  with  whom  I  had  love  affairs  a  jeering  and  ironical
smile,  taking  from  their  human  charm  all  the  perfection  of


202  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


the  divine  beauty.    It  made  some  very  charming  w^oraen  made
for  giving  happiness  appear  ugly  in  my  eyes.

However,  I  shall  not  have  been  enamored  of  an  adorable
shadow  the  actual  body  of  which  I  did  not  believe  existed,
though  it  was  the  presentiment  of  your  own  beauty.  O
Rosalind!  I  have  been  so  unhappy  because  of  you  before
knowing  you.

0  Theodore!  I  have  been  unhappy  because  of  you  after
having  known  you.  If  you  will,  you  are  able  to  open  to  me
the  paradise  of  my  dreams.  You  are  standing  on  the  thresh-
old as  a  guardian  angel  wûth  folded  wings,  and  you  hold  the
golden  key  in  your  beautiful  hands.  Speak,  Rosalind,  speak,
will  you  ?

1  await  only  one  word  from  you  to  seal  my  fate.  Do
decide  !  Are  you  Apollo,  the  hunter  from  heaven,  or  Aphro-
dite rising  from  the  bosom  of  tlie  sea?  Where  have  you  left
your  car  of  gems  harnessed  to  four  horses  of  flame?  What
have  you  done  with  your  pearl  shell  and  your  dolphins  with
their  azure  tails  ?  What  amorous  nymph  has  melted  her  body
in  that  of  yours  in  the  middle  of  a  kiss?  O  handsome  young
man,  you  are  more  charming  than  Cypris  or  Adonis,  more
adorable  than  all  the  women.

But  you  are  a  woman;  we  are  not  now  in  transformation
times — Adonis  and  Hermaphrodite  are  dead,  and  it  is  no
longer  by  a  man  that  beauty  shall  be  realized;  for  since  the
heroes  and  gods  are  no  more  you  alone  conserve  in  your  body
of  marble,  as  in  the  Greek  temple,  the  precious  gift  of  form,
and  show  that  the  earth  has  nothing  to  envy  heaven.  You
worthily  represent  the  first  divinity  of  the  world,  the  most
pure  symbol  of  eternal  essence — ^beauty.  Since  I  have  seen
you  something  has  rent  in  me,  a  veil  has  fallen,  a  door  has
opened;  I  have  felt  internally  inundated  by  many  waves  of
light;  I  have  learned  that  my  life  is  before  me  and  that  I  have
at  last  arrived  at  the  decisive  crossroads.  The  lines  obscured
and  lost  in  the  partly  shaded  faces  that  I  sought  to  distinguish
in  the  shadow  are  suddenly  illuminated,  the  brown  colors  that
darkened  the  bottom  of  the  picture  are  softly  lightened,  a
tender  dewy  gleam  has  glided  on  the  sea,  which  is  a  little
green  in  the  distance.    The  trees,  ceasing  to  appear  in  con-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  203

fusing  shapes,  have  commenced  to  stand  out  in  a  more  distinct
fashion.  The  flowers,  charged  with  dew,  have  spotted  with
brilliant  points  the  dull  green  of  the  turf.  I  have  seen  the
bullfinch  with  his  scarlet  breast  at  the  end  of  a  branch  of
elder,  the  little  white  rabbit  with  red  eyes  and  straight  ears
who  puts  his  head  between  two  blades  of  thyme,  passing  his
feet  over  his  muzzle,  and  the  timid  stag  who  com.es  to  drink
at  the  brook  and  see  the  reflection  of  his  horns  in  the  water.
From  the  morning  when  the  sun  of  love  rose  on  my  life
everything  changed;  where  vacillated  in  the  shadows  some
terrifying  forms  rendered  all  the  more  terrible  and  monstrous
by  their  vagueness,  I  can  now  see  groups  of  trees  in  flower,
surrounded  by  graceful  amphitheaters,  silver  palaces  with
their  terraces  strewn  with  vases  and  statues  bathing  their  feet
in  azure  lakes  and  appearing  to  swim  between  two  heavens.
That  which  I  took  in  the  obscurity  for  a  gigantic  dragon  with
wings  armed  with  claws  tearing  through  the  night  with  scaly
feet,  is  a  felucca  with  silken  sail  and  oars  painted  and  gilt,
full  of  women  and  musicians;  and  that  frightful  crab  I  be-
lieved to  be  waving  above  my  head  his  claws  is  a  fan  palm  the
long  and  narrow  leaves  of  which  the  night  breeze  is  stirring.
My  fancies  and  my  errors  have  vanished — I  am  in  love.

Despairing  of  ever  finding  you,  I  accused  my  dream  of
lying  and  I  quarreled  furiously  with  fate.  I  said  that  I  was
very  mad  to  seek  a  like  type,  or  that  nature  was  very  infertile
and  the  Creator  very  incapable,  not  having  power  to  realize
the  simple  thought  of  my  heart.  Prometheus  had  the  noble
pride  of  will  to  make  a  man  to  rival  with  God;  I  myself  had
created  a  woman,  and  I  believed  that  in  punishment  for  my
audacity  a  desire  always  unsatiated  gnawed  my  liver  like
another  vulture.  I  expected  to  be  enchained  with  links  of
steel  on  a  gray  rock  beside  the  savage  ocean;  but  the  beauti-
ful sea  nymphs  with  their  long  green  hair  rising  above  the
waves,  their  white  necks  outstretched,  and  showing  to  the  sun
their  bodies  of  pearl-shell  all  sparkling  with  tears  of  the  sea,
would  not  come  to  rest  on  the  shore  to  converse  with  and
console  me  in  my  trouble  as  in  the  play  of  old  ^schylus.

It  has  not  been  thus.

You  have  appeared,  and  I  have  blamed  the  weakness  of  my


204  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

imagination.  My  torment  has  not  been  that  I  fear  being  per-
petually a  prey  to  an  idea  on  a  sterile  rock;  but  I  have
suffered  no  less.  I  have  seen  that  in  effect  you  exist,  that  my
presentiments  have  not  lied  on  that  point;  but  you  are
presented  to  me  with  the  ambiguous  and  terrible  beauty  of  the
Sphinx.  As  Isis,  the  mysterious  goddess,  you  were  enveloped
in  a  veil  that  I  dare  not  upraise  from  fear  of  falling  dead.
If  you  knew  under  my  apparent  heedlessness  with  what  breath-
less attention  and  anxiety  I  observe  you  and  follow  you  in  all
your  smallest  movements  !  Nothing  escapes  me,  as  I  gaze
ardently  at  the  little  of  your  flesh  which  appears,  your  neck,
or  your  wrists,  to  try  to  ascertain  your  sex  !  Your  hands  have
been  to  me  a  subject  of  profound  study,  and  I  can  say  that
I  know  the  least  sinuosities,  the  most  imperceptible  veins,  the
slightest  dimple;  if  you  were  hidden  from  head  to  foot  under
the  most  impenetrable  mask  I  could  recognize  you  solely  by
seeing  one  of  your  fingers.  I  analyze  the  undulations  of  your
walk,  the  manner  in  which  you  place  your  feet  or  brush  back
your  hair.  I  seek  to  surprise  your  secret  in  the  habit  of  your
body;  I  watch  you  above  all  in  those  hours  of  lassitude  when
the  bones  seem  withdrawn  from  the  body  and  when  the  limbs
are  depressed  and  pliant  as  if  they  were  untied,  to  see  if  the
feminine  contours  are  more  pronounced  in  that  state  of
forgetfulness  and  carelessness.

Never  has  any  person  been  watched  more  closely  than  you  ;
I  forget  myself  for  hours  in  my  contemplation.  Retired  in
some  corner  of  the  salon,  having  in  hand  a  book  that  I  am  not
reading,  or  crouched  behind  the  curtain  of  my  chamber  when
you  are  in  yours  and  the  blinds  of  your  window  are  raised,
and,  much  impressed  by  the  marvelous  beauty  which  clings
around  you  like  a  luminous  atmosphere,  I  say  to  myself,  as-
suredly that  is  a  woman.  Then  all  at  once  a  movement
brusque  and  bold,  a  deep  tone  or  a  cavalier  fashion,  destroys
in  one  minute  my  frail  edifice  of  probabilities,  and  I  repeat  my
former  doubts.  I  am  traversing  the  uncharted  ocean  of  my
amorous  musing  under  full  sail,  and  you  come  to  seek  me
to  fence  with  you  or  play  tennis.  The  young  girl  transformed
into  a  young  cavalier  gives  me  some  terrible  strokes  with  her
foil,  striking  my  own  weapon  from  my  hand,  as  quick  and


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUFIN  205

nîmble  as  the  bravo  trained  to  fence.  Each  instant  of  the
day  brings  a  like  disappointment.  I  Tenture  to  address  you
to-day,  my  dear  girl.  It  is  you  I  adore,  and  I  see  you  tenderly
bending  to  the  ear  of  a  lady  and  whispering  beyond  her  hair
some  facetious  poem  or  compliment.  Judge  of  my  situation —
or  well,  some  woman,  that  in  my  strange  jealousy  I  might  live
with  the  greatest  voluptuousness  in  the  world,  she  hanging  on
your  arm  and  holding  you  aside  for  confiding  to  you  some
puerile  secrets  and  holding  you  for  hours  in  the  recess  of  the
window.

I  am  enraged  at  seeing  the  women  speak  to  you,  for  that
makes  me  believe  you  are  a  man,  and  even  had  you  been  I
should  not  have  suffered  such  extreme  pain.  When  the  men
approach  freely  and  familiarly  I  am  still  more  jealous,  because
I  dream  that  you  are  a  woman,  and  that  they  have  perhaps
the  same  suspicion  as  myself.  I  am  a  prey  to  the  most  con-
trary passions,  and  know  not  what  to  do.

I  am  angry  with  myself;  I  most  bitterly  reproach  myself
for  being  thus  tormented  by  a  visionary  love  and  not  having
the  strength  to  tear  from  my  heart  that  venomous  plant  which
sprang  up  in  a  night  like  a  poisonous  mushroom.  I  curse  you,
I  call  you  my  evil  genius,  I  have  believed  in  the  same  instant
that  you  are  Beelzebub  in  person,  for  I  have  no  power  to  ex-
plain the  sensation  I  experience  before  you.  When  I  was  fully
persuaded  that  you  were  a  woman  in  disguise,  the  improba-
bility of  motives  likely  to  justify  such  a  caprice  renewed  my
imcertainty,  and  I  began  again  to  deplore  that  the  ideal  I  had
dreamed  for  the  love  of  my  soul  belonged  to  some  one  of  the
same  sex  as  myself.  I  reviled  the  chance  that  had  made  a
man  of  such  charming  appearance,  and  for  my  eternal  mis-
fortune had  brought  us  together  when  I  had  given  up  hope  of
seeing  realized  the  idea  of  pure  beatrty  that  I  had  caressed
for  so  long  in  my  heart.  Now,  Rosalind,  I  have  the  profound
certainty  that  you  are  the  most  beautiful  of  women;  I  have
seen  you  in  the  costume  of  your  sex.  I  have  seen  your
shoulders,  your  arms  so  pure  and  so  correctly  rounded,  and
the  commencement  of  your  breast,  as  displayed  by  your  partly
open  vest,  and  they  can  belong  only  to  a  young  girl  ;  Meleager,
the  beautiful  hunter,  nor  Bacchus  the  effeminate,  with  their


206  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

doubtful  forms,  have  ever  had  a  like  softness  of  lines  nor
such  fine  skins,  although  both  being  of  marble  of  Paros
polished  by  the  amorous  kisses  of  twenty  ages,  I  am  not
tormented  in  that  direction.  But  that  is  not  all.  You  are  a
woman,  and  my  love  is  no  longer  reprehensible.  I  can  then
display  my  feelings  without  remorse  and  allow  myself  to  drift
towards  you.  Great  and  unbridled  though  the  passion  be  that
I  experience,  it  is  permitted,  and  I  avow  it.  Rosalind,  for
you  I  burn  in  silence,  and  you  ignore  the  immensity  of  my
love.  That  revelation  is  slow  in  coming  to  you.  That  is  not
surprising.  I  hate  you  not  ;  I  love  you.  Will  you  be  able  to
love  me  ?  I  know  not — and  I  tremble,  for  I  am  more  unhappy
now  than  before.  For  instance,  it  appears  to  me  that  you  do
not  hate  me.  WTien  we  have  acted  if  /  please  you,  you  have
given  to  certain  parts  of  your  rôle  a  particular  accent  which
has  augmented  the  sense  and  in  some  way  induced  me  to
declare  myself.  I  have  believed  that  I  saw  in  your  eyes  and
in  your  smile  gracious  promise  of  indulgence,  and  felt  your
hand  respond  to  the  pressure  of  mine.  If  I  was  deceived!
O  God  !  That  is  a  thing  on  which  I  dare  not  reflect  !  En-
couraged by  all  that  and  urged  by  my  love,  I  have  written
to  you,  for  the  clothing  you  wear  ill  suits  such  a  confession,
and  a  thousand  times  have  the  words  stopped  on  my  lips,  even
when  I  had  the  idea  and  firm  conviction  that  I  spoke  to
a  woman;  that  male  costume  shocked  all  my  tender,  loving
thoughts  and  hindered  them  from  taking  their  flight  towards
you.

I  beg  you,  Rosalind,  if  you  do  not  yet  love  me,  strive  to  do
so;  me  who  has  loved  you  in  spite  of  all,  under  the  veil  which
envelops  you  by  pity  for  us  w^ithout  doubt.  Devote  not  the
rest  of  your  life  to  more  frightful  despair  and  to  more  gloomy
discouragement;  dream  that  I  adore  you,  from  the  first  ray
of  the  thought  in  my  head  that  you  were  revealed  before,  and
that  since  I  was  a  child  you  have  appeared  to  me  in  dreams
with  a  crown  of  drops  of  dew,  two  prismatic  wings,  and  a
little  blue  flower  in  your  hand.  That  you  are  the  aim,  the
means,  and  the  savor  of  my  life;  that  without  you  I  am
nothing  but  a  vain  apparition,  and  that  if  you  blow  out  the
flame  you  have  lighted  there  will  remain  at  the  most  of  me


I


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  207

one  pinch  of  dust  more  fine  and  impalpable  than  that  which
sprinkles  the  wings  of  the  dead.  Rosalind,  you  have  many
recipes  for  healing  love-sickness,  heal  me,  for  I  am  very  ill.
Play  your  part  up  to  the  end.  Throw  off  the  clothing  of  the
beautiful  page  Ganymede  and  give  your  white  hand  to  the
youngest  son  of  the  brave  knight  Roland  de  Bois.


CHAPTER  XIV

I  WAS  at  my  window  occupied  in  gazing  at  the  stars,  which
were  twinkling  joyously  in  the  flower-gardens  of  heaven,  and
breathing  the  beautiful  perfume  of  the  night  borne  upon  a
dying  breeze.  The  wind  from  the  open  window  had  extin-
guished my  lamp,  the  last  which  remained  alight  in  the
château.  My  thoughts  degenerated  into  vague  reverie,  and
a  species  of  somnolence  took  me.  However,  I  remained  still
leaning  on  the  stone  balustrade,  fascinated  by  the  charm  of
the  night.  Careless  and  forgetful  Rosette,  seeing  my  lamp  no
longer  burning,  and  not  being  able  to  distinguish  me  because
of  a  great  angle  of  shadow  which  fell  precisely  on  the  window,
had  believed  without  doubt  that  I  was  gone  to  bed,  and  the
time  had  come  for  risking  a  last  and  desperate  attempt.  She
pushed  the  door  so  softly  that  I  did  not  hear  her  enter,  and
she  was  within  two  steps  of  me  before  I  perceived  her.  She
was  very  astonished  at  seeing  me  still  up,  but  quickly  recover-
ing from  her  surprise,  she  came  to  me  and  took  my  arm  and
called  me  twice  by  my  name,  "Theodore,  Theodore.'*

"What,  you,  Rosette,  here  at  this  hour,  all  alone  without  a
light!'*

"Is  that  a  reproach,  Theodore  ?  or  is  it  only  a  simple  phrase
purely  exclamatory?  Yes,  me,  Rosette,  the  beautiful  lady,
here  in  your  room  with  you,  and  not  in  mine,  where  I  should
be  at  eleven  o'clock  at  night  or  perhaps  midnight,  without
duenna  or  chaperon  or  maid — ^that  is  very  astonishing,  is  it
not?     I  am  quite  as  surprised  as  you,  and  I  know  not  what


208  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

explanation  to  give  you."  In  saying  that  she  passed  one  of
her  arms  around  my  body.

"Rosette,"  I  said,  trying  to  free  myself,  "I  must  relight  the
lamp;  nothing  is  more  sad  than  darkness  in  a  chamber — and
then  it  is  truly  murder  not  seeing  clearly  when  you  are  present
and  being  deprived  of  the  spectacle  of  your  beauty.  Permit
me  the  means  of  getting  a  morsel  of  tinder  and  a  match,  that
I  may  make  a  little  sun  to  illuminate  all  that  the  jealous  night
effaces  under  her  shadows."

'That  is  no  hardship;  I  prefer  you  not  to  see  my  blushes.
I  feel  my  cheeks  all  burning,  for  I  am  dying  of  shame."

She  dropped  her  face  upon  my  breast;  she  remained  some
minutes  thus,  as  if  suffocated  with  emotion.  I,  during  that
time,  passed  mechanically  my  fingers  through  the  long  curls
of  her  streaming  hair.  I  sought  in  my  brain  some  honest
way  of  escaping  from  my  embarrassing  position,  but  found
it  not.  I  was  in  my  last  entrenchment,  and  Rosette  appeared
quite  decided  not  to  retire  from  the  position  she  had  taken  up.
I  myself  had  only  an  open  dressing-gown,  which  very  poorly
disguised  me,  and  I  was  uneasy  as  to  the  result.

"Theodore,  hear  me,"  said  Rosette,  rising,  throwing  her
hair  on  both  sides  of  her  face  as  far  as  I  could  see  in  the
feeble  light  that  the  stars  and  a  tiny  crescent  of  the  moon,
which  had  just  commenced  to  rise,  threw  into  the  room
through  the  open  casement.  'The  step  that  I  take  is  a  strange
one;  everybody  will  blame  me  for  it;  but  you  are  leaving  very
soon,  and  I  love  you!  I  will  not  let  you  go  without  being
explicit  with  you.  Perhaps  you  may  never  return;  perhaps
this  is  the  first  and  last  time  that  I  shall  see  you.  Who  knows
where  you  go?  But  go  where  you  will,  you  carry  my  spirit
and  my  life  witli  you.  If  you  were  remaining  I  should  not
have  come  to  this  extremity  !  The  happiness  of  contemplating
and  of  hearing  you,  of  living  by  the  side  of  you  would  have
sufficed.  I  should  have  demanded  nothing  more.  I  should
have  shut  up  my  love  in  my  heart  ;  you  would  only  have  looked
upon  me  as  a  good  and  sincere  friend.  But  that  may  not  be.
You  say  that  absolutely  you  must  leave — that  wearies  you.
Theodore,  look  upon  me  not  as  an  amorous  shadow  that  may
not  follow  you  and  would  vanish  in  your  body.    It  must  dis-


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  209

please  you  to  find,  always  behind  you,  the  same  suppliant  eyes
and  hands  held  out  to  seize  the  border  of  your  mantle.  I
know  you,  but  this  will  not  hinder  me.  Besides,  you  cannot
complain.  Is  it  not  your  own  fault  ?  I  was  calm,  tranquil,  al-
most happy,  before  knowing  you.  You  arrive,  handsome,
young,  smiling  like  a  Phoebus,  the  charming  god.  You  have
paid  me  the  most  impressive  attentions,  the  most  delicate
homage.  Never  was  a  cavalier  more  spiritual  and  more  gal-
lant. Your  lips  each  minute  let  fall  some  roses  and  rubies —
everything  becoming  for  you  an  occasion  for  poesy,  and  you
know  how  to  turn  the  most  insignificant  phrases  into  adorable
compliments.  A  woman  who  at  first  mortally  hated  you  would
finish  by  loving  you,  and  I  loved  you  from  the  instant  I  saw
you.  Why,  then,  do  you  appear  surprised,  having  been  so
amiable,  at  being  dearly  loved?  Is  it  not  a  natural  conse-
quence? I  am  not  a  fool  nor  thoughtless,  nor  a  little
romantic  girl  who  falls  in  love  with  the  first  sword  she  sees.
I  know  the  world  and  what  is  called  life.  What  I  am  doing,
all  women — even  the  most  virtuous,  most  prudish — ^have  done
as  much.  What  idea  and  what  intention  have  you?  That  of
pleasing  me,  I  imagine.  For  I  cannot  suppose  any  other.
Why  is  it  then  that  you  have  such  a  sorrowful  look,  having
so  completely  succeeded?  If  I  have  done  anything  un-
wittingly that  has  displeased  you,  I  demand  your  pardon.  Is
it  that  you  do  not  find  me  beautiful  enough,  or  have  you  dis-
covered in  me  some  great  default  that  you  reject?  You  have
the  right  of  being  hard  to  please.  But  you  have  lied  strangely
if  I  am  not  beautiful.  I  am  young  as  you,  and  I  love  you.
Why  now  do  you  disdain  me?

"You  are  eager  to  be  near  me,  you  sustain  my  arm  with
such  constant  solicitude,  you  press  so  tenderly  the  hand  I  give
you,  you  raise  towards  me  such  languorous  eyes.  If  you  love
me  not,  of  what  good  is  all  this  deception?  Would  you  by
chance  be  so  cruel  as  to  light  the  flame  of  love  in  a  heart  after-
wards to  make  it  the  subject  of  laughter?  Ah,  that  would  be
horrible  raillery,  an  impiety,  a  sacrilege!  That  would  only
be  the  amusement  of  a  deranged  mind  and  I  do  not  believe
that  of  you.  What  is  then  the  cause  of  this  sudden  change  of
front  ?    As  for  me,  I  can  see  nothing.    What  mystery  hides  a


210  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

coldness  like  this?  I  will  not  believe  that  you  have  any  re-
pugnance for  me;  of  that  you  have  given  proof,  for  no  one
courts  a  woman  keenly  for  whom  he  has  any  dislike.  To  do
so  one  would  need  to  be  tlie  greatest  knave  on  earth.  O
Theodore,  what  have  you  against  me  ?  Who  has  changed  you
thus?  What  have  I  done?  If  the  love  that  you  appeared  to
have  for  me  has  flown,  mine,  alas,  has  remained  and  I  cannot
tear  it  from  my  heart.  Have  pity  on  me,  Theodore,  for  I  am
very  unhappy.  Do  at  least  seem  to  love  me  a  little,  and  speak
to  me  a  few  soft  words  that  will  not  cost  you  much,  to  prove
at  least  that  you  have  not  an  insurmountable  horror  of  me."
In  that  pathetic  passage  of  her  discourse  her  sobs  com-
pletely choked  her  voice.  She  crossed  her  two  hands  on  my
shoulders  and  there  rested  her  forehead  in  an  attitude  of
despair.  All  that  she  had  said  was  not  more  than  just,  and  I
had  no  satisfactory  reply  to  make.  I  was  not  able  to  take  a
bantering  tone;  that  would  have  been  quite  out  of  place.
Rosette  was  not  one  of  those  creatures  that  one  has  power
to  treat  lightly  ;  besides,  I  was  too  touched  to  be  able  to  do  it.
I  felt  myself  culpable  of  playing  thus  with  the  heart  of  a
charming  woman,  and  I  experienced  the  most  lively  and  the
most  sincere  remorse  in  the  world.  Seeing  that  I  did  not
answer,  the  dear  child  heaved  a  long  sigh  and  made  a  move-
ment as  if  to  rise,  but  she  collapsed  beneath  her  emotion.
Tlien  she  surrounded  me  with  her  arms,  the  freshness  of  which
penetrated  my  doublet,  placed  her  face  on  mine,  and  fell  to
crying  silently.  The  effect  on  me,  of  feeling  thus  streaming
on  my  cheeks  that  inexhaustible  current  of  tears,  was  singular.
I  was  not  slow  in  their  mingling  with  mine,  and  that  was  a
truly  bitter  shower,  copious  enough  to  cause  a  new  deluge,  if
it  had  lasted  only  forty  days.  The  moon  at  that  instant  there
shone  precisely  on  the  window;  one  pale  ray  plunged  into  the
chamber,  and  lit  with  a  bluish  gleam  our  silent  group.  With
her  hair  scattered  and  her  dolorous  looks.  Rosette  had  the
appearance  of  a  figure  in  alabaster  of  Melancholy  seated  on
a  tomb.  As  for  me  I  know  not  how  I  looked,  seeing  that  I
could  not  see  myself,  not  having  a  mirror  ;  but  I  think  I  could
very  well  have  sat  for  a  statue  of  uncertainty  personified.
I  was  troubled,  and  I  lavished  on  Rosette  caresses  more  tender


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  211

than  usual.  From  her  hair  my  hand  had  fallen  to  her  velvet
neck  and  from  there  to  her  round  and  polished  shoulder,  that
I  patted  softly,  and  when  I  followed  the  trembling  line  the
child  vibrated  under  my  touch  as  a  key  under  the  fingers  of
a  musician;  her  flesh  started  and  quivered  and  a  tremor  ran
the  length  of  her  body.  Myself  I  experienced  a  vague  and
confused  longing,  which  I  was  not  able  to  analyze>  and  I  felt
a  great  pleasure  in  caressing  her  pure  and  delicate  features.
I  quitted  her  shoulder  and  profiting  by  the  opening  of  a  fold
I  enclosed  suddenly  in  my  hand  her  little  affrighted  throat,
which  palpitated  distractedly  as  a  turtle-dove  surprised  in  her
nest.  From  the  extreme  line  of  her  cheek,  which  I  skimmed
over  with  a  kiss,  I  arrived  at  her  partly  open  mouth.  We
remained  thus  some  time;  I  know  not  for  example  if  it  was
two  minutes  or  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  one  hour;  for  I  had
totally  lost  the  notion  of  time,  and  I  know  not  if  I  was  in
heaven  or  on  earth,  here  or  elsewhere,  dead  or  living.  The
delightful  wine  of  pleasure  had  so  far  intoxicated  me  at  the
first  gulp  I  had  drunk  that  all  my  reason  was  gone.  Rosette
embraced  me  still  more  tightly  with  her  arms,  and  enveloped
all  my  body.  She  leaned  on  me  convulsively,  pressing  me  to
her  breast,  and  with  each  passionate  kiss  her  life  seemed  to
run  entirely  to  the  place  touched  and  leave  the  rest  of  her
person.  Some  singular  ideas  passed  through  my  head.  I
should,  if  I  had  not  been  afraid  of  betraying  my  disguise,
have  responded  to  the  passionate  bursts  of  Rosette,  and  per-
haps made  some  vain  and  foolish  attempt  for  giving  an
appearance  of  reality  to  that  shadow  of  pleasure  that  my
beautiful  lover  embraced  with  much  ardor.  I  had  not  yet  had
a  lover,  and  these  lively  attacks,  her  reiterated  caresses,  and
sweet  kisses  disturbed  me  greatly,  although  they  were  from
a  woman  ;  and  then  that  nocturnal  visit,  that  romantic  passion,
the  moonlight,  all  had  for  me  a  freshness  and  a  charm  of
novelty  which  made  me  forget  for  the  moment  that  I  was  not
a  man.

However,  making  a  great  effort  to  control  myself,  I  told
Rosette  that  she  horribly  compromised  herself  by  coming  into
my  chamber  at  such  an  hour  and  remaining  there  so  long.


212  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

that  her  women  would  notice  her  absence,  and  see  that  she
had  not  passed  the  night  in  her  apartment.  I  said  that  so
softly  that  Rosette  believed,  the  poor  child,  that  the  happy
hour  she  had  striven  for  so  laboriously  was  going  to  strike
at  last  for  her.  She  was  once  more  disappointed.  My  situa-
tion was  most  critical,  when  the  door  turned  on  its  hinges
and  gave  entrance  to  Chevalier  Alcibiades  in  person  ;  he  held
a  taper  in  one  hand  and  his  sword  in  the  other.  He  came
straight  towards  us,  putting  the  light  under  the  nose  of  the
confused  Rosette.     He  said  in  a  bantering  tone:

*'Good-day,  my  sister."

Poor  little  Rosette  had  not  the  strength  to  utter  one  word
in  reply.

"It  seems,  my  very  dear  and  very  virtuous  sister,  that
having  judged  in  your  wisdom  that  the  company  of  Signor
Theodore  was  more  pleasant  than  your  ow^n,  you  have  come
to  visit  him?  Or  perhaps  there  are  ghosts  in  your  chamber
and  you  have  thought  that  you  would  be  safer  here,  under  the
protection  of  the  said  Signor  ?  That  is  a  good  thought.  So,
Monsieur  the  Knight  of  Sérannes,  you  have  made  soft  eyes
at  Madam  my  sister,  and  you  believe  that  it  is  no  concern  of
mine.  I  think  it  will  not  be  out  of  place  if  I  cut  your  throat
a  little,  and  if  you  will  be  so  good  I  shall  be  infinitely  obliged
to  you.  Theodore,  you  have  abused  the  friendship  that  I  had
for  you,  and  you  make  me  repent  of  the  good  opinion  that  I
at  once  formed  on  the  loyalty  of  your  character.  It  is  a
great  pity.'*

I,  not  being  able  to  defend  myself  in  a  valid  manner,  ap-
pearances are  against  me, — for  who  would  have  believed  me
if  I  had  said,  as  actually  happened,  that  Rosette  had  come  into
my  chamber  against  my  will,  and  that  far  from  seeking  to
please  her,  I  did  all  that  was  possible  to  turn  her  away  from
me  ? — I  had  but  one  thing  to  say.    I  said  to  him  :

"Signor  Alcibiades,  we — we  will  fight  when  you  please."

During  this  colloquy  Rosette  had  not  omitted  to  faint,  the
usual  action  under  similar  circumstances.  I  went  to  a
crystal  cup  full  of  water,  and  after  plunging  the  end  of  a
great  white  rose  partly  in  bloom  into  it,  I  sprinkled  some
drops  on  her  face  that  made  her  come  to  promptly.     Not


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  213

knowing  how  to  keep  her  countenance,  she  collapsed  beside
the  bed  and  buried  her  pretty  head  under  the  coverlet,  like  a
bird  preparing  for  sleep.  She  had  so  gathered  the  wraps  and
the  cushions  around  her  that  it  would  have  been  very  diffi-
cult to  discern  what  it  was  under  the  heap.  Some  sweet  little
sighs  going  forth  from  time  to  time  alone  made  it  possible  to
discover  that  it  was  a  young  repentent  sinner,  or  at  least  one
excessively  sorry  for  sinning  in  intention  and  not  in  reality,
which  was  the  case  of  poor  Rosette.  Monsieur  the  brother,
not  having  any  more  uneasiness  about  his  sister,  resumed
the  dialogue,  and  said  to  me  in  a  somewhat  gentler  tone  :

**It  is  not  absolutely  indispensable  for  us  to  cut  each  other's
throats  immediately;  that  is  an  extreme  means  and  one  is
always  in  time  to  exert  oneself.  Listen;  the  match  is  not
equal  between  us.  You  are  in  your  first  youth,  and  much
less  vigorous  than  I.  If  we  fight  I  shall  kill  you,  or  assuredly
disfigure  you  ;  and  I  would  rather  not  kill  nor  disfigure  you  ;
that  would  be  a  pity.  Rosette,  who  is  down  there  under  the
coverlet  without  speaking,  would  attempt  my  life,  for  she  is
spiteful  and  bad  as  a  tigress  when  she  is  upset,  that  dear  little
dove.  You  don't  know  that;  you  who  have  been  her  Prince
Galaor,  and  who  received  nothing  but  charming  sweetness,
all  without  avail.  Rosette  is  free,  you  also.  It  appears  you  are
not  irreconcilable  enemies;  her  mourning  is  drawing  to  an
end,  and  the  best  thing  in  the  world  for  her.  Marry  her  ;  she
will  not  want  to  live  alone  again.  And  in  that  case  I  shall  re-
frain from  making  you  the  scabbard  of  my  sword — ^that
would  not  be  agreeable  either  to  you  or  for  me.  What  do
you  think  of  it?"

I  was  obliged  to  make  a  horrible  grimace,  for  that  which
he  proposed  was  of  all  things  in  the  world  the  most  imprac-
ticable for  me.  I  would  sooner  have  walked  with  four  feet
against  the  ceiling  as  the  flies  do,  and  unhooked  the  sun  with-
out taking  the  footstool  to  heighten  me,  than  do  that  which
he  demanded  of  me,  and  yet  the  last  proposition  was  incon-
tcstably  more  agreeable  than  the  first.  He  appeared  sur-
prised that  I  did  not  accept  with  transport,  and  repeated  what
he  had  said,  to  give  me  time  to  reply.

"The  alliance  would  be  most  honorable  for  me,  and  one  I


214  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

had  never  dared  to  hope.  I  know  that  it  is  an  unheard-of
stroke  of  luck  for  a  young  man  who  has  neither  rank  nor
position  in  the  world,  comprising  as  ît  does  tlie  most  il-
lustrious treasure  of  all,  happiness;  but,  still,  I  must  persist
in  my  refusal,  and  since  I  have  the  liberty  of  choice  between
tlie  duel  and  the  marriage,  I  prefer  the  duel.  That  is  a
singular  taste,  that  few  men  would  have,  but  it  is  mine."

Here  Rosette  uttered  a  most  dolorous  sob,  raising  her  head
and  quickly  dropping  it  again,  as  a  snail  when  one  strikes
its  horns,  on  seeing  my  impassive  and  determined  face.

''It  is  not  that  I  do  not  love  Madam  Rosette  ;  I  love  her  in-
finitely, but  I  have  reasons  for  not  marrying,  which  you  your-
self would  find  excellent,  if  it  were  possible  for  me  to  tell
you.  Besides,  things  have  not  gone  as  far  as  appearances
seem  to  indicate;  beyond  some  kisses  and  an  ardent  friend-
ship, I  can  explain  and  justify,  there  is  nothing  between  us
I  am  ashamed  to  acknowledge,  and  the  virtue  of  your  sister  is
assuredly  the  most  intact  and  the  most  pure  in  all  the  world" —
I  owed  her  that  testimony.  *'Now  at  what  time  do  we  fight,
Monsieur  Alcibiades,  and  at  what  place?"

*'Here,    immediately!"    cried    Alcibiades,    mad    with    fury.

^'What,  in  the  presence  of  Rosette  ?"

''Draw,  wretch,  or  I  will  assassinate  you!"  he  continued,
brandishing  his  sword  and  waving  it  round  his  head.

"At  least  let  us  go  from  the  chamber."

"If  you  don't  put  up  your  guard  I  will  nail  you  against  the
wall  like  a  bat,  my  handsome  Celadon,  and  you  shall  finely
flap  the  wings  you  will  not  liberate,  I  tell  you,"  and  he  rushed
on  me  w^ith  his  sword.  I  drew  my  rapier,  for  he  would  have
done  as  he  said,  and  I  contented  myself  at  first  with  par-
rying the  thrusts  he  delivered.  Rosette  made  a  superhuman
effort,  trying  to  throw  herself  between  our  swords,  for  the
two  combatants  were  equally  dear  to  her,  but  her  strength
betrayed  her,  and  she  rolled  senseless  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.
Our  irons  clashed,  making  the  noise  of  an  anvil,  for  the  little
space  we  had  forced  us  to  close  quarters,  and  Alcibiades  two
or  three  times  almost  reached  me,  and  if  I  had  not  had  an
excellent  master  with  regard  to  arms  my  life  would  have  been
in  great  danger,   for  with  astonishing  skill  and  prodigious


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  215

strength,  he  exhausted  all  the  ruses  and  feints  of  fencing  in
his  efforts  to  touch  me.  Enraged  at  not  being  able  to  reach
me,  he  uncovered  himself  two  or  three  times.  I  would  not
profit  by  the  openings,  but  he  returned  to  the  charge  in  so
enraged  and  savage  a  fashion  that  I  was  forced  to  seize  a
chance  which  he  left  me,  and  since  the  noise,  flashing,  and
whirling  of  the  steel  intoxicated  and  dazzled  me,  I  thought
not  of  death.  I  had  not  the  least  fear;  that  point,  sharp
and  deadly,  which  came  before  my  eyes  each  second,  had  no
more  effect  upon  me  than  if  I  was  fighting  with  the  button
foils,  only  I  was  indignant  at  the  brutality  of  Alcibiades,  and
the  sentiment  of  my  perfect  innocence  greatly  augmented  that
indignation.  I  would  only  prick  his  arm  or  his  shoulder  to
make  his  sword  fall  from  his  hands,  for  I  had  vainly  essayed
to  strike  it  from  his  grip.  He  had  a  wrist  of  iron,  and  my
efforts  were  quite  unavailing.  At  last  he  delivered  a  thrust
so  fiercely  and  so  low  that  I  could  only  half  parry  it.  My
sleeve  was  pierced,  and  I  felt  the  cold  iron  on  my  arm,  but
I  was  not  wounded.  At  that  sight  anger  took  me,  and  in
place  of  defending  I  attacked  in  my  turn.  I  forgot  that  he
was  Rosette's  brother,  and  I  rushed  on  him  as  if  he  had  been
my  mortal  enemy.  Profiting  by  the  false  position  of  his
sword,  I  launched  a  thrust  at  his  flank  so  well  directed  that
it  reached  his  side.  He  said  ''Oh  !"  and  fell  backward.  I  be-
lieved him  dead,  but  he  was  not  really,  only  wounded,  and  his
failure  arose  from  a  false  step  which  he  had  made  in  essay-
ing to  break.  I  cannot  explain  the  sensation  that  I  then  ex-
perienced. Certainly  it  is  not  a  difiicult  reflection  to  make
that  in  striking  the  flesh  with  a  fine  and  trenchant  point,  one
pierces  a  hole  and  the  blood  gushes  out.  However,  I  fell  into
a  profound  stupor  at  seeing  growing  red  stains  on  the  doublet
of  Alcibiades.  I  know  that  never  before  in  my  life  had  I
experienced  such  a  great  surprise,  and  it  seemed  to  me  that
something  very  much  out  of  the  common  had  taken  place.

It  was  not  such  an  unusual  occurrence  after  all.  Still  it
appeared  so  to  me  that  the  blood  ran  from  a  wound,  and  that
the  wound  had  been  opened  by  me,  and  that  a  young  girl  of
my  age  (I  was  about  to  write  a  young  man,  so  have  I  entered
into  the  spirit  of  my  part)  had  struck  down  a  vigorous  cap-


216  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

tain  trained  in  arms  as  was  the  Signor  Alcibiades,  ail  for  the
crime  of  seduction  and  refusal  of  marriage  with  a  young
woman — very  rich  and,  what  is  more,  very  charming  !

I  was  truly  in  a  cruelly  embarrassing  position  with  the
fainting  sister,  the  brother  that  I  believed  dead,  and  myself
not  much  further  from  being  dead  or  fainting  than  the  other
two.    I  hung  to  the  cord  of  the  bell  and  I  rang  loudly  enough
to  waken  the  dead,  so  much  tliat  the  rope  remained  in  my
hand.     Leaving  to  Rosette  swooning  and  to  Alcibiades  em-
bowelled  the  task  of  explaining  to  the  domestics  and  to  the
old  aunt,  I  went  straight  to  the  stable.     The  air  quickly  re-
vived me;  I  led  out  my  horse  and  saddled  and  bridled  him
myself;  I  satisfied  myself  that  the  crupper  and  the  curb  were
in  good  order;  I  put  the  stirrups  of  the  same  length,  I  tight-
ened tlie  girths  by  a  notch — briefly — I  harnessed  him  com-
pletely with  an  attention  at  least  singular  at  such  a  moment
and  a  calmness  inconceivable  after  a  combat  thus  terminated.
I  mounted  my  horse,  and  I  crossed  the  park  by  a  path  that  I
knew;  the  branches  of  the  trees  all  laden  with  dew  whipped
me  and  wetted  my  face.    It  was  as  if  the  old  trees  extended
their  arms  to  retain  me  and  keep  me  for  love  of  their  chate-
laine.   If  I  had  been  in  another  state  of  mind,  or  at  all  super-
stitious, I  might  have  looked  upon  tliem  as  so  many  phantoms
about  to  seize  me  and  shaking  their  fists  at  me.     But  really
my  ideas  had  entirely  deserted  me  and  I  was  gripped  by  a
leaden  stupor  so  strong  that  I  was  hardly  conscious  of  its
weight  on  the  brain  like  a  helmet  too  tight;  only  it  seemed  to
me  that  I  had  killed  some  one,  and  that  was  the  reason  of
my  departure.     I  had  besides  a  horrible  inclination  to  sleep
because  of  the  early  hour,  for  the  violence  of  the  emotions
of  that  night  had  a  physical  reaction,  and  had  fatigued  me
bodily.     I  arrived  at  a  little  gate  which  opened  on  the  fields
by  a  secret  which  Rosette  had  shown  me  in  one  of  our  walks.
I  dismounted  from  my  horse,  I  touched  the  button  and  pushed
the  door,  I  regained  the  saddle  after  leading  my  horse  through,
and  made  him  gallop  so  far  that  I  regained  the  high  road  to
P.,  where   I  arrived  at  early  daybreak.     This   is  the  very
faitliful   and  very  circumstantial  history  of   my   first  good
fortime,  and  my  first  duel.


b


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  217


CHAPTER  XV

It  was  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  when  I  entered  the
town.  The  people  in  the  houses  looked  out  of  the  windows,
the  brave  natives  displaying  their  benign  faces  surmounted
by  a  pyramidal  night-cap,  at  the  steps  of  my  horse,  whose
hoofs  sounded  loudly  on  the  uneven  and  pebbly  road,  and  the
Venuses  of  the  place  exhibited  their  red  faces  and  matutinal
bare  breasts,  as  they  wearied  themselves  in  conjectures  on  the
unwonted  appearance  of  a  traveler  in  C.  at  a  like  hour  and
in  such  equipment,  for  I  was  very  sparsely  clothed  in  a  dress
to  say  the  least  suspicious.  I  made  a  little  boy,  who  had  his
haïr  over  his  eyes  and  a  muzzle  like  a  water-spaniel,  direct
me  to  an  inn,  giving  him  some  pence  for  his  pains  and  a
conscientious  flick  with  my  riding-whip,  which  made  him  fly
away  screaming  like  a  jay  plucked  alive.  I  threw  myself
on  to  a  bed  and  slept  soundly.  When  I  awoke  it  was  three
o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  That  hardly  sufficed  to  rest  me
completely.  It  was  not  enough  for  a  restless  night,  an  ad-
venture, a  duel,  and  a  very  rapid  and  successful  flight.

I  was  very  anxious  about  Alcibiades's  wound;  but  some
days  after  I  was  completely  reassured,  for  I  learnt  that  nothing
dangerous  followed  and  that  he  was  quite  convalescent.  This
relieved  me  of  a  singular  weight,  for  the  idea  of  having
killed  a  man  strangely  tormented  me,  although  it  was  in
legitimate  defense  and  against  my  own  will.  I  was  not  yet
arrived  to  that  state  of  sublime  indifference  to  the  lives  of
men  which  I  have  since  reached.

I  returned  to  C.  Many  of  the  young  men  with  whom  I
had  traveled  I  met  again.  That  gave  me  pleasure  ;  I  became
more  intimate  with  them,  and  they  introduced  me  into  many
agreeable  houses.  I  was  perfectly  used  to  my  dress,  and  the
rude  and  active  life  I  had  led  and  the  violent  exercises  in
which  I  had  taken  part  had  rendered  me  twice  as  robust  as
I  was  before.  I  followed  the  young  madbrains  everywhere;
I  rode,  hunted,  and  joined  in  their  orgies.  I  had  learnt  to
drink,  though  without  attaining  to  the  German  capacity  of


218  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

some  of  them;  I  could  empty  two  or  three  bottles  for  my
part  without  becoming  very  tipsy — very  satisfactory  pro-
gress. I  made  exquisite  verses  like  a  god,  and  I  kissed  de-
liberately enough  the  girls  at  the  inn.  In  short  I  became  an
accomplished  young  cavalier  in  conformity  with  the  latest
fashion  of  the  time.  I  rid  myself  of  certain  provincial  ideas
I  had  about  virtue  and  other  such-like  notions.  On  the
contrary,  I  became  so  extremely  delicate  on  points  of  honor
that  I  fought  a  duel  almost  daily;  that  same  was  become  for
me  a  necessity,  a  species  of  indispensable  exercise,  without
which  I  should  have  ill  carried  myself  all  day.  Also,  when
no  one  had  looked  at  me,  or  trodden  on  my  foot,  and  I  had
no  motive  for  fighting,  sooner  than  rest  idle  with  nothing  on
my  hands  I  would  serve  as  second  to  my  comrades,  or  the
same  to  men  whom  I  only  knew  by  name.  I  had  soon  a
colossal  renown  for  bravery,  and  nothing  less  than  that  would
have  stopped  the  pleasantness  which  would  have  been  in-
fallibly suggested  by  my  beardless  face  and  effeminate  appear-
ance. But  three  or  four  surplus  buttonholes  that  I  opened
in  some  doublets,  and  a  few  slices  carved  very  delicately
from  some  recalcitrant  skins  generally  caused  my  appearance
to  be  thought  more  manly  than  Mars  in  person,  or  Priapus
himself,  and  men  were  to  be  found  who  swore  they  had  held
my  bastards  at  the  baptismal  font.  Beyond  all  this  apparent
dissipation  and  wasting  life,  I  did  not  neglect  the  carrying
out  of  my  primary  idea,  that  this  is  to  say  the  conscientious
study  of  man  and  the  solution  of  the  great  problem  of  a  per-
fect lover,  a  problem  not  less  difficult  to  solve  than  the  phil-
osopher's stone.  It  is  of  certain  ideas  as  of  the  horizon,  which
certainly  exists  when  you  see  it  in  front  of  you  whichever
side  you  turn,  but  which  obstinately  flies  before  you,  whether
you  step  slowly  or  go  at  a  gallop,  and  remains  always  at  the
same  distance,  for  it  cannot  manifest  itself  except  with  a  de-
termined condition  of  distance,  it  is  destroyed  in  a  measure
as  you  advance  to  form  farther  off  its  fleeting,  unsatisfying
azure,  and  it  is  in  vain  that  you  try  to  catch  it  by  the  border
of  its  flying  mantle.  The  more  I  advanced  in  the  knowledge
of  the  animal,  the  more  I  saw  to  what  point  the  realization  of
my  desire  was  impossible,  and  how  far  what  I  demanded


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  219

for  happily  loving  was  beyond  the  condition  of  his  nature.
I  was  convinced  that  the  man  who  would  be  most  sincerely
in  love  with  me  would  find  the  means  with  the  best  will  in
the  world  to  make  me  the  most  miserable  of  women,  and  still
I  had  abandoned  many  of  my  girlish  exigencies,  I  was  fallen
from  sublime  clouds,  not  altogether  into  t^e  street  and  the
kennel,  but  upon  a  hill  of  medium  height,  accessible,  but  a
little  steep.  The  climb,  it  is  true,  was  rough  enough;  but  I
had  the  pride  of  believing  that  I  was  value  for  the  trouble
of  the  effort,  and  that  I  should  be  a  sufficient  compensation  for
the  exertion  required.  I  could  never  resolve  to  take  a  step
forward.  I  waited  patiently,  perched  on  my  summit.  Here
was  my  plan:  under  my  manly  dress  I  should  make  the  ac-
quaintance with  some  young  man  whose  exterior  pleased  me.
I  should  live  familiarly  with  him;  by  some  adroit  questions
and  false  confidences,  which  would  provoke  true  ones,  I  should
soon  acquire  a  complete  knowledge  of  his  sentiments  and  his
thoughts;  and  if  I  found  him  such  as  I  wished,  I  should  pre-
tend to  make  a  journey,  and  keep  away  from  him  for  three
or  four  months,  to  give  him  time  to  forget  my  features.  Then
I  should  return  in  my  woman's  costume,  and  arrange  in  a
retired  suburb  a  voluptuous  little  house  hidden  by  trees  and
flowers.  I  should  dispose  things  so  that  he  met  me  and  made
love  to  me,  and  if  he  showed  a  true  and  faithful  love  for  me
I  should  give  myself  to  him  without  restriction  or  precaution.
The  title  of  his  mistress  would  have  to  me  appeared  honor-
able; I  should  not  have  demanded  any  other.  But  assuredly
that  plan  will  not  be  put  in  execution,  for  that  is  a  plan's
usual  fate,  and  in  that  is  displayed  principally  the  frailty  of
the  will  and  the  pure  nothingness  of  man.  The  proverb  that
what  God  wills  woman  wills  is  not  more  true  than  any  other
proverb;  that  is  to  say,  not  at  all.  So  when  I  had  only  seen
men  at  a  distance  and  beyond  my  desire,  they  had  appeared
handsome  to  me  and  the  eye  had  made  an  illusion.  Now,  at
last,  I  found  them  frightful,  and  I  could  not  understand  how
a  woman  could  admit  them  into  her  bed.  As  to  me,  my  heart
turns  against  it;  I  could  not  bring  myself  to  it.  Their  features
are  gross,  ignoble,  without  elegance.  What  lines  hurtful  and
unpleasant  they  have,  how  dark,  and  furrowed  are  their  skins.


220  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

Some  are  as  swarthy  as  if  they  had  been  hanged  for  six
months;  they  are  emaciated,  bony,  hairy,  with  violin  strings
on  their  hands,  and  great  feet  like  a  drawbridge;  a  dirty
mustache,  is  always  full  of  food,  and  turned  up  like  a  hook
to  the  ears;  the  long  hair  rough  as  the  bristles  of  a  broom,
chin  ending  like  that  of  a  wild  boar,  the  lips  cracked  and  dry
from  strong  liquors,  eyes  surrounded  by  three  of  four  black
rings,  and  the  neck  full  of  stretched  veins,  great  muscles,  and
projecting  cartilages.  Others  are  mattresses  of  red  meat,
pushing  before  them  a  belly  that  their  waist-belt  will  hardly
encircle;  they  open  and  wink  their  little  sea-green  eyes,  in-
flamed with  luxury,  and  resemble  much  more  a  hippopotamus
in  trousers  than  human  creatures.  They  smell  always  of
wine  or  brandy  or  tobacco,  or  their  natural  odor,  which
ÎS  much  the  worst  of  all.  As  to  those  whose  forms  are  a
little  less  disgusting,  they  resemble  ill-formed  women — that
is  all.

I  had  not  remarked  all  that  I  was  in  life  as  in  a  cloud,
my  feet  hardly  toucliing  the  earth.  The  odor  of  the  roses
and  lilies  of  spring  was  borne  to  my  head  like  too  strong  a
perfume.  I  only  dreamt  of  accomplished  heroes,  faithful
and  respectful  lovers,  flames  worthy  of  the  altar,  marvelous
devotions  and  sacrifices,  and  I  should  have  believed  I  had
found  all  that  in  the  first  scoundrel  that  wished  me  good  day.
However,  the  first  and  greatest  intoxication  did  not  last  long.
Strange  suspicions  seized  me,  and  I  had  no  rest  until  I  had
cleared  them  away.  At  first  the  horror  that  I  had  for  men
was  pushed  to  the  last  degree  of  exaggeration,  and  I  re-
garded them  as  dreadful  monstrosities;  their  manners,  modes
of  thought,  and  negligent,  cynical  language,  their  brutalities
and  scorn  of  women  shocked  and  revolted  me  to  the  last  point
of  many  of  the  ideas  I  had  formed;  very  few  were  realized.
They  are  not  monsters  if  you  will,  but  much  worse  than  that,
my  faith  !  There  are  some  excellent  boys  of  very  jovial
hiunor,  who  eat  and  drink  well,  who  will  render  you  all  sorts
of  services  spirited  and  brave,  good  painters  and  good  musi-
cians who  are  good  for  a  thousand  things  except,  however,
for  the  one  for  which  they  were  created,  viz.  mate  to  the
animal  called  woman,  with  whom  they  have  not  the  slightest


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  221

bearing,  physical  or  moral.  I  had  at  first  some  trouble  in
disguising  the  contempt  which  they  inspired  me  with,  but
little  by  little  I  accustomed  myself  to  their  manner  of  life.
I  felt  no  more  piqued  at  the  railleries  they  launched  against
women  than  if  I  had  been  of  their  sex.  I  made,  on  the
contrary,  some  very  good  jests,  the  success  of  which  strangely
flattered  my  pride;  assuredly  none  of  my  comrades  went  as
far  as  I  did  in  sarcasms  and  pleasantries  on  the  subject.  The
perfect  knowledge  of  the  ground  gave  me  a  great  advantage
and  beyond  their  piquant  turn  my  brilliant  epigrams  shone
from  the  merit  of  an  exactitude  which  theirs  often  lacked.
For  much  of  the  ill  that  is  often  said  of  women  is  not  without
some  foundation;  it  is  none  the  less  difficult  for  men  to  pre-
serve the  indifference  necessary  to  jest  about  tliem  decently
or  properly,  and  there  is  often  a  deal  of  love  in  their  in-
vectives.

I  noticed  that  it  was  those  that  were  most  tender  and  had
the  most  feeling  for  women  who  treated  them  worse  than  the
others,  and  who  returned  to  the  subject  with  a  particular
animosity,  as  if  they  had  a  mortal  rancor  on  account  of  tlieir
not  being  what  they  wished,  and  falsifying  the  good  opinion
they  conceived  at  first.  That  which  I  demanded  before  all
was  not  physical  beauty,  it  was  beauty  of  the  soul,  love;  but
love  as  I  feel  it  is  perhaps  not  in  the  human  possibilities —
and  yet  it  appears  to  me  that  I  must  love  thus  and  that  I  give
more  than  I  exact.  What  magnificent  folly  !  What  sublime
prodigality  !  To  deliver  yourself  entirely  without  caring  any-
thing for  self,  renouncing  the  possession  of  yourself  and  your
freedom  of  will,  placing  it  in  the  hands  of  another,  to  see  no
more  with  your  eyes  or  hear  with  your  ears,  being  one  in
two  bodies,  to  melt  and  mingle  your  souls  in  such  fashion
that  you  would  not  know  if  you  were  yourself  or  the  other
being,  now  the  sun,  now  the  moon,  to  see  all  the  world  created
in  one  being  only,  displacing  the  center  of  life,  to  be  ready  at
all  times  for  the  greatest  sacrifices  and  the  most  absolute
abnegation,  to  suffer  in  the  bosom  of  the  person  loved  as  if
it  was  your  own,  oh,  wonder,  to  double  yourself  while  giving
yourself  !  That  is  love  as  I  conceive  it.  Faithful  as  the  ivy,
entwining   like   the   young  vine,    cooing   as   the   turtledove,


222  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

these  are  indispensable  and  are  the  first  and  most  simple  con-
ditions.

If  I  had  remained  at  home  under  the  dress  of  my  sex,  sadly
turning  my  wheel  or  working  tapestry  behind  the  embrasure
of  a  windowpane,  that  which  I  have  sought  through  the
world  would  perhaps  have  found  me  of  itself,  for  love  is  like
fortune  and  dislikes  being  pursued.  It  visits  of  preference
those  that  sleep  beside  the  wells,  and  often  the  kisses  of
queens  and  gods  descend  upon  closed  eyes.  There  is  one
thing  which  lures  and  deceives  you,  the  thought  that  all  the
adventures  and  all  the  happiness  exist  only  in  places  where
you  are  not,  and  it  is  a  sad  mistake  to  saddle  your  horse  and
post  off  after  your  ideal.  Many  people  make  that  error,  many
others  will  still  make  it.  The  horizon  is  always  the  most
charming  azure,  although  when  you  arrive  at  the  hills  they
are  often  composed  of  poor  cracked  clay  or  rain-washed  ocher.

I  had  imagined  that  the  world  was  full  of  adorable  young
men,  and  that  on  the  roads  one  met  battalions  of  Esplandians,
Amadises,  and  Lancelots  of  the  Lake  pursuing  their  Dulcineas,
and  I  was  very  much  astonished  that  the  world  took  very
little  heed  of  that  sublime  search  and  was  content  to  share  the
bed  of  the  first  harlot  that  came  in  the  way.  I  am  well  pun-
ished for  my  curiosity  and  distrust.  I  am  used  up  in  the  most
horrible  manner  possible  without  having  had  enjoyment.

With  me  knowledge  has  advanced  before  use;  nothing  is
much  worse  than  these  forward  experiences  which  are  not
the  fruit  of  action.  Ignorance  the  most  complete  would  be
a  thousand  times  better.  It  would  at  least  commit  you  to
many  foolish  things  which  would  serve  to  instruct  and  rectify
your  ideas;  for  under  the  disgust  of  which  I  was  speaking
there  is  always  a  lively  and  rebellious  element  which  pro-
duces the  most  strange  disorders:  the  spirit  is  convinced,  the
body  is  not,  and  will  not  subscribe  to  this  superb  disdain.
The  young  and  robust  body  acts  and  winces  under  the  spirit
like  a  vigorous  stallion  ridden  by  a  feeble  old  man  whom,  how-
ever, he  is  unable  to  throw,  for  tlie  curb  holds  the  head  and
the  bit  tears  his  mouth.

Since  I  have  lived  with  the  men  I  have  seen  so  many  women
unworthily  betrayed,  so  many  secret  connections  imprudently


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  223

divulged,  the  most  pure  loves  dragged  through  the  mire,
young  men  running  to  frightful  courtesans  leaving  the  arms
of  the  most  charming  mistresses,  the  best-established  intrigues
broken  suddenly  and  v^ithout  plausible  motive,  that  I  now  find
it  not  possible  to  decide  on  taking  a  lover.  It  would  be  to
throw  oneself  in  full  daylight  with  eyes  open  into  a  bottom-
less pit.  However,  the  secret  wish  of  my  heart  is  still  to
have  one.  The  voice  of  nature  stifles  the  voice  of  reason.  I
feel  strongly  that  I  shall  never  be  happy  if  I  do  not  love  and
am  not  loved.  But  the  misfortune  is  that  one  can  only  have
a  man  for  a  lover,  and  if  the  men  arc  not  all  devils  they  are
very  far  from  being  angels.  It  would  be  useless  to  stick
feathers  on  their  shoulder  blades  and  on  their  heads  a  halo
of  gilt  paper.    I  know  too  much  to  be  thus  deceived.

All  the  fine  things  they  might  say  to  me  would  be  of  no
avail.  I  know  in  advance  what  they  will  say  and  could  say
it  myself.  I  have  seen  them  studying  their  parts  and  re-
hearsing before  going  on  the  stage.  I  know  their  principal
tirades  by  heart  and  the  passages  on  which  they  count.
Neither  pallor  of  face  nor  alteration  of  features  would  con-
vince me.  I  know  that  they  prove  nothing.  A  night  of  orgy,
a  few  bottles  of  wine,  and  two  or  three  girls  are  sufficient  to
wrinkle  the  face  very  conveniently.  I  have  seen  this  fine
trick  practiced  by  a  young  marquis,  by  nature  very  rosy  and
fresh-colored,  who  found  himself  the  better  for  it,  for  to  that
touching  pallor  he  owed  the  crowning  of  his  passion.  I  know
also  how  the  most  languorous  Celadons  console  themselves
for  the  rigors  of  their  Astrasas  and  find  means  for  being
patient  in  awaiting  the  happy  hour.  I  have  seen  slatterns
serving  as  doubles  for  chaste  Ariadnes.

In  truth,  after  that  no  man  tempts  me  much,  for  he  has
not  beauty  as  the  woman,  beauty,  that  splendid  vestment  which
disguises  so  well  the  souFs  imperfection,  that  divine  drapery
cast  by  God  over  the  nudity  of  the  world  which  makes  it  in
some  way  excusable  to  love  the  vilest  courtesan  of  the  kennel,
if  she  possesses  the  magnificent  and  royal  gift.  In  default
of  virtues  of  the  soul  I  would  at  least  have  the  exquisite
perfection  of  form,  satiny  flesh,  roundness  of  contour,  soft-
ness of  line,  fineness  of  skin,  in  fact  all  that  makes  the  charm


224  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

of  woman.  Since  I  cannot  have  love  I  would  have  volup-
tuousness, imperfectly  replacing  the  brother  by  the  sister.
But  all  the  men  I  have  seen  appear  to  me  to  be  frightfully
ugly;  my  horse  is  a  hundred  times  more  handsome,  and  I
should  have  less  repugnance  in  embracing  him  than  certain
marvelous  fellows  who  think  themselves  very  charming.
Certainly  a  fop  like  those  I  know  would  not  be  a  very  brilliant
theme  to  embroider  with  variants  of  pleasure.  A  military
man  would  hardly  be  more  suitable  for  me;  they  have  a
mechanical  walk,  and  there  is  something  bestial  in  their
faces  which  makes  me  consider  them  hardly  human.  The
gentlemen  of  the  robe  delight  me  no  more:  they  are  dirty,
oily,  hairy,  threadbare,  with  glassy  eyes  and  lipless  mouths;
they  smell  extraordinarily  rank  and  moldy,  and  I  should
have  no  inclination  to  put  my  face  against  their  lynx  or
badger-like  muzzles.  As  to  poets,  they  think  of  nothing  in
the  world  but  the  endings  of  words,  and  go  no  farther  back
than  to  the  penultimate,  and  it  is  true  to  say  that  they  are
difficult  to  conveniently  utilize  ;  they  are  more  wearisome  than
the  others,  they  are  also  ugly  and  have  not  the  least  distinction
nor  the  least  elegance  in  their  figure,  and  their  attire  is  truly
singular.  Some  men  who  are  occupied  all  the  day  with  form
and  beauty  perceive  not  that  their  boots  are  ill  made  and  their
hats  ridiculous  ;  they  have  the  appearance  of  country  apothe-
caries or  trainers  of  learned  dogs  out  of  work,  and  would
disgust  you  from  poetry  and  verse  for  many  eternities.  Be-
sides painters  are  also  enormously  stupid;  they  see  nothing
beyond  the  seven  colors.  One  of  two  that  I  had  passed  some
days  with  at  R.,  and  who  was  asked  what  he  thought  of  me,
made  this  ingenious  reply:  *'He  is  warm  in  tone,  and  in  the
shadows  pure  Naples  yellow  should  be  employed  instead  of
white  with  a  little  Cassel  ocher  and  reddish  brown."  That
was  his  opinion,  and  more,  his  nose  was  crooked,  and  his  eyes
as  his  nose,  so  they  did  not  improve  his  appearance.  Whom
shall  I  take — a  military  man  with  a  bulging  chest,  a  limb  of
the  law  with  convex  shoulders,  a  poet  or  painter  with  a  scared
look,  a  thin  little  coxcomb  without  means?  Which  cage  shall
I  choose  in  that  menagerie?  I  ignore  these  completely,  and
I  feel  no  inclination  for  one  side  or  the  other,  for  they  are  as


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  225

perfectly  equal  as  possible  in  foolishness  and  ugliness.  After
that  there  remains  only  one  thing  for  me  to  do,  that  would  be
to  take  some  one  that  I  loved,  whether  a  porter  or  a  jockey!
But  I  love  not  a  porter,  O  unhappy  heroine  that  I  am,  un-
mated  turtle-dove  condemned  to  elegiac  cooings.  Oh,  how
many  times  have  I  wished  that  I  were  truly  a  man  as  I  appear
to  be.  How  many  women  I  should  have  understood  and  whose
hearts  would  have  understood  mine.  How  perfectly  happy  I
should  have  been  with  those  delicacies  of  love,  those  noble
bursts  of  pure  passion  to  which  I  should  have  been  able  to
respond.  What  softness,  what  delights,  as  all  the  sensitive-
ness of  my  soul  would  have  freely  blossomed  without  being
obliged  to  close  and  contract  every  minute  under  some  coarse
touch  !  What  charming  efflorescence  of  invisible  flowers
which  never  opened,  and  whose  mysterious  perfume  would
have  sweetly  embalmed  the  fraternal  soul  !  It  seems  to  me
that  would  have  been  an  enchanting  life,  an  infinite  ecstasy
with  wings  outstretched,  promenades  with  hands  entwined,
without  releasing  their  hold  under  the  avenues  of  golden
foliage,  through  groves  of  eternally  smiling  roses,  in  parks
full  of  fish-ponds  with  gliding  swans  and  alabaster  vases
hanging  amid  the  leaves.  HI  had  been  a  young  man  how  I
should  have  loved  Rosette;  what  adoration  that  would  have
been,  our  souls  being  truly  made  for  each  other,  two  pearls
destined  to  melt  together  and  so  make  but  one.  How  per-
fectly would  I  have  realized  the  idea  that  she  had  formed  to
love.  Her  character  suited  me  completely,  and  her  style  of
beauty  pleased  me.  It  is  a  pity  that  our  love  was  totally  con-
demned to  indispensable  platonism.

An  adventure  has  lately  happened  to  me.  I  used  to  go  to
a  house  where  there  was  a  very  charming  little  girl  about
fifteen  years  old  or  more.  I  had  never  seen  a  more  adorable
miniature;  she  was  fair,  but  so  delicately  and  transparently
fair  that  ordinary  blondes  would  have  appeared  brown  and  as
dark  as  moles  beside  her.  One  would  have  said  that  she
had  golden  hair  powdered  with  silver;  her  eyebrows  were
of  a  tint  so  soft  and  melting  that  they  were  hardly  visible;
her  eyes,  of  a  pale  blue,  had  the  most  velvety  look  and  the
most  silky  lashes  imaginable  ;  her  mouth,  too  small  to  put  the


226  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

tip  of  your  finger  into  it,  added  still  more  to  the  childish  and
exquisite  character  of  her  beauty,  and  the  soft  roundness
and  the  dimples  of  her  cheeks  had  an  inexpressible  ingenu-
ousness of  charm.  All  her  dear  little  person  charmed  me
beyond  expression.  I  loved  her  little  frail  white  hands,  trans-
parent as  the  day,  her  bird-like  foot  which  hardly  touched
the  ground,  her  figure  which  a  breath  would  have  broken,
and  her  pearly  shoulders,  not  yet  developed,  that  her  scarf,
put  crosswise,  happily  betrayed.  Her  chatter,  to  which  art-
lessness  gave  a  new  piquancy  to  her  natural  humor,  engaged
me  for  hours  at  a  time,  and  I  was  singularly  pleased  in  making
her  talk.  She  would  utter  a  thousand  delicious  drolleries
with  an  extraordinary  fineness  of  intention,  even  without
having  apparently  the  least  knowledge  in  the  world  of  their
meaning,  thus  making  them  a  thousand  times  more  attractive.

I  gave  her  bonbons  and  sweets  that  I  reserved  expressly
for  her  in  a  light  shell  box  which  pleased  her  very  much,  for
she  is  as  dainty  as  the  true  pussy-cat,  which  she  is.  As  soon
as  I  arrived  she  would  run  up  to  me  and  tap  my  pockets  to
see  if  the  very  pretty  bonbon  box  was  there,  and  I  made
her  run  from  one  hand  to  the  other,  and  fight  a  little  battle,
which  always  ended  by  her  gaining  the  upper  hand  and  com-
pletely rifling  me.  One  day,  however,  she  contented  herself
with  saluting  me  with  a  very  grave  air,  and  came  not  as  she
ordinarily  did  to  see  if  the  fountain  of  sweets  was  still  flow-
ing in  my  pocket.  She  remained  proudly  on  her  chair,  quite
upright,  with  her  elbows  drawn  back.

'*Ah  well,  Ninon,"  I  said,  "have  you  taken  a  fancy  to  salt
now,  or  do  you  fear  that  bonbons  will  make  your  teeth  fall
out?"  and  in  saying  that  I  tapped  the  box,  which  gave  from
under  my  vest  the  most  honeyed  and  sugary  sound  in  the
world.

She  put  out  her  little  tongue  halfway  on  the  side  of  her
mouth  as  if  to  taste  the  ideal  sweetness  of  the  absent  bonbons,
but  she  did  not  budge.  Then  I  drew  the  box  from  my  pocket,
opened  it,  and  began  to  religiously  swallow  the  burnt  almonds
which  she  loved  above  all.  The  greedy  instinct  was  for  an
instant  stronger  than  her  resolution;  she  put  out  a  hand  to
take  some,  but  drew  it  back  immediately,  saying:


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  227

'*I  am  too  big  to  eat  sweets/'  and  she  gave  a  sigh.

"I  have  not  perceived  that  you  have  grown  much  since  last
week  ;  you  are  like  the  mushrooms,  then,  which  grow  up  in  a
night.    Come,  let  me  measure  you."

"Laugh  as  much  as  you  will,"  she  replied,  with  a  charming
pout.     ''I  am  not  a  little  girl,  and  I  will  become  very  big."

''These  are  excellent  resolutions  in  which  you  must  per-
severe, and  might  I  be  able  to  know,  my  dear  young  lady,
for  what  purpose  these  magniiScent  ideas  have  entered  your
head?  For  a  week  ago  you  appeared  to  find  it  very  nice
being  little,  and  cracked  your  almonds  without  otherwise
harming  or  compromising  your  dignity."

The  little  person  regarded  me  with  a  singular  air,  moved
her  eyes  around  her,  and  when  she  was  well  assured  that  no
one  could  hear  us,  she  leaned  towards  me  in  a  mysterious
manner  and  said:

"I  have  a  lover."

"The  deuce  !  I  am  no  longer  astonished  that  you  will  not
have  any  more  sweets  ;  you  have,  however,  done  wrong  in  not
taking  some;  you  might  have  played  at  dining  with  him  or
exchanged  them  for  a  shuttlecock."

The  child  made  a  disdainful  movement  with  her  shoulders
and  appeared  to  have  a  look  of  perfect  pity  for  me  as  she
resumed  the  attitude  of  an  offended  queen.    I  continued  :

"What  is  the  name  of  this  glorious  personage?  Arthur,  I
suppose,  or  Henry,"  these  being  two  little  boys  with  whom
she  was  in  the  habit  of  playing,  and  which  she  called  her
husbands.

"No,  neither  Arthur  nor  Henry,"  she  said,  fixing  upon
me  her  clear,  transparent  eyes,  "a  gentleman."  She  raised
her  hand  above  her  head  to  give  me  an  idea  of  his  height.

"As  tall  as  that?  But  this  is  serious.  Who  then  is  this
tall  lover?"

"Monsieur  Theodore,  I  will  tell  you,  but  you  must  not  speak
about  it  to  any  one,  neither  to  mamma  nor  to  Polly  (her
governess)  or  to  your  friends,  who,  thinking  me  a  child,
would  make  fun  of  me."

I  promised  her  the  most  inviolable  secrecy,  for  I  was  very
curious  to  know  who  this  gallant  personage  was,  and  the


228  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

child,  seeing  that  I  was  treating  the  thing  jocularly,  hesitated
to  give  me  her  entire  confidence.  Reassured  by  the  word  of
honor  that  I  gave  her  to  be  discreetly  silent  about  it,  she  left
her  armchair,  came  and  leant  over  the  back  of  mine,  and
whispered  very  softly  in  my  ear  the  name  of  the  dear  prince.
I  was  confounded.  It  was  the  chevalier  of  G.,  a  dirty-minded
animal  with  the  morals  of  a  schoolmaster  and  the  physique
of  a  drummajor,  one  of  the  most  intemperate  debauched  men
it  was  possible  to  see,  a  true  satyr  without  the  feet  of  the  goat
and  the  pointed  ears.  That  inspired  me  with  serious  fears  for
dear  Ninon,  and  I  promised  myself  that  I  would  put  the
matter  in  good  order.

Some  people  came  in,  and  the  conversation  was  stopped.
I  retired  into  a  corner  and  sought  in  my  head  a  way  of  hinder-
ing the  thing  from  going  farther,  for  it  would  have  been  a
veritable  disaster  for  such  a  delicious  creature  to  fall  into
the  hands  of  such  an  arrant  scoundrel.  Tlie  mother  of  the
little  one  was  a  kind  of  gay  woman,  much  given  to  play,  and
keeping  a  gambling  house  and  a  sort  of  literary  salon.  People
read  bad  verses  there  and  lost  good  crowns  which  compen-
sated. She  had  very  little  love  for  her  daughter,  who  was
to  her  in  a  manner  a  sort  of  living  certificate  of  baptism
which  prevented  her  from  falsifying  her  chronology.  Be-
sides, the  girl  was  growing  up,  and  her  youthful  charms  gave
rise  to  comparisons  which  were  not  to  the  advantage  of  her
prototype,  who  was  already  showing  signs  of  wear  through
the  friction  of  years.  The  child  was  thus  neglected  and  left
without  a  defense  to  the  attacks  of  the  scoundrels  frequent-
ing the  house.  If  her  mother  had  occupied  herself  with  her
it  would  have  most  probably  been  only  to  gain  by  her  youth,
and  make  a  profit  of  her  innocence  and  beauty  ;  in  one  fashion
or  another  there  was  no  doubt  as  to  the  fate  awaiting  her.
That  gave  me  pain,  for  she  was  a  charming  little  creature,  a
pearl  of  tlie  first  water,  who  assuredly  merited  a  better  fate
than  to  be  lost  in  that  infected  slough.  That  idea  touched  me
to  the  quick,  and  I  resolved  to  take  her  at  all  costs  from
that  frightful  house.  The  first  thing  to  do  was  to  hinder
the  chevalier  from  pursuing  his  object.  The  way  I  found  the
best  and  most  simple  was  to  seek  a  quarrel  with  him  and  so


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  229

make  him  fight  me,  and  I  had  the  greatest  trouble  in  the  world
to  do  so,  for  he  is  as  cowardly  as  possible,  and  fears  an  en-
counter more  than  anything  in  the  world.  At  last  I  said  so
many  piquant  things  to  him  that  he  had  to  call  me  out,  al-
though much  against  his  wish.  I  threatened  also  to  have  him
thrashed  by  my  footman  if  he  did  not  make  a  better  show.
He  knew  well  enough,  however,  how  to  hold  his  weapon,
but  fear  troubled  him  to  such  an  extent  that  our  irons  had
hardly  crossed  before  I  found  means  to  administer  to  him  a
pretty  little  thrust  that  sent  him  to  bed  for  a  fortnight.  That
satisfied  me,  for  I  had  no  desire  to  kill  him,  and  I  would
much  rather  he  lived  to  be  hanged  later  on,  a  touching  care
for  which  he  should  have  owed  me  more  good-will.  My
rogue  being  extended  between  two  sheets  and  duly  bandaged,
there  remained  only  to  persuade  the  child  to  leave  the  house,
and  this  was  not  excessively  difficult.  I  told  her  a  tale  about
the  disappearance  of  her  lover,  which  gave  her  great  anxiety.
I  said  that  he  had  gone  oflf  with  an  actress  belonging  to  the
company  then  at  G.  ;  that  made  her  indignant,  as  you  may
imagine.  But  I  consoled  her  by  saying  all  sorts  of  ill  of  her
chevalier,  who  was  ugly,  a  drunkard,  and  already  old,  and
ended  by  asking  her  if  she  would  not  like  me  better  for  her
gallant.  She  replied  that  she  would  much,  because  I  was  more
handsome  and  my  clothes  were  new.  That  artlessness,  spoken
with  enormous  seriousness,  made  me  laugh  almost  to  tears.
I  raised  the  head  of  the  child  and  succeeded  so  well  that  she
decided  to  leave  the  house.  A  few  bouquets,  nearly  as  many
kisses,  and  a  pearl  necklace  that  I  gave  her  charmed  her  to
an  extent  difficult  to  describe,  and  she  assumed  in  the  presence
of  her  little  friends  a  most  laughable  air  of  importance.

I  had  made  a  very  rich  and  very  elegant  page's  costume,
not  tight  fitting,  for  I  was  not  able  to  bring  her  away  in  girl's
clothes,  nor  to  put  on  woman's  dress  myself  ;  for  that  I  would
not  do.  I  bought  her  a  little  horse,  quiet  and  easy  to  ride,
and,  yet,  sufficiently  good  to  follow  my  barb  when  it  pleased
me  to  go  fast.  Then  I  told  the  fair  one  to  come  down  at  dusk
to  the  door  and  I  would  be  there  to  take  her.  This  she  did
very  punctually;  I  found  her  keeping  watch  behind  the  half-
opened  door.     I  passed  very  near  the  house;  she  came  out.


230  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

I  gave  her  my  hand;  she  rested  her  foot  on  the  point  of
mine  and  jumped  very  lightly  up  behind  me,  for  she  had
marvelous  agility.  I  spurred  my  horse,  and  by  seven  or  eight
deserted  lanes  I  found  means  of  returning  to  my  house  with-
out any  one  seeing  us.  I  made  her  exchange  her  dress  for  her
disguise,  myself  acting  as  her  chambermaid.  She  made  at
first  some  objections  and  would  dress  herself  alone,  but  I
made  her  understand  that  would  lose  much  time,  and  besides,
being  my  mistress,  it  was  not  the  least  improper  and  that
it  was  the  practice  between  lovers.  It  wanted  no  more  to
convince  her,  and  she  gave  in  to  circumstance  w^ith  the  best
grace  in  the  world.  Her  body  was  a  little  marvel  of  delicacy;
her  arms  though  a  little  thin,  like  those  of  all  young  girls,
were  of  inexpressible  sweetness  of  line,  and  her  growing
bosom  gave  such  charming  promise,  that  when  more  formed
it  would  be  quite  incomparable.  She  had  still  all  the  graces
of  the  child  and  already  all  the  charm  of  the  woman.  She
was  in  tliat  adorable  stage  of  transition  from  the  little  girl  to
the  young  girl,  that  fugitive  and  delicious  epoch  where  the
beauty  is  full  of  hope,  and  where  each  day,  in  place  of  taking
something  from  your  love,  adds  to  it  new  perfections.  Her
costume  suited  her  well,  it  gave  her  a  little  mutinous  air
which  was  very  curious  and  amusing,  and  made  her  burst
out  laughing  when  I  presented  her  the  mirror  to  judge  the
effect  of  her  toilette.  I  afterwards  made  her  eat  some  biscuits
soaked  in  Spanish  wine  in  order  to  give  her  courage  and  make
her  better  able  to  bear  the  fatigues  of  the  road.

The  horses  were  waiting  all  saddled  in  the  court;  she
mounted  hers  with  some  deliberation,  I  bestrode  the  other,
and  we  started.  The  night  had  completely  fallen,  and  lights
which  occasionally  appeared  were  being  extinguished  every
moment,  showing  that  the  honest  town  of  C.  was  virtuously
occupied,  as  all  country  towns  should  be  at  the  hour  of  nine.
We  were  not  able  to  go  very  fast,  for  Ninon  was  no  better
horsewoman  than  she  should  be,  and  when  her  horse  began
to  trot  she  would  cling  with  all  her  strength  to  his  mane.
However,  on  the  following  morning  we  were  too  far  away
to  be  overtaken,  at  least  not  without  extreme  diligence.  But
we  were  not  pursued,  or  at  least  if  we  were  it  was  in  an


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  231

opposite  direction  to  that  we  had  followed.  I  was  singularly
attached  to  the  little  fair  one  ;  I  had  no  longer  you  with  me,
my  dear  Graciosa,  and  I  experienced  the  immense  want  of
loving  some  one  or  something,  of  having  a  dog  or  a  child  to
caress  lovingly;  Ninon  was  that  to  me.  She  slept  in  my  bed
and  passed  her  little  arms  around  mj  body  to  go  to  sleep.
She  believed  most  seriously  she  was  my  mistress,  and  had  no
doubt  that  I  was  a  man.  Her  youth  and  extreme  innocence
kept  her  in  that  error,  which  I  took  care  not.  to  correct.  The
kisses  that  I  gave  her  perfectly  completed  the  illusion,  for
her  ideas  had  not  yet  gone  beyond  that,  and  nothing  so  far
had  led  her  to  suspect  anything  else.  Besides,  she  was  only
partly  deceived,  and  really  there  was  the  same  difference
between  her  and  me  as  there  is  between  me  and  the  men.  She
was  so  transparent,  so  slender,  so  light,  of  so  choice  and  deli-
cate a  nature  that  she  was  a  woman  even  to  me,  who
am  myself  a  woman,  and  who  looks  like  a  Hercules  beside  her.
I  am  tall  and  dark,  she  is  short  and  fair;  her  features  are  so
soft  that  they  make  mine  appear  almost  hard  and  austere,  and
her  voice  is  such  a  melodious  warble  that  mine  appears  harsh
compared  with  hers.  A  man  would  have  broken  her  in
morsels,  and  I  always  fear  that  the  wind  will  carry  her  off
some  fine  morning.  I  should  like  to  enclose  her  in  a  box  of
cotton-wool  and  carry  her  suspended  from  my  neck.  You
cannot  imagine,  my  good  friend,  how  much  of  grace  and  wit
she  has.  Her  delicious  purrings,  her  childish  caresses,  her
little  ways  and  pretty  manners  are  delightful  ;  she  is  the  most
adorable  creature  on  earth,  and  it  would  have  been  truly  a
pity  had  she  remained  with  her  unworthy  mother.  I  took  a
malicious  joy  in  stealing  away  that  treasure  from  the  rapacity
of  men.  I  was  the  griffin  which  hindered  them  from  approach-
ing her,  and  if  I  did  not  enjoy  her  myself  at  least  no  one  else
did — ^an  idea  always  consoling,  which  is  not  in  the  power  of
the  foolish  detractors  of  egoism.  I  purposed  to  keep  her  in
ignorance  as  long  as  possible,  and  to  keep  her  near  me  until
she  would  stay  no  longer,  or  until  I  had  assured  a  safe  place
for  her.

In  her  little  boy's  costume  I  took  her  in  all  my  travels  right
and  left.     This  kind  of  life  pleased  her  singularly,  and  the


232  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

pleasure  that  she  took  in  it  helped  to  support  the  fatigues.
Everywhere  I  was  complimented  on  the  exquisite  beauty  of
my  page,  and  I  doubt  not  it  gave  rise  in  the  minds  of  many
to  a  suspicion  exactly  the  opposite  of  the  truth.  Many  per-
sons tried  to  unravel  the  mystery,  but  I  did  not  let  the  little
one  speak  to  anybody,  and  the  curious  were  all  disappointed.
Every  day  I  discovered  in  that  amiable  child  some  new
quality  which  made  me  cherish  her  more  and  congratulate
myself  on  the  resolution  I  had  taken.  Assuredly  men  were
not  worthy  of  possessing  her,  and  it  would  have  been  de-
plorable if  so  many  charms  of  body  and  soul  had  been
delivered  to  their  brutal  appetites  and  cynical  depravity.  A
woman  only  could  love  her  delicately  and  tenderly  enough.
One  side  of  my  character  which  could  not  have  been  de-
veloped in  any  other  connection,  was  quite  brought  out  in
this  adventure,  that  was  the  desire  and  inclination  to  afford
protection,  a  virtue  which  is  habitually  the  business  of  men.
It  would  have  displeased  me  if  I  had  taken  a  lover,  if  he  had
given  himself  the  air  of  defending  me,  for  the  reason  that
this  is  a  care  I  love  to  take  with  the  people  that  please  me,
and  that  my  pride  is  found  better  suited  with  the  first  part
than  the  second,  although  the  second  may  be  more  agreeable.
Also  I  felt  pleased  to  give  to  my  dear  little  one  all  the  cares
and  protection  possible,  such  as  helping  her  on  difficult  roads,
holding  her  bridle  or  stirrup,  serving  her  at  table,  undressing
and  putting  her  to  bed,  defending  her  if  any  one  insulted  her,
in  short,  doing  for  her  all  that  the  most  passionate  and  at-
tentive lover  would  do  for  an  adored  mistress.  I  insensibly
lost  the  idea  of  my  sex,  though  at  the  beginning  I  hardly
remembered  that  I  was  a  woman.  I  often  only  just  escaped
saying  something  that  was  not  consistent  with  the  dress  I
wore.  Now  this  never  happened  ;  though  when  I  write  to  you,
who  knows  my  secret,  in  confidence  I  sometimes  keep  an  un-
necessary virility  in  my  adjectives.  If  I  ever  have  a  fancy
to  go  and  seek  my  skirts  in  the  drawers,  or  where  I  may  have
left  them,  which  I  very  much  doubt,  imless  I  become  amorous
of  some  young  beau,  I  shall  have  a  difficulty  in  losing  these
habits,  and  in  place  of  being  a  woman  disguised  as  a  man,  I
shall  have  the  appearance  of  a  man  disguised  as  a  woman.


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  233

In  truth,  neither  one  nor  the  other  of  the  two  sexes  are  mine  ;
I  have  not  the  imbecile  submission,  the  timidity,  or  the  in-
significance of  the  woman;  I  have  not  the  vices  of  men,  their
disgusting  intemperance  or  their  brutal  inclinations.  I  am
of  a  third  sex,  one  that  has  as  yet  no  name  above  or  below,
more  defective  or  superior.  I  have  the  body  and  soul  of  a
woman,  the  spirit  and  the  strength  of  a  man,  and  I  have  too
much  or  not  enough  of  either  to  be  able  to  couple  with  one
of  them.  O  Graciosa,  I  shall  never  be  able  to  love  any  one
completely,  man  or  woman.  Something  unsatiated  is  always
grumbling  within  me,  and  the  lover  or  the  friend  responds  to
only  one  side  of  my  character.  If  I  had  a  lover  the  feminine
element  in  me  would  doubtless  for  some  time  dominate  the
male;  but  this  would  not  last  long,  and  I  feel  I  should  only
be  half  contented.  If  I  had  a  friend  the  idea  of  bodily
voluptuousness  would  hinder  me  from  tasting  entirely  the
pure  friendship  of  the  soul,  so  that  I  know  not  where  to  stop
and  float  perpetually  from  one  to  the  other.  My  fancy  would
be  to  have  both  sexes  in  turn  for  satisfying  this  double
nature — man  to-day,  woman  to-morrow;  for  my  lovers  I
should  reserve  my  languorous  tenderness,  my  submissive  and
devoted  manners,  my  softest  caresses,  my  little  plaintive  sighs,
all  that  which  is  cattish  and  womanly  in  my  character.  Then
with  my  mistresses  I  should  be  enterprising,  bold,  passionate,
with  aggressive  manners,  and  my  hat  cocked  over  my  ear  in
the  style  of  a  captain  or  adventurer.  My  nature  thus  would  be
entirely  brought  to  light,  and  I  should  be  perfectly  happy,  for
true  happiness  consists  of  being  able  to  develop  freely  in  all
directions  and  being  all  that  one  may  be.  But  these  are  im-
possible things,  and  I  must  not  dream.  I  had  taken  away  the
child  with  the  idea  of  giving  a  change  to  my  inclinations  and
directing  upon  some  one  all  the  vague  tenderness  which  floats
in  my  soul  and  inundates  it;  I  had  taken  her  as  a  sort
of  escapement  for  my  loving  faculties,  but  I  soon  recognized,
in  spite  of  all  the  loving  affection  I  bore  her,  what  an  immense
void,  what  a  bottomless  abyss  she  had  left  in  my  heart,  and
how  little  her  most  tender  caresses  satisfied  me.  I  resolved
on  trying  a  lover,  but  a  long  time  passed  without  my  meeting
a  man  who  did  not  displease  me.


234  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAlIPIxV


I  had  forgotten  to  tell  you  that  Rosette,  having  discovered
where  I  was  gone,  had  written  me  a  most  suppliant  letter,
begging  me  to  go  and  see  her.  I  was  not  able  to  refuse,  and
I  rejoined  her  in  the  country  where  she  was.  I  have  re-
turned there  many  times  since,  and  quite  lately  Rosette,
despairing  of  ever  having  me  for  a  lover,  has  thrown  herself
into  the  whirlpool  of  society  and  dissipation,  as  do  all  tender
souls  who  are  not  religious,  when  they  are  robbed  of  their
first  love.  She  had  many  adventures  in  a  short  time,  and  the
list  of  her  conquests  was  already  very  long,  for  every  one
had  not  the  same  reasons  for  resisting  her  as  I  had.  She  had
with  her  a  young  man  named  d'Albert  who  was  at  that  time
her  accepted  lover.  I  appeared  to  make  quite  a  particular
impression  on  him  and  he  took  from  the  first  a  very  strong
liking  to  me.  Although  he  treated  her  with  much  respect,
and  his  manners  were  tender  enough  in  the  main  towards
her,  he  did  not  love  Rosette,  not  from  satiety  or  distaste,  but
rather  because  she  did  not  respond  to  certain  ideas,  true  or
false,  which  he  had  formed  of  love  and  beauty.  An  ideal
phantom  interposed  between  her  and  him,  and  hindered  him
from  being  as  happy  as  he  would  have  been  without  it.
Evidently  his  dream  was  not  accomplished,  and  he  sighed
after  something  else.  But  he  did  not  seek  it,  and  remained
faithful  to  the  bonds  that  weighed  upon  him,  for  he  has  more
delicacy  in  his  soul  than  most  men,  and  his  heart  is  very  far
from  being  as  corrupt  as  his  mind.  Not  knowing  that
Rosette  had  ever  been  in  love  except  with  me,  and  that  she
was  so  still,  and  notwithstanding  all  her  intrigues  and  follies,
he  feared  to  grieve  her  by  letting  her  see  that  he  did  not  love
her,  and  out  of  consideration,  sacrificed  himself  in  the
most  generous  manner  possible.  The  beauty  of  my  features
pleased  him  extraordinarily,  for  he  attached  an  extreme  im-
portance to  external  form.  So  much  so  that  he  became
amorous  of  me  in  spite  of  my  man's  attire  and  the  formidable
rapier  that  I  carried  by  my  side.  I  avow  that  I  admired  him
for  the  fineness  of  his  instinct,  and  that  I  felt  for  him  some
esteem  for  having  penetrated  through  my  disguise.  In  the
beginning  he  believed  himself  cursed  with  a  most  depraved
taste,  though  in  effect  he  was  not,  and  I  laughed  inwardly  to


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  235

see  him  thus  torment  himself.  He  had  sometimes,  when
speaking  to  me,  a  frightened  look  which  very  much  amused
me,  and  the  natural  inclination  he  felt  towards  me  appeared
to  him  a  diabolical  impulse  which  should  be  strongly  resisted.
On  these  occasions  he  would  fall  back  upon  Rosette  with  fury,
and  endeavor  to  correct  himself  with  more  orthodox  love-
making;  then  he  would  return  to  me  more  strongly  attracted
than  before.  Then  the  luminous  idea  that  I  might  be  a
woman  glided  into  his  mind.  To  convince  himself  of  this  he
set  himself  to  observe  and  study  me  with  the  most  minute
attention.  He  must  know  each  particular  hair,  also  how  many
I  have  on  my  eyelids,  my  feet,  hands,  neck,  cheeks,  even  the
down  at  the  corner  of  my  lips;  he  has  examined,  compared,
and  analyzed  them  all,  and  from  that  investigation,  in  which
the  artist  aided  the  lover,  it  seemed  clear  as  the  day  (when
it  is  clear)  that  I  was  well  and  duly  a  woman,  and  moreover
his  ideal  ;  his  type  of  beauty,  the  reality  of  his  dream.  Marvel-
ous discovery  !

It  only  remained  to  move  me  to  pity,  and  grant  the  gift
of  amorous  mercy,  to  prove  entirely  my  sex.  A  comedy  which
we  played,  and  in  which  I  appeared  as  a  woman,  completely
decided  him.  I  cast  him  a  few  equivocal  glances,  and  made
use  of  some  passages  in  my  part  analogous  to  our  situation  to
embolden  him  and  make  him  to  declare  himself.  For  if  I  did
not  love  him  passionately  he  pleased  me  well  enough  to  prevent
me  from  leaving  him  to  die  of  a  broken  heart;  and  as  he
was  the  first  since  my  transformation  to  have  any  suspicion
that  I  was  a  woman,  it  was  quite  right  that  I  should  enlighten
him  on  this  important  point,  and  I  was  resolved  not  to  leave
him  the  shadow  of  a  doubt.  He  came  many  times  into  my
room  with  his  declaration  on  his  lips,  but  dared  not  utter  it;
for  really  it  is  difficult  to  speak  of  love  to  some  one  who  is
dressed  like  yourself  and  is  putting  on  riding-boots.  At  last,
not  being  able  to  take  upon  himself  to  speak,  he  wrote  me  a
very  long,  very  Pindaric  letter,  in  which  he  explained  to  me
at  great  length  that  I  knew  better  than  he  did.  I  do  not  quite
know  what  I  ought  to  do;  admit  his  request  or  reject  it.  The
latter  would  be  immoderately  virtuous,  besides  his  grief  at
being  refused  would  be  too  great.    H  we  make  unhappy  the


236  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

people  vve  love  what  shall  we  do  to  those  we  hate?  Perhaps
it  would  be  strictly  more  becoming  to  be  cruel  for  a  time,  and
to  wait  at  least  a  month  before  unfastening  the  tigress's  skin
and  putting  humanity  into  a  chemise.

But  since  I  have  resolved  to  yield  to  him,  at  once  is  as  good
as  later  on;  I  do  not  think  much  of  these  fine  mathematical
resistances  in  which  one  hand  is  surrendered  to-day,  another
to-morrow,  then  the  foot,  then  the  leg,  and  the  knee  as  far
as  the  garter,  nor  of  those  intractable  virtues  always  ready
to  pull  the  bell  if  you  overstep  the  mark  which  they  have
fixed  for  the  day.  It  makes  me  laugh  to  see  those  methodical
Lucretias  walking  backwards  with  signs  of  the  most  virginal
fright,  and  throwing  from  time  to  time  a  furtive  look  over
their  shoulder,  to  assure  themselves  that  the  sofa  where  they
must  fall  is  directly  behind  them.  That  is  a  precaution  I  could
never  take.  I  do  not  love  d'Albert,  at  least  in  the  sense  that
I  give  to  that  word;  but  I  have  certainly  a  liking  and
inclination  for  him;  his  wit  pleases  me,  and  his  person  does
not  repel  me.  There  are  not  many  men  of  whom  I  can  say  as
much.  He  has  not  all,  but  he  has  something.  What  pleases
me  in  him,  is  that  he  does  not  seek  to  satiate  himself  brutally
like  other  men  ;  he  has  a  perpetual  aspiration  and  an  ever  sus-
tained longing  for  the  beautiful,  towards  material  beauty  only
it  is  true,  but  it  is  still  a  noble  inclination,  and  one  which  is
sufiicient  to  keep  him  in  pure  regions.  His  conduct  with
Rosette  proves  his  honesty  of  heart,  honesty  more  rare  than
the  other  if  it  is  possible;  and  then,  if  I  must  tell  you,  I  am
possessed  with  the  most  violent  desires.  I  languish  and  I
die  of  voluptuousness,  for  the  dress  I  wear,  while  engaging
me  in  all  sorts  of  adventures  with  women,  protects  me  only
too  perfectly  against  the  enterprises  of  men.  An  idea  which
I  never  realize  floats  vaguely  in  my  head,  and  that  insipid  and
colorless  dream  fatigues  and  wearies  me.  Many  women
placed  amidst  the  most  chaste  lead  the  lives  of  courtesans,
and  I,  by  a  funny  contrast,  remain  virgin  and  chaste  as  the
cold  Diana  herself,  in  the  midst  of  the  widest  dissipation  and
surrounded  by  the  greatest  debauchees  of  the  age.  This  bodily
ignorance,  unaccompanied  by  ignorance  of  the  mind,  is  the
most  miserable  thing  possible.     So  that  my  flesh  shall  not


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  237

»i  I  i  ■  — — — —  ■     ■ •

prîde  îtself  over  my  spirit  I  will  profane  it  equally,  if  it  is
a  greater  profanation  than  eating  or  drinking,  which  I  very
much  doubt.  In  a  word,  I  will  find  out  everything  there  is
to  be  learned.  Since  d'Albert  has  recognized  me  under  my
disguise,  it  is  very  just  that  he  should  be  rewarded  for  his
penetration.  He  is  the  first  to  divine  that  I  was  a  woman,
and  I  shall  do  my  best  to  prove  to  him  that  his  suspicions  were
well  founded.  It  would  be  most  uncharitable  to  let  him
believe  that  he  had  a  monstrous  taste.  It  is  d'Albert  then
who  will  solve  my  doubts  and  give  me  my  first  lesson  in  love.
I  shall  agitate  no  further  now,  but  bring  about  the  climax  in
a  poetic  manner.  I  am  inclined  not  to  reply  to  his  letter,  and
to  look  coldly  on  him  for  some  days  when  I  see  him  very  sad
and  despairing,  inveighing  against  the  gods,  shaking  his  fist
at  creation,  and  regarding  the  wells,  to  see  if  they  are  not  too
deep  to  throw  himself  into  them.  I  shall  throw  my  ass's  skin
to  the  end  of  the  corridor  and  put  on  my  cultured  robe,  that
is  to  say  my  costume  as  Rosalind,  for  my  feminine  wardrobe
is  very  restricted.  Then  I  shall  go  to  him,  radiant  as  a
peacock  with  outspread  tail,  showing  that  which  I  ordinarily
conceal  with  great  care,  and  wearing  only  a  little  circlet  of
lace  round  my  throat,  very  low  and  very  loose,  and  say  to
him  in  the  most  pathetic  tone  that  I  am  able  to  assume,  "O
very  elegiac  and  perspicacious  young  man,  I  am  truly  a  young
and  modest  beauty  who  adores  you  into  the  bargain,  and  who
desires  to  share  her  pleasures  with  you.  See  if  that  suits  you,
and  if  you  have  still  any  scruples,  touch  this,  go  in  peace,  and
sin  the  most  that  you  can."  This  fine  discourse  ended,  I  shall
let  myself  fall  half -swooning  into  his  arms,  uttering  melan-
choly sighs  ;  I  shall  adroitly  let  the  hook  of  my  dress  become
unfastened  in  a  manner  that  will  leave  me  in  strict  costume,
that  is  to  say,  in  part  nude.  D'Albert  will  do  the  rest,  and  I
hope  that  the  next  morning  I  shall  know  all  about  those  fine
things  that  I  have  troubled  my  brain  for  a  long  time.  In
satisfying  my  curiosity  I  shall  have,  moreover,  the  pleasure
of  making  one  happy.  I  also  propose  to  go  and  pay  Rosette
a  visit  in  the  same  dress,  and  let  her  see  that  if  I  have  not
responded  to  her  love  it  is  not  from  coldness  or  distaste.  I  do
not  wish  her  to  hold  a  bad  opinion  of  mc,  and  she  deserves


238  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

as  much  as  d'Albert  that  I  should  betray  my  disguise  in  her
favor.  What  a  look  of  surprise  she  will  assume  at  the  reve-
lation !  Her  pride  will  be  consoled,  but  her  love  will  lament.
Good-by,  all  beautiful  and  all  good;  pray  the  good  God  that
I  may  not  think  as  little  of  the  pleasure  as  those  that  bestow  it.
I  have  joked  all  through  this  long  letter,  and  yet  what  I  am
going  to  undertake  is  a  serious  thing,  which  I  may  feel  for
the  rest  of  my  life.


CHAPTER  XVI

It  was  now  more  than  a  fortnight  since  d'Albert  had  de-
posited his  amorous  epistle  on  Theodore's  table,  and  still  there
seemed  no  change  in  the  latter's  attitude.  D'Albert  was  at
a  loss  to  understand  this  silence.  Had  his  precious  epistle
gone  astray  or  got  lost?  This  seemed  hardly  likely,  for
Theodore  had  returned  to  his  room  directly  after,  and  it  would
indeed  have  been  extraordinary  had  he  failed  to  perceive  a
great  paper  lying  by  itself  in  the  middle  of  the  table  in  a
manner  to  attract  the  attention  of  even  the  most  unobservant.
Or  was  it  that  d'Albert  was  entirely  mistaken  and  Theodore
was  really  a  man,  or,  in  case  she  were  a  woman,  had  she  so
pronounced  a  feeling  of  contempt  that  she  did  not  deign  to
give  herself  the  trouble  to  reply?

Unlike  ourselves,  our  dear  d'Albert  had  not  the  advantage
of  perusing  the  correspondence  of  Graciosa,  the  confidante  of
the  beautiful  de  Maupin,  so  he  was  not  in  a  position  to  decide
affirmatively  or  negatively  any  of  these  important  questions,
and  he  fluctuated  sadly  in  the  most  miserable  irresolution.

One  evening  he  was  in  his  room,  his  forehead  leaning  sadly
against  the  windowpane,  looking  gloomily  at  the  chestnut
trees  in  the  park,  the  leaves  of  which  were  already  reddening
and  dropping.  A  thick  mist  obscured  the  horizon,  and  the
deepening  twilight  only  served  to  increase  his  misery.  A
large  swan  plunging  his  long  neck  into  the  streaming  water


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  239


of  the  river  was  the  only  visible  living  thing  which  animated
a  little  the  gloomy  landscape.  D'Albert  was  dreaming  as
sadly  as  any  man  may  dream  at  five  o'clock  in  the  evening
in  the  dusk  of  autumn,  a  disappointed  man,  a  sharp  north  wind
for  his  music,  and  the  skeleton  of  a  leafless  forest  for  his
outlook.  He  thought  of  throwing  himself  into  the  river,  but
the  water  seemed  very  black  and  very  cold.  Having  no  pistol,
shooting  himself  was  out  of  the  question.  In  despair,  he  went
so  far  as  to  wish  to  resume  his  acquaintance  with  women
who  were  perfectly  insupportable  to  him,  and  whom  he  should
have  had  whipped  out  of  his  house  by  his  servants.  He
finished  by  deciding  upon  something  still  more  terrible — ^the
writing  of  a  second  letter.    O  threefold  idiot  !

He  was  in  the  midst  of  these  meditations  when  he  felt  a
hand  placed  on  his  shoulder  like  a  little  dove  alighting  upon
a  palm  tree — ^the  comparison  limps  a  little,  inasmuch  as
d'Albert's  shoulder  bears  little  resemblance  to  a  palm  tree.
Still,  we  will  conserve  the  pure  Orientalism.  The  hand  was
joined  to  an  arm  attached  to  a  shoulder  which  formed
part  of  the  body  of  none  other  than  Theodore,  Rosalind,
Mademoiselle  d'Aubigny,  or  Madalaine  de  Maupin,  to  call  her
by  her  true  name.  We,  who  fully  anticipated  such  a  visit,
are  not  in  the  least  astonished,  but  d'Albert,  who  had  no  ink-
ling of  it,  gave  vent  to  a  little  cry  of  surprise.  Here  was
indeed  Rosalind,  so  beautiful  and  so  radiant  that  she  lit  up  all
the  rooms  with  the  strings  of  pearls  in  her  hair,  her  prismatic
dress  with  the  lace  front,  her  red-heeled  shoes,  and  her
handsome  fan  of  peacock's  plumes,  in  short,  such  as  she  was
on  the  day  of  the  performance.  Only,  and  this  difference  was
important  and  decisive,  she  wore  neither  scarf,  ruff,  nor
anything  that  would  hide  from  view  her  perfect  figure.  A
beautiful  bosom,  white  and  smooth  as  the  purest  marble,
boldly  projected  beyond  her  low-cut  dress.

''Ah  well,  Orlando;  do  you  not  recognize  your  Rosalind,
or  have  you  left  your  love  hanging  with  your  sonnets  on  some
bushes  in  the  forest  of  Arden?  Are  you  yet  cured  of  the
passion  which  you  vowed  that  I  alone  had  power  to  assuage?
I  am  afraid  you  are."


^  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


"Oh  no,  Rosalind,  I  am  worse  than  ever.  I  am  in  agony;
I  am  dead,  or  very  near  it."

''You  look  exceedingly  well  for  a  dead  man.  Many  living
ones  look  much  worse/'

**What  a  week  I  have  passed!  You  cannot  imagine  it,
Rosalind.  I  hope  it  may  be  reckoned  of  equal  value  to  a
thousand  years  of  purgatory  in  another  world.  But  if  I  dare,
may  I  ask  why  you  have  not  replied  to  me  sooner?*'

*'Why?  I  hardly  know,  unless  it  was  because  I  did  not.
However,  if  this  does  not  appear  to  you,  a  valid  motive,  here
are  three  others,  mucli  worse,  from  which  you  may  choose.
First,  carried  away  by  your  passion,  you  did  not  write  legibly,
so  that  it  has  taken  me  more  than  a  w^eek  to  make  out  what
was  in  your  letter  ;  next,  because  my  modesty  would  not  allow
me  in  less  time  to  nurture  such  an  absurd  idea  as  that
of  taking  a  dithyrambic  poet  for  my  lover;  and  then,  because
I  was  anxious  to  see  if  you  would  attempt  to  blow  out  your
brains  and  hang  yourself  witli  your  garters.    There  !"

"Oh  !  do  not  jest;  I  assure  you  that  you  have  done  well  in
coming  to-day.     You  might  not  have  found  me  to-morrow."

"Really,  poor  boy?  Do  not  assume  such  a  sorrowful,
weeping  air,  for  it  affects  me  also,  and  if  once  I  loose  the
floodgates  of  my  sensibility,  I  warn  you  you  will  be  completely
submerged.  Just  now  I  gave  you  three  bad  reasons.  I  now
offer  you  three  good  kisses.     There!"

Her  debt  discharged,  and  still  greatly  moved,  she  sat  down
on  d* Albert's  knee,  and  passing  her  fingers  through  his  hair,
she  said  to  him  :

"All  my  cruelties  are  exliausted,  my  sweet  friend.  I  have
taken  this  fortnight  to  satisfy  my  ferocity.  Perhaps  I  found
it  as  long  as  you.  Do  not  become  conceited  because  of  my
frankness,  but  that  is  true.  I  do  not  demand  of  you  an  oath
of  eternal  love,  nor  any  exaggerated  protestations.  Love  me
as  much  as  the  good  God  wills.  That  is  all  I  ask.  I  will  do
as  much  on  my  side.  I  will  not  call  you  a  perfidious  wretch
when  you  love  me  no  more;  and  you  will  have  the  goodness
to  spare  me  the  corresponding  odious  titles.  If  I  should  hap-
pen to  leave  you  I  shall  only  be  a  woman  that  has  ceased  to
love  you;  nothing  more.     It  is  not  necessary  to  hate  me  all


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  241

through  life  because  of  one  or  two  love  passages.  Whatever
may  happen,  and  wherever  destiny  may  drive  me,  I  swear  to
you,  and  this  is  a  promise  that  one  may  keep,  that  I  will  al-
ways have  a  charming  remembrance  of  you;  and  if  I  am  no
more  your  mistress,  I  shall  be  your  friend,  as  I  have  been
your  comrade.  For  you  I  have  put  aside  this  night  my  manly
dress.  I  shall  resume  it  to-morrow  for  good.  Dream  that  I
am  Rosalind  at  night.  All  the  day  I  am  and  can  only  be
Theodore  de  Sérannes."

Any  further  utterance  was  checked  by  a  long  kiss  which
d'Albert  planted  full  on  her  lips,  followed  by  others  too
numerous  to  count.  As  the  earnest  entreaties  of  d'Albert
became  more  tender  and  more  pressing,  the  beautiful  features
of  Theodore,  instead  of  being  blooming  and  radiant,  took  an
expression  of  proud  melancholy  w^hicli  gave  her  lover  much
imeasiness.

"Why,  my  dear  sovereign,  have  you  the  chaste  and  serious
air  of  an  antique  Diana,  when  it  would  be  much  better  to
have  the  smiling  lips  of  Venus  rising  from  the  sea?*'

"My  dear  d'Albert,  it  is  because  I  am  more  like  the  huntress
Diana  than  anything  else.  I  had  taken  when  very  young  the
dress  of  a  man,  for  some  reasons  it  would  be  tedious  and  use-
less to  tell  you.  You  alone  have  divined  my  sex,  and  if  I  have
made  conquests  they  have  been  over  women  ;  very  superfluous
conquests  they  have  been,  and  more  than  once  most  em-
barrassing. In  a  word,  I  have  always  preserved  my  virginity,
and  that  is  why  I  am  sad,  now  that  I  feel  that  I  may  not  be
able  to  give  to-morrow  that  which  I  had  to-day."

As  she  spoke,  she  parted  with  two  beautiful  hands  the
young  man's  long  hair,  and  pressed  upon  his  pale  forehead
her  soft  lips.  D'Albert,  singularly  moved  by  the  soft  and
solemn  tone  in  which  she  had  spoken,  took  her  hands  and
kissed  all  the  fingers  one  after  the  other,  then  very  delicately
broke  the  lacing  of  her  dress,  so  that  the  corsage  opened,  the
two  white  treasures  appearing  in  all  their  splendor.

Filled  with  a  new  passion,  d'Albert  clasped  her  in  his  arms,
covering  with  kisses  her  shoulders  and  bosom.  The  hair  of
the  half-swooning  girl  became  loosened,  and  her  dress  fell  at
her  feet  as  by  enchantment.    She  remained  quite  upright,  like


242  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

a  white  apparition.  The  enchanted  lover  knelt  dovvn,  and  had
soon  thrown,  each  into  an  opposite  corner  of  the  apartment,
the  two  pretty  little  shoes  with  red  heels,  while  the  em-
broidered stockings  followed  very  closely.

She  thus  remained  without  any  covering,  in  all  the  trans-
parent luster  of  her  beautiful  body,  in  the  soft  light  of  an
alabaster  lamp  that  d'Albert  had  lighted,  her  fallen  clothing
looking  like  a  sort  of  stand.

The  young  enthusiast  for  beauty  was  not  able  to  satisfy  his
eyes  on  a  spectacle  like  this,  for  we  must  say,  to  the  immense
praise  of  Rosalind,  that  this  time  the  reality  was  above  the
dream,  and  he  did  not  experience  the  slightest  disappointment.
Everything  w^as  united  in  tlie  beautiful  body  which  posed
before  him— delicacy  and  strength,  form  and  color,  the  lines
of  a  Greek  statue  of  the  best  era,  and  the  tone  of  a  Titian.
He  saw  there,  palpable  and  crystallized,  the  cloudy  fancy  that
he  had  many  times  vainly  striven  to  halt  in  its  flight.  He
was  not  forced,  in  the  manner  he  used  to  complain  of
so  bitterly  to  his  friend  Silvio,  to  confine  his  gaze  to  one  part,
well  enough  formed,  not  passing  beyond  it  on  pain  of  seeing
something  frightful,  and  his  amorous  eye  descended  from  the
head  to  the  feet,  ascended  from  the  feet  to  the  head,  always
sweetly  endeared  by  a  correct  and  harmonious  form.  The
knees  were  admirably  pure,  the  ankles  elegant  and  fine,  the
legs  and  thighs  of  a  proud  and  superb  turn,  the  body  glossy
as  an  agate,  the  hips  supple  and  powerful,  the  bosom  would
make  the  gods  come  down  from  heaven  to  kiss  arms  and
shoulders  of  the  most  magnificent  character.  A  torrent  of
beautiful  brown  hair,  lightly  crisped,  such  as  one  sees  on  the
heads  painted  by  old  masters,  fell  in  little  waves  along  an
ivory  back  of  which  it  marvelously  heightened  the  whiteness.

The  painter  satisfied,  the  lover  resumed  the  ascendancy,  for
though  one  has  some  love  of  art,  there  are  things  that  one
cannot  merely  look  for  any  length  of  time  satisfactorily.

He  raised  the  beauty  in  his  arms  and  carried  her  to  the
bed.

«  ♦  4:  4:  4^  ♦

Instead  of  returning  to  her  own  room  Rosalind  went
straight  to  that  of  Rosette.     What  she  said  there  and  what


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  243

she  did  I  have  never  been  able  to  find  out,  although  I  have
made  the  most  conscientious  inquiries.  I  have  not  found  any-
thing either  in  the  papers  of  Graciosa  or  in  those  belonging
to  d'Albert  and  Silvio  relating  to  that  visit.  Only  a  maid  of
Rosette  apprised  me  of  a  singular  circumstance.  It  was  that
her  mistress  had  not  slept  that  night  with  her  lover;  but  the
bed  was  disturbed  and  had  been  used,  and  bore  the  impression
of  two  bodies  ;  and,  moreover,  she  showed  me  two  pearls,  per-
fectly resembling  those  which  Theodore  wore  in  his  hair
when  acting  in  the  part  of  Rosalind.  She  had  found  these  in
making  the  bed.  I  leave  this  remark  to  the  sagacity  of  the
reader  and  leave  him  to  draw  what  inferences  he  will.  As
to  myself,  I  have  made  above  a  thousand  conjectures,  all  most
unreasonable,  each  and  all  so  absurd  that  I  truly  dare  not
write  them  even  in  the  most  virtuously  periphrastic  style.  It
was  well  towards  midday  when  Theodore  left  Rosette's  room.
He  did  not  appear  either  at  dinner  or  supper.  DAlbert  and
Rosette  did  not  appear  surprised  at  this.  He  went  to  bed  in
good  time,  and  the  following  morning,  as  soon  as  it  was  day-
light, without  informing  any  one,  saddled  his  horse  and  that
of  his  page  and  left  the  castle,  telling  a  footman  that  they
were  not  to  wait  dinner  for  him,  and  that  he  might  not  perhaps
return  for  some  days.  D'Albert  and  Rosette  were  very  much
astonished,  not  knowing  to  what  to  attribute  this  strange  dis-
appearance, d'Albert  above  all,  for  he  thought  that  his  prowess
of  the  first  night  had  entitled  him  to  a  second.  At  the  end  of
the  week  the  unhappy,  disappointed  lover  received  a  letter
from  Theodore  which  we  shall  transcribe.  I  much  fear  that
it  will  not  satisfy  my  readers,  male  or  female,  but  in  truth  the
letter  was  written  thus  and  not  otherwise,  and  this  glorious
romance  shall  have  no  other  conclusion.

"You  are  no  doubt  greatly  surprised,  my  dear  d'Albert,  at
what  has  transpired.  After  doing  what  I  have  done,  I  will
permit  you  to  be  so,  for  you  have  the  right.  You  have  al-
ready given  me  at  least  twenty  of  those  epithets  that  we  were
agreed  should  be  erased  from  our  vocabulary,  perfidious,  in-
constant, villainous.  Is  it  not  so  ?  At  least  you  will  not  call
me  virtuous,  or  cruel,  and  that  will  be  something  gained.  You
curse  me  and  you  are  wrong.    You  had  an  inclination  for  me.


244»  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN

I  was  your  ideal;  very  well.  I  accorded  to  you  at  once
what  you  desired.  You  might  have  had  it  much  sooner.  I
served  as  body  for  your  dream,  with  the  readiest  complaisance
in  the  world.  I  gave  you  that  which  I  shall  assuredly  not
give  to  any  one  again,  a  surprise  on  which  you  hardly  counted,
and,  knowing  which,  should  have  your  good  will.  Now  that
I  have  satisfied  you,  it  pleases  me  to  go  away.  What  is  there
so  monstrous  in  this?  You  have  had  me  entirely  and  without
reserve  all  one  night.  What  would  you  have  more  ?  Another
night,  and  then  yet  another.  You  would  even  want  the  days.
You  would  continue  this  way  till  you  were  disgusted  with  me.
I  can  hear  you  from  here  crying  out  most  gallantly  that  I  am
not  one  of  those  w^hich  disgust  you.  But  it  would  be  the
same  with  me  as  the  others.  It  may  last  six  months,  two
years,  ten  years,  if  you  will,  but  the  end  always  must  come.
You  would  keep  me  from  sentiments  of  propriety,  or  perhaps
because  you  would  not  have  the  courage  to  dismiss  me.  What
good  is  it  to  wait  for  that  end?  And  then  perhaps  I  might
cease  to  love  you.  I  have  found  you  charming.  Perhaps  by
dint  of  seeing  you  I  should  find  you  become  detestable.
Pardon  me  this  supposition.  In  living  with  you  in  great
intimacy,  I  should  witliout  doubt  have  occasion  to  see  you  in
a  cotton  cap,  or  in  some  funny  or  ridiculous  domestic  situation.
You  would  necessarily  lose  the  romantic  and  mysterious  side
tliat  seduced  me  above  all  things,  and  your  character,  better
understood,  would  no  longer  appear  strange  to  me.  I  should
be  less  occupied  with  you  if  I  had  you  near  me,  in  the  same
way  that  we  treat  books  which  we  never  open  because  we
have  them  in  our  libraries.  Your  nose  or  your  wit  would  not
seem  as  well  turned.  I  should  perceive  that  your  coat  was
ill-fitting  or  that  your  hose  were  untidy,  I  should  h^ve  a
thousand  awakenings  of  this  kind  which  would  have  singularly
pained  me,  and  at  the  end  I  should  have  arrived  at  the  con-
clusion that  you  had  neither  heart  nor  soul,  and  that  I  was
destined  to  be  misunderstood  in  love.  You  adore  me  and  I
you.  You  have  not  the  slightest  reproach  to  make  me,  and
I  have  not  the  least  complaint  in  the  world  to  make  against
you.  I  have  been  particularly  faithful  to  you  all  throughout
our  amour.    I  have  deceived  you  in  nothing.     I  had  neither


MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN  245

false  bosom  nor  false  virtue;  you  had  tlie  extreme  goodness
to  say  that  I  was  more  beautiful  than  you  had  imagined
because  of  the  beauty  I  gave  you.  You  gave  me  much
pleasure.  We  are  quits.  I  go  my  way,  you  go  yours.  Per-
haps we  may  meet  again  at  the  Antipodes.  Live  in  that  hope.
**You  believe  perhaps  that  I  do  not  love  you  because  I  leave
you.  You  will  recognize  the  truth  of  this  later  on.  If  I  had
done  less  in  your  case  I  should  have  remained,  and  would
have  poured  out  the  insipid  beverage  to  the  dregs.  Your  love
would  have  soon  expired  from  weariness;  after  some  time
you  would  quite  have  forgotten  me,  and  reading  my  name
over  in  the  list  of  your  conquests,  you  would  have  asked,  who
on  earth  was  this?  I  have  at  least  the  satisfaction  of  think-
ing that  you  will  remember  me  rather  than  another.  Your
unsatisfied  desire  opens  still  its  wings  to  fly  to  me.  I  shall  be
always  something  desirable  to  you,  where  your  fancy  loves
to  return,  and  I  hope  that  in  the  bed  of  any  mistresses  you
may  have,  you  will  sometimes  dream  of  that  one  night  you
passed  with  me.  You  never  will  be  more  amiable  than  you
were  on  that  very  happy  evening,  and  at  the  same  time,  if
you  were,  it  would  really  be  somewhat  less,  for  in  love  as  in
poetry  to  remain  at  the  same  point  is  to  go  back.  Hold  to
that  impression;  you  will  do  w^ell.  You  have  made  the  task
of  the  lovers,  I  may  have  a  difficult  one  (if  I  have  other
lovers),  and  no  one  will  be  able  to  efface  your  remembrance.
They  shall  be  the  heirs  of  Alexander.  If  you  grieve  too  much
at  losing  me  burn  this  letter,  which  is  the  sole  proof  that  you
have  had  me,  and  you  will  believe  you  have  had  a  beautiful
dream.  What  hinders  you?  The  vision  has  vanished  before
the  day,  at  the  time  when  dreams  return  home  by  the  horn  or
ivory  gate.  How  many  are  dead  who,  less  happy  than  you,
have  not  given  even  one  kiss  to  their  ideal.  I  am  not  ca-
pricious, nor  mad,  nor  a  conceited  prude.  My  action  is  the
result  of  profound  conviction.  It  is  not  to  inflame  you  more
or  from  calculated  coquetry  that  I  have  departed  from  C.
Do  not  try  to  follow  me  or  find  me  again.  You  will  not
succeed.  My  precautions  to  conceal  myself  from  you  are  too
well  taken.  You  will  always  be  to  me  the  man  who  opened
up  for  me  a  world  of  new  sensations.    These  are  things  that


246  MADEMOISELLE  DE  MAUPIN


a  woman  does  not  easily  forget.  Although  absent  I  think  of
you  often,  more  often  than  if  you  were  with  me.  Console  to
the  best  of  your  ability  poor  Rosette,  who  must  be  as  sorry
for  my  departure  as  you  are.  Love  well,  both  of  you,  and
remember  me  whom  you  both  loved,  and  sometimes  speak  my
name  in  a  kiss."


THE  £«•


"lK*i


'A£Fl'''2tV>*  '^*'


g'Wi   *%


'»


4'  ^É^"    III'  P


V


.^'  ^^^  .


'^''^    ^     /it.V£^5%*      M.^y    ^f^
