Sir Gawain and the Green Knight
Anonymous (14th century)
Translated by K. G. T. Webster and W. A. Neilson (1917) (Boston: Houghton Mifflin)
Source: Internet Archive (from the Riverside Literature volume with Piers Plowman)
Rights: Public Domain
Note: Verse translation; OCR-derived from 1917 edition, lightly cleaned. The Piers Plowman portion of the volume is not included.

SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


FYTTE THE FIRST

1. After the siege and the assault had
ceased at Troy, the city been destroyed
and burned to brands and ashes, _the warrior
who wrought there the trains of treason
was tried for his treachery, the truest on
earth.1 This was Aeueas the noble; he and
his high kindred afterwards conquered
provinces, and became patrons of well nigh
all the wealth in the West Isles. As soon
as rich Romulus turns him to Rome, with
great pride he at once builds that city, and
names it with his own name, which it now
has; Ticius turns to Tuscany and founds
dwellit|£s; Longobard raises homes in Lom-
bai'dy ; and, far over the French flood, Felix
Brutus establishes Britain joyfully on many
broad banks, where war and waste and

/onders by turns have since dwelt, and
nanya swift interchange of bliss and woe.

2. And when this Britain was founded by
his great hero, bold men loving strife bred
herein, and many a time they wrought
.estruction. More strange things have hap-
>ened in this land since these days than in
ny other that I know; but of all the Brit-
jh kings that built hero, Arthur was ever

die most courteous, as I have heard tell.
Therefore, I mean to tell of an adventure
in the world, which some count strange and
extraordinary even among the wonders of
Arthur. If ye will listen to this lay but a
little while, I will tell it forthright as I
heard it told in town, as it is set down in
story that cannot be changed, long written
in the land in true words.

3. This King lay royally at Camelot at
Christmas tide with many fine lords, the
best of men, all the rich brethren of the
Round Table, with right rich revel and
careless mirth. There full many heroes

1 Construction clear, though sense odd. Antenor and
Aeneas were the traitors who in the mediaeval story of
Troy handed over the city to the Greeks. Antenor re-
mained unpopular, hut Aeneas suffered no loss of repu-
tation. See Lydgate's Troy Book in the publications of
the Early English Text Soc., Bk. IV, 1. 4539 f.


tourneyed betimes, jousted full gaily;
then returned these gentle knights to the
court to make carols.2 For there the feast
was held full fifteen days alike with all
the meat and the mirth that men could de- 1
vise. Such a merry'tuHiwlVglorious to hear ;
joyful din by day, dancing at night. All
was high -joy in halls and chambers with -
lords and ladies as pleased them best. With
all the weal in the world they dwelt there
together, the most famous knights save-only
Christ, the loveliest ladies that ever had
life, and he, the comeliest of kings, who
holds the court. For all this fair company
were in their prime in the hall, the happiest
troop under heaven with the proudest of
kings. Truly it would be hard to name any-
where so'brave a band.

4. When New Year was fresh and but ~
newly come, the court was served double on
the dais. As soon as the kingwith his knights
was come into the hall, the chanting in the
chapel came to an end; loud was the cry
there of clerks and others. Noel was cele-
brated anew, shouted full often; and after-
wards the great ones ran about to fcttke
handsel;8 called aloud for New Year's
gifts, paid them out briskly, busily dis- - '•-
cussed the gifts; ladies laughed full loud,
though they had lost; and he that won was
not wroth, that may ye well trow. All this
mirth they made till the meat time. When
they had washed, worthily they went to
their seats, the best man ever above, as it
best behoved. Queen Guinevere full beau-
teous was set in the midst, placed on the
rich dais adorned all about. Fine silk at the
sides, a canopy over her of precious cloth
of Toulouse, and tapestries of Tars,4 that
were embroidered and set with the best
gems that Weaajt could-buy. Truly no man
could say that he ever beheld a comelier
lady than she, with her dancing gray eyes.

6. But Arthur would not eat till all were

* Dancing and singing in a ring.

* New Year's gifts of good omen.

* Oriental figured stuff.


•


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


served. He was so merry in his mirth, and
somewhat -childlike in his manner; his life
pleased him well; he loved little~~either to
lie long or to sit long, so busied him his
young blood and his wild brain. And an-
other custom moved him also, that he
through chivalry had taken up; he would
never eat upon such a dear day before he
was told an uooouth tale of some adventur-
ous thing, of some great marvel that he
could believe, of ancient heroes, of arms, or
of other adventures; or unless some person
demanded of him a sure knight to join with
him in jousting, to incur peril, to risk life
against life, twisting each i^the other, leav-
ing the victory to fortune. This was the
king's custom whenever he held court at
each goodly feast among his free company
in the hall. And so with undaunted face he
strides stoutly to his seat on that New Year,
making great mirth with everybody.

6. Thus the great king stands waiting be-
fore the high table, talking of trifles full
courteously. The good Gawain was placed
there beside Guinevere, and Agravain of
the Hard Hand sat on the other side, both
of them the king's sister's sons and full sure
knights. Bishop Baldwin at the top begins
the table, and Ywain, Urien's son, ate by
himself. These were placed on the dais and
honorably served, and after them many a
good man at the side tables. Then the
first course came in with blare of trumpets,
which were hung with many a bright ban-
ner. A new noise of kettle-drums with the
noble pipes, wild and stirring melodies wak-
ened the echoes; that many a heart heaved
full high at their tones. Dainties of precious
meats followed, foison of fresh viands, and
on so many dishes that it was difficult to
find place before the people to set on the
cloth the silver that held the several courses.
Each man as he himself preferred partook
without hesitation. Every two 1 had twelve
dishes between them, good beer and bright
wine both.

7. Now will I tell you no more of their
service, for everybody must well under-
stand that there was no lack of opportunity
for the people to take their food.3 Another

i It was extremely sumptuous having only two at a
mess ; i. e. only two sharing the same cup and platter.

' It seems to make somewhat better sense if we trans-
pose, as has here been done, lines 132 and 133 ; other-
wise this passage means that a second course came in
heralded by new music.


noise full new suddenly drew nigh, for
scarcely had the music ceased a moment,
and the first course been properly served in
the court, than there burst in at the hall"-
door an awesome bttin$fcin"neight one of tl
tallest men in the world; from the neck to
the waist so square and so thick was he, and
his loins and his limbs so long and so great,
that half giant I believed him to have been,
or, at any rate, the largest of men, and
withal the handsomest in spite of his bulk,
that ever rode; for though his back and
breast were so vast, yet his belly and waist
were properly slim; and all his form accord-
ing, full fairly shaped. At the hue of his
noble face men wondered; he carried him-
self in hostile fashion and was entirely
green.

8. All green was this man and his cloth-
ing; a straight coat sat tight to his sides; a
fair mantle above, adorned within; the lin-
ing showed, with costly trimming of shining
white fur; and such his hood also, that was
caught back from his locks and la\^on his -*^l
shoulders, febe-het» well stretched; 3 hose of
the same green, that clung to his calf; and
clean spurs under, of bright gold upon silk
bands richly barred^and shoes4 on his shanks

as the hero rides. And all his vesture ver-
ily was clean verdure, both the bars of his
belt, and the other beauteous stones that
were set in fine array about himself and his
saddle, worked on silk. It would be too
difficult to tell the half of the trifles that
were embroidered there, with birds and
flies, with gay gauds of green, — the gold
ever in the middle; the pendants of the
-Jbpoitrel, the proud crupper, the bits, — and
all the metal was enamelled; the stirrups
that he stood on were coloured the same, and
his saddle bow likewise, and his fine reins6
that glimmered and glinted all of green
stones. The horse that he rode on was of
the same colour too, a green horse, great and
thick, a steed full stiff to guide, in gay em-
broidered bridle, and one right dear to his
master.

9. This hero was splendidly dressed in
green; and the hair of his head matched that
of his horse;6 fair flowing locks enfolded
his shoulders; a beard as big as a bush hung

» Translation doubtful. « Word doubtful.

* Our "reins" is a mere stop-gap. The MS. has the
puzzling sturtes.

8 Translating hors swete of the MS. as " horse'a
suite."


T


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


over his breast; and it, together with his
splendid hair that reached from his head,
was trimmed evenly all round above his
elbows, so that half his arms were caught,
thereunder in the manner of a king's hood,1'
that covers his neck. The mane of that great
horse was much like it, very curly and
combed, with knots full many folded in with
gold wire about the fair green, — always
one knot of the hair, another of gold. The
tail and the forelock were twined in the
same way, and both bound with a band of
bright green, set with full precious stones
the whole length of the dock, and then tied
up with a thong in a tight knot; where rang
many bells full bright of burnished gold.
Such a steed in the world, such a hero as
rides him, was never beheld in that hall be-
fore that time. His glances were like bright
lightning, so said all that saw him. It
seemed as if no man could endure under his
blows.

10. He had neither helm nor hauberk,
nor gorget, armour nor breastplate, nor
shaft nor shield to guard or to smite ; but
in his one hand he had a holly twig, that is
greenest when groves are bare, and an axe
in his other, a huge and prodigious one, a
weapon merciless almost beyond descrip-
tion; the head had the vast length of an ell-
yard, the blade all of green steel and of
beaten gold; the bit2 brightly burnished,
with a broad edge, as well shaped for cut-
ting as sharp razors. The stern warrior
gripped it by 8 the steel of its stout staff,
which was wound with iron to the end of
the wood and all engraven with green in
beauteous work. A lace was lapped about
it, that was fastened at the head, and tied
up often along the helve^'with many pre-
cious tassels attached on rich embroidered
buttons of the bright green. This hero turns
him in and enters the hall, riding straight
to the high dais, fearless of mischief. He
greeted never a one, but looked loftily
about, and the first word that he uttered
was: "Where is the governor of this com-
pany ? Gladly I would see that hero and
speak with him."

He cast his eye on the knights and rode

1 The word capndos here translated "hood" ia
rare. It might conceivably mean " camail," a protec-
tion of mail for the neck and part of the head, that
hung down from or under the helm.

» " Bit " is still used for the cutting edge of an axe.

* Not in the MS.


fiercely up and down, stopped and gan pon-
der who was there the most renowned.

11. All gazed fixedly on the man, for
everybody marvelled what it might mean,
that a knight and a horse could have such
a colour: as green grown as the grass, and
greener, it seemed; shining brighter than
green enamel on gold. All were amazed who
stood there, and stalked nearer to him, with
all the wonder in the world what he would
do; for many marvels had they seen, but
such never before. Therefore for ^antoc^
and faery the folk there deemed it; and for
that reason many a noble warrior was slow
to answer, and all were astonished at his
voice and sat stone still in a deep silence
through the rich hall. Their voices 4 sank as
though they had suddenly fallen asleep. 1
deem, however, that it was not all for fear,
but somewhat for courtesy. But now let
him to whom all defer undertake the wight.

12. Then Arthur before the high dais
beheld that adventure, and. saluted the
stranger properly, for never was he afraid,
and said, "Sir, welcome indeed to this
place. I am called Arthur, the head of this
hostel. Light courteously down and tarry,
I pray thee; and whatso thy will is we
shall wit after."

"Nay, so help me he that sits on high,"
quoth the hero. " To dwell any time in
this house was not my errand ; but because
the fame of tbi« peepte is lifted up so high,
and thy town and thy mien are held the best,
the stoutest in steel gear on steeds to ride,
the wightest and the worthiest of the world's
kind, and proved opponents in other proper
sports; and here courtesy is known, as I
have heard tell, — it is this that has enticed
me hither certainly at this time. You may
be sure by this branch that I bear here that
I pass in peace and seek no quarrel; for if I
had set out with a company in fighting fash-
ion, I have a hauberk at home and a helm
both, a shield and a sharp spear shining
bright, and other weapons to wield, I ween
well also; but since I wished no war, my
weeds are softer. Now if thou be as bold as
all men tell, thou wilt grant me graciously
the game that I ask."

Arthur knew how to answer, and said:
" Sir courteous knight, if it is battle that
thou cravest, thou .shall not fail of a fight
here."

« Possibly "faces" or "look*."


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


13. " Nay, I demand no fight; in faith I
tell thee there are but beardless children
about on this bench. If I were hasped in
arms on a high steed there is no man here
to match me, their might is so weak. There-
fore I crave in this court a Christmas game,
for it is Yule and New Year, and here are
many gallants. If there be a man in this
house who holds himself so hardy, is so
bold in his blood, so rash in his head, that
he dares stiffly strike one stroke for an-
other, I shall give him as my gift this rich
gisarm, this axe, that is heavy enough, to
handle as he likes; and I shall abide the

i^first blow as bare as I sit. If any warrior
-v"/ be wight enough to try what I propose, let
him leap lightly to me and take this weapon
— I qtt&-alaiiB it forever, let him keep it
as his own — and I shall stand^him a stroke
firmly on this floor. At another time, by our
-A*rw;:^ -iady, thou wilt grant me the boon of deal-
ing him another blow; I will give him re-
spite of a twelvemonth and a day. Now hie,
and let us see quickly if any herein dare
say aught."

14. If he had astonished them at first,
stiller were then all the retainers in hall,
the high and the low. The warrior on his
steed ^ettled himself in his saddle, and
fiercely his red eyes he reeled about ; bent
his tli.ck bro\vs, shining green ; and waved
his beard, awaiting whoso would rise. When
none would answer him he coughed aloud,
stretehad himself haughtily and began to
speak; "What! Is this Arthur's house,"
said the hero tht-n, " that is famous through
SD many realms ? Where is now your pride
a.id your conquests, your fierceness, and
your wrath and your great words ? Now is
the revel and the renown of the Round
Table overcome by the word of a single
man; for all tremble for dread without a
blow shown."

With this he laughed so loud that the
lord grieved; the blood shot for shame into
his fair face. He waxed as wroth as the wind ;
and so did all that were there. The king so
keen of mood theu stood near that proud
man.

15. " Sir," said he, " by heaven thy asking
is f oolis!) ; and as thou hast demanded folly,
it behooves thee to find it. I know no man
that is aghast of thy great words. Give me
now thy-gfJsapHij for God's sake, and I will
grant thy boon that thou hast bidden."


Quickly he leaped to him and -caught a'
his hand; and the other alights fiercely o,
foot. Now Arthur has his axe, and grip.
the helve; he whirls it sternly about as if,
he meant to strike with it. The bold stran-
ger stood upjrighf 'before him, higher than
any in the~hoiise"6y a head and more; with
stern cheer he stood there, stroked his.
beard, and with cool countenance drew
down his coat, no more afraid or dismayed
for Arthur's great strokes than if some one?
had brought him a drink of wine upon the
bench.

Gawain, that sat by the queen, turned to
the king: " I beseech now with all courtesy
that this affair might be mine."

16. " Would ye, worthy lord," quoth
Gawain to the king, " bid me step from
this bench and stand by you there, — that I
without rudeness might leave this table,
and that my liege lady liked it not ill — I
would come to your helpjbefore your rich
court; for methinks it is obviously unseemly
that such an asking is made po -inuch-«f iti
your hall, even though ye yourself be will-
ing to take it upon you, while so many bold
ones sit about you on the bench ; than whom,
I ween, none under heaven are higher of
spirit, nor more mighty on the field where
strife is reared. I am the weakest, I know,
and feeblest of wit; and to tell the truth
there would be the least loss in my life. I
am only to praise forasmuch as ye are my
uncle; no other nobility than your blood
know I in my body. And since this adven-
ture is so foolish, it belongs not to you; I
have asked it of you first; give it to me.
Let this great court decide 1 if I have not
spoken well."

The heroes took counsel together and
they all gave the same advice, — to free
the crowned king and give the game to
Gawain.

17. Then the king commanded Gawain
to rise from the table; and he right quickly
stood up and made himself ready, kneeled
down before the king and took the weapon;
and Arthur lovingly left it to him, lifted up
his hand and gave him God's blessing, and
gladly bade him be hardy both of heart and
of hand. "Take care, cousin," quoth t'he
king, " tUa* -then, give h«w- •«- -e»t ; and if
thou handle him properly, I readily belie ve

i This word is supplied. Perhaps " speak " would be
more conservative.

'


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


that thou shalt endure the blow which he
shall give after."

Gawain goes to the man with gisarm in
hand; aud he boldly awaits him, shrinking
never a whit. Then speaks to Sir Gawain
the knight in the green; "Rehearse we our
agreement before we go farther. First I
conjure thee, hero, how thou art called,
that thou tell me it truly, so that I may
believe it."

"In good faith," quoth the knight,
"Gawain am I called, who give you this
buffet, whatever befalls after; and at this
time twelvemonth I am to take from thee
another with whatever weapon thou wilt,
and from no wight else alive."

The other answers again, " Sir Gawain,
so thrive I as I am heartily glad that thou
shalt give this blow."

18. " By God," quoth the green knight,
"Sir Gawain, it delights me that I am to
get at thy fist what 1 have requested here;
and thou hust readily aud truly rehearsed
the whole of the covenant that I asked of
the king, save that thou shalt assure me,
sir, bv thy troth, that thou wilt seek me
thyself wheresoever thou thinkest I may
be found upon the earth, and fetch for thy-
self such wages as thou dealest me today
before this rich company."

" Where should I seek thee ? " quoth
Gawain. " Where is thy place ? I know
never where thou livest, by him that
wrought me; nor do I know thoe, knight,
thy court, nor thy name. But tell me trulv
the way and how thou art called, and I will
use all my wit to win my way thither, —
and that I swear thee, for a sooth, and by my
sure troth."

" New Year will suffice for that ; no more
is needed now," quoth the man in green to
Gawain the courteous. "To tell the truth,
after I have received thy tap, and thou hast
smitten me well, I shall promptly inform
thee of my house and my home and mine
own name. Then thou mayest inquire about
my journey and hold promise ; and if I speak
no speech, then thou speedest the better, for
thou mayest linger at ease iu thy land and
seek no further. Take now thy grim tool to
thee and let us see how thou knockest."

" Gladly, sir, for sooth," quoth Gawain as
he strokes his axe.

19. The green knight on the ground pre-
pared himself properly. With the head a


little bowed he disclosed the flesh. His long,
lovely locks he laid over his crown, and let
the naked nape of his neck show for the
blow. Gawain gripped his axe and gathered
it on high; the left foot he set before ou
the ground, and let the axe light smartly
down on the naked flesh,1 so that the sharp
edge severed the giant's bones, and shrank
through the clear flesh 2 and sheared it in
twain, till the edge of the brown steel bit
into the ground. The fair head fell from"
the neck to the earth, and many pushed it
with their feet where it rolled forth. The
blood burst from the body and glistened
on the green. Yet never faltered nor fell
the hero for all that; but stoutly he started
up with firm steps, and fiercely he
forth where the heroes stood, caught his
lovely head, and lifted it up straightway.
Then he turned to his steed, seized the bri-
dle, stepped into the steel bow and strode
aloft, holding the head in his hand by the
hair; and as oabeidy the man sat in his sad-
die as if no mishap had ailed him, though
he was headless on the spot. He turned his
trunk about — that ugly body that bled.
Many a one of them thought that he had
lost his reason.

20. For he held the head straight up in
his hand; turned the face toward the highest
on the dais; and it lifted up the eyelids and
looked straight out, and spoke thus much
with its rnoulh, as ye may now hear: —
"Look Gawain, that thou be ready to go
as thou hast promised, and seek loyally,
hero, till thou find me; as thou hast prom-
ised in this hall in the hearing of these
knights. To the green chapel go thou, I
charge tbee, to receive such a blow as thou
hast dealt. Thou deservest to be promptly
paid on New Year's morn.3 As the knight
of the green chapel many men know me;
therefore, if thou strivest to find me, thou
shalt never fail. And so come, or it be-
hooves thee to be called recreant."

With a wild' rush he turned the reins,
and flew out at the hall door — his head iu
his hand — so that the fire of the flint flew
from the foal's hoofs. To what country he
vanished knew none there; no more than
they wist whence he was come. The king
and Gawain «wwe«l-|wifch"laTrg'hier at that

Some such word has t4 be supplied after naked.


2 "Grease " in the origijnal.
1 Morris's punctuation of


altered.


this passage hag been


8


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


green man; but this adventure was reck-
oned a marvel among men.

21. Though the courteous king wondered
in his heart, he leF"M0~ semblance be seen,
but said aloud to the comely queen with
courteous speech, " Dear dame, today be
fiever1 flls'mayed ; well becoming are such
tricks at Christmas, ia»lfteb>crf mtertaut-
•"""+ to laugh and sing about among these
" pleasant carols of knights and ladies. Never-
theless I may well go to my meat, for I can
not deny that I have seen a marvel." He
glanced at Sir Gavvain and said cheerfully,
"Now, sir, hang up thine axe; it has hewn
enough." And it was put above the dais to
hang on the tapestry where all men might
marvel at it, and by it ayouch the wonder-
ful happening. Then they turned to the
board, these heroes together — the king and
the good knight — and the keen men served
them double of all dainties, as was most
fitting; with all manner of meat, and min-
strelsy both. They spent that day in joy
until it came to an end. Now take care,
Sir Gawain, that thou blench not for the
pain to prosecute this adventure that thou
bast taken on hand.


,.


FYTTE THE SECOND


. This hansel) of adventures had Arthur
at the beginning, in the young year, since he
yearned to hear boasting, •f^clthougk there
waa little news when they went to their
1 seats, now they are provided with stern
work,1 their hands quite full. Gawain was
glad to begin those games in the hall; but
it would not be surprising if the end were
heavy; for though men be merry in mind
when they have much drink, yet a year runs

/full swiftly, and yields never the same ; the
beginning full seldom matches the end. And
So this Yule went by, and the year after it,
each season in turn following the other.
After Christmas came the crabbed Lent, that
tries the flesh, with fish and more simple
food. But thea the ..weather of the world
quarrels with winter, and though the cold
still clings, the clouds lift; copiously de-
scends the rain in warm showers, and falls
upon the fair earth. Flowers show there;
green are the garments both of fields and of
groves; birds hurry to build, and lustily

i Morris's punctuation of this passage has been
changed.


they sing for the solace of the soft summer,
that follows thereafter. Blossoms swell into
bloom in rows rich and rank; and lovely
notes are heard in the beauteous wood.

2. After the season of summer with the
soft winds, when Zephyrus blows on seeds
and herbs, happy is the plant that waxes
then, when the dank dew drops from the
leaves, to await the blissful glance of the
bright sun. But then harvest hastens and
hardens it soon: warns it to wax full ripe
against the winter. He drives with drought
the dust to rise, — from the face of the earth
to fly full high. The wild wind of the wel-
kin wrestles with the sun. The leaves fall
from the ^ttttt^k and light on the ground.
The grass becomes all gray that erst was
green. Then all ripes and rots that which
formerly flourished; and thus runs the year
in yesterdays many; and winter returns
again without — qglHn pj_ man,2 till the


_

Micbelmas moon has come in wintry wise.
Then thinks Gawain full soon of his


voyage.

3. Yet till Allhallows day with Arthur
he lingers; and Arthur made a feast on that
festival for the hero's sake, with great and
gay revel of the Round Table. Knights full
courteous and comely ladies all for love of
that man were in sorrow; but nevertheless
they spoke only of mirth ; and many a joy-
less one there made jests for his gentle sake.
After meat he mournfully addresses his
uncle, and speaks of his passnge, and openly
he says — " Now, liege lord of my life, leave .
I ask of you. Ye know the eest of this
case; I do not care to tell you even a trifle
of its dangers ; 8 but I am ready to start for
the fray na later tb*n' tomorrow morn, to
seek the man in the green, as God will
guide me."

Then the best of the castle gathered to-
gether, Ywain and Erec, and others full
many, Sir Dodinel de Sauvage, the Duke
of Clarence, Lancelot and Lyonel and Lucan
the Good, Sir Bors and Sir Bedever, big
men both, and many other proud ones, with
Mador de la Port. All this company of the
court came nearer to the king, to counsel
the knight, with care at their hearts. There
was much deep grief felt in the hall that
so worthy a one as Gawain should go on
that errand, to endure a sorry dint and

, » Passage a bit vague.
* Morris's punctuation altered.


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


deal none bimself with his brand. But the
knight ever made good cheer, and said,
" Why should I swerve from stern and
strange destiny ? What can a man do but
try?"

4. He lingered there all that day, and on
the mom made ready. Early he asked for
his arms, and they were all brought. First
a carpet of Toulouse was stretched over the
floor, and much was the gilt gear that
gleamed upon it. The brave man stepped
thereon and handled the steel, clad in a
doublet of costly Tars, and afterwards a
well wrought hood, closed on top and bound
within with a glistening white fur. Then
they put the sabatons1 upon the hero's feet,
lapped his legs in steel with fair greaves, to
which were attached well polished poleyues2
fastened about his knees with knots of gold.

,. Fine c»iss«aj then, that well enclosed his
thick, brawn}' thighs, they attached with
j£hongs. Next the d««e*ated burnie 8 of
bright steel rings upon precious stuff encased
the hero, and well burnished braces upon his
two arms, with elbow-pieces goodly and gay
and gloves of plate, and all the goodly gear
that might avail him at that time, with rich
coat armour, gold spurs well fastened, and
a sure brand girt about hia side by a silken
Bash.

5. When he was hasped in arms his har-
ness was rich; the least latchet or loop
gleamed with gold. So, harnessed as he was,
he heard his mass, offered and adored at
the high altar. Then he came to the king
and his court; courteously took his leave of
lords and ladies; and they kissed him, and

_V)Bvoyed him, entrusting him to Christ. By
that time was Gringolet ready, and girt with
a saddle that gleamed full gaily with many
gold fringes; everywhere nailed anew,
prepared for that emergency. The bridle,
barred about, was bound with bright gold;
the decoration of the breastplate and of the
flue housings, the crupper and caparison,
accorded with the saddle-bow, and all was
adorned with rich red gold nails, that glit-
tered and gleamed like thejgflsftHil'bf the sun.
Then he took the helm and quickly kissed
it. It was stoutly stapled and stuffed within;
it was high on his head, hasped behind, with
a light urison4 over the ventail,5 embroid-
ered and bound with the best gems on a

knee pieces. > coat of mail.


i »teel shoes. «

* scarf. * visor.


,


.


broad silken/ border; and birds on the seams
like painted 'popinjays 6 preening themselves
here and there; turtle-doves and true-loves7
thickly interlaced. As^mauyxkud«-4h«ce
were ac had been in town for seven winters.
The circlet that surrounded his crown was
even more precious — a device of gleaming
diamonds.

6. Then they showed him the shield, that
was of sheer gules, with the pentangle
painted in pure gold. He took it by the
baldric and cast it about his neck; and it
became the hero passing fair. And why
the peutangle pertains to that noble prince
I mean to tell you, though it should delay
me. It is a sign that Solomon set formerly
as a token of truth, by its own right, for
it is a figure that holds five points, and
each line overlaps and locks in another; and
throughout it is endless; and the English
call it everywhere, as I hear, the endless
knot. Therefore it suits this knight and bis
clear arms, forever faithful in five things,
and in each of them five ways. Gawain was
known for good andWrefined gold, devoid ^
of every villainy, adorned with virtues.
Therefore, the new 8 pentangle he bore on
shield and coat, as the man most true of
speech and the knight gentlest of behaviour.

7. First, he was found faultless in Eis five
wits; and again the hero failed never in his
five fingers; and all his affiance in this world
was in the five wounds that Christ received
on the cross, as the creed tells; and where-
soever this man was hard bestead in the
mele^e his pious^ thought was in this above
all other things — to take all his strength
from the five joys that the courteous Queen
of Heaven had of her child. For this cause
the knight had her image comely painted in
the greater half of his shield, that when he
looked down thereupon, his courage never
abated. The fifth five that I find that the
hero used, were generosity and fellowship
above all things, his purity and his cour-
tesv *hj^ never sworvedy and pity that
passes all qualities. These very five were
more surely set upon that warrior than upon
any other. Now all these 9 were established
fivefold in this knight, and each one was . .
.fogtoucd in another that had no end, and
they were fastened on five points that ««ver
Jailed, nor met anywhere, nor sundered


'


* parrots. .

e Should it be now t


i true lover's knots.

• These five larger virtues.

'


10


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


/ «-i


either, but finished always without end at
each corner, wherever the game began or
concluded Therefore on his fair shield this
knot was painted royally with red gold upon
red gules. That is the true pentangle as
the ^people yni'iptnly call it. Now was the
gay'Gawain armed. He caught up his lance
right there, and with a good-day he weut
for evermore.

8. He spurred his steed with the spurs
and sprang on his way so swiftly that the
steae struck out &r« after him. All who
saw the gentle man sighed in heart, and the
heroes said all together to each other in their
love for that comely knight, " By Christ, it
is a shame that thou, hero, must be lost, who
art so noble of life. In faith it is not easy
to find his match upon the earth. To have
acted more warily would have been better
counsel; and to have made yon dear one a
duke; it would well become him to be a
brilliant leader of people here. This would
e been better than to have him utterly
destroyed, gi¥ea ovefH» an elvish man for
mere boasting pride. Who ever knew any
king to take such counsel as to suffer knights
tobesotrickedforaChristmasgame." Much
warm water welled from eyes when that
ceemly sire departed from the dwellings

.jthat day. He made no stop, but wightly
went his way; many a tiresome path he
rode, as I heard the book teTTT

r 9. Now rides this hero, Sir Gawain,
through the realm of Logres in God's be-
half, though to him it seemed no play. Oft
alone companionless he lodged at night in
places where he found not before him the
fare that he liked. No company had he hut
his foal by friths and downs, nor nobody
but God to talk with by the way; till that
he approached nigh unto North Wales. He
kept all the isles of Anglesey on the left
side, and fared over the fords by the fore-
lands, over at the Holy Head, till he again
took land in the wilderness of Wirrel. There
dwelt but few that loved either God or man
with good heart. And ever as he fared he
asked of men that he met if they had heard
any talk of a green knight of the green
chapel in any spot thereabout, and all nicked
him with nay, that never in their life saw they
any man of such green hue. The knight took
strange roads by many a *e»gh bank. His
cheer changed full oft ere he saw that chapel.
» The meaning of the verb is doubtful.


10. Many a cliff he overclimbed in strange
countries; far sundered from his friends,
lonely he rode. At each ford or water
where the hero passed it were strange if he
found not a foe before him, and that so foul
and so fell that it behooved him to fight.
So many marvels in the mountains there the
man found that it were too tedious to tell
of the tenth part. Sometimes he warred
with serpents, and with wolves also, some-
times with oavngeo that dwelt in tbe cliffs; :
both with bulls and bears, and boars some-
times; and giants that assailed him from the
high fell. Had he not been doughty and
stern, and served God, doubtless he had been
dead and slain full oft. But the warfare
tried him not so much but that the winter
was worse, when the cold clear water shed
from the clouds, and froze ere it might fall
to the barren earth. Near slain with the
sleet he slept in his iron more nights than
enough on naked rocks, where clattering
from the crest the cold burn ran, and hung t
high over his head in hard icicles. Thus in v
peril and pain and plights full hard through
the country wanders this knight all alone
till Christmas Eve. At that tide to Mary
he made his moan that she might direct his
riding and lead him to some dwelling.

11. Merrily on the morn he rides by a7
mount into a forest full deep, that was
strangely wild. High hills were on each
side, and woods beneath of hoar oaks full
huge, a hundred together. The hazel and
the hawthorn were twined all together,
covered everywhere with rough ragged
moss, with many unblithe birds upon bare
twigs that piteously piped there for pain of
the cold. The knight upon Gringolet rides
all alone imder the boughs, through many a
moss and mire, mourning for his trials, lest .
he should never siir-vive to see the service of
that Sire who on that very night was born
of a lady to quell our pain. And therefore
sighing he said : " I beseech thee, Lord, and
Mary, that is mildest mother so dear, for
some harbour where I might properly hear
mass and thy matins tomorrow. Meekly I
ask it, and thereto earnestly I pray my pater
and ave and creed." He rode in his prayer
and lamented for his misdeeds. Oft-times
he blessed himself, and said, "Christ's cross
speed me."

12. The hero had not crossed himself
more than thrice ere he was aware in the


SIR GAWAlN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


ii


wood of a dwelling «« a IM^ above a clear-
ing, on a mount, hidden under the boughs
of many a huge tree about the ditches; a
castle the comeliest that ever knight owned,
set on a prauHi\ a park all about, with ite

, and


surrounded with many a tree for more than
two miles. The hero gazed at the castle on
that one side as it shimmered and shone
through the fair oaks. Then he humbly
doffed his helm and devoutly he thanked
Jesus and St. Julian — who are both gentle
— who courteously had directed him and
barkened ~lo Bis cry. "Now bon hostel,"
XTquoth the man, "I beseech you y*k ! " Then
he spurs Gringolet with his gilt heels, and he
full fortunately takes the way to the chief
road, that soon brought the hero to the bridge-
end iu haste. The bridge was securely lifted,
the gates locked fast ; the walls were well
arrayed ; no wind blast did it fear.

13. The hero that sat on his horse, abode
on the bank of the deep double ditch that
stretched to the place. The wall sank in the

** water wondrous deep, and again a full huge
height it towered aloft, of hard hewn stone
up to the top courses, corbelled under the
battlement in the best manner ; and above
fine watch-towers ranged along, with many
good loop-holes that sbowtnl- full i,li'Sii{7 A
better barbican that hero never looked upon.
And farther within he beheld the high hall,
with towers set full thickly about, and fair
and wondrous high filioles with carved tops
cunningly devised. Chalk-white chimneys
enough he saw that gleamed full white on
the battlements. So many painted pinnacles
were set, everywhere, built so thick among
the^penolIatioaB of the castle, that it verily
appeared cut out of paper. Fair enough it
seemed to the noble knight on his horse if
he could only attain the shelter within, to
harbour in that hostel, while the holiday
lasted. He called, and soon there appeared
on the walla right pleasant porter who took
his message and greeted the knight errant.

14. " Good sir," quoth Gawain, "would
you go my errand to the high lord of this
house to crave harbour? "

" Yea, by Peter," quoth the porter; " and
truly I trow that ye are welcome, sir, to
dwell while you like."

Then the man went again quickly, and

r err>Yvd-Sf folk with him, to receive the

knight.j They let down the great draw and

• ~rt & P

W. iu*. V tt-WJ3L1%vO.,J^)

-ri °-0~-if;J.


eagerly poured out, and kneeled down on
their knees upon the cold earth to welcome
the hero as it seemed to them proper. They
opened up wide the broad gate for him and
he raised them courteously, and rode over
the bridge. Several a"Renda.nts held his
saddle while he alighted, and afterwards
good men enough stabled his steed. Then
knights and squires came down to bring this
hero joyfully into the hall. When he lifted
up his helm people enough hurried to take
it at his hand, in order to serve the courte-
ous one; his sword and his shield they took
too. Then he greeted full courteously the
knights each one; and many a proud man
pressed there to honour that prince. All
hasped in his high weeds, they led him to
the hall, where a fair fire burned fiercely
upon the hearth. Then the lord of the
people came from his chamber to meet
courteously the man on the floor, lie said,
"Ye are welcome to wield as you like what
is here; all is your own to have at your will
and commandment." " Gramercy," quoth
Gawaiu. " Christ reward you for it." Like
glad heroes either folded the other in his
arms.

15. Gawain looked on the man who
greeted him so goodly, and thought it a bold
hero that owned the castle, a huge warrior
for the nonce, and pf- great age. Broad and
bright was his beard, and all beaver-hued.
Firm-gaited was he on his stalwart limbs;
with a faceas fierce as fire, and a free speech;
and to the hero he seemed well suited in-
deed to govern a nation of good people.

The lord turned to a chamber and
promptly commanded to give Gawain a
retinue to serve him in lowly wise; and
there were ready at his bidding men enough,
who brought him to a bright bower where
tlie bedding was curtains of pure silk with
clear gold hems, and cover{««90 right curi- -~T
ous with comely kottUirs, adorned above
with bright fur. Curtains running on ropes,
red gold rings, tapestries of Toulouse and
Tars hung on the wall, and under foot on
the floor of the same pattern. There with
mirthful speeches the hero was despoiled of
his burnie and of his bright weeds. Quickly
men brought him rich robes that he might
pick and choose the best for his change. As
soon as he took one and was wrapped therein,
that sat upon him seemly with sailing skirts,
the hero- W bi6-vi**ge verily^eemed to


W .


12


_1


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


—0- every man -MI looks glowing and lovely
in all/his Haibc; it seemed to them that
Christ ne verlhade a comelier knight. Wher-
ever in the world he were, it seemed as if
he might be a prince without peer in the
field where fell men fight.

16. A chair before the chimney,1 where
charcoal burned, was prepared for Sir Ga-
wain richly with cloths and cushions, upon
counterpanes that were both fine. And then
a beauteous mantle was cast on the man, of a
brown fabric richly embroidered, and fairly
furred within with the best skins, all of
ermine; the hood of the same. And he sat
on that settle in seemly rich attire, and
warmed him thoroughly; and then his cheer
mended. Soon a table was raised up on
trestles full fair, and set with a clean cloth
that showed clear white, nopkino, salt-cel-
lar, and silver spoons. The hero washed

i when he would and went to his meat. Men
' served him seemly enough, — double f«44
as was proper — with pottages various and
suitable, seasoned in the best manner; and
many kinds of fish, some baked in bread,
some broiled on the coals, some boiled, some
in sauces savoured with spices; and always
disotHirso so pleasant that it pleased the
warrior. Full freely and often the hero
called it a feast right courteously, when all
the retainers together praised him as_coufc
teous.2 " Do this penance now, and seen
things will be better ! " Right mirthful was
he for the wine that went to his head.

17. Then they questioned and inquired
cpftgiiiffly in skilful queries put to the prince
himself, till he courteously acknowledged
that he was of the court which noble
Arthur holds alone, who is the rich, royal
king of the Round Table; and that it was
Gawain himself that sits in the house, by
chance come for that Christinas. When the
lord had learned that he had that hero, he
-laughed aloud, so <fe*w it seemed to him;
and all the men in the castle made much
joy at appearing promptly in the presence
of him who contains in his own person all

i In the old meaning of fireplace, flre-back, or grate.

1 Possibly the host, and not Gawain, is the subject of
this sentence, which then might be translated : " Full
freely and oft the host called it a feast (i.e. made the
feaster welcome) right courteously, when all the retain-
ers praised him (Gawain or the host?) as courteous."
In the next two sentences the host is pretty certainly
the subject. With this interpretation cf. Macbeth, in, 4,
33 : " The feast is sold that is not often vouch'd, while
't is a-making, 't is given with welcome."


.

worth and prowess inrl griuiimin Irnitr, and
is ever praised; above all the men in the
world his renown is the greatest. Each
warrior said full softly to his companion —
" Now shall we see courteous turns of be-
haviour, and the blameless forms of noble
talking; what profit there is in speech may
we learn without asking since we have taken
that fine father of uurture. God has indeed
given us his grace, who grants us to have
such a guest as Gawain, on account of whose
birth men sit and sing for joy. This hero
will now teach us what distinguished man-
ners are; I think that those who hear him
will learn how to make love."

18. When the dinner was done and the j
deftf ones risen, the time was nigh arrived
at the night. Chaplains took their way to
the chapels, and rang full loudly, as they
should, to the meludimis evensongof the high
time. The lord turns thither, and the lady
also. Into a comely closet daintily she enters.
Gawain joyfully proceeds, and goes thither
straightway. The lord takes him by the
mantle and leads him to his seat, recognizes
him openly and calls him by his name, and
says he is the welcomest wight in the world.
And Gawain thanked him thoroughly and
either embraced the other, and they sat so-
berly together during the service. Then the
lady desired to look on the knight, and came
from her closet with many fair maidens.
But she was fairer than all the others in
flesh and face, in skin and form, in com-
plexion and demeanour — more beautiful
than Guinevere, it seemed to the hero. He
walked through the chancel to greet that
gracious one. Another lady led her by the
left hand, that was older than she ; an ancient
lady it seemed, and one highly honoured
by the knights about her; but unlike to look
on were the ladies, for if the younger was
fair, yellow was the other. Rich red on the
one bloomed everywhere ; rough wrinkled
cheeks rolled on the other. The kerchiefs
of the one broidered with many clear pearls,
upenty. displayed her breast and her bright
throat, which shone clearer than snow that
falls on the hills. The other covered her
neck with a gorget, that wrapped her black
chin in milk-white pleats. Her forehead
was completely enveloped in silken folds,
adorned and tricked 3 with small ornaments;

> The precise, but not the general, meaning of t!i3
two participles is uncertain.


.


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


7


and naught was bare of that lady but the
black brows, the two eyes, the nose, and the
nuked lips ; and those were ugly to behold
and oddly bleared. A gracious lady in the
land one might cull her forsooth ! Her body
was short and thick, her hips round l and
broad. More pleasant to look on was the
being she led.

19. When Gawain looked on that beau-
teous one who gazed graciously, he took
leave of the lord, and went toward them.
The elder he saluted, bowing full low; the
lovelier he took a little in his arms; he
kissed her comely, and knightly he greeted
her. They welcomed hiuit and he quickly
asked to be their servant if it pleased them.
They took him between them and led him
conversing to the fireplace in the parlour;
and straightway they called for spices,
which men speeded to bring them unspar-
ingly, and the pleasant wine therewith each
time. The lord leaped merrily up full often,
and saw to it that the mirth never faltered.
Gaily he snatched off his hood and hung it
on a spear, and »nhoi4tit them to win it as
a prize — he to have it2 who could make
the most mirth that Christmas tide. "And
I shall try, by my faith, with the help of my
friends8 to compete with the best, ere I lose
tny apparel." Ihus with laughing mimn the
lord makes merry in order to glad Sir
Gawain with games in the hall that night.
When it came time, the king commanded
lights; Sir Gawain took his leave and went
to his bed.

20. On the morn when as every man
knows God was born to die for us, joy
waxes in every dwelling in the world for
his sake. So it did there on that day, with
many dainties at meats and meals, right
quaint dishes, and brave men on the dais
dressed in their best. The old ancient wife
sits the highest, the courteous lord placed
by her, as I trow; Gawain and the gay lady
together just in the middle, as the courses4
properly come; and afterwards the rest
throughout all the hall, as it seemed best
to them, each man in his.degree was prop-
erly served. There was meat, there was

i The meaning of bay is doubtful.

* These four words supplied.

« This phrase may go with "lose," thus aggravating
the joke.

« This word (messe) can refer to the courses (the
food), or to the "mess" (the two persons eating to-
gether, i.e. using the same goblet, platter, etc.).


mirth, there was much joy, that it were
arduous for me to tell thereof, Chough to
note it I took pains b«lik».5 But yet I know
that Gawain and the lovely lady took com-
fort in each other's company, in the choice
play of their sharp wits, and the pure cour-
tesy of their naodeafr talk ; their disport sur-
passed indeed that of any royal game.
Trumps and drums came playing loudly;
each man minded his own business, and they
two minded theirs.

21. Much delight was taken there that foi
day, and the second; and the third followed

as pleasantly. The joy of St. John's day
was genth/to hear of; and it was the last of
the festival, the people considered. There
were guests to go upon the grey morn;
therefore wondrous kite- they sat up and '
drank the wine, danced full gayly with
sweet carols. At the last, when it was late,
they took their leave, each good man to
wend on his way. Gawain gave his host
good day; but the good man takes him, and
leads him to his own chamber, by the fire-
place; and there he draws him aside and
proppr'y tHnH him for the great worship •
that he had granted him in honouring his
house on that high tide, in embellishing Lis
castle with his good cheer. "Indeed, sir,
while I live I shall be the better that Gawain
has been my guest at God's own fenst."

" Gramercy, sir," quoth Gawain, " in good
faith the merit is yours; all the honour
is your own, — the high King reward you;
aiid I am your man to work your behest in
high and in low as I am bound by right."

The lord eagerly strives to hold the knight
longer; but Gawain answers him that he
can in no wise.

22. Then the hero asked of him full
fairly what extraordinary deed had driven
him at that &WP time from the king's court,
to go all alone so boldly, ere the holidays
were wholly t*verr,v> - >' 'Vnrvvx fti.--!- "

"For sooth, sir," quoth the hero, "ye
say but the truth; a high errand and a
tiuL&i^ had me from these dwellings; for I
am summoned to such a place as I know
not in the world whitherward to wend to
find it. I would not for all the land in
Logres fail to reach it on New Year's morn
— so our Lord help me. Therefore, sir,

8 The clause literally translated Is insignificant; we
expect something like " and yet I should fall for all my
pains."


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


&


IOSS


e. ^° Q


this request I require of you here, that ye
tell me truly if ever ye heard tale of the
green chapel, where in the world it stands,
and of the knight green in colour that keeps
it. There was established by statute an
agreement between us that I should meet
that man at that landmark if I could but
survive. And of that same New Year there
now lacks but little, and by God's Son I
would gladlier look on that person — if
God would let me — than wield any posses-
sion in the world. Therefore, indeed — by
your good will — it behooves me to wend;
I have now at my disposal barely three
days; and I were as fain fall dead as fail of
mine errand."

? Then ^aiighjng quoth tha lord, " Now it
b^hoovesufee to stay ; for I shall direct you
to that spot by the time's end — ^the green
chapel upon the ground/ GFrieve you no
more; for ye shall be in your bed, sir, at
thine ease home days-ye4/and set out on
the first of the year and come to that place
,'at mid-morn, to do what you like. Stay till
New Year's day; and rise and go then.
One shall set you on your way; it is not
two miles hence."

23. Then was Gawain full glad, and
merrily he laughed; "Now I thank you es-
pecially for this above all oFher things; now
that my quest is achieved, I shall dwell
at your will, and do whatever else ye de-
cide."

Then the sire seized him and set him be-
side him, and let the ladies be fetched to
please them the better. Fair entertainment
they had quietly among themselves; the
lord in his jovial, friendly demeanor 4»-
haved as a man.out of1 his wits that knew
/not what he did. Then he spake to the
/knight, crying loud, " Ye have agreed to
do the deed that I bid. Will ye hold this
hest here at e»ee ? " H^ MV^y/Two-Tv^*-** •

" Yea, sir, forsooth," said ttae true hero,
" while I stay in your castle I shall be obe-
dient to your hest."

"Since ye have travelled/ from afar,"
quoth the warrior, " and then have sat late
with me, ye are not well Nourished, I know,
either with sustenance or with sleep. Ye
shall linger in your loft and lie at your ease
tomorrow till mass time; and go to meat
when ye will with my wife, who shall sit

> Wnlde in the text is translated as a corruption of
some such word as " was lacking," or " wandered."


'


with you and comfort you with her com-
pany till I return home; and I shall rise
early and go hunting." Gawain grants all
this, bowing courteously.

24. " Yet further," quoth the hero, "let us , -
make an agreement. Whatsoever I win in
the wood, it shall be yours ; and whatsoever
fortune, ye achieve, exchange with me there- ,
for. Sweefe sir, swap we so, s\v«>ar truly,,
whichever one of us gets the worse or the\ r
better."

" By God," quoth Gawain the good, " I
consent thereto; and whatever game you
like, agreeable it seems to me."

^Oii this beverage just brought the bar-
gain is made," said the lord of that people;
and botlxjaughed.

Then ttiey drank and played and amused2
themselves, these lords and ladies, so long
as it pleased them; and then with polite
demeanour and many fair gestures, they
stood up and lingered a while, and talked
quietly, kissed full comely, and took their
Ljave. With many a gay servant and gleam-
ing tor-jhes each hero was brought to his
bed full softly at the last. Yet before they
went to bed they oft rehearsed the cove-
nants. The old lord of that people kuew
well how to keep up a jest.

FYTTE THE THJRD I.

_i . If . ••_ • t\ . f^ —•». -^*.AM.


/ 1. Full early before the day the folk '
arose; the guests that would go called their
grooms, and these hastened to saddle the
horses, arrange their gear, and fri ii*«r their i
mnjTsr%T-he--g-peat- owe* arrayed themselves
to ride, leaped up lightly and caught their
bridles, each wight on his way where it
well pleased him.

The dear lord of the land was not the
last; arrayed for the riding, with retainers
full many, he ate a sop 8 hastily after he
had heard mass, and took his way quickly
with his bugle to the field. By the time
that any daylight gleamed upon earth, he
with his heroes were mounted on their high
horses. Then these hunter^ that understood
it, coupled their hounds, unclosed the ken-
nel doors and called them thereout, blew

' 'blithely on bugles three simple calls. At
this the brachets 4 bayed and m?de a wild
noise, and the, banters chasiisedfand turned

* Word doubtful. » Took a light repaat

« Hounds that hunt by scent.


"CMJTJL c^,


*t>


>IR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


back


- that wandered uff, — a hundred


hunters of the best there were, as I have
heard tell. To their stations the trackers
went; hunters cast off the couples ; and then
arose for the good blasts great uproar in
that forest. ,-.. • *. ••• ' .

2. At the first noise of the quest the
game quaked; the deer moved down into

~j the dale, dazed for dread; hurried to the
'-height; but quickly they were biiidorod by

,j the beaters, who cried stoutly. They let the
harts with the high heads go their way, the

.^Jgjld bucks also with their broad palms,1

•" for the generous lord had forbidden that
there should any man meddle with the
male deer in the close season. But the hinds
were held back with "Hay!" and "Ho!"
and the does driven with great din to the
;-o deep glades. There might one see as they
ran the flight of arrows; at each turn under
the boughs out flew a shaft, that savagely
bit on the brown hide with full broad heads.
How they leaped and bled and died by the
banks ! And ever the hounds with a rush
eagerly followed them; hunters with shrill
horn hastened after with such a resound-
ing cry as if cliffs had cracked. What game
" escaped the men who shot was all run down
and torn at the stands. /-The deer2 were
' pestered at the heights, and worried at the
waters; the people were so alert at the low
stations, and the greyhounds so great, that
got them quickly and pulled them down as
fast as a man could see. The lord, shouting
for joy, shot and alighted full oft, and
passed the day thus with joy till the dark
night.

3. So this lord sports by the eaves of the
linden wood, and Gawain the good man lies
in his gay bed; reposes till the day light
gleams on the walls, under the beautiful
coverlets, curtained about. And as he fell
into a doze, faintly he heard a little din at
the door, then <listinetly;s and he heaved
up his head out of the clothes, caught up a
corner of his curtain a little, and watched
warily in that direction to see what it might
be. It was the lady, loveliest to behold, who
drew the door to after her right slyly and
quietly, and turned toward the bed. The
hero grew 4*asl*f al and laid himself down
cunningly and pretended that he slept. And
she stepped quietly, and stole to his bed,

l The flat, broad part of the linrn.

» Subject supplied. » Meaning not quite sure.


cast up the curtain, and crept within, and
seated herself full softly on the bedside,
and stayed there surprisingly long, to see
when he should awake. The man lay pre-
tending a full great while, bothered in his
conscience what this affair might mean or
amount to. Marvellous it seemed to him.
But yet he said to himself, " More seemly
would it be to find out by asking what she
would." Then he waked, and stretched, and I Z
turned to her ; unlocked his eyelids, and
made believe he was amazed, and crossed
himself with his hand, to be the safer for
his prayer. With chin and cheek full sweet,
of mingled white and red, right lovely she
looked, with her small laughing lips.

4. " Good morrow, Sir Gawain ! " said
that fair lady. " Ye are a careless sleeper
when one can enter thus. Now ye are cer-
tainly taken; unless we can make a truce
I shall bind you in your bed, ye may be
sure of that ! " All laughing the lady shot
those jests.

" Good morrow, fair one," quoth Gawain
the blithe. " I shall be at your disposal, and
that pleases me well, for I yield me out-
right and pray for grace, — and that is the
best course, I judge, for I am in straits."
And thus he returned the jests with many
a blithe laugh. " But would ye, lovely lady,
grant me leave, fro** your prisoner and bid *l*
him rise, I would leave this bed and dress
myself better. Then I could talk with you
in more comfort."

" Nay, forsooth, fair sir," said that sweet
one, "ye shall not rise from your bed; I
shall manage you better. I shall tie you
</' and afterwards talk with my
knight that I have caught; for I ween well,
ye are indeed Sir Gawain, whom all the
world worships whereso ye ride. Your
honour, your courtesy, is heartily praised,
by lords, by ladies, by all alive; and now
ye are here, forsooth, and we all alone. My
lord and his people are gone far away; the
other men in their beds, and my maidens
also; the door shut and closed with a strong
hasp; and since I have in this house him
whom all like, I shall make good use of my
time while it lasts. Ye are welcome to my
person, to do whatever you wish; 1 am per-
force, and must remain, your servant."

< Meaning doubtful.

' A mere guess : the line appears to be literally " I
ahall cover you here the other half also."


i6


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


5. " Iti good faith," quoth Gawain, " a
great pri vilege it seems to rne — though I
be uot uow he that ye speak of. To reach
such reverence as ye rehearse here, I am a
man unworthy, I know well. By God, I
should be glad — if it seemed good to you

. — to do what I might m jipeech or in serv-

ice to eakaflee- your worship;1 — it were a
pure joy."

" In good faith, Sir Gawain," quoth the
gay lady, " if I should speak ill of the fame
and the prowess that pleases all others, or
esteem it light, it would show but-small

jtte.^-'iaiseei-Hmeofc.2 But there are ladies enough
who were liefer have this courteous one in
their power — as I have thee here, — to
dally dearly with your dainty words, to
comfort themselves and dispel their cares,
— than much of the treasure and gold that
they have. But I praise the Lord who rules
the skies that through his grace I have
wholly in my hand that which all desire."

I X k> o Great cheer she that was so fair of face
made him; the knight with discreet speeches
_ answered her every proposal.

6. " Madame," quoth the merry man,
" Mary reward you, for in good faith I
have found your generosity noble. People
judge a person's deeds largely from the ac-
counts of others;3 but the praise that they
accord my deserts is but idle. It is simply
your owu nobility, who know nothing but
good." J

"By Mary," quoth the gracious one,
" methinks it is otherwise ; for were I
worth all the store of women alive, and all
the wealth of the world were in my hands,
and I should bargain and choose to get me
a lord, then for the good traits that I
have found in the knight here, of beauty
and graciousness and gay seeming, and
from what I have heard before and hold
in this case to be true, there should no hero
in the world be chosen before you."

"Indeed, worthy one," quoth the hero,
"ye might4 have chosen much better; but
I am proud of the estimation that ye put
upon me; and as your devoted servant I
hold you my sovereign, and your knight
I become; and Christ pay you for it."

Thus they spoke of various things till
past the midmorn; and ever the lady be-


haved as if she loved him much. But the
hero fared with caution and made courteous
pretences. " Though I were the fairest of
women," mused the lady, " little love would
he show, because of the danger that he seeks
without reproach — the blow that may slay
him, but must needs be undergone." The
lady then asked leave, aud he granted her
full soon.

7. Then she gave him good day, and of
a sudden laughed; and as she stood there
she astonished him with right sharp words :
" Now may he that speeds each speech, pay
you for this entertainment; but that ye are
Gawaiu, it gaiO imit in my mind." '

" Wherefore ?7f quoth the hero; and
eaget-ly he asks, afraid lest he had failed
in the performance of his design.6 But the
hidy blessed him and spake in this wise:
"A man as good as Gawain is properly
held — and courtesy is closed so entirely
in him — could not easily have lingered so
long with a lady but he had on some trifling
excuse or other7 courteously craved a kiss."
Then said Gawain, " Indeed, be it as you
like; I shall kiss at your commandment as
becomes a knight, and feat8 lest he dis-
please you; so urge that plea no more."
She comes nearer at that and takes him
in her arms; stoops graciously down and
kisses . the man. , They courteously entrust .
ve"SCif other to Christ. She goes forth at the
door without more ado, and he prepares to
rise, and hurries amain; calls to his cham-
berlain, chooses his weeds, steps forth
blithely to mass when he is ready; aud then
he goes to his meat, behaving -always eour-
-toQuslyr and makes merry all day till the
bright moon rises. Never was a hero fairer
entertained by two such worthy dames, the
older and the younger. Much disport they
make together.

8. And ever the lord of the land is bound
on his sport, to hunt in holts and heath at
barren hinds. Such a sum of docs and of
other deer he slew there by the time the
sun was low, that it were a marvel to esti-
mate. Then eagerly they all flocked to-
gether at the last; and quickly of the slain
deer they made a quarry. The leaders


1 The passage is none too clear.

a The last clause is obscure in the text.

' The passage is obscure. « " might " supplied'

'4. -Vv^a-y-rw -, ,

U i/W7


• The negative is supplied.

« Possibly, "in some form of courtesy."
' Literally, " By some touch of some trifle at BOme
tale's end."

• " Fear " is an emendation by Morris ; the clause is
obscure.


a


T

SIR GAWAINi AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


hastened thereto\with men enough; gath-
ered the greatest of -grease,1 and proceodod
fv&p&¥ ly to un4o-a them as the occasion de-
mands. Some that were there tried them
at the assay 3 and found two fingers of fat
on the leanest of all. Afterwards they slit
' the slot,4 seized the arber,5 cut it free with
a sharp knife, and tied it 6 up. Next they
cut clown along the four limbs and rent off
the hide ; then they opened the belly, took
out the paunch, cutting eagerly, and laid
aside the knot.7 They began at the throat
again and skilfully divided the weasand
from the windpipe and threw out the guts.
Then they cut out the shoulders with their
sharp knives, and pulled them through by a
little hole, so as to have whole sides. Next
they divided the breast, and cut it in two;
and once more they began at the throat,
split the beast quickly right up to the oratolv
took oiit the advancers,8 and immediately
severed all the fillets by the ribs, and took
them off properly along the backbone even
to the haunch, — all of which hung to-
gether. Then they heaved it up whole and
cut it off there; and that they took for the
numbles,9 as it is rightly called. At the
fork of the thighs they cut the flaps behind ;
hastily they hewed the carcass in two, and
severed it along the backbone.

9. Both the head and the neck they
hewed off then, and afterwards they
sundered the sides swiftly from the chine,
and the corbie's fee 10 they cast i» a. gra*m
tree. Then they pierced either thick side
through by the rib, and hung them each by
the hocks of the haunches — each man for
his fee, as it befell him to have it. Upon a
skin of a fair beast they fed their hounds
with the liver and the lights, the leather
of the paunches, and bread bathed in
blood mingled thereamong. Loudly they
blew the prize, and bayed their hounds;
then they started to carry home their meat,
blown g full stoutly many loud notes. By the

> The correct hunting term for " the fattest."

• Cut up.

' Probably at the side of tlie neck, or on the brisket.
« Probably at thp hollow of the breast bone.

• The gullet probably.

« The schyre is presumably the "arber "; though In
1. 2256 it appo-rs to be the skin of the neck or nape.

' i.e. the entrails, with the gullet knotted to prevent
the filth from escaping.

• This titbit is sometimes called a part of the nnm-
bles.

» A choice cut ; hence, capriciously, onr humble-pie.
10 A bit of the offal for the crows.


time daylight was done the band had all
arrived at the comely castle, where the
knight is quietly waiting in comfort beside
a bright fire. When the lord arrived and
Gawain met him, there was joy enough. '1^0

10. Then the lord commanded to gather
in the hall all the household, and both the
ladies to come down with their maids. Be-
fore all the folk on the floor he bade men
fetch his venison before him; and all in
merry sport he called Gawain, told him the
number of the choice beasts, and showed
him the fat meat cut from n the ribs; "How
like you this play ? Have I won the prize ?
Have I pcaperiy earned thanks by my $-*>
woodcraft?"

" Yes, indeed," quoth the other hero;
"here is the fairest store that I saw this
seven year in the season of winter."

"And all 1 give you, Gawain," quoth
the host, then ; " for by our plighted cov-
enant you can claim it as your own."

" That is true," replied the hero, " and 1
say to you the same; I too have won this
worthy thing within doors ; and I am sure
that with quite as good will it belongs to
you." He throws his arms about bis fair
neck and kisses him as courteously as he
knew how. "Take you there my merchan- I \Q $
dise; I have won no more; though I should
give it up willingly even if it were greater."

" It is good," quoth the good man;
"gramercy therefor. Perchance it might
be better if you would tell me where you
won this same favour by your own 12 wit.'?

" That was not the agreement," said he;
" ask me no more, for ye have got all that
belongs to you, be sure of that."

They laughed and made merry in low
tones; then they went quickly to supper
with new dainties enough.

11. And afterwards as they sat by a fire-
place in a chamber, servants poured to
them oft the choice wine; and again in
their jesting they agreed to make the same
bargain on the morning that they made be-
fore, — whatsoever chance betide to ex-
change their winnings at night when they
met, whatsoever new they win. They made
this agreement before all the court, and
the beverage was brought forth merrily at
that time.13 Then at length they politely
took leave; and everybody hurried to bed.

n Literally "upon." >» Possessive uncertain.

» A drink ratines the agreement — as before.


i8


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


When the cock had crowed and cackled
but thrice, the lord had leaped from his
bed; likewise his followers each one, so
that the meat and the mass were promptly
despatched, and the troop ready for the
chase in the wood ere any day sprang.
J^t ot^With hunters audhorns they passed through
the plaifrs^ndHncoupled the racing hounds
among the thorna.<f ao.Aax' OL s.fi^~,->_A fr£\
Lj. 2. | « 12. Soon they Ucard-Uio-ory of-tbe^tegs
•H'v-o-^^by a marsh side. The huntsman encouraged
the hounds that first caught the scent,
hurled sharp words at them with a great
noise. The hounds that heard it hastened
thither quickly, and fell immediately to the
scent, forty at once. Then there rose such
a resounding cry of gathered hounds that
the rocks about rang. The hunters cheered
them with horn and with mouth; then all
together they swung in a troop between a
n -^ r, pool in that wood and a wild crag. On a
hill, beside a cliff at the side of the bog,
where the rough rock was rudely fallen,
tliey fared to the finding, and the hunters
after them. The men surrounded both the
rock and the hill, because they knew well
that he was within them, — the beast that
the bloodhounds were proclaiming there.
Then they beat on the bushes and bade
him rise up, and he savagely rushed out
athwart the men, the most formidable of
^ swine. Long since had he left the herd
on account of his age, for he was a huge
beast, the greatest of boars. Hia grinduri
' when he grunted grieved many, for at his
first burst he thrust three to the earth, and
sped hastily forth at great speed without
respite. And they hallooed " High ! " full
loudly, and cried " Hay, hay ! " With horns
to mouth lustily they blew the recheat.1
Many were the merry cries of men and of
hounds that hastened after this boar with
hue and cry to kill him. Full oft he bides
foe i at bay, and maims the pack in the melee.
He hurts many of the hounds and griev-
ously they howl and yell.

13. The hunters pushed forward then to
shoot at him, aimed at him wi*t» their ar-
rows and hit him often. But the shafts that
struck on his shields,2 give way at the pith,
and the barbs would not bite on his brawn
though the shaven shafts shivered in pieces;
the hcud hopped out again wheresoever it

1 A call for collecting the hounds.
» The tough skin of the Hanks.


hit. But when the dints of their j keen
strokes scared him, then mad for dopfefuc-
4km he rushed on the men, did them sore
hurt where he hurled forth, and many a one
gpow woi»y^ thereat and gave back a little.
But the lord on a light liorse hurries after
him, blowing his bugle like a bold hero.
He winds the recheat as he rides through
thick groves, following this wild swine
till the sun -declined. Thus they drive on
the day with such doings while our lovely
hero lies comfortably in his bed at home in
clothes full rich of hue. The lady did not
forget; she came to greet him; full early
she was by him to change his mind.

14. She comes to the curtain and peeps
at the knight. Sir Gawain at once welcomes
her worthily, and she returns his greeting
right promptly, seats herself softly by his
side, laughs openly, and with a lovely look
addresses these words to him : " Sir, if ye
be Gawain, it seems to me a very strange
thing that a man of such quality should
not follow the conventions of good society;
and should after making acquaintance with
» person cast him utterly from his mind.
Thou hast already forgotten what I taught
you yesterday in the best language that I
knew."

"What is that? " quoth the hero. "For-
sooth I know not. If what ye say be true,
I am to blame."

" Yet I taught you about kissing," re-
plied the fair lady; "wherever a counte-
nance is known, quickly to -'aim a kiss;
that becomes every knight who practices
courtesy."

" Cease such speech, my dear lady," said
the ready, man. " I durst not cLiim it lest
I should be denied. If I proposed and were
refused, I should certainly be wrong in
proffering."

" By my faith," quoth the lovely dame,
" ye cannot be refused. Ye are strong
enough to compel it by strength if ye
pleased, supposing any were so ill-bred as
to deny you."

" Yea, by God," said Gawain, " your
speech is good; but violence is considered
discourteous among my people, as is any
gift that is not given with a good will. I
am at your command to kiss when ye like.
Ye may begin when ye please, and leave
off whenever it likes you."

The lady stoops down and gracefully


>*->«vi -


r-vvi^Vrn


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


kisses his face. They converse long of the
fears and joys of love.

15. " I should like to know from you,
sir," said the peerless lady, "if it vexes
you not, — what might be the reasouSthat so
young and so gallant person as ye uow are,
one so courteous and so knightly as ye are
known everywhere to be, have never spoken
of love.1 For in relating the pains of true

^ knights, the chief thing praised in all of
•^chivalry is the tyyal sport of love, — and
the science of anus: it is the title, token,
and text of their works; how heroes for
their true love adventured their lives, en-
dured for their sweethearts doleful hours,
and afterwards avenged themselves by their
valour; dispersed their care, and brought
bliss to bower, with plenteous rewards for
themselves. And ye are the most renowned
knight of your time; your fame and your
worship walks everywhere, — and now I
have sat by you here two separate times,
have I never heard from your head a
• single word that pertained at all to love,
less or more. And ye, that are so courte-
ous and so distinguished in your vows,
ought willingly to show and teach to a
young thing some tokens of the art of true
love. Why are ye so rude who are so praised?
Is it that ye deem me too dull to hearken
to your dalliance ? For shame ! I came
hither all alone to sit and learn from you
some accomplishment: do teach me part of
your skill while my lord is from home."

16. "In good faith," quoth Gawain,
" God reward you 1 Great is the entertain-
ment, and huge the pleasure to me, that so
worthy a one as ye should come hither, and
take pains with so poor a man, and play
with your knipht in any wise; it delights
me. But to take upon myself the task of
expounding true love, of touching upon the
themes of that text, and tales of arms be-
fore you, who I wot well have more knowl-
edge of that sort by the half than I or a
hundred such have, or ever shall have so
long as I live, — that were a manifold folly
by my troth, dear one. But I would work
yoxir will with all my might, highly be-
holden to you as I am; and I wish ever-
more to be your servant, so God save me."

Thus the fair lady besought him, and

1 The words in italics are rashly supplied by the
translator. For several lilies here the construction is
unclear.


tried him oft, for to have won him to
wrong, — whatever it was she purposed;
but he defended himself so fairly that no
fault appeared, nor any evil on either side;
they knew nought but joy. They laughed
and played a long time, till at last she
kissed him, took her leave fairly, and went
her way.

17. Then the hero bestirred himself and
rose to the mass; and afterwards their din-
ner was dight and splendidly served. The
hero sported with the ladies all day, but
the lord raced over the land full oft, fol-
lowing his uncouth swine, that rushed along
the banks and bit in sunder the backs of his
best brachets.3 There he abode at his bay
till bowmen broke it, and maugre his head
made him move forth. ''Many fell arrows
there flew when the folk gathered about,
but yet at times he made the stoutest to
start; till at the last he was so weary he
could no more run; but with the haste that
he might he won to a hole in a cleft by a
rock, where the burn runs. He got the
bank at his back and began to scrape; the
ugly froth foamed from the corners of his
mouth, and he whet his white tusks. It
was not pleasant for all the bold hunter3
that stood about him to approach him even
remotely; and to go nigh him durst none
for fear of harm. He had hurt so many
before, that all seemed then full loath to be
more torn with the tusks of that savage
and crazed beast. •fcCX&^j

18. W4»«ui,the knight came himself, rein-
ing his steed, and saw him bide at the bay
near his men, he lighted nimbly down,
left his courser, pulled- out a bright brand
and boldly strode forth, and hurried fast
through the stream where the fell one
abode. The wild creature was ware of the
wight with weapon in hand, and heaved
on high his hairs; so fiercely he snorted
that many feared for their lord lest to him
befell the worse. The swine rushed directly
upon the hero, so that man and boar were
both in a heap in the wildest of the water;
but the boar had the worse, for the mau
marked him well as they first met and skil-
fully set his point exactly in the slot,8
pierced him up to the hilt so that his heart
split, and he gave way squealing and went
quickly down the water. A hundred hounds
seized him and fiercely bit on him. Men

z hounds. ' The proper piercing spot in the chest.


20


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


brought him to land and the dogs finished
him.1

19. There was blowing of the prize 2 on
many a loud horn, high halloing aloft by
mighty hunters; brachets bayed the beast
as the masters bade who were the chief
huntsmen of that swtffc chase. Then a wight
that was wise in woodcraft begins skilfully
to unlace 3 this boar. First he hews off its
head and sets it on high; and afterwards
splits him all down his rough back, and
takes out the bowels and singes them on
the coals; then with bread mingled with
these, he rewards his hounds. Afterwards
he cuts the brawn in fine broad shields, and
has out the hastlets 4 in the proper man-
ner. And now they bind the halves all whole
together, and afterwards stoutly hang them
on a stiff staff. Now with this same swine
they take their way home. The boar's
head was borne before the warrior who
slew him at the stream through the force
of his own strong hand. It seemed long to
him until he saw Sir Gawain in the hall;
then he called, and Gawain came promptly
to take his fees there.

20. The lord jested5 full loudly, and
merrily he laughed when he saw Sir Ga-
wain; with pleasure he spoke. The good
ladies were called and the household gath-
ered. He showed them the shields and told
them the tale of the girth 6 and length of the
wild swine; and also of his viciousness in
the wood where he fled. That other knight
full comely commended his deeds, and
praised it as a great bag that he had made;
for such a brawn of a beast, the bold man
said, nor such sides of a swine, saw he
never before. Then they handled the huge
head; the courteous man praised it and
-»»4e-f»HoU. of it to kw«» the lord. /

"Now Gawain," quoth the good man,
" this game is your own, by fi»e and fast
foreword, truly ye know."

" It is sooth," quoth the hero; "and as
tfuely all my getting I shall give you in
turn, by my troth." He took the warrior
about the neck and courteously kissed him,
and another time he served him the same.

1 Present and past tense are oddly mixed in this
nza, as often in the poem. This time they have been
inalized.

The horn-blowing for the pame's death,
cut up. « cutlets.

Two words not clear.
Translating largesse as " largeness."


'


" Now we are even," quoth the warrior,
" tonight of all the covenants that we knit
by 4»w since I came hither." ' •">

Said the lord, " By St. Giles, ye are the
best that I know ! Ye will be rich in a
short time, if ye drive such ohaft'ei* ! •>^*'

21. Then they raked tables aloft on
trestles, and cast cloths upon them. The
clear light then appeared along the walls,
as men set and distributed waxen torches
all about the hall. Much mirth and glee
rose up therein, about the fire on the hearth,
and in various wise at the supper and after.
Many noble songs they sang, as Christmas
carols and new dance tunes, with all the
mannerly mirth that a man can tell of. And
ever our lovely knight sat beside the lady.
Such seemly cheer she made to the hero,
sought with such slystoleu7 glances to please1
the stalwart one, that the wight was all
amazed, and wroth with himself. But he
would not on account of his breeding re-
prove her, but responded in all courtesy,
howsoever outrageous she might be. When
they had played in the hall as long as their
will lasted, the lord called to bedwards, aud
to the room with a fireplace they passed.

22. And there they drank and talked,
and the lord proposed again to make the
same arrangement for New Year's Eve.
But the knight craved leave to depart on
the morn, for it was nigh at the term that
he must keep. The lord hindered him from
that, persuaded him to linger, and said,
" As I am true man, I pledge my troth
thou shalt reach the green chapel to do thy
tasks, sir, by New Year's light, long be-
fore prime. Therefore lie in thy loft and
take thine ease; and I shall hunt in this
holt nnd keep the covenant — change mer-
chandise with thee when I return hither;
for I have tried thee twice, and faithful I
find thee; now, 'third time, best time.' 8
Think Oh the morrow. Make we merry
while we may, and be joyful; for a man can
catch wffib'flf' whensoever he likes."

This was readily granted and Gawain
stayed. Drink was quickly brought to them,
and to bed they went with lights. Sir Ga-
wain lay and slept full still and soft all
night; the lord, mindful of his hunting, was
dight full early.

* A guess for stollen.

s The line is not clear ; literally, perhaps, " third
time, throw best."


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


21


J 23. After mass he and his men took a
morsel. Merry was the morning. He asks for
his mount, and all the sportsmen who should
accompany him on horse were ready mounted
| on their steeds before the hall gates. Won-
l': drous fair was the field, for. the frost still
. lingorod. The sun rose in a rack of ruddy
: red, and drove all the clouds from the wel-
kin. The hunters uncoupled by a holt side,
and the rocks in the forest rang for the
noise of their horns. Some dogs fell on a
scent where the fox had loitered; followed
it oft obliquely l through the cunning of their
©wiles. A kennet2 cried upon it; the hunts-
man encoxiraged him, and his fellows hast-
ened after, panting thickly. They ran forth
in a rabble on Reynard's very track, and he
hurried before them. Soon they found him;
and when they actually saw him they chased
him fast, baying him full fiercely with a
huge noise. And he trants3 and turns
through many a rough grove; doubles and
. hearkens by hedges full often. At the last
by a little ditch he leaps over a spinny,
and steals out full stilly by a rough rand.4
escaped from the wood lie turns with


J wiles from the hounds' b,ut then he arrived,
ere he knew it, at a^chosonjstnnd, where in
an instant three stout hunters in gray
threatened him at once. He blenched again

L quickly, and bravely started off; with all
.the woe in the world, he turned away to the
wood.

c\ 24. Then was it a pure joy to listen to the
hounds, when all the gathered mute6 got
view of him. The cry they set on his head at
the sight was as if all the resounding cliffs
had clattered down in a heap. Here he was
halloed when the hunters met him, loudly
cried upon with noisy calls; there he was
threatened and often called thief; and ever
the ticklers were at his tail so that he could
not tarry. Oft he was run at when he catad
-»«t, and oft he reeled in again, so wily was
Reynard. And ever he led the bespattered
lord and his troop in this manner among the
hills, now in them, now over, now under,
while the courteous knight at home slept
wholesomely within the comely curtains on
the cold morn.

But the lady for love cared not to sleep
nor to give up the purpose that bode in her
heart; but up she rose quickly and took her


> Word obscure. * small hou

* Unploughed strip by woodside.


ill hound.


« twists.
E pack.


way thither in a gay mantle mo oily reach-
ing to the earth, and furred full fine with
skins of the best. No ornaments of gold on
her head; but only the bright stones set
about her *tressour 6 in clusters of twenty.
With her fair face and her lovely throat
all naked, her breast bare before and be-
hind too, she comes within the chamber
door and closes it after her, throws up a
window and calls on the wight, and smartly
thus stirred him with her fair cheery words.
" Ah man, how can you sleep, this morning
is so clear ! " Though he was drowsing
deep, yet could he hear her.

25. In the dreary depths of a dream the
noble was sunk, like a man suffering from
many sad thougbte. how destiny should
dight 1dm7 his wetra at the green chapel
that day when he met the man, and had to
abide his buffet without more debate. But
whenAhe h«cL£u£l.y recovered his wits, lie
emerged from his dreams and answered
with haste. The lovely lady came laughing
sweetly, stooped over his fair face and
courteously kissed him. He welcomed her
worthily with choice cheer. To see her so
glorious, and so gaily attired, so faultless
of feature, and so lovely of colour, warmed
his heart with welling joy. With smooth
and gracious smiling they straightway
waxed mirthful. All was bliss and good
cheer that passed between them. They ex-
changed goodly words; much happiness they
felt, and great was the peril between them,
unless Mary thought of her knight.

26. For that beauteous princess con-
strained him so sorely, and tho dftngo*
pressed him so nigh./ that of necessity it
behooved him either accept her love or
rudely refuse it. He thought much of his
courtesy, lest he should prove a clown; and
more on his villainy if he should do sin, and
be traitor to the hero who owned the castle.
" God shield ! " quoth the warrior, " tbat
shall not befall!" With a little love-dalli-
ance he laid aside all the pointed speeches
that sprang from her mouth.

Quoth the lady to the hero: "Ye deserve
blame if ye love not her who is so near
you, — of all creatures in the world most
wounded in heart; — unless indeed ye have
a sweetheart, a dearer being, that pleases
you better, and ye have plighted faith so

• headdress, nnul.

' Words in italics supplied by Morris.


1170


22


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


firmly to that gentle one that ye care not
to loosen it. — Verily now that is what I
believe, and I pray you that you tell me
truly; for all the loves in the world deny
not the truth with guile."

"By St. John!" said the knight, and
courteously he smiled, " I have none, and
none will I have,^ CM.- ^t-^J^f^- •

27. " That is the worst of all ! " quoth
the lady. " I am answered indeed, to my
sorrow. Kiss me now comely and I shall
go hence. I can only mourn in the world as
a maid that loved much."

Sighing she stooped down and kissed him
seemly; and then she severed from him, and
said as she stood, " Now, dear, at this de-
parting do me this comfort; give me some-
what of thy gift, thy glove if it might be,
that I may think on thee, sir, to lessen my
mourning."

"Now in truth," quoth that man, "I
would I had here for thy love, the dearest
thing that I wield; for truly ye have right
oft in reason deserved a greater reward
than I could reckon. But to exchange with
you love-tokens, that would profit but little.
It is not for your honor to have at this time
a glove of Ga wain's gift for a keepsake;
and I am here on an errand in lands un-
couth, and have no men with mails full of
precious things for remembrances at this
moment ; and that mislikes me, lady. But
every man must act according to his cir-
cumstances, and none should take it ill or
repine."

"Now, courteous and honourable one,"
quoth that lovesome lady, " though I shall
have nothing of yours, yet shall ye have of
mine."

28. She reached him a rich ring of red
gold work with a gleaming stone standing
aloft, that shed blushing beams like the
bright sun; know ye well it was worth
wealth full huge. But the man refused it,
and readily he said: "I desire no great
gifts, my gay one, at this time. I have
nauglit to give you, and naught will I take."

She offered it him full pressinglv, and
he refused her offer, and swore swiftly on
his sooth that he would not take it. And
she sorrowed that he refused, and said
thereafter, "If ye refuse my ring, since it
seems too rich, and ye would not be so highly
beholden to me, I shall give you my girdje,
that will enrich- -yen; less.? .'u^a^Tc 4/0"^ •

V


She lightly caught a lace that went about
her sides, knit upon her kirtle under the !S
bright mantle. It was adorned with green
silk, and ornamented with gold, broidered
all around, decked with fringes;1 and that
she offered to the hero, and gaily besought
that, though it were unworthy, he would
take it. And he denied that he would in
any wise take either gold or present ere
God sent him grace to achieve the chance
that he had chosen there. " And therefore,
I pray you, be not displeased, and give over ^
your attempt; for I intend never to consent.
I am dearly beholden to you because of
your entertainment; and ever in hot and in
cold I will be your true servant."
5^291 " iSoWtrefuseWe} this silk," said the/%£
lady then, "because itts simple in itself, ** A.
it certainly seems to be? Lo! little it is,
and less it is worth; but whoso knew the
virtues that are knit therein, he would es-
teem it at a greater price peradventure;
for whatsoever man is girt with this green
lace, while he has it fittingly wrapped
about him, there is no warrior under heaven
than can wound him; for he could not be
slain by any device in the world."

Then the knight paused, and it came to
his heart that it would be a jewel for the
peril that awaited him when he arrived at
the chapel to undergo his ordeal. Could he
manage to be unslain, that were a noble de-
vice. Then he indulged her entreaties and
suffered her to speak ; a-.id she pressed the
belt on him and offered it to him eagerly.
And he accepted it, and she gave it him with
a good will, and besought him for her sake
never to discover it, but to conceal it loy-
ally from her lord. The man agreed that
never person should know it indeed but
they twain. Full oft he thanked her, right
glad in heart and thought. By that she had
kissed the stout knight three times.

30. Then she takes her leave and leaves -
him there, for more entertainment she could
not get from that man. When she was gone
Sir Gawain bestirs himself, rises and dresses
in noble array. He lays up the love-lace the
lady had given him, hides it full cleverly
where he can find it again. Then promptly
he takes his way to the chapel ; quietly ap-
proaches to the priest and prays him there

> Reading frynges for MS. fyngres ; or we may keep
the text and translate, "wrought, embroidered, by
flugers."


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


that he would elevate his life, and teach
him better how his soul should be saved
when he should go hence. Then he shrives
him cleanly and shows his misdeeds, both
the more and the less, beseeches mercy, and
begs for absolution. And the priest assoils
him thoroughly and set him as clean as if
doomsday had been due on the morrow.
And afterwards Gawain makes more mirth
among the fair ladies that day with comely
carols and all kinds of joy than ever he did
before, till the dark night. Everyone had
pleasure of him there, and said indeed that
he had never been so merry since he came
hither.

3 31. Now let him linger in that place,
where may love betide him. The lord is
still in the field leading his men. He has
overtaken this fox tint he followed so long,
as he sprinted over a spinny to spy the ras-
cal, where he heard the hounds that has-
tened fast after him. Reynard came run-
ning through a rough grove, and all the
rabble in a rout right at his heels. The man
was ware of the game, and warily abode;
pullod out his bright brand and struck at
the beast; and he dodged from the sharp
weapon and would have turned; but a dog
seized him ere he could, and right before
the horse's feet they all fell on him and
worried tliis wily one with a great noise.
The lord lighted quickly, and caught him
forthwith; pulled him full hastily out of
the dogs' mouths, and holding him high over
his head, halloed fast; and there many fierce
hounds hayed him. Hunters hied them thith-
er with horns full many, ever blowing the

f recheat1 till they saw the hero. As soon as
HisTnoble company was come, all that bare
bus;le bl"W at once, and all the others that
had no horns halloed. It was the merri-
est mute2 that ever men heard — the rich
riot tint there was raised for Reynard's
soul. They rewarded the hounds there,
stroked them and rubbed their heads; and
afterwards they took Reynard and turned
off his coat.

J.TL 32. And then they hastened home, for it
was nigh night, blowing full stoutly in their
great horns. The lord alighted at last at
his dear home, found fire on the floor, and
the hero beside it, Sir Gawain the good,
that glad was withal among the ladies; in

1 The note that recalls all the dogs.
* Noise 'of the whole band.


their love he had much joy. He wore a
mantle of blue that reached to the earth;
his surcoat, that was softly furred, became
him well; and his hood of the same hung
on his shoulder. Trimmed all about with
fine fur were both. He met this good man /^ 3 *
in the middle of the floor, and all joyfully
he greeted him, and goodly he said : " Now
I shall fulfill our covenant, that we have
just made, where no drink was spared."
Then he embraces the knight and kisses
him thrice with as much gusto and as sober-
ly as he could give them.

" By Christ ! " quoth the other knight,
" ye get much bliss in the profits of this /^3fr
business — if ye drive good bargains ! "

" Of the bargain, no matter," quoth curt-
ly that other, " so long as the debts that I
owed are properly paid."

"Mary!" quoth the other man, "my
offering is the worse, for I have hunted all
this day, and naught have I got but this
foul fox-fell; the fiend have the good ones!
And that is full poor to pay for such fine
things as ye have given me here, three such
rare kisses."

"It is enough," quoth Sir Gawain; "I
thank you, by the rood." And as they stood
there the lord told him how the fox was
slain.

33. With mirth and minstrelsy, with I */ 5" 2.
meats at their will, they made as merry as
any men could. With laughing of ladies,
with merry jests, Gawain and the good uiau
were both as glad as if the court were mad,
or else drunk. Both the man and his retinue
made many jokes till the season arrived
when they must sever; the men had to go
to their beds at last. Then humbly this
gentle man takes his leave of the lord first;
and fairly he thanks him. " For such a joy-
ous sojourn as I have had here, for the
honor you have shown me at this high feast,
the high king reward you ! I can only give
you myself to be one of your men, if that
pleases you. For I must needs, as ye know,
proceed, tomorrow, if ye will grant me
some man to show, as yon promised, the
way to the green chapel, as God will suffer
me to take on New Year's day the doom of
my fate."

" In good faith," quoth the good man,
" with a good will ! All that ever I prom- /
ised you, I will perform." Therewith he '
assigns a servant to set him in the way, and


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


conduct him by the downs, that he should
without hesitation travel through the forest
and fare at the best in the woods. The lord
• thanked Gawain for the worship he had
been willing to show him. Then the knight
took his leave of the beautiful ladies.

34. With care and with kissing he speaks
to them, and many earnest thanks he
presses upon them. And they returned him
the same again promptly; they entrusted
him to Christ with sighings full sad. After-
wards he graciously departs from the house-
hold; each man that he met he thanked him
for his service and his solace, and the vari-
ous pains with which they had been busy to
serve him. And each man was as sad to
sever from him there as if they had ever
dwelt worthily with that hero. Then with
people and with light he was led to his
chamber and blithely brought to bed to be
at his rest. Whether he slept-soundly I dare
not say, for he had much to think of on the
morrow if he would. Let him lie there; he
was near what he sought. If ye will be still
a while I shall tell you how they fared.


YTTE THE FOURTH ***


1. Now nlglis(\tne New Year, ~ahd the
night passes. Thexilayfoi voo-ee-ta the darkj
as God bids ; but outside wild storms wak-
ened in the world; clouds cast the cold
keenly to the earth ; with discomfort enough
to the naked, the snow from the north flew
sharply, and nipped the game. The bluster-
ing wind blew from the heights, and drove
each dale full of great drifts. The man who
lay in his bed heard it right well; though
he locks his lids, full little he sleeps. By
each cock that crew he knew well the hour.
Promptly he leaped up ere the day sprang,
for there was the light of a lamp that
gleamed in his chamber. He called to his
chamberlain, who quickly answered him,
and bade him bring his bnrnie and saddle
his horse. The chamberlain gets up and
fetches him his weeds, and arrays Sir
Gawain in proper fashion. First he dressed
him in his clothes to keep out the cold, and
then he put on the rest of his harness, that
had been well kept, both mail and plate,
and brightly polished. The rings of his rich
bnrnie had been rocked from the rust,1 and
all was fresh as at first; and Gawain was
i That is, In a barrel of Band.


fain to give thanks for it. The attendant
had wiped each piece well and often. Then
the noblest man betwixt here and Greece
bade his steed be brought.

2. Meanwhile, he threw upon himself his •
finest weeds ; his surcoat with its *eg*«-»,-n
cftitoe of excellent work, virtuous stones set
upon velvet, all wrought about and bound
with embroidered seams, and fairly furred
withiu with rare skins. Yet left he not the
lace, the lady's gift, — that forgot not
Gawain for his own good. When he had
belted his brand upon his broad haunches,
he dressed his love-token double about him,
the knight swathed sweetly about his waist
the girdle of green silk, which became him
well, upon the royal red cloth that was fair to
see. But this hero wore not the girdle for
its wealth, for pride of the pendants, though
they were polished, and though the glitter-
ing gold gleamed on the ends; but to save
himself when it behoved him to suffer, to
await his doom without resistance, with no
brand or knife to defend him. By this the
good man is ready and goes out quickly.
Full often he thanks the distinguished com-
pany.

3. Gringolet the huge and strong was2<K
ready, who had been kept skilfully iu the
safest manner. The proud horse in his
splendid condition longed for spurring.
The hero approached him, noticed his coat,
and said soberly, and by his sooth swore —

" Here, in this castle, is a company that are
mindful of courtesy. The man who main-
tains them, joy may he have; the dear lady,
love betide her in this life, since they for
charity cherish a guest and uphold honor in
their hand. May the Being reward them
who holds the heaven on high — and also
you all. And if I might live any longer in
the world I should give you some reward if
I could." Then he stepped into stirrup and
strode aloft. His servant offered him his
shield; he put it on his shoulder. He spurred
Gringolet with his gilt heels, and the steed
jumped on the stone; no longer he stood
still, but pranced. Gawain's -swvant, who
bore his lance and helm, was by then on the
horse. "This castle I entrust to Christ;
may he give it aye good chance ! "

4. The bridge was let down, and the broad -
gntes unbarred and borne open on both
sides. The hero crossed himself quickly and
passed the boards, praised the porter, who


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


knelt before him giving good day and pray-
ing God that he save Gawaiii. And so he
went on his way with his one man that
should teach him how to find that dismal
place where he should receive the rueful
blow. They rode by banks where boughs
are bare; they climbed by cliffs where the
cold clings; the sky was upheld, but it was
ugly beneath; mist hung on the moor and
melted on the mount; each hill had a hat, a
huge mist-cloak. Brooks boiled and broke
from the banks about, shattering sheer on
their shores where they showered down.
Dreary was the way, where they should
travel by the wood, till soon came the sea-
son when the sun rises at that time. They
were on a hill full high, the white snow
about them, when the man that rode beside
him bade his master abide.

"f / 5. "I have brought you hither, sir, at
this time ; and now ye are not far from that
famous spot that ye have asked and in-
quired so specially after. But I shall say to
you forsooth, since I know you, and ye are
a man that I love well, if ye would work
by my wit ye should be the better for it. The
place that ye press to is held full perilous.
There dwells in that waste a wight the
worst upon earth; for he is stiff and stern
and loves to strike ; and greater he is than
any man in the world, and his body bigger
than the four best that are in Arthur's
house, and bigger than Hector or any other.
/•He mnintaino that adventure at the green~

-chapel. There passes by that place none so
proud in arms but he dins him to death
with dint of his hand. For he is a man with-
out measure and uses no mercy; for be it
churl or chaplain that rides by the chapel,
monk or mass-priest, or any man else, he
likes as well to kill him as to go alive him-
self. Therefore I tell ye as truly as ye sit
in the saddle, come ye there ye shall be
killed — trust me well — though ye had
twenty lives to spend. He has dwelt here
full long and caused much strife in the
laud. Against his sore dints ye cannot de-
fend yourself.

fc 6. " Therefore, good Sir Gawain, let the
fellow alone, and go away some other road,
for God's sake. Repair to some other coun-
try, where Christ may speed you; and I
shall hie me home again, and promise you
further — which I will swear by God and
all his good saints, so help me God and the


and oaths enough — that I will
loyally conceal you, and never tell tale that
ever ye fled for any man that I know of."

"Gramercy," quoth Gawain. And stetaly-
he added. " Well worth thee, man, who
wishes my good; and I well believe thou
wouldst loyally conceal me. But if thou
kept promise never so faithfully, and I gave
up here, sought for fear to fly as you ad-
vise, I were a knight coward ; I could not be
excused. But I will go to the chapel what-
ever chance may fall, and talk with that
same man the tale that I like, be it good
or evil, as it pleases fate to have it. Though
he be a stern champion to cope with, and *
armed with a club, full well can God man- {
age to save his servants."

7. " Mary ! " quoth that other man,
" now thou sayest as much as that thou wilt
take upon thyself thine own destruction; if
it pleases thee to lose thy life, I shall not
let nor hinder thee. Have here thy helm
on thy head, thy spear in thy hand; and ride
down this same lana. by yon rock-side till
thou be brought to the bottom of the rugged
valley; then look a little up the grassy slope
on thy left hand, and thou shalt see in that
ravine the chapel itself, and the burly man
^on the fieldywho keeps it. Now farewell in
God's name, Gawain the noble, for all the
gold in the world I would not go with thee
nor bear thee fellowship through this wood
a foot further."

At that the man turned his bridle in the
wood, hit the horse with the heels as hard
as he could; leaped over the land, and left
the knight there all alone.

"By God's self," quoth Gawain, " I will
neither grieve nor groan. To God's will I
am full obedient, and to him I have en-
trusted myself."

8. Then he spurs Gringolet and follows
the path ; pushes in by a hollow beside a
thicket; rides through the rough slope right
to the dale; and then he looked about him,
and wild it seemed to him. He saw no sign
of dwelling anywhere around, but on both
sides high steep banks, and rough hunched
crags with projecting stones; the shadows
of . tl»^ -cliffs-seemed to him tffrrit»l«. Then
he paused and held back his horse, and oft
changed his cheer while seeking the chapel.
He saw none such on any side, and strange
it seemed to him. But soon, a little dis-
tance off on a grassy spot he descried a


,

\ T-VW-*


26


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


mound as it were, a smooth hill by the bank

of the stream near a ford of the flood that

ran there. The burn bubbled there as if it

were boiling. The knight urges his steed,

and comes to the hill; lights nimbly down,

-fie^" and ties the rein and his rich toidle to a

U*^'tree by a rough branch; then he turns to

the hill and walks about it, debating with

himself what it might be. It had a hole at

the end and on either side, and was over-

- grown with grass in slumps everywhere,

and was all hollow within — nothing but an

. ifsNold cave or a crevice of an old crag. He

could not understand it at all. " Alas, Lord,"

quoth the gentle knight, " can this be the

green chapel ? Here about midnight the

devil might tell his matins."

V \ % *] 9. " Now," quoth Gawain, " it certainly is
mysterious here; this oratory is ugly, over-
grown with herbs. Well it beseems the
wight clad in green here to do his devotions
in the devil's wise. Now I feel in my five
^ wits it is the fiend that has made this bar-
•~ j^jy^- )gain with me, to destroy me here. This is
a chapel of mischance; may ill fortune be-
tide it ! It is the cursedest kirk that ever I
came in ! "

With high helm on his head, his lance in
his hand, he strides up to .the rock of the
rude dwelling. Then he heard from that
high hill, in a rough cave, on a bank beyond
the brook, a marvellously savage noise. Lo,
the cliff clattered as though it would split,
as if one were grinding a scythe on a grind-
stone. It whirred and screeched like water
at a mill; it rushed and rang that it was
ruth to hear.

" By God," quoth Gawain then, " that
gear, I fancy, is being prepared to give me
a good reception. Yet though I must lose
my life, fear shall never make me change
colour."

10. Then the knight called full high:
" Who «UwUe in this place to keep covenant
with me ? For now the good Gawain is
passing right here. If any wight wishes
ought, let him come hither fast, now or
never, to fulfill his need ! "

" Abide ! " quoth one on the bank over
his head. " Thou shalt have in all haste
that which I promised thee once."

Yet he kept on with that noise sharply for
a while, turning and whetting, ere he would
come down. And then he annsged by a crag
and came from a hole, whirling out of a


dark place with a fell weapon — a Danish
axe new dight, to give the blow with. It
had fast to the helve a great head, sharp-
ened on the stone. Four feet long was the
weapon — no less, by that lace that gleamed
full bright. And the man in the green was I
arrayed as before — both his skin and his
limbs, locks, and beard; save that on foot
he Btsidos fairly on the earth. He set the >
steel shaft to the stone and stalked beside .^
it. When he came to the water, where he
did not wish to wade, he hopped over on
his axe, and fiercely, advanced, with sav-'1-
age ferocity pacing the broad snow-covered
glade. Sir Gawain met the knight and
bowed to him, not at all low. The other
said, " Now, sweet sir, in a covenant a man
can trust thee."

11. " Gawain," quoth the green warrior,^
" may God preserve thee. Indeed thou art
welcome, hero, to my place; and thou hast
timed thy travel as a true man should. And
thou knowest the covenants made between
us; at this time twelve month, thoujookestjlt
what fell/to thee, — and I^t this New Year
was to repay you-Mra$Ssi»3%r. And now we
are in this valley entirely alone ; here are
no men to part us, however we may behave.
Have thy helm off thy head, and have here
thy pay. Make no more debate than I of-
fered thee then, when thou whipped off my
head at one blow."

"Nay," quoth Gawain, "by God that
lent me life, I shall grudge thee not a whit^<
whatever misfortune falls. But arrange thee
for thy one stroke, and I shall stand still
and hinder thee not the least from doing
the work as you like."

He bent the neck and bowed down, show-
ing the flesh all bare ; and behaved as if he
cared not. For no dread would he flinch.

12. Then the man in the green got ready *i~
quickly, gathered up his grim tool to smite
Gawain. With all the might in his body he
bare it aloft, and aimed a savage blow as
though he wished to kill him. Had it driven
down as earnestly as he feinted, the ever
doughty one would have been dead of his
dint. But Gawain glanced to-_one-si4e en >
the gisarml as it came gliding down to slay
him there in the glade, and shrank a little
with the shoulders from the sharp iron.
The other warrior with a quick motion
withheld the bright weapon, and then he
reproved the prince with many proud words.

H


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


27


"Thou art not Gawain," said the man,
" who is held so good, who never flinched
,^ for any ar-my by hill nor by vale ; and now
thou fleest for fear before thou feelest any
harm. Such cowardice I never heard of
that knight. I neither winced, nor fled, sir.
when thou didst strike, nor med any w*e£s
in King Arthur's house. My head flew to
my foot, and yet I never budged; and thou,
ere any harm taken, art fearful in heart.
Wherefore the better man I ought to be
called for it."

" I flinched once," quoth Gawain, " and
will do so no more. Yet if my head should
fall on the stones, I cannot restore it.
v- 13. " But make ready, sir, by thy faith,
and bring me to the point. Deal to me my
destiny, and do it promptly; for I shall
stand thee a stroke, and not start again till
thine axe has hit me — have here my troth."

" Have at thee then ! " quoth the other,
•-; and heaves it aloft, and BJaa£>as savagely
as if he were mad. He strikes at him
mightily, but touches the man not; for he
withheld his hand cleverly ere it could hurt.
Gawain awaits it properly and flinches with
no member, but stands still as a stone, or a
stump that is twisted into the rocky ground
with a hundred roots.

Then merrily spoke the man in the green:
"So, now thou hast thy heart whole it be-
hoves me to hit. Now keep back the fine
hood that Arthur gave thee, and see if thou
canst keep thy neck whole from this stroke."

Said Gawain in great nnger: " Why, thrash
on, thou wild man ! Thou threatenest too
long. I guess that thine own heart is timid! "

"Forsooth," quoth the other warrior,

" thou speakest so fiercely that I will not

delay thine errand a bit longer." Then he

'takes his -strirte to strike and knits both

brow and lip. No wonder Gawain mislikes

it and gives up all thought of escape.

q 14. Lightly he lifts his axe and lets the

« edge come down fowriyon the bare neck.

lYet though he smote rudely, it hurt him but

little; only cut him on one side so that it

severed the skin. The sharp bit reached the

flesh through the fair fat, so that the bright

blood shot over his shoulders to the earth.

And when the hero saw the blood glint on

the snow, he leaped forth/ more than a

spear's length, eagerly seized his helm, cast

it on his head, threw his shoulders under

his fair shield, pulled out a bright sword


and fiercely spoke. Never in this world
since he was born of his mother was he half


" Cease, sir, of thy blow ! Offer me no
more. I have without strife taken a stroke
in this place; and if thou givest me more, I
shall promptly repay and yield q»iuii4y
again, trust thou that! Only one stroke falls
to me here. The covenant which we made
in Arthur's halls provided just that; and
therefore, courteous sir, now hold ! "

15. The warrior turned from him and
rested on his axe. He set the shaft on the
ground, leaned on the head, and beheld
how the douglity hero stood his ground
grimly, fully armed and devoid of fear. In
his heart it pleased him. Then with a great
voice, and a huge laugh, he spoke merrily
to the hero: "Bold sir, in this place be not
so savage. Nobody has here unmannerly
mishandled thee, nor done but according to
covenant made at the king's court. I prom-
ised thee a stroke and thou hast it; hold
thee well paid. I release thee of the rem-
nant, of all other rights. If I had been skil-
ful peradventure I could have given you a
worse buffet. First I menaced you merrily
with a pure feint, and gave thee no blow;
which was but justice, considering the cov-
enant which we made on the first night, and
which thou held with me trustily; for truly
all the gain thou gave me as a good man
should. The second feint this morning,
sir, I proffered thee, because thou didst kiss
my fair wife and didst hand the kisses over
to me ; for these two occasions I gave thee
here but two bare feints without harm. A
true man truly restores; such an one need
dread no harm. At the third time thou
didst fail ; and so take thee that tap.

16. "For it is my weed that thou wear-
est, that same woven girdle. Mine own
wife gave it thee, I know well, forsooth.
Now know I well thy kisses, and thy vir-
tues also. And as for the wooing of my
wife, I managed it myself. I sent her to
try thee, and truly it seems to me thou art
the most faultless hero that ever went on
-£uyj. As a pearl is of greater price than
white peas, so is Gawain, in good faith,
compared with other gay knights. But in
this case, sir, you lacked a little, and loy-
alty failed you. But that was for no amor- "U
pus work, nor wooing either, but because

ye loved your life, — the less I blame you."


28


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


That other brave man stood a great while
in a study; so stricken was he for grief that
he groaned within. All the blood of his
breast rushed to his face; and he shrank for
shame when the warrior talked. This was
the first word that the man spoke — "Cursed
oowardiee and covetousness both! In you
is villainy and vice, that destroy virtue."
Then he caught at the knot and loosed the
fastening ; fiercely reached the belt to the
warrior himself. "Lo! there is the decep-
tion, foul may it fall! For fear of thy knock
| cowardice taught me to make a truce with
| covetousness, to forsake my nature, which
' is generosity and loyalty, that belong to
knights. Now am I faulty and false, and a
pnwnjd JiaYft BVPT: been. ±rom treachery
and untruth ever come sorrow and care.
Here I confess to you, knight, that my con-
duct is all faulty. Let me \^Hit j^ase_jrou
now, and after I shall beware.""

17. Then the other laughed and said
courteously: " I hold it qmter emedied , the
harm that I had. Thou hast made a clean
confession, acknowledging all thy misde&5§,
an6T hast received the-oenance openly from
the point. of niy edge. I hold thee quit of
that plight, and purified as clean as if thou
hadst never forfeited since tboti was first
born. And I give thee, sir, the girdle that
| is gold hemmed. Since it is green, as is
I my gown« Sir Gawain, ye may think upon
this same adventure where thou goest forth
among great princes; and this shall be a
genuine token among chivalrous knights of
the adventure of the green chapel, and ye
shall come again this New Year to my
dwelling, and we shall revel the remnant
of this rich feast full well." The lord
pressed the invitation and said, " With my
wife, who was your great enemy, I think
we shall reconcile you."

>-j 18. "Nay, forsooth," quoth the hero;
and seizing his helm, he took it off quickly
thanked the warrior. " I have had a
good visit, bliss betide you; and may He
pay you well who directs all merciesi. Com-
mend me to that courteous one, your comely
mate ; both the one and the other, my hon-
oured ladies, who have thus with their craft
quaintly beguiled their knight. But it is
no wonder that a fool should rave, and
through wiles of women be won to sorrow.
For so was Adam beguiled by one, and
Solomon by many, indeed ; and Samson also,

f^

AW^~\


i . • ,


Delilah dealt him his weij?d« and David
thereafter was deceived by Bethsheba, who
suffered much sorrow. Since these men
were plagued by their wiles, it were a huge
gain to love them well and believe them
not — if a person but could ; for these men
were of old the best, and the most fortu-
nate, excellent above all others under the
heavens; and all they were beguiled by
women whom they had to do with.1 If I be
now deceived, meseems I might be ex-
cused.

19. "But your girdle," quoth Gawain,! '+
" God reward you for it ! That will I keep
with good will; not for the precious gold,
nor the anmiter nor the silk, nor the *'iAo
pendants, for its wealth nor for its beauty
nor for its fine work; bjit in sign of my
fault I shall behold it oft; WEeii I ride in
renown I shall lament to myself the fault
and the deceit of the crabbed flesh, how
tender it is to catch stains of filth; and
thus when pride shall prick me for prowess
of arms, a look on this love-lace shall mod-
erate my heart. But one thing I would
pray you — may it displease you not —
since ye are lord of the land yonder where

I have stayed worshipf ully with you —
may the Being who upholds the heaven
and sits on high repay you for it I — how
name ye your right name ? and then no
more."

" That shall I tell thee truly," quoth the
other then. " Ber^lak de Hautdesert I am ' *J
called in this land through the might of
Morgen la Fay, who dwells in my house.
She lias acquired deep learning, hard-won

skill, many of the masteries , of Merlin i —

P i i J ,• jF SiT • ' ' • • >1 v -. -,

tor she has at times dealt in rare inagto y

with that renowned clerk, who knows all
your knights at home. Morgan the Goddess
is therefore her name; no_person is so
haughty but she can tame him.

20. " She sent me in this wise to your rich - : f
hall to assay its pride and try if it were |
true that circulates about the great renown
of the Round Table. She prepared for me
this wonder to take away your wits, to have
grieved Guinevere and caused her to die
through fright of that same HW«, that
ghostly speaker with his head in his hand
before the high table. That is she, the
ancient lady at home. She is even thine
aunt, Arthur's half-sister, the daughter of

i Ibis passage is none too clear.


SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT


29


that Duchess of Tintagel upon whom dear
Uther afterwards begot Arthur, that is now
king. Therefore, I beg you, sir, to come to
thine aunt; make merry in my house ; my
people love thee, and I like thee as well, sir,
by my faith as I do any man under God
for thy great truth."

But he answered him nay, he would in
no wise. They embraced and kissed, each
entrusted other to the Prince of Paradise,
and they parted right there in the cold. Ga-
wain on horse full fair rides boldly to the
king's court, and the knight all in green
whithersoever he would.
9, 21. Wild wavs in the world Gawain now
rides on Gringolet, he who had- got the
boon of his life. Oft he harboured in houses,
and oft without; and many an adventure in
vale he had, and won oft; but that I care
not at this time to mention in my tale. The
hurt was whole that he had got in his neck;
and he bare the glistening belt about him,
crossed obliquely like a baldric, the lace
fastened under his left arm with a knot, in
token that he was taken in a fault. And thus
he comes to the court, the knight all sound.
There wakened joy in that dwelling when
0 the great ones knew that good Gawain had
come; joyous it seemed to them. The king
kisses the knight, and the queen also; and
afterwards many a sure knight, who sought
to embrace him and asked him of his jour-
ney. And wondrously he tells it, confess-
ing all the trials that he had, the adventure
of the chapel, the behavior of the knight,
the love of the lady — and, at the last, the
lace. He showed them the nick in his neck


that he caught at the lord's hands for his
irplojajty. He grieved when he had to tell
it; he groaned for sorrow, and the blood
rushed to his face for shame when he de-
clared it.

22. "Lo! lord," quoth the hero, as he ?
handled the lace, " this that I bear in my
neck is the badge of this blame. This is the .
evil_and the loss that I have got from the vM^r>
cowardice and covetousness that I showed 0
there. This is the token of untruth that I
am taken in, and I must needs wear it while
I may last; foregone may hide his shame
without mishapSJor where it once is in-
curred, depart will it never."

The king and all the court comfort the
knight. They .laugh loud at his tele, and
lovingly agree that Tlie lords and ladies
that belong to the Table, each knight of
the brotherhood, should have a baldric, an
oblique band about him of a bright green,
and wear that for the sake of the hero.
And that emblem was accorded the renown
of the Round Table, and he was ever after
honoured that had it.

As it is told in the best book of romance,
thus in Arthur's day this adventure betid,
which the Bjnatus books bear witness of.
After Brutus the bold hero first came
hither, when the siege and the assault had
ceased at Troy, many adventures of this
sort happened. Now may He that bore the
crown of thorns bring us to bis bliss.
AMEN.


HONY SOIT QUI MAL PENCE.
