================================================================================
The Attic Nights of Aulus Gellius, Vol. III (Books 14-20)
Aulus Gellius | With an English translation by John C. Rolfe (Loeb Classical Library, 1927)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Internet Archive: Loeb Classical Library, Aulus Gellius vol. 3 (1927)
Source URL: https://archive.org/details/atticnightsofaul0003unse
Rights: Public Domain (U.S.)
Staged: 2026-10-09 | Tower of Babel Library, Batch 09a (classical-literature lane)
================================================================================

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY


EDITED BY
T. E. PAGE, rirr.».
E. CAPPS, pu.p., up. W. H. D. ROUSE, rirr.».


- THE ATTIC NIGHTS
OF AULUS GELLIUS


E - Lr !
D Mid mt oF
E o OM Fy. i. 4 o
» f Unc AA


T€.
FEM


T
x
rS
-
us
*


THE ATTIC NIGHTS
OF AULUS GELLIUS


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
JOHN C. ROLFE, Pu.D., Lrrr.D.


UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA


IN THREE VOLUMES
II


LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN
NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS
MOMXXVII


E


t went e xd NN cu
Havel LU, wl PEU C JA
= GA, Tot e dtd ’ ,


^w
LOL
hd
*


s


iiM Ant
Printed in


V LVUUEUTM As
Bae sib YUN dq X E


CONTENTS


PAGE
THE ATTIO NIGHTS—

CHAPTER HEADINGS, BOOKS XIV-XX. . . . . . Vil
BOOK Vie UE E ted oM cura ms, io. cH) S ana YR. s l
DOORS UU REM IR M I I AN CE M CMM DI
BOOESCUIM B ge SO Mo po. bu tero e necs qat 129
POGINOCVII NR M cupo su cd S 0, OD
POOLE UTI Sy ee TODAS POPs wipe crragt
iux SUS ey eh ee a at OR ee
DOE XOSK A he oe tee ee en ng ea)
TRDE OREN ANIESI NOS D IR creda wey. tira er e 405
GREEK INDEX OF NAMES ..... « 5... . 488
TNI ESSOBSUBIROTS Sues ME M Le d9L


l


DECIMI


CAPITULA LIBRI QUARTI


PAGINA


I. Dissertatio Favorini philosophi adversus eos qui
Chaldaei appellantur, et ex coetu motibusque side-
rum et stellarum fata hominum dicturos pollicentur


IL Quem in modum disseruerit Favorinus consultus a
mesuperoiBoioiudigdi ka. ta MN


III. An aemuli offensique inter sese fuerint Xenophon
et Plato. Reiter n . Yee

IV. Quod apte Chrysippus et graphice imaginem Ius
titiae modulis coloribusque verborum depinxit .


. . .


V. Lis atque contentio grammaticorum Romae inlus-
trium enarrata, super casu vocativo vocabuli quod
est ‘‘egregius " LS VERDE, fon DES

VI. Cuimodi sint quae speciem doctrinarum habeant,
sed neque delectent neque utilia sint ; atque inibi


de vocabulis singularum urbium regionumque in-
mutatis


VIL Quod M. Varro Cn. Pompeio, consuli primum
designato, commentarium dedit, quem appellavit
ipse Eicaywyixdv, de officio senatus habendi


VIII. Quaesitum esse dissensumque an praefectus La-
tinarum causa creatus ius senatus convocandi con-
sulendique habeat "


CAPITULA LIBRI QUINTI DECIMI


I. Quod in Quinti Claudii 4nnalibus scriptum est lignum
alumine oblitum non ardere see


vi


2


=


32


38


58


—— Qe


CHAPTER HEADINGS OF
BOOK XIV


I. A discourse of the philosopher Favorinus directed
against those who are called Chaldaeans, and who
profess to tell men's fortuues from the conjunction
and movements of the stars and constellations .


IL How Favorinus discoursed when I consulted him
about the duty ofa judge. . . =. -


III. Whether Plato and Xenophon were rivals and not
on good terms with each other . . .


IV. That Chrysippus skilfully and vividly described
the likeness of Justice in melodious and picturesque
language us Sess nuts betta


V. The strife and contention of two eminent gram-
marians at Rome as to the vocative case of egregius


VI. Of certain things which have the appearance of
‘learning, but are neither entertaining nor useful ;
and also of changes in the names of several cities
andsrecions yews wae XD Fr eo =

VIL That Marcus Varro presented Gnaeus Pompeius,
when he was consul-elect for the first time, with a
commentary, which Varro himself called Eioayw-
yucós, on the method of conducting meetings of the
Sonabom P NC yo ues e cua tr T eli p Soll

VIII. Inquiry and difference of opinion as to whether
the praefect appointed for the Latin Festival has


the right of convening and consulting the senate


BOOK XV


I. That itis written in the Annals of Quintus Claudius
that wood smeared with alum does not burn


PAGE


43


47


vii


CAPITULA


PAGINA


IL Quod Plato, in libris quos De Legibus composuit,
largiores laetioresque in conviviis invitatiunculas
vini non inutiles esse existimavit . . . . . .


III. Quid M. Cicero de particula ista senserit scripserit-
que quae praeposita est verbis ‘‘aufugio” et “au
fero"; et an in verbo “autumo” eadem istaec
praepositio esse videri debeat . . . . . . .


IV. Historia de Ventidio Basso, ignobili homine, quem
primum de Parthis triumphasse memoriae traditum
8b... seca] Gd fes lites ity terae Pech sd is hte EFE


V. Verbum ‘‘profligo” a plerisque dici inproprie in-
scieque. 4 c 2. an, uu Sai m a eUP EE CENE


VI. In libro M. Ciceronis De Gloria secundo manifestum
erratum, in ea parte in qua scriptum est super
Hectorelet Aiace/ M E DN "NT


VIL Observatum esse in senibus quod annum fere
aetatis tertium et sexagesimum agant aut laboribus
aut interitu aut clade aliqua insignitum ; atque inibi
super eadem observatione exemplum adpositum
epistulae divi Augusti ad Gaium filium . . . .


VIII. Locus ex oratione Favoni, veteris oratoris, de
cenarum atque luxuriae obprobratione, qua usus est
cum legem Liciniam de sumptu minuendo suasit.


IX. Quod Caecilius poeta ** frontem ? genere virili non
poetice, sed cum probatione et cum analogia appel-
lavit: so edet urne ghee ie EE E

X. De voluntario et admirando interitu virginum
Milesiarum . ,


. . . . . . . . . .


XI. Verba senatusconsulti de exigendis urbe Roma
philosophis 3 item verba edicti censorum, quo in-
probati et coerciti sunt qui disciplinam rhetoricam
instituere et exercere Romae coeperant .


. . .


XII. Locus ex oratione Gracchi de parsimonia ac de
pudicitia sua memoratissimus


Vili


60


66


76


86


88


CHAPTER HEADINGS


II. That Plato in the work which he wrote On the Laws
expressed the opinion that inducements to drink
more abundantly and more merrily at feasts were
not without benefit . 5


III. What Marcus Cicero thought and wrote about the
prefix in the verbs awfugio and aufero ; and whether
this same preposition is to be seen in the verb
autwmo . . . :


IV. The story of Ventidius Bassus, a man of obscure
birth, who is reported to have been the first to
celebrate a triumph over the Parthians . :

V. That the verb profligo is used by many improperly
ündHenorautbyd e een cee ene) ke oe

VI. An evident mistake in the second book of Cicero


On Glory, in the place where he has written about
Hector and Ajax


VII. It has been okserved of old men, that the sixty-
third year of their life is marked as a rule by
troubles, by death, or by some disaster, and an
example apropos of this observation is taken from
a letter of the deified Augustus to his son Gaius


VIII. A passage from a speech of Favonius, an early
orator, containing an attack which he made on
luxurious entertainments, when he was advocating
the Licinian law for lessening extravagance


IX. That the poet Caecilius used /rons in the masculine
gender, not by poetic licence, but properly and by
analogy - —- =. - — P


X. About the strange suicides of the maids of Miletus


XI. The words of a decree of the senate on expelling
philosophers from the city of Rome; also the
words of the edict of the censors by which those
were rebuked and restrained who had begun to
establish and practise the art of rhetoric at Rome.


XII. A highly memorable passage from a speech of
Gracchus’, regarding his frugality and continence .


PAGE


61


77


81


83
85


87


89 y
1x


CAPITULA


PAGINA


XIII. De verbis inopinatis, quae utroqueversum dicun-
tur et à grammaticis communia" vocantur .


XIV. Quod Metellus Numidicus figuram orationis
novam ex orationibus Graecis mutuatus est. . .


XV. *'Passis velis" et * passis manibus" dixisse veteres
non a verbo suo, quod est ''patior," sed ab alieno,
quod ests! pandozag Ee A c ER E


XVI. De novo genere interitus Crotoniensis Milonis .


XVIL Quam ob causam nobiles pueri Atheniensium
tibiis canere desierint, cum patrium istum morem
canendihaberent. .


XVIIL Quod pugna belli civilis vietoriaque Gai Cae-
saris, quam vicit in Pharsaliis campis, nuntiata
praedictaque est per cuiuspiam sacerdotis vaticinium
eodem ipso die in Italia Patavi


XIX. Verba M. Varronis memoria digna ex Safwra,
quae inscribitur Ilepl'EBecudrev . . .


XX. Notata quaedam de Euripidis poetae genere, vita,
moribus deque eiusdem fine vitae . NC S


XXI. Quod a poetis Iovis filii prudentissimi huma-
nissimique, Neptuni autem ferocissimi et inhuma-
nissimi traduntur  .


XXII Historia de Sertorio, egregio duce, deque astu
eius commenticiisque simulamentis quibus ad bar-
baros milites continendos conciliandosque sihi
ubebaturs LE


XXIII. De aetatibus historicorum nobilium, Hellanici,
Herodoti, Thucydidis Se Se eS
XXIV. Quid Vulcacius Sedigitus, in libro quem De
Poetis scripsit, de comicis Latinis iudicarit . . .
XXV. De verbis quibusdam novis, quae in Gnaei Mati
Mimiambis offenderamus . . . . . . . ,
XXVI. Quibus verbis Aristoteles philosophus definierit
syllogismum ; eiusque definitionis interpretamentum


.


verbis Latinis factum


90


96


96


98


100


102


104


104


108


116


CHAPTER HEADINGS


XIII. Of some unusual words, which are used in either
voice and are called by the grammarians ‘‘ common ”


XIV. That Metellus Numidicus borrowed a new form
of expression from Greek usage . . .


XV. That the early writers used passis velis and passis
manibus, not from the verb patior, to which the
participle belongs, but from pando, to which it
does not belong . JN Egi MR, A vns

XVI. Of the singular death of Milo of Croton . . .

XVII. Why young men of noble rank at Athens gave
up playing the pipes, although it was one of their
DASVe Customs ML. Mur. galore caia

XVIII. That the battle which Gaius Caesar fought on
the plains of Pharsalus during the civil war was
announced on the very same day at Patavium in
Italy, and his victory foretold, by the divination of
ENDE Lud eae ramon CATR | Tone comme PUPA

XIX. Memorable words of Marcus Varro from the
satire entitled Mep) ESecudtwy . . » - + -

XX. Certain facts about the birth, life and character
of the poet Euripides, and about the end of his life

XXI. That by the poets the sons of Jupiter are repre-
sented as most wise and refined, but those of
Neptune as very haughty and rude ay

XXII. A story of the distinguished leader Sertorius ;
of his cunning, and of the clever devices which he
used to control and conciliate his barbarian
ROLLLCL SM met tees ork Ass wikis ponsosleme ativst igs

XXIIL Of the age of the famous historians, Hellanicus,
Herodotusand Thucydides . . . . «+ = +

XXIV. Vuleacius Sedigitus’ canon of the Latin writers
of comedy, from the book which he wrote On Poets

XXV. Of certain new words which I had met in the
Mimiambics of Gnaeus Matius A UU Sete

XXVI. In what words the philosopher Aristotle defined
a syllogism ; and an interpretation of his definition
in Itin terms e :


PAGE


CAPITULA


PAGINA


XXVII. Quid sint ‘‘comitia calata,” quid ‘‘curiata,”
quid ‘‘centuriata,” quid ‘‘tributa,” quid **conci-
lium? ; atque inibi quaedam eiusdemmodi . . .


XXVIII. Quod erravit Cornelius Nepos, cum scripsit
Ciceronem tres et viginti annos natum causam pro
Sexto Roscio dixisse. . . . 3^ Ero ma


XXIX. Quali figura orationis et quam nova L. Piso
annalium scriptor usus sit . . cinis


XXX. Vehiculum quod ‘petorritum” appellatur,
cuiatis linguae vocabulum sit, Graecae an Gallicae.


XXXI. Quae verba legaverint Rodii ad hostium ducem
Demetrium, cum ab eo obsiderentur, super illa
incluta Talysi imagine . .


CAPITULA LIBRI SEXTI DECIMI


I. Verba Musoni philosophi Graeca, digna atque utilia
audiri observarique ; eiusdemque utilitatis senten-
tia a M. Catone multis ante annis Numantiae ad
equites dieta « € . +


. . . . . . .


IL Cuiusmodi sit lex apud dialecticos percontandi
disserendique ; et quae sit eius legis reprehensio


III. Quanam ratione effici dixerit Erasistratus medicus,
si cibus forte deerit, ut tolerari aliquantisper inedia
possit et tolerari fames; verbaque ipsa Erasistrati
superearescripta . .


IV. Quo ritu quibusque verbis fetialis populi Romani
bellum indicere solitus sit his quibus populus
bellum fieri iusserat; et item in quae verba
conceptum fuerit iusiurandum de furtis militaribus
sanciendis; et uti milites seripti intra praedictum
diem in loco certo frequentitarent, causis quibus-


dam exceptis, propter quas id iusiurandum remitti
aecum esset . .


- * - . . . . . . .


Vit Stet heli " quid significet ; deque eius vocabuli
ratonibus. . . .,


* . . . . . . .


xii


116


120
122


124


126


134


138


142


CHAPTER HEADINGS


XXVII. The meaning of comitia calata, curiata, centu-
riata and tributa, and of concilwm; and other
related matters ofthe same kind. . . . .


XXVIII. That Cornelius Nepos was in error when he
wrote that Cicero defended Sextus Roscius at the
age of twenty-three PARR Qn $

XXIX. A new form of expression used by Lucius Piso,
theswriberiofrannalsQ ee Hee. Ie es

XXX. Whether the word petorritwm, applied to a
vehicle, is Greek or.Galbe 2: 5°. $m -

XXXI. A message sent by the Rhodians about the
celebrated statue of Ialysus to Demetrius, leader
of the enemy, at the time when they were besieged
ys hires o ot etba rius X acce dto OMA afe cede


BOOK XVI
L A saying of Musonius, the Greek philosopher, of
practical value and worth hearing and bearing in


mind ; and a remark of equal value made by Marcus
Cato many years before to the knights at Numantia


II. Thenature of the rule of the logicians in disputation
and declamation, and the defect of that rule


IIL By what means Erasistratus, the physician, said
that one could do for a time without eating, if food
chanced to be lacking, and endure hunger ; and his

| wordsion that subject’... 2 see rs (sd is eus


IV. In what fashion and in what language the war-


herald of the Roman people was aceustomed to


declare war upon those against whom the people.


- had. voted that war should be made; also in
what words the oath relating to the prohibition
and punishment of theft by the soldiers was
couched ; and how the soldiers that were enrolled
were to appear at an appointed time and place,
with some exceptional cases in which they might
properly be freed from that oath . . . + + +


V. The meaning of vestibulum and the various deriva-
tions proposed for the word dde ue:


PAGE


117


127


131


133


135


139


143
xiii


CAPITULA


PAGINA


VI. Hostiae quae dicuntur ''*bidentes," quid sint et
quam ob causam ita appellatae sint ; superque ea
re P. Nigidii et Tulii Hygini sententiae . . . .


VII. Quod Laberius verba pleraque licentius petulan-
tiusque finxit; et quod multis item verbis utitur
de quibus an sint Latini quaeri solet. . .


VIII. Quid significet et quid a nostris appellatum sit
quod ‘‘axioma” dialectici dicunt ; et quaedam alia
quae prima in disciplina dialectica traduntur . .


IX. Quid significet verbum in libris veterum creber-
rime positum *susquedeque? . . . . . .


X. Quid sint *'proletarii," quid “‘capite censi"; quid
item sit in X77. Tabulis “‘adsiduus” ; et quae eius
vocabuliratiosit- OE


.


XI. Historia ex Herodoti libris sumpta de Psyllorum
interitu, qui in Syrtibus Africanis colebant. .


XII. De his vocabulis quae Cloatius Verus aut satis
commode aut nimis absurde et inlepide ad origines
linguae Graecae redigit . Een sd


. .


XIII. Quid sit “municipium” et quid a ‘ colonia”
differat; et quid sint *'municipes " quaeque sit
eius vocabuli ratio ac proprietas ; atque inibi, quod
divus Hadrianus in senatu de iure atque vocabulo
municipum verba fecit . . . . . :


XIV. Quod M. Cato differre dixit "properare" et
** festinare" ; et quam incommode Verrius Flaceus


x


verbi quod est *'festinat" £érvuov interpretatus
OSC. CON .


XV. Quid Theophrastus mirum de perdicibus scriptum
reliquerit et quid Theopompus de leporibus. .


XVI. ''Agrippas" a partus aegri et inprosperi vitio
appellatos; deque his deabus quae vocantur
** Prorsa? et ‘ Postverta”’ TM


XVII. Quae ratio vocabuli sit agri Vaticani .
xiv


148


184
184


de ti


CHAPTER HEADINGS


VI. What the victims are which are called bidentes, and
why they are so called ; and the opinions of Publius
Nigidius and Julius Hyginus on that subject


VII. That Laberius formed many words freely and
boldly, and that he even uses numerous words
whose Latinity is often questioned


VIII. The meaning of what the logicians call ‘‘an
axiom," and what it is called by our countrymen ;
and some other things which belong to the elements
of the dialectic art .


IX. The meaning of the expression susque deque, which
occurs frequently in the books of early writers.


X. The meaning of proletarii and capite censi; also of
adsiduus in the Twelve Tables, and the origin of the


mme c MU pr eine PED ET
XI. A story taken from the books of Herodotus about
: the destruction of the Psylli, who dwelt in the
A trjcan vrbes CIC E TEN.


XII. Of those words which Cloatius Verus referred to
a Greek origin, either quite fittingly or too absurdly
and tastelessly . . . OD eM Xe UT

XIII. The meaning of municipiwm and how it differs
from colonia; and what mwnicipes are and the
derivation and proper use of that word ; and also
what the deified Hadrian said in the senate about
the name and rights of the municipes


XIV. That Marcus Cato said there was a difference
between properare and festinare, and how inappro-
priately Verrius Flaecus explained the origin of
bhedattemwonde UM c LT ur e pec

XV. The strange thing recorded of partridges by
Theophrastus, and of hares by Theopompus


XVI. That the name Agrippa was given to those whose
birth was difficult and unnatural; and of the
goddesses called Prorsa and Postverta :


XVII. Of the origin of the term ager Vaticanus


VOL. III. b


PAGE


149


158


157


163


181


183


185


185
XV


CAPITULA


PAGINA


XVIII. Lepida quaedam et memoratu et cognitu de
parte geometriae quae ómrixf appellatur, et item
alia quae kavovucj, et tertia itidem quae dicitur
LET LICH m ECL RS a HE


XIX. Sumpta historia ex Herodoti libro super fidicine
Arione. 2» c CM qus wi


CAPITULA LIBRI SEPTIMI DECIMI


I. Quod Gallus Asinius et Largius Licinns sententiam
M. Ciceronis reprehenderunt ex oratione quam
dixit Pro AM. Caelio; et quid adversus homines
stolidissimos pro eadem sententia vere digneque
dici possitx cus atre Matt LE


. . . .


II. Verba quaedam ex Q. Claudi Annalium primo
cursim in legendo notatà . . . .


- . . .


III. Verba M. Varronis ex libro quinto et vicesimo
Humanarum, quibus contra opinionem volgariam
interpretatus est Homeri versum . .


IV. Quid Menander poeta Philemoni poetae dixerit, a
quo saepe indigne in certaminibus comoediarum
superatus est; et quod saepissime Euripides in
tragoedia ab ignobilibus poetis victus est . . .


V. Nequaquam esse verum, quod minutis quibusdam
rhetoricae artifieibus videatur, M. Ciceronem in
libro quem De Amicitia scripsit vitioso argumento
usum, dupisBntobpevoy àvrl óuoAoyovuévov posuisse ;
totumque id consideratius tractatum exploratum-
ques. 4 14e Iu orm Ice NE a UE iS


VI. Falsum esse, quod Verrius Flaccus, in libro secundo
quos De Obscwris M. Catonis composuit, de servo
recepticio scriptum reliquit


VIL Verba haec ex Atinia lege: ‘quod subruptum
erit, eius rei aeterna auctoritas esto," P. Nigidio et
Q. Scaevolae visa esse non minus de praeterito
furto quam de futuro cavisse


186


188


196


CHAPTER HEADINGS


XVIII. Some interesting and instructive remarks about
that part of Geometry which is called ** Optics" ;
of another part called ** Harmony," and also of a
third called ** Metric”


XIX. A story about the lyre-player Arion, taken from
the work of Herodotus PE oR ce Le Poe Sm


BOOK XVII


I. That Asinius Gallus and Largius Licinus criticized
a saying of Cicero's in the speech which he
delivered For Marcus Caelius; and what may be
said with truth and propriety in defence of that
saying, in reply to those most foolish critics.


II. Certain words from the first book of the Annals of
Quintus Claudius, noted in a hasty reading


III. The words of Marcus Varro in the twenty-fifth
book of his Human Antiquities, in which he has
interpreted a line of Homer in a sense contrary to
the general opinion


IV. What the poet Menander said to Philemon, by
whom he was often defeated in contests in comedy ;
and that Euripides was very often vanquished in
tragedy by obscure poets . Dor e e Deal


V. That it is by no means true, as some meticulous
artists in rhetoric affirm, that Marcus Cicero, in his
book On Friendship, made use of a faulty argument
and postulated the disputed for the admitted ;
with a careful discussion and examination of this
whole question .


VI. That what Verrius Flaccus wrote about servus
recepticius, in his second book On the Obscurities of
Marcus Cato, is false ;


VII. These words from the Atinian law, ‘‘ the claim on
whatever shall be stolen shall be everlasting,”
seemed to Publius Nigidius and Quintus Scaevola
to have reference not less to a past theft than toa
future one AO ex d tos


PAGE


187


189


211


213


CAPITULA


PAGINA


VIII. In sermonibus apud mensam Tauri philosophi
quaeri agitarique eiusmodi solita: “‘cur oleum
saepe et facile, vina rarius congelascant, acetum
haut fere umquam" et ‘‘quod aquae fluviorum
fontiumque durentur, mare gelu non duretur" . .


IX. De notis litterarum quae in C. Caesaris epistulis
reperiuntur; deque aliis clandestinis litteris ex
vetere historia petitis; et quid cxvtdAn sit Lacon-
DC PEN NC SI TS VERS Lu PA

X. Quid de versibus Vergilii Favorinus existumarit,
quibus in describenda | iuba montis Aetnae Pin-
darum poetam secutus est; conlataque ab eo super
eadem re utriusque carmina et diiudicata  .


XI. Quod Plutarchus in libris Symposiacis opinionem
Platonis de habitu atque natura stomachi, fistulae-
que eius quae rpaxeia dicitur, adversum Erasistra-
tum medicum tutatus est, auctoritate adhibita anti-
qui.mediel Hippooraliss. s. << ax! » :


XII. De materiis infamibus, quas Graeci à8ó£ovs appel-
lant, a Favorino exercendi gratia disputatis


XIII. “Quin” particula quot qualesque varietates
significationis habeat et quam saepe in veterum
Scriptis obscura sit :


XIV. Sententiae ex Publili Mimis selectae lepidiores


XV. Quod Carneades Academieus elleboro stomachum
purgavit, scripturus adversus Zenonis Stoici de-


creta ; deque natura medellaque ellebori candidi et
HIST) Ah eV Meee eae


XVI. Anates Ponticas vim habere venenis digerendis


potentem ; atque inibi de Mitridati regis in id
genus medicamentum sollertia :


XVIL Mitridatem, Ponti regem, quinque et viginti
gentium linguis locutum; Quintumque Ennium


tria corda habere sese dixisse, quod tris linguas
percalluisset, Graecam, Oscam, Latinam


xviii


. . .


228


232


238


246


250


252,
256


258


260


CHAPTER HEADINGS


VIII. In conversation at the table of the philosopher
Taurus questions of this kind were proposed and
discussed: “why oil congeals often and readily,
wine seldom, vinegar hardly ever,” and ‘‘that the
waters of rivers and springs freeze, while the sea
CANO a c po og bor yt ae, gin Es

IX. Of the cypher letters which are found in the
epistles of Gaius Caesar, and of other secret forms
of writing taken from ancient history ; and what
thelbaconlamsakunGAnIs = | a, a). sp oT oe

X. What Favorinus thought of the verses of Virgil in
which he imitated the poet Pindar in his descrip-
tion of an eruption of Mount Aetna ; his comparison
and evaluatian of the verses of the two poets on
bhcsamobhenow M ase Ein CE se

XI. That Plutarch in his Symposiacs defended the
opinion of Plato about the structure and nature of
the stomach, and of the tube which is called rpaxeta,
against the physician Erasistratus, urging the
authority of the ancient physician Hippocrates

XII. Of ignoble subjects, called by the Greeks &8o£o:
or *'unexpected," argued by Favorinus for the
salkexofipraebice sles) x Sus


XIII. How many and what varieties of meaning the
particle quin has, and that it is often obscure in
the earlier literature Toute ot came

XIV. Neat sayings selected from the Mimes of
Publilius d) He oe ae WM Mot, ARTY nS

XV. That Carneades the Academic purged his stomach
with hellebore when about to write against the
dogmas of Zeno the Stoic; and of the nature and
curative powers of white and black hellebore

XVI. That Pontic ducks have a power which is able to
expel poisons ; and also of the skill of Mithridates
in preparing antidotes. . . . - - + + -

XVIL. That Mithridates, king of Pontus, spoke the
languages of twenty-five nations ; and that Quintus
Ennius said that he had three hearts, since he was
proficient in three tongues, Greek, Oscan and Latin


PAGE


229


233


239


263
xix


CAPITULA


XVIII. Quod M. Varro C. Sallustium, historiae Scrip-
torem, deprehensum ab Annio Milone in adulterio
scribit et loris caesum pecuniaque data dimissum .


XIX. Quid Epictetus philosophus dicere solitus sit
hominibus nequam et inpuris, disciplinas philoso-
phiae studiose tractantibus; et quae duo verba
observanda praeceperit omnium rerum longe salu-
berrims “in l9 vox. ott NM


XX. Verba sumpta ex Symposio Platonis, numeris
coagmentisque verborum scite modulateque apta,
exercendi gratia in Latinam orationem versa


XXI. Quibus temporibus post Romam conditam Graeci
Romanique inlustres viri floruerint ante secundum
bellum Carthaginensium


H


CAPITULA LIBRI OCTAVI DECIMI


I. Disputationes a philosopho Stoico et contra a Peri-
patetico, arbitro Favorino, factae; quaesitumque
inter eos quantum in perficienda vita beata virtus
valeret quantumque esset in his quae dicuntur ex-
tranea . SONS E AS —


. B


II. Cuiusmodi quaestionum certationibus Saturnalicia
ludiera Athenis agitare soliti simus ; atque inibi
expressa quaedam sophismatia et aenigmata oblec-
tatoria i à :


III. Quid Aeschines rhetor, in oratione qua Timarchum
de inpudicitia accusavit, Lacedaemonios statuisse
dixerit super sententia probatissima, quam impro-
batissimus homo dixisset :


IV. Quod Sulpicius Apollinaris praedicantem quendam
a sese uno Sallusti historias intellegi inlusit, quaes-
tione proposita quid verba ista apud Sallustium
significarent; “incertum, stolidior an vanior"


XX


PAGINA


264


. 264


268


212


296


302


306


dpud amici


—


mesh


CHAPTER HEADINGS


XVIII. The statement of Marcus Varro that Gaius
Sallustius, the writer of history, was taken in
adultery by Annius Milo and was let go only after
he had been beaten with thongs and had paid a
Sumvolrmoneve Me E MR Ri s


XIX. What Epictetus the philosopher used to say to
worthless and vile men, who zealously followed the
pursuit of philosophy ; and the two words whose
remembrance he enjoined as by far the most
salutary in all respects. . . .


XX. A passage taken from the Symposiwm of Plato,
skilful, harmonious and fitting in its rhythm and
structure, which for the sake of practice I have
turned into the Latin tongue . . . . .


XXL The dates after the founding of Rome and before
the second war with Carthage at which distinguished
Greeks and Romans flourished


BOOK XVIII


I. Discussions held by a Stoic philosopher and in
opposition by a Peripatetic, with Favorinus as
arbiter; and the question at issue was, how far
virtue availed in determining a happy life and to
what extent happiness was dependent on what are
called external circumstances


II. What kind of questions we used to discuss when
spending the Saturnalia at Athens; and some
amusing sophistries and enigmas


III. What the orator Aeschines, in the speech in which
he accused Timarchus of unchastity, said that the
Lacedaemonians decided about the praiseworthy


suggestion of a most unpraiseworthy man. . .


IV. How Sulpicius Apollinaris made fun of a man who
asserted that he alone understood Sallust's histories,
by inquiring the meaning of these words in Sallust :
incertum, an stolidior an vanior ,


PAGE


303


307
xxi


CAPITULA


V. Quod Q. Ennius in septimo Aznali ‘‘quadrupes
eques? ac non ‘‘quadrupes equus," ut legunt
multi, scriptum reliquit ONSE


VI. Quod Aelius Melissus in libro cui titulum fecit De
Loquendi Proprictate, quem, cum ederet, cornum esse
copiae dicebat, rem scripsit neque dictu neque au-
ditu dignam, cum differre ** matronam" et ‘‘mat-

‘rem familias" existimavit differentia longe vanis-
sima ——


VII. Quem in modum Favorinus tractaverit intem-
pestivum quendam de verborum ambiguitatibus
quaerentem ; atque ibi, quot significationes capiat
SCONLIO' e Se MEM RT MP ME


VIII. *OuoioréAevra et óuoiómrera atque alia id genus
quae ornamenta orationis putantur inepta esse et
puerilia, Lucili quoque versibus declarari


IX. Quid significet apud M. Catonem verbum “in-
secenda "; quodque ‘‘insecenda” potius legendum
sit quam, quod plerique existimant, ** insequenda ".


X. Errare istos qui in exploranda febri venarum pulsus
pertemptari putant, non arteriarum .


XI. Verba ex carminibus Furi Antiatis inscite a
Caesellio Vindice reprehensa; versusque ipsi in
quibus ea verba sunt subseripti . . . .


XII. Morem istum veteribus nostris fuisse verba pati-
endi mutare ac vertere in agendi modum . .


*


XIIL Quali talione Diogenes philosophus usus sit,


prises a dialectio quodam sophismatio inpu-
gnbjc|.- eek a


XIV. Quid sit numerus ''hemiolios," quid ‘‘epitritos” ;
et quod vocabula ista non facile nostri ausi sunt
conyertere in linguam Latinam


xxii


PAGINA


310


316


318


324


326


330


334


336


340


342


CHAPTER HEADINGS


V. That Quintus Ennius, in the seventh book of his
Annals, wrote quadrupes eques, and not quadrupes
COS tas many read. “9 2 9. 4 | s :


VI. That Aelius Melissus, in the book to which he gave
the title On Correctness of Speech, and which on
its publieation he called a horn of plenty, wrote
something that deserves neither to be said nor
heard, when he expressed the opinion that matrona
and mater familias differ in meaning, thus making a
distinction that is wholly groundless er


VIL How Favorinus treated a man who made an
unseasonable inquiry about words of ambiguous
meaning; and iu that connection the different
meanings of the word contio


VIII. That ópororéAevra, ópoiórrera, and other devices
of the kind which are considered ornaments of
style, are silly and puerile, is indicated, among
other places, in the verses of Lucilius


IX. The meaning of the word insecenda in Marcus
Cato ; and that insecenda ought to be read rather
than insequenda, which many prefer .


X. That those persons are in error who think that in
testing for fever the pulse of the veins is felt, and
not that of the arteries . . . :


XI. Words from the poems of Furius of Antium which
were ignorantly criticized by Caesellius Vindex ; a
quotation of the very verses which include the
words in question


XII. That our forefathers had the custom of changing
passive verbs and turning them into active . :


XIII. The retort which the philosopher Diogenes
made, when he was challenged by a logician with
animpudent sophistry . . . —


XIV. What the number is which is called hemioltos and
what epitritos; and that our countrymen have not
rashly ventured to translate those words into
Latin ;


PAGE


311


317


319


335


337


341


343
xxiii


CAPITULA


PAGINA
XV. Quod M. Varro in herois versibus observaverit
rem nimis anxiae et curiosae observationis . . . 344


CAPITULA LIBRI NONI DECIMI!


I. Responsio cuiusdam philosophi, interrogati quam ob
causam maris tempestate palluerit . . . . . 348


IL Ex quinque corporis sensibus duos esse cum beluis
maxime communes ; quodque turpis et improba est
voluptas quae ex auditu, visu odoratuque procedit,
quae vero ex gustu tactuque est, rerum omnium foe-
dissima est, cum hae duae bestiarum etiam sint,
reliquae hominum tantum . . . . . . . 894


IIL Quod turpius est frigide laudari quam acerbius
vituperare d'w v3 abuti Ue PIDE ENSSS


IV. Quamobrem venter repentino timore effluat ; quare
etiam ignis urinam lacessat. . . . . . . . 360


V. Ex Aristotelis libris sumptum quod nivis aqua potui
pessima sit; et quod ex nive crystallus concreatur. 360


VI. Quod pudor sanguinem ad extera diffundit, timor
verocontrahit . . . GO I ee Nw.


VII. Quid sit **obesum ^ ; nonnullaque alia prisca vo-
cabula. . . . . 3966


VIII. Quaestio an ''harena," **eaelum," “ triticum’”’
pluralia inveniantur; atque inibi de ‘ quadrigis,”
''inimicitiis," nonnullis praeterea vocabulis, an
singulari numero comperiantur . . . . . . 370


. . . E . . B . E


IX. Antonii Iuliani in convivio ad quosdam Graecos
lepidissima responsio  .' . 4 s.m bates) RLOSIM


X. Verba haee, **praeter propter," in usu volgi protrita,
etiam. Ennii fuisse... smn dust anc amu dae DAE


1 The lemmata of Book xix are ommited by o; they are supplied in
varying forms in s,


xxiv


ape


CHAPTER HEADINGS


XV. That Mareus Varro in heroie verse noted a
matter demanding very minute and careful obser-
vation . PON, RENE Fons


BOOK XIX


I. The reply of a certain philosopher, when he was
asked why he turned pale in a storm at sea


II. That of the five senses of the body two in particular
we share with beasts; and that pleasure which
comes from hearing, sight and smell is base and
reprehensible, but that which comes from taste and
touch is the most shameful of all, since the last
pre. ene felt also d Beans the others dd bs man-
kin :


IIL That it is more (TH to be be praised clay than
to be accused bitterly .


IV. Why the bowels are loosened by sudden peti
also why fire provokes urine . :


V. A statement from the works of phe that
snow-water is a very bad thing to drink; and that
ice is formed from snow uA "re


VI. That shame drives the blood outward, while fear
checks it .


VIL The meaning of obeswm and of some other carly
words Msg


vul. An inquiry whether harena, caelum and triticwnr
are found in the plural ; also whether quadrigae,
inimicitiac, and some other Sg occur in the
singular .


IX. The very witty reply of Antonius Julianus to
certain Greeks at a banquet . BUM Pets


X. That the words praeter propter, which are in
common use, were found also in Ennius.


PAGE


945


349


385


XXV


CAPITULA


PAGINA


XI. Ponit versus Platonis amatorios quos admodum
iuvenis lusit, dum tragoediis contendit . . . .


XII. Dissertatio Herodis Attici super vi et natura
doloris suaeque opinionis affirmatio per exemplum
indocti rustici, qui cum rubis fructiferas arbores
praecidibsu ms "vt^ ed actam d cr In


XIII. Quos “pumiliones”’ dicimus, Graece vavous
appellari us eie y att sobra duel Guns CER MS


XIV. Contemporaneos fuisse Caesari et Ciceroni M.
Varronem et P. Nigidium, aetatis suae doctissimos
Romanos; et quod Nigidii commentationes propter
earum obscuritatem subtilitatemque in volgus non
exennüd D E Mc X E M


CAPITULA LIBRI VICESIMI


I. Disputatio Sex. Caecilii iureconsulti et Favorini
philosophi de legibus Duodecim Tabularum .


IL Vocabulum ‘‘siticinum’’ in M. Catonis oratione
quid Bignifüicet, <5. CX


III. Quam ob causam L. Accius poeta in Pragmaticis
sicinnistas ‘‘nebuloso nomine" esse dixerit.


IV. Artificum scaenicorum studium amoremque in-
honestum probrosumque esse ; et super ea re verba
Aristotelis philosophiadseripta . . . . . .


V. Exempla epistularum Alexandri regis et Aristotelis
philosophi, ita uti sunt edita; eaque in linguam
Latinam versa. M E


. . . .


VI. Quaesitum atque tractatum utrum siet rectius dicere
** habeo curam vestri," an vestrum" .


. . LI


VII. Quam diversae Graecorum sint sententiae super
numero Niobaefiliorum. . . . .


xxvi


390


430


430


436


449


"x


CHAPTER HEADINGS


XI. He gives! some amatory verses of Plato, with
which the philosopher amused himself when he was
a very young man and was contending for the
tragicvphizo s Baa. crag gies E e a s
XIL A discourse of Herodes Atticus on the power
and nature of pain, and a confirmation of his view
by the example of an ignorant countryman who


cut down fruit-trees along with thorns . . . .
XUI. That what we call pumiliones, the Greeks term
vayot . . . .


XIV. That Mareus Varro and Publius Nigidius, the
most learned Romans of their time, were contempo-
raries of Caesar and Cicero ; and that the commen-
taries of Nigidius, because of their obscurity and
subtlety, did not become popular


BOOK XX


I. A discussion of the jurist Sextus Caecilius and the
philosopher Favorinus about the laws of the
NGI TD Los RE St EE M e

IL The meaning of the word siticines in a speech of
Marcus Gatos NN LE E E. ME.

III. Why the poet Accius in his Pragmatica said that
sicinnistae was a **nebulous word” . . . .

IV. That devotion to play-actors, and love of them,
was shameful and disgraceful. with a quotation of
the words of the philosopher Aristotle on that
subject Ua o rd M en p.d


V. Specimens of letters of king Alexander and the
philosopher Aristotle, just as they were written ;
with a rendering of the same into Latin c


VI. It is asked and discussed whether it is more
correct to say habeo curam vestri, or vestrum


VII. How the opinions of the Greeks differ as to the
number of Niobe’s children . . . + + +


1 See critical note, p. xxiv.


PAGE


391


393


397


401


407


429


431 !


431


CAPITULA
PAGINA
VIII. De his quae habere evumTecíav videntur cum ;
lunaiuvenescente ac senescente . . . . . . 442


IX. Qualibus verbis delectari solitus sit Antonius
Iulianus, positis in Mimiambis Cn. Matii; et quid
significet M. Cato in oratione quam scripsit de
innocentia sua, cum ita dictitat: ‘‘numquam


vestimenta a populo peposci" . . . . . . .
X. Quid vocabulum ‘‘ex iure manum consertum " sig-
DilcoUs tera nay Eo esee He ey ie BINE EE RS


XI. Quid sit *'seulnae" verbum positum apud M.
Varronem... jog) ably tue c ds a coti P E


xxviii


450


CHAPTER HEADINGS


PAGE
VIII. Of things which seem to have cuurtwota, or
** coincidence," with the waning and waxing moon 443


IX. A passage in the Mimiambi of Gnaeus Matius, in
which Antonius Julianus used to delight; and the
meaning of Marcus Cato in the speech which he
wrote on his own uprightness, when he said: ‘I
have never asked the people for garments" — . . 445


X. The meaning of the phrase ex iwre manum consertum. 447


XI. The meaning of the word sculna, used by Marcus
VAT Omer Nu Par Mc E die rel wee dO


xxix


« 7 d "
y "- rupes:


Lm


i > : - é E ‘ ‘ . L


d ELE AISEIC GNIGEPTS
OF AULUS GELLIUS


BOOK XIV


VOL. III.


A. GELLII
NOCTIUM ATTICARUM


LIBER QUARTUS DECIMUS
I


Dissertatio Favorini philosophi adversus eos qui Chaldaei
appellantur, et ex coetu motibusque siderum et stellarum
* fata hominum dicturos pollicentur.


ApvERSUM istos qui sese * Chaldaeos" seu ** ge-
nethliacos" appellant ac de motu deque positu
stellarum dicere posse quae futura sunt profitentur,
audivimus quondam Favorinum philosophum Romae
Graece disserentem egregia atque inlustri oratione ;
exercendi autem, non ostentandi, gratia ingenii, an
quod ita serio iudicatoque existimaret, non habeo
dicere. Capita autem locorum argumentorumque
quibus usus est, quod eius meminisse potui, egressus
ibi ex auditione propere adnotavi, eaque fuerunt ad
hanc ferme sententiam : disciplinam istam Chaldaeo-
rum tantae vetustatis non esse quantae videri volunt, -
neque eos principes eius auctoresque esse, quos ipsi
ferant, sed id praestigiarum atque offuciarum genus
commentos esse homines aeruscatores et cibum
quaestumque ex mendaciis captantes. Atque eos,
; * ree: calculators of nativities; see also note on
1. 9. 6.


* p. 44, Marres,
2


THE ATTIC NIGHTS
OF AULUS. GELLIUS


BOOK XIV
I


A discourse of the philosopher Favorinus directed against
those who are called Chaldaeans, and who profess to tell
men's fortunes from the conjunction and movements of the
stars and constellations.


Aaatnst those who call themselves ** Chaldaeans ”
or “ astrologers,’ and profess from the movements
and position of the stars to be able to read the
future, I once at Rome heard the philosopher Favo-
rinus discourse in Greek in admirable and brilliant
language. But whether it was for the purpose of
exercising, not vaunting, his talent, or because he
‘seriously and sincerely believed what he said, I am
unable to tell; but I promptly jotted down the heads
.of the topics and of the arguments which he used,
so far as I could recall them immediately after
leaving the meeting, and they were about to this
effect:2 That this science of the Chaldaeans was
not of so great antiquity as they would have it
appear; that they are not the founders and authors
of it, as they themselves declare, but that tricks and
delusions of that kind were devised by jugglers and
men who made a living and profit from their lies.


3
B 2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


quoniam viderent terrena quaedam inter homines
caelestium rerum sensu atque ductu moveri, quale
est quod oceanus quasi lunae comes cum ea simul
senescit adolescitque, hinc videlicet sibi argumentum
ad suadendum paravisse ut crederemus omnia rerum
humanarum et parva et maxima, tamquam stellis
atque sideribus evincta, duci et regi. Esse autem
nimis quam ineptum absurdumque, ut, quoniam
aestus oceani cum lunae curriculo congruit, negotium
quoque alicuius, quod ei forte de aquae ductu cum
rivalibus aut de communi pariete cum vicino apud
iudicem est, ut existimemus, id negotium quasi
habena quadam de caelo vinctum gubernari. Quod
etsi vi et ratione quapiam divina fieri potest, nequa-
quam id tamen censebat in tam brevi exiguoque vitae
spatio quantovis hominis ingenio conprehendi posse
et percipi, set coniectari pauca quaedam, ut verbo
ipsius utar, TaxvLepécrepov, nullo scientiae fundo
concepto, sed fusa et vaga et arbitraria, qualis
longinqua oculorum acies est per intervalla media
caligantium ; tolli enim quod maxime inter deos
atque homines differt, si homines quoque res omnis
post futuras praenoscerent. Ipsam deinde siderum
stellarumque observationem, quam esse originem
scientiae suae praedicarent, hautquaquam putabat
liquide consistere. ** Nam si principes Chaldaei, qui
in patentibus campis colebant, stellarum motus et


* In a rough and ready, superficial manner,


BOOK XIV. 1. 3-8


And since they saw that some terrestrial phenomena
known to men were caused by the influence and
control of the heavenly bodies, as for example the
ocean, as though a companion of the moon, grows
old and resumes its youth along with her—from
this, forsooth, they derived an argument for per-
suading us to believe that all human affairs, both the
greatest and the least, as though bound to the stars
and constellations, are influenced and governed by
them, But Favorinus said that it was utterly foolish
and absurd to suppose, because the tide of the ocean
corresponds with the course of the moon, that a suit
at law which one happens to have about an aqueduct
with his neighbours, or with the man next door
about a party wall, is also bound to heaven as if by
a kind of chain and is decided by the stars. But
even if by some divine power and purpose this could
happen, yet he thought that it could by no means
be grasped and understood in such a brief and scant
span of life as ours by any human intellect, but he be-
lieved that some few things were conjectured zaxv-
g.epéo repov (to use his own term), that is, “ somewhat
roughly," with no sure foundation of knowledge, but
in a loose, random and arbitrary manner, just as when
we look at objects far away with eyes blinded by
their remoteness from us. For the greatest differ-
ence between men and gods was removed, if man
also had the power of foreknowing all future events.
Furthermore, he thought that even the observation
of the stars and constellations, which they declared
to be the foundation of their knowledge, was by no
means a matter of certainty. “For if the original
Chaldaeans," said he, * who dwelt in the open plains,
watched the movements and orbits of the stars, their


5


10


11


12


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


vias et discessiones et coetus intuentes, quid ex his
efficeretur observaverunt, procedat," inquit, **haec
sane disciplina, set sub ea modo inclinatione caeli,
sub qua tune Chaldaei fuerunt; non enim potest,"
inquit, *ratio Chaldaeorum observationis manere, si
quis ea uti velit sub diversis caeli regionibus. Nam
quanta," inquit, *partium circulorumque caeli ex
devergentia et convexionibus mundi varietas sit,
quis non videt? Eaedem igitur stellae, per quas
omnia divina humanaque fieri contendunt, sicuti non
usquequaque pruinas aut calores cient, sed mutant et
variant tempestatesque eodem in tempore alibi placi-
das, alibi violentas movent, cur non eventa quoque
rerum ac negotiorum alia efficiunt in Chaldaeis, alia
in Gaetulis, alia aput Danuvium, alia aput Nilum ? Per
autem," ! inquit, * inconsequens, ipsum quidem cor-
pus et habitum tam profundi aeris sub alio atque alio
caeli curvamine non eundem manere, in hominum
autem negotiis stellas istas opinari idem semper osten-
dere, si eas ex quacumque terra conspexeris,"  Prae-
terea mirabatur id cuiquam pro percepto liquere, stel-
las istas quas a Chaldaeis et Babyloniis sive Aegyptiis
observatas ferunt, quas multi * erraticas," Nigidius
“errones " vocat, non esse plures quam volgo diceren-
tur; posse enim fieri existimabat ut et alii quidam
planetes pari potestate essent, sine quibus recta


! autem enim, Q; enim, Hertz.


1 Fr. 87, Swoboda ; the reference is to the planets.


6


BOOK XIV. r. 8-12


separations and conjunctions, and observed their
effects, let this art continue to be practised, but let it
be only under the same inclination of the heavens as
that under which the Chaldaeans then were. For
the system of observation of the Chaldaeans cannot
remain valid, if anyone should wish to apply it
to different regions of the sky. For who does not
see," said he, *how great is the diversity of the
zones and circles of the heavens caused by the
inclination and convexity of the earth? Why then
should not those same stars, by which they maintain
that all human and divine affairs are affected, just as
they do not everywhere arouse cold and heat, but
change and vary the weather, at the same time
causing calm in one place and storm in another—
why should they not, I say, produce one series of
affairs and events in the land of the Chaldaeans,
another among the Gaetulians, another on the
Danube, and still another on the Nile? But,” said
he, *it is utterly inconsistent to suppose that the
mass and the condition of this vast height of air
does not remain the same under one or another
region of the heavens, but that in human affairs
- those stars always indicate the same thing from
whatever part of the earth you may observe them."
Besides, he expressed his surprise that anyone con-
sidered it a certainty that those stars which they
say were observed by the Chaldaeans and Baby-
lonians, or by the Egyptians, which many call
erralicae, or * wandering," but Nigidius called er-
rones, or “the wanderers,"! are not more numerous
than is commonly assumed ; for he thought it might
possibly be the case that there were some other
planets of equal power, without which a correct and


7


13


14


15


16


17


18


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


atque perpetua observatio perfici non quiret, neque
eos tamen cernere homines possent propter exuper-
antiam vel splendoris vel altitudinis. “Nam et
quaedam," inquit, sidera a quibusdam terris conspici-
untur earumque terrarum hominibus nota sunt; sed
eadem ipsa ex alia omni terra non videntur et sunt
aliis omnino ignarissima. Atque uti demus," inquit,
* et has tantummodo stellas et ex una parte terrae
observari debuisse, quae tandem finis observationis
istius fuit et quae tempora satis esse visa sunt
ad percipiendum quid praemonstraret aut coetus
stellarum aut circuitus aut transitus? Nam si isto
modo coepta fieri observatio est, ut animadverteretur
quo habitu quaque forma quaque positura stellarum
aliquis nasceretur, tum deinceps ab ineunte vita
fortuna eius et mores et ingenium et circumstantia
rerum negotiorumque et ad postremum finis etiam
vitae spectaretur eaque omnia, ut usu venerant,
litteris mandarentur ac postea longis temporibus,
cum ipsae illae eodem in loco eodemque habitu
forent, eadem ceteris quoque eventura existimarentur,
qui eodem! illo tempore nati fuissent — si isto,"
inquit, *modo observari coeptum et ex ea observa-
tione conposita quaedam disciplina est, nullo id
pacto potest procedere. Dicant enim quot tandem
annis vel potius quot saeculis orbis hic observationis
perfici quiverit." Constare quippe inter astrologos
dicebat, stellas istas quas “erraticas” dicerent,


! eodem deleted by Skutsch.
U—— ———ÀÁ"u— Apoc Et n s


! That is, the time when the stars were again in the same
position, The point is, that observations made for one man,
even though they came out right, were of no value, because


8


BOOK XIV. 1. 12-18


final observation could not be completed, but that
men could not see them because of their remarkable
brilliance or altitude. “For,” said he, “some stars
are visible from certain lands and are known to the
men of those lands; but those same stars are not
visible from every other land and are wholly un-
known to other men. And granting,” said he, “both
that only these stars ought to be observed, and
that too from one part of the earth, what possible
end was there to such observation, and what
periods of time seemed sufficient for understanding
what the conjunction or the orbits or the transits of
the stars foretold? For if an observation was made in
the beginning in such a manner that it was calculated
under what aspect, arrangement and position of the
stars anyone was born, and if thereafter his fortune
from the beginning of his life, his character, his dis-
position, the circumstances of his affairs and activities,
and finally also the end of his life were noted, and all
these things as they had actually happened were
committed to writing, and long afterwards, when
the same stars were in the same aspect and position,
it was supposed that those same things would
happen to others who had been born at that same
time ;! if the first observations were made in that
way,” said he, “and from such observations a kind
of science was formed, it can by no means be a
success. For let them tell me in how many years,
pray, or rather in how many ages, the cycle of the
observations could be completed.” For he said that
it was agreed among astrologers that those stars
which they call “wandering,” which are supposed


of the long time that it took for the stars to reach the same
positions that they had at the time of the earlier observations.


9


19


20


21


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


quae esse omnium rerum fatales viderentur, infinito
prope et innumerabili numero annorum ad eundem
locum, cum eodem abitu simul omnes reverti!
unde? profectae sunt, ut neque ullus observationis
tenor neque memoriae ulla effigies litterarum ? tanto
aevo potuerint edurare. Atque illud etiam cuimodi
esset considerandum putabat, quod aliud stellarum
agmen foret quo primum tempore conciperetur homo
in utero matris, aliud postea cum in decem mensibus
proximis in lucem ederetur, quaerebatque qui con-
veniret diversam super eodem fieri demonstrationem,
si, ut ipsi putarent, alius atque alius earundem
stellarum situs atque ductus alias atque alias
fortunas daret. Sed et nuptiarum tempore, ex
quibus liberi quaererentur, atque ipso etiam illo maris
et feminae iam declarari coitu oportere dicebat certo
quodam et necessario stellarum ordine quales qualique
fortuna homines gignerentur; ac multo etiam ante,
cum pater ipse atque mater nascerentur, ex eorum
genitura debuisse iam tunc prospici quinam olim
futuri essent quos hi creaturi forent; et supra longe
atque longe per infinitum, ut, si disciplina ista funda-
mento aliquo veritatis nixa est, centesimo usque
abhine saeculo vel magis primo caeli atque mundi
exordio atque inde iam deinceps continua significa-
tione, quotiens generis auctores eiusdem homines
nascerentur, stellae istae praemonstrare debuerint
qualis qualique fato futurus sit quisquis hodie natus
est. “Quo autem," inquit, *pacto credi potest,
uniuscuiusque stellarum formae et positionis sortem


1 reverti (redire, etc.) added by J. F. Gronov and others after
sunt; reverti unde olim omnes, Skutsch.

* unde added by Vogel.

? litterarum deleted by Skutsch.


IO


BOOK XIV. 1, 18-21


to determine the fate of all things, beginning their
course together, return to the same place from
which they set out only after an innumerable and
almost infinite number of years, so that there could
be no continuity of observation, and no literary
record could endure for so long an epoch. And
he thought that this point also ought to be taken
into consideration, that one constellation presided
at the time when a man was first conceived in
his mothers womb, and another one ten months
later when he came into the world, and he asked
how it was consistent for a different indication to be
made about the same person, if, as they themselves
thought, a different position and order of the same
stars gave different fortunes. But also at the time
of marriage, from which children were expected,
and at the very union of the husband and wife,
he said that it ought to be indicated by a fixed and
inevitable position of the stars, with what character
and fortune men would be born; and, indeed, long
before that, when the father and mother were them-
selves born, it ought to be foretold even then from
their horoscope what offspring they would produce;
and far, far back of that, even to infinity, so that,
if that science rested on any foundation of truth,
a hundred years ago, or rather at the beginning
of heaven and earth, and then on in an unbroken
series of predictions as long as generation followed
generation, those stars ought to have foretold what
character and fortune anyone would have who is
born to-day. ‘But how," said he, ‘‘can it be
believed that the fate and fortune foretold by the
form and position of any one of the stars are


4 ante, cum, Hertz; antequam, c.
II


22


23


24


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


atque fortunam uni omnino homini certam destina-
tamque esse eamque formam post longissima saecu-
lorum spatia restitui, si vitae fortunarumque eiusdem
hominis indicia in tam brevibus intervallis per singu-
los maiorum eius gradus perque infinitum succes-
sionum ordinem tam saepe ac tam multipliciter
eadem ipsa, non eadem stellarum facie denotantur?
Quod si id fieri potest eaque diversitas atque varietas
admittitur per omnis antiquitatis gradus ad signifi-
canda eorum hominum qui post nascentur exordia
imparilitas haec turbat observationem omnisque ratio
disciplinae confunditur." Iam vero id minime
ferundum censebat, quod non modo casus et eventa
quae evenirent extrinsecus, sed consilia quoque ipsa
hominum et arbitria et varias voluntates adpetitiones-
que et declinationes et fortuitos repentinosque in
levissimis rebus animorum impetus recessusque mo-
veri agitarique desuper e caelo putarent; tamquam
quod forte ire in balneas volueris ac deinde nolueris
atque id rursus volueris, non ex aliqua dispari
variaque animi agitatione, sed ex necessaria quadam
errantium siderum reciprocatione contigerit, ut plane
homines non, quod dicitur, Aoywà La, sed ludicra et
ridenda quaedam neurospasta esse videantur, si nihil
sua sponte, nihil arbitratu suo faciunt, sed ducentibus
stellis et aurigantibus. “Ac si," inquit, * potuisse
praedici adfirmant Pyrrusne rex an Manius Curius
proelio victurus esset, cur tandem non de alea
quoque ac de calculis et alveolo audent dicere, quis-


12


BOOK XIV, 1. 21-24


fixed and attached to one particular individual, and
that the same position of the stars is restored only
after a long series of years, if the indications of the
same man's life and fortunes in such short intervals,
through the single degrees of his forefathers and
through an infinite order of successions, are so often
and so frequently pointed out as the same, although
the position of the stars is not the same? But if
this can happen, and if this contradiction and varia
tion be admitted through all the epochs of antiquity
in foretelling the origin of those men who are to
be born afterwards, this inequality confounds the
observation and the whole theory of the science
falls to the ground." Moreover, he thought that the
most intolerable thing was their belief that not only
occurrences and events of an external nature, but
even men's very deliberations, their purposes, their
various pleasures, their likes and dislikes, the chance
and sudden attractions and aversions of their feel-
ings on trifling matters, were excited and influenced
from heaven above; for example, if you happened
to wish to go to the baths, and then should change
your mind, and again should decide to go, that all
this happens, not from some shifting and variable
state of mind, but from a fateful ebb and flow of the
planets. Thus men would clearly be seen to be, not
Aoywà £a, or * reasoning beings," as they are called,
but a species of ludicrous and ridiculous puppets, if
it be true that they do nothing of their own volition
or their own will, but are led and driven by the
stars. “ And if,” said he, “they affirm that it could
have been foretold whether king Pyrrhus or Manius
Curius was to be victorious in the battle, why,
pray, do they not dare also to predict which of the


I3


25


26


27


28


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


nam ibi ludentium vincat? An videlicet magna
sciunt, parva nesciunt, et minora maioribus inper-
ceptiora sunt? Sed si magnitudines rerum sibi
vindicant magisque esse perspicuas et facilius com-
prehendi posse dicunt, volo," inquit, ** mihi respond-
eant quid in hac totius mundi contemplatione, prae
tantis naturae operibus, in tam parvis atque brevibus
hegotiis fortunisque hominum magnum putent?
Atque id velim etiam," inquit, “ut respondeant : si
tam parvum atque rapidum est momentum temporis,
in quo homo nascens fatum accipit, ut in eodem illo
puncto sub eodem circulo caeli plures simul ad
eandem compententiam nasci non queant, et si
idcirco gemini quoque non eadem vitae sorte sunt,
quoniam non eodem temporis puncto editi sunt—
peto," inquit, *respondeant, cursum illum temporis
transvolantis, qui vix cogitatione animi conprehendi
potest, quonam pacto aut consulto adsequi queant
aut ipsi perspicere et reprehendere, cum in tam
praecipiti dierum  noctiumque vertigine minima
momenta ingentes facere dicant mutationes?" Ad
postremum autem et quid esset quod adversum hoc
dici posset requirebat, quod homines utriusque sexus,
omnium aetatum, diversis stellarum motibus in vitam
editi, regionibus sub quibus geniti sunt longe di-
stantibus, omnes tamen isti, aut hiantibus terris aut
labentibus tectis aut oppidorum expugnationibus aut
eadem in navi fluctu obruti, eodem genere mortis
eodemque ictu temporis universi simul interirent.
* Quod scilicet," inquit, *numquam eveniret, si
momenta nascendi singulis adtributa suas unumquid-
14


BOOK XIV. 1. 24-28


players with dice or counters on a board will win?
Or, forsooth, do they know important things, but not
those which are unimportant; and are unimportant
things more difficult to understand than the im-
portant? But if they claim knowledge of great
matters and say that they are plainer and easier to
be understood, I should like," said he, “to have
them tell me, in this observation of the whole
world, in comparison with such mighty works of
nature, what they regard as great in the trifling and
brief fortunes and affairs of men. And I should like
to have them answer this question also," said he:
“if the instant in which man at birth is allotted his
destiny is so brief and fleeting, that at that same
moment not more than one can be born with the
same conjunction under the same circle of the
heavens, and if therefore even twins have different
lots in life, since they are not born at the same
instant —I ask them to tell me," said he, “how and
by what plan they are able to overtake the course
of that fleeting moment, which can scarcely be
grasped by one's thoughts, or to detain and examine
it, when in the swift revolution of days and nights
even the briefest moments, as they say, cause great
changes?" Then, finaly, he asked what answer
could be made to this argument, that human beings
of both sexes, of all ages, born into the world under
different positions of the stars and in regions widely
separated, nevertheless sometimes all perished to-
gether by the same kind of death and at the same
moment, either from an earthquake, or a falling
building, or the sack of a town, or the wreck of the
same ship. “This,” said he, “of course would never
happen, if the natal influence assigned to the birth


t5


29


30


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


que leges haberent. Quod si quaedam," inquit, “in
hominum morte atque vita etiam diversis temporibus
editorum per stellarum pares quosdam postea con-
ventus paria nonnulla et consimilia posse dicunt
optingere, cur non aliquando possint omnia quoque
paria usu venire, ut existant per huiuscemodi stel-
larum concursiones et similitudines Socratae simul et
Antisthenae et Platones multi genere, forma, in-
genio, moribus, vita omni et morte pari? Quod
nequaquam," inquit, *'prorsus fieri potest. Non
igitur hac causa probe uti queunt adversum hominum


31 impares ortus, interitus pares." Illud autem condo-


32


nare se his dicebat quod non id quoque requireret :
si vitae mortisque hominum rerumque humanarum
omnium tempus et ratio et causa in caelo et apud -
stellas foret, quid de muscis aut vermiculis aut
echinis, multis aliis minutissimis terra marique ani-
mantibus dicerent? An istaec quoque isdem, quibus
homines, legibus nascerentur isdemque itidem ex-
tinguerentur? ut aut ranunculis quoque et culicibus
nascendi fata sint de caelestium siderum motibus
adtributa aut, si id non putarent, nulla ratio videretur
cur ea siderum vis in hominibus valeret, deficeret in
ceteris.

Haec nos sicca et incondita et propemodum ieiuna
oratione adtigimus! Set Favorinus, ut hominis
ingenium fuit utque est Graecae facundiae copia
simul et venustas, latius ea et amoenius et splendidius
et profluentius exequebatur, atque identidem com-


1 adtigimus, Skutsch ; adtingimus, MSS.
16 j


BOOK XIV. r. 28-32


of each of them had its own peculiar conditions.
But if," he said, “they answer that even in the life
and death of men who are born at different times
certain events may happen which are alike and
similar, through some similar conjunction of the
stars at a later time, why may not sometimes every-
thing become equal, so that through such agreement
and similarity of the stars many a Socrates and
Antisthenes and Plato may appear, equal in birth,
in person, in talent, in character, in their whole life
and in their death? But this," said he, “can by
no means whatever happen. Therefore they cannot
properly use this argument against the inequality of
men's births and the similarity of their death."
He added that he excused them from this further
inquiry: namely, if the time, the manner and the
cause of men's life and death, and of all human.
affairs, were in heaven and with the stars, what would
they say of flies, worms, sea urchins, and many
other minute animals of land and sea? Were
they too born and destroyed under the same
laws as men? so that to frogs also and gnats
either the same fates are assigned at birth by
- the movements of the constellations, or, if they
do not believe that, there seemed to be no
reason why that power of the stars should be
effective with men and ineffectual with the other
animals.

These remarks I have touched upon in a dry,
unadorned, and almost jejune style. But Favorinus,
such was the man's talent and such is at once the
copiousness and the charm of Greek eloquence,
delivered them at greater length and with more
charm, brilliance and readiness, and from time to


I7


VOL. III. C


33


34


35


36


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


monebat ut caveremus ne qua nobis isti sycophantae
ad faciendam fidem inreperent, quod viderentur
quaedam interdum vera effutire aut spargere. “Non
enim comprehensa," inquit, *neque definita neque
percepta dicunt, sed lubrica atque ambagiosa con-
iectatione nitentes, inter falsa atque vera pedetemptim
quasi per tenebras ingredientes, eunt et aut multa
temptando incidunt repente inprudentes in veritatem
aut ipsorum, qui eos consulunt, multa credulitate
ducente perveniunt callide ad ea quae vera sunt, et
idcirco videntur in praeteritis rebus quam in futuris
veritatem facilius imitari. Ista tamen omnia quae
aut temere aut astute vera dicunt, prae ceteris,"
inquit, * quae mentiuntur, pars ea non sit millesima."
Praeter haec autem quae dicentem Favorinum
audivimus, multa etiam memini poetarum veterum
testimonia, quibus huiuscemodi ambages fallaciosae
confutantur. Ex quibus est Pacuvianum illud :


Nam si quae eventüra sunt provídeant, aequi-
perént Iovi,


item Accianum illud :


Nihil (inquit) erédo auguribus, qui ates verbis
divitant
Aliénas, suas ut aüro locupletént domus.


Idem Favorinus, deterrere volens ac depellere
adulescentes a genethliacis istis et quibusdam aliis id
genus, qui prodigiosis artibus futura omnia dicturos
pollicentur, nullo pacto adeundos eos esse consulen-
dosque huiuscemodi argumentis concludebat: * Aut
lese E. ei. i le uae su.


! v, 407, Ribbeck,
2 v. 169, Ribbeck?,


18


BOOK XIV. 1. 32-36


time he warned us to take care lest in any way those
sycophants should worm their way into our confidence
by sometimes seeming to stumble upon, and give


utterance to, something true. “For they do not,”


said he, “say anything that is tangible, definite or
comprehensible, but depending upon slippery and
roundabout conjecture, groping with cautious steps
between truth and falsehood, as if walking in the
dark, they go their way. And after making many
attempts they either happen suddenly on the truth
without knowing it, or led by the great credulity of
those who consult them, they get hold by cunning of
something true, and therefore obviously find it easier
to come somewhere near the truth in past events
than in those to come. Yet all the true things
which they say through accident or cunning,” said
he, “are not a thousandth part of the falsehoods
which they utter.”

But besides these remarks which I heard Favorinus
make, I recall many testimonies of the ancient poets,
by which delusive fallacies of this kind are refuted.
Among these is the following saying of Pacuvius : !


Could men divine the future, they'd match Jove.
Also this from Accius, who writes :?


I trust the augurs not, who with mere words
Enrich men's ears, to load themselves with gold.


Favorinus too, wishing to deter and turn away
young men from such calculators of nativities and
from certain others of that kind, who profess to
reveal all the future by means of magic arts, con-
cluded with arguments of this sort, to show that they
ought by no means to be resorted to and consulted.

I9


.c2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


adversa," inquit, * eventura dicunt, aut prospera. Si
dicunt prospera et fallunt, miser fies frustra expec-
tando; si adversa dicunt et mentiuntur, miser fies
frustra timendo; sin vera respondent eaque sunt
non prospera, iam inde ex animo miser fies, antequam
e fato fias; si felicia promittunt eaque eventura sunt,
tum plane duo erunt incommoda : et expectatio te
spei suspensum fatigabit et futurum gaudii fructum
spes tibi iam praefloraverit. ^ Nullo igitur pacto
utendum est istiusmodi hominibus res futuras
praesagientibus.”’


II


Quem in modum disseruerit Favorinus consultus a me super
officio iudicis.

Quo primum tempore a praetoribus lectus in
iudices sum, ut iudicia quae appellantur * privata "'
susciperem, libros utriusque linguae de officio iudicis
scriptos conquisivi, ut homo adulescens, a poetarum
fabulis et a rhetorum epilogis ad iudicandas lites
vocatus, rem iudiciariam, quoniam * vocis," ut dicitur,
"vivae" penuria erat, ex * mutis," quod aiunt,
'* magistris" cognoscerem. Atque in dierum quidem
diffissionibus conperendinationibusque et aliis quibus-
dam legitimis ritibus ex ipsa lege Iulia et ex Sabini
Masurii et quorundam aliorum iurisperitorum com-
mentariis commoniti et adminiculati sumus. In his


1 See note on xii. 13. 1.


* A law of Julius Caesar and Augustus regulating criminal
processes.


20


BOOK XIV. 1. 36-11. 2


“They predict," said he, “either adverse or pros-
perous events. If they foretell prosperity and
deceive you, you will be made wretched by vain
expectations ; if they foretell adversity and lie, you
. will be made wretched by useless fears. But if they
predict truly and the events are unhappy, you will
thereby be made wretched by anticipation, before you
are fated to be so ; if on the contrary they promise
prosperity and it comes to pass, then there will
clearly be two disadvantages: the anticipation of
your hopes will wear you out with suspense, and
hope will in advance have reaped the fruit of your
approaching happiness. Therefore there is every
reason why you should not resort to men of that
kind, who profess knowledge of the future."


II


How Favorinus discoursed when I consulted him about the
duty of a judge.

AT the time when I was first chosen by the prae-
. tors to be one of the judges in charge of the suits
which are called “ private," * I hunted up books
written in both languages on the duty of a judge, in
order that, being a young man, called from poets’
tales and orators’ perorations to preside in court, I
might from lack of the “living voice,’ as they say,
gain legal lore from so-called ‘mute counsellors.”
And with regard to postponements and delays and
some other legal principles I was advised and helped
by the Julian Law itself2 and by the commentaries
of Masurius Sabinus ? and some other jurists.* But in


3 Jur. Civ. iii. 9, Bremer. 4 ji, 2, p. 567, Bremer.
21


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


autem, quae existere solent, negotiorum ambagibus
et in ancipiti rationum diversarum circumstantia
nihil quicquam nos huiuscemodi libri iuverunt.

3 Nam, etsi consilia iudicibus ex praesentium causarum
statu capienda sunt, generalia tamen quaedam
praemonita et praecepta sunt, quibus ante causam
praemuniri iudex praepararique ad incertos casus
futurarum difficultatum debeat, sicut illa mihi
tunc accidit inexplicabilis reperiendae sententiae
ambiguitas.

4  Petebatur apud me pecunia, quae dicebatur data
numerataque, sed qui petebat neque tabulis neque
testibus id factum docebat et argumentis admodum

5 exilibus nitebatur. Sed eum constabat virum esse
firme bonum notaeque et expertae fidei et vitae in-
culpatissimae, multaque et inlustria exempla probitatis

6 sinceritatisque eius expromebantur; illum autem
unde petebatur hominem esse non bonae rei vitaque
turpi et sordida convictumque volgo in mendaciis
plenumque esse perfidiarum et fraudum ostendebatur.

7 Is tamen cum suis multis patronis clamitabat probari
apud me debere pecuniam datam consuetis modis,
** expensi latione," * mensae rationibus," * chirogra-
phi exhibitione," *tabularum obsignatione," “testium

8 intercessione," ex quibus omnibus si nulla re pro-
baretur, dimitti iam se sane! oportere et adversarium
de calumnia damnari, quod de utriusque autem vita
atque factis diceretur, frustra id fieri atque dici ; rem
enim de petenda pecunia apud iudicem privatum
agi, non apud censores de moribus.


! se sane, Lion; se, 8; sane, s.


* i.e. advanced or loaned by the claimant.
22


BOOK XIV. 1. 2-8


those complicated cases which often come up, and
in the perplexity arising from conflicting opinions,
such books gave me no aid at all. For although the
opinions of judges ought to be formed from the
conditions of the cases before them, yet there are
certain general principles and precepts by. which,
before hearing a case, the judge ought to guard and
prepare himself against the uncertain event of future
difficulties ; as, for example, an inexplicable perplexity
in coming to àn opinion once befell me.

A sum of money was claimed before me, which
was said to have been paid and counted out;! but the
claimant did not show this by documents or witnesses,
but relied upon very slender arguments. It was
clear, however, that he was a thoroughly good man,
of well-known and tested integrity and of blameless
life, and many striking instances of his probity and
honesty were presented. On the other hand, the
man upon whom the claim was made was shown to
be of no substance, of base and evil life, often con-
victed of lying, and full of treachery and fraud. Yet
he, along with his numerous advocates, noisily
protested that the payment of the money ought to
be shown in the usual way, by a “receipt for pay-
ment," by a * book of accounts,” by “producing a
signature,’ by “a sealed deed,” or by the * testi-
mony of witnesses’’; and if it could be shown in
none of these ways, that he ought surely to be
dismissed at once and his accuser found guilty of
blackmail. He maintained that the testimony
relating to the life and conduct of the two parties
was irrelevant; for this was a case of claiming money
before a private judge, not a question of morals
inquired into by the censors.


23


9


10


1l


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Tunc ibi amici mei, quos rogaveram in consilium,
viri exercitati atque in patrociniis et in operis fori
celebres semperque se circumundique distrahentibus
causis festinantes, non sedendum diutius ac nihil esse
dubium dicebant quin absolvendus foret, quem acce-
pisse pecuniam nulla probatione sollemni docebatur.
Sed enim ego homines cum considerabam, alterum
fidei, alterum probri plenum spurcissimaeque vitae ac
defamatissimae, nequaquam adduci potui ad absol-
vendum. ussi igitur diem diffindi atque inde a
subselliis pergo ire ad Favorinum philosophum, quem
in eo tempore Romae plurimum sectabar, atque ei de
causa ac de hominibus quae apud me dicta fuerant,
uti res erat, narro omnia ac peto ut et ipsum illud in
quo haerebam, et cetera etiam quae observanda mihi
forent in officio iudicis, faceret me ut earum rerum
essem prudentior.

Tum Favorinus, religione illa cunctationis et
solicitudinis nostrae conprobata: “Id quidem,"
inquit, *super quo nunc deliberas, videri potest specie
tenui parvaque esse. Sed si de omni quoque officio
iudicis praeire tibi me vis, nequaquam est vel loci


13 huius vel temporis; est enim disceptatio ista mul-


14


tiiugae et sinuosae quaestionis multaque et anxia
cura et circumspicientia indigens. Namque, ut
pauca tibi nunc quaestionum capita adtingam, iam
omnium primum hoc de iudicis officio quaeritur: si
24 ]


BOOK XIV. 1. 9-14


Thereupon some friends of mine, whom I had
asked to aid me with their advice, experienced
men with a reputation gained in acting as advocates
and in the business of the forum, who were always
inclined to act in haste because of the suits every-
where demanding attention, declared there was no
need of sitting longer and that there was no doubt
that the defendant ought to be acquitted, since it
could not be shown in any of the usual ways that he
had received the money. But when I contemplated
the men, one abounding in honesty, the other in
baseness and of a most shameful and degraded life,
I could not by any means be argued into an acquittal.
I therefore ordered a postponement and from the
bench I proceeded to go to the philosopher
Favorinus, with whom I associated a great deal at
Rome at that time. I told him the whole story
of the suit and of the men, as it had been related
to me, begging that with regard both to the matter
about which I was then in doubt, as well as to others
which I should have to consider in my position as
judge, he should make me a man of greater wisdom
in such affairs.

Then Favorinus, after commending my scrupulous
hesitation and my conscientiousness said: “The
question which you are now considering may seem
to be of a trifling and insignificant character. But
if you wish me to instruct you as to the full duties
ofa judge, this is by no means a fit place or time ;
for such a discussion involves many intricate ques-
tions and requires long and anxious attention and
consideration. For—to touch at once upon a few
leading questions for your benefit—the first query
relating to the duty of a judge is this. If a judge


25


15


16


17


18


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


iudex forte id sciat, super qua re apud eum litigatur,
eaque res uni ei, priusquam agi coepta aut in iudi-
cium deducta sit, ex alio quodam negotio casuve!
aliquo cognita liquido et comperta sit, neque id
tamen in agenda causa probetur, oporteatne eum
secundum ea quae sciens venit iudicare, an secundum
ea quae aguntur? Id etiam," inquit, * quaeri solet,
an deceat atque conveniat iudici causa iam cognita,
si facultas esse videatur conponendi negotii, officio
paulisper iudicis dilato communis amicitiae et quasi
pacificatoris partes recipere? Atque illud amplius
ambigi ac dubitari scio, debeatne iudex inter cognos-
cendum ea quae dicto quaesitoque opus est dicere
et quaerere, etiamsi cuius ea dici quaerique interest
neque dicat neque postulet?  Patrocinari enim
prorsus hoc esse aiunt, non iudicare.

* Praeter haec super ea quoque re dissentitur, an
ex usu exque officio sit iudicis, rem causamque de
qua cognoscit interlocutionibus suis ita exprimere
consignareque, ut ante sententiae tempus, ex iis quae
apud eum in praesens confuse varieque dicuntur, pro-
inde ut quoquo in loco ac tempore movetur, signa
et indicia faciat motus atque sensus sui. Nam qui
iudices," inquit, “acres atque celeres videntur, non
aliter existimant rem qua de agitur indagari conpre-


! casuve, Cramer ; casuque, MSS.


26


BOOK XIV. rm. 14-18


chance to have knowledge of a matter which is
brought to trial before him, and the matter is clearly
known and demonstrated to him alone from some
external circumstance or event, before it has begun
to be argued or brought into court, but nevertheless
the same thing is not proved in the course of the
trial, ought he to decide in accordance with what
he knew beforehand, or according to the evidence
in the case? This question also,” said he, “is often
raised, whether it is fitting and proper for a judge,
after a case has been heard, if there seems to be an
opportunity for compromising the dispute, to post-
pone the duty of a judge for a time and take the
part of a common friend and peace-maker, as it
were. And I know that this further is a matter
of doubt and inquiry, whether a judge, when hearing
a suit, ought to mention and ask about the things
which it is for the interest of one of the parties to
the suit to mention and inquire, even if the party in
question neither mentions nor calls for them. For
they say that this is in fact to play the part of an
advocate, not of a judge.

* Besides these questions, there is disagreement
also on this point, whether it is consistent with the
practice and office of a judge by his occasional
remarks so to explain and set forth the matter and
the case which is being tried, that before the time
of his decision, as the result of statements which at
the time are made before him in a confused and
doubtful form, he gives signs and indications of the
emotions and feelings by which he is affected on
each occasion and at every time. For those judges
who give the impression of being keen and quick
think that the matter in dispute cannot be examined


27


19


20


21


22


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


hendique posse, nisi is qui iudicat crebris interroga-
tionibus necessariisque interlocutionibus et suos
sensus aperiat et litigantium deprehendat. Contra
autem qui sedatiores et graviores putantur negant
iudicem debere ante sententiam, dum causa utrum-
que agitatur, quotiens aliqua re proposita motus est,
totiens significare quid sentiat. Eventurum enim
aiunt, ut, quia pro varietate propositionum argumen-
torumque alius atque alius motus animi patiendus
est, aliter atque aliter eadem in causa eodemque in
tempore sentire et interloqui videantur.

* Sed de his," inquit, *et ceteris huiuscemodi
iudicialis officii tractatibus et nos posthac, cum erit
otium, dicere quid sentiamus conabimur et praecepta
Aelii Tuberonis super officio iudicis, quae nuper-
rime legi, recensebimus. Quod autem ad pecuniam
pertinet quam apud iudicem peti dixisti, suadeo
hercle tibi, utare M. Catonis, prudentissimi viri,
consilio, qui, in oratione quam Pro L. T'urio contra
Cn. Gellium dixit, ita esse a maioribus traditum
observatumque ait, ut si quod inter duos actum est
neque tabulis neque testibus planum fieri possit,
tum apud iudicem qui de ea re cognosceret, uter
ex his vir melior esset quaereretur et, si pares essent
seu boni pariter seu mali, tum illi unde petitur
crederetur ac secundum eum iudicaretur. In hac


* Tempore evidently refers to the whole period of the
trial; Favorinus seems to use the word in a double sense,
to emphasize his point.

* ]i., Jordan,


28


BOOK XIV. 1. 18-22


and understood, unless the judge by frequent ques-
tions and necessary interruptions makes his own
opinion clear and grasps that of the litigants. But,
on the other hand, those who have a reputation for
calmness and dignity maintain that the judge ought
not, before giving his decision and while the case is
being pleaded by both parties, to indicate his opinion
whenever he is influenced by some argument that
is brought forward. For they say that the result
will be, since one emotion of the mind after another
must be excited by the variety of points and argu-
ments, that such judges will seem to feel and speak
differently about the same case and almost at the
same time.!

* But," said he, “about these and other similar
discussions as to the duty of a judge I shall attempt
to give you my views later, when we have leisure,
and I will repeat the precepts of Aelius Tubero on
the subject, which I have read very recently. But
so far as concerns the money which you said was
claimed before your tribunal, I advise you, by
Heaven! to follow the counsel of that shrewdest
of men, Marcus Cato; for he, in the speech which
he delivered For Lucius T'urius against Gnaeus Gellius?
said that this custom had been handed down and
observed by our forefathers, that if a question at
issue between two men could not be proved either
by documents or witnesses, then the question should
be raised before the judge who was trying the case
which of the two was the better man, and if they
were either equally good or equally bad, that then
the one upon whom the claim was made should be
believed and the verdict should be given in his
favour. But in this case about which you are in


29


23


24
25


26


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


autem causa de qua tu ambigis, optimus est qui
petit, unde petitur deterrimus, et res est inter duos
acta sine testibus. Eas igitur et credas ei qui petit,
condemnesque eum de quo petitur, quoniam, sicuti
dicis, duo pares non sunt et qui petit melior est."

Hoc quidem mihi tum Favorinus, ut virum philo-
sophum decuit, suasit. Sed maius ego altiusque
id esse existimavi quam quod meae aetati et medio-
critati conveniret, ut cognovisse et condemnasse de
moribus, non de probationibus rei gestae viderer;
ut absolverem tamen inducere in animum non quivi
et propterea iuravi, mihi non liquere, atque ita
iudicatu illo solutus sum.

Verba ex oratione M. Catonis cuius commeminit
Favorinus, haec sunt: * Atque ego a maioribus
memoria sic accepi: si quis quid alter ab altero
peterent, si ambo pares essent, sive boni sive mali
essent, quod duo res! gessissent uti testes non
interessent, illi unde petitur, ei potius credendum
esse. Nunc si sponsionem fecissent? Gellius cum
Turio: ‘Ni vir melior esset Gellius quam Turius,’
“nemo, opinor, tam insanus esset qui iudicaret
meliorem esse Gellium quam Turium ; si non melior
Gellius est Turio, potius oportet credi unde petitur."

1 pei, Rutgers; pares, Sku!sch,
2 fecisset, NO.
30


BOOK XIV. m. 22-26


doubt the claimant is a person of the highest
character and the one on whom the claim is made
is the worst of men, and there are no witnesses to
the transaction between the two. So then go and
give credit to the claimant and condemn the one
on whom the claim is made, since, as you say, the
two are not equal and the claimant is the better
man.

This was the advice which Favorinus gave me at
that time, as became a philosopher. But I thought
that I should show more importance and presump-
tion than became my youth and humble merit, if I
appeared to sit in judgment on and condemn a man
from the characters of the disputants rather than
from the evidence in the case; yet I could not
make up my mind to acquit the defendant, and
accordingly I took oath that the matter was not
clear to me and in that way I was relieved from
rendering a decision.

The words of the speech of Marcus Cato which
Favorinus mentioned are these: ‘ And I have learnt
this from the tradition of our ancestors: if anyone
claim anything from another, and both are equally


either good or bad, provided there are no witnesses


to the transaction between the two, the one from
whom the claim is made ought rather to be credited.
Now, if Gellius had made a wager? with Turio on
the issue, ‘Provided Gellius were not a better man
than Turio, no one, I think, would be so mad.
as to decide that Gellius is better than Turio; if
Gellius is not better than Turio, the one from whom
the claim is made ought preferably to be credited."


1 See note on vi. 11. 9.


3T


Ó


t2


e


n


b


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


III


An aemuli offensique inter sese fuerint Xenophon et
Plato.

Qui de Xenophontis Platonisque vita et moribus
pleraque omnia exquisitissime scripsere, non afuisse
ab eis motus quosdam tacitos et occultos simultatis
aemulationisque mutuae putaverunt et eius rei
argumenta quaedam coniectaria ex eorum scriptis
protulerunt. Ea sunt profecto huiuscemodi: quod
neque a Platone in tot numero libris mentio usquam
facta sit Xenophontis neque item contra ab eo in
suis libris Platonis, quamquam uterque ac maxime
Plato complurium Socratis sectatorum in sermonibus
quos scripsit commeminerit. Id etiam esse non
sincerae neque amicae voluntatis indicium credi-
derunt, quod Xenophon inclito illi operi Platonis,
quod de optimo statu reipublicae civitatisque ad-
ministrandae scriptum est, lectis ex eo duobus fere
libris qui primi in volgus exierant, opposuit contra
conscripsitque diversum regiae administrationis
genus, quod Ilaide(as Kvpov inscriptum est. Eo
facto scriptoque eius usque adeo permotum esse
Platonem ferunt, ut quodam in libro, mentione
Cyri regis habita, retractandi levandique eius operis
gratia, virum quidem Cyrum navum et strenuum
fuisse dixerit, zoiBe(as 0$ ox ópÜOs dba 7d
maparav; haec enim verba sunt de Cyro Platonis.

Praeterea putant id quoque ad ista, quae dixi,


1 De Legg. 12, p. 694, c.
32


BOOK XIV. mr. 1-5


III


. Whether Plato and Xenophon were rivals and not on good
terms with each other.


TuHos—E who have written most carefully and
thoroughly about the life and character of Xenophon
and Plato have expressed the belief that they were
not free from certain secret and concealed feelings
of enmity and rivalry of each other, and they have
set forth some conjectural evidence of this, drawn
from their writings. These are in fact of this sort:
that Plato in his great number of works nowhere
makes mention of Xenophon, nor, on the other
hand, does Xenophon mention Plato in his writings,
although both men, and in particular Plato in the
dialogues which he wrote, mention many followers
of Socrates. This too they thought was an indica-
tion of no sincerely friendly feeling : that Xenophon
in opposition to that celebrated work of Plato, which
he wrote on the best form of constitution and of
governing a city-state, having barely read the two
books of Plato's work which were first made public,
' proposed a different mode of government (to wit,
a monarchy) in the work entitled IIoióe(o, Kvpov, or
The Education of Cyrus. They say that Plato was
so disturbed by that conduct and book of his, that
having made mention of king Cyrus in one of his
own books, in order to criticize and belittle
Xenophon’s work he said! that Cyrus was indeed
a strong and active man, but * had by no means had
a fitting education”; for these are Plato's words
about Cyrus.

Moreover, they think that this also is added to

33

VOL. III. D


10


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS
\


accedere: quod Xenophon, in libris quos dictorum
atque factorum Socratis commentarios composuit,
negat Socraten de caeli atque naturae causis
rationibusque umquam disputavisse, ac ne disciplinas
quidem ceteras, quae pafjuara Graeci appellant,
quae ad bene beateque vivendum non pergerent,
aut attigisse aut comprobasse, idcircoque turpiter
eos mentiri dicit, qui dissertationes istiusmodi
Socrati adtribuerent.  * Hoc autem," inquiunt,
* Xenophon cum scripsit, Platonem videlicet notat,
in cuius libris Socrates physica et musica et geo-
metrica disserit." Sed enim de viris optimis et
gravissimis si credendum hoc aut suspicandum fuit,
causam equidem esse arbitror non obtrectationis nec
invidiae neque de gloria maiore parienda certationis ;
haec enim procul a moribus philosophiae absunt,
in quibus illi duo omnium iudicio excelluerunt.
Quae igitur est opinionis istius ratio? Haec pro-
fecto est: aequiperatio ipsa plerumque et parilitas
virtutum inter sese consimilium, etiamsi contentionis
studium et voluntas abest, speciem tamen aemu-
lationis creat, Nam cum ingenia quaedam magna
duornm pluriumve in eiusdem rei studio inlustrium
aut pari sunt fama aut proxima, oritur apud diversos
favisores eorum industriae! laudisque aestumandae
contentio. Tum postea ex alieno certamine ad eos
quoque ipsos contagium certationis adspirat cursus-
que eorum ad eandem virtutis calcem pergentium,
quando est compar vel ambiguus, in aemulandi


1 jnlustriae, suggested by Hosius.


1 Memorabilia, 1.1.11.
* For ambiguus in this sense see Virg. Aen. v. 326.


34


BOOK XIV. 1. 5-10


what I have already said: that Xenophon, in the
book which he wrote as records of the sayings and
doings of Socrates,! asserts that Socrates never dis-
cussed the causes and laws of the heavens and of
nature, and that he never touched upon or approved
the other sciences, called by the Greeks pa6ypara,
which did not contribute to a good and happy life ;
accordingly, he says that those who have attributed
discourses of that kind to Socrates are guilty of a
base falsehood.

* But when Xenophon wrote this," they say, * he
of course refers to Plato, in whose works Socrates
discourses on physics, music and geometry." But
if anything of this kind was to be believed, or even
suspected, in noble and dignified men, I do not
believe that the motive was hostility or envy, or a
contest for gaining greater glory; for such con-
siderations are wholly alien to the character of
philosophers, among whom those two were in all
men's judgment pre-eminent. What then is the
reason for that opinion? Undoubtedly this: the
mere equality and likeness of kindred talents, even
.though the desire and inclination of contention be
absent, nevertheless create an appearance of rivalry.
For when two or more men of great intellectual
gifts, who have gained distinction in the same pur-
suit, are of equal or nearly equal fame, then there
arises among their various partisans emulation in
expressing an estimate of their efforts and merit.
Then later, from the contention of others, the
contagion of rivalry spreads to the men them-
selves, and while they are pressing on to the same
goal of honour, the race is so even, or almost
even,? that it comes imperceptibly under a sus-


35
D 2


11


1


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


suspiciones non suo, sed faventium studio delabitur.
Proinde igitur et Xenophon et Plato, Socraticae
amoenitatis duo lumina, certare aemularique inter
sese existimati sunt, quia de his apud alios uter
esset exuperantior certabatur et quia duae eminen-
tiae, cum simul iunctae in arduum nituntur, simul-
acrum quoddam contentionis aemulae pariunt.


IV


Quod apte Chrysippus et graphice imaginem [Iustitiae
modulis coloribusque verborum depinxit.


CoNpicNE mehercule et condecore Chrysippus, in
librorum qui inscribuntur Ilepi Kadod xoi 'Hóovjs
primo, os et oculos Iustitiae vultumque eius severis
atque venerandis verborum coloribus depinxit,
Facit quippe imaginem [Iustitiae fierique solitam
esse dicit a pictoribus rhetoribusque antiquioribus
ad hunc ferme modum : “ Forma atque filo virginali,
aspectu vehementi et formidabili, luminibus ocu-
lorum acribus, neque humilis neque atrocis, sed
reverendae cuiusdam tristitiae dignitate." Ex
imaginis autem istius significatione intellegi voluit,
iudicem, qui lustitiae antistes est, oportere esse
gravem, sanctum, severum, incorruptum, inadulabi-
lem contraque improbos nocentesque inmisericordem
atque inexorabilem erectumque et arduum ac poten-
tem, vi et maiestate aequitatis veritatisque terrificum.
Verba ipsa Chrysippi de Iustitia scripta haec


! They were not rivals, but both equally eager to attain
* virtue." Thus they seem like competitors in a race, and


36


BOOK XIV. mr ro-1v. 4


picion of rivalry, not from any purpose of their own,
but from the zeal of their partisans! So then Xeno-
phon and Plato, the two luminaries of Socratic

-eloquence, were believed to contend with and rival
each other, because others strove to show that one or
the other was the superior, and because two eminent
characters, when they are labouring side by side
for a lofty aim, beget a kind of appearance of rivalry
and competition.


IV


That Chrysippus skilfully and vividly represented the like-
ness of Justice in melodious and picturesque language.
Mosr worthily, by Heaven! and most elegantly

did Chrysippus, in the first book of his work entitled

On Beauty and Pleasure, depict the face and eyes of

Justice, and her aspect, with austere and noble

word.painting. For he represents the figure of

Justice, and says that it was usually represented by

the painters and orators of old in about the follow-

ing manner: “ Of maidenly form and bearing, with a

stern and fearsome countenance, a keen glance of the

' eye, and a dignity and solemnity which was neither

mean nor cruel, but awe-inspiring.” From the spirit

of this representation he wished it to be understood
that the judge, who is the priest of Justice, ought to
be dignified, holy, austere, incorruptible, not suscep-
tible to flattery, pitiless and inexorable towards the
wicked and guilty, vigorous, lofty, and powerful,
terrible. by reason of the force and majesty of equity
and truth. Chrysippus’ own words about Justice


as they run so that you can hardly tell which leads, their
partisans insist on regarding them as rivals.


3


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


sunt: llapÜévos dé ctvar Aéyerat Kata ovpBodrov ToU
dOu&d opos elvar kal pydapds evdiddvat Tots. kakovpyots,
pnde rpocterOar pyre rovs émieweis Aóyovs pire zapat-
tyow kai dénow pyte koAakeíav pyre àXAAo pydey TOv
TolovTwy* ots akoAovOws kai ckvÜpoemi) ypaderat kal
ovvesTnKos éxovaa. TO Tpóc«wrov kal évrovov Kal SedopKos
Brérovea, date Tois pev adiKors PoBov eurrorety, Tots be
dixalous Odpoos: Tots wev Tpordirovs Ovros TOU ToLovTOU
mpoowrov, Tots 0€ érépots poc ávrovs.

Haec verba Chrysippi eo etiam magis ponenda
existimavi, ut prompta ad considerandum iudican-
dumque sint, quoniam legentibus ea nobis deli-
catiorum ! quidam disciplinarum philosophi, Saevitiae
imaginem istam esse, non Iustitiae, dixerunt.


V


Lis atque contentio grammaticorum Romae inlustrium
enarrata, super casu  vocativo vocabuli quod est


** egregius."

Deressus ego quondam diutina commentatione
laxandi levandique animi gratia in Agrippae campo
deambulabam, Atque ibi duos forte grammaticos
conspicatus non parvi in urbe Roma nominis, certa-
tioni eorum acerrimae adfui, cum alter in casu


1 delicatiores, w; corr. by Stephanus.


1 The campus Agrippae, laid out by the famous minister
of Augustus, was finished and dedicated by the emperor in


38


BOOK XIV. iv. 4-v. 1


are as follows: *She has the title of virgin as a
symbol of her purity and an indication that she has
never given way to evil-doers, that she has never
yielded to soothing words, to prayers and entreaties,
to flattery, nor to anything of that kind. There-
fore she is properly represented too as stern and
dignified, with a serious expression and a keen,
steadfast glance, in order that she may inspire fear
in the wicked and courage in the good; to the
latter, as her friends, she presents a friendly aspect,
to the former a stern face."

I thought it the more necessary to quote these
words of Chrysippus, in order that they might be
before us for consideration and judgment, since, on
hearing me read them, some philosophers who are
more sentimental in their views called that a repre-
sentation of Cruelty rather than of Justice.


V


The strife and contention of two eminent grammarians at
Rome as to the vocative case of egregius.


Once upon a time, wearied with constant writing,
I was walking in the park of Agrippa! for the
purpose of relieving and resting my mind. And
there, as it chanced, I saw two grammarians of no
small repute in the city of Rome, and was a witness
of a violent dispute between them, one maintaining


7.0. It extended from the line of the aqua Virgo on the
south at least as far as the modern via S. Claudio on the
north, and from the via Lata to the slope of the Quirinal hill,
although its eastern boundary is quite uncertain; see Platner,
Topog.*, p. 477.

39


.ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


vocativo * vir egregi" dicendum contenderet, alter
* vir egregie."

Ratio autem eius, qui ‘‘egregi”’ oportere dici
censebat, huiuscemodi fuit: * Quaecumque," inquit,
* nomina seu vocabula recto casu numero singulari
*us' syllaba finiuntur, in quibus ante ultimam
syllabam — posita est i littera, ea omnia casu
vocativo : littera terminantur, ut ‘Caelius Caeli,
* modius modi, ‘tertius terti, * Accius Acci, ‘ Titius
Titi' et similia omnia; sic igitur *egregius, quoniam
‘us’ syllaba in casu nominandi finitur eamque
syllabam praecedit : littera, habere debebit in
casu vocandi i litteram extremam et idcirco
‘egregi, non egregie, rectius dicetur. Nam
‘divus’ et ‘rivus’ et *clivus' non ‘us’ syllaba
terminantur, sed ea quae per duo w scribenda est,
propter cuius syllabae sonum declarandum reperta
erat nova littera, quae * digamma' appellabatur."

Hoc ubi ille alter audivit, * O," inquit, * egregie
grammatice vel, si id mavis, egregissime, dic, oro
te, *inscius' et ‘impius’ et ‘sobrius’ et *ebrius'
et ‘proprius’ et ‘propitius’ et ‘anxius’ et ‘con-
trarius, quae *us' syllaba finiuntur, in quibus ante
ultimam syllabam i littera est, quem casum vocandi
habent? Me enim pudor et verecundia tenent,
pronuntiare ea secundum tuam definitionem," Sed
cum ille paulisper oppositu horum vocabulorum
commotus reticuisset et mox tamen se conlegisset
eandemque illam quam definierat regulam retineret

* The Greek digamma had practically the form of Latin
F and the pronunciation of Latin V (the semi-vowel).
The Romans used the character to represent the sound


of f, at first with the addition of the aspirate À (as in
Shefhaked, C.I.L. i*. 3 and xiv. 4193) and afterwards alone.


40


BOOK XIV. v. 1-4


that vir egregi was the proper form of the vocative
case, the other vir egregie.

The argument of the one who thought that we
should say egregi was of this sort: * Whatever
nouns or words,” said he, “end in the nominative
singular in the syllable ws preceded by :, in the
vocative case terminate in the letter 7, as Caelius
Caeli, modius modi, tertius terti, Accius Acci, Titius Titi,
and the like ; so then egregius, since it ends in the
syllable us in the nominative and the letter 7 pre-
cedes that syllable, must in the vocative singular
have z for the final letter, and therefore it is correct
to say egregi, not egregie. For divus and rivus and
clivus do not end in the syllable ws, but in that
which ought to be written with two w’s, and in order
to indicate that sound a new letter was devised,
which was called the digamma." !

When the other heard this, he said: O egregie
grammatice, or if you prefer, egregissime, tell me, I
pray you, what is the vocative case of inscius, impius,
sobrius, ebrius, proprius, propitius, anxius, and con-
trarius, which end in the syllable us and have the
letter i before the final syllable? For shame and
modesty prevent me from pronouncing them accord-
ing to your rule." Now the other, overcome by the
accumulation of so many words against him, remained
silent for a time; but then he nevertheless rallied,
and upheld and defended that.same rule which he


Since V was used both for the vowel v and the semi-vowel v,
the emperor Claudius introduced an inverted digamma (i),
to represent the latter sound ; see Suet. Claud. xii. 3 and
(e.g.) C.I.L. vi. 919. The writing of F for V, to which
Gellius seems to refer, was apparently confined to a few
grammarians ; see Cassiodorus, vii. 148. 8 K and Priscian,
my dle Bake


4I


bo


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


et propugnaret diceretque et * proprium " et “ pro-
pitium" et *anxium" et * contrarium" itidem in
casu vocativo dicendum, ut * adversarius" et ‘ ex-
trarius " diceretur ; *inscium " quoque et * impium "
et *ebrium" et “sobrium” insolentius quidem
paulo, sed rectius per i litteram, non per e, in eodem
casu pronuntiandum, eaque inter eos contentio
longius duceretur, non arbitratus ego operae pre-
tium esse eadem istaec diutius audire, clamantes
conpugnantesque illos reliqui.


VI


Cuimodi sint quae speciem doctrinarum habeant, sed neque
delectent neque utilia sint; atque inibi de vocabulis
singularum urbium regionumque inmutatis.


Howo nobis familiaris, in litterarum cultu non
ignobilis magnamque aetatis partem in libris ver-
satus *Adiutum," inquit, *ornatumque volo ire
Noctes tuas"; et simul dat mihi librum grandi
volumine doctrinae omnigenus, ut ipse dicebat,
praescatentem, quem sibi elaboratum esse ait ex
multis et variis et remotis lectionibus, ut ex eo
sumerem quantum liberet rerum memoria dignarum.
Accipio cupidus et libens, tamquam si copiae cornum
nactus essem, et recondo me penitus, ut sine arbitris
legam.

At quae ibi scripta erant, pro luppiter, mera
miracula! quo nomine fuerit qui primus * gram-
maticus " appellatus est; et quot fuerint Pythagorae
nobiles, quot Hippocratae; et cuiusmodi fuisse


42


BOOK XIV. v. 4-v1. 3


had laid down, maintaining that proprius, propitius,
anaius and contrarius ought to have the same form
in the vocative case as adversarius and extrarius ; that
- inscius also and impius and ebrius and sobrius were
somewhat less commonly, nevertheless more cor-
rectly, made to end in that same case in the letter
i rather than e. But as this contest of theirs was
likely to be continued for some time, I did not think
it worth while to listen to those same arguments
any longer, and I left them shouting and wrangling.


Vi


Of certain things which have the appearance of learning, but
are neither entertaining nor useful; and also of changes
in the names of several cities and regions.


A FRIEND of mine, a man not without fame as a
student of literature, who had passed a great part
of his life among books, said to me: *I should like
to aid and adorn your Nights,’ at the same time
presenting me with a book of great bulk, overflow-
ing, as he himself put it, with learning of every
kind. Hesaid that he had compiled it as the result
of wide, varied and abstruse reading, and he invited
me to take from it as much as I liked and thought
worthy of record. I took the book eagerly and
gladly, as if I had got possession of the horn of
plenty, and shut myself up in order to read it without
interruption.

But what was written there was, by Jove! merely
a list of curiosities: the name of the man who was
first called a ** grammarian " ; the number of famous
men named Pythagoras and Hippocrates ; Homer's

43


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Homerus dicat in Ulixis domo Aaspgv; et quam
ob causam Telemachus cubans iunctim sibi cubantem
Pisistratum non manu adtigerit, sed pedis ictu
excitarit; et Euryclia Telemachum quo genere
claustri incluserit; et quapropter idem poeta rosam
non norit, oleum ex rosa norit. Atque illud etiam
scriptum fuit, quae nomina fuerint sociorum Ulixis,
qui a Scylla rapti laceratique sunt; utrum & cj
éco Oadrdooyn Ulixes erraverit xar' 'Apícrapxov an
€v Tjj co xarà Kpárgra; item etiam istic scriptum
4 fuit, qui sint apud Homerum versus isopsephi; et
quorum ibi nominum zapacrixís reperiatur; et quis
adeo versus sit, qui per singula vocabula singulis
syllabis increscat; ac deinde qua ratione dixerit
singulas pecudes in singulos annos terna parere;
et ex quinque operimentis quibus Achillis clipeus
munitus est, quod factum ex auro est summum sit
an medium, et praeterea quibus urbibus regioni-
busque vocabula iam mutata sint, quod Boeotia
ante appellata fuerit * Aonia, quod Aegyptus
** Aeria," quod Creta quoque eodem nomine “ Aeria "'
dicta -sit, quod Attice *''Axrj," quod Corinthus
* Ephyre," quod Macedonia **'Hya6(o," quod Thes-
salia ** Aiuovia,” quod Tyros * Sarra," quod Thracia
ante *Sithonia"! dicta sit, quod Paestum * IIoc«-
8óviov."
5 Haec item atque alia multa istiusmodi scripta in
eo libro fuerunt.
Quem cum statim properans redderem : * "Ovauó


! Sithonia, Hertz; Sithon, MSS.


1 Odyss. xxii. 198, 137. ? Odyss. xv. 44.
5 Odyss. i. 441. 4 Iliad xxiii. 186.
5 Odyss. xii. 245, $ p. 244, Lehrs.


44


BOOK XIV. vr. 3-5


description! of the Aavpj, or “ narrow passage," in
the house of Ulysses; why Telemachus did not
touch Pisistratus, who was lying beside him, with
his hand, but awakened him by a kick ;? with what
kind of bolt Euryclia shut in Telemachus;? and
why the same poet did not know the rose, but did
know oil made from roses.4 It also contained the
names of the companions of Ulysses who were seized
and torn to pieces by Scylla; 5 whether the wander-
ings of Ulysses were in the inner sea, as Aristarchus
believed,$ or in the outer sea, according to Crates.
There was also a list of the isopsephic verses in
Homer ;? what names in the same writer are given
in the form of an acrostic ; what verse it is in which
each word is a syllable longer than the preceding
word;8 by what rule each head of cattle produces
three offspring each year;? of the five layers with
which the shield of Achilles was strengthened,
whether the one made of gold was on top or in the
middle; 1 and besides what regions and cities had
had a change of name, as Boeotia was formerly
called Aonia, Egypt Aeria, Crete by the same name
Aeria, Attica cle, Corinth Ephyre, Macedonia
Emathia, Thessaly Haemonia, Tyre Sarra, Thrace
Sithonia, Paestum Poseidonia.

These things and many others of the same kind
were included in that book.

Hastening to return it to him at once, I said: “I


7 That is, those whose letters, treated as figures, amounted
to the same sum, thus Iliad vii. 264 and 265 = 3498. See
Suet. Nero xxxix. 2 and note a (L.C.L.).

8 An example is Iliad iii. 182, à udkap *Arpeldn moipnyeves
0XBiobaluov.

® Odyss. iv. 86. 10 Tiiad xx. 269.


45


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


cov," inquam, “ doctissime virorum, tavrys Tis voÀv-
paÓías et librum hunc opulentissimum recipe, nil
prosus ad nostras paupertinas litteras congruentem.
Nam meae Noctes, quas instructum ornatumque isti,
de uno maxime illo versu Homeri quaerunt, quem
Socrates prae omnibus semper rebus sibi esse cordi
dicebat :


9, > , , A. , , »»
Ortt Tou ev Meyapoltot KQKOV T ayaGov T€ TETUKTAL.


VII


Quod M. Varro Cn. Pompeio, consuli primum designato,
commentarium dedit, quem appellavit ipse EicaywyiKdy,
de offieio senatus habendi.

1  Gwatro Pompeio consulatus primus cum M. Crasso
2 designatus est. Eum magistratum Pompeius cum
initurus foret, quoniam per militiae tempora senatus
habendi consulendique,! rerum expers urbanarum
fuit, M. Varronem, familiarem suum, rogavit uti
commentarium faceret Eicayweyuóv—sic enim Varro
ipse appellat—, ex quo disceret quid facere dicere-
3 que deberet, cum senatum consuleret. Eum librum
commentarium, quem super ea re Pompeio fecerat,
perisse Varro ait in litteris quas ad Oppianum


! senatus . . . consulendique deleted by C. IV. F.


Müller; reliquarumque rerum, Mommsen ; omninoque re-
rum, Mdhly.


1 Odyss. iv. 392.
* The emphasis is on the last two words. Socrates thought
that the chief value of the study of philosophy was its effect


46


BOOK XIV. vr. 5-vrr. 3


congratulate you, most learned sir, on this display
of encyclopaedie erudition; but take back this
precious volume, which does not have the slightest
connection with my humble writings. For my
Nights, which you wish to assist and adorn, base
their inquiries especially on that one verse of Homer
which Socrates said was above all other things
always dear to him: 1


Whate’er of good and ill has come to you at
home." ?


VII


That Marcus Varro presented Gnaeus Pompeius, when he was
consul elect for the first time, with a commentary, which
Varro himself called Eicaywyixds,3 on the method of
conducting meetings of the senate.


Gwarus Pomprius was elected consul for the first
time with Marcus Crassus. When he was on the
point of entering upon the office, because of his
long military service he was unacquainted with the
method of convening and consulting the senate,
' and of city affairs in general He therefore asked
his friend Marcus Varro to make him a book of
instructions (Eicayeywós, as Varro himself termed
it), from which he might learn what he ought to say
and do when he brought a measure before the
House. Varro in letters which he wrote to Op-


on the student's own life and character. Gellius appar-
ently means that he is collecting materials for home
consumption; see Praef. i, wt liberis meis partae istius-
modi remisstones essent.

3 The word means Introductory. It was what we should
call a ** Handbook of Parliamentary Practice.”


47


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


dedit, quae sunt in libro Epistolicarum Quaestionum
quarto, in quibus litteris, quoniam quae ante scrip-
serat non comparebant, docet rursum multa ad eam
rem ducentia.

4 Primum ibi ponit qui fuerint per quos more
maiorum senatus haberi soleret eosque nominat:
* dictatorem, consules, praetores, tribunos plebi,
interregem, praefectum urbi," neque alii praeter
hos ius fuisse dixit facere senatusconsultum,
quotiensque usus venisset ut omnes isti magistratus
eodem tempore Roniae essent, tum quo supra ordine
scripti essent, qui eorum prior aliis esset, ei potis-

b simum senatus consulendi ius fuisse ait, deinde
extraordinario iure tribunos quoque militares, qui
pro consulibus fuissent, item decemviros, quibus
imperium consulare tum esset, item triumviros
reipublicae constituendae causa creatos ius con-
sulendi senatum habuisse.

6 Postea scripsit de intercessionibus dixitque inter-
cedendi ne senatusconsultum fieret ius fuisse iis
solis qui eadem potestate qua ii qui senatuscon-
sultum facere vellent maioreve essent.

7 Tum adscripsit de locis in quibus senatuscon-
sultum fieri iure posset, docuitque confirmavitque,
nisi in loco per augurem constituto, quod “ tem-


! datum e senatus consulto fuisset, Momumsen; tum esset,
MSS.


1 i, p. 195, Bipont.

? i, p. 125, Bremer.

* From 444 to 384 m.c. military tribunes with consular
authority took the place of the consuls.

* The decemviri legibus scribundis, who drew up the Twelve
Tables in 450 B.o.


48


*


BOOK XIV, vu. 3-7


pianus, contained in the fourth book of his Jnvestiga-
tions in Epistolary Form, says! that this notebook


.which he made for Pompey on that subject was


lost; and since what he had previously written was
no longer in existence, he repeats in those letters a
good deal bearing upon the same subject.?

First of all, he tells us there by what magistrates
the senate was commonly convened according to
the usage of our forefathers, naming these: “the
dictator, consuls, praetors, tribunes of the commons,
interrex, and prefect of the city." No other except
these, he said, had the right to pass a decree of
the senate, and whenever it happened that. all those
magistrates were in Rome at the same time, then he
says that the first in the order of the list which
I have just quoted had the prior right of bringing a
matter before the senate; next, by an exceptional
privilege, the military tribunes also who had acted
as consuls? and likewise the decemvirs,* who in
their day had consular authority, and the triumvirs 5
appointed to reorganize the State, had the privilege
of bringing measures before the House.

Afterwards he wrote about vetoes, and said that
the right to veto a decree of the senate belonged
only to those who had the same authority $ as those
who wished to pass the decree, or greater power.

He then added a list of the places in which a
decree of the senate might lawfully be made, and
he showed and maintained that this was regular only


5 The second triumvirate of Antony, Octavian and Lepidus;
cf, iii. 9. 4 and the note.

5 Potestate is used in the technical sense. ‘‘ The par potestas
conferred on the colleague of the presiding officer the right
to interpose his veto” (Abbott, Roman Political Institutions,
§ 274).

49

VOL. III. E


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


plum " appellaretur, senatusconsultum factum esset,
iustum id non fuisse. Propterea et in curia Hostilia
ét in Pompeia et post in Iulia, cum profana ea loca
fuissent, templa esse per augures constituta, ut in
iis senatusconsulta more maiorum iusta fieri possent.
Inter quae id quoque scriptum reliquit, non omnes
aedes sacras templa esse ac ne aedem quidem Vestae
templum esse.

Post haec deinceps dicit senatusconsultum ante
exortum aut post occasum solem factum ratum non
fuisse, opus etiam censorium fecisse existimatos
per quos eo tempore senatusconsultum factum esset,

Docet deinde inibi multa: quibus diebus habere
senatum ius non sit; immolareque hostiam prius au-
spicarique debere, qui senatum habiturus esset, de
rebusque divinis prius quam humanis ad senatum
referendum esse; tum porro referri oportere aut in-
finite de republica aut de singulis rebus finite ;
senatusque consultum fieri duobus modis: aut per
discessionem, si consentiretur, aut, si res dubia esset,
per singulorum sententias exquisitas ; singulos autem


1 A templum (from temno) was originally a sacred precinct.

2 The curia Hostia, on the Comitium (see iv. 5. 1 and
note 3), was the earliest senate house, ascribed to Tullus
Hostilius, the third king of Rome. It was restored by Sulla
in 80 B.c., rebuilt by Faustus Sulla after its destruction by
firein 52 B.C. The curia Julia was begun by Caesar in 45 &.c.
The curia Pompei, in which Caesar was murdered, was built
by Pompey in 55 5.0., near his theatre. Whether it was an
exedra, of his colonnade, or a separate building, is uncertain.

3 The shrine or temple of Vesta, in spite of its sacred
character, was not a consecrated templum. It was said to


50


X


BOOK XIV, vu. 7-9


in a place which had been appointed by an augur,
and called a *temple."! Therefore in the Hostilian


. Senate House? and the Pompeian, and later in the


Julian, since those were unconsecrated places,
* temples" were established by the augurs, in order
that in those places lawful decrees of the senate
might be made according to the usage of our fore-
fathers. In connection with which he also wrote
this, that not all sacred edifices are temples, and
that not even the shrine of Vesta was a temple.?

After this he goes on to say that a decree of
the senate made before sunrise or after sunset was
not valid, and that those through whom a decree of
the senate was made at that time were thought to
have committed an act deserving censure.

Then he gives much instruction on the same
lines: on what days it was not lawful to hold a
meeting of the senate; that one who was about to
hold a meeting of the senate should first offer up
a victim and take the auspices; that questions re-
lating to the gods ought to be presented to the
senate before those affecting men ; then further that


- resolutions should be presented indefinitely,* as affect-


ing the general welfare, or definitely on specific cases ;
that a decree of the senate was made in two ways:
either by division if there was general agreement, or
if the matter was disputed, by calling for the opinion
of each senator ; furthermore the senators ought to


have been built by Numa, and was certainly very ancient.
It was burned and rebuilt several times, the last restora-
tion being in A.D. 196 by Julia Domna, wife of Septimius
Severus.

4 That is, in general terms, as in Livy xxii. l. 5, cum
(consul) de re publica retulisset, i.e. ‘had proposed a general
discussion of the interests of the State.”

51


E 2


10


11


12


13


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


debere consuli gradatim incipique a consulari gradu.
Ex quo gradu semper quidem antea primum rogari
solitum, qui princeps in senatum lectus esset; tum
autem, cum haec scriberet, novam morem institutum
refert per ambitionem gratiamque, ut is primus
rogaretur quem rogare vellet qui haberet senatum,
dum is tamen ex gradu consulari esset. Praeter
haec de pignore quoque capiendo disserit deque
multa dicenda senatori qui, cum in senatum venire
deberet, non adesset. Haec et alia quaedam id
genus in libro quo supra dixi M. Varro epistula ad
Oppianum scripta executus est.

Sed quod ait senatusconsultum duobus modis fieri
solere, aut conquisitis sententiis aut per discessionem,
parum convenire videtur cum eo quod Ateius Capito
in Coniectaneis scriptum reliquit. Nam in libro VIIII.
Tuberonem dicere ait nullum senatusconsultum fieri
posse non discessione facta, quia in omnibus senatus-
consultis, etiam in iis quae per relationem fierent,
discessio esset necessaria, idque ipse Capito verum
esse adfirmat. Sed de hac omni re alio in loco


plenius accuratiusque nos memini scribere.


1 Cf. Suet. Jul. xxi.


52


BOOK XIV. vi. 9-13


be asked their opinions in order, beginning with the
grade of consul. And in that grade in former times
the one to be called upon first was always the one
who had first been enrolled in the senate ; but at
the time when he was writing he said that a new
custom had become current, through partiality and
a desire to curry favour, of asking first for the
opinion of the one whom the presiding officer
wished to call upon, provided however that he was
of consular rank.! Besides this he discoursed about
seizure of goods ? and the imposing of a fine upon a
senator who was not present when it was his duty
to attend a meeting. These and certain other
matters of that kind, first published in the book of
which I spoke above, Marcus Varro treated in a letter
written to Oppianus.

But when he says that a decree of the senate
is commonly made in two ways, either by calling for
opinions or by division, that does not seem to agree
with what Ateius Capito has written in his Mis-
cellanies. Forin Book VIIII Capito says? that Tubero
asserts 4 that no decree of the senate could be made
without a division, since in all decrees of the senate,
even in those which are made by calling for opinions,
a division was necessary, and Capito himself declares
that this is true. But I recall writing on this
whole matter more fully and exactly in another


place.®


2 In consequence of the issue of a writ of execution ; see
Mommsen, Síaatsr. i. 160, and cf, Suet. Jul, xvii. 2.

3 Frag. 3, Huschke ; 5, Bremer.

4 Frag. 1, Huschke ; De Off. Sen. 1, Bremer.

5 jii. 18.


53


1


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


VIII


Quaesitum esse dissensumque an praefectus Latinarum causa
creatus ius senatus convocandi consulendique habeat.


PnaErEcTUM urbi Latinarum causa relictum sena-
tum habere posse Iunius negat, quoniam ne senator
quidem sit neque ius habeat sententiae dicendae,
cum ex ea aetate praefectus fiat quae non sit sena-
toria. M. autem Varro in quarto  Epistolicarum
Quaestionum et Ateius Capito in Coniectaneorum VIII.,
ius esse praefecto senatus habendi dicunt; deque ea
re adsensum esse Capito Varronem! Tuberoni
contra sententiam [unii refert : * Nam et tribunis,"
inquit, * plebis senatus habendi ius erat, quamquam
senatores non essent, ante Atinium plebiscitum."


1 Capito Varronem, Hertz ; capitonem, w.


1 Frag. 10, Huschke; id., Bremer.

* The feriae Latinae were held on the Alban Mount in
April at a date set by the consuls. Since the consuls must
be present at the celebration, they appointed a praefectus
urbi to take their place in Rome. Under the empire he was
called praefectus wrbi feriarum Latinarum, to distinguish him
from the praefectus wrbi instituted by Augustus (Suet. Aug.
xxxvii. Since a praefectus had the powers of the officer or
officers in whose place he was appointed, Varro and Capito are
right in theory ; but since very young men were often appointed


54


BOOK XIV. vin. 1-2


VIII


Inquiry and difference of opinion as to whether the praefect
appointed for the Latin Festival has the right of convening
and consulting the senate.


Junrus declares! that the praefect left in charge
of the city because of the Latin Festival? may not
hold a meeting of the senate, since he is neither
a senator nor has he the right of expressing his
opinion, because he is made praefect at an age when
he is not eligible to the senate. But Marcus Varro
in the fourth book of his Investigations in Epistolary
Form? and Ateius Capito in the ninth of his
Miscellanies* assert that the praefect has the right to
convene the senate, and Capito declares that Varro
agrees on this point with Tubero, contrary to the
view of Junius: “For the tribunes of the commons
also," says Capito,® ** had the right of convening the
senate before the bill of Atinius,® although they
were not senators."


to the office (Suet. Nero, vii. 2; S. H. A. vita Marci, iv, ete.),
Junius may have been right as to the actual practice.

3 p. 196, Bipont.

* Frag. 4, Huschke ; id., Bremer.

5 De Off. Sen. 2, Bremer.

6 Passed by the tribune Atinius in 197 B.c.


55


|2UMIOUOP/PUSTWTJO: 83411
]


% ; finit fio ti ir sartifgindh. ibit Jini il "L5a0
AP Ga ea ose siete


tasti Sof Sucks! dL AMT EM iad Fe
, ah mlgsap i rani, ET D en q0üm3à waup o
sold snlodas oan sl nites Jone. wwdr6H st 30 inBilidak af
vapetiete bent S ih Vokineloab abot
NW. didi ffs 5t Moi nmt i d fior "eub nns £
doupasen: pug TOT digi its 2n] gu ilie Ris
upset «uod doe eotquod me ohio mks aunties aie -
"api oatilidro emdayusico cisbiraup otblderi ctii 2595
E End TUA duiifiguat 3 y » ats istud ‘orp unbla
E "Amo 2. adi amwlquiup s pu olbiyssai o eiesny s ish £
| taoeüred ur visites Pt Hiupai 7  urganté i isaiol: egcti
ge ie diri Sha fs WHeie- sia aq Bes imi votis 221
snbtobà BU ha Sp Sonor iban blur votis Ely
en: raya, a ma muursy ,Muenobis oenrpfl-ecnob
 andsilal Uli ip A: V anselmie anoxig de. vsaliss +
isintsorio t ovdibndiladgtoroint HA sui sonrda. i35 pl
Jstibuslo 'utiiiostrabhs $9 diuphi. tien io^
E, Yassiuab. ehrofatiot | unieditaneria g^ imirdqe xz
Bip: jauissiden ddinbhyiM. bigot: apta Tod«n h Sat Bi "f


[ du 3i cgi moni siraiióe ^ Sepeup ufi —
ee


LIBER QUINTUS DECIMUS
I


Quod in Quinti Claudii Annalibus scriptum est lignum
alumine oblitum non ardere.


1  DkcraMavERAT Antonius Iulianus rhetor, praeter-
quam semper alias, tum vero nimium quantum de-
lectabiliter et feliciter. Sunt enim ferme scholasticae
istae declamationes eiusdem hominis eiusdemque fa-

2 cundiae, non eiusdem tamen cotidie felicitatis, Nos
ergo familiares eius circumfusi undique eum proseque-
bamur domum, cum inde subeuntes montem Cispium
conspicimus insulam quandam occupatam igni multis
arduisque tabulatis editam et propinqua iam omnia

3 flagrare vasto incendio. Tum quispiam ibi ex comi-
tibus Iuliani: * Magni," inquit, *reditus urbanorum
praediorum, sed pericula sunt longe maxima, Si
quid autem posset remedii fore, ut ne tam adsidue
domus Romae arderent, venum hercle dedissem res

4 rusticas et urbicas emissem." Atque illi Iulianus
laeta, ut mos eius fuit, inter fabulandum venustate :
* Si Annalem,” inquit, * undevicensimum Q. Claudi le-
gisses, optumi et sincerissimi Scriptoris, docuisset te
profecto Archelaus, regis Mitridati praefectus, qua


medella quaque sollertia ignem defenderes, ut ne
58


BOOK XV
I


That it is written in the Annals of Quintus Claudius that
wood smeared with alum does not burn.


Tue rhetorician Antonius Julianus, besides holding
forth on many other occasions, had once declaimed
to the special delight and joy of his hearers. For
such scholastic declamations generally show the
characteristics of the same man and the same
eloquence, but yet do not every day give the same
pleasure. We friends of his therefore thronged
about him on all sides and were escorting him home,
when, as we were on our way up the Cispian Hill,
we saw that a block of houses, built high with many
stories, had caught fire, and that now all the
neighbouring buildings were burning in a mighty
conflagration. Then some one of Julianus’ com-
panions said: ** The income from city property is
great, but the dangers are far greater, But if some
remedy could be devised to prevent houses in Rome
from so constantly catching fire, by Jove! I would
sell my country property and buy in the city." And
Julianus replied to him in his usual happy and
graceful style: “If you had read the nineteenth
book of the Annals of Quintus Claudius, that ex-
cellent and faithful writer, you would surely have
learned from Archelaus, a praefect of king Mithri-
dates, by what method and by what skill you might
prevent fires, so that no wooden building of yours


59


5


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


ulla tua aedificatio e ligno correpta atque insinuata
flammis arderet."
Percontatus ego sum quid esset illud mirum


6 Quadrigarii. Repetit: “In eo igitur libro scriptum


7


_


inveni, cum obpugnaret L. Sulla in terra Attica Pi-
raeum et contra Archelaus regis Mitridati praefectus
ex eo oppido propugnaret, turrim ligneam defendendi
gratia structam, cum ex omni latere cireumplexa igni
foret, ardere non quisse, quod alumine ab Archelao
oblita fuisset."

Verba Quadrigarii ex eo libro haec sunt: “ Cum
Sulla conatus! esset tempore ? magno, eduxit copias,
ut Archelai turrim unam quam ille interposuit
ligneam incenderet. Venit, accessit, ligna subdidit,
submovit Graecos, ignem admovit; satis sunt diu
conati, numquam quiverunt incendere, ita Archelaus
omnem materiam obleverat alumine, quod Sulla


atque milites mirabantur, et postquam non succen-


dit,? reduxit copias."


II


Quod Plato in libris quos De Legibus composuit largiores
laetioresque in conviviis invitatiunculas vini non inutiles
esse existimavit.


Ex insula Creta quispiam aetatem Athenis agens
Platonicum sese philosophum dicebat et viderier ges-


2 tibat. Erat autem nihili homo et nugator atque in


1 cunctatus, sugg. by Hosius. ? opere, Lipsius.
* succendit, w ; successit, Damsté.


60


BOOK XV. r. 4-1. 2


would burn, even though caught and penetrated
by the flames."

I inquired what this marvel of Quadrigarius ! was.
He rejoined: *In that book then I found it
recorded, that when Lucius Sulla attacked the
Piraeus in the land of Attica, and Archelaus, praefect
of king Mithridates, was defending it against him,
Sulla was unable to burn a wooden tower constructed
for purposes of defence, although it had been
surrounded with fire on every side, because Arche-
laus had smeared it with alum.”

The words of Quadrigarius in that book are as
follows :?. “ When Sulla had exerted himself for a
long time, he led out his troops in order to set fire
to a single wooden tower which Archelaus had
interposed. He came, he drew near, he put wood
under it, he beat off the Greeks, he applied fire ;
though they tried for a considerable time, they were
never able to set it on fire, so thoroughly had
Archelaus covered all the wood with alum. Sulla
and his soldiers were amazed at this, and failing in
his attempt, the general led back his troops."


II


That Plato in the work which he wrote On the Laws expressed
the opinion that inducements to drink more abundantly
and more merrily at feasts were not without benefit.


A an from the island of Crete, who was living in
Athens, gave out that he was a Platonic philosopher
and desired to pass as one. He was, however, a
man of no worth, a trifler, boastful of his command


1 That is, Quintus Claudius Quadrigarius ; see 8 4.
2 Frag. 81, Peter?


61


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Graecae facundiae gloria iactabundus et praeterea

3 vini libidine adusque ludibria ebriosus. Is in convi-
viis iuvenum, quae agitare Athenis hebdomadibus
lunae sollemne nobis fuit, simulatque modus epulis
factus et utiles delectabilesque sermones coeperant,
tum, silentio ad audiendum petito, loqui coeptabat
atque id genus vili et incondita verborum caterva
hortabatur omnes ad bibendum, idque se facere ex
decreto Platonico praedicabat, tamquam Plato in
libris quos De Legibus composuit laudes ebrietatis
copiosissime scripsisset utilemque esse eam bonis ac
fortibus viris censuisset; ac simul inter eiusmodi
orationem crebis et ingentibus poculis ingenium
omne ingurgitabat, fomitem esse quendam dicens
et ignitabulum ingenii virtutisque, si mens et corpus
hominis vino flagraret.

4 Sed enim Plato in primo et secundo De Legibus
non, ut ille nebulo opinabatur, ebrietatem istam
turpissimam quae labefacere et inminuere hominum
mentes solet laudavit, sed hanc largiorem paulo iu-
cundioremque vini invitationem, quae fieret sub qui-
busdam quasi arbitris et magistris conviviorum sobriis,

5 non inprobavit. Nam et modicis honestisque inter
bibendum remissionibus refici integrarique animos ad
instauranda sobrietatis officia existumavit reddique
eos sensim laetiores atque ad intentiones rursum ca-
piendas fieri habiliores, et simul, si qui penitus in his
adfectionum cupiditatumque errores inessent, quos


una idexi nd nici bee DOOR 2) NRW AERE
! 9, p. 637, a; 14, p. 647, E.
62


BOOK XV. u. 2-5


of Grecian eloquence, besides having a passion
for wine which fairly made him a laughing stock.
At the entertainments which it was the custom of
us young men to hold at Athens at the beginning of
each week, as soon as we had finished eating and
an instructive and pleasant conversation had begun,
this fellow, having called for silence that he might
be heard, began to speak, and using a cheap and
disordered rabble of words after his usual fashion,
urged all to drink ; and this he declared that he did in
accordance with the injunction of Plato, maintaining
that Plato in his work On the Laws had written most
eloquently in praise of drunkenness, and had decided
that it was beneficial to good and strong men. And
at the same time, while he was thus speaking, he
drenched such wits as he had with frequent and
huge beakers, saying that it was a kind of touchwood
and tinder to the intellect and the faculties, if mind
and body were inflamed with wine.

However, Plato in the first! and second? books of
his work On the Laws did not, as that fool thought,
praise that shameful intoxication which is wont to
undermine and weaken men's minds, although he
did not disapprove of that somewhat more generous
- and cheerful inspiration of wine which is regulated
by some temperate arbiters, so to speak, and
presidents of banquets. For he thought that by the
proper and moderate relaxation of drinking the
mind was refreshed and renewed for resuming the
duties of sobriety, and that men were gradually
rendered happier and became readier to repeat
their efforts. At the same time, if there were deep
in their hearts any errors of inclination or desire,


? 9, p. 666, A ; 12, p. 671, 5. ,
3


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


aliquis pudor reverens concelaret, ea omnia sine gravi
periculo, libertate per vinum data detegi et ad corri-
gendum medendumque fieri oportuniora.

Atque hoc etiam Plato ibidem dicit, non defu-
giendas esse neque respuendas huiuscemodi exercita-
tiones adversum propulsandam vini violentiam neque
ullum umquam continentem prorsum ac temperantem
satis fideliter visum esse, cuius vita victusque non
inter ipsa errorum pericula et in mediis voluptatum
inlecebris explorata sit. Nam cuilibentiae gratiaeque
omnes conviviorum incognitae sint quique illarum
omnino expers sit, si eum forte ad participandas
eiusmodi voluptates aut voluntas tulerit aut casus
induxerit aut necessitas compulerit, deleniri plerum-
que et capi, neque mentem animumque eius con-
sistere, sed vi quadam nova ictum labascere. Con-
grediendum igitur censuit et, tamquam in acie
quadam, cum voluptariis rebus cumque ista vini
licentia comminus decernendum, ut adversum eas
non fuga simus tuti nec absentia, sed vigore animi
et constanti praesentia moderatoque usu temperan-
tiam continentiamque tueamur et calefacto simul
refotoque animo, si quid in eo vel frigidae tristitiae
vel torpentis verecundiae fuerit, deluamus.


64


—


BOOK XV. 1. 5-8


which a kind of reverential shame concealed, he
thought that by the frankness engendered by wine
all these were disclosed without great danger and
became more amenable to correction and cure.

And in the same place Plato says this also: that
exercises of this kind ! for the purpose of resisting the
violence of wine, are not to be avoided and shunned,
and that no one ever appeared to be altogether self-
restrained and temperate whose life and habits had
not been tested amid the very dangers of error
and in the midst of the enticements of pleasures.
For when all the license and attractions of banquets
are unknown, and a man is wholly unfamiliar with
them, if haply inclination has led him, or chance
has induced him, or necessity has compelled him, to
take part in pleasures of that kind, then he is as a rule
seduced and taken captive, his mind and soul fail
to meet the test, but give way, as if attacked by
some strange power. Therefore he thought that
we ought to meet the issue and contend hand to
hand, as in a kind of battle, with pleasure and
indulgence in wine, in order that we may not be
safe against them by flight or absence, but that
by vigour of spirit, by presence of mind, and by
moderate use, we may preserve our temperance and
self-restraint, and at the same time by warming and
refreshing the mind we may free it of whatever
frigid austerity or dull bashfulness it may contain.


1 That is, in the moderate use of wine, explained by
adversum . . . violentiam.


65


VOL. III, F


T


4


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Ill


Quid M. Cicero de particula ista senserit scripseritque quae
praeposita est verbis ‘“‘aufugio” et ''aufero"; et an in
verbo ‘‘autumo” eadem istaec praepositio esse videri
debeat.


Leaimus librum M. Ciceronis qui inscriptus est
Orator. In eo libro Cicero, cum dixisset verba haec
*aufugio " et *aufero" composita quidem esse ex
praepositione *ab" et ex verbis “ fugio" et ** fero,"
sed eam praepositionem, quo fieret vox pronuntiatu
audituque lenior, versam mutatamque esse in “ au "'
syllabam coeptumque esse dici “ aufugio " et *aufero"
pro “ abfugio” et ** abfero "—cum haec, inquam, ita
dixisset, tum postea ibidem super eadem particula
ita scripsit: * Haec," ! inquit, * praepositio praeter
haec duo verba nullo alio in verbo reperietur."

Invenimus autem in Conmentario Nigidiano, ver-
bum **autumo" compositum ex **ab"' praepositione
et verbo * aestumo"' dictumque intercise “ autumo ”
quasi *'abaestumo," quod significaret “totum
aestumo," tamquam * abnumero." Sed, quod sit cum
honore multo dictum P. Nigidii, hominis eruditissimi,
audacius hoc argutiusque esse videtur quam verius,
* Autumo " enim non id solum significat, * aestumo,"
sed et ** dico " et “ opinor " et * censeo," cum quibus
verbis praepositio ista neque cohaerentia vocis neque


1 quae, Cic.


+ du is probably a different preposition from ab; see
Archiv. f. lat. Lex. u. Gr., x, p. 480, and xiii, pp. 7 f.

? $ 158. 3 Frag. 51, Swoboda.

* The derivation of aufumo is uncertain ; some take the
original meaning to be '* divining " and connect it with avis P


66


BOOK XV. nr. 1-6


III


. What Mareus Cicero thought and wrote about the prefix in
the verbs aufugio and aufero; and whether this same
preposition is to be seen in the verb autwmo.


I reap a book of Marcus Cicero's entitled 7'Àe
Orator. In that book when Cicero had said that
the verbs aufugio and aufero were indeed formed
of the preposition ab and the verbs fugio and fero,
but that the preposition, in order that the word
might be smoother in pronunciation and sound, was
changed and altered into the syllable au, and
aufugio and aufero began to be used for abfugio and
abfero; when he had said this, I say, he afterwards
in the same work wrote as follows of the same
particle:? “This preposition,” he says, “will be
found in no other verb save these two only.”

But I have found in the Commentary of Nigidius ?
that the verb autumo is formed from the preposi-
tion ab and the verb aestumo (estimate) and that
aulumo is a contracted form of abaestumo, signifying
totum aestumo, on the analogy of abnumero.* But, be
it said with great respect for Publius Nigidius, a
most learned man, this seems to be rather bold and
clever than true. For auíumo does not only mean
« [ think," but also “I say," “I am of the opinion,"
and “I consider," with which verbs that preposition
has no connection either in the composition of the


see T.L.L. s.v. Walde rejects that derivation in favour of
the one from autem; cf. Fay, Class. Quart. i. (1907) p. 25.
Here the original meaning is assumed to be ‘‘ repeat, assert,”
and in fact autwmo and fero are sometimes synonymous.
The development of the meanings of autwino was doubtless
influenced by aestumo, which has the same suffix.

67

F 2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


7 significatione sententiae convenit. Praeterea vir
acerrimae in studio litterarum diligentiae M. Tullius
non sola esse haec duo verba dixisset, si reperiri

8 posset ullum tertium. Sed illud magis inspici
quaerique dignum est, versane sit et mutata *ab"
praepositio in “au’’ syllabam propter lenitatem
vocis, an potius * au" particula sua sit propria
origine et proinde ut pleraeque aliae praepositiones a
Graecis, ita haec quoque inde accepta sit; sicuti est
in illo versu Homeri :


^ >
Avépuoay piv zpüra kai éaa£av kai COeipav,
et:


"A Bpopot, adiaxot.


IV


Historia de Ventidio Basso, ignobili homine, quem primum
de Parthis triumphasse memoriae traditum est.


| In sermonibus nuper fuit seniorum hominum et
eruditorum, multos in vetere memoria altissimum
dignitatis gradum ascendisse ignobilissimos prius
2 homines et despicatissimos. Nihil adeo de quoquam
tantae admirationi fuit, quantae fuerunt quae de
3 Ventidio Basso scripta sunt: eum Picentem fuisse
genere et loco humili; et matrem eius a Pompeio


! See note 1, p. 66; it is not ** taken from the Greeks.”
2 Tliad i. 459, 3 Jliad xiii. 41,
68


BOOK XV, nr. 6-1v. 3


word or in the expression of its meaning. Besides,
Marcus Tullius, a man of unwearied industry in the
- pursuit of letters, would not have said that these
were the only two verbs containing au, if any third
example could be found. But the following point
is more worthy of examination and investigation,
whether the preposition ab is altered and changed
into the syllable aw for the sake of making the
pronunciation smoother, or whether more properly
the particle au has its own origin, and just as many
other prepositions were taken from the Greeks, so
this one also is derived from that source.’ Asin that
verse of Homer :?


First bent them back (a?épvaav), then slew and
flayed the beasts ;
and :?


Loud-shouting (adiaxo), noisy.*


IV


The story of Ventidius Bassus, a man of obscure birth, who
is reported to have been the first to celebrate a triumph
over the Parthians.


Ir was lately remarked in the conversation of
certain old and learned men that in ancient times
many persons of most obscure birth, who were
previously held in great contempt, had risen to the
highest grade of dignity. Nothing that was said
about anyone, however, excited so much wonder as
the story recorded of Ventidius Bassus. He was
born in Picenum in a humble station, and with his
mother was taken prisoner by Pompeius Strabo,

4 Or, in silence, noiseless ; see L. and S. s, vv.


69


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Strabone, Pompei Magni patre, bello sociali, quo
Asculanos subegit, captam cum ipso esse ; mox trium-
phante Pompeio Strabone eum quoque puerum inter
ceteros ante currum imperatoris sinu matris vectum
esse; post, cum adolevisset, victum sibi aegre quae-
sisse eumque sordide invenisse comparandis ! mulis
et vehiculis, quae magistratibus qui sortiti provincias
forent praebenda publice conduxisset. In isto
quaestu notum esse coepisse C. Caesari et cum eo
profectum esse in Gallias. Tum, quia in ea pro-
vincia satis naviter versatus esset et deinceps civili
bello mandata sibi pleraque inpigre et strenue
fecisset, non modo in amicitiam Caesaris, sed ex ea
in amplissimum quoque ordinem pervenisse; mox
tribunum quoque plebi ac deinde praetorem creatum
atque in eo tempore iudicatum esse a senatu hostem
cum M. Antonio ; post vero coniunctis partibus? non
pristinam tantum dignitatem reciperasse, sed ponti-
ficatum ae deinde consulatum quoque adeptum esse,
eamque rem tam intoleranter tulisse populum Ro-
manum, qui Ventidium Bassum meminerat curandis
mulis victitasse, ut vulgo per vias urbis versiculi
proscriberentur :

! conquirendis, Damsté, but cf. Suet. Jul, ]xxv. 3; Calig.
xxvii. 1.

* patribus, e; corr. in c: coniunctum patribus, Hertz.


1 90-89 ».c. War was waged by the Italian allies against
Rome. After a bitter contest, in which 300,000 men are said
to have perished, the Romans were victorious, but by the


79


BOOK XV. wv. 3


father of Pompey the Great, in the Social War,! in
the course of which Strabo subdued the Aesculani.?
Afterwards, when Pompeius Strabo triumphed, the
boy also was carried in his mother’s arms amid the
rest of the captives before the general's chariot.
Later, when he had grown up, he worked hard to
gain a livelihood, resorting to the humble calling of
a buyer of mules and carriages, which he had con-
tracted with the State to furnish to the magistrates
who had been allotted provinces. In that occupation
he made the acquaintance of Gaius Caesar and went
with him to the Gallic provinces. Then, because
he had shown commendable energy in that province,
and later during the civil war had executed numerous
commissions with promptness and vigour, he not
only gained Caesar's friendship, but because of it
rose even to the highest rank. Afterwards he was
also made tribune of the commons, and then praetor,
and at that time he was declared a public enemy
by the senate along with Mark Antony. Afterwards,
however, when the parties were united, he not only
recovered his former rank, but gained first the ponti-
ficate and then the consulship.3 At this the Roman
people, who remembered that Ventidius Bassus had
made a living by taking care of mules, were so
indignant that these verses 4 were posted everywhere
about the streets of the city:


lex Plautia Papiria granted nearly all the demands of the
allies, including the franchise.

2 Aesculum was the capital of the Picenates, one of the
seven peoples who made up the allies.


3 43 B.C. s
4 p. 331, 7, Bihrens ; cf. Virg. Catal. x., believed by some


to refer to Ventidius Bassus, but probably wrongly. See
Virgil, L.C.L., ii., p. 499, n. 2
71


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Concirrite omnes aügures, harüspices !
Porténtum inusitátum conflatám est recens ;
Nam mílas qui fricábat, consul fáctus est.


Eundem Bassum Suetonius Tranquillus praepo-
situm esse a M. Antonio provinciis orientalibus Par-
thosque in Syriam introrumpentis tribus ab eo
proelis fusos scribit, eumque primum omnium de
Parthis triumphasse et morte obita publico funere
sepultum esse.


V
Verbum ** profligo” a plerisque dici inproprie insciteque.


Sicur alia verba pleraque, ignoratione et inscitia
improbe dicentium quae non intellegant, deflexa ac
depravata sunt a ratione recta et consuetudine, ita
huius quoque verbi, quod est “ profligo," significatio
versa et corrupta est. Nam cum ab adfligendo et ad
perniciem interitumque deducendo inclinatum id
tractumque sit, semperque eo verbo qui diligenter
locuti sunt ita usi sint, ut “ profligare" dicerent
* prodigere " et * deperdere" « profligatasque res ”
quasi “‘proflictas " et * perditas " appellarent, nune
audio aedificia et templa et alia fere multa quae
prope absoluta adfectaque sunt “in profligato ”’ esse
dici ipsaque esse iam “ profligata.”’ Quapropter
urbanissime respondisse praetorem, non indoctum
virum, barbunculo! cuidam ex advocatorum turba,
Sulpieius Apollinaris in quadam epistula scriptum


1 barunculo, Heraeus (see T.LL. s.v.)3 b


( aruasculo, e ; bar-
baseulo, Hosius; barbariusculo, Madvig."


* Frag. 210, Reiff.
72


BOOK XV. rv. 3-v. 3


Assemble, soothsayers and augurs all !
A portent strange has taken place of late ;
For he who curried mules is consul now.


Suetonius Tranquillus writes! that this same
Bassus was put in charge of the eastern provinces by
Mark Antony, and that when the Parthians invaded
Syria he routed them in three battles;? that he was
the first of all to celebrate a triumph over the
Parthians, and was honoured when he died with a
publie funeral.


V


That the verb profíigo is used by many improperly and
ignorantly.

JusT as many other words, through the ignorance
and stupidity of those who speak badly wbat they
do not understand, are diverted and turned aside
from their proper and usual meaning, so too has
the signification of the verb profligo been changed
and perverted. For while it is taken over and
derived from adfligo, in the sense of “bring to ruin
and destruction," and while all who have been
careful in their diction have always used the word
to express “waste” and “destroy,” calling things
that were cast down aud destroyed res profligatae, I
now hear that buildings, temples, and many other
things that are almost complete and finished are
said to be in profligato and the things themselves
profligata. "Therefore that was a very witty reply, as
Sulpicius Apollinaris has recorded in one of his
Letters, which a praetor, a man not without learning,
made to a simpleton among a crowd of advocates.


2 39 aud 38 B.C.
73


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


4 reliquit. “Nam cum ille," inquit, “ rabula audaculus
ita postulasset verbaque ita fecisset: * Omnia, vir
clarissime, negotia de quibus te cogniturum esse
hodie dixisti diligentia et velocitate tua profligata
sunt, unum id solum relictum est, de quo, rogo,
audias, tum praetor satis ridicule: * An illa negotia
de quibus iam cognovisse me dicis profligata sint
equidem nescio; hoc autem negotium quod in te
incidit, procul dubio, sive id audiam sive non audiam,
profligatum est." ”

5 Quod significare autem volunt qui “ profligatum
dicunt, hi qui Latine locuti sunt non * profligatum,”
sed * adfectum " dixerunt, sicuti M. Cicero in ora-

6 tione, quam habuit De Provinciis Consularibus. Eius
verba haec sunt: * Bellum adfectum videmus et,

7 vere ut dicam, paene confectum." Item infra : “ Nam
ipse Caesar quid est quod! in ea? provincia com-
morari velit, nisi ut ea quae per eum adfecta sunt,

8 perfecta reipublicae tradat?" Idem Cicero in
Oeconomico : “Cum vero adfecta iam prope aestate
uvas a sole mitescere tempus est.”


,


VI


In libro M, Ciceronis De Gloria secundo manifestum erratum,
in ea parte in qua scriptum est super Hectore et Aiace.


l Iw libro M, Tulli, qui est secundus De Gloria,


manifestus error est non magnae rei, quem errorem


1 est cur, Cic, ? ea, omitted by MSS. of Cic,
74


BOOK XV. v. 3-vr. 1


* For," said he, * when that impudent prater had
made a request in these terms: ‘All the business,
renowned sir, about which you said that you would
take cognizance to-day, because of your diligence
and promptness is done (profligata sunt) ; one matter
only remains, to which I beg you to give attention.’
Then the praetor wittily enough replied: * Whether
the affairs of which you say that I have taken
cognizance are done (profligata), I do not know ; but
this business which has fallen into your hands is
undoubtedly done for (profligatum est), whether I
hear it or not."

But to indicate what those wish to express who
use profligatum in the sense of “ nearly done," those
who have spoken good Latin used, not profligatum,
but adfectum, as for example Marcus Cicero, in the
speech which he delivered About the Consular Provinces.
His words are as follows:* * We see the war near-
ing its end (adfectum) and, to tell the truth, all but
finished.” Also further on:? “For why should
Caesar himself wish to remain longer in that province,
except that he may turn over to the State, completed,
the tasks which he has nearly finished (adfecta sunt) ? "
Cicero also says in the Oeconomicus :? ** When indeed,
as summer is already well nigh ended (adfecta), it is
time for the grapes to ripen in the sun."


VI


An evident mistake in the second book of Cicero On Glory,
in the place where he has written about Hector and Ajax.


IN Cicero's second book On Glory there is an
evident mistake, of no great importance—a mistake


1 $19. * $99. 3 Frag. 21, p. 978, Orelli?.
15


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


esse possit cognoscere non aliquis eruditorum, sed qui

2 tantum legerit 'Oppov ró H’. Quamobrem non tam
id mirabamur errasse in ea re M. Tullium, quam
non esse animadversum hoc postea correctumque vel
ab ipso vel a Tirone, liberto eius, diligentissimo

3 homine et librorum patroni sui studiosissimo. Ita
enim scriptum in eo libro est: * Apud eundem
poetam Aiax cum Hectore congrediens depugnandi
causa agit ut sepeliatur, si sit forte victus, declarat-
que se velle ut suum tumulum multis etiam post
saeculis praetereuntes sic loquantur :


Hic situs est vitae iampridem lumina linquens,
Qui quondam Hectoreo perculsus concidit ense.
Fabitur haec aliquis, mea semper gloria vivet.


4 Huius autem sententiae versus, quos Cicero in
linguam. Latinam vertit, non Aiax apud Homerum
dicit neque Aiax agit ut sepeliatur, sed Hector dicit
et Hector de sepultura agit, priusquam sciat an Aiax
secum depugnandi causa congressurus sit.


VII


Observatum esse in senibus quod annum fere aetatis tertium
eb sexagesimum agant aut laboribus aut interitu aut clade
aliqua insignitum ; atque inibi super eadem observatione


exemplum adpositum epistulae divi Augusti ad Gaium
filium.


1l ObsservaTum in multa hominum memoria exper-
tumque est,senioribus plerisque omnibus sexagesimum


1 [L, frag. 1, p. 989, Orelli? 2 Iliad vii. 89.
? Gaius and Lucius Caesar were sons of Agrippa and
Julia, and grandsons of Augustus (see Gaium nepotem, § 3).


76


BOOK XV. vr. 1-vir. x


which it does not require a man of learning to
detect, but merely one who has read the seventh
book of Homer. Therefore I am not so much
surprised that Marcus Tullius erred in that matter,
as that it was not noticed later and corrected either
by Cicero himself or by Tiro, his freedman, a most
careful man, who gave great attention to his patron’s
books. Now, in that book the following passage
occurs :! “ The same poet says that Ajax, when about
to engage with Hector in combat, arranges for his
burial in case he should chance to be defeated,
declaring that he wishes that those who pass his
tomb even after many ages should thus speak : 2


Here lies a man of life’s light long bereft,
Who slain by Hector’s sword fell long ago.
This, one shall say; my glory ne’er shall die.”


But the verses to this purport, which Cicero has
turned into the Latin tongue, Ajax does not utter in
Homer, nor is it Ajax who plans his burial, but Hector
speaks the lines and arranges for burial, before he
knows whether Ajax will meet him in combat.


VII


~ It has been observed of old men, that the sixty-third year of
their life is marked as a rule by troubles, by death, or by
some disaster; andan example apropos of this observation
is taken from a letter from the deified Augustus to his son


Gaius.?

Ir has been observed during a long period of
human recollection, and found to be true, that for
almost all old men the sixty-third year of their age
Both were adopted by Augustus, and on the death of the


young Marcellus were made principes dwventulis, and thus
designated as the successors of Augustus.


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


tertium vitae annum cum periculo et clade aliqua
venire aut corporis morbique gravioris aut vitae inte-
ritus aut animi aegritudinis. Propterea, qui rerum
verborumque istiusmodi studio tenentur eum aetatis
annum appellant kAuiakrgpukóv.

Nocte quoque ista proxima superiore, cum librum
Epistularum divi Augusti, quas ad Gaium nepotem
suum scripsit, legeremus duceremurque elegantia
orationis neque morosa neque anxia, sed facili hercle
et simplici, id ipsum in quadam epistula super eodem
anno scriptum offendimus; eiusque epistula exem-
plum hoc est:


“1X. Kal. Octobris.


* Ave, mi Gai, meus asellus iucundissimus, quem
semper medius fidius desidero, cum a me abes. Set
praecipue diebus talibus, qualis est hodiernus, oculi
mei requirunt meum Gaium, quem, ubicumque hoc
die fuisti, spero laetum et bene valentem celebrasse
quartum et sexagesimum natalem meum. Nam, ut
vides, kAuxakrpa communem seniorum omnium .
tertium et sexagesimum annum evasimus. Deos
autem oro ut mihi quantumcumque superest temporis,
id salvis nobis traducere liceat in statu reipublicae
felicissimo, dvépayabovvrev $puQv kal diadeyouevwv
stationem meam."


1 Cf. iii. 10. 9. ? p. 155, 18, Wichert.
3 Sept. 23.
78


BOOK XV, vu. 1-3


is attended with danger, and with some disaster
involving either serious bodily illness, or loss of life,
or mental suffering. Therefore those who are
engaged in the study of matters and terms of that
kind call that period of life the “climacteric.” !

Night before last, too, when I was reading a
volume of letters of the deified Augustus, written to
his grandson Gaius, and was led on by the elegance
of the style, which was easy and simple, by Heaven !
without mannerisms or effort, in one of the letters I
ran upon a reference to this very belief about that
same year. I give a copy of the letter :?


* The ninth day before the Kalends of October.?


* Greeting, my dear Gaius, my dearest little
donkey, whom, so help me! I constantly miss
whenever you are away from me. But especially
on such days as to-day my eyes are eager for my
Gaius, and wherever you have been to-day, I hope you
have celebrated my sixty-fourth birthday in health
and happiness. For, as you see, I have passed the
climacterie common to all old men, the sixty-third
year. And I pray the gods that whatever time is
left to me I may pass with you safe and well, with
our country in a flourishing condition, while you? are
playing the man and preparing to succeed to my
position."

4 A term of affection. The asellus is an attractive little
beast, whatever the reputation of the asinus. The ocellus
of Beroaldus and Damsté's aucellus (=avicellus, ** birdlet”’ ;
the usual form is avicula, as in ii. 29. 2) are needless
changes, particularly in view of Augustus’ humorous ten-
dencies ; Weiss cites vi. 16. 5, where asellus has a different,
but hardly more complimentary, meaning.

5 The plural refers to Gaius and his brother Lucius; see
note.


79


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


VIII


Locus ex oratione Favoni, veteris oratoris, de cenarum
atque luxuriae obprobratione, qua usus est cum legem
Liciniam de sumptu minuendo suasit.


Cum legeremus orationem veterem Favoni, non
indiserti viri, qua oratione . . . totum, ut meminisse
possemus odio esse hercle istiusmodi sumptus atque
victus, perdidicimus. Verba haec, quae adposuimus,
Favoni sunt: ‘ Praefecti popinae atque luxuriae
negant cenam lautam esse, nisi cum lubentissime
edis, tum auferatur et alia esca melior atque amplior
succenturietur. Is nunc flos cenae habetur inter
istos quibus sumptus et fastidium pro facetiis procedit,
qui negant ullam avem praeter ficedulam totam
comesse oportere; ceterarum avium atque altilium
nisi tantum adponatur, ut a cluniculis infériore parte +
saturi fiant, convivium putant inopia sordere, superio-
rem partem avium atque altilium qui edint, eos
palatum parum delicatum? habere. Si proportione
pergit luxuria crescere, quid relinquitur, nisi ut
delibari sibi cenas iubeant, ne edendo defetigentur,
quando stratus lectus? auro, argento, purpura am-
plior aliquot hominibus quam dis inmortalibus
adornatur?"'


! Damsté would delete inferiore parte and avium atque
adtiliwm.

* parum delicatum added by Hertz; palatum non habere, c.

? lectus added by Skutsch.


* The sense of the lacuna seems to be given in the chapter
heading.
* OQ. R.F., p. 207, Meyer?.


8o


BOOK XV. vu. 1-2


VIII


A passage from a speech of Favonius, an early orator, con-
taining an attack which he made on luxurious entertain-
ments, when he was advocating the Licinian law for
lessening extravagance.


WnuEN I was reading an old speech of Favonius, a
man of no little eloquence, in which! . . . I learned
the whole of it by heart, in order to be able to
remember that such extravagant living is truly
hateful. These words which I have added are those
of Favonius:? “The leaders in gluttony and luxury
declare that an entertainment is not elegant, unless,
when you areeating with the greatest relish, your plate
is removed and a better, richer dainty comes from
the reserves. This to-day is thought the very flower
of a feast among those with whom extravagance and
fastidiousness take the place of elegance; who say
that the whole of no bird ought to be eaten except a
fig-pecker; who think that a dinner is mean and
stingy unless so many of the other birds and fatted
fowl are provided, that the guests may be satisfied
with the rumps and hinder parts; who believe that
those who eat the upper parts of such birds and
fowl have no refinement of taste. If luxury con-
tinues to increase in its present proportion, what
remains but that men should bid someone to eat
their dinners for them, in order that they may not
fatigue themselves by feeding, when the couch is
more profusely adorned with gold, silver and purple
for a few mortals than for the immortal gods?” ?

3 The reference is probably to the Zectistermiwm, when the
images of the gods were placed upon couches and food was
set before them by the vii vir? epulones. 4

I


VOL. III. G


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


IX


Quod Caecilius poeta *'frontem" genere virili non poetice,
sed cum probatione et cum analogia appellavit.


1 Vere ac diserte Caecilius hoc in Subditivo scripsit :


Nam hi sunt inimici péssumi, fronte hílaro, corde
tristi,
Quos néque ut adprendas néque uti dimittás scias.


2 Hos ego versus, cum de quodam istiusmodi homine
sermones essent, in circulo forte iuvenum eruditiorum

3 dixi. Tum de grammaticorum volgo quispiam no-
biscum ibi adsisteris non sane ignobilis, “ Quanta,"
inquit, “licentia audaciaque Caecilius hic fuit, cum
*fronte hilaro, non *fronte hilara' dixit et tam

4 inmanem soloecismum nihil veritus est!" * Immo,”
inquam, * potius nos et quam audaces et quam
licentes sumus, qui *frontem' inprobe indocteque
non virili genere dicimus, cum et ratio proportionis!
quae ‘analogia’ appellatur, et veterum auctoritates
non ‘hance,’ sed‘ hunc frontem ' debere dici suadeant.

5 Quippe M. Cato in primo Originum ita scripsit:
‘Postridie signis conlatis, aequo fronte, peditatu,
equitibus atque alis cum hostium legionibus pugnavi-
mus. ‘Recto’ quoque *fronte' idem Cato in libro
eodem dicit."

6  Atille semidoctus grammaticus : * Missas," inquit,
"auctoritates facias, quas quidem ut habeas posse
fieri puto, sed rationem dic, quam non habes."


! pro portione, Skutsch, comparing Varro, L.L. x. 3.37.
—————————————— 2 EM
! ii. 79, Ribbeck?. * On analogy see ii, 25.

* Frag. 99, Peter?, * Frag. 100, Peter?,
82


BOOK XV. rx. 1-6


IX


That the poet Caecilius used frons in the masculine gender,
' not by poetic license, but properly and by analogy.


Correct Ly and elegantly did Caecilius write this
in his Changeling :+


The worst of foes are these, of aspect gay ( fronte
hilaro),

Gloomy of heart, whom we can neither grasp

Nor yet let go.


I chanced to quote these lines in a company of well
educated young men, when we were speaking of a
man of that kind. Thereupon one of a throng of
grammarians who stood there with us, a man of no
little repute, said: “What license and boldness
Caecilius showed here in saying fronte hilaro and not
fronte hilara, and in not shrinking from so dreadful
a solecism." “Nay,” said I, “it is rather we who
are as bold and free as possible in improperly and
ignorantly failing to use frons in the masculine
gender, when both the principle ofregularity which is
called analogy? and the authority of earlier writers
indicate that we ought to say, not hanc frontem, but
hunc frontem. Indeed, Marcus Cato in the first book
of his Origins wrote as follows :% ‘On the following
day in open combat, with straight front (aequo fronte)
we fought with the enemy's legions with foot, horse
and wings. Also Cato again says * recto fronte in the
same book."

But that half-educated grammarian said: * Away
with your authorities, which I think you may per-
haps have, but give me a reason, which you do not

83
a 2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


7 Atque ego his eius verbis, ut tum ferebat aetas,
inritatior, 4 Audi," inquam, ** mi magister, rationem
falsam quidem, sed quam redarguere falsam esse tu

8 non queas. Omnia,” inquam, *'vocabula tribus
litteris finita quibus * frons ' finitur, generis masculini
sunt, si in genetivo quoque casu eadem syllaba

9 finiantur, ut ‘mons, ‘fons, ‘pons,’ ‘frons.’” At
ille contra renidens: ‘ Audi,” inquit, * discipule,
plura alia consimilia, quae non sint generis mascu-

10 lini.” Petebant ibi omnes ut vel unum statim
diceret. Sed cum homo voltum intorqueret et non
hisceret et colores mutaret, tum ego intercessi et
* Vade," inquam, * nunc et habeto ad requirendum
triginta dies; postquam inveneris, repetes nos."

11 Atque ita hominem nulli rei ad indagandum voca-
bulum, quo rescinderet finitionem fictam, dimisimus.


X
De voluntario et admirando interitu virginum Milesiarum.


| Prurarcuus in librorum quos Ilept Vrvyjs inscripsit
primo, cum de morbis dissereret in animos hominum
incidentibus, virgines! dixit Milesii nominis fere
quot tum in ea civitate erant repente sine ulla evi-
denti causa voluntatem cepisse obeundae mortis ac
2 deinde plurimas vitam suspendio amisisse. Id cum
accideret in dies crebrius neque animis earum mori
perseverantium medicina adhiberi quiret, decrevisse
Milesios ut virgines quae corporibus suspensis de-


! virginem, 3; virginum, Hertz.


! Nouns of the third declension ending in s preceded
by a consonant are regularly feminine. The four excep-


84


BOOK XV. 1x. 7-x. 2


have." Then I, somewhat irritated by those words
of his, as was natural at my time of life: * Listen,”
said I, “my dear sir, to a reason that may be false,
but which you cannot prove to be false. All words,”
said I, “ ending in the three letters in which frons ends
are of the masculine gender, if they end in the same
syllable in the genitive case also, as mons, fons, pons,
frons. ! But he replied with a laugh: “ Hear,
young scholar, several other similar words which are
not of the masculine gender." Then all begged him
at once to name just one. But when the man was
screwing up his face, could not open his lips, and
changed colour, then I broke in, saying: “Go now
and take thirty days to hunt one up; when you
have found it, meet us again." And thus we sent
off this worthless fellow to hunt up a word with
which to break down the rule which I had made.


X
About the strange suicides of the maids of Miletus.


PruTAncH in the first book of his work On the Soul?
discussing disorders which affect the human mind,
has told us that almost all the maidens of the
Milesian nation suddenly without any apparent
cause conceived a desire to die, and thereupon many
of them hanged themselves. When this happened
more frequently every day, and no remedy had any
effect on their resolve to die, the Milesians passed a
decree that all those maidens who committed suicide


tions are mons, fons, dens, and pons; frons is usually
feminine.


2 vii. p. 20, Bernadakis.
85


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


mortuae forent, ut hae omnes nudae, cum eodem
laqueo quo essent praevinctae efferrentur. Post id
decretum virgines voluntariam mortem non petisse
pudore solo deterritas tam inhonesti funeris.


XI


Verba senatusconsulti de exigendis urbe Roma philosophis ;
item verba edicti censorum, quo inprobati et coerciti sunt
qui disciplinam rhetoricam instituere et exercere Romae
coeperant.


C. Fannio SrRaBoNE, M. Valerio Messala coss.
senatusconsultum de philosophis et de rhetoribus
Latinis! factum est: * M. Pomponius praetor sena-
tum consuluit. Quod verba facta sunt de philosophis
et de rhetoribus, de ea re ita censuerunt, ut M.
Pomponius praetor animadverteret curaretque, uti
ei? e republica fideque sua videretur, uti Romae ne
essent."

Aliquot deinde annis post id senatusconsultum Cn.
Domitius Ahenobarbus et L. Licinius Crassus cen-
sores de coercendis rhetoribus Latinis ita edixe-
runt: * Renuntiatum est nobis esse homines, qui
novum genus disciplinae instituerunt, ad quos iu-
ventus in ludum conveniat; eos sibi nomen inpo-
suisse Latinos rhetoras; ibi homines adulescentulos


x e deleted by Pighius, comparing Suetonius, De
whet. 1.


2 ut si ei, Swet. De Rhet. 1.


ee EE eee
2.161 5,0.


* Fontes Iuris Rom., p. 157 ; cf. Suetonius, De Rhet 1 (ii.
p. 434, L.C.L.).


86


BOOK XV. x. 2-x1. 2


by hanging should be carried to the grave naked,
along with the same rope by which they had
destroyed themselves. After that decree the
maidens ceased to seek a voluntary death, deterred
by the mere shame of so disgraceful a burial.


XI


The words of a decree of the senate on expelling philosophers
from the city of Rome ; also the words of the edict of the
censors by which those were rebuked and restrained who
had begun to establish and practise the art of rhetoric at


Rome.


IN the consulship of Gaius Fannius Strabo and
Marcus Valerius Messala! the following decree of
the senate was passed regarding Latin speaking
philosophers and rhetoricians : ? « The praetor Marcus
Pomponius laid a proposition before the senate. As
the result of a discussion about philosophers and
rhetoricians, the senate decreed that Marcus Pom-
ponius,the praetor, should take heed and provide,
in whatever way seemed to him in accord with the
interests of the State and his oath of office, that
they should not remain in Rome."

Then some years? after that decree of the senate
Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and Lucius Licinius
Crassus the censors issued the following edict for
restraining the Latin rhetoricians:* *It has been
reported to us that there be men who have intro-
duced a new kind of training, and that our young
men frequent their schools; that these men have
assumed the title of Latin rhetoricians, and that


3 99 B.C.
& F.I.R., p. 215; Suetonius ii, p. 434 f£. L.C.L.


87


3


4


5


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


dies totos desidere. Maiores nostri quae liberos suos
discere et quos in ludos itare vellent instituerunt.
Haec nova, quae praeter consuetudinem ac morem
maiorum fiunt, neque placent neque recta videntur.
Quapropter et his qui eos ludos habent, et his qui eo
venire consuerunt, visum est faciundum, ut ostendere-
mus nostram sententiam, nobis non placere."

Neque illis solum temporibus, nimis rudibus nec-
dum Graeca disciplina expolitis, philosophi ex urbe
Roma pulsi sunt, verum etiam Domitiano imperante
senatusconsulto eiecti atque urbe et Italia interdicti
sunt. Qua tempestate Epictetus quoque philo-


sophus propter id senatusconsultum Nicopolim Roma .
decessit.


XII


Locus ex oratione Gracchi de parsimonia ac de pudieitia sua
memoratissimus.

C. Graccuus cum ex Sardinia rediit, orationem ad
populum in contione habuit. Ea verba haec sunt:
* Versatus sum,” inquit, “in provincia, quomodo ex
usu vestro existimabam esse, non quomodo ambitioni
meae conducere arbitrabar. Nulla apud me fuit
popina, neque pueri eximia facie stabant, et in con-
vivio liberi vestri modestius erant quam apud prin-


STAND. 89:


* The celebrated tribune of 123 and 192 s.c.
famous as an orator Ch LOR


88


He was


BOOK XV, xi. 2-xi. 2


young men spend whole days with them in idleness.
Our forefathers determined what they wished their
children to learn and what schools they desired them
to attend. These innovations in the customs and
principles of our forefathers neither please us nor
seem proper. "Therefore it seems necessary to make
our opinion known, both to those who have such
schools and to those who are in the habit of attend-
ing them, that they are displeasing to us."

And it was not only in those times, which were
somewhat rude and not yet refined by Greek
training, that philosophers were driven from the
city of Rome, but even in the reign of Domitian!
by a decree of the senate they were driven from
the city and forbidden Italy. And it »was at that
time that the philosopher Epictetus also withdrew
from Rome to Nicopolis because of that senatorial
decree.


XII


A highly memorable passage from a speech of Gracchus,
regarding his frugality and continence.


Wuen Gaius Gracchus? returned from Sardinia,
he delivered a speech to an assembly of the people
in the following words:? “I conducted myself in
my province," said he, “as I thought would be to
your advantage, not as I believed would contribute
to my own ambitions. There was no tavern at my
establishment, nor did slaves of conspicuous beauty
wait upon me, and at an entertainment of mine your
sons were treated with more modesty than at their


? Q, R.F., p. 231, Meyer’.
89


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


3 cipia." Post deinde haec dicit: ** Ita versatus sum
in provincia, uti nemo posset vere dicere assem aut
eo plus in muneribus me accepisse, aut mea opera
quemquam sumptum fecisse. Biennium fui in pro-
vincia; si ulla meretrix domum meam introivit aut
cuiusquam servulus propter me sollicitatus est,omnium
nationum postremissimum nequissimumque  existi-
matote. Cum a servis eorum tam caste me habue-
rim, inde poteritis considerare quomodo me putetis

4 cum liberis vestris vixisse." Atque ibi ex intervalio:
* [taque," inquit, ** Quirites, cum Romam profectus
sum, zonas quas plenas argenti extuli, eas ex pro-
vincia inanes retuli. Alii vini amphoras quas plenas
tulerunt, eas argento repletas domum reporta-
verunt."


XIII


De verbis inopinatis, quae' utroqueversum dicuntur et a
grammaticis *fcommunia" vocantur.

1 “Uror” et *vereor" et *consolor" communis
verba sunt ac dici utroqueversus possunt: “ vereor
te " et * vereor abs te," id est “tu me vereris" ; “ utor
te " et “ utor abs te,” id est “tu me uteris " ; 1 * hortor
te" et "hortor abs te," id est “tu me hortaris”;
* consolor te" et * consolor abs te," id est “tu me
consolaris"; “testor” quoque et interpretor"

2 significatione reciproca dicuntur. Sunt autem verba


lid... uteris, c ; id (pro id, Q) factum, c.


90


BOOK XV. xr. 2x10. 2


generals tent.” Later on he continues as follows :
*[ so conducted myself in my province that no
one could truly say that I received a penny, or more
than that,’ by way of present, or that anyone was
put to expense on my account, I spent two years
in my province; if any courtesan entered my house
or anyone's slave was bribed on my account, con-
sider me the lowest and basest of mankind. Since
I conducted myself so continently towards their
slaves, you may judge from that on what terms I
lived with your sons.” Then after an interval he
goes on: “Accordingly, fellow citizens, when I
left for Rome, I brought back empty from the
province the purses which I took there full of
money. Others have brought home overflowing
with money the jars which they took to their
province filled with wine."


XIII


Of some unusual words, which are used in either voice and
are called by the grammarians ** common."


,


Uron, vereor, hortor and consolor are “ common’
verbs and can be used either way: “I respect you"
and “I am respected by you," that is, “ you respect
me"; “I use you" and “I am used by you," that
is, “you use me"; “I exhort you" and “I am
exhorted by you," that is, “you exhort me"; “I
console you" and “I am consoled by you,” that is,
“you console me." Testor too and interpretor are
used in a reciprocal sense. But all these words are


1 One is reminded of the story of the politician who
declared that he had never received a penny in bribes, but
that it was as wellto say nothing about thousand dollar bills.


OI


9


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


haec omnia ex altera parte inusitata, et an dicta
sint in eam quoque partem quaeri solet.
Afranius in Consobrinis :


Em istó parentum est vita vilis liberis,
Ubi málunt metui, quám vereri se áb suis.


Hic * vereri" ex ea parte dictum est quae est non
usitatior, Novius in  Lignaria verbum quod est
* utitur" ex contraria parte dicit:


Quía supellex mülta quae non ütitur, emitür
tamen,


id est “quae usui non est" M. Cato in quinta
Origine: *'Exercitum," inquit, *suum pransum,
paratum, cohortatum eduxit foras atque instruxit."
** Consolor " quoque in partem alteram, praeterquam
dici solitum est, scriptum invenimus in epistula
Q. Metelli, quam, cum in exilio esset, ad Cn. et
ad L. Domitios dedit. * At cum animum," inquit,
* vestrum erga me video, vehementer consolor et
fides virtusque vestra mihi ante oculos versatur."
* Testata" itidem et * interpretata" eadem ratione
dixit M, Tullius in primo libro De Divinatione, ut
"testor" *interpretor"que verba communia videri
debeant. Sallustius quoque eodem modo: * dilar-
gitis proscriptorum bonis" dicit, tamquam verbum
*largior" sit ex verbis communibus.

“Veritum” autem, sicut “puditum” et ** pigi-


1 jj, 33, Ribbeck?, ? v. 48, Ribbeck?,
92


BOOK XV. xm. 2-9


unusual in the second of these meanings, and it is
a matter of inquiry whether they are ever so used.
Afranius in Z'Àe Cousins says :1


Lo! there his children hold a sire's life cheap,
Where rather feared than honoured (vereri) he
would be.


Here vereor is used in its less common sense. Novius
also in the Wood-dealer uses the word utor with a
passive meaning :?


Since a deal of gear is bought which is not used
(ulitur).


That is, “which is not to be used.’ Marcus Cato
in the fifth book of his Origins has this:? ** He led
forth his army, fed, ready, and encouraged (coAor-
tatum), and drew it up in order of battle.” We
find consolor also used in a different sense from the
one which it commonly has, in a letter of Quintus
Metellus, which he wrote during his exile to Gnaeus
and Lucius Domitius.  *But," he says, “when I
realize your feeling towards me, I am very greatly
consoled (consolor), and your loyalty and worth are
brought before my eyes." Marcus Tullius used
testata and interpretata in the same manner in the
first book of his work On Divination,* so that testor
and interpretor ought also to be considered to be
“common” verbs. Sallust too in a similar way
says:? “The goods of the proscribed having been
given away (dilargitis),' indicating that largior is one
of the * common " verbs.

Moreover, we see that veritum, like puditum and


3 Frag. 101, Peter?. * $87 and $53.
5 Hist.i. 49, Maur.


93


10


11


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


tum," non personaliter per infinitum modum dictum
esse, non a vetustioribus tantum videmus, sed a M.
quoque Tullio in secundo De Finibus. ** Primum,"
inquit, * Aristippi Cyrenaicorumque omnium, quos
non est veritum in ea voluptate quae maxima dul-
cedine sensum moveret summum bonum ponere."

* Dignor" quoque et * veneror" et * confiteor'
et "testor" habita sunt in verbis communibus. Sic
illa in Vergilio dicta sunt:


,


Coniugio, Anchisa, Veneris dignate superbo,


eur


cursusque dabit venerata secundos.


,


** Confessi" autem “aeris,” de quo facta confessio
est, in XII. T'abulis scriptum est his verbis: * Aeris
confessi rebusque iure! iudicatis XXX. dies iusti
sunto." Item ex isdem tabulis id quoque est.
* Qui se sierit testarier libripensve fuerit, ni testi-


monium fariatur, inprobus intestabilisque esto."


! jure, cf. xx. i. 45; omitted here by v.
a MNT cl MA e s


! That is, without having a particular person or thing as its
subject.


2 $39,
* de, who did not scruple.


94


BOOK XV. xri. 9-11


pigitum, is used impersonally and indefinitely, not
only by the earlier writers, but also by Marcus
Tullius in the second book of his De Finibus?
* First (I will refute), says he, *the view of
Aristippus and of all the Cyrenaic philosophers,
to whom it caused no fear ? (veritum est) to assign the
highest good to that pleasure which affects the
senses with greatest delight.”

Dignor, too, veneror, confiteor and testor are treated
as “common” verbs. Thus we find in Virgil :*


Of wedlock high with Venus worthy deemed


(dignate),
and?
Revered in prayer (venerata), shall grant a voyage
safe.


Moreover, confessi aeris, meaning a debt of which
admission is made, is written in the 7'»welve Tables
in these words:9 “For an admitted debt, when
the matter has been taken into court, let the respite
be thirty days." Also in those same Tables we find
this:" * Whoever shall allow himself to be sum-
moned as a witness or shall act as a balance-holder,8
if he does not give his testimony, let him be re-
garded as dishonoured and incapable of giving
testimony in the future."

4 Aen. ii. 475. 5 Aen. ili. 460.

Sura dle FE;

8 That is, in a symbolic sale, when the purchaser touched
a balance with a coin. See note on v. 19. 3 (vol. i., p. 436).


95


"


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XIV


Quod Metelus Numidicus figuram orationis novam ex
orationibus Graecis mutuatus est.


APur Q. Metellum Numidicum in libro accusa-
tionis In Valerium Messalam tertio nove dictum esse
adnotavimus. Verba ex oratione eius haec sunt:
* Cum sese sciret in tantum crimen venisse atque
socios ad senatum questum flentes venisse, sese pe-
cunias maximas exactos esse."  **Sese! pecunias,"
inquit, maximas? exactos esse" pro eo quod est:
* pecunias a se esse? maximas exactas."

Id nobis videbatur Graeca figura dictum ; Graeci
enim dicunt: cicerpagaro pe àpy)puv, id significat
*exegit me pecuniam." Quod si id dici potest,
etiam * exactus esse aliqui pecuniam "" dici potest,
Caeciliusque eadem figura in Hypobolimaeo Aeschino


usus videtur:
Ego illád minus nihilo éxigor portórium,


id est ** nihilominus exigitur de me portorium,”


XV


**Passis velis" et ‘‘passis manibus" dixisse veteres non a


verbo suo, quod est '*patior," sed ab alieno, quod est
** pando."


An eo quod est “pando” * passum" veteres
dixerunt, non *pansum," et cum “ex” praeposi-


1 Sese added by Hertz. * maximas added by Carrio.
3 ase esse, Hertz; esse, Q; a se, v.


96


BOOK XV, xiv. 1—v. r


XIV


That Metellus Numidicus borrowed a new form of expression
from Greek usage.


In Quintus Metellus Numidicus, in the third book
of his Accusation of Valerius Messala, I have made
note of a novel expression. The words of his speech
are as follows:1 “When he knew that he had
incurred so grave an accusation, and that our allies
had come to the senate in tears, to make complaint
that they had been exacted enormous sums of
money (pecunias maximas exactos esse) He says
*that they had been exacted enormous sums of
money,’ instead of “that enormous sums of money
had been exacted from them."

This seemed to me an imitation of a Greek idiom ;
for the Greeks say : eicerpá£aró je dpyvpiov, meaning
“he exacted me money." But if this can be said,
so too can * one is exacted money," and Caecilius
seems to have used that form of expression in his
Supposilitious Aeschinus :*


Yet I the customs-fee exacted am.
That is to say, “ yet the customs-fee is exacted from
je.
XV


That the early writers used passis velis and passis manibus,
not from the verb patior, to which the participle belongs,
but from pando, to which it does not belong.


From the verb pando the ancients made passum,
not pansum, and with the preposition ex they formed


1 O.R.F., p. 276, Mever?. 2 v, 92, Ribbeck?.


97
VOL. III. H


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


2 tione *expassum," non *expansum." Caecilius in
Synaristosis ;


Herí vero prospéxisse eum se ex tégulis,
Haec nüntiasse et flammeum expassüm domi.


3 “Capillo” quoque esse mulier * passo" dicitur,
quasi porrecto et expanso, et * passis manibus"
et * velis passis" dicimus, quod significat diductis

4 atque distentis. Itaque Plautus in Miüite Glorioso,
a littera in e mutata per compositi vocabuli morem,
* dispessis " dicit pro eo, quod est “ dispassis " :


Credo égo istoc exempló tibi esse péreundum!
extra pórtam,
Dispéssis manibus pátibulum cum habébis,


XVI :
De novo genere interitus Crotoniensis Milonis.


l1 Miro Crotoniensis, athleta inlustris, quem in
chronicis scriptum est Olympiade LXII? primum
coronatum esse, exitum habuit e vita miserandum
2 et mirandum. Cum iam natu grandis artem athle-
ticam desisset iterque faceret forte solus in locis
Italiae silvestribus, quercum vidit proxime viam
3 patulis in parte media rimis hiantem. Tum experiri,
credo, etiam tunc volens an ullae sibi reliquae vires


? pereundum, edd. Plaut. ; eundum, w.
* ]xii. primum, ZLübbert ; prima, w ; plurima, Damsté.


1 v, 197, Ribbeck’.
98


BOOK XV. xv. 1-xvi. 3


.expassum, not expansum. Caecilius in the Fellow-
breakfasters says :!


That yesterday he'd looked in from the roof,
Had this announced, and straight the veil? was
spread (expassum).


A woman too is said to be capillo passo, or “ with
disordered hair,' when it is hanging down and
loosened, and we say passis manibus and velis passis
of hands and sails stretched out and spread. There-
fore Plautus in his Braggart Captain, changing an a
into an e, as is usual in compound words, uses
dispessis for dispassis in these lines:?


Methinks you thus must die without the gate,
When you shall hold the cross with hands out-
stretched (dispessis).


XVI
Of the singular death of Milo of Croton.*


Miro of Croton, a famous athlete, who was first
crowned at the sixty-second Olympiad,? as the
chronicles record, ended his life in a strange and
lamentable manner. When he was already advanced
in age and had given up the athletic art, he chanced
to be journeying alone in a wooded part of Italy.
Near the road he saw an oak tree, the middle of
which gaped with wide cracks. Then wishing, I sup-
pose, to try whether he still had any strength left,

2 The flame-coloured (yellow) bridal veil.

3 359. Cf. iv. 17. 8; & became c before two consonants, 7
before a single one, except r.

4 The same story is told by Strabo, vi. 1. 12 (iii, p. 45,
L.C. L.). 5 582 B.C.


99
HJ


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


adessent, inmissis in cavernas arboris digitis, didu-,
cere et rescindere quercum conatus est. Ac mediam
quidem partem ! discidit divellitque ; quercus autem
in duas diducta partis, cum ille, quasi perfecto quod
erat conixus, manus laxasset, cessante vi rediit
in naturam manibusque eius retentis inclusisque
stricta denuo et cohaesa, dilacerandum hominem


feris praebuit.


XVII


Quam ob causam nobiles pueri Atheniensium tibiis canere
desierint, cum patrium istum morem canendi haberent.


ArciprADES Atheniensis, cum apud avunculum
Periclen puer artibus ac disciplinis liberalibus
erudiretur et arcessi Pericles Antigenidam tibicinem
iussisset, üt eum canere tibiis, quod honestissimum
tum videbatur, doceret, traditas sibi tibias, cum ad os
adhibuisset inflassetque, pudefactus oris deformitate
abiecit infregitque. Ea res cum percrebuisset,
omnium tum Atheniensium consensu disciplina
tibiis canendi desita est. Scriptum hoc in Con-


mentario Pamphilae nono et vicesimo.


! partem deleted by Ranchinus.


100


BOOK XV. xv. 3-xvit. 3


he put his fingers into the hollows of the tree and
tried to rend apart and split the oak. And in fact
he did tear asunder and divide the middle part;
but when the oak was thus split into two parts, and
he relaxed his hold as if he had accomplished his
attempt, the tree returned to its natural position
when the pressure ceased, and catching and holding
his hands as it came together and united, it kept
the man there, to be torn to pieces by wild beasts.


XVII


Why young men of noble rank at Athens gave up playing
the pipes, although it was one of their native customs.


ArciBiADEs the Athenian in his boyhood was being
trained in the liberal arts and sciences at the home
of his uncle, Pericles; and Pericles had ordered
Antigenides, a player on the pipes, to be sent for,
to teach the boy to play on that instrument, which
was then considered a great accomplishment. But
when the pipes were handed to him and he had put
them to his lips and blown, disgusted at the ugly
distortion of his face, he threw them away and broke
them in two. When this matter was noised abroad,
by the universal consent of the Athenians of that
time the art of playing the pipes was given up. This
story is told in the twenty-ninth book of the
Commentary of Pamphilas.!


,


1 F.H.G.iii. 521. 9.


IOI


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XVIII


Quod pugna belli civilis vietoriaque Gai Caesaris, quam
vicit in Pharsaliis campis, nuntiata praedictaque est per
cuiuspiam sacerdotis! vaticinium eodem ipso die in Italia
Patavi.


Qvo C. Caesar et Cn. Pompeius die per civile
bellum signis conlatis in Thessalia conflixerunt, res
accidit Patavi in transpadana Italia memorari digna.
Cornelius quidam sacerdos, et nobilis et sacerdotii
religionibus venerandus et castitate vitae sanctus,
repente mota mente conspicere se procul dixit
pugnam acerrimam pugnari, ac deinde alios cedere,
alios urgere, caedem, fugam, tela volantia, instau-
rationem pugnae, inpressionem, gemitus, vulnera,
proinde ut si ipse in proelio versaretur, coram videre
sese vociferatus est ac postea subito exclamavit
Caesarem vicisse.

Ea Cornelii sacerdotis ariolatio levis tum quidem
visa est et vecors. Magnae mox admirationi fuit,
quod non modo pugnae dies quae in Thessalia pugnata
est, neque proelii exitus qui erat praedictus, idem
fuit, sed omnes quoque pugnandi reciprocae vices
et ipsa exercituum duorum conflictatio vaticinantis
motu atque verbis repraesentata est.


1 sacerdotis, scripsi, of. 88 2 and 3 (beginning) ; praesagi
or sagacis, Hosius ; remigis, e. As Madvig long ago pointed
out (Adv. Crit. ii, p. 605, n. 1), this is not a question of palaeo-
102


BOOK XV. xvi. 1-3


XVIII


That the battle which Gaius Caesar fought on the plains of
Pharsalus during the civil war was announced on the
very same day at Patavium in Italy, and his victory
foretold, by the divination of a seer.


On the day that Gaius Caesar and Gnaeus
Pompeius engaged in battle in Thessaly during the
civil war, an event occurred at Patavium in Trans-
padane Italy, which is deserving of record. A priest
called Cornelius, a man of good birth, honoured for
scrupulousness in ‘his office and revered for the
purity of his life, was suddenly seized by a prophetic
inspiration and said that he saw a most furious battle
taking place afar off; then he shouted out, just as
if he were personally taking part in the engagement,
that some were giving way, others pressing on;
that he saw before him carnage, flight, flying
weapons, a renewal of the engagement, an attack,
groans and wounds ; and later he suddenly exclaimed
that Caesar was victorious.

At the time the prophecy of the priest Cornelius
seemed unimportant and without meaning. After-
wards, however, it caused great surprise, since not
only the time of the battle which was fought in
Thessaly, and its predicted outcome, were verified,
but all the shifting fortunes of the day and the
very conflict of the two armies were represented
by the gestures and words of the seer.!


1 Of, Plutarch, Caesar, 47.


graphy, but remigis was a marginal note, suggested by the story
in Cic. Div. i. 68, which somehow made its way into the text.


103


T


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XIX


Verba M. Varronis memoria digna ex Satura, quae inscri- -
bitur Ilepl ^E0ecuárev.


NoN paucissimi sunt in quos potest convenire id
quod M. Varro dicit in Satura quae inscribitur
llepi "Eco drov. Verba haec sunt: “Si, quantum
operae sumpsisti ut tuus pistor bonum faceret
panem, eius duodecimam philosophiae dedisses, ipse
bonus iampridem esses factus. Nunc illum qui
norunt volunt emere milibus centum, te qui novit
nemo centussis."


XX


Notata quaedam de Euripidis poetae genere, vita, moribus
deque eiusdem fine vitae.


EuniPiDi poetae matrem Theopompus agrestia
olera vendentem victum quaesisse dicit. Patri
autem eius nato illo responsum est a Chaldaeis eum
puerum, cum adolevisset, victorem in certaminibus
fore; id ei puero fatum esse. Pater interpretatus
athletam debere esse, roborato exercitatoque filii sui
corpore, Olympiam certaturum eum inter athletas
pueros deduxit. Ac primo quidem in certamen per
ambiguam aetatem receptus non est, post Eleusino
et Theseo certamine pugnavit et coronatus est.


1 Fr. 404, Biicheler, * P.H.G. i. 994.


? Athletic games in connection with the Eleusinian
mysteries.


104


BOOK XV. xix. 1-xx. 3


XIX


Memorable words of Marcus Varro, from the satire entitled
Tlep) “Edecuatwr.


THERE are not a few to whom that may apply which
is said by Marcus Varro in his satire entitled IIepi
*Edcopatwv, or On Eatables. His words are these :!
“Tf you had given to philosophy a twelfth part of
the effort which you spent in making your baker give
you good bread, you would long since have become
a good man. As it is, those who know him are
willing to buy Aim at a hundred thousand sesterces,
while no one who knows you would take you at a


hundred."


XX


Certain facts about the birth, life and character of the poet
Euripides, and about the end of his life.


Tueorompus says? that the mother of the poet
Euripides made a living by selling country produce.
Furthermore, when Euripides was born, his father
was assured by the astrologers that the boy, when
he grew up, would be victor in the games; for that
was his destiny. His father, understanding this to
mean that he ought to be an athlete, exercised and
strengthened his son's body and took him to Olympia
to contend among the wrestlers. And at first he’
was not admitted to the contest because of his
tender age, but afterwards he engaged in the
Eleusinian? and Thesean‘ contests and won crowns.


4 A festival held at Athens in the autumn in the month


Pyanepsion, in honour of Theseus.
105


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


4 Mox a corporis cura ad excolendi animi studium
transgressus, auditor fuit physici Anaxagorae et Pro-
dici rhetoris, in morali autem philosophia Socratis.
Tragoediam  seribere natus annos duodeviginti

5 adortus est. Philochorus refert in insula Salamine
speluncam esse taetram et horridam, quam nos
vidimus, in qua Euripides tragoedias scriptitarit.

6 Mulieres fere omnes in maiorem modum exosus
fuisse dicitur, sive quod natura abhorruit a mulierum
coetu sive quod duas simul uxores habuerat, cum
id decreto ab Atheniensibus facto ius esset, quarum

7 matrimonii pertaedebat. ^ Eius odii in mulieres
Aristophanes quoque meminit é ais mporépats
@esuodopiafoveats in his versibus:


NÀv oiv árácawuw mapauw kai Aéyo,
Totrov koAácat Tov avdpa zoAAQv oivexa.
» N: © ^ > ^ ^ ,

Apta. yàp 1j48s, & "yvvatkes, dpa kakd,

BA LE) 3 , CR , EE ,

T €v àypiowt Tots! Aaxavols avr0s Tpadeis.
8 Alexander autem Aetolus hos de Euripide versus
composuit :


'O 9' "Ava£ayópov rpóduxos xav orpipves pev iovye


Trpoc euretv,
^ , N ,
Kat jucoyéAes, kai twOdlew 00: ap olvov pepa-
Onkws,
> 9 ¢ , a> À
AXN 0 te ypdpat, rovr av pédttos Kal Xewpwvov
d
ETETEVYEL.


9 Is cum in Macedonia apud Archelaum regem esset
utereturque eo rex familiariter, rediens nocte ab
eius cena, canibus a quodam aemulo inmissis di-


! rots omitted by codd. of Aristoph.


+ FLAG. i, 412.
* These words are probably not part of the quotation.


106


BOOK XV. xx. 4-9


Later, turning from attention to bodily exercise to
the desire of training his mind, he was a pupil of the
natural philosopher Anaxagoras and the rhetorician
Prodicus, and, in moral philosophy, of Socrates. At
the age of eighteen he attempted to write a tragedy.
Philochorus relates! that there is on the island of
Salamis a grim and gloomy cavern,? which I myself
have seen, in which Euripides wrote tragedies.

He is said to have had an exceeding antipathy
towards almost all women, either because he had
a natural disinclination to their society, or because
he had had two wives at the same time (since that was
permitted by a decree passed by the Athenians) and
they had made wedlock hatefulto him. Aristophanes
also notices his antipathy to women in the first edition

of the Thesmophoriazousae in these verses : ?


Now then I urge and call on all our sex

This man to punish for his many crimes.

For on us, women, he brings bitter woes,
Himself brought up ‘mid bitter garden plants.


But Alexander the Aetolian composed the follow-
ing lines about Euripides :*

The pupil of stout Anaxagoras,

Of churlish speech and gloomy, ne’er has learned

To jest amid the wine; but what he wrote

Might honey and the Sirens well have known,


When Euripides was in Macedonia at the court of
Archelaus, and had become an intimate friend of the
king, returning home one night from a dinner with
the monarch he was torn by dogs, which were set


3 453 ff.
4 Anal. Alex. p. 247, Meineke.
107


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


laceratus est et ex his vulneribus mors secuta est.


10 Sepulchrum autem eius et memoriam Macedones


[mm


eo dignati sunt honore, ut in gloriae quoque loco
praedicarent: ovror àv! adv priya, Hipimdes, óXovró
mov, quod egregius poeta morte obita sepultus in
eorum terra foret. Quamobrem cum legati ad eos
ab Atheniensibus missi petissent ut ossa Athenas
in terram illius patriam permitterent transferri,
maximo consensu Macedones in ea re deneganda
perstiterunt.


XXI


Quod a poetis Iovis filii prudentissimi humanissimique,
Neptuni autem ferocissimi et inhumanissimi traduntur.


PnaxsrANTISsIMOS virtute, prudentia, viribus? Iovis
filios poetae appellaverunt, ut Aeacum et Minoa
et Sarpedona; ferocissimos et inmanes et alienos ab
omni humanitate, tamquam e mari genitos, Neptuni
filios dixerunt, Cyclopa et Cercyona et Scirona et
Laestrygonas.


XXII


Historia de Sertorio, egregio duce, deque astu eius com-
mentiejsque simulamentis quibus ad barbaros milites
continendos conciliandosque sibi utebatur.


SkEnRTORIUs, vir acer egregiusque dux, et utendi?
regendique exercitus peritus fuit. Is in temporibus

1 &v added by Capps.

* viribus, w ; moribus, Kronenberg.


3 exacuendi or excitandi suggested by Hostus; dux
educendi, 7'Y.


? He died in 406 n.c. ; according to another version of the
story it was a band of women who tore him to pieces, Both
108


BOOK XV. xx. 9-xxi. 2


upon him by a rival of his, and death resulted from
his wounds! The Macedonians treated his tomb
and his memory with such honour that they used to
proclaim: “Never, Euripides, shall thy monument
perish," also by way of self-glorification, because the
distinguished poet had met his death and been
buried in their land. Therefore when envoys, sent
to them by the Athenians, begged that they should
allow his bones to be moved to Athens, his native
land, the Macedonians unanimously persisted in
refusing.
XXI
That by the poets the sons of Jupiter are represented as most


wise and refined, but those of Neptune as very haughty
and rude.


Tue poets have called the sons of Jupiter most
excellent in worth, wisdom and strength, for example
Aeacus, Minos and Sarpedon ; the sons of Neptune,
the Cyclops, Cercyon, Sciron, and the Laestrygonians,
they said, were most haughty and cruel, and strangers
to all refinement, as being sprung from the sea.


XXII


A story of the distinguished leader Sertorius ; of his cunning,
and of the clever devices which he used to control and
conciliate his barbarian soldiers.


SEnToniUs, a brave man and a distinguished
general, was skilled in using and commanding an
army. In times of great difficulty he would lie to


tales are of doubtful authenticity; the one told by Gellius
appears also in Athenaeus xiii. 597, but is denied in verses
preserved in Suidas, s.v. dmaiuexe.


109


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


difficillimis et mentiebatur ad milites, si mendacium
prodesset, et litteras compositas pro veris legebat et
somnium simulabat et falsas religiones conferebat, si
quid istae res eum apud militum animos adiuvabant.
3,41llud adeo Sertori nobile est: Cerva alba eximiae
pulchritudinis et vivacissimae celeritatis a Lusitano
5 ei quodam dono data est. Hane sibi oblatam
divinitus et instinctam Dianae numine conloqui
secum monereque et docere quae utilia factu essent,
persuadere omnibus institit ac, si quid durius vide-
batur quod imperandum militibus foret, a cerva
sese monitum praedicabat. Id cum dixerat, uni-
6 versi, tamquam si deo, libentes parebant. Ea cerva
quodam die, cum incursio esset hostium nuntiata,
festinatione ac tumultu consternata in fugam se
prorupit atque in palude proxima delituit et frustra !
7 requisita perisse credita est. Neque multis diebus
post inventam esse cervam Sertorio nuntiatur.
8 Tum qui nuntiaverat iussit tacere, ac ne cui palam
diceret interminatus est, praecepitque ut eam postero
die repente in eum locum in quo ipse cum amicis
esset inmitteret. Admissis deinde amicis postridie,
visum sibi esse ait in quiete cervam quae perisset
ad se reverti et, ut prius consuerat, quod opus esset
9 facto praedicere; tum servo quod imperaverat
significat, cerva emissa in cubiculum Sertorii intro-
rupit, clamor factus et orta admiratio est,


1 frustra, Cornelissen ; postea, w.
IIO


BOOK XV. xx, 2-9


his soldiers, if a lie was advantageous, he would read
forged letters for genuine ones, feign dreams, and
resort to fictitious omens, if such devices helped him
to keep up the spirits of his soldiers. The following
story about Sertorius is particularly well known: A
white hind of remarkable beauty, agility and swift-
ness was given him as a present by a man of Lusi-
tania. He tried to convince everyone that the
animal had been given him by the gods, and that
inspired by the divine power of Diana, it talked with
him, and showed and indicated what it was expedien
to do; and if any command which he felt obliged to
give his soldiers seemed unusually difficult, he
declared that he had been advised by the hind.
When he said that, all willingly rendered obedience,
as if to a god. One day, when an advance of the
enemy had been reported, the hind, alarmed by the
hurry and confusion, took to flight and hid in a
neighbouring marsh, and after being sought for in
vain was believed to have perished. Not many days
later, word was brought to Sertorius that the hind
had been found. Then he bade the one who had
brought the news to keep silence, threatening him
with punishment in case he revealed the matter to
anyone; and he ordered him suddenly on the
following day to let the animal into the place where
he himself was with his friends. Then, next day,
having called in his friends, he said that he had
dreamed that the lost hind had returned to him, and
after its usual manner had told him what ought to
be done. Thereupon he signed to the slave to do
what he had ordered; the hind was let loose and
burst into Sertorius’ room, amid shouts of amaze-
ment.

IIT


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Eaque hominum barbarorum credulitas Sertorio

10 in magnis rebus magno usui fuit. Memoria prodita

est, ex his nationibus quae eum Sertorio faciebant,

cum multis proeliis superatus esset, neminem

umquam ab eo descivisse, quamquam id genus
hominum esset mobilissimum.


XXIII


De aetatibus historicorum nobilium, Hellanici, Herodoti,
Thucydidis.

1  Hettanicus, Herodotus, Thucydides, historiae
scriptores, in isdem fere temporibus laude ingenti
floruerunt et non nimis longe distantibus fuerunt

2 aetatibus. Nam Hellanicus initio belli Pelopon-
nesiaci fuisse quinque et sexaginta annos natus
videtur, Herodotus tres et quinquaginta, Thucydides


quadraginta. Scriptum est hoc in libro undecimo
Pamphilae.


XXIV


Quid Vulcacius Sedigitus, in libro quem De Poetis scripsit,
de comicis Latinis iudicarit,

l Sepierrus in libro quem scripsit De Poetis, quid

de his sentiat qui comoedias fecerunt, et quem ex

omnibus praestare ceteris putet, ac deinceps quo


quemque in loco et honore ponat, his versibus suis
demonstrat :


Multós incertos cértare hanc rem vídimus,
Palmám poetae cómico cui déferant.

Eum méo iudicio errórem dissolvám tibi,
Ut, cóntra si quis séntiat, nihil séntiat.


1 Tn 413 z.c.


BOOK XV. xxr. 9-xxiv. 1


This credulity of the barbarians was very helpful
to Sertorius in important matters. It is recorded
that of those tribes which acted with Sertorius,
although he was defeated in many battles, not one
ever deserted him, although that race of men is
most inconstant.


XXIII


Of the age of the famous historians, Hellanicus, Herodotus
and Thucydides.


HarLANIiCUus, Herodotus, and Thucydides, writers
of history, enjoyed great glory at almost the same
time, and did not differ very greatly in age. For
Hellanicus seems to have been sixty-five years old
at the beginning of the Peloponnesian war,! Hero-
dotus fifty-three, Thucydides forty. This is stated
in the eleventh book of Pamphilas.?


XXIV


Vulcacius Sedigitus’ canon of the Latin writers of comedy,
from the book which he wrote On Poets.


Sepiaitus, in the book which he wrote On Poets,
shows in the following verses of his? what he thought
of those who wrote comedies, which one he thinks
surpasses all the rest, and then what rank and honour
he gives to each of them:


This question many doubtfully dispute,
Which comic poet they’d award the palm.
This doubt my judgment shall for you resolve ;
If any differ from me, senseless he.

2 F.H.G. iii. 591. 7 ; of, xv. 17, 3, above.

3 Frag. 1, Báhrens.

II3

VOL. III. I


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Caecílio palmam Státio do mímico.

Plautüs secundus fácile exuperat céteros.
Dein Naévius, qui férvet, pretio in tértiost.
Si erít, quod quarto détur, dabitur Lícinio.
Post insequi Licínium facio Atilium.

In séxto consequétur hos Teréntius,
Turpilius septimüm, Trabea octavum óptinet,
Nonó loco esse facile facio Lüscium.
Decimum áddo causa antíquitatis Ennium.


XXV


De verbis quibusdam novis, quae in Gnaei Mati Mimiambis
offenderamus.


1 Cw. Martius, vir eruditus, in Mimiambis suis non
absurde neque absone finxit *recentatur" pro eo,
quod Graeci dicunt ávaveotrat, id est * denuo nascitur
atque iterum fit recens," Versus, in quibus hoc
verbum est, hi sunt:


Iam iam albicascit Phoebus et recentatur
Commune lumen hominibus 1 voluptatis.


2 Idem Matius in isdem Mimiambis edulcare dicit,
quod est * dulcius reddere, in his versibus :


Quapropter edulcare convenit vitam
Curasque acerbas sensibus gubernare.


! et voluptatibus, e ; omitted by Nonius ii, p. 246, Linds.


* The principle on which the ranking was done is a dis-
puted question—the amount of originality, that of rdéos, and


II4


BOOK XV. xxiv. 1-xxv. 2


First place I give Caecilius Statius.

Plautus holds second rank without a peer ;
Then Naevius third, for passion and for fire.
If fourth there be, be he Licinius.

I place Atilius next, after Licinius.

These let Terentius follow, sixth in rank.
Turpilius seventh, Trabea eighth place holds.
Ninth palm I gladly give to Luscius,

To Ennius tenth, as bard of long ago.!


XXV


Of certain new words which 1 had met in the Mimiambics of
Gnaeus Matius.


GNaEUs Marrus, a learned man, in his Mimiambics
properly and fitly coined the word recentatur for the
idea expressed by the Greek dvaveotra:, that is * it
is born again and is again made new." The lines in
which the word occurs are these : ?


E'en now doth Phoebus gleam, again is born
(recentatur)
The common light to joys of mortal men.


Matius too, in the same Mimiambics, says edulcare,
meaning “to sweeten,” in these lines :?


And therefore it is fit to sweeten (edulcare) life,
And bitter cares with wisdom to control.


personal feeling have been suggested. Vulcacius lived about
130 p.c. He is cited by Suetonius, v. Ter. ii, iv, v (L.C. L. il,
pp. 456, 458, 462).
2 Frag. 9, Báhrens.
3 Frag. 10, Bihrens.
115
12


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XXVI


Quibus verbis Aristoteles philosophus definierit syllogismum ;
eiusque definitionis interpretamentum verbis Latinis
" factum.

ARISTOTELES, quid “ syllogismus" esset, his versibus
definivit: Adyos, év à reÜévrov rwv, Érepóv te àv
keutevov é£ áváykgs ovpBaiver da tov Keysévwv. — Eius
cefinitionis non videbatur habere incommode inter-
pretatio facta hoc modo: * Syllogismus est oratio, in
qua, consensis quibusdam et concessis, aliud quid
quam quae concessa sunt, per ea quae concessa
sunt, necessario conficitur."


XXVII


Quid sint ‘‘comitia calata," quid ** curiata," quid ** centur-
lata," quid ‘‘tributa,” quid **concilium ” ; atque inibi
quaedam eiusdemmodi.

IN libro Laelii Felicis Ad Q. Mucium primo
scriptum est Labeonem scribere “calata” comitia
esse quae pro conlegio pontificum habentur, aut
regis aut flaminum inaugurandorum causa. Eorum
autem alia esse * curiata," alia * centuriata " 3. Our
iata" per lictorem curiatum * calari," id est “con-
vocari," * centuriata"' per cornicinem.


1 Topic. i. 1, p. 100. 25.
* Frag. 1ff., i. p. 70, Bremer,


116


BOOK XV. xxvi. r-xxvit. 2


XXVI


~ In what words the philosopher Aristotle defined a syllogism ;
and an interpretation of his definition in Latin terms.


AnisTOTLE defines a syllogism in these lines:! “A
sentence in which, granted certain premises, some-
thing else than these premises necessarily follows as
the result of these premises." The following inter-
pretation of this definition seemed to me fairly
good: * A syllogism is a sentence in which, certain
things being granted and accepted, something else
than that which was granted is necessarily established
through what was granted."


XXVII


The meaning of comitia calata, cwriata, centuriata, and
tributa, and of concilium, and other related matters of the


same kind.


In the first book of the work of Laelius Felix
addressed T'o Quintus Mucius it is said? that Labeo
wrote ? that the comitia calata, or “ convoked
assembly,” was held on behalf of the college of
pontiffs for the purpose of installing the king 4 or
the flamens. Other assemblies were those “of the
curies" and “of the centuries”; the former were
called together (calari being used in the sense of
“eonvoke”) by the curiate lictor, the latter by a


hornblower.


? Frag. 92, Huschke ; inc. 187, Bremer.
4 That is, the rex sacrorwm ; see note on x. 15, 21.


II]


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Isdem comitiis, quae *calata" appellari diximus,
et sacrorum detestatio et testamenta fieri solebant,
Tria enim genera testamentorum fuisse accepimus :
unum, quod calatis comitiis in populi contione fieret,
alterum in procinctu, cum viri ad proelium faciendum
in aciem vocabantur, tertium per familiae emancipa-
tionem, cui aes et libra adhiberetur.

In eodem Laeli Felicis libro haec scripta sunt:
“Is qui non! universum populum, sed partem
aliquam adesse iubet, non * comitia, sed * concilium '
edicere debet. Tribuni autem neque advocant
patricios neque ad eos referre ulla de re possunt.
Ita ne ‘leges’ quidem proprie, sed ‘plebisscita’
appellantur quae tribunis plebis ferentibus accepta
sunt, quibus rogationibus ante patricii non tene-
bantur, donec Q. Hortensius dictator legem tulit, ut
eo iure quod plebs statuisset omnes Quirites teneren-
tur" Item n eodem libro hoc scriptum est: * Cum
ex generibus hominum suffragium feratur, * curiata '
comitia esse, cum ex censu et aetate * centuriata,’


cum ex regionibus et locis, ‘tributa’; centuriata .


autem comitia intra pomerium fieri nefas esse, quia
exercitum extra urbem imperari oporteat, intra
urbem imperari ius non sit, Propterea centuriata


! non ut, Q.


UU Áo eer E P
1 See Mommsen, Staats. iii, p. 307, n. 2.
* See note on xv. 13. 11. 3 In 341 2.6.
* The comitia curiata were organized on the basis of the
thirty cwriae of the three original Roman tribes, These


118


"——


bass


BOOK XV. xxvi. 3-5


In that same assembly, which we have said was
called calata, or “ convoked," wills were customarily
made and sacrifices annulled. For we learn that
there were three kinds of wills: one which was
made in the “convoked assembly” before the col-
lected people, a second on the battle-field,! when the
men were called into line for the purpose of fighting,
a third the symbolic sale of a householder's property
by means of the coin and balance.?

In the same book of Laelius Felix this is written :
* One who orders a part of the people to assemble,
but not all the people, ought to announce a council
rather than an assembly. Moreover, tribunes do
not summon the patricians, nor may they refer any
question to them, Therefore bills which are passed
on the initiative of the tribunes of the commons are
properly called plebiscita, or ‘decrees of the com-
mons, rather than ‘laws.’ In former times the
patricians were not bound by such decrees until the
dictator Quintus Hortensius passed a law, providing
that all the Quirites should be bound by whatever
enactment the commons should pass.” It is also
written in the same book: “ When voting is done
according to families of men,‘ the assembly is called
‘curiate’; when it is according to property and age,
‘centuriate’; when according to regions and locali-
ties, ‘tribal.’ Further it impious for the assembly
of the centuries to be held within the pomerium,
because the army must be summoned outside of the
city, and it is not lawful for it to be summoned
within the city. Therefore it was customary for the


. euriae included the patrician gentes, which, before the time
of the military assembly (comitia centuriata) attributed to
Servius Tullius, alone had the full rights of citizenship.


119


*-


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


in campo Martio haberi exercitumque imperari
praesidii causa solitum, quoniam populus esset in
suffragiis ferendis occupatus."


XXVIII


Quod erravit Cornelius Nepos, cum scripsit Ciceronem tres
et viginti annos natum causam pro Sexto Roscio dixisse.


ConNELIUs Nepos et rerum memoriae non indiligens
et M. Ciceronis ut qui maxime amicus familiaris
fuit. Atque is tamen, in primo librorum quos de
vita illius composuit, errasse videtur, cum eum
scripsit tres et viginti annos natum primum causam
iudicii publici egisse Sextumque Roscium parricidii
3 reum defendisse. Dinumeratis quippe annis a Q.
Caepione et Q. Serrano, quibus consulibus ante diem
tertium Nonas Ianuar. M. Cicero natus est, ad M.
Tullium et Cn. Dolabellam quibus consulibus causam
privatam Pro Quinctio apud Aquilium Gallum iudicem
dixit, sex et viginti anni reperiuntur — Neque
dubium est quin post annum quam Pro Quinctio
dixerat, Sex. Roscium reum parricidii defenderit,
annos iam septem atque viginti natus, L, Sulla
Felice II. Q. Metello Pio consulibus.

In qua re etiam Fenestellam errasse Pedianus
Asconius animadvertit, quod eum scripserit sexto
vicesimo aetatis anno pro Sex. Roscio dixisse.
Longior autem Nepotis quam Fenestellae error est,
nisi quis vult in animum inducere Nepotem, studio


1 Frag. 1, Peter’, * January 3, 106 3.c.
* p. xv, Kiessling and Schill, * Frag. 17, Peter?,


I20


BOOK XV. xxvit. 5-xxvii. 5


assembly of the centuries to be held in the field of
Mars, and the army to be summoned there for
purposes of defence while the people were busy
casting their votes.”


XXVIII


That Cornelius Nepos was in error when he wrote that
Cicero defended Sextus Roscius at the age of twenty-
three.

ConNELIUs Nepos was a careful student of records
and one of Marcus Cicero’s most intimate friends.
Yet in the first book of his Life of Cicero he seems
to have erred in writing! that Cicero made his first
plea in a public trial at the age of twenty-three
years, defending Sextus Roscius, who was charged
with murder. For if we count the years from
Quintus Caepio and Quintus Serranus, in whose
consulship Cicero was born on the third day before
the Nones of January,” to Marcus Tullius and Gnaeus
Dolabella, in whose consulate he pleaded a private
case In Defence of Quinctius before Aquilius Gallus as
judge, the result is twenty-six years. And there is
no doubt that he defended Sextus Roscius on a
charge of murder the year after he spoke Jn Defence
of Quinctius ; that is, at the age of twenty-seven, in
the consulship of Lucius Sulla Felix and Metellus
Pius, the former for a second time.

Asconius Pedianus has noted? that Fenestella
also made a mistake in regard to this matter, in
writing 4 that he pleaded for Sextus Roscius in the
twenty-sixth year of his age. But the mistake of
Nepos is greater than that of Fenestella, unless
anyone is inclined to believe that Nepos, led by a

TOI


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


amoris et amicitiae adductum, amplificandae admi-
rationis gratia quadriennium suppressisse, ut M
Cicero orationem florentissimam dixisse Pro Roscio
admodum adulescens videretur.

Illud adeo ab utriusque oratoris studiosis animad-
versum et scriptum est, quod Demosthenes et Cicero
pari aetate inlustrissimas primas! orationes in causis ?
dixerunt, alter Karta 'Avóporíovos et Kara Tuxokpdrovs
septem et viginti annos natus, alter anno minor Pro
P. Quinctio septimoque et vicesimo Pro Sex. Roscio.
Vixerunt quoque non nimis numerum annorum
diversum; alter tres et sexaginta annos, Demos-
thenes sexaginta.


XXIX


Quali figura orationis et quam nova L. Piso annalium scriptor
usus sit.

Duar istae in loquendo figurae notae satis usitatae-
que sunt : “mihi nomen est Iulius " et “ mihi nomen
est Iulio"; tertiam figuram novam hercle repperi
apud Pisonem in secundo Annalium. Verba Pisonis
haec sunt: *L. Tarquinium, collegam suum, quia
Tarquinio nomine esset, metuere ; eumque orat uti
sua voluntate Roma concedat." **Quia Tarquinio,"
inquit, * nomine esset" ; hoc proinde est, tamquam
si ego dicam : ** mihi nomen est Iulium."


H primas suggested by Hosius, omitted in w.
* causis privatis, Hertz.


122


BOOK XV. xxvi. 5-xxix. 2


feeling of friendship and regard, suppressed four
years in order to increase our admiration of Cicero,
by making it appear that he delivered his brilliant
speech In Defence of Roscius when he was a very
young man.

This also has been noted and recorded by the
admirers of both orators, that Demosthenes and
Cicero delivered their first brilliant speeches in the
courts at the same age, the former Against Androtion
and Against Timocrates at the age of twenty-seven,
the latter when a year younger In Defence of
Quinctius and at twenty-seven In Defence of Seatus
Roscius. Also, the number of years which they
lived did not differ very greatly; Cicero died at
sixty-three, Demosthenes at sixty.!


XXIX


A new form of expression used by Lucius Piso, the writer of
annals.


Tue two following modes of saying “my name is
Julius" are common and familiar: mui nomen est
lulius and mihi nomen est Iulio. I have actually found
a third, and new, form in Piso, in the second book
of his Annals. His words are these:? “They
feared his colleague, Lucius Tarquinius, because he
had the Tarquinian name; and he begged him to
leave Rome of his own free will." ? * Because," says
he, “he had the Tarquinian name 7. this is as if I
should say mihi momen est Iulium, or *I have the
Julian name."


1 In 922 B.C. ? Frag. 19, Peter?.
3 Of, Livy, ii. 2. 3.


123


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XXX


Vehiculum quod ‘‘petorritum” appellatur, cuiatis linguae
vocabulum sit, Graecae an Gallicae.


l Qui ab alio genere vitae detriti iam et retorridi
ad litterarum disciplinas serius adeunt, si forte idem
sunt garruli natura et subargutuli, oppido quam fiunt

2in litterarum ostentatione inepti et frivoli. Quod
genus profecto ille homo est, qui de * petorritis "

3 nuper argutissimas nugas dixit. Nam cum quaere-
retur, * petorritum " quali forma vehiculum cuiatis-
que linguae vocabulum esset, et faciem vehiculi
ementitus est longe alienam falsamque et vocabulum
Graecum! esse dixit atque adsignificare volucres
rotas interpretatus est, commutataque una littera
“petorritum " esse dictum volebat quasi * petorro-

4 tum"; scriptum etiam hoc esse a Valerio Probo
contendit.

5 Ego, cum Probi multos admodum Commentationum
libros adquisierim, neque Scriptum in his inveni nec
usquam alioqui Probum scripsisse credo; *'petorri-

6 tum" enim est non ex Graecia dimidiatum, sed
totum Transalpibus;? nam est vox Gallica. Id

7scriptum est in libro M. Varronis quarto decimo
Rerum Divinarum, quo in loco Varro, cum de “ petor-
rito" dixisset, esse id verbum Gallicum, * lanceam
quoque dixit non Latinum, set Hispanicum verbum
esse.


! semigraecum, Dazsté,
2 For Transalpibus cf. Pliny, N.H. iii, 194 (Heraeus) ;


totum ortum trans Alpibus, Hertz ; totum transalpinum, J.
G'ronov.


! Making a hybrid word, from rérouat, ** fly," and rota.
See crit. note 1,


* Frag. 108, Agahd,
124


BOOK XV. xxx. 1-7


XXX


Whether the word petorritwm, applied to a vehicle, is Greek
or Gallic.

Tuose who approach the study of letters late in
life, after they are worn out and exhausted by some
other occupation, particularly if they are garrulous
and of only moderate keenness, make themselves
exceedingly ridiculous and silly by displaying their
would-be knowledge. To this class that man surely
belongs, who lately talked fine-spun nonsense about
petorrita, or “ four-wheeled wagons.” For when the
question was asked, what form of vehicle the petor-
ritum was, and from what language the word came, :
he falsely described a form of vehicle very unlike
the real one; he also declared that the name was
Greek and interpreted it as meaning “flying wheels," !
maintaining that pelorritum was formed by the change
of a single letter from petorrotum, and that this form
was actually used by Valerius Probus.

When I had got together many copies of the
Commentaries of Probus, [ did not find that spelling
in them, and I do not believe that Probus used it
anywhere else. For petorritum is not a hybrid word
derived in part from the Greek, but the entire word
belongs to the people across the Alps; for it is a
Gallic word. It is found in the fourteenth book ot
Marcus Varro’s Divine Antiquities, where Varro, speak-
ing of petorritum, says? that it is a Gallic term.2 He
also says that lancea, or “lance,” is not a Latin, but a
Spanish word.


3 Gellius is right; petorrita, like several other words
connected with horses and carriages, is borrowed from the
Gallic. In Celtic, as also in Oscan and Umbrian, Latin qu is
represented by p; hence petor or petora = quattuor.

125


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XXXI


Quae verba legaverint Rodii ad hostium ducem Demetrium,
cum ab eo obsiderentur, super illa incluta Ialysi imagine.


1 Ropvm insulam celebritatis antiquissimae oppidum-
que in ea pulcherrimum ornatissimumque obsidebat
obpugnabatque Demetrius, dux aetatis suae inclutus,
cui a peritia disciplinaque faciendi obsidii machina-
rumque sollertia ad capienda oppida repertarum

2 cognomentum IloAwpkyr5s fuit. Tum ibi in obsi-
dione aedes quasdam publice factas, quae extra urbis
muros cum parvo praesidio erant, adgredi et vastare
atque absumere igni parabat.

3 In eis aedibus erat memoratissima illa imago Ia-
lysi, Protogenis manu facta, inlustris pictoris, cuius
operis pulehritudinem praestantiamque ira percitus

4 Rodiis invidebat. Mittunt Rodii ad Demetrium
legatos cum his verbis: * Quae, malum," inquiunt,
“ratiost ut tu imaginem istam velis incendio aedium
facto disperdere? Nam si nos omnes superaveris et
oppidum hoc totum ceperis, imagine quoque illa
integra et incolumi per victoriam potieris ; sin vero
nos vincere obsidendo nequiveris, petimus consideres
ne turpe tibi sit, quia non potueris bello Rodios vin-

5 cere, bellum cum Protogene mortuo gessisse." Hoe
ubi ex legatis audivit, obpugnatione desita et imagini
et civitati pepercit.


e—— lee ee UN JOUET TU SM


* Grandson of Helios, the Sungod, and brother of Lindus
and Cameirus, with whom he possessed the island of Rhodes.
The city of Ialysus on that island was named from him as its
founder.

* A famous painter of Caunus in Caria, a contemporary of


126


"EZ


BOOK XV. xxxt. 1-5


XXXI


A message sent by the Rhodians about the celebrated statue
of Ialysus to Demetrius, leader of the enemy, at the time
when they were besieged by him.

Tue island of Rhodes, of ancient fame, and the
fairest and richest town in it were besieged and
assaulted by Demetrius, a famous general of his
time, who was surnamed IloAtopryr/s, or “the taker
of cities," from his skill and training in conducting
sieges and the cleverness of the engines which he
devised for the capture of towns. On that occasion
he was preparing in the course of the siege to attack,
pillage and burn a public building without the walls
of the town, which had only a weak garrison.

In this building was that famous picture of Ialysus,1
the work of Protogenes, the distinguished painter ;
and incited by anger against them, Demetrius be-
grudged the Rhodians the beauty and fame of that
work of art. The Rhodians sent envoys to Demetrius
with this message: “ What on earth is your reason
for wishing to set fire to that building and destroy
our painting? For if you overcome all of us and
take this whole town, through your victory you will
gain possession also of that painting, uninjured and
entire; but if you are unable to overcome us by
your siege, we beg you to take thought lest it bring
shame upon you, because you could not conquer the
Rhodians in war, to have waged war with the dead
Protogenes.” Upon hearing this message from the
envoys, Demetrius abandoned the siege and spared
both the picture and the city.


Apelles, flourished about 332 B.C. See Pliny, N.H. xxxv.
101 ff.
127


BOOK XVI


LIBER SEXTUS DECIMUS
I


Verba Musoni philosophi Graeca, digna atque utilia audiri
observarique ; eiusdemque utilitatis sententia a M. Catone
multis ante annis Numantiae ad equites dicta.


l  ADULESCENTULI cum.etiamtum in scholis essemus,
évOupnudtiov hoe Graecum quod adposui dictum esse
a Musonio philosopho audiebamus et, quoniam vere
atque luculente dictum verbisque est brevibus et ro-
tundis vinctum, perquam libenter memineramus :

2"Av ru mpdgys kaÀÓv peta móvov, 6 ev Toves otxerat, TO
St Kadov péverr àv te Tojons aiocypov peta T0ovijs, Td
bev 78d olxyerat, TO 8€ alo xpóv peéver.

3 Postea istam ipsam sententiam in Catonis ora-
tione, quam dixit Nwmantiae apud Equites, positam
legimus. Quae etsi laxioribus paulo longioribusque
verbis comprehensa est praequam illud Graecum
quod diximus, quoniam tamen prior tempore anti-

4 quiorque est, venerabilior videri debet. Verba ex
oratione haec sunt: * Cogitate cum animis vestris,
si quid vos per laborem recte feceritis, labor ille a
vobis cito recedet, bene factum a vobis, dum vivitis,
non abscedet; sed si qua per voluptatem nequiter
feceritis, voluptas cito abibit, nequiter factum illud
apud vos semper manebit."

CIC MG GENE EU Ea exe o ol
1 p. 273, Beerlkamp.
136


BOOK XVI


I


A saying of Musonius, the Greek philosopher, which is of
practical value and worth hearing and bearing in mind ;
and a remark of equal value made by Marcus Cato many
years before to the knights at Numantia.


Wuen I was still young and a schoolboy, I heard
that this Greek sentiment which I have subjoined
was uttered by the philosopher Musonius, and since it
is a true and brilliant saying, expressed briefly and
roundly, I very willingly committed it to memory :!
* ]f you accomplish anything noble with toil, the
toil passes, but the noble deed endures. If you do
anything shameful with pleasure, the pleasure passes,
but the shame endures.”

Later, I read that same sentiment in the speech
of Marcus Cato which he delivered dt Numantia to
the Knights. Although it is expressed somewhat
loosely and diffusely compared with the Greek which
I have given, yet, since it is prior in time and more
ancient, it ought to seem worthy of greater respect.
The words in the speech are as follows :? “ Bear in
mind, that if through toil you accomplish a good
deed, that toil will quickly pass from you, the good
deed will not leave you so long as you live; but if
through pleasure you do anything dishonourable,
the pleasure will quickly pass away, that dishonour-
able act will remain with you for ever."


? p. 38, 11, Jordan.
Xj


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


II


Cuiusmodi sit lex apud dialecticos percontandi disserendique ;
et quae sit eius legis reprehensio.


1  LreEw esse aiunt disciplinae dialecticae, si de
quapiam re quaeratur disputeturque atque ibi quid
rogere ut respondeas, tum ne amplius quid dicas
quam id solum quod es rogatus aut aias aut neges;
eamque legem qui non servent, et aut plus aut aliter
quam sunt rogati respondeant, existumantur indoc-

2tique! esse disputandique morem atque rationem
non tenere. Hoc quidem quod dicunt in plerisque

3 disputationibus procul dubio fieri oportet. Inde-
finitus namque inexplicabilisque sermo fiet, nisi
interrogationibus responsionibusque simplicibus fuerit
determinatus.

4 Sed enim esse quaedam videntur, in quibus si
breviter et ad id quod rogatus fueris respondeas,

5 capiare. Nam si quis his verbis interroget : ** Postulo
uti respondeas desierisne facere adulterium an non,"
utrumcumque dialectica lege responderis, sive aias seu
neges, haerebis in captione, tamquam si te dicas adul-

6 terum quam si neges;? nam qui facere non desinit,

7non id necessario etiam fecit. Falsa igitur est
species istius captionis et nequaquam procedere ad
id potest, ut conligi concludique possit eum facere

8 adulterium qui se negaverit facere desisse. Quid
autem legis istius propugnatores in illa captiuncula
facient, in qua haerere eos necessum est, si nihil
amplius quam quod interrogati erunt responderint ?

! indoctique, QZON ; indocti, IIQ? ; rudes indoctique JV?;
indocti inscitique, sugg. by Hosius (cf. xix. 8. 12).

? tam... neges, c; tamquam si te dicas adulterum
. o . negent, MSS.


132


BOOK XVI. rr. 1-8


II


The nature of the rule of the logicians in disputation and
declamation, and the defect of that rule.


Tuery say that it is a rule of the dialectic art, that
if there is inquiry and discussion of any subject, and
you are called upon to answer a question which is
asked, you should answer the question by a simple
“yes” or “no.” And those who do not observe
that rule, but answer more than they were asked,
or differently, are thought to be both uneducated and
unobservant of the customs and laws of debate. Asa
matter of fact this dictum undoubtedly ought to be
followed in very many debates. For a discussion
will become endless and hopelessly involved, unless
it is confined to simple questions and answers.

But there seem to be some discussions in which,
if you answer what you are asked briefly and directly,
you are caught in a trap. For if anyone should put
a question in these words: “I ask you to tell me
whether you have given up committing adultery or
not,” whichever way you answer according to this
rule of debate, whether you say * yes" or “no,” you
will be caught in a dilemma, equally if you should
say that you are an adulterer, or should deny it ; for
one who has not given up a thing has not of necessity
ever done it. That then is a deceptive kind of
catch-question, and can by no means lead to the
inference and conclusion that he commits adultery
who says that he has not given up doing it. But
what will the defenders of that rule do in that
dilemma, in which they must necessarily be caught,
if they give a simple answer to the question? For


133


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


9 Nam, si ita ego istorum aliquem rogem : * Quicquid


10


ilal


12


13


non perdidisti habeasne an non habeas postulo ut
aias aut neges," utrumcumque breviter responderit,
capietur. Nam si habere! se negaverit quod non
perdidit, colligetur oculos eum non habere, quos
non perdidit; sin vero habere se dixerit, colligetur
habere eum cornua, quae non perdidit. Rectius
igitur cautiusque ita respondebitur: “ Quicquid
habui, id habeo, si id non perdidi" Sed huiusce-
modi responsio non fit ex ea lege quam diximus;
plus enim, quam quod rogatus est, respondet.
Propterea id quoque ad eam legem addi solet, non
esse captiosis interrogationibus respondendum.


III


Quanam ratione effici dixerit Erasistratus medicus, si cibus
forte deerit, ut tolerari aliquantisper inedia possit et


tolerari fames; verbaque ipsa Erasistrati super ea re
Scripta.


Cum Favorino Romae dies plerumque totos eramus
tenebatque animos nostros homo ille fandi dul-
cissimus atque eum, quoquo iret, quasi ex lingua
prorsum eius capti? prosequebamur ; ita sermonibus
usquequaque amoenissimis demulcebat. Tum ad
quendam aegrum cum isset visere nosque cum eo
una introissemus multaque ad medicos, qui tum
forte istic erant, valitudinis eius gratia oratione
Graeca dixisset, * Ac ne hoc quidem mirum," inquit,
* videri debet, quod, cum antehac semper edundi


! si non habere, c ; non deleted by Gruppe.


134


BOOK XVI. u. 9-1. 2


if I should ask any one of them: “ Do you, or do
you not, have what you have not lost? I demand
the answer ‘yes’ or no,” whichever way he replies
briefly, he will be caught. For if he says that he
does not have what he has not lost, the conclusion
will be drawn that he has no eyes, since he has not
lost them; but if he says that he has it, it will be
concluded that he has horns, because he has not lost
them. Therefore it will be more cautious and more
correct to reply as follows: *I have whatever I had,
if I have not lost it." But an answer of that kind
is not made in accordance with the rule which we
have mentioned; for more is answered than was
asked. Therefore this proviso also is commonly
added to the rule, that one need not answer catch-
questions.


III


By what means Erasistratus, the physician, said that one
could do for a time without eating, if food chanced to be
lacking, and endure hunger; and his own words on that
subject.

1 orrEN spent whole days in Rome with Favorinus.
His delightful conversation held my mind enthralled,
and I attended him wherever he went, as if actually
taken prisoner by his eloquence; to such a degree
did he constantly delight me with his most agree-
. able discourse. Once when he had gone to visit a
sick man, and I had entered with him, having con-
versed for some time in Greek about the man's ill-
ness with the physicians who chanced to be there
at the time, he said : * This ought not to seem sur-
prising either, that although previously he was always


2 apti, Stephanus.
135


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


fuerit adpetens, nunc post imperatam inediam tridui
3 omnis eius adpetitio pristina elanguerit. Nam quod
Erasistratus scriptum," inquit, * reliquit propemo-
dum verum est: esuritionem faciunt inanes paten-
tesque intestinorum fibrae et cava intus ventris ac
stomachi vacua et hiantia; quae ubi aut cibo con-
plentur aut inanitate diutina contrahuntur et coni-
vent, tunc loco, in quem cibus capitur, vel stipato
vel adducto, voluntas capiendi eius desiderandique
4restinguitur." Scythas quoque ait eundem Erasis-
tratum dicere, cum sit usus ut famem longius tole-
rent, fasceis ventrem strictissime circumligare. Ea
ventris conpressione esuritionem posse depelli credi-
tum est.
5 Haee tum Favorinus multaque istiusmodi alia
6 adfabilissime dicebat, nos autem postea, cum librum
forte Erasistrati legeremus Awupéceov primum, id
ipsum in eo libro, quod Favorinum audiebamus di-
7 cere, scriptum offendimus. Verba Erasistrati ad
eam rem pertinentia haec sunt: "EXoyd/ópe8o otv
Tap. Tv la xupàv. cp rog TS KotALas eva TÜv
ood [pass aoiriay: kat yàp Tos émimAeov ügtroUgtv Karta
Mpoaiperw €v rois pros xpóvots 1) zretva. zapakoAovÜet,
8 Üo'repov be obkért, Deinde , paululum infra: Eifio-
pevor 8€ elow Kal of SxvVOa, Stay dia twa kaipüv. dvary-
Kdfwvrar à dovrety, fovais arelats THY Kola wo déyyew,
os TS Tels a robs ]jrrov evoxAovoys: oxedov be Kat
Orav mArjpys Kotla 7) T) à. TÓ Kévayua. ev avry] pnder et bed


dua roUro o) cewücw, Stay 8€ ohddpa evrerrokvüa D»
KEVOMA OVK EXEL


1 p. 193, Fuchs.


BOOK XVI. 1. 2-8


eager for food, now after an enforced fast of three
days all his former appetite is lost, For what
Erasistratus has written is pretty nearly true," said
he, “that the empty and open fibres of the intes-
tines, the hollowness of the belly within and the
empty and yawning cavity of the stomach, cause
hunger; but when these are either filled with food or
are contracted and brought together by continued
fasting, then, since the place into which the food is
received is either filled or made smaller, the impulse
to take food, or to crave it, is destroyed.” He de-
clared that Erasistratus also said that the Scythians
too, when it was necessary for them to endure pro-
tracted hunger, bound a very tight bandage around
their bellies. That by such compression of the belly
it was believed that hunger could be prevented.
These things and many others of the kind
Favorinus said most entertainingly on that occasion ;
but later, when I chanced to be reading the first
book of Erasistratus’ Distinctions, I found in that
book the very passage which 1 had heard Favorinus
quote. The words of Erasistratus on the subject
are as follows: “I reasoned therefore that the ability
to fast for a long time is caused by strong compres-
sion of the belly ; for with those who voluntarily fast
for a long time, at first hunger ensues, but later it
passes away." Then a little later: “And the
Scythians also are accustomed, when on any occasion
it is necessary to fast, to bind up the belly with
broad belts, in the belief that the hunger thus
troubles them less; and one may almost say too that
when the stomach is full, men feel no hunger for the
reason that there is no vacuity in it, and likewise
when it is greatly compressed there is no vacuity.”


137


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


9 In eodem libro Erasistratus vim quandam famis


10


2


non tolerabilem, quam Graeci BovAyov appellant,
in diebus frigidissimis multo facilius accidere ait
quam cum serenum atque placidum est, atque eius
rei causas, cur is morbus in eo plerumque tempore
oriatur, nondum sibi esse compertas dicit, Verba
: fe eae » pA
quibus id dicit, haec sunt: '"Azopov 8€ kai Oeópevov
émwokéjeos kai émi tovTov kal ézi tov Aovrüv ovXi-
pudvrwv, dua Tí €v Trois Wixeow pGAÀXov TO cipTTOpa
ToUro yiveTal 3) év Tals EvdlaLs ;


IV


Quo ritu quibusque verbis fetialis populi Romani bellum in-
dicere solitus sit his quibus populus bellum fieri iusserat ;
et item in quae verba conceptum fuerit iusiurandum de
furtis militaribus sanciendis ; et uti milites scripti intra
praedictum diem in loco certo frequentitarent, causis
quibusdam exceptis, propter quas id iusiurandum remitti
aecum esset.


CiNcius in libro tertio De Re Militari, fetialem
populi Romani bellum indicentem hostibus telumque
in agrum eorum iacientem, hisce verbis uti scripsit :
“ Quod populus Hermundulus hominesque populi
Hermunduli adversus populum Romanum bellum !
fecere deliqueruntque, quodque populus Romanus
cum populo Hermundulo hominibusque Hermundulis
bellum iussit, ob eam rem ego populusque Romanus
populo Hermundulo hominibusque Hermundulis
bellum dico facioque.”

Item in libro eiusdem Cincii De Re Militari


! bellum deleted by H. J. Müller and A. Schmidt.


1 Frag. 12, Huschke ; 2, Bremer.
138


BOOK XVI. rr. 9-1v. 2


In the same book Erasistratus declares that a
kind of irresistibly violent hunger, which the Greeks
call BovAwos, or *ox-hunger," is much more apt
to be felt on very cold days than when the
weather is calm and pleasant, and that the reasons
why this disorder prevails especially at such times
have not yet become clearto him. The words which
he uses are these: “It is unknown and requires
investigation, both in reference to the case in question
and in that of others who suffer from ‘ ox-hunger,’
why this symptom appears rather on cold days than
in warm weather."


IV


In what fashion and in what language the war-herald of the
Roman people was accustomed to declare war upon those
against whom the people had voted that war should be
made; also in what words the oath relating to the prohibi-
tion and punishment of theft by the soldiers was couched ;
and how the soldiers that were enrolled were to appear at
an appointed time and place, with some exceptional cases
in which they might properly be freed from that oath.


CiNcius writes in his third book On Military
Science? that the war-herald of the Roman people,
when he declared war on the enemy and hurled a
spear into their territory, used the following words :
« Whereas the Hermandulan people and the men of
the Hermandulan people have made war against the
Roman people and have transgressed against them,
and whereas the Roman people has ordered war with
the Hermandulan people and the men of the Her-
mandulans, therefore I and the Roman people declare
and make war with the Hermandulan people and
with the men of the Hermandulans."

Also in the fifth book of the same Cincius On

139


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


quinto ita scriptum est: * Cum dilectus antiquitus
fieret et milites scriberentur, iusiurandum eos tri-
bunis militaris adigebat in verba haec (magistratus
verba):! *C. Laelii C. fili consulis, L. Cornelii P.
fli consulis in exercitu, decemque milia passuum
prope, furtum non facies dolo malo solus neque cum
pluribus pluris nummi argentei in dies singulos;
extraque hastam, hastile, ligna, poma, pabulum,
utrem, follem, faculam si quid ibi inveneris sustu-
lerisve quod tuum non erit, quod pluris nummi
argentei erit, uti tu ad C. Laelium C. filium con-
sulem Luciumve Cornelium P. filium sive quem ad
uter eorum iusserit proferes, aut profitebere in triduo
proximo quidquid inveneris sustulerisve dolo? malo,
aut domino suo, cuium id censebis esse, reddes, uti
quod rectum factum esse voles.' "

3  * Militibus autem scriptis, dies praefinibatur quo
die adessent et citanti consuli responderent ; deinde

4 concipiebatur iusiurandum, ut adessent, his additis
exceptionibus : * Nisi harunce quae causa erit: funus
familiare feriaeve denicales, quae non eius rei causa
in eum diem conlatae sint, quo is eo die minus ibi
esset, morbus sonticus auspiciumve quod sine pia-
culo praeterire non liceat, sacrificiumve anniver-


! magistratu (-us, Q*) verba, 9; in magistratu verba, OX ;
in magistratu, N II; deleted by Hertz, see edit. maior, ii, xci.
* dolo, Aldus; in dolo, c.


1 Frag. 13, Huschke ; 2, Bremer.

* feriae denicales (from de and nex) are thus described by
Paul Fest. p. 61, Linds.: colebantur cum hominis mortui
causa familia purgatur. — Graeci enim vékvv mortuum dicunt.

* See xx. 1. 27. It refers especially to epilepsy, also called
morbus comitialis, or ‘election disease," because if anyone


140


BOOK XVI. iv. 2-4


Military Science we read the following :1 “When a
levy was made in ancient times and soldiers were
enrolled, the tribune of the soldiers compelled them
to take an oath in the following words dictated by
the magistrate : ‘In the army of the consuls Gaius
Laelius, son of Gaius, and Lucius Cornelius, son of
Publius, and for ten miles around it, you will not
with malice aforethought commit a theft, either
alone or with others, of more than the value of a
silver sesterce in any one day. And except for one
spear, a spearshaft, wood, fruit, fodder, a bladder,
a purse and a torch, if you find or carry off anything
there which is not your own and is worth more than
one silver sesterce, you will bring it to the consul
Gaius Laelius, son of Gaius, or to the consul Lucius
Cornelius, son of Publius, or to whomsoever either
of them shall appoint, or you will make known
within the next three days whatever you have
found or wrongfully carried off, or you will restore
it to him whom you suppose to be its rightful
owner, as you wish to do what is right.’

« Moreover, when soldiers had been enrolled, a day
was appointed on which they should appear and should
answer to the consul's summons; then an oath was
taken, binding them to appear, with the addition
of the following exceptions: * Unless there be any
of the following excuses : a funeral in his family or
purification from a dead body ? (provided these were
not appointed for that day in order that he might not
appear on that day), a dangerous disease? or an omen
which could not be passed by without expiatory
rites, or an anniversary sacrifice which could not


present was attacked by it, elections, or other public business,
might be postponed ; cf. Suetonius, Jul. xlv. 1.
I4I


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


sarium quod recte fieri non possit nisi ipsus eo die
ibi sit, vis hostesve, status condictusve dies cum
hoste ; si cui eorum harunce quae causa erit, tum se
postridie quam per eas causas licebit, eo die venturum
adiuturumque eum qui eum pagum, vicum, oppi-
dumve delegerit.' "

5 Item in eodem libro verba haec sunt: “ Miles cum
die, qui prodictus est, aberat neque excusatus erat,
infrequens notabatur.” !

6 Item in libro sexto hoc scriptum est : * Alae dictae
exercitus equitum ordines, quod circum legiones
dextra sinistraque tamquam alae in avium corporibus
locabantur. In legione sunt centuriae sexaginta,

 manipuli triginta, cohortes decem."


V


“Vestibulum” quid significet; deque eius vocabuli
rationibus.

1  PrERaQuE sunt vocabula quibus vulgo utimur,
neque tamen liquido scimus quid ea proprie atque
vere significent ; sed incompertam et vulgariam
traditionem rei non exploratae secuti, videmur magis
dicere quod volumus, quam dicimus; sicuti est
* vestibulum," verbum in sermonibus celebre atque
obvium, non omnibus tamen qui illo facile utuntur

2 satis spectatum.  Animadverti enim quosdam haut-


1 notabatur, J. F. Gronov ; dabatur, c.


* Stranger or foreigner was the original meaning of hostis.
142


BOOK XVI. rv. 4-v. 2


be properly celebrated unless he himself were
present on that day, violence or the attack of
enemies, a stated and appointed day with a
foreigner!; if anyone shall have any of these ex-
cuses, then on the day following that on which
he is excused for these reasons he shall come and
render service to the one who held the levy in that
district, village or town.’ "'

Also in the same book are these words:? * When
a soldier was absent on the appointed day and had
not been excused, he was branded as a deserter.”

Also in the sixth book we find this:? “The
columns of cavalry were called the wings of the
army, because they were placed around the legions
on the right and on the left, as wings are on the
bodies of birds. In a legion there are sixty cen-
turies, thirty maniples, and ten cohorts."


M


The meaning of vestibulum and the various derivations
proposed for the word.


THERE are numerous words which we use com-
monly, without however clearly knowing what their
proper and exact meaning is; but following an
uncertain and vulgar tradition without investigating
the matter, we seem to say what we mean rather
than say it; an example is vestibulum or “ vesti-
bule," a word frequently met in conversation, yet
not wholly clear to all who readily make use of it.
For I have observed that some men who are by


2 Frag. 14, Huschke ; 3, Bremer.
3 Td. 15 and 4.


143


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


quaquam indoctos viros opinari * vestibulum" esse
partem domus primorem, quam vulgus * atrium g
vocat. C. Aelius Gallus, in libro De Significatione
Verborum Quae ad Ius Civile Pertinent secundo, * vesti-
bulum " esse dicit non in ipsis aedibus neque partem
aedium, sed locum ante ianuam domus vacuum, per
quem a via aditus accessusque ad aedis est, cum
dextra sinistraque ianuam tecta saepiunt ! viae iuncta
atque ipsa ianua procul a via est, area vacanti inter-,
sita.

Quae porro huic vocabulo ratio sit, quaeri multum
solet; sed quae scripta legi, ea ferme omnia in-
concinna atque absurda visa sunt. Quod Sulpicium
autem Apollinarem memini dicere, virum eleganti
scientia ornatum, huiuscemodi est: *** Ve’ particula,
sicuti quaedam alia, tum intentionem significat, tum
minutionem. Nam ‘vetus’ et * vehemens, alterum
ab aetatis magnitudine compositum elisumque est,
alterum a mentis vi atque impetu dicitur. ‘Vescum’
autem, quod ex ‘ve’ particula et *esca' copulatum
est, utriusque diversae significationis vim capit.
Aliter enim Lucretius ‘vescum’ salem dicit ex
edendi intentione, aliter Lucilius ‘vescum’ appellat
cum edendi fastidio. Qui domos igitur amplas anti-
quitus faciebant, locum ante ianuam vacuum relin-
quebant, qui inter fores domus et viam medius
esset. In eo loco, qui dominum eius domus saluta-


! januam tecta saepiunt, JMadvig; tecta quae, NONQ?;
tectaque, QZ (Zosius) ; tecte, X ; tecta, Carrio.


! Frag. 5, Huschke; 23, Bremer.

2 Properly syncope ; from ve-+ actas! On vehemens see
note on v. 12. 10 (i, p. 414).

3 j, 326 ; see v. 12. 10 and note.

4 v. 602, Marx.


144


BOOK XVI. v. 2-9


no means without learning think that the vestibule
is the front part of the house, which is commonly
. known as the atrium. Gaius Aelius Gallus, in the
second book of his work On the Meaning of Words
relating to the Civil Law, says! that the vestibule
is not in the house itself, nor is it a part of the
house, but is an open place before the door of the
house, through which there is approach and access
to the house from the street, while on the right
and left the door is hemmed in by buildings extended
to the street and the door itself is at a distance from
the street, separated from it by this vacant space.
Furthermore, it is often inquired what the de-
rivation of this word is; but nearly everything that I
have read on the subject has seemed awkward and
absurd. But what I recall hearing from Sulpicius
Apollinaris, a man of choice learning, is as follows :
“The particle ve, like some others, is now in-
tensive and now the reverse; for of vetus and
vehemens, the former is made by intensifying the
idea of age, with elision,? and the latter from the
pówer and force of the mind. But vescus, which
- is formed from the particle ve and esca, assumes
the force of both opposite meanings. For Lucretius?
uses vescum salem, or ‘devouring salt, in one sense,
indicating a strong propensity to eat, Lucilius* in
the other sense, of fastidiousness in eating.? Those
then in early times who made spacious houses left a
vacant place before the entrance, midway between
the door of the house and the street. There those
who had come to pay their respects to the master of


5 Munro, on Lucr. i. 326, takes vescus in the sense of
“slowly eating away" which would correspond with
Lucilius' use of the word.

145

VOL. IIT. L


10


TO


12


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


tum venerant, priusquam admitterentur, consistebant
et neque in via stabant, neque intra aedis erant.
Ab illa ergo grandis loci consistione et quasi quadam
stabulatione * vestibula' appellata sunt spatia, sicuti
diximus, grandia ante fores aedium relicta, in quibus
starent qui venissent, priusquam in domum intro-
mitterentur. Meminisse autem debebimus id
vocabulum non semper a veteribus scriptoribus
proprie, sed per quasdam translationes esse dictum,
quae tamen ita sunt factae, ut ab ista de qua diximus
proprietate non longe desciverint, sicut illud in sexto
Vergilii :
Vestibulum ante ipsum primisque in faucibus
Orci


Luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae :


non enim ‘vestibulum’ priorem! partem domus
infernae esse dicit, quod obrepere potest tamquam si
ita dicatur, sed loca duo demonstrat extra Orci fores,
‘vestibulum’ et ‘fauces, ex quibus ‘vestibulum’
appellat ante ipsam quasi domum et ante ipsa Orci
penetralia, *fauces' autem vocat iter angustum, per
quod ad vestibulum adiretur."


! primorem, Damsté, comparing § 2.


1 This derivation is correct, but ve- is used in the sense of
** apart."

SC Aen. vitio ds

* In the Roman house the term fauces was applied to the
passageway leading from the front door into the atrium. The


146


BOOK XVI. v. 9-12


the house took their places before they were ad-
mitted, standing neither in the street nor within
the house. Therefore from that standing in a large
space, and as it were from a kind of ‘standing
place, the name vestibule was given to the great
places left, as I have said, before the doors of houses,
in which those who had come to call stood, before
they were admitted to the house. But we shall
have to bear in mind that this word was not always
used literally by the early writers, but in various
figurative senses, which however are so formed as
not to differ widely from that proper meaning which
we have mentioned, as for example in the sixth book
of Vergil :?


Before the vestibule, e'en in Hell's very jaws,
Avenging Cares and Grief have made their beds.


For he does not call the front part of the infernal
dwelling the *vestibule, although one might be
misled into thinking it so called, but he designates
two places outside the doors of Orcus, the * vesti-
bule’ and the fauces, of which ‘vestibule’ is
applied to the part as it were before the house
itself and before the private rooms of Orcus, while
fauces designates the narrow passage through which
the vestibule was approached.” ?


fauces and the vestibulum formed one continuous passageway,
separated by the door, the fauces being inside and the vesti-
bulwm outside ; see Harv. Stud. Class. Phil. i. 1ff. and most
modern handbooks. In $ 10 vestibulum is correctly defined ;
in § 12 the relative positions of fawces and vestibulum are
inverted, and both are put ‘outside the door." The vesti-
bulum can properly be said to be * approached" by the
fauces only from within. Virgil probably used fauces in its
ordinary sense of *' jaws.”


147
19


IN


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


VI


Hostiae quae dicuntur ''bidentes," quid sint et quam ob
causam ita appellatae sint ; superque ea re P. Nigidii et
Iulii Hygini sententiae.


Repeuntes ex! Graecia, Brundisium navem ad-
vertimus. Ibi quispiam linguae Latinae litterator,
Roma a Brundisinis accersitus, experiundum sese
vulgo dabat. Imus ad eum nos quoque oblectamenti
gratia, erat enim fessus atque languens animus de
aestu maris. Legebat barbare insciteque "Vergilii
septimum, in quo libro hic versus est :


Centum lanigeras mactabat rite bidentis,


et iubebat rogare se si quis quid omnium rerum
vellet discere. Tum ego, indocti hominis confi-
dentiam demiratus: ‘“ Docesne,’ inquam, “nos,
magister, cur * bidentes' dicantur?" ***Bidentes,' "
inquit, **oves appellatae, idcircoque  lanigeras
dixit, ut oves planius demonstraret." ‘ Posthac,”
inquam, ** videbimus an oves solae, ut tu ais, bidentes
dicantur et an Pomponius, Atellanarum poeta, in
Gallis T'ransalpinis erraverit, cum hoc scripsit :


Mars, tíbi factürum voveo, si umquam rédierit,
Bidénti verre,


1 ex added by Hertz.


1 The result of seasickness ; cf. Plaut. Rud. 510, anime
male fit. Contine, quaeso, caput.

2 vii. 93.

* An early farce, of Oscan origin, named from the town of
Atella. The Atellande were first given literary form by L.
148


BOOK XVI. vr. 1-7


VI


What the victims are which are called bidentes, and why they
were so called ; and the opinions of Publius Nigidius and
Julius Hyginus on that subject.


On my return from Greece I put in at Brundisium.
There a dabbler in the Latin Janguage, who had
been called from Rome by the people of Brundisium,
was offering himself generally to be tested. I also
went to him for the sake of amusement, for my
mind was weary and languid+ from the tossing of
the sea. He was reading in a barbarous and
ignorant manner from the seventh book of Vergil,
in which this verse occurs :?


An hundred woolly sheep (bidentes) he duly


slew,


and he invited anyone to ask him anything whatever
which one wished to learn. Then I, marvelling at
the assurance of the ignorant fellow, said: * Will
“ou tell us, master, why bidentes are so called ? "
* Bidentes,’ said he, “means sheep, and he called
them ‘woolly, to show more clearly that they are
sheep." I replied: “We will see later whether
only sheep are called bidentes, as you say, and whether
Pomponius, the writer of Atellanae? was in error in
his T'ransalpine Gauls, when he wrote this : 4


O Mars, if ever I return, I vow
To sacrifice to thee with two-toothed (bidenti)


boar.
Pomponius of Bononia (Bologna) and Novius, in the time of


Sulla.
4 y, 51, Ribbeck?.


149


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


8 sed nunc ego a te rogavi ecquam scias esse huiusce


10


1n


12


13


14


vocabuli rationem." — Atque ille nihil cunctatus, sed
nimium quantum audacter: '/Oves," inquit, “ ‘ bi-
dentes' dictae, quod duos tantum dentes habeant."
* Ubi terrarum, quaeso te," inquam, * duos solos per
naturam dentes habere ovem vidisti? Ostentum
enim est et piaculis factis procurandum." Tum ille
permotus mihi et inritatus : * Quaere," inquit, “ea
potius quae e grammatico quaerenda sunt; nam de
ovium dentibus opiliones percontantur.,"  Facetias
nebulonis hominis risi et reliqui.

P. autem Nigidius, in libro quem De Extis com-
posuit, * bidentes" appellari ait non oves solas, sed
omnes bimas hostias, neque tamen dixit apertius, cur
*bidentes"; sed, quod ultro existumabamus, id
scriptum invenimus in commentariis quisbusdam ad
ius pontificum pertinentibus, * bidennes" primo
dictas, d littera inmissa, quasi * biennes," tum longo
usu loquendi corruptam vocem esse et ex “ bidenni
bus” * bidentes" factum, quoniam id videbatur esse
dictu facilius leniusque.

Hyginus tamen Iulius, qui ius pontificum non
videtur ignorasse, in quarto librorum quos De Ver-
gilio fecit, * bidentes" appellari scripsit hostias quae
per aetatem duos dentes altiores haberent. Verba
ilius ipsa posui: “Quae ‘bidens’ est,” inquit,
** hostia, oportet habeat dentes octo, sed ex his duo


ceteris altiores, per quos appareat ex minore aetate
I50


BOOK XVI. vi. 8-15


But now l asked you whether you know the reason
for this name," And he, withouta moment’s hesita-
. tion, but with the greatest possible assurance, said :
* Sheep are called bidentes, because they have only
two teeth." “Where on earth, pray,” said I, “have
you seen a sheep that by nature had only two teeth?
For that is a portent and ought to be met with
expiatory offerings.” Then he, greatly disturbed
and angry with me, cried : “Ask rather such questions
as ought to be put to a grammarian ; for one inquires
of shepherds about the teeth of sheep.” I laughed
at the wit of the blockhead and left him.

Now Publius Nigidius, in the book which he
wrote On Sacrificial Meats, says! that not sheep
alone are called bidentes, but all victims that are two
years old; yet he has not explained clearly why
they are called bideates. But I find written in some
Notes on the Pontifical Lam? what I had myself
thought, that they were first called bidennes, that is
biennes with the insertion of the letter d ; then by
long use in speech the word became changed and
from bidennes was formed bidentes, because the latter
- seemed easier and less harsh to pronounce.

However, Julius Hyginus, who seems not to have
been ignorant of pontifical law, in the fourth book of
his work On Virgil, wrote? that those victims were
called bidentes which were so young that they had
only two prominent teeth. I quote his own words:
« The victim called bidens should have eight teeth,
but of these two should be more prominent than the
rest, to make it plain that they have passed from


1 Frag. 81, Swoboda.
2 iii, p. 566, Bremer.
3 Fr 5, p. 27, Bunte.
151


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


in maiorem transcendisse." Haec Hygini opinio an
vera sit, non argui! argumentis, sed oculis videri ?
potest.


VII


Quod Laberius verba pleraque licentius petulantiusque
finxit; et quod multis item verbis utitur de quibus an
sint Latina quaeri solet.


1 Lazertus, in mimis quos scriptitavit, oppido quam
verba finxit praelicenter. Nam et * mendicimo-

2 nium " dicit et * moechimonium " et * adulterionem "
* adulteritatemque " pro *adulterio" et « depudi-
cavit " pro * stupravit " et * abluvium " pro * diluvio "
et, quod in mimo ponit quem Cophinwn inscripsit ,?

3 “manuatus est" pro * furatus est" et item in
Fullone furem ** manuarium " appellat :


manuari (inquit) pudorem perdidisti,


4 multaque alia huiuscemodi novat. Neque non obso-


leta quoque et maculantia ex sordidiore vulgi usu
ponit, quale est in Staminariis :


Tóllet bona fidé vos Orcus nüdas in catómum.


5 Et * elutriare lintea " et * lavandaria " dicit, quae ad
lavandum sint data, et :


. largui, an addition suggested by Hosius; argumentis
iudicari, Hertz (see crit. note 9).


? videri, Q; iudicari, c. 1
? inseripsit, Nonus ii, p. 141. 2 (p. 205 Linds.) ; Scripsit, w.


? Hyginus! explanation is the accepted one. ^

2 v. 150, Ribbeck, * Id. v. 39. * Id. v. 46.

5 manuarius, an adj. from manus, “hand” (e.g. manu-
aria mole, “a hand-mill ") The transition, in the sub-


152


—— — o


BOOK XVI, vr. 15-vir. 5


infancy to a less tender age." Whether this opinion
of Hyginus is true or not may be determined by
observation without resort to argument.!


VII


That Laberius formed many words freely and boldly, and
that he even uses numerous words whose Latinity is often
questioned.


Lazertus, in the mimes which he wrote, coined
words with the greatest possible freedom. For he
said ? mendicimonium for * beggary," moechimonium,
adulterio or adulteritas for * adultery," depudicavit for
* dishonoured," and abluvium for diluvium, or * deluge";
in the farce which he entitled The Basket? he uses
manuatus est for “he stole," and in The Fuller* he
calls a thief manuarius,? saying :


Thief (manuari), you have lost your shame,


and he makes many other innovations of the same
kind. He also used obsolete and obscene words,
such as are spoken only by the dregs of the people,
as in the Spinners’ Shop :$


Orcus, in truth, will bear you on his shoulders
(catomum) 7 nude.


He uses? elutriare for * washing out" linen, and
lavandaria, or “wash,” of those things which are
sent to be washed.


stantive, to the meaning ''thief" is made easier by manu-
ariwm aes, ‘money won at dice,” Gell. xviii. 13. 4.

8 y, 87, Ribbeck*.

7 catomum = Kat’ Gpov, Thes. Ling. Lat. s.v.

8 y, 151, Ribbeck?.


153


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


coícior (inquit) in fullónicam,
et:

Quid próperas? ecquid praécurris, caldónia ? !
Item in Restione *talabarriunculos" dicit, quos vul-
gus “talabarriones,’ item in Compitalibus :

malas malaxavi,
item in Cacomnemone :
Hic est (inquit)
Mle gurdus, quém ego me abhinc ménses duos ex
África
Vénientem excepísse tibi narrávi,
item in mimo, qui inscribitur Natalicius,? ** cippum "'
* . M
dicit et “obbam” et *camellam" et * pittacium


? ,


et “capitium ” :
Induis (inquit) cápitium tunicaé pittacium.
! caldonia, MSS. ; Caldonia, Hosius; Calidoniam, Ribbeck.


? Natalieius, F/ckeisen; nata, L. (.1. X) IX ; nata, Z!;
Natalia or Natta, Bothe.


1 Id. v. 147. With fullonicam, sc. artem and see Archiv
für laf. Lex. wu. Gram. x, p. 240.

? There is nothing unusual in the word fullonica; hence
the unusual word must be conicior (in this connection).

? Id. v. 148. Ribbeck's Calidoniam, ‘‘would’st outstrip
the Calidonian maid?" 4.e, Atalanta, makes excellent sense;
but with that reading we have no odd or unusual word at all.
caldonia, as à common noun, might mean “heater,” or bath
attendant (so Weiss), or it might be derived from calidus in
the sense of "quick, hasty.” There is nothing to indicate
that it is a proper name, as Hosius takes it to be.


154


BOOK XVI. vir. 5-9


He says:!
Into the fulling business I am hurled (coicior),?
and?


O heater (caldonia), what's your haste?  Would'st
aught outstrip ?


Also in the Ropemaker* he applies the term tala-
barriunculi to those whom the general public call
talabarriones? He writes in the Compitalia : ®


My jaws I've tamed (malaxavt),
and in The Forgetful Man,’


This is that dolt (gurdus) who, when two months
ago

From Africa I came, did meet me here,

As I did say.


Also in the farce entitled Natalicius he uses? cippus
for a small column, obba for a cup, camella for a
bowl? pittacium for a flap 19 and capitium for a breast-
band; the last-named passage reads :


A breast-band (capitium) you put on, the tunic’s
flap (pittacium).


A2 Tae 19. 5 The meaning is not known.

6 Id. v. 37; malaxavi, from the Greek padaxi(w. It is
clear that the choice of the word is due to the assonance, or
jingle, of mala malaxavt.

7 Jd. v..13. 8 Td, vv. 60 and 61.
? Literally, ‘‘a little room,” a diminutive of camera.

10 The 7.L.L. defines capitiwm as foramen tunicae capiti
aptum, which seems meaningless with indus. The Forcellini-
De Vit makes capitiwm a breast-band (= strophiwm ?) and
pittactum, ** plagula, segmentum, quod vesti assuitur," with
the explanation: ‘‘guod, tamguam pittacium, tunicae adsutun
et adfiawm est.”

155


10


1l


12


13


14


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Praeterea in Anna Peranna “gubernium” pro
* gubernatore" et * planum" pro “sycophanta”’ et
" nanum " pro * pumilione" dicit; quamquam * pla-
num" pro *sycophanta" M. quoque Cicero in
oratione scriptum reliquit, quam Pro Cluentio dixit.
Atque item, in mimo qui Saturnalia inscriptus est,
* botulum " pro **farcimine" appellat et “hominem
levennam " pro “levi.” Item in Necyomantia “ cocio-
nem" pervulgate dicit, quem veteres “arillatorem ”
dixerunt. Verba Laberi haec sunt :


Duás uxores? hércle hoc plus negóti est, inquit,

cócio ;

Séx aediles víderat.

Sed enim, in mimo quem inscripsit Alexandream,
eodem quidem quo vulgus, sed probe Latineque usus
est Graeco vocabulo ; ** emplastrum " enim dixit ote
Tépos, non genere feminino, ut isti novicii semidocti.
Verba ex eo mimo adposui :


Quid est ius iurandum ? émplastrum aeris álieni.


VIII


Quid significet et quid a nostris appellatum sit quod
*' axioma " dialectici dicunt; et quaedam alia quae prima
in disciplina dialectica traduntur.


Cum in disciplinas dialecticas induci atque imbui
vellemus, necessus fuit adire atque cognoscere quas
vocant dialectici cicaywyds. Tum, quia in primo
wu ee Um tuis d scite ens MM Cal f


1 v, 3, Ribbeck?, ? Greek mAdvos. 5 579.
* v. 80, Ribbeck$, ME CAS EE


156


—


BOOK XVI. vir. ro-vnr. 2


Further, in his Anna Peranna he uses! gubernius
for pilot, and planus? for sycophant, and manus for
dwarf; but Marcus Cicero also wrote planus for
sycophant in the speech which he delivered /»
Defence of Cluentius Moreover Laberius in the
farce entitled The Saturnalia ^ calls a sausage botulus
and says homo levanna instead of levis or **slight."
In the Necyomantia too he uses the very vulgar
expression cocio for what our forefathers called
arillator or **haggler. His words are these :?


Two wives? More trouble this, the haggler
(cocio) says ;
Six aediles he had seen.


However, in the farce which he called Alexandrea,
he used 7 the same Greek word which is in common
use, but correctly and in good Latin form ; for he
put emplastrum in the neuter, not in the feminine
gender, as those half-educated innovators of ours do.
I quote the words of that farce:


What is an oath? A plaster (emplastrum) for a
debt.


VIII


The meaning of what the logicians call ‘‘an axiom,” and what
it is called by our countrymen; and some other things
which belong to the elements of the dialectic art.


Wuen I wished to be introduced to the science
of logic and instructed in it, it was necessary to
take up and learn what the dialecticians call cicaywyat
or “introductory exercises.” Then because at first

6 Referring to the addition by Caesar of two aediles cereales
to the two plebei and two curules ; see note on x. 6. 3.


ST vl.
157


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


cepi aétwudtwv discendum, quae M. Varro alias “ pro-
fata," alias **proloquia" appellat, Commentarium De
Proloquis L. Aelii, docti hominis, qui magister
Varronis fuit, studiose quaesivimus eumque in Pacis

3 bibliotheca repertum legimus. Sed in eo nihil edo-
center neque ad instituendum explanate scriptum
est, fecisseque videtur eum librum Aelius sui magis
admonendi quam aliorum docendi gratia.

4  Redimus igitur necessario ad Graecos libros. Ex
quibus accepimus agé/wua esse his verbis definitum : !

5 Aexrüv abroreAés üzódavrov ócov é$' arg. Hoc ego
supersedi vertere, quia novis et inconditis vocibus
utendum fuit, quas pati aures per insolentiam vix

6 possent. Sed M. Varro in libro De Lingua Latina
ad Ciceronem quarto vicesimo expeditissime ita
finit: * Proloquium est sententia in qua nihil deside-
ratur."

7 Erit autem planius quid istud sit, si exemplum
eius dixerimus.  "A&íoya igitur, sive id ** proloquium ”
dicere placet, huiuscemodi est: * Hannibal Poenus
fuit"; *Scipio Numantiam delevit"; * Milo caedis

8 damnatus est”; “ neque bonum est voluptas neque
malum"; et omnino quicquid ita dicitur plena
atque perfecta verborum sententia, ut id necesse sit
aut verum aut falsum esse, id a dialecticis dé(wua
appellatum est, a M. Varrone, sicuti dixi, “ prolo-
quium," a M. autem Cicerone * pronuntiatum," quo


! definitum added by Skutsch.


1 Fr, 36, Wilmanns.


? Vespasian's Temple of Peace in the Forum Pacis,
3 p. 36, 15, Mentz.


* An absolute and self-evident proposition.


158


BOOK XVI. vm. 2-8


I had to learn about axioms, which Marcus Varro
calls; now profata, or * propositions," and now
proloquia, or “preliminary statements,” I sought
diligently for the Commentary on Proloquia of Lucius
Aelius, a learned man, who was the teacher of
Varro; and finding it in the library of Peace,? I
read it. But I found in it nothing that was written
to instruct or to make the matter clear, but Aelius?
seems to have made that book rather as suggestions
for his own use than for the purpose of teaching
others.

I therefore of necessity returned to my Greek books.
From these I obtained this definition of an axiom:
Nexrov abroreMs àmódavrov ómov ep avrQ.* This I
forbore to turn into Latin, since it would have been
necessary to use new and as yet uncoined words,
such as, from their strangeness, the ear could hardly
endure. But Marcus Varro in the twenty-fourth book
of his Latin Language, dedicated to Cicero, thus
defines the word very briefly :> “A proloquium is
a statement in which nothing is lacking.”

But his definition will be clearer if I give an
example. An axiom, then, or a preliminary pro-
position, if you prefer, is of this kind: “ Hannibal
was a Carthaginian”; “ Scipio destroyed Numantia” ;
« Milo was found guilty of murder"; * pleasure is
neither a good nor an evil"; and in general any
saying which is a full and perfect thought, so
expressed in words that it is necessarily either true
or false, is called by the logicians an “axiom, by
Marcus Varro, as I have said, a “ proposition," but by
Marcus Cicero 5 a pronuntiatum, or “ pronouncement, "


5 Fr, 36, Wilmanns.
9 Tusc. Disp. i. 14.
159


10


11


12


13


14


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


ille tamen vocabulo tantisper uti se adtestatus est,
* quoad melius,” inquit, ‘ invenero.”

Sed quod Graeci cvvgugévov d€twua dicunt, id alii
nostrorum “adiunctum,” alii “ conexum " dixerunt.
Id “conexum” tale est: “si Plato ambulat, Plato
movetur"; ‘si dies est, sol super terras est." Item
quod illi evuzezAeypuévov, nos vel * coniunctum " vel
* copulatum " dicimus, quod est eiusdemmodi : “ P.
Scipio, Pauli filius, et bis consul fuit et triumphavit
et censura functus est et collega in censura L.
Mummi fuit." In omni autem coniuncto si unum
est mendacium, etiamsi cetera vera sunt, totum esse
mendacium dicitur. Nam si ad ea omnia quae de
Scipione illo vera dixi, addidero “et Hannibalem in
Africa superavit," quod est falsum, universa quoque
illa quae coniuncte dicta sunt, propter hoc unum
quod falsum accesserit, quia simul dicentur, vera non
erunt.

Est item aliud quod Graeci dueLevypevov á£copa,, nos
* disiunctum " dicimus. Id huiuscemodi est: * Aut
malum est voluptas aut bonum, aut neque bonum
neque malum est." Omnia autem quae disiunguntur
pugnantia esse inter sese oportet, eorumque opposita,
quae aytixe(ueva Graeci dicunt, ea quoque ipsa inter
se adversa esse. Ex omnibus quae disiunguntur
unum esse verum debet, falsa cetera. Quod si aut
nihil omnium verum aut omnia plurave quam unum
vera erunt, aut quae disiuncta sunt non pugnabunt,
aut quae opposita eorum sunt contraria inter sese
non erunt, tunc id disiunctum mendacium est et


Lc —————— —— — ——Ó


1 Literally, **a connected axiom.”

® Aelius Stilo, fr. iii. 21, p. 34, Mentz.

* Two connected sentences of which the second follows as
the result of the first.


160


BOOK XVI. vin. 8-14


a word however which he declared that he used
* only until I can find a better one."

But what the Greeks call evvgugévov agéiwpa, or “a
hypothetical syllogism," * some of our countrymen?
call adiunctum, others conexum.? The following are
examples of this: “If Plato is walking, Plato is
moving "; “if it is day, the sun is above the earth."
Also what they call cuyrerdcypévov, or “a compound
proposition," we call comiunctum or copulatum; for
example: “ Publius Scipio, son of Paulus, was twice
consul and celebrated a triumph, and held the
censorship, and was the colleague of Lucius Mum-
mius in his censorship.’ But in the whole of a
proposition of this kind, if one member is false,
even if the rest are true, the whole is said to be
false. For if to all those true statements which
I have made about that Scipio I add “ and he worsted
Hannibal in Africa,’ which is false, all those other
statements which are made in conjunction will not
be true, because of this one false statement which
is made with them.

There is also another form, which the Greeks call
SueLevypévov d€iwpa, or * a disjunctive proposition," and
we call disiunctum. For example : “ Pleasure is either
good or evil, or it is neither good nor evil.” Now
all statements which are contrasted ought to.be
opposed to each other, and their opposites, which
the Greeks call dyrixe/eva, ought also to be opposed.
Of all statements which are contrasted, one ought
to be true and the rest false. But if none at all of
them is true, or if all, or more than one, are true,
or if the contrasted things are not at odds, or if
those which are opposed to each other are not
contrary, then that is a false contrast and is called


161
VOL. III, M


15
16


17


1


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


appellatur zapaSte£evyuévov, sicuti hoc est, in quo quae
opposita non sunt contraria: “ Aut curris aut am-
bulas aut stas." Nam ipsa quidem inter se adversa
sunt, sed opposita eorum non pugnant: “non ambu-
lare" enim et “non stare" et “non currere" con-
traria inter sese non sunt, quoniam * contraria" ea
dicuntur quae simul vera esse non queunt; possis
enim simul eodemque tempore neque ambulare neque
stare neque currere.

Sed hoc iam breve ex dialectica libamentum de-
disse nunc satis erit atque id solum addendum ad-
monendumque est, quod huius disciplinae studium
atque cognitio in principiis quidem taetra et asper-
nabilis insuavisque esse et inutilis videri solet, sed,
ubi aliquantum processeris, tum denique et emolu-
mentum eius in animo tuo dilucebit et sequitur
quaedam discendi voluptas insatiabilis, cui sane nisi
modum feceris, periculum non mediocre erit ne, ut
plerique alii tu quoque in illis dialecticae gyris
atque meandris, tamquam apud Sirenios scopulos,
consenescas.


IX


Quid significet verbum in libris veterum creberrime positum
* susque deque."


* SusquE deque fero" aut “ susque deque sum " 1


aut * susque deque habeo "— his enim omnibus modis


! aut s.d. sum, added by Hertz; aut s.d. est, Skutsch.
162


BOOK XVI. wim, 14-1x. 1


mapaduelevypevov. For instance, this case, in which
the things which are opposed are not contraries:
* Either you run or you walk or you stand."
These acts are indeed contrasted, but when opposed
they are not contrary; for “not to walk” and “not
to stand" and * not to run" are not contrary to
one another, since those things are -ealled * con-
traries" which cannot be true at the same time.
But you may at once and at the same time neither
walk, stand, nor run.

But for the present it will be enough to have
given this little taste of logic, and I need only add
by way of advice, that the study and knowledge of
this science in its rudiments does indeed, as a rule,
seem forbidding and contemptible, as well as dis-
agreeable and useless. But when you have made
some progress, then finally its advantages will be-
come clear to you, and a kind of insatiable desire
for acquiring it will arise; so much so, that if you
do not set bounds to it, there will be great danger
lest, as many others have done, you should reach a
second childhood amid those mazes and meanders
of logic, as if among the rocks of the Sirens.


IX


The meaning of the expression susque deque, which occurs
frequently in the books of early writers.


SusqUE deque fero, susque deque sum, or susque deque
habeo1—for all these forms occur, meaning * it’s all


1 Susque deque, ‘‘both up and down,” is an expression
denoting indifference. 1t occurs without a verb in Cic. ad
Att. xiv. 6. 1, de Octavio susque deque. See Paul, Fest. p. 271
Linds., susque deque significat plus minusve.


163


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


dicitur—verbum est ex hominum doctorum sermo-
nibus. In poematis quoque et in epistulis veterum
scriptum est plurifariam ; sed facilius reperias qui
2 verbum ostentent quam qui intellegant. Ita pleri-
que nostrum quae remotiora verba invenimus dicere
3 ea properamus, non discere. Significat autem “ susque
deque ferre" animo aequo esse et quod accidit non
magni pendere atque interdum neglegere et con-
temnere, et propemodum id valet quod dicitur


4 Graece ddiadopetv. Laberius in Compitalibus :


Nunc tu lentu’s, nunc tu susque déque fers ;
Matér familias tua in lecto adversó sedet,
Servós sextantis ütitur nefáriis

Verbís.


5 M. Varro in Sisenna vel De Historia: * Quod si non
horum omnium similia essent principia ac post-


6 principia, susque deque esset." Lucilius in tertio:


Verum haec ludus ibi susque omnia deque fuerunt,

Susque et deque fuere, inquam, omnia, ludus
locusque ;

lllud opus durum, ut Setinum accessimus finem :

AiyiAuro* montes, Aetnae omnes, asperi Athones.


1 aigilepes, Marz.


164


BOOK XVI. ix. 1-6


one to me "—is an expression used in the everyday
language of cultivated men. It occurs frequently
in poems too and in the letters of the early writers ;
but you will more readily find persons who flaunt
the phrase than who understand it. So true is it
that many of us hasten to use out-of-the-way words
that we have stumbled upon, but not to learn
their meaning. Now susque deque ferre means to
be indifferent and not to lay much stress upon
anything that happens; sometimes it means to
neglect and despise, having about the force of the
Greek word àSwdopetv. Laberius says in his Com-
pitalia : +

Now you are dull, now ’tis all one to you (susque

deque fers) ;
Your wife sits by you on the marriage bed,”
A penny slave unseemly language dares.


Marcus Varro in his Sisenna, or On History says :%
« But if all these things did not have similar begin-
nings and sequels, it would be all one (susque deque
essel)" So Lucilius in his third book writes:*


All this was sport, to us it was all one (susque
deque fuerunt),

All one it was, I say, all sport and play ;

That was hard toil, when we gained Setia's
bourne :

Goat-traversed heights, Aetnas, rough Athoses.


1 y, 99, Ribbeck?,

2 The marriage bed in the early Roman house stood in the
atrium, opposite the door, whence it was called lectus ad-
versus; in later times a symbolic bed stood in the same


place.
3 956, Riese. * 110 ff., Marx.


165


1


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


X


Quid sint *' proletarii," quid **capite censi"; quid item sit
in XII, Tabulis **adsiduus" ; et quae eius vocabuli ratio
sit.

Or1um erat quodam die Romae in foro a negotiis
et laeta quaedam celebritas feriarum legebaturque
in consessu forte conplurium Enni liber ex Annalibus.
In eo libro versus hi fuerunt :


Proletarius publicitus scutisque feroque
Ornatur ferro; muros urbemque forumque
Exeubiis curant.


Tum ibi quaeri coeptum est, quid esset “ proletarius.”
Atque ego, aspiciens quempiam in eo circulo ius
civile callentem, familiarem meum, rogabam ut id
verbum nobis enarraret, et cum illic se iuris, non
rei grammaticae peritum esse respondisset, “ Eo
maxime," inquam, *te dicere hoc oportet, quando,
ut praedicas, peritus iuris es. Nam Q. Ennius
verbum hoc ex Duodecim Tabulis westris accepit,
in quibus, si recte commemini, ita scriptum est:
* Adsiduo vindex adsiduus esto. Proletario iam civil
quis volet vindex esto.’  Petimus igitur ne Annalem
nunc Q. Ennii, sed Duodecim Tabulas legi arbitrere


1 civi cui, w ; cui deleted by Scholl.


1 Ann. 183 ff. Cop
* The vindex is here one who voluntarily agrees to go
before the magistrate as the representative of the defendant,


166


———— di


—


BOOK XVI. x. 1-6


X


The meaning of proletarii and capite censi ; also of adsidwws
in the Twelve Tables, and the origin of the word.


One day there was a cessation of business in the
Forum at Rome, and as the holiday was being joy-
fully celebrated, it chanced that one of the books of
the Annals of Ennius was read in an assembly of
very many persons. In this book the following
lines occurred :!


With shield and savage sword is Proletarius
armed

At publie cost; they guard our walls, our mart
and town.


Then the question was raised there, what proletarius
meant. And seeing in that company a man who
was skilled in the civil law, a friend of mine, I
asked him to explain the word to us; and when he
rejoined that he was an expert in civil law and not
in grammatical matters, I said: * You in particular
ought to explain this, since, as you declare, you are
skilled in civil law. For Quintus Ennius took this
word from your Twelve Tables, in which, if I re-
member aright, we have the following:? *For a
freeholder let the protector? be a freeholder. Fora
proletariate citizen 4 Jet whoso will be protector. We
therefore ask you to consider that not one of the
books of Quintus Ennius Annals, but the Twelve


and thereby takes upon himself the action in the stead of
the latter (Allen, Remnants of Early Latin, p. 85).

4 The proletarti (cf. proles) were ** child-producers," who
made no other contribution to the State ; see § 13.


167


10


WW


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


et quid sit in ea lege ‘proletarius civis’ interpre-
tere." “Ego vero," inquit ille, *dicere atque
interpretari hoc deberem, si ius Faunorum et
Aboriginum didicissem. Sed enim cum * proletarii’
et ‘adsidui’ et ‘sanates’ et ‘vades’ et * subvades'
et *viginti quinque asses’ et *taliones' furtorumque
quaestio ‘cum lance et licio’ evanuerint omnisque
illa Duodecim Tabularum antiquitas, nisi in legis
actionibus centumviralium causarum lege Aebutia
lata consopita sit, studium scientiamque ego prae-
stare debeo iuris et legum vocumque earum quibus
utimur."

Tum forte quadam Iulium Paulum, poetam memo-
riae nostrae doctissimum, praetereuntem conspeximus.
Is a nobis salutatur, rogatusque uti de sententia de-
que ratione istius vocabuli nos doceret, * Qui in plebe,"
inquit, * Romana tenuissimi pauperrimique erant ne-
que amplius quam mille quingentum aeris in censum
deferebant, * proletarii’ appellati sunt, qui vero nullo
aut perquam parvo aere censebantur, ‘ capite censi"
vocabantur, extremus autem census capite censorum
aeris fuit trecentis septuaginta quinque. Sed quo-
niam res pecuniaque familiaris obsidis vicem pigneris-
que esse apud rempublicam videbatur amorisque in
patriam fides quaedam in ea firmamentumque erat,
neque proletarii neque capite censi milites, nisi in
tumultu maximo, scribebantur, quia familia pecu-


1 XII Tab. i. 4, 5, 10; viii. 2, 4, 15. For proletarii see
note, p. 167. Theadsidui were ** permanent settlers," or tax-
payers, belonging to one of the five upper Servian classes,
The sanates seem to have been clients or dependents of the
wealthy Roman citizens. Vades were sureties, who gave
bail; subvades, sub-sureties, who gave security for the bail.
On viginti quinque asses, the penalty for an assault, see xx.


168


BOOK XVI. x. 6-11


Tables are being read, and interpret the meaning
of * proletariate citizen’ in that law." “It is true,"
said he, “that if I had learned the law of the Fauns
and Aborigines, I ought to explain and interpret
this. But since proletarii, adsidui, sanates, vades, sub-
vades, ‘ twenty-five asses, ‘retaliation, and trials for
theft ‘by plate and girdle’! have disappeared, and
since all the ancient lore of the Twelve Tables,
except for legal questions before the court of the
centumviri, was put to sleep by the Aebutian law,?
I ought only to exhibit interest in, and knowledge of,
the law and statutes and legal terms which we now
actually use.”

Just then, by some chance, we caught sight ot
Julius Paulus passing by, the most learned poet
within my recollection. We greeted him, and when
he was asked to enlighten us as to the meaning and
derivation of that word, he said: ‘‘Those of the
Roman commons who were humblest and of smallest
means, and who reported no more than fifteen
hundred asses at the census, were called proletarit,
but those who were rated as having no property at
all, or next to none, were termed capite censi, or
‘counted by head. And the lowest rating of the
capile censi was three hundred and seventy-five asses.
But since property and money were regarded as a
hostage and pledge of loyalty to the State, and
since there was in them a kind of guarantee and
assurance of patriotism, neither the prolelarii nor
the capite censi were enrolled as soldiers except in
some time of extraordinary disorder, because they had
1. 12; for taliones, xx. 1. 14; and for cum lance et licio, note


on xi. 18. 9.
2 The date is unknown.


169


12


13


14


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


niaque his aut tenuis aut nulla esset. Proletariorum
tamen ordo honestior aliquanto et re et nomine
quam capite censorum fuit; nam et asperis rei-
publicae temporibus, cum iuventutis inopia esset, in
militiam tumultuariam legebantur armaque is sumptu
publico praebebantur, et non capitis censione, sed
prosperiore vocabulo a munere officioque prolis
edendae appellati sunt, quod, cum re familiari parva
minus possent rempublicam iuvare, subolis tamen
gignendae copia civitatem frequentarent. Capite
censos autem primus C. Marius, ut quidam ferunt
bello Cimbrico, difficillimis reipublicae temporibus,
vel potius, ut Sallustius ait, bello Iugurthino, milites
scripsisse traditur, cum id factum ante in nulla
memoria extaret. ‘Adsiduus’ in X77. Tabulis pro
locuplete et facile facienti dictus aut ab assibus,!
id est, aere dando, cum id tempora reipublicae
postularent, aut a muneris pro familiari copia
faciendi adsiduitate."

Verba autem Sallusti in Historia Iugurthina de
C. Mario consule et de capite censis haec sunt:
"Ipse interea milites scribere, non more maiorum
nec ex classibus, sed ut libido cuiusque erat, capite
censos plerosque. Id factum alii inopia bonorum,


! ab assiduis w; corrected in c. — Hosius swogests assariis,
comparing Varro, L.L. vii. 71 ; Gram. Lat. i. 76. 3 K.


! That is, to meet a fumultus, **a rebellion” or irregular
warfare. At first used as a military term, tumultuarius later
acquired a general sense ; cf. tumultuario rogo, ** on a hastily
erected pyre," Suet. Calig. lix.

Bt lO:

3 locuples seems to be derived from locus, in the sense of
** Jand," and the root ple- of pleo and plenus.

* Both these derivations are fanciful; adsidwus is con-
nected with adsideo, as the grammarian Caper knew
170


——


BOOK XVI.) x. 11—16


little or no property and money. However, the class
of proletarii was somewhat more honourable in fact
and in name than that of the capite censi; for in times
of danger to the State, when there was a scarcity of
men of military age, they were enrolled for hasty
service,! and arms were furnished them at public
expense. And they were called, not capite censi,
but by a more auspicious name derived from their
duty and function of producing offspring, for
although they could not greatly aid the State with
what small property they had, yet they added to the
population of their country by their power of be-
getting children. Gaius Marius is said to have been
the first, according to some in the war with the
Cimbri in a most critical period for our country, or
more probably, as Sallust says, in the Jugurthine
war, to have enrolled soldiers from the capite censi,
since such an act was unheard of before that
time. Adsiduus in the Twelve Tables? is used of
one who is rich and well to do,? either because
he contributed ‘asses’ (that is, money) when the
exigencies of the State required it, or from his
‘assiduity’ in making contributions according to
the amount of his property." 4

Now the words of Sallust in the Jugurthine War
about Gaius Marius and the capite censi are these :?
« He himself in the meantime enrolled soldiers, not
according to the classes, or in the manner of our
forefathers, but allowing anyone to volunteer, for
the most part the lowest class (capite censos). Some
say that he did this through lack of good men,


(Gram. Lat. vii. 108. 5, Keil), and means ‘‘a permanent
settler."
5 Jug. Ixxxvi. 2.


171


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


alii per ambitionem consulis memorabant, quod ab
eo genere celebratus auctusque erat, et homini
potentiam quaerenti egentissimus quisque oportunis-
E 35

simus.


XI


Historia ex Herodoti libris sumpta de Psyllorum interitu,
qui in Syrtibus Africanis colebant.


1 Gens in Italia Marsorum orta fertur a Circae filio.

2 Propterea Marsis bominibus, quorum dumtaxat
familiae cum externis cognationibus nondum etiam
permixtae corruptaeque sunt, vi quadam genitali
datum ut et serpentium virulentorum domitores
sint et incentionibus herbarumque sucis faciant
medellarum miracula.

3 Hac eadem vi praeditos esse quosdam videmus,
qui “ Psylli" vocantur. Quorum super nomine et
genere cum in veteribus litteris quaesissem,! in
quarto denique Herodoti libro fabulam de Psyllis

4 hane invenimus: Psyllos quondam fuisse in terra
Africa conterminos Nasamonibus Austrumque in
finibus eorum quodam in tempore perquam validum

5 ac diutinum flavisse ; eo flatu aquam omnem in locis

6 in quibus colebant exaruisse; Psyllos, re aquaria
defectos, eam iniuriam graviter Austro suscensuisse
decretumque fecisse, uti armis sumptis ad Austrum,
proinde quasi ad hostem, iure belli res petitum pro-

7 ficiscerentur. Atque ita profectis ventum Austrum


! quaesissemus, Kronenberg.


Lovely.


172


BOOK XVI. x. 16-xt. 7


others because of a desire to curry favour, since that
class had given him honour and rank, and as a
matter of fact, to one who aspires to power the
poorest man is the most helpful."


XI


A story taken from the books of Herodotus about the
destruction of the Psylli, who dwelt in the African Syrtes.


Tur race of the Marsians in Italy is said to have
sprung from the son of Circe. Therefore it was
given to the Marsic men, provided their families
were not stained through the admixture of foreign
alliances, by an inborn hereditary power to be the
subduers of poisonous serpents and to perform
wonderful cures by incantations and the juices of
plants.

We see certain persons called Psylli endowed
with this same power. And when I had sought in
ancient records for information about their name
and race, I found at last in the fourth book of
Herodotus! this story about them: that the Psylli
had once been neighbours in the land of Africa ot
the Nasamones, and that the South Wind at a
certain season in their territories blew very long
and hard ; that because of that gale all the water in
the regions which they inhabited dried up; that
the Psylli, deprived of their water supply, were
grievously incensed at the South Wind because of
that injury and voted to take up arms and march
against the South Wind as against an enemy, and
demand restitution according to the laws of war.
And when they had thus set out, the South Wind


173


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


magno spiritus agmine venisse obviam eosque uni-
versos cum omnibus copiis armisque, cumulis monti-

8 busque harenarum supervectis, operuisse. Eo facto
Psyllos ad unum omnis interisse, itaque eorum fines
a Nasamonibus occupatos.


XII


De his vocabulis quae Cloatius Verus aut satis commode
aut nimis absurde et inlepide ad origines linguae Graecae
redigit.

l  CroaTiUs Verus in libris quos inscripsit Verborum
a Graecis Tractorum, non pauca hercle dicit curiose
et sagaciter conquisita, neque non tamen quaedam

2 futtilia et frivola. ** Errare," inquit, “dictum est
4zó ToU éppew," versumque infert Homeri, in quo
id verbum est:


er A la ^ 3X / ,,
Epp éx vio 08oc0v, éAéyywr re £oóvrov.


3 Item “alucinari” factum scripsit ex eo, quod dicitur
Graece dAvew, unde “elucum” quoque esse dictum
putat, a littera in e versa, tarditatem quandam animi
et stuporem, qui alucinantibus plerumque usu venit.

4 Item “fascinum” appellatum ! quasi * bascanum "
et *fascinare" esse quasi * bascinare."

5 Commode haec sane omnia et conducenter. Sed
in libro quarto: * Faenerator," inquit, * appellatus


! appellatum, Skutsch ; appellat, w.


} p. 31, Egger. "OR US x Te
3 Gk. Bac«dviov. 4 Gk. Ba7kalvco.


174


E


BOOK XVI. xr. 7-xu. 5


came to meet them with a great blast of air, and
piling upon them mountainous heaps of sand, buried
them all with their entire forces and arms. Through
this act the Psylli all perished to a man, and
accordingly their territories were occupied by the
Nasamones,


XII


Of those words which Cloatius Verus referred to a Greek
origin, either quite fittingly or too absurdly and taste-
lessly.


CLoatius Verus, in the books which he entitled
Words taken from the Greek, says not a few things
indeed which show careful and keen investigation,
but also some which are foolish and _ trifling,
* Errare (to err)," he says,! “is derived from the
Greek @ppew,’ and he quotes a line of Homer in
which that word occurs :?


Swift wander (éppe) from the isle, most wretched
man.


Cloatius also wrote that alucinari, or * dream," is de-
rived from the Greek ddvew, or * be distraught,’ and
from this he thinks that the word elucus also is
taken, with a change of a to e, meaning a certain
sluggishness and stupidity of mind, which commonly
comes to dreamy folk. He also derives fascinum, or
“charm,” as if it were bascanum,? and fascinare, as if
it were bascinare,* or ** bewitch."

All these are fitting and proper enough. But in
his fourth book he says :9 ** Faenerator is equivalent to


5 p. 32, Egger.
i15


1


2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


est quasi doeuvepárop, dad ToU daiverbar émi TO
xpnororepov, quoniam id genus hominum! speciem
ostentent humanitatis et commodi esse videantur
inopibus nummos desiderantibus," idque dixisse ait
Hypsicraten quempiam grammaticum, cuius libri
sane nobiles sunt super his, quae a Graecis accepta
sunt. Sive hoc autem ipse Cloatius sive nescio quis
alius nebulo effutivit, nihil potest dici insulsius.
* Faenerator" enim, sicuti M. Varro in libro tertio
De Sermone Latino scripsit, a faenore est nomi-
natus; “faenus” autem dictum ait a fetu et quasi
a fetura quadam pecuniae parientis atque incres-
centis. Idcirco et M. Catonem et ceteros aetatis
eius “feneratorem” sine a littera pronuntiasse


tradit, sicuti “fetus” ipse et * fecunditas" appel-
lata.


XIII


Quid sit ‘“‘municipium” et quid a “colonia” differat; et
quid sint * municipes" quaeque sit eius vocabuli ratio
ac proprietas ; atque inibi, quod divus Hadrianus in senatu
de iure atque vocabulo municipum verba fecit.


* MuniciPES" et "municipia" verba sunt dictu
facilia et usu obvia, et neutiquam reperias qui haec
dicit, quin scire se plane putet quid dicat. Sed
profecto aliud est, atque aliter dicitur. Quotus
enim fere nostrum est, qui, cum ex colonia populi
Romani sit, non se * municipem " esse et populares


! homines, Skutsch.


1 Frag. 62, Wilmanns.
* Thurneysen, 7.L.L. s.v. fenus, thinks this derivation
176


BOOK XVI. xu. 5-xim, 2


$awepárop, meaning ‘to appear at one’s best, since
that class of men present an appearance of kindliness
and pretend to be accommodating to poor men who
are in need of money”; and he declared that this
was stated by Hypsicrates, a grammarian whose
books on Words Borrowed from the Greeks are very
well known. But whether Cloatius himself or some
other blockhead gave vent to this nonsense, nothing
can be more silly. For faenerator, as Marcus Varro
wrote in the third book of his Latin Diction,! “is so
called from faenus, or * interest, but faenus," he says,
“is derived from fetus? or ‘offspring,’ and from a
birth, as it were, from money, producing and giving
increase." Therefore he says that Marcus Cato?
and others of his time pronounced fenerator without
the letter a, just as fetus itself and fecunditas were
pronounced.


XIII


The meaning of mwunicipiwm and how it differs from colonia ;
and what municipes are and. the derivation and proper use
of that word ; and also what the deified Hadrian said in
the senate about the name and rights of municipes.


Mownicrprs and municipia are words which are read-
ily spoken and in common use, and you would never
find a man who uses them who does not think that
he understands perfectly what he is saying. But in
fact it is something different, and the meaning is
different. For how rarely is one of us found who,
coming from a colony of the Roman people, does not
say what is far removed from reason and from truth,


is perhaps correct ; we may compare Greek cókos, which
means both ‘‘ offspring" and '* interest."
? Frag. inc. 62, Jordan.
177


VOL. III, N


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


suos * municipes" esse dicat, quod est a ratione et
a veritate longe aversum? Sic adeo et ^ municipia "'
quid et quo iure sint quantumque a “colonia "
differant ignoramus, existimamusque meliore con-
dicione esse “colonias” quam “ municipia.”

De cuius opinationis tam promiscae erroribus
divus Hadrianus in oratione, quam De Italicensibus,
unde ipse ortus fuit, in senatu habuit, peritissime
disseruit mirarique se ostendit quod et ipsi Itali-
censes et quaedam item alia municipia antiqua, in
quibus Uticenses nominat, cum suis moribus legi-
busque uti possent, in ius coloniarum mutari gesti-
verint. Praenestinos autem refert maximo opere a
Tiberio imperatore petisse orasseque ut ex colonia
in municipii statum redigerentur, idque illis Tiberium
pro ferenda gratia tribuisse, quod in eorum finibus
sub ipso oppido ex capitali morbo revaluisset.

* Municipes " ergo sunt cives Romani ex municipiis,
legibus suis et suo iure utentes, muneris tantum
cum populo Romano honorari participes, a quo
munere capessendo appellati videntur, nullis aliis
necessitatibus neque ulla populi Romani lege ad-
stricti, nisi in quam populus eorum fundus factus
est, Primos autem municipes sine suffragii iure
Caerites esse factos accepimus concessumque illis
ut civitatis Romanae honorem quidem caperent, sed
negotiis tamen atque oneribus vacarent, pro sacris


! O.R. F.? p. 608. Italica was a city of Spain on the river
Baetis, opposite Hispalis (Seville). 1t was founded by Scipio
Africanus the Elder and peopled by his veterans; whence
the name ‘‘the Italian city.” It was the birthplace of
Trajan and Hadrian.

* Such as serving in the legions and not among the auxili-
aries.

3 For fundus cf. xix. 8. 19.

178


———


BOOK XVI. xui. 2-7


namely, that he is mwniceps and that his fellow
citizens are municipes? So general is the ignorance
of what municipia are and what rights they have,
and how far they differ from a * colony," as well as
the belief that coloniae are better off than municipia.
With regard to the errors in this opinion which is
so general the deified Hadrian, in the speech which
he delivered in the senate In Behalf of the
Jtalicenses,! from whom he himself came, discoursed
most learnedly, showing his surprise that the
Italicenses themselves and also some other ancient
municipia, among whom he names the citizens ot
Utica, when they might enjoy their own customs
and laws, desired instead to have the rights of
colonies. Moreover, he asserts that the citizens of
Praeneste earnestly begged and prayed the emperor
Tiberius that they might be changed from a colony
into the condition of a municipium, and that Tiberius
granted their request by way of conferring a favour,
because in their territory, and near their town itself,
he had recovered from a dangerous illness.
Municipes, then, are Roman citizens from free
towns, using their own laws and enjoying their own
rights, merely sharing with the Roman people an
honorary munus, or * privilege "* (from the enjoy-
ment of which privilege they appear to derive their
name), and bound by no other compulsion and no
other law of the Roman people, except such as their
own citizens have officially ratified.? We learn
besides that the people of Caere were the first
municipes without the right of suffrage, and that it
was allowed them to assume the honour of Roman
citizenship, but yet to be free from service and
burdens, in return for receiving and guarding sacred
179
N 2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


bello Gallico receptis custoditisque. Hine * tabulae
Caerites" appellatae versa vice, in quas censores
referri iubebant quos notae causa suffragiis priva-
bant.

Sed “ coloniarum " alia necessitudo est; non enim
veniunt extrinsecus in civitatem nec suis radicibus
nituntur, sed ex civitate quasi propagatae sunt et
iura institutaque omnia populi Romani, non sui
arbitrii, habent. Quae tamen condicio, cum sit
magis obnoxia et minus libera, potior tamen et
praestabilior existimatur propter amplitudinem
maiestatemque populi Romani, cuius istae coloniae
quasi effigies parvae simulacraque esse quaedam
videntur, et simul quia obscura oblitterataque sunt
municipiorum iura, quibus uti iam per innotitiam
non queunt.


XIV


Quod M, Cato differre dixit ‘‘properare” et ‘‘festinare” ;
et quam incommode Verrius Flaccus verbi quod est
** festinat" érvuov interpretatus est.

* FEsrINaARE" et *" properare" idem significare
atque in eandem rem dici videntur. Sed M. Cato
id differre existimat eaque hoc modo divisa— verba
sunt ipsius ex oratione, quam De Suis Virtutibus


1 Their government was modelled on that of Rome, with
a senate (decuriones) two chief magistrates (ZIviri iure di-
eundo), elected annually, etc,


180


BOOK XVI. xin. 7—x1v. 2


objects during the war with the Gauls. Hence by
contraries those tablets were called Caerites on
which the censors ordered those to be enrolled
whom they deprived of their votes by way of
disgrace.

But the relationship of the “ colonies" is a different
one; for they do not come into citizenship from
without, nor grow from roots of their own, but they
are as it were transplanted from the State and have
all the laws and institutions of the Roman people,
not those of their own choice. This condition, al-
though it is more exposed to control and less free, is
nevertheless thought preferable and superior be-
cause of the greatness and majesty of the Roman
people, of which those colonies seem to be minia-
tures, as it were, and in a way copies;! and at the
same time because the rights of the municipal towns
become obscure and invalid, and from ignorance of
their existence the townsmen are no longer able to
make use of them.


Hu


XIV


That Marcus Cato said there was a difference between pro-
perare and festinare, and how inappropriately Verrius
Flaceus explained the origin of the latter word.


Fesriware and properare seem to indicate the same
thing and to be used of the same thing. But Marcus
Cato thinks that there is a difference, and that the
difference is this—1 quote his own words from the
speech which he pronounced On his Own Merits :?


2 p. 44. 4, Jordan.
181


B


e


T


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


habuit—: * Aliud est ‘ properare,’ aliud ‘ festinare."
Qui unum quid mature transigit, is properat; qui
multa simul incipit neque perficit, is festinat."
Verrius Flaccus rationem dicere volens differentiae
huius: **Festinat, " inquit, *a fando dicitur, quo-
niam isti ignaviores, qui nihil perficere possunt,
plus verborum quam operae habent." Sed id nimis
coactum atque absurdum videtur neque tanti esse
momenti potest prima in utroque verbo littera, ut
propter eam unam tam diversa verba * festinare "
et * fari" eadem videri debeant. Commodius autem
propiusque visum est, * festinare" esse quasi *'fes-
sum esse," Nam qui multis simul rebus properandis
defessus est, is iam non properat, set festinat.


XV


Quid Theophrastus mirum de perdicibus scriptum reliquerit
et quid Theopompus de leporibus.
Tueornrastus, philosophorum peritissimus, omnes
in Paphlagonia perdices bina corda habere dicit,
Theopompus in Bisaltia lepores bina iecora.


! p. xv, Müller.


182


a M. dame"


BOOK XVI. xiv. 2-xv. 1


«It is one thing to hasten (properare), another to
hurry (festinare) He who finishes some one thing
in good season, hastens (properat); one who begins
many things at the same time but does not finish
them, hurries (festinat).”

Verrius Flaccus, wishing to explain the nature of
this difference, says :1 * Festinat is derived from for
(to speak), since those idle folk who can accom-
plish nothing talk more than they act." But that
seems too forced and absurd, nor can the first letter
of the two words be of such weight that because of
it such different words as festino and for should
appear to be the same. But it seems more fitting and
closer to explain festinare as equivalent to fessum
esse or “be wearied.” For one who tires himself
out by hastily attacking many things at once no
longer hastens, but hurries.”


XV


The strange thing recorded of partridges by Theophrastus
and of hares by Theopompus.


TuEoPHRAsTUs, most expert of philosophers,
declares? that in Paphlagonia all the partridges
have two hearts; Theopompus,* that in Bisaltia the
hares have two livers each.


2 Both derivations are fanciful, Festino is related to con-


festim, but its origin is uncertain. :
3 Frag. 182, Wimmer. |. 4 F.H.G, i. 901.


183


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XVI


* Agrippas" a partus aegri et inprosperi vitio appellatos;
deque his deabus quae vocantur ** Prorsa” et ‘‘ Postverta.”’

Quorum in nascendo non caput, sed pedes primi
extiterant, qui partus difficillimus aegerrimusque
habetur, “ Agrippae" appellati, vocabulo ab aegri-
tudine et pedibus conficto. Esse autem pueros in
utero Varro dicit capite infimo nixos, sursum pedibus
elatis, non ut hominis natura est, sed ut arboris.
Nam pedes cruraque arboris ramos appellat, caput
stirpem atque caudicem. “Quando igitur," inquit,
“contra naturam forte conversi in pedes, brachiis
plerumque diductis, retineri solent, aegriusque tunc
mulieres enituntur, huius periculi deprecandi gratia
arae statutae sunt Romae duabus Carmentibus,
quarum altera ‘ Postverta’ cognominatast, * Prorsa’


altera, a recti perversique partus et potestate et
nomine."


XVII
Quae ratio vocabuli sit agri Vaticani.


Er agrum Vaticanum et eiusdem agri deum prae-
sidem appellatum acceperamus a vaticiniis quae vi


1 Ant. Rer. Div. xiv, frag. 175, Agahd.

2 Carmenta was a birth-goddess, whose festival, the
Carmentalia (or Karmentalia) occurred on Jan. ll and 15
The Carmentes may originally have been wise women who


184


BOOK XVI. xvi. 1-xvir. 1


XVI


That the name Agrippa was given to those whose birth was
difficult and unnatural ; and of the goddesses called Prorsa
and Postverta.


Tnuosk at whose birth the feet appeared first,
instead of the head, which is considered the most
difficult and dangerous form of parturition, are called
Agrippae, a word formed from aegritudo, or “ diffi-
culty,” and pedes (feet). But Varro says! that the
position of children in the womb is with the head
lowest and the feet raised up, not according to the
nature of a man, but of a tree. For he likens the
branches of a tree to the feet and legs, and the stock
and trunk to the head. “ Accordingly," says he,
* when they chanced to be turned upon their feet
in an unnatural position, since their arms are usually
extended they are wont to be held back, and then
women give birth with greater difficulty. For
the purpose of averting this danger altars were set
up at Rome to the two Carmentes,? of whom one was
called Postverta, the other Prorsa,t named from
natural and unnatural births, and their power over
them."


XVII


Of the origin of the term ager Vaticanus.


We had been told that the ager Vaticanus, or
* Vatican region," and the presiding deity of the
same place, took their names from the vaticinia, or


assisted at births and were later deified (Fowler, Roman
Festivals, pp 290 ff.). à
3 That is, head foremost. 4 That is, feet foremost.


185


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


atque instinctu eius dei in eo agro fieri solita essent.
Sed praeter hane causam M. Varro in libris Divi-
narum aliam esse tradit istius nominis rationem:
* Nam sicut Aius," inquit, “ deus appellatus araque
ei statuta est quae est infima nova via, quod eo in
loco divinitus vox edita erat, ita Vaticanus deus
nominatus penes quem essent vocis humanae initia,
quoniam pueri, simul atque parti sunt, eam primam
vocem edunt quae prima in Vaticano syllabast
idcircoque ‘ vagire ' dicitur, exprimente verbo sonum
vocis recentis."


to


XVIII


Lepida quaedam et memoratu et cognitu de parte geometriae
quae ómTix/, appellatur, et item alia quae xavovikn, et
tertia itidem quae dicitur perpixn.


1 Pars quaedam geometriae ózrwj appellatur quae
ad oculos pertinet, pars altera, quae ad auris, kavo-
vuo; vocatur, qua musici ut fundamento artis suae

2 utuntur. Utraque harum spatiis et intervallis linea-
rum et ratione numerorum constat.

3 “Omrixy facit multa demiranda id genus, ut in
speculo uno imagines unius rei plures appareant;
item ut speculum in loco certo positum nihil imagi-
net, aliorsum translatum faciat imagines; item si
rectus speculum spectes, imago fiat tua eiusmodi, ut


1 Frag. 205, Agahd.
186


BOOK XVI. xvm. 1—xvit. 3


* prophecies,” which were wont to be made in that
region through the power and inspiration of that
god. But in addition to that reason Marcus Varro,
in his Antiquities of the Gods, states! that there is
another explanation of the name: “ For," says he,
«just as Aius was called a god and the altar was
erected in his honour which stands at the bottom of
the Nova Via, because in that place a voice from
heaven was heard, so that god was called Vaticanus
who controls the beginnings of human speech, since
children, as soon as they are born, first utter the
sound which forms the first syllable of Vaticanus ;
hence the word vagire (‘cry’), which represents
the sound of a new-born infant's voice."


XVIII


Some interesting and instructive remarks about that part of
Geometry which is called ** Optics? ; of another part called
* Harmony," and also of a third called ** Metric,"


A PanT of Geometry which relates to the sight is
called ózrucj or ‘ Optics,” another part, relating to
the ears, is known as kavovucj, or f Harmony," which
musicians make use of as the foundation of their art.
These are concerned respectively with the spaces
and the intervals between lines and with the theory
of musical numbers.

Optics effect many surprising things, such as the
appearance in one mirror of several images of the
same thing; also that a mirror placed in a certain
position shows no image, but when moved to another
spot gives reflections ; also that if you look straight
into a mirror, your reflection is such that your head

187


e


~


w t2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


caput deorsum videatur, pedes sursum. Reddit etiam
causas ea disciplina cur istae quoque visiones fallant,
ut quae in aqua conspiciuntur maiora ad oculos fiant,
quae procul ab oculis sunt, minora.

Kavovixy autem longitudines et altitudines vocis
emetitur. Longior mensura vocis jvÓpuós dicitur,
altior wédos. Est et alia species kavovudjs, quae ap-
pellatur uerpuoj, per quam syllabarum longarum et
brevium et mediocrium iunctura et modus congruens
cum principiis geometriae aurium mensura examina-
tur. “Sed haec," inquit M. Varro, “aut omnino
non discimus aut prius desistimus quam intellegamus
cur discenda sint. Voluptas autem," inquit, * vel
utilitas talium disciplinarum in postprincipiis existit,
cum perfectae absolutaeque sunt; in principiis vero
ipsis ineptae et insuaves videntur."


XIX
Sumpta historia ex Herodoti libro super fidicine Arione.


Cetert admodum et cohibili oratione vocumque
filo tereti et candido fabulam scripsit Herodotus
super fidicine illo Arione. * Vetus," inquit, “et
nobilis Arion cantator fidibus fuit. Is loco et oppido


+ The first effect is produced when the surface of a mirror
is divided into numerous smaller mirrors, Pliny N.H.
xxxiii. 129, describes cups, the interior of which was so
fashioned as to give numerous reflections. The second is
described (¢.g.) in Pausanias viii. 37. 7. The third is pro-


188


BOOK XVI. xvi. 3-xix. 3


appears below and your feet uppermost.! This science
also gives the reasons for optical illusions, such as
the magnifying of objects seen in the water, and the
small size of those that are remote from the eye.

Harmony, on the other hand, measures the length
and pitch of sounds. The measure of the length of
a tone is called $v6pós, or “rhythm,” of its pitch,
p.éXos, or “melody.” There is also another variety
of Harmony which is called uerpuoj, or “ Metric," by
which the combination of long and short syllables,
and those which are neither long nor short, and the
verse measure according to the principles of geometry
is examined with the aid of the ears. *'*But these
things," says Marcus Varro,” * we either do not learn
at all, or we leave off before we know why they
ought to be learned. But the pleasure," he says,
* and the advantage of such sciences appear in their
later study, when they have been completely
mastered; but in their mere elements they seem
foolish and unattractive." ?


XIX


A story about the lyre-player Arion, taken from the work of
Herodotus.


Herovotus has written * of the famous lyre-player
Arion in terse and vigorous language and in simple
and elegant style. “Arion,” says he, “in days of
old was a celebrated player upon the lyre. The


duced when one looks into a concave mirror from a certain
distance. Magic mirrors of various kinds and properties
were known in antiquity, as well as divination by means of
mirrors. See Trans. Numis. and Ant. Soc. of Phila., 1910,


pp. 187 ff.
? p. 337, Bipont. 3 Of. xvi. 8. 15 ff. * i, 23.


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Methymnaeus, terra atque insula omni Lesbius fuit.

4 Eum Arionem rex Corinthi Periander amicum ama-
5 tumque habuit artis gratia. Is inde a rege pro-
6 ficiscitur, terras inclutas Siciliam atque Italiam
visere. Ubi eo venit auresque omnium mentesque
in utriusque terrae urbibus demulsit, in quaestibus
istic et voluptatibus amoribusque hominum fuit.
7Is tum postea grandi pecunia et re bona multa
8 copiosus Corinthum instituit redire, navem igitur et
navitas, ut notiores amicioresque sibi, Corinthios

9 delegit." Sed eos Corinthios, homine accepto
" navique in altum provecta, praedae pecuniaeque
10 cupidos cepisse consilium de necando Arione. Tum
illum ibi, pernicie intellecta, pecuniam ceteraque
sua, ut haberent, dedisse, vitam modo sibi ut parce-

ll rent oravisse.  Navitas precum eius harum com-
miseritum esse illactenus ut ei necem adferre per
vim suis manibus temperarent, sed imperavisse ut
12 jam statim coram  desiliret praeceps in mare.
* Homo," inquit, *ibi territus, spe omni vitae
perdita, id unum postea oravit, ut priusquam mortem
obpeteret, induere permitterent sua sibi omnia
indumenta et fides capere et canere carmen casus
13 illius sui consolabile. Feros et inmanes navitas
prolubium tamen audiendi subit; quod oraverat im-

14 petrat. Atque ibi mox de more cinctus, amictus,
ornatus stansque in summae puppis foro, carmen
quod *orthium' dicitur voce sublatissima cantavit.
15 Ad postrema cantus cum fidibus ornatuque omni,
sicut stabat canebatque, iecit sese procul in pro-


1 625-585 B.c.

? This was a song in such a high key that it could be
reached by few voices. In Aristophanes, Knights, 1979
(L.C.L. i, p. 247) the dps »vóuos is played by a
** prince of harpers.”

190


BOOK XVI. xix. 3-15


town in which he was born was Methymna, but from
the name of his country and the island as a whole
he was a Lesbian. This Arion for the sake of his
art was held in friendship and affection by Periander,
king of Corinth.! Later, he left the king, to visit
the famous lands of Sicily and Italy. On his arrival
there he charmed the ears and minds of all in the
cities of both countries, and there he was enriched
as well as being generally admired and beloved.
Then later, laden with money and with wealth of
all kinds, he determined to return to Corinth,
choosing a Corinthian vessel and crew, as better
known to him and more friendly." But Herodotus
says that those Corinthians, having received Arion
on board and put to sea, formed the plan of murder-
ing bim for the sake of his money. Then he,
realizing that death was at hand, gave them posses-
sion of his money and other goods, but begged that
they should at least spare his life. The sailors were
moved by his prayers only so far as to refrain from
putting him to death with their own hands, but they
bade him at once, before their eyes, leap headlong
into the sea. “Then,” says Herodotus, “the poor
man, in terror and utterly hopeless of life, finally
made the one request that before meeting his end he
might be allowed to put on all his costume, take his
lyre, and sing a song in consolation of his fate. The
sailors, though savage and cruel, nevertheless had a
desire to hear him ; his request was granted. Then
afterwards, crowned in the usual way, robed and
adorned, he stood upon the extreme stern and lifting
up his voice on high sang the song called * orthian.'?
Finally, having finished his song, with his lyre and
all his equipment, just as he stood and sang, he


I9I


16


17


18


19


20


21


22
23


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


fundum. Navitae, hautquaquam dubitantes quin
perisset, cursum quem facere coeperant tenuerunt.
Sed novum et mirum et pium facinus contigit."
Delphinum repente inter undas adnavisse fluitantique
sese homini subdidisse et dorso super fluctus edito
vectavisse incolumique eum corpore et ornatu
Taenarum in terram Laconicam devexisse. Tum
Arionem prorsus ex eo loco Corinthum petivisse
talemque Periandro regi, qualis delphino vectus
fuerat, inopinanti sese optulisse eique rem, sicuti
acciderat, narravisse. Regem istaec parum credi-
disse, Arionem, quasi falleret, custodiri iussisse,
navitas inquisitos, ablegato Arione, dissimulanter
interrogasse ecquid audissent in his locis unde
venissent super Arione? Los dixisse, hominem, cum
inde irent, in terra Italia fuisse eumque illic bene
agitare et studiis delectationibusque urbium florere
atque in gratia pecuniaque magna opulentum fortu-
natumque esse. Tum inter haec eorum verba Ario-
nem cum fidibus et indumentis cum quibus se in
salum eiaculaverat extitisse, navitas stupefactos
convictosque ire infitias non quisse. Eam fabulam
dicere Lesbios et Corinthios atque esse fabulae
argumentum, quod simulacra duo aenea ad Tae-


narum viserentur, delphinus vehens et homo in-
sidens,


192


—


BOOK XVI. xix. 15-23


threw himself far out into the deep. The sailors,
not doubting in the least that he had perished, held
on the course which they had begun. But an un-
heard of, strange and miraculous thing happened."
Herodotus asserts that a dolphin suddenly swam
up amid the waves, dove under the floating man,
and lifting his back above the flood, carried him and
landed him at Taenarum in the Laconian land, with
his person and adornment uninjured. Then Arion
went from there straight to Corinth and, just as he
was when the dolphin carried him, presented him-
self unexpectedly to king Periander and told him
exactly what had occurred. The king did not
believe the story but ordered that Arion be im-
prisoned as an impostor. He hunted up the sailors,
and in the absence of Arion craftily questioned them,
asking whether they had heard anything of Arion in
the places from which they had come. They replied
that the man had been in the land of Italy when
they left it, that he was doing well there, enjoying
the devotion and the pleasures of the cities, and
that both in prestige and in money he was rich and
fortunate. Then, in the midst of their story, Arion
suddenly appeared with his lyre, clad in the gar-
ments in which he had thrown himself into thé sea ;
the sailors were amazed and proved guilty, and could
not deny their crime. This story is told by the
Lesbians and the Corinthians, and in testimony to
its truth two brazen images are to be seen near
Taenarum, the dolphin carrying the man, who is
seated on his back.


193


VOL. III. oO


kw y ey Ds |X PEL UP
fq j E : 7 th ip if tie D


ray Me


BOOK XVII


»


o 2


ILBER SEPTIMUS DECIMUS
I


Quod Gallus Asinius et Largius Licinus sententiam M. Cicero-
nis reprehenderunt ex oratione quam dixit Pro M. Caelio;
et quid adversus homines stolidissimos pro eadem sententia
vere! digneque dici possit.

1 Ur quidam fuerunt monstra hominum, quod de dis
inmortalibus impias falsasque opiniones prodiderunt,
ita nonnulli tam prodigiosi tamque vecordes extite-
runt, in quibus sunt Gallus Asinius et Largius
Licinus, cuius liber etiam fertur infando titulo
Ciceromastix, ut scribere ausi sint M. Ciceronem
parum integre atque inproprie atque inconsiderate

2 locutum. Atque alia quidem quae reprehenderunt

3 neque dictu neque auditu digna sunt, sed enim hoc?
in quo sibimet ipsi praeter cetera esse visi sunt
verborum pensitatores subtilissimi, cedo, quale id sit
consideremus.

4 M. Cicero Pro M. Caelio ita scribit: “Nam quod
obiectum est de pudicitia quodque omnium accu-
satorum non criminibus, sed vocibus maledictisque
celebratum est, id numquam tam acerbe feret M.
Caelius, ut eum paeniteat non deformem esse

5 natum." Non existumant verbo proprio esse ysum,
quod ait * paeniteat," atque id prope ineptum etiam


2 e re, Skutsch ; mere, 8.
* in hoc, w; in deleted by Hosius.


32816,


f cud


BOOK XVII
I


That Asinius Gallus and Largius Licinus criticized a saying
of Cicero's in the speech which he delivered For Marcus
Caelius ; and what may be said with truth and propriety
in defence of that saying, in reply to those most foolish
critics.


Jusr as there have been monsters of men who ex-
pressed impious and false opinions about the immortal
gods, so there have been some so extravagant and
so ignorant that they have dared to say that Marcus
Cicero spoke without correctness, propriety, or con-
sideration; among these are Asinius Gallus and
Largius Licinus, and the latter’s book even bears the
outrageous title of The Scourge of Cicero. Now the
other things that they have censured are certainly not
worth hearing or mentioning; but let us consider
the value of this stricture of theirs, in which par-
ticularly they are, in their own opinion, very keen


. critics of language.


Marcus Cicero in his speech For Marcus Caelius !
writes as follows: * As to the charge made against his
chastity and published by all his accusers, not in the
form of actual charges, but of gossip and calumnies,
Marcus Caelius will never take that so much to heart,


-as to repent that he was not born ugly.” They


think that Cicero has not used the proper word in
saying paeniteat, or “ repent,” and they go so far as
to add that it is almost absurd; “for,” they say,


197


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS

6 esse dicunt. ‘‘Nam *paenitere, " inquiunt, “tum
dicere solemus, cum quae ipsi fecimus aut quae de
nostra voluntate nostroque consilio facta sunt, ea
nobis post incipiunt displicere sententiamque in iis

7 nostram demutamus" ; neminem autem recte ita
loqui * paenitere sese, quod natus sit " aut “ paeni-
tere, quod mortalis sit" aut “quod ex offenso forte
vulneratoque corpore dolorem sentiat," quando
istiusmodi rerum nec consilium sit nostrum nec
arbitrium, sed ea ingratis nostris! vi ac necessitate
naturae nobis accidant: *'Sicut hercle," inquiunt,

8 “non voluntarium fuit M. Caelio, quali forma nasce-
retur, cuius eum dixit ‘non paenitere, tamquam in
ea causa res esset ut rationem caperet paenitendi.”

9 Est haec quidem, quam dicunt, verbi huiusce
sententia et ‘ paenitere’’ nisi in voluntariis rebus
non probe dicitur, tametsi antiquiores verbo ipso
alio quoque modo usitati sunt et * paenitet" ab eo
quod est “ paene " et * paenuria " dixerunt. Sed id

10 aliorsum pertinet atque alio in loco dicetur. Nunc
autem, sub hac eadem significatione quae vulgo
nota est, non modo ineptum hoc non est quod
M. Cicero dixit, sed festivissimum adeo et facetissi-

11 mum est. Nam cum adversarii et obtrectatores M.
Caeli, quoniam erat pulchro corpore, formam eius
et faciem in suspiciones inpudicitiae accerserent,
inludens Cicero tam absurdam criminationem, quod
formam, quam natura fecerat, vitio darent, eodem
ipso errore quem inludebat sciens usus est et * non


1 in nostris, w; in deleted by Carrio.


! This promise is not fulfilled,
198


BOOK XVII. 1. 5-11


“we regularly use paenitere when things which we
ourselves have done, or which have been done in
accordance with our wish and design, later begin to
displease us and we change our opinion about them."
But that no one correctly says that he “repents
being born” or * repents being mortal," or “ because
he feels pain from any chance injury or wound
inflicted upon his body"; for in such cases there is
no design or choice on our part, but such things
happen to us against our will by some necessity or
force of nature. “In the same way," they continue,
«it was not a matter of choice with Marcus Caelius
with what person he was born; yet he says that ‘he
did not repent this,’ as if there were in that cireum-
stance ground for a feeling of repentance. ”

This is in fact, as they say, the force of that word,
and paenitere is strictly used of none but voluntary
acts, although our forefathers used that same word
also in a different sense and connected paenitet with
the words paene (almost) and paenuria (want). But
that is another question, and will be spoken of in
another placé! But with regard to the point at
issue, giving to paenitere this same meaning which
is commonly recognized, what Marcus Cicero said
- js not only not foolish, but in the highest degree
elegant and witty. For since the adversaries and
detractors of Marcus Caelius, inasmuch as he was
of handsome person, made use of his appearance
and figure to throw doubt upon his chastity, there-
fore Cicero, making sport of such an absurd charge
as to impute to him as a fault the good looks
which nature had given him, has deliberately
adopted that very same false charge of which he
is making fun, saying: “ Marcus Caelius is not sorry


199


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


paenitet," inquit, * M. Caelium, non deformem esse
natum," ut vel hac ipsa re, quod ita dicebat,
obprobraret adversariis ac per facetias ostentaret
facere eos deridiculum, quod proinde Caelio formam
crimini darent, quasi arbitrium eius fuisset, quali
forma nasceretur.


II


Verba quaedam ex Q. Claudi Annalium primo cursim in
legendo notata.


Cum librum veteris scriptoris legebamus, conaba-
mur postea memoriae vegetandae gratia indipisci
animo ac recensere quae in eo libro scripta essent in
uirasque existimationes laudis aut culpae adnota-
mentis digna, eratque hoc sane quam utile exercitium
ad conciliandas nobis, ubi venisset usus, verborum
sententiarumque elegantium recordationes. Velut
haec verba ex Q. Claudi primo Annali, quae me-
minisse potui, notavi, quem librum legimus biduo
proximo superiore.

** Arma," inquit, * plerique abiciunt'atque inermi
inlatebrant sese."  * Inlatebrant" verbum poeticum
visum est, sed non absurdum neque asperum.

* Ea," inquit, *dum fiunt, Latini subnixo animo
ex victoria inerti consilium ineunt"  « Subnixo
animo " ! quasi sublimi et supra nixo, verbum bene
significans et non fortuitum ; demonstratque animi
altitudinem fiduciamque, quoniam quibus innitimur,
lis quasi erigimur attollimurque.


EXE. .: animo, supplied by Hertz from Nonius iv, p. 405, 29;
et victoria certi, Canter.


! Frag. 22, Peter?, * Frag. 13, Peter?,
200


— ^d


BOOK XVII. 1. 11-1. 4


for not having been born ugly"; so that by the very
fact of speaking thus he might reproach his accusers
and wittily show that they were doing an absurd
thing in making Caelius' handsome person an accu-
sation agaiust him, just as if the person with which
he was born depended upon his own volition.


II


Certain words from the first book of the Annals of Quintus
Claudius, noted in a hasty reading.


WueneEver I read the book of an early writer, I
tried afterwards, for the purpose of quickening my
memory, to recall and review any passages in the
book which were worthy of note, in the way either
of praise or censure ; and I found it an exceedingly
helpful exercise for ensuring my recollection of
elegant words and phrases, whenever need of them
should arise. For example, in the first book of the
Annals of Quintus Claudius, which I had read on
the preceding two days, I noted these passages:

*'lhe greater number," says he, “threw away
their arms and hid themselves unarmed." The verb
inlatebrant, for * hid themselves," seemed poetic, but
neither improper nor harsh.

«While these things were going on," he says?
*the Latins, their spirits raised because of their .
easy victory, form a plan." Subnixo animo is.
significant and carefully chosen expression with the
force of “raised and elevated in spirit”; and
- it indicates loftiness and confidence of spirit, since
we are, as it were, raised and lifted up by that upon
which we depend. ?


201


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


5 ‘Domus,’ inquit, “suas quemque ire iubet et
sua omnia frunisci'"'  * Frunisci" ! rarius quidem
fuit in aetate M. Tulli ac deinceps infra rarissimum,
dubitatumque est ab inperitis antiquitatis an Latinum

6 foret. Non modo autem Latinum, sed iucundius
amoeniusque etiam verbum est * fruniscor" quam
* fruor," et ut “ fatiscor" a “ fateor,” ita * fruniscor "

7 factum est a “fruor.’ Q. Metellus Numidicus, qui
caste pureque lingua usus Latina videtur, in epistula
quam exul Ad Domitios misit, ita scripsit : ‘ Illi vero
omni iure atque honestate interdicti, ego neque
aqua neque igni careo et summa gloria fruniscor.”

8 Novius, in Atellania quae Parcus inscripta est, hoc
verbo ita utitur:


Quód magno opere quaésiverunt, íd frunisci nón
queunt.
Qui non parsit ápud se, . .. . . frunitus est,


9  * Et Romani," inquit, * multis armis et magno com-
meatu praedaque ingenti copiantur." **Copiantur"?
verbum castrense est nec facile id reperias apud
civilium causarum oratores, ex eademque figura est
qua “ lignantur” et * pabulantur " et ‘ aquantur.”’

10 Sole,” inquit, “occaso.” ‘Sole occaso " non
insuavi vetustate est, si quis aurem habeat non
sordidam nec proculcatam ; in Duodecim autem


1 frunisci, added by Carrio.
* copiantur, added by Hertz (Carrio).


1 Frag. 23, Peter?. 2 v. 77, Ribbeck®.
3 Frag. 24, Peter?. MICE Sk ub a Rot s


202


BOOK XVII. ru. 5-10


* He bids each one," he says,! * go to his own
house and enjoy his possessions."  Frunisci, meaning
* enjoy," was somewhat rare in the days of Marcus
Tullius and became still rarer after that time, and
its Latinity was questioned by those who were
unacquainted with our early literature. However,
fruniscor is not only good Latin, but it is more
elegant and pleasing than fruor, from which it is
formed in the same way as fatiscor from fateor.
Quintus Metellus Numidicus, who is known to have
used the Latin tongue with purity and simplicity, in
the letter which he sent when in exile To the
Domitii, wrote as follows: * They indeed were cut
off from every right and honour, I lack neither
water nor fire and I enjoy (fruniscor) the greatest
glory." Novius, in his Atellan farce entitled The
Miser, uses this word :?


What eagerly they sought they can't enjoy
( frunisci) ;
Who does not spare, enjoys the goods he has.

«And the Romans," says Quadrigarius,? “get
possession of (copiantur) many arms and a great
supply of provisions, and enormous booty."  Co-
. piantur is a soldier's word, and you will not readily
find it in the pleaders of civil suits; it is formed in
the same way as lignantur, or “ gather wood,"
pabulantur, or “ forage,” and aquantur, or “ get
water."

Quadrigarius uses sole occaso for “at sunset." 4
This expression has a flavour of antiquity which is
not without charm, if one possesses an ear that is
not dull and commonplace; furthermore the phrase
occurs in the Twelve T'ables in the following passage :?

203


ll


12


13


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Tabulis verbum hoc ita scriptum est: ** Ante meri-
diem causam coniciunto, cum perorant ambo prae-
sentes. Post meridiem praesenti litem addicito. Si
ambo praesentes, sol! occasus suprema tempestas
esto."

* Nos," inquit, *in medium relinquemus.” Vulgus
* jn medio " dicit; nam vitium esse istuc putat et,
si dicas *in medium ponere," id quoque esse soloe-
con putant; set probabilius significantiusque sic dici
videbitur, si quis ea verba non incuriose introspiciat ;
Graece quoque «iva eis uécov, vitium id non est.

* Postquam nuntiatum est," inquit, * ut pugnatum
esset in Gallos, id civitas graviter tulit." “In
Gallos" mundius subtiliusque est quam “‘cum Gallis"
aut * contra Gallos"; nam pinguiora haec obsoleti-
oraque sunt.

** Simul," inquit, “forma, factis, eloquentia, digni-
tate, acrimonia, confidentia pariter praecellebat, ut
facile intellegeretur magnum viaticum ex se atque
in se ad rempublicam evertendam habere." “ Mag-
num viaticum " pro magna facultate et paratu magno
nove positum est, videturque Graecos secutus, qui
épodiov a sumptu viae ad aliarum quoque rerum
apparatus traducunt ac saepe éóo8(acov pro eo dicunt,
quod est ** institue " et * instrue."


! sol, Hosius, comparing xiv. 7. 8 ; solis, Q.


1 Frag. 25, Peter?,

2 The phrase in mediwm has various meanings, according
to the context and the verb with which it is used; cf. Cic.
ad Fam. xv. 9. 6, se... eam rem numquam in medium
propter periculi metum protulisse; Cluent. 77 ; Virg. Aen.
v. 401. If the lexicons are to be trusted, in medium ponere


204


— —


BOOK XVII. ir. 10-13


* Before midday let them hear the case, with both
parties making their pleas in person. After mid-
day, decide the case in favour of the one who is
present. If both are present, let sunset be the
limit of the proceedings."

“We,” says he, “will leave it undecided (im
medium)" ‘The common people say i medio ; for
they think that in medium is an error, and if you
should say im medium ponere (to make known)? they
consider that also a solecism ; but if anyone examines
these words with some care, that expression will
seem to him the more correct and the more ex-
pressive ; moreover in Greek @ecivar eis pécov is not
an error.

« After it was announced,” he says;? * that a battle
had been fought against the Gauls (im Gallos), the
State was troubled." Jn Gallos is neater and finer
than cum Gallis or contra Gallos; for these are some-
what awkward and out of date.

«At the same time," he says,* “he excelled in
person, in exploits, in eloquence, in position, in
energy, and confidence alike, so that it was easily
seen that he possessed from himself and in himself a
great equipment (magnum viaticum) for overthrowing
. the republic." Magnum viaticum is a novel expres-
sion for great ability and great resources, and
Claudius seems to have followed the Greeks, who
transferred éfdd.ov from the meaning of ** money for
a journey " to preparation for other things, and often
say épodiacov for “ prepare " and “ make ready.”


is rare, and the usual expression is. i medio ponere, e.g.
Cic. Nat. Deor. i. 13, ponam in medio sententias philosophorum.
3 Frag. 1, Peter?. 4 Id. 8.


205


14


15


16


17


18


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


* Nam Marcus," inquit, * Manlius, quem Capito-
lium servasse a Gallis supra ostendi cuiusque operam
cum M. Furio dictatore apud Gallos cumprime
fortem atque exsuperabilem respublica sensit, is et
genere et vi et virtute bellica nemini concedebat.”
* Adprime"' crebrius est, “cumprime”’ rarius tra-
ductumque ex eo est, quod * cumprimis " dicebant
pro quod est ** inprimis."

* Nihil sibi," inquit, “divitias opus esse." Nos
* divitiis" dicimus. Sed vitium hoc orationis nullum
est ac ne id quidem est quod figura dici solet; recta
enim istaec oratio est et veteres conpluscule ita
dixerunt, nec ratio dici potest, cur rectius sit
* divitiis opus esse" quam “divitias,” nisi qui
grammaticorum nova instituta ut reuévov iepa ob-
servant.

* Nam hac,"! inquit, * maxime versatur deorum
iniquitas, quod deteriores sunt incolumiores neque
optimum quemquam inter nos sinunt diurnare."
Inusitate “diurnare” dixit pro * diu vivere," sed
ex ea figuratione est, qua dicimus “ perennare."

* Cum iis," inquit, * consermonabatur.' ‘“ Ser-
monari"' rusticius videtur, sed rectius est, *sermo-
cinari " tritius,? sed corruptius est.

** Sese," inquit, “ne id quoque, quod tum suaderet,
facturum esse." ‘Ne id quoque " dixit pro “ne id
quidem," infrequens nunc in loquendo, sed in libris
veterum creberrimum.


1 hac suggested by Hosius; haec, w.
* tritius, Hosius; rectius, «e ; crebrius, c ; lectius, Dziatzko.


: "id 7, Peter?. 2 Td. 26. 3 Id. 9.
4510.16 5 Td. 17.


206


BOOK XVII. ir. 14-18


* For Marcus Manlius," said he,! * who, as I have
shown above, saved the Capitol from the Gauls, and
whose service, along with that of Marcus Furius
the dictator, the State found especially (cumprime)
valiant and irresistible against the Gauls, yielded
to no one in race, in strength and in warlike
valour.”  Adprime is more frequent for “especially” ;
cumprime is rarer and is derived from the expression
cumprimis with the force of inprimis.

Quadrigarius says? that * he has no need for
riches (divitias). We use the ablative divitis with
opus. But this usage of his is not a mistake in
grammar, nor is it even what is termed a figure ;
for it is correct Latin and the early writers quite
frequently used that case ; moreover, no reason can
be given why divitiis opus esse is more correct than
divitias, except by those who look upon the in-
novations of grammarians as oracular responses.

* For herein especially,’ says he,’ “lies the
injustice of the gods, that the worst men are the
least subject to injury, and that they do not allow
the best men to remain long (diurmare) with us."
His use of diurnare for diu vivere is unusual, but it
is justified by the figure by which we use perennare
(to last for years).

He says:* ** He conversed (consermonabatur) with
them." Sermonari seems somewhat rustic, but is
more correct ; sermocinari is more common, but is not
such pure Latin.

«That he would not do even that," says he,®
* which he then advised." He has used ne id quoque
for ne id quidem; the former is not common now in
conversation, but is very frequent in the books of
the earlier writers.

207


19


20


21


22, 23


25


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


“Tanta,” inquit, *sanctitudo fani est, ut num-
H . : x EHI
quam quisquam violare sit ausus."  ‘“ Sanctitas


quoque et * sanctimonia " non minus Latine dicuntur,


sed nescio quid maioris dignitatis est verbum
*  sanctitudo," sicuti M. Cato Jn L. Veturium * duri-
tudinem " quam * duritiam " dicere gravius putavit :
* Qui illius," inquit, *impudentiam norat et duri-
tudinem."

* Cum tantus," inquit, *arrabo penes Samnites
populi Romani esset." ** Arrabonem " dixit sescentos
obsides et id maluit quam pignus dicere, quoniam
vis huius vocabuli in ea sententia gravior acriorque
est; sed nunc “arrabo” in sordidis verbis haberi
coeptus ac multo videtur sordidius ** arra," quamquam
** arra" quoque veteres saepe dixerint et conpluriens
Laberius.

“ Miserrimas," inquit, * vitas exegerunt," et: “hic
nimiis in otiis," inquit, * consumptus est." Elegantia
utrobique ex multitudine numeri quaesita est.

* Cominius," inquit, “qua ascenderat, descendit
atque verba Gallis dedit." * Verba Cominium dedisse
Gallis" dicit, qui nihil quicquam cuiquam dixerat ;
neque eum Galli, qui Capitolium obsidebant, ascen-
dentem aut descendentem! viderant. Sed «verba
dedit" haut secus posuit quam si tu dicas «latuit
atque obrepsit.”

* Convalles," inquit, “et arboreta magna erant."


! aut descendentem, c ; not in the MSS.


clog, * xviii. 8, Jordan. 3 Frag. 90, Peter?.
* v, 152, Ribbeck?, 5 Frag. 27, Peter?,

$50. 98. 7 Frag. 4, Peter?, s fa. 9g;
? From earlier arbos and -etum.


208


BOOK XVII. ir. 19-25


* Such is the sanctity (sanctitudo) of the fane,"
says he,! * that no one ever ventured to violate it."
Sanctitas and sanctimonia are equally good Latin, but
the word sanctitudo somehow has greater dignity,
just as Marcus Cato, in his speech Against Lucius
Veturius, thought it more forcible to use duritudo
than duritia, saying? “ Who knew their impudence
and hardihood (duritudinem).”’

«Since the Roman people," says Quadrigarius;?
*had given such a pledge (arrabo) to the Sam-
nites.’ He applied the term arrabo to the six
hundred hostages and preferred to use that word
rather than pignus, since the force of arrabo in that
connection is weightier and more pointed; but
nowadays arrabo is beginning to be numbered
among vulgar words, and arra seems even more so,
although the early writers often used arra, and
Laberius 4 has it several times.

“They have spent most wretched lives (vitas),”
says. Quadrigarius,> and, * This man is worn out
by too much leisure (o£is)." In both cases elegance
is sought by the use of the plural number.

*« Cominius," says he," “ came down the same way
he had gone up and so deceived the Gauls.” He
.says that Cominius *gave words to the Gauls,"
meaning “deceived them," although he had said
nothing to anybody ; and the Gauls who were be-
sieging the Capitol had seen him neither going up
nor coming down. But *he gave words" is used
with the meaning of “he escaped the notice of,
and circumvented.”

Again he says:9 “There were valleys and great
woods (arboreta)." Arboreta is a less familiar word,
arbusta ? the more usual one.

209

VOL. III. P


26


27


bo


3


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


* Arboreta" ignobilius verbum, * arbusta" cele-
bratius.

* Putabant," inquit, “eos qui foris atque qui in
arce erant inter se commutationes et consilia facere."
* Commutationes," id est conlationes communica-
tionesque, non usitate dixit, set non hercle inscite
nec ineleganter.

Haec ego pauca interim super eo libro, quorum
memoria post lectionem subpetierat, mihi notavi.


IH


Verba M. Varronis ex libro quinto et vicesimo Hwmanarum,
quibus contra opinionem volgariam interpretatus est Homeri
versum.


IN sermonibus forte quos de temporibus rerum
ad usus hominum repertarum agitabamus, adulescens
quispiam non indoctus sparti quoque usum in terra
Graecia diu incognitum fuisse dixit multisque post
Ilium captum tempestatibus ex terra Hispania ad-
vectum.  Riserunt hoc ad inludendum ex his, qui
ibi aderant, unus atque alter, male homines litterati,
quod genus áyopaíovs Graeci appellant, atque eum
qui id dixerat librum legisse Homeri aiebant, cui
versus hic forte deesset:


Kai 6% dotpa a'éayre veüv kal ordpta AcAvvrat.
Tum ille prorsum inritatus : * Non,” inquit, “ meo
libro versus iste! sed vobis plane magister defuit, si
creditis in eo versu omápra id significare quod nos


1 iste, Lion; ipse, QII; se, Z; sed, NOX; ipse, sed,
Longolius.


1 Frag. 5, Peter?, 2 Iliad ii. 135.


BOOK XVII. ir. 25-111. 3


«They thought," says he, “that those who
were without and those that were within the citadel
were exchanging communications (commutationes) and
plans." Commutationes, meaning * conferences and
communications," is not usual, but, by Heaven! is
neither erroneous nor inelegant.

These few notes on that book, such things as I
remembered after reading it, I have now jotted
down for my own use.


III


The words of Marcus Varro in the twenty-fifth book of his
Human Antiquities, in which he has interpreted a line of
Homer contrary to the general opinion.


Ir happened in the course of conversations which
we carried on about the dates of various inventions
for human use, that a young man not without
learning observed that the use of spartum or
“Spanish broom” also was for a long time un-
known in the land of Greece and that it was im-
ported from Spain many years after the taking of
Ilium. One or two half-educated fellows who were
present there, of the class that the Greeks call
dyopaiou, or ** haunters of the market-place," laughed
in derision of this statement, and declared that the
man who had made it had read a copy of Homer
which happened to lack the following verse 22

And rotted the ship's timbers, loosed the ropes
(omápra).

Then the youth, in great vexation, replied : * It
was not my book that lacked that line, but you who
badly lacked a teacher, if you believe that cmápra
in that verse means what we call spartum, or *a


211
p 2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


4'spartum' dicimus." Maiorem illi risum subiciunt,
neque id desierunt, nisi liber ab eo prolatus esset
M. Varronis vicesimus quintus Humanarum, in quo
de isto Homeri verbo a Varrone ita scriptum est:
“Ego eápra apud Homerum non plus ‘spartum’
significare puto quam eáprovs, qui dicuntur in agro
Thebano nati. In Graecia sparti copia modo coepit
esse ex Hispania. Neque ea ipsa facultate usi
Liburni; sed hi plerasque naves loris suebant, Graeci
magis cannabo et stuppa ceterisque sativis rebus, a


5 quibus omdpta appellabant." Quod cum ita Varro .


dicat, dubito hercle, an posterior syllaba in eo verbo,
quod apud Homerum est, acuenda sit, nisi quia voces
huiusmodi, cum ex communi significatione in rei
certae proprietatem concedunt, diversitate accentuum
separantur.


IV


Quid Menander poeta Philemoni poetae dixerit, a quo saepe
indigne in certaminibus comoediarum superatus est; et


quod saepissime Euripides in tragoedia ab ignobilibus
poetis victus est.


1 Menanper a Philemone, nequaquam pari scriptore,
in certaminibus comoediarum ambitu gratiaque et

2 factionibus saepenumero vincebatur. Eum cum forte
habuisset obviam, ** Quaeso," inquit, * Philemo, bona
venia dic mihi, cum me vincis, non erubescis ?


! desierunt suggested by Hosius; destituerunt, Q!z; th
other MSS, have destiterunt, | Mode oe


212


anti ^


BOOK XVII. ur. 3-1v. 2


rope of Spanish broom.’” They only laughed the
louder, and would have continued to do so, had he
not produced the twenty-fifth book of Varro's
Human Antiquities, in which Varro writes as follows
of that Homeric word:! “I believe that oezápra
in Homer does not mean sparta, or ‘Spanish broom,’
but rather cápro, a kind of broom which is said
to grow in the Theban territory. In Greece there
has only recently been a supply of spartum, imported
from Spain. The Liburnians did not make use of that
material either, but as a rule fastened their ships
together with thongs,” while the Greeks made more
use of hemp, tow, and other cultivated plants
(sativis), from which ropes got their name of sparta.”
Since Varro says this, I have grave doubts whether
the last syllable in the Homeric word ought not
to have an acute accent; unless it be because
words of this kind, when they pass from their
general meaning to the designation of a particular


[o]
thing, are distinguished by a difference in accent.


IV


What the poet Menander said to Philemon, by whom he was
often undeservedly defeated in contests in comedy ; and that
Euripides was very often vanquished in tragedy by obscure


poets.


In contests in comedy Menander was often de-
feated by Philemon, a writer by no means his equal,
owing to intrigue, favour, and partisanship. When
Menander once happened to meet his rival, he
said: * Pray pardon me, Philemon, but really, don't
you blush when you defeat me ? "'

1 Frag. 4, Mirsch.
2 See sutiles naves, Plin. N.H. xxiv. 69.


213


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


3 Euripidem quoque M. Varro ait, cum quinque
et septuaginta tragoedias scripserit, in quinque solis
vicisse, cum eum saepe vincerent aliquot poetae
ignavissimi.

4  Menandrum autem alii centum octo, partim cen-

5 tum novem reliquisse comoedias ferunt. Sed Apollo-
dori, scriptoris celebratissimi, hos de Menandro versus
legimus in libro qui Chronica inscriptus est :


x»
Kydiorets àv ék Avoreibous aTpós,
IIpós totow ékaróv weve ypawas Spduata
> ^ ^
E£éume, zevrikovra kai Oveiv éràv.


6 Ex istis tamen centum et quinque omnibus, solis eum
octo vicisse, idem Apollodorus eodem in libro scripsit.


V


Nequaquam esse verum, quod minutis quibusdam rhetoricae
artificibus videatur, M. Ciceronem in libro quem De
Amicitia scripsit vitioso argumento usum, audio Bntovmevov
àvrl óuoXoyovuévov posuisse; totumque id consideratius
tractatum exploratumque.


1 M. Cicero, in dialogo cui titulus est Laelius vel
De Amicitia, docere volens amicitiam non Spe expec-
tationeque utilitatis neque pretii mercedisque causa
colendam, sed quod ipsa per sese plena virtutis hones-
tatisque sit expetendam diligendamque esse, etiamsi
nihil opis nihilque emolumenti ex ea percipi queat,
hac sententia atque his verbis usus est eaque dicere


! p. 351, Bipont.


? Some MSS. of the Greek Life of Euripides give fifteen,
which seems a more probable number for so popular a poet.
Sophocles won eighteen at the City Dionysia alone.


214


BOOK XVII. rv. 3-v. 1


Marcus Varro says! that Euripides also, although
he wrote seventy-five tragedies, was victor with only
five? and was often vanquished by some very poor
poets. i

Some say that Menander left one hundred and
eight comedies, others that the number was a
hundred and nine. But we find these words of
Apollodorus, a very famous writer, about Menander
in his work entitled Chronica :?

Cephissia's child, by Diopeithes sired,
An hundred plays he left and five besides ;
At fifty-two he died.


Yet Apollodorus also writes in the same book that
out of all those hundred and five dramas Menander
gained the victory only with eight.


V


That it is by no means true, as some meticulous artists
in rhetoric affirm, that Marcus Cicero, in his book On
Friendship, made use of a faulty argument and postulated


** the disputed for the admitted" ; with a careful diseussion
and examination of this whole question.


Marcus Cicero, in the dialogue entitled Laelius,
or On Friendship, wishes to teach us that friendship
ought not to be cultivated in the hope and expectation
of advantage, profit, or gain, but that it should be
sought and cherished because in itself it is rich in
virtue and honour, even though no aid and no
advantage can be gained from it. This thought
he has expressed in the following words, put into
the mouth of Gaius Laelius, a wise man and a very


3 Frag. 77, p. 9398, Jacoby.
215


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


facit C. Laelium, sapientem virum, qui Publii Africani

2 fuerat amicissimus: * Quid enim? Africanus indigens
mei? Ne? ego quidem illius. Sed ego admiratione
quadam virtutis eius, ille vicissim opinione fortasse
nonnulla quam de meis moribus habebat me dilexit ;
auxit benivolentiam consuetudo. Sed quamquam
utilitates multae et magnae consecutae sunt, non
sunt tamen ab earum spe causae diligendi profectae.
Ut enim benefici liberalesque sumus, non ut exigamus
gratiam—neque enim beneficium faeneramur, sed
natura propensi ad liberalitatem sumus—, sic ami-
citiam non spe mercedis adducti, sed quod omnis eius
fructus in ipso amore inest, expetendam putamus."

3 Hoc cum legeretur in coetu forte hominum docto-
rum, rhetoricus quidam sophista, utriusque linguae
callens, haut sane ignobilis ex istis acutulis et
minutis doctoribus qui reyvuo( appellantur, atque in
disserendo tamen non impiger, usum esse existimabat
argumento M. Tullium non probo neque apodictico,
sed eiusdem quaestionis, cuius esset ea ipsa res de qua
quaereretur; verbisque id vitium Graecis appellat,
quod accepisset dudioBytovmevoy ávri Ój.oAoyovj.évov.

4 '* Nam ‘beneficos,’” inquit, “et liberales? sumpsit
ad confirmandum id quod de amicitia dicebat, cum
ipsum illud et soleat quaeri et debeat, quisquis
liberaliter et benigne facit, qua mente quoque con-
silio benignus liberalisque sit ? utrum, quia mutuam


1 minime hereule ! ac ne, Cic,


1 $30.


216


BOOK XVIL v. 1-4


dear friend of Publius Africanus:!  '* Well, then,
does Africanus need my help? No more do I need
his. But I love him because of a certain admiration
for his virtues; he in turn has affection for me
perhaps because of some opinion which he has
formed of my character; and intimacy has increased
our attachment. But although many great advan- -
tages have resulted, yet the motives for our friend-
ship did not arise from the hope of those advantages.
For just as we are kindly and generous, not in order
to compel a return—for we do not put favours out
at interest, but we are naturally inclined to generosity
— just so we think that friendship is to be desired,
not because we are led by hope of gain, but because
all its fruit is in the affection itself."

When it chanced that these words were read in
a company of cultured men, a sophistical rhetorician,
skilled in both tongues, a man of some note among
those clever and meticulous teachers known as
rexvixoi, or “connoisseurs,” who was at the same time
not without ability in disputation, expressed the
opinion that Marcus Tullius had used an argument
which was neither sound nor clear, but one which was
of the same uncertainty as the question at issue
itself ; and he described that fault by Greek words,
saying that Cicero had postulated àj.Quo ByTovpevov
dytl ókoXoyovpévov, that is, “ what was disputed rather
than what was admitted."

“For,” said he, “he took benefici, ‘the kindly,
and liberales, ‘the generous, to confirm what he
said about friendship, although that very question
is commonly asked and ought to be asked, with
what thought and purpose one who acts liberally
and kindly is kind and generous. Whether it is


217


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


gratiam speret et eum in quem benignus sit ad
parem curam sui provocet, quod facere plerique
omnes videntur, an, quia natura sit benivolus be-
nignitasque eum per sese ipsa et liberalitas delectet
sine ulla recipiendae gratiae procuratione, quod est
5 omnium ferme rarisimum?" . Argumenta autem
censebat aut probabilia esse debere aut perspicua et
minime controversa, idque “ apodixin " vocari dicebat,
cum ea quae dubia aut obscura sunt, per ea quae
6 ambigua non sunt inlustrantur. Atque, ut ostenderet
beneficos liberalesque ad id quod de amicitia quaere-
retur quasi argumentum exemplumve sumi non opor-
tere, “ Eodem," inquit, “ simulacro eademque rationis
imagine amicitia invicem pro argumento sumi potest,
si quis adfirmet homines beneficos liberalesque esse
debere, non spe aliqua compendii, set amore et
7 studio honestatis. Poterit enim consimiliter ita
dicere: * Namque, ut amicitiam non spe utilitatis
amplectimur, sic benefici liberalesque non gratiae
8 reciperandae studio esse debemus.' Poterit sane,"
inquit, *ita dicere, sed neque amicitia liberalitati
neque liberalitas amicitiae praebere argumentum
potest, cum de utraque pariter quaeratur."
9 Haec ille rhetoricus artifex dicere quibusdam vide-
batur perite et scienter, sed videlicet eum vocabula
10 rerum vera ignoravisse. Nam * beneficum et libera-


1 That is, àróóciis.


218


BOOK XVII. v. 4-10


because he hopes for a return of the favour, and
tries to arouse in the one to whom he is kind a
like feeling towards himself, as almost all seem to
do; or because he is by nature kindly, and kindness
and generosity gratify him for their own sakes
without any thought of a return of the favour,
which is as a rule the rarest of all." Furthermore,
he thought that arguments ought to be either
convincing, or clear and not open to controversy,
and he said that the term apodiais,! or “ demonstra-
tion," was properly used only when things that are
doubtful or obscure are made plain through things
about which there is no doubt. And in order that
he might show that the kind and generous ought
not to be taken as an argument or example for the
question about friendship, he said: “ By the same
comparison and the same appearance of reason,
friendship in its turn may be taken as an argument,
if one should declare that men ought to be kindly
and generous, not from the hope of a return, but
from the desire and love of honourable conduct.
For he will be able to argue in a very similar manner
as follows : * Now just as we do not embrace friend-
ship through hope of advantage, so we ought not
to be generous and kindly with the desire of having
the favour returned.’ He will indeed," said he, “be
able to say this, but friendship cannot furnish an
argument for generosity, nor generosity for friend-
ship, since in the case of each there is equally an
open question."

It seemed to some that this artist in rhetoric
argued cleverly and learnedly, but that as a matter of
fact he was ignorant of the true meaning of terms.
For Cicero calls a man “kind and generous” in the


219


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


lem" Cicero appellat, ita ut philosophi appellandum
esse censent, non eum qui, ut ipse ait, beneficia
faeneratur, sed qui benigne facit, nulla tacita! ratione
ll ad utilitates suas redundante. Non ergo obscuro
neque ambiguo argumento usus est, sed certo atque
perspicuo, siquidem, qui vere beneficus liberalisque
est, qua mente bene aut liberaliter facit non quae-
12 ritur? Aliis enim longe nominibus appellandus est,
si, cum talia facit, sui potius quam alterius iuvandi
13 causa facit. Processisset autem argutatori isti fortas-
sean reprehensio, si Cicero ita dixisset: * Ut enim
benefice liberaliterque facimus, non ut exigamus
gratiam"; videretur enim benefice facere etiam in
non beneficum cadere posse, si id per aliquam cir-
cumstantiam fieret, non per ipsam perpetuae be-
14 nignitatis constantiam. Sed cum “ beneficos liberal-
esque" dixerit neque alius modi isti sint quam
cuius esse eos supra diximus, * inlotis," quod aiunt,
"pedibus" et verbis reprehendit doctissimi viri
orationem. :


! citate, Q ; citata, Q* ; citatus, Her(z.
? quaerit, Skutsch.


uoted in § 2.
. 9. 8 (vol. i, p. 49) with the note, and Plautus, Poen.


2


220


- niunt adim. efie


BOOK XVII, v. 10-14


sense that the philosophers believe those words
ought to be used: not of one who, as Cicero himself
expresses it, puts favours out at interest, but of one
who shows kindness without having any secret
reason which redounds to his own advantage. There-
fore he has used an argument which is not obscure
or doubtful, but trustworthy and clear, since if
anyone is trüly kind and generous, it is not asked
with what motive he acts kindly or generously. For
he must be called by very different names if, when
he does such things, he does them for his own
advantage rather than for that of another. Possibly
the criticism made by this sophist might have some
justification, if Cicero had said :1 * For as we do some
kind and generous action, not in order to compel a
return." Forit might seem that anyone who was not
kindly might happen to do a kind action, if it was done
because of some accidental circumstance and not
through a fixed habit of constant kindliness. But
since Cicero spoke of ** kindly and generous people,"
and meant no other sort than that which we have
mentioned before, it is “with unwashed feet," ? as
the proverb says, and unwashed words that our
critic assails the argument of that most learned
man.


316, dlotis manibus. The reference is to washing before
handling sacred objects or performing religious rites. Ht
verbis is an addition by Gellius, in the sense of ''hasty
inconsiderate language."


221


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Mi


Falsum esse, quod Verrius Flaccus, in libro secundo quos De
Obseuris M. Catonis composuit, de servo recepticio scriptum
reliquit.


1 M. Caro Voconiam legem suadens verbis hisce
usus est: “ Principio vobis mulier magnam dotem
adtulit; tum magnam pecuniam recipit, quam in
viri potestatem non conmittit, eam pecuniam viro
mutuam dat; postea, ubi irata facta est, servum
recepticium sectari atque flagitare virum iubet."

2  Quaerebatur, *servus recepticius" quid esset.
Libri statim quaesiti allatique sunt Verrii Flacci
De Obscuris Catonis. In libro secundo scriptum et
inventum est, “recepticium servum" dici nequam
et nulli pretii, qui, cum venum esset datus, redhibitus

3 ob aliquod vitium receptusque sit. * Propterea,"
inquit, **servus eiusmodi sectari maritum et flagitare
pecuniam iubebatur, ut eo ipso dolor maior et contu-
melia gravior viro fieret, quod eum servus nihili
petendae pecuniae causa conpellaret."

4 Cum pace autem cumque venia istorum, si qui
sunt, qui Verrii Flacci auctoritate capiuntur, dictum

5 hoc sit. * Recepticius" enim * servus," in ea re
quam dicit Cato, aliud omnino est quam Verrius

6 scripsit. Atque id cuivis facile intellectu est; res
enim procul dubio sic est: quando mulier dotem


! His recommendation of this law is also mentioned by
Cicero, Cato Mai. 14, who discusses some features of the law
in Perr. i. 1. 101 ff. ; see also xx. 1. 23, below. The law,
which in general had to do with inheritances, has been the
subject of much discussion ; one of its provisions was that no
one should make a woman his heir.

? p. 54, 5, Jordan. 3 p. xvi, Müller.
222


BOOK XVII. vr. 1-6


VI


That what Verrius Flaccus wrote about servus recepticius,
in his second book On the Obscwrities of Marcus Cato, is
false.

Marcus Caro, when recommending the Voconian
law,! spoke as follows:? “In the beginning the
woman brought you a great dowry ; then she holds
back a large sum of money, which she does not entrust
to the control of her husband, but lends it to her
husband. Later, becoming angry with him, she
orders a servus receplicius, or ‘slave of her own,’
to hound him and demand the money."

The question was asked what was meant by servus
recepticius, At once the books of Verrius Flaccus
On the Obscurities of Cato were asked for and pro-
duced. In the second book was found the state-
ment? that servus receplicius was the name applied
to a slave that was worthless and of no value, who,
after being sold, was returned because of some fault
and taken back. “ Therefore,’ says Flaccus, “a
slave of that kind was bidden to hound her husband
and demand the money, in order that the man's
vexation might be greater, and the insult put upon
him still more bitter, for the very reason that a
worthless slave dunned him for the payment of
money."

But with the indulgence and pardon of those, if
such there be, who are influenced by the authority
of Verrius Flaccus, this must be said. That recep-
licius servus in the case of which Cato is speaking is
something very different from what Verrius wrote.
And this is easy for anyone to understand ; for the


situation is undoubtedly this: when the woman
223


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


marito dabat, tum quae ex suis bonis retinebat neque
ad virum tramittebat, ea “ recipere " dicebatur, sicuti
nune quoque in venditionibus “recipi” dicuntur,

7 quae excipiuntur neque veneunt. Quo verbo Plautus
quoque in Z'rinummo usus est in hoc versu :


Postículum hoc recépit,t cum aedis véndidit,


id est: cum aedis vendidit, particulam quandam
quae post eas aedis erat non vendidit, sed retinuit.
8 Ipse etiam Cato mulierem demonstrare locupletem
volens: * Mulier," inquit, *et magnam dotem dat
et magnam pecuniam recipit," hoc est: et magnam
9 dotem dat et magnam pecuniam retinet. Ex ea
igitur re familiari, quam sibi dote data retinuit,
10 pecuniam viro mutuam dat. Eam pecuniam cum
viro forte irata repetere instituit, adponit ei flagita-
torem “servum recepticium," hoc est proprium
servum suum, quem cum pecunia reliqua receperat
neque dederat doti, sed retinuerat; non enim servo
mariti imperare hoc mulierem fas erat, sed proprio
suo.
l1 Plura dicere quibus hoc nostrum tuear supersedeo ;
ipsa enim sunt per sese evidentia et quod a Verrio
dicitur et a nobis; quod utrum ergo videbitur cuique
verius, eo utatur.


* recepit, MSS. of Plaut. except A, and of Nonius, p. 384
(613, Linds.); recipit, c.


224


———


*


BOOK XVII. vi. 6-11


gave the dowry to her husband, what she retained
of her property and did not give over to her
husband she was said to * hold back " (recipere), just
as now also at sales those things are said to be
* held back " which are set aside and not sold. This
Br sean bee also used in the T'rinummus in this
ine:


But when he sold the house, this little place
Behind it he held back (recepit).


That is, when he sold the house, he did not sell a
small part which was behind the house, but held it
back. Cato himself too, wishing to describe the
woman as rich, says: * The woman brings a great
dowry and holds back a large sum of money "s, that
is, she gives a great dowry and retains possession
of a large sum of money. From that property then
which she kept for herself after giving her dowry,
she lent money to her husband. When she
happened to be vexed with her husband and deter-
mined to demand the money back, she appoints to
demand it from him a servus recepticius, that is, a
slave of her very own, whom she had held back
with the rest of the money and had not given as
part of her dowry, but had retained ; for it was not
right for the woman to give such an order to a slave
of her husband, but only to one of her very own.

I forbear to say more in defence of this view of
mine; for the opinion of Verrius and mine are
before you, each by itself; anyone therefore may
adopt whichever of the two seems to him the truer.


1 v, 194.


225
VOL. III. Q


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


VII


Verba haec ex Atinia lege: ''quod subruptum erit, eius rei
aeterna auctoritas esto," P. Nigidio et Q. Scaevolae visa
esse non minus de praeterito furto quam de futuro cavisse.


l Lais veteris Atiniae verba sunt: “Quod subrup-

2tum erit, eius rei aeterna auctoritas esto." Quis
aliud putet in hisce verbis quam de tempore tantum

3 futuro legem loqui? Sed Q. Scaevola patrem suum
et Brutum et Manilium, viros adprime doctos, quae-
sisse ait dubitasseque utrumne in post facta modo
furta lex valeret an etiam in ante facta; quoniam
* subruptum erit" utrumque tempus videretur osten-
dere, tam praeteritum quam futurum.

4 Itaque P. Nigidius, civitatis Romanae doctissimus,
super dubitatione bac eorum scripsit in tertio vice-
simo Grammaticorum Commentariorum. Atque ipse
quoque idem putat, incertam esse temporis demon-

5 strationem, sed anguste perquam et obscure disserit,
ut signa rerum ponere videas ad subsidium magis

6 memoriae suae quam ad legentium disciplinam. Vide-
batur tamen hoc dicere, suum verbum et “est” esse
et * erit" ; quando per sese ponuntur, habent atque
retinent tempus suum, cum vero praeterito iunguntur,
vim temporis sui amittunt et in praeteritum conten-

7 dunt. Cum enim dico: “in campo est" et “in
comitio est," tempus instans significo ; item cum dico


' Different from the plebiscitum of xiv. 8. 9, The date is
uncertain.


? Fontes Iur. Rom., p. 45, 6.

® Fr. 3, Huschke ; Zur. Cv. xvi. 5, Bremer.

5 Resp. 4, Bremer. 5 Resp. 5, Bremer.

5 Resp. 5, Bremer. * Fr. 34, Swoboda. — * Cf. xvi. 8. 3.
226


BOOK XVII. vu. 1-7


VII


These words from the Atinian law, ‘‘ the claim on whatever
shall be stolen shall be everlasting," seemed to Publius
Nigidius and Quintus Scaevola to have reference not less
to a past theft than to a future one.


Tne words of the ancient Atinian law! are as
follows :? * Whatever shall have been stolen, let
the right to claim the thing be everlasting.” Who
would suppose that in these words the law referred
to anything else than to future time? But Quintus
Scaevola says? that his father? and Brutus? and
Manilius? exceedingly learned men, inquired and
were in doubt whether the law was valid in cases
of future theft only or also in those already com-
mitted in the past; since subreptum erit seems to
indicate both times, past as well as future.

Therefore Publius Nigidius, the most learned man
of the Roman State, discussed this uncertainty of
theirs in the twenty-third book of his Grammatical
Notes And he himself too has the same opinion,
that the indication of the time is indefinite, but he
speaks very concisely and obscurely, so that you may
see that he is rather making notes to aid his own
memory than trying to instruct his readers. How-
ever, his meaning seems to be that est and erit are
independent words; when they are used alone,
they have and retain their own tense, but when
they are joined with a past participle, they lose the
force of their own tense, and are transferred to the
past. For when I say in campo est, or «Deis in
the field," and in comitio est, or “he is in the comi-
tium," I refer to the present time; also when I

227
Q 2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


“in campo erit," tempus futurum demonstro; at
cum dico: * factum est," * scriptum est," “sub-
ruptum est," quamquam “est” verbum temporis est
praesentis, confunditur tamen cum praeterito et
praesens esse desinit.

8 “Sic igitur," inquit, “etiam istud quod in lege
est; si dividas separesque duo verba haec ‘sub-
ruptum et *erit, ut sic audias * subruptum erit,'!
tamquam * certamen erit aut *sacrificium erit, tum
videbitur lex in postfuturum loqui; si vero copulate
permixteque dictum intellegas, ut * subruptum erit?
non duo, sed unum verbum sit idque unitum? pati-
endi declinatione sit, tum hoc verbo non minus
praeteritum tempus ostenditur quam futurum."


VIII
In sermonibus apud mensam Tauri philosophi quaeri agitari-
que eiusmodi solita: **cur oleum saepe et facile, vina rarius


congelascant, acetum haut fere umquam " et ** quod aquae
fluviorum fontiumque durentur, mare gelu non duretur.”


1 PutLtosopnus Taurus accipiebat nos Athenis cena

2 plerumque ad id diei ubi iam vesperaverat ; id enim
est tempus istic cenandi. Frequens eius cenae fundus
et firmamentum omne erat aula una lentis Aegyptiae
et cucurbitae inibi minutim caesae.


1 erit added by Hertz; * supruptum,” tum ** erit," suggested
by Hosius.


? unitum, Hertz; unita, v ; unita p. declinatio, Skutsch.


! [n Rome the dinner-hour was considerably earlier, usually
the ninth hour, or about three o'clock in the afternoon ;


228


—S


BOOK XVII. vr. 7-vur. 2


say in campo erit (he will be in the field), or im
comitio erit (he wil be in the comitium), I
indicate future time: but when I say factum est,
scriptum est or subruptum est, although the verb est
is in the present tense, it is nevertheless united with
the past and ceases to be present.

* Similarly then," he says, * with regard also to
the wording of the law ; if you divide and separate
these two words subruptum and erit, so that you
understand subruptum erit as you would certamen erit,
that is, ‘there will be a contest, or sacrificium erit
(there will be a sacrifice), then the law will seem
to have reference to an act completed in future
time ; but if you understand the two words to be
united and mingled, so that subruptum erit is not two
words, but one, and is a single form of the passive
inflection, then that word indicates past time no less
than future."


VIII


In conversation at the table of the philosopher Taurus ques-
tions of this kind were proposed and discussed: ‘‘ why
oil congeals often and readily, wine seldom, vinegar hardly
ever,” and * that the waters of rivers and springs freeze,
while the sea does not."


THE philosopher Taurus at Athens usually enter-
tained us at dinner at the time of day when evening
had already come on ; for there that is the time for
dining. The entire basis and foundation of the meal
usually consisted of one pot of Egyptian beans, to
which were added gourds cut in small pieces.


see Hor. Epist. 1. 7. 71 ; Mart. iv. 8. 6. To-day, too, the
dinner-hour is later in Athens than in Rome, although the


difference is not so great as in ancient times.
229


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


3 Ea quodam die ubi paratis et expectantibus nobis
adlata atque inposita mensae est, puerum iubet
4 Taurus oleum in aulam indere! Erat is puer
genere Atticus, ad annos maxime natus octo, festi-
5 vissimis aetatis et gentis argutiis scatens. Gutum
Samium ore tenus inprudens inanem, tamquam si
inesset oleum, adfert convertitque eum et, ut solitum
est, circumegit per omnem partem aulae manum :?
6 nullum indeibatoleum. Aspicit puer gutum atrocibus
oculis stomachabundus et concussum vehementius
7 iterum in aulam vertit; idque cum omnes sensim
atque summissim rideremus, tum puer Graece, et
id quidem perquam Attice “iy yeAGre," inquit, “ én
Tovhaov àXX ok lare, ofa ppixn wept rv OpÜpov yéyove
8 rijpepov ; kek«pvardAAorau"  Verbero,” inquit ridens
Taurus, * nonne is curriculo atque oleum petis ? "
Sed cum puer foras emptum isset, nihil ipse ista
mora offensior: * Aula," inquit, * oleo indiget et, ut
video, intolerandum fervit; cohibeamus manus atque
interea, quoniam puer nunc admonuit solere oleum
congelascere, consideremus cur oleum quidem saepe
9 et facile, set vina rarenter congelascant?" Atque
10 aspicit me et iubet quid sentiam dicere. Tum ego
respondi coniectare me vinum idcirco minus cito
congelascere, quod semina quaedam caldoris in sese
haberet essetque natura ignitius, ob eamque rem
dictum esse ab Homero aiGora otvov, non, ut alii
putarent, propter colorem.


1 aedere, X, with erasure of à ; videre, Q.
* manum, w; manu suggested by Hosius.


1 Iliad i. 462, ete.

* In Homer this word, from aidds, ‘‘fire” and dy, **e e,”
means “‘ fiery-looking ” or ** sparkling," rather than “ fiery."
230


BOOK XVII. vir. 3-10


One day when this dish had been brought and
placed upon the table, and we were ready and
awaiting the meal, Taurus ordered a slave-boy to
pour some oil into the pot. The slave was a boy
of Attic birth, at most eight years old, overflowing
with the merry wit characteristic of his race and
his time of life. He brought an empty Samian
flask, from oversight, as he said, supposing there
was oil in it, turned it up and, as he usually did,
passed it with his hand over all parts of the pot ;
but no oil came out. The boy, in anger, looked
savagely at the flask, shook it violently, and again
turned it over the pot; and when we were all
quietly and furtively laughing at his actions, he
said in Greek, and excellent Attic Greek at that :
«Don't laugh; there's oil in it; but don’t you
know how cold it was this morning ; it’s congealed.”
« You rascal,’ said Taurus with a laugh, “run and
fetch some oil.”

But when the boy had gone out to buy oil,
Taurus, not at all put out by the delay, said: “ The
pot needs oil, and, asI see, is intolerably hot ; let us
withhold our hands and meanwhile, since the slave
has just told us that oil is in the habit of congealing,
let us consider why oil congeals often and readily,
but wine rarely." And he looked at me and bade
me give my opinion. Then I replied that I inferred
that wine congealed less quickly because it had in
it certain seeds of heat and was naturally more fiery,
and that was why Homer called 1 it aldo,” and not,
as some supposed, on account of its colour.


Gellius seems to be wrong so far as Homer is concerned,
although some other writers used at@oy in the sense of


** fiery," as applied to persons.
231


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


** Est quidem," inquit Taurus, “ ita ut dicis; nam
ferme convenit vinum, ubi potum est, calefacere
corpora. Sed non secus oleum quoque calorificum
est neque minorem vim in corporibus calefaciendis
habet. Ad hoc,siistaec quae calidiora sunt difficilius
gelu coguntur, congruens est ut quae frigidiora sunt
facile cogantur. Acetum autem omnium maxime
frigorificum est atque id numquam tamen concrescit.
Num igitur magis causa oleo coaguli celerioris in
levitate est? Faciliora enim ad coeundum videntur
quae levatiora levioraque sunt.”

Praeterea id quoque ait quaeri dignum, cur flu-
viorum et fontium aquae gelu durentur, mare omne
incongelabile sit. “Tametsi Herodotus," inquit,
* historiae scriptor, contra omnium ferme qui haec
quaesiverunt opinionem, scribit mare Bosporicum,
quod ‘Cimmerium’ appellatur, earumque partium
mare omne quod ‘Scythicum’ dicitur, gelu stringi
et consistere."

Dum haec Taurus, interea puer venerat et aula


deferbuerat tempusque esse coeperat edendi et
tacendi.


IX
De notis litterarum quae in C. Caesaris epistulis reperiuntur ;
deque aliis clandestinis litteris ex vetere historia petitis ; !
et quid exvrdAm sit Laconica.
Lisni sunt epistularum C. Caesaris ad C. Oppium
et Balbum Cornelium, qui rebus eius absentis cura-


1 petita, Skutsch, comparing lemmata of i. 3; 7:11.


liv. 28 (8i ,"p. 226, LW).
* The Cimmerian Bosphorus, the present Strait of
2/92


(—


BOOK XVII, vur. rr-ix. 1


“It is indeed," says Taurus, “as you say. For it
is well known that wine, when we drink it, warms
the body. But oil is equally calorific and has no
less power of warming the body. Besides, if those
things which are warmer are frozen with greater
difficulty, it follows that those which are colder
freeze more readily. But vinegar is the most
cooling of all things and yet it never freezes. Is
the reason then for the quicker freezing of oil to be
found in its lightness? For those things seem to
congeal more readily which are lighter and smoother."

Taurus says besides that it is also worth inquiring
why the waters of rivers and streams freeze, while
all the sea is incapable of freezing. “ Although
Herodotus," said he, * the writer of history, contrary
to the opinion of almost all who have investigated
these matters, writes! that the Bosphoric sea, which
is called Cimmerian,? and all that part of the sea
which is termed Scythian,? is bound fast by the
cold and brought to a standstill.”

While Taurus was thus speaking, the boy had
returned, the pot had cooled off, and the time had
come to eat and hold our peace.


IX


Of the cypher letters which are found in the epistles of
Gaius Caesar, and of other secret forms of writing taken
from ancient history ; and what the Laconian exvráAm is.


Tuere are volumes of letters of Gaius Caesar
addressed to Gaius Oppius and Cornelius Balbus,


Yenikale, connecting the Palus Maeotis (Sea of Azov) with
the Pontus Euxinus or Black Sea. .
3 Herodotus does not use the term *'Scythian Sea,” but
says ‘‘the sea," referring to the Palus Maeotis and the
Euxine. See the map, Herod., L.C. L., vol. ii.
233


10


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


bant. In his epistulis quibusdam in locis inveniun-
tur litterae singulariae sine coagmentis syllabarum,
quas tu putes positas incondite ; nam verba ex his
litteris confici nulla possunt. Erat autem conven-
tum inter eos clandestinum de commutando situ
litterarum, ut in scripto quidem alia aliae locum et
nomen teneret, sed in legendo locus cuique suus et
potestas restitueretur; quaenam vero littera pro qua
scriberetur, ante is, sicuti dixi, conplacebat qui hanc
scribendi latebram parabant. Est adeo Probi gram-
matici commentarius satis curiose factus De Occulta
Litterarum Significatione in Epistularum C. Caesaris
Scriptura.

Lacedaemonii autem veteres, cum dissimulare et
occultare litteras publice ad imperatores suos missas
volebant, ne, si ab hostibus eae captae? forent,
consilia sua noscerentur, epistulas id genus factas
mittebant. Surculi duo erant teretes, oblonguli,
pari crassamento eiusdemque longitudinis, derasi


atque ornati consimiliter; unus imperatori in bellum .


proficiscenti dabatur, alterum domi magistratus cum
iure? atque cum signo habebant. Quando usus
venerat litterarum secretiorum, circum eum surcu-
lum lorum modicae tenuitatis, longum autem
quantum rei satis erat, conplicabant, volumine
rotundo et simplici, ita uti orae adiunctae undique et
cohaerentes lori, quod plicabatur, coirent. Litteras
deinde in eo loro per transversas iuncturarum oras


1 seriptura, Hertz ; scriptarum, o.
* hostibus exceptae, c.
? cura, Madvig ; loro, Goettling.


1 ji. p. 137, Dinter.
? See Suet. ul. lvi. 6, who says that Caesar wrote d for a,
and so on with the other letters.


234


BOOK XVII. 1x. r-ro


who had charge of his affairs in his absence. In
certain parts of these letters! there are found
individual characters which are not connected to
form syllables, but apparently are written at random ;
for no word can be formed from those letters. But
a secret agreement had been made between the
correspondents about a change in the position of
the letters, so that, in writing, one name and
position was given to one letter and another to
another, but in reading its own place and force was
restored to each of them.? But which letter was
written for which was, as I have already said, agreed
upon by those who devised this secret code. There
is in fact a commentary of the grammarian Probus,
On the Secret meaning of the Letters appearing in the
Epistles of Gaius Caesar, which is a very careful piece
of work.

But the ancient Lacedaemonians, when they
wanted to conceal and disguise the public dispatches
sent to their generals, in order that, in case they
were intercepted by the enemy, their plans might
not be known, used to send letters written in the
following manner. There were two thin, cylindrical
wands of the same thickness and length, smoothed
and prepared so as to be exactly alike. One of
these was given to the general when he went to
war, the other the magistrates kept at home under
their control and seal When the need of more
secret communication arose, they bound about the
staff a thong of moderate thickness, but long enough
for the purpose, in a simple spiral in such a way
that the edges of the thong which was twined
around the stick met and were joined throughout.
Then they wrote the dispatch on that thong across


235


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


versibus a summo ad imum proficiscentibus inscribe-
bant; id lorum litteris ita perscriptis revolutum ex
surculo imperatori commenti istius conscio mitte-
bant; resolutio autem lori litteras truncas atque
mutilas reddebat membraque earum et apices in
partis diversissimas spargebat; propterea, si id
lorum in manus hostium inciderat, nihil quicquam
coniectari ex eo scripto quibat; sed ubi ille ad quem
erat missum acceperat, surculo conpari, quem habe-
bat, a! capite ad finem, proinde ut debere fieri
sciebat, circumplicabat, atque ita litterae per eundem
ambitum surculi coalescentes rursum coibant inte-
gramque et incorruptam epistulam et facilem legi
praestabant. Hoc genus epistulae Lacedaemonii
ckvráAqv appellant. Legebamus id quoque in vetere
historia rerum Poenicarum, virum indidem quempiam
inlustrem—sive ille Hasdrubal sive quis alius est non
retineo—epistulam scriptam super rebus arcanis hoc
modo abscondisse: pugillaria nova, nondum etiam
cera inlita, accepisse,? litteras in lignum incidisse,
postea tabulas, uti solitum est, cera conlevisse easque
tabulas, tamquam non scriptas, cui facturum id prae-
dixerat misisse ; eum deinde ceram derasisse litteras-
que incolumes ligno incisas legisse.

Est et alia in monumentis rerum Graecarum pro-
funda quaedam et inopinabilis latebra, barbarico
astu excogitata. Histiaeus nomine fuit, loco natus
in terra Asia non ignobili, Asiam tunc tenebat


1 a added by Madvig.
* cepisse, Kronenberg, comparing xix. 12. 9; but see Hor.
Serm. i. 4, 14-15.


1 See note on xiii. 31. 10, and 4.J. P. xlviii, No. 1.


236


BOOK XVII. ix. ro-20


. the connected edges of the joints, with the lines
running from the top to the bottom. When the
letter had been written in this way, the thong was
unrolled from the wand and sent to the general,
who was familiar with the device. But the unroll-
ing of the thong made the letters imperfect and
broken, and their parts and strokes ! were divided and
separated. Therefore, if the thong fell into the
hands of the enemy, nothing at all could be made
out from the writing; but when the one to whom
the letter was sent had received it, he wound it
around the corresponding staff, which he had, from
the top to the bottom, just as he knew that it ought
to be done, and thus the letters, united by encircling
a similar staff, came together again, rendering the
dispatch entire and undamaged, and easy to read.
This kind of letter the Lacedaemonians called
oxutédyn. I also read this in an ancient history of
Carthage, that a certain famous man of that country
—whether it was Hasdrubal or another I do not
recall—disguised a letter written about secret
matters in the following way: he took new tablets,
not yet provided with wax, and cut the letters into
the wood. Afterwards he covered the tablet. with
wax in the usual way and sent it, apparently without
writing, to one to whom he had previously told his

lan. The recipient then scraped off the wax,
found the letters safe and sound inscribed upon the
wood, and read them.

There is also in the records of Grecian history
another profound and difficult method of conceal-
ment, devised by a barbarian’s cunning. He was
called Histiaeus and was born in the land of Asia in
no mean station. At that time king Darius held


237


21


22


23


24
25


26
27


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


imperio rex Darius. Is Histiaeus, cum in Persis
apud Darium esset, Aristagorae cuipiam res quasdam
occultas nuntiare furtivo scripto volebat. Com-
miniscitur opertum hoc litterarum admirandum,
Servo suo diu oculos aegros habenti capillum ex
capite omni tamquam medendi gratia deradit
caputque eius leve in litterarum formas conpungit.
His litteris quae voluerat perscripsit, hominem
postea quoad capillus adolesceret domo continuit.
Ubi id factum est, ire ad Aristagoran iubet et “Cum
ad eum," inquit, * veneris, mandasse me dicito ut.
caput tuum, sicut nuper egomet feci, deradat."
Servus, ut imperatum erat, ad Aristagoran venit
mandatumque domini adfert. Atque ille id non
esse frustra ratus, quod erat mandatum fecit. Ita
litterae perlatae sunt.


X


Quid de versibus Vergilii Favorinus existumarit, quibus in
describenda flagrantia montis Aetnae Pindarum poetam
secutus est; conlataque ab eo super eadem re utriusque
carmina et diiudicata.! :


FavoniNuM philosophum, cum in hospitis sui
Antiatem villam aestu anni concessisset nosque ad
eum videndum Roma venissemus, memini super
Pindaro poeta et Vergilio in hunc ferme modum
disserere: ‘Amici,’ inquit, * familiaresque — P.
Vergilii, in his quae de ingenio moribusque eius
memoriae tradiderunt, dicere eum solitum ferunt
parere se versus more atque ritu ursino, Namque


! indiiudicata, 5; iudicata, Hertz.


238


BOOK XVII. ix. 20-x. 3


sway in Asia. This Histiaeus, being in Persia with
Darius, wished to send a confidential message to
a certain Aristagoras in a secret manner. He
devised this remarkable method of concealing a
letter. He shaved all the hair from the head of
a slave of his who had long suffered from weak eyes,
as if for the purpose of treatment. Then he tattooed
the forms of the letters on his smooth head. When
in this way he had written what he wished, he kept
the man at home for a time, until his hair grew out.
When this happened, he ordered him to go to
Aristagoras, adding: “ When you come to him, say
that I told him to shave your head, as I did a little
while ago." The slave, as he was bidden, came
to Aristagoras and delivered his master's order.
Aristagoras, thinking that the command must gave
some reason, did as he was directed. And thus the
letter reached its destination.


X


What Favorinus thought of the verses of Virgil in which
he imitated the poet Pindar in his description of an
eruption of Mount Aetna; his comparison and evaluation
of the verses of the two poets on the same theme.


I nEwEMnzR that the philosopher Favorinus, when
he had gone during the hot season to the villa of a
friend of his at Antium, and I had come from Rome
to see him, discoursed in about the following manner
about the poets Pindar and Virgil. “The friends
and intimates of Publius Vergilius," said he, “in the
accounts which they have left us of his talents and
his character, say that he used to declare that he
produced verses after the manner and fashion of a


239


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


ut illa bestia fetum ederet ineffigiatum informemque
lambendoque id postea quod ita edidisset confor-
maret et fingeret, proinde ingenii quoque sui partus
recentes rudi esse facie et inperfecta, sed deinceps
tractando colendoque reddere iis se oris et vultus linia-
menta. Hoc virum iudicii subtilissimi ingenue atque
vere dixisse, res," inquit, * indicium facit, Nam
quae reliquit perfecta expolitaque quibusque inposuit
census atque dilectus sui supremam manum, omni
poeticae venustatis laude florent; sed quae pro-
crastinata sunt ab eo, ut post recenserentur, et
absolvi, quoniam mors praeverterat, nequiverunt, ne-
quaquam poetarum elegantissimi nomine atque iudicio
digna sunt. Itaque cum morbo obpressus adventare
mortem viderat, petivit oravitque a suis amicissimis
inpense, ut Aeneida, quam nondum satis elimavisset,
adolerent.

“In his autem," inquit, *quae videntur retractari
et corrigi debuisse, is maxime locus est qui de monte
Aetna factus est. Nam cum Pindari, veteris poetae,
carmen quod de natura atque flagrantia montis eius
compositum est, aemulari vellet, eiusmodi sententias
et verba molitus est, ut Pindaro quoque ipso, qui
nimis opima pinguique esse facundia existimatus est,
insolentior hoc quidem in loco tumidiorque sit,
Atque uti vosmet ipsos," inquit, “eius quod dico
arbitros faciam, carmen Pindari quod est super
monte Aetna, quantulum est mihi memoriae,
dicam :


! Cf. Suet. Vita Verg. 22 (ii. p. 470, L.C.L.).
240 i


BOOK XVII. x. 3-9


bear. For he said that as that beast brought forth
her young formless and misshapen, and afterwards
by licking the young cub gave it form and shape,
just so the fresh products of his mind were rude in
form and imperfect, but afterwards by working over
them and polishing them he gave them a definite
form and expression. That this was honestly and
truly said by that man of fine taste," said he, “is
shown by the result. For the parts that he left
perfected and polished, to which his judgment and
approval had applied the final hand, enjoy the highest
praise for poetical beauty ; but those parts which he
postponed, with the intention of revising them later,
but was unable to finish because he was overtaken
by death, are in no way worthy of the fame and
taste of the most elegant of poets. It was for that
reason, when he was laid low by disease and saw that
death was near, that he begged and earnestly be-
sought his best friends to burn the Aeneid, which he
had not yet sufficiently revised.

* Now among the passages,’ said Favorinus, “which
particularly seem to have needed revision and correc-
tion is the one which was composed about Mount
Aetna. Forwishing to rival the poem which the earlier
poet Pindar composed about the nature and eruption
of that mountain, he has heaped up such words and
expressions that in this passage at least he is more
extravagant and bombastic even than Pindar him-
self, who was thought to have too rich and luxuriant
a style. And in order that you yourselves," said
he, “may be judges of what I say, I will repeat
Pindar’s poem about Mount Aetna, so far as I can
remember it :?

? Pyth. i, 21 ff. °
241
VOL. III. R


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Tas épevyovrar pev àmAdrov zvpós áyvórarat

"Ex pvxGv 7ayaé morajoi 0 duépownv pev 7poxéovrt
Wy, »
póov Kamvov

Aidwv’? àAN év dpdvacow mérpos!

Doivicca kvÀuw8ojéva. brOE €s Babeiay Hepa móvrov
mÀáka. civ TATAyw.

Keivo 9' 'Adaíoroto kpovvods éprzeróv

Aevorárovs àvaméuzev repas pev Üavpdauov vpocióéa-
Gat, Padpa 8€ kal mapeóvrov axodoat.


10 Audite nunc,” inquit, ** Vergilii versus, quos inchoasse


11


eum verius dixerim, quam fecisse :


Portus ab accessu ventorum inmotus et ingens
Ipse, sed horrificis iuxta tonat Aetna ruinis
Interdumque atram prorumpit ad aethera nubem,
Turbine fumantem piceo et candente favilla,
Adtollitque globos flammarum et sidera lambit ;
Interdum scopulos avulsaque viscera montis
Erigit eructans liquefactaque saxa sub auras

Cum gemitu glomerat fundoque exaestuat imo.


Iam principio," inquit, * Pindarus, veritati magis
obsecutus, id dixit quod res erat quodque istic usu
veniebat quodque oculis videbatur, interdius fumare


12 Aetnam, noctu flammigare ; Vergilius autem, dum


13


in strepitu sonituque verborum conquirendo laborat,
utrumque tempus, nulla discretione facta, confudit.
Atque ille Graecus quidem fontes imitus? ignis
eructari et fluere amnes fumi et flammarum fulva et
tortuosa volumina in plagas maris ferre, quasi quos-


1 mérpas omitted by c. * jmitus, Lipsius; imitatus, c.


! The monster was the giant Typhoeus, or Typhon, who
was struck by Zeus’,thunder-bolt and buried under Aetna.


242


BOOK XVII. x. 9-13


Mount Aetna, from whose inmost caves burst forth
The purest fount of unapproachable fire.

By day her rivers roll a lurid stream

Of smoke, while 'mid the gloom of night red flame,
On sweeping, whirleth rocks with crashing din
Far down to the deep sea. And high aloft

That monster ! flingeth fearful founts of fire,

A marvel to behold or e'en to hear

From close at hand.


* Now hear the verses of Virgil, which I may more
truly say that he began than finished :?


There lies a port, safe from the winds' approach,

Spacious itself, but Aetna close at hand

Thunders with crashes dire, and now hurls forth

Skyward a dusky cloud with eddies black

And glowing ash, and uplifts balls of flame

And licks the stars; now spews forth rocks,

The mountain’s entrails torn, hurls molten crags

Groaning to heaven, and seethes from depths
profound.


* Now in the first place," said Favorinus, “ Pindar
has more closely followed the truth and has given
a realistic description of what actually happened
there, and what he saw with his own eyes; namely,
that Aetna in the daytime sends forth smoke and
at night fire; but Virgil, labouring to find grand
and sonorous words, confuses the two periods of time
and makes no distinction between them. Then the
Greek has vividly pictured the streams of fire belched
from the depths and the flowing rivers of smoke, and


2 Aen. iii, 570 ff.


243
R 2


14


18


19


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


dam igneos angues, luculente dixit; at hic noster
*atram nubem turbine piceo et favilla fumantem '
póov kamzvo? aifwva interpretari volens, crasse et in-
modice congessit, *globos' quoque ‘flammarum,’
quod ille xpovvovs dixerat, duriter et dxvpws trans-
tulit. Item quod ait: *sidera lambit, vacanter hoc
etiam," inquit, *accumulavit et inaniter." Neque
non id quoque inenarrabile esse ait et propemodum
insensibile, quod * nubem atram fumare" dixit
* turbine piceo et favilla candente." ‘‘Non enim
fumare," inquit, * solent neque atra esse quae sunt
candentia; nisi si *candenti' dixit pervulgate et
inproprie pro ferventi favilla, non pro ignea et
relucenti. Nam ‘candens’ scilicet a candore dictum,
non a calore. Quod ‘saxa’ autem ‘et scopulos
eructari et erigi' eosdemque ipsos statim ‘ liquefieri
et gemere atque glomerari sub auras' dixit, hoc,"
inquit, *nec a Pindaro scriptum nec umquam fando
auditum et omnium, quae monstra dicuntur, mon-
struosissimum est."


1 Not all modern critics would agree with Favorinus as to
Virgil’s last two lines, with their elaborate accommodation
of sound to sense.


244


BOOK XVII. x. 13-19


the rushing of lurid and spiral volumes of flame into
the waters of the sea, like so many fiery serpents; but
our poet, attempting to render fdov xarvod alfwva, ‘a
lurid stream of smoke, has clumsily and diffusely
piled up the words atram nubem turbine piceo et favilla
fumantem, ‘a dusky cloud smoking with eddies black
and glowing ash,’ and what Pindar called «povvot, or
* founts, he has harshly and inaccurately rendered by
‘balls of flame.’ Likewise when he says sidera lambit,
‘it licks the stars, this also," he says, “is a useless
and foolish elaboration. And this too is inexplicable
and almost incomprehensible, when he speaks of a
* black cloud smoking with eddies black and glowing
ash. For things which glow," said Favorinus, “do
not usually smoke nor are they black ; unless candenti
(‘glowing’) is used vulgarly and inaccurately for hot
ashes, instead of those which are fiery and gleaming.
For candens, of course, is connected with candor, or
‘whiteness,’ not with calor (‘heat’). But when he
says saxa et scopulos eruclari et erigi, ‘that rocks and
crags are spewed forth and whirled skyward,’ and
that these same crags at once liquefiert et gemere atque
glomerari ad auras, ‘are molten and groan and are
whirled to heaven, this," he said, *is what Pindar
never wrote and what was never spoken by anyone;
and it is the most monstrous of all monstrous


descriptions." !


245


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XI


Quod Plutarchus in libris Symposiacis opinionem Platonis de
habitu atque natura stomachi, fistulaeque eius quae rpaxeia
dicitur, adversum  Erasistratum medicum tutatus est,
auctoritate adhibita antiqui medici Hippocratis.


Er Plutarchus et alii quidam docti viri repre-
 hensum esse ab Erasistrato, nobili medico, Platonem
scripsere, quod potum dixit defluere ad pulmonem
eoque satis humectato demanare per eum, quia sit
rimosior, et confluere inde in vesicam, errorisque
istius fuisse Aleaeum ducem, qui in poematis suis
scriberet :


Téyye TVEV{LOVa ow" TÓ yàp aoTpov mepiteAXerat,


ipsum autem Erasistratum dicere duas esse quasi
canaliculas quasdam vel fistulas easque ab oris fauci-
bus proficisci deorsum, per earumque alteram deduci
delabique in stomachum esculenta omnia et poscu-
lenta! ex eoque ferri in ventriculum, quae Graece
appellatur jj kíro xoa, atque ibi subigi digerique,
ac deinde aridiora ex his recrementa in alvum con-
venire, quod Graece xóAov dicitur, humidiora per
renes in vesicam.  Peralteram autem fistulam, quae
Graece nominatur rpaxeia áprypía, spiritum a summo
ore in pulmonem atque inde rursum in os et in
nares commeare, perque eandem viam vocis quoque


! posculenta, Z, cf. iv. 1. 17; poculenta (potulenta, NQ), «.


1 Sympos. vii. 1. ? p. 194, Fuchs.

* Tim. 44, p. 91, A; 31, p. 70, c. * Frag. 39, Bergk?,
5 pp. 184 ff. and 194, Fuchs.

* The three places referred to are the stomach, the small


246


BOOK XVII. xr. 1-4.


XI


That Plutarch in his Symposiacs defended the opinion of
Plato about the structure and nature of the stomach, and
of the tube which is called rpaxeia, against the physician
Erasistratus, urging the authority of the ancient physician
Hippocrates.


Boru Plutarch! and certain other learned men
have written that Plato was criticized by the famous
physician Erasistratus,? because he said? that drink
went to the lungs and having sufficiently moistened
them, flowed through them, since they are somewhat
porous, and from there passed into the bladder.
They declared that the originator of that error was
Aleaeus, who wrote* in his poems:


Wet now the lungs with wine ; the dog-star shines, -


but that Erasistratus himself declared? that there
were two little canals, so to speak, or pipes, and
that they extended downward from the throat; that
through one of these all food and drink passed and
went into the stomach, and from there were carried
into the belly, which the Greeks call 7 «dr« oua.
That there it is reduced and digested and then the
drier excrement passes into the bowels, which the
Greeks call káAov, and the moisture through the
kidneys into the bladder. But through the other
tube, which the Greeks call the Tpaxeta áprwpía, Or
«rough windpipe," the breath passes from the lips
into the lungs, and from there goes back into the
mouth and nostrils, and along this same road a
passage for the voice also is made ; and lest drink


intestine and the large intestine. Neither the Greek nor the
Latin terms are always used consistently.
247


e


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


fieri meatum ac, ne potus cibusve aridior, quem
oporteret in stomachum ire, procideret ex ore labere-
turque in eam fistulam per quam spiritus reciprocatur,
eaque offensione intercluderetur animae via, inposi-
tam esse arte quadam et ope naturae inde apud duo
ista foramina, quae dicitur éxvyAwrris, quasi claustra
quaedam mobilia, coniventia vicissim et resurgentia,
eamque ézyAwrrida inter edendum bibendumque
operire atque protegere ri Tpaxéiav dprypiav, ne
quid ex esca potuve incideret in illud quasi aestu-
antis animae iter; ac propterea nihil humoris influere
in pulmonem ore ipso arteriae communito.

Haec Erasistratus medicus adversum Platonem.
Sed Plutarchus in libro! Symposiacorum auctorem
Platonis sententiae Hippocraten dicit fuisse idemque
esse opinatos et Philistiona Locrum et Dioxippum
Hippocraticum, veteres medicos et nobiles ; atque
illam, de qua Erasistratus dixerat, érvyAwtrida non
idcirco eo in loco constitutam, ne quid ex potu
influeret in arteriam ; nam pulmoni quoque fovendo
rigandoque utiles necessariosque humores videri, set
adpositam quasi moderatricem quandam et arbitram
prohibendi admittendive quod ex salutis usu foret,
uti edulia quidem omnia defenderet ab arteria de-
pelleretque in stomachum, potum autem partiretur
inter stomachum et pulmonem et quod ex eo admitti
in pulmonem per arteriam deberet, non rapidum id
neque universum, sed quadam quasi obice sustenta-


! septimo, Volkmann ; Symp. vii, Skutsch.
MM MM MÀ MÀ M
IOCIS S. * Frag. 7, p. 112, Wellmann.


248


BOOK XVII. xr. 4-6


or drier food, which ought to pass into the stomach,
should fall from the mouth and slip into that tube
through which the breath goes back and forth, and
by such an accident the path of the breath should
be cut off, there has been placed at these two open-
ings by a kind of helpful device of nature, a sort of
movable valve which is called the *epiglottis," which
alternately shuts and opens. This epiglottis, while
we are eating and drinking, covers and protects “the
rough windpipe," in order that no particle of food or
drink may fall into that path, so to speak, of the
rising and falling breath; and on that account no
moisture passes into the lungs, since the opening
of the windpipe itself is well protected.

These are the views of the physician Erasistratus,
as opposed to Plato. But Plutarch, in his Symposiacs,*
says that the originator of Plato’s opinion was Hip-
pocrates, and that the same opinion was held by
Philistion of Locris? and Dioxippus the pupil of
Hippocrates, famous physicians of the olden time ;
also that the epiglottis, of which Erasistratus spoke,
was not placed where it is to prevent anything
that we drank from flowing into the windpipe ; for
fluid seems necessary and serviceable for refreshing
and moistening the lungs; but it was placed there
as a kind of controller and arbiter, to exclude or
admit whatever was necessary for the health of the
body; to keep away all foods from the windpipe
and turn them to the stomach, but to divide what is
drunk between the stomach and the lungs. And
that part which ought to be admitted into the lungs
through the windpipe the epiglottis does not let
through rapidly and all at once, but when it has
been checked and held back, as it were by a kind


249


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


tum ac repressum sensim paulatimque tramitteret
atque omne reliquum in alteram stomachi fistulam
derivaret.


XII


De materiis infamibus, quas Graeci à3órovs appellant, a
Favorino exercendi gratia disputatis.


INrAMES materias, sive quis mavult dicere “ino-
pinabiles," quas Graeci á8ófovs $moÓéces appellant,
et veteres adorti sunt, non sophistae solum, sed
philosophi quoque, et noster Favorinus oppido quam
libens in eas materias se! deiciebat,? vel ingenio ex-
pergificando ratus idoneas vel exercendis argutiis vel
edomandis usu difficultatibus ; sicuti, cum Thersitae
laudes quaesivit et cum febrim quartis diebus recur-
rentem laudavit, lepida sane multa et non facilia in-
ventu in utramque causam dixit eaque scripta in
libris reliquit.

Sed in febris laudibus testem etiam Platonem
produxit, quem scripsisse ait qui quartanam passus
convaluerit viresque integras recuperaverit, fidelius
constantiusque postea valiturum. Atque inibi in 3
isdem laudibus non hercle hac sententiola invenuste
lusit: “Versus,” inquit, * est longo hominum aevo
probatus :


"AAXore uxrpvu) meet Hyuepy, dÀXore pajryp.
! se added by Madvig.


* deiciebat, T ; dicebat, X ; deicebat, w.
3 in added in c.


! See Pease, ‘‘ Things without Honor," Class, Phil. xxi. pp.
27 ff. An example is Erasmus’ Praise of Folly.
* Frag. 65, Marres, * See note 1, p. 252,


250


BOOK XVII. xr. 6-xi. 4


of dam, it allows it to pass gradually and little by
little, and turns aside all the remainder into the
other tube leading to the stomach.


XII


Of ignoble subjects, called by the Greeks &oto, or ''un-
expected," argued by Favorinus for the sake of practice.


Nor only the sophists of old, but the philosophers
as well, took up ignoble subjects,! or if you prefer,
unexpected ones, adofo. trofécets, as the Greeks call
them ; and our friend Favorinus took a great deal of
pleasure in descending to such subjects; either
thinking them suitable for stimulating his thoughts
or exercising his cleverness or overcoming difficulties
by practice. For example, when he attempted to
praise Thersites and pronounced a eulogy upon the
quartan ague,? he said many clever and ingenious
things on both topics, which he has left written in
his works.

But in his eulogy of fever he even produced Plato
as a witness, declaring that the philosopher wrote 4
that one who after suffering from quartan ague got
well and recovered his full strength, would afterwards
enjoy surer and more constant health. And in that
same eulogy he made this quip, which, of a truth, is
not ungraceful: “The following lines," he says,
« have met with the approval of many generations of
men :5


Sometimes a day is like a stepmother,
And sometimes like a mother.


4 Tim. 10, p. 86 A. 5 Hesiod, Works and Days, 825.


251


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Eo versu significatur, non omni die bene esse posse,
5 sed isto bene atque alio male. Quod cum ita sit,”
inquit, *ut in rebus humanis bene aut male vice
alterna sit, haec biduo medio intervallata febris
quanto est fortunatior, in qua est pia pytpud, 8o
pagrépes !"'


XIII


“Quin” particula quot qualesque varietates significationis
habeat et quam saepe in veterum scriptis obscura sit.


“Quin” particula, quam grammatici coniunction-
em appellant, variis modis sententiisque conectere
orationem videtur. Aliter enim dici putatur, cum
quasi increpantes vel interrogantes vel exhortantes
dicimus * quin venis?" “ quin legis?” « quin fugis ? "
aliter, cum ita confirmamus : “non dubium est, quin
M. Tullius omnium sit eloquentissimus,” aliter autem,
cum sic componimus, quod quasi priori videtur con-
trarium : “non idcirco causas Isocrates non defendit,
quin id utile esse et honestum existumarit" ; a quo
illa significatio non abhorret, quae est in tertia Origine
M. Catonis. *'Haut eos," inquit, *eo postremum
scribo, quin populi et boni et strenui sient.” In
secunda quoque Origine M. Cato non longe secus hac
particula usus est: “ Neque satis," inquit, * habuit
quod eum in occulto vitiaverat, quin eius famam
prostitueret.”’


* Owing to the Roman method of inclusive reckoning, the
quartan ague, occurring on every fourth day, had an interval
of two days ; see Class Phil. viii. 1 ff.

* Frag. 73, Peter’,

* This rather difficult example I do not find in our
grammars, * Id. 36.


252


-—————


BOOK XVII. x11. 4-xut. 4


The meaning of the verses is that a man cannot fare
well every day, but fares well on one day and ill on
another. Since it is true," he says, “that in human
affairs things are in turn, now good, now bad, how
much more fortunate is this fever which has an
interval of two days;! since it has only one stepmother,
but two mothers ! "


XIII


How many and what varieties of meaning the particle
quin has, and that it is often obscure in the earlier
literature.

Tur particle quin, which the grammarians call a
conjunction, seems to connect sentences in various
ways and with divers meanings. For it seems to
have one meaning when we say, as if chiding or
questioning or exhorting, quim venis? “ Why don't
you come?" quin legis? ** Why don't you read?” or
quin fugis ? ** Why don't you flee?" ; but it has a
different meaning when we affirm, for example, that —
“there is no doubt but that (quim) Marcus Tullius
is the most eloquent of all men,’ and still a third,
when we add something which seems contradictory
to a former statement: «Isocrates did not plead
causes, not but that he thought it useful and
honourable so to do." In the last of these sentences
the meaning is not very different from that which is
found in the third book of Marcus Cato's Origins : 2)
«these I describe last, not but that they are good
and valiant peoples.” 3 Also in the second book of
the Origins Marcus Cato has used this particle in
a very similar manner : 4 « He did not consider it
enough to have slandered him privately, without
openly defaming his character."

253


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


5 . Praeterea animadvertimus Quadrigarium in octavo
Annalium particula ista usum esse obscurissime.
Verba ipsius posuimus : * Romam venit; vix superat

6 quin triumphus decernatur.” Item in sexto Annali
eiusdem verba haec sunt: “ Paene factum est quin

7 castra relinquerent atque cederent hosti.” Non me
autem praeterit dicere aliquem posse de summo

8 pectore nil esse in his verbis negotii ; nam “ quin ”
utrobique positum pro “ut” planissimumque esse, si
ita dicas : * Romam venit ; vix superat, ut triumphus
decernatur"; item alio in loco: * Paene factum est,

9 ut castra relinquerent atque cederent hosti. Sed
utantur sane, qui tam expediti sunt, perfugiis com-
mutationum in verbis quae non intelleguntur, utantur
tamen, ubi id facere poterunt, verecundius.

10 — Hanc particulam de qua dicimus, nisi si quis didi-
cerit compositam copulatamque esse neque vim
tantum coniungendi habere, sed certa quadam
significatione factam, numquam profecto rationes ac

M varietates istius comprehensurus est. Quod quia
longioris dissertationis est, poterit, cui otium est,


reperire hoc in P. Nigidii Commentariis, quos Gram-
malicos inscripsit.


! Frag. 70, Peter?,

* Quin = “why not " ; see note 4 below. 3 Ja. 58.

* This translation, which Gellius rightly rejects, neglects
the negative in quin. Both examples from Quadrigarius
might be explained as dubitative questions in the para-


254


BOOK XVII. xu 5-11


Ihave noted, besides, that Quadrigarius in the
eighth book of his Annals has used that particle
in a very obscure manner. I quote his exact
words: 1 “‘ He came to Rome; he barely succeeds in
having a triumph voted.” ? Also in the sixth book
of the same writer’s Annals are these words :? “ It
lacked little but that (quiz) they should leave their
camp and yield to the enemy.” Now I am quite
well aware that someone may say off-hand that
there is no difficulty in these words; for quin in
both passages is used for uf, and the meaning is -
perfectly plain if you say: * He came to Rome ; he
with difficulty brought it about that a triumph
should be voted " ;*^ and also in the other passage,
«It almost happened that they left their camp and
yielded to the enemy." Let those who are so ready
find refuge in changing words which they do not
understand, but let them do so with more modesty,
when the occasion permits.

Only one who has learned that this particle of
which we are speaking is a compound and formed of
two parts, and that it does not merely have the
function of a connective but has a definite meaning
of its own,® will ever understand its variations in
meaning. But because an explanation of these ~
would require a long dissertation, he who has
leisure may find it in the Commentaries of Publius
Nigidius which he entitled Grammatical.§


tactic form; e.g. ‘“‘ Why should not a triumph be granted
him?”

5 quin is formed from qui, the ablative of the interrogative
and ablative stem qui- and -ne, “not.” It is used in both
dependent and independent sentences. See Lane, Lat. Gr.’
1980 ff.

6 Frag. 52, Swoboda.

255


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XIV
Sententiae ex Publili Mimis selectae lepidiores.


1 Pusuitius mimos scriptitavit. Dignus habitus est

2 qui subpar Laberio iudicaretur. C. autem Caesarem
ita Laberii maledicentia et adrogantia offendebat, ut
acceptiores sibi esse Publili quam Laberii mimos
praedicaret.

3 Huius Publili sententiae feruntur pleraeque lepidae
et ad communem sermonum usum commendatissimae,

4 ex quibus sunt istae singulis versibus circumscriptae,
quas libitum hercle est adscribere :


Malum ést consilium quód mutari nón potest.

Benefícium dando accépit, qui dignó dedit.

Ferás, non culpes, quód vitari nón potest.

Cui plás licet, quam pár est, plus vult, quám licet.

Comés facundus ín via pro véhiculo est.

Frugálitas miséria est rumoris boni.

Herédis fletus sáb persona risus est.

Furór fit laesa saépius patiéntia.

Inprobe Neptánum accusat, qui iterum naufragiüm
facit.

ta amicum habeas pósse ut facile! fíeri hunc
inimicám putes.

Veterém ferendo iniáriam invités novam.

Numquám periclum sine periclo vincitur,

Nimium áltercando véritas amittitur.

Pars bénefici est, quod pétitur si bellé neges.


! facile, Syrus ; omitted by w and Macrob, ii. 7. 11.


1 Meyer, vv. 362, 55, 176, 106, 104, 193, 221, 178, 264, 245,
645, 383, 416, 469. In one instance it has seemed necessary
to use two lines in the English version,


256


BOOK XVII. xiv. 1-4


XIV
* Neat sayings selected from the Mimes of Publilius.


PuBLiLIUS wrote mimes. He was thought worthy
of being rated about equal to Laberius. But the
scurrility and the arrogance of Laberius so offended
Gaius Caesar, that he declared that he was better
pleased with the mimes of Publilius than with those
of Laberius.

Many sayings of this Publilius are current, which
are neat and well adapted to the use of ordinary
conversation. Among these are the following, con-
sisting of a single line each, which I have indeed
taken pleasure in quoting :!


Bad is the plan which cannot bear a change.

He gains by giving who has given to worth.

Endure and don't deplore what can't be helped.?

Who's given too much, will want more than 's
allowed.

A witty comrade at your side,

To walk's as easy as to ride.

Frugality is misery in disguise.

Heirs' tears are laughter underneath a mask.

Patience too oft provoked is turned to rage.

He wrongly Neptune blames, who suffers ship-
wreck twice,

Regard a friend as one who may be foe.

By bearing old wrongs new ones you provoke.

With danger ever danger 's overcome.

'Mid too much wrangling truth is often lost.

Who courteously declines, grants half your suit.


2 Of. ** What can’t be cured must be endured.”
3 (f. ** Give an inch, he'll take an ell."


257


VOL. IIl, S


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XV. :
Quod Carneades Academicus elleboro stomachum purgavit,


scripturus adversus Zenonis Stoici decreta ; deque natura
medellaque ellebori candidi et nigri.


CaARNEADES Ácademicus, scripturus adversum Stoici
Zenonis libros, superiora corporis elleboro candido
purgavit, ne quid ex corruptis in stomacho humoribus
ad domicilia usque animi redundaret et instantiam
vigoremque mentis labefaceret; tanta cura tantoque


apparatu sui vir ingenio praestanti ad refellenda quae


scripserat Zeno aggressus; idque cum in historia
Graeca legissem, quod * elleboro candido" scriptum
erat, quid esset quaesivi.

Tum comperi duas species ellebori esse discerni-
culo coloris insignes, candidi et nigri; eos autem
colores non in semine ellebori neque in virgultis, sed
in radice dinosci; candido stomachum et ventrem
superiorem vomitionibus purgari; nigro alvum, quae
* inferior" vocatur, dilui, utriusque esse hanc vim,
ut humores noxios in quibus causae morborum sunt
extrahant. Esse autem periculum ne inter causas
morborum, omni corporum via patefacta, ea quoque
ipsa, in quibus causa vivendi est, efluant amissoque
omni naturalis alimoniae fundamento homo exhaustus
intereat.


5 eflluant suggested by Hosius ; amittantur, Vahlen (Cf. xxx
12. 5) ; exinaniantur, o ; omitted by c.
———MÉÉÁMU———— —— ee


1 The small intestine, see note on xvii. 11. 9.
? The large intestine.


258


BOOK XVII. xv. 1-5


XV


That Carneades the Academie purged his stomach with
hellebore when about to write against the dogmas of Zeno
the Stoic ; and of the nature and curative powers of white
and black hellebore.


Wuewn Carneades, the Academic philosopher, was
about to write against the books of the Stoic Zeno,
he cleansed the upper part of his body with white
hellebore, in order that none of the corrupt humours
of his stomach might rise to the abode of his mind
and weaken the power and vigour of his intellect ;
with such care and such preparation did this man of
surpassing talent set about refuting what Zeno had
written. When I had read of this in Grecian
history, I inquired what was meant by the term
* white hellebore.”’

Then I learned that there are two kinds of
hellebore distinguished by a difference in colour,
white and black; but that those colours are dis-
tinguished neither in the seed of the hellebore nor
in its plant, but in the root; further, that with
white hellebore the stomach and upper belly! are
purged by vomiting; by the black the so-called
lower belly is loosened, and the effect of both is to
remove the noxious humours in which the causes of
diseases are situated. But that there is danger lest,
when every avenue of the body is opened, along
with the causes of disease the juices on which the
principle of life depends should also pass away, and
the man should perish from exhaustion because of
the destruction of the entire foundation of natural


nourishment.
259


6


m—


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Set elleborum sumi posse tutissime in insula
Anticyra Plinius Secundus in libris Naturalis Historiae
scripsit. Propterea Livium Drusum, qui tribunus
plebi fuit, cum morbum qui “ comitialis" dicitur
pateretur, Anticyram navigasse et in ea insula
elleborum bibisse ait, atque ita morbo liberatum.

Praeterea scriptum legimus Gallos in venatibus
tinguere elleboro sagittas, quod his ictae, exanimatae
ferae teneriores ad epulas fiant ; sed propter ellebori
contagium vulnera ex sagittis facta circumcidere
latius dicuntur.


XVI


Anates Ponticas vim habere venenis digerendis potentem;
atque inibi de Mitridati regis in id genus medicamentum
sollertia.


Anates Ponticas dicitur edundis vulgo venenis
victitare. Scriptum etiam a Lenaeo, Cn. Pompei
liberto, Mitridatem illum Ponti regem medicinae rei
et remediorum id genus sollertem fuisse solitumque
earum sanguinem miscere medicamentis quae dige-
rendis venenis valent, eumque sanguinem vel po-


! xxv. 59.

* There were three places of this name, all celebrated for
their hellebore, which was regarded as a cure for insanity.
One was in Locris, on the Corinthian Gulf ; the second was
on the Maliac Gulf at the foot of Mt. Oeta. The third,
usually considered the most important, was a town of Phocis
on the Corinthian Gulf. See hes. Ling. Lat. $.v., where
Plin. .N. H. xxv. 52 is assigned to the last-named, in spite of


260


BOOK XVII. xv. 6—xvi. 2


But Plinius Secundus, in his work On Natural
History, wrote! that hellebore could be taken with
the greatest safety in the island of Anticyra.? That
for this reason Livius Drusus, the former tribune of
the commons, when he was suffering from the so-
called ** election " disease, sailed to Anticyra, drank
hellebore in that island, and was thus cured of the
ailment.

I have read besides that the Gauls, when hunting,
dip their arrows in hellebore, because the wild
animals that are struck and killed by arrows thus
treated become tenderer for eating ; but because of
the contagion of the hellebore they are said to cut
out a large piece of flesh around the wounds made
by the arrows.


XVI


That Pontic ducks have a power which is able to expel
poisons ; and also of the skill of Mithridates in preparing


antidotes.


Ir is said that the ducks of Pontus commonly live
by eating poisons. It was also written by Lenaeus,*
the freedman of Pompey the Great, that Mithri-
dates, the famous king of Pontus, was skilled in
medicine and in antidotes of that kind, and that he
was accustomed to mix the blood of these ducks with
drugs that have the power of expelling poisons, and
that the blood was the very most powerful agency


insula. Baumgarten-Crusius, Suetonius, refer the reference
in Calig. xxix to an island, which they do not locate. In
Hor. Ars. Poet. 300, tribus Anticyris may refer to three
Anticyras, but is more probably used in a general sense.

3 See note on xvi. 4. 4.


4 See Suet. De Gramm. xv. (ii, p. 418, TOL.) n
20I


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


3 tentissimum esse in ea confectione; ipsum autem
regem adsiduo talium medellarum usu a clandestinis

4 epularum insidiis cavisse, quin et scientem quoque
ultro et ostentandi gratia venenum rapidum et velox
saepenumero hausisse, atque id tamen sine noxa

5 fuisse. Quamobrem postea, cum proelio victus in
ultima regni refugisset et mori decrevisset, venena
violentissima festinandae necis causa frustra ex-

6 pertus, suo se ipse gladio transegit. Huius regis
antidotus celebratissima est, quae “ Mitridatios "
vocatur.


XVII


Mitridatem, Ponti regem, quinque! et viginti gentium
linguis locutum ; Quintumque Ennium tria corda habere
sese dixisse, quod tris linguas percalluisset, Graecam,
Oscam, Latinam.


—


Quintus Ennrus tria corda habere sese dicebat,
2 quod loqui Graece et Osce et Latine sciret. Mitri-
dates autem, Ponti atque Bithyniae rex inclutus, qui
a Cn: Pompeio bello superatus est, quinque? et
viginti gentium quas sub dicione habuit linguas
percalluit earumque omnium gentium viris haut
umquam per interpretem conlocutus est, sed ut
quemque ab eo appellari usus fuit, proinde lingua et
oratione ipsius non minus scite quam si gentilis eius
esset locutus est.


1 duobus, I1; II, ¢; duarum, Pliny and others.
? duarum, c.


262


BOOK XVII. xvi. 2—-xvil. 2


in their preparation; furthermore, that the king
himself by the constant use of such remedies guarded
against hidden plots at banquets ; nay more, that
he often voluntarily and wittingly, to show his im-
munity, drank a swift and rapid poison, which yet
did him no harm. Therefore, at a later time, when
he had been defeated in battle, and after fleeing to
the remotest bounds of his kingdom had resolved to
take his own life, having vainly tried the most
violent poisons for the purpose of hastening his
death, he fell upon his own sword. The most
celebrated antidote of this king is the one which is
called “ Mithridatian."


XVII


That Mithridates, king of Pontus, spoke the languages of
twenty-five nations ; and that Quintus Ennius said that he
had three hearts, because he was proficient in three
tongues, Greek, Oscan, and Latin.


Quintus Ennrus used to say that he had three
hearts, because he knew how to speak Greek, Oscan,
and Latin. But Mithridates, the celebrated king of
Pontus and Bithynia, who was overcome in war by
Gnaeus Pompeius, was proficient in the languages
of the twenty-five races which he held under his
sway. He never spoke to the men of all those
nations through an interpreter, but whenever it was
necessary for him to address any one of them, he
used his language and speech with as much skill as
if he were his fellow-countryman.


1 66-63 B.C.


263


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XVIII


Quod M. Varro C. Sallustium, historiae scriptorem, depre-
hensum ab Annio Milone in adulterio scribit et loris caesum
pecuniaque data dimissum.


M. Vanno, in litteris atque vita fide homo multa
et gravis, in libro quem inscripsit! Pius aut De Pace,
C. Sallustium scriptorem seriae illius et severae
orationis, in cuius historia notiones censorias fieri
atque exerceri videmus, in adulterio deprehensum
ab Annio Milone loris bene caesum dicit et, cum
dedisset pecuniam, dimissum.


XIX


Quid Epictetus philosophus dicere solitus sit hominibus
nequam et inpuris, disciplinas philosophiae studiose
tractantibus; et quae duo verba observanda praeceperit
omnium rerum longe saluberrima.?


Favorinum ego audivi dicere Epictetum philo-
sophum dixisse plerosque istos, qui philosophari
viderentur, philosophos esse eiuscemodi dvev Tov
TpáTTelW, expe o0 Aéyew; id significat «factis procul,
verbis tenus." Iam illud est vehementius quod
Arrianus solitum eum dictitare, in libris quos de
dissertationibus eius composuit, scriptum reliquit.
"Nam cum," inquit, * animadverterat hominem
pudore amisso, inportuna industria, corruptis mori-


! scripsit, w ; corrected by Burman.
* saluberrima, Skutsch ; salubria, c.


! p. 256, Riese.
264


a


BOOK XVII. xvui. 1-xix. 3


XVIII


The statement of Marcus Varro that Gaius Sallustius, the
writer of history, was taken in adultery by Annius Milo
and was let go only after he had been beaten with thongs
and had paid a sum of money.


Mancus Vanno, a man of great trustworthiness and
authority in his writings and in his life, in the work
which he entitled Pius, or On Peace,! says that Gaius
Sallustius, the author of those austere and dignified
works, whom we see in his history writing and act-
ing like a censor, was taken in adultery by Annius
Milo, soundly beaten with thongs, and allowed to
escape only after paying a sum of money.?


XIX


What Epictetus the philosopher used to say to worthless and
vile men, who zealously followed the pursuit of philosophy ;
and the two words whose remembrance he enjoined as by
far the most salutary in all respects.


I nearp Favorinus say that the philosopher Epic-
tetus declared? that very many of those who pro-
fessed to be philosophers were of the kind dvev ro
zpárrew, péxpt ToU Aéyew, which means * without
deeds, limited to words" ; that is, they preached but
did not practise, But that is still more severe which
Arrian, in his work On the Dissertations of Epictetus,*
has written that this philosopher used to say. “ For,"
says Arrian, * when he perceived that a man without
shame, persistent in wickedness, of abandoned


2 On this story see Sallust, L.C. L., p. x.
3 Frag. 10, p. 410, Schenkl.
* ji. 19 ; ef, Gell. i. 2. 8.
265


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


bus, audacem, confidentem lingua ceteraque omnia
praeterquam animam procurantem, istiusmodi homi-
nem cum viderat studia quoque et disciplinas philo-
sophiae contrectare et physica adire et meditari
dialectica multaque id genus theoremata auspicari
sciscitarique, inclamabat deum atque hominum
fidem ac plerumque inter clamandum his eum verbis
increpabat: ‘”Av@pwre, rod fAXes; oKéepar ei ke-
káÜaprat TO dyyetov: av yàp eis THY otgatv. atta BadAys,
ámóXero: jv cam], otpov 7) ófos yevoito 3) €( Te Toírav


4 xéipov.' " Nil profecto his verbis gravius, nil verius,


quibus declarabat maximus philosophorum, litteras
atque doctrinas philosophiae, cum in hominem
falsum atque degenerem tamquam in vas spurcum
atque pollutum influxissent, verti, mutari, corrumpi
et, quod ipse kvvikórepov ait, urinam fieri aut si quid
est urina spurcius.

Praeterea idem ille Epictetus, quod ex eodem
Favorino audivimus, solitus dicere est duo esse vitia
multo omnium gravissima ac taeterrima, intolerantiam
et incontinentiam, cum aut iniurias quae sunt
ferendae non toleramus neque ferimus, aut a quibus
rebus voluptatibusque nos tenere debemus, non
tenemus, * [taque," inquit, “si quis haec duo verba
cordi habeat eaque sibi imperando atque observando
curet, is erit pleraque inpeccabilis vitamque vivet
tranquillissimam." Verba haec duo dicebat: àvéyov
et ázéxov.


1 That is, he used some phrase equivalent to pro dewm
atque hominwm fidem ! (Heaven help us !).


266


————— o P


BOOK XVII. xix. 3-6


character, reckless, boastful, and cultivating every-
thing else except his soul—when he saw such a
man taking up also the study and pursuit of philo-
sophy, attacking natural history, practising logic and
balancing and investigating many problems of that
kind, he used to invoke the help! of gods and men,
and usually amid his exclamations chided the man
in these terms: ‘O man, where are you storing
these things? Consider whether the vessel be clean.
For if you take them into your self-conceit, they are
lost; if they are spoiled, they become urine or
vinegar or something worse, if possible." Nothing
surely could be weightier, nothing truer than these
words, in which the greatest of philosophers declared
that the learning and precepts of philosophy, flowing -
into a base and degenerate man, as if into a soiled
and filthy vessel, are turned, altered, spoiled, and as
he himself more cynically expresses it, become urine
or, if possible, something worse than urine.

Moreover, that same Epictetus, as we also heard
from Favorinus, used to say that there were two
faults which were by far the worst and most disgust-
ing of all, lack of endurance and lack of self-restraint,
when we cannot put up with or bear the wrongs
which we ought to endure, or cannot restrain our-
selves from actions or pleasures from which we
ought to refrain. “ Therefore,” said he, “if anyone
would take these two words to heart and use them
for his own guidance and regulation, he will be
almost without sin and will lead a very peaceful
life. These two words,’ he said, “are .ávéxov
(bear) and ázéxov (forbear).” ?

2 The two Greek words, like Eng. ‘‘ bear and forbear,”
formed a stock formula.


267


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XX


Verba sumpta ex Symposio Platonis, numeris! coagmentisque
verborum scite modulateque apta,? exercendi gratia in
Latinam orationem versa.


Symposium Platonis apud philosophum Taurum
legebatur. Verba illa Pausaniae inter convivas amo-
rem vice sua laudantis, ea verba ita prorsum amavi-
mus, ut meminisse etiam studuerimus. Sunt adeo,
quae meminimus, verba haec: Iláca yàp zpáfis 8€
éxev. abri) ep abris mparropévy otre Kai) ovre aic xpá-
otov 0 viv Heis zrotoüp.ev, 3) aívew 3) d8ew 1) 9i éyea Da.
ovK écTL TOoUTOv aiTo Kab’ attd KaAddv oiüév, GAN’ ey T
mpage, ws àv mpaxÓj, rowoU0rov áméfy Kadds piv yàp
TparrÓpevov kai OpÜQs kaAóv yiyverat, pij dpOds 8i
aigXpOv: otrw 5) kal 7d épüv, kal 6 "Epos o? was écTiv
Kadds ot0? dftos eyxwpudferbat, dN’ 6 adds Tporpémov
EOS
€pav.

Haec verba ubi lecta sunt, atque ibi Taurus mihi :
* Heus," inquit, * tu, rhetorisce,"— sic enim me in
principio recens in diatribam acceptum appellitabat,
existimans eloquentiae unius extundendae gratia
Athenas venisse, —* videsne," inquit, * evOvpynpa cre-
brum et coruscum et convexum brevibusque et
rotundis numeris cum quadam aequabili cireumactione
devinctum? Habesne nobis dicere in libris rhetorum
vestrorum tam apte tamque modulate compositam
orationem? Sed hos," inquit, *tamen numeros


! cum numeris sugg. by Hosius.
* apta, Lion ; apteque composita, Beloe; aptique, w; apta
atque, Damsté.
AE M o e EUER UR A... NNNM
1 Sympos. p. 180, x.
268


BOOK XVII. xx. 1-5


XX


A passage taken from the Symposiwm of Plato, skilful,
harmonious and fitting in its rhythm and structure, which
for the sake of practice I have turned into the Latin
tongue.


Tue Symposium of Plato was being read before the
philosopher Taurus, Those words of Pausanias in
which, taking his turn among the banqueters, he
eulogizes love, I admired so much that I even
resolved to commit them to memory. And the
words, if I remember rightly, are as follows:
* Every action is of this nature: in and of itself,
when done, it is neither good nor bad; for example,
what we are now doing, drinking, or singing, or
arguing. Not one of these things is in itself good,
but it may become so by the way in which it is done.
Well and rightly done, it becomes a good action;
wrongly done, it becomes shameful. It is the same
with love; for not all love is honourable or worthy of
praise, but only that which leads us to love worthily."

When these words had been read, thereupon
Taurus said to me: “ Ho! you young rhetorician "—
for so he used to call me in the beginning, when I
was first admitted to his class, supposing that I had
come to Athens only to work up eloquence ?—* do
you see this syllogism, full of meaning, brilliant,
well rounded and constructed in brief and smooth
numbers with a kind of symmetrical turn? Can
you quote us so apt and so melodiously formed a
passage from the works of your rhetoricians? But yet


2 This would seem to imply that Gellius went to Athens
on completing his studies in Rome ; see Introd. p. xv.


269


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


6 censeo videas 6800 zápepyov. Ad ipsa enim Platonis
penetralia ipsarumque rerum pondera et dignitates
pergendum est, non ad vocularum eius amoenitatem
nec ad verborum venustates deversitandum."

7 Haec admonitio Tauri de orationis Platonicae
modülis non modo non repressit, sed instrinxit etiam
nos ad elegantiam Graecae orationis verbis Latinis

8 adfectandam ; atque uti quaedam animalium parva et
vilia ad imitandum sunt quas res cumque audierint
viderintve petulantia, proinde nos ea quae in Platonis
oratione demiramur non aemulari quidem, sed lineas
umbrasque facere ausi sumus. Velut ipsum hoc est,

9 quod ex isdem illis verbis eius effinximus : “ Omne,"
inquit, * omnino factum sic sese habet ; neque turpe
est, quantum in eo est, neque honestum: velut est,
quas nunc facimus ipsi res, bibere, cantare, disserere.
Nihil namque horum ipsum ex sese honestum est ;
quali cum fieret modo factum est, tale extitit ; si recte
honesteque factum est, tum honestum fit ; sin parum
recte, turpe fit. Sic amare ; sic amor non honestus
omnis neque omnis laude dignus, sed qui facit nos
ut honeste amemus."


270


BOOK XVII. xx. 5-9


I advise you to look upon this rhythm as an incidental
feature; for one must penetrate to the inmost
depths of Plato's mind and feel the weight and
dignity of his subject matter, not be diverted to the
charm of his diction or the grace of his expression."
This admonition of Taurus as to Plato's style not
only did not deter me, but even encouraged me to
try to equal the elegance of the Greek in a Latin
rendering ; and just as there are small and insignifi-
cant animals which through  wantonness imitate
everything which they have seen or heard, just so I
had the assurance, not indeed to rival those qualities
which I admired in Plato's style, but to give a
shadowy outline of them, such as the following,
which I patterned on those very words of his:
* Every act, in general," he says, “is of this nature ;
it is in itself neither base nor honourable; as, for
example, the things which we ourselves are now
doing, drinking, singing, arguing. For none of
these things is honourable in itself, but it becomes
so by the manner in which it is done; if it is done
rightly and honourably, it is then honourable; but
if it is not rightly done, then it is shameful. It is
the same with love; thus not every kind of love is
honourable, not every kind is deserving of praise,
but only that which leads us to love honourably."


271


1


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XXI


Quibus temporibus post Romam conditam Graeci Romanique
inlustres viri floruerint ante secundum bellum Carthaginien-
sium.


Ur conspectum quendam aetatum antiquissimarum,
item virorum inlustrium qui in his aetatibus nati
fuissent haberemus, ne in sermonibus forte incon-
spectum aliquid super aetate atque vita clariorum
hominum temere diceremus, sicuti sophista ille àzai-
8evros, qui publice nuper disserens Carneaden philo-
sophum a rege Alexandro, Philippi filio, pecunia
donatum et Panaetium Stoicum cum superiore Afri-
cano vixissedixit; ut ab istiusmodi, inquam, temporum
aetatumque erroribus caveremus, et excerpebamus
ex libris qui chronici appellantur quibus temporibus
floruissent Graeci simul atque Romani viri, qui vel
ingenio vel imperio nobiles insignesque post condi-
tam Romam fuissent ante secundum bellum Cartha-
giniensium, easque nunc excerptiones nostras variis
diversisque in locis factas cursim digessimus, Neque
enim id nobis negotium fuit, ut acri atque subtili
cura excellentium in utraque gente hominum cvyxpo-
v.c 405s componeremus, sed ut Noctes istae quadamte-


! Leutze has shown (see Biogr. Note, i. p. xxiv) that,
besides the Chronica of Cornelius Nepos, Gellius made use of
Varronian sources, which used a different chronology.
According to the source which he followed, Gellius! dates are
reckoned from 751 (Nepos) or 753 B.c. (Varro) as the date of
the founding of Rome. He does not, however, confuse these
epochs in speaking of the same event. In my notes the
Varronian chronology is followed, except as otherwise indi-
cated ; for full details see the article of Leutze.

* Carneades, who was one of the envoys sent from Athens


272


BOOK XVII. xxi. 1


XXI


The times after the founding of Rome and before the second
war with Carthage at which distinguished Greeks and
Romans flourished.


I wisugp to have a kind of survey of ancient times,
and also of the famous men who were born in those
days,lest I might in conversation chance to make
some careless remark about the date and life of
celebrated men, as that ignorant sophist did who
lately, in a publie lecture, said that Carneades the
philosopher? was presented with a sum of money by
king Alexander, son of Philip, and that Panaetius
the Stoic was intimate with the elder Africanus.3
In order, I say, to guard against such errors in dates
and periods of time, I made notes from the books
known as Chronicles * of the times when those Greeks
and Romans flourished who were famous and con-
spicuous either for talent or for political power,
between the founding of Rome and the second
Punie war. And these excerpts of mine, made in
various and sundry places, I have now put hastily to-
gether. For it was not my endeavour with keen
and subtle care to compile a catalogue of the
eminent men of both nations who lived at the same
time, but merely to strew these Nights of mine


to Rome in 155 B.c., lived more than a hundred years after
the death of Alexander.

- 3 Panaetius, born about 185 B.c., was the teacher and
personal friend of the younger Africanus.

* Chronica (xpovud) were chronological lists of historical
events. The Chronica of Nepos seem to have given the im-
portant dates in foreign, as well as in Roman, history, in-
cluding mythology.

5 218-202 B.o.

273


VOL. III. m


t2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


nus his quoque historiae flosculis leviter iniectis
aspergerentur. Satis autem visum est in hoc con-
mentario de temporibus paucorum hominum dicere,
ex quorum aetatibus de pluribus quoque, quos non
nominaremus, haut difficilis coniectura fieri posset.

Incipiemus igitur a Solone claro, quoniam de
Homero et Hesiodo inter omnes fere scriptores
constitit aetatem eos egisse vel isdem fere tempori-
bus vel Homerum aliquanto antiquiorem, utrumque
tamen ante Romam conditam vixisse, Silviis Albae
regnantibus, annis post bellum Troianum, ut Cassius
in primo Annalium de Homero atque Hesiodo scrip-
tum reliquit, plus centum atque sexaginta, ante
Romam autem conditam, ut Cornelius Nepos in
primo Chronico de Homero dicit, annis circiter
centum et sexaginta.

Solonem ergo accepimus, unum ex illo nobili
numero sapientium, leges scripsisse Atheniensium,
Tarquinio Prisco Romae regnante, anno regni eius
tricesimo tertio! Servio autem Tullio regnante,
Pisistratus Athenis tyrannus fuit, Solone ante in
exilium voluntarium profecto, quoniam id ei prae-
dicenti non creditum est. Postea Pythagoras Samius
in Italiam venit, Tarquini filio regnum optinente, cui
cognomentum Superbus fuit, isdemque temporibus


1 Leuze (Rh. Mus., 1911) om chronological grounds would
read xxiii. with T.


! After his usual fashion, Gellius tries to present his
material in an entertaining form by introducing the anecdote
of the ignorant sophist, by freedom of treatment, and by
condensation ; also by the arrangement of his matter.

2 Frag. 8, Peter?; F.H.G. iii, p. 688.

3 Frag. 2, Peter?. Nepos’ date is 910 n.c., that of Cassius
(Hemina), 1024. Both are too late, for literary and archeo-


274


BOOK XVII. xxr. 1-7


lightly here and there with a few of these flowers of
history.! Moreover, it seemed sufficient in this
survey to speak of the dates of a few men, from which
it would not be difficult to infer the periods also of
many more whom I did not name.

I shall begin, then, with the illustrious Solon; for,
as regards Homer and Hesiod, it is agreed by almost
all writers, either that they lived at approximately
the same period, or that Homer was somewhat the
earlier; yet that both lived before the founding of
Rome, when the Silvii were ruling in Alba, more
than a hundred and sixty years after the ‘Trojan
war, as Cassius has written? about Homer and
Hesiod in the first book of his Aznals, but about a
hundred and sixty years before the founding of
Rome, as Cornelius Nepos says of Homer in the first
book of his Chronicles.8

Well then, we are told that Solon, one of the
famous sages,* drew up laws for the Athenians when
Tarquinius Priscus was king at Rome;? in the thirty-
third year of his reign.6 Afterwards, when Servius
Tullius was king,’ Pisistratus was tyrant at Athens,
Solon having previously gone into voluntary exile,
since he had not been believed when he predicted
that tyranny. Still later, Pythagoras of Samos came
to Italy, when the son of Tarquinius was king, he
who was surnamed the Proud,? and at that same time


logical evidence indicate the end of the twelfth century
before our era as the time of the Homeric poems. See Amer.
Journ. of Phil. xlvi (1995), pp. 26 ff.

4 About 639-559 B.c. For the seven sages see vol. i,
posto:

5 616-578 B.c., traditional chronology.

$ See the critical note.

7 578-534 B.C. 8 534—510 5.0.


275


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


occisus est Athenis ab Harmodio et Aristogitone
Hipparchus, Pisistrati filius, Hippiae tyranni frater.


8 Archilochum autem Nepos Cornelius tradit, Tullo


9


10


1


-—


12


13


Hostilio Romae regnante, iam tune fuisse poematis
clarum et nobilem.

Ducentesimo deinde et sexagesimo anno post Ro-
mam conditam, aut non longe amplius, victos esse ab
Atheniensibus Persas memoriae traditum est pugnam
illam inclutam Marathoniam, Miltiade duce, qui post
eam victoriam damnatus a populo Atheniensi in vin-
culis publicis mortem obiit. Tum Aeschylus Athenis
tragoediarum poeta celebris fuit. Romae autem istis
ferme temporibus tribunos et aediles tum primum
per seditionem sibi plebes creavit ac non diu post
Cn. Marcius Coriolanus exagitatus vexatusque a
tribunis plebi ad Vulscos, qui tum hostes erant, a
rep. descivit bellumque populo Romano fecit.

Post deinde paucis annis Xerxes rex ab Athenien-
sibus et pleraque Graecia, Themistocle duce, navali
proelio quod ad Salamina factum est victus fugatus-
que est. Inde anno fere quarto, Menenio Agrippa,
M. Horatio Pulvillo consulibus, bello Veienti apud
fluvium Cremeram Fabii sex et trecenti patricii
cum familiis suis universi ab hostibus circumventi
perierunt.


! 514 B.C. * Frag. 4, Peter?.

3 673-641 B.C. 4 Flourished about 650 B.o.

5 490 B.c., but Gellius, here following Nepos, puts it in 493.

5 He lived from 525 to 456 n.c. * 494 B.C.

8 Leutze suggests that Gellius so arranged his material as
to show that at a time when the Greeks were fighting epoch-
making battles the Romans were warring with comparatively
insignificant Italian peoples.

? 480 5.0. Gellius is here using a Varronian source ;
Nepos' date would be 483.


276


BOOK XVII. xxi. 7-13


Hipparchus, son of Pisistratus and brother of the
- tyrant Hippias, was slain at Athens by Harmodius
and Aristogeiton. ^ And Cornelius Nepos adds? that
when Tullus Hostilius was king at Rome? Archi-
lochus was already illustrious and famous for his
poems.*

Then, in the two hundred and sixtieth year after
the founding of Rome, or not much later, it is re-
corded that the Persians were vanquished by the
Athenians in the famous battle of Marathon under
the lead of Militiades,? who after that victory was
condemned by the Athenians and died in the public
prison. At that time Aeschylus, the tragic poet,
flourished at Athens. In Rome, at about the same
time, the commons, as the result of a secession, for
the first time elected their own tribunes and
aediles;? and not much later Gnaeus Marcius
Coriolanus, harassed and exasperated by the tri-
bunes of the commons, turned traitor to the republic
and joined the Volscians, who were then our
enemies and made war upon the Roman people.

Then a few years later, King Xerxes was
beaten and put to flight by the Athenians and
a good part of Greece, under the lead of Themis-
tocles, in the sea-fight at Salamis.? About threeit?
years afterwards, in the consulship of Menenius
Agrippa and Marcus Horatius Pulvillus, during the
war with Veii, the patrician Fabii, three hundred
and six in number, along with their dependents,”
were all ambushed at the river Cremera and slain.


10 That is, in the fourth year; see note on xvii. 12. 5


p. 252). ^
11 Some 4000 in number. This was in 471 B.C.


277


14
15


16


ini


18


19


20


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Iuxta ea tempora Empedocles Agrigentinus in
philosophiae naturalis studio floruit. Romae autem
per eas tempestates decemviros legibus scribundis
creatos constitit tabulasque ab his primo decem con-
scriptas, mox alias duas additas.

Bellum deinde in terra Graecia maximum Pelo-
ponnensiacum, quod Thucydides memoriae mandavit,
coeptum est circa annum fere post conditam Romam
trecentesimum vicesimum tertium. Qua tempestate
Olus Postumius Tubertus dictator Romae fuit, qui
filium suum, quod contra suum dictum in hostem
pugnaverat, securi necavit. Hostes tune populi
Romani fuerunt Fidenates atque Aequi. In hoc
tempore nobiles celebresque erant Sophocles ac
deinde Euripides tragici poetae et Hippocrates
medicus et philosophus Democritus, quibus Socrates
Atheniensis natu quidem posterior fuit, sed quibus-
dam temporibus isdem vixerunt.

Iam deinde, tribunis militaribus consulari imperio
rempublicam Romae regentibus, ad annum fere con-
ditae urbis trecentesimum quadragesimum septimum,
triginta illi tyranni praepositi sunt a Lacedaemoniis
Atheniensibus et in Sicilia Dionysius superior tyran-
nidem tenuit, paucisque annis post Socrates Athenis
capitis damnatus est et in carcere veneno necatus.
Set! ea fere tempestate Romae M. Furius Camillus


1 set, Q; the other MSS. omit ; et, Hertz.


1 Flourished about 450 s.c. In §§ 14-15 Leuze sees the
chronology of Fabius Pictor.

2 45] B.O. * 431 m9, .

4 See note on $ 11, above. Here the contrast is still more
marked.

5 Born 469 n. c.

9 407 p.c. They were first chosen in 444, but were com-


278


BOOK XVII. xxr. 14-20


At about that time Empedocles of Agrigentum
was eminent in the domain of natural philosophy.!
Butat Rome at that epoch it is stated that a board
of ten was appointed? to codify laws, and that at
first they compiled ten tables, to which afterwards
two more were added.

Then the great Peloponnesian war began in
Greece, which Thucydides has handed down to
memory, about three hundred and twenty-three
years after the founding of Rome.? At that time
Olus Postumius Tubertus was dictator at Rome, and
executed his own son, because he had fought against
the enemy contrary to his fathers order. The
people of Fidenae and Aequium were then at war
with the Roman people During that period
Sophocles, and later Euripides, were famous and
renowned as tragic poets, Hippocrates as a physician,
and as a philosopher, Democritus; Socrates the
Athenian was younger than these,® but was in part
their contemporary. -

Somewhat later, when the military tribunes with
consular authority were in power® at Rome, about
the three hundred and forty-seventh year after the
founding of the city, the notorious thirty tyrants
were imposed upon the Athenians by the Lacedae-
monians, and in Sicily the elder Dionysius was
tyrant.? A few years later, at Athens, Socrates was
. condemned to death and executed in prison by
means of poison. At about the same time, at Rome,
From 404 s.c. (407, Nepos) to 367 the
series of military tribunes was interrupted by only two
consular years. Gellius here records changes in the form of
overnment of Athens, Syracuse and Rome,

7 404 B.C.


pelled to resign.


279


21
22


23


24


25


28


29


30


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


dictator fuit et Veios cepit; ac post non longo tem-
pore bellum Senonicum fuit, cum Galli Romam
praeter Capitolium ceperunt.

Neque multo postea Eudoxus astrologus in terra
Graecia nobilitatus est Lacedaemoniique ab Athe-
niensibus apud Corinthum superati duce Phormione,
et M. Manlius Romae, qui Gallos in obsidione
Capitolii obrepentes per ardua depulerat, convictus
est consilium de regno occupando inisse, damnatus-
que capitis e saxo Tarpeio, ut M. Varro ait, praeceps
datus, ut Cornelius autem Nepos scriptum reliquit,
verberando necatus est; eoque ipso anno, qui erat
post reciperatam urbem septimus, Aristotelem philo-
sophum natum esse memoriae mandatum est.

Aliquot deinde annis post bellum Senonicum The-
bani Lacedaemonios duce Epaminonda apud Leuctra
superaverunt ac brevi post tempore in urbe Roma
lege Licinii Stolonis consules creari etiam ex plebe
coepti, cum antea ius non esset nisi ex patriciis
gentibus fieri consulem.

Circa annum deinde urbis conditae quadringente-
simum Philippus, Amyntae filius, Alexandri pater,
regnum Macedoniae adeptus est inque eo tempore
Alexander natus est paucisque inde annis post Plato
philosophus ad Dionysium Siciliae tyrannum posteri-
orem profectus est; post deinde aliquanto tempore
Philippus apud Chaeroneam proelio magno Athenien-


rc E seer ee EROS V DNE QUO Odit.


1 390 n.c. ; 387, Varro. 2 499 p.c.
3 Annales iii, frag. 9, Peter?. In 384 zc.
4 Chron., frag. 5, Peter?,


5 384 p.c. $971 BO, * 307 B.c.
8 356 p.c. 9 838 B.C,


280


———— nsiddd


BOOK XVII. xxi. 20-30


Marcus Furius Camillus was dictator and took Veii.
Not long afterwards came the war with the Senones,
when the Gauls captured Rome with the exception
of the Capitol.!

Not long after these events the astronomer
Eudoxus was famed in the land of Greece, the
Lacedaemonians were defeated by the Athenians
at Corinth under the lead of Phormio? and at Rome
Marcus Manlius, who during the siege of the Capitol
had repulsed the Gauls as they were climbing up
its steep cliffs, was convicted of having formed the
design of making himself king. Marcus Varro
says? that he was condemned to death and hurled
from the Tarpeian rock; but Cornelius Nepos has
written 4 that he was scourged to death. In the
very same year, which was the seventh after the
recovery of the city, it is recorded that the
philosopher Aristotle was born.®

Next, some years after the war with the Senones,
the Thebans defeated the  Lacedaemonians at
Leuctra® under the lead of Epaminondas, and a
little later in the city of Rome the law of Licinius
Stolo provided for the elections of consuls also from
the plebeians," whereas before that time it was not
lawful for a consul to be chosen except from the
patrician families. :

Then, about the four hundredth year after the
founding of the city, Philip, son of Amyntas and
father of Alexander, became king of Macedonia.
At that time Alexander was born,? and a few years
later the philosopher Plato went to the court of the
younger Dionysius, tyrant of Sicily ; then some little
time afterwards Philip defeated the Athenians in
the great battle at Chaeronea.? At that time the

281


31


32


33


34


35


36


37


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


ses vicit. Tum Demosthenes orator ex eo proelio
salutem fuga quaesivit, cumque id ei quod fugerat
probrose obiceretur, versu illo notissimo elusit :


ACT -
**"Avijp," inquit, “6 devywy kai Tad paynoerat.


Postea Philippus ex insidiis occiditur ; at Alexander
regnum adeptus ad subigendos Persas in Asiam
atque in Orientem transgressus est. Alter autem
Alexander, cui cognomentum Molosso fuit, in Italiam
venit, bellum populo Romano facturus—iam enim
fama virtutis felicitatisque Romanae apud exteras
gentes enitescere inceptabat—, sed priusquam
bellum faceret, vita decessit. Eum Molossum, cum
in Italiam transiret, dixisse accepimus se quidem ad
Romanos ire quasi in andronitin, Macedonem ad
Persas quasi in  gynaeconitin. Postea Macedo
Alexander, pleraque parte orientali subacta, cum
annos undecim regnavisset, obiit mortis diem.
Neque haut longe post Aristoteles philosophus et
post aliquanto Demosthenes vita functi sunt isdem-
que ferme tempestatibus populus Romanus gravi ac
diutino Samnitium bello conflictatus est consulesque
Tiberius Veturius et Spurius Postumius, in locis
iniquis apud Caudium a Samnitibus circumvallati ac
subiugi missi, turpi foedere facto discesserunt, ob
eamque causam, populi iussu Samnitibus per fetiales
dediti, recepti non sunt,

Post annum deinde urbis conditae quadringentesi-
mum fere et septuagesimum bellum cum rege Pyrro


! Menander, Monost. 45. * 336 n.c.
SLOD SNR: 1 829 BO: 5 322 p.c. 5 321 Bc.


282


BOOK XVII. xxr. 30-37


orator Demosthenes sought safety in flight from the
battlefield, and when he was bitterly taunted with
his flight he jestingly replied in the well-known
Verse:t


The man who runs away will fight again.


Later Philip fell victim to a conspiracy; but
Alexander, who succeeded him,? crossed over into
Asia and the Orient, to subdue the Persians. But
another Alexander, surnamed Molossus, came into
Italy intending to make war on the Roman people
— for already the fame of Roman valour and success
was beginning to be conspicuous among foreign
nations—but he died before beginning the war.
We have learned that on his way to Italy that
Molossus said that he was going against the Romans
as a nation of men, but the Macedonian was going
against the Persians as one of women. Later, the
Macedonian Alexander, having subdued the greater
part of the east, died ? after a reign of eleven years.
Not long after this the philosopher Aristotle ended
his life, and a little later, Demosthenes ;? at about
that same time the Roman people engaged in a
dangerous and protracted war with the Samnites
and the consuls Tiberius Veturius and Spurius
Postumius were surrounded by the Samnites in a
perilous position near Caudium and being sent
under the yoke were allowed to depart only when
they had made a shameful treaty ;® and when for that
reason the consuls by vote of the people were
surrendered to the Samnites through the fetial

priests, they were not accepted.
Then, about four hundred and seventy years after
the founding of the city, war was begun with king
283


38
39


40


4l


42


43


44


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


sumptum est. Ea tempestate Epicurus Atheniensis
et Zeno Citiensis philosophi celebres erant, eodem-
que tempore C. Fabricius Luscinus et Q. Aemilius
Papus censores Romae fuerunt et P. Cornelium
Rufinum, qui bis consul et dictator fuerat, senatu
moverunt; causamque isti notae subscripserunt,
quod eum comperissent argenti facti cenae gratia
decem pondo libras habere.

Anno deinde post Romam conditam quadringente-
simo ferme et nonagesimo, consulibus Appio Claudio,
cui cognomentum Caudex fuit, Appii illius Caeci
fratre, et Marco Fulvio Flacco, bellum adversum
Poenos primum coeptum est, neque diu post Calli-
machus, poeta Cyrenensis, Alexandriae apud Ptole-
maeum regem celebratus est.

Annis deinde postea paulo pluribus quam viginti,
pace eum Poenis facta, consulibus C.! Claudio Cen-
thone, Appii Caeci filio, et M. Sempronio Tuditano,
primus omnium L. Livius poeta fabulas docere Romae
coepit post Sophoclis et Euripidis mortem annis
plus fere centum et sexaginta, post Menandri annis
circiter quinquaginta duobus. Claudium et Tudi-
tanum consules secuntur Q. Valerius et C. Mamilius,
quibus natum esse Q. Ennium poetam M. Varro in
primo De Poetis libro scripsit eumque, cum septimum
et sexagesimum annum haberet, duodecimum ? Anna-
lem scripsisse, idque ipsum Ennium in eodem libro
dicere.

Anno deinde post Romam conditam quingen-


1! C. added by Hosius.
* duodevicesimum, Merula ; xxii (first x erased), X ; xvii,
L. Müller.


1 280 n.c. 2 264 n.c. 3 240 B.o.
4 239 8.C. 5 p. 259, Bipont.
284


BOOK XVII. xxt. 37-44


Pyrrhus! At that time Epicurus the Athenian and
Zeno of Citium were famed as philosophers, and at
the same time the censors at Rome, Gaius Fabricius
Luscinus and Quintus Aemilius Papus, expelled
from the senate Publius Cornelius Rufinus, who had
twice been consul and dictator; and they recorded
as the reason for that censure the fact that they
had learned of his using ten pounds' weight of
silverware at a dinner.

Then, in about the four hundred and ninetieth
year after the founding of Rome, when the consuls
were Appius Claudius, surnamed Caudex, brother
of the celebrated Appius the Blind, and Marcus
Fluvius Flaccus, the first war with the Carthaginians
broke out? and not long afterwards Callimachus,
the poet of Cyrene, was famous at the court of
king Ptolemy at Alexandria,

A little more than twenty years later, when peace
had been made with the Carthaginians and the
consuls were C. Claudius Centho, son of Appius the
Blind, and Marcus Sempronius Tuditanus, the poet
Lucius Livius was the very first to put plays upon
the stage at Rome,’ more than a hundred and sixty
years after the death of Sophocles and Euripides
and about forty-two years after the death of
Menander. The consuls Claudius and Tuditanus
were followed by Quintus Valerius and Gaius
Mamilius, in whose year the poet Quintus Ennius
was born,’ as Marcus Varro has written in the first
book of his work On Poets ;® and he adds that at
the age of sixty-seven Ennius had written the
twelfth Book of the Annals, and that Ennius himself
says so in that same book.

Five hundred and nineteen years after the found-

285


46
4T


48


49


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


tesimo undevicesimo! Sp. Carvilius Ruga primus
Romae de amicorum sententia divortium cum uxore
fecit, quod sterila esset iurassetque apud censores,
uxorem se liberum quaerundorum? causa habere,
eodemque anno Cn. Naevius poeta fabulas apud
populum dedit, quem M. Varro in libro De Poetis
primo stipendia fecisse ait bello Poenico primo,
idque ipsum Naevium dicere in eo carmine quod de
eodem bello scripsit. Porcius autem Licinus serius?
poeticam Romae coepisse dicit * in his versibus :


Poénico belló secundo Musa pinnató gradu
Intulit se béllicosam in Rómuli gentém feram.


Ac deinde annis fere post quindecim bellum ad-
versum Poenos sumptum est atque non nimium
longe ?.M. Cato orator in civitate et Plautus poeta
in scaena floruerunt ; isdemque temporibus Diogenes
Stoicus et Carneades Academicus et Critolaus Peri-
pateticus ab Atheniensibus ad senatum populi
Romani negotii publici gratia legati sunt. Neque
magno intervallo postea Q. Ennius et iuxta Caecilius


! vicesimo tertio, iv. 3. 2. ? quaerundum, iv. 3. 2.

? Porcium (Portium, 8; Portum, X) autem Licinium
servius, c, corrected by Torrentius and Carrio.

* dixit, Hertz; Porcium . . . dicere, Ritschi, Schanz,
Rhein. Mus. liv. 19.

® longe post (cf. $ 35), sugg. by Hosius.


* 235 B.C. Iniv.3 Gellius gave the date as 231, following
a different chronology. Dionysius of Halicarnassus agrees
with the former (Varronian) chronology. On the formula
Liberum. quaerundorum causa see note on iv. 3. 2 (vol. i,
p. 322).

3 235 B.C. * p. 259, Bipont.

* Frag. 1, Bührens. 5218 B.C.
286


BOOK XVII. xxt. 44—49


ing of Rome, Spurius Carvilius Ruga, at the advice
of his friends, was the first Roman to divorce his
wife,on the ground that she was barren and that he
had taken oath before the censors that he married
for the purpose of having children.! In that same
year the poet Naevius exhibited plays to the people,’
and Marcus Varro says? in the first book of his
work On Poets that Naevius served in the first
Punie war and that the poet himself makes that
statement in the poem which he wrote on that
same war. But Porcius Licinius says? in the follow-
ing verses that Rome was later in taking up the
poetic art:

In the second Punic war with winged flight

The Muse to Romulus' warrior nation came.


Then, about fifteen years later, war was begun
with the Carthaginians,® and not very long after
that Marcus Cato was famous as a political orator
and Plautus as a dramatic poet; and at that same
time Diogenes the Stoic, Carneades the Academic,
and Critolaus the Peripatetic were sent by the
Athenians as envoys to the senate of the Roman
people on public business. Not very long after
this came Quintus Ennius, and then Caecilius and
Terence,® and afterwards Pacuvius" and when


6 These three poets died respectively in 169, 168 and
159 s.c, before the coming of the envoys to Rome in
155 s.c. Since Gellius announced the second Punie war
as his limit, Leuze believes that he added this section from
memory.

7 Pacuvius (220—130 B.c.) was older than Terence, but
outlived him. ‘Terence’s comedies were produced between
166 and 160 B.c. ; he died in 159, but the date of his birth
is uncertain.


287


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


et Terentius et subinde et Pacuvius et Pacuvio iam
sene Accius clariorque tune in poematis eorum
obtrectandis Lucilius fuit.

50 — Sed progressi longius sumus, cum finem pro-
posuerimus adnotatiunculis istis bellum Poenorum
secundum.


288


BOOK XVII. xxt. 49-50


Pacuvius was already an old man, Accius and then
Lucilius, who was still more famous through his
"criticisms of the poems of his predecessors.

But I have gone too far, since the limit that
I set for these little notes was the second Punic
war,


289


VOL Il.


L3


a - E


aire Bor thhok near thy
hf dypedur SO redd
ew sit^ ha
Nx Une
pner pese aay “pad!


1 ,


LU MIHOONS VIUA


LIBER OCTAVUS DECIMUS
I


Disputationes a philosopho Stoico et contra a Peripatetico,
arbitro Favorino, factae ; quaesitumque inter eos quantum
in perficienda vita beata virtus valeret quantumque esset
in his quae dicuntur extranea.


1l  FauriLianEsS Favorini erant duo quidam non in-
celebres in urbe Roma philosophi. Eorum fuit unus

2 Peripateticae disciplinae sectator, alter Stoicae. His
quondam ego acriter atque contente pro suis utrim-
que decretis propugnantibus, cum essemus una
omnes Ostiae cum Favorino, interfui. Ambulaba-

3mus autem in litore, cum iam advesperasceret,
aestate anni novi.!

4 Atque ibi Stoicus censebat et vitam beatam ho-
mini virtute animi sola et miseriam summam malitia
sola posse effici, etiamsi cetera bona omnia quae cor-
poralia et externa appellarentur virtuti deessent,

5 malitiae adessent, Ille contra Peripateticus miseram
quidem vitam vitiis animi et malitia sola fieri con-
cedebat, sed ad conplendos omnes vitae beatae
numeros virtutem solam nequaquam satis esse
existimabat, quoniam et corporis integritas sani-
tasque et honestus modus formae et pecunia familia-
ris? et bona existimatio ceteraque omnia corporis et
fortunae bona necessaria viderentur perficiendae
vitae beatae.


! nova, Salmasius ; novi, «e ; molli, Damsté.


* fortunae et pecuniae reique familiaris, Madvig; res
familiaris, Damsté ; but cf. iii. 17. 1.


292


a


BOOK XVIII
I


Discussions held by a Stoic philosopher and in opposition
by a Peripatetie, with Favorinus as arbiter; and the
question at issue was, how far virtue availed in deter-
mining a happy life and to what extent happiness was
dependent on what are called external circumstances.


TugnE were two friends of Favorinus, philosophers
of no little note in the city of Rome; one of them
was a follower of the Peripatetic school, the other
of the Stoic, I was once present when these men
argued ably and vigorously, each for his own beliefs,
when we were all with Favorinus at Ostia. And
we were walking along the shore in springtime,
just as evening was falling.

And on that occasion the Stoic maintained that
man could enjoy a happy life only through virtue,
and that the greatest wretchedness was due to
wickedness only, even though all the other bless-
ings, which are called external, should be lacking
to the virtuous man and present with the wicked.
The Peripatetic, on the other hand, admitted that
a wretched life was due solely to vicious thoughts
and wickedness, but he believed that virtue alone
was by no means sufficient to round out all the
parts of a happy life, since the complete use of
one’s limbs, good health, a reasonably attractive
person, property, good repute, and all the other
advantages of body and fortune seemed necessary
to make a perfectly happy life.

293


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


6 — Reclamabat hoc in loco Stoicus et, tamquam duas
ille res diversas poneret, mirabatur, quod, cum essent
malitia et virtus duo contraria, vita misera et beata
quoque aeque contraria, non servaret in utrisque vim

_, /et naturam contrarii et ad miseriam quidem vitae
conficiendam satis valere malitiam solam putaret, ad
praestandam vero beatam vitam non satis solam esse

8 virtutem diceret. Atque id maxime dissidere neque
convenire dicebat, quod qui profiteretur vitam nullo
pacto beatam effici posse si virtus sola abesset, idem
contra negaret, beatam fieri vitam cum sola virtus
adesset, et quem daret haberetque virtuti absenti
honorem, eundem petenti atque praesenti adimeret.

9 Tum Peripateticus perquam hercle festive : “ Rogo
te," inquit, *cum bona venia respondeas an existi-
mes esse vini amphoram, cum abest ab ea unus

10 congius?" ** Minime," inquit, “ vini amphora dici
11 potest ex qua abest congius.” Hoe ubi accepit
Peripateticus, * Unus igitur," inquit, * congius am-
phoram facere dici debebit, quoniam, cum deest ille
unus, non fit amphora vini et, cum accessit, fit
amphora. Quod si id dicere absurdum est, uno
congio solo fieri amphoram, itidem absurdum est
una sola virtute vitam fieri beatam dicere, quoniam,
cum virtus abest, beata esse vita numquam potest." 1
12 Tum Favorinus aspiciens Peripateticum, “ Est qui-


! possit, or quamquam Jer quoniam, Skutsch.


* Somewhat less than 6 gallons,
* A little less than 6 pints.


294


BOOK XVIII. 1. 6-12


Here the Stoic made outcry against him, and
maintaining that his opponent was advancing two
contrary propositions, expressed his surprise that,
since wickedness and virtue were two opposites, and
a wretched and a happy life were also opposites,
he did not preserve in each the force and nature
of an opposite, but believed that wickedness alone
was sufficient to cause an unhappy life, at the same
time declaring that virtue alone was not suffi-
cient to guarantee a happy life. And he said
that it was especially inconsistent and contradictory
for one who maintained that a life could in no
way be made happy if virtue alone were lacking,
to deny on the other hand that a life could be
happy when virtue alone was present, and thus
to take away from virtue when present and
demanding it, that honour which he gave and
bestowed upon virtue when lacking.

Thereupon the Peripatetic, in truth very wittily,
said: * Pray pardon me, and tell me this, whether
you think that an amphora! of wine from which a
congius? has been taken, is still an amphora?" *' By
no means," was the reply, *can that be called an
amphora of wine, from which a congius is missing.”
When the Peripatetic heard this, he retorted:
« Then it will have to be said that one congius makes
an amphora of wine, since when that one is lacking,
it is not an amphora, and when it is added, it
becomes an amphora. But if it is absurd to say
that an amphora is made from one single congius, it
is equally absurd to say that a life is made happy by
virtue alone by itself, because when virtue is lacking
life can never be happy."

Then Favorinus, turning to the Peripatetic, said :


295


13


14


15


16


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


dem," inquit, “argutiola haec qua de congio vini
usus es exposita in libris; sed, ut scis, captio magis
lepida quam probum aut simile argumentum videri
debet. Congius enim, cum deest, efficit quidem ne
sit iustae mensurae amphora; sed cum accedit et
additur, non ille unus facit amphoram, sed supplet.
Virtus autem, ut isti dicunt, non accessio neque
supplementum, sed sola ipsa vitae beatae instar est
et propterea beatam vitam sola una, cum adest,
facit."

Haec atque alia quaedam minuta magis et nodosa,
tamquam apud arbitrum Favorinum, in suam uterque
sententiam conferebant. Sed cum iam prima fax
noctis et densiores esse tenebrae coepissent, prosecuti
Favorinum in domum, ad quam devertebat, dis-
cessimus.


II


Cuiusmodi quaestionum certationibus Saturnalicia ludicra
Athenis agitare soliti simus ; atque inibi expressa quaedam
sophismatia et aenigmata oblectatoria.


SaTURNALIA Athenis agitabamus hilare prorsum ac
modeste, non, ut dicitur, *remittentes animum "—


nam * remittere," inquit Musonius, * animum quasi
amittere est "—, sed demulcentes eum paulum atque


2 laxantes iucundis honestisque sermonum  inlecta-


tionibus. Conveniebamus autem ad eandem cenam
conplusculi, qui Romani in Graeciam veneramus
quique easdem auditiones eosdemque doctores cole-


3 bamus. Tum qui et cenulam ordine suo curabat,


praemium solvendae quaestionis ponebat librum


1 p. 275, Peerlkamp. 2 Cf. note on vii. 13. 2.
296


BOOK XVIII. r. 12-1. 3


«This clever turn which you have used about the
congius of wine is indeed set forth in the books ; but,
as you know, it ought to be regarded rather as a neat
catch than as an honest or plausible argument. For
when a congius is lacking, it indeed causes the am-
phora not to be of full measure; but when it is added
and put in, it alone does not make, but completes,
an amphora. But virtue, as the Stoics say, is not
an addition or a supplement, but it by itself is the
equivalent of a happy life, and therefore it alone
makes a happy life, when it is present."

These and some other minute and knotty argu-
ments each advanced in support of his own opinion,
before Favorinus as umpire. But when the first
night-lights appeared and the darkness grew thicker,
we escorted Favorinus to the house where he was
putting up; and when he went in, we separated.


II


What kind of questions we used to discuss when spending
the Saturnalia at Athens; and some amusing sophistries
and enigmas.


Wz used to spend the Saturnalia at Athens very
merrily yet temperately, not *relaxing our minds,"
as the saying is—for, as Musonius asserts,! to relax
the mind is like losing it—but diverting our minds
a little and relieving them by the delights of pleasant
and improving conversation. Accordingly, a number
of us Romans who had come to Greece, and who
attended the same lectures and devoted ourselves to
the same teachers, met at the same dinner-table.
Then the one who was giving the entertainment in
his turn,? offered as a prize for solving a problem


297


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


veteris scriptoris vel Graecum vel Latinum et
coronam e lauro plexam, totidemque res quaerebat
quot homines istic eramus; cumque eas omnis
exposuerat, rem locumque dicendi sors dabat.

4 Quaestio igitur soluta corona et praemio donabatur,
non soluta autem tramittebatur ad eum qui sortito

5 successerat, idque in orbem vice pàri servabatur. Si
nemo dissolvebat, corona eius quaestionis deo cuius

6 id festum erat dicabatur. Quaerebantur autem res
huiuscemodi: aut sententia poetae veteris lepide
obscura, non anxie, aut historiae antiquioris requi-
sitio, aut decreti cuiuspiam ex philosophia perperam
invulgati purgatio, aut captionis sophisticae solutio,
aut inopinati rariorisque verbi indagatio, aut tempus
item in verbo perspicuo obscurissimum.

7 Itaque nuperquaesita esse memini numero septem,
quorum prima fuit enarratio horum versuum, qui
sunt in Saturis Quinti Enni uno multifariam verbo
concinniter inplicati. Quorum exemplum hoc est :


Nám qui lepidé postulat álterum frustrári,
Quém frustratür, frustra eum dícit frustra ésse ;
Nam si se! früstrari quém frustras séntit,

Qui frustratur frustrast, si non ille früstra est.


8 Secunda quaestio fuit quonam modo audiri atque
accipi deberet, quod Plato, in civitate quam in libris


! nam si se suggested by Hosius ; nam qui sese, ALS,
® ille frustra est, Skutsch.


1 vv. 59 ff., Vahlen?,

* Rendered as follows by R. J. E. Tiddy in Gordon, English
Literature and the Classics, p. 206: “The man who thinks to
Score a pretty score off another, says that he has scored off
him off whom he would score—but he hasn’t all the same.
For he who thinks he’s scoring, but isn’t all the same, is
scored off himself—and so the other Scores,


298


BOOK XVIII. it. 3-8


the work of some old Greek or Roman writer and
a crown woven from laurel, and put to us as many
questions as there were guests present. But when
he had put them all, the question which each was to
discuss and the order of speaking were determined
by lot. Then, when a question was correctly an-
swered, the reward was a crown and a prize ; if it
was not correctly answered, it was passed on to the
next in the allotment, and this process was repeated
throughout the circle. If no one could answer a
particular question, the crown was dedicated to the
god in whose honour the festival was held. Now
the questions that were proposed were of this kind :
an obscure saying of some early poet, amusing rather
than perplexing; some point in ancient history; the
correction of some tenet of philosophy which was
commonly misinterpreted, the solution of some
sophistical catch, the investigation of a rare and
unusual word, or of an obscure use of the tense of a
verb of plain meaning.

And I recollect that once seven questions were
put, the first of which was an explanation of these
verses in the Saturae of Quintus Ennius,! in which
one word is very neatly used in many different
senses. They run as follows:


Who tries with craft another to deceive,
Deceives himself, if he says he's deceived

Whom he'd deceive. For if whom you'd deceive
Perceives that he’s deceived, the deceiver ‘tis
Who is deceived, the other’s not deceived.”


The second question was how it ought to be
understood and interpreted that Plato in the State


299


10


11


12


13


14


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


suis condidit, koivàs tas yvvatkas, id est communes
esse mulieres, censuit et praemia viris fortissimis
summisque bellatoribus posuit saviationes puerorum
et puellarum. Tertio in loco hoc quaesitum est, in
quibus verbis captionum istarum fraus esset et quo
pacto distingui resolvique possent: * Quod non
perdidisti, habes; cornua non perdidisti: habes
igitur cornua," item altera captio: “quod ego sum,
id tu non es; homo ego sum:! homo igitur tu
nones," Quaesitum ibi est quae esset huius quoque
sophismatis resolutio: “Cum mentior et mentiri me
dico, mentior an verum dico?" Postea quaestio
istaec fuit, quam ob causam patricii Megalensibus
mutitare soliti sint, plebes Cerealibus. Secundum
ea hoc quaesitum est: verbum * verant," quod
significat * vera dicunt," quisnam poetarum veterum
dixerit? Sexta quaestio fuit, * asphodelum " cuius-
modi herba sit, quod Hesiodus in isto versu
posuerit :


, 308 ¥ v , bd ^
Nijritot, ot06 iracw bow Àéov ipic zavrüs
Odd’ 6 »'2 Ad. HEUTE 8c X
v Og OV EV pa ayn TE Kal acho € o bey ovelap,
et quid item Hesiodus se dicere sentiat, cum dimi-
dium plus esse toto dicit. Postrema quaestionum


! homo . . . sum supplied by Hertz (sed homo sum
igitur, Q).


1 Rep., p. 457, etc. ; 460, 468.

? The festival of Magna Mater, on April 4, established in
204 B.C.

? The festival of Ceres, on April 19.

* Works and Days, 40, Cf. Horace, Odes, i. 31. 16:

me pascunt olivae,
Me cichorea levesque malvae.

* Hesiod means that a simple and frugal life is the best.
He had shared his father’s property with his brother Perses ;
300


BOOK XVIII. 1. 8-14


which he planned in his books! said xowàs ras
yvvatkas, that is, declared that women “should be
common property," and that the rewards of the
bravest men and the greatest warriors should be the
kisses of boys and maidens. In the third place
this was asked, in what words the fallacy of the
following catches consisted and how they could be
made out and explained: * What you have not
lost, that you have. You have not lost horns;
therefore you have horns." Also another catch:
« What I am, that you are not. I am a man; there-
fore you are not a man." Then it was inquired
what was the solution of this sophistry: “ When I
lie and admit that I lie, do I lie or speak the
truth?" Afterwards this question was put, why the
patricians are in the habit of entertaining one
another on the Megalensia,* and the plebeians on
the Cerealia. Next came this question: ** What
one of the early poets used the verb verant, in the
sense of ‘they speak the truth’?” The sixth ques-
tion was, what kind of a plant the * asphodel" was,
which Hesiod mentioned in the following lines :*


O fools! who know not how much half exceeds
the whole,?
Or that the asphodel and mallow make fine food.


And also what Hesiod meant when he said that the
half was more than the whole. The last of all the


but Perses went to law and through the partiality of the
judges got possession of the whole inheritance. He soon
wasted it, and Hesiod, through his thrift, was able to come to
his help. Hence the expression became proverbial. Cicero,
on seeing a bust of his brother Quintus, who was of short
stature, said: ‘‘ Half of my brother is greater than the
whole.” (Macrob. Sat. ii. 3. 4.)

301


15


16


L2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


omnium. haec fuit:  *Sceripserim," * legerim,
* venerim," cuius temporis verba sint, praeteriti
an futuri an utriusque?

Haec ubi ordine quo dixi proposita atque singulis
sorte ductis disputata explanataque sunt, libris
coronisque omnes donati sumus, nisi ob unam
quaestionem, quae fuit de verbo * verant." Nemo
enim tum commeminerat, dictum esse a Q. Ennio
id verbum in tertio decimo Aznnalium in isto versu:


Satin vates verant aetate in agunda ?


Corona igitur huius quaestionis deo feriarum istarum
Saturno datast.


III


Quid Aeschines rhetor, in oratione qua Timarchum de
inpudicitia accusavit, Lacedaemonios statuisse dixerit


super sententia probatissima, quam inprobatissimus homo
dixisset.


AEsCHINES, vel acerrimus prudentissimusque orato-
rüm qui apud contiones Atheniensium floruerunt, in
oratione illa saeva criminosaque et virulenta, qua
Timarchum de inpudicitia graviter insigniterque
accusabat, nobile et inlustre consilium Laedaemoniis
dedisse dicit virum indidem civitatis eiusdem prin-
cipem, virtute atque aetate magna praeditum.

“Populus,” inquit, * Lacedaemonius de summa
republica sua, quidnam esset utile et honestum
tt TRÀ lE MX 4 enim aa)


! v. 380, Vahlen?, 4 In Timarch, 180.
302


BOOK XVIII. n. 14-1. 2


questions was this: of what tense the verbs scrip-
serim, legerim and venerim are, perfect or future, or
both.

When these questions had been put in the order
that I have mentioned, and had been discussed and
explained by the several guests on whom the lots
fell, we were all presented with crowns and books,
except for the one question about the verb verant.
For at the time no one remembered that the word
was used by Quintus Ennius in the thirteenth book
of his Annals in the following line :!


Do seers speak truth (verant), predicting life's
extent ?


Therefore the crown for this question was presented
to Saturn, the god of that festival.


III


What the orator Aeschines, in the speech in which he
accused Timarchus of unchastity, said that the Lacedae-
monians decided about the praiseworthy suggestion of a
most unpraiseworthy man. :


ArscurNESs, the most acute and sagacious of the
orators who gained renown in the Athenian assem-
blies, in that cruel, slanderous and virulent speech
in which he severely and directly accused Timarchus
of unchastity, says that a man of advanced years
and high character, a leader in that State, once gave
noble and distinguished counsel to the Lacedae-
monians.

“The people of Lacedaemon," he says,? “were
deliberating as to what was honourable and ex-
pedient in a matter of great moment to their State.


393


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


3 deliberabat. Tum exurgit sententiae dicendae gratia
homo quispiam turpitudine pristinae vitae diffama-
tissimus, sed lingua tunc atque facundia nimium

4 quanto praestabilis. Consilium quod dabat, quod-
que oportere fieri suadebat, acceptum ab universis
et conplacitum est futurumque erat ex eius sententia

5 populi decretum. Ibi unus ex illo principum ordine
quos Lacedaemonii, aetatis dignitatisque maiestate,
tamquam arbitros et magistros disciplinae publicae
verebantur, commoto irritatoque animo exilit, et
*Quaenam, inquit, * Lacedaemonii, ratio aut quae
tandem spes erit urbem hane et hane rempublicam
salvam inexpugnabilemque esse diutius posse, si
huiuscemodi anteactae vitae hominibus consiliariis
utemur? Quod si proba istaec et honesta sententia
est, quaeso vos, non sinamus eandem dehonestari

6 turpissimi auctoris contagio. Atque ubi hoc dixit,
elegit virum fortitudine atque iustitia praeter alios
praestantem, sed inopi lingua et infacundum, iussit-
que eum consensu petituque omnium eandem illam
sententiam diserti viri cuimodi posset verbis dicere,
ut nulla prioris mentione habita, scitum atque
decretum populi ex eius unius nomine fieret qui

7 id! ipsum denuo dixerat. Atque ita, ut suaserat

8 prudentissimus senex, factum est. Sic bona sen-
tentia mansit, turpis auctor mutatus est."


1 qui id, J. F. Gronov; quod, c.


.. 1 Cf. Cie. De Senectute, 20, apud. Lacedaemonios quidem
ii qui amplissimum magistratum gerunt, ut sunt, sic etiam
nominantur, senes, referring to the yepoucla.


304


mat


BOOK XVIII. im. 2-8


Then there arose, for the purpose of giving his
opinion, a man notorious for the baseness of his past
life, but at the same time highly eminent for his
eloquence and oratory. The advice which he gave,
and the course which he said ought to be followed,
were approved and accepted by all, and a decree
of the people was about to be passed in accordance
with his opinion. Thereupon one of that body of
leading citizens whom the Lacedaemonians, because
of the prestige of their age and rank, reverenced as
judges and directors of public policy,! sprang up in
a spirit of anger and vexation, and said: ‘What
prospect, Lacedaemonians, or what hope, pray, will
there be that this city and this State can longer be
secure and invincible, if we follow counsellors whose
past life is like that of this man? Even if this
advice is honourable and noble, let us not, I pray
you, allow it to be disgraced by the pollution of its
most shameful author. And when he had said this,
he selected a man conspicuous before all others for
his courage and justice, but a poor speaker and
without eloquence, and bade him, with the consent
and at the request of all, to deliver that opinion of
the eloquent man in the best language he could
command, in order that, without mention of the
former speaker, the vote and decree of the people
might be passed under the name of him alone who
had last made that proposition. And the action
which that most sagacious old man had recommended
was taken. So the good advice endured, but its
base author was displaced."


395


VOL, III, X


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


iv


Quod Sulpicius Apollinaris praedicantem quendam a sese
uno Sallusti historias intellegi inlusit, quaestione proposita
quid verba ista apud Sallustium significarent: ‘‘incertum,
stolidior an vanior.”


Cum iam adulescentuli Romae praetextam et
puerilem togam mutassemus magistrosque tunc nobis
nosmet ipsi exploratiores quaereremus, in Sandaliario
forte apud librarios fuimus, cum ibi in multorum
hominum coetu Apollinaris Sulpicius, vir in memoria
nostra praeter alios doctus, iactatorem quempiam
et venditatorem Sallustianae lectionis inrisit inlusit-
que genere illo facetissimae dissimulationis, qua
Socrates ad sophistas utebatur. Nam cum ille se
unum et unicum lectorem esse enarratoremque
Sallustii diceret neque primam tantum cutem ac
speciem sententiarum, sed sanguinem quoque ipsum
ac medullam verborum eius eruere atque introspicere
penitus praedicaret, tum Apollinaris amplecti vene-
rarique se doctrinas illius dicens: ‘ Per,” inquit,
* magister optume, exoptatus mihi nune venis cum
sanguine et medulla Sallusti verborum. Hesterno
enim die quaerebatur ex me quidnam verba haec
eius in quarto Historiarum libro de Cn. Lentulo
scripta significent, de quo incertum fuisse ait,
stolidiorne esset an vanior," eaque ipsa verba, uti
sunt a Sallustio scripta, dixit: “At Cn. Lentulus
patriciae gentis, collega eius, cui cognomentum


1 Hist. iv. 1, Maur.


306


BOOK XVIII. iv. 1-4


IV


How Sulpicius Apollinaris made fun of a man who asserted
that he alone understood Sallust’s histories, by inquiring
the meaning of these words in Sallust: incertum, stolidior
an vanior.


Wuen I was already a young man at Rome, having
laid aside the purple-bordered toga of boyhood, and
was on my own account seeking masters of deeper
knowledge, I happened to be with the booksellers
in Shoemaker's Street at the time when Sulpicius
Apollinaris, the most learned man of all within my
memory, in the presence of a large gathering made
fun of a boastful fellow who was parading his read-
ing of Sallust, and turned him into ridicule with that
kind of witty irony which Socrates used against the
sophists. For when the man declared that he was
the one and only reader and expositor of Sallust,
and openly boasted that he did not merely search
into the outer skin and obvious meaning of his
sentences, but delved into and thoroughly examined
the very blood and marrow of his words, then
Apollinaris, pretending to embrace and venerate his
learning, said: “ Most opportunely, my good master,
do you come to me now with the blood and marrow of
Sallust's language. For yesterday I was asked what
in the world those words of his meant which he
wrote in the fourth book of his Histories about
Gnaeus Lentulus, of whom he says that it is un-
certain whether he was more churlish or more
unreliable" ; and he quoted the very words, as
Sallust wrote them:! * But Gnaeus Lentulus, his
colleague, surnamed Clodianus, a man of patrician
family—and it is not at all easy to say whether he

397
x 2


10


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Clodiano fuit, perincertum stolidior an vanior, legem
de pecunia quam Sulla emptoribus bonorum re-
miserat exigenda promulgavit."

Quaesitum ergo ex se Apollinaris neque id se
dissolvere potuisse adseverabat, quid esset “ vanior”
et quid *stolidior," quoniam Sallustius sic ea sepa-
rasse atque opposuisse inter se videretur, tamquam
diversa ac dissimilia nec eiusdem utraque vitii
forent, ae propterea petebat uti se doceret signi-
ficationes utriusque vocis et origines.

Tum ille rictu oris labearumque ductu contemni
a se ostendens et rem de qua quaereretur et
hominem ipsum qui quaereret, “ Priscorum," inquit,
“et remotorum ego verborum medullas et san-
guinem, sicuti dixi, perspicere et elicere soleo, non
istorum quae proculcata vulgo et protrita sunt.
Ipso illo quippe Cn. Lentulo *stolidior' est et
‘vanior’ qui ignorat eiusdem stultitiae esse vani-
tatem et stoliditatem." Sed ubi hoc dixit, media
ipsa sermonum reliquit et abire coepit. Nos deinde
eum tenebamus urgebamusque, et cumprimis Apol-
linaris, ut de vocabulorum vel differentia vel, si ei
ita videretur, similitudine plenius apertiusque dis-
sereret et, ut ne sibi invideret discere volenti,
orabat.

Atque ille, se iam plane inludi ratus, negotium
sibi esse causatur et digreditur. Nos autem postea
ex Apollinari didicimus, ** vanos" proprie dici, non
ut vulgus diceret, desipientis aut hebetes aut in-
eptos, sed, ut veterum doctissimi dixissent, men-


: 308


BOOK XVIIL rv. 4-10


was more churlish or more unreliable— proposed a
bill for exacting the money which Sulla had remitted
to the purchasers of property.”

Apollinaris therefore asserted that it was asked of
him, and that he had not been able to answer the
question, what was meant by vanior and what by
stolidior, since Sallust seemed to have separated the
words and contrasted them with each other, as if
they were different and unlike and did not both
designate the same fault; and therefore he asked
that the man would tell him the meaning and origin
of the two words.

Then the other, showing by a grin and a grimace
that he despised both the subject of the inquiry and
the questioner himself, said: *I am accustomed to
examine and explain the marrow and blood of
ancient and recondite words, as I said, not of those
which are in common use and trite. Surely a man
is more worthless and stupid than Gnaeus Lentulus
himself, if he does not know that vanitas and sto-
liditas indicate the same kind of folly." But having
said that, he left us in the very midst of our discus-
sion and began to sneak off. Then we laid hold on
him and pressed him, and in particular Apollinaris
begged him to discourse at greater length and more
plainly upon the difference, or, if he preferred, on
the similarity of the words, and not to begrudge the
information to one who was eager to learn.

Then the fellow, realizing by this time that he
was being laughed at, pleaded an engagement and
made off. But we afterwards learned from Apol-
linaris that the term vani was properly applied, not
as in common parlance to those who were foolish or
dull or silly, but, as the most learned of the ancients


399


11


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


daces et infidos et levia inaniaque pro gravibus et
veris astutissime componentes; *'stolidos" autem
vocari non tam stultos et excordes quam taetros!
et molestos et inlepidos, quos Graeci uox0m$pobs xai
$oprwoís dicerent. Etyma quoque harum vocum
et origines scriptas esse dicebat in libris Nigidianis.

Quas requisitas ego et repertas cum primarum
significationum exemplis, ut commentariis harum
Noctium inferrem, notavi et intulisse iam me aliquo
in loco commentationibus istis existimo.


V


Quod Q. Ennius in septimo Annali ‘‘quadrupes eques"
ac non ‘‘quadrupes equus," ut legunt multi, scriptum


reliquit.

Cum Antonio Iuliano rhetore, viro hercle bono
et facundiae florentis, complures adulescentuli,
familiares eius, Puteolis aestivarum feriarum lu-
dum et iocum in litteris amoenioribus et in volup-
tatibus pudicis honestisque agitabamus. Atque
ibi tune Iuliano nuntiatur, dvayvéorny quendam,
non indoctum hominem, voce admodum scita et
canora Ennii Annales legere ad populum in theatro.
* Eamus," inquit, *auditum nescio quem istum


Ennianistam "; hoc enim se ille nomine appellari
volebat.


! castros, Z; stautros, Q ; austeres, Hertz.


1 Fr. 45, Swoboda. anus is related to vacare and VACUUS 5


Eng. ''want"; stolidus to stolo, ‘‘dullard,” from the root
stel-, ** stand," ‘‘be stiff.”


310


BOOK XVIII. iv. 1o-v. 3


had used them, to liars, deceivers, and those who
cleverly devised light and empty statements in
place of those which were true and earnest. But
that those were called stolidi who were not so much
foolish and witless as austere, churlish and disagree-
able, such men as the Greeks called poy@npoi, “ugly
fellows,” and ¢oprixoé, common " or “ vulgar folk.”
He also said that the roots and derivations of these
words were to be found in the books of Nigidius.*
Having sought for these words and found them,
with examples of their earliest meanings, I made a
note of them, in order to include them in the notes
contained in these Nights, and I think that I have
already introduced them somewhere among them.?


V


That Quintus Ennius, in the seventh book of his Annals,
wrote quadrupes eques, and not quadrupes equus, as many
read it.

A NUMBER of us young men, friends of his, were
at Puteoli with the rhetorician Antonius Julianus,
a fine man in truth and of distinguished eloquence,
and we were spending the summer holidays in
amusement and gaiety, amid literary diversions and
seemly and improving pleasures. And while we
were there, word was brought to Julianus that a
certain reader, a man not without learning, was
reciting the Annals of Ennius to the people in the
theatre in a very refined and musical voice. “ Let
us go,” said he, “ to hear this ‘ Ennianist, whoever he
may be"; for that was the name by which the
man wished to be called.


2 viii. 14.
311


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Quem cum iam inter ingentes clamores legentem
invenissemus—legebat autem librum ex Annalibus
Ennii septimum—, hos eum primum versus per-
peram pronuntiantem audivimus:


Denique vi magna quadrupes equus! atque
elephanti
Proiciunt sese,


neque multis postea versibus additis, celebrantibus
eum laudantibusque omnibus, discessit.

Tum Iulianus egrediens e theatro: **Quid vobis,"
inquit, “de hoc anagnosta et de quadrupede equo
videtur? sic enim profecto legit:


Denique vi magna quadrupes equus atque ele-
phanti
Proiciunt sese.


Ecquid putatis, si magistrum praelectoremque ha-
buisset alicuius aeris,? ‘quadrupes equus' dicturum
fuisse ac non ‘quadrupes eques, quod ab Ennio
ita scriptum relictumque esse nemo unus lit-
terarum veterum diligens dubitavit?" ^ Cumque
aliquot eorum qui aderant * quadrupes equus" apud
suum quisque grammaticum legisse se dicerent et
mirarentur quidnam esset * quadrupes eques,"
* Vellem vos," inquit, * optimi iuvenes, tam ac-
curate Q. Ennium legisse quam P. Vergilius legerat,
qui hunc eius versum secutus in Georgicis suis
‘equitem’ pro *equo' posuit his in versibus:


1 eques, Vahlen. 2 auris, Damste.


1 vy. 232 ff. Vahlen?, . tan, 11;
312


BOOK XVIII. v. 4-7


When at last we had found him reading amid
loud applause—and he was reading the seventh
book of the Annals of Ennius—we first heard him
wrongly recite the following lines :*


Then with great force on rush the four-footed


horse (equus)
And elephants,


and without adding many more verses, he departed
amid the praises and applause of the whole com-
pany.

Then Julianus, as he came out of the theatre,
said: “ What think you of this reader and his four-
footed horse? For surely he read it thus:


Denique vi magna quadrupes equus atque
elephanti
Proiciunt sese.


Do you think that, if he had had a master and
instructor worth a penny, he would have said
quadrupes equus and mot quadrupes eques ? For no
one who has given any attention to ancient literature
doubts that Ennius left it written in that way."
When several of those who were present declared
that they had read quadrupes equus, each with his
own teacher, and wondered what was the meaning
of quadrupes eques, J ulianus rejoined: “I could wish,
my worthy young friends, that you had read Quintus
Ennius as accurately as did Publius Vergilius, who,
imitating this verse of his in The Georgics, used eques
for equus in these lines :?


313


10


11


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Frena Pelethronii Lapithae gyrosque dedere
Impositi dorso atque equitem docuere sub armis
Insultare solo et gressus glomerare superbos.


In quo loco equitem, si quis modo non inscite
inepteque argutior sit, nihil potest accipi aliud nisi
* equum"; pleraque enim veterum aetas et hominem
equo insidentem et equum cui! insideretur * equi-
tem" dixerunt. Propterea ‘equitare’ etiam, quod
verbum e vocabulo ‘equitis’ inclinatum est, et
homo equo utens et equus sub homine gradiens
dicebatur. Lucilius adeo, vir adprime linguae
Latinae sciens, ‘ecum equitare' dicit his versibus :


Quis hune currere equum nos atque equitare
videmus,

His equitat curritque ; oculis equitare videmus ;

Ergo oculis equitat.


Sed enim contentus," inquit, *ego his non fui et,
ut non turbidae fidei nec ambiguae, sed ut purae
liquentisque esset, *equus ne an feques' scriptum
Ennius reliquisset, librum summae atque reverendae
vestustatis, quem fere constabat Lampadionis manu
emendatum, studio pretioque multo unius versus
inspiciendi gratia conduxi et “eques,’ non * equus,
scriptum in eo versu inveni."


* cui, Skutsch ; qui, e (quo, 7),


crier tie Ebrei aereis eee ee e EN


! Julianus gave this meaning to equitem, but the modern
editors give it the usual one of ** horseman.”

* vv. 1284 ff. Marx, who reads ecum for equum.

? Similar sophistries were indulged in by Chrysippus (Diog.
Laert, vii. 180 ff.) and other philosophers. See Marx ad loc.

4 C. Octavius Lampadio edited the Bellum Punicum of


314


BOOK XVIII. v. 7-11


'Thessalian Lapiths, high on horses' back,

Gave us the bit and circling course, and taught

The horse, full armed, to' gallop o'er the
plain

And round his paces proud.


In this passage, unless one is foolishly and sillily
captious, equitem can be taken in no other sense
than that of ‘horse, for many of the early writers
called the man who sat upon a horse eques and also
the horse on which hesat. Hence equitare also, which
is derived from the word eques, equitis, was said both
of the man who rode the horse and of the horse
which carried the man. — Lucilius, indeed, a man con-
spieuous for his command of the Latin language,
says equum equitare in these lines:?


With what we see the courser run and trot,

. With this he runs and trots. Now, "tis with
eyes

We see him trot; hence with his eyes he
trots.?


* But," said Apollinaris, «I was not content with
these examples, and in order that it might not
appear uncertain and doubtful, but clear and evident,
whether Ennius wrote equus or eques, I procured at
great trouble and expense, for the sake of examining
one line, a copy of heavy and venerable antiquity,
which it was almost certain had been edited by
the hand of Lampadio;* and in that copy I found
eques and not equus written in that line."


Naevius and divided the poem into seven books ; see Suet.
Gr, ii. (L.C. L. ii, p. 399). Apparently he also edited
Ennius.


315


12


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Hoc tum nobis Iulianus et multa alia lucide simul
et adfabiliter dixit. Sed eadem ipsa post etiam in
pervulgatis commentariis scripta offendimus.


VI


Quod Aelius Melissus, in libro cui titulum fecit De Loguendi
Proprietate, quem, cum ederet, cornum esse copiae dicebat,
rem scripsit neque dictu neque auditu dignam, cum differre
" matronam " et “‘matrem familias ” existimavit differentia
longe vanissima.

Ag.ius Me.issus in nostra memoria fuit Romae
summi quidem loci inter grammaticos id 1 temporis ;
sed maiore in litteris erat iactantia et copirreta
quam opera. Is praeter alia quae scripsit com-
pluria, librum composuit, ut tum videbatur cum
est editus, doctrinae inclutae. Ei libro titulus est
ingentis cuiusdam inlecebrae ad legendum ; scriptus
quippe est De Loquendi Proprietate. Quis adeo
existimet loqui se recte atque proprie posse, nisi
illas Melissi proprietates perdidicerit ?

Ex eo libro verba haec sunt: * * Matrona? est
quae semel peperit, quae saepius, ‘mater familias iu
sicuti sus quae semel peperit, *porcetra, quae
saepius, ‘scrofa.’” Utrum autem hoc de matrona
ac de matrefamilias Melissus excogitaverit ipse et
coniectaverit, an scriptum ab alio quo legerit,
hariolis profecto est opus. Nam de *porcetra "


1 id, Falster ; et, y 5 8; (— sed), 5; sui, Damsté.


316


BOOK XVIII. v. 12-vr. 6


This at the time Julianus explained to us, along
with other problems, clearly and courteously. But
afterwards I ran upon the very same remarks in some
very well-known handbooks.


VI


That Aelius Melissus, in the book to which he gave the title
On Correctness of Speech, and which on its publication he
called a horn of plenty, wrote something that deserves
neither to be said nor heard, when he expressed the opinion
that matrona and mater familias differ in meaning, thus
making a distinction that is wholly groundless.


WrirHIN my memory Aelius Melissus held the
highest rank among the grammarians of his day
at Rome ; but in literary criticism he showed greater
boastfulness and sophistry than real merit. Besides
many other works which he wrote, he made a book
which at the time when it was issued seemed to be
one of remarkable learning. The title of the book
was designed to be especially attractive to readers,
for it was called On Correctness in Speech. Who,
then, would suppose that he could speak correctly
or with propriety unless he had learned those rules
of Melissus ?

From that book I take these words: * Matrona, * a
matron, is a woman who has given birth once ; she
who has done so more than once is called mater
familias, * mother of a family ’; just so a sow which
has had one litter is called porcetra; one which has
had more, scrofa.” But to decide whether Melissus
thought out this distinction between matrona and
mater familias and that it was his own conjecture,
or whether he read what someone else had written,
surely requires soothsayers. For with regard to


317


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


habet sane auctorem Pomponium in Atellania, quae

7 hoc eodem vocabulo inscripta est; sed * matronam "
non esse appellatam nisi quae semel peperit, neque
" matrem familias" nisi quae saepius, nullis veterum

8 scriptorum auctoritatibus confirmari potest. Enim-
vero illud impendio probabilius est quod idonei
vocum antiquarum enarratores tradiderunt, * ma-
tronam " dictam esse proprie quae in matrimonium
cum viro convenisset, quoad in eo matrimonio
maneret, etiamsi liberi nondum nati forent, dic-
tamque ita esse a matris nomine, non adepto iam,
sed cum spe et omine mox adipiscendi, unde ipsum

9 quoque * matrimonium " dicitur, * matrem" autem
“familias” appellatam esse eam solam quae in
mariti manu mancipioque aut in eius in cuius
maritus manu mancipioque esset, quoniam non in
matrimonium tantum, sed in familiam quoque ma-
riti et in sui heredis locum venisset.


VII
Quem in modum Favorinus tractaverit intempestivum
quendam! de verborum ambiguitatibus quaerentem ; ?
atque ibi, quot significationes capiat ‘‘contio.”
1  Dowrrro, homini docto celebrique in urbe Roma
grammatico, cui cognomentum *Insano" factum


1 Favorinum tractaverit intempestivus quidam, J. Gronov;
RAE i à :
Domitius Favorinum tr. intempestive quaedam, Boot.
* querentem, Damsté.


1 p. 295, Ribbeck?,


318


BOOK XVIII. vi. 6—vir. 1


porcetra he has, it is true, the authority of Pomponius
in the Atellan farce which bears that very title;! but
that “matron” was applied only to a woman who
had given birth once, and “mother of a family 5
only to one who had done so more than once, can
be proved by the authority of no ancient writer.
‘Indeed, that seems much more probable which
competent interpreters of ancient terms have
written, that *matron" was properly applied to
one who had contracted a marriage with a man,
so long as she remained in that state, even though
children were not yet born to them ; and that she was
so called from the word mater, or * mother," a state
which she had not yet attained, but which she had ©
the hope and promise of attaining later. Matri-
monium itself, or ‘marriage,’ has the same de-
rivation; but that woman only is called ** mother of
the household " 2 who is in the power and possession
of her husband, or in the power and possession
of the one under whose authority her husband is;
since she had come, not only into a state of wedlock,
but also into the family of her husband and into the
position of his heir.


VII


How Favorinus treated a man who made an unseasonable
inquiry about words of ambiguous meaning ; and in that
connection the different meanings of the word contio.


Dowrrius was a learned and famous grammarian
in the city of Rome, who was given the surname


2 Mater familias is the feminine equivalent of pater
familias. The latter was * father of the household" in
authority, although he was not the actual father of all its
members. In C.Z. L. vi. 1085, Julia, wife of Septimius Severus,
is called mater Augusti nostri et castrorwm et senatus et patriae.


319


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


2 est, quoniam erat natura intractabilior et morosior,
ei Domitio Favorinus noster cum forte apud fanum
Carmentis obviam venisset atque ego cum Favorino
essem, * Quaeso," inquit, “te, magister, dicas mihi
num erravi quod, cum vellem 8ypyyopias Latine


dicere, ^contiones' dixi? Dubito quippe et requiro


an veterum eorum qui electius locuti sunt pro verbis
et oratione dixerit quis ‘contionem.’” Tum Do-
mitius voce atque vultu atrociore ‘ Nulla,” inquit,
* prorsus bonae salutis spes reliqua est, cum vos
quoque, philosophorum inlustrissimi, nihil iam aliud
quam verba auctoritatesque verborum cordi habetis.
Mittam autem librum tibi, in quo id reperias quod
quaeris. Ego enim grammaticus vitae iam atque
morum disciplinas quaero, vos philosophi mera estis,
ut M. Cato ait, ‘mortualia’; glosaria namque con-
ligitis et lexidia, res taetras et inanes et frivolas,
tamquam mulierum voces praeficarum. Atque
utinam," inquit, * muti omnes homines essemus!
minus improbitas instrumenti haberet."

Cumque digressi essemus, “Non tempestive,"
inquit Favorinus, “hune hominem accessimus,
Videtur enim mihi ézyjuws HatverOa. Scitote,”
inquit, * tamen intemperiem istam quae pedayyodia
dicitur, non parvis nec abiectis ingeniis accidere,
GAAG elvan oyeddv rc T0 máÜos TOdTO Hpwikov et veritates
plerumque fortiter dicere, sed respectum non habere
pojre Kaipod gore pérpov. Vel ipsum hoc quale
existimatis quod nunc de philosophis dixit? Nonne,


1 Contio, from coventio (= conventio) meant first an assembly,
then a speech to an assembly, and finally the place of meet-


ing. It is used in the sense of a speech by Cicero, Caesar,
and other good writers.


* Frag. incert. 19, Jordan.
320


—— —!(:


BOOK XVIII. vir. 1-4


Insanus, or “The Madman,” because he was by
nature rather difficult and churlish. When our
friend Favorinus, in my company, chanced to have
met this Domitius at the temple of Carmentis,
Favorinus said: ‘I pray you, master, tell me
whether I was in error in saying contiones, when
I wanted to turn Sypyyopfa into Latin; for I am
in doubt and should be glad to be informed whether
any of the men of old who spoke with special
elegance used contio of words and of a speech." +
Then Domitius, with excited voice and expression,
replied: “There is absolutely no hope left of
anything good, when even you distinguished *
philosophers care for nothing save words and the
authority for words. But I will send you a book, in
which you will find what you ask. For I,a gram-
marian, am inquiring into the conduct of life and
manners, while you philosophers are nothing but

- mortualia, or * winding sheets, as Marcus Cato says :?
for you collect glossaries and word-lists, filthy, foolish,
trifling things, like the dirges of female hired
mourners. And I could wish,” said he, “ that all we
mortals were dumb! for then dishonesty would lack
its chief instrument.”

When we had left him, Favorinus said: ‘We
approached this man at an unseasonable time. For
he seems to me to be clearly mad. Know, however,"
said he, “that the disorder which is called peday-
xoMa, or ‘melancholia, does not attack small or
contemptible minds, but it is in a way a kind of
heroic affliction and its victims often speak the truth
boldly, but without regard to time or moderation.
For example, what think you of this which he just
said of philosophers? If Antisthenes or Diogenes

321


VOL, III. Y


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


si id Antisthenes aut Diogenes dixisset, dignum
memoria visum esset?"
5 Misit autem paulo post Favorino librum quem
promiserat—Verri, opinor, Flacci erat—, in quo
scripta ad hoc genus quaestionis pertinentia haec
fuerunt: * senatum " dici et pro loco et pro homi-
nibus, *civitatem " et pro loco et oppido et pro
iure quoque omnium! et pro hominum multitudine,
**tribus " quoque et *decurias" dici et pro loco et
pro iure et pro hominibus, * contionem " autem tria
significare: locum suggestumque unde verba fierent,
sicut M. Tullius in oratione quae inscripta est
Contra Contionem Q. Metelli : ** Escendi," inquit, * in
contionem ; concursus est populi factus"; item
significare coetum populi adsistentis, sicuti idem
M. Tullius in Oratore ait: **Contiones saepe ex-
clamare vidi, cum apte verba cecidissent. Etenim?
expectant aures, ut verbis conligetur sententia";
item orationem ipsam quae ad populum diceretur. .
Exempla? in eo libro scripta non erant. Sed
nos postea Favorino desideranti harum omnium
significationum monumenta apud Ciceronem, sicut
supra scripsi, et apud elegantissimos veterum reperta
9 exhibuimus; id autem quod potissimum expetebat,
"contionem" esse dictam pro verbis et oratione,
docui titulo Tulliani libri, qui a M. Cicerone in-
scriptus est Contra Contionem Q. Metelli, quo nihil


o .-1 oe


! civium, Otho; Quiritium, Skutsch ; omnium deleted by
Vassis.


2 id enim, Cc. 5 exempla illa suggested by Hosius.


1 Festus, p. xvi, Müller,
* Frag. 4, p. 946, Orelli, 3 $168.
322


BOOK XVIII. vu. 4-9


had said it, would it not have seemed worthy of
remembrance ? "

But a little later Domitius sent Favorinus the
book which he had promised—I think it was one
by Verrius Flaccus—in which the following was
written with regard to questions of that kind :! that
senatus (senate) was used both of a place and of
persons; civias (state) of a situation and a town,
also of the rights of a community, and of a body
of men; further that ¢tribus (tribes) and decuriae
(decuries) designated places, privileges and per-
sons, and that contio had three meanings: the
place and tribunal from which speaking was done,
as Marcus Tullius in his speech, Jn Reply to the
Address of Quintus Metellus, says :? “I mounted the
tribunal (contionem) ; the people assembled." It also
signifies an assembly of the people gathered together,
since the same Marcus Tullius says in his Orator :?
«I have often heard audiences (contiones) cry out,
when words ended in a proper rhythm; for the
ears expect the thought to be expressed in har-
monious words.” It likewise designated the speech
itself which was made to the people.*

Examples of these uses were not given in that
pook. But afterwards I found and showed to
Favorinus at his request instances of all these
meanings in Cicero, as I remarked above, and in the
most elegant of the early writers ; but that which
he especially desired, an example of contio used for
words and of a speech, I pointed out in the title
of a book by Cicero, which he had called Jn Reply
to the Address of Quintus Metellus; for there Contionem


4 See note 1, p. 320, Gellius has given the meanings in
the wrong order.
378


v 2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


profecto significatur aliud quam ipsa quae a Metello
dicta est oratio.


VIII
'OuotoréAevra et óuoiómrera atque alia id genus quae orna-
menta orationis putantur inepta esse et puerilia, Lucili
quoque versibus declarari.

'OpotoréAevra et icokaráAykra et cdápwra et ópoi-
mtwra ceteraque huiusmodi scitamenta, quae isti
apirocali qui se Isocratios videri volunt in conlo-
candis verbis immodice faciunt et rancide, quam
sint insubida et inertia et puerilia facetissime hercle
significat in quinto Saturarum Lucilius. Nam ubi
est cum amico conquestus, quod ad se aegrotum
non viseret, haec ibidem addit festiviter:


Quo me habeam pacto, tametsi non quaeris, docebo,

Quando in eo numero mansi! quo in maxima
non? est i

Pars hominum . . .

Ut perisse velis quem visere nolueris, cum

Debueris. Hoc ** nolueris" et * debueris" te

Si minus delectat (quod atechnon)? et Isocratium 4
hoc

ckAnpades que simul totum ac si cvpperpaxrades,®

Non operam perdo, si tu hic.


mansi, e; mansti, Nannius, Hosius.

non, w; nunc, Scaliger, Hosius.

atexnon or atexnon, e ; &rexvov, Hosius.

Isocratium, Scaliger ; eissocratium, 8; the other MSS.
have eisocratium.

Lerodesque . . . miraciodes, Marz.


l
2
3
4


e


1 vy, 181 ff, Marx.


* The poet has been ill, but still lives; cf. abiit ad plures,
Petron. 42.


324


a


—


BOOK XVIII. vu. g-vir. 2


surely means nothing else than the speech itself
which was delivered by Metellus.


VIII


That óuotoréAevra, duotdmTwra, and other devices of the kind
which are considered ornaments of style, are silly and
puerile, is indicated, among other places, in some verses of
Lucilius.

Lucius in the fifth book of his Satires shows, and
indeed most wittily, how silly, useless, and puerile
are ópowréAevra, or “words of the same ending,"
isoxataAnxta, or ** words of the same sound,” zápica,
or “words exactly balanced," ópoiómroro, or “ words
of the same case," and other niceties of that kind
which those foolish pedants who wish to appear to
be followers of Isocrates use in their compositions
without moderation or taste. For having complained
to a friend because he did not come to see him when
he was ill, he adds these merry words :+


Although you do not ask me how I am,

I'll tell you, since with those I still abide

Who of all mortals are the lesser part ?. . .
You are the slacker friend ? who'd wish him dead
Whom you'd not visit though it was your debit.
But if you chide this *visit" joined with “debit "
(T'was writ by chance), if you detest it all,
This silly, puerile, Isocratic 4 stuff,

I'll waste no time on you,° since such you are.®


? Marx suggests Tu cessator malus, talis amicus as the
sense of the lacuna.

4 The homototeleuta of Isocrates are mentioned, among
others, by Cicero, Orator, 38.

5 That is, in deleting the jingle.

6 Such a friend as he has described.


325


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


IX


Quid significet, apud M. Catonem verbum ‘‘insecenda
quodque ‘‘insecenda” potius legendum sit quam, quod
plerique existimat, ‘‘insequenda,”


»


In libro vetere, in quo erat oratio M. Catonis
De Ptolemaeo contra Thermum, sic scriptum fuit:
*Sed si omnia dolo fecit, omnia avaritiae atque
pecuniae causa fecit, eiusmodi scelera nefaria, quae
neque fando neque legendo audivimus, supplicium
pro factis dare oportet." . .. -

** Insecenda " ! quid esset quaeri coeptum. Tum
ex his qui aderant alter litterator fuit, alter litteras
sciens, id est alter docens, doctus alter. Hi duo
inter sese dissentiebant. Et grammaticus quidem
contendebat, *'insequenda" scribendum esse ;2
*'insequenda' enim scribi," inquit, debet, non
*insecenda, quoniam ‘insequens’ significat . . .'
traditumque esse ‘inseque’ quasi ‘perge dicere’
et ‘insequere’ itaque ab Ennio scriptum in his
versibus :


Inseque, Musa, manu Romanorum induperator
Quod quisque in bello gessit cum rege Philippo."


Alter autem ille eruditior, nihil mendum, sed
recte atque integre scriptum esse perseverabat et
Velio Longo, non homini indocto, fidem esse ha-


! insecenda must have occurred in the lacuna.
* insequenda . . . esse added by Hertz.
3 debet added by Carrio.


1 p. 42. 6, Jordan.
326


BOOK XVIII. ix. 1-4


IX


The meaning of the word insecenda in Marcus Cato; and that
insecenda ought to be read rather than insequenda, which
many prefer.


IN an old book, containing the speech of Marcus
Cato On Ptolemy against Thermus, were these words :!
« But if he did everything craftily, everything for
the sake of avarice and pelf, such abominable crimes
as we have never heard of or read of, he ought to
suffer punishment for his acts. . 9

The question was raised what Znsecenda meant.
Of those who were present at the time there was
one who was a dabbler in literature and another
who was versed in it; that is to say, one was
teaching the subject, the other was learned in it.?
These two disagreed with each other, the grammarian
maintaining that insequenda ought to be written :
* For," said he, “ insequenda should be written, not
insecenda, since insequens means . . . and mseque has
come down to us in the sense of * proceed to say,
and accordingly insequor was written by Ennius in
the following verses :?

Proceed, O Muse, when Rome with Philip
warred,
To tell the valorous deeds our leaders wrought."

But the other, more learned, man declared that
there was no mistake, but that it was written
correctly and properly, and that we ought to trust
Velius Longus, a man not without learning, who


2 On the distinction between Zterator and litteratws see
Suet. Gram. iv. (ii, p. 401 f. L.C. L.).
3 Ann. 326f., Vahlen?, who reads insece.


327


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


bendam, qui in commentario quod fecisset De Usu
Antiquae Lectionis scripserit non *inseque" apud
Ennium legendum, sed * insece" ; ideoque a veteri-
bus, quas narrationes" dicimus, * insectiones "
esse appellatas; Varronem quoque versum hunc


Plauti de Menaechmis :
Nihilo! minus esse videtur séctius quam sómnia,


sic enarrasse: * nihilo magis narranda esse quam si
ea essent somnia." Haec illi inter se certabant.

5 Ego arbitror et a M. Catone “insecenda” et a
Q. Ennio * insece " scriptum sine x littera. Offendi
enim in bibliotheca Patrensi librum verae vetustatis
Livii Andronici, qui inscriptus est 'O8/ccea, in quo
erat versus primus cum hoc verbo sine « littera :


Virum mihi, Camena, insece versutum,
factus ex illo Homeri versu :
"Arópa. pow évvere, Movoa, ToÀrporov.


6 Illic igitur aetatis et fidei magnae libro credo. Nam,
quod in versu Plautino est: * sectius quam somnia,"

7 nihil in alteras partes argumenti habet. Etiamsi
veteres autem non *'inseque," sed “insece” dixe-
runt, credo, quia erat lenius leviusque, tamen eius-

8 dem sententiae verbum videtur. Nam et “ sequo "
et "sequor" et item * secta" et * sectio" con-
suetudine loquendi differunt; sed qui penitus in-
spexerit, origo et ratio utriusque una est.


! haec nihilo, Plaut. minus esse mihi videntur setius,
edd, Plaut.


1 v, 1047.
328


S4


BOOK XVIII. 1x. 4-8


wrote in the commentary which he composed On
the Use of Archaic Terms, that inseque should not
be read in Ennius, but insece; and that therefore
the early writers called what we term narrationes, or
«tales, insectiones; that Varro also explained this
verse from the Menaechmi of Plautus :!


Nihilo minus esse videtur sectius quam somnia,


as follows: * they seem to me no more worth telling
than if they were dreams." — Such was their dis-
cussion.

I think that both Marcus Cato and Quintus
Ennius wrote insecenda and insece without vu. For in
the library at Patrae? I found a manuscript of Livius
Andronicus of undoubted antiquity, entitled 'Oàc-
cea, in which the first line contained this word
without the letter wu:


Tell me (insece), O Muse, about the crafty man,


translated from this line of Homer: Ac


"AvOpa. jor &yvere, Modca, qoXvrpomov.


On that point then I trust a book of great age
and authority. For the fact that the line of Plautus
has sectius quam somnia lends no weight to the opposite
opinion. However, even if the men of old did say
insece and not inseque, I suppose because it was
lighter and smoother, yet the two words seem to
have the same meaning. For sequo and sequor and
likewise secta and sectio differ in the manner of their
use, but anyone who examines them closely will find
that their derivation and meaning are the same.


2 A city of Achaia, near the entrance to the Corinthian


Gulf, modern Patras.
3 Frag. 1, Bahrens. * Odyss. i. 1.
329


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


9 Doctores quoque et interpretes vocum Graecarum :
" Avópa. pou ** £yvere," Modtoa
et:
*"Egmere" viv pot, Moicat,


dictum putant, quod Latine “inseque” dicitur;
namque in altero v geminum, in altero o esse
10 tralatum dicunt. Sed etiam ipsum illud “én,”
quod significat verba aut versus, non aliunde esse
dictum tradunt quam “dd rod érecbac kai tod
1l eirév." Eadem ergo ratione antiqui nostri nar-


rationes sermonesque *' insectiones " appellitaverunt.


X
Errare istos qui in exploranda febri venarum pulsus per-
temptari putant, non arteriarum.


1 Iw Herodis, C. V., villam, quae est in agro Attico,
loco qui appellatur Cephisiae, aquis lucidis et!
nemoribus frequentem, aestu anni medio conces-

2 seram, Ibi alvo mihi cita et accedente febri rapida

3 decubueram. Eo Calvisius Taurus philosophus et
alii quidam sectatores eius cum Athenis visendi mei
gratia venissent, medicus, qui tum in his locis re-
pertus adsidebat mihi, narrare Tauro coeperat quid
incommodi paterer et quibus modulis quibusque

4 intervallis accederet febris decederetque. Tum in
eo sermone, cum iam me sinceriore corpusculo
factum diceret, ** Potes," inquit Tauro, “tu quoque


1 lucidis et, Damsté; educis, Q; et lucis et, c; lucis
deleted by Hertz; laetis suggested by Hosius.


1 Odyss. i. 1. * Iliad ii, 484, etc.
339


BOOK XVIII, 1x. 9-X. 4


The teachers also and interpreters of Greek words

think that in

dvdpa jou &vvere, Mos!
and

Zomete viv pot, Mota”,
ivvere and éezere are expressed by the Latin word
inseque ; for they say that in one word the v is
doubled, in the other changed to c. And they also
say that the word érw, which means “ words" or
« verses," can be derived only ázó rot érecOat kai TOU
eizeiv, that is from “ follow " and “say.” Therefore
for the same reason our forefathers called narrations
and discourses insectiones.


X


That those persons are in error who think that in testing for
fever the pulse of the veins is felt, and not that of the


arteries.


In the midst of the summer's heat I had with-
drawn to the country house of Herodes, a man of
senatorial rank, at a place in the territory of Attica :
which is called Cephisia, abounding in clear waters
and groves. There I was confined to my bed by an
attack of diarrhoea, accompanied by a high fever.
When the philosopher Calvisius Taurus, and some
others who were disciples of his, had come there
from Athens to visit me, the physician who had
been found there and who was sitting by me at the
time, began to tell Taurus what discomfort I suffered
and with what variations and intervals the fever came
and went. Then in the course of the conversation
remarking that I was now getting better, he said to
Taurus: “ You too may satisfy yourself of this, éàv


331


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


id ipsum comprehendere, éàv ayy avro) tis $Aeflós,
quod nostris verbis profecto ita dicitur: ‘si attigeris
venam illius.'

Hane loquendi imperitiam, quod venam pro
arteria dixisset, cum in eo docti homines qui cum
Tauro erant, tamquam in minime utili medico offen-
dissent atque id murmure et vultu ostenderent,
tum ibi Taurus, ut mos eius fuit, satis leniter:
* Certi," inquit, *sumus, vir bone, non ignorare
te quid ‘vena’ appelletur et quid *arteria, quod
venae quidem suapte vi inmobiles sint et sanguinis
tantum  demittendi gratia explorentur, arteriae
autem motu atque pulsu suo habitum et modum
febrium demonstrent; sed, ut video, pervulgate
magis quam inscite locutus es; non enim te solum,
sed alios quoque itidem errantis audivi venam pro
arteria dicere. Fac igitur ut experiamur elegan-
tiorem esse te in medendo quam in dicendo, et
cum dis bene volentibus opera tua sistas hune nobis
sanum atque validum quam citissime."

Hoc ego postea cum in medico reprehensum
esse meminissem, existimavi non medico soli, sed
omnibus quoque hominibus liberis liberaliterque
institutis, turpe esse ne ea quidem cognovisse ad
notitiam corporis nostri pertinentia, quae non altius
occultiusque remota sunt et quae natura nobis
tuendae valitudinis causa et in promptu esse et in
propatulo voluerit; ac propterea, quantum habui
lemporis subsicivi, medicinae quoque disciplinae
libros attigi, quos arbitrabar esse idoneos ad do-
cendum, et ex his cum alia pleraque ab isto
humanitatis usu non aliena, tum de venis quoque
et arteriis didicisse videor ad hunc ferme modum:


332


BOOK XVIII. x. 4-8


dy abro? ris pAeBds, which in our language certainly
means: si attigeris venam illius; that is, ‘if you will
put your finger on his vein. "

The learned men who accompanied Taurus were
shocked by this careless language in calling an artery
a vein, and looking on him as a physician of little
value, showed their opinion by their murmurs and
expression. Whereupon Taurus, very mildly, as was
his way, said: “ We feel sure, my good sir, that you
are not unaware of the difference between veins and
arteries; that the veins have no power of motion
and are examined only for the purpose of drawing
off blood, but that the arteries by their motion and
pulsation show the condition and degree of fever.
But, as I see, you spoke rather in common parlance
than through ignorance; for I have heard others, as
well as you, erroneously use the term ‘vein’ for
‘artery.’ Let us then find that you are more skilled
in curing diseases than in the use of language, and
with the favour of the gods restore this man to us by

our art, sound and well, as soon as possible.”

Afterwards when I recalled this criticism of the
physician, I thought that it was shameful, not only
for a physician, but for all cultivated and liberally
educated men, not to know even such facts pertaining
to the knowledge of our bodies as are not deep and
recondite, but which nature, for the purpose of
maintaining our health, has allowed to be evident
and obvious. Therefore I devoted such spare time
as 1 had to dipping into those books on the art of
medicine which I thought were suited to instruct me,
and from them I seem to have learned, not only many
other things which have to do with human expe-
rience, but also concerning veins and arteries what I


333


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


9 “ Vena" est conceptaculum sanguinis, quod dyyetov
medici vocant, mixti confusique cum spiritu naturali,
in quo plus sanguinis est, minus spiritus; “arteria d
est conceptaculum spiritus naturalis mixti confusi-
que cum sanguine, in quo plus spiritus est, minus

10 sanguinis; odvypos autem est intentio motus et
remissio in corde et in arteria naturalis, non arbi-

11 traria. Medicis autem veteribus oratione Graeca
ita definitus est: * Xóvyunós éorw diactodn Te kai
cvGToÀi ámpoaíperos dprmpías kai Kapdias.”


XI


Verba ex carminibus Furi Antiatis inscite a Cáesellio Vin-
dice reprehensa ; versusque ipsi in quibus ea verba sunt
subscripti.


1 Now hercle idem sentio cum Caesellio Vindice,
grammatico, ut mea opinio est, hautquaquam ine-
2rudito. Verum hoc tamen petulanter insciteque,
quod Furium, veterem poetam, dedecorasse linguam
Latinam scripsit huiuscemodi vocum fictionibus quae
mihi quidem neque abhorrere a poetica facultate
visae sunt neque dictu profatuque ipso taetrae aut
insuaves esse, sicuti sunt quaedam alia ab inlustribus
. poetis ficta dure et rancide.

3. Quae reprehendit autem Caesellius Furiana haec
sunt: quod terram in lutum versam “lutescere "
dixerit et tenebras in noctis modum factas “ nocte-
scere" et pristinas reciperare vires * virescere," et
quod ventus si! mare caerulum crispicans nitefacit
“purpurat” dixerit, et opulentum fieri **opule-
scere."


1 si suggested by Hosius ; caerulum cum, Dziatzko.
334


BOOK XVIII. x. 9-x1. 3


may express as follows: A “vein” is a receptacle,
or àyyctov, as the physicians call it, for blood mingled
and combined with vital breath, in which the blood
predominates and the breath is less. An “artery”
is a receptacle for the vital breath mingled and
combined with blood, in which there is more breath
and less blood. Sqvyyds (pulsation) is the natural
and involuntary expansion and contraction in the
heart and in the artery. But the ancient Greek
physicians defined it thus: “ An involuntary dilation
or contraction of the pulse and of the heart."


XI


Words from the poems of Furius of Antium which were
ignorantly criticised by Caesellius Vindex; a quotation of
the very verses which include the words in question.


I certainty do not agree with Caesellius Vindex,
the grammarian, though in my opinion he is by no
means without learning. But yet this was a hasty
and ignorant statement of his, that the ancient poet
Furius of Antium had degraded the Latin language
by forming words of a kind which to me did not
seem inconsistent with a poet’s license nor to be
vulgar or unpleasant to speak and utter, as are some
others which have been harshly and tastelessly
fashioned by distinguished poets.

The expressions of Furius which Caesellius censures
are these: that he uses /utescere of earth which has
turned into mud, noclescere of darkness that has
arisen like that of night, virescere of recovering
former strength, describes the wind curling the
blue sea and making it shine by purpurat, and uses
opulescere for becoming rich.


335


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


4 Versus autem ipsos ex poematis Furianis, in
quibus verba haec sunt, subdidi:


Sanguine diluitur tellus, cava terra lutescit.
Omnia noctescunt tenebris caliginis atrae.
Increscunt animi, virescit volnere virtus.

Sicut fulica levis! volitat super aequora classis,
Spiritus Eurorum viridis cum purpurat undas.
Quo magis in patriis possint opulescere campis.


XH


Morem istum veteribus nostris fuisse verba patiendi mutare
ac vetere in agendi modum.


1 Ip quoque habitum est in oratione facienda
elegantiae genus, ut pro verbis habentibus patiendi
figuram agentia ponerent ac deinde haec vice inter

2 sese mutua verterent. Juventius in comoedia :


pallium (inquit) flocci non facio? ut splendeat an
maculet.? .


Nonne hoc inpendio venustius gratiusque est
3 quam si diceret * maculetur"? Plautus etiam non
dissimiliter :


Quid ést?—Hoc rugat pállium, amíctus non sum
cómmode.


' sic fulica levius, Beloe.
* non facio, added by Fleckeisen.
* splendeat an maculet, Seyfert : splendean, 80IIX.


336


BOOK XVIII. xr. 4-xn. 3


I have added the very lines from the poems of
Furius in which these words occur :!
Blood floods the world, the deep earth turns to


mud (/utescit),
All becomes night (noctescunt) with darkness of


black gloom.
Their courage grows, valour 's renewed (virescit)


by wounds.
The fleet, like sea-bird, lightly skims the deep,
The East Wind's breath empurples (purpurat) the


green surge.
That on their native plains they may grow rich


(opulescere).


XII


That our forefathers had the custom of changing passive verbs
aud turning them into active.


Tuts also used to be regarded as a kind of elegance
in composition, to use active verbs in place of those
which had a passive form and then in turn to
substitute the former for the latter. Thus Juventius


in a comedy says :?

I care not if my cloak resplendent be, or spot.3

Is not this far more graceful and pleasing than if
he said maculetur, “if it be spotted"? Plautus
also says in a similar way : z

What's wrong ?—This cloak doth wrinkle (ruga),

I'm ill clad.
1 Frag. 1-6, Báhrens. 2 5, Ribbeck?.


3 The line is corrupt, but with Seyffert’s emendation fairly
clear. 4 Frag. fab. inc. xlv, Gotz.


337
VOL. III.


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


4 Itidem Plautus * pulveret" dicit, quod non pulvere
impleat, set ipsum pulveris plenum sit:
Exí tu, Dave, age, spárge; mundum hoc ésse
vestibulum volo.
Venüs ventura est nóstra, non hoc pülveret.
5 In Asinaria quoque * contemples" dicit pro * con-
templeris " :
Meüm caput contémples, si quidem é re consultás
tua.


6 Cn. Gellius in Annalibus: **Postquam tempestas

7 sedavit, Atherbal taurum immolavit." M. Cato in
Originibus: ** Eodem convenae conplures ex agro

8 accessitavere. Eo res eorum auxit." Varro libris
quos ad Marcellum De Lingua Latina fecit: “In
priore verbo graves prosodiae, quae fuerunt, manent,
reliquae mutant,” “mutant”! inquit elegantissime

9 pro "mutantur." Potest etiam id quoque ab eodem
Varrone in septimo Divinarum similiter dictum
videri: “Inter duas filias regum quid mutet, inter

10 Antigonam et Tulliam, est animadvertere." Verba
autem patiendi pro agentibus in omnibus ferme-
modum veterum scriptis reperiuntur. Ex quibus
sunt pauca ista, quae nune meminimus: * muneror
te" pro * munero " et * significor" pro *' significo ”
et *sacrificor" pro “ sacrifico” et * adsentior " pro
"adsentio" et “faeneror” pro *faenero" et « pig-
neror" pro *pignero" et alia istiusmodi pleraque,
quae, proinde ut in legendo fuerint obvia, nota-
buntur.


! mutant added by Carrio.


1 Td. xlvi. 2 v. 539. * Frag. 30, Peter 2.
4 Jd. 90. 5 Frag. 61, Wilmanns.
$ '** Elegant" because it balances manent,


338


|


BOOK XVIII. xi. 4-10


" Also Plautus uses pulveret, not of making dusty, but
of being dusty :!


Go, sprinkle, slave; I'd have this entrance neat.
My Venus comes, don't let the place show dust
(pulveret).

In the Asinaria he uses contemples for contempleris :?

Observe (contemples) my head, if you'd your interest

heed.

Gnaeus Gellius in his Annals? writes: * After the
storm quieted (sedavit) Adherbal sacrificed a bull" ;
Marcus Cato in his Origins : + * Many strangers came
to that same place from the country. Therefore
their wealth waxed (auzit).” Varro in the books
which he wrote On Latin Diction, dedicated to Mar-
cellus, said :* * In the former word the accents that
were grave remain so. The others change," where
mutant, “change,” is a very elegant expression for
mutantur, “are changed." ® The same expression too
seems to be used by Varro in the seventh book of his
Divine Anliquities :* “What a difference (quid mutet)
there is between princesses may be seen in Antigone
and Tullia. But passive verbs instead of active are
found in the writings of almost all the men of the
olden time. A few of these, which I recall now, are
the following: muneror te, or “I reward you," for
munero ; significor, or f I indicate," for significo ;
assentior, or ** I assent,” for assentio ; sacrificor, or “ I
sacrifice,’ for sacrifico; faeneror, or “ I practise
usury,” for faenero ; pigneror, or “I take as a
pledge," for pignero, and many others of the same
kind, which will be noted as I meet them in reading.


7 Frag. 1, p. exlv, Merkel.


339
za


1


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XIII


Quali talione Diogenes philosophus usus sit, pertemptatus a
dialectico quodam sophismatio inpudenti.


SaATURNALIBUS Athenis alea quadam festiva et


2 honesta lusitabamus huiuscemodi: ubi convene-


3


ramus conplusculi eiusdem studii homines ad la-
vandi tempus, captiones quae *' sophismata ” appel-
lantur mente agitabamus easque, quasi talos aut
tesserulas, in medium vice sua quisque iaciebamus.
Captionis solutae aut parum intellectae praemium


4 poenave erat nummus unus sestertius. Hoc aere


5


7


conlecto, quasi manuario, cenula curabatur omnibus
qui eum lusum luseramus. Erant autem captiones
ad hoe fere exemplum, tametsi Latina oratione
non satis scite ac paene etiam inlepide exponuntur:
"Quod nix est, hoc grando non est; nix autem
alba est: grando igitur alba non est." Item aliud
non dissimile: * Quod homo est, non est hoc equus;
homo autem animal est: equus igitur animal non
est." Dicere ergo debebat qui ad sophisma dilu-
endum ac refellendum ritu aleatorio vocatus erat,
in qua parte quoque in verbo captio foret, quid
dari concedique non oporteret; nisi dixerat, nummo
singulo multabatur. Ea multa cenam iuvabat.
Libet autem dicere quam facete Diogenes so-
phisma id genus, quod supra dixi, a quodam
dialectico ex Platonis diatriba per contumeliam pro-


8 positum, remuneratus sit. Nam cum ita rogasset


349


BOOK XVIII. xui. 1-8


XIII


The retort which the philosopher Diogenes made, when he
was challenged by a logician with an impudent sophistry.


AT Athens during the Saturnalia we engaged in a
pleasant and improving diversion of this kind : when
a number of us who were interested in the same
study had met at the time of the bath, we discussed
the catch questions which are called “sophisms,”
and each one of us cast them before the company in
his turn, like knuckle-bones or dice. The prize for
solving a problem, or the penalty for failing to
understand it, was a single sestertius. From the
money thus collected, as if it had been won at dice,
alittle dinner was provided for all of us who had
taken part in the game. Now the sophisms were
somewhat as follows, although they cannot be
expressed very elegantly in Latin, or even without
clumsiness: “What snow is, that hail is not;
but snow is white, therefore hail is not white."
A somewhat similar one is this: “ What man is, that
a horse is not; man is an animal, therefore a horse
is not an animal" The one who was called upon by
the throw of the dice to solve and refute the
sophistry was expected to tell in what part of the
proposition and in what word the fallacy consisted,
and what ought not to be granted and conceded;
if he did not succeed, he was fined one sestertius.
The fine contributed to the dinner.

I must tell you how wittily Diogenes paid back
a sophism of that kind which I have mentioned
above, proposed with insulting intent by a logician
of the Platonie school. For when the logician had


341


2


3


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


dialecticus: * Quod ego sum, id tu non es?" et
Diogenes adnuisset, atque ille addidisset: “ Homo
autem ego sum," cum id quoque adsensus esset,
contra dialecticus ita conclusisset: ‘‘ Homo igitur tu
non es," * Hoc quidem," inquit Diogenes, “ falsum
est, et si verum fieri vis, a me incipe."


XIV


Quid sit numerus ''hemiolios," quid ‘‘ epitritos”; et quod
vocabula ista non facile nostri ausi sunt convertere in
linguam Latinam.


FicunAE quaedam numerorum, quas Graeci certis
nominibus appellant, vocabula in lingua Latina non
habent. Sed qui de numeris Latine scripserunt
Graeca ipsa dixerunt, fingere autem nostra, quoniam
id absurde futurum erat, noluerunt. Quale enim
fieri nomen posset *hemiolio" numero aut * epitrito" ?


4 Est autem *  hemiolios " qui numerum aliquem totum


5


6


in sese habet dimidiumque eius, ut tres ad duo, quin-
decim ad decem, triginta ad viginti; “epitritos” est
qui habet totum aliquem numerum et eiusdem partem


tertiam, ut quattuor ad tres, duodecim ad novem,


quadraginta ad triginta. Haec autem notare me-
minisseque non esse abs re visum est, quoniam
vocabula ista numerorum nisi intelleguntur, rationes
quaedam  subtilissimae in libris philosophorum
scriptae percipi non queunt.


342


BOOK XVIII. xi. 8—x1v. 6


asked: “You are not what I am, are you?" and
Diogenes had admitted it, he added: *' But I am a
man." And when Diogenes had assented to that
also and the logician had concluded: “ Then you are
not a man,” Diogenes retorted: “That is a lie, but
if you want it to be true, begin your proposition with
me.


XIV


What the number is which is called hemiodios and what
epitritos; and that our countrymen have not rashly
ventured to translate those words into Latin.


CERTAIN numerical figures which the Greeks call
by definite terms have no corresponding names in
Latin. But those who have written in Latin about
numbers have used the Greek expressions and have
hesitated to make up Latin equivalents, since that
would be absurd. For what name could one give to
a number which is said to be hemiolios or epitritos ?
But Aemiolios is à number which contains in itself
some other whole number and its half, as three
compared with two, fifteen with ten, thirty with
twenty ; epitritos is a number which contains another
whole number and its third part, as four compared
with three, twelve with nine, forty with thirty. It
does not seem out of place to note and to remember
these numerical terms ; for unless they are under-
stood, some of the most subtle calculations recorded
in the writings of the philosophers cannot be com-
prehended.


343


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


XV


Quod M. Varro in herois versibus observaverit rem nimis
anxiae et curiosae observationis.


IN longis versibus qui * hexametri" vocantur, item
in senariis, animadverterunt metrici primos duos
pedes, item extremos duos, habere singulos posse
integras partes orationis, medios haut umquam posse,
sed constare eos semper ex verbis aut divisis aut
2 mixtis atque confusis. M. etiam Varro in libris
Disciplinarum | scripsit, observasse sese in versu
hexametro, quod omnimodo quintus semipes verbum
finiret et quod priores quinque semipedes aeque
magnam vim haberent in efficiendo versu atque alii
posteriores septem, idque ipsum ratione quadam
geometrica fieri disserit,


! See note on iv. 5. 6 (vol. i, p. 328).

* That is, the first two feet and the last two may consist
of undivided words, but the third and fourth are formed
either of words which are divided, or of parts of different


344


Es


BOOK XVIII. xv. 1-2


XV


That Marcus Varro in heroic verse noted a matter demand-
ing very minute and careful observation.


In the long lines called hexameters, and likewise
in senarii,! students of metric have observed that the
first two feet, and also the last two, may consist each
of a single part of speech, but that those between
may not, but are always formed of words which are
either divided, or combined and run together.?
Varro in his book On the Arís? wrote that he had
observed in hexameter verse that the fifth half-foot
always ends a word,‘ and that the first five half-feet
are of equally great importance in making a verse
with the following seven; and he argues that this
happens in accordance with a certain geometrical
ratio.


words. But that this rule is not invariable was shown by
Muretus, Variae Lectiones, xi. 6.

3 p. 202, Bipont.

4 That is, there is a caesura in the fifth foot, according to
Varro.


345


kocvaludosdt edo dad
bob Shab ovine iov imi foli
Se any ah Of ubeummt -
Hif quil «up ial Ore. Dil, z trt "1
for ety winters labi sepebccosa ni ariel


d ad uede Aaa wares: AE TAA 47 dull ^ Vim 4
; cw das 3e edition imb ur


fr 4b» Mu! dn sf. Pada
SM


BOOK XIX


T


LIBER NONUS DECIMUS
I


Responsio cuiusdam philosophi, interrogati quam ob causam
maris tempestate palluerit.


NavicABAMUS a Cassiopa Brundisium mare Ionium
violentum et vastum et iactabundum. Nox deinde
quae diem primum secuta est, in ea fere tota ventus
a latere saeviens navem undis compleverat. Tum
postea, complorantibus nostris omnibus atque in
sentina satis agentibus, dies quidem tandem inluxit.
Sed nihil de periculo neque de saevitia venti
remissum, quin turbines etiam crebriores et caelum
atrum et fumigantes globi et figurae quaedam nubium
metuendae quos *typhonas" vocabant, inpendere
inminereque ac depressurae navem videbantur.

In eadem fuit philosophus in disciplina Stoica
celebratus, quem ego Athenis cognoveram non parva
virum auctoritate satisque attente discipulos iuvenes
continentem. Eum tunc in tantis periculis inque
illo tumultu caeli marisque requirebam oculis, scire
cupiens quonam statu animi et an interritus intre-
pidusque esset. Atque ibi hominem conspicimus


| Lemmata of Book xix omitted in v ; appear in various foris
in s.


1 A town in the north-eastern part of Corcyra, also called
Cassiope.


? Typhon, according to Hesiod, was a son of Typhoeus


348


BOOK XIX
I


The reply of a certain philosopher, when he was asked why
he turned pale in a storm at sea.


We were sailing from Cassiopa! to Brundisium
over the lonian sea, violent, vast and storm-tossed.
During almost the whole of the night which followed
our first day a fierce side-wind blew, which had
filled our ship with water. Then afterwards, while
we were all still lamenting, and working hard at the
pumps, day at last dawned. But there was no less
danger and no slackening of the violence of the wind ;
on the contrary, more frequent whirlwinds, a black
sky, masses of fog, and a kind of fearful cloud-forms,
which they called ftyphones,? or “ typhoons," seemed
to hang over and threaten us, ready to overwhelm
the ship.

In our company was an eminent philosopher of
the Stoie sect, whom I had known at Athens as a
man of no slight importance, holding the young men
who were his pupils under very good control. In
the midst of the great dangers of that time and that
tumult of sea and sky I looked for him, desiring to
know in what state of mind he was and whether he
was unterrified and courageous. And then I beheld


(see note on xvii. 10. 9) and father of the winds; but by later
poets he was identified with Typhos or Typhoeus. His name
was given to the violent storms called typhoons.


S49


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


pavidum et expallidum,! ploratus quidem nullos,
sicuti ceteri omnes, nec ullas huiusmodi voces cientem,
sed coloris et voltus turbatione non multum a ceteris


7 differentem. At ubi caelum enituit et deferbuit


10


1l
12


13


mare et ardor ille periculi deflagravit, accedit ad
Stoicum Graecus quispiam dives ex Asia, magno,
ut videbamus, cultu paratuque rerum et familiae,
atque ipse erat multis corporis animique deliciis
aflluens. Is quasi inludens: “Quid hoc," inquit,
* est, o philosophe, quod, cum in periculis essemus,
timuisti tu et palluisti? Ego neque timui neque
pallui.”” Et philosophus aliquantum cunctatus an
respondere ei conveniret, “Si quid ego,” inquit, ‘in
tanta violentia tempestatum videor paulum pavefac-
tus, non tu istius rei ratione audienda dignus es.
Set tibi sane Aristippus,? ille Socratis discipulus, pro
me responderit,? qui in simili * tempore a simillimo
tui homine interrogatus quare philosophus timeret,
cum ille contra nihil metueret, non eandem esse
causam sibi atque illi respondit, quoniam is quidem
esset non magnopere sollicitus pro anima nequissimi
nebulonis, ipsum autem pro Aristippi anima timere."

His tunc verbis Stoicus divitem illum Asiaticum
a sese molitus est. Sed postea, cum Brundisium ad-
ventaremus malaciaque esset venti ac maris, percon-
tatus eum sum quaenam illa ratio esset pavoris sui,
quam dicere ei supersedisset a quo fuerat non satis
digne compellatus? Atque ille mihi placide et


1 expallidum, Hosius; extrilidum, e; exterritum, J. F.
Gronov; exalbidum, Skutsch; extimidum, Georges.

? Aristippius, J. Gronov; Aristippus, we; Hertz placed a
lacuna after ile, suggesting egregius Socratis ille to fill 4t.

3 Frag. Phil. Graec. ii. 407. 16.

4 qui consimili, suggested by Hosius.


350


BOOK XIX. 1. 6-13.


the man frightened and ghastly pale, not indeed
uttering any lamentations, as all the rest were doing,
nor any outcries of that kind, but in his loss of colour
and distracted expression not differing much from the
others. But when the sky cleared, the sea grew
calm, and the heat of danger cooled, then the Stoic
was approached by a rich Greek from Asia, a man of
elegant apparel, as we saw, and with an abundance
of baggage and many attendants, while he himself
showed signs of a luxurious person and disposition.
This man, in a bantering tone, said: * What does
this mean, Sir philosopher, that when we were in
danger you were afraid and turned pale, while I
neither feared nor changed colour?" And the
philosopher, after hesitating for a moment about the
propriety of answering him, said: “If in such a
terrible storm I did show a little fear, you are not
worthy to be told the reason for it. But, if you
please, the famous Aristippus, the pupil of Socrates,
shall answer for me,! who on being asked on a
similar occasion by a man much like you why he
feared, though a philosopher, while his questioner on
the contrary had no fear, replied that they had not
the same motives, for his questioner need not be
very anxious about the life of a worthless coxcomb,
but he himself feared for the life of an Aristippus."

With these words then the Stoic rid himself of the
rich Asiatic. But later, when we were approaching
Brundisium and sea and sky were calm, I asked him
what the reason for his fear was, which he had
refused to reveal to the man who had improperly
addressed him. And he quietly and courteously
replied : “Since you are desirous of knowing, hear


1 Frag. Phil. Graec. ii. 407.16.
351


14


15


17


18


19


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


comiter : “ Quoniam," inquit, *audiendi cupidus es,
audi quid super isto brevi quidem, sed necessario et
naturali pavore maiores nostri, conditores sectae
Stoicae, senserint,vel potius," inquit, ‘‘lege ; nam et
facilius credideris, si legas, et memineris magis."
Atque ibi coram ex sarcinula sua librum protulit
Epicteti philosophi quintum  A:aAéfeov, quas ab
Arriano digestas congruere scriptis Zvwvos et
Chrysippi non dubium est.

In eo libro Graeca scilicet oratione scriptam hanc
sententiam legimus: “Visa animi, quas davracías
philosophi appellant, quibus mens hominis prima sta-
tim specie accidentis ad animum rei pellitur, non
voluntatis sunt neque arbitrariae, sed vi quadam sua
inferunt sese hominibus noscitanda; probationes
autem, quas ovyxatafecers vocant, quibus eadem visa
noseuntur, voluntariae sunt fiuntque hominum
arbitratu. Propterea cum sonus aliquis formidabilis
aut caelo aut ex ruina aut repentinus nescio cuius
perieuli nuntius vel quid aliud est! eiusmodi factum,
sapientis quoque animum paulisper moveri et contrahi
et pallescere necessum est, non opinione alicuius mali
praecepta, sed quibusdam motibus rapidis et incon-
sultis, officium mentis atque rationis praevertentibus.
Mox tamen ille sapiens ibidem ras rotavras $avraocías,
id est visa istaec animi sui terrifica, non adprobat,
hoe est od ovyxatariberar o006 mpocemiofafeu? sed
abiecit respuitque nec ei metuendum esse in his
quiequam videtur. Atque hoe inter insipientis


l est, J. Gronov ; ex, 5; y omits.
2 Kronenberg transfers ovd& mpocemibotá(e. to § 20, after
ovyKararlOerat.


1 Frag. 9, p. 408, Schenkl.
352


a


BOOK XIX. r. 13-19


what our forefathers, the founders of the Stoic sect,
thought about that brief but inevitable and natural
fear, or rather," said he, “read it, for if you read it,
you will be the more ready to believe it and you will
remember it better." Thereupon before my eyes he
drew from his little bag the fifth book of the Dis-
courses of the philosopher Epictetus, which, as
arranged by Arrian, undoubtedly agree with the
writings of Zeno and Chrysippus.

In that book I read this statement, which of course
was written in Greek! : “The mental visions, which
the philosophers call davracio: or f phantasies, by
which the mind of man on the very first appearance
of an object is impelled to the perception of the
object, are neither voluntary nor controlled by the
will, but through a certain power of their own they
force their recognition upon men ; but the expres-
sions of assent, which they call cvykaraÜéces, by
which these visions are recognized, are voluntary
and subject to man's will. Therefore when some
terrifying sound, either from heaven or from a falling
building or as a sudden announcement of some
danger, or anything else of that kind occurs, even
the mind of a wise man must necessarily be dis-
turbed, must shrink and feel alarm, not from a pre-
conceived idea of any danger, but from certain swift
and unexpected attacks which overthrow the power
of the mind and of reason. Presently, however, the
wise man does not approve ‘ such phantasies, that is
to say, such terrifying mental visions (to quote the
Greek, ‘he does not consent to them nor confirm
them’), but he rejects and scorns them, nor does he
see in them anything that ought to excite fear,
And they say that there is this difference between

353


VOL. III, AA


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


sapientisque animum differre dicunt, quod insipiens,
qualia sibi esse primo animi sui pulsu visa sunt saeva
et aspera, talia esse vero putat et eadem incepta,
tamquam si iure metuenda sint, sua quoque adsensione
adprobat xoi vpocemióofáfe: hoc enim verbo Stoici,
cum super ista re disserunt, utuntur. Sapiens autem,
cum breviter et strictim colore atque vultu motus est,
ov cvykarar(Üerat, sed statum vigoremque sententiae
suae retinet quam de huiuscemodi visis semper habuit,
ut de minime metuendis, sed fronte falsa et
formidine inani territantibus.”

Haec Epictetum philosophum ex decretis Stoi-
corum sensisse atque dixisse, in eo quo dixi libro
legimus adnotandaque esse idcirco existimavimus,
ut rebus forte id genus quibus dixi obortis pavescere
sensim et quasi albescere, non insipientis esse
hominis neque ignavi putemus et in eo tamen brevi
motu naturali magis infirmitati cedamus quam quod
esse ea qualia visa sunt censeamus.


II


Ex quinque corporis sensibus duos esse cum beluis maxime
communes ; quodque turpis et improba est voluptas quae
ex auditu, visu odoratuque procedit, quae vero ex gustu
tactuque est, rerum omnium foedissima est, cum hae duae
bestiarum etiam sint, reliquae hominum tantum.


QuiNQuE sunt hominum sensus, quos Graeci
aicOyoes appellant, per quos voluptas animo aut


354


BOOK XIX. 1. 19-1. 1


the mind of a foolish man and that of a wise man,
that the foolish man thinks that such * visions’ are
in fact as dreadful and terrifying as they appear at
the original impact of them on his mind, and by his
assent he approves of such ideas as if they were
rightly to be feared, and ‘ confirms’ them; for
zpocemio£áfe, is the word which the Stoics use in
their discourses on the subject. But the wise man,
after being affected for a short time and slightly in
his colour and expression, ‘does not assent, but
retains the steadfastness and strength of the opinion
which he has always had about visions of this kind,
namely that they are in no wise to be feared but
excite terror by a false appearance and vain alarms.”

That these were the opinions and utterances of
Epictetus the philosopher in accordance with the
beliefs of the Stoics I read in that book which I
have mentioned, and I thought that they ought to
be recorded for this reason, that when things of the
kind which I have named chance to occur, we may
not think that to fear for a time and, as it were, turn
white is the mark of a foolish and weak man, but in
that brief but natural impulse we yield rather to
human weakness than because we believe that those
things are what they seem.


II


That of the five senses of the body two in particular we share
with beasts; and that pleasure which comes from hearing,
sight and smell is base and reprehensible, but that which
comes from taste and touch is the most shameful of all,
since the last two are felt also by beasts, theothers only by
mankind.

Men have five senses, which the Greeks call
aicOjoes, by which mental or bodily pleasure is
355


AA 2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


corpori quaeri videtur: gustus, tactus, odoratus,
visus, auditus. Ex his omnibus quae inmodice
voluptas capitur, ea turpis atque inproba existimatur.

2 Sed enim quae nimia ex gustu atque tactu est, ea
voluptas, sicuti sapientes viri censuerunt, omnium
rerum foedissima est, eosque maxime qui duabus
istis beluinis voluptatibus sese dediderunt, gravissimi
vitii vocabulis Graeci appellant vel &xpare vel
ákoAderovs; nos eos vel “incontinentes’’ dicimus
vel * intemperantes " : dxoAdorovs enim, si interpre-
tari coactius velis, nimis id verbum insolens erit.

3 Istae autem voluptates duae gustus atque tactus,
id est libidines in cibos atque in Venerem prodigae,
solae sunt hominibus communes cum beluis et
idcirco in pecudum ferorumque animalium numero
habetur, quisquis est his ferinis voluptatibus prae-

4 vinctus ; ceterae ex tribus aliis sensibus proficiscentes
hominum esse tantum propriae videntur.

5 Verba super hac re Aristotelis philosophi ad-
scripsi, ut vel auctoritas clari atque incluti viri tam
infamibus nos voluptatibus deterreret: Aià mí of karà
Tijv THS Apis 1) yevoews 780viv ! ycyvonévqv, dv $repBáA-
Awow, ákparéis Aéyovrai; oi Te yàp cepi rà adpodiova
dx«óAacTrot TotoUrou? of ce wept Tas THS tpopys azo-
Aa ces: rüv 0? Kata Thy rpodwjv, dm’ évíov piv ev T)
yAórry TÓ 390, ax’ évíov 8& év TQ Adpvyyu Oi xai
Pirosevos yepdvov Adpvyya? eUxero éxew- ij Sud TO ras
àvÓ TovTwv yiyvopevas j00vàs kowüs elvat TMiv Kat Tots
arrows Ldows ; &re * otcdv Kowüv,? üruxóraTa( eiot kai
padrvora 3) mover éroveddurtoy ds tov® Sd rovrov JTTÓ-

l $Oov$v, o0 üv, Arist. 2 Toto(ro: omitted by MSS. of Arist.
9? gdpuyya, Arist. 4 Gre oiv, Arist. ‘
5 obom Kowal, many MSS. of Arist. 8 Gore TÓv, Arist.


| Problemata, xxviii. 7.


356


—— — À—


BOOK XIX. m. 1-5


evidently sought : taste, touch, smell, sight, hearing.
From all of these the enjoyment of any immoderate
pleasure is regarded as base and reprehensible. But
excessive pleasure from taste or touch in the opinion
of philosophers is the basest of all things, and those
in particular who have given themselves up to those
two animal pleasures the Greeks call by terms
of the gravest reproach either áxpareis or dxohacror ;
we call them either incontinentes (incontinent) or
intemperantes (intemperate) ; for if you should desire
to have a closer translation of d«éAacro, the
equivalent will be too unusual. But those two
pleasures of taste and touch, namely, gluttony and
venery, are the only ones common to man with the
lower animals, and therefore whoever is enslaved to
these beastly pleasures is regarded as in the number
of brutes and beasts; the remaining pleasures pro-
ceeding from the other three senses seem to be
peculiar to man alone.

I have added the words of Aristotle the philosopher
on this subject, in order that the authority of that
renowned and illustrious man might turn us from
such shameful pleasures: “Why are they called
incontinent who indulge to excess in the pleasures of
taste and touch? For both those who are immoderate
in venery and those who are immoderate in the
enjoyment of food are such. But of the latter, some
find this gratification in the tongue and others in
the throat, and it was for that reason that Philoxenos
prayed to have the throat of a crane. Is it because
the pleasures derived from such sources are common
to us with the other animals? And being thus
common they are the most dishonourable and more
than the other pleasures, or alone, objects of


357


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


£ Ne ^ ^ > / , ^ M
j.evov Weyouev kal ákpari) kai àkóXagTov Aéyojev ix TO
vró TOv xepíoTrov T9ovàv $rTücÜa. | obcQv Se TOv
alaOceov Tévre, TA GANa Loa àmÓ TOv Oo póvov rv

r/ ev 3 b ^ » ^ v >

mpoepnuévov T0erat Kara 8€ tas dAAÀas 7 OÀos OvdxX

6 5jóera, 3) karà avpjeB5k0s roUro wacxe. Quis igitur
habens aliquid humani pudoris voluptatibus istis
duabus coeundi atque comedendi, quae sunt homini

7 cum sue atque asino communes, gaudeat? Socrates
quidem dicebat multos homines propterea velle
vivere, ut ederent et biberent, se bibere atque esse,

8 ut viveret. Hippocrates autem, divina vir scientia,
de coitu venerio ita existimabat, partem esse quan-
dam morbi taeterrimi, quem nostri * comitialem "
dixerunt; namque ipsius verba haec traduntur: rv
cvvovaíav elvat gukpày éridnyiav.


III


Quod turpius est frigide laudari quam acerbius vituperari.


1  Turpius esse dicebat Favorinus philosophus exigue
atque frigide laudari quam insectanter et graviter

2 vituperari: * Quoniam," inquit, *qui maledicit et
vituperat, quanto id acerbius facit, tam maximo ille
pro inimico et iniquo ducitur et plerumque propterea
fidem non capit. Sed qui infecunde atque ieiune
laudat destitui a causa videtur et amicus quidem
creditur eius quem laudare vult, sed nihil posse
reperire quod iure laudet."


1 See note on xvi. 4. 4.


358


-—


BOOK XIX. m. 5-11. 2


reproach, so that we censure a man who is addicted
to them and call him incontinent and incorrigible
because he is enslaved to the meanest of pleasures.
Now, there being five senses, the other animals are
gratified by the two which have been mentioned only,
but from the others they either enjoy no pleasure at
all, or they merely experience it incidentally."
Who, then, having any human modesty, would take
pleasure in those two delights of venery and/gluttony,
which are common to man with the hog and the ass ?
Socrates indeed used to say that many men wish to
live in order to eat and drink, but that he ate and
drank in order to live. Hippocrates, moreover, a
man of divine wisdom, believed of venery that it
was a part of the horrible disease which our country-
men call comitialis, or “the election disease" ;! for
these are his very words as they have come down
to us: “that coition is a brief epilepsy."


III


Thatitis more disgraceful to be praised coldly than to be
accused bitterly.


FavoniNus the philosopher used to say that it was
more shameful to be praised faintly and coldly than
to be censured violently and severely: “F or," said
he, “the man who reviles and censures you is re-
garded as unjust and hostile towards you in propor-
tion to the bitterness of his invective, and therefore
he is usually not believed. But one who praises
grudgingly and faintly seems to lack a theme ; he is
regarded as the friend of a man whom he would like
‘to praise but as unable to find anything in him which
he can justly commend.”


359


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


IV


Quamobrem venter repentino timore effluat; quare etiani
ignis urinam lacessat.
1l  AuirorEss libri sunt, qui Problemata Physica in-
scribuntur, lepidissimi et elegantiarum omnigenus
2 referti. In his quaerit quam ob causam eveniat ut
quibus invasit repentinus rei magnae timor, plerum-
3 que alvo statim cita fiant. Item quaerit cur accidat
ut eum qui propter ignem diutius stetit libido urinae
4 lacessat. Ac de alvo quidem inter timendum prona
atque praecipiti causam esse dicit quod timor omnis
sit algificus, quem ille appellat yvxpomoiv,! eaque
vi frigoris sanguinem caldoremque omnem de summa
corporis cute cogat penitus et depellat faciatque
simul ut qui timent, sanguine ex ore decedente,
5 pallescant. “Is autem," inquit, * sanguis et caldor
in intuma coactus movet plerumque alvum et
6 incitat." De urina celebri, ex igni proximo facta,
verba haec posuit: Td S& zip duaxyadg 7d memmyós?
domrep 1)ÀAtos THY xiva.


id


Ex Aristotelis libris sumptum quod nivis aqua potui pessima
sit ; et quod ex nive crystallus concreatur.

l Iw Tiburte rus concesseramus hominis amici divitis

aestate anni flagrantissima ego et quidam alii aequales


1 Wuxpomody, notin Arist. 2 memyybs év TO oduatt, Arist.


I xxvii. 10; vii. 3.
* This is not what Aristotle said, but that water formed


360


ee


BOOK XIX. rv. 1-v. x


IV


Why the bowels are loosened by sudden terror; also why
fire provokes urine.

Tuere is a work of Aristotle, entitled Physical
Questions, which is most delightful, and filled with
choice knowledge of all kinds. In this book he
inquires! why it happens that those who are seized
with sudden fear of some great catastrophe commonly
suffer at once from looseness of the bowels. He
also inquires why it happens that one who has stood
for some time before a fire is overtaken with a desire
to make water. And he says that the cause of the
loosening and discharge of the bowels because of
fear is due to the fact that all terror is cold-produc-
ing, or yvxpomo)s, as he calls it, and that by the
effect of that cold it drives and expels all the blood
and heat from the surface of the skin and at the
same time causes those who fear to grow pale,
because the blood leaves the face. * Now this blood
and heat," he says, “being driven inwards, usually
moves the bowels and stimulates them." For the
frequent urinating caused by nearness to a fire he
gave this reason: “ The fire dissolves the solid
matter, as the sun does snow."


V


A statement from the works of Aristotle, that snow-water is
a very bad thing to drink ; and that ice is formed from
snow.?


IN the hottest season of the year with some com-
panions and friends of mine who were students of


from ice was unwholesome, see $$ 5 and 9. See crit. note 1,
p. 362.
361


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


et familiares mei, eloquentiae aut philosophiae secta-

2 tores. Erat nobiscum vir bonus ex peripatetica disci-
plina, bene doctus et Aristotelis unice studiosissimus.

3 Is nos aquam multam ex diluta nive bibentes coerce-
bat severiusque increpabat. Adhibebat nobis auctori-
tates nobilium medicorum et cumprimis Aristotelis
philosophi, rei omnis humanae peritissimi, qui aquam
nivalem frugibus sane et arboribus fecundam diceret,
sed hominibus potu nimio insalubrem esse tabemque
et morbos sensim atque in diem longam visceribus
inseminare.

4 Haec quidem ille ad nos prudenter et benivole et
adsidue dictitabat. Sed cum bibendae nivis pausa
fieret nulla, promit e bibliotheca Tiburti, quae tunc
in Herculis templo satis commode instructa libris
erat, Aristotelis librum eumque ad nos adfert et
* Huius saltem," inquit, “sapientissimi viri verbis
credite ac desinite valitudinem vestram profligare.”

56 In eo libro scriptum fuit deterrimam esse potu
aquam e nive itemque solidius latiusque concretam
esse ! eam, quam xpícraAXor Graeci appellant ; causa-

6 que ibi adscripta est huiuscemodi: “ Quoniam, cum
aqua frigore aeris duratur et coit, necessum est fieri
evaporationem et quandam quasi auram tenuissimam

7 exprimi ex ea et emanare. Id autem," inquit, “in
ea levissimum est quod evaporatur; manet autem
quod est gravius et sordidius et insalubrius, atque


1 esse deleted by Vogel.


! Frag. 214, Rose.
362


| ———


BOOK XIX. v. 1-7


eloquence or of philosophy, I had withdrawn to the
country-place of a rich friend at Tibur. There was
with us a good man of the Peripatetic school, well
trained and especially devoted to Aristotle. When
we drank a good deal of water made of melted
snow, he tried to restrain us and rather severely
scolded us. He cited us the authority of famous
physicians and in particular of the philosopher
Aristotle, a man skilled in all human knowledge,
who declared that snow-water was indeed helpful to
grain and trees, but was a very unwholesome drink
for human beings, and that it gradually produced
wasting diseases in the body, which made their
appearance only after a long time.

This counsel he gave us repeatedly in a spirit of
prudence and goodwill. But when the drinking of
snow-water went on without interruption, from the
library of Tibur, which at that time was in the
temple of Hercules and was well supplied with
books, he drew out a volume of Aristotle and
brought it to us, saying: * At least believe the
words of this wisest of men and cease to ruin your
health."

In that book it was written! that water from snow
was very bad to drink, as was also that water which
was more solidly and completely congealed, which the
Greeks call kpíovaAXos, or “ clear ice”; and the follow-
ing reason was there given for this: * That when
water is hardened by the cold air and congeals, it
necessarily follows that evaporation takes place and
that a kind of very thin vapour, so to speak, is
forced from it and comes out of it. But its lightest
part," he said, “is that which is evaporated ; what
remains is heavier and less clean and wholesome,


363


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


id, pulsu aeris verberatum, in modum coloremque


8 spumae candidae oritur. Sed aliquantum quod est


9


10


2


salubrius diffari atque evaporari ex nive indicium
illud est, quod! minor fit illo, quod ante fuerat
quam concresceret.”

Verba ipsa Aristotelis ex eo libro pauca sumpsi
et adscripsi: Aw ví rà dad xióvos xai KpvoTaAAwv
Bdara $aUAá éorw; Ort wavrós Bdatos tyyvupevoy Td
Aemrórarov kal kovdórarov éfaruífeu  owpetov d€, drt
éAarrov yiverar 7) wpórepov, Órav Taj) wayév. ámeAg-
AvÜóros otv Tod Syrewordrov, GvayKn de, TO karaAet-
mopevov xetpov eivat. Hoc ubi legimus, placuit honorem
doctissimo viro haberi Aristoteli. Atque ita postea
ego bellum et odium nivi indixi, alii indutias cum
ea varie factitabant.


VI


Quod pudor sanguinem ad extera diffundit, timor vero
contrahit.


IN Problematis Aristotelis philosophi ita scriptum
est: Ava ré of pév ala xvvópevot épvOpidcw, of 8& poBov-
MEVvOL @XpLOoW, TapaTAnciov TOv Tabdv Ovrov; Ste
Tüv wey aicxuvouevwv diaxetrar Td olpa. ex THs Kapdias
cis (ravra Ta mépy ToU TwmaTos, dae ézvroAdfew* Tors
8€ PoBybeiow cvvrpéxe. els Tijv Kapdiav, Sore exAetrew
€x Tov dAÀXov jLEpOv.

Hoe ego Athenis cum Tauro nostro legissem


1 quod, Hertz; qui, c.


As Hannibal did against the Romans.
364


BOOK XIX, v. 7-v1. 2


and this part, beaten upon by the throbbing of the
air, takes on the form and colour of white foam.
But that some more wholesome part is forced out and
evaporated from the snow is shown by the fact that
it becomes less than it was before it congealed."

I have taken a few of Aristotle's own words from
that book, and I quote them: * Why is the water
made from snow or ice unwholesome? Because from
all water that is frozen the lightest and thinnest part
evaporates. And the proof of this is that when it
melts after being frozen, its volume is less than
before. But since the most wholesome part is gone,
it necessarily follows that what is left is less whole-
some." After I read this, we decided to pay honour
to the learned Aristotle. And so I for my part
immediately declared war upon snow and swore
hatred against it! while the others made truces with
it on various terms.


VI
That shame drives the blood outward, while fear checks it.


IN the Problems of the philosopher Aristotle is the
following passage :? “ Why do men who are ashamed
turn red and those who fear grow pale; although
these emotions are similar? Because the blood of
those who feel shame flows from the heart to all
parts of the body, and therefore comes to the surface ;
but the blood of those who fear rushes to the heart,
and consequently leaves all the other parts of the
body."

When I had read this at Athens with our friend


? Frag. 243, Rose.
365


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


percontatusque essem quid de ratione ista reddita
sentiret, “Dixit quidem," inquit, “probe et vere
quid accideret diffuso sanguine aut contracto, sed

3 cur ita fieret non dixit. Adhuc enim quaeri potest
quam ob causam pudor sanguinem diffundat, timor
contrahat, cum sit pudor species timoris atque ita
definiatur: «timor iustae reprehensionis.’ Ita enim
philosophi definiunt: aicyivn éorly $ófos Ówaíov
Woyov.”


VII
Quid sit ** obesum " ; nonnullaque alia prisca vocabula.


1 In agro Vaticano Iulius Paulus poeta, vir bonus et
rerum litterarumque veterum inpense doctus, heredi-
olum tenue possidebat. Eo saepe nos ad sese vocabat
et olusculis pomisque satis comiter copioseque in-

2 vitabat. Atque ita molli quodam tempestatis autum-
nae die ego et Iulius Celsinus, cum ad eum cenas-
semus et apud mensam eius audissemus legi Laevi
Alcestin vediremusque in urbem sole iam fere occiduo,
figuras habitusque verborum nove aut insigniter
dictorum in Laeviano illo carmine ruminabamur et,
ut quaeque vox indidem digna animadverti sub-
venerat, qua nos quoque possemus uti, memoriae
mandabamus.

3 Erant autem verba quae tunc suppetebant, huius-
cemodi :


Corpore (inquit) pectoreque undique obeso ac
Mente exsensa tardigenuclo
Senio obpressum,


1 This is characteristic of the archaistic period in which
Gellius lived.


366


^-—-————————


BOOK XIX. vi. 2-vir. 3


Taurus and had asked him what he thought about
that reason which had been assigned, he answered :
* He has told us properly and truly what happens
when the blood is diffused or concentrated, but he
has not told us why this takes place. For the
question may still be asked why it is that shame
diffuses the blood and fear contracts it, when shame
is a kind of fear and is defined by the philosophers
as ‘the fear of just censure. For they say: aicyvvy
éoTiv $óflos Owaiov oyov.”


VII
The meaning of obesus and of some other early words.


Tue poet Julius Paulus, a worthy man, very learned
in early history and letters, inherited a small estate
in the Vatican district. He often invited us there
to visit him and entertained us very pleasantly and
generously with vegetables and fruits. And so one
mild day in autumn, when Julius Celsinus and I had
dined with him, and after hearing the Alcestis of
Laevius read at his table were returning to the city
just before sunset, we were ruminating on the
rhetorical figures and the new or striking use of
words in that poem of Laevius', and as each word
occurred that was worthy of notice with reference
to its future use by ourselves we committed it to
memory.

Now the passages which then came to mind were
of this sort :?

Of chest and body wasted (obeso) everywhere,

Of mind devoid of sense and slow of pace,

With age o'ercome.


2 Frag. 8, Bahrens.


367


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


* Obesum " hic notavimus proprie magis, quam usitate
dictum pro exili atque gracilento; vulgus enim áxvpos
vel xarà avtidpacw “obesum”’ pro * uberi" atque
4 * pingui " dicit. Item notavimus quod “ oblitteram ”
5 gentem pro *oblitterata" dixit; item quod hostis
qui foedera frangerent, “ foedifragos," non “ foederi-
6 fragos" dixit; item, quod rubentem auroram * pudo-
ricolorem " appellavit et Memnonem “ nocticolorem”’ ;
7 item, quod “forte” dubitanter et ab eo quod est
* sileo," *silenta loca" dixit et **pulverulenta" et

* pestilenta " et quod ** carendum tui est" pro “ te.”
8quodque * magno impete" pro *impetu"; item
9 quod *fortescere "" posuit pro *fortem fieri" quod-
que “dolentiam” pro “dolore” et “avens” pro
10 *libens"; item ‘“curis intolerantibus" pro “in-
tolerandis," quodque ** manciolis," inquit, * tenellis ”
pro ** manibus " et *quis tamsiliceo?" Item * fiere,"
inquit, *inpendio infit," id est *fieri inpense in-

1l cipit"; quodque * accipitret" posuit pro * laceret."
12 His nos inter viam verborum Laevianorum ad-
13 notatiunculis oblectabamus. Cetera enim, quae vide-
bantur nimium poetica, ex prosae orationis usu
alieniora praetermisimus ; veluti fuit quod de Nestore

14 ait “ trisaeclisenex " et * dulciorelocus iste," quod de
tumidis magnisque fluctibus inquit ** multigrumis " et


1 Frag. 9, Bührens.


? A verb formed from accipiter, “hawk,” meaning **to
tear," as a hawk does its prey.


368


BOOK XIX. vu. 3-14


Here we noticed that obesus is used, rather in its
- proper than in its common signification, to mean
slender and lean; for the vulgar use obesus, axvpws
(improperly), or xerà ávríjpaew (by contraries),
for uber (bulky) and pinguis (fat) We also
observed! that he spoke of an extinct race as
oblittera instead of oblitterata, and that he charac-
terized enemies who broke treaties as foedifragi,
not foederifragi ; that he called the blushing Aurora
pudoricolor, or “ shame-coloured " and Memnon,
nocticolor, or *night-coloured "; also that he used
forte for *hesitatingly," and said silenta loca, or
*silent places," from the verb sileo; further, that
he used pulverulenta for “dusty " and pestilentia
for “pestilent,’ the genitive case instead of the
ablative with careo ; magno impete, or “mighty onset,"
instead of impetu; that he used fortescere for fortem
fieri, or “become brave,’ dolentia for dolor,or “sorrow,”
vens for libens, or “desirous”; that he spoke of
curae intolerantes, or * unendurable cares," instead of
inlolerandae, manciolae tenellae, or «tender hands,"
instead of manus, and quis tam siliceo for * who is of
so flinty a heart?" He also says fiere inpendio infit,
meaning fieri inpense incipit, or “the expense begins
to be great," and he used accipetret® for laceret, or
* rends."

We entertained ourselves on our way with these
notes on Laevius’ diction. But others we passed
over as too poetic and unsuited to use in prose ; for
example, when he calls Nestor trisaeclisenex, or “an
old man who had lived three generations " and
dulciorelocus iste, or ‘that sweet-mouthed speaker,”
when he calls great swelling waves multigruma, or
* great-hillocked," and says that rivers congealed by

369


VOL. III. BB


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


15 flumina gelu concreta * tegimine" esse * onychino "

16 dixit, et quae multiplica ludens conposuit, quale illud
est, quod vituperones suos *'subductisupercilicarp-
tores" appellavit.


VIII


Quaestio an ‘‘harena,” ‘‘caelum,” ‘‘triticum” pluralia
inveniantur; atque inibi de ‘‘quadrigis,” ‘‘ inimicitiis,”
nonnullis praeterea vocabulis, an singulari numero com-
periantur.


1  ApuLEscENTULUs Romae, priusquam Athenas con-
cederem, quando erat a magistris auditionibusque
obeundis otium, ad Frontonem Cornelium visendi
gratia pergebam sermonibusque eius purissimis bona-
rumque doctrinarum plenis fruebar. Nec umquam
factum est, quotiens eum vidimus loquentemque
audivimus, quin rediremus fere cultiores doctioresque.

2 Veluti fuit illa quodam die sermocinatio illius, levi
quidem de re, sed a Latinae tamen linguae studio

3 non abhorrens. Nam, cum quispiam familiaris eius,
bene eruditus homo et tum poeta inlustris, liberatum
esse se aquae intercutis morbo diceret, quod ** harenis
calentibus" esset usus, tum adludens Fronto : ** Morbo
quidem," inquit, “cares, sed verbi vitio non cares.
Gaius enim Caesar, ille perpetuus dictator, Cn.
Pompei socer, a quo familia et appellatio Caesarum
deinceps propagata est, vir ingenii praecellentis, ser-
monis praeter alios suae aetatis castissimi, in libris,
quos ad M. Ciceronem De Analogia conscripsit,
‘harenas’ vitiose dici existimat, quod * harena' num-


1 Frag. 7, Báhrens. 2 ji. p. 126, Dinter.
S


BOOK XIX, vu. 15-vitt. 3


the cold have an onychinum tegimen, or “an onyx
covering”; also his many humorous ‘multiple com-
pounds, as when he calls his detractors! subducti-
supercilicarptores, or ** carpers with raised eye-brows."


VIII


An inquiry whether harena, caelum and triticwm are found in
the plural; also whether quadrigae, inimicitiae, and some
other words, occur in the singular.


Wuen I was a young man at Rome, before I went
to Athens, I often paid a visit to Cornelius Fronto,
when I had leisure from my masters and my lectures,
and enjoyed his refined conversations which abounded
besides in excellent information. Whenever I saw
him and heard him speak, I almost never failed to
come away improved and better informed. An
example is the following little talk of his, held one
day on a trivial subject, it is true, but yet not with-
out importance for the study of the Latin language.
For when an intimate friend of his, a learned man
and an eminent poet of the day, said that he had
been cured of dropsy by the use of hot sand (calentes
harenae), thereupon Fronto in jesting fashion said :
« You are indeed freed of your complaint, but not of
the complaint of improper language. For Gaius
Caesar, the famous life-dictator and father-in-law of
Gnaeus Pompeius, from whom the family and the
name of the Caesars are derived, a man of wonderful
talent, surpassing all others of his time in the purity
of his diction, in the work On Analogy, which he
dedicated to Marcus Cicero, wrote? that harenae is
an improper term, since harena ought never to be


371


z
uz
bo


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


quam multitudinis numero appellanda sit, sicuti neque

4 * caelum" neque ' triticum ' ; contra autem * quadrigas,"
etiamsi currus unus, equorum quattuor iunctorum
agmen unum sit, plurativo semper numero dicendas
putat, sicut ‘arma’? et ‘moenia’ et ‘comitia’ et
*inimicitias'—nisi quid contra ea dicis, poetarum
pulcherrime, quo et te purges et non esse id vitium
demonstres.”

5 ‘De ‘caelo,’” inquit ille, “et ‘ tritico’ non infitias
eo, quin singulo semper numero dicenda sint, neque
de ‘armis’ et ‘moenibus’ et *comitiis, quin figura

6 multitudinis perpetua censeantur; videbimus autem
potius? de * inimicitiis" et *quadrigis Ac fortassean
de ‘ quadrigis’ veterum auctoritati concessero, ‘ ini-
micitiam" tamen, sicuti ‘inscientiam’ et *inpoten-
tiam" et ‘iniuriam,’ quae ratio est quamobrem C.
Caesar vel dictam esse a veteribus vel dicendam a
nobis non putat, quando Plautus, linguae Latinae
decus, * deliciam' quoque é&vuxó; dixerit pro ‘ deliciis ' ?

Méa (inquit) voluptas, méa delicia.?
' Inimicitiam* autem Q. Ennius in illo memoratissimo
libro dixit :
Eo ego (inquit) ingenio natus sum ;
Amicitiam atque inimicitiam in frontem promptam
gero.


! circa arma, Q ; castra, arma, Vogel.
? potius, Hosius; post, c.
? meae deliciae, codd. Plaut. ; mea delicia, Lindsay.


* Harenae is used by Virgil, Horace, and Ovid (e.g. Hor.
Odes, i. 28. 1 ; iii. 4. 31; Virg. Aen. i. 107); also by Seneca
the philosopher, Tacitus, Suetonius (4wg. lxxx.) and other
post-Augustan prose-writers and poets,


372


BOOK XIX. vir. 3-6


used in the plural any more than caelum. (heaven)
and triticum (whéat) But on the other hand he
thinks that quadrigae, even though it be a single
chariot, that is, one team of four horses yoked
together, ought always to be used in the plural
number, like arma (arms), moenia (walls), comitia
(election) and  mimiciliae (hostility)—unless, my
finest of poets, you have anything to say in reply,
to excuse yourself and show that you have not made
an error."

« With regard to caelum," said the poet, “and /ri-
ticum I do not deny that they ought always to be used
in the singular, nor with regard to arma, moenia and
comilia, that their use ought to be confined to the
plural; but we will inquire rather about énimüciliae
and quadrigae. And perhaps in the case of quadrigae
I shall yield to the authority of the early writers :
but what reason is there why Caesar should think
that inimicitia was not used by the ancients, as were
inscientia (ignorance) and impotentia (impotence)
and iniuria (injury), and ought not to be used by
us, when Plautus, that glory of the Latin tongue,
even used delicia in the singular number instead of
deliciae? For he says:


O my delight, my darling (delicia).


Furthermore Quintus Ennius, in that most famous
book of his, said :?


Such is my habit; plain upon my brow
Friendship I bear and enmity (inimicitiam) to see.


2 Poen. 365. 3 Achilles, 12, p. 120, Vahlen?.
S18


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Sed enim * harenas' parum Latine dici, quis, oro te,
alius aut scripsit aut dixit? Ac propterea peto ut, si
Gai Caesaris liber prae manibus est, promi iubeas, ut
quam confidenter hoc indicat aestimari a te possit."

7 Tune, prolato libro De Analogia primo, verba

8 haec ex eo pauca memoriae mandavi. Nam, cum
supra dixisset, neque * caelum" neque “ triticum”
neque * harenam" multitudinis significationem pati,
* Num tu," inquit, *harum rerum natura accidere
arbitraris quod *unam terram’ ac! ‘plures terras’
et ‘urbem’ et ‘urbes’ et ‘imperium’ et * imperia"
dicamus, neque ‘ quadrigas' in unam nominis figuram
redigere neque * harenam ' multitudinis appellatione
convertere possimus ? *

9 His deinde verbis lectis ibi? Fronto ad illum po-
etam : ** Videturne tibi," inquit, ** C. Caesar de statu
verbi contra te satis aperte satisque constanter pro-

10 nuntiasse?" Tunc permotus auctoritate libri poeta :
*Si a Caesare," inquit, *ius provocandi foret, ego
nunc ab hoc Caesaris libro provocassem. Sed quo-
niam ipse rationem sententiae suae reddere super-
sedit, nos te nunc rogamus ut dicas quam esse
causam vitii putes et in *quadriga' dicenda et in

11 *harenis'"? Tum Fronto ita respondit: **Quad-
rigae' semper, etsi multiiugae non sunt, multitudinis
tamen numero tenentur, quoniam quattuor simul
equi iuncti *quadrigae, quasi *quadriiugae, vocan-
tur, neque debet prorsus appellatio equorum plurium

12 includi in singularis numeri unitatem." Eandemque
rationem * harenae' * habendam, sed in specie dispari ;
nam eum *harena' singulari in numero dicta multi-


! ac plures, Heríz; adplures, 8; the other MSS. have et.
? ibi, Salmasius ; sibi, v. 3 harenis, Carrio; harena, c.
* harenae supplied by Hertz; habet arena, M. advig.

374


BOOK XIX. vin. 6 12


But pray, who else has written or said that harenae
is not good Latin? And therefore I beg of you,
if Gaius Caesar’s book is accessible, that you have it
brought, in order that you may judge with how
much confidence he makes this statement.”

At the time, the first book On Analogy being
brought, I committed to memory these few words
from it; for, first asserting that neither caelum,
triticum, nor harena admitted a plural meaning, Caesar
said: “Do you not think that it happens from the
nature of these things that we say ‘ one land’ and
‘several lands, ‘city’ and ‘cities, ‘ command ’
and ‘commands,’ and that we cannot convert quad-
rigae into the form of a singular noun or harena into a
plural?”

When these words had been read, Fronto said to
the poet: “ Does it not seem to you that Gaius Caesar
has decided against you as to the status of this word
with sufficient clearness and force?"  Thereupon
the poet, greatly impressed by the authority of the
book, said: “If it were lawful to appeal from Caesar,
I would now appeal from this book of his. But
since he has neglected to give the reason for his
opinion, I now ask you to tell on what ground you
think it an error to say quadriga and harenae." Then
Fronto replied as follows: “ Quadrigae is always con-
fined to the plural number, even though there be
only one horse, since four horses yoked together are
called quadrigae, from quadruugae, and certainly a
term which designates many horses ought not to be
included under the oneness expressed by the
singular number. The same reasoning must be
applied to arena, but in a different form ; for since
harena, though used in the singular number, never-


375


13


14


15


16


17


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


tudinem tamen et copiam significet minimarum, ex
quibus constat, partium, indocte et inscite * harenae"
dici videntur, tamquam id vocabulum indigeat
numeri amplitudine, cum ei singulariter dicto!
ingenita sit naturalis sui multitudo. Sed haec ego,”
inquit, * dixi, non ut huius sententiae legisque
fundus subscriptorque fierem, sed ut ne Caesaris,
viri docti, opinionem  ázapapvÓgrov destituerem.
Nam cum ‘caelum’ semper évuxós dicatur, ‘mare’
et ‘terra’ non semper, et ‘pulvis,’ ‘ventus’ et
‘fumus’ non semper, cur ‘indutias’ et ‘ caerimonias
scriptores veteres nonnumquam singulari numero
appellaverunt, *ferias' et *nundinas' et ‘ inferias"
et fexequias' numquam? Cur ‘mel’ et * vinum?
atque id genus cetera numerum multitudinis capiunt,
*lacte?? non capiat?  Quaeri, inquam, ista omnia et
enucleari et extundi ab hominibus negotiosis in
civitate tam occupata non queunt. Quin his quoque
ipsis quae iam dixi demoratos vos esse video, alicui,
opinor, negotio destinatos. Ite ergo nunc et,
quando forte erit otium, quaerite an * quadrigam '
et ‘harenas’ dixerit e cohorte illa dumtaxat anti-
quiore vel oratorum aliquis vel poetarum, id est
classicus adsiduusque aliquis Scriptor, non prole-
tarius."

Haec quidem Fronto requirere nos iussit vocabula
non ea re, opinor, quod scripta esse in ullis veterum
libris existumaret, sed ut nobis studium lectitandi in
quaerendis rarioribus verbis exerceret. Quod unum


! dieto, Madvig ; dici, w. ? lae, y.


5o A he classical form is, of course, Zac. Lacte and lact occur
in early Latin, and the use of lacte here is an archaism, which
was not understood by some of the scribes; see crit, note 9.


376


BOOK XIX. vri. 12-17


theless indicates the multiplicity and abundance of
the minute parts of which it consists, harenae seems
to be an ignorant and improper usage, as if the word
needed a plural form, when its collective nature
makes it natural for it to be used in the singular.
But," said he, *I have said this, not in order to give
my authority and signature to this opinion and rule,
but that I might not leave the view of that learned
man, Caesar, unsupported. For while caelum, or
‘sky,’ is always used in the singular, but mare, or
‘sea,’ and ferra, or ‘land,’ not always, and pulvis,
or ‘dust,’ ventus, or ‘wind, and fumus, or ‘smoke,
not always, why did the early writers sometimes use
indutiae, or ‘truce, and caerimoniae, or ‘ceremony,
in the singular, but never feriae, or ‘ holiday,’
nundinae, or ‘market day, inferiae, or ‘offering to
the dead,’ and exsequiae, or ‘obsequies’? Why may
mel, or ‘honey,’ and vinum, or ‘wine,’ and other
words of that kind, be used in the plural, but not
lacte (milk)?! All these questions, I say, cannot be
investigated, unravelled, and thrashed out by men
of affairs in so busy a city; indeed, I see that you
have been delayed even by these matters of which I
have spoken, being intent, I suppose, on some busi-
ness. So go now and inquire, when you chance
to have leisure, whether any orator or poet, provided
he be of that earlier band—that is to say, any
classical or authoritative writer, not one of the
common herd—has used quadriga or harenae.”

Now Fronto asked us to look up these words, I
think, not because he thought that they were to be
found in any books of the early writers, but to rouse
in us an interest in reading for the purpose of
hunting down rare words, The one, then, which


377


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


ergo rarissimum videbatur, invenimus * quadrigam ”


numero singulari dictam in libro Saturarum M.
18 Varronis, qui inscriptus est Ecdemeticus. ** Hare-
nas" autem zAyfvvri«ós dictas minore studio quaeri-
mus, quia praeter C. Caesarem, quod equidem
meminerim, nemo id doctorum hominum dedit.


IX


Antonii Iuliani in convivio ad quosdam Graecos lepidissima
responsio.

1l  ADULESCENS e terra Asia de equestri loco, laetae
indolis moribusque et fortuna bene ornatus et ad
rem musicam facili ingenio ac lubenti, cenam dabat
amicis ac magistris sub urbe in rusculo celebrandae
lucis annuae, quam principem sibi vitae habuerat.

2 Venerat tum nobiscum ad eandem cenam Antonius
Iulianus rhetor, docendis publice iuvenibus magister,
Hispano ore florentisque homo facundiae et rerum

3 litterarumque veterum peritus. Is, ubi eduliis finis
et poculis mox sermonibusque tempus fuit, deside-
ravit exhiberi, quos habere eum adulescentem scie-
bat, scitissimos utriusque sexus, qui canerent voce

4 et qui psallerent. Ac posteaquam introducti pueri
puellaeque sunt, iucundum in modum 'Avaxpeóvreua
pleraque et Sapphica et poetarum quoque recentium
eAcyeta quaedam erotica dulcia et venusta cecinerunt,

5 Oblectati autem sumus praeter multa alia versiculis
lepidissimis Anacreontis senis, quos equidem scripsi,
ut interea labor hic vigiliarum et inquies suavitate
paulisper vocum atque modulorum adquiesceret :


* The plural is used by Ovid, Virgil, and Horace; and by
later poets and prose-writers; e.g. Suetonius, Avg. lxxx.
(i., p. 246, L.C. L.).

* Poetae Lyrici Graeci, iii., p. 298, Bergk*.


378


BOOK XIX. vur. 17-1x. 5


seemed the rarest, quadriga, 1 found used in the
singular number in that book of Marcus Varro's
. Satires which is entitled Ecdemeticus. But I sought
with less interest for an example of the plural harenae,
because, except Gaius Caesar, no one among learned
men has used that form, so far as I can recall.


IX


The very neat reply of Antonius Julianus to certain Greeks
at a banquet.

A youne man of equestrian rank from the land of
Asia, gifted by nature, well off in manners and
fortune, with a taste and talent for music, was
celebrating the anniversary of the day on which he
began life by giving a dinner to his friends and
teachers in a little country place near the city. There
had come with us then to that dinner the rhetorician
Antonius Julianus, a publie teacher of young men,
who spoke with a Spanish accent, but was very
eloquent, besides being well acquainted with our
early literature. When there was an end of eating
and drinking, and the time came for conversation,
Julianus asked that the singers and lyre-players be
produced, the most skilful of both sexes, whom he
knew that the young man had at hand. And when
the boys and girls were brought in, they sang in a
most charming way several odes of Anacreon and
Sappho, as well as some erotic elegies of more recent
poets that were sweet and graceful But we were
especially pleased with some delightful verses of
Anacreon, written in his old age,? which I noted
down, in order that sometimes the toil and worry of
this task of mine might find relief in the sweetness
of poetical compositions :


B69


ch


8


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


^ » ,
Tov apyvpov Topevoas,
"Hacé, pot toinoov
, ^ EET d
IIavozA(as j.&v ovxG
Ti yàp payout Kapol ;
Ilorypiov € KotAov
"Ocov divn Babvvov,

b ^ af E p 3 Sx
Kat ja] ^ mote kat’ avTO
Myr dotpa pyr’ àpá£as*
Té TAeddwv uéXet por,
Ti & àcrépos Boóreo ;
Tloinoov auréXovs prot

N , : ENT
Kai B8órpvas kar! avrov
Kai xpvaéovs zarobvras
‘Opod kaAd Avaío
"Epora koi. Bé8vAAov.


Tum Graeci plusculi qui in eo convivio erant,
homines amoeni et nostras quoque litteras haut in-
curiose docti, Iulianum rhetorem lacessere insectari-
que adorti sunt tamquam prorsus barbarum et
agrestem, qui ortus terra Hispania foret clamatorque
tantum et facundia rabida iurgiosaque esset eiusque
linguae exercitationes doceret quae nullas volup-
tates nullamque mulcedinem Veneris atque Musae
haberet; saepeque eum  percontabantur quid de
Anacreonte ceterisque id genus poetis sentiret et
ecquis nostrorum poetarum tam fluentes carminum
delicias fecisset. ** Nisi Catullus," inquiunt, “forte
pauca et Calvus itidem pauca, Nam Laevius inpli-
cata et Hortensius invenusta et Cinna inlepida et
Memmius dura ac deinceps omnes rudia fecerunt
atque absona."

Tum ille pro lingua patria, tamquam pro aris et
focis, animo inritato indignabundus : ** Cedere equi-
380


BOOK XIX. ix. 6-8


Shaping the silver, Hephaestus,
Make me no panoply, pray ;

What do I care for war's combats ?
Make me a drinking cup rather,
Deep as you ever can make it ;
Carve on it no stars and no wains ;
What care I, pray, for the Pleiads,
What for the star of Bootes?

Make vines, and clusters upon them,
Treading them Love and Bathyllus,
Made of pure gold, with Lyaeus.


Then several Greeks who were present at that
dinner, men of refinement and not without con-
siderable acquaintance also with our literature, began
to attack and assail Julianus the rhetorician as
altogether barbarous and rustic, since he was sprung
from the land of Spain, was a mere ranter of violent
and noisy speech, and taught exercises in a tongue
which hàd no charm and no sweetness of Venus and
the Muse; and they asked him more than once
what he thought of Anacreon and the other poets of
that kind, and whether any of our bards had written
such smooth-flowing and delightful poems; “except,”
said they, * perhaps a few of Catullus and also
possibly a few of Calvus; forthe compositions of Lae-
vius were involved, those of Hortensius without
elegance, of Cinna harsh, of Memmius rude, and in
short those of all the poets without polish or
melody."

Then Julianus, filled with anger and indignation,
spoke as follows in behalf of his mother tongue, as if
for his altars and his fires: “I must indeed grant you


1 noi, Bergk from Anth. Pal. xi. 48.
381


10


im


12


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


dem," inquit, *vobis debui, ut in tali asotia atque
nequitia Aleinum! vinceretis et sicut in voluptatibus
cultus atque victus, ita in cantilenarum quoque
mollitiis? anteiretis. Sed ne nos, id est nomen
Latinum, tamquam profecto vastos quosdam et
insubidos, dvadpodicias condemnetis, permittite mihi,
quaeso, operire pallio caput, quod in quadam parum
pudica oratione Socraten fecisse aiunt, et audite ac
discite nostros quoque antiquiores ante eos quos
nominastis poetas amasios ac venerios fuisse."

Tum resupinus, capite convelato, voce admodum
quam suavi, versus cecinit Valeri Aeditui, veteris


poetae, item Porcii Licini et Q. Catuli, quibus |


mundius, venustius, limatius, tersius? Graecum
Latinumve nihil quicquam reperiri puto.
Aeditui versus :


Dicere cum conor curam tibi, Pamphila, cordis,
Quid mi abs te quaeram ? verba labris abeunt,

Per pectus manat subito subido * mihi sudor:
Sic tacitus, subidus, dum pudeo, pereo.


Atque item alios versus eiusdem addidit, non hercle
minus dulces quam priores :


1 Alcinum, Hertz (ef. Hor. Ep. i. 2. 28 ff.) ; arcinnum, e;
Apicium suggested by Hosius (cf. Sen. Ep. cxx. 19).

2 mollitiis, Hertz; multis, e.

3 tersius, Salmasius ; persius, pessius, pressius, MSS.

4 subido added by Usener ; stupido, C. F. IW. Müller.


1 Probably (see crit. note) another form of Alcinous, King
ofthe Phaeacians. He is not represented by Homer as ‘‘li-
centious and base," but that opinion arose at a later time.
Cf. Horace, Zpist. i. 2. 28 ff.

2 Frag. 1, Bührens.


382


BOOK XIX. ix. 8-12


that in such licentiousness and baseness you would
outdo Alcinus! and that as you outstrip us in the
pleasures of adornment and of food, so you do also in
the wantonness ot your ditties. But lest you should
condemn us, that is, the Latin race, as lacking in
Aphrodite's charm, just as if we were barbarous
and ignorant, allow me, I pray, to cover my head
with my cloak (as they say Socrates did when
making somewhat indelicate remarks), and hear
and learn that our forefathers also were lovers and
devoted to Venus before those poets whom you
have named."

Then lying upon his back with veiled head, he
chanted in exceedingly sweet tones some verses of
Valerius Aedituus, an early poet, and also of Porcius
Licinus and Quintus Catulus; and I think that
nothing can be found neater, more graceful, more
polished and more terse than those verses, either in
Greek or in Latin:

The verses of Aedituus are as follows :?


When, Pamphila, I try to tell my love,
What shall I ask of you? Words fail my lips,
A sudden sweat o'erflows my ardent? breast;
Thus fond and silent, I refrain and die.


And he also added other verses of the same poet,
no less sweet than the former ones :4


3 Subidus occurs only here, and its meaning is not certain
It seems to be connected with the verb subo, *burn with
love," but some regard it as the opposite of énsubidus,
‘foolish, stupid," in which case it might be translated
« oonscious," The alliteration and assonance in this epigram
are noteworthy.

4 Frag. 2, Báhrens.


383


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Qui faculam praefers, Phileros, quae nil opus
nobis ?
Ibimus sic, lucet pectore flamma satis.
Istam nam potis est vis saeva extinguere venti
Aut imber caelo candidus! praecipitans,
At contra hunc ignem Veneris, nisi si Venus ipsa,
Nullast quae possit vis alia opprimere.


13 Item dixit versus Porcii Licini hosce :


Custodes ovium tenerae ? propaginis, agnum,
Quaeritis ignem? ite huc; quaeritis? ignis
homost.
Si digito attigero, incendam silvam simul omnem ;
Omne pecus flammast, omnia quae video.


14 Quinti Catuli versus illi fuerunt :


Aufugit mi animus; credo, ut solet, ad Theo-
timum
Devenit. Sic est: perfugium illud habet.
Qui, si non interdixem, ne illunc fugitivum
Mitteret ad se intro, sed magis eiceret ?
Ibimus quaesitum. . Verum, ne ipsi teneamur,
Formido, Quid ago? Da Venus consilium.


X


Verba haec, ** praeter propter," in tsu vulgi protrita,? etiam
Ennii fuisse.


1 Memini me quondam et Celsinum Iulium Numidam
ad Frontonem Cornelium, pedes tunc graviter


aegrum, ire et visere. Atque ubi* introducti sumus,
offendimus eum cubantem in scimpodio Graeciensi,


1 concitus, Bahrens.
* teneraeque, Victorius; vernae, Hertz and Unger; ven-
dere, w. 3 prodita, MSS.
384


BOOK XIX, 1x. r2-x. 1


O Phileros, why a torch, that we need not?

Just as we are we'll go, our hearts aflame.

That flame no wild wind's blast can ever quench,
Or rain that falls torrential from the skies ;
Venus herself alone can quell her fire,

No other force there is that has such power.


He also recited the following verses of Porcius
Licinus :+


O shepherds of the lambs, the ewes’ aue
brood,

~ Seek ye for fire? Come hither; man is fire.

Touch I the wood with finger-tip, it burns;

Your flock’s a flame, all I behold is fire.


The verses of Quintus Catulus were these :?


My soul has left me; it has fled, methinks,
To Theotimus; he its refuge is.
But what if I should beg that he refuse

- The truant to admit, but cast it out?
I'll go to him; but what if I be caught?
What shall I do? Queen Venus, lend me aid.


X


That the words praeter propter, which are in common use,
were found also in Ennius.

I REMEMBER that I once went with Julius Celsinus
the Numidian to visit Cornelius Fronto, who was then
seriously ill with the gout. When we arrived and
were admitted, we found him lying on a Greek


1 Frag. 5, Báhrens. 2 Frag. 1, Bahrens.


4 ubi, Salmasius ; ibi, 5; ibi qui, y ; ibi ubi, Hertz.


385
VOL. III. cc


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


circumundique sedentibus multis doctrina aut genere

2 aut fortuna nobilibus viris.  Adsistebant fabri aedium
complures, balneis novis moliendis adhibiti, ostende-

3 bantque depictas in membranulis varias species bal-
nearum. Ex quibus cum elegisset unam formam
speciemque operis interrogavit quantus esset
pecuniae sumptus? ad id totum opus absolvendum.

4 Cumque architectus dixisset necessaria videri esse
sestertia ferme trecenta, unus ex amicis Frontonis:
* Et praeterpropter," inquit, *' alia quinquaginta."

5 Tum Fronto, dilatis sermonibus quos habere de
balnearum sumptu institerat, aspiciens ad eum
amicum qui dixerat quinquaginta esse alia praeter-

propter necessaria? eum interrogavit quid signifi-

6 caret verbum “ praeterpropter." Atque ille amicus :
«Non meum," inquit, “hoe verbum est, sed mul-

7 torum hominum quos loquentis id audias ; quid autem
id verbum significet, non ex me, sed ex grammatico
quaerundum est," ac simul digito demonstrat gram-
maticum, haud incelebri nomine Romae docentem
unaque ibi* sedentem. Tum grammaticus usitati

8 pervulgatique verbi obscuritate motus: * Quaeri-
mus," inquit, *quod honore quaestionis minime

9 dignum est. Nam nescio quid hoe praenimis ple-
beium est et in opificum sermonibus quam in
hominum doctorum ? notius."

10 At enim Fronto, iam voce atque vultu intentiore :
* Itane," inquit, * magister, dehonestum tibi decul-


1 operis, Lipsius; veris (veneris, X), MSS. ; verisimilem,
Damsté.


? sumptus, Q; espectus, Z; conspectus, y; conputus
suggested by Hosius.
9 y


3 necessaria . . . praeterpropter supplied by Skutsch.
4 unaque ibi supplied by Hosius.


396


BOOK XIX. x. 1-10


couch, and sitting around him a large number of men
famous for learning, birth or fortune. By his side
stood several builders, who had been summoned to
construct some new baths and were exhibiting
different plans for baths, drawn on little pieces of
parchment. When he had selected one plan and
specimen of their work, he inquired what the ex-
pense would be of completing that entire project.
And when the architect had said that it would
probably require about three hundred thousand
sesterces, one of Fronto's friends said, “ And another
fifty thousand, more or less (praeterpropter).” :
^ Then Fronto, interrupting the conversation which
he had begun to hold about the expense of the
baths, and looking at the friend who had said that
another fifty thousand would be needed praeler-
propter, asked him what that word meant. And the
friend replied: “ That word is not my own, for you
may hear many men using it; but what the word
means you must ask from a grammarian, not from
me" ; and at the same time he pointed out a gram-
" marian of no little fame as a teacher at Rome, who
was sitting there with them. Then the grammarian,
surprised by the uncertainty about a familiar and
much used word, said: ‘‘ We inquire about some-
thing which does not at all deserve the honour of
investigation, for this is some utterly plebeian ex-
pression or other, better known in the talk of
mechanics than in that of cultivated men."

But Fronto, raising his voice and with a more
earnest expression, said: “Sir, does this word seem
to you so degraded and utterly faulty, when Marcus


5 in hominum doctorum supplied by Carrio.
387


cc 2


11


12


13


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


patumque hoc verbum videtur, quo et M. Cato et
M. Varro et pleraque aetas superior ut necessario
et Latino usi sunt?" Atque ibi Iulius Celsinus
admonuit, in tragoedia quoque Enni quae Iphigenia
inscripta est, id ipsum de quo quaerebatur scriptum
esse et a grammaticis contaminari magis solitum
quam enarrari. Quocirca statim proferri IpAigeniam
Q. Enni iubet. In eius tragoediae choro inscriptos
esse hos versus legimus :
Ótio qui néscit uti à
Plás negoti habét quam cum est negótium in
negótio.
Nám cui quod agat ínstitutumst, níl nisi! ne-
gótium,
Íd agit, id? studét, ibi mentem atque ánimum
. delectát suum,
Otioso in ótio animus néscit quid velit.3
Hóc idem est; em néque domi nunc nós nec
militiaé sumus,
Ímus huc, hinc ílluc, cum illuc véntum est, ire
illine lubet,
Íncerte errat ánimus, praeterprópter vitam vívitur.


Hoc ibi lectum est, tum deinde Fronto ad gram-
maticum iam labentem: ** Audistine," inquit, ** magis-
ter optime, Ennium tuum dixisse ‘ praeterpropter'
et cum sententia quidem tali, quali severissimae
philosophorum esse obiurgationes solent?  Petimus
igitur dicas, quoniam de Enniano iam verbo quae-
ritur, qui sit remotus * huiusce versus sensus :


1 pilnisi, Zeríz ; in illis, 5; in illo, y.

? id added by Ribbeck.

3 quid agat, quid velit, Dziatzko.

^ remotus, Hosius; motus, «e ; ignotus, Hertz.


388


BOOK XIX. x. 10-13


Cato! and Marcus Varro,? and the early writers in
general have used it as necessary and as good
Latin?" And thereupon Julius Celsinus reminded
him that also in the tragedy of Ennius entitled
Iphigenia the very word about which we were in-
quiring was found, and that it was more frequently
corrupted by the grammarians than explained.
Consequently, he at once asked that the Iphigenia of
Quintus Ennius be brought and in a chorus of that
tragedy we read these lines:?


That man in truth who knows not leisure's use

More trouble has than one by tasks pursued ;

For he who has a task must be performed,

Devotes himself to that with heart and soul ;

The idle mind knows not what 'tis it wants.

With us it is the same; for not at home

Are we nor in the field ; from place to place

We haste; and once arrived, we would be gone.

Aimless we drift, we live but more or less

(praeterpropter).*

When this had been read there, then Fronto said
to the grammarian, who was already wavering:
* Have you heard, most worthy master, that your
Ennius used praeterpropter, and that too in an expres-
sion of opinion resembling the austerest diatribes
of the philosophers? We beg you then to tell us,
since we are now investigating a word used by
Ennius, what the hidden meaning is in this line:


! Frag. inc. 53, Jordan.

2 p. 340, Bipont. 3 183, Ribbeck?.

4 That is, we exist rather than really live. Cf. Sophocles,
Jr. Iphig. there: yap oddtv éoOrdv eixata oxoAnh, ‘aimless idle-
ness produces nothing that is good.” (Bergk, De Frag.
Soph. p. 15.) |

389


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Íncerte errat Animus, praeterprópter vitam vivitur.”


14 Et grammaticus sudans multum ac rubens multum,
cum id plerique prolixius riderent, exurgit et abiens:
“Tibi,” inquit, * Fronto, postea uni dicam, ne
inscitiores audiant ac discant." Atque ita omnes,
relicta ibi quaestione verbi, consurreximus.


XI


Ponit versus Platonis amatorios quos admodum iuvenis
lusit, dum tragoediis contendit.


1  CzrEBRANTUR duo isti Graeci versiculi multorum-
que doctorum hominum memoria dignantur, quod

2 sint lepidissimi et venustissimae brevitatis. Neque
adeo pauci sunt veteres scriptores, qui quidem ! eos
Platonis esse philosophi adfirmant, quibus ille
adulescens luserit, cum tragoediis quoque eodem
tempore faciendis praeluderet :


TH Woxnv 'Ayá8ova. duXQv ézi xeiAeow oXov:
*HAÓe yàp 7j TAjpov ws 9i oou évg.
3 Hoc à(eriyov amicus meus, oóx dguovcos adulescens,
in plures versiculos licentius liberiusque vertit. Qui


quoniam mihi quidem visi sunt non esse memoratu
indigni, subdidi :


1 qui quidem, Zion; quidem, Q ; quid, Z ; qui, y.


! The writing of tragedies as youthful literary exercises


399


um m


BOOK XIX. x. 13-xt. 3


Aimless we drift, we live but more or less."


And the grammarian, in a profuse sweat and
blushing deeply,since many of the company were
laughing long and loud at this, got up, saying as
he left: *I will tell you at a later time, when we
are alone, Fronto, in order that ignorant folk may
not hear and learn." And so we all rose, leaving
the consideration of the word at that point.


XI


He gives some amatory verses of Plato, with which the
philosopher amused himself when he was a very young
man and was contending for the tragic prize.


Here are two Greek verses that are famous and
deemed worthy of remembrance by many learned
men because of their charm and graceful terseness.
There are in fact not a few ancient writers who
declare that they are the work of the philosopher
Plato, with which he amused himself in his youth,
while at the same time he was beginning his literary
career by writing tragedies.!


My soul, when I kissed Agathon, did pass
My lips; as though, poor soul, *twould leap across.


This distich a friend of mine, a young man no
stranger to the Muses, has paraphrased somewhat
boldly and freely in a number of lines. And since
they seemed to me not undeserving of remembrance,
I have added them here :?


was not uncommon; see Suet. Ju. lvi. 7, and Plin. Zpist.
vii. 4. 2, The lemma is wrong ; cf. note 2, p. 360.
2 p. 375, Báhrens.
391


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


4 Cum semihiulco savio
Meo puellum savior
Dulcemque florem spiritus
Duco ex aperto tramite,
Anima male! aegra et saucia
Cucurrit ad labeas mihi,
Rictumque in oris pervium
Et labra pueri mollia,
Rimata itineri transitus,
Ut transiliret, nititur.
Tum si morae quid plusculae
Fuisset in coetu osculi,
Amoris igni percita
Transisset et me linqueret
Et mira prorsum res foret,
Ut fierem ad me? mortuus,
Ad puerum ut? intus viverem.


XII


Dissertatio Herodis Attici super vi et natura doloris suaeque
opinionis affirmatio per exemplum indocti rustici, qui cum
rubis fructiferas arbores praecidit.


1 Heropem Articum, consularem virum, Athenis
disserentem audivi Graeca oratione, in qua fere


omnes memoriae nostrae universos gravitate atque '


2 copia et elegantia vocum longe praestitit. Disseruit
autem contra ázáÜewv Stoicorum, lacessitus a quodam
Stoico, tamquam minus sapienter et parum viriliter

3 dolorem ferret ex morte pueri quem amaverat. In


! male suggested by Hosius (cf. Hor. S. i. 4. 66) ; mea, Hertz.

* fierem and ad me transposed by L. Müller.

Sut added by Scaliger; at puerulo intus suggested by
Hosius.


392


BOOK XIX. xr. 4-xit. 3


When with my parted lips my love I kiss,

And quaff the breath's sweet balm from open
mouth,

Smitten with love my soul mounts to my lips,

And through my love's soft mouth its way would
take,

Passing the open gateway of the lips.

But if our kiss, delayed, had been prolonged,

By love's fire swayed my soul that way had ta'en,

And left me. Faith, a wondrous thing it were,

If I should die, but live within my love.


XII


A discourse of Herodes Atticus on the power and nature of
pain, and a confirmation of his view by the example of an
ignorant countryman who cut down fruit-trees along
with thorns.


I once heard Herodes Atticus, the ex-consul,
holding forth at Athens in the Greek language, in
which he far surpassed almost all the men of our
time in distinction, fluency, and elegance of diction.
He was speaking at the time against the dade,
or “lack of feeling” of the Stoics, in consequence
of having been assailed by one of that sect, who
alleged that he did not endure the grief which he
felt at the death of a beloved boy with sufficient


393


‘ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


ea dissertione,! quantulum memini, huiuscemodi
sensus est : quod nullus usquam homo, qui secundum
naturam sentiret et saperet, adfectionibus istis animi,
quas 7d) appellabat, aegritudinis, cupiditatis,
timoris, irae, voluptatis, carere et vacare totis posset?
atque, si posset etiam obniti ut totis careret, non
fore? id melius, quoniam langueret animus et tor-
peret, adfectionum quarundam adminiculis, ut

4 necessaria plurimum temperie privatus. Dicebat
enim sensus istos motusque animi, qui cum inmode-
ratiores sunt vitia fiunt, innexos inplicatosque esse

5 vigoribus quibusdam mentium et alacritatibus, ac
propterea, si omnino omnis eos inperitius convella-
mus, periculum esse ne eis* adhaerentes bonas

6 quoque et utiles animi indoles amittamus. Mode-
randos esse igitur et scite considerateque purgandos
censebat, ut ea tantum quae aliena sunt contraque
naturam videntur et cum pernicie adgnata sunt
detrahantur, ne profecto id accidat quod cuipiam
Thraco insipienti et rudi in agro quem emerat
procurando venisse usu fabulast.

7 “Homo Thracus," inquit, *ex ultima barbaria,
ruris colendi insolens, cum in terras cultiores hu-
manioris vitae cupidine commigrasset, fundum mer-
catus est oleo atque vino consitum. Qui cum 5
nihil admodum super vite aut arbore colenda sciret,
videt forte vicinum rubos alte atque late obortas
excidentem, fraxinos ad summum prope verticem


! dissertione, w (cf. Thes, Ling. Lat.); dissertatione,
Beroaldus.


? posset rhetor non dolere (dolore) MSS.; rh. non d.
deleted by Carrio.


? fore, H. J. Müller ; ex Te, w,
* ne eis, c ; necis, o.


394


BOOK XIX. xr. 3-7


wisdom and fortitude. The sense of the discourse, so
far as 1 remember, was as follows: that no man, who
felt and thought normally, could be wholly exempt
and free from those emotions of the mind, which
he called 74604, caused by sorrow, desire, fear, anger
and pleasure ; and even if he could so resist them as
to be free from them altogether, he would not be
better off, since his mind would grow weak and
sluggish, being deprived of the support of certain
emotions, as of a highly necessary stimulus. For
he declared that those feelings and impulses of the
mind, though they become faults when excessive,
are connected and involved in certain powers and
activities of the intellect; and therefore, if we
should in our ignorance eradicate them altogether,
there would be danger lest we lose also the good
and useful qualities of the mind which are connected
with them. Therefore he thought that they ought
to be regulated, and pruned skilfully and carefully,
so that those only should be removed which are
unsuitable and unnatural, lest in fact that should
happen which once (according to the story) befell
an ignorant and rude Thracian in cultivating a field
which he had bought.

« When a man of Thrace,’ said he, “ from a remote
and barbarous land, and unskilled in agriculture,
had moved into a more civilized country, in order
to lead a less wild life, he bought a farm planted
with olives and vines. Knowing nothing at all about
the care of vines or trees, he chanced to see a neigh-
bour cutting down the thorns which had sprung up
high and wide, pruning his ash-trees almost to


5 cum added by Skutsch.
395


oo


10


=


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


deputantem, suboles vitium e radicibus caudicum
super terram fusas revellentem, stolones in pomis
aut in oleis proceros atque derectos amputantem,
acceditque prope et cur tantam ligni atque frondium
caedem faceret percontatus est. Et vicinus ita
respondit: *Ut ager, inquit, “mundus purusque
fiat, eius arbor atque vitis fecundior,’ Discedit
ille a vicino gratias agens et laetus, tamquam adeptus
rei rusticae disciplinam. Tum falcem ibi ac securim
capit: atque ibi homo misere! inperitus vites suas
sibi omnis et oleas detruncat comasque arborum
laetissimas uberrimosque vitium palmites decidit et
frutecta atque virgulta simul omnia, pomis frugi-
busque gignendis felicia, eum sentibus et rubis puri-
ficandi agri gratia convellit, mala mercede doctus
audaciam fiduciamque peccandi imitatione falsa
eruditus, Sic," inquit, * isti apathiae sectatores,
qui videri se esse tranquillos et intrepidos et in-
mobiles volunt, dum nihil cupiunt, nihil dolent, nihil
irascuntur, nihil gaudent, omnibus vehementioris
animi officiis amputatis, in torpore ignavae et quasi
enervatae vitae consenescunt.”’


XIII
Quos ** pumiliones ” dicimus, Graece vdyous appellari.


STABANT forte una in vestibulo Palatii fabulantes
Fronto Cornelius et Festus Postumius et Apollinaris
Sulpicius, atque ego ibi adsistens cum quibusdam


! miser, o; corr. by Hosius (of. xiii. 31. 1, etc.).


396


BOOK XIX. xu, 7-xui. 1


their tops, pulling up the suckers of his vines which
had spread over the earth from the main roots, and
cutting off the tall straight shoots on his fruit and
olive trees. He drew near and asked why the other
was making such havoc of his wood and leaves. The
neighbour answered; ‘In order to make the field
clean and neat and the trees and vines more pro-
ductive. The Thracian left his neighbour with
thanks, rejoicing that he had gained some know-
ledge of farming. ‘Then he took his sickle and axe;
and thereupon in his pitiful ignorance the fellow
cuts down all his vines and olives, lopping off the
richest branches of the trees and the most fruitful
shoots of the vines, and, with the idea of clearing
up his place, he pulls up all the shrubs and shoots
fit for bearing fruits and crops, along with the
brambles and thorns, having learnt assurance at a
ruinous price and acquired boldness in error through
faulty imitation. Thus it is," said Herodes, * that
those disciples of insensibility, wishing to be thought
calm, courageous and steadfast because of showing
neither desire nor grief, neither wrath nor joy, root
out all the more vigorous emotions of the mind, and
grow old in the torpor of a sluggish and, as it were,
nerveless life."


XIII


That what we call pumiliones the Greeks term yavol.


Corne.ius Fronto, Festus Postumius, and Sulpicius
Apollinaris chanced to be standing and talking
together in the vestibule of the Palace;! and I,
being near by with some companions, eagerly


1 The palace of the Caesars on the Palatine Hill at Rome.
397


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


aliis sermones eorum, quos de litterarum disciplinis
habebant, curiosius captabam. Tum Fronto Apolli-
nari: “Fac me," inquit, “oro, magister, ut sim
certus an recte supersederim *nanos' dicere parva
nimis statura homines maluerimque eos * pumiliones '
appellare, quoniam hoc scriptum esse in libris
veterum memineram, ‘nanos’ autem sordidum esse
verbum et barbarum credebam?" ‘Est quidem,"
inquit, * hoc" Apollinaris, “in consuetudine inperiti
vulgi frequens, sed barbarum non est censeturque
linguae Graecae origine; vdvovs enim Graeci! voca-
verunt brevi atque humili corpore homines paulum
supra terram extantes idque ita dixerunt adhibita
quadam ratione etymologiae cum sententia vocabuli
competente et, si memoria," inquit, “mihi non
labat scriptum hoc est in comoedia Aristophanis,
cui nomen est OA«d8es? — Fuisset autem verbum hoc
a te civitate donatum aut in Latinam coloniam
deductum, si tu eo uti dignatus fores, essetque id
inpendio probabilius quam quae a Laberio ignobilia
nimis et sordentia in usum linguae Latinae intro-
missa sunt."


Tum Festus Postumius grammatico cuipiam Latino,


Frontonis familiari : ** Docuit," inquit, “nos Apolli-


naris, ‘nanos’ verbum Graecum esse, tu nos doce,
quoniam? de mulis aut eculeis humilioribus vulgo
dicitur, anne Latinum sit et aput quem scriptum
reperiatur?" Atque ille grammaticus, homo sane
perquam in noscendis veteribus scriptis exercitus :
“Si piaculum," inquit, “non committitur, praesente


1 Graeci, c; Graece, w.
9


: "OX«dües, Hertz ; àaAes, w (or something similar).
quoniam, Skutsch; in quo, c.


That is, a short word for short people. The derivation


398


BOOK XIX, xir. 1-5


listened to their conversations on literary subjects.
Then said Fronto to Apollinaris: “I pray you, Sir,
inform me whether I was right in forbearing to
call men of excessively small stature nami and in
preferring the term pumiliones ; for I remembered
that the latter word appears in the books of early
writers, while I thought that mami was vulgar and
barbarous.” “It is true,’ replied Apollinaris, that
the word nani is frequent in the language of the
ignorant vulgar; yet it is not barbarous, but is
thought to be of Greek origin; for the Greeks
called men of short and low stature, rising but little
above the ground, vávo, or * dwarfs,’ using that word
by the application of a certain etymological principle
corresponding with its meaning,* and if my memory
is not at fault," said he, “it occurs in the comedy of
Aristophanes entitled 'OAxáàes;? or The Cargo Boats.
But this word would have been given citizenship
by you, or established in a Latin colony, if you had
deigned to use it, and it would be very much more
acceptable than the low and vulgar words which
Laberius introduced into the Latin language." ?
Thereupon Postumius Festus said to a Latin
grammarian, a friend of Fronto's: * Apollinaris has
told us that nani is a Greek word ; do you inform
us whether it is good Latin, when it is used, as it
commonly is, of small mules or ponies, and in what
author it is found.” And that grammarian, a man
very well versed in knowledge of the early literature,
said: “If 1 am not committing sacrilege in giving


of vdvos, from which nani comes, is uncertain, Pwmilio is
connected by some with muypadlov, = muypyatos, “thumb-
ing”; cf. Lat. pugnus: by others with puer and pubes.

? Frag. 427, Kock. 3 See xvi. 7.


399


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Apollinare, quid de voce ulla Graeca Latinave
sentiam dicere, audeo tibi, Feste, quaerenti respon-
dere esse hoc verbum Latinum scriptumque inveniri
in poematis Helvi Cinnae, non ignobilis neque in-
docti poetae," versusque eius ipsos dixit, quos,
quoniam memoriae mihi forte aderant, adscripsi :


At nunc me Genumana per salicta
Bigis raeda rapit citata nanis.


AIV


Contemporaneos fuisse Caesari et Ciceroni M. Varronem et
P. Nigidium, aetatis suae doctissimos Romanos ; et quod
Nigidii commentationes propter earum obscuritatem sub-
tilitatemque in vulgus non exeunt.


AETas M. Ciceronis et C. Caesaris praestanti
facundia paucos habuit, doctrinarum autem multi-
formium variarumque artium quibus humanitas eru-
dita est columina habuit M. Varronem et P. Nigidium.
Sed Varronis quidem monumenta rerum ac disci-
plinarum, quae per litteras condidit, in propatulo
frequentique usu feruntur, Nigidianae autem com-
mentationes non proinde in volgus exeunt et obscu-
ritas subtilitasque earum tamquam parum utilis
derelicta est. Sicuti sunt quae paulo ante legimus
in Commentarüs eius, quos Grammaticos inscripsit, ex !
quibus quaedam ad demonstrandum scripturae genus
exempli gratia sumpsi.

Nam, cum de natura atque ordine litterarum dis-
sereret quas grammatici * vocales" appellant, verba


lex, Aldus; et, o.
400


BOOK XIX, xri. 5-xiv. 5


my opinion of any Greek or Latin word in the
presence of Apollinaris, I venture to reply to your
inquiry, Festus, that the word is Latin and is found
in the poems of Helvius Cinna, a poet neither
obscure nor without learning." And he gave the
verses themselves, which I have added, since I
chanced to remember them:


But now through Genumanian willow groves
The wagon hurries me with dwarf steeds (bigis
nanis) twain.


XIV


That Marcus Varro and Publius Nigidius, the most learned
Romans of their time, were contemporaries of Caesar and
Cicero, and that the commentaries of Nigidius, because of
their obscurity and subtlety, did not become popular.


Tue time of Marcus Cicero and Gaius Caesar had
few men of surpassing eloquence, but in encyclo-
paedie learning and in the varied sciences by which
humanity is enobled it possesses two towering figures
in Marcus Varro and Publius Nigidius. Now the
records of knowledge and learning left in written
form by Varro are familiar and in general use, the
observations of Nigidius, however, are not so widely
known, but their obscurity and subtlety have caused
them to be neglected, as of little practical value. As
a specimen I may cite what I read a short time ago
in his work entitled Grammatical Notes; from this
book I have made a few extracts, as an example of
the nature of his writings.

When discussing the nature and order of the
letters? which the grammarians call vocales, or


1 Frag. 1, Báhrens. ? Properly ** sounds."
40I


VOL, LI. DD


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


haec scripsit, quae reliquimus inenarrata ad exercen-
6 dam legentium intentionem: * 4 et o semper
principes sunt, ? et & semper subditae, e et subit et


—~


praeit; praeit! in ‘Euripo,’ subit in ‘Aemilio.” Si |


quis putat praeire w in his verbis : * Valerius,’ * Ven-
nonius,’ * Volusius,’ aut i in his: *iampridem,' * iecur,
*jocus, ‘iucundum,’ errabit, quod hae litterae, cum


praeeunt, ne vocales quidem sunt.” Item ex eodem -


libro verba haec sunt: “ Inter litteram x et g est alia
vis, ut in nomine ‘anguis’ et ‘angari’ et *ancorae'
et ‘increpat’ et ‘incurrit’ et ingenuus. In omnibus
his non verum x, sed adulterinum ponitur. Nam x
non esse lingua indicio est; nam si ea littera esset,
lingua palatum tangeret." Alio deinde in loco ita
scriptum : * Graecos non tantae inscitiae arcesso, qui
ov ex o et v scripserunt, quantae? qui ei ex e et 2;
illud enim inopia fecerunt, hoc nulla re subacti."


1 praeit added by Hertz.
2 quantae added in o ; quantae nostri fuerunt, Hertz.


1 Frag. 53, Swoboda, 2 They are semi-vowels.

? Frag. 54, Swoboda.

4 This word is cited by the Thes. Ling. Lat. from Lucilius
200, Lachmann ; that, however, is a conjecture of Scaliger's


me


and Marx (262) reads Ancerius, a personal name. The mean-
ing of the word is uncertain. It is perhaps the same as the |


Greek &yyapos, ** courier," a loan-word of Persian origin.
5 Pronounced like ng ; for example, angcora.
$ Frag. 55, Swoboda. ? That is, the Romans.
8 Since the sound of v was that of French w, German i,


the Greeks were compelled to use ov for the long v. In.
Latin the genuine diphthong c? had changed to iz before the |


402


BOOK XIX. xiv. 5-8


* vowels," he wrote the following, which I leave
unexplained, in order to test my readers' powers
of application :* * 4 and o," he says, “always stand
first in diphthongs, ? and w always second, e both
follows and precedes ; it precedes in Euripus, follows
in Aemilius. If anyone supposes that u precedes
in the words Valerius, Vannonius, and Volusius,
or that 7 precedes in iampridem (long ago), iecur
(liver), iocus (joke), and zucundus (agreeable), he
will be wrong, for when these letters precede, they
are in fact not vowels,’ ? These words also are
from the same book :? “ Between the letters x and
g another element is introduced, as in the words
anguis (snake), angari ancora (anchor), icrepat
(chides), incurrit (runs upon), and ingenuus (free-born).
In all these we have, not a true , but a so-called
n adulierinum,? For the tongue shows that it is not
an ordinary »; since if it were that sound, the
tongue would touch the palate in making it." Then
in another place we find this:9 “I do not charge
those Greeks with so great ignorance in writing ov
(=: v) with o and v, as I do those? who wrote ei
(21i) with e and 2; for the former the Greeks
did from necessity, in the latter case there was no
compulsion." 8


period of our earliest records; an example is dico for deico
(cf. Selkvvju). The spurious diphthong e?, which probably
was the only one known to Nigidius, was introduced to
indicate the sound of i, and was not necessary, although,
like the tall 7 and the apex (over other vowels) it was
convenient.


493


ES
a
*


VIE
LIE


pei 1 Zeb cue sidilid d
"pee "Ralatéero etos tod oon ho "l
tipebe qutaria i ous ont bp Ec T T
Vbi: A. uen erik dev y mel
vituli uu P $i sitet, zr " B3 D prm esr
totu] a ral to sm ott ipeo to AUS dad

umen 3 ^ bun coder by One Micra it


ane ay) ES 3 pi wp i ok f dub nay 4 led
A b. " | ain vind :
ya | ET aj ebper wi}
u$ wir. fot? nies
rv om ee sik "n
Tees "quee y Atm
NUT o bun 1 2 * UIN 'OKNOS X i
HA J ; 245 1 i 2” pig Ae E
Sallie | i515. 73.8 jJ - yess Lé! ads Mut


fast al Ho3miksweeosiboeapeet oct T Amst"


idi quier iBdt ere at 1) ende ji weld”
ü Nl 2 "nzgnt c) lon “SH road NU Apa
cr’ & d$ Tug. ow vaa Vout
] I i Siw TORT
] i + bis LU
h ^ it 6S a &j ) "niw
: ved) sani td CENT Tiitezwett 40 e» (sh
“(Pek AF dea ety
E -
b LIMINE
p


LIBER VICESIMUS
I


Disputatio Sex. Caecilii iureconsulti et Favorini philosophi
de legibus Duodecim Tabularum.


Sextus CakciLivs in disciplina iuris atque in legibus
populi Romani noscendis interpretandisque scientia,
usu auctoritateque inlustris fuit. Ad eum forte in
area Palatina, cum salutationem Caesaris opperiremur,
philosophus Favorinus accessit conlocutusque est,
nobis multisque aliis praesentibus. In illis tunc
eorum sermonibus orta mentiost legum decemvira-
lium, quas decemviri eius rei gratia a populo creati
conposuerunt, in duodecim tabulas conscripserunt.

Eas leges cum Sex. Caecilius, inquisitis explora-
tisque multarum urbium legibus, eleganti atque
absoluta brevitate verborum scriptas diceret, * Sit," 1
inquit, * hoc ’’ Favorinus, “ in pleraque earum legum
parte ita uti dicis; non enim minus cupide tabulas
istas duodecim legi quam illos duodecim libros
Platonis De Legibus. Sed quaedam istic esse anim-
advertuntur aut obscurissima aut durissima? aut
lenia contra nimis et remissa aut nequaquam ita, ut
scriptum est, consistentia.”


l git, Beroaldus; sed, c.
* aut durissima, added by J. Gronov.


1 That is, Antoninus Pius,

* The Area Palatina was originally the space bounded on
the west by the Domus Tiberiana, or Palace of Tiberius, and
the Domus Augustana ; as time went on, it must have been
bounded and restricted by other parts of the Imperial Palace,
406


—— delit


BOOK XX
I


A diseussion of the jurist Sextus Caecilius and the philo
sopher Favorinus about the laws of the Z'welve Tables.


Sexrus Carcitius was famed for his knowledge,
experience and authority in the science of jurispru-
dence and in understanding and interpreting the
laws of the Roman people. It happened that as we
were waiting to pay our respects to Caesar! the
philosopher Favorinus met and accosted Caecilius
in the Palatine square? in my presence and that of
several others. In the conversation which they
carried on at the time mention was made of the
laws of the decemvirs, which the board of ten
appointed by the people for that purpose wrote and
inscribed upon twelve tablets.?

When Sextus Caecilius, who had examined and
studied the laws of many cities, said that they were
drawn up in the most choice and concise terms,
Favorinus rejoined: “It may be as you say in the
greater part of those laws ; for I read your twelve
tables with as eager interest as I did the twelve books
of Plato On the Laws. But some of them seem to
me to be either very obscure or very cruel, or on
the other hand too mild and lenient, or by no
means to be taken exactly as they are written.”


3 These laws were set up in the Forum on ten tablets of
bronze in 451 B.c., to which two more tablets were added


in 450.
407


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


5 “QObscuritates,” inquit Sex. Caecilius, “non adsigne-
mus culpae scribentium, sed inscitiae non adsequent-
ium, quamquam hi quoque ipsi, qui quae scripta sunt

6 minus percipiunt culpa vacant. Nam longa aetas
verba atque mores veteres oblitteravit, quibus verbis
moribusque sententia legum conprehensa est. Tre-
centesimo quoque anno post Romam conditam
tabulae conpositae scriptaeque sunt, a quo tempore
ad hunc diem anni esse non longe minus sescenti!

7 videntur. Dure autem scriptum esse in istis legibus
quid existimari potest? nisi duram esse legem putas,
quae iudicem arbitrumve iure datum, qui ob rem
iudicandam ? pecuniam accepisse convictus est,
capite poenitur aut quae furem manifestum ei cui
furtum factum est in servitutem tradit, nocturnum

8 autem furem ius occidendi tribuit. Dic enim,
quaeso, dic, vir sapientiae studiosissime, an aut
iudicis illius perfidiam contra omnia divina atque
humana iusiurandum suum pecunia vendentis aut
furis manifesti intolerandam audaciam aut nocturni
grassatoris insidiosam violentiam non dignam esse
capitis poena existumes ?”’

9 “Noli,” inquit Favorinus, “ex me quaerere quid
ego existumem. Scis enim solitum esse me, pro
disciplina sectae quam colo, inquirere potius quam

10 decernere. Sed non levis existimator neque asper-


: sexcenti, J. F. Gronov ; septingenti, c.
Iain iudicandam, Scioppius (cf. Quint. v. 10. 87 ; Tac. Ann.
iv. 31; etc.); dicendam, e. Heraeus suggests that we have q,


Susion of ob rem iudicandam and ob ius dicendum or ob
falsum testimonium dicendum.


! The chronology of N. epos; see note on § 3, above
the chapter heading of xvii, 21. Say aao


ix) 3 vili, 4. Sid


408


BOOK XX. 1..5-10


« As for the obscurities," said Sextus Caecilius,
«let us not charge those to the fault of the makers
of the laws, but to the ignorance of those who
cannot follow their meaning, although they also
who do not fully understand what is written may
be excused, For long lapse of time has rendered
old words and customs obsolete, and it is in the
light of those words and customs that the sense
of the laws is to be understood. As a matter of
fact, the laws were compiled and written in the
three hundredth year after the founding of Rome,’
and from that time until to-day is clearly not less
than six hundred years. But what can be looked
upon as cruel in those laws? Unless you think a
law is cruel which punishes with death a judge or
arbiter appointed by law, who has been convicted
of taking a bribe for rendering his decision,” or
which hands over a thief caught in the act to be
the slave of the man from whom he stole,? and
makes it lawful to kill a robber who comes by
night.4 Tell me, I pray, tell me, you deep student
of philosophy, whether you think that the perfidy
of a juror who sells his oath contrary to all laws,
human and divine, or the intolerable audacity of an
open theft, or the treacherous violence of a nocturnal
footpad, does not deserve the penalty of death?”

« Don't ask me," said Favorinus, * what I think.
For you know that, according to the practice of the
sect to which I belong,5 I am accustomed rather to
inquire than to decide. But the Roman people is
a judge neither insignificant nor contemptible, and


5 He probably refers to the Pyrronian sceptics, about
whose beliefs he wrote a work in ten books ; see xi. 5, 5.


409


ll


12


13


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


nabilis est populus Romanus, cui delicta quidem
istaec vindicanda, poenae tamen huiuscemodi nimis
durae esse visae sunt; passus enim est leges istas de
tam inmodico supplicio situ atque senio emori, Sicut
illud quoque inhumaniter scriptum improbavit, quod,
si homo in ius vocatus, morbo aut aetate aeger ad
ingrediendum invalidus est, ‘arcera non sternitur,
sed ipse aufertur et iumento imponitur atque ex
domo sua ad praetorem in comitium nova funeris
facie effertur. Quam enim ob causam morbo ad-
fectus et ad respondendum pro sese non idoneus,
iumento adhaerens in ius adversario deportatur?
Quod vero dixi videri quaedam esse inpendio molliora,
nonne tibi quoque videtur nimis esse dilutum quod ita
de iniuria poenienda scriptum est: ‘Si iniuriam
alteri faxsit, viginti quinque aeris poenae sunto '?
Quis enim erit tam inops, quem ab iniuriae faciendae
libidine viginti quinque asses deterreant? taque
cum eam legem Labeo quoque! vester in libris, quos


Ad Duodecim Tabulas conscripsit, non probaret:


*Quidam,'? inquit, *L. Veratius fuit egregie
homo inprobus atque inmani vecordia. Is pro de-
lectamento habebat, os hominis liberi manus suae
palma verberare. Eum servus sequebatur ferens
crumenam plenam assium; ut quemque depalma-
verat, numerari statim secundum Duodecim Tabulas
quinque et viginti asses iubebat.' Propterea," in-


! Labeo quoque, Huschke ; cum Labeo q., 95NO ; eum (tum,
II) quoque Labeo, 1X.

* quidam added by Carrio; various other suggestions for
partly filling the lacuna before inquit have been made.


* That is, with a pallet for lying upon.

* At that time one of the two chief magistrates, corre-
sponding to the consuls of later times,
410


—


BOOK XX. 1. 10-13


while they thought that such crimes ought to be
punished, they yet believed that punishments of
that kind were too severe; for they have allowed
the laws which prescribed such excessive penalties
to die out from disuse and old age. Just so they
considered it also an inhuman provision, that if a
man has been summoned to court, and being dis-
abled through illness or years is too weak to walk,
‘a covered waggon he need not spread’ ;? but the
man is carried out and placed upon a beast of burden
and conveyed from his home to the praetor ? in the
comitium, as if he were a living corpse. For why
should one who is a prey to illness, and unable to
appear, be haled into court at the demand of his
adversary, clinging to a draught animal? But as
for my statement that some laws were excessively
- Jenient, do not you yourself think that law too
lax, which reads as follows with regard to the
penalty for an injury :? * If anyone has inflicted an
injury upon another, let him be fined twenty-five
asses’? For who will be found so poor that
twenty-five asses would keep him from inflicting an
injury if he desired to? And therefore your friend
Labeo also, in the work which he wrote On the
Twelve Tables) expressing his disapproval of that
law, says :5 ‘One Lucius Veratius was an exceedingly
wicked man and of cruel brutality. He used to
amuse himself by striking free men in the face with
his open hand. A slave followed him with a purse
full of asses; as often as he had buffeted anyone, he
ordered twenty-five asses to be counted out at once,
according to the provision of the Twelve Tables’


3 viii. 4. 4 Frag. 25, Hushke; 3, Bremer.
5 There seems to be a lacuna in the text; see crit. note.
411


14


15


16


T7


18


19


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


quit, * praetores postea hanc abolescere et relinqui
censuerunt iniuriisque aestumandis recuperatores se
daturos edixerunt. Nonnulla autem in istis legibus
ne consistere quidem, sicuti dixi, visa sunt, velut illa
lex talionis, cuius verba, nisi memoria me fallit, haec
sunt: *Si membrum rupit, ni cum e pacto, talio esto.'
Praeter enim ulciscendi acerbitatem ne procedere
quoque executio iustae talionis potest. Nam cui
membrum ab alio ruptum est, si ipsi itidem rumpere
per talionem velit, quaero, an efficere possit rum-
pendi pariter membri aequilibrium? In qua re
primum ea diffieultas est inexplicabilis, Quid si!
membrum," inquit, * alteri inprudens ruperit ? Quod
enim inprudentia factum est, retaliari per inpruden-
tiam debet. Ictus quippe fortuitus et consultus non
cadunt sub eiusdem talionis similitudinem. Quonam
igitur modo inprudentem poterit imitari, qui in
exequenda talione non licentiae ius habet, sed in-
prudentiae? Sed et si prudens ruperit, nequaquam
patietur aut altius se laedi aut latius. Quod cuius-
modi libra atque mensura caveri possit, non reperio.
Quin etiam, si quid plus erit aliterve conmissum, res
fiet ridiculae atrocitatis, ut contraria actio mutuae
talionis oriatur et adolescat infinita quaedam recipro-
catio talionum. Nam de inmanitate illa secandi
partiendique humani corporis, si unus ob pecuniam
debitam iudicatus addictusque sit pluribus, non libet


2 quid si, Q* ; qui si, IZ ; quis in, O ; quis vi, Q; qui sin,
N ; quis, X.


! The law reads: tertiis nundinis partis secanto. Si plus
minusve secuerunt, se fraude esto, on the third market da
(i.e. after about two weeks ; See note on $ 49, below) let them
cut him into pieces, If they have eut more or less (than
their proper share), let it be without prejudice (to them),”
4T2


BOOK XX. r. 13-19


Therefore,’ he continued, “the praetors afterwards
decided that this law was obsolete and invalid and
declared that they would appoint arbiters to appraise
damages. Again, some things in those laws obviously
cannot, as I have said, even be carried out; for
instance, the one referring to retaliation, which
reads as follows, if my memory is correct : * If one
has broken another's limb, there shall be retaliation,
unless a compromise be made.’ Now not to men-
tion the cruelty of the vengeance, the exaction even
of a just retaliation is impossible. For if one whose
limb has been broken by another wishes to retaliate
by breaking a limb of his injurer, can he succeed,
pray, in breaking the limb. in exactly the same
manner? In this case there first arises this insoluble
difficulty. What about one who has broken another's
limb unintentionally? For what has been done
unintentionally ought to be retaliated unintention-
ally. For a chance blow and an intentional one do
not fall under the same category of retaliation.
How then will it be possible to imitate unintentional
action, when in retaliating one has not the right
of intention, but of unintention? But if he break
it intentionally, the offender will certainly not allow
himself to be injured more deeply or more severely ;
but by what weight and measure this can be avoided,
I do not understand. Nay more, if retaliation is
taken to a greater extent or differently, it will be
a matter of absurd cruelty that a counter-action for
retaliation should arise and an endless interchange
of retaliation take place. But that enormity of
cutting and dividing a man’s body, if an individual
is brought to trial for debt and adjudged to several
creditors I do not care to remember, and I am


413


21


22


23


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


meminisse et piget dicere. Quid enim videri potest
efferatius, quid ab hominis ingenio diversius quam
quod membra inopis debitoris acerbissimo! laniatu
distrahebantur, sicuti nunc bona venum distra-
huntur?"

Tum Sex. Caecilius amplexus utraque manu
Favorinum, * Tu es," inquit, *unus profecto in
nostra memoria non Graecae modo, sed Romanae
quoque rei peritissimus. Quis enim philosophorum
disciplinae suae leges tam scite atque docte callet
quam leges tu nostras decemvirales percalluisti ?
Sed, quaeso tecum tamen, degrediare paulisper
curriculis istis disputationum vestrarum academicis
omissoque studio, quicquid lubitum est arguendi
tuendique, consideres gravius cuiusmodi sint ea
quae reprehendisti, nec ideo contemnas legum
istarum antiquitates, quod plerisque ipse? iam
populus Romanus uti desiverit. Non enim profecto
ignoras legum oportunitates et medellas pro tempo-
rum moribus et pro rerum publicarum generibus ac
pro utilitatum praesentium rationibus proque viti-
orum quibus medendum est fervoribus mutari atque
flecti neque uno statu consistere, quin, ut facies caeli
et maris, ita rerum atque fortunae tempestatibus
varientur. Quid salubrius visum est rogatione illa
Stolonis iugerum de numero praefinito? Quid uti-
lius plebisscito Voconio de coercendis mulierum
hereditatibus? Quid tam necessarium existimatum
est propulsandae civium luxuriae quam lex Licinia


1 acerbissimo, Hosius ; brevissimo, w; saevissimo, Bynkers-
hoek. * ipse, Hosius ; ipsis, w; ipsus, Boot.


1 Oportunitates refers to the advantage or assistance which
the laws afford to meet the special needs of defence; medellas,
to the remedies they furnish for the cure of vice and crime.


414


a


BOOK XX. r. 19-23


ashamed to mention it. For what can seem more
savage, what more inconsistent with humanity, than
for the limbs of a poor debtor to be barbarously
butchered and sold, just as to-day his goods are
divided and sold?”

Then Sextus Caecilius, throwing both arms
about Favorinus, said: * You are indeed the one
man within my memory who is most familiar both
with Greek and with Roman lore. For what
philosopher is skilled and learned in the laws of his
sect to the extent to which you are thoroughly
versed in our decemviral legislation? But yet, 1
pray you, depart for a little from that academic
manner of arguing of yours, and laying aside the
passion for attacking or defending anything what-
ever according to your inclination, consider more
seriously what is the nature of the details which
you have censured, and do not scorn those ancient
laws merely because there are many of them which
even the Roman people have now ceased to use. For
you surely are not unaware that according to the
manners of the times, the conditions of govern-
ments, considerations of immediate utility, and the
vehemence of the vices which are to be remedied,
the advantages and remedies offered by the laws ! are
often changed and modified, and do not remain in
the same condition; on the contrary, like the face
of heaven and the sea, they vary according to the
seasons of circumstances and of fortune. What
seemed more salutary than that law of Stolo limiting
the number of acres? What more expedient than
the bill of Voconius regulating the inheritances of
women? What was thought so necessary for check-
ing the luxury of the citizens as the law of Licinius


415


24


25


26


277


28


29


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


et Fannia aliaeque item leges sumptuariae? Omnia
tamen haec oblitterata et operta sunt civitatis opu-
lentia quasi quibusdam fluctibus exaestuantis. Sed
cur tibi esse visa est inhumana lex omnium mea
quidem sententia humanissima, quae iumentum dari
iubet aegro aut seni in ius vocato? Verba sunt
haec de lege * Si in ius vocat' : * Si morbus aevitasve
vitium escit, qui in ius vocabit iumentum dato; si
nolet, arceram ne sternito. An tu forte morbum
appellari hic putas aegrotationem gravem cum febri
rapida et quercera, iumentumque dici pecus aliquod
unicum tergo vehens? ac propterea minus fuisse
humanum existumas aegrotum domi suae cubantem
iumento inpositum in ius rapi? Hoc, mi Favorine,
nequaquam ita est. Nam morbus in lege ista non
febriculosus neque nimium gravis, sed vitium aliquod
inbecillitatis atque invalentiae demonstratur, non
periculum vitae ostenditur. ^ Ceteroqui morbum
vehementiorem, vim graviter nocendi habentem,
legum istarum scriptores alio in loco, non per se
* morbum,' sed *morbum sonticum' appellant. Iumen-
tum quoque non id solum significat quod nunc
dicitur, sed vectabulum etiam quod a iunctis pecori-
bus trahebatur; veteres! nostri ‘iumentum’ a
‘iungendo’ dixerunt. ‘Arcera’ autem vocabatur
plaustrum * tectum undique et munitum, quasi arca


! veteres enim, c.
* plaustrum rusticum, Hertz from Nonius.


1 The first provision of the law is: S? in ius vocat, ito, ‘if
he summon him to court, let him go." Here the words
** 8i . . . vocat" are used merely to designate the law.

LIT TENUIS SO SD, 4 See xvi. 4. 4 and the note.
416


BOOK XX. 1. 23-29


and Fannius and other sumptuary laws? Yet all
these have been wiped out and buried by the wealth
of the State, as if by the waves of a swelling sea.
But why did that law appear to you inhumane
which in my opinion is the most humane ofdalls
that law, namely, which provides that a beast be
furnished for a sick or aged man who is called into
court? The words of that law, ‘if he summon
him to court,'! are as follows :? ‘If disease or age
be a hindrance, let the summoner provide a beast ;
if he does not wish, he need not spread a covered
waggon. Do you by any chance suppose that
morbus (disease) here means a dangerous sickness
with a high fever and ague, and that iumentum (beast)
means only one animal, capable of carrying someone
on his back ; and is it for that reason that you think
it was inhumane for a man lying sick-a-bed at his
home to be placed upon a beast and hurried off to
court? That is by no means the case, my dear
Favorinus. For morbus in that law does not mean
a serious complaint attended with fever, but some
defect of weakness and indisposition, not involving
danger to life. On the contrary, a more severe dis-
order, having the power of material injury, the
writers of those laws call in another place? not
morbus alone, but morbus sonticus, or ‘a serious
disease. 4 Jumentum also does not have only the
meaning which it has at present, but it might even
mean a vehicle drawn by yoked animals; for our
forefathers formed iumentum from iungo. Further-
more arcera was the name for a waggon, enclosed
and shut in on all sides like a great chest (arca)? and


5 The derivation of arcera from arca seems to be generally
accepted.
417


VOL. III. E E


30


31


32


33


34


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


quaedam magna, vestimentis instrata, qua nimis
aegri aut senes portari cubantes solebant. Quaenam
tibi igitur acerbitas esse visa est, quod in ius vocato
paupertino homini vel inopi, qui aut pedibus forte
aegris esset aut quo alio casu ingredi non quiret,
plaustrum esse dandum censuerunt? neque insterni
tamen delicate arceram iusserunt, quoniam satis
esset invalido cuimodi vectabulum. Atque id fece-
runt, ne causatio ista aegri corporis perpetuam
vocationem daret fidem  detractantibus iurisque
actiones declinantibus ; sed enim insubide.t

* [niurias factas quinque et viginti assibus sanx-
erunt. Nonomnino omnes, mi Favorine, iniurias aere
isto pauco diluerunt, tametsi haec ipsa paucitas assium
grave pondus aeris fuit; nam librariis assibus in ea
tempestate populus usus est. Sed iniurias atrociores,
ut de osse fracto, non liberis modo, verum etiam
servis factas, inpensiore damno vindicaverunt, qui-
busdam autem iniuriis talionem quoque adposuerunt.
Quam quidem tu talionem, vir optime, iniquius
paulo insectatus es ac ne consistere quidem dixisti
lepida quadam sollertia verborum, quoniam talioni
par non sit talio neque rumpi membrum facile possit
ad alterius rupturae, ut ais tu, ‘aequilibrium.’
Verumst, mi Favorine, talionem parissimam fieri
difficillime. Sed decemviri minuere atque extinguere
volentes huiuscemodi violentiam pulsandi atque
laedendi talione, eo quoque metu coercendos esse


 insubide, Heraeus; ipsum vide, w; ipse, Boot; vide
quod, c.


1 See note on $ 11, above. 2 viii, 3.


418


—€——


BOOK XX. 1, 29-34


strewn with robes, and in it men who were too ill
or old used to be carried lying down. What cruelty
then does there seem to you to be in deciding that
a waggon ought to be furnished for a poor or needy
man who was called into court, if haply through
lameness or some other mischance he was unable to
walk; and in not requiring that ‘a closed carriage’
be luxuriously strewn, when a conveyance of any
kind was sufficient for the invalid? And they made
that decision, in order that the excuse of a diseased
body might not give perpetual immunity to those
who neglected their obligations and put off suits at
law ; but foolishly.

* They assessed inflicted injuries at twenty-five
asses. ‘They did not, my dear Favorinus, by any
means compensate all injuries by that trifling sum,
although even that small number of asses meant
a heavy weight of copper; for the as which the
people then used weighed a pound. But more cruel
injuries, such as breaking a bone, inflicted not only
on freemen but even on slaves, they punished with
a heavier fine,? and for some injuries they even pre-
scribed retaliation. This very law of retaliation,
my dear sir, you criticized somewhat unfairly, saying
with facetious captiousness that it was impossible
to carry it out, since injury and retaliation could not
be exactly alike, and because it was not easy to
break a limb in such a way as to be an exact
aequilibrium, or ‘balance,’ as you put it, of the
breaking of the other man’s. It is true, my dear
Favorinus, that to make exact retaliation is very
difficult. But the Ten, wishing by retaliation to
diminish and abolish such violence as beating and
injuring, thought that men ought to be restrained

419
EE 2


36


37


39


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


homines putaverunt neque eius qui membrum alteri
rupisset et pacisci tamen de talione redimenda
nollet tantam esse habendam rationem arbitrati
sunt, ut an prudens inprudensne rupisset spectandum
putarent aut talionem in eo vel ad amussim aequi-
perarent vel in librili perpenderent; sed potius
eundem animum eundemque impetum in eadem
parte corporis rumpenda, non eundem quoque casum
exigi voluerunt, quoniam modus voluntatis praestari
posset, casus ictus non posset.

** Quod si ita est ut dico, et ut ipse aequitatis habitus
demonstrat, taliones illae tuae reciprocae argutiores
profectoquam veriores fuerunt. Sedquoniamacerbum
quoque esse hoc genus poenae putas, quae, obsecro te,
ista acerbitas est, si idem fiat in te quod tute in alio
feceris? praesertim cum habeas facultatem paciscendi
et non necesse sit pati talionem, nisi eam tu elegeris.
Quod edictum autem praetorum de aestimandis
iniuriis probabilius esse existimas,! nolo hoc ignores,
hane quoque ipsam talionem ad aestimationem
iudicis redigi necessario solitam, Nam si reus, qui
depecisci noluerat, iudici talionem imperanti non
parebat, aestimata lite iudex hominem pecuniae
damnabat, atque ita, si reo et pactio gravis et acerba
talio visa fuerat, severitas legis ad pecuniae multam
redibat.

* Restat, ut ei quod de sectione partitioneque
que corporis inmanissimum esse tibi visum est
respondeam. Omnibus quidem virtutum generibus


! existimas, Huschke ; ex his (iis, NOX), w.


420


BOOK XX. 1. 34-39


by the fear of such a penalty; and they did not
think that so much consideration ought to be had
for one who broke another's limb, and refused to
compromise by buying off retaliation, as to consider
that the question ought to be raised whether he
broke it intentionally or not, nor did they make
the retaliation in such a case exactly equivalent or
weigh it in a balance; but they aimed rather at
exacting the same spirit and the same violence in
breaking the same part of the body, but not also the
same result, since the degree of intention can be
determined, but the effect of a chance blow cannot.

* But if this is as I say, and as the condition of fair-
ness itself dictates, those mutual retaliations that you
imagined were certainly rather ingenious than real.
But since you think that even this kind of punish-
ment is cruel, what cruelty, pray, is there in doing the
same thing to you which you have done to another ?
especially when you have the opportunity of com-
promising, and. when it is not necessary for you to
suffer retaliation unless you choose that alternative.
As for your idea that the praetors’ edict was pre-
ferable in taking cognizance of injuries, I want you
to realize this, that this retaliation also wasewont
of necessity to be subject to the discretion of a
judge. For if a defendant, who refused to com-
promise, did not obey the judge who ordered retalia-
tion, the judge considered the case and fined the
man a sum of money; so that, if the defendant
thought the compromise hard and the retaliation
cruel, the severity of the law was limited to a fine.

«]t remains for me to answer your belief that the
cutting and division of a man's body is most in-
human, It was by the exercise and cultivation of


421


41


43


44


45


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


exercendis colendisque populus Romanus e parva
origine ad tantae amplitudinis instar emicuit, sed
omnium maxime atque praecipue fidem coluit
sanctamque habuit tam privatim quam publice. Sic
consules, clarissimos viros, hostibus confirmandae
fidei publicae causa dedidit! sic clientem in fidem
acceptum cariorem haberi quam propinquos tuendum-
que esse contra cognatos censuit, neque peius ullum
facinus existimatum est quam si cui probaretur
clientem  divisui habuisse. Hane autem fidem
maiores nostri non modo in officiorum vicibus, sed in
negotiorum quoque contractibus sanxerunt maxime-
que in pecuniae mutuaticae usu atque commercio;
adimi enim putaverunt subsidium hoc inopiae
temporariae, quo communis omnium vita indiget,
si perfidia debitorum sine gravi poena eluderet.
Confessi igitur aeris ac debiti iudicatis triginta dies
sunt dati conquirendae pecuniae causa, quam
dissolverent, eosque dies decemviri *iustos' appel-
laverunt, velut quoddam iustitium, id est iuris inter
eos quasi interstitionem quandam et cessationem,
quibus diebus nihil cum his agi iure posset.

* Post deinde, nisi dissolverant, ad praetorem voca-
bantür et ab eo quibus erant iudicati addicebantur,
nervo quoque aut compedibus vinciebantur. Sic enim
sunt, opinor, verba legis: * Aeris confessi rebusque
iure iudicatis triginta dies iusti sunto. Post deinde


! dedit, w ; corr. by Daniel.
oe i ee ee ye
! In the Samnite war, after the battle of the Caudine
Forks in 321 s.c.
? jii, 1-4,


422


diues. tust


BOOK XX. 1. 39-45


all the virtues that the Roman people sprang from
a lowly origin to such a height of greatness, but
most of all and in particular they cultivated integrity
and regarded it as sacred, whether publie or private.
Thus for the purpose of vindicating the public
honour it surrendered its consuls, most distinguished
men, to the enemy,! thus it maintained that a client
taken under a man's protection should be held dearer
than his relatives and protected against his own
kindred, nor was any crime thought to be worse
than if anyone was convicted of having defrauded
a client. This degree of faith our forefathers
ordained, not only in public functions, but also
in private contracts, and particularly in the use and
interchange of borrowed money ; for they thought
that this aid to temporary need, which is made
necessary by the common intercourse of life, was
lost, if perfidy on the part of debtors escaped with
a slight punishment. Therefore in the case of those
liable for an acknowledged debt thirty days were
allowed for raising the money to satisfy the
obligation, and those days the Ten called *legiti-
mate, as if they formed a kind of moratorium, that
is to say, a cessation and interruption of judicial
proceedings, during which no legal action could be
taken against them.

«Then later, unless they had paid the debt,
they were summoned before the praetor and
were by him made over to those to whom they
had been adjudged; and they were also fastened
in the stocks or in fetters. For that, I think,
is the meaning of these words:? *For a con-
fessed debt and for judgment duly pronounced let
thirty days be the legitimate time. Then let there


423


46


47


48


49


50


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


manus iniectio esto, in ius ducito. Ni iudicatum
facit aut quis endo eo in iure vindicit, secum ducito,
vincito aut nervo aut compedibus. Quindecim
pondo ne minore aut si volet maiore vincito. Si
volet suo vivito. Ni suo vivit, qui eum vinctum
habebit, libras farris endo dies dato. Si volet plus
dato. Erat autem ius interea paciscendi ac, nisi
pacti forent, habebantur in vinculis dies sexaginta.
Inter eos dies trinis nundinis continuis ad praetorem
in comitium producebantur, quantaeque pecuniae
iudicati essent praedicabatur. Tertiis autem nun-
dinis capite poenas dabant aut trans Tiberim peregre
venum ibant. Sed eam capitis poenam sanciendae,
sicuti dixi, fidei gratia horrificam atrocitatis ostentu
novisque terroribus metuendam reddiderunt. Nam
si plures forent, quibus reus esset iudicatus,! secare,
si vellent, atque partiri corpus addicti sibi hominis
permiserunt. Et quidem verba ipsa legis dicam,
ne existimes invidiam me istam forte formidare:
‘Tertiis,’ inquit, ^nundinis partis secanto. Si plus
minusve secuerunt, se fraude esto. Nihil profecto
inmitius, nihil inmanius, nisi, ut re ipsa apparet, eo
consilio tanta inmanitas poenae denuntiatast, ne ad


1 adiudicatus, Sh2dsch.


1 F. D. Allen, Remnants of Early Latin, p. 86, suggested

that minore and maiore probably ought to change places.
iii. 5.

? The nundinae, or market days, came on every ninth day,
reckoned in the Roman fashión. The time between two
market days was the French ** huit jours” and our ** week.”
Tertiis nundinis, counting the one at the beginning of the
period (in the Roman fashion), would be about two weeks
(actually seventeen days),


424


BOOK XX. 1. 45-50


be a laying on of hands, bring him to court. If he
does not satisfy the judgment, or unless someone
in the presence of the magistrate intervenes as a
surety,let the creditor take him home and fasten
him in stocks or in fetters. Let him fasten him
with not less than fifteen pounds weight, or if he
wish, with more. If the prisoner wishes, he may
live at his own expense. If he does not, the
creditor shall give him a pound of meal each day.
If he wishes, he may give more.’ In the meantime
the right of compromising the case was allowed,”
and if they did not compromise it, debtors were
confined for sixty days. During that time on three
successive market-days? they were brought before
the praetor and the amount of the judgment against
them was announced. But on the third day* they
were capitally condemned or sent across the Tiber
to be sold abroad. But they made this capital
punishment horrible by a show of cruelty and fearful
by unusual terrors, for the sake, as I have said, of
making faith sacred. For if there were several, to
whom the debtor had been adjudged, the laws
allowed them to cut the man who had been made
over to them im pieces, if they wished, and share
his body. And indeed I will quote the very words
of the law, less haply you should think that I shrink
from their odium : ? ‘On the third market day,’ it
says, ‘let them cut him up; if they have cut more
or less, let them not be held accountable. Nothing
surely is more merciless, nothing less humane, un-
less, as is evident on the face of it, such a cruel
punishment was threatened in order that they


25116 5 jit, 6.


425


51


53


54


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


eam umquam perveniretur. Addici namque nunc
et vinciri multos videmus, quia vinculorum poenam
deterrimi homines contemnunt, dissectum esse
antiquitus neminem equidem legi neque audivi,
quoniam saevitia ista poenae contemni non quitast.
An putas, Favorine, si non illa etiam ex Duodecim
Tabulis de testimoniis falsis poena abolevisset et si
nunc quoque, ut antea, qui falsum testimonium
dixisse convictus esset, e saxo Tarpeio deiceretur,
mentituros fuisse pro testimonio tam multos quam
videmus? Acerbitas plerumque ulciscendi maleficii
bene atque caute vivendi disciplinast. Historia de
Metto Fufetio Albano nobis quoque, non admodum
numero! istiusmodi libros lectitantibus, ignota non
est, qui, quoniam pactum atque condictum cum rege
populi Romani perfide ruperat, binis quadrigis
evinctus in diversa nitentibus laceratus est; novum
atque asperum supplicium quis negat? sed, quid
elegantissimus poeta dicat, vide :


at tu dictis, Albane, maneres.”’


Haec taliaque alia ubi Sextus Caecilius, omnibus
qui aderant, ipso quoque Favorino adprobante atque
laudante, disseruit, nuntiatum est Caesarem iam
salutari, et separati sumus.


! saepe numero, Knapp.


! viii. 93.
* He was the ruler of Alba Longa in the time of Tullus
Hostilius, the third king of Rome (673-641 r.c.)


426


BOOK XX. r. 50-55


might never have to resort to it. For nowadays
we see many condemned and bound, because worth-
less men despise the punishment of bondage; but
I have never read or heard of anyone having been
cut up in ancient days, since the severity of that
law could not be scorned. Or do you suppose,
Favorinus, that if the penalty provided by the
Twelve Tables! for false witness had not become ob-
solete, and if now, as formerly, one who was convicted
of giving false witness was hurled from the Tarpeian
Rock, that we should see so many guilty of lying
on the witness stand? Severity in punishing crime
is often the cause of upright and careful living.
The story of the Alban Mettius Fufetius? is not
unknown even to me, although I read few books
of that kind. Since he had treacherously broken
a pact and agreement made with the king of the
Roman people, he was bound to two four-horse
teams and torn asunder as the horses rushed in
opposite directions. Who denies that this is an
unusual and cruel punishment? but see what the
most refined of poets says : ?


But you, O Alban, should have kept your word."


When Sextus Caecilius had said these and other
things with the approval of all who were present,
including Favorinus himself, it was announced that
Caesar was now receiving, and we separated.


3 Virg. Aen. viii. 643.


427


-


t2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


II


Vocabulum ‘“‘siticinum” in M. Catonis oratione quid
significet.


* SiricINES" scriptum est in oratione M. Catonis,
quae scribitur Ne Imperium sit Veteri, ubi Novus
Venerit. * Siticines," inquit, “et liticines et tubi-
cines." Sed Caesellius Vindex in Commentariis
Lectionum Antiquarum scire quidem se ait, “liticines "
lituo cantare et * tubicines " tuba ; quid istuc autem
sit, quo *siticines " cantant, homo ingenuae veritatis
scire sese negat. Nos autem in Capitonis Atei
Coniectaneis invenimus, “siticines” appellatos qui
apud * sitos" canere soliti essent, hoc est vita
functos et sepultos, eosque habuisse proprium genus


tubae, qua canerent, a ceterorum  tubicinum
differens.


III


Quam ob causam L, Accius poeta in Pragmaticis sicinnistas
** nebuloso nomine " esse dixerit.


Qvos “sicinistas” vulgus dicit, qui rectius locuti
sunt, *' sicinnistas " littera » gemina dixerunt. * Sicin-
nium" enim genus veteris saltationis fuit. Salta-
bundi autem canebant, quae nunc stantes canunt.
Posuit hoc verbum L. Accius poeta in Pragmaticis
appellarique * sicinnistas" ait “nebuloso nomine,"
credo propterea *nebuloso," quod, “ sicinnium”
cur diceretur, obscurum esset.


! ]xix, Jordan. ? Frag. 7, Huschke ; 9, Bremer.
428


BOOK XX. m. 1-1. 3


II


The meaning of the word siticines in a speech of Marcus
Cato's.


Tue word siticines is found in a speech of Marcus
Cato entitled Let not a Former Official retain hus
pomer, mhen his Successor arrives.! He speaks of
siticines, liticines and tubicines. But Caesellius Vindex,
in his Notes on Early Words, declares that he knows
that liticines played upon the lituus, or “ clarion,” and
tibicines on the tuba, or “ trumpet," but, being a man
of conscientious honesty, he says that he does not
know what instrument the siticines used. But 1 have
found in the Miscellanies of Ateius Capito? that those
were called siticines who played in the presence of
those who were “ laid away ” (sitos), that is, who were
dead and buried ; and that they had a special kind
of trumpet on which they played, differing from
those of the other trumpeters.


III


Why the poet Lucius Accius in his Pragmatica said that
sicinnistae was a ** nebulous word."


Tuose whom the vulgar call sicimistae, persons
who:speak more accurately have called sicinnistae
with a double ». For the sicinnium was an ancient
form of dance. Moreover, those who now stand and
sing formerly danced as they sang. Lucius Accius
used this word in his Pragmatica, and says that
sicinnistae are so called by a “nebulous” (nebuloso)
term, using the word “nebulous,” I suppose, be-
cause the reason for the term sicinnium was obscure.


429


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


IV


Artificum scaenicorum studium amoremque inhonestum pro-
brosumque esse; et super ea re verba Aristotelis philo-
sophi adscripta.


CowoEDos quispiam et tragoedos et tibicines dives
adulescens, Tauri philosophi discipulus, ut! liberos
homines in deliciis atque in delectamentis habebat.
Id genus autem artifices Graece appellantur oi cepi
tov Aióvvcov texvirat. — Eum adulescentem Taurus
a sodalitatibus convictuque hominum scaenicorum
abducere volens, misit ei verba haec ex Aristotelis
libro exscripta, qui IIpoffujuara “EyxvxAta inscriptus
est, iussitque uti ea cotidie lectitaret: Aid Tí of
Avovvatakoi Texvirat ws émi Td TOAD covgpoé eiguv; 3j?
Ld v , M 3 » 4 ^ 8 ^
ott o"Kkurra Aoyov kai? duXocodías* Kxowwvodtor Sd
TO Tepl Tas avayKaias Téxvas TO TOAD pépos ToU Biov
elvat, kal Ott év dxpaciats tov woAiv xpóvov ciciy,
ale be RU 53 , à ,

OTE 0€ Ev ázoptaus ; ? audorepa 06 PavAdTHTOS TapacKevac-

,

TLKG.


V


Exempla epistularum Alexandri regis et Aristotelis philo-
sophi, ita uti sunt edita; eaque in linguam Latinam versa.


CoMMENTATIONUM suarum artiumque quas dis-
cipulis tradebat Aristoteles philosophus, regis
Alexandri magister, duas species habuisse dicitur.
Alia erant, quae nominabat €Corepwká, alia, quae


1 ut added by Vogel. * 4, Arist. ; omitted by w.
3 kal omitted by Arist, 4 godías, Arist.
5 Tb word ToU Bíov eicív, rà 5t kal ev am. , Arist.


430


BOOK XX. iv. 1-v. 1


IV


That devotion to play-actors, and love of them, was shame-
ful and disgraceful, with a quotation of the words of the
philosopher Aristotle on that subject.


A WEALTHY young man, a pupil of the philosopher
Taurus, was devoted to, and delighted in, the society of
comic and tragic actors and musicians, as if they
were freemen. Now in Greek they call artists of
that kind of zepl Audvucov rexvira, or “craftsmen of
Dionysus." Taurus, wishing to wean that youth
from the intimacy and companionship of men con-
nected with the stage, sent him these words ex-
tracted from the work of Aristotle entitled Universal
Questions, and bade him read it over every day:!
«Why are the craftsmen of Dionysus for the most
part worthless fellows? Is it because they are least
of all familiar with reading.and philosophy, since the
greater part of their life is given to their essential
pursuits and much of their time is spent in intemper-
ance and sometimes in poverty too? For both of
these things are incentives to wickedness.”


x


V


Specimens of letters of King Alexander and the philosopher
Aristotle, just as they were written; with a rendering of
the same into Latin.


Tue philosopher Aristotle, the teacher of king
Alexander, is said to have had two forms of the
lectures and instructions which he delivered to his
pupils. One of these was the kind called e£orepud,


1 Prob, xxx 10; frag. 209, Rose.
à 431


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


2 appellabat dxpoarixa. “Efwrepixa dicebantur, quae
ad rhetoricas meditationes facultatemque arguti-
arum civiliumque rerum notitiam  conducebant,
áxpoaruá autem vocabantur, in quibus philosophia
remotior subtiliorque agitabatur quaeque ad naturae
contemplationes disceptationesve dialecticas perti-
nebant.  Huie disciplinae, quam dixi, áxpoaruxy
tempus exercendae dabat in Lycio matutinum nec
ad eam quemquam temere admittebat, nisi quorum
ante ingenium et eruditionis elementa atque in
discendo studium laboremque explorasset.  lllas
vero exotericas auditiones exercitiumque dicendi
eodem in loco vesperi faciebat easque vulgo iuve-
nibus sine dilectu praebebat, atque eum dedAuwodv
vepérarov appellabat, illum alterum supra éw6wov ;
utroque enim tempore ambulans disserebat. Libros
quoque suos, earum omnium rerum conmentarios,
seorsum divisit, ut alii * exoterici" dicerentur,
partim *'acroatici."

Eos libros generis “acroatici” cum in vulgus
ab eo editos rex Alexander cognovisset atque ea
tempestate armis exercitam! omnem prope Asiam
teneret regemque ipsum Darium proeliis et victoriis
urgeret, in ilis tamen tantis negotiis litteras ad
Aristotelem misit, non eum recte fecisse, quod
disciplinas acroaticas, quibus ab eo ipse eruditus


! exercitam, Carrio (cf. Plaut. Epid. 529, Skutsch) ;
exercitum, w.


1 4e. esoteric, or inner, for the initiated only. The term was
originally applied to Aristotle’s acroatic (or acroamatic) writ-
ings, which were not made public, as were his exoteric
Dialogues, but were read to hearers only (cf. àxo?w) and were
of a strictly scientific character. Except for the fragments of


432


BOOK XX. v. 1-7


or *exoteric," the other áxpoarwá, or * acroatic." !
Those were called *exoteric" which gave training
in rhetorical exercises, logical subtlety, and acquaint-
ance with politics; those were called *acroatic" in
which a more profound and recondite philosophy
was discussed, which related to the contemplation
of nature or dialectic discussions. To the practice
of the **acroatic" training which I have mentioned
he devoted the morning hours in the Lyceum;? and he
did not ordinarily admit any pupil to it until he had
tested his ability, his elementary knowledge, and his
zeal and devotion to study. The exoteric lectures
and exercises in speaking he held at the same place
in the evening and opened them generally to young
men without distinction. This he called 3eAwós
mepiratos, or * the evening walk," the other which I
have mentioned above, éw6ivds, or “the morning
walk" ;? for on both occasions he walked as he
spoke. He also divided his books on all these
subjects into two divisions, calling one set * exoteric,”
the other “ acroatic."

When King Alexander knew that he had published
those books of the * acroatic" set, although at that
time the king was keeping almost all of Asia in a state
of panic by his deeds of arms, and was pressing King
Darius himself hard by attacks and victories, yet in
the midst of such urgent affairs he sent a letter to
Aristotle, saying that the’ philosopher had not done
right in publishing the books and so revealing to the


his Déalogwes, all the works of Aristotle which have come
down to us are of the latter class.

? See note on vii. 16. 1 (ii, p. 135).

3 Hence the term *'peripatetics," from mepumrarée, “walk


up and down."
433
VOL. III, FF


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


8 foret, libris foras editis involgasset: “Nam qua,"


10


Lf


12


inquit, “alia re praestare ceteris poterimus, si ea
quae ex te accepimus omnium prosus fient com-
munia? Quippe ego doctrina anteire malim quam
copiis atque opulentiis."

Rescripsit ei Aristoteles ad hanc sententiam:
* Acroaticos libros, quos editos quereris et non
proinde ut arcana absconditos, neque editos scito
esse neque non editos, quoniam his solis cognobiles
erunt, qui nos audiverunt." +

Exempla utrarumque litterarum sumpta ex An-
dronici philosophi libro subdidi; amavi? prosus
in utriusque epistula brevitatis elegantissimae filum
tenuissimum:


' AAé£avópos "ApwrroréAet €t zpárrew.


Oix ópÜOs émoígcas, éküo)s To)s àxpoarwovs? TOv
H " V EY " € ^ ^ » > >

Aóyov: tive yap 8i) diotcopey queis TOY dAÀXov, ei Kad
^ , bo

ods erawdevOnuev Aóyovs, obrot TavTwY écovroi KOLWOE ;
DN, óc , ~ ^ M OPES 4 > , Xx

éyó 8& Bovdroiuny av rais wept rà àpwrra épmetptaus 1)

rais Suvdpeow Ota pépew. eppwoo.


*"ApurroteAns [JaciXet AdeEavdpw eb mpárrew.


"Eypayás pot epi rv axpoatixkav Aóyav, oidpevos
Sev abrots DvAdrrew év ámoppyrow. (c0. otv adtods
Kat éxdeSomeévovs Kal py ékOcüopévovs: fvverol yáp eicw
póvows Tots Hpov ákovcaguv. ^ éopoco, '"AAéfavópe


Bac e.


lqui.. . audiverunt added by Hertz.

? amavi scripsi; amavi autem, c; an autem, w; en
autem, Rose.  Prosus seems to call for a preceding verb or
adjective; see my article in Class. Phil. xvii (1922), 144 jf.
Otherwise I should prefer the en autem of Rose,

3 axpoauarikous, Piut.


434


i


BOOK XX. v. 7-12


public the acroatic training, in which he himself had
been instructed. “ For in what other way,” said he,
* can I excel the rest, if that instruction which 1 have
received from you becomes the common property of
all the world? For I would rather be first in learn-
ing than in wealth and power."

Aristotle replied to him to this purport: “ Know
that the acroatic books, which you complain have
been made public and not hidden as if they contained
secrets, have neither been made public nor hidden,
since they can be understood only by those who
have heard my lectures.”

I have added copies of both letters, taken from
the book of the philosopher Andronicus! I was
particularly charmed with the slender thread of
elegant brevity in the letter of each.


* Alexander to Aristotle, Greeting.


* You have not done right in publishing your acro-
atic lectures; for wherein, pray, shall I differ from
other men, if these lectures, by which i was in-
structed, become the common property of all? As
for me, I should wish to excel in acquaintance with
what is noblest, rather than in power. Farewell.”


* Aristotle to King Alexander, Greeting.


* You have written to me regarding my acroatic
lectures, thinking that I ought to have kept them
secret. Know then that they have both been made
public and not made publie. For they are intelligible
only to those who have heard me. Farewell, King
Alexander."


1 Frag. 662, Rose.
435


KE 2


13


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Hoc ego verbum £vverol ydép eicw quaerens uno
itidem verbo dicere, aliud non repperi quam quod
est scriptum a M. Catone in sexta Origine: “ Itaque
ego," inquit, “cognobiliorem cognitionem esse
arbitror."


VI


Quaesitum atque tractatum utrum siet rectius dicere
*habeo curam vestri," an ''vestrum."


PrERcoNTABaR Apollinarem Sulpicium, cum eum
Romae adulescentulus sectarer, qua ratione diceretur
*habeo curam vestri" aut “ misereor vestri" et
iste casus *vestri" eo in loco quem videretur
habere casum rectum. Is hic mihi ita respondit:
* Quaeris," inquit, *ex me, quod mihi quoque est
iamdiu in perpetua quaestione. "Videtur enim non
‘vestri’ oportere dici, sed *vestrum,' sicuti Graeci
locuntur: émyeAotpar tudv, x5j0ouat tudv, in quo
loco $pàv aptius vestrum" dicitur quam *vestri*
et habet casum nominandi, quem tu ‘rectum’
appellasti, ‘vos.’1 Invenio tamen," inquit, “non
paucis in locis ‘nostri’ atque *vestri' dictum, non
* nostrum ' aut *vestrum, L. Sulla Rerum Gestarum
libro secundo: * Quod si fieri potest, ut etiam nunc
nostri vobis in mentem veniat, nosque magis. dignos
creditis quibus civibus quam hostibus utamini qui-
que pro vobis potius quam contra vos pugnemus,
neque nostro neque maiorum nostrorum immerito ?
nobis id continget. Terentius in Phormione :


1 vos added by Hertz.
? immerito, Madvig ; merito, w.


436


———


BOOK XX. v. 13-vi. 4


When trying, in the phrase évveroi yáp ciow, to
express the word £vveroí by a single Latin term, I
found nothing better than what is written by Marcus
Cato in the sixth book of his Origins:! ** Therefore
I think the information is more comprehensible
(cognobilior)."


VI


It is asked and discussed whether it it is more correct to say
habeo curam vestri, or vestrum.


I askep Sulpicius Apollinaris, when I was studying
with him at Rome in my youth, on what principle
people said Aabeo curam vestri, or “I have care for
you," and misereor vestri, or “I pity you," and what
he thought the nominative case of vestri was in such
connections. Thereupon he answered me as follows :
« You ask something of me about which I too have
long been in a state of uncertainty. For it seems to
me that one ought to say, not vestri, but vestrum, just
as the Greeks say émipeAodpor tua and xydopat pv,
where $uóv is translated by vestrum more fittingly
than by vestri, having vos for the naming case, or
the ‘direct’ case, as you called it. Yet in not a
few places," said he, *] find nostri and vestri, not
nostrum or vestrum, Thus Lucius Sulla says, in the
second book of his Autobiography :? “But if it is
possible that even now you think of me (nostri), and
believe me worthy to be your fellow citizen rather
than your enemy, and to fight for you rather than
against you, this will surely be due to my services
and those of my forefathers.” Also Terence in the
Phormio :?

1 Frag. 105, Peter?. 2 Frag. 3, Peter”. Sive 172:

431


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS :


Ita plérique ingenió sumus omnes, nóstri nosmet
paénitet.


5 Afranius in togata :

Nescío qui nostri míseritust tandém deus.
6 Et Laberius in Necyomantia :

Dum diüátius retinétur, nostri oblítus est.


7  *Dubium porro," inquit, “non est, quin eodem
haec omnia casu dicantur : ‘nostri paenitet, ! * nostri
oblitus est,’ ‘nostri misertus est,’ quo dicitur: ‘mei
paenitet, ‘mei misertus est, ‘mei oblitus est.

8 ‘Mei’ autem casus interrogandi est, quem ‘ gene-
tivum" grammatici vocant, et ab eo declinatur, quod
est ‘ego’; huius deinde plurativum est ‘nos.’
‘Tui’ aeque declinatur ab eo, quod est ‘tu’; huius

9 itidem plurativum est ‘vos.’ Sic namque Plautus
declinavit in Pseudolo in hisce versibus :


Si ex té tacente fieri possem cértior,

Ere, quaé miseriae, té tam misere mácerent,
Duorüm labori ego hóminum parsissém lubens :
Mei té rogandi et tis? respondendí mihi.


* Mei' enim Plautus hoc in loco non ab eo dixit, quod
10 est ‘meus,’ sed ab eo, quod est ‘ego.’ Itaque si
dicere velis *patrem mei’ pro ' patrem meum, quo
Graeci modo roy zarépa. pov dicunt, inusitate quidem,
sed recte profecto eaque ratione dices, qua Plautus
11 dixit ‘labori mei’ pro *labori meo. Haec autem
ipsa ratio est in numero plurativo, qua Gracchus
* misereri vestrum" dixit et qua M. Cicero * contentio


! nostri paenitet added by Shutsch.
! v. 417, Ribbeck?,


? tui tis y.


438


Quum miii d E DN


BOOK XX. vr. 4-11


Of such a nature are we almost all,
That with ourselves (nostri) we discontented are.


Afranius wrote in an Italian play :!
At last some god or other pitied us (nostr?).

And Laberius in the Necyomantia :*
Detained for many days, he us (nostri) forgot.


« There is no doubt," said he, “that in all these
phrases: ‘we are discontented, ‘he forgot us, ‘he
pitied us’ (nostri), the same case is used as in ‘1
repent’ (mei paenitet), ‘he pitied me" (mei miseritus
est), * he forgot me’ (mei oblitus est). But mei is the
case of questioning? which the grammarians call
‘genitive, and comes from ego; and the plural of
egoisnos. Tui also is formed from tu, and the plural
of this is vos. For Plautus has thus declined those
pronouns in the Pseudolus, in the following lines :*


O Sir, could I be told without your words

What wretchedness so grievous troubles you,

I would have spared the trouble of two men:

My own (met), of asking you, and yours (/is — tui),
of answering.


For Plautus here uses mei, not from meus, but from
ego. Therefore if you should choose to say patrem
mei instead of patrem meum, as the Greeks say róv
matépa pov, it would be unusual, but surely correct,
and on the same principle that Plautus used labori
mei, * the trouble of me, for /abori meo, * my trouble.'
The same rule applies also in the plural number,
where Gracchus said? misereri vestrum and Marcus


2 vy, 62, Ribbeck?. 3 See note on xiii. 26. 1.
4 vy. 3 ff. 5 Q.R.F. p. 248, Meyer’,
439


12


13
14


15


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


vestrum" et ‘contentione nostrum dixit quaque
item ratione Quadrigarius in Annali undevicesimo
verba haec posuit: *C. Mari, ecquando te nostrum
et reipublicae miserebitur!" Cur igitur Terentius
* paenitet nostri,’ non * nostrum,' et Afranius * nostri
miseritus est,’ non ‘nostrum’? Nihil hercle," inquit,
* mihi de ista re in mentem venit, nisi auctoritas
quaedam vetustatis non nimis anxie neque super-
stitiose loquentis. Nam sicuti multifariam scriptum
est * vestrorum ' pro ‘ vestrum,’ ut in Plauti Mostellaria
in hoc versu:


Vérum illud esse! máxima? párs vestrorum in-
téllegit,


cum vellet ‘maxima pars’ dicere * vestrum, ita non-
numquam *vestri' quoque dictum est pro * vestrum.'
Sed procul dubio qui rectissime loqui volet * vestrum
potius dixerit quam *vestri' Et idcirco inportunis-
sime," inquit, «fecerunt, qui in plerisque Sallusti
exemplaribus scripturam istam sincerissimam cor-
ruperunt. Nam cum ita in Catilina scriptum esset :
‘Saepe maiores vestrum miseriti plebis Romanae,’
* vestrum" obleverunt et ‘vestri’ superscripserunt.
Ex quo in plures libros mendae istius indoles
manavit."

Haec memini mihi Apollinarem dicere, eaque tunc
ipsa, ita ut dicta fuerant, notavi.


1 illud est, codd. Plaut.


Eus maxime, O!; maximum (maximam, Plaut. B) adeo,
aut.


1 Pro Planc. § 16. ® Div. in Caec. § 37.


440


BOOK XX. vi, 11-15


Cicero! contentio vestrum, and contentione nostrum? and
on the same principle Quadrigarius in the nineteenth
book of his Annals wrote these words:? * Gaius
Marius, when pray will you pity us (nostrum) and the
State?’ Why then should Terence use paenitet nostri,
not nostrum, and Afranius nostri miseritus est, not
nostrum? Indeed," said he, “no reason for this occurs
to me except the authority of a certain ancient
usage, which was not too anxious or scrupulous in
the use of language. For just as vestrorum is often
used for vesirum, as in this line from the Mostellaria
of Plautus,*


The greatest part of you (vestrorum) know that is
true


(where vestrorum is for vestrum), in the same way vestri
also is sometimes used for vestrum. But undoubtedly
one who desires to speak very correctly will prefer
vestrum to vestri. And therefore," said he, “ those
have acted most arbitrarily who in many copies of
Sallust have corrupted a thoroughly sound reading.
For although he wrote in the Catiline : 5 «Often your
forefathers (maiores vestrum), pitying the Roman
commons,’ they erased vestrum and wrote vestri over
it. And from this? that error has grown and found
its way into more manuscripts."

This is what I remember hearing from Apollinaris,
and I noted down his very words at the time, exactly
as they were spoken.

3 Frag. 83, Peter?. 4 v. 980. 5 xxxiii, 2.


6 Indoles is perhaps ‘‘the nature of the error," 4.e., the
disposition to make an error of that kind.


441


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


VII


Quam diversae Graecorum sint sententiae super numero
Niobae filiorum.*


1 Mina et prope adeo ridicula diversitas fabulae
apud Graecos poetas deprenditur super numero
2 Niobae filiorum. Nam Homerus pueros puellasque
eius bis senos dicit fuisse, Euripides bis septenos,
Sappho bis novenos, Bacchylides et Pindarus bis
denos, quidam alii scriptores tres fuisse solos dixerunt.


VIII


De his quae habere cuurrwolay videntur cum luna iuvene-
scente ? ac senescente.


1l  ANNIANUs poeta in fundo suo, quem in agro
Falisco possidebat, agitare erat solitus vindemiam

2 hilare atque amoeniter. Ad eos dies me et quosdam

3item alios familiaris vocavit. Ibi tum cenantibus
nobis magnus ostrearum numerus Roma missus est.
Quae cum adpositae fuissent et multae quidem, sed
inuberes macriusculaeque? essent: * Luna," inquit
Annianus, *nunc videlicet senescit; ea re ostrea
quoque, sicuti quaedam alia, tenuis exsuctaque est."

4 Cum quaereremus quae alia item senescente Luna
tabescerent, * Nonne Lucilium," inquit, * nostrum
meministis dicere :


| Lemma omitted by w ; supplied by c, omitting sint.

* juvenescente, suggested by Hosius, who writes mansuescente
in his teat; ansuescente, 5NIT; anuescente (ac vescente, X),
OX ; accrescente or adolescénte, Lion.

* macriusculaeque, Hertz; macrae quaeque, NX ; macrae-
que IIX?; macrus queque, 6.


442


—————


BOOK XX. vn. 1-viuir. 4


VII


How the-opinions of the Greeks differ as to the number of
Niobe's children.


A sTRANGE and indeed almost absurd variation is
to be noted in the Greek poets as to the number of
Niobe's children. For Homer says! that she had
six sons and six daughters; Euripides,? seven of
each; Sappho,? nine; Bacchylides* and Pindar,°®
ten; while certain other writers have said that there
were only three sons and three daughters.


VIII


Of things which seem to have cvmrecía, or * coincidence," :
with the waning and waxing moon.


Tur poet Annianus owned an estate in the
Faliscan territory, where he used to celebrate the
vintage season with mirth and jollity, On one
occasion he invited me, along with some other
friends. As we were dining there one day, a large
quantity of oysters were sent from Rome. When
they were set before us and proved to be indeed
numerous, but neither rich nor very plump, Annianus
said: “Of course the moon is waning just now;
therefore the oyster also, like some other things, is
thin and juiceless." When we asked what other
things wasted away with the waning moon, he
answered: “Don’t you remember that our Lucilius
says:


1 Tliad xxiv. 602. 2 Frag. 455, N?.
3 Frag. 143, Bergk. 4 Frag. 46, Blass?.
5 Frag. 65, Bergk. 6 v. 1201, Marx.


443


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Luna alit ostrea et implet echinos, muribus fibras
Et iecur addit ?


5 Eadem autem ipsa quae crescente luna gliscunt, de-

6 ficiente contra defiunt. Aelurorum quoque oculi ad
easdem vices lunae aut ampliores fiunt aut minores,

7 Id etiam,” inquit, «^ multo mirandum est magis, quod
apud Plutarchum in quarto Jn Hesiodum Commentario
legi: * Cepetum revirescit et congerminat decedente
luna, contra autem inarescit adolescente. Eam cau-
sam esse dicunt sacerdotes Aegyptii, cur Pelusiotae
cepe non edint, quia solum olerum omnium contra
lunae augmenta atque damna vices minuendi et
augendi habeat contrarias." "


IX


Qualibus verbis delectari solitus sit Antonius Iulianus, positis
in Mimiambis On.! Matii; et quid significet M. Cato in
oratione quam scripsit de innocentia sua, cum ita
dietitat: 'numquaim vestimenta a populo peposci."


1 Devecrarti mulcerique aures suas dicebat Antonius
Iulianus figmentis verborum novis Cn. Matii, hominis


2 eruditi, qualia haec quoque essent, quae scripta ab eo
in Mimiambis memorabat :


Sinuque amicam refice frigidam caldo,
Columbulatim labra conserens labris.


! On. . . . quam added by L, Müller.


LM.


1 Of. Hor. Serm. ii. 4. 30, lubrica nascentes implent conchylia
lunae ; Cie. de Div. ii. 33.


444


BOOK XX. vir. 4-1x. 2


The moon makes oysters fat, sea-urchins full,
And bulk and substance to the mussels adds ?!


Furthermore, those same things which grow as the
moon waxes grow less asit wanes. The eyes of cats
also become larger or smaller according to the same
changes of the moon. This too,” said he, “is much
more greatly to be wondered at, which I read in the
fourth book of Plutarch's Commentary on Hesiod :*
* The onion grows and buds as the moon wanes, but,
on the contrary, dries up while the moon waxes.
The Egyptian priests say that this is the reason why
the people of Pelusium do not eat the onion, because
it is the only one of all vegetables which has an
interchange of increase and decrease contrary to the
waxing and waning of the moon, "


IX


A passage in the Mimiambi of Gnaeus Matius, in which
Antonius lulianus used to delight; and the meaning of
Marcus Cato in the speech which he wrote on his own
uprightness, when he said: ‘‘ I have never asked the people
for garments.”


Antonius Jutianus used to say that his ears were
soothed and charmed by the newly-coined words of
Gnaeus Matius, a man of learning, such as the
following, which he said were written by Matius in
his Mimiambi :?


Revive your cold love in your warm embrace,
Close joining lip to lip like amorous dove (columbu-
latim).


? Frag, 90, Bernadakis.
3 Frag. 12, Báhrens (F.P.E. p. 282).


445


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


3 Item id quoque iucunde lepideque fictum dictitabat :


Iam tonsiles tapetes ebrii fuco,


Quos concha purpura imbuens venenavit.
1


X


Quid vocabulum ‘‘ ex iure manum consertum ” significet.?


1 * Ex iure manum consertum " verba sunt ex anti-
quis actionibus, quae, cum lege agitur et vindiciae
contenduntur, dici nunc quoque apud praetorem

2solent. Rogavi ego Romae grammaticum, celebri
hominem fama et multo nomine, quid haec verba
essent. Tum ille me despiciens: * Aut erras,"
inquit, ** adulescens, aut ludis; rem enim doceo gram-
maticam, non ius respondeo; si quid igitur ex
Vergilio, Plauto, Ennio quaerere habes, quaeras
licet."

3 “Ex Ennio ergo," inquam, “est, magister, quod

4 quaero. Ennius enim verbis hisce usus est." Cum-
que ille demiratus aliena haec esse a poetis et haud
usquam inveniri in carminibus Ennii diceret, tum
ego hos versus ex octavo Annali absentes dixi, nam
forte eos tamquam insigniter praeter alios factos
memineram :


Pellitur? e medio sapientia, vi geritur res;
Spernitur orator bonus, horridus miles amatur.


1 Something is lacking, as the chapter-heading shows.
? Lemmata of X and XI omitted by c.
3 Tollitur, Cic. pro Mur. 30.
ee ee ee ee ds
1 Id. 13. * That is, the murez or ** purple-fish."


446


BOOK XxX. ix. 3-x. 4


And this also he declared to be charmingly and
neatly devised :!


The shorn rugs now are drunken with the dye
With which the shell? has drenched and coloured
ree them.


X


The meaning of the phrase ex ture manum consertum.


Ex iure manum consertum, or “lay on hands accord-
ing to law," is a phrase taken from ancient cases
at law, and commonly used to-day when a case is
tried before the praetor and claims are made. I
asked a Roman grammarian, a man of wide reputa-
tion and great name, what the meaning of these
words was. But he, looking scornfully at me, said:
* Either you are making a mistake, youngster, or
you are jesting; for I teach grammar and do not
give legal advice. If you want to know anything
connected with Virgil, Plautus or Ennius, you may
ask me."

* [t is a question from Ennius then, master," said
I, “that I am asking. For it was Ennius who used
those words." And when the grammarian said in
great surprise that the words were unsuited to poetry
and that they were not to be found anywhere in the
poems of Ennius, I quoted from memory the follow-
ing lines from the eighth book of the Annals ; for it
chanced that I remembered them because of their
particularly striking character :?


Wisdom is driven forth and force prevails ;
They scorn the speaker good, the rude soldier love.


3 yv, 268 ff., Vahlen.
447


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


Haut doctis dictis certantes nec maledictis,

Miscent inter sese inimicitiam agitantes.

Non ex iure manum! consertum, sed magis ferro

Rem? repetunt regnumque petunt, vadunt so-
lida vi.


5 Cum hos ego versus Ennianos dixissem, ** Credo,"
inquit grammaticus, “iam tibi. Sed tu velim credas
mihi, Quintum Ennium didicisse hoc non ex poeticae
litteris, set ex iuris aliquo perito. Eas igitur tu
quoque," inquit, *et discas unde Ennius didicit."

6 — Usus consilio sum magistri, quod docere ipse de-
buerat a quo discerem praetermonstrantis. Itaque
id quod ex iureconsultis quodque ex libris eorum
didici inferendum his commentariis existimavi, quo-
niam in medio rerum et hominum vitam qui colunt
ignorare non oportet verba actionum civilium cele-

7 briora. * Manum conserere" . . . Nam de qua re
disceptatur in iure in re? praesenti, sive ager sive
quid aliud est, cum adversario simul manu prendere
et in ea re sollemnibus verbis vindicare, id est

8 vindicia."  Correptio manus in re atque in loco
praesenti apud praetorem ex Duodecim Tabulis fiebat,
in quibus ita scriptum est: “Si qui in iure manum

9 conserunt.” Sed postquam praetores, propagatis
Italiae finibus, satis iurisdictionis 4 negotiis occupati,
proficisci vindiciarum dicendarum causa ad? longin-


! manum, Cic, Fam. vii. 13. 2 and some MSS. of pro Mur.
30; manu, c.


* rem, (jc. ; rei, o.

? in iure in re, Hertz; in iure, N ; in re, early editors.
4 satis iurisdictionis, Karlowa; datis iur., MSS.

5 ad added by Oiselius ; in, Carrio.


evi Ss


448


BOOK XX. x. 4-9


Contending not with learning nor abuse,

They join in strife, not laying claim by law,

But, seeking with the sword both, wealth and
power,

With force resistless rush.


When I had recited these verses from Ennius, the
grammarian rejoined : * Now I believe you. But I
would have you believe me, when I say that Quintus
Ennius learned this, not from his reading of the
poets, but from someone learned in the law. Do
you too then go and learn from the same source as
Ennius."

I followed the advice of this teacher, when he
referred me to another from whom I could learn
what he ought to have taught me himself. And 1
thought that I ought to include in these notes of
mine what I have learned from jurists and their
writings, since those who are living in the midst of
affairs and among men ought not to be ignorant of
the commoner legal expressions. Manum conserere;
“to lay on hands." . . . For with one's opponent to
lay hold of and claim in the prescribed formula
anything about which there is a dispute, whether it
be a field or something else, is called vindicia, or “a
claim." A seizing with the hand of the thing or
place in question took place in the presence of the
praetor according to the Twelve Tables, in which it
was written :1 “If any lay on hands in the presence
of the magistrate." ? But when the boundaries of
Italy were extended and the praetors were greatly
occupied with legal business, they found it hard to go
to distant places to settle claims. Therefore it became


2 Of xx. i, 48; see Allen, Remnants of Early Latin, p. 85.


449


VOL, II. GG


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


quas res gravabantur, institutum est contra Duodecim
Tabulas tacito consensu, ut litigantes non in iure
apud praetorem manum consererent, sed “ex iure
manum consertum” vocarent, id est alter alterum
ex iure ad conserendam manum in rem de qua
ageretur vocaret atque profecti simul in agrum
de quo litigabatur, terrae aliquid ex eo, uti unam
glebam, in ius in urbem ad praetorem deferrent
et in ea gleba, tamquam in toto agro, vindicarent.
10 Idcireo Ennius significare volens gestum,! non, ut
ad praetorem solitum est, legitimis actionibus neque
ex iure manum consertum, sed bello ferroque et
vera vi atque solida rem repeti dixit;? quod videtur
dixisse, conferens vim illam civilem et festucariam,
quae verbo diceretur, non quae manu fieret, cum vi
- bellica et cruenta.


Quid sit ** seulnae" verbum positum apud M. Varronem.


P. Laviwi liber est non incuriose factus. Is in-
2scriptus est De Verbis Sordidis, In eo scripsit
“sculnam” vulgo dici, quasi “seculnam”; “ quem
qui elegantius," inquit, «loquuntur * sequestrem '
3 appellant." Utrumque vocabulum a sequendo factum


est, quod eius qui electus sit utraque pars fidem


* volens gestum, Huschke ; volens bellum, N.
? rem . . . dixit added by Boot.


! festuca, **a stalk or stem," was used of the rod with


450


BOOK XX. x. 9-xi. 3


usual by silent consent, though contrary to the Twelve

Tables, for the litigants not to lay on hands in court
in the presence of the praetor, but to call for “a
laying on of hands according to law” ; that is, that
the one litigant should summon the other to the
object in question, to lay hands on it according to
law, and that they should go together to the field
under dispute and bring some earth from it to the
city to the praetor’s court, for example one clod, and
should lay claim to that clod, as if it were the whole
field. Accordingly Ennius, wishing to describe such
action, said that restitution was demanded, not by
legal processes, such as are carried on before a
praetor, nor by a laying on of hands according to law,
but by war and the sword, and by genuine and resist-
less violence ; and he seems to have expressed this by
comparing that civil and symbolic! power which is
exercised in name only and not actually, with warlike
and sanguinary violence,


XI
The meaning of the word scu/na, used by Marcus Varro.


Pusuius Lavinius is the author of a carefully
written book, entitled On Vulgar Words. In it he
wrote that scul&a was a colloquial form for secuína,
“for which," says he, (more elegant speakers use
sequester, or* arbiter." Each of these words is derived
from sequor, because both parties “ follow" the
decision of the arbiter who is chosen. Lavinius


which slaves were touched in the ceremony of manumission.
Here festucariam (a drat Aeyduevov) is extended in meaning
to include any symbolic legal process.
451
aa 2


ATTIC NIGHTS OF AULUS GELLIUS


4sequatur.  Sculnam" autem scriptum esse in
Logistorico M. Varronis, qui inscribitur Catus, idem

5 Lavinius in eodem libro admonet. Sed quod apud
sequestrem depositum erat, f*sequestro positum "
per adverbium dicebant. Cato De Ptolomaeo con-
tra Thermum: “Per deos immortalis, nolite vos
atque vlr


452


———


BOOK XX. x1. 4-5


reminds us in the same book that scul/na was written
in the division of Marcus Varro's Logistorica entitled
Catus] But that which was deposited with the
arbiter they spoke of as sequestro positum, “ deposited
for arbitration," using the adverb sequestro. Cato,
in his speech On Ptolemy against Thermus, says: 2
* By the immortal gods, do not . . . .”


1 Frag. 37, Riese. ? x, 3, Jordan,


453


E € AR ome "^ad
A E
364 A E RN


ÁÍ-—
"


AEM 4
x5 p * o mu sen B 2 X46
oc aint Ret) | ania te aL TG


Se


tU


INDEX OF NAMES!


Abdera, v. 3. 3.

Abderites, x. 17. 4.
Abdera. à

Aborigines, v. 21. 7; xvi. 10. 7.

gode i. 13415 55 v1:147 97 1x;
5. 4.

Academicus, -a, -um, adj. from
Academia: curricula, xx. 1l. 21;
philosophi, xi. 5. 6; sc. philosophi,
xi. 5. 8; as substantive, xvii. 15.
tod) 21:48,

Acca, see Larentia.

Accianum illud, xiv. 1. 34. Accord-
ing to Nonius (s.v. divitant), the
reference is to the Astyanaz.

Accius, L.,? iii. 3.1, 9; xiii. 2 passim;
xvi. 21. 49; Atreus, xiii. 2. 2;
Didascalica, ii. 11. L, 2, 4; JVeo-
ptolemus, xiii. 3.2; Pelops, ii. 6. 23;
Pragmatica, xx. 3. L, 3; Sotadica,
vi. 9. 16; see also Accianum illud.

Achaei, i. 11. 8; x. 16. 15.

Achaeis, De, see M. Porcius Cato
Gensorius.

Achaicum bellum, x. 16. 17.

Achilles, iii. 11. 5; x. 16. 14; xiv. 6.
4; Romanus, ii. 11. 1.

Achilles, see Ennius.

Achivi, xi. 4. 3.

Acilius, O., vi. 14. 9.

Aeacides, x. 16. 14, 16.

Aeacus, xv. 21. l. An early king of
Aegina, reputed to be a son of
Zeus.

Aebutia lex, xvi. 10. 8. A law of
uncertain date.


Of or from


Aedilibus vitio Creatis,
Porcius Cato Censorius.

Acdilicia, see Quinctius Atta.

Aeditumus, see Pomponius.

Aedituus, see Valerius.

Aegina, ii. 21. 1.

Aegyptiaci libri, see Apion.

Aegypti zi. 2S ly 65 715 xy, d.

iz

Aegyptius, -a, -um, adj. from Aegyp-
tus, iii, 11. 6; lens, xvii. 8. 2;
palma, vi. 16. 5; sacerdotes, xx. 8. T.

Aegyptus, ii, 22. 23; v. 14. 2; vii.
17. 8; x. 10. 2; xiv. 6. 4.

Aelii, vii. 15. 5.

Aelius Catus, Sex.,* iv. 1. 20.

Aelius Gallus, C.,4 De Significatione
Verborum quae ad Ius Civile perti-
nent, xvi. 5. 3. A. Roman jurist of
the time of Cicero and Varro.

Aelius Melissus, De Loquendi Pro-
prietate, xviii. 6 passim, A Roman
grammarian.

Aelius Stilo, L.,5 i. 18 passim; ii. 21.
8; iii. 8. 12; v. 21. 6; x. 21. 2
(bis); xii. 4. 55 Indices Plauti, iii.
3. 1; De Proloquiis, xvi. 8. 2, 3.

Aelius Tubero, Q., i. 22. 7 (bis).

Aelius Tubero, Q.,? vii. 3. L; 4. b; xiv.
7. 13; 8. 2; Historiae, vii. 3. 1;
4.9; x. 28. L, 1; Ad. C. Oppium,
vi.9. 11; Super Officio Iudicis, xiv.
2. 20.

Aemilia lex, ii, 24. 12.

Aemilius, xix. 14. 6.

Aemilius Lepidus, M., xii. 8. 5.


De, see M.


1 J, = Lemma, the headings of the various chapters of the twenty books.
Passim usually indicates that the word occurs four times or more, ordinarily
in L and in the first section. When a word occurs several times, but not in L
or in the first few sections, f. and ff. are used, Titles of works of literature are


put in italics.


Explanations of names,


and titles of collections of fragments,


which are given in the Indices to Volumes i and ii are not repeated. Of the
latter those numbered from 1 to 40 are in Vol. i, numbers 41 and 42 are in Vol. ii,


455


INDEX OF NAMES


Aemilius Papus, Q., iii. 8. 6; xvii.
21. 39.

(Aemilius) Paulus, (L.), iii. 4. 1; iv.
20. 10; vi. 12. 4; xiii. 3. 6 (bis);
xvi. 8. 10.

Aeneas, ii. 16. 3 ff.; x. 16. 2 ff.

Aeneis, see Vergilius.

Aequi, xvii. 21. 17. An early people
of Latium, made subject to Rome
in 304 B.C.

Aeria, xiv. 6. 4. An ancient name of
Egypt and Crete.

Aeschines, In Timarchum, xviii. 3. L,
1; cf.i. 5. 1 (note).

Aeschinus, see Hypobolimaeus.

Aeschylus, xiii. 25. 7; xvii. 21. 10;
IIvpóópos IIpojmevs, xiii. 19. 4 (bis).

Aesopus, ii. 29 passim.

Aethalides, iv. 11. 14.

Aetna, xvii. 10. 8 ff.; Aetnae, xvi. 9,
6. The volcano in eastern Sicily.

Aetolus, see Alexander.

Afranius, L.,!? xx. 6. 5, 11; Conso-
brinus, xv. 13. 3; Sella, xiii. 8. L,
1,95 Xeuhis, x. 11. 8.

Afri homines, viii. 13.

Africa, iv. 18. 3; v. 14. 17, 26; vi. 1.
4, viia. ix... 7.105. x. 2696:
xiii. 20.10; xvi 7.8; 8.11; 11.4.

Africani Syrtes, xvi. 11. L. Two
gulfs (Syrtis Maior and Minor) on
the northern coast of Africa near
Carthage; they were dangerous
because of their tides and shoals,

Africanus, see P. Cornelius Scipio.

Africus, -a, - um, adj. to Africa: mare,
xiii 30. 5; sc. ventus, ii. 22. 12;
90. 1, 8, 5.

Agamemnoniae Mycenae, x. 16. 14.

Agrigentinus, adj. from Agrigentum, a
city of southern Sicily, xvii. 21. 14,

Agrippa, xvi. 16. L, 1. Origin of the
name.

Agrippa, see Menenius and Vipsanius,

Agrippae campus, xiv. 5. 1 (see note).

Ahenobarbus, see Domitius,

Aiax, xiii. 25.18; xv. 6. 3, 4 (ter).

Aius, xvi. 17. 2. A deity that was
supposed to have warned the
Romans of the coming of the Gauls
in 389 B.C.


Alba (Longa), ii. 16. 1; xvii. 21. 3.

Albania, ix. 4. 6.

Albanus, -a, -um, adj. from Alba, xx.
1.54 (bis); nomen, ii. 16. 1.

Albinus, see Postumius.

Alcaeus,* xvii. 11. 1l. The celebrated
Greek lyric poet of the end of the
Seventh and the beginning of the
sixth century B.C.

Alcestis, see Laevius.

Alcibiades, i. 9. 9; 17223 xv. 17.1

Alcides, x. 16. 12.

Alcinus (?) xix. 9. 8. For Alcinous,
king of the Phaeacians,

Alco, iv. 11. 14.

Alexander, see Ennius,

Alexander Aetolus,4 xv. 20. 8. A
Greek poet and grammarian of the
time of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus
(283-247 B.C.), one of the famous
“tragic Pleiad."

Alexander Magnus, v. 2 passim; vi. 1.
1; vii. 8 passim; ix. 3. L, 3; xiii.
4. L, 1 (bis); xvii. 21. 28 f., 32 ff.;
Xx. 9 passim; Alexandri equus, v.


2. L, 1 (bis); epistulae, xx. 5. L;


xiii. 4. 2.

Alexander Molossus, xvii. 21. 33 (bis).
A king of Epirus, uncle of Alexander
the Great.

Alexandrea, see Laberius, D.

Alexandria, xvii, 21. 41, The city in
Egypt.

Alexandrinum bellum, vii. 17. 3.

ced ii. 23. 1; IIv6ayopígovca, iv.

Alfenus Varus,‘ vii. 5. L, 2, 5; Digesta,
vii. 5. 1; Coniectanea, vii. 5. 1.

Allia, v. 17. 2.

Alliensis pugna, iv. 9. 6.

Alyattes, i. 11. L, 7.

Amata, i, 12. 14, 19.

Ambracia, vi. 16. 5.

Ambraciensis, adj.
Di. 89.1.

Amphitruo, see T. Maccius Plautus,

Amyntas, ix. 3. 1; xvii. 91. 98.

Anacreon, ? xix. 9. 5, 7. A celebrated
Greek lyric poet, born in Teos about
550 B.C.

Analogia, De, see O. Julius Caesar.


from Ambracia,


*? Th. Bergk,! Poetae Lyrici Graeci. Leipzig, 1882 (B5.
**. A, Meineke, Analecta Alexandrina, Berlin, 1843.


456


—————M


INDEX OF NAMES


Anaxagoras, xv. 20. 4. A Greek
philosopher from Olazomenae in
Asia Minor, born about 500 B.C.
He lived for a time in Athens in
intimate friendship with Pericles.

Anchises, ii. 16. 9; xv. 13. 10.

Androclus, v. 14. 10, 13, 15 f., 29 (bis),
30 (bis).

Andronicus, xx. 5. 10. A Rhodian
philosopher, the head of the Peri-
patetics at Rome about 58 B.C.

Andronicus, see Livius.

Animalibus, De, see Nigidius Figulus.

Anio, xiii. 23. 6.

Anna (ac) Peranna, xiii. 23. 4.

Anna, Peranna, see Laberius, D.

Annaeus Cornutus; De  Figuris
Sententiarum, ix. 10. L, 5; Com-
mentaria in Vergilium, ii. 6. 1.

Annaeus Seneca, L., xii. 2. L, 1, 11 ff.;
Epistulae Morales, xii. 2. 3.

Annales, see v. 18 and Oalpurnius
Piso, Cassius, Claudius Quadri-

.garius, Ennius, On. Gellius, Fabius
Pictor, and Valerius Antias.

Annales Maximi, iv. 5. 6.

ONU vis. 1965 iy 105 dox,
8, 1,.9. :

Annius, vii. 9 passim.

Annius Milo, T., xvi. 8. 7; xvii. 18.
L, 1. Chief magistrate of Lanu-
vium in Latium and tribune of the
commons in Rome in 57 B.C, See

, also M. 'Tullius Cicero,

Antia lex, ii. 24. 13.

Antias, see Valerius.

Antias villa, xvii. 10. 1. A villa of
Favorinus at Antium, on the coast
of Latium.

Anticato, see C. Iulius Caesar.

Anticyra, xvii, 15. 6 (bis). A town in
Phocis and one in Thessaly, both
famous for hellebore.

Antigenides, xv. 17. 1. A flute-
player.

Antigona, also Antigone, xviii. 12. 9.
Daughter of Oedipus and heroine of
a tragedy of Sophocles.

Antiochina pecunia, iv. 18. 7; vi.
1978;


Antiochus Magnus, iv. 18. 3; v. 5. L,
1,2; vi.9.6,12; xii. 13. 26.

Antiquae Lectiones, Praef. 6; see also
Caesellius Vindex.

Antisthenes,í5 ix, 0. 8; xviii. 7. 4.
Antisthenae, xiv. 1. 29. A pupil
of Socrates and founder of the Cynic
school of philosophy.

Antistius Labeo,! i. 12. L, 1; iv. 2. 3,
qii xni OS L5 135-12: 15:85:75
xv. 27. 1; Commentarii ad XII
Tabulas, i. 12. 18; vi. 15.1; xx.
1. 13; Ad Praetoris Edictum, xiii.
10. 3; Posteriores, xiii. 10. 2.

Antoninianae orationes, see M. 'Tullius
Cicero. Orations against M. Anto-
nius, also called Philippics.

Antonius, L., i. 16. 5 (bis).

Antonius, M., iv. 6. 2 (bis).
Antonius, M., i. 16. 5; ili. 9. 4, 5;
vi. 11. 4, 5, 6; xy. 4. 3, 4. ;
Antonius lulianus, i. 4 passim; ix.
1.2, 3,7; 15 passim; xv. 1.1, 3, 4;
xviii. 5 passim; xix. 9. L, 2,7; xx.

9-Lorlz

Aonia, xiv. 6. 4. An ancient name of
Boeotia.

Apion Pleistoneices,® v. 14. 1; vi. 8.
2; Aegyptiaci libri, v. 14. L (cf.
v. 14. 4), 29s: x. 10.2;

Apollinaris, see Sulpicius.

Apollo, v. 12. 12, 13; xiii. 27. 3.

Apollodorus, ii. 23. 1.

Apollodorus, Chronica, xvii. 4. 5, 6.
A. Greek grammarian and historian
who flourished at Athens about
140 B.C. His Chronica gave a sum-
mary of political and literary history
from 1183 B.C. (his date for the fall
of Troy) until his own time.

Apollonius (Rhodius), ix. 9. 3.

Appius Claudius, see Claudius.

Apuli, ii. 22. 21.

Apulus ecus, ii. 22. 23.

Aquilius, iii. 3. 4.

Aquilius Gallus, C., xv. 28. 3. A
celebrated Roman jurist and orator,
a friend of Cicero and his colleague
in the quaestorship.

Arcesilas, see Arcesilaus.


15 P, G. A. Mullachius, Fragmenta Philosophorum Graecorum, Paris, 1860


(SP...


ss $55 acoby, Apollodors Chronik (Philol. Untersuchungen xvi), Berlin, 1902.


, 457


INDEX OF NAMES


Arcesilaus or Arcesilas, iii. 5. L, 1.

Archelaus, xv. 20. 9. King of Mace-
donia in the time of Euripides.

Archelaus, xv. 1. 4, 6 (bis) One of
Mithradates' generals.

Archilochus, xvii. 21. 8. The famous
Greek poet, a native of Paros; he
flourished about 650 B.C.

Archytas, x. 12. 9 (bis).

Area Capitolina, ii. 10.2; Fori Traiani,
xiii. 25.2; Palatina, xx. 1. 2 (see
note); Volcani, iv. 5. 4.

Arescon, ix. 4. 15.

Arescusa, ix. 4. 15.

Argei, x. 15. 30 (see note).

Argi or Argos, lii. 9. 2ff., 8; ix. 4.

= 155. x8: d47

Argivum bellum, x. 16. 17.

Argos, see Argi.

Arimaspi, ix. 4. 6.

Arion, xvi. 19 passim.

Ariopagitae, xii. 7. L, 5, 6. See note.

Aristagoras, xvii.9.21, 24,26 (bis). A
brother-in-law of Histiaeus, tyrant
of Miletus in the latter part of the
sixth and the beginning of the fifth
century.

Aristarchus, ii. 25. 4; see also Aris-
tides.

Aristeas, ix. 4. 3.

Aristides, iii, 10. 6.
Aristarchus.

Aristippus,5 xv. 13. 9; xix. 1. 10
(bis) A Greek philosopher, a pupil
of Socrates; he founded the
Oyrenaic school.

Aristo, T., xi. 18. 16. A Roman
jurist of the time of Trajan, a friend
of the younger Pliny.

Aristodemus, xi, 9. 2 (bis).

Aristogiton, ix. 2. 10; xvii. 91. 7.

Aristophanes, ‘OAxdSes (?), xix. 13. 3;
Frogs, Praef. 21; i. 15. 19; xd,
25. 7; Al IIpórepat @couodopidcov-
cat, XV. 20. 7.

Aristoteles, ii, 12. 1; 22.94; iii. 11.
Vi Jos 16.6; dT 05 95 im at,
4,11; vi.6. L,2; ix. 3 passim; x.
2. L, 1; xiii 5 passim; 7. 6 (bis);
xv. 26. L, 1; xvii. 21. 25, 35; xix.
2.5; 5 passim; xx. 4. L; 5. iy 3L
7, 9; Epist. ad Alex. Magnum, xx.
9. 9; De Animalibus; xiii, 7. 6;
Ilept Mvyuns, vi 6. 3; viii. ae
Problemata Physica, xix. 4. as


458


Erroneously for


,


IlpoBAxaro "EykikMua, xx. 4. 3;
Problematon libri, i.11.17,19; Pro-
blemata, ii. 30. 11; iii. 6. 1; xix.
6. 1. See ’ApiororéAys.

Aristoxenus, iv. 11 passim; De Pytha-
gora, iv. 11. 4.

Arretinum oraculum, iii. 3. 8 (see
note).

Arrianus, Flavius, xix. 1. 14; De
Dissertationibus Epicteti, i, 2. 6;
xvii. 19. 2.

Artemisia, x. 18 passim.

Arvales, fratres, vii. 7. 8. A very
ancient Roman priesthood, con-
nected with agriculture and the
fertility of the fields. 'The order
was revived and given prominence
by Augustus.

Asconius Pedianus, Q., xv. 28. 4. A
Roman grammarian, who lived
from about A.D. 3 to 88. He wrote
commentaries on Cicero's orations,
of which those on five have sur-
vived in a fragmentary condition
rcd by A. O. Olark, Oxford,
1907).

Asculani, xv. 4. 3. The people of
Asculum, the chief town of Picenum.

Asellio, see Sempronius,

Asellus, see Claudius.

Asia, i. 13. 11; ii. 6. 18; vi. 9. 6;
x. 3.5; xii. T. 1; 13. 26; 15. 2;
xiii. 2. 1; xvii. 9. 19, 20; 21. 32;
xix.J. 7: 9. d5 xx

Asiaticus, adj. from Asia, xix. 1. 11.
See also L. Cornelius Scipio.

Asinaria, see T. Maccius Plautus.

Asinius Gallus, O., xvii. l. L, 1. Son
of Asinius Pollio. He was consul
in 8 B.C.

Asinius Pollio, C., Epist. ad Cicero-
nem, i, 22. 19; ad Plancum, x. 26.


nels
Astraba, see T. Maccius Plautus.
Ateius Capito, O.,* i. 12. 8; ii. 24, 2,
15; x. 20. 2, 5, 6; Coniectanea, ii.
24. 2; xiv. 7. 12, 13; 8. 2 (bis);
Xxx. 2. 3; De Iudiciis Publicis, iv.
14.1; x. 6. 4; Epist. xiii, 12. ios
De Officio Senatorio, iv. 10. [53.75
De Pontificio Iure, iv. 6. L, 10.
Atellania, sc. fabula, x. 24. 5.
Aternia lex, xi. 1. L, 2.
Aternius, A., ii, ll. 1,


Consul in
454 B.C.


INDEX OF NAMES


Athenae, i. 2. 1; ii. 2. 1; 12. 1; iii,
13.3; vi. 5. 5; vii. 10. 2, 4 (bis);
dac Ds T7. 1. (0255425 "x- lob xi:

E91 xi. bs dT Die exalt nea;
av200.81558:52720500055 ^. xvilt Ow 13
20:.:4:121. 5, 7, 10; LO sexvilla Lis
1058: 18: 15 xix. 1745" 892368.905
12. 1.

Athenienses, ii. 1.5; 12.1; iii. 2. 4;
Vi, 14: 1,8: vil. 10725 bes ix.
2. 10:57 x1. 18712: ag avin Tous 25
20. 6, 10; xvii. 21. 4, 9, 12, 19, 23,
30, 48. Atheniensis, i. 8. 20; iii.
i126 x18. T5 Le xv. bis d xvii.
21.18, 38.

Atheniensis populus, viii. 9; xi. 18.
L; xvii. 21. 9.

Atherbal, xviii. 12. 6. The name of
two Carthaginian commanders, one
in the first and one in the second
Punic war, Which is meant is
uncertain,

Athones, xvi. 9. 6. Plural of Athos,
the well-known mountain of Chal-
cidice in Macedonia, used by
Lucilius as typical of steep and
rugged country.

Atilius, xv. 24. A Roman writer of
comedy of the ante-classical period,
perhaps identical with the writer
of tragedy mentioned by Suetonius
(Jul. Ixxxiv. 2).

'Auilius « Ting | Vee Uidsn eee
senator,

Atilius Regulus, M., vii. 3 ; 4 passim.
Consul in 267 and 256 B.C.

Atilius Regulus, M., iv. 3. 2. Son
of the above, consul in 227 B.C.
with P. Valerius, and in 217.

(Atilius) Serranus, Q., xv. 28. 3.
sul in 106 B.C.

Atinius, -a, -um, adj. to Atinius,
tribune of the commons in 197 B.C. ;
plebiscitum, xiv. 8. 2; lex, xvii. 7.


A Roman


Con-


hal

Atreus, see L. Accius.

Atta, see Quinctius.

Attalus, xii. 13. 20. Attalus I, king
of Pergamum írom 241 to 197
B.C.

Attica, Praef. 4; xv. 1. 6. See also
Attice.


Attice, xiv. 6. 4. Another form of
Attica.

Attice, xvii. 8. 7. Adv. to Atticus.

Attici, ii. 3. 2; xiii, 6. L.

Atticus, -a, -um, adj. to Attica:
ager, xviii. 10. 1; homines, v. 20. 3;
lingua, i. 2. 4; fi. 3. 1; moctes,
Praef. 4, 10; puer, xvii. 8. 4;
talentum, iii. 17. 3; terra, Praef. 4.

Atticum, Epistulae ad, see M. Tullius
Cicero.

Atticus, see Herodes.

Attius, iii. 16. 13, 14. See note.

Aufeia lex, xi. 10. 1. See O. Sem-
pronius Gracchus.

Augurinus, see Minucius.

Augurium Privatum, see
Figulus.

Augustus, Caesar, ii. 24. 14, 15; vi.
S225 dixo TES 1020x227: (t27)5 Ele bis
xiii. 6. 4; 12.2; 21.4; Epistulae,
x. 11. 5; 24. 2; Epist. ad Gaium
Nepotem, xv. 7. L, 3.

Aulus, xi. 8. 4. Refers to A. Postu-
mius Albinus.

Aulularia, see T. Maccius Plautus.

Aurelius Opilius: !? Indices Plauti,
iii. 3. 1; Musae, i. 25. 17, 18 (cf.
Praef. 8).

Aurunci, i. 10. 1.

Auruncus, v. 12. 14.

Auspiciis, De, see Valerius Messala.

Auster, xvi. 11.4, 6 (bis), 7. The South
Wind, personified.

Aventinus, sc. mons, xiii. 14. 4, 7 (bis).

Axium, ad Q., vi. 3. 10, 55. See M.
Tullius Tiro.


Nigidius


Babylonii, iii. 2. 5; xiv. 1. 11.

Bacchae, see Euripides.

Bacchylides,!? xx. 7. 2.

Bagrada, also Bagradas, vii. 3.

Balbus, see Cornelius.

Bassus, see Ventidius.

Bello Carthaginiensi, De, sce M. Porcius
Cato Censorius.

Bias, v. 11 passim.

Bibulus, see Calpurnius.

Bisaltia, xvi. 15. A country in Thrace
on the river Strymon.

Bithynia, xvii. 17. 2. A country in
the northern part of Asia Minor.


47 TF, Blass, Bacchylidis Carmina, Leipzig, 1899.


459


INDEX OF NAMES


Bithynis, Pro, see C. Tulius Caesar.

Boeotia, xii. 5. 1; xiv. 6. 4. ;

Boeotia, ii. 3. 3, 9. See T. Maccius
Plautus.

Borysthenes, ix. 4. 6.

Bosporicum mare, xvii. 8. 16. Also
called mare Cimmerium, the modern
Sea of Azov.

Brundisini, xvi. 6. 1, the people of
Brundisium, the seaport in south-


6. 1; xix. 1. 1, 12. :
Bruttiani, x. 3. 17, 18 (bis), 19 (see


note).
Bruttii, x. 3. 19 (ter).
Brutus, see Iunius.
Bucephalas, v. 2. L, 1.
Bucephalon, v. 2. 5.
Bucolica, see Theocritus and Vergilius.
Busiris, ii. 6. 3.
Butes, v. 8. 5.


Cacomnemone, see Laberius, D.

Caecias, ii. 22. 24. 'The name of a
wind.

Caecilius, Sex., xx. 1. L, 1, 4, 5, 20,
55. A Roman jurist of the time
of Favorinus and Gellius.

Caecilius Metellus Nepos, Q., xviii. 7.
7, 9. Consul in 57 B.C. See also
M. Tullius Cicero.

Caecilius Metellus Numidicus, Q.,M
vii, L1. p, 1; 3d 99: 4. 4: pe
Ducendis Uxoribus, i. 6 passim; In
Valerium Maximum, xv. 14. L, 1;
Adversus C. Manlium, vii. 11. 2;
De Triumpho Suo, xii 9. 4, 6;
Epist. ad Cn. et L. Domitios, xv.
18.65 xvii, 92.7.

Caecilius Metellus Pius, Q., ix. 1. 1
(bis); xv. 28. 3.

Caecilius Statius,?? ii. 23 passim; iv.
20.13 (bis); v. 6.12; xv. 9. L, 3;
24; xvii. 21. 49; Chrysium, vi. 17.
13; Hypobolimaeus Aeschinus, xv.
14. 5; Plocium, ii. 28. b; iii. 16. 4,
9; Polument, xi. 7. 6 (see note);
Subditivus, xv. 9. 1; Synaristosae,
xv. 15. 2; Triumphus, vi. 7. 9.

Caecina, Pro A., see M. Tullius Cicero,

Oaedicius, Q., iii. 7. L (bis), 1, 20, 21.

Caelius, xiv. 5. 2.

Caelius, M., i. 15. 9, 10.

Oaelius (Rufus) M.,


460


xvi dl 4


Tribune in 52 B.C., an orator, and
a friend and correspondent of
Cicero. See also M. Tullius Cicero.

Caelius Sabinus, vi. 4. L, 1; De
Edicto Aedilium Curulium, iv. 2. 3.

Caeneus, ix. 4. 14.

Caenis, ix. 4. 14.

Caepio, see Servilius.

Caerites, xvi. 13. 7. 'The people of
Caere, a city of Etruria west of Veii
near the sea-coast.

Caerites tabulae, xvi. 13. 7.

Caesar, v. 14. 15; xii. 5.13; salutatio
Caesaris, iv. 1. 1; xx. 1. 2, 55;
familia et appellatio Caesarum, xix.
8. 3. See also Augustus, Iulius,
and Kaicap.

Caeselli Erroribus, De, see "Terentius
Scaurus.

Caesellius Vindex, ii. 16. L; ix. 14,
6 (bis); xviii. 11. L, 1, 8; Lectionum
Antiquarum Commentarium, ii. 16.
5,8; iii. 16. 11 (bis); vi. 2 passim;
xi. 15. 2 ff.; xx. 2. 2; cf. Praef. 6.

Caleni, x. 3. 3.

Callicles, x. 22. 2. .

Callimachus,?® iv. 11. 2; ix. 9. 3;
xvii. 21. 41.

Callistratus, iii. 13 passim; "H epi
'Opomo) Aiky, iii. 13. 5.

(Calpurnius) Bibulus, M., iv. 10. 5.

(Calpurnius) Piso Frugi, L.,? Annales,
vii. 9. L, 1 (ter); xi. 14.1; xv. 29.
L, 2 (bis).

Calvisius Taurus, i. 9. 8, 11; 96. L,
1, 10; ii. 2 passim; vii. 10. L, 1;
13 passim; viii 6; ix. 5. 8; x. 19.
1,2,4; xii 5 passim; xvii. 8 pas-
sim; 20. 1. 4, 7; xviii. 10. 31;
xix. 6.2; xx. 4. 1,3; Commentarii,
i. 26.3; In Gorgian Platonis Comm.,
vii. 14. 5.

Calvus, see Licinius.

Oamena, xviii. 9. 5; Camenae, i, 24, 2,
Italic goddesses identified with the
Greek Muses,

Oamillus, see Furius.

Campanus, -a, -um: sonipes, i, 16.
11; superbia, i. 24. 2.

Cannae, iii, 15. 4.

Cannensis, -e, adj. from QCannae:
pugna, v. 17. 55. proelium, vi. 18. 2.

Capito, see Ateius and Sinnius.

Capitolinus, -a, -um : area, ii. 10. 2
(sce note); favisae, ii. 10. ds, ees


INDEX OF NAMES


Capitolium, ii. 10. E d IS br.
18.4255 5v4 12.12; 12-2: vi. 1. 6
(bis); x. 24, 85 Wise xd: 8209 H1,
29. 1, 4; xvii. 2. 14, 24; 91. 22, 94.

Capua, vi. 20. 1.

Caria, x. 18. 2.

Carmen de Moribus, see M. Porcius
Cato Censorius.

Carmentes, xvi. 16. 4. Italic god-
desses presiding over births. .

Carmentis fanum, xviii. 7. 2. The
shrine of Carmentis (or Carmenta),
at the foot of the southern end of
the Capitoline Hill, near the porta
Carmentalis,

Carneades, vi. 14. 9, 10; xvii. 15. L,
1; 21.1, 48.

Carthaginienses, iii. 14. 19; vi. 1. 4;
256: 12.173 18:26 vii. 4. D, 1 (bis);
5-1 (bis); aos 10; 27. 3, 4 xvii.
DIC bp d Of. Poeni and Poenicus.

Carthaginiensis, -e, adj.: bellum, iii.
7. 3, imperator, iii. 7. 13.

Carthago, vii. 4. 2; vii. 8. 3, for Car-
thago Nova.

Carvilianum divortium, iv. 3. L.
Referring to Carvilius Ruga.

Carvilius Ruga, Sp., iv. 3. 2 (bis);
xvii. 21. 44.

Casina, i. 7. ll.

Casina, see T. Maccius Plautus,

Casinum, ix. 4. 15.

Cassiopa, xix. 1. 1. A town in the
north-eastern part of Corcyra, also
called Cassiope.

Cassium, Contra C., see M. Porcius
Cato.

Cassius (Hemina, L.):? Annales,
xvii. 21. 3. He lived in the first
part of the second century B.C.

Cassius Longinus, C., ix. 4. 15.

Cassius Longinus, O., iii. 9. 4, 5 (ter).

Castor, xi. 3. 6 passim; Castoris aedes,


xi. Be 2.
Castricius, T., i ONDE 4; ii, 27. L, 3;
x12 19. dy by 5; 53 passim.


Catilina, E. etri d ii. 7, 20; v. 6. 15.
Catilina, see O. Sallustius.

Cato, see Porcius.

Catullus, see Valerius.

Catularius, see Laberius, D.

Oatulus, see Lutatius.


Catus aut de Liberis Educandis, see M.
Terentius Varro.

Caudex, see Claudius.

Caudium, xvii. 21. 36. A town of
Samnium, the scene of the defeat
of the Romans in 321 B.C.

Cebes, ii. 18. 4.

Cela, see Panda.

Celsinus, see Iulius.

Gentho, see Claudius.

Cephisia, i. 2.2; xviii. 10. 1.


Oercyon, xv. 21. l. A son of Nep-
tune. ^

Oerealia, sc. sacra, xviii. 2. 11 (see
note).


Ceres, iv. 6. 8; xiii. 21. 22; 23. 4.

Cetegus, see Cornelius.

Chaeronea, xvii. 21. 30. A town of
Boeotia, the scene of the defeat of
the Athenians by Philip of Macedon
in 338 B.C.

Chalcedonia pelamys, vi. 16. 5.

Chalcidica ara, x. 16. 7.

Chalcidicensis colonia, x. 16. 8.

Chaldaei, i. 9. 6 (see note); iii. 10. 9;
xiv. 1. I, 1, 2, 8 (fer), 9, Il; xv.20. 2.

Chares, v. 2. 2

Chilo, i, 3. L, j (bis), 8, 17, 30, 31.

Chresphontes, see Ennius.

Chronica, see Apollodorus and Cor-
nelius Nepos.

Chryses, see Pacuvius.

Chrysium, see Caecilius Statius.

Chrysippus,‘8 vi. 16. 6; vii. 1. L,

7; 2 passim; xi. 12. 1; xiv. 4. 2
4,5; xix. 1. 14; Ilepi Tpovotas,*8
vii.l. 252.85 ; ILept Kao) kat 'Hó0vyjs,
xiv. 4. l. See alo Xpicurmos.

Cicero, see Tullius.

Ciceromastia, see Largius Licinus,

Oilices scari, vi. 16. 5.

Cimbricum bellum, xvi. 10. 14.

Cimmerium mare, xvii. 8. 16. See
Bosporicum mare.

Cincii, vii. 15. 5.

Cincius Alimentus:* De Re Militari,
xvi.4.1,2. A Roman annalist and
jurist, praetor in 209 B.C.

Oinna, see Helvius.

Circe, xvi. 11. 1. The famous en-
chantress, daughter of the Sun,

Circenses ludi, iii. 10. 16.


48 A, Gercke, Chrysippea, Fleckeis, Jahrb. Suppl. xiv, 689, Leipzig, 1885.


461


INDEX OF NAMES


Circus Maximus, v. 14. 5.

Cispius mons, xv. 1. 2. The northern
spur of the Esquiline Hill at Rome.

Cistellaria, see 'T. Maccius Plautus.

Citiensis, xvii. 21. 38. Adj. from
Citium, a town of Cyprus, the birth-
place of Zeno.

Clarus, see Erucius.

Claudii, xiii. 23. S.

Claudius, Divus, xiii. 14.7. Emperor
of Rome from A.D. 41 to 54.

Claudius, Ser. : ** Commentarium, xiii.
23. 19; Indices Plauti, iii. 3. 1.

Claudius Asellus, Ti., ii. 20. 6; iii. 4.1;
iv.17.1; vi.11.9. Tribune of the
commons in 139 B.C.

Claudius Caecus, Ap., x. 6. L, 2; xvii.
21. 40, 42,

Olaudius Caudex, Ap., xvii. 21. 40.
Consul in 264 B.C.

Claudius Centho, or Cento, 0., xvii. 21.
42, 43. Son of Caecus; consulin 240
B.C.


Claudius Crassus, Ap.,ix. 11. 3. Oon-
sul in 349 B.C.

Claudius Pulcher, C., vii. 16. 11. ‘

Claudius Pulcher, P., x. 6. 9. Son of


Caecus and consul in 241 B.C.

Claudius Quadrigarius, Q., v. 21. 6;
Annales, i. 7. 9 (bis), 13; 16. L, 1;
20.6; 11.2. 12, 19; 19.7, 8; 3H. T.
21,5. 8. T4 5, Qs. Wad TiO svi dhe 43
ix. 1 (passim); 13 (passim); 14. L,
1,3,20; x. 1. 3; 13. 4 (bis); xiii.
29. L, 1, 4; 90. 7; xv. 1. L, 4ff.;
X»1L.2, db 92 718.0: 2c. 8. 31.

Olearchus, iv. 11. 14.

Cleopatra, ii. 22. 23.

Oloatius Verus: Verba a Graecis
tracta, xvi. 12. L, 1, 6. A gram-
marian of the Augustan Age.

Clodianus, see On, Cornelius Lentulus.

Olodius, P., i. 16. 15; ii. 7. 20; x.
20. 3.

Olodius Tuseus, v. 20. 2.
Ooelianum illud, x. 24. 6.
to Coelius Antipater.
Coelius Antipater: Historiae, x. 1. 3,

4; 24. 7; see also Coelianum.

Colophonius, iii. 11. 6.

Colorator, see Laberius, D.

Cominius (Pontius), xvii.


Referring


Botte oA


brave youth who took a message
from the army at Veii to the Roman
senate, besieged by the Gauls in
the Capitol, urging them to recall
Camillus from exile; see Livy v.
46. 8.

Commentarti, Commentarium, Com-
mentarius, Commentationes, — see
Annaeus Cornutus, Antistius Labeo,
Caesellius Vindex, Calvisius Taurus,
Gavius Bassus, Julius Hyginus,
Masurius Sabinus, Nigidius Figulus,
Pamphila, Plutarchus, Sempronius
Tuditanus, Valerius Probus.

Comoedia, i. 24. 3. Comedy, per-
sonified.

Compitalia, sc. sacra, x. 24. 3 (bis);
see note.

Compitalia, see Laberius, D.

Conciliatrix, see Quinctius Atta.

Consobrinus, see Afranius.

Constituendo Accusatore, De, see M.
Tullius Cicero.

Coniectanea, Praef. 9; see Alfenus and
Ateius.

Cophinus, see Laberius, D.

Copiae cornu, i. 8. 2.

Corinthii, xvi. 19. 8, 9, 23.

Oorinthius, -a, -um, i. 8. 3; see also
Kopív6tos.

Corinthus, xiv. 6. 4; xvi. 19. 4, 8, 17;
xvii. 21. 23; see also Kopw6os.

Coriolanus, see Marcius.

Cornelius, xv. 18. 2, 3.
priest.

Cornelius Balbus, L., xvii. 9. 1. A
native of Gades and an intimate
friend of Julius Caesar. He was
consul in 40 B.C., being, according
to Pliny, N.H. vii. 135, the first
man of foreign birth to attain that
office.

(Cornelius) Cetegus (M.), xii. 2. 3, 11.
Consul in 204 B.C., famous as an
orator.

(Cornelius Dolabella, Cn. xii. 7
(passim). Valerius Maximus, viii.
l. amb. 2, has P. Perhaps the same
as Cicero's son-in-law,

Cornelius Dolabella, On., xv. 28. 3.
In Dolabellam, see O. Julius Caesar,

Cornelius Dolabella, P., iii, 9. 4


The name of à


*9 A, E, Egger, Latini Sermonis Vetustioris Reliquiae, Paris, 1843,


402


INDEX OF NAMES


(quater). Consul in 44 B.C., son-in-
law of Cicero.

_ Cornelius Fronto, M., ii. 26. L, 1, 2, 7,
20 (bis); xiii. 29. 2 (bis), 5, 6; xix.
8.1, 3, 9 ff.; 10 (passim); 13.1

Cornelius Lentulus Clodianus, 553 5
xviii. 4. 3, 4, 6. Consul in 72 B.C.

Cornelius Nepos : * Chronica, xvii. 21.
3, 8, 24; Exempla, vi. 18. 11; cf,
vi. 1o. 1; De Viris Illustribus, xi
855i: De Vita Ciceronis, xv. 28
(passim). A writer of history and
biography, born in Cisalpine Gaul;
he lived from about 99 to 24 B.C.

Cornelius Rufinus, P., iv. 8 (passim);
xvii. 21. 39.

Cornelius Scipio, P., vi. 1. 2 ff.

Cornelius Scipio Africanus maior, P.,14
iv. 18 (passim); vi. 1 (passim); 19
(passim); vii. 8 (passim); xii. 8. d
4; xvii 5. 1, 2; 21. 1; "Oratio, iv.
18. 6.

Cornelius Scipio Africanus minor, p.t
ii. 13. 35 iii. 4. L, 1 Gis), 2; vi. 12.
152 xiii, 3. 65 xvi. 8. 7, 10, 11; xvii.
b. "s 2; Pro $e contra Ti. Claudium
Asellum, ii. 20, 5; vi. 11. 9; cf. iii.
4. 1; iv. 17. 1; Ad Populum de
Moribus,iv.20.10; v.19.15; Adv.
Naevium, iv. 18. 6; Adv. P. Sul-
picium Gallum, vi. 12. 4, 5.

Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus, L., iv. 18.
8; vi. 19 (passim); xvi. 4. 2 (bis).

Cornelius Scipio Nasica, P., iv. 20. 11.

Cornelius Sisenna, L.,? ii. 25. 9;
Historia, ‘or Historiae, 1x: 14. 125
Ero. eee, 1.0, ds

Cornelius Sulla, Ipod. 12. 16.

(Cornelius) Sulla, P.,i. 5.3; vii. 16. 6;
xii, 12. 2.

Cornelius Sulla Felix, L.,’ ii. 24. 11;
SE 20.s10s ze E4545 X92 15 6,
7 (bis); 28. 3 $exyiis 4. 4. fles,
Gestae, 1. 12. 165! xx; Gide

Coruncanius, Ti., i. 10. 1; iv. 6, 10,

Corvinus, see Valerius.

Oossitius, L., ix. 4. 15.

Crassus, see Licinius.

Crates, ii. 25. 4. See also Kparn
Ed probably went to Rome in 168

a xvii 21, 13. A river near

Veii, north of Rome.

Cresphontes, see Yinnius.

Creta, ii, 2. 1; xiv. 0. 4; xv. 2.1.


Cretenses, i. 11. 6.

Critolaus, vi. 14. 9, 10; ix. 5. 65 xi.
9:30:25010; Us) xvid, 21. 48.

Croesus, y. 9 (passim).

Cronus, see Diodorus,

Orotoniensis, xv. 16. L, 1. Adj. from
Croton, a Greek city of southern
Italy, in the north-eastern part of
the country of the Bruttii,

Ctesias, ix. 4. 3.

Curae, xvi. 5. 11.

Curius, M’., i. 10. 1; x. 16.16; xiv.
1. 24.

Oyelops, iii. 11. 5; son of Neptune,
xv. 2L. 1: Cyclopes, ix; 4. 6.

Cynicae Saturae, see M. Terentius
Varro.

Cynicus, ii. 18. 9.
and Diogenes.

Oynthus, ix. 9. 13.

Cyrenaici, xv. 13. 9. See Aristippus.

Oyrenensis, xvii. 21, 41. Adj. from
Cyrene, a Greek city on the northern
coast of Africa, between Carthage
and Alexandria.

Cyrus, x. 16. 4; xiv. 3. 4 (bis). See
also Kipos.


See Antisthenes


Daedalus, vii, 6 (passim).
Danuvius, xiv. 1. 9. The Danube.
Darius (Hystaspis) xvii. 9. 20, 91.
King of Persia from 521 to 485 B.C.
Darius (Codomannus), vii. 8. 3; xx.
7


Davus, xviii. 12.4. A common slave-
name in Roman comedy.

Decem Hominibus, De, a speech of M,
Porcius Cato Censorius,

Decima, iii. 16. 10, 11.

Delphi, xii. 5. 1.

Demades, xi. 10. L, 1, 6.

Demetrius HoAcopxytjs, XV 31. L, 1,
4, Son of Antigonus, one of the
generals of Alexander the Great.
After a victorious career, during
which he became ruler of Mace-
donia, he was defeated and ended
his life in confinement to a fortress
in Syria. His descendants ruled
in Macedonia until the Roman con-
quest in 168 B.C.

Democritus, v. 3. 4, 5, 6; 15. 8; x.
17. 15 1, 4; xvil. 21:018; De Vt
et Natura Chamaeleontis, x. 12 (pas-
sim); Ilepi Aoimar, iv. 13. 3.


463


INDEX OF NAMES


Demosthenes, i. 5. 151; 8.1,3,5,6;
iii. 13. 2; vill. 9; ix. 1;
x. 19715 2, 3; Xhi9 (passim); 10.
T 15 xw. 2846, 72 xyH. 21.35
35; Kara ’Avdpotiwvos, x. 19. 2 f.
xv. 28. 6; De Corona, ii. 27. L, 1;
xiii. 1. 6, 7; Kara Tu okpárovs, xv.
28. 6.

Diagoras, iii. 15. 3 (bis).

Dialis, adj. to Iuppiter (cf. Diespiter) :
flamen, i. 12.15,16; x. 15 (passim);
flaminica, x. 19. 263; sc. flamen, x.
15 (passim).

Diana, ii. 6.18; ix. 9.13 ff.; xv. 22. 5.

Dicaearchus, iv. 11. 14.

-Didascalica, see Accius.

Didius, T., ii. 27. 2.

Dido, ix. 9. 14.

Digesta, see Alfenus Varus.

Diespiter, v. 12. 5.

Dio Syracosius, iii. 17. 2.

Diodorus Cronus, xi. 12. L, 2.

Diogenes Cynicus, ii. 18. 9; xviii. 7.
4; 13. I, 7, 8.

Diogenes Stoicus, vi. 14. 9, 10; xvii.
21. 48.

Diomedes, ii. 23. 7.

Diomedes Thrax, iii. 9. 2 (bis).

Dionysia, i. 5. L, 3

_ Dionysia, sc. sacra, viii. 11.

Dionysius superior, xvii. 21. 19. A
tyrant of Syracuse, who lived from
about 431 to 367 B.C.

Dionysius posterior, xvii. 21. 99. A
tyrant of Syracuse, who succeeded
the elder Dionysius in 367 B.C. and
ruled until 343.

Diovis, v. 12 (passim).

Dioxippus Hippocraticus, xvii. 11. 6.
A physieian of Cos of the fourth
century B.O., a pupil of Hippocrates ;
also called Dexippus.

Disciplinae, a work of M. Terentius
Varro.

Dolabella, see Cornelius,

Domitianus, xv. 11. 4. Emperor of
Rome from A.D. 81 to 96.

Domitii, On. and L., xv. 13. 6.

Domitius Ahenobarbus, Cn., xv. 11. 2
Censor in 92 B.C.

Domitius Insanus, xviii. 75. 1, 2, 3. A
grammarian of the time of the
Antonines,

Dorice, ii. 26. 10.

Dote, De, see M, Porcius Cato Censorius,


464


Draco, xi. 18 (passim). i
Drusus, see Livius.
Dulichiae rates, ii. 6. 1. 1
Duodecim Tabulis, De, see Antistius |
Labeo. {
Duodecim Tabulae, i. 12. 18; iii. 2.
13; (16. 12); vi. 15. 1; vii. 7. 3;
viii. is xd, 49. GR. xvo I3 ae
xvi. 10. 5 £., LP xvii. 2. 10; 21
15; xx. €. 1,38. 10. 8 f. ;


Ecdemeticus. One of Varro’s Menip- |
pean Satires; see Terentius I:

Eisocratium, — Isocratium, xviii. 8. 2

Electra, vi. 5. 6, 7.

Electra, see Sophocles.

Eleusinus, -a, -um, adj. from Eleusis :
certamen, xv. 20. 3; oppidum, viii.
10; initia, xi 6.5. |

Elidensis, H8 3.

Elissa, xiii. 1. 5. Another name of —
Dido.

Elydis, xiii. 14. 7 (see crit. note).

Empedocles, iv. 11. 9; xvii. 21. 14. —

Ennianista, xviii 5. 3. A reader
from Ennius.

Ennianus, -a, -um, adj. from Ennius, 1
xii. 2. 7; .Neoptolemus, v. 15. 9;-

16. 5; populus, xii. 2. 10; verbum, |


M
t
s


xix. 10. 13; versus, xi. 4. 3; xx.2
10. 5.
Ennius, Q.,?9 vi. 12. 7; ix. 4. 1; xii,
2 Ly Sis d B (bis); xv. 245


xvii. 17. L,1; 21. 43, 49; xix. 10.
19$ xx. 10. 3 2; Annales, 1. 29. 16;
ii. 26. 11, 21; iii. 14. 5; vi.9 (pas-.


sim); vil 6. 6, 95 ix. 14. 5; x. 14
6; 25.4; 29. xii. 2, 3; 4. L, 13
xiii. 21. is, 14; "93. 18; xvi. 10. 1

9, 6$ -xyll 21. 43; xviii. 2. 16;


5. L; 2, 4 9.3,4, 5; xx. 10. 38i
Achilles, iv. 17. 14; Alexander,
vii. 5. 10; Cresphontes, vii. 16. 103
Erechtheus, vii. 16.9; Hecuba, xi. 4;
Eh, 3,4; Iphigenia, xix. 10. 11, 123
13; ' Melanippa, v. Ll. 12, 14; vi
ac i Phoenix, vi. 17. 10; uncer--
tain tragedies, v. 15.9; 16. 5; xix
8. 6; Saturae, ii. 29. 20; vi. 9. 23
xviii, 2. 73 Scipio, iv. 7. 2 ff.
Epaminondas, xvii. 21.26. A famous.
Theban general and statesman, who.
flourished from 379 to 362 B.C.
Ephesius vir, Praef. 12; see note.
Ephesus, ii. 6. 18.


,


E"


INDEX OF NAMES


Ephorus, iii. 11. 2.

Ephyre, xiv. 6. 4. Another name for
Corinth.

Epicharmium illud, i. 15. 15.

Epictetus, i. 2. L, 6, 7, 13; ii. 18.
TO S x vAETL T5 2 avait. 592705, slo's


AuaAéfew, xix. 1. 14, 21; Disserta-_


tiones, i. 2. 6.


Epicurus, ii. 6. 12; 8. L, 1 (bis), 6; ©


9 (passim); 18.8; v. 15. 8; 16. 3;
ix. 5. D, 2,8; xvii. 21. 88.

Epidicus, iv. 17. 4.

Epidicus, a comedy of T. Maccius
Plautus.

Epirus, x. 16. 16...

Epistulae Confusae, Praef. 9.

Epistulae Morales, Praef. 9; see also
Annaeus Seneca.


- Epistolicae Quaestiones, Praef. 9; see


also M. Porcius Oato Censorius.

FErasistratus,? xvii. 11 (passim);
Avatpégeu, xvi. 3 (passim). A Greek
physieian, grandson of Aristotle;
he greatly advanced the knowledge
of anatomy.

Erechtheus, see Ennius.

Erucius Olarus, vii. 6. 12; Epistulae
ad Sulpicium Apollinarem, xiii. 18.
2, 8.

Etruria, iv. 5. 2.

Etrusci haruspices, iv. 5. L, 5.

Euander, i. 10. 2; see note.

Euathlus, v. 10. 3 ff.

Euclides, vii. 10. L, 1, 4.

Eudemus, xiii. 5. L, 3 (bis) A
Rhodian philosopher.

Eudoxus, xvii. 21.23. Anastronomer
of Onidos, who lived about 366 B.C.

Eunuchus, the name of a comedy of
Terentius Afer.

Euphorbus, iv. 11. 14.

Eupolis,® i. 15. 12.

Euripides, vi. 3. 28; 16.6, 7; xiii. 19
(passim); 25. 7; xv. 20 (passim);
xvii. 4. 3; 21. 18, 42; xx. T. 2;
Bacchae, i. 15. 17; xiii. 19. 3;
Hecuba, xi. 4. L, 15 'Ivó, xiii. 19. 4.
See also Evpurt Sys.

Euripus, xix. 14. 6. The strait be-
tween the island of Euboea and the
mainland, at Chalcis.

Europa, x. 7. 2 (bis).


Hurotas, ix. 9. 13.

Eurus, ii. 22. 7 ff.; Euri, xviii, 11. 4.

Buryclia, xiv. 6. 3. The nurse of
Telemachus, son of Odysseus.

Eurystheus, ii. 6. 3.


Fabii, xvii. 21. 13.

Fabius Licinus, M., x. 6. 4.

Fabius Maximus, Q., ii. 2. 13 (bis);
vas oo Le ess tbe

Fabius Maximus, Q., ii. 2. 13.

Fabius Pictor, Q.,7 i. 12. 14; x. 15.1;
Annales, v. 4. 1.

Fabricius Luscinus, O., i. 10. 1; 14.

; iii. 8 (passim); iv. 8 (pas-
sim); i

Facta et Dicta Mirabilia, see Valerius
Maximus.

Falernum, sc. vinum, vi. 20. 6.

Faliscus ager, xx. 8.1. The territory
about Falerii, a town about thirty
miles north of Rome.

Fannia lex, ii. 24. 3, 5, 7; xx. l. 23.

Fannius Strabo, O., ii. 24. 2 ff.; xv.
135705

Fata, iii. 16. 9; see note.

Fato, De, see M. Tullius Cicero.

Fauni, v. 21. 7; xvi. 10. 7.

Favonius, ii. 22. 12, 16.

Favonius, xv. 8. L, 1, 2. An orator.

Favorinus,??i. 3.27; 10. L,1; 15.17;
21.4; ii. 1.3; 5.L,1; 12.5; 22.
T, 1, 3, 27; 26. Ly 15 8, 7, 16, 20;
iii. 1 (passim); 3.6; 16.17; 19. L,
1,3; iv. 1 (passim); v. 11. 8, 135
viii. 2; 14; ix. 8. L, 3; 13. 5;
x. 12. 9,10; xi. 5. 0; xii. l. L, 1,
24; xiii, 25. 2, 4, 5, 9; xiv. 1. L,

1, 32, 34, 35; 2. L, 11, 12, 24, 26;
xvi.3.5,6; xvii. 10. b, 1; 12. L,
1; 19. 1, 5; xviii. 1 (passim);
(passim); xix. 9.1; xx. ie yee
9, 20, 27, 81, 34, 53, 55; Laudes
Febris and Laudes Thersitae, xvii.
12, 2; Ilvppwvetor Tpdmot, xi. 5.

Fenestella, xv. 28. 4 (bis). A Roman
historian who flourished under
Augustus and died during the reign
of Tiberius. He wrote Annales, of
which only fragments survive.

Ferentini, x. 3. 3. |

Festus, see Postumius.


50 R. Fuchs, De Erasistrato Capita Selecta, Hermes, xxix (1894),
?


AULUS GELLIUS—-VOL. III.


p. 171.
465


HH


INDEX OF NAMES


Fidenates, xvii. 21. 17. The people
of Fidenae, an ancient town five
miles north of Rome.

Tidus, see Optatus.

Figuris Sententiarum, De, see Annaeus
Cornutus.

Flaccus, see Fulvius.

Flaminia, x. 15. 7.

Flavius, On., vii. 9 (passim); see note
on vii. 9. Va

Floria res,
Censorius.

Fortuna, xiii. 23. 4.

Forum Augusti, ix. 11. 10; Traiani,
xiii. 25.1; cf. Area.

Fronto, see Cornelius.

Frugi, see Calpurnius Piso.

Fufetia, vii. 7. 1.

Fufetius, Mettus, xx. 1. 54. An
Alban leader who acted treacher-
ously towards the Romans and
suffered a terrible punishment.

Fullo, a mime of D. Laberius.

Fulvius Flaccus, M., xvii.
Consul in 264 B.C.

Fulvius Flaccus Nobilior, M., v. 6.
24, 26; xii. 8. 5.

Fundanius, 0.9.8025.

Furianus, -a, "um, adj. from Furius
(Antias), xviii. 1. 9; poemata, xviii.
di.

Furium, Contra, a speech of M. Porcius
Oato Censorius.

Furius Antias? xvii. 11. L, 2. An
early Roman poet from "Antium,
perhaps the one burlesqued by
Horace in Serm. ii. 5. 40.

Furius (Camillus), L., ix. a 3.

Furius Camillus, M., "xvii. 2. 14; 21.
20. Consular iribune in 403 B.C.
and several] times thereafter. He
saved Rome from the Gauls, took
Veii, and rendered other services to
his country.

Furtis, De, see Masurius Sabinus.


see M. Porcius Cato


21. 40.


Gaetuli, xiv. 1. 9. An African people
living south of Mauretania,
Numidia, and the region of the
Syrtes.

Gaia Taracia, see Taracia.

Gaium nepotem, Epistula ad,
Augustus.

Gaius, xv. 7. 3 (bis) Refers to Q.
Iulius Caesar, grandson of Augustus,


466


see


Galatea, ix. 9. 6.

Galba, see Sulpicius. .

Galli, ii. 22. 20; v. 4. 3; 17. 2 (bis);
ix. 11. 4, 5; xvii. 2. 12 (quater), 14
(bis), 24 (ter); 15. 7; 21. 22, 24.
Sing. Gallus, ix. 11. 6; 13. 7 ff.

Galli, see Laberius, D.

Galli Transalpini, see Pomponius.
Gallia, ii. 22. 28; iii. 9. 7; Narbonen-
sis, xiii. 20. 12; Galliae, xv. 4. 3.

Gallianum, xiii. 12. 4; see note.

Gallice, ii, 25. 8; xi. 7. 4.

Gallieus, -a, -um, adj. to Gallia:
bellum, xvi. 13. 7; gladium, ix. 13.
17; lingua, xv. 30. L; sc. soleae,
xiii. 22. 6 (i9; verbum, xv. 30. 7;
vor, xv. 30.

Gallus, see prece and Sulpicius.

Gallus, see Galli.

Gallus, adj., ii. 25. 8.

Gavius Bassus : * Commentarii, iii, 9. 1,
8; 18. 3; De Origine Verborum et
Vocabulorum, ii. 4 Srey iii, 19.
du ds v. 7. D, 15 xi. 17. 4.

Gellium, On., Contra, see M. Porcius
Cato Censorius.

Gellius, On., viii. 14; xiv. 2. 26
(quater); Annales, xiii. 23. 13, 15,
16; xviii. 12. 6.

Gellius, L., v. 6. 15.

Gemelli, see Laberius, D.

Geminus, see Servilius,

Genumana salicta, xix. 13. 5.

Georgica, see Vergilius Maro,

Glaucus, xiii. 27. 9.

Glaucus, ii. 23. 7.

Gorgian, Commentarii in, see Calvisius
Taurus,

Gorgias, see Plato.

Gracchi, vi. 19. L.

Gracchus, see Sempronius.

Graece, i. 16. 8; 18.5; 20.6; 22. 9;
ii. 22. 9-16; 35. 8; 26. 95 iii, 10. Ly
Wess We 10. Gs 15. 2, 3; 18. 2;
vii. 14. 2: ix. 18. L3 16.7; ses
6; xiib 9. 4; 31. 17; xiv. 1. 1;
xvi 9.3; 12.3; xvii 2.11; 8.7;


11.3 (bis), 3; i. dox dae L;
mx. ae 2.


4. 1; xi. 10. 6; xii. D. 1; 16, 9%
xii. 31, 3; xv. 30. 6; xvi. 6. 1;
E ; 4; 21. 12, 16, 23; xviii,


INDEX OF NAMES


Graeciense scimpodium, xix. 10. 1.

Graecus and Graeci, Praef. 11; i. 7.
6501 7:5:98::4: 9. 6; 15. 17; 18. 2,
5; 20. 7; 22. 9; 25. 8, 11; ii. 7. 2
18; 20. 4; 21. AAA 9; 29. 8, 10,
12: 28. 1: 26. ie 19; 28. 1; iii,
9:29 sel Ore as dv UE Ob s0815:16: y.
5225010; 05 12,210: 1352-05 * 182/85
20. 4; vi. 8. 34; Ee 9: 19:- EL.
2; 12. 3; 14. 1; vii. 2. 1; 14. 4;


, »
1125495: Oe ged. 01 5 25. 5 (bis);
2x1. Ogee 2105 7162015 03? xii; 52;
6. 15 xiii.-6.:L, 1; 9. 4 ff; nt 7;
192515. (5285) 50 212105 7 22. 7:5128.3,
953195290, 25 * cay.) 9:505 xv» 1.77;
3. 8; 14. 4; 25. 1; xvi. 3.9; 8. 9,
22; 135712. 1,16; xvii; 2. 1395. 3,2,
4: 10,125. 12; byl; xviii. 4. 10;
"471 aci xost 6 22:013. 2591 0296 ;
9:015 :7151914:98 5: 5x3::6 125 3.512
Graecus, -a, -um, adj. to Graecia, i
8:21651:11:1235192:5 ZO is (2661 8, 19
ix. 9. 4; xix. 9. 10; cognomentum,
xi. 5. 1; comoedia, ii. 23. 19; dis-
ciplina, xii. 25. 4; xv. ibn 3;
evOvumpurtov, zwi xd. s se.
"ARCA HE xvi. 1.3; sc. fabula,
ii. 23. 3; facundia (facundiae), i. 2.
Js ai ddrir 21: xiv. 1. 32
xv. 2. 2; figura, xv. 14, 4; gram-
matict, ii, 25. 4; historia (historiae),
TS Ue vi. 1.1; XQ LTD
a 15. 33 homo, 112 21; ces evil. 8.
; liber, Praef. 25 axe 4s 8;0xvi. 8.
i xviii. 2. p "lingua, 118: 5;
ii, 22. 1; 26. , 7, 20; v. 20. 7;
i1: D. xaii » 4 (bis); xv. 30. L;
xvi. 12. L; xvii 17, 335 xix; 13785
$c. lingua, xviii. 14. 2; litterae, iit
19.1; xi. 16. 2; xiii. 9. 4, 5; 25.
4; nomen, ii. 10. 95 xis 16. 8;
oratio, i. 2. 6; 7. 8; p xis de p 8.


1009825095 Octo de 24; xvi. 3. Ae
xvii, 20. Tp aval 10. 11; xix. 1l.
15; 12. 1: oratores, xii, 25. 8;


$C. "philosophi, i. 26. 11 (bis); poema,
ix. 9. 1; poeta, iii. 3. 15; xiii. 25.
S xxu. praestigiae, xiii. 24. 2;
proverbium, xiii, 29. 0; ratio, vi.
9. L; res, ii. 21. 8; v. 14. Jos xvii,
9. 18; xx. 1. 20; scalae, Dx; 15. 29;
scriptor, xi. 5.6; ? sententiae, ix.9. L;
sermo, ii, 25.1; sophista, vi. 3. 34:


titulus, xiii. 9. 3; tragoedus, xi. 10,

6; werbum, i. 18. 2: 2262185

VIA doce xo dU. Dir ace oe T5 Gis

xiii. 9. 4; xvi. l. D; xvii. 5. 3;

xix. 13. 4; versiculi, xix. 11. a

versus, iv. E 7:3:3x,9:45 xi: 18. 3;

vir, xvii. iA T vocabulum, à

8:09: i36; ¥. 18.7; 20. 3;

vlsel200254 axe DoD plots Tie 1; xy.

SC. vocabulum,

; voz, vii. 15. 6;
x.4.4; xi. 16. 2; xiii, 92, 55 xviii,
9:9; xixJ 1375.

Grai, xiii. 8. 3.

Grammatici Commentarii, see Nigidius
Figulus.

Granius, iv. 17. 2.

Gratiae, xiii, 11. 2.


Hadrianus, Divus,™ iii. 16. 12 (bis);
xi. 15. 3; xiii. 22. 1; Oratio de
Italicensibus, xvi. 13. Ib, 4

Hamilcar, iv. 7. 2.

Hammon, see Iuppiter.

Hannibal, ii. 6. 7 (02s) ; (19. 9); iv. 7.
21f.; 18. 8; v. 5 (passim); vi. 1.
4; 2.5 ff.5 18. LOR RE cy 19 (ter);
(24. 656); xvi. 8. Ns lage

Hariolus, see Naevius.

Harmodius, ix. 2. 10; xvii. 21. 7.

Harpalus, x. 16. 4.

Hasdrubal, iv. 7. 2; xvii. 9. 16.

Hebdomades, see M. "Terentius Varro.

Hector, xiii. 25.18; xv. 6. 3, 4 (bis).
See also " Ekrop.

Hectoreus ensis, xv. 6. 3.

Hecuba, xi. 4. 1.

Hecuba, see Ennius and Euripides.

Hegesias, ix. 4. 3.

Helicon, iii. 11. 3.

Heliconius Tripus, see Hesiodus.

Hellanicus, xv. 23 (ter). A writer of
history and chronicles; he was born
in Mitylene and was a contemporary
of Herodotus. See also 'EAAávukos.

Helvius Cinna, O., ix. 12. 12; xix. 9.
Ugo (Ds

Heraclides Ponticus, viii (end).

(Heraclitus), Praef. 12.

Herculaneum sacrificium, xi. 6. 2.

Herculanus pes, i. 1. 3.

Hercules, i. l (passim); iii. 9. 2; x.
10. 19» xl. 6. 14 3, 25 Herculis
templum, xix. 5. 4.


467
IH


INDEX OF NAMES


Here, xiii. 23. 18.

Herennius, O., x. 20. 10.

Herie Iunonis, xiii. 23. 2.

Hermippus, iii. 13. 1.

Hermundulus, -a, -um, adj. : populus,
xvi. 4, 1 (fer); homines, xvi. 4. 1


ter).

Hees Atticus, Tiberius Claudius,
i, 2. L, 1, 6, 13; ix. 2 (passim);
xviii. 10. hee Le Y i.

pov xv. 23. L, 1,2; Historiae,

dps we ii 10° 11: yg. nod:
viii. 4; xii. 7. L, 1; xvi. 11. L, 3;
19. L, 1; xvii. 8. 16.

Hersilia, xiii, 23. 13.

Hesiodum, | Commentarium in, see
Plutarchus.

Hesiodus, iii. 11 (passim); ix. 9. 3;
xvii. 21. 3 (bis); xviii. 2. 13;
Epigramma in Tripode Heliconio, iii.

11. 3; "Epya, i. 15, 14; iv. 5.
xvii, 12. 4; xviii. 2. 13; rectal
pi ll.5.

Hesiona, see Naevius,

Hiberica glans, vi. 16. 5.

Hiberus, ii. 22. 29.

Hiempsal, ix. 12. 14.

Hierocles, ix. 5. L, 8. A philosopher
of the time of Diocletian,

Hierocles, vi. 7. 9.

Hipparchus, xvii. 21. 7. Son of
Pisistratus, slain in 514 B.C.

Hippias, ix. 2.10; xvii. 21. 7.

Hippocrates,?® xvii. ll. L, 63. 91. 18;
xix. 2. 8; IIepi Tpodys, iii. ^16. L, 1,
8. Hippocratae, xiv. 6. 8.

Hippocraticus, adj. from Hippocrates,
xvii. 11. 6.

Hispani, ii. 22. 29.

Hispania, ii. 27. 2; vi. 1. 8; 9. 12
vii. 8. 3; x. 26. 6; sil Bed, 4.
xix. 9. 7.

Hispanieus, -a, -um, adj. from His-
pania: verbum, A 30. 7; gladius,
ix. 13. 14.

Hispanus, -a, -um, adj. to Hispania :
tir, vii. 8. 3; os, xix. 9. 2.

Histros or Hister, x. 7. L, 1, 2 (bis).

Histiaeus, xvii, 9. 19, 91. Dyrant of
Miletus in the time of Miltiades.

Historia and Historiae, see Aelius
Tubero, A. Albinus, Coelius Anti-
pater, Cornelius Sisenna, Herodotus,
Sempronius Asellio, Timaeus, and
Valerius Antias,


468


Historia Naturalis, Praef. 8. See also
Plinius Secundus.

Homericus, -a, -um, adj. from
Homerus, i. 15. 4; annuus partus,
iii. 16. 22; hiatus, vi. 20. 6; Anta,
ix.-9. 15; "verbum, v. 8. 10; s
ii. 26. 20; SC. versus, xiii. 27.3

Homerus, i. 15.3; n. 8. 1; 21. 35
iii. 11 (passim); ie dd. 1 vi. 14.
7; 20. 41L; ix. 9 (passim); 10. 3;
gui. 27. Ts "xiv. 6. 3 (bis) 5; xvii.
21. 3$ (ter); Iliad, i. 11. 8; Diss 3,
Xt; BG. 11; D 30. DIDRDES 5;
vi. 20. 5; vii. 6. 12 (bis); xii. 1.
20; xiii, 3. Bs Te 35d. 21. 14, 25;
20.16; 27.3; xiv. 6. 3, 4; xv. 3.
8; 6. 4; xvii. 3. 2, 4, '5; 8. 10;
xviii. 9. 5; Xx. 7.25 Odyssey, i. 2.
85. ii- 22. 9, 16; 30. 7, 8, 10; iii.
16. 15; v. 1. 6; vi. 20. 5; vii. 2.
14; ix. 9. 12; xiii, 95. 162. xiv. 4.
3,4, 0; xvi. 12. 2; xviii, 9. 5, 9.

Hora Quirini, xiii, 23. 9.

Horatia lex, vii. 7. 2 (bis).

Horatianus atabulus, ii. 22,
note.

Horatii, i. 10. 1.

Horatius Cocles, iv. 5. 1.

Horatius Pulvillus, M., xvii. 21. 13.
Consul in 477 B.C.

Hortensius, Q., xv. 27. 4.
in 341 B.C.

Hortensius (Hortalus), 9^ i. 5. L, 2,
95 vit 16.13; xix.

Hostilia curia, xiv. 3. 1 : p note.

Hostilius, Tullus, xvii. 21. 8. Third
king of Rome.

Hostilius Mancinus, A., iv. 14. L, 2 f.

(Hostilius) Mancinus, Q., vi. 9. 12.

(Hostilius) Tubulus, L., ii. 7. 20; see
note.

Hyginus, see Iulius,

Hyperion, x. 17. 4.

Hypobolimaeus Aeschinus, see Caecilius
Statius.

Hypsicrates, xvi. 12. 6. A gram-
marian contemporary with M.
Terentius Varro.

Hyrcanae tigres, xii. 1, 20,


25; see


Dictator


Ialysus, xv. 31. 3; see note.

Ianuariae Kalendae, iii, 2. 19 (bis);
xiii. 25. 4; Nonae, xv. 28. 3.

Ianus, i, 16. 5 (bis), see note; Ianus-
pater, v. 12. 5.


ee de adscmsbc mo dc EE EE EE PME


————


G——————————————


EE


INDEX OF NAMES


Iapyx, sc. ventus, ii. 22. L, 2, 21, 23;
$c. ecus, ii. 22. 23.

Tdas ive. bs

Idaeus, xiii. 25. 18.

Idas, xiii. 21. 11.

Idus, i 21. 7;.24. 11, 14;
(passim).

Ietae, iii. 11. 7.

Ilias, see Homerus and Matius.

Ilium, xvii. 3. 1. Ilium, also called
Troy, the famous city of north-
western Asia Minor.

Illyrii, ix. 4. 8.

Illyrius ager, xi. 3. 2.

Imbrex, see Licinius.

India, ix. 4. 9, 10.

Indicum bellum, v. 2. 4.

Inferi, x. 16. 2.

Inous, xiii. 27. 2.

Insania, De, see M. Terentius Varro.

Insanus, see Domitius.

Tocus, i. 24. 3; xix. 14. 6.

Ionium mare, xix. 1. l. The part of
the Mediterranean Sea between
Sicily, southern Italy and Greece.

Ios, iii. 11. 6.

Iovispater, v. 12. 5.

Iphigenia, see Ennius.

Isigonus Nicaeensis, ix. 4. 3.

Ismara patria, xiii. 21. 11.

Isocrates, x. 18. 6 (bis); xvii. 13. 2.

Isocratii, xviii. 8. 1, 2.

Ister, see Histros.

Italia, i. 10. 1; 12. 8; ii. 6. 7 (ter);
20. 5; ili. 8. 1 (bis); iv. 4. 1; vi.
11. 6; ix. 4. 1; x. 3. 19 (bis); 16.
3, 6, 16; xi. 1. D, 1, 2; xv. ll. 4;
16.2; xvi. 11, 1; 19. 6, 205 xvii.
21. 6, 33 (bis); xx. 10. 9; Trans-
padana,xv. 18.1. Seealso'IraMa.

Italica municipia, x. 3. 2.

Italicenses, xvi. 13. 4. The people of
Italiea in Spain; see also Hadri-
anus.

Italus sanguis, ii. 16. 1.

Iudicio Publico, De, see Ateius Capito.

Iugurtha, i. 22. 15.

Iugurtha, see Sallustius Crispus.

Iugurthinus, -a, -um, adj.
Iugurtha: bellum, xvi, 10. 14;
historia, xvi. 10. 16,

Iulianus, see Antonius.

Iulius, -a, -um, adj. to Iulius (Caesar) ;
curia, xiv. 7. 7 (see note); lez, ii. 19.
L,4; 24.14; iv. 4. 3; xiv. 2. 1.


wa i


Iulius, xv. 29. 1 (bis) 2. Used as a
general name.

Iulius, O., iv. 6. 2.

(Iulius), L., iv. 6. 2.

Iulius Caesar, C.,?° iv. 10. L, 5, 8 (ter);
vi. 9. 15; viii. 15; (x. 24. 2); xv.
Zh BUTS erle ESISRD ETE S quis
9. L,1,5; 14.2; xix. 8.3 fi; 14.
L, 1; divus Iulius, xii. 14. 4:
Ad Marcum Ciceronem de Analogia,
i.10.4; 1v.10.9; ix. 14. 2b; xix.
8.311, 7; Anticato, iv. 16. 8; Ad
C. Oppium et Cornelium Balbum
Epist., xvii. 9. 1; Pro Bithynis, v.
13.6; In Dolabellam, iv. 16. 8; De
Plautia Rogatione, xiii. 3. 5.

Iulius Celsinus, xix. 7. 2; 10. 1, 11.

Iulius Hyginus, 0.27: Hzempla, x.
18. 7; In Vergilium Commentarii,
i. 21 (passim); v. 8. L, 1, 3; vii.
67 15, 2.15: x. l6: d secvi: 067 £a
14, 15; De Vita Rebusque Inlus-
trium Virorum, i. 14.1; vi. 1. 2.

Iulius Modestus: ?" Quaestiones Con-
fusae, iii. 9.1; cf. Praef. 9.

Iulius Paulus, i. 22. 9; v. 4. 1; xvi.
TON Oeiecixn Toul.

Iuncus, M., v. 13. 6.

(Iunius) Brutus, M., vi. 15. 1; vii.


Tunius (Gracchanus), xiv. 8. 1, 2.

Iuno, iv. 3. 8 (bis); xiii. 4. 2; 23. 2.

Iuppiter, i. 9. 10; iv. 6. 3; 18.3; v.
19. 415: vi. 1. 6 (zs); x. L5. 20,
32; 10.12; xii.6.2; 8.2,9; xiv.
1.84; 6.3; xv.21.L,1; Hammon,
xiii. 4. 2; Olympius, i. 1. 2; lapis,
i. 21. 4 (see note).

Iure Civili, De, see Q. Mucius Scaevola.

Iuris Disciplinis, De, see M. Porcius
Cato Licinianus.

Ius Civile, see Masurius Sabinus.

Iustitia, xiv. 4 (passim).

Iuventius,!° xviii. 12.
of comedies, contemporary
Plautus and Terence.


2. A writer
with


Kalendae, ii. 24, 11, 14; iii. 2. 6 (ter),
13; v.17 (passim); xii. 13 (passim) ;
lanuariae, ii. 2. 12 (bis); Octobres,
XY De


Labeo, sec Antistius and Pacuvius.
Laberiani versus, x. 17. 4.
Laberius, iii, 7. 21.


469


INDEX OF NAMES


Laberius,! D., viii. 15 (bis); xi. 15.
d xvid. Ls; xvi 25,90; 14. 1,
2 (bis); xix. 13. 3; Alezandrea,
xvi. 7. 13; Anna Peranna, xvi. 7.
10; Cacomnemon, xvi. 7. 8; Catu-
larius, vi. 9.18; Colorator, vi. 9. 4;
Compitalia, xvi. 7. 7; 9. 4;
Cophinus, xvi. 7. 2; Fullo, xvi. 7.
3; Galli, vi. 9. 3; Gemelli, i. 7. 12
13; Lacus Avernus, xi. 15.
Natalicius, xvi. 7. 9; Necyomantia,
xvi 7.12; xx. 6.6; Restio, x. 17.
L, 2,3; xvi 7.6; Salinator, iii. 12.
2,4; Saturnalia, xvi. 7.11; Sorores,
ix. 12. 11; Staminarii, xvi. 7. 4;
Stricturae, iii. 18. 9.

Lacedaemonii, i. 11. L, 1, 17; ii. 15.
2; xi 18. L, 17; xvii 9. 6, 15;
21. 19, 23, 26; xviii. 3 (passim);
Lacedaemonius, i. 3. L, 1. See
also Xake8auxóvcot.

Lacedaemonius populus, xviii. 3. 2.

Laco, tii. 7. 19; xii. 2.7.

Laconicus, -a, -um, adj. from Laconia :
ckvráAm, xvii. 9. L; terra, xvi. 19.
16; tibicinia, i. 11. 10.

Lacus Avernus, see Laberius, D.

Laelius, see Tullius Cicero.

Laelius Felix:* Ad Quintum Mur-
cium, xv. 27. 1, 4.

Laelius Sapiens, C., i. 22. 8; xvi. 4,
2 (bis).

Laestrygones, xv. 21.1. A mythical
race of cannibals encountered by
Odysseus.

Laevinus, see Valerius.

Laevius,? xix. 9. 7; Alcestis, xix. 7. 25
Erotopaegnia, ii, 24, 8,9; Protesilao-
damia, xii. 10. 5,

Lais, i. 8 (passim).

Lampadio (0. Octavius), xviii, 5. 11.
A Roman grammarian of the ante-
classical period.

Lapithae, xviii, 5. 7. A mythieal
people of Thrace, famous for their
combat with the centaurs.

Larentia, Acca, vii. 7. L, 1, 5 ff.

Largius Licinus: Ciceromastix, xvii.


,


xb bs
Latinus and Latini, ii. 10.3; v. 12. 4;
20.1; ix. 13. 20; xiii. 6. L; xvii. 2. 4.
Latine, i. 7. 19; 18. 1, 5; 22. L, 9;
ii. 22. 9, 14, 15; 25. 2; iv. 1. 6,
18: 2: llt ive 0:522 alle 6; vii 2s
ix. 1. 8; 14. 5 15. 6; xiii, 9. 4;


470


21. 19; 23. 9; xvi..7. 18; xvii. 9.
19; 17. 1; xy. 959 9-147
23 xix. 8.6.

Latinus,-a, -um, adj. from Latium,
ii. 29. 3; v. 91. 41; xit. 21:90.
xvii 2. 0; xix. 9. 10; carmen, ii.
22, 2; colonia, xix. 13. 3; comici,
xv. 24. L; elegantia, vi. 17. 4;
eloquentia, ix. 15. 2; xiii. 25. 12;
facundia, xii. 1. 24; sc. feriae, xiv.
8. L, 1; grammaticus, xix. 13. 4;
interpretamentum, v. 18. 7; liber,
Praef. 2; xviii. 2. 3; lingua, i. 94.
2; ii. 22. 1; .25. 5; 26. 5; iv. 16.
8; v. 20. 7; vi. 11. 8; 14. 6; 17. 3,
4; vii. 10. 5; x. 24. 2; xi. 3. 1;
16. L; xiii. 9. 2; 10. 2; 23. 19;
xv. 6. 4; xvi. 6.1; 8.6; xvii. 17.
DL; xvii 0.10. Ss, qot co mae
T4 1s xix. 8. 2,650182: 35 "Xx. B.
L; littera, xiii. 9. 5; nomen, i. 2.
4; xix. 9. 9; oratio, ii. 26.5; vii.
16. 1;"vuL B: x; 23. 8: xis 1s
16.1; xviii. 18. 5; philosophi, i. 26.
11; rhetor, xv. 11. 1, 2 (bis); sermo,
ii. 25. 1; xii. 6. 3; 10. 4; xvi. 12.
7; verbum, i. 20. 9; ii. 96. 18; viii.
2; xii. 10. L, 1; 13. 4; xiii. 9. 4;
17. 1; 30. 1; xv. 26. L ; 30. LA
xvii. 2. 6; 20. 7; xix. 10. 10; 13.
4, 5; vocabulum, i. 20. L; ii. 96.
Li v.20.1; xi 1.5; vox, i. 18. d
xiii. 10. 1; 25. 4; xix. 13. 5.

Latina Lingua, De, see M. Terentius
Varro.

Latino Sermone, De, see M. Terentius
Varro,

Latium, iv. 3. 1; 4. 1, $$ x1 59 fs
x. 28.1; xi. 8. 3,

Latona, ix. 9. 13.

Laudationes funebres, xiii, 20. 17.

Laus Catonis, see M. Tullius Cicero,

Laurens, adj. to Laurentum: ager,
X. 2. 2; ora, ix. 19. 22,

Laurentinus, -a, -um,
Laurentum: via, x. 2. 3

Lavinia, ii. 16. 1, 2, 2,

Lavinium x. 16. 8.

e: P., De Verbis Sordidis, xx

d, 4.

Lavina litora, x. 16. 6.

Lebadia, xii. 5. 1. A town of north-
western Boeotia, near Chaeronea,
Lectio, Praef. 6. See also Antiquae

Lectiones,


adj.


from


INDEX OF NAMES


Lege Agraria, De, see M. Tullius
Cicero.

Legibus Promulgatis, De, see C. Sem-
pronius Gracchus.

Lenaeus, see Pompeius.

Lentulus, see Cornelius.

Leonides, also Leonidas, iii. 7. L, 19.

Lepidus, see Aemilius.

Lesbia, vii. 16. 2 (bis), 13.

Lesbii, xvi. 19. 23. The people of
Lesbos.

Lesbius, -a, -um, adj. to Lesbos, xvi.
19. 3; vinum, xiii. b. 5. See also
Aéc Bros.

Lesbos, xiii. 5. 3, 11.

Leucae, i. 13. 11.

Leuctra, xvii. 21. 26. A town in the
southern part of Boeotia, the scene
of the defeat of the Lacedaemonians
by Epaminondas in 371 B.C.

Liber, xiii. 11. 7.

Liber Commentarius de
Porcia, xiii. 20. 17.

Liburni, xvii. 3. 4. An Illyrian
people, dwelling on the north-
western coast of the Adriatic Sea,
famous for their seamanship and
their swift vessels (Liburnae or
Liburnicae, sc. naves).

Licinia lex, ii. 24. 7 ff.; xv. 8. b; xx.


Familia


Licinius, vi. 9. 9.

Licinius, xv. 24. Probably the same
as Licinius Imbrex.

(Licinius) Calvus, O., ix. 12. 10; xix.


Licinius Crassus, L., xi. 2. 4 (bis);
xv. 1l. 2. The famous orator,
consul in 95, censor in 92 B.C.

(Licinius) Crassus, M., iva 10r DON v
0: 29 oiv. hed

Licinius Crassus, Q. (erroneously for
P.)ix.4.15. Consul in 171 B.C.

Licinius Imbrex: ? .Veaera, xiii. 23.
16.

(Licinius) Orassus Mucianus, P2413.
9, 10, 13. Oonsul and pontifex
maximus in 131 B.C.

Licinius Mucianus, ix. 4. 15.

(Licinius) Lucullus, L., xi. 8. 2. Consul
in 151 B.C.

Licinius Stolo, O., vi. 3. 40; xvii, 21.
27; xx. 1. 23.

Licinus, see Porcius.


Lingua Latina, De, see M. "Terentius
Varro.

Livius Andronicus, L.,? xvii. 21. 42;
*Odvaceia, iii. 16. 11; xviii. 9. 5;
Odyssey, vi. 7. 11, 12.

Livius Drusus, xvii. 15. 6. "Tribune
of the commons with Gaius Grac-
chus in 122 B.C.


Locrus, xvii. 11. 6. A native of
Locris in central Greece. See also
Aoxpés.


Logistorici, see M. Terentius Varro.

Longa Alba, see Alba.

Longinus, see Cassius.

Lua Saturni, xiii. 23. 2; see note.

Lucani, ii. 19. 7.

Lucanus, -a, -üm, adj. to Lucania:
ager, x. 16. 3; adulescens, vi. 11. 7.

Lucetius, v. 12. 6, 7. A name or
epithet of Jupiter.

Lucilius, O.,?? vi. 14. 6; xi. 7. 9;
xvii. 21. 49; Saturae, i. 3. 19; 16.
2, 10, 11, 12; ii. 24. 4, 10; iii. 14.
10 ff.; iv. 1. 3; 16. 6 (bis); 1T.
1ff.; vi 3. 28; viii. 5; ix. 14. 11,
22, 23; x. 20. 4; xi. 7. 9; xvi. 9.
7; 9.6; xviii. 5. 10; 8. L, 25 xx. 8. 4.

Lucilium, Commentarii tn, ii. 24. 5.

Lucilius, xii, 2. 3. The friend to
whom Seneca addressed his Zpís-
tulae Morales.

Lucretius, i. 21. 5, 6, 7; v. 15. 4;
x. 26. 9 (bis); xii. 10. 8; xiii. 21.
PAR Scal e fi

Luctus, xvi. 5. ll. Grief, personified.

Lucullus, see Licinius.

Ludus, i. 24. 3. Sport, personified.

Luscius, xv. 24. A writer of comedies
(palliatae) contemporary with
Terence.

Lusitanus, xv. 22. 4; Lusitani, x. 26.
3. The inhabitants of Lusitania,
modern Portugal.

(Lutatius) Catulus, (Q.), i. 11. 16.

(Lutatius) Catulus, Q., 11; 10..25
9. 10, 14.

Lycium, vii. 16. 1; xx. 5. 4. More
commonly Lyceum.

Lycurgus, ii. 15. 2.

Lydia, i. 11. 7. E

Lysias, i. 9, 9; ii. 5. L, 1 (bis).


xix.


Maccius Plautus, T., i. 7. 18; 24. L,
1, 3 (ter); iii. 3 (passim); iv. T. 2;
vi. 17. 6, 11; xv. 24; xvii 21. 475


471


INDEX OF NAMES


xviii. 12 3, 4; xx. 10. 2; Indices,
ii. 3. 11f.; <Addictus, iii, 3. 14;
Agroecus, iii. 3. 9; Amphitruo, i. 7.
17; Anus, iii. 3. 9; Asinaria, i. 22.
20: Nas) 14.12: seville I2. 53
Astraba, xi. 7. 5 (bis); Aulularia,
iii. 14. 15; vi. 9. 6; Bacchides, i.
7. 9; iii. 14. 14; Bis Compressa,
ili. 3.9; Boeotia, iii. 3.3,9; Casina,
i. 7. 11, 18; Ciéstellaria, iii. 16. 2;
vi. 7. 3; Commorientes, iii. 3. 9;
Cordalius, iii. 3. 9; Epidicus, iv.
6» 4:. 14. zy | Rretum; "lii.a 3. qs
Gemini Lenones, ii. 3. 9; Men-
aechmi, ii. 14. 16; xviii. 9. 4, 6;
Miles Gloriosus, xv. 15. 4; Mos-
tellaria, xx. 6. 12;  Nervularia,
iii. 3.6; Persa, v. 21.16; Poenulus,
xiii. 30. 6 (bis); xix. 8. 6; Pseudo-
lus, xx. 6. 9 (bis), 10; Rudens, ix.
12.21; Saturio, ii. 3. 14; Stichus,
vi. 17. 4; Trigemini, vi. 9. 7;
Trinummus, xvii. 6.7; Truculentus,
xiii. 28. 11 ff.; Comedy of unknown
title, iii. 3. 14.

Macedo, xiii. 8. 4.

Macedones, vi. 3. 2; xv. 20. 10 (bis).
Macedo (referring to Alexander the
Great), xvii. 21. 33, 34.

Macedonia, ix. 3. 1; xv. 20. 9; xvii.
21. 28.

Macedonis, xiv. 6. 4. Another name
for Macedonia.

Macetae, ix. 3. 1.

Maia Voleani, xiii. 23. 2.

Mamilius, O., xvii. 21. 43.
239 B.C.

Mancinus, see Hostilius,

Manilia, iv. 14 (passim).

Manilius, iii. 3. 1. Author of an Index
to Plautus.

Manilius, (M’.), xvii. 7. 3. A famous

' Roman jurist; he was consul in
149 B.C. and was an intimate friend
of the younger Scipio,

Manius, see Curius.

Manliana imperia, i. 13. 7 (see note);
ix. 13. 20.

Manlium, Adversus C., see Caecilius
Metellus Numidicus,

Manlius, C., vii. 11. 2.

Manlius (Capitolinus), M., xvii. 2. 14;
21.24. Consul in 392 B.C. He won
his surname by saving the Roman
Capitol from the invading Gauls,


472


Consul in


(Manlius) Torquatus, L., i. 5. 3.

Manlius Torquatus, T., ix. 13 (passim).

Marathonia pugna, xvii. 21. 9,

Marcellum, Ad, De Sermone Latino,
see M. Terentius Varro.

Marcellum, Epist. ad, see Valerius
Probus.

Marcius, M., vi. 9. 9.

Marcius Coriolanus, Cn., xvii. 21. 10.
A Roman of the fifth century B.C.
who won his surname by the capture
of Corioli. He afterwards fought
on the side of the Volscians against
his country.

Marcius Rex, Q., xiii. 20. 10.

Marcus, see M. Antonius, triumvir.

Marius, O., x. 1. 3; xvi. 10. 14, 16;
xx. 6. 11. The conqueror of
Jugurtha and the Cimbri, seven
times consul.

Marius, M., x. 3. 2.

Maro, see P. Vergilius Maro.

Mars, iv. 6. 2; vi. 3. 52; xiii. 93. 9
(bis) 10 ff.; xvi 6. 7. See also
Mavors and Marspater.

Marsi, xvi. 11. 1.


T. d xw2 Sd
hastae, iv. 6. L, 1, 2; triumphus,
v. 6. 22.

Massilia, x. 16. 4.

Masurius Sabinus, iii. 16. 23; v. 6.
27; 19. 11; x. 15. 17; xi. 18. 11 ff.;
xiv. 2. 1; De Furtis, xi. 18. 12; De
Indigenis Commentarii, iv. 9. 8, ys
lus Civile, iv. 1l. 21; 2.15; v. 13.
5; xi 18. 20ff.; AMemorialia, iv.
20.115 Fe 6.913,97.

Matius, On. Iliad, vii. 6. 5; ix. 14,
14, 15; Mimiambi, x. 24. 10; xv.

198, Es-1, 32 ace) d d

Mauretania, x. 26, 2.

Maurice, ii. 25. 8.

oo ii. 25. 8.
ausolus, x. 18 (passim). King of
Caria, husband of reer es

Mausolus, see Theodectes.

Mavors, xiii, 23. 18. Another name
of Mars.


ee


INDEX OF NAMES


Megalenses ludi, ii. 24. 2 (see note);
(sc. ludi), xviii. 2. 11.

Megara (-orum), vii. 10. 2, 4 (bis).

Megarenses, vii. 10. 3.

Melanippa, see Ennius.

Melicertes, xiii. 27. 2; see also MeAX-
KepTys.

Melicus, -a, -um, a dialectic form
of Medicus, Medic: grues, vi. 16, 5.
Memmius, xix. 9. 7. Governor of
Bithynia in 57 B.C., whom Catullus

accompanied to his province.

Memnon, xix. 7. 6. Son of Aurora, an
ally of Priam in the Trojan War;
he was slain by Achilles.

Memoria, xiii. 8. L, 1, 3.

Memoriales Libri, Praef. 8.

Memorialia, see Masurius Sabinus.

Menander, ii. 23 (passim); xvii. 4
(passim); 21. 42; Plociwm, ii. 23.
6 ff. ; iii, 16. 3.

Menelaus, vi, 14. 2; xii 2. 7.

Menenius Agrippa, xvii. 21. 13. Con-
sul in 503 B.C. He persuaded the
plebeians to return from the Sacred
Mount in 493.

Menippeae Saturae, see M. "Terentius
Varro.

Menippus, ii. 18. 7.

Meropa, vi. 3. 28.

Messala, see Valerius.

Messana, x. 3. 12.

Metellus, see Caecilius.

Methymnaeus, xvi. 19. 3. An in-
habitant of Methymna, a city of
Lesbos.

Mettus Fufetius, see Fufetius.

Mevia, see L. Pomponius.

Milesii, i, 11. 7; xi. 9. 1 (quater); xv.
10. 2.

Milesius, -a, -um, adj. to Miletus :
legati, xi. 9. L; momen, xv. NE Sue
virgines, xv. 10. L.

Miletus, xi. 9. l. A city in the north-
western part of Caria, in Asia Minor.

Milo, see Annius.

Milo, xv. 16. L, 1. The celebrated
athlete of Crotona i in southern Italy.

Milone, Pro, see M. Tullius Cicero.

Miltiades, xvii. 21. 9. An Athenian
who became tyrant of the Cher-
sonesus. Returning to Athens, he


59» Q. Enni Carminum Reliquiae.
Supersunt.


became one of the ten generals of
the State and commanded the army
at the battle of Marathon in 490


20B. 0.

Mimas, ix. 12. 22.

Mimiambi, see Matius.

Minerva, x. 16. 14; xiii. 23. 4.

Minoia regna, vii. 6. 1.

Minos, xv. 21. 1. A mythical king
of Crete, reputed to be the son of
Zeus (Jupiter) and Europa. Pro-
bably a word meaning king or ruler,
like the Egyptian Ptolemy.

Minucius Augurinus, O., vi. 19. 2.

Minucius Thermus, Q., x. 3. 17.

Mitridates, also Mithridates and
Mithradates, xi. 10. 4; xv. 1. 4, 6;
xvii. 16. 2; 17. L, 2. Mithridate
VI, or the Great, king of Pontu
from 120 to 63 B.C.

Mitridatios (sc. antidotus), xvii. 16. 6.

Mnesitheus, xiii. 31. 14

Moera, iii. 16. 11.

Moles Martis, xiii. 23. 2; see note.

Molossus, see Alexander.

Morta, iii. 16. 11 (ter).

Mucius Scaevola, Q.,4 iii. 2. 12; iv.
d. 17 (bts), 205. ve 19.65 vis Loe:
xi, 2. 4 (bis); =v. 27.15; xvii. 7. L,
3; De Lure Civili, vi. 15. 2.

Mummius, L., x. 16. 17; xvi. 8. 10.

Sra io Plancus, T1 29505 x.

26

Musa, Praef. 19; ix. 3. 2; 10.1; xiii.
11. 2; xvii. 21, 45; xviii. "e UY
See also Movca.

Musae, Praef. 6;
Opilius.

Musonius, ?? v. 1. L, 1; ix. 2. 8 (bis);
xvi. 1. im 1; xviii. 2. UR

Mycenae, x. 16.14, The famous city
in Argolis.

Mylattenses, i. 13. 11.

Mys, ii. 18. 8.


see also Aurelius


Naevius, On.,? i. 24. L, 1, 2 (bis); iii.
3. b; vii. 8. 53 vil, 14; xv. 94;
xvii. 21. 45 (bis); epitaph of, i. 24.
11.; Bellum Punicum,** v. 12. 1; F
xvii. 21. 45; Hariolus, iii. 3. 15;
Hesiona, x. 25. 3 (bis) ; Leon, iii. 5i
15; Triphallus, ii. 19. 6.


Accedunt Cn. Naevi Belli Poenici quae
L, Müller, Leningrad, 1884. Also P.P.R.


413


INDEX OF NAMES


Naevius, M., iv. 18. 3.

Narbonensis, see Gallia.

Nasamones, xvi. 11. 4, 8.
people.

Nasica, see Cornelius Scipio.

-Natalicius, see Laberius, D.

Naturalis Historia, see O.
Secundus.

Naucrates, x. 18. 6.

Naupactus, vi. 8. 2.

Nausicaa, ix. 9. 12, 14.

Naxos, iii. 15. 1.

Neaera, xiii. 23. 16.

Neaera, see Licinius Imbrex.

Neapolis, ix. 15. 1. -

Necyomantia, see Laberius, D.

Neoptolemus, v. 15. 9; 16. 5.

Neoptolemus, see Accius and Ennius.

Nepos, see Cornelius.

Neptunus, ii. 28. 1; iii. 16. 15, 16;
mi 29. 93 '3NP Bs, xv. 21. doy 4
xvii. 14. 4.

Neptunuspater, v. 12. 5.

Neratius:* De Nuptiis, iv. 4. 4.

Neria, Nerio, Neriones Martis, xiii.
23 (passim).

Nero, xiii. 23. 8.

Nervularia, see Plautus.

Nescis quid vesper vehat, see M. Teren-
tius Varro, Saturae Menippeae.

Nestor, vi. 14. 7; xix. 7. 13.

Nicaeensis, ix. 4. 3.

Nicanor, see Seleucus,

Nicias, iii. 8. 5, 8.
King Pyrrhus.

Nicomedes, v. 13. 6; xi. 10. 4.

Nicopolis, xv. 11. 5. A city of south-
western Epirus, near Actium, built
by Augustus to commemorate his
victory over Antony and Cleopatra,
in 31 B.C.

Nigidianus, -a, -um, adj. from Nigi-
dius, ix. 12. 6; commentarium, xv.
3. 4; commentationes, xix. 14. 3;
liber, xiii. 26. 4; libri, xviii. 4. 11;
temperamentum, x. 11. 5.

Nigidius Figulus, P.,?? ii. 26. 19; iii.
10..2s 1v. 10. b, i$! v. 21k 65 vil.
6: E; vil: 14:9 1129,79 Ger tl
L,1,4; xiii. 10. L, 4; xiv. 1. 11;
xvi 6. L; xix. 14. L, 1; De Ani-
malibus, vi. 9.5; Augurium Priva-
tum, vii. 6. 10, 11; Commentaria
Grammatica, iii. 12. L, 1; iv. 9 (pas-
sim); x. 4, L, 1; 5. L, 1; xii. 14,


. 474


An African


Plinius


A follower of


3, 4; xiii. 6. 3; 26 (passim); xv.
8.9; xvii 7.4; 19.11; xix. 14, 4;
De Extis, xvi. 6. 12; De Vento, ii.
22. 31.

Nilus, x. 7. I5; 1.

Niptra, see Pacuvius.

Noctes, xiv. 6. 1, 5; xv. 21. 1.
also Atticae.

Nola, vi. 20. L, 1 (bis), 2.

Nolani, vi. 20. L, 1 (bis).

Nona, iii. 16. 10, 11.

Nonae, ii. 24. 11, 14; v. 17 (passim).

Notus, ii. 22. 10.

Nova via, xvi, 17. 2. A. street in
Rome running along the northern
slope of the Palatine hill.

Novius : !° Lignaria, xv. 13. 4; Par-
cus, Xvii. 2. 8. A Roman writer of
the first century B.C., who with
L. Pomponius gave the fabulae Atel-
lanae à position in literature.

Numa, i. 12. 105 iv. 3. 3.

Numantia, ii. 13. 3; xvi. 1. L, 3;
S

Numeri, i. 24. 3.

Numida, xix. 10. 1. An inhabitant
of Numidia, a country on the
northern coast of Africa, east of
Mauretania.

Numidicus, see Caecilius Metellus,


See


Oceanus, xiv. 1. 3 ff.; xii. 13. 17 ff.

Octobres Kalendae, xv. 7. 3.

Odyssia, see Homerus and Livius
Andronicus.

Officio Mariti, De, see M. Terentius
Varro, Saturae Menippeae.

Officiis, De, see Panaetius and M.
Tullius Cicero.

Olympia, iii. 15. 3; xv. 20. 3.

Olympias, xv. 16. 1. The interval
of four years between the celebra-
tions of the Olympic Games. The
first Olympiad began in 776 B.C.

Olympias, vi. 1. 1; xiii. 4. L (bis), 2;
Epist. to Alexander, xiii, 4. 2,
Mother of Alexander the Great.

Olympicum stadium, i. 1. 2, 3.

Olympius, adj. from Olympus, the
mountain on the border of Thessaly
and Macedonia regarded as the
abode of the gods; see Iuppiter.

Onesicritus, ix. 4. 3.

Oppianum, Epist. ad, see M. Terentius
Varro,


INDEX OF NAMES


Oppium, Ad C., see Aelius Tubero;
:. Zpistulae ad C. Oppium, see Iulius

Oaesar.

Oppius, O., vi. 1. 2; 9. 11.

Optatus, Fidus, ii. 3. 5.

Orchus (also Orcus), i. 24. 2; xvi. 5.
1151257. 4.

Oratore, De, see M. Tullius Cicero,

Orestes, iii. 10. 11; vi. 5. 5, 7.

Orestes sive De Insania, see M. Teren-
lius Varro.

Oriades (also Oreades), ix. 9. 13.

Oriens, iii. 2. 15; xvii. 21. 32.

Origine Vocabulorum, De, see Gavius
Bassus.

Origines, see M. Porcius Cato.

Oropus, vi. 14. 8.

Osce, ii. 25. 8; xvii. 17. 1.

Oscus, -a, -um, ii. 25. 95 lingua, xvii.
YT d

Ostia, xvii. 1. 2. 'The seaport of
Rome, at the mouth of the Tiber.

Otacilius Crassus, (M'.), x. 6. 4.


Pacuvianus, xiv. 1. 34. Adj. from
Pacuvius.

Pacuvius, M.,? i. 24. L, 1, 4 (bis);
ii. 26. 13; vi. 14.6; xiii. 2 (passim);
8.4; xvii. 21. 49 (bis); epitaph of,
i. 24.1; Chryses,iv.17.15; Niptra,
xiii. 30. 3; Paulus, ix. 14, 13.

_ Pacuvius Labeo, v. 21. 10.

^ Paestum, xiv. 6. 4. A city in the
north-western part of Lucania,
famous for its temples; see also
Tlowedaviov.

Palatinus, -a, -um, adj. from Palatium:
aedes, iv. 1.1; area, xx. 1.2; mons,
xiii. 14. 2.

Palatium, xii. 12. 2; xix. 13.1. A
name applied to the Palatine Hill
at Romé and also to the palace of
the emperors on that hill.

Pales, xiii. 23. 4.

Palinurus, x. 16. 2, 3, 9.

Pamphila, xv. 23. 2; Commentarium,
xv. 17. 8. A female writer of his-
tory, who lived in the time of Nero
(A.D. 54-68).

Panaetius,®? xii. 5. 10; xvii. 21. 1;
De Officiis, xiii. 28. L, 1. A Greek


philosopher of Rhodes, born about
180 B.C.

Panda Cela, xiii. 23. 4.

Panopea, also Panope, xiii. 27. 2.

Paphlagonia, xvi. 15. A country in
the northern part of Asia Minor,
east of Bithynia.

Papia lex, i. 12. 11, 12 (67s); see note.

Papirius, L., iii. 16. 23.

Papirius Praetextatus, i. 23 (passim).

Papus, see Aemilius.

Parca, iii. 16. 10, 11.

Parcus, see Novius.

Parmenides, see Plato.

Parnasia laurus, iv. 17. 5.

Parthenius, ix. 9. 3; xiii. 27. L, 1.

Parthi, xv. 4. L, 4 (bis) The in-
habitants of Parthia, a country of
Asia, south-east of the Caspian Sea.

Patavium, xv. 18. L, 1. A city of
northern Italy in the country of the
Veneti, modern Padua.

Patrensis bibliotheca, xviii. 9.5. The
library at Patrae, a city of Achaia,
near the entrance to the Gulf of
Corinth; modern Patras.

Patroclus, vi. 7. 11.

Paulus, see Aemilius and Iulius.

Paulus, see Pacuvius.

Pausanias, xvii. 20. 2. An Athenian
mentioned by Plato and Xenophon.

Pax, Peace, personified as a goddess :
Pacis bibliotheca, xvi. 8.2, thelibrary
jn the temple of Peace; templum,
v. 21. 9; the temple of Peace in the
Forum of Vespasian ; it was begun by
Vespasian A.D. 71 and finished by
Domitian.

Pelasgi, i. 10. 1.

Pelethronii, xviii. 5. 7. Adj. from
Pelethronium, a district of Thessaly,
the abode of the Lapithae.

Peleus, iii. 11. 5 (bis).

Peloponnesiacum bellum, ii. 1. 5; xv.
23.2; xvii. 21. 16.

Pelusiotae, xx. 8. 7. The people of
Pelusium, a city at the mouths of
the Nile, situated on the east side
of the eastern mouth.

Peranna, see Anna.

Peregrinus Proteus, viii, 3; xii. 11.


y te


MENU: Ue Ue a EIER o ETT e
51 H, N. Fowler, Panaetii et Hecatonis librorum fragmenta, Bonn, 1885.


475


Periander, xvi. 19. 4, 17. An early
king of Corinth (625—585 B.C.).

Pericles, i. 3. 20; xv. 17. 1 (bis) —

Peripatetica disciplina, i. 8. 1; xix.
5


22.

Peripateticus (sc. philosophus), ii. 18.
8; vi.14.9; ix. 5. 6; xvii. 21. 48;
xviii, 1 (passim).

Persae, vii. 17. 1; xvii. 9. 21; 21.9;
32, 33.

Persaeus, ii. 18. 8.

Perses, also Perseus, vi. 3. 2 ff.
(passim).

Persicae clades, vii. 17. L.

Pessinuntii aselli, vi. 16. 5.

Petilii, iv. 18. 7.

Phaedon, ii. 18. L, 1, 3.

Pharsalii campi, xv. 18. L. Referring
to Phi us in Thessaly, the scene
of the defeat of Pompey by Caesar
in 48 B.C.

Philemo, xvii. 4. L, 1, 2. A Greek
writer of the New Comedy at
Athens, an older contemporary and
a rival of Menander; he was born
about 362 B.C.

Phileros, xix. 9. 12.

Philippides, iii. 15. 2.

Philippus, ii. 27. L, 1, 5; v. 2. 2; vi.
1l. 1; viii. 9; ix. 3 (passim); xiii.
4.1; xvii. 21.1, 28, 30,32; Epistles,
ix. 3. 3. Philip II of Macedon,
father of Alexander the Great. He
reigned from 359 to 336 B.O. See
also ®tAurmos.

Philippus, vi. 3. 2; xviii. 9. 3. Philip
V of Macedon, father of Perses.

Philistio Locrus, xvii. 11.6. A Greek
physician of the fourth century B.C.,
a native of Locris in central Greece.

Philochorus, iii. 11, 2; xv. 20. 5.

Philolaus, iii. 17. L, 1.

Philostephanus, ix. 4. 3. A pupil of
Callimachus, who wrote Iepi Tov
Tapadofwr IIoraj.Qv.

Phocis, x. 16. 4.

Phoebus, xv. 25. 1. An epithet of
Apollo, as the Sun-god.

Phoeniz, see Ennius.

Phormio, xvii. 21. 23. An Athenian
general, who gained brilliant vic-
tories over the Peloponnesian fleet
in 429 B.O.

Phormio, see Terentius Afer.

Phrygia, ii. 29. 1.


416


Phrygia attagena, vi. 6.95.

Phryx, ii. 29. L.

Picens, xv. 4.38. A native of Picenum,
a district of Italy bounded on the
east by the Adriatic, on the west.
by Umbria and the Sabine terri-
tory. n

Pieus, v. 8. 6. ]

Pindarus, xvii. 10 (passim); xx. 7. 25.
Pythian Odes, xvii. 10. 8. The
famous Greek lyric poet, born in or |


INDEX OF NAMES
Y


near Thebes in 522 B.C. I
Piraeus, ii. 21. 1; xv. 1. 6.
Pisae, i. 1. 2. i


Pisistratus, xiv. 6. 3. Son of Nestor.
Pisistratus, vii. 17. 1; xvii. 21. 5, 7.)
Tyrant of Athens from 560 to 527.
B.C. i
Piso, see Calpurnius and Pupius.
Pisonem, In, see M. Tullius Cicero,
Pius, see Oaecilius Metellus. :
Pius aut De Pace, see M. Terentius
Varro. |

Plancio, Pro Cn., see M. Tullius Cicero.

Plancius, Cn., i. 4. 3.

Plancum, Epistulae ad L., see i. 22. 19
and note. ;

Plato, i. 9.10; ii, 5. L, 1 (bis); 8.95.
18.1,2; iii. 13 (passim); 17. 4, 1,05
iv. 11. 3; vii. 14. L; ix. 6. 7; xiv. 3.
(passim); xvi. 8. 9 (bis); xvii. il.
Lh; 21. 29; xvi 18. $^ xi 4 1M
L, 2; Platones, xiv. 1. 29; Gorgias,
vii. 14. 6, 7, 8; x. 22. L, 1, 3, 243)
xii. 9. 6; De Legibus, xiv. 8. 4:
Xv. 2 (passim); xx. 1l. 4; Parmen-
ides, vii. 13. 10; Phaedo, ii. 18. 2;
vii. 1. 6; Phaedrus, i. 9. 9; xix. 9.
9; Protagoras, v. 3. 1; De Re-
publica, iv. ll. 3; xiv. 3. 3; xviii. |

. 8; Symposium, i. 9. 9; xvii
20. L, 1, 6, 8; Theaetetus, xiii 19.
L, 2; Timaeus, v. ló. ^; v. 16. D
xvii ll. 1, 6; 12. 3. See also.
IlA&rov.

Platonieus, -a, -um, adj. from Plato:
decretum, xv. 2. 3; disciplina, vio
10. 1; loci, viii. 8; oratio, xvii. 20.
7; philosophus, xv. 2. 1. 1

Plautia rogatione, De, see C. Iulius
Caesar. i

Plautianae fabulae, iii. 3. 10. 1

Plautinus, -à, -um, vi. 17. 12; fabulae,
iii. 3. 10.


Plautissimi versus, iii. 3. 4.


|


INDEX OF NAMES


Plautius, iii. 3. 10.

Plautus, see Maccius.

Plinius Secundus, C., ix. 16. L, 1, 7;
Natural History, ii. 16. 22, 23, 24;
ix. 4, 7, 18, 16; x. 12 (passim);
xvii. 15. 6 (cf. Praef. 8); Studio-
sorum libri, ix. 16. 2 ff.

Pleistoneices, see Apion.

Plocium, see Caecilius Statius and
Menander.

Plutarchus, i. 26. 4ff.; iii. 5. 1; xi.
16. 7, 8; IIepi Aopyncias, i. 26. 7;
Bios 'HpakAées (?), i. 1. L, 1 (see
note); In Hesiodum Commentarius,
xx. 8.7; De Homero, ii. 8. L, 1, 5;

Oe, D ain 117 Dy 117^ rept
TloAvrpaynoavvys, xi. 16. 2; epi
Vuyxys, i. 3. 31; xv. 10. 1; Sym-
posiaca, iii. 5; iii. 6. 1, 3; iv. 11.
TRG. xvdge ET 35 Ae

Poeni, iii. 4. 1; v. 6. 10; vii. 4. 2, 4;
1:5. 192097272: xw. 21. 40, 42;
46, 50.

Poeniceus color, ii. 26. 8 ff.; iii. 9. 9.

Poenicus and Punicus, -a, -um, adj.
to Poeni: bellum, vi. l. 4; vii. 3;
x. 6. 4; xvii. 21. 45 (bis); castra,
vi. 18. 3; metus, ix. 12. 15; momen,
iv. 7. L; populus, x. 27. L; res,
xvii. 9. 16; verbum, viii. 13.

Poenulus, see T. Maccius Plautus.

Poenus, -a, -um, adj. to Poeni, iv. 18.
Selves 0, Iu D$ X» 3. 195 “xvi. 8. 7.5
imperator, ii. 7. 3; vi. 18. 5;
populus, x. 27.1; Psyllus, ix. 12.12.

Pollio, see Asinius.

Pollux, xi. 6. 4, 5.

Polumeni, see Caecilius Statius.

Polus, vi. 5. L, 1, 3, 7; see note.

Polybius, vi. 14. 10.

Polycrita, iii, 15. 1.

Polyphontes, vi. 3. 28.

Pompeia curia (also Pompei curia),
xiv. 7. 7. An exedra in the Colon-
nade of Pompey builb near the
stage of his theatre in 55 B.C.; or
perhaps an adjoining building.

Pompei, De Imperio Cn., see M, Tullius
Cicero,

(Pompeius) Lenaeus, xvii. 16. 2. A
freedman of Pompey, author of a
satire directed at Sallust; see
Suetonius, Gramm. xv.

Pompeius Magnus, Cn., iv. 10. 5 (bis);
ix. 12. 14 (ter); x. 1. L, 6 ff.; 20.3,


deci DE Ge save (ook, 1542,97
Vea oe 18, 5 txyill, 16. 25
2; xix. 8. 3.

Pompeius Strabo, Cn., xv. 4. 3 (bis).
Father of Pompey the Great.

Pomponiani versus, x. 24. 5.

Pomponius, L.1?: Aeditumus, xii. 10.
7; Galli Transalpini, xvi. 6. 7;
Mevia, x. 24.5; Porcetra, xviii. 6. 6.
A writer of fabulae Atellanae, who
flourished about 90 B.C. He was
born in Bononia (Bologna). See
Nonius.

Pomponius, M., xv. 11. 1 (bis)
Praetor in 161 B.C.

Pomptinus ager, ix. 11. 4.

Pompylus, ii. 18. 8.

Ponticae anites, xvii. 16. L, 1. See
Pontus.

Ponticus, see Heraclides and Pontus.

Pontius, O., i. 25. 6; ii. 19. 8.

(Pontius) Cominius, xvii. 2. 24. A
brave Roman youth, who during
the siege of the Capitol by the Gauls
volunteered to take a message from
the army at Veii to the senate,
asking that Camillus be made
dictator.

Pontus, xvii 10. 25 17. 1, 2; A
country in the north-eastern part
of Asia Minor.

Popilius, M., iv. 20. 11.

Popilium, In P., see CO. Sempronius
Gracchus.

Porcia. Familia, Liber Commentarius
de, xiii. 20. 17.

Porcius, -a, -um, adj.: familia, xiii.
20. L; lex, x. 3. 13.

Porcius, xiii. 12. 6. A tribune of the
commons.

Porcius Cato, L., xiii. 20. 13.
M. Porcius Cato Salonianus.

Porcius Cato Censorius, M., ii. 17. 7;
1v294 1251271351518: Zs Va tke Oly
VielS. Use x, 8. Los 20025 X122;
1; 8.1, 4; 18. L; xiii. 20 (passim) ;
24, I 1; xvi, 12, 8; xvii. 21. 47;
Xvill. 753 xix. 107: 105 xx. 9. is
De Agricultura, iii. 14. 17 f. (De Ke
Rustica, x. 26. 8);  Epistolicae
Quaestiones, vi. 10. 2; Carmen de
Moribus, xi. 9. 2, 5; Origines,
i. 16. 4; ii. 19. 9; 22.28; 28. 5,
Genii, Value, 6, 195 v. 20: LT yd
ac Fis xo 19 105247 75 3d: 1.65


471


Son of


INDEX OF NAMES


3. 2; xiii. 25. 15; xv. 9. 5 (bis);
13.5; xvii. 13. 8, 4; xvii. 12. 7;

' xx. 5. 18; Orationes, xiii. 25. 12;
De Achaeis, ii. 6. 7 (bis); De Aedi-
libus Vitio Creatis, xii. 18. L, 1;
De Bello Carthaginiensi, ix. 14. 10
(cf. iii. 14. 19); De Consulatu Suo,
iv. 17. 15; De Decem Hominibus,
xiii. 25. 12; De Dote, x. 23. L, 4;
De Falsis Pugnis, x. 3. 15 ff.; De
Re Ploria, ix. 19. 4, 83 x. 13. 2;
In M. Fulvium Nobiliorem, v. 6.
24 ff.; Contra Furium, x. 24. 10;
De Lusitanis contra Servium Gal-
bam, i. 12. 17; xiii. 25. 15; Ad
Milites contra Galbam, i, 23. 1£.;
Ne Imperium sit Veteri ubi Novus
venerit, xx. 2. L, 1; Apud Censores
in Lentulum, v. 13. 4; Numantiae
apud Equites, xvi. 1. L, 3; De
Praeda Dividenda, xi. 18. 18; De
Ptolemaeo contra Thermum, xviii.
9.L,1,5; xx.11. 5; Pro Rhodien-
sibus, vi. 3 (passim); xiii. 25. 13 ; In
L. Veturium De Sacrificio Com-
misso, vi. 22. 3; xvii. 2. 20;
De Suis Virtutibus contra Ther-
mum, xvi 14. L, 2; Contra C.
Cassium, x. 14. 3; Si se Caelius
Tribunus Plebis appellasset, i. 15.
8, 9, 10; Contra Servium Galbam
(cf. Origines), xiii. 25. 15; Contra
Tiberium exulem, ii. 14. L, 1, 3;
Pro L. Turio contra Cn. Gellium,
xiv. 2. 21, 26; Qua Voconiam
Legem suasit, vi. 13. 8; xvii, 6
(passim); De Re Militari, vi. 4. 5.

Porcius Oato (Licinianus) M., xiii.
20. 7; De Iuris Disciplina, xiii. 20.
9


Porcius Cato Nepos, M.:
xiii. 20 (passim).

Porcius Cato, M., xiii. 20. 3.

Porcius Cato Salonianus, M., xiii. 20.
1-15, 13, 15.

Porcius Cato, M., xiii, 20. 3, 11 ff.

Porcius Oato Uticensis, M., iv. 10. L,
8 (quater); xiii. 20. 111f, Great-
grandson of Cato the Censor.

Porcius Licinus? xvii. 21. 45; xix.
9. 10, 13. Author of a didactic
poem dealing with literary history.
He seems to have lived in the time
of Scipio and Laelius,

Posidippus, ii. 23. 1.


478


Orationes,


Posteriores, see Antistius Labeo.

Postumia, vi. 20. 6; see note.

Postumiana imperia, i. 13. 7; see
note and xvii. 21. 17.

Postumius, A., iv. 6. 2.

Postumius, Sp., xvii. 21. 36.

Postumius Albinus, A.,? xi. 8 (passim); -
Historia, xi. 8. 3. Consul in lol
B.C.

Postumius Festus, xix. 13. 1, 4, 5.

Postumius Tubertus, Olus, xvii. 21,
17. Dictator in 431 B.C.

Postumus, see Silvius.

Postverta, xvi. 16. L, 4. A goddess.

Praeda Militibus Dividenda, De, se
M. Porcius Cato Censorius.

Praenestini, xvi. 13. 5. The people
of Praeneste, a hill town about
twenty miles east of Rome, modern
Palestrina.

Praenestinus recessus, xi. 3. 1l.

Praetextatus, see Papirius.

Pratum, Praef. 8; see also Suetonius, |

Praxiteles, xiii. 17. 3, 4. A famous
Greek sculptor, born in Athens
about 390 B.C., represented by ——
beautiful works of art, originals and
copies. f

Priamus, xiii. 21. 12, E

Problemata, see Aristoteles,

Probus, see Valerius.

Proconnesius, ix. 4. 3.

Prodicus, xv, 20. 4. A Greek sophist
of Ceos, a contemporary of Socrates.

Prodromi (venti), ii, 22. 25. 1

Prorsa,xvi. 16. L, 4. A birth goddess. -

Protagoras, v. 3 (passim); v. 10. 3 ff. |

Protagoras, see Plato.

Protagorion àvríozpejov, v. ll. 1 (cf.
v. 10).

Protesilaodamia, see Laevius.

Proteus, see Peregrinus. :

Protogenes, xv. 31. 8, 4. A cele-
brated Greek painter of Caunus in
Caria, who spent the greater part
of his life in Rhodes. He died in.
300 B.C. ; 1

Psyllus, ix. 12. 12 (see note); xvi. 11
(passim).

Ptolemaei, vii. 17. 3.

Ptolemaeo, De, see M. Porcius Cato
Censorius, |

Ptolemaeus, xvii. 21. 41. Referrin
to Ptolemy Philadelphus, 285-247
B.C


INDEX OF NAMES


Publilius (Syrus)? xvii. 14 (passim).
Roman writer of mimes, or farces,
who flourished in the time of Julius
Caesar. With D. Laberius he gave
the mime literary importance,

Pugnis Falsis, De, see M. Porcius Cato
Censorius,

Pulvillus, see Horatius.

Punicum Bellum, see Naevius.

Punicus, see Poenicus.

(Pupius) Piso (Calpurnianus), M., ii.
20.3. Consul in 61 B.C.

Puteolanum mare, vi. 8. 2.

Puteoli, xviii. 5. 1. A seaport of
Campania, on the northern shore
of the Bay of Naples, modern
Pozzuoli.

Pygmaei, ix. 4. 11.

Pyrenaeus, iv. 17. 15. The Pyrenees,
between France and Spain.

Pyrro, xi. 5. 4.

Pyrronii, xi. 5 (passim).

Pyrronii philosophi, xi. 5. 1, 6.

Pyrrus, also Pyrrhus, ii. 3. 5.

Pyrrus, also Pyrrhus, iii. 8 (passim);
zm. 16. 15, 16, 18; xiv. 1. 24; xvii.
21. 37.

Pyrrus, iv. 11. 14.

Pythagoras, i. 1. L, 1; 9.1, 8, 12;
20, 6; iv. 11 (passim); xvii. 21. 6;
Pythagorae, xiv. 6. 3. See also
llv6oyópas.

Pythagora, De, see Aristoxenus.

Pythagorei, iv. 11. 3. See

, IIv6aryopetot.

Pythagorica disciplina, i. 9. L; iii.
17. 5


also


Pythagorici, i. 9. 11; iv. 11. 11, 13.
See also IIv6ayopuot.

Pythagoricus, iii. 17. L, 1; iv. 11. 7;
2n 12: 9


Pythia, xii. 5. 1 (sc. certamina). The
Pythian Games, held on the Cris-
saean plain below Delphi every
fourth year.


Qua Legem Aufeiam  Dissuasit, a
speech of C. Sempronius Gracchus,

Quadrigarius, see Claudius.

Quaestiones Epistolicae, see Cato Oen-
sorius.


Quaestiones Confusae, see "Terentius
Varro.
Quinctio, Pro, see M. Tullius Cicero.
Quinctius Atta T.: !? Aedilicia, vi. 9.
10; Conciliatriz, vi. 9. 8.
Quinquatrus, ii. 21. 7; see note.
Quirinalis, -e, adj. from Quirinus:


ined vii. 7. 7; lituus, v. 8. 1 (bis),


Quirinus, xiii. 23. 2.

Quirites, i. 6. 2; 12. 14; iv. 18. 3; v.
19:19; vii, 1S 35 x. .14. 3. (025);
24.8; xi. 10.2; xii. 9. 4 (bis); xv.
12. 4; 27. 4. The designation of
the Roman people as citizens.


Rabirio, C., Pro, see M. Tullius Cicero.

Re Floria, De, see M. Porcius Cato
Censorius.

Regulus, see Atilius.

He Militari, De, see M. Porcius Cato
Censorius,
Re Publica, De, see M. Tullius Cicero.
Re Rustica, De, see M, Porcius Cato
Censorius and M. Terentius Varro.
Rebus per Epistulam Quaesitis, De, see
Valgius Rufus.

Remus, xiii. 14. 5.

Rerum Divinarum Libri, see M.
Terentius Varro. 1

Rerum Humanarum Libri,
Terentius Varro.

Res Gestae, see Cornelius Sulla Felix
and Sempronius Asellio,

Restio, see Laberius, D.

Rex, see Marcius.

Rhodius, see Rodius.

Risus, i. 24. 3.

Robigus, v. 12. 14.

Rodanus, also Rhodanus, x. 7. L, 2.

Rodienses, also Rhodienses, vi. 3
(passim); xiii. 25, 13.

Rodiensibus, Pro, see M. Porcius Cato
Censorius.

Rodiensis civitas, also Rhodiensis, vi.


see M.


ES
Rodii, also Rhodii, xv. 31. L, 3, 4 (bis).
Rodius, -a, -um, also Rhodius, adj.
from Rodus: helops, vi. 16. 5;
vinum, xiii. 5. 5, 8; as substantive,
iii. 15. 3.


52 Q., Meyer, Publilii Syri mimi sententiae, Leipzig, 1880.


479


INDEX OF NAMES


ERE also Rhodus, xiii. 5. 3; xv.
oie
Roma, i. 2. 1; 23.4: 94,2; 3173-5;
20. 5; iii. ?. 11 (bis); 5. 14, 15;
16. 12, 21:91; asino 15 5.151;
v. 4,33 6. 10; 12. 2; 13.1; 14.
L, 4, 6, 26; vi. 3. 2, 5, 6; 19.1;
14. 8; ind; 18. L, 2, 4, 9; vii. 3;
4. 1, 4; 6. 12; ix. 1l. 9; 15. 2;
x. 1.1, 8; 16. 5; 23. 13 24. 6, 7
xi 6.L; 7.8; xii. 13.1; aati, 2.15
1323: 1371-7 18.234 290 19 ca d.
E Qs D^ 12 i 1. 45 xv. l. as
11 (passim); 12. 4; 29.2: xvi. 6.
1: 10-1: 16:4; xvii. 13071; 13.5;
8; 21. oh 4, 8, 9, 10, 15 ff.,
19 £,2 Red 27, 39 f., 42, 44 (bis),
6. 1; 7. 1;


PM


"See also “Palins
omae xiii. 22. 2. "
Romani, i. 18. 4; ii. 15. 1; 23 91. 15
23.8, 10; 94. 1; 98. 95 iii. 9. 16;
Bi: 16:95 y.05.4, D: 1858; vie
9.15: 1222; 18.5, 3,95 1x: a. 115
44. 125 x29: 193! 10. Diy kG, 16;
xiii.0. L; 9.4; xvii. 2.9; 21.93;
xvii. 2,2; 9.9; xixo 14. Br
Romanus, -a, -um, adj. from Roma:
Achilles, ii. 11. 1; acies, x. 9. L;
adulescens, vii. 3; antiquitates, xiii.
12.2; civis and cives, i. 7. 2; iv. 1.
18; x. 3. 7, 12 (bis), 13 (bis); xvi
18.6; civitas, xvi. 19. 7; xvii. 7. 4;
consules, iii. 8. 8; dictator, i. 25. 6;
disciplina, x. 6. 1; eques, iv. 12. 2;
xi 23; exercitus, iii. oO. Ex, 1l.
5; felicitas, xvii. 21. 33; genus, iv.
16. 1; historia, i. 13. 10; ii, 2. L;
x. 16. L; homo and homines, ii. 91.
1; x. 10. 1; xi. 8. D, 3; imperator,
x. 27. Bi} $mperium, x. "V. E Ls
tuventus, x. 29. 2; lingua, i. 18.
1; ludi, ii. 24. 3; magistratus,
x, 8..85 milies, l. 11. 9 301. T.
4, 14; mulieres, xi. 6. L, 1; plebs,
X. os 13; xvi, UO, 10: xc 6i. bs
populus, 4.76, Oy Tae Lhe 3: 1;
dA. D: 24085 iil. 2. 7; 8.5; 15. 4:
iv. 5, 2, 4; 1s. 9s Rs -5. 2; 6.
12. L; ^13. Tu 4 2 (bis); vi. 2.
6; 3 (passim); (14. ^. 18. 2; 19. 7;
vii. 5. l(bis); T. a 85. x. 9. 13, 19;
18.4; 23.1; 24.3 ,9; 27. 1, 1, 33


3


28.1; xi. 1.1, 4; 18. 0; xii, 3. 1;


480


a Wash: go Dar aes
92. 1s 235 1$ 2b. 20h "onec 4. 25
xvi. 4. L, 1 (quater); b Ü 6 (bis),
8,9: xviL 2,21. 2I. TIL, T7, 93,
36, 4s; £x. d. 25 10, 22, " 89, 54;
res, xi. 8. 1,13; xx:1:20; ritus, xiii.
Za. us sacra, iii. 2.8; senatus, v. 6.
10; verbum, i. 9. 12; ' viri, iv. 16. 1;
vi. 32. 3; xvii. 21. L,1; virtus, ix.
13. 14; xvii. 21. 33.

Romulus, i1 16.3; in. 16.16; vi Fe
6, 8 (bis); xi. 14 (passim); xiii, 14,
2; 5; xvii. 21. 45.

Roscius, Q., v. 8. 4.

Roscius, Sex., ix. 14. 19.

Rubra, see Saxa Rubra.

Rudens, see 'T. Maccius Plautus.

Rufinus, see Cornelius.

Rufus, see Valgius.

Ruga, see Carvilius.

Rullus (P. Servilius), xiii. 25. 4. "Tri-
bune of the commons in 63 B.C.
In his History of Rome he seems to
have given much attention to
Roman institutions.

Rutilius (Rufus) P.,* vi. 14. 10 (cf.
iv. 1. 22).


Sabini, xi. 1. 5; xiii. 23. 8, 9.

Sabinus, iii. 16. 8.

Sabinus, see Caelius and Masurius.

Sabinus, -a, -um, adj. to Sabini:
fundus, vi. 11. 9; verbum, xiii. 23.
7; vocabulum, xi. 1. 5.

Sacerdotibus Publicis, De, x. 15. 1.

Sacrificio Commisso, De, see M.
Porcius Cato Censorius.

Saevitia, xiv. 4. 5. Cruelty, per-
sonified.

Salacia Neptuni, xiii. 23. 2 (see note).

Salamis, xv. 20. 5; xvii. 21. 12. An
island in the Saronic Gulf, near
Athens.

Salernum, i. 16. 2.

Salinator, see Laberius, D.

Salius, i. 12. 6.

Sallustianus, -a, -um, adj. from Ears
tius ch i10. 18; x. 26. 8
lectio, xviii. 4.


Sallustius Crispus, C95 ive 3502905


xvii 18. L, 1:

iii, 1 (passim) ;
War ld. te 418
xx. Q. 14; ' Historiae, it, 15. 13:
De 17. 75 27. 2; Tv 410865 xc 12,


Catilina, i. 15. 185
iv. 15 (passim);


1x. 19. 9; x. 91. 2; |.


INDEX OF NAMES


Wats) 0227 "xc feed 20-10):

L, 1, 2, 10; ' xiii, 30. 5; P unes
xviii. 4 (passim); Iugurtha, i. 22.
15; ix. 14. 20; x. 21. 2; xvi. 10,
14; 16.

Salonianus, see Porcius.

Salonius, xiii. 20. 8 (bis).
Cato the Censor.

Samius, -a, -um, adj. from Samos:
ii. 10. 6; xvii. 21. 6; atAleta, v. 9.
5; gutus, xvii. 8. 5.

Samnites, i. 14. L, 1 (ter); xi. 1. 5;
xvii. 2. 21; 21. 36 (fer); sing.

* Samnis, i. 25. 6.

Samos, vi. 16. 5.

Sandalarius vicus, xviii. 4. 1. A
Street in Rome, probably opening
into the Argiletum and correspond-
ing to the poa via del Colosseo.

Santra, vii. 15.

Sapientia, xiii. Be ies gi

Sapientes, i. 3. 1 (see note); iii. 10.
16: xi. 18. 5; c£. iy. 1. 16.

Sapphica, xix. 9. 4.

Sappho, xix. 9. 4; xx. 7. 2. The
famous poetess of Lesbos, who
flourished towards the end of the
seventh century B.C.

Sardinia, xiii. 30. 5; xv. 12. 1.

Sarpedon, xv.21.1. A Lycian prince,
according to one tradition a son of
Zeus (Jupiter); an ally of the
Trojans.

Sarra, xiv. 6.4. An ancient name for

q Tyre.

Saturae, see Ennius and Lucilius.

Saturae Menippeae, see M. "Terentius
Varro.

Saturio, see Maccius Plautus.

Saturnalia, ii. 24. 3 (see note); xviii.
he OOT3 T,

Saturnalia, see Laberius, D.
Saturnalicia ludicra, xviii. 2. L.
Another term for the Saturnalia.

Saturnus, xiii. 23. 2; xviii. 2. 16.

Saturnuspater, v. 12. 5.

Sauromatae, ix. 4. 6.

Saxa Rubra, vi. 11. 6. A village on
the via Flaminia, six miles north of
Rome.

Scaevola, see Mucius.

Scaurus, see Terentius.

Scipiades, iv. 17. 1.

Scipio, see Cornelius.

Scipio, see Ennius.


A client of


AULUS GELLIUS—VOL. III.


Sciron, xv. 21. 1. A son of Neptune,
who kicked his victims from the
Scironian Rock, situated on the sea-
coast between Athens and Megara.

Scylla, xiv. 6. 3. The monster on the
Italian side of the Straits of Messina.


Scythae, ix. 4. 6; xvi. 4. See
also XxX8at.
Scythicum mare, xvii. 8. 16; see note.


Sedigitus, see Volcacius.

Seianus equus, iii. 9. L, 1, 6.

Seius, On., iii. 9. 2, 4.

Seleucus Nicanor, vii. 17. 2.

Sella, see Afranius.

Semproniae leges, x. 3. 13.

Sempronius, Ti., x. 6. 3.

Sempronius Asellio,? i. 13. 10; ii. 13.
3; Historiae or Res Gestae, ii. 13. 2 ;
iv.9.1295- v; 18515 7,97 xii 9.65
22. 8.

Sempronius Gracchus, C.,!4i. 11. 10 ff.;
Vis 19:90:50 Keds 1e $x1j10.24, 0107
xii, 8. 13; xx 6. l1; Oratio qua
Legem Aufeiam dissuasit, xi. 10. L
(Hs) 1; De Legibus Promulgatis, Dx

14 16; x. 3 (passim); In P.
Popilium, xi. 13. 1; De P. Popilio
circum Conciliabula, Be hp tes BSS
Cum ex Sardinia rediit, xv. 12. L, 1.

Sempronius Gracchus, (Ti.), ii. 2. 13.

Sempronius Gracchus, Ti., vi. 19. L,
6, 8; vii. 16. 11; xii. 8.1, 4. Father
of Tiberius and Gaius Gracchus.

Sempronius Gracchus, Ti., ii. 13. 4
(Dis), D; vi 9. 125 19.65 xii, 8. 1.
Tribune in 133 B.C.

Sempronius Tuditanus, C.,* vii. 4. L,
1,4; Commentarii, xii. 15. 4.

Sempronius Tuditanus, M., xvii. 21,
42, 43. Consul in 240 B.C.

Seneca, see Annaeus.

Senones, v. 17. 2.

Senonicum bellum, xvii. 21. 21, 26.
See Senones.

Septentriones, ii. 21. 4; 22. 3 ff.;

10. 2.

Sermone Latino, De, see M. Terentius
Varro.

Serranus, see Atilius.

Sertorius, (Q.), ii. 27. L, 2, 5; x. 26.
2; xv. 22 (passim).

Servilianus, i. 2. 1.

(Servilius) Caepio, Q., iii. 9. 7; xv.


Servilius Geminus, xii. 4. 1, 4.
481
IX


Servius, see Olaudius, Sulpicius and


us.

Sestio, Pro P., see M. Tullius Cicero.

Sextiles, Nonae, v. 17. 5.

Setinus finis, xvi. 9. 6. Referring to
Setia, an ancient town of Latium,
overlooking the Pomptine Marshes.

Sibylla, iv. 1. 1; see note on i, 19. 11.

Sibyllini libri, i. 19. L, 1, 10. See
notes on i, 12. 6 and i. 19. 11.

Sicani, i. 10. 1.

Sicilia, L 7. 20; 18..7- 95 22 .6- 25
ziii. 25. 9, 10, 11; xvi 19.5; xwii.
21. 19, 29.

Sicinius Dentatus, L., ii. 11. L ,1.

Siculi, xiii, 25. 10.

Sidicinum, see Teanum.

Sidicinus quaestor, x. 3. 3.

Sigillaria, ii. 3. 5 (see note); v. 4. 1.

Silvae, Praet. 6.

Silvii, xvii. 21. 3. The names of
several kings of Alba Longa.

Silvius, Postumus, ii. 16. 1, 3 ff.

Sinniana opinio, v. 21. 14. Referring
to Sinnius Capito.

Sinnius Capito,‘ Epistles, v. 20. L
(bis), 1, 2; 21. 9, 11.

Sirenii scopuli, xvi. 8. 17. See
Sirenes.

Sisenna, see Cornelius.

Sisenna, see M. 'Terentius Varro.

Sithonia, xiv. 6. 4. An ancient name
for Thrace.

Smyrnaeus, - a, -um, adj. from Smyrna
ale ii. ll. 6; mulier, xii.


Sociale bellum, xv. 4. 3. See Marsi-
cum bellum.

Socrates, i. 17 (passim); ii. 1. L, 1, 2;
P .1,4,5; vii. 10. 4 (bis); viii. 11;

SE 6; "xiv. 3. 2, 5 (bis), 6 (bis);
6. 5; xv. 20. 4; xvii 21. 18, 19;
xviii. 4, 1; xix. d.d0s 305 9. 9:
Socratae, xiv. 1. 29.

Socraticus, -a, -um, adj. from Socrates,
1h 18. D, 4; vi WO. Do d: 3x b. d
amoenitas, xiv. 3. 11; cohors, ii. 18.
1; modus, iv. 1. L.

Sol, ‘ii. 22. 31 (bis); 28. 4; iii. 2. 3 ff.;
xvii. 2. 10.

Solon, ii. 12. io E. 2; xi. 18. L, 5 (bis);
xvii. 21. 3,

Sophia, xiii. ^s N

Pophesles, xii, 11. Tis xit. 19b T5095
xvii. 21. 18, 42 ; Alas Aoxpós, xiii,


482


INDEX OF NAMES :
:
|


19. 2; Electra, vi. 5. 5; B@uszides,
xiii. 19. 3; Frag., xii. 11. 6.
Sorores, see Laberius, D.
Sotadica, see Accius.
Soterici lecti, xii. 9. 11, 12 (see note).
Sotion : Kepas "ApadGetas, i. 8. L, 1.
Spartanus, iii. 7.
Speusippus, iii. 17. 3; ix. 5. 4.
Stammarii, see Laberius, D
Statius, iv. 20. 12. A slave name. ]
5
1


Stichus, see T. Maccius Plautus.
Stilo, see Aelius.
Stoa, xii. 5. 5. A colonnade in the —
market-place at Athens, in which |
- Zeno taught. :
Stoicus, Stoici, i. 2. L (ter), 6 (bis) |
7 (bis); ii. 18. 8; v. 15. 6; 16.25%
: E^


1.

4, 6; xix. 1. 7, 11, 19, 21; 12 3]

(bis). |

Stoicus, -a, -um, adj. : disciplina, . 2. |
35 x. 5. 1; xviii, 1. 1; xix. 1.4; -
homo, xii. 5. 4; philosophia, vii. 2.
1; philosophus, xii. 5. ll; xviii, 1.
L; secta, xix. 1. 13.

Stolo, see Licinius. |

Strabo, see Fannius. j

Strictura, see Laberius, D. à

Studiosorum Libri, see C. Plinius |
Secundus.

Stygia palus, ii. 6. 13.

Subditivus, see ed Va

Subsolanus ventus, ii

Suculae, xiii. 9 eae |

Suetonius Tranquillus, (0.,*! xv. 4. 4;
Ludicra Historia, ix. 7. 9. 1

Sulla, see Cornelius. :

Sulpicium, Ad Ser. see M. Tobey
Cicero.

(Sulpicium) Galbam, Ser., Contra, see
M. Porcius Cato Censorius.

Sulpicius, Q., v. 17. 2.

Sulpicius Apollinaris, ii. 16. L, 8, 10;
iv.17.11; vi. 8. is xi. 15.8; xii,
i3. , 19, 19, 21; xiii. 18. 2, 3: 20.
1,5, 17; xvi. 5. à; xviii, 4 (passim);

1, 1039

D 8. 9;- xv. 6-3. i

rra as Galba, Ser. i. 12. 17; xiii.


Suipicivs Gallus, P., vi. 12. A 4.
Sulpicius (Rufus), Ser.,4 ii. 10. b, 1; iveg
2.19; wi b. 1; 12. L, 4; xii. 13.


xlix. 13 Xx. dK


———————— BÉ —


INDEX. OF NAMES


21; De Dotibus, iv. 3.2: iv. 4. L,
1,3; Ad M. Varronem Epist., ii. 10.
1; De Sacris Detestandis, vii. 12. 1;
In Reprehensis Scaevolae Capitibus,
iv. 1. 20.

Superbus, see Tarquinius.

Symposiaca, see Plutarchus.

Synaristosis, see Caecilius Statius.

Syracosius, see Dio.

Syria, iii. 9. 4 (bis); xv. 4. 4.

Syrtes, xvi. ll. L.

Syrus, see Publilius,


Tabulae Duodecim, see Duodecim
Tabulae.

'Taenarus or Taenarum, xvi. 19. 16, 23.
A promontory in Laconia, modern
Cape Matapan, the southern point
of the Peloponnesus (Morea).

Taracia, Gaia, vii. 7. L, 1 (bis), 2.

Tarentinum oppidum, xiii. 2. L.

Tarentum, vi. 16. 5; xiii. 2. 1.

Tarpeium saxum, xvii. 21. 24; xx. l.
53. A cliff on the Capitoline Hill,
from which traitors were hurled.

Tarpeius, Sp., ii. 11. 1.

Tarquinium nomen, xv. 29. 2 (bis).

Tarquinius (Oollatinus), L., xv. 29. 2.
An elder brother of "Tarquinius
Priscus, with Brutus one of the
first consuls at Rome, but forced
to abdicate because of his connection
with the Tarquins.

Tarquinius Priscus, xvii. 21. 4, 6.

^- The fifth king of Rome (616-578
B.C.).

Tarquinius Superbus, i. 19 (passim);
xvii. 21. 6.

Tartesia muraena, vi. 16. 5.

Tatius, T., xiii. 23. 13.

Taurus, see Calvisius.

Taurus, xiii. 9. 4, 6.

Taurus, xii. 13. L, 25 ff.

Teanum Sidicinum, x. 3. 3.

"Telemachus, xiv. 6. 3. Son of Odys-
seus (Ulysses). See also TyA€naxos.

Tempus, xii. 11. 7.

Terentius, M., xi. 1. 4.

Terentius (Afer), P., vi. 14.6; xv. 24;
xvii. 21.49; Heautontimorumenos,
iv. 9.11; 16.2; Phormio, vi. 7. 4;
mx, 6, 4, 11.


53 H, Kummrow, Symbola Critica ad Grammaticos Lat., Berlin, 1880,


Terentius Scaurus: 9 De Caeselli
Erroribus, xi. 15. 3 ff.

Terentius Varro, M.,37 i. 18.6; 20. 4,
Oy Zoe 10s 31:9:1021 15. dss Qo LO
28. 95111. 14. D, 151v. 9. 1; 16. 15
vu2 106 VT al: SOI bc, ey OSE >.<

20, Op XA. 6, 0s) xiv. d: 1n, 2 (5135

Xvi. 8. 2 (bis), 0; 8; 16.2; 18. 6;

zxyi. 4.3; 21.94; xvii.9.4; 15.

Tr xix. 10: 10; 14.0 T5 715. 2:5 xx

11. L; Antiquitates Rerum Divin-

arum, 1, 18; I 3.5 iH. 16.556597 x.

TS. BIR cv. 9025 XY. 145.25 ovili.

12. 9; Ant. Rerum Humanarum,

1.16.3; 18. L; 25. L, 1, 10 (De Bello

et Pace); ii. 2. L, 2, 4, 7 (De

Diebus); (v. 4. 5); x. 7. L, 25 xi.

1. 1, 4, 5; xiii. 12. 5 (bis), 7; 13

(passim); 17.2,3; xvii. 3. L, 4 ff. ;

De Comoediis Plautinis, ii. 3. 2 f.,

9f, 14; JDésciplinge, x. 1. 41.5

xvii. 15. 2; Ad Ser. Sulpicium

Epist, ii. 10. L, 2; . Epistolicae

Quaestiones, vi. 10. 2 (attributed

by Gellius to Cato); xiv. 7. 3, 11

(Epist. ad Oppianum); 8. 2 (bis);

Hebdomades vel De Imaginibus, iii.

10. L, 1,16; 11. 3, 7 ; Eicaywycéds, de

Officio Senatus habendi xiv. 7. 2 ft.;

De Lingua Latina ad Ciceronem,

11.21.58, 10:25:20, 07 wd less

x. 21. 2 (bis); xvi. 8. 6; Logistorici

or Logistoria, iv. 19. L, 2—Sisenna

vel De Historia, xvi. 9. 5; Orestes
aut De Insania, xii. 4. 1; Catus

aut De Liberis Educandis, xx. 11. 4;

Pius aut De Pace, xvii. 18. L, 1—De

Poetis, i. 294. 3; xvii. 21. 43, 45;

De Re Rustica, ii. 20. 1, 3, 4, 9 (bis)

Saturae Menippeae or Cynicae, ii.

18. 7; xiii, 31. L, 1—Ais Ilaióes

ot yépovres, vii. 5.10; Ecdemeticus,

xix. 8. 17; IIepi 'Eóco&rov, vi. 16.

L,1,4; xv.19. L; 1; '"Immokiov, iii.

18. 5; Nescis quid Vesper Serus

vehat,i. 22.4, 10; xiii. ll. L, 1, 7;

De Officio Maritt, i. 17. L, 4 ff.;

Teomaxia, xiii. 23.4; Testamentum,

iii. 16.13; 'Yópok/cv, xiii. 31. L, 1,

2; Td ézi rH $ak[fj pvpov, xiii. 29.

5—De Sermone Latino ad Marcel-

lum,95 xii. 6. 3; 10. 4; xvi. 12. 7;

xviii. 12. 8.


t.


483
112


INDEX OF NAMES


Testamentum, see M. Terentius Varro.

'Tettius, see Attius.

'Thasiae nuces, vi. 16. 5.

Theaetetus, see Plato.

Thebae, iii. 10. 16.

"Thebani, xvii. 21. 26.

"Thebanus ager, xvii. 3. 4.

Themistocles, xvii. 21. 12. The
famous Athenian general and states-
man, born in 514 B.C.

Theocritus, ix. 9. 3, 4 ff.; Bucolica,
ix. 9. 4.

Theodectes, x. 18.
Mausolus, x. 18. 7.

Theognis, i. 3. 19.

ees TL ones ae 13. 92

1.8.95 wii 6,19 xil: 5 (passim);
iu 15. SEA as De Amicitia, i. 3. L,
10 ff., 21, 25, "28 £.: viii. 6.

"Theopompus, x.18.6 (bis); xv. 20.1;
xvi.15. 1.

Eee xix. 9. 14.

"Thermopylae, li. T. BM.

‘Thermus, see Minucius.

Thermum, De Ptolemaeo contra, see
M. Porcius Cato.

Thersites, i. 15. 11; xvii. 12. 2.

Theseum certamen, xv. 20. 3. A
festival, with games, celebrated at
Athens in honour of Theseus.

Theseus, x. 16. 12 (ter), 13.

Thessalia, xiv. 6. 4; xv. 18. 1, 3. A
country in the north-eastern part
of Greece.

Thracia, iii. 9. 3; xiv. 6. 4.

Thracus, xix. 12. 6; Z'"racus homo,
xix. 12. T.

Thraeca natio, x.

"Thrax, iii. 9. 2.

Threicii, xiii. 21. 11.

Thucydides, i, 11. Gy hy x, 23. Gy 1,
2; xvii. 21. 16.

Thysdritanus civis, ix. 4. 15.

Tiberianae domus bibliotheca, xiii,
20. 1.

Tiberinus campus, vii. 7. 4.

Tiberis, xii. 13. 8 (quater); xx. 1. 47.

Tiberium exulem, contra, see M. Por-
cius Cato Censorius.

Tiberius Caesar, ii. 24. 15; v. 6. 14;
xvi. 13. 5 (bis). Emperor of Rome
from A.D. 14 to 37.


6 (see note);


25. 4.


^! F. Wimmer, Theophrasti Eresii Opera; III, Fragmenta, Leipzig, 1862.


484


|


Tibur, xix, 5. 1. A town of Latium,
sixteen miles north-east of Rome,
modern Tivoli.

Tiburs bibliotheca, ix. 14. 3; xix. 5.4. —

Timaeus, see Plato.

Timaeus: Historiae, xi. 1. 1.

Timarchum, In, see Aeschines.

Timochares, iii. 8. 1, 3, 5.

"Tiro, see Tullius.

Tironianus, -a, -um, adj. from (Tullius)
Tiro: cura atque disciplina, i. 3.1;
liber, xiii. 21. 16. 2

Titiae balneae, iii. 1. 1 (see note). 4

Titius, xiv. 5. 2. i

Titius, L., v. 19. 9.

Titulus, see Afranius.

Titus Lucretius, see Lucretius. !

Tityrus, ix. 9. ll. See also Térvpos.

"Tolosanus, -a, -um, adj. :
9. 7; oppidum, iii. 9. 7.

"Torquatus, see Manlius.

Trabea, xv. 24.1? A Roman comic |
poet who flourished about 130 B.C.

Traianus, xiii. 25. 28; Traiani templi
bibliotheca, xi. 17. 1; forum, xii, 25. -
x IS


aurum, ii. |


Tranquillus, see Suetonius.

Trebatius, O.,* iv. 2. 9, 10;
ligionibus, vii. 12. L, 5, 6.

Trigemini, see T. Maccius Plautus.

Trinummus, see T. Maccius Plautus. )

Triphallus, see Naevius.

Triumpho Suo, De,
Metellus Numidicus.

Triumphus, see Caecilius Statius.

Troia, x. 16. 14. !

"Troianum bellum, xvii. 21. 3. !

Truculentus, see T. Maccius Plautus. "

Tubero, see Aelius. I

Tubertus, see Postumius.

Tubulus, see Hostilius.

Tuditanus, see Sempronius.

Tullia, xviii, 12. 9. Daughter of
Servius Tullius, who drove her car
over her father's dead body. !

Tullianus, -a, .um, adj. from Tullius
(GNIS xii. 13. 19; liber, xviii.

Tullius, Servius, x. 16. 3; 28, 1, 2%
xiii. 14. 4; xvii. 21. 5.

Tullius Cicero, M, 1.8. 14, 215 S223
ii. 17 (passim); 25. 5; iii. 36; 19; iv.


De Re-


see Caecilius |


"—


INDEX OF NAMES


HOMES ivenGe 15:08. 4:5 “viedo,
S525); 195 dbi ox. T TS Titer):
912 16:80:29 21. L, 1, 2; 24.1;
zu Lo 1 xai: 3. 2, 4i; 3: 25 12.
441,47 18, L, 29; xiii. 9. 1; Xv.
93.75. 6. 2, 43 xvii, 2. 5; 13. 2;
gebe BR 14. quic (Brutus), xi.


2. 4; Orator, ii. 17 (passim); xiii,
21. 24; xy. 9. L, 1, 2; xviii 7. 8;
De Oratore, 1. 11:05, es L5. b, (5
158, BI; XCTI, iy 2; Orationes
Antoninianae, or Philippics, i. 16.
050022: paving ott. 5) dine, ob
(passim) ; 53. 1, 6; Pro Caecina,
vii. 16. 12; Pro M. Caelio, xvii.
1 (passim); Pro Cluentio, xvi. 7.
405 Pro. Malone, i. 10.; 15; In
Pisonem, xiii. 25. 22 ff.; Pro Cn.
Plancio, i, 4. L, 2f., 6; ix. 12. 4;
xx. 6. 11; De Imperio Cn. Pompei,
i. 7. 16, 20; De Provinciis Con-
sularibus, iii. 16. 195- xvieb. amm
Pro Quinctio, xv. 28. 8 (bis), 6;
Pro C. Rabirio, xii. 3. 1; Pro Sez.
Roscio, ix. 14. 19; xv. 28 (passim);
Contra Rullum de Lege Agraria,
vii. 16. 7; xill. 25. 4ff., 27, 32;
Pro Sestio, ix. 14. 6, 7; xii. 13.
2b1f.; Pro Sulla, vii. 16. 63. In
Verrem: Orat. de consist. Acc., or
Divinatio in Caecilium, iv. 9: 7;
xiii, 25. 9, 10; xx. 6. 11; <Actio 11,
i. 7 (passim); ii. 6. 8; vii. 16. 13;
Keon Wage latices ai, «10.26
13, 1/519: xili21. 15, 16 f., 22;
Contra Contionem Q. Metelli, xviii.
17.17,9; Epist. ad Atticum, iv. 9. 6;
Epist. ad Fam., i. 22. 19 (ad L.


Piancum); xii. 13. 21 (ad Ser.
Sulpicium), 22; Laelius sive De
Amicitia, i. 3. L, 13, 18; viii. 6;


xvii. 5 (passim); De Divinatione,
en ioi 8, 4; xv. 18. 7; De Fato,
13; De Finibus, xv. 13.:9;
o Officiis. xiii. 28.1; De Republica,
i. 22. 8, 10; vii. 16. 11; PIN aes
Tusculanae "Disputationes, sates
xvi. 8. 8; De Gloria, xv. 6. L, 1:
De Iure Civili in Artem redigendo,
i. 22. 7,10; Laus Catonis, xii. 20.
3, 4, 14; Oeconomicus, xv. 5. 8.
(Tullium) "Ciceronem, ad, De Analogia,
see O. fulius Caesar.
(Tullium) Ciceronem, ad, De Lingua
Latina, see M. Terentius Varro.


(Tullium) Ciceronem, Epistula ad, see
Asinius Pollio.

Tullius Decula, M., xv. 28. 3.
in 81 B.C.

Tullius Tiro, M.,°* iv. 10. 6 (cf. note
on i. 7. 1); vi 3. L, 8:5; xii. 3.
L,3,4; xii. 9 (passim); xv. 6.2;
Epist., x. 1. 7, 85; Epist. ad Q.
Axium, vi. 3. 10 pa IIavóékTa:t,
xiii. 9. 3 ff. (cf. Praef. 7).

Tullus, see Hostilius.

Turio, L., Pro, see M. Porcius Cato
Censorius.

Turius, L., xiv. 2. 26 (quater).

Turpilius, xv. 24. A Roman writer
of comedy (palliatae), a younger
contemporary of Terence,

Tusce, ii. 25. 8; xi. 7. 4.

Tusculanus, -a, -um, adj.:
xiii. 24. 2: fundum, ii, 20. 3.

Tuscus, ii. 25. 8.

"Tuscus, see Clodius.

Tyrii principes, ix. 9. 14.

Tyros, xiv. 6. 4. Tyre, a city of
Phoenicia, at the eastern end of
the Mediterranean.


Consul


homo,


ii 26. 13; v. 1.


Ulixes, i. 15. 3; 6;
2. 17 (bis); xi. 4. 25


Xd dd p reix T
xiv. 6. 3 (ter).
Umbri, iii. 2. 6.
Umbria, iii. 2. 6.
Usus, xiii. 8. L, 1, 3.
Utica, xiii, 20. 3, 11 ff.
Uticenses, xvi. 13. 4. The people
of Utica.


Valerium | Messalam, In, see Q.
Caecilius Metellus Numidicus.

Valerius, xiii. 26. 2; xix. 14. 6;
Valeri Cre xiii. 26. L, 1.

Valerius, L., v. 19. 9.

Valerius, Qu bus "209143.
239 B.C.

Valerius Aedituus,? xix. 9. 10, 11.
A Roman writer of epigrams of the
ante-classical period.

Meee Antias,? i. 7. 10, 13; v. 21.
6; 19. 8; vii. 8:65 Annales,
nera or Historiae, ii. 8. 4; vi.
9:29: 12,5073 oats (eas

(V. alerius) "Catullus, vi. 6 (bis); vii.
16 (passim); xix. 9.

Valerius (Flaccus), ie d. 3. 2.


485


Consul in


INDEX OF NAMES


(Valerius) Laevinus, M., xiii. 13. 4.

Valerius Maximus: Facta et Dicta
Mirabilia, xii. 7. 8.

Valerius Maximus Corvinus (M.), ix
11 (passim).

(Valerius) Messala, M. xiii. 14. 5;
De Auspiciis, xiii. 15 (passim); 16.


Ln

Valerius "Messala, M.,
DISC

Valerius Probus, i. 15. 18; iii. l. 5,
63 vis doo. 9. H5 125 ix. 9. 129.:
xiii. 21. a 3, Sa o xv. "80. 4, 5 (bis):
Commentationes, "xv. 30. 5; Epist.
ad Marcellum, iv. 7. L, 1; De
Occulta Litterarum Significatione in
Epistularum C. Caesaris Scriptura,
xvii. 9. 5.

Valerius Soranus, Q., ii. 10. 3.
Valgius Rufus, C.: :4s “De Rebus xd
Epistulam Quaesitis, xii. 3. L, 1, 2.

Varro, see Terentius.

Varronianae fabulae, iii. 3. 3.

Vaticanus, -a, -um, adj., xvi. 17. 2;
ager, xvi. 17. d. aoo0mixc Y. 15
deus, xvi. 17. 2. Relating to the
Vatican Hill at Rome, originally
a part of the Janiculum, which by
the end of the republic was also
called Mons Vaticanus; see Platner,
Topog. Rome?, p. 507.

Vediovis, v. 12 (passim).

Veiens bellum, xvii. 21. 13.
with Veii.

Veii, xvii. 21. 20. A powerful Etrus-
can city, on the river Cremera,
about twelve miles north-west of
Rome.

Velia, x. 16. 3, 4. A city of Lucania,
founded by Phocaeans in 543 B.C.
Velinus portus, x. 16 (passim). The

harbour of Velia.

Velius Longus: De Usu Antiquae
Lectionis, xvii. 9. 4. A Roman
grammarian of the first half of the
second century A.D.

Venerius triumphus, v. 6. 22.

Vennonius, xix. 14. 6.

Ventidius Bassus, (P.), xv. 4 (passim).
Consul in 43 B.C.

Venus, v. 6.22; ix. 10, L, 1; xv. 13.
10; xvid. 12. 4: xdx. 2.95 "9,77.
12 (bis), 14.

Venusina plebs, x. 3. 5.

Veratius, L., xx. 1. 13.


486


if, 24.2; xv.


The war


— iii, 10. 2 (see note); xiii.


Vergilianus sensus, H. 16.1.

Vergilium, | Commentaria
Annaeus Cornutus.

Vergilium, Commentarii in, see Iulius
Hyginus.

Vergilius Maro, P., i. 21. L, 2 (bis), 7 »
iL 3. D; 6: Xn ds svat 17.11; ix. 93
L; xii.'2. 2; 10 (bis); xiii. 21. “a


in, see


ves TeURa vi. 12. 6; vii. 6. p


1; 12.17,22; 14.8; x. 16 (passim);
xi 1.920; xiH. 4. D; 21. DUE;
$3 uy 13. 10; xvi. 5. 11; $. 3;
xyii 10. 7, 10, 12; xx. XJ. Eg
Bucolics, ii. 6. 1; ix. 9. 4f, 7 Hi
Georgics, i. 21. 3 2, 4,5; 22. 12
19; 8. 3. 6; 6. 3, 19; 26:18; tye
16. 7; 17. 5, 11; v. 12. 13 (bis);
vi 17.8, 9: 20.5, 1: ix: Jas
x.12.6; 29. 4; xii. 21. 4; 27. 2;
xviii. 5. 7.

Veritas, xii. 11. 7.

Verres, O., x. 3. 13; xiii. 25. 10.

Verrem, In, see M. Tullius Cicero.

Verrius Flaccus, M.,9? xvi. 14. 3; xviii
7. 9; De Obscuris Catonis, xvii. 6
(passim); Res Memoria Digne, iv. 54
6; De Verborum Significatu, v. 17.1
18. 2. A Roman grammarian of


lexicon, existing only in the frag-
ments of an abridgment by Festu:
and a further abridgment by Pauli
Diaconus.

Vesevus, vi. 20. 1 (bis).

Vesta, i. 12. 11; Vestae atrium, i. 12.
9; templum, xiv. 7. 7; virgo or
sacerdos, i. 12 (passim); vii. 7. 2
X. 16) L, 3L.

Vestalis, adj. from Vesta: sacerdos,
a. en 14 (bis); x. 15.31; virgo,i.12
9, 18.

Veturium, L., In, see M. Porcius Oa
Censorius.

Veturius, Ti., xvii. 21. 36. Consul
321 B.C,

Vi et Natura Chamaeleontis, De, si
Democritus.


INDEX OF NAMES


Victoria, vii. 6. 5 (bis);
aedes, x. 1. 7 (see note).

Vindex, see Caesellius.

Viris Illustribus, De, see Cornelius
Nepos.

Virites Quirini, xiii. 23. 2.

Voconia lex, vi. 13. 3; xvii. 6. 1;
(Voconium plebisscitum) xx. l. 23.

Voconiam legem, qua suasit, see M.
Porcius Cato Censorius.

Volcacius Sedigitus: Indices Plauti,
iii. 8.1; De Poetis, xv. 24 (bis).

Volcanus, 'also Vulcanus, ix. 10. L, 1;
xiii, 23. 2; Volcani area, iv. 8. 4
(see note).

Volturnus, ii. 22. 10 ff.

Volusius, xix. 14. 6.

Vulsci, also Volsci, xvii. 21. 11. A


Victoriae


people of Latium, south-east of
Rome.


Xanthippe, i. 17. 1; viii. 11.

Xenophanes, iii. 11. 2.

Xenophilus, iv. 11. 7.

Xenophon, xiv. 3 (passim); Uadetas
Kópov, xiv. 3. 3; Dictorum alque
Factorum Socratis Commentarii, xiv.
3. 5. An Athenian general and
writer, born about 444 B.C.

Xerxes, vii. 17. 1; xvii. 21. 12.


Zeno, ii. 18. 8; ix. 5. 5; xvii. 15. L,
1,2; 21.39. See also Zjvwv.

Zmyrna, ix. 4. 15.

Zodiacus, iii. 10. 4; xiii, 9. 6.


487


INDEX OF GREEK NAMES


*Aydbwv, xix. 11.2.

"A aj.én vov, ti, 6. 11.

'A8nvà, ii. 23. 9.

Alas Mokpós, see Sophocles.

Aiyurriakd, see ‘E\Aavikos.

Aiuovia, xiv. 6. 4. An ancient name
for Thessaly.

"Ais, Xi Ty 2.

Aicxvdos, xiii. 25.7. See Aeschylus.

“Ax7y, xiv. 6.4, An ancient name for
Attica.

:AA $etós, xiii. 27. 3.

'AAéfavópos, Xx. d a 12 (bis). See
Alexander Magn

*Apadéetas képas, ng soe 653.8. 1.

'" Avakpeóvreua, xix. 9. 4. Referring to
Anacreon,


'Avaf£áyopas, xv. 20. 8. See Anaxa-
goras.

'Avóporíev, xv. 28. 6. An Athenian
historian, a pupil of Isocrates,


accused in an oration of Demos.
thenes.

*AvOnpa, Praef. 6.

;Arapkrías, ii, 22. 15.

*Amiwy WAecoroveixyns: Aegyptiaca, vi.
8. 4; De Alezandri Laudibus, vii
8. is See Apion,

‘ATO wr, i 11::95. 19.

;Apyeiot, i TOI.

'Aptarapxos,! xiv. 6. 3.
chus.

"ApuaroréAns, Di 16. I3; iv. 131; 19
Ix. d; 6; 3c, D. L1, 12. bar ane
toteles.

;Apxiras, x. 12. 10. See Archytas.

7 Aprejus, ix. 9. 12.

"Adaroros, xvii. 10. 9.
form of "H auc TOS; the Greek
god of fire. See"Hóataeros.

* Adpodtry, vi. 8. 0;


See Apollo.
See Aristar-


The Doric


! Lehrs, K., De Aristarchi Studiis H omericis,’ Leipzig, 1882.


488


'Axavot, i. 11. 8. In Homer, a general
term for the Greeks. —


BadvaAdos, xix. 9. 6. A favourite of
Polycrates of Samos, and of Ana-
creon.

Bowrys, ii. 21. 3; xix. 9. 6.


TAavxos, xiii. 27.1. See Glaucus.


Anyeamup, vi. 16. 7.

AvadcEeis, see Epictetus.

Acdacxadrxa, Praef. 8.

Acxacapxia, vi. 8. 5.

Avoyévys : nOcxy, i. 2. 10. See Diogenes
Stoicus.

Atovvgtakoi rexvirat, XX. 4. 4. The
artists of Dionysus, a term applied
to actors, because of the connection
of the drama with the festival of
Dionysus,

Avovygos, xx. 4. 2. Dionysus, the
Greek god of wine, also called
Bacchus; identified by the Romans
with Liber.

AvoretOns, xvii. 4. 5.
Menander.


Cf. L. Accius.


The father of


“Eyxecpisia, Praet. 7.

'Eóeouárov, epi, see M. Terentius
Varro, Saturae Menippeae.

"Exrop, xiii. 25. 16. See Hector.

"EAucov, Praef. te

'EAA&vtxos : AiyvmTL.aká, i. 2. lO. See
Hellanicus.

"EAAxy, i. 18. 2.

JEpvuavOos, ix, 9, 19.

"Epos, xvii. 20. 3; xix. 9. 6. Eros,
the Greek god of love, identified by
the Romans with Cupido, Cupid.


^


(—————————


INDEX OF GREEK NAMES


*Ernotar, ii. 22. 30. 31. See also
Etesiae.

Evdeidys, i. 20. 9.

Evpyparta, Praef. 6.

Evpuriéys, Xv. 20. 10. See Euripides.


*ExexAzjs, v. 9. 5.


Zevs, li. 23. 9; ix. 9. 12; xiii, 25. 7, 16.
Zeus, the Greek god corresponding
to the Roman Juppiter.

Zébvpos,ii, 22. 12. Zephyrus, Zephyr,
the name of a wind.

Záveov, xix. 1.14. See Zeno.


*"H6uc$, see Diogenes Stoicus.

*Huadia, xiv. 6. 4. Emathia, an early
name of Macedonia,

"Hóaucros, xix. 9. 6. Hephaestus, the
Greek god of fire, identified by the
Romans with Volcanus, Vulcan.


@copodopragovear mpórepat, see Aris-
tophanes.
Oéris, xii. 1. 20.


"Iamvyia, ii. 22. 21. Iapygia,the early
name of Calabria, in south-eastern
Italy.

*IAcó6ev, i. 2. 8.

'Ivó, see Euripides.

*"Immokíov, see M. Terentius Varro,
Saturae Menippeae.

*Ip:s, xiii. 25. 21.

‘Iotopia Mavrodary, Praef. 8.

'Ir«Aéa, vi. 8.5. See Italia.


Katcop, i. 2. 12.

Kypia, Praef. 6.

Km$uiess, xvii. 4. 5, Of Cephisia
(q.v.), the birthplace of Menander.

Kikxwves, i. 2. 8.

KAeáv6rs, i. 2. 10.

KAecapígra, ix. 9. 5.

Kopív6tos, ii. 18. 9. See Corinthius.

Kópuw6os, i. 8. 4. See Corinthus.

Kpdarns, xiv. 6. 3. See Crates.

KpwBvay, ii. 23. 9 (bis).

Kpoicos, V. 9. 4. See Croesus.

Kipos, xiv. 3.3. See Cyrus.


AaxeSauudvior, i. 11.5. See Lacedae-
monii.

Ada, li. 23. 12.

Acimaves, Praef. 6.

AéaBtos, sc. oivos, xiii. 5. 9.


Ante, ix. 9. 12, 15 (bis).

A«fBvkós, ix. 9. 7.

Aowu.Gv, epi, see Democritus.

Avatos, xix. 9. 6. Lyaeus, an epithet
of Bacchus as the dispeller of care.

Adxvot, Praef. 7.


MeAcképrys, xiii. 27. 1. See Melicertes.

Mryjuns, epi, vi. 6. 3 (see note), a
work of Aristotle.

Moóica, xviii. 9. 5, 9. Movdoa, Praef.
21; xviii. 9.9. See Musa.


Nypeides, xiii, 23. 3.
Nypevs, xiii. 27. 1.


Reviadns, ii. 18. 9, 10.


*Odvocea, see Livius Andronicus.
“OAkades, see Aristophanes.
*OAvmTos, ii. 23. 9.

"Opnmpos, xv. 6.1. See Homerus.
"Ovetpos, xiii. 25. 21.


II&ykaprov, Praef. 8.

Ilatóeta. Kvpov, see Xenophon.

Mavdéxrar, Praef. 7; xiii. 9. 3.

Iavrodary '1oTopía, Praet. 8.

Wapaéipides, Praef. 7.

Tldpepya, Praef. 8.

TIézAos, Praef. 6.

IIgAevs, xii. 1. 20.

IIAárov, iii. 17. 6. See Plato.

HAetá8es, iii. 10.2; xiii, 9.6; xix. 9. 6.

IloAtopkmTás, xv. 31. 1. Taker of
Oities, an epithet of Demetrius
Poliorcetes.

TloAumpaymoavvys, Ilepó, see Plutar-
chus


Ilogeidáov, xiii, 27. 3.

Iloceióvtov, also IIoccióovía, xiv. 6.
4. Posidonia, the Greek name of
Paestum.

IIpayjrucé, Praef. 8. é

IIpoBayjuata, Praef. 7; see also Aris-
totle.

IIv6ayópas, iv. ll. 2, 5. See Pytha-
goras.

IIv6c-yopetot, vii. 2. 12. See Pytha-
gorei. :

Tivéayopigouca, see Alexis.

Iv@ayoprxot, iv. 11. 12. Followers 0
Pythagoras (q.v.). ;

IIvppcvetou Tpózot, see Favorinus.


489


INDEX OF GREEK NAMES


Ilvpóópos Tpoundevs, 'O, see Aeschy-
lus.


*Póyux, vi. 8. 5.


Serpyves, xv. 20. 8. The Sirens, as
sweet singers.

BerotxIuv, ii, 28. 1.

X(AAos, see Tíuov.

Xktouaxía, see M. Terentius Varro,
Saturae Menippeae.

Xxk0a., xvi. 3.8. See Scythae.

Xrpwparets, Praet. 7.

Swxpamys, x. 22. 4, 10, 17. See
Socrates.


Tapavrivos, x. 12. 10.

TzAépaxos, xiii xiii. 25. 20.

Tniyeros, ix. 9. 12.

Tiwoxparys, xv. 28. 6.
thenes.

Tiwwr, iii, 17. 4, 6; XiAXos, iii. 17. 4.


See Demos-


Téírvpos, ix. 9. 7 (bis).
Toro, = oe
Tpodys, Mepi, see Hippocrates.


"Y a8es, xiii. 9. 4.

"Yaxcv8os, vi. 8. 5. i

"Yüpokóov, see M. Terentius Varro,
Saturae Menippeae.


DOwrides, see 2 gap gi

Pidummos, ii. 27. 1; ix. 3. 6. See
Philippus (II).

Mr mou xix. 2. 5. Philoxenos, a
dithyrambic Greek poet of Oythera,
born 435 B.C.


XeiXov, i. 3. 31.
Xpyovrmos,i.2.10. See Chrysippus.


'Oporro?, 7 Sixy wept, iii. 13. 5. See
Callistratus.


? Wachsmuth, O., Corpusculum Poesis Epicae Graecae Ludibundae, Leipzig,


1885. See also note 43, p. 456.


490


INDEX OF


Actors: character of, xx. 4; pay of,
xi. 10. 6; an actor's realism, vi. 5.

adulescens and iuvenis in Gellius,
vol. i. p. xiii.

alcyones, see Halcyon days.

Anecdotes and Stories : Androcles and
the lion, v. 14; Arion and the dol-
phin, xvi. 19; boy's ready wit, a,
i. 23; dolphin in love, a, vi. 8;
cf. xvi. 19. 16; horse of Seius, the,
iii. 9; maids of Miletus, the, xv.
10; marvellous tales, ix. 4; x. 12;
monstrous serpent, a, vii. 3; re-
conciliations of famous men, xii. 8.
See also History.

Apex, of the strokes which make up
letters, xiii. 31. 10 (see note); xvii.
9. 12.

Art, works of: painting of Talysus,
xv. 31.3; statue of Horatius Cocles,
iv. 5. 1; of Valerius Corvinus, ix.
11. 10; tomb of Mausolus, x. 18.

Artists:  Praxiteles, xiii, 17. 33
Protogenes, xv. 31. 3, 4.

Astrologers: attacked by Favorinus,
xiv. 1; called Ohaldaei or geneth-
liaci, xiv. 1. 1; in popular parlance,
mathematici, i. 9. 6; climacteric,
the (cAcmaxryp), iii. 10. 9, cf. xv. Ne
2. See also Astronomy.

Astronomy: aequinox, bruma, sol-
stitium, iii. 10. 4—constellations :
Bowrys, ii. 21. 3; xix. 9. 6; septen-
triones (duata), ii. 21. 3, 4, 9; S.


SUBJECTS!


maiores and minores, iii. 10. 2;
septentrio maior and minor, ii. 21.


3; suculae (vá8es), xiii. 9. 4;
taurus, xiii, 9. 4, 6;  vergiliae
(mAetádes), iii. 10. 2; xiii. 9. 6—


the moon: eclipse of, ii. 28. 4 ff.;
hebdomades of,? xv. 2. 3; influence
of, real and fancied, xiv. 1. 3; xx.
8: orbit of, i. 20. 6; iii. 10. 6—
planets, iii. 10. 2; xiv. 1. 11f.—
the sun: as measure of day, iii.
2. 4ff.; eclipse of, ii. 28. 4 ff.;
place of rising and setting, ii. 22. 5 ff.

Athletes: v. 9. 6; xiii 28. 3f.;
Buripides as an athlete, xv. 20. 2 f.;
pancratistae, xiii, 28. 3; strange
death of Milo, xv. 16.


classicus scriptor, xix. 8. 15.

Colours, Greek and Latin names of,
ii. 26.

Communication, secret, xvii. 9 (cypher
writing, 1-5 ; exvráAw, 6-15 ; other
devices, 16 ff.).


Day, the civil, iii. 2 (reckoning of
birthday). See also Kalendae,
Idus, Nonae (Index of Names).

Decrees of the senate: method of
passing, iii. 18. 1ff.; xiv. 7. 9,
12 ff.; proper place and time for,
xiv. 7. 1 ff.; quotation of, iv. 6. 2;
xw. Ld.

Divination, remarkable instance of,


1 This Index is not complete, but merely cites some of the many topics


treated by Gellius.


example Etymology and Lexicography.


The categories necessarily overlap to some extent; for


In such cases references are put under


one of two or more such heads and, with a few exceptions, are not repeated.
As a rule, references are given only to places where information is given in the


text or in notes.


2 These seem to have been the first days of the four seven-day phases of the
moon; new moon, first quarter, full moon and last quarter.


491


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


xv.18. See also auspices (Religious
antiquities) and Soothsayers.
divinatio, see Oratory.

Dress, see Private Life.

Edicts: of Augustus or Tiberius, ii.
24. 15; of censors, xv. 11. 2; of
consuls, iii, 18. 7; xiii. 15. 1; of
curule aediles, iv. 2. 1; of praetors,
x. 15. 315 x.24.3; xx. 1.18.


Enigma (scirpus), an, xii. 6.

Ethics, see Philosophy.

Etiquette: deference to age, ii. 15. 1,
2; d. to fathers of children, ii. 15.
3 ff.; d. between father and son,
ii. 2; d. to a friend of superior
rank, xii. 4; d. to an official, vii.
9. 5; precedence in duties, v. 13;
at dinner parties, xiii. 11. 2 ff.

Euphony (eb$ovía), i. 7. 19 f.; xiii. 21.
1ff.; xvii. 2. 10; insensibility to,
i. 7. 20; xiii. 21. 7f.; xvii. 2. 10;
should not blind one to defects, xi.
13. 5, 10.


Fable, ii. 29. 3 ff.; value of, ii, 29.
d


Festivals: Greek: Dionysia, viii. 11;
Eleusinian games, xv. 20. 3; E.
mysteries, xi. 6. 5; Olympic games,
iii. 15.3; xv.20.3; Thesean games,
xv. 20. 3—Roman: feriae deni-
cales, xvi. 4. 4; f. Latinae, xiv. 8.
1; f. praecidaneae, iv. 6. 9 f.; ludi
Cereales, xviii, 2. 11; 1. Megalenses,
ii. 24. 2; xviii. 2. 11; 1. plebei, ii,
24. 3; l. Romani, ii. 24. 3; quin-
quatrus, ii. 21. 7; sacra Com-
pitalia, x. 24. 3; Saturnalia, ii, 24.
3; amusements at, xviii, 2; 13.
111.; Saturnalicia ludicra, xviii, 2. I,

Fires prevented by alum, xv. 1. 6 ff,

Food and drink: acorns the earliest
food, v. 6. 12; children, proper diet
of, iv. 19; delicacies, places famous
for, vi. 16; wine: called Liberi
bellaria, xii 11. 7; forbidden to
women, x. 23. 1 ff.; Lesbian and
Rhodian, xiii. 5. 5 ff.; Plato on,
xv. 2; Romulus on, xi. 14; some
varieties of, x. 23. 2; xiii. 31. 14 ff,
See also Philosophy.


le


Grammar: “ natural" origin of lan-
guage, x. 4; analogy (avadoyia)


492


and anomaly (avwuadéa), ii. 25;
xv. 9. 4—grammatical terms:
casus nominandi, xx. 6. 2; c.
rectus, xiii. 26. 4; c. genetivus,
iv. 16. 3; c. patrius, ix. 14. 18;
c. interrogandi, xiii. 26. 4; c.
dandi, ix. 14. 21; c. dativus, iv.
16. 3, 5; —defectio, v. 8. 3—
numerus singularis, multitudinis,
plurativüs (zAw6vvrukós), singu-
lus (évxós), xix. 8. L, 3, 4, 5—
verba communia, xv. 13; v.
patiendi and agendi, xviii. 19.
10; verbum  indefinitum (à-
mapeudator), i. 7. 6.

Gender: acina for acinum, vi. 20.
6; aer, f. xiii, 21. 14; cor, m.
(2), vi. 2. 3f.; cupressus, m.,
xii. 21. 13; frons, m., xv. 9. 3,
8; funis, f., xiii. 21.21; mundus,
n., iv. 1. $; ovis, m., xi. 1. 4;
incestus and tributus for inces-
tum and tributum, xiii. 21. 19.

Number: liberi of one son or
daughter, ii. 13; plural for eleg-
ance, xvii. 2. 22 f.; nouns used
only in sing. or in plur., xix. 8.

Voice: passive form with active
Pw: Evil. 32. 10; Ui. 95.
7 ff.

Accent: Greek and Latin names for,
xiii. 6. 1; 26. 3; summus tonus
(rpozo3(a acuta), xiii. 36. 3;
acute, vi. 2. 11; 7 (passim);
xiii 26. 3; xvii. 3. 5; circumflex,
iv. 7. 2, 4; grave, xiii. 96. 1;
of affatim, etc., vi. 7; of certain
Punic names, iv. 7—quantity:
before-ns and -nf,ii. 17; before
“800, "vil, X5. 3t compensatory
lengthening, ii. 17. 9; in com-
pounds of iacio, iv. 17; in in-
tensive verbs, ix. 6; in the prefix
pro-, ii 17. 5ff.;  cdligatus,
conexus, cópertus, ii. 17. 7, 8.

Sounds: vowels: weakening of, iv.
17. 8; xv. 15. 4; order of in
diphthongs, xix. 14. 5 ff.; ov for
Greek v, ei for Latin i, xix. 14. 8
—semi-vowels: u and i as, xix.
14. 6—consonants: h misplaced,
ii. 3; n adulterinum, xix. 14, 7.

Forms: gen. sing. of decl. I in as,
xviii. 6. 4; in -ai (dat. in -ae),
xiii. 26. 4—gen. sing. of decl. IT


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


in -i (nom. pl. in -ei), xiii. 26. 4;
voc. in -i; xiii. 26. 1ff.; abl.
sing. in -u, xiii, 21. 15 ff.'—lacte
as nom. sing., xix. 8. 13; acc.
sing. of decl. III in -im, acc.
plur. in -is, xiii. 21. 6 ff.—
locative in -i, x. 24. 8 ff. ; —gen.
sing. of decl. IV in -uis, dat. in
-u, iv. 16. 1ff.; impete for im-
petu, xix. 7. 8;—gen. sing. of
decl. V. in -es, -e, and -ii, dat.
sing. in -e, -ii (?), ix. 14. 1 ff. and
21 ff.—mei and mehei, xiii. 26.
4; vestrum or vestri, xx. 6—
plura and  pluria (compluria,
compluriens), v. 21—nox, viii. 1
(explained as = noctu; really a
gen. in -S); quartum or quarto,
x. 1. 3 ff.; raro and rarenter, ii.
25.8; sextum, x. 1. 10; susque
deque, xvi. 9—cenatus sum from
ceno, etc., ii. 25. 7; passum from
pando, xv. 15; reduplicated per-
fects, vi. 9; fut. infin. act. with-
out esse, i. 7—au, xv. 3; in for
intra, xii. 183. 7, 8—mne...
quoque for ne... quidem,
xvii. 2. 18.

£tymology : words truly or falsely
attributed to a Greek origin, xvi.
12—suffives: -aria, ii. 20; -ax,
iij. 12; -bundus, xi. 15; -lentus,
xi. 15. 6; -mentum, vii. 12;
-osus, iv. 9. 2, 12; iii. 12; -ito,
etc. ix. 6; -sco, vii. 15; xvii.
2.5; -tim, xii, 15—prefixes : de-,
vii. 16 f.. 3 f£. ; per-, ix. 9. 15 f. ; re-,
ii. 19; ve-, v. 12. 8 ff.—aedituus
and aeditumus, xii. 10; alucinari,
xvi. 12. 3; autumo, xv. 3. 4 ff.;
avarus, x. 5; caerimonia, iv. 9. 8;
eurulis, iii. 18. 4; errare, xvi.
12.2; elucum, xvi. 12. 3; cf.iv.
19; faenus, xvi. 12. 7 ff. ; " faener-
ator, xvi. 12. 5ff.; fascinum
(faseinare), xvi. 12. 4: favisae, ii
10. 3£.; festinare, xvi. 14. 3, 5;
figura, xiii. 30. 2; frater, xiii, 10.


Lexicography :


4; fur, i. 18. 4; indutiae, i. 25.
12 ff.; Italia, xi. 1. 1; lepus, i.
18.2; lictor, xii. 3; locuples, x
5.2; nolo, vi. 11. 8; paelex, iv.
3.3; paenitet, xvii. 1l. 9; parcus,
iii. 19. 2 ff.; pumiliones (vavor),
xix. 13. 3 ff. ; quiesco, vii. 15. 6;
religiosus, iv. 9. 2 ff.; sacellum,
vii. 12.5; saltem, xii. 14; sculna,
xx. ll. 1f.; secta and sectis,
xviii. 9. 8; septentriones, ii. 21.
6 ff.; sequester (sequestro), xx.
11.2f.; soror, xiii. 10. 3; testa-
mentum, vii. 12. 1 ff.; vagire,
xvi. 17. 2; vestibulum, xvi. 5.
8ff. See also Lexicography.
Syntaz and Style: active verbs with
a passive meaning, xviii. 12. 1 ff. ;
passive forms for active, xviii. 12.
10; ii. 25. 9 (active for passive);
cf. adj. used both actively and
passively, ix. 12; a Marco
tabellarius, vi. 11. 6; atque, x.
29; Augustus, style of, x. 24. 2;
careo with gen., xix. 7. 7; cum
partim hominum, x. 13; exigor
pecuniam, xv. 14; est, etc.
omitted, v. 8. 7; iniuria mihi
factum itur, x. 14; lituo parvaque
succinctus trabea, v. 8; medium,
relinquere in, xvii. 2. 11; mille
with gen., i. 16; miseror, etc.
with gen., xx. 6. 7; mortales
multi for homines m., xiii. 29;
Nigidius, obscure style of, xix. 14.
3; novissimus and novissime
avoided, x. 21; nomen mihi est,
etc., xv. 29; opus est divitias,
xvii. 2. 15; use of rare words
deprecated, i. 10; tense of sub-
ruptum erit, etc., xvii. 7; vereri
used impersonally, xv. 13. 9;
with dignor, etc. as a ‘‘ common "'
verb, xv. 13. 10. See also
Euphony.
archaic words: *
androgyni, ix. 4. 16; apluda, xi.
7. 5; bellaria, xiii. 11. 7; blater-


1 So Gellius; such forms are really of decl. IV.

2 This and the following lists are not complete, and they do not always
indicate the translator’s opinion; they are limited for the most part to instances
in which the word or phrase is characterized in the text as archaic (early), rustic,
etc., and in some cases only a few specimens are given.


493


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


ones, linguaces and locutuleii, Lh
15. 20; bovinator, xi. 7. 9;
flocces, xi. 7. 6; ; incestus, xiii. 21.
19; insectio, xviii xviii. 9. 11; in, cis, uls
for intra, etc., = 13. 7: ne’...
quoque, xvii. 2. 18; roborarium,
ji. 20. 5; scirpi, xii. 6. 1; stri-
biligo, v. 20. 1; temetum, x. 23.
1; tributus, xiii. 21. 19—bor-
rowed words: eupsones, viii. 13;
lancea, xv. 30. 7; lepus, i. 18. 2;
Nero, xiii. 23. 8; paelex, iv. 3. 3;
petorritum, xv. 30. 3 f£. ; puteus,
i. 18. 2—Greek words trans-
literated: aenigma, xii. 6. 1;
androgyni, ix. 4L 16; apirocali,
xviii. 8. 1l; apodicticus, apodixis,
xvii. 5. 3, '5; apologus, ii. 29. L,
ds argyranche (synanche), xi. 9.
1; ischia and ischiaci, iv. 13. L,
1; orthium, xvi. 19. 14; pyra-
mides, i. 20. 3; soloecum (soloe-
cismus?), v. 20. 6—words used
in both a good and a bad sense
(including honor), xii. 9—com-
mon words used with less usual
meanings: adfectus, iii. 16. 17 ff. ;
ambulare (of ships) x. 26. 8;
arduus, iv. 15. 2ff.; augeo as
passive, xviii. 12. 7; defendo,
Er 12. 29 deprecor, vii. 16;
eques for equus, xviii. 5. 4 ff.;
gradior, x. 26. 9; levitas and
nequitia, vi. 11; manifestarius,
i. 7. 3; obesus, xix. 7. 3—rustic
or vulgar words: cf. xiii. 6. 3;
apluda, xi. 7. 5; copiari (sermo
castrensis), xvii. 2. 9; sculna,
xx. 11; sermonari, xvii. 2. 17;
triones; ii. 21. 8—compounds:
dulciorelocus, xix. 7. 14; multi-
iugus, multicolorus, multiformius,
xi. 16. 4; xix. 14. 1; nocticolor
and pudoricolor, xix. 7. 6; sub-
ductisupercilicarptores, xix. 7.
16; tardigenuclus, xix. 7. 3; tri-
saeclisenex, xix. 7. 13—rare
words: in Q. Claudius Quadri-
garius, Tu. 2; in Furius Antias,


num prandium, xiii. 3l. 12;
civitas (senatus, decuriae, tribus),
xviii. 7. 5; cognobilior, xx. 5.
13; contio, xviii. 7. 2 ff.; cras-

sator, Sk eS dimidius and
dimidiatus, i iii. 14; edepol (meher-
cle, mecastor), jal. ei 4; 6$;
elegans, xi. 2; equitare, xviii. 5.
S£. ; exempla, vii. 14.4; festinare
and properare, xvi. 14; flagitia
and vitia, i. 17. 6; honor, xii. 9.
3ff.; humanitas, xiii. 17; incon-
tinentes So intemperantes
(axóAac o0, xix. 2. 2; inlaudatus,
ii. 6. 3, 9 ff. ; inlatabile (&mAaTés),
i. 20. 9; inparilitas, word. 1;
inpolitia, iv. 12. 2; intentio
(émírasis), vi. 7. 5; litterator
and litteratus, xviii. 9. 2; locuples,
x. 5. 2; longaevus, ii. 16. 8 ff.;
manubiae and praeda, xiii. 25;
matrona and materfamilias, xviii.
6. 4ff.; mature (inmaturus), x.
11. 4; mellaria (ueAto 0 Gves), ii.
20. 9; mendacium dicere and
mentiri, xi. 11; obnoxius, vi. 17;
passis manibus (velis) xv. 15;
persona, v. 7; porcetra and
Scrofa, xviii. 6. 4; praeter prop-
ter, xix. 10. 5 ff.; 'profligo, xv. a
purum putum, vii. 5.1 11.5 pyra-
mides, i. 20. 3; quadrantalia
(x$So)), i. 20. 3; recentatur, xv.
e 1; rescire, ii. 19; roboraria,
ii. 20. 5; sacellum, vii. 12. 5;
Hp xii. 6. 1; sculna, xx. ll:
sermonari and sermocinari, xvii.
2. 17; sera eruditio (oWipabia),
xi. 7.3; cf. xv. 30. 1; sicinnistae,
sicinnium, xx. 3; Siticines, XX.
2; soloecum (aóAotkov), v. 20.
6; spadix, iii. 9. 9; spartum
(orapta), xvii. 3; superesse, i. 22;
templum, xiv. ". T3 testabilis
(Gntestabilis)) vii. 7. 3; trans-
fretare (transfretatio), x. 26;
trusatiles molae, iii. 3. 14; urtica
(&xaAXÓm), iv. 11. 13; vitium
and morbus, iv. 2.


xviii. 11. 3; in D. Laberius, xvi.
7; in Laevius, xix. 7; in On
Matius, xv. 25; xx. 9—words
defined :? bidentes, xvi. 6; cani-


Greek: difficulty of rendering into
Latin, xi. 16; scalae, x. 15. 29;
scimpodium, xix. e transla
tions from, and comparisons of,


1 Sometimes the derivation is given. A few phrases are included.


494


ee ee ee ee eee ee ee eee


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Greek and Latin writers, see Literary


History.


Haleyon days, iii. 10. 5.

Fromm see Prosody and versifica-
ion.

History and biegraphy : chronological
survey of Greek and Roman history,
xvi. 21—Roman: Aemilius Le-
pidus, his reconciliation with
Fulvius Flaccus, xii. 8. 5ff.;
Oaedicius, heroism of, iii. 7; Caesar
tries to silence Cato, iv. 10. 8;
Sieinius Dentatus, his glorious
career, ii. 11; Fabricius and the
Samnites, i. 14; and Pyrrhus, iii.
8; and Rufinus, iv. 8; Manlius
Torquatus, ix. 13; Regulus, vii. 4;
Rome and Carthage as rivals, x.
27; Scipio Africanus, his self-con-
fidence, iv. 18; marvellous tales
about, vi. 1; his appeal to the
tribunes, vi. 19. 2 ff.; his continence
affirmed and questioned, vii. 8; his
reconciliation with the father of the
Gracchi, xii, 8. 1 ff—Greek: Alex-
ander and Bucephalas, v. 2; Croesus
and his son, v. 9; Leonidas, honours
paid to, iii. 7. 19—Alyattes, king
of Lydia, i. 11. 7; Hannibal and
Antiochus, v. 5; Mithridates as a
linguist, xvii. 17. 2—History of
Literature: Greek: Homer, birth-
place of, iii. 11. 6 ff.; Homer and
Hesiod, dates of, iii, 11. 1ff.;
Huripides, life of, xv. 20; prizes

. taken by, xvii. 4. 3; Hellanicus,
Herodotus and Thucydides, dates
of, xv. 28; Menander, number of
his plays, xvii. 4. 4 f.; of his prizes,
xvii. 4. 6; often defeated by
Philemon, xvii 4. 1 f.—Roman:
Albinus rebuked by Cato, xi. 8;
Ennius describes himself, xii. 4;
his three languages, xvii. 17. 1;
Laberius and Publilius Syrus,
Caesar's estimate of, xvii. 14. 2;
Naevius, Pacuvius and Plautus,
epitaphs of, i. 24; Naevius writes
plays in prison, iii. 3. 15; Nigidius
and Varro, date of, xix. 14. 1;
Pacuvius and Accius meet, xiii. 2;
Plautus, early life of, iii. 3. 14;
works of, iii. 3. 1ff See also
Literary  Criticism—History of


Philosophy: Aristotle and Alex-
ander, xx. 5; Aristotle chooses his
successor, xiii, 5; Aristotle and
Plato buy books at high prices, iii.
17; Plato and Xenophon, alleged
rivalry of, xiv. 3; Protagoras, how
he became a philosopher, v. 3;
Pythagoras, previous incarnations
of, iv. 11. 14. See also Philosophy.


Law: aedile, improper conduct of an,
iv. 14; adoption, methods of, v.
19; Areopagus, a difficult case
referred to the, xii. 7; betrothal,
law of, iv. 4; chattels, return of,
iv. 2. 6 ff.; clients, obligations to,
v. 13. 4 ff.; divorce and dowry, iv.
3; fines, xi. 1. 2ff.; guardians,
obligations of, v. 13. 4 f.; injuries,
penalties for, xx. 1. 31 ff.; judge,
duties of, xiv. 2; lex, privilegium
and plebiscitum defined, x. 20;
cf. xv. 27. 4; punishment, various
reasons for, vii. 14; retaliation, xx.
1. 141f.; slaves, sale of, vi. 4;
Solon, examination of a law of, ii.
12; sumptuary laws, ii. 24; xx. 1.
23; theft, definitions and penalties,
wis 155 «x18. 95 0 ffo; ox.) de ies
methods of detecting, xi. 18. 9;
among soldiers, xvi. 4. 2; allowed
jn Egypt and Sparta, xi. 18. 16 f.;
a discussion of the Twelve Tables,
xx. 1; wills, xv. 27. 3; women,
returnable if barren, iv. 2. 9 ff.;
may not be adopted, v. 19. 10;
must be abstemious, x. 23. 1 ff.;
judged by husband, x. 23. 4f.; a
woman fined for unseemly language,
x16;

Laws: Aebutian, xvi. 10. 8; Aemi-
lian, ii. 24. 12; Antian, ii, 24. 13;
Atinian, xvii. 7. 1 (Atinian plebi-
scitum, xiv. 8. 2); Aufeian, xi. 10.
1; Fannian, ii. 24. 8, 5, 7; xx. l.
23; Licinian sumptuary, ii. 24.
box Y Bere soe. 295m (OL
Licinius Stolo), vi. 3. 37; Porcian
and Sempronian, x. 3.13; Voconian,
Nie t9 os xa. 029 Ls) ok) he 29.
See also Decrees and Edicts.

Legal terms: actio in quadruplum,

xi. 18. 10; actiones (cautiones) rei

uxoriae, iv. 3. 1; adsiduus, xvi.

10. 5, 8, 15; agere ex sponsu, iv.


495


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


4. 2; capite censi, xvi. 10. 10 ff.;
chirographi exhibitio, xiv. 2. 7;
corona, sub, vi. 4. 3 1.5 dies
iusti, xx. 1. 43; dies status cum
hoste, xvi. 4. 4; ercto non cito, i.
9. 12; expensi latio, xiv. 2. 7; ex
jure manum consertum, xx. 10;
furtum manifestum, conceptum,
oblatum, xi. 18. 11; intercessio
testium, xiv. 2. 7; iudicia privata,
xiv. 2. 1; iustiüàum, xx. 1. 43;
lanx liciumque, xi. 18. 9; libripens,
xv. 13. 11; obsignatio tabularum,
xiv. 2. 7; postliminium, vi. 18. 7 f.;
proletarii, xvi. 10. 10; recepticius
Servus (recipere), xvii. 6; recu-
peratores, xx. l. 13; redhibitio, iv.
2.-7 #%.; retare flumen, xi. 17;
sanates, vades, subvades, taliones,
xvi. 10. 8; usucapio and pignoris-
capio, vi. 10; vadimonium stitisse,
ii. 14; vindicia, xx. 10. 7.
Libraries: Alexandria, vii. 17. 3;
Athens, vii. 17. 1f.; Patrae, xviii.
9.55 “Libary ix. 14. 8; xix. 5b. 4;
Rome: domus Tiberiana, xiii. 20.
1; templum Pacis, v. 21. 9; xvi.
8. 2; templum Traiani, xi. 17. 1.
Literary criticism ; general: affected
antiquarianism, i. 10; xi 7;
annals and history compared, v.
18; canon of Vulcacius, the, xv.
24; Lucilius on omovoréAcuTa, etc.,
xviii. 8; rivalry (ayév), xi. 4; self-
styled interpreters of Ennius, xviii.
5.2f.; of Sallust, xviii. 4. 1f.; of
Varro, xiii. 31. 1;—Greek : Buri-
pides, a verse of Sophocles attributed
to by Plato, xiii. 19. 1 f.; imitates
Sophocles and Aeschylus, xiii. 19.
3 ff.; Plato and Lysias, style of,
ii. 5; Plato, youthful verses of Q»
xix. 1l. 2—Roman: Catullus,
elegance of, vi. 20. 6; Cicero errs
in citing Homer, xv. 6; Cicero
defended, xvii. 1; epigrams, some
early, xix. 9. 10 ff; Gracchus,
criticized by Castricius, xi. 13;
Laberius, verses on Democritus,
X.17.2 ff. ; ; Piso'sstyle commended,
vii. 9. 1; Sallust, defence of a
passage of, xviii. 4. 315; Seneca
on Ennius 'and Cicero, xii. 2. 2 »; es
varying estimates of Seneca's style
and value, xii, 2. 1, 12 ff. ; Varro on a


496


Logic and  Dialecties :


Military antiquities :


line of Homer, xvii. 3 ; Virgil, defence
of a passage of, ii. 16; criticized by
Cornutus, ix. 10; deletes a refer-
ence to Nola, vi. 20. 1 ff.—Greek
and Roman writers compared:
Caecilius and Menander, ii. 23;
Cato and Musonius, xvi. 1; Euri-
pides and Ennius, xi. 4;
translated by Gellius, viii. 8; xvii.
20; Virgil, Homer, and Parthenius,
zd 27. £4.; Virgil and Pindar,
xvii. 10; Virgil, Homer and Theo-
critus, ix. 9. See also History of
Literature, Oratory, and Text
Criticism.

ambiguous
words, Chrysippus and Diodorus
on, xi. 12; avriorpedov, v. 10; 11;
Pliny the elder deceived by, ix. 16;
elements of Logic distasteful, xvi.
8.16; danger of over-attention to,
xvi. 8. 17; enthymema (év@vuyua),
i.4.2; vi. 8. 27; xii. 2. 14; xvii.
20. 4; Qv8vumuár.a), vii. 13. 4;
Epicurus criticized by Plutarch, ii
8; 9; rules of debate, xvi. 2;
syllogism defined by Aristotle, xv =
26. See also Philosophy, Rhetoric,
Sophists, and Sophism.


Metric and versification: hexameter,


structure of, xviii. 15; hiatus, vi.
20. 2 ff.; isopsephic verses, xiv. 6.
4; numeri innumeri of Plautus, i.
24. 3; quadrati versus, ii. 29. 20;

iv. 7. 4; senarii, iv. 4. 6; xviii. 15;

verses with an additional syllable
in each successive word, xiv. 6. 4,

aes militare,
vi. 10.2; arms and weapons, x. 25.
2 i; aurum coronarium, v. 6. 6;
battle, methods of entering, i. 14,
1ff.; i. 11. 9; classes procinctae,
i. TF. Soak x. 15.4 4; formations,
x. 9.1; infrequens miles, xvi. 4. 5;
legion, number of centuries and
cohorts in, xvi. 4. 6; oath of
Soldiers, xvi. 4. 2, 4; ovation, v.
6. 21; praeda and manubiae, xiii,
25; "prizes and crowns, v. 6;
punishments, 3*8; testamentum
in procinctu, xv. 27. 3; triumphus
Martius and Venerius, ws 6; 925

truces, i. 20; war, method of de-
claring, xvi, 4.


Plato _


dl tee cep (eati gm mti, memi


p --——————


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Medical matters: antidotes of Mithri-
dates, xvii. 16. 21f.; arteries and
veins, xviii. 10. 5ff.; blood and
colour, effect of shame and fear
on the, xix. 6; change of sex, ix.
4. 15; childbirth : development of
the embryo, iii. 10. 7 ff.; number
of children at a birth, x. 2; period
of gestation, iii. 16;  presiding
deities, xvi. 16. 4; in animals, xiii.
7 (lioness), xvii. 10. 2f. (bear);
dumbness cured, v. 9. 1, 5; helle-
bore, varieties and effect of, xvii.
15; hunger, how endured, xvi. 3;
joy sometimes fatal, iii. 15; lungs,
function of, xvii. 11; medici musici,
iii. 10. 13 (see also Music); morbus
comitialis, xvii. 15. 6; xix. 2. 8;
morbus sonticus, xvi. 4. 4; xx. 1.
27; oscitatio, iv. 20. 9; senses, the,
xix, 2; snake-bite cured, iv. 13. 3;
xvi. 1l; sneezing, an effect of, iii. 16.
24; snow- and ice-water unwhole-
some, xix, 5; stomach, function of
the, xvii. 11; teeth, growth and
loss of, iii. 10. 12; urine, effect of
heat on, xix. 4. 3;  windpipe,
function of, xvii. 11; yawning, an
effect of, iii. 16. 24 (see also osci-
tatio, above).

Music: foundation of  (kavovucj),
xvi. 18. 4; effect on gout, iv. 13
1ff.; on snake-bite, iv. 13. 3;
liticines, siticines, tubicines, xx. 2;
martial music, i. 11; why Athenian
youths gave up the pipes, xv. 17.

Mythology: Aius deus, xvi. 17. 2;
Apollo identified with Vediovis, v.
12. 11f.; Cyclopes, ix. 4. 6; xv.
21; Diomedes and Glaucus, ii. 23. 7 ;
Iovem lapidem iurare, i. 21. 4;
Jupiter and Neptune, sons of, xv.
21; Niobe, children of, xx. 7. See
also Religious antiquities.


Names: Agrippa, origin of, xvi. 16.
1; cities and countries, old and
new names of, xiv. 6. 4; Nero,
origin of, xiii, 23. 8; Postumus, ii.
16. 315; Praetextatus, i. 23. 13;
repudiation of certain praenomina,
ix. 2. 11; various ways of indicat-
ing, xv. 29.

Natural history : chamaeleon, the, x.
12. 1ff.; colours known to Greeks


AULUS GELLIUS—VOL. III.


and Romans, ii. 26; corpus defined,


v. 15. 3f; dove, Archytas’
wooden, x. 12. 9ff.; hares of
Bisaltia, the, xvi. 15; lyre, a


peculiarity of the, ix. 7. 3; mirrors,
properties of, xvi. 18. 3; moon,
effects of, see Astronomy; oil,
readily congeals, xvii. 8. 8 ff.;
olive leaves turn over, ix. 7. 1f.;
palm-wood, curious property of,
iii. 6; partridges of Paphlagonia,
the, xvi. 15; pine, does not grow
from the same root when cut down,


effect of various winds on, ii. 30;
winds, names and properties of, ii.
22; vision and sight, v. 16. See
also Medical matters.


Oratory and orators: eloquence
differs from loquacity, i. 15; devices
proper for advocates, i. 6. 4; pre-
ambles (principia), purpose of, vi.
3. 13; three styles, vi. 14—Cicero
and Demosthenes, first pleas of,
xv. 28; Demosthenes overcome by
bashfulness, viii. 9; alleged bribery
of, xi. 9; ascribed to Demades, x1.
10; turns from Plato to Callistratus,
iii, 13; visits Lais, i. 8. 51f.;
Gracchus on his own economy and

- eontinence, xv. 12; Gracchus’
pitchpipe, i. 11. 10ff. See also
Literary criticism and Rhetoric.


Philosophy and Ethics: anger, should
a philosopher feel? i. 26; applause
at lectures deprecated, v.1; beauty,
normal or conjugal, v. 11. 10 ff.;
bonum, the summum, xviii. 1;
charges against others no justifica-
tion for wrongdoing, x. 19; com-
mands, should they be obeyed
literally? i. 13 ; commands of a
father, should they be obeyed? ii.
7; contentment, Uato on, xiii. 24;
Democritus puts out his eyes, x. 17;
Euclides risks his life in order to
hear Socrates, vii. 10; emotions,
on the, xix. 12. 3 ff.; endurance,
how Socrates cultivated, ii. 1. 1 ff. ;
faint praise worse than censure,


497
KK


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


xix.3; fate and free will, Chrysippus
on, vii. 2; Cicero on, xiii. 1; fear,
should a philosopher show? xix. 1.
4ff.; friendship, should one do
wrong for the sake of? i. 3; good
advice should not be put in the
mouth of an unworthy man, xviii.
3; husband, Varro on the duty of
a, i. 17. 41f.; injuries should be
guarded against, xiii. 28; insults
should not be answered in kind, vii.
11; Justice, a philosopher's picture
of, xiv. 4; mortualia applied to
philosophers, xviii. 7. 3; a mother
Should nurse her own child, xii. 1;
motives for not sinning, xii. 11;
pain, on bearing, xii. 5. 4ff.;
patience, how Socrates cultivated,
i. 17; Peregrinus rebukes inatten-
tion, viii. 3; philosophers who were
formerly slaves, ii. 18; p. as envoys
to Rome, vi. 14. 8f.; xvii. 21. 48;
p. expelied from Rome, xv. 11. 1,
3 ff; pretended philosophers re-
buked or ridiculed, i. 2; ix. 2;
x. 22; xiii. 8. b; 24. 2; xvii. 19;
philosophy, value of, xv. 19; over-
indulgence in, v. 16. 5; x. 22;
pleasure, on, ix. 5; praise of things
without honour, xvii. 12 ; providence,
on, vii. 1; Pyrronian philosophers,
xi. 5. 1 ff.; compared with Acade-
mics, xi. 5, 8; Pythagoreans, diet
of, iv. 11; training of, i. 9; taking
sides in a dispute, ii, 12; temperance
of Socrates, ii. 1. 4 f.; vices, origin
of, vii. 1. 13; the worst in the
opinion of Epictetus, xvii. 19. 5
(his motto, §6); virtue and the
happy life, see bonum summum;
visa animi (davracía:), xi. 5. 6 ff. ;
xix. 1. 15 ff.; wisdom the daughter
of experience and memory, xiii, 8,


See also Philosophical terms,
Sophisms and Sophists.
Philosophical terms: acroaticae


auditiones or lectiones (àkpoa.ruká),
xx. 5; affectus or affectiones (má09),
i, 26. 11; apodixis (dzoóeí£eus),
xvii. 5. 5; axioma (á£íop.a), xvi. 8;
a, adiunctum or conexum (ournp-
Mévov), Xvi, 8. 9; a. coniunctum
or copulatum  (cvymemAeypuévov),
xvi 8. 10;  consideratores or
quaesitores (oxemrixoi), xi. 5. 2;


498


exotericae auditiones or lectiones
(éforepuká), xx. 5; gripi (kvptesov-
Tes,  JOvXáGovres, awpeites), i.
2. 4; idiotae, i. 2. 6; indifferens
(aduddopor), ix. 5. 5; xii. 5. 4; in-
explicabile (&zopov), ix. 15. 6; in-
tolerantia (incontinentia), xvii. 19.
9; mediocritas (uezpro7ys), i. 26. 11;


opposita (avrtkeiueva), xvi. 8. 13; -


privatio (orepyots), i. 26. 11; pro-
bationes (cvyxata@éoets), xix. 1. 16;
profata,  proloquia, pronuntiata
(2étépara), xvi. 8. 2, 8; Protagorian
avtiorpedorv, v. 10; 11. 1; reciproca


argumenta (avr.oTpéQovra), v. 10. -


2; syllogismus, i. 2.
Aristotle's definition, xv. 26.

Private life: betrothal, formula of,
iv. 4. 2; clients, duty to, v. 13. 2 f. ;
cf. xx. 1. 40; dinner parties, xiii.
11; divorce, iv. 3.2; xvii. 21. 44;
dress, propriety in, xi. 2. 5; xiii.
ll. 5; 22; frugality of the early
Romans and growth of luxury, ii.
24; games, number of laps at
circensian, iii, 10. 16; house:
atrium, xvi. 5.2; fauces, xvi. 5. 12;
vestibulum, xvi. 5. 2, 8ff.; v. of
the Palatium, xix. 13. 1; marriage,
xvii. 21. 44; xviii. 6. 8; Metellus
on, i. 6; mill (molae trusatiles), iii,
3. 14; penus, meaning of, iv. 1;
periods of life, x. 28; praenomina
rejected, ix. 2. 11; rings, where
worn and why, x. 10; salutatio, iv.
1.1; xx. 1. 2, 55; shaving, iii. 4;
siticines, xx. 2. 3; solarium, iii. 3.
5; women, position and conduct
of, x. 23. See also Etiquette, Law,
Philosophy and Ethics,

Proverbs and proverbial expressions :
alba linea, Praef. 11; caninum
prandium, xiii. 31. 16; gold of
Tolosa, iii. 9. 7; hidden music, xiii.
31. 3; horse of Seius, iii. 9. 6;
human life like iron, xi. 2. 6; inlotis
pedibus, i. 9. 8; (et verbis), xvii. 5.
14; inter os et offam, xiii. 18;
ov mavrós avdpos és Kópwéov tg6
9 TÀoUs, i. 8. 4.

Public life : assemblies, xv. 27; v.19.
6; auspices, xiii. 15. 4 ff; Oaeritez
tabulae, xvi. 13. 7; classis, x. 15.
1; classicus (infra classem), vi. 13;
colonia and municipium, xvi, 13;


4; n. Sats @


T


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


decuriae, xviii. 7. 5; election disease,
xvii. 15. 6; intercessio, xiii. 12. 9;
xiv. 7. 6; patricians, relation to
tribunes, xv. 27. 4; entertain at
Megalenses, xviii. 2. 11; pediarii
equites, iii. 18. 5; senatores, iii, 18.
1ff.; plebs, entertain at Cereales,
xviii. 2. 11; populum, loqui cum
(agere cum), xiii. 16; populus and
plebs, x. 20. 5; proletarii, xvi. 10;
Quirites, i. 6. 2, ete.; sella curulis,
iii. 18. 4; senate: expulsion from,
iv. 8. 7; xvii. 21. 39; method of
conducting meetings, xiv. 7; Sibyl-
line books, the, i. 19. See also
Decrees,  Edicts, and Public
officials.

Public officials: aediles cereales, xvi.
7: 12- (note); curules, iv. 2. 1;
plebei, x. 6. 3; censors, iv. 12; 20;
vi. 22; xiii, 15. 4; xv. 11.2; xvi.
13.7; xvii. 21. 44; censorium opus,
xiv. 7. 8; consuls, ii. 15. 4 ff. ; v. 4.
Seem, 19:05; 102416; 106. 1;
xiv. 7. 4 ff.; xvii. 21. 27; dictator,
xiv. 7. 4; d. Carthaginiensium, x.
24. 7; decemviri, x. 3. 17; xiii.
25.6; d.legibus scribundis, viii. 1;
Si NISI OS Save ds, OF xvii, 210 15;
xx. 1.3; interrex, xiv. 7. 4; magis-
irates, major and minor, xiii. 15;
rank of, xiv. 7. 4; rights of, xiii.
12. 6ff.; praefectus aerario, xiii,
25. 30; p. urbi, xiv. 7. 4; xiv. 8;
praetors, v. 19. 2; xiii, 18. 1ff.;
dONMom40.3 151 xivo 2t T$ 7.
4; xx. 10. 8; princeps senatus,
iv. 10. 2ff.; xiv. 7. 9; quaestor,
xiii. 12. 6; 13. 1ff.; q. Sidicinus,
x. 3. 3; tribunus aerario, vi. 10. 2;
t. militaris, xvi. 4. 2; t. m. with
consular authority, xiv. 7. 5;
xvii. 21. 19; t. plebei, iii. 2. 11;
iv. 14. 4, 6; vi. 19. 5, 7; xiii. 12.
4 ff.; xiv. 7. 4; 8. 2; xv. 27. 45

i. 21. 11; triumvir (capitalis),

xiii. 12. 6; t. rei publicae consti-

tuendae, iii, 9. 4; xiv. 7. 5—1. curi-

atus, xv. 27. 2—Greek officials:
tyrant, xvii. 21. 29 (cf. tyrannidem,

xvii. 21. 19); thirty tyrants, xvii.

91. 19—minor officials (apparitores):

lictor, ii. 2. 13; xii. 3; xiii. 12. 6;

viator, iv. 10. 8; xii, 3. 1; xiii, 12.6.

See also Religious officials,


Religious antiquities: argei, x. 15.
30; auspices, xiii. 15. 4; xvi. 4. 4;
aves obscenae, xiii, 14. 6; a.
praepetes and  inferae, vii. 6;
Ceres, sacrifice to, iv. 6. 8; dies
atri, iv. 6. 10; (nefasti) v. 17. 1;
d. inominales, v. 17. 3; d. religiosi
(nefasti) iv. 9. 5; expiatory rites
because of an earthquake, ii. 28;
cf. iv. 6. 1; because of lightning,
iv. 5; because the spears of Mars
moved, iv. 6; flamen Dialis, dress
and ceremonial of, x. 15; i. 12.
15f.; flaminia, x. 15. 7; flaminica,
x. 15. 26 ff.; Nerio of Mars, etc.,
xiii. 23; Vestal virgins, method of
choosing and privileges of, i. 12;
ef. vii. 7. 2; x. 15. 31; victims, iv.
6. 7 f. See also Religious officials
and Festivals.

Religious officials :
vii. 7. 8; augurs, i. 12. 16, 17;

3 ^vi. 6. 9f.; "xdv. 1. 34;

3 (end); auguralis virga
(lituus), v. 8. 10; fetialis, xvi. 4;
flamen Quirinalis, vii, 7. 7; ponti-
fices, i. 19. 15; v. 17.2; x. 15. 17;
pontificis sponsa, i. 12. 7; quin-
decimviri sacris faciundis, i. 12. 6;
19. 11; rex sacrificulus (sacrorum),
xw 15.21; xv. 27. 15; salius; 1. 12.
6; septemviri epulonum, i. 12. 6;
tubicen sacrorum, i. 12. 7. See
also Religious antiquities.

Rhetoric: an enthymema (éyOvunua)
of Cicero examined, i. 4; criticism
of an e. of Cicero, xvii. 5; defence
of an oration of Cato, vi. 3; of
Metellus, i. 6; a defence of Sallust,
iii. 1; Gellius lays up a store of
new and unusual words, xix. 7. 2;
rhetoric of Plato, xvii. 20. 4;
rhetoricians warned by the censors,
xv. 1l. 2; rhetorieus sophista
(rexv uós), xvii. 5. 3 ft. rhetoriscus,
xvii. 20. 4. See also Oratory,
Philosophy and Literary criticism.


Arvales fratres,


Sea, the, colour applied to by Ennius,
ii. 26. 21. See Natural history.

Seven, the number, iii. 10; s. sages,
i.3.1; s. wonders of the world, x.
18. 4.

Ships and boats, names of, x. 25. 5;
naves sutiles, xvii. 3. 4.

499


K K 2


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Soothsayers, perfidy of some Etruscan,
iv. 5; vi. 1.3. See also Divination
and Religious Antiquities.

Sophisms, examples of: i. 2. 4; v.
10; 11; vi. 3.344%; vii. 13. b fi.;
xviii. 1. 9 ff.; xviii. 2. 10.

Sophists, alluded to, vi. 3. 34; xviii.
4. 1; contrasted with philosophers,
xvii. 12. 1; v. 3, 7; ignorance of
a sophista &ma(óevros, xvii. 21. 1;
Protagoras a sophist, v. 3. 7; a
rhetorical sophist described, xvii.
5.3


Text criticism: manuscripts con-
sulted : of Cato, ii. 14. 1; x. 13.3;
of Claudius Quadrigarius, ix. 14.
1; of Catullus, vi. 20. 6; of Cicero,
i. 7. 1; i. 16. 15; of Ennius, xviii,
5. 11; of Fabius Pictor, v. 4. 1;
of Sallust, ix. 14. 26; xx. 6. 14;
: of Virgil, i. 21. 2; ix. 14. 7—amaro
or amaror, i. 21; loquentia or
eloquentia, i. 15. 18; eques or
equus, xviii. 5. 5 ff. ; urbis or urbes,
xiii 21. 11f.; turrim or turrem,
etc., xiii. 21. 6 ff,

Talent, value of in sesterces, iii, 17. 2;
Waves

Time, see Day and Astronomy.

Topography : aedes Palatinae, iv. 1.
1; ager Vaticanus, xvi. 17. 1;
area Palatina, xx. 1. 2; a, Volcani,
iv. 5. 4; atrium Vestae,i. 12. 95
bibliothecae, see Libraries; campus
Agrippae, xiv. 5. 1; «c. Martius
(Tiberinus) vii. 7. 4; xv. 27. 5;


CAL ed Ietud osea
PRiNTED IN Great BRITAIN BY Ricwarp Cray


Capitol, restoration of, ii. 10. 2;
comitium, iv. 5. 1; curia Hostilia,
Tulia and Pompeia, xiv. 7. 7; forum
Augusti, ix. 11. 10; f. Traiani, xiii.
25. 1; Ianus medius, i. 16. 5;
mons Aventinus, xiii. 14. 4; m.
Cispius, xv. 1. 2; m. Palatinus,
xiii. 14. 2; Palatium, xii. 12. 2;
xix. 13. 1; pomerium, xiii. 14;
xv. 27. 5; temple of Peace, v. 21.
9; of Vesta, xiv. 7. 7; of Victory,
X. 1. 7; theatre of Pompey, x. 1.
7H:
Translation, see Literary criticism.


"emo


Villas: of Herodes Atticus near
Athens, i. 2.1, 2; of Favorinus’ friend
at Antium, xvii. 10. 1; of Gellius (?)
at Praeneste, xi. 3.-1; of Julius
Paulus, xix. 7. 1; of Merula at
"Tusculum, ii. 20. 3.


Wood made fireproof, see Fires.

Wit and humour: Cicero laughs off
a charge of falsehood, xii. 12; Fabri-
cius on Rufinus, iv. 8. 6; Hannibal
and Antiochus, v. 5; Julianus and
the Greeks, xix. 9. 8 ff.; Olympias'
witty reply to Alexander, xiii. 4-—
word-plays: tollere and ferre, i.
17. 4; mellita quae non mellita,
Téupkagiw and méje, xiii. 11. 6;
turba and turbulenta, xiii. 11. 3.
Many of the Roman etymologies
are word-plays, such as that of
parcus in iii. 19. 2. See faenerator,
frater, lepus, etc., under Etymology.
