Lives of Illustrious Men (Gennadius) (Gennadius of Marseilles)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, 1892. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 III. Gennadius.

 List of the Authors whom Gennadius added, after the Death of the
 Blessed Jerome. [2572]

 1. James; surnamed the Wise.

 2. Julius, bishop of Rome.

 3. Paulonas the presbyter.

 4. Vitellius the African.

 5. Macrobius the presbyter.

 6. Heliodorus the presbyter.

 7. Pachomius the presbyter-monk.

 8. Theodorus, his successor.

 9. Oresiesis the monk.

 10. Macarius the monk.

 11. Evagrius the monk.

 12. Theodorus the presbyter.

 13. Prudentius.

 14. Audentius the bishop.

 15. Commodianus.

 16. Faustinus the presbyter.

 17. Rufinus the presbyter.

 18. Tichonius the African.

 19. Severus the presbyter.

 20. Antiochus the bishop.

 21. Severianus the bishop.

 22. Nicaeas the bishop.

 23. Olympius the bishop.

 24. Bachiarius.

 25. Sabbatius the bishop.

 26. Isaac.

 27. Ursinus.

 28. Another Macarius.

 29. Heliodorus the presbyter.

 30. John, bishop of Constantinople.

 31. John, another bishop.

 32. Paulus the bishop.

 33. Helvidius.

 34. Theophilus the bishop.

 35. Eusebius the bishop.

 36. Vigilantius the presbyter.

 37. Simplicianus the bishop.

 38. Vigilius the bishop.

 39. Augustine the bishop.

 40. Orosius the presbyter.

 41. Maximus the bishop.

 42. Petronius the bishop.

 43. Pelagius the heresiarch.

 44. Innocentius the bishop.

 45. Caelestius, follower of Pelagius.

 46. Julianus the bishop.

 47. Lucianus the presbyter.

 48. Avitus the presbyter.

 49. Paulinus the bishop.

 50. Eutropius the presbyter.

 51. Another Evagrius.

 52. Vigilius the deacon.

 53. Atticus the holy bishop.

 54. Nestorius the heresiarch.

 55. Caelestinus the bishop.

 56. Theodorus the bishop.

 57. Fastidius the bishop.

 58. Cyrillus the bishop.

 59. Timotheus the bishop.

 60. Leporius the presbyter.

 61. Victorinus the rhetorician.

 62. Cassianus the deacon.

 63. Philippus the presbyter.

 64. Eucherius the bishop.

 65. Vincentius the Gaul.

 66. Syagrius.

 67. Isaac the presbyter.

 68. Salvianus the presbyter.

 69. Paulinus the bishop.

 70. Hilarius the bishop.

 71. Leo the bishop.

 72. Mochimus the presbyter.

 73. Timotheus the bishop.

 74. Asclepius the bishop.

 75. Peter the presbyter.

 76. Paul the presbyter.

 77. Pastor the bishop.

 78. Victor the bishop.

 79. Voconius the bishop.

 80. Musaeus the presbyter.

 81. Vincentius the presbyter.

 82. Cyrus the monk.

 83. Samuel the presbyter.

 84. Claudianus the presbyter.

 85. Prosper.

 86. Faustus the bishop.

 87. Servus Dei the bishop.

 88. Victorius.

 89. Theodoritus the bishop.

 90. Gennadius the bishop.

 91. Theodulus the presbyter.

 92. John the presbyter.

 93. Sidonius the bishop.

 94. Gelasius the bishop.

 95. Honoratus the bishop.

 96. Cerealis the bishop.

 97. Eugenius the bishop.

 98. Pomerius the bishop.

 99. Gennadius.

 [2572] List...Jerome. This is in a few mss. only.

 Chapter I.

 James, [2573] surnamed the Wise, was bishop of Nisibis the famous city
 of the Persians and one of the confessors under Maximinus the
 persecutor. He was also one of those who, in the Nicean council, by
 their opposition overthrew the Arian perversity of the Homoousia. That
 the blessed Jerome mentions this man in his Chronicle as a man of great
 virtues and yet does not place him in his catalogue of writers, will be
 easily explained if we note that of the three or four Syrians whom he
 mentions he says that he read them translated into the Greek. From this
 it is evident that, at that period, he did not know the Syriac language
 or literature and therefore he did not know a writer who had not yet
 been translated into another language. All his writings are contained
 in twenty-six books namely On faith, Against all heresies, On charity
 towards all, On fasting, On prayer, On particular affection towards our
 neighbor, On the resurrection, On the life after death, On humility, On
 penitence, [2574] On satisfaction, On virginity, On the worth [2575] of
 the soul, On circumcision, On the blessed grapes, On the saying in
 Isaiah, "the grape cluster shall not be destroyed," That Christ is the
 son of God and consubstantial with the Father, On chastity, Against the
 Nations, On the construction of the tabernacle, On the conversation of
 the nations, On the Persian kingdom, On the persecution of the
 Christians. He composed also a Chronicle of little interest indeed to
 the Greeks, but of great reliability in that it is constructed only on
 the authority of the Divine Scriptures. It shuts the mouths of those
 who, on some daring guess, idly philosophize concerning the advent of
 Antichrist, or of our Lord. This man died in the time of Constantius
 and according to the direction of his father Constantine was buried
 within the walls of Nisibis, for the protection evidently of the city,
 and it turned out as Constantine had expected. For many years after,
 Julian having entered Nisibis and grudging either the glory of him who
 was buried there or the faith of Constantine, whose family he
 persecuted on account of this envy, ordered the remains of the saint to
 be carried out of the city, and a few months later, as a matter of
 public policy, the Emperor Jovian who succeeded Julian, gave over to
 the barbarians the city which, with the adjoining territory, is subject
 unto the Persian rule until this day.

 [2573] Became bishop before 325, died after 350.

 [2574] On penitence. A few mss. read "patience" for "penitence" but the
 only one which the translator has been able to find which gives both is
 one at Wolfenbüttel dated 1460, nor is it in the earliest editions
 (e.g.) Nürn. Koburger 1495, Paris 1512). But the later editions
 (Fabricius, Herding) have both.

 [2575] worth, mss. generally; feeling, editions generally.

 Chapter II.

 Julius, [2576] bishop of Rome, wrote to one Dionysius a single epistle
 On the incarnation of Our Lord, which at that time was regarded as
 useful against those who asserted that, as by incarnation there were
 two persons in Christ, so also there were two natures, but now this too
 is regarded as injurious for it nourishes the Eutychian and Timothean
 heresies.

 [2576] Bishop (Pope) 337, died 352.

 Chapter III.

 Paulonas, [2577] the Presbyter, disciple of the blessed deacon Ephraim
 a man of very energetic character and learned in the holy scriptures
 was distinguished among the doctors of the church while his master was
 still living and especially as an extemporaneous orator. After the
 death of his master, overcome by love of reputation, separating himself
 from the church, he wrote many things opposed to the faith. The blessed
 Ephraim when on the point of death is reported to have said to him as
 he stood by his side--See to it, Paulonas that you do not yield
 yourself to your own ideas, but when you shall think that you
 understand God wholly, believe that you have not known,--for he felt
 beforehand from the studies or the words of Paulonus, that he was
 investigating new things, and was stretching out his mind to the
 illimitable, whence also he frequently called him the new Bardesanes.

 [2577] Flourished 370.

 Chapter IV.

 Vitellius [2578] the African, defending the Donatist schism wrote Why
 the servants of God are hated by the world, in which, except in
 speaking of us as persecutors, he published excellent doctrine. He
 wrote also Against the nations and against us as traditors of the Holy
 Scriptures in times of persecution, and wrote much On ecclesiastical
 procedure. He was distinguished during the reign of Constans son of the
 emperor Constantinus.

 [2578] Fourth century.

 Chapter V.

 Macrobius [2579] the Presbyter was likewise as I learned from the
 writings of Optatus, afterwards secretly bishop of the Donatians in
 Rome. He wrote, having been up to this time a presbyter in the church
 of God, a work To confessors and virgins, a work of ethics indeed, but
 of very necessary doctrine as well and fortified with sentiments well
 fitted for the preservation of chastity. He was distinguished first in
 our party in Africa and afterwards in his own, that is among the
 Donatians or Montanists at Rome.

 [2579] Bishop about 370.

 Chapter VI.

 Heliodorus [2580] the Presbyter wrote a book entitled An introductory
 treatise on the nature of things, in which he showed that the beginning
 of things was one, that nothing was coaeval with God, that God was not
 the creator of evil, but in such wise the creator of all good, that
 matter, which is used for [2581] evil, was created by God after evil
 was discovered, and that nothing material whatever can be regarded as
 established in any other way than by God, and that there was no other
 creator than God, who, when by His foreknowledge He knew that nature
 was to be changed, [2582] warned of punishment.

 [2580] About 360.

 [2581] Used for T 35 31 a e 21; inclined to 30? ? Fabr. Her.

 [2582] changed A T 25 30 31 a e 21 10 Bamb. Bern. Gemblac. Sigberg.
 Guelfenb.; given over to death Fabr. Her. etc.

 Chapter VII.

 Pachomius [2583] the monk, a man endowed with apostolic grace both in
 teaching and in performing miracles, and founder of the Egyptian
 monasteries, wrote an Order of discipline suited to both classes of
 monks, which he received by angelic dictation. He wrote letters also to
 the associated bishops of his district, in an alphabet concealed by
 mystic sacraments so as to surpass customary human knowledge and only
 manifest to those of special grace or desert, that is To the Abbot
 Cornelius one, To the Abbot Syrus one, and one To the heads of all
 monasteries exhorting that, gathered together to one very ancient
 monastery which is called in the Egyptian language Bau, they should
 celebrate the day of the Passover together as by everlasting law. He
 urged likewise in another letter that on the day of remission, which is
 celebrated in the month of August, the chief bishops should be gathered
 together to one place, and wrote one other letter to the brethren who
 had been sent to work outside the monasteries.

 [2583] Born about 292, died 348.

 Chapter VIII.

 Theodorus, [2584] successor to the grace and the headship of the above
 mentioned Abbot Pachomius, addressed to other monasteries letters
 written in the language of Holy Scripture, in which nevertheless he
 frequently mentions his master and teacher Pachomius and sets forth his
 doctrine and life as examples. This he had been taught he said by an
 Angel that he himself might teach again. He likewise exhorts them to
 remain by the purpose of their heart and desire, and to restore to
 harmony and unity those who, a dissension having arisen after the death
 of the Abbot, had broken the unity by separating themselves from the
 community. Three hortatory epistles of his are extant.

 [2584] Born about 314, died 367.

 Chapter IX.

 Oresiesis [2585] the monk, the colleague of both Pachomius and
 Theodorus, a man learned to perfection in Scripture, [2586] composed a
 book seasoned with divine salt and formed of the essentials of all
 monastic discipline and to speak moderately, in which almost the whole
 Old and New Testament is found set forth in compact dissertations--all,
 at least, which relates to the special needs of monks. This he gave to
 his brethren almost on the very day of his death leaving, as it were, a
 legacy.

 [2585] Died about 380.

 [2586] Scripture 25 30 a e 10: Holy Scriptures A T 31 21.

 Chapter X.

 Macarius, [2587] the Egyptian monk, distinguished for his miracles and
 virtues, wrote one letter which was addressed to the younger men of his
 profession. In this he taught them that he could serve God perfectly
 who, knowing the condition of his creation, should devote himself to
 all labours, and by wrestling against every thing which is agreeable in
 this life, and at the same time imploring the aid of God would attain
 also to natural purity and obtain continence, as a well merited gift of
 nature.

 [2587] Born about 300, died 390 (391).

 Chapter XI.

 Evagrius [2588] the monk, the intimate disciple of the above mentioned
 Macarius, educated in [2589] sacred and profane literature and
 distinguished, whom the book which is called the Lives of the fathers
 mentions as a most continent and erudite man, wrote many things of use
 to monks among which are these: Suggestions against the eight principal
 sins. He was first to mention or among the first at least to teach
 these setting against them eight books taken from the testimony of the
 Holy Scriptures only, after the example of our Lord, who always met his
 tempter with quotations from Scripture, so that every suggestion,
 whether of the devil or of depraved nature had a testimony against it.
 This work I have, under instructions, translated into Latin translating
 with the same simplicity which I found in the Greek. He composed also a
 book of One hundred sentiments for those living simply as anchorites,
 arranged by chapters, and one of Fifty sentiments for the erudite and
 studious, which I first translated into Latin. The former one,
 translated before, I restored, partly by retranslating and partly by
 emendation, so as to represent the true meaning of the author, because
 I saw that the translation was vitiated and confused by time. He
 composed also a doctrine of the common-life suited to Cenobites and
 Synodites, [2590] and to the virgin consecrated to God, a little book
 suitable to her religion and sex. He published also a few collections
 of opinions very obscure and, as he himself says of them, only to be
 understood by the hearts of monks, and these likewise I published in
 Latin. He lived to old age, mighty in signs and miracles.

 [2588] Born 345, died 399.

 [2589] educated in T 31 e Her.; omit A 25 30 a.

 [2590] Synodites a kind of monks.

 Chapter XII.

 Theodorus, [2591] presbyter of the church at Antioch, a cautious
 investigator and clever of tongue, wrote against the Apollinarians and
 Anomians On the incarnation of the Lord, fifteen books containing as
 many as fifteen thousand verses, in which he showed by the clearest
 reasoning and by the testimony of Scripture that just as the Lord Jesus
 had a plenitude of deity, so he had a plenitude of humanity. He taught
 also that man consists only of two substances, soul and body and that
 sense and spirit are not different substances, but inherent inborn
 faculties of the soul through which it is inspired and has rationality
 and through which it makes the body capable of feeling. Moreover the
 fourteenth book of this work treats wholly of the uncreated and alone
 incorporeal and ruling nature of the holy Trinity and of the
 rationality of animals which he explains in a devotional spirit, on the
 authority of Holy Scriptures. In the fifteenth volume he confirms and
 fortifies the whole body of his work by citing the traditions of the
 fathers.

 [2591] Theodore of Mopsuesta (?), born at Antioch (?) about 350, died
 428.

 Chapter XIII.

 Prudentius, [2592] a man well versed in secular literature, composed a
 Trocheum [2593] of selected persons from the whole Old and New
 Testament. He wrote a commentary also, after the fashion of the Greeks,
 On the six days of creation from creation of the world until the
 creation of the first man and his fall. He wrote also short books which
 are entitled in the Greek, Apotheosis, Psychomachia and Hamartigenia,
 that is On divinity, On spiritual conflict, On the origin of sin. He
 wrote also In praise of martyrs, an invitation to martyrdom in one book
 citing several as examples and another of Hymns, but specially directed
 Against Symmachus [2594] who defended idolatry, from which we learn
 that Palatinus was a soldier.

 [2592] Born at Saragossa 348, was at Rome in 405, died in Spain 408?

 [2593] Trocheum. There is much controversy over the word, some
 maintaining that it should be Dittochaeon= "the double food or double
 testament" (Lock in Smith and Wace) or Diptychon. It is a description
 of a series of pictures from the Bible. The mss. read Trocheum a.e.;
 Troceum T 25; Trocetum 30; Trocleum A; Tropeum 31. A recent monograph
 on the subject has not yet come to hand.

 [2594] Symmachus. Two works are here confused, the work against
 Symmachus, and the Cathemerinon hymns, in the preface to which the
 quotation occurs.

 Chapter XIV.

 Audentius, [2595] bishop of Spain, wrote a book against the Manicheans,
 Sabellians and Arians and very particularly against the Photinians who
 are now called Bonosiacians. This book he entitled On faith against
 heretics, and in it he showed the Son to have been coeternal with the
 Father and that He did not receive the beginning of his deity from God
 the Father, at the time when conceived by the act of God, he was born
 of the Virgin Mary his mother in true humanity.

 [2595] Bishop of Toledo about 390. (Chevalier) or in the reign of
 Constantius (Ceillier), 370 (Hoefer).

 Chapter XV.

 Commodianus, [2596] while he was engaged in secular literature read
 also our writings and, finding opportunity, accepted the faith. Having
 become a Christian thus and wishing to offer the fruit of his studies
 to Christ the author of his salvation, he wrote, in barely tolerable
 semi-versified language, Against the pagans, and because he was very
 little acquainted with our literature he was better able to overthrow
 their [doctrine] than to establish ours. Whence also, contending
 against them concerning the divine counterpromises, he discoursed in a
 sufficiently wretched and so to speak, gross fashion, to their
 stupefaction and our despair. Following Tertullian, Lactantius and
 Papias as authorities he adopted and inculcated in his students good
 ethical principles and especially a voluntary love of poverty.

 [2596] Flourished about 270. There is wide variety of opinion
 respecting this date, some placing as early as 250 and some nearly one
 hundred years later.

 Chapter XVI.

 Faustinus [2597] the presbyter wrote to Queen Flaccilla seven books
 Against the Arians and Macedonians, arguing and convicting them by the
 testimonies of the very Scriptures which they used, in perverted
 meaning, for blasphemy. He wrote also a book which, together with a
 certain presbyter named Marcellinus, he addressed to the emperors
 Valentinianus, Theodosius and Arcadius, in defence of their fellow
 Christians. From this it appears that he acquiesced in the Luciferian
 schism, in that in this same book he blames Hilary of Poitiers and
 Damasus, bishop of Rome, for giving ill-advised counsel to the church,
 advising that the apostate [2598] bishops should be received into
 communion for the sake of restoring the peace. For it was as
 displeasing to the Luciferians to receive the bishops who in the
 Ariminian council had communed with Arius, as it was to the Novatians
 to receive the penitent apostates.

 [2597] Flourished about 384.

 [2598] Apostate = prevaricatores.

 Chapter XVII.

 Rufinus, [2599] presbyter of the church at Aquileia, was not the least
 among the doctors of the church and had a fine talent for elegant
 translation from Greek into Latin. In this way he opened to the Latin
 speaking church the greater part of the Greek literature; translating
 the works of Basil of Cæsarea in Cappadocia, Gregory Nazianzan, that
 most eloquent man, the Recognitions of Clement of Rome, the Church
 history of Eusebius of Cæsarea in Palestine, the Sentences of Xystus,
 [2600] the Sentences of Evagrius and the work of Pamphilus Martyr
 Against the mathematicians. Whatever among all these which are read by
 the Latins have prefatory matter, have been translated by Rufinus, but
 those which are without Prologue have been translated by some one else
 who did not choose to write a prologue. Not all of Origen, however, is
 his work, for Jerome translated some which are identified by his
 prologue. On his own account, the same Rufinus, ever through the grace
 of God published an Exposition of the Apostles' creed so excellent that
 other expositions are regarded as of no account in comparison. He also
 wrote in a threefold sense, that is, the historical, moral and mystical
 sense, on Jacob's blessing on the patriarchs. He wrote also many
 epistles exhorting to fear of God, among which those which he addressed
 to Proba are preëminent. He added also a tenth and eleventh book to the
 ecclesiastical history which we have said was written by Eusebius and
 translated by him. Moreover he responded to a detractor of his works,
 in two volumes, arguing and proving that he exercised his talent with
 the aid of the Lord and in the sight of God, for the good of the
 church, while he, on the other hand, incited by jealousy had taken to
 polemics.

 [2599] Born 345, at Jerusalem about 390, died 410.

 [2600] XystusT 25 30 e; Sextus A 31 a Xystus of Rome T Her.

 Chapter XVIII.

 Tichonius, [2601] an African by nationality was, it is said,
 sufficiently learned in sacred literature, not wholly unacquainted with
 secular literature and zealous in ecclesiastical affairs. He wrote
 books On internal war and Expositions of various causes in which for
 the defence of his friends, he cites the ancient councils and from all
 of which [2602] he is recognized to have been a Donatist. He composed
 also eight Rules for investigating and ascertaining the meaning of the
 Scriptures, compressing them into one volume. He also expounded the
 Apocalypse of John entire, regarding nothing in it in a carnal sense,
 but all in a spiritual sense. In this exposition he maintained the
 angelical nature [2603] to be corporeal, moreover he doubts that there
 will be a reign of the righteous on earth for a thousand years after
 the resurrection, or that there will be two resurrections of the dead
 in the flesh, one of the righteous and the other of the unrighteous,
 but maintains that there will be one simultaneous resurrection of all,
 at which shall arise even the aborted and the deformed lest any living
 human being, however deformed, should be lost. He makes such
 distinction to be sure, between the two resurrections as to make the
 first, which he calls the apocalypse of the righteous, only to take
 place in the growth of the church where, justified by faith, they are
 raised from the dead bodies of their sins through baptism to the
 service of eternal life, but the second, the general resurrection of
 all men in the flesh. This man flourished at the same period with the
 above mentioned Rufinus during the reign of Theodosius and his sons.

 [2601] 399.

 [2602] from all of which A 25 30 31 a; from which e T Her.

 [2603] angelical nature etc., "that the human body is an abode of
 angels" (angelicam stationem corpus esse) Phillott, in Smith and Wace.

 Chapter XIX.

 Severus [2604] the presbyter, surnamed Sulpitius, of the province of
 Aquitania, a man distinguished by his birth, by his excellent literary
 work, by his devotion to poverty and by his humility, beloved also of
 the sainted men Martin bishop of Tours and Paulinus Nolanus, wrote
 small books which are far from despicable. He wrote to his sister many
 Letters exhorting to love of God and contempt of the world. These are
 well known. He wrote two to the above mentioned Paulinus Nolanus and
 others to others, but because, in some, family matters are included,
 they have not been collected for publication. He composed also a
 Chronicle, and wrote also to the profit of many, a Life of the holy
 Martin, monk and bishop, a man famous for signs and wonders and
 virtues. [2605] He also wrote a Conference between Postumianus and
 Gallus, in which he himself acted as mediator and judge of the debate.
 The subject matter was the manner of life of the oriental monks and of
 St. Martin--a sort of dialogue in two divisions. In the first of these
 he mentions a decree of the bishops at the synod of Alexandria in his
 own time to the effect that Origen is to be read, though cautiously, by
 those who are wise, for the good that is in him, and is to be rejected
 by the less able on account of the evil. In his old age, he was led
 astray by the Pelagians, and recognizing the guilt of much speaking,
 kept silent until his death, in order that by penitent silence he might
 atone for the sin which he had contracted by speaking.

 [2604] Sulpicius Severus born after 353, died about 410.

 [2605] Virtues or miracles.

 Chapter XX.

 Antiochus [2606] the bishop, wrote one long [2607] volume Against
 avarice and he composed a homily, full of [2608] godly penitence and
 humility On the healing of the blind man whose sight was restored by
 the Saviour. He died during the reign of the emperor Arcadius.

 [2606] Bishop of Ptolemais (Acre) about 400, died about 408.

 [2607] long. a 25 30 31; great A T e.

 [2608] full of A 25 30 31 a e; on T 21 Her.

 Chapter XXI.

 Severianus, [2609] bishop of the church of Gabala, was learned in the
 Holy Scriptures and a wonderful preacher of homilies. On this account
 he was frequently summoned by the bishop John and the emperor Arcadius
 to preach a sermon at Constantinople. I have read his Exposition of the
 epistle to the Galatians and a most attractive little work On baptism
 and the feast of Epiphany. He died in the reign of Theodosius, his son
 by baptism.

 [2609] Severianus of Emesa. Bishop 400-3, died after 408.

 Chapter XXII.

 Niceas, [2610] [2611] bishop of the city of Romatia, composed, in
 simple and clear language, six books of Instruction for neophites. The
 first of these contains, How candidates who seek to obtain grace of
 baptism ought to act, the second, On the errors of relationship, in
 which he relates that not far from his own time a certain Melodius,
 father of a family, on account of his liberality and Garadius [2612] a
 peasant, on account of his bravery, were placed, by the heathen, among
 the gods. A third book On faith in one sovereign, a fourth Against
 genealogy, [2613] a fifth On the creed, a sixth On the sacrifice of the
 paschal lamb. He addressed a work also To the fallen virgin, an
 incentive to amendment for all who have fallen.

 [2610] Nicetas Bishop of "Remessianen" or Romaciana or Remetiana in
 Dacia before 392, died after 414.

 [2611] T and 31 read Niceta or Nicetas, but other mss. Niceas and so
 Fabricius and Her.

 [2612] Garadius A T 31 a e; Gadarius 25 30 Her.

 [2613] Genealogy T 25 30 21; genethlogiam 31 a e.

 Chapter XXIII.

 Olympius [2614] the bishop, a Spaniard by nationality, wrote a book of
 faith against those who blame nature and not the will, showing that
 evil was introduced into nature not by creation but by disobedience.

 [2614] Bishop of Barcelona about 316.

 Chapter XXIV.

 Bachiarius, [2615] a Christian philosopher, prompt and ready and minded
 to devote his time to God, chose travel as a means of preserving the
 integrity of his purpose. He is said to have published acceptable small
 works but I have only read one of them, a work On faith, in which he
 justified himself to the chief priest of the city, defending himself
 against those who complained and misrepresented his travel, and
 asserting that he undertook his travel not through fear of men but for
 the sake of God, that going forth from his land and kindred he might
 become a co-heir with Abraham the patriarch.

 [2615] A Spanish bishop. Flourished about 400.

 Chapter XXV.

 Sabbatius, [2616] bishop of the Gallican province, at the request of a
 certain virgin, chaste and devoted to Christ, Secunda by name, composed
 a book On faith against Marcion and Valentinus his teacher, also
 against Eunomius and his Master Aëtius, showing, both by reason and by
 testimony of the Scriptures, that the origin of the deity is one, that
 the Author of his eternity and the Creator of the earth out of nothing,
 are one and the same, and likewise concerning Christ, that he did not
 appear as man in a phantasm but had real flesh through which eating,
 drinking, weary and weeping, suffering, dying, rising again he was
 demonstrated to be man indeed. For Marcion and Valentinus had been
 opposed to these opinions asserting that the origin of Deity is twofold
 and that Christ came in a phantasm. To Aëtius indeed and Eunomius his
 disciple, he showed that the Father and Son are not of two natures and
 equal in divinity but of one essence and the one from the other, that
 is the Son from the Father, the one coeternal with the other, which
 belief Aëtius and Eunomius opposed.

 [2616] St. Servais, Bishop of Tongres 338, died at Maestricht 384. The
 patron saint of Maestricht. Supposed by some to be the same as
 Phebadius (Faegadius, Phaebadius, Segatius, Sabadius Phitadius (called
 in Gascony Fiari)? bishop of Agen. Flourished 440 (Cave).

 Chapter XXVI.

 Isaac [2617] wrote On the Holy Trinity and a book On the incarnation of
 the Lord, writing in a very obscure style of argument and involved
 language, maintaining that three persons exist in one Deity, in such
 wise that any thing may be peculiar to each which another does not
 have, that is to say, that the Father has this peculiarity that He,
 himself without source, is the source of others, that the Son has this
 peculiarity, that, begotten, He is not posterior to the begetter, that
 the Holy Spirit has this peculiarity, that He is neither made nor
 begotten but nevertheless is from another. Of the incarnation of the
 Lord indeed, he writes that the person of the Son of God is believed to
 be one, while yet there are two natures existing in him.

 [2617] Converted Jew, flourished about 385.

 Chapter XXVII.

 Ursinus [2618] the monk wrote against those who say that heretics
 should be rebaptized, teaching [2619] that it is not legitimate nor
 honouring God, that those should be rebaptized who have been baptized
 either in the name of Christ alone or in the name of the Father and of
 the Son and of the Holy Spirit, though the formula has been used in a
 vitiated sense. He considers that after the simple confession of the
 Holy Trinity and of Christ, the imposition of the hands of the catholic
 priest is sufficient for salvation.

 [2618] Flourished above 440.

 [2619] Omit "teaching" e T 31.

 Chapter XXVIII.

 Macarius [2620] another monk, wrote at Rome books Against the
 mathematicians, in which labour he sought the comfort of oriental
 writings.

 [2620] Flourished fifth century.

 Chapter XXIX.

 Heliodorus, [2621] presbyter of Antioch, published an excellent volume
 gathered from Holy Scriptures On Virginity.

 [2621] Flourished about 440.

 Chapter XXX.

 [John [2622] [2623] bishop of Constantinople, a man of marvelous
 knowledge and in sanctity of life, in every respect worthy of
 imitation, wrote many and very useful works for all who are hastening
 to divine things. Among them are the following On compunction of soul
 one book, That no one is injured except by himself, an excellent volume
 In praise of the blessed Paul the apostle, On the excesses and ill
 reputation of Eutropius a prætorian prefect and many others, as I have
 said, which may be found by the industrious.]

 [2622] John Chrysostom born at Antioch about 347, bishop of
 Constantinople 398, deposed 403, died 407.

 [2623] This whole paragraph is omitted by most mss., though T and 21
 have it.

 Chapter XXXI.

 Another John, [2624] [2625] bishop of Jerusalem, wrote a book against
 those who disparaged his studies, in which he shows that he follows the
 genius of Origen not his creed.

 [2624] Bishop 386, died 417.

 [2625] JohnA 25 30 31 a e; another John [T ?] 21.

 Chapter XXXII.

 Paul the bishop wrote a short work On penitence in which he lays down
 this law for penitents; that they ought to repent for their sins in
 such manner that they be not beyond measure overwhelmed with despairing
 sadness.

 Chapter XXXIII.

 Helvidius, [2626] a disciple of Auxentius and imitator of Symmachus,
 wrote, indeed, with zeal for religion but not according to knowledge, a
 book, polished neither in language nor in reasoning, a work in which he
 so attempted to twist the meaning of the Holy Scriptures to his own
 perversity, as to venture to assert on their testimony that Joseph and
 Mary, after the nativity of our Lord, had children who were called
 brothers of the Lord. In reply to his perverseness Jerome, published a
 book against him, well filled with scripture proofs. [2627]

 [2626] Fourth century.

 [2627] In reply...proofs A T 25 30 21; omit e 31 a.

 Chapter XXXIV.

 Theophilus, [2628] bishop of the church [2629] of Alexandria, wrote one
 great volume Against Origen in which he condemns pretty nearly all his
 sayings and himself likewise, at the same time saying that he was not
 original in his views but derived them from the ancient fathers
 especially from Heraclas, that he was deposed from [2630] the office of
 presbyter driven from the church and compelled to fly from the city. He
 also wrote Against the Anthropomorphites, heretics who say that God has
 the human form and members, confuting in a long discussion and arguing
 by testimonies of Divine Scripture and convincing. He shows that,
 according to the belief of the Fathers, God is to be thought of as
 incorporal, not formed with any suggestion of members at all, and
 therefore there is nothing like Him among created things in substance,
 nor has the incorruptibility nor unchangeableness nor incorporeality of
 his nature been given to any one but that all intellectual natures are
 corporeal, all corruptible, all mutable, that He alone should not be
 subject to corruptibility or changeableness, who alone has immortality
 and life. Likewise the return of the paschal feast which the great
 council at Nicea had found would take place after ninety years at the
 same time, the same month and day adding some observations on the
 festival and explanations he gave to the emperor Theodosius. I have
 read also three books On faith, which bear his name but, as their
 language is not like his, I do not very much think they are by him.

 [2628] Bishop 385, died 412.

 [2629] ChurchT 21; city A 25 30 31 a.

 [2630] deposed 25 31 a e?; elect A 30; stripped of T.

 Chapter XXXV.

 Eusebius [2631] wrote On the mystery of our Lord's cross and the
 faithfulness of the apostles, and especially of Peter, gained by virtue
 of the cross.

 [2631] Bishop of Milan 451, died 462.

 Chapter XXXVI.

 Vigilantius, [2632] a citizen of Gaul, had the church of Barcelona. He
 wrote also with some zeal for religion but, overcome by the desire for
 human praise and presuming above his strength, being a man of polished
 language but not practised in the meaning of Scriptures, he expounded
 the vision of Daniel in a perverted sense and said other frivolous
 things which are necessarily mentioned in a catalogue of heretics. [To
 him also the blessed Jerome the presbyter responded.] [2633]

 [2632] At Jerusalem 394, heretic about 404.

 [2633] to him...responded A Her.; omit T 25 30 31 a e.

 Chapter XXXVII.

 Simplicianus, [2634] the bishop, exhorted Augustine then presbyter, in
 many letters, that he should exercise his genius and take time for
 exposition of the Scriptures that, as it were, a new Ambrosius, the
 task master of Origen might appear. Wherefore also he sent to him many
 examinations of scriptures. There is also an epistle of his of
 Questions in which he teaches by asking questions as if wishing to
 learn.

 [2634] Bishop of Milan 397, died 400.

 Chapter XXXVIII.

 Vigilius [2635] the bishop wrote to one Simplicianus a small book In
 praise of martyrs and an epistle containing the acts of the martyrs in
 his time among the barbarians.

 [2635] Bishop of Trent 388, died 405.

 Chapter XXXIX.

 Augustine, [2636] of Africa, bishop of Hipporegensis, a man renowned
 throughout the world for learning both sacred and secular, unblemished
 in the faith, pure in life, wrote works so many that they cannot all be
 gathered. For who is there that can boast himself of having all his
 works, or who reads with such diligence as to read all he has written?
 [2637] As an old man even, he published fifteen books On the Trinity
 which he had begun as a young man. In which, as scripture says, brought
 into the chamber of the king and adorned with the manifold garment of
 the wisdom of God, he exhibited a church not having spot or wrinkle or
 any such thing. In his work On the incarnation of the Lord also he
 manifested a peculiar piety. On the resurrection of the dead he wrote
 with equal sincerity, and left it to the less able to raise doubts
 respecting abortions. [2638] [2639]

 [2636] Born at Tagaste 354, baptized at Milan 387, bishop of Hippo 395,
 died 430.

 [2637] all he has written e T A 30 31 a Her.; 25 Fabr. add "wherefore
 on account of his much speaking Solomon's saying came true that In the
 multitude of words there wanteth not sin.'" This expression in the
 editions has been the ground of much comment on Gennadius'
 Semi-pelagian bias, but it almost certainly does not represent the
 original form of the text.

 [2638] Abortions "That abortions...shall rise again I make bold neither
 to affirm nor to deny" Augustine De civ. Dei. 22, 13.

 [2639] T 31 end thus; A omits and left...abortions but adds a few lines
 of other matter; e adds differing matter; a adds remained a catholic;
 30 adds remained a catholic and died in the same city--the city which
 is still called Hypporegensis; while 25 adds a vast amount.

 Chapter XL.

 Orosius, [2640] a Spanish presbyter, a man most eloquent and learned in
 history, wrote eight books against those enemies of the Christians who
 say that the decay of the Roman State was caused by the Christian
 religion. In these rehearsing the calamities and miseries and
 disturbances of wars, of pretty much the whole world from the creation
 [2641] he shows that the Roman Empire owed to the Christian religion
 its undeserved continuance and the state of peace which it enjoyed for
 the worship of God.

 In the first book he described the world situated within the ever
 flowing stream of Oceanus and intersected by the Tanais, giving the
 situations of places, the names, number and customs of nations, the
 characteristics of various regions, the wars begun and the formation of
 empires sealed with the blood of kinsmen.

 This is the Orosius who, sent by Augustine to Hieronymus to teach the
 nature of the soul, returning, was the first to bring to the West
 relics of the blessed Stephen the first martyr then recently found. He
 flourished almost [2642] at the end of the reign of the emperor
 Honorius.

 [2640] Paulus Orosius of Tarragon, the historian, flourished about 413
 or 417. His history was begun after 416 and finished in 417.

 [2641] from the creation ("from the whole period of the earth") A 25 30
 31 a e; omit T 21 Her.

 [2642] almost25 30 31 a e; omit T A Her.

 Chapter XLI.

 Maximus, [2643] bishop of the church at Turin, a man fairly industrious
 in the study of the Holy Scripture, and good at teaching the people
 extemporaneously, composed treatises In praise of the apostles and John
 the Baptist, and a Homily on all the martyrs. Moreover he wrote many
 acute comments on passages from the Gospels and the Acts of the
 Apostles. He wrote also two treatises, On the life [2644] of Saint
 Eusebius, bishop of Vercelli, and confessor, and On Saint Cyprian, and
 published a monograph On the grace of baptism. I have read his On
 avarice, On hospitality, On the eclipse of the moon, On almsgiving, On
 the saying in Isaiah, Your winedealers mix wine with water, On Our
 Lord's Passion, A general treatise On fasting by the servants of God,
 On the quadragesimal fast in particular, and That there should be no
 jesting on fast day, On Judas, the betrayer, On Our Lord's cross, On
 His sepulchre, On His resurrection, On the accusation and trial of Our
 Lord before Pontius Pilate, On the Kalends of January, a homily On the
 day of Our Lord's Nativity, also homilies On Epiphany, On the Passover,
 On Pentecost, many also, On having no fear of carnal Foes, On giving
 thanks after meat, On the repentance of the Ninivites, and other
 homilies of his, published [2645] on various occasions, whose names I
 do not remember. He died in the reign of Honorius and Theodosius the
 younger.

 [2643] Maximus of Vercelli, bishop of Turin about 415, died 466-470.

 [2644] omit life A 30 a.

 [2645] published T 30 21 Her.; delivered A 25 31 a e.

 Chapter XLII.

 Petronius, [2646] bishop of Bologna in Italy [2647] a man of holy life
 and from his youth practised in monastic studies, is reputed to have
 written the Lives of the Fathers, to wit of the Egyptian monks, a work
 which the monks accept as the mirror and pattern of their profession. I
 have read a treatise which bears his name On the ordination of bishops,
 a work full of good reasoning and notable for its humility, but whose
 polished style shows it not to have been his, but perhaps, as some say,
 the work of his father Petronius, [2648] a man of great eloquence and
 learned in secular literature. This I think is to be accepted, for the
 author of the work describes himself as a prætorian prefect. He died in
 the reign of Theodosius and Valentinianus.

 [2646] Bishop of Bologna 430, died before 350.

 [2647] in Italy A 30 31 a e; omit T 25 21 Her.

 [2648] Petronius A 25 30 31; omit T a?

 Chapter XLIII.

 Pelagius [2649] the heresiarch, before he was proclaimed a heretic
 wrote works of practical value for students: three books On belief in
 the Trinity, and one book of Selections from Holy Scriptures bearing on
 the Christian life. This latter was preceded by tables of contents,
 after the model of Saint Cyprian the martyr. After he was proclaimed
 heretic, however, he wrote works bearing on his heresy.

 [2649] At Rome about 400, at Carthage 411, heretic 417.

 Chapter XLIV.

 Innocentius, [2650] bishop of Rome, wrote the decree which the Western
 churches passed against the Pelagians and which his successor, Pope
 Zosimus, afterwards widely promulgated.

 [2650] Bishop or "Pope" 402, died 417.

 Chapter XLV.

 Caelestius, [2651] before he joined Pelagius, while yet a very young
 man, wrote to his parents three epistles On monastic life, written as
 short books, and containing moral maxims suited to every one who is
 seeking God, containing no trace of the fault which afterwards appeared
 but wholly devoted to the encouragement of virtue.

 [2651] Heretic 412-417.

 Chapter XLVI.

 Julianus [2652] the bishop, a man of vigorous character, learned in the
 Divine Scriptures, and proficient both in Greek and Latin, was, before
 he disclosed his participation in the ungodliness of Pelagius,
 distinguished among the doctors of the church. But afterwards, trying
 to defend the Pelagian heresy, he wrote four books, Against Augustine,
 the opponent of Pelagius, and then again, eight books more. There is
 also a book containing a discussion, where each defends his side.

 This Julianus, in time of famine and want, attracting many through the
 alms which he gave, and the glamour of virtue, which they cast around
 him, associated them with him in his heresy. He died during the reign
 of Valentinianus, the son of Constantius.

 [2652] Bishop of Eclanum about 416.

 Chapter XLVII.

 Lucianus [2653] the presbyter, a holy man to whom, at the time when
 Honorius and Theodosius were Emperors, God revealed the place of the
 sepulchre and the remains of Saint Stephen the Protomartyr, wrote out
 that revelation in Greek, addressing it to all the churches.

 [2653] Lucianus of Caphargamala, flourished 415.

 Chapter XLVIII.

 Avitus [2654] the presbyter, a Spaniard by race, translated the above
 mentioned work of the presbyter Lucianus into Latin, and sent it with
 his letter annexed, by the hand of Orosius the presbyter, to the
 Western churches.

 [2654] Avitus of Braga, died 440.

 Chapter XLIX.

 Paulinus, [2655] bishop of Nola in Campania, composed many brief works
 in verse, also a consolatory work to Celsus On the death of a christian
 and baptized child, a sort of epitaph, well fortified with christian
 hope, also many Letters to Severus, and A panegric in prose written
 before he became bishop, On victory over tyrants which was addressed to
 Theodosius and maintained that victory lay rather in faith and prayer,
 than in arms. He wrote also a Sacramentary and Hymnal.

 He also addressed many letters to his sister, On contempt of the world,
 and published treatises of different sorts, on various occasions.
 [2656]

 The most notable of all his minor works are the works On repentance,
 and A general panegyric of all the martyrs. He lived in the reign of
 Honorius and Valentinianus, and was distinguished, not only for
 erudition [2657] and holiness of life, but also for his ability to cast
 out demons.

 [2655] Pontius Meropius (Anicius?) Paulinus, Born at Bordeaux 353
 (354?), pupil of Ausonius, baptized before 389, bishop before 410, died
 431.

 [2656] on various occasions is omitted by T 31 e.

 [2657] erudition A T 31 a e 21; observation 25 30 Her.

 Chapter L.

 Eutropius, [2658] the presbyter, wrote to two sisters, handmaids of
 Christ, who had been disinherited by their parents on account of their
 devotion to chastity and their love for religion, two Consolatory
 letters in the form of small books, written in polished and clear
 language and fortified not only by argument, but also by testimonies
 from the Scriptures.

 [2658] Pupil of Augustine about 430.

 Chapter LI.

 Another Evagrius [2659] wrote a Discussion between Simon the Jew and
 Theophilus the Christian, a work which is very well known.

 [2659] Pupil of St. Martin of Tours 405.

 Chapter LII.

 Vigilius [2660] the deacon. composed out of the traditions of the
 fathers a Rule for monks, which is accustomed to be read in the
 monastery for the profit of the assembled monks. It is written in
 condensed and clear language and covers the whole range of monastic
 duties.

 [2660] Flourished about 430.

 Chapter LIII.

 Atticus [2661] bishop of Constantinople, wrote to the princess
 daughters [2662] of the Emperor Arcadius, On faith and virginity, a
 most excellent work, in which he attacks by anticipation the Nestorian
 doctrine.

 [2661] Bishop of Constantinople 406, died 425.

 [2662] Daughters Pulcheria and her sisters.

 Chapter LIV.

 Nestorius [2663] [2664] the heresiarch, was regarded, while presbyter
 of the church at Antioch, as a remarkable extemporaneous teacher,
 [2665] and composed a great many treatises on various Questions, into
 which already at that time [2666] he infused that subtle evil, which
 afterwards became the poison of acknowledged impiety, veiled meanwhile
 by moral exhortation. But afterwards, when commended by his eloquence
 and abstemiousness he had been made pontiff of the church at
 Constantinople, showing openly what he had for a long while concealed,
 he became a declared enemy of the church, and wrote a book On the
 incarnation of the Lord, formed of sixty-two passages from Divine
 Scripture, used in a perverted meaning. What he maintained in this book
 may be found in the catalogue of heretics.

 [2663] Bishop of Constantinople 428, deposed 431, died in the Thebaid
 about 439.

 [2664] Nestorius 25 30 Her; Nestor A T 31 a e 21.

 [2665] teacher A T 30 31 a e; omit 25 Her.

 [2666] at that time A T a e; omit 25 30 31.

 Chapter LV.

 Caelestinus, [2667] bishop of Rome, addressed a volume to the churches
 of the East and West, giving an account of the decree of the synod
 against the above mentioned Nestorius and maintaining that while there
 are two complete natures in Christ, the person of the Son of God is to
 be regarded as single. The above mentioned Nestorius was shown to be
 opposed to this view. Xystus likewise, the successor of Caelestinus,
 wrote on the same subject and to the same Nestorius and the Eastern
 bishops, giving the views of the Western bishops against his error.

 [2667] Bishop (Pope) of Rome 422, died 432.

 Chapter LVI.

 Theodotus, [2668] ^[2669] bishop of Ancyra in Galatia, while at [2670]
 Ephesus, wrote against Nestorius a work of defence and refutation,
 [2671] written, to be sure, in dialectic style, but interwoven with
 passages from the Holy Scriptures. His method was to make statements
 and then quote proof texts from the Scriptures.

 [2668] Theodotus Bishop of Ancyra 431-8.

 [2669] Theodotus T ? a e; Theodorus a 25 30 31 Fabr. Her.

 [2670] while at T 31 e 21; while formerly at 25 30 a A?

 [2671] and refutation A 25 30 a; omit T 31 e 21.

 Chapter LVII.

 Fastidius, [2672] bishop in Britain, wrote to one Fatalis, a book On
 the Christian life, and another On preserving the estate of virginity,
 [2673] a work full of sound doctrine, and doing honour to God.

 [2672] Flourished 420.

 [2673] virginity T 31 e 21; widowhood A 25 30 a Fabr. Her.

 Chapter LVIII.

 Cyril, [2674] bishop of the church at Alexandria, published various
 treatises on various Questions, and also composed many homilies, which
 are recommended for preaching by the Greek bishops. Other books of his
 are; On the downfall of the synagogue, On faith against the heretics,
 and a work directed especially against Nestorius and entitled, A
 Refutation, in which all the secrets of Nestorius are exposed and his
 published opinions are refuted.

 [2674] Born about 376, bishop of Alexandria 412, died 444.

 Chapter LIX.

 Timotheus, [2675] the bishop composed a book On the nativity of Our
 Lord according to the flesh, which is supposed to have been written at
 Epiphany.

 [2675] From position evidently flourished before 450.

 Chapter LX.

 Leporius, [2676] formerly monk afterwards presbyter, relying on purity,
 [2677] through his own free will and unaided effort, instead of
 depending on the help of God, began to follow the Pelagian doctrine.
 But having been admonished by the Gallican doctors, and corrected by
 Augustine in Africa, he wrote a book containing his retraction, in
 which he both acknowledges his error and returns thanks for his
 correction. At the same time in correction of his false view of the
 incarnation of Christ, he presented the Catholic view, acknowledging
 the single person of the Son of God, and the two natures existing in
 Christ in his substance. [2678]

 [2676] Flourished 418-430.

 [2677] purityT 31 a e 21; purity of life A 25 30.

 [2678] in his substance A T 30 31 a e 21; omit 25 Her.

 Chapter LXI.

 Victorinus, [2679] a rhetorician of Marseilles, wrote to his son
 Etherius, a commentary On Genesis, commenting, that is, from the
 beginning of the book to the death of the patriarch Abraham, and
 published four [2680] books in verse, words which have a savour of
 piety indeed, but, in that he was a man busied with secular literature
 and quite untrained in the Divine Scriptures, they are of slight
 weight, so far as ideas are concerned.

 He died in the reign of Theodosius and Valentinianus.

 [2679] Claudius Marius Victor (Victorius or Victorinus) of Marseilles
 died 445.

 [2680] fourA T 31 a e; three 25 30.

 Chapter LXII.

 Cassianus, [2681] Scythian by race, ordained deacon by bishop John the
 Great, at Constantinople, and a presbyter at Marseilles, founded two
 monasteries, that is to say one for men and one for women, which are
 still standing. He wrote from experience, and in forcible language, or
 to speak more clearly, with meaning back of his words, and action back
 of his talk. He covered the whole field of practical directions, for
 monks of all sorts, in the following works: On dress, also On the canon
 of prayers, and the Usage in the saying of Psalms, (for these in the
 Egyptian monasteries, are said day and night), three books. One of
 Institutes, eight books On the origin, nature and remedies for the
 eight principal sins, a book on each sin. He also compiled Conferences
 with the Egyptian fathers, as follows: On the aim of a monk and his
 creed, On discretion, On three vocations to the service of God, On the
 warfare of the flesh against the spirit and the spirit against the
 flesh, On the nature of all sins, On the slaughter of the saints, On
 fickleness of mind, On principalities, On the nature of prayer, On the
 duration of prayer, On perfection, On chastity, On the protection of
 God, On the knowledge of spiritual things, On the Divine graces, On
 friendship, On whether to define or not to define, On three ancient
 kinds of monks and a fourth recently arisen, On the object of cenobites
 and hermits, On true satisfaction in repentance, On the remission of
 the Quinquagesimal fast, On nocturnal illusions, On the saying of the
 apostles, "For the good which I would do, I do not, but the evil which
 I would not, that I do," On mortification, and finally at the request
 of Leo the archdeacon, afterwards bishop of Rome, he wrote seven books
 against Nestorius, On the incarnation of the Lord, and writing this,
 made an end, both of writing and living, at Marseilles, in the reign of
 Theodosius and Valentinianus.

 [2681] Johannes Cassianus died 450.

 Chapter LXIII.

 Philip, [2682] the presbyter Jerome's best pupil, published a
 Commentary on Job, written in an unaffected style. I have read his
 Familiar letters, exceedingly witty, exhorting the endurance of poverty
 and sufferings. He died in the reign of Martianus and Avitus.

 [2682] Died about 455.

 Chapter LXIV.

 Eucherius, [2683] bishop of the church at Lyons, wrote to his relative
 Valerianus, On contempt for the world and worldly philosophy, a single
 letter, written in a style which shows sound learning and reasoning. He
 wrote also to his sons, Salonius and Veranius, afterward bishops, a
 discussion On certain obscure passages of Holy Scriptures, and besides,
 revising and condensing certain works of Saint Cassianus, he compressed
 them into one volume, and wrote other works suited to ecclesiastical or
 monastic pursuits. He died in the reign of Valentinianus and Martianus.

 [2683] Bishop about 435, died 450.

 Chapter LXV.

 Vincentius, [2684] the Gaul, presbyter in the Monastery on the Island
 of Lerins, a man learned in the Holy Scriptures and very well informed
 in matters of ecclesiastical doctrine, composed a powerful disputation,
 written in tolerably finished and clear language, which, suppressing
 his name, he entitled Peregrinus against heretics. The greater part of
 the second book of this work having been stolen, he composed a brief
 reproduction of the substance of the original work, and published in
 one [book]. He died in the reign of Theodosius and Valentinianus.

 [2684] Presbyter 434, died before 450.

 Chapter LXVI.

 Syagrius [2685] wrote On faith, against the presumptuous words, which
 heretics assume for the purpose of destroying or superseding the names
 of the Holy Trinity, for they say that the Father ought not to be
 called Father, lest the name, Son should harmonize with that of Father,
 but that he should be called the Unbegotten or the Imperishable and the
 Absolute, in order that whatever may be distinct from Him in person,
 may also be separate in nature, showing that the Father, who is
 unchangeable in nature may be called the Unbegotten, though the
 Scripture may not call Him so, that the person of the Son is begotten
 from Him, not made, and that the person of the Holy Spirit proceeds
 from Him not begotten, and not made. Under the name of this Syagrius I
 found seven books, entitled On Faith and the rules of Faith, but as
 they did not agree in style, I did not believe they were written by
 him.

 [2685] Syagrius of Lyons, died 486.

 Chapter LXVII.

 Isaac, [2686] presbyter of the church at Antioch, whose many works
 cover a long period, wrote in Syriac especially against the Nestorians
 and Eutychians. He lamented the downfall of Antioch in an elegiac poem,
 taking up the same strain that Ephraim, the deacon, sounded on the
 downfall of Nicomedia. He died during the reign of Leo and Majorianus.

 [2686] Isaac of Amida (Diarbekir) presbyter died about 460.

 Chapter LXVIII.

 Salvianus, [2687] presbyter of Marseilles, well informed both in
 secular and in sacred literature, and to speak without invidiousness, a
 master among bishops, wrote many things in a scholastic and clear
 style, of which I have read the following: four books On the Excellence
 of virginity, to Marcellus the presbyter, three books Against avarice,
 five books On the present judgment, [2688] and one book On punishment
 according to desert, addressed to Salonius the bishop, also one book of
 Commentary on the latter part of the book of Ecclesiastes, addressed to
 Claudius bishop of Vienne, one book of Epistles. [2689] He also
 composed one book in verse after the Greek fashion, a sort of
 Hexaemeron, covering the period from the beginning of Genesis to the
 creation of man, also many Homilies delivered to the bishops, and I am
 sure I do not know how many On the sacraments. He is still living at a
 good old age.

 [2687] Born about 390, Presbyter about 428, died about 484.

 [2688] present judgment more generally known as Divine Providence (De
 gubernatione Dei.)

 [2689] one book of epistles a 25 30; omit A T 31 e 21.

 Chapter LXIX.

 Paulinus [2690] composed treatises On the beginning of the
 Quadragesimal, of which I have read two, On the Passover Sabbath, On
 obedience, On penitence, On neophytes.

 [2690] From position evidently flourished about 450.

 Chapter LXX.

 Hilary, [2691] bishop of the church at Arles, a man learned in Holy
 Scriptures, was devoted to poverty, and earnestly anxious to live in
 narrow circumstances, not only in religiousness of mind, but also in
 labour of body. To secure this estate of poverty, this man of noble
 race and very differently brought up, engaged in farming, though it was
 beyond his strength, and yet did not neglect spiritual matters. He was
 an acceptable teacher also, and without regard to persons administered
 correction to all. [2692] He published some few things, brief, but
 showing immortal genius, and indicating an erudite mind, as well as
 capacity for vigorous speech; among these that work which is of so
 great practical value to many, his Life of Saint Honoratus, his
 predecessor. He died during the reign of Valentinianus and Martianus.

 [2691] Born about 401, bishop 429, died 449.

 [2692] correction to all; Her. adds work of preaching but has the
 support of no good mss.

 Chapter LXXI.

 Leo, [2693] bishop [2694] of Rome, wrote a letter to Flavianus, bishop
 of the church at Constantinople, against Eutyches the presbyter, who at
 that time, on account of his ambition for the episcopate was trying to
 introduce novelties into the church. In this he advises Flavianus, if
 Eutyches confesses his error and promises amendment, to receive him,
 but if he should persist in the course he had entered on, that he
 should be condemned together with his heresy. He likewise teaches in
 this epistle and confirms by divine testimony that as the Lord Jesus
 Christ is to be considered the true son of the Divine Father, so
 likewise he is to be considered true man with human nature, that is,
 that he derived a body of flesh from the flesh of the virgin and not as
 Eutyches asserted, that he showed a body from heaven. [2695] He died in
 the reign of Leo and Majorianus.

 [2693] Leo the Great, Bishop (Pope) 440, died 461.

 [2694] bishop: A 30 31 e have pontiff.

 [2695] T and 21 add after heaven "and he addressed another letter on
 this same subject to the Emperor Leo in whose reign also he died."

 Chapter LXXII.

 Mochimus, [2696] the Mesopotamian, a presbyter at Antioch, wrote an
 excellent book Against Eutyches, and is said to be writing others,
 which I have not yet read.

 [2696] Presbyter 457.

 Chapter LXXIII.

 Timotheus, [2697] [2698] when Proterius [2699] had been put to death by
 the Alexandrians, in response to popular clamour, willingly or
 unwillingly allowed himself to be made bishop by a single bishop in the
 place of him who had been put to death. And lest he, having been
 illegally appointed, should be deservedly deposed at the will of the
 people who had hated Proterius, he pronounced all the bishops of his
 vicinity to be Nestorians, and boldly presuming to wash out the stain
 on his conscience by hardihood, wrote a very persuasive book to the
 Emperor Leo, which he attempted to fortify by testimonies of the
 Fathers, used in a perverted sense, so far as to show, for the sake of
 deceiving the emperor and establishing his heresy, that Leo of Rome,
 pontiff of the city, and the synod of Chalcedon, and all the Western
 bishops were fundamentally Nestorians. But by the grace of God, the
 enemy of the church was refuted and overthrown at the Council of
 Chalcedon. He is said to be living in exile, still an heresiarch, and
 it is most likely so. This book of his for learning's sake, I
 translated by request of the brethren into Latin and prefixed a caveat.
 [2700]

 [2697] Bishop of Alexandria 380, died 385.

 [2698] Timotheus 31 e add Bishop of Alexandria.

 [2699] Proterius; 25 30 Fabr. Her. add the bishop.

 [2700] This book...caveat A T 25 30 31 a e 21 Fabr.; omit Migne. Her.

 Chapter LXXIV.

 Asclepius, [2701] the African, bishop of a large see [2702] within the
 borders of Bagais, wrote against the Arians, and is said to be now
 writing against the Donatists. He is famous for his extemporaneous
 teaching.

 [2701] Bishop of Bagais (Vagen) about 485.

 [2702] large see A T 25 30 31 a? e earliest eds.; small village. Fabr.
 Migne. Her.

 Chapter LXXV.

 Peter, [2703] presbyter of the church at Edessa, a famous preacher,
 wrote Treatises on various subjects, and Hymns after the manner of
 Saint Ephrem, the deacon.

 [2703] Flourished 450.

 Chapter LXXVI.

 Paul [2704] the presbyter, a Pannonian by nationality, as I learned
 from his own mouth, wrote On preserving virginity, and contempt for the
 world, and the Ordering of life or the correction of morals, written in
 a mediocre style, but flavoured with divine salt. The two books were
 addressed to a certain noble virgin devoted to Christ, Constantia by
 name, and in them he mentions Jovinian the heretic and preacher of
 voluptuousness and lusts, who was so far removed from leading a
 continent and chaste life, that he belched forth his life in the midst
 of luxurious banquets. [2705]

 [2704] Flourished 430?

 [2705] T adds several lines.

 Chapter LXXVII.

 Pastor [2706] the bishop composed a short work, written in the form of
 a creed, and containing pretty much the whole round of Ecclesiastical
 doctrine in sentences. In this, among other heresies which he
 anathematizes without giving the names of their authors, he condemns
 the Priscillians and their author.

 [2706] Bishop in Spain? about 400.

 Chapter LXXVIII.

 Victor, [2707] bishop of Cartenna in Mauritania, wrote one long book
 against the Arians, which he sent to king Genseric by his followers, as
 I learned from the preface to the work, [2708] and a work On the
 repentance of the publican, [2709] in which he drew up a rule of life
 for the penitent, according to the authority of Scriptures. He also
 wrote a consolatory work to one Basilius, On the death of a son, filled
 with resurrection hope and good counsel. He also composed many
 Homilies, which have been arranged as continuous works and are as I
 know, made use of by brethren anxious for their own salvation.

 [2707] Victor of Cartenna (Tenez Afr.) bishop about 450.

 [2708] which he sent...work A T 30 31 e 21 Fabr.; omit 25 a Her.

 [2709] publican Fabr. Migne, Her.: On public penance, A T 30 31 a? e?:
 omit publican 25 Bamb Bern. the oldest editions.

 Chapter LXXIX.

 Voconius, [2710] bishop of Castellanum in Mauritania, wrote Against the
 enemies of the church, Jews, Arians, and other heretics. He composed
 also an excellent work On the Sacraments. [2711]

 [2710] Bishop of Castellan in Mauritania about 450.

 [2711] Sacraments or of Sacraments i.e. a Sacrementary.

 Chapter LXXX.

 Musaeus, [2712] presbyter of the church at Marseilles, a man learned in
 Divine Scriptures and most accurate in their interpretation, as well as
 master of an excellent scholastic style, on the request of Saint
 Venerius the bishop, selected from Holy Scriptures passages suited to
 the various feast days of the year, also passages from the Psalms for
 responses suited to the season, and the passages for reading. The
 readers in the church found this work of the greatest value, in that it
 saved them trouble and anxiety in the selection of passages, and was
 useful for the instruction of the people as well as for the dignity of
 the service. He also addressed to Saint Eustathius [2713] the bishop,
 successor to the above mentioned man of God, an excellent and sizable
 volume, a Sacramentary, [2714] divided into various sections, according
 to the various offices and seasons, Readings and Psalms, both for
 reading and chanting, but also filled throughout with petitions to the
 Lord, [2715] and thanksgiving for his benefits. By this work we know
 him to have been a man of strong intelligence and chaste eloquence. He
 is said to have also delivered homilies, which are, as I know, valued
 by pious men, but which I have not read. He died in the reign of Leo
 and Majorianus.

 [2712] Died before 461.

 [2713] Eustathius 31 e; Eustasius A T a. ed. 1512; Eusebius 25, 30;
 Eustachius Fabr. Migne, Her.

 [2714] Sacramentary or On the Sacraments.

 [2715] the Lord T 25 30 31 a e God Fabr. Her.

 Chapter LXXXI.

 Vincentius [2716] the presbyter, a native of Gaul, practised in Divine
 Scripture and possessed of a style polished by speaking and by wide
 reading, wrote a Commentary On the Psalms. A part of this work, he read
 in my hearing, to a man of God, at Cannatae, promising at the same
 time, that if the Lord should spare his life and strength, he would
 treat the whole Psalter in the same way.

 [2716] Apparently about 450.

 Chapter LXXXII.

 Cyrus, [2717] an Alexandrian by race, and a physician by profession, at
 first a philosopher then a monk, an expert speaker, at first wrote
 elegantly and powerfully against Nestorius, but afterwards, since he
 began to inveigh against him too intemperately [2718] and dealt in
 syllogism rather than Scripture, he began to foster the Timothean
 doctrine. Finally he declined to accept the decree of the council of
 Chalcedon, and did not think the doctrine that after the incarnation
 the Son of God comprehended two natures, was to be acquiesced in.

 [2717] Flourished 460.

 [2718] since he began to inveigh against him too intemperately Norimb.
 and the eds., but the other mss. read "nevertheless" inveigh or
 "inveighs less" or "more" and "is found" for "inveigh." T 21 25 a
 Wolfenb. agree in reading in illo minus invenitur instead of in illum
 nimius inventur. Norimb has same with nimius instead of minus. The
 reading of T 21 25 a Wolfenb. thus reinforced and in view of the fact
 of the easy confusion of minus and nimius in transcribing, is the most
 probable reading, but it is hard to decide and harder still to make
 sense of it.

 Chapter LXXXIII.

 Samuel, [2719] presbyter of the church at Edessa, is said to have
 written many things in Syriac against the enemies of the church,
 especially against the Nestorians, the Eutychians and the Timotheans,
 new heresies all, but differing from one another. On this account he
 frequently speaks of the triple beast, while he briefly refutes by the
 opinion of the church, and the authority of Holy Scriptures, showing to
 the Nestorians, that the Son was God in man, not simply man born of a
 Virgin, to the Eutychians, that he had true human flesh, taken on by
 God, and not merely a body made of thick air, or shown from Heaven; to
 the Timotheans, that the Word was made flesh in such wise, that the
 Word remains Word in substance, and, human nature remaining human
 nature, one person of the Son of God is produced by union, not by
 mingling. He is said to be still living at Constantinople, for at the
 beginning of the reign of Anthemius, I knew his writings, and knew that
 he was in the land of the living.

 [2719] Presbyter 467.

 Chapter LXXXIV.

 Claudianus, [2720] presbyter of the church at Vienne, a master speaker,
 and shrewd in argument, composed three books, On the condition and
 substance of the soul, in which he discusses how far anything is
 incorporeal excepting God.

 [He wrote also some other things, among which are, A Hymn on Our Lord's
 Passion, which begins "Pange lingua gloriosi." He was moreover brother
 of Mamertus, bishop of Vienne.] [2721] (See note.)

 [2720] Claudianus Ecdicius Mamertius died 473-4.

 [2721] wrote...Vienne is said to be in a certain manuscript of the
 Monastery of "St. Michaelis de Tumba" but is omitted by A T 25 30 31 a
 e 21 Bamb. Bern. etc etc. and certainly does not belong in text. It is
 left in brackets above because given in the editions.

 Chapter LXXXV.

 Prosper [2722] of Aquitania, a man scholastic in style and vigorous in
 statement, is said to have composed many works, of which I have read a
 Chronicle, which bears his name, and which extends from the creation of
 the first man, according to Divine Scripture, until the death of the
 Emperor Valentinianus and the taking of Rome by Genseric king of the
 Vandals. I regard as his also an anonymous book against certain works
 of Cassianus, which the church of God finds salutary, but which he
 brands as injurious, and in fact, some of the opinions of Cassian and
 Prosper on the grace of God and on free will are at variance with one
 another. Epistles of Pope Leo against Eutyches, On the true incarnation
 of Christ, sent to various persons, are also thought [2723] to have
 been dictated by him.

 [2722] Born 403, wrote chronicle 445? died 463.

 [2723] thought A 25 30 31 a e 21; said T Fabr. Her.

 Chapter LXXXVI.

 Faustus, [2724] first abbot of the monastery at Lerins, and then made
 bishop [2725] of Riez in Gaul, a man studious of the Divine Scriptures,
 taking his text from the historic creed of the church, composed a book
 On the Holy Spirit, in which he shows from the belief of the fathers,
 that the Holy Spirit is consubstantial and coeternal with the Father
 and the Son, the fulness of the Trinity and therefore God. [2726] He
 published also an excellent work, On the grace of God, through which we
 are saved, [2727] in which he teaches that the grace of God always
 invites, precedes and helps our will, and whatever gain that freedom of
 will may attain for its pious effect, is not its own desert, but the
 gift of grace. I have read also a little book of his Against the Arians
 and Macedonians, in which he posits a coëssential Trinity, and another
 against those who say that there is anything incorporeal in created
 things, in which he maintains from the testimony of Scriptures, and by
 quotations from the fathers, that nothing is to be regarded as
 incorporeal but God. There is also a letter of his, written in the form
 of a little book, and addressed to a certain deacon, named Graecus,
 who, leaving the Catholic faith, had gone over to the Nestorian
 impiety.

 In this epistle he admonishes him to believe that the holy Virgin Mary
 did not bring forth a mere human being, who afterwards should receive
 divinity, but true God in true man. There are still other works by him,
 but as I have not read, I do not care to mention them. This excellent
 doctor is enthusiastically believed in and admired. He wrote afterwards
 also to Felix, the Prætonian prefect, and a man of Patrician rank, son
 of Magnus the consul, a very pious letter, exhorting to the fear of
 God, a work well fitted to induce one to repent with his whole heart.

 [2724] Abbot of Lerins 433-4, bishop of Riez 462, exiled 477-84, died
 490.

 [2725] Made bishop A T 31 e 21; bishop a 25 30.

 [2726] and therefore God T 25 31 a e 21 [31 A?;] obtaining Fabr. Her.;
 Bamb and ed. 1512 read and therefore but join to next sentence.

 [2727] savedA T 25; add and the free will of the human mind in which we
 are saved 30 31 a e.

 Chapter LXXXVII.

 Servus Dei [2728] the bishop, wrote against those who say that Christ
 while living in this world did not see the Father with his eyes of
 flesh--But after his resurrection from the dead and his ascension into
 heaven when he had been translated into the glory of God the Father as
 in reward so to speak to him for his abnegation and a compensation for
 his martyrdom. In this work he showed both from his own argument and
 from the testimony of Sacred Scriptures that the Lord Jesus from his
 conception by the Holy Spirit and his birth of the Virgin through which
 true God in true man himself also man made God was born, always beheld
 with his eyes of flesh both the Father and the Holy Spirit through the
 special and complete union of God and man.

 [2728] Bishop of "Tiburcisen" about 406-11.

 Chapter LXXXVIII.

 Victorius [2729] the Aquitanian, a careful [2730] reckoner, on
 invitation of St. Hilary bishop of Rome, composed a Paschal cycle with
 the most careful investigation following his four predecessors, that is
 Hippolytus, Eusebius, Theophilus and Prosper, and extended the series
 of years to the year five hundred and thirty-two, reckoning in such
 wise that in the year 533 the paschal festival should take place again
 on the same month and day and the same moon as on that first year when
 the Passion and resurrection of our Lord took place.

 [2729] Wrote 457. 30 a read Victorinus.

 [2730] careful T 25 30 31 a Fabr.; most diligent A Norimb?; Bern
 Norimb. et alt add of the Scriptures: of measures Her.

 Chapter LXXXIX.

 Theodoretus [2731] [2732] bishop of Cyrus (for the city founded by
 Cyrus king of the Persians preserves until the present day in Syria the
 name of its founder) is said to have written many works. Such as have
 come to my knowledge are the following: On the incarnation of the Lord,
 Against Eutyches the presbyter and Dioscorus bishop of Alexandria who
 deny that Christ had human flesh; strong works by which he confirmed
 through reason and the testimony of Scripture that He had real flesh
 from the maternal substance which he derived from His Virgin mother
 just as he had true deity which he received at birth by eternal
 generation from God the Father. There are ten books of the
 ecclesiastical history which he wrote in imitation of Eusebius of
 Cæsarea beginning where Eusebius ends and extending to his own time,
 that is from the Vicennalia of Constantine until the accession of the
 elder Leo in whose reign he died.

 [2731] Theodoret born about 393, bishop of Cyrrhaus 423, wrote 450,
 died 457.

 [2732] Theodoretus A a e; Theodoritus 31; Theodorus T 25 30.

 Chapter XC.

 Gennadius [2733] a Patriarch [2734] of the church of Constantinople, a
 man brilliant in speech and of strong genius, was so richly equipped by
 his reading of the ancients that he was able to expound the prophet
 Daniel entire commenting on every word.

 He composed also many Homilies. He died while the elder Leo was
 Emperor.

 [2733] Bishop (or "Pontiff") 458, died 471.

 [2734] Patriarch (Pontiff) A T 30 31 e 21; bishop 25 a Fabr. Her.

 Chapter XCI.

 Theodulus, [2735] [2736] a presbyter in Coelesyria is said to have
 written many works, but the only one which has come to my hand, is the
 one which he composed On the harmony of divine Scripture, that is, the
 Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, against the ancient heretics
 who on account of discrepancies in the injunctions of the ritual, say
 that the God of the Old Testament is different from the God of the New.
 In this work he shows it to have been by the dispensation of one and
 the same God, the author of both Scriptures, that one law should be
 given by Moses to those of old in a ritual of sacrifices and in
 judicial laws, and another to us through the presence of Christ in the
 holy mysteries and future promises, that they should not be considered
 different, but as dictated by one spirit and one author, since these
 things which if observed only according to the letter, would slay, if
 observed according to the spirit, would give life to the mind. This
 writer died three years since [2737] in the reign of Zeno.

 [2735] Died 492 (C)--rather before 491.

 [2736] Theodulus A T 31 a e; Theodorus 25 30 21.

 [2737] three years since A T 30? 31 21; omit 25 a.

 Chapter XCII.

 [Sidonius [2738] bishop of the Arverni wrote several acceptable works
 and being a man sound in doctrine as well as thoroughly imbued with
 divine and human learning and a man of commanding genius wrote a
 considerable volume of letters to different persons written in various
 metres or in prose and this showed his ability in literature. Strong in
 Christian vigour even in the midst of that barbaric ferocity which at
 that time oppressed the Gauls he was regarded as a catholic father and
 a distinguished doctor. He flourished during the tempest which marked
 the rule of Leo and Zenos.] [2739]

 [2738] Caius Sollius Apollinaris Sidonius born about 430, bishop 472,
 died about 488.

 [2739] This chapter is in Norimb. and three only of the mss. seen by
 the translator N. British Museum Harl. 3155, xv cent.; 43 Wolfenbüttel
 838 xv cent.; k Paris B. N. Lat. 896. It is omitted by A T 25 30 31 a e
 21 etc. etc. etc. and really has no place in the text, but as it was
 early introduced and is in the editions (not however the earliest ones)
 it is given here.

 Chapter XCIII.

 John [2740] of Antioch first grammarian, and then Presbyter, wrote
 against those who assert that Christ is to be adored in one substance
 only and do not admit that two natures are to be recognized in Christ.
 He taught according to the Scriptural account that in Him God and man
 exist in one person, and not the flesh and the Word in one nature.

 He likewise attacked certain sentiments of Cyril, bishop of Alexandria,
 unwisely [2741] delivered by Cyril against Nestorius, which now are an
 encouragement and give strength to the Timotheans. [2742] He is said to
 be still living and preaching.

 [2740] Flourished 477-495.

 [2741] unwisely T 25 30 31 e; unwisely saying A? a?

 [2742] Timotheans A T 25 30 31 a e 21 etc; add which is absurd Fabr.
 Migne, Her.

 Chapter XCIV.

 [Gelasius, [2743] [2744] bishop of Rome wrote Against Eutyches and
 Nestorius a great and notable volume, also Treatises on various parts
 of the scripture and the sacraments written in a polished style. He
 also wrote Epistles against Peter and Acacius which are still preserved
 in the catholic church. He wrote also Hymns after the fashion of bishop
 Ambrosius. He died during the reign of the emperor Anastasius.

 [2743] Bishop 492, died 496.

 [2744] From this point to the end is bracketed, as a large part of the
 mss. end with John of Antioch. Of our mss. Gelasius and Gennadius are
 contained in 25 30 e², Honoratus to Pomerius in A 30 31 e² 40.

 Chapter XCV.

 Honoratus, [2745] bishop of Constantina in Africa wrote a letter to one
 Arcadius who on account of his confession of the catholic faith had
 been exiled to Africa by King Genseric. [2746] This letter was an
 exhortation to endure hardness for Christ and fortified by modern
 examples and scripture illustrations showing that perseverance in the
 confession of the faith not only purges past sins but also procures the
 blessing of martyrdom.

 [2745] Bishop of Constantina (Cirta) 437.

 [2746] exiled by King Genseric; omit e² 30 31 40.

 Chapter XCVI.

 Cerealis [2747] the bishop, an African by birth, was asked by Maximus
 bishop of the Arians whether he could establish the catholic faith by a
 few testimonies of Divine Scripture and without any controversial
 assertions. This he did in the name of the Lord, truth itself helping
 him, not with a few testimonies as Maximus had derisively asked, but
 proving by copious proof texts from both Old and New Testaments and
 published in a little book.

 [2747] Bishop of "Castelli Ripensis" in Africa 484.

 Chapter XCVII.

 Eugenius, [2748] bishop of Carthage in Africa and public confessor,
 commanded by Huneric [2749] King of the Vandals to write an exposition
 of the catholic faith and especially to discuss the meaning of the word
 Homoousian, with the consent of all the bishops and confessors of
 Mauritania in Africa and Sardinia and Corsica, who had remained in the
 catholic faith, composed a book of faith, fortified not only by
 quotations from the Holy Scriptures but by testimonies of the Fathers,
 and sent it by his companions in confession. But now, exiled as a
 reward for his faithful tongue, like an anxious shepherd over his sheep
 he has left behind works urging them to remember the faith and the one
 sacred baptism to be preserved at all hazards. He also wrote out the
 Discussions which he held through messengers with the leaders of the
 Arians and sent them to be given to Huneric by his major domo. Likewise
 also he presented to the same, petitions for the peace of the
 Christians which were of the nature of an Apology, and he is said to be
 still living for the strengthening of the church.

 [2748] Bishop 479, died 505.

 [2749] Huneric A; omit e² 30 31 40.

 Chapter XCVIII.

 Pomerius [2750] the Mauritanian was ordained presbyter in Gaul. He
 composed a dialectical treatise in eight books On the nature of the
 soul and its properties, also one On the resurrection and its
 particular bearing for the faithful in this life and in general for all
 men, written in clear language and style, in the form of a dialogue
 between Julian the bishop, and Verus the presbyter. The first book
 contains discourses on what the soul is and in what sense it is thought
 to be created in the image of God, the second, whether the soul should
 be thought of as corporeal or incorporeal, the third, how the soul of
 the first man [2751] was made, fourth, whether the soul which is put in
 the body at birth is newly created and without sin, or produced from
 the substance of the first man like a shoot from a root it brings also
 with it the original sin of the first man, fifth, a review of the
 fourth book of the discussion, [2752] and an inquiry as to what is the
 capability of the soul, that is its possibilities, and that it gains
 its capability from a single and pure will, the sixth, whence arises
 the conflict between flesh and the spirit, spoken of by the apostle,
 seventh, on the difference between the flesh and the spirit in respect
 of life, of death and of resurrection, the eighth, answers to questions
 concerning the things which it is predicted will happen at the end of
 the world, to such questions, that is, as are usually propounded
 concerning the resurrection. I remember to have once read a hortatory
 work of his, addressed to some one named Principius, On contempt of the
 world, and of transitory things, and another entitled, On vices and
 virtues. He is said to have written yet other works, which have not
 come to my knowledge, and to be still writing. He is still living, and
 his life is worthy of Christian profession, and his rank in the church.

 [2750] Died 498.

 [2751] the first man A; the first man's soul e² 30 31 40.

 [2752] discussion 30 40 e²; discussion and definition A 31.

 Chapter XCIX.

 I Gennadius, [2753] a presbyter of Marseilles, have written eight books
 Against all heresies, five [2754] books Against Nestorius, ten [2755]
 books Against Eutyches, three books Against Pelagius, also treatises On
 the Millennium and On the Apocalypse of Saint John, also an epistle On
 my creed, sent to the blessed Gelasius, bishop of Rome.]

 [2753] Died 496.

 [2754] fivee 25 30; six Fabr. Her.

 [2755] tene 25 30; six Norimb Her.; eleven Guelefenb.

 Life and Works of Rufinus

 with

 Jerome's Apology Against Rufinus.

 Translated with Prolegomena and Notes,

 by

 The Hon. and rev. William Henry Fremantle, M.A.

 Canon of Canterbury, Fellow and Tutor of Baliol College, Oxford.

 Prolegomena

 on the

 Life and Works of Rufinus.

 ------------------------

 Note.--The References (where a simple number is given) are to the pages
 in this Volume.

 Tyrannius Rufinus is chiefly known from his relation to Jerome, first
 as an intimate friend and afterwards as a bitter enemy. The immense
 influence of Jerome, through all the ages in which criticism was
 asleep, has unduly lowered his adversary. But he has some solid claims
 of his own on our recognition. His work on the Creed, besides its
 intrinsic merits, must always be an authority as a witness to the state
 of the creed as held in the Italian churches in the beginning of the
 5th century, as also to the state of the Canon and the Apocrypha at
 that time. And it is to his translations that we are indebted for our
 knowledge of many of the works of Origen, including the greatest of
 them all, the Peri 'Archon. We are the more grateful for his services
 because they were so opportune. The works of Origen, which had been
 neglected in the West for a century and to such an extent that the Pope
 Anastasius says (433) that he neither knows who he was nor what he
 wrote, came suddenly into notice in the last quarter of a century
 before Alaric's sack of Rome a.d. 385-410: and it was at this moment
 that Rufinus appeared, according to his friend Macarius' dream (439)
 like a ship laden with the merchandize of the East, an Italian who had
 lived some 25 years in Greek lands, and sufficiently equipped for the
 work of a translator. Through his labours during the last 13 years of
 that eventful time a considerable part of the works of the great
 Alexandrian have floated down across the ocean of the Dark Ages, and,
 while lost in their native Greek, have in their Latin garb come to
 enrich the later civilization of the West.

 a.d. 344-5: Rufinus was born at Concordia (Jer. Ep. v. 2. comp. with
 Ep. x. and De Vir. Ill. §53) between Aquileia and Altinum, a place of
 some importance, which was destroyed by the Huns in 452 but afterwards
 rebuilt. His birth was about the year 344 or 345, he being slightly
 older than Jerome. Nothing is known of his education or the events of
 his youth; but that he was early acquainted with Jerome and was
 interested in sacred literature is seen from the fact that in 368 when
 Jerome went with Bonosus to Gaul, Rufinus begged him to copy for him
 the works of Hilary on the Psalms and on the Councils of the Church
 (Jer. Ep. v. 2).

 a.d. 372-3: His mother did not die till the year 397, as is seen from
 Jerome's mention of her (Letter LXXXI, 1), and it would appear that
 both his parents were Christians. But he was not baptized till about
 his 28th year. He was at that time living at Aquileia, where he had
 embraced the monastic state, and was a member of the company of young
 ascetics to which Jerome and Bonosus belonged. The presence among them
 of Hylas (Jerome Letter III, 3) the freedman of Melania, the wealthy
 and ascetic Roman matron, shows that that relation had already begun
 which was afterwards of such importance in the life of Rufinus. It must
 have been just before the breaking up of that company that he was
 baptized, for Jerome, writing of him (Ep. iv. 2) in 374 from Antioch
 says "He has but lately been washed and is as white as snow." He
 himself gives a full account of his baptism in his Apology (436).

 a.d. 373: When this company of friends was scattered, Rufinus joined
 the noble Roman lady, Melania, in her pilgrimage to the East (Jer.
 Letter iv. 2). He visited the monasteries of Egypt, and apparently
 desired to remain there; but a persecution arose against the orthodox
 monks from Lucius the Arian bishop of Alexandria, seconded by the
 governor, both being prompted by the Arian Emperor Valens: the
 monasteries were in many cases broken up (Sozomen, vi, 19, Socrates iv,
 21-3, Rufinus Eccl. Hist. ii, 3), and Rufinus himself for a while
 suffered imprisonment and was then banished from Egypt (430 Eccl. Hist.
 ii, 4). Rufinus probably on coming out of prison joined Melania who had
 then settled at Diocæsarea (Pallad. Hist. Laus. §117) on the coast of
 Palestine for the purpose of making a home for the Egyptian exiles on
 their way to their various destinations. He states in his Apology (466)
 that he was 6 years in Egypt, and that he returned there again, after
 an interval, for two years more. He was a pupil both of Didymus, then
 head of the catechetical school, who wrote for him a treatise on the
 death of infants (534), and of Theophilus, afterward Bishop of
 Alexandria (528), and that he saw many of the well-known hermits (466),
 such as Serapion and Macarius, whom he describes in his History of the
 Monks. Whether Melania returned with him to Egypt, or whether she went
 to Jerusalem, we do not know: it is also uncertain whether a journey
 which he made (Eccl. Hist. ii. 8) to Edessa was undertaken at this
 time. The date of the settlement of Melania on the Mount of Olives
 according to Jerome's Chronicle is 379, or, according to our present
 reckoning of dates, 377. We may suppose that Rufinus joined her in 379.
 This was his home for eighteen years, till the year 397.

 a.d. 386: Rufinus was ordained at Jerusalem, probably about the time
 when John, with whom he was closely connected, succeeded Cyril in the
 Bishopric. The great resources of Melania were added to his own which
 seem to have been not inconsiderable. He built habitations for monks on
 the Mount of Olives, and employed them in learned pursuits, and in
 copying manuscripts. On the arrival of Jerome at Bethlehem, the old
 friendship was renewed, though not apparently with all its former
 warmth. Jerome certainly at times visited Rufinus and once at least
 stayed with him (465), and he and his friends brought mss. to be copied
 by the monks of the Mount of Olives (465). He gave lectures on
 Christian writers and doctrine, of which a satirical account is given
 at a later period by Jerome [2756] in his letter to Rusticus (cxxv,
 §18). The nick-name Grunnius which he there gives him was probably
 caused by some trick of the voice. But we may gather from Jerome that
 he read the Greek church writers diligently and lectured upon them, a
 study which enabled him to do much good work at a later time. It is
 probable that he lectured in Greek, since he says in 397 that his Latin
 was weak through disuse (439). We may set against Jerome's depreciatory
 description the account given by Palladius (Hist. Laus. §118).
 "Rufinus, who lived with Melania, was a man of congenial spirit, and of
 great nobility and strength of character. No man has ever been known of
 greater learning or of gentler disposition." Palladius also speaks of
 the princely hospitality of Melania and Rufinus: "They received," he
 says, "bishops and monks, virgins and matrons and helped them out of
 their own funds: They passed their life offending none and being
 helpers of the whole world." It is said by Palladius that he had heard
 from Melania that she had been present at the death of Pambas in Egypt
 which took place in the year 385, and it is probable that Rufinus
 accompanied her on this occasion. He himself records [2757] a journey
 which he made to Edessa and Charrhoe, when he saw settlements of the
 monks like those which he had previously seen in Egypt. But the date of
 this journey does not appear. It may have been undertaken in order to
 visit some of the exiles from Egypt before his establishment on the Mt.
 of Olives. He records also the visits of the remarkable men who were
 entertained by him; Bacurius, who had been king of the Ubii, and
 afterwards count of the Domestics under Theodosius, and was governor or
 duke of Palestine when Rufinus settled there; and Ædesius the companion
 of Frumentius the Missionary to the tribes in the N. W. of India. But
 his chief interest and occupation throughout seems to have been with
 his monks at Mt. Olivet with perhaps some connection with the diocesan
 work of his friend John, the Bp. of Jerusalem. Palladius records that
 Rufinus and Melania were the means of restoring to the communion of the
 church 400 monks. What was this schism, which Palladius describes as
 being "on account of Paulinus"? It is probable that the words relate to
 the monks of Bethlehem whose alienation from the Church of Jerusalem
 had been due to the ordination of Paulinian, Jerome's brother, by
 Epiphanius. We know that Rufinus before leaving Palestine was
 reconciled to Jerome (Jer. Ap. iii. 26, 33); and we know also that
 Jerome's book against John, Bishop of Jerusalem, which describes the
 schism was suddenly broken off; [2758] and that he remained from that
 time forward at one with his Bishop. We may be allowed to believe that
 the influence of Melania as well as Rufinus had been exerted for some
 time previously to bring about this happy result.

 a.d. 382: Rufinus' part in the controversy thus terminated is partly
 known and partly the subject of inference. The original source of
 discord is not known. It is possible that Rufinus, who had been
 mentioned by Jerome in his Chronicle (a.d. 378) as being, together with
 Florentius and Bonosus, a specially distinguished monk, did not find
 himself included in his friend's Catalogue of Church writers (De Vir.
 III.) published at Bethlehem.

 a.d. 392: When Aterbius began the Origenist troubles at Jerusalem,
 Rufinus, who treated him with merited scorn (Jer. Ap. iii, 33) probably
 felt some resentment at Jerome who, by "giving satisfaction" to the
 heresy hunter, had countenanced his proceedings. Rufinus appears as
 Bishop John's adviser during the visit of Epiphanius (Jer. Letter li,
 2, 6), as the chief of a chorus of presbyters who applauded their own
 bishop and derided Epiphanius as a "silly old man;" [2759] and as
 present when Epiphanius remonstrated with his brother-bishop. He is
 also mentioned by Epiphanius in his letter to John (Jer. Letter li. 6)
 as holding an important place in the Church, "May God free you and all
 about you, especially the presbyter Rufinus, from the heresy of Origen,
 and all others." This sentence will suggest to all who are familiar
 with church-controversies a whole series of scenes in the schism which
 continued between Bethlehem and Jerusalem during the next five years.
 Jerome believed Rufinus to have injured him at every turn, to have
 procured the abstraction of a Manuscript of his from the house occupied
 by Fabiola on her visit to Bethlehem (Apol. iii, 4) perhaps to have
 been in league with Vigilantius (Comp. Jer. Ep. lxi, 3 with Apol. iii,
 4, 19). But such insinuations have the appearance rather of the
 suspicions prompted by anger than of actual fact. In any case they were
 condoned when the two old companions who had been so long parted by
 ecclesiastical strife met together at the Church of the Resurrection at
 a solemn eucharistic feast, and joined hands in token of
 reconciliation, and when Jerome accompanied his friend some way on his
 journey before their final parting (Jer. Vol. iii, 24).

 a.d. 397: He arrived in Italy, in company with Melania, early in the
 spring of 397. They were there received by Paulinus of Nola with great
 honour. [2760] Melania went on at once to Rome; but Rufinus stopped at
 the monastery of Pinetum near Terracina. His welcome by the Abbot
 Urseius and the philosopher Macarius, and their request to him to
 translate various Greek books, amongst others the Peri 'Archon of
 Origen, are described in his Prefaces to the Benedictions of the
 Patriarchs, the Apology of Pamphilus and the translations of Origen
 (417, 418, 420, 439). The preface to Origen's chief work (427) had the
 worst and most lasting results. He says that, being aware of the odium
 attaching to the name of Origen, he had feared to translate the work:
 but that the example of Jerome (whom he does not name but whose great
 ability he extols) in translating Origen encourages him to follow in
 his steps. This Preface, with this translation of the Peri 'Archon, was
 published in Rome early in the year 398, Rufinus having moved there to
 stay with Melania.

 a.d. 400-403: At Rome he lived in the circle of Melania, her son
 Publicola and his wife Albina, with their daughter the younger Melania
 and her husband Pinianus, to whom we may probably add the Pope
 Siricius, and certainly Apronianus, a young noble whom he speaks of as
 his son in the faith (435, 564). Jerome's friend Eusebius of Cremona
 was also in Rome, and on friendly terms with him (445). But on the
 appearance of the work of Origen with Rufinus' Preface, a great ferment
 arose leading to the violent controversy between Rufinus and Jerome
 which is described in the Preface to their Apologies (434, 482).

 a.d. 398: Meanwhile, Rufinus had left Rome probably in 398, having
 obtained the usual Literæ Formatæ from the Pope Siricius, who died that
 year, to introduce him to other churches. [2761] We hear of him at
 Milan, where in the presence of the Bishop, Simplicianus, [2762] he met
 Eusebius of Cremona, and heard him read out a letter of Theophilus
 containing some passages from the Peri 'Archon, against which he
 vehemently protested (490).

 a.d. 399-408: He then, having probably visited his native city of
 Concordia, where his mother, [2763] possibly his father also (430, 502)
 was still living, took up his abode at Aquileia. There he was welcomed
 by the bishop, Chromatius, by whom he had been baptized some 26 or 27
 years before. Rufinus probably arrived at Aquileia in the beginning of
 399, and remained there 9 or 10 years. It was during this period that
 all his principal works except the Commentary on the Benedictions of
 the patriarchs, the translation of the Peri 'Archon and Pamphilus'
 Apology, and the book on adulterations of Origen were composed. It was
 soon after his settlement at Aquileia that he heard from Apronianus of
 the letter of Jerome to Pammachius and Oceanus [2764] expressing his
 anger against him for the mention he had made of Jerome in the Preface
 to the Peri 'Archon. The conciliatory letter to Rufinus which
 accompanied this and which was an answer to a friendly one from Rufinus
 [2765] was not sent on by Jerome's friends (489); and Rufinus, thinking
 that his old friend had completely turned against him, composed his
 Apology (434-482) which drew forth Jerome's reply (482-541). This
 controversy is placed in full before the reader of this volume in an
 English translation, with prefatory notes. It may therefore be treated
 very shortly here.

 Rufinus' Apology is an answer to Jerome's letter to Pammachius and
 Oceanus. It is addressed to Apronianus of Rome. He makes a profession
 of his Christian standing and faith, especially on the points raised by
 the Origenistic controversy; he describes the circumstances which had
 led him to translate the books of Origen, and defends his method of
 translation, which, he says, has been misrepresented by men sent from
 the East to lay snares for him. His method, he declares, was the same
 which had been used by Jerome, who boasted that through him the Latins
 knew all that was good in Origen and nothing of the bad. Where he found
 passages in Origen's writings, in flagrant contradiction to the
 orthodox opinion he had maintained elsewhere, he concluded that the
 passage had been falsified by heretics, and restored the more orthodox
 statement which he believed to have been originally there. He then
 turns round upon Jerome and points out that, in his Commentaries on the
 Ephesians, written some 10 years before, to which he specially referred
 in his Letter as showing his freedom from heresy, he had practically
 adopted the opinions now imputed to Origen as heretical, such as the
 fall of souls from a previous state into the prison house of earthly
 bodies, and the universal restoration of spiritual beings.

 In the second book he clears himself from the imputation of following
 Origen and Plato in believing in the lawfulness of using occasional
 falsehood in the government and training of men. But he imputes to his
 adversary a systematic use of falsehood in reference to his reading
 heathen authors, while he professed in his letter to Eustochium (Jer.
 Ep. xxii) to have solemnly promised never even to possess them. He then
 takes a wider view of Jerome's writings, showing how, in this Letter to
 Eustochium, his books against Jovinian, etc., he had by his satirical
 pictures held up to ridicule the various classes of Christians, clergy,
 monks, virgins: how he had praised Origen indiscriminately as a teacher
 second only to the Apostles: how he had defamed men like Ambrose, and
 therefore his present accusations were little worth: how he boasted of
 having taken as his teachers not only Origenists like Didymus or
 heretics like Apollinarius, but heathen like Porphyry, and had made his
 translation of the Old Testament under the influence of the Jew
 Baranina (whose name Rufinus perverts into Barabbas). He concludes by
 summarizing his accusations and calling upon the reader to choose
 between him and his opponent.

 This Apology was only sent to a few friends of Rufinus (530); but
 portions of it became known to Jerome's friends and his brother
 Paulinian (493) carried them to Bethlehem, together with Rufinus'
 Apology addressed to Pope Anastasius. Jerome had also before him the
 letter of Anastasius to John Bishop of Jerusalem (509) showing his
 dislike of Rufinus' proceedings. On these he grounds his own Apology,
 which was originally in two books and was addressed to Pammachius and
 Marcella a.d. 402.

 In the first book he blames Rufinus' breach of friendship after the
 reconciliation which had taken place at Jerusalem; he then shows that
 he was compelled to translate the Peri 'Archon in order to show what it
 really was. He declares that the Apology of Origen translated by
 Rufinus as the work of Pamphilus was really written by Eusebius; that
 Origen had been condemned by Theophilus and Anastasius, by East and
 West alike, and by the decree of the Emperors. He defends himself for
 having used heathen and heretical teachers, and help of a Jewish
 scholar in translating the Old Testament. As to his Commentaries on the
 Ephesians he declares that he merely put side by side the opinions of
 various commentators, indicating at times his knowledge that some were
 heretical: and as to his anti-Ciceronian dream, he ridicules the idea
 that a man can be bound by his night visions.

 In the second book he criticizes Rufinus' Apology addressed to
 Anastasius as to both its style and its matter, and blames him for his
 treatment of Epiphanius, and endeavours to implicate him in the
 imputation of heresy. He then defends his translation of the Old
 Testament, showing by copious quotations from the Prefaces to the Books
 that he had done nothing condemnatory of the Septuagint, whose version
 he had himself translated into Latin and constantly used in familiar
 expositions.

 This Apology was brought to Rufinus at Aquileia by a merchant who was
 leaving again in two days (522). Chromatius no doubt urged him, as he
 urged Jerome (520) not to continue the controversy and he yielded. He
 wrote, however, a private letter to Jerome, which has been lost,
 sending him an accurate copy of his Apology, and while declining public
 controversy, yet declaring that he could have said even more than
 before, and divulged things which would have been worse to Jerome than
 death. Jerome in his answer written a.d. 403, which forms B. iii of his
 Apology, declares that the controversy is Rufinus' fault, and defends
 his friends for their conduct towards him, even in holding back the
 conciliatory letter written in 399; but shows how a way might still be
 open for friendship. He touches again upon most of the points dwelt on
 in the previous books, defending himself and accusing Rufinus, and ends
 by declaring that his bitter reply was necessitated first by Rufinus'
 threats, and secondly by his abhorrence of heresy, from all complicity
 with which he must at any price clear himself.

 This book closed the controversy. Rufinus did not reply, Jerome did not
 relent. Nothing in Rufinus' subsequent writings reflects on Jerome; but
 Jerome is never weary of expressing his hatred of Rufinus, speaking of
 him after his death as "the Scorpion" [2766] and writing malignant
 satirical descriptions of him like that in his letter to Rusticus.
 [2767]

 It may be observed, however, that notwithstanding the violent words
 used on both sides, it was possible for eminent churchmen to esteem and
 befriend both parties. Augustine, on receiving Jerome's Apology,
 laments, in words which must have been felt by Jerome as a severe
 reproach, that two such men, so loved by the churches, should thus tear
 each other to pieces. Chromatius, while he kept up communications with
 Jerome, and supplied him with funds for his literary work, was also the
 friend and adviser of Rufinus.

 Rufinus' friends at Aquileia, like those at the Pinetum and at Rome,
 were anxious to gain from him a knowledge of the great church-writers
 of the East, and especially of Origen. No one at Aquileia seems to have
 known Greek. He makes excuses in his Prefaces (430, 563, 565, etc.) for
 the difficulty of the task and his own short-comings which seem to be
 partly conventional, partly genuine. But he did a work which he alone
 or almost alone at that period was qualified to do. His translations of
 Origen and Pamphilus were already known. We learn from Jerome (536)
 that Rufinus had translated parts of the LXX. He now translated
 Eusebius' Church History, and added to it two books of his own; he
 translated the so-called Recognitions of Clement, which till then were
 almost unknown in Italy. He wrote a History of the Monks of the East,
 partly from personal knowledge, partly from what he had heard or read
 of them. And he translated the Commentaries of Origen upon the
 Heptateuch or 1st seven books of Scripture, except Numbers and
 Deuteronomy; and those on the Epistle to the Romans. He also wrote his
 exposition of the Creed (541-563), and probably some other works which
 have not come down to us.

 a.d. 400-402: The first part of his stay at Aquileia was troubled by
 the controversy with Jerome. He also received from his friends at Rome
 the intelligence that his Preface and translation of the Peri 'Archon
 had been brought to the notice of the Pope Anastasius, by Pammachius
 and Marcella (430); and probably the letter of the Pope to Venerius
 Bishop of Milan, which is quoted in Anastasius' letter to John of
 Jerusalem (433) was also brought to his knowledge.

 a.d. 400: Though there is no reason to suppose, as has been often done,
 that the Pope passed sentence upon him, still less that he summoned him
 to Rome. Rufinus was so far affected by what he heard of the adverse
 feeling excited in the Pope's mind toward him that he thought it
 desirable to write an explanation or apology (430-2) vindicating his
 action in the translation of Origen, and giving an exposition of his
 own belief on some of the principal points dealt with in the Peri
 'Archon. From the letter of Anastasius to John of Jerusalem we gather
 that John had written to him in the interest of Rufinus, and had blamed
 Jerome's friends at Rome, perhaps also Jerome himself, for the part
 they had taken in reference to him. It is a curious fact that this
 letter was known to Jerome but not to Rufinus during the controversy
 (509); but it can hardly be inferred with any certainty from this that
 John had changed sides and favoured Jerome at Rufinus' expense.

 a.d. 408: After 8 or 9 years at Aquileia Rufinus returned to Rome. His
 friend Chromatius of Aquileia had died in 405. Anastasius of Rome had
 also passed away (a.d. 402), and his successor Innocentius was without
 prejudice against Rufinus. Melania was either there or with Paulinus at
 Nola. Her son Publicola had died in 406, but his widow Albina was with
 her, and her granddaughter the younger Melania with her husband
 Pinianus. The siege of Rome by Alaric was impending, and the whole
 party were starting by way of Sicily and Africa, in both of which
 Melania had property, intending eventually to reach Palestine. He
 joined their "religious company" as he tells us in the Preface to
 Origen on Numbers (568) which, according to Palladius (Hist. Laus. 119)
 formed a vast caravan with slaves, virgins and eunuchs; and he was with
 them in Sicily when Alaric burned Rhegium (568) the flames of which
 they saw across the straits.

 This translation of Numbers was his last work. He was at that time
 suffering in his eyes; and he died soon afterwards in Sicily, as we
 learn from Jerome's malicious words "The Scorpion now lies underground
 between Enceladus and Porphyrion." [2768] The undying hatred of Jerome
 towards him has unduly lowered him in the estimation of the Church. He
 was far below Jerome in literary ability, but in their great
 controversy he displayed more magnanimity than his rival, being willing
 to forego a public answer to his provoking apology. He was highly
 esteemed by the eminent churchmen of his time and the Bishops near whom
 he lived. Chromatius of Aquileia was his friend; for Petronius of
 Bologna he wrote his monastic history, for Gaudentius of Brixia he
 translated the Clementine Recognitions, for Laurentius (perhaps of his
 native Concordia) he composed his work on the Creed. Paulinus of Nola
 continued his friendship for him to the end. Above all Augustine speaks
 of him as the object of love and of honour; and, in his reply to Jerome
 [2769] who had sent him his Apology, says: "I grieved, when I had read
 your book, that such discord should have arisen between persons so dear
 and so intimate, bound to all the churches by a bond of affection and
 of renown."

 We may conclude this notice by two quotations from writers who lived
 shortly after the death of Rufinus; the first of which shows how
 unfairly the fame of Jerome has pressed on the memory of his
 antagonist, while the second may be taken as the verdict of
 unprejudiced history. Pope Gelasius, at a Council at Rome in 494, drew
 up a list of books to be received in the church, in which he says of
 Rufinus: "He was a religious man, and wrote many books of use to the
 Church, and many commentaries on the Scripture; but, since the most
 blessed Jerome infamed him on certain points, we take part with him
 (Jerome) in this and in all cases in which he has pronounced a
 condemnation." (Migne's Patrologia vol. lix. col. 175). On the other
 hand Gennadius, in his list of Ecclesiastical writers (c. 17) says:
 "Rufinus, the presbyter, of Aquileia, was not the least of the
 church-teachers, and showed an elegant genius in his translations from
 Greek into Latin;" and, after giving a list of his writings, he
 continues: "He also replied in two volumes to him who decried his
 works, showing convincingly that he had exercised his powers through
 the might which God had given him, and for the good of the church, and
 that it was through a spirit of rivalry that his adversary had employed
 his pen in defaming him."

 [2756] "He came in with a slow and stately step; he spoke with a broken
 utterance, sometimes with a kind of disjointed sobs rather than words.
 He had a pile of tomes upon the table; and then, with a frown and a
 contraction of the nostrils, and his forehead wrinkled up, he snapped
 his fingers to call the attention of his audience. What he said had no
 depth in it; but he criticized others, and pointed out their defects,
 as though he would exclude them from the Senate of Christian teachers.
 He was rich, and entertained freely, and many flocked round him in his
 public appearances. He was as luxurious as Nero at home, as stern as
 Cato abroad; as full of contradictions as the Chimæra."

 [2757] Hist. Eccl. ii. 8.

 [2758] For the date of this work, see the Note prefixed to it in the
 translation of Jerome's works, Vol. vi. of this series.

 [2759] See Jerome's expressions in his book "Against John of Jerusalem"
 c. 11, which evidently refer to Rufinus: "grinning like a dog and
 turning up his nose."

 [2760] Paulinus Ep. xxix, 12.

 [2761] Jer. Ep. cxxvii, 9 Ap. iii. 21.

 [2762] Successor of Ambrose, and Bishop a.d. 397-400. See the Letter of
 Anastasius to him. Jer. Ep. xcv.

 [2763] She died soon after. See Jerome Ep. lxxxi, 1.

 [2764] Jer. Ep. lxxxiv.

 [2765] See Jer. Ep. lxxxi, 1.

 [2766] Jer. Ep. cxxvii. 10.

 [2767] Jer. Ep. cxxv.

 [2768] Jer. Pref. to Comm. on Ezek. B. I.

 [2769] Aug. Letter 73 (In Jerome's Letters No. 110).

 Works of Rufinus.

 I. Original Works which still Survive.

 1. A Commentary on the Benedictions of the 12 Patriarchs. This short
 work was composed at the monastery of Pinetum near Terracina during
 Lent in the year 398, at the request of Paulinus of Nola. Rufinus had
 stayed with Paulinus on his first arrival with Melania in Italy
 (Paulinus. Ep. xxix, 12.) and Paulinus wrote to him (417) after he had
 gone to Pinetum begging him to give an explanation of the blessing of
 Jacob in Judah. Rufinus, though not replying for a time, sent his
 exposition, and afterwards, on a second request from Paulinus, added
 the exposition of the rest of the blessings in the Patriarchs, like the
 son in the parable (as he explains in a graceful letter prefixed to the
 work) who said "I go not," but afterwards repented and went.

 The exposition is well written and clear; but it is not in itself of
 much value. The text on which he comments is very faulty: for instance,
 in the Blessing of Reuben, instead of the words "the excellency of
 dignity and the excellency of power," it has "durus conversatione, et
 durus, temerarius." When Rufinus adheres to the plain interpretation of
 the passage his comments are sensible and clear; but he soon passes to
 the mystic sense: Reuben is God's first-born people, the Jews, and the
 couch which he defiles is the law of the Old Testament; and the moral
 interpretation is grounded on the supposed meaning of Reuben, "the Son
 who is seen," that is the visible, carnal man, who breaks through the
 law. So, in Judah's "binding his foal to the vine," the explanation
 given as he says, by the Jews, that the vines will be so plentiful that
 they are used even for tying up the young colts, is dismissed. The foal
 is the Christian Church the offspring of Israel which is God's ass, and
 is bound to Christ the true vine.

 2. A dissertation on the adulteration of the works of Origen by
 heretics, subjoined to his translation of Pamphilus' Apology for
 Origen. This will be found in the present volume pp. 421-427.

 3. An apology addressed to the Pope Anastasius. See the introductory
 note prefixed to the translation of this work (429) now first
 translated into English.

 4. The Apology for himself against the attacks of Jerome. See the
 introductory statement prefixed to the translation (434-5).

 5. Ecclesiastical History in Two Books, being a continuation of the
 History of Eusebius translated by Rufinus into Latin. This work was
 composed at Aquileia at the request of the Bishop, Chromatius. The date
 is probably 401, since in the Preface Rufinus says that he had been
 requested to translate Eusebius at the time when Alaric was invading
 Italy. This must allude to the first of Alaric's invasions, in 400,
 since the second invasion (402) would have been marked by some word
 such as "Iterum," and at the 3d in 408 Chromatius had already died. The
 history does not attempt to give more than the chief events, and these
 are told with little sense of proportion, the Council of Ariminum
 occupying about 20 lines, while the story of the right arm of Arsenius
 which Athanasius was accused of cutting off takes up five times that
 space. Some documents of great importance, however, are given, such as
 the canons of Nicæa, and the Creed as it issued from the council. But
 there is much credulity, as shown in the account of the Discovery of
 the True Cross by Helena mother of Constantine, and the stories of the
 death of Arius and the attempted rebuilding of the Jewish Temple under
 Julian. Rufinus has none of the critical power needed for a true
 historian. We may add that all that is valuable in his history is
 incorporated into the works of Socrates (translated in Vol. iii. of
 this Series). See especially B. ii, c. 1.

 6. The History of the Monks which is a description of the Egyptian
 Solitaries appears to have no mark of its date: But it was, no doubt,
 composed at Aquileia between 398 and 409, probably in the later part of
 that period. It was written in the name of Petronius Bishop of Bologna,
 and records his experiences, which he says he had been often requested
 by the monks of Mt. Olivet to commit to writing. It is full of strange
 stories like those in Jerome's Lives of the Hermits Hilarion and
 Malchus. [2770] There is often a verbal resemblance between this book
 and the Lausiac History of Palladius; indeed, they at times record the
 same adventures (compare the story of the crocodiles, Ruf. Hist. Mon.
 xxxiii. 6 with Pall. Hist. Laus. cl., where even the same prayers and
 texts are put into the mouths of the two narrators.) But it is probable
 that in these cases Palladius is indebted to Rufinus.

 7. The Exposition of the Creed is described in the note prefixed to the
 Translation (541).

 8. The Prefaces to the Books of Origen, translated by Rufinus, and to
 the Apology of Pamphilus for Origen, together with the Book on the
 Adulteration of Origen's Writings are given in this volume (420-427).
 That to the Peri 'Archon (427) is the document on which the great
 controversy between Jerome and Rufinus turns. That to Numbers gives
 personal details of importance, while the Peroration to the Ep. to the
 Romans exhibits the method used in translating. The Preface and
 Epilogue to the work of Pamphilus are of great importance in connexion
 with the controversy between Jerome and Rufinus.

 [2770] See those Lives translated in Vol. vi of this Series.

 II. Translations from Greek Writers.

 1. The Rule of St. Basil, translated at Pinetum for the Abbat Urseius
 in 397 or 398. This was the first work written by Rufinus of which we
 have any knowledge.

 2. The Apology of Pamphilus for Origen. This formed the 1st book of an
 Apology for Origen's teaching in 6 books, which were composed by
 Eusebius and Pamphilus during the latter's imprisonment at Cæsarea
 previous to his martyrdom. Eusebius speaks of this work in a general
 way (H. E. vi. 33) as written by himself and Pamphilus. The last book,
 however, was written by Eusebius alone after the death of Pamphilus.
 The part translated by Rufinus is only the 1st book, and this he
 believed to be by Pamphilus alone. Jerome in his Apology (487, 514)
 asserted that the whole was by Eusebius alone. But his bitter feeling
 led him astray in this. The Apology for Origen has perished with the
 exception of this 1st book which survives in Rufinus' Translation. The
 Preface which he prefixed to the work, and the Epilogue which he
 subjoined to it under the name of "The book concerning the adulteration
 of the works of Origen" are given in our translation (420-427). This
 work was written at Pinetum near Terracina at the request of Macarius,
 to whom the Preface is addressed, in the end of 397 or the beginning of
 398. For the questions relating to the authorship of the Apology the
 reader is referred to the Apologies of Jerome and Rufinus (esp. pp.
 487, 514), to Lightfoot's Article on Eusebius in the Dict. of Eccl.
 Biography, and the Prolegomena to the Translation of Eusebius in this
 Series, p. 36.

 3. Origen's Peri 'Archon. This translation was also made at the request
 of Macarius, and was finished as the Preface to B. iii. shows in the
 Lent of 398. The questions raised by this Translation are discussed in
 the Introductions to the Works of Jerome (Vol. vi of this Series), and
 of Rufinus in this Volume; and the controversy itself is developed in
 their Apologies (434-540). The greater part of the Peri 'Archon is
 known to us only through this translation.

 4. Origen's Homilies. Those on the Books of Moses and of Joshua were
 translated at various times during the last 10 years of Rufinus' life.
 He had intended, as he states in his Preface to the Book of Numbers, to
 translate all that had been written by Origen on the Pentateuch: he
 accomplished this as regards the first three books, and also as to the
 book of Joshua, at the request of Chromatius; the book of Numbers he
 only finished in Sicily, just before his death; and the Commentaries on
 Deuteronomy he did not live to translate. In these translations, as he
 tells us (567), he did not scruple to supply what he found to be
 omitted in the Greek, the Homilies being of a hortatory kind, whereas
 Rufinus' object was an exposition of the text.

 The Translation of the Homilies on Judges, though there is no Preface
 to it, is ascribed to Rufinus by Fontanini, who maintains that in this
 case, the name of Rufinus being discredited on account of Jerome's
 diatribe against him, the editors have suppressed the Preface, while in
 some other cases they have substituted the name of Jerome for that of
 Rufinus.

 The Translation of Origen's Commentary 36th, 37th and 38th Psalms is
 unquestionably by Rufinus; it is dedicated to Apronianus, and may have
 been written in Rome (Fontanini col. 188, beginning of ch. viii). The
 Preface is given by us in this volume. Fontanini also gives to Rufinus
 a Translation of Origen's Homilies on I Kings and on Canticles. The
 books on Joshua and Judges he translated as he found them (567), but in
 the next he adopted a different method.

 The works of Origen on the Ep. to the Romans were very long, and
 Rufinus did not scruple to condense them (reducing the 25 books of
 Origen to 10), as he clearly states in his Peroration (567). This work
 he addressed to Heraclius, and it was composed during his stay at
 Aquileia.

 Rufinus had hoped, as we learn from the same Peroration (567), to
 translate some at least of the Commentaries of Origen upon the other
 Epistles of St. Paul; but he first determined to finish those upon the
 Pentateuch, a task in which, as we have seen, he was overtaken by
 death.

 5. The Translation of 10 Tracts of St. Basil and 8 of Gregory
 Nazianzen. These are to be found in the works of Basil and Gregory, but
 without Prefaces; they are, however, mentioned by Rufinus himself in
 his Eccl. Hist. ii. 9, and in a letter to Apronianus quoted by
 Fontanini Vit. Ruf. II., viii, I. col. 189.

 6. The Sentences of Xystus, which have been variously attributed to a
 philosopher who flourished in the reign of Augustus, and is quoted by
 Seneca, and to Xystus, or Sixtus, Bp. of Rome, who suffered martyrdom
 in 258. They are called the Annulus ('encheiridion) as inseparable from
 the hand. Rufinus speaks of them in his Preface, translated in this
 volume, as being traditionally ascribed to the Bishop; he does not
 pledge himself to this opinion, but does not deny it; and recent
 research has shown that, though they may have a basis in heathen
 philosophy, they are in their present form the writings of a Christian.
 Jerome, however, scoffs at Rufinus again and again, as either through
 ignorance or heterodoxy ascribing to a Christian Bishop and martyr the
 work of a Pythagorean (See Jerome ad Ctesiphontem (Ep. cxxxiii. c. 3),
 Comm. on Ezek. B. vi. ch. 8, on Jerem. B. iv. ch. 22. The whole matter
 is fully discussed in Dict. of Christian Biog. Art. Xystus.)

 7. The Sentences of Evagrius Ponticus (or Iberita or Galatus) in three
 treatises, (1) to Virgins, (2) To Monks, (3) On the Passionless State.
 These are described with bitter depreciation as heretical works by
 Jerome (Ad Ctes. Ep. 133 c. 3. Pref. to Anti-Pelagian Dialogue and to
 B. iv. of Comm. on Jerem.) but approved by Gennadius (c. 9.) who issued
 an amended version of Rufinus' translation. Rufinus' translation is
 said to be in the Vatican library by Fontanini (Vita Rufini Lib. II. c.
 iv. in Migne's Patrologia Vol. 21 col. 205.)

 8. The Recognitions of Clement supposed to have been written by Clement
 Bishop of Rome, but now known to be a work of 50 or 60 years later. The
 translation of it was asked for by Silvia sister of Rufinus the
 Prætorian Prefect, and was unsuccessfully attempted by Paulinus of Nola
 (see his letter to Rufinus in Fontanini as above, col. 208.) After the
 death of Silvia, Gaudentius Bp. of Brixia where she died as a saint,
 urged Rufinus to make the translation (Peror. to Ep. to Rom. 567)
 Preface of Rufinus.)

 9. The translation of Eusebius' Eccl. History in 9 books, a work much
 valued in Gaul, and often reprinted in later times. The Preface
 (Migne's Rufinus col. 461) is addressed to Chromatius, and says that it
 was demanded by him at the time of Alaric's invasion of Italy (a.d.
 400) as an antidote to the unsettlement of men's minds. Rufinus speaks
 humbly of himself as having little practice in Latin writing. He says
 that he has compressed the 10th book which contained little of real
 history, and added what remained of it to Book 9. See Prolegomena to
 Eusebius in this Series Vol. i. p. 54.

 It is a curious and important fact that all the translations known to
 have been made by Rufinus have survived. This is due no doubt to their
 being the only translations extant in the Middle Ages of great writers
 like Origen and Basil, and to the impossibility of procuring others.
 The uncritical spirit of the time may have been favourable to them. Had
 they been recognized as the works of Rufinus, they might have been
 destroyed; but it was possible, even after the revival of learning, to
 attribute many of them to Jerome.

 Gennadius mentions a series of Rufinus' letters, which have not
 survived, amongst which were several of special importance addressed to
 Proba, a lady who is highly commended by Jerome in his letter to
 Demetrias. [2771] Jerome also mentions (537) some translations of
 Rufinus from Latin into Greek, but his allusion is somewhat vague; and
 some translations from the LXX (536). A translation of Josephus, and a
 Commentary on the first 75 Psalms, and on Hosea, Joel and Amos, a Life
 of St. Eugenia and a Book on the Faith have been attributed to Rufinus
 but are believed not to be his. These, with the exception of the
 translation of Josephus, are given by Vallarsi in his edition of
 Rufinus. Besides these, translations of Origen's Seven Homilies on
 Matthew and one on John, and of his treatises on Mary Magdalen and on
 Christ's Epiphany have at times been attributed to Rufinus.

 We do not propose to go minutely into the Bibliography of Rufinus'
 Works. Some of them were among the earliest printed books. The Editio
 Princeps of the Commentary on the Creed bears date Oxford, 1468 but is
 commonly believed to be really of 1478; that of the Ecclesiastical
 History, Paris, 1474; that of the History of the Monks, undated, is
 believed to be of 1471; that of the Commentaries of Origen is of 1503
 (Aldus Minutius); that of the Sayings of Xystus, of 1507, and of the
 Peri 'Archon is of 1514 (Venice). They continued to be reprinted up to
 1580; but, with the exception of the Sayings of Xystus, no further
 editions were published till the edition of Vallarsi (Verona, 1745),
 and the Life by Fontanini (Rome, 1742). Since that date, though various
 editions and translations of the Expositions of the Creed have
 appeared, no attempt has been made to give the whole of Rufinus'
 writings. Migne (Patrologia, Vol. xxi., Paris, 1849) is contented to
 reprint Vallarsi without alteration.

 No complete edition of Rufinus' Works, therefore, exists. The volume of
 Migne's Patrologia (21) contains the Life by Fontanini (Rome, 1742),
 the Notice by Schoenemann (Leipzig, 1792), and Vallarsi's edition
 (Verona, 1745) of Rufinus' chief works, viz. The Benedictions of the
 Patriarchs, the Commentary on the Creed, the Monastic History, the
 Ecclesiastical History, the Apology against Jerome, and the Apology
 addressed to Anastasius. Vallarsi had intended to edit the Translations
 from Greek writers, but did not accomplish this. The Prefaces to these
 translations, some of which are of great importance, have therefore to
 be sought by the student in the editions of the writers to whose works
 they are prefixed. They are collected and translated in this Volume for
 the first time.

 We have in the present work not attempted to translate all the original
 works of Rufinus. We have omitted the Exposition of the Benedictions of
 the Twelve patriarchs, the Ecclesiastical History and the History of
 the Monks. The rest we have given. They include his Apologies, together
 with the Letter of Pope Anastasius about him to John of Jerusalem, the
 Prefaces to the Peri 'Archon and the Apology of Pamphilus, and the
 Epilogue to the latter work, called the Dissertation on the
 adulteration of the Works of Origen, together with the Prefaces which
 are still extant to his Translations of Origen's Commentaries and his
 Peroration to Origen on Romans. We have also included his best known
 work, his Commentary on the Creed, a translation of which has kindly
 been placed at our service by Dr. Heurtley, Lady Margaret Professor of
 Theology at Oxford.

 [2771] Letter cxxx, 7.

 Writings of Rufinus.

 ------------------------

 Preface to the Commentary on the Benedictions of the Twelve Patriarchs.

 --------------

 Rufinus had arrived with Melania, in Italy, in the spring of 397, after
 a stay in the East of some 25 years. They had visited Paulinus at Nola,
 and had been entertained by him with the highest honours. Melania
 probably remained in Campania, where she had property, engaged in
 family affairs; but Rufinus set out for Rome. He stopped, however, for
 some months at the monastery of Pinetum near Terracina, with his friend
 Urseius the Abbot.

 His work on Jacob's Benedictions on his sons in Gen. xlix was
 occasioned by the following letter from Paulinus, who alludes to it in
 writing to Sulpicius Severus (Ep. xxviii). "I have written a short note
 to the Presbyter Rufinus, the companion of the saintly Melania in her
 spiritual journey, a truly holy and truly learned man, and one united
 with me on this account in the closest affection." The work itself,
 being an Exposition of Scripture, is not given, but only the Preface.

 Paulinus to his brother Rufinus, all best wishes. [2772]

 1. Even a short letter from one so likeminded as yourself is a great
 refreshment, like the dew which revives a thirsty field when the rivers
 are low. But while I confess that I have been refreshed by this letter
 which, though short, is still from you, and is sent by the servant of
 our common children, yet I have been troubled at hearing that all at
 once through the disquiet of your anxiety and the uncertainty caused by
 delay, you have determined that you must go to Rome. May the Lord grant
 you to receive joy in the Lord from what we are doing: so that, as now
 we share in your anxiety, so we may rejoice in your joy, and that we
 may still have some beginnings of hope that we may enjoy your presence,
 when you begin to see clearly your way and the will of the Lord
 concerning you.

 2. You are kind enough, with that affection which makes you love me as
 yourself, to desire that I should take up more seriously the study of
 Greek literature. I acknowledge the kindness which dictates this wish;
 but I am unable to give it effect, unless, through God's blessing on my
 earnest desires, I should have the happiness of your company for a
 longer time. How can I gain any proficiency in a foreign tongue in the
 absence of him who might teach me what I do not know? I think that, in
 the matter of the translation of St. Clement, [2773] besides the other
 defects of my abilities, you noticed this especially as showing the
 weakness caused by my want of practice, that where I had been unable to
 understand the words or to express them accurately, I have translated
 them according to my idea of their drift, or, to speak more truly, set
 down what I thought ought to be there. All the more therefore do I need
 that, through God's mercy, I may have your company in fuller measure;
 for that will be like wealth to the poor or like gathering the crumbs
 which fall from the rich man's table with the eager appetite of the
 bondman's heart.

 3. At the moment when I was writing these words my eye fell upon a
 passage of Scripture, occurring in a portion which I had set down for
 reading, namely that in which Judah is blessed by Jacob; and I
 determined after a time to knock at the door of your mind, for which
 the Lord had given me this most timely occasion. I beg you, if you love
 me, or rather because you love me so greatly, to write and say how you
 understand this blessing of the Patriarchs; and, if there are some
 things in it which are worth knowing but hard to understand, impart to
 me also the knowledge of them; especially of that passage which says:
 "Binding his colt to the vine and his ass's [2774] colt to the
 haircloth." [2775] Tell me what is the colt and the ass's colt, and why
 his colt is to be bound to the vine, but the ass's colt to the hair
 cloth.

 The answer of Rufinus forms the Preface to his Exposition of the
 Benedictions.

 1. The more I excuse myself to you, and the more I assert that I am
 unable to respond to your inquiries, the more instant you become in
 your requests, and the harder become your demands: you treat me as you
 would an ox whose laziness you have discovered, and prick his flanks
 and back as he stops and turns back with goads of ever increasing
 sharpness. I must point out to you, therefore, that, even if I am able
 to bow my neck low so as just to drag the heavy yoke which you lay upon
 me, yet I have no chance of bursting at a rapid pace into the open and
 wide-spreading plains through a form of speech which flows at large and
 pours itself forth over far-extending space. Bear with me therefore if
 my resolution has been but tardily fulfilled, and if I come up only at
 a feeble pace to the point to which you call me.

 2. You ask me how the passage in Genesis is to be understood in which
 Israel the father of the patriarchs is represented as predicting what
 he saw would happen to each of his sons, and says of Judah, amongst
 other things: "Binding his colt to the vine, and his ass's colt to the
 tendril of the vine." You write it "and his ass's colt to the
 haircloth" (cilicium); but in the Greek it stands: kai te heliki ton
 polon tes onou autou. The Greeks call by the name helika(twist) not the
 sprigs of the vine (as our copies have it) but those sickle-like shoots
 [2776] by which it supports itself on branches of trees or poles or the
 supports of the kind which I think the farmers call goatikins; [2777]
 so that the vine is made safe by these clinging shoots from all danger
 of falling, and the tendril can either become loaded with grapes or
 grow out in unfettered length. I think therefore that this very word
 (helici), like some others, must have been set down a long time ago in
 the Latin versions, and that it was afterwards supposed by
 unintelligent copyists that by helici, hair-cloth (cilicium) must be
 meant.

 3. It is easy in this way to emend the mistakes of the translation; but
 it is not so easy to find out the meaning of the expression itself
 unless we take into consideration the whole passage. But the treatment
 of this passage would be placed in a fuller and clearer light if we
 could go back to the beginning of the whole of these Benedictions. But
 this implies no small amount of leisure and of time; or, to speak in a
 more Christian sense, it demands a mind illuminated by the Holy Spirit.
 My talent is but slight, and there are many demands on my time; and my
 friends are urging me to comply with their requests about Origen.
 [2778] But, so far as these circumstances admit, and so great a matter
 can be treated with brevity, I will state at once what appears to me
 the true meaning of this passage, for the love with which you bid me
 trust you in everything, and without prejudice to the judgment of
 others, who may have something better to say about it.

 [2772] Salutem, a word implying well-being generally as well as health.

 [2773] That is, the Recognitions. See the Preface to Rufinus'
 Translation in this volume, with the explanatory note prefixed to it.

 [2774] Gen. xlix. ii

 [2775] This is a mistaken reading (though said by Vallarsi to be
 accepted by both Ambrose and Augustin), Cilicium for heliki. Rufinus
 adopts the latter. "Binding his ass's colt to the tendril of the vine."

 [2776] The word in the text rucinnulos is unknown in Latin. The most
 likely conjecture as to the right reading is ruscarias quibus (that is
 ruscarias falculas--sickles for weeding out butcher's broom, as
 mentioned by Cato and Varro).

 [2777] Capreolos. Properly little goats, thus used for the props, the
 fork of which resembled the horns of the goat. The word is also used
 for the tendrils of the vine, and is by some derived from capio.

 [2778] That is about the translation of the Peri 'Archon. See the
 Preface to this further on.

 Preface to Book II.

 Rufinus, as we see by his Preface to the former book, considered it
 unsatisfactory to expound the Blessing upon Judah apart from those on
 his brethren. Paulinus therefore, taking the occasion of their common
 friend Cerealis' journey to Rome, sends the following letter to induce
 Rufinus to expound the remaining Benedictions.

 Paulinus to his brother Rufinus, all good wishes.

 1. Although our son Cerealis declared to me that it was uncertain
 whether, in returning as he now does to St. Peter, [2779] he would be
 able to visit you, yet it appears to me that it would be blamable in me
 and vexatious to you were I not to write to you by him in whom you have
 a part as well as I. It seems to me preferable to lose some letter
 paper by his not visiting you rather than to lose credit with you as I
 think I should do by his visiting you without it: and therefore I have
 entrusted this letter, I will not say to chance, but to faith: for I
 believe that the Lord will direct to you the way both of our son and of
 my letter; since to those who long for good all will turn to good; and
 indeed he longs for you as you ought to be longed for by one who
 understands the good he may gain from your society. I believe that this
 longing of his in a good matter will not be lost, according to his
 faith and piety: and therefore I have confidence that he will reach you
 and abide with you, and that I shall see the saving help of the Lord
 doubled towards you, since in him you will have the accession of a good
 son and pupil and assistant, and he will find in you a father and
 teacher of all good things given to him from the Lord, who will add to
 the efficacy and power of his prayers the strength of spiritual grace.
 As to myself, though I have the assurance that when you return to the
 East you will be unwilling to depart without visiting me, yet my sins
 make me fear that the daughter of Babylon, may turn you away from me. I
 pray therefore with earnest longings to the Lord that he would give me
 not according to my deserts but according to my desire and may direct
 your course to me in the way of peace; for such as do not walk in that
 way are reprobate and condemned and incapable of truly longing for your
 presence.

 2. But now for the business part of my letter. I charge you, with the
 importunity, with which I am in the habit of knocking at your door even
 in the middle of the night, being driven by fear of a refusal to the
 modest attitude of a supplicant, to show me kindness once more, and to
 expound the Benedictions on the twelve Patriarchs. You have already
 made a beginning with the prophecy relating to Judah, and have given,
 according to the precept, a threefold interpretation of it. I now beg
 you to expound the prophecy as it relates to each of the sons of Judah:
 so that I may myself become possessed of the truth by your means, and
 may also gain through your help the favor and the praise which will
 accrue to me; for I shall thus be able to make answer to those who have
 thought well to consult me on the difficulties of this passage of
 Scripture not with foolish words drawn from my own understanding but
 with divine truth flowing from your inspiration.

 ------------------------

 Rufinus, though at this time busy with his larger works, the
 translations of Pamphilus' defence of Origen, and Origen's Peri
 'Archon, and, though about to set out for Rome, lost no time in
 composing the work which Paulinus demanded, and sent it him with the
 following letter.

 Rufinus to His Brother Paulinus, the Man of God, with All Good Wishes.

 1. Though our common son Cerealis did not visit me, he felt what pain
 he would cause me if he delayed my reception of your letter, and
 forwarded it to me. In reading it I felt, as usual, a continual
 increase in my yearning towards you: but I found towards its close a
 request from which I have frequently begged you to excuse me--I mean
 the request which you make that I should write something in answer to
 your questions as to the interpretation of passages of Scripture. I
 thought that I should lead you to desist from these questions by the
 writings I have once and again sent you, which have given evidence of
 my ignorance and of the roughness of my speech.

 2. But since you still are not weary of commanding me, I have at once,
 to the best of my powers, added to what I had written at your desire on
 the Benediction of Judah the comments on the remaining eleven
 patriarchs. I acted like the man in the parable of the two sons. I
 thought that I should thus best fulfil the father's will: and though
 when he ordered me to go into the vineyard I had said I will not go,
 yet after a while I went. If, as I grant, there is some rashness in the
 fact that with so little capacity we attempt such a great task, I would
 say, with submission to you, that this must be most justly imputed to
 you, since, through your excessive love for me you do not see that my
 measure of knowledge, as of other virtues, is but slight. I wrote this
 work in the days of Lent, while I was staying in the monastery of
 Pinetum, and I wrote it for you. But I found it impossible to conceal
 this poor work from the brethren who were there: and they, considering
 that a thing which had been honoured by your approval must be of great
 importance, extorted from me the permission to copy it for themselves.
 Thus, while you demand from me food for yourself you give refreshment
 to others also. Farewell, and be in peace, my most loving brother, most
 true worshipper of God, and an Israelite in whom there is no guile. I
 entreat you who are so full of the grace of God to hold me still in
 remembrance.

 [2779] That is to Rome.

 Translation of Pamphilus' Defence of Origen.

 Written at Pinetum a.d. 397.

 While Rufinus was staying at Pinetum, a Christian named Macarius [2780]
 sought his advice and assistance. He was engaged in a controversy with
 the Mathematici, a class of men who had deserted the scientific studies
 from which they took their name, and had turned to astrology and a
 belief in Fatalism. Macarius, having heard of Origen's greatness in the
 region of Christian speculation, earnestly desired some knowledge of
 his writings: but was unable to attain it through ignorance of Greek.
 He declared to Rufinus that he had had a dream in which he saw a ship
 laden with Eastern merchandize arriving in Italy, and that it was
 declared to him that this ship would contain the means of attaining the
 knowledge he desired. The coming of Rufinus seemed to him the
 fulfilment of his dream, and he earnestly besought him to impart to him
 some of the treasures of his Greek learning, and especially to
 translate for him Origen's great speculative work, the Peri 'Archon,
 that is On First Principles. [2781] Rufinus hesitated, knowing that
 there was a strong prejudice against Origen, and that he was looked on,
 especially in the West, as a heretic, though his writings were little
 known there. He yielded, however, to the solicitations of Macarius: but
 to guard against the imputation of heresy, he undertook three
 preliminary works. First, he translated the Apology of the Martyr
 Pamphilus for Origen; secondly, he wrote a short treatise on the
 Adulteration by heretics of the works of Origen; and, thirdly, in
 translating the Peri 'Archon he prefixed to it an elaborate Preface in
 justification of his course in translating the work. All these
 documents became the subject of vehement controversy which found its
 expression in the letter of Jerome to his friends at Rome, and the
 Apologies of Rufinus and Jerome translated in this volume.

 The Apology of Pamphilus for Origen forms the sixth book of a work
 undertaken by him in connexion with Eusebius of Cæsarea, the Church
 Historian. Pamphilus was a great collector of books, and a learned man,
 but Eusebius was the chief writer. Pamphilus was put to death in the
 last persecution, that under Galerius; and Eusebius having at a later
 time fallen under suspicion of Arianism, it was attempted by those who
 disliked Origen, to dissociate Pamphilus from all connexion with the
 work. There seems however no reason to doubt, notwithstanding Jerome's
 violent protestations, that Pamphilus was associated with Eusebius
 throughout the work, and that he actually wrote the sixth book. The
 translation of this Apology was made first, and sent out with a Preface
 which runs as follows:

 You have been moved by your desire to know the truth, Macarius, who are
 "a man greatly beloved," [2782] to make a request of me, which will
 bring you the blessing attached to the knowledge of the truth; but it
 will win for me the greatest indignation on the part of those who
 consider themselves aggrieved whenever any one does not think evil of
 Origen. It is true that it is not my opinion about him that you have
 asked for, but that of the holy martyr Pamphilus; and you have
 requested to have the book which he is said to have written in his
 defence in Greek translated for you into Latin: nevertheless I do not
 doubt that there will be some who will think themselves aggrieved if I
 say anything in his defence even in the words of another man. I beg
 them to do nothing in the spirit of presumption and of prejudice; and,
 since we must all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, not to
 refuse to hear the truth spoken, lest haply they should do wrong
 through ignorance. Let them consider that to wound the consciences of
 their weaker brethren by false accusations is to sin against Christ;
 and therefore let them not lend their ears to the accusers, nor seek an
 account of another man's faith from a third party, especially when an
 opportunity is given them for gaining personal and direct knowledge,
 and the substance and quality of each man's faith is to be known by his
 own confession. For so the Scripture says: [2783] "With the heart man
 believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made
 unto salvation": and: [2784] "By his words shall each man be justified,
 and by his word shall he be condemned." The opinions of Origen in the
 various parts of Scripture are clearly set forth in the present work:
 as to the cause of our finding certain places in which he contradicts
 himself, an explanation will be offered in the short document
 subjoined. [2785] But as for myself, I hold that which has been handed
 down to us from the holy fathers, namely, that the Holy Trinity is
 coeternal, and of a single nature, virtue and substance; that the Son
 of God in these last times has been made man, has suffered for our
 transgressions and rose again from the dead in the very flesh in which
 he suffered, and thereby imparted the hope of the resurrection to the
 whole race of mankind. When we speak of the resurrection of the flesh,
 we do so, not with any subterfuges, as is slanderously reported by
 certain persons; we believe that it is this very flesh in which we are
 now living which will rise again, not one kind of flesh instead of
 another, nor another body than the body of this flesh. When we speak of
 the body rising we do so in the words of the apostle; for he himself
 made use of this word: and when we speak of the flesh, our confession
 is that of the Creed. It is an absurd invention of maliciousness to
 think that the human body is different from the flesh. However, whether
 we speak of that which is to rise, according to the common faith, as
 the flesh, or, according to the Apostle, as the body, this we must
 believe, that according to the clear statement of the Apostle, that
 which shall rise shall rise in power and in glory; it will rise an
 incorruptible and a spiritual body: for "corruption cannot inherit
 incorruption." We must maintain this preëminence of the body, or flesh,
 which is to be: but, with this proviso, we must hold that the
 resurrection of the flesh is perfect and entire; we must on the one
 hand maintain the identity of the flesh, while on the other we must not
 detract from the dignity and glory of the incorruptible and spiritual
 body. For so the Scripture speaks. This is what is preached by the
 reverend Bishop John at Jerusalem; this we with him both confess and
 hold. If any one either believes or teaches otherwise, or insinuates
 that we believe differently from the exposition of our faith, let him
 be anathema. Let this then be taken as a record of our belief by any
 who desire to know it. Whatever we read and whatever we do is in
 accordance with this account of our faith; we follow the words of the
 Apostle, [2786] "proving all things, holding fast that which is good,
 avoiding every form of evil." [2787] "And as many as walk by this rule,
 peace be upon them and upon the Israel of God."

 [2780] See the account in Rufinus' Apology I. 11.

 [2781] The word may also mean On beginnings, or On Principalities and
 Powers: these ideas being connected together in the speculation of the
 Alexandrian theology.

 [2782] Daniel x. 11, ix. 23. The name Macarius means Blessed.

 [2783] Rom. x. 10

 [2784] Matt. xii. 37

 [2785] See the Epilogue, infra.

 [2786] 1 Thess. v. 21, 22

 [2787] Gal. vi. 16

 Rufinus's Epilogue to Pamphilus the Martyr's Apology for Origen

 otherwise

 The Book Concerning the Adulteration of the Works of Origen.

 ------------------------

 Addressed to Macarius at Pinetum a.d. 397.

 ------------------------

 The next work was sent out at the same time with Pamphilus' Apology.
 Rufinus believed that Origen's works had been adulterated by heretics
 so as to turn his assertions into support of their own opinions. He
 therefore, in his translation of the Peri 'Archon, altered many things
 which had a heterodox meaning as found in the ordinary mss. of Origen,
 so as to make the work consistent with itself and with the orthodox
 views expressed in other parts of Origen's writings. How far this
 process was legitimate or honest must be judged from a perusal of the
 controversy which followed; but it should be borne in mind, first, that
 the standard of literary exactness and conscientiousness was not the
 same in those days as in ours; secondly, that when everything depended
 on copyists there was room for infinite variations in the copies,
 whether through negligence, ignorance or fraud; thirdly, that the
 principles adopted by Rufinus were precisely those acknowledged by his
 great opponent Jerome, in his Treatise De Optimo Genere Interpretandi,
 and his Letter to Vigilantius (Letters lxvi and lxi).

 My object in the translation from Greek into Latin of the holy martyr
 Pamphilus' Apology for Origen, which I have given in the preceding
 volume according to my ability and the requirements of the matter, is
 this: I wish you to know through full information that the rule of
 faith which has been set forth above in his writings is that which we
 must embrace and hold; for it is clearly shown that the Catholic
 opinion is contained in them all. Nevertheless you have to allow that
 there are found in his books certain things not only different from
 this but in certain cases even repugnant to it; things which our canons
 of truth do not sanction, and which we can neither receive nor approve.
 As to the cause of this an opinion has reached me which has been widely
 entertained, and which I wish to be fully known by you and by those who
 desire to know what is true, since it is possible also that some who
 have before been actuated by the love of fault-finding may acquiesce in
 the truth and reason of the matter when they have it set before them;
 for some seem determined to believe anything in the world to be true
 rather than that which withdraws from them the occasions of
 fault-finding. It must, I think, be felt to be wholly impossible that a
 man so learned and so wise, a man whom even his accusers may well admit
 to have been neither foolish nor insane, should have written what is
 contrary and repugnant to himself and his own opinions. But even
 suppose that this could in some way have happened; suppose, as some
 perhaps have said, that in the decline of life he might have forgotten
 what he had written in his early days, and have made assertions at
 variance with his former opinions; how are we to deal with the fact
 that we sometimes find in the very same passages, and, as I may say,
 almost in successive sentences, clauses inserted expressive of contrary
 opinions? Can we believe that in the same work and in the same book,
 and even sometimes, as I have said, in the following paragraph, a man
 could have forgotten his own views? For example that, when he had said
 just before that no passage in all the Scripture could be found in
 which the Holy Spirit was spoken of as made or created, he could have
 immediately added that the Holy Spirit had been made along with the
 rest of the creatures? or again, that the same man who clearly states
 that the Father and the Son are of one substance, or as it is called in
 Greek Homoousion, could in the next sentence say that He was of another
 substance, and was a created being, when he had but a little before
 described him as born of the very nature of God the Father? Or again in
 the matter of the resurrection of the flesh, could he who so clearly
 declared that it was the nature of the flesh which ascended with the
 Word of God into heaven, and there appeared to the celestial Powers,
 presenting a new image of himself for them to worship, could he, I ask
 you, possibly turn round and say that this flesh was not to be saved?
 Such things could not happen even in the case of a man who had taken
 leave of his senses and was not sound in the brain. How, therefore,
 this came to pass, I will point out with all possible brevity. The
 heretics are capable of any violence, they have no remorse and no
 scruples: this we are forced to recognize by the audacities of which
 they have been frequently convicted. And, just as their father the
 devil has from the beginning made it his object to falsify the words of
 God and twist them from their true meaning, and subtilely to
 interpolate among them his own poisonous ideas, so he has left these
 successors of his the same art as their inheritance. Accordingly, when
 God had said to Adam, "You shall eat of all the trees of the garden;"
 he, when he wished to deceive Eve interpolated a single syllable, by
 which he reduced within the narrowest bounds God's liberality in
 permitting all the fruits to be eaten. He said: "Yea, hath God said, Ye
 shall not eat of any tree of the garden?" and thus by suggesting the
 complaint that God's command was severe, he more easily persuaded her
 to transgress the precept. The heretics have followed the example of
 their father, the craft of their teacher. Whenever they found in any of
 the renowned writers of old days a discussion of those things which
 pertain to the glory of God so full and faithful that every believer
 could gain profit and instruction from it, they have not scrupled to
 infuse into their writings the poisonous taint of their own false
 doctrines; this they have done, either by inserting things which the
 writers had not said or by changing by interpolation what they had
 said, so that their own poisonous heresy might more easily be asserted
 and authorized by passing under the name of all the church writers of
 the greatest learning and renown; they meant it to appear that
 well-known and orthodox men had held as they did. We hold the clearest
 proofs of this in the case of the Greek writers and this adulteration
 of books is to be found in the case of many of the ancients; but it
 will suffice to adduce the testimony of a few, so that it may be more
 easily understood what has befallen the writings of Origen.

 Clement, the disciple of the Apostles, who was bishop of the Roman
 church next to the Apostles, was a martyr, wrote the work which is
 called in the Greek 'Anagnorismos, or in Latin, The Recognition. [2788]
 In these books he sets forth again and again in the name of the Apostle
 Peter a doctrine which appears to be truly apostolical: yet in certain
 passages the heresy of Eunomius is so brought in that you would imagine
 that you were listening to an argument of Eunomius himself, asserting
 that the Son of God was created out of no existing elements. Then again
 that other method of falsification is introduced, by which it is made
 to appear that the nature of the devil and of other demons has not
 resulted from the wickedness of their will and purpose, but from an
 exceptional and separate quality of their creation, although he in all
 other places had taught that every reasonable creature was endowed with
 the faculty of free will. There are also some other things inserted
 into his books which the church's creed does not admit. I ask, then,
 what we are to think of these things? Are we to believe that an
 apostolic man, nay, almost an apostle (since he writes the things which
 the apostles speak), one to whom the apostle Paul bore his testimony in
 the words, "With Clement and others, my fellow labourers, whose names
 are in the book of life" was the writer of words which contradict the
 book of life? or are we to say, as we have said before, that perverse
 men, in order to gain authority for their own heresies by the use of
 the names of holy men, and so procure their readier acceptance,
 interpolated these things which it is impossible to believe that the
 true authors either thought or wrote?

 Again, the other Clement, the presbyter of Alexandria, and the teacher
 of that church, in almost all his books describes the three Persons as
 having one and the same glory and eternity: and yet we sometimes find
 in his books passages in which he speaks of the Son as a creature of
 God. Is it credible that so great a man as he, so orthodox in all
 points, and so learned, either held opinions mutually contradictory, or
 left in writing views concerning God which it is an impiety, I will not
 say to believe, but even to listen to?

 Once more, Dionysius the Bishop of Alexandria, was a most learned
 maintainer of the church's faith, and in passages without end defended
 the unity and eternity of the Trinity, so earnestly that some persons
 of less insight imagine that he held the views of Sabellius; yet in the
 books which he wrote against the heresy of Sabellius, there are things
 inserted of such a character that the Arians endeavour to shield
 themselves under his authority, and on this account the holy Bishop
 Athanasius felt himself compelled to write an apology for his work,
 because he was assured that he could not have held strange opinions or
 have written things in which he contradicted himself, but felt sure
 that these things had been interpreted by ill disposed men.

 This opinion we have been led to form by the force of the facts
 themselves, in the case of these very reverend men and doctors of the
 church; we have found it impossible, I say, to believe that those
 reverend men who again and again have supported the church's belief
 should in particular points have held opinions contradictory to
 themselves. As to Origen, however, in whom, as I have said above, are
 to be found, as in those others, certain diversities of statement, it
 will not be sufficient to think precisely as we think or feel about
 those who enjoy an established reputation for orthodoxy; nor could a
 similar charge be met by a similar excuse, were it not that its
 validity is shown by words and writings of his own in which he makes
 this fact the subject of earnest complaint. What he had to suffer while
 still living in the flesh, while still having feeling and sight, from
 the corruption of his books and treatises, or from counterfeit versions
 of them, we may learn clearly from his own letter which he wrote to
 certain intimate friends at Alexandria; and by this you will see how it
 comes to pass that some things which are self-contradictory are found
 in his writings. [2789]

 "Some of those persons who take a pleasure in accusing their
 neighbours, bring against us and our teaching the charge of blasphemy,
 though from us they have never heard anything of the kind. Let them
 take heed to themselves how they refuse to mark that solemn injunction
 which says that [2790] Revilers shall not inherit the kingdom of God,'
 when they declare that I hold that the father of wickedness and
 perdition, and of those who are cast forth from the kingdom of God,
 that is the devil, is to be saved, a thing which no man can say even if
 he has taken leave of his senses and is manifestly insane. Yet it is no
 wonder, I think, if my teaching is falsified by my adversaries, and is
 corrupted and adulterated in the same manner as the epistle of Paul the
 Apostle. Certain men, as we know, compiled a false epistle under the
 name of Paul, so that they might trouble the Thessalonians as if the
 day of the Lord were nigh at hand, and thus beguile them. It is on
 account of that false epistle that he wrote these words in the second
 epistle to the Thessalonians: [2791] We beseech you, brethren, by the
 coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering together unto him; to
 the end that ye be not quickly shaken from your mind, nor yet be
 troubled, either by spirit or by word or by letter as sent from us, as
 that the day of the Lord is at hand. Let no man beguile you in any
 wise.' It is something of the same kind, I perceive, which is happening
 to us also. A certain promoter of heresy, after a discussion which had
 been held between us in the presence of many persons, and notes of it
 had been taken, procured the document from those who had written out
 the notes, and added or struck out whatever he chose, and changed
 things as he thought right, and published it abroad as if it were my
 work, but pointing in triumphant scorn at the expressions which he had
 himself inserted. The brethren in Palestine, indignant at this, sent a
 man to me at Athens to obtain from me an authentic copy of the work. Up
 to that time I had never even read it over again or revised it: it had
 been so completely neglected and thrown aside that it could hardly be
 found. Nevertheless, I sent it: and,--God is witness that I am speaking
 the truth,--when I met the man himself who had adulterated the work,
 and took him to task for having done so, he answered, as if he were
 giving me satisfaction: "I did it because I wished to improve that
 treatise and to purge away its faults." What kind of a purging was this
 that he applied to my dissertation? such a purging as Marcion or his
 successor Apelles after him gave to the Gospels and to the writings of
 the Apostle. They subverted the true text of Scripture; and this man
 similarly first took away the true statements which I had made, and
 then inserted what was false to furnish grounds for accusation against
 me. But, though those who have dared to do this are impious and
 heretical men, yet those who give credence to such accusations against
 us shall not escape the judgment of God. There are others also, not a
 few, who have done this through a wish to throw confusion into the
 churches. Lately, a certain heretic who had seen me at Ephesus and had
 refused to meet me, and had not opened his mouth in my presence, but
 for some reason or other had avoided doing so, afterwards composed a
 dissertation according to his own fancy, partly mine, partly his own,
 and sent it to his disciples in various places: I know that it reached
 those who were in Rome, and I doubt not that it reached others also. He
 was behaving in the same reckless way at Antioch also before I came
 there: and the dissertation which he brought with him came into the
 hands of many of our friends. But when I arrived, I took him to task in
 the presence of many persons, and, when he persisted, with a complete
 absence of shame, in the impudent defence of his forgery, I demanded
 that the book should be brought in amongst us, so that my mode of
 speech might be recognized by the brethren, who of course knew the
 points on which I am accustomed to insist and the method of teaching
 which I employ. He did not, however, venture to bring in the book, and
 his assertions were refuted by them all and he himself was convicted of
 forgery, and thus the brethren were taught a lesson not to give ear to
 such accusations. If then any one is willing to trust me at all--I
 speak as in the sight of God--let him believe what I say about the
 things which are falsely inserted in my letter. But if any man refuses
 to believe me, and chooses to speak evil of me, it is not to me that he
 does the injury: he will himself be arraigned as a false witness before
 God, since he is either bearing false witness against his neighbour, or
 giving credit to those who bear it."

 Such are the complaints which he made while still living, and while he
 was still able to detect the corruptions and falsifications which had
 been made in his books. There is another letter of his, in which I
 remember to have read a complaint of the falsifying of his writings;
 but I have not a copy of it at hand, otherwise I could add to those
 which I have quoted a second testimony in favour of his good faith and
 veracity direct from himself. But I think that I have said enough to
 satisfy those who listen to what is said, not in the interest of strife
 and detraction, but in that of a love of truth. I have shown and proved
 in the case of the saintly men of whom I have made mention, and of
 whose orthodoxy is no question, that, where the tenor of a book is
 presumably right, anything which is found in it contrary to the faith
 of the church is more properly believed to have been inserted by
 heretics than to have been written by the author: and I cannot think it
 an absurd demand that the same thing should be believed in the case of
 Origen, not only because the argument is similar but because of the
 witness given by himself in the complaints which I have brought out
 from his writings: otherwise we must believe that, like a silly or
 insane person, he has written in contradiction to himself.

 As to the possibility that the heretics may have acted in the violent
 manner supposed, such wickedness may easily be believed of them. They
 have given a specimen of it, which makes it credible in the present
 case, in the fact that they have been unable to keep off their impious
 hands even from the sacred words of the Gospel. Any one who has a mind
 to see how they have acted in the case of the Acts of the Apostles or
 their Epistles, how they have befouled them and gnawed them away, how
 they have defiled them in every kind of way, sometimes adding words
 which expressed their impious doctrine, sometimes taking out the
 opposing truths, will understand it most fully if he will read the
 books of Tertullian written against Marcion. It is no great thing that
 they should have corrupted the writings of Origen when they have dared
 to corrupt the sayings of God our Saviour. It is true that some persons
 may withhold their assent from what I am saying on the ground of the
 difference of the heresies; since it was one kind of heresy the
 partisans of which corrupted the Gospels, but it is another which is
 aimed at in these passages which, as we assert, have been inserted in
 the works of Origen. Let those who have such doubts consider that, as
 in all the saints dwells the one spirit of God (for the Apostle says,
 [2792] "The spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets," and
 again, [2793] "We all have been made to drink of that one spirit"); so
 also in all the heretics dwells the one spirit of the devil, who
 teaches them all and at all times the same or similar wickedness.

 There may, however, be some to whom the instances we have given have
 less persuasive force because they have to do with Greek writers; and
 therefore, although it is a Greek writer for whom I am pleading, yet,
 since it is the Latin tongue which is, so to speak, entrusted with the
 argument, and they are Latin people before whom you have earnestly
 begged me to plead the cause of these men, and to show what wounds they
 suffer by the calumnious renderings of their works, it will be
 satisfactory to show that things of the same kind have happened to
 Latin as well as Greek writers, and that men approved for their saintly
 character have had a storm of calumny raised against them by the
 falsification of their works. I will recount things of still recent
 memory, so that nothing may be lacking to the manifest credibility of
 my contention, and its truth may lie open for all to see.

 Hilary Bishop of Pictavium [2794] was a believer in the Catholic
 doctrine, and wrote a very complete work of instruction with the view
 of bringing back from their error those who had subscribed the
 faithless creed of Ariminum. [2795] This book fell into the hands of
 his adversaries and ill wishers, whether, as some said, by bribing his
 secretary, or by no matter what other cause. He knew nothing of this:
 but the book was so falsified by them, the saintly man being all the
 while entirely unconscious of it, that, when his enemies began to
 accuse him of heresy in the episcopal assembly, as holding what they
 knew they had corruptly inserted in his manuscript, he himself demanded
 the production of his book as evidence of his faith. It was brought
 from his house, and was found to be full of matter which he repudiated:
 but it caused him to be excommunicated and to be excluded from the
 meeting of the synod. In this case, however, though the crime was one
 of unexampled wickedness, the man who was the victim of it was alive,
 and present in the flesh; and the hostile faction could be convicted
 and brought to punishment, when their tricks became known and their
 machinations were exposed. A remedy was applied through statements,
 explanations, and similar things: for living men can take action on
 their own behalf, the dead can refute no accusations under which they
 labour.

 Take another case. The whole collection of the letters of the martyr
 Cyprian is usually found in a single manuscript. Into this collection
 certain heretics who held a blasphemous doctrine about the Holy Spirit
 inserted a treatise of Tertullian on the Trinity, which was faultily
 expressed though he is himself an upholder of our faith: and from the
 copies thus made they wrote out a number of others; these they
 distributed through the whole of the vast city of Constantinople at a
 very low price: men were attracted by this cheapness and readily bought
 up the documents full of hidden snares of which they knew nothing; and
 thus the heretics found means of gaining credit for their impious
 doctrines through the authority of a great name. It happened, however,
 that, shortly after the publication, there were found there some of our
 catholic brothers who were able to expose this wicked fabrication, and
 recalled as many as they could reach from the entanglements of error.
 In this they partly succeeded. But there were a great many in those
 parts who remained convinced that the saintly martyr Cyprian held the
 belief which had been erroneously expressed by Tertullian.

 I will add one other instance of the falsification of a document. It is
 one of recent memory, though it is an example of the primeval subtlety,
 and it surpasses all the stories of the ancients.

 Bishop Damasus, at the time when a consultation was held in the matter
 of the reconciling of the followers of Apollinarius to the church,
 [2796] desired to have a document setting forth the faith of the
 church, which should be subscribed by those who wished to be
 reconciled. The compiling of this document he entrusted to a certain
 friend of his, a presbyter and a highly accomplished man, [2797] who
 usually acted for him in matters of this kind. When he came to compose
 the document, he found it necessary, in speaking of the Incarnation of
 our Lord, to apply to him the expression "Homo Dominicus." The
 Apollinarists [2798] took offence at this expression, and began to
 impugn it as a novelty. The writer of the document thereupon undertook
 to defend himself, and to confute the objectors by the authority of
 ancient Catholic writers; and he happened to show to one of those who
 complained of the novelty of the expression a book of the bishop
 Athanasius in which the word which was under discussion occurred. The
 man to whom this evidence was offered appeared to be convinced, and
 asked that the manuscript should be lent to him so that he might
 convince the rest who from their ignorance were still maintaining their
 objections. When he had got the manuscript into his hands he devised a
 perfectly new method of falsification. He first erased the passage in
 which the expression occurred, and then wrote in again the same words
 which he had erased. He returned the paper, and it was accepted without
 question. The controversy about this expression again arose; the
 manuscript was brought forward: the expression in question was found in
 it, but in a position where there had been an erasure: and the man who
 had brought forward such a manuscript lost all authority, since the
 erasure seemed to be the proof of malpractice and falsification.
 However, in this case as in one which I mentioned before, it was a
 living man who was thus treated by a living man, and he at once did all
 in his power to lay bare the iniquitous fraud which had been committed,
 and to remove the stain of this nefarious act from the man who was
 innocent and had done no evil of the kind, and to attach it to the real
 author of the deed, so that it should completely overwhelm him with
 infamy.

 Since, then, Origen in his letter complains with his own voice that he
 has suffered such things at the hands of the heretics who wished him
 ill, and similar things have happened in the case of many other
 orthodox men among both the dead and the living, and since in the cases
 adduced, men's writings are proved to have been tampered with in a
 similar way: what determined obstinacy is this, which refuses to admit
 the same excuse when the case is the same, and, when the circumstances
 are parallel, assigns to one party the allowance due to respect, but to
 another infamy due to a criminal. The truth must be told, and must not
 lie hid at this point; for it is impossible for any man really to judge
 so unjustly as to form different opinions on cases which are similar.
 The fact is that the prompters of Origen's accusers are men who make
 long controversial discourses in the churches, [2799] and even write
 books the whole matter of which is borrowed from him, and who wish to
 deter men of simple mind from reading him, for fear that their
 plagiarisms should become widely known, though, indeed, their
 appropriations would be no reproach to them if they were not ungrateful
 to their master.

 For instance, one of these men, [2800] who thinks that a necessity is
 laid upon him, [2801] like that of preaching the Gospel, to speak evil
 of Origen among all nations and tongues, declared in a vast assembly of
 Christian hearers that he had read six thousand of his works. Surely,
 if his object in reading these were, as he is in the habit of
 asserting, only to acquaint himself with Origen's faults, ten or twenty
 or at most thirty of these works would have sufficed for the purpose.
 But to read six thousand books is no longer wishing to know the man,
 but giving up almost one's whole life to his teaching and researches.
 On what ground then can his words be worthy of credit when he blames
 men who have only read quite a few of these books while their rule of
 faith is kept sacred and their piety unimpaired.

 What has been said may suffice to show what opinion we ought to form of
 the books of Origen. I think that every one who has at heart the
 interests of truth, not of controversy, may easily assent to the
 well-proved statements I have made. But if any man perseveres in his
 contentiousness, we have no such custom. [2802] It is a settled custom
 among us, when we read him, to hold fast that which is good, according
 to the apostolic injunction. If we find in these books anything
 discrepant to the Catholic faith, we suspect that it has been inserted
 by the heretics, and consider it as alien from his opinion as it is
 from our faith. If, however, this is a mistake of ours, we run, as I
 think, no danger from such an error; for we ourselves, through God's
 help, continue unharmed by avoiding what we hold in suspicion and
 condemn: and further we shall not be accounted accusers of our brethren
 before God (you will remember that the accusing of the brethren is the
 special work of the devil, and that he received the name of devil
 [2803] from his being a slanderer). Moreover, we thus escape the
 sentence pronounced on evil speakers, which separates those who are
 such from the kingdom of God.

 [2788] Rufinus was deceived as was the whole world until the revival of
 learning, in believing this fabrication to be the work of Clement. It
 is really a romance in the form of an autobiography of Clement,
 supposed to be addressed to James of Jerusalem; and was written
 probably in Asia Minor or Syria about a.d. 200. See Article "Clementine
 Literature" in Dict. of Ch. Biog.

 [2789] The letter is headed "On the adulteration and corruption of his
 books; from the 4th book of the letters of Origen: a letter written to
 certain familiar friends at Alexandria."

 [2790] 1 Cor. vi. 10

 [2791] 2 Thess. ii. 1-3

 [2792] 1 Cor. xiv. 32

 [2793] 1 Cor. xii. 13

 [2794] Poictiers.

 [2795] There seem to be no means of throwing light upon this story.
 Hilary was not at the council of Ariminum, but at that of Seleucia,
 held the same year (359). On his return to Gaul in 361 he endeavoured,
 in various meetings of bishops to reunite with the Homoousians those
 who had subscribed the creed of Ariminum. (See Art. on Hilary Pictav.
 in Dict. of Christ. Biography.) It may have been in one of these
 meetings that this scene occurred.

 [2796] This was in 382, the year after the Council of Constantinople.
 Jerome had come from Constantinople to Rome with the Eastern Bishops
 Epiphanius of Salamis in Cyprus and Paulinus of Antioch. His position
 at Rome is described in the words of his letter (cxxiii) to Ageruchia,
 c. 10. "I was assisting Damasus in matters of ecclesiastical
 literature, and answering the questions discussed in the Councils of
 the East and the West."

 [2797] Jerome.

 [2798] Apollinaris, in his reaction from Arianism, held that the
 Godhead supplied the place of the human soul in Christ. Hence their
 objection to this expression.

 [2799] This is believed to refer to Epiphanius, whose anti-Origenistic
 sermon at Jerusalem in the year 394 greatly irritated the Bishops John
 and Rufinus. See Jerome Ep. li, and "Against John of Jerusalem," c. 14.

 [2800] Epiphanius.

 [2801] 1 Cor. ix. 16

 [2802] Adapted from 1 Cor. xi. 16

 [2803] Diabolos (diabolus) from diaballo to slander.

 Preface to the Translations of Origen's Books Peri 'Archon

 ------------------------

 Addressed to Macarius, at Pinetum, a.d. 397.

 ------------------------

 The Translation of the two first Books of the Peri 'Archon was issued
 soon after, or contemporaneously with the Apology of Pamphilus. The
 Preface to them was intended to remove prejudices by showing that
 Jerome (who though not named is clearly described) had been Rufinus'
 precursor in translating Origen. The compliments paid to Jerome were no
 doubt sincere: but the use made of his previous action can hardly be
 justified. Rufinus knew well that Jerome's view of Origen had to some
 extent altered, that a disagreeable controversy had sprung up at
 Jerusalem about him, in which he and Jerome had taken opposite sides:
 and that the animosity aroused by this had with the greatest difficulty
 been allayed, and a reconciliation effected at the moment when he had
 quitted Palestine. This Preface with the Translation of the Peri
 'Archon was the most immediate cause of the violent controversy and the
 final estrangement between Rufinus and Jerome.

 I am aware that a great many of our brethren were incited by their
 longing for Scriptural knowledge to demand from various men who were
 versed in Greek literature that they would give the works of Origen to
 men who used the Latin tongue, and thus make him a Roman. Among these
 was that brother and associate of mine to whom this request was made by
 bishop Damasus, and who when he translated the two homilies on the Song
 of Songs from Greek into Latin prefixed to the work a preface [2804] so
 full of beauty and so magnificent that he awoke in every one the desire
 of reading Origen and eagerly investigating his works. He said that to
 the soul of that great man the words might well be applied: [2805] "The
 King has brought me into his chamber": and he declared that Origen in
 his other books had surpassed all other men, but in this had surpassed
 himself. What he promises in this Preface is, indeed, that he will give
 to Roman ears not only these books but many others of Origen. But I
 find that he is so enamoured of his own style that he pursues a still
 more ambitious object, namely, that he should be the creator of the
 book, not merely its translator. I am then following out a task begun
 by him and commended by his example; but it is out of my power to set
 forth the words of this great man with a force and an eloquence like
 his: and I have therefore to fear that it may happen through my fault
 that the man whom he justly commends as a teacher of the church both in
 knowledge and in wisdom second only to the Apostles may be thought to
 have a far lower rank through my poverty of language. When I reflected
 on this I was inclined to keep silence, and not to assent to the
 brethren who were constantly adjuring me to make the translation. But
 your influence is such, my most faithful brother Macarius, that even
 the consciousness of my unfitness is not sufficient to make me resist.
 I have therefore yielded to your importunity though it was against my
 resolution, so that I might no longer be exposed to the demands of a
 severe taskmaster; but I have done so on this condition and on this
 understanding, that in making the translation I should follow as far as
 possible the method of my predecessors, and especially of him of whom I
 have already made mention. He, after translating into Latin above
 seventy of the books of Origen which he called Homiletics, and also a
 certain number of the "Tomes," proceeded to purge and pare away in his
 translation all the causes of stumbling which are to be found in the
 Greek works; and this he did in such a way that the Latin reader will
 find nothing in them which jars with our faith. In his steps,
 therefore, I follow, not, indeed, with the power of eloquence which is
 his, but, as far as may be, in his rules and method, that is, taking
 care not to promulgate those things which are found in the books of
 Origen to be discrepant and contradictory to one another. The cause of
 these variations I have set forth very fully for your information in
 the Apology which Pamphilus wrote for the books of Origen, to which I
 have appended a very short treatise [2806] showing by proofs which seem
 to me quite clear that his books have been in very many cases falsified
 by heretical and ill-disposed persons. This is especially the case with
 the books which you now require me to translate, namely, the Peri
 'Archon, which may be rendered either Concerning First Principles or
 Concerning Principalities. These books are in truth, apart from these
 questions, exceedingly obscure and difficult; for in them he discusses
 matters over which the philosophers have spent their whole lives
 without any result. But our Christian thinker has done all that lay in
 his power to turn to purposes of sound religion the belief in a creator
 and the order of the created world which they had made subservient to
 their false religion. Wherever therefore I have found in his books
 anything contrary to the truth concerning the Trinity which he has in
 other places spoken of in a strictly orthodox sense, I have either
 omitted it as a foreign and not genuine expression or set it down in
 terms agreeing with the rule of faith which we find him constantly
 assenting to. There are things, no doubt, which he has developed in
 somewhat obscure language, wishing to pass rapidly over them, and as
 addressing those who have experience and knowledge of such matters; in
 these cases I have made the passage plain by adding words which I had
 read in other books of his where the matter was more fully treated. I
 have done this in the interest of clearness: but I have put in nothing
 of my own; I have only given him back his own words, though taken from
 other passages. I have explained this in the Preface, so that those who
 calumniate us should not think that they had found in this fresh
 material for their charges. But let them take heed what they are about
 in their perversity and contentiousness. As for me, I have not
 undertaken this laborious task (in which I trust that God will be my
 helper in answer to your prayers) for the sake of shutting the mouths
 of calumnious men, but with the view of supplying material for the
 increase of real knowledge to those who desired it. This only I require
 of every man who undertakes to copy out these books or to read them, in
 the sight of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and adjure
 him by our faith in the coming kingdom, by the assurance of the
 resurrection of the dead, by the eternal fire which is prepared for the
 devil and his angels (even as he trusts that he shall not possess as
 his eternal inheritance that place where there is weeping and gnashing
 of teeth, and where their fire will not be quenched and their worm will
 not die) that he should neither add nor take away, that he should
 neither insert nor change, anything in that which is written but that
 he should compare his copy with that from which it is copied and
 correct it critically letter for letter, and that he should not keep by
 him a copy which has not received correction or criticism, lest, if his
 copy is not thus distinct, the difficulty of the meaning may beget a
 still greater obscurity in the mind of the readers.

 [2804] Translated among Jerome's works in this Series.

 [2805] Cant. i. 4

 [2806] See the Translation in this Volume.

 Preface to Book III. of the Peri 'Archon

 ------------------------

 Rufinus had now come to Rome. The translation of B. III. and IV. had
 been made probably at Pinetum early in 398. He was already aware of the
 strong feelings aroused by his Translation of B. I. and II., and he
 complains that parts of his work were obtained by Jerome's friends
 while still uncorrected, and used to his discredit (Apol. i, 18-21, ii,
 44); but he continued the work, prefixing to it the following Preface
 as his justification.

 Reader, remember me in your sacred moments of prayer, that I may be a
 worthy follower of the Spirit. It was you, Macarius, by whose
 instigation, I might say by whose compulsion, I translated the two
 first books of the Peri 'Archon. I did it during Lent; and at that time
 your near presence, my Christian brother, and your fuller leisure,
 forced me also into fuller diligence. But now that you are living at
 the opposite end of Rome from me, and my taskmaster pays his visits
 more seldom, I have taken longer in unfolding the sense of the two last
 books. You will remember that in my former preface I gave you warning
 that some people would be full of indignation when they found that I
 had no harm to say of Origen: and this, as I think you have found, has
 not been long in coming to pass. But if those demons who excite men's
 tongues to evil speaking, have been already set on fire by that first
 part of the work, though in it the author had not yet fully laid bare
 their devices, what will be the effect of this second part, in which he
 is going to disclose all the secret labyrinths through which they creep
 into the hearts of men and deceive the hearts of the weak and the
 frail? You will see disorder springing up on all sides, and party
 spirit will be raised, and an outcry will spread all through the town,
 and Origen will be summoned to the bar and condemned for his attempt to
 dispel the darkness of ignorance by the light of the Gospel's lamp. But
 all this will matter very little to those who are endeavouring to hold
 fast the sound form of the catholic faith while exercising their minds
 in the study of divine things.

 I think it necessary, however, to remind you of the principle which I
 acted upon in reference to the former books, and which I have observed
 in the present case also, namely, not to set down in my translation
 things evidently contradictory to our belief and to the author's
 opinions as elsewhere expressed, but to pass them over as not genuine
 but inserted by others. On the other hand I have not, either in the
 former books or in these, omitted the novel opinions which he has
 expressed about the formation of the reasonable creation, considering
 that it is not in such things that the faith mainly consists, but that
 what he is aiming at is merely knowledge and the exercise of the
 faculties, and that possibly there may be certain heresies which may
 have to be answered in this way. Only, in cases where he may have
 chosen to repeat in these later books what he had said before in the
 earlier, I have thought it expedient to cut out certain portions for
 the sake of brevity.

 Those whose object in reading these books is to gain knowledge, not to
 disparage their author, would do well to seek the aid of men more
 skilled than themselves in interpreting them. For it is an absurd thing
 to get grammarians to explain to us the fictions of the poets' writings
 and the laughable stories of the comedians, and yet to think that books
 which speak of God and the celestial powers, and the whole universe,
 and which discuss all the errors of pagan philosophy and of heretical
 pravity are things which any one can understand without a teacher to
 explain them. In this way it comes to pass that men prefer to remain in
 ignorance and to pronounce rash judgments on things which are difficult
 and obscure rather than to gain an understanding of them by diligent
 study.

 Rufinus' Apology in Defence of Himself.

 ------------------------

 Sent to Anastasius, Bishop of the City of Rome.

 ------------------------

 This document was called forth by accusations against Rufinus made,
 soon after his accession, to Anastasius, who held the Roman see from
 498 to 503. The authority of the Roman Popes at this time was not what
 it afterwards became, and it is improbable that Anastasius should have
 summoned Rufinus, as some suppose him to have done, from Aquileia,
 where he was living on confidential terms with the Bishop Chromatius,
 to come to Rome to answer a formal accusation or to be judged by him.
 But since Rome was the centre of information, a Christian would not
 wish to be ill-thought of by its Bishop. Those who accused Rufinus were
 the friends of Jerome at Rome, especially the noble widow Marcella and
 the Senator Pammachius. They had endeavoured to gain some condemnation
 of Rufinus from Siricius before his death in November 398; but Siricius
 befriended Rufinus ("his simplicity was imposed on," according to
 Jerome). [2807] On the election of Anastasius, however, in 399, they
 accused Rufinus of having, by his translation of Origen's Peri 'Archon
 introduced heresy into the Roman church. Jerome thus speaks of
 Marcella, Ep. cxxvii. 10. "She was the cause of the condemnation of the
 heretics: she brought witnesses who had been at a former time under
 their instruction, and thus imbued with error and heresy; she showed
 how many there were who had been deceived; she had the volumes of the
 Peri 'Archon brought in, and pointed out the alterations which the
 Scorpion [2808] had made in them: till at last letters were written,
 and that more than once, summoning the heretics to come and defend
 themselves, but they did not dare to come. So great was the force of
 conviction brought to bear on them that, to prevent their heresy being
 exposed in their presence, they chose to stay away and be condemned."
 From the letter of Anastasius to John of Jerusalem about Rufinus we
 gather that, while he strongly disapproved the translation of Origen,
 he left Rufinus himself to his own conscience, and did not care to know
 what had become of him. The letter of Rufinus, though called an
 Apology, bears no trace of being an answer to a summons or judgment of
 the Pontiff, but merely a reply to statements which were likely to
 prejudice him in the Pontiff's opinion. The year in which the Apology
 was written was 400 a.d.

 1. It has been brought to my knowledge that certain persons, in the
 course of a controversy which they have been raising in your Holiness'
 jurisdiction on matters of faith or on other points, have made mention
 of my name. I venture to believe that your Holiness, who have been
 trained from your infancy in the strict principles of the Church, has
 refused to listen to any calumnies which may have been directed against
 an absent person, and one who has been favourably known to you as
 united with you in the faith and love of God. Nevertheless, since I
 hear it reported that my reputation has been attacked, I have thought
 it right to make my position clear to your Holiness in writing. It was
 impossible for me to do this in person. I have just returned to my
 family [2809] after an absence of nearly 30 years; and it would have
 been harsh and almost inhuman to come away again so soon from those
 whom I had been so late in revisiting. The labour also of my long
 journey has left me too weak to begin the journey again. My object in
 this letter is not to remove some stain of suspicion from your mind,
 which I regard as a holy place, as a kind of divine sanctuary which
 does not admit any evil thing. Rather, I desire that the confession I
 am about to make to you may be like a stick placed in your hands to
 drive away any envious persons who may be barking like dogs against me.

 2. My faith, indeed, was sufficiently proved when the heretics
 persecuted me. I was at that time sojourning in the church of
 Alexandria, and underwent imprisonment and exile which was then the
 penalty of faithfulness; yet for the sake of any who may wish to put my
 faith to the test, or to hear and learn what it is I will declare it. I
 believe that the Trinity is of one nature and godhead, of one and the
 same power and substance; so that between the Father, the Son and the
 Holy Ghost there is no diversity at all, except that the one is the
 Father, the second the Son, and the third the Holy Ghost. There is a
 Trinity of real and living Persons, a unity of nature and substance.

 3. I also confess that the Son of God has in these last days been born
 of the Virgin and the Holy Spirit: that he has taken upon him our
 natural human flesh and soul; that in this he suffered and was buried
 and rose again from the dead; that the flesh in which he rose was that
 same flesh which had been laid in the sepulchre; and that in this same
 flesh, together with the soul, he ascended into heaven after his
 resurrection: from whence we look for his coming to judge the quick and
 the dead.

 4. But, further, as to the resurrection of our own flesh, I believe
 that it will be in its integrity and perfection; it will be this very
 flesh in which we now live. We do not hold, as is slanderously reported
 by some men, that another flesh will rise instead of this; but this
 very flesh, without the loss of a single member, without the cutting
 off of any single part of the body; none whatever of all its properties
 will be absent except its corruptibility. It is this which is promised
 by the holy Apostle concerning the body: It is sown in corruption, it
 is raised in incorruption; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in
 power; it is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown a
 natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. This is the doctrine which
 has been handed down to me by those from whom I received holy baptism
 in the Church of Aquileia; and I think that it is the same which the
 Apostolic See has by long usage handed down and taught.

 5. I affirm, moreover, a judgment to come, in which judgment every man
 is to receive the due meed of his bodily life, according to that which
 he has done, whether good or evil. And, if in the case of men the
 reward is to be according to their works, how much more will this be so
 in the case of the devil, who is the universal cause of sin? Of the
 devil himself our belief is that which is written in the Gospel,
 namely, that both he and all his angels, will receive as their portion
 the eternal fire, and with him those who do his works, that is, who
 become the accusers of their brethren. If then any one denies that the
 devil is to be subjected to the eternal fires, may he have his part
 with him in the eternal fire, so that he may know by experience the
 fact which he now denies.

 6. I am next informed that some stir has been made on the question of
 the nature of the soul. Whether complaints on a matter of this kind
 ought to be entertained instead of being put aside, you must yourself
 decide. If, however, you desire to know my opinion on the subject, I
 will state it frankly. I have read a great many writers on this
 question, and I find that they express divers opinions. Some of those
 whom I have read hold that the soul is infused together with the
 material body through the channel [2810] of the human seed; and of this
 they give such proofs as they can. I think that this was the opinion of
 Tertullian or Lactantius among the Latins, perhaps also of a few
 others. Others assert that God is every day making new souls, and
 infusing them into the bodies which have been framed in the womb; while
 others again believe that the souls were all made long ago, when God
 made all things of nothing, and that all that he now does is to plant
 out each soul in its body as it seems good to him. This is the opinion
 of Origen, and of some others of the Greeks. For myself, I declare in
 the presence of God that, after reading each of these opinions, I am up
 to the present moment unable to hold any of them as certain and
 absolute; the determination of the truth in this question I leave to
 God and to any to whom it shall please him to reveal it. My profession
 on this point is therefore, first, that these several opinions are
 those which I have found in books, but, secondly, that I as yet remain
 in ignorance on the subject, except so far as this, that the Church
 delivers it as an article of faith that God is the creator of souls as
 well as of bodies.

 7. Now as to another matter. I am told that objections have been raised
 against me because, forsooth, at the request of some of my brethren, I
 translated certain works of Origen from Greek into Latin. I suppose
 that every one sees that it is only through ill will that this is made
 a matter of blame. For, if there is any offensive statement in the
 author, why is this to be twisted into a fault of the translator? I was
 asked to exhibit in Latin what stands written in the Greek text; and I
 did nothing more than fit the Latin words to the Greek ideas. If,
 therefore, there is anything to praise in these ideas, the praise does
 not belong to me; and similarly as to anything to which blame may
 attach. I admit that I put something of my own into the work; as I
 stated in my Preface, I used my own discretion in cutting out not a few
 passages; but only those as to which I had come to suspect that the
 thing had not been so stated by Origen himself; and the statement
 appeared to me in these cases to have been inserted by others, because
 in other places I had found the author state the matter in a catholic
 sense. I entreat you therefore, holy, venerable and saintly father, not
 to permit a storm of ill will to be raised against me because of this,
 nor to sanction the employment of partisanship and of calumny--weapons
 which ought never to be used in the Church of God. Where can simple
 faith and innocence be safe if they are not protected in the Church? I
 am not a defender or a champion of Origen; nor am I the first who has
 translated his works. Others before me had done the very same thing,
 and I did it, the last of many, at the request of my brethren. If an
 order is to be given that such translations are not to be made, such an
 order holds good for the future, not the past; but if those are to be
 blamed who have made these translations before any such order was
 given, the blame must begin with those who took the first step.

 8. As for me, I declare in Christ's name that I never held, nor ever
 will hold, any other faith but that which I have set forth above, that
 is, the faith which is held by the Church of Rome, by that of
 Alexandria, and by my own church of Aquileia; and which is also
 preached at Jerusalem; and if there is any one who believes otherwise,
 whoever he may be, let him be Anathema. But those who through mere ill
 will and malice engender dissensions and offences among their brethren,
 and cause them to stumble, shall give account of it in the day of
 judgment.

 [2807] Jerome Letter cxxvii. 9.

 [2808] The Scorpion is Jerome's name for Rufinus, especially after his
 death. He means that Rufinus had altered the too palpable expressions
 of heresy, so that the more subtle expressions of it might gain
 acceptance.

 [2809] Rufinus uses the word "parentes." Jerome in his Apology (ii, 2)
 scoffs at the notion that a man of Rufinus' age (about 55) could have
 parents living, and supposes that he is making a false suggestion by
 using the word in the sense in which it was vulgarly used--that of
 relations generally, as it is now used in French.

 [2810] Traducem, properly, the layer, by which the vine is propagated,
 and hence the medium through which life is communicated. This is the
 theory of the "traducianists" who thus made the soul to be derived from
 the parent by procreation. It is contrasted with that of the
 "creationists" who held that each soul was separately created, and
 infused into the child at the moment when life began.

 The Letter of Anastasius,

 Bishop of the Church of Rome to John Bishop of Jerusalem Concerning the
 Character of Rufinus.

 ------------------------

 The letter of Anastasius to John of Jerusalem was written in the year
 401; it is spoken of in Jerome's Apol. iii., c. 21, which was written
 in the first half of 402, as "the letter of last year." Jerome
 intimates in the same passage that it was only one of several letters
 of the same character which Anastasius wrote to the East. Rufinus had
 not seen it, and refused to believe its genuineness. But there seems to
 be no reason for doubting this. Anastasius had, at the earnest request
 of Theophilus of Alexandria, formally condemned Origenism. And Rufinus'
 translations of Origen's Peri 'Archon and of Pamphilus' Vindication of
 Origen, and his own book on the Falsification of Origen's works were
 taken at Rome as a defence of Origenism generally. Rufinus, however,
 appealed continually, and especially in his Apology to Anastasius, to
 the church of Jerusalem, where he had been ordained. "My faith," he
 says, "is that which is preached at Jerusalem." Anastasius, therefore,
 in condemning Origen would be understood as condemning Rufinus, and
 might also seem to condemn his Bishop John of Jerusalem. This will
 account for the fulsome praises with which the letter opens. John,
 moreover, had written "to consult" Anastasius about Rufinus, which
 probably implies some action in Rufinus' interest; but the fact that
 Jerome knew the contents of the letter and Rufinus did not seems to
 show that Bishop John had become more friendly with Jerome and less so
 with Rufinus.

 1. The kind words of approval that you have addressed, my dear Bishop,
 to your brother Bishop, is a fresh mark of your long tried affection.
 It is a high commendation which you confer upon me, a most lavish
 recognition of my services. I thank you for this proof of your love;
 and, following you at a distance in my littleness, I bring the tribute
 of my words to honour the splendour of your holiness and those virtues
 which the Lord has conferred upon you. You excel all others so far, the
 splendour of your praise shines forth so conspicuously, that no words
 which I can use can equal your deserts. Yet your glory excites in me
 such admiration that I cannot turn away from the attempt to describe
 it, even though I can never do so adequately. And, first, the praise
 which you have bestowed on me out of the serene heaven of your great
 spirit forms part of your own glory: for it is the majesty of your
 episcopate, shining forth like the sun upon the opposite quarter of the
 world, which has reflected its own brightness upon us. And you give me
 your friendship unreservedly; you do not weigh me in the balance of
 criticism. If it is right for you to praise me, must not your praise be
 echoed back to you? I beg you therefore, for your own sake no less than
 mine, that you will not praise me any more to my face. I ask this for
 two reasons: if the praise is undeserved it must excite in your
 brother-bishop a sense of pain; if it is true, it must make him blush.

 2. Let me come to the subject of your letter. Rufinus, about whom you
 have done me the honour to ask my advice, must bring his conscience to
 the bar of the divine majesty. It is for him to see how he can approve
 himself to God as maintaining his true allegiance to him.

 3. As for Origen, whose writings he has translated into our language, I
 have neither formerly known, nor do I now seek to know either who he
 was or what expression he may have given to his thought. But as to the
 feeling left by this matter on my own mind I should be glad to speak
 with your holiness for a moment. The impression which I have received
 is this,--and it has been brought out clearly by the reading of parts
 of Origen's works by the people of our City, and by the sort of mist of
 blindness which it threw over them,--that his object was to
 disintegrate our faith, which is that of the Apostles, and has been
 confirmed by the traditions of the fathers, by leading us into tortuous
 paths.

 4. I want to know what is the meaning of the translation of this work
 into the Roman tongue. If the translator intends by it to put the
 author in the wrong, and to denounce to the world his execrable deeds,
 well and good. In that case he will expose to well-merited hatred one
 who has long laboured under the adverse weight of public opinion. But
 if by translating all these evil things he means to give his assent to
 them, and in that sense gives them to the world to read, then the
 edifice which he has reared at the expense of so much labour serves for
 nothing else than to make the guilt the act of his own will, and to
 give the sanction of his unlooked for support to the overthrow of all
 that is of prime importance in the true faith as held by Catholic
 Christians from the time of the Apostles till now.

 5. Far be such teaching from the catholic system of the Church of Rome.
 It can never by any possibility come to pass that we should accept as
 reasonable things which we condemn as matters of law and right. We
 have, therefore, the assurance that Christ our God, whose providence
 reaches over the whole world, bestows his approval on us when we say
 that it is wholly impossible for us to admit doctrines which defile the
 church, which subvert its well tried moral system, which offend the
 ears of all who are witnesses of our doings and lay the ground for
 strife and anger and dissensions. This was the motive which led me to
 write my letter to Venerius [2811] our brother in the Episcopate, the
 character of which, written as it was in my weakness but with great
 care and diligence, you will realize by what I now subjoin: "Whence,
 then, he who translated the work has gained and preserves this
 assurance of innocence I am not greatly troubled to know: it fills me
 with no vain alarm. I certainly shall omit nothing which may enable me
 to guard the faith of the Gospel amongst my own people, and to warn, as
 far as in me lies, those who form part of my body, in whatever part of
 the world they live, not to allow any translation of profane authors to
 creep in and spring up amongst them, which will seek to unsettle the
 mind of devout men by spreading its own darkness among them. Moreover,
 I cannot pass over in silence an event which has given me great
 pleasure, the decree issued by our Emperors, [2812] by which every one
 who serves God is warned against the reading of Origen, and all who are
 convicted of reading his impious works are condemned by the imperial
 judgment." In these words my formal sentence was pronounced.

 6. You are troubled by the complaint which people make as to our
 treatment of Rufinus, so that you pursue certain persons [2813] with
 vague suspicions. But I will meet this feeling of yours with an
 instance taken from holy writ, namely, where it is said: "Man seeth not
 as God seeth; for God looketh upon the heart, but man upon the
 countenance." Therefore, my dearly beloved brother, put away all your
 prejudice. Weigh the conduct of Rufinus in your own unbiassed judgment;
 ask yourself whether he has not translated Origen's words into Latin
 and approved them, and whether a man who gives his encouragement to
 vicious acts committed by another differs at all from the guilty party.
 In any case I beg you to be assured of this, that he is so completely
 separate from all part or lot with us, that I neither know nor wish to
 know either what he is doing or where he is living. I have only to add
 that it is for him to consider where he may obtain absolution.

 [2811] Appointed bishop of Milan in 400, in succession to Simplicianus.

 [2812] Arcadius and Honorius.

 [2813] Probably the friends of Jerome at Rome, Pammachius and Marcella.
