Histories of the Kings of Britain
Geoffrey of Monmouth (c. 1136)
Translated by Sebastian Evans (1912, Everyman's Library)
Source: Global Grey ebook reprint of the public-domain Evans translation
Rights: Public Domain
Note: Complete 12-book Historia. Evans' epilogue and notes not included.

Book One
Book Two
Book Three
Book Four
Book Five
Book Six
Book Seven
Book Eight
Book Nine
Book Ten
Book Eleven
Book Twelve
The Translator’s Epilogue

1

Book One
CHAPTER I
EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO ROBERT, EARL OF GLOUCESTER
Geoffrey’s Prologue
Oftentimes in turning over in mine own mind the many themes that might be subject-matter
of a book, my thoughts would fall upon the plan of writing a history of the Kings of Britain,
and in my musings thereupon me seemed it a marvel that, beyond such mention as Gildas and
Bede have made of them in their luminous tractate, nought could I find as concerning the
kings that had dwelt in Britain before the Incarnation of Christ, nor nought even as
concerning Arthur and the many others that did succeed him after the Incarnation, albeit that
their deeds be worthy of praise everlasting and be as pleasantly rehearsed from memory by
word of mouth in the traditions of many peoples as though they had been written down.
To Robert of Glouchester
Now, whilst, I was thinking upon such matters, Walter, Archdeacon of Oxford, a man learned
not only in the art of eloquence, but in the histories of foreign lands, offered me a certain
most ancient book in the British language that did set forth the doings of them all in due
succession and order from Brute, the first King of the Britons, onward to Cadwallader, the
son of Cadwallo, all told in stories of exceeding beauty. At his request, therefore, albeit that
never have I gathered gay flowers of speech in other men’s little gardens, and am content
with mine own rustic manner of speech and mine own writing-reeds, have I been at the pains
to translate this volume into the Latin tongue. For had I besprinkled my page with high-flown
phrases, I should only have engendered a weariness in my readers by compelling them to
spend more time over the meaning of the words than upon understanding the drift of my
story.
Unto this my little work, therefore, do thou, Robert, Duke of Gloucester, show favour in such
wise that it may be so corrected by thy guidance and counsel as that it may be held to have
sprung, not from the poor little fountain of Geoffrey of Monmouth, but rather from thine own
deep sea of knowledge, and to savour of thy salt. Let it be held to be thine own offspring, as
thou thyself art offspring of the illustrious Henry, King of the English.
Praises of Britain
Let it be thine, as one that hath been nurtured in the liberal arts by philosophy, and called
unto the command of our armies by thine own inborn prowess of knighthood; thine, whom in
these our days haileth with heart-felt affection Britain as though in thee she had been
vouchsafed a second Henry.
CHAPTER II
Britain, best of islands, lieth in the Western Ocean betwixt Gaul and Ireland, and containeth
eight hundred miles in length and two hundred in breadth. Whatsoever is fitting for the use of
mortal men the island doth afford in unfailing plenty. For she aboundeth in metals of every
kind; fields hath she, stretching far and wide, and hillsides meet for tillage of the best,
whereon, by reason of the fruitfulness of the soil, the divers crops in their season do yield
their harvests. Forests also hath she filled with every manner of wild deer, in the glades
whereof groweth grass that the cattle may find therein meet change of pasture, and flowers of
many colours that do proffer their honey unto the bees that flit ever busily about them.

2

Meadows hath she, set in pleasant places, green at the foot of misty mountains, wherein be
sparkling well-springs clear and bright, flowing forth with a gentle whispering ripple in
shining streams that sing sweet lullaby unto them that lie upon their banks. Watered is she,
moreover, by lakes and rivers wherein is much fish, and, besides the narrow sea of the
Southern coast whereby men make voyage unto Gaul, by three noble rivers, Thames, to wit,
Severn and Humber, the which he stretcheth forth as it were three arms whereby she taketh in
the traffic from oversea brought hither from every land in her fleets.
Of Duke Æneass
By twice ten cities, moreover, and twice four, was she graced in days of old, whereof some
with shattered walls in desolate places be now fallen into decay, whilst some, still whole, do
contain churches of the saints with towers builded wondrous fair on high, wherein companies
of religious, both men and women, do their service unto God after the traditions of the
Christian faith. Lastly, it is inhabited of five peoples, Romans, to wit, Britons, Saxons, Picts
and Scots. Of these the Britons did first settle them therein from sea to sea before the others,
until, by reason of their pride, divine vengeance did overtake them, and they yielded them
unto the Picts and Saxons. Remaineth now for me to tell from whence they came and in what
wise they did land upon our shores, as by way of foretaste of that which shall hereafter be
related more at large.
CHAPTER III
After the Trojan War, Æneas, fleeing from the desolation of the city, came with Ascanius by
ship unto Italy. There, for that Æneas was worshipfully received by King Latinus, Turnus,
King of the Rutulians, did wax envious and made war against him. When they met in battle,
Æneas had the upper hand, and after that Turnus was slain, obtained the kingdom of Italy and
Lavinia the daughter of Latinus.
The birth of Brute
Later, when his own last day had come, Ascanius, now King in his stead, founded Alba on
Tiber, and begat a son whose name was Silvius. Silvius, unknown to his father, had fallen in
love with and privily taken to wife a certain niece of Lavinia, who was now about to become
a mother. When this came to the knowledge of his father Ascanius, he commanded his
wizards to discover whether the damsel should be brought to bed of a boy or a girl. When
they had made sure of the matter by art magic, they told him that the child would be a boy
that should slay his father and his mother, and after much travel in many lands, should, albeit
an exile, be exalted unto the highest honours. Nor were the wizards out in their forecast, for
when the day came that she should be delivered of a child, the mother bare a son, but herself
died in his birth. Howbeit, the child was given in charge unto a nurse, and was named Brute.
At last, after thrice five years had gone by, the lad, bearing his father company out a-hunting,
slew him by striking him unwittingly with an arrow. For when the verderers drave the deer in
front of them, Brute, thinking to take aim at them, smote his own father under the breast.
Upon the death of his father he was driven out of Italy, his kinsfolk being wroth with him for
having wrought a deed so dreadful. He went therefore as an exile into Greece, and there fell
in with the descendants of Helenus, the son of Priam, who at that time were held in bondage
under the power of Pandrasus, King of the Greeks.
Brute’s youthful prowess
For Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, after the overthrow of Troy, had led away with him in fetters
the foresaid Helenus and a great number of others besides, whom he commanded to be held
in bondage by way of revenging upon them his father’s death. And when Brute understood
that they were of the lineage of his former fellow-citizens, he sojourned amongst them.

3

Howbeit, in such wise did he achieve renown for his knighthood and prowess, that he was
beloved by kings and dukes above all the other youths of the country. For among the wise he
was as wise as he was valiant among warriors, and whatsoever gold or silver or ornaments he
won, he gave it all in largess to his comrades in battle. His fame was thus spread abroad
among all nations, and the Trojans flocked unto him from all parts, beseeching him that he
should be their King and deliver them front the slavery of the Greeks; the which they
declared might easily be done, seeing that they had now so multiplied in the land as that
without making count of little ones and women they were already reckoned to be seven
thousand. There was, moreover, a certain youth of high nobility in Greece, by name
Assaracus, who was no less favourable to their cause. For he was born of a Trojan mother,
and he had in them the fullest affiance that by their help he would be able to resist the
harassing persecution of the Greeks. For his brother laid claim against him in respect of three
castles which his father when dying had conferred upon him, but which the brother was now
trying to take away from him because Assaracus had been born of a concubine.
Brute to Pandrasus
The brother himself was Greek both by father and mother, and had rallied the King and the
rest of the Greeks to the support of his cause. When, therefore, Brute saw how great was the
multitude of fighting men, and also how strong were the castles of Assaracus which were
open unto him, he granted their request without misgiving.
CHAPTER IV
When, therefore, he was thus chosen their Duke, he summons together the Trojans from
every quarter and garrisons the strongholds of Assaracus. Howbeit, Assaracus himself, with
all the host of men and women that were upon their side, occupied the forests and hills. Then
Brute sent his letter addressed unto the King in these words: ‘To Pandrasus, King of the
Greeks, Brute, Duke of them that are left of Troy, greeting: Whereas a nation sprung from the
illustrious race of Dardanus deigned not to be treated in thy kingdom otherwise than as the
purity of their nobility did demand, they have betaken them into the depths of the forests. For
they held it better to live a life after the manner of wild beasts, to wit on flesh and herbs, with
liberty, than to be cockered with dainties of every kind and remain any longer under the yoke
of bondage unto thee. If this offendeth the loftiness of thy power, they are rather to be
pardoned than held to blame, for of all that are in captivity it is the common aim and desire to
recover their former dignity.
Brute’s first victory
Be thou, therefore, moved to mercy towards them, and deign to bestow upon them their lost
liberty, allowing them to inhabit the forest glades that they have occupied to the end that thus
they might flee beyond the reach of slavery. But if this thou wilt not, grant them at least that
they may depart unto other nations of the world with thy good will.’
CHAPTER V
When Pandrasus, therefore, had learnt the drift of this letter, he was beyond measure amazed
that they whom he had held in bondage should so abound in hardihood as to address any
mandates of the kind unto him. He therefore summoned a council of his nobles, and decreed
that an army should be levied in order to hunt them down. But whilst that he was searching
the wildernesses wherein he supposed them to be, and the stronghold of Sparatinum, Brute
issued forth with three thousand men, and suddenly attacked him when he was expecting
nothing of the kind. For, hearing of his arrival, he had thrown himself into the said stronghold
the night before, in order that he might make an unlooked-for onslaught upon them when they

4

were unarmed and marching without order. The Trojans accordingly charged down upon
them and attacked them stoutly, doing their best to overwhelm them with slaughter.
The Greeks defeated
The Greeks, moreover, suddenly taken aback, are scattered in all directions, and scamper off,
the King at their head, to get across the river Akalon that runneth anigh. But in fording the
stream they suffer sore jeopardy from the whirling currents of the flood. Whilst they are thus
fleeing abroad,. Brute overtaketh them, and smiteth down them that he overtaketh partly in
the waters of the river and partly on the banks, and, hurrying hither and thither amongst them,
rejoiceth greatly to inflict upon them a double death. Which when Antigonus the brother of
Pandrasus beheld, he was beyond measure afflicted, and as soon as he could recall his
straggling comrades to the ranks, returned and charged swiftly upon the raging Trojans. For
he was minded rather to die fighting than to make a craven flight only to be drowned in the
muddy whirlpits of the river. Marching, therefore, in a solid battalion, he exhorted his
comrades to resist like men, and hurl back the deadly weapons with all their might. Yet did it
avail him little or nothing. For the Trojans were accoutred with arms, while the others were
unarmed. Pressing forward, therefore, all the more boldly on this account, they inflicted a
grievous slaughter upon them, nor did they cease to harry them in such fashion until they had
slaughtered well-nigh the whole of them, and had taken captive Antigonus and his comrade
Anacletus.
CHAPTER VI
Pandrasus besiegeth Brute
Now, when Brute had achieved the victory, he garrisoned the stronghold with six hundred
men, and then sought out the recesses of the forest wherein the Trojan folk were expecting
his protection. But Pandrasus, in sore tribulation over his own flight and the capture of his
brother, spent the night in getting his scattered forces together again, and when the morrow
morning dawned marched with his reassembled people to besiege the stronghold. For he
thought that Brute had again set himself therein together with Antigonus and the other
prisoners. When, therefore, he came anigh the walls, he examined the situation of the castle,
and distributed his army in companies, and disposed them in divers places around it, telling
off sonic to forbid all egress to them that were enclosed within, some to divert the course of
the rivers, and others, again with store of battering-rams and other engines to shatter the
fabric of the walls. They all obeyed his orders to the best of their endeavour, devising in what
manner most cruelly they might annoy the besieged. When the night came on, moreover, they
chose the boldest of their number to keep guard over the camp and tents against any stealthy
attack of the enemy, while the rest, worn out with fatigue-labour, refreshed them with
undisturbed sleep.
CHAPTER VII
Brute’s cunning device
The besieged, on the other hand, standing on the top of the walls, endeavour with all their
strength to beat back the machinations of the device enemy by counter-devices, with one
mind busying themselves in their own defence, now flinging down missiles, now lighted
brimstone torches among them. When the wall was undermined by sappers working under
shelter of ‘a tortoise,’ they compelled the enemy to retreat by Greek fire and a shower of
boiling water. Suffering, howbeit, from scarcity of victual and the daily travail, they sent a
messenger unto Brute, beseeching him to hasten to their assistance, for sore were they afeared
lest they should he reduced by weakness to desert the fortress. Brute, therefore, anxious to
come to their succour, is sore tormented inwardly for that he hath not enough men to

5

adventure on delivering battle in the field. Howbeit, taking crafty counsel, he maketh resolve
to attack the enemy’s camp by night, and by deceiving the sentinels, to slay I them sleeping.
But, for that he knew this could only be done with the assistance and assent of one of the
Greeks, he called unto him Anacletus, the comrade of Antigonus, and, unsheathing his sword,
spake unto him on this wise:—
‘Most noble youth, thine own life and that of Antigonus are already at an end, save thou
faithfully agree to execute that which I shall command thee according unto my will. For it is
my purpose on this night following to attack the camp of the Greeks in such sort that I may
inflict upon them an unexpected slaughter.
A perilous stratagem
But I fear me lest their sentinels should discover my secret intent, and that thus the enterprise
be brought to nought. Wherefore, seeing that it behoveth us first of all to turn our arms
against the watch, I am desirous of deceiving them by means of you, so that I may have safer
passage for attacking the others. Do thou, therefore, acting warily as befitteth a matter of such
weight, go to the guard at the second hour of the night, and allaying the suspicions of any by
words of feigning, say that thou hast carried off Antigonus out of my dungeons unto a combe
in the forest, and that he there lieth hidden among the under-wood, being unable to get any
further on account of the fetters wherewith thou will feign that he is shackled. Then thou shalt
guide them to the issue of the forest as if for the purpose of setting him free, and there will I
be with a company of armed men ready to slay them.’
CHAPTER VIII
Anacletus, therefore, scared all the time by the sight of the sword, which during the time
these words were spoken had been raised ready to slay hint, made promise by oath that he
would execute this command on condition that longer life were granted unto Antigonus as
well as himself. The covenant was at last confirmed, and at the second hour of the night,
which was then just at hand, Anacletus started on his way towards the guard as he had been
commanded.
But a successful
And when at last he arrived anigh the camp, the sentinels on every side who keep eye upon
all the hidden corners of the places run up and ask him the cause of his coming, and whether
he hath come in order to betray the army? Unto whom he, feigning the greatest joy, made
answer: ‘Of a truth I come not here as a traitor to mine own folk, but as one that hath escaped
from the prison of the Trojans do I thus flee unto you, beseeching you that ye come with me
to our Antigonus, whom I have rescued from the chains of Brute. Him, indeed, hindered by
the weight of his shackles, have I but just now enjoined to lie hidden in the underwood by the
issue of the forest until I could find some whom I can lead thither to set him free.’ Whilst that
they were still doubting whether he told truth, came up one who had known him aforetime,
and after saluting him, told his comrades who he was. They thereupon, hesitating no longer,
summoned the rest who were at a distance to come as swiftly as might be, and followed him
as far as the wood, wherein, as he had told them before, Antigonus was hiding. While they,
accordingly, were making their way through the brushwood, Brute, with his armed
companies, cometh forth, and charging upon them soon inflicted a most terrible slaughter on
the panic-stricken guard.
A deadly signal
Then he marched on to the leaguer, dividing his comrades into three companies, and
commanding that each should approach the camp at a different point, prudently and without

6

noise, but that after they had effected an entrance into the camp, they should refrain from
slaughtering any until such time as he, with his own special company, had taken possession
of the King’s pavilion, when he would blow his own horn as a signal for them.
CHAPTER IX
He further instructed them in what manner they were to do everything that was to be done.
Forthwith they lightly make their way into the camp, and after fulfilling all that they have
been commanded, await the promised signal, which Brute tarried not long to give as soon as
he set foot without the pavilion of Pandrasus, which above all others he was burning to
attack. When the signal was heard, they unsheath their swords as swiftly as may be, rush into
the sleeping-tents of the drowsy enemy, redouble their death-dealing blows, and march in this
wise, all pitiless, throughout the camp. The rest waken up at the groans of the dying, and are
stricken helpless with dismay at the sight of the butchers, like sheep seized of a sudden by the
wolves. For nought of protection did they think to find, seeing that they had not even time
enow either to lay hands on their arms or to take to flight. They could but run without arms to
and fro amidst armed men as sudden impulse might lead. But all the time they are being cut
to pieces by the onslaught of their enemies. He that escaped half-alive, hurrying forth in his
eagerness for flight was dashed to the ground among the rocks and trees and brambles; and
yielded up his unhappy soul together with his red blood.
The King’s life spared
He that was furnished with a shield only, or other covering, dropped down through fear of
death among the same rocks, or swiftly fleeing through the darkness of the night, fell, and in
falling brake a leg or an arm. He to whom neither of these mischances befel, not knowing
whither to fly, was drowned in the rushing of the neighbouring rivers. Scarce one departed
unharmed without peril of any mishap. They within the fortress, moreover, when they knew
of the arrival of their fellows in arms, issued forth and redoubled the slaughter that was
wrought.
CHAPTER X
Now Brute, when he had obtained possession of the royal tent, was careful to bind the King
and to keep him safe. For he knew that he could attain the object at which he aimed more
readily by the King’s life than by his death. But the company that were with him ceased not
from the slaughter they made, which in the part of the camp they held had wrought a
clearance that was nought less than extermination. When the night had thus been spent and
the light of dawn revealed how mighty a loss had been inflicted on the people, Brute, in a
very tempest of delight, now that the carnage was over, gave permission to his comrades to
deal as they pleased with the spoils of the slain.
Mempricius speaketh
Then he entereth the fortress with the King, and there awaiteth until he should have
distributed the treasure. When this was all allotted, he again garrisoned the castle and gave
orders for the burial of the dead. He then again collected his troops and returned rejoicing in
his victory to the forest. The tidings filled the hearts of his men with no less joy, and the
doughty Duke, after summoning the elders, made inquiry of them what they thought ought to
be demanded of Pandrasus, for, now that he was placed in their power, he would grant any
petition they might make to the utmost, provided he were allowed to go free. Some of them at
once proposed one thing, and some another, according to their inclinations. Part exhorted him
to ask for a portion of the kingdom for them to dwell therein; part for leave to go their way
elsewhere and for whatever might be of use to them upon the journey. And seeing that after a

7

long while they still hesitated, one amongst them, Mempricius by name, rose up and besought
silence, when he spake thus in the hearing of the rest:—
‘Wherefore, fathers, do ye hesitate about that which, in my opinion, is most expedient for
your own welfare? There is but one thing to be asked for, to wit, leave to depart, if ye desire
that yourselves and your children should have lasting peace. For if it be that ye grant
Pandrasus his life on condition that ye obtain a part of Greece, and so be minded to sojourn in
the midst of the Danai, never will ye enjoy an enduring peace so long as the brethren and
sons and grandsons of them upon whom ye inflicted the slaughter of yesterday remain
intermingled amongst ye or are your next neighbours without.
His counsel taken
For so long as they remember the slaying of their kinsfolk they will hold ye always in eternal
hatred, and taking offence at every the merest trifle, will do their best to wreak vengeance
upon ye. Nor will ye, seeing that your host is the smaller, have strength to resist the
aggressions of so many indwellers of the land. For if any strife for the mastery should arise,
their numbers will wax daily while your own will wane. Mine opinion, therefore, is that ye
ask of him his eldest daughter, whom they call Ignoge, as a wife for our Duke, and along with
her gold and silver, ships and corn, and whatsoever else may be needful for our voyage. And
if so be that he will grant her, we will then with his leave go on our way to. seek out other
lands.’
CHAPTER XI
When he had made an end of this speech, with more to the like effect, the whole assembly
signified their assent, and counselled that Pandrasus be brought into their midst, and, save he
should be favourable towards this their petition, should be condemned to a death as cruel as
might be. No tarrying was there. He is brought thither and set in a chair on high, where he is
instructed, moreover, what tortures he will have to suffer in case he refuse to do according as
he is commanded. Whereupon he made answer on this wise:—
Pandrasus yieldeth
‘Forasmuch as the gods are against me, and have delivered me and my brother Anacletus into
your hands, needs must I grant your petition, lest in case ye should meet with a denial we lose
the life which ye have the power to give or to take away as ye may choose. For nought hold I
better nor dearer than life, nor is it marvel that I should be willing to ransom it at the price of
any outward goods and possessions. Wherefore, albeit against my will, I will obey your
orders. Some comfort, nevertheless, seem I to have in this, that I shall give my daughter unto
a youth of such prowess, whom the nobility that doth now burgeon within him no less than
his renown which hath been made known to us, do declare to be a scion of the house of Priam
and Anchises. For who but he could have delivered the exiles of Troy, the bondsmen of so
many and such mighty princes, from their chains? Who but he could have urged them to
successful resistance against the nation of the Greeks? Who but he with so few would have
challenged to battle so mighty a host of armed warriors and at the first onset have led away
their King in fetters? But sith that a youth so noble and of so mighty prowess hath been able
to withstand me, I give him my daughter Ignoge. I give him, moreover, gold and silver, ships,
corn, wine and oil, and whatsoever ye shall deem needful for your journey. And if it be that
ye turn aside from your present purpose, and be minded to abide with the Greeks, I yield ye
the third part of my kingdom wherein to dwell.
Brute weddeth Ignoge

8

But if otherwise, I will fulfil my first promises in deeds, and that ye may have the fuller
assurance, with you will I remain as hostage until I shall have done all things whereunto I
have pledged me.’
The agreement thus confirmed, envoys are directed to gather ships together from all the
shores of Greece. These, when they were assembled to the number of three hundred and
twenty-four, are duly presented and laden with provision of all sorts. The daughter is married
to Brute, and each man, according as his rank demanded, was presented with gold and silver.
All his promises exactly fulfilled, the King is set free from prison; and at the same time the
Trojans depart from his dominions with a prosperous wind. But Ignoge, standing on the lofty
poop of the ship, falleth swooning again and again into the arms of Brute, and with sobbing
and shedding of tears lamenteth to forsake her kinsfolk and her country; nor turneth she her
eyes away from the shore, so long as the shore itself is in sight. Brute, the while, soothing her
with gentle words, at one time foldeth her in a sweet embrace, or at another kisseth her as
sweetly, nor doth he slacken his endeavour to comfort her until, weary with weeping, she
falleth at last on sleep.
In the meanwhile, what with these and other matters, they ran on together for two days and a
night with a fair current of wind, and drew to land at a certain island called Leogecia, which
had been uninhabited ever since it was laid waste by pirates in the days of old.
A deserted city
Howbeit, Brute sent three hundred men inland to discover by whom it might be inhabited.
Who, finding not a soul, slew such venison of divers kinds as they found in the glades and the
forests. They came, moreover, to a certain deserted city, wherein they found a temple of
Diana. Now in this temple was an image of the goddess, that gave responses, if haply it were
asked of any votary that there did worship. At last they returned to their ships, laden with the
venison they had found, and report to their comrades the lie of the land and the situation of
the city, bearing the Duke on hand that he make repair unto the temple, and after making
offerings of propitiation, inquire of the deity of the place what land she would grant them as a
fixed abiding place. By the common consent of all, therefore, Brute took with him Gerion the
augur, and twelve of the elders, and sought out the temple, bringing with them everything
necessary for making sacrifice. When they arrived they surrounded their brows with garlands,
and set up three altars according to immemorial wont, before the holy place, to the three
Gods, Jove, to wit, and Mercury as well as to Diana, and made unto each his own special
libation. Brute himself, holding in his right hand a vessel full of sacrificial wine and the blood
of a white hind before the altar of the goddess, with face upturned towards her image, broke
silence in these words:—
The response of Diana
‘Goddess and forest Queen, the wild boar’s terror,
Thou who the maze of heaven or nether mansions
Walkest at will, vouchsafe thy rede to earthward!
Tell me what lands thy will it is we dwell in?
What sure abode? Lo, there to Thee for ever
Temples I vow, and chant of holy maidens!’
After he had nine times repeated this, he walked four times round the altar, poured forth the
wine he held upon the hearth of offering, laid him down upon the fell of a hind that he had
stretched in front of the altar, and after invoking slumber fell on sleep. For as at that time it
was the third hour of the night, wherein are mortals visited by the sweetest sleep. Then it
seemed him the goddess stood there before him, and spake unto him on this wise:—

9

‘Brute,—past the realms of Gaul, beneath the sunset
Lieth an Island, girt about by ocean,
Guarded by ocean—erst the haunt of giants,
Desert of late, and meet for this thy people.
Seek it! For there is thine abode for ever.
There by thy sons again shall Troy be builded
There of thy blood shall Kings be born, hereafter
Sovran in every land the wide world over.’
On awakening from such a vision, the Duke remained in doubt whether it were a dream that
he had seen, or whether it were the living goddess herself who had thus foretold the land
whereunto he should go. At last he called his companions and related unto them from first to
last all that had befallen him in his sleep. They thereupon were filled with exceeding great
joy, and advise that they should at once turn back to their ships, and while the wind is still
blowing fair, should get under way as quickly as possible full sail for the West in search of
that land which the goddess had promised. Nor did they tarry.
A voyage of adventure
They rejoin their comrades and launch out into the deep, and after ploughing the waves for a
run of thirty days, made the coast of Africa, still not knowing in which direction to steer their
ships. Then came they to the Altars of the Phileni, and the place of the Salt-pans, steering
from thence betwixt Ruscicada and the mountains Azarae, where they encountered sore peril
from an attack by pirates. Natheless, they won the victory, and went on their way enriched by
the spoil and plunder they had taken.
CHAPTER XII
From thence, passing the mouth of the river Malva, they arrived in Mauritania, where lack of
food and drink compelled them to disembark, and dividing themselves into companies, they
harried the whole region from end to end. When they had revictualled their ships, they made
sail for the Columns of Hercules, where they saw many of the monsters of the deep called
Sirens, which surrounded the ships and well-nigh overwhelmed them. Howbeit, they made
shift to escape, and came to the Tyrrhene sea, where they found nigh the shore four
generations born of the exiles from Troy, who had borne Antenor company in his flight.
Their Duke was called Corineus, a sober-minded man and excellent in counsel, mighty in
body, valiance and hardiness, insomuch as that if it were he had to deal with a giant in single
combat he would straightway overthrow him as though he were wrestling with a lad.
Corineus goeth a-hunting
Accordingly, when they knew the ancient stock whereof he was born, they took him into their
company, as well as the people whereof he was chieftain, that in after-days were called
Cornishmen after the name of their Duke. He it was that in all encounters was of more help to
Brute than were any of the others.
Then came they to Aquitaine, and entering into the mouth of the Loire, cast anchor there.
Here they abode seven days and explored the lie of the land. Goffarius Pictus then ruled in
Aquitaine, and was King of the country, who, hearing the rumour of a foreign folk that had
come with a great fleet and had landed within the frontier of his dominions, sent envoys to
make inquiry whether their demanded peace or war? While the legates were on their way to
the fleet, they met Corineus who had just landed with two hundred men to hunt for venison in
the forest. Thereupon they accost him, and ask him by whose leave he hath thus trespassed
into the King’s forest to slay his deer? And when Corineus made them answer, that in such a
matter no leave nor license whatever could be held as needful, one of their number, Imbert by

10

name, rushed forward, and drawing his bow, aimed an arrow at him. Corineus avoided the
arrow, and ran in upon Imbert as fast as he might, and with the bow that he carried all-tobrake his head in pieces. Thereupon the rest fled, just making shift to escape his hands, and
reported the death of their fellow to Goffarius. The Duke of the Poitevins, taking the matter
sorely to heart, forthwith assembled a mighty host to take vengeance upon them for the death
of his messenger.
Corineus: his prowess
Brute, hearing tidings of his coming, set guards over his ships, bidding the women and
children remain on board, while he himself along with the whole flower of his army marcheth
forth to meet the enemy. When the engagement at last began, the fighting is fierce on both
sides, and after they had spent a great part of the day in battling, Corineus thought it shame
that the Aquitanians should hold their ground so stoutly, and the Trojans not be able to press
forward to the victory. So taking heart afresh, he called his own men apart to the right of the
battle, and forming them in rank made a rapid charge upon the enemy, and when, with his
men in close order, he had broken the front ranks, he never stinted striking down the enemy
till he had cut his way right through the battalion and forced them all to flee. Good luck had
supplied the place of a sword he lost with a battle-axe, wherewith he cleft in twain any that
came next him from the crown of the head right down to the girdlestead. Brute marvels; his
comrades and even the enemy marvel at the hardihood and valour of the man, who,
brandishing his battle-axe among the flying host, added not a little to their terror by shouting,
‘Whither fly ye, cowards? Whither fly ye, cravens? Turn back, I tell ye, turn, and do battle
with Corineus! Shame upon ye! So many thousands as are ye, do ye flee before my single
arm?
Goffarius vanquished
Flee then! and take with ye at least this comfort in your flight, that it is I who am after ye, I
who ere now have so oft been wont to drive the Tyrrhene giants in flight before me, and to
hurl them to hell by threes and fours at a time!’
CHAPTER XIII
At these words of his a certain earl named Subardus with three hundred men turned back and
charged down upon him. But Corineus, in raising his shield to ward the blow, forgat not the
battle-axe he held in his hand. Lifting it overhead, he smote him a buffet upon the top of his
helmet that cleft him right through into two halves. After this, he straightway rusheth in
amongst the rest, whirling his axe, and a passing furious slaughter he maketh. Hurrying hither
and thither, he avoideth receiving a single stroke, but never resteth a moment from smiting
down his enemies. Of one he loppeth off hand and arm, of another he cleaveth the shoulders
from the body, of another he striketh off the head at a single blow, of another he severeth the
legs from the thigh. All dash headlong upon him only; he dasheth headlong in upon them all.
Brute, who beholdeth all this, glowing with love of the man, hurrieth forward with a company
to succour him. Then ariseth a mighty shouting betwixt the two peoples—the strokes are
redoubled, and passing bloody is the slaughter on the one side and the other. But it endureth
not long. The Trojans win the day, and drive King Goffarius and his Poitevins in flight before
them.
A battle nigh Tours
Goffarius, escaping by the skin of his teeth, betook him into the parts of Gaul to have succour
of his kinsfolk and acquaintance. At that time twelve kings there were in Gaul, each of equal
rank, under whose dominion the whole country was ruled. They all received him kindly, and

11

with one accord did pledge them to drive out from the frontiers of Aquitaine this foreign folk
that had arrived there.
CHAPTER XIV
Brute, overjoyed at the said victory, enriched his comrades with the spoils of the slain, ant
after again forming the ranks in companies. he leadeth his host inland with the intention of
sacking the whole country and loading his ship, with the countless treasure. Accordingly, he
burneth the cities in all directions, fire after fire, and ransacketh their hidden hoards; even the
fields are laid waste, and citizen and countryman alike are subjected to a piteous slaughter,
his aim being to exterminate the unhappy race to the last man. But after that he had thus
visited with bloodshed well-nigh the whole of Aquitaine, he came unto the place where now
standeth the city of Tours, which, as Homer beareth witness, he afterwards himself builded.
Finding after diligent survey that the place was convenient as a refuge, he there decided to
pitch his camp, so that if need were he could betake him thereinto.
Goffarius boasteth
For sore misgiving had he by reason of the arrival of Goffarius, who had marched into the
neighbourhood along with the Kings and Princes of Gaul and a mighty host of armed
warriors to do battle against him. When his camp was fully finished, he awaited Goffarius for
two days therein, confident alike in his own prudence and in the hardihood of the young men
whereof he was the chieftain.
CHAPTER XV
Now, when Goffarius heard of the Trojans being there, he advanced by forced marches day
and night until he came well within sight of Brute’s camp. Gazing grimly thereon, yet
somewhat smiling withal, he burst forth into these words: ‘Alas! what grievous destiny is
here? Have these ignoble exiles pitched their camp within dominions of mine? To arms, ye
warriors to arms! and charge through their serried ranks! Right soon may we take captive this
herd of half-men like sheep and hold them in bondage throughout our realm!’ Forthwith, all
they that he had brought with him leapt to arms, and marched upon their enemies ranked in
twelve battalions. But not after any woman wise did Brute range his men and march to meet
them. Prudently instructing his troops as to what they were to do, how to advance, and in
what order to hold their ground, he gives the word to charge. At the first onset, the Trojans
for a time had the upper hand, and fearful was the slaughter they made of the enemy, for nigh
two thousand of them fell, and the rest were so daunted at the sight that they all but turned to
flee.
Corineus: his stratagem
But where the numbers of men are the greater, there the more often doth victory abide. In this
case, therefore, the Gauls, albeit that at first they were beaten back, yet being thrice so many
as their enemies, made shift to form themselves again in rank and charged in again on every
side against the Trojans, whom they compelled after much bloodshed to take refuge in the
camp. Having thus obtained the victory, they beleaguered them within the camp, never
thinking but that before they departed thence the besieged would either offer their necks to
the fetters, or suffer a cruel and lingering death from the pangs of hunger. In the meanwhile,
on the night following, Corineus entered into counsel with Brute, and agreed with him that he
would issue forth of the camp that same night by certain secret byways, and would lie hidden
in the neighbouring forest until daybreak. And when Brute, issuing forth just before dawn,
should be engaged in battle with the enemy, he himself with his company should attack them
in the rear, and charging in upon them put them to the sword. Brute applauded this device of
Corineus, who, cautiously issuing forth as he had proposed with three thousand men, betook

12

him to the depths of the forest. Accordingly, when the morrow morning began to break, Brute
ordained his men in companies, and opening the gates of the camp, marched forth to battle.
The Gauls straightway set themselves to oppose him, and disposing their troops in battle
array came to close quarters with him.
How Tours city was named
Many thousands of men are at once cut down on both sides, and many are the wounds given
and received, for not a man spareth his adversary. It chanced that a certain Trojan was there
present named Turonus, a nephew of Brute’s, than whom was none more valiant and hardy
save only Corineus himself. He with his single sword slew no less than six hundred men.
Unhappily he was slain before his time by a sudden onslaught of the Gauls; and the foresaid
city of Tours acquired the name thereof by reason of his being there buried. And while the
troops on both sides were in the very thickest of the battle, Corineus came upon them of a
sudden and charged the enemy at the double in the rear. Straightway the others, pressing
forward from the front, renew the attack more hotly and strain them to the utmost to complete
the slaughter. The Gauls were aghast with dismay even at the very shout of the Cornishmen
as they charged in on the rear, and thinking that they were more in number than they were,
fled, hot foot, from the field. The Trojans are on their heels, hewing them down in pursuit,
nor cease they to follow them up until the victory is their own. Brute, nevertheless, albeit he
were right glad at heart to have achieved so signal a triumph, was sore grieved by anxiety on
one account, for he saw that, whilst his own numbers were minished daily, those of the Gauls
were daily multiplied. Wherefore, seeing it was doubtful whether he could any longer hold
out against them, he chose rather to retire to his ships while the greater part of his army was
still whole and the glory of the victory still fresh, and to set sail in quest of the island which
the divine monition had prophesied should be his own.
Brute landeth at Totnes
Nor was there any tarriance. With the assent of his men, he returned to his fleet, and after
loading his ships with all the treasures and luxuries he had acquired, he re-embarked, and
with a prosperous wind sought out the promised island, where he landed at last in safety at
Totnes.
CHAPTER XVI
At that time the name of the island was Albion, and of none was it inhabited save only of a
few giants. Natheless the pleasant aspect of the land, with the abundance of fish in the rivers
and deer in the choice forests thereof did fill Brute and his companions with no small desire
that they should dwell therein. Wherefore, after exploring certain districts of the land, they
drove the giants they found to take refuge in the caverns of the mountains, and divided the
country among them by lot according as the Duke made grant thereof. They begin to till the
fields, and to build them houses in such sort that after a brief space ye might have thought it
had been inhabited from time immemorial. Then, at last, Brute calleth the island Britain, and
his companions Britons, after his own name, for he was minded that his memory should be
perpetuated in the derivation of the name. Whence afterward the country speech, which was
aforetime called Trojan or crooked Greek, was called British.
The giant Goemagot
But Corineus called that share of the kingdom which had fallen unto him by lot Cornwall,
after the manner of his own name, and the people Cornishmen, therein following the Duke’s
example. For albeit that he might have had the choice of a province before all the others that
had come thither, yet was he minded rather to have that share of the land which is now called
Cornwall, whether from being, as it is, the cornu or horn of Britain, or from a corruption of

13

the said name Corineus. For nought gave him greater pleasure than to wrestle with the giants,
of whom was greater plenty there than in any of the provinces that had been shared amongst
his comrades. Among others was a certain hateful one by name Goemagot, twelve cubits in
height, who was of such lustihood, that when he had once uprooted it, he would wield an oak
tree as lightly as it were a wand of hazel. On a certain day when Brute was holding high
festival to the gods in the port whereat he had first landed, this one, along with a score other
giants, fell upon him and did passing cruel slaughter on the British. Howbeit, at the last, the
Britons collecting together from all quarters prevailed against them and slew them all, save
Goemagot only. Him Brute had commanded to be kept alive, as he was minded to see a
wrestling bout betwixt him and Corineus, who was beyond measure keen to match himself
against such monsters.
New Troy founded
So Corineus, overjoyed at the prospect, girt himself for the encounter, and flinging away his
arms, challenged him to a bout at wrestling. At the start, on the one side stands Corineus, on
the other the giant, each hugging the other tight in the shackles of their arms, both making the
very air quake with their breathless gasping. It was not long before Goemagot, grasping
Corineus with all his force, brake him three of his ribs, two on the right side and one on the
left. Roused thereby to fury, Corineus gathered up all his strength, heaved him up on his
shoulders and ran with his burden as fast as he could for the weight to the seashore nighest at
hand. Mounting up to the top of a high cliff, and disengaging himself, he hurled the deadly
monster he had carried on his shoulder into the sea, where, falling on the sharp rocks, he was
mangled all to pieces and dyed the waves with his blood, so that ever thereafter that place
from the flinging down of the giant hath been known as Lamgoemagot, to wit, ‘Goemagot’s
Leap,’ and is called by that name unto this present day.
CHAPTER XVII
After that he had seen his kingdom, Brute was minded to build him a chief city, and
following out his intention, he went round the whole circuit of the land in search of a fitting
site. When he came to the river Thames, he walked along the banks till he found the very spot
best suited to his purpose. He therefore founded his city there and called it New Troy, and by
this name was it known for many ages thereafter, until at last, by corruption of the word, it
came to be called Trinovantum.
London and King Lud
But afterward, Lud, the brother of Cassibelaunus, who fought-with Julius Cæsar, possessed
him of the helm of the kingdom, and surrounded the city with right noble walls, as well as
with towers builded with marvellous art, commanding that it should be called Kaerlud, that
is, the City of Lud, after his own name. Whence afterward a contention arose betwixt him and
his brother Nennius, who took it ill that he should be minded to do away the name of Troy in
his own country. But since Gildas, the historian, hath treated of this contention at sufficient
length, I have chosen the rather to pass it over, lest that which so great a writer hath already
set forth in so eloquent a style, I should only seem to besmirch in mine own homelier manner
of speech.
CHAPTER XVIII
Accordingly, when the aforesaid Duke founded the said city, he granted it as of right unto the
citizens that should dwell therein, and gave them a law under which they should be
peacefully entreated. At that time Eli the priest reigned in Judæa, and the Ark of the Covenant
was taken by the Philistines. The sons of Hector reigned in Troy, having driven out the

14

descendants of Antenor. In Italy reigned Sylvius Æneas, the son of Æneas and uncle of Brute,
he being the third of the Latin kings.

15

Book Two
CHAPTER I
Locrine and Ignoge
Now Ignoge, the wife of Brute, bare unto him three sons of high renown, whose names were
Locrine, Albanact and Camber. When their father departed this life in the twenty-fourth year
after his arrival, they buried him within the city that he had builded, and divided the realm of
Britain amongst themselves, each succeeding him in his share therein. Locrine, that was
eldest born, had the midland part of the island, which in later days was called Loegria, after
his name. Next, Camber had that part which lieth beyond the river Severn, and is now called
Wales, which afterward was for a long time called Cambria, after his name; whence unto this
day do the folk of the country call them Cymry in the British tongue. But Albanact, the
youngest, had the country which in these days in our tongue is called Scotland, and gave it
the name or Albany, after his own. And after that these had of a long time reigned in peace
and concord, Humber, the King of the Huns, landed in Albany, and engaging in battle with
Albanact, slew him, and compelled the country folk to flee unto Locrine.
CHAPTER II
Locrine and Estrildis
Locrine, accordingly, when he heard the rumour, besought his brother Camber to accompany
him, called out the whole youth of the country, and went to meet the King of the Huns in the
neighbourhood of the river Humber. When the armies met, he compelled Humber to flee, but
when he had fled as far as the river, it chanced that he was drowned therein, and thus left his
name to the stream. Locrine, therefore, after he had won the victory, distributed the spoil
among his comrades, keeping nothing for himself save the gold and silver that he found in the
enemy’s ships. He also kept for himself three damsels of marvellous beauty, whereof one was
the daughter of a certain King of Germany, whom the foresaid Humber had seized along with
the two other damsels when he laid waste her father’s country. Her name was Estrildis, and
so fair was she that scarce might any be found to compare with her for beauty, for no
polished ivory, nor newly-fallen snow, nor no lilies could surpass the whiteness of her flesh.
Taken with love of her, Locrine would fain that she should share his bed, and that the
marriage-torch should be lighted to celebrate their wedding. But when Corineus found out
what he was minded to do he was wroth beyond measure, for that Locrine had pledged
himself to marry Corineus’ own daughter.
CHAPTER III
Locrine weddeth Gwendolen
He came accordingly unto the King, and brandishing his battle-axe in his right hand, spake
unto him on this wise: ‘Be these the wages, Locrine, that thou wouldst pay me for the wounds
I have suffered in thy father’s service when he was warring against unknown peoples, that
you disdain my daughter and stoop to yoke you with a barbarian woman? If this indeed be so,
thou dost it on peril of my vengeance, so long as any strength is left in this right hand, which
hath quenched the delight of life in so many giants on the Tyrrhene shores.’ Shouting these
words aloud again and yet again, he brandished the axe as if about to strike him, when the
friends of both flung themselves betwixt. And after that Corineus were somewhat appeased,
they compelled Locrine to perform that which he had pledged him to do.

16

CHAPTER IV
Locrine accordingly married Corineus’ daughter, Gwendolen by name; yet, natheless did he
not forget the love he bare unto Estrildis. Wherefore, in the city of Trinovant, did he make
fashion a chamber underground wherein he enclosed her, and caused her be right honourably
served of the attendants of his household, for that he was minded to keep his love of her
secret. For he was sore troubled by reason of his dread of Corineus, so that he durst not hold
her openly, but, as hath been said already, kept her in hiding, and seven whole years did
haunt her in secret, so that none knew thereof save only they that were the closest of his
familiars.
Gwendolen’s revenge
For, so often as he was minded to go unto her, he would feign that he made hidden sacrifice
unto his gods, whereby he did lightly move others to believe the same, albeit in truth it were
no such thing. In the meantime, Estrildis did become great with child, and brought forth a
daughter of marvellous beauty, whom she called Sabrina. Gwendolen also became pregnant
and haiê a son, unto whom was given the name of Maddan. This son was delivered into the
charge of his grandfather Corineus, and had of him his teachings and nurture.
CHAPTER V
Years later, after Corineus was dead, Locrine deserted Gwendolen and raised Estrildis to be
Queen. Gwendolen thereupon, being beyond measure indignant, went into Cornwall, and
gathering together all the youth of that kingdom, began to harass Locrine by leading forays
into his land. At last, after both had mustered their armies, a battle was fought on the river
Stour, and Locrine, smitten by an arrow, lost his life and all the joys thereof. Whereupon
Gwendolen laid hold on the helm of state, maddened by the same revengeful fury as her
father, insomuch as that she bade Estrildis and Sabrina her daughter be flung into the river
that now called Severn, issuing an edict throughout all Britain that the river should be called
by the damsel’s name.
Maddan and his sons
For she was minded that it should bear her name for ever, for that it was her own husband
that begat her; whereby it cometh to pass that even unto this day the river in the British
tongue is called Sabren, which by corruption in other speech is called Severn.
CHAPTER VI
Gwendolen reigned fifteen years after the slaying of Locrine, who had reigned ten years. And
when she saw that her son Maddan had grown to man’s estate, she conferred upon him the
sceptre of the realm, contenting herself with the province of Cornwall, wherein she passed the
rest of her life. At that time Samuel the prophet reigned in Judæa, and Sylvius Æneas was
still living. And Homer was held to be a famous teller of histories and poet. Whilst Maddan
held the sceptre, his wife bare unto him two sons, Mempricius and Malim. And he maintained
his kingdom in peace diligently for forty years. But after his death arose discord betwixt the
two brethren as concerning the ‘kingdom, for that each of them was eager to possess the
whole island. Mempricius accordingly, desirous of achieving his own ends, entered into
conference with Malim as if for the purpose of establishing concord betwixt them.
Mempricius and Ebraucus
But kindled, as it were, by the fire-brand of treason, he slew him in the presence of them that
had come to take counsel in the matter, and having thus obtained the government of the
whole island, exercised so sore a tyranny over the people that he destroyed well-nigh all the

17

more noble men of the land. Moreover, hating all of his own family, either by violence or
treachery he made away with every single one that he feared might be able to succeed him in
the kingdom. He further left his own wife that had borne him the famous youth Ebraucus, and
abandoned himself wholly to unclean living. At last, in the twentieth year of his reign, while
he was out hunting, he rode apart from his companions into a certain combe, wherein he was
surrounded by a herd of raging wolves and miserably devoured. At that time Saul reigned in
Judæa and Eurystheus in Lacedæmon.
CHAPTER VII
After the death of Mempricius, his son Ebraucus, a man tall of stature and of marvellous
strength, undertook the government of Britain, which he held for forty years. He was the first
after Brute to take a fleet along the coasts of Gaul, and carrying war into the country to harass
the provinces by the slaughter of men and the sacking of the cities; returning thence with
victory and enriched with boundless plenty of gold and silver. He afterwards founded a city
beyond the Humber, which, after his own name, he called Kaerebrauc, that is to say, the City
of Ebrauc.
Ebrauc’s children
At that time King David reigned in Judæa and Sylvius Latinus in Italy. Gad, Nathan and
Asaph prophesied in Israel. Ebrauc founded also the city of Alclud towards Albany, and the
fortress of Mount Agned, which now is called the Castle of Damsels and the Dolorous
Mountain.
CHAPTER VIII
He begat, moreover, twenty sons by twenty wives that he had, besides thirty daughters, and
for forty years did he maintain the kingdom of Britain right stoutly. The names of his sons
were these: Brute Greenshield, Margadud, Sisilius, Regin, Morivid, Bladud, Lagon, Bodloan,
Kincar, Spaden, Gaul, Darden, Eldad, Ivor, Gangu, Hector, Kerin, Rud, Assaracus, Buel. The
names of the daughters were: Gloygni, Ignogen, Oudas, Guenliam, Gaurdid, Angarad,
Guendoloe, Tangustel, Gorgon, Median, Methabel, Ourar, Mailiure, Kambreda, Ragan, Gael,
Ecub, Nest, Cheun, Stadud, Gladud, Ebren, Blagan, Ahallac, Angaes, Galaes, the fairest of all
at that time living in Britain or Gaul, Edra, Anaor, Stadial and Egron. These all did their
father cause to be convoyed into Italy unto Sylvius Alba, who reigned after Sylvius Latinus.
There were they married with the more noble Trojans with whom the Latin and Sabine
women did refuse to match them. The sons, moreover, with Assaracus their brother for
chieftain, took a fleet into Germany, where, with the help of Sylvius Alba, they subdued the
people and possessed themselves of the kingdom.
Brute Greenshield
CHAPTER IX
Howbeit, Brute, surnamed Greenshield, remained with his father, and obtaining the
government of the kingdom after his father’s death, reigned for twelve years. Him succeeded
his son Leil, a lover of peace and justice, who, taking advantage of a prosperous reign,
builded a city in the north parts of Britain called after s name Kaerleil. At this time did
Solomon begin to build the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem, and the Queen of Sheba came
thither to hearken unto his wisdom. At the same time Sylvius Epitus succeeded his father
Alba in the kingdom of the Latins. Leil lived five-and-twenty years after that he had come
into the kingdom, albeit toward the end he maintained his royalty but feebly. Owing to his
sluggard slackness a civil war suddenly arose in the realm. After him reigned his son
Hudibras nine-and-thirty years, who, after the civil dissensions, did restore concord among

18

the people and founded Kaerlem, that is, Canterbury. He also founded Kaerguen, which is
Winchester, and the fortress of Mount Paladur, which is now called Shaftesbury. There, while
the wall was a-building, an eagle spake, the sayings whereof, had I believed them to be true, I
would not have shrunk from committing to written memory along with the rest. At that time
reigned Capys, the son of Epitus, and Haggai, Amos, Joel and Azarias did prophesy.
CHAPTER X
Bladud foundeth Bath
Next succeeded Bladud his son, in whose hands the kingdom remained for twenty years. He
builded the city of Kaerbadon, that is now called Bath, and fashioned hot baths therein, meet
for the needs of men, the which he placed under the guardianship of the deity Minerva, in
whose temple he set fires that could not be quenched, that never turned into ashes, but as they
began to fail became as it were round balls of stone. At that time did Elijah pray that it might
not rain upon the earth, and it rained not for the space of three years and six months. Bladud
was a right cunning craftsman, and did teach nigromancy throughout the realm of Britain, nor
did he stint of his subtle sleights until he had fashioned him wings and tried to go upon the
top of the air, when he fell upon the temple of Apollo in the city of Trinovantum, and was
dashed into many pieces.
CHAPTER XI
When Bladud was thus given over to the destinies, his son Lear was next raised to the
kingdom, and ruled the country after manly fashion for three-score years. He it was that
builded the city on the river Soar, that in the British is called Kaerleir, but in the Saxon,
Leicester.
King Lear and his daughters
Male issue was denied unto him, his only children being three daughters named Goneril,
Regan and Cordelia, whom all he did love with marvellous affection, but most of all the
youngest borne to wit, Cordelia. And when that he began to be upon the verge of eld, he
thought to divide his kingdom amongst them, and to marry them unto such husbands as were
worthy to have them along with their share of the kingdom. But that he might know which of
them was most worthy of the largest share, he went unto them to make inquiry of each as to
which of them did most love himself. When, accordingly, he asked of Goneril how much she
loved him, she first called all the gods of heaven to witness that her father was dearer to her
heart than the very soul that dwelt within her body. Unto whom saith her father: ‘For this,
that thou hast set mine old age before thine own life, thee, my dearest daughter, will I marry
unto whatsoever youth shall be thy choice, together with the third part of Britain.’ Next,
Regan, that was second, fain to take ensample of her sister and to wheedle her father into
doing her an equal kindness, made answer with a solemn oath that she could no otherwise
express her thought than by saying that she loved him better than all the world beside. The
credulous father thereupon promised to marry her with the same dignity as her elder sister,
with another third part of the kingdom for her share. But the last, Cordelia, when she saw
how her father had been cajoled by the flatteries of her sisters who had already spoken, and
desiring to make trial of him otherwise, went on to make answer unto him thus:
Lear wroth with Cordelia
‘Father mine, is there a daughter anywhere that presumeth to love her father more than a
father? None such, I trow, there is that durst confess as much, save she were trying to hide the
truth in words of jest. For myself, I have ever loved thee as a father, nor never from that love
will I be turned aside. Albeit that thou art bent on wringing more from me, yet hearken to the

19

true measure of my love. Ask of me no more, but let this be mine answer: So much as thou
hast, so much art thou worth, and so much do I love thee.’ Thereupon forthwith, her father,
thinking that she had thus spoken out of the abundance of her heart, waxed mightily
indignant, nor did he tarry to make known what his answer would be. ‘For that thou hast so
despised thy father’s old age that thou hast disdained to love me even as well as these thy
sisters love me, I also will disdain thee, nor never in my realm shalt thou have share with thy
sisters. Howbeit, sith that thou art my daughter, say not but that I will marry thee upon terms
of some kind unto some stranger that is of other land than mine, if so be that fortune shall
offer such an one; only be sure of this, that never will I trouble me to marry thee with such
honour as thy sisters, inasmuch as, whereas up to this time I have loved thee better than the
others, it now seemeth that thou lovest me less than they.’
Straightway thereupon, by counsel of the nobles of the realm, he giveth the twain sisters unto
two Dukes, of Cornwall, to wit, and Albany, together with one moiety only of the island so
long as he should live, but after his death he willed that they should have the whole of the
kingdom of Britain.
Cordelia married into France
Now it so fell out about this time that Aganippus, King of the Franks, hearing report of
Cordelia’s beauty, forthwith despatched his envoys to the King, beseeching him that Cordelia
might be entrusted to their charge as his bride whom he would marry with due rite of the
wedding-torch. But her father, still persisting in his wrath, made answer that right willingly
would he give her, but that needs must it be without land or fee, seeing that he had shared his
kingdom along with all his gold and silver betwixt Cordelia’s sisters Goneril and Regan,
When this word was brought unto Aganippus, for that he was on fire with love of the damsel,
he sent again unto King Lear saying that enow had he of gold and silver and other
possessions, for that one-third part of Gaul was his, and that he was fain to marry the damsel
only that he might have sons by her to inherit his land. So at last the bargain was struck, and
Cordelia was sent to Gaul to be married unto Aganippus.
CHAPTER XII
Some long time after, when Lear began to wax more sluggish by reason of age, the foresaid
Dukes, with whom and his two daughters he had divided Britain, rebelled against him and
took away from him the realm and the kingly power which up to that time he had held right
manfully and gloriously.
Lear’s piteous plight
Howbeit, concord was, restored, and one of his sons-in-law, Maglaunus, Duke of Albany,
agreed to maintain him with threescore knights, so that he should not be without some
semblance of state. But after that he had sojourned with his son-in-law two years, his
daughter Goneril began to wax indignant at the number of his knights, who flung gibes at her
servants for that their rations were not more plentiful. Whereupon, after speaking to her
husband, she ordered her father to be content with a service of thirty knights and to dismiss
the other thirty that he had. The King, taking this in dudgeon, left Maglaunus, and betook him
to Henvin, Duke of Cornwall, unto whom he had married his other daughter. Here, at first, he
was received with honour, but a year had not passed before discord again arose betwixt those
of the King’s household and those of the Duke’s, insomuch as that Regan, waxing indignant,
ordered her father to dismiss all his company save five knights only to do him service. Her
father, beyond measure aggrieved thereat, returned once more to his eldest daughter, thinking
to move her to pity and to persuade her to maintain himself and his retinue. Howbeit, she had
never renounced her first indignation, but swore by all the gods of Heaven that never should

20

he take up his abode with her save he contented himself with the service of a single knight
and were quit of all the rest. Moreover, she upbraided the old man for that, having nothing of
his own to give away, he should be minded to go about with such a retinue; so that finding
she would not give way to his wishes one single tittle, he at last obeyed and remained content
with one knight only, leaving the rest to go their way.
Lear seeketh Cordelia
But when the remembrance of his former dignity came back unto him, bearing witness to the
misery of the estate to which he was now reduced, he began to bethink him of going to his
youngest daughter oversea. Howbeit, he sore misdoubted that she would do nought for him,
seeing that he had held her, as I have said, in such scanty honour in the matter of her
marriage. Natheless, disdaining any longer to endure so mean a life, he betook him across the
Channel to Gaul. But when he found that two other princes were making the passage at the
same time, and that he himself had been assigned but the third place, he brake forth into tears
and sobbing, and cried aloud: ‘Ye destinies that do pursue your wonted way marked out by
irrevocable decree, wherefore was it your will ever to uplift me to happiness so fleeting? For
a keener grief it is to call to mind that lost happiness than to suffer the presence of the
unhappiness that cometh after. For the memory of the days when in the midst of hundreds of
thousands of warriors I went to batter down the walls of cities and to lay waste the provinces
of mine enemies is more grievous unto me than the calamity that hath overtaken me in the
meanness of mine estate, which hath incited them that but now were grovelling under my feet
to desert my feebleness. O angry fortune! will the day ever come wherein I may requite the
evil turn that hath thus driven forth the length of my days and my poverty?
Cordelia’s compassion
O Cordelia, my daughter, how true were the words wherein thou didst make answer unto me,
when I did ask of thee how much thou didst love me! For thou saidst, So much as thou hast
so much art thou worth, and so much do I love thee. So long, therefore, as I had that which
was mine own to give, so long seemed I of worth unto them that were the lovers, not of
myself but of my gifts. They loved me at times, but better loved they the presents I made unto
them. Now that the presents are no longer forthcoming, they too have gone their ways. But
with what face, O thou dearest of my children, shall I dare appear before thee? I who, wroth
with thee for these thy words, was minded to marry thee less honourably than thy sisters,
who, after all the kindnesses I have conferred upon them have allowed me to become an
outcast and a beggar?’
Landing at last, his mind filled with these reflections and others of a like kind, he came to
Karitia, where his daughter lived, and waiting without the city, sent a messenger to tell her
into what indigence he had fallen, and to beseech his daughter’s compassion inasmuch as he
had neither food nor clothing. On hearing the tidings, Cordelia was much moved and wept
bitterly. When she made inquiry how many armed men he had with him, the messenger told
her that he had none save a single knight, who was waiting with him without the city. Then
took she as much gold and silver as was needful and gave it unto the messenger, bidding him
take her father to another city, where he should bathe him, clothe him and nurse him, feigning
that he was a sick man.
Lear’s honourable reception
She commanded also that he should have a retinue of forty knights well appointed and armed,
and that then he should duly announce his arrival to Aganippus and herself. The messenger
accordingly forthwith attended King Lear into another city, and hid him there in secret until
that he had fully accomplished all that Cordelia had borne him on hand to do.

21

CHAPTER XIII
As soon, therefore, as he was meetly arrayed in kingly apparel and invested with the ensigns
of royalty and a train of retainers, he sent word unto Aganippus and his daughter that he had
been driven out of the realm of Britain by his sons-in-law, and had come unto them in order
that by their assistance he might be able to recover his kingdom. They accordingly, with the
great counsellors and nobles, came forth to receive him with all honour, and placed in his
hands the power over the whole of Gaul until such time as they had restored him unto his
former dignity.
CHAPTER XIV
In the meanwhile, Aganippus sent envoys throughout the whole of Gaul to summon every
knight bearing arms therein to spare no pains in coming to help him to recover the kingdom
of Britain for his father-in-law, King Lear.
Lear recovereth his kingdom
When they had all made them ready, Lear led the assembled host together with Aganippus
and his daughter into Britain, fought a battle with his sons-in-law, and won the victory, again
bringing them all under his own dominion. In the third year thereafter he died, and Aganippus
died also, and Cordelia, now mistress of the helm of state in Britain, buried her father in a
certain underground chamber which she had bidden be made under the river Soar at
Leicester. This underground chamber was founded in honour of the two-faced Janus, and
there, when the yearly celebration of the day came round, did all the workmen of the city set
hand unto such work as they were about to be busied upon throughout the year.
CHAPTER XV
Now, when Cordelia had governed the kingdom in peace for five years, two sons of her
sisters began to harass her, Margan, to wit, and Cunedag, that had been born unto the Dukes
Maglaunus and Henvin, both of them youths of notable likelihood and prowess, Margan
being son of Maglaunus and Cunedag of Henvin. These, after the deaths of their fathers, had
succeeded them in their dukedoms, and now took it in high dudgeon that Britain should be
subject to the rule of a woman.
Margan and Cunedag
They therefore assembled their hosts and rebelled against the Queen, nor were they minded to
put an end to their outraged until after laying waste a number of provinces, they had defeated
her in several battles, and had at last taken her and put her in prison, wherein, overwhelmed
with grief for the loss of her kingdom, she slew herself. Forthwith the youths divided the
island between them, whereof that part which stretcheth from the Humber towards Caithness
fell to Margan’s share, and the other, on the other side of the river, that vergeth toward the
West, was allotted to Cunedag. After the space of two years, certain of them that rejoiced in
making disturbance in the realm, joined them with Margan and began to tempt him to walk in
crooked paths, saying that foul shame it was he, the eldest born, should not have dominion
over the whole island; so that, what with this and other grievances, they at last egged him on
to march with an army into Cunedag’s territories, and thus began to heap fuel on the fire they
had kindled. On the war breaking out, Cunedag with all his host marched out to meet him,
and in the battle that was fought inflicted no small slaughter, driving Margan in flight before
him, and afterwards following his flight from province to province, until at last he overtook
and slew him in a village of Wales, which after that Margan was slain there hath been called
by his name, Margan to wit, ever since by the country folk even unto this day. Cunedag,

22

accordingly, having won the victory, possessed himself of the monarchy of the whole island
and governed the same gloriously for three-and-thirty years.
Ferrex and Porrex
At that time Isaiah and Hosea prophesied, and Rome was founded the eleventh of the Kalends
of May by the twin-brethren, Romulus and Remus.
CHAPTER XVI
Afterwards, upon the death of Cunedag, his son Rivallo succeeded him, a peaceful youth and
fortunate, who governed the realm with diligence. In his time there fell a rain of blood three
days, and a great swarming of flies was there, whereof men died. After him succeeded
Gurgustius, his son, unto whom Sisillius, and after him Lago the nephew of Gurgustius, unto
whom succeeded Kinmarch the son of Sisillius, and after him Gorbodug. Unto him were two
sons born, whereof the one was called Ferrex and the other Porrex. But when their father
began to verge upon eld, a contention arose betwixt the twain as to which should succeed him
in the kingdom. Howbeit, Porrex, spurred on thereunto by a more grasping covetise, layeth
snares for his brother with design of slaying him, whereupon Ferrex, when the matter was
discovered unto him, betook him across the Channel into Gaul, and, having obtained the help
of Suard, King of the Franks, returned and fought against his brother. In this battle betwixt
them, Ferrex was slain together with the entire host that accompanied him. Thereupon their
mother, who was named Widen, when she learnt the certainty of her son’s death, was beyond
measure troubled, and conceived a bitter hatred of the other, for she loved the one that was
slain the better of the twain, and so hotly did her wrath blaze up by reason of his death, that
she was minded to revenge it upon his brother.
Dunwallo Molmutius
She accordingly took possession of the tent wherein he was lying fast asleep, and setting
upon him with her waiting-women hacked him all into little pieces. Thenceforward the
people was sore afflicted by civil war for a long space, and the kingdom was governed by
five kings who harried the one another with mutual forays wherein was much blood spilt.
CHAPTER XVII
At last, in after days, arose a certain youth renowned above all others for his singular
prowess, by name Dunwallo Molmutius, the son of Cloten, King of Cornwall. Excelling all
the Kings of Britain in comeliness and courage, he no sooner undertook the government of
the country upon his father’s death than he invaded the lands of Ymner, King of Loegria,
whom after a battle he defeated and slew. Thereupon Rudauc, the King of Kambria, and
Stater, King of Albany, took counsel together, and after that they had contracted an alliance,
led their armies into Dunwallo’s territory to lay waste town and country and destroy his
people. Dunwallo marched to meet them with thirty thousand men and gave battle, but after
great part of the day had been spent in fighting and neither party could claim the victory, he
called apart six hundred of his bravest youths and bade them all take and don the arms of the
enemies they had slain.
The Molmutine laws
He himself also flung aside the arms he was wearing and did the like. He then led them into
the press of the enemy’s ranks, going in among them as though he were of their own party,
and when he had reached the place where Rudauc and Stater were leading on their men, gave
the word unto his comrades to charge down upon them. They accordingly dashed forward,
and the two Kings were slain in the onset and a number of others along with them. But
Dunwallo Molmutius, fearing lest he should be himself slain of his own men, turned back

23

with his comrades and disarmed him. Then, donning again the arms that he had flung aside,
he cheereth on his comrades to another charge which he himself led foremost. Scarce a
moment later the day was won and the enemy put to flight and scattered. It was then only left
for him to march through the lands of the slain, overthrow their cities and fortresses, and
subject their people to his dominion. And after that he had thus utterly subjugated the whole
island, he fashioned for himself a crown of gold and restored the realm unto the former estate
thereof.
This King it was that did establish amongst the Britons the laws that were called the
Molmutine laws, the which even unto this day are celebrated amongst the English. For among
other things which, long time after, the Blessed Gildas did write of him, he ordained that the
temples of the gods and the cities should enjoy such privilege, as that in case any runaway or
guilty man should take refuge therein, he should depart thence forgiven of his adversary.
Dunwallo buried
He ordained, moreover, that the ways which led unto the foresaid temples and cities, no less
than the ploughs of the husbandmen, should by the same law be held inviolable. In his days,
therefore, the knife of the cut-throat was blunted and the cruelties of the robber ceased in the
land, for nowhere was any that durst do violence unto other. At last, after that forty years
were fulfilled sithence that he had taken the crown, he departed and was buried in the city of
Trinovantum anigh the Temple of Concord, which he ad builded to the confirmation of his
law.

24

Book Three
CHAPTER I
Belinus and Brennius
After Dunwallo’s death, his two sons, Belinus, to wit, and Brennius, both desirous of
succeeding him in the kingdom, clashed the one upon the other with a mighty shock. For the
contention between them was which of the twain should wear the diadem of the realm. But
after they had fought may battles thereanent betwixt themselves, the friends of both did
intervene between them and restored them to concord, covenanting that the kingdom should
be shared between them on this condition, that Belinus should have the crown of the island
along with Loegria, Kambria, and Cornwall to boot, forasmuch as he was the elder born, and
Trojan custom did demand that the dignity of the inheritance should fall unto him, while
Brennius, for that he was the younger, should be subject to his brother, and should hold
Northumbria from the Humber as far as Caithness. These covenants being duly confirmed by
treaty, they governed the country for a space of five years in peace and justice. But, for that
discord doth ever seek to intermeddle with prosperity, certain forgers of falsehoods were not
lacking that found access to Brennius, saying unto him:
Brennius fareth into Norway
‘What sluggard sloth hath thus beset thee to hold thee in subjection unto Belinus, when the
same father and mother and the same nobility have made thee his peer? Add to this,
moreover, how in many a hard- fought battle thou hast over and over again shown how thou
couldst withstand Cheulf, Duke of the Morini, and put him to flight when he would have
made good his landing upon the shores of our province. Break, therefore, this covenant that is
a disgrace unto thee, and take to wife the daughter of the King of Norway, and by his help
recover the dignity thou hast lost.’ After that they had corrupted the youth’s mind with these
and other like conceits, he at last assented unto their counsel, sailed away to Norway, and
married the King’s daughter, even as he had been advised by these glozing sycophants.
CHAPTER II
Meanwhile, when this was reported to his brother, he took it in dudgeon that without asking
leave or licence he had thus acted against him. He therefore marched into Northumbria and
took the cities of them of that province, garrisoning them with his own men. Whereupon
Brennius, hearing a rumour that notified him of his brother’s doings, fitted out a fleet and
returned to Britain, bringing with him a strong force of Norwegians. But whilst that he was
cleaving the level fields of the sea with a fair wind and without misgiving, Guichtlac, King of
the Danes, who had followed him, fell upon him suddenly, he himself being desperately
enamoured of the damsel that Brennius had married.
Brennius robbed of his bride
Aggrieved, therefore, beyond measure at his loss of her, he had fitted forth his ships and men
and started in pursuit of him full sail. In the battle at sea that followed it so happened that he
came alongside the ship wherein was the foresaid damsel, and making the vessel fast to his
own with grappling hooks, fetched the damsel out of the one aboard the other and set her
down in the midst of his own shipmates. But whilst the barks were thus grappled together and
were swaying about hither and thither in the deep sea, foul winds rise of a sudden, and in the
squall the ships are parted, and driven by stress of weather upon different coasts. The King of

25

Denmark, after drifting for five days out of his course before the tempest in continual terror,
made land at last with the damsel on the coast of Northumbria, knowing not upon what
shores he had been cast by this unlooked-for disaster. And when the men of the country
learned what had fallen out, they took and brought them to Belinus, who was awaiting his
brother’s arrival in the parts by the sea. There were also along with Guichtlac’s ships three
other ships, whereof one was of them that Brennius had fitted out. Glad enough was the King
when he heard who they were, but yet more exceeding glad that this had befallen him just at
the very moment he was most desirous of being revenged upon his brother.
CHAPTER III
Belinus conquereth Brennius
After a space of some days, Brennius had got his ships together again, and, to and behold ye,
landeth on the coast of Albany. Forthwith, as soon as he heareth how his bride and they that
were with her have been taken captive, and that in his absence his brother hath wrested from
him, the kingdom of Northumbria, he sendeth messengers unto him, demanding that his
kingdom and his bride shall be at once restored unto him, otherwise he will lay the whole
island waste from sea to sea, and slay his brother whensoever and wheresoever he may meet
him withal. Which when Belinus understood, he flatly refused his demand, and summoning
all the host of the island marcheth into Albany to do battle with him. But Brennius, when he
knew that he had only asked to be denied, and that his brother was thus coming against him,
went to meet him in the forest that is called Calaterium, there to meet and do battle with him.
Both, accordingly, took up a position on the same field, each dividing his fellows into
companies, and advancing the one upon the other, began the engagement at close quarters.
Great part of the day was spent in fighting, for they of greater prowess on both sides met
hand to hand. Great was the bloodshed on the one side and on the other, for sore deadly were
the wounds they dealt with their brandished weapons, and the wounded fell before the onset
of the companies as they had been corn before the reaper’s sickle.
Guichlac’s petition granted
At last the Britons prevail, and the Norwegians flee with their maimed and mangled
companies to their ships. Belinus pursueth them as they flee, making slaughter without pity.
In that battle fell 15,000 men, nor of the residue was there a single thousand that escaped
unharmed. Brennius, just making shift to reach one ship that fortune threw in his way, betook
him to the coast of Gaul. But the rest who had come with him could only skulk away to the
best hiding-place they could find as chance might guide them.
CHAPTER IV
When Belinus had achieved the victory, he summoned all the nobles of the realm to meet him
at York, to take counsel with him as to what he should do with the King of the Danes. For the
King had sent him word from his prison that he would submit himself and the kingdom of
Denmark unto him, and pay him yearly tribute, so he were allowed to depart freely along
with his mistress. He sent word further that he would confirm the covenant by solemn oath,
and give hostages for its fulfilment. When this offer was laid before the assembled nobles, all
of them signified their willingness that Belinus should grant Guichtlac’s petition on these
terms. He himself also agreed, and Guichtlac, released from prison, returned to Den mark
with his mistress.
CHAPTER V
Belinus maketh royal roads

26

Belinus, moreover, finding none in the kingdom Britain that was minded to withstand him,
and at he was undisputed master of the island from sea to sea, confirmed the laws which his
father had ordained, and commanded that even and steadfast justice should be done
throughout the realm. Especially careful was he to proclaim that the cities and the highways
that led unto the city should have the same peace that Dunwallo has established therein. But a
dissension arose as concerning the highways, for that none knew the line whereby their
boundaries were determined. The King therefore, being minded to leave no loophole for
quibbles in the law, called together all the workmen of the whole island, and commanded a
highway to be builded of stone and mortar that should cut through the entire length of the
island from the Cornish sea to the coast of Caithness, and should run in a straight line from
one city unto another the whole of the way along. A second also he bade be made across the
width of the kingdom, which, stretching from the city of Menevia on the sea of Demetia as
far as Hamo’s port, should show clear guidance to the cities along the line. Two others also
he made be laid out slantwise athwart the island so as to afford access unto the other cities.
Then he dedicated them with all honour and dignity, and proclaimed it as of his common law,
that condign punishment should be inflicted on any that shall do violence to other thereupon.
Segin receiveth Brennius
But if that any would fain know all of his ordinances as concerning them, let him read the
Molmutine laws that Gildas the historian did translate out of the British into Latin, and King
Alfred out of Latin into the English tongue.
CHAPTER VI
In the meanwhile that Belinus was reigning in peace and tranquillity, his brother Brennius,
driven forth, as hath been said, to the shores of Gaul, was sore tormented of inward
tribulation. For he took it grievously to heart that he was banished from his country, without
any means of returning thither so as to enjoy again the dignity he had lost. Not knowing
therefore what to do, he betook him unto the Princes of Gaul, with a company of twelve
knights only. And when he had laid open his ill-fortune unto them all, and found that no
succour could he obtain from any, he came at last unto Segin, Duke of the Allobroges, and of
him was right honourably received. And whilst that he was still sojourning with him, he
entered into so close familiarity with the Duke, as, that none other was there in his court that
was preferred before him. For in all matters, whether of peace or of war, such prowess did he
show that the Duke loved him with a father’s love. For he was comely to look upon, tall and
big of limb, and, as was meet, well-taught in hawking and venery. And for that he had fallen
into so near friendship with the Duke, Segin determined that he should take unto him his only
daughter in lawful wedlock.
Brennius weddeth a Gaulish wife
And if thereafter it should so be that the Duke were without heir male, he granted Brennius
that after his own death he should have the kingdom of the Allobroges along with his
daughter. But in case a son should be born unto the Duke, he promised his assistance in
raising him to the kingship of Britain, and this was promised him not only by the Duke but by
all the champion knights that were of the Duke’s allegiance, so great was the friendship they
bare towards him. Straightway thereupon the damsel is given in marriage to Brennius, the
princes of the land become his men, and the throne of the country is conferred upon him. Nor
had the full twelvemonth elapsed wherein these matters were settled, before the Duke’s last
day arrived, and he departed out of this life. Then Brennius neglected not the occasion to bind
unto himself yet more closely those princes of the land whose friendship he had aforetime
secured, by distributing largesse among them from the Duke’s treasure that had been hoarded

27

from the time of his ancestors. And, that which the Allobroges did hold of yet higher esteem,
he was right bountiful in his gifts of victual and never shut his door against no man.
CHAPTER VII
Having thus drawn the affection of every man to himself, he deliberated inwardly in what
manner he might take his revenge upon his brother Belinus, and when he announced his plans
unto the people that were his lieges, they all with one accord declared that they would go with
him into whatsoever land he might design to lead them.
Conwenna reconcileth her sons
Nor did he linger, for, assembling a mighty host, he entered into covenant with the Gauls for
leave to pass unmolested through their provinces on his way towards Britain. Forthwith he
fitted out a fleet on the shore of Neustria, and launching into the deep, with a fair wind made
good his landing on the island. As soon as the tidings of his arrival was bruited abroad, his
brother Belinus, mustering all the youth of the kingdom, marched forth to meet him. But
while their companies were still standing in orderly rank on the two sides just ready to begin
the engagement, the mother of both, who was still living, pressed her hastily forward in the
midst of the serried ranks. Her name was Conwenna, and the desire of her heart was to look
again upon her son whom she had not seen of so long a time. Accordingly, so soon as she had
reached with trembling steps the place where he was standing, she flung her arms about his
neck, and stayed the yearning of her heart by kissing him again and yet again. Then, baring
her bosom, she spake unto him on this wise in a voice broken by her sobs: ‘Remember, my
son, remember these breasts that thou hast sucked and the womb that bare thee wherein the
Maker of all things hath created thee man of man and brought thee forth into the world
through the throes of child-birth.
The kiss of peace
Remember all the anxieties that I have suffered for thee, and grant thou this my petition!
Yield thy pardon unto thy brother, and constrain the wrath that thou hast conceived against
him, for no revenge is thine of right as against one that hath never offered thee either insult or
injury. Even this that thou dost urge against him, to wit, that through him thou hast been
banished from thy kingdom, if so be that thou wilt more narrowly look into the bearings of
the case, nought wilt thou find therein that thou canst call a wrong. For he banished thee not
that any worse thing might befall thee, but he compelled thee to forego the worser things that
thou mightest be exalted unto the better. For whereas thou didst only possess thy share of the
kingdom as his vassal, now that thou hast lost it, thou art his peer in that thou hast obtained
the realm of the Allobroges. What else hath he done herein, save that from being a needy
knight, he hath promoted thee to be a high and mighty king? Add to this that the quarrel
which hath risen betwixt ye was none of his seeking, but was begun by thee when, trusting to
the King’s help of Norway, thou didst burn to rebel against him!’
Moved, therefore, by the prayer unto which she had thus given utterance, in a chastened spirit
he yielded obedience to her will, and doing off his helmet, walked forward with her to his
brother. Belinus, when he saw him thus coming towards him with a countenance of peace,
flung aside his arms and ran into his embrace with a kiss.
The brothers invade Gaul
The brothers made friends forthwith, and with their disarmed troops made their way unto the
city of Trinovantum. There taking counsel what they should do, they made them ready to lead
their common army into Gaul, and to subject all the provinces thereof to their dominion.
CHAPTER VIII

28

At the end of the year they passed the Channel into Gaul, and began to lay the country waste.
When the tidings thereof were bruited abroad among the various nations, all the knights of
the Franks came to meet them and fight against them. But the victory falling to Belinus and
Brennius, the Franks fled with their wounded companies in all directions. But the Britons and
Allobroges, so soon as they had won the day, ceased not to follow up the fleeing Gauls until
they had taken captive their Kings and compelled them to surrender. Setting garrisons in the
cities they overthrew, they reduced the whole kingdom to submission within a single
twelvemonth. Lastly, when they had forced all the provinces to yield, they started for Rome
with all their host, and ravaged the cities and farms throughout Italy.
CHAPTER IX
At that time there were two Consuls at Rome, Gabius and Porsena, unto whose government
the country had been committed, who, when they saw that no people were so strong they
might withstand the fierce fury of Belinus and Brennius, came unto them with consent of the
Senate, to bespeak their goodwill and friendship.
They take Rome
They offered, moreover, presents of much gold and silver, and a tribute every year so they
might be allowed to hold their own in peace. Taking hostages, therefore, to secure their
loyalty, the Kings granted them pardon, and led their troops into Germany. Natheless, so soon
as ever they had set them to work ravaging that country, the Romans repented them of the
foresaid covenant, and taking courage afresh, marched forth to help the Germans. When the
Kings found it out, they took it in grievous dudgeon, and held counsel how best to meet the
attack of the two peoples together, for so huge a multitude of Italians had arrived that they
were in no small jeopardy. Wherefore, after taking counsel together, Belinus with his Britons
remained in Germany to carry on the war against the enemy, while Brennius with his armies
marched upon Rome to take revenge for the broken covenant. Howbeit, the Italians coming to
know thereof, deserted the Germans, and hurried back to Rome, doing their best to out-march
the advance of Brennius and get there first. But when their design was notified to Belinus, he
called back his army, and starting off as soon as night was past, took possession of a certain
valley through which the enemy would have to pass, and lying in ambush there, waited for
their arrival. On the morrow at dawn, the Italians, who had begun their march, reached the
same spot, and when they beheld before them the valley glittering with the arms of their
enemies, at once surmised in dismay that they who were there were Brennius and his
Senonian Gauls.
Rome recovered
Thereupon, as soon as the enemy were well in sight, Belinus suddenly charged down upon
them and dashed swiftly into their midst. In a moment the Romans, marching disorderly and
without arms, were utterly taken aback, and skurried off the field in headlong flight, followed
hard by Belinus, who never once stinted of slaughtering them without mercy till night came
on and he could no longer see to make an end of the bloodshed. After this victory he followed
in search of Brennius, who had already been three days besieging Rome. They joined forces,
accordingly, and the common army made a general assault upon the city, and doing their
utmost to breach the walls. Moreover, by way of adding terror to slaughter, they set up
gibbets in front of the city gates, and sent word to the besieged that they would hang up the
hostages they had given on the gallows-tree in case they were minded not to surrender.
Natheless, the Romans, persisting in their purpose, scorned to take pity on their sons and
grandsons, and determined to defend themselves all drive the enemy back from the walls, at
one time shattering their engines either with appliances devised for defence or with counter

29

engines of the same kind, and at another with weapons and missiles of all sorts. So, when the
brethren saw that they were thus loath to yield, in a fit of insolent wrath they bade hang fourand-twenty of the noblest among the hostages in sight of their kinsfolk.
Brennius in Italy
But the Romans only thereby provoked to a yet more insolent stubbornness, and relying on a
message they had received from the Consuls Gabius and Porsena to the effect that they would
come to their succour on the morrow, resolved to make a sally from the city and do battle
with the besiegers. Marching forth accordingly, in close file, they made a sudden assault upon
the Allobroges and Britons, and the citizens also issuing forth with them, helped them to do
no small slaughter at the outset. Natheless, the brethren, when they saw so sudden a
discomfiture inflicted on their fellow-soldiers, were right sore uneasy, and with redoubled
vigour cheered them on, re-formed their ranks, and leading on one assault after another
compelled them to give ground. At the last, after many thousand fighting men had been slain,
he victory rested with the brethren; Gabius was slain, Porsena made prisoner, the city was
taken. Nought remained for them but to distribute the hidden treasures of the citizens in
largesse to their comrades.
CHAPTER X
After he had won this victory, Brennius abode still in Italy, and trampled upon the people
thereof with tyranny unheard of. But of his other deeds and of his end, for that they be written
in the Roman histories, I do in no wise care to treat, seeing that thereby I should import too
great a prolixity into my work, and that in going over ground which others have already
beaten, I should be turning aside from my present purpose.
Belinus returneth to Britain
Howbeit Belinus returned to Britain and ruled the kingdom all the rest of his life in peace.
Wheresoever the cities that had aforetime been builded had fallen into decay he restored
them, and many new ones did he found. Amongst others he did lay out one upon the river
Usk nigh the Severn sea, that was of many ages called Kaerusk, that was the mother city of
Demetia. But after that the Romans came hither, the old name was done away and it was
called the City of the Legions, drawing the name from the Roman legions that wont to winter
there. In the city of Trinovantum made he a gate of marvellous workmanship upon the banks
of Thames, the which the citizens do still in these days call Billingsgate after his name. He
builded, moreover, a tower of wondrous bigness, with a quay at the foot whereunto ships
could come alongside. He renewed his father’s laws everywhere throughout the kingdom,
rejoicing always in doing steady and even-handed justice. In his days, therefore, did he cause
such wealth to accrue unto his people as that the like hath never been heard tell of in any age
neither before nor since. At the end, when his last day did snatch him away from this life, his
body was burnt and his ashes were enclosed in a golden urn which they placed with
wondrous skilful artifice upon the top of the foresaid tower.
CHAPTER XI
Spaniards settle in Ireland
Afterward, his son succeeded him, Gurgiunt Brabtruc, a sober man and a prudent, who,
imitating his father’s deeds in all things, did love peace and justice, and when his neighbours
rebelled against him, taking fresh courage by ensample of his father, he fought sundry right
bloody battles against them, and forced his enemies back into subjection due. Amongst other
matters it so fell out that the King of Denmark who had paid tribute in his father’s days did
eschew making the same payment unto himself, denying that he owed him any subjection. He

30

thereupon, taking the matter in high choler, led a fleet into Denmark, and after afflicting the
people with grievous deadly havoc, slew the King and imposed his ancient yoke upon the
country.
CHAPTER XII
At that time, when he was returning home after the victory by the Isles of Orkney, he fell in
with thirty ships thronged with men and women, and when he made inquiry as to the reason
of their coming thither, their Duke, Partholoim by name, came unto him, and, doing him
much worship, besought pardon of him and peace. He had been banished, he said, from the
parts of Spain, and was cruising in those waters in search of a land wherein to settle. He made
petition, moreover, that some small share of Britain might be allotted unto them wherein to
dwell, so as that they need no longer rove the irksome highways of the sea.
The Mercian law
Wherefore, when Gurgiunt Brabtruc had learnt that they came out of Spain and were called
Barclenses, and that this was the drift of their petition, he sent men with them to the island of
Hibernia which at that time was desert without a single inhabitant, and made them a grant
thereof. Thenceforward they did there increase and multiply, and have held the island even
unto this day. But Gurgiunt Brabtruc, when that he had fulfilled the days of his life in peace,
was buried in the City of Legions which after his father’s death he had made it his care to
beautify with public buildings and walls.
CHAPTER XIII
After him, Guithelin won the crown of the kingdom which all the days of his life he governed
in kindly and sober wise. His wife was a noble woman named Martia, learned in all the arts.
She, among many other and unheard-of things that she had found out of her own natural wit,
did devise the law which the Britons call Martiana. This also did King Alfred translate along
with the others and called it in the Saxon tongue the Mercian law. And when Guithelin died,
the rule of the kingdom fell unto the foresaid Queen and her son who was called Sisillius.
For, at that time, Sisillius was but of seven year, nor did his age warrant that the rule of the
kingdom should be given up into his hands.
CHAPTER XIV
Morvid: his cruelty
For which reason, she being wise in counsel and politic beyond the common, did obtain the
empire of the whole island. When she departed out of the light of this world, Sisillius took the
crown, and held the helm of state. After him, Kimar his son held rule, unto whom succeeded
Danius by his brother, and after his death was Morvid crowned, who was son of his father
Danius by Tangustela his concubine. He would have been of highest renown for his prowess,
had he not given way to exceeding great cruelty, for no man would he spare in his wrath, but
would slay him on the spot had he any weapon at hand. Natheless was he comely of aspect
and profuse in giving of largesse, nor was there another of so great valour in the land as that
he could withstand him in single combat.
CHAPTER XV
In his days did a certain King of the Moranians land with a great force on the shore of
Northumbria and began to ravage the country. Morvid, thereupon collecting together all the
youth of his dominions, marched forth against them and did battle with him. He was of more
avail in fighting singly than was the greater part of the army of his dominions put together,
and when he had won the victory not a soul was left on live that he did not slay.

31

Gorbonian ruleth well
For he commanded them to be brought unto him one after the other that he might glut his
blood-thirst by putting them to death; and when he ceased for a time out of sheer weariness,
he ordered them be skinned alive, and burnt after they were skinned. But in the midst of these
his cruel outrages a calamity befell hint that put an end to his wickedness. For a beast, more
fell than any monster ever heard of before, came up from the Irish sea and preyed continually
upon the seafaring folk that dwelt in those parts. And when Morvid heard tidings thereof, he
came unto the beast and fought with her single-handed. But when he had used up all his
weapons against her in vain, the monster ran upon him with open jaws and swallowed him up
as he had been a little fish.
CHAPTER XVI
Five sons had been born unto him, whereof the eldest-born, Gorbonian, succeeded to the
throne. None at that time was a man more just, nor more a lover of upright dealing, nor none
that ruled his people with greater diligence. For it was ever his custom to pay first due honour
unto the gods and then right justice to the commonalty. He restored the temples of the gods
throughout all the cities of Britain and budded many new. All his days did the island abound
in a plenty of riches such as none of the neighbouring countries did enjoy. For he enjoined the
husbandmen to till their lands, and protected them against the oppressions of their landlords.
Arthgallo ruleth ill
His young men of war, moreover, he did maintain with gold and silver in such sort as none of
them should have need to do injury unto any other. In the midst of these d many other deeds
that bare witness unto his born goodness, he paid the debt of nature, and, parting from the
light of this world, was buried the city of Trinovantum.
CHAPTER XVII
After him, Arthgallo his brother wore the crown the kingdom, a man in all he did the very
contrary of his brother. For he made it his business everywhere to smite down the noble and
upraise the base; to take away from the rich that which was their own, and to heap up untold
treasure for himself. The which the barons of the realm refusing to put up with any longer,
raised an insurrection against him, and deposed him from the throve of the kingdom. They
then raised thereunto Elidur his brother, who for the pity that he afterward showed unto his
brother was called the Pious. For after that he had held the kingdom a space of five years,
whilst he was hunting in the forests of Calaterium, it so fell out that he met his brother who
had been deposed. His brother had wandered through sundry of the provincial kingdoms
seeking for help to recover his lost honours, but help nowhere could he find, and when he
could no longer endure the poverty that had overtaken him, had returned to Britain with a
company of ten knights only. Seeking out, therefore, such as had aforetime been his friends,
he was passing through the foresaid forest when Elidur his brother espied him in such
unhoped-for wise.
Elidur’s piety
As soon as he saw him he ran up to him and embraced him, kissing him again and again. And
when he had wept long time over his brother’s mean estate, he brought him with him to the
city of Alclud and hid him in his own chamber. He then feigned that he himself was there
lying sick and sent his messengers throughout the whole kingdom to intimate unto those
princes that were vassals of the crown that he was fain they should come to visit him. And
when all had come together in the city where he lay, he bade that each one of them should
come severally into his chamber without making any noise. For he said that the sound of

32

many voices would be hurtful to his head in case they all came in together in a crowd. Each
one, therefore, believing the story, obeyed his bidding and came into the house orderly, the
one after another. Elidur, the meanwhile, had given order unto his serjeants that were there all
ready, to take each one as he came in, and, save he were minded again to swear allegiance
unto Arthgallo his brother, to smite off his head. Thus did he deal severally with them all, and
so, by fear of death, reconciled them all unto Arthgallo. When the covenant was duly
confirmed, Elidur brought Arthgallo unto the city of York, and taking the crown off his own
head set it upon that of his brother. Hence it was that the name of the Pious was bestowed
upon him, for that he had shown, as I have said, this pity towards his brother. Arthgallo,
accordingly, reigned ten years, and did so amend him of his former misdeeds, as that now he
did begin to abase the baser sort and to exalt the gentler, to allow every man to hold his own,
and to do right justice.
Elidur three times King
After a time, falling into a lethargy, he died and was buried in the city of Carlisle.
CHAPTER XVIII
Thereafter Elidur was again made King, and was restored unto his former dignity. But whilst
that he was following his eldest brother Gorbonian in all good deeds, his twain other brothers,
Vigenius and Peredur, assembling armed men from every quarter, march forth to fight against
him. Having won the victory, they took him and shut him up within the tower of the city of
Trinovantum, setting a guard to watch. Afterward, they shared the kingdom in twain, whereof
that part which stretcheth westward from Humber fell to the lot of Vigenius, but the other
with the whole of Albany to Peredur. At last, after seven years had slipped away, Vigenius
died and the whole kingdom fell unto Peredur. When the sceptre was set in his hand, he did
ever thereafter govern the kingdom mildly and soberly, insomuch that it was said of him that
he did excel his brothers who had gone before him, nor was any mention made of Elidur. But,
for that death knoweth not to spare any man, she came upon him unawares and snatched him
away from life.
Succession of Kings
Then straightway is Elidur led forth from prison and a third time raised to the throne, who,
after that he had fulfilled his time in bounty and justice, passing forth from the light of this
world left his piety as an ensample unto them that should come after him.
CHAPTER XIX
After Elidur’s death, a son of Gorbonian took the crown of the kingdom, and did imitate his
uncle in wisdom as in wit. For, eschewing all tyranny, he exercised justice and mercy towards
his people, nor turned aside from the path of righteousness. After him reigned Margan, the
son of Arthgallo, who, taking ensample by the gentleness of his kinsfolk, ruled the nation of
the Britons in tranquillity. Him succeeded Enniaun, his brother, who departed so widely from
his father’s wont in his treatment of the people, that in the sixth year of his reign he was
deposed from the throne of the realm. In his place was set his kinsman Idwallo, the son of
Vigenius, who, admonished by the fate that had befallen Enniaun, did pursue the paths of
justice and righteousness. Unto him succeeded Runno, son of Peredur, and him Geruntius,
son of Elidur, After him came Catell his son, and after Catell, Coill; after Coill, Porrex, and
after Porrex, Cherin. Unto him were born three sons, Fulgenius, to wit, Eldad and Andragius,
who reigned the one after the other. Thenceforward, Urian, son of Andragius, succeeded,
unto whom Eliud, unto whom Cledauc, unto whom Cleto, unto whom Gurgintius, unto whom
Merian, unto whom Bledun, unto whom Cap, unto whom Owen, unto whom Sisillius, unto
whom Blegabred.

33

Lud the city-builder
He surpassed all the singers of the forepast age, both in measures of harmony and in the
fashioning of all manner of musical instruments, so as that he might seem the very god of all
minstrels. After him reigned Arthmail his brother, and after Arthmail Eldol, unto whom
succeeded Redion, unto horn Rhodderch, unto whom Samuilpenissel, to whom Pir, unto
whom Capoir. Then succeeded Cligueill, the son of Capoir, a man in all his acts moderate
and prudent, and who above all things did exercise right justice among his peoples.
CHAPTER XX
After him succeeded his son Hely, and ruled the kingdom for forty year. Unto him were born
three sons, Lud, Cassibelaunus and Nennius, whereof the eldest born, Lud, to wit, took the
kingdom on his father’s death. Thereafter, for that a right glorious city-builder was he, he
renewed the walls of Trinovantum, and girdled it around with innumerable towers. He did
likewise enjoin the citizens that they should build houses and stately fabrics therein, so as that
no city in far-off kingdoms should contain fairer palaces. He himself was a man of war, and
bountiful in giving of feasts. And, albeit that he had many cities in his dominion, yet this did
he love above all other, and therein did he sojourn the greater part of the whole year, whence
it was afterward named Kaerlud, and after that, by corruption of the name, Kaerlondon. In a
later day, by the changing of the tongues, it was called London, and yet later, after the
landing of the foreign folk that did subdue the country unto themselves, hath it been called
Londres.
Cassibelaunus king
Alter the death of Lud, his body was buried in the foresaid city nigh unto that gate, which
even yet is called Porthlud in British, but in Saxon Ludgate. Two sons were born unto him,
Androgeus and Tenuantius, but for that by reason of their infancy they were unable to rule
the kingdom, their uncle Cassibelaunus was raised to the throne of the kingdom in their stead.
So soon as he was crowned King, he did so abound alike in bounty and in prowess, as that his
fame was bruited abroad, even in far-off kingdoms. Whence it came to pass that the kingship
of the whole realm did fall unto him and not unto his nephews. Howbeit, Cassibelaunus,
yielding willingly to natural affection, was not minded that the youths should be without
kingdoms of their own, wherefore he allotted a large share of the realm unto each. For the
city of Trinovantum did he grant unto Androgeus along with the duchy of Kent, and the
duchy of Cornwall unto Tenuantius. He himself, howbeit, as wearing the sovereign dignity of
the crown, was mindful to hold them along with all the princes of the whole island in
vassalage unto himself.

34

Book Four
CHAPTER I
Cæsar beholdeth Britain
In the meantime it so fell out, as may be found in the Roman histories, that after he had
conquered Gaul, Julius Cæsar came to the coast of the Ruteni. And when he had espied from
thence the island of Britain, he asked of them that stood around, what land it might be and
who were they that dwelt therein? Whilst that he was still looking out to seaward after he had
learnt the name of the kingdom and of the people, ‘By Hercules,’ saith he, ‘we Romans and
these Britons be of one ancestry, for we also do come of Trojan stock. For after the
destruction of Troy, Æneas was first father unto us, as unto them was Brute, whom Silvius,
son of Ascanius, son of Æneas, did beget. But, and if I mistake not, they be sore degenerate
from us, and know not what warfare meaneth, seeing that they lie thus sundered from the
world in the outer ocean. Lightly may they be compelled to give us tribute, and to offer
perpetual obedience unto the dignity of Rome.
A brave letter
Natheless, first of all let us send them word bidding them pay us toll and tallage unvisited and
untouched of the Roman people, and, like the rest of the nations, do homage to the Senate,
lest haply, by shedding the blood of these our kinsmen, we should offend the ancient nobility
of Priam, father of us all.’ Having sent this message in a letter to King Cassibelaunus,
Cassibelaunus waxed indignant and sent him back an epistle in these words.
CHAPTER II
‘Cassibelaunus, King of the Britons, to Caius Julius Cæsar. Marvellous, Cæsar, is the
covetousness of the Roman people, the which, insatiable of aught that is of gold or silver,
cannot even let us alone that have our abode beyond the world and in peril of the ocean, but
must needs presume to make a snatch at our revenues, which up to this time we have
possessed in quiet. Nor is even this enow for them, save we also cast away our freedom for
the sake of becoming subject unto them and enduring a perpetual bondage. An insult unto
thyself, Cæsar, is this which thou dost ask of us, seeing that the same noble blood that flowed
in the veins of Æneas beateth in the heart of Briton and of Roman alike, and that those very
same glorious links that unite us in a common kindred ought also no less closely to bind us in
firm and abiding friendship. That friendship it was that thou shouldst have asked of us, not
slavery. We know how to bestow our friendship freely; we know not how to bear the yoke of
bondage. For such freedom have we been wont to enjoy, that bowing the neck unto slavery is
a thing wholly unknown amongst
Cæsar saileth to Britainus
Yea, should even the gods themselves think to snatch it from us, we would withstand them to
the last gasp, and it should go hard but that we would hold to it in their despite. Be it
therefore clearly understood, Cæsar, that in case, thou hast threatened, thou dost emprise the
conquest of this island of Britain, thou shalt find, us ready to fight both for our freedom and
for our country.’
CHAPTER III
When he readeth this letter, Caius Julius Cæsar fitteth out his fleet and only waiteth for a fair
wind to adventure on the enterprise of carrying into effect the message he had sent to

35

Cassibelaunus. As soon as the wished-for wind began to blow, he hoisted sail and came with
a fair course into the mouth of the Thames with his army. They had already landed from the
boats, when, lo, Cassibelaunus with all his strength cometh to meet him. On reaching the
town of Dorobellum he there held counsel with his barons how best to keep the enemy at a
distance. There were with him Belinus, his Commander-in-Chief of the army, by whose
counsel the whole kingdom was governed; his two nephews, Androgeus to wit, Duke of
Trinovantum, and Tenuantius, Duke of Cornwall.
Nennius: his valour
There were, moreover, three kings that were his vassals, Cridious, King of Albany,
Guerthaeth of Venedotia, and Britael of Demetia, who, as they had encouraged the rest to
fight, and all were eager for the fray, gave counsel thatthey should forthwith march upon
Cæsar’s camp, and before that he had taken any fortress or city, dash in upon him and drive
him out, for that, so he once were within any of the garrisoned places of the country, it would
be all the harder to dislodge him, as he would then know whither he and his men might repair
for safety. All having signified their assent, they accordingly marched to the coast where
Julius had set up his camp and his tents, and there, both armies in battle-array, engage in
combat hand-to-hand with the enemy, spear-thrust against spear-thrust and sword-stroke
against sword-stroke. Forthwith on this side and on that the wounded fell smitten through the
vitals, and the ground is flooded with the gore of the dying, as when a sudden south-wester
drives back an ebbing tide. And in the thick of the melly, it so chanced that Nennius and
Androgeus, who commanded the men of Kent and the citizens of Trinovantum, fell upon the
bodyguard of the Emperor himself. When they came together, the Emperor’s company was
well-nigh scattered by the close ranks of the British assailants, and whilst they were
confusedly battling together, blow on blow, good luck gave Nennius a chance of
encountering Julius himself. Nennius accordingly ran in upon him, glad beyond measure that
it should lie in his power to strike even one blow at a man so great. Cæsar, when he saw him
making a rush at him, received him on the shield he held before him, and smote him on the
helmet with his naked sword as hard as his strength would allow.
Cæsar fleeth to his ships
Then, lifting the sword again, he was fain to follow up the first by a second blow that should
deal a deadly wound, but, Nennius, seeing his intention, lifted his shield between, and
Cæsar’s blade, glancing off his helmet, stuck fast in the shield with so passing great force,
that when they could no longer maintain the combat for the press of the troops rushing in
upon them, the Emperor had not strength to wrench it forth. Howbeit, Nennius, when he had
laid hold on Cæsar’s sword on this wise, hurled away his own that he held, and tugging forth
the other, falleth swiftly on the enemy. Whomsoever he smote therewith, he either smote off
his head or wounded him so sore at the passing, as that no hope was there of his living
thereafter. At last, whilst he was thus playing havoc with the enemy, Labienus the tribune
came against him, but was slain by Nennius at the first onset. At last, when the day was far
spent, the Britons pressed forward in close rank, and charging on undaunted time after time,
by God’s grace won the day, and Cæsar with his wounded Romans retreated to the beach
betwixt the camp and the ships. During the night he got together all that were left of his
troops and betook him to his ships, glad enough to make the deep sea his camp of refuge.
And when his comrades dissuaded him from continuing the campaign, he was content to
abide by their counsel, and returned unto Gaul.
CHAPTER IV
Death of Nennius

36

Cassibelaunus, rejoicing in the victory he had achieved, gave thanks unto God, and calling
together his comrades in success, bestowed exceeding abundant largesse upon each according
to the merits of his prowess. On the other hand, his heart was wrung with sore grief for that
his brother Nennius had been hurt mortally, and was then lying in jeopardy of death. For
Julius, in the combat aforesaid, had stricken him a wound beyond help of leechcraft, and
within the fortnight after the battle he departed the light of this world by an untimely death,
and was buried in the city of Trinovantum nigh the north gate. At his funeral were kingly
honours paid unto him, and they set by his side, in his coffin, the sword of Cæsar that had
stuck in his shield in the fight. And the name of that sword was Saffron Death, for that no
man smitten thereby might escape on live.
CHAPTER V
When Julius thus turned his back to the enemy and landed on the shores of Gaul, the Gauls
made great effort to rebel and to cast off the dominion of Julius. For they made count that he
had been so enfeebled as that they need no longer dread his power. For amongst them all was
there but one same story, that the whole sea was seething over with the ships of
Cassibelaunus, ready to pursue the flight of Julius himself. Whence the bolder spirits amongst
the Gauls busied them in taking thought how best to drive him beyond their frontiers, which
Julius getting wind of, he had no mind to take in hand a doubtful war against so fierce a
people, but chose rather to open his treasuries and wait upon certain of the chief nobles, so as
to bring back the receivers of his bounty to their allegiance.
Cæsar’s second attempt
Unto the common folk he promiseth freedom; unto the disinherited the restoration of their
losses, and even to the bondsman liberty. Thus he that foretime had stripped them of all they
possessed and roared at them with the fierceness of a lion, hath now become a gentle lamb,
and humbly bleateth out what a pleasure it is unto him to be able to restore them everything;
nor doth he stint his wheedling until such time as he hath recovered the power he had lost. In
the meanwhile not a day passed but he chewed the cud over his flight and the victory of the
Britons.
CHAPTER VI
After a space of two years he again maketh ready to cross the ocean-channel and revenge him
upon Cassibelaunus, who on his part, as soon as knew it, garrisoned his cities everywhere,
repaired their ruined walls and stationed armed soldiers at all the ports. In the bed of the river
Thames, moreover, whereby Cæsar would have to sail unto he city of Trinovantum, he
planted great stakes as thick as a man’s thigh and shod with iron and lead below the level of
the stream so as to crash to the bows of any of Cæsar’s ships that might come against them.
Assembling, moreover, all the youth of the island, he constructed cantonments along the
coast and waited for the enemy’s arrival.
CHAPTER VII
A battle on the Thames
Julius, meanwhile, after providing everything necessary for his expedition, embarked with a
countless multitude of warriors on board, eager to wreak havoc upon the people who had
defeated him, and wreaked, no doubt, it would have been, so only he could have reached dry
land without damage to his fleet—a feat, howbeit, that he failed to achieve. For whilst that be
was making way up Thames towards the foresaid city, his ships ran upon the fixed stakes and
suffered sore and sudden jeopardy. For by this disaster not only were his soldiers drowned to
the number of many thousands, but his battered ships sank foundered by the inrush of the

37

river. When Cæsar found how matters were going, he made all haste to back sail, and setting
all hands to work, to run inshore. They, moreover, who had made shift to escape the first peril
by the skin of their teeth, crawled up with him unto dry land. Cassibelaunus, who stood on
the bank all the time looking on, was glad enough of the peril of them that were drowned, but
had little joy over the safety of the rest. He gave the signal to his fellow-soldiers, and charged
down upon the Romans. But the Romans, albeit they had suffered this jeopardy in the river,
so soon as they stood on dry land, withstood the charge of the Britons like men, and having
hardihood for their wall of defence, made no small slaughter of their enemies, albeit that the
slaughter they suffered was more grievous than that they inflicted, for the disaster at the river
had sore thinned their companies, while the ranks of the Britons, multiplied every hour by
fresh reinforcements, outnumbered them by three to one.
Cæsar again fleeth
No marvel, therefore, that the stronger triumphed over the weaker. Wherefore when Cæsar
saw that he was thoroughly routed, he fled with his minished numbers to his ships, and
reached the shelter of the sea exactly as he wished, for a timely wind blew fair, and hoisting
sail he made the coast of the Morini in safety. He then threw himself into a certain tower he
had constructed at a place called Odnea before he went this time to Britain, for his mind
misgave him as to the loyalty of the Gauls, and he feared they might rise against him a
second time, as they did when, as the poet says, he first ‘showed his back to the Britons.’ It
was in view of this likelihood that he had builded this tower as a place of refuge, so that in
case the people should raise an insurrection he might be able to withstand any rebellion.
CHAPTER VIII
Cassibelaunus, after winning this second victory, was mightily elated, and issued an edict that
all the barons of Britain and their wives should assemble in the city of Trinovantum to
celebrate the solemnities due unto their country gods who had granted them the victory over
so mighty an Emperor. They accordingly all came without tarrying and made sacrifice of
divers kinds, and profuse slaying of cattle.
A deadly quarrel
Forty thousand kine did they offer, a hundred thousand sheep, and of all manner fowl a
number not lightly to be reckoned, besides thirty thousand in all of every sort of forest deer.
And when they had paid all due honour unto the gods, they feasted them on the remainder as
was the wont on occasion of solemn sacrifices; and the day and the night they spent in
playing games of divers kinds. Now, while the sports were going on, it fell out that two noble
youths, whereof the one was nephew of the King and the other of Duke Androgeus, had tried
conclusions man to man in a wrestling bout, and fell out as to which had had the upper hand.
The name of the King’s nephew was Hireglas, and of the other Evelin. And after many insults
had been bandied about betwixt them, Evelin snatched up a sword and smote off the King’s
nephew’s head, whereupon was a mighty ferment in the court, and the news of the murder
forthwith flying abroad soon reached Cassibelaunus. Grievously troubled at his kinsman’s
fate, Cassibelaunus commanded Androgeus to bring his nephew into court before him, and
that when so brought he should be ready to undergo such sentence as the barons might
pronounce, so that Hireglas should not remain unavenged in case they should find that he had
been unjustly slain. Howbeit, for that Androgeus had a suspicion as to the King’s mind in the
matter, he made answer that he himself had his own court, and that whatsoever claim any
might have as against any of his men ought to be heard and decided therein.
Cæsar invited to Britain

38

If, therefore, Cassibelaunus were resolved to have the law of Evelin, he ought by custom
immemorial to have sought it in Androgeus’s own court in the city of Trinovantum.
Cassibelaunus, thereupon, finding that he could not obtain the satisfaction he meant to have
taken, threatened Androgeus with a solemn oath that he would waste his duchy with sword
and fire, save he agreed to allow his claim. Howbeit, Androgeus waxing wroth, withheld
obedience to his demand, and Cassibelaunus waxing wroth no less, made haste to ravage his
dominions. Natheless, Androgeus, through his friends and kinsfolk about the court, besought
the King to lay aside his wrath, but finding that he could in no wise allay his fury, began to
take thought whether he might not make shift to devise some other means of withstanding
him. At last, despairing utterly of compassing his purpose otherwise, he resolved to call in
Cæsar to his succour, and sent his letters unto him conceived in these words:—
‘To Caius Julius Cæsar, Androgeus, Duke of Trinovantum, after aforetime wishing him
death, now wisheth health. I do repent me of that I wrought against thee when thou didst
battle with my King, for, had I eschewed such enterprise, thou wouldst have conquered
Cassibelaunus, upon whom hath crept such pride of his triumph as that he is now bent on
driving me beyond his frontiers—me, through whom he did achieve the triumph. This is the
reward that he holdeth due unto my merits. I have saved him his inheritance, he now seeketh
to disinherit me. I have restored him a second time unto his kingdom, he now desireth to
reave me of mine own kingdom!
Androgeus’ letter
For in fighting against thee all these benefits have I bestowed upon him. I call the gods of
heaven to witness that never have I deserved his wrath, save I can be said to deserve it for
refusing to deliver up unto him my nephew whom he doth earnestly desire to condemn to an
unjust death. And that the truth hereof may be clearly manifest to your discernment, take note
in what manner the quarrel did arise. It so fell out that for joy of our victory we were
celebrating a festival unto our country gods, unto whom when we had duly offered sacrifice,
our youth did pass the time in sports one with another. Among the rest our nephews, taking
ensample of the others, did engage in a wrestling bout. And when my nephew had won the
bout, the other, burning with unjust wrath, ran up to strike him. But he, avoiding the blow,
took him by the forearm, thinking to snatch the sword out of his fist. In the struggle the
King’s nephew fell upon the point of the sword and dropped down stricken to the death.
When, therefore, this was reported unto the King, he commanded me to deliver up my
nephew to suffer punishment for the manslaughter. The which when I refused to do, he came
with all his host into my provinces and hath most grievously harried them. For which reason,
praying thy mercy, I do beseech thy help that I may be restored, and by my means thou shalt
be master of all Britain. In me hast thou no cause for misgiving, for here is no treason. The
motives of men are swayed by events, and it may well be that some may become friends that
have aforetime been at strife, and some there be that after flight may yet achieve the victory.’
CHAPTER IX
Cæsar’s third arrival
When he had read this letter, Julius Cæsar took counsel with his familiars and was advised by
them not to go to Britain simply upon the Duke’s verbal invitation, but to demand hostages in
addition enough to ensure his good faith before starting on the expedition. Androgeus
accordingly forthwith sent his son Scæva along with thirty noble youths that were nigh
kinsfolk of his own. When the hostages were delivered, Cæsar was reassured, and recalling
his troops, sailed with a stern wind to the haven of Rutupi. Cassibelaunus in the meanwhile
had begun to besiege the city of Trinovantum and to sack the manor houses in the country

39

round. Howbeit, as soon as he heard that Julius had landed, he raised the siege and hurried
away to meet the Emperor. And, as he was marching into a valley near Dorobernia, he caught
sight of the Roman army pitching their camp and the tents therein, for Androgeus had led
them thither so as to fall upon them there by ambuscade. In a moment, the Romans,
understanding that the Britons were upon them, armed them as swiftly as they might, and
stationed their men in companies. On the other side, the Britons don their arms and advance
together in squadrons. Howbeit, Androgeus with five thousand men in arms lay concealed in
the forest nigh at hand ready to run to Cæsar’s assistance and make a stealthy and sudden
onslaught upon Cassibelaunus and his comrades.
Cassibelaunus defeated
As they came together in this order on the one side and the other, never a moment did they
slack of flinging javelins that carried death into the enemies’ ranks, and dealing wounds as
deadly with blow on blow of their swords. The squadrons clash together, and mighty is the
shedding of blood. On both sides the wounded drop like leaves of the trees in autumn. And
while the battle is at the hottest, forth issueth Androgeus from the forest and falleth on the
rear of Cassibelaunus’s main army, whereupon depended the fate of the battle. Presently, his
vanguard already in part cut down and disordered by the onset of the Romans, and his rear
thus harassed by their own fellow-countrymen, he could stand his ground no longer; and his
broken and scattered forces flee routed from the field. By the side of the valley rose a rocky
hill with a thick hazel wood at the top, whereunto Cassibelaunus with his men fled for cover
when they found themselves defeated on the level, and taking their stand in the wood,
defended them like men and slew a number of the enemy that pursued them. For the Romans
and the men of Androgeus were hard after them, cutting up the squadrons in their flight, and
skirmishing heavily with them on the hillside without being able to force their way to the top.
For the rocks on the hill and the steepness of the ridge afforded such good cover to the British
that they could make sallies from the heights and still carry slaughter among the enemy.
Cæsar, therefore, beleaguered the hill all that night, for it was dark already, and cut off every
means of retreat, thinking to wring from the King by hunger what he could not force from
him by arms.
Britons a noble race
O, but in those days was the British race worthy of all admiration, which had twice driven in
flight before them him who had subjected the whole world beside unto himself, and even in
defeat now withstood him whom no nation of the earth had been able to withstand, ready to
die for their country and their freedom! To their praise it was that Lucan sang how Cæsar
‘Scared when he found the Britons that he sought for,
Only displayed his craven back before them.’
At the end of the second day, Cassibelaunus, who had all this time had nought to eat, began
to fear that he must yield him captive to hunger and submit him to the prison of Cæsar. He
sent word accordingly to Androgeus to make peace for him with Julius, lest the dignity of the
race whereof he was born should suffer by his being led into captivity. He sent word also,
that he had not deserved he should desire his death, albeit that he had harassed his country.
And when the messengers had told him their errand, saith Androgeus:
‘Not to be beloved is the prince that in war is gentle as a lamb, but in peace fierce as a lion.
Gods of heaven and earth! My lord beseecheth me now that aforetime did command me:
Doth he now desire to make peace with Cæsar and to do him homage, of whom Cæsar did
first desire peace? Forsooth, he might have known that he who drove an Emperor so mighty
out of his kingdom could also bring him back.

40

Androgeus pleadeth with Cæsar
Why am I to be treated unfairly who could render my service either to him or to another? Led
blindfold of his own folly is he that doth exasperate injuries and insults the fellow-soldiers
unto with whom he oweth his victories. For no victory is won by the commander alone, but
by them that shed their blood for him in the battle. Natheless will I make his peace with him
if I may, for the injury that he hath done me is enough revenged in this that he hath prayed
my mercy.’
CHAPTER X
Thereupon Androgeus went straightway to Julius, and clasping his knees, spake unto him on
this wise:
’Behold, already hast thou enough revenged thee upon Cassibelaunus. Have mercy now
upon him! Nought more remaineth for him to do save only that he render homage unto thee
and pay due tribute unto the dignity of Rome.’ And when Cæsar answered him never a word,
Androgeus spake again:
‘This thing only, Cæsar, have I promised unto thee, and nought more than this, that I would
do mine utmost to make Cassibelaunus acknowledge him thy man and to subdue Britain unto
thy sovereignty. Lo, now, Cassibelaunus is vanquished and Britain subdued unto thee by
mine assistance. What more owe I unto thee? May He that did create all things forbid that I
should suffer lord of mine that prayeth me of mercy and hath done me right as touching the
wrong he had done unto me, to be thrust into prison or chained in fetters.
Cæsar quitteth Britain
No light thing is it to slay Cassibelaunus while I am on live, nor shall I blush to render him all
service that I may save thou hearken unto my counsel.’
Julius thereupon, his eagerness somewhat slackened by fear of Androgeus, accepted the
allegiance of Cassibelaunus on condition of his paying tribute, the amount of the tribute he
pledged himself to pay being three thousand pounds of silver. Thenceforward Julius and
Cassibelaunus made friends together, and bestowed gifts of courtesy the one upon the other.
Afterwards Cæsar wintered in Britain, and with the return of spring crossed the Channel into
Gaul. Some time later, after collecting an army of men of all nations, he marched to Rome
against Pompey.
CHAPTER XI
After seven years had passed by, Cassibelaunus died and was buried in the city of Eboracum.
Unto whom succeeded Tenuantius, Duke of Cornwall, the brother of Androgeus, for
Androgeus himself had gone to Rome along with Cæsar, so that Tenuantius was crowned
King, and governed the realm with diligence. He was a man of warlike spirit and dealt out
strong-handed justice. After him, his son Cymbeline was raised to the kingly dignity, a
strenuous knight that had been nurtured in the household of Augustus Cæsar. He had
contracted so nigh a friendship with the Romans that albeit he might well have withheld the
tribute from them, yet, natheless, did he pay the same of his own free-will.
Cymbeline and his sons
In those days was born our Lord Christ Jesus, by whose precious blood was mankind
redeemed, that aforetime had been bound in the chains of the devils.
CHAPTER XII

41

Cymbeline, after that he had ten years governed Britain, begat two sons, whereof the elder
born was named Guiderius and the other Arviragus. And when the days of his life were
fulfilled, he gave up the helm of state to Guiderius. But when Guiderius refused to pay the
tribute which the Romans demanded, Claudius, who had been raised to the Empire, made a
descent upon the island. There was with him his commander-in-chief of his army who was
called in the British tongue Levis Hamo, by whose counsel all campaigns that were
undertaken were directed. This man, accordingly, when he had disembarked at the city of
Porchester, began by building up the gates of the city with a wall so as to shut all issue for the
citizens, his design being either to compel the hunger-starven burgesses to surrender or
otherwise to slay them without mercy.
CHAPTER XIII
Claudius and Hamo
When the tidings of Claudius Cæsar’s arrival was spread abroad, Guiderius assembled every
armed man in the realm and marched against the Roman army, and when the battle began, at
first stoutly made head against the enemy, slaying more men with his own single sword than
the greater part of his army put together. Already Claudius was betaking him to his ships,
already were the Romans well-nigh scattered, when the crafty Hamo, casting aside the
armour he was wearing, did on the arms of a Briton, and in guise of a Briton fought against
his own men. Then he cheered on the Britons to the pursuit, promising them a speedy victory.
For he had learned their tongue and their customs, seeing that he himself had learnt nurture
along with the British hostages at Rome. By this device he made shift by degrees to come
close up to the King, and when he found an opening to get at him, just when he least
suspected any peril of the kind, slew him by the edge of the sword, and slipping away betwixt
the companies of his enemies, rejoined his own men with his ill-omened victory. But
Arviragus, as soon as he espied that his brother was slain, straightway cast aside his own
armour and did on that of the King, hurrying hither and thither and cheering on his men to
stand their ground as though it had been Guiderius himself. They, not knowing that the King
was dead, took fresh courage from his cheering, at once held their ground and battled on,
doing no small slaughter among the enemy. At the last the Romans gave way, and
abandoning the field, flee shamefully in two divisions, Claudius, in the one, betaking him
unto the shelter of his ships, and Hamo, not having time to reach the ships, slipping away into
the forest.
Hamo killed at Southampton
Arviragus therefore, weening that Claudius was fleeing along with him, hurried in pursuit,
and never once stinted of chasing him from point to point, until he came to a stand on the
seacoast, at the place that is now called Hampton, after the name of the said Hamo. There was
a haven there, suitable for ships to lade and unlade, and a number of merchant carracks were
then lying therein. Hamo was mighty keen to get aboard of them, but Arviragus was too
quick for him, and unexpectedly coming down upon him slew him on the sudden. The haven,
accordingly, hath from that day unto this been called Hamo’s Port.
CHAPTER XIV
Meanwhile Claudius, as soon as he could get his men together again, attacked the city
aforesaid, which at that time was called Kaerperis, but now Porchester. It was not long before
he cast down the walls, and after defeating the citizens pursued Arviragus to Winton, within
which city he had taken refuge. He then besieged that city, and endeavoured to take it by
divers devices. But Arviragus, when he beheld himself besieged, mustered his forces, and
opening the gates sallied forth to fight. Howbeit, just as he was preparing to charge, Claudius

42

sent messengers unto him bearing word that he was minded to make peace. For he feared the
hardiness of the King and the valour of the Britons, and chose rather to subdue him by
prudence and policy than to run the hazard of a doubtful encounter.
Arviragus weddeth Genuissa
He therefore proposed a reconciliation, and promised to give him his daughter, so only he
would acknowledge the kingdom of Britain to be a fief of the Roman Empire. The aldermen
of his court accordingly counselled him to lay aside his warlike preparations and accept the
promise of Claudius. For no disgrace was it, they said, unto him to become a vassal of the
Romans, seeing that they had possessed them of the empire of the whole world. Claudius
accordingly sent to Rome for his daughter forthwith, and availing him of Arviragus’s
assistance, brought the Orkneys and the outlying islands into subjection to himself.
CHAPTER XV
At the end of winter the envoys returned with his daughter and delivered her unto her father.
The damsel’s name was Genuissa, and of so surpassing beauty was she that she was the
admiration of all that beheld her. And after that they were joined in lawful wedlock, she did
kindle so fervent love in the heart of the King as that he held her, and her only, dearer than all
he world beside. Whence, being fain that the place where he was first wedded unto her should
be made famous for ever, he proposed unto Claudius that he should build thereon a city
which might perpetuate to future times the remembrance of so happy a marriage. Claudius
gladly received the proposal, and commanded a city to be builded, which, after his own
name, he called Kaerglou, or Gloucester, by which name it is known even unto this day,
situate upon the bank of the Severn, which is the boundary betwixt Demetia and Loegria.
Gloucester builded
Howbeit, some do say that it hath the name from one Gloius, the duke that was born unto
Claudius in that city, unto whom after the death of Arviragus the dukedom of Demetia did
fall. After the city was builded and the island was at peace, Claudius returned to Rome, and
granted the rule of the islands of the province unto Arviragus. At that time Paul the Apostle
did found the Church of Antioch, and coming afterward unto Rome did there hold the
bishopric thereof, sending Mark the Evangelist into Egypt to preach the Gospel he had
written.
CHAPTER XVI
After Claudius had returned to Rome, Arviragus began to show his policy and his prowess, to
rebuild cities and castles, and to hold the people of the realm in check, with such justice as
that he was a terror even unto kings afar off. Howbeit his pride did therewithal wax so great
as that he despised the Roman power, and was minded no longer to be bound by his homage
to the Senate, but to arrogate all things unto himself. Upon hearing these tidings, Vespasian
was sent by Claudius either to bring about a reconciliation with Arviragus or to reimpose his
subjection to the Romans.
Vespasian at Exeter
But when Vespasian began to draw nigh unto the haven of Rutupi, Arviragus met him and
forbade him to enter thereinto. And so vast a multitude of men in arms had he brought with
him as that the Romans were scared, and durst not attempt to land lest he should attack them.
Vespasian accordingly drew away from that port, and backing sail made for Totnes. As soon
as he reached dry land, he marched upon Kaer-Huelgoit, that is called Exeter, to besiege it.
And when he had beleaguered. it for seven days, Arviragus with his army arrived and did
battle with him. On that day the armies of both were sore cut up, but neither obtained the

43

victory. But at morn upon the morrow, by the mediation of Genuissa the Queen, the Dukes
made friends and despatched their fellow-soldiers over into Hibernia. When the winter was
over, Vespasian returned to Rome, and Arviragus remained in Britain. At last, on the verge of
old age, he began to show greater regard for the Senate, and ruled his kingdom in peace and
quietness, confirmed the ancient customary laws and established others new, bestowing,
moreover, passing great largesse on all such as he held worthy thereof. His fame being
bruited abroad throughout all Europe, the Romans both loved and feared him in such wise
that of all kings was there none of whom was there so much talk at Rome as of him. Whence
Juvenal in his book doth record how a certain blind man, when he was speaking to Nero
about the huge turbot that had been caught, said:
‘Some king shalt thou lead captive,
Or from the draught-tree of his British chariot
Headlong shall fall Arviragus.’
Marius defeateth Rodric
None was more stark than he in war, in peace none more gentle, none jollier, none more
bountiful in largesse. When he had fulfilled the days of his life, he was buried at Gloucester
in a certain temple which he had builded and dedicated in honour of Claudius.
CHAPTER XVII
His son Marius succeeded him in the kingdom, a man of marvellous prudence and wisdom.
In his reign, after a time, came a certain King of the Picts, named Rodric, with a great fleet
from Scythia and landed in the northern part of Britain which is called Albania, beginning to
ravage the province. Assembling his people, Marius accordingly came to meet him, and after
sundry battles obtained the victory. He then set up a stone in token of his triumph in that
province which was afterward called Westimaria after his name, whereon is graven a writing
that beareth witness unto his memory even unto this day. After that Rodric was slain, he gave
unto the conquered people that had come with him that part of Albany which is called
Caithness wherein to inhabit. For the land was wilderness, seeing that none had dwelt therein
to till the land for many a long day. And for that they had no wives, they besought of the
Britons their daughters and kinswomen, but the Britons disdained to match their children with
such manner of folk. Whereupon, finding that they did only meet with denial in this quarter,
they betook them over the Channel to Ireland and brought back with them women from
thence, of whom were born a mixed breed that did hugely multiply their numbers.
Coill loveth the Romans
But enough concerning them, for I purpose not to treat of their history, nor of that of the
Scots who derive their origin from them and the Hibernians. But Marius, when that he had
settled the island in absolute peace, began to manifest his affection for the Roman people,
paying the tribute that they demanded, and, provoked thereunto by ensample of his father, did
exercise justice, law and peace and all things honourable throughout his kingdom.
CHAPTER XVIII
But when he had ended the course of his life, his son Coill guided the helm of state. Coill
from childhood had been brought up at Rome, and having been taught Roman ways, had
conceived a mighty liking for the Romans. Wherefore he also paid them the tribute and
eschewed all wrangling about it, for that he saw the whole world was subject unto them, and
that their power did surpass the power of any one province or of any alliance among the
smaller nations. He paid therefore that which was demanded, and in peace held that which
was his own. None of all the kings ever showed greater honour unto his nobility, for them

44

that were rich did he allow to live in peace, and them that were poor did he maintain with
unfailing bounty.
CHAPTER XIX
Of King Lucius
Unto Coill was born one single son whose name was Lucius, who, upon the death of his
father, had succeeded to the crown of the kingdom, and did so closely imitate his father in all
good works that he was held by all to be another Coill. Natheless, being minded that his
ending should surpass his beginning, he despatched his letters unto Pope Eleutherius
beseeching that from him he might receive Christianity. For the miracles that were wrought
by the young recruits of Christ’s army in divers lands had lifted all clouds from his mind, and
panting with love of the true faith, his pious petition was allowed to take effect, forasmuch as
the blessed Pontiff, finding that his devotion was such, sent unto him two most religious
doctors, Pagan and Duvian, who, preaching unto him the Incarnation of the Word of God, did
wash him in holy baptism and converted him unto Christ. Straightway the peoples of all the
nation, around came running together to follow the King’s example, and cleansed in the same
holy laver, were made partakers of the kingdom of Heaven. The blessed doctors, therefore,
when they had purged away the paganism of well-nigh the whole island, dedicated the
temples that had been founded in honour of very many gods unto the One God and unto His
saints, and filled them with divers companies of ordained religious. There were then in
Britain eight-and-twenty flamens as well as three archflamens, unto whose power the other
judges of public morals and officials of the temple were subject.
Flamens and Bishops
These also, by precept of the Pope, did they snatch away from idolatry; and where there were
flamens there did they set bishops, and archbishops where there were archflamens. The seats
of the archflamens were in the three noblest cities, in London, to wit, and in York and in
Caerleon, whereof the ancient walls and buildings still remaining on the Usk, in Glamorgan,
do bear witness to the former dignity thereof. From these three was superstition purged away,
and the eight-and-twenty bishops, with their several dioceses, were subordinated unto them.
Unto the Metropolitan of York Deira was subject, along with Albany, both of which the great
river Humber doth divide from Loegria. Unto the Metropolitan of London Loegria and
Cornwall were subject. These two provinces the Severn doth bound from Cambria, that is,
Wales, which was subject unto Caerleon, the City of Legions.
CHAPTER XX
At last, when everything had been thus ordained new, the prelates returned to Rome and
besought the most blessed Pope to confirm the ordinances they had made. And when the
confirmation had been duly granted they returned into Britain with a passing great company
of others, by the teaching of whom the nation of the British was in a brief space established in
the Christian faith. Their names and acts are to be found recorded in the book that Gildas
wrote as concerning the victory of Aurelius Ambrosius, the which he hath handled in a
treatise so luminous as that in nowise is there any need to write it new in a meaner style.

45

Book Five
CHAPTER I
Lucius the Glorious dieth
Meanwhile King Lucius the Glorious, when he saw how the worship of the true faith had
been magnified in his kingdom, did rejoice with exceeding great joy, and converting the
revenues and lands which formerly did belong unto the temples of idols unto a better use, did
by grant allow then, to be still held by the churches of the faithful. And for that it seemed him
he ought to show them yet greater honour, he did increase them with broader fields and fair
dwelling-houses, and confirmed their liberties by privileges of all kinds. Amidst these and
other acts designed to the same purpose he departed this life, and was right worshipfully
buried in the church of the first See in the year from the Incarnation of Our Lord one hundred
and fifty-six. No issue left he to succeed him, whence at his death dissension arose amongst
the Britons and the power of the Romans was sore enfeebled withal.
CHAPTER II
When these tidings were brought unto Rome, the Senate sent as legate Severus the senator
and two legions along with him to recover the country to the Roman power.
Severus defeateth Fulgenius
So soon as he had landed, he did battle with the Britons, and one part of them surrendered
unto him, but the rest, whom he could not subdue, he did so harass with continual slaughter
and defeat, as that he drove them to take refuge beyond Deira in Albany. Natheless, under
their Duke, Fulgenius, they withstood him with all their might, and many a time inflicted
passing sore slaughter both upon their fellow-countrymen and upon the Romans. For Severus
took with him as auxiliaries all the island people whomsoever he could find, and thus
oftentimes returned with victory. But their Emperor, grievously annoyed at these incursions,
bade build a wall betwixt Deira and Albany so as to hinder his making any nigher attack upon
him. A wall accordingly they wrought at the common charge from sea to sea that did for a
long space bar every opening against the inroads of the enemy. Howbeit, when Fulgenius
could no longer stand his ground, he crossed over into Scythia to beseech the help of the Picts
in restoring him to his dignity. And when he had there assembled all the youth of the country,
he returned with a passing great fleet into Britain, and laid siege unto York. Which matter
coming to be bruited abroad amongst the other nations, the greater part of the Britons
deserted Severus and went over to Fulgenius. But not for that did Severus slacken tin his
emprise. He mustered his Romans and the other Britons that still stuck to him, marched off to
the beleaguered city and gave battle to Fulgenius. But when the battle had been hotly fought
out to the end, Severus and a multitude of his men had been slain, and Fulgenius himself
wounded to the death.
Carausius the Pirate
Severus was buried just afterwards at York, whereof his legions had taken possession. He left
two sons, Bassianus and Geta, whereof Geta was born of a Roman mother while Bassianus
was son of British lady. When their father was dead, the Romans according) raised Geta to
the kingship, favouring him the rather for that he was Roman of both sides. But the Britons
refused to accept him, and elected Bassianus for that he was of their kindred by his mother’s

46

blood. Straightway the brethren fall to fighting, wherein Geta being slain Bassianus obtaineth
possession of the kingdom.
CHAPTER III
At that time was there in Britain a certain youth by name Carausius, born of low degree, who
after that he had approved his prowess in many encounters, made his way to Rome, and
besought leave of the Senate to defend with his fleets the coasts of Britain against the
incursions of the barbarians, the which if it were granted unto him he promised that be would
achieve so many and such great matters as that the Republic should be more magnified
thereby, than it could be were the kingdom of Britain delivered into their hands These fine
promises he made cajoled the Senate, and he succeeded in obtaining that which he had asked
for, returning to Britain with charters sealed.
Bassianus betrayed
Forthwith, swiftly collecting a number of ships, he made choice of a number of daring
youngsters and putting to sea went round all the shores of the kingdom and raised a passing
great disturbance among the people. Meanwhile, landing in the neighbouring islands, he
ravaged the fields, sacked the towns and cities, and plundered all that they possessed from the
islanders. Whilst he was carrying on in this wise, all they that hanker after other men’s goods
began to flock about him, whereby presently such an army had he got together as that none of
the neighbouring princes could have withstood him. Presently his spirit was so puffed up at
having such a force at his command that he told the Britons, so they would make him king, he
would slay the Romans to a man and free the whole island of that race of barbarians. And
when he had obtained his demand, he forthwith gave Bassianus battle and slew him, taking
the rule of the kingdom into his own hands. Howbeit, it was the Picts whom Fulgenius, his
mother’s brother, had brought into Britain that did betray Bassianus, for just in the pinch of
the battle, when it was their bounden duty to come to Bassianus’ rescue, they had been so
corrupted by the promises and bribes of Carausius, that they fell upon the allies of Bassianus.
Whereby the rest, who could not tell which were their allies and which their enemies, fled
away, hot foot, and victory remained with Carausius. He, when he had won the day, gave the
Picts a place wherein they might dwell in Albany, and there abode they through after ages,
mixed up with the Britons.
CHAPTER IV
Allectus is slain
When this usurpation of Carausius was reported at Rome, the Senate sent Allectus as legate
with three legions to slay the tyrant and restore the kingdom of Britain to the power of Rome.
Straightway, as soon as he was landed, Allectus did battle with Carausius, and after he had
slain him mounted the throne of the kingdom. He then visited the Britons with exceeding
bloody slaughter for that they had deserted the Republic and had stuck to an alliance with
Carausius. Howbeit, the Britons, grievously indignant thereat, raised up Asclepiodotus, Duke
of Cornwall, to be King, and making common cause, pursued Allectus and challenged him to
battle. He was then in London and was celebrating a festival to the gods of the country. But
the moment he was aware of Asclepiodotus’ arrival, he quitted the sacrifice and issuing forth
with all his forces against him right stoutly delivered his attack. Howbeit, Asclepiodotus was
too strong for him, and after scattering his troops compelled Allectus to flee in such sort as
that following hard on his heels he at last overtook and slew him, along with many thousand
men to boot. And when the victory had thus fallen unto him, Livius Gallus, that was
colleague of Allectus, called together the remainder of the Romans into the city and shut the

47

gates, setting garrisons in the towers and other places of defence, weening that he could thus
make stand against Asclepiodotus, or at leastwise escape the death that threatened him.
Siege of London
But Asclepiodotus, espying this that he had done, straightway laid siege to the city and sent
word to all the Dukes of Britain that he had slain Allectus with many of his men, and was
now besieging Gallus with the residue of the Romans within London; wherefore he did most
earnestly pray and beseech each one of them to hasten as speedily as might be to his
assistance. For the whole race of the Romans might lightly be exterminated out of Britain so
only they all joined in a common assault upon the besieged. In answer to his summons
accordingly came the Demetae, the Venedotians, the Deiri, and they of Albany together with
all other whatsoever of British ace. And when all had come together before the Duke’s own
eyes, he bade innumerable engines be made wherewith to batter down the walls of the city.
Every single man setteth him to the work, daring and hardy, and doeth all that one man may
do to storm the city. Forthwith the walls are battered down and a breach is made whereby
they force an entrance and put the Romans to the sword. But the Romans, seeing that they
were being slaughtered without a moment’s stay, persuaded Gallus to surrender and deliver
himself and them up to Asclepiodotus, praying him of his mercy that they might be allowed
to depart with their lives. For well-nigh all of them were already slain save one single legion
that still survived.
Diocletian: his persecution
Gallus yielded his assent thereunto, and gave up his men and himself unto Asclepiodotus, but
when he did greatly desire to have mercy upon them, up came the Venedotians and forming
themselves in rank about them smote off every one of their heads on that one day, over a
brook within the city that was afterward called after the Duke’s name in British, Nantgallim,
but in Saxon, Walbrook.
CHAPTER V
The Romans thus trampled underfoot, Asclepiodotus took the crown of the kingdom, and
with the assent of the people set it upon his own head. Thenceforward he ruled the country in
right justice and peace ten years, checking the cruelties of robbers and the murders wrought
by the knives of the highwaymen. In his days arose the persecution of the Emperor
Diocletian, wherein Christianity was well-nigh blotted out of the whole island, wherein it had
remained whole and inviolate from the days of King Lucius. For Maximianus Herculius,
chief of the armies of the foresaid tyrant, had conquered the country, and by his command all
the churches were thrown down, and all the sacred scriptures that could be found were burnt
in the market-places. The priests, moreover, that had been elected, along with the faithful
committed to their charge, were put to death, insomuch as that a thronging fellowship of
Christians did hasten to vie with one another which should first reach the kingdom of Heaven
and the delight thereof, as though it had been their own abiding place.
Coel slayeth Asclepiodotus
God did therefore magnify His mercy upon us, and in the day of persecution, lest the British
people should lose their way utterly in the thick darkness of that dreadful night, did of His
own free gift enlumine lamps of exceeding brightness in His holy Martyrs whose tombs and
places where they suffered would kindle no feeble glow of divine charity in the hearts of their
beholders, had not all knowledge thereof been lost unto their fellow countrymen through the
grievous perversity of the barbarians. Amongst others of both sexes that with undaunted
courage stood firm in the ranks of Christ suffered Alban of Verulam and Julius and Aaron of
the City of Legions, whereof Alban, glowing with the grace of charity, when his confessor

48

Amphibalus was pursued by his persecutors and was just on the very verge of being taken,
did first hide him in his own house and afterwards offer himself to suffer death in his place,
herein following the en-sample of Christ laying down His life for His sheep. The other twain
were torn limb from limb and mangled in unheard-of wise, and fled forth without tarrying
unto the gates of the Jerusalem that is above, crowned with the garlands of their martyrdom.
CHAPTER VI
Meanwhile Coel, Duke of Kaercolvin, that is, Colchester, raised an insurrection against King
Asclepiodotus, and after slaying him in a pitched battle, did set the crown of the kingdom
upon his own head. When the tidings thereof were announced at Rome, the Senate rejoiced
greatly over the death of the King, who had throughout been so sore a trouble unto the
Roman power.
Queen Helena
Calling to mind withal the disaster they had suffered in the loss of the kingdom, they sent as
legate Constantius the senator, who had subdued Spain unto their dominion, a wise man and a
hardy, who had wrought more than any other to magnify the power of the commonweal. Now
Coel, Duke of the Britons, when he was aware that Constantius was arrived, durst not venture
to do battle against him for that he had heard tell of him how no King might make stand
against him. Accordingly, so soon as Constantius set foot within the island, Coel sent his
messengers unto him, and besought him of peace, promising fealty and homage on condition
that he might possess the kingdom of Britain and pay nought beyond the wonted tribute unto
the Roman sovereignty. This message delivered, Constantius thereunto agreed, and peace was
duly confirmed by the giving of hostages. A month afterward Coel was overtaken of a right
grievous malady, whereof within eight days he died. After his death, Constantius took unto
himself the crown of the kingdom and therewithal the daughter of Coel unto wife. Her name
was Helena, and all the damsels of the kingdom did she surpass in beauty, nor was none other
anywhere to be found that was held more cunning of skill in instruments of music nor better
learned in the liberal arts. None other issue had her father to succeed him on the throne of the
kingdom, wherefore he had made it his special care that she should be so instructed as that
she might the more easily take in hand the government of the realm after her father’s death.
Constantine succeedeth
And after that Constantius had taken her as his Queen, she bare unto him a son, and called his
name Constantine. Sithence that time, eleven years had passed away, when Constantius died
at York and bequeathed the kingdom unto his son. Who, when he was raised to the honours
of the throne, within a few years did begin to manifest passing great prowess, showing the
fierceness of a lion in maintaining justice among his people, restraining the ravening of
robbers and treading underfoot the cruelties of them that did use oppression, being resolved
that everywhere his peace should be made new and firmly stablished.
CHAPTER VII
At that time was there a certain tyrant at Rome, Maxentius by name, who strove to oust every
upright citizen from his inheritance, and with most o hateful tyranny did oppress the
commonweal. They upon whom his cruelty fell, driven out of their own lands and country,
fled away unto Constantine in Britain, and by him were received with honour. At last, when
many such had flocked about him, they did stir him up unto hatred of the said tyrant, and did
full often exclaim against him in speeches such as this:

49

‘How long, O Constantine, wilt thou endure this our calamity and exile? Wherefore delayest
thou to restore of us to our native land? Thou art the only one of our blood strong enough to
give us back that which we have lost and to drive Maxentius forth.
Constantine Emperor Rome
For what prince is there that may be compared unto the King of Britain, of whether it be in
the valour of his hardy soldiers or in the plenty of his gold and silver? We do adjure thee,
give us back our possessions, give us back our wives and children by emprising an expedition
to Rome with thine army and ourselves.’
CHAPTER VIII
Provoked thereunto by these and other words, Constantine accordingly went to Rome and
subdued it unto himself, and thereafter did obtain the sovereignty of the whole world. He had
taken with him three uncles of Helena, Leolin, to wit, Trahern and Marius, and raised them
unto the order of Senators. In the meanwhile Octavius, Duke of the Wissei, raised an
insurrection against the proconsuls of the Roman sovereignty unto whom the government of
the island had been entrusted, and after slaying them, himself assumed the throne of the
kingdom. And when tidings of this had been brought unto Constantine, he sent hither
Trahern, the uncle of Helena, with three legions to recover the island unto the Roman
sovereignty. Trahern, accordingly, landing on the coast nigh the city that in British is called
Kaerperis, made an assault thereupon, and within two days took it. The which, being bruited
abroad amongst all the nations, King Octavius gathered together the whole armed strength of
the island and met him no great way from Winchester, in the field that in British is called
Maisuria, and, delivering battle, obtained the victory.
Octavius retrieveth defeat
Trahern with his wounded troops betook him to his ships, and embarking, made for Albany
by sea voyage, where he busied him in ravaging the provinces. When this news was brought
back again by his messenger, King Octavius reassembled his companies in pursuit of him,
and did battle with him in the province that was called Westmoreland; but this time he had to
flee without the victory. But Trahern, when he saw that victory was his own, pursued
Octavius and gave him no rest until he had wrested from him his cities and his crown.
Octavius, therefore, in sore trouble at the loss of his kingdom, repaired with a fleet to Norway
to seek for help from King Gombert. Meanwhile he had by edict bidden his familiars use
every effort to compass the death of Trahern. The Earl of a certain municipal fortified town,
who loved Octavius above all other, accordingly, was not slow in fulfilling the command. For
when on a day Trahern issued forth of London, he lay in wait for him with a hundred soldiers
in a certain combe of the forest wherethrough he had to pass, and as he was going by, sallied
out unexpectedly upon him and slew him in the midst of his own fellow-soldiers. So, when
this was reported unto Octavius, he returned unto Britain, and after scattering the Romans,
recovered the throne of the kingdom. Hence, after a brief space, such was his prowess and so
great plenty of gold and silver had he, as that no man was there of whom he was afeard, and
he held the kingdom of Britain happily from that time forward until the days of Gratian and
Valentinian.
CHAPTER IX
Conan thinketh to be King
At last, worn out with eld, and desirous of making provision for his people at his death, he
inquired of his counsellors which of his family they would most gladly raise to be king after
that he himself were departed. For he had but one single daughter, and was without heir male

50

unto whom he might hand down the rule of the country. Some, accordingly, proposed that he
should give his daughter to wife along with the kingdom unto some Roman noble, so as that
thereby they should enjoy the firmer peace. But others gave their voice that Conan Meriadoc,
his nephew, should be declared heir to the throne of the kingdom, and that his daughter
should be given in marriage with dowry of gold and silver unto the prince of some other
kingdom. Whilst that they were debating these matters amongst themselves, in came
Caradoc, Duke of Cornwall, and gave it as his counsel that they should invite Maximian the
Senator and give him the King’s daughter and the kingdom, that so they might enjoy
perpetual peace. For his father was a Welsh Briton, he being the son of Leoline, uncle of
Constantine, of whom mention hath been made above. By his mother and by birth, howbeit,
he was Roman, and by blood was he of royal pedigree on both sides. Caradoc held therefore
that this marriage did promise an abiding peace, for that he knew Maximian, being at once of
the family of the Emperors and also by origin a Briton, would have good right to the kingdom
of Britain.
Maurice inviteth Maximian
But when the Duke of Cornwall had thus delivered his counsel, Conan, the King’s nephew,
waxed indignant, for his one endeavour was to make a snatch at the kingdom for himself, and
aiming at this end only, stuck not to run counter to the whole court beside. But Caradoc,
being in nowise minded to change his purpose, sent his son Maurice to Rome to sound
Maximian on the matter. Maurice himself was a big man and a comely, as well as of great
prowess and hardiment, and if any would gainsay aught that he laid down, he would prove
the same in arms in single combat. When, therefore, he appeared in presence of Maximian, he
was received in becoming wise, and honoured above the knights that were his fellows. At that
time was there a mighty quarrel toward betwixt Maximian himself and the two Emperors
Gratian and his brother Valentinian, for that he had been denied in the matter of one third part
of the empire which he had demanded. When Maurice, therefore, saw that Maximian was
being put upon by the twain Emperors, he spake unto him in these words:
‘What cause hast thou, Maximian, to be afeard of Gratian, when the way lieth open unto thee
to snatch the empire from him? Come with me into the island of Britain and thou shalt wear
the crown of the kingdom. For King Octavius is sore borne down by eld and lethargy and
desireth nought better than to find some man such as thyself unto whom he may give his
kingdom and his daughter. For heir male hath he none, and counsel hath he sought of his
barons unto whom he should give his daughter to wife, with the kingdom for dower.
Maximian cometh to Britain
And, for that his barons would fain give obedient answer unto his address, his high court hath
made resolve that the kingdom and the damsel should be granted unto thee, and unto me have
they given commission that I should notify thee of the matter. If, therefore, thou wilt come
with me into Britain, thou shalt achieve this adventure; the plenty of gold and silver that is in
Britain shall be thine, and the multitude of hardy men of war that dwell therein. Thus wilt
thou be enough strong to return unto Rome, and, after that thou hast driven forth these
Emperors, then mayst thou enjoy the empire thereof thyself. For even thus did Constantine
thy kinsman before thee, and many another of our kings that hath ere now raised him unto the
empire.’
CHAPTER X
Maximian, therefore, giving assent unto his words, came with him into Britain. On his way
he sacked the cities of the Franks, and thereby purveyed him of heaps of gold and silver
wherewith to pay the men of arms he mustered from every quarter. Soon afterward he put to

51

sea and made for Hamo’s Port with a fair wind. And when tidings thereof were brought unto
the King, he was dismayed with sore amazement, weening that an enemy’s army was upon
him. Wherefore calling unto him Conan his nephew, he commanded him to summon every
man in arms throughout the country and to march against the enemy.
Octavius affrighted
Conan accordingly assembled all the youth of the kingdom and came to Hamo’s Port, where
Maximian had pitched his tents. He, when he perceived how huge a multitude they were that
had arrived, as in a grievous quandary, for what was there he could do? They that had come
with him were a far smaller company—he dreaded the number and the courage of Conan’s
fighting men, and of peace had he no hope. Wherefore, calling unto him the elders of his host
along with Maurice, he bade them say what they thought best to be done in such an overtake?
Unto whom saith Maurice:
‘Not for us, certes, is it to do battle with such an army of knights and warriors, nor came we
hither for any such purpose as an invasion of Britain by force of arms. Behoveth us ask for
peace and leave to abide in the land until such time as we know the King’s mind. Let us say
that we be envoys from the Emperors, and bear their mandates to Octavius, so as to humour
these folk and wheedle them with politic words.’ So, all of them approving this scheme, he
took with him twelve of the barons, hoary-headed and of sounder wit than the rest, all with
boughs of olive in their right hands, and came to meet Duke Conan. When the Britons beheld
these men of reverend age bearing the olive in token of peace, they uprose from their seats to
do them honour, and made way for them to pass freely unto the Duke. Straightway, standing
in the presence of Conan Meriadoc, when they had saluted him on behalf of the Emperors
and the Senate, they said that Maximian had commission unto King Octavius to bear him the
mandates of Gratian and Valentinian.
Maurice: his crafty device
Unto whom Conan: ‘Wherefore, then, is he followed by so large a company? This is not the
guise wherein legates wont to appear, but rather that of an invading army that is minded to do
us a mischief.’ Then saith Maurice: ‘Unmeet had it been for a man of so high rank to come
hither save in seemly state and with due escort of knights and men; and all the more for that
as representing the Roman empire, and also by reason of deeds done by his forefathers, he
may haply be hated of many kings. Were he to march through the land with a lesser
company, like enow he might be slain by the enemies of the commonweal. In peace he
cometh, and in peace he doth beseech, as in truth ought well to be believed from that which
he hath done. For from the time that here we landed have we so behaved us as that we have
done no wrong unto no man. All our charges have we paid like peaceful folk; we have bought
fairly that which we needed, and nought have we taken from any man by force.’ And whilst
that Conan was still wavering as to whether he would make choice of peace or war, Caradoc,
Duke of Cornwall, accosted him, as also did other of the barons, and persuaded him not to
enter upon a war after listening unto such a petition. Wherefore, albeit that he were fainer to
fight, he laid down his arms and granted peace, himself escorting Maximian to the King in
London, and setting forth unto him the whole matter in order as it had fallen out.
CHAPTER XI
Caradoc his speech to Octavian
Then Caradoc, Duke of Cornwall, taking with him his son Maurice, bade that the bystanders
should withdraw them, and addressed the King in these words:

52

‘Behold, that which they who do with truer affection observe their obedience and fealty
towards thee have so long time desired, hath, by God’s providence, now been brought unto a
happy issue. For thou didst ordain that thy barons should give thee counsel as to what were
best to do as concerning both thy daughter and thy kingdom, forasmuch as that in these days
thine eld doth so sore let and hinder thee of governing by people any longer. Some there were
that counselled delivering up the crown unto Conan thy nephew and marrying thy daughter
worthily elsewhere, as fearing the ruin of our countrymen should a prince of foreign tongue
be set over them. Others would have granted the realm unto thy daughter so she were
matched with some noble of our own speech who might succeed thee on thy departure. But
the more part gave it as their counsel that some man of the blood or the Emperors should be
sent for, unto whom might be given thy daughter and thy crown. For they promised that a
firm and abiding peace would ensue therefrom, seeing that they would be protected by the
power of Rome. Now, therefore, behold, God hath deigned that this youth should be wafted
to thy shores, who is born not only of the blood of the Romans but of the blood royal of the
Britons, and unto him, by my counsel, wilt thou not tarry to give thy daughter in wedlock.
Maximian and Conan reconciled
For, put case thou shouldst deny him in this, what right canst thou confer upon any other as
against him to the realm of Britain? For a kinsman is he of Constantine, and nephew of Coel
our King, whose daughter Helena none can deny to have possessed the kingdom by right
hereditary.’ And when Caradoc had thus made report of the counsel of the barons, Octavius
agreed thereunto and by common consent forthwith gave the kingdom of Britain together
with his daughter unto Maximian. The which Conan Meriadoc beholding, he did wax
indignant beyond all telling and betook him privily unto Albany where he busied him in
raising an army to harass Maximian. When he had assembled his troops together he crossed
the Humber river and ravaged the provinces both on the hither side thereof and on the further.
When this was reported unto Maximian he assembled his whole strength, and hurrying forth
to meet him defeated him in battle and returned home with victory. Natheless was Conan not
so enfeebled thereby that he could not again rally his men, and when he had got them
together he set him again to harrying the provinces. Maximian accordingly returned, and
fought several battles with him, wherein at one time he would come back victorious and at
another worsted. At last, after each had inflicted sore loss upon the other, the friends of both
did come betwixt, and a reconciliation was brought about.
CHAPTER XII
Maximian invadeth Armorica
Five years later Maximian, puffed up with pride and surquedry by reason of the passing great
store of gold and silver that did daily flow in upon him fitted out an exceeding mighty fleet
and assembled every single armed warrior in Britain. For the realm of Britain was not enough
for him, but he A must needs seek also to subjugate the Gauls. Crossing the Channel, he went
first into the kingdom of Armorica, that now is called Brittany, and made war upon the
Gaulish folk that did then inhabit therein. But the Gauls under Duke Inbalt coming to meet
him, did battle against him, wherein the more part finding themselves in sore jeopardy did
fettle them to flee, for Duke Inbalt had fallen and fifteen thousand men-at-arms that had come
together from all parts of the kingdom. And when Maximian had achieved so notable a
slaughter, he was overjoyed beyond all measure, for well knew he that after the death of so
many fighting men he should soon subdue the country. He therefore called Conan unto him
without the ranks, and saith unto him, somewhat smiling the while: ‘Lo, we have won us one
of the fairest realms of Gaul, and herein, behold, lieth good hope that we be able to win the
rest. Hasten we, therefore, to take the cities and strong places thereof, before the tidings of

53

this jeopardy fly forth unto further Gaul and call the rest of the peoples to arms. For, so we
can hold this kingdom, I misdoubt me not but we can subdue the whole of Gaul unto our
dominion.
Maximian covenanteth with Conan
Nor let it irk thee to have yielded the kingdom of Britain unto me, albeit that thou hadst hope
of possessing it thyself, for whatsoever thou hast lost country therein will I make good unto
thee in this country, for in this kingdom will I make thee King, and it shall be another Britain
that we will replenish with men of our own race after that we have driven out them that do
now abide therein. For the land is fruitful of corn and the rivers of fish. The forests be pasing
fair and the glades and launds thereof right pleasant, insomuch as that in my judgment is
there nowhere to be found a land that is more delightful.’ And therewithal did Conan bow his
head before him and con him thanks, promising that, so long as he should live, he would do
him homage and fealty as his loyal vassal.
CHAPTER XIII
After this they called out their troops and marched upon Rennes, taking it the same day. For
when they heard how cruel were the Britons and how they had slain their fellow-countrymen,
the citizens fled the swiftest they might, leaving behind them the women and children. Others
in the other cities and other towns did follow their ensample, whereby was easy entrance
made for the Britons, who into whatsoever place they entered, slew all that therein was of
male kind, sparing only the women. At last, when they had utterly done away every single
male that dwelt in the whole of the provinces, they garrisoned the cities and towns with
British warriors and established camps in divers places upon the headlands.
He peopleth the land with Britons
Accordingly, so soon as Maximian’s cruelness was bruited abroad throughout the other
provinces of Gaul, a mighty consternation fell upon every duke and every prince, so as none
other hope had they save only in offering prayers and oblations to their gods. From every
country quarter they fled unto the cities and strongholds and whatsoever places seemed to
offer a safe refuge. Maximian, therefore, finding himself so mighty a terror unto them, took
fresh hardihood, and made haste to multiply his army by offer of swingeing bounties unto
recruits. For whomsoever he knew to be greedy of other men’s goods, him did he enlist, and
stinted not to stuff their wallets with gold or silver, or largesse of one kind or another.
CHAPTER XIV
Thereby did he gather such a host about him as he weened was enow for him to be able to
subjugate the whole of Gaul. Howbeit, he did put off practising further severities for a brief
space, until the kingdom he had taken began to settle down and Ire should have replenished it
with a British folk. He accordingly issued an edict that a hundred thousand of the common
folk in the island of Britain should be collected and should come to him, besides thirty
thousand soldiers who should safeguard them that were to remain in the country from any
incursion of the enemy.
Conan sendeth for British women
And when all these things were accomplished and the Britons had arrived, he distributed
them amongst all the nations of the kingdom of Armorica, and did thus create a second
Britain the which he did bestow upon Conan Meriadoc. But he himself with the rest of his
fellow-soldiers went into further Gaul, and after divers most grievous battles did subdue the
same, as well as the whole of Germany, having obtained the victory in every single battle.
Then, stablishing the throne of his empire at Trier, he did so furiously wreak his revenge

54

upon the two Emperors Gratian and Valentinian, that he slew the one and put the other to
flight from the city of Rome.
CHAPTER XV
In the meanwhile the Gauls and Aquitanians did sore harass Conan and the Armorican
Britons, and annoy them continually with repeated incursions, which Conan withstood,
repaying slaughter with slaughter and right manfully defending the country committed unto
him. And when the victory had fallen unto him, he was minded to give wives unto his
comrades-in-arms so that unto them might be born heirs that should possess that land in
perpetuity. And that they might make no mixture with the Gauls, he issued decree that
women should come from the island of Britain to be married unto them. He therefore sent
messengers into the island unto Dionotus, King of Cornwall, who had succeeded his brother
Caradoc in the kingdom, that he should take charge of this business.
Ursula and 11,000 virgins
For he himself teas noble and exceeding powerful, and unto him had Maximian entrusted the
rule of the island while he himself was busied in the aforesaid emprises. Now Dionotus had a
daughter of marvellous beauty whose name was Ursula, whom Conan did desire above all
things beside.
CHAPTER XVI
Dionotus accordingly, upon seeing Conan’s messenger, being desirous of obeying his wishes,
assembled together from the divers provinces the daughters of nobles to the number of eleven
thousand, and of others born of the common people sixty thousand, and bade them all meet
together within the city of London. He commanded further that ships should be brought
thither from the various coasts wherein they might be sent oversea unto the husbands that
awaited them. For albeit that in so vast a company many there were that were well-pleased
with their lot, yet were there more unto whom it was displeasing, for that they loved their
kinsfolk and their country with a greater affection. Nor, haply, were lacking some who
preferring chastity to marriage would rather have lost their life even in some foreign nation
than obtain wealth and a husband on this wise. For albeit that few were of the same mind, yet
would well-nigh all have chosen somewhat different could they have had their own way in
the matter.
The virgins shipwrecked
When the fleet was ready, the damsels go aboard and dropping down the river Thames make
for the high seas. At last, just as they were tacking to make the shore of Armorica, a contrary
wind sprang up in their teeth and very soon scattered all their company. The ships were all in
sore jeopardy in the midst of the sea. The more part of them foundered, and those that did
escape utter shipwreck were driven on to barbarous islands, where they were either slain or
sold into bondage by the uncouth people, inasmuch as they had fallen among the detestable
soldiery of Guanius and Melga, who by command of Gratian did ravage all the nations along
the coast and Germany itself with dreadful slaughter. Guanius was King of the Huns and
Melga of the Picts, whom Gratian had specially commissioned and sent into Germany to
harass and slay them that favoured Maximian. Whilst these were roving along the seaboard
plundering and murdering, they met the damsels as they were driven on to the shore in those
parts. These Ambrones, beholding the beauty of the damsels, would fain have wantoned with
them, but meeting denial, fell upon them and slaughtered by far the most part of them without
mercy. Then the detestable Dukes of the Picts and Huns, Guanius and Melga, who favoured
the cause of Gratian and Valentinian, when they learnt that the island of Britain had been
emptied of all its men-at-arms, hurriedly steered thitherward, and taking them of the

55

neighbour islands into their alliance made straight for Albany. Setting their men in marching
order they accordingly invaded the kingdom wherein was neither ruler nor defender, and
slaughtered the helpless common folk, for Maximian, as hath been said, had taken with him
all the young fighting men that he could find and had left behind none but the unarmed and
witless tillers of the soil.
Gratian Municeps and Gratian the Emperor
So when Guanius and Melga found that they could make no stand against them, they made no
small slaughter amongst them, never ceasing to sack and ravage the cities and provinces as
they had been so many sheepfolds. When, therefore, this so grievous calamity was reported
unto Maximian, he sent Gratian the Burgess with two legions to their assistance, who as soon
as they landed in the island gave battle to the enemy and drove them forth into Hibernia with
sore slaughter. In the meanwhile Maximian was slain at Rome by the friends of Gratian, and
the Britons whom he had brought with him were slain or scattered. They that made shift to
escape betook them to their fellow-countrymen in Armorica that now was called the other
Britain.

56

Book Six
CHAPTER I
Gratian Municeps slain
Now Gratian the Burgess, when he heard of Maximian’s being murdered, assumed the crown
of the kingdom, and made himself King. Thenceforth such tyranny wrought he over the
people, as that the common folk, banding them together, fell upon him and slew him. This
news being bruited abroad among the other kingdoms, the enemies already spoken of
returned from Hibernia, and bringing with them Scots, Norwegians and Danes, did lay waste
the realm from sea to sea with sword and fire. On account of this devastation and most cruel
oppression, messengers are sent with letters to Rome, begging and entreating that in answer
to their tearful petition an armed force may be sent to avenge them, and promising faithful
subjection for ever, so only the Romans will drive their enemies away. A legion accordingly
that had not suffered in their former disasters is placed under their command, and after
disembarking from the ships wherein it was carried across the ocean, soon came to close
quarters with the enemy. At last, after that a passing great multitude of them had been
stricken down, the Romans drove them all out of the country and freed the wretched
commonalty from this outrageous havoc.
The Romans leave Britain
They then bade the Britons make a wall from sea to sea betwixt Albany and Deira builded of
turfs, that should be a terror to warn off the enemy and a safeguard to the men of the country.
For Albany was utterly wasted by the barbarians that haunted therein, and whatsoever
enemies made descent upon the land did there find a convenient shelter. Wherefore the
native-born indwellers of the land did set them to work right diligently, and partly at the
public charge and partly at private did complete the building of the wall.
CHAPTER II
The Romans thereupon gave public notice to the country that thenceforward they could in no
wise be troubled again to undertake any more laborious expeditions of this kind, and that
such and so great an army by land and sea as was that of the Romans held it disgrace to
endure fatigue-work for the sake of a pack of cowardly, pilfering vagabonds. Wherefore
henceforth they must look to fighting their own battles single-handed, and the best thing they
could do was to inure them in arms and fight like men with all their might to defend their
land and substance, their wives and children, and that which is even dearer than these—their
freedom and their lives. And at the same time as they gave this public warning, they bade
every man in the island that could bear arms come to an assembly in London, for that the
Romans were making ready to embark for home.
Archbishop Guethelin
And when all were come together, Guethelin, Metropolitan of London, was charged to make
a speech unto them, the which he did in these words:
‘At the bidding of the princes standing here present, my bounden duty it is to speak unto you,
yet needs must I weep rather than make appeal unto ye in any lofty discourse. For sore it
grieveth me of the feebleness and orphanhood that hath overtaken us sithence that Maximian
hath stripped the realm of every single fighting man and youth. For ye were but the remnant,
a folk that knew nought of the ways of war, but were employed in other toil, tillers of the soil

57

and craftsmen in the several handicrafts of trade. Wherefore, when your foemen of foreign
nations did fall upon ye, they drave ye forth of your sheepcotes into the wilderness as ye had
been sheep straying without a shepherd, until such time as the Roman power did restore ye
unto your holdings. Now, therefore, will ye always set your hopes upon being safeguarded by
the foreigner? Will ye even yet not teach your hands to fight with shield and sword and spear
against these thieves and robbers, no whit stronger than ye be yourselves, save for your own
listlessness and lethargy? The Romans are aweary of the travail of these voyages to and fro
for nought save to fight your battles. They have now chosen rather to lose the whole of the
tribute ye pay than any longer to endure these fatigues by land and sea. What though ye were
only common folk in the days when ye had soldiers, ween ye therefore that manhood hath
departed from ye?
Guanius and Melga again
Cannot men be born in thwart order, so as that a soldier may be the son of a farm-labourer, or
a farm-labourer son of a soldier, the son of a shopkeeper soldier, or the soldier’s son a
shopkeeper? And sithence that of common wont the one doth beget the other, I trow not that
aught of manhood is lost by any. But if that men ye be, quit ye like men, and pray Christ He
give ye hardihood to defend your freedom.’ And when he had made an end of speaking, such
a cheering and shouting arose that ye would have said they were all brimming over with
valour.
CHAPTER III
After this the Romans encourage the timid folk with brave counsel, and leave them patterns
whereby to fashion their arms. They did likewise ordain that towers should be set at intervals
overlooking the sea all along the ocean seaboard of the southern districts where they had their
shipping, for that here was most peril to be dreaded from the barbarians. But easier is it to
make a hawk of a haggard than presently to make a scholar of a ploughman, and he that
poureth forth deep learning before them doth but scatter pearls before swine. For so soon as
ever the Romans had bidden them farewell as they that never should return thither, behold the
Dukes Guanius and Melga issue forth again from the ships wherein they had fled into Ireland,
along with the rest of the companies of Scots and Picts, as well as of the Norwegians, Danes
and others that they brought with them, and take possession of the whole of Albany as far as
the wall.
The witless Briton
For knowing that the Romans had left the island, and had vowed never to return, they set to
work to lay waste the island with more than their wonted assurance. And in face of all this,
nought could the Britons find to do but to post their slow-witted yokels on the top of the wall,
too clumsy to fight and too addle-pated with the quaking of their midriffs to run away, who
so stuck there day and night squatting on their silly perches. Meanwhile the long hooked
weapons of the enemy are never idle, wherewithal they dragged down the thrice-wretched
clowns from the walls and dashed them to the ground. And well was it for them that were
slain by this untimely death, for that by their speedy departure they avoided being snatched
away by the same grievous and lingering torments as their brethren and their children. O, the
vengeance of God upon past sins! Such was the doom that befell through the wicked madness
of Maximian that had drained the kingdom of so many gallant warriors, who, had they been
present in so sore a strait, no people could have fallen upon them that they would not have
forced to flee, as was well seen, so long as they remained in the land. But enough hath been
said. Forsaking the cities and the high wall, again the country folk are put to flight, again are
they scattered, even more hopelessly than they were wont; again are they pursued by the

58

enemy, again are they overtaken by a yet bloodier slaughter, and the wretched common folk
are torn to pieces by their foes as sheep are rent by the wolves.
A fruitless petition
Yet once again therefore do the miserable remnant send letters unto Agitius, the chief
commander of the Roman forces, appealing unto him on this wise: ‘Unto Agitius, thrice
consul, the groans of the Britons.’ Then, after some few words, the complaint proceedeth:
‘The sea driveth us upon the barbarians, the barbarians drive us back again unto the sea.
Betwixt the twain we be thus but bandied from one death unto another, for either we be
drowned or slain by the sword.’ Natheless, nought the more might they obtain the succour
they sought. Sad and sorry return they home to tell their fellow-countrymen how ill their
petition hath sped.
CHAPTER IV
After taking counsel hereupon, Guethelin, Archbishop of London, passed across the Channel
into Lesser Britain, which at that time was called Armorica or Letavia, to seek help of their
brethren oversea. At that time Aldroen was the King thereof, the fourth from Conan, unto
whom, as hath been said, Maximian had given the kingdom. Aldroen seeing a man so
reverend, received him with honour and asked of him wherefore he had come. Unto whom
Guethelin:
‘Your Highness ere now hath been acquainted with the misery—a misery, in truth, that may
well move thee unto tears—which we, thy Britons, have suffered from the time that
Maximian did despoil our island of all her warriors, and commanded that the realm which
thou dost possess—and long in peace mayst thou possess the same—should be by them
inhabited.
Guethelin and Aldroen
For all they of the neighbour islands of the province have risen up against us, the povertystricken remnant of our name, and have so made void our island, of old replenished with
abundant wealth of every kind, as that all the nations thereof are utterly destitute of the staff
of food, save only such meat as they can kill by hunting to stay their hunger; nor was there
any to help it, for not one strong man, not a single warrior was left unto us of our own people.
For the Romans have conceived a weariness of us, and have utterly denied us their succour.
Bereft of all other hope, we have now thrown us upon thy mercy, beseeching thee to grant us
thy protection, and to defend the kingdom, of right thine own, from the incursions of the
barbarians. For, if it be that thou thyself are unwilling, what other is there that Ought of right
to be crowned with the diadem of Constantine and Maximian, the diadem that hath been worn
by thy grandsires and great-grandsires? Make ready thy fleets and come! Behold, into thy
hands do I deliver the kingdom of Britain!’
Thereupon Aldroen thus made answer:
‘The time hath been when I would not have refused to accept the island of Britain, had any
offered it unto me, for other country, I wot, is there none more fruitful whilst it enjoyeth
peace and tranquillity. But now that so sore calamity hath overtaken it, the value thereof is
sore diminished, and hateful hath it become unto myself and unto other princes.
Constantine of Brittany
But more than all other evil hath the power of the Romans done hurt thereunto, forasmuch as
that no man may hold enduring sovereignty therein but that needs must he lose his freedom
and bear the yoke of bondage. Who would not, therefore, choose rather to possess less

59

elsewhere, than to hold all the riches thereof under the yoke of slavery? This realm that is
now subject unto my dominion do I possess as sovereign, not as vassal unto any sovereign
lord unto whom my homage is due. This single kingdom therefore have I chosen to prefer
before all other nations, for that I can govern it in freedom; yet natheless, sithence that my
grandsires and great-grandsires and their forefathers have held right in the island, I do
commit unto thy charge my brother Constantine and two thousand men, who, if God so will,
may free the land from the inroads of the barbarians, and crown him with the diadem thereof.
For a brother I have of this name, skilled in warfare and of good conditions. Him will I not
fail to commit unto thee with so many men as I have said, if it please thee to accept him. But
as of a greater number I do deem it right to hold my peace, for that an inroad of the Gauls
doth daily threaten me.’
Scarce had Aldroen made an end of his speaking, when the Archbishop rose up to thank him,
and when Constantine was called unto him, smiled upon him in exultation, crying out: ‘Christ
conquereth! Christ is Emperor! Christ is King! behold here the King of forsaken Britain!
Only be Christ with us, and lo, here is he that is our safety, our hope, our joy!’
Constantine victorious
No need of more. The ships are made ready on the coast, the men are chosen from divers
parts of the kingdom, and delivered unto Guethelin.
CHAPTER V
And when everything was ready they put to sea and made for the haven of Totnes. Forthwith
they assembled what was left of the youth of the island, and attacking the enemy, through the
merits of the blessed man, obtained the victory. Thereupon the Britons that afore were
scattered flocked unto them from every quarter, and a great council was held at Silchester,
where they raised Constantine to be King and set the crown of the realm upon his head. They
gave him also unto wife a damsel born of a noble Roman family whom Archbishop Guethelin
had brought up, who in due course did bear unto him three sons, whose names were
Constans, Aurelius Ambrosius and Uther Pendragon. Constans, the eldest born, he made over
to the church of Amphibalus in Winchester, that he might there be admitted into the order of
monks. The other twain, Aurelius, to wit, and Uther, he gave in charge to Guethelin to be
brought up. At last, after ten years had passed away, a certain Pict that was his vassal came
unto him, and feigning that he did desire to hold secret converse with him, when all had gone
apart, slew him with a knife in a spring-wood thicket.
CHAPTER VI
Constans the monk crowned
On the death of Constantine a dissension arose among the barons whom they should raise to
the throne. Some were for Aurelius Ambrosius, others for Uther Pendragon, and others for
others of the blood royal. At last, while they were still contending now for this one and now
for that, Vortigern, Earl of the Gewissi, who was himself panting to snatch the crown at all
hazards, went unto Constans the monk and spake unto him on this wise: ‘Behold, thy father is
dead, and neither of thy brethren can be made King by reason of their childish age, nor none
other of thy family do I see whom the people can raise to be King. Now, therefore, if thou
wilt be guided by my counsel, and wilt multiply my substance, I will bring the people into
such a mind as that they shall choose thee for King, and albeit that thy religious order be
against it, I will free thee from this habit of the cloister.’ When Constans heard him speak
thus, he rejoiced with exceeding great joy, and promised with a solemn oath that he would do
whatsoever he might will. So Vortigern took him and led him to London clad in royal array
and made him King, albeit scarce with the assent of the people. At that time, Guethelin the

60

Archbishop was dead, nor was there none other that durst presume to anoint him King, for
that he had been monk and might not of right be so translated. Natheless, not for that did he
refuse the crown that Vortigern did set upon his head in lieu of a bishop.
CHAPTER VII
Constans a do-nought King
When Constans was thus raised to the throne, he committed unto Vortigern the whole
ordinance of the kingdom, and gave him up utterly unto his counsel in such sort as that
nought did he do without his bidding. And this did he out of sheer feebleness of wit, for that
in the cloister nought had he learnt of the governance of a kingdom. The which when
Vortigern understood, he began to take thought within himself by what means he might be
made King in his stead, for of a long time this was that he had coveted above all other thing,
and he now saw that this was a fitting time when his wish might lightly be carried into effect.
For the whole realm had been committed unto his ordinance, and Constans, who was called
King, was there as nought save the shadow of a prince. For nought of stern stuff had he in
him, nor no will to do justice, insomuch as that of none was he dreaded, neither of his own
people nor of the nations around. His brethren, moreover, the two children, to wit, Uther
Pendragon and Aurelius Ambrosius, were not yet out of the cradle, and incapable of the rule
of the kingdom. A further mischance, moreover, had befallen inasmuch as that all the elder
barons of the realm were dead, and Vortigern alone, politic and prudent, seemed the only
counsellor of any weight, for the rest were well-nigh all of them but mere lads and youths that
had come into their honours as it might happen when their fathers and uncles had been slain
in the battles that had been fought aforetime.
Vortigern hatcheth treason
Vortigern, accordingly, finding all these things favourable, took thought by what contrivance
he might most easily and craftily depose Constans the monk and step into his shoes with most
renown. He therefore chose rather to put if his scheme for a time, until he had better
stablished his power in the divers nations of the kingdom and accustomed them unto his rule.
He began, therefore, by demanding that the King’s treasures should be given into his custody,
as well as the cities with their garrisons, saying that there was talk of the out-islanders
intending an attack upon them. And when this demand was granted, he set everywhere
familiars of his own to hold the cities in allegiance unto himself. Then, scheming in
furtherance of the treason he designed, he went unto Constans and told him that needs must
he increase the number of his household that he might the more safely withstand the enemies
that were coming against him. Unto whom Constans: ‘Have I not committed all things unto
thy disposition? Do, therefore, whatsoever thou wilt, so only that they abide in mine
allegiance.’ Whereupon Vortigern: ‘It hath been told me that the Picts are minded to lead the
Danes and Norwegians against us so as that they may harry us to the uttermost. Wherefore I
propose, and unto me seemeth it the safest counsel, that thou shouldst retain certain of the
Picts in thy court that may serve as go-betweens to bring us witting from them that be
without. For, and it be true that already they have begun to rebel, they will spy out the
contrivances and crafty devices of their fellows in such sort as that lightly mayst thou escape
them.’
Vortigern bribeth the Picts
Herein behold the secret treachery of a secret enemy! For not in this wise did he counsel
Constans as having regard unto his safety, but rather for that he knew the Picts to be a shifty
folk and swift to every crime. When that they were drunken, therefore, or moved to wrath,
they might full easily be egged on against the King, and so murder him out of hand. Whence,

61

if aught of the kind should happen, the way would be open unto him of advancing himself
unto the kingdom even as he had so often coveted to do. Sending messengers, therefore, into
Scotland, he invited a hundred Pictish soldiers from thence and received them into the King’s
retinue. And after that they were received, he showed them honour above all other, filling
their pouches with all manner of bounties and their bellies with meats and drinks beyond
measure, in such sort as that they held him to be a very king. Accordingly, they would wait
upon him through the streets singing songs in his praise, saying: ‘Worthy is Vortigern of the
empire! Worthy is he of the sceptre of Britain, whereof Constans is unworthy!’ Upon this,
Vortigern would bestow more and more largesse upon them that he might be yet more
pleasing in their eyes. But when he had won the hearts of them all, he made them drunken,
saying that he was minded to retire from Britain that he might acquire more abundant treasure
of his own, for that the scanty allowance he had could not possibly be enow to keep fifty
soldiers in his pay. Then, in sorrowful-seeming wise he betook him privily unto his own
lodging and left them drinking in the hall.
Constans is murdered
Upon seeing this, the Picts, believing that what he said was true, were aggrieved beyond
telling and began to mutter one with another, saying: Wherefore suffer we this monk to live?
Why do we not rather slay him, so that Vortigern may possess the throne of the kingdom? For
who but he ought to succeed him in the kingdom? For worthy is he of all dominion and
honour, worthy is he of all sovereignty, that stinteth not to bestow such largesse upon us!’
CHAPTER VIII
Thereupon they burst into the sleeping-chamber, and fall suddenly upon Constans, and
smiting off his head, bare it to show to Vortigern, who when he beheld it burst into tears as
one overborne by sorrow, albeit that never aforetime was he so beside himself with joy.
Calling together the citizens of London, for it was there that all this befell, he bade all the
traitors be first set in fetters and then beheaded for presuming to perpetrate a crime so
heinous. Some there were that deemed the treason had been devised by Vortigern, for that the
Picts never durst have done the deed save with his knowledge and consent. Others again
stuck not a moment to purge him of so black a crime. At last, the matter not being cleared up,
they unto whom had been committed the nurture of the two brethren, Aurelius Ambrosius
and Uther Pendragon, fled away with them into Little Britain, fearing lest they should be
slain of Vortigern. There King Budec received them and brought them up in due honour.
CHAPTER IX
Vortigern usurpeth the crown
Now Vortigern, when he saw that there was none his peer in the kingdom, set the crown
thereof upon his own head and usurped precedence over all his fellow-princes. Howbeit, his
treason at last being publicly known, the people of the neighbouring out-islands, whom the
Picts had led with them into Albany, raised an insurrection against him. For the Picts,
indignant that their comrades-in-arms had been thus put to death on account of Constans,
were minded to revenge them upon Vortigern, who was thereby not only sore troubled in his
mind, but suffered heavy loss amongst his fighting-men in battle. On the other hand, he was
still more sorely troubled in his mind by his dread of Aurelius Ambrosius and his brother
Uther Pendragon, who, as hath been said, had fled into Little Britain for fear of him. For day
after day was it noised in his ears that they were now grown men, and had builded a passing
huge fleet, being minded to adventure a return unto the kingdom that of right was their own.
CHAPTER X

62

In the meanwhile three brigantines, which we call ‘long-boats,’ arrived on the coasts of Kent
full of armed warriors and captained by the two brethren Horsus and Hengist. Vortigern was
then at Dorobernia, which is now called Canterbury, his custom being to visit that city very
often.
Horsus and Hengist
When his messengers reported unto him that certain men unknown and big of stature had
arrived, he took them into his peace, and bade them be brought unto him. Presently, when
they came before him, he fixed his eyes upon the two brethren, for that they did surpass the
others both in dignity and in comeliness. And, when, he had passed the rest of the company
under review, he made inquiry as to the country of their birth and the cause of their coming
into his kingdom. Unto whom Hengist, for that he was of riper years and readier wit than the
others, thus began to make answer on behalf of them all:
‘Most noble of all the Kings, the Saxon land is our birthplace, one of the countries of
Germany, and the reason of our coming is to offer our services unto thee or unto some other
prince. For we have been banished from our country, and this for none other reason than for
that the custom of our country did so demand. For such is the custom in our country that
whensoever they that dwell therein do multiply too thick upon the ground, the princes of the
divers provinces do meet together and bid the young men of the whole kingdom come before
them. They do then cast lots and make choice of the likeliest and strongest to go forth and
seek a livelihood in other lands, so as that their native country may be disburdened of its
overgrown multitudes. Accordingly, owing to our country being thus overstocked with men,
the princes came together, and casting lots, did make choice of these young men that here
thou seest before thee, and bade them obey the custom that hath been ordained of time
immemorial.
Vortigern covenanteth with Hengist
They did appoint, moreover, us twain brethren, of whom I am named Hengist and this other
Horsus, to be their captains, for that we were born of the family of the dukes. Wherefore, in
obedience unto decrees ordained of yore, have we put to sea and under the guidance of
Mercury have sought out this thy kingdom.’
At the name of Mercury the King lifted up his countenance and asked of what manner
religion they were. Unto whom Hengist:
‘We do worship our country gods, Saturn, Jove and the rest of them that do govern the world,
but most of all Mercury, whom in our tongue we do call Woden. Unto him have our
forefathers dedicated the fourth day of the week that even unto this day hath borne the name
of Wednesday after his name. Next unto him we do worship the goddess that is most
powerful above all other goddesses, Frea by name, unto whom they dedicated the sixth day,
which we call Friday after her name.’ Saith Vortigern: ‘Right sore doth it grieve me of this
your belief, the which may rather be called your unbelief, yet natheless, of your coming do I
rejoice, for either God or some other hath brought ye hither to succour me in mine hour of
need. For mine enemies do oppress me on every side, and so ye make common cause with me
in the toils of fighting my battles, ye shall be worshipfully retained in my service within my
realm, and right rich will I make ye in all manner of land and fee.’
The barbarians forthwith agreed, and after the covenant had been duly confirmed remained in
the court.
Hengist’s subtle craft

63

Presently thereupon, the Picts issuing from Albany, mustered a huge army and began to
ravage the northern parts of the island. As soon aft as ever Vortigern had witting thereof, he
called his men together and marched forth to meet them on the further side Humber. When
the men of the country came into close quarters with the enemy, both sides made a passing
sharp onset; but little need had they of the country to do much of the fighting, for the Saxons
that were there did battle in such gallant fashion as that the enemies that aforetime were ever
wont to have the upper hand were put to flight, hot foot, without delay.
CHAPTER XI
Vortigern accordingly, when he had won the victory by their means, increased his bounties
upon them and gave unto their duke, Hengist, many lands in the district of Lindsey for the
maintenance of himself and his fellow-soldiers. Hengist therefore, as a politic man and a
crafty, when that he found the King bare so great a friendship towards him, spake unto him
on this wise:
‘My lord, thy foemen do persecute thee on every side, and few be they of thine own folk that
bear thee any love. They all do threaten thee and say that they will bring in hither thy brother
Aurelius Ambrosius from the shores of Armorica, that, after deposing thee, they may raise
him to be King. May it therefore please thee that we send unto our own country and invite
warriors thence so that the number of our fighting men may be increased.
Hengist’s crafty petition
Yet is there one thing further that I would beseech of the discretion of thy clemency, were it
not that I misdoubt me I might suffer a denial thereof.’ Upon this saith Vortigern: ‘Send
therefore thine envoys unto Germany and invite whomsoever thou wilt, and, as for thyself,
ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and no denial thereof shalt thou suffer.’ Thereupon Hengist
bowed his head before him and gave him thanks, saying: ‘Thou hast enriched me of large
dwelling-houses and lands, yet withal hast thou withheld such honour as may beseem a Duke,
seeing that my forefathers were dukes in mine own land. Wherefore, methinketh amongst so
much beside, some city or castle might have been given unto me, whereby I might have been
held of greater account by the barons of thy realm. The rank of an Earl or a Prince might have
been granted unto one born of a family that hath held both these titles of nobility.’ Saith
Vortigern: ‘I am forbidden to grant any boon of this kind upon thee, for that ye be foreigners
and heathen men, nor as yet have I learnt your manners and customs so as that I should make
ye the equals of mine own folk; nor yet, were I to hold ye as mine own very country-folk,
could I set precedent of such a grant so the barons of the realm were against it.’ Whereunto
Hengist: ‘Grant,’ saith he, ‘unto thy servant but so much only as may be compassed round
about by a single thong within the land that thou hast given me, that so I may build me a high
place therein whereunto if need be I may betake me.
Hengist’s daughter Rowen
For loyal liegeman unto thee have I been and shall be, and in thy fealty will I do all that it is
within my mind to do.’ Whereupon the King, moved by his words, did grant him his petition,
and bade him send his envoys into Germany forthwith, so that the warriors he invited thence
might hasten at once unto his succour. Straightway, as soon as he had despatched his envoys
into Germany, Hengist took a bull’s hide, and wrought the same into a single thong
throughout. He then compassed round with his thong a stony place that he had thought
cunningly chosen, and within the space thus meted out did begin to build the castle that was
afterwards called in British, Kaercorrei, but in Saxon, Thongceaster, the which in the Latin
speech is called Castrum corrigiæ.
CHAPTER XII

64

Meantime the envoys returned from Germany, bringing with them eighteen ships full of
chosen warriors. They convoyed also the daughter of Hengist, Rowen by name, whose beauty
was unparagoned of any. When they were arrived, Hengist invited King Vortigern into his
house to look at the new building and the new warriors that had come into the land. The King
accordingly came privily forthwith, and not only praised the work so swiftly wrought, but
received the soldiers that had been invited into his retinue.
Wacht heil and Drinc heil
And after that he had been entertained at a banquet royal, the damsel stepped forth of her
chamber bearing a golden cup filled with wine, and coming next the King, bended her knee
and spake, saying: ‘Laverd King, wacht heil!’ But he, when he beheld the damsels face, was
all amazed at her beauty and his heart was enkindled of delight. Then he asked of his
interpreter what it was that the damsel had said, whereupon the interpreter made answer: ‘She
hath called thee “Lord King,” and hath greeted thee by wishing thee health. But the answer
that thou shouldst make unto her is “Drinc heil.”‘ Whereupon Vortigern made answer: ‘Drinc
heil!’ and bade the damsel drink. Then he took the cup from her hand and kissed her, and
drank; and from that day unto this hath the custom held in Britain that he who drinketh at a
feast saith unto another, ‘Wacht heil!’ and he that receiveth the drink after him maketh
answer, ‘Drinc heil!’ Howbeit, Vortigern, drunken with the divers kinds of liquor, Satan
entering into his heart, did wax enamoured of the damsel, and demanded her of her father.
Satan entering into his heart, I say, for that he, being a Christian, did desire to mate him with
a heathen woman. Hengist, a crafty man and a prudent, herein discovering the inconstancy of
the King’s mind, forthwith held counsel with his brother Horsus and the rest of the aldermen
that were with him what were best to be done as touching the King’s petition. But they all
were of one counsel, that the damsel should be given unto the King, and that they should ask
of him the province of Kent in return for her. So the matter was settled out of hand.
Vortigern wedded Rowen
The damsel was given unto Vortigern, and the province of Kent unto Vortigern without the
knowledge of Gorangon the Earl that of right; was lord thereof. That very same night was the
weddeth King unto the heathen woman, with whom thenceforth was he beyond all measure
well-pleased. Natheless, thereby full swiftly did he raise up enemies against him amongst the
barons! of the realm and amongst his own children. For aforetime had three sons been born
unto him, whereof these were the names: Vortimer, Katigern and Pascentius.
CHAPTER XIII
At that time came St. Germanus, Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus, Bishop of Troyes, to preach
the word of God unto the Britons. For their Christianity had been corrupted, not only on
account of the King having set a heathen folk in their midst, but on account of the Pelagian
heresy, by the venom whereof they had long time been infected. Natheless, by the preaching
of the blessed men the religion of the true faith was restored amongst them, the which they
did daily make manifest by many miracles, for many miracles were wrought of God by them,
as Gildas hath set forth in his tractate with abundant clearness and eloquence. Now, when the
damsel was given unto the King as hath been told, Hengist said unto him: ‘Behold, I am now
thy father, and meet is it that I be thy counsellor; nor do thou slight my counsel, for by the
valour of my folk shalt thou subdue all thine enemies unto thyself.
More Saxons arrive
Let us invite also hither my son Octa with his brother Ebissa, for gallant warriors they be; and
give unto them the lands that lie in the northern parts of Britain nigh the wall betwixt Deira
and Scotland, for there will they bear the brunt of the barbarians’ assaults in such sort that

65

thou upon the hither side of Humber shalt abide in peace.’ So Vortigern obeyed, and bade
them invite whomsoever they would that might bring him any strength of succour. Envoys
accordingly were sent, and Octa, Ebissa and Cerdic came with three hundred ships all full of
an armed host, all of whom did Vortigern receive kindly, bestowing upon them unstinted
largesse. For by them he conquered all his enemies and won every field that was fought. By
little and little Hengist invited more and more ships and multiplied his numbers daily. So
when the Britons saw what he was doing, they began to be adread of their treason and spake
unto the King that he should banish them forth of his realm, for that Paynims ought not to
communicate with Christians nor be thrust into their midst, for that this was forbidden by the
Christian law; and, moreover, that so huge a multitude had already arrived as that they were a
terror to the folk of the country, insomuch as that none could tell which were the Paynims and
which Christians, for that the heathens had wedded their daughters and kinswomen. Upon
these and the like grounds of objection they did urge the King to dismiss them from his
retinue, lest at any time they should deal treacherously with him and overrun the folk of the
country. But Vortigern did eschew giving heed unto their counsel, for he loved the Saxons
above all other nations on account of his wife.
Vortimer made King
Which when the Britons understood, they forthwith forsook Vortigern and with one accord
raised up Vortimer his sin to be their King, who accepting their counsel, at once began to
drive out the barbarians everywhere, fighting against them and continually harassing them
with fresh incursions and slaughter. Four pitched battles he fought with them; the first on the
river Derwent, the second at the ford of Episford, where Horsus and Catigern, another son of
Vortigern, met hand to hand, both falling in the encounter, each wounded to the death by the
other. The third battle was on the seacoast, when the Saxons fled, sneaking away like women
to their ships and taking refuge in the Isle of Thanet. But Vortimer there beleaguered them,
and harassed them day after day by attacking them from his ships. And when they could no
longer withstand the attack of the Britons, they sent King Vortigern who had been with them
in all their battles to his son Vortimer to petition for leave to depart and to repair unto
Germany in safety. And while a conference was being held upon the matter, they took the
occasion to embark on board their brigantines, and returned into Germany leaving their
women and children behind them.
CHAPTER XIV
Vortimer thus having won the victory, at once began to restore their possessions unto the
plundered countrymen, to treat them with affection and honour, and to repair the churches at
the bidding of St. Germanus.
Rowen poisoneth Vortimer
But the devil did straightway wax envious of his goodness, and entering into the heart of his
step-mother Rowen, did egg her on to compass his destruction. She, calling to her aid all the
sleights of witchcraft, gave him by a certain familiar of his own, whom she had corrupted
with bribes innumerable, a draught of poison. No sooner had the noble warrior drunk thereof
than he was smitten with a sudden malady so grievous that hope of his life was none.
Forthwith he bade all his soldiers come unto him, and making known unto them that death
was already upon him, distributed amongst them his gold and silver and all the treasure that
his forefathers had heaped together. He did comfort, moreover, them that were weeping and
groaning around him, telling them that this way along which he was now about to journey
was none other than the way of all flesh. The brave young warriors, moreover, that wont to
fight at his side in every battle, he did exhort to fight for their country and to defend the same

66

against all attacks of their enemies. Moved by an impulse of exceeding hardihood, moreover,
he commanded that a brazen pyramid should be wrought for him, and set in the haven
wherein the Saxons were wont to land, and that after his death his body should be buried on
the top thereof, so as that when the barbarians beheld his image thereupon they should back
sail and turn them home again to Germany. For he said that not one of them durst come anigh
so they did even behold his image.
Hengist returns
O, the passing great hardihood of the man who was thus desirous that even after death he
might be dreaded by those unto whom while living he had been a terror! Natheless, after his
death, the Britons did otherwise, for they buried his corpse in the city of Trinovantum.
CHAPTER XV
After the death of his son, Vortigern was restored unto his kingdom, and at the earnest
instance of his wife sent his envoys to Hengist in Germany, bidding him to come back again
to Britain, but privily and with but few men only, as he was afeard, in case he came over
otherwise, a quarrel might arise betwixt the barbarians and the men of the country. Howbeit,
Hengist, hearing of Vortimer’s death, raised an army of three hundred thousand armed men,
and fitting out a fleet returned unto Britain. But as soon as the arrival of so huge a host was
reported to Vortigern and the princes of the realm, they took it in high dudgeon, and taking
counsel together, resolved to give them battle and drive them forth of their coasts. Tidings of
this resolve were at once sent to Hengist by messengers from his daughter, and he forthwith
bethought him what were best to do by way of dealing a counter-stroke.—After much
brooding over divers devices, the one that he made choice of in the end was to betray the
people of the kingdom by approaching them under a show of peace.
Hengist: his treachery
He accordingly sent messengers unto the King, bidding them bear him on hand that he had
not brought with him so mighty an armament either with any purpose that they should remain
with him in the country, or in any way do violence unto any that dwelt therein. The only
reason he had brought them with him was that he believed Vortimer to be still alive, and that
in case Vortimer had opposed his return he was minded to be able to withstand him. Howbeit,
now that he had no longer any doubt as to Vortimer being dead, he committed himself and his
people unto Vortigern to dispose of as he should think best. So many of their number as he
might wish to retain with him in the kingdom might stay, and so many as he might desire to
dismiss he was quite willing should return to Germany forthwith. And, in case Vortigern
were willing to accept these terms, he himself besought him to name a day and place for then
to meet, and they would then settle everything in accordance with his wishes. When such a
message was brought unto Vortigern, passing well-pleased was he, for he had no mind that
Hengist should again depart. So at last he bade that the men of the country and the Saxons
should meet together nigh the monastery of Ambrius on the Kalends of May, then just
drawing on, that then and there the matter might be solemnly settled. Now Hengist, having a
mind to put in use a new manner of treason, made ordinance unto his comrades that every
single one of them should have a long knife hidden along the sole of his boot, and when the
Britons were without any suspicion discussing the business of the meeting, he himself would
give the signal, ‘Nemet oure saxas,’ whereupon each of them should be ready to fall boldly
upon the Briton standing next him, and drawing forth his knife to cut his throat as swiftly as
might be.
Massacre of Britons

67

Accordingly on the day appointed all met together in the city aforesaid, and began to talk
together over the terms of peace, and when Hengist espied that the hour had come when his
treachery might most meetly be carried into effect, he shouted out, ‘Nemet oure saxas!’ and
forthwith laid hold on Vortigern and held him fast by his royal robe. The moment the Saxons
heard the signal they drew forth their long knives and set upon the princes that stood around,
thinking of nought less at the instant, and cut the throats of about four hundred and sixty
amongst the barons and earls, whose bodies the blessed Eldad did afterward bury and place in
the ground after Christian fashion not far from Kaercaradoc, that now called Salisbury, within
the churchyard that lieth about the monastery of Abbot Ambrius, who of yore had been the
founder thereof. For all of them had come unarmed, nor never deemed of aught save treating
as touching the peace. Whence it came to pass that the others, which had come for nought but
treachery, could lightly slay them as having done off their arms. Howbeit the Paynims
wrought not their treason unavenged, for many of themselves were slain whilst that they were
putting the others to death, he Britons snatching the stones and sticks that were on the ground,
and in self-defence doing no little execution upon their betrayers.
CHAPTER XVI
Eldol of Gloucester
Among others that were there was Eldol, Earl of Gloucester, who, seeing this treachery, took
up a stake that he had found by chance and defended himself therewithal. Whomsoever he
got at, he brake him the limb he struck and sent him to hell forthwith. Of some the head, of
others the arms, of others the shoulders, and of many more the legs did he shatter, causing no
small terror wheresoever he laid about him, nor did he stir from the place before he had slain
seventy men with the stake he wielded. But when he could no longer stand his ground against
so great a multitude, he made shift to get away and betook him to his own city. Many fell on
the one side and the other, but the Saxons had the upper hand, as well they might, seeing that
the Britons, never suspecting aught of the kind, had come without arms and so were the less
able to defend them. Natheless, they were not minded to slay Vortigern, but bound him and
threatened him with death, and demanded his cities and strong places as ransom for his life;
he straightway granting all they had a mind to, so he were allowed to escape on live. And
when he had confirmed this unto them by oath, they loosed him from his fetters, and
marching first of all upon London, took that city, taking next York and Lincoln as well as
Winchester, and ravaging the country at will, slaying the country folk as wolves do sheep
forsaken of their shepherd.
Vortigern’s tower
When therefore Vortigern beheld so terrible a devastation, he betook him privily into the
parts of Wales, not knowing what to do against this accursed people.
CHAPTER XVII
Howbeit, he at last took counsel of his wizards, and bade them tell him what he should do.
They told him that he ought to build him a tower exceeding strong, as all his other castles he
had lost. He sought accordingly in all manner of places to find one fit for such a purpose and
came at last unto Mount Eryri, where, assembling a great gang of masons from divers
countries, he bade them build the tower. The stonemasons, accordingly, came together and
began to lay the foundations thereof, but whatsoever they wrought one day was all swallowed
up by the soil the next, in such sort as that they knew not whither their work had evanished
unto. And when word was brought hereof unto Vortigern, he again held counsel with his
wizards to tell him the reason thereof. So they told him that he must go search for a lad that
had never a father, and when he had found him should slay him and sprinkle his blood over

68

the mortar and the stones, for this, they said, would be good for making the foundation of the
tower hold firm. Forthwith messengers are sent into all the provinces to look for such manner
of man, and when they came into the city that was afterward called Carmarthen, they saw
some lad playing before the gate and went to look on at the game.
Finding of Merlin
And being weary with travel, they sate them down in the ring and looked about them to see if
they could find what they were in quest of. At last, when the day was far spent, a sudden
quarrel sprang up betwixt a couple of youths whose names were Merlin and Dalbutius. And
as they were wrangling together, saith Dalbutius unto Merlin: ‘What a fool must thou be to
think thou art a match for me! Keep thy distance, prithee! Here am I, born of the blood royal
on both sides of the house; and thou? None knoweth what thou art, for never a father hadst
thou!’ At that word the messengers lifted up their faces, and looking narrowly upon Merlin,
asked the bystanders who he might be. They told them that none knew his father, but that his
mother was daughter of the King of Demetia, and that she lived along with the nuns in St.
Peter’s Church in that same city.
CHAPTER XVIII
The messengers thereupon hurried off to the reeve of the city, and enjoined him in the King’s
name that Merlin and his mother should be sent unto the King. The reeve, accordingly, so
soon as he knew the errand whereon they came, forthwith sent Merlin and his mother unto
Vortigern for him to deal withal as he might list. And when they were brought into his
presence, the King received the mother with all attention as knowing that she was of right
noble birth, and afterward began to make inquiry as to who was the father of the lad.
Merlin’s father
Unto whom she made answer: ‘As my soul liveth and thine, O my lord the King, none know I
that was his father. One thing only I know, that on a time whenas I and the damsels that were
about my person were in our chambers, one appeared unto me in the shape of a right comely
youth and embracing me full straitly in his arms did kiss me, and after that he had abided
with me some little time did as suddenly evanish away so that nought more did I see of him.
Natheless, many a time and oft did he speak unto me when that I was sitting alone, albeit at
never once did I catch sight of him. But after that he had thus haunted me of a long time I did
conceive and bear a child. So much, my lord King, is my true story, and so much leave I unto
thee to interpret aright, for none other have I known that is father unto this youth.’ Amazed at
her words, the King commanded that Maugantius should be called unto him to declare
whether such a thing might be as the lady had said. Maugantius was brought accordingly, and
when he had heard the story from first to last, said unto Vortigern: ‘In the books of our wise
men and in many histories have I found that many men have been born into the world on this
wise. For, as Apuleius in writing as touching the god of Socrates doth make report, certain
spirits there be betwixt the moon and the earth, the which we do call incubus dæmons. These
have a nature that doth partake both of men and angels, and whensoever they will they do
take upon them the shape of men, and do hold converse with mortal women. Haply one of
these hath appeared unto this lady, and is the father of the youth.’
CHAPTER XIX
Merlin and the magicians
And when Merlin had hearkened unto all this, and the he came unto the King and said:
‘Wherefore have I and my mother been called into thy presence?’ Unto whom Vortigern:
‘My wizards have declared it unto me as their counsel that I should seek out one that had

69

never a father, that when I shall have sprinkled his blood upon the foundation of the tower my
work should stand firm.’ Then said Merlin: ‘Bid thy wizards come before me, and I will
convict them of having devised a lie.’
The King, amazed at his words, straightway bade his wizards come and set them down before
Merlin. Unto whom spake Merlin: ‘Know ye not what it is that doth hinder the foundation
being laid of this tower? Ye have given counsel that the mortar thereof should be slacked of
my blood, that so the tower should stand forthwith. Now tell me, what is it that lieth hid
beneath the foundation, for somewhat is there that doth not allow it to stand?’ But the wizards
were adread and held their peace.
Then saith Merlin, that is also called Ambrosius: ‘My lord the King, call thy workmen and
bid delve the soil, and a pool shalt thou find beneath it that doth forbid thy tower to stand.’
And when this was done, straightway a pool was found under the earth, the which had made
the soil unconstant. Then Ambrosius Merlin again came nigh unto the wizards and saith:
‘Tell me now, ye lying flatterers, what is it that is under the pool?’
The magicians dumbfounded
But they were all dumb and answered unto him never a word. And again spake he unto the
King, saying: ‘Command, O King, that the pool be drained by conduits, and in the bottom
thereof shalt thou behold two hollow stones and therein two dragons asleep.’ The King,
believing his words for that he had spoken true as touching the pool, commanded also that the
pool should be drained. And when he found that it was even as Merlin had said he marvelled
greatly. All they that stood by were no less astonished at such wisdom being found in him,
deeming that he was possessed of some spirit of God.

70

Book Seven
CHAPTER I
OF THE PROPHECIES OF MERLIN
Geoffrey’s address
I had not come so far as this place of my history, when by reason of the much talk that was
made about Merlin my contemporaries did on every side press me to make public an edition
of his prophecies, and more especially Alexander, Bishop of Lincoln, a man of the highest
piety and wisdom. Nor was there none other, whether he were cleric or layman, that did
retain so many knights or nobles in his household, whom his gentle holiness of life and
bountiful kindliness did allure into his service. Wherefore, for that he it was whom I did most
earnestly desire to please above all other, I did translate the prophecies and did send them
unto him along with a letter unto this effect.
CHAPTER II
‘The affection I bear unto thy nobility, Alexander, Prelate of Lincoln, hath compelled me to
translate the Prophecies of Merlin out of the British into Latin before I had made an end of
the History I had begun as concerning the acts of the British Kings; for my purpose was to
have finished that first, and afterward to have published this present work, for fear lest, both
labours hanging on my hands at once, my wit should scarce be sufficient for either.
to Bishop Alexander
Howbeit, sithence that I am well assured aforehand of pardon being granted unto me
according to the discretion of thine own subtile wit, I have set my rustic reed to the writing of
these little books, and have interpreted for thee this unknown language. Greatly, natheless, do
I marvel that thou hast deigned to commit this task unto my poor pen, seeing that the wand of
thy power might have commanded the services of so many more learned and more wealthy
than am I to charm the ears of thy Minerva with the delight of a sublimer song. And, to say
nothing of all the philosophers of the whole island of Britain, this I blush not to confess, that
thou art the one man who hast it in thee to chant more excellently than they all unto this
adventurous lyre. Howbeit, sith it so pleaseth thee that Geoffrey of Monmouth should sound
his pipe in these vaticinations, eschew thou not to show favour unto his minstrelsies, and if so
be that he carol out of time or tune do thou with the ferule of thine own muses chastise him
back into keeping true harmony and measure.’
CHAPTER III
Accordingly, while Vortigern, King of the Britons, was yet seated upon the bank of the pool
that had been drained, forth issued the two dragons, whereof the one was white and the other
red.
Merlin’s prophecies
And when the one had drawn anigh unto the other, they grappled together in baleful combat
and breathed forth fire as they panted. But presently the white dragon did prevail, and drave
the red dragon unto the verge of the lake. But he, grieving to be thus driven forth, fell fiercely
again upon the white one, and forced him to draw back. And whilst that they were fighting on
this wise, the King bade Ambrosius Merlin declare what this battle of the dragons did

71

portend. Thereupon he straightway burst into tears, and drawing in the breath of prophecy,
spake, saying;
‘Woe unto the Red Dragon, for his extermination draweth nigh; and his caverns shall be
occupied of the White Dragon that betokeneth the Saxons whom thou hast invited hither. But
the Red signifieth the race of Britain that shall be oppressed of the White. Therefore shall the
mountains and the valleys thereof be made level plain and the streams of the valleys shall
flow with blood. The rites of religion shall be done away and the ruin of the churches be
made manifest. At the last, she that is oppressed shall prevail and resist the cruelty of them
that come from without. For the Boar of Cornwall shall bring succour and shall trample their
necks beneath his feet. The islands of the Ocean shall be subdued unto his power, and the
forests of Gaul shall he possess. The house of Romulus shall dread the fierceness of his
prowess and doubtful shall be his end. Renowned shall he be in the mouth of the peoples, and
his deeds shall be as meat unto them that tell thereof.
Merlin’s prophecies
Six of his descendants shall follow his sceptre, but after them shall rise up the German Worm.
The Wolf of the sea shall exalt him, unto whom the woods of Africa shall bear company.
Again shall religion be done away, and the Sees of the Primates shall be transmuted. The
dignity of London shall adorn Dorobernia and men shall resort unto the seventh shepherd of
York in the realm of Armorica. Menevia shall be robed in the pall of the City of Legions and
a preacher of Ireland shall be stricken dumb on account of an infant in the womb. It shall rain
a shower of blood, and a baleful famine shall prey upon mortal men. When these things
befall, then shall the Red one grieve, yet when he hath undergone his travail shall he wax
strong. Then shall the calamity of the White be hastened and that which is builded in his little
gardens shall be overthrown. Seven sceptre-bearers shall be slain, and one thereof shall be
canonised a saint. Children shall perish in the wombs of their mothers, and dread shall be the
torments of men that thereby may they that were born in the land be restored unto their own.
He that shall do these things shall clothe him in the brazen man, and throughout many ages
shall keep guard over the gates of London sitting upon a brazen horse. Thereafter shall the
Red Dragon turn him back into his own ways, and labour to wreak is wrath upon himself.
Wherefore the vengeance of the Thunderer shall overtake him, for that every field shall fail
the tiller of the soil. Death shall snatch away the people and all nations shall be made void.
The remnant that are left shall forsake their native soil and sow seed in plantations of foreign
lands.
Merlin’s prophecies
The Blessed King shall fit forth a navy and shall be reckoned twelfth in the court amongst the
saints. A grievous desolation of the land shall there be, and the threshing-floors of harvests
shall return unto the forests fruitful in mast and acorn. Then again shall the White Dragon
arise and invite hither the daughter of Germany. Again shall our little gardens be filled of
foreign seed, the Red one shall pine away at the furthest end of the pool. Thereafter shall the
German Worm be crowned and the Brazen Prince be buried. A term hath been assigned unto
him that he shall not be able to overpass. A hundred and fifty years shall he remain in
disquiet and subjection, but three hundred shall he be seated therein. Then shall the North
wind rise against him and snatch from him the flowers that the West wind had brought forth.
There shall be gilding in the temples and the edge of the sword shall not cease. Scarce shall
the German Worm find refuge in his caves for the vengeance of his treason that shall
overtake him. Yet at the last for a little while shall he wax strong albeit that the decimation of
Neustria shall do him a hurt. For a people in wood and jerkins of iron shall come upon him
and take vengeance upon him for his wickedness. He shall restore their dwelling-places unto

72

them that did inhabit them aforetime, and the ruin of the foreigner shall be made manifest.
The seed of the White Dragon shall be rooted out of our little gardens and the remnant of his
generation shall be decimated. The yoke of bondage shall they bear and their mother shall
they wound with spades and ploughs.
Merlin’s prophecies
Two dragons shall succeed, whereof the one shall be slain by the arrow of envy, but he other
shall return under the shadow of a name. The Lion of Justice shall succeed, at whose warning
the towers of Gaul and the dragons of the island shall tremble. In those days shall gold be
wrung forth from the lily and the nettle, and silver shall flow from the hooves of them that
low. They that go crisped and curled shall be clad in fleeces of many colours, and the
garment without shall betoken that which is within. The feet of them that bark shall be
cropped short. The wild deer shall have peace, but humanity shall suffer dole. The shape of
commerce shall be cloven in twain; the half shall be round. The ravening of kites shall perish
and the teeth of wolves be blunted. The Lion’s whelps shall be transformed into fishes of the
sea, and his Eagle build her nest upon Mount Aravius. Venedotia shall be red with mother’s
blood and six brethren shall the house of Corineus slay. The island shall be drenched in
nightly tears, whence all men shall be provoked unto all things. Woe unto thee, Neustria, for
the brain of the Lion shall be poured forth upon thee; and with mangled limbs shall he be
thrust forth of his native soil. They that come after shall strive to outsoar the highest, but the
favour of the newcomers shall be exalted. Piety shall do hurt unto him that doth possess
through impiety until he shall have clad him in his father. Wherefore, girdled about with the
teeth of wolves, shall he climb over the heights of the mountains and the shadow of him that
weareth a helmet.
Merlin’s prophecies
Albany shall be moved unto wrath, and calling unto them that are at her side shall busy her
only in the shedding of blood. A bridle-bit shall be set in her jaws that shall be forged in the
Bay of Armorica. This shall the Eagle of the broken covenant gild over, and the Eagle shall
rejoice in her third nesting. The roaring whelps shall keep vigil, and forsaking the forests
shall follow the chase within the walls of cities. No small slaughter shall they make of them
that withstand them, and the tongues of bulls shall they cut out. They shall load with chains
the necks of them that roar, and the days of their grandsire shall they renew. Thenceforward
from the first unto the fourth, from the fourth unto the third, from the third unto the second
the thumb shall be rolled in oil. The sixth shall overthrow the walls of Hibernia and change
the forests into a plain. He shall unite the divers shares into one, and with the head of the
Lion shall he be crowned. His beginning shall be subject unto roving affection, but his end
shall soar up to those above. For the seats of the blessed shall he renew throughout the lands,
and shepherds shall he set in places befitting. Two cities shall he robe in two palls, and virgin
bounties shall he bestow upon virgins. Thereby shall he merit the favour of the Thunderer,
and his place shall be amongst the blessed. Of him shall issue forth the Lynx that seeth
through all things, and shall keep watch to bring about the downfall of his own race, for
through him shall Neustria lose both islands and be despoiled of her ancient dignity. Then
shall the men of the country be turned back into the island for that strife shall be kindled
amongst the foreigners.
Merlin’s prophecies
An old man, moreover, snowy white, hat sitteth upon a snow-white horse, shall turn side the
river of Pereiron and with a white wand hall measure out a mill thereon. Cadwallader shall
call unto Conan, and shall receive Albany to his fellowship. Then shall there be slaughter of

73

the foreigners: then shall the rivers run blood: then shall gush forth the fountains of Armorica
and shall be crowned with the diadem of Brutus. Cambria shall be filled with gladness and
the oaks of Cornwall shall wax green. The island shall be called by the name of Brutus and
the name given by foreigners shall be done away. From Conan shall issue forth the warlike
Boar that shall try the sharpness of his tushes within the forests of Gaul. For the greater oaks
shall he stub short each one, but unto the smaller shall he grant protection. The Arab and the
African shall be adread of him, for even into furthest Spain shall sweep the swiftness of his
career. The He-goat of the Castle of Venus shall succeed, having horns of gold and a beard of
silver, and a cloud shall he breathe forth of his nostrils so dark as that the face of the island
shall be wholly overshadowed. There shall be peace in his time, and the harvests shall be
multiplied by the bounty of the soil. Women shall become serpents in their gait, and all their
steps be full of pride. The castles of Venus shall be builded new, nor shall Cupid’s arrows
cease to wound. Every fountain shall be turned into blood, and two Kings shall encounter in
nigh combat for the Lioness of the ford of the staff. Every soil shall riot in luxury, neither
shall mankind cease to follow after lust.
Merlin’s prophecies
All these things shall three ages see, until the buried Kings be brought to light in the city of
London. Again shall famine return; again mortality return; and the citizens shall mourn over
the desolation of their cities. Then shall the Boar of commerce arrive in the land, who shall
recall the scattered flocks unto the pastures they have lost. His breast shall be meat unto the
hungry and his tongue as drink unto them that thirst. From his mouth shall issue forth rivers
that shall slake the parching gullets of men. Thereafter shall a tree rise up above the Tower of
London, that thrusting forth three branches only shall overshadow all the face of the whole
island with the spreading breadth of the leaves thereof. Against it shall come the Northwind
as an adversary, and an evil blast thereof shall tear away the third branch, but the two that
shall remain shall occupy his place until the one shall bring to nought the other by the
multitude of his leaves. But when this shall be, then shall he himself hold the places of the
twain, and offer sustenance unto birds from the lands that are without. And it shall be
accounted hurtful unto native fowl, for they shall lose the freedom of their flight by reason of
their dread of the shadow thereof. The Ass of wickedness shall succeed, swift to fall upon the
workers of gold but slow against the ravening of wolves. In those days the oaks of the forest
shall burn, and acorns shall grow upon the boughs of the linden tree. The Severn sea shall
flow forth by seven mouths, and the river of Usk shall seethe for seven months. The fishes
thereof shall die for the heat, and of the fishes shall serpents be engendered.
Merlin’s prophecies
The baths of the city of Bath shall wax cold, and the wholesome waters thereof shall breed
death. London shall mourn the slaughter of twenty thousand, and the Thames river shall be
turned into blood. They that wear the cowl shall be provoked unto marriage, and their outcry
shall be heard in the mountains of the Alps.
CHAPTER IV
‘Three fountains shall well forth in the city of Winchester, whereof the streams shall dispart
the island into three portions. Whosoever shall drink of the one shall rejoice in the length of
his days, neither shall he be overtaken nor afflicted of any malady. He that shall drink of the
second shall perish of hunger unappeasable, and wanness and dread shall sit manifest in his
face. He that shall drink of the third shall be slain by hazard of sudden death, neither shall his
body be a corpse that men may bury. They that would fain escape so deadly a swallow-pit
will strive to hide it with divers coverings. But whatsoever bulk be cast thereon shall take the

74

shape of other substance. For if stones be heaped thereupon, the stones shall be turned into
wood, wood into ashes, ashes into water. Moreover, a damsel shall be sent forth of the City of
Canute’s Forest to work healing by leechcraft, and when she shall have put forth all her arts,
by her breath only shall she dry up the hurtful fountains. Thereafter, when she shall have
refreshed her with the wholesome water, in her right hand shall she carry the forest of
Caledon and in her left the bulwarks of the walls of London.
Merlin’s prophecies
Whithersoever she shall walk, her footsteps shall smoke of brimstone that shall burn with a
twofold flame, and the smoke thereof shall arouse the Ruteni, and make meat for them that be
under the sea. She herself shall overflow with tears of compassion, and shall fill the island
with the shrieks of her lamenting. He that shall slay her shall be a Stag of ten branches,
whereof four shall wear crowns of gold, but the remaining six shall be turned into horns of
wild oxen that shall arouse the three islands of Britain with their accursed bellowing. The
Daneian forest shall waken, and bursting forth into human speech shall cry aloud:
‘“Hither, thou Cambria, and bringing Cornwall with thee at thy side, say unto Winchester:
‘The earth shall swallow thee: transfer the see of the shepherd thither where ships do come to
haven, and let the rest of the members follow the head.’ For the day is at hand wherein thy
citizens shall perish for their crimes of perjury. The whiteness of wools hath done thee hurt,
and the diversity of the dyes thereof. Woe unto the perjured race, for by reason of them shall
the renowned city fall into ruin.” The ships shall be glad at the greatness of increase, and out
of two shall one be made. The Hedgehog that is loaden with apples shall rebuild her, and unto
the smell of the apples the fowls of many forests shall fly together. He shall add thereunto a
mighty palace, and wall it around with six hundred towers. London shall behold it with envy
and trebly increase her walls. The Thames river shall compass her round on every side, and
the report of that work shall pass beyond the Alps.
Merlin’s prophecies
Within her shall the Hedgehog hide his apples and shall devise ways under ground. In that
day shall stones speak, and the sea whereby men sail into Gaul shall be narrowed into a
straiter channel. Upon each bank thereof shall one man be heard of another, and the soil of
the island shall be made broad. The hidden things of them that are beneath the sea shall be
revealed, and Gaul shall tremble for dread. Thereafter shall a Heron issue forth of the forest
Calaterium, and shall fly around the island for a space of two years. By her cries at night shall
she call the fowls of the air together and all winged things shall she assemble in her company.
They shall fall upon the tillage of mortal men and every grain of the harvests shall they
devour. A famine shall follow the people, and a baleful mortality the famine. And when this
sore calamity hath come to an end, then shall the accursed fowl go unto the Valley Galabes,
and uplift it so that it shall be a high mountain. Upon the top thereof, moreover, shall she
plant an oak and build her nest in the branches thereof. Three eggs shall be laid in the nest,
wherefrom shall issue forth a fox, a wolf and a bear. The Fox shall devour her mother, and an
ass’s head shall she wear. In this guise shall she affright her brethren and make them flee into
Neustria. But they shall awaken the tusky Boar, and borne back together in a boat, shall do
battle with the Fox. And when the fight hath begun, she shall feign her dead and move the
Boar to pity her.
Merlin’s prophecies
Presently he shall go unto her corpse, and standing over her shall breathe upon her eyes and
her face. But she, not forgetful of her ancient cunning, shall bite his left foot and rend it away
utterly from his body. Leaping, moreover, upon him, she shall snatch away from him his right

75

ear and his tail, and slink away into the caverns of the mountains. Thus befooled, the Boar
shall demand of the Wolf and the Bear that they restore unto him the members he hath lost.
The twain accordingly, when they shall have entered into his cause, shall promise him two
feet of the Fox, both her ears and her tail, the which they will compound into hog’s flesh
wherewith to make him whole. Hereunto shall the Boar agree, and shall await his promised
restoration. In the meantime shall the Fox come down from the mountains and change herself
into a Wolf, and making believe that she is fain to speak with the Boar, shall come unto him
and craftily eat all of him up. Thereafter shall she turn herself into the Boar, and feigning that
she hath lost the missing members shall abide the coming of her twain brethren. But after that
they shall come unto her, them also with sudden-snapping tooth shall she slay, and shall be
crowned with the head of a lion.
‘In her days shall be born a serpent that shall be bent wholly upon the destruction of mankind.
He shall encompass London with his length, and all them that pass by shall he devour. The
Mountain Ox shall take upon him the head of a wolf and shall whiten his teeth in the
workshop of the Severn. He shall gather unto his company the flocks of them of Albany and
Cambria that shall drink dry the river Thames.
Merlin’s prophecies
The Ass shall unto the Goat of the long beard and shall change shapes with him. Thereupon
shall the Mountain Ox wax wroth, and calling unto him the Wolf, shall become a horned Bull
against them. And when he shall let loose his cruelty upon them, flesh and bones shall he
devour them, yet shall he burned upon the top of Urian. The ashes of his funeral pyre shall be
turned into swans that shall swim upon the dry as it had been a river. They shall devour fishes
in fishes, and men in men shall they swallow up. But when they shall be stricken with eld,
they shall become wolves of the sea, and within the depths of the sea shall they devise their
treacheries. They shall swamp out the dockyards, and no little silver shall they gather together
thereby. Again the Thames shall flow, and calling his streams together shall overpass the
limits of his bed. The neighbouring cities shall he hide out of his sight and overwhelm the
mountains that seek to oppose him. Fulfilled of guile and wickedness, he shall make recourse
unto the fountain of Galabes, and from thence shall seditions arise that shall provoke the
Venedotians to battle. The oaks of the forest shall come together and engage in conflict with
the rocks of the Gewissi. The raven shall be there with the kite and shall devour the carcases
of the slain. The owl shall build her nest upon the walls of Gloucester, and in the nest thereof
shall an ass be brought forth. The serpent of Malvern shall nurture him, and many deceits
shall he urge him to contrive. When he hath taken the crown, he shall transcend the highest
and shall affright the folk of the land with the hoarseness of his bray. In his days shall the
mountains of Panchaia totter, and the provinces shall be despoiled of their forests.
Merlin’s prophecies
For a Worm the breath whereof is fire shall come upon then and burn up the trees with the
vapour he shall breathe forth. Out of him shall issue forth seven lions disfigured by heads of
goats. With the stench of their nostrils shall they corrupt women, and their own wives shall
they cause to be as harlots. The father shall not know his own son, for that they shall live in
common, even as brute beasts. But a Giant of iniquity shall arise that shall daunt all by the
keenness of his eyes. Against him shall rise up the Dragon of Worcester, and shall strive to
bring him unto nought. And in the battle shall he prevail against the Dragon, who shall suffer
oppression under the wickedness of the conqueror. For he shall mount upon the Dragon, and
putting off his garment shall sit upon him naked. The Dragon shall bear him aloft, and
swingeing his tail shall beat him upon his naked body. Then shall the Giant, again renewing
his strength, pierce his gullet with his sword, and at last shall the Dragon die poisoned,

76

entangled within the coils of his tail. After him shall succeed the Boar of Totnes, and with
baleful tyranny shall he oppress the people. Gloucester shall send forth a Lion that in divers
battles shall harass him even as he rageth. He shall trample him under his feet, and affright
him with his yawning jaws. At last the Lion shall wrangle with the realm, and climb above
the backs of the nobles. A Bull shall appear in the midst of the conflict, and shall smite the
Lion with his right foot. He shall drive him forth through all the taverns of the kingdom, but
his horns shall he break against the walls of Oxford.
Merlin’s prophecies
The Fox of Kaerdubali shall wreak revenge upon the Lion, and shall wholly devour him with
her teeth. But the Adder of Lincoln shall coil about her, and betoken his presence unto many
dragons by his dreadful hissing. Then shall the dragons encounter, and one shall tear other
into pieces. He that hath wings shall oppress him that hath none, and fix his poisonous claws
in his cheeks. Others shall gather together to the battle and one shall slay other therein. A
fifth shall succeed unto them that are slain, and by various devices shall break the residue in
pieces. Upon the back of one shall he climb with a sword and sever his head from his body.
Then, putting off his garment, shall he climb upon another and grasp his tail in his right hand
and his left, for naked shall he vanquish him against whom when clad he might nought
prevail. The rest shall he torment and drive them all the kingdom round. Thereafter shall a
roaring Lion come forth and dread shall be the cruel fellness thereof. Thrice five portions
shall he bring into one, and he only shall possess the people. A Giant shall glitter in white
array and spread him abroad over the white people as a tree. Luxury shall waste the strength
of princes and of a sudden shall they be turned into beasts. Amongst them shall arise a Lion,
swollen with the blood of men. Under him shall be set a reaper with a sickle in the standing
corn, and even as he toileth at his reaping shall he be oppressed of him. The charioteer of
York shall appease them, and thrusting forth his lord, shall mount the chariot he driveth.
Merlin’s prophecies
With his drawn sword shall he threaten the East, and the rut of his chariot wheels shall he fill
with blood. Then shall he become a fish of the sea that shall mate with a serpent that shall
allure him by her hissing. Thence shall be born three thundering bulls, who, when they have
eaten up their pastures, shall be turned into trees. The first shall carry a scourge of vipers, and
shall turn his back upon the next-born, who shall strive to snatch away the scourge, but by the
last shall it be seized and carried off. They shall turn away their faces the one from other until
they shall have cast away the poisoned cup. Unto him shall succeed the Husbandman of
Albany, at whose back shall a serpent overhang. He shall busy him in turning of the soil so
that the land may be white unto harvest. The serpent shall weary him in spilling of his venom,
that the green blade may never ripen to the full ear. The people shall be wasted by deadly
slaughter, and the walls of cities shall be made desolate. Then shall the city of Claudius be
given for healing, and she shall interpose the foster-daughter of the Scourger. For she shall
hold the balance whereby the medicine of healing is meted out, and in a brief space shall the
island be renewed. Then shall two follow the sceptre, unto whom shall the horned Dragon
minister. The one shall come in iron, and upon a flying serpent shall he ride. With his body
naked shall he sit upon his back, and with his right hand shall he lay hold upon his tail. The
seas shall be troubled at the noise of his crying, and fear shall fall upon the other because of
him.
Merlin’s prophecies
Therefore shall the second take the Lion into his company, but a strife shall arise betwixt
them, and they shall fight together. With mutual wounds shall the one be stricken of the

77

other, but the fellness of the beast shall prevail. Then shall one come with harp and tabor, and
shall appease the fierceness of the Lion. Wherefore the nations of the realm shall be at peace,
and shall call upon the Lion to be holder of the balance. In the seat assigned him he shall pay
heed unto the weights, but his palms shall he stretch forth into Albany. They of the Northern
province shall thereby be aggrieved and shall throw open the gates of the temples. The Wolf
that beareth the ensign shall be captain of the companies, and Cornwall shall he encompass
round about with his tail. A knight in a chariot shall withstand him, and that people shall he
change into a boar. Wherefore the Boar shall lay waste the provinces, but his head shall he
hide in the depths of the Severn sea. A man shall hug a lion in gold, and the dazzling of the
gold shall blind the eyes of them that look thereon. Silver shall wax white in the circuit
thereof, and shall be a vexation unto the wine-presses. Mortals shall be drunken with the wine
that is set before them, and turning their back upon heaven, shall fix their eyes upon the earth.
The stars shall turn their face away from them, and their wonted course shall be confounded.
In the wrath of the stars shall the standing corn be withered and the dews of heaven shall be
forbidden to fall. Root and branch shall change places, and the newness of the thing shall be
as a miracle.
Merlin’s prophecies
The shining of the sun shall be dimmed by the amber of Mercury, and shall be a dread unto
them that behold it. Stilbon of Arcady shall change his shield, and the helmet of Mars shall
call unto Venus. The helmet of Mars shall cast a shadow, and the rage of Mercury shall
overpass all bounds. Iron Orion shall bare his sword. Phœbus of the ocean shall torment his
clouds. Jupiter shall trespass beyond his appointed bounds, and Venus forsake the way that
hath been ordained unto her. The malignity of Saturn the star shall fall upon earth with the
rain of heaven, and shall slay mankind as it were with a crooked sickle. The twice six houses
of the stars shall mourn over the wayward wandering of their guests. The Twins shall
surcease from their wonted embrace, and shall call the Urn unto the fountains. The scales of
the Balance shall hang awry until the Ram shall set his crooked horns beneath them. The tail
of the Scorpion shall breed lightnings, and the Crab fall at strife with the Sun. The Virgin
shall forget her maiden shame, and climb up on the back of the Sagittary. The chariot of the
Moon shall disturb the Zodiac, and the Pleiades shall burst into tears and lamentation. None
hereafter shall return unto his wonted duty, but Ariadne shall lie hidden within the closed
gateways of her sea-beaten headland. In the twinkling of an eye shall the seas lift them up,
and the dust of them of old again begin to live. With a baleful blast shall the winds do battle
together, and the sound thereof shall be heard amongst the stars.’

78

Book Eight
CHAPTER I
Merlin foretelleth the king’s death
When Merlin had delivered these and many other prophecies, all they that stood by were
stricken with amazement at his words, albeit that they could not apprehend the full meaning
thereof. Vortigern himself, marvelling above all other, did applaud the young man’s wit no
less than the predictions themselves. For none had the then present age produced that had on
any such wise opened his lips in his presence. Accordingly, being fain to learn what should
be the ending of his own life, he besought the youth to tell him what he knew thereof. Unto
this saith Merlin:
‘Flee thou from the fire of the sons of Constantine, if flee it thou mayst! Even now are they
fitting forth their ships—even now are they leaving the coasts of Armorica behind and
spreading their sails upon the deep. They will make for the island of Britain and invade the
Saxon race. That accursed people will they subdue, but first will they shut up thyself in a
tower and burn thee! Unto thine own bane didst thou betray—Their it father and invite the
Saxons into the island. Thou didst invite them as thy bodyguard, they have come over as thy
headsmen. Two deaths await thee, nor is it clear which one of the twain thou mayst first
escape. For upon the one
Aurelius made King
For upon the one side, the Saxons will lay waste thy kingdom and will seek to compass thy
death. Upon the other, the two brethren Aurelius and Uther Pendragon will enter into thy land
seeking to revenge their father’s death upon thee. Seek out refuge if thou mayst. To-morrow
will they make haven in Totnes. The faces of the Saxons shall be red with blood: Hengist
shall be slain, and thereafter shall Aurelius Ambrosius be crowned King. He shall give peace
unto the nations: he shall restore the churches, yet shall he die of poison. Unto him shall
succeed his brother Uther Pendragon. whose days shall likewise be cut short by poison. At
this so black betrayal shall thine own descendants be present, whom the Boar of Cornwall
shall thereafter devour!’
Straightway, when the morrow dawned, came Aurelius Ambrosius with his brother unto land
with ten thousand warriors in their company.
CHAPTER II
When the tidings of their coming were bruited abroad, the Britons who had been scattered
with such slaughter gathered them together again, and strengthened by the comradeship of
their fellow-countrymen, are fuller of cheer than of late they have been wont. They called the
clergy together, anointed Aurelius as King, and did homage to him according to custom. But
when they counselled falling upon the Saxons, the King dissuaded them, being minded first
of all to follow up Vortigern, for so grievously did he take to heart the treachery that had been
wrought against his father, that nought him seemed to do save first of all he might avenge
him.
Eldol joineth Aurelius
Accordingly, desirous of fulfilling his purpose, he marcheth his army into Cambria and
maketh toward the castle of Genoreu whither Vortigern had fled for refuge. This castle was in
the country of Hergin, upon the river Gania on the mountain that is called Cloar. When

79

Ambrosius had come thereunto, remembering the treason wrought against his father and
brother, he speaketh unto Eldol, Duke of Gloucester, saying: ‘See now, noble Duke, the walls
of this city, whether they be strong enow to protect Vortigern, that I sheathe not the point of
my sword in his bowels. For violent death hath he deserved, nor deem I that thou knowest not
how well he hath deserved it. O, most impious of men, worthy to die in torment unspeakable!
First, he betrayed my father Constantine, who had delivered him and his country from the
ravages of the Picts; then Constans, my brother, whom he raised to be King, only to destroy
him; then, when he had branded himself by his own treacheries, he thrust his heathens in
amongst the freemen of the land that he might exterminate all them that loyally abided by
their fealty unto me. Yet by God’s permission hath he now fallen unawares into the snare that
he had laid for His faithful. For when the Saxons found him out in his iniquities they thrust
him forth of the kingdom, for the which ought none to be sorry. Yet, methinketh, all men may
well be sore grieved that this accursed people whom this accursed man hath invited hither
have slaughtered my noble freemen, have laid waste my fruitful country, have destroyed the
holy churches and well-nigh done away all Christianity from sea to sea.
Hengist alarmed
Now, therefore, my fellow-countrymen, quit ye like men, and wreak your vengeance first of
all upon him that hath wrought all these evil deeds! Then let us turn our arms against the
enemies that compass us around, and save the country from being swallowed up in their
insatiable maw!’
Forthwith they brought their engines of all kinds into play and strove their best to breach the
walls, but when all else failed, they set the place on fire, and the fire, finding fuel, spread
blazing up till it had burned up the tower and Vortigern therein.
CHAPTER III
When the report of this reached Hengist and his Saxons he was smitten with dread, for he was
afeard of the prowess of Aurelius. For such valour and hardihood was in the man, that when
he was in the parts of Gaul was none other that durst meet him in combat man to man. For
when he ran a tilt at any, either he would thrust down his enemy from his horse or frush his
spear to flinders. Moreover he was free-handed of his bounties, diligent in observances of
religion, moderate in all things, and above all things did he eschew a lie. Valiant afoot, more
valiant yet a-horseback, and right well-skilled in conduct of an army.
Aurelius marcheth north
These prowesses of his whilst he was still sojourning in Armorican Britain, had fame, in her
busy flights abroad, brought report of into the island, insomuch as that the Saxons were
adread thereof and drew them unto the further side of Humber, where they garrisoned the
cities and castles in those parts, for that the country had ever been open unto them as a land of
refuge. For the nighness thereof unto Scotland gave them protection, seeing that Scotland had
ever been wont to watch for occasion to do hurt unto the people of the country. Wherefore
this tract of land, fearsome to dwell in, and void of native folk, had ever offered safe resort
unto strangers, insomuch as on account of the nature no less than the situation of the land it
had ever lain open unto the Picts and Scots, Danskers and Norwegians and others that landed
therein with intent to lay waste the island. Knowing, therefore, that in that part of the country
they were safe from their next neighbours, they fled thitherward, so that should need be they
could take refuge as readily as in their own castles. So when this was told unto Aurelius, he
took fresh hardihood and had good hope of a victory. Wherefore, calling the men of the
country together as swiftly as might be, he reinforced his own army and started on his march
towards the North. As he passed through the divers countries sore grieved was he to behold

80

the desolation thereof, but most of all to see the churches all thrown down even to the ground,
and the restoration thereof did he vow, so he might obtain the victory.
CHAPTER IV
Hengist meeteth Aurelius
Howbeit Hengist, when he learnt of his arrival, took courage again, and made choice among
his fellow-soldiers of them that did most need encouragement, and gave them heart,
exhorting each of them to stand their ground like men and to be nowise in dread in fighting
against Aurelius. For he told them that he had but a few Armorican Britons with him, whose
number was at most not more than ten thousand men. But as for the island Britons, he held
them as nought, for that he had so often defeated them in battle. Hence, therefore, he
promised his men victory, and safety withal by reason of their greater numbers, for there
were then some two hundred thousand men in arms. And when he had thus spirited up all of
them and put them in stomach to fight, he advanced towards Aurelius as far as a field that
was called Maesbeli, through the which Aurelius would have to pass, for he was minded to
make a sudden and stealthy onslaught and to fall upon the Britons at unawares. Howbeit
Aurelius got wind of the design, but so far from delaying on that account to approach the
field, he rather marched forward with the greater speed. When he came in sight of the enemy,
he formed his troops in order. Three thousand Armoricans he told off to attend upon the
knights, and the rest he set in line mixed-medley-wise along with the islanders. The
Demetians he stationed on the hills, the Venedotians in the forest hard by, to the end that in
case the Saxons should flee thither they should find those there that would stop them.
CHAPTER V
Battle at Maesbeli
Meanwhile Eldol, Duke of Gloucester, came unto the King, saying:
‘This one day would be enow for all the days of my life, so God would grant me to do battle
with Hengist man to man. For one of us twain should die or ever our swords should be still.
For well do I mind me of the day that we came together as if we were to have peace. And
when we were talking over the agreement, he did betray all of us that were there, and slew
them all with knives save me alone, who found a stake and did thereby escape. Upon that
same day fell four hundred and sixty barons and earls that had come thither all unarmed. It
was in this sore jeopardy that God did convey unto me that stake, whereby I did defend me
and made shift to get me away.’ Thus spake Eldol, and Aurelius did exhort all his comrades
to set their hopes only in the Son of God, and then to fall right hardily upon the enemy and
fight with one mind for their country. Upon the other part, Hengist set his troops in fighting
order, and as he set them, instructed them how they should bear them in the battle, walking to
and fro betwixt the battalions and giving orders unto each so as to inspirit them all with
hardihood to fight. Then, when all the companies on both sides were drawn forth in battlearray, the foremost ranks engage, dealing blow upon blow and shedding no little blood. On
the one side the Britons, on the other the Saxons, drop down to die of their wounds.
Battle at Knaresborough
Aurelius cheereth on his Christians, Hengist giveth the word unto his Paynims; and as the
conflict thus was raging, ever among did Eldol seek occasion to get at hand-grips with
Hengist, but none such offered; for Hengist, when he saw his own men fall, and that the
Britons by God’s grace were gaining ground, straightway fled away and made for the Castle
of Kaerconan, that is now called Knaresborough. Aurelius pursueth him, and whomsoever he
overtook upon his way he either slew or made captive as bondsman. When, therefore,

81

Hengist perceived that he was being hunted down of Aurelius, he was not minded to enter
into the castle, but commanding his troops again to form in rank, decided to renew the battle,
for he knew that the castle could in no wise withstand Aurelius, and that all his defence lay in
his own sword and spear. At last, when Aurelius had overtaken him, he also ranked his
comrades in companies, and charged right hardily upon him. Natheless, the Saxons hold their
ground as one man, and many on both sides are wounded to the death. Blood floweth
everywhere, and the cries of the dying rouse the living to a fiercer wrath. At last the Saxons
would have prevailed, had not a company of knights of the Armorican Britons come down
upon them. For Aurelius had stationed them apart as he had done in the first battle. When
these charged down upon them, the Saxons were forced to give ground, and after being
broken, albeit in nowise cut to pieces, were scarce able to form in rank again. Then the
Britons advance more hardily and harass the enemy with one accord.
Eldol taketh Hengist prisoner
Nor did Aurelius stint to cheer on his men to smite down them that came in his way, to give
chase to them that fled, and do all that man might do to comfort his comrades. In like manner
did Eldol; hurrying to and fro in all parts of the field, and dealing deadly wounds upon the
foe, yet ever, whatsoever he did, was his heart set upon having but one chance of forgathering
with Hengist man to man.
CHAPTER VI
And whilst the divers companies were thus charging and cutting and thrusting in divers parts,
it so fell out that the twain did encounter one another at an even advantage, and began to
smite and smite yet again either upon other, stroke upon stroke. O, but those champions
thirsted for the fight, and when one let drive at other and their swords clashed together the
sparks flew at ach blow as though they made lightning flash midst thunder. Long time was it
doubtful which of the twain had the more stalwart thews, for at one time would Eldol prevail
and Hengist give ground; at another would Hengist prevail and Eldol give ground. And whilst
they were still battling on this wise came up Gorlois, Duke of Cornwall, with the battalion he
commanded and began to harass the enemy’s companies. Thereupon, when Eldol espied him,
he took fresh hardihood, and gripping Hengist by the nose-piece of his helmet, put forth all
his force and dragged him forth into the midst of his own people.
Aurelius is victor
Rejoicing thereat with exceeding great gladness, he cried aloud: ‘God hath fulfilled my
desire! Up, men! and down with these Ambrons before ye! In your hands is the victory, for in
conquering Hengist we have conquered them!’ In the midst of all this the Britons failed not to
bear down upon the Paynims, charging again and again, and when they fell back, advancing
with redoubled hardihood, giving not a moment’s respite until the victory was won. At last
the Saxons fled, whithersoever each man’s sudden thought might lead. Some betook them to
the cities; others to the forest mountains, others to their ships. But Octa, Hengist’s son, with
the greater part of the residue, made his way to York, while Eosa his kinsman made for the
city of Alclud, and garrisoned him there with a numberless host of armed men.
CHAPTER VII
After that Aurelius had thus won the day, he took the city of Conan, whereof I have before
made mention, and there sojourned three days. Meanwhile he bade the dead be buried, the
wounded be attended, and the weary given rest, besides supplying them with comforts of all
kinds. After this he called together his Dukes and bade them say what should be done with
Hengist. Eldad, Bishop of Gloucester and brother of Eldol, was present, a man of the highest
wisdom and piety.

82

Eldad’s counsel
He, when he beheld Hengist standing before the King, bade the rest keep silence and spake
unto him on this wise: ‘Were all here to try to set this man free, yet would I myself hew him
in pieces; for therein should I follow the ensample of Samuel the prophet when he had Agag,
King of the Amalekites, in his power; for he hewed him to pieces, saying, “As thy sword hath
made mothers childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women.” Wherefore do ye
the same unto Hengist, for that he is another Agag.’ Eldol thereupon took his sword, led
Hengist without the city and sent him unto hell with his head smitten off. But Aurelius, that
was ever sober in all things, bade him be buried, and a mound of earth be heaped above his
body after the manner of the Paynims.
CHAPTER VIII
Then Aurelius led his army unto York to beleaguer Octa, Hengist’s son. And when he laid
siege unto the city, Octa misdoubted whether he might withstand him and hold the city
against so huge a host. After taking counsel thereupon, he issued forth along with the more
noble of them that were with him, bearing a chain in his hand and with dust upon his head,
and presented him before the King with these words: ‘My gods be vanquished, nor do I falter
to acknowledge that it is thy God which reigneth and hath compelled so many nobles to come
unto thee on this wise. Wherefore do thou accept of us and of this chain, and, save thou have
mercy upon us, have us bound and doom us unto any punishment thou wilt.’
Aurelius at York
Aurelius was thereby moved to pity, and taking counsel, bade declare what should be done
unto them. And when divers of them had delivered divers counsel, Eldad the Bishop rose up
and spake his mind after this fashion: ‘The Gibeonites of their own will did come unto the
children of Israel, and beseeching mercy did obtain mercy. Shall we Christians, therefore, be
worse than Jews and deny mercy unto these? Mercy is that they beseech, mercy let them
have! Broad is this island of Britain, and in many places void of inhabitants. Let us therefore
make covenant with them that, so we suffer them to dwell at least in our desert places, they
shall be vassal unto us for ever.’ The King thereupon agreed unto Eldad’s proposal, and had
mercy upon them. Moreover, moved thereto by the ensample of Octa, came Eosa and the rest
of them that had fled and begged for mercy. He assigned unto them, therefore, the country
upon the borders of Scotland, and confirmed a covenant with them.
CHAPTER IX
Having now triumphed over all his enemies, the King called together the earls and princes of
the realm to meet him at York, and gave ordinance unto them to restore the churches which
the Saxon people had destroyed. Howbeit, he himself began to rebuild the Metropolitan
church of that city and the rest of the cathedral churches of the province.
London, Winchester and Salisbury
After a space of fifteen days, when he had stablished a gang of workmen in the several
places, he repaired unto London, which the ravages of the enemy had not spared, and sore
grieved at the destruction that had been wrought, recalled the residue of the citizens from all
parts and set him to bring about their restoration. There also he made ordinance for the
government of the kingdom, renewing the laws that had dropped on sleep, and allotting unto
the grandchildren the possessions that their grandsires had lost. Whatsoever estates had lost
all heirs he shared amongst his fellow-soldiers. For all his thought and intention was turned
upon the restitution of the realm, the reformation of the churches, the renewal of peace and
law and the administering of justice. He next went on to Winchester to restore it the same as

83

the other cities, and when he had there stablished all that had to be stablished toward the
restoration thereof, by advice of Bishop Eldad, he went unto the monastery nigh Kaercaradoc,
that is now called Salisbury, where the earls and princes lay buried whom the accursed
Hengist had betrayed. There was there a convent of three hundred brethren upon the Mount
of Ambrius, who, as is said, was the founder thereof in days of old. When he looked around
upon the place where they lay dead, he was moved to pity and tears began to flow. At last he
fell to pondering within himself in what wise he might best make the place memorable, for
worthy of remembrance did he deem the green turf that covered so many noble warriors that
had died for their country.
CHAPTER X
Merlin summoned
Accordingly he called together from all quarters the master craftsmen in stone and wood, and
bade them put forth their utmost skill to contrive some new kind of building that should stand
for ever in memory of men so worthy. But all of them, mistrusting their own mastery in such
a matter, were only able to meet him with a ‘Nay.’ Whereupon Tremounos, Archbishop of
Caerleon, came unto the King and saith he: ‘If man there be anywhere strong enow to carry
out this ordinance into effect, let Merlin, Vortigern’s prophet, set hand thereunto. For well I
wot that never another man in thy kingdom is there that is brighter of wit than he, whether it
be in foretelling that which shall be or in devising engines of artifice. Bid him come hither
and set his wits to work, and I warrant he shall build thee a memorial to last!’ Accordingly,
when Aurelius had asked many questions about him, he sent divers messengers through the
divers countries of the kingdom to find and fetch him; and after they had journeyed
throughout the provinces they found him in the country of the Gewissi, at the fountain of
Galabes that he wont to haunt, and, telling him what it was they wanted, brought him unto the
King. The King received him gladly and bade him declare the future, being fain to hear
marvellous things. Unto whom Merlin: ‘Mysteries of such kind be in no wise to be revealed
save only in sore need. For, and I were to utter them lightly or to make laughter, the spirit that
teacheth me would be dumb and would forsake me in the hour of need.’
The dance of Giants
At last, when he had in like manner denied them all, the King was not minded to ask him
further about the future, but spake unto him of the work he did propose to construct. Unto
whom Merlin:
‘If thou be fain to grace the burial-place of these men with a work that shall endure for ever,
send for the Dance of the Giants that is in Killaraus, a mountain in Ireland. For a structure of
stones is there that none of this age could raise save his wit were strong enough to carry his
art. For the stones be big, nor is there stone anywhere of more virtue, and, so they be set up
round this plot in a circle, even as they be now there set up, here shall they stand for ever.’
CHAPTER XI
At these words of Merlin, Aurelius burst out laughing, and quoth he: ‘But how may this be,
that stones of such bigness and in a country so far away may be brought hither, as if Britain
were lacking in stones enow for the job?’ Whereunto Merlin made answer: ‘Laugh not so
lightly, King, for not lightly are these words spoken. For in these stones is a mystery, and a
healing virtue against many ailments. Giants of old did carry them from the furthest ends of
Africa and did set them up in Ireland what time they did inhabit therein.
Uther goeth to Ireland

84

And unto this end they did it, that they might make them baths therein whensoever they ailed
of any malady, for they did wash the stones and pour forth the water into the baths, whereby
they that were sick were made whole. Moreover, they did mix confections of herbs with the
water, whereby they that were wounded had healing, for not a stone is there that lacketh in
virtue of leechcraft.’ When the Britons heard these things, they bethought them that it were
well to send for the stones, and to harry the Irish folk by force of arms if they should be
minded to withhold them. At last they made choice of Uther Pendragon, the King’s brother,
with fifteen thousand men, to attend to this business. They made choice also of Merlin, so
that whatsoever might have to be done should be dealt with according his wit and counsel.
Then, as soon as the ships are ready, they put to sea and make for Ireland with a prosperous
gale.
CHAPTER XII
At that time was Gilloman King in Ireland, a youth of marvellous prowess, who, so soon as
ever he heard of the Britons having landed in Ireland, got together a huge army and started
forth to meet them. And when he had learned the reason wherefore they had come, he
laughed, and saith he unto them that stood by:
‘No wonder the craven Saxon folk were strong enough to lay waste the island of Britain when
the Britons themselves are such gross-witted wiseacres. Who hath ever heard of such folly?
Are the stones of Ireland any better than those of Britain that our kingdom should thus be
challenged to fight for them?
Merlin’s engines
Arm yourselves, men, and defend your country, for never while life is in me shall they carry
off from us the very smallest stone of the Dance.’
Uther accordingly, seeing that they were ready fight, fell upon them straightway at the
double-quick. Forthwith the Britons prevailed, and, his Irishmen all cut up and slain, forced
Gilloman to flee for his life. When they had won the day they pressed forward to Mount
Killaraus, and when they reached the structure of stones rejoiced and marvelled greatly.
Whilst they were all standing around, Merlin came unto them and said: ‘Now, my men, try
what ye can do to fetch me down these stones! Then may ye know whether strength avail
more than skill, or skill than strength.’ Thereupon at his bidding they all with one accord set
to work with all manner devices, and did their utmost to fetch down the Dance. Some rigged
up huge hawsers, some set to with ropes, some planted scaling ladders, all eager to get done
with the work, yet natheless was none of them never a whit the forwarder. And when they
were all weary and spent, Merlin burst out on laughing and put together his own engines. At
last, when he had set in place everything whatsoever that was needed, he laid the stones down
so lightly as none would believe, and when he had laid them down, bade carry them to the
ships and place them inboard, and on this wise did they again set sail and returned unto
Britain with joy, presently with a fair wind making land, and fetching the stones to the ir
burial-place ready to set up.
Stonehenge erected
When this was reported unto Aurelius, he sent messengers throughout the countries of
Britain, bidding summon clergy and laity, and enjoining them when summoned to assemble
at the Mount of Ambrius with rejoicing and honour to set up the stones again round the
foresaid burial-place. Accordingly, in obedience to the edict, came pontiffs and abbots and
folk of every single order or condition that were his subjects, and when all were met together
on the day appointed, Ambrosius set the crown upon his own head and celebrated the
‘Whitsuntide festival right royally, giving up the three following days running to the holiday.

85

Meanwhile such honours as lacked a holder he distributed as bounties unto them of his
household as rewards for their toil in his service. At that time two of the Metropolitan Sees,
York, to wit, and the City of the Legions, were vacant without their shepherds. Wherefore,
being minded to consult the common wish of his peoples, he gave York unto Samson, a man
of high dignity and illustrious by the depth of his piety; and Caerleon unto Dubricius, whom
the providence of God had before singled out as like to be right serviceable in that same
place. And when he had settled these and other matters in his realm, he bade Merlin set up the
stones that he had brought from Ireland around the burial-place. Merlin accordingly obeyed
his ordinance, and set them up about the compass of the burial-ground in such wise as they
had stood upon Mount Killaraus in Ireland, and proved yet once again how skill surpasseth
strength.
CHAPTER XIII
Pascentius joineth Gilloman
At that same time Pascentius, Vortigern’s son, who had fled away to Germany, called out
every knight in arms of that kingdom against Aurelius Ambrosius, being minded to avenge
his father, and promised them exceeding plenty of gold and silver so he were able to subdue
Britain unto himself with their assistance. And when he had bribed the whole youth of the
country by his promises, he fitted out a passing great fleet, and, landing in the Northern parts
of the island, began to lay them waste. And when message of this was brought unto the King,
he assembled his host and marched forth to meet them, challenging his cruel foemen to do
battle with him. They as willingly accepted the challenge, but coming into conflict with the
Britons, were by the grace of God defeated and forced to take to flight.
CHAPTER XIV
Pascentius, therefore, being thus compelled to flee away, durst not return into Germany, but
backing sail, betook him unto Gilloman in Ireland, and was received by him. And when he
had made known the disaster that had befallen him, Gilloman had compassion upon him and
made complaint of the injury that Uther, the brother of Aurelius, had done him when he came
in quest of the Giants’ Dance. At last they confirmed a covenant of alliance betwixt them, and
fitting out their ships, embarked therein and made for the city of Menevia.
Eopa’s treachery
This being bruited abroad, Uther Pendragon levied an army and marched into Wales to do
battle with them, for his brother Aurelius lay sick at Winchester and could not go himself,
greatly to the joy of Pascentius, Gilloman and the Saxons that were with them when they
heard it, for they deemed that by reason of his malady they would easily be able to subdue the
kingdom of Britain. And whilst all the folk were talking thereupon, came one of the Saxons,
named Eopa, unto Pascentius, saying: ‘What boon wilt thou bestow upon the man that shall
slay Aurelius for thee?’ Saith Pascentius: ‘O, might I but find the man that durst go through
with such a resolve, I would give him a thousand pounds of silver, and my good-will as long
as I live, and if that it be my luck to wear the crown of the kingdom, I will make him a
general of mine army; and so much am I ready to confirm by oath.’ Saith Eopa: ‘The British
tongue have I learnt, and the manners of the men I know well. Some cunning, moreover, have
I in leechcraft. So, therefore, that thou fulfil unto me this that thou dost promise, I will feign
me to be a Christian and a Briton, and when I shall have obtained access unto the King as a
leech, such a draught will I compound for him as that he shall die thereof. And that I may the
more readily come unto him, I will feign me to be a monk right passing devout and right
learned in all doctrine withal.’
Eopa poisoneth Aurelius

86

And when Eopa thus promised what he would do, Pascentius struck the bargain with him and
confirmed by oath the conditions of the pledge. Eopa accordingly shaved his beard, tonsured
his head, took upon him the habit of a monk, and, laden with his gallipots of drugs, started on
his way towards Winchester. As soon as he arrived in that city he proffered his services unto
them of the King’s household and found favour in their eyes, for none at that time could have
been more welcome unto them than a leech. They therefore received him gladly, and when he
was led into the King’s presence he promised to restore him his health, so he were treated
with his potions. Forthwith, accordingly, he was bidden to prepare a drink, and privily mixing
a poison therewithal, he offered the same unto the King. When Aurelius had taken and drunk
it, the accursed Ambron straightway bade him cover him up under the coverlid and go to
sleep, to the end that his detestable potion might work the more strongly. The King at once
obeyed the traitor’s bidding and went to sleep as if upon the way to a speedy recovery.
Presently, when the poison had crept into the pores and veins of his body, death, that wont to
spare no man, ensued upon his sleep. Meanwhile that accursed traitor made shift betwixt one
and another to slip forth and took heed never to show him in court again.
Merlin readeth the portent
Whilst these things were being enacted at Winchester, there appeared a star of marvellous
bigness and brightness, stretching forth one ray whereon was a ball of fire spreading forth in
the likeness of a dragon, and from the mouth of the dragon issued forth two rays, whereof the
one was of such length as that it did seem to reach beyond the regions of Gaul, and the other,
verging toward the Irish sea, did end in seven lesser rays.
CHAPTER XV
At the appearance of this star all that did behold it were stricken with wonder and fear. Uther,
also, the King’s brother, who was leading a hostile army into Cambria, was smitten with no
small dread, insomuch as that he betook him unto sundry wizards to make known unto him
what the star might portend. Amongst the rest, he bade call Merlin, for he also had come
along with the army so that the business of the fighting might be dealt with according to his
counsel. And when he was brought unto the King and stood before him, he was bidden
declare what the star did betoken. Whereupon, bursting into tears and drawing a long breath,
he cried aloud, saying:
‘O, loss irreparable! O, orphaned people of Britain! O, departure of a most noble King! Dead
is the renowned King of the Britons, Aurelius Ambrosius, in whose death shall we all also be
dead, save God deign to be our helper! Wherefore hasten, most noble Duke Uther, hasten and
tarry not to do battle upon thine enemies! The victory shall be thine, and King thou shalt be
of the whole of Britain! For this is what yon star doth betoken, and the fiery dragon that is
under the star!
Aurelius is dead
The ray, moreover, that stretcheth forth toward the regions of Gaul, Both portend that a son
shall be born unto thee that shall be of surpassing mighty dominion, whose power shall
extend over all the realms that lie beneath the ray; and the other ray signifieth a daughter
whose sons and grandsons shall hold the kingdom of Britain in succession.’
CHAPTER XVI
But Uther, albeit misdoubting whether Merlin spake true, continued the advance against the
enemy that he had already begun, for he was so nigh unto Menevia as that not more than half
a day’s march had to be covered. And when his advance was reported unto Gilloman,
Pascentius and the Saxons that were with them, they issued forth to meet him and do battle

87

with him. So soon as the armies came in sight of one another, they both set them in fighting
array, and coming to close quarters, began a hand to hand engagement, soldiers being slain on
the one side and the other as is wont in such cases. At last, when the day was far spent, Uther
in the end prevailed and obtained the victory after Gilloman and Pascentius had been slain.
The barbarians thereupon took to flight, and scampered off to their ships, pursued by the
Britons who slew a number of them in their flight. The Duke’s victory being thus by Christ’s
favour complete, he returned the swiftest he might after so sore travail unto Winchester. For
messengers had arrived announcing the death of the King and bringing word that he was
presently to be buried by the bishops of the land within the Giants’ Dance, nigh the convent
of Ambrius, according to the instructions he had given when alive.
Uther Pendragon crowned
When they heard of his departure, the pontiffs and abbots and all the clergy of the province
assembled in the city of Winchester, and honoured him with a funeral such as was befitting a
King so mighty. And, for that in his lifetime he had commanded he should be buried in the
graveyard he had enclosed, thither they bare his body and laid it in the ground with right
royal ceremony.
CHAPTER XVII
But his brother Uther, calling together the clergy of the country, took upon him the crown of
the island, and with universal assent was raised to be King. And, remembering in what wise
Merlin had interpreted the meaning of the star aforementioned, bade two dragons be wrought
in gold in the likeness of the dragon he had seen upon the ray of the star. And when that they
had been wrought in marvellous cunning craftsmanship, he made offering of the one unto the
chief church of the See of Winton, but the other did he keep himself to carry about with him
in the wars. From that day forth was he called Uther Pendragon, for thus do we call a
dragon’s head in the British tongue. And the reason wherefore this name was given unto him
was that Merlin had prophesied he should be King by means of the dragon.
CHAPTER XVIII
Siege of York
In the meantime Octa, Hengist’s son, and Eosa, his kinsman, now that they were quit of the
covenant they had made with Aurelius Ambrosius, set them to work to harass the King and
ravage his minions. For they were now taking into their the Saxons that Pascentius had
brought with him, and were sending their messengers into Germany for the rest. Octa,
accordingly, having surrounded him with a passing great army, did invade the Northern
provinces, nor did he stint to give his cruelty free course until he had destroyed all the cities
and strong places from Albany as far as York. At last, when he had begun to beleaguer that
city, Uther Pendragon came upon him with the whole force of the kingdom and gave him
battle. The Saxons stood their ground like men, remaining unbroken by the assaults of the
Britons, who were forced at last to flee. The Saxons followed up the victory they had won,
and pursued the Britons as far as Mount Damen, when the daylight failed them. Now this hill
was steep, and at the top was a hazel coppice, but half-way up were tall broken rocks
amongst which wild beasts might well make their lairs. Howbeit, the Britons took possession
thereof and abode all that night amongst the rocks and hazel bushes. But when the Bear
began to turn her chariot as it drew toward dawn, Uther bade call the earls and princes to treat
with him in counsel how they might best fall upon the enemy.
Gorlois giveth counsel

88

All accordingly came as quickly as might be into the King’s presence, who bade them declare
their counsel thereupon. They accordingly enjoined Gorlois Duke of Cornwall, to speak his
opinion first, for that he was a man of much counsel and ripe of age. ‘No need,’ saith he, ‘of
beating about the bush and making long speeches, for we must make the best use of what
remains of the night. What is most wanted just now is valour and hardihood if ye would fain
enjoy your lives and liberties. The multitude of Paynims is huge and hungry for fight, while
we are but a handful. If we wait until daylight overtaketh us, better, I ween, not fight them at
all. Up, then, while the darkness lasteth, and coming down upon them in close order, let us
rush their camp by a sudden surprise. For, whilst they have no suspicion and never dream of
our falling upon them in such wise, if we make the rush with one accord and put forth our
hardihood, I doubt not but we shall win the day.’
This counsel pleased the King and all his men, and all obeyed his injunctions. Doing on their
armour, they ranked them in companies and made towards the enemy’s camp, intending to
make a general onset upon them all at once. But when they drew nigh the scouts became
aware of their approach, and woke up their sleepy comrades with the braying of their
trumpets. In sore disorder and amazement the enemy leap up, some to arm them, some
overcome with terror to flee whithersoever chance might lead them. But the Britons,
marching in close rank, quickly approaching and reaching the camp, and, finding an entrance,
rush in upon the enemy with drawn swords.
Uther cometh London
The enemy thus surprised of a sudden could make no effectual resistance, while the Britons
took courage to from knowing all about what they were doing, rushing in hardily with a will
and laying about them in deadly fashion. The Paynims were slain by thousands; Octa and
Eosa were taken prisoners, and the Saxons utterly put to the rout.
CHAPTER XIX
After this victory Uther marched unto the city of Alclud, and made ordinance for settling that
province, as well as for restoring peace everywhere. He also went round all the nations of the
Scots, and made that rebellious people lay aside their savage ways, for such justice did he
execute throughout the lands as never another of his predecessors had ever done before him.
In his days did misdoers tremble, for they were dealt punishment without mercy. At last,
when he had stablished his peace in the parts of the North, he went to London and bade that
Octa and Eosa should be kept in prison there. And when the Easter festival drew nigh, he
bade the barons of the realm assemble in that city that he might celebrate so high holiday
with honour by assuming the crown thereon. All obeyed accordingly, and repairing thither
from the several cities, assembled together on the eve of the festival. The King, accordingly,
celebrated the ceremony as he had proposed, and made merry along with his barons, all of
whom did make great cheer for that the King had received them in such joyful wise.
Gorlois goeth into Cornwall
For all the nobles that were there had come with their wives and daughters as was meet on so
glad a festival. Among the rest, Gorlois, Duke of Cornwall, was there, with his wife Igerne,
that in beauty did surpass all the other dames of the whole of Britain. And when the King
espied her amidst the others, he did suddenly wax so fain of her love that, paying no heed
unto none of the others, he turned all his attention only upon her. Only unto her did he send
dainty tit-bits from his own dish; only unto her did he send the golden cups with messages
through his familiars. Many a time did he smile upon her and spake merrily unto her withal.
But when her husband did perceive all this, straightway he waxed wroth and retired from the
court without leave taken. Nor was any that might recall him thither, for that he feared to lose

89

the one thing that he loved better than all other. Uther, waxing wroth hereat, commanded him
to return and appear in his court that he might take lawful satisfaction for the affront he had
put upon him. And when Gorlois was not minded to obey the summons, the King was
enraged beyond all measure and sware with an oath that he would ravage his demesnes so he
hastened not to make him satisfaction. Forthwith, the quarrel betwixt the two abiding
unsettled, the King gathered a mighty army together and went his way into the province of
Cornwall and set fire to the cities and castles therein. But Gorlois, not daring to meet him in
the field for that he had not so many armed men, chose rather to garrison his own strong
places until such time as he obtained the succour he had besought from Ireland.
Uther sendeth for Merlin
And, for that he was more troubled upon his wife’s account than upon his own, he placed her
in the Castle of Tintagel on the seacoast, as holding it to be the safer refuge. Howbeit, he
himself betook him into the Castle of Dimilioc, being afeard that in case disaster should
befall him both might be caught in one trap. And when message of this was brought unto the
King, he went unto the castle wherein Gorlois had ensconced him, and beleaguered him and
cut off all access unto him. At length, at the end of a week, mindful of his love for Igerne, he
spake unto one of his familiars named Ulfin of Ricaradoc: ‘I am consumed of love for Igerne,
nor can I have no joy, nor do I look to escape peril of my body save I may have possession of
her. Do thou therefore give me, counsel in what wise I may fulfil my desire, for, and I do not,
of mine inward sorrow shall I die.’ Unto whom Ulfin: ‘And who shall give thee any counsel
that may avail, seeing that there is no force that may prevail whereby to come unto her in the
Castle of Tintagel? For it is situate on the sea, and is on every side encompassed thereby, nor
none other entrance is there save such as a narrow rock doth furnish, the which three armed
knights could hold against thee, albeit thou wert standing there with the whole realm of
Britain beside thee. But, and if Merlin the Prophet would take the matter in hand, I do verily
believe that by his counsel thou mightest compass thy heart’s desire.’
The King, therefore, believing him, bade Merlin be called, for he, too, had come unto the
leaguer.
Merlin’s magic arts
Merlin came forthwith accordingly, and when he stood in presence of the King, was bidden
give counsel how the King’s desire might be fulfilled. When he found how sore tribulation of
mind the King was suffering, he was moved at beholding the effect of a love so exceeding
great, and saith he: ‘The fulfilment of thy desire doth demand the practice of arts new and
unheard of in this thy day. Yet know I how to give thee the semblance of Gorlois by my
leechcrafts in such sort as that thou shalt seem in all things to be his very self. If, therefore,
thou art minded to obey me, I will make thee like unto him utterly, and Ulfin will I make like
unto Jordan of Tintagel his familiar. I also will take upon me another figure and will be with
ye as a third, and in such wise we may go safely unto the castle and have access unto Igerne.’
The King obeyed accordingly, and gave heed strictly unto that which Merlin enjoined him. At
last, committing the siege into charge of his familiars, he did entrust himself unto the arts and
medicaments of Merlin, and was transformed into the semblance of Gorlois. Ulfin was
changed into Jordan, and Merlin into Bricel in such sort as that none could have told the one
from the other. They then went their way toward Tintagel, and at dusk hour arrived at the
castle. The porter, weening that the Duke had arrived, swiftly unmade the doors, and the three
were admitted. For what other than Gorlois could it be, seeing that in all things it seemed as if
Gorlois himself were there? So the King lay that night with Igerne, for as he had beguiled her
by the false likeness he had taken upon him, so he beguiled her also by the feigned discourses
wherewith he did full artfully entertain her.

90

Uther deceiveth Igerne
For he told her he had issued forth of the besieged city for naught save to see to the safety of
her dear self and the castle wherein she lay, in such sort that she believed him every word,
and had no thought to deny him in aught he might desire. And upon that same night was the
most renowned Arthur conceived, that was not only famous in after years, but was well
worthy of all the fame he did achieve by his surpassing prowess.
CHAPTER XX
In the meantime, when the beleaguering army found that the King was not amongst them,
they did unadvisedly make endeavour to breach the walls and challenge the besieged Duke to
battle. Who, himself also acting unadvisedly, did straightway sally forth with his comrades in
arms, weening that his handful of men were strong enow to make head against so huge a host
of armed warriors. But when they met face to face in battle, Gorlois was amongst the first
that were slain, and all his companies were scattered. The castle, moreover, that they had
besieged was taken, and the treasure that was found therein divided, albeit not by fair casting
of lots, for whatsoever his luck or hardihood might throw in his way did each man greedily
clutch in his claws for his own. But by the time that this outrageous plundering had at last
come to an end messengers had come unto Igerne to tell her of the Duke’s death and the issue
of the siege.
Uther weddeth Igerne
But when they beheld the King in the likeness of the Duke sitting beside her, they blushed
scarlet, and stared in amazement at finding that he whom they had just left dead at the leaguer
had thus arrived hither safe and sound, for little they knew what the medicaments of Merlin
had accomplished. The King therefore, smiling at the tidings, and embracing the countess,
spake saying: ‘Not slain, verily, am I, for lo, here thou seest me alive, yet, natheless, sore it
irketh me of the destruction of my castle and the slaughter of my comrades, for that which
next is to dread is lest the King should overtake us here and make us prisoners in this castle.
First of all, therefore, will I go meet him and make my peace with him, lest a worst thing
befall us.’ Issuing forth accordingly, he made his way unto his own army, and putting off the
semblance of Gorlois again became Uther Pendragon. And when he understood how
everything had fallen out, albeit that he was sore grieved at the death of Gorlois, yet could he
not but be glad that Igerne was released from the bond of matrimony. Returning, therefore, to
Tintagel, he took the castle, and not the castle only, but Igerne also therein, and on this wise
fulfilled he his desire. Thereafter were they linked together in no little mutual love, and two
children were born unto them, a son and a daughter, whereof the son was named Arthur and
the daughter Anna.
CHAPTER XXI
Of Octa and Eosa
And as the days and seasons passed by, the King was overtaken by a malady that did of a
long time afflict him. In the meantime, the keepers of the prison wherein Octa and Eosa, of
whom I have spoken above, were leading a life full wearisome, fled away with them unto
Germany and struck terror throughout the kingdom. For the rumour ran that they had roused
the whole of Germany, and had fitted out a passing mighty fleet, intending to return unto the
island and destroy it, as, indeed, was the fact, for they did so return with such a fleet and a
numberless host of companions, and, entering into the parts of Albany, did visit the cities and
the people of the land with fire and sword. Whereupon the army of Britain is given in charge
unto Lot of Lodonesia to keep the enemy at a distance. For he was also Earl of Leicester, a
right valiant knight and ripe as well in years as in counsel, and, his prowess approving him

91

worthy thereof, the King had given unto him his daughter Anna and the charge of the
kingdom whilst his malady lay upon him. He in his campaign against the enemy was
oftentimes repulsed by them, and had to betake him into his cities, but yet more often did he
put them to flight and scatter them, forcing them to flee at one time unto the forests and at
another unto their ships. For the issue of the battles betwixt them was so doubtful that none
could tell unto which of the twain the victory should be accorded. That which did most hurt
unto the Britons was their own pride, for that they did disdain to obey the Earl’s summons
unto arms, whereby coming the fewer into the field, they were unable to overpower the
greater numbers of the enemy.
CHAPTER XXII
Battle at Verulam
The island being thus well-nigh all laid waste, when the reason thereof was reported unto the
King, he waxed wroth beyond what his infirmity was able to bear, and bade all his barons
come together before him that he might rebuke them for their pride and lukewarmness. And
when he beheld them all in his presence, he chided them with words of chastisement, and
sware that he himself would lead them against the enemy. Accordingly he bade make a litter
wherein he might be carried, seeing that his malady did hinder him of moving otherwise from
place to place. And all of them he bade be ready, so that, should occasion befall, they might
march against the enemy. Forthwith the litter is made ready, and all likewise are ready to start
when the day and the occasion arrived.
CHAPTER XXIII
Setting the King within the litter, they started for Verulam, where the Saxons were sore
distressing all the people. And when Octa and Eosa learnt how the Britons had arrived and
had brought with them the King in a litter, they did disdain to fight him withal for that he had
to be carried about and could not even go alone. Such an one, they said, was half-dead
already, and it would ill become so great men as were they to fight him. They withdrew them
accordingly into the city, leaving the gates open as if to show how little they were afeard.
The Britons victorious
But when this was reported unto Uther, he bade leaguer the city as swiftly as might be, and
made assault upon the walls on every side. The Britons obeyed, laid siege to the city and
stormed the walls. Carrying slaughter amongst the Saxons, they were just entering by the
breaches they had made, when the Saxons began to bethink them of withstanding them in
earnest, and seeing the advantage they had already gained, repented them of their former
arrogance, and set to work to defend them as best they might, climbing upon the walls and
driving back the Britons with all manner weapons of offence. At last, whilst the fight was still
raging betwixt them, the night drew on that doth invite all men unto repose. Many thereupon
would fain have rested from the toil of arms, but more were of counsel that it were better to
keep on fighting until they had made an end of their enemies. Howbeit, the Saxons, when
they understood how grievously they had erred in their pride, and that they had thereby given
away the victory unto the Britons, made resolve to sally forth at dawn and challenge the
Britons to a pitched battle in the field, and this was done accordingly. For so soon as Titan
had brought back the light of day, they marched forth in orderly array in pursuance of their
design. The Britons perceiving the same, divided their force into companies, and coming to
meet them were the first to begin the attack. The Saxons straightway stand their ground; the
Britons press forward, and much blood is shed on both sides.
Saxons ever treacherous

92

Not until the day was far spent did victory declare for the Britons, and the Saxons turned tail,
leaving Octa and Eosa dead upon the field. So overjoyed was the King at the issue of the
battle, that whereas afore he was too weak to lift him up without help of another, he now
raised him with a light effort and sate him upright in the litter as though he were of a sudden
restored unto health. Then, with a laugh, he cried out in a merry voice: ‘These Ambrons
called me the half-dead King, for that I was lying sick of my malady in the litter, and so in
truth I was. Yet would I rather conquer them half-dead, than be conquered by them safe and
sound and have to go on living thereafter. For better is death with honour than life with
shame.’
CHAPTER XXIV
Howbeit, although the Saxons were defeated, never a whit the more for that did they abate
their malice, but marching off into the provinces of the North did harass the people of those
parts without respite. King Uther, as he had proposed, was eager to pursue them, but his
princes did dissuade him therefrom for that after the victory his malady lay yet more
grievously upon him. Wherefore the enemy did with the greater hardihood press forward
against him and put forth all their strength by every means to subdue the kingdom unto
themselves. Giving loose, moreover, unto their wonted treachery, they devise plots for
making away with the King by secret practices.
Uther dieth of poison
And, for that they might get at him none other way, they resolved to get rid of him by poison,
which they did. For whilst he was still lying in the city of Verulam, they sent messengers in
the habit of poor men to spy out the state of the court, and when they had learnt exactly how
matters stood, they found out one device, whereof they made choice above all other for
carrying out their treachery against him. For nigh the court was a spring of passing bright
clear water, whereof the King was wont to drink when by reason of his malady other liquors
did go against his stomach. Unto this spring accordingly these accursed traitors did obtain
access, and did so infect the same with poison all round about as that the water flowing
therefrom was all corrupted. When, therefore, the King did next drink of the water he was
seized of a sudden by death, as were also a hundred others after him until such time as the
treason was discovered, when the spring was covered over with a mound of earth. And when
the King’s death was bruited abroad the bishops assembled with all the clergy of the realm
and bare his body unto the convent of Ambrius, and laid it in the ground after kingly wise by
the side of Aurelius Ambrosius within the Giants’ Dance.

93

Book Nine
CHAPTER I
Dubricius crowneth Arthur
After the death of Uther Pendragon, the barons of Britain did come together from the divers
provinces unto the city of Silchester, and did bear on hand Dubricius, Archbishop of the City
of Legions, that he should crown as king Arthur, the late King’s son. For sore was need upon
them, seeing that when the Saxons heard of Uther’s death they had invited their fellowcountrymen from Germany, and under their Duke Colgrin were bent upon exterminating the
Britons. They had, moreover, entirely subdued all that part of the island which stretcheth
from the river Humber as far as the sea of Caithness. Dubricius therefore, sorrowing over the
calamities of the country, assembled the other prelates, and did invest Arthur with the crown
of the realm. At that time Arthur was a youth of fifteen years, of a courage and generosity
beyond compare, whereunto his inborn goodness did lend such grace as that he was beloved
of well-nigh all the peoples in the land. After he had been invested with the ensigns of
royalty, he abided by his ancient wont, and was so prodigal of his bounties as that he began to
run short of wherewithal to distribute amongst the huge multitude of knights that made repair
unto him.
Arthur’s first battles
But he that hath within him a bountiful nature along with prowess, albeit that he be lacking
for a time, natheless in no wise shall poverty be his bane for ever. Wherefore did Arthur, for
that in him did valour keep company with largesse, make resolve to harry the Saxons, to the
end that with their treasure he might make rich the retainers that were of his own household.
And herein was he monished of his own lawful right, seeing that of right ought he to hold the
sovereignty of the whole island in virtue of his claim hereditary. Assembling, therefore, all
the youth that were of his allegiance, he made first for York. And when Colgrin was ware of
this, he got together his Saxons, Scots and Picts, and came with a mighty multitude to meet
him nigh the river Douglas, where, by the time the battle came to an end, the more part of
both armies had been put to the sword. Natheless, Arthur won the day, and after pursuing
Colgrin’s flight as far as York, did beleaguer him within that city. Thereupon, Baldulf,
hearing of his brother’s flight, made for the besieged city with six thousand men to relieve
him. For, at the time his brother had fought the battle, he himself was upon the seacoast
awaiting the arrival of Duke Cheldric, who was just coming from Germany to their
assistance. And when he had come within ten mile of the city, he was resolved to make a
night march and fall upon them by surprise. Howbeit, Arthur was ware of his purpose, and
bade Cador, Duke of Cornwall, go meet him that same night with six hundred horse and three
thousand foot.
Baldulf: his craft
He, choosing a position on the road whereby the enemy were bound to march, surprised them
by an assault on the sudden, and cutting up and slaying the Saxons, drave Baldulf off in
flight. Baldulf, distressed beyond measure that he could convey no succour to his brother,
took counsel with himself in what wise he might have speech of him, for he weened that so
he might get at him, they might together devise some shift for the safety of them both. Failing
all other means of access unto him, he shaved off his hair and his beard, and did upon him the
habit of a jongleur with a ghittern, and walking to and fro within the camp, made show as had

94

he been a minstrel singing unto the tunes that he thrummed the while upon his ghittern. And,
for that none suspected him, by little and little he drew nigh unto the walls of the city, ever
keeping up the disguise he had taken upon him. At last he was found out by some of the
besieged, who thereupon drew him up with cords over the wall into the city and brought him
unto his brother, who, overjoyed at the sight of him, greeted him with kisses and embraces.
At last, after talking over every kind of shift, when they had fallen utterly into despair of ever
issuing forth, the messengers they had sent into Germany returned, bringing with them unto
Albany six hundred ships full of stout warriors under Duke Cheldric; and when Arthur’s
counsellors heard tell of their coming, they advised him to hold the leaguer no longer, for that
sore hazard would it be to do battle with so mighty a multitude of enemies as had now
arrived.
CHAPTER II
Battle of Lincoln
Arthur, therefore, in obedience to the counsel of his retainers, retired him into the city of
London. Hither he summoned all the clergy and chief men of his allegiance and bade them
declare their counsel as to what were best and safest for him to do against this inroad of the
Paynim. At last, by common consent of them all, messengers are sent unto King Hoel in
Armorica with tidings of the calamitous estate of Britain. For Hoel was sister’s son unto
Arthur, born unto Dubric, King of the Armorican Britons. Wherefore, so soon as he heard of
the invasion wherewith his uncle was threatened, he bade fit out his fleet, and mustering
fifteen thousand men-at-arms, made for Hamo’s port with the first fair wind. Arthur received
him with all honour due, and the twain embraced the one the other over and over again.
CHAPTER III
A Few days later they set forth for the city of Kaerlindcoit, then besieged by the Paynim
already mentioned, the which city lieth upon a hill betwixt two rivers in the province of
Lindesey, and is otherwise called Lincoln. Accordingly, when they had come thither with
their whole host, they did battle with the Saxons and routed them with no common slaughter,
for upon that day fell six thousand of them, some part drowned in the rivers and some part
smitten of deadly weapons.
Saxons ever treacherous
The residue, in dismay, forsook the siege and fled, but Arthur stinted not in pursuit until they
had reached the forest of Caledon, wherein they assembled again after the fight and did their
best to make a stand against him. When the battle began, they wrought sore havoc amongst
the Britons, defending themselves like men, and avoiding the arrows of the Britons in the
shelter afforded by the trees. When Arthur espied this he bade the trees about that part of the
forest be felled, and the trunks set in a compass around them in such wise as that all ways of
issuing forth were shut against them, for he was minded to beleaguer them therein until they
should be starven to death of hunger. This done, he bade his companies patrol the forest, and
abode in that same place three days. Whereupon the Saxons, lacking all victual and famishing
to death, besought leave to issue forth upon covenant that they would leave all their gold and
silver behind them so they might return unto Germany with nought but their ships only. They
promised further to give them tribute from Germany and to leave hostages for the payment
thereof. Arthur, taking counsel thereupon, agreed unto their petition, retaining all their
treasure and the hostages for payment of the tribute, and granting only unto them bare
permission to depart. Natheless, whilst that they were ploughing the seas as they returned
homeward, it repented them of the covenant they had made, and tacking about, they returned

95

into Britain, making the shore at Totnes. Taking possession of the country, they devastated
the land as far as the Severn sea, slaying the husbandmen with deadly wounds.
The siege of Bath
Marching forth from thence they made for the country about Bath and besieged that city.
When word of this was brought unto the King, astonished beyond measure at their wicked
daring, he bade judgment be done upon their hostages and hanged them out of hand, and,
abandoning the expedition whereby he intended to repress the Picts and Scots, hurried away
to disperse the leaguer. Howbeit, that which did most sorely grieve him in this strait was that
he was compelled to leave his nephew Hoel behind him lying sick in the city of Alclud.
When at last he arrived in the province of Somerset, and beheld the leaguer nigh at hand, he
spake in these words; ‘For that these Saxons, of most impious and hateful name, have
disdained to keep faith with me, I, keeping my faith unto my God, will endeavour me this day
to revenge upon them the blood of my countrymen. To arms, therefore, ye warriors, to arms,
and fall upon yonder traitors like men, for, of a certainty, by Christ’s succour, we cannot fail
of victory!’
CHAPTER IV
When he had thus spoken, the holy Dubric, Archbishop of the City of Legions, went up on to
the top of a certain mount and cried out with a loud voice:
‘Ye men that be known from these others by your Christian profession, take heed ye bear in
mind the piety ye owe unto your country and unto your fellow-countrymen, whose slaughter
by the treachery of the Paynim shall be unto ye a disgrace everlasting save ye press hardily
forward to defend them.
Arthur’s armour
Fight ye therefore for your country, and if it be that death overtake ye, suffer it willingly for
your country’s sake, for death itself is victory and a healing unto the soul, inasmuch as he that
shall have died for his brethren doth offer himself a living sacrifice unto God, nor is it
doubtful that herein he doth follow in the footsteps of Christ who disdained not to lay down
His own soul for His brethren. Whosoever, therefore, amongst ye shall be slain in this battle,
unto him shall that death be as full penance and absolution of all his sins, if so be he receive it
willingly on this wise.’
Forthwith, thus cheered by the benison of the blessed man, each one hastened to arm him to
do his bidding, and Arthur himself doing upon him a habergeon worthy of a king so noble,
did set upon his head a helm of gold graven with the semblance of a dragon. Upon his
shoulders, moreover, did he bear the shield that was named Priwen, wherein, upon the inner
side, was painted the image of holy Mary, Mother of God, that many a time and oft did call
her back unto his memory. Girt was he also with Caliburn, best of swords, that was forged
within the Isle of Avalon; and the lance that did grace his right hand was called by the name
Ron, a tall lance and a stout, full meet to do slaughter withal. Then, stationing his companies,
he made hardy assault upon the Saxons that after their wont were ranked wedge-wise in
battalions. Natheless, all day long did they stand their ground manfully maugre the Britons
that did deliver assault upon assault against them.
Victory at Bath
At last, just verging upon sundown, the Saxons occupied a hill close by that might serve them
for a camp, for, secure in their numbers, the hill alone seemed all the camp they needed. But
when the morrow’s sun brought back the day, Arthur with his army clomb up to the top of the
hill, albeit that in the ascent he lost many of his men. For the Saxons, dashing down from the

96

height, had the better advantage in dealing their wounds, whilst they could also run far more
swiftly down the hill than he could struggle up. Howbeit, putting forth their utmost strength,
the Britons did at last reach the top, and forthwith close with the enemy hand to hand. The
Saxons, fronting them with their broad chests, strive with all their endeavour to stand their
ground. And when much of the day had been spent on this wise, Arthur waxed wroth at the
subbornness of their resistance, and the slowness of his own advance, and drawing forth
Caliburn, his sword, crieth aloud the name of Holy Mary, and thrusteth him forward with a
swift onset into the thickest press of the enemy’s ranks. Whomsoever he touched, calling
upon God, he slew at a single blow, nor did he once slacken in his onslaught until that he had
slain four hundred and seventy men single-handed with his sword Caliburn. This when the
Britons beheld, they followed him up in close rank dealing slaughter on every side. Colgrin
and Baldulf his brother fell amongst the first, and many thousands fell besides. Howbeit, as
soon as Cheldric saw the jeopardy of his fellows, he turned to flee away.
CHAPTER V
Arthur at Alclud
The King having won the victory, bade Cador, Duke of Cornwall, pursue the enemy, while he
himself hastened his march into Albany, for word had thence been brought him that the Scots
and Picts were besieging Hoel in the city of Alclud, wherein, as I have said, he was lying
afflicted of grievous sickness, and sore need it was he should come swiftly to his succour lest
he should be taken by the barbarians along with the city. The Duke of Cornwall, accordingly,
accompanied by ten thousand men, started from Bath, but was not minded, in the first place,
to pursue the fleeing Saxons, deeming it better to make all speed to get hold of their ships and
thus forbid their embarking therein. As soon as he had taken possession of the ships, he
manned them with his best soldiers, who could be trusted to take heed that no Paynim came
aboard, in case they should flee unto them to escape. Then he made best haste to obey
Arthur’s orders by following up the enemy and slaying all he overtook without mercy.
Whereupon they, who but just now had fallen upon the Britons with the fury of a double
thunderbolt, straightway sneak off, faint of heart, some into the depths of the forest, others
into the mountains and caves, anywhither so only they may live yet a little longer. At last,
when they found all shelter failing, they march their shattered companies into the Isle of
Thanet.
Cador slayeth Cheldric
Thither the Duke of Cornwall follows hard upon their heels, smiting them down without
mercy as was his wont; nor did he stay his hand until after Cheldric had been slain. He
compelled them to give hostages for the surrender of the whole residue.
CHAPTER VI
Having thus established peace, he marched towards Alclud, which Arthur had already
delivered from the oppression of the barbarians. He next led his army into Moray, where the
Scots and Picts were beleaguered, for after they had thrice been defeated in battle by Arthur
and his nephew they had fled into that province. When they had reached Loch Lomond, they
occupied the islands that be therein, thinking to find safe refuge; for this lake doth contain
sixty islands and receiveth sixty rivers, albeit that but a single stream doth flow from thence
unto the sea. Upon these islands are sixty rocks plain to be seen, whereof each one doth bear
an eyrie of eagles that there congregating year by year do notify any prodigy that is to come
to pass in the kingdom by uttering a shrill scream all together in concert. Unto these islands
accordingly the enemy had fled in order to avail them of the protection of the lake. But small
profit reaped they thereby, for Arthur collected a fleet and went round about the inlets of the

97

rivers for fifteen days together, and did so beleaguer them as that they were famished to death
of hunger by thousands.
Arthur pardoneth the Scots
And whilst that he was serving them out on this wise arrived Guillamur, King of Ireland, with
a mighty host of barbarians in a fleet, to bring succor unto the wretched islanders. Whereupon
Arthur left off the leaguer and began to turn his arms against the Irish, whom he forced to
return unto their own country, cut to pieces without mercy. When he had won the victory, he
again gave all his thoughts to doing away utterly the race of the Scots and Picts, and yielded
him to treating them with a cruelty beyond compare. Not a single one that he could lay hands
on did he spare, insomuch as that at last all the bishops of the miserable country assembled
together with all the clergy of their obedience, and came unto him barefoot, bearing relics of
the saints and the sacraments of the church, imploring the King’s mercy for the safety of their
people. As soon as they came into his presence, they prayed him on their bended knees to
have pity on the down-trodden folk, for that he had visited them with pains and penalties
enow, nor was any need to cut off the scanty few that still survived to the last man. Some
petty portion of the country he might allot unto them whereon they might be allowed to bear
the yoke of perpetual bondage, for this were they willing to do. And when they had besought
the King on this wise, he was moved unto tears for very pity, and, agreeing unto the petition
of the holy men, granted them his pardon.
CHAPTER VII
Marvels of Britain
These matters ended, Hoel did explore the site of the foresaid lake, and marvelled greatly to
behold how so many rivers, so many islands, so many rocks and so many eyries of eagles did
all so exactly agree in number. And while he thus marvelled, holding the same for a miracle,
Arthur came unto him and told him there was another lake in the same province even yet
more marvellous. ‘It lieth,’ saith he, ‘not far hence, and it hath twenty foot in breadth and the
same measure in length, with but five foot of depth. Howbeit, within this square, whether it
be by artifice of man or by ordinance of nature, do breed four manner fishes in the four
corners thereof; nor never is a fish of one quarter found in any of the others. Moreover,’ saith
he, ‘another lake is there in the parts of Wales nigh the Severn, which the men of that country
do call Linligwan, whereinto when the sea floweth it is received as into a whirlpit or swallow,
in suchwise as that the lake is never the fuller for the waters it doth ingulf so as to cover the
margent of the banks thereof. Natheless, when the sea ebbeth again, it doth spout forth the
waters it hath sucked in as it were a mountain, and overplasheth and covereth the banks. At
such a time, were the folk of all that country to stand anigh with their faces toward the lake
and should be sprinkled of the spray of the waves upon their garments, they should scarce
escape, if indeed they did at all escape, being swallowed up of the lake. Natheless, should
they turn their back to the lake, they need have no fear of being sprinkled, even though they
should stand upon the very brink.’
CHAPTER VIII
Lot, Urian and Angusel
Pardon granted unto the Scottish people, the King made for York, there to celebrate the
forthcoming Christmas festival. And when he was entered into the city and beheld the
desolation of the holy churches, he was sore grieved and moved unto compassion. For
Samson the Archbishop had been driven forth along with all the other holy men of religion,
and the half-burnt churches had ceased from the offices of God, so fiercely had the fury of the
Paynim prevailed. Forthwith he summoned a convocation of the clergy and people, and

98

appointed Pyramus his chaplain unto the Metropolitan See; restored the churches that were
cast down even to the ground, and did grace them with convents of religious both men and
women. The barons also that had been driven out by the incursions of the Saxons did he
restore unto their former honours.
CHAPTER IX
In that city were three brethren born of blood royal, Lot, to wit, and Urian and Angusel, that
had held the principality of those parts before the Saxons had prevailed. Being minded,
therefore, to grant unto them as unto the others their hereditary rights, he restored unto
Angusel the kingly power of the Scots, and conferred the sceptre of the people of Moray
upon Urian.
Arthur weddeth Guenevere
Howbeit, Lot, who in the days of Aurelius Ambrosius had married Arthur’s own sister, who
had borne unto him Gawain and Mordred, he did reinstate in the Dukedom of Lothian and of
the other provinces thereby that had appertained unto him aforetime. At last, when he had reestablished the state of the whole country in its ancient dignity, he took unto him a wife born
of a noble Roman family, Guenevere, who, brought up and nurtured in the household of Duke
Cador, did surpass in beauty all the other dames of the island.
CHAPTER X
When the next summer came on he fitted out his fleet and sailed unto the island of Hibernia,
that he desired to subdue unto himself. No sooner had he landed than Guillamur, beforementioned, came to meet him with a host past numbering, purposing to do battle with him.
But as soon as the fight began, his folk, naked and unarmed, fled whithersoever they might
find a place of refuge. Guillamur was forthwith taken prisoner and compelled to surrender,
and the rest of the princes of the country, smitten with dismay, likewise surrendered them
after their King’s ensample. All parts of Ireland thus subdued, he made with his fleet for
Iceland, and there also defeated the people and subjugated the island. Next, for far and wide
amongst the other islands it was rumoured that no country could stand against him, Doldavy,
King of Gothland, and Gunfast, King of the Orkneys, came of their own accord, and
promising a tribute, did homage unto him.
Of Arthur’s Court
At the end of winter he returned into Britain, and re-establishing his peace firmly throughout
the realm, did abide therein for the next twelve years.
CHAPTER XI
At the end of this time he invited unto him all soever of most prowess from far-off kingdoms
and began to multiply his household retinue, and to hold such courtly fashion in his
household as begat rivalry amongst peoples at a distance, insomuch as the noblest in the land,
fain to vie with him, would hold himself as nought, save in the cut of his clothes and the
manner of his arms he followed the pattern of Arthur’s knights. At last the fame of his bounty
and his prowess was upon every man’s tongue, even unto the uttermost ends of the earth, and
a fear fell upon the Kings of realms oversea lest he might fall upon them in arms and they
might lose the nations under their dominion. Grievously tormented of these devouring cares,
they set them to repairing their cities and the towers of their cities, and builded them
strongholds in places meet for defence, to the end that in case Arthur should lead an
expedition against them they might find refuge therein should need be. And when this was
notified unto Arthur, his heart was uplifted for that he was a terror unto them all, and he set
his desire upon subduing the whole of Europe unto himself.

99

Lot, King of Norway
Fitting forth his fleets accordingly, he made first of all for Norway, being minded to set the
crown thereof upon the head of Lot, his sister’s son. For Lot was grandson of Sichelm, King
of Norway, who at that time had died leaving the kingdom unto him. But the Norwegians
disinclined to receive him, and had raised one Riculf to the kingly power, deeming that, so
they garrisoned their cities, he would be able to withstand Arthur himself. At that time
Gawain, the son of Lot, was a youth of twelve years, and had been sent by his uncle to be
brought up as a page in the service of Pope Sulpicius, from whom he had received arms.
Accordingly, when Arthur, as I had begun to tell, landed upon the coast of Norway, King
Riculf met him with the whole people of the kingdom and did battle; but after much blood
had been shed upon both sides, the Britons at last prevailed, and making an onset, slew Riculf
with a number of his men. When they had won this victory they overran and set fire to the
cities, scattering the country folk, nor did they cease to give full loose to their cruelty until
they had submitted the whole of Norway as well as Denmark unto the dominion of Arthur.
These countries thus conquered, as soon as Arthur had raised Lot to be King of Norway
Arthur sailed for Gaul, and dividing his force into companies began everywhere to lay the
country waste. The province of Gaul at that time had been committed to the charge of Flollo,
Tribune of Rome, who ruled it under the Emperor Leo. He, when he was ware of Arthur’s
arrival, summoned every soldier in arms that owned his allegiance and fought against Arthur,
but in no wise might he stand against him.
Flollo challenges Arthur
For the youth of all the islands he had conquered were in Arthur’s company, whence it was of
common report that his army was so great that scarce of any the greatest might he be
overcome. In his retinue, moreover, was the better part of the knighthood of Gaul, whom by
his much largesse he had bound unto himself. Flollo, therefore, when he saw that he had been
worsted in the battle, forthwith forsaking the field, fled with a few of his men unto Paris.
There, reassembling his straggling army, he put the city in estate of defence and again was
fain to do battle with Arthur. But whilst he was thinking of strengthening his army by
auxiliaries from the neighbouring countries, Arthur came upon him at unawares and besieged
him in the city. At the end of a month, Flollo, taking it grievously to heart that his people
should be famished to death, sent unto Arthur challenging him to single combat on condition
that whichsoever of the twain should be conqueror should have the kingdom of the other. For
he was of great stature, hardihood and valour, and of his overweening confidence herein had
sent this challenge hoping that it might open unto him a door of safety. When the message
was brought unto Arthur, mightily was he rejoiced at Flollo’s proposal, and sent back word
that he was ready and willing to abide by the conditions thereof. Thereupon each did duly
enter into covenant with the other, and the twain met in an island that is without the city, all
the folk watching to see what might be the issue. Both were armed full seemly, and each
bestrode a destrier of marvellous swiftness; nor was it easy to forecast which of the twain
were most like to win the day.
Duel with Flollo
Taking their stand opposite each other, and couching lance in rest, they forthwith set spur to
their steeds and smote together with a right mighty shock. But Arthur, who bare his spear the
more heedfully, thrusted the same into the top of Flollo’s breast, and shielding off the other’s
blow with all the force he might, bare him to the ground. Then, unsheathing his sword, he
was hastening to smite him, when Flollo, on his legs again in an instant, ran upon him with
his spear levelled, and with a deadly thrust into his destrier’s chest brought both horse and
rider to the ground. When the Britons saw their King lying his length on the field, they

100

thought he was slain and could scarce be withholden from breaking the covenant and setting
on the Gauls with one accord. But before they had resolved to transgress the bounds of peace
Arthur was quickly on his legs again, and, covering him with his shield, was hastily stepping
up to meet Flollo, who was bearing down upon him. And now, standing up to each other man
to man, they redouble buffet on buffet, each bent upon fighting it out to the death. At last
Flollo found an opening and smote Arthur on the forehead, and, had not the crash of the
stroke on the helmet blunted the edge of his sword, the wound might well have been Arthur’s
death. But when the blood welled forth, and Arthur saw his habergeon and shield all red
therewithal, his wrath waxed yet more burning hot, and raising Caliburn aloft, with all his
force he brought it down through the helmet on to the head of Flollo and clove it sheer in
twain.
Bedevere and Kay
With this stroke Flollo fell, and beating the ground with his heels, gave up his ghost to the
winds.
When the tidings was known throughout the army, the citizens all ran together and, opening
the gates, delivered themselves up unto Arthur. He, after thus achieving the victory, divided
his army into two commands, giving one into commission unto Duke Hoel, and bidding him
go conquer Guitard, Duke of the Poitevins, whilst he himself with the other command busied
him with subduing the other provinces. Thereupon Hoel marched into Aquitaine, invaded the
cities of the country, and after harassing Guitard in a number of battles, compelled him to
surrender. He next laid waste Gascony with fire and sword, and subjugated the princes
thereof. After a space of nine years, when he had subdued all the parts of Gaul unto his
dominion, Arthur again came unto Paris and there held his court. He there also summoned a
convocation of the clergy and people, and did confirm the stablishment of the realm in peace
and law. At that time, moreover, he made grant of Neustria, which is now called Normandy,
unto Bedevere his butler, and the province of Anjou unto Kay his seneschal. Many other
provinces also did he grant unto the noblemen that did him service in his household. At last,
when all the states and peoples were stablished in his peace, he returned into Britain at the
beginning of spring.
CHAPTER XII
Arthur at Caerleon
When the high festival of Whitsuntide began to draw nigh, Arthur, filled with exceeding great
joy at having achieved so great success, was fain to hold high court, and to set the crown of
the kingdom upon his head, to convene the Kings and Dukes that were his vassals to the
festival so that he might the more worshipfully celebrate the same, and renew his peace more
firmly amongst his barons. Howbeit, when he made known his desire unto his familiars, he,
by their counsel, made choice of the City of Legions wherein to fulfil his design. For, situate
in a passing pleasant position on the river Usk in Glamorgan, not far from the Severn sea, and
abounding in wealth above all other cities, it was the place most meet for so high a solemnity.
For on the one side thereof flowed the noble river aforesaid whereby the Kings and Princes
that should come from oversea might be borne thither in their ships; and on the other side,
girdled about with meadows and woods, passing fair was the magnificence of the kingly
palaces thereof with the gilded verges of the roofs that imitated Rome. Howbeit, the chiefest
glories thereof were the two churches, one raised in honour of the Martyr Julius, that was
right fair graced by a convent of virgins that had dedicated them unto God, and the second,
founded in the name of the blessed Aaron, his companion, the main pillars whereof were a

101

brotherhood of canons regular, and this was the cathedral church of the third Metropolitan
See of Britain.
The glories of Caerleon
It had, moreover, a school of two hundred philosophers learned in astronomy and in the other
arts, that did diligently observe the courses of the stars, and did by true inferences foretell the
prodigies which at that time were about to befall unto King Arthur. Such was the city, famed
for such abundance of things delightsome, that was now busking her for the festival that had
been proclaimed. Messengers were sent forth into the divers kingdoms, and all that owed
allegiance throughout the Gauls and the neighbour islands were invited unto the court. Came
accordingly Angusel, King of Albany, that is now called Scotland; Urian, King of them of
Moray; Cadwallo Lewirh, King of the Venedotians, that now be called the North Welsh;
Sater, King of the Demeti, that is, of the South Welsh; Cador, King of Cornwall, the
Archbishops of the three Metropolitan Sees, to wit, of London and York, and Dubric of the
City of Legions. He, Primate of Britain and Legate of the Apostolic See, was of so
meritorious a piety that he could make whole by his prayers any that lay oppressed of any
malady. Came also the Earls of noble cities; Morvid, Earl of Gloucester; Mauron of
Winchester; Anaraut of Salisbury; Arthgal of Carguet, that is also called Warguit; Jugein
from Leicester; Cursal from Caistor; Kimmare, Duke of Dorobernia; Galluc of Salisbury;
Urgen from Bath; Jonathal of Dorchester; Boso of Ridoc, that is Oxford. Besides the earls
came champions of lesser dignity, Danant map Papo; Cheneus map Coil; Peredur map Elidur;
Guisul map Nogoit; Regin map Claut; Eddelein map Cledauc; Kincar map Bagan; Kimmare;
Gorbonian map Goit; Clofaut; Rupmaneton; Kimbelim map Trunat; Chatleus map Catel;
Kinlich map Neton, and many another beside, the names whereof be too long to tell.
Guests at Court
From the neighbour islands came likewise Guillamur, King of Ireland; Malvasius, King of
Iceland; Doldavy, King of Gothland: Gunvasius, King of the Orkneys; Lot, King of Norway;
Aschil, King of the Danes. From the parts oversea came also Holdin, King of the Ruteni;
Leodegar, Earl of Boulogne; Bedevere the Butler, Duke of Normandy; Borel of Maine; Kay
the Seneschal, Duke of Anjou; Guitard of Poitou; the Twelve Peers of the Gauls whom
Guerin of Chartres brought with him; Hoel, Duke of the Armorican Britons, with the barons
of his allegiance, who marched along with such magnificence of equipment in trappings and
mules and horses as may not easily be told. Besides all these, not a single Prince of any price
on this side Spain remained at home and came not upon the proclamation. And no marvel, for
Arthur’s bounty was of common report throughout the whole wide world, and all men for his
sake were fain to come.
CHAPTER XIII
When all at last were assembled in the city on the high day of the festival, the archbishops
were conducted unto the palace to crown the King with the royal diadem.
Arthur’s coronation
Dubric, therefore, upon whom the charge fell, for that the court was held within his diocese,
was ready to celebrate the service. As soon as the King had been invested with the ensigns of
kingship, he was led in right comely wise to the church of the Metropolitan See, two
archbishops supporting him, the one upon his right hand side the other upon his left. Four
Kings, moreover, to wit, those of Albany, Cornwall, and North and South Wales, went before
him, bearing before him, as was their right, four golden swords. A company of clerics in holy
orders of every degree went chanting music marvellous sweet in front. Of the other party, the
archbishops and pontiffs led the Queen, crowned with laurel and wearing her own ensigns,

102

unto the church of the virgins dedicatee, The four Queens, moreover, of the four Kings
already mentioned, did bear before her according to wont and custom four white doves, and
the ladies that were present did follow after her rejoicing greatly. At last, when the procession
was over, so manifold was the music of the organs and so many were the hymns that were
chanted in both churches, that the knights who were there scarce knew which church they
should enter first for the exceeding sweetness of the harmonies in both. First into the one and
then into the other they flocked in crowds, nor, had the whole day been given up to the
celebration, would any have felt a moment’s weariness thereof. And when the divine services
had been celebrated in both churches, the King and Queen put off their crowns, and doing on
lighter robes of state, went to meat, he to his palace with the men, she to another palace with
the women.
A State banquet
For the Britons did observe the ancient custom of the Trojans, and were wont to celebrate
their high festival days, the men with the men and the women with the women severally. And
when all were set at table according as the rank of each did demand, Kay the Seneschal, in a
doublet furred of ermines, and a thousand youths of full high degree in his company, all
likewise clad in ermines, did serve the meats along with him. Of the other part, as many in
doublets furred of vair did follow Bedevere the Butler, and along with him did serve the
drinks from the divers ewers into the manifold-fashioned cups. In the palace of the Queen no
less did numberless pages, clad in divers brave liveries, offer their service each after his
office, the which were I to go about to describe I might draw out my history into an endless
prolixity. For at that time was Britain exalted unto so high a pitch of dignity as that it did
surpass all other kingdoms in plenty of riches, in luxury of adornment, and in the courteous
wit of them that dwelt therein. Whatsoever knight in the land was of renown for his prowess
did wear his clothes and his arms all of one same colour. And the dames, no less witty, would
apparel them in like manner in a single colour, nor would they deign have the love of none
save he had thrice approved him in the wars. Wherefore at that time did dames wax chaste
and knights the nobler for their love.
CHAPTER XIV
Tourneys and games
Refreshed by their banqueting, they go forth into the fields without the city, and sundry
among them fall to playing at sundry manner games. Presently the knights engage in a game
on horseback, making show of fighting a battle whilst the dames and damsels looking on
from the top of the walls, for whose sake the courtly knights make believe to be fighting, do
cheer them on for the sake of seeing the better sport. Others elsewhere spend the rest of the
day in shooting arrows, some in tilting with spears, some in flinging heavy stones, some in
putting the weight; others again in playing at the dice or in a diversity of other games, but all
without wrangling; and whosoever had done best in his own game was presented by Arthur
with a boon of price. And after the first three days had been spent on this wise, upon the
fourth day all they that had done service in virtue of the office they held were summoned, and
unto each was made grant of the honour of the office he held, in possession, earldom, to wit,
of city or castle, archbishopric, bishopric, abbacy, or whatsoever else it might be.
CHAPTER XV
Lucius Hiberius: his letter
Now the blessed Dubric, piously yearning after the life of a hermit, did depose himself from
the archiepiscopal See, and David, the King’s uncle, was consecrated in his place, whose life
was an ensample of all goodness unto them whom he had instructed in his doctrine. In the

103

place, moreover, of the holy Samson, Archbishop of Dol, was appointed Chelian, an
illustrious priest of Landaff, with the consent of Hoel, King of the Armorican Britons, unto
whom the good life and conditions of the man had commended him. The Bishopric of
Silchester also was assigned to Mangan, and that of Winton unto Diwan, and the pontifical
mitre of Alclud unto Eledan. And whilst Arthur was allotting these benefices amongst them,
behold, twelve men of ripe age and worshipful aspect, bearing branches of olive in their right
hands in token of embassy, approach anigh the King with quiet step and words as quiet, and
after saluting him, present unto him a letter on behalf of Lucius Hiberius conceived in these
words:
‘Lucius, Procurator of the Republic, unto Arthur, King of Britain, wisheth that which he hath
deserved.
‘With much marvel do I marvel at the insolence of thy tyranny. I do marvel, I say, thereat,
and at the injury that thou hast done unto Rome. When I recall it to remembrance, I am
moved unto wrath for that thou art so far beside thyself as not to acknowledge it, and art in no
hurry to perceive what it is to have offended the Senate by thy wrongful deeds, albeit none
better knoweth than thou that the whole world oweth vassalage thereunto. For the tribute of
Britain that the Senate hath commanded thee to pay, and that hath been paid these many ages
unto Caius Julius, and unto his successors in the dignity of Rome, thou hast presumed to hold
back in contempt of an empire of so lofty rank.
Cador jesteth
Thou hast, moreover, seized from them Gaul, seized from them the province of the
Allobroges, seized from them all the islands of the Ocean sea, the Kings whereof have paid
tribute unto our forefathers from the time that the Roman power did in those parts prevail.
Now, therefore, seeing that the Senate hath decreed to demand lawful redress of thee for
heaping so huge a pile of injuries upon them, I do command thee that thou appear in Rome,
and do appoint the middle day of August in the year next coming as the term of thine
appearance, there to make satisfaction unto thy lords, and to abide by such sentence as their
justice shall decree. Wherein if thou dost make default, I myself will enter into thy dominions
and will take heed by means of the sword to restore unto the Republic all those lands whereof
thy mad presumption hath plundered her.’
When this letter was read in presence of the King and his earls, Arthur went apart with them
into the Giants’ Tower, that is at the entrance of the palace, to treat with them as to what
ordinance they ought to make as against a mandate of the kind. But, just as they had begun to
mount the stair, Cador, Duke of Cornwall, that was ever a merry man, burst out on laughing
before the King, and spake unto him on this wise:
‘Until now it hath been my fear that the easy life the Britons have led this long time they have
been at peace might make them wax craven, and utterly do away in them their renown in
knighthood wherein they have ever been held to excel all other nations. For where use of
arms is none, Arthur’s and nought is there to do but to toy with women speech and play at the
dice and such like follies, none need doubt but that cowardice will tarnish all they once had of
valour and honour and hardihood and renown. For nigh upon five year is it since we took to
junketings of the kind for lack of the sports of Mars. Wherefore, methinks, God Himself hath
put the Romans upon this hankering, that so He may deliver us from our cowardize and
restore us to our prowess as it wont to be in the old days.’
And whilst he was saying this and more to the same purpose, they were come to their seats,
and when they were all set, Arthur spake unto them thus:
CHAPTER XVI

104

‘Comrades,’ saith he, ‘alike in adversity and in prosperity, whose prowess I have made proof
of in giving of counsel no less than in deeds of arms, now earnestly bethink ye all in
common, and make ye wise provision as to what ye deem best for us to do in face of such
mandate as is this, for that which is diligently provided for by a wise man aforehand is the
more easily borne withal when it cometh to the act. The more easily therefore shall we be
able to withstand the attack of Lucius, if we shall first with one accord have applied us to
weighing heedfully the means whereby we may best enfeeble the effect thereof.
Let Rome pay tribute to us
Which, verily, I deem not greatly to be dreaded of us, seeing that he doth with so
unreasonable cause demand the tribute that he desireth to have from Britain. For he saith that
we ought of right to give it unto him, for that it was paid unto Julius Cæsar and the other his
successors, who, invited by the discords of the ancient Britons, did of old invade Britain by
force of arms, and did thus by violence subdue unto their power the country tottering as it
then was with civil dissensions. But, forasmuch as it was on this wise that they possessed
them of the country, it hath been only by an injustice that they have taken tribute thereof. For
nought that is taken by force and violence can be justly possessed by him that did the
violence. Wherefore a cause without reason is this that he pretendeth whereby he assumeth
that we are of right his tributaries. Howbeit, sith that he thus presumeth to demand of us that
which is unjust, let us also, by like reasoning, ask tribute of Rome from him, and let him that
is the better man of the twain carry off that which he hath demanded to have. For, if it be that
because Julius Cæsar and the rest of the Roman Kings did conquer Britain in old days, he
doth therefore decree that tribute ought now to be paid unto him therefrom, in like manner do
I now decree that Rome ought of right to pay tribute unto me, forasmuch as mine ancestors
did of yore obtain possession of Rome. For Belinus, that most high and mighty King, did,
with the assistance of his brother, Brennius, to wit, Duke of the Allobroges, take the city, and
in the midmost of the market-place thereof did hang a score of the most noble Romans; and
moreover, after they had taken it, did for many a year possess the same, Constantine, also, the
son of Helena, no less than Maximian, both of them nigh of kindred unto myself, and both of
whom, the one after the other, wore the crown of Britain, did also obtain the throne of the
Roman empire.
not we to Rome
Bethink ye, therefore, whether we should ask tribute of Rome? But as to Gaul or the
neighbour islands of the Ocean, no need is there of answer, inasmuch as he shrank from
defending them at the time we took them out of his dominion.’
And when he had thus spoken with more to the same effect, Hoel, King of the Armorican
Britons, rising up in precedence of all the rest, made answer unto him on this wise:
CHAPTER XVII
‘Were each one of up to take thought within himself, and were he able to turn over in his
mind all the arguments upon every point in question, I deem that no better counsel could he
find than this which the wise discretion of thy policy hath thus proposed unto our acceptance.
For so exactly hath thy provident forethought anticipated our desire, and with such Tullian
dew of eloquence hast thou besprinkled it withal, that we ought all of us to praise without
ceasing the affection of a man so constant, the power of a mind so wise, the profit of counsel
so exceeding apt to the occasion. For if, in accordance with thine argument, thou art minded
to go to Rome, I doubt not that the victory shall be ours, seeing that what we do justly
demand of our enemies they did first begin to demand of us.
Hoel’s speech

105

For whosoever doth seek to snatch away from another those things that be his own doth
deserve to lose his own through him whom he seeketh to wrong. Wherefore, sith that the
Romans do desire to take from us that which is our own, beyond all doubt we shall take their
own from them, so only we be allowed to meet them in the field. Behold, this is the battle
most to be desired by all Britons. Behold the prophecies of the Sibyl that are witnessed by
tokens true, that for the third time shall one of British race be born that shall obtain the
empire of Rome. Already are the oracles fulfilled as to the two, sith that manifestly, as thou
hast said, the two illustrious princes, Belinus and Constantine, have worn the imperial crown
of the Roman empire. And now in thee have we the third unto whom is promised that highest
height of honour. Hasten thou, therefore, to receive that which God tarrieth not to grant.
Hasten to subjugate that which doth desire to be subjugated! Hasten to exalt us all, who, in
order that thou thyself mayst be exalted, will shrink not from receiving wounds, nay, nor
from losing our very lives. And that thou mayst carry this matter through I will accompany
thy presence with ten thousand men-at-arms.’
CHAPTER XVIII
When Hoel had made an end of his speech, Angusel also, King of Albany, went on to declare
what was his mind in the matter on this wise:
Angusel’s speech
‘From the moment that I understood my lord to be so minded as he hath said, such gladness
hath entered into my heart that I know not how to utter it at this present. For in all our past
campaigns that we have fought against kings so many and so mighty, all that we have done
meseemeth as nought so long as the Romans and the Germans remain unharmed, and we
revenge not like men the slaughter they have formerly inflicted upon our fellow-countrymen.
But now that leave is granted us to meet them in battle, I rejoice with exceeding great joy,
and do yearn with desire for the day to come when we shall meet. I am athirst for their blood,
even as for a well-spring when I had for three days been forbidden to drink. O, may I see that
morrow! How sweet will be the wounds whether I give them or receive! when the right hand
dealeth with right hand. Yea, death itself will be sweet, so I may suffer it in revenging our
fathers, in safeguarding our freedom, in exalting our King! Let us fall upon these half men,
and falling upon them, tread them under foot, so that when we have conquered them we may
spoil them of their honours and enjoy the victory we have won. I will add two thousand
horsemen to our army besides those on foot.’
CHAPTER XIX
Thereafter the rest said what there was left to say. Each promised the knight’s service that
was due from him, so that besides those that the Duke of Armorica had promised, sixty
thousand were reckoned from the island of Britain alone of armed men with all arms.
Numbers of the host
But the Kings of the other islands, inasmuch as they had not yet taken up with the custom of
having knights, promised foot soldiers as many as were due from them, so that out of the six
islands, to wit, Ireland, Iceland, Gothland, the Orkneys, Norway and Denmark, were
numbered six score thousand. From the duchies of the Gauls, the Ruteni, Portunians,
Estrusians, Maine, Anjou and Poitou, eighty thousand; from the twelve earldoms of those
who came along with Guerin of Chartres, twelve hundred. Altogether they made eighty-three
thousand two hundred besides those on foot, who were not so easy to reckon.
CHAPTER XX

106

King Arthur, seeing that all those of his allegiance were ready with one accord, bade them
return quickly unto their own countries and call out the armies they had promised; so that in
the Kalends of August they might hasten unto the haven of Barfleur, and from thence
advance with him to the frontiers of the Allobroges to meet the Romans. Howbeit, he sent
word unto the Emperors through their ambassadors that in no wise would he pay the tribute,
nor would go to Rome for the sake of obeying their decree, but rather for the sake of
demanding from them what they had by judicial sentence decreed to demand from him.
Thereupon the ambassadors depart, the Kings depart, the barons depart, nor are they slow to
perform what they had been bidden to do.

107

Book Ten
CHAPTER I
The Roman muster
Lucius Hiberius, when he learnt that such answer had been decreed, by command of the
Senate called forth the Kings of the Orient to make ready their armies and come with him, to
the conquest of Britain. In haste accordingly came Epistrophius, King of the Greeks;
Mustensar, King of the Africans; Alifantinas, King of Spain; Hirtacius, King of the Parthians;
Bocchus of the Medes; Sertorius of Libya; Teucer, King of Phrygia; Serses, King of the
Ituraeans; Pandrasus, King of Egypt; Micipsa, King of Babylon; Polytetes, Duke of Bithynia;
Evander of Syria; Aethion of Bœotia; Hippolytus of Crete, with the dukes and barons of their
allegiance. Of the senatorial order, moreover, Lucius Catellus, Marius Lepidus, Caius
Metellus Cotta, Quintus Milvius Catulus, Quintus Carutius, and so many others as were
reckoned to make up a total of four hundred thousand one hundred and sixty.
CHAPTER II
All needful ordinance made, they started on their expedition Britainwards at the beginning of
the Kalends of August.
Arthur’s vision
When Arthur learned that they were upon the march, he made over the charge of defending
Britain unto his nephew Mordred and his Queen Guenevere, he himself with his army making
for Hamo’s port, where he embarked with a fair breeze of wind. And whilst that he was
thronged about with his numberless ships, and was cleaving the deep with a prosperous
course and much rejoicing, a passing deep sleep as about the middle of the night did overtake
him, and in his sleep he saw in dream a certain bear flying in the air, at the growling whereof
all the shores did tremble. He saw, moreover, a dreadful dragon come flying from the West
that did enlumine the whole country with the flashing of his eyes. And when the one did meet
the other there was a marvellous fight betwixt them, and presently the dragon leaping again
and again upon the bear, did scorch him up with his fiery breath and cast down his shrivelled
carcass to the earth. And thereby awakened, Arthur did relate his dream unto them that stood
by, who expounded the same unto him saying that the dragon did betoken himself, but the
bear some giant with whom he should encounter; that the fight did foretoken a battle that
should be betwixt them, and that the dragon’s victory should be his own. Natheless, Arthur
did conjecture otherwise thereof, weening that such vision as had befallen him was more like
to have to do with himself and the Emperor. At last, when the night had finished her course
and the dawn waxed red, they came to in the haven of Barfleur, and pitching their tents
thereby, did await the coming of the Kings of the islands and the Dukes of the neighbour
provinces.
CHAPTER III
Arthur fighteth a giant
Meanwhile tidings are brought unto that Arthur a certain giant of marvellous bigness hath
arrived out of the parts of Spain, and moreover, that he hath seized Helena, niece of Duke
Hoel, out of the hands of them that hath charge of her, and hath fled with her unto the top of
the mount that is now called of Michael, whither the knights of the country had pursued him.
Howbeit, nought might they prevail against him, neither by sea nor by land, for when they

108

would attack him, either he would sink their ships with hugeous rocks, or slay the men with
javelins or other weapons, and, moreover, devour many half-alive. Accordingly, in the
following night at the second hour, he took with him Kay the Seneschal and Bedevere the
Butler, and issuing forth of the tents, unknown to the others, started on his way towards the
mount. For of such puissance was his own valour that he deigned not lead an army against
such monsters, as holding himself singly enow for their destruction, and being minded to
spirit up his men to follow his ensample. Now, when they came anigh the mount, they espied
a great fire of wood a-blazing thereupon, and another smaller fire upon a smaller mount not
far away from the first. So, being in doubt which were the one whereupon the giant had his
wone, they sent Bedevere to spy out the certainty of the matter.
Bedevere and the old woman
He, therefore, finding a little boat, oared him first unto the smaller mount, for none otherwise
might he attain thereunto, seeing that it was set in the sea. And when he began to climb up
towards the top he heard above him the ullaloo of a woman wailing above him, and at first
shuddered, for he misdoubted him the monster might be there. But quickly recovering his
hardihood, he drew his sword from the scabbard and mounted to the very top, whereon
nought found he save the fire of wood they had espied. But close thereby he saw a newlymade grave-mound, and beside it an old woman weeping and lamenting, who, so soon as she
beheld him, stinted her tears forthwith and spake unto him on this wise: ‘O, unhappy man,
what evil doom hath brought thee unto this place? O, thou that must endure the pangs
unspeakable of death, woe is me for thee! Woe is me that a monster so accurst must this night
consume the flower of thine youth! For that most foul and impious giant of execrable name
shall presently be here, that did carry hither unto this mount the niece of our Duke, whom I
have but just now sithence buried in this grave, and me, her nurse, along with her. On what
unheard of wise will he slay thee and tarry not? Alas for the sorrow and the doom! is most
queenly foster-child of mine own, swooning with terror when this abhorred monster would
fain have embraced her, breathed forth the life that now can never know the longer day that it
deserved! Ochone for mine other soul—mine other life—mine other sweetness of gladness!
Flee thou, my beloved, flee, lest he find thee here, and rend thee limb from limb by a pitiable
death!’
Arthur and the giant
But Bedevere, moved to the heart deeply as heart of man may be moved, soothed her with
words of comfort, and promising her such cheer as speedy succour might bring, returned unto
Arthur and told him the story of what he had found. Howbeit, Arthur, grieving over the
damsel’s hapless fate, bade them that they should allow him to attack the monster singly, but
if need were should come unto his rescue and fall upon the giant like men. They made their
way from thence unto the greater mount, and giving their horses in charge to their squires,
began to climb the mount, Arthur going first. Just then that unnatural monster was by the fire,
his chops all besmeared with the clotted blood of half-eaten swine, the residue whereof he
was toasting on spits over the live embers. The moment he espied them, when nought was
less in his thought, he hastened him to get hold of his club, which two young men could
scarce have lifted from the ground. The King forthwith unsheathed his sword, and covering
him with his shield, hurried as swiftly as hurry he might to be beforehand with him, and
prevent his getting hold of the club. But the giant, not unaware of his intention, had already
clutched it and smote the King upon the cover of his shield with such a buffet as that the
sound of the stroke filled the whole shore, and did utterly deafen his ears. But Arthur,
thereupon blazing out into bitter wrath, lifted his sword and dealt him a wound upon his

109

forehead, from whence the blood gushed forth over his face and eyes in such sort as wellnigh blinded his sight.
Of the giant Ritho
Howbeit, the blow was not deadly, for he had warded his forehead with his club in such wise
as to scape being killed outright. Natheless, blinded as he was with the blood welling forth,
again he cometh on more fiercely than ever, and as a wild boar rusheth from his lay upon a
huntsman, so thrust he in within the sweep of Arthur’s sword, gripped him by the loins, and
forced him to his knees upon the ground. Howbeit, Arthur, nothing daunted, soon slipped
from out his clutches, and swiftly bestirring him with his sword, hacked the accursed monster
first in one place and then in another, and gave him no f respite until at last he smote him a
deadly buffet on the head, and buried the whole breadth of his sword in his brain-pan. The
abhorred beast roared aloud and dropped with a mighty crash like an oak torn up by the roots
in the fury of the winds. Thereupon the King brake out on laughing, bidding Bedevere strike
off his head and give it to one of the squires to carry to the camp as a raree show for
sightseers. Natheless, he bade that they who came to look upon it should keep their tongues
quiet, inasmuch as never had he forgathered with none other of so puissant hardihood since
he slew the giant Ritho upon Mount Eryri, that had challenged him to fight with him. For this
Ritho had fashioned him a furred cloak of the beards of the kings he had slain, and he had
bidden Arthur heedfully to flay off his beard and send it unto him with the skin, in which
case, seeing that Arthur did excel other kings, he would sew it in his honour above the other
beards on his cloak.
Arthur at Autun
Howbeit, in case he refused, he challenged him to fight upon such covenant, that he which
should prove the better man of the twain should have the other’s beard as well as the furred
cloak. So when it came to the scratch Arthur had the best of it and carried off Ritho’s beard
and his cloak, and sithence that time had never had to do with none so strong until he lighted
upon this one, as he is above reported as asserting. After he had won this victory as I have
said, they returned just after daybreak to their tents with the head; crowds coming running up
to look upon it and praising the valour of the man that had delivered the country from so
insatiable a man. But Hoel, grieving over the loss of his niece, bade build a church above her
body upon the mount where she lay, the which was named after the damsel’s grave, and is
called the Tomb of Helena unto this day.
CHAPTER IV
When all were come together that Arthur had expected, he marched from thence to Autun,
where he thought the Emperor was. But when he had come as far as the river Aube, tidings
were brought him that he had pitched his camp not far away, and was marching with an army
so huge, that it was impossible, so they said, to withstand him. Howbeit, so little was Arthur
affrighted thereat, that no change made he in his plans, but pitched his camp upon the river
bank, from whence he could freely lead forth his army, and whither in case of need he could
as easily repair.
Boso of Oxford
He then sent two of his earls, Boso of Oxford and Guerin of Chartres, together with his
nephew Gawain, unto Lucius Hiberius, to intimate unto him that either he must retire
forthwith beyond the frontier of Gaul or come next day to try conclusions with him as to
which of the twain had the better right to the country. Thereupon the young men of the court,
rejoicing exceedingly at the prospect, began to egg on Gawain to start the quarrel before
leaving the Emperor’s camp, so that they might have occasion to come to blows with the

110

Romans forthwith. Away went the envoys accordingly to Lucius, and bade him retreat from
Gaul at once or come out next day to fight. And when he made them answer that he had not
come thither to retreat, but on the contrary to command, a nephew of his that was there, one
Caius Quintilianus, took occasion to say that the Britons were better men at bragging and
threatening than in deeds of hardihood and prowess. Gawain thereat waxing wroth, drew the
sword wherewith he was girt, and running upon him smote off his head, coming swiftly away
with his companions to their horses. The Romans, some on foot and some on horse, start in
hot pursuit, straining their utmost to wreak revenge for their fellow-countryman upon the
fleeing legates. But Guerin of Chartres, when one of them was almost nigh enow to touch
hint, wheeled round of a sudden and couching his spear thrust him through the armour and
right through the middle of the body, and stretched him out as flat as he might upon the
ground.
and Guerin of Chartres
Boso of Oxford, waxing jealous at seeing Guerin do so daring a deed, turned back his own
destrier and thrust his spear into the gullet of the first man he met, and forced him, mortally
wounded, to part company with the hackney whereon he was pursuing him. Meanwhile,
Marcellus Mutius, burning to be first to avenge Quintilianus, was hard upon the back of
Gawain and had begun to lay hold upon him, when Gawain suddenly turning round, clove
him with the sword he still held in his hand sheer through helmet and skull down to the
breast. Gawain, moreover, bade him when he should meet Quintilianus, whom he had slain in
the camp, in hell, Ito tell him that in such manner of bragging and threatening were none
better men than the Britons.
Gawain then, reassembling his comrades, counselled that all should turn back, and that in
charging all together each should do his best to slay his man. All agreed accordingly; all
turned back, and each killed his man. Howbeit, the Romans kept on pursuing them and now
and again with spear or sword made shift to wound some few of them, but were unable either
to hold or to unhorse any. But whilst they were following up the pursuit nigh a certain wood,
straightway forth issue therefrom about six thousand Britons who having intelligence of the
flight of the earls, had hidden them therein for the purpose of bringing them succour. Sallying
forth, they set spur to their horses, and rending the air with their shouts and covering them
with their shields, attack the Romans on the sudden, and presently drive them in flight before
them, Pursuing them with one accord, they smite some from their horses with their spears,
some they take prisoner, some they slay.
Petreius Cotta
When word of this was brought to the senator Petreius, he took with him a company of ten
thousand men, and hastened to succour his comrades, and compelled the Britons to hasten
back to the wood from whence they had made the sally, not without some loss of his own
men. For in their flight the Britons turned back, and knowing the ground well, did inflict
passing heavy slaughter upon their pursuers. Whilst the Britons were thus giving ground,
Hider, with five thousand men, hurried to their assistance. They now make a stand, and
whereas they had afore shown their back to the Romans, they now show their front and set to
work to lay about them like men as stoutly as they might. The Romans also stand up to them
stiffly, and one while it is Briton that gets stricken down and another while Roman. But the
Britons were yearning with all their soul for a fight, and cared not greatly whether they won
or lost in the first bout so long as the fighting were really begun, whereas the Romans went to
work more heedfully, and Petreius Cotta, like a good captain as he was, skilfully instructed
them how and when to advance or retreat, and thus did the greater damage to the Britons.
Now, when Boso took note of this, he called a number of them that he knew to be the hardiest

111

aside from the others, and spake unto them on this wise: Seeing that we began this battle
without Arthur’s knowledge, we must take right good heed that we get not the worst of it in
our adventure. For and if it be that we come to grief herein, we shall not only do heavy
damage to our men, but we shall have the King cursing us for our foolhardiness.
Boso’s enterprise
Wherefore, pluck up your courage, and follow me into the Roman ranks, and if that we have
any luck we will either slay Petreius or take him prisoner.’ So they all set spur to their horses,
and charging with one accord into the enemies’ ranks, came to where Petreius was giving
orders to his men. Boso rushed in upon him as swiftly as he might, grasped him round the
neck, and, as he had made up his mind to do aforehand, dropped down with him to the
ground. Thereupon the Romans come running up to rescue him from the enemy, and the
Britons as quickly run up to succour Boso. A mighty slaughter is made betwixt them, with
mighty shouting and uproar as the Romans struggle to deliver the Duke and the Britons to
hold him. On both sides were wounders and wounded, strikers and stricken to the ground.
There, moreover, could it be seen which was the better man at thrust of spear and stroke of
swords and fling of javelin. At last the Britons falling upon them in close rank, unbroken by
the Roman charge, move off into the safety of their own lines along with Petreius. From
thence forthwith they again charge upon the Romans, now bereft of their captain and for the
most part enfeebled and dispirited and beginning to turn tail. They press forward and strike at
them in the rear, cut down them they strike, plunder them they cut down, and pass by them
they have plundered to pursue the rest. Howbeit, a number of them they take prisoner whom
they are minded to present unto the King.
Duke Cador and Richer
In the end, when they had inflicted mischief enow upon them, they made their way back to
the camp with their spoil and their captives, and, relating all that had befallen them resented
Petreius Cotta and the rest of the prisoners unto Arthur and wished him joy of the victory. He,
in return, did bid them joy, and promised them honours and increase of honours seeing that
they had done deeds of such prowess in his absence. Being minded, moreover, to thrust the
captives into prison, he called unto him certain of his serjeants to bring them on the morrow
unto Paris, and deliver them unto the charge of the reeves of the city until further ordinance
should be made on their behalf. He further commanded Duke Cador, Bedevere the Butler and
the two Earls Borel and Richer, with their retinues, to convoy them so far on their way as that
they need be under no fear of molestation by the Romans.
CHAPTER V
But the Romans happening to get wind of this arrangement, by command of the Emperor
made choice of fifteen thousand of their men to march that very night so as to be beforehand,
and to rescue the prisoners after defeating the convoy. These were to be under the command
of the Senators Vulteius Catellus and Quintus Carutius, besides Evander, King of Syria, and
Sertorius, King of Libya, who started on the appointed march with the said soldiers at night,
and hid them in a position convenient for an ambuscade upon the road they weened that the
party would travel by.
Bedevere and Borel
On the morrow the Britons begin their march with the prisoners, and had well-nigh reached
the place, not knowing what snares the crafty enemy had set for them. Howbeit, no sooner
had they entered that part of the road than the Romans sallied forth of a sudden and surprised
and broke the ranks of the British who were quite unprepared for an attack of the kind.
Natheless, albeit they were thus taken aback, they soon drew together again and made a stout

112

defence, setting some to guard the prisoners whilst the rest divided into companies to do
battle with the enemy. Richer and Bedevere were in command of the company that kept
guard over the prisoners, Cador, Duke of Cornwall, with Borer, taking command of the rest.
But the Romans had all burst in upon them disorderly, and took no heed to dispose their men
in companies, their one care, indeed, being which should be first to slaughter the Britons
before they could form their ranks and marshal them so as to defend themselves. By reason of
this the Britons were reduced to so sore straits that they would shamefully have lost the
prisoners they were convoying had not good luck swiftly brought them the succour they
needed. For Guitard, Duke of the Poitevins, who had discovered the stratagem, had arrived
with three thousand men, by whose timely assistance the Britons did at last prevail and pay
back the evil turn of the slaughter upon the insolent brigands that had assaulted them. But
many of their own men did they lose in the first onset, for among others they lost Borel, the
renowned Earl of Maine, who, while battling with Evander, King of Syria, was pierced
through the throat with his spear, and poured forth his life with his blood.
Lucius thinketh to flee
They lost, moreover, four barons, Hireglas of Periron, Maurice of Cahors, Aliduc of Tintagel,
and his son Hider, than whom none hardier were easy to be found. Natheless, the Britons
stinted nought of their hardihood nor gave them up to despair, but straining every endeavour
determined to keep safe their prisoners and cut down their enemies to the last. In the end the
Romans, unable to stand up against them, hastily retreated from the field and began to make
for their camp. But the Britons, still pursuing them, slew many and took more prisoners, nor
did they rest until Vulteius Catellus and Evander, King of Syria, were slain and the rest
utterly scattered. When they had won the victory, they sent the prisoners they were convoying
on to Paris, and marching back unto their King with them that they had lately taken, promised
him hope of supreme victory, seeing that so few had won the day against so many enemies
that had come against them.
CHAPTER VI
Lucius Hiberius, meanwhile, taking these disasters sorely to heart, was mightily perplexed
and distressed to make resolve whether it were better for him to hazard a general engagement
with Arthur, or to throw himself into Autun and there await assistance from the Emperor Leo.
In the end he took counsel of his fears, and on the night following marched his armies into
Langres on his way to Autun.
Captains of the host
As soon as Arthur discovered this scheme, he determined to be beforehand with him on the
march, and that same night, leaving the city on his left, he took up a position in a certain
valley called Soissie, through the which Lucius would have to pass. Disposing his men in
companies as he thought best, he posted one legion close by under the command of Morvid,
Earl of Gloucester, so that, if need were, he would know whither to betake him to rally his
broken companies and again give battle to the enemy. The rest of his force he divided into
seven battalions, and in each battalion placed five thousand five hundred and fifty-five men,
all fully armed. One division of each consisted of horse and the remainder of foot, and order
was passed amongst them that when the infantry advanced to the attack, the cavalry
advancing in close line slantwise on their flanks should do their best to scatter the enemy.
The infantry divisions, British fashion, were drawn up in a square with a right and left wing.
One of these was commanded by Angusel, King of Albany, and Cador, Duke of Cornwall,
the one in the right wing and the other in the left. Another was in command of two earls of
renown, to wit, Guerin of Chartres, and Boso of Rhedicen, which in the tongue of the Saxons

113

is called Oxford. A third was commanded by Aschil, King of the Danskers, and Lot, King of
the Norwegians. The fourth by Hoel, Duke of Armorica, and Gawain, the King’s nephew.
Arthur’s speech
After these four were four others stationed in the rear, one of which was in the command of
Kay the Seneschal and Bedevere the Butler. Holdin, Duke of the Ruteni, and Guitard, Duke
of the Poitevins, commanded the second; Vigenis of Leicester, Jonathal of Dorchester, and
Carsalem of Caistor the third, and Urbgenius of Bath the fourth. To the rear of all these he
made. choice of a position for himself and one legion that he designed to be his bodyguard,
and here he set up the golden dragon he had for standard, whereunto, if need should be, the
wounded and weary might repair as unto a camp. In that legion which was in attendance upon
himself were six thousand six hundred and sixty-six men.
CHAPTER VII
When all these dispositions were made, Arthur spake unto his fellow-soldiers on this wise:—
‘Lieges mine, ye that have made Britain Lady of thirty realms, I do bid ye joy of your
prowess, that meseemeth hath in nowise failed ye, but rather hath waxed the stronger albeit
that for five years no occasion have ye had to put it to the proof; and hitherto have given
more thought unto the disports of an easy life than unto the practice of arms. Natheless, in no
wise have ye degenerated from the inborn valour of your race, but staunch as ever, have
scattered in flight before ye these Romans that pricked by the spur of their own pride would
fain curtail ye of your freedom. Already, marching with a host larger than your own, have
they ventured to begin the attack, and failing to withstand your advance, have taken refuge
with shame in yonder city.
They shall march to Rome
At this moment they are ready to issue forth from thence upon their march towards Autun.
Through this valley must they pass, and here falling upon them when they least expect it, may
you meet and slaughter them like sheep. Surely they deemed that the cowardize of the nations
of the East was in ye when they were minded to make your country tributary and yourselves
bond-slaves! What! have they heard not of the battles ye fought with the Danskers and
Norwegians and the Dukes of the Gauls, when ye delivered them from their shameful yoke
and gave them into my allegiance? We, therefore, that were strong enow to subdue the
mightier, shall doubtless prove stronger yet against this feebler foe, so we only take the same
pains in the same spirit to crush these emasculate cravens. Only obey my will and command
as loyal comrades of mine own, and what honours, what treasures await each one of ye! For
so soon as we have put these to the rout, forthwith we start for Rome. For us to march upon
Rome is to take it and possess. Yours shall be the gold and silver, the palaces and castles, the
towns and cities and all the riches of the vanquished!’
Whilst he yet spake thus all unite in a mighty cheer, ready to meet death rather than flee from
the field leaving him there alive.
CHAPTER VIII
Lucius: his speech
Now Lucius Hiberius, who had been warned of their design and the trap that was laid for
him,was not minded to flee as he had at first proposed, but plucking up his courage to march
to the valley and meet them. With this design he called his Dukes together and spake unto
them thus:—

114

‘Venerable Fathers, unto whose empire the realms of the East and of the West do owe their
allegiance, call ye now your fathers unto remembrance, how they shrank not from shedding
their blood to vanquish the enemies of the Commonweal, but leaving unto their children an
ensample of prowess and knightly hardihood, did so bear them in the field as though God had
decreed that none of them should die in battle. Wherefore full oft did they achieve the
triumph, I and in the triumph avoidance of death, for that unto none might aught else befall
than was ordained by the providence of God. Hence sprang the increase of the Commonweal;
hence the increase of their own prowess; hence, moreover, came it that the uprightness, the
honour and the bounty that are wont to be in them of gentle blood, ever flourishing amongst
them from age to age, have exalted them and their descendants unto the dominion of the
whole world. This is the spirit I would fain arouse within ye. I do appeal unto ye that ye be
mindful of your ancient valour, and be staunch thereunto. Let us seek out our foemen in the
valley wherein they now lurk in ambush for us, and fight to win from them that which is our
own of right! Nor deem ye that I have made repair unto this city for refuge as though I would
shrink from them or their invasions.
The host marshalled
On the contrary, I reckoned upon their foolishly pursuing us, and believed that we might
surprise them by suddenly falling upon them when they were scattered in pursuit so as to put
them to the rout with a decisive slaughter. But now that they have done otherwise than we
expected, let us also do otherwise. Let us seek them out and fall upon them hardily, or, if so
be that they are strong enow to fall upon us first, let us stand our ground with one accord and
abide their first onset. On this wise, without doubt, we shall win the day, for in most battles
he that hath been able to withstand the first charge hath most often come off the conqueror.’
So when he had made an end of speaking thus, with much more to the same effect, all with
one assent agreeing and pledging them by oath with joining of hands, they all hastened to do
on their armour, and when they were armed at last, sally forth from Langres and march to the
valley where Arthur had stationed his men. They, likewise, had marshalled their men in
twelve wedge-shaped battalions, all infantry, and formed, Roman fashion, in the shape of a
wedge, so that when the army was in full array each division contained six thousand six
hundred and sixty-six soldiers. Unto each, moreover, they appointed captains to give orders
when to advance and when to stand their ground against the enemy’s onset. Unto one they
appointed Lucius Catellus, the senator, and Alifantinas, King of Spain, commanders. Unto
the second, Hirtacius, King of the Parthians, and Marius Lepidus, the senator; unto the third,
Bocchus, King of the Medes, and Caius Metellus, the senator; unto the fourth, Sertorius, King
of Libya, and Quintus Milvius, senator.
The battle begins
These four divisions were placed in the vanguard of the army. In their rear came another four,
whereof one was under the command of Serses, King of the Ituraeans; the second under
Pandrasus, King of Egypt; the third under Polytetes, Duke of Bithynia; the fourth under
Teucer, Duke of Phrygia. Behind these again were other four battalions, one captained by
Quintus Carutius, senator; the second by Lælius of Hostia; the third by Sulpicius Subuculus;
the fourth by Mauricius Silvanus. Lucius himself was moving hither and thither amongst
them giving orders and instructions how they should behave them. In their midst he bade set
up firmly the golden eagle that he had brought with him for standard, and warned the men
that should any by misadventure be separated from the ranks, he should endeavour to return
thereunto.
CHAPTER IX

115

After that they were arrayed the one against the other, Britons on this side and Romans on
that, javelins upright, forthwith upon hearing the blare of the trumpets the battalion under the
command of the King of Spain and Lucius Catellus fell hardily upon the division led by the
King of Scotland and the Duke of Cornwall, but could in no wise make any breach in the
close ranks of them that opposed them.
Bedevere slain
And whilst they were still struggling most fiercely to make head against them, up came the
division captained by Guerin and Boso, who, spurring their horses to a gallop, charged
against the assailants, and breaking right through and beyond them came face to face with the
battalion that the; the King of the Parthians was leading against Anschil, King of the Danes.
Straight, the battalions fling them the one upon another, burst through each other’s ranks and
batter together in a general melly. Pitiable is the slaughter wrought betwixt them amidst the
din as one after another droppeth on both sides, beating the ground with head or heels and
retching forth his life with his blood. But the first grave disaster fell upon the Britons, for
Bedevere the Butler was slain and Kay the Seneschal wounded unto the death. For Bedevere,
when he met Bocchus, King of the Medes, fell dead, smitten through by his spear amidst the
ranks of the enemy, and Kay the Seneschal, in attempting to avenge him, was surrounded by
the Median troops and received a deadly hurt. Natheless, after the wont of good knight,
opening a way with the wing that he led, he slew and scattered the Medes, and would have
brought off his company unharmed and returned with them to their own ranks had he not
been met by the division of the King of Libya, the assault whereof dispersed all his men.
Natheless, still retreating, albeit with but four of his followers, he made shift to flee unto the
Golden Dragon, bearing with him the corpse of Bedevere. Alas! what lamentation was there
amongst the Neustrians when they beheld the body of their Duke rent by so many wounds!
Hireglas avengeth Bedevere
Alas, what wailing was there amongst the Angevins when they searched with all the arts of
leechcraft the wounds of Kay their earl! But no time was that for sorrowing when the bloodbespattered ranks rushing one upon another scarce allowed space for a sigh ere they were
forced to turn to defend their own lives. And now Hireglas, the nephew of Bedevere, wroth
beyond measure at his death, took with him a company of three hundred men of his own, and
like a wild boar amidst a pack of hounds dashed with a sudden gallop of their steeds right
through the ranks of the enemy towards the place where he had espied the standard of the
King of the Medes, little reckoning of aught that might befall himself so only he might
avenge his uncle. Gaining the place he desired, he slew the King and carried him off to his
comrades, and laying the corpse by the side of that of the Butler, hewed it utterly to pieces.
Then, with a mighty shout cheering on the troops of his fellow-countrymen, he called upon
them to fall upon the enemy and harass them with charge after charge now, whilst their
courage was still hot, whilst the hearts of their foes were still quaking with terror; whilst they
had the advantage in bearing down upon them hand to hand through their companies being
more skilfully ordered than those of the enemy, and being thus able to renew the attack more
often and to inflict a deadlier damage. Thus cheered by his counsel, they made a general
charge upon the enemy from every quarter, and the slaughter on both sides waxed exceeding
heavy.
Many Romans slain
For on the side of the Romans, besides numberless others, fell Alifantinas, King of Spain, and
Micipsa of Babylon, as well as the senators Quintus Milvius and Marius Lepidus. On the side
of the Britons fell Holdin, King of the Ruteni, and Leodegar of Boulogne, besides three Earls

116

of Britain, Carsalem of Caistor, Galluc of Salisbury, and Urbgen of Bath. The troops they led
thus, sore enfeebled, retreated until they came upon the battalion of the Armorican Britons
commanded by Hoel and Gawain. But the Armoricans thereupon, like a fire bursting into a
blaze, made a charge upon the enemy, and rallying them that had retreated, soon compelled
those that but just before had been the pursuers to flee in their turn, and ever followed them
up, slaying some and stretching others on the ground, nor ceased from their slaughter until
they reached the bodyguard of the Emperor, who, when he saw the disaster that had
overtaken his comrades, had hastened to bring them succour.
CHAPTER X
In the first onset the Britons suffered great loss. For Kinmarcoch, Earl of Treguier, fell, and
with him two thousand men. Fell also three barons of renown, Richomarch, Bloccovius, and
Lagivius of Bodlaon, who, had they been princes of kingdoms, would have been celebrated
by fame to all after-ages for the passing great prowess that was in them. For when they were
charging along with Hoel and Gawain, as hath been said, not an enemy escaped that came
within their reach, but either with sword or with spear they sent the life out of him.
Hoel and Gawain
But when they fell in with the bodyguard of Lucius, they were surrounded on all sides by the
Romans, and fell along with Kinmarcoch and his followers. But Hoel and Gawain, than
whom have no better knights been born in later ages, were only spurred to keener endeavour
by the death of their comrades, and rode hither and thither, one in one direction and the other
in another searching the companies of the Emperor’s guards for occasion to do them a hurt.
And now Gawain, still glowing with the fire kindled by his former exploits, endeavoured to
cleave an opening, whereby he might come at the Emperor himself and forgather with him.
Like a right hardy knight as he was, he made a dash upon the enemy, bearing some to the
ground and slaying them in the fall, while Hoel, in no wise less hardy than he, fell like a
thunderbolt upon another company, cheering on his men, and smiting the enemy undaunted
by their blows, not a moment passing but either he struck or was stricken. None that beheld
them could have said which of the twain was the doughtier knight or quitted him better that
day.
CHAPTER XI
Howbeit, Gawain thus dashing amidst the companies, found at last the opening he longed for,
and rushing upon the Emperor forgathered with him man to man. Lucius, then in the flower
and prime of youth, had plenty of hardihood, plenty of strength and plenty of prowess, nor
was there nought he did more desire than to encounter such a knight as would compel him to
prove what he was worth in feats of arms.
Gawain fighteth Lucius
Wherefore, standing up to Gawain, he rejoiceth to begin the encounter and prideth him
therein for that he hath heard such renown of him. Long while did the battle last betwixt
them, and mighty were the blows they dealt one upon other or warded with the shields that
covered them as each strove for vantage to strike the death-blow on the other. But whilst that
they were thus in the very hottest of the fight, behold the Romans, suddenly recovering their
vigour, make a charge upon the Armoricans and come to their Emperor’s rescue. Hoel and
Gawain and their companies are driven off and sore cut up, until all of a sudden they came up
over against Arthur and his company. For Arthur, hearing of the slaughter just inflicted upon
his men, had hurried forward with his guard, and drawing forth Caliburn, best of swords, had
cheered on his comrades, crying out in a loud voice and hot words: ‘What be ye men doing?
Will ye let these womanish knaves slip forth of your hands unharmed? Let not a soul of them

117

escape alive! Remember your own right hands that have fought in so many battles and
subdued thirty realms to my dominion! Remember your grandsires whom the Romans
stronger than themselves made tributaries! Remember your freedom that these half men
feebler than yourselves would fain reave away from ye! Let not a single one escape alive—
not a single one escape!
Arthur’s valour
What be ye doing?’ Shouting out these reproaches and many more besides, he dashed
forward upon the enemy, flung them down, smote them—never a one did he meet but he slew
either him or his horse at a single buffet. They fled from him like sheep from a fierce lion
madly famishing to devour aught that chance may throw in his way. Nought might armour
avail them but that Caliburn would carve their souls from out them with their blood. Two
Kings, Sertorius of Libya, and Polytetes of Bithynia did their evil hap bring in front of him,
whom he despatched to hell with their heads hewn off. And when the Britons beheld in what
wise their King did battle, they took heart and hardihood again, and fell with one accord upon
the Romans, pressing forward in close rank, so that whilst they afoot cut them down on this
wise, they a-horseback did their best to fling them down and thrust them through. Natheless,
the Romans made stout resistance, and, urged on by Lucius, strove hard to pay back the
Britons for the slaughter inflicted on the guard of their renowned King. On both sides the
battle rageth as though it had been but just begun. On this side, as hath been said, Arthur
many a time and oft smiting the enemies, exhorted the Britons to stand firm; on the other,
Lucius Hiberius exhorted his Romans, and gave them counsel, and led them in many a daring
exploit of prowess. Nor did he himself cease to fight with his own hand, but going round
from one to another amongst his companies slew every single enemy that chance threw in his
way, either with his spear or his sword.
The Romans defeated
Thus a most unconscionable slaughter took place on either side, for at one time the Britons
and at another the Romans would have the upper hand. In the end, while the battle was still
going on thus, to and behold, Morvid, Earl of Gloucester, with the legion which as I have said
above was posted betwixt the hills, came up full speed and fell heavily on the enemy’s rear
just at a moment they least expected it, broke through their lines, scattering them in all
directions, with exceeding great slaughter. Many thousand Romans fell in this onslaught, and
amongst them even the Emperor himself, slain in the midst of his companies by a spear-thrust
from a hand unknown. And thus, ever following up their advantage, the Britons, albeit with
sore travail, won the victory that day.
CHAPTER XII
The Romans, thus scattered, betook them, some to the waste-lands and forests, some to the
cities and towns, each fleeing to the refuge he deemed safest. The Britons pursue them, take
them prisoner, plunder them, put them miserably to the sword, insomuch as that the more part
of them stretch forth their hands womanish-wise to be bound so only they might have yet a
little space longer to live.
The burials
The which, verily, might seem to have been ordained by providence divine, seeing that
whereas in days of yore the Romans had persecuted the grandsires of the Britons with their
unjust oppressions, so now did the Britons in defence of the freedom whereof they would
have bereft them, and refusing the tribute that they did unrighteously demand, take vengeance
on the grandchildren of the Romans.

118

CHAPTER XIII
The victory complete, Arthur bade the bodies of his barons be separated from the carcasses of
the enemy, and embalmed in kingly wise, and borne when enbalmed into the abbeys of the
province. Bedevere the Butler was carried unto Bayeux, his own city that was builded by
Bedevere the first, his great-grandfather, and loud was the lamentation that the Neustrians
made over him. There, in a certain churchyard in the southern part of the city, was he
worshipfully laid next the wall. But Kay, grievously wounded, was borne in a litter unto
Chinon, a town he himself had builded, and dying a brief space after of the same wound, was
buried, as became a Duke of Anjou, in a certain forest in a convent of brethren hermit that
dwelt there no great way from the city. Holdin, likewise, Duke of the Ruteni, was borne into
Flanders and buried in his own city of Terouanne. Howbeit, the rest of the earls and barons
were carried, as Arthur had enjoined, unto the abbeys in the neighbourhood. Having pity,
moreover, upon his enemies, he bade the folk of the country bury them. But the body of
Lucius he bade bear unto the Senate with a message to say that none other tribute was due
from Britain.
Treason of Mordred
Then he abode in those parts until after the following winter, and busied him with bringing
the cities of the Allobroges into his allegiance. But the summer coming on, at which time he
designed to march unto Rome, he had begun to climb the passes of the mountains, when
message was brought him that his nephew Mordred, unto whom he had committed the charge
of Britain, had tyrannously and traitorously set the crown of the kingdom upon his own head,
and had linked him in unhallowed union with Guenevere the Queen in despite of her former
marriage.

119

Book Eleven
CHAPTER I
Arthur hasteneth to Britain
Hereof, verily, most noble Earl, will Geoffrey of Monmouth say nought. Natheless, according
as he hath found it in the British discourse aforementioned, and hath heard from Walter of
Oxford, a man of passing deep lore in many histories, in his own mean style will he briefly
treat of the battles which that renowned King upon his return to Britain after this victory did
fight with his nephew. So soon therefore as the infamy of the aforesaid crime did reach his
ears, he forthwith deferred the expedition he had emprised against Leo, the King of the
Romans, and sending Hoel, Duke of the Armoricans, with the Gaulish army to restore peace
in those parts, he straightway hastened back to Britain with none save the island Kings and
their armies. Now, that most detestable traitor Mordred had despatched Cheldric, the Duke of
the Saxons, into Germany, there to enlist any soever that would join him, and hurry back
again with them, such as they might be, the quickest sail he could make. He pledged himself,
moreover, by covenant to give him that part of the island which stretcheth from the river
Humber as far as Scotland, and whatsoever Horsus and Hengist had possessed in Kent in the
time of Vortigern.
Gawain slain at Richborough
Cheldric, accordingly, obeying his injunctions, had landed with eight hundred ships full of
armed Paynims, and doing homage unto this traitor did acknowledge him as his liege lord and
king. He had likewise gathered into his company the Scots, Picts and Irish, and whomsoever
else he knew bare hatred unto his uncle. All told, they numbered some eight hundred
thousand Paynims and Christians, and in their company and relying on their assistance he
came to meet Arthur on his arrival at Richborough haven, and in the battle that ensued did
inflict sore slaughter on his men when they were landed. For upon that day fell Angusel, King
of Albany, and Gawain, the King’s nephew, along with numberless other. Eventus, son of
Urian his brother, succeeded Angusel in the kingdom, and did afterward win great renown for
his prowesses in those wars. At last, when with sore travail they had gained possession of the
coast, they revenged them on Mordred for this slaughter, and drove him fleeing before them.
For inured to arms as they had been in so many battles, they disposed their companies right
skilfully, distributing horse and foot in parties, in such wise that in the fight itself, when the
infantry were engaged in the attack or defence, the horse charging slantwise at full speed
would strain every endeavour to break the enemies’ ranks and compel them to take to flight.
Howbeit, the Perjurer again collected his men together from all parts, and on the night
following marched into Winchester.
Mordred fleeth to Cornwall
When this was reported unto Queen Guenevere, she was forthwith smitten with despair and
fled from York unto Caerleon, where, she purposed thenceforth to lead a chaste life amongst
the nuns, and did take the veil of their order in the church of Julius the Martyr.
CHAPTER II
But Arthur, burning with yet hotter wrath for the loss of so many hundred comrades-in-arms,
after first giving Christian burial to the slain, upon the third day marched upon that city and
beleaguered the miscreant that had ensconced him therein. Natheless, he was not minded to

120

renounce his design, but encouraging his adherents by all the devices he could, marched forth
with his troops -and arrayed them to meet his uncle. At the first onset was exceeding great
slaughter on either side, the which at last waxed heavier upon his side and compelled him to
quit the field with shame. Then, little caring what burial were given unto his slain, ‘borne by
the swift-oared ferryman of flight,’ he started in all haste on his march toward Cornwall.
Arthur, torn by inward anxiety for that he had so often escaped him, pursued him into that
country as far as the river Camel, where Mordred was awaiting his arrival. For Mordred,
being, as he was, of all men the boldest and ever the swiftest to begin the attack, straightway
marshalled his men in companies, preferring rather to conquer or to die than to be any longer
continually on the flight in this wise. There still remained unto him out of the number of
allies I have mentioned sixty thousand men, and these he divided into three battalions, in each
of which were six thousand six hundred and sixty-six men-at-arms.
whither Arthur followeth
Besides these, he made out of the rest that were over a single battalion, and appointing
captains to each of the others, took command of this himself. When these were all posted in
position, he spake words of encouragement unto each in turn, promising them the lands and
goods of their adversaries in case they fought out the battle to a victory. Arthur also
marshalled his army over against them, which he divided into nine battalions of infantry
formed in square with a right and left wing, and having appointed captains to each, exhorted
them to make an end utterly of these perjurers and thieves, who, brought from foreign lands
into the island at the bidding of a traitor, were minded to reave them of their holdings and
their honours. He told them, moreover, that these motley barbarians from divers kingdoms
were a pack of raw recruits that knew nought of the usages of war, and were in no wise able
to make stand against valiant men like themselves, seasoned in so many battles, if they fell
upon them hardily and fought like men. And whilst the twain were still exhorting their men
on the one side and the other, the battalions made a sudden rush each at other and began the
battle, struggling as if to try which should deal their blows the quicker. Straight, such havoc
is wrought upon both sides, such groaning is there of the dying, such fury in the onset, as it
would be grievous and burdensome to describe. Everywhere are wounders and wounded,
slayers and slain. And after much of the day had been spent on this wise, Arthur at last, with
one battalion
Arthur mortally wounded
And after much of the day had been spent on this wise, Arthur at last, with one battalion
wherein were six thousand six hundred and sixty-six men, made a charge upon the company
wherein he knew Mordred to be, and hewing a path with their swords, cut clean through it
and inflicted a most grievous slaughter. For therein fell that accursed traitor and many
thousands along with him. Natheless not for the loss of him did his troops take to flight, but
rallying together from all parts of the field, struggle to stand their ground with the best
hardihood they might. Right passing deadly is the strife betwixt the foes, for well-nigh all the
captains that were in command on both sides rushed into the press with their companies and
fell. On Mordred’s side fell Cheldric, Elaf, Egbricht, Bunignus, that were Saxons, Gillapatric,
Gillamor, Gislafel, Gillar, Irish. The Scots and Picts, with well-nigh all that they commanded,
were cut off to a man. On Arthur’s side, Olbricht, King of Norway, Aschil, King of Denmark,
Cador, Limenic, Cassibelaunus, with many thousands of his lieges as well Britons as others
that he had brought with him. Even the renowned King Arthur himself was wounded deadly,
and was borne thence unto the island of Avalon for the healing of his wounds, where he gave
up the crown of Britain unto his kinsman Constantine, son of Cador, Duke of Cornwall, in the
year of the Incarnation of Our Lord five hundred and forty-two.

121

CHAPTER III
Constantine succeedeth him
When Constantine was crowned King, the Saxons and the two sons of Mordred raised an
insurrection against him; but could nought prevail, and after fighting many battles, the one
fled to London and the other to Winchester, and did enter and take possession of those cities.
At that time died the holy Daniel, that most devout prelate of the church of Bangor, and
Thomas, Bishop of Gloucester, was elected unto the archbishopric of London. At that time
also died David, that most holy Archbishop of Caerleon, in the city of Menevia, within his
own abbey, which he loved above all the other monasteries of his diocese, for that it was
founded by the blessed Patrick who had foretold his nativity. For whilst he was there
sojourning for a while with his fellow-brethren he was smitten of a sudden lethargy and died
there, being buried in the same church by command of Malgo, King of Venedotia. In his
place, Kinoc, priest of the church of Lambadarn, was appointed to the Metropolitan See, and
was thus promoted unto the higher dignity.
CHAPTER IV
But Constantine pursued the Saxons and subdued them unto his allegiance; and took the two
sons of Mordred. The one youth, who had fled into the church of St. Amphibalus at
Winchester, he slew before the altar; but the other, who was in hiding in the monastery of
certain brethren in London, he did there find beside the altar and slew by a cruel death.
Succession of Kings
In the third year thereafter he was himself slain by Conan, smitten by God’s judgment, and
was buried by the side of Uther Pendragon within the structure of stones set together with
marvellous art not far from Salisbury which in the English tongue is called Stonehenge.
CHAPTER V
Unto him succeeded Aurelius Conan, a youth of wondrous prowess, his nephew, who, as he
held the monarchy of the whole island, so might he have been worthy the crown thereof had
he not been a lover of civil war. For he raised disturbance against his uncle, who of right
ought to have reigned after Constantine, and thrust him into prison, and after slaying both his
sons, did himself obtain the kingdom, and died in the second year of his reign.
CHAPTER VI
Unto Conan succeeded Vortipore, against whom the Saxons raised an insurrection, bringing
over their fellow-countrymen from Germany in a passing mighty fleet. But he did battle with
them and overcame them, and after that he had obtained the monarchy of the whole kingdom
did govern the people thereof for four years in diligence and in peace.
CHAPTER VII
Careticus hated of all
Unto him succeeded Malgo, one of the comeliest men in the whole of Britain, the driver-out
of many tyrants, redoubted in arms, more bountiful than others and renowned for prowess
beyond compare, yet hateful in the sight of God for his secret vices. He obtained the
sovereignty of the whole island, and after many exceeding deadly battles did add unto his
dominions the six neighbour islands of the Ocean, to wit, Ireland, Iceland, Gothland, the
Orkneys, Norway and Denmark.
CHAPTER VIII

122

Unto Malgo succeeded Careticus, a lover of civil wars, hateful unto God and unto the
Britons. The Saxons, having had experience of his shiftiness, went unto Gormund, King of
the Africans, in Ireland, wherein, adventuring thither with a, vast fleet, he had conquered the
folk of the country. Thereupon, by the treachery of the Saxons, he sailed across with a
hundred and sixty-six thousand Africans into Britain, which in one province the Saxons by
perjuring their oath of fealty, and in another the Britons by continually carrying on civil wars
amongst themselves, were utterly laying waste. Entering into covenant, therefore, with the
Saxons, Gormund made war upon Careticus, and after many battles betwixt them, drove him
fleeing from city unto city until he forced him into Cirencester and did there beleaguer him.
Here Isembard, nephew of Lewis, King of the Franks, came unto him and entered into a
league of friendship with him and forsook his Christianity for his sake upon condition that he
would grant him his assistance in seizing the kingdom of Gaul away from his uncle, by
whom, as he said, he had been driven forth by violence and wrong.
Geoffrey: his sermon
When Gormund at last had taken and burnt the said city, he did battle with Careticus and
drove him fleeing beyond the Severn into Wales. Then he desolated the fields, set fire to all
the neighbouring cities, nor did he stint his fury until he had burnt up well-nigh the whole
face of the country from sea to sea; in such sort that all the colonies were battered to the
ground by rams, and all they that dwelt therein along with the priests of the churches
delivered up to the flashing of their swords or the crackling of the flames. The residue of
them that were slaughtered in these dreadful visitations had no choice but to flee unto
whatsoever shelter might seem to promise safety.
CHAPTER IX
Wherefore, O thou neglectful nation, borne down by the weight of thine outrageous
iniquities, wherefore, ever thirsting after civil wars, hast thou thus enfeebled thee by these
discords within thine own household? Thou that of old didst subdue the kingdoms that lie
afar off unto thy might, thou that wast planted a noble vine, wholly a right seed, how art thou
now turned into the degenerate plant of a bitter vine, that thus thou canst no longer protect
thine own country, thine own wives and children from thine enemies. Yea, onward!
Loegria occupied by Saxons
On with thine inward discords, little understanding that word of the Gospel, every kingdom
divided against itself shall be made desolate and the house shall fall upon the house! For that
thy kingdom hath been divided against itself, for that the rage of civil war and the smoke of
envy have darkened thy mind, for that thy pride hath forbidden thee to pay thine allegiance
unto one only King, therefore now dost thou behold thy country made desolate by these most
sacrilegious heathen and the houses thereof falling upon the houses, that thy children yet
unborn shall mourn. For they shall see the whelps of the barbarian lioness lords over their
strong places and their cities and over all else that is now their own. Forth of all these shall
they be driven, and scarce again if ever shall they recover the glories of their ancient estate!
CHAPTER X
Howbeit, after that the tyrant of evil omen had laid waste, as hath been said, well-nigh the
whole island with his countless thousands of Africans, the more part thereof which was called
Loegria did he make over unto the Saxons through whose treachery he had come into the
land. The remnant of the Britons did therefore withdraw them into the western parts of the
kingdom, Cornwall, to wit, and Wales, from whence they ceased not to harry their enemies
with frequent and deadly forays.

123

Civil wars
The three archbishops, to wit, he of Caerleon, Theon of London, and Thadioceus of York,
when they beheld all the churches within their obedience destroyed even to the ground, fled
away with all the clergy that had survived so dreadful a calamity unto the shelter of the
forests of Wales, bearing with them the relics of the saints, fearing lest so many holy bones of
such pious men of old might be scattered and lost in the invasion of the barbarians were they
to stay and offer themselves to instant martyrdom, thus leaving the relics in such imminent
peril. Many of them betook them in a mighty fleet unto Armorican Britain, so that the whole
church of the two provinces, Loegria, to wit, and Northumbria, was left desolate of all the
convents of religious therein. But of this will I tell the story elsewhere, when I come to
translate the Book of their Exile.
CHAPTER XI
Thereafter for many ages did the Britons lose the crown of the kingdom and the sovereignty
of the island, nor made they any endeavour to recover their former dignity. On the contrary,
they did many a time and oft lay waste that part of the country which did still remain unto
them, subject now not unto one king only, but unto three tyrants. But neither did the Saxons
as yet obtain the crown of the island, for they also were subject unto three kings, and did at
one time send forth their forays against themselves, and at another against the Britons.
CHAPTER XII
Pope Gregory and Augustine
In the meantime was Augustine sent by the blessed Pope Gregory into Britain to preach the
Word of God unto the English, who, blinded by heathen superstition, had wholly done away
with Christianity in that part of the island which they held. Howbeit, in the part belonging to
the Britons the Christianity still flourished which had been held there from the days of Pope
Eleutherius and had never failed amongst them. But after Augustine came, he found in their
province seven bishoprics and an archbishopric provided with most godly prelates besides a
number of abbacies wherein the Lord’s flock held right order. Amongst others there was in
the city of Bangor a certain most noble church wherein was said to be such a number of
monks that when the monastery was divided into seven portions with a prior set over each,
not one of them had less than three hundred monks, who did all live by the labour of their
own hands. Their abbot was called Dinoot, and was in marvellous wise learned in the liberal
arts.
Abbot Dinoot
He, when Augustine did demand subjection from the British bishops, in order that they might
undertake in common the task of preaching the Gospel unto the English people, made answer
with divers arguings, that they owed no subjection unto him as of right, nor were they minded
to bestow their preaching upon their enemies, seeing that they had an archbishop of their
own, and that the nations of the Saxons did persist in withholding their own country from
them; whence they did ever hold them in the deepest abhorrence, and reeked nought of their
faith and religion, and in nought had more in common with the Saxons than with dogs.
CHAPTER XIII
Ethelbert, therefore, King of the men of Kent, when he saw that the Britons did disdain to
make subjection unto Augustine, and did despise his preaching, took the same in grievous
dudgeon and stirred up Ethelfrid, King of the Northumbrians, and the other Saxon knights to
collect a mighty army and go unto the city of Bangor to make away utterly with the Abbot
Dinoot and the rest of the clerics that did hold them in scorn. Agreeably therefore unto his

124

counsel, they mustered a marvellous great army, and upon their way unto the province of the
Britons came unto Leicester, where Brocmail, Earl of that city, was expecting their arrival.
There had come also unto the same city out of the divers provinces of Britain a numberless
company of monks and hermits, and more especially from the city of Bangor, to pray for the
safety of their people. Thereupon, assembling all his armies from every quarter, Ethelfrid,
King of the Northumbrians, gave battle unto Brocmail, who, making such stand as he could
against him with a lesser number of soldiers, quitted the city and fled, but not before he had
inflicted exceeding great slaughter upon the enemy.
Ethelfrid defeated
But Ethelfrid, after he had taken the city, understanding the reason wherefore the said monks
had come unto the city, bade his men first turn their arms against them, and thus upon that
very day one thousand two hundred of then, adorned with the palm of martyrdom, did obtain
a seat in the kingdom of Heaven. These, when the said tyrant of the Saxons went forward on
his march towards the city of Bangor, hearing of his mad outrage, the Dukes of the Britons, to
wit, Blederic, Duke of Cornwall, Margadud, King of the South Welsh, and Cadran, King of
the North, came from all parts to meet him, and joining battle with him, drove him fleeing
wounded before them, but so passing great was the number of his army slain, that it was
reckoned not less than about ten thousand and sixty-six had fallen. On the side of the Britons
likewise fell Blederic, Duke of Cornwall, who was their commander in those battles.

125

Book Twelve
CHAPTER I
Ethelfrid and Cadvan
Thereafter all the princes of the Britons did come together in the city of Leicester, and took
common counsel that they would make Cadvan their King, and that under his command they
would pursue Ethelfrid beyond the Humber. When they had set the crown of the kingdom
upon his head, they all assembled together from all parts and crossed the Humber. And when
message of this was brought unto Ethelfrid he allied all the Kings of the Saxons unto himself
and marched to meet Cadvan. But when they had marshalled their companies on both sides
their friends came and made peace betwixt then on these conditions, that they should possess
Britain, Ethelfrid on the further side Humber, and Cadvan on the hither side. And after that
they had confirmed this covenant by oath and giving of hostages, such a friendship sprang up
betwixt them as that they had all things in common. In the meanwhile it so fell out that
Ethelfrid did drive forth his own wife and took unto himself another, and in such hatred did
he hold her that he had driven forth that he banished her from the kingdom of Northumbria.
Whereupon, for that Ethelfrid was father of her child as yet unborn, she went unto King
Cadvan, beseeching his intervention that she might be restored unto her husband.
Cadwallo and Edwin
And when he might in no wise persuade Ethelfrid to grant her petition she abode in Cadvan’s
household until such time as she was delivered of a son. Now, a little later, a son was born
unto King Cadvan of the Queen his wife, and thereafter were the two boys, whereof the one
was called Cadwallo and the other Edwin, nurtured together as became princes of the blood
royal. And when in course of time their boyhood had grown into youth, their parents sent
them unto Solomon, King of the Armorican Britons, that in his household they might learn
the lessons of knighthood and the customs of courtly manners. They accordingly were
received of him kindly and diligently cared for, soon beginning to be admitted to his
familiarity, in such sort that none other was there of their age in his court that could be more
private with the King or speak unto him more merrily withal. At last they did often do battle
before him in encounter with his enemies, and did win much fame of their valour in many
exploits of prowess.
CHAPTER II
In later days, after the death of their parents, they returned into Britain, and, taking over the
helm of the kingdom, renewed the friendship that had been betwixt their fathers. After two
years had passed away, Edwin besought Cadwallo that he might have a crown of his own,
and fulfil the constituted ceremonies of sovereignty in the parts of Northumbria in such wise
as he himself fulfilled them according to ancient wont upon the hither side of the Humber.
Brian’s speech
And when a conference was being held upon the matter nigh the river Duglas, and the wiser
sort were taking counsel together what were best to be done, Cadwallo chanced to be lying on
the other bank of the river with his head resting on the bosom of a certain nephew of his
whom they called Brian. And whilst the messengers brought him word what was being said
upon both sides at the conference, Brian wept, and the tears flowing from his eyes did so fall
as that they bedewed the King’s face and his beard. The King, weening that it was a shower

126

of rain, lifted up his head, and seeing that the youth was all melted in tears, asked him the
cause of this sudden sorrow. Unto whom he made answer:
‘Good cause have I to weep continually and the British people no less, for that ever since the
country was visited by the invasion of these barbarians in the days of Malgo never hath she
known a prince that might avail to restore her unto her ancient dignity. And now even the
petty residue of her honour is being minished by thy sufferance, seeing that these Saxon
adventurers, who have ever proved traitors unto her, must now begin to share with her the
honours of the kingly crown. For, once let them be exalted by having a king of their own,
they will be held of so much higher renown in the country from whence they came as that
ready enow will their fellow-barbarians be to come at their call, when they bid them to our
shores to assist them in the extermination of our race.
Cadwallo refuseth Edwin
For ever hath it been their wont to deal treacherously, nor never keep firm faith with none.
Wherefore, say I, by us ought they ever more to be not exalted but cast down. When King
Vortigern first took them into his service as retainers, they abode here as under a shadowy
show of peace, as though they were ready to fight for our country, but as soon as ever they
were strong enough openly to manifest their wickedness and to return evil for good they did
betray him and wrought grievous slaughter upon the people of his kingdom. Next they did
betray Aurelius Ambrosius, unto whom, after vowing the most awful sacraments of
allegiance, they gave poison as he sat at meat with them at a banquet. Next, they betrayed
Arthur, when, .casting aside the allegiance they owed him, they fought against him with his
nephew Mordred. Last of all, belying their fealty unto King Careticus, they brought in upon
him Gormund, ‘King of the Africans, by whose invasion hath the country been reft from the
people and the King himself driven forth with shame.’
CHAPTER III
When he spake thus, Cadwallo repented him of having harboured the thought of such a
covenant, and sent word unto Edwin that he could in no wise persuade his counsellors to
agree upon his granting Edwin’s petition, for that they said it was against right, and against
the ancient traditions of the island that the single sovereignty of the crown should be divided
betwixt two crowned heads.
The wizard Pellitus
Thereat Edwin waxed wroth, and dismissing the conference, he retired into Northumbria,
saying that he would wear Cadwallo’s crown maugre his head, which, when Cadwallo
understood, he sent back word that he would smite off his head under the crown if he durst
presume to be crowned within the kingdom of Britain.
CHAPTER IV
Discord having thus arisen betwixt them, and the men of both having harried the lands of the
other in a number of armed forays, both at last met on the further side of Humber, and in the
battle that was fought Cadwallo lost many thousands of his men and was put to flight, making
his way in such haste as he might through Albany unto the island of Hibernia. But Edwin,
after he had won the victory, led his army through the provinces of Britain, and burning the
cities, did grievously torment the citizens and husbandmen. But whilst that he was thus giving
a loose unto his cruelty, Cadwallo was ever endeavouring to return unto his country by ships,
but could never make shift to do so, for that unto whatsoever haven he steered his course
there was Edwin with his host to meet him and forbid his landing. Now there was come unto
him a certain right cunning wizard out of Spain, by name Pellitus, who was learned in the

127

flight of birds and the courses of the stars, and did foretell unto him all disaster that might
befall, and along of him it was that Edwin had witting of Cadwallo’s return so as thus he was
able to meet him, shatter his ships and drown their crews, and close every port against him.
Brian’s new art
Cadwallo, therefore, not knowing what to do, and well-nigh falling into utter despair of ever
returning, at last bethought him or going unto Solomon, King of the Armorican Britons, to
ask for help and counsel, so that he might be able to return unto his country. And as he was
making sail for Armorica a wild gale arose of a sudden and the ships of his companions were
so scattered thereby, as that in a short space no one of them remained by another. The pilot of
the King’s ship was smitten with such terror that he let go the rudder and committed the ship
to the guidance of hazard, so that all that night they lay in peril of death while she tossed
hither and thither upon the heaving of the billows. At dawn upon the morrow they made a
certain island that is called Garnarey, where with sore travail they made shift to come ashore.
Howbeit, Cadwallo was seized of so sore grief for the loss of his shipmates that for three days
and nights he loathed all food and lay sick abed. But upon the fourth day early he was taken
with a mighty longing for venison meat, and calling Brian unto him told him what it was that
he did most desire. Brian thereupon took his bow and quiver, and went throughout the island,
so that if good luck should bring any deer in his way he might take back meat thereof unto
Cadwallo. And when he had searched it from end to end without finding that whereof he was
in quest, he was in grievous straits for that he might not fulfil his lord’s desire, and sore
adread lest his sickness should end in his death were he unable to satisfy his longing.
Solomon of Brittany
He fell therefore upon practising a new art. He cut open his own thigh and took therefrom a
slice of the flesh, and making a spit ready did toast the same thereon and bore it unto the King
for venison. Presently, he, weening it to be flesh of deer, began to eat thereof, and was
mightily refreshed, much marvelling that never aforetime had he tasted meat so sweet in
flavour. At last, when he had eaten his fill, he was of merrier and lighter cheer, insomuch as
that after three days he was all sound and whole again. Then, for the wind stood fair, they
make ready the ship’s outfit, and hoisting sail embark on their deep-sea voyage and make for
the city of Kidalet. Then, coming unto King Solomon, they are of him received right kindly
as was beseeming men so worshipful, and when he learnt the reason of their coming thither
he promised them his help in these words:
CHAPTER V
‘Sore grief is it unto us, most noble youths, that the land of your grandsires should be thus
oppressed of a barbarous folk, and that ye have been ignominiously driven forth from thence.
Yet, natheless, seeing that others be able to defend their realms, a marvel is it, meseemeth,
that your people should have lost an island so fruitful, and are unable to make stand against
this nation of the Angles, whom our own men here do count as nought.
succoureth Cadwallo
For whilst the folk of this my Britain did dwell along with your own folk in your own Britain
they did hold dominion over all kingdoms of the provinces, nor was there a people anywhere,
save only the Roman people, strong enow to subjugate them. Nor were the Romans
themselves able to do this that I have said of their own might, but through the strife that had
arisen amongst the nobles of the island. But the Romans, albeit that they held it subject for a
time, yet after their rulers were either lost to the island or slain, did either themselves retire
therefrom, or else were driven out with shame. But after the Britons came into the province
under their Dukes Maximian and Conan, the residue that remained behind have never

128

thereafter enjoyed such privilege as to hold possession of the crown of the kingdom in
unbroken succession. For albeit that many of their princes have maintained the ancient
dignity of their forefathers, yet a still greater number of feebler heirs have succeeded them
who have lost it utterly when their enemies did invade them. Hence do I grieve over the
weakness of your country, for that ye be come of the same blood as ourselves, and are
therefore called Britons no less than are our own folk, who, as ye see, do hold our own
against all our neighbours in arms.’
CHAPTER VI
When he had made an end of speaking thus, with more to like purpose, Cadwallo, some little
shamed, made answer on this wise:
Cadwallo’s speech
‘Manifold thanks do I render unto thee, O King, “sprung of grandsires whose great grandsires
were kings,” for that thou hast promised to help me to recover my kingdom. Howbeit, this
which thou saidst, that it is marvellous my people have not maintained their ancestral dignity
sithence the Britons did come into those provinces meseemeth is in no wise a marvel. For the
more noble of the whole realm did follow the Dukes thou hast named, and only the ignoble
did remain behind and did possess them of their lands and honours. These, thus suddenly
raised to noble rank, were puffed up by their new dignities far beyond their predecessors.
They were purse-proud by reason of the abundance of their riches; they waxed wanton for
that no sense of honour did restrain their lust. Amongst them, moreover, did prevail that
which is the overthrow of all that is good, the hatred of truth and of them that assert the
truth—the love of a lie and of them that do forge lies, the acceptance of the evil for the good,
the reverence of iniquity rather than of charity, the acknowledgment of Satan as an angel of
light. Kings were anointed not for God’s sake, but for that they were more cruel than others;
and were murdered but a brief while thereafter by them that did anoint them, not by
examination of the truth of any charge against them, but for that they had chosen others yet
more cruel in their stead. If any of them were more merciful or did seem, even were it but a
little, to show favour unto truth, against him as the subverter of Britain were hurled all the
weapons of their hatred. Lastly, all things whatsoever that were pleasing or displeasing unto
God they weighed as of equal account in the balance, if indeed the things that were hateful
did not turn the scale.
Bretons and Britons
Therefore did they all things that were contrary to the safety of the people, as though the True
Physician of all men were unwilling to bestow healing upon them. And all this was done not
only by worldly laymen, but even by the Lord’s own flock and the shepherds thereof without
distinction. No cause for marvel, therefore, is it that such degenerate ones, hated of God for
sins so grievous, should have lost the country they had on this wise polluted. For God was
minded to take vengeance upon them when He suffered a nation of strangers to overrun them
and drive us out of the fields that our fathers did possess. Natheless, a worthy deed it were, so
God allow, to restore our people unto their ancient dignity, but it should be a lasting reproach
unto our race, that we were feeble rulers, who in this our time laboured nought to maintain
our rights. Moreover, I do with the more confidence beseech thy help for that we had both
one great-grandfather’s grandfather. For Malgo, that mighty King of Britain who reigned
fourth after Arthur, begat two sons, whereof the one was called Ennian and the other Runo.
Ennian was father of Jago, Jago of Cadvan, my father. But Runo, who after his brother’s
death was driven forth by the invasion of the Saxons, did come hither into this province, and
gave his daughter unto Duke Hoel, the son of Hoel the Great, who conquered so many

129

kingdoms with Arthur. Unto him was born Alan, the father of thine own father Hoel, who, so
long as he lived, was no small terror unto the Gauls.‘
CHAPTER VII
Brian cometh to York
In the meantime, while he was spending the winter with Solomon, they made resolve that
Brian should cross over into Britain and by some means or other make away with King
Edwin’s wizard lest by his wonted craft he should forewarn him of Cadwallo’s coming.
Accordingly, after he had landed at Hamo’s port, he did upon him the garments of a certain
poor man, feigning him to be the poor man himself. He wrought him a staff of iron sharp at
the end wherewith to slay the wizard in case he should chance to fall in with him, and then
made his way to York, in the which city Edwin was at that time sojourning. And when he was
come thither he joined him with a company of poor men that waited for alms before the
King’s door. And whilst that he was pacing to and fro, behold, his sister came forth of the
great hall, with an ewer in her hand wherein she was carrying water unto the Queen. She had
been carried off by Edwin from the city of Worcester what time he was wreaking havoc in
the provinces of the Britons after the flight of Cadwallo. When, therefore, she passed in front
of Brian, he knew her at once, and with eyes overflowing with tears called unto her in a low
voice. The damsel, turning her head at his voice, was at first in doubt who it might be, but
when she drew nigher and recognised her brother, she was like to have fallen in a swoon for
dread lest by any mishap he should be known and taken by his enemies.
and slayeth Pellitus
Wherefore, deferring kisses and familiar greetings for the time, she spake with him as though
she were talking of some other indifferent matter, and told him briefly how the buildings of
the court lay, pointing them out, and pointing out also the wizard of whom he was in search,
who chanced to be walking up and down amongst the poor men whilst the alms was being
distributed unto them. Brian, therefore, when he had taken knowledge of the man, bade his
sister steal privily forth of her chamber the next night and come unto him without the city
hard by a certain old church where he would await her coming among the dark arches of the
place. He then joined him in amongst the throng of poor folk in that part where Pellitus was
setting them in place, and the moment there was an opening to smite him, he lifted up the
pilgrim’s staff I have already spoken of and thrust it in under the wizard’s chest, and slew
him with that same blow. Instantly he dropped the staff amongst the throng, and passed on
unnoticed, so that none suspected him, and by God’s grace made shift to reach the hidingplace I have mentioned. But when night came on, his sister, who tried every endeavour to get
forth and join him, found that get forth she could not, for that Edwin, affrighted at the murder
of Pellitus, had set watchers round the court, who, spying into every hidden corner, denied all
means of issue. When Brian made discovery of this, he betook him away from that place and
went unto Exeter, where he called the Britons together and made known unto them what he
had done.
Cadwallo returneth to Britain
Then, sending messengers unto Cadwallo, he garrisoned that city and sent word unto all the
barons of the Britons to see to the defences of their castles and cities, and await in gladness
the coming of Cadwallo, who, having secured the succour of Solomon, was shortly about to
undertake their defence. These tidings being bruited throughout the whole island, Peanda,
King of the Mercians, with a mighty multitude of Saxons, came to Exeter and beleaguered
Brian therein.
CHAPTER VIII

130

Meanwhile Cadwallo landed in Britain with ten thousand men whom King Solomon had
placed under his command, and soon made his way towards Exeter where King Peanda was
holding the leaguer; and when he drew anigh, he divided his men into four companies and
lost no time before he fell upon the enemy. And when he joined battle, Peanda was forthwith
taken prisoner and his army utterly put to the rout. And when he saw that none other way of
safety was open to him he made his submission unto Cadwallo, and gave hostages, pledging
him to do battle along with hint against the Saxons. Having thus won the victory over him,
Cadwallo called his barons together, who for a long time past had slipped out of his hands,
and made for Northumbria against Edwin, never ceasing to lay waste the country on his
march. When this was reported unto Edwin, he summoned all the petty Kings of the Angles
to join him, and, meeting Cadwallo in the field that is called Hevenfeld, did battle with the
Britons. The fighting was quickly over.
and defeateth all enemies
Edwin was slain and well-nigh all the folk he had with him, as also was his son Offrid, and
Godbold, King of the Orkneys, who had come to help him.
CHAPTER IX
Having obtained this victory, Cadwallo marched through all the provinces of the Angles, and
wrought such havoc upon the Saxons as that scarce would he spare the womankind or the
tender years of their little ones, putting all that he found to most grievous torture, forasmuch
as he was minded utterly to sweep the English race out of the bounds of Britain. Then next he
fought a battle with Osric, who had succeeded Edwin, and slew him with his two nephews
who ought of right to have reigned after him, as also slew he Adan, King of the Scots, who
had come to their assistance.
CHAPTER X
After all these were slain, Oswald succeeded to the kingdom of Northumberland, whom, with
the rest of them that had fought against him, Cadwallo drove fleeing before him as far as the
wall in that province which Severus the Emperor had builded of old betwixt England and
Scotland. Then, afterward, he sent Peanda, King of the Mercians, and the more part of his
army unto that place to do battle with him.
Peanda slayeth Oswald
But Oswald, one night when he was beleaguered by the aforesaid Peanda in the place called
Hevenfeld, that is the Field of Heaven, did there set up a Cross of the Lord, and gave orders
unto his fellow-soldiers that they should cry aloud at the very topmost of their voices in these
words: ‘Let us all bend our knees before the living and true God Almighty, beseeching Him
with one accord that He deliver us from the proud army of the British King and of his
accursed commander Peanda, for He Himself knoweth that we have undertaken these just
wars for the salvation of our country.’ All did according as they had been commanded, and,
marching forth against the enemy at early dawn, they did achieve the victory which the merit
of their faith had deserved. When word of this was brought unto Cadwallo, he, blazing out
into fiery wrath, collected his army and followed in pursuit of the holy King Oswald, and in
the midst of a battle that was fought at the place called Bourne, Peanda did fall upon him and
slay him.
CHAPTER XI
Oswald being thus slain along with many thousands of his men, his brother Oswi succeeded
him in the kingdom of Northumbria, and by dint of heavy bribes of gold and silver given to
Cadwallo, who now possessed the empire of all Britain, did obtain his peace and became his

131

vassal. Thereupon his brother Alfrid, and Ethelwald, his brother’s son, raised an insurrection
against him. But when they found that they could in no wise stand against him, they fled
away unto Peanda, King of the Mercians, imploring him that he would collect an army and go
with them to the further side Humber to reave Oswi of his kingdom.
Oswi hatcheth treason
But Peanda, for that he was adread of breaking the peace which King Cadwallo had
established throughout the realm of Britain, deferred starting any disturbance without his
leave until such time as he could in some way or another work upon him either to march
against King Oswi himself, or at least grant him licence to do battle with him. When,
therefore, King Cadwallo held high court one Whitsuntide and celebrated the festival by
wearing the crown of Britain in London, and all of the Kings of the Angles save Oswi alone,
and all the Dukes of the Britons were present, Peanda went unto the King and asked hint
wherefore Oswi alone was absent when all the rest of the princes of the Saxons were there?
And when Cadwallo made answer that it was by reason of a sickness that lay upon him,
Peanda went on to tell him that Oswi had sent for Saxons into Germany that he might
revenge the death of his brother Oswald upon them both. He added, moreover, that he had
broken the King’s peace, seeing that he alone had begun the war and contention betwixt them
when he had driven Ethelfrid, King of Northumbria, and Ethelwald, his brother’s son, forth of
their kingdom by levying war against them. He did therefore further beseech leave to be
allowed either to slay him or to drive him forth of his kingdom.
CHAPTER XII
Margadud: his speech
The King, therefore, whose own thoughts were somewhat divided betwixt the divers aspects
of the matter, called his familiars apart and bade them declare their opinions upon a case of
the kind. And after much counsel had been given, Margadud, King of the South Welsh, spake
amongst the rest:
‘My Lord, seeing that it hath ever been thy purpose to drive the race of the Angles forth of
the frontiers of Britain, wherefore shouldst thou now turn aside from thy resolve and suffer
them to live in peace in our midst? Go to, now! Give them leave at least to fall out amongst
themselves and slaughter one another at will until they shall have exterminated themselves
from our land! No faith is to be kept with one that is ever hatching of treason and laying of
snares to catch him unto whom of right he oweth fealty. These Saxons, in sooth, ever since
they did first set foot in our country, have never done naught but lurk in ambush to betray our
folk. What faith ought we to keep with them? Give Peanda leave to make war upon Oswi the
swiftest he may, that thus they may kill one another in civil discord to their hearts’ content
and our island be rid of the whole pack of them!’
CHAPTER XIII
With these and many other words, Cadwallo was prevailed upon to grant Peanda leave to do
battle with Oswi.
Peanda slain
Peanda accordingly got together a huge army, marched to the Humber, and laying waste that
province of the country, began to harass that King in bitter earnest. Oswi, thereby reduced to
his last shift, promised him numberless right royal treasures and bribes beyond all belief to
put an end to the havoc he was wreaking, abandon the invasion he had begun and go quietly
home. And when he found that he could in no wise prevail upon him to grant his entreaties,
the King, relying on divine succour, albeit that his army were the smaller, gave him battle

132

nigh the river Winned, and won a victory wherein Peanda, together with thirty Dukes, was
slain. Peanda being thus killed, Wulfred his son, by grant of Cadwallo, succeeded him in the
kingdom. He, leaguing himself with Ebba and Edbert, Dukes of the Mercians, rebelled
against Oswi, but at the command of Cadwallo made peace with him. At last, at the end of
eight-and-forty years, Cadwallo, that most noble and puissant King of the Britons, borne
down by old age and sickness, departed this life upon the fifteenth of the Kalends of
December. The Britons embalmed his body with balsams and sweet-scented condiments, and
set it with marvellous art within a brazen image cast to the measure of his stature. This image,
moreover, in armour of wondrous beauty and craftsmanship, they set upon a brazen horse
above the West Gate of London in token of the victory I have spoken of, and as a terror unto
the Saxons. They did likewise build beneath it a church in honour of St. Martin, wherein are
divine services celebrated for him and the faithful departed.
CHAPTER XIV
Cadwallader made King
Cadwallader his son succeeded him in the government of the kingdom, a youth whom Bede
calleth Elidwald. In the beginning he maintained him stoutly and made good peace, but after
he had worn the crown twelve years he fell into feeble health and civil dissension brake out
amongst the Britons. His mother was the sister of Peanda but only on her father’s side,
Peanda being born of a different mother; she was sprung from a noble family of the Gewissi.
It was after King Cadwallo had entered into the covenant of amity with her brother Peanda
that he took her to wife and that she bare him Cadwallader.
CHAPTER XV
He, therefore, as I began to tell ye, falling sick, the Britons begin to quarrel, and by their
accursed discords destroy the wealth of the country. A second calamity, moreover, followeth
on the first, for a deadly and memorable famine fell upon the foolish folk, insomuch as that
every province was empty of all sustenance of food, save only such partial provision as the
huntsman’s art could supply. And upon the heels of this famine followed a pestilence of death
so grievous as that in a brief space so great was the multitude of people laid low, the living
were not enough to bury the dead.
Cadwallader’s lament
By reason whereof, the miserable remnant of the people forsaking their own country in flocks
did make their way unto lands oversea, with mighty lamentation chanting under the folds of
the sails: ‘Thou hast given us, O God, even as sheep unto the slaughter, and amongst the
nations hast Thou scattered us.’ Yea, even King Cadwallader himself, voyaging with his
wretched fleet for Armorica, did make addition unto the lamentation on this wise: ‘Woe unto
us, miserable sinners, for our grievous iniquities wherewith we have never ceased to offend
against God so long as space was granted unto us for repentance! Wherefore the vengeance
of His might lieth thus heavy upon us, and doth uproot us from our native soil, albeit that
never were the Romans of old nor after them the Scots nor the Picts nor even the crafty
treasons of the Saxons able to exterminate our people. In vain have we so oft recovered our
country from them, seeing that it was not God’s will we should reign therein for ever. He, the
true Judge, when He saw that in no wise were we minded to cease from our iniquities and
that no man could drive us forth of the kingdom, willed Himself to chastise our folly, and
hath now directed against us this visitation of His wrath whereby we are compelled to forsake
our own country by multitudes at a time. Now, therefore, return ye Romans; ye Scots and
Picts return; return, ye Ambrons and Saxons! Behold, Britain lieth open unto ye! She that
never might ye avail to dispeople, hath by the wrath of God been now left desolate! Not your

133

valour driveth us forth, but the might of Him that is over all, the God whom never hath our
people been slow to offend.’
CHAPTER XVI
The Saxons return
In the midst of these and other lamentations was Cadwallader borne forth unto the Armorican
shore, and upon his landing, came with all his multitude unto King Alan, nephew of
Solomon, and by hint was worthily received. Britain, therefore, deserted of all her people
save some few whom death had spared in the parts of Wales for a space of eleven years
together, became a place abhorred even of the Britons themselves; nor, in sooth, did the
Saxons find it a home to be desired at that same time, for they, too, died therein without
intermission. But when the deadly plague had ceased, the remnant of them, true unto their
ancient wont, sent word unto their fellow-countrymen in Germany, telling them that now the
island of Britain was deserted of her own people they might lightly take possession thereof,
so only they would come together and dwell therein. So, when they understood these tidings,
that accursed folk, collecting a countless host of men and women, landed in the parts of
Northumbria and inhabited the desolated provinces from Albany even unto Cornwall. For
none indweller was there to say them nay, save only the few and needy little remnants of the
Britons that had survived and herded together in the forest fastnesses of Wales. From that
time the power of the Britons ceased in the island, and the English began to reign.
CHAPTER XVII
The Britons shall prevail hereafter
Then, after some brief space of time had elapsed and the Saxon people had thus been
reinforced, Cadwallader, bethinking him that his kingdom was now purged from the
contagion of the plague, besought help of Alan that he might be restored unto his former
kingdom. But when the King had granted his petition, behold, even as he was fitting out his
fleet, the Voice of an Angel spake unto him in thunder, forbidding him to emprise the
adventure, for that God had willed the Britons should no longer reign in Britain before that
time should come whereof Merlin had prophesied unto Arthur. The Voice bade him,
moreover, that he should go unto Pope Sergius at Rome, where, after due penance done, he
should be numbered amongst the blessed. Yet, further, the Voice told him that the people of
the Britons should again possess the island by merit of their faith when the appointed time
should come, but that this time should not be until the Britons had obtained his relics and had
translated them from Rome into Britain. Then, when the relics had likewise been revealed of
the other saints, which had been hidden away by reason of the invasion of the Paynims, they
should recover the kingdom they had lost. And when this message had been spoken in the
ears of the holy man, he went straightway unto King Alan and made known unto him that
which had been revealed unto himself.
CHAPTER XVIII
Cadwallader dieth
Then Alan took divers books, as that of the prophecies of the Eagle that did prophesy at
Shaftesbury, and of the songs of Sibyl and Merlin, and began to search all things that were
therein to see whether Cadwallader’s revelation did agree with the written oracles. And when
he found no discrepancy therein, he did counsel Cadwallader to be obedient unto the divine
dispensation, and foregoing all thought of recovering Britain, to perform that which the
angelic monition had bidden him. He counselled him, moreover, to send his son Ivor and his
nephew Ini to rule over the remnant of the Britons in the island, lest the people born of their

134

ancient race should lose their freedom by the invasion of the barbarians. Then Cadwallader,
renouncing worldly things for the sake of God and His kingdom everlasting, came unto
Rome, and was confirmed by Pope Sergius, and no long time after, being smitten of a sudden
lethargy, upon the twelfth day of the Kalends of May in the year of Our Lord’s incarnation,
six hundred and eighty-nine, was released from the contagion of the flesh and did enter into
the hall of the kingdom of Heaven.
CHAPTER XIX
Of the Welsh
When Ivor and Ini had got ships together, they raised all the men they could, and made for
the island, where for nine-and-forty years they harassed the English people, and did most
cruelly raid their lands, but all to little avail. For the said pestilence and famine and
customary dissensions had so caused this proud people to degenerate that they could no
longer keep their foes at a distance. And, as barbarism crept in, they were no longer called
Britons but Welsh, a word derived either from Gualo, one of their Dukes, or from Guales,
their Queen, or else from their being barbarians. But the Saxons did wiselier, kept peace and
concord amongst themselves, tilled their fields and builded anew their cities and castles, and
thus throwing off the sovereignty of the Britons, held the empire of all Loegria under their
Duke Athelstan, who was the first to wear a crown amongst them. But the Welsh,
degenerating from the nobility of the Britons, never afterwards recovered the sovereignty of
the island, but on the contrary, quarrelling at one time amongst themselves, and at another
with the Saxons, never ceased to have bloodshed on hand either in public or private feud.
