German Instrument of Surrender
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Wikisource (multiple pages). Public domain.

--- German Instrument of Surrender (7 May 1945) ---

Only this text in English is authoritative


Act of Military Surrender


We the undersigned, acting by authority of the German High Command, hereby surrender unconditionally to the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force and simultaneously to the Soviet High Command all forces on land, sea, and in the air who are at this date under German control.


The German High Command will at once issue orders to all German military, naval and air authorities and to all forces under German control to cease active operations at 2301 hours Central European time on 8 May and to remain in the positions occupied at that time. No ship, vessel, or aircraft is to be scuttled, or any damage done to their hull, machinery or equipment.


The German High Command will at once issue to the appropriate commanders, and ensure the carrying out of any further orders issued by the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force and by the Soviet High Command.


This act of military surrender is without prejudice to, and will be superseded by any general instrument of surrender imposed by, or on behalf of the United Nations and applicable to Germany and the German armed forces as a whole.


Signed at Rheims at 0241 France on the 7th day of May, 1945.


On behalf of the German High Command.


in the presence of


On behalf of the Supreme Commander,
Allied Expeditionary Force.


On behalf of the Soviet
High Command.


Major General, French Army
(Witness)


Page 1
Page 2


This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).


Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse


--- Definitive German Instrument of Surrender (8 May 1945) ---

Act of Military Surrender


We the undersigned, acting by authority of the German High Command, hereby surrender unconditionally to the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force and simultaneously to the Supreme High Command of the Red Army all forces on land, sea, and in the air who are at this date under German control.


The German High Command will at once issue orders to all German military, naval and air authorities and to all forces under German control to cease active operations at 2301 hours Central European time on 8th May 1945, to remain in the positions occupied at that time and to disarm completely, handing over their weapons and equipment to the local allied commanders or officers designated by Representatives of the Allied Supreme Commands. No ship, vessel, or aircraft is to be scuttled, or any damage done to their hull, machinery or equipment, and also to machines of all kinds, armament, apparatus, and all the technical means of prosecution of war in general.


This act of military surrender is without prejudice to, and will be superseded by any general instrument of surrender imposed by, or on behalf of the United Nations and applicable to Germany and the German armed forces as a whole.


In the event of the German High Command or any of the forces under their control failing to act in accordance with this Act of Surrender, the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force and the Supreme High Command of the Red Army will take such punitive or other action as they deem appropriate.


Signed at Berlin on the 8. day of May, 1945


Von FriedeburgKeitelStumpff


On behalf of the German High Command


––––––––––––––––––––


in the presence of:


A. W. Tedder
On behalf of the
Supreme Commander
Allied Expeditionary Force


Georgi Zhukov
On behalf of the
Supreme High Command of the
Red Army


At the signing also were present as witnesses:


F. de Lattre-Tassigny
General Commanding in Chief
First French Army


Carl Spaatz
General, Commanding
United States Strategic Air Forces


Page 1
Page 2
Page 3


This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).


Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
