The Life and Revelations of Saint Gertrude (Gertrude the Great (Sister M. Frances Clare, trans.), 1870)
======================================================================
The Life and Revelations of Saint Gertrude the Great of Helfta (d. 1302) — the Herald of Divine Love (Legatus Divinae Pietatis) in the 1870 English translation by Sister M. Frances Clare of Kenmare. The great Helfta visionary's record of the Sacred Heart devotion at its source. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1870 edition (https://archive.org/details/thelifeandrevela00gertuoft).

THE


LIFE  AND  REVELATIONS


OF


SAINT GERTRUDE.


ST.  GERTRUDE  THE  GREAT.

Engraved  from  the  Spanish  miraculous  Painting.


Htfe  ant>

of

aint  ©trtrutie

Firgin  ano  ^bbes?0,  of  tlje  ^ruer  of


EDITION


LONDON:  BURNS  &  OATES,  LIMITED
NEW  YORK, CINCINNATI,  CHICAGO:  BENZIGER  BROTHERS


Sir  Jttartam


Jpgjjt  $tfr.

THE  PALACE,  KILLARNEY,  Dec.  nth,  1870.
MY  DEAR  SISTER  IN  CHRIST,—

I  learn  that  you  are  issuing  some  new  Works,  aud  some  new
editions  of  those  already  published.  Your  literary  labours  reflect
honour  on  your  Convent,  on  your  Order,  and  on  this  Diocese.

But  I  rejoice  much  moir.  in  this,  that  yoo.  are  contributing  to  supply
one  of  our  greatest  needs — a  Catholic  Literature.  I  know,  too,  that
the  funds  realised  by  the  sale  of  your  works  are  exclusively  devoted
to  the  service  of  religion.

Praying  God  to  bless  you,  and  to  preserve  your  health  and  strength,
Yours  sincerely  in  Christ,

>£D.  MOKIARTY.
To  SISTER  M.  FRANCES  CLARE,
Convent  of  Poor  Clares,  Kenmare,  Co.  Kerry,


CONTENTS.


PART I.
CHAPTER  I. PAGE  1.

The  Saint's  birth  and  parentage — Her  early  dedication  to  God — In
tellectual  gifts — Divine  communications  concerning  her  sanctity
— Our  Lord  declares  that  He  finds  rest  and  repose  in  her  heart
— Desires  a  holy  person  to  seek  Him  there.

CHAPTER  II. PAGE  11.

St.  Gertrude  predicts  the  election  of  Adolphus  of  Nassau— Quiets
the  fears  of  the  sisters,  who  expect  to  suffer  a  temporal  loss
— Her  election  as  Abbess — Removal  to  Heldelfs— Revelations
of  her  sanctity — Our  Lord  appears  to  her,  hearing  the  house  of
religion — Her  generosity  of  spirit.

CHAPTER  III. PAGE  20.

The  Saint  obtains  favourable  weather — Miracles  mentioned  in  her
Office — Union  of  her  will  with  God's— Counsels  others — Desired
to  write  her  revelations — Her  sanctity  revealed  to  St.  Mechtilde.

CHAPTER  IV. PACK  29.

She  asks  St.  Mechtilde  to  pray  for  her— Our  Lord  is  pleased  with  her
patience  and  mildness — He  declares  that  He  dwells  in  her  ;  and
hides  her  imperfections.

CHAPTER  V. PAGE  32.

The  Saint  as  Abbess — Tenderness  towards  others — Care  of  the  sick —
Her  last  illness — Value  of  suffering — She  is  forbidden  to  resign
her  office — Our  Lord  accepts  as  done  to  Himself  what  is  done  for
her — St.  Lebuin.


Viii  CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  VI. PAGE  41.

Her  dying  words— Devotion  to  the  Divine  Office— Tenderness  to  lier
spiritual  children— Ocr  Lord  appears  to  her  in  her  agony—  Pro
mises  to  receive  her  as  He  received  His  Blessed  Mother — Angels
call  her  to  paradise.

CHAPTER  VII. PAGE  45.

Her  death— Of  her  eternal  joys— Our  Lord  consoles  her  religious
—Revelations  of  her  sanctity— Prays  that  her  religious  may  be
comforted  at  her  tomb— Her  obsequies— Our  Lord  blesses  her
tomb.

CHAPTER  VIII. PAGE  52.

Favours  granted  at  the  interment  of  the  Saint — Souls  released
through  her  intercession— How  our  Lord  gathered  a  lily— Of  fear
in  the  last  agony— Purgatory  in  sickness — Efficacy  of  prayers  for
the  dead.

CHAPTER  IX. PAGE  56.

Happy  death  of  another  religious — Our  Lord  specially  rewards  her
charity  to  others — Purgatory  in  sickness — How  our  Lord  purified
a  dying  religious — Efficacy  of  prayers  for  the  departed — Of  Masses
for  the  dead — Reward  of  fervour  when  suffering.

CHAPTER  X. PAGE  61.

St.  Gertrude  not  formally  canonised — History  of  her  cultus — Benedict
XIV. — Her  Office  approved — Name  inserted  in  Martyrology —
Lanspergius— His  History— Preface  to  Insinuationes— Plea  for
the  female  sex — Conclusion.


PART  II.

CHAPTER  I. PAGE  71.

The  Saint's  thanksgiving  to  God  for  the  first  grace  vouchsafed  to  her,
by  which  her  mind  was  withdrawn  from  earthly  things  and
united  to  Him.

CHAPTER  II. PAGE  74.
How  the  grace  of  God  illuminated  her  interiorly.

CHAPTER  III. PAGE  75.

Of  the  pleasure  which  God  took  in  making  His  abode  in  the  soul  of
Gertrude.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  IV. PAGE  79.

Of  the  stigmatas  imprinted  in  the  heart  of  Gertrude,  and  her  exercises

in  honour  of  the  Five  Wounds.

CHAPTER  V. PAGE  82.

Of  the  Wound  of  Divine  Love  ;  and  of  the  manner  of  bathing,
anointing,  and  binding  it  up.

CHAPTER  VI. PAGE  85.
Of  the  intimate  union  of  the  Infant  Jesus  with  her  heart.

CHAPTER  VII. PAGE  86.

The  Divinity  is  imprinted  upon  the  soul  of  Gertrude  as  a  seal  upon
wax.

CHAPTER  VIII. PAGE  88.
Of  the  admirable  union  of  her  soul  with  God.

CHAPTER  IX. PAGE  90.

Of  another  admirable  manner  in  which  St.  Gertrude  was  closely
united  to  God.

CHAPTER  X. PAGE  92.

How  the  Lord  obliged  her  to  write  these  things  ;  and  how  He
illuminated  her.

CHAPTER  XI. PAGE  94.

She  receives  the  gift  of  tears,  and  is  warned  of  the  snares  which  the
demon  has  laid  for  her.

CHAPTER  XII. PAGE  f..f.
With  how  much  goodness  God  Ui'ii's  our  faults.

CHAPTER  XIII. PAGE  97.
Of  the  necessity  of  exact  vigilance  over  the  senses  and  affections.

CHAPTER  XIV. PAGE  99.
Different  exercises  by  which  the  soul  is  purified.

CHAPTER  XV. PAGE  100.

How  agreeable  works  of  charity  are  to  God  ;  and  also  meditations
on  holy  things.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  XVI. PAGE  102.

Of  the  inconceivable  tenderness  which  the  most  glorious  Virgin
has  for  us.

CHAPTER  XVII. PAGE  104.
Of  the  garments  with  which  we  should  clothe  Jesus  and  His  Mother.

CHAPTER  XVIII. PAGE  106.
How  God  bears  with  our  defects— Instruction  on  humility.

CHAPTER  XIX. PAGE  107.

How  God  is  pleased  to  condescend  to  His  creatures  ;  and  what  glory
God  derives  thence  from  the  blessed.

CHAPTER  XX. PAGE  109.

Of  some  considerable  privileges  which  God  granted  to  this  Virgin,
and  of  the  grace  which  He  promised  to  her  clients.

CHAPTER  XXI. PAGE  114.
Thanksgivings  for  the  confirmation  of  the  aforesaid  favours.

CHAPTER  XXII. PAGE  116.

How  St.  Gertrude  was  admitted  to  the  vision  of  God — Of  the  kiss  of
peace  and  other  similar  favours.

CHAPTER  XXIII. PAGE  119.

Recapitulation  of  the  gifts  already  mentioned— The  Saint  complains
of  her  infirmity  and  ingratitude.

CHAPTER  XXIV. PAGE  128.
Conclusion  of  this  Book.


PART  III.

CHAPTER  I. PAGE  131.

Our  Lord  gives  His  Blessed  Mother  to  St.  Gertrude  to  be  her  mother,
in  order  that  she  may  have  recourse  to  her  in  all  her  afflictions.


CONTENTS.  XI


CHAPTER  II. PAGE  132.
Adversity  is  the  spiritual  ring  with  which  the  soul  is  betrothed  to  God.

CHAPTER  III. PAGE  133.
Human  consolation  weakens  that  which  is  Divine.

CHAPTER  IV. PAGE  134.
How  vile  and  despicable  ar«»  all  transitory  pleasures.

CHAPTER  V. PAGE  137.

The  perfect  resignation  of  St.  Gertrude  into  the  hands  of  God  in  all
adversities,  and  what  merit  she  acquired  thereby.

CHAPTER  VI. PAGE  138.

The  co-operation  of  the  faithful  soul  at  the  Holy  Sacrifice — Five
favours  on  which  the  Saint  was  desired  to  meditate,  when  unable
to  assist  at  it.

CHAPTER  VII. PAGE  140.

With  what  confidence  we  should  have  recourse  to  God  in  all  our
needs  and  temptations.

CHAPTER  VIII. PAGE  141.
Of  the  efficacy  of  prayers  for  others.

CHAPTER  IX. PAGE  145.

Of  the  admirable  effects  of  Communion,  and  that  we  should  not  lightly
abstain  from  it,  even  for  our  unworthiness.

CHAPTER  X. PAGE  147.

The  indulgence  which  our  Lord  granted  to  St.  Gertrude — Her  ardent
desire  to  be  conformed  in  all  things  to  the  will  of  God.

CHAPTER  XL PAGE  149.

How  the  soul  may  seek  God,  and  transfigure  itself  into  Him,  in  foui
ways.

CHAPTER  XII. PAGE  151.

Reparation  for  the  fall  of  a  Host,  which  it  was  feared  had  been
consecrated.


arii  CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  XIII. PAGE  152.

Of  the  value  and  efficacy  of  Confession — How  we  should  conquer  the
difficulties  we  feel  in  approaching  the  Sacrament  of  Penance.

CHAPTER  XIV. PAGE  155.

The  different  effects  of  charity  are  explained  by  the  comparison  of
a  tree  covered  with  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruit.

CHAPTER  XV. PAGE  157.

How  afflictions  unite  the  soul  to  Jesus  Christ ;  and  of  the  effect  of  an
unjust  excommunication.

CHAPTER  XVI. PAGE  161.

A  vision  in  which  St.  Gertrude  beheld  our  Lord  communicating  the

sisters.

CHAPTER  XVII PAGE  165.

How  we  should  prepare  ourselves  to  receive  the  Body  of  Jesus  Christ
-Different  exercises  of  piety  which  St.  Gertrude  practised  towards
this  august  Sacrament.

CHAPTER  XVIII. PAGE  177.

The  devotion  of  St.  Gertrude  to  the  Mother  of  God— She  is  taught
to  invoke  her  as  the  white  lily  of  the  adorable  Trinity,  and  the
vennillion  rose  of  heaven.

CHAPTER  XIX. PAGE  180.
How  the  praises  offered  to  the  Saints  may  be  referred  to  God.

CHAPTER  XX. PAGE  180.

How  God  desires  to  be  sought  for  by  the  soul  that  loves  Him  ;  and
how  He  loves  us  when  we  suffer.

CHAPTER  XXI. PAGE  181.

The  Saint  receives  a  triple  absolution  and  benediction  from  the
Blessed  Trinity,  through  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ.

CHAPTER  XXII. PAGE  182.
Favours  granted  to  the  Saint  during  the  recital  of  the  Divine  Office.


CONTENTS.  riii


CHAFFER  XXITL PAGE  184.

Of  the  abundant  virtue  which  flows  from  the  Heart  of  Jesus  into  tho
faithful  soul.

CHAPTER  XXIV. PAGE  186.

Of  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  faithful  soul,  and  how  to  make
a  spiritual  cloister  in  the  Body  and  Heart  of  Jesus.

CHAPTER  XXV. PAGE  188.

Of  the  union  of  the  soul  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  how  she  is  pre
pared,  by  the  merits  of  the  Saints,  to  be  an  agreeable  abode  for
her  God.

CHAPTER  XXVI. PAGE  189.

Of  the  merit  of  a  good  will,  and  instructions  on  some  words  of  the
Divine  Office.

CHAPTER  XXVII. PAGE  207.
Why  God  is  pleased  by  images  of  Jesus  crucified.

CHAPTER  XXVIII. PAGE  208.
Of  spiritual  thirst  for  God,  and  of  the  utility  of  sufferings.

CHAPTER  XXIX. PAGE  210.

How  insidious  are  the  snares  of  the  demon,  and  especially  when  we
chant.

CHAPTER  XXX. PAGE  211.

That  our  prayers  are  certainly  heard,  even  though  we  do  not  perceive
their  effect ;  and  how  to  supply  for  our  unworthiness  in  approach
ing  Holy  Communion  through  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ  and  His
Saints.

CHAPTER  XXXI. PAGE  213.

Of  the  advantages  of  frequent  Communion,  and  of  receiving  the  holy
Viaticum.

CHAPTER  XXXII. PAGE  214.

flow  Qo<l  norrects  the  past  negligences  of  a  soul  who  loves  Him,  and
remedies  those  which  Hiay  occur  in  future.


OHAFTKK  XXXIII. PAOX  Slfv
Of  :h<>  Y*:-.I*  *r.d  taqpwtNMI  •!  *v;r::u.V.  Corn -minion.

CH.vrrvs  xxxiv. p.v^v  •::>.

Of  the  »tiKty  of  meditating  on  the  Passion  of  war  Low!,  ami  how
He  ofi«n Himself  to  Ik*  Eton**! F*»hw  in  »:

our  siv*

OKvrrys  XXXV. Tv,^:  !^1.

Of  tk«  bwndl*  of  myrrh,  ami  how  w«  should  pmetbe  pfttvrae*  in
«dT«nitr.  *ccv>r\lins:  «o  UM»  oxiunple  of  Christ.

OHArrvs  XXXVI r\^-  '."•:-.

Tl»t  oVToikm  to  tfe*  Passion  of  our  Lwrvi  promotes  union  with
CM,

XXXVII. PAGK  225.

Of  th«  Mob  of  $w^t-«wenin§  clorw  which  the  Saint,  moTttl
put  into  UM  wwind*  of  the  cnicifix  inste*vl  of  the  iron  n.i  '
of  tit*  pmtitoiie  wfckb  our  Lord  testified  for  thi*.

CBARKR  XXXVIIl. PAGK  227.

How  we  m*r  remember  the  P»s^s  < : .  :xnd  pn vl  *in\  th  i

CHAFTKR  XXXIX. PAOT  MOL

Tbat  we  ibottld  gire  some  token  of  oar  lore  to  God  after  ex

vv.-.:  .;:: vs.

CHAFTKR  XL PACK  2SL
Of  the  effects  of  pra>-er  in  adversity.

CHAPTER  XLI. PACK  2ML

Prayer  composed  by  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  which  He

v-. :v.-se  I  :.-'.- • :'.-,% ".r  '-'.y

CHAPTKRXLII. PACSK  2M.

How  the  p»t  delight  hi  God,  and  how  God  takes  pleasure  in  them,
especially  whom  they  commit  all  their  good  desires  to  Him.

CHAPTER  XLJIL PAGE  296.
Of  two  pulsations -of  the  Heart  of  J


PA«E  237.
Of  the  MMMT  i»  which  we  rixmU  *tk  oax  Lard  for  rat  «r  •!«•*.

TKB  XLV. PACE  239.
Of  pwfeet  «•****<»  of  <melr«i  to  tike  Drw»«  wOL


CH>.  frr*;si  X  L  V  I  .

Of  the  «wx«M*  pl^ursr^  whkh  th«  w\  f.;A*  fa  O-xi-

Pxcr  241.
Of  the  k*g»or  euMed  by  Dirn*  lor«u

JL PACJB243.

Th*t  tb«  faitM  ol  «ml  <m«bt  to  abrndoa  hctwtf  to  tibe  wffl  rf  O*d,  f  or
life  a«d  death,


PACE  244.
Of  the  be»dH  we  may  derire  from  <mr  finite.

CHAITEB  L. PACE  246.

Of  tKe  rnew»l  of  tte  Serea  Sac«««rt«  n  Wr  ml,  ud  of  tetenMl
eb*

CHAFTEBLI. PACE  248.
Of  tbe  fidelity  vbidi  we  «wt  only  expect  to  fa*  m  G«d,  M*  W


CHAPTEfcLIL PACE  250.


OHAFTEB  LIIL PAC.V
flow  we  may  profit  by  tb«  merit  of  othem

CHAPTEB  LTV. PAGE  254.
Prayer  eompoced  by  the  Sahxt

CHAPTEE  LV. PACE  297.
Oar  Lord  show*  her  His  Heart.

CHAFTEB  LVL PAGE  257.
Of  charity  toward*  an  erring  brother.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  LVII. PAGE  259.

That  the  care  of  temporal  affairs  and  exterior  duties  may  be
acceptable  to  God.

CHAPTER  LVIII. PAGE  262.
Of  the  merit  of  patience.

CHAPTER  L1X. PAGE  264.

Of  the  aversion  which  God  has  for  impatience — And  how  agreeable
it  is  to  Him  that  we  should  return  thanks  for  His  benefits.

CHAPTER  LX. PAGE  266.
That  God  is  pleased  with  us  when  we  are  displeased  with  ourselvea.

CHAPTER  LXI. PAGE  267.

Of  the  effect  of  prayers  for  others.

CHAPTER  LXII. PAGE  270.
Instructions  for  different  persons  in  different  states  of  life.

CHAPTER  LXIII. PAGE  278.

That  the  Church  is  figured  by  the  members  of  Jesus  Christ— How  we
must  act  towards  those  members  which  are  diseased,  and  in  regard
to  our  Superior.

CHAPTER  LXIV. PAGE  281.
On  the  spiritual  participation  of  merits.

CHAPTER  LXV. PAGE  283.
Of  the  utility  of  temptation.

CHAPTER  LXVI. PAGE  283.
That  frequent  Communion  is  agreeable  to  God.

CHAPTER  LXVII. PAGE  284.
Of  the  right  manner  of  exercising  zeal.

CHAPTER  LXVIII. PAGE  285.
That  we  do  not  always  receive  the  fruit  of  our  prayers  immediately.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTEU  LAIA. PAGE  286.
The  value  of  exact  obedience.

CHAPTER  LXX. PAGE  287.
Instructions  on  different  subjects.

CHAPTER  LXXT. PAGE  290.
Of  the  loss  of  friends  ;  and  how  we  should  offer  our  trials  to  God.

CHAPTER  LXXII. PAGE  291.
Instructions  on  various  subjects.


PART  IV.
CHAPTER  I. PAGE  295.

With  what  devotion  we  ought  to  prepare  ourselves  for  festivals-
Advantages  of  recommending  ourselves  to  the  prayers  of  others
— Our  enjoyment  of  God  corresponds  to  our  desires  and  our
capacity  to  receive  it.

CHAPTER  II. PAGE  297.
Instructions  for  celebrating. the  Feast  of  the  Nativity.

CHAPTER  III. PAGE  308.

For  the  Feast  of  the  Nativity — Apparition  of  the  Infant  Jesus  and  Ilia
Blessed  Mother.

CHAPTER  IV. PAGE  313.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist.

His  virtues,  and  the  manner  of  imitating  His  purity.

CHAPTER  V. PAGE  322.
For  the  Feast  of  the  Circumcision.

Of  the  holy  name  of  Jesus  ;  and  the  renewal  of  our  good  intention*
at  the  commencement  of  the  new  year.


xviil


VI. FAGE  326.
For  the  Feast  of  the  Epiphany.
Of  the  oblations  which  are  acceptable  to  God.

CHAPTER  VII. PAGE  329.
For  the  Second  Sunday  after  Epiphany.

St.  Gertrude  receives  absolution  from  our  Divine  Lord—  Instruction*
for  Holy  Communion.

CHAPTER  VIII. PAGE  332.
For  the  Feast  of  St.  Agnes,  Virgin  and  Martyr.

Apparition  of  St.  Agnes—  Virtue  of  the  words  which  she  uttered  si
her  death.

CHAPTER  IX. PAGE  334.

For  the  Feast  of  the  Purification.

CHAPTER  X. PAGE  338.
For  Septuagesima  Sunday.

Instruction  concerning  receiving  and  abstaining  from  the  Holy
Communion.

CHAPTER  XI. PAGE  341.

For  Sexagesima.
Instruction  on  Noah's  ark  ;  a  mystical  day  therein.

CHAPTER  XII. PAGE  345.
For  the  Saturday  before  Quinquagesima.

Devotions  for  the  time  of  the  Carnival  —  Of  the  value  and  efficacy  of
suffering.

CHAPTER  XIII. PAGE  350.
For  Quinquagesima  (continued).

How  acceptable  good  works  are  to  our  Lord  during  the  three  days  of
the  Carnival  ;  and  how  such  works  obtain  merit  by  union  with
the  Passion  of  Christ.

CHAPTER  XIV. PAGE  353.

Instruction  for  the  First  Sunday  of  Lent.

How  the  soul  is  purified  and  embellished  by  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ.


CONTENTS.  XUC


CHAPTER  XV. PAGB  356.

For  tJie  Monday  after  the  First  Sunday  of  Lent.

Of  the  true  manner  of  spiritually  performing  the  corporal  works

of  mercy.

CHAPTER  XVI. PAGE  357.

For  the  Second  Sunday  in  Lent.

Of  the  oblation  of  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  ska  of  the  Church.

CHAPTER  XVII. PAGE  359.

For  the  Third  Sunday  of  Lent.

How  we  may  obtain  a  share  in  the  merits  of  the  Life  of  Jesus  Christ.

CHAPTER  XVIII. PAGE  360.
For  the  Fourth  Sunday  of  Lent.
The  Saint  is  instructed  how  to  atone  for  the  sins  of  the  Church.

CHAPTEK  XIX. PAGB  363.
For  the  Feast  of  St.  Gregory,  Pope.

Of  the  glory  and  prerogatives  of  St.  Gregory,  and  the  recompense
reserved  for  this  Doctor  of  the  Church.

CHAPTER  XX. PAGE  365.
For  the  Feast  of  the  glorious  St.  Benedict.

The  beatitude  and  glory  of  this  Saint  shown  to  St.  Gertrude — The
particular  recompense  reserved  for  those  who  observe  regular
discipline  faithfully.

CHAPTER  XXI. PAGE  3(58.
For  the  Vigil  and  Feast  of  the  Annunciation.
Exercises  of  devotion  to  the  Blessed  Virgin.

CHAPTER  XXII. PAGE  373.

For  Passion  Sunday.
Exercises  of  devotion  for  that  day.

CHAPTER  XXIII. PAGE  375.

For  Palm  Sunday.
Of  spiritual  Communion,  ancl  other  exercises  for  this  holy  day.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  XXIV. PAGE  383.
For  Wednesday  in  Holy  Week.

CHAPTER  XXV. PAGE  384.
For  Holy  Thursday.

Of  offering  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ  to  obtain  pardon  for  the  sing  of
the  Church — Of  His  love  in  the  adorable  Sacrament  of  the  Altar.

CHAPTER  XXVI. PAGE  389.
For  Good  Friday.

The  Saint  is  favoured  with  a  rapture— Exercises  on  the  Passion  of
our  Lord.

CHAPTER  XXVII. PAGE  394.
For  Easter  Sunday.

How  the  souls  are  freed  from  their  pains— Of  a  good-will— How  to
praise  God  in  the  Alleluia.

CHAPTER  XXVIII. PAGE  397.
For  Easter  Monday.

That  God  takes  an  exact  account  of  our  merits  ;  and  how  they  an
enriched  by  the  merits  of  Christ.

CHAPTER  XXIX. PAGE  398.

For  Easter  Tuesday.
Of  the  renewal  of  spiritual  espousals.

CHAPTER  XXX. PAGE  399.

Fur  Easter  Wednesday.
That  we  can  do  nothing  good  without  the  Divine  assistant.

CHAPTER  XXXI.  PAGE  400.
For  Thursday  in  Easter  Week.
Of  offering  our  actions  to  God.

CHAPTER  XXXII. PAGE  401.

For  Low  Sunday.
How  we  should  dispose  ourselves  to  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.


CONTENTS.  Xll


CHAPTER  XXXIII. PAGE  402.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  Mark,  Evangelist.

Of  the  Litanies,  and  invocation  of  saints.

CHAPTER  XXXIV. PAGE  403.
For  the  Feast  of  St.  John  before  the  Latin  Gate.

Of  the  sweet  memory  of  St.  John — How  imperfections  of  vvriicli  we
forget  to  accuse  ourselves  in  confession  are  pardoned  by  Cod.

CHAPTER  XXXV. PAGE  405.

For  the  Ascension.
The  manner  of  saluting  our  Lord's  Five  Wounds.

CHAPTER  XXXVT. PAGE  406.
For  the  Sunday  before  Ascension  T/tursda//.

Of  the  merit  of  condescension  and  compassion  for  the  infirm— And
how  we  should  desire  contempt.

CHAPTER  XXXVII. PAGE  409.
For  the  Ror/ation  Days.

How  we  should  pray  for  the  just,  for  sinners,  and  for  the  souls  in
purgatory.

CHAPTER  XXXVIII. PAGE  410.
For  Ascension-day.

Of  the  renunciation  of  our  own  will — And  certain  exercises  of  picfy
for  this  Festival.

CHAPTER  XXXIX. PAGE  413.

For  the  Sunday  after  Ascension.

How  to  prepare  ourselves  worthily  to  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.

CHAPTER  XL. PAGE  414.
For  the  Vujil  and  Feast  of  Pentecost.
Of  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost— And  other  exercises  for  this  day.

CHAPTER  XLI. PAGE  4]  9.
For  Monday  in  Whitsun  Week.

How  the  oblation  of  the  Sacred  Host  supplies  for  our  deficiencies-
Exercises  for  the  A'jm'8  Dei.


XX11  CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  XLII. PAGE  420.
For  the  Tuesday  in  Whitsun  Week.

How  the  Sacred  Host  supplies  for  all  our  negligences,  and  how  the
Holy  Spirit  unites  Himself  in  Communion  to  holy  souls.

CHAPTER  XLIII. PAGE  421.
For  the  Feast  of  the  Blessed  Trinity.

How  we  may  glorify  the  Most  Holy  Trinity  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
— And  what  obstacles  human  affections  place  to  our  advancement.

CHAPTER  XLTV. PAGE  423.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  John,  Baptist.

Apparition  of  the  Saint— Effects  of  his  intercession.

CHAPTER  XLV. PAGE  425.
For  the  Feast  of  the  Holy  Apostles  SS.  Peter  and  Paul.

How  we  may  feed  Christ's  sheep  spiritually — Of  the  intercession  of
the  Apostles — And  the  fruit  of  Holy  Communion.

CHAPTER  XLVI. PAGE  427.
For  the  Feast  of  St.  Margaret,  Virgin  and  Martyr.

The  glory  of  this  Saint,  and  of  the  recompense  which  God  reservoi
for  the  least  good  action.

CHAPTER  XLVIL PAGE  428.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  Mary  Magdalen.

Of  true  penance  and  good-will.

CHAPTER  XLVIII. PAGE  430.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  James.

Advantages  of  the  pilgrimage  to  Compostella — And  how  we  may
honour  the  Saints  by  Communion.

CHAPTER  XLIX. PAGE  432.

For  the  Vigil  and  Feast  of  the  Assumption.

Of  the  manner  of  honouring  and  saluting  the  Blessed  Virgin.

CHAPTER  L. PAGE  446.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  Bernard.

The  merit  and  glory  of  this  Saint.


CONTENTS.  xxiii


CHAPTER  LI. PAGE  449.
For  the  Feast  of  St.  Augustine.

Of  the  glory  and  virtue  of  this  Saint— Of  the  merits  of  St.  Francis
and  St.  Dominic.

CHAPTER  LII. PAGE  453.
For  the  Festival  of  the  Nativity  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.

Exercises  for  celebrating  this  Feast  devoutly — How  powerfully  the
Blessed  Virgin  protects  those  who  invoke  her  ;  and  how  we  may
supply  for  our  negligences  in  her  service.

CHAPTER  LIU. PAGE  459.
For  the  Feast  of  the  Exaltation  of  the  Cross.

Of  the  exaltation of  the Cross — Of  the  love  of  enemies — Of  the
observance  of  the  regular  fast — Of  the  true  relics  of  Jesus  Christ.

CHAPTER  LIV. PAGE  4G2.
For  the  Feast  of  St.  Michael

Of  the  faithful  care  which  the  angels  have  of  us,  and  how  we  should
honour  them.

CHAPTER  LV. PAGE  464.
For  the  Feast  of  the  Eleven  Thousand  Virgins.

Of  the  fruits  of  thanksgiving— That  God  requires  us  to  fructify  His
gifts — And  of  the  Response  Regnum  mundi.

CHAPTER  LVI. PAGE  467.
For  the  Feast  of  All  Saints.

Of  the  different  orders  of  the  Church  Militant— How  to  honour  the
saints  by  thanksgivings,  that  we  may  participate  in  their  merits.

CHAPTER  LVII. PAGE  470.
For  the  Feast  of  St.  Elizabeth.

How  pleasing  it  is  to  the  saints  that  we  should  praise  God  on  their
account.

CHAPTER  LVIII. PAGE  470.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  Catherine.
Of  the  patronage  and  merits  of  this  Saint.


XXIV  CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  LIX. PAGE  471.
For  the  Dedication  of  a  Church.

CHAPTER  LX. PAGE  475.
For  the  Dedication  of  a  Chapel.

Of  the  presence  and  grace  of  God  in  holy  places — And  how  the  angels
supply  for  our  obligation  of  praising  God.

CHAPTER  LXI. PAGE  478.

Of  a  marvellous  vision,  in  which  the  Saint  beheld  our  Lord  celebrating

Mass.


PART  V.

CHAPTER  I. PAGE  487.
How  St.  Mechtilde  prepared  for  death,  and  received  extreme  unction.

CHAPTER  II. PAGE  496.

Of  the  happy  death  of  St.  Mechtilde,  and  her  reward  in  heaven  —
Of  the  merits  and  intercession  of  the  saints — And  how  to  offer
the  Five  Wounds  of  Christ  to  supply  for  our  defects.

CHAPTER  III. PAGE  502.

Of  the  precious  death  of  Sisters  M.  and  L.— Of  the  exact  account  taken
in  purgatory  of  their  faults,  and  of  the  reward  of  their  merits.

CHAPTER  IV. PAGE  505.
How  a  disobedience  was  expiated  by  an  illness.

CHAPTER  V. PAGE  507.

Of  the  happy  d^ath  of  Sister  M.— The  approbation  of  these  Revelation*
— And  the  favours  promised  through  her  merits.

CHAPTER  VI. PAGE  510.

Of  the  agony  and  death  of  M.  B. ,  and  of  her  blessed  soul— How
•alutary  it  is  to  assist  the  souls  in  Purgatory.


CONTENTS.  XXV


CHAPTER  VII. PAGE  512.

How  the  souls  of  G.  and  B.  were  purified  for  neglecting  confession,
and  for  taking  pleasure  in  earthly  things.

CHAPTER  VIII. PAGE  515.

Of  Sister  G.'s  happy  preparation  for  death— Her  fervent  desires,  and
her  glory.

CHAPTER  IX. PAGE  518.
The  rewards  which  Brother  S.  received  for  his  fidelity  and  benevolence.

CHAPTER  X. PAGE  519.

How  Brother  Hermann  suffered  for  obstinacy — And  of  the  assistance
which  may  be  obtained  in  the  other  life  by  the  prayers  of  the
saints  and  the  faithful.

CHAPTER  XI. PAGE  522.

How  Brother  John  was  rewarded  for  his  labours  and  punished  for
his  faults.

CHAPTER  XII. PAGE  523.

HOTT  the  soul  of  Brother  The  :  was  released  by  prayers  in  honour
of  the  Five  Wounds.

CHAPTER  XIII. PAGE  525.

What  Brother  F.  suffered  for  indolence  and  want  of  submission— The
efficacy  of  fervent  prayer.

CHAPTER  XIV. PAGE  526.

Those  who  have  persevered  long  in  sin  are  not  easily  benefited  by  the
prayers  of  the  Church,  and  are  liberated  with  difficulty.

CHAPTER  XV. PAGE  528.

Of  the  oblation  of  the  Host— And  of  prayers  for  the  souls  of
deceased  parents.

CHAPTER  XVI. PAGE  530.

Of  the  effect  of  the  Great  Psalter— Of  the  zeal  of  Christ  for  the  salva
tion  of  souls — And  how  willing  He  is  to  hear  the  prayers  of  those
who  love  Him.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTEB  XVIL PAGE  532.

Of  the  severe  sufferings  of  a  soldier  —  And  the  efficacy  of  the  Great
Psalter.

CHAPTER  XVIII. PAGE  534.

Explanation  of  the  Great  Psalter,  and  of  the  Seven  Masses  of
St.  Gregory.

CHAPTER  XIX. PAGE  539.

The  reward  of  praying  for  the  dead  —  And  the  punishment  of
disobedience  and  detractions.

CHAPTER  XX. PAGE  542.

Of  the  ardent  desire  of  death  which  our  Lord  enkindled  in  the  soul
of  Gertrude.

CHAPTER  XXI. PAGE  543.
How  Gertrude  prayed  for  death.

CHAPTER  XXII. PAGE  544.
Of  the  wounds  of  Divine  love  with  which  the  Saint  was  transfixed.

CHAPTER  XXIII. PAGE  545.
Our  preparations  for  death  are  not  forgotten  before  God*

CHAPTER  XXIV. PAGE  546.

Exercises  in  preparation  for  death  —  And  devotion  to  the  Blessed
Virgin.

CHAPTER  XXV. PAGE  552.

How  our  Lord  Jesus  and  all  the  saints  console  the  souls  of  the  just  in
their  last  moments  —  And  with  what  love  our  Lord  communicate*
Himself  to  His  elect  in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar.

CHAPTER  XXVI. PAGE  555.

Of  the  sweefc  repose  which  the  Saint  enjoyed  ;  and  how  she  satisfied
for  her  negligences.


CONTENTS.  XXVli


CHAPTER  XXVII. PAGE  559.

How  the  Saint  supplied  for  her  negligences  in  the  service  of  the
Blessed  Virgin  Mary.

CHAPTER  XXVIII. PAGE  560.
How  Gertrude  prepared  for  death.

CHAPTER  XXIX. PAGE  563.
How  our  Lord  authorised  this  work.

CHAPTER  XXX. PAGE  564.
Oblation  of  this  work  to  the  Divine  glory— Conclusion.


ADVERTISEMENT.


THE  Insinuationes  Dimnce  fietatis  consist  of  Five  Books.  The
Second  only  was  written  by  the  Saint :  the  remaining  four  were
compiled  from  her  papers,  and  from  personal  knowledge  of  her
life,  by  a  religious  of  her  monastery.  This  religious, who  care
fully  conceals  her  name,  was  probably  the  Sister  whom  St.  Ger
trude  mentions  herself,  and  in  whom  she  evidently  had  the
greatest  confidence.  As  the  object  of  the  Insinuationes  is  mani
festly  to  relate  the  supernatural  favours  bestowed  on  St.  Ger
trude,  her  personal  history  is  but  briefly  adverted  to,  and  only
in  connection  with  the  graces  bestowed  on  her  by  God.  Hence
but  little  is  known  of  the  Saint's  early  life.  The  first  book
of  the  Insinuationes  contains  some  allusions  to  it ;  but  it  con
sists  principally  of  a  panegyric  and  a  formal  enumeration  of
her  virtues.  To  avoid  needless  and  uninteresting  repetition,
this  was  omitted,  and  the  substance  of  it  carefully  embodied
in  the  life  of  St.  Gertrude,  for  which  we  have  endeavoured  to
collate  materials  from  every  possible  source.  The  chronology
of  Campacci  has  been  followed  as  the  most  reliable,  and  as
highly  esteemed  by  the  learned  Benedictines  of  Solesmes.

The  second,  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  parts  of  this  work  are
translations  of  the  second,  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  books  of  the
Insinuationes.  The  edition  principally  used  has  been  the  "  In
sinuationes  Divinw  Pietatis,  seu  Vita  et  Revelationes  S.  Ger-
trudis,  Virginis  et  Abbatissse,  Ordinis  S.  Benedicti.  Amendis
quibus  scatebant  expurgatse  studio  et  labore  D[om]  N[icolas]
C[anteleu]  B[enedictinus].  Parisiis  apud  Fredericum  Leonard^
Congregationis  S.  Mauri  Ordinis  S.  Benedicti.  Typogr.  via


XXX  ADVERTISEMENT.


Jacobaea  sub  Scuto  Veneto,  M.DC.LXII.  Cum  privilegio  et  ap-
probatione."  The  "  Scuto  Veneto"  is  duly  represented  on  the
title-page,  and  the  winged  lion  of  St.  Mark  holds  an  open
Gospel,  with  the  legend  "Pax  tibi  Marce  Evangelista  meus."
The  motto,  "  Virtute  invidiam  vince,"  is  engraved  on  a  scroll
above  the  emblem.

Doni  Canteleu  was  a  holy  and  learned  priest.  It  is  said  that
the  hour  of  his  death  was  revealed  to  him  while  he  was  occu
pied  in  preparing  his  edition  of  the  Insinuations*.  But  he  had
commenced  his  work  for  God,  and  for  Him  also  it  was  consum
mated.  The  last  corrections  were  made  the  very  day  of  his
death  ;  and  though  he  did  not  live  to  see  his  work  issue
from  the  press,  surely  his  reward  was  not  the  less  sure  or  mag
nificent.

This  edition  contains,  first,  a  dedication  of  the  work  to  the
Maurist  Fathers,  by  Leonard,  the  publisher  ;  secondly,  a  brief
Prologue,  by  D.  Canteleu,  in  which  he  explains  the  corrections
and  emendations  which  he  has  made  in  former  editions  ;  and,
thirdly,  the  well-known  apology  of  Lanspergius,  of  which  we
have  given  a  resume  in  the  Introduction.  There  are  also  ex
tracts  from  Blosius's  Monili  Spiritual*,  and  an  important  note,
found  in  an  old  Codex  of  a  Styrian  monastery,  which  mentions
that  the  convent  of  Helfide  was  destroyed  in  the  year  1342,
during  the  wars  between  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  and  the  Count
of  Mansfield  ;  but  the  holy  virgins  were  saved  by  an  evident
protection  of  God,  and  removed  to  the  suburbs  of  Eisleben.

It  has  been  our  earnest  endeavour  to  render  this  translation
as  faithful  and  accurate  as  possible.  One  chapter  has  been
omitted,  and  several  passages,  which  could  hardly  be  rendered
in  English  with  propriety ;  and  as  the  substance  of  several
chapters  from  the  fifth  book  are  contained  in  the  Life,  they
have  also  been  passed  over.  We  are  privileged  to  say  that  we
have  been  guided  in  the  general  arrangement  of  the  work  by
the  advice  of  the  Right  Rev.  Dr  Ullathorne,  O.S.B.,  to  whose
paternal  and  most  undeserved  kindness  on  this,  as  on  many
other  occasions,  we  owe  a  debt  of  affectionate  gratitude.  Nor
can  we  omit  most  grateful  mention  of  the  invaluable  assistance


ADVERTISEMENT.


obtained  from  the  world-famed  Abbaye  of  Solesmes,  through
the  Kev.  Father  Wilfrid  Windham,  O.S.B.,  to  whose  researches
and  learning  we  owe  many  of  the  notes  appended  to  this  vol
ume.  We  have  also  to  acknowledge  the  charity  of  Dom
Wolter,  O.S.B.,  Prior  of  Beuron,  whose  noble  and  successful
efforts  to  revive  and  extend  the  Benedictine  Order  in  Germany
are  too  well  known  to  need  further  comment.

The  recently-published  French  translation  of  the  Insinua-
tiones  is  said  to  be  a  reprint  of  the  translation  made  by  Dom
Mege,  from  his  Latin  edition  of  1664.  In  this  edition  many
passages  are  omitted,  and  others  are  rendered  differently  from
the  editions  of  Canteleu  and  Tilmaimi  Bredenbachii,  Coloniae,
1563,  which  perfectly  coincide.  An  Italian  translation,  which
purports  to  be  a  translation  from  the  Latin  of  Lanspergius,
also  corresponds  with  these  works.  The  title-page  runs  thus  :
"  La  vita  della  B.  Virgine  Gertruda,  ridotta  in  v.  libri,  del
K.  F.  Geo.  Lanspergio,  Monaco  della  Certosa  .  .  .  Tradotta  per
1'Eccel.  Medico  M.  Vicenzo  Buondi.  Venetia,  1606."  This
edition  contains  the  Exercises.

Indeed,  the  Italian  Benedictines  have  devoted  themselves
with  special  fervour  to  producing  editions  or  translations  of
these  Revelations  ;  but  perhaps  one  of  the  most  valuable  works
on  the  subject  is  that  of  a  secular  priest,  Gaspar  Campacci,  who
published  the  Life  of  St.  Gertrude,  in  4to,  at  Venice,  in  1748.
His  work  is  divided  into  two  parts  ;  the  first  part  contains  the
Life  of  the  Saint,  the  second  part  contains  her  Revelations.
At  the  end  of  the  first  part  he  has  appended  a  valuable  Chrono
logical  Discussion,  in  which  he  fixes  the  date  of  her  birth,  her
death,  and  the  principal  events  of  her  life.

But  one  of  the  most  interesting  editions  of  the  Life  and
Revelations  of  this  great  Saint  is  the  Spanish  translation  of
Leander,  of  Grenada,  a  copy  of  which  is  at  present  in  the
Library  of  the  British  Museum,  and  is  dated,  Seville,  1606.

As  the  literary  history  of  this  work  is  one  of  more  than
ordinary  interest  and  edification,  as  well  as  a  necessary  ex
planation  of  the  origin  of  the  miraculous  engraving,  an  account
of  it  is  appended  at  considerable  length  j  and  this  account  is


XXX11  ADVERTISEMENT.


translated  from  the  letter  of  the  saintly  Bishop  Ypres,  of  Tarra
gona,  to  Dom  Leander  : —

"  I  cannot  tell  you  with  what  joy  and  consolation  I  have
received  the  book  of  the  Eevelations  of  Gertrude,  which  you
have  translated  into  Castilian.  ...  I  will  now  relate  what
occurred  regarding  the  Latin  edition  printed  at  Madrid.

"  While  I  was  Confessor  to  the  King,  I  met  with  the  works
of  Blosius  accidentally,  and  found  so  much  pleasure  therein,
that  I  read  them  repeatedly.  Afterwards,  when  I  mentioned
this  to  Dom  Alphonsus  Colone,  now  Archbishop  of  Carthagena,
he  assured  me  that  a  translation  was  then  in  the  press  at
Seville;  and  I  requested  him  to  send  me  the  sheets  as  they
appeared.  This  was  at  the  time  when  King  Philip  II.  was
seized  with  his  last  illness.  I  considered  the  work  so  suitable
for  his  circumstances,  that  I  read  it  to  him  frequently  ;  and
he  found  such  consolation  and  sweetness  therein,  that  in  my
absence  he  caused  it  to  be  read  to  him  by  the  Infanta  Ma
dame  Elizabeth.  I  know  well  the  profit  he  derived  from  it,
and  it  will  be  known  to  all  in  heaven.

"  From  this  moment  I  conceived  so  strong  an  aifection  for
the  Revelations  of  St.  Gertrude,  that  I  desired  ardently  to
know  if  they  had  been  published."

The  good  prelate  then  relates  how  he  found  them,  after
much  research,  in  the  library  of  St.  Lawrence  ;  that  the  volume
had  never  been  opened  since  it  had  been  placed  there  ten
years  before  ;  and  details  his  many  and  unsuccessful  attempts
to  obtain  a  translation.  After  he  had  retired  to  Tarragona,  he
commenced  the  undertaking  himself  ;  but  when  he  "  had  com
pleted,  corrected,  and  amended  the  first  four  books,"  he  heard
that  the  work  was  already  in  the  press  at  Salamanca.

"  I  desired  some  copies  to  be  sent  to  me,"  he  continues ;
"and  when  I  had  seen  the  translation,  considered  the  diligence
with  which  it  had  been  made,  the  grave,  clear,  eloquent  style,
and  the  careful  annotations,  I  was  supremely  delighted,  because
the  same  thing  had  happened  to  me  as  to  St.  Bonaventure  and
St.  Thomas,  in  regard  to  the  Office  of  the  Most  Holy  Sacra
ment  ;  and  I  consider  it  a  special  favour  that  the  Saint  has  so


ADVERTISEMENT.  XXxiii


ordered  all,  that  my  edition  has  been  delayed,  since  the  result
will  be  a  greater  glory  to  her  Sovereign  Spouse.  As  for  myself,
I  am  persuaded  that  I  have  lost  nothing  thereby,  and  that  she
has  received  my  labour  and  my  good-will  into  her  treasury.  I
must  confess  also  that  I  have  never  in  my  life  received  a  greater
satisfaction  in  the  perusal  of  any  other  work  than  this ;  for
though  I  have  read  the  Revelations  so  often  in  Latin  that  I
know  them  almost  by  heart,  I  do  not  the  less  esteem  this
translation,  and  I  will  make  it  known  to  all  my  friends.  Be
assured,  my  father,  that  you  have  performed  a  great  service
to  God,  a  great  good  to  souls,  and  that  you  have  thereby
secured  your  salvation.  May  God  fulfil  in  you  all  the  privi
leges  and  promises  which  He  has  made  to  the  clients  of  this
sublime  virgin  !

"  I  have  purchased  an  immense  number  of  these  volumes
for  the  Discalced  Carmelites,  and  all  who  are  earnestly  desiring
a  more  perfect  life  ;  and  I  would,  were  it  possible,  disseminate
them  throughout  the  entire  world.

"  If  by  chance  you  have  met  with  the  picture  of  this  blessed
Saint,  I  wish  to  tell  you  the  origin  of  it,  because  1  hope  it  will
be  a  subject  of  consolation  to  you.  The  first  picture,  which
was  done  in  Spain,  was  copied,  by  my  desire,  from  a  portrait
of  a  Religious  of  the  same  Order,  which  was  in  the  royal  cabinet
at  Madrid.  To  distinguish  the  copy  from  the  original,  I  de
sired  the  painter  to  put  an  Infant  Jesus  in  her  heart,  and  a
scroll  with  the  words,  Invenies  me  in  corde  Gertrudis.  I  also
had  seven  rings  put  on  the  fingers  of  her  right  hand,  that  they
might  be  a  pledge  of  the  promises  which  our  Lord  has  made  to
favour  her  friends.

"  The  artist  has  declared  to  me  that  never  in  his  life  did
such  a  thing  happen  to  him  as  has  happened  in  painting  this
virgin  ;  for  though  he  had  always  succeeded  in  copying  to  the
life,  he  now  found  that  he  could  not  succeed,  with  all  his  pains,
in  imitating  the  original  ;  and  each  time  that  he  attempted  to
do  so,  he  found  he  drew  what  far  surpassed  what  he  could
have  thought  or  imagined  ;  and  so  his  picture  in  no  way  re
sembled  the  original,  except  in  the  habit.  This  picture  has


ADVERTISEMENT.


been  circulated  throughout  Spain.  I  have  had  it  painted  in
many  places,  in  company  with  our  holy  mother  Teresa  of  Jesus,
whom  you  so  often  consoled  by  your  discourses."

The  saintly  prelate  concludes  thus  :  —  "  God  have  you  in  His
holy  keeping.  I  hope  that  His  Majesty  will  grant  you  the
grace  that  you  may  be  assisted  at  the  hour  of  your  death  by
His  two  faithful  spouses,  who  during  their  lives  were  always  so
full  of  gratitude  and  courtesy.

"  FR.  DIEGO,  Bishop  of  Tarragona.

"  Given  at  Tarragona,  Nov.  15,  1603."

We  can  scarcely  be  surprised  that  a  miraculous  favour
should  be  granted  to  one  so  profoundly  humble,  so  deeply
loving,  and  so  rarely  disinterested.  Perhaps  the  annals  of  lite
rature  have  seldom  furnished  so  distinguished  an  example  of
courtesy  as  that  given  by  the  Bishop  of  Tarragona  ;  or  rather,
we  should  say,  Christian  charity  has  seldom  shone  forth  so
sweetly  and  so  brightly  as  in  his  cordial  desire  for  the  success
of  another  in  a  labour  which  he  had  all  but  accomplished
himself.

A  number  of  approbations  follow  that  of  the  holy  Bishop,
notably  one  from  Suarez,  dated  Salamanca,  July  15,  1603,  and
another  from  the  Father  Prior  of  the  Discalced  Carmelites,
who  observes  that  an  edition  in  the  mother  tongue  is  most
useful  and  acceptable,  even  to  the  learned.

The  miraculous  picture  was  soon  engraved,  and  its  fame
extended  throughout  Europe.  The  copy  contained  in  this
volume  has  been  made  from  the  edition  of  «  P.  F.  Laurentii
Clement,  Monachi  Ordinis  S.  Benedicti  Congregationis  His-
panicse.  Salisburgi,  MDCLXII."

CONVENT  OF  POOR  CLARES,  KENMAIWZ,

Feafi  of  St.  John  before  the  Latin  Gate,

May  6,  1865.


INTBODUCTION.


THERE  is  perhaps  no  Order  in  the  Church  which  at  once
commands  our  admiration  and  wins  our  love  like  that  of
the  great  Order  of  St.  Benedict.  Even  heresy  has  offered
its  poor  meed  of  praise,  in  attempting  to  transplant  it  to
a  foreign  soil;  and  is  fain  to  shelter  its  feeble  imitation  of
religious  life  under  the  name  of  the  great  Patriarch  of  the
West,  claiming  a  patron  in  the  Church,  because  none
can  be  found  outside  its  pale.  It  stands,  like  a  primeval
forest,  by  the  great  river  Time, — its  roots  extending  deep
and  wide,  and  forming  an  unshaken  barrier  to  the  ever-
surging  waves:  its  branches  extending  far  and  high,  and
affording  shelter  and  protection  in  the  wildest  storms.

Peace  and  strength  are  the  essential  characteristics  of
its  Rule  and  its  children  ;  prayer  and  love,  the  source  and
the  support  of  these,  its  most  manifest  glories.  And  of
this  spirit  St.  Gertrude  is  the  perfect  realisation  •  a  Pax
vobiscum  is  breathed  into  the  soul  in  every  revelation  and
in  every  action  of  that  greatest  of  saints.  Her  strength
is  the  calm,  Beautiful  strength  of  peace  •  for  perfect  peace


INTRODUCTION.


alone  can  exist  where  the  soul  is  stayed  upon  the  Un
changeable,  and  thus  can  no  longer  be  shaken  by  the
transitory  blasts  which  disturb  the  less  perfect.

This  work  has  been  undertaken  with  feelings  of  no  ordi
nary  affection.  There  are  few  Orders  in  the  Church  which
are  not  indebted  in  some  degree  to  the  Benedictine  :  but
none  more  deeply  than  that  of  the  poor  one  of  Assisi,  who
found  in  the  Benedictines  his  first  and  kindest  supporters  ;
and  when  his  second  Order  was  established,  it  was  they
who  gave  a  temporary  home  and  a  holy  example  to  the
gentle  Clare  de  Seen"  and  her  young  sister  Agnes.  We
can  scarcely  turn  over  a  page  in  the  history  of  the  Friars
Minors  or  the  Poor  Clares  without  finding  how  this
kindness  has  been  continued  and  increased.  May  this
offering  to  the  great  Order  of  St.  Benedict  be  accepted  by
his  devoted  children  as  a  humble  though  a  poor  return  for
their  unwearied  love  !

A  recent  review  of  the  Gertrudenbuch  von  P.  Maurus
Walter  which  is  attributed  to  a  Father  of  the  Order,  enters
so  fully  into  the  peculiar  merits  and  sanctity  of  St.  Gertrude,
that  we  cannot  forbear  an  extract.  Would  that  its  eloquent
and  spiritual  words  had  found  a  less  ephemeral  resting-place
than  the  pages  in  which  it  is  inserted  !

a  St.  Gertrude,  in  the  most  extensive  sense,  was  a
daughter  of  the  cloister.  Officium  and  sacrijicium,  the
Scriptures  and  the  Liturgy,  are  the  two  wings  by  which
pure  souls  fly  to  God  in  monastic  life.  The  Missal  and
the  Breviary  are  the  two  fountains  of  liturgical  devotion
from  which  they  may  draw  the  pure  waters  of  life.  These
waters  and  those  wings  were  well  understood  and  ap-


INTRODUCTION.  XXXVH


predated  in  the  Middle  Ages  ;  and  in  the  sixty  thousand
convents  which  sent  up  praise  to  God,  sicut  incensum  in
conspectu  ejus,  during  the  lifetime  of  St.  Gertrude,  there
was  not  one  being  who  more  fully  grasped  these  two
means  of  perfection,  or  turned  them  to  greater  advantage,
than  our  Saint.  Through  them  she  became  the  grosse
Aebtissinn  ;  through  them,  directed  by  the  tender,  loving
spirit  of  the  Kule,  she  became  the  most  perfect  and  striking
exponent  of  the  spirit  of  St.  Benedict  that  can  be  found  in
the  lives  of  the  Saints  of  God/'

Nor  is  he  less  eloquent  in  speaking  of  the  great  restora
tions,  or  rather,  we  should  say,  advancements,  of  his
Order  ;  of  St.  Martin's,  consecrated  once  more  to  its  ancient
uses,  where,  by  the  piety  of  the  widowed  Princess  Cathe
rine  of  Hohenzollern,  the  children  of  St.  Benedict,  with
the  special  blessing  of  the  Holy  See,  are  leading  lives  of
no  ordinary  fervour  and  devotedness,  under  the  guidance  of
their  holy  Prior  Dom  Wolter  ;  where  the  ancient  and  mira
culous  image  of  the  Mother  of  Sorrows  is  venerated  once
more  by  thousands  of  devout  pilgrims  ; — and  of  Solesmes
with  its  Abbot,  whose  European  fame  for  learning  is  only
equalled  by  his  cloistral  fame  for  sanctity  ;  where  "  sixty
God-praising  monks  chanted  together  the  Gregorian  choral
song  "  in  the  curious  old  church  of  the  monastery;  *  "  where


*  This  quaint  and  curious  old  church  would  require  a  volume  of  its
own.  It  is  chiefly  remarkable  for  statuary  of  unusual  size,  in  groups,
representing  various  incidents  in  the  life  of  our  Divine  Lord.  One  of
these  groups  represents  Jesus  Christ  giving  Holy  Communion  to  His
Blessed  Mother.  A  good  prior  of  mediaaval  times  considered  this  a
grievous  impiety,  and  accordingly  chopped  off  the  hands  of  our  Lord

d


INTRODUCTION.


joyful  obedience,  brotherly  love,  and  studious  attention  to
the  never-wanting  guest,  are  beautifully  combined  with,
and  enhanced  by,  genuine  and  ardent  zeal  for  ecclesiastical
discipline  and  authority,  with  a  devotion  to  literature,
and  an  anxiety  for  its  advancement,  which  can  hardly  be
surpassed."

The  history  of  the  labours  of  Abbot  Gueranger  would
almost  require  a  volume.  Perhaps  his  chiefest  eternal
fame,  and  his  brightest  reward,  will  be,  for  the  government
of  his  monastery  ;  the  foundations  he  has  effected  ;  and
his  persevering  efforts,  in  the  face  of  opposition  which
would  have  crushed  any  ordinary  mind,  in  planting  the
Roman  Liturgy  in  France,  in  place  of  that  which  at  least
bore  a  tincture  of  independence  of  the  Holy  See,  and  a
trace  of  rationalism.

We  read  in  the  Book  of  Genesis,  that  Adam  and  Eve
heard  "  the  voice  of  the  Lord  God  walking  in  Paradise  at
the  afternoon  air."  And  we  can  scarcely  doubt,  that
had  they  preserved  their  original  innocence,  the  Creator
would  have  found  His  delight  in  conversing  with  the
creature,  arid  would  have  communicated  Himself  continu
ally  and  familiarly  to  the  beings  to  whom  He  had  Himself
given  existence.  Sin  prevented  the  continuance  of  that


with  a  hatchet  I  The  Blessed  Sacrament  is  reserved  here  in  a  golden
dove,  according  to  an  ancient  custom.  There  is  a  very  curious  and
very  ancient  inscription,  in  the  old  Greek  characters,  which  dates
from  the  end  of  the  second  century,  over  the  altar  of  the  Sacred  Heart,
HTORI  SKMNOI,  "To  the  magnanimous  Heart."  It  was  found  by
his  Mmiiiuiicu  Cardinal  Petra,  formerly  monk  of  Solesuies,  on  a  touib-
•tone  near  Autuu.


INTRODUCTION.  XXXIX


which  would  have  constituted  man's  highest  felicity  ;  but
where  sin  is  subdued  and  banished  from  the  soul  by  that
all-victorious  grace  which  has  triumphed  over  man's  per-
verseness,  and  made  his  very  fall  an  occasion  of  mercy,
there  we  might  reasonably  hope  and  expect  that  such
favours  would  again  be  renewed.  The  artist  loves  to  gaze
upon  the  creation  of  his  genius  ;  the  poet,  to  muse  upon
the  offspring  of  his  fancy  ;  the  philosopher,  to  ponder  on
the  discoveries  of  his  intellect  ;  the  artificer,  to  admire  the
works  of  his  hands  ;  the  mother  finds  her  joy  in  the  simple
affections  of  her  children  ;  the  bride,  her  only  pleasure  in
the  caresses  of  her  bridegroom.  Each  loves  with  a  spe
cial  affection  that  which  has  emanated  from  his  genius,
or  is  so  united  to  him  by  ties  of  consanguinity  as  to  be
A  part  of  his  being.  And  shall  it  be  supposed  that  the
great  Father  is  less  loving  than  His  children;  that  lie
who  has  hidden  some,  chosen  amongst  many,  to  be  II in
brides,  will  love  them  less,  and  find  less  pleasure  in  con
verse  with  them,  than  those  in  whom  He  has  Himself  im
planted  the  deep  and  ardent  feelings  of  earthly  love  ?

We  know  how  freely  our  Divine  Lord  conversed  with
His  disciples  when  on  earth  ;  and  we  may  find  a  remark
able  similarity  between  this  converse,  as  recorded  in  the
holy  Gospels,  and  that  which  we  find  in  the  Revelations  of
St,  Gertrude.  He  instructed  them  by  parables  ;  and  these
parables  were  remarkable  for  their  simplicity,  and,  if  we
may  use  the  term,  for  their  homeliness.  The  kingdom  of
heaven  is  likened  to  a  householder  :  where  shall  we  find  a
more  ordinary  comparison  ?  It  is  likened  to  leaven  :  what
more  familiar  1  It  ia  described  as  a  treasure  hidden  in  a


INTRODUCTION.


field  :  what  more  simple  ?  And  yet  these  ordinary,  familiar,
and  simple  comparisons  are  explained  in  words  as  ordinary
and  simple.  We  shall  find  it  so  in  the  Revelations  of  this
Saint ;  and  even  as  the  instructions  given  to  the  Apostles
were  not  intended  solely  for  themselves,  so  also  our  loving
Muster  permits  us  to  know  and  to  be  instructed  by  what
He  vouchsafed  to  communicate  to  one  of  His  most  blessed
Saints.

After  His  Resurrection,  we  find  no  change  in  His
manner  of  addressing  His  disciples,  unless,  indeed,  there
be  a  deeper  tenderness  in  His  words  and  actions.  He  is
anxious  that  they  should  dine  when  wearied  with  their
long  night's  fruitless  toil,  and  He  Himself  provides  their
meal ;  for  when  they  come  to  land,  they  see  "  hot  coals
lying,  and  a  fish  laid  thereon,  and  bread."  Ah  !  who  but
Jesus  would  have  had  these  "  hot  coals  "  ready,  and  pro
vided  not  only  necessary  food,  but  even  the  luxury  of  fire  ?
And  so  we  find  in  the  life  of  this  dear  Saint,  that  she  also
is  invited  many  times  to  mystical  repasts,  wherein  not  her
body,  but  her  soul  is  fed,  and  not  her  soul  only,  but  also
the  souls  of  all  those  who  are  privileged  to  read  or  hear  of
these  mysterious  banquets.

And  yet  in  reading  the  lives  of  those  Saints  who  have
been  favoured  with  intimate  communications  from  their
Spouse,  there  are  few  persons  who  do  not  select,  on  the
most  arbitrary  principles — or  rather,  on  no  principles
whatsoever — certain  circumstances  which  they  consider
improbable,  and  certain  communications  which  they  think
unlikely  or  even  unreasonable  ;  and  these  they  reject  and
condemn,  while  they  believe  and  accept  what  seems  to


INTRODUCTION.


their  judgment  possible  or  true.  But  who  shall  limit
the  condescension  of  a  God  who  has  died  of  love  ?  Who
shall  say  He  may  condescend  so  far  to  His  creatures,  but
no  further  1  Who  shall  say  He  may  communicate  Himself
in  this  fashion,  but  not  in  that  1  Who  shall  venture  to  lay
down  rules  for  the  Spirit,  which  "  breatheth  where  He
will  1 "  *  "  Who  among  men  is  he  that  can  know  the
counsel  of  God  1  or  who  can  think  what  the  will  of  God
is  ?  For  the  thoughts  of  mortal  men  are  fearful,  and  our
counsel  uncertain.  For  the  corruptible  body  is  a  load
upon  the  soul,  and  the  earthly  habitation  presseth  down
the  mind  that  museth  upon  many  things.  And  hardly  do
we  guess  aright  at  things  that  are  upon  earth  :  and  with
labour  do  we  find  the  things  that  are  before  us.  But  the
things  that  are  in  heaven,  who  shall  search  out  ?  And
who  shall  know  Thy  thought,  except  Thou  give  wisdom,
and  send  Thy  Holy  Spirit  from  above  ] "  t

Nay,  rather  let  us  listen  in  reverent  awe  when  God
permits  us  the  favour  of  hearing  these  blessed  communica
tions  which  He  has  been  pleased  to  make  to  those  whom
He  has  admitted  to  this  singular  intimacy  with  Himself.
If  we  are  privileged  to  have  patrons  who  hold  high  places
at  court,  let  us  thankfully  avail  ourselves  of  their  conde
scension  in  admitting  us  to  the  intimacy  of  the  King,  in
allowing  us  the  privilege  of  being  sharers  in  His  most
hidden  counsels,  and  of  knowing,  as  only  His  beloved  can,
the  secrets  of  His  love.  It  is  remarkable  that  those  only
whom  God  has  favoured  with  a  more  than  ordinary  inti-

*  St.  John  iii  a.  t  Wisdom  ix.  13-17.


INTRODUCTION.


macy,  have  invariably  been  distinguished  for  simplicity.
Whether  it  is  that  the  Almighty  wills  to  confound  the
wisdom  of  the  wise,  by  admitting  those  whom  they  might
contemn  to  a  share  in  His  most  signal  favours,  or  whether
it  is  that  such  are  more  peculiarly  fitted  to  be  recipients
of  His  grace,  we  would  not  even  conjecture;  yet  such
appears  to  be  the  ordinary  rule  of  spiritual  life.  Perhaps
few,  if  any,  were  so  favoured  with  the  intimacy  of  our
Lord  as  the  Saint  of  whom  we  write.  His  absence  was
an  exceptional  case,  His  presence  her  ordinary  enjoyment.
The  whispers  of  His  love  were  heard  alike  in  the  stillness
of  the  night,  in  the  psalmody  of  the  choir,  in  the  ordinary
duties  of  religious  life,  and  in  the  less  acceptable  and  more
trying  moments  spent  in  converse  with  strangers.  The
Dove  seemed  ever  whispering  in  her  inmost  soul ;  or
rather,  might  we  not  say  that  she  lay  ever  in  the  Wounded
Heart  of  her  Spouse — the  true  home  of  His  beloved
ones ;  and  there  what  other  speech  could  fall  upon  her
listening  ear,  save  the  accents  of  that  voice,  whose  lowest
murmur  ravishes  the  very  Seraphim  in  trance  of  ecstatic
praise  ?

And  when  Jesus  vouchsafes  to  speak  as  a  friend  to
his  friend — nay,  rather,  as  a  spouse  to  his  bride — why
should  we  be  amazed  that  His  converse  should  be  of  that
familiar  and  tender  nature  which  characterises  the  human
love  which  He  has  sanctioned,  and  which  has  become
pure  and  holy  since  He,  through  His  Church,  has  ele
vated  it  to  the  dignity  of  a  Sacrament  ?  Nay,  long  before
this  elevation  and  dignity  was  vouchsafed  to  human
love,  such  intercourse — even  in  an  inspired  volume — is


INTRODUCTION.  xliii


taken  to  typify  that  which  exists  between  the  soul  and
God.

The  words,  "  My  love,  My  dove,  My  beautiful  one  ! "
were  addressed  to  the  bride  long  before  the  Bridegroom
had  appeared  as  the  Incarnate  God.  And  why,  when  He
has  vouchsafed  to  become  man,  when  He  has  participated
in  human  griefs,  and  hallowed  human  affections — oh  !  why
should  His  accents  be  less  loving,  or  His  voice  sound
less  sweetly  in  the  ear  1  When  the  day  breaks,  and
the  shadows  pass  away,  shall  we  not  also  hear  those
accents,  and  behold  that  Face,  and  obtain  some  share  in
these  favours,  which  even  here  are  vouchsafed  to  more
pure  and  saintly  souls  ?

The  Revelations  of  St.  Gertrude  indeed  differ  from,
or  rather  are  distinguished  above,  those  of  other  saints,
in  the  familiarity  and  frequency  of  these  heavenly  commu
nications.  We  shall  not  read  of  marvellous  miracles,  of
ecstatic  flights,  of  long-continued  raptures,  of  prophetic
announcements,  though  such  events  are  recorded  occasion
ally  ;  the  Saint — if  we  may  be  permitted  the  expression —
lived  at  home  with  her  Spouse  ;  and  hence  her  life  was
one  continued  and  almost  uninterrupted  succession  of  the
highest  states  of  spiritual  life.

Were  an  apology  needed  for  the  familiar  terms  in
which  this  intercourse  is  described  by  herself  in  the  one
precious  book  in  which  she  records  these  favours,  or  by
others,  in  the  continuation  of  the  subject  by  one  of  her
Religious,  we  might  easily  quote  many  passages,  even  from
Scripture,  where  such  expressions  are  used  and  therefore
sanctioned.  If  it  be  objected  that  the  frequent  embraces


INTRODUCTION.


of  love  which  she  received  from  her  Spouse  are  too
familiar  a  token  of  tenderness  from  a  God  to  His  creature,
let  us  remember  that  He  permitted  Magdalen  to  kiss
His  feet,  and  the  beloved  Apostle  to  lie  upon  His  bosom.
Is  He  not  still  Man,  and  does  not  His  Human  Heart  still
love  us  with  a  human  love  ?  Why,  then,  may  not  the
condescension  which  the  Son  of  God  practised  when  on
earth  be  continued  by  Him  when  in  heaven  ?  Why,  if
He  were  pleased  that  His  Feet  should  be  kissed  and
anointed  by  a  repentant  sinner,  should  He  not  still  accept
the  love  of  those  who  perform  spiritually  a  devotion  which
they  cannot  perform  corporally  1  And  wherefore  should
we  suppose  that  the  Fountain  of  Love  should  be  less
loving  than  the  poor  little  channels  through  which  He
permits  the  impetuous  torrent  of  His  charity  to  flow,—
channels  which  only  serve  to  chill  that  spring  which  at  its
source  has  never  ceased  to  burn  ?

If  our  love  were  purified, — if  we  had  no  carnal  taint
in  our  affections, — if  the  slimy  trail  of  the  serpent  had  not
stained  and  darkened  within  us  God's  most  precious  gift,
that  which  He  declares  Himself  to  be, — we  should  not  so
easily  doubt  or  mislike  these  marvellous  manifestations  of
His  most  marvellous  charity.  Why  should  not  the  virgin
Gertrude  rest  in  mystic  rapture  upon  the  bosom  of  Jesus,
when  Jesus  Himself  every  day  permits  those  who  are
incomparably  less  worthy  to  receive  Himself  within
them?

But  enough  of  this.  Let  us  rather  apologise  for  our
own  coldness  in  believing,  than  for  God's  love  in  giving ;
and  let  us  thank  Him  that  He  has  found  souls  even  upon


INTRODUCTION.  xlv


earth  who  will  permit  Him  to  love  as  He  desires  to  love  ;
who  will,  as  far  as  creatures  may,  love  as  He  asks  to  be
loved.

"  I  wish  men  could  be  persuaded  to  study  St.  Gertrude
more  than  they  do,"  was  the  exclamation  of  one  whose
own  soul  burned  with  no  ordinary  love.  And  why  does  he
desire  this  ?  Because  of  her  bright,  free,  joyous  spirit ;
because  she  loved  God  so  purely  and  so  entirely,  that  the
narrow  mistrusts  of  those  who  love  Him  less  never  for  an
instant  found  place  in  her  blessed  soul.  A  loving  heart
will  always  be  a  thankful  heart ;  and  so  the  continual
incense  of  thanksgiving  which  ascended  from  tha  heart  of
Gertrude  before  the  Eternal  Throne,  was  but  the  fragrant
nroma  of  the  love  which  burned  daily  deeper  and  brighter
within  her.


THE  LIFE  OF  ST. GEETKUDE.


CHAPTER  I.

The  Saint's  birth  and  parentage—  Her  early  dedication  to  God—In
tellectual  gifts—  Divine  communications  concerning  her  sanctity

—  Our  Lord  declares  that  He  finds  rest  and  repose  in  her  heart

—  Desires  a  holy  person  to  seek  Him  there.


H^HE  thirteenth  century  was  an  eventful  one  for  the  world
and  the  Church.  Its  commencement  found  the  great
orders  of  St.  Dominic  and  St.  Francis  established  in  almost
every  city  of  Europe,  already  winning  martyrs'  crowns,  and
counting  their  trophies  won  for  the  Lamb  by  hundreds  and
by  thousands.  St.  Elizabeth  of  Hungary  had  sanctified  a
palace,  and  edified  a  nation  by  her  heroic  virtue  and  her
meek  resignation  in  adversity.  St.  Thomas  of  Aquin  and
the  seraphic  St.  Bonaventura  had  bequeathed  such  treasures
to  the  Church,  as  had  never  before  been  confided  to  her
keeping.  St.  Louis  had  died  a  victim  to  his  love  of  Jesns
crucified,  and  his  grief  that  the  land  where  his  Lord  had
died  should  be  despoiled  by  the  heathen  and  defiled  by
the  infidel.  It  was,  in  truth,  a  century  of  Saints,  and  of
Saints  of  more  than  ordinary  note  ;  at  the  close  of  this  cen-

A


THE LIFE  OF ST. GERTRUDE.


tury,  as  a  crowning  gift,  came  the  great  and  beautiful  Saint
Gertrude,  whose  history  has  been  too  little  knowH  amongst
us,  while  her  very  name  receives  a  continual  homage  of
reverent  love.

The  illustrious  Benedictine  Abbess  was  born  at  Eisleben,
a  small  town  in  the  county  of  Mansfield,  on  the  6th  of
January  1263  ;*  and  thus,  as  it  has  been  happily  remarked,
a  star  of  no  ordinary  brilliancy  was  given  to  the  Church  on
the  day  on  which  that  Church  was  mystically  led  by  a  star
to  her  Incarnate  God.  It  is  said  that  the  family  of  the
Counts  of  Lachenborn  were  nearly  related  to  the  imperial
family  of  Germany ;  but  whatever  their  rank  or  dignity
may  have  been,  all  distinct  remembrance  of  it  has  long
since  passed  away,  and  they  are  only  now  remembered  as
illustrious  because  of  the  surpassing  sanctity  of  their  illus
trious  child.  Bucelinus,  in  his  Aquila  Imperil  Benedictini,
gives  a  genealogical  tree  of  the  family  of  the  Counts  of
Hackeborn,  commencing  with  the  father  of  the  Saint,  and
concluding  with  "  Fredericus,  Dominus  et  Comes  in  Hacke
born,  fainiliw  suae  ultimus ;"  but  there  is  no  date  by  which

*  There  has  been  much  dispute  as  to  the  precise  year  in  which  the
Saint  was  born,  though  a  circumstance  which  will  be  related  hereafter
fixes  the  period  with  tolerable  certainty.  In  the  date,  as  also  in  the
etymology  of  her  family  name,  we  have  followed  the  opinion  of  the
learned  Abbot  of  Solesmes.  In  Coxe's  House  of  Austria  he  mentions
the  marriage  of  Anne,  sister  of  Count  Hohenberg,  to  the  famous
Rodolph  of  Hapsburg ;  Beetham,  in  his  valuable  Genealogies,  calls
her  Anne  of  Hochberg.  The  similarity  of  the  name  to  that  of
Hackeborn  suggests  a  possibility  that  the  connection  with  the  im
perial  family  may  have  been  through  this  channel.  The  town  of
Eisleben  still  exists,  and  has,  it  will  be  remembered,  the  unenviable
notoriety  of  being  the  birthplace  of  Luther.  It  is  the  capital  of  the
county  of  Mansfield :  the  tombs  of  the  ancient  Counts  of  Mansfield
are  still  preserved  in  the  churches  of  St.  Andrew  and  St.  Ann.  It
has  also  a  ruined  castle,  but,  alas  !  no  tradition  of  its  Saint,  though  it
Bifi?  be  this  ruin  was  once  possessed  by  her  noble  family.


EARLY  CONSECRATION TO GOD.


to  determine  when  this  Count,  the  "  last  of  his  family,"
passed  away  from  earth.  When  the  Saint  had  attained  her
fifth  year,  she  was  placed  in  the  famous  Benedictine  Abbey
of  Rodersdorf,  in  the  diocese  of  Halberstadt,  where  she  was
soon  joined  by  her  younger  sister,  Mechtilde.*

Here,  under  the  careful  training  of  the  Benedictine
Dames, — who  then,  as  now,  devoted  themselves  with  un
wearied  solicitude,  and  more  than  ordinary  intellectual
abilities,  to  the  education  of  those  confided  to  their  charge,
— the  young  Countess  of  Lachenborn  advanced  in  wisdom
and  learning,  both  human  and  divine.

The  high  intellectual  gifts  with  which  St.  Gertrude  was
endowed  had  the  most  ample  advantages  for  their  develop*
ment.  At  an  early  age  she  was  sufficiently  conversant  with
the  Latin  tongue  to  read  and  converse  in  that  language;
her  reading  was  extensive  for  an  age  in  which  literature  was
confined  to  parchment  manuscripts  and  oral  instructions.
Indeed,  her  devotion  to  literary  pursuits — though  these
were  of  the  best  and  purest  kind,  since  the  Scriptures,  the
Fathers,  and  other  theological  works,  were  her  chief  study
— seemed  at  first  likely  to  prove  a  hindrance  to  her  spiritual
advancement.  Yet  all  was  overruled  by  infinite  love  and
infinite  wisdom.  Her  writings  were  to  be  the  Church's
treasure  in  all  ages,  though,  like  stars  in  a  stormy  sky,  their


*  A  special  provision  is  made  in  the  Rule  of  St.  Benedict,  ch.  lix.,
to  regulate  this  matter.  The  practice  of  offering  very  young  children
who  were  dedicated  by  their  parents  to  the  service  of  God  in  holy
religion,  was  generally  observed  in  the  Order,  until  the  custom  was
abolished  by  the  authority  of  Pope  Clement  III.  It  is  also  expressly
forbidden  by  the  Council  of  Trent.  (See  Helyot,  Hist.  Reg.  Orders.)
"When  St.  Benedict  wrote  his  Rule,  the  Church  had  not  legislated  for
religious  orders.  Had  those  regulations  been  enacted  during  his  life
time,  he  would  have  been  the  first  to  acknowledge  their  authority,  and
to  require  his  spiritual  children  to  submit  to  them.


THE LIFE OF ST. GERTRUDE.


light  may  be  for  a  time  concealed  from  men,  only  perchance
to  shine  more  gloriously  when  they  shall  have  emerged  from
this  passing  obscurity.

Secular  learning  might  encase  the  jewel,  but  it  could  not
produce  it ;  it  might  enhance  the  beauty  of  the  pure  and
sparkling  stream,  by  diverting  its  course  through  a  more
cultivated  channel,  but  it  could  not  produce  the  stream  it
self.  And  now  the  Spouse  of  virgins  began  to  speak  to  the
heart  of  His  chosen  one,  and  to  withdraw  her  from  those
exterior  occupations,  no  longer  necessary  for  mental  cultiva
tion,  that  she  might  listen  without  distraction  or  hindrance
to  those  whispers  of  His  love  which  we  also,  despite  our
unworthiness,  are  permitted  to  hear  and  to  enjoy.

The  Saint  has  informed  us  herself  when  and  how  the
first  of  these  heavenly  communications  was  vouchsafed  to
her.  It  was  on  Monday,  the  25th  of  January,  "  at  the  close
of  day,  the  Light  of  lights  came  to  dissipate  the  obscurity
of  her  darkness,  and  to  commence  her  conversion."  And
Jesus  came,  as  He  mostly  comes  to  His  beloved  ones,  as  she
performed  an  act  of  humility  and  obedience — declining  to
an  ancient  religious,  to  fulfil  a  conventual  observance,  and
doubtless  from  no  mere  habitual  custom,  but  with  deep  and
lowly  reverence  for  a  spouse  of  Christ,  whom  she  considered
incomparably  her  superior  in  virtue  and  sanctity.

Her  sisters  were  not  slow  to  perceive  that  their  com
panion  was  specially  favoured  by  Heaven.  One  religious,
who  had  long  suffered  from  most  painful  temptations,  waa
warned  in  a  dream  to  apply  to  Gertrude  for  relief,  and  to
recommend  herself  to  her  prayers.  The  moment  she
complied  with  this  injunction,  the  temptation  ceased.
Another,  who  feared  to  communicate  under  a  similar  and
even  more  urgent  trial,  obtained  a  morsel  of  cloth  which
had  been  used  by  the  Saint,  and  placing  it  near  her  heart,


HER POWER WITH GOD.


implored  our  Lord  to  deliver  her  by  the  merits  of  Gertrude.
The  favour  was  granted  ,  and  from  that  moment  she  never
suffered  from  the  same  temptation.  It  would  appear,
indeed,  that  Gertrude  was  specially  designed  by  Providence
to  assist  others,  even  during  her  lifetime,  by  her  merits
and  intercession,  as  well  as  by  the  gift  of  counsel  with
which  she  was  singularly  favoured.

A  person,  whose  sanctity  had  been  long  manifest,  and
who  was  specially  favoured  by  Divine  communications,
came  to  the  monastery  from  a  distant  country,  to  obtain
an  interview  with  the  Saint.  As  she  knew  none  of  the
religious  personally,  she  prayed  that  whoever  would  benefit
her  soul  most  by  their  conversation  might  be  sent  to  her.
It  was  then  made  known  to  her,  that  whoever  should  come
and  take  their  place  beside  her  would  be  indeed  the  one
most  beloved  by  God,  and  the  most  holy  amongst  the
religious.  On  her  arrival,  St.  Gertrude  came  to  her ;  but
so  well  did  she  conceal  any  appearance  of  sanctity,  and  hide
the  supernatural  light  with  which  she  was  favoured,  that
the  stranger  imagined  she  had  been  deceived,  and  again
prayed  as  she  had  done  before.  The  same  reply  was  once
more  vouchsafed  to  her;  and  she  was  assured  that  this  was
indeed  the  religious  who  was  so  dear  to  God.  Shortly  after,
the  visitor  had  a  long  interview  with  St.  Mechtilde,  whose
conversation  she  greatly  preferred,  and  whose  sanctity  was
more  apparent.  Again  she  "inquired  of  God,"  and  asked
why  St.  Gertrude  was  preferred  to  her  sister.  Our  Lord
replied  that  He  had  indeed  operated  great  graces  in
Mechtilde,  but  in  Gertrude  He  had  operated,  and  He
would  yet  operate,  far  greater.

Another  person  of  great  sanctity,  who  was  praying  for
the  Saint,  felt  a  singular  impulse  of  affection  for  her,  which
she  believed  to  be  supernatural.  "  0  Divine  Love  ! "  she


6  THE LIFE OF ST. GERTRUDE.

exclaimed,  "what  is  it  You  behold  in  this  virgin  which
obliges  You  to  esteem  her  so  highly  and  to  love  her  so
much?"  Our  Lord  replied:  "It  is  My  goodness  alone
which  obliges  Me ;  since  she  contains  and  perfects  in  her
soul  those  five  virtues  which  please  Me  above  all  others,
and  which  I  have  placed  therein  by  a  singular  liberality.
She  possesses  purity,  by  a  continual  influence  of  My  grace  ;
she  possesses  humility,  amidst  the  great  diversity  of  gifts
which  I  have  bestowed  on  her — for  the  more  I  effect  in  her,
the  more  she  abases  herself;  she  possesses  a  true  benignity,
which  makes  her  desire  the  salvation  of  the  whole  world
for  My  greater  glory ;  she  possesses  a  true  fidelity,  spread
ing  abroad,  without  reserve,  all  her  treasures  for  the  same
end.  Finally,  she  possesses  a  consummate  charity ;  for  she
loves  Me  with  her  whole  heart,  with  her  whole  soul,  and
with  her  whole  strength ;  and  for  love  of  Me,  she  loves  her
neighbour  as  herself."

After  our  Lord  had  spoken  thus  to  this  soul,  He  showed
her  a  precious  stone  on  His  heart,  in  the  form  of  a  triangle,
made  of  trefoils,  the  beauty  and  brilliancy  of  which  cannot
be  described  ;  and  He  said  to  her  :  "  I  always  wear  this
jewel  as  a  pledge  of  the  affection  which  I  have  for  My
spouse.  I  have  made  it  in  this  form,  that  all  the  celestial
court  may  know  by  the  brightness  of  the  first  leaf  that
there  is  no  creature  on  earth  so  dear  to  Me  as  Gertrude,
because  there  is  no  one  at  this  present  time  amongst  man
kind  who  is  united  to  Me  so  closely  as  she  is,  either  by
purity  of  intention  or  by  uprightness  of  will.  They  will
see  by  the  second  leaf,  that  there  is  no  soul  still  bound  by
the  chains  of  flesh  and  blood  whom  I  am  so  disposed  to
enrich  by  My  graces  and  favours.  And  they  will  observe
in  the  splendour  of  the  third  leaf,  that  there  is  no  one  who
refers  to  My  glory  alone  the  gifts  received  from  Me  with


THE MYSTIC TREFOIL.


such  sincerity  and  fidelity  as  Gertrude  ;  who,  far  from
wishing  to  claim  the  least  thing  for  herself,  desires  most
ardently  that  nothing  shall  be  ever  attributed  to  her."
Our  Lord  concluded  this  revelation  by  saying  to  the  holy
person  to  whom  He  had  thus  condescended  to  speak  of  the
perfections  of  our  Saint  :  "  You  cannot  find  Me  in  any
place  in  which  I  delight,  more,  or  which  is  more  suitable
for  Me,  than  in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar,  and  after  that,
in  the  heart  and  soul  of  Gertrude,  My  beloved ;  for  to
wards  her  all  My  affections,  and  the  complacences  of  My
Divine  love,  turn  in  a  singular  manner."*

On  another  occasion,  a  devout  person,  who  was  praying
for  the  Saint,  heard  these  words  :  "  She  for  whom  thou
prayest  is  My  dove,  who  has  no  guile  in  her,  for  she  rejects
from  her  heart  as  gall  all  the  guile  and  bitterness  of  sin.
She  is  My  chosen  lily,  which  I  love  to  bear  in  My  hands;
for  it  is  My  delight  and  My  pleasure  to  repose  in  the  purity
and  innocence  of  this  chaste  soul.  She  is  My  rose,  whose
odour  is  full  of  sweetness,  because  of  her  patience  in  every
adversity,  and  the  thanksgivings  which  she  continually  offers
Me,  which  ascend  before  Me  as  the  sweetest  perfumes.  She
is  that  spring  flower  which  never  fades,  and  which  I  take
pleasure  in  contemplating,  because  she  keeps  and  maintains
continually  in  her  breast  an  ardent  desire  not  only  for  all
virtues,  but  for  the  utmost  perfection  of  every  virtue.  She
is  as  a  sweet  melody,  which  ravishes  the  ears  of  the  blessed;
and  this  melody  is  composed  of  all  the  sufferings  she  endures
with  so  much  constancy."

A  little  before  Lent,  as  Gertrude  was  reading  a  lecture

*  It  is  generally  supposed,  but  without  sufficient  authority,  that
these  words  were  addressed  to  St.  Mech tilde.  She  may  have  been
the  "holy  person  "  to  whom  the  revelation  was  made  ;  but  this  opinion
vi  merely  conjectural.


8  THE LIFE OF ST. GEIITRUDE.

for  the  community,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  Order,
she  repeated  these  words  twice  :  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord
thy  God  with  thy  whole  heart,  and  with  thy  whole  soul,  and
with  thy  whole  strength  "  (Deut.  vi.)  The  Saint  lived  in  a
community  of  saints,  where  more  than  one  favoured  soul
was  vouchsafed  intimate  and  frequent  communion  with  her
Spouse.  A  sister,  who  was  touched  by  the  devotion  with
which  these  words  were  uttered,  prayed  that  He  who  so
loved  Gertrude,  and  had  taught  her  to  love  Him  so  much,
would  vouchsafe  to  impart  to  her  the  same  blessed  lesson.
Our  Lord  replied  :  "  I  have  borne  her  in  My  arms  from  her
infancy,  I  have  preserved  her  in  her  baptismal  purity  and
innocence,  until  she,  by  her  own  free  choice  and  will,  has
given  herself  to  Me  entirely  and  for  ever  ;  and  as  a  recom
pense  for  the  perfection  of  her  desires,  I,  in  return,  have
given  Myself  entirely  to  her.  So  pleasing  is  this  soul  to
Me,  that  when  I  am  offended  by  men,  I  often  enter  therein
to  repose,  and  I  make  her  endure  some  pain  of  body  or  of
mind,  which  I  inflict  on  her  for  the  sins  of  others  ;  and
as  she  accepts  this  suffering  with  the  same  thanksgiving,
humility,  and  patience  as  she  receives  all  that  comes  from
Me,  and  offers  it  to  Me  in  union  with  My  sufferings,  she
appeases  My  anger,  and  obliges  My  mercy  to  pardon,  for
her  sake,  an  immense  number  of  sinners."

On  another  occasion,  Gertrude  having  humbly  asked
the  prayers  of  a  sister,  the  religious  complied  with  her  re
quest,  and  while  praying  for  the  Saint,  heard  these  words  :
"  The  faults  which  appear  in  Gertrude  may  rather  be  called
steps  in  perfection  ;  for  it  would  be  almost  impossible  that
human  weakness  could  be  preserved  from  the  blasts  of  vain
glory,  amidst  the  abundance  of  graces  which  I  continually
operate  in  her,  if  her  virtues  were  not  hidden  from  her
eyes  under  the  veils  and  shadows  of  apparent  defects.


HER DEFECTS VIRTUES.  9

Thus,  even  as  the  earth  produces  a  richer  and  more  abun
dant  harvest  in  proportion  as  the  labourer  has  been  careful
in  manuring  it,  so  the  gratitude  of  Gertrude  bears  Me
richer  fruit,  the  more  I  make  her  see  her  own  weakness.
It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  permit  different  imperfections
in  her,  for  which  she  is  in  a  state  of  continual  humiliation,
sending  her  a  particular  grace  for  each,  with  which  she  blots
them  all  out  from  My  sight ;  and  the  time  will  come  when
I  will  change  these  defects  into  so  many  virtues,  so  that
her  soul  will  shine  before  Me  as  a  most  glorious  sun."

What  these  defects  we're,  we  are  not  told.  The  Saint's
patience  in  sickness  and  in  trial  was  unalterable;  her
charity  to  her  sisters  abounded  with  each  necessity  for  its
exercise;  and  her  sanctity  was  apparent  in  every  action
of  her  holy  life.  A  special  gift  of  prophecy  or  foreknow
ledge  enabled  her  to  give  advice  with  promptness,  and  the
greatest  wisdom,  on  the  most  important  occasions.  When
these  gifts  became  known,  the  monastery  was  frequently
visited  by  all  classes  of  persons,  who  came  to  converse  with
her  on  spiritual  subjects,  or  to  obtain  counsel  in  difficulties.
Her  deep  study  of  Holy  Scripture  and  of  the  Fathers  now
bore  abundant  fruit,  and  it  was  observed  that  she  had  a
singular,  and  no  doubt  a  heaven-sent,  felicity  in  applying
what  she  had  read  and  treasured  in  her  memory  to  the
spiritual  necessities  of  those  with  whom  she  conversed.

God  and  the  salvation  of  souls — this  was  the  one  object
of  her  life,  the  one  end  of  every  action.  From  her  humility,
she  had  fully  persuaded  herself  that  the  marvellous  graces
bestowed  on  her  were  given  her  merely  for  others.  This
holy  delusion  served  two  important  ends — it  saved  her  from
every  temptation  to  spiritual  complacence,  and  it  induced
her  to  impart  freely  to  others  a  knowledge  of  the  revela
tions  and  other  favours  bestowed  on  her.  She  was  simply,


10  THE LIFE OP ST. GERTRUDE.

accordingto  herownidea,  a  channel  of  divine  grace  to  others;
and  believing  this  to  be  her  end,  she  neither  spared  time
nor  labour  for  its  accomplishment.  Often  her  rest  was
shortened  and  her  food  forgotten,  when  souls  demanded
time  or  anxious  thought.  "  Not  satisfied  even  with  this,  she
often  deprived  herself  of  the  sweetness  of  contemplation,
when  it  was  necessary  to  succour  the  tempted,  to  console
the  afflicted,  or,  what  she  desired  above  all  else,  to  enkindle
and  increase  the  fire  of  divine  love  in  any  soul.  For  as
iron,  when  placed  in  the  fire,  becomes  itself  like  fire,  thus
this  virgin,  burning  with  love,  seemed  to  be  all  love,  such
zeal  had  she  for  the  salvation  of  all."

She  believed  that  God  would  indeed  be  glorified  there
by,  and  that  His  gifts  would  thus  be  multiplied  a  hundred
fold  ;  "  she  was  absolutely  persuaded  that  she  received
nothing  for  herself,  but  that  all  was  for  the  salvation  of
others.  She  never  beheld  any  one  whom  she  did  riot  con
sider  better  than  herself,  and  it  was  on  this  account  that
she  was  so  convinced  that  God  would  receive  more  glory  by
the  communication  of  His  graces  to  them.  She  believed
that  they  merited  more  by  a  single  thought,  by  their  mere
innocence,  even  by  their  purity  of  heart,  than  she  could  do
by  all  her  mental  powers  or  spiritual  gifts."  Can  we  won
der  that  a  vessel  so  emptied  of  self  should  have  been  filled
to  overflowing  with  God  ? — that  the  "  perfume  of  the  oint
ment  "  should  have  lingered  for  so  many  hundreds  of  years
in  the  house  of  God,  and  that  it  still  affords  refreshment
and  consolation  to  His  chosen  spouses,  and  to  the  most
saintly  souls  1  May  this  poor  effort  to  extend  the  sweet
ness  of  that  perfume  be  for  His  honour  and  glory,  for  the
honour  of  this  blessed  Saint,  and  for  the  refreshment  of
the  little  ones  of  Jesus  !


PREDICTS THE ELECTION OF AN EMPEROR.  11


CHAPTER  II.

St.  Gertrude  predicts  the  election  of  Adolphus  of  Nassau — Quiets
^he  fears  of  the  sisters,  who  expect  to  suffer  a  temporal  loss
— Her  election  as  Abbess — Removal  to  Heldelfs — Revelations
of  her  sanctity — Our  Lord  appears  to  her,  bearing  the  house  of
religion — Her  generosity  of  spirit.

IN  the  year  1273,  Rodolph  of  Hapsburg  ascended  the  im
perial  throne  as  Emperor  of  Germany,  though,  as  he  was
not  crowned  by  the  Holy  See,  he  only  bore  the  humbler
title  of  King  of  the  Romans.  It  is  said  that  his  election
was  predicted  by  a  priest  to  whom  he  showed  singular
marks  of  reverence  and  respect  while  bearing  the  Holy
Viaticum  to  a  dying  man.*  Coxe,  in  his  House  of  Austria,
highly  extols  the  character  of  this  prince,  but  observes
that  he  was  raised  to  the  imperial  throne  chiefly  through
the  influence  of  the  Archbishop  of  Mentz.  Albert,  the
emperor's  sole  surviving  son,  succeeded  to  the  hereditary
dominions  of  his  father.  The  electors  would  probably  have


*  This  circumstance  is  so  interesting,  and  so  well  authenticated,  as
to  merit  a  passing  notice.  It  is  mentioned  by  Feller,  Moreri,  in  Hciss's
History  of  Austria,  lib  ii.  c.  22,  and  in  the  Acta  SS.  Maii,  torn,  viii.,
where  a  somewhat  similar  act  of  devotion,  performed  by  Charles  ILof
Spain,  is  related  at  length.  The  account  given  by  Heiss  is  as  follows  :
On  one  occasion,  when  Rodolph  was  engaged  in  the  chase,  it  began  to
rain  with  such  violence  as  to  render  the  road  extremely  dirty  ;  when,
chancing  to  meet  a  poor  curate  on  foot,  carrying  the  Host  to  a  sick
person,  he  was  so  much  affected  by  the  sight  of  this  good  priest
labouring  through  the  mire,  that  he  immediately  alighted,  saying,  it
ill  became  him  to  ride  on  horseback  while  the  priest  who  carried  his
Lord  was  walking  on  foot.  He  then  made  the  priest  mount  his  horse,
attended  him  bareheaded  to  the  sick  man's  house,  and  afterwards
conducted  him  to  his  church,  where  the  priest,  amazed  at  his  zeal,
gave  him  his  benediction,  and,  being  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost,
prophesied  that  he  and  his  descendants  would  sit  upon  the  imperial
throne.


12  THE LIPK OP ST. GERTRUDE.

accepted  him  as  their  chief,  had  not  his  stern  and  uncon-
ciliating  manners  offended  his  best  friends,  and,  contrary
to  all  expectation,  Adolphus,  Count  of  Nassau,  was  raised
to  the  vacant  throne.

The  nomination  of  Adolphus  took  place  on  the  10th
May  1292.  How  little  did  he  imagine  that  his  new  dignity
and  tragic  end  were  at  that  very  moment  revealed  to  a  nun
in  a  distant  and  lonely  cloister  !  The  sisters  were  earnest
in  their  prayers  for  a  worthy  successor  to  their  most
Christian  king,  and  interceded,  as  true  religious  ever  will,
with  fervent  supplications  for  the  welfare  of  their  country.
On  the  very  day,  and  almost  at  the  same  moment,  when
the  important  affair  was  decided,  Gertrude  told  the  Abbess
of  her  monastery  what  had  occurred,  and  predicted  the
terrible  fate  of  the  new  monarch.*

The  troubles  of  the  times  were  not  without  their  effect
upon  the  monastery  of  Rodersdorf.  Once,  when  it  was
threatened  with  a  terrible  calamity,  which  was  considered
inevitable  because  of  the  menaces  of  those  who  had  both
power  and  force  on  their  side,  the  Saint  went  to  her  Supe
rior,  and  assured  her  there  was  no  longer  any  cause  for
fear.  Almost  at  the  same  moment,  the  person  whose  anger


*  Adolphus,  soon  after  his  election,  offended  the  Archbishop  of
Mentz,  to  whom  he  owed  his  elevation,  and  alienated  the  electors  by
arbitrary  efforts  to  aggrandise  his  family.  Albert,  meanwhile,  still
hoped  by  some  happy  chance  to  obtain  his  father's  crown.  In  1298  a
Diet  was  assembled  at  Mentz ;  a  long  list  of  grievances  was  drawn
up ;  Adolphus  was  cited  to  appear,  and,  on  his  refusal,  deposed.
Albert  was  then  raised  to  the  imperial  dignity.  A  civil  war  ensued.
The  two  armies  met  at  Gellheim,  between  Spires  and  Worms,  on  the
2d  July,  and,  being  led  by  the  rival  sovereigns,  fought  with  unusual
intrepidity.  Here,  by  a  clever  stratagem,  the  soldiers  of  Albert
pierced  through  the  guards  who  surrounded  Adolphus,  and  dis
mounted  him.  After  a  long  defence,  he  attacked  his  rival  once
more,  but  was  slain  by  him  with  a  lance.


SUPPORTS THE HOUSE OF RELIGION.  13

had  been  so  much  dreaded  came  to  the  convent,  and  the
religious  found,  to  their  joy  and  amazement,  that  the  local
judges  had  appeased  all  differences,  and  established  peace
even  as  Gertrude  had  predicted  to  the  Abbess.

St.  Gertrude  was  chosen  Abbess  of  her  monastery  in  the
year  1294.  The  year  following,  the  religious  removed  to
Heldelfs.  The  Saint  was  elected  to  this  important  charge
at  the  early  age  of  thirty — no  slight  testimony  to  her  sin
gular  prudence  and  extraordinary  virtue.  For  forty  years
she  continued  to  edify  and  guide  her  spiritual  children,
many  of  whom  had  attained  a  high  degree  of  sanctity.  As
Superior,  she  was  distinguished  for  charity  and  zeal.
While  others  suffered,  whether  in  body  or  in  mind,  she
could  not  rest ;  and  where  there  was  need  of  amendment,
her  tears  and  prayers  brought  repentance  and  renewed
fervour,  rather  than  any  severity  of  reproof,  which  her  very
office  might  have  more  than  sanctioned.  The  importance
of  her  work,  and  its  immense  value  in  the  eyes  of  her
Divine  Spouse,  was  manifested  to  her  by  a  remarkable
vision,  which  must  ever  be  a  special  subject  of  instruction
and  consolation  for  those  similarly  circumstanced,  and,  in
deed,  for  all  religious.

Our  Lord  appeared  to  her,  bearing  on  His  sacred  shoul
ders  a  vast  and  magnificent  building.*  "  Behold,"  He
said,  "  with  what  labour,  care,  and  vigilance  I  carry  this
beloved  house,  which  is  none  other  than  that  of  Religion.
It  is  everywhere  threatened  with  ruin,  because  there  are
so  few  persons  who  are  willing  to  do  or  to  suffer  any-


*  In  the  French  translation  this  is  rendered  maison  de  plaisance;
the  idea  is  very  beautiful,  certainly,  but  then  it  is  not  in  the  original,
where  the  term  is  simply  domum.  There  is  a  remarkable  coincidence
between  this  vision  and  the  command  given  to  St.  Francis  of  Assisi
to  repair  the  house  of  God.


14  THE LIFE OF ST. GERTRUDE.

thing  for  its  support  and  increase.  You,  therefore,  should
suffer  with  Me  in  bearing  it  ;  for  all  those  who  endea
vour,  by  their  words  or  actions,  to  extend  religion,  and
who  try  to  re-establish  it  in  its  first  fervour  and  purity,
are  so  many  strong  pillars  which  sustain  this  holy  house,
and  comfort  Me  by  sharing  with  Me  the  weight  of  this
burden."

From  this  moment  the  Saint  devoted  herself,  with  all
the  sanctified  energy  of  a  naturally  ardent  temperament,
to  the  work  so  dear  to  her  Spouse.  Her  monastery  became
indeed  a  "  pleasure-house  "  of  delight  to  the  Spouse  of  vir
gins.  Under  her  guidance,  the  fervent  increased  in  fervour,
and  the  saintly  advanced  rapidly  in  perfection.  Many  were
favoured  with  intimate  and  most  blessed  communications
from  heaven  ;  one  at  least,*  her  sister  in  the  flesh  as  well
as  in  the  spirit,  obtained  even  on  earth  a  recognition  of  her
sanctity,  and  ranks  amongst  those  who  are  invoked  upon
the  Church's  altars.

But  the  life  of  the  young  Abbess  was  not  to  be  devoted
exclusively  to  active  service ;  and  our  Lord  began  now  to
teach  her  that  exterior  zeal  should  have  its  limits,  how
ever  holy  the  end  for  which  it  laboured  ;  that  contempla
tion  was  not  only  necessary  for  the  individual  soul,  but
also  to  promote  the  glory  of  God  in  others ;  since  prayer
alone  may  effect  conversions  and  sanctifications,  while
active  exertion,  without  its  vivifying  influence,  is  of  little
avail.  A  person  to  whom  our  Divine  Lord  had  revealed
His  designs  in  regard  to  the  Saint  wrote  thus  to  her  : —

"  0  blessed  spouse  of  Christ,  enter  into  the  joy  of  your
Lord  !  His  Divine  Heart  opens  for  you  its  fount  of  in
effable  sweetness,  as  a  reward  for  the  fidelity  with  which

*  St.  Mechtilde,


OUR  LORD'S  LOVE  FOR  HER  REVEALED  TO  ANOTHER. )5

you  have  laboured  for  His  glory  and  for  the  defence  of  the
truth.  He  desires  now  that  you  should  rest  in  the  shadow
of  His  most  peaceful  consolations  :  *  for  as  a  good  tree,
planted  by  the  river-side,  takes  root  deeply  and  produces
abundant  fruit,  so  will  you  produce  for  your  Beloved  the
fruit  of  your  thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  which  are  most
pleasing  to  Him,  by  His  grace  operating  within  you.  Do
not  fear  that  the  heat  of  persecution  will  wither  up  your
soul,  for  it  is  continually  bedewed  by  the  sacred  waters  of
grace.  As  you  seek  in  all  your  actions  the  glory  of  God,  and
not  your  own,  the  fervour  of  your  zeal  increases  a  hundred
fold  the  fruits  which  you  offer  to  your  dear  Spouse  ;  not
only  by  the  pious  works  which  you  actually  accomplish,
but  even  by  those  which  you  desire  to  do  yourself  or  to  see
done  by  others,  although  it  is  not  in  your  power  to  perform
them.  Jesus  Christ  Himself  will  supply  before  His  Father
your  needs  and  your  defects,  and  those  of  others  for  whom
you  are  solicitous;  therefore,  do  not  doubt  that  He  will
equally  reward  all  you  desire  to  do  as  if  you  had  accom
plished  it ;  and  know  that  the  whole  court  of  heaven  re
joices  in  your  advancement,  and  returns  thanks  and  praise
to  God  for  love  of  you."

The  union  of  the  Saint  with  her  Lord  became  now  so
intimate  that  even  the  apprehension  of  sudden  death  ap
peared  unable  to  disturb  her  peace  for  a  moment.  On  one
occasion,  as  she  journeyed  from  one  convent  to  another,  she
was  suddenly  precipitated  down  a  steep  mountain-path.
M  My  sweet  Lord,"  she  exclaimed,  "  how  happy  should  I
have  been  if  this  fall  had  brought  me  sooner  to  Thee  !  "
Her  companions  inquired  if  she  would  not  fear  to  die  with
out  the  Sacraments.  "  I  desire  most  ardently,"  she  replied,

*  "  Sub  umbra  tranquillizing  Qonsolationis  su»."


16  THE LIFE OF ST. GERTRUDE.


"to  receive  the  support  of  the  Sacraments  before  1  die;
but  I  prefer  the  providence  and  the  will  of  my  Lord  and
my  God  even  to  all  the  Sacraments,  for  I  believe  this  is
the  best  preparation  for  death.  It  is  indifferent  to  me
whether  it  be  slow  or  sudden,  provided  that  it  is  pleasing  in
His  sight  to  whom  I  hope  it  will  bring  me ;  for  I  trust,  in
whatever  manner  I  die,  that  I  shall  not  be  deprived  of  the
mercy  of  my  God,  without  which  my  eternal  ruin  would  be
inevitable,  whether  I  die  an  unprepared  death,  or  whether
I  have  long  anticipated  my  end."

The  Saint's  confidence  in  God  was  indeed  an  eminent
characteristic  of  her  sanctity,  and  one  which  obtained  for
her  immense  favours.  How  could  the  Heart  of  Jesus  re
fuse  anything  to  one  who  trusted  Him  so  entirely?  How
pleasing  this  virtue  was  to  her  Spouse  was  revealed  to  one
of  her  religious,  who  had  long  prayed  in  vain  for  a  par
ticular  favour  which  she  ardently  desired.  At  last  our
Divine  Lord  vouchsafed  to  inform  her  of  the  reason  of  this
delay,  at  which  she  had  felt  and  expressed  her  profound
amazement.  "I  have  delayed  answering  your  prayers,
because  you  have  not  yet  sufficient  confidence  in  the  effects
which  My  mercy  produces  in  you.  Why  do  you  not  act
like  Gertrude,  My  chosen  virgin,  who  is  so  firmly  estab
lished  on  My  Providence,  that  there  is  nothing  which  she
does  not  hope  for  from  the  plenitude  of  My  grace ;  there
fore  I  will  never  refuse  her  anything,  whatever  she  may
ask  Me."

A  holy  man  once  earnestly  prayed  that  he  might  know
what  virtue  was  most  pleasing  to  our  Lord  in  His  spouse.
He  was  answered,  that  it  was  "  her  generosity  of  heart."  *

*  "  Respondit  Dominus  :  Libertas  cordis  ; "  but  the  word  "  freedom  "
or  "  generosity  "  seems  to  give  the  idea  more  correctly  in  English.  Ja
this  passage  also  the  French  translation  is  vague  and  incorrect.


HER  LIBERTY  OF  SPIRIT.  17


But  as  this  surprised  him  not  a  little,  he  ventured  to  reply  :
"  As  for  me,  O  Lord,  I  had  imagined  that  what  pleased
You  most  in  this  soul  was  the  perfect  knowledge  she  had
of  herself,  and  the  high  degree  of  love  to  which,  by  Your
grace,  she  has  attained."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  This  gener
osity  of  heart  is  of  such  value  and  so  great  a  good,  that
the  height  of  perfection  may  be  obtained  through  it.  By
means  of  it  My  elect  is  prepared  at  all  times  for  receiving
gifts  of  great  value,  which  prevents  her  from  attaching  her
heart  to  anything  which  could  either  impede  Me  or  dis
please  Me."

One  happy  effect  of  this  liberty  of  spirit  was,  that  the
Saint  could  not  bear  either  to  possess  or  retain  anything
that  was  not  absolutely  necessary  for  use  ;  and  yet  we  are
told  that  she  had  a  sweet  and  holy  attachment  to  such
things  as  were  used  for  holy  purposes — to  the  tablets  on
which  she  wrote — and  well  might  she  love  them,  since  her
writings  were  the  special  work  for  which  Providence  had
given  her  to  the  Church,  and  were  begun  by  the  express
command  of  her  Divine  Spouse  ;  for  such  spiritual  works
as  promised  the  greatest  edification  and  proved  most  profit
able  to  herself  and  to  her  sisters — and  this  because  she
believed  these  inanimate  things  were  used  by  her  Lord  to
render  Him  a  special  service,  and  to  procure  His  greater
honour  and  glory.

The  happy  manner  in  which  she  combined  the  duties
of  the  active  life  with  that  unceasing  union  with  her  Be
loved  which  so  specially  characterised  her  spiritual  life
was  shown  to  St.  Mechtilde  in  a  vision.  On  one  occasion,
as  she  chanted,  she  beheld  our  Divine  Lord  seated  on  a  high
throne,  around  which  St.  Gertrude  walked  without  turning
her  eyes  from  her  Master  even  for  a  moment.  At  the
same  time,  she  appeared  to  fulfil  her  exterior  duties  with


18  THE LIFE  OP ST. GERTRUDE.

the  most  perfect  exactness.  As  her  holy  sister  mused  in
amazement  on  the  vision,  she  heard  these  words  :  "  This
is  an  image  of  the  life  which  My  beloved  Gertrude  lives ;
thus  does  she  ever  walk  in  My  presence,  never  relaxing
in  her  ardent  desire  to  know  and  to  do  what  is  most
pleasing  to  My  heart.  As  soon  as  she  has  ascertained  it,
she  executes  it  with  care  and  fidelity,  and  then  promptly
passes  to  some  other  duty,  seeking  in  her  zeal  always  to
find  some  new  virtue  to  practise.  Thus  her  whole  life  is
a  continuous  chain  of  praise,  consecrated  to  My  honour  and
glory.'5

"  But,  Lord,"  replied  St.  Mechtilde,  "  if  the  life  of  St.
Gertrude  is  so  perfect,  how  is  it  that  she  cannot  support
the  imperfections  of  others,  and  that  they  appear  so  great
to  her  1  "

Our  Lord  replied,  with  admirable  sweetness  :  "It  is
because  she  cannot  endure  that  her  own  heart  should  be
sullied  with  the  slightest  stain,  and  therefore  she  cannot  see
without  emotion  the  least  defect  in  the  heart  of  another."

It  was  the  custom  of  the  Saint,  when  she  was  offered
any  choice  in  articles  of  clothing  or  other  necessaries,  to
close  her  eyes,  and  then  to  put  out  her  hand  and  take
whatever  she  touched.  Then  she  received  whatever  fell
to  her  lot  with  the  most  lively  gratitude,  as  a  present  from
our  Lord  Himself.  Indeed,  her  devotion  to  Divine  Provi
dence  was  a  special  feature  in  her  sanctity,  and  one  which
procured  her  many  favours.  What  could  be  refused  to  one
who  trusted  so  utterly  to  Eternal  Love  !

The  sanctity  of  St.  Mechtilde  was  well  known  to  the
Saint,  and  she  frequently  asked  her  advice  and  prayers.
Once,  as  Mechtilde  prayed  fervently  for  her,  in  compliance
with  her  desire,  she  beheld  our  Divine  Lord  attired  as  a
Bridegroom,  and  clothed  in  a  robe  of  green  lined  with  gold.


A  VISION  OF  JESUS.  19


His  beauty  surpassed  that  of  millions  of  angels,  and  He
tenderly  embraced  with  His  right  arm  her  for  whom  she
prayed.  It  appeared  to  her  that  Gertrude  also  embraced
her  Lord,  and  that  her  heart  was  attached  to  the  wound  in
the  side  of  Jesus.  As  she  sought  in  amazement  to  com
prehend  this  extraordinary  vision,  she  heard  these  words :
"  Know  that  the  green  and  gold  of  My  vestments  represent
the  operation  of  My  Divinity,  always  new,  and  always
acting  by  the  influence  of  My  love.  Yes,"  He  added,
after  again  repeating  the  same  words,  "My  operation  is
always  new,  and  always  in  action  in  the  soul  of  Gertrude ;
and  the  union  which  you  behold  of  her  heart  with  My
side  shows  that  she  is  attached  so  inseparably  to  Me,  that
she  is  in  a  condition  to  receive  every  moment  the  infusions
of  My  Divinity."

St.  Mechtilde  then  asked  if  St.  Gertrude,  who  was  so
dear  to  God,  never  committed  any  fault ;  and  why  she
appeared  so  ready  at  any  moment  to  change  her  occupation,
and  to  do,  as  if  by  chance,  whatever  came  into  her  mind,
her  conscience  appearing  to  be  equally  at  rest  whether  she
prayed,  wrote,  read,  instructed,  reproved,  or  consoled.

Our  Saviour  replied  :  "  I  have  united  My  Heart  so
closely  to  her  soul  by  the  ties  of  My  mercy,  that  she  has
become  one  spirit  with  Me.  It  is  on  this  account  she  obeys
so  promptly  all  the  desires  of  My  will ;  so  that  the  harmony
and  understanding  which  exist  between  the  different
members  of  the  body  and  the  heart  is  not  greater  than  that
which  exists  between  the  soul  of  Gertrude  and  Mine ;  and
as  the  moment  a  man  has  willed  in  his  heart  a  movement
of  his  hands,  they  accomplish  his  desire,  because  they  are
entirely  subject  to  the  will  of  the  heart ;  and  as  one  desires
in  his  mind  that  his  eyes  should  look  on  any  object,  and
his  eyes  immediatelv  open  to  obey  him, — so  Gertrude  is


20  THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

ever  with  Me,  and  at  every  moment  is  ready  to  obey  the
movements  which  I  suggest."

A  similar  revelation  was  made  about  the  same  time  to
another  holy  person,  to  whom  it  was  said ,  that  the  union
of  the  Saint  with  her  Spouse  would  become  even  yet  more
perfect,  that  she  would  receive  the  gifts  of  God  with  yet
greater  abundance,  and  that  she  would  obtain  so  perfect  a
union  with  Him,  that  with  her  eyes  she  would  only  see
what  God  willed  her  to  see,  with  her  ears  only  hear  what
He  willed  her  to  hear,  and  with  her  lips  only  speak  what
He  willed  her  to  speak.


CHAPTER  III.

'fl;e  Saint  obtains  favourable  weatlier — Miracles  mentioned  in  her
Office— Union  of  her  will  with  God's — Counsels  others — Desired
to  write  her  revelations — Her  sanctity  revealed  to  St.  Mechtilde,

THAT  one  so  united  to  God  should  have  been  specially
favoured  with  the  gift  of  miracles,  is  but  what  we  might
expect  in  the  ordinary  course  of  spiritual  life.  Those  who
give  themselves  up  without  reserve  to  God,  receive  His
gifts  also  without  reserve.  They  do  His  will,  and  He  accom
plishes  theirs  :  for  the  will  of  the  Bridegroom  and  the
bride  is  one.  The  Saint  once  obtained  the  cessation  of  a
frost,  which  was  so  severe,  that  had  it  continued  longer
the  fruits  of  the  earth  would  have  been  utterly  destroyed.
Her  petition  was  offered  at  the  Holy  Sacrifice ;  and  as  she
was  about  to  approach  the  adorable  Sacrament  of  the  Altar,
Dur  Lord  assured  her  that  He  had  granted  her  request.
With  holy  boldness,  however,  she  asked  that  the  hail
jehich  was  then  falling  might  instantly  cease.  Her  petition
vas  granted;  but  as  she  was  absorbed  in  the  greatness  of  the


SHE  OBTAINS  MIRACULOUS  CHANGE  OF  WEATHER. 21

action  she  was  about  to  perform,  she  thought  no  more  of
her  request.  It  was  only  remembered  as  she  left  the  church,
and  saw  the  thaw  which  had  already  commenced.  Those
who  knew  not  of  the  prayer  of  the  Saint  were  greatly
amazed  at  the  sudden  change  of  weather,  and  feared  it  was
but  a  passing  cessation  of  the  dreaded  severity ;  but  it  was
not  so  :  the  country  was  spared  desolation  arid  famine,
though  few  knew  to  whom  they  were  indebted  for  this
favour.

Once  also,  when  long  and  heavy  rain  threatened  to  de
stroy  the  harvest,  all  the  sisters  were  constantly  offering
prayers  and  penances  to  avert  the  calamity.  Gertrude  at
last,  with  the  holy  confidence  of  extraordinary  sanctity,  de
clared  that  she  would  not  cease  praying  until  she  obtained
fine  weather.  Immediately  the  sky  became  serene  and
fair,  though  a  few  moments  before  dark  and  heavy  clouds
had  threatened  a  long  continuance  of  rain.*

"  One  evening,  after  supper,"  says  her  biographer,  "  when
the  community  went  into  the  court  to  finish  some  work,

*  This  miracle  is  mentioned  also  in  the  Office  for  her  Feast.  The
response  after  the  vi.  Lesson,  ii.  Nocturn,  commences  thus:  "  Cum
asperrimo  gelu  ten-a  diu  concrcta,"  &c.  "  When  the  earth,  hardened
by  severe  frost,  gave  not  its  fruit,  blessed  Gertrude,  touched  with
grief,  prayed  to  her  Spouse,  when  suddenly  the  ice  thawed,  and  a
joyful  spring  succeeded.''  The  response  after  the  vii.  Lesson  con
tinues  :  "  Messis  tempore,"  &c.  "At  hai-vest-time,  when  the  fruits
of  the  earth  suffered  from  continued  rain,  Gertrude  poured  forth  her
heart  as  water  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  immediately  there  was  a
great  calm."

As  the  Benedictine  Breviary  differs  in  many  details  from  the  Roman,
a  brief  explanation  of  its  arrangement  may  be  necessary,  as  it  will  be
so  frequently  referred  to  in  this  work.  Matins  commence,  as  usual,
with  the  Pater  noster,  Deus  in  adjutnrium,  &c.  ;  then  the  Domine
labia  is  repeated  three  times.  The  Psalm  Domine  quid  multiplicati
aunt  (Ps.  iii.)  is  recited  before  the  Venite.  There  are  usually  twelve
Lessons.  These  arrangements  are  expressly  provided  for  in  the  llule
of  St.  Benedict,  ch.  viii.  to  xviii.


22  THE  LIFE  OP  ST. GERTRUDE.

the  sun,  which  was  still  above  the  horizon,  was  suddenly
covered  with  clouds,  which  threatened  to  fall  in  heavy  rain.
Gertrude  sighed  deeply, — and  I  myself  heard  her,— speak
ing  thus  to  God  :  '  O  Lord  my  God,  Creator  of  the  uni
verse,  I  do  not  pretend  to  constrain  You  to  obey  my  sinful
will ;  on  the  contrary,  if  Your  infinite  mercy  wills  not  to
oppose  the  degrees  of  Your  justice,  and  prevent  this  rain,
except  for  my  sake,  I  would  rather  that  Your  will,  which
I  adore,  should  be  accomplished,  and  that  it  should  rain,
if  You  have  willed  it  thus.'  She  said  these  things  with  a
perfect  resignation  to  the  will  of  God,  having  her  mind
occupied  solely  with  the  consideration  of  Divine  Provi
dence,  whose  orders  she  desired  to  see  executed.  But,
behold  a  marvel !  she  had  scarcely  finished  these  words,
when  a  clap  of  thunder  was  heard,  and  large  drops  of
rain  began  to  fall  rapidly.  She,  quite  overcome,  and
touched  with  compassion  for  the  sisters,  exclaimed  again,
'  Have  pity  on  us,  O  God  of  clemency,  at  least  for  a
brief  space,  until  we  have  finished  the  work  which  we
have  been  commanded  to  do.'  God,  to  show  that  He
refused  nothing  to  her  prayers,  caused  the  rain  to  cease
until  all  was  finished."  The  community  then  returned
to  their  enclosure ;  but  they  had  scarcely  reached  the
door,  when  there  came  on  so  violent  a  storm  of  thunder,
lightning,  and  rain,  that  those  who  remained  in  the  court
were  perfectly  deluged  with  it.  "  It  is  thus,"  continues
the  chronicler,  "  that  God  obeys  the  prayers  of  His  elect,
who  have  entirely  renounced  their  own  desires  for  love  of
Him."

It  was  the  Saint's  ordinary  custom  to  have  recourse  to
her  heavenly  Spouse  in  every  trial,  whether  of  less  or
greater  import ;  and  her  prayers  were  equally  accepted
on  all  such  occasions.  What,  indeed,  is  little  in  His  sight,


WHY  GOD  REFUSED  HER  A  REQUEST.  23


who  so  cares  for  His  elect,  th;it  the  very  hairs  of  their  ho;ul
are  numbered,  and  not  one  can  fall  without  His  knowledge  ?
Thus  it  is  related  of  Gertrude,  that  even  when  she  had  lost
a  needle  with  which  she  had  been  working,  and  had  sought
it  for  some  time  in  tbe  straw  where  it  had  fallen,  she  turned
to  her  Lord,  for  whose  glory  it  had  been  used,  and  asked
Him  to  help  her  in  her  search ;  even  as  she  spoke,  she  put
her  hand  once  more  into  the  straw,  and  found  instantly
what  she  had  so  long  looked  for  in  vain.  Indeed,  so  great
was  the  power  of  the  Saint  over  the  Heart  of  her  Spouse,
that  it  appeared  as  if  our  Divine  Lord  Himself  was  pained
to  refuse  her  any  request.  It  happened  on  one  occasion,
that  a  long  continuance  of  drought,  combined  with  tem
pestuous  weather,  caused  serious  fears  for  the  fruits  of  the
earth.  St.  Gertrude,  as  usual,  had  recourse  to  prayer.  It
was  not  the  will  of  God  to  grant  her  petition  ;  but  with
amazing  condescension,  He  vouchsafed  not  only  to  inform
her  of  His  designs,  but  even,  as  it  would  appear,  to  excuse
Himself  to  her  for  not  complying  with  her  request.

"  The  reason  which  obliges  Me  sometimes  to  grant  the
prayers  of  My  elect  does  not  exist  between  you  and  Me ;
since  our  wills  are  so  closely  united  by  the  sacred  tie  of
grace,  that  you  desire  nothing  but  what  I  Myself  desire.
But  because  I  design  by  the  terrors  of  this  tempest  to
conquer  some  who  rebel  against  My  will,  and  at  least  to
oblige  them  to  seek  Me  by  prayer,  since  they  only  come  to
Me  when  they  have  no  other  resource,  it  is  necessary  that  I
should  refuse  you  what  you  desire.  Nevertheless,  that  you
may  know  that  your  prayers  have  not  failed  in  their  effect,  I
will  grant  you  in  return  some  other  spiritual  favour."  What
a  revelation  of  the  tenderness  of  the  Father  and  the  sanctity
of  the  child  !  Alas  !  then,  are  there  those  to  whom  our
de.ir  Lord  is  obliged  to  grant  the  favours  they  ask  because


24  THE  LIFE  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.


they  cannot  bear  to  be  refused, — because,  to  prevent  their
murmurs,  He  gives  that  which,  had  they  more  faith,  would
be  refused  !  and,  alas  !  is  it  not  too  true  that  thousands
seek  Him  only  when  all  else  has  failed,  and  must  be  driven
into  the  Arms  which  all  day  long  are  opened  to  welcome
them  with  such  ineffable  tenderness  !

As  Gertrude  was  frequently  consulted  on  all  subjects,  not
only  by  those  who  had  the  happiness  of  living  under  her
immediate  guidance,  but  also  by  hundreds  who  came  from
afar,  attracted  by  the  fame  of  her  sanctity,  it  happened  more
than  once  that  she  was  seized  with  holy  fear  lest  her  words
and  her  counsel  should  rather  hinder  than  advance  those
who  had  recourse  to  her.  As  she  prayed  for  light  on  this
important  subject,  our  Lord  replied  :  "  Fear  nothing  from
henceforward  ;  be  consoled,  take  courage,  and  be  at  rest.
I  am  the  Lord  thy  God ;  I  am  thy  Beloved,  who  has  created
thee  by  a  pure  effect  of  My  love  ;  I  have  chosen  thee  to
make  thee  My  abode  by  My  grace,  and  to  take  My  delight
in  thee  ;  therefore,  I  will  reply  truly  by  thee  to  those  who
seek  Me  through  thee  with  fervour  and  humility.  I  promise
you  also,  that  I  will  never  permit  any  one  whom  I  consider
unworthy  of  receiving  My  Body  and  Blood  to  ask  your
advice  on  that  matter.  Therefore,  send  forward  the
scrupulous  and  timorous  in  the  greatest  security,  because,
for  your  sake,  I  will  exclude  none  of  them  from  My
paternal  affection ;  but  I  will  rather  embrace  them  in  the
tenderest  charity,  and  refuse  them  not  My  sweetest  kiss  of
peace."

Once,  as  she  prayed  for  a  certain  person,  and  felt  ashamed
that  this  person  had  not  greater  faith  in  obtaining  even
more  than  she  had  asked,  our  Lord  said  to  her,  with  great
kindness  :  "  Whatever  any  person  hopes  to  obtain  through
your  intercession,  they  shall  certainly  receive  from  Me;


OUR  LORD  TOUCHES  HER  TONGUE. 25

and  further,  whatever  you  shall  promise  to  any  one  in  My
name  shall  certainly  be  done  for  them  ;  for  though  the
suppliant,  through  human  infirmity,  may  not  perceive  what
I  have  done,  I  will  nevertheless  fulfil  My  promise,  and
produce  the  desired  effect  in  his  soul.5'

After  some  days,  as  the  Saint  reflected  in  amazement
how  such  great  promises  could  be  made  to  one  so  unworthy,
and  inquired  of  her  Spouse  how  He  could  bestow  His  graces
on  so  vile  a  creature,  He  replied  to  her  :  "  Does  not  the
Universal  Church  allow  that  I  formerly  said  to  Peter  alone,
'  Whatever  you  shall  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in
heaven '  (Matt,  xvi.) ;  and  at  the  same  time  believe  that
the  ministers  of  the  Church  exercise  the  same  power  now  1
Why,  then,  do  you  not  believe  that  I  can  and  will  carry
out  whatever  Divine  love  prompts  Me  to  promise  you  1 "
He  then  touched  her  tongue,  and  said  :  "  Behold,  I  have
given  My  words  in  your  mouth  "  (Jer.  i.  9) ;  "  and  I  truly
confirm  whatever  you  may  say  to  others  at  My  suggestion
and  in  My  name  :  to  whomsoever  you  shall  promise  any
thing  through  My  goodness  upon  earth,  I  will  make  it  sure,
and  ratify  it  in  heaven."  To  these  marvellous  promises
the  Saint  replied  :  "  Lord,  I  would  grieve  were  any  one
thus  to  incur  eternal  loss,  as  they  would  were  I  to  say  no
crime  would  escape  unpunished,  or  anything  of  that  kind."
He  replied  :  "  Whenever  the  love  of  justice  or  of  souls
shall  prompt  you  so  to  speak,  My  clemency  will  previously
admonish  the  sinner  you  thus  address  to  repent  of  his  sins,
so  that  he  may  not  deserve  vengeance  or  punishment  by
making  light  of  your  instructions."*  The  Saint  answered  :
"  If  it  be  really  true,  my  God,  that  Thou,  in  Thy  goodness,
dost  thus  speak  through  me,  how  is  it  that  my  words  have


*  This  passage  is  entirely  omitted  in  the  French  translation,


THE LIFE  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.


so  little  effect  on  some  persons,  notwithstanding  the  ardent
desire  I  have  to  lead  them  to  glorify  Thee  and  to  save
themselves  ?  "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Marvel  not  if  your
words  are  sometimes  fruitless,  and  produce  no  effect,  since,
when  I  dwelt  among  men,  My  own  words,  though  uttered
with  the  fervour  and  power  of  the  Godhead,  produced  not
the  fruit  of  salvation  in  the  hearts  of  all.  It  is  through
My  Divine  Providence  that  all  things  are  arranged  and
perfected  in  the  fitting  time,  as  appointed  by  Me."

Soon  after,  having  occasion  to  reprove  a  person  for  a
fault,  she  feared  she  had  acted  indiscreetly,  and  with  too
much  severity.  She  turned  immediately  to  her  Spouse,  and
implored  Him  that  she  might  never  say  anything  to  any
one  that  would  not  be  according  to  His  heart.  "Fear
nothing,  My  daughter,"  replied  our  Saviour,  "but  rather
be  filled  with  a  holy  confidence  ;  for  I  will  give  you  this
special  grace,  that  when  any  one  shall  have  recourse  to  you
with  faith  and  humility,  in  order  to  consult  you  on  any
subject  whatsoever,  the  light  of  My  truth  shall  discover  to
you  the  most  hidden  obscurities  in  the  matter,  and  you  will
judge  of  them  as  truly  as  I  Myself,  according  to  the  matter
in  hand,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  persons.  You.  will
reprehend  severely,  from  Me,  those  whose  conduct  I  make
known  to  you  to  have  been  guilty ;  and,  on  the  contrary,
you  will  be  sweet  and  affable  to  those  whose  faults  have  been
less  serious."  "  King  of  heaven  and  earth,"  she  exclaimed,
"  withhold  the  torrent  of  Thy  mercies,  for  a  fragment  of
dust  and  ashes  such  as  I  am  is  unworthy  to  receive  such
great  favours."  "Why  be  so  amazed,  My  daughter,"
replied  our  Lord,  sweetly  soothing  her,  "  if  I  make  you
a  judge  of  the  causes  of  My  enmities,  when  I  have  so  often
communicated  to  you  the  secrets  of  My  friendship  ? "  Then
He  added  these  words  :  "All  those  who,  when  overcome


ST. MECHTILDE  BEHOLDS  HER  AS  A  BRIDGE.  27


with  sadness,  and  having  their  hearts  oppressed  with  any
affliction,  go  with  deep  humility  and  true  sincerity  to  obtain
counsel  and  consolation  from  you,  shall  never  be  dis
appointed  ;  for  I  the  Lord,  dwelling  in  thee,  on  the  impulse
of  the  exuberance  of  My  love,  desire  to  make  you  the
medium  of  saving  many;  and  it  is  certain  that  all  the  joy
which  your  heart  will  experience  in  this  is  drawn  from  the
fruitful  source  of  My  heart."

St.  Mechtilde  once  beheld  the  heart  of  this  Saint  form
ing,  as  it  were,  a  firm  and  stable  bridge,  the  sides  of  which
appeared  to  her  to  be  bordered,  the  one  with  the  Divinity
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  other  with  His  holy  Humanity,  as
with  two  walls.  After  beholding  this,  she  heard  these
words :  "  Those  who  come  to  Me  by  this  bridge  need  have
no  apprehension  of  wandering  or  of  falling ;  that  is  to  say,
all  those  who  receive  her  counsels,  and  execute  them  faith
fully,  shall  never  wander  from  the  right  path,  which  leads
to  the  life  of  a  blessed  eternity."

When  our  Divine  Lord  revealed  to  the  Saint  that  it
was  His  will  she  should  commit  her  revelations  to  writing,
her  humility  was  exceedingly  amazed.  But  her  heavenly
Spouse  thus  instructed  and  consoled  her  :  "  For  what  pur
pose  has  it  been  committed  to  writing  that  I  visited  St.
Catherine  in  her  prison,  and  encouraged  her  by  these
words  :  '  Be  firm  and  immovable,  My  daughter,  for  I  am
with  you  '  1  What  purpose  does  it  serve  that  it  should  be
known  how  I  visited  John,  My  favourite,  and  said  to  him,
'Come  to  Me,  my  beloved'?  What  purpose  does  it  serve
that  these  and  many  other  things  concerning  them  and
others  of  My  Saints  are  known,  unless  it  be  to  enkindle  the
zeal  of  those  who  read  and  hear  them,  and  to  manifest  to
all  men  the  greatness  of  My  love  ?  In  this  manner,"  added
the  Saviour,  "  the  desire  of  obtaining  the  same  favours  aa


28  THE  LIFE  OP  ST. GERTRUDE.


those  which  they  shall  see  you  have  obtained  from  Me  will
produce  devotion  in  the  hearts  of  those  who,  considering
the  effusion  of  My  grace  and  the  excess  of  My  mercy,  shall
endeavour  to  change  their  present  life  for  one  more  per
fect."

On  another  occasion,  as  the  Saint  marvelled  why  God
urged  her  so  strongly  to  make  known  her  revelations,  since
He  knew  that  the  majority  of  mankind  are  so  weak  and
unspiritual,  that,  far  from  finding  in  them  any  example
for  their  edification,  they  would  more  probably  find  a  sub
ject  of  contempt  and  raillery,  she  heard  the  Lord  saying  to
her :  "  I  have  so  planted  My  grace  in  you,  that  I  expect  it
will  bear  Me  immense  fruit ;  therefore  it  is  My  desire  that
all  those  who  receive  similar  favours,  and  who  despise  them
by  their  negligence,  shall  learn  from  you  on  what  conditions
I  have  given  them  these  gifts,  in  order  that  My  grace  may
be  increased  in  them  in  proportion  as  their  gratitude  in
creases.  But  should  there  be  any  sufficiently  malicious  to
defame  the  sanctity  of  these  works,  the  penalty  of  their  sin
shall  fall  on  themselves,  and  you  will  not  be  accountable
for  it.  For  the  Prophet  Ezechiel  has  said  from  Me :  '  I
will  lay  a  stumbling-block  before  him '  (Ez.  iii.) ;  that  is  to
say,  I  dispose,  permit,  and  even  command  many  things  for
the  salvation  of  My  elect,  although  they  are  a  subject  of
scandal  to  the  reprobate."

From  these  words  St.  Gertrude  understood  that  God
often  inspired  His  elect  to  do  what  was  occasion  of  scandal
to  others,  though  not  with  the  design  of  giving  them  scan
dal  ;  and  that  we  should  never  abstain  from  performing  any
good  work  in  order  to  maintain  a  false  peace  with  such  per
sons  :  a  lesson,  indeed,  worth  treasuring  and  observing  at
every  period  of  the  Church's  history ;  for  what  has  the
Church  or  the  world  ever  gained  by  unholy  compliances,


HER  PATIENCE  AND  MILDNESS.  29

by  timid  concealment  of  miraculous  favours,  or  by  the  false
shame  of  those  who,  through  human  respect,  fear  openly  to
confess  their  belief  in  supernatural  occurrences,  the  truth
of  which  they  dare  not  altogether  deny  1  If  the  world  is
scandalised,  let  it  be  scandalised,  since  even  the  Eternal
Truth  Himself  was  not  spared  its  censures.


CHAPTER  IV.

She  asks  St.  Mechtilde  to  pray  for  her— Our  Lord  is  pleased  with  hei
patience  and  mildness— He  declares  that  He  dwells  in  her  ;  and
hides  her  imperfections.

ON  one  occasion  St.  Gertrude  implored  St.  Mechtilde  to
obtain  by  her  prayers  two  graces,  of  which  she  believed
herself  to  stand  greatly  in  need.  These  graces  were,
patience  and  mildness.  As  St.  Mechtilde  prayed,  our
Lord  spoke  thus  to  her  :  "  The  sweetness,  which  fills  Ger
trude  with  a  perfect  tranquillity,  and  which  pleases  Me
infinitely,  results  from  My  making  My  abode  in  the  peace
of  her  heart ;  *  and  because  I  dwell  constantly  in  her,  she  of
necessity  must  dwell  in  Me  ;  or  if  she  is  obliged  sometimes
to  go  out,  let  her  do  what  the  loving  bride  does  when  in
the  company  of  her  spouse — if  she  is  called  away  from
him,  she  takes  him  by  the  hand  and  brings  him  with  her :
thus,  if  she  judges  it  necessary  to  leave  the  sweet  repose
of  contemplation,  in  order  to  labour  for  the  salvation  of
her  neighbour,  let  her  make  the  saving  sign  of  the  Cross
upon  her  heart ;  let  her  utter  My  name  once  before  she
speaks  ;  and  after  that,  let  her  say  all  that  My  grace  in
spires  her  with.  In  like  manner,  the  patience  of  this  Saint,

*  "  Mansuetudo  quae  mihi  in  ea  placet nomen  accipit  a  manendo."


30  THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

to  be  agreeable  to  Me,  must  proceed  from  the  peace  and
science*  of  her  heart ;  that  is  to  say,  she  must  be  equally
tranquil  and  enlightened  ;  and  must  have,  on  the  one  hand,
such  a  care  of  possessing  her  peace,  that  no  adversity  may
be  able  to  deprive  her  of  it ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  let
the  motive  for  which  she  suffers  be  always  present  to  her
mind,  and  let  her  have  no  other  motive  in  suffering  but
love  alone,  that  she  may  give  Me  a  proof  of  her  perfect
fidelity."

A  person  to  whom  the  Saint  was  entirely  unknown,  but
who  had  been  asked  to  pray  for  her,  received  the  following
communication  from  our  Lord  :  "  I  delight  so  much  in  her
that  I  have  chosen  her  as  My  abode.  All  that  others  see
and  love  in  her  is  My  work  \  and  whoever  loves  My  work
in  her,  loves  Me  ;  it  is  for  this  reason  that  those  who  are
not  capable  of  perceiving  the  interior  gifts  of  her  mind,
admire  her  address,  her  eloquence,  and  all  the  other  ex
terior  qualities  with  which  I  have  endowed  her.  And  I
desire  that  they  should  know  that  I  have  withdrawn  her
from  her  parents  and  all  her  friends,  that  none  may  love
her  from  ties  of  consanguinity,  but  that  I  Myself  may  be
the  only  cause  of  the  love  and  esteem  which  they  have  for
her."

When  St.  Gertrude  was  informed  of  these  and  other
revelations  which  had  been  made  concerning  her,  she  ex
claimed  :  "  0  my  Beloved  I  how  is  it  that  Thy  mercy
bears  with  my  iniquity,  for  the  sole  reason  that  Thy  pro
vidences  and  infinitely  perfect  and  adorable  works  are
always  agreeable  to  me  ? — since  this  does  not  result  from
my  virtue,  but  from  the  attractions  of  Thy  perfections  and
Thy  adorable  goodness,  which  does  nothing  unjust,  nothing

*  "  Patientia  nomen  accepit  a  pace  et  scientia."


SENSIBLE  CONSOLATION  NOT  ALWAYS  BENEFICIAL. 31

which  is  not  perfectly  good  and  perfectly  adorable."  The
Lord  made  use  of  this  simile  in  reply  :  "  When  a  person
cannot  read  some  small  writing,  she  uses  glasses,  in  order
to  make  the  characters  appear  larger ;  this  is  accom
plished,  not  by  any  alteration  in  the  writing,  but  by  the
quality  of  the  glasses.*  In  like  manner,  My  daughter,  if  I
find  any  imperfections  or  defects  in  you,  I  efface  them  and
repair  them  by  the  abundant  liberality  of  My  mercy."

As  the  Saint  was  deprived  for  some  time  of  the  accus
tomed  visits  of  her  Spouse,  she  ventured  to  inquire  why  the
favour  was  withheld,  though  she  neither  fell  into  discourage
ment  nor  depression  in  consequence.  "  When  a  person  looks
at  any  one  who  is  close  to  them,"  replied  our  Lord,  "  the
too  great  proximity  often  prevents  them  from  seeing  dis
tinctly  ;  as,  for  example,  when  a  friend  meets  his  friend  and
embraces  him,  this  close  union  deprives  him  of  the  pleasure
of  looking  at  him.  "  St.  Gertrude  understood  by  these
words,  that  we  often  merit  more  when  deprived  of  sensible
grace,  provided  that  we  do  not  become  less  fervent  in  the
practice  of  good  works.

In  the  early  years  of  the  Saint's  spiritual  life,  our  Lord
often  spoke  to  her  in  an  audible  voice  ;  but  later  these
communications  assumed  a  different  character.  The  Saint
inquired  the  reason,  and  received  this  reply  :  "  In  former
years  I  oftener  instructed  you  by  giving  you  various  answers
that  you  might  know,  and  that  you  might  make  known,  the
designs  of  My  will  to  others  ;  but  now  I  only  make  Myself
known  to  you  in  spirit,  and  I  give  you  inspirations  by
lights  which  would  be  difficult  to  express  in  words.  For

*  Beading-glasses  Lad  just  then  come  into  use.  They  are  supposed
to  have  been  invented  by  Alexander  de  Spina,  a  monk  of  Florence,
about  1285.  The  merit  of  the  discovery  is  also  claimed  for  our  owo
Koger  Bacon.


32  THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

I  have  chosen  you  for  this  purpose  that  I  may  use  you  as
the  repository  of  My  treasures,  wherein  I  may  repose  the
riches  of  My  grace,  providing  that  every  one  should  find
whatever  he  needs  in  you,  as  in  the  spouse  who  knows  all
the  secrets  of  her  Bridegroom,  and,  on  account  of  her
Divine  union  with  Him,  acknowledges  His  wishes  and  His
will  in  all  things."  And  it  was  even  so.  For  when  the  Saint
prayed  for  anything,  even  if  she  received  no  reply  from  our
Lord,  as  she  had  done  formerly,  she  nevertheless  felt  equal
consolation,  and  a  certain  assurance  that  her  prayer  was
heard.  Also,  when  any  one  came  to  ask  counsel  or  con
solation  of  her,  she  at  once  felt  her  heart  filled  with  the
necessary  light,  and  inspired  what  to  say,  without  a  mo
ment's  reflection ;  and  this  with  so  much  assurance  and
certainty,  that  she  would  have  given  her  life  for  the  truth
of  the  inspiration.

CHAPTER  V.

The  Saint  as  Abbess— Tenderness  towards  others— Care  of  the  sick—
Her  last  illness— Value  of  suffering— She  is  forbidden  to  resign
her  office— Our  Lord  accepts  as  done  to  Himself  what  is  done  for
her — St.  Lebuiu.

ACCORDING  to  the  calculations  of  Campacci,  the  Saint  was
elected  Abbess  on  the  3d  of  May  1294,  and  governed  her
monastery  for  forty  years,  six  months,  and  fourteen  days.*
In  the  exercise  of  her  charge  she  conducted  herself  with
great  wisdom,  sweetness,  and  prudence,  coupled  with  a

*  Ins.  lib.  v. :  "  Tandem  exacto  anno  xl.  et  die  xi.  Heti  !  heu!
infirmitatem  incurrit,  quse  dicitur  apoplexia  minor."  The  learned
Benedictine  Fathers  of  Solesmes  seem  to  prefer  the  reasoning  of
Oampacci ;  but  probably  there  is  no  discrepancy  in  the  statement,  as
ne  includes  the  time  of  her  illness  in  the  time  of  her  continuance,  in
office.


CARE  OP  THE  SICK.  33


marvellous  discretion,  and  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the
benefit  of  mankind  ;  in  charity  and  love  towards  God,  in
piety  and  vigilance  towards  her  neighbour;  in  profound
humility  and  mortification  towards  herself.  The  sick  had
special  occasion  to  extol  her  charity  and  her  care,  for  she
visited  them  assiduously,  supplied  them  with  every
necessary,  and,  far  from  contenting  herself  with  consoling
them  merely  by  words,  she  served  them  with  her  own  hands,
comforting  them  in  their  necessities,*  and  providing  even
for  their  repose  and  recreation.  Pier  religious,  indeed,
were  often  obliged  to  interfere  in  these  exercises  of  devotion,
lest  their  beloved  Superior  should  exceed  her  strength,  and
exhaust  an  already  enfeebled  frame  in  these  ministries  of
love.  Even  in  her  dying  moments,  her  thoughts,  as  we  shall
see  later,  were  constantly  occupied  with  a  sick  sister  ;  nor
could  she  be  satisfied  until  she  was  carried  to  her  to  console
her.  So  true  a  mother  was  this  blessed  Saint  to  the  chil
dren  whom  God  had  given  her  !

"  While,  then,  she  thus  flourished  in  all  kinds  of  virtue,
and,  like  a  mystic  rose,  emitted  a  sweet  odour  of  sanctity,
agreeable  alike  to  God  and  man,  when  she  had  concluded
the  fortieth  year  and  eleventh  day  of  her  administration  of
the  charge  of  Abbess,  she  was  attacked  with  an  illness,
usually  called  the  little  apoplexy.  This  illness  was  for  her

*  The  26th  chapter  of  the  Rule  of  St.  Benedict  provides  especially
for  this  important  duty  ;  and  the  Abbot  is  not  only  required  "to  take
all  possible  care  that  nothing  be  neglected  in  the  service  of  the  sick,"
but  is  made  responsible  for  the  deficiencies  of  others  in  this  matter  :
"  Let  the  Abbot,  therefore,  be  vigilant  that  the  sick  may  suffer  no
thing  by  the  negligence  of  procurators  and  servants,  and  remember
that  he  shall  be  responsible  for  all  the  faults  of  his  brethren."  We
see  in  the  life  of  St.  Gertrude,  that  even  her  own  dangerous  illness
would  not  allow  her  to  forget  the  sufferings  of  others.  How,  indeed,
could  a  true  spiritual  mother  allow  any  child  to  die.  alone  nad
neglected?

0


34  TUB  LIFE  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.

R  favourable  touch  of  the  Almighty  Hand,  who  willed  to
free  her  from  the  ties  of  the  flesh  and  the  miseries  of  earth,
and  to  draw  to  Himself  this  noble  and  generous  soul,  who,
having  nourished  herself  so  long  only  with  the  fruit  of  the
most  excellent  virtues,  had  acquired  an  extraordinary  vigour
and  strength  ;  but  for  her  religious,  it  was  a  dart  which
pierced  their  hearts,  and  filled  them  with  exceeding  sadness.
They  could  not  but  be  deeply  moved  and  feel  most  acutely
at  beholding  themselves  on  the  point  of  losing  so  gifted  a
Superior,  who,  in  their  opinion  at  least,  had  no  equal  in  the
world  ;  such  benedictions  and  favours  had  God  poured  forth
on  her,  both  in  the  order  of  nature  and  grace.  She  had
brought  up  in  the  monastery,  and  received  to  profession,
more  than  a  hundred  religious  ;  but  of  this  great  number
we  never  knew  one  who  had  the  same  esteem  and  venera
tion  for  any  person  as  for  their  incomparable  Abbess.  Her
power  of  winning  others  was  so  great  and  so  engaging,
that  even  the  young  children  who  were  placed  in  the
convent  conceived  so  tender  and  strong  an  affection  for  her,
that  as  soon  as  they  were  instructed  in  the  things  of  God,
and  learned  that  she  was  their  spiritual  mother,  they  would
have  considered  it  a  fault  and  a  disrespect  to  say  that
they  loved  either  father  or  mother  or  any  other  relative
more  than  the  Saint.

"  So  dangerous  an  attack  of  illness  made  the  religions
fear  that  this  star,  which  shone  so  brightly  by  the  light  of
the  Sun  of  Justice,  was  about  to  set;  and,  as  they  appre
hended,  when  they  were  no  longer  guided  by  the  wisdom
of  so  amiable  and  holy  a  mother,  nor  animated  by  the  bril
liancy  and  force  of  her  example,  that  they  might  stray  from
the  strictness  of  the  narrow  path  of  holy  religion,  they  had
recourse  to  the  Father  of  Mercies,  and  iddressed  to  Him
their  earnest  prayers  for  her  recovery.  And  He  who  ia


A  SUFFERING  LIFE  NOT  USELESS.  35

sovereignly  good  despised  not  the  sighs  and  tears  of  these
poor  children,  but,  because  it  was  not  convenient  that  He
should  grant  them  what  was  contrary  to  the  immutable
decrees  of  His  Providence,  He  heard  them  in  another
manner,  and  in  the  way  which  was  most  useful  and  advan
tageous  for  their  salvation  ;  since,  by  making  them  consider
the  approaching  decease  of  their  mother  as  the  commence
ment  of  her  happiness,  He  filled  them  with  consolation,
and  enabled  them  to  rejoice  in  her  joy."

The  religious  of  whom  mention  has  already  been  made,
as  one  singularly  favoured  by  Divine  communications,  now
prayed  with  great  fervour  for  her  dying  Superior.  Our
Lord  replied  to  her :  "  I  have  waited  with  inexpressible  joy
for  this  moment,  that  I  might  lead  My  elect  into  solitude,
and  there  speak  to  her  heart.  I  have  not  been  disappointed
in  My  expectation,  for  she  conforms  herself  in  all  things
to  My  will,  and  obeys  Me  in  the  manner  which  is  most
agreeable  to  Me."  The  holy  Benedictine  understood  that
by  solitude  our  Lord  meant  the  illness  of  the  Saint,  in
which  He  spoke  to  the  heart  of  His  beloved,  and  not  to
her  ear ;  for  His  language  is  such  as  cannot  be  understood
in  an  ordinary  manner,  just  as  those  things  which  are
spoken  to  the  heart  are  rather  felt  than  heard.  Tribulations
and  afflictions  of  heart  are  the  Lord's  language  to  His  elect ;
when  one  who  suffers  thus  reflects  that  they  are  useless,
that  they  are  spending  their  time  uselessly, — that  others  are
labouring  for  them,  and  labouring  in  vain,  inasmuch  aa
they  are  never  to  recover  their  health  through  this  labour,
— the  soul  answers  to  such  thoughts,  that  that  which  is
most  pleasing  to  God  is  to  maintain  interior  patience,  and
to  desire  that  the  entire  will  of  God  may  be  accomplished
in  them.  Such  an  answer  does  not  reach  heaven  in  the
usual  manner  of  human  communications,  but  resounds,  as


36  THE  LIFE  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

it  were,  through  that  sweetest  Divine  organ,  the  Heart  of
Jesus,  which  is  the  ecstatic  joy  of  the  entire  Trinity  and
the  heavenly  hot>t  He  continued  thus :  "  My  beloved
affords  Me  the  most  intense  and  agreeable  delight,  because
she  despises  not  the  afflictions  of  infirmity,  as  Queen
Vasthi  despised  the  orders  of  King  Assuerus,  when  he
commanded  her  to  appear  with  a  diadem  on  her  head,  that
she  might  exhibit  her  beauty  to  his  nobles.  So,  when  I
take  pleasure  in  displaying  the  beauty  of  My  chosen  one
in  the  presence  of  the  ever-adorable  Trinity  and  the  hea
venly  host,  I  oppress  her  with  sickness  and  infirmity  ;  and
she  carries  out  My  intentions  to  My  perfect  satisfaction,
when,  with  all  patience,  she  the  more  willingly  and  dis
erectly  receives  the  relief  and  comfort  I  choose  to  give  her
body  ;  and  it  adds  to  her  glory  that  she  sometimes  does
this  with  inconvenience  to  herself :  but  it  should  be  her
consolation  to  recollect  that  all  things  work  together  unto
good  to  those  that  love  God"  (Rom.  viii.)

On  another  occasion,  while  the  same  religious  was  pray
ing  for  her,  the  Lord  said  to  her  :  "  It  is  a  pleasure  to  Me
to  have  My  chosen  one  prepare  a  lodging  for  Me,  and  then
to  bestow  on  her  pearls  and  flowers  of  gold.  By  pearls  I
mean  her  senses,  by  flowers  of  gold  her  leisure,  with  which,
when  she  has  time,  and  her  strength  is  somewhat  restored,
she  discharges  her  duty  as  well  as  she  can,  in  preparing
most  becoming  and  acceptable  ornaments  for  Me  ;  being
solicitous  how  she  may  so  arrange  everything  that  can
tend  to  increase  and  preserve  religion,  so  that  after  her
death  her  rules  and  example  may  be  as  a  firm  pillar  to
support  religion  in  eternal  praise.  But,  in  the  height  of
her  labours,  if  she  feels  that  she  is  injuring  her  health,  she
immediately  desists,  and  leaves  Me  to  finish  the  work  ;  for
the  real  fidelity  that  moves  My  Heart  consists  in  persons


VALUE  OP  PATIENCE  IN  SICKNESS.  37

discharging  their  duty  when  they  find  themselves  in  good
health,  and  immediately  desisting  and  intrusting  all  to  Me
when  they  find  themselves  indisposed."

As  the  illness  of  the  Saint  increased,  she  became  incap
able  of  the  least  manual  labour,  and  her  tender  conscience
was  filled  with  fear  lest  there  should  be  any  imperfectk/fc
even  in  this  compulsory  inactivity  ;  she  therefore  requested
the  religious  who  had  received  so  many  revelations  for  her
consolation  to  pray  for  her.  Our  Lord  replied  :

"  A  good  king  never  takes  it  ill  of  his  queen  if  she
neglect  bringing  forward  at  a  given  hour  the  ornaments
that  he  is  most  gratified  at  receiving  ;  but  he  is  much  more
pleased  at  finding  her  always  ready  to  comply  with  his
wishes ;  and  the  sweetness  of  My  most  benign  Heart
delights  more  in  the  patient  endurance  with  which  My
chosen  one  bears  her  infirmity,  on  the  relief  of  which  she
resumes  her  labours  for  the  extension  of  religion,  so  far  as
she  can  do  so  without  injuring  her  health."

As  the  Saint  found  herself  daily  more  and  more  unequal
to  the  important  duties  of  her  office,  she  became  anxious  to
resign  her  charge  ;  but  even  this  desire  she  was  unwilling  to
put  into  effect,  until  assured  that  it  was  the  will  of  God.
Fearful  lest  her  own  inclination  might  deceive  her,  even
in  the  interpretation  of  heavenly  communications,  she
requested  her  favoured  daughter  to  ask  the  counsel  she
needed  from  the  Source  of  all  wisdom.  Our  Lord  conde
scended  to  reply, — may  we  not  hope  for  the  consolation  and
help  of  many  of  His  chosen  ones,  as  well  as  of  the  soul  so
singularly  favoured  thus  specially  to  know  His  will  1 — "  By
this  illness  I  sanctify  My  chosen  one,  to  make  her  a  fit  habi
tation  for  Myself — as  a  church  is  sanctified  by  the  blessing
of  a  bishop.  In  like  manner  as  a  church  is  secured  with
locks,  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  the  unworthy,  so  I,  by


38  THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

that  infirmity,  seal  her  up  so  that  her  mind  cannot  be
occupied  by  externals,  which  tend  to  disturb  the  heart  and
distract  it  from  Me,  and  in  which  there  is  sometimes  i\3
great  utility.  Thus,  as  '  My  delight  is  to  be  with  the
children  of  men  '  (Prov.  viii.),  as  I  have  said  in  the  Book  of
Wisdom,  I  exercise  and  purify  Gertrude  by  sickness,  that
she  may  merit  to  become  My  dwelling  and  My  temple ;
according  to  the  word  of  My  Prophet  :  '  The  Lord  is  nigh
unto  those  who  are  of  a  contrite  heart'  (Ps.  xxxiii.)  I
continue  also  to  embellish  and  adorn  her  with  the  rich  and
precious  gifts  of  a  good  will  and  a  right  intention,  which
produce  and  animate  all  her  actions,  that  I  may  erect  My
throne  and  repose  in  her,  as  a  king  who  is  seated  on  his
conch  of  justice,  and  that  I  may  therein  take  My  delight
as  long  as  she  is  on  earth,  until  I  call  her  to  abide  with
Me  in  heaven,  where  I  will  share  My  eternal  delights  with
her ;  but  in  the  meanwhile  I  have  not  entirely  deprived
her  of  health,  and  I  have  left  her  the  use  of  her  exterior
senses,  desiring  still  to  employ  her  to  make  known  My  will
and  My  answers  to  the  community  which  she  governs,  as
formerly  I  gave  the  people  of  Israel  the  Ark  of  the  Cove
nant,  where  I  delivered  My  oracles  and  received  their
respect  and  adoration.  Therefore,  as  Gertrude  is  a  spirit
ual  ark,  I  desire  that  she  should  contain  manna, — that  is
to  say,  the  sweetness  and  tenderness  of  charity  to  console
the  souls  under  her  guidance,  and  to  solace  their  griefs  as
far  as  she  can.  I  desire  also  that  she  should  possess  the
Tables  of  the  Law, — that  is  to  say,  that  she  should  declare
or  forbid  what  should  be  done  or  not  done,  in  order  to
please  Me,  and  that  in  so  doing  she  should  be  guided  by
the  lights  and  discernment  with  which  I  have  enlightened
her.  But  I  desire  also  that  she  should  be  the  rod  of  Aaron,
— that  is  to  say,  the  authority  and  zeal  of  justice,  to  correct


OP  ABSTAINING  FROM  COMMUNION  IN  SICKNESS. 39


those  persons  who  stray  from  their  duty,  to  prescribe  and
impose  salutary  penances,  and  to  decide  and  regulate  every
thing  with  a  fervent  and  even  mind.  She  should  consider
that  I  could  easily  reform  what  needs  reform,  or  what  is
ill-regulated,  by  simple  inspirations,  or  by  trials  and  dis
graces  ;  but  I  effect  these  things  through  her  to  increase
her  merit.  And  if  any  one  fails  to  profit  by  her  warnings
and  corrections,  it  shall  be  no  prejudice  to  Gertrude,  since
she  has  done  her  duty  and  has  employed  all  the  care  and
vigilance  possible  to  convert  the  sinner:  Man  may  plant  and
water,  but  I  only  can  give  the  increase  (1  Cor.  iii.)"

As  the  Saint  now  became  troubled  because  she  could
not  approach  the  Holy  Communion  as  frequently  as  she
had  been  accustomed  to  do,  and  also  because  she  feared  to
approach  it  without  her  usual  preparation,  which  her  sick
ness  rendered  impossible,  she  made  known  her  trial  to  the
beloved  companion  who  had  so  often  obtained  counsel  for
her.  She  was  also  grieved  because  the  religious  took  so
much  trouble  to  serve  her,  and  devoted  so  much  time  to
her,  since  every  effort  to  procure  her  recovery  seemed  of
no  avail.  To  the  first  difficulty  the  Lord  replied  :  "  When
it  is  purely  for  Me  that  Gertrude  abstains  from  communion,
or  from  any  other  good  work  which  she  would  willingly
practise,  if  it  could  be  accomplished  without  increasing  her
illness  or  injuring  her  health,  then  the  liberality  of  My
goodness  will  impart  to  her  a  share  in  all  the  good  workb
which  are  done  by  the  faithful ;  for  all  the  good  which  is
done  in  the  Church  belongs  to  Me,  and  I  dispose  of  it  as
[  will ;  and  this  because  it  is  from  a  pure  intention,  and
for  Me  only,  that  she  has  not  participated  in  the  graces  ot
those  holy  exercises  which  she  has  omitted."

To  the  other  inquiry  our  Lord  answered  :  "  You  must
serve  her  with  respectful  charity,  cheerful  and  promptly,


40  THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

to  love  and  honour  Me,  because  I  dwell  in  her,  and  I  have
made  her  the  head  of  this  community  ;  therefore  let  each
assist  her,  as  the  members  assist  the  head.  Let  her  refer
to  My  honour  and  glory  the  service  which  is  rendered  to
her  ;  and  rejoice  that  I  employ  her,  as  one  who  is  united
to  Me  by  a  constant  and  faithful  friendship,  to  increase
the  merit  of  My  elect  ;  for  I  will  reward  all  the  good  that
is  done  for  her,  not  only  in  act,  but  by  words  of  affection,
as  if  it  had  been  done  .to  Myself."

On  the  feast  of  St.  Lebuin,*  as  the  sisters  prayed  in
common,  with  special  fervour,  for  the  recovery  of  their  be
loved  mother,  the  religious  invoked  the  Saint  with  great
earnestness  ;  and  he  replied  :  "  When  a  king  is  engaged
with  his  queen,  do  you  not  think  that  it  would  be  most
unbecoming  in  a  private  soldier  to  interrupt  him,  by  ask
ing  him  to  give  his  family  the  pleasure  and  consolation  of
seeing  her  3 — thus,  it  is  most  unbecoming  that  any  one
should  pray  for  the  recovery  of  others,  for  their  own  views,
when  they  are  united  by  patience  arid  good-will  to  the
very  King  of  heaven  Himself."  Whence  we  are  to  learn
that  when  those  who  glorify  God  by  sickness  ask  the
prayers  of  the  Saints,  they  merit  thereby  to  become  more
patient  and  obtain  more  abundant  and  valuable  fruit  from
their  infirmity.


*  St.  Lebuin,  Lebwin,  or  Liafwin,  patron  of  Daventer.  This  Saint
was  English  by  birth  ;  after  his  ordination,  he  went  to  Germany,  and
there,  under  the  direction  of  St.  Gregory,  built  a  church  and  founded
«  mission,  near  Daventer,  in  772.  He  was  not  a  martyr,  though  the
term  is  used  in  the  Insinuations.  Butler  says:  "Being  denied  the
more  compendious  sacrifice  of  himself,  he  finished  his  martyrdom,  by
labours  and  austerities,  before  the  close  of  the  eighth  century."  His
feast  is  kept  on  the  12th  of  November— the  date  helps  to  fix  that  of
St.  Gertrude's  death.


HER  DYING  WORDS,  "  MY  SPIRIT."  41


CHAPTER  VI.

Her  dying  words— Devotion  to  the  Diviue  Office— Tenderness  to  her
spiritual  children— Our  Lord  appears  to  her  in  her  agony —
Promises  to  receive  her  as  He  received  His  blessed  Mother-
Angels  call  her  to  paradise.

FOR  several  months  before  her  death,  St.  Gertrude  entirely
lost  the  use  of  speech,  and  was  only  able  to  articulate  the
words  "  My  spirit."*  Those  who  attended  her  in  vain  en
deavoured  to  ascertain  what  she  meant ;  indeed,  it  appeared
almost  miraculous  that  she  was  able  to  pronounce  them,
while  otherwise  totally  deprived  of  utterance.  As  she
repeated  them  constantly,  the  religious  before  mentioned
inquired  of  her  heavenly  Spouse  if  they  contained  any
spiritual  signification.  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Because  I
the  Lord  God,  dwelling  in  her,  have  so  drawn  and  united
her  spirit  to  Mine,  that  she  sees  Me  alone  in  every  creature,
therefore,  in  her  words,  in  her  answers,  and  in  her  prayers,
she  makes  mention  of  Me  as  the  Person  in  whom  her  spirit
lives.  And  whenever  she  acts  thus,  I  intimate  to  the  whole
heavenly  host  that  it  is  to  Me  alone  she  looks,  and  for  this
she  will  have  everlasting  glory  in  heaven."

The  Saint  still  listened  with  the  utmost  attention  when
any  one  spoke  to  her  of  God  ;  and  so  great  was  her  fervour,
that  she  insisted  on  being  brought  daily  to  assist  at  the
Adorable  Sacrifice,  although  one  of  her  limbs  was  perfectly
useless,  and  the  other  in  such  a  state  that  she  could  not  bear
it  to  be  touched,  even  in  the  gentlest  manner,  without  suf
fering  most  acute  pain.  Still  she  took  the  greatest  care  to
conceal  her  real  state,  and  avoided  the  least  gesture  of  pain,
lest  she  should  be  deprived  of  her  highest  consolation.  Her


"  Spiritus  meua,"


42  THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


life-long  devotion  to  the  Office  now  manifested  itself  to  all,
At  the  times  at  which  she  had  been  so  long  accustomed  to
watch  and  pray,  she  remained  wakeful  and  alert,  although
even  when  taking  necessary  food  she  was  constantly  over
come  by  sleep,  consequent  on  the  languor  of  her  disease.
It  was  remarked  also  that  the  last  time  she  uttered  the
words  "  My  spirit/'  it  appeared  as  if  she  intended  it  as  an
offering  of  the  Office  of  Compline,  after  which  she  fell  into
her  agony.

Her  singular  charity  and  tender  affection  were  manifested
with  peculiar  sweetness  during  this  long  last  illness.  As  she
could  not  speak  to  the  sisters  who  visited  her,  she  exerted
her  failing  strength  to  testify  the  pleasure  she  found  in  their
presence,  and  the  depth  of  her  maternal  love,  which  could
not  bear  to  leave  one  unconsoled.  To  each  she  would  sweetly
use  the  one  expression,  "  My  spirit,"  and  to  each  extend  her
hand  caressingly,  though  she  could  not  move  it  without
severe  pain  :  so  like  was  she  to  her  beloved  Spouse,  so
utterly  regardless  of  her  own  suffering,  when  even  a  passing
consolation  could  be  bestowed  upon  another.  And  each
time  the  religious  left  her,  she  again  raised  the  suffering
hand  in  benediction,  well  knowing  with  what  devotion  that
favour  had  often  been  sought  by  her  faithful  children.

One  sister,  however,  was  unable  to  visit  her  dying  Supe
rior  :  she  was  herself  confined  to  a  bed  of  suffering  ;  but
she  was  not  forgotten.  The  Saint  made  such  earnest  en
treaties  by  signs  to  those  who  attended  her,  that  at  last  they
complied  with  the  request,  and  carried  her  to  the  religious.
She  could  only  say  the  words  so  often  uttered,  but  her
maternal  heart  was  ingenious  in  its  love,  and  she  expressed
her  sympathy  and  affection  for  the  poor  sister  by  such
gentle  and  tender  signs  and  caresses,  that  those  who  stood
by  could  not  refrain  from  tears,


OUR  LORD  APPEARS  TO  HEtt  WHEN  DYING.  43

A  month  after  the  Saint  had  lost  the  use  of  speech,  she
appeared  so  ill  that  it  was  considered  necessary  to  admi
nister  the  last  anointing  without  delay.  As  the  religious
were  preparing  for  the  holy  rite,  our  Divine  Lord  appeared
to  St.  Gertrude  under  the  form  of  a  Spouse  of  exceeding
beauty,  and  extended  His  arms  to  her,  as  if  to  invite  her  to
Himself,  moving  in  whatever  direction  she  turned  her  face.
It  was  revealed  to  the  religious  before  mentioned  that  our
Lord  had  so  much  love  for  His  faithful  servant,  that  Ho
ardently  desired  to  receive  her  into  the  arms  of  His  mercy,
and  to  put  her  in  possession  of  the  glories  of  heaven.  The
religious  inquired  how  it  could  be  that  her  beloved  mother
equalled  in  merit  those  virgin  Saints  whom  the  Church  had
canonised  because  they  had  shed  their  blood  for  the  faith.
She  received  this  reply  :  "  Since  the  first  year  in  which  she
held  office  as  Abbess,  she  united  and  conformed  her  will
BO  perfectly  to  Mine  as  to  have  merited  an  equal  reward.
But  now  that  her  virtues  have  increased  with  her  years,  I
have  given  her  a  yet  greater  share  of  glory  and  merit."

When  the  happy  day  of  release  came,  which  the  Saint
had  so  long  and  so  ardently  desired,  our  Lord  appeared  to
her  with  His  Divine  countenance  radiant  with  joy.  On  His
right  hand  stood  His  ever-blessed  Mother,  and  on  His  left
the  beloved  disciple  John.  An  immense  multitude  of
Saints  attended  the  King  of  Saints,  and  amongst  their
glorious  ranks  were  seen  a  band  of  virgins,  who  appeared
to  the  religious  of  the  monastery  and  joined  themselves
with  them.  Our  Divine  Lord  approached  the  bed  of  the
dying  Saint,  showing  such  marks  of  tenderness  and  affec
tion  as  were  more  than  sufficient  to  sweeten  the  bitterness
of  death.  When  the  Passion  was  read,  at  the  words,  "  Et
inclinato  capite  emisit  spiritum"  *  our  Lord  inclined  to-

*  "And  bowing  His  head,  He  gave  up  the  ghost  "  (John  xix.)


44  THE  LIFE  OP  ST. GERTRUDE.

wards  His  faithful  spouse,  and  opened  wide  His  adorable
Heart,  as  if  transported  with  love,  pouring  forth  all  its  ten
derness  on  her.  It  might  have  seemed  enough  ;  but  even  on
earth  there  was  yet  more  consolation  reserved  for  her  who
had  been  faithful  usque  ad  mortem — even  until  death.

As  the  sisters  prayed  and  wept  around  her  bed,  the  re
ligious  so  favoured  by  our  Lord  ventured  to  address  Him
thus  :  "  0  most  sweet  Jesus  !  we  beseech  Thee,  by  the  good
ness  which  prompted  Thee  to  give  us  so  dear  a  mother,
that,  as  Thou  art  about  to  take  her  from  this  world,  Thou
wouldst  condescend  to  our  prayers,  and  receive  her  with  the
same  affection  as  Thou  didst  Thy  Blessed  Mother,  when  she
went  forth  from  the  body.  "  Then  our  Lord,  with  exceed
ing  clemency,  turned  to  His  blessed  Mother,  and  said  to
her :  "  Tell  Me,  My  Mother,  what  I  did  most  pleasing  to
you  when  you  were  leaving  the  world ;  for  they  ask  Me  to
bestow  a  similar  favour  on  their  mother. "  "  My  Son,"  re
plied  the  Holy  Virgin  sweetly,  "  my  greatest  joy  was  the
grace  which  You  showed  me  of  receiving  me  in  the  secure
asylum  of  Your  holy  arms.  "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  I  granted
this  because  My  Mother,  when  on  earth,  ever  remembered
My  Passion  with  such  intense  anguish.  "  Then  He  added  :
"  I  granted  this  favour  to  My  chosen  one  in  recompense
for  the  care  which  you  had,  while  yet  on  earth,  to  meditate
often  in  your  mind,  and  to  revere  by  your  grief  and  your
tears,  the  mystery  of  My  Passion.  Gertrude  must  there
fore  render  herself  in  some  sort  worthy  of  this  favour,  by
the  pain  and  difficulty  which  she  will  suffer  to-day  in
breathing.  The  patience  which  she  will  thus  be  called  to
exercise  will  place  her  in  a  state  somewhat  similar  to  that
to  which  you  were  often  reduced  by  the  recollection  of  My
Bufferings."

St.  Gertrude  accordingly  continued  in  her  agony  the


ANGELS  CALL  HER  TO  HEAVEN.  45


entire  day ;  but  our  Lord  did  not  leave  her  to  suffer  alone.
His  Heart  had  already  been  opened  to  her,  and  from  thence
she  drew  the  help  and  consolation  she  needed.  Celestial
spirits  also  surrounded  her  bed,  and  she  beheld  them  in
viting  her  to  paradise,  and  heard  their  celestial  harmony  as
they  sung  continually  :  "  Come,  come,  come,  0  lady  !  the
joys  of  heaven  await  thee  !  Alleluia  !  Alleluia  ! "  *


CHAPTER  VII.

Her  death — Of  her  eternal  joys — Our  Lord  consoles  her  religioUB
— Revelations  of  her  sanctity — Prays  that  her  religious  may  b*
comforted  at  her  tomb— Her  obsequies— Our  Lord  blesses  her
tomb.

THE  moment  of  release  came  at  last,  and  Gertrude  passed
to  the  eternal  embraces  of  her  Spouse.  The  religious,  whose
revelations  seemed  scarcely  less  wonderful  than  those  of
her  saintly  Superior,  heard  our  Divine  Lord  address  her
thus  :  "  Behold,  now,  you  are  to  be  united  to  Me,  and  to
become  My  own  for  ever,  by  the  sweet  embrace  which  I
will  give  to  your  soul,  and  in  which  I  will  present  you  to
My  eternal  Father  by  the  close  embrace  of  My  Heart :  "
as  if  our  Lord  would  say,  that  though  His  almighty  power
had  detained  her  until  that  moment  on  earth  in  order  that
she  might  amass  a  greater  fund  of  merit,  His  extreme
goodness,  and  the  impatience  of  His  love,  if  we  maybe  per
mitted  so  to  speak,  could  no  longer  defer  her  happiness,  or
leave  His  treasure  in  the  mire  of  earth  ;  but  that  He  de
sired  to  transport  her  without  delay  to  Paradise,  and  to

*  Ant.  Mag.,  ii.  Vespers  of  her  Feast:  "  Apparuerunt  coelestes
apiritus  de  coelo  descendentes  in  terram,  qui  Gertrudem  ad  paradisi
gaudiamodulatis  vocibus  invitabant :  '  Veni,  veni,  veni,  Domina,  quia
te  expectant  coeli  deliciae.  All.  AIL'"


46  THE  LIFE  OF  ST. GKRThi/DE.

have  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  her  enjoy  eternal  blessed
ness.

"  And  now  this  happy  and  a  thousand  times  blessed
soul  took  her  flight  to  heaven,  and  retired  into  the  sanc
tuary  of  the  Divinity — I  mean,  into  the  sweetest  Heart  of
Jesus,  the  faithful  and  magnificent  Spouse  who  had  opened
it  to  her  by  so  great  an  excess  of  His  bounty.  Who  can
imagine  the  feelings  which  so  extraordinary  a  favour
excited  in  this  holy  soul,  the  wonders  which  she  dis
covered,  the  glories  with  which  she  was  enlightened,  and
the  avidity  with  which  she  drank  in  the  pure  and  holy
delights  which  flowed  upon  her  from  the  Divinity  as  from
a  fountain.  We  will  not  undertake  to  speak  here  of  the
welcome  or  of  the  caresses  which  she  received  from  her
Divine  Spouse,  which  the  excellence  of  His  bounty  and  His
infinite  perfections  rendered  so  amiable,  nor  of  the  joy  and
the  thanksgivings  with  which  the  Angels  and  Saints  at
tended  her  triumph,  nor  of  the  praise  which  they  gave  to
her  eminent  virtue  ;  for  our  mind  is  too  weak  and  our  pen
too  poor  in  eloquence  to  relate  such  things  ;  and  it  is  both
more  safe  and  more  agreeable  to  our  duty  to  content  our
selves  with  sharing  in  the  common  joy  of  the  blessed  who
assisted  at  her  entrance  into  glory,  and  to  sing  canticles  of
thanksgiving  to  God,  who,  by  His  mercy,  has  raised  her  to
such  a  high  honour.

"This  sun  of  the  religious  life,  which  had  shed  abroad
so  far  the  light  of  good  example,  shining  no  more  on
earth,  and  this  soul,  which  was  but  as  a  little  drop  of  water
in  comparison  with  God,  having  entered  happily  into  the
infinite  ocean  of  the  Divinity,  from  whence  she  had  come
forth  by  creation,  the  daughters  of  her  monastery  were  at
first  quite  cast  down,  and  plunged  into  the  obscurity  of  a
dark  sadness.  They  endeavoured,  nevertheless,  to  rise


GRIEF  OF  THK  RELIGIOUS  FOK  TH  KIR  MOTHER.  47


from  this  depression,  looking  with  the  eyes  of  faith,  as  it
were  across  little  openings,  at  the  sublime  land  of  glory
in  which  they  believed  their  mother  had  been  placed.  But,
on  the  other  hand,  as  they  considered  the  greatness  of  their
loss,  and  that  they  had  been  deprived  of  so  excellent  an
Abbess,  whose  like  had  never  been  nor  could  ever  hope
to  be  seen  by  them,  they  fell  again  into  deep  grief,  and
poured  forth  torrents  of  tears.  But  in  the  end,  the  hope
of  their  mother's  happiness  increasing  more  and  more  in
their  souls,  they  began  to  rejoice  with  her,  and  to  beseech
her  to  console  them  herself  with  her  maternal  tenderness
and  affection  ;  and  then  they  began  to  manifest  their  joy
by  singing  the  responsory  Surge,  Virgo,  et  nostras,  which
was  commenced  by  that  religious  who  had  the  greatest
share  in  the  confidence  of  St.  Gertrude  and  in  the  favours
with  which  heaven  had  honoured  her,  and  who  was  there
fore  the  more  obliged  to  interest  herself  in  her  triumph.

"  Thus  this  virginal  body,  which  had  been  the  temple
of  Jesus  Christ,  was  borne  by  the  hands  of  these  virgins
into  the  chapel,  and  placed  before  the  altar.  Then,  all
the  community  being  prostrated  in  prayer  round  the
corpse,  they  beheld  the  soul  of  the  Saint,  radiant  with
glory,  standing  before  the  throne  of  the  most  Holy  Trinity,
and  praying  for  the  salvation  of  all  those  who  had  been
formerly  under  her  guidance."

While  the  Mass  was  being  said  for  the  repose  of  her
soul,  the  religious  who  had  been  so  dear  to  her  poured
forth  her  heart  to  God,  and  represented  the  excess  of  her
affliction  to  Him.  Our  Lord  deigned  to  console  her  by
this  reply  :  "  Why  are  you  so  afflicted  for  the  death  of
Gertrude  ?  If  I  have  taken  her  from  you,  am  I  not  able
to  supply  what  is  wanting  to  you  ?  If,  after  the  decease
of  a  gentleman,  the  lord  to  whom  his  lands  belong  takea


48  THE  LIFE  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.

possession  of  them,  and  unites  them  to  his  own  domains
by  a  just  right,  and  if  this  lord  has  a  high  reputation  for
equity,  there  may  well  be  confidence  in  him  that  he  will
not  abandon  the  children  of  the  deceased,  and  that  he  will
give  them  what  will  be  necessary  for  their  subsistence, —
how  much  more  just  is  it,  then,  that  you  should  confide
in  Me,  who  am  goodness  itself,  and  that  you  should  hope
firmly,  if  you  turn  to  Me  with  your  whole  heart,  that  I
will  be  to  you  all  which  she  has  been,  and  that  I  will
give  to  each  of  you  that  which  you  think  you  have  lost
in  her?"

On  the  following  day,  when  they  were  preparing  to
inter  the  body,  before  the  first  Mass,  this  servant  of  God
offered  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  with  all  its  marvellous  gifts
and  graces,  for  the  repose  of  the  soul  so  dear  to  her.
Ou  Lord  received  this  offering  as  a  vase  in  the  form  of  a
human  heart,  filled  with  the  most  precious  wines.  Having
placed  it  in  His  bosom,  He  called  the  Saint  to  Him  thus  :
u  Corne  to  Me,  My  little  one,  and  dispose  of  the  goods
which  your  children  have  sent  you."  Then  the  Saint
turned  to  her  Beloved,  and  found  in  His  Heart  treasures
of  all  virtues  and  of  all  good ;  she  took  several,  as  it  were
with  her  hand,  and,  moved  by  the  tenderness  and  good
ness  with  which  God  had  filled  her,  she  said  :  "  O  my
beloved  Lord,  this  grace  would  be  most  suitable  for  the
Prioress,  and  this  for  another  religious,  and  this  for
another  ;"  even  as  when  on  earth  she  had  known  the  need
of  each,  which  now  she  desired  to  supply  from  the  inex
haustible  treasures  of  His  Divine  Heart.

Then  our  Lord,  looking  at  her  sweetly,  said  :  "  Come
yet  nearer  to  Me,  My  beloved."  The  Saint  rose  joyfully,
and  placed  herself  at  the  left  side  of  our  Lord,  who  made
her  look  into  His  Heart,  saying  :  "  Behold  Me  now,  as  I


WHY  OUR  IMPERFECTIONS \RE  PERMITTED.  49

behold  you."  *  By  this  she  learned  that,  in  her  desire  to
obtain  graces  and  gifts  for  others,  there  had  been  formerly
some  natural  affection ;  but  this  intimate  communication
with  God  changed  her  first  desire  into  a  perfect  conformity
to  His  will,  for,  though  He  loves  men  far  more  than
they  can  possibly  conceive,  He  nevertheless,  in  infinite
wisdom,  permits  that  many  should  continue  in  certain
defects  and  imperfections,  from  which  He  could  easily
deliver  them  by  His  grace.

At  the  elevation  of  the  Host,  the  same  religious,  in
offering  the  Host  conjointly  with  the  priest,  offered  also
for  the  deceased  all  the  movements  of  filial  affection  which
the  Heart  of  Jesus  Christ  had  for  His  holy  Mother  ;  then
our  Lord  said  lovingly  to  the  soul  :  "  Approach,  O
daughter,  that  I  may  manifest  to  you  the  filial  affection
of  My  most  loving  Heart."  The  Blessed  Virgin  then
took  this  soul  in  her  arms  and  brought  her  to  her  Son,
who  inclined  towards  her,  and  testified  a  filial  affection
for  her  with  the  tenderest  charity.  The  religious  renewed
the  offering  at  other  Masses  ;  but  as  there  were  more  than
twenty  celebrated,  she  desired  to  offer  something  still
more  precious,  to  increase  the  merit  of  her  beloved  mother.
She  therefore  offered  the  filial  affection  which  our  Lord
had  for  His  Father  in  His  Divinity,  and  for  His  Mother
in  His  Humanity.  When  she  made  this  offering,  the  Son
of  God  arose,  stood  before  His  Father,  and  called  the  soul
of  the  deceased  to  Him,  saying  :  "  Come  hither,  lady  and
queen  ;  for  now  a  greater  offering  is  sent  to  thee."  Then
the  Mother  of  God  led  her  to  a  more  sublime  degree  of
glory,  and  the  religious  said  to  her  :  "  0  my  venerable
mother,  I  can  no  longer  see  you,  nor  can  I  know  anything


*  "  Respice  nunc,  sicut  ego  respicio."


50  THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

of  the  rank  to  which  your  merits  have  raised  you."  The
Saint  replied  :  "  You  can  still  ask  me  whatever  you  de
sire."  The  religious  then  said  :  "  My  good  mother,  why
do  you  not  pray  to  God  that  we  may  be  able  to  restrain
our  tears,  when  you  know  that  many  of  us  have  suffered
in  consequence  of  our  grief,  and  you  could  never  bear  to
see  us  afflicted  when  on  earth  ? "  The  Saint  replied  :  "  My
Lord  has  so  tender  and  condescending  an  affection  for  me,
that  He  makes  even  those  things  tend  to  my  advantage
and  glory  which  would  avail  but  little  for  others  •  and  in
recompense  for  the  vigilance  and  discretion  with  which  I
formerly  guided  you,  He  permits  me  to  present  your  tears
to  Him  in  a  chalice  of  gold, .  and  in  exchange  He  gives
me  to  drink  of  the  living  waters  of  His  Divine  sweetness.
Therefore  it  is  that,  having  tasted  so  agreeable  a  beverage,
I  sing  to  My  Beloved  a  canticle  of  thanksgiving  for  my
daughters  and  myself."

The  religious  then  inquired  if  this  favour  was  granted
only  for  the  tears  they  shed  purely  for  God,  and  from  their
apprehension  that  regular  observance  should  suffer  by  her
decease.  She  replied  :  "  For  all  tears,  even  when  caused
by  human  love  and  tenderness  ;  but  when  these  tears  are
shed  for  the  glory  of  God,  the  Son  of  God  Himself  sings
thanksgivings  with  me  ;  and  this  affords  me  a  joy  as  great
as  the  difference  between  the  creature  and  the  Creator."
Then,  calling  the  religious  by  name,  she  said  to  her  :
"  My  daughter.  I  have  received  a  particular  recompense
from  God  for  the  fidelity  and  zeal  with  which  I  led  you
to  act  for  the  glory  of  God  in  the  matter  you  know  of.
For  my  beloved  Lord  Jesus  sings  continually  in  my  heart
a  song  of  love,  for  which  I  am  glorified  by  the  whole  court
of  heaven.  My  ears  are  entertained  with  a  ravishing
melody  •  my  eyes  behold  a  most  glorious  light ;  I  inhale


OUR  LORD  BLESSES  HER  GRAVE.  51


and  taste  a  most  sweet  fragrance  ;  but  there  are  other
pleasures  which  I  could  have  enjoyed,  and  of  which  I  am
deprived  because  I  had  been  a  little  negligent  in  this
affair,  although  I  did  all  with  a  good  intention  and  to
promote  peace."

When  the  bell  was  rung  at  the  elevation  of  the  Host,
the  religious  offered  It  to  supply  the  deficiencies  of  the
deceased  ;  when  she  had  done  so,  It  appeared  to  the  soul
of  the  deceased  in  the  form  of  a  radiant  sceptre,  which
seemed  to  move  before  her  in  a  marvellous  manner.  But
when  she  desired  to  touch  it,  she  was  unable,  because  what
is  neglected  in  this  life  cannot  be  repaired  or  supplied
perfectly  in  the  other.  Nevertheless,  as  the  Saint,  by  a
special  gift  of  God,  excelled  in  gratitude  and  thankfulness,
she  prayed  for  all  who  had  come  to  assist  at  her  obsequies  ;
and  she  obtained  for  many  the  pardon  of  their  sins,  and
an  increase  of  grace  to  regulate  their  lives  better  and  to
perform  good  works.

When  the  priest  was  giving  the  Benediction  at  the  end
of  Mass,  the  religious  beheld  her  blessed  mother  standing
before  the  throne  of  the  most  Holy  Trinity,  where  she
prayed  thus  :  "  Giver  of  gifts  !  grant,  I  beseech  Thee,
that  whenever  any  of  my  daughters  shall  go  to  my  tomb
to  make  known  their  griefs  to  me,  or  their  imperfections
and  defects,  that  they  may  receive  such  consolation  and
support  as  to  know  that  I  am  still  their  mother."  This
prayer  was  heard  ;  for  God,  by  His  almighty  power,  His
wisdom,  and  His  goodness,  granted  special  favours  there
to  each  religious.  When  the  body  of  the  Saint  was
placed  in  the  tomb,  our  Lord,  to  confirm  His  promise,  was
seen  to  make  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  the  body  each  time
that  earth  was  cast  on  it ;  and  after  it  was  entirely  covered,
the  Blessed  Mother  of  our  Lord  also  made  the  sign  of  the


52  THR  LIFE  OF  ST.  GERTBtrDB.

cross  on  the  fcomb,  as  a  further  assurance  that  her  Son  hsui
granted  this  favour  to  the  Saint.*


CHAPTER  VIII.

Favours  granted  at  the  interment  of  the  Saint— Souls  released
through  her  intercession— How  our  Lord  gathered  a  lily— Of  fear
in  the  last  agony— Purgatory  in  sickness — Efficacy  of  prayers  for
the  dead.

AFTER  the  corpse  had  been  interred,  while  the  response
Regnum  mitndi  t  was  singing,  wonderful  signs  of  the
beatitude  of  Gertrude  were  beheld  in  heaven,  and  the  very
walls  and  pavement  of  the  monastery  seemed  to  thrill  with
joy.  The  Saint  appeared,  with  a  troop  of  virgins  of
admirable  beauty.  She  held  a  lily  and  other  flowers  in
her  right  hand,  and  on  her  left  conducted  the  religious  of
her  community  who  had  already  attained  eternal  beatitude.


*  We  find  the  following  passage  in  Pere  Baron's  Incendie,  vol.  ii.,
lib.  iii.,  c.  28  :  "  St.  Gertrude,  having  made  a  donation  of  all  her  merits
and  good  works  to  the  souls  in  purgatory,  the  demon  appeared  to  her
at  the  moment  of  her  death,  and  mocked  her,  saying:  'How  vain
thou  art !  and  how  cruel  thou  hast  been  to  thyself !  For  what  greater
pride  can  there  be  than  to  wish  to  pay  the  debts  of  others  without
paying  one's  own?  Now— now  we  will  see  the  result;  when  thou
art  dead  thou  wilt  pay  for  thyself  in  the  fires  of  purgatory,  and  I  will
laugh  at  thy  folly  whilst  thou  weepest  for  thy  pride.'  Then  she
beheld  her  Divine  Spouse  approaching  her,  who  consoled  her  with
these  words  :  '  In  order  that  you  may  know  how  agreeable  your
charity  for  the  souls  of  the  departed  has  been  to  Me,  I  remit  to  you
now  all  the  pains  of  purgatory  which  you  might  have  suffered  ;  and
as  I  have  promised  to  return  you  a  hundred  for  one,  I  will  further
increase  your  celestial  glory  abundantly,  giving  you  a  special  recom
pense  for  the  charity  which  you  have  exercised  towards  My  beloved
souls  in  purgatory,  by  renouncing  in  their  favour  your  works  of
satisfaction.'"

f  "The  kingdom  of  this  world  and  all  its  ornaments  I  have  despised
for  the  love  of  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Ant.  Com.  Vid.


SHE  APPEAKS  TO  A  RELIGIOUS.  53

In  this  glorious  triumph  they  came  before  the  throne
of  God;  and  when  the  words  quern  vidi  were  chanted,
God  the  Father  bestowed  gifts  on  them  ;  at  the  words
quern  amavi,  God  the  Son  bestowed  His  liberality  on
them  \  and  at  the  In  quern  credidi,  the  Holy  Spirit  granted
similar  favours.  When  they  sung  quern  dilexi,  St.  Ger
trude  turned  towards  her  heavenly  Spouse,  and  saluted
Him  with  ardent  ]ove.  As  they  chanted  the  response
Libera  me,  Domine,  many  souls  were  seen  entering  heaven
with  great  joy,  who  had  been  released  through  the  Masses
said  that  day,  and  by  the  merits  of  the  Saint.  Amongst
others,  a  lay  brother  who  had  been  somewhat  negligent  in
spiritual  things,  but  who  had  been  much  relieved  by  the
intercession  of  the  Saint.

On  the  thirtieth  day  St.  Gertrude  appeared  again  to  this
religious,  but  with  a  splendour  which  far  surpassed  the
visions  she  had  seen  before.  The  reason  of  this  was,  that
God  willed  that  the  merit  which  she  had  acquired  by  His
grace  in  suffering  her  infirmities  and  sickness  with  so  much
patience,  should  appear  exteriorly,  and  that  the  beauty  of
her  soul  should  shine  forth  visibly.  A  book  of  gold,  richly
adorned,  was  seen  before  the  throne  of  God,  in  which  was
written  all  the  instructions  she  had  given  to  those  persons
who  had  been  under  her  guidance  while  she  was  on  earth  •
to  which  was  yet  to  be  added  all  the  advancement  in
virtue  which  they  had  attained  either  by  her  teaching  or
example.

At  Mass,  the  religious  prayed  with  great  fervour  that
our  Lord  would  reward  her  blessed  mother  for  her  maternal
love  and  care.  Our  Lord  replied  :  "I  grant  your  prayer,
arid  consent  that  each  of  you  should  make  a  similar  petition
to  Me  ;  for  I  have  such  a  good  will  for  this  soul,  that  there
is  scarcely  any  gift  or  grace  which  I  am  not  disposed  to


54  THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

grant  her."  Then,  looking  at  the  Saint  lovingly,  He  said  :
"  You  have  bestowed  your  benefits  well,  since  they  are  re
turned  to  you  so  gratefully."  Gertrude  then  prostrated
before  the  throne  of  His  glory,  to  thank  Him  for  the  fidelity
of  those  who  had  been  formerly  under  her  guidance,  and
said  :  "  Eternal,  boundless,  and  unceasing  praise  be  to  Thee,
my  sweetest  Lord,  for  all  Thy  benefits ;  and  blessed  be  the
moment  in  which  Thou  didst  will  to  prepare  and  sustain  me
to  receive  such  rewards.  O  God  of  my  life,  do  Thou  answer
them  for  me."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  I  will  fix  the  eyes  of
My  mercy  upon  them."  He  then  made  the  sign  of  the
cross  twice  with  His  most  holy  hand  ;  and  by  this  He
gave  to  each  member  of  the  community  the  grace  of  giving
good  example,  and  the  grace  of  having  a  pure  intention  of
Divine  love  in  their  hearts.

Twelve  days  after  the  death  of  St.  Gertrude,  one  of  her
.spiritual  daughters  was  also  called  to  her  eternal  reward.
Her  death  added  much  to  the  affliction  of  the  religious,
for  her  innocence  and  purity  of  heart  had  made  her  singu
larly  beloved.  As  the  favoured  religious  wept  and  prayed
for  her,  and  thought  of  how  much  her  sisters  had  been  de
prived  in  losing  her  good  example  and  her  wise  counsels,
she  ventured  to  exclaim  :  "  Ah,  my  beloved  Lord !  why
have  You  taken  her  so  suddenly  from  us  ? "  Our  Lord
replied  •  "  While  you  were  burying  Gertrude,  My  beloved,
I  was  taking  My  delight  amongst  your  devoted  community,
where  I  had  descended  to  feed  upon  the  lilies ;  and  as  I
beheld  this  lily,  which  pleased  Me  exceedingly,  I  took  it
in  My  hand  ;  and  as  I  held  it  therein  for  eleven  days  be
fore  breaking  it  from  the  stem,  it  increased  marvellously
in  beauty  and  in  the  odour  of  sanctity  ;  and  then  I  took
it  to  Myself  for  My  own  special  delight."  He  then
added :  "  When  any  of  you  reflect  on  the  pleasure  you


HOW  JESUS  GATHERS  LILIES.  55


found  in  her  society,  and  desire  to  enjoy  it  again,  if  you
offer  this  desire  to  Me,  it  renews  the  pleasure  I  find  in
the  fragrance  of  this  lily,  and  I  will  return  it  a  hundred
fold."

As  the  religious,  like  a  faithful  and  loving  sister,  offered
the  Host  at  the  Elevation  for  her  soul,  with  all  the  fidelity
of  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  she  saw  her  elevated  to  a  higher
and  yet  more  sublime  degree  of  glory,  where  her  garments
shone  marvellously,  and  she  was  honoured  by  blessed
spirits.  And  this  she  beheld  whenever  she  made  this
offering  for  her.

Then,  as  she  inquired  of  our  Divine  Lord  why  the
sister  had  appeared  in  great  fear  and  alarm  during  her
agony,  she  received  this  reply  :  "It  was  for  her  good,  and
an  effect  of  My  mercy.  For  during  her  sickness  she  de
sired  very  much  to  be  assisted  by  your  prayers,  so  that
she  might  be  admitted  into  heaven  immediately.  I  pro
mised  you  this  favour,  which  she  believed  she  would
obtain  from  Me.  I  was  pleased  with  her  confidence,  and
determined  to  do  her  yet  more  good  than  I  had  before
purposed.  But  as  young  persons  seldom  purify  themselves
from  slight  negligences — such  as  seeking  too  much  amuse
ment,  and  taking  pleasure  in  what  is  useless — and  us  it
was  necessary  that  she  should  be  purified  from  these  little
stains  by  the  inconveniences  and  pains  of  sickness,  before
I  could  bring  her  to  heaven,  I  could  not  bear  that,  after
having  endured  all  with  so  much  resignation  and  patience,
she  should  still  be  unable  to  enjoy  this  blessedness.  I
therefore  permitted  her  to  be  further  tried  by  fear,  caused
by  the  sight  of  evil  spirits  ;  and  thus  she  became  perfectly
purified,  and  merited  eternal  glory."  "  But  where  wert
Thou,  then,  0  Lord  ? "  inquired  the  religious.  Our  Lord
replied  :  "  I  was  hidden  on  her  left  side ;  and  as  soon  as


66  THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  GKRTRUDE.


she  was  sufficiently  purified,  I  showed  Myself  to  her,  and
took  her  with  Me  to  eternal  rest  and  glory."


CHAPTER  IX.

Happy  death  of  another  religious— Our  Lord  specially  rewards  her
charity  to  others—  Purgatory  in  sickness — How  our  Lord  purified
a  dying  religious — Efficacy  of  prayers  for  the  departed — Of  Masses
for  the  dead— .Reward  of  fervour  when  suffering.

ANOTHER  religious  died  soon  after,  who  from  her  infancy
had  been  specially  devoted  to  the  Mother  of  God.  After
she  had  received  the  last  Sacraments,  and  when  she  ap
peared  almost  dead,  she  gave  singular  edification  to  the
religious  by  the  affection  and  compunction  with  which  she
kissed  the  wounds  of  a  crucifix  which  was  presented  to
her,  addressing  it  in  the  tenderest  words.  After  pouring
forth  the  most  ardent  and  fervent  ejaculations  for  pardon
of  her  sins,  for  the  protection  of  her  Spouse  in  her  last
moments,  and  for  the  assistance  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  the
Angels,  and  Saints,  her  strength  failed,  and  she  passed,  as
in  a  quiet  sleep,  to  her  eternal  reward.  As  the  community
were  reciting  the  usual  prayers  for  the  repose  of  her  soul,
our  Lord  appeared  to  a  religious  with  the  deceased  in  His
arms,  saying  to  her,  caressingly,  "  Do  you  know  Me,  My
child  ?  "  Then  she  who  was  favoured  with  this  vision
prayed  that  our  Lord  would  specially  reward  that  soul  for
her  humble  and  efficacious  charity  in  having  served  her
on  many  occasions,  and  for  having  been  specially  earnest
in  doing  service  to  those  religious  who  were  most  holy
and  devoted  to  God,  in  order  that  she  might  share  in
their  merits  and  graces.  Our  Lord  therefore  presented
His  deified  Heart  to  her,  saying  :  "  Drink  freely  from  Me


PURIFICATION  IN  SICKNESS.  57


a  reward  for  all  which  thou  didst  when  on  earth  for  My
elect."

On  the  following  day,  at  Mass,  the  soul  appeared  as  if
seated  in  our  Lord's  bosom,  and  His  Blessed  Mother  ap
peared  to  rejoice  this  soul  by  a  communication  of  her
merits.  This  was  specially  the  case  while  the  community
recited  the  Psalter  for  her,  with  the  Ave  Maria;  so  that
at  each  word  the  Mother  of  our  Lord  appeared  to  make
presents  to  this  soul,  who  received  them  to  increase  her
merit  before  God.  While  they  prayed  thus,  the  religious
desired  much  to  know  what  faults  the  deceased  had  com
mitted,  from  which  it  had  been  necessary  to  purify  her
before  her  death  ;  and  she  prayed  God  to  make  this  known
to  her.  As  her  prayer  was  the  result  of  a  Divine  inspiration,
and  not  of  an  idle  curiosity,  it  was  heard ;  and  our  Lord
replied:  "She  took  some  complacence  in  her  own  judg
ment  ;  but  I  purified  her  from  this,  by  causing  her  to  die
before  the  community  had  finished  the  prayers  which  they
were  offering  for  her.  This  troubled  her  much,  because
she  feared  it  would  prove  an  obstacle  to  her  happiness,  by
depriving  her  of  the  assistance  which  she  hoped  to  derive
from  the  prayers  of  others."

To  this  the  religious  replied  :  "  Lord,  could  she  not
b.ave  been  purified  from  this  by  the  sentiments  of  com
punction  which  she  had  in  imploring  pardon  for  all  her
sins  at  the  last  moment  of  her  life?"  Our  Lord  replied  :
"  This  general  contrition  was  not  sufficient,  because  she
still  had  some  confidence  in  her  own  judgment,  and  was
not  perfectly  docile  to  those  who  instructed  her;  and
therefore  it  was  necessary  that  she  should  be  purified  by
this  suffering."  He  added  :  "  She  also  needed  purifica
tion,  for  having  sometimes  neglected  the  grace  of  confes
sion  ;  but  My  goodness  remitted  this  fault  to  her  for  the


58  THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

sake  of  some  persons  whom  I  honour  with  My  friendship,
and  of  others  who  had  charge  of  her,  and  for  the  pain  and
mortification  I  caused  her  by  obliging  her  to  confess,
against  her  inclination,  on  the  day  of  her  death  ;  and  then
I  pardoned  her  all  the  omissions  she  had  been  guilty  of  in
this  matter."

At  the  Mass,  when  they  sung  at  the  offertory  Hostias
ac  preces*  our  Lord  elevated  His  right  hand,  and  shed
forth  from  it  a  marvellous  light,  which  illuminated  the
whole  heaven,  but  especially  this  soul,  which  was  in  the
bosom  of  our  Lord.  Then  the  Saints  approached,  each
according  to  their  rank,  and  placed  their  merits  as  an  offer
ing  on  the  breast  of  Jesus,  to  supply  for  the  deficiencies  of
this  soul.  The  religious  knew  that  they  acted  thus  be
cause,  when  that  soul  was  on  earth,  she  had  been  accus
tomed  to  pray  that  the  Saints  would  give  this  assistance
to  the  souls  of  the  deceased.  The  Saints  then  testified
their  affection  for  her  by  endeavouring  to  increase  her
happiness,  and  the  virgins  caressed  her  specially,  as
having,  in  common  with  them,  the  excellent  grace  of
virginity.

On  another  occasion,  when  the  religious  prayed  for  this
soul,  with  few  but  ardent  words,  it  appeared  to  her  that
all  her  words  were  engraven  on  the  bosom  of  Jesus,  and
formed  there  so  many  little  windows,  which  opened  into
the  Heart  of  Jesus.  Then  she  heard  our  Lord  say  to  this
soul  :  "  Look  through  heaven,  and  see  if  there  is  any
grace  in  the  Saints  which  you  would  desire  to  have,  and
draw  it  from  My  Heart  through  these  little  openings."
The  religious  knew,  further,  that  each  prayer  which  waa


*From  tbo  Offertory,  Missa  Defu.  :  "We  offer  to  Thee,  O  Lord
•acrifices  and  prayers  :  do  Thou  receive  them  in  behalf  of  those  soulg
vhom  we  commemorate,"  &c.


VALUE  OP  DIFFERENT  INTENTIONS  FOR  MASS.  59

made  devoutly  for  her  produced  the  same  effect.  At  the
elevation  of  the  Host,  our  Lord  appeared  to  present  His
sacred  Body  to  this  soul,  under  the  form  of  a  spotless
lamb ;  having  embraced  it  devoutly,  she  became  entirely
changed  in  this  embrace,  because  she  obtained  new  joys,
and  a  more  clear  knowledge  of  the  Divinity.  Then  the
religious  begged  her  to  pray  for  those  who  were  under  her
guidance,  and  she  replied  :  "I  will  pray  for  them,  but  I  can
desire  nothing  except  what  I  see  to  be  conformable  to  the
will  of  my  beloved  Lord."  The  religious  replied  :  "Is  it
not  advantageous  to  them  to  hope  in  your  prayers  ?  "  She
answered :  "  It  will  avail  them  much  for  our  Lord  to  be
hold  their  earnest  desire  for  our  intercession."  "  But,"
continued  the  religious,  "  can  you  not  pray  especially  for
your  special  friends,  if  they  have  not  asked  your  prayers  V
She  replied  :  "  Our  Lord,  of  His  infinite  charity,  grants
them  particular  favours  for  our  sake."  "  Since  this  is
the  case,  pray  specially  for  the  priest  who  communicates
for  you."  The  soul  answered :  "  He  will  afford  me  a
double  advantage ;  because,  as  the  Lord  receives  it  from
him  and  returns  it  to  me,  so  will  He  return  to  him  what  I
have  gained  thereby;  as  gold  appears  to  greater  advan
tage  when  contrasted  with  colours."  *

"  From  what  you  say,"  continued  the  religious,  "  it
would  appear  that  it  is  more  salutary  to  celebrate  Mass
for  the  dead  than  for  any  other  intention  1 "  She  replied  :
"When  this  is  done  through  charity,  it  is  of  more  avail
than  if  the  mass  were  said  merely  as  a  sacerdotal  duty."
"  And  how  know  you  all  these  things  1 "  inquired  the
religious,  "  since  you  appeared  to  know  so  little  when  on
earth  1  "  The  soul  replied  :  "  I  know  it  from  the  Source

*  This  passage  is  not  very  clear  in  the  original.


60  TUK  LIFE  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.


of  which  St.  Augustine  speaks.  When  God  looks  into  the
soul,  it  learns  all  things."*

Once,  as  the  religious  beheld  this  soul  clothed  with  a
scarlet  robe,  and  in  a  high  degree  of  glory,  she  inquired  of
our  Lord  how  she  had  merited  such  favours.  He  replied :
"  I  have  done  for  her  what  I  promised  through  you,  by
clothing  her  with  My  Passion  to  reward  her  for  an  occa
sion  on  which  her  heart  was  greatly  depressed,  and  yet
she  did  not  exempt  herself  from  the  ordinary  duties  of  the
order;  and  although  she  had  to  do  more  than  her
.strength  allowed,  she  did  not  complain  much  of  it."  He
added  :  "  And  for  the  weakness  and  exhaustion  which  she
suffered  in  her  sickness,  I  have  caused  her  to  be  accom
panied  by  the  princes  of  My  kingdom,  who  make  her  find
a  special  satisfaction  in  the  glory  which  she  enjoys ;  and
I  have  recompensed  her  so  abundantly  for  what  she
endured,  that  she  desires  to  have  suffered  a  hundred
times  more."

The  religious  also  beheld  many  souls  kneeling  before
her  to  testify  their  gratitude  for  their  deliverance  from
purgatory,  through  the  prayers  which  had  been  offered
for  her,  and  which  she  had  not  needed.  She  inquired  if
the  community  would  obtain  any  advantage  from  this  j
and  they  replied  :  "  It  is  certainly  very  advantageous  to
you,  for  our  Lord  will  pour  fortli  grace  on  you  for  each."
In  another  Mass,  which  was  not  for  the  dead,  the  religious
inquired  of  this  soul  what  fruit  she  could  obtain  thereby,
as  it  was  not  for  the  dead.  The  soul  replied  :  "  And
what  share  has  a  queen  in  the  possession  of  the  king  her
lord1?  Know  that  I  am  so  closely  united  to  the  King
my  Lord  and  my  beloved  Spouse,  that  I  share  in  all  Hia

*  "Deum  serael  inspexisse,  est  omaia  didicisse."


HER  OFFICE  GRANTED.  61


goods,  as  a  queen  is  admitted  to  the  table  of  the  king  ;
for  which,  may  the  King  of  kings  be  eternally  praised  and
glorified  !"


CHAPTER  X.

St.  Gertrude  not  formally  canonised— History  of  her  cultus — Benedict
XIV.— Her  Office  approved— Name  inserted  in  Martyrology—
Lanspergius— His  history— Preface  to  Insinuationes— Plea  for
the  female  sex — Conclusion.

ST.  GERTRUDE  was  never  formally  canonised.  Benedict
XIV.  says,*  that  her  cultus  was  first  permitted  on  the  7th
October  1G06,  four  centuries  after  her  death,  when,  by  a
decree  of  the  Sacred  Congregation  of  Rites,  an  office  was
granted  to  the  nuns  of  the  monastery  of  St.  John  Evan
gelist,  of  the  city  of  Licia.  On  the  20th  June  1609,  the
nuns  of  the  Conception  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  of  Mexico
obtained  a  similar  favour,  the  Office  being  a  double.  The
Benedictine  monks  and  nuns  of  the  Congregation  of
Cassiensis  were  granted  a  double,  ad  lib.,  on  the  19th
December  1654.  The  beautiful  Office  of  the  Saint  at
present  in  use  was  composed  by  Dom  G.  H.  Vaillant.  t
In  the  Bibliotlieqiie  Generate  des  Ecrivains  <le  VOrdre  dt
St.  JBenott,  t.  iii.,  p.  170,  we  find  the  following  details:
"Dom  Bernard  Audebert,  Superior-General  of  the  Con
gregation  of  St.  Maur,  having  established  the  feast  of  St.
Gertrude  in  1673,  whose  cultus  was  already  famous  in
Rome,  Spain,  arid  the  Indies,  Dom  Vaillant,  of  the  same


*  De  serv.  Dei  cart,  et  beat.,  lib.  i.,  c.  xli.

t  In  the  Office  for  the  Saint  used  by  the  Benedictines  of  the  Most
Holy  Sacrament,  we  read  that  she  was  made  Abbess  of  a  monastery
in  the  town  of  Delphos,  and  hence  is  called  the  Delphic  Gertrude  :
"Deinde  alterius  in  urbe  Delphos,  unde  Gertrude  Delphica  dicitur,"
vi.  Lesson,  ii.  Nocturu.


62  THE  LIFE  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Congregation,  composed  the  Office  of  the  holy  Benedictine
Abbess,  which  was  chanted  from  this  year  in  the  mon
asteries  of  the  congregation.  The  author  uses  the  most
tender  expressions  of  the  Canticle  of  Canticles — a  language
which  only  suits  a  small  number  of  holy  souls,  who  are
elevated  above  earthly  things."

It  is  more  difficult  to  ascertain  why  the  Office  was
transferred  to  March.  The  Maurist  fathers  made  this
change  in  a  general  chapter,  possibly  because  there  are  so
many  feasts  in  November ;  but  again  the  question  arises
why  they  chose  a  day  already  occupied  by  St.  Gertrude  of
Nivelle.*  As  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  ascertain,  the
feast  is  celebrated  on  the  15th  November  by  the  Bene
dictine  Order,  with  the  exception  of  this  congregation.
The  17th  November  was  the  day  first  appointed  for  the
festival ;  but,  as  Benedict  XIV.  quaintly  observes,  it  was
found  that  this  day  was  already  occupied  by  a  Bishop  and
Doctor  of  the  Church,  and  as  St.  Gregory  Thaurnaturgus
had  in  his  lifetime  moved  mountains  from  their  place,  it
was  not  seemly  that  after  his  death  he  should  be  remove  1
out  of  his  place  by  a  woman,  or  give  precedence  to  a
virgin.  Moreover,  the  day  of  St.  Gertrude's  decease  was
doubtful ;  it  occurred  soon  after  the  feast  of  St.  Lebuin
(November  12),  and  this  was  the  only  guide  to  a  decision.
A  decree  was  then  published,  urbis  et  orbis.  The  Sacred
Congregation  of  Rites,  at  the  instance  of  the  King  of
Poland,  approved  an  Office  conformable  to  the  Eoman
Breviary,  for  "  Christians  of  both  sexes,  secular  as  well  as
regular,  who  are  bound  to  the  Canonical  Hours."  This
was  authorised  by  his  Holiness  Clement  XII.  on  the  9th
March  1739.


*  Daughter  of  Pepin.  duke  of  Brabant,  A.D.  664.


LANSPERGIUS.  63


The  question  of  the  Saint's  canonisation  had  been  raised
previously.  In  the  year  1677,  the  insertion  of  her  name
in  the  Roman  Martyrology  was  proposed.  Bothinius,
Archbishop  of  Myra,  then  Promoter  of  the  Faith,  declared
that  there  was  no  document  warranting  either  her  canon
isation  or  beatification  ;  "  However,"  Benedict  XIV.  adds,
"  I  find  the  following  note  in  his  own  handwriting  :  t  After
writing  the  above,  a  plenary  indulgence,  authorised  by
a  brief,  was  obtained  on  the  feast  of  the  Saint,  which
carries  much  weight  with  it;  because,  according  to  the
decrees  of  Alexander  VII.  of  happy  memory,  such  indul
gence  is  not  granted  to  any  one  not  previously  named  in
the  Martyrology ;  and  at  present  (whatever  may  have
been  the  case  previous  to  the  decree  aforesaid)  it  is
generally  refused.  But  the  official  secretaries  stated  that
they  found  St.  Gertrude  described  in  their  books  as  la
magna,  and  therefore  entitled  to  be  inserted  in  said
Martyrology.' "

The  name  was  therefore  inserted  on  the  22d  January
1678,  but  without  any  special  eulogium.  The  words  "  who
was  remarkable  for  the  gift  of  revelation"  were  added
afterwards.  It  is  generally  believed  that  the  five  books
known  as  the  Insinuationes  Divince  Pietatis  were  first
translated  from  the  original  German  by  Lanspergius.
Benedict  XIV.  mentions  a  previous  work  by  Lamberto
Luscorino,  written  in  1390  ;  "  but  this,"  he  adds,  "as  far
.as  I  know,  was  never  published."  Lanspergius  says,  at  the
conclusion  of  his  Preface,  that  after  a  most  diligent  search
he  could  obtain  only  one  copy  in  Latin,  the  first  book  of
which  was  so  torn  and  mutilated,  that  he  was  obliged  to
translate  the  same  from  the  German  into  Latin,  and  adopt
the  Latin  copy  for  the  remainder.  From  this  it  may  be
reasonably  inferred  that  the  work  had  been  already  tran-


64  TTIK  LIFE  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.


slated  and  edited  ;  but  there  is  no  doubt  the  edition  of
Lanspergius  was  the  first  to  bring  the  Revelations  into
general  notice.  How  one  longs  to  know  if  the  "  Teutonic  *
copy  which  he  used  was  the  original  manuscript  of  the
Saint,  and  where  he  obtained  it !

Lanspergius  wrote  at  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  and  at
the  commencement  of  the  sixteenth  century.  He  was
born  at  Lansberg,  in  Bavaria,  and  entered  the  Order  of
Carthusians  at  Cologne  while  still  young.  His  piety  arid
devotion  procured  for  him  the  distinctive  appellation  of
"the  Just."  He  died  in  1539,  before  he  had  attained  his
fiftieth  year.  His  works,  which  are  principally  ascetical,
breathe  a  singularly  devout  and  pious  spirit ;  they  were
published  at  Cologne,  in  five  vols.  4to,  1693.

The  Preface  which  he  prefixed  to  the  Insinuationes  has
been  republished  by  all  who  have  since  edited  the  work.
The  title  of  Insinuationes,  so  expressive  in  the  Latin,  so
impossible  to  be  translated  into  English,  which  he  was  the
first  to  prefix  to  the  Revelations  of  St.  Gertrude,  has  also
been  retained.  Lanspergius  commences  his  Preface  by
observing,  "  that  no  one  should  be  surprised  if,  in  tha
present  day,  when  the  Holy  Scripture  is  inquired  for  by
all,"  he  should  have  brought  out  a  book  of  revelations  ;
and  he  anticipates  objections  to  the  work  by  observing,
that  even  those  who  carp  at  such  disclosures  when  made
to  religious,  cannot  deny  that  the  Old  Testament  itself  is
entirely  a  volume  of  revelations.  He  suggests  that
objectors  to  such  Divine  manifestations  must  be  of  the
number  of  those  from  whom  Christ  Himself  declares  His
secrets  to  have  been  hidden  by  the  Father,  as  being  the
"  wise  and  prudent  "  of  the  world.  It  is  for  the  "  little
ones "  that  he  uncovers  his  candle,  which  has  been  too
long  hidden  under  a  bushel  \  but  considering  himself  a


APOLOGY  FOK  THE  FEMALE  SEX.  65

debtor  to  all,  he  feels  bound  to  declare  that  nothing  shall
be  found  in  this  volume  which  is  contrary  to  Scripture,  or
which  may  not  be  proved  thereby.  He  continues  :

"  Let  the  reader  further  learn  that  we  possess  the  pro-
foundest  veneration  for  the  Scripture,  so  that  we  do  not
attribute  equal  authority  to  any  other  work,  howevei
sublime  ;  but  we  must  confess — such  is  the  kindness  and
profuseness  of  Divine  love — that  there  is  no  sex,  age,
condition,  which  it  will  not  condescend  to  illuminate,  or
entice,  and  invite,  according  to  its  capacity  or  its  power  of
being  so  attracted.  And  thus  God  has  established  in  His
Church,  not  only  various  ecclesiastical  writers,  but  also
various  methods  of  teaching,  of  phrase,  and  of  expression,
and  that  in  both  sexes ;  so  that  every  one  may  be  instructed,
illuminated,  and  edified  according  to  his  taste.

"  But  some  will  perhaps  object  that  these  revelations
were  made  to  a  woman,  and  either  despising  or  suspect
ing  the  whole  female  race,  will  think  that,  no  matter  how
holy  a  virgin  or  a  woman  may  be,  she  must  of  necessity
be  frail  and  unstable,  having  nothing  manly  (which  means
perfect)  about  her.  As  if  holy  women  have  not  often
been  more  constant  in  virtue,  more  ready  for  martyrdom,
more  chary  of  their  chastity,  more  full  of  mercy,  more  intent
on  averting  God's  anger,  than  many  men ;  and  have  given
us  examples  of  virtue  which  are  very  often  superior  to  those
of  men.  We  men,  therefore,  should  rather  be  confounded
when  we  reflect  on  them,  and  look  up  to  the  whole  sex
with  veneration.

"  I  will  not  deny  that  the  same  sex,  that  is,  certain  pious
virgins  or  women  devoted  to  God,  when  left  to  themselves,
and  unaided  by  any  help  from  God,  are  by  no  means  be
yond  suspicion  ;  for  vain-glory,  to  which  females  are  very
much  exposed,  or  a  vain  complacency  in  themselves,  leads


66  THE  LIFE  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.

them  to  believe  that  what  was  entirely  human  was  really
a  Divine  inspiration  ;  and  at  other  times,  delighted  with
the  applause  and  esteem  of  men,  they  have  considered
themselves  far  better  and  superior  to  what  they  are  in
reality.

"  Such  people,  however,  are  easily  detected.  An  im
postor,  especially  a  female  one,  cannot  escape  very  long ;
because,  wherever  the  very  deepest  foundation  of  humility
is  not  laid,  the  whole  edifice  falls  ignominiously.  But
where  real  humility  exists,  such  humility  as  those  possess,
and  as  all  should  possess,  who  cling  to  God  alone  from
pure,  simple,  and  chaste  affection,  whatever  sex  such  be
long  to,  they  will  neither  be  deceived  nor  will  they  wish
to  deceive  others  ;  for  though  they  may  feel  some  heavenly
motion,  or  receive  some  unusual  celestial  grace,  it  troubles
them,  it  raises  much  doubt  in  their  mind,  how  such  can
come  from  God — how  such  can  happen  to  them,  weak,
contemptible,  mere  nothings  as  they  are — how  God  could
come  to  know  them  at  all ;  and  they  look  upon  it  as  riish
absurd  for  God,  by  such  singular  gifts,  to  prefer  them  to
others,  or  to  do  any  such  thing  for  them  in  preference  to
others."

He  then  speaks  of  the  humility  of  the  Blessed  Virgin
when  saluted  by  the  Angel,  and  says  that  those  who  are
truly  humble  and  holy  will  riot  believe  any  revelation  or
vision  until  assured  by  those  who  direct  them.  God
speaks  to  whom  He  pleases,  and  makes  no  distinction
of  sex,  unless  indeed  it  be  to  give  more  abundantly  to
the  weaker  when  they  deserve  it  by  humility  and  devo
tion.  But  though  He  chose  to  speak  through  Balaam's
ass,  we  are  not  therefore  to  call  the  ass  blessed.  But
we  call  St.  Gertrude  blessed,  such  was  her  sanctity,  purity,
and  sincerity  in  seeking  God's  glory  and  His  will  in  all


SHE  EXCELLED  IN  EVERY  VIRTUE.  67


things,  as  to  merit  being  the  medium  of  revealing  His
secrets  to  us.

Lanspergius  then  shows  that  the  character  of  these
Revelations  is  such  as  to  make  them  of  general  utility  to
the  Church,  as  there  is  "  nothing  obscure,  nothing  doubt
ful  ;  no  prophecy  of  the  future ;  nothing  but  what  we  can
desire  arid  wish  for, — namely,  the  extent  of  God's  kind
ness,  clemency,  and  compassion ; "  and  that  "  they  show
with  what  a  most  benign  Providence  He  deals  with  His
singular  friends,  who,  renouncing  their  own  desires,  seek
His  will  alone  ;  and  how  He  promotes  them  to  salutary,-
then  to  better,  and  then  to  the  choicest  gifts/'

He  then  enumerates  the  various  women  mentioned  in
Scripture  who  have  either  prophesied  or  even  had  rule
over  God's  people,  commencing  with  Debbora*  and  end
ing  with  Elizabeth  and  Anna.  "  I  say  nothing  of  the
Female,  the  Virgin  Mary,  the  most  worthy,  not  only  of
women,  but  of  all  created  beings,  for  it  is  not  seemly  to
compare  her  with  any  one,  since  she  excels  them  all  as  the
sun  outshines  the  stars."

The  good  Carthusian  returns  again  to  what  seems  a
favourite  theme,  and  says  he  passes  over  the  details
which  he  might  have  given  of  the  glorious  triumphs,  the
constancy,  and  the  endurance  of  female  martyrs,  and,  with
a  brief  condemnation  of  those  ecclesiastics  who,  because
they  are,  or  think  themselves,  "  men  of  great  importance,
and  high  in  the  esteem  of  the  people,  despise  the  weaker
sex,"  and  restrain  the  devout  from  communicating  as  fre
quently  as  they  desire,  passes  on  to  a  panegyric  on  the
learning  of  the  Saint  and  her  sanctity  :  "  As  regards  her
sanctity,  she  so  abounded  in  the  virtues,  that  you  could

*  Is  Father  Faber's  remark,  All  for  Jesus,  p.  333,  a  coincidence  or
a  quotation?


68  THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

not  say  which  was  most  prominent.  Look  at  her  humility
—  you  can  find  nothing  like  it;  at  her  chastity — you
would  say  she  excelled  in  it ;  observe  her  mildness  and
kindness — you  would  put  them  before  the  others  :  for  she
was  so  advanced  in  each  virtue,  you  would  say  each  was
her  principal  one."

He  next  considers  the  practices  of  devotion  which  she
proposes,  especially  that  of  uniting  all  our  actions,  how
ever  trifling,  to  those  of  our  Divine  Lord  :  "  Oh,  the  bar
gain  !  "  he  exclaims  ;  "  would  he  not  be  considered  a  fool
who  would  not  give  a  piece  of  copper  for  a  heap  of  gold,
or  a  flint  for  a  pearl  ? "  Thus  are  all  our  good  actions
turned  to  immense  account,  and  become  of  great  value  to
us,  inasmuch  as  by  our  intention  of  uniting  them  with  the
oblation  of  Christ  they  become  part  and  parcel  of  His
merits.  Further,  if  we  do  all  this  not  merely  for  ourselves
but  for  others,  and  above  all  for  Holy  Church,  our  gain  is
increased,  God  is  more  glorified,  and  the  Church  ia
strengthened  and  supported  : "  for  all  property,  the  more
common  it  becomes,  the  more  heavenly  it  becomes," —
words  surely  worth  noting  and  treasuring  in  every  stage
of  our  spiritual  life.

The  testimonies  of  various  divines  and  doctors  who
had  examined  the  Revelations  are  next  adduced.  The
most  approved  theologians  amongst  the  Dominicans  and
Franciscans  were  employed  upon  it;  amongst  others,
Brother  Henry  of  Mulhuseri,  and  a  certain  Father  called
a  Burgo,  belonging  to  the  Friars  Minors  at  Halbustat,  a
person  highly  esteemed  for  his  learning  about  the  year
1300.  He  also  observes:  "There  were  many  other
learned  persons,  especially  among  the  Friars  Preachers,
who  conversed  with  her  in  her  lifetime,  and  testified  to
her  learning  and  sincerity.  The  testimony  of  one  who


CONCLUSION.  69


gent  the  following,  after  a  most  accurate  revision  of  the
book,  I  cannot  withhold  :  '  I  consider  that  no  one  having
the  Spirit  of  God  in  him  can  either  find  fault  with  or
impugn  anything  written  in  this  book.  Nerved  by  the
Spirit  of  Truth,  from  whom  all  wisdom  emanates,  I  offer
and  hold  myself  bound  unto  death  to  meet  any  one  in
defence  of  the  holy  and  Catholic  doctrine  contained  in  it.'"
Such  a  testimony  from  a  member  of  an  Order  ever  dis
tinguished  for  its  theological  learning  and  calm  judgment,
will  carry  a  weight  with  it  which  renders  further  observa
tion  unnecessary  ;  and  as  the  arrangement  of  the  work  has
been  fully  explained  elsewhere,  we  will  conclude  in  the
graceful  and  holy  words  of  onr  author :  "  Farewell,  there
fore,  courteous  reader ;  we  ask  your  forgiveness  for  any
oversight  herein,  for  none  certainly  has  been  deliberate.
Here  look  for  and  study  what  is  right  and  perfcct  ;  and
may  God,  through  the  intercession  of  the  same  pioua
virgin  and  the  prayers  of  all  pious  readers  hereof,  have
mercy  upon  me."


PART  II.
THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

WRITTEN BY HERSELF.


CHAPTER  L

Ilie  Saint's  thanksgiving  to  God  for  the  first  grace  vouchsafed  to  her,
by  which  her  mind  was  withdrawn  from  earthly  things  and
united  to  Him.

LET  the  Abyss  of  Uncreated  Wisdom  invoke  the  Abyss
of  Omnipotent  Power  to  praise  and  extol  the  amazing
charity  which,  by  an  excess  of  Thino  infinite  mercy,  0  most
sweet  God  of  my  life  and  only  Love  of  my  soul,  hast  led
Thee  through  a  desert,  pathless,  and  dry  land — that  is,
through  the  many  obstacles  I  have  placed  to  Thy  mercy —
to  descend  into  the  valley  of  my  miseries.

I  was  in  the  twenty-sixth  year  of  my  age  when,  on  the
Monday  *  before  the  Feast  of  the  Purification  of  Thy  most
chaste  Mother,  in  a  happy  hour,  after  Compline,  at  the
close  of  day,  Thou  the  true  Light,  who  art  clearer  than
any  light,  and  yet  deeper  than  any  recess,  having  resolved
to  dissipate  the  obscurity  of  my  darkness,  didst  sweetly

*"Secunda  feria  ante,  &c.,  quoa  fuit  sexto  kalendas  Februarii."
The  French  translation  has  :  "Lundi  vingt-cinquieme  Janvier;"  the
Italian,  "  Che  fu  alii  27  di  Genaio."


72  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST. GKRTRTJDE.

and  gently  commence  my  conversion  by  appeasing  the
trouble  winch  Thou  hadst  excited  in  my  soul  for  more
than  a  month,  which  Thou  didst  deign  to  use,  as  I  believe,
to  destroy  the  fortress  of  vain-glory  and  curiosity  which
my  pride  had  raised  up  within  me,  although  I  bore  the
name  and  habit  of  a  religious  to  no  purpose  ;  but  Thou
didst  will  to  use  this  means,  that  Thou  mightest  thereby
show  me  Thy  salvation.

Being,  then,  in  the  middle  of  our  dormitory,  at  the
hour  I  have  named,  and  having  inclined  to  an  ancient
religious,  according  to  our  rule,  on  raising  my  head  I
beheld  Thee,  my  most  loving  Love,  and  my  Redeemer,
surpassing  in  beauty  the  children  of  men,  under  the  form
of  a  youth  of  sixteen  years,  beautiful  and  amiable,  and
attracting  my  heart  and  my  eyes  by  the  infinite  light  of
Thy  glory,  which  Thou  hadst  the  goodness  to  proportion
to  the  weakness  of  my  nature  ;  and  standing  before  me,
Thou  didst  utter  these  words,  full  of  tenderness  and  sweet
ness  :  "  Thy  salvation  is  at  hand  ;  why  art  thou  consumed
with  grief  ?  Hast  thou  no  counsellor,  that  thou  art  so
changed  by  sadness  ?  "  When  Thou  hadst  spoken  thus,
although  I  knew  that  I  stood  corporally  in  the  place  I  have
mentioned,  it  seemed  to  me,  nevertheless,  that  I  was  in
our  choir,  in  the  corner  *  where  I  had  been  accustomed  to
offer  up  my  tepid  prayers,  and  that  there  I  heard  these
words  :  "I  will  save  thee,  I  will  deliver  thee  ;  fear  not ;"
and  after  I  had  heard  them,  I  saw  Thee  place  Thy  right
hand  in  mine,  as  if  to  ratify  Thy  promise.

Then  I  heard  Thee  speak  thus  :  "  You  have  licked
the  dust  with  My  enemies,  and  you  have  sucked  honey
amidst  thorns  ;  but  return  now  to  Me — I  will  receive  you,

*  "  In  angulo."


SHE  RELATES  THE  FIRST  APPARITION  OF  JESUS. 73

and  inebriate  you  with  the  torrent  of  My  celestial  delights."
When  Thou  hadst  said  these  words,  my  soul  melted  within
me  ;  and  as  I  desired  to  approach  Thee,  I  beheld  between
Thee  and  me  (I  mean,  from  Thy  right  hand  to  my  left
hand)  a  hedge  of  such  prodigious  length  that  I  could  see
no  end  to  it  either  before  or  behind,  and  the  top  of  it
appeared  so  set  with  thorns  that  I  could  find  no  way  to
return  to  Thee,  Thou  only  consolation  of  my  soul.  Then
I  paused  to  weep  over  my  faults  and  crimes,  which  were
doubtless  figured  by  this  hedge  which  divided  us.  In  the
ardour  of  the  desires  with  which  I  desired  Thee,  and  in
my  weakness,  0  charitable  Father  of  the  poor,  "  whose
mercies  are  over  all  Thy  works,"  Thou  didst  take  me  by  the
hand,  and  placed  me  near  Thee  instantly,  without  difficulty,
so  that,  casting  my  eyes  upon  the  precious  Hand  which  Thou
hadst  extended  to  me  as  a  pledge  of  Thy  promises,  I  recog
nised,  O  sweet  Jesus,  Thy  radiant  wounds,  which  have
made  of  no  effect  the  handwriting  that  was  against  us.*

By  these  and  other  illuminations  Thou  didst  enlighten
and  soften  my  mind,  detaching  me  powerfully,  by  an  interior
unction,  from  an  inordinate  love  of  literature  and  from  all
my  vanities,  so  that  I  only  despised  those  things  which
had  formerly  pleased  me ;  and  all  that  was  not  Thee,  O
God  of  my  heart,  appeared  vile  to  me,  and  Thou  alone  wert
pleasing  to  my  soul.  And  I  praise,  bless,  adore,  and  thank
from  my  inmost  soul,  as  far  as  I  am  able,  but  not  as  far
as  I  ought,  Thy  wise  mercy  and  Thy  merciful  wisdom,  that
Thou,  my  Creator  and  Redeemer,  didst  endeavour  in  so
loving  a  manner  to  submit  my  unconquerable  self-opiniated-
ness  to  the  sweetness  of  Thy  yoke  ;  composing  a  beverage
suitable  to  my  temperament,  which  has  infused  new  light

*  An  allusion  to  Col.  ii.  14.


74  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

into  my  soul,  so  that  I  began  to  run  after  the  odour  of  Thy
ointments,  and  Thy  yoke  became  sweet  arid  Thy  burden
light,  though  a  little  while  before  they  had  appeared  hard,
and  almost  unbearable.


CHAPTER  II.

How  the  grace  of  God  illuminated  her  interiorly.

HAIL,  Salvation  and  Light  of  my  soul !  may  all  that  is  in
heaven,  in  earth,  and  in  the  abyss,  return  thanks  to  Thee
for  the  extraordinary  grace  which  has  led  my  soul  to  know
and  consider  what  passes  within  my  heart,  of  which  I  had
no  more  care  formerly  than  (if  I  may  so  speak)  of  what
passes  within  my  hands  or  feet.  But  after  the  infusion
of  Thy  most  sweet  light,  I  saw  many  things  in  my  heart
which  offended  Thy  purity,  and  I  even  perceived  that  all
within  me  was  in  such  disorder  and  confusion  that  Thou
couldst  not  abide  therein.

Nevertheless,  my  most  loving  Jesus,  neither  all  thesa
defects,  nor  all  my  unworthiness,  prevented  Thee  from
honouring  me  with  Thy  visible  presence  nearly  every  day
that  I  received  the  life-giving  nourishment  of  Thy  Body
and  Thy  Blood,  although  I  only  beheld  Thee  indistinctly,
as  one  who  sees  at  dawn  :  Thou  didst  endeavour  by  this
sweet  compliance  to  attract  my  soul,  so  that  it  might  be
entirely  united  to  Thee,  and  that  I  might  know  Thee
better  and  enjoy  Thee  more  fully.  And  as  I  disposed
myself  to  labour  for  the  obtaining  of  these  favours  on  the
Feast  of  the  Annunciation  of  Thy  Mother,  when  Thou
didst  ally  Thyself  with  our  nature  in  her  virginal  womb,
—Thou  who  saidest,  "  Here  I  am  before  I  called  Thee,"
—Thou  didst  anticipate  this  day  by  pouring  forth  on  me.


HOW  OUR  LORD  ABODE  IN  HER  SOUL. 75

nnworthy  though  I  am,  on  the  Vigil  of  the  Feast,  the  sweet
ness  of  Thy  benediction,  at  Chapter,  which  was  held  after
Matins,  on  account  of  the  Sunday  following.

But  since  it  is  not  possible  for  me  to  describe  in  what
manner  thou  didst  visit  me,  O  Orient  from  on  high,  in  the
bowels  of  Thy  mercy  and  sweetness,  permit  me,  O  Giver  of
gifts,  to  immolate  a  sacrifice  of  Thanksgiving  to  Thee  on:
the  altar  of  my  heart,  in  order  to  obtain  for  myself  and  for
all  Thine  elect  the  blessedness  of  experiencing  frequently
this  union  of  sweetness  and  this  sweetness  of  union,  which
before  this  time  was  utterly  unknown  to  me ;  for  when  I
reflect  on  the  kind  of  life  which  I  led  formerly,  and  which
I  have  led  since,  I  protest  in  truth  that  it  is  a  pure  effect
of  Thy  grace,  which  Thou  hast  given  me  without  any  merit
of  mine.

Thou  didst  give  me  from  henceforward  a  more  clear
knowledge  of  Thyself,  which  was  such  that  the  sweetness
of  Thy  love  led  me  to  correct  my  faults  far  more  than  the
fear  of  the  punishments  with  which  Thy  just  anger  threat
ened  me.  But  I  do  not  remember  ever  to  have  enjoyed  so
great  happiness  at  any  other  time  as  during  these  days  of
which  I  speak,  in  which  Thou  didst  invite  me  to  the  delights
of  Thy  royal  table ;  and  I  know  not  for  certain  whether  it
is  Thy  wise  Providence  which  has  deprived  me  of  them,  or
whether  it  is  my  negligence  which  has  drawn  on  me  this
chastisement.

CHAPTER  III.

Of  the  pleasure  which  God  took  in  making  His  abode  in  the  soul  of
Gertrude.

WHILST  Thou  didst  act  so  lovingly  towards  me,  and  didst
not  cease  to  draw  my  soul  from  vanity  and  to  Thyself,  it


76 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

happened  on  a  certain  day,  between  the  Festival  of  the
Resurrection  and  Ascension,  that  I  went  into  the  court
before  Prime,  and  seated  myself  near  the  fountain, — and  1
began  to  consider  the  beauty  of  the  place,  which  charmed
me  on  account  of  the  clear  and  flowing  stream,  the  verdure
of  the  trees  which  surrounded  it,  and  the  flight  of  the
birds,  and  particularly  of  the  doves, — above  all,  the  sweet
calm, — apart  from  all,  and  considering  within  myself  what
would  make  this  place  most  useful  to  me,  I  thought  that  it
would  be  the  friendship  of  a  wise  and  intimate  companion,
who  would  sweeten  my  solitude  or  render  it  useful  to  others,
when  Thou,  my  Lord  and  my  God,  who  are  a  torrent  of
inestimable  pleasure,  after  having  inspired  me  with  the
first  impulse  of  this  desire,  Thou  didst  will  to  be  also  the
end  of  it,  inspiring  me  with  the  thought  that  if  by  continual
gratitude  I  return  Thy  graces  to  Thee,  as  a  stream  returns
to  its  source  ;  if,  increasing  in  the  love  of  virtue,  I  put  forth,
like  the  trees,  the  flowers  of  good  works  ;  furthermore,  if,
despising  the  things  of  earth,  I  fly  upwards,  freely,  like  the
birds,  and  thus  free  my  senses  from  the  distraction  of  ex
terior  things, — my  soul  would  then  be  empty,  and  my  heart
would  be  an  agreeable  abode  for  Thee.

As  I  was  occupied  with  the  recollection  of  these  things
during  the  same  day,  having  knelt  after  Vespers  for  my
evening  prayer  before  retiring  to  rest,  this  passage  of  the
Gospel  came  suddenly  to  my  mind  :  "  If  any  man  love  Me,
he  will  keep  My  word,  and  My  Father  will  love  him,  and
We  will  come  to  him  and  will  make  Our  abode  with  him  "
(John  xiv.  23).  At  these  words  my  worthless  heart  per
ceived  Thee,  0  my  most  sweet  God  and  my  delight,  present
therein.  Oh,  that  all  the  waters  of  the  sea  were  changed
into  blood,  that  I  might  pass  them  over  my  head,  and  thus
wash  away  my  exceeding  vileness,  which  Thou  hast  chosen


OUR  LORD  LEAVES  HER  FOR  ELEVEN  DAYS.  77

for  Thine  abode  !  or  that  my  heart  might  be  torn  thia
moment  from  my  body  and  cast  into  a  furnace,  that  it
might  be  purified  from  its  dross,  and  made  at  least  less
unworthy  of  Thy  presence  !  for  Thou  my  God,  since  that
hour,  hast  treated  me  sometimes  with  sweetness  and  some
times  with  severity,  as  I  have  amended  or  been  negligent ;
although,  to  speak  the  truth,  when  the  most  perfect  amend-
jnent  which  I  could  attain,  even  for  a  moment,  should  have
lasted  niy  whole  life,  it  could  not  merit  to  obtain  for  me
the  most  trifling  or  the  least  condescending  of  the  graces
which  I  have  ever  received  from  Thee,  so  great  are  my
crimes  and  sins.

The  excess  of  Thy  goodness  obliges  me  to  believe  that
the  sight  of  my  faults  rather  moves  Thee  to  fear  Thou  wilt
see  me  perish  than  to  excite  Thine  anger,  making  me  know
that  Thy  patience  in  supporting  my  defects  until  now,  with
so  much  goodness,  is  greater  than  the  sweetness  with  which
Thou  didst  bear  with  the  perfidious  Judas  during  Thy
mortal  life ;  and  although  my  mind  takes  pleasure  in  wan
dering  after  and  in  distracting  itself  with  perishable  things,
yet,  after  some  hours,  after  some  days,  and,  alas  !  I  must
add,  after  whole  weeks,  when  I  return  into  my  heart,  I
find  Thee  there  ;  so  that  I  cannot  complain  that  Thou  hast
left  me  even  for  a  moment,  from  that  time  until  this  year,
which  is  the  ninth  since  I  received  this  grace,  except  once,
when  I  perceived  that  Thou  didst  leave  me  for  the  space
of  eleven  days,  before  the  Feast  of  St.  John  Baptist, — and
it  appeared  to  me  that  this  happened  on  account  of  a  worldly
conversation  the  Thursday  preceding ;  and  Thy  absence
lasted  until  the  Vigil  of  St.  John,  when  the  Mass  Ne
timeas,  Zacharia*  is  said.  Then  Thy  sweetest  humanity

*  "  Fear  not,  Zachary  ;  thy  prayer  is  heard,"  &c.  (Introit  for  Mass,
Vigil  of  St.  John  Baptist.)


78 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

and  Thy  stupendous  charity  moved  Thee  to  seek  me,  when
I  had  reached  such  a  pitch  of  madness,  that  I  thought  no
more  of  the  greatness  of  the  treasure  I  had  lost,  and  for
the  loss  of  which  I  do  not  remember  to  have  felt  any  grief
at  that  time,  nor  even  to  have  had  the  desire  of  recovering
it.

I  cannot  now  be  sufficiently  amazed  at  the  mania  which
possessed  my  soul,  unless,  indeed,  it  was,  that  Thou  didst
desire  me  to  know  by  my  own  experience  what  St.  Bernard
said :  "  When  we  fly  from  Thee,  Thou  pursuest  us  ;  when
we  turn  our  backs,  Thou  dost  present  Thyself  before  us ;
when  we  despise  Thee,  Thou  dost  entreat  us  ;  and  there  is
neither  insult  nor  contempt  which  hinders  Thee  from  la
bouring  unweariedly  to  bring  us  to  the  attainment  of  that
which  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  and  which  the
heart  of  man  cannot  comprehend."

And  as  Thou  didst  bestow  on  me  Thy  first  graces  with
out  any  merit  on  my  part,  so  now  that  I  have  had  a
second  relapse,  which  is  worse  than  the  first,  and  renders
me  yet  more  unworthy  to  receive  Thee,  Thou  hast  deigned
to  give  me  the  joy  of  Thy  presence  without  interruption,
until  this  very  hour  :  for  which  be  praise  and  thanksgiving
to  Thee  as  the  Source  of  all  good  ;  and  that  it  may  please
Thee  to  preserve  this  precious  grace  in  me,  I  offer  Thee
that  excellent  prayer  which  Thou  didst  utter  with  such
amazing  fervour  when  sweating  blood  in  agony,  and  which
the  burning  love  of  Thy  Divinity  and  Thy  pure  devotion
rendered  so  efficacious  •  beseeching  Thee,  by  virtue  of
this  most  perfect  prayer,  to  draw  and  unite  me  entirely  to
Thyself,  that  I  may  remain  inseparably  attached  to  Thee,
even  when  I  am  obliged  to  attend  to  exterior  duties  for
the  good  of  my  neighbour,  and  that  afterwards  I  may  re
turn  again  to  seek  Thee  within  me,  when  I  have  accom-


THE  STIGMATAS  IMPRINTED  ON  HER  HEART.  79

plisbed  them  for  Thy  glory  in  the  most  perfect  manner
possible,  even  as  the  winds,  when  agitated  by  a  tempest,
return  again  to  their  former  calm  when  it  has  ceased  ;  that
Thou  mayest  find  me  as  zealous  in  labouring  for  Thee  as
Thou  hast  been  assiduous  in  helping  me  ;  and  that,  by  this
means,  Thou  mayest  elevate  me  to  the  highest  degree  of
perfection  to  which  Thy  justice  can  permit  Thy  mercy  to
raise  so  carnal  and  rebellious  a  creature ;  so  that  Thou
mayest  receive  my  soul  into  Thy  hands  when  I  breathe  my
last  sigh,  and  conduct  it  with  a  kiss  of  peace  where  Thou
dwellest,  who  reignest  indivisibly  and  eternally  with  the
Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit  for  endless  ages.  Amen.


CHAPTER  IV.

Of  the  stigmatac  imprinted  in  the  heart  of  Gertrude,  and  her
exercises  in  honour  of  the  Five  "Wounds.

I  BELIEVE  it  was  during  the  winter  of  the  first  or  second
year  when  I  began  to  receive  these  favours,  that  I  met  the
following  prayer  in  a  book  of  devotions  :

"  O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Son  of  the  living  God,  grant
that  I  may  aspire  towards  Thee  with  my  whole  heart,  with
full  desire  and  with  thirsty  soul,  seeking  only  Thy  sweet
ness  and  Thy  delights,  so  that  my  whole  mind  and  all  that
is  within  me  may  most  ardently  sigh  to  Thee,  who  art  our
true  Beatitude.  O  most  merciful  Lord,  engrave  Thy  Wounds
upon  my  heart  with  Thy  most  precious  Blood,  that  I  may
read  in  them  both  Thy  grief  and  Thy  love  ;  and  that  the
memory  of  Thy  Wounds  may  ever  remain  in  my  inmost
heart,  to  excite  my  compassion  for  Thy  sufferings  and  to
increase  in  me  Thy  love.  Grant  me  also  to  despise  all
creatures,  and  that  my  heart  may  delight  in  Thee  alone.
Amen."


80 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Having  learned  this  prayer  with  great  satisfaction,  I
repeated  it  frequently,  and  Thou,  who  despisest  not  the
prayer  of  the  humble,  heard  my  petitions ;  for  soon  after,
during  the  same  winter,  being  in  the  refectory  after  Ves
pers,  for  collation,  I  was  seated  near  a  person  to  whom  I
had  made  known  my  secret.  I  relate  these  things  for  the
benefit  of  those  who  may  read  what  I  write,  because  I  have
often  perceived  that  the  fervour  of  rny  devotion  is  increased
by  this  kind  of  communication  ;  but  I  know  not  for  cer
tain,  O  Lord  my  God,  whether  it  was  Thy  Spirit,  or  per
haps  human  affection,  made  me  act  thus,  although  I  have
heard  from  those  experienced  in  such  matters  that  it  is
always  better  to  reveal  these  secrets — not  indifferently  to
all,  but  chiefly  to  those  who  are  not  only  our  friends,  but
whom  we  are  bound  to  reverence  ;  yet,  as  I  am  doubtful,
as  I  have  said,  I  commit  all  to  Thy  faithful  Providence,
whose  spirit  is  sweeter  than  honey.  If  this  fervour  arose
from  any  human  affection,  I  am  even  more  bound  to  have
a  profound  gratitude  for  it,  since  Thou  hast  deigned  to
unite  the  mire  of  my  vileness  to  the  precious  gold  of  Thy
charity,  that  so  the  precious  stones  of  Thy  grace  might  be
encased  in  me.

Being  seated  in  the  refectory,  as  I  said  before,  I  thought
attentively  on  these  things,  when  I  perceived  that  the  grace
which  I  had  so  long  asked  by  the  aforesaid  prayer  was
granted  to  me,  unworthy  though  I  am  ;  for  I  perceived  in
spirit  that  Thou  hadst  imprinted  in  the  depth  of  my  heart
the  adorable  marks  of  Thy  sacred  Wounds,  even  as  they
are  on  Thy  Body ;  that  Thou  hadst  cured  my  soul,  in  im
printing  these  Wounds  on  it ;  and  that,  to  satisfy  its  thirst,
Thou  hadst  given  it  the  precious  beverage  of  Thy  love.

But  my  unworthiness  had  not  yet  exhausted  the  abyss
of  Thy  mercy  ;  for  I  received  from  Thine  overflowing  liber-


DEVOTION  TO  THE  FIVE  WOUNDS.  81


ality  this  remarkable  gift — that  each  time  during  the  day
in  which  I  endeavoured  to  apply  myself  in  spirit  to  those
adorable  Wounds,  saying  five  verses  of  the  Psalm  flenedic,
anima  meet,  Domino  (Ps.  cii.),  I  never  failed  to  receive
some  new  favour.  At  the  first  verse,  "  Bless  the  Lord,  O
my  soul,"  I  deposited  all  the  rust  of  my  sins  and  my  volup
tuousness  at  the  Wounds  of  Thy  blessed  Feet ;  at  the
second  verse,  "  Bless  the  Lord,  and  never  forget  all  He
hath  done  for  thee,"  I  washed  away  all  the  stains  of  carnal
and  perishable  pleasures  in  the  sweet  bath  of  Blood  and
Water  which  Thou  didst  pour  forth  for  me  ;  at  the  third
verse,  "  Who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities,"  I  reposed  my
spirit  in  the  Wound  of  Thy  Left  Hand,  even  as  the  dove
makes  its  nest  in  the  crevice  of  the  rock  ;  at  the  fourth
verse,  "  Who  redeemeth  thy  life  from  destruction,"  I  ap
proached  Thy  Eight  Hand,  and  took  from  thence  all  that
I  needed  for  my  perfection  in  virtue  ;  and  being  thus  mag
nificently  adorned,  I  passed  to  the  fifth  verse,  "  Who  satis-
fieth  thy  desire  with  good  things,"  that  I  might  be  purified
from  all  the  defilement  of  sin,  and  have  the  indigence  01
my  wants  supplied,  so  that  I  might  become  worthy  of  Thy
presence, — though  of  myself  I  am  utterly  unworthy, — and
might  merit  the  joy  of  Thy  chaste  embraces.

I  declare  also  that  Thou  hast  freely  granted  my  other
petition — namely,  that  I  might  read  Thy  grief  and  Thy  love
together.  But,  alas  !  this  did  not  continue  long,  although
I  cannot  accuse  Thee  of  having  withdrawn  it  from  me  ;  but
I  complain  of  having  lost  it  myself  by  my  own  negligence.
This  Thine  excessive  goodness  and  infinite  mercy  has
hidden  from  itself,  and  has  procured  to  me,  without  any
merit  on  my  part,  the  greatest  of  Thy  gifts — the  impres
sion  of  Thy  Wounds  ;  for  which  be  praise,  honour,  glory  ?
dominion,  and  thanksgiving  to  Thee  for  endless  ages  !

¥


82 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


CHAPTER  Y.

Of  the  Wound  of  Divine  Love  ;  and  of  the  manlier  of  bathing,
anointing,  and  binding  it  up.

SEVEN  years  after,  a  little  before  Advent,  by  Thine  ordi
nance,  who  art  the  Source  of  all  good,  I  engaged  a  certain
person  to  say  this  prayer  every  day  for  me  before  a  cruci
fix,  "  0  most  loving  Lord,  by  Thy  pierced  Heart,  pierce  her
heart  with  the  arrow  of  Thy  love,  so  that  nothing  earthly
may  remain  therein,  and  that  it  may  be  entirely  filled  with
1  he  strength  of  Thy  Divinity."  Being  moved,  as  I  believe,
by  these  prayers,  on  the  Sunday  when  they  sang  the  Mass
Gaudete  in  Domino*  Thy  infinite  liberality  having  per
mitted  me,  by  an  excess  of  mercy,  to  approach  the  Com
munion  of  Thy  adorable  Body  and  Blood,  Thou  didst  infuse
a  desire  in  me  when  I  approached  It,  which  broke  forth
in  these  words  :  "  Lord,  I  am  not  worthy  to  receive  the
least  of  Thy  gifts  ;  but  I  beseech  Thee,  by  the  merits  and
prayers  of  all  here  present,  to  pierce  my  heart  with  the  arrow
of  Thy  love."  I  soon  perceived  that  my  words  had  reached
Thy  Divine  Heart,  both  by  an  interior  effusion  of  grace,
and  by  a  remarkable  prodigy  which  Thou  didst  show  me
in  the  image  of  Thy  crucifixion.

After  I  had  received  the  Sacrament  of  life,  and  had
retired  to  the  place  where  I  pray,  it  seemed  to  me  that  I
saw  a  ray  of  light  like  an  arrow  coming  forth  from  the
wound  of  the  right  side  of  the  crucifix,  which  was  in  an
elevated  place,  and  it  continued,  as  it  were,  to  advance  and
retire  for  some  time,  sweetly  attracting  my  cold  affections.
But  my  desire  was  not  entirely  satisfied  with  these  things

*  Introit  for  Third  Sunday  in  Advent.


THIRD  WEDNESDAY  IN  ADVENT.  83

until  the  following  Wednesday,*  when,  after  the  Mass,  the
faithful  meditated  on  Thy  adorable  Incarnation  and  Annun
ciation,  in  which  I  joined,  however  imperfectly.  And,  be
hold, Thou  earnest  suddenly  before  me,  and  didst  imprint
a  wound  in  my  heart,  saying  these  words  :  "  May  the  full
tide  of  your  affections  flow  hither,  so  that  all  your  plea
sure.,  your  hope,  your  joy,  your  grief,  your  fear,  and  every
other  feeling  may  be  sustained  by  My  love  ! "  And  I
immediately  remembered  that  I  had  heard  a  wound  should
be  bathed,  anointed,  and  bandaged.  But  Thou  didst  not
teach  rue  then  in  what  manner  I  should  perform  these
things ;  for  Thou  didst  defer  it,  to  discover  it  to  me  more
clearly  in  the  end  by  means  of  another  person,  who  had
accustomed  the  ears  of  her  soul  to  discern  far  more  exactly
and  delicately  than  I  do  the  sweet  murmurs  of  Thy  love.

She  advised  me  to  reflect  devoutly  upon  the  love  of  Thy
Heart  when  hanging  on  the  cross,  and  to  draw  from  this
fountain  the  waters  of  true  devotion,  to  wash  away  all  my
ofl'ences ;  to  take  from  the  unction  of  mercy  the  oil  of
gratitude,  which  the  sweetness  of  this  inestimable  love  has
produced  as  a  remedy  for  all  adversities,  and  to  use  this
efficacious  charity  and  the  strength  of  this  consummate
love  as  a  ligament  of  justification  to  unite  all  my  thoughts,
words,  and  works  indissolubly  and  powerfully  to  Thee.
May  all  the  deprivation  of  those  things  which  my  malice
and  wickedness  has  caused  be  supplied  through  that  love
whose  plenitude  abides  in  Him  who,  being  seated  on  Thy
right  hand,  has  become  "  bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh  of
my  flesh  ! "  As  it  is  by  Him,  through  the  operation  of  the

*  Feria  quartum.  The  Annunciation  is  specially  commemorated
on  the  Wednesday  in  the  third  week  in  Advent.  Formerly,  feasts
which  fell  on  this  day  were  transferred  ;  and  in  monasteries,  the  Abbot
delivered  a  homily  on  the  Gospel  Missns  cst.


84  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Holy  Spirit,  that  Thou  bast  placed  in  me  this  noble  virtue
of  compassion,  humility,  and  reverence,  to  enable  me  to
speak  to  Thee,  it  is  also  by  Him  that  I  present  to  Thee
my  complaint  of  the  miseries  I  endure,  which  are  so  great
in  number,  and  which  have  caused  me  to  offend  Thy  Di
vine  goodness  in  so  many  ways  by  my  thoughts,  words,
and  actions,  but  principally  by  the  bad  use  which  I  have
made  of  the  aforesaid  graces,  by  my  unfaithfulness,  my
negligence,  and  my  irreverence.  For  if  Thou  hast  given
to  one  so  unworthy  even  a  thread  of  flax  *  as  a  remem
brance  of  Thee,  I  should  have  been  bound  to  respect  it  more
than  I  have  done  all  these  favours.

Thou  knowest,  0  my  God,  from  whom  nothing  is  hid
den,  that  the  reason  why  I  have  written  these  things,  so
much  against  my  inclination,  is,  that  I  have  profited  so
little  by  Thy  liberality,  that  I  cannot  believe  they  were
made  known  to  me  for  myself  alone,  since  thine  eternal
wisdom  cannot  be  deceived.  Grant,  then,  0  Giver  of  gifts,
who  hast  so  freely  and  unreservedly  bestowed  them  on  me,
that  whoever  reads  these  things  may  be  touched  with  ten
derness  and  compassion  for  Thee  ;  and,  knowing  that  the
zeal  which  Thou  hast  for  the  salvation  of  souls  has  induced
Thee  to  leave  such  royal  gems  t  so  long  in  my  defiled  heart,
they  may  praise,  adore,  and  extol  Thy  mercy,  saying  with
their  lips,  and  with  their  hearts,  "  Praise,  honour,  glory,  and
benediction  be  to  Thee,  0  God  the  Father,  from  whom  all
things  proceed,"  thus  to  supply  for  my  deficiencies.  J

*  "Filum  de  stupa,"
t  "  Tarn  regalem  gem  mam."

J  The  words,  "Hie  distulit  scribere  usque  in  Octohrem,"  are  at  the
end  of  chapter  v.  in  the  original,  in  italics.


VISION  OF  THE  INFANT  JESUS.  85

CHAPTER  VI.

Of  the  intimate  union  of  the  Infant  Jesus  with  her  heart.

0  UNATTAINABLE  height  of  surpassing  excellence  !  O  pro
found  abyss  of  inscrutable  wisdom  !  O  immense  extent  of
most  desirable  charity  !  how  powerfully  and  exuberantly  are
the  most  delicious  torrents  of  Thy  most  sweet  Divinity
pouring  themselves  forth  on  me,  vile  worm  that  I  am,  crawl
ing  in  my  negligences  and  sins  ;  since  it  is  permitted  to  me,
even  while  wandering  in  exile,  to  speak,  according  to  my
poor  capacity,  of  the  ravishing  sweetness  and  inconceivable
delights  by  means  of  which  those  who  unite  themselves  to
God  become  one  spirit  with  Him  ;  which  blessedness  is
poured  forth  on  me  with  such  abundance,  who  am  but  a  little
dust.  Since,  after  having  permitted  me  to  drink  of  this  pre
cious  beverage,  I  am  still  privileged  with  the  remembrance
of  it,  I  will  use  such  words  as  I  can  to  describe  it.

It  was  on  that  most  sacred  night  in  which  the  sweet
dew  of  Divine  grace  fell  on  all  the  world,  and  the  heavens
dropped  sweetness,  that  my  soul,  exposed  like  a  mystic
fleece  in  the  court  of  the  monastery,  having  received  in
meditation  this  celestial  rain,  was  prepared  to  assist  at  this
Divine  Birth,  in  which  a  Virgin  brought  forth  a  Son,  true
God  and  Man,  even  as  a  star  produces  its  ray.  In  this
night,  I  say,  my  soul  beheld  before  it  suddenly  a  delicate
Child,  but  just  born,  in  whom  were  concealed  the  greatest
gifts  of  perfection.  I  imagined  that  I  received  this  precious
deposit  in  my  bosom  with  the  tenderest  affection.  As  I
possessed  it  within  me,  it  seemed  to  me  that  all  at  once  I
was  changed  into  the  colour*  of  this  Divine  Infant,  if  we

*  "In  eumdem  colorem."


86  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.

may  be  permitted  to  call  that  colour  which  cannot  be  coin-
pared  to  anything  visible.

Then  I  understood  the  meaning  contained  in  those  sweet
and  ineffable  words  :  "  God  will  (erit)  be  all  in  all  "  (1  Cor.
xv.  28)  ;  and  my  soul,  which  was  enriched  by  the  presence
of  my  Beloved,  soon  knew,  by  its  transports  of  joy,  that  it
possessed  the  presence  of  its  Spouse.  Then  it  received
these  words  with  exceeding  avidity,  which  were  presented
as  a  delicious  beverage  to  satisfy  the  ardour  of  its  thirst :
"  As  I  am  the  figure  of  the  substance  of  God,  My  Father,
in  His  Divinity,  so  also  you  shall  be  the  figure  of  My  sub
stance  in  My  Humanity,  receiving  in  your  deified  soul  the
infusions  of  My  Divinity,  as  the  air  receives  the  brightness
of  the  solar  rays,  that  these  rays  may  penetrate  you  so  in
timately  as  to  prepare  you  for  the  closest  union  with  Me."

O  most  noble  balsam  of  the  Divinity,  pouring  Thyself
out  like  an  ocean  of  charity,  shooting  forth  and  budding
eternally,  diffusing  Thyself  until  the  end  of  time  !  O  invin
cible  strength  of  the  Hand  of  the  most  High,  which  causes
so  frail  a  vessel,  and  one  which  should  be  cast  away  in  con
tempt,  to  receive  within  it  so  precious  a  liquor !  O  evident
testimony  of  the  exuberance  of  Divine  goodness,  not  to
withdraw  from  me  when  I  wandered  in  the  devious  ways
of  sin,  but  rather  to  unite  me  to  itself  as  far  as  my  misery
would  permit !


CHAPTER  VII.

The  Divinity  is  imprinted  upon  the  soul  of  Gertrude  as  a  seal
upon  wax.

THE  day  of  the  most  holy  Purification,  as  I  was  confined  to
bed  after  a  severe  illness,  and  as  I  was  troubled  in  my


CORPORAL  SUFFERINGS  PREPARE  FOR  SPIRITUAL  FAVOURS. 87


mind  about  daybreak,  fearing  that  my  corporal  infirmity
would  deprive  me  of  the  Divine  visit  with  which  I  had
been  so  often  consoled, —  on  the  same  clay  the  august  media
trix,  the  Mother  of  God  the  true  Mediator,  consoled  me  by
these  words  :  "As  you  never  remember  to  have  endured
more  severe  corporal  sufferings  than  those  caused  by  your
illness,  know  also  that  you  have  never  received  from  my
Son  more  noble  gifts  than  those  which  will  now  be  given
to  you,  and  for  which  your  sufferings  have  prepared  you."

This  consoled  me  exceedingly  ;  and  having  received  the
Food  which  gives  life  immediately  after  the  Procession,  I
thought  only  of  God  and  myself;  and  I  beheld  my  soul,
under  the  similitude  of  wax  softened  by  the  fire,  impressed
like  a  seal  upon  the  bosom  of  the  Lord  ;  and  immediately
I  beheld  it  surrounding  and  partly  drawn  into  this  treasure-
house,  where  the  ever-peaceful  Trinity  abides  corporally  in
the  plenitude  of  the  Divinity,  and  resplendent  with  its
glorious  impression.

O  ardent  fire  of  my  God,  which  contains,  produces,  and
imprints  those  living  ardours  which  attract  the  humid
waters  of  my  soul,  and  dry  up  the  torrents  of  earthly
delights,  and  afterwards  soften  my  hard  self-opinionated-
ness,  which  time  has  hardened  so  exceedingly  !  0  con
suming  h're,  which  even  amid  ardent  flames  imparts  sweet
ness  and  peace  to  the  soul  !  in  Thee,  and  in  none  other,  do
we  receive  this  grace  of  being  reformed  to  the  image  and
likeness  in  which  we  were  created.  O  burning  furnace,  in
which  we  enjoy  the  true  vision  of  peace,  which  tries  and
purifies  the  gold  of  the  elect,  and  leads  the  soul  to  seek
eagerly  for  its  highest  good,  even  Thyself,  in  Thy  eternal
truth.


88  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.

CHAPTER  VIII.

Of  the  admirable  union  of  her  soul  with  God.

ON  the  following  Sunday,  at  the  Mass  Esto  mihi*  Thou
didst  enkindle  my  spirit,  and  increase  my  desires  to  receive
yet  more  noble  gifts  which  Thou  wert  about  to  bestow  on
me  ;  especially  by  these  two  words,  which  moved  my  soul
deeply,  namely,  the  versicle  of  the  first  response  :  "  Bene-
dicens^  benedicam  tibi" — "With  blessings  I  will  bless  thee/'
and  the  versicle  of  the  ninth  response  :  "  Tibi  enim  et  se-
mini  tuo  dabo  universas  region es  has  " — "  To  thee  and  to
thy  posterity  I  will  give  all  these  countries  "  (Gen.  xxvi.).
For  then  Thou  didst  show  me  what  were  these  countries
which  Thy  boundless  liberality  had  promised.  0  blessed
country,  where  blessings  flow  upon  blessings  !  0  field  of
delights,  whose  least  grain  is  capable  of  satisfying  the
hunger  which  any  of  the  elect  may  have  for  those  things
which  the  human  heart  considers  desirable,  delightful,
amiable,  sweet,  and  joyful.  While  I  attended  to  these
things  as  well  as  I  could,  though  not  as  well  as  I  ought,
the  sweetness  and  charity  of  my  Saviour  and  my  God  was
made  known  to  me  ;  not  as  an  act  of  justice,  for  I  was  far
from  meriting  such  favours,  but  as  an  act  of  His  ineffable
mercy,  fortifying  me  by  an  adoptive  charity,  and  rendering
my  extreme  vileness — all  unworthy,  miserable,  and  detest
able  as  it  is — capable  of  receiving  a  more  supercelestial
and  superinestimable  union  with  Him.  But,  my  God,  how
have  I  merited  this  inestimable  gift  from  Thy  justice  ?
Surely  it  proceeds  from  this  love,  which  observes  no  rule — •
this  ardent  love,  which  is  not  limited  by  reason,  and  which

*  Introit  of  Mass  for  Quinquagesima  Sunday,
t  Response,  i.  Nocturn.


HER  SOUL  COMPARED  TO  WAX.  89

has  inebriated  Thee,  my  sweetest  Lord,  if  I  may  dare  say
so — causing  Thee,  as  if  devoid  of  wisdom,  to  unite  what  is
so  dissimilar  ;  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  the  tenderness
of  Thine  essential  goodness,  and  Thy  nature,  being  inwardly
moved  by  Thy  sweetest  charity  (which  causes  Thee  not
only  to  love,  but  to  be  all  love,  and  the  torrent  of  which
Thou  hast  turned  towards  the  salvation  of  the  human  race),
having  inclined  Thee  to  draw  from  the  depths  of  misery
the  least  of  Thy  creatures,  deficient  in  all  good,  contemp
tible  on  account  of  her  life  and  conduct,  to  elevate  her  to  a
share  in  Thy  kingdom,  or  rather  in  Thy  Divine  Majesty,
in  order  by  this  to  confirm  the  confidence  of  all  who  are  in
the  Church  ;  so  that  I  have  hope  for  all  Christians,  and
can  believe  that  there  will  not  be  even  one  who  will  abuse
the  gifts  of  God  as  I  have  done,  or  give  such  scandal  to
their  neighbour.

But  since  we  may  understand  the  invisible  things  of
God,  in  some  measure,  by  those  which  are  visible — as  I
have  before  remarked — I  saw  (to  express  as  far  as  I  can
that  which  is  inexpressible)  that  the  part  of  His  blessed
Heart  where  the  Lord  received  my  soul  on  the  Feast  of  the
Purification,  under  the  form  of  wax  softened  by  the  fire,
was,  as  it  were,  dropping  a  sweat,  which  came  forth  with
violence,  even  as  if  the  substance  of  the  wax  was  melted  by
the  excessive  heat  hidden  in  the  depth  of  this  Heart.  This
sacred  reservoir  attracted  these  drops  to  itself  with  surpris
ing  force,  powerfully  and  inexpressibly,  and  even  so  incon
ceivably,  that  one  saw  evidently  that  love,  which  could  not
be  hindered  from  communicating  itself,  had  an  absolute
power  in  this  place,  where  it  discovered  secrets  which  were
so  great,  so  hidden,  and  so  impenetrable.

O  eternal  solstice !  secure  mansion,  containing  all  that
is  desirable  !  Paradise  of  unchanging  delights,  continual


90  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.


fountain  of  inestimable  pleasures,  wherein  there  is  eternal
spring-time,  soothing  by  its  sweet  song,  or  rather  by  its
delicious  and  intellectual  melodies,  rejoicing  by  the  odour
of  its  vivifying  perfumes,  inebriating  by  the  soothing  sweet
ness  of  its  mystic  liquors,  and  transforming  by  its  secret
caresses  !

O  thrice  blessed,  thrice  happy,  and,  if  I  may  so  speak,
a  hundred  times  holy,  is  he  who  allows  himself  to  be  guided
by  this  grace  ;  and  who,  having  clean  hands,  and  a  pure
heart,  and  spotless  lips,  merits  to  be  thus  united  to  and
incorporated  with  his  God  !  What  does  he  not  see  and
hear  and  feel  and  taste  ?  How  can  my  stammering  tongue
speak  of  it  ?

For  although  the  Divine  mercy  has  made  me  experience
this  by  a  particular  favour,  nevertheless  the  obstinacy  of
my  sins,  and  the  thick  covering  of  negligence  with  which
I  am  encompassed,  hinders  me  from  fully  understanding
it.  For  if  all  the  science  of  men  and  angels  were  united
together,  it  would  not  be  capable  of  making  us  understand,
even  in  the  least  degree,  the  sublime  majesty  of  so  high  a
subject.

CHAPTER  IX.

Of  another  admirable  manner  in  which  St.  Gertrude  was  closely
united  to  God.

SOON  after,  during  the  fast  *  when  I  was  confined  to  bed
for  the  second  time  by  a  severe  sickness,  and  the  other
sisters  were  occupied  elsewhere,  so  that  I  was  left  alone  one
morning,  the  Lord,  who  never  abandons  those  who  are  de
prived  of  human  consolation,  came  to  verify  these  words  of

*  Lent.


HOW  SICKNESS  SANCTIFIES  THE  SOUL.  91


the  prophet:  "  I  am  with  him  in  tribulation"  (Ps.  xc.).  He
turned  His  right  Side  towards  me,  and  there  came  forth
from  His  blessed  and  inmost  Heart  a  pure  and  solid  stream,
like  crystal ;  and  on  His  Breast  there  was  a  precious  orna
ment,  like  a  necklace,  which  seemed  to  alternate  between
gold  and  rose-colour.  Then  our  Lord  said  to  me  :  "  This
sickness  which  you  suffer  will  sanctify  your  soul ;  so  that
each  time  you  go  forth  from  Me,  like  the  stream  which  I
have  shown  you,  for  the  good  of  your  neighbour,  either  in
thought,  word,  or  act,  even  then,  as  the  purity  of  the  crystal
renders  the  colour  of  the  gold  and  the  rose  more  brilliant,
so  the  cooperation  of  the  precious  gold  of  My  Divinity,  and
the  rose  of  the  perfect  patience  of  My  Humanity,  will  render
your  works  always  agreeable  to  Me  by  the  purity  of  your
intention."

O  greatness  of  this  little  bit  of  dust,  which  this  celestial
Lover  has  taken  from  the  mire  to  encase  in  His  jewels  !  O
excellence  of  this  little  flower,  which  the  ray  of  the  true
Sun  Himself  has  drawn  from  the  marsh,  to  make  it  beauti
ful  as  Himself  !  O  happiness  of  this  blessed  and  favoured
soul,  which  the  Lord  of  glory  has  esteemed  so  highly,
that  though  He  can  create  whatever  He  pleases,  He  attracts
it  so  sweetly  and  beautifies  it  by  uniting  it  to  Himself !
This  soul,  I  say,  though  it  is  adorned  with  His  image  and
likeness,  is,  nevertheless,  as  far  from  Him  as  the  creature
from  the  Creator.  Therefore  is  he  blessed  a  thousand  times
who  has  received  the  grace  to  persevere  in  this  state,  to
which,  alas  !  I  fear  I  shall  never  attain,  even  for  a  single
moment.

O  gift  surpassing  all  gifts,  to  be  satisfied  with  the  sweet
ness  of  the  Divinity,  and  to  be  superabundantly  inebriated
with  Divine  charity  in  the  cellar  where  it  is  reserved ;  so
that  our  feet  are  no  longer  free  to  roam  to  any  place  where


92 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

its  Divine  fragrance  is  not  perceived  :  unless,  indeed,  they
are  led  forth  by  charity,  when  they  pour  out  on  others  the
wealth  of  the  Divine  faithfulness,  and  enable  them  to  par
take  of  their  surpassing  sweetness.

I  hope,  my  Lord  and  my  God,  that  Thou,  in  Thy  most
benign  love,  wilt  grant  me  this  grace,  which  by  Thine
almighty  power  Thou  canst  impart  to  all  Thine  elect.  It  is
true  Thine  inscrutable  wisdom  alone  knows  how  Thou
canst  do  this,  notwithstanding  my  unworthiness.  But  I
honour  and  I  glorify  Thy  wise  and  merciful  almightiness  ;
I  glorify  and  magnify  Thy  almighty  and  all-merciful  wis
dom  ;  I  praise  and  adore  Thy  wise  and  omnipotent  mercy ;
I  bless  and  thank  Thy  omnipotent  and  wise  kindnesL,  0
my  God,  because  Thou  hast  bestowed  on  me  graces  so  far
beyond  my  deserts,  notwithstanding  all  the  obstacles  I
opposed  to  Thy  bounty.


CHAPTER  X.

How  the  Lord  obliged  her  to  write  these  things  ;  and  how  He
illuminated  her.

I  CONSIDERED  it  so  unsuitable  for  me  to  publish  these
writings,  that  my  conscience  would  not  consent  to  do  so ;
therefore  I  deferred  doing  it  until  the  Feast  of  the  Exalta
tion  of  the  Holy  Cross.*  On  that  day,  having  determined
before  Mass  to  apply  myself  to  other  occupations,  the  Lord
conquered  the  repugnance  of  my  reason  by  these  words  :
"Be  assured  that  you  will  not  be  released  from  the  prison
of  the  flesh  until  you  have  paid  this  debt  which  still  binds
you.''  And  as  I  reflected  that  I  had  already  employed  the

*  September  14. The  words  quoted  in  the  following  page  are  not
in  the  present  Office.


OUR  LORD  DESIRES  HER  TO  WRITE  HER  REVELATIONS. 93

gifts  of  God  for  the  advancement  of  my  neighbour — if  not
by  my  writing,  at  least  by  my  words — He  brought  for
ward  these  words  which  I  had  heard  used  at  the  preceding
Matins  :  "  If  the  Lord  had  willed  to  teach  His  doctrine
only  to  those  who  were  present,  He  would  have  taught  by
word  only,  not  by  writing.  But  now  they  are  written  for
the  salvation  of  many."  He  added  further:  "I  desire
your  writings  to  be  an  indisputable  evidence  of  Mv  Divine
goodness  in  these  latter  times,  in  which  I  purpose  to  do
good  to  many."

These  words  having  depressed  me,  I  began  to  consider
within  myself  how  difficult  and  even  impossible  it  would  be
to  find  thoughts  and  words  capable  of  explaining  these
things  to  the  human  intellect  without  scandal.  But  the
Lord  delivered  me  from  this  pusillanimity  by  pouring  out
on  my  soul  an  abundant  rain,  the  impetuous  fall  of  which
weighed  me  down  like  a  young  and  tender  plant — vile
creature  that  I  am  ! — instead  of  watering  me  gently,  so  as
to  make  me  increase  in  perfection ;  and  I  could  find  no
profit  from  it,  except  from  some  weighty  words,  the  sense
of  which  I  was  unable  perfectly  to  penetrate.  Therefore,
finding  myself  still  more  depressed,  I  inquired  what  would
be  the  advantage  of  these  writings  ;  and  Thy  goodness,  my
God,  solaced  my  trouble  with  Thy  usual  sweetness,  re
freshing  my  soul  by  this  reply :  "  Since  this  deluge  ap
pears  useless  to  you,  behold,  I  will  now  approach  you
to  My  Divine  Heart,  that  your  words  may  be  gentle  and
sweet,  according  to  the  capabilities  of  your  mind."  Which
promise,  my  Lord  and  my  God,  Thou  didst  most  faithfully
fulfil.  And  for  four  days,  at  a  convenient  hour  each  morn
ing,  Thou  didst  suggest  with  so  much  clearness  and  sweet
ness  what  I  composed,  that  I  have  been  able  to  write  it
without  difficulty  and  without  reflection,  even  as  if  I  had


94 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

learned  it  by  heart  long  before  ;  with  this  limitation,  that
when  I  had  written  a  sufficient  quantity  each  day,  it  has
not  been  possible  for  me,  although  I  applied  my  whole
mind  to  it,  to  find  a  single  word  to  express  the  things
which  on  the  following  day  I  could  write  freely  :  thus  in
structing  and  refraining  my  impetuosity,  as  the  Scripture
teaches  :*  "  Let  none  so  apply  himself  to  action  as  to  omit
contemplation."  Thus  art  Thou  jealous  for  my  welfare  ;
and  whilst  Thou  givest  me  leisure  to  enjoy  the  embraces
of  Rachel,  Thou  dost  not  permit  me  to  be  deprived  of  the
glorious  fruitfulness  of  Lia.  May  Thy  wise  love  deign  to
accomplish  in  me  these  two  things  !


CHAPTER  XI.

She  receives  the  gift  of  tears,  and  is  warned  of  the  snares  which  the
demon  has  laid  for  her.

SINCE,  Lord,  Thou  hast  so  often  diversified  the  salutary
taste  of  Thy  presence,  and  that  Thou  hast  prevented  my
baseness  so  assiduously  with  the  sweetness  of  Thy  benedic
tions,  especially  during  the  first  three  years,  and  more
especially  when  I  was  admitted  to  the  participation  of  Thy
adorable  Body  and  Blood, — since  I  can  make  no  return  to
Thee  for  this,  even  by  a  single  thanksgiving  for  a  thousand
favours, —  I  remit  the  thanksgivings  which  I  owe  to  that
eternal,  infinite,  and  incommunicable  gratitude  by  which,
O  ever-peaceful  and  resplendent  Trinity,  Thou  dost  fully
satisfy  all  our  debts  of  Thyself,  by  Thyself,  and  in  Thyself.
And  I,  who  am  but  dust,  offer  my  thanksgivings  to  Thee,
through  Him  who  stands  by  Thee,  clothed  with  my  sub-


*  "  Sicut  Scriptura  docet." The  exact  words  are  not  in  Scripture,


SHE  OBTAINS  THE  GIFT  OF  TEARS.  93

stance,  through  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  all  the
benefits  which  I  have  received  from  Thee,  but  principally,
for  having  instructed  my  ignorance  by  so  evident  a  sign,
that  Thou  hast  shown  me  clearly  how  I  corrupt  the  purity
of  Thy  gifts.

On  one  occasion,  when  I  assisted  at  a  Mass  at  \vhich  1
was  to  communicate,  I  perceived  that  Thou  wert  present,
by  an  admirable  condescension,  and  that  Thou  didst  use
this  similitude  to  instruct  me,  by  appearing  as  if  parched
with  thirst,  and  desiring  that  I  should  give  Thee  to  drink ;
and  while  I  was  troubled  thereat,  and  could  not  even  force
a  tear  from  my  eyes,  I  beheld  Thee  presenting  me  with  a
golden  cup  with  Thine  own  Hand.  When  I  took  it,  my
heart  immediately  melted  into  a  torrent  of  fervent  tears.
Then  I  saw  a  certain  despicable  creature  at  my  right  hand,
who  was  secretly  putting  something  bitter  and  venomous
into  it,  and  inciting  me  to  put  it  in  this  cup.  But  as  this
was  followed  by  an  instant  motion  of  vain-glory,  I  easily
understood  that  it  was  a  stratagem  of  that  ancient  enemy,
who  turns  against  us  all  his  rage  when  he  sees  us  enriched
with  Thy  gifts.

But  thanks  be  to  Thy  faithfulness,  my  God,  thanks  to
Thy  protection,  who  art  one  and  true  God,  Trinity  in  Unity,
Unity  in  Trinity,  who  permittest  not  that  we  should  be
tempted  beyond  our  strength,  although  Thou  sometimes
permittest  us  to  be  tempted  for  our  advancement  in  virtue ;
and  when  Thou  seest  that  we  confide  in  Thee,  Thou  un-
dertakest  our  cause,  and,  with  boundless  generosity,  dost
win  the  victory  for  us,  and  then  allow  us  the  merit  of  it,
if  only  we  will  to  do  right :  and  Thou  dost  procure  ua
this  advantage  to  increase  our  merit,  that,  as  Thou  dost
iiot  permit  our  enemy  to  interfere  with  our  free  will,  so
neither  dost  Thou  interfere  with  it  Thyself  in  any  way.


96  THE  EEVELATIONS  OF  ST. GEKTRt,rDE.


Thou  didst  teach  me  also,  on  another  occasion,  that  to
yield  easily  to  the  enemy  makes  him  insolent  in  attacking
us  again  on  the  same  subject ;  therefore  Thy  justice  re
quires  that  Thou  shouldst  sometimes  conceal  the  greatness
of  Thy  mercy  in  pardoning  our  negligence,  because  we  re
sist  evil  more  certainly,  more  usefully,  more  efficaciously,
and  more  happily,  when  we  resist  it  with  all  our  might.


CHAPTER  XII.

With  how  much  goodness  God  bears  our  faults.

I  RENDER  Thee  thanks  also  for  another  revelation,  which
was  no  less  advantageous  and  acceptable  to  me,  by  which
I  was  shown  with  what  benign  patience  Thou  dost  bear
our  defects,  that,  by  correcting  us  thus,  Thou  mightest  in
sure  our  happiness.  For  one  evening,  having  allowed  my
self  to  give  way  to  anger,  and  on  the  following  morning,
before  break  of  day,  finding  myself  disposed  to  pray,  Thou
didst  present  Thyself  to  me  under  so  strange  a  form,  that
it  seemed  to  me  on  beholding  Thee  that  Thou  wert  not  only
deprived  of  all  kind  of  good,  but  even  of  strength.  Then,
my  conscience  being  touched  for  my  past  fault,  I  began  to
reflect  with  grief  how  improper  a  thing  it  had  been  for  me
to  trouble  the  Supreme  Author  of  peace  and  purity  by  my
ill-regulated  passion.  I  thought  it  would  have  been  better
that  Thou  shouldst  have  been  absent  from  me  when  I  failed
to  repel  Thine  enemy,  while  he  solicited  me  to  do  that
which  was  so  contrary  to  Thy  will.

Thou  didst  apply  this  to  me  :  "  Even  as  a  poor  invalid
who  has  been  brought  out  to  enjoy  the  sunshine  by  the
assistance  of  others,  with  much  difficulty,  when  he  sees  a
storm  coming  on,  has  no  other  consolation  than  the  hope


OF  EXACT  VIGILANCE  OVER  THE  SENSES.  97

of  soon  seeing  fine  weather  again, — thus,  under  the  influ
ence  of  your  love,  I  prefer  dwelling  with  you  in  all  the
tempests  of  vice,  hoping  to  behold  the  calm  of  your  amend
ment,  and  to  see  you  enter  the  port  of  humility."

Since  my  tongue  is  too  feeble  to  explain  the  abundance
of  the  graces  which  thou  didst  pour  forth  on  me  during
the  three  entire  days  in  which  this  apparition  lasted,  per
mit,  O  my  God,  that  my  heart  may  supply  for  its  weakness,
and  teach  me  how  to  render  a  thanksgiving  of  gratitude
for  the  depth  of  the  humility  to  which  Thy  love  then  abased
itself  for  this  charity,  so  amazing  and  so  tender,  which  Thou
hast  for  us.


CHAPTER  XIII.

Of  the  necessity  of  exact  vigilance  over  the  senses  and  affections.

I  CONFESS  also  before  Thy  goodness,  God  of  mercy,  that
Thou  didst  use  another  means  to  animate  my  languor  ;
and  though  at  first  Thou  didst  commence  Thy  work  by
the  intervention  of  a  third  person,  Thou  didst  will  never
theless  to  consummate  it  Thyself  with  mercy  and  con
descension.  This  person  proposed  to  my  consideration  the
Gospel  which  relates  that  aftei  Thy  Birth  Thou  wert  found
by  shepherds  ;  she  added,  that  Thou  hadst  made  known  to
her  that  if  I  would  truly  find  Thee,  I  must  watch  over  my
senses,  as  the  shepherds  over  their  flocks.  I  had  some  diffi
culty  in  believing  this,  and  there  seemed  to  me  but  little
reason  in  it,  knowing  that  Thou  hadst  given  other  capabili
ties  to  my  soul  than  those  of  serving  Thee  as  a  hired  shep
herd  would  his  master  ;  so  that,  from  morning  until  even
ing,  I  was  full  of  discouragement  After  Compline,  as  I
was  in  the  place  where  I  pray,  Thou  didst  solace  my  grief

0


THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GKRTRUDE.


by  this  comparison  ;  "  If  a  bride  prepare  food  sometimes
for  her  bridegroom's  falcons,*  she  will  not  on  this  account
be  deprived  of  his  caresses  ;  so,  if  I  occupied  myself  for
love  of  Thee  in  watching  over  my  affections  and  senses,  I
should  not  on  this  account  be  deprived  of  the  sweetness  of
Thy  graces."

Thou  didst  give  me  for  this  purpose  the  spirit  of  fear,
under  the  figure  of  a  green  rod,  in  order  that,  remaining
always  with  Thee,  and  never  leaving  the  shelter  of  Thine
embraces  even  for  a  single  moment,  I  might  without  danger
extend  my  care  to  all  the  windings  and  labyrinths  in
which  human  affection  so  often  loses  itself.  Thou  didst
add,  that  when  anything  presented  itself  to  my  mind
which  sought  to  turn  my  thoughts  to  the  right,  as  to  joy
or  hope  ;  to  the  left,  as  to  fear,  grief,  or  anger, — that  I  should
threaten  them  with  the  rod  of  fear  ;  and  that  afterwards,  by
the  restraining  of  my  senses,  I  should  immolate  this  affec
tion,  like  a  new-born  lamb,  by  the  fire  of  my  heart,  and
offer  it  to  Thee  as  a  feast.

But,  alas  !  how  many  times  when  the  opportunity  has
come  have  I  not  snatched,  as  if  from  Thy  very  lips,  by  a
malicious  lightness,  or  by  a  passionate  word  or  action,  that
which  I  had  given  Thee,  and  presented  it  to  Thine  enemy  !
and  even  then  Thou  hast  looked  on  me  with  tenderness
and  sweetness,  as  if  Thou  hadst  not  perceived  my  infidelity ;
and  thereby  Thou  hast  often  excited  transports  of  sweet
ness  in  my  soul,  which  have  served  to  make  me  correct
and  watch  over  myself  far  more  than  the  threats  and  feai
of  Thine  anger.


*  Accipitribus  ;  lit.  birds  of  prey.


OUR  LORD  ASKS  TO  LIE  DOWN  IN  HER HEART.  99


CHAPTEE  XIV.

Different  exercises  by  which  the  soul  is  purified.
THE  Sunday  before  Lent,  while  they  chanted  the  J?sto
mihi*  Thou  didst  make  me  understand  by  the  words  of
this  introit,  0  only  Object  of  my  love,  that,  being  wearied
by  the  persecutions  and  outrages  which  so  many  persons
inflict  on  Thee,  Thou  didst  ask  for  my  heart,  that  Thou
mightest  repose  therein.  Therefore,  each  time  that  I  en
tered  therein  during  these  three  days,  Thou  didst  appear  to
me  as  if  lying  down  there  like  a  person  exhausted  by  ex
treme  languor,  and  I  could  find  no  greater  solace  of  Thy
woe  during  this  period  than  to  pray,  keep  silence,  and
perform  other  exercises  of  mortification  in  Thine  honour
for  the  conversion  of  worldly  persons.

Thy  grace  makes  me  know  further,  by  frequent  reve
lations,  that  the  soul,  dwelling  in  the  body  of  frail  hu
manity,  is  darkened  in  the  same  manner  as  a  person  who
stands  in  a  narrow  space,  and  is  surrounded  on  all  sides  by
a  vapour  exhaling  from  a  cooking  vessel.  And  when  the
body  is  afflicted  by  any  evil,  the  part  which  suffers  is  to
the  soul  as  a  beam  from  the  sun  which  enlightens  the  air,
and  from  which  it  receives  marvellous  clearness ;  therefore
the  heavier  one's  sufferings  are,  the  purer  is  the  light  the
soul  receives.  But  afflictions  and  trials  of  the  heart  in
humility,  patience,  and  other  virtues  impart  the  greatest
lustre  to  the  soul,  as  they  touch  it  more  keenly,  efficaciously,
and  intimately ;  works  of  charity,  above  all,  give  it  an  ad
mirable  serenity  and  brightness.

Thanks  be  to  Thee,  0  Lover  of  men,  that  Thou  hast
sometimes  led  me  by  this  means  to  patience  !  But,  alas  !

*  Introit  for  Quiuquageaiina.


100 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

— and  a  thousand  times,  alas  ! — how  seldom  have  I  listened
to  Thy  counsels,  or  rather,  how  seldom  have  I  done  what
I  ought  to  have  done  !  0  Lord,  Thou  knowest  the  grief,
the  shame,  and  the  dejection  of  my  soul  for  this  •  Thou
knowest  the  desire  of  my  heart  to  apply  to  Thee  for  my
deficiencies.

On  another  occasion,  when  I  was  about  to  communicate
at  Mass,  being  filled  abundantly  with  Thy  Spirit,  and  seek
ing  within  myself  what  I  could  do  in  return  for  so  great  a
favour,  Thou  didst  propose  to  me,  as  a  Master  full  of  wis
dom,  these  words  of  the  Apostle  :  "  I  wish  myself  to  be  an
anathema  for  my  brethren  "  (Rom.  ix.).  And  although  Thou
hadst  taught  me  before  that  the  soul  had  its  abode  in  the
heart,  Thou  didst  make  me  know  also  that  it  resided  in  the
brain  ;  and  this  truth,  of  which  I  had  been  ignorant  until
then,  was  confirmed  to  me  afterwards  by  a  testimony  of
Scripture.  Thou  didst  teach  me  also,  that  the  great  per
fection  of  a  soul  consists  in  relinquishing  the  pleasure  which
it  finds  in  the  affections,  in  order  to  occupy  itself,  for  the
love  of  Thee,  in  watching  over  its  exterior  senses,  and  iu
labouring  in  works  of  charity  for  the  salvation  of  its  neigh
bour.


CHAPTER  XV.

How  agreeable  works  of  charity  are  to  God ;  and  also  meditation*
on  holy  things.

THE  day  of  Thine  adorable  Nativity,  I  took  Thee  from  the
crib,  wrapped  in  swathing-clothes,  like  a  little  infant  newly
born,  and  placed  Thee  in  my  heart,  that  I  might  make  a
bouquet  of  myrrh  of  all  thy  infant  sufferings  and  incom-
modities,  to  place  it  in  my  breast,  that  I  might  drink  there-


SHE  RECEIVES  THE  INFANT  JESUS  IN  HEU  ARMS. 101

from  a  libation  *  of  Divine  sweetness.  But  as  I  considered
this  the  greatest  favour  Thou  couldest  bestow  on  me,  Thou,
who,  when  we  least  expect  it,  accompaniest  Thy  first  graces
by  others  yet  more  precious,  didst  will  to  diversify  the
abundance  of  Thy  graces  in  this  manner.

For  on  the  same  day,  the  following  year,  as  the  Mass
Dominus  dixit  t  was  said,  I  received  Thee,  coming  forth
from  the  virginal  womb  of  Thy  Mother  as  a  feeble  and
delicate  Infant,  arid  carried  Thee  for  some  time  in  my
arms.  It  seemed  to  me  that  the  compassion  which  I  had
shown  before  the  Feast,  by  some  special  prayers  for  a  per
son  in  affliction,  had  obtained  this  favour  for  me  ;  but,
alas  !  after  having  obtained  it,  I  did  not  receive  it  with  the
devotion  I  ought.  I  know  not  if  it  were  an  act  of  Thy
justice,  or  a  chastisement  of  my  negligence  ;  I  hope,  never
theless,  that  Thy  justice,  by  the  intermission  of  Thy  mercy
has  so  ordered  it,  to  make  me  know  more  clearly  the  great
ness  of  my  unworthiness,  and  to  make  me  less  negligent
in  putting  away  idle  thoughts.  But  it  is  for  Thee,  0
Lord,  to  say  to  which  of  these  causes  I  ought  to  refer  this
effect.

Nevertheless,  as  I  gathered  up  all  my  strength  to  make
a  last  effort  to  gain  Thee  by  my  loving  caresses,  I  per
ceived  that  all  this  was  of  no  avail,  until  I  commenced
praying  for  sinners,  for  the  souls  in  purgatory,  or  for  those
who  were  in  any  affliction,  when  I  knew  that  I  was  heard  ,•
but  still  more  one  evening,  when  I  formed  the  resolution
of  commencing  the  prayers  which  I  say  for  the  deceased,
offering  them  for  those  most  beloved  by  Thee,  with  the


* Botrus,  a  Hebrew  word,  translated  "the  grape,"  Mich.  vii.  1 ;  in
Greek  fiorpvs ;  and  hence  Latinised  botrus  or  botryt.  Used  also
tropically  for  a  draught  or  medicament.

t  Introit,  First  or  Midnight  Mass  at  Christmas.


102 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Collect,  Omnipotent,  sempiterne  Deus,  cui  nunquam  sine
spe,*  instead  of  commencing,  as  I  had  been  accustomed  to
do,  by  praying  for  those  related  to  me,  with  the  Collect,
Deus,  qui  nos  patrem  et  matrem  ;  and  it  seemed  to  me  that
this  change  was  very  pleasing  to  Thee.

I  believe  also  that  it  pleased  Thee  much,  when  I
chanted  as  loud  as  I  could,  and  at  each  note  fixed  my  in
tention  on  Thee,  as  one  fixes  his  eye  on  his  book,  who  has
not  yet  learned  the  chant  perfectly.  Still  I  know  that  I
have  been  negligent  in  this  and  in  other  things  which  con
cern  Thy  glory  ;  and  I  confess  it  to  Thee,  Father  of  mercy,
asking  pardon  through  the  bitter  Passion  of  Thy  blameless
Son  Jesus  Christ,  in  whom  Thou  didst  declare  Thyself  well
pleased,  saying  :  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am
well  pleased  "  (St  Matt,  xvii.) ;  through  Him  I  ask  the
grace  of  amendment  and  atonement  for  my  negligences.


CHAPTER  XVI.

Of  the  inconceivable  tenderness  which  the  most  glorious  Virgin
has  for  us.

ON  the  Feast  of  the  Purification,  at  the  Procession,  when
Thou,  our  Salvation  and  Redemption,  wert  borne  as  an
offering  to  the  Temple,  at  the  Antiphon,  Cum  inducerent,^

*Not  in  present  office :  Deus  qui—  Collect,  Mass  for  Deceased
Parents.

f  "When  His  parents  brought  in  the  Child  Jesus,"  &c.,  Versicle
at  Procession,  Feast  of  the  Purification.  This  procession  is  very
ancient.  It  is  mentioned  by  Pope  Gelasius  I.  St.  Bernard's  sermons
on  such  occasions  are  full  of  singular  unction  and  sweetness.  He
says  :  "  The  procession  was  first  made  by  the  Virgin  Mother,  Simeon,
and  Anna,  to  be  afterwards  performed  in  all  places  and  by  every
natiou.  The  concurrence  of  many  in  procession  symbolises  our  union


THE  TKNDERNESS  OF  MARY.  103

Thy  Virgin  Mother  told  me  to  give  her  her  Child,  the
blessed  Fruit  of  her  womb ;  and  she  demanded  Thee
again  from  me  with  a  severe  countenance,  as  if  she  was
not  pleased  with  my  care  of  Thee,  who  art  the  honour  and
joy  of  her  spotless  virginity.

Then,  remembering  the  grace  which  she  had  received
from  Thee  of  being  the  hope  of  the  despairing  and  the
reconciler  of  sinners,  I  exclaimed  :  "  0  Mother  of  mercy  !
was  not  the  Fount  of  forgiveness  given  to  thee  as  thy  Son,
that  thou  mightest  obtain  all  grace  for  us  from  Him,  and
that  the  multitude  of  our  sins  and  our  deficiencies  might
be  covered  by  thy  abundant  charity  ? "  Then  she  looked
on  me  once  more  with  a  serene  and  loving  countenance,  so
that  I  might  know  that  if  my  fault  obliged  her  to  appear
severe  to  me,  she  was,  nevertheless,  full  of  the  most  con
summate  tenderness,  and  penetrated  to  her  inmost  heart
with  the  most  sweet  and  Divine  charity.  I  soon  beheld
the  tokens  of  it,  since  a  few  words  removed  her  anger,  and
her  sweetness  shone  forth  resplendently.  May  this  abun
dant  tenderness  of  Thy  Mother  intercede  with  Thee,  and
obtain  pardon  for  ray  faults  !

And  I  know,  by  a  testimony  clearer  than  light  itself,
that  no  obstacle  could  have  arrested  the  torrent  of  Thy
sweetness,  when,  on  the  Feast  of  Thy  Nativity,  the  pre
ceding  year,  Thou  didst  grant  me  a  yet  greater  favour,
though  in  a  similar  manner,  as  if  I  had  merited  it  by  the
fervour  of  my  zeal  the  year  before,  when,  far  from  meriting
a  new  grace,  I  was  justly  worthy  of  chastisement  for  having
lost  the  first.

For  when  these  words  of  the  Gospel  were  read,  "


and  charity  ;  our  walking, advancement  in  virtue ; the  lights  we
carry,  Christ,  the  true  Light,"


104 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

ftlium  suum  primogenitum,"  *  Thy  spotless  Mother  pre
sented  Thee  to  me  with  her  pure  hands.  And  Thou,  0
amiable  Infant,  didst  endeavour  to  embrace  me  with  all
Thy  might ;  I,  though  utterly  unworthy,  received  Thee,
and  Thou  didst  put  Thy  Jittle  arms  round  my  neck,  ex
haling  on  me  from  Thy  mouth  a  breath  so  full  of  sweet
ness,  that  I  was  nourished  and  abundantly  satisfied  there
with.  For  this,  0  Lord  my  God,  may  my  soul  and  all
that  is  within  me  adore  and  bless  Thy  Holy  Name  !  And
when  Thy  Blessed  Mother  sought  to  wrap  Thee  in  Thy
gwathing-clothes,  I  desired  to  be  wrapped  up  in  them  also,
for  fear  of  losing  the  company  of  One  whose  smiles  and
favours  exceed  the  sweetness  of  honey  and  the  honey
comb.  Thou  wert  then  clothed  in  the  fairest  robe  of
innocence,  and  cinctured  with  the  golden  cincture  of  love ;
and  I  felt  that  if  I  wished  to  be  so  clothed  and  so
cinctured,  I  should  seek  to  have  more  purity  of  heart,  and
to  abound  more  in  love.


CHAPTER  XVII.

Of  the  garments  with  which  we  should  clothe  Jesus  and  His
Mother.

I  GIVE  Thee  thanks,  Creator  of  the  firmament,  Fashioner
of  its  celestial  lights  and  of  the  flowers  of  spring,  because,
although  Thou  needest  not  my  goods,  Thou,  for  my  in
struction,  didst  order  me  to  clothe  Thee  with  the  garments
of  an  infant  on  the  day  of  Thy  Purification,  before  Thou


"She  brought  forth  her  first-born  Son,"  &c.  (Luke  ii.),  Gospel
for  Midnight  Mass.  What  follows  is  omitted  in  the  French  tran
slation.


SHE  CLOTHES  THE  INFANT  JESUS.  105

wert  carried  into  the  Temple.  And  this  is  the  manner
in  which  Thou  dost  desire  me  to  draw  from  the  hidden
treasures  of  Thy  love — namely,  to  extol  with  all  my
powers  the  innocence  of  Thy  Holy  Humanity,  but  with
such  faithfulness  and  devotion,  that  if  I  could  receive  in
my  own  person  all  the  glory  due  to  Thy  blessed  innocence,
I  would,  nevertheless,  freely  renounce  it,  in  order  to
enhance  thereby  the  praise  of  Thy  innocence.  It  seemed
to  me  that  this  pure  intention  clothed  Thee  with  a  White
robe,  such  as  infants  wear:  Thou  whose  omnipotence
"calleth  those  things  that  are  not  as  those  that  are"
(Rom.  iv.  17).

So  also,  when  I  endeavoured  to  penetrate  devoutly  into
the  abyss  of  Thy  humility,  I  saw  thee  clothed  in  a  green
tunic,  as  a  sign  that  Thy  grace  is  ever  flourishing,  and  that
it  never  withers  in  the  valley  of  humility.  Then  contem
plating  the  fire  of  Thy  love,  which  has  made  Thee  produce
all  which  Thou  hast  produced,  I  beheld  Thee  clothed  in
purple,  to  indicate  that  charity  is  truly  a  royal  mantle,
without  which  none  can  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

As  I  admired  the  same  virtues  in  Thy  glorious  Mother,
she  appeared  to  me  clothed  in  the  same  manner  ;  and  as
this  Blessed  Virgin  nourishes  like  a  rose  without  thorns,
and  a  lily  without  spot,  being  adorned  with  the  flowers  of
all  virtues,  I  besought  this  most  benign  Mother  to  intercede
continually  with  Thee  for  our  necessities


106 THE  EEVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

CHAPTER  XVIII.

How  God  bears  with  our  defects— Instruction  on  humility.

ONE  day,  after  I  had  washed  my  hands,  and  was  standing
round  the  table  with  the  community,  perplexed  in  mind,
considering  the  brightness  of  the  sun,  which  was  in  its  full
strength,  I  said  within  myself :  "  If  the  Lord,  who  has
created  the  sun,  and  whose  beauty  is  said  to  be  the  admi
ration  of  the  sun  and  moon, — if  He,  who  is  a  consuming
fire,  is  as  truly  in  me  as  He  shows  Himself  frequently  be
fore  me,  how  is  it  possible  that  my  heart  continues  like  ice,
and  that  I  lead  so  evil  a  life  ? "

Then  Thou,  whose  words,  though  always  sweet,  were
now  much  sweeter,  and  therefore  the  more  necessary  for  my
heart  in  its  state  of  agitation, — Thou,  I  say,  didst  reply  thus
to  me :  "  In  what  should  My  omnipotence  be  extolled,  if  I
could  not  contain  Myself  within  Myself  wherever  I  am,  so
that  I  am  only  felt  or  seen  as  is  most  suitable  for  the  time,
place,  and  person  1  For  since  the  creation  of  heaven  and
earth  I  have  worked  for  the  redemption  of  all,  more  by  the
wisdom  of  My  benignity  than  by  the  power  of  My  majesty.
And  this  benignity  of  wisdom  shines  most  in  My  tolerance
towards  the  imperfect,  leading  them,  even  by  their  own  free
will,  into  the  way  of  perfection."  Seeing  also,  on  a  certain
feast-day,  that  many  who  had  recommended  themselves  to
my  prayers  were  going  to  Communion,  and  that  I  was  de
prived  of  It  by  sickness — or  rather,  prevented  on  account
of  my  unworthiness — and  reflecting  in  my  mind  on  the
numerous  benefits  I  had  received  from  God,  I  began  to  fear
the  wind  of  vain-glory,  which  might  dry  up  the  waters  of
Divine  grace ;  and  I  desired  to  have  some  reflection  in  my
mind  that  might  prevent  its  recurrence.  Then  Thy  pater-


PRAYER  AND  THANKSGIVING.  107

nal  goodness  instructed  me  thus  :  that  I  should  consider
Thy  affection  towards  me  under  the  similitude  of  a  father
of  a  family,  who,  being  delighted  at  seeing  so  many  beau
tiful  children  receiving  admiration  from  his  neighbours
and  servants,  had,  amongst  others,  a  little  one  who  was  not
so  beautiful  as  his  companions,  whom  he,  nevertheless,  often
took  in  his  bosom,  moved  by  paternal  tenderness,  and  con
soled  him  by  gentle  words  and  kind  gifts  ;  and  Thou  didst
add,  that  if  I  had  this  humble  esteem  of  myself,  so  as  to
believe  myself  the  most  imperfect  of  all,  the  torrents  of  Thy
celestial  sweetness  would  never  cease  to  flow  into  my  soul.
I  give  thanks  to  Thee,  most  loving  God,  Lover  of  men,
by  the  merit  of  the  reciprocal  gratitude  of  the  adorable
Trinity,  for  this  and  for  many  other  salutary  instructions
by  which  Thou  hast  instructed  my  ignorance  so  many  times
as  the  best  of  masters, — I  offer  my  sighs  to  Thee  through
the  bitter  Passion  of  Jesus  Christ  Thy  Son  ;  I  offer  to  Thee
His  pains  and  tears  and  dolors,  in  expiation  of  all  the  negli
gences  by  which  I  have  so  often  stifled  the  Spirit  of  God
in  my  heart.  I  beseech  Thee,  in  union  with  the  efficacious
prayer  of  this  Thy  beloved  Son,  and  by  the  grace  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  to  amend  my  life,  and  to  supply  for  my  defi<
ciencies.  This  I  beseech  Thee  to  grant  by  that  love  which
arrested  Thine  anger  when  Thy  only  Son,  the  object  of  Thy
complacence,  was  reputed  a  criminal.


CHAPTER  XIX.

How  God  is  pleased  to  condescend  to  His  creatures  ;  and  what  glory
God  derives  thence  from  the  blessed.

I  GIVE  thanks  to  Thy  loving  mercy  and  to  Thy  merciful
love,  most  loving  Lord, for  the  revelation  by  which  Thy


108  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.


goodness  satisfied  my  weak  and  wavering  soul  when  I  so
ardently  desired  to  be  released  from  the  chains  of  the  flesh  :
not  that  I  might  suffer  less,  but  that  I  might  release  Thy
goodness  from  the  debt  which  Thy  exceeding  love  has  under
taken  for  my  salvation  ;  although  Thy  Divine  omnipotence
and  eternal  wisdom  were  not  obliged  to  grant  me  this
favour, — but  Thou  didst  bestow  it  on  my  unworthiness
and  ingratitude  of  Thy  superabounding  liberality.

When,  therefore,  I  desired  to  be  dissolved,  Thou,  my
God,  who  art  the  honour  and  glory  of  heaven,  didst  appear
to  me,  descending  from  the  royal  throne  of  Thy  majesty,
and  approaching  to  sinners  by  a  most  obliging  and  favour
able  condescension  ;  and  then  certain  streams  of  precious
liquor  seemed  to  flow  through  heaven,  before  which  all  the
saints  prostrated  themselves  in  thanksgiving  ;  and  having
satisfied  their  thirst  with  joy  in  this  torrent  of  delights,
broke  forth  in  canticles  of  praise  for  all  Thy  mercy  towards
sinners.  Whilst  these  things  happened  I  heard  these  words  :
"  Consider  how  agreeable  this  concert  of  praise  is,  not  only
to  My  ears,  but  even  to  My  most  loving  Heart ;  and  beware
for  the  future  how  you  desire  so  importunately  to  be  sepa
rated  from  the  body,  merely  for  the  sake  of  being  delivered
from  the  flesh,  in  which  I  pour  forth  so  freely  the  gifts  of
My  grace;  for  the  more  unworthy  they  are  to  whom  I
condescend,  the  more  I  merit  to  be  glorified  for  it  by  all
creatures."

As  thou  didst  give  this  consolation  at  the  moment
when  I  approached  Thy  life-giving  Sacrament,  as  soon  as
I  had  recollected  myself  and  formed  my  intention,  as  I
was  bound  to  do,  Thou  didst  make  known  to  me  further
in  what  manner,  and  with  what  intention,  each  one  should
approach  to  unite  themselves  to  Thy  sacred  Body  and
Blood ;  so  that,  even  if  this  Sacrament  served  for  our  con-


OF  ABSTAINING  FROM  OR  RECEIVING  HOLT  COMMUNION. 109

demnation,  were  it  possible,  the  love  of  Thy  love  and  of
Thy  glory  would  cause  us  to  think  nothing  of  this,  provided
that  thereby  Thy  mercy  shone  forth  still  more  in  not  refus
ing  to  give  Thyself  to  those  who  are  so  utterly  unworthy.
Then  I  inquired  concerning  those  who,  from  a  consciousness
of  their  unworthiness,  abstain  from  Communion,  fearing
to  profane  by  a  presumptuous  irreverence  the  sanctity  of
this  Sacrament ;  and  I  received  this  blessed  answer  from
Thee  :  "  He  who  communicates  from  a  pure  desire  of  My
glory,  as  I  have  said,  can  never  communicate  with  irrever
ence."  For  which  may  eternal  praise  and  glory  be  given
to  Thee  for  endless  ages  !


CHAPTER  XX.

Of  some  considerable  privileges  which  God  granted  to  this  virgin,  and
of  the  grace  which  He  promised  to  her  clients.

MAY  my  heart  and  my  soul,  with  all  the  substance  of  my
flesh,  all  my  senses,  and  all  the  powers  of  my  body  and  my
mind,  witli  all  creatures,  praise  Thee  and  give  Thee  thanks,
O  sweetest  Lord,  faithful  Lover  of  mankind,  for  Thy  signal
mercy ;  which  has  not  only  dissimulated  the  utterly  un
worthy  preparation  with  which  I  have  not  feared  to
approach  the  supercelestial  banquet  of  Thy  most  sacred
Body  and  Blood,  but  has  added  this  gift  to  me,  the  most
utterly  vile  and  perfectly  useless  of  Thy  creatures.  First,
of  having  been  assured  by  Thy  grace  that  all  who  desire
to  approach  this  Sacrament,  and  who  are  restrained  by  fear
from  a  timid  conscience,  who  come  to  me,  who  am  the  least
of  Thy  servants,  led  by  humility,  to  seek  consolation, —
that  Thy  exceeding  mercy  will  judge  them  worthy,  in  re-


110 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GKRTKUDE.


compense  for  this  humility,  to  receive  this  Sacrament  with
fruit  to  eternal  life.  Thou  hast  also  added,  that  Thou  wilt
not  permit  any  one,  whom  thy  justice  deems  unworthy,
to  abase  themselves  to  ask  counsel  of  me,  0  Supreme
Euler,  "  who,  though  Thou  dwellest  on  high,  regardest  the
humble"  (Ps.  cxii.).

What  prompted  Thy  mercy,  when  Thou  sawest  me  ap
proach  so  often  unworthily,  to  suspend  Thy  judgment,  and
not  to  inflict  on  me  the  punishment  1  deserve  ?  Thou  wiliest
to  make  others  worthy  by  the  virtue  of  humility  ;  and
though  Thou  couldst  do  so  more  effectually  without  my
assistance,  Thy  love,  looking  upon  my  misery,  made  Thee
effect  this  through  me  ;  so  that  thus  I  may  be  a  sharer  in
the  merits  of  those  who,  through  iny  admonitions,  enjoy
the  fruits  of  salvation.

But,  alas  !  this  is  not  the  only  remedy  which  my  misery
requires  ;  nor  will  one  remedy  satisfy  Thy  mercy,  O  most
kind  Lord !  For  Thou  didst  assure  my  unworthiness
that  Thou  wouldst  consider  whoever  should  expose  their
defects  to  me,  with  a  contrite  and  humble  heart,  guilty
or  innocent,  as  I  had  declared  them  more  or  less  guilty  ;
and  from  henceforward  Thy  grace  would  so  sustain  them
that  They  should  never  again  be  in  such  danger  from
their  faults  as  they  had  been  previously.  And  thus  Thou
hast  relieved  my  indigence,  which  is  so  great  that  I  have
never  even  for  a  single  day  corrected  myself  as  I  ought,  and
yet  Thou  dost  permit  me  to  participate  in  the  victories  of
others,  when  Thou,  my  good  God,  dost  condescend  to  make
use  of  me,  as  a  most  unworthy  instrument,  to  give  the  grace
of  victory  to  Thine  other  more  deserving  friends  through
my  words.

Thirdly.  The  abundant  liberality  of  Thy  grace  has  en
riched  my  poverty  of  merit  by  this  assurance, — that  when-


PROMISES  MADE  TO  HER  BY  OUR  LORD.  Ill

ever  I  promise  a  favour  to  any  one,  or  the  pardon  of  any
fault,  through  confidence  in  Thy  mercy,  Thy  benign  love
will  ratify  my  words,  and  execute  my  promise  as  faithfully
as  if  it  had  been  confirmed  by  an  oath  of  the  Eternal  Truth.
Thou  didst  add  further,  that  if  any  one  found  that  the
salutary  effects  of  my  promises  were  deferred,  they  should
continually  remind  Thee  that  I  had  promised  this  grace
from.  Thee.  Thus  dost  Thou  provide  for  my  salvation
according  to  the  words  of  the  Gospel  :  "  With  what  measure
you  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again  "  (Matt.  vii.  2).
And  as  I,  alas  !  continually  fall  into  the  greatest  faults,  Thou
desirest  by  this  means  to  remit  the  punishment  I  deserve.

Fourthly.  To  solace  my  miseries,  Thou  hast  assured  me,
amongst  other  things,  that  whosoever  recommend  them
selves  humbly  and  devoutly  to  my  prayers  will  certainly
obtain  all  the  fruit  which  they  hoped  to  obtain  by  the
intercession  of  any  other  person  :  in  which  Thou  hast  pro
vided  for  my  negligence,  which  prevents  me  from  satisfying,
not  only  for  the  prayers  which  are  made  gratuitously  for
the  Church,  but  also  for  those  of  obligation  ;  and  thou  hast
found  the  means  of  applying  the  fruit  of  them  to  me,  ac
cording  to  the  words  of  David  :  "  My  prayers  shall  be
turned  into  my  bosom  "  (Ps.  xxxiv.) ;  making  me  participate
in  the  merits  of  Thine  elect,  who  shall  ask  these  graces  of
Thee  through  my  intermission,  although  I  am  utterly  un
worthy  of  it,  and  granting  me  a  share  in  them  to  supply  for
my  indigence.

Fifthly.  Thou  hast  further  promoted  my  salvation  by
conferring  these  special  favours  on  me,  that  whosoever,
with  a  good  will,  a  right  intention,  and  a  humble  con
fidence,  shall  come  to  speak  to  me  upon  their  spiritual  ad
vancement,  should  never  leave  me  without  being  edified  or
receiving  spiritual  consolation.  In  this  also  thou  hast


112 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

most  suitably  supplied  for  my  indigence  ;  for,  alas  !  I  have
wasted  the  talent  Thou  didst  so  liberally  bestow  on  me  by
my  useless  words ;  but  now  I  may  gain  some  merit  by
what  I  confide  to  others.

Sixthly.  Thy  liberality,  0  Lord,  has  bestowed  on  me
this  gift,  more  necessary  than  all, — certifying  to  me,  that
whoever,  in  their  charity,  will  either  pray  for  me — the
vilest  of  God's  creatures — or  perform  any  good  works,
either  for  the  amendment  of  my  life, — or  the  forgiveness  of
the  sins  of  my  youth,  or  the  correction  of  my  iniquity  and
malice,  shall  receive  this  reward  from  Thy  abundant
liberality— namely,  that  they  shall  not  die  until,  by  Thy
grace,  their  lives  have  become  pleasing  to  Thee ;  and  that
Thou  wilt  dwell  in  their  souls  by  a  special  friendship  and
intimacy.

And  this  Thou  hast  granted  of  Thy  paternal  tenderness,
to  assist  my  extreme  indigence  ;  as  thou  knowest  how
many  and  how  great  corrections  are  needed  for  my  innu
merable  sins  and  negligences.  Thus,  as  Thy  loving  mercy
will  not  permit  me  to  perish,  and,  on  the  contrary,  by
reason  of  Thy  justice,  will  not  permit  me  to  be  saved  with
all  my  imperfections,  Thou  hast  provided  for  me  by  means
of  the  gains  and  merits  of  others.

Thou  hast  added  to  all  these  favours,  my  kind  God,  by
an  abundant  liberality, — that  if  any  one,  after  my  death,
considering  with  how  much  familiarity  Thou  didst  commu
nicate  with  my  unworthiriess  while  in  this  life,  should  re
commend  themselves  humbly  to  my  prayers,  Thou  wouldst
hear  them  as  willingly  as  if  they  invoked  the  intercession
of  any  other  person,  provided  that  they  had  the  intention
of  repairing  their  faults  and  negligences,  and  that  they
humbly  and  devoutly  thanked  Thee  for  five  special  benefits
which  Thou  didst  grant  ine.


THANKSGIVING  FOR  FIVE  FAVOURS  BESTOWED  ON  HER. 113


First.  For  the  love  by  which  Thou  didst  freely  choose
me  from  all  eternity,  and  which  I  declare  to  be  the  greatest
of  ail  the  benefits  which  Thou  hast  bestowed  on  me  ;  for  as
Thou  wert  not  ignorant  of,  or  rather  didst  foresee,  the  cor
rupt  life  which  I  should  lead,  the  excess  of  my  ingratitude,
and  how  I  should  abuse  Thy  gifts,  so  that  I  deserve  to
have  been  born  a  pagan,  and  not  an  enlightened  human
being, — Thy  mercy,  which  infinitely  exceeds  our  crimes,
has  chosen  me,  in  preference  to  many  other  Christians,  to
bear  the  holy  character  of  a  religious.

Secondly.  Because  Thou  hast  drawn  me  blessedly  to
Thee ;  and  I  acknowledge  it  to  be  an  effect  of  the  clemency
and  charity  which  is  natural  to  Thee,  who  hast  won,  by  the
attractions  of  Thy  caresses,  this  rebellious  and  stubborn
heart,  which  deserves  to  be  loaded  with  fetters  and  chains  ;
and  it  has  seemed  as  if  Thou  hadst  found  in  me  the  faith
ful  companion  of  Thy  love,  and  that  Thy  greatest  pleasure
was  to  be  united  to  me.

Thirdly.  Because  Thou  hast  united  me  so  intimately  to
Thee  ;  and  I  declare,  as  I  am  bound,  that  I  am  indebted
for  this  only  to  Thy  signal  liberality,  as  if  the  number  of  the
just  was  not  great  enough  to  receive  the  immense  abund
ance  of  Thy  mercies  ;  not  that  I  had  better  dispositions  than
others,  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  Thy  charity  might  be  the
more  signalised  in  me  thereby.

Fourthly.  That  Thou  hast  taken  pleasure  and  delight
in  dwelling  in  my  soul ;  and  this,  if  I  may  so  speak,  pro
ceeds  from  the  ardour  of  Thy  love,  which  has  deigned  to
testify,  even  by  words,  that  it  is  the  joy  of  Thy  all-powerful
wisdom  to  stoop  to  one  so  dissimilar  to  Thee,  and  so  utterly
ungrateful.

Fifthly.  That  it  has  pleased  Thee  to  accomplish  Thy
work  happily  in  me  -3  and  it  is  a  favour  which  I  have  hoped


114 THE  HEVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

with  humble  confidence  from  the  tenderness  of  Thy  most
benign  charity,  and  for  which  I  adore  Thee  with  gratitude  ;
declaring,  O  sovereign,  true,  and  only  treasure  of  my  soul,
that  I  have  in  no  way  contributed  to  it  by  my  merits,  but
that  it  is  a  pure  gift  of  Thy  liberality.

All  these  benefits  coming  from  Thine  immense  charity,
and  being  so  far  above  my  nothingness,  I  am  unable  to
give  thanks  for  them  worthily;  but  Thou  hast  further
assisted  my  misery,  in  exciting  others,  by  the  most  con
descending  promises,  to  render  thanksgivings  to  Thee,  the
merit  of  which  may  supply  my  deficiencies.  For  which
may  all  creatures  in  heaven,  on  earth,  and  under  the  earth,
glorify  Thee  and  thank  Thee  continually  !


CHAPTER  XXI.

Thanksgivings  for  the  confirmation  of  the  aforesaid  favours.

AMONGST  other  things,  it  has  pleased  Thee,  my  Lord,  in
the  abundance  of  Thine  inestimable  charity,  to  ratify  and
confirm  these  favours.  On  a  certain  day.  as  I  meditated
on  and  compared  Thy  mercy  and  my  malice,  I  was  filled
with  extreme  joy,  even  to  such  presumption,  as  to  complain
that  Thou  hadst  not  assured  me  of  these  favours  by  solemn
contract;*  when  Thy  sweet  and  affable  charity  agreed  to
satisfy  my  objection,  saying  to  me  :  "  Do  not  complain  of
this;  approach  and  receive  the  confirmation  of  My  pro
mises."  And  immediately  Thou  didst  open  to  me,  with
both  hands,  the  ark  of  Thy  Divine  love  and  infallible  truth,
namely,  Thy  Deified  Heart ;  and  Thou  didst  command  me


*  "  Manu  ad  rnanum  non  firinasse."


HER  SEVEN  PRIVILEGES  CONFIRMED  BY  SEVEN  RINGS. 115

to  extend  my  hand, — I,  perverse  creature  as  I  am,  seeking,
like  the  Jews,  for  a  sign  ;  and  then,  drawing  back  Thy
Sacred  Heart,  with  my  hand  enclosed  therein,  Thou  saidst :
"  Behold,  I  promise  to  preserve  inviolate  the  gifts  which  I
have  bestowed  on  thee  ;  however,  if  I  suspend  their  effects
for  a  time,  by  way  of  dispensation,  I  oblige  Myself,  by
the  omnipotence,  wisdom,  and  love  of  the  Trinity,  in  which
I  live  and  reign  true  God  through  all  ages,  to  recompense
thee  afterwards  threefold.''

After  these  most  sweet  words,  as  I  withdrew  my  hand,
I  perceived  thereon  seven  golden  circlets,  in  the  form  of
rings,*  one  on  each  finger,  and  three  on  the  signet  finger  ;
which  indicated  that  the  seven  privileges  were  confirmed  to
me,  as  I  had  asked.  Then  Thy  loving  mercy  added  these
words  :  "  Each  time  that  you  acknowledge  your  nnworthi-
ness  of  My  gifts,  and  confide  fully  in  My  mercy,  each
time  you  acquit  yourself  of  the  debts  you  owe  Me  for  these
benefits."

Oh,  how  ingenious  is  Thy  Paternity  in  providing  for
Thy  children,  notwithstanding  their  vile  degeneracy,  and
the  mariner  in  which  they  have  squandered  Thy  substance,
falling  from  innocence,  and  depriving  Thee  of  Thy  rightful
worship  !  yet  hast  Thou  deigned  to  accept  as  an  offering
the  reflection  I  make  on  my  miseries.  Do  Thou,  the  Giver
of  gifts,  the  Source  of  all  good,  without  whom  nothing  is
good  and  nothing  is  holy, — do  Thou,  for  Thy  glory  and
the  salvation  of  my  soul,  grant  me  grace  to  know  my  un-


*  This  favour  is  commemorated  by  the  Church  in  her  Office,
3d  Ant.  at  Lauds,  "  Annulis  septem,"  &c.  ;  "My  Lord  Jesus  has
espoused  me  to  Him  with  seven  rings,  and  crowned  me  as  a  bride."
A  similar  Antiphon  may  be  found  in  the  Office  of  St.  Agnes,  V.  M.  ;
"  My  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  espoused  me  with  His  ring,"  &<j.
(Vespers,  3d  Ant.)


116 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


worthiness  of  all  Thy  gifts,  whether  great  or  little,  whether
exterior  or  interior,  and  in  all  things  to  have  the  most
perfect  confidence  in  Thy  mercy.


CHAPTER  XXII.

How  St.  Gertrude  was  admitted  to  the  vision  of  God— Of  the  kiss
of  peace,  and  other  similar  favours.

I  SHOULD  be  unjust,  in  recalling  the  gratuitous  gifts  which
I  have  received  from  Thy  charitable  clemency,  if  I  ungrate
fully  passed  over  what  was  granted  to  my  unworthiness,  by
Thy  most  loving  clemency,  during  a  certain  Lent.  For  on
the  second  Sunday,  as  they  sang  at  Mass  before  the  pro
cession,  the  response  which  commences  Vidi  Dominum
facie  ad  faciem,*  a  marvellous  and  inestimable  coruscation
illuminated  my  soul  with  the  light  of  Divine  revelation,
and  it  appeared  to  me  that  my  face  was  pressed  to  another
face,  as  St.  Bernard  says  :  "Not  a  form,  but  forming  ;  not
attracting  the  bodily  eye,  but  rejoicing  the  heart ;  giving
freely  gifts  of  love,  not  merely  in  appearance  but  in
reality."

In  this  most  enchanting  vision,  Thine  eyes,  bright  as
the  solar  rays,  appeared  opposite  to  mine,  and  Thou  alone
knowest  how  Thou,  my  dearest  Lord,  affected  not  only  my
soul,  but  even  my  body  and  all  my  strength.  Grant,  there
fore,  that  as  long  as  I  live  I  may  prove  myself  Thy  humble
and  devoted  servant.


*  Loquebar  Christus  :  "  Christ  spoke  to  His  beloved  Gertrude  face
to  face,  as  a  man  speaks  in  secret  to  his  friend  "  (i.  Ant.  ii.  Vespers).
See  also  x.  Response,  3  Nocturn.,  Benedictine  Breviary,  Office  for
second  Sunday  in  Lent.


SHE  SEES  OUR  LORD  FACE  TO  FACE. 117

But  even  as  the  rose  is  more  beautiful  and  gives  forth
a  sweeter  fragrance  in  the  spring,  when  it  flourishes,  than
in  the  winter,  when  it  is  dried  up,  and,  like  the  remembrance
of  a  joy  that  is  past,  rekindles  in  us  some  pleasure  to  think
of  it,  so  I  desire,  by  some  comparison,  to  declare  what  I
felt  in  this  most  joyful  vision,  to  extol  Thy  love,  so  that  if
those  who  read  this  receive  similar  or  even  greater  favours,
they  may  thereby  be  excited  to  acts  of  thanksgiving  ;  and  I
myself,  by  recalling  them  frequently,  will  inflame  the  negli
gence  of  my  gratitude  beneath  the  rays  of  this  burning-
glass.  When  Thou  didst  display  Thy  most  adorable  Face, —
the  source  of  all  blessedness,  as  I  have  said,  embracing  me,
unworthy, — a  light  of  inestimable  sweetness  passed  through
Thy  Deified  eyes  into  mine,  passing  through  my  inmost
being,  operating  in  all  my  members  with  admirable  power
and  sweetness  :  first,  it  appeared  as  if  the  marrow  were
taken  from  my  bones  ;  then,  my  flesh  and  bones  appeared
annihilated  ;  so  much  so,  that  it  seemed  as  if  my  substance
no  longer  had  any  consciousness  save  of  that  Divine  splen
dour,  which  shone  in  so  inexplicable  and  delightful  a  manner
that  it  was  the  source  of  the  most  inestimable  pleasure  and
joy  to  my  soul.

Oh,  what  shall  I  say  further  of  this  most  sweet  vision,
if  I  may  so  term  it  ?  For  all  the  eloquence  in  the  world,  if
employed  daily  to  persuade  me,  could  never  convince  me
that  I  should  behold  Thee  more  clearly  even  in  glory,
O  my  God,  the  only  salvation  of  my  soul,  if  Thou  hadst
not  taught  me  by  experience.  I  will  dare  to  say  that  if
anything,  human  or  Divine,  can  exceed  the  blessedness  of
Thy  embrace  in  this  vision,  as  I  consider,  I  may  truly  say
that,  unless  thy  Divine  virtue  possessed  that  person,  the
soul  would  never  remain  in  the  body  after  a  momentary
taste  of  this  blessedness.


118 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

I  render  thanks  to  Thee,  through  the  union  of  mutual
love  which  reigns  in  the  adorable  Trinity,  for  what  I  have
so  often  experienced,  and  that  Thou  hast  deigned  to  favour
me  with  Thy  caresses ;  so  that  while  I  sat  meditating,  or
reading  the  Canonical  Hours,  or  saying  the  Office  of  the
Dead,  Thou  hast  often,  during  a  single  Psalm,  embraced  rny
soul  many  times  with  a  kiss,  which  far  surpasses  the  most
fragrant  perfumes  or  the  sweetest  honey  ;  and  I  have  often
observed  Thou  didst  look  on  me  favourably  in  the  con
descending  caresses  Thou  didst  give  to  my  soul.  But
though  all  these  things  were  filled  with  an  extreme  sweet
ness,  I  declare,  nevertheless,  that  nothing  touched  me  so
much  as  this  majestic  look  of  which  I  have  spoken.  For
this,  and  for  all  the  other  favours,  whose  value  Thou  alone
knowest,  mayest  Thou  rejoice  for  ever  in  that  ineffable
sweetness  surpassing  all  comprehension,  which  the  Divine
Persons  communicate  mutually  to  each  other  in  the  bosom
of  the  Divinity  !

May  a  like  thanksgiving — or,  if  possible,  one  even
greater — be  rendered  to  Thee,  for  an  extraordinary  favour
Thou  hast  granted  me,  of  which  Thou  alone  knowest,  and
which  is  so  great,  that  I  can  neither  fully  express  it  by  my
feeble  words,  nor  altogether  pass  it  over  in  silence ;  and,
lest  1  should  lose  the  remembrance  of  it  through  my  frailty,
I  write  this  to  recall  it  to  my  memory  and  to  excite  my
gratitude.  But,  my  God,  do  not  allow  the  meanest  of  Thy
servants  to  be  guilty  of  such  an  excess  of  madness  as  volun
tarily  to  forget,  even  for  a  single  instant,  the  gratitude  which
she  is  bound  to  have  for  the  visits  with  which  Thou  bast  hon
oured  her  of  Thy  pure  and  gratuitous  liberality,  and  which
she  has  received  for  so  many  years  without  meriting  thern^
For,  although  I  am  the  most  unworthy  of  all  creatures,  I
declare,  nevertheless,  that  these  visits  with  which  Thou


THANKSGIVINGS,  AND  RECAPITULATION.  119

hast  favoured  me  far  surpass  anything  that  could  be
merited  during  this  life.  I,  therefore,  implore  Thy  sweetest
mercy  to  preserve  this  gift  to  me  for  Thy  glory,  with  the
same  goodness  with  which  Thou  hast  so  liberally  bestowed
it,  without  any  merit  on  my  part,  so  that  all  creatures  may
glorify  Thee  eternally  for  it ;  since  the  more  my  unworthi-
ness  is  made  known,  the  more  resplendently  Thy  mercy
will  shine  forth.


CHAPTER  XXIIL

Recapitulation  of  the  gifts  already  mentioned— The  Saint  complains
of  her  infirmity  and  ingratitude.

MAY  my  soul  bless  Thee,  0  Lord  God,  my  Creator,  from  the
inmost  depths  of  my  heart ;  and  let  it  declare  the  mercies
with  which  Thy  charity  has  abounded,  and  encompassed
me,  O  my  sweetest  Love  !  I  give  thanks,  as  far  as  I  am
able,  to  Thine  immense  mercy  ;  I  praise  and  glorify  the
longanimity  of  Thy  patience,  which  has  borne  with  me,
while  I  passed  the  years  of  my  infancy,  childhood,  and
youth,  even  until  my  twenty-fifth  year,  in  such  blindness
and  folly,  that  if  Thou  hadst  not  preserved  me,  either  by
the  natural  dread  which  Thou  didst  give  me  for  evil,  and
an  inclination  for  good,  or  by  the  reproofs  of  others,  and
by  so  many  aids,  and  if  Thou  hadst  not  saved  me  by  Thy
pure  mercy,  it  appears  to  me  that  I  would  have  sinned  at
every  opportunity,  either  by  my  thoughts,  my  words,  or  my
actions,  even  as  if  I  had  been  an  infidel  in  the  midst  of
infidels,  and  as  if  I  had  not  known,  my  God,  that  Thou
wert  the  rewarder  of  good  and  the  avenger  of  evil,  although
Thou  didst  choose  me  even  from  my  infancy — that  is,  from


120


THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


the  age  of  five  years — to  live  in  the  bosom  of  holy  religion,
amongst  Thy  most  faithful  friends.

Although  Thy  felicity,  O  Lord,  can  neither  increase  nor
diminish,  and  Thou  needest  not  our  goods,*  nevertheless,
neither  my  negligences  nor  my  faults  have  diminished  Thy
praises,  if  I  may  so  speak, — I  who  am  so  justly  bound  to
glorify  Thee  continually,  with  all  creatures,  and  with  all  the
powers  of  my  soul.  Thou  alone  knowest  what  I  feel  con
cerning  this  matter,  and  how  profoundly  my  soul  is  touched
by  Thy  condescension  towards  it.

Therefore,  0  loving  Father,  I  offer  thee,  for  the  re
mission  of  my  sins,  all  the  sufferings  which  Thy  beloved
Son  endured,  from  the  hour  when  He  wept  on  straw  in  a
manger, — all  the  sufferings  of  His  Infancy,  the  privations
of  His  Childhood,  the  griefs  of  His  Youth,  and  the  bitter
sufferings  of  His  Manhood, — until  the  hour  when  He  bowed
His  head  upon  the  Cross,  and  gave  up  the  ghost  with  a
loud  cry.  Furthermore,  in  satisfaction  for  all  my  negli
gences,  I  offer  to  Thee,  0  loving  Father,  the  life  of  Thy
Divine  Son,  which  was  so  perfect  in  every  thought,  word,
and  action,  from  the  time  when  He  came  down  from  Thy
celestial  throne  to  The  Virgin's  womb,  and  thence  came
forth  into  this  world,  until  the  hour  when  He  presented  to
Thy  Fatherly  regard  His  victorious  and  glorified  Body.

And  because  it  is  just  that  the  heart  which  loves  Thee
should  compassionate  all  Thy  afflictions,  I  beseech  Thee,
for  the  love  of  Thy  only  Son,  and  by  the  virtue  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  that  whoever,  by  my  request,  or  from  any  other
motive,  shall  desire  to  supply  for  my  deficiencies,  either
during  my  life  or  after  my  death,  for  Thy  glory,  even  by  a
sight  or  by  a  good  work,  that  Thou  wilt  receive  for  them


*  Psalm  xv.  2.


f  "  Etiam  uno  gemitu.1


RECAPITULATION.  121


also,  and  for  the  remission  of  their  sins  and  negligences,
the  offerings  which  I  make  Thee  of  the  conversation  and
sufferings  of  Thy  Divine  Son ;  and  that  I  may  effectually
obtain  my  request,  I  conjure  thee  to  perpetuate  my  desire
to  all  eternity,  and  even  when  I  shall  reign,  by  Thy  grace,
with  Thee  in  heaven.

I  adore  and  bless  with  thanksgiving,  and  with  all
humility,  Thy  ineffable  charity,  0  Father  of  mercies,  by
which,  notwithstanding  the  disorders  of  my  life,  Thou  hast
had  thoughts  of  peace  towards  me,  and  not  of  S3  verity,
overwhelming  me  with  the  greatness  and  multitude  of  Thy
benefits,  even  as  if  I  had  led  the  life  of  an  angel  amongst
men.  Thou  didst  commence  this  work  in  me  during
Advent,  before  I  had  attained  my  twenty-fifth  year,  and
consummated  it  on  the  Epiphany  by  a  certain  fear,  by
which  I  was  so  agitated  that  I  began  to  have  a  distaste
for  all  the  pleasures  of  youth,  so  that  thus  my  heart  be
came  in  some  sort  prepared  to  receive  Thee.

Having  entered  on  my  twenty-sixth  year,  the  second
feria  before  the  feast  of  the  Purification,  at  the  close  of
day,  after  Compline,  Thou,  Lord,  who  art  the  true  Light
shining  in  darkness, — Thou  didst  put  an  end  to  my
spiritual  obscurity  and  darkness,  and  to  my  youthful  vani
ties.  For  at  this  time  Thou  didst  give  me  evident  tokens
of  Thine  amazing  charity  and  of  Thine  amiable  presence ;
and  Thou  didst  teach  me,  by  a  loving  reconciliation,  to  know
Thee  and  to  love  Thee ;  and  having  made  me  enter  into
my  interior,  which  was  until  then  unknown  to  me,  Thou
didst  act  towards  me  in  marvellous  and  hidden  ways,  so
that  thou  didst  seem  to  take  the  same  delight  in  dwelling
in  my  soul  as  a  friend  in  living  with  his  friend  or  a  bride
groom  with  his  bride.

Thou  didst  visit  me,  then,  at  different  times,  and  in


i


12-'  THERKVELA:  ..  GERTRUI-E.

different  ways,  to  preserve  this  commerce  of  charity ;  but
.iy  on  the  Vigil  of  the  Annunciation,  and  before  the

lay  in  the inoru-
pliue,  by  granting  me  that

favour  which  ought  to  be  a  subject  of  admiration  and
reverence  to  all  creatures, — namely,  that  from  that  hour
until  now  I  never  found  Thee  absent  from  my  iieart  for  a
.single  instant  when  I  entered  therein,  except  once,  when
Thou  wert  absent  for  eleven  days.

I  cannot  express  by  my  words  either  the  number  or
the  value  of  the  gifts  Thou  hast  bestowed  on  me,  permit
me,  O  Giver  of  gifts,  to  offer  Thee  in  thanksgiving  a  sacri
fice  of  joy  in  a  spirit  of  humility,  especially  for  having  pre
pared  a  dwelling  in  my  heart,  according  to  Thy  desire  and
mine  ;  so  that  I  have  neither  heard  nor  read  anything  of
the  Temple  of  Solomon  or  the  palace  of  Assuerus  which
seemed  to  me  preferable  to  the  delights  which,  thanks  to
Thy  grace,  have  been  placed  in  rne,  and  which  Thou  hast
permitted  my  un worth  -jare  with  Thee,  as  a  queen

with  the  king.  But  there  are  two  favours  which  I  espe
cially  esteem.  The  first  is,  that  Thou  hast;  imprinted  on
my  heart  the  glorious  mark.-*  of  Thy  saving  Wounds,  and
that  Thou  hast  truly  arid  deeply  pierced  this  same  heart
with  the  wound  of  Thy  love  ;  so  that  even  if  Thou  hadst
never  granted  me  a  gr  .int'son.  either  exteriorly  or

rly,  Thou  hast  conferred  such  happiness  on  me  by
these  two  alone,  that  even  if  I  lived  for  a  thousand  years  I
should  find  each  hour  more  C'.n.-obition.  thanksgiving,  and
instruction  than  I  could  possibly  contain.

ies  these  things,  Thou  hast  also  granted  me  Thy
secret  friend-hip,  by  opening  the  sacred  ark  of  Thy  Divinity
— I  mean  Thy  Deified  Heart —  to  me  in  so  many  manners,
as  to  be  the  source  of  ail  my  happiness  ;  sometimes  impart-


OUR  LORD'S  TENDEBNESS  ix  COVERING  HER  DEFECTS.  123

freely,  sometimes  as  a  special  mark  of  our  mutual
friend-  for  mine, Thou  hast  also  re-

to  me  hidden  mysteries  concerning  Thy  judgments
and  Ti  nd  Thou ::  a  melted :

by  Th  I  did  not  know  the  ;-.'

Thy  overflowing  cond  .1  should  be  amaz-.

I  told  that  even  Thy  Blessed  Mother,  who  reigns  wiih  Thee
in  heaven,  had  been  chosen  to  receive  such  extraordinary
marks  of  tenderness  and  affection.

By  all  these  marks  of  Thy  gentle  love  Thou  hast  led  me
to  a  salutary  kn^  .  and  at  the  same  time

spared  my  shame  with  so  much  charity,  that — pardon  me
ing  it— it  IN .  <  -.  em  as  if  the  loss  of  half  Thy  king
dom  were  less  to  Thee  than  to  cause  me  a  momentary  coa-
:or  my  imperfections. I  u  order  to  make

them  known  to  me,  Thou  expedient,

_  I me  the  delects  whi.  ;d  Thee  in

and  of  which,  when  I  ei..  myself,  I  fou:.d

/  than  they  .:>t  not

sjn  of  havi;  _  i  them  in  me.

Further,  Thou  hast  won  my  soul  by  Thy  faithful  pro-
:h  and  after  it;  and  if  I  had

only  obtained  this  favour  from  Thee,  it  would  be  sufficient
to  fill  my  heart  with  the  mo*t  lively  hope  and  desire.  But

.in  of  Thy  infinite  mercy  was  n^t  yet  exhaus:
Thou  hast  heard  the  frequent  prayers  which  I  ad  .
to  Thee  for  sinners  fc:  for  other  COL-

tions  ;  and  so  great  have  Wen  the>e  favours,  that  I  have
I found  one  to  whom  I  could  discover  them,  as  I
know  them  myself,  on  account  of  the  pusiUanimitv  of  the
human  heart,  which  is  slow  of  belief. To  crown  all  these
I,  Thou  1.  :ae  Thy  sweetest  Mother,  the

Blessed  Virgin,  for  n.  te,  ;uid  Thou  h


124  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


recommended  me  to  her  many  times  with  the  same  ardour
as  a  faithful  bridegroom  would  recommend  his  beloved
bride  to  his  own  mother.  Thou  hast  also  often  sent  the
.princes  of  Thy  court  to  minister  to  me  ;  not  only  from  the
choirs  of  angels  and  archangels,  but  even  those  of  higher
rank,  as  Thy  kindness,  my  God,  judged  it  expedient  for
my  advancement  in  spiritual  exercises.  But  when,  for  ray
soul's  good,  Thou  hast  deprived  me  for  a  time  of  some  of
Thy  delights,  I  have  yielded  to  a  weak  and  shameful  in
gratitude,  and  have  forgotten  Thy  gifts,  as  if  they  had  been
of  no  benefit  to  me  ;  and  if  by  Thy  grace  I  discovered  what
I  had  lost,  and  asked  Thee  to  restore  it,  or  to  grant  me  some
other  favour,  Thou  didst  immediately  give  me  all,  as  if  it
had  been  a  deposit  which  I  had  entrusted  to  Thy  keeping.
Besides  these  favours,  Thou  didst  grant  me  others  of  the
utmost  value,  especially  on  the  day  of  Thy  Nativity,  the
Sunday  Esto  mihi ;  and  also  another  Sunday  after  Pente
cost  Thou  didst  elevate  me,  or  rather  Thou  didst  ravish  me,
to  so  close  a  union  with  Thyself,  that  I  marvel  more  than
at  a  miracle  how  I  have  lived  since  then  as  a  creature
amongst  creatures ;  and  am  even  more  amazed,  and  even
horrified,  that  I  have  not  amended  my  faults  as  I  was
bound  to  do.  Nevertheless,  the  fountain  of  Thy  mercy  has
not  dried  up  for  me,  0  Jesus,  of  all  lovers  the  most  loving,
— or  rather,  the  only  One  who  loves  the  ungrateful  truly
and  disinterestedly.  For  after  a  time,  having  forgotten  my
vileness,  unworthy  that  I  am,  and  having  begun  to  disre
lish  those  things  which  are  the  joy  and  praise  of  heaven
and  earth, — if  it  were  only  because  an  infinite  God  had
abased  Himself  unreservedly  towards  a  vile  and  abject
worm, — Thou,  the  Giver,  Renovator,  and  Preserver  of
every  good, — Thou  didst  arouse  me  from  my  torpor,  and
excite  me  to  gratitude,  by  revealing  to  a  certain  person,


HUMBLE  CONFESSIONS  OF  HER  UNWORTHINESS. 125


who  was  very  devout  to  Thee  and  familiar  with  TLee,
some  particulars  of  the  gifts  which  Thou  hast  bestowed
on  me,  which  they  could  not  have  known  by  human
means,  since  I  had  not  revealed  them  to  any  human  be
ing  j  so  that  I  heard  from  their  lips  what  was  only  known
to  my  secret  heart.

As  I  recall  these  words  and  others,  the  glory  of  which
is  due  to  Thee  alone,  I  will  sing  a  canticle  on  a  harmonious
instrument,  which  is  none  other  than  Thy  Divine  Heart,
by  the  virtue  of  the  Spirit  of  consolation.  Eternal  Father,
may  all  that  is  in  heaven,  on  earth,  or  in  the  deep — may
all  things  which  have  been,  which  are,  or  which  will  be —
render  Thee  thanks  and  praise  !  Even  as  gold  shines  most
clearly  when  surrounded  by  various  colours, — even  as  black
appears  darker  by  contrast  with  them, — so  is  the  blackness
of  my  ungrateful  life,  when  compared  with  the  splendour
of  the  Divine  benefits  so  abundantly  bestowed  on  me.  For
as  Thou  couldst  not  grant  any  favours  that  were  not  com
mensurate  with  Thy  royal  liberality,  I  have  only  received
them  in  my  boorish  ignorance,  and  as  an  unfortunate  abuser
of  thy  graces.  This  Thou  didst,  as  it  were,  dissimulate
by  an  effect  of  Thy  natural  clemency,  so  that  it  appeared
as  if  Thou  never  didst  more  for  me  than  when  I  did  least
for  Thee.  And  even  when  Thou  didst  seek  hospitality  in
my  poor  dwelling, — Thou,  who  reposest  in  the  loving
bosom  of  thy  celestial  Father, — I  have  been  so  negligent
and  so  careless  in  entertaining  Thee,  that  I  should,  even
from  natural  humanity,  have  been  bound  to  tend  a  leper
with  more  care  who  had  asked  a  shelter  under  my  roof,
after  overwhelming  me  with  outrages  and  injuries.  Far,
0  Lord,  who  adorned  the  stars  with  beauty — far  from  re
cognising  the  graces  Thou  didst  bestow  on  me — whether  by
filling  me  with  interior  consolation,  or  by  imprinting  on


T26  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

me  Thy  sacred  Wounds,  or  by  revealing  to  me  Thy  secrets,
and  even  those  of  Thy  friends,  or  by  giving  me  marks  of
Thy  friendship  and  tenderness  greater  than  could  have  been
found  had  the  earth  been  traversed  from  east  to  west — I
have  been  so  ungrateful  as  to  outrage  Thee  by  despising
these  tilings,  by  seeking  strange  pleasures,  and  by  prefer
ring  the  bitterness  of  exterior  things  to  the  sweetness  of
Thy  celestial  manna.  I  have  distrusted  Thy  promises,  O
God  of  truth,  as  if  Thou  wert  a  man  who  couldst  lie,  or
fail  in  Thy  fidelity  !

Alas  !  I  have  also  offended  the  goodness  with  which
Thou  hast  heard  my  unworthy  prayers  so  favourably,  by
hardening  my  heart  against  Thy  will,  and,  as  I  ought  to
declare  with  tears  in  my  eyes,  sometimes  pretending  not  to
understand  Thy  will,  lest  the  reproaches  of  my  conscience
should  oblige  me  to  obey  it.

I  have  also  despised  the  aid  of  Thy  most  glorious
Mother,  and  that  of  the  blessed  spirits  whom  Thou  hast
sent  to  me  ;  and  I  have  been  so  unhappy  as  to  prove  an
obstacle  even  to  my  earthly  friends,  on  whom  I  have  leant,
instead  of  relying  on  Thee  alone  ;  and  far  from  increasing
my  gratitude  and  my  vigilance  over  my  faults,  on  seeing
that  Thy  charity  continued  Thy  favours,  notwithstanding
my  negligence,  I,  on  the  contrary,  returned  Thee  evil  for
good,  like  a  tyrant,  or  rather  like  a  demon,  and  had  the
hardihood  to  live  even  more  carelessly.

But  my  greatest  fault  is,  that  after  the  incredible  union
which  I  have  had  with  Thee,  and  which  is  known  to  Thee
alone,  I  have  not  feared  to  sully  my  soul  again  with  the
same  defects,  which  Thou  hast  permitted  to  continue  in
me  in  order  that  I  might  conquer  them,  and  thus  obtain
greater  glory  with  Thee  in  heaven.  I  have  sinned  also,  in
that  when  Thou  didst  di^ver  to  my  friends  Thy  hidden


HER  OBJECT  IN  WRITING.  127


favours,  to  excite  my  gratitude,  I  failed  in  accomplishing
Thy  designs  therein,  by  rejoicing  in  a  human  manner,  and
neglecting  to  correspond  with  Thy  designs  by  the  duty  of
gratitude.

And  now,  0  adorable  Creator  of  my  soul,  permit  the
groans  of  my  heart  to  rise  even  to  heaven  in  expiation  of
all  these  faults,  and  of  others  which  Thou  mayest  yet  bring
to  my  recollection.  Accept  my  grief  for  the  immense
number  of  offences  which  I  have  committed  against  the
nobleness  of  Thy  Divine  goodness.  I  offer  it  to  Thee,  with
all  the  gratitude  and  all  the  reverence  which  Thou  hast
enabled  me,  for  all  in  heaven,  on  earth,  and  in  the  deep,
through  the  merit  of  Thy  beloved  Son,  and  by  the  power
of  the  Holy  Spirit.

Since,  then,  I  am  altogether  incapable  of  producing
worthy  fruits  of  penance,  I  implore  Thy  mercy,  O  my
sweetest  Love,  to  inspire  those  hearts  which  have  sufficient
fidelity  and  zeal  to  appease  Thee  by  a  sacrifice  of  propitia
tion,  to  repair  for  my  defects  by  their  sighs,  their  prayers,
and  other  good  works,  arid  to  pay  the  debt  of  praise  which
I  owe  to  Thee  alone,  0  Lord  my  God  ;  because,  as  Thou
seest  the  bottom  of  my  heart,  Thou  knowest  that  I  have
only  written  these  things  from  a  pure  love  of  Thy  glory,
in  order  that  many  who  shall  read  them  after  my  death
may  be  touched  by  Thy  sweetness  and  clemency,  consider
ing  the  greatness  of  Thy  love,  which  has  abased  itself  so
low  for  the  salvation  of  mankind  as  to  permit  such  nume
rous  and  precious  gifts  to  be  abused,  as  I,  alas  !  have  abused
them.

But  I  give  thanks  with  all  my  might,  O  Lord,  my
Creator  and  re-Creator,  to  Thine  infinite  mercy,  that,  from
the  abyss  of  Thy  overflowing  goodness,  Thou  hast  made
known  to  me  that  whosoever  shall  remember  me  as  I  have


128 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


said  above,  for  Thy  glory,  either  by  praying  for  sinners,
or  by  giving  thanks  for  the  elect,  or  by  any  other  good
works,  shall  not  leave  this  world  until  Thou  hast  granted
him  the  grace  to  become  pleasing  to  Thee,  and  so  order
his  heart  that  Thou  mayest  find  joy  and  pleasure  therein.
For  which  may  eternal  praise  be  given  to  Thee,  which  shall
return  without  ceasing  to  the  uncreated  Love  whence  it
proceeded.


CHAPTER XXIV.

Conclusion  of  this  Book.

BEHOLD,  O  loving  Lord,  I  offer  Thee  the  talent  of  Thy  con-
descending  intimacy,  which  Thou  hast  confided  to  me,  vile
creature  that  I  am.  I  have  traded  with  it  for  love  of  Thy
love  in  that  which  I  have  written,  or  which  I  may  yet
write.  And  I  can  boldly  declare,  by  Thy  grace,  that  I  have
had  no  other  motive  in  saying  or  writing  these  things,  ex
cept  that  of  obeying  Thy  will,  of  promoting  Thy  glory,  and
of  zeal  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  I  desire,  therefore,  that
all  should  praise  Thee  and  give  Thee  thanks,  that  my  un-
worthiness  has  not  caused  Thee  to  withdraw  Thy  mercy
from  me.  I  desire  also  that  Thou  shouldst  be  praised  for
those  who,  reading  these  things,  are  charmed  with  the  sweet
ness  of  Thy  charity,  and  inwardly  drawn  to  desire  the
same  ;  and  also  for  those  who,  studying  them  as  students,
commence  with  the  alphabet,  and  attain  to  philosophy, —
thus  being  led  by  the  perusal  of  these  things,  as  by  pic
tures  and  images,  to  search  for  the  hidden  manna,  which  in
creases  the  hunger  of  those  who  partake  of  it,  and  which
is  not  found  in  corporal  substances.

Therefore,  since  Thou,  the  Almighty  Dispenser  of  all


PRAYER  FOR  THOSE  WHO  READ  HEU  REVELATIONS. 129


good  things,  dost  vouchsafe  to  pasture  us  during  our  exile,
until,  "  beholding  the  glory  of  the  Lord  with  unveiled
countenance,  we  are  transformed  into  His  image,  and
from  glory  to  glory  by  the  power  of  the  spirit  of  love  "
(2  Cor.  iii.  18);  meanwhile,  according  to  Thy  faithful  pro
mises  and  the  humble  desire  of  my  heart,  grant,  I  beseech
Thee,  to  all  who  read  these  writings  with  humility,  the
peace  of  Thy  love,  compassion  for  my  miseries,  and  a  salu
tary  compunction  for  their  furtherance  in  perfection;  so
that,  elevating  their  hearts  towards  Thee  with  burning  love,
they  may  be  like  so  many  golden  censers,  whose  sweet
odours  shall  abundantly  supply  all  my  negligence  and  in
gratitude.  Amen.


PART  III.
THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

COMPILED BY THE RELIGIOUS OF HER MONASTERY.

CHAPTER  L

Our  Lord  gives  His  Blessed  Mother  to  St.  Gertrude  to  be  her  mother,
in  order  that  she  may  have  recourse  to  her  in  all  her  afflictions.

ST.  GERTRUDE  having  learned  by  Divine  revelation
that  she  was  about  to  endure  some  trial  *  for  the
increase  of  her  merit,  began  to  fear  through  human  weak
ness  -,  but  the  Lord  had  compassion  on  her  infirmity,  and
gave  her  His  most  merciful  Mother,  the  Empress  of
Heaven,  for  her  mother  and  for  her  dispenser ;  so  that,
when  the  burden  of  her  grief  appeared  beyond  her  strength,
she  might  always  have  recourse  to  this  Mother  of  mercy,
and  by  her  intervention  obtain  relief.

Some  time  after,  as  she  was much  grieved  because  a
devout  person  obliged  her  to  reveal  the  singular  favours

*  The  French  translations  here  have  "quelque  disgrace;"  the
Latin,  "  adversitatis."  The  passage  which  follows  has  also  been
translated  very  loosely,  and  two  sentences  inserted  which  are  not  in
the  original.


132 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

with  which  God  had  honoured  her  on  the  preceding  feast,
she  had  recourse  to  the  Mother  of  the  afflicted,  in  order
to  learn  from  her  what  she  ought  to  do  on  this  occasion.
"  Give  freely  what  you  possess,"  she  replied ;  "  for  my
Son  is  rich  enough  to  repay  all  that  you  expend  for  His
glory."  But  as  the  Saint  desired  to  conceal  as  much  as
possible  the  great  favours  granted  to  her,  even  while  she
partly  revealed  them,  she  desired  to  know  from  her
heavenly  Spouse  how  far  her  conduct  was  agreeable  to
Him.  Prostrating  herself  at  His  feet,  she  implored  Him
to  make  known  His  will  to  her,  and  to  give  her  the  desire
of  accomplishing  it.  Her  confidence  merited  for  her  this
reply,  which  she  received  from  the  Divine  Mercy  :  "  Give
My  money  to  the  bank,  that  when  I  come  I  may  receive
it  with  usury "  (Luke  xix.  23).  And  thus  she  learnecj
that  the  reasons  which  she  had  considered  good,  and  even
inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  were  merely  human;  so
that  from  henceforth  she  imparted  more  freely  what  was
revealed  to  her,  and  not  without  reason ;  for  Solomon  has
declared  :  "It  is  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  the  word,
and  the  glory  of  kings  to  search  out  the  speech  "  (Prov.
xxv.  2).

CHAPTER  II.

Adversity  is  the  spiritual  ring  with  which  the  soul  is  betrothed
to  God.

As  Gertrude  offered  to  God  in  her  prayers  all  that  she
suffered  in  body  and  mind,  and  all  the  pleasures  of  which
she  had  deprived  herself,  whether  in  the  flesh  or  the  spirit,
our  Lord  appeared  to  her,  and  showed  her  the  pleasures
and  the  pains  which  she  had  offered  to  Him  under  the
form  of  two  rings,  enriched  with  precious  stones,  which  He


CORPORAL  PAIN  A  PLEDGE  OF  SPIRITUAL  ESPOUSALS. 133


wore  to  adorn  His  hands.  The  Saint,  perceiving  this,
repeated  the  offering  frequently;  and  when  suffering  a
corporal  affliction  some  time  afterwards,  she  beheld  Jesus
her  Lord  touch  her  left  eye  with  the  ring  which  He  carried
in  His  left  hand,  and  which  represented  corporal  afflictions
and  sufferings  ;  and  from  this  moment  she  felt  extreme
suffering  in  this  eye,  which  she  had  beheld  our  Lord  touch
in  spirit,  and  this  pain  was  never  entirely  removed.

She  knew  from  this  that,  as  the  ring  is  the  sign  of
espousal,  so  also  sufferings  in  body  or  mind  are  testimonies
of  the  spiritual  espousal  of  the  soul  with  God ;  so  that  who
ever  suffers  may  say  confidently,  with  all  truth  :  "  My  Lord
Jesus  Christ  has  espoused  me  to  Him  with  His  ring ;  "
and  if  he  recognises  in  those  afflictions  the  graces  which
he  has  received,  and  returns  thanks,  he  may  add  :  "  He
has  adorned  me  with  a  crown  as  His  spouse;"  because
thanksgiving  in  tribulation  is  a  crown  of  glory  more  bril
liant  than  gold,  and  incomparably  more  precious  than
topaz.


CHAPTER  III.

Human  consolation  weakens  that  which  is  Divine.

GERTRUDE  received  another  plain  testimony,  although  she
did  not  understand  it  very  well  at  first,  that  contradictions
and  privation  of  consolation  in  suffering  greatly  increase
merit.  On  a  certain  day,  about  the  Feast  of  Pentecost,  as
she  suffered  such  severe  pain  in  her  side  that  those  who
were  present  feared  her  last  hour  had  arrived,  her  Beloved,
the  true  Consoler  of  her  soul,  retired  from  her,  and  thus
increased  her  suffering,  although  the  cares  and  attentions
of  those  who  surrounded  her  were  redoubled;  whereas,


134 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE,

when  she  was  less  carefully  attended,  this  loving  Lord
remained  near  her,  to  solace  the  severity  of  her  pain  by
His  presence  :  thus  making  her  understand,  that  when  we
are  deprived  of  human  consolation,  the  Divine  Mercy  re
gards  us  most  favourably.

Towards  evening,  as  the  Saint  was  worn  out  by  acute
suffering,  she  sought  to  obtain  some  mitigation  of  it  from
our  Lord  ;  but  He  raised  His  right  arm,  and  showed  her
the  pain  she  had  endured  all  day  as  a  precious  ornament
on  His  bosom.  As  this  ornament  appeared  so  perfect  and
so  complete  in  every  part,  she  rejoiced,  hoping  that  her
suffering  -would  now  cease ;  but  our  Lord  replied :
'•  What  you  suffer  after  this  will  add  brightness  to  this
ornament ".  And  certainly,  although  it  was  garnished
with  precious  stones,  the  gold  appeared  dark  and  dull.
-2e  suffered  afterwards  was  not  so  grievous  in  itself  ;
was  more  tried  by  being  deprived  of  consolation,
than  by  the  acuteness  of  the  pain.


CHAPTER  IV.
How  vile  and  despicable  are  all  transitory  pleasures.

ABOUT  the  Feast  of  St.  Bartholomew,*  Gertrude  felt  herself
overwhelmed  with  an  exceeding  sadness  and  a  temptation

l  Saint  was  martyred  in  Armenia,  It  is  related
in  the  Life  of  St.  Elizabeth  of  Hungary,  that  when  the  Blessed  Virgin
appeared  to  her  during  the  vigil  of  Christmas,  she  mentioned  the
Bartholomew,  with  St.  John  and  St.  Lawrence,  as  special
**  lovers  of  Jesus."  She  added  :  *«  If  thou  wilt  consent  to  be  deprived
of  afl  that  is  dear  to  thee,  and  even  of  thy  own  will,  I  will  obtain  for
thee  the  same  reward  that  Bartholomew  received  when  his  skin  was
flayed  off.  If  thou  endurest  insults  patiently,  thou  wilt  be  like  unto


TEMPTATIONS  TO  JM1  .SS.  135

to  impatience.  This  caused  such  darkness  in  her  soul,
that  she  appeared  insensible  to  all  the  pleasures  which  the
presence  of  God  imparted  to  her,  and  light  was  not  restored
to  her  until  the  following  Saturday  through  the  inter _
of  the  Mother  of  God,  when  they  sang  in  her  honour  the
Antiphon  which  commences  "  Mary,  Star  of  the  sea."  *
The  following  day,  as  she  rejoiced  inwardly  at  the  sweetness
and  tenderness  with  which  God  treated  her,  she  began  to
reflect  on  her  late  impatience  and  her  other  faults ;  then,
feeling  exceedingly  displeased  with  herself,  she  prayed  to
God  for  her  amendment,  but  with  such  discouragement,
that,  beholding  the  enormity  and  the  multitude  of  her
she  cried  out  in  despair :  "  God  of  mercy,  set  bounds
to  my  malice,  since  I  place  neither  end  nor  measure  to  it !
1  Deliver  me,  O  Lord,  and  set  me  beside  Thee,  and  let  any
man's  hand  fight  against  me ' n  (Job  xvii  3).

Our  Lord,  compassionating  her  extreme  affliction,  showed
her  a  small,  narrow  garden,  filled  with  many  beautiful
flowers,  but  surrounded  with  thorns,  through  which  a  little
stream  of  honey  flowed.  He  said  to  her :  '•  Would  you
prefer  the  pleasure  which  you  might  enjoy  here  to  Me  ? "
She  replied:  "Assuredly  not,  O  Lord  my  God."  Then
He  showed  her  another  little  garden,  filled  with  mire  and
dirt,  but  covered  with  some  verdure,  and  containing  a  few
common  flowers.  Being  asked  likewise  if  she  would  prefer
this,  she  turned  away  from  it  to  show  her  aversion,  and
exclaimed  :  "  May  I  never  prefer  the  fearful  illusion  of  an
apparent  good,  which  conceals  a  real  evil,  to  Him  who  is
the  only  sovereign,  true,  unchangeable,  and  eternal  Good  ! "


Lawrence  when  he  suffered  martyrdom. If  thou  keepest
when  reproached  and  offended,  thou  wilt  merit  as  John  did  when  the
wicked  sought  to  poison  him."
*  Stella  Maria  maris  ;  probably  Art,  mart*  Stella.


]  36 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Our  Lord  replied:  "Why,  then,  do  you  mistrust,  as  one
deprived  of  charity ;  since  the  favours  with  which  I  over
whelm  you  are  a  proof  that  you  possess  it  ?  And  why  do
you  speak  despairingly  because  of  your  sins,  since  Scrip
ture  testifies  that  charity  covers  a  multitude  of  sins,  when
you  do  not  prefer  your  will  to  Mine,  although  by  following
it  you  might  live  without  trouble,  and  in  honour,  in  the
esteem  of  men,  and  with  a  reputation  for  sanctity  ?  I  have
represented  this  self-will  to  you  under  the  figure  of  a  garden
filled  with  flowers,  and  the  pleasures  of  a  sensual  life  by
the  verdure  which  covered  the  mire."  She  replied  :  "Oh,
would  to  God  a  thousand  times  that,  by  the  contempt  of
the  garden  of  flowers,  which  Thou  hast  shown  me,  I  may
have  altogether  renounced  my  own  will  !  but  I  fear  the
insignificance  of  the  place  disposed  me  to  do  so  more
easily."  "  It  is  thus,"  our  Lord  replied,  "that,  in  guiding
the  consciences  of  My  elect,  I  only  let  them  see  temporal
advantages  to  a  small  extent,  in  order  to  avoid  exposing
their  weakness  to  great  temptation,  and  to  inspire  them
more  easily  with  contempt  for  the  false  pleasures  of  earth."
Then  Gertrude  renounced  entirely  all  the  pleasures  of
heaven  and  earth,  and  cast  herself  with  such  constancy  and
fervour  into  the  bosom  of  her  Beloved,  that  she  believed
no  creature  would  now  be  able  to  remove  her  for  a  single
moment  from  His  arms,  where  she  tasted  with  joy  that  life-
giving  draught  which  flowed  from  the  wounded  Side  of  her
Lord,  and  whose  sweetness  infinitely  surpassed  that  of  the
most  precious  balm.


OUR  LORD'S  UNION  WITH  HER.  137


CHAPTER  V.

The  perfect  resignation  of  St.  Gertrude  into  the  hands  of  God  in  all
adversities,  and  what  merit  she  acquired  thereby.

ON  the  Feast  of  the  Apostle  St.  Matthew,*  our  Lord  having
prevented  her  by  the  sweetness  of  His  frequent  benedictions,
she  offered  the  chalice  in  thanksgiving  at  the  Elevation  ;
and  having  reflected  that  her  oblation  would  be  of  little
value  if  she  did  not  willingly  offer  to  bear  all  kinds  of  suffer
ing  for  the  love  of  Christ,  she  rose,  in  the  fervour  of  her
zeal,  from  the  bosom  of  her  Spouse,  in  which  was  all  her
delight,  and  threw  herself  on  the  ground  as  a  vile  carcass,
exclaiming  :  "  I  offer  myself  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  to  endure
all  that  may  promote  Thy  glory."  Then  the  Lord  hastened
quickly  to  her,  and  placed  Himself  on  the  ground  beside
her,  as  if  to  support  her,  saying :  "  This  is  Mine."  "  Yes,"
exclaimed  the  Saint,  turning  towards  God,  and  animated
with  fresh  courage  ;  "  I  belong  to  Thee — I  am  the  work  of
Thy  hands."  "  It  is  true,"  replied  our  Lord  ;  "  but  this
grace  is  singularly  yours,  that  I  am  so  closely  united  to
thee  by  love,  that  I  would  not  willingly  enjoy  beatitude
without  thee."

Being  amazed  at  the  exceeding  condescension  of  these
words,  she  exclaimed  :  "  Why  dost  Thou  speak  thus  to  me,
0  Lord,  since  Thou  hast  such  an  infinite  number  of  friends
in  heaven  and  on  earth,  with  whom  Thou  couldst  share
Thy  happiness,  even  had  I  never  been  created  1 "  Our  Lord
replied  :  "  He  who  has  always  wanted  a  limb  does  not  feel
the  same  privation  as  one  who  loses  it  in  advanced  years  ;
in  like  manner,  I  have  so  placed  My  love  in  thee,  that  I
could  not  bear  that  we  should  be  separated  from  each  other."


*  September  21.


138 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


CHAPTER  VI.

The  co-operation  of  the  faithful  soul  at  the  Holy  Sacrifice— Five
favours  on  which  the  Saint  was  desired  to  meditate,  when  unable
to  assist  at  it.

ON  the  Feast  of  St.  Maurice,*  as  the  celebrant  pronounced
the  secret  words  of  consecration,  St.  Gertrude  said  to  our
Lord  :  "  Lord,  the  mystery  which  Thou  dost  now  operate
is  so  tremendous  and  so  great,  that  I  scarcely  dare  to
breathe  or  speak ;  it  is  enough  for  me  to  hide  myself  in
the  deepest  valley  of  humility  which  I  can  find,  expecting
my  share  in  the  salvation  which  Thou  dost  there  impart  to
Thine  elect."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  When  a  mother  wishes
to  do  some  work  with  pearls  and  precious  stones,  she  some
times  places  her  child  in  an  elevated  place  to  hold  her
thread  or  her  pearls,  or  to  do  her  some  other  service ;  so
I  have  placed  you  in  an  eminent  position  to  dispose  of
the  merits  of  this  Mass  ;  and  if  you  elevate  your  will  even
to  desire  willingly  to  suffer  all  kinds  of  labour  and  pain,
in  order  that  this  sacrifice,  which  is  so  salutary  for  all
Christians,  whether  living  or  dead,  may  be  fully  accom
plished  in  all  its  excellence,  you  will  then  have  contributed,
according  to  the  extent  of  your  ability,  to  the  accom
plishment  of  My  work."

Once,  when  the  Saint  was  confined  to  bed,  and  unable
to  assist  at  Mass,  at  which  she  had  hoped  to  have  com
municated,  she  said  to  God  with  a  troubled  spirit  :  "  To

*  September  22.  St.  Maurice  was  a  commander,  if  not  chief  captain,
of  the  famous  Christian  Theban  legion,  which  was  first  decimated,
and  then  cruelly  martyred  in  cold  blood,  by  the  command  of  the
Emperor  Maximinian,  for  refusing  to  join  the  army  in  sacrificing  to
the  gods  for  the  success  of  his  expedition  into  Gaul.


FIVE  SUBJECTS  OF  MEDITATION  AT  MASS.  139


what  must  I  attribute  my  hindrance  from  assisting  to-day
at  the  Holy  Mysteries,  if  not  to  Thy  Divine  Providence,  my
Beloved  ? — and  how  shall  I  prepare  myself  to  receive  the
Communion  of  Thy  adorable  Body  and  Blood,  since  my
intention  at  Mass  always  seemed  to  me  my  best  prepara
tion  ? "  "  Since  you  attribute  the  cause  to  Me,"  replied  our
Lord,  "to  console  you,  I  will  make  you  hear  the  songs  of
joy  with  which  heaven  resounds  when  I  espouse  a  soul.

"  Hear,  then,  from  Me,  that  my  Blood  is  your  redemp
tion  j  meditate  on  those  three-and-thirty  years  during  which
I  laboured  for  you  in  exile,  and  sought  only  to  ally  Myself
with  you  ;  and  let  this  serve  for  the  first  part  of  Mass.

"  Hear  me  telling  you  how  I  have  dowered  you  with
the  riches  of  My  Spirit,  and  that  even  as  I  endured  so
much  bodily  labour  during  the  three-and-thirty  years  in
which  I  sought  you,  so  also  My  soul  feels  an  ineffable  joy
at  the  union  and  spiritual  marriage  which  we  have  con
tracted  ;  and  let  this  be  your  consolation  during  the  second
part  of  Mass.

"  Listen,  then,  to  Me,  while  I  tell  you  how  you  are  re
plenished  with  My  Divinity,  which  has  the  power  to  make
you  taste  the  purest  delights  and  the  most  ravishing  sweet
ness  inwardly,  whilst  exteriorly  you  are  suffering  the  se
verest  pain.  This  will  serve  for  the  third  part  of  Mass.

"  Hear,  further,  how  you  are  sanctified  by  My  love ;
know  that  you  have  nothing  of  yourself,  and  that  all  which
renders  you  agreeable  to  Me  conies  from  Me.  Occupy  your
self  with  these  thoughts  during  the  fourth  part  of  Mass.

"  Lastly,  hear  that  you  have  been  united  *  to  Me  in  the
sublimest  manner ;  and  know  that,  as  '  all  power  has  been
given  to  Me  in  heaven  and  on  earth,'  I  cannot  be  hindered


;Couglutinatione.'


140 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

from  exalting  you,  as  a  king  exalts  his  queen  to  his  throne,
and  consequently  renders  her  an  object  of  respect.  Rejoice,
then,  in  reflecting  on  these  things,  and  do  not  complain
again  that  you  have  been  deprived  of  hearing  Mass."


CHAPTER  VII.

"With  what  confidence  we  should  have  recourse  to  God  in  all  our
needs  and  temptations.

As  Gertrude  prepared  herself  for  Communion  on  the  Feast
of  the  Holy  Innocents,  she  found  herself  distracted  by  a
crowd  of  importunate  thoughts  ;  and  having  implored  the
Divine  assistance,  our  Lord,  in  His  exceeding  mercy,  spoke
thus  to  her  :  "  If  any  one,  when  encompassed  by  temptation,
throws  himself  on  My  protection  with  a  firm  hope,  he  is  of
the  number  of  those  of  whom  I  can  say  :  '  One  is  My  dove,
chosen  amongst  a  thousand  ;  he  has  pierced  My  Divine  Heart
with  one  glance  of  His  eye  ; '  so  that  if  I  thought  I  could
not  assist  him,  My  heart  would  be  so  desolate  that  even
all  the  joys  of  heaven  could  not  alleviate  my  grief,  because
he  is  a  part  of  My  Body,  and  is  united  to  My  Divinity ;  and
I  am  ever  the  advocate  of  My  elect,  full  of  compassion  for
their  every  need."

"Lord,"  replied  St.  Gertrude,  "how  is  it  that  Thy  im
maculate  Body,  in  which  Thou  never  hadst  any  contradic
tion,  enables  Thee  to  compassionate  our  many  weaknesses  1 n
He  replied :  "  You  may  easily  convince  yourself  of  this.
Has  not  My  Apostle  said  :  '  It  behoved  Him  in  all  things
to  be  made  like  unto  His  brethren,  that  He  might  be  able
to  succour  them  also  that  are  tempted  1 '  "  *  He  added  :

*  Heb.  ii.  17, 18.


ST.  MARY  MAGDALEN.  141


"  This  eye  of  My  beloved,  which  pierces  My  heart,  is  the
confidence  which  she  ought  to  have  in  Me, —  that  I  know,
that  I  am  able,  and  that  I  am  willing  to  assist  her  faith
fully  in  all  her  miseries  ;  and  this  confidence  has  such  power
over  My  goodness,  that  it  is  not  possible  for  Me  to  abandon
her."  "  But,  Lord,"  replied  the  Saint,  "  since  confidence  is
so  great  a  gift  that  none  can  have  it  unless  Thou  dost  bestow
it,  what  merit  have  those  who  are  deprived  of  it  ? "  He  re
plied  :  "  Each  can  at  least  overcome  his  diffidence,  in  some
degree,  by  the  testimony  of  Scripture,  and  say,  if  not  with
his  whole  heart,  at  least  with  his  lips  :  '  If  I  should  be
cast  into  hell,  Thou,  O  Lord,  wilt  deliver  me ;'  and  again,
4  Although  He  should  kill  me,  I  will  trust  Him.' "


CHAPTER  VIII.

Of  the  efficacy  of  prayers  for  others.

GOD  having  revealed  to  a  certain  person  that  He  willed  to
deliver  a  great  number  of  souls  from  purgatory,  through
the  prayers  of  the  community,  a  general  prayer  was  en
joined  for  all  the  religious.  As  St.  Gertrude  prayed,  one
Sunday,  in  the  manner  prescribed,  she  pleaded  most  fer
vently  with  God  for  the  deliverance  of  these  souls,  and,
being  rapt  in  spirit,  she  beheld  the  Lord,  like  a  king  in
the  midst  of  His  glory,  occupied  in  distributing  rewards
and  gifts  ;  not  being  able  to  discern  exactly  why  He  was
thus  so  greatly  occupied,  she  said  to  Him  :  "  Most  loving
Lord  !  since  you  made  known  to  me  last  year,  on  the  Feast
of  St.  Mary  Magdalen,  notwithstanding  my  unworthiness,
that  Thine  own  goodness  had  obliged  Thee  to  grant  mercy
to  those  who  approached  Thy  sacred  Feet,  since  so  many
persons  prostrated  themselves  before  Thee  on  this  day,  to


142 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

imitate  the  blessed  sinner,  Thy  faithful  lover,  do  me  the
further  grace  to  discover  to  the  eyes  of  my  soul  the
meaning  of  Thy  present  employment,  which  I  do  not  under
stand."

Our  Lord  replied  :  "  I  am  distributing  gifts."  The  Saint
knew  by  these  words  that  God  was  applying  the  prayers
of  the  community  to  the  souls,  whom,  however,  she  was
not  permitted  to  see,  although  they  were  present.  Then  He
added  :  "  Will  you  not  offer  Me  your  merits  to  increase
My  gifts'?"  At  these  words  she  was  deeply  moved;  and
not  knowing  that  the  community  were  then  occupied  in
the  same  way,  she  was  filled  with  gratitude,  believing  that
something  special  was  required  of  her,  and  replied  joyfully :
"  Yes,  Lord  ;  I  offer  Thee  not  only  my  merits,  which  are
worth  nothing,  but  I  offer  Thee  all  the  good  done  by  my
community,  which  I  attribute  entirely  to  the  union  which
I  have,  by  Thy  grace,  with  my  sisters ;  and  I  offer  it  to
Thee  of  my  free  will,  and  most  gladly,  for  the  honour  of
Thy  majesty  and  Thine  infinite  perfection."  And  the  Lord
graciously  accepted  her  offering.

Then  our  Lord  appeared  as  if  disengaged,  and,  covering
Himself  and  Gertrude  with  a  light  cloud,  He  inclined  lov
ingly  towards  her,  and  said  :  "  Listen  to  Me  only,  and  taste
the  sweetness  of  My  grace."  She  replied  :  "  My  God  and
my  Beloved  !  why  hast  Thou  deprived  me  of  the  favour
Thou  hast  bestowed  on  another,  of  revealing  to  her  with  so
much  clearness  the  mercy  which  Thou  didst  desire  to  exer
cise  towards  those  souls,  since  Thou  hast  discovered  to  me
so  many  secrets  ?  "  He  replied  :  "  Reflect  frequently,  that
My  graces  usually  serve  to  humble  you,  because  you  be
lieve  yourself  unworthy  of  them,  and  that  you  believe
that  they  are  only  given  to  you  as  to  a  servant  who  is
engaged  for  daily  labour,  and  as  if  you  could  not  be  faithful


VALUE  OP  PRAYERS  FOR  OTHERS. 143

to  Me  without  this  reward  ;  and  hence  you  prefer  others
who  serve  Me  faithfully  without  these  favours.  And  I
have  willed  to  render  you  like  them  in  this ;  so  that  while
you  did  not  know  more  than  others  of  the  mercy  which  I
desired  to  exercise  towards  those  souls,  you  laboured  for
them  with  equal  zeal ;  therefore  you  are  not  deprived  of
an  advantage  you  value  so  much  for  others."

At  these  words  she  was  exceedingly  moved  ;  marvelling
at  the  amazing  and  ineffable  condescension  of  the  Divine
goodness  towards  her,  in  pouring  forth  on  her  such  abundant
favours  ;  and,  when  giving  less,  acting  thus  to  preserve  that
humility  which  is  the  foundation  of  all  graces.  She  learned
then  how  God  arranges,  for  the  good  of  those  whom  He
loves,  the  bestowal  or  the  refusal  of  His  favours  ;  and  being
ravished  out  of  herself  in  an  excess  of  adoration  and  grati
tude  for  the  infinite  goodness  of  God  towards  her,  she  cast
herself,  fainting  away  in  utter  self-annihilation,  into  the
arms  of  her  Lord,  saying  to  Him  :  "  My  God,  my  weakness
is  unable  to  bear  the  excess  of  Thy  mercy."  Then  the
Lord  moderated  in  her  a  little  the  overwhelming  power  of
this  great  thought,  and,  as  she  recovered  her  strength,  she
said  to  Him :  "  Since  Thy  inexplicable  and  incomprehen
sible  wisdom  wills  that  I  should  be  deprived  of  this  gift,  I
will  desire  it  no  longer.  But.  my  God,  wilt  Thou  not  hear
my  prayers  for  my  friends? "  Then  our  Lord  confirmed  His
words  as  with  an  oath,  replying :  "  I  will,  by  My  Divine
power."  The  Saint  replied  :  "  Hear,  then,  my  petition  for
the  person  so  often  recommended  to  my  prayers."  And
immediately  she  beheld  a  stream,  pure  as  crystal,  flowing
forth  from  the  Heart  of  the  Lord  into  the  person  for  whom
she  prayed.  She  then  asked  :  "  Lord,  what  will  this  per
son  gain  by  this,  since  she  does  not  see  it  flowing  into  her  ?  "
He  replied :  "  When  a  physician  gives  a  draught  to  a  sick


J.44  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

person,  those  who  are  present  do  not  see  him  recover  hia
health  the  moment  he  takes  the  remedy,  nor  does  the  sick
man  himself  feel  cured ;  nevertheless,  the  physician  knows
well  the  value  of  the  remedy,  and  how  salutary  it  will
prove  to  the  patient."  "  But  why,  Lord,  dost  Thou  not  de
liver  her  from  the  ill-regulated  habits  and  the  other  defects
from  which  I  have  implored  Thee  so  many  times  to  deliver
her  ? "  He  replied  :  "  It  is  said  of  Me,  when  I  was  in  My
Childhood,  that  I  '  advanced  in  wisdom,  and  in  age,  and  in
grace  with  God  and  man.'  So  will  this  person  advance
from  hour  to  hour,  changing  her  faults  into  virtues ;  and
I  will  deliver  her  from  all  the  infirmities  of  nature,  so
that  after  this  she  may  possess  the  blessedness  which  I
have  prepared  for  man,  whom  I  have  exalted  above  the
angels."

As  the  hour  at  which  the  Saint  was  to  communicate
was  now  near,  she  prayed  God  to  show  mercy  to  as  many
sinners  as  would  be  saved  (for  she  dared  not  pray  for  the
reprobate)  as  He  had  that  day  delivered  souls  from  purga
tory  by  the  merit  of  the  prayers  which  had  been  offered.  But
our  Lord  reproved  her  timidity,  saying  :  "  Is  not  the  offering
of  My  spotless  Body  and  My  precious  Blood  sufficient  merit
to  recall  even  those  who  walk  in  the  ways  of  perdition  to
a  better  life  1 "  Then  Gertrude,  reflecting  on  the  infinite
goodness  testified  by  these  words,  exclaimed  :  "  Since  Thine
ineffable  charity  will  condescend  to  my  unworthy  prayers,
I  beseech  Thee,  uniting  my  petitions  to  the  love  and  desire
of  all  creatures,  that  it  may  please  Thee  to  deliver  as
many  persons  who  live  in  sin  and  are  in  peril  thereby  as
Thou  hast  delivered  souls  from  purgatory,  without  prefer
ring  those  who  are  my  friends  either  by  consanguinity  OP
proximity."  Our  Lord  accepted  this  petition  graciously,
and  certified  its  acceptance  to  her.  "  I  would  know  further,


CONFIDENCE  CAN  OBTAIN  ALL  THINGS.  145

O  Lord,"  she  continued,  "  what  I  shall  add  to  these  prayers
to  make  them  yet  more  efficacious  1 "  Then,  as  she  received
no  answer,  she  continued :  "  Lord,  I  fear  that  my  unfaithful
ness  does  not  merit  a  reply  to  this  question,  because  Thou,
who  seest  the  hearts  of  all,  knowest  that  I  will  not  comply
with  Thy  command."  Then  our  Lord,  turning  towards  her
with  a  countenance  full  of  sweetness,  replied  :  "  Confidence
alone  can  easily  obtain  all  things  ;  but  if  your  devotion  urges
you  to  add  anything  further,  say  the  Psalm  Laudate  Do-
minum,  omnes  gentes,  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  times,  in
order  to  supply  for  those  praises  which  men  fail  in  offering
to  Me."


CHAPTER  IX.

Of  the  admirable  effects  of  Communion,  and  that  we  should  not  lightly
abstain  from  It,  even  for  our  unworthiness.

ON  the  Feast  of  St.  Mathias  *  Gertrude  resolved,  for  many
reasons,  to  abstain  from  Holy  Communion.  But  as  her  mind
was  occupied  with  God  and  herself  during  the  first  Mass,
our  Lord  presented  Himself  to  her,  with  such  marks  of  affec
tion  as  a  friend  might  manifest  to  his  friend.  Nevertheless,
as  the  Saint  was  accustomed  to  such  favours,  she  desired
yet  more,  and  wished  to  pass  entirely  into  her  Beloved,  so
that  she  might  be  wholly  united  to  Him  and  consumed  in
the  fire  of  His  love.  But  as  she  could  not  obtain  this,  she
began  to  occupy  herself  with  the  Divine  praises,  which  was
one  of  her  ordinary  exercises.  First,  she  glorified  the
goodness  and  mercy  of  the  ever-adorable  Trinity,  for  all
the  graces  which  had  flowed  forth  from  its  deep  abyss  for

*  February  24.


146 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

the  salvation  of  all  the  elect;  secondly,  she  returned
thanks  for  all  the  favours  which  had  been  bestowed  on  the
august  Mother  of  God ;  thirdly,  for  all  the  graces  infused
into  the  sacred  Humanity  of  Jesus  Christ ;  imploring  all
the  saints  in  general,  and  each  in  particular,  to  offer  in
dividually  in  sacrifice  to  the  effulgent  and  ever-peaceful
Trinity,  in  satisfaction  for  her  negligence,  all  the  dispo
sitions  and  zeal  with  which  they  were  adorned  on  the
day  of  their  elevation  into  glory,  and  the  consummation  of
their  perfection,  and  of  their  eternal  reward.  For  this
intention  she  said  the  Psalm  Laudate  Dominum  thrice :
first,  in  honour  of  all  the  saints  ;  secondly,  in  honour  of
the  Blessed  Virgin ;  and  thirdly,  in  honour  of  the  Son  of
God.

Our  Lord  then  said  to  her  :  "  How  will  you  recompense
My  saints,  who  have  made  such  offerings  to  Me  for  you,
since  you  intend  to  omit  your  usual  offering  of  thanksgiv
ing  for  them  ? "  The  Saint  did  not  reply.  At  the  oblation
of  the  Host  she  desired  greatly  to  know  what  offering  of
eternal  praise  she  could  make  to  God  the  Father.  "  If  you
prepare  yourself  to  approach  the  life-giving  Sacrament  of  My
Body  and  Blood  to-day,"  said  our  Lord,  "  you  will  obtain  thia
triple  favour  which  you  have  desired  during  Mass — namely,
to  enjoy  the  sweetness  of  My  love,  and  to  become  united  to
Me  by  the  power  of  My  Divinity,  even  as  gold  is  united  to
silver,  and  thus  will  possess  a  precious  amalgam,  which  -will
be  worthy  to  offer  to  the  eternal  praise  of  God  the  Father,
and  acquit  yourself  of  the  gratitude  which  you  owe  to  all
the  saints."

These  words  kindled  in  her  so  ardent  a  desire  for  Com
munion,  that  even  if  she  had  to  force  her  way  to  it  across
drawn  swords,  it  would  have  appeared  little  to  her.  After*
wards,  when  she  had  received  the  Body  of  the  Lord,  as  she


HOW  WE  HIDE  GOD'S  PATEKNAL  LOVE  FROM  US. 147

made  her  thanksgiving,  this  Lover  of  men  spoke  thus  to
her :  "  You  have  resolved  of  your  own  will  to  serve  Me  to
day  with  others  by  brick,  straw,  and  stubble ;  but  I  have
chosen  to  place  you  amongst  those  who  are  replenished
with  the  delights  of  My  royal  table."

On  the  same  day  another  person  abstained  from  Com
munion  without  any  reasonable  cause.  She  said  to  her
Lord :  "  Most  merciful  God,  why  have  You  permitted  her
to  be  thus  tempted  ? "  "  What  can  I  do  for  her,"  He  re
plied,  "  since  she  has  herself  so  covered  her  eyes  with  the
veil  of  her  unworthiness,  that  she  cannot  possibly  see  the
tenderness  of  My  paternal  Heart  1  "


CHAPTER  X.

The  indulgence  which  our  Lord  granted  to  St.  Gertrude— Her  ardent
desire  to  be  conformed  in  all  things  to  the  will  of  God.

As  the  Saint  learned  that  an  indulgence  of  many  years
was  published  on  condition  of  the  usual  offerings,  she
said,  with  her  whole  heart :  "  Lord,  if  I  were  rich  I  would
willingly  give  a  large  sum  of  gold  and  silver,  that  by  this
means  I  might  be  absolved  by  these  indulgences  for  the
praise  and  glory  of  Thy  Name."  To  this  the  Lord  replied
lovingly,  saying :  "  I  grant  you,  by  My  authority,  a  full
remission  of  all  your  sins  and  negligences  ;  "  and  at  the
same  moment  she  saw  her  soul  without  spot,  and  as  white
as  snow.

But  some  time  after,  entering  into  herself  and  finding
her  soul  still  adorned  with  the  same  purity,  she  feared
what  she  had  seen  before  had  been  an  illusion,  as  it  seemed
impossible  that  it  had  not  been  in  some  degree  tarnished  by
the  negligences  and  faults  into  which  her  weakness  caused


148  IE]


her  to  f;ill  HO  often. liut  the Ln  I  her  ;«m1.'

by  Uiene  wordn  : "  I>o:it  thou  think  that  I  ponaesi  lew*  |/
than I have be1.  to  wed on My  0rMtur6f1 If  I h
to  tin-, n,  ii virtu*:,  that  if  a  dtoolotUttd

men  .  format  ••',

and even become brighter  than before, how much
more can  J,  who am the  Creator  of  the  nun,  by  directing
My  looku upon a .'.inner, /':inovc all hin  Htain:;,  j>ui,:
him,  hy  tin;  fin:  of  My  low,  from  ",v<  .ry  :-j>ot  '<"

On  another  oc'-.;j.:-.ion  H!H;  wa:<  HO  »Ji  x;oura^;d  l>y  her
mi  worth  inean  a/id  weakne:,;;,  tJjat  nhe  .••.eernco1  to  liave  rifj
power  to  prai;-;e  (joo1,  nor  to  tante  tlje  HWcetne-.H  of  contem
plation.  liut  the  J.onJ,  oy  a  pure  efl'eet  of  Hi-  mr-.rcy,  W)
reMtored  h'-r  <;our.v/e;  },y  communicalin^  to  h<  i  the  moHt
Jioly  convcfHation  of  J'  u:,  (Jnjj.t,,  that  all  }jer  <{•-.  .ire.'i  \ver«
h;i.ti:ifir;rl,  and  ;,he  Deemed  to  he  pre:-ented  to  the  Kiu;^  of
km"-:,  h»:r  Spoune,  witlj  tlje  :-,;..me  beauty  an  KHther  wa«
pi'  •  .ented  to  A  .\n-.i  u  .  AH  nhe  appealed  :  o  adorned,  the
.Saviour,  in  loving  r;onde'.een:-.ion,  addre;;He,d  IjerthuK:  "What
do:.t,  Uiou  d«.:,ire,  O<jueen?J>  "  I  heneeeh  and  iniplon;  Th«j'r,
O  Lord,"  hhe  re-plied,  "  with  all  my  heart,  that  Thy  ador
able  and  I)ivine  will  may  be  accompimhed  in  me,  aecordin;/
to  Thy  f/ood  pleaaure."  Our  Lord  then  named  different
pcrHoriH  wlio  had  recommended  theni'.'-l  ve:',  to  her  prayerH,
;md  asked  what  H!I«  fle:-jred  for  each  individually.  "  Lord,"
she  replied,  "  J  only  ask  that  Thy  mo:.t  j.ea.eeful  will  may
be  perfectly  uocomplihhed  in  them."  Our  Lord  inrjuired
further:  "And  what  do  you  deHire  that  I  Khould  do  for
you  '<  "  "I  have  no  other  joy,"  nhe  annwered,  "than  to
denire  that  Thy  amiable  and  peaceful  will  may  alway
accomplished  in  me,  and  in  all  creatures;  and  I  am  ready,
for  thin  end,  t,o  offer  every  member  of  my  body  to  be  ex
po.,  ed,  one  after  the  other,  to  the  acutent  buffering."  God,


i • •  I  RJOfl  -rui. 01  ' '  ' »:on. Ml)


wfi<> I..'  'I IM-I Hi--  I".-'! UltM -.void.".,  i"

w:ird<d In  i for UK-MI |j

: vviUl •  ncli .-.ril'.nr f.o •  «••• MM  of My

<<u!<d, I will M-w:ird you wif.li Un:-.  FtOOtDpttlMj

ll]  ;i|i|,<-;,r  :>•:•.  IgTMftbll i"  I  'f  .V«" h.id

fiolftttd  My  will,  <:vcn  iii  t.h<-  mo  ».  hiflmM  matter."


(MIAI-ITi;

If.,  v Iho  p. ,nl n,  in. ,t  •<  If ,,,!.. Him, in four

Wllll.r.  Mi'-  Ant.i|.lii.n  ///  l'Ttiiln-,,irn  +  w;r:  rlin  nh-rl,  in  wliir.li
tli''  v.'Mi-l"  if  in- in.  'lili'/it  •tiiiiii-t  -ni'-'i  ;ii'-  i<-|,«-:it«-(|  (Our  LIKKM,
f.li"  i<-Mrc|.<-f|  on  four  olifl«'icnt,  nn .nii«-r:i  in  wlii'-.li  t,li<-  f.uth
fu!  :<.nl  ririy  r«  I;  f  ;,,,|.

I'y  t.li'-  fii^l  VfOrdt)  "  I'-'/  ni"lil.  I  -'.oiflit  [I  mi  whom  my
ff.ul  lov  t.li,"  |bf  uii'l'i  .l.ood  tli<-  fii  t.  w:iy  "f  Mtkiflg  ^'»«l,
}>y  (lie  pen  « •:•.  ;IIK|  blMtitlgfl  wlii'-li  :irc  ofl«T<-r|  to  linn  on
til'-  MCTed  'oudi  of  ••f,iil.«-iri|,l:it.|f1n.  H'ncc  tlic  woi'l-,  "  F
con-lit.  Him,  ;.nd  found  Him  not,/'  follow  iinnn  •  I  i:il.«-  ly  ;

rc.m  . •  -lull-  (.(,<-  foul  in imprifonkl in  tlie  fle»h  H)IO  '  "i

not,  pnilM (  •"'! I"  i  f'-ct.ly.

,'  ,li'- ui,'l<  i lood the NCOfld rn:.nn'r of Mfkfalg (-'"l in

UK- VfOrdf, " I will rif.f,  ini'l will  |Q  :il,ouf,  MM-  (  it.y  : in  I.|IM

.  !•-.  :ind the DTOftdWIJI I will ?•.«•«•  l< Him whom myfioiil

lovct.h  ,"  bfOAttM  'he  rtrioui  thtokigiTingi  winch
rmdtn  »•••  '-"-i  f'»  nil  MM-  giftowith  wim-h  FI«-
ih  :  on  Riant  m  •  ipra  Md  i-y  »-h«-  irorda,  "  HM-  •  i,.  •  i-.  .-md

l.io:if|w!iy"," And M v/c  cmnot |,i;u |  Cod m thi'.  wo,|,|

* "I" ni.y I... I, l,y i.i;.;l,»., I p.,n;/lil, Ilirn wli-.in r.iy B'.nl lov.  I  I,"
'(':,i, I. m I  , . ,.,i,,rn.  n..  >..<  i,l. .,1 i. [,<-,,,,.) I.'...  t.nin, I'Vlwt Of Bt.

Mi.iy M:.!;.|l.|. II, I, III. ,,r,l. ,,:;,..,! ;,  „ „(, AtltlJ,!).,!!.


150 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

as  He  should  be  praised  for  all  His  gifts,  the  words,  "  1
sought  Him,  and  I  found  Him  not,"  are  added.

By  these  words,  "  The  watchman  found  me,"  she  under
stood  the  justice  and  mercy  of  God,  which  cause  the  soul
to  enter  into  herself,  and  then  to  compare  her  unworthiness
with  the  benefits  which  she  has  received  from  God  ;  so  that
she  begins  by  her  grief  and  repentance  for  her  faults  to
seek  His  mercy,  saying :  "  Have  you  seen  Him  whom
my  soul  loveth  ? "  And  thus,  as  she  has  no  faith  in  her
own  merits,  she  turns  with  humble  confidence  to  the
Divine  mercy,  and  by  the  fervour  of  her  prayers,  and  the
inspiration  of  grace,  she  at  last  finds  Him  whom  the  faith
ful  soul  seeks.

This  Antiphon  being  concluded,  she  felt  her  heart  deeply
moved  by  all  the  sweetness  with  which  the  Divine  mercy
had  filled  it  during  this  time,  and  with  many  other  graces
which  it  would  be  impossible  to  describe,  so  that  even  her
bodily  strength  failed  her.  Then  she  said  to  God  :  "  It
seems  to  me  that  I  can  truly  say  to  Thee  now,  '  Behold  !
my  beloved  Lord  !  not  only  my  inmost  soul,  but  every  part
of  my  body  is  moved  towards  Thee  !  ' " — "  I  know  and  feel
it  perfectly,"  replied  our  Lord,  "  because  these  graces  have
flowed  from  Me  and  returned  to  Me.  But  as  for  you,  who
are  held  captive  in  the  chains  of  mortality,  you  can  never
understand  all  the  reciprocal  sweetness  which  My  Divinity
feels  towards  you."  He  added  :  "  Know,  however,  that  this
movement  of  grace  glorifies  you,  as  My  Body  was  glorified
on  Mount  Thabor  in  presence  of  My  three  beloved  dis
ciples  ;  so  that  I  can  say  of  you,  in  the  sweetness  of  my
charity :  '  This  is  My  beloved  daughter,  in  whom  I  am
well  pleased.'  For  it  is  the  property  of  this  grace  to  com
municate  to  the  body  as  well  as  to  the  mind  a  marvellous
glory  and  brightness."


REPARATION  FOR  IRREVERENCE  TO  HOLY  SACRAMENT.  151


CHAPTER  XII.

Rep.tration  for  the  fall  of  a  Host,  which  it  was  feared  had  been
consecrated.

IT  happened  one  day  that,  in  preparing  for  Mass,  a  Host
fell  from  some  fold,  and  all  were  in  doubt  whether  it  had
been  consecrated  or  not. The  Saint  had  recourse  to  God ;
and having learned that the wafer had  not been con
secrated,  she  rejoiced  much  that  no  irreverence  had  been
committed. Yet,  as  all  her  care  was  to  promote  the  glory
of  God,  she  said  to  Him  :  "  Although  Thy  infinite  good
ness  has  not  permitted  that Thou shouldest  receive so
great  an  outrage  in  this  place,  and  in  the  Sacrament  of
the  Altar, — nevertheless,  0  Lord  of  the  Universe,  because
Thou  wert  treated  with  a  like  indignity  and  irreverence,
not  only  by  Thy  enemies  the  heathen  and  the  Jews,  but,
alas  !  even  by  Thy  most  faithful  friends,  whom  Thou  hast
redeemed  by  the  price  of  Thy  most  precious  Blood,  and,  1
weep  to  say  it,  sometimes  even  by  priests  and  religious,
I  will  not  make  it  known  that  this  host  was  not  conse
crated,  in  order  that  Thou  mayest  not  be  deprived  of  the
satisfaction  that  will  be  offered  to  Thee." Then  she  added  :
"  O  Lord  my  God  !  make  known  to  me  what  satisfaction
is  most  agreeable  to  Thee  for  each  offence  which  is  com
mitted  against  Thee ;  because  I  will  try  to  accomplish  it
for  love  of  Thy  honour  and  glory,  even  if  I  consume  my
whole  strength  in  doing  it." Our  Lord  then  made  known
to  her  that  He  would accept the recital of  the  Lord's
Prayer  two  hundred  and  twenty-five  times,  in  honour  of
His  sacred  Limbs  ;  and  of  as  many  acts  of  charity  towards
her neighbour,  in  thanksgiving  to  Him  who  has  said  :
"  So  long  as  you  did  it  to  one  of  these  My  least  brethren,


152 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

you  did  it  to  Me"  (Matt,  xxv.),  and  in  union  with  that
love  which  made  God  become  Man  for  us  ;  and  that  she
should  deprive  herself  as  many  times  of  the  vain  and  use
less  pleasures  of  earth,  and  occupy  herself  only  with  the
real  and  true  pleasures  of  the  Divinity.

Oh,  how  great  and  ineffable  is  the  mercy  and  kindness
of  our  most  loving  God,  which  accepts  and  rewards  as
offerings  what  we  should  deserve  most  just  punishment
for  if  we  omitted  !


CHAPTER  XIII.

Of  the  value  and  efficacy  of  Confession — How  we  should  conquer  the
difficulties  we  feel  in  approaching  the  Sacrament  of  Penance.

THE  Lord,  who  is  ever  jealous  of  the  salvation  of  His  elect,
sometimes  makes  the  most  trifling  thing  appear  full  of
difficulty,  for  the  increase  of  our  merit.  It  was  with  this
intention  that  He  once  allowed  St.  Gertrude  to  feel  the
duty  of  confession  so  burdensome,  that  it  seemed  as  if  she
could  never  perform  this  duty  by  her  own  strength.  She
therefore  addressed  herself  to  God  with  all  the  fervour  she
could  command,  and  He  replied  :  "  Why  do  you  not  con
fide  this  confession  to  Me,  with  such  confidence  that  you
need  think  no  more  of  your  own  labour  or  exertion  to
make  it  perfect  ?  "  She  replied  :  "  I  have  a  full  and  super
abundant  confidence  in  Thy  mercy  and  omnipotence,
my  loving  Lord  ;  but  I  think  it  is  only  just,  as  I  have
offended  Thee  by  my  sins,  that  I  should  give  Thee  some
tokens  of  my  amendment,  by  reflecting  on  the  disorders  of
my  life  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul."  Our  Lord  having
manifested  to  her  that  her  design  was  agreeable  to  Him,
Gertrude  occupied  herself  entirely  with  the  recollections
of  her  sins,  and  it  appeared  to  her  as  if  her  skin  were  torn


OP  SACRAMENTAL  CONFESSION.  153

in  several  places,  and  as  if  it  had  been  pierced  with  thorns  ;
then,  having  discovered  her  wounds  and  miseries  to  the
Father  of  Mercies  as  to  a  wise  and  faithful  Physician,  He
inclined  lovingly  towards  her,  and  said  :  "  I  will  warm  the
bath  of  confession  for  you  by  My  Divine  breath  ;  and
when  you  have  bathed  yourself  in  it,  according  to  My
desire,  you  will  appear  without  spot  before  Me."  Then
she  prepared  in  all  haste  to  plunge  into  this  bath,  saying  :
"  Lord,  I  renounce  every  sentiment  of  human  respect  for
love  of  Thee  ;  and  even  should  I  be  obliged  to  publish  my
crimes  to  the  whole  world,  I  am  ready  to  do  so."  Then
our  Lord  covered  her  with  His  mantle,  and  allowed  her
to  repose  upon  His  bosom  until  this  bath  was  prepared
for  her.

When  the  time  came  for  confession,  she  was  more  tried
than  before.  "  Lord,"  she  exclaimed,  "  since  Thy  paternal
love  knows  all  I  suffer  about  this  confession,  why  dost
Thou  permit  me  to  be  weighed  down  by  this  trial?"
"  Those  who  take  a  bath,"  replied  our  Lord,  "  are  accus
tomed  to  have  themselves  rubbed,  in  order  to  purify  them
selves  more  completely  :  thus  the  trouble  of  mind  which
you  suffer  will  serve  to  purify  you."  Then,  having  per
ceived  on  the  right  side  of  her  Spouse  a  bath  which  ex
haled  a  thick  vapour,  she  saw  on  the  other  side  a  delicious
garden,  enamelled  with  flowers,  of  which  the  most  remark
able  were  roses  without  thorns,  of  rare  beauty,,  which
emitted  a  sweet  and  vivifying  odour,  attracting  all  who
approached  thither.  The  Lord  made  a  sign  to  her  to  enter
this  garden,  if  she  preferred  it  to  the  bath  which  she
feared  so  much.  u  Not  this,  0  Lord,"  she  exclaimed,
"  but  the  bath  which  Thou  hast  warmed  for  me  by  Thy
Divine  breath."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  May  it  avail  for
your  eternal  salvation  !  "


154  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.


Gertrude  then  understood  that  the  garden  represented
the  interior  joys  of  Divine  grace,  which  expose  the  faith
ful  soul  to  the  south  wind  of  charity,  water  it  with  the
loving  dew  of  tears,  and  in  an  instant  make  it  whiter  than
snow,  assuring  it  not  only  of  a  general  pardon  of  all  its
faults,  but  even  of  a  new  increase  of  merit.  But  she
doubted  not  God  was  better  pleased  that  for  love  of  Him
she  had  chosen  what  was  painful,  and  refused  what  was
consoling.  Then,  having  retired  to  pray  after  her  confes
sion,  she  felt  a  most  powerful  assistance  from  God  in  this
exercise ;  so  that  what  He  had  formerly  made  so  painful
to  her  now  appeared  light  and  easy.  It  must  be  observed
here  that  the  soul  is  purified  from  the  stain  of  sin  prin
cipally  in  two  manners ;  first,  by  the  bitterness  of  penance,
which  is  represented  under  the  figure  of  a  bath  ;  and
secondly,  by  the  sweet  embrace  of  Divine  love,  which  is
figured  by  the  garden.  Before  confession,  the  Saint  had
occupied  herself  in  contemplating  the  Wound  of  the  Left
Hand,  so  that  after  this  bath  she  might  rest  therein  until
she  could  accomplish  the  penance  enjoined  by  the  priest.
But  as  it  was  such  that  she  was  obliged  to  defer  it  for
some  time,  she  was  extremely  afflicted  that  she  could  not
converse  familiarly  and  freely  with  her  faithful  and  amiable
Spouse  until  she  had  paid  this  debt.  Therefore,  during
Mass,  as  the  priest  immolated  the  Sacred  Host,  which
truly  and  efficaciously  blots  out  all  the  sins  of  men,  she
offered  to  God  thanksgiving  for  all  that  He  had  done  for
her  in  the  bath  of  penance,  and  in  satisfaction  for  her
faults.  This  the  Eternal  Father  accepted,  and  received
her  into  His  bosom,  where  she  learned  that  "  this  Orient
from  on  high  "  had  visited  her  in  the  plenitude  of  mercy
and  truth.


CHARITY  SYMBOLISED  BY  A  TREE.  155


CHAPTER  XIV.

The  different  effects  of  charity  are  explained  by  the  comparison  o!
a  tree  covered  with  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruit.

ON  the  following  day,  as  the  Saint  heard  Mass,  she  was
overcome  by  weariness  ;  but  the  sound  of  the  bell  aroused
her,  and  she  beheld  Jesus  Christ,  her  Lord  and  King,  hold
ing  a  tree  in  His  hand,  which  appeared  to  have  been  jnst  cut
from  the  root,  but  which  was  covered  with  the  most  beau
tiful  fruit,  and  whose  leaves  shone  like  so  many  stars,
shooting  forth  rays  of  admirable  brightness  ;  and  having
given  of  these  fruits  to  the  Saints  who  composed  His
celestial  court,  they  found  a  marvellous  sweetness  therein.
Soon  after,  our  Lord  planted  this  tree  in  the  garden  of
her  heart,  that  she  might  make  it  more  fruitful  by  cul
tivation,  that  she  might  repose  under  it  and  be  refreshed
there.  Having  received  this  deposit,  she  began  to  pray
for  a  person  who  had  persecuted  her  a  short  time  before,
asking,  to  increase  its  fruitfulness,  that  she  might  suffer
again  what  she  had  already  suffered,  to  draw  down  more
abundant  grace  on  this  person.  At  this  moment  she  be
held  a  flower,  of  a  most  beautiful  colour,  burst  forth  on  the
top  of  the  tree,  which  promised  to  change  into  fruit  if  she
executed  her  good  intention.  This  tree  was  the  symbol  of
charity,  which  bears  not  only  the  abundant  fruit  of  good
works,  but  also  the  flowers  of  good-will,  and  the  bright
leaves  of  holy  desires.  Therefore,  the  citizens  of  heaven
rejoice  greatly  when  men  condescend  towards  their  brethren,
and  endeavour  with  all  their  power  to  solace  them  in  their
needs.  At  the  moment  of  the  elevation  of  the  Host,  our
Lord  adorned  the  Saint  with  the  various  graces  which  He
had  communicated  to  her  on  the  preceding  day.


156 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

On  the  same  day,  at  noon,  our  Lord  appeared  to  her
under  the  form  of  a  beautiful  youth,  and  asked  her  td
gather  nuts  for  Him  from  the  tree  before  mentioned  ;  and
for  this  purpose  He  raised  the  tree  up,  that  she  might
place  herself  in  the  branches.  "  Bat,  my  sweet  Lord,"  *  she
replied,  "  why  do  You  ask  me  to  do  that  which  is  far  beyond
the  weakness  of  my  virtue  and  my  sex,  and  which  Thy
condescension  would  rather  incline  Thee  to  do  for  me  1 "
"  By  no  means,"  He  replied ;  "  should  not  the  spouse  act
more  freely  in  her  own  house,  amongst  her  friends  and
domestics,  than  a  respectful  bridegroom  who  only  enters
occasionally  to  pay  her  a  visit  ?  But  if  she  grant  any
thing  to  the  timidity  of  her  bridegroom  while  he  ia  with
her,  he  will  not  fail  to  have  the  same  consideration  for  her
when  she  visits  him."  By  this  she  understood  what  un
reasonable  excuses  persons  make  when  they  say  :  "  If  God
wills  me  to  do  this  or  that,  He  will  give  me  the  grace
necessary  to  do  it ;  "  whereas  it  is  only  just  that  men  should
bend  their  wills  entirely  to  God's,  and  never  seek  their  own
convenience  on  any  occasion,  and  then  they  will  enjoy  here
after  an  eternal  recompense.

As  Gertrude  now  desired  to  present  her  Divine  Spouse
with  the  nuts  for  which  He  had  asked,  He  ascended  the
tree,  and  seated  Himself  near  her,  commanding  her  to
peel  them,  and  prepare  them  for  eating ;  teaching  her  by
this  parable,  that  it  is  not  sufficient  for  us  to  overcome
our  aversion  to  do  good  to  our  enemies,  if  we  do  not  also
seek  to  do  so  in  a  perfect  manner.  He  thus  deigned  to
teach  her,  by  ordering  her  to  pull  and  prepare  those  nuts,
that  we  should  do  good  to  our  persecutors ;  and  it  is  for
this  reason  that  nuts,  whose  shell  is  hard  and  bitter,  were

*  "  O  dulcissime  juvenis  1 "


OP  AN  UNJUST  EXCOMMUNICATION.  157

mingled  with  the  soft  and  delicious  fruit  of  this  tree,  in
order  that  we  might  understand  that  charity  towards  our
enemies  should  be  seasoned  with  the  sweetness  of  Divine
grace,  which  makes  men  ready  to  endure  death  itself  for
Jesus  Christ.


CHAPTER  XV.

How  afflictions  unite  the  soul  to  Jesus  Christ ;  and  of  the  effect  of  an
unjust  excommunication.

WHILE  the  Mass,  Salve,  Sancte  Parens*  was  said  in  honour
of  the  Mother  of  God,  being  the  last  day  on  which  the  Holy
Sacrifice  was  allowed  to  be  celebrated,  on  account  of  an
interdict,  St.  Gertrude  addressed  God  thus  :  "  How  wilt
Thou  console  us,  most  kind  Lord,  in  our  present  afflic
tion  ? "  He  replied  :  "  I  will  increase  My  joys  in  you  ;  for
as  a  spouse  entertains  himself  more  familiarly  with  his
bride  in  the  retirement  of  his  house  than  in  public,  so  will
I  take  My  pleasure  in  your  retreat.  My  love  will  increase
in  you,  even  as  a  fire  which  is  enclosed  burns  with  great
force ;  and  the  delight  which  I  will  find  in  you,  and  the
love  which  you  will  have  for  Me,  will  be  like  a  pent-up
ocean,  which  seems  to  increase  by  the  impediments  placed
to  its  progress,  until  at  last  it  breaks  forth  impetuously."
"  But  how  long  will  this  interdict  continue  ] "  inquired  the
Saint.  The  Lord  replied  :  "  The  favours  which  I  promise
you  will  last  as  long  as  it  does."  She  replied  :  "  It  appears
a  degradation  to  the  great  ones  of  earth  to  reveal  their
secrets  to  those  beneath  them  ;  is  it  not,  then,  unworthy  of


*  "Hail,  holy  Parent." Introit  of  Mass  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,
from  the  Purification  to  Advent,  composed  by  Sedulius.


158 THE  REVELATION 8  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Thy  Majesty,  who  art  the  King  of  kings,  to  discover  the
secrets  of  Thy  Divine  Providence  to  me,  who  am  the  shame
and  rebuke  of  all  creatures  ?  It  is  on  this  account,  doubt
less,  that  Thou  dost  not  make  known  to  me  when  this  inter
dict  will  terminate,  although  Thou  knowest  the  end  of  all
things  before  they  have  commenced."  "It  is  not  so,"
replied  the  Lord ;  "  I  conceal  the  secret  from  you  for
the  furtherance  of  your  spiritual  welfare  ;  for  if  I  some
times  admit  you  to  My  secrets  in  contemplation,  I  exclude
you  from  them  also  to  preserve  your  humility,  that  by
receiving  this  grace  you  may  know  what  you  are  in  Me  ;
and  by  being  deprived  of  it,  you  may  know  what  you  are
of  yourself."

At  the  offertory  of  the  Mass,  Recordare,  Virgo  Maria*
as  the  words  ut  loquaris  pro  nobis  bona  were  repeated,  the
Saint  raised  her  heart  towards  the  Mother  of  all  grace,
and  the  Lord  said  to  her :  "  Even  should  there  be  none  to
speak  good  things  for  you,  I  am  already  prepared  Myself
to  favour  you."  But  as  Gertrude  reflected  on  the  multi
tude  of  her  own  faults,  and  those  of  some  others,  she  was
doubtful  whether  she  was  entirely  reconciled  with  God ;
but  He  said  to  her  tenderly  :  "  My  natural  goodness  obliges
Me  to  have  regard  to  those  amongst  you  who  are  most
perfect ;  and  as  all  are  encircled  by  My  Divinity,  the  per
fections  hide  the  imperfections."  "  0  bountiful  Lord  !  "
inquired  Gertrude,  "  how  canst  Thou  give  graces  so  full  of
consolation  to  one  so  unworthy  to  receive  them1?"  He
replied  :  "  My  love  compels  Me."  "  Where,  then,"  she  in
quired,  "  are  the  stains  which  I.  contracted  lately  by  my
impatience,  and  which  I  manifested  by  my  words  ?  "  "  The
fire  of  My  love,"  He  replied,  "  has  consumed  them  entirely ;

* Now  offertory  for  the  Mass  of  the  Seven  Dolors.


OBLATION  OF  THE  HOST.  159

for  I  efface  all  the  stains  which  I  meet  with  in  the  souls
whom  I  visit  by  My  free  and  loving  grace."

"  0  God  of  mercy  !  "  continued  Gertrude,  "  since  Thou
hast  so  often  assisted  my  misery  with  Thy  graces,  I  desire
to  know  if  my  faults,  such  as  niy  late  impatience  and  other
similar  ones,  will  be  purified  in  my  soul  before  or  after
my  death  1 "  Then,  as  our  Lord  lovingly  made  as  though
He  heard  her  not,  she  added:  "If  Thy  justice  demanded  it,
I  would  freely  and  willingly  descend  even  into  hell,  to  make
a  more  condign  satisfaction  to  Thee.  But  if  it  is  more
glorious  to  Thy  natural  goodness  and  mercy  to  consume  my
imperfections  by  the  fire  of  Thy  love,  I  will  venture  to  im
plore  Thee  that  this  same  love  may  efface  all  the  stains
from  my  soul,  and  make  it  purer  than  I  could  merit."  Arid
this  appeared  agreeable  to  our  Lord  in  His  goodness  and
tenderness.

On  the  following  day,  as  Mass  was  celebrated  for  the
people  in  the  parish  church,  she  said  to  God  at  the  time  of
Communion :  "  Dost  Thou  not  compassionate  us,  most
loving  Father,  for  being  deprived,  on  account  of  these
goods,  of  this  most  precious  good,  the  Sacred  Food  of  the
Body  and  Blood?"  "How  can  I  feel  it  more?"  replied  the
Lord ;  "  if  I  conduct  My  spouse  to  a  banquet,  and  I  perceive,
before  she  enters,  that  her  attire  is  disarranged,  will  I  not
draw  her  aside  to  a  retired  place,  and  arrange  it  with  My
own  hands,  that  I  may  introduce  her  with  honour?"  "  But,
my  God,"  she  inquired,  "  how  can  they  have  this  grace
who  suffer  this  evil  through  us  ? "  He  replied  :  "  Do  not
think  of  them  ;  I  will  settle  this  matter  with  them."

Thee,  at  the  oblation  of  the  Host,  as  she  offered  It  to
the  Lord  for  His  eternal  praise  and  the  welfare  of  her  com
munity,  the  Lord  received  It  in  her,  communicating  to  her
its  vivifying  sweetness,  and  saying  :  "  I  will  nourish  them


160 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

with  this  Divine  Food."  "Wilt  Thou  not  communicate
Thyself,  my  God,  to  all  the  community  ? "  she  inquired.
"  No,"  He  replied  :  "  only  to  those  who  have  the  desire  of
communicating,  or  the  will  to  desire  it ;  but  for  the  rest
who  belong  to  the  community,  they  shall  have  the  advan
tage  of  feeling  themselves  excited  to  partake  of  this  celes
tial  food,  even  as  persons  who  have  no  thought  of  eating
are  attracted  by  the  odour  of  some  viand,  and  begin  to
desire  to  partake  of  it."

On  the  Feast  of  the  Assumption  she  heard  our  Lord
say,  at  the  elevation  of  the  Host :  "  I  am  going  to  immo
late  Myself  to  God  My  Father  for  My  members."  She
said  :  "  Most  loving  Lord,  wilt  Thou  permit  us,  who  are
cut  off  from  Thee  by  the  anathema  of  those  who  would
take  our  goods  from  us,  to  be  joined  to  them  ? "  The  Lord
replied  :  "  If  any  one  could  take  away  from  you  the  inti
mate  union  by  which  you  are  united  to  Me,  then  indeed
you  would  be  separated  from  Me.  But  as  for  the  excom
munication  which  is  inflicted  on  you,  it  will  make  no  more
impression  on  you  than  a  blunt  knife  would  upon  a  tree,
which  it  could  not  penetrate,  and  at  best  could  but  mark
slightly."  She  replied  :  "  My  Lord  and  my  God,  who  art
the  infallible  Truth,  Thou  hast  made  known  to  me,  al
though  unworthy  of  such  a  revelation,  that  Thou  wouldest
increase  Thy  consolations  in  us  and  redouble  Thy  love ;
and  yet  there  are  some  amongst  us  who  complain  that
their  charity  is  becoming  cold."  "  I  contain  all  good  in
Myself,"  replied  our  Lord  ;  <l  and  I  distribute  to  each  iu
season  what  they  need."


MYSTIC  LADDER  OF  FAITH.  161


CHAPTER  XVI.

A  vision  in  -which  St.  Gertrude  beheld  our  Lord  communicating  the
sisters.

ON  a  Sunday  on  which  fell  both  the  Feast  of  St.  Lawrence
and  that  of  the  dedication  of  the  church  of  the  monastery,*
the  Saint,  having  begun  to  pray  during  the  first  Mass  for
some  persons  who  had  recommended  themselves  to  her
prayers,  perceived  a  green  vine-branch  which  came  forth
from  the  throne  of  God,  and  descended  to  the  earth  ;  and
by  its  foliage,  as  by  steps,  one  could  ascend  from  the
bottom  to  the  top.  She  understood  that  this  mystic  ladder
was  a  symbol  of  faith,  by  which  the  elect  mount  up  to
heaven ;  and  as  she  saw  many  of  her  sisters  assembled  at
the  summit  of  this  vine,  on  the  left  side  of  the  throne  of
God,  amongst  whom  Jesus  Christ  stood  with  extreme
pleasure  in  presence  of  His  heavenly  Father,  the  hour  ap
proached  at  which  the  community  would  have  communi
cated,  if  they  had  not  been  hindered  by  the  interdict ;  and
she  desired  ardently  that  she  and  those  present  might
receive  this  life-giving  Sacrament,  which,  by  an  incompre
hensible  secret  of  the  Divine  goodness,  gives  life  to  men,
despite  all  the  obstacles  which  are  opposed  to  it.

After  this,  she  saw  Jesus  Christ  holding  a  Host  in  His
hand,  which  He  plunged  into  the  Heart  of  God  His  Father ;
and  when  He  drew  it  forth,  it  seemed  as  if  coloured  ver
milion  or  tinged  with  blood.  Gertrude  was  amazed  at
this,  and  marvelled  much  what  it  might  signify,  the  more
so  because  red  is  a  symbol  of  the  Passion,  and  the  Eternal
Father  could  never  have  any  marks  of  suffering.  Being
thus  entirely  absorbed  in  meditating  on  what  she  saw,  she

*  August  10.


162 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

forgot  to  ask  for  the  accomplishment  of  her  desires;  but
soon  after  she  knew,  without  perceiving  in  what  manner  it
was  effected,  that  the  Lord  had  chosen  for  the  place  of  His
dwelling  and  repose  the  hearts  and  souls  of  all  her  sisters
•whom  she  had  seen  assembled  around  the  throne  of  God»
The  Saint  now  remembered  a  person  who  had  recommended
herself  to  her  prayers  before  Mass  with  great  humility  and
devotion,  and  she  prayed  God  to  grant  her  a  share  in  these
favours.  He  replied,  that  no  one  could  ascend  thus  unless
she  was  elevated  by  confidence,  of  which  the  person  for
whom  she  prayed  had  but  little.  The  Saint  replied  :  "  It
seems  to  me,  my  God,  that  the  want  of  confidence  in  this
person  proceeds  from  a  humility,  on  which  Thou  dost
usually  pour  forth  Thy  most  abundant  graces."  Our  Lord
answered  :  "  I  will  descend  now,  and  communicate  Myself
to  this  soul  and  to  all  who  are  in  the  valley  of  self-abase
ment."  Then  the  Son  of  God,  the  Lord  and  Master  of  all
virtues,  appeared  to  descend  suddenly  by  a  crimson  lad
der,  and  soon  after  she  beheld  Him  at  the  altar  of  the
church  of  the  monastery,  clothed  with  pontifical  vestments,
and  bearing  in  His  Hands  a  pix  like  those  in  which  the  con
secrated  Hosts  alone  are  reserved,  and  He  remained  seated
before  the  priest  until  the  Preface  of  the  Mass.

A  multitude  of  angels  attended  Him,  so  that  the  whole
church  on  the  northern  side,  which  was  to  the  right  side
of  the  Lord,  seemed  filled  with  them  ;  and  these  blessed
spirits  testified  a  particular  joy  in  visiting  the  place  where
their  fellow-citizens,*  the  religious  of  the  monastery,  had  so
often  addressed  their  prayers  to  God.  On  the  left — that  is,
on  the  south,  side — there  was  but  one  choir  of  angels,  who
were  followed  by  a  choir  of  apostles,  a  choir  of  martyrs,  a

*  "  Concivibus  suis."


OF  THE  ACTIVE  AND  CONTEMPLATIVE  LIFE.  163

choir  of  confessors,  and  a  choir  of  virgins,  each  apart
Gertrude,  beholding  so  august  an  assembly,  and  reflecting
that,  according  to  Scripture,  it  is  purity  which  brings  us
nearest  to  God,  perceived  between  the  Lord  and  the  choir
of  virgins  rays  of  light,  shining  like  snow,  which  united
these  holy  virgins  more  closely  than  the  other  saints  to
their  Spouse,  by  the  ravishing  sweetness  of  His  caresses
and  intimacy.

She  also  perceived  rays  of  a  most  brilliant  light,  which
were  shed  upon  some  members  of  the  community,  as  if  there
were  no  obstacle  between  them  and  God  ;  although  they
were  materially  separated  from  the  church  where  she
beheld  this  mysterious  apparition.  And  though  the  Saint
was  filled  with  an  extreme  joy  during  this  rapture,  she  was
still  solicitous  for  the  sisters,  and  said  to  God  :  "  Lord,  since
Thou  hast  been  pleased  to  pour  forth  on  me  the  free  gifts
of  Thine  ineffable  love,  what  wilt  Thou  give  to  those  who
are  engaged  in  exterior  duties  ? "  He  replied  :  "  I  will
anoint  them  with  balsam,  though  they  seem  to  sleep."
Gertrude  was  surprised  at  this,  and  could  not  understand
how  those  who  did  not  give  themselves  to  a  contemplative
life  should  receive  nevertheless  the  same  reward  as  those
who  were  entirely  devoted  to  it.  Then,  as  she  began  to
examine  into  the  quality  of  these  perfumes  of  which  the
Son  of  God  had  spoken,  by  comparing  them  to  balm  and
aromatic  ointments, — a  small  portion  of  which  will  suffice
to  preserve  the  body  from  corruption,  whether  it  is  em
balmed  before  or  after  the  sleep  of  death,  so  that  it  has
received  this  unction, — she  was  enlightened  in  her  difficulty
by  this  familiar  comparison  :  namely,  that  when  any  one
partakes  of  food,  every  member  of  his  body  is  strengthened
and  nourished  by  it,  although  the  mouth  alone  perceives
the  delicacy  of  the  viand  ;  so  when  God,  by  an  excess  of


164 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

His  mercy,  grants  any  special  grace  to  one  of  His  elect,  all
participate  in  it ;  and  principally  those  who  are  united  by
the  ties  of  community,  where  they  receive  an  increase  and
superabundance  of  merit;  and  they  only  <ire  excluded
from  this  benefit  who  exclude  themselves  by  their  jealousy
or  ill-will.

Then,  as  the  Gloria  in  excelsis  was  intoned,  the  Sovereign
Pontiff,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  breathed  towards  heaven,
to  the  honour  of  His  Eternal  Father,  a  breath  like  a  burning
flame.  And  at  the  words  :  Et  in  terrd  pax  hominibus  bonce
voluntatis,  He  breathed  upon  those  who  were  present  a  white
light,  bright  as  snow.  At  the  words  of  the  Preface,  Sursum
corda,  the  Son  of  God  arose,  and  by  an  efficacious  attraction
drew  towards  Himself  all  who  were  present.  Then  turning
towards  the  east,  assisted  by  an  infinite  number  of  angels,
He  stood  and  raised  His  hands,  and  offered  to  God  Hia
Father,  through  the  words  of  the  Preface,  the  prayers  of  the
faithful.  After  this,  when  they  began  the  Agnus  Dei,
the  Lord  rose  before  the  altar,  with  all  the  power  of  His  ma
jesty  ;  communicating  Himself,  at  the  second  Agnus  Dei,
by  an  impenetrable  effect  of  His  wisdom,  to  the  souls  of  all
the  assistants ;  at  the  third  Agnus  Dei,  withdrawing  into
Himself,  He  offered  in  His  own  person  to  God  His  Father
all  their  prayers  and  desires.  Then  pouring  forth  again
His  sweetness,  He  gave  the  pax  with  His  own  blessed  lips
to  all  the  saints  who  were  present ;  honouring  with  singular
favour  the  company  of  virgins,  offering  this  kiss  both  to
their  lips  and  their  hearts.

After  this,  pouring  forth  the  torrents  of  His  love,  He
gave  Himself  to  the  community,  with  these  words  :  "I  am
all  yours ;  therefore,  let  each  enjoy  Me  as  she  desires/'
Then  Gertrude  replied  to  her  Spouse  :  "  Lord,  now  that  I
am  satiated  with  Thy  incredible  delights,  it  seems  to  me


OF  PREPARATION  FOR  HOLY  COMMUNION.  165

that  Thou  art  still  too  far  from  me  when  Thou  reposest  on
the  altar ;  therefore,  for  the  benediction  of  this  Mass,  unite
my  soul  so  to  Thee  that  I  may  feel  it  is  bound  to  Thee."
This  the  Lord  accomplished  in  such  a  manner  that  she
knew  by  her  union  with  her  Spouse  how  pleasing  her
desire  was  to  Him.


CHAPTER  XVII.

How  we  should  prepare  ourselves  to  receive  the  Body  of  Jesus  Christ
—  Differeut  exercises  of  piety  which  St.  Gertrude  practised  towards
this  august  Sacrament.

§  1.  The  Three  Persons  of  the  Blessed  Trinity  communicate
Their  sanctity  to  Gertrude,  that  site  may  communicate
more  worthily.

As  the  Saint  approached  to  receive  the  Sacrament  of  Life —
when  they  sang  the  Sanctus,  sanctus,  sanctus,  in  the  Anti-
phon  Gaude  et  laetare — she  prostrated  herself  on  the  ground,
praying  to  God  with  her  whole  heart  that  He  would  be
pleased  to  prepare  her  worthily  to  participate  in  the  celes
tial  Food,  for  His  glory  and  for  the  advantage  of  others.
The  Son  of  God  then  abased  Himself  quickly  towards  her,
and,  embracing  her  soul  while  they  sang  the  word  sanctus,
said  :  "  At  the  word  sanctus,  which  is  referred  to  My
Person,  I  will  give  you  all  the  sanctity  of  My  Divinity  and
My  Humanity,  as  a  worthy  preparation  to  approach  these
Holy  Mysteries."

The  following  Sunday,  as  she  returned  thanks  to  God
for  this  favour,  she  beheld  the  Son  of  God,  more  beautiful
than  a  million  of  angels,  presenting  her  condescendingly  to
God  His  Father,  clothed  with  His  own  holiness,  which  He
had  given  to  her.  The  Eternal  Father  took  such  great


166 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTKUDE.

pleasure  in  the  soul,  for  the  sake  of  His  only  Son,  that,
not  being  able  to  refrain  from  pouring  forth  His  graces,
He  granted  to  her,  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  sanctity,
which  is  attributed  to  Them  as  holy  (sanctus),  that  she
might  obtain  the  full  blessing  of  all  sanctity,  as  well  of
that  which  emanates  from  Omnipotence  as  of  that  which
emanates  from  wisdom  and  love.

§  2.  St.  Gertrude,  preparing  for  Communion,  receives  the
assurance  from  Jesus  Christ  that  He  will  never  depart  from
her,  and  that  for  her  sake  He  will  do  good  to  others.

On  another  occasion,  when  she  was  about  to  communi
cate,  and  perceived  that  many  were  abstaining  from  it  for
different  reasons,  she  rejoiced  in  spirit,  and  being  touched
to  the  heart,  said  to  God  :  "I  give  Thee  thanks,  my  most
loving  Love  and  my  God,  that  Thou  hast  placed  me  in  this
happy  state,  in  which  neither  my  relations  nor  any  earthly
consideration  can  prevent  me  from  approaching  Thy  ban
quet  of  delights."  To  which  the  Lord  replied,  with  His
usual  sweetness  :  "  Since  you  have  declared  that  there  is
nothing  which  can  separate  you  from  Me,  know  also  that
there  is  nothing  in  heaven  or  earth,  neither  judgment  nor
justice,  which  can  hinder  me  from  doing  all  the  good  for
you  which  My  Divine  Heart  desires."

On  another  occasion,  as  Gertrude  approached  the  Holy
Communion,  and  desired  ardently  that  the  Lord  would
prepare  her  worthily,  this  sweet  and  loving  Lord  consoled
her  by  these  tender  words  :  "  I  will  clothe  Myself  with  your
person,  in  order  that  I  may  be  able  to  extend  My  Hand  *
to  do  good  to  sinners  without  being  wounded  by  the  thorns

"  Delicatam  maimm  .  .  .  inter  hispidos  peccutores."


OUR  LORD  PURIFIES  HER  SOUL.  167

which  surround  them.  And  I  will  also  clothe  you  with
Myself,  in  order  that  all  those  whom  you  remember  before
Me,  and  even  those  who  are  naturally  like  you,  may  be
raised  to  this  high  dignity,  that  I  may  do  good  to  them  ac
cording  to  My  royal  munificence."

§  3.  St.  Gertrude  is  presented  to  the  Holy  Trinity  by  Jesus
Christ.  She  obtains  joy  for  the  blessed,  grace  for  the  just,
repentance  for  sinners,  and  release  for  the  souls  in  pur
gatory.

One  day  when  the  Saint  was  about  to  partake  of  the
Divine  Food,  she  reflected  on  the  graces  which  God  had
bestowed  on  her,  and  recalled  this  passage  in  the  Book  of
Kings  :  "  Who  am  I,  and  what  is  my  father's  family  ? "
(1  Kings  xviii.)  Then,  turning  from  these  last  words,  as
only  proper  for  those  who  had  always  served  God,  she  con
sidered  herself  as  a  little  plant,  which,  on  account  of  its
proximity  to  the  inextinguishable  fire  of  the  Divine  Heart,
received  its  benefits ;  and  she  saw  that  she  wasted  it,  hour
after  hour,  by  her  faults  and  negligences  ;  and  that,  being
reduced  as  it  were  to  ashes,  she  resembled  a  burned-out
coal,  which  had  been  cast  away.  Therefore  she  turned
towards  Jesus  Christ,  her  beloved  Mediator,  and  besought
Him  to  present  her  to  God  the  Father,  and  to  reconcile  her
to  Him  j  and  it  appeared  to  her  that  her  dear  Spouse  drew
her  to  Him  by  the  vapour  of  the  love  which  came  forth
from  the  Wounds  of  His  Heart,  and  that  He  washed  her
in  the  water  which  flowed  from  it,  watering  her  with  the
life-giving  Blood  which  was  contained  therein;  so  that,  by
degrees,  she  was  transformed  from  the  burned-out  coal  to  a
tree  covered  with  verdure,  whose  branches  were  divided
into  three  parts,  like  a  lily ;  and  the  Son  of  God,  having
taken  it,  presented  it,  with  marks  of  honour  and  thanks-


168 THE  KEVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTKUDE.

giving,  to  the  most  holy  and  adorable  Trinity ;  who  re
ceived  it  with  such  love  and  tenderness,  that  the  Eternal
Father,  by  His  omnipotence,  attached  to  the  highest
branches  of  this  tree  all  the  fruit  which  the  soul  of  the
Saint  might  have  produced  if  she  had  corresponded  as
she  ought  with  the  commands  of  the  Divine  Omnipotence.
The  Son  of  God  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  like  manner,
placed  on  two  other  parts  of  its  branches  the  fruits  of  wis
dom  and  charity.

Having,  therefore,  received  the  Body  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  contemplating  her  Lord,  as  we  have  said,  under  the
similitude  of  a  tree,  whose  root  was  in  the  Wound  of  the
Side  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  seemed  to  her  that  a  kind  of  sap,
formed  of  the  Humanity  and  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ,  came
forth  in  a  miraculous  manner  from  this  sacred  Wound,  and
passed  through  the  stem  of  this  tree  into  all  its  branches,
producing  flowers  and  fruit,  which  appeared  as  bright,  in
Comparison  with  her  ordinary  life,  as  gold  exceeds  crystal
in  its  brightness.  This  gave  pleasure  and  an  indescribable
joy,  not  only  to  the  Most  Holy  Trinity,  but  even  to  all  the
blessed,  who,  having  risen  out  of  respect,  presented  their
merits  to  her  individually,  in  the  form  of  crowns,  and  sus
pended  them  on  the  branches  of  this  tree,  to  His  praise
and  glory  who  had  given  them  new  joy  through  her
merits.

Then  Gertrude  prayed  to  God  that  all  who  were  in
heaven,  on  earth,  or  in  purgatory,  and  who  ought  without
doubt  to  have  reaped  some  fruit  from  her  works,  had  she
not  been  so  negligent,  might  at  least  receive  some  advantage
from  the  graces  which  His  Divine  goodness  had  communi
cated  to  her.  Then  these  good  works,  which  were  figured
by  the  fruit  of  the  tree,  began  to  distil  a  liquor  of  extra
ordinary  virtue  :  a  part  of  which  evaporated  on  high,  fill-


ADVANTAGES  OP  HEARING  MASS  DEVOUTLY.  169

ing  the  blessed  with  joy;  another  portion  flowed  down  into
purgatory,  soothing  the  pains  of  those  who  suffered  there ;
and  part,  spreading  itself  forth  upon  the  earth,  augmenting
the  sweetness  of  grace  in  the  just,  and  in  sinners  the  bitter
ness  of  penance.

§  4:.  How  advantageous  it  is  to  hear  Holy  Mass.

As  Gertrude  offered  the  adorable  Host  to  the  Eternal
Father,  at  the  moment  of  the  Elevation,  in  satisfaction  for
all  her  sins,  and  in  reparation  for  all  her  negligences,  she
beheld  her  soul  presented  before  the  Divine  Majesty  with
the  same  sentiments  of  joy  in  which  Jesus  Christ — who  is
the  splendour  and  living  image  of  the  glory  of  His  Father,
and  the  Lamb  of  God  without  spot — offered  Himself  on  the
altar  to  God  His  Father  for  the  salvation  of  the  whole
world ;  because  the  Eternal  Father  considered  her  as
purified  from  all  sin  by  the  merit  of  the  spotless  Humanity
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  enriched  and  adorned  with  all  the
virtues  which,  through  the  same  Holy  Humanity,  adorned
the  glorious  Divinity  of  His  Son.

As  the  Saint  returned  thanks  to  God  for  these  graces
with  all  her  power,  and  took  pleasure  in  considering  the
extraordinary  favours  which  He  had  communicated  to  her,
it  was  revealed  to  her  that  whenever  any  one  assists  at
Mass  with  devotion,  occupied  with  God,  who  offers  Himself
in  this  Sacrament  for  the  whole  world,  he  is  truly  regarded
by  tbe  Eternal  Father  with  the  tenderness  merited  by  the
sacred  Host  which  is  offered  to  Him,  and  becomes  like  to
one  who,  coming  out  of  a  dark  place  into  the  midst  of  sun
light,  finds  himself  suddenly  surrounded  by  brightness.
Then  the  Saint  made  this  inquiry  of  God  :  "  Is  not  he  who
falls  into  sin  deprived  of  this  good,  even  as  one  who  goes
from  light  into  darkness  loses  the  favour  of  beholding  the


170 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


light  ] "  The  Lord  replied  :  "  No ;  for  although  the  sinner
hides  My  Divine  light  from  him,  still  My  goodness  will
not  fail  to  leave  him  some  ray  to  guide  him  to  eternal  life  ;
and  this  light  will  increase  whenever  he  hears  Muss  with
devotion  or  approaches  the  Sacraments."

§  5.  The  spiritual  vestments  with  which  the  soul  should  be
adorned  to  receive  the  Holy  Communion,  and  of  the  neces
sity  of  sanctifying  the  tongue  which  has  touched  the  Body
of  Christ.

As  Gertrude  was  about  to  communicate,  and  feared  she
was  not  sufficiently  prepared,  though  the  moment  was  at
hand,  she  addressed  her  soul  thus  :  "  Behold,  thy  Spouse
calls  thee  :  and  how  canst  thou  dare  to  appear  before  Him
without  being  adorned  as  thou  shouldst  be?"  Then,  reflect-
iug  more  and  more  on  her  un worthiness — entirely  dis
trusting  herself,  and  placing  her  confidence  in  the  mercy  of
God  alone — she  said  to  herself :  "Why  defer  longer  1  since,
even  had  I  a  thousand  years,  I  could  not  prepare  as  I
ought,  having  nothing  which  could  serve  to  promote  the
right  dispositions  in  me.  But  I  will  meet  Him  with  con
fidence  and  humility  ;  and  when  my  Lord  beholds  me  from
afar,  He  can  fill  me  with  all  the  grace  and  the  attractions
with  which  His  love  desires  that  I  should  appear  before
Him."  And,  approaching  the  Holy  Mysteries  in  this
disposition,  she  thought  only  of  her  negligences  and  im
perfections.  But  as  she  advanced,  she  perceived  our  Lord
regarding  her  with  an  eye  of  compassion,  or  rather  of  love,
and  sending  her  His  innocence,  that  she  might  be  adorned
therewith  as  with  a  white  garment.  He  gave  her  His  humi
lity,  which  made  Him  converse  with  creatures  so  utterly  un
worthy  of  such  a  favour  ;  and  this  served  her  for  a  purple
tunic.  He  filled  her  with  that  hope  which  would  make


OUR  LORD  REPRESENTS  HIMSELF  AS  A  PELICAN. 171

her  sigh  ardently  for  Him  whom  she  loved,  to  add  the
beauty  of  green  to  her  garments.  He  presented  her  with
His  love  of  souls  for  a  vestment  of  gold.  He  inspired  her
with  the  joy  which  He  takes  in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful
for  a  crown  of  precious  stones.  And,  lastly,  He  gave  her
for  sandals  that  confidence  with  which  He  deigned  to  rest
on  the  inconstancy  of  human  frailty,  and  which  made  Him
find  His  delights  with  the  children  of  men.  And  thus  she
was  worthy  to  be  presented  to  God.

After  her  Communion,  as  she  recollected  herself  inte
riorly,  our  Lord  appeared  to  her  under  the  form  of  a  pelican,
as  it  is  usually  represented,  piercing  its  heart  with  its  beak.
Marvelling  at  this,  she  said :  "  My  Lord,  what  wouldst  Thou
teach  me  by  this  vision  1 " — "  I  wish,"  replied  our  Lord,
"  that  you  would  consider  the  excess  of  love  which  obliges
Me  to  present  you  with  such  a  gift ;  for  after  having  thus
given  Myself,  I  would  rather  remain  dead  in  the  tomb,  so
to  speak,  than  deprive  a  soul  who  loves  Me  of  the  fruit
of  My  liberality.  Consider  also,  that  even  as  the  blood
which  comes  from  the  heart  of  the  pelican  gives  life  to
its  little  ones,  so  also  the  soul  whom  I  nourish  with  the
Divine  Food  which  I  present  to  it,  receives  a  life  which
will  never  end."

On  another  occasion,  after  Communion,  as  the  Saint  was
considering  with  what  circumspection  she  should  use  that
tongue,  honoured  above  all  the  members  of  the  body  in
being  the  depository  of  the  most  precious  mysteries  of
Jesus  Christ,  she  was  instructed  by  this  comparison  :  That
one  who  does  not  abstain  from  vain,  idle,  or  sinful  dis
course,  and  who  approaches  the  Holy  Communion  without
repentance,  is  like  a  person  who  gathers  a  heap  of  stones  at
the  threshold  of  his  door  to  throw  at  his  guest  when  he  cornea
to  visit  him,  or  beats  him  cruelly  on  the  head  with  a  rod.


172 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


§  6.  Of  the  inejalle  love  of  God  in  the  Sacrament  of  the
Altar.

Gertrude,  having  one  day  heard  a  sermon  on  the  justice
of  God,  was  so  overcome  by  fear,  that  she  dared  not  approach
this  Divine  Sacrament ;  but  God,  in  His  mercy,  reassured
her  by  these  words :  "  If  you  will  not  look  with  the  eyes
of  your  soul  on  the  many  mercies  which  I  have  bestowed  on
you,  open  at  least  the  eyes  of  your  body,  and  behold  Me
before  you  enclosed  in  a  little  pix,  and  know  assuredly
that  the  rigour  of  My  justice  is  even  thus  limited  within
the  bounds  of  the  mercy  which  I  exercise  towards  men  in
the  dispensation  of  this  Sacrament."

On  a  similar  occasion,  the  sweetness  of  Divine  goodness
urged  her  to  a  participation  in  the  Holy  Mysteries,  by  these
words :  "  Consider  in  how  small  a  space  I  give  you  My
entire  Divinity  and  My  Humanity.  Compare  the  size  *  of
this  with  the  size  of  the  human  body,  and  judge  then  of  the
greatness  of  My  love.  For  as  the  human  body  surpasses
My  Body  in  size — that  is  to  say,  the  quantity  of  the  species
of  bread  under  which  My  Body  is  contained — so  My  mercy
and  charity  in  this  Sacrament  reduce  Me  to  this  state,
that  the  soul  which  loves  Me  is  in  some  sort  above  Me,
as  the  human  body  is  greater  than  My  Body."

On  another  day,  as  she  received  the  saving  Host,  our
Lord  addressed  her  thus :  "  Consider  that  the  priest  who
gives  you  the  Host  touches  it  directly  with  his  hands,  and
that  the  vestments  with  which  he  is  clothed,  out  of  respect,
do  not  reach  beyond  his  arms ;  this  is  to  teach  you,  that
although  I  regard  with  pleasure  all  that  is  done  for  My
glory,  as  prayers,  fasts,  vigils,  and  other  like  works  of


"  Quantitatein."


HUMILITY  PREFERRED  TO  THE  GRACE  OF  DEVOTION. 173

piety,  still  (those  who  have  little  imderstanding  will  not
comprehend  it)  the  confidence  with  which  the  elect  have
recourse  to  Me  in  their  weakness  touches  Me  far  more
sensibly ;  even  as  you  see  My  flesh  is  nearer  to  the  hands
of  the  priest  than  his  vestments."

§  7.  That  humility  is  more  agreeable  to  God  than  sensible
devotion  ;  and  how  much  our  Lord  desires  to  give  Himself
to  the  soul  who  loves  Him.

Once,  when  Gertrude  heard  the  bell  which  called  her
to  Communion,  and  the  chant  had  already  commenced,  as
she  felt  that  she  was  not  sufficiently  prepared,  she  said  to
our  Lord  :  "  Behold,  Lord,  Thou  art  coming  to  me  ;  but
why  hast  Thou  not  granted  me  the  grace  of  devotion,
so  that  I  might  present  myself  before  Thee  with  a  better
preparation?"  He  replied:  "A  bridegroom  admires  the
personal  beauty  of  his  bride  more  than  her  ornaments  ;  and
in  like  manner  I  prefer  the  virtue  of  humility  to  the  grace
of  devotion."

Once,  when  many  of  the  religious  had  abstained  from
Communion,  Gertrude  returned  thanks  to  God,  saying,
"  I  thank  Thee,  0  Lord,  that  Thou  hast  invited  me  to  Thy
sacred  Banquet."  To  which  our  Lord  replied,  with  words
full  of  sweetness  and  tenderness  :  "  Know  that  I  have
desired  thee  with  My  whole  heart."  "Alas,  Lord!"  she
exclaimed,  "  what  glory  can  accrue  to  Thy  Divinity
when  I  touch  this  Sacrament  with  my  unworthy  lips?"
He  replied  :  "  Even  as  the  love  which  we  have  for  a  friend
makes  us  take  pleasure  in  hearing  him  speak,  so  also  the
charity  which*  I  have  for  My  elect  makes  Me  sometimes  find
satisfaction  in  that  in  which  they  find  none."

Once,  as  the  Saint  ardently  desired  to  see  the  sacred


174 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Host  as  the  priest  communicated  the  people,  but  could  not
do  so  on  account  of  the  crowd,  she  heard  our  Lord  saying
to  her :  "  A  sweet  secret  shall  be  between  us,  which  is
unknown  to  those  who  absent  themselves  from  Me ;  but
thou,  if  thou  wouldst  enjoy  it,  approach;  and  thou  shalt
not  see,  but  taste  and  prove,  the  sweetness  of  this  hidden
manna."

§  8.  That  it  is  not  wrong  to  abstain  from  Communion
through  reverence.

As  Gertrude  saw  one  of  her  sisters  approaching  the
Hoiy  Eucharist  with  extreme  emotions  of  fear,  she  turned
from  her  with  a  feeling  of  indignation ;  but  the  Lord
charitably  reproved  her  by  these  words :  "  Do  you  not
know  that  I  am  honoured  by  reverence  as  well  as  by  love  ?
But  as  human  weakness  is  not  able  to  combine  the  two  at
one  moment,  and  as  all  are  the  members  of  one  body,  those
who  have  less  should  take  from  those  who  have  more.  For
example,  let  her  who  is  more  moved  by  the  sweetness  of  My
love  think  less  of  the  duty  of  respect,  and  be  thankful  that
another  supplies  for  her  deficiency,  by  being  more  exact  in
testifying  her  reverence  ;  and  let  that  other  desire  that  she
should  obtain  the  joy  and  consolation  that  a  soul  possesses
who  is  full  of  the  Divine  unction."

Once  also,  as  Gertrude  prayed  for  a  sister  under  similar
circumstances,  our  Lord  replied  :  "I  would  that  My  elect
should  not  consider  Me  so  severe,  but  rather  believe  that
I  receive  as  a  benefit  the  least  service  they  render  Me  at
their  own  expense.  For  example,  she  makes  a  sacrifice  to
God  at  her  own  expense  who,  although  she  finds  no  sweet
ness  in  devotion,  never  omits  the  service  of  God,  either  by
prayers,  prostrations,  or  other  acts  of  devotion,  still  hoping,


OF  FEELING  LESS  FERVOUR  AT  COMMUNION. 175

in  His  mercy,  that  He  will  accept  the  fulfilment  of  these
duties."

§  9. Whence  it  is  that  we  sometimes  feel  less  fervour  at  the
moment  of  Communion  than  at  any  other  time.

As  Gertrude  prayed  for  a  person  who  complained  of
having  less  devotion  on  the  days  on  which  she  communi
cated  than  on  others,  our  Lord  said  to  her  :  "  This  has
not  happened  by  chance,  but  by  a  particular  Providence,
which  inspires  feelings  of  devotion  at  unexpected  times,
to  elevate  the  heart  of  man,  which  is  so  enslaved  by  the
body ;  but  on  festivals  and  at  the  time  of  Communion  I
withdraw  this  grace,  preferring  to  occupy  the  hearts  of  My
elect  with  good  desires  or  humility  j  and  this  may  be  more
advantageous  to  their  welfare  than  the  grace  of  devotion."

§  1 0.  God  permits  the  just  to  fall  for  their  humiliation.

As  the  Saint  prayed  for  a  person  who  had  abstained
from  receiving  the  Body  of  the  Lord,  fearing  to  be  an
occasion  of  scandal,  our  Lord  made  known  His  will  by  this
comparison  :  "  As  a  man  who  washes  his  hands  to  remove  a
stain,  removes  at  the  same  time  not  only  what  he  has  seen,
but  also  cleanses  his  hands  perfectly,  so  the  just  are  allowed
to  fall  into  some  trifling  faults,  that  they  may  become  more
agreeable  to  Me  by  their  repentance  and  humility  ;  but
there  are  some  who  contradict  My  designs  in  this,  by
neglecting  the  interior  beauty  which  I  desire  to  see  after
their  penance,  thinking  of  the  exterior,  and  of  the  judgment
of  men ;  and  this  they  do,  when  they  deprive  themselves  of
the  grace  which  they  might  receive  in  the  Sacrament,  from
the  fear  of  scandalising  those  who  do  not  think  them  suffi
ciently  prepared."


176 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

§  11.  Jesus  Christ  If  imself  prepares  the  Saint  for
Communion.

As  the  Saint  was  about  to  receive  Holy  Communion,
she  felt  herself  invited  by  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  It  ap
peared  to  her  that  she  was  in  the  celestial  kingdom,  and
that  she  was  seated  in  glory  near  the  Eternal  Father,  to  eat
with  Him  at  His  table.  But  as  she  considered  that  she  waa
neither  properly  attired  nor  sufficiently  prepared,  she  en
deavoured  to  withdraw.  Then  the  Son  of  God  came  to
her,  and  led  her  to  a  retired  place  to  prepare  her  for  this
banquet.  And  first,  He  remitted  her  sins  by  washing  her
hands ;  offering  His  Passion  for  her  amendment.  Then
He  gave  her  a  necklace,  bracelets,  and  rings ;  and  having
thus  adorned  her,  He  desired  her  to  walk  discreetly,  as  one
so  adorned  should  do,  and  not  like  a  foolish  person,  who,  even
when  thus  attired,  would  be  despised  rather  than  honoured.

She  understood  by  these  words,  that  they  walk  like  foola
who,  after  they  have  been  cured  of  their  defects,  are  as  pusil
lanimous  as  ever,  because  they  have  not  an  entire  confidence
that  Jesus  Christ  will  supply  for  their  defects.

§  12.  Of  the  value  of  communicating  for  the  souls  in
purgatory.

One  day,  after  Communion,  the  Saint  offered  the  Host
which  she  had  just  received  for  the  souls  in  purgatory  ;  and
perceiving  the  great  benefit  they  obtained  thereby,  she  was
amazed,  and  said  to  her  Spouse  :  "  My  God,  since  I  am
obliged  to  declare  for  Thy  glory  that  Thou  dost  honour  me
continually  with  Thy  presence,  or  rather,  that  Thou  abidest
in  my  soul,  unworthy  as  I  am,  how  is  it  that  Thou  dost
not  work  through  me  as  Thou  hast  done  to-day  after  I  have
received  Thy  adorable  Body  ?  "  He  replied  :  "  It  is  not


RECEIVING  COMMUNION  FOR  THE  SOULS  IN  PURGATORY. 177

easy  for  every  one  to  approach  a  king  who  remains  always
in  his  palace  ;  but  when  his  love  for  his  queen  induces  him
to  go  forth,  then  all  may  behold,  through  her  kindness,  his
pomp  and  mngnificence  ;  thus,  when,  moved  by  My  love,  I
visit  one  of  the  faithful  (who  is  free  from  mortal  sin)  in  the
Sacrament  of  the  Altar,  all  who  are  in  heaven,  on  earth,  or
in  purgatory,  receive  immense  benefits  thereby."

On  another  occasion  the  Saint  humbled  herself  deeply
before  approaching  the  Holy  Communion,  in  honour  and  in
imitation  of  the  humility  of  the  Son  of  God  in  descend
ing  into  limbo.  Then,  uniting  herself  with  His  descent,
she  found  herself  descending  to  the  very  depths  of  purga
tory  ;  and  humbling  herself  still  lower,  she  heard  our  Lord
say  to  her  :  "  I  will  draw  you  to  Me  in  the  Sacrament  of  the
Altar  in  such  a  manner  that  you  will  draw  after  you  all
those  who  shall  perceive  the  odour  of  your  desire."

Having  received  this  promise  from  our  Lord,  she  desired
after  Communion  that  He  would  release  as  many  souls  as
she  could  divide  the  Host  into  particles  in  her  mouth  ;  but
as  she  tried  to  effect  this,  He  said  to  her :  "  In  order  that
you  may  know  that  My  mercy  is  above  all  My  works,  and
that  the  abyss  of  My  mercy  cannot  be  exhausted,  I  am
ready  to  grant  you,  through  the  merit  of  this  life-giving
Sacrament,  more  than  you  dare  to  ask  Me."


CHAPTER  XVIII.

The  devotion  of  St.  Gertrude  to  the  Mother  of  God— She  is  taught
to  invoke  her  as  the  white  lily  of  the  adorable  Trinity,  and  the
vermilion  rose  of  heaven.

As  Gertrude  offered  herself  to  God  during  her  prayer,  and
inquired  how  He  desired  her  to  occupy  herself  at  this  time,


178  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

He  replied :  "  Honour  My  Mother,  who  is  seated  at  My
side,  and  employ  yourself  in  praising  her."  Then  the  Saint
began  to  salute  the  Queen  of  heaven,  reciting  the  verse,
Paradisus  voluptas,  &c. — "  Paradise  of  delights ;  "  and
extolling  her  because  she  was  the  abode  full  of  delights
which  the  impenetrable  wisdom  of  God,  who  knows  all
creatures  perfectly,  had  chosen  for  His  dwelling ;  and  she
besought  her  to  obtain  for  her  a  heart  adorned  with  so
many  virtues  that  God  might  take  pleasure  in  dwelling
therein.  Then  the  Blessed  Virgin  inclined  towards  her,
and  planted  in  her  heart  the  different  flowers  of  virtue —
the  rose  of  charity,  the  lily  of  chastity,  the  violet  of  humi
lity,  the  flexibility  of  obedience,  and  many  other  gifts;
thus  showing  how  promptly  she  assists  those  who  invoke
her  assistance.

Then  the  Saint  addressed  her  thus  :  Gaude,  morum
(Hsciplina — "  Rejoice,  model  of  discipline ;  "  praising  her
for  having  ordered  her  desires,  judgment,  and  affection  with
more  care  and  circumspection  than  the  rest  of  mankind,
and  for  having  served  the  Lord,  who  dwelt  in  her,  with
such  respect  and  reverence,  that  she  had  never  given  Him
the  least  occasion  of  pain  in  her  thoughts,  words,  or  actions.
Having  besought  her  to  obtain  for  her  also  the  same  grace,
it  appeared  to  her  that  the  Mother  of  God  sent  her  all  her
affections  under  the  form  of  young  virgins,  recommending
each  in  particular  to  unite  her  dispositions  to  those  of  her
client,  and  to  supply  for  any  defects  into  which  she  might
fall.  By  this  also  she  understood  with  what  promptitude
the  Blessed  Virgin  assists  those  who  invoke  her.  Then  the
Saint  besought  our  Lord  to  supply  for  her  omissions  in  de
votion  to  His  Blessed  Mother,  which  He  was  pleased  to  do.

The  following  day,  as  Gertrude  prayed,  the  Mother  of
God  appeared  to  her,  in  the  presence  of  the  ever-adorable


MATIY  THE  WHITE  LILY  OF  THE  BLESSED  TRINITY. 179

Trinity,  under  the  form  of  a  white  lily,  with  three  leaves,
one  standing  erect,  and  the  other  two  bent  down.  By  this
she  understood  that  it  was  not  without  reason  that  the
Blessed  Mother  of  God  was  called  the  white  lily  of  the
Trinity,  since  she  contained  in  herself,  with  more  plenitude
and  perfection  than  any  other  creature,  the  virtues  of  the
Most  Holy  Trinity,  which  she  had  never  sullied  by  the
slightest  stain  of  sin.  The  upright  leaf  of  the  lily  repre
sented  the  omnipotence  of  God  the  Father,  and  the  two
leaves  which  bent  down,  the  wisdom  and  love  of  the  Son
and  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  which  the  Holy  Virgin  approaches
so  nearly.  Then  the  Blessed  Virgin  made  known  to  her
that  if  any  one  salutes  her  devoutly  as  the  white  lily  of  the
Trinity  and  the  vermilion  rose  of  heaven,  she  will  show
her  how  she  prevails  by  the  omnipotence  of  the  Father,
how  skilful  she  is  in  procuring  the  salvation  of  men  by  the
wisdom  of  the  Son,  and  with  what  an  exceeding  love  her
heart  is  filled  by  the  charity  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The
Blessed  Virgin  added  these  words  :  "  I  will  appear  at  the
hour  of  death  to  those  who  salute  me  thus  in  such  glory,
that  they  will  anticipate  the  very  joys  of  heaven."  From
this  time  the  Saint  frequently  saluted  the  Holy  Virgin  or
her  images  with  these  words :  "  Hail,  white  lily  of  the
ever-peaceful  and  glorious  Trinity  !  hail,  effulgent  rose,  the
delight  of  heaven,  of  whom  the  King  of  heaven  was  born,
and  by  whose  milk  He  was  nourished  !  do  thou  feed  our
souls  by  the  effusions  of  thy  Divine  influences."


180 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

CHAPTER  X[X.

How  the  praises  offered  to  the  Saints  may  be  referred  to  God.
As  St.  Gertrude  was  accustomed  to  refer  all  that  was  sweet
and  agreeable  to  her  Beloved,  when  she  heard  or  read  the
praise  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  or  of  the  Saints,  and  was  moro
than  usually  moved  thereby,  she  raised  her  heart  to  God,
so  that  she  thought  more  of  Him  than  of  the  Saint  whose
memory  was  honoured  ;  and  as  she  heard  a  sermon  on  the
Feast  of  the  Annunciation,  in  which  the  Blessed  Virgin  was
spoken  of  exclusively,  and  no  mention  was  made  of  the
Incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  she  was  so  grieved,  that  as
she  passed  the  altar  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  returning  from
the  sermon,  she  did  not  salute  her  with  her  usual  devotion,
but  rather  offered  her  salutation  to  Jesus,  the  blessed  Fruit
of  her  womb.  But  afterwards  she  feared  she  had  displeased
this  august  queen,  until  our  Lord  consoled  her  by  these
loving  words  :  "  Fear  not,  Gertrude,  My  beloved  ;  for  al
though  you  have  referred  the  honour  and  praise  which  you
usually  render  to  My  dear  Mother  exclusively  to  Me,  it  will
not  be  the  less  agreeable  to  her."


CHAPTER  XX.

How  God  desires  to  be  sought  for  by  the  soul  that  loves  Him  ;  and
how  He  loves  us  when  we  suffer.

ON  one  occasion,  when  the  Saint  was  prevented  from
assisting  at  Vespers,  by  some  infirmity,  she  exclaimed :
"  Lord,  wouldest  Thou  not  be  more  honoured  if  I  were  in
choir  with  the  community,  engaged  in  prayer,  and  fulfilling
the  duties  of  my  Rule,  than  by  my  being  here,  passing  my
time  uselessly,  in  consequence  of  this  illness  ? "  Our  Lord


RECEIVES  THE  BENEDICTION  OF  THE  BLESSED  TRTNITY. 181

replied  :  "  Be  assured  that  the  bridegroom  takes  moie
pleasure  in  conversing  with  his  bride  familiarly  in  his
house,  than  when  he  displays  her  before  the  world,  adorned
with  her  richest  ornaments."  By  these  words  she  under
stood  that  the  soul  appears  in  public,  and  clothed  with  all
her  state,  when  she  occupies  herself  in  good  works  for  the
glory  of  God  ;  but  that  she  reposes  in  secret  with  her
Spouse,  when  she  is  hindered  by  any  infirmity  from  attend
ing  to  those  exercises,  for  in  this  state  she  is  deprived  of
the  satisfaction  of  acting  according  to  her  own  inclination,
and  she  remains  abandoned  entirely  to  the  will  of  God  ;  and
therefore  it  is  that  God  takes  most  pleasure  in  us  when  we
find  least  occasion  of  pleasing  and  glorifying  ourselves.


CHAPTER  XXI.

The  Saint  receives  a  triple  absolution  and  benediction  from  the
Blessed  Trinity,  through  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ.

As  the  Saint  heard  Mass  one  day  with  the  greatest  fervour,
it  appeared  to  her  that  her  guardian  angel  took  her  in  his
arms  as  if  she  were  a  little  child,  at  the  Kyrie  Eleison,  and
presented  her  to  God  the  Father,  to  receive  His  bene
diction,  saying :  "  Eternal  Father,  bless  Thy  little  child."
And  because  for  a  time  He  replied  not,  as  if  He  would
testify  by  His  silence  that  so  miserable  a  creature  was
unworthy  of  this  favour,  she  began  to  enter  into  herself,
and  to  consider  her  unworthiness  and  nothingness  with
extreme  confusion.  Then  the  Son  of  God  arose,  and  gave
her  the  merits  of  His  most  holy  life  to  supply  her  defects,  so
that  she  appeared  as  if  clothed  with  a  rich  and  shining
robe,  and  as  if  she  had  attained  to  the  full  age  and  strength
of  Jesus  Christ.


182  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTJRUDE.

Then  the  Eternal  Father  inclined  lovingly  towards  her,
and  gave  her  His  absolution  thrice,  as  a  sign  of  the  triple
remission  of  all  the  sins  which  she  had  committed  against
His  omnipotence  in  thought,  word,  or  deed.  The  Saint
offered  in  thanksgiving  the  adorable  life  of  His  only  Son  ;
and  at  the  same  time  the  precious  stones  with  which  her
garments  were  adorned  emitted  a  harmonious  concert  to  the
eternal  glory  of  God,  which  testified  how  agreeable  it  is  to
Him  to  offer  Him  the  all-perfect  and  holy  life  of  His  Son.
The  same  angel  then  presented  her  to  God  the  Son,
saying  :  "  Bless  Thy  sister,  0  King  of  Heaven  ; "  and  having
received  from  Him  a  triple  benediction,  to  efface  all  the
sins  she  had  committed  against  the  Divine  Wisdom,  he  then
presented  her  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  with  these  words  :  "  O
Lover  of  men,  bless  Thy  spouse;"  and  she  received  from  Him
also  a  triple  benediction,  in  remission  of  all  the  sins  which
she  had  committed  against  the  Divine  Goodness.  Let  those
who  read  this  reflect  on  these  three  benedictions  at  the
Kyrie  Eleuon.


CHAPTER  XXII.

Favours  granted  to  the  Saint  during  the  recital  of  the  Divine
Office.

ONCE,  as  the  Saint  was  reciting  the  Divine  Office  with
extraordinary  fervour,  on  the  Feast  of  a  Saint,  each  word
which  she  uttered  appeared  to  dart  like  an  arrow  from  her
heart  into  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  penetrating  it  deeply,  and
filling  it  with  ineffable  satisfaction.  From  one  end  of  these
arrows  rays  of  light  shot  forth  like  stars,  which  seemed  to
fall  on  all  the  saints,  but  especially  on  the  one  whose  festival
was  celebrated  j  from  the  lower  end  of  the  arrows  drops  of


OUR  LORD  GIVES  HER  HIS  HEART.  183

dew  flowed  forth,  which  fertilised  the  souls  of  the  living,
and  refreshed  the  souls  in  purgatory.

As  the  Saint  endeavoured  on  another  occasion  to  at
tach  some  particular  intention  to  each  note  and  each  word
of  her  chant,  she  was  often  hindered  by  the  weakness
of  nature,  and  at  last  exclaimed,  with  much  sadness  :
"  Alas  !  what  fruit  can  I  obtain  from  this  exercise,  when
I  am  so  unstable  ? "  But  our  Lord,  who  could  not  en
dure  to  behold  the  affliction  of  His  servant,  with  His  own
hands  presented  her  with  His  Divine  Heart,  under  the
figure  of  a  burning  lamp,  saying  to  her:  "Behold,  I  present
to  the  eyes  of  your  soul  My  loving  Heart,  which  is  the  organ
of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity,  that  it  may  accomplish  all  that
you  cannot  accomplish  yourself,  and  thus  all  will  seem
perfect  in  you  to  My  eyes ;  for  even  as  a  faithful  servant  ia
always  ready  to  execute  the  commands  of  his  master,  so,
from  henceforth,  My  Heart  will  be  always  ready,  at  any
moment,  to  repair  your  defects  and  negligences."

Gertrude  wondered  and  feared,  because  of  this  amazing
goodness  of  her  Lord,  thinking  that  it  was  not  becoming  for
the  adorable  Heart,  which  is  the  treasure-house  *  of  the
Divinity,  and  the  fruitful  source  of  every  good,  to  remain
continually  near  so  miserable  a  creature,  to  supply  for  her
defects,  even  as  a  servant  attends  on  his  master.  But  the
Lord  consoled  and  encouraged  her  by  this  comparison :
"  If  you  have  a  beautiful  and  melodious  voice,  and  take
much  pleasure  in  chanting,  will  you  not  feel  displeased  if
another  person,  whose  voice  is  harsh  and  unpleasant,  and
who  can  scarcely  utter  a  correct  sound,  wishes  to  sing,
instead  of  you,  and  insists  on  doing  so  ?  Thus  My
Divine  Heart,  understanding  human  inconstancy  and

*  "  G»zophylacivu»."


184 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GKHTRUDE.

frailty,  desires  with  incredible  ardour  continually  to  be
invited,  either  by  your  words,  or  at  least  by  some  other
sign,  to  operate  and  accomplish  in  you  what  you  are  not
able  to  accomplish  yourself ;  and  as  its  omnipotence  enables
it  to  act  without  trouble,  and  its  impenetrable  wisdom
enables  it  to  act  in  the  most  perfect  manner,  so  also  its
joyous  and  loving  charity  makes  it  ardently  desire  to
accomplish  this  end."


CHAPTER  XXIII.

Of  the  abundant  virtue  which  flows  from  the  Heart  of  Jesus  into  the
faithful  soul.

SOME  days  after,  as  the  Saint  reflected  upon  this  stupendous
favour  with  singular  gratitude,  she  anxiously  inquired  of
the  Lord  how  long  it  would  be  continued  to  her.  He  re
plied  :  "  As  long  as  you  desire  to  have  it ,  for  it  would
grieve  Me  to  deprive  you  of  it."  She  answered  :  "  But  is
it  possible  that  Thy  Deified  Heart  is  suspended  like  a
lamp  in  the  midst  of  mine,  which  is,  alas !  so  unworthy  of
its  presence,  when  at  the  same  time  I  have  the  joy  of  finding
in  Thyself  this  very  same  source  of  all  delight  ?  "  "  It  is
even  so,"  replied  the  Lord  ;  "  when  you  wish  to  take  hold
of  anything,  you  stretch  forth  your  hand,  and  then  with
draw  it  again  after  you  have  taken  it ;  so  also  the  love
which  I  bear  towards  you  causes  Me  to  extend  My  Heart
to  draw  you  to  Me,  when  you  are  distracting  yourself  with
exterior  things ;  and  then,  when  you  have  recollected
yourself,  I  withdraw  My  Heart,  and  you  along  with  it,  so
that  you  may  enter  into  Me ;  and  thus  I  make  you  taste  the
sweetness  of  all  virtues."

Then,  as  she  considered  on  the  one  hand,  with  exceeding
wonder  and  gratitude,  the  greatness  of  the  charity  which


SUE  HEARS  A  HEAVENLY  HARPER. 185

God  had  for  her,  and,  on  the  other,  her  own  nothingness
and  the  great  number  of  her  faults,  she  retired  with  pro
found  self-contempt  into  the  valley  of  humility,  esteeming
herself  unworthy  of  any  grace  ;  and  having  remained
therein  hidden  for  some  time,  He  who  loves  to  pour  forth
His  gifts  on  the  humble  seemed  to  make  a  golden  tube  *
come  forth  from  His  Heart,  which  descended  upon  this
humble  soul  in  the  form  of  a  lamp,  making  a  channel
through  which  He  poured  forth  on  her  the  abundance  of  all
His  marvels ;  so  that  when  she  humbled  herself  at  the
recollection  of  her  faults,  our  Lord  poured  forth  on  her
from  His  sacred  Heart  all  the  virtue  and  beauty  of  His
Divine  perfection,  which  concealed  her  imperfections  from
the  eyes  of  the  Divine  Goodness.  And  further,  if  she
desired  any  new  ornament,  or  any  of  those  things  which
appeared  attractive  and  desirable  to  the  human  heart,  it
was  communicated  to  her,  with  much  pleasure  and  joy,  by
this  same  mysterious  canal.

When  she  had  tasted  the  sweetness  of  these  holy
delights  for  some  time,  and  was  adorned  with  all  virtues, —
not  her  own,  but  those  given  her  by  God, — she  heard  a
most  melodious  sound,  as  of  a  sweet  harper  harping  upon
his  harp,  and  these  words  were  sung  to  her  :  "  Come,  O
Mine  own,  to  Me  :  enter,  O  Mine  own,  into  Me  :  abide,  O
Mine  own,  with  Me."  t  And  the  Lord  Himself  explained
the  meaning  of  this  canticle  to  her,  saying  :  "  Come  to  Me,
because  I  love  you,  and  desire  that  you  should  be  always
present  before  Me,  as  My  beloved  spouse,  and  therefore

*  "Fistulam."

f  "Audivit  quandam  vocem  dulcissimam,  tanquam  cytharistaa
euaviter  demulcent!  melodia  cytharizantis  in  cythara  sua,  haec  verba  :
Veni  mea  ad  me  :  Intra  meum  in  me:  Mane  meus  mecum."  Had
she,  then,  indeed  heard  that  ineffable  song  which  w}U  be  the  joy  and
the  eternal  consolation  of  the  redeemed  ?


186 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

I  call  you  ;  and  because  My  delights  are  in  you,  I  desire
that  you  should  enter  into  Me.  Furthermore,  because  I
am  the  God  of  love,  I  desire  that  you  should  remain
indissolubly  united  to  Me,  even  as  the  body  is  united  to
the  spirit,  without  which  it  cannot  live  for  a  moment."
This  rapture  continued  for  an  hour,  and  the  Saint  was
drawn  in  a  miraculous  manner  into  the  Heart  of  Jesus,
through  this  sacred  channel  of  which  we  have  spoken,  so
that  she  found  herself  happily  reposing  in  the  bosom  of
her  Lord  and  Spouse.  What  she  felt,  what  she  saw,  what
she  heard,  what  she  tasted,  what  she  learned  of  the  words
of  life,  she  alone  can  know,  and  they  who,  like  her,  are
worthy  to  be  admitted  to  this  sublime  union  with  their
Spouse  Jesus,  their  soul's  true  love,  who  is  God,  blessed
for  ever.  Amen.


CHAPTER  XXIV.

Of  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  faithful  soul,  and  how  to
make  a  spiritual  cloister  in  the  Body  and  Heart  of  Jesus.

ON  Good  Friday,  as  they  made  a  commemoration  of  our
Lord's  burial,  after  the  Office,  Gertrude  implored  Him  to
bury  Himself  in  her  soul,  and  to  abide  therein  for  ever.
Our  Lord  replied,  with  infinite  charity  :  "  I  will  serve  as
a  stone  to  close  the  gates  of  your  senses ;  I  will  place  My
affections  there  as  soldiers  to  guard  this  stone,  to  defend
your  heart  against  all  hurtful  affections,  and  to  work  in
you  My  Divine  power,  for  My  eternal  glory."

Then,  fearing  that  she  had  judged  a  person  harshly  for
something  which  she  had  seen  her  do,  she  said  to  God  :
"  Lord,  Thou  hast  placed  soldiers  to  guard  the  entrance  of
my  heart ;  but,  alas  !  I  fear  they  have  withdrawn,  since  I


A  SPIRITUAL  CLOISTER  IN  OUR  LORD'S  HUMANITY. 187

have  judged  my  neighbour  so  harshly."  "  How  can  you
complain  that  they  have  withdrawn,"  replied  our  Lord,
"  when  at  this  moment  you  experience  their  assistance  ? —
for  it  is  a  sign  that  one  desires  to  be  united  to  Me  when
they  cannot  take  pleasure  in  what  displeases  Me."

While  they  sang  the  Antiphon  at  Vespers,  Vidi  aquam
fgredientem — "  I  saw  water  springing  forth  " — the  Lord
said  to  Gertrude  :  "  Behold  My  Heart, — let  it  be  your
temple;  then  go  through  the  other  parts  of  My  Body,
and  arrange  for  the  other  parts  of  a  monastery  wherever  it
seems  best  to  you ;  for  I  desire  that  My  sacred  Humanity
should  henceforth  be  your  cloister."  "  Lord,"  replied  the
Saint,  "  I  know  not  how  to  seek  or  choose,  because  I  have
found  such  sweetness  in  Thy  Heart,  which  Thou  hast
deigned  to  give  me  for  a  temple,  that  I  can  find  neither  repose
nor  rest  out  of  it, — two  things  which  are  absolutely  neces
sary  in  the  cloister."  "  If  you  desire  it,"  said  the  Saviour,
"  you  can  still  find  these  two  things  in  My  Heart ;  for  have
you  not  heard  that  there  are  persons  who  never  leave  My
house  even  for  food  or  rest,  like  St.  Dominic  ?  Nevertheless,
choose  in  the  other  parts  of  My  Body  the  places  which  you
have  need  of  for  this  spiritual  monastery."

Then  Gertrude,  obeying  the  commands  of  God,  chose
the  Feet  of  her  Spouse  for  her  lavatory  ;  His  Hands  for
her  work-room  ;  His  Mouth  for  her  reception-room,  or
chapter-room ;  His  Eyes  for  her  school,  in  which  she
could  read  ;  and  His  Ears  for  her  confessional.  Then
the  Lord  taught  her  that  whenever  she  committed  any
fault,  she  should  ascend  to  this  sacred  tribunal  by  the  five
degrees  of  humiliation,  which  are  expressed  in  those  five
words  :  "  I  come  to  Thee  vile,  sinful,  poor,  wicked,  and
unworthy,  0  Abyss  of  overflowing  goodness,  to  be  cleansed
from  every  stain,  and  purified  from  all  sin."


J88


THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


CHAPTER  XXV.

Of  the  union  of  the  soul  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  how  she  is  pre
pared,  by  the  merits  of  the  Saints,  to  be  an  agreeable  abode  for
her  God.

As  Gertrude  reflected  on  different  instances  of  instability,
she  turned  to  God,  and  said  :  "  It  is  my  only  good  to  be
united  to  Thee  alone,  my  Beloved."  The  Lord,  inclining
towards  her  and  embracing  her  tenderly,  said  :  "  And  it  is
always  sweet  to  me  to  be  united  to  thee,  My  beloved."  As
He  said  these  words,  all  the  saints  arose  and  offered  their
merits  before  the  throne  of  God  for  her  soul,  that  it  might
become  more  worthy  of  being  His  abode.  Then  she  knew
how  prompt  God  is  in  inclining  towards  the  soul  that  calls
upon  Him,  and  with  what  joy  all  the  blessed  contribute
their  merits  to  supply  for  our  unworthiness.

The  Saint  then  exclaimed,  in  the  fervour  of  her  desires  :
"  I  salute  Thee,  my  most  loving  Lord,  although  I  am  but  a
vile  and  abject  creature."  And  she  received  this  reply
from  the  sweetest  mercy  of  God  :  "  And  I  salute  you  also  in
return,  My  beloved  spouse."  By  this  she  knew  that  each
time  a  soul  says  to  God,  "  My  Beloved,  my  most  dear
Lord,  my  sweetest  Jesus,"  or  any  other  words -which  ex
press  her  ardent  devotion,  He  often  replies  to  her  in  a
manner  which  obtains  for  her  a  special  privilege  of  grace
in  heaven  ;  like  the  special  glory  which  St.  John  the  Evan
gelist  obtained  on  earth,  of  being  called  "the  disciple
whom  Jesus  loved."


THE  MERIT  OF  A  GOOD  WILL.  189


CHAPTER  XXVI.

Of  the  merit  of  a  good  will,  and  instructions  on  some  words  of  the
Divine  Office.

AT  the  Mass  Vein  et  ostende*  the  Lord  appeared  to  St.
Gertrude,  full  of  sweetness  and  grace,  breathing  forth  a  holy
and  vivifying  odour,  and  pouring  forth  from  the  august
throne  of  His  glory  the  influences  of  His  love  for  the  sweet
Feast  of  His  Nativity.

Then,  the  saint  having  prayed  Him  to  enrich  all  who
had  been  recommended  to  her  prayers  with  special  grace,
He  said  to  her  :  "I  have  given  to  each  a  tube  of  pure  gold  ;
of  which  such  is  the  virtue,  that  by  it  they  may  draw  forth
all  they  need  from  My  sacred  Heart."  By  this  mystic
tube  she  understood  that  good  will  by  which  men  may
acquire  all  the  spiritual  riches  which  are  in  heaven  and  on
earth.  For  example  :  if  any  one,  burning  with  the  fire
of  pure  and  holy  desires,  endeavours  to  give  God  as
much  thanks  and  praise  and  as  many  testimonies  of  service
and  fidelity  as  certain  of  His  saints  have  rendered  to  Him,
the  infinite  goodness  of  God  regards  this  good  will  as  if  it
had  really  been  effected.  But  this  tube  becomes  more
brilliant  than  gold  when  men  thank  God  for  having  given
them  so  noble  and  elevated  a  will,  that  they  might  have
acquired  infinitely  greater  advantages  by  it  than  the  whole
world  could  bestow.

She  knew,  also,  that  all  her  sisters  who  surrounded
Jesus  Christ  received  Divine  grace  by  similar  tubes.  Some
appeared  to  receive  it  directly  from  the  Heart  of  Jesus


*Introit  for  Saturday  in  Ember  "Week;  Advent,  "Come,  O  Lord,
and  show  unto  us  Thy  face,"  &c.


190 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Christ,  others  from  His  Hands;  but  the  farther  from  His
Heart  they  drew  these  graces,  the  more  difficulty  they  had  in
obtaining  them ;  whereas  those  who  drew  them  from  His
Divine  Heart  obtained  them  more  easily,  more  sweetly,
and  more  abundantly.  Those  who  drew  directly  from  His
sacred  Heart  represented  those  persons  who  conform  them
selves  entirely  to  the  Divine  will,  who  desire  above  all
things  that  this  will  should  be  .accomplished  in  them,  both
in  regard  to  spirituals  and  temporals.  And  these  persons
touch  the  Heart  of  God  so  powerfully,  and  render  it  so
favourable  to  them  at  the  time  that  God  has  determined,  that
they  receive  the  torrent  of  Divine  sweetness  with  as  much
abundance  and  pleasure  as  they  have  abandoned  themselves
perfectly  to  His  holy  will.  But  those  who  endeavoured  to
drawtheir  graces  fromthe  other  members  of  the  Body  of  Jesus
Christ,  represent  those  persons  who  endeavour  to  acquire  vir
tue  according  to  their  natural  inclinations  ;  and  the  fear  and
difficulty  they  experience  is  proportionate  to  the  extent  to
which  they  have  relied  on  their  own  judgment,  and  have
failed  to  abandon  themselves  to  Divine  Providence.

§  1.  Of  the  most  perfect  manner  of  offering  our  hearts  to
God,

As  Gertrude  offered  her  heart  to  God  in  the  following
manner, — "Lord,  behold  my  heart,  which  is  detached  from
all  creatures ;  I  offer  it  to  Thee  freely,  beseeching  Thee  to
purify  it  in  the  sanctifying  Waters  of  Thy  adorable  Side,
and  to  adorn  it  with  the  precious  Blood  of  Thy  sweetest
Heart,  and  to  unite  it  to  Thee  by  the  odours  of  charity," —
our  Lord  appeared  to  her,  and  offered  her  heart  to  His
Eternal  Father,  united  to  His  own,  under  the  form  of  a
chalice,  the  two  parts  of  which  were  joined  together  by
wax.  The  Saint,  perceiving  this,  said,  with  extreme  fer-


THE  ADVENT  OFFICE.  191

vour :  "  Grant  me  the  grace,  most  loving  Lord,  that  my
heart  may  be  always  before  Thee  like  the  flasks  *  which
princes  use,  so  that  Thou  mayest  have  it  cleansed  and
filled  and  emptied,  according  to  Thy  good  pleasures,  when
ever  and  however  Thou  wiliest."  This  request  being
heard  favourably  by  the  Son  of  God,  He  said  to  His  Father :
"  Eternal  Father  !  may  this  soul  pour  "forth  for  Thy  infinite
glory  what  Mine  contains  in  My  Humanity  !  "  And  from
that  moment,  whenever  the  Saint  offered  her  heart  to  God,
saying  the  words  above  mentioned,  it  seemed  to  her  so
filled,  that  it  poured  itself  forth  in  thanksgiving  and  praises,
augmenting  the  joy  of  the  blessed  in  heaven,  and  contri
buting  to  the  adornment  of  the  just  on  earth,  as  will  be
seen  hereafter.  From  this  moment  the  Saint  knew  that
God  willed  her  to  commit  to  writing  what  He  had  re
vealed  to  her,  that  it  might  be  for  the  benefit  of  many.

§  2.  Of  confidence  in  God,  and  of  reparation  for  the  con
tempts  offered  to  Him.

In  Advent,  by  the  response  Ecce  venitj  she  knew  that
if  any  one  formed  in  their  heart,  with  a  firm  purpose,  a
perfect  desire  of  submitting  in  all  things  to  the  adorable
will  of  God,  alike  in  prosperity  as  in  adversity,  they  would,
by  His  grace,  render  the  same  honour  to  God  by  this
thought  as  if  they  crowned  Him  with  a  royal  diadem.

And  by  these  words  of  the  Prophet  Isaias  :  "  Arise,
arise  !  stand  up,  0  Jerusalem  ; "  she  understood  the  advan
tage  which  the  Church  militant  receives  from  the  devotion
of  the  elect.  For  when  a  soul,  full  of  love,  turns  to  God

"Flasconum,  qui  ad  refectionem  dominornm  deferuntur.''
V.  Response,  ii.  Nocturn,  2d  Sunday  in  Advent :  "Behold,  the
Lord  our  Protector  cometh,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."


192  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

with  her  whole  heart,  and  with  a  perfect  will  of  repairing,
were  it  possible,  all  the  dishonour  done  to  Jesus  Christ,
she  appeases  His  anger  by  her  loving  charity,  so  that  He
is  willing  to  pardon  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.

By  the  words,  "  That  hast  drunk  the  cup  of  His  wrath
even  to  the  bottom"  (Isa.  li.),  may  be  understood  how  she
has  averted  the  severity  of  Divine  justice.  But  by  the  fol
lowing  words,  "That  hast  drunk  even  to  the  dregs,"  she
knew  that  the  reprobate  have  the  dregs  of  this  chalice  for
their  portion,  and  can  never  obtain  redemption.

§  3.  Of  refraining  from  useless  words.

By  these  words  of  Isaias,  "  Thou  dost  not  thy  own
ways,  and  thy  own  will  is  not  found  to  speak  a  word  "
(Iviii.  13),  she  knew  that  he  who  regulates  his  words  and
actions  thoughtfully,  and  abstains  even  from  those  that  are
lawful  when  they  are  not  necessary,  will  obtain  a  triple
advantage  :  first,  he  will  find  a  greater  pleasure  in  God,
according  to  these  words,  "  Thou  shalt  be  delighted  in  the
Lord  ; "  secondly,  bad  thoughts  will  have  less  power  over
him,  for  it  is  said,  "  I  will  lift  thee  above  the  high  places
of  the  earth  ;  "  and  thirdly,  in  eternity  the  Son  of  God  will
communicate  the  merits  of  His  most  holy  life  more  abun
dantly  to  him  than  to  others,  because  by  it  he  has  been
victorious  over  every  temptation,  and  gained  a  glorious  vic
tory,  as  these  words  express :  "I  will  feed  thee  with  the
inheritance  of  Jacob  thy  father."

God  made  known  to  her  also  by  these  words,  "  Behold,
his  reward  is  with  him"  (Isa.  xxxix.),  that  our  Lord  Himself,
by  His  love,  is  the  reward  of  His  elect ;  and  He  insinuates
Himself  into  their  souls  with  such  sweetness,  that  they
may  truly  say  they  are  rewarded  beyond  all  their  deserts.
"  And  his  work  is  before  him  ;  "  that  is  to  say,  when  we


HOW  AFFLICTIONS  CURE  THE  SOUL.  193

abandon  ourselves  entirely  to  Divine  Providence,  and  seek
only  the  accomplishment  of  the  will  of  God  in  all  things,
grace  has  already  rendered  us  perfect  in  the  sight  of
God.

By  the  words,  "  Be  ye  holy,  children  of  Israel,"  Gertrude
learned  that  those  who  repent  promptly  of  the  sins  they
have  committed,  and  set  themselves  with  a  sincere  heart  to
keep  the  commandments  of  God,  are  as  truly  sanctified  and
as  promptly  cured  as  the  leper  to  whom  our  Lord  said  :  "I
will:  be  thou  made  clean."  By  the  words,  "Sing  ye  to
the  Lord  a  new  canticle  "  (Ps.  cxlix.),  she  knew  that  he
sings  a  new  canticle  who  sings  with  devotion ;  because;
when  he  has  received  the  grace  from  God  to  understand
what  he  sings,  his  chant  becomes  agreeable  to  God.

§  4. God  sends  afflictions  to  cure  our  souls.

By  the  words,  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me ;  He
hath  sent  me  to  heal  the  contrite  of  heart"  (Isa.  Ixi.),  she
understood  that  the  Son  of  God,  having  been  sent  by  His
Father  to  heal  contrite  hearts,  was  accustomed  to  send  some
affliction  to  His  elect,  even  should  it  be  only  exterior,  in
order  to  heal  them.  But  when  this  happens,  He  does  not
always  deliver  them  from  the  affliction  which  has  made
them  contrite,  because  it  is  not  hurtful  to  them ;  for  He
prefers  to  cure  that  which  might  cause  them  eternal  death.

By  the  words,  In  splendoribus  sanctorum  * — "  In  the
brightness  of  the  saints  "  (Ps.  cix.),  she  knew  that  the  light
of  the  Divinity  is  so  great  and  so  incomprehensible,  that
even  if  each  saint  who  has  lived  or  who  will  live,  from  the

*  Antiphon  at  ii.  Vespers  of  the  Nativity,  from  the  first  Psalm
at  Vespers  for  Sundays  and  Festivals.  These  revelations  were
probably  made  during  Advent,  when  the  prophecies  of  Isaias  are
read  at  Matins.

N


194 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

time  of  Adam  to  the  end  of  the  world,  were  given  a  special
knowledge  of  it,  as  clear,  as  elevated,  and  as  extended  as
could  be  given  to  any  creature,  so  that  none  should  be  able
to  explain  it  to  the  other,  nor  to  share  in  their  knowledge, —
even  should  the  number  of  saints  be  a  thousand  times
greater  than  it  is, — the  Divinity  would  still  remain  infinitely
beyond  their  conception.  Thus  it  is  not  written  splendore,
but  in  splendoribus — "In  the  brightness  [plu.]  of  Thy  saints;
from  the  womb,  before  the  day-star,  I  begot  Thee."

§  5.  How  we  must  carry  our  cross  after  Jesus  Christ,  and
how  the  mercy  of  God  chastises  the  elect.

At  the  Antiphon  Qui  vult  * — "  If  any  man  will  come  after
Me,  let  him  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  Me"  (Matt,  xvi.),
Gertrude  beheld  our  Lord  walking  on  a  road  which  seemed
pleasant  because  of  the  beauty  of  the  verdure  and  flowers
which  covered  it,  but  which  nevertheless  was  narrow,  and
rough  with  thorns.  Then  she  beheld  a  cross  which  went
before  Him,  and  separated  the  thorns  from  one  another,
making  the  road  wider  and  more  easy;  while  the
Saviour  turned  to  those  who  came  after  Him,  and  en
couraged  them,  looking  at  them  with  a  sweet  and  loving
countenance,  and  saying :  "  Let  him  that  will  come  after
Me,  take  up  his  cross,  and  deny  himself,  and  follow  Me."
By  this  she  knew  that  our  temptations  are  our  crosses.
For  example  :  it  is  a  cross  to  one  person  to  be  obliged  by
obedience  to  do  what  she  dislikes ;  to  another,  to  be  re
strained.  Now,  each  ought  so  to  carry  his  cross  as  to  be
willing  to  suffer  with  a  good  heart  all  that  crosses  him,  and
yet  to  neglect  nothing  which  he  thinks  may  be  for  the  glory
of  God.

*  Aut.  at  Magnificat  of  ii.  Vespers,  Com.  of  one  Martyr.


VALUE  OF  CHARITY.  195

As  they  chanted  this  verse,*  "  The  words  of  the  wicked
have  prevailed  over  us "  (Ps.  Ixiv.),  she  knew  that  when
any  one  who  has  sinned  through  human  frailty  is  too
severely  reprehended  for  it  by  another,  this  excessive
severity  draws  down  the  inercy  of  God  on  him,  and  in
creases  his  merit.

As  they  sung  the  Salve  lieyina,  at  the  words,  "  Turn  on
us  those  merciful  eyes  of  Thine,"  as  the  Saint  desired  that
our  Lord  would  cure  her  of  a  bodily  infirmity,  He  said  to
her,  with  sweet  familiarity  :  "  Do  you  not  know  that  I  look
on  you  with  eyes  of  mercy  whenever  you  suffer  any  pain  of
body  or  mind  1 "

On  another  occasion,  as  they  sung  the  words  Gloriosuin
sangainem^  on  the  Feast  of  some  Martyrs,  she  knew  that
even  as  blood,  which  naturally  inspires  a  feeling  of  horror
when  considered  in  itself,  is  nevertheless  praised  in  Scrip
ture  when  it  is  poured  forth  for  Jesus  Christ,  so  omissions
of  religious  duties,  from  charity  or  obedience,  are  so
agreeable  to  God,  that  they  may  be  justly  termed  glorious.
She  knew  also,  on  another  occasion,  that  God,  by  a  secret
dispensation  of  His  judgments,  sometimes  permits  sinners
to  receive  a  reply  which  serves  only  to  harden  them  in  their
obstinacy,  when  they  seek  by  artifice  to  ascertain  from  the
elect  what  is  hidden  from  them.  Even  as  the  Prophet
Ezechiel  writes  :  "  He  that  shall  place  his  uncleannesses  in
his  heart,  and  set  up  the  stumbling-block  of  his  iniquity
before  his  face,  and  shall  come  to  the  prophet,  inquiring  of
Me  by  him  ;  I,  the  Lord,  will  answer  him  according  to  the
multitude  of  his  uucleannesses  "  (Ez.  xiv.)


•  "  VerbainiquorumprcBvaluerunt  super  nos,"  2dPs.  at  Lauds,  feria
quarta,  and  in  the  Office  of  the  Dead.
•{•  Kesponse  after  ii.  Lesson  in  the  Common  of  many  Martyrs.


196 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


§  6. That  without  the  consent  of  the  will  we  do  not  sin,  and
how  we  are  obliged  to  reprove  evil-doers.

As  they  sung  these  words  in  honour  of  St.  John,  Haurit
virus  hie  letale*  she  understood,  that  as  the  virtue  of  faith
preserved  John  from  the  poison,  so  the  action  of  the  will
which  resists  sin  preserves  the  soul  pure,  however  mortal
the  venom  may  be  which  glides  into  the  heart  against  its
will.  By  the  versicle  Dignare,  Dominerf  she  knew  that
when  man  has  recourse  to  God,  and  beseeches  Him  to  pre
serve  him  from  sin,  even  though  he  should  seem  afterwards,
by  a  secret  permission  of  Providence,  to  fall  into  some  con
siderable  fault,  his  fall  nevertheless  will  not  be  nearly  so
great  as  it  would  otherwise  have  been,  and  the  grace  of
Jesus  Christ  will  so  sustain  him  that  he  will  easily  repent.

When  they  chanted  the  Response  Benedicens^she  stood
demanding  the  benediction  in  the  person  of  Noah.  On
receiving  it,  the  Lord  in  His  turn  seemed  to  ask  hers.  By
this  she  understood  that  man  blesses  God  when  he  repents
for  having  offended  his  Creator,  and  when  he  asks  His  help
to  avoid  sin  for  the  future.  By  the  words,  Ubi  est  §  (Gen.
iv.),  she  knew  that  the  Lord  would  demand  an  account
from  every  religious  of  the  sins  which  her  neighbour  had
committed,  and  which  she  might  have  prevented,  either
by  warning  the  person  herself  or  by  informing  her  supe
rior  ;  and  that  the  excuse  of  those  who  say,  "  It  is  not

*  "This  Saint  took  poison  without  harm."  Not  in  either  of  tho
Offices  of  St.  John  ;  probably  from  a  hymn.

t  "Vouchsafe,  O  Lord,  to  keep  us  this  day  without  sin,"  at  Prime,
and  in  the  Te  Deum.

J  ix.  Response,  iii.  Nocturn,  Sexagesima  Sunday.  But  the  word
there  is  Benedixit—"  God  blessed  Noah  and  his  sons,"  &c.

§  i.  Nocturn,  ii.  Lesson,  v,  Feria  after  Septuagesima— "  Where  is
thy  brother  Abel  ?  "


OP  CONCEALING  THE  FAULTS  OP  OTHERS  SINFULLY. 197


my  place  to  correct  others;"  or,  "I  am  as  bad  as  they  are,"
will  be  no  more  accepted  by  God  than  the  words  of  Cain  :
"Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  1 "

For  each  is  obliged  before  God  to  turn  his  brother  from
sin,  and  to  assist  him  to  advance  in  virtue  ;  and  he  who
neglects  this  duty  against  his  conscience  offends  God.  It
is  useless  for  him  to  pretend  that  he  has  received  no
commission,  for  his  own  conscience  will  teach  him  that
God  requires  it  from  him  ;  and  if  he  neglects  it,  God  will
demand  an  account  from  him  even  more  strictly  than  from
a  superior  who  was  absent  when  the  evil  was  committed,  or
who  did  not  notice  it  when  present.  Thus  we  find  these
words  in  Scripture  :  "  Woe  to  him  who  sins,  but  a  double
woe  to  him  who  assists  in  sin."  We  make  ourselves
guilty  of  the  sin  of  others,  if  we  consent  to  it  by  concealing
it  when  we  might  procure  glory  to  God  by  discovering  it.

§  7.  They  who  labour  for  the  advancement  of  religion  are
rewarded  as  if  they  had  clothed  the  Saviour — Angels
encompass  the  blest.

By  the  Response  which  commences  Induit  me*  Ger
trude  learned  that  he  who  labours  by  his  works  and  by  his
words  for  the  advancement  of  religion  and  the  defence  of
justice,  acts  as  if  He  clothed  God  Himself  with  a  magni
ficent  and  sumptuous  garment ;  and  the  Lord  will  recom
pense  him  in  the  life  eternal,  according  to  the  riches  of  His
royal  liberality,  by  clothing  him  with  a  robe  of  gladness,
and  crowning  him  with  a  diadem  of  glory  ;  but,  above  all,
that  he  who  suffers  for  the  promotion  of  good,  or  for  reli
gion,  is  as  agreeable  to  God  as  a  garment  which  warmed

*  "  The  Lord  hath  clothed  me,"  Common  of  Virgins,  xi.  Response,
iii.  Nocturn.


198 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

and  covered  him  would  be  to  a  poor  man ;  and  that  if  he
•who  labours  for  the  good  of  religion  makes  no  progress  on
account  of  the  obstacles  he  meets  with,  his  reward  will  not
be  the  less  for  this  before  God.

While  they  chanted  the  Response  Vocavit  angelus*
she  knew  that  the  choirs  of  angels,  whose  assistance  is  so
powerful,  surround  the  elect  to  defend  them.  But  God,  by
His  paternal  Providence,  sometimes  suspends  the  effect  of
this  protection,  and  permits  the  just  to  be  tempted,  that  He
may  recompense  them  gloriously  when  they  have  gained  a
victory  with  less  help  from  on  high  and  from  their  angels.

At  the  Response  Vocavit  angelus  Domini  Abraham,  she
learned  that  as  Abraham  satisfied  the  claims  of  obedience
by  raising  his  arm,  and  merited  to  be  called  by  an  angel,
so,  when  the  elect  bend  their  minds  and  their  wills  to  per
form  any  painful  work  for  the  love  of  God,  they  merit  to
taste  at  that  moment  the  sweetness  of  grace,  and  to  be  con
soled  by  the  testimony  of  their  own  conscience.  And  this  is
a  favour  which  the  infinite  liberality  of  God  bestows  even
before  those  eternal  recompenses  which  shall  be  given  to
each  according  to  the  measure  of  his  works.  As  the  Saint
reflected  on  some  trials  which  she  had  formerly  suffered,
she  inquired  of  God  why  she  had  been  thus  tried  by  these
persons.  "  When  the  hand  of  a  father  wills  to  chastise  his
child,"  replied  our  Lord,  "the  rod  cannot  oppose  itself.
Therefore,  I  desire  that  My  elect  should  never  attribute
their  sufferings  to  those  whom  I  make  use  of  to  purify
them  ;  but  rather  let  them  cast  their  eyes  on  My  paternal
love,  which  would  not  allow  even  a  breath  of  wind  to
approach  them  unless  it  furthered  their  eternal  salvation  ;


*  "The  Angel  of  the  Lord  called  Abraham, "  Quinquagesim  a  Sunday,
.  Response,  ii.  Nocturn.


HOW  WE  SHOULD  OFFER  OUR  ACTIONS.  199

and  therefore  they  should  have  compassion  on  those  who
stain  themselves  to  purify  them."

§  8.  Of  offering  our  actions  through  the  Son  to  the  Eternal
Father.

One  day  the  Saint  offered  a  painful  duty  to  the  Eternal
Father,  saying  :  "  Lord,  I  offer  Thee  this  action  through
Thy  only  Son,  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  Thy
eternal  glory."  And  it  was  made  known  to  her  that  this
intention  gave  an  extraordinary  value  and  price  to  her  work,
and  elevated  it  above  a  mere  human  action  ;  and  that  this
offering  was  very  agreeable  to  God  the  Father.  And  even  as
objects  appear  green  when  seen  through  green  glass,  or  red
when  seen  through  red  glass,  so  all  that  is  offered  to  the
Eternal  Father  through  His  only  Son  becomes  most  pleasing
and  acceptable  to  Him.

§  9.  Of  the  utility  of  prayer  when  it  does  not  produce
sensible  fruit.

Gertrude  inquired  of  God  what  advantage  some  of  her
friends  had  gained  by  her  prayers,  since  they  did  not  seem
better  for  them.  The  Lord  instructed  her  by  this  comparison :
"  When  a  child  returns  from  visiting  an  emperor,  who  has
enriched  him  with  vast  possessions  and  an  immense  revenue,
those  who  behold  him  in  the  weakness  of  childhood  little
imagine  the  treasures  of  which  he  is  in  possession,  although
those  who  have  been  present  are  well  aware  how  powerful
and  important  his  wealth  will  render  him  hereafter.  Do
not,  therefore,  be  surprised  if  you  do  not  see  the  fruits  of
your  prayers  with  your  bodily  eyes,  since  I  dispose  of  them,
according  to  My  eternal  wisdom,  to  greater  advantage.  And
know  that  the  more  you  pray  for  any  one,  the  happier  they
will  become,  because  no  prayer  of  faith  can  remain  un-


200 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST  GERTRUDE.

fruitful,  although  we  do  not  know  in  what  manner  it  will
fructify."

§  10.  Of  the  eternal  recompense  of  directing  our  thoughts  to
God.

Gertrude  desired  to  know  what  advantage  there  was  in
referring  our  thoughts  to  God,  and  she  received  this  in
struction  :  that  when  man  raises  his  mind  to  heaven  by
meditation  or  reflection,  he  presents,  as  it  were,  before  the
tbrone  of  God's  glory  a  bright  and  shining  mirror,  in  which
the  Lord  beholds  His  own  image  with  pleasure,  because  He
is  the  Author  and  Dispenser  of  all  good.  And  the  more
difficulty  any  one  finds  in  this  elevation  of  soul,  the  more
perfect  and  agreeable  this  mirror  appears  before  the  Most
Holy  Trinity  and  the  saints,  and  it  will  remain  for  the
eternal  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  this  soul.

§  11.  That  adversity  prevents  occasion  of  sin,  and  of  the  good
effects  of  a  good  will.

On  a  fast-day,  when  the  Saint  was  unable  to  chant  from
severe  indisposition  and  headache,  she  inquired  of  God  why
He  so  often  permitted  these  infirmities  to  visit  her  on  fes
tivals.  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  It  is  to  prevent  you  from  dis
sipating  yourself  by  the  pleasures  of  the  harmony  of  the
chant,  and  so  being  less  disposed  to  receive  grace."  "But,"
she  inquired,  "could  not  Thy  grace  prevent  this  misfor
tune  1 "  To  this  our  Lord  answered  :  "  It  is  a  greater
advantage  to  men  to  turn  away  occasions  of  falls  by  trials,
because  then  they  have  a  double  merit — that  of  patience
and  that  of  humility."

Once  also  the  Saint  exclaimed  with  ardour  :  "  0  my
Saviour  !  why  have  I  not  a  fire  sufficiently  strong  to  melt
my  heart,  so  that  I  might  pour  it  forth  entirely  into  Thee?"


THE  ADVANTAGE  OF  FREE  WILL.  201


"  Your  will,"  replied  the  Lord,  "  will  be  to  you  the  fire
which  you  desire."  And  from  this  she  knew  that  by  the
effort  of  his  will  man  may  fully  accomplish  all  that  he
desires  to  do  for  the  glory  of  God.

As  the  Saint  often  sought  by  her  prayers  to  obtain  the
extinction  of  all  vices,  both  in  herself  and  in  others,  it
appeared  to  her  that  this  favour  could  only  be  obtained  by
the  removal  of  inclination  to  evil,  so  that  the  soul  should
fce  enabled  to  resist  evil  as  easily  as  she  is  inclined  to  it.
But  she  perceived  the  admirable  wisdom  of  Divine  Provi
dence  for  the  salvation  of  mankind,  which,  for  the  increase
of  our  eternal  glory,  permits  us  to  combat  with  our  vices,
that  we  may  be  crowned  more  gloriously  in  heaven.

§  12. Of  tlie  effects  of  Divine  love.

Having  heard  a  preacher  declare  that  no  person  could
be  saved  without  the  love  of  God,  and  that  all  must  at  least
have  so  much  of  it  as  would  lead  them  to  repent  and  to
abstain  from  sin,  the  Saint  began  to  think  that  many,  when
dying,  seemed  to  repent  more  from  the  fear  of  hell  than
from  the  love  of  God.  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  When  I  behold
any  one  in  his  agony  who  has  thought  of  Me  with  plea
sure,  or  who  has  performed  any  works  deserving  of  reward,
I  appear  to  him  at  the  moment  of  death  with  a  countenance
so  full  of  love  and  mercy,  that  he  repents  from  his  inmost
heart  for  having  ever  offended  Me,  and  he  is  saved  by  this
repentance.  I  desire,  therefore,  that  My  elect  should  ac
knowledge  this  mercy  by  thanksgivings,  and  that  they
should  praise  Me  for  this  amongst  the  great  number  of
benefits  which  they  receive  from  Me.

Once  also,  as  Gertrude  meditated  on  her  own  sinfulness
and  depravity,  she  began  to  marvel  how  she  could  be
agreeable  in  the  sight  of  God,  who  must  behold  a  thousand


202 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

imperfections  where  she  saw  only  one.  But  our  Lord  con
soled  her  by  this  reply  :  "  Love  makes  all  agreeable."  *
And  she  learned  that  if  on  earth  love  has  such  power  that
it  makes  even  deformity  pleasing,  how  much  more  easily
can  that  God  who  is  Love  render  those  pleasing  to  Himself
by  love  -whom  He  loves  !

§  13.  The  merit  of  conforming  one's  will  to  God  for  life
or  death.

As  the  Saint  desired,  like  the  Apostle,  to  be  dissolved
and  to  be  with  Christ,  and  poured  forth  many  sighs  to  God
for  this  end,  she  was  consoled  by  this  reply  :  "  Whenever
any  one  desires  with  all  their  heart  to  be  delivered  from  the
prison  of  the  body,  and  yet,  at  the  same  time,  is  perfectly
willing  to  remain  therein  so  long  as  it  shall  please  God,
Jesus  Christ  unites  the  merit  of  His  adorable  life  to  theirs,
which  renders  them  marvellously  perfect  in  the  sight  of  the
Eternal  Father."

§  14.  That  God  does  not  always  expect  a,  full  return  for
the  graces  He  bestows,  and  of  the  value  of  fervent  de
sires.

As  the  Saint  reflected  on  the  little  profit  she  had  gained,
either  for  herself  or  for  others,  from  the  many  graces  which
had  been  bestowed  on  her,  she  was  consoled  by  this  as
surance  :  "  That  God  does  not  bestow  His  graces  on  His
elect  in  such  a  manner  as  to  expect  a  perfect  return,  as
human  frailty  often  prevents  this  ;  but  His  excessive  liber
ality  cannot  contain  itself,  though  He  knows  that  man  can
not  exercise  himself  in  all ;  nevertheless,  He  continually
communicates  new  graces  of  supererogation,  in  order  to  raise

'  "Amor  facit  placentiam."


THE  VALUE  OF  GOOD  DESIRES.  203

him  thereby  to  the  highest  blessedness  in  the  world  to  come.
And  even  as  wealth  is  bestowed  on  a  child  so  that  he  may
profit  by  it  hereafter,  though  he  knows  not  as  yet  the
value  of  it,  so  the  Lord  communicates  His  grace  to  His
elect  in  this  life,  that  He  may  amass  treasures  for  them,  the
enjoyment  of  which  will  render  them  happy  in  heaven."

§  15.  Our  Lord  prefers  su/ering  without  devotion  to  devotion
without  suffering.

On  another  occasion,  as  the  Saint  grieved  in  her  heart
that  she  could  not  form  as  ardent  desires  for  the  glory  of
God  as  she  wished  to  do,  she  was  taught  by  God  that  He
is  perfectly  satisfied  with  our  desires  when  we  are  not  able
to  do  more ;  and  that  they  are  great  in  proportion  to  our
desire  that  they  should  be  great.  When,  therefore,  the
heart  forms  a  desire,  or  wishes  to  have  a  desire,  God  takes
the  same  pleasure  in  abiding  therein  as  men  do  in  dwell
ing  where  flowers  are  budding  forth  in  the  spring-time.
Once  also,  when  she  found  herself  negligent  and  distracted
from  infirmity,  and,  entering  into  herself,  began  to  confess  her
fault  to  our  Lord  with  humble  devotion, — though  she  feared
that  it  would  be  long  before  she  should  recover  the  sweetness
of  Divine  grace  of  which  she  had  been  deprived, — the  infinite
mercy  of  God  was  moved  towards  her,  and  He  said  to  her  :
"  My  daughter,  thou  hast  been  always  with  Me,  and  all
that  I  have  is  thine."  Then  she  knew  by  these  words,
that  when,  through  frailty,  we  fail  to  refer  our  intentions
to  God,  His  mercy  still  esteems  our  will  worthy  of  eternal
recompense,  provided  only  that  our  will  has  not  strayed
from  Him,  and  that  we  often  make  acts  of  contrition  for
our  sins.

As  the  Saint  felt  an  illness  coming  on  her  immediately
before  a  festival,  she  desired  that  our  Lord  would  preserve


204  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTEUDE.

her  health  until  it  was  over,  or  at  least  permit  her  to  have
sufficient  strength  to  assist  at  it ;  still,  she  abandoned  her
self  entirely  to  the  will  of  God.  Then  she  received  this
reply  from  the  Lord  :  "  In  asking  Me  these  things,  and  at
the  same  time  in  submitting  entirely  to  My  will,  you  lead
Me  into  a  garden  of  delights,  enamelled  with  flowers,  which
is  most  agreeable  to  Me.  But  I  know  that  if  I  grant
what  you  ask,  and  allow  you  to  assist  at  these  services,  I
shall  be  obliged  to  follow  you  into  the  place  which  pleases
you  ;  whereas,  if  I  refuse  you  this,  and  you  still  continue
patient,  you  will  follow  Me  into  the  place  which  I  prefer,  be
cause  I  find  more  pleasure  in  you  if  you  form  good  inten
tions  in  a  state  of  suffering,  than  if  you  have  devotion  accom
panied  by  pleasure."

§  16.  The  pleasure  of  the  senses  deprives  of  spiritual
pleasures.

As  the  Saint  one  day  reflected  on  the  arrangements  of
Providence,  by  which  some  are  filled  with  consolation,  whila
others  experience  only  dryness,  God  made  known  to  her
that  He  had  created  the  human  heart  to  contain  pleasure,
as  a  vase  contains  water.  But  if  this  vase  lets  out  the
water  by  little  holes,  it  soon  becomes  empty  ;  or  if  any  water
remains,  it  will  eventually  dry  up.  So,  if  the  human  heart,
when  filled  with  spiritual  delights,  pours  itself  out  through
the  bodily  senses,  by  seeing,  hearing,  &c.,  it  will  at  last
become  empty,  and  incapable  of  tasting  the  pleasures  which
are  found  in  God,  as  each  may  know  by  his  own  experi
ence.  If  we  give  a  glance  or  say  a  word  without  reflection,
it  passes  away  like  water  emptied  from  a  vessel.  But  if
we  do  ourselves  violence  for  the  love  of  God,  celestial  sweet
ness  will  so  increase  in  our  hearts  that  they  will  seem  too
email  to  contain  it.  Thus,  when  we  learn  to  restrain  the


COMPARISON  OF  A  MOTHER  AND  CHILD.  205

pleasures  of  the  senses,  we  begin  to  find  pleasure  in  God,
and  the  more  this  victory  costs  us,  the  more  joy  we  find
in  God.

Once,  as  the  Saint  was  exceedingly  troubled  about  a
matter  of  little  consequence,  and  offered  her  trouble  to  God,
for  His  eternal  glory,  at  the  moment  of  the  Elevation,  it
seemed  to  her  that  our  Lord  drew  her  soul  by  the  Host  as
if  by  a  ladder,*  until  He  made  it  repose  on  His  bosom,  and
then  He  spoke  thus  lovingly  to  her  :  "  In  this  sacred  couch
you  shall  be  exempt  from  every  care;f  but  whenever  you
leave  it,  your  heart  will  be  filled  with  a  bitterness  as  an
antidote  against  evil."

§17. Of  the  caresses  with  which  God  favours  a  faithful  soul,
and  of  the  esteem  we  ought  to  have  for  patience.

Gertrude,  finding  herself  one  day  depressed  by  weak
ness,  said  to  God  :  "  Lord,  what  will  become  of  me,  and
what  dost  Thou  design  to  do  with  me  ]"  "I  will  comfort
you,"  He  replied,  "  even  as  a  mother  comforts  her  child."
He  added :  "  Have  you  never  seen  a  mother  caress  her
child  ?"  As  she  did  not  reply,  because  she  did  riot  remember
a  circumstance  of  the  kind,  our  Lord  showed  her  a  mother
whom  she  had  beheld  caressing  a  little  child  about  six
months  before,  and  He  made  her  remark  three  things
which  she  had  not  observed.

First,  that  this  mother  often  offered  to  embrace  this
child,  and  that  the  child  rose  up  to  come  to  her,  though
still  weak  and  frail.  He  added,  that  thus  she  ought  to
rise  up  by  the  love  of  contemplation  to  the  enjoyment  of
the  Adorable  Object  of  her  love.

Secondly,  that  the  mother  often  tried  her  child,  asking

*  "Cancellum."  t  "  Kespirabis  ab  omni  molestia. "


206 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GEKTRUDE.

him  would  he  have  this  or  that,  and  -yet  not  giving  him
what  she  offered.  Thus  God  sometimes  tempts  man  by
allowing  him  to  fear  afflictions  which  never  happen  ;  and
yet,  if  he  submits  freely,  God  is  satisfied  with  his  resigna
tion,  and  it  obtains  an  eternal  reward  for  him.

Thirdly,  that  none  of  those  who  were  present,  except
the  mother,  understood  what  the  child  said,  because  he
could  not  yet  speak  plainly.  Thus  God  alone  knows  and
understands  the  intentions  of  men,  and  judges  them  accord
ingly  ;  in  which  He  acts  very  differently  from  their  fellow-
creatures,  who  only  consider  the  exterior.

Gertrude  inquired  one  day  of  our  Lord  how  He  desired
her  to  employ  her  time  at  that  hour.  "  I  will  that  you
should  learn  patience,"  He  replied ;  for  at  the  time  she
Avas  very  much  disquieted.  "But,"  she  replied,  "ho\v,
and  by  what  means,  can  I  learn  it  1 "  Then  our  Lord,  like
a  charitable  master  who  takes  up  his  little  scholars  in  his
arms,  began  to  teach  her  three  different  letters  by  which
she  might  learn  patience.  "  Consider,"  He  said,  "  in  the
first  place,  how  a  king  honours  those  who  are  most  like  him
with  his  friendship  ;  and  learn  from  this  how  the  love  which.
I  bear  you  is  increased  when,  for  love  of  Me,  you  suffer  con
tempts  like  those  which  I  endured.  Secondly,  consider
how  much  the  court  respects  him  who  is  most  like  the  king,
and  is  most  intimate  with  him  :  and  judge  from  this  what
glory  is  prepared  for  you  in  heaven  as  the  reward  of  your
patience.  Thirdly,  consider  what  consolation  the  tender
compassion  of  a  faithful  friend  gives  to  his  friend,  and
learn  from  this  what  compassion  I  feel  in  heaven  for  eveii
the  least  thought  which  afflicts  you  here."


OF  DEVOTION  TO  A  CBDCIFIX.  207


CHAPTER  XXVII.

Why  God  is  pleased  by  images  of  Jesus  crucified.

ON  the  return  of  the  community  from  a  procession  which
had  been  ordered  for  fine  weather,  Gertrude  heard  the  Son
of  God  speak  thus  to  His  Father  from  a  crucifix  which
had  been  carried  before  the  procession :  "  Eternal  Father,
I  come  with  My  whole  army  to  supplicate  You,  under  the
same  form  in  which  I  reconciled  You  to  the  human  race."
And  these  words  were  received  by  the  Eternal  Father
with  as  much  complacence  as  if  a  satisfaction  had  been
offered  to  Him  which  surpassed  a  thousand  times  all  the
sins  of  men.  Then  she  beheld  God  the  Father  taking  up
the  image  of  the  crucifix  into  the  clouds  with  these  words :
"  This  is  the  sign  of  the  covenant  which  I  have  made  with
the  earth"  (Gen.  ix.)

On  another  occasion,  when  the  people  were  suffering
exceedingly  from  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  the  Saint
often  implored  the  mercy  of  God  with  others,  but  without
effect.  At  last  she  addressed  her  Lord  thus  :  "  0  charitable
Lord,  how  canst  Thou  so  long  resist  the  desires  of  so  many
persons,  since  I,  who  am  so  unworthy  of  Thy  goodness,  have
often  obtained  much  more  considerable  favours  merely  by
the  confidence  I  have  in  Thee  1  "  "  Why  be  surprised,"  re
plied  our  Lord,  "  that  a  father  should  allow  his  son  to  ask
him  repeatedly  for  a  crown,  if  he  laid  by  a  hundred  marks
of  gold  for  him  each  time  the  request  was  made  ?  Neither
should  you  be  surprised  if  I  defer  answering  your  petition ;
because  each  time  that  you  implore  My  aid  by  the  least
word,  or  even  in  thought,  I  prepare  a  recompense  for  you
in  eternity  of  infinitely  greater  value  than  a  hundred  marks
of  gold."


208  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

CHAPTER  XXVIII.

Of  spiritual  thirst  for  God,  and  of  the  utility  of  sufferings.

WHILE  the  Psalm  Sicut  cervi  *  was  chanted  in  the  Office
for  the  Dead,  Gertrude,  hearing  these  words,  "My  soul
thirsteth,"  endeavoured  to  re-animate  her  fervour,  and  said
to  our  Lord  :  "Alas,  Lord  !  how  feeble  are  the  desires  I
have  for  Thee,  who  art  my  true  and  only  Good  !  and  how
seldom  I  can  say  to  Thee,  '  My  soul  thirsteth  for  Thee'!  "
"  You  tell  Me,"  replied  our  Lord,  "  not  seldom,  but  without
ceasing,  that  your  soul  thirsteth  after  Me  ;  for  the  exceed
ing  love  which  makes  Me  seek  the  salvation  of  men  obliges
Me  also  to  believe  that  in  all  the  good  which  My  elect
desire,  they  desire  Me,  because  all  good  proceeds  from  Me.
For  example  :  if  any  one  desires  health,  rest,  wisdom,  con
veniences,  or  any  other  advantages,  My  goodness  often
makes  Me  believe  it  is  Me  whom  they  seek  in  these  things,
that  I  may  give  them  a  greater  reward  ;  unless  they  de-
nberately  turn  their  intention  from  Me,  as  by  desiring
wisdom  that  they  may  satisfy  their  pride,  or  health  that
they  may  commit  some  sin.  And  it  is  for  this  reason  that
I  am  accustomed  to  afflict  those  who  are  dearest  to  Me  with
corporal  infirmities,  with  mental  depression,  and  other  trials,
so  that  when  they  desire  the  goods  which  are  opposed  to
these  evils,  the  ardent  love  of  My  Heart  may  reward  them
with  greater  profusion."

Gertrude  also  learned  that  "  He  whose  delight  is  to  be
with  the  children  of  men "  (Prov.  viii.),  when  He  finds
nothing  in  them  worthy  of  His  presence,  sends  them  suffer
ings  either  of  body  or  mind,  that  He  may  be  able  to  abide .
with  them,  as  Holy  Scripture  says  :  "  The  Lord  is  nigh


*  Ps.  xli. ;  in  the  Office  for  the  Dead,  3d  P$.  in  iii.  Nocturn.


HOW  HE  GIVES  HIS  BELOVED  SLEEP.  209


unto  those  that  are  of  a  contrite  heart"  (Ps.  xxxiii.) ;  and,
•"'  I  am  with  him  in  tribulation"  (Ps.  xc.)  Let  such  conside
rations  excite  our  gratitude,  and  teach  us  to  exclaim,  with
the  Apostle,  and  with  the  whole  affection  of  our  souls  :  "  Ob,
the  depth  of  the  riches  of  the  wisdom  and  the  knowledge  of
God  !  How  incomprehensible  are  His  judgments,  and  how
unsearchable  His  ways  !"  (Rom.  xi.) — which  He  has  dis
covered  to  save  men.

One  night,  while  the  Saint  was  sleeping,  our  Lord
visited  her  with  so  much  sweetness,  and  she  felt  so  consoled
with  His  Divine  presence,  that  it  seemed  to  her  as  if  she
had  been  refreshed  by  some  delicious  feast.  When  she
awoke,  she  returned  thanks  to  God,  exclaiming :  "  How
have  I  merited  this,  my  Lord  and  my  God,  more  than
others,  who  are  so  often  tormented  by  horrible  dreams,  that
their  very  cries  terrify  those  who  hear  them  ?  "  Our  Lord
replied  :  "  When  those  persons  whom  I  have  determined
to  sanctify  by  suffering  seek  bodily  comforts  while  they  are
awake,  and  thus  deprive  themselves  of  occasions  of  merit,
I,  in  My  love,  send  them  sufferings  during  their  sleep,  that
they  may  have  an  opportunity  of  acquiring  merit."  "  But,
Lord,"  replied  the  Saint,  "how  can  they  merit  by  this
when  they  suffer  without  any  intention,  and  against  their
will  1 "  "  It  is  an  effect  of  My  mercy,"  replied  our  Lord  ;
"for  the  same  thing  happens  to  these  persons  as  to  those
who  adorn  themselves  with  waxen  ornaments,  and  who  ap
pear  well  attired,  although  those  who  wear  gold  and  precious
Btones  are  esteemed  more  wealthy/


210 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


CHAPTER  XXIX.

How  insidious  are  the  snares  of  the  demon,  and  especially  when  we
chant.

As  Gertrude  recited  her  Hours  without  much  attention,
she  perceived  our  ancient  enemy  mocking  her  at  the  Psalm
Mirabilia*  cutting  each  word  short,  and  then  exclaiming :
"  Your  Creator,  your  Saviour,  and  your  Redeemer  has  well
bestowed  on  you  the  gifts  of  speech,  since  you  can  recite  so
glibly  that  even  in  a  single  Psalm  you  have  omitted  so
many  letters,  so  many  syllables,  and  so  many  words  !  "  She
knew  from  this,  that  if  this  treacherous  enemy  had  counted
so  exactly  even  the  least  letter  or  syllable  of  the  Psalm
which  she  had  omitted  or  uttered  carelessly,  what  terrible
accusations  he  would  bring  after  death  against  those  who
were  in  the  habit  of  reciting  their  Office  hurriedly,  without
any  intention.

On  another  occasion,  as  the  Saint  was  occupied  in
spinning  wool,  she  allowed  some  little  tufts  to  fall  on  the
ground,  thinking  only  of  recommending  her  work  to  God
with  great  fervour.  In  the  meanwhile  she  perceived  the
demon  busily  occupied  in  gathering  up  the  tufts,  as  if  for
a  testimony  of  her  fault  ;  but  the  Saint  invoked  the  assist
ance  of  the  Lord,  who  chased  away  the  evil  spirit  with  in
dignation,  for  daring  to  interfere  in  a  work  which  had  been
recommended  to  God  at  its  commencement.


*  "  Thy  testimonies  are  wonderful : "  the  last  portion  of  Psalm
cxix.,  which  is  recited  at  None.


OUR  PRAYERS  NOT  ALWAYS  ANSWERED  AS  WE  EXPECT.  211


CHAPTER  XXX.

That  our  prayers  are  certainly  heard,  even  though  we  do  not  per
ceive  their  effect  ;  and  how  to  supply  for  our  unworthiness  in
approaching  Holy  Communion  through  the  merits  of  Jesus
Christ  and  His  saints.

ONE  day,  as  Gertrude  felt  herself  enkindled  with  extraor
dinary  desires,  she  said  :  "  Lord,  may  I  pray  to  Thee  now  ?  "
"  You  may,  My  beloved  one,"  *  He  replied  tenderly,  "  be
cause  I  will  comply  with  your  will  in  all  things,  as  a
servant  would  obey  the  commands  of  his  master."  "  I  am
well  assured,"  replied  the  Saint,  "  O  God,  full  of  charity,
that  Thy  words  are  always  true  ;  but  since  Thou  dost  mani
fest  such  condescension  towards  me,  although  I  am  so  un
worthy  of  it,  whence  comes  it  that  my  prayers  so  often
remain  without  effect  1 "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  If  a  queen
desires  her  servant  to  give  her  some  thread,!  which  she
supposes,  because  she  is  unable  to  see  behind,  is  hanging
from  her  left  shoulder,  and  he  finds  it  at  her  right,  does  he
not  equally  fulfil  her  intention,  if  he  hands  it  to  her  from
the  place  he  finds  it  in,  as  if  it  were  from  the  place  she
supposed  it  to  be  ?  So  also,  if  in  My  inscrutable  wisdom
I  do  not  hear  your  prayers  exactly  as  you  desire,  I  do  so
in  a  manner  more  useful  for  you,  though  human  frailty
prevents  you  from  seeing  this."

As  the  Saint  was  about  to  communicate  on  one  occasion,
she  felt  grieved  that  she  had  not  made  sufficient  preparation,
and  she  besought  the  Blessed  Virgin  and  all  the  saints
to  offer  to  God  for  her  all  the  dispositions  which  each  hud
entertained  in  receiving  the  various  graces  which  had  been
granted  to  them.  She  then  besought  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ

*  "Domina  regina.**  *  "  Filium."


212  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

that  He  would  be  pleased  also  to  offer  for  her  the  perfection
with  which  He  appeared  on  the  day  of  His  Ascension,  when
He  presented  Himself  to  God  the  Father  and  entered  into
eternal  glory.  Afterwards  she  desired  to  know  of  what
avail  this  prayer  had  been  to  her,  and  our  Lord  replied  :
"It  has  enabled  you  to  appear  before  the  whole  court  of
heaven  with  all  the  ornaments  you  have  desired."  He
added  :  "  Why  should  you  distrust  Me,  who  am  all-power
ful  and  all-merciful,  since  there  is  not  one  upon  earth
who  could  not  clothe  his  friend  in  his  own  ornaments  and
garments,  and  thereby  make  him  appear  as  gloriously  attired
as  himself  1  "

As  she  remembered  afterwards  that  she  had  promised  to
communicate  that  day  for  some  persons  who  had  recom
mended  themselves  to  her  prayers,  she  besought  God  with
great  fervour  to  grant  them  the  fruit  of  this  Sacrament,  and
received  this  reply  :  "I  will  grant  them  this  favour  ;  but
I  leave  it  to  their  free  will  to  avail  themselves  of  it  as
they  wish."  She  then  inquired  how  these  souls  should  be
prepared  to  receive  this  grace,  and  our  Lord  answered  :
"  Whenever,  from  this  time,  they  turn  to  Me  with  a  pure
heart  and  a  perfect  will,  invoking  the  assistance  of  My
grace,  if  only  by  a  single  word  or  the  least  sigh,  they  will
immediately  appear  clothed  with  the  ornaments  that  you
have  obtained  for  them  by  your  prayers."


ADVANTAGES  OF  FREQUENT  COMMUNION.  213


CHAPTER  XXXI.

Of  the  advantages  of  frequent  Communion,  and  of  receiving  the  holy
Viaticum.

ONCE  also,  as  the  Saint  was  about  to  communicate,  she
said  :  "  0  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  give  me ? "  "I  will  give
Myself  to  thee  entirely,"  He  replied,  "  with  all  the  virtue
of  My  Divinity,  even  as  My  Virgin  Mother  received  Me.'*
"  But  what  shall  I  gain  by  this  1 "  inquired  Gertrude,
"more  than  those  persons  who  received  Thee  yesterday
with  me,  and  who  will  not  receive  Thee  to-day,  since  Thou
dost  always  give  Thyself  entirely  and  without  reserve  ? "
Our  Lord  replied  :  "  If  people  in  the  world  honour  one  who
has  been  a  consul  twice  more  than  a  person  who  has  only
once  filled  that  office,  how  shall  he  fail  of  greater  glory  in
eternity  who  has  received  Me  more  frequently  on  earth  ?  "
Then  she  exclaimed,  sighing  :  "  How  far  above  me  in
beatitude  will  those  priests  be  who  communicate  every  day
to  fulfil  the  duties  of  their  ministry !  "  "  It  is  true,"  replied
our  Lord,  "  that  those  who  celebrate  worthily  shall  shine
in  great  glory  ;  but  the  love  of  him  who  communicates
with  pleasure  should  be  judged  of  very  differently  from  the
exterior  magnificence  which  appears  in  this  mystery.  There
will  be  one  reward  for  him  who  has  approached  with  desire
and  love  ;  there  will  be  another  for  him  who  approaches
with  fear  and  reverence ;  and  another  for  him  who  is  very
diligent  in  his  preparation.  But  those  who  habitually
celebrate  through  custom  only,  shall  have  no  share  in  My
gifts."

As  the  Saint  prayed  that  God  would  permit  her  to
receive  the  holy  Viaticum  as  her  last  nourishment  imme
diately  before  her  death,  she  was  informed  interiorly  that


214 THK  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


her  desire  was  not  a  good  one  ;  for  the  effect  of  the  Sacrament
could  not  be  lessened  by  the  trifling  refreshment  taken  in
sickness,  merely  to  preserve  life,  for  the  glory  of  God.
Everything  good  in  man  is  ennobled  by  participation  in  the
Sacrament  which  unites  him  to  God  ;  but  particularly  at  the
moment  of  death,  after  he  has  received  the  Bread  of  Life,
he  may  merit  by  all  that  he  does  with  a  pure  intention,
such  as  performing  acts  of  patience,  eating,  drinking,  &c.,
by  which  he  accumulates  eternal  beatitude  from  his  union
with  the  Body  of  Christ.


CHAPTER  XXXII.

How  God  corrects  the  past  negligences  of  a  soul  who  loves  Him,  &ud
remedies  those  which  may  occur  in  future.

ON  a  Feast  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  on  which  Gertrude  had  re
ceived  some  special  and  admirable  gifts,  she  began  to  enter
into  herself,  and  considering  her  ingratitude  and  negligence,
she  became  dejected,  because  she  had  shown  so  little  devo
tion  towards  the  Mother  of  God,  and  the  Saints  who  were
honoured  on  that  day,  on  account  of  the  singular  favours
which  they  had  received.  But  our  Lord,  desiring  to  console
her,  with  His  ordinary  goodness,  said  to  His  Blessed  Mother
and  the  Saints  :  "  Have  I  not  satisfied  for  her  by  communicat
ing  Myself  to  her  with  all  the  sweetness  of  My  Divinity  in
your  presence  ? "  They  replied  :  "  The  goodness  with  which
Thou  hast  supplied  what  she  owed  to  us  truly  surpasses  all
our  merits."  Then  our  Lord  conversed  sweetly  with  this
soul,  and  said  :  "  Are  you  satisfied  with  this  reparation  1 "
"  I  should  be  so  indeed,  my  God,"  she  answered  ;  "  but  one
thing  is  wanting  to  me  ;  I  fear,  now  my  past  negligences  are
effaced,  that  I  shall  begin  to  commit  new  ones, — I  am  so  in-


EFFFCTS  OP  HOLY  COMMUNION.  215


Blined  to  evil."  He  replied  :  "  I  will  give  Myself  to  you  in
BO  efficacious  a  manner,  that  I  will  efface  entirely,  not  only
the  faults  which  you  have  committed,  but  even  those  which
you  may  commit  ;  only  be  careful  to  preserve  yourself
from  any  stain  of  sin  after  you  have  received  the  most  holy
Sacrament."  As  He  said  these  things,  she  replied  :  "Alas,
Lord  !  I  fear  that  I  shall  not  even  fulfil  this  duty  as  I
ought  :  therefore,  O  most  charitable  of  all  Masters,  teach
me,  I  beseech  Thee,  how  I  may  purify  myself  from  the
stains  which  I  may  contract."  He  replied  :  "  Do  not  allow
them  to  remain  long  in  you,  but  as  soon  as  you  perceive
them  say,  with  all  the  fervour  of  your  heart :  '  Lo;  1,  have
mercy  on  me  ! '  or,  '  Jesus  Christ,  who  art  my  only  hope,
grant  that  all  my  sins  may  be  effaced  by  the  merit  of  Thy
saving  Death  ! '  "

The  Saint  then  approached  to  receive  the  Body  of
Christ,  and  she  perceived  that  her  soul  had  become  as
clear  as  transparent  crystal,  and  that  the  Divinity  of  Jesus
Christ,  whom  she  had  just  received,  was  miraculously  en
cased  therein  like  gold  shining  through  the  crystal,  and
producing  such  sweet,  amazing,  and  inconceivable  effects,
that  the  adorable  Trinity  and  all  the  saints  were  thereby
filled  with  joy.  From  this  we  may  know  that  every
spiritual  loss  can  be  repaired  by  worthily  receiving  the
Body  of  Christ.  For  in  truth  the  effects  produced  in  her
Boul  by  God  were  so  excellent,  that  it  appeared  as  if  the
whole  celestial  court  testified  that  their  greatest  delight
was  to  behold  a  soul  in  whom  such  marvels  were  per
formed.

The  promise  which  God  made  her  in  regard  to  her
future  faults  must  be  understood  thus  :  that  as  one  sees
equally  well  on  every  side  an  object  which  is  contained  in
crystal,  so  also  the  Divine  operations  were  seen  in  this  soul,


216 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.


unless  they  were  obscured  by  the  cloud  of  sin,  for  this  aloiie
could  prevent  their  being  discerned.


CHAPTER  XXXIII.

Of  the  value  and  importance  of  spiritual  Communion.

THIS  holy  spouse  of  Jesus  Christ  had  usually  an  extreme
and  ardent  desire  to  receive  the  Body  of  Christ,  and  it  hap
pened  that  once,  when  she  prepared  for  Communion  with  more
than  ordinary  devotion,  she  found  herself  so  weak  on  Sunday
night,  that  she  feared  she  would  not  be  able  to  communi
cate  ;  but,  according  to  her  usual  custom,  she  consulted  her
Lord,  to  know  what  would  be  most  pleasing  to  Him.  He  re
plied  :  "  Even  as  a  spouse  who  was  already  satisfied  with  a
"  variety  of  viands  would  prefer  remaining  near  his  bride  to
sitting  at  table  with  her,  so  would  I  prefer  that  you  should
deprive  yourself  of  Communion  through  holy  prudence,  on
this  occasion,  rather  than  approach  it."  "  And  how,  my
loving  Lord,  can  You  say  that  You  are  thus  satiated  ? "  The
Lord  replied  :  "  By  your  moderation  in  speech,  by  your
guard  over  your  senses,  by  all  your  desires,  by  all  your
prayers,  by  all  the  good  dispositions  with  which  you  have
prepared  to  receive  My  adorable  Body  and  Blood — these
^are  to  Me  as  the  most  delicious  food  and  refreshment. "

When  she  came  to  Mass,  though  still  in  a  state  of
extreme  weakness,  and  had  prepared  for  spiritual  Com
munion,  she  heard  the  sound  of  a  bell  announcing  the
return  of  a  priest  who  had  gone  to  a  village  to  give  com
munion  to  a  sick  person.  "  0  Life  of  my  soul !"  she  ex
claimed  ;  "  how  gladly  would  I  receive  Thee  spiritually,  if
I  had  time  to  prepare  myself  worthily  !  "  "  The  looks  of


EFFECTS  PJlODUCliD  BY THE  GLANCE  OF  DIVINE  MERCY.  217

My  Divine  mercy,"  replied  the  Lord,  "  will  impart  to  you
the  necessary  preparation  ; "  and  at  the  same  time,  it  seemed
to  the  Saint  that  the  Lord  cast  a  look  upon  her  soul  like  a
ray  of  sunlight,  saying  :  "I  will  fix  my  eyes  upon  thee  "  (Ps.
xxxi.)  From  these  words  she  understood  that  the  look  of
God  produces  three  effects  in  our  souls,  similar  to  those  that
the  sun  produces  in  our  bodies,  and  that  the  soul  ought
to  prepare  in  three  ways  to  receive  it.  First,  the  glance
of  Divine  mercy  searches  the  soul,  and  purifies  it  from
every  stain,  making  it  whiter  than  snow ;  and  we  obtain
this  favour  by  a  humble  acknowledgment  of  our  defects.
Secondly,  this  look  of  mercy  softens  the  soul,  and  pre
pares  it  to  receive  spiritual  gifts,  even  as  wax  is  soft
ened  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  becomes  capable  of
receiving  any  impression  ;  and  the  soul  acquires  this  by
a  pious  intention.  Thirdly,  the  glance  of  Divine  mercy
on  the  soul  makes  it  fruitful  in  the  different  flowers  of
virtue,  even  as  the  sun  produces  and  ripens  different  sorts
of  fruit ;  and  the  third  effect  is  obtained  by  a  faithful
confidence,  which  causes  us  to  abandon  ourselves  entirely
to  God,  confiding  assuredly  in  the  superabundance  of  His
mercy,  believing  that  all  things  will  contribute  to  our
eternal  welfare,  whether  they  appear  favourable  or  adverse.
Then,  as  some  of  the  community  communicated  at  Mass,
our  Divine  Lord  appeared  to  give  Himself  to  each  with  His
own  Hani,  making  the  sign  of  the  cross  as  the  priest  does;
the  Saint,  marvelling  at  this,  said  to  Him:  "Lord,  have  not
those  who  have  received  Thee  in  this  Sacrament  obtained
greater  grace  than  I,  whom  Thou  hast  gratuitously  favoured
with  so  many  benefits  1 "  "  Who  is  esteemed  most  worthy,"
replied  our  Lord,  "  he  who  is  adorned  with  pearls  and  pre
cious  stones,  or  he  who  has  an  immense  treasure  of  pure
gold  hidden  in  his  house  1  "  making  her  understand  by


218  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.


these  words,  that  while  he  who  communicates  aacr«ament«illy
receives  without  doubt  immense  grace,  both  spiritually  and
corporally,  as  the  Church  believes,  still,  he  who  abstains  from
receiving  the  Body  of  Christ  through  obedience  and  holy
discretion,  and  purely  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  who,  being
inflamed  with  Divine  love,  communicates  spiritually,  merits
to  receive  a  benediction  like  that  given  to  the  saint,  and
obtains  from  God  more  abundant  fruit,  although  the  order
and  secret  of  this  conduct  is  entirely  hidden  from  the  eyes
of  men.


CHAPTER  XXXIY.

Of  the  utility  of  meditating  on  the  Passion  of  our  Lord,  and  how
He  offers  Himself  to  the  Eternal  Father  in  satisfaction  fot
our  sins.

ON  a  certain  Friday,  in  the  evening,  Gertrude  cast  her
eyes  on  a  crucifix,  and,  being  penetrated  with  grief,  she  ex
claimed  :  "  Ah,  my  Creator  and  my  Beloved  !  what  cruelties
hast  Thou  not  suffered  on  this  day  for  my  salvation  !  while
I,  alas  !  have  been  so  occupied  that  I  have  not  devoutly
recalled  what  Thou  didst  suffer  for  me  each  hour,  when
Thou,  who  art  the  Life  which  vivifies  all  things,  didst  will
to  die  for  love  of  me."  To  which  our  Lord  answered  from
the  cross  :  "  I  have  supplied  what  you  neglect,  for  I  have
accumulated  each  hour  in  My  Heart  what  you  ought  to
have  accumulated  in  your  heart ;  in  consequence,  it  is  so
inflamed  with  love,  that  I  have  ardently  desired  this  hour
in  which  you  have  addressed  this  prayer  to  Me,  in  union
with  which  I  will  offer  to  God  my  Father  all  that  I
have  done  for  you  during  this  day,  and  without  which


OF  DEVOTION  TO  THE  CRUCIFIX.  219

even  that  could  not  be  so  advantageous  for  your  salva
tion."

We  may  learn  from  this  the  faithful  love  of  God  to
wards  man,  since  He  satisfies  His  Eternal  Father  by  a
single  intention  which  He  excites  in  them,  and  this  in  so
sublime  and  excellent  a  manner  that  it  merits  the  everlast
ing  praises  of  men.

As  this  Saint  touched  the  crucifix  devoutly,  she  learned
that  if  any  one  only  looks  on  the  image  of  the  cross  of  Jesus
Christ  with  a  holy  intention,  God  regards  him  with  such
goodness  and  mercy,  that  he  receives  in  his  soul,  as  in  a
spotless  mirror,  an  image  which  is  so  agreeable  that  the
whole  court  of  heaven  delights  therein  ;  and  this  serves
to  increase  his  eternal  glory  in  the  life  to  come  in  pro
portion  as  he  has  practised  this  act  of  devotion  in  this
life.

On  another  occasion  she  learned  that  when  any  one  turns
towards  a  crucifix,  he  ought  to  persuade  himself  that  our
Lord  speaks  thus  lovingly  to  his  heart :  "  Behold  how,
for  your  love,  I  have  been  fastened  to  this  cross, — naked,
despised,  torn  and  woanded  in  My  Body,  and  in  all  My
members  ;  and  still  My  Heart  has  such  tender  charity  for
you,  that  were  it  necessary  for  your  salvation,  and  were  there
no  other  means  of  saving  yon,  I  would  even  at  this  moment
suffer  for  you  alone  all  that  I  have  suffered  for  the  whole
world."  By  this  reflection  man  ought  to  excite  himself  to
gratitude,  because  it  never  happens  that  any  one  looks  at
a  crucifix  without  a  particular  providence.  There  is  no
Christian,  therefore,  who  is  not  guilty,  if  he  is  so  ungrateful
as  to  neglect  the  adorable  price  of  his  salvation,  since  we
can  never  look  at  a  crucifix  thoughtfully  without  receiving
great  benefit  thereby.

On  another  occasion,  as  she  was  occupied  in  considering


220 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

the  Passion  of  our  Lord,  it  was  made  known  to  her  that
there  is  infinitely  more  merit  in  meditating  attentively  on  the
Passion  of  Jesus  than  in  any  other  exercise.  For  as  it  is
impossible  to  handle  flour  without  attaching  it  to  yourself,  so
also  is  it  impossible  to  meditate  devoutly  on  the  Passion  of
the  Lord  without  deriving  great  fruit  thereby.  And  when
any  one  reads  anything  concerning  the  Passion,  they  at  least
dispose  their  souls  to  receive  the  fruit  of  it,  as  it  is  more
meritorious  to  meditate  on  it  than  on  any  subject.  Let
us,  then,  endeavour  to  reflect  constantly  on  it,  that  it  may
be  honey  to  our  lips,  music  to  our  ears,  and  joy  to  our
hearts.

As  the  Saint  endeavoured  to  choose,  amongst  the  dif
ferent  favours  which  our  Lord  had  bestowed  on  her,  the
graces  which  would  be  most  for  the  benefit  of  others,  if
revealed  to  them,  our  Lord  spoke  thus  to  her  :  "  It  is  most
advantageous  to  men  to  make  known  to  them  that  it  would
be  of  extreme  utility  to  remember  constantly  that  I,  who
am  the  Son  of  a  Virgin,  stand  before  God  the  Father  for
the  salvation  of  the  human  race,  and  that  whenever  they
commit  any  fault  in  their  hearts  through  human  frailty,  I
offer  My  spotless  Heart  to  the  Eternal  Father  in  satisfaction
for  them  ;  when  they  sin  by  their  actions,  I  offer  My  pierced
Hands;  and  so  in  regard  to  the  other  faults  that  they  commit.
Thus  My  innocence  appeases  Him,  and  disposes  Him  to
pardon  those  who  do  penance  for  their  faults.  And  there
fore  it  is  that  I  desire  My  elect  should  return  Me  thanks
whenever  they  have  obtained  pardon  for  their  faults,  be
cause  it  is  through  Me  that  they  have  obtained  it  so  easily."


OF  FOLLOWING  THE  EXAMPLE  OF  CHRIST.  221


CHAPTER  XXXY.

Of  the  bundle  of  myrrh,  and  how  we  should  practise  patience  in
adversity,  according  to  the  example  of  Christ.

ONE  night  a  crucifix,  which  the  Saint  had  near  her  bed,
seemed  to  bow  down  towards  her,  and  she  exclaimed  :  "  O
my  sweet  Jesus  !  why  dost  Thou  thus  abase  Thyself  1 "  He
replied  :  "  The  love  of  My  Divine  Heart  attracts  Me  to  you."
Then  she  took  the  image  and  placed  it  on  her  heart,  car
essing  it  tenderly,  and  saying  :  "  A  bundle  of  myrrh  is
my  Beloved  to  me  "  (Cant,  i.) ;  to  which  our  Lord  replied,
interrupting  her  :  "  I  will  carry  Him  in  my  bosom  ; "
making  her  to  understand  by  this  that  we  ought  to  hide  in
His  adorable  Passion  all  the  pains  we  suffer,  whether  of
body  or  mind,  as  we  would  place  a  prop  *  in  a  bundle  of
sticks.  Thus  those  who  are  tempted  to  impatience  by  ad
versity  should  recall  to  mind  the  adorable  patience  of  the
Son  of  God,  who  was  led  like  a  meek  lamb  to  the  slaughter
for  our  salvation,  and  never  opened  His  mouth  to  utter  the
least  word  of  impatience.  And  when  any  one  is  disposed
to  revenge  the  ill  that  has  been  done  to  him,  either  in  word
or  deed,  he  should  endeavour  to  recall  to  himself  with
what  peace  of  heart  his  beloved  Jesus  suffered,  not  render
ing  evil  for  evil,  nor  testifying  the  least  resentment  by  His
words,  but,  on  the  contrary,  rewarding  those  who  made
Him  suffer  by  redeeming  them  by  His  sufferings  and  His
death  :  and  thus  let  us  endeavour,  according  to  the  ex
ample  of  our  Lord,  to  do  good  for  evil  So  also,  if  any  one
entertains  a  mortal  hatred  towards  those  who  have  offended
him,  he  ought  to  remember  the  exceeding  sweetness  with

•"Sudem.'


222 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

winch  the  Son  of  God  prayed  for  His  executioners,  even  when
enduring  the  very  torments  of  His  Passion,  and  in  the
agony  of  death  praying  for  His  crucifiers  with  these  words :
"  Father,  forgive  them,"  &c.  (Luke  xxiii.);  and,  in  union  with
this  love,  let  us  pray  for  our  enemies.  Our  Lord  then  said  :
"  Whosoever  hides  his  sufferings  and  adversities  in  the
bouquet  of  My  Passion,  and  joins  them  on  to  such  of  My
sufferings  as  they  seem  most  to  resemble,  he  truly  reposes
in  My  bosom,  and  I  will  give  him,  to  augment  his  merits,
all  that  My  singular  charity  has  merited  by  My  patience
and  by  My  other  virtues."

The  Saint  inquired  :  "  How,  0  Lord,  do  You  receive  the
special  devotion  which  some  have  for  the  image  of  Your
cross  ?  "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  It  is  very  acceptable  to  Me  ;
nevertheless,  when  those  who  have  a  special  devotion  to
these  representations  of  My  cross  fail  to  imitate  the  example
of  My  Passion,  their  conduct  is  like  that  of  a  mother  who,
to  gratify  herself  and  for  her  own  honour,  adorns  her
daughter  with  different  ornaments,  but  refuses  her  harshly
what  she  most  desires  to  have.  While  this  mother  de
prives  her  child  of  what  she  wishes  for,  the  child  cares
little  for  all  else  that  is  given  to  her,  because  she  knows  it
is  done  through  pride,  and  not  from  affection.  So  all  the
testimonies  of  love,  respect,  and  reverence  which  are  offered
to  the  image  of  My  cross  will  not  be  perfectly  acceptable
V)  Me  unless  the  examples  of  My  Passion  are  also  imitated."


OF  HONOURING  THE  CRUCIFIX.  223


CHAPTER  XXXVI.

That  devotion  to  the  Passion  of  our  Lord  promotes  union  with
God.

As  Gertrude  once  sought,  with  some  anxiety,  for  an  image
of  the  holy  cross,  that  she  might  often  honour  it  for  love  of
her  Lord,  she  began  to  fear  that  this  exterior  exercise  might
hinder  her  from  enjoying  the  interior  favours  of  God.  But
our  Lord  said  to  her:  "  Fear  not,  My  beloved  ;  for  this  cannot
hinder  your  spirituality,  since  I  alone  will  occupy  you  ;  for
I  am  not  a  little  pleased  with  those  who  honour  the  image
of  My  crucifixion  very  devoutly ;  and  as  it  often  happens
that,  when  a  king  has  a  spouse  with  whom  he  cannot  always
remain,  he  leaves  one  who  is  most  dear  to  him  to  take
charge  of  her  in  his  absence,  and  regards  all  the  duties  of
friendship  and  affection  which  she  renders  to  him  as  if  they
had  been  offered  to  himself,  because  he  knows  that  this  pro
ceeds  from  her  love  for  him, — so  I  take  pleasure  in  the
veneration  offered  to  My  cross,  when  it  is  offered  purely  for
My  love, — when  the  cross  is  not  desired  for  itself,  but  that  it
may  serve  to  renew  the  memory  of  the  love  and  fidelity  with
which  I  endured  the  bitterness  of  My  Passion,  and  wben
there  is  an  ardent  desire  to  imitate  the  example  of  My
Passion."

One  night,  as  the  Saint  was  occupied  in  meditating  on
the  Passion,  she  found  that  the  fervour  of  her  zeal  had
affected  her  body,  and  caused  an  inflammation  in  the  side  ;
when  she  addressed  herself  thus  to  God :  "  Most  sweet
Love  !  if  some  persons  knew  what  I  now  suffer,  they  would
think  that  I  ought  to  interrupt  this  exercise,  in  order  to
recover  my  bodily  health  ;  although  Thou  knowest — Thou
who  beholdest  clearly  that  which  is  most  hidden  within  me


224  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

— that  all  my  strength  and  my  senses  could  not  resist  the
most  passing  movement  of  Thy  grace."  To  which  our
Lord  replied  :  "  Who  could  be  ignorant  of  this,  without
being  altogether  insensible  that  the  sweetness  of  My  Divinity
surpasses  incomparably  all  the  pleasures  of  the  flesh  and
the  senses  ?  since  all  earthly  and  corporal  pleasure  is  but
as  a  drop  of  dew  to  this  great  ocean.  And  yet  these  sen
sible  pleasures  often  draw  men  away  irresistibly,  though
they  know  how  they  endanger,  not  only  their  bodies,  but
even  their  souls.  How,  then,  should  a  soul  penetrated
with  the  sweetness  of  My  Divinity  be  able  to  hinder  itself
from  being  carried  away  by  the  attractions  of  a  love  which
will  constitute  its  eternal  felicity  ?"

She  replied  :  "  But  perhaps  they  would  say  that,  as  I
am  professed  in  a  religious  order,  I  ought  so  to  moderate
the  ardour  of  my  devotion  that  it  may  not  prove  a  hindrance
to  my  observance  of  rule."  Then  the  Lord  deigned  to  in
struct  her  by  this  comparison  :  "  If  a  chamberlain  had  been
placed  at  the  table  of  a  king,  in  order  to  serve  his  majesty
with  the  respect  due  to  him,  and  if  this  king,  from  age  or
infirmity,  required  one  who  stood  by  to  support  him,  would
it  not  be  an  extreme  incivility  if  this  chamberlain  rose
hastily  and  allowed  his  master  to  fall,  because  he  had  been
also  specially  chosen  to  stand  and  serve  at  his  table  1  So
would  it  be  far  more  uncourteous  if  one  whom  I  called
in  My  gratuitous  mercy  to  the  enjoyment  of  My  contempla
tion  should  withdraw  from  it  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
the  order  in  which  he  was  professed ;  since  I,  the  Creator  and
Framer  of  the  universe,  take  infinitely  more  pleasure  in
loving  souls,  than  in  any  labours  and  corporal  exercises  per
formed  without  love  and  without  a  pure  intention.  But  if
any  person  is  not  really  called  by  My  Spirit  to  the  repose
of  contemplation,  'and  yet  neglects  the  observance  of  his


OF  THE  CLOVES  PUT  FOR  NAILS  IN  THE  CRUCIFIX. 225

Rule  to  occupy  himself  therein,  he  is  like  those  who  place
themselves  at  the  table  of  the  king  without  being  invited,
although  they  were  only  destined  to  serve  at  it.  And,  as  a
servant  who  sat  at  the  king's  table  without  being  asked
would  receive  contempt  instead  of  honour,  so  he  who
neglects  his  Rule,  and  endeavours  in  his  own  strength  to
obtain  the  gift  of  contemplation — which  none  can  obtain
without  a  special  gift  from  Me — would  receive  more  disad
vantage  than  profit ;  making  no  progress  in  what  he  had
undertaken,  and  becoming  tepid  in  his  duty.  But  as  for
him  who,  without  any  necessity,  and  merely  for  his  bodily
convenience,  neglects  the  exercises  of  his  Order,  and  seeks
satisfaction  in  exterior  things,  he  acts  as  one  would  do  who,
being  destined  to  serve  at  the  king's  table,  should  go  out  to
his  stables  and  defile  himself  shamefully  in  cleansing  them."


CHAPTER  XXXVII.

Of  the  nails  of  sweet-smelling  cloves  *  which  the  Saint,  moved  by  love,
put  into  the  wounds  of  the  crucifix  instead  of  the  iron  nails,  and
of  the  gratitude  which  our  Lord  testified  for  this.

ONE  Friday,  when  the  Saint  had  spent  the  whole  night  in
meditation,  and  had  been  prevented  from  sleeping  by  the
ardour  of  her  love,  she  remembered  with  what  tenderness
she  had  snatched  the  iron  nails  from  a  crucifix  which  she
always  kept  near  her,  and  replaced  them  by  nails  of  sweet-
smelling  cloves,  and  she  said  to  God  :  "  My  Beloved,  how
didst  Thou  accept  my  drawing  the  iron  nails  from  the  sacred
Wounds  of  Thy  Hands  and  Feet,  to  place  these  cloves  therein,
which  give  an  agreeable  odour?"  Our  Lord  replied:  "It was


"Qariofilis.1


226  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST  GERTRUDE.

so  agreeable  to  Me,  that  in  return  for  it  I  poured  forth  the
noble  balsam  of  My  Divinity  into  the  wounds  of  your  sins.
And  for  this  all  the  saints  will  praise  Me  eternally  •  for  your
wounds,  by  the  infusion  of  this  liquor,  will  become  agree
able."  "  But,  Lord,"  inquired  the  Saint,  "  wilt  Thou  not
grant  the  same  grace  to  those  who  perform  the  same  ac
tion  ?  "  "  Not  to  all,"  He  replied  ;  "  but  those  who  do  it
with  the  same  fervour  will  receive  a  similar  reward  ;  and
those  who,  following  your  example,  do  likewise  with  all  the
devotion  of  which  they  are  capable,  will  receive  a  lesser
recompense."

Gertrude  then  took  the  crucifix  and  clasped  it  in  her
arms,  kissing  it  tenderly,  until  she  felt  herself  growing  weak
from  her  long  vigil,  when  she  laid  it  aside,  and  taking  leave
of  her  Spouse,*  asked  His  permission  to  go  and  rest,  that
she  might  recover  her  strength,  which  was  almost  exhausted
by  her  long  meditation.  After  she  had  spoken  thus,  she
turned  from  the  crucifix  and  composed  herself  to  sleep.
But  as  she  reposed,  our  Lord  stretched  forth  His  right
Hand  from  the  cross  to  embrace  her,  and  whispered  these
words  to  her  :  "  Listen  to  Me,  My  beloved  ;  I  will  sing  you
a  canticle  of  love."  And  then  He  commenced,  in  a  tender
and  harmonious  voice,  to  sing  the  following  verse  to  the
chant  of  the  hymn  Rex  Christe,  factor  omnium  ; —

"  Amor  meus  continuus
Tibi  languor  assiduus :
Amor  tuus  suavissimus
Mihi  sapor  gratissimus."  f


*  "Vale  dilecte  mi,  et  habe  bonam  noctem."

t  The  hymn  Rex  Christe  may  be  found  in  Gerbert's  Monumenta
vcteris  Lituryice  Alcmannicw.  It  was  composed  by  St.  Gregory  the
Great,  and  was  formerly  chanted  at  Tenebrae  after  the  Benedictus.


OF  THE  HYMN  "  REX  CHRISTE."  227

Having  finished  the  verse,  He  said :  "  Now,  My  beloved,
instead  of  the  Kyrie  eleison,  which  is  sung  at  the  end  of  each
verse  of  the  hymn  Rex  Christe,  ask  what  you  will,  and  I  will
grant  it  to  you."  The  Saint  then  prayed  for  some  par
ticular  intentions,  and  her  prayers  were  favourably  heard.
Our  Lord  again  chanted  the  same  verse,  and  at  the  end
again  exhorted  Gertrude  to  pray.  This  He  repeated  many
times,  at  different  intervals,  not  allowing  her  a  moment's
rest,  until  she  became  completely  exhausted.  She  then
slept  a  little  before  daybreak  ;  but  the  Lord  Jesus,  who
is  always  near  those  who  love  Him,  appeared  to  her  in
her  sleep.  He  seemed  to  prepare  a  delicious  feast  for  her
in  the  sacred  Wound  of  His  adorable  Side,  and  He  Himself
placed  the  food  in  her  mouth  in  order  to  refresh  her ;  so
that  when  she  awoke,  she  found  that  she  had  been  marvel
lously  strengthened  during  her  sleep,  for  which  she  returned
most  humble  and  ardent  thanks  to  God.


CHAPTER  XXXVIII.

How  we  may  remember  the  Passion  of  Christ,  and  proclaim  the
praises  of  the  Virgin  Mother  of  God,  in  reciting  the  Seven
Canonical  Hours.

ONE  night,  as  Gertrude  kept  vigil,  and  was  occupied  with
the  remembrance  of  the  Lord's  Passion,  as  she  felt  much

The  verse  sung  to  this  chant  is  extremely  difficult  to  render  in
English  :

"  The  more  I  love  thee,  yet  the  more

Thou  seek'st  this  burning  fire ;
While  thy  dear  love  is  still  to  me
Sweetness  I  still  desire."


228 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

fatigued,  although  she  had  not  yet  recited  Matins,  she  said
to  God  :  "  Ah,  my  Lord  !  since  Thou  knowest  that  my
weakness  requires  rest,  teach  me  what  honour  and  what
service  I  can  render  to  Thy  Blessed  Mother,  now  that  it  is
not  in  my  power  to  recite  her  Office."  *  "  Glorify  Me,"  re
plied  our  Lord,  "  through  My  loving  Heart,  for  the  inno
cence  of  that  spotless  virginity  by  which  she  conceived  Me,
being  a  virgin;  brought  me  forth,  being  a  virgin  ;  and  still
remained  a  pure  and  spotless  virgin  after  childbirth  ;  imi
tating  thus  My  innocence  when  I  was  taken  at  the  hour
of  Matins  for  the  redemption  of  the  human  race,  and  was
bound,  struck  with  rods,  buffeted,  and  overwhelmed  piti
lessly  with  every  kind  of  misery  and  opprobrium."  While
she  did  this,  it  appeared  to  her  that  the  Lord  presented  His
Divine  Heart  to  the  most  holy  Virgin  His  Mother,  under
the  figure  of  a  golden  cup,  that  she  might  drink  from  it ;
and  that,  being  satiated  with  this  sweet  beverage, — or  rather
abundantly  inebriated  thereby, — her  very  soul  might  be
filled  with  exceeding  gladness.

Then  Gertrude  praised  the  Blessed  Virgin,  saying  to  her :
"  I  salute  thee,  most  Blessed  Mother,  august  Sanctuary  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  through  the  sweetest  Heart  of  Jesus  Christ,
thy  beloved  Son  and  the  Son  of  the  Eternal  Father,  be
seeching  thee  to  assist  us  in  all  our  necessities,  both  now
and  in  the  hour  of  our  death.  Amen."  She  knew,  when
any  one  glorified  our  Lord  in  these  words,  and  added,
in  praise  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  "  I  praise  and  salute  thee,
O  Motber,"  <kc.,  that  each  time  He  presented  her  His


*  '  Not  of  obligation,  but  recited  by  some  religious  who  are  not
bound  to  recite  the  Divine  Office,  and  also  by  several  of  the  con
templative  Orders,  as  a  matter  of  devotion,  after  they  have  recited
their  Office  of  obligation.


DEVOTIONS  TO  THE  MOTHER  OF  GOD.  229

Divine  Heart  to  satisfy  her  thirst  in  the  manner  above
described,  it  gave  exceeding  satisfaction  to  the  Queen  of
Virgins  to  be  saluted  thus ;  and  that  she  would  recom
pense  it  according  to  the  extent  of  her  liberality  and  ma
ternal  tenderness.

Our  Lord  then  added  :  "  At  the  hour  of  Prime,  praise
Me,  through  My  sweetest  Heart,  for  the  most  peaceful  hu
mility  with  which  the  immaculate  Virgin  disposed  herself
more  and  more  to  receive  Me,  and  imitated  the  humility
with  which  I,  who  am  the  Judge  of  the  living  and  the
dead,  willed  at  the  same  hour  to  submit  Myself  to  a  Gen
tile,  to  be  judged  by  him  for  the  redemption  of  man
kind.

"  At  Tierce,  praise  Me  for  the  fervent  desires  by  which
the  Blessed  Virgin  drew  Me  down  into  her  virginal  womb
from  the  bosom  of  My  Eternal  Father,  and  imitated  Me  in
the  ardour  and  zeal  with  which  I  desired  the  salvation  of
men,  when,  being  torn  with  whips  and  crowned  with  thorns,
I  bore,  at  the  third  hour,  a  shameful  and  infamous  cross
on  My  shoulders  with  extreme  meekness  and  patience.

"  At  Sext,  praise  Me  for  the  firm  and  assured  hope  with
which  this  celestial  Virgin  thought  only  of  glorifying  Me
by  the  purity  of  her  intentions  ;  in  which  she  imitated  Me
when  I,  being  suspended  on  the  tree  of  the  cross,  in  all  the
bitterness  and  anguish  of  death,  longed  with  My  whole  soul
for  the  redemption  of  the  human  race,  crying  out,  'I  thirst !'
— that  is,  for  the  salvation  of  men ;  so  that,  had  it  been
necessary  for  Me  to  suffer  more  bitter  or  cruel  tor
ments,  I  would  willingly  have  borne  them  for  their  re
demption.

"  At  None,  praise  Me  for  the  ardent  and  mutual  love
which  united  My  Divine  Heart  to  that  of  the  spotless  Vir
gin,  and  which  united  and  inseparably  conjoined  My  all-


230  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTKUDE.

glorious  Divinity  with  My  Humanity  in  her  chaste  womb,
imitating  Me  in  My  mortal  life  until  I  expired  on  the  cross
at  the  ninth  hour  for  the  salvation  of  men.

"  At  Vespers,  praise  Me  for  the  constant  faith  of  My
Blessed  Mother  at  My  death,  during  the  desertion  of  My
Apostles,  and  the  despair  of  all ;  in  which  she  imitated  the
fidelity  with  which  I  descended  into  limbo  after  My  death,
that  I  might  withdraw  those  souls  by  My  all-powerful
hand  and  mercy,  and  bring  them  to  the  joys  of  para
dise.

"  At  Compline,  praise  Me  for  the  incomparable  per
severance  with  which  My  sweetest  Mother  persevered  in
every  virtue  even  to  the  end,  and  imitated  Me  in  the  work
of  man's  redemption,  which  I  accomplished  with  so  much
care,  that  after  I  had  obtained  their  perfect  redemption  by
a  most  cruel  death,  I  nevertheless  allowed  My  incorrup
tible  Body  to  be  laid  in  the  tomb,  to  show  that  there  is
no  degree  of  contempt  or  humiliation  to  which  I  would
not  submit  for  the  welfare  of  man."


CHAPTER  XXXIX.

That  we  should  give  some  token  of  our  love  to  God  after  exterior
occupations.

IT  was  always  a  trial  to  the  Saint  to  be  obliged,  even  for
a  time,  to  occupy  herself  with  exterior  things ;  and  often
when  this  occurred  she  would  rise  suddenly  in  the  fervour
of  her  spirit,  and,  hastening  to  the  place  where  she  was
accustomed  to  pray,  would  exclaim  :  "  Behold,  Lord,  how
I  am  wearied  with  creatures  !  I  would  have  no  other  com
panionship  and  no  other  conversation  except  Thine, — I  leave


OF  DEVOTION  TO  OUR  LOllD's  WOUNDS.  231

them  all  to  seek  Thee,  sole  and  only  Good,  and  delight  of
my  heart  and  soul."  Then,  kissing  the  Wounds  of  Christ
five  times,  she  would  say  eacli  time  :  "  Hail,  Jesus,  my
loving  Spouse  ! — I  embrace  Thee  respectfully  in  the  joy
of  the  Divinity,  with  the  whole  universe,  and  with  all  the
affection  of  which  I  am  capable  ;  and  I  embrace  Thee  in
the  Wounds  of  Thy  love."  Thus  did  she  pour  forth  all
her  griefs  into  the  Wounds  of  her  Lord,  and  find  therein
all  her  consolation  and  all  her  joy.

As  she  frequently  acted  thus,  she  inquired  one  day  of  our
Lord  if  it  was  agreeable  to  Him,  because  it  only  occupied
her  for  a  few  moments.  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Each  time
that  you  turn  thus  to  Me,  I  accept  it  as  a  friend  would
accept  the  kindness  of  his  friend,  who  frequently  through
the  day  endeavoured  to  show  him  the  greatest  hospitality
by  word  and  act.  And  even  as  such  a  person  would
consider  how  he  could  repay  this  kindness  when  his  host
came  to  his  house,  so  do  I  reflect  continually,  with  the
greatest  pleasure,  how  I  shall  repay  you,  and  recompense
you  in  glory,  according  to  the  royal  liberality  of  My  omni
potence,  of  My  wisdom,  and  of  My  mercy,  by  testimonies
of  charity  and  sweetness  multiplied  a  hundredfold,  for  each
offering  that  you  have  made  Me  on  earth."


CHAPTER  XL.

Of  the  effects  of  prayer  in  adversity.

ONCE,  as  the  community  feared  an  armed  attack  upon  their
monastery,  they  recited  the  entire  Psalter,  and  at  the  end
of  each  Psalm,  the  verse,  "  0  Lux  beatissima,"  *  with  the


*  "  O  most  blessed  Light :"  the  commencement  of  a  verse  of  the
Sequence  in  the  Mass  for  Whit-Sunday.


232  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST  GERTRUDE.


Antiphon,  "  Veni,  Sancte  Spiritus"  Gertrude,  who  was  pray
ing  fervently  with  her  sisters,  knew  interiorly  that  our
Lord,  by  this  prayer,  had  moved  the  souls  of  some  by  the
Holy  Spirit  to  perceive  their  negligences,  and  to  repent.
As  they  felt  these  movements  of  compunction,  the  Saint  saw
a  kind  of  vapour  exhaling  from  the  hearts  of  those  who  were
thus  moved,  which  covered  the  monastery  and  the  places
around  it,  and  drove  away  every  enemy.  And  in  proportion
as  the  heart  of  each  was  moved  to  compunction  and  in
clined  to  good,  the  vapour  appeared  more  powerful  in  ex
pelling  evil.  Thus  she  knew  that  this  fear  was  designed
by  the  Lord  to  draw  to  Himself  the  hearts  of  His  elect  con
gregation,  that,  being  proved  by  affliction  and  purified  from
their  negligences,  they  might  take  refuge  under  His  pater
nal  protection,  and  find  more  abundant  succour  and  con
solation.  Having  perceived  this,  she  said  to  the  Lord  :
"  Whence  comes  it,  my  loving  Lord,  that  the  revelations
which  Thou  hast  made  to  me  in  Thy  gratuitous  mercy  are
so  different  from  those  which  Thou  hast  made  to  others,
that  persons  may  often  know  them,  although  I  so  much
desire  to  conceal  them  1 "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  If  a  master,
when  questioned  by  persons  who  speak  different  languages,
answered  each  in  the  one  tongue,  his  discourse  would  only
profit  those  who  understood  it ;  but  if  he  speaks  to  each  in
his  own  tongue — in  Latin  to  him  who  understands  Latin,
and  in  Greek  to  him  who  understands  Greek — then  eacli
can  comprehend  what  is  said.  Thus  the  greater  the  di
versity  with  which  I  communicate  My  gifts,  the  more  My
impenetrable  wisdom  is  displayed,  which  replies  to  each  ac
cording  to  their  comprehension  and  the  understanding  with
which  I  have  gifted  them, — speaking  to  the  simple  by  plain
and  sensible  parables,  and  to  the  enlightened  in  a  more
sublime  and  hidden  manner."


SHORT  PKAYERS  IN  HONOUR  OF  THE  FIVE  WOUNDS. 233


CHAPTER  XLI.

Prayer  composed  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  which  He
promised  to  hear  favourably.

ON  a  similar  occasion,  as  the  community  recited  the  Canticle
tienedicite*  adding  to  each  verse  prayers  proper  for  the
occasion,  Gertrude  perceived  our  Lord  standing  before  her ;
and  at  each  verse  which  they  recited,  prostrate  and  im
ploring  pardon,  He  appeared  to  raise  His  left  arm,  and
offer  her  the  Wound  of  His  adorable  Side  to  kiss.  As  the
Saint  embraced  it  several  times,  our  Lord  testified  that  this
mark  of  her  love  was  extremely  agreeable  to  Him.  Then
she  said  to  Him  :  "  Since  I  perceive,  my  most  loving  Lord,
that  Thou  art  pleased  with  this  devotion,  do  me  the  favour
of  teaching  me  some  little  prayer  which  Thou  wilt  receive
with  a  like  charity,  when  it  shall  be  addressed  to  Thee
devoutly  by  any  one."  Then  she  knew  by  inspiration,  that
if  any  one  shall  say  these  words  five  times  with  devotion  :
«*  Jesus,  Saviour  of  the  world,  have  mercy  on  me  ! — Thou
to  whom  nothing  is  impossible,  save  to  refuse  mercy  to
the  wretched  ; "  or,  "  0  Christ,  who  by  Thy  Cross  hast
redeemed  the  world,  hear  us  ! "  or,  "  Hail,  Jesus,  my
loving  Spouse  !  I  salute  Thee  in  the  ineffable  joys  of  Thy
Divinity  ;  I  embrace  Thee  with  the  affection  of  all  creatures,
and  I  kiss  the  sacred  Wound  of  Thy  love  ;  "  or,  "  The  Lord
is  my  strength  and  my  glory  :  He  is  my  salvation," — if
these  words  are  recited  in  honour  of  the  Five  Wounds  of
the  Lord,  kissing  them  devoutly,  adding  some  prayers  or
good  works,  and  offering  them  through  the  sweetest  Heart
of  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  the  organ  of  the  most  Holy  Tri-


*  "  All  ye  works  of  the  Lord,  bless  the  Lord  : "  Canticle  of  the
Three  Children,  said  at  Lauds  on  Sundays  and  festivals.


234 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


nity,  they  will  be  as  acceptable  to  God  as  the  most  arduous
devotion.

On  another  occasion,  also,  when  they  recited  the  same
Canticle,  our  Lord  appeared  to  her,  making  burning  flames
to  pour  forth  from  the  crucifix  which  was  usually  exposed
before  the  community,  and  sending  them  up  to  God  for
them  ;  manifesting  to  her  the  excessive  love  and  ardent
desire  of  His  Heart,  when  He  interceded  with  His  Father
for  the  welfare  of  this  congregation.


CHAPTER  XLIL

How  the  just  delight  in  God,  and  how  God  takes  pleasure  in  them,
especially  when  they  commit  all  their  good  desires  to  Him.

ON  one  occasion,  when  the  Saint  was  prevented  by  illness
from  communicating,  and  she  felt  her  devotion  also  lan
guishing,  she  addressed  herself  thus  to  God  :  "  0  Sweetness
of  my  soul !  knowing — alas !  only  too  well — how  unworthy
I  am  to  approach  the  Sacrament  of  Thy  Body  and  Blood,
I  would  abstain  from  Communion,  if  I  could  find  consolation
in  any  creature  out  of  Thee;  but  since  I  can  behold  nothing
from  east  to  west,  nor  from  north  to  south,  in  which  I  can
find  any  consolation  or  pleasure,  either  for  body  or  soul,
except  in  Thee  alone,  and  as  I  am  parched  and  thirsty,  and
breathless  from  desire,  I  come  to  Thee,  the  Fountain  of
living  water."  Our  Lord,  in  His  benign  love,  replied  thus  :
"  As  you  assure  Me  that  you  can  find  no  pleasure  apart
from  Me,  so  I  assure  you  also  that  I  do  not  wish  to  find
pleasure  in  any  creature  apart  from  you."  But  as  the
Saint  reflected,  that  although  the  Lord  had  promised  this  at
that  time,  still  at  some  future  period  it  might  be  otherwise,


OP  DESIKING  HEALTH.  235

He  answered  her  thoughts  thus :  "  My  will  is  the  same  as
My  power,  and  therefore  I  can  do  nothing  except  what
I  will."  "  But,  0  most  loving  Lord,"  replied  the  Saint,
"  what  subject  of  complacence  canst  Thou  find  in  one  who
is  the  repulse  and  shame  of  all  creatures '?  "  "  The  Eye  of
My  Divinity,"  He  replied,  "takes  extreme  pleasure  in  re
garding  you,  on  account  of  the  various  great  gifts  which
I  have  bestowed  on  you.  Your  words  are  as  a  concert  of
sweet  music  to  My  Divine  ears,  whether  you  utter  them  to
offer  Me  your  love,  to  pray  for  sinners  or  for  the  souls  in
purgatory,  to  instruct  or  to  correct  others,  or  when  you
speak  in  any  manner  for  My  glory ;  and  though  men  may
obtain  no  advantage  from  your  words,  and  they  may  remain
without  effect,  still  the  good  intention  which  prompted
them,  and  which  has  Me  only  for  its  object,  makes  them
resound  sweetly  in  My  ears,  and  will  cause  them  to  touch
even  My  very  inmost  heart.  The  hope  with  which  you
sigh  after  Me  ascends  as  a  fragrant  odour  before  Me  ;  your
prayers  and  desires  are  sweeter  to  Me  than  any  perfume;
and  in  your  love  I  find  the  greatest  pleasure."

Then  the  Saint  began  to  desire  ardently  a  restoration  of
her  former  health,  that  she  might  be  able  to  observe  the
austerities  of  her  Order  with  more  exactness.  But  our  Lord
replied  lovingly :  "  Why  does  My  spouse  become  importunate
to  Me,  as  if  she  would  oppose  My  will? "  "What,  Lord!"  she
replied  ;  "  how  can  a  desire,  which  seems  to  me  to  be  only
for  Thy  glory,  be  so  opposed  to  Thy  will?  "  "From  the
manner  in  which  you  ask  it,"  replied  our  Lord,  "I  con
sider  it  only  as  the  desire  of  a  child;  but  if  you  should  ask
it  more  earnestly,  I  should  not  be  pleased  at  your  request."

From  these  words  the  Saint  knew  that  the  desire  of
health,  from  a  pure  intention  of  serving  God,  is  indeed
good  ;  but  that  it  ^  far  more  perfect  to  abandon  oneself


236 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


entirely  to  the  Divine  will,  and  to  believe  that  all  which
God  ordains  for  us,  whether  of  prosperity  or  adversity,  can
not  but  be  for  our  advantage.


CHAPTER  XLIII.

Of  two  pulsations  of  the  Heart  of  Jesus,

As  Gertrude  saw  one  of  her  sisters  hastening  to  the  ser
mon,  she  said  to  God  complainingly  :  "  Thou  knowest,  my
Beloved,  with  what  pleasure  I  would  now  hear  this  ser
mon,  were  I  not  hindered  by  sickness."  Our  Lord  replied  :
"  Wilt  thou,  My  dear  spouse,  that  I  should  preach  to  thee
Myself  ?  "  and  she  answered  :  "  Very  willingly."  Then
our  Lord  made  her  rest  on  His  Heart,  so  that  her  soul
touched  it ;  and  as  she  remained  there  some  time,  she  felt
two  most  sweet  and  admirable  movements  therein.  Then
the  Lord  said  to  her  :  "  Each  of  these  movements  operates
the  salvation  of  man  in  three  different  manners.  The  first
operates  the  salvation  of  sinners ;  the  second,  that  of  the
just.  By  the  first,  I  converse  continually  with  my  Eternal
Father — I  appease  His  anger  against  sinners,  and  I  incline
Him  to  show  them  mercy.  By  the  second,  I  speak  to  My
saints,  excusing  sinners  to  them,  and  urging  them,  with
the  zeal  and  fidelity  of  a  brother,  to  intercede  with  God  for
them.  By  the  third,  I  speak  to  sinners  themselves,  calling
them  mercifully  to  penance,  and  awaiting  their  conversion
with  ineffable  desire.

"  By  the  second  movement  of  My  Heart,  I  invite  My
Father  to  rejoice  with  Me  for  having  poured  forth  My
precious  Blood  so  efficaciously  for  the  just,  in  whose  merits
I  find  so  many  delights.  Secondly,  I  invite  all  the  heavenly
host  to  praise  My  providences,  that  they  may  return  Me


TWO  MOVEMENTS  OP  THE  SACRED  HEART.  237

thanks  for  all  the  benefits  which  I  have  granted  them,
and  that  I  may  grant  them  more  for  the  future.  Thirdly,  I
speak  to  the  just,  giving  them  many  salutary  caresses,  and
warning  them  to  profit  faithfully  by  them,  from  day  to  day,
and  hour  to  hour.  As  the  pulsations  of  the  human  heart
are  not  interrupted  by  seeing,  hearing,  or  any  manual  occu
pation,  but  always  continue  without  relaxation,  so  the
care  of  the  government  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  the  whole
universe,  cannot  diminish  or  interrupt  for  a  moment  these
two  movements*  of  My  Divine  Heart,  which  will  continue
to  the  end  of  ages."


CHAPTER  XLTV.

Of  the  manner  in  which  we  should  ask  our  Lord  for  rest  or  sleep.

IT  happened  some  time  after,  that  Gertrude  passed  an
entire  night  without  sleeping,  which  so  weakened  her  that
her  strength  entirely  failed  ;  and  she  offered  her  prostration,
as  usual,  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  salvation  of  men.
Then  our  Lord,  charitably  compassionating  her  weakness,
taught  her  to  invoke  Him  by  these  words  :  "  I  beseech  Thee,
O  most  merciful  God,  by  the  most  tranquil  sweetness  with
which  Thou  hast  reposed  from  all  eternity  in  the  bosom  of
the  Father,  by  Thy  peaceful  abode  of  nine  months  in  the
womb  of  a  virgin,  and  by  all  the  holy  delights  which  Thou
hast  ever  enjoyed  in  souls  filled  with  Thy  love,  to  grant  me
some  rest, — not  for  my  own  satisfaction,  but  for  Thy  eternal
glory, — in  order  that  the  strength  of  my  wearied  body  may
be  restored,  and  that  I  may  be  able  to  fulfil  my  duties."

*  "Binos  pulsua."


238  THE  TCKVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

And  as  she  said  these  words,  she  saw  herself  coming
nearer  to  God,  as  if  she  ascended  by  steps.  Then  our  Lord
showed  her  a  place  at  His  right  hand,  and  said  to  her  :
"  Come,  My  beloved,  repose  on  My  Heart,  and  see  if  My
anxious  love  will  permit  you  to  rest  without  anxiety."  *  As
she  reclined  thus  on  the  loving  Heart  of  Jesus,  and  felt  its
sweet  pulsations  more  sensibly,  she  said  to  Hirn  :  "  O  my
Beloved  !  what  wouldest  Thou  say  to  me  by  those  pulsa
tions?"  He  replied:  "I  would  say,  that  when  any  one
finds  herself  exhausted  and  deprived  of  strength  by  long
wakefulness,  and  addresses  to  Me  the  prayer  with  which
I  have  just  inspired  you,  that  I  may  grant  them  the
strength  they  need  for  My  service. — if  I  do  not  hear
them,  and  they  bear  their  weakness  with,  patience  and
humility,  I  will  console  them  with  the  same  tenderness
and  charity  as  a  friend  would  his  friend,  who  rose  from
his  bed  with  alacrity,  although  overpowered  with  sleep,
merely  for  the  sake  of  enjoying  the  pleasure  which  he  found
in  his  conversation.  And  as  this  compliance  would  be  even
more  agreeable  to  him  than  if  it  were  offered  by  a  person
who  usually  passed  the  night  without  sleeping  much,  so
also  is  he  infinitely  more  pleasing  to  Me  who,  having
exhausted  all  his  strength  by  vigils,  offers  Me  his  weakness,
and  bears  it  with  humility  and  patience,  than  he  who,  being
more  robust,  is  able  to  remain  entire  nights  in  prayer,
without  suffering  much  inconvenience."

*  "Et  probautrum  inauietua  amor  meus  te  quiescere  sinat."


REWARD  OF  PERFECT  RESIGNATION.  239

CHAPTER  XLV.

Of  perfect  resignation  of  ourselves  to  the  Divine  will.

GERTRUDE  being  once  ill  of  a  fever,  which  sometimes  in
creased  after  perspiration  and  sometimes  diminished,  find
ing  herself  one  night  bathed  in  perspiration,  began  to  desire
very  anxiously  to  know  if  she  would  be  better  or  worse
after  it.  Then  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  appeared  to  her
radiant  with  beauty,  and  bearing  health  in  His  right  hand
and  sickness  in  his  left  :  He  presented  them  to  her,  that  she
might  choose  whichever  she  preferred.  But  the  Saint  re
fused  both,  and,  casting  herself  into  the  arms  of  her  Lord,
she  approached  His  loving  Heart,  in  which  the  plenitude  of
all  good  abides,  that  she  might  learn  His  adorable  will.
Our  Lord  received  her  with  much  sweetness,  and  embraced
her  lovingly,  allowing  her  to  rest  on  His  bosom  ;  but  she
turned  her  face  away  from  Him,  and,  inclining  her  head
backwards,  exclaimed :  "  I  turn  my  face  from  Thee,  and  I
entreat  Thee  with  my  whole  heart  not  to  consider  my  inclin
ation  in  anything,  but  to  accomplish  Thy  adorable  will  in
all  that  concerns  me."

From  this  we  may  learn  that  the  faithful  soul  ought  to
confide  all  that  concerns  her  to  God  with  perfect  confidence,
and  that  she  should  prefer  being  ignorant  of  His  designs
towards  her,  so  that  His  will  may  be  more  fully  accom
plished  in  her.

The  Lord  then  poured  into  the  bosom  of  the  Saint  two
streams  of  living  water,  which  came  forth  from  the  two
sides  of  His  Heart,  as  from  a  mystic  vessel,  and  said  to
her  :  "  Since  you  have  turned  your  face  from  me,  and
renounced  your  own  will  in  all  things,  I  will  pour  forth  on
you  all  the  sweetness  of  My  Divine  Heart."  "  My  sweet


240 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Lord,"  replied  Gertrude,  "since  Thou  hast  so  often,  and
in  such  different  ways,  bestowed  Thy  Deified  Heart  on  me,
I  desire  to  know  what  I  shall  gain  from  this  new  gift."  He
replied :  "  Does  not  the  Catholic  faith  teach  you  that
I  bestow  Myself,  with  all  the  riches  that  are  contained  in
the  treasures  of  My  Divinity  and  My  Humanity,  for  the
salvation  of  those  who  communicate  even  once  1 — and  that
the  oftener  men  communicate,  the  more  their  beatitude  is
increased  and  perfected  ?  "


CHAPTER  XLVI.
Of  the  sensible  pleasure  which  the  soul  finds  in  God.

As  many  persons  advised  the  Saint  to  refrain  from  medi
tation  until  she  recovered  her  health,  she  complied  with
their  desire,  being  always  anxious  to  do  the  will  of  another
rather  than  her  own ;  but  on  condition  that  she  should  be
allowed  to  occupy  herself  in  adorning  the  crucifixes  and
other  holy  images,  so  that  she  might  at  least  preserve  a
perpetual  remembrance  of  Jesus  crucified  by  these  exte
rior  representations.  One  night,  as  she  was  occupied  in
thinking  how  she  could  arrange  some  straw*  as  a  sepulchre
for  the  crucifix,  on  Friday  evening,  at  the  commemoration
of  the  Passion  after  Vespers,  the  God  of  love,  who  regards
the  intention  rather  than  the  works  of  those  who  love  Him,
insinuated  Himself  into  her  thoughts  thus :  "  Rejoice  in
God,  My  beloved,  and  He  will  give  you  all  your  heart's
desires."  By  these  words  she  understood,  that  when  we
take  pleasure  in  such  things  for  the  love  of  God,  His
Divine  Heart  is  pleased  thereby ;  even  as  the  father  of  a

*  "Pallia."


OP  DEVOTION  TO  THE  PASSION.  241

family  engages  an  excellent  concert  of  music,  which  enter
tains  those  who  are  seated  at  table  with  him  as  well  as
himself.

"  But,  my  most  loving  God,"  inquired  the  Saint,  "  what
glory  can  this  exterior  satisfaction  give  Thee,  which  satisfies
the  senses  more  -than  the  soul  1 "  He  replied  :  "  Even  as
an  avaricious  usurer  would  be  sorry  to  lose  the  opportunity
of  gaining  a  single  penny,  so  I,  who  find  all  my  joy  in  you,
do  not  intend  to  allow  even  your  least  thought,  nor  a  single
movement  of  your  finger,  which  you  have  done  for  love  of
Me,  to  pass  by  without  using  it  for  My  glory  and  your
eternal  welfare."  She  replied  :  "  If  Thine  immense  good
ness  can  find  pleasure  in  this,  what  dost  Thou  say  of  the
verses  in  which  all  Thy  passion  is  commemorated  ? "  "I
take  the  same  pleasure  in  them,"  replied  our  Lord,  "  as  a
person  would  who  was  conducted  by  his  friend,  with  marks
of  tenderness  and  friendship,  to  an  agreeable  garden,  where,
while  breathing  the  fresh  air  and  sweet  odour  of  the  place,
he  would  also  have  the  pleasure  of  admiring  its  beautiful
flowers,  hearing  a  concert  of  exquisite  music,  and  of  re
freshing  himself  with  the  rarest  and  most  exquisite  fruits.
And  I  promise  you,  My  beloved,  recompense  for  the  satis
faction  you  have  given  Me  by  your  verses,  and  also  those
who  read  them  often  with  devotion,  while  they  live  in  this
life  of  sorrow,  which  leads  to  the  life  eternal."


CHAPTER  XLVII.

Of  the  languor  caused  by  Divine  love.

SOON  after,  during  the  seventh  illness  of  the  Saint,  as  her
mind  was  occupied  with  God,  on  a  certain  night  our  Lord
approached  her,  and  said  to  her,  with  extreme  sweetness

Q


242 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

and  charity  :  "  Tell  Me,  My  beloved,  that  you  languish  for
love  of  Me."  She -replied:  "How  can  I,  a  poor  sinner,
presume  to  say  that  I  languish  for  love  to  Thee?"  Our
Lord  answered  :  "  Whoever  offers  himself  willingly  to  suffer
anything  in  order  to  please  Me,  he  truly  glorifies  Me,  and,
glorifying  Me,  tells  Me  that  he  languishes  for  love  of  Me ;
provided  that  He  continues  patient,  and  that  he  never  turns
his  eyes  away  from  Me."  "  But  what  advantage  canst  Thou
gain  from  this  assurance,  my  beloved  Lord  ] "  inquired  the
Saint.  The  Lord  answered  :  "  This  assurance  imparts  joy
to  My  Divinity,  glory  to  My  Humanity,  pleasure  to  My
eyes,  and  satisfaction  to  My  ears.  Further,  the  unction  of
My  love  is  so  powerfully  moved  thereby,  that  I  am  com
pelled  to  heal  the  contrite  heart — that  is  to  say,  those  who
desire  this  grace ;  to  preach  to  those  who  are  in  captivity
— that  is,  to  pardon  signers;  to  open  the  door  to  those
who  are  in  prison — -that  is,  to  release  the  souls  in  pur
gatory."

Gertrude  then  said  to  the  Lord  :  "  Father  of  mercies  !
after  this  sickness,  which  is  the  seventh  that  I  have  had,
wilt  Thou  not  restore  me  to  my  former  health  ? "  Our  Lord
replied  :  "  If  I  had  made  known  to  you  at  the  commence
ment  of  your  first  illness  that  you  would  have  to  endure
seven,  perhaps  you  would  have  given  way  to  impatience
through  human  frailty.  So,  also,  if  I  now  promised  you
that  this  would  be  the  last  sickness,  the  hope  with  which
you  would  look  forward  to  its  termination  might  lessen
your  merit.  Therefore  the  paternal  providence  of  My  un
created  wisdom  has  wisely  ordained  that  you  should  remain
ignorant  on  both  subjects,  that  you  might  be  obliged  to
have  recourse  to  Me  continually  with  your  whole  heart,
and  to  commend  your  troubles,  whether  exterior  or  in
terior,  to  My  fidelity ;  since  I  watch  over  you  so  faithfully


OP  ABANDONING  OURSELVES  TO  GOD'S  PROVIDENCE. 243

and  lovingly,  that  I  would  not  permit  you  to  be  tried  be
yond  your  strength,  knowing  how  much  your  patience  can
bear.  This  you  can  easily  understand,  if  you  remember
how  much  weaker  you  were  after  your  first  sickness  than
you  are  now  after  your  seventh ;  for  although  human
reason  might  have  considered  this  impossible,  yet  nothing
is  impossible  to  My  Divine  omnipotence."


CHAPTER  XLVIII.

That  the  faithful  soul  ought  to  abandon  herself  to  the  will  of  God,
for  life  and  death.

As  the  Saint  offered  various  testimonies  of  her  love  to  God
during  the  night, — asking  Him,  amongst  other  things,  how
it  happened  that  she  had  never  wished  to  know  whether
her  sickness  would  end  in  life  or  death,  though  it  had
lasted  so  long  ;  and  how  it  was  that  she  felt  equally  indif
ferent  to  either, — our  Lord  answered  her  thus  :  "  When  a
bridegroom  conducts  his  bride  into  a  garden  of  roses,  to
gather  them  for  a  bouquet,  she  takes  so  much  pleasure  in
his  sweet  conversation,  that  she  never  pauses  to  inquire
which  of  the  roses  he  would  wish  her  to  gather,  but  she  takes
whatever  flower  her  bridegroom  gives  her,  and  places  it  in
her  bouquet.  So  also  the  faithful  soul,  whose  greatest
pleasure  is  the  accomplishment  of  My  will,  and  delights  in
it  as  in  a  garden  of  roses,  is  indifferent  whether  I  restore
her  health  or  take  her  out  of  the  present  life,  because,
being  full  of  confidence,  she  abandons  herself  entirely  to
My  paternal  care."

One  night  also,  when  the  Saint  was  much  exhausted  by
her  spiritual  exercises,  and  by  the  interior  converse  she


244  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

had  had  with  her  Lord,  she  took  a  few  grapes,  with  the  in-
iention  of  refreshing  her  Spouse  in  herself.  The  Lord  re
ceived  them  with  much  gratitude,  and  said  to  her :  "  I  am
now  compensated  for  the  bitter  draught  offered  me  in  a
sponge  as  I  hung  on  the  cross  for  your  love,  because  I
taste  now  in  your  heart  an  ineffable  sweetness ;  and  the
more  purely  you  recreate  your  body  for  love  of  Me,  the
sweeter  is  the  refreshment  I  find  in  your  soul."

As  she  had  thrown  from  her  the  skins  and  stones  of  the
grapes  which  ske  had  in  her  hands,  she  saw  the  devil — the
persecutor  of  all  good — trying  to  gather  them  up,  as  if  to
reproach  her  for  the  dispensation  which  her  infirmity  had
made  her  take,  by  eating  after  Matins,  contrary  to  the
Rule.  But  the  moment  he  attempted  to  touch  one  of  the
skins,  he  was  so  scorched  and  burned,  as  if  by  devouring
flames,  that  he  fled  from  the  house,  uttering  fearful  cries,
and  taking  care  for  the  future  how  he  touched  anything
that  could  cause  him  such  frightful  torments.


CHAPTER  XLIX.

Of  the  benefit  we  may  derive  from  our  faults.

ONE  night,  as  Gertrude  was  occupied  in  examining  her
conscience,  she  remarked  that  she  had  a  habit  of  saying
"God  knows,"  without  reflection  and  without  necessity;
and  having  blamed  herself  very  severely  for  this  fault,  she
besought  the  Divine  Majesty  never  to  permit  her  to  use
His  sweet  name  lightly  again.  Our  Lord  replied  lovingly
to  her :  "  Why  would  you  deprive  Me  of  the  glory  and
yourself  of  the  immense  reward  which  you  acquire  every
time  you  perceive  this  fault,  or  any  similar  one,  and  seri
ously  endeavour  to  correct  it  ?  For  when  any  one  exerts


THE  SPIF,:TUAL  ADVANTAGE  OP  BODILY  WEAKNESS.  245


himself  to  overcome  his  faults  for  love  of  Me,  he  offers  Me
the  same  testimony  of  fidelity  and  respect  as  a  soldier
would  do  to  his  captain  when  he  courageously  resisted  his
enemies  in  battle,  overcoming  them  all,  and  casting  them
to  the  ground  with  his  own  arm."

After  this,  as  the  Saint  rested  on  the  bosom  of  her
Lord,  she  felt  a  great  weakness  of  heart,  which  she  offered
thus  to  Him  :  "  My  beloved  Spouse !  I  offer  Thee  this  de
bilitated  heart,  with  all  its  affections  and  desires,  that  Thou
mayest  take  pleasure  therein  according  to  Thy  will."  He
replied  :  "I  accept  your  offering  of  this  weak  heart,  and  prefer
it  to  a  strong  one  ;  even  as  the  hunter  prefers  what  he  has
.taken  in  the  chase  to  tame  animals."

Although  the  infirmities  of  the  Saint  prevented  her
from  assisting  in  choir,  still  she  often  went  to  listen  to  the
Office,  in  order  thus  to  exercise  her  body  in  some  manner
in  the  service  of  God  ;  and  reflecting  that  she  was  not  as
attentive  or  recollected  as  she  desired,  she  manifested  her
grief  to  her  Divine  Spouse,  saying  to  Him,  with  a  dejected
heart :  "  What  glory  canst  Thou  receive,  my  loving  Lord,
from  my  sitting  here  in  this  idle  and  negligent  manner,
paying  so  little  attention  to  what  is  said  or  chanted  to
Thy  glory  ?  "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  And  what  satisfaction
would  you  not  have  if  your  friend  presented  you  with  a
draught  of  newly-made  and  delicious  mead,  which  you
thought  would  strengthen  you  1  Be  assured,  then,  that  I
find  infinitely  more  pleasure  in  every  word,  and  even  every
syllable,  to  which  you  listen  attentively  for  My  glory."

At  the  Mass  which  was  celebrated  after,  Gertrude  felt
unable  to  rise  at  the  Gospel,  and  she  doubted  whether  to
spare  herself  or  not  on  such  occasions,  as  she  had  no  hope
of  her  recovery  ;  but  she  asked  God,  according  to  her  cus
tom,  what  would  be  most  for  His  glory.  He  replied


246 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

"  When,  for  love  of  Me,  you  do  anything  with  difficulty,
and  which  is  beyond  your  strength,  I  receive  it  even  as  if
I  had  an  absolute  need  of  it ;  but  when  you  omit  anything
to  take  due  care  of  your  body,  referring  all  to  My  glory,  I
consider  it  in  the  same  manner  as  an  infirm  person  would
consider  some  relief  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  do
without :  thus  I  will  recompense  you  for  both  according  tc
the  greatness  of  My  Divine  munificence."


CHAPTER  L.

Of  the  renewal  *  of  the  Seven  Sacraments  in  her  soul,  and  of
fraternal  charity.

As  Gertrude  examined  her  conscience  one  day,  she  did-
covered  some  faults  which  she  was  extremely  anxious  to
confess  ;  but  as  she  could  not  have  recourse  to  her  confessor
at  the  time,  she  began  as  usual  to  discover  her  grief  to  our
Lord,  who  consoled  her  thus  :  "  Why,"  He  inquired,  "  are
you  troubled,  My  beloved,  since  I  am  the  sovereign  Priest
and  true  Pontiff,  to  whom  you  can  have  recourse  ;  and  I  can
renew  in  your  soul  with  greater  efiicacy  the  grace  of  the
Seven  Sacraments,  by  a  single  operation,  than  either  priest
or  Bishop  could  by  conferring  each  separately  ?  For  I  will
baptize  you  in  My  precious  Blood  ;  I  will  confirm  you  in
My  victorious  strength  ;  I  will  espouse  you  in  My  faithful
love  ;  I  will  consecrate  you  in  the  perfection  of  My  holy
life  ;  I  will  absolve  you  from  all  your  sins  by  the  charity  of
My  heart ;  I  will  feed  you  Myself  by  My  overflowing  ten
derness,  and  I  will  feed  Myself  also  on  you  ;  I  will  purify
you  inwardly  by  so  powerful  an  anointing  of  the  sweetness

*  "Renovatione."


SHE  REPEATS  THE  OFFICE  WITH  ANOTHER  SISTER. 247

of  My  spirit,  that  all  your  senses  and  your  actions  will
breathe  the  most  fervent  piety,  which,  pouring  down  on
you  like  holy  oil,  will  sanctify  you  more  and  more  unto  life
eternal."

Once  when  the  Saint  had  risen  to  say  Matins,  although
in  a  state  of  extreme  weakness,  and  had  already  finished
the  first  nocturn,  another  religious,  who  was  also  ill,  came
to  her,  and  she  immediately  recommenced  the  Matins  with
her,  with  great  charity  and  devotion.  Afterwards,  being
occupied  with  God  during  holy  Mass,  she  perceived  that
her  soul  was  magnificently  adorned  with  precious  stones,
which  emitted  a  most  admirable  brightness.  Our  Lord  then
made  known  to  her  that  she  had  received  those  gifts  in
recompense  for  her  humble  charity  in  having  recommenced
her  Matins  for  the  convenience  of  a  younger  t  sister ;  and
that  she  had  received  as  many  different  ornaments  as  she
had  repeated  words.  The  Saint  then  remembered  some
negligence  of  which  she  had  not  been  able  to  accuse  herself
in  confession,  on  account  of  the  absence  of  her  confessor  ;
and  as  she  mourned  over  this  to  our  Lord,  He  said  to  her :
"  Why  do  you  complain  of  your  negligences, — you  who  are
BO  richly  clothed  with  the  robe  of  charity,  which  covers  a
multitude  of  sins  ? "  "  How  can  I  console  myself,"  she  re
plied,  "  when  I  still  perceive  that  I  am  stained  by  them  \  "
But  our  Lord  answered  :  "  Charity  not  only  covers  sins,
but,  like  a  burning  sun,  consumes  and  annihilates  the
slightest  imperfections,  and  overwhelms  the  soul  with
merit."

Gertrude  once  perceived  that  a  person  neglected  some
observances  of  the  Rule,  and  feared  that  she  would  be  guilty
in  the  sight  of  God  if  she  did  not  correct  it,  as  she  knew
of  it ;  but  she  also  apprehended  that  some  who  were  less
strict  might  think  she  interfered  more  than  was  necessary


248 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

in  trifling  matters.  This  trouble,  however,  she  offered,  ac
cording  to  her  custom,  to  our  Lord ;  who,  in  order  to  show
how  agreeable  her  devotion  was  to  Him,  said  to  her  :  "  Each
time  that,  for  love  of  Me,  you  suffer  this  reproach,  or  any
similar  to  it,  I  will  strengthen  you  mightily,  and  will  en
compass  you,  as  a  city  is  encompassed  with  trenches  and
walls,  so  that  no  occupation  will  be  able  to  distract  you,  or
to  separate  you  from  Me ;  and,  further,  I  will  add  to  your
merit  that  which  any  one  might  have  acquired  if  they  had
submitted  themselves  with  humility  to  your  admonitions."


CHAPTER  LI.

Of  the  fidelity  which  we  must  only  expect  to  fiud  in  God,  and  of
the  grace  of  patience.

As  it  usually  happens  that  the  injuries  which  we  receive
from  a  friend  are  more  difficult  to  bear  than  those  which
••)  receive  from  an  enemy,  according  to  the  words  of  Scrip
ture,  "  If  my  enemy  had  reviled  me,  I  would  verily  have
borne  with  it  "  (Ps.  liv.),— Gertrude,  knowing  that  a  certain
person,  for  whose  welfare  she  had  laboured  with  extreme
solicitude,  did  not  respond  with  the  same  fidelity  to  her
care,  and  even,  through  a  kind  of  contempt,  acted  contrary
to  what  she  advised,  had  recourse  to  our  Lord  in  her  af
fliction,  who  consoled  her  thus  :  "  Do  not  be  grieved,  My
daughter,  for  I  have  permitted  this  to  happen  for  your
eternal  welfare,  that  I  may  the  oftener  enjoy  your  company
and  conversation,  in  which  I  take  so  much  pleasure.  And
even  as  a  mother  who  has  a  little  child  whom  she  loves
specially,  and  therefore  desires  to  have  always  with  her,


GOD  SENDS  TRIALS  TO  DRIVE  US  TO  HIMSELF. 249


places  something  that  will  alarm  her,  and  oblige  her  to
come  back  into  her  arms,  when  she  has  strayed  from  her,
so  also,  desiring  to  have  you  always  near  Me,  I  permit
your  friends  to  contradict  you  in  some  things,  that  you
may  find  no  true  fidelity  in  any  creature,  and  therefore
have  recourse  to  Me  with  all  the  more  eagerness,  because
you  know  that  I  possess  the  plenitude  and  stability  of  all
contentment."

After  this  it  seemed  to  her  as  if  our  Lord  placed  her  in
His  bosom  like  a  little  child,  and  there  caressed  her  in
many  ways ;  and,  approaching  His  adorable  lips  to  her  ears,
He  whispered  to  her  :  "As  a  tender  mother  soothes  the
troubles  of  her  little  one  by  her  kisses  and  embraces,  so  do
I  desire  to  soothe  all  your  pain  and  grief  by  the  sweet  mur
mur  of  My  loving  words."  After  the  Saint  had  enjoyed
these  and  many  other  consolations  for  some  time,  our  Lord
offered  her  His  Heart,  and  said  to  her :  "  Contemplate  now,
My  beloved,  the  hidden  secrets  of  My  Heart,  and  consider
attentively  with  what  fidelity  I  have  ordered  all  that  you
have  ever  desired  of  Me  for  your  benefit  and  the  salvation
of  your  soul ;  and  see  if  you  can  accuse  Me  of  unfaithfulness
to  you,  even  by  a  single  word."  When  she  had  done  this,
she  beheld  our  Lord  crowning  her  with  a  wreath  of  flowers,
more  radiant  than  gold,  as  a  reward  for  the  trial  of  which
we  have  just  spoken.

Then  the  Saint,  remembering  some  persons  who,  she
knew,  were  tried  in  other  ways,  said  to  God  :  "  Surely  these
persons  merit  to  receive  from  Thy  liberality,  Father  of
mercies,  a  richer  recompense,  and  to  be  adorned  with  more
splendid  ornaments  than  I,  since  they  are  not  assisted  by
the  consolations  which  I  receive,  though  so  unworthy,  and

*  "Larvaij,


250  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

since  I  do  not  bear  what  happens  to  me  with  the  patience  I
ought  ?  "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  In  these  things,  as  in  all
others,  I  manifest  the  special  charity  and  tenderness  which  I
have  for  you ;  even  as  a  mother  who  loves  her  only  child
wishes  to  adorn  her  with  ornaments  of  gold  and  silver,  but,
knowing  that  she  could  not  bear  their  weight,  decks  her
with  different  flowers,  which,  without  incommoding  her,  do
not  fail  to  add  to  her  attractions.  So,  also,  I  moderate  the
rigour  of  your  sufferings,  lest  you  should  fall  under  the
burden,  and  thereby  be  deprived  of  the  merit  of  patience."
Then,  as  the  Saint  reflected  on  the  great  care  of  the
Divine  mercy  for  her  salvation,  she  began  to  praise  Him
with  great  gratitude ;  and  she  perceived  that  those  flowers
with  which  her  sufferings  had  been  mystically  rewarded
expanded  more  and  more  as  she  returned  thanks.  She
understood  also,  that  the  grace  that  God  had  given  her,  of
praising  Him  in  adversity,  was  as  much  more  excellent  as
an  ornament  of  solid  gold  is  to  one  which  has  merely  been
gilt.


CHAPTER  LII.

The  value  of  a  good  will.

A  CERTAIN  nobleman  having  sent  to  the  monastery  to  ask
the  religious  to  found  a  convent,  Gertrude — who  was  always
anxious  to  accomplish  the  will  of  God,  though  she  was  un
able  to  comply  with  this  request — cast  herself  before  a  cru
cifix,  and  offered  herself  to  God  with  her  whole  heart,  pray
ing  that  His  holy  will  might  be  accomplished.  It  seemed
to  her  that  our  Lord  was  so  deeply  touched  by  this  offering,
that  He  descended  from  the  cross  to  embrace  her  with  ex
treme  affection  and  gladness,  and  received  her  with  marks


OF  GOOD  DESIRES  WHICH  CANNOT  BE  ACCOMPLISHED. 251

of  ineffable  joy — even  as  a  sick  person  who  had  been  given
over  by  the  physician  would  receive  a  remedy  which  he
had  long  desired,  and  which  he  hoped  might  restore
his  health — and  having  then  gently  approached  .her  to
the  adorable  Wound  of  His  Side,  He  said  to  her :  "  You
are  welcome,  My  beloved  ;  *  you  are  the  balm  of  My  wounds,
and  the  sweetener  of  all  My  griefs."  Gertrude  knew  by
these  words  that  when  any  one  abandons  his  will  without
reserve  to  the  good  pleasure  of  God,  whatever  adversity
may  be  impending,  our  Lord  receives  it  as  if  he  had
anointed  His  Wounds,  even  at  the  very  hour  of  His  Passion,
with  the  most  precious  and  healing  ointments.

After  this,  as  Gertrude  prayed,  she  began  to  think  of
many  things  by  which  she  hoped  to  procure  the  glory  of
God  and  the  advancement  of  religion.  But  after  a  time
she  reproached  herself  for  these  reflections,  which  perhaps
could  never  bear  any  fruit,  because  she  was  so  weak  that
she  seemed  more  likely  to  die  than  to  be  able  to  undertake
any  laborious  work.  Then  the  Lord  Jesus  appeared  to  her
in  the  midst  of  her  soul,  radiant  with  glory,  and  adorned
with  roses  and  fair  lilies ;  and  He  said  to  her :  "  Behold
how  I  am  adorned  by  your  good  will,  even  as  I  was  by  the
stars  and  the  golden  candlesticks,  in  the  midst  of  which
St.  John,  in  the  Apocalypse,  declares  that  he  saw  the  Son
of  Man  standing,  and  having  seven  stars  in  His  right  hand ;
and  know  that  I  have  received  as  much  pleasure  from  the
other  thoughts  of  your  heart  as  from  this  sweet  and  agree
able  garland  of  lilies  and  roses."

"  0  God  of  my  heart ! "  exclaimed  the  Saint,  "  why  dost
Thou  embarrass  my  soul  with  so  many  different  desires,
which  are  all  without  effect,  since  it  is  so  short  a  time


*  "  Ben.  e  venias  mihi  cb.arissima.M


252  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


since  Thou  didst  give  me  the  thought  and  desire  of  receiv
ing  extreme  unction,  and  disposed  my  soul  to  receive  it  by
filling  me  with  such  joy  and  consolation  ?  And  now,  on  the
contrary,  Thou  dost  make  me  desire  the  establishment  of
a  new  monastery,  although  I  am  still  so  weak  that  I  am
scarcely  able  to  walk."  "  I  do  this,"  replied  our  Lord,  "  to
accomplish  what  I  have  said  at  the  commencement  of  this
book,  that  'I  had  given  you  to  be  the  light  of  the  Gentiles ;'
that  is,  to  enlighten  many  people  :  therefore  it  is  necessary
that  your  book*  should  contain  information  on  many  sub
jects,  for  the  consolation  and  instruction  of  others.  And  as
two  persons  who  love  each  other  often  find  pleasure  in  con
versing  on  subjects  which  do  not  specially  concern  them, —
as  a  friend  often  proposes  to  his  friend  the  most  difficult
and  intricate  questions, — so  do  I  take  pleasure  in  proposing
many  things  to  My  elect  which  will  never  happen  to  them,
in  order  to  prove  their  love  and  fidelity  for  Me,  and  to
reward  them  for  many  purposes  which  they  cannot  carry
into  effect,  counting  all  their  good  intentions  as  if  they  had
been  carried  into  action.  So  I  inclined  your  will  to  desire
death  ;  and,  consequently,  made  you  feel  this  wish  to  receive
extreme  unction.  And  I  have  preserved  in  the  depth  of
My  Heart,  for  your  eternal  salvation,  all  that  you  have
done  in  thought  or  act  to  prepare  yourself  for  this  Sacra
ment.  Thus  you  may  understand  these  words  :  '  The  just
man,  if  he  be  prevented  with  death,  shall  be  in  rest.'  t  For
if  you  were  deprived  of  this  Sacrament  by  sudden  death,  or
if  you  receive  it  after  you  had  lost  consciousness, — which
often  happens  to  ,My  elect, — you  would  not  suffer  any  loss
thereby,  because  all  the  preparation  for  death  which  you
have  made  for  so  many  years  is  preserved  in  the  unfading

*  "  In  libro  tuo."  t  Wisdom  iv.


OF  PRAYER  FOR  THE  LIVING  AND  THE  DEAD. 253


spring-time  of  My  Divinity,*  where,  by  My  cooperation,
it  always  remains  green  and  flourishing,  and  fructifying
for  your  eternal  salvation."


CHAPTER LIII.

How  we  may  profit  by  the  merit  of  others.

GERTRUDE  was  requested  by  a  person,  when  she  offered  to
God  all  the  gratuitous  gifts  with  which  He  had  favoured
her,  to  ask  that  she  might  have  a  share  in  their  merit.  As
she  prayed  thus,  she  perceived  this  person  standing  before
the  Lord,  who  was  seated  on  His  throne  of  glory,  and  held
in  His  hand  a  robe  magnificently  adorned,  which  He  pre
sented  to  her,  but  still  without  clothing  her  in  it.  The
Saint,  being  surprised  at  this,  said  to  Him  :  "  When  I  made
a  similar  offering  to  Thee,  a  few  days  since,  Thou  didst  at
once  take  the  soul  of  the  poor  woman  for  whom  I  prayed
to  the  joys  of  paradise  ;  and  why,  most  loving  Lord,  dost
Thou  not  now  clothe  this  person  with  the  robe  which  Thou
hast  shown  her,  and  which  she  so  ardently  desires,  through
the  merits  of  the  graces  Thou  hast  bestowed  on  me,  though
so  unworthy  of  them  1 "  Our  Lord  answered  :  "  When  any
thing  is  offered  to  Me  for  the  faithful  departed,  I  immedi
ately  use  it  for  them,  according  to  My  natural  inclination
to  show  mercy  and  pardon,  either  for  the  remission  of  their
sins  for  their  consolation,  or  for  the  increase  of  their
eternal  felicity,  according  to  the  condition  of  those  for
whom  the  offering  is  made.  But  when  a  similar  offering  is
made  for  the  living,  I  keep  it  for  their  benefit,  because  they


In  immarcessibili  seternitatis  mcse  vernantiA."


2/)4 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

can  still  increase  their  merit  by  their  good  works,  by  their
good  desires,  and  by  their  good  will;  and  it  is  only
reasonable  that  they  should  endeavour  to  acquire  by  their
labour  what  they  desire  to  obtain  through  the  intercession
of  others.

"  Therefore,  if  she  for  whom  you  pray  desires  to  be
clothed  with  your  merits,  she  must  study  these  three
things  :  First,  she  must  receive  this  robe  with  humility  and
gratitude — that  is  to  say,  she  must  acknowledge  humbly
that  she  has  need  of  the  merits  of  others — and  she  must  ren
der  Me  fervent  thanksgivings  for  having  deigned  to  supply
her  poverty  out  of  their  abundance ;  secondly,  she  must
take  this  robe  with  faith  and  hope — that  is,  hoping  in  My
goodness,  she  must  believe  that  she  will  receive  thereby  a
great  assistance  to  her  eternal  salvation  ;  thirdly,  let  her
clothe  herself  in  charity,  exercising  herself  in  this  and  in
other  virtues.  Let  all  those  who  desire  a  share  in  the
merits  and  virtues  of  others  act  in  like  manner,  if  they
would  profit  thereby."


CHAPTER  LTV.

Prayer  composed  by  the  Saint.

GKUTRTTDE  having  been  bled  some  time  after  the  Fast,*  she
was  frequently  heard  uttering  these  words  :  "  O  King,  of
all  kings  the  most  excellent !  O  illustrious  Prince  !  "  with
others  of  a  similar  import  ;  and  as  she  recollected  herself
one  morning  in  the  place  where  she  usually  prayed,  she
said  to  God  :  "  0  most  loving  Lord  !  what  wilt  Thou  that  I
should  do  with  these  words  which  so  often  present  them-


*  "  Ante  jejunium  "—probably  after  Lent.


THE  GOLDEN  COLLAR.  255


selves  to  my  mind  and  my  lips  ?  "  Then  our  Lord  showed
her  a  golden  collar,  composed  of  four  parts,  which  He  held
in  His  Hands.  But  as  the  Saint  did  not  know  what  these
four  parts  signified,  He  made  known  to  her  in  spirit  that
the  first  part  represented  the  Divinity  of  Christ;  the  second,
the  Soul  of  Christ ;  the  third,  every  faithful  soul  whom  He
had  espoused  in  His  own  Blood  ;  and  the  fourth,  the  pure
and  immaculate  Body  of  Christ.  She  knew  also  that  the
reason  why  the  faithful  soul  was  placed  in  this  collar,  be
tween  the  Soul  and  the  Body  of  Jesus  Christ,  was  to  show
with  what  indissoluble  love  the  Saviour  had  united  the
faithful  soul  to  His  own  Body  and  Soul.  And  suddenly
she  was  inspired  with  these  words,  in  a  rapture,  at  the
sight  of  this  collar  :

Prayer.

"  Thou  art  the  life  of  my  soul  !  May  all  the  desires  of
my  heart  be  united  to  Thee  by  Thy  burning  love  !  may
they  languish  and  die  whenever  they  turn  to  any  object
apart  from  Thee  ;  for  Thou  art  the  beauty  of  all  colours,
the  sweetness  of  all  taste,  the  fragrance  of  all  odours,  the
harmony  of  all  sounds,  the  charm  of  all  embraces  !  In
Thee  is  the  voluptuousness  of  delight ;  from  Thee  flows
forth  a  torrent  of  love  ;  to  Thee  are  all  drawn  by  Thy
powerful  attractions  ;  and  by  Thee  all  receive  the  sweet
influences  of  love  !  Thou  art  the  overflowing  Abyss  of  the
Divinity  !  0  King,  greater  than  all  kings  !  supreme  Emperor,
sovereign  Prince,  peaceful  Ruler,  faithful  Protector!  Thou
art  the  vivifying  gem  of  human  nobility  with  the  noblest
sentiments  !  *  Thou  art  a  Worker  full  of  skill;  a  Master
full  of  clemency  ;  a  Counsellor  full  of  wisdom ;  a  Defender

*  "In  vivificans  gemma  humanae  nobilitatis."


256  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

full  of  kindness  ;  a  Friend  most  faithful !  Thou  art  the
sweet  savour  of  all  delights  !  0  gentle  caresser,  whose
touch  imparts  healing  !  O  ardent  Lover,  sweet  and  chaste
Spouse  !  Thou  art  the  Spring- flower  of  unchanging  beauty  !
0  loving  Brother,  beautiful  Youth,  joyful  Companion,
liberal  Host,  careful  Administrator  !  I  prefer  Thee  to  every
creature  ;  for  Thee  I  renounce  all  pleasures  ;  for  Thee  I  seek
all  adversity  ;  and  in  all  this  I  desire  only  Thy  glory.  My
heart  and  lips  testify  that  Thou  art  the  quickener  of  all
good.  I  unite,  by  the  merit  of  Thy  love,  the  fervour  of
my  devotions  to  the  virtue  of  Thy  prayers,  so  that  by  the
power  of  this  Divine  union  I  may  be  raised  to  the  highest
perfection,  and  all  rebellious  movements  may  be  calmed
within  me."

All  these  sentences  seemed  like  so  many  brilliant  stones
separately  enchased  in  the  gold  of  this  collar.  On  the  fol
lowing  Sunday,  as  Gertrude  assisted  at  the  Mass  at  which
she  was  to  communicate,  and  recited  this  prayer  with  much
devotion,  she  perceived  that  our  Lord  was  pleased  with  it,
and  she  said  to  Him  :  "  0  most  loving  Lord  !  since  I  per
ceive  that  these  words  are  so  agreeable  to  Thee,  I  will  advise
as  many  persons  as  I  can  to  offer  it  to  Thee  devoutly,  as  a
precious  collar  of  pearls."  Our  Lord  replied:  "No  one
c;m  give  Me  what  is  Mine;*  but  whoever  recites  it  devoutly
shall  feel  his  knowledge  of  Me  increase,  and  shall  receive
light  from  My  Divinity,  which  shall  be  showered  down  on
him  by  the  efficacy  of  these  words ;  even  as  they  who  hold
a  plate  of  polished  metal  to  the  sun  behold  therein  the  re
flection  of  its  light."  The  Saint  immediately  felt  the  effect
of  these  words,  for  as  soon  as  she  had  recited  this  prayer


"  Nemo  mihi  dat,  quod  meum  est."


OUR  LORD  SHOWS  HER  HIS  HEART. 257

she  perceived  that  the  surface  of  her  soul  *  became  radiant
with  Divine  light,  and  she  found  an  increase  of  sweetness
and  pleasure  in  Divine  things.


CHAPTER  LV.

Our  Lord  shows  her  His  Heart.

JESUS  CHRIST  once  appeared  to  the  Saint,  and,  showing  her
His  Heart,  said  to  her  :  "  My  beloved,  give  Me  your  heart  j  "
and  as  she  presented  it  to  Him  with  profound  respect,  it
seemed  to  her  that  He  united  it  to  His  by  a  canal  which
reached  to  the  ground,  through  which  He  poured  forth
abundantly  the  effusions  of  His  infinite  grace,  saying  to
her  :  "  Henceforth  I  shall  use  your  heart  as  a  canal  through
which  I  will  pour  forth  the  impetuous  torrents  of  mercy
and  consolation  which  flow  from  My  loving  Heart  on  all
those  who  shall  dispose  themselves  to  receive  it,  by  having
recourse  to  you  with  humility  and  confidence."


CHAPTER  LVI.

Of  charity  towards  an  erring  brother.

As  the  Saint  prayed  one  day  for  some  persons  who  had
formerly  injured  the  convent  seriously  by  their  thefts,  and
were  again  committing  depredations,  our  Lord  appeared  to
her  as  if  suffering  much  pain  in  one  of  His  arms,  which
was  so  drawn  back  that  the  nerves  were  seriously  injured  :
and  He  said  to  her  :  "  Consider  what  torment  he


"  Facies  animae  suse.


258 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

cause  Me  who  should  strike  Me  with  his  closed  hand  on
this  suffering  arm  :  and  reflect  that  I  am  outraged  in  like
manner  by  all  those  who,  without  compassionating  the
danger  to  which  the  souls  who  persecute  you  are  exposed,
do  nothing  else  but  talk  maliciously  of  their  sins  and  what
they  have  suffered  in  consequence,  without  reflecting  that
these  unhappy  people  are  members  of  My  Body ;  while  all
those  who,  touched  by  compassion,  implore  My  mercy  for
them,  that  I  may  convert  them,  act  towards  Me  as  if  they
soothed  the  pain  of  My  arm  with  healing  ointments  :  and  I
consider  those  who,  by  their  counsels  and  charitable  warn
ings,  try  to  induce  them  to  amend  their  lives,  as  wise  phy
sicians,  who  endeavour  to  restore  My  arm  to  its  proper
position."

Then  Gertrude,  admiring  the  ineffable  goodness  of  God,
said  to  Him  :  "  But  how,  Lord,  can  these  unworthy  persons
be  compared  to  Your  arm  ?  "  He  replied  :  "  Because  they
are  members  of  the  body  of  the  Church,  of  which  I  glory  in
being  the  Head."  "  Bat,  my  God,"  exclaimed  Gertrude,
"  they  are  cut  off  from  the  Church  by  excommunication,
since  they  have  been  publicly  anathematised  for  the  vio
lence  they  have  done  to  this  monastery."  "  Nevertheless,"
replied  the  Lord,  "  as  they  can  be  restored  to  the  bosom  of
the  Church  by  absolution,  My  natural  goodness  obliges  Me
to  care  for  them,  and  I  desire  with  incredible  ardour  that
they  should  be  converted  and  do  penance."

The  Saint  then  prayed  that  the  monastery  might  be
defended  from  their  snares  by  His  paternal  protection,  and
she  received  this  reply :  "  If  you  humble  yourselves  under  My
mighty  Hand,  and  acknowledge  before  Me  in  the  secret  of
your  hearts  that  your  sins  have  merited  this  chastisement,
My  paternal  mercy  will  protect  you  from  all  the  efforts  of
your  enemies;  but  if  you  rise  up  proudly  against  those


OP  THE  CONVENT  PROCURATORS.  259

who  persecute  you,  wishing  them  evil  for  evil,  then,  by  My
just  judgment,  I  will  permit  them  to  become  stronger  than
you,  and  to  afflict  you  still  more."


CHAPTER  LVII.

That  the  care  of  temporal  affairs  and  exterior  duties  may  be
acceptable  to  God.

ONE  year,  when  the  convent  was  much  burdened  by  a  heavy
debt,  the  Saint  prayed  to  God  with  more  devotion  than
usual  that  the  convent  procurators  *  might  be  able  to  pay
their  debts.  He  replied  tenderly  :  "  What  advantage  shall
I  gain  if  I  assist  them  in  this  1 "  The  Saint  replied  :  "  They
will  then  be  able  to  occupy  themselves  with  more  fervour
and  recollection  in  their  spiritual  duties."  "  And  what  will
this  advantage  Me,"  continued  our  Lord,  "  since  I  have  no
need  of  your  goods,  and  it  is  equally  the  same  to  Me  whether
you  employ  yourselves  in  bodily  or  mental  exercises,  pro
vided  you  refer  your  intention  to  Me  ?  For  if  I  only  took
pleasure  in  spiritual  exercises,  I  should  have  so  reformed
human  nature  after  the  Fall,  that  it  would  no  longer  have
needed  food,  or  clothing,  or  any  of  the  other  necessaries  of
life,  which  are  now  obtained  with  so  much  labour.  And
as  a  powerful  emperor  is  pleased,  not  merely  with  bringing
up  noble  ladies  in  the  court  of  his  empress,  but  also  brings
up  in  his  own  court  nobles,  captains,  and  soldiers,  who  are
employed  in  different  ways,  that  they  may  serve  him  when
any  occasion  presents  itself,  so  also  I  take  pleasure,  not
only  in  the  interior  delights  of  contemplation,  but  also  in
the  different  exterior  affairs  and  occupations  of  the  children

*  "  Provisoes  claustri.**


260  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

of  men,  with  whom  I  love  to  dwell  when  they  labour  in
them  for  My  love  and  for  My  glory  ;  because  in  these  occu
pations  they  are  so  much  exercised  in  charity,  patience,
humility,  and  the  other  virtues."

After  this  the  Saint  beheld  the  person  who  had  the
principal  charge  of  the  temporal  affairs  of  the  monastery  as
if  he  were  resting  on  the  left  Hand  of  the  Lord  ;  and  it  ap
peared  to  her  that  he  often  rose  with  great  pain,  and  offered
Him  a  piece  of  gold  enriched  with  a  precious  stone.  Our
Lord  then  said  to  her  :  "  Know,  that  if  I  lessened  the  trou
bles  of  him  for  whom  you  pray,  I  should  be  also  deprived
of  these  precious  stones  which  are  so  acceptable  to  Me  j
and  he  would  lessen  the  recompense  which  he  will  receive  ;
for  then  he  would  only  be  able  to  offer  Me  with  his  right
hand  this  piece  of  gold  without  any  ornament.  He  presents
Me  with  a  piece  of  gold  who,  without  suffering  any  adver
sity,  refers  all  his  actions  to  God  according  to  His  adorable
will.  But  he  who  is  constantly  suffering,  and  still  con
forms  himself  to  the  decrees  of  Providence,  offers  Me  gold
enriched  with  very  rare  and  precious  stones."

Nevertheless,  the  Saint  still  continued  to  pray  that  the
convent  procurator  might  be  relieved  from  his  difficulties.
But  our  Lord  said  to  her:  "  Why  does  it  seem  hard  to  you
that  any  one  should  suffer  these  inconveniences  for  love  of
Me,  since  I  am  the  one  true  Friend  whose  faithfulness  never
changes  ?  For  when  any  one  is  deprived  of  all  human  help
and  consolation,  and  is  driven  to  the  last  extremity,  those
who  have  formerly  received  kindness  from  them  are  sorry
for  their  misfortunes,  and  yet  their  sorrow  is  often  fruitless,
and  can  afford  no  assistance  to  their  friend.  But  I  am  the
only  true  Friend  who,  in  such  dire  necessity,  will  console
the  afflicted  with  the  merit  and  glory  of  all  the  good  works
they  have  practised  during  their  whole  life,  whether  by


RECOMPENSE  OF  BODILY  LABOURS.  261

thoughts,  words,  or  actions  ;  and  these  shall  appear  scat
tered  over  My  vestments  like  roses  and  lilies  ;  while  this
delightful  vision  shall  revive  in  the  soul  its  hopes  of  eternal
life,  to  which  it  beholds  itself  invited  in  recompense  for  its
good  works.  Then  the  soul  disposes  itself  in  holy  content
ment  to  depart  from  its  mortal  body  and  to  enter  eternal
felicity,  so  that  amidst  its  joys  it  may  say  :  '  Behold  the
smell  of  my  beloved  is  as  the  smell  of  a  fertile  field  '  (Gen.
xxvii.)  For  even  as  the  body  is  composed  of  many  mem
bers  united  together,  so  also  the  soul  consists  of  affections,
such  as  fear,  grief,  joy,  love,  hope,  anger,  modesty  ;  in  the
exercise  of  each  of  which  the  more  man  acts  for  My  glory
the  more  he  will  find  in  Me  that  incomprehensible  and  in
effable  joy,  and  that  secure  delight,  which  will  prepare  him
for  eternal  happiness.  For  in  the  resurrection,  when  the
body  will  be  raised  incorruptible,  each  of  its  members  will
receive  a  special  recompense  for  the  labours  and  actions
which  it  has  performed  in  My  name  and  for  My  love.  But
the  soul  will  receive  an  incomparably  greater  reward  for  all
the  holy  affections  it  has  entertained  for  My  love,  for  its
compunction,  and  even  for  having  animated  the  body  for
My  service."

Once  again,  as  the  Saint  prayed  that  the  faithful  pro
curator  might  receive  the  full  reward  of  his  troublesome
labours  for  the  temporal  good  of  the  community,  our  Lord
said  to  her  :  "  His  body,  which  is  wearied  by  so  many
labours  for  Me,  is  like  a  treasure-house,  in  which  I  place
as  many  drachms  of  silver  as  his  limbs  make  movements  to
fulfil  the  duties  with  which  he  is  charged  :  and  his  heart  is
like  an  ark,  in  which  I  place  in  reserve  as  many  drachms
of  gold  as  he  has  had  thoughts  of  providing  carefully,  for
love  of  Me,  for  those  persons  who  are  under  his  care."  Then
the  Saint  exclaimed,  in  surprise  :  "It  seems  to  me,  O  Lord,


262 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

that  this  man  is  not  so  perfect  as  to  undertake  all  that  he
does  purely  for  Thy  glory  ;  for  I  believe  he  also  thinks  of
the  temporal  profit  he  obtains  thereby,  and  consequently  of
his  bodily  convenience.  How,  then,  canst  Thou,  my  God,
find  such  pleasure  as  Thou  sayest  in  his  heart  and  in  his
body  ? "  Our  Lord  condescended  to  reply  thus  :  "  It  is  be
cause  his  will  is  so  entirely  submitted  *  to  Mine,  that  I  am
always  the  principal  cause  of  his  actions;  and  for  this
reason  he  will  merit  an  inestimable  recompense  for  all  his
thoughts,  his  words,  and  his  works.  If  he  applies  himself
to  each  action  with  a  still  greater  purity  of  intention,  he
will  increase  his  merit  even  as  gold  exceeds  silver  in  value  ;
and  if  he  endeavours  to  refer  all  his  thoughts  and  anxieties
to  Me  with  a  yet  purer  intention,  they  will  become  as  much
more  excellent  as  refined  gold  is  in  comparison  of  that
which  is  alloyed  with  a  baser  metal."


CHAPTER  LVIII.
Of  the  merit  of  patience.

IT  happened  one  day  that  a  person  was  injured  from  an
accident  which  occurred  during  some  employment,  and
Gertrude,  compassionating  her  suffering,  prayed  that  the
limb,  which  had  been  injured  in  a  holy  occupation,  might
not  be  endangered.  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  It  will  not  be  en
dangered  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  pain  will  bring  down  on
her  soul  a  recompense  of  inestimable  value.  And  further,
all  those  who  endeavour  to  soothe  or  cure  her  pain  shall
receive  an  eternal  reward  ;  for  even  as  a  piece  of  cloth

*  "Adaptata."


MERIT  OF  BEARING  WHAT  MUST  BE  ENDURED. 263


which  has  been  dipped  in  saffron  imparts  the  same  colour
to  whatever  it  touches,  so,  when  one  member  suffers,  all
the  members  who  serve  her  shall  be  crowned  with  her  in
glory."  "  But,  my  God,"  inquired  the  Saint,  "  how  can
those  who  thus  assist  each  other  render  themselves  worthy
of  so  great  a  recompense  when  they  labour  thus,  not  that
she  who  is  wounded  may  suffer  longer  or  more  patiently
for  love  of  Thee,  but  merely  to  lessen  her  pain  ? "  To  this
our  Lord  vouchsafed  a  reply  full  of  ineffable  consolation :
"  The  patience  with  which  any  one  endures  an  evil  for  My
love  and  for  My  glory,  which  cannot  be  remedied  by  any
human  means,  is  not  a  patience  which  I  condemn  ;  on  the
contrary,  having  sanctified  it  by  these  words  which  I  ad
dressed  in  My  agony  to  My  eternal  Father,  '  My  Father,
if  it  be  possible,  let  this  chalice  pass  from  Me '  (Matt,  xxvi.),
it  becomes  of  incomparable  merit  and  value."  "  But,"  in
quired  Gertrude,  "  is  it  not  better  to  endure  patiently  every
evil  which  happens,  than  merely  to  bear  it  because  we  can
not  prevent  it  ?  "  Our  Lord  answered  :  "  This  is  a  secret
hidden  in  the  abyss  of  My  Divine  perfection,  and  which  sur
passes  human  understanding  ;  but,  to  speak  according  to
the  manner  of  men,  there  is  the  same  difference  between
these  two  kinds  of  sufferings  as  between  two  beautiful
colours,  which  are  both  so  brilliant  and  attractive,  that  it  is
difficult  to  give  the  preference  to  either."  Then  Gertrude
prayed  that  our  Lord  would  make  this  known  to  this  per
son  Himself,  and  thus  give  her  effectual  and  true  consola
tion  ;  but  He  answered  :  "  This  must  not  be  \  but  know
that  I  refuse  her  this  by  a  secret  dispensation  of  My  Divine
wisdom,  in  order  to  prove  her  further,  and  to  give  her  the
merit  of  three  virtues — patience,  faith,  and  humility :  pa
tience,  because  if  she  found  such  consolation  in  these  words
as  you  now  experience,  all  her  pains  would  be  so  sweetened


264  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

that  the  merit  of  her  patience  would  be  thereby  much
diminished ;  faith,  in  order  that  she  may  believe  on  the
word  of  another  what  she  has  not  experienced  herself,  since
faith  remains  without  merit  and  unfruitful  when  human
reason  has  perceived  what  it  believes  ;  humility,  that  she
may  believe  that  others  excel  her,  because  they  know  by
Divine  inspiration  what  she  does  not  merit  to  know."


CHAPTER  LIX.

Of  the  aversion  which  God  has  for  impatience — And  how  agreeable
it  is  to  Him  that  we  should  return  thanks  for  His  benefits.

As  the  Saint  prayed  for  a  person  for  whom  she  had  great
compassion,  because  she  knew  that  in  a  moment  of  im
patience  she  had  asked  why  God  had  permitted  her  to  be
tried  in  a  way  which  she  thought  she  had  not  deserved,
our  Lord  said  to  her :  "  Ask  this  person  why  these  trials
are  not  proportioned  to  her ;  and  tell  her,  that  since  the
kingdom  of  heaven  cannot  be  obtained  without  suffering,
that  she  shall  choose  herself  whatever  suffering  she
thinks  most  suitable  for  her  ;  and  when  it  happens  to  her,
let  her  bear  it  with  patience."  She  understood  by  these
words,  that  the  most  dangerous  kind  of  impatience  is  that
in  which  persons  imagine  that  they  would  be  patient  under
other  trials,  but  that  they  cannot  be  patient  under  what
God  sends  them  ;  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  they  ought  to
be  firmly  persuaded  that  all  which  comes  from  God  is  most
advantageous  to  them,  and  that  when  they  do  not  receive
it  with  patience,  they  ought  at  least  to  make  it  an  occasion
of  humiliation.

Our Lord  then  addressed  His  faithful  spouse thus;


HER  CONFIDENCE  IN  GOD.  265

"  And  what  do  you  think  of  My  conduct  in  your  regard  ]
Do  you  think  that  I  have  sent  you  suffering  which  is  be
yond  your  strength  ?  "  "  Assuredly  not,  my  God/'  she  re
plied  ;  "  but  I  sincerely  confess,  and  will  acknowledge  to
my  last  breath,  that  Thy  providence  has  governed  me,  both
spiritually  and  temporally,  in  prosperity  and  adversity,  in
so  prudent  a  manner,  that  all  the  wisdom  of  the  world  from
its  commencement  even  until  now  could  not  have  acted
thus,  and  that  Thou  only,  my  sweetest  Lord,  who  art  the
Uncreated  Wisdom,  wert  capable  of  it :  *  Who  reachest
from  end  to  end  mightily,  and  orderest  all  things  sweetly' "
(Wis.  viii.)

Then  the  Son  of  God  led  her  to  His  Father,  and  asked
her  what  she  would  say  to  Him.  "  I  render  Thee  thanks,
Holy  Father,"  she  exclaimed,  "  with  all  my  power,  through
Him  who  sittest  at  Thy  right  hand,  for  all  the  magnificent
gifts  which  I  have  received  from  Thy  bounty,  knowing  that
this  could  not  be  effected  by  any  creature,  and  could  only
be  accomplished  by  Thy  Divine  omnipotence,  who  can  seat
all  things  to  exist."  Then  He  led  her  to  the  Holy  Spirit,
that  she  might  offer  her  thanksgivings  to  Him  for  all  His
benefits  ;  and  she  said  :  "  I  give  Thee  thanks,  0  Holy  Ghost
the  Comforter,  through  the  merit  of  Him  who,  by  Thy  co
operation,  was  made  Man  in  the  womb  of  a  Virgin,  that
Thou  hast  charitably  prevented  me  in  all  things  with  the
gratuitous  benediction  of  Thy  sweetness,  though  I  am  so
unworthy  ;  and  I  am  convinced  that  Thine  ineffable  charity
alone  could  have  bestowed  such  benefits  on  me,  in  which
resides,  from  which  proceeds,  and  through  which  we  receive,
every  good."

Then  the  Son  of  God,  addressing  her  with  the  greatest
possible  tenderness,  said  to  her  : "  I  take  you  under  My
protection  more  especially  than  any  other  creature ;  and  I


THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


shall  have  a  greater  care  of  you  than  I  owe  to  them  by
right  of  creation,  redemption,  or  even  of  My  own  free
choice."  From  this  the  Saint  knew  that  when  any  one
renders  similar  thanksgiving  to  the  Divine  Goodness,  and
abandons  himself  with  confidence  and  gratitude  to  His
holy  providence,  that  the  Lord  takes  a  particular  care  of
him  even  as  a  Superior  is  obliged  to  watch  specially  over
one  whose  vows  he  has  received.


CHAPTER  LX.

That  God  is  pleased  with  us  when  we  are  displeased  with  ourselves.

As  Gertrude  prayed  for  a  person  with  special  affection,  and
said  to  our  Lord,  "  Hear  me,  O  loving  Lord,  according  to
the  sweetness  of  Thy  paternal  love,  for  her  for  whom  I
pray," — our  Lord  answered  :  "  I  usually  hear  when  you
pray  for  her."  "  Why,  then,"  replied  Gertrude,  "  does  she
so  often  entreat  me  to  pray  for  her,  alleging  always  her
unworthiness  and  nothingness,  as  if  she  never  received  any
consolation  from  Thee  1 "  "  This,"  answered  the  Saviour,
'  is  the  sweetest  way  in  which  My  spouse  could  gain  My
affection  ;  this  ornament  becomes  her  best,  and  in  this  she
pleases  Me  most,  because  thus  she  is  displeasing  to  herself.
and  this  grace  increases  in  her  in  proportion  as  you  pray
for  her."  On  another  occasion,  when  she  prayed  at  the  same
time  for  this  person  and  also  for  another,  our  Lord  said  to
her  :  "  I  have  brought  her  nearer  to  Me,  and  therefore  it  is
necessary  she  should  be  purified  by  some  little  trial ;  even  as
a  young  girl  who,  on  account  of  her  love  and  tenderness  for
her  mother,  wishes  to  seat  herself  beside  her,  although  she
may  be  more  inconvenienced  thereby  than  her  sisters,  who


WHAT  WE  LOSE  BY  WANT  OP  FAITH.  267


take  their  proper  seats  round  their  mother, — the  mother
also  cannot  look  so  easily  and  lovingly  on  the  child  beside
her  as  on  those  who  sit  opposite  to  her."


CHAPTER  LXI.

Of  the  effect  of  prayers  for  others.

§  1.  That  we  must  pray  with  faith.

As  Gertrude  once  prostrated  at  the  feet  of  our  Lord  Jesus,
and  kissed  His  Wounds  with  all  possible  respect  and  devo
tion,  before  praying  for  several  persons  and  several  affairs
which  had  been  recommended  to  her,  she  saw  a  stream
breaking  forth  from  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  which  appeared
to  water  all  the  place  where  she  was.  She  understood
that  this  stream  was  the  efficacy  of  the  prayers  which  she
had  offered  at  His  feet,  and  said  to  Him  :  "  My  Lord,
what  advantage  will  those  persons  receive  for  whom  I
have  prayed,  since  they  cannot  feel  the  effect  of  my  prayers,
and  consequently  cannot  expect  any  consolation  there
from  ?  "  Our  Lord  answered  by  the  following  similitude  :
"  When  a  king  makes  peace  after  a  long  war,  those  who
live  at  a  distance  cannot  be  made  aware  of  it  until  a
favourable  opportunity  occurs;  thus  they  who  separate
themselves  from  Me  by  their  diffidence  or  other  defects
cannot  perceive  when  others  pray  for  them."  "  But,
Lord,"  she  replied,  "Thou  hast  Thyself  made  known  to
me  that  some  of  those  for  whom  I  have  prayed  are  not
separated  far  from  Thee."  "  It  is  true,"  answered  our  Lord ;
"  but  he  to  whom  the  king  gives  his  orders  personally,  and
not  through  his  officers,  must  wait  for  the  convenience  of


268 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

his  prince.  And  thus  I  will  Myself  make  known  to  them
the  effect  of  your  prayers,  when  I  find  it  will  be  most  ad
vantageous  to  them  to  do  so."

Gertrude  then  prayed  specially  for  a  person  who  had
persecuted  her  formerly,  and  received  this  reply:  "As  it
would  be  impossible  for  any  one  to  have  his  foot  pierced
through  without  his  heart  sympathising  in  its  sufferings,
so  My  paternal  goodness  cannot  fail  to  look  with  eyes  of
mercy  on  those  who,  while  they  groan  under  their  own  in
firmities  and  feel  their  need  of  pardon,  are  nevertheless
moved  by  a  holy  charity  to  pray  for  the  welfare  of  their
neighbour."

§  2. What  we  should  ask  for  the  sick

As  it  is  a  duty  of  humanity  to  pray  often  for  the  sick,
the  Saint  inquired  of  God  what  would  be  most  for  tha
advantage  of  an  invalid  for  whom  she  prayed.  Our  Lord
replied  :  "  Say  two  words  for  her  with  devotion — first,
pray  that  she  may  preserve  her  patience  ;  and  secondly,
pray  that  I  may  make  every  moment  of  suffering  serve  for
her  spiritual  advancement  and  for  My  glory,  according  as
the  charity  of  My  paternal  Heart  has  ordained  from  all
eternity  for  her  salvation.  And  know  that  each  time  you
pray  thus,  you  will  increase  your  merit  and  that  of  the
sick  person,  even  as  an  artist  makes  the  colours  brighter
by  retouching  his  painting."

§  3.  How  we  should  pray  for  those  who  occupy  elevated
positions  in  the  Church.

As  Gertrude  prayed  for  persons  in  office,  she  under-
stood  that  what  God  desired  most  from  them,  and  especially
from  prelates,  was,  that  they  should  possess  these  dignities


RECOMMENDING  OURSELVES  TO  THE  PRAYERS  OF  OTHERS.  269

as  if  they  possessed  them  not — that  is  to  say,  that  they
should  use  their  authority  as  if  it  had  only  been  granted
to  them  for  a  day  or  an  hour,  and  that  they  should  be
ready  at  any  moment  to  resign  their  charge,  yet  without
ceasing  to  do  all  in  their  power  for  the  glory  of  God,  say
ing  to  themselves  continually  in  their  hearts  :  "  Courage  !
let  us  neglect  nothing  which  may  procure  the  honour  of
our  Lord  in  these  matters,  that  we  may  at  last  lay  down
our  burden  without  fear,  when  we  have  promoted  His  glory
and  the  advantage  of  our  neighbour."

§  4. Of  the  value  and  importance  of  recommending  ourselvet
to  the  prayers  of  others.

As  the  Saint  prayed  for  a  person  who  had  requested  her
prayers  with  great  humility,  both  personally  and  through
others,  she  saw  our  Lord  approach  this  person,  encompass
ing  her  with  celestial  light,  and  pouring  forth  on  her  in  the
midst  of  this  splendour  all  the  graces  which  she  had  hoped
to  receive  through  the  merits  of  the  prayers  of  Gertrude.
Our  Lord  taught  her  by  this,  that  when  any  one  confides
in  the  prayers  of  another,  with  a  firm  confidence  that
through  their  intercession  they  will  receive  grace  from  God,
the  Lord  in  His  goodness  pours  forth  His  benedictions  on
them  according  to  the  measure  of  their  desires  and  their
faith,  even  when  he  to  whose  prayers  they  have  recom
mended  themselves  neglects  to  pray  for  them.


270  THE  BEVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTEUDJE.

CHAPTER  LXIL

Instructions  for  different  persons  in  different  states  of  life.

§  1.  For  one,  who  has  an  ardent  desire  to  advance  in
perfection.

As  Gertrude  prayed  for  a  person  who  had  an  ardent
desire  to  advance  in  perfection,  she  received  this  instruc
tion  :  "  Tell  her  from  Me,  that  if  she  desires  to  unite  her-
welf  to  Me  by  the  tie  of  special  love,  she  must,  like  a  noble
bird,*  make  a  nest  at  My  feet  of  the  branches  of  her  own
nothingness  and  the  palms  of  My  greatness,  where  she  may
repose  by  a  continual  remembrance  of  her  un worthiness,
because  man  is  aways  inclined  to  evil  of  himself,  and  not
to  good,  unless  he  is  prevented  by  My  grace.  Let  her
often  reflect  on  My  mercy,  and  on  the  paternal  goodness
with  which  I  am  ready  to  receive  men  when  they  have
fallen,  if  they  return  to  Me  by  penance.  When  she  desires
to  leave  this  nest  in  order  to  seek  for  food,  she  must  fly
into  My  bosom,  wherein,  with  affectionate  gratitude,  she
must  reflect  on  the  different  blessings  with  which  I  have
enriched  her  by  My  superabundant  kindness.  If  she  de
sires  to  fly  further,  and  to  ascend  higher  on  the  wings
of  her  desires,  she  must  rise  with  the  swiftness  of  an
eagle  to  the  contemplation  of  heavenly  things,  which  are
above  her;  she  must  fly  around  My  face,  supported
like  a  seraph  on  the  wings  of  charity,  and  gaze  with  the
piercing  eyes  of  her  spirit  upon  the  glory  of  the  King  of
kings.

"  But  since  it  is  impossible  for  her  during  this  life  to


avis  j"  probably  the  eagle  is  intended.


INSTRUCTIONS  FOB  DIFFERENT  PERSONS.  271

continue  long  in  this  high  contemplation,  even  for  an  hour,
she  must  depress  her  wings,  by  thinking  frequently  of  her
own  nothingness,  and  return  to  her  nest,  remaining  there  in
repose  until  she  is  able  again  to  renew  her  flight  by  acts  of
thanksgiving  and  gratitude ;  then  let  her  seek  once  more
her  pasture,  and  elevate  herself  again  in  ecstasy  to  the
highest  contemplation  of  the  Divine  Majesty.  Thus,  by
repeating  frequently  these  difficult  movements,  entering
into  her  nest  by  considerations  of  her  unworthiness,  and
coming  forth  from  it  by  meditating  on  My  benefits,  she
will  elevate  herself  to  heavenly  contemplation,  and  she  will
always  taste  celestial  joys."

§  2.  Instruction  for  one  who  had  entered  religion  at  an
advanced  period.

Gertrude  now  prayed  for  another  person  who  had  been
particularly  recommended  to  her,  and  who,  having  renounced
the  world  after  passing  the  flower  of  her  youth  in  it,  had
consecrated  herself  to  God  in  religion.  She  besought  Him,
by  the  same  love  with  which  He  had  promised  her  that
He  would  use  her  heart  as  a  canal  through  which  to  pour
forth  His  grace  on  others,  that  He  would  now  accomplish
this  promise  for  His  own  glory,  and  for  the  satisfaction
and  advantage  of  this  person  ;  and  as  she  prayed  thus,  she
saw  her  heart  united,  under  the  form  of  a  little  canal,  to
the  loving  Heart  of  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  who  appeared
seated  on  His  royal  throne.

Then  Gertrude  also  saw  the  person  for  whom  she
prayed  prostrating  humbly  before  God  ;  she  beheld  our
Lord  offering  her  His  left  hand,  and  saying  to  her  :  "  I
will  place  you  under  the  protection  of  My  incomprehensible
omnipotence,  My  inscrutable  wisdom,  and  My  ineffable
goodness," — at  the  same  time  presenting  to  her  three  fingers


272 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

of  His  left  hand,  with  which  He  touched  hers ;  thus  in
dicating  three  different  manners  in  which  she  should
endeavour  to  regulate  her  life.  First,  that  when  she  com
menced  any  duty,  she  should  always  submit  herself  humbly
to  the  Divine  omnipotence,  acknowledging  herself  a  useless
servant,  since  she  had  passed  her  best  years  unfruitfully,
without  thinking  of  God  her  Creator ;  praying  fervently  that
the  Almighty  would  give  her  grace  to  act  as  she  ought
therein.  Secondly,  that  she  should  protest,  before  the  im
penetrable  wisdom  of  God,  that  she  was  unworthy  to  receive
any  effusion  of  Divine  knowledge,  because  she  had  not
accustomed  her  senses  from  her  infancy  to  occupy  them
selves  with  Divine  things,  but  rather  had  used  them  for
human  pride  and  vainglory.  Thus  abasing  herself  in  pro
found  humility,  she  should  detach  herself  from  everything
earthly,  and  apply  herself  solely  to  the  contemplation  of
God ;  and  that  she  should,  according  to  the  circumstances
of  time  and  place,  endeavour  to  impart  to  others  the
effusions  of  Divine  grace  which  were  poured  forth  on  her.
Thirdly,  that  she  should  receive  with  great  thanksgiving
the  good  will  which  the  Lord  had  freely  bestowed  on  her,
and  by  means  of  which  she  would  be  enabled  to  observe  the
two  preceding  counsels.

It  appeared  to  the  Saint,  also,  that  our  Lord  wore  a
ring  on  the  ring-finger  of  His  left  hand,  the  material  of
which  was  of  little  value,  though  it  contained  a  very  rare
and  precious  stone  of  the  colour  of  fire  ;  and  it  was  revealed
to  her  that  this  ring  symbolised  the  imperfect  life  of  this
person,  which  she  had  offered  to  God  by  forsaking  t}ie
world,  and  enrolling  herself  under  the  Divine  standard  ;
and  that  the  precious  stone  signified  the  mercy  and  ineff
able  liberality  whereby  our  Saviour  had  inspired  her  with
a  good  will,  so  that  all  her  works  might  become  perfect  be-


THE  HOLE  OP  THE  ROCK.  273

fore  God.  Therefore  the  voice  * — that  is  to  say,  the  inten
tion — of  this  person  ought  to  be  a  continual  thanksgiving
and  praise  to  God  for  this  immense  grace.  She  knew,  also,
whenever  this  person  performed  any  good  work  by  Divine
assistance,  that  our  Lord  placed  it  on  His  right  hand  as  a
ring  of  great  value,  displaying  it  before  all  the  heavenly
court,  and  appearing  to  take  satisfaction  in  having  received
the  gift  from  His  spouse, — that  is,  from  the  soul  of  this
person.  This  gave  all  the  blessed  souls  a  love  for  her,  as
princes  have  for  the  spouse  of  their  king ;  arid  they  ren
dered  their  services  to  this  person,  whenever  God  desired
it,  with  all  the  fervour  and  devotedness  which  the  Church
triumphant  in  heaven  renders  to  the  Church  militant  on
earth.

§  3.  Instruction  for  a  person  who  was  desired  to  make  her
nest  in  the  hole  of  the  rock — that  is,  in  the  wounded
Side  of  Jesus.

As  the  Saint  prayed  with  much  devotion  for  another
person,  she  received  this  instruction  for  her  :  that  she  was
to  make  her  nest  in  the  hole  of  the  rock, — that  is,  in  the
adorable  Side  of  Jesus  Christ, — so  that,  reposing  there,  she
should  suck  honey  from  the  rock, — that  is,  the  sweetness
of  the  intention  of  the  Deified  Heart  of  Jesus, — and  thus
she  might  learn  to  imitate  His  example,  according  to  the
instruction  of  Holy  Scripture;  but  especially  in  three
things.  First  :  as  our  Lord  frequently  passed  whole  nights
in  prayer,  she  should  imitate  Him  by  having  recourse  to
prayer  in  every  trial  and  adversity.  Secondly  :  that  as
Jesus  Christ  preached  in  the  towns  and  villages,  she  should
endeavour  to  edify  her  neighbour,  not  only  by  word,  but


274 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

by  works ;  by  her  conduct,  and  even  by  the  least  move-
inent  of  her  body.  Thirdly  :  that  as  our  Saviour  was  always
ready  to  assist  the  needy,  she  should  also  render  service  to
her  neighbour  by  word  and  act ;  that  whenever  she  was
about  to  perform  any  action,  she  should  always  recommend
it  to  God,  uniting  it  to  His  most  perfect  works,  that  it
might  be  accomplished  according  to  His  adorable  will,  for
the  salvation  of  the  world  ;  and  at  its  conclusion  she  should
again  offer  it  to  the  Son  of  God,  that  He  might  amend  its
defects,  and  present  it  to  God  His  Father  for  His  eternal
glory.

Whenever  this  person  came  forth  from  her  nest,  she
was  to  use  three  supports ;  one  to  assist  her  in  walking,
and  the  other  two  to  support  her  on  either  side.  The  first
support  was  to  be  a  fervent  charity,  by  which  she  was  to
endeavour  with  all  her  might  to  draw  all  kinds  of  persona
to  God,  and  to  be  useful  to  them  for  the  glory  of  God,  in
consideration  of  that  Divine  love  by  which  He  had  laboured
for  the  common  salvation  of  the  whole  human  race.  The
second  support,  which  she  was  to  use  on  the  right  side,  was
a  humble  subjection,  by  which  she  was  to  submit  herself
to  all  for  the  love  of  God,  and  to  take  the  utmost  care  that
neither  her  superiors  nor  her  inferiors  should  be  scandalised
by  her  words  or  actions.  The  third  support,  which  she  was
to  use  on  the  left  side,  was  an  exact  vigilance  over  herself,
by  means  of  which  she  should  endeavour  to  preserve  herself
from  all  sin,  and  to  avoid  the  stains  which  she  might  con
tract  by  thought,  word,  or  action.

§  4.  Instruction  for  another  person  who  was  to  erect  ct
mystical  throne.

As  Gertrude  prayed  for  another  person,  her  spiritual
life  was  thus  represented  to  her :  She  appeared  before  the


OF  THE  PLEASURES  OF  OUR  FATHERLAND.  275

throne  of  God  as  if  engaged  in  building  a  magnificent  throne
of  precious  stones,  the  cement  of  which  was  pure  gold.
Sometimes  she  rested  on  this  throne,  and  then  rose  up
again  to  resume  her  labour  with  greater  fervour.  The
Saint  understood  that  these  precious  stones  represented  the
different  afflictions  by  which  the  grace  of  God  was  preserved
and  strengthened  in  the  soul  of  this  person ;  for  the  Lord
leads  His  elect  through  this  life  by  rough  and  difficult
paths,  lest  pleasures  here  should  make  them  forget  the
pleasures  of  their  fatherland.*  The  gold  which  cemented
these  precious  stones  together  represented  the  habitual
grace  which  this  soul  possessed,  and  by  means  of  which,
with  a  lively  faith,  she  made  such  profit  of  all  the  trials
she  suffered,  whether  exterior  or  interior.  The  repose
which  she  took  when  sitting  on  this  throne  signified  the
sweetness  of  Divine  consolation  which  she  enjoyed  ;  and
the  rising  again,  the  good  works  in  which  she  persevered
continually,  and  by  which  she  profited  so  much  that  she
daily  rose  to  a  higher  degree  of  perfection.

§  5. The  life  of  another  person  represented  under  the  figure
of  a  tree.

As  the  Saint  prayed  for  another  person,  her  life  was
thus  represented  to  her :  She  beheld  before  the  throne  of
the  Divine  Majesty  a  very  beautiful  tree,  the  trunk  and
branches  of  which  were  green  and  flourishing,  the  leaves
shining  like  gold.  The  person  for  whom  she  prayed  ap
peared  to  ascend  into  this  tree,  and  to  cut  off  some  Sittle
branches  which  had  commenced  to  wither  ;  and  she  had
no  sooner  effected  this,  than  Gertrude  beheld  the  same

*  "  Ne  dum  delectantur  in  via,  obliviscuntur  eorum  quw  aunt  in
patria."


THE  KEVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


number  of  branches  coming  forth  from  different  parts  of  the
throne  of  God,  which  were  presented  to  this  person  to  take
the  place  of  those  which  she  had  cut  off;  and  when  these
weie  grafted  on  the  tree,  they  appeared  to  bring  forth  fruit
of  a  red  colour,  which  she  gathered  and  presented  to  God,
who  received  the  offering  with  much  pleasure.

The  tree  represented  the  religious  life  into  which  this
person  had  entered  to  serve  God  ;  the  gold-coloured  leaves
the  good  works  which  she  practised  in  her  monastery  —  and
these  were  rendered  of  still  more  value  by  the  prayers  of
one  of  her  relatives,  who  had  induced  her  to  become  a  reli
gious,  and  had  recommended  her  to  God  with  much  fervent
prayer.  The  instrument  with  which  she  cut  off  the  withered
branches  represented  the  consideration  of  her  own  defects,
in  order  to  extirpate  them  by  penance.  The  branches
which  came  forth  from  the  throne  of  God  to  replace  those
which  she  had  cut  off,  signified  the  perfect  and  holy  life  of
Jesus  Christ,  who,  through  the  merits  and  prayers  of  her
relation,  was  always  ready  to  supply  her  defects.  Lastly,
the  fruit  which  she  gathered  and  presented  to  God  signified
the  good-will  she  had  to  correct  her  faults,  which  was  most
acceptable  to  the  Lord,  who  thinks  more  of  the  good-will
of  a  sincere  heart  than  of  great  actions  without  a  pure
intention.

§  6.  Instruction  for  a  learned  and  for  an  ignorant  person,

figured  by  the  three  Apostles  on  Mount  Thabor.
As  the  Saint  prayed  fervently  for  two  persons  who  had
been  recommended  to  her  prayers,  but  of  whom  she  knew
nothing,  she  besought  our  Lord  to  reveal  their  spiritual
state  to  her.  Our  Lord  then  desired  her  to  inform  them
of  two  revelations  which  had  been  made  to  her  for  two
other  persons  for  whom  she  had  been  praying  previously,


SIGNIFICATION  OP  THE  APOSTLES'  NAMES.  277

one  of  whom  was  learned  and  the  other  illiterate ;  and  He
added,  that  all  persons,  whatever  might  be  their  state  or
condition,  would  find  instruction  in  the  preceding  reve
lations,  as  well  as  in  those  which  follow.  Of  the  learned
person,  our  Lord  said  :  "  I  have  taken  her  up,  with  My
Apostles,  on  the  mountain  of  new  light;*  therefore,  in
regulating  her  conduct,  let  her  be  instructed  by  the  mean
ing  of  the  names  of  the  Apostles  who  were  led  to  that
mountain.  Now,  Peter,  according  to  the  interpreters,  sig
nifies  '  knowledge  ; '  t  let  her  then  endeavour,  in  all  her
reading,  to  attain  to  self-knowledge.  For  example  :  when
she  reads  of  vices  or  virtues,  let  her  examine  if  she  has  any
vices,  and  see  what  progress  she  has  made  in  virtue.  Then,
when  she  has  obtained  a  more  perfect  knowledge  of  herself,
let  her  follow  the  signification  of  the  name  James,  which
is  interpreted  *  supplanter,  and  endeavour  to  fight  cou
rageously  against  her  vices,  and  to  advance  in  virtues.
And  since  the  name  John  signifies  '  grace/  let  her  endea
vour,  at  least  for  one  hour  each  day,  in  the  morning  or
evening,  or  whenever  she  finds  it  most  suitable,  to  separate


*  "  In  montem  novi  luminis."

f  This  passage  is  a  difficult  one.  We  are  happy,  however,  in
being  able  to  append  a  note  with  which  we  have  been  favoured  by
one  of  the  Benedictine  Fathers  of  Solesmes,  to  whom  we  are  deeply
indebted  for  valuable  assistance.  In  reply  to  our  query,  he  writes
thus  :  "  As  regards  the  names,  '  Petrus,'  &c.  :  Simon,  in  the  Hebrew,
is  the  same  as  hearing,  obeying  ;  for  scama  means,  '  to  hear,  to  obey  ;'
but  this  hardly  agrees  with  the  interpretation  given,— ie.,  '  Petrus
itaque  interpretatur  agnoscens.'  James,  from  the  Latin  '  Jacobus,'
which  means  'supplanter'  (Gen.  xxvii.  26),  because  he  took  hold
of  his  brother's  foot  (plantam)  ;  Jacob,  in  Hebrew,  meaning  'a
supplanter.'  John,  in  Latin  'Johannes,' — i.e.,  '  Deus  donavit,  vel,
Deus  misertus  est,  aut,  Dei  donum  gratia  et  misericordia,'— from  ia
(Hebrew),  a  contraction  for  Jehovah  (Deus)  and  chanan,— i.e.,
'  Misertus  est,'  or  '  donavit.'"


278 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

herself  from  all  exterior  things,  and  to  recollect  herself  in
teriorly,  to  think  of  Me  and  know  My  will ;  and  let  her
thus  exercise  herself  devoutly,  as  far  as  she  can  during  the
time  which  she  has  chosen,  in  all  that  I  inspire  her  with  ;
whether  it  be  praise,  thanksgiving  for  the  special  favours
I  have  bestowed  on  her,  or  for  those  which  I  have  granted
to  others,  or  prayer  for  sinners,  or  for  the  souls  in  purga
tory."

The  following  instruction  was  given  for  the  unlearned
person  because  she  was  much  troubled  that  she  could  not
apply  to  prayer  as  she  desired,  being  hindered  by  the  duties
of  her  office  :  "  I  have  not  merely  chosen  her  to  serve  Me
for  an  hour  in  the  day,  but  that  she  may  be  continually
with  Me, — that  is,  that  she  may  perform  all  her  actions  for
My  glory,  and  with  the  same  intention  with  which  she
would  desire  to  pray.  Let  her  also  practise  this  devotion
in  all  the  trouble  which  she  finds  in  her  employment, —
namely,  to  have  a  constant  desire  that  all  those  who  benefit
by  her  labour  may  not  only  find  bodily  refreshment,  but  that
they  may  be  incited  to  love  Me  interiorly,  and  be  strength
ened  in  all  good ;  and  each  time  that  she  acts  thus,  her
labours  and  works  will  be  to  Me  as  if  she  presented  Me
with  so  many  different  and  delicious  viands."


CHAPTER  LXIII.

That  the  Church  is  figured  by  the  members  of  Jesus  Christ— How
we  must  act  towards  those  members  which  are  diseased,  and
in  regard  to  our  Superior.

As  the  Saint  prayed  for  another  person,  the  Lord  Jesus,
the  King  of  Glory,  appeared  to  her,  showing  her,  under  the


THE  CHURCH  CHRIST'rf  MYSTICAL  BODY.  279

figure  of  His  natural  Body  the  mystical  Body  of  Ilia
Church,  of  which  He  is  the  Head  and  the  Spouse.  He
appeared  to  have  the  right  side  of  His  Body  magnificently
clothed  with  a  royal  and  Divine  habit ;  but  the  left  was
uncovered,  and  seemed  all  over  ulcers.  The  Saint  was  in
structed  by  this,  that  the  right  side  of  our  Lord  signified
the  elect  who  are  in  His  Church,  and  who  have  been  pre
vented  by  special  gifts  of  grace  ;  the  left  side  represented
the  imperfect,  who  are  still  full  of  vices  and  imperfections.
The  ornaments  with  which  the  right  side  of  our  Lord  was
adorned  represented  the  benefits  and  services  which  some
had  rendered  by  a  singular  zeal  to  those  whom  they  knew
to  be  more  advanced  in  virtue  than  others,  and  to  enjoy  more
familiarity  with  God  ;  because,  whenever  they  acted  thus,
they  bestowed,  as  it  were,  a  new  ornament  on  the  Lord.
But  there  are  also  those  who,  while  they  willingly  do  service
to  virtuous  persons  for  the  love  of  God,  reprehend  the
faults  of  the  wicked  and  imperfect  with  such  severity  that
they  increase  these  wounds  instead  of  healing  them.

Our  Lord  then  spoke  thus  to  Gertrude  :  "  Let  all  learn
from  My  example  in  this  matter  how  they  should  heal  the
wounds  of  the  Church,  which  is  My  mystical  Body, — that
is,  how  they  should  correct  the  faults  of  their  neighbours.
First,  they  must  touch  them  gently,  and  endeavour,  by
their  kind  and  charitable  advice,  to  withdraw  them  from
their  imperfections.  When  they  see  that  these  means  are
ineffectual,  then,  in  the  course  of  time,  they  may  use
stronger  remedies  to  effect  their  cure.  Those  who  care
nothing  for  My  words  are  they  who,  while  they  know  of  the
faults  of  others,  concern  themselves  so  little  about  them,
that  they  would  not  correct  them,  even  by  a  word,  for  fear
of  giving  themselves  the  least  trouble,  saying,  with  Cain,
'  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  1 '  They  plaster  over  My


280 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

wounds  who,  instead  of  trying  to  heal  them,  draw  them  out,
and  cause  them  to  become  corrupt,  by  allowing  the  imper
fections  of  their  neighbours  to  continue  by  their  silence,
when  they  might  cure  them  by  their  words.

"  There  are  others  who  discover  the  faults  of  their  neigh
bours,  but  give  way  to  anger  if  they  are  not  corrected  and
chastised  for  them  at  the  moment,  according  to  their  fancy  ;
and  such  persons  resolve  in  their  hearts  never  again  to
advise  or  reprehend  another,  imagining  that  their  advice
has  been  disregarded  ;  and  yet  they  will  condemn  others
harshly  themselves,  even  injuring  them,  by  untruths,  with
out  giving  them  one  word  of  advice  for  their  /imendment.
And  they  who  act  thus  seem  as  if  they  placed  a  plaster  on
My  wounds  exteriorly,  while  interiorly  they  tear  them  with
burning  irons.

"  They  who  neglect  to  correct  the  faults  of  others  more
from  negligence  than  from  malice  act  as  if  they  trod  on
My  feet.  And  those  who  follow  the  impulses  of  their  own
will,  without  caring  how  they  scandalise  My  elect,  so  that
they  gratify  their  inclinations,  seem  to  pierce  My  hands
with  red-hot  needles.

"There  are  others,  also,  who  sincerely  love,  as  they
ought,  good  and  holy  Superiors,  and  who  show  them  every
respect  by  their  words  and  actions,  and  yet  despise  those
who  appear  less  perfect,  and  condemn  their  actions  in  their
own  minds  too  rigorously  ;  and  these  act  as  if  they  adorned
the  right  side  of  My  head  with  pearls  and  precious  stones,
and,  at  the  same  time,  struck  the  other  side  violently  and
without  mercy  when  I  desire  to  lay  it  down  upon  them  to
rest.  There  are  some  also  who  applaud  the  ill-regulated
actions  of  their  Superiors,  in  order  to  insinuate  themselves
into  their  friendship,  and  thus  to  be  permitted  more  easily
to  follow  their  own  will ;  and  these  act  as  if  they  dragged


OP  COMMUNICATION  OP  MERITS.  281

My  head  back  rudely,  insulting  Me  in  My  suffering,  and
finding  pleasure  in  My  wounds."


CHAPTER  LXIV.

On  the  spiritual  participation  of  merits.

As  the  Saint  prayed  for  another  person  who  had  been
devoutly  recommended  to  her  prayers,  she  commenced  by
asking  God  to  allow  her  to  participate  in  all  the  good  which
she  might  effect,  however  unworthy,  by  her  vigils,  her
fasts,  her  prayers,  and  other  good  works.  Our  Lord  re
plied  :  "  I  will  communicate  to  her  all  the  favours  which
the  gratuitous  goodness  of  My  Divinity  has  operated  or  will
operate  in  you  even  to  the  end."  The  Saint  then  asked  :
"  Since  Thy  holy  and  universal  Church  participates  in  all
the  good  which  Thou  dost  operate  in  me,  by  me,  and  by
all  Thine  elect,  what  particular  advantage  will  this  person
receive  from  Thy  bounty,  in  consequence  of  my  ardent  de
sire  that  she  should  share  in  all  the  graces  which  Thou
conferrest  on  me  1"  Our  Lord  answered  by  this  com
parison  :  "  Even  as  a  lady  of  rank,  who  understands  the  art
of  skilfully  arranging  pearls  and  precious  stones  to  adorn
herself  and  her  sister,  does  honour  to  her  house  and  her
parents,  and  though  she  who  is  thus  skilled  obtains  the
greatest  applause,  still  those  whom  she  adorns  are  more
admired  than  those  who  are  altogether  deprived  of  such
jewels ;  so  also  the  Church  shares  in  what  is  granted  to
each  individual ;  but  they  who  have  received  them,  and
those  whom  they  desire  to  participate  in  them,  receive  the
greatest  profit  from  them."

Then  the  Saint  told  our  Lord  that  a  person  who  had


282 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


attended  Dame  Mechtilde  in  her  illness  complained  that  she
had  not  attended  her  as  she  wished  ;  above  all,  she  grieved
that  she  had  not  spoken  to  her  about  her  soul  as  she  had
desired,  fearing,  if  she  did  so,  that  she  might  incommode
her.  Onr  Lord  replied  :  "  She  serves  Me  daily  at  My  table,
*as  a  prince  would  his  emperor,  by  the  good-will  with  which
she  so  often  served  My  spouse  with  such  alacrity  and  liber
ality  ;  for  I  take  pleasure  in  all  the  services  which  she  has
rendered  to  her,  whether  by  serving  her  with  food  and
drink,  or  by  soothing  her  sufferings  by  her  words  or  actions.
And  as  for  the  complaint  which  she  makes  of  not  having
spoken  to  her  often  enough  of  spiritual  things,  I  will
supply  for  this  Myself,  as  a  charitable  bridegroom,  who,
seeing  that  his  bride  from  respect  refrains  from  asking  him
for  something  that  she  ardently  desires,  grants  double  to
her  modesty.  Furthermore,  on  account  of  the  joy  which
she  feels  for  all  the  favours  which  I  have  granted  to  My
spouse,  her  soul  will  receive  in  heaven  an  inestimable  de
light  for  all  the  graces  which  have  been  poured  forth  on
her  from  the  incomprehensible  source  of  light.  For  as  the
rays  of  the  sun,  when  they  fall  on  the  surface  of  the  water,
reflect  themselves  again  on  some  other  surface,  so  the
brightness  of  My  grace,  which  shines  into  the  souls  of  those
whom  I  have  presented  on  earth  with  the  sweetness  of  My
benediction,  will  cast  their  light  through  eternity  upon  the
souls  of  those  who  have  rejoiced  in  their  happiness,  and
form  an  image  brighter  than  that  of  the  most  highly-
polished  mirror."


OP  DETERRING  OTHERS  FROM  FREQUENT  COMMUNION. 283

CHAPTER  LXV.

Of  the  utility  of  temptation.

As  Gertrude  prayed  for  a  person  who  was  greatly  tried  by
temptation,  she  received  this  reply  :  "  It  is  I  who  have  sent
this  temptation,  and  who  permit  it,  that  she  may  thus  per
ceive  and  repent  of  her  defects,  and  efface  those  defects
which  she  does  not  see  ;  as  it  usually  happens  that,  when
men  perceive  any  stain  on  their  hands,  they  wash  them,
and  thus  thoroughly  cleanse  away  lesser  stains,  which  they
would  not  have  perceived  or  removed  if  they  had  not  seen
a  greater  one.

CHAPTER  LXVI.

That  frequent  Communion  is  agreeable  to  God.

A  CERTAIN  person,  moved  by  a  zeal  for  justice,  sometimes
exclaimed  against  those  whom  she  thought  approached  tho
Holy  Communion  with  too  little  preparation  and  fervour,
and  rendered  them  so  fearful,  that  they  dared  not  com
municate.  On  this  account,  as  Gertrude  prayed  for  this
person,  and  inquired  how  our  Lord  received  her  zeal,  He
replied :  "  Since  I  find  My  delight  in  dwelling  with  the
children  of  men,  and  have  left  them  this  Sacrament  by  an
excess  of  love,  for  a  remembrance  of  Me,  that  by  this
they  may  remember  Me  frequently  j  and,  finally,  have
obliged  Myself  to  remain  in  this  mystery  until  the  con
summation  of  ages, — all  who,  by  their  words  or  persuasions,
drive  away  those  who  are  not  in  mortal  sin,  and  thus  bin
der  and  interrupt  the  delight  which  I  find  in  them,  act  like
a  severe  master,  who  forbids  the  children  of  the  king  to
speak  to  those  of  their  own  age  who  may  be  poor  or  be-


284 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

neath  them  in  rank,  because  he  considers  it  more  correct
that  his  pupils  should  receive  the  honour  due  to  their  dig
nity  than  to  permit  them  this  enjoyment."  "  But,  Lord,"
inquired  the  Saint,  "  if  this  person  formed  a  firm  resolu
tion  not  to  commit  this  fault  any  more,  wouldst  Thou  not
pardon  her  for  the  past  I'1  "I  would  not  only  pardon  her,"
our  Lord  replied ;  "  but  her  action  would  be  as  agreeable
to  Me  as  it  would  be  to  the  king's  son  if  his  master  allowed
him  to  play  with  those  children  from  whom  he  had  pre
viously  driven  him  away  with  such  severity."


CHAPTER  LXVII.

Of  the  right  manner  of  exercising  zeal.

As  Gertrude  prayed  for  a  person  whose  conscience  waa
troubled,  fearing  that  she  was  guilty  before  God  for  not
having  borne  with  sufficient  patience  the  negligence  of  some
persons  by  whose  bad  example  she  feared  religious  disci
pline  would  become  relaxed,  our  Lord,  who  is  the  best  of
all  masters,  instructed  her  thus  :  "  If  any  one  desires  that
her  zeal  should  be  an  acceptable  sacrifice  to  Me,  and  use-
ful  to  her  own  soul,  she  should  have  a  special  care  of  three
things  ;  first,  she  should  show  a  gentle  and  serene  coun
tenance  towards  those  whom  she  desires  to  correct  for  their
faults,  and  even,  when  opportunity  offers,  she  should  mani
fest  her  charity  towards  them  by  her  actions  as  well  as  by  her
words  ;  secondly,  she  should  be  careful  not  to  publish  £hese
negligences  in  places  where  she  neither  expects  amendment
in  the  person  corrected  nor  caution  in  the  listeners  ;  thirdly^
when  her  conscience  urges  her  to  reprehend  any  fault,  no
human  consideration  should  induce  her  to  be  silent,  but,  from


OP  CHARITABLE  ADMONITIONS.  285

a  pure  motive  of  giving  glory  to  God  and  benefiting  souls,
let  her  seek  an  opportunity  of  correcting  these  imperfec
tions  with  profit  and  charity.  Then  she  will  be  rewarded
according  to  her  labour,  not  according  to  her  success  ;  for
if  her  care  entirely  fails  of  effect,  it  will  not  be  her  fault,
but  the  fault  of  those  who  refuse  to  hear  her."

As  the  Saint  prayed  again  for  two  persons  who  had  a
verbal  disagreement,  one  anxious  for  the  maintenance  of
justice,  and  the  other  for  charity,  our  Lord  said  to  her :
"  When  a  father  who  loves  his  little  children  sees  them
playing  together  and  disporting  merely  for  amusement,  he
appears  not  to  notice  it ;  but  if  he  perceives  that  one  rises
up  against  the  other  too  harshly,  then  he  immediately
reprehends  severely  the  one  who  is  in  fault.  Thus  also  I,
who  am  the  Father  of  mercies,  when  I  see  two  persons
arguing  together  with  a  good  intention,  appear  not  to  per
ceive  it,  though  I  would  much  prefer  to  see  them  enjoy  an
entire  peace  of  heart ;  but  if  one  becomes  angry  with  the
other,  she  shall  not  escape  the  rod  of  My  paternal  justice."


CHAPTER  LXVIII.

That  we  do  not  always  receive  the  fruit  of  our  prayers
immediately

As  another  person  complained  that  she  did  not  receive  the
fruit  of  the  prayers  which  were  offered  for  her,  the  Saint  laid
the  matter  before  God,  and  received  this  reply  :  "Ask  this
person  what  she  would  think  most  advantageous  to  a  cousin
or  any  other  relative  for  whom  she  ardently  desired  a  bene
fice, — whether  the  right  to  it  should  be  conferred  on  him  as
a  child,  or  whether  he  should  be  allowed  the  revenues  also,


286 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GEHTKUDE.


and  permitted  to  use  them  as  lie  pleased  ]  According  to
human  prudence,  she  could  only  reply  that  it  would  be
more  advantageous  to  confer  on  him  the  right  to  the  bene
fice,  and  the  revenue  when  he  could  use  it  properly,  than
when  he  might  squander  it  wastefully.  Let  her,  then,  con
fide  in  My  wisdom  and  My  Divine  mercy,  since  I  am  her
Father,  her  Brother,  and  her  Spouse,  and  I  will  obtain  what
will  be  advantageous  for  her  body  and  soul  with  far  more
care  and  fidelity  than  she  would  for  any  relative  ;  and  let
her  believe  that  I  preserve  carefully  the  fruit  of  all  the
prayers  and  desires  which  are  addressed  to  Me  for  her,
until  a  suitable  time  comes  to  permit  her  the  enjoyment  of
them ;  then  I  will  commit  them  to  her  entirely,  when  no
one  will  be  able  to  corrupt  them,  or  to  deprive  her  of  them
by  their  importunities.  And  let  her  be  persuaded  that  thia
is  far  more  useful  to  her  than  to  pour  into  her  soul  some
sweetness  which  might,  perhaps,  be  an  occasion  of  vain
glory  to  her,  or  become  tarnished  by  her  pride  ;  or  than  to
grant  her  some  temporal  prosperity,  which  might  prove  au
occasion  of  sin."


CHAPTER  LXIX.

The  value  of  exact  obedience.

As  the  Hebdomadaria  recited  the  chapter  at  Matins  by
heart,  it  was  revealed  to  Gertrude  that  she  acted  thus  to
satisfy  a  precept  of  the  Rule  *  which  requires  that  it  should
be  recited  thus,  and  that  she  acquired  as  much  merit  by

*  Chapter  xii.,  the  manner  of  singing  Lauds:  "To  these  (the
Psalms)  shall  be  subjoined  a  lesson  of  the  Apocalypse,  which  shall  be
recited  from  memory,'1  &c.  The  Hebdomadaria — the  person  who
officiates  for  the  week.


THE  IMMENSE  REWARD  OF  EXACT  OBEDIENCE. 287

tliis  as  if  as  many  persons  as  there  were  words  in  what  she
chanted  interceded  for  her  with  God.  She  remembered
what  St.  Bernard  has  said  will  happen  at  the  hour  of
death,  when  our  actions  will  address  us  thus  :  "  You  have
produced  us  ;  we  are  your  work  ;  we  will  never  leave  you,
but  will  abide  continually  with  you,  and  appear  with  you
at  the  judgment."  Then  God  will  permit  all  the  actions  of
the  obedient  to  appear  as  so  many  persons  of  distinction,
•who  will  console  him,  and  intercede  for  him  with  God  ;  so
that  each  good  action  performed  through  obedience,  with
a  pure  intention,  will  obtain  the  pardon  of  some  negligence,
and  thereby  afford  extreme  consolation  to  persons  in  their
agony.


CHAPTER  LXX.

Instructions  on  different  subjects.
§  1.  For  the  Hebdomadaria.

ANOTHER  Hebdomadaria,  who  was  appointed  to  read  the
Psalter,  having  recommended  herself  to  the  prayers  of  the
Saint,  she  began  to  intercede  for  her,  and  saw  in  spirit
the  Son  of  God  elevating  this  person  before  the  throne  oi
His  Eternal  Father,  praying  Him  to  grant  her  a  share  in
the  zeal  and  fidelity  with  which  He  had  desired  the  glory
of  God  His  Father  and  the  saivation  of  the  human  race.
After  He  had  prayed  thus  for  this  person,  she  appeared
clothed  with  ornaments  like  His.  Therefore,  as  the  Son
of  God  is  said  to  stand  before  His  Father  to  render  Him
favourable  to  His  Church,  so  this  person,  like  another  Esther,
stood  with  the  Son  of  God  before  the  Eternal  Father  pray
ing  for  her  people,  that  is  to  say,  for  her  community.  And
as  she  thus  acquitted  herself  of  the  obligation  of  reciting


288 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

the  Psalter,  the  heavenly  Father  received  her  words  in  two
different  manners,  like  a  lord  who  receives  a  debt  by  the.
person  who  has  entered  bail  for  his  debtors,  and  like  a  sum
of  money  given  by  his  steward  to  distribute  amongst  his
friends.  It  appeared,  also,  that  our  Lord  gave  this  person
all  she  desired  to  obtain  by  her  prayers  for  the  community,
and  that  He  had  granted  them  all  they  asked.

3  2. Why  God  permits  faults  in  superiors.

As  St.  Gertrude  prayed  to  God  to  correct  a  fault  in  one
of  her  superiors,  she  received  this  reply  :  "  Do  you  not
know  that  not  only  this  person,  but  also  all  those  who
have  charge  of  this  My  beloved  community,  have  some
defects,  since  no  one  can  be  entirely  free  from  them  in  this
life  ?  And  this  happens  by  an  excess  of  the  mercy,  ten
derness,  and  love  with  which  I  have  chosen  this  congre
gation,  that  by  this  means  their  merit  may  be  greatly  in
creased.  For  it  is  far  more  virtuous  to  submit  to  a  person
whose  faults  are  apparent,  than  to  one  who  always  appears
perfect."  To  this  the  Saint  replied  :  "  Although  I  am  full
of  joy  in  perceiving  great  merit  in  inferiors,  I  ardently
desire  that  superiors  should  be  free  from  faults,  and  I  fear
they  contract  them  by  their  imperfections."  Our  Lord
answered  :  "  I,  who  know  all  their  weaknesses,  sometimes
permit  them,  in  the  diversity  of  their  employments,  to  be
sullied  by  some  stain,  because  otherwise  they  might  never
attain  so  high  a  degree  of  humility.  Therefore,  as  the
merit  of  inferiors  is  increased  both  by  the  perfections  and
imperfections  of  their  superiors,  so  the  merit  of  superiors
increases  by  the  perfections  and  imperfections  of  inferiors,
even  as  the  different  members  of  the  same  body  contribute
to  mutual  increase."

From  these  words  Gertrude  learned  to  admire  the  in-


GOD  TEMPERS  OUR  ADVERSITIES.  289

finite  wisdom  of  God,  who  arranges  all  things  for  the  per
fection  of  His  elect  with  such  care,  that  He  even  uses  their
defects  for  their  increase  in  perfection  ;  so  that,  were  there
no  other  subject  than  this  wherein  the  mercy  of  God  shone
forth,  the  united  thanksgivings  of  all  His  creatures  would
not  suffice  to  praise  Him  for  it.

§  3. Of  the  fruits  of  adversity,  and  how  we  should  correct
our  faults.

As  the  Saint  prayed  for  a  person  who  was  in  trouble,
she  received  this  reply  :  "  Do  not  defide  in  Me,  for  I  will
never  permit  My  elect  to  be  tried  beyond  their  strength  ;
and  I  am  always  with  them  to  moderate  the  burden  of  their
adversity,  even  as  a  mother  who  wishes  to  warm  her  little
child  at  the  fire  always  holds  her  hand  between  the  fire
and  her  child  ;  so,  when  I  know  that  it  is  necessary  to  purify
My  elect  by  sufferings,  I  send  them  not  for  their  destruc
tion,  but  to  prove  them  and  to  contribute  to  their  salva
tion."  As  she  prayed  afterwards  for  a  person  whom  she
had  seen  commit  a  fault,  she  said,  in  the  fervour  of  her
desires  :  "  Lord,  although  I  am  the  least  of  Thy  creatures,
since  what  I  ask  for  this  man  is  for  Thy  glory,  why  dost
Thou  not  hear  me,  Thou  who  art  almighty,  and  canst  do
all  things?"  The  Lord  answered  :  "As  My  omnipotence
can  do  all  things,  so  does  My  wisdom  discern  all  things  ;
therefore  I  do  nothing  that  is  not  suitable.  And  as  an
earthly  monarch  who  had  the  power  and  will  to  cleanse  his
stables  would  not  do  so  himself,  because  it  would  be  unsuit
able,  so  I  do  not  withdraw  persons  from  the  evil  into  which
they  have  fallen  of  their  own  will,  if  they  do  not  change
their  will,  and  render  themselves  agreeable  in  My  sight,
and  worthy  of  My  love."

T


290 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

§  4. Of  avoiding  negligence  and  confusion  in  the  Divine

Office.

As  the  Saint  watched  a  person  who  went  round  the  choir
during  Matins  to  remind  the  sisters  of  some  observance
which  had  been  forgotten,  and  thereby  caused  some  con
fusion,  she  inquired  of  God  if  this  action  was  agreeable  to
Him.  He  answered  :  "Whosoever  endeavours  to  prevent
any  neglect  in  the  Divine  Office  for  My  glory,  and  admon
ishes  others  for  the  same  purpose,  I  will  supply  what  he
has  omitted  in  this  duty  of  piety  and  devotion  which  he  is
obliged  to  practise."


CHAPTER  LXXI.

Of  the  loss  of  friends  ;  and  how  we  should  offer  our  trials  to  God.

As  the  Saint  prayed  for  a  person  who  was  grieved  at  the
illness  of  a  friend  whose  death  she  expected,  she  received
this  instruction  from  God  :  "  When  any  one  has  lost,  or
fears  to  lose,  a  faithful  friend  in  whom  they  find  not  only
the  consolation  of  friendship,  but  also  great  assistance  for
their  advancement  in  virtue,  if  they  offer  Me  this  afflic
tion,  and  would  rather  My  will  should  be  accomplished
than  that  their  friend  should  live,  they  may  be  assured,
if  they  form  this  desire  in  their  hearts  even  for  a  single
hour,  that  I  will  preserve  their  offering  in  the  same  beauty
and  freshness  as  it  was  presented  to  Me;  and  all  the
afflictions  which  may  happen  to  them  afterwards  through
human  weakness  will  contribute  to  the  advancement  of
their  salvation  in  such  a  manner,  that  all  thoughts  which
may  grieve  them — as,  for  example,  when  they  remember
such  or  such  a  consolation  which  they  might  have  found


HOW  A  PASSING  AFFLICTION  IS  REWARDED. 291

in  this  person,  and  of  which  they  are  now  deprived — all
those  griefs  and  inquietudes  which  overwhelm  man  through
the  weakness  of  his  human  nature — will  only  serve  to  make
place  in  their  souls  for  Divine  consolations,  after  the  offer
ing  of  which  I  have  spoken ;  for  I  will  bestow  on  them  as
many  consolations  as  they  have  suffered  afflictions.  And
I  will  act  towards  them  even  as  a  lapidary  who  is  obliged
to  place  in  his  work  of  gold  or  silver  as  many  precious
stones  as  he  has  made  niches  to  receive  them.  Now,  My
Divine  consolation  is  like  a  precious  stone,  because  precious
stones  are  said  to  have  strength ;  *  so  the  Divine  consolation
which  man  obtains  by  enduring  a  passing  affliction  has
such  efficacy,  that  there  is  nothing  which  can  be  renounced
in  this  life,  however  great,  which  will  not  be  restored  a
hundredfold  in  this  life,  and  a  thousandfold  in  eternity."


CHAPTER  LXXII.

Instructions  on  various  subjects.
§  1 .  Of  the  stains  ivhich  might  tarnish  the  purity  of  virginity.

As  Gertrude  prayed  once  for  a  person  who  ardently  desired
to  have  the  merit  of  virginity  before  God,  but  who  feared
to  have  tarnished  its  brightness  by  some  human  weakness,
she  appeared  in  the  arms  of  the  Lord,  clothed  modestly  in
a  snow-white  robe  ;  and  He  gave  this  instruction  :  "  When
virginity  receives  some  slight  stain  through  human  weak
ness,  and  this  becomes  the  occasion  of  exercising  a  true
and  solid  penance,  I  cause  these  stains  to  appear  as  or
naments  on  the  soul,  and  they  adorn  it  as  folds  adorn  a
robe.t  Nevertheless,  as  Scripture,  which  cannot  be  in


'Dicuntur  habere  vires."  f  "  Sicut  plicae  in  vestimento."


292 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

error,  assures  us  'that  incorruption  bringeth  near  to  God1
(Wis.  vi.),  it  must  be  observed,  that  if  these  stains  weie
caused  by  great  sins,  they  would  impede  the  effusions  of
Divine  love."

§  2. Of  renouncing  our  own  judgment.

As  she  prayed  for  another  person  who  desired  Divine
consolation,  she  received  this  reply  :  "  She  is  herself  the
obstacle  which  prevents  her  from  receiving  the  sweetness
of  My  grace  ;  for  when  I  draw  My  elect  to  Me  by  the  in
terior  attractions  of  My  love,  they  who  remain  obstinate  in
the  exercise  of  their  own  judgment  place  the  same  impedi
ment  to  it  as  one  would  who  closed  his  nostrils  with  his
robe  to  prevent  himself  from  smelling  a  delicious  perfume.
But  he  who,  for  love  of  Me,  renounces  his  own  judgment  to
follow  that  of  another,  acquires  a  merit  all  the  greater  few
acting  contrary  to  his  inclination,  because  he  is  not  merely
humble,  but  perfectly  victorious ;  for  the  apostle  says  none
will  be  crowned  '  except  he  strives  lawfully  ' "  (2  Tim.  ii.)

§  3. That  the  will  is  reputed  before  God  as  an  act.

As  the  Saint  prayed  for  a  person  who  found  great  diffi
culty  in  a  work  which  had  been  commanded  her,  our  Lord
instructed  her  thus  :  "If  any  one  desires,  for  love  of  Me,
to  undertake  any  painful  work,  by  which  he  fears  to  be
hindered  from  his  devotions,  if  heprefersthe  accomplishment
of  My  will  to  his  soul's  good,  I  will  so  esteem  the  purity
his  intention,  as  to  consider  it  as  if  it  had  really  been  of
carried  into  action  ;  and  even  if  he  never  commences  what
he  has  undertaken,  he  will  not  fail  to  obtain  the  same  re
ward  from  Me  as  if  he  had  accomplished  it,  and  had  never
committed  the  least  negligence  in  the  matter.


HOW  AFFLICTIONS  COVER  OUR  DEFECTS.  293

§  4. That  we  ought  not  to  prefer  exterior  things  to  interior.

On  another  occasion,  when  the  Saint  prayed  for  a  per
son  who  was  troubled  about  some  subject  of  which  she
was  herself  the  cause,  she  received  this  reply  :  "  By  these
pains  I  purify  the  negligence  which  she  has  contracted  by
preferring,  from  human  motives,  an  exterior  utility  to  her
interior  advancement."  "  But  since  she  cannot  live  without
the  exterior  goods,"  replied  the  Saint,  "  what  fault  can  she
have  committed  by  this  foresight^,  which  is  a  necessity  of
her  office  1  "  Our  Lord  answered  :  "  It  is  an  honour  and
an  ornament  to  a  lady  of  rank  to  wear  a  mantle  lined  with
furs  ;  but  if  she  turned  it  inside  out,  what  was  suitable  for
her  rank  would  become  a  subject  of  confusion,  so  that  her
mother,  to  prevent  such  an  exposure,  would  cover  her  with
another  mantle,  lest  she  should  be  considered  to  have  lost
her  senses.  Thus  I,  who  tenderly  love  this  person  as  My
own  child,  cover  her  defects  with  different  kinds  of  afflic
tions,  and  I  permit  them  to  happen  to  her  for  this  reason,
without  any  fault  of  hers.  Further,  I  have  adorned  her
with  patience  as  a  special  ornament;  for  Ihave  recommended
in  the  Gospel  that  men  should  seek  first  the  kingdom  of
God  and  His  justice — that  is,  the  perfection  of  the  interior
man — and  then,  not  that  they  should  seek  exterior  things,
for  I  have  promised  that  they  shall  be  added  to  them."
These  words  should  be  carefully  considered  by  all  religious
who  desire  to  be  friends  of  God.


PART  IV.
THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

COMPILED  BY  THE RELIGIOUS OF IIEB MONASTERY.

CHAPTER  I.

With  what  devotion  we  ought  to  prepare  ourselves  for  festivals-
Advantages  of  recommending  ourselves  to  the  prayers  of  others
—Our  enjoyment  of  God  corresponds  to  our  desires  and  our
capacity  to  receive  it.

A  S  the  Saint  was  watching  during  the  greater  part  of
**•  the  night  which  preceded  the  Vigil  of  Christmas,
before  Matins,  and  had  occupied  herself  entirely  in  medi
tating  on  the  Response  De  ilia  occulta*  in  which  she  took
great  pleasure,  she  was  suddenly  ravished  in  spirit,  and  in
her  rapture  she  beheld  Jesus  Christ  reposing  sweetly  and
peacefully  in  the  bosom  of  His  Father;  and  the  desires
which  were  addressed  to  Him  by  those  who  wished  to
spend  this  feast  with  great  devotion  appeared  under  the
figure  of  a  certain  vapour.  Then  this  beautiful  and  gentle
Jesus  sent  forth  from  His  Divine  Heart  a  light  which
spread  itself  over  this  vapour,  which  showed  them  the  way
in  which  they  should  come  to  Him.  As  each  approached

*  "VVe  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  where  this  Response  occurs  ;
it  is  not  in  the  present  Benedictine  Breviary.


296  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


to  God,  she  perceived  that  those  who  had  recommended
themselves  humbly  to  the  prayers  of  others  were  led  by
the  hand  by  persons  who  surrounded  them,  and  thus  they
went  direct  to  God  in  the  splendour  of  this  light,  which
came  forth  from  His  Heart ;  whereas  those  who  had  con
fided  merely  in  their  own  efforts  and  prayers  wandered
from  this  path,  but  arrived  at  last  at  the  term  by  a  light
which  came  to  them  from  God.

As  the  Saint  desired  to  know  with  what  special  grace
it  had  pleased  God  to  communicate  Himself  to  each  of  her
sisters,  she  immediately  beheld  them  all  reposing  in  the
bosom  of  the  Son  of  God,  where  each  was  filled  with  joy
according  to  her  capacity  and  desires.  She  observed  that
none  hindered  the  other,  but  that  each  enjoyed  God  as
fully  as  if  He  had  given  Himself  to  each  individually;  that
some  embraced  Him  lovingly,  as  a  Child  about  to  be  born
for  us  :  that  others  regarded  Him  as  a  faithful  Friend,  to
whom  they  could  therefore  disclose  every  secret  of  their
hearts  ;  while  others,  pouring  forth  the  whole  joy  of  their
souls,  caressed  Him  as  a  Spouse  chosen  amongst  a  thou
sand,  and  more  beloved  than  all, — so  that  each  found  in
Him,  in  a  most  pure  and  holy  manner,  the  accomplishment
of  her  individual  desires.

Then  the  Saint  came  forward,  according  to  her  usual
custom,  and  cast  herself  at  the  feet  of  her  Lord,  saying  to
Him :  "  0  most  loving  Lord  !  what  should  my  dispositions
be,  and  what  devotion  can  I  offer  to  Thy  most  blessed
Mother  at  this  Divine  birth,  since  my  bodily  infirmity
prevents  Me  even  from  reciting  the  Hours  to  which  my
profession  obliges  me  ? "  It  appeared  to  her  then  that  our
Lord,  moved  by  compassion  for  her  poverty,  gathered  toge
ther  all  that  she  had  said  for  the  glory  of  God  or  the  good
of  souls  during  the  Advent,  and  offered  it  lovingly  to  His


FOR  THE  FEAST  OF  THE  NATIVITY.  297

sweetest  Mother,  who  was  seated  in  glory  at  His  side  j  and
to  this  He  joined  all  the  fruits  which  her  words  might  have
produced,  even  to  the  end  of  ages,  to  supply  for  any  negli
gence  which  she  might  have  committed  in  her  service.
The  Mother  of  God,  having  received  this  offering,  appeared
as  if  adorned  by  it;  and  Gertrude  approached  her,  be
seeching  her  to  intercede  for  her  with  her  Son.  Then  the
Blessed  Virgin  turned  towards  Him  with  a  loving  coun
tenance,  and,  after  embracing  Him,  addressed  Him  thus  :
"  My  beloved  Son,  I  beseech  Thee  to  join  Thy  affection  to
mine,  and  to  grant  to  the  prayers  of  this  soul,  who  loves
Thee  with  so  much  fervour,  all  she  asks  of  Thee."  Then
the  Saint  addressed  our  Lord  thus  :  "  O  Sweetness  of  my
soul !  0  Jesus,  most  loving  and  most  desirable  !  0  dearest
of  all  who  are  dear  ! "  After  having  said  these  and  many
similar  words,  she  exclaimed  :  "  What  fruit  can  there  be
in  these  words,  uttered  by  one  so  vile  ?  "  Our  Lord  replied  :
"  What  does  it  matter  what  kind  of  wood  is  used  to  stir  up
perfumes  and  vases  of  incense,  since,  whatever  they  are
stirred  with,  they  always  emit  the  same  odour?  Thus,
when  any  one  says  to  Me,  '  My  sweetest  Lord,'  tkc.,  what
does  it  matter  if  they  think  themselves  utterly  vile,  since
My  goodness,  like  a  perfume  stirred  up,  exhales  an  odour
in  which  I  take  extreme  pleasure,  and  which  gives  to  those
who  move  it  by  their  words  a  sweetness  which  is  to  them
a  foretaste  of  eternal  life  ?  "


CHAPTER  II.

Instructions  for  celebrating  the  Feast  of  the  Nativity.

THE  next  day,  the  Saint  watched  for some time  before
Matins,  and  occupied  herself  with  reflecting,  in  the  bitter-


298 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

ness  of  her  heart,  on  some  impatience  to  which  she  had
given  way  on  the  preceding  evening,  in  consequence  of  a
negligence  of  those  who  attended  her.  As  she  heard  the
first  signal  for  Matins,  she  was  filled  with  joy,  praising  God
for  the  announcement  that  the  Feast  of  the  most  sweet
Nativity  of  her  Lord  was  so  near  at  hand.  Then  the
Eternal  Father  addressed  Himself  lovingly  to  her,  saying :
"  Behold,  I  am  going  to  send  into  your  soul  the  affection
which  I  sent  before  the  face  of  My  only  Son  to  purify  the
world  from  its  sins,  and  I  will  enkindle  it  in  your  soul,
that  you  also  may  be  purified  from  all  the  sinful  stains  of
your  past  negligences,  and  thus  you  may  be  prepared  to
celebrate  the  approaching  feast  worthily."  After  this
favour,  she  reflected  bitterly  on  the  faults  which  she  had
committed,  and  considered  herself  as  a  creature  altogether
unworthy  of  the  graces  of  God,  since  a  trifling  negligence
in  one  of  His  servants  had  caused  her  to  give  way  to  such
great  impatience.

But  the  Divine  mercy  instructed  her  that  all  the  reflec
tions  which  men  make  with  sorrow  for  their  faults,  after
they  have  done  penance  for  them,  will  serve  to  prepare  them
for  receiving  the  grace  of  God,  as  Scripture  teaches  :  "If
the  wicked  do  penance  for  all  his  sins,  he  shall  live,  and
not  die"  (Ez.  xviii.)

At  the  second  bell  for  Matins,  the  Saint  again  began
to  praise  God ;  and  God  the  Father  spoke  thus  to  her  :
"  Behold,  I  will  again  place  in  your  soul  that  which  I  sent
before  My  Son  to  correct  the  defects  and  weaknesses  of
man,  that  those  defects  may  be  amended  which  are  not
for  your  perfection  ;  for  there  are  certain  faults  in  men,
the  knowledge  of  which  serves  to  humble  them,  and  causes
a  holy  compunction,  and  these  faults  further  their  salvation ;
and  I  permit  these  defects  even  in  those  whom  I  love  most,


CHRISTMAS  AT  MATINS.  299

in  order  to  exercise  their  virtue.  But  there  are  other  faults
of  which  they  think  little,  and,  what  is  still  worse,  they  de
fend  them  as  if  they  were  virtues,  and  will  not  be  corrected
for  them.  These  faults  place  the  soul  in  great  peril  of
eternal  damnation ;  but  from  these  your  soul  is  now  puri
fied."

At  the  third  toll  of  the  bell,  as  she  continued  to  praise
God,  the  Eternal  Father  filled  her  soul  with  all  the  virtues
which  had  been  found  in  the  souls  of  the  Patriarchs,  Pro
phets,  and  the  Faithful  before  the  advent  of  His  Son — such
as  humility,  desire,  knowledge,  love,  hope,  &c. — that  she
might  celebrate  so  great  a  feast  worthily.  The  Lord  then
adorned  her  with  these  virtues  as  so  many  brilliant  stars,
and  stood  before  her,  saying  :  "  My  daughter,  which  would
you  prefer — that  I  should  serve  you,  or  that  you  should
serve  Me  ?  "  For  she  enjoyed  God  in  two  ways — first,  by
a  rapture  which  absorbed  her  entirely  in  God,  so  that  she
could  not  explain  much  of  what  she  learned  therein  for  the
edification  of  others ;  and  secondly,  by  a  grace  which  God
conferred  on  her  of  instructing  her  in  Holy  Scripture,  of
which  He  imparted  to  her  the  spirit  and  meaning,  so  that
it  seemed  to  her  as  if  she  conversed  with  God  familiarly,
as  a  friend  would  with  his  friend  ;  and  this  enabled  her  to
be  extremely  useful  to  others.  God  then  asked  her  which
she  preferred — that  He  should  serve  her  in  the  first  man
ner,  or  that  she  should  serve  Him  in  the  second  1  But  as
she  sought  not  her  own  things,  but  those  of  the  Lord  Jesus,
she  preferred  having  the  labour  of  instructing  her  neighbour
for  the  glory  of  God,  to  seeking  her  own  satisfaction  by
tasting  His  sweetness ;  and  God  appeared  well  pleased  with
her  choice.

As  matins  commenced,  she  implored  the  Divine  as
sistance  by  the  words  Deus  in  adjutorium;  by  the  Do*


300 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

mine  labia  mea  aperiis,  which  is  repeated  three  times,  she
saluted  and  adored,  with  her  whole  heart,  her  whole  soul,
and  all  her  strength,  the  infinite  power  of  the  Father,  the
impenetrable  wisdom  of  the  Son,  and  the  ineffable  good
ness  of  the  Holy  Ghost — adoring  the  Trinity  in  Unity,  and
the  Unity  in  Trinity;  then,  at  the  first  five  verses  of  the
Psalm  Domine  quid  multiplicati  sunt*  she  approached  in
spirit  to  the  holy  Wounds  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  embraced
them  lovingly  ;  at  the  sixth  verse  of  this  Psalm,  she  pro
strated  at  the  Feet  of  our  Lord,  to  adore  and  thank  Him  for
the  remission  of  all  her  sins  ;  at  the  seventh,  she  approached
His  sacred  Hands,  and  thanked  Him  for  all  the  favours
which  she  had  received  during  her  whole  life  from  His
goodness  ;  at  the  eighth,  she  inclined  profoundly  before  the
loving  Wound  of  His  sacred  Side  ;  at  the  ninth  (the  Gloria
Patri),  she  united  with  all  creatures  in  adoring  the  effulgent
and  ever-peaceful  Trinity,  and,  approaching  the  Heart  of
Jesus,  she  saluted  it  with  the  deepest  affection,  extolling  it
for  having  hidden  within  it  all  the  incomprehensible  riches
of  the  Divinity.

At  the  first  verse  of  the  Psalm  Veniterf  having  pro
strated  once  more  to  adore  the  Wound  of  the  Lord's  Left
Foot,  she  obtained  through  it  a  full  remission  of  all  the

'Psalm,  iii.,  proper  to  Benedictines,  who  say  it  at  the  com
mencement  of  Matins.  See  Rule  of  St.  Benedict,  ch.  ix.  It  will
be  remembered  that  the  Domine  labia  is  repeated  three  times  by
Benedictines.

t  Psalm,  xciv.,  said  at  the  commencement  of  Mating.  It  is  di
vided  into  five  parts.  An  Antiphon  called  the  Invitatory  is  said
after  each,  and  before  and  after  the  Gloria  Patri,  with  which  it
concludes.  The  Invitatory  varies  with  the  festival  or  feria,  but
is  always  an  invitation  to  sing  the  Divine  praises.  The  Hodie
scietis—"  To-day  ye  shall  know  that  the  Lord  will  come,  and  to
morrow  ye  shall  see  His  glory  "—is  the  Invitatory  for  the  Vigil  of
Christmas,  as  above.


DEVOTIONS  AT  THE  "  \EN1TE  EXULTEMUS."  301

Bins  which  she  had  committed  by  thoughts  or  words.
Then  she  adored  the  Eight  Foot  at  the  second  verse,  and
obtained  pardon  of  all  the  sins  of  omission  by  which  she
had  failed  in  the  perfection  of  her  thoughts  and  words  ;  at
the  third  verse,  she  turned  to  the  Blessed  Wound  of  the
Left  Hand,  and  received  the  remission  of  all  the  sins  she
had  committed  by  act ;  at  the  fourth,  she  received  from  the
Right  Hand  of  the  Lord  what  supplied  for  all  the  omissions
in  her  good  works  ;  lastly,  at  the  fifth  verse  she  approached
the  most  holy  Wound  of  the  Side  of  her  Beloved  (which
abounds  and  superabounds  in  all  good),  and,  having  kissed
it  very  devoutly  in  the  place  from  whence  the  precious
water  sprang  forth  at  the  touch  of  the  soldier's  lance,  she
was  purged  from  every  stain,  made  whiter  than  snow,  and
adorned  with  every  virtue  by  the  precious  Blood  ;  then,
chanting  the  Gloria  Patri,  and  honouring  the  adorable
Trinity  as  at  the  preceding  Psalm,  when  singing  the  Sicut
erat,  she  concluded  all  in  the  heart  of  Jesus,  which  contains
all  that  is  Divine  and  satisfying.  During  the  Invitatory
Hodie  scietis,  which  is  repeated  five  times  in  the  Venite
and  twice  after  it,  God  purified  seven  affections  in  her,
which  became  marvellously  ennobled  by  being  united  with
the  affections  of  Jesus  Christ.

While  they  sang  the  other  Psalms,  she  remained  in  the
presence  of  the  Lord  clothed  with  virtues,  as  with  so  many
brilliant  stars.  At  this  moment,  as  all  her  desires  tended
towards  God,  she  prayed  that  all  which  she  might  do,
whether  exteriorly  or  spiritually,  on  the  day  of  the  Nativity
of  her  sweet  Jesus,  might  be  done  to  the  honour  and  glory
of  the  most  holy  and  adorable  Trinity.  When  the  bell  rang
for  Lauds,  our  Lord  said  to  her :  "  As  the  sound  of  these
bells  announce  the  Feast  of  My  Nativity,  I  will  grant
lhat  all  which  you  do  o»  this  festival — whether  by  chant-


302 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

ing,  reading,  praying,  meditating,  or  even  by  exterior  ex
ercises,  such  as  eating  and  sleeping — shall  resound  to  the
praises  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity,  by  union  with  My  desires
and  love,  which  were  ever  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God
the  Father."

When  they  lit  the  seven  candles,*  she  received  from
God  the  seven  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  far  as  she  was
capable,  and  in  proportion  even  as  Jesus  Christ  was  filled
with  them  Himself.  As  she  besought  our  Lord,  by  the
condescension  with  which  He  willed  to  be  born  in  a  stable,t
to  prepare  her  heart  for  His  birth,  this  most  clement  Lord
complied  with  her  desire,  and  made  a  stable  in  her  heart,
giving  her  His  omnipotence,  wisdom,  and  benignity  for  a
roof  -and  walls.

She  now  beheld  with  great  joy  and  admiration  all  the
good  works  which  God  enables  men  to  perform  by  His
goodness  and  power,  and  in  which  He  allowed  her  to  share
as  a  preparation  for  this  feast,  attached  to  these  walls  like
little  bells.  Then  she  beheld  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  imparted
new  joys  and  gifts  to  her,  while  he  was  attended  by  the
princes  of  heaven.

After  this,  as  the  Saint  repeated,  two  hundred  and
twenty  times,  "  I  adore  Thee,  I  love  Thee,"  &c.,  it  seemed
to  her  that  at  each  prayer  His  members  were  presented  to
her  to  use  as  instruments  of  Divine  praise ;  and  that  after
wards  Jesus  Christ  purified,  in  a  marvellous  manner,  all
her  senses",  exterior  and  interior,  and  renewed  them  in  puri
fying  them,  so  that  they  became  sanctified  by  union  with


*  "  Septem  candalre  accendernnt. "  In  monastic  churches,  there  were
formerly  seven  candles  before  the  altar.  See  Dom  Marteae,  De  Ant.
Mon.  lib.  v.  e.  i.

t  "  Diversorio."


OUR  LORD  PRESIDES  AT  CHAPTER.  303


His.  As  the  bell  rang  for  Chapter,  she  again  praised  God
for  His  goodness  in  assisting  thereat  in  person,  as  had  been
revealed  to  Mechtilde,  her  sister  ;  and  she  knew  that  He
was  present  by  the  devotion  which  she  observed  in  the  sis
ters  who  assisted  at  Chapter,  and  who  burned  with  ardour
to  see  this  revelation  accomplished,  because  it  seemed  as  if
our  Lord  waited  with  extreme  joy  until  all  the  community
were  assembled,  being  seated  in  the  place  of  the  Lady  Ab
bess,  in  whose  person  He  appeared  to  preside,  but  with  a
marvellous  glory,  and  accompanied  by  a  great  number  of
blessed  spirits,  who  surrounded  the  throne  of  His  Ma
jesty.

When  the  religious  were  seated,  our  Lord  said,  as  if  in  a
transport  of  joy :  "Behold  My  friends  who  have  assembled
here  ! "  One  of  the  religious  then  having  said  the  Jube,
Domne*  and  another  replying,  In  viam  mandalorum  suo-
rum,  our  Lord  extended  His  venerable  Hand,  and  blessed
the  convent,  saying :  "  I  consent  to  all  which  shall  be  done  or
enacted,  reposing  on  the  omnipotence  of  My  Father."  Then,
as  the  religious  commenced  the  words,  "  JESUS  CHRISTUS,
FILIUS  DKI  vivi,  IN  BETHELEHEM  JUDA  NASCITUR,"  all  the
choirs  of  angels,  hearing  the  announcement  of  the  birth  of
their  Lord  and  King,  were  filled  with  ineffable  joy,  and
fell  prostrate  on  the  ground  to  adore  Him.  The  sisters  then
commenced  the  Miserere,  according  to  custom.  The  angel

*  The  reading  of  the  "Christmas  Martyrology  "  is  a  ceremony  of
great  state  and  magnificence  in  monastic  houses.  What  honours
could  be  sufficiently  great  for  the  announcement  of  the  Divine
Buth?  The  Community  generally  proceed  from  the  choir  to  tho
chapter-house,  or  room,  after  Prime,  and  there,  when  the  blessing
has  been  asked  in  the  usual  form,  the  Martyrology  is  solemnly
chanted,  all  falling  prostrate  in  adoration  when  the  words
Jesus  Christus  Filius  Dei  vivi,  in  Bethel  ehem  Juda  nascitur,  are
chanted.


304 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

guardian  of  each  religious  presented  her  heart  with  joy  to
God ;  and  it  seemed  as  if  our  Lord  received  from  each  a
certain  knot  *  or  twisted  cord,  which  He  placed  in  His
bosom.  When  those  who  loved  God  with  the  greatest
fervour  offered  Him  their  hearts,  the  angels  of  the  choir
of  Seraphim,  who  attended  our  Lord  and  supported  Him,
disposed  those  religious  for  their  offering.  When  the
hearts  of  those  who  were  most  enlightened  in  the  know
ledge  of  God  were  offered,  the  angels  of  the  choir  of  Che
rubim  came  to  present  their  homage.  When  the  hearts  of
those  who  exercised  themselves  most  in  virtue  were  offered,
the  angels  of  the  choir  of  Virtues  came  to  their  assistance ;
and  thus  also  the  other  angels  exercised  their  ministry,
according  as  those  whose  virtues  corresponded  to  their
nature  came  to  offer  their  hearts  to  our  Lord.  But  as  for
those  in  whom  this  revelation  excited  no  more  devotion
than  usual,  they  were  offered  to  God  by  the  angels ;  bii«
th«ir  bodies  appeared  at  the  same  time  as  if  prostrate  on
the  ground.

Then  Gertrude  approached  her  Spouse,  and  offered
Him  the  first  Miserere,  which  was  said  for  her,  exclaiming :
"  O  my  loving  Spouse,  I  renounce  my  own  interest  in  this,
and  I  offer  it  to  Thee  for  Thy  eternal  praise,  that  it  may
please  Thee  to  grant  some  grace  to  Thy  special  friends  or
mine,  as  it  shall  please  Thy  mercy."  Our  Lord  then  re
ceived  this  Miserere  as  a  brilliant  and  beautiful  pearl,
placing  it  in  a  ring  which  He  had  before  Him,  which  was
marvellously  embellished  with  precious  stones  and  flowers
of  gold,  saying :  "  Behold,  I  have  placed  this  pearl  which
you  have  offered  Me  in  the  centre  of  this  ring,  that  all
those  who  recommend  themselves  to  your  prayers,  or  who

*  "Nexum."


A VISION AT CHAPTER.  305

merely  implore  your  assistance  by  a  look,  may  derive  the
same  advantage  from  it  as  the  Jews  drew  from  looking  at
tue  brazen  serpent,  which  I  caused  to  be  lifted  up  in  the
wilderness  by  Moses."

When  the  Psalms  were  finished,  and  the  sisters  had
accused  themselves  of  their  faults,  two  princes  appeared,
who  bore  a  tablet  of  gold,  which  they  held  before  our  Lord.
He  then  opened  the  knots,  which  had  been  hidden  in  His
bosom  ;  and  all  the  words  of  the  Psalms  and  prayers  which
had  been  said  were  seen  under  the  form  of  brilliant  and
beautiful  pearls,  each  of  which  shone  marvellously,  and
gave  forth  a  sweet  and  melodious  sound.  This  brilliancy
was  an  indication  of  the  zeal  and  love  with  which  these
souls  endeavoured  to  please  our  Lord,  and  the  melodious
sound  a  prediction  that  the  fruit  which  the  whole  Church
would  gather  from  their  prayers  would  be  rendered  to  them
twofold.

Gertrude  perceived  that  the  Lord  effected  all  these
marvels  in  consequence  of  the  particular  devotion  which
the  community  had,  expecting  that  He  would  preside  that
day  at  the  Chapter.  While  the  names  were  read  from  the
tablet  *  of  those  who  were  to  chant  or  read  at  Matins,  our
Lord  looked  at  them  with  pleasure,  and  inclined  His  Head  to
those  who  listened  attentively  to  what  was  prescribed  them
with  such  sensible  marks  of  tenderness,  that  the  tongue
of  man  would  fail  to  describe  it ;  and  He  consoled  those
who  were  grieved  that  nothing  was  given  them  to  chant  in


*  la  most  religious  houses,  the  name  of  the  sister  who  is  to
officiate  for  the  week,  and  of  those  who  are  to  read  the  Lessons,  to
serve,  to  read  in  the  refectory,  &c. ,  are  read  out  at  Chapter.  This
passage  alludes  to  the  custom,  which  was  evidently  in  use  in  St.
Gertrude's  time,  and  shows  how  dear  is  a  ready  acceptance  of  the
will  of  superiors,  even  in  trifling  matters,  to  our  blessed  Lord.

U


306 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

an  ineffable  manner.  Gertrude,  who  beheld  all  this  in  spirit,
said  to  our  Lord  :  "  O  Lord,  if  this  community  only  knew
what  extreme  tenderness  Thou  hast  for  them,  how  those
sisters  would  be  grieved  whose  names  were  not  read
out."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  All  those  who  have  the  desire
of  singing  or  reading,  although  they  do  not  do  so,  will  be
treated  by  Me  with  the  same  goodness  as  if  they  did  ;  for
their  will  pleases  Me  as  much  as  their  action,  and  it  will  be
equally  rewarded.  And  all  those  who  listened  to  what  w«s
prescribed  them,  and  received  it  with  an  inclination  of  the
head,  desiring  to  accomplish  it  for  My  glory,  and  beseech
ing  Me  to  aid  them  to  perform  it  worthily,  will  so  draw
down  the  sweetness  of  My  love  upon  them,  that  I  will  not
defer  bestowing  new  graces  on  them  as  a  mark  of  My
approbation."

When  the  Prioress,  according  to  the  rules  of  the  Order,*
accused  herself  of  negligence,  in  the  name  of  theCommunity^
before  the  Lady  Abbess,  our  Lord  spoke  thus  :  "I  absolve
you,  by  the  power  of  My  Divinity,  from  all  the  negligences
of  which  you  have  accused  yourself  before  Me ;  and  when-


*  The  superioresses  of  some  Benedictine  monasteries  are  termed
abbesses ;  of  others  prioresses.  When  there  is  an  abbess,  the  second
superioress  is  called  prioress ;  and  when  the  superioress  is  a  prioress,
her  assistant  is  termed  sub-prioress.  Convents  founded  by  royal
charter  are  abbeys  ;  but  if  the  right  of  nomination  is  in  royal  hands,
the  appointments  are  not  always  such  as  could  be  desired.  As  far
as  we  have  been  able  to  ascertain,  the  Miserere  is  not  said  now  at
Chapter ;  but  the  beautiful  custom  of  the  prioress  asking  pardon  of
the  community  for  her  faults  towards  them  is  still  continued  on  the
eves  of  great  festivals.  The  community  then  ask  her  pardon  for
their  faults  towards  her  ;  and  finally  ask  pardon  of  each  other  for
any  mutual  disedification.  When  superiors  humble  themselves  thus
for  their  faults,  they  can  scarcely  fail  to  receive  the  love  and  respect
due  to  such  true  Christian  humility.


OF  DIVINE  INSPIRATION  AND  HUMAN  THOUGHTS. 307

ever  you  fall  again  through  human  frailty,  I  will  pardon
you  and  show  you  mercy.''

As  they  read  the  seven  Penitential  Psalms  as  a  penance
for  their  sins  of  negligence  and  inattention,  each  word  ap
peared  on  the  same  tablet  in  the  form  of  pearls  •  but  they
were  of  a  dark  colour,  and  arranged  near  the  brilliant  ones
of  which  we  have  already  spoken  ;  because  these  Psalms
were  repeated  through  custom,  not  from  special  devotion  :
from  whence  we  may  learn,  that  what  is  done  through  cus
tom  contributes  in  some  degree  to  our  merit,  though  God
regards  as  infinitely  more  excellent  and  agreeable  what  is
done  through  devotion.

As  the  verse  Gloria  tibi,  Dominc*  was  chanted  at  Ves
pers,  the  Saint  beheld  a  multitude  of  angels  flying  round
the  convent,  and  singing  the  same  words  in  loud  and  joyful
accents.  She  then  inquired  of  our  Lord  what  advantage
men  gained  when  the  angels  joined  thus  in  their  Psalmody.
As  He  did  not  reply,  and  she  continued  to  desire  this  in
formation,  she  was  interiorly  told,  by  Divine  inspiration,
that  when  angels  are  present  at  our  solemnities,  they  pray
to  God  that  those  who  imitate  them  in  their  devotion  may
imitate  them  in  purity  of  body  and  soul.

Then  she  began  to  be  doubtful,  as  often  happens,
whether  this  thought  had  come  from  God,  or  whether  it
proceeded  merely  from  her  own  imagination.  But  our
Lord  consoled  her  by  this  reply  :  "  Do  not  fear  ;  for  your
will  is  so  perfectly  united  to  Mine,  that  you  can  only  will
what  I  do,  and  consequently  you  desire  only  My  glory.  Be
assured  the  holy  angels  are  so  submissive  to  your  good  de
sires,  that  if  until  now  they  have  not  prayed  for  you  as  you


*  Last  verse  of  the  hymn  for  Vespers  at  Christmas ; the  sama
termination  is  used  until  the  Epiphany  to  all  hymns.


308  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

wish,  they  will  henceforth  do  so  with  the  greatest  fervour.
And  because  I,  as  their  King,  have  made  you  in  some  sort  a
queen,  they  are  so  disposed  to  obey  you,  that  if  you  require
anything  from  them,  they  will  endeavour  to  accomplish  it
the  moment  you  desire  it."

After  Vespers,  as  the  relics  of  the  convent  and  the  image
of  the  Blessed  Virgin  were  carried  in  procession  as  usual,
the  Saint  felt  grieved  that  her  illness  had  prevented  her
from  reciting  a  number  of  prayers,  and  performing  some  acts
of  devotion  which  she  wished  to  offer  to  the  Mother  of  God
on  this  solemn  Feast;  but  she  found  herself  at  the  same
time  filled  with  an  unction  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  so  that  she
offered  her  the  sweetest  and  most  noble  Heart  of  Jesus
Christ  to  supply  for  all  her  negligences.  The  Blessed
Virgin  received  this  offering  with  great  satisfaction  and
pleasure,  because  she  considered  this  Heart  as  the  most
honourable  gift  which  could  be  offered  her,  as  it  contained
every  good.


CHAPTER  III.

For  the  Feast  of  the  Nativity — Apparition  of  the  Infant  Jesus
and  His  Blessed  Mother.

ON  the  night  of  the  Nativity,  at  Matins,  as  the  Saint  con
tinued  these  exercises,  our  Lord,  to  correspond  with  her
movements  of  fidelity  and  devotion,  drew  her  entirely  to
Himself,  so  that,  by  a  sweet  influence  of  His  Divinity  in
her  soul,  and  by  a  reflux  of  knowledge  which  passed  from
her  soul  to  God,  she  knew  all  that  was  chanted  at  Matins,
whether  Responsories  or  Psalms  ;  and  this  knowledge  gave
her  ineffable  and  incomprehensible  joy.  While  this  con-


THE  NATIVITY  AT  MATINS.  309

tinued,  she  beheld  all  the  saints  standing  before  the  throne
of  the  King  of  kings,  reciting  Matins  with  great  devotion,
for  His  Divine  honour  and  glory.

Remembering  several  persons  who  had  been  recom
mended  to  her  prayers,  she  said,  with  great  humility  :
"  How  can  I,  who  am  so  unworthy,  pray  for  persons  who
stand  praising  Thee  with  such  labour  and  devotion,  since
my  infirmity  prevents  me  from  following  their  example  1  "
Our  Lord  replied  :  "  You  can  very  well  pray  for  these
persons,  for  I  have  hidden  you  in  the  bosom  of  My  paternal
goodness,  that  you  may  ask  and  obtain  from  Me  what
ever  you  will."  "  But,  Lord,"  replied  the  Saint,  "  since
it  pleases  Thee  that  I  should  pray  for  them,  I  beseech
Thee  to  appoint  a  time  in  which  I  may  do  so  with  fidelity,
in  manner  worthy  of  Thee,  and  with  utility  to  them  without
losing  the  happiness  with  which  Thou  dost  honour  me  in
partaking  of  Thy  celestial  joys."  To  this  our  Lord  re
plied  :  "  Recommend  each  to  My  Divine  kindness  and  love,
since  it  is  this  love  that  has  made  Me  descend  from  the
bosom  of  My  Father  to  serve  men."  When  she  had  named
each  individually,  our  Lord,  won  by  His  tender  love,
supplied  the  needs  of  each  by  a  most  loving  compas
sion.

After  this,  the  Blessed  Virgin  appeared  to  her,  seated
honourably  near  her  Divine  Son  ;  and  while  the  Descendit
de  ccelis  *  was  chanted,  our  Lord  appeared  to  recall  the


*  The  Responsory,  iv.  Lesson,  i.  Nocturn,  Matins  for  Christmas  ;
"Descendit  de  coelis  Deus  verus,  a  Pater  genitus,  introivit  in
uterum  Virginis,  nobis  ut  appareret  visibilis,  indutus  carne  humana
protoparente  edita  :  Et  exivit  per  clausam  portam,  Deus  et  homo,  lux
et  vita,  conditor  munda  "— The  true  God.  born  of  the  Father,  de-
scended  from  heaven,  and  entered  into  the  Virgin's  womb,  that  Ho
might  appear  visibly  to  us,  clothed  with  the  flesh  given  to  our  first


310 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

extreme  goodness  which  had  made  Him  descend  from  the
bosom  of  His  Father  into  that  of  the  Virgin,  and  He
looked  so  lovingly  upon  His  mother,  as  to  move  her
very  heart;  and  by  His  embrace  He  renewed  all  the
joys  which  she  had  when  in  the  world  in  His  holy  Hu
manity.

She  also  beheld  the  sacred  and  virginal  womb  of  the
Mother  of  God,  which  was  clear  as  crystal,  and  in  which
our  Lord  appeared  in  the  form  of  an  infant,  and  flew
promptly  and  lovingly  to  her  heart :  by  this  she  understood
that,  as  the  Humanity  of  Christ  fed  upon  her  virginal  milk,
so  did  His  Divinity  feed  on  the  purity  and  love  of  her
heart.  At  the  response,  Verlum  caro  factum  est*  when  all
the  sisters  made  a  profound  inclination  to  honour  the  Incar
nation  of  Jesus  Christ,  she  heard  Him  saying :  "  When
ever  any  one  inclines  at  these  words,  from  gratitude  and
devotion,  giving  Me  thanks  for  having  become  Man  for  his
sake,  I  also  incline  to  him,  by  a  pure  movement  of  My
goodness  ;  and  I  offer,  from  My  inmost  Heart,  all  the  fruit
and  merit  of  My  Humanity  to  God  the  Father,  that  the
eternal  beautitude  of  this  person  may  be  doubled."

At  the  words  et  veritatis,  the  Blessed  Virgin  came  forth


parents,  and  came  forth  through  the  closed  gate  God  and  man,  Light
and  Life,  the  maker  of  the  world."  This  clausam  portam  of  Ezechiel
is  constantly  referred  by  the  Fathers  to  the  Blessed  Virgin.  St.
Bernard,  in  his  sermon  on  the  Twelve  Privileges  B.V.M.  says,  Mary
is  the  eastern  gate,  which  none  could  pass  but  one.  St.  Jerome
writes  :  "  She  (Mary)  is  the  eastern  gate  of  which  Ezechiel  speaks  as
always  closed."  St.  Augustine,  in  his  sermon  on  the  Nativity  :  "  The
closed  gate  is  the  emblem  of  the  integrity  of  her  immaculate  flesh.
She  remained  inviolate  after  childbirth,  and  became  more  holy  by
conception.

*  Responsory,  xii.  Lesson,  iii.  Nocturn  ;  the  Te  Deum  follows,  and
on  Christmas  night  the  Midnight  Mass  is  said,  after  which  Lauds  are
commenced.


HOW  TO  CAREY  THE  INFANT  JESUS.  311

with  the  double  ornament  of  her  virginity  and  her  mater
nity,  and,  accosting  the  first  sister  on  the  right  side  of  the
choir,  she  embraced  her  closely,  presenting  her  Divine  Son,
whom  she  held  in  her  arms;  and  in  this  manner  she
proceeded  to  each  sister,  allowing  each  to  embrace  this  in
comparably  amiable  Child.  Amongst  those  who  were  thus
favoured,  some  held  Him  in  their  arms  most  carefully,
appearing  very  anxious  that  He  should  suffer  no  incon
venience  ;  others,  on  the  contrary,  neglected  these  pre
cautions,  and  permitted  His  Head  to  hang  down  in  a  very
painful  manner.  By  this  she  understood,  that  those  who
had  no  will  but  that  of  God  rested  the  Head  of  the  loving
Jesus  on  a  soft  pillow,  that  supported  Him,  by  their  good
will ;  while  those  whose  wills  were  inflexible  and  imperfect
allowed  the  Head  of  the  Infant  Jesus  to  hang  down  incon
veniently.  Therefore,  my  beloved,  let  us  empty  our  hearts
and  consciences  of  all  self-will,  and  offer  our  hearts  to  our
Lord  with  full  and  entire  obedience  to  His  good  pleasure,
since  He  only  seeks  our  spiritual  advancement ;  why  should
we  disturb,  even  by  the  merest  trifle,  the  repose  and  conso
lation  of  so  delicate  and  tender  an  Infant,  who  comes  to
us  with  such  goodness  and  love  ?

At  the  Mass  Dominus  dixit*  our  Lord  again  imparted
to  her  a  knowledge  of  all  that  was  said,  which  gave  her
ineffable  joy.

Then,  from  the  Gloria  in  excelsis  to  the  words  Primo-
genitus  Maria?  virginis  matris,  she  began  to  think  that  the
title  of  only  Son  was  more  suitable  than  that  of  first-born,
because  the  Immaculate  had  only  brought  forth  this  Son,
whom  she  merited  to  conceive  by  the  power  of  the  Holy


*  The  Introit  of  the  first  or  Midnight  Mass. Primogenitus — pro
bably  a  reference  to  the  Gospel  for  that  Mass.


312 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Ghost ;  but  the  Blessed  Virgin  said  to  her  sweetly  :  "  Cull
my  beloved  Jesus  my  first-born,  rather  than  my  only  be
gotten,  for  I  brought  Him  forth  first ;  but  after  Him,  or
rather  by  Him,  I  have  made  you  His  brethren  and  my
children,  when  I  adopted  you  as  such  by  the  maternal
affection  which  I  have  for  you."

At  the  offertory,  the  Saint,  in  spirit,  beheld  the  sisters
offering  to  our  Lord  all  the  devotions  which  they  had  per
formed  during  Advent.  Some  placed  them  in  the  bosom  of
the  Divine  Infant,  whose  image  had  been  impressed  on  their
souls  ;  and  the  Blessed  Virgin  inclined  towards  each  with
unparalleled  condescension,  placing  her  Divine  Son  so  that
He  could  receive  in  His  Hands  what  they  offered  :  others
appeared  to  advance  towards  the  altar,  and  remained  in  the
centre  of  the  choir,  where  they  offered  their  prayers  to  the
Blessed  Virgin  and  to  her  Son  ;  but  He  was  not  placed  so
that  He  could  receive  them,  and  made  signs  to  that  effect.
She  understood  from  this,  that  those  who  placed  their
offerings  in  the  bosom  of  the  Child  Jesus  were  they  who
were  united  to  the  Lord  with  their  whole  hearts,  wherein
He  was  spiritually  born,  and  that  the  Blessed  Virgin
assisted  them  in  this  with  all  her  power,  rejoicing  with
them  in  their  devotion  and  spiritual  advancement ;  but
those  persons  who  had  offered  their  gifts  in  the  centre  of
the  choir  were  they  who  only  thought  of  the  Birth  of  our
Lord  on  the  Festival,  and  because  they  were  reminded  of  it
by  the  special  devotion  of  the  Church.

Then  this  blessed  soul  approached  the  King  of  Glory,
to  present  Him  the  good-will  of  those  who  would  have
accomplished  many  things,  had  they  not  been  hindered  by
a  lawful  cause.  And  she  was  instructed  in  spirit  that
all  the  prayers  which  had  been  made  with  devotion  were
placed  as  pearls  in  the  tablet,  and  that  the  good-will  ot


VISIT  OF  ST.  JOHN,  EVANGELIST.  313

those  who  would  have  performed  the  same  devotions,  had
they  not  been  occupied,  and  who  grieved  and  consequently
humbled  themselves  for  this  omission,  should  be  placed  in
the  chain  with  which  our  Lord's  bosom  was  adorned,  and
that  they  would  obtain  such  advantage  from  this  nearness
to  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  that  they  would  be  as  if  they  had  the
key  of  a  treasure  which  contained  all  they  could  desire.


CHAPTER  IV.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist.
His  virtues,  and  the  manner  of  imitating  His  purity.

THE  Apostles  and  Evangelist  St.  John  appeared  to  this  vir
gin  as  she  prayed  one  day  during  Advent.  He  was  clothed
in  a  gold-coloured  habit,  covered  with  golden  eagles  ;  which
signified  that,  though  this  Saint  was  elevated  to  the  highest
contemplation,  even  while  in  the  body,  he  always  sought  to
humble  himself  by  the  consideration  of  his  own  unworthi-
ness.  As  Gertrude  began  to  consider  these  ornaments,  she
perceived  a  red  light  shining  from  under  the  golden  eagles  \
from  which  she  learned  that  St.  John  always  commenced
his  contemplation  by  the  remembrance  of  the  Passion  of  the
Lord,  which  he  had  beheld  with  his  own  eyes,  and  which
he  had  never  ceased  to  mourn  in  his  inmost  heart ;  and
thus  by  degrees  he  flew  to  the  sublimity  of  the  Divine
Majesty,  which  he  contemplated  without  pain  by  the  eyes
of  his  soul,  as  far  as  it  is  possible  for  man  to  do.  He  had
also  two  golden  lilies  on  his  two  shoulders — on  the  right
was  written,  in  marvellous  characters,  the  words  of  the


314 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Gospel  Discipulus  quern  diligebat  Jesus ;  and  on  the  left,
Iste  custos  Virginis;  *  to  mark  the  singular  advantage  which
he  enjoyed  of  being  called,  and  of  being  the  disciple  whom
Jesus  loved  above  the  rest  of  His  Apostles,  and  of  having
been  found  worthy  by  Christ  Himself  to  receive  from  Him
the  charge  of  His  Mother  before  He  expired,  on  account  of
his  surpassing  purity.

The  Apostle  had  a  magnificent  rational  t  on  his  breast,
to  indicate  his  prerogative  of  having  reposed  on  the  bosom
of  Jesus  during  the  last  Supper.  The  words,  In  principio
erat  verbum,  were  written  on  it  in  letters  of  living  gold,  to
show  the  marvellous  virtue  of  the  words  contained  in  his
Gospel.  Then  St.  Gertrudesaid  toourLord :  "  O  mostloving
Lord,  why  is  Thy  beloved  one  manifested  to  a  creature  so
unworthy  as  I  am  1 "  Our  Lord  answered  :  "  I  have  done
this  that  he  may  be  united  to  you  by  a  special  friendship  ;
and  as  you  have  no  apostle,  J  I  have  appointed  him  to  be
ever  your  faithful  advocate  with  Me  in  heaven."  "  Teach
me,  then,  my  sweetest  Lord,"  she  replied,  "  how  I  can
show  my  gratitude  to  him."  Our  Lord  answered  :  "  If  any
person  says  a  Pater  nosier  daily  in  honour  of  this  Apostle,
reminding  him  of  the  sweet  fidelity  with  which  his  heart


*  "  The  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved."  "  This  is  the  guardian  of  the
Virgin."

t  The  rational  was  the  high-priest's  breast-plate  (Ex.  xxv.  7).
Calmet  speaksthus  of  it :  "  This  appellation  was  given  to  an  embroidery
about  ten  inches  square,  which  the  high-priest  wore  on  his  breast.
On  it  were  placed  fcmr  rows  of  precious  stones,  on  each  of  which  the
name  of  one  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  was  engraven.  The  rational  was
doubled,  and  contained  within  it  the  mystic  Urim  and  Thummim.
The  name  'rational,'  or  'rational  of  judgment,'  was  given  to  it  either
because  the  judgment  and  will  of  God  were  made  known  thereby,  or
because  the  high-priest  wore  it  when  he  pronounced  judgment  09
grave  affairs."

J  "Et  cum  nullum  habeas  Apostolum."


BT.  JOHN  TAKES  HER  UP  TO  HEAVEN.  315

was  filled  when  I  taught  this  prayer,  he  will  not  fail  to
obtain  for  whoever  prays  thus  the  grace  of  persevering
faithfully  in  virtue,  even  to  the  end  of  his  life."

This  Apostle  also  appeared  to  the  Saint  as  she  assisted
at  Matins,  on  his  Feast,  when  she  applied  with  special
fervour  to  her  usual  exercises.  Gertrude  then  recom
mended  some  of  the  religious  of  whom  she  had  charge
very  fervently  to  him  ;  he  received  her  prayer  very  lov
ingly,  and  said  :  "I  am  like  my  Master  in  this — that  I
love  those  who  love  me."  The  Saint  inquired  :  "  What
grace,  then,  and  what  benefit,  can  I  hope  for,  who  am  so
unworthy,  on  your  dear  Feast  ? "  "  Come,"  he  replied  \
11  come  with  me,  thou  elect  one  of  my  Lord,  and  let  us
repose  together  on  the  sweetest  bosom  of  the  Lord,  in
which  all  the  treasures  of  beatitude  lie  hidden."  Then,
taking  her  up  in  spirit,  he  presented  her  to  our  loving
Saviour;  and  having  placed  her  on  His  right,  he  placed
himself  on  the  left,  and  reposed  there.  Then  he  exclaimed,
pointing  reverently  to  the  bosom  of  Jesus  :  "  Behold,  this
is  the  Saint  of  saints,  who  draws  to  Himself  all  that  is
good  in  heaven  and  on  earth  ! "

She  then  inquired  of  St.  John  why  he  placed  himself  on
the  left  hand,  and  had  given  the  right  to  her.  He  replied  :
"It  is  because  I  have  become  one  spirit  with  God,  and  am
able  to  penetrate  where  flesh  cannot  enter;  but  you  are  not
yet  able  to  penetrate  into  such  high  things,  because  you
are  still  in  the  flesh.  I  have  therefore  placed  you  at  the
opening  of  the  Divine  Heart,  from  whence  you  may  drink
in  all  the  sweet  consolations  which  flow  from  it  with  such
impetuous  abundance,  that  it  is  capable  of  satisfying  all
who  desire  to  taste  thereof."  Then,  as  she  felt  the  con
stant  pulsations  of  the  Divine  Heart,  and  rejoiced  exceed
ingly  thereat,  she  said  to  St.  John  :  "  Beloved  of  God,  didst


316 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

not  thou  feel  those  pulsations  when  thou  wert  lying  on  the
Lord's  breast  at  the  Last  Supper  ]  "  "  Yes,"  he  replied  ;
"and  this  with  such  plenitude,  that  liquid  does  not  enter
more  rapidly  into  bread  than  the  sweetness  of  those  plea
sures  penetrated  my  soul,  so  that  my  spirit  became  more
ardent  than  water  under  the  action  of  a  glowing  fire."

"  And  why,"  she  inquired,  "  have  you  neither  said  nor
written  anything  of  this  for  our  edification  1 "  He  re
plied  :  "  Because  I  was  charged  with  instructing  the  newly
formed  Church  concerning  the  mysteries  of  the  uncreated
Word,  that  those  truths  might  be  transmitted  to  future
ages,  as  far  as  they  would  be  capable  of  comprehending
them,  for  no  one  can  comprehend  them  entirely ;  and  I
deferred  speaking  of  these  Divine  pulsations  until  later
ages,  that  the  world  might  be  aroused  from  its  torpor,  arid
animated,  when  it  had  grown  cold,  by  hearing  of  these
things."  Then,  as  she  contemplated  St.  John  reposing
upon  the  bosom  of  the  Lord,  he  said  to  her  :  "  I  now
appear  to  you  in  the  same  form  as  when  I  lay  on  the
bosom  of  my  beloved  Lord  and  only  Friend  at  the  Last
Supper ;  but  if  you  wish  it,  I  will  obtain  for  you  the
favour  of  beholding  me  in  the  form  in  which  I  now  enjoy
the  delights  of  heaven."  And  as  she  desired  this  favour
very  ardently,  she  beheld  an  immense  ocean  within  the
Heart  of  Jesus,  in  which  St.  John  appeared  to  float  with
ineffable  joy  and  perfect  freedom;  and  she  learned  that  the
Saint  became  so  filled  and  inebriated  with  the  torrent  of
pleasure  which  he  tasted  in  God,  that  a  vein  came  from  his
heart,  whereby  he  poured  forth  the  sweet  waters  of  the
Divinity — that  is  to  say,  his  instructions,  and  above  all,
his  Gospel — over  the  face  of  the  earth.

On another occasion during the same feast, as the
took  great  satisfaction  in  the  frequent  praises  which


THE  CHASTITY  OF  THIS  APOSTLE.  317

were  given  to  the  Apostle  for  his  perfect  virginity,  she
asked  this  special  friend  of  God  to  obtain  by  his  prayers
that  we  miuht  preserve  our  chastity  with  such  care  as  to
merit  a  share  in  his  praises.

St.  John  replied  :  "  He  who  would  participate  in  the
beatitude  which  my  victories  have  won,  must  run  as  I  ran
when  on  earth."  Then  he  added  ;  ''I  frequently  reflected
on  the  sweet  familiarity  and  friendship  with  which  I  was
favoured  by  Jesus,  my  most  loving  Lord  and  Master,  in  re
ward  for  my  chastity,  and  for  having  watched  so  carefully
over  my  words  and  actions  that  I  never  tarnished  this
virtue  in  the  slightest  degree.  The  Apostles  separated
themselves  from  such  company  as  they  considered  doubtful,
but  mixed  freely  with  what  was  not  (as  it  is  remarked  in
the  Acts,  that  they  were  with  the  women,  and  Mary  the
Mother  of  Jesus)  ;  I  never  avoided  women  when  there  waa
an  opportunity  of  rendering  them  any  service,  either  of
body  or  soul ;  but  I  still  watched  over  myself  with  extreme
vigilance,  and  always  implored  the  assistance  of  God  when
charity  obliged  me  to  assist  them  in  any  way.  Therefore
these  words  are  chanted  of  me  :  In  tribulatione  invocasti
me,  et  exaudivi  te  (Ps.  Ixxx.)  *  For  God  never  permitted
my  affection  to  render  any  one  less  pure ;  wherefore  I  re
ceived  this  recompense  from  my  beloved  Master,  that  my
chastity  is  more  praised  than  that  of  any  other  saint ;  and
I  have  obtained  a  more  eminent  rank  in  heaven,  where,  by
a  special  privilege,  I  receive  with  extreme  pleasure  the  rays
of  this  love,  which  is  as  a  mirror  without  spot  and  the
brightness  of  eternal  light,  f  So  that,  being  placed  before

*  This  is  not  in  the  Office  of  the  Saint  in  the  present  Benedictine
Breviary.

f  "  She  is  the  brightness  of  eternal  light,  and  the  unspotted  mirroi
of  God's  majesty  "  (Wis.  vii.  )


318 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


this  Divine  love,  whose  brightness  I  receive  each  time  that
my  chastity  is  commemorated  in  the  Church,  my  loving
Master  salutes  me  in  a  most  sweet  and  affable  manner,
filling  my  inmost  soul  with  such  joy,  that  it  penetrates
into  all  its  powers  and  sentiments  like  a  delicious  bever
age.  And  thus  the  words,  Ponam  te  sicut  signaculum  in
conspectu  mco*  are  sung  of  me  ;  that  is,  I  am  placed  as  a
receptacle  for  the  effusions  of  the  sweetest  and  most  ardent
charity."

Then  St.  Gertrude,  being  raised  to  a  higher  degree  ot
knowledge,  understood  by  these  words  of  our  Lord  in  the
Gospel,  "  In  My  Father's  house  there  are  many  mansions  "
(John  xiv.  ),  that  there  are  three  mansions  in  the  heavenly
kingdom,  which  correspond  with  three  classes  of  persons
who  have  preserved  their  virginity.

The  first  mansion  is  for  those  who,  like  the  Apostles,  fly
from  what  is  doubtful,  but  associate  freely  with  others  ;  who
vigorously  resist  all  temptations,  and  if  they  fall  perform
worthy  fruits  of  penance.

The  second  mansion  is  for  those  who  avoid  alike  the
doubtful  and  that  which  appears  safe ;  carefully  shunning
what  might  prove  an  occasion  even  of  temptation  ;  and
chastise  their  flesh,  subduing  it  so  that  it  can  no  longer
rebel  against  the  spirit :  to  this  rank  belong  St.  John  the
Baptist  and  other  spiritual  persons,  who  also  are  placed  in
the  second  mansion  after  they  have  been  prevented  gra
tuitously  by  the  mercy  of  God,  and  have  cooperated  faith
fully  with  His  graces,  so  as  to  avoid  evil  and  to  exercise
themselves  in  the  practice  of  good.


*  "  In  that  day  I  will  uphold  My  servant,  and  I  will  place  thee  as  a
seal  before  Me  "  (Responsory.  is.  Lesson,  iii.  Nocturn,  Matins  for  the
Feast  of  St.  John).


THE  THREE  MANSIONS  OP  CHASTE  SOULS.  319

The  third  mansion  is  for  those  who,  prevented  by  the
sweetness  of  the  benedictions  and  grace  of  God,  have  a
natural  horror  of  all  evil ;  *  but  who,  nevertheless,  in  the
different  accidents  of  life,  find  themselves  sometimes  with
the  good  and  sometimes  with  the  wicked,  but  always
detest  evil  and  adhere  to  good,  endeavouring  to  render
both  their  own  conduct  and  that  of  others  perfectly
irreproachable.  Such  persons  draw  marvellous  fruit  from
the  human  affections,  which  they  have  in  common  with
others ;  since  they  fear  because  of  their  affections,  and
humble  themselves,  watching  over  their  hearts  with  greater
diligence  ;  as  St.  Gregory  says :  "  It  shows  a  good  con
science  to  fear  a  fault  where  there  is  none."  In  this  class
St.  John  obtained  the  first  rank.

Hence  these  words  are  chanted  on  his  Feast :  Qui  vi-
cerit,  faciam  ilium  columnam  in  templo  meo;~\"  for  who
ever  conquers  nature — that  is,  his  affections — becomes  as
a  pillar  whereon  God  can  repose  while  pouring  forth  the/
abundance  of  His  sweetness.  Et  scribam  super  eum  nomen
mtum  ;  that  is,  to  imprint  upon  him  the  visible  marks  of
His  Divine  friendship.  Et  nomen  civitatis  novce  Jerusalem  ;
that  is,  he  shall  receive,  both  exteriorly  and  interiorly,  a
particular  recompense  for  each  person  whose  spiritual  wel
fare  he  has  procured  on  earth.

St.  Gertrude  was  favoured  also  with  another  vision,  re
ferring  to  the  same  subject ;  for  as  she  began  to  consider
why  the  Church  extolled  the  virginity  of  St.  John  the
Evangelist  more  than  that  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  God,


"  Omne  malum  quasi  naturaliter  abhorent."

f  Responsory  after  the  v.  Lesson,  ii.  Nocturn:  "He  that  shall
overcome,  I  will  make  him  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God,  and  I
will  write  upon  him  the  name  of  my  God,  and  the  name  of  the  city
of  my  God  the  new  Jerusalem"  (Apo.  iii.  12).


320 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

who  knows  the  thoughts  of  men,  caused  her  to  see  the  two
Saints  in  a  vision.  St.  John  the  Baptist  was  seated  on  an
elevated  throne,  in  the  middle  of  the  sea,  separated  from
all  the  world;  St.  John  the  Evangelist  stood  in  the
midst  of  a  furnace,  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  flames.  As
the  Saint  beheld  this,  and  marvelled  thereat,  our  Lord  said
to  her,  for  her  instruction  :  "  Which  do  you  consider  most
wonderful, — to  see  the  Evangelist  not  burning,  or  the
Baptist  not  consumed  1 "  From  this  she  learned  that
there  will  be  a  great  difference  between  the  reward  of  those
whose  virtue  has  been  assaulted  and  of  those  who  have
preserved  it  in  peace.

One  night,  also,  when  the  Saint  was  engaged  in  prayer
with  great  devotion,  she  beheld  St.  John  approaching  our
Lord,  resting  himself  upon  Him,  and  embracing  Him
very  lovingly  and  ardently.  Then,  as  she  cast  herself
humbly  at  the  feet  of  our  Lord,  to  implore  pardon  for  her
sins,  St.  John  said  to  her,  with  great  condescension  :  "  Do
not  let  my  presence  trouble  you ;  behold  one  whose  love
will  suffice  for  thousands ;  behold  a  mouth  in  which  each
will  find  a  special  sweetness  ;  behold  an  ear  which  will
guard  inviolably  all  the  secrets  confided  to  it."

As  they  chanted  the  words,  Mulier,  ecce  filius  tuus,  *
Gertrude  beheld  a  marvellous  light,  which  came  forth  from
the  Heart  of  God,  and  shone  upon  St.  John,  obtaining  for
him  the  respect  and  veneration  of  all  the  saints.  She  also
saw  the  Blessed  Virgin  manifesting  a  special  joy  towards
him  when  she  was  called  his  mother  ;  and  the  beloved  dis
ciple  saluted  her  also  with  the  deepest  respect  and  affection.
Also,  when  the  words  were  chanted  which  referred  to  the


*  "  Woman,  behold  thy  son." These  words  are  not  in  the  present
Office.


THJfi  MERITS  OF  ST.  JOHN  THE  EVANGELIST.  321

particular  privileges  of  friendship  which  the  saint  had  re
ceived  from  his  Divine  Master,  such  as  these  :  late  est  Jo
annes,  qui  supra  pectus  Domini  in  coena  recubuit ;  and,  hte
est  discipulus  quern  diliyebat  Jesus,*  he  appeared  sur
rounded  with  a  new  light  of  glory,  which  distinguished
him  from  the  other  saints ;  and  for  this  they  praised  God
with  their  whole  souls,  which  caused  the  blessed  John  to
rejoice  greatly.

At  the  words  Apparuit  caro  suo,  she  understood  that  by
the  form  under  which  our  Lord  visited  St.  John  He  re
newed  in  him  all  the  sweetness  of  that  mutual  friendship
which  he  had  enjoyed  during  his  mortal  life.  Therefore
the  Apostle,  changed  as  it  were  into  a  new  man,  tasted  in
some  degree  the  joys  of  eternity  ;  and  this  principally  ii«
three  things,  for  which  he  thanked  G  d  when  he  was
dying.  For  he  said,  first :  "  I  have  seen  Thy  face,  and  I
am  renewed  thereby/'  Secondly  :  "  The  sweetness  of  Thy
perfumes,  Lord  Jesui*,  has  kindled  eternal  desires  within
me."  And  thirdly  :  "  Thy  voice  is  full  of  sweetness."  For
the  virtue  of  His  presence  had  imparted  the  vigour  of
immortality ;  the  strength  of  His  Divine  vocation  had
replenished  him  with  the  sweetest  hope  ;  and  His  gentle
words  had  rilled  his  soul  with  surpassing  gladness.  Again,
as  they  read  that  he  rose  up  to  follow  Jesus,t  he  appeared
to  dispose  himself  to  follow  Him  in  heaven ;  and  she
knew  that  St.  John  had  such  a  full  and  entire  confidence
in  the  goodness  of  his  beloved  Lord  and  Master,  that  he
hoped  he  would  die  without  feeling  the  pains  of  death  ;  and


*  "  This  is  John,  who  leaned  on  the  Lord's  breast  at  supper ; "
"This  is  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved."  Response  after  the  iii.
Lesson,  i.  Nocturn,  and  Antiphon  at  Benedictus.

t  St.  John  xxi.  20.

X


322 THU  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

he  merited  to  obtain  this  favour,  because  it  was  the  great
ness  of  his  love,  and  not  the  fear  of  death,  which  had
caused  him  to  desire  it.

Then  the  Saint  began  to  marvel  how  it  could  be,  when
it  was  inferred  from  Scripture,  St.  John  had  not  tasted  the
pains  of  death,  because  he  had  suffered  so  deeply  in  spirit
at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  that  it  should  be  said  now,  this
privilege  had  been  granted  to  him  for  his  confidence.  But
our  Lord  replied  :  "  I  have  rewarded  My  elect  in  heaven
with  a  special  glory  for  his  virginity,  and  for  the  compas
sion  which  he  had  at  My  death  ;  but  I  have  also  recom
pensed  his  lively  hope,  which  made  him  believe  that  I
would  refuse  him  nothing,  by  withdrawing  him  from  the
world  without  permitting  him  to  experience  the  pains  of
death,  and  by  having  preserved  his  body  from  corruption/'


CHAPTER  V.

For  the  Feast  of  the  Circumcision.

Of  the  holy  name  of  Jesus  ;  and  the  renewal  of  our  good  intentions
at  the  commencement  of  the  new  year.

ON  the  Feast  of  the  Circumcision,  St.  Gertrude  offered  cer
tain  salutations  of  the  sweet  name  of  Jesus,  which  had  been
compiled  by  devout  persons  ;  and  these  salutations  appeared
before  God  with  the  brilliancy  of  stars,  and  in  the  form  of
white  roses ;  from  each  of  which  hung  a  little  golden  bell,
which  gave  forth  the  sweetest  melody,  and  caused  ineffable
pleasure  to  the  Divine  Heart  of  Jesus.  As  she  uttered  the
words,  "  Hail,  Jesus  !  most  loving,  most  benign,  most  desir
able  ! "  &c.,  she  desired  very  ardently  to  find  other  expres
sions  to  add  to  the  name  of  Jesus,  that  His  Heart  might


THE  NAME  OF  JESUS  WRITTEN  ON  HER  SOUL. 323

be  still  more  touched  thereby ;  but  the  earnest  love  with
which  she  sought  to  accomplish  this  exhausted  her  strength,
and  our  Lord,  moved  with  pity,  and  as  it  were  vanquished
by  her  love,  inclined  towards  her,  and  embraced  her  with
exceeding  love,  saying  :  "  Behold,  I  have  imprinted  My
name  upon  your  lips,  that  you  may  bear  it  before  the
whole  world ;  and  whenever  your  lips  move  to  utter  it,  it
will  resound  before  me  as  a  most  harmonious  melody."

After  this  she  found  the  name  of  JESUS  written  on  the
upper  part  of  her  soul*  in  characters  of  living  gold,  which
appeared  like  shining  stars  emitting  a  soft  light.  The  word
JUSTICE  was  written  in  the  same  manner  on  the  lower  part.
By  the  inscription  "Jesus,"  which  signifies  Saviour,  she
understood  that  she  was  to  manifest  Him  to  all  as  the
Source  of  life  and  salvation  ;  by  the  inscription  "  Justice,"
she  understood  that  she  was  to  represent  all  the  rigours  of
Divine  justice  to  those  whose  minds  were  hardened,  that
the  fear  of  God's  judgments  might  serve  to  deter  them  from
evil,  if  they  would  not  be  won  by  His  mercies.

Then  she  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  O  sweetest  love  !  I  be
seech  Thee  to  give  our  congregation,  which  always  belongs
entirely  to  Thee,  a  new-year's  gift,  even  as  a  bridegroom
does  to  his  bride."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  '  Be  renewed
in  the  spirit  of  your  mind  '  "  (Eph.  iv.  23).  She  answered  :
"  O  Father  of  Mercies  !  do  not  forget  to  circumcise  all
our  imperfections  on  this  blessed  festival  of  Thy  holy
Circumcision."  To  this  our  Lord  answered  :  "  Circurnciso
yourself  by  meditating  on  your  Rule."  "  O  loving  Lord  I  "
she  replied,  "  why  dost  Thou  reply  to  me  so  seriously,
since  Thou  knowest  that  if  Thou  dost  not  assist  us  with
Thy  grace,  we  shall  fail  in  our  endeavours  ;  for  Thou  hast

*  "  In  superior!  labio  animse  suae,"


324 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


Thyself  said,  that  it  is  not  possible  for  us  to  do  any  good
without  Thee."  Then  our  Lord,  as  if  won  and  carried
away  by  the  words  of  the  Saint,  placed  her  soul  in  His
bosom,  and  said  to  her  with  great  sweetness  :  "  Yes,  I  de
sire  that  you  should  cooperate  with  Me  in  this  ;  and  all
those  amongst  you  who,  at  the  commencement  of  this  year,
repent  with  all  their  hearts,  for  My  love,  of  the  faults  which
they  have  committed  against  their  Rule,  and  resolve  to
avoid  them  for  the  future,  shall  obtain  this  favour — that  I
will  be  to  them  as  a  kind  master,  who  holds  the  child  whom
he  teaches  in  his  arms,  to  point  out  his  letters  to  him,  to
efface  his  imperfections,  or  to  supply  his  defects  ;  and  thus
My  mercy  will  amend  their  defects,  and  My  paternal  love
will  supply  their  negligences.  And  if  they  forget  any
duty  through  dissipation  of  mind,  I  will  supply  it  to
them  by  the  reflections  which  I  will  cause  them  to  make
on  it."  He  added  :  "  Those  who  endeavour  to  turn  their
minds  from  all  which  they  know  to  be  displeasing  to  Me,
and  who  endeavour  to  please  me  in  all  things,  shall  receive
the  light  of  My  Divine  heart  to  direct  their  thoughts  ;  and
I  will  so  dispose  their  works,  that  they  shall  be  able  each
year  to  offer  Me  a  new  gift,*  which  will  not  be  unworthy
of  My  acceptance,  and  which  will  be  salutary  for  them.

As  the  Saint  prayed  for  a  person  who  had  asked  that
she  would  obtain  from  God  for  her,  as  a  new-year's  gift,
that  her  heart  might  always  remain  faithful  to  him  in
prosperity  and  in  adversity,  our  Lord  replied  sweetly  :  "  I
accept  the  desire  of  this  person  for  whom  you  pray  as  a
most  acceptable  new-year's  gift ;  but  as  it  is  right  that  I
should  give  her  what  she  asks  in  return,  I  wish  that  this
gift  should  be  shared  between  us  ;  that  it  should  be  advan-

*  "Xenium.


HOW  GOD  ADORNS  THE  SOUL.  325

tageous  to  her,  and  agreeable  to  Me  ;  that  it  should  redound
to  My  glory  on  the  one  hand,  and  that  it  should  continually
impart  new  ornaments  of  virtue  to  her  on  the  other.  For,
as  a  mother,  when  she  is  teaching  her  child  to  w.ork,  guides
her  hand  by  her  own  knowledge,  so  also  I  use  My  eternal
wisdom  in  teaching  this  person  to  prepare  these  gifts.

Then  the  Saint  understood  that  the  pearls  with  which
these  gifts  were  to  be  embellished  were  the  holy  desires
and  good  sentiments  which  drew  the  soul  to  God ;  such  as
fear,  love,  hope,  joy,  and  such-like,  the  least  of  which  is
not  overlooked  by  God  when  He  labours  for  the  salvation
of  our  souls.

As  she  prayed  then  for  many  other  persons,  and  especiall}
for  ons  whose  soul  had  lately  become  troubled,  and,  as
Gertrude  believed,  through  her,  our  Lord  said  to  her :  "  I
am  using  her  very  affliction  and  trouble  to  expand  her
heart  and  to  open  her  hands,  that  she  may  receive  more
abundantly  and  suitably  the  gifts  which  I  have  prepared
for  her."  "Alas,  Lord!"  exclaimed  the  Saint,  "was  it
necessary  that  I  should  be  the  scourge  with  which  Thou
didst  purify  this  soul  ?"  Our  Lord  answered  :  "  Why  say
'  Alas  !'  when  those  who  thus  purify  My  elect,  without  any
intention  of  afflicting  them,  but,  on  the  contrary,  compas
sionating  their  sufferings  with  all  their  hearts,  are  as  a
gentle  rod  in  My  hands,  and  their  merit  increases  in  pro
portion  as  the  souls  are  purified  2"


326 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

CHAPTER  VI.

For  the  Feast  of  the  Epiphany.
Of  the  oblations  which  are  acceptable  to  God.

ON  the  Feast  of  the  Epipbany  this  holy  soul  offered  to
God,  in  imitation  of  the  three  kings — for  myrrh,  the  Body
of  Jesus  Christ,  with  all  the  merits  of  His  Passion,  for  the
remission  of  all  the  sins  of  men,  from  the  first  to  the  last
of  the  human  race  •  for  incense,  the  Soul  of  Jesus  Christ,
with  all  His  holy  actions,  for  the  negligences  of  the  whole
world  ;  for  gold,  His  Divinity,  with  all  its  perfections
and  joys,  in  satisfaction  for  the  defects  of  all  creatures.
Then  our  Lord  appeared,  and  presented  her  offering,  as  a
most  worthy  new-year's  gift,  to  the  Most  Holy  and  august
Trinity.  As  He  passed  through  the  midst  of  heaven,  all
the  celestial  court  inclined  profoundly  before  Him  to  honour
this  gift,  as  men  prostrate  before  the  Holy  Sacrament  when
it  is  present.

As  she  prayed  devoutly  for  a  certain  person  who  had
asked  her  to  offer  the  oblation  which  she  had  made  before
the  Epiphany  for  her,  our  Lord  appeared  to  her,  bearing
this  offering  through  the  midst  of  heaven,  to  present  it  to
God  the  Father  ;  and  she  saw  that  all  the  celestial  court
considered  the  offering  of  great  value.  From  this  she
learned  that  when  we  offer  our  prayers,  or  any  other  gift,
to  God,  the  celestial  court  praises  and  extols  Him  for  our
devotion  ;  and  when  a  soul,  not  satisfied  with  its  own
actions  and  prayers,  offers  with  them  those  of  Jesus  Christ
• — which  are  infinitely  more  perfect — the  value  of  his  offer
ing  cannot  be  increased,  and  is  worthy  to  be  presented  to
the  Most  Holy  Trinity.

On  another  occasion,  on  the  same  feast,  as  the  words  of


FOR  THE  EPIPHANY.  327

the  Gospel  were  read,  "  And,  falling  down,  they  adored
Him  ;  and  opening  their  treasures,  they  offered  Him  gifts  "
(Matt.  ii.  11),  the  Saint,  animated  by  the  example  of  the
magi,  and  transported  with  zeal,  rose  to  prostrate  herself
devoutly  and  humbly  at  the  feet  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;
adoring  Him  for  all  in  heaven,  on  earth,  and  under  the
earth ;  and,  finding  nothing  worthy  to  offer  Him,  she
Rough t  anxiously  and  eagerly  amongst  all  creatures  to  find
something  which  she  could  present  to  her  only  Love.  And
as  she  thus  searched,  she  beheld  some  vile  and  miserable
creatures,  who  contributed  nothing  to  the  glory  of  the
Saviour,  and  these  she  endeavoured  to  bring  back  to  Him
whom  all  creatures  are  bound  to  serve.  Then,  in  the
fervour  of  her  desires,  she  gathered  up  in  her  heart  all  the
fears,  griefs,  pains,  and  inquietudes  which  had  been  suffered
by  creatures,  not  for  the  Divine  glory,  but  because  of  human
infirmity  ;  and  these  she  offered  to  the  Lord  as  myrrh.
Then  she  charged  herself  with  all  the  pretended  sanctity  of
hypocrites,  Pharisees,  heretics,  and  other  such  persons,  and
offered  this  to  God  as  incense.  Then  she  took  on  herself
all  the  falsehood  and  impurity  which  had  been  in  the
hearts  of  men,  and  offered  it  to  God  as  gold ;  while  her
heart  burned  with  desire  to  reduce  all  the  insubordination
of  creatures  into  a  profound  subjection  to  their  Creator.
And  as  she  offered  these  things  to  God,  they  appeared  like
shining  gold  purified  in  the  furnace.

As  our  Lord  accepted  all  this  with  great  satisfaction,
and  collected  these  new  year's  gifts  as  if  they  were  precious
gems  for  His  diadem,  He  said  to  the  Saint  :  "  Behold  the
gems  which  you  have  offered  Me  ;  I  consider  them  of  great
value,  and  I  will  always  bear  them  on  the  diadem  which
adorns  My  Head,  in  memory  of  your  singular  affection  for
Me,  that  they  may  increase  My  glory  in  My  celestial  court


328  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

even  as  an  earthly  monarch  adorns  himself  with  the  rarest
and  most  precious  jewel  *  in  his  kingdom."

Then  the  Saint  remembered  a  person  who  had  often
asked  her  to  make  some  offering  for  her  on  that  day  ;  and
plie  asked  the  Lord  what  He  would  wish  her  to  offer.  He
replied  :  "  Offer  Me  her  feet,  her  hands,  and  her  heart.  The
feet  indicate  the  desires  ;  and  as  this  person  desires  to  make
a  return  to  Me  for  My  Passion,  let  her  endeavour  to  suffer
patiently  all  pains  of  body  or  mind,  in  union  with  My
Passion,  for  the  glory  of  My  Name,  and  the  benefit  of  My
Spouse,  the  Church  ;  and  I  will  accept  this  as  myrrh.  As
the  hands  indicate  action,  let  her  endeavour  to  unite  all
her  actions,  whether  corporal  or  spiritual,  to  the  perfect
actions  of  My  most  holy  Humanity,  and  all  her  actions  will
obtain  thereby  a  most  marvellous  excellence  ;  and  I  will
receive  them  as  an  incense  of  the  most  fragrant  odour.  As
the  heart  indicates  the  will,  let  her  always  humble  herself
to  all,  and  be  guided  by  a  prudent  counsellor,  that  she
may  know  My  will,  and  then  let  her  accomplish  it  freely
and  cheerfully  :  I  will  accept  this  union  of  her  will  with
My  Divine  will  as  an  amalgam  t  of  pure  gold,  which  can
never  be  separated."

Then,  as  the  Saint  prayed  for  certain  persons  who  had
been  specially  recommended  to  her,  she  beheld  our  Divine


*  **  Qui  vulgari  lingua  vocatur,  ein  Besant "  (the  B  for  P).  The
etymology  of  this  word  is  not  clear.  Amort,  in  his  commentary
on  this  passage,  observes,  that  it  is  not  the  name  of  a  gem  or  pre
cious  stone,  but  more  probably  the  epithet  of  some  precious  stone.
He  adds,  that  after  seeking  in  all  dictionaries  and  catalogues  of
precious  stones,  he  could  not  find  any  called  by  the  name  of  Pesant
(heavy).  Perhaps  some  precious  stone  of  great  weight  went  by  this
popular  name.

t  "  Electrum."


DEVOTION  TO  THE  HOLY  FACE. 329

Lord,  with  a  kind  of  bag*  under  His  left  arm,  so  arranged
that  He  could  easily  put  His  right  hand  therein  \  and  here
He  placed  the  prayers  which  she  had  offered,  to  reserve
them  for  the  benefit  of  His  special  friends.  And  as  she
offered  for  each  what  they  had  requested,  she  beheld  these
petitions  arranged  before  our  Lord  as  so  many  beautiful
new-year's  gifts,  with  which  He  adorned  the  souls  of  those
who  approached  Him  with  less  perfect  dispositions.  She
knew  that  the  fidelity,  or  rather  the  confidence,  of  these
persons,  in  recommending  themselves  to  her  prayers,  had
merited  this  special  favour  from  God,  inasmuch  as  they
were  not  concerned  whether  she  offered  these  prayers  from
herself  or  from  them,  provided  that  they  were  acceptable  to
God.


CHAPTER  VIL

For  the  Second  Sunday  after  Epiphany.

St.  Gertrude  receives  absolution  from  our  Divine  Lord— Instruction
for  Hoi}'  Communion.

ON  the  Sunday  Omnis  terrafi  St. Gertrude  prepared  her
self,  by  a  spiritual  confession,  to  behold  the  Sacred  Face  of


"Marsupium."

t  Omnis  terra— the  Introit  for  Mass,  Second  Sunday  after
Epiphany,  in  the  Roman  Missal.  The  Mass  of  the  Holy  Name  is
now,  however,  generally  substituted  for  it.  The  devotion  to  the
Holy  Face,  like  all  Catholic  devotions,  has  only  deepened  with  the
lapse  of  ages,  and  the  faithful  still  venerate  it  as  lovingly  and
ardently  as  when  the  great  St.  Gertrude  wrote  of  it.  It  is  still
shown  at  Koine,  on  the  very  same  day  mentioned  by  the  Saint.
M.  le  Chanoiue  de  Montault,  in  his  Annie  liturgique  a  Rome,  p.  25,


830 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

the  Lord,  as  the  faithful  do  on  this  day  at  Rome  ;  and  she
represented  this  Face  to  herself  as  all  disfigured  by  her  sins,
and  cast  herself  at  the  feet  of  the  Lord,  to  ask  pardon  for
all  her  transgressions.  Then  He  lifted  up  His  venerable
Hand,  and  blessed  her  thus  :  "  I  grant  you,  by  the  bowels  of
My  mercy,  the  pardon  and  remission  of  all  your  sins ;  and
that  you  may  truly  amend  your  life,  I  enjoin  you  this  satis
faction — that  each  day  during  this  year  you  will  perform
some  action  in  union  with,  and  in  memory  of,  the  mercy  by
which  I  grant  you  this  indulgence."  The  Saint  accepted
the  satisfaction  with  great  thanksgiving  ;  but  fearing  her
frailty,  she  said  :  "  But  what  shall  I  do,  O  Lord,  if  I  should
fail  in  this,  through  my  negligence  ?  "  "  Why  should  you
fail  in  so  easy  a  matter?"  he  replied  ;  "  for  I  will  accept
the  least  thing  which  you  do  with  this  intention,  if  it
be  only  to  lift  a  pebble  or  a  straw*  from  the  ground,  to
utter  a  single  word,  to  show  kindness  to  any  one,  to  say  the
Requiem  ceternam  for  the  faithful  departed,  or  to  pray  for
sinners  or  the  just."

The  Saint  was  exceedingly  consoled  by  this,  and  began


nays:  "Second  Sunday  after  Epiphany,  at  the  Basilica  of  the
Vatican,  at  half -past  three,  procession  of  the  Confraternity  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  exposition  of  the  great  relics  of  the  Passion  ;  the
Holy  Lance,  the  Wood  of  the  Cross,  and  the  Veil  of  St.  Veronica."

Dom  Gueranger,  in  his  Annie  liturgique,  also  mentions  a  solemn
exhihition  of  this  holy  relic,  at  which  the  Pope  assists,  on  Easter
Sunday,  after  the  Post-Communion.  The  devotion  to  the  Sacred
Face  has  been  much  propagated  in  France  during  the  last  few  years,
and  has  heen  the  means  of  procuring  many  miraculous  graces  and
cures.  It  is,  indeed,  a  consoling  devotion  ;  for  we  shall  be  judged
standing  before  the  Face  of  Christ,  but  no  longer  the  suffering  Face.
If,  then,  we  have  been  devout  to  it  during  life,  surely  we  may  hope
that  it  will  look  mercifully  and  lovingly  upon  us  when  we  stand  before
the  judgment-seat.

*  "Calcaveris,  seu  calamum."


THE  REWARDS  OF  THE  JUST. 331

to  pray  for  her  particular  friends,  beseeching  our  Lord  to
grant  them  the  same  favour.  He  granted  her  petition,  and
said :  "  All  who  wish  to  share  with  you  in  the  satisfaction
which  I  have  imposed  on  you,  will  also  receive  a  similar
indulgence  and  remission  of  their  sins."  And  then  ex
tending  His  sacred  Hand,  He  gave  her  His  benediction  a
second  time.  After  this  He  said  :  "  Oh,  what  abundant
benedictions  I  will  pour  forth  on  him  who  returns  to  Me
at  the  end  of  this  year  with  works  of  charity  exceeding
the  number  of  his  sins  ! "  But  the  Saint  exclaimed  dis
trustfully  :  "  How  can  this  be,  since  the  heart  of  man  is  so
prone  to  evil,  that  scarcely  an  hour  passes  in  which  he
does  not  sin  in  many  ways  ?"  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Why
should  you  think  this  so  difficult,  when  there  are  many
things  that  please  Me,  and  there  is  nothing,  however
difficult,  which  My  grace  cannot  accomplish."  "Lord,"
inquired  Gertrude,  "  what  will  you  give  to  him  who  accom
plishes  this  in  Thy  strength  ? "  "I  can  give  you  no  better
answer  than  this,''  He  replied,  "  That  I  will  give  '  What
eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  it  entered
into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive'"  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).  How
happy  will  he  be  who  has  practised  this  devotion  for  a
year,  or  even  for  a  single  month,  since  he  may  expect  the
same  reward  from  the  liberality  of  His  God  !

On  the  following  day,  as  she  prayed  for  those  who  com
municated  according  to  her  advice,  but  could  not  approach
the  Sacrament  of  Penance,  on  account  of  the  absence  of
their  confessor,  it  appeared  that  our  Lord  clothed  them
with  a  white  robe,  as  a  sign  of  innocence,  adorned  with  pre
cious  stones,  which  had  the  form  and  the  scent  of  violets,
as  a  type  of  the  humility  with  which  they  had  followed  her
advice.  A  rose-coloured  mantle  was  also  given  to  them,
covered  with  flowers  of  gold,  which  signified  the  loving


332 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Passion  of  our  Lord,  in  virtue  of  which  they  obtained  a
worthy  preparation  for  Communion.  "  Let  them  be  seated
near  me,"  said  our  Lord,  "  that  it  may  be  known  that  it  is
not  by  accident,  but  on  purpose,  that  the  first  place  is  kept
for  them  ;  because  from  all  eternity  it  has  been  ordained
that  those  who  have  followed  your  advice  shall  receive  ex
traordinary  favours  from  Me  to-day  ;  and  those  who  have
communicated  without  confessing  and  without  asking  your
advice,  resting  on  the  goodness  and  grace  of  God,  shall
receive  a  rose-coloured  mantle  with  gold  flowers,  and  shall
also  be  seated  at  the  table  of  the  Lord."

Those  who,  through  humility  and  compunction,  had  ab
stained  from  Communion,  appeared  as  if  standing  before
the  table,  and  rejoicing  in  its  delights.  Then  the  Lord,
moved  by  His  own  mercy,  blessed  them  with  His  Hand,
saying  these  words  :  "  All  those  who  meditate  frequently
on  the  vision  of  My  Divine  Face,  attracted  by  the  desires
of  love,  shall  receive  within  them,  by  the  virtue  of  My
Humanity,  a  bright  ray  of  My  Divinity,  which  shall  en
lighten  their  inmost  souls,  so  that  they  shall  reflect  the
light  of  My  countenance  in  a  special  manner  in  eternity."


CHAPTER  VIII.
For  the  Feast  of  St.  Agnes,  Virgin  and  Martyr.

Apparition  of  St.  Agnes— Virtue  of  the  words  which  she  uttered  at
her  death.

ON  the  night  of  the  Feast  of  St.  Agnes,  the  beloved  of  God,*
as  Gertrude  rejoiced  greatly  for  the  glory  which  the  love  of

*  January  21.


OF  ST.  AGNES,  VIRGIN  AND  MARTYR.  333

this  Saint  had  given  to  our  Lord,  and  for  the  words  she
had  uttered  which  gave  such  joy  to  the  heavenly  court,
she  exclaimed  :  "  Alas,  Lord  !  what  joy  and  consolation
would  I  not  have  experienced  at  hearing  these  words
chanted,  if  my  infirmity  had  not  prevented  me  !  "  Our
Lord  replied  :  "  I  reserve  this  for  you  in  myself ;  and,
either  in  this  life,  or  in  the  next,  you  shall  taste  other  con
solations,  which  will  be  all  the  sweeter  to  you  because  they
will  have  less  of  the  insipidity  of  your  own  will."

From  this  she  understood  that  nothing  can  diminish
the  spiritual  welfare  of  the  elect,  unless  through  their  own
fault.  As  they  read  the  sixth  Lesson  (which  related  that
St.  Agnes  was  accused  of  being  a  Christian  from  her  child
hood,  and  so  bewitched  by  magic  that  she  called  Jesus
Christ  her  Spouse),  St.  Gertrude  exclaimed  sorrowfully  :
"  Alas,  my  Lord  and  my  God,  what  does  not  Thy  Divine
Majesty  suffer  from  men  ! "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  The
perfect  love  which  united  Me  and  Agnes  satisfies  Me  for
all  these  indignities."  "0  Lord,"  replied  the  Saint,  "grant
to  all  thy  elect  the  grace  to  attach  themselves  so  inviolably
to  Thee,  that  Thou  mayest  no  longer  think  of  the  injuries
by  which  men  outrage  Thee."

On  the  Feast  of  St.  Augustine,*  as  God  showed  Gertrude
the  merits  of  many  saints,  she  desired  to  know  something
of  the  merits  of  St.  Agnes,  whom  she  had  loved  from  her
very  infancy  with  the  greatest  tenderness  and  devotion.
Our  Lord  yielded  to  her  desire  and  prayer,  and  showed
her  that  great  Saint,  so  united  to  His  Heart  as  to  indicate
her  extraordinary  innocence,  and  to  manifest  the  truth  of
what  has  been  said  by  the  Wise  Man,  that  "  Incorruption
bringeth  near  to  God"  (Wis.  vi.  20.);  for  she  seemed  so

*  May  26.


334 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

near  God,  that  it  appeared  as  if  no  one  in  heaven  could
equal  her  innocence  and  love.

From  this  she  learned  that  there  is  not  an  instant  in
which  God  does  not  place  before  Him  the  devotion  and  joy
which  holy  souls  either  have  felt  or  will  yet  feel  from  the
sweet  words  of  St.  Agnes  which  are  recited  by  the  Church,*
and  that  He  causes  the  pleasure  which  He  finds  therein  to
pour  forth  from  His  Heart  into  that  of  this  holy  virgin,
which  is  so  intimately  united  to  His,  while  she  becomes
marvellously  adorned  thereby  with  new  jewels,  casting
rays  of  light  every  moment  into  those  souls  who  rejoice  in
her  devotion.


CHAPTER  IX.
For  the  Feast  of  the  Purification.

ON  the  Feast  of  the  Purification  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  as
the  Saint  rejoiced  in  spirit  at  the  first  sound  of  the  bell
for  Matins,  and  said  to  our  Lord,  "  My  heart  and  my  soul
salute  Thee,  0  loving  Saviour,  at  the  sound  of  the  bell
which  announces  the  Feast  of  the  Purification  of  Thy  most
holy  Mother,"  He  replied  condescendingly :  "  And  the
bowels  of  My  pity  knock  at  the  gates  of  Divine  Mercy  for
you,  to  obtain  the  full  remission  of  all  your  sins."  As  the
bell  for  Matins  ceased  to  ring,  our  Lord  wished  to  recom
pense  her  salutation  a  thousandfold,  and  said  to  her :
"0  joy  of  My  Heart,  My  Divinity  salutes  thee  ;  and  I


*  The  Lessons  and  Responses  for  the  Office  of  St.  Agnes  are  full  of
singular  beauty,  and  enriched  with  the  utterances  of  burning  love
which  she  poured  forth  at  the  moment  of  trial  and  death.


HOW  CHKIST  UNITES  OUJi  WORKS  TO  HIS.  335


send  you  all  the  merits  of  My  holy  Humanity,  to  enable
you  to  pass  this  festival  in  a  manner  pleasing  to  Me."

Some  months  after,  as  she  desired  to  hear  what  was
chanted  in  choir,  and  grieved  for  the  infirmity  which  de
tained  her  in  bed,  she  said  complainingly  :  "  O  Lord,  if
distance  did  not  prevent  me  from  hearing,  how  my  heart
would  rejoice  for  each  word  chanted  at  Matins  !  "  But  our
Lord  answered  :  "My  spouse,  if  you  know  not  what  is
chanted  in  choir,  turn  to  Me,  and  contemplate  attentively
what  passes  within  Me,  and  you  will  not  fail  to  find  what
will  satisfy  you."  Then  she  knew  in  spirit  that  the
Lord  took  unto  Himself  all  the  good  that  holy  souls  were
doing  in  the  Church,  and  that,  having  purified  and  perfected
it  in  Himself,  He  offered  it  in  eternal  praise  to  the  Most
Holy  Trinity  ;  and  that,  drawing  into  His  Divine  Heart  the
good  works  which  were  done  for  the  glory  of  God,  He  en
nobled  and  perfected  them  ;  and  she  perceived  that,  while
the  works  united  to  the  members  of  Jesus  Christ  operated
in  the  soul  a  good  of  inestimable  value,  those  which  He
drew  into  His  Heart  surpassed  the  others  in  perfection  and
excellence,  even  as  a  living  man  exceeds  in  dignity  one  who
is  dead.

After  this,  as  she  heard  the  second  Response,  arid
grieved  that  she  had  not  heard  the  first,  which  was  Adorna
thalamum,  she  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  Teach  me,  I  implore
Thee,  my  Beloved,  how  I  can  adorn  the  couch  of  my  heart,
so  that  it  may  please  Thee."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Open
your  heart  to  Me,  and  let  Me  see  therein  the  images  which
you  know  to  be  most  pleasing  to  Me."  From  this  the
Saint  understood  that  our  Lord  is  exceedingly  pleased  when
we  open  our  hearts  by  remembering  His  sufferings,  and
thanking  Him  for  His  benefits.  As  they  sang  Post  par-
turn  virgo,  at  the  second  ISTocturn,  at  the  words  Intercede


336  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

pro  nobis,*  St.  Gertrude  saw  the  Blessed  Virgin  wiping
away  all  stains  from  the  religious  of  the  convent ;  and
hiding  them  in  a  corner,  she  placed  herself  before  them,  so
as  to  conceal  them  from  the  eyes  of  Divine  justice.  During
the  Antiphon  Beata  mater,  at  the  word  Intercede  she  saw
the  Blessed  Virgin,  elevated  and  radiant  with  glory,  offer
ing  to  her  Son,  who  is  the  King  of  kings,  after  a  gentle
embrace,  all  the  devotions  of  the  sisters,  in  union  with  her
own.

But  as  Gertrude  still  complained  of  the  obstacles  which
were  caused  by  her  infirmities,  our  Lord  said  to  her  :  "If
Simeon  and  Anna — I  mean  the  effects  of  your  infirmity —
still  hinder  you  from  attending  the  Divine  Office,  come
forth  with  Me  on  Mount  Calvary,  where  you  will  find  a
young  man  full  of  beauty  arid  affection  to  place  you  upon
a  cross."

She  therefore  followed  Him  tht  'e  in  spirit,  and  the
memory  of  the  Passion  caused  a  marvellous  deligkf.  in  her
soul.  Then  she  went  forth  by  a  gate  on  the  northeui  side,
and  entered  into  a  magnificent  temple,  where  she  beheld
the  blessed  old  man  Simeon  standing  near  the  altar,  and
uttering  these  words  as  he  prayed  :  "  When  will  He  come  ?
when  shall  I  behold  Him  ?  shall  I  live  until  He  comes  ?  "
And  as  he  repeated  the  same  and  similar  words,  he  felt  his
soul  thrill  within  him,  and  turning  round  suddenly,  he
beheld  the  Blessed  Virgin  before  the  altar,  holding  in  her
arms  the  Infant  Jesus,  the  most  beautiful  of  the  children  of
men.  As  soon  as  he  beheld  Him,  he  was  enlightened  by
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  recognised  the  Redeemer  of  the  world  ;


"  After  childbirth  thou  didst  remain  a  virgin.  Intercede  for  us,
O  Mother  of  God  ; "  v.  Ant.  ii.  Nocturn.  Bcata  mate)'  is  the  Anti
phon  at  Magnificat  in  the  Little  Office  B.  V.M.


VISION  OF  THE  PRESENTATION  IN  THE  TEMPLE. 33?

and  then  taking  Him  into  his  arms  with  great  joy,  he  ex
claimed  :  Nunc  dimittis  servum  tuum,  Domine  ;  at  the  words
quiet  viderunt  oculi  mei,  he  kissed  Him  lovingly  ;  and  at
the  words  quod  parasti,  he  lifted  Him  before  the  Ark,  to
offer  Him  to  God  the  Father  as  the  salvation  of  His  people.
The  Ark  then  became  brilliant  with  light,  and  the  image
of  the  Infant  Jesus  appeared  therein  resplendent  with
beauty,  which  signified  that  He  was  the  consummation
of  all  the  sacrifices  of  the  old  and  new  covenants.  Then
Simeon  exclaimed,  in  the  fervour  of  his  love  :  Lumen  ad
revelationem  gentium,  and  returned  the  Child  to  His  Mother,
saying  :  Et  tuum  ipsius  animam  pertransibit  gladius.  Then
the  Blessed  Virgin  offered  two  young  doves  for  her  Divine
Son,  which  indicated  the  innocent  lives  of  the  faithful,  who,
like  doves,  reply  in  sweet  murmurs  to  all  evil,  and  collect
pure  grain — that  is,  endeavour  to  follow  the  example  of
the  Saints ;  and  those  who  act  thus  redeem  the  Lord  Jesus,
when  they  fill  up  and  accomplish  what  our  Lord  has  left
for  them  to  do.

At  the  eighth  Response,  Ora  pro  nob  is,  &c.,  the  Queen
of  Virgins  knelt  before  God  as  the  mediatrix  between  Him
and  the  religious,  praying  for  each  individually  ;  but  her
Divine  Son  raised  her  up  respectfully,  and  placed  her  near
Him  on  the  throne  of  His  glory,  granting  her  full  autho
rity  to  command  what  she  would.  Then  she  desired  the
choir  of  Powers  to  surround  the  convent,  and  to  defend
it  mightily  against  the  wiles  of  the  ancient  enemy.  The
angels  immediately  obeyed  the  orders  of  the  Queen  of
Heaven,  and,  joining  their  shields  together,  encompassed
the  convent  on  all  sides.

Then  St.  Gertrude,  said  to  the  Blessed  Virgin:  "0
Mother  of  Mercy,  will  not  those  who  have  not  assisted  in
choir  have  a  share  in  this  mighty  defence  ? "  The  holy

V


338  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Virgin  replied  :  "  They  will  share  in  it,  and  so  will  all  those
who,  here  or  elsewhere,  preserve  the  true  spirit  of  religion  ;
but  if  any  fail  in  religious  observance,  and  are  not  earnestly
seeking  to  attain  perfection,  they  will  not  merit  to  be  under
the  protection  of  the  angels."  To  this  our  Lord  added  :
"  Let  those  who  desire  to  live  under  so  powerful  a  protec
tion  make  shields  for  themselves  in  this  manner  :  narrow
below — that  is,  towards  themselves — by  humility,  and  large
above — that  is,  towards  Me — by  a  full  and  perfect  confi
dence  in  My  goodness."

When  the  Versicle  Ora  pro  nobis  was  sung  at  the  pro
cession,  the  Blessed  Virgin  appeared  to  place  her  Son  gently
upon  the  altar,  and  then,  prostrating  devoutly  before  Him,
she  interceded  for  all  the  congregation  ;  and  this  royal
Child  inclined  towards  her,  to  signify  that  He  not  only
heard  her  prayers,  but  that  He  would  also  accomplish  all
that  His  beloved  Mother  desired.


CHAPTER  X.

For  Septuagesima  Sunday.

Instruction  concerning  receiving  and  abstaining  from  the  Holy
Communion.

ON  the  Sunday  Circumdederunt*  St.  Gertrude,  though  still
very  weak,  desired  ardently  to  receive  the  Sacrament ;  but
although  she  had  prepared  herself  with  great  fervour,  she
abstained,  by  the  advice  of  her  spiritual  mother,  througli
discretion.  As  she  offered  this  privation  to  God,  she  found

*  Dominica  circumdederunt. "  The  groans  of death surrouuded
me,"  &c. — Introit  for  Septuagesima  Sunday.


SEPTUAGES1MA SUNDAY.  339


herself  standing  before  the  Lord  ;  and  He  inclined  sweetly
towards  her,  placing  her  in  the  bosom  of  His  paternal
goodness,  saying  to  her,  with  the  caresses  and  affability  of
a  mother  to  her  child  :  "  Since  you  abstain  from  receiving
Me  purely  for  Me,  I  will  keep  you  in  My  bosom,  so  that
no  exterior  labour  may  trouble  you."  The  Saint,  being
overwhelmed  with  delight  on  the  bosom  of  our  Lord,  said
to  Him  :  "  O  most  loving  Spouse,  since  the  whole  world
is  seated  in  wickedness  (1  John  v.  19),  and  opposes  Thy
glory  at  this  time  more  than  at  any  other  by  the  excesses
into  which  it  plunges,  I  desire  with  all  my  heart  that  my
congregation  should  be  employed  in  making  reparation  to
Thee.  Therefore,  if  Thou  wilt  deign  to  acknowledge  me
as  Thy  servant,  though,  alas  !  so  unworthy,  and  accept  me
as  Thine  ambassador,  I  will  gladly  announce  some  special
exercise  for  Thy  love  to  all  who  are  devoutly  disposed,  in
order  to  honour  Thee  in  reparation  for  the  sins  now  com
mitted."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Whoever  will  be  My  am
bassador  on  this  occasion  will  have  this  reward — that  all
which  he  gains  for  Me  will  be  acquired  and  gained  for
himself."

From  this  she  learned  that  all  who  labour  to  instruct
others,  either  by  their  words  or  their  writings,  for  the
honour  of  God  and'  the  advancement  of  their  neighbours'
salvation,  will  receive  a  reward  even  to  endless  ages  for
the  fruit  which  has  been  drawn  from  their  books  or  their
instructions.  Then  He  added :  "  Whoever  offers  Me  the
satisfaction  of  his  corporal  necessities,  such  as  eating,
drinking,  sleeping,  &c.,  saying  in  his  heart  or  with  his
lips  :  '  Lord,  I  take  this  food '  (or  whatever  it  may  be)  '  in
union  with  the  love  with  which  Thou  didst  perform  the  like
action  when  on  earth,  for  the  glory  of  Thy  Father  and  the
salvation  of  men,'  praying  that,  in  union  with  My  Divine


340  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

love,  it  may  serve  for  the  salvation  of  all  in  heaven,  on
earth,  or  in  purgatory — each  time  he  makes  this  offering,
he  presents  Me  with  a  strong  shield  to  protect  Me  against
the  insults  and  outrages  of  sinners."

Then,  as  the  sisters  communicated  at  the  Mass,  our
Lord  placed  Gertrude  tenderly  at  the  loving  Wound  of  His
Side,  and  said  to  her:  "  Since  discretion  obliges  you  to  ab
stain  from  receiving  Me  corporally  in  the  Sacrament,  drink
now  from  My  Heart  the  sweet  influences  of  My  Divinity."
Having  drunk  of  this  torrent  of  sweetness  and  delight,  as
she  thanked  our  Lord  devoutly  for  it,  she  saw  all  those  who
had  communicated  that  day  standing  in  the  presence  of
the  Lord,  who  gave  to  each  a  marvellously  beautiful  habit,
and  a  special  gift,  which  enabled  them  to  prepare  them
selves  worthily  for  Communion.  As  they  obtained  these
great  favours  through  the  merits  of  Gertrude,  they  also
offered  to  our  Lord  in  their  turn  the  advantages  which  they
had  received  through  her,  for  the  increase  of  her  glory  and
merit.  From  this  she  understood  that  those  who  dispose
themselves  for  Holy  Communion  by  particular  prayers  and
devotions,  and  who  nevertheless  abstain  for  good  reasons,
as  through  obedience  or  humility,  are  replenished  by  God
with  the  torrent  of  Divine  delights;  while  their  preparation
for  Communion  contributes  to  prepare  others,  and  the  fruit
which  others  derive  thereby  returns  to  their  advantage.
Then  St.  Gertrude  exclaimed  :  "  0  Lord,  if  it  is  true  that
those  who  abstain  thus  from  communicating  receive  such
great  fruit,  is  it,  then,  more  advantageous  to  abstain  ?  "
Our  Lord  replied  :  "  By  no  means  ;  for  those  who  approach
the  Sacrament  for  love  of  My  glory  receive  the  food  of  My
Divine  Body  as  the  delicious  nectar  of  the  Divinity,  and
are  adorned  with  the  incomparable  splendour  of  My  Divine
virtues."  "  Lord,"  inquired  the  Saint,  "  what  will  happen


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  SEXAGESIMA.


to  those  who  abstain  from  Communion  on  account  of  their
negligences,  and  yet  pass  the  day  in  the  same  negligences  1  "
He  replied  :  "  They  render  themselves  still  more  unworthy
of  Communion,  and  they  deprive  themselves  of  the  fruit  of
the  Communions  made  on  that  day  throughout  the  Church."
Then  the  Saint  continued  :  "  Tell  me,  I  beseech  Thee,  0
Lord,  why  it  happens  that  certain  souls,  who  judge  them
selves  unworthy  of  Communion,  and  apply  themselves  less
earnestly  to  prepare  for  it,  are  nevertheless  pressed  by  so
ardent  a  desire  to  receive  Thy  sacred  Body,  that  it  grieves
them  exceedingly  to  abstain  on  the  days  appointed  for
receiving  it  ?  "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  This  happens  to  them
by  a  special  grace  of  My  sweet  Spirit  ;  as  a  king,  who  is
always  accustomed  to  the  court,  naturally  prefers  the  plea
sure  which  he  always  enjoys  there,  to  the  satisfaction  which
others  find  in  roaming  through  the  streets  and  squares."


CHAPTER XL

For  Sexagesima.
Instruction  on  Noah's  ark ;  a  mystical  day  therein.

ON  the  Sunday  Jfixurge,  as  she  was  still  confined  to  bed,
she  heard  the  words  Benedicens  ergo  *  chanted  at  Matins  :
and  reflecting  on  the  sentiments  of  joy  and  devotion  which
she  had  so  often  experienced  in  listening  to  this  Response,


*  This  Response  is  not  in  the  present  Benedictine  Breviary.
The  Book  of  Genesis  is  commenced  at  Matins  for  Septuagesima
Sunday.  On  Sexagesima  Sunday  the  Lessons  refer  to  the  Flood,
&c.  ;  hence  the  peculiar  applicability  of  the  following  revelations  to
the  time  and  the  train  of  thought  suggested  by  the  Office.  Exurge
— "Arise!  why  sleepest  Thou.  O  Lord?"- -Introit  for  Sexagesima
Sunday.


342  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

she  exclaimed  :  UO  Lord,  thou  knowest  with  what  fervent
love  I  have  often  chanted  this  Response  and  many  others
when  I  was  carried  up  before  Thy  throne  of  glory,  and
there  intoned  each  note  and  word  in  Thy  Heart,  as  on  a
most  sweet  organ.  But,  alas  !  now  that  I  am  infirm,  [
neglect  many  things."  "My  beloved  one,"  replied  our
Lord,  "  I  can  testify  to  the  truth  of  wh'at  you  say,  and  I
know  that  you  have  often  chanted  these  words  most  sweetly
on  the  organ  of  my  Divine  Heart  •  therefore  I  am  now
going  to  chant  for  you  in  return."  Then  He  added :  ''Even
as  I  swore  to  My  servant  Noe  that  I  would  no  more  destroy
the  earth  with  a  flood,  so  do  I  swear  to  you  also,  by  My
Divinity,  that  all  those  who  listen  to  your  advice  with
humility,  and  avail  themselves  of  it  to  regulate  their  lives,
shall  never  perish,  but  shall  assuredly  attain  to  Me  safely
and  without  wandering,  who  am  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and
the  Life;  and  I  confirm  this  oath  to  you  by  the  seal  of  My
most  holy  Humanity."  "O  Eternal  Wisdom,"  replied  Ger
trude,  "  since  thou  foreseest  all  the  excesses  and  crime*
into  which  men  will  again  precipitate  themselves,  why  didst
Thou  make  so  solemn  a  promise  in  their  favour  that  Thou
wouldst  not  again  destroy  the  world  by  a  deluge  1 "  Our
Lord  replied  :  "I  made  it  to  strengthen  them  in  their  good
resolutions  during  the  calm  of  prosperity,  so  that  in  tho
storm  of  affliction  they  may  be  bound  in  honour  to  keep
their  promise."  Then  she  said  :  "O  Lord  God,  wilt  Thou
teach  Thy  handmaid  how  to  build  an  ark  for  Thee  during
this  week1?  "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  You  can  build  an  ark
in  your  heart,  which  will  be  very  pleasing  to  me  ;  but  ob
serve  carefully  that  there  were  three  chambers  in  Noe's
ark  :  the  birds  were  in  the  highest,  men  in  the  middle,
and  beasts  in  the  lowest.  Thus  you  should  divide  the  day
into  three  parts  :  from  early  morning  rntil  None  return


A MYSTICAL  DAY IN  NOAH'S AHK.  343

IUe  thanks,  on  the  part  of  the  whole  Church,  and  from  the
very  bottom  of  your  heart,  for  all  the  benefits  which  I  have
nestowed  on  men  from  the  creation  of  the  world  to  the
present  time,  and  especially  for  the  signal  benefit  which  I
confer  on  them  by  immolating  Myself  to  God  the  Father
daily,  from  daybreak  until  None,  on  the  Altar  for  their
salvation,  while  men  employ  themselves  in  feasting  and
debaucheries,  without  a  thought  of  gratitude.  If  you  there
fore  study  to  repair  their  faults,  and  supply  for  their  lack
of  thanksgivings,  you  will  gather  birds  into  the  first  stage
of  your  ark.  From  None  until  Vespers,  by  attaching  your
self  firmly  to  the  exercise  of  good  works,  and  by  uniting
them  to  those  performed  by  My  sacred  Humanity,  in  satis
faction  for  the  negligence  and  ingratitude  of  men,  who
refuse  to  correspond  with  My  benefits,  you  will  enclose  men
in  the  centre  of  the  ark.  From  Vespers  you  may  reflect
and  consider  in  the  bitterness  of  your  heart  how  men  have
the  impiety  to  add  to  their  ingratitude  an  infinity  of  crimes
which  excite  My  anger,  and  by  offering  in  atonement  all
the  bitterness  and  pains  which  I  suffered  in  My  Passion
and  Death,  though  I  was  innocent;  and  thus  you  may
enclose  beasts  in  the  lowest  part  of  the  ark."

Then  she  said  to  the  Lord  :  "As  I  have  asked  this  in
struction  of  Thee  so  earnestly,  I  cannot  feel  certain  that
Thou,  O  best  of  teachers,  hast  taught  it  to  me."  He  replied :
"You  ought  not  to  esteem  it  less  because  I  have  given  it
to  you  on  account  of  the  earnest  desire  you  expressed  ;  for
I  have  created  your  senses  for  My  service.  Was  it  not
a  more  wonderful  thing  to  say,  '  Let  us  make  man  to  Our
image  and  likeness,'  when  I  created  him  with  deliberation
and  counsel,  than  to  say,  when  I  created  other  things :  '  Let
there  be  a  firmament,'  or  '  Let  there  be  light  ? '"  She  re
plied  :  "  If  I  availed  myself  of  this  authority  to  introduce


344 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

this  exercise  for  the  benefit  of  others,  some  one  else  might
introduce  other  things,  which  might  not  be  an  effect  of
Thy  Divine  grace."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Add  this  caution  :
whoever  knows  in  his  heart  that  his  will  is  so  united  to
Mine  as  never  to  dissent  from  it,  either  in  prosperity  or
adversity,  and  who  acts  and  suffers  in  all  things  purely  for
My  glory,  may  certainly  affirm  that  whatever  he  learns  in
teriorly  is  from  Me,  if  it  is  useful  to  others,  and  not  con
tradictory  to  Scripture."

Then  the  Lord  stood  before  this  soul,  and  said  :  "  Now,
queen  and  lady,*  console  Me,  as  I  have  consoled  thee ; "
and  having  said  this,  He  inclined  lovingly  towards  her.
But  this  soul,  being  overwhelmed  with  amazement  at  such
unheard-of  condescension,  exclaimed,  with  the  deepest
humility,  from  her  inmost  heart :  "  Ah,  Lord  !  Thou  art
the  Creator,  and  I  am  but  a  creature."  As  she  uttered
these  words,  her  soul  was  drawn  and  united  to  God  in  a
marvellous  manner,  and  enjoyed  with  Him  the  sublimest
beatitude.  Then  she  said  to  the  Lord  :  "  Vouchsafe,  O
Father  of  mercy,  to  give  a  little  rest  to  Thy  servant,  who  is
weakened  by  the  remedies  she  has  used,  that  I  may  com
municate  worthily  to-day."  He  replied  :  "  The  union  with
Me,  which  you  now  enjoy,  will  render  you  stronger  than
any  bodily  repose  which  you  could  take."  While  Mass
was  being  celebrated,  as  she  complained  in  the  presence  of
God  that  her  infirmity  prevented  her  from  hearing  it,  our
Lord  said  to  her  :  "Repeat  the  Confiteor"  When  she  had
concluded,  He  pronounced  these  words:  "May  My  Divinity
have  mercy  on  you,  and  pardon  you  all  your  sins  ! "  and
extending  His  venerable  Hand,  He  gave  her  His  benedic
tion.  Then  the  Lord  took  her  into  His  arms,  and  said  ;

"Eia,  domiua  regiua."


DEVOTIONS  FOR  TJlE  CARNIVAL.  345


"  ,'vv.d  God  created  man  to  His  own  image."  Then  He
signed*  her  eyes  and  her  ears,  her  mouth  and  her  heart,
her  ha.ids  and  her  feet ;  and  sweetly  repeating  these  words
each  time,  he  renewed  His  image  and  resemblance  in  her
soul.

On  the  Tuesday  before  Ash  Wednesday,  a  day  on  which
people  in  the  world  commit  the  greatest  excesses  in  eating
and  drinking,  St.  Gertrude  heard  the  bell  ringing  for  the
workmen's  breakfast,  and  exclaimed,  with  a  sigh  :  "  Alas,
my  Lord,  how  early  in  the  day  men  begin  to  offend  Thee
by  their  gourmandising  !  "  But  our  Lord  replied :  "  Do  not
grieve,  My  beloved  ;  those  who  are  now  summoned  to  their
meal  are  not  of  the  number  of  those  who  offend  Me  by
greediness,  since  this  refection  is  a  warning  to  them  to
apply  to  work  ;  and  I  take  as  much  satisfaction  in  seeing
them  eat,  as  a  man  would  in  seeing  his  horse  refreshed
when  he  needed  its  labour."


CHAPTER  XII.

For  the  Saturday  before  Quinquagesima.

Devotions  for  the  time  of  the  Carnival— Of  the  value  and  efficacy
of  suffering.

ON  the  Saturday  before  Quinquagesima  Sunday,  as  St.
Gertrude  disengaged  herself  from  all  exterior  cares,  and
recollected  herself  in  prayer,  she  was  received  into  the
bosom  of  the  Divine  goodness,  where  she  enjoyed  the  sweet
influences  of  His  delights  with  such  perfect  power,  that  it
appeared  to  her  as  if  she  disposed  of  the  kingdoms  of  hea-

*  "Consignans."


346  TIIK  REVELATIONS  OF  ST. GERTRUDK.

vcn  and  c;irth  with  her  Spouse.  The  day  passed  in  these
spiritual  delights  ;  but  towards  evening  she  began  to  be
troubled  about  a  trifling  matter,  so  that  she  no  longer
enjoyed  them.  At  last,  before  Matins,  as  she  had  passed
the  greater  part  of  the  night  in  this  disquiet,  which  pre
vented  her  from  sleeping,  she  besought  our  Lord  that  He
would  remove  this  obstacle  to  her  enjoyment  of  His  Divine
delights,  if  it  was  for  His  glory.  The  Lord  replied  :  "  If
you  desire  to  soothe  My  pains,  you  must  bear  your  own,
and  stand  at  My  left,  so  that  I  may  recline  upon  yon,
and  look  into  your  heart,  where  the  sweet  concert  of  your
holy  desires,  your  perfect  confidence  in  Me,  and  the  ardour
of  your  zeal  for  the  eternal  salvation  of  all  mankind,  may
move  me  powerfully,  appeasing  My  justice.  Further  :  as
the  rich  treasures  of  your  heart  will  be  open  to  Me,  I  may
impart  them  to  those  who  are  in  need,  and  whose  wants
and  necessities  you  would  desire  to  relieve  as  far  as  you
could.  For  if  you  stood  on  My  right  hand,  that  is  in
prosperity,  you  would  deprive  Me  of  these  delights."

Then  the  Saint  asked  our  Lord  to  prescribe  some  exer
cise  by  which  she  might  serve  Him  lovingly  during  these
three  days,  on  which  men  commit  so  many  crimes  and
excesses.  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  You  could  not  please  Me
better  than  by  suffering  patiently  all  that  grieves  or  tires
you,  whether  interior  or  exterior,  in  memory  of  My  Pas
sion,  and  by  doing  whatever  you  find  most  difficult  ;
and  you  will  do  this  most  effectually  by  controlling  and
restraining  your  senses.  Whoever  acts  thus  in  memory  of
My  Passion  may  hope  for  a  great  reward  from  Me."  "  But,"
continued  the  Saint,  "  I  desire  ardently  to  know  from  Thee,
O  most  loving  Teacher,*  what  sufferings  are  most  capable

*  "  Doctor  amantissime. "


VISION  OF  THE  SCOURGING.  347


of  appeasing  the  just  anger  which  Thou  feelest  during  these
three  days  of  excess."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  You  can  do
nothing  more  acceptable  to  Me  than  to  say  the  Pater  nosier
three  times,  or  the  Psalm  Laudate  Dominum,  omnes  gentes  ;
and  at  the  first  repetition,  offer  to  God  all  the  wearinesses
and  labours  of  My  Heart  for  the  salvation  of  men  ;  and
suffer  or  labour,  praise  or  give  thanks,  in  reparation  for  all
the  unlawful  pleasures  in  which  the  human  heart  indulges
at  this  time.  At  the  second  repetition,  offer  to  God  My
Father  all  the  abstinences  and  mortifications  of  My  lips,
whether  in  eating,  speaking,  preaching,  or  praying,  in  satis
faction  for  all  the  sins  of  the  tongue  now  committed.  At
the  third  repetition,  offer  to  God  my  Father  all  the  actions
and  movements  of  My  most  holy  Body,  and  of  each  mem
ber  thereof,  with  all  the  bitterness  of  My  Passion  and  Death,
in  satisfaction  for  all  the  sins  which  men  commit  now
against  their  own  salvation."

At  the  hour  of  Terce,  our  Lord  appeared  to  St.  Ger
trude  in  the  position  in  which  He  was  when  tied  to  the
pillar  between  two  executioners,  one  of  whom  tore  Him
with  thorns,  and  the  other  bruised  Him  with  a  whip  full
of  large  knots  ;  both  striking  His  Face,  which  seemed
so  disfigured,  that  her  very  heart  melted  away  with  com
passion  ;  nor  could  she  restrain  her  tears  whenever  she
recalled  that  mournful  spectacle  during  the  day,  since  it
appeared  to  her  that  none  upon  earth  had  ever  been  so
cruelly  used  as  her  sweet  Lord  Jesus.  Even  the  very
pupil  of  the  eye  was  torn  and  inflamed,  both  by  the  thorns
and  the  blows  of  the  scourge.  It  appeared  also  to  her  that
her  Lord  turned  His  blessed  Face  from  side  to  side  ;  but
when  He  turned  it  from  one  executioner,  the  other  struck  it
still  more  furiously;  then  He  turned  to  her,  and  exclaimed  :
"  Have  you  not  read  what  is  written  of  Me  :  Vidimus  earn


348  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

tanquam  leprosum  ?  " — "  We  have  thought  Him  as  it  were  A
leper"  (Is.  liii.  4).  The  Saint  replied  :  "  Alas,  Lord  !  what
remedy  can  we  find  to  soothe  the  agonising  pains  of  Thy
Divine  Face  !  "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  The  most  efficacious
and  the  tenderest  remedy  which  you  can  prepare  for  Me  is
to  meditate  lovingly  on  My  Passion,  and  to  pray  charitably
for  the  conversion  of  sinners.  These  two  executioners
represent  the  laity,  who  offend  God  openly,  striking  Him
with  thorns,  and  the  religious,  who  strike  Him  still  more
unpitiably  with  the  knotted  cords  of  secret  sins.  But  both
offend  Him  to  the  face,  and  outrage  the  very  God  of
heaven."

She  then  understood  that  the  Passion  of  our  Lord  is
read  in  the  Gospel*  that  it  may  be  recalled  to  mind  by  His
special  friends,  for  His  glory  and  for  the  good  of  the
Church  ;  that  the  scourging  is  mentioned  therein  twice
according  to  the  vision  which  she  beheld  ;  and  that  charity
is  recommended  in  the  Epistle  to  exercise  us  in  the  love  of
God  arid  our  neighbour ;  suffering  with  God  all  the  op
probriums  which  men  made  Him  suffer,  and  pitying  the
neighbours  for  the  misery  to  which  they  reduce  themselves
by  offending  God  in  this  manner.

At  Mass  the  Saint  began  to  invoke  the  Divine  assist-


*  This  probably  refers  to  the  Gospel  for  Quinquagesima  Sunday
(Luke  xviii.  31),  in  which  it  is  remarkable  that  our  Lord  mentions  the
scourging  twice  :  "  He  shall  be  mocked  and  scourged  and  spat  upon  ;
and  after  they  have  scourged  Him,"  &c.  The  Epistle  is  1  Cor.  xiii.
1-13,  which,  it  Avill  be  remembered,  is  the  Apostle's  great  lesson  of
charity.  The  reference  may  be,  however,  to  the  Matins  ;  and  this
seems  most  probable,  as  the  Mass  is  mentioned  after.  The  Gospel
read  at  the  end  of  Matins  is  the  same :  In  illo  tempore :  Assumpsit
Jesus  duod»cim;  and  the  Little  Chapter  at  Lauds  is  from  the  Epistle  :
Fratres  :  Si  linguishominum  loquor,  &c.


OUK  iA)KD  ASKS  HER  TO  DEFEND  HIM.  349

ance  in  the  words  of  the  lutroit ;  *  but  our  Lord  appeared
to  use  the  same  words  in  addressing  her  as  if  He  needed
her  assistance  against  the  evils  and  cruelties  then  exercised
against  Him,  saying  to  her  :  "  You  are  my  beloved  one  ;
be  My  protector,  by  your  resolution  of  being  My  defence
against  all  those  who  injure  Me  and  treat  Me  with  con
tempt  ;  for  I  come  to  you  to  hide  Me."  Then  the  Saint
embraced  her  Lord,  striving  with  all  her  power  to  draw
Him  into  her  very  soul ;  but  she  became  so  ravished  in
God,  that  she  did  not  know  whether  the  sisters  stood  or
sat  in  the  choir.  When  she  was  told  that  she  was  not
conforming  to  the  accustomed  usage,  she  besought  our
Lord  that  nothing  might  be  observed  of  what  was  passing
within  her.  He  replied  :  "  Let  your  love  keep  your  place
near  Me  ;  and  as  for  yourself,  you  can  attend  to  your  ex
terior  deportment."  "  O  most  loving  Lord,"  she  replied,
"  if  it  is  true  that  my  love  can  keep  my  place  near  Thee,
I  hope  that  reason  will  suffice  to  guide  my  exterior  con
duct,  that  I  may  love  Thee  more  freely."  And  she  obtained
this  gift  from  God  ;  for  while  she  continued  absorbed  in
God,  she  still  followed  exactly  the  common  exercises  of
the  other  religious.


*  Introit  for  Quinquagesima  Sunday  :  Esto  mihi  in  Deum  protec-
torem,  et  in  locum  refugii,  &c.  —  "Be  thou  unto  me  a  God,  a  pro
tector,  and  ft  place  of  refuge  to  save  me,"  &c.


350  THE  11EVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GEETliUDB.


CHAPTER  XIII.
For  Quinquagesima  (continued).

How  acceptable  good  works  are  to  our  Lord  during  the  three  days  of
the  Carnival ;  and  how  such  works  obtain  merit  by  union  with
the  Passion  of  Christ.

ON  the  night  of  Quinquagesima  Sunday  the  Lord  Jesus
appeared  to  Gertrude,  seated  on  a  throne,  and  attended  by
St.  Jyhii  the  Evangelist,  who  sat  at  His  feet  writing.  As
she  inquired  what  he  wrote,  our  Lord  replied  :  "  I  have
desired  him  to  note  carefully  on  this  paper  the  services
which  the  community  rendered  Me  yesterday,  and  I  will
also  have  those  noted  down  which  they  will  render  Me  on
the  two  following  days  ;  so  that  when  I  am  enthroned  as
Judge  by  My  Father,  I  may  render  to  each,  after  her  death,
good  measure  for  what  she  has  done  ;  that  the  fruit  of  My
Passion,  which  is  the  source  of  all  the  merit  and  excel
lence  the  actions  of  men  can  have,  may  render  this  mea
sure  pressed  down ;  and  that  this  parchment  *  which  I  will
bring  to  My  Father  may  render  the  measure  so  heaped  up,
that  it  will  pour  forth  abundantly :  and  this  is  for  the  ser
vices  which  they  render  Me  at  a  time  when  men  overwhelm
Me  with  injuries  by  their  debaucheries  ;  for  as  I  never  fail
in  fidelity,  I  cannot  be  wanting  in  justice  to  those  who  serve
Me.  Furthermore,  although  King  David  acknowledged
during  his  life  the  services  which  his  friends  had  rendered
to  him,  still  he  recommended  Solomon  to  show  favour  after
his  death  to  the  children  of  Berzellai  the  Galaadite,  and  to
admit  them  to  his  table,  because  they  came  to  meet  him  when
he  fled  from  Absoloni.  For  as  the  services  which  we  ren-

*  "  Cartha  "  iu  two  editions  ;  evidently  a  misprint  for  "  Charta."


VISION  OF  ST.  JOHN  WRITING  IN  BLACK  AND  GOLD. 351

der  in  adversity  are  far  more  esteemed  than  those  which
are  rendered  in  prosperity,  so  I  esteem  far  more  the  services
which  are  offered  to  me  now,  when  the  world  offends  Me  so
much  more  than  at  any  other  time.

As  St.  John  sat  and  wrote,  she  saw  him  dipping  his
reed  into  the  horn  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  and  then  the
writing  appeared  black ;  but  when  he  dipped  his  reed  into
the  loving  Wound  of  the  Side  of  Jesus,  the  writing  ap
peared  rose-coloured ;  in  some  places  it  was  diversified  with
black  and  gold.  She  understood  by  this,  that  the  black
writing  signified  the  works  which  were  done  by  the  re
ligious  through  custom,  such  as  fasting,  &c.,  which  all
religious  communities  commence  now ;  that  the  red  letters,
diversified  with  black  and  gold,  indicated  the  works  which
were  done  in  memory  of  our  Lord's  Passion,  to  obtain  grace
or  other  similar  intentions.  But  those  works  which  were
done  purely  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  in  union  with  the
Passion  of  Christ,  for  the  salvation  of  all  mankind,  without
any  view  of  self-interest,  of  grace,  or  merit,  were  written
in  letters  of  pure  gold ;  and  these  works  would  obtain  the
greatest  reward  from  God,  since  what  is  done  purely  for
the  love  and  glory  of  God  is  of  the  highest  merit  and  value,
and  increases  beyond  all  measure  the  recompenses  of  eternal
life.

The  Saint  also  perceived  spaces  between  the  writing ;
and  as  she  inquired  what  this  signified,  our  Lord  replied  :
"As  your  community  is  accustomed  to  remain  with  Me
at  this  time,  and  to  offer  your  petitions  in  honour  of  My
Passion,  I  have  caused  each  thought  and  word  to  be
inscribed  here;  in  the  vacant  places  all  that  you  have
done  in  memory  of  My  Passion,  and  not  from  mere  custom,
is  inscribed."  "But  how  could  all  our  actions  be  thus  ac
ceptable  1 "  inquired  Gertrude.  "  They  would  be  so,"  replied


352 THE  EEVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDK

our  Lord,  "  if  your  fasts,  vigils,  and  regular  discipline  were
performed  in  memory  of  My  Passion,  and  were  offered  to
Me  in  union  with  the  mortification  of  My  senses  which  I
practised  during  My  Passion.  For  although  I  could  have
silenced  My  accusers  by  a  single  word,  I  was  as  a  sheep  led
to  the  slaughter ;  I  inclined  My  head  humbly,  and  cast  My
eyes  to  the  ground,  never  opening  My  lips  before  My  Judge,
or  replying  even  to  one  of  the  false  accusations  which  were
brought  against  Me."

"Ah!"  exclaimed  Gertrude,  "teach  me,  0  best  of
teachers,  how  to  perform  even  one  action  perfectly  in
memory  of  Thy  Passion."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  When  you
are  praying,  extend  your  arms  to  represent  the  manner  in
which  I  extended  Mine  to  God  My  Father  in  My  Passion  ;
and  do  this  for  the  salvation  of  every  member  of  the  Church,
in  union  with  tho  love  with  which  I  stretched  out  My  arms
upon  the  cross."  "  If  I  do  this,"  she  replied,  "  I  must  hide
myself  in  a  corner,  for  it  is  far  from  being  customary."
Our  Lord  replied  :  "  If  any  one  prays  thus  with  his  hands
extended,  without  fear  of  contradiction,  he  pays  Me  the
same  honour  as  one  would  do  who  solemnly  enthroned  a
king."

St.  Gertrude  also  observed  in  these  writings,  that  the
actions  of  those  who,  for  the  love  of  God,  gave  good  ad
vice  to  others,  were  noted  down ;  from  which  we  perceive
the  exceeding  goodness  of  God,  who  not  only  delights
in  procuring  our  salvation,  but  even  seeks  to  recompense
doubly  the  least  good  that  we  do.  Then  the  Saint  said  :
"  0  Lord'!  why  is  it  that  St.  John  has  been  chosen  to  write
these  things  rather  than  our  holy  Father  St.  Benedict,
who  belongs  to  our  own  Order?"  Our  Lord  replied  :  "I
have  chosen  My  beloved  disciple  because  he  has  written  of
the  love  of  God  and  the  neighbour,  therefore  is  most  fit  for


FOR  THE  FIRST  SUNDAY  IN  LENT.  353

this  office  ;  for  I  have  confidence  in  him  that  he  will  record
what  is  most  suitable  to  My  power  and  My  Divinity,  as
well  as  what  will  be  most  for  your  advantage."

On  Ash  Wednesday  St.  Gertrude  came  to  our  Lord,
in  the  person  of  the  Church,  and  with  the  Church,  offering
to  him  the  penance  of  the  fast  for  the  Church  ;  and  she
was  received  by  Him  with  so  many  tokens  of  love,  and  in
so  favourable  a  manner,  that  she  learned  indubitably,  and
by  experience,  the  strength  and  tenderness  of  the  affection
which  Christ  has  for  the  Church  His  Spouse,  in  whose  per
son  she  approached  Him.


CHAPTER  XIV.
Instruction  for  the  First  Sunday  of  Lent.

How  the  soul  is  purified  and  embellished  by  the  merits  of  Jeaus
Christ.

ON  the  Sunday  Invocabit*  as  Gertrude  felt  unable  to  re
ceive  the  Body  of  our  Lord,  she  besought  Him  with  her
whole  heart  to  supply,  by  His  forty  days'  fast,  for  the
dispensations  which  her  infirmity  obliged  her  to  accept.
Then  the  Son  of  God  rose  up  and  knelt  before  His  Father,
with  a  joyful  countenance,  saying :  "  I,  who  am  Thy
only  Son,  co-eternal  and  consubstantial  with  Thee,  know,
by  My  inscrutable  wisdom,  the  defects  of  human  weak
ness  as  man  could  not  know ;  therefore  do  I  abundantly
compassionate  this  weakness,  and,  desiring  to  supply  for  it
perfectly,  I  offer  Thee,  0  holy  Father,  the  restraints  of  My

*  Invocabit :  "  He  shall  call  upon  Me,  and  I  will  hear  him,"  &C.
— Introit  for  the  First  Sunday  in  Lent.

Z


354  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST. OEKTRUDE.

blessed  Mouth,  in  atonement  for  all  sins  of  omission  and
commission  of  which  the  tongues  of  men  are  guilty;  I  offer
Thee,  0  just  Father,  the  restraints  of  My  Ears  for  all  their
sins  of  hearing ;  I  oifer  Thee  the  restraints  of  My  Eyes  for
all  their  sins  committed  by  seeing;  I  offer  Thee  the  re
straints  of  My  Hands  and  Feet  for  all  the  sins  of  those
members.  Lastly,  I  offer  to  Thy  Majesty,  0  most  loving
Father,  My  Divine  Heart  for  all  their  sins  of  thought,
desire,  or  will."

Then  the  Saint  stood  before  God  the  Father,  clothed  in
a  red  and  white  garment,  and  adorned  with  many  orna
ments.  The  white  robe  indicated  the  innocence  conferred
on  her  soul  by  the  mortifications  of  Christ ;  the  red  signified
the  merits  of  His  fasts ;  and  the  diversity  of  ornaments,  the
many  ways  and  exercises  by  which  our  Lord  laboured  for
our  eternal  salvation.  Then  the  Eternal  Father  took  this
soul  thus  adorned,  and  placed  it  at  a  banquet  between  Him
self  and  His  only  Son.  On  the  one  side,  the  splendour  of
the  Divine  omnipotence  overshadowed  her,  to  enhance  her
apparel  and  her  dignity;  on  the  other  side,  she  was  illume
nated  by  the  light  of  the  inscrutable  wisdom  of  God  the  Son,
which  had  adorned  and  embellished  her  with  the  treasures
and  perfections  of  His  life.  Between  these  two  lights  there
was  an  opening,*  through  which  might  be  seen  the  humble
sentiments  which  this  soul  had  of  her  baseness  and  defects  ;
and  her  humility  pleased  God  so  much,  that  it  won  for  her
the  tenderest  affection  of  this  Almighty  King.

Then  our  Lord  placed  before  St.  Gertrude  the  three
victories,  f  which  are  mentioned  in  the  Gospel  of  the  day,

*  "Rima."

+  Our  Lord's  three  victories  over  His  threefold  temptations,  in
the  wilderness,  related  in  the  Gospel  for  the  First  Sunday  of  Lent,
Mutt.  iv.  1-11;  the  Epistle  is  2  Cor.  vi.  1-10.


OUR  LORD'S  THREE  VICTORIES.  355


under  the  form  of  different  kinds  of  food,*  that  they  might
serve  her  as  an  antidote  against  the  three  vices  to  which
men  are  most  subject — namely,  delectation,  consent,  and
concupiscence.t  First,  He  manifested  to  her  the  signal  vic
tory  which  He  had  gained  over  the  devil,  who  tempted  Him
to  the  pleasure  of  eating,  when  he  asked  Him  to  change  the
stones  into  bread,  and  our  Lord  wisely  answered  him,  that
man  doth  not  live  by  bread  alone  ;  and  He  desired  her  to
offer  it  to  God,  in  satisfaction  for  all  the  sins  which  she  might
have  committed  through  love  of  pleasure,  and  to  obtain
strength  to  resist  such  temptations  for  the  time  to  come.
For  the  more  we  yield  to  temptations,  the  less  capable  we
are  of  resisting  them  ;  and  each  may  thus  offer  our  Lord's
victory  for  their  own  needs.  Our  Lord  then  gave  her  His
second  victory  for  the  remission  of  all  the  sins  which  she
might  have  committed  by  consent,  and  to  obtain  grace  for
the  future  to  resist  these  temptations  efficaciously  ;  and
each  may  also  offer  this  victory,  for  the  same  end,  and  with
the  same  advantage,  to  obtain  from  God  the  pardon  of  all
sins  of  thought,  word,  or  act,  and  grace  to  avoid  falling
for  the  time  to  come.  Lastly,  our  Lord  gave  her  His  third
victory  as  a  remedy  against  avarice,  which  desires  the
goods  and  advantages  of  earth,  and  to  obtain  strength  to
resist  this  temptation.

During  the  Epistle  at  Mass,  the  Saint  applied  herself  to
noting  the  virtues  mentioned  therein,  which  she  thought
might  be  most  useful  to  practise  or  to  teach  others  ;  and  as
she  felt  she  needed  the  gift  of  understanding,  she  said  to
the  Lord:  "Teach  me,  O  Beloved,  which  of  these  virtues
will  please  Thee  best ;  for,  alas  !  I  am  not  specially  earnest


*  "Ferculorum."

t  "  DslecLatione,  cousensu,  et  concupiscentia."


356  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.

in  any."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Observe  that  the  words  In
Spiritu  Sancto  ('in  the  Holy  Ghost')  occur  in  the  middle  of
these  victories.  As,  therefore,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  good
will,*  study  above  all  things  to  have  this  good-will,  for  you
will  gain  more  by  it  than  by  any  other  virtue,  and  it  will
obtain  for  you  the  perfection  of  all  virtue.  For  whoever
has  a  perfect  will  to  praise  Me,  if  he  could,  more  than  all
the  world,  or  to  love  Me,  thank  Me,  suffer  with  Me,  or
exercise  himself  in  the  most  perfect  manner  in  all  kinds  of
virtue,  will  certainly  be  recompensed  by  My  Divine  libe
rality  more  advantageously  than  one  who  has  actually
performed  many  other  things."  Then  the  Holy  Spirit
appeared  before  Gertrude,  enlightening  in  a  marvellous
manner  that  place  where  the  depravity  and  imperfection  of
her  soul  could  be  seen  ;  so  that,  the  virtue  of  this  Divine
light  having  entirely  removed  her  defects,  she  found  herself
happily  immersed  in  the  Source  of  eternal  light.


CHAPTER  XV.
For  the  Monday  after  the  First  Sunday  of  Lent.

Of  the  true  manner  of  spiritually  performing  the  corporal  works  of
mercy,

THE  second  feria  after  the  Sunday  Invocalit,  as  these  words
were  read  in  the  Gospel,  f  "Come,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father  ;
for  I  was  hungry,"  <fec.,  St.  Gertrude  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  0
my  Lord,  since  we  cannot  feed  the  hungry  and  give  drink
to  the  thirsty,  because  our  Rule  forbids  us  to  possess  any-

*  "  Spiritus  Sanctus  est  bona  voluntas."

t  Gospel  for  the  Monday  after  tho  First  Sunday  in  Lent,  Matt.
«v.  31-46.


HOW  TO  PERFORM  WORKS  OF  MERCY  SPIRITUALLY. 357

thing  of  our  own,  teach  me  how  we  may  participate  in  the
sweet  blessings  with  which  Thou  hast  promised  in  this
Gospel  to  reward  works  of  mercy."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "As
I  am  the  Salvation  and  Life  of  the  soul,  and  as  1  continu
ally  hunger  and  thirst  for  the  salvation  of  men,  if  you
endeavour  to  study  some  words  of  Scripture  every  day  for
the  benefit  of  others,  you  will  bestow  on  Me  a  most  sweet
refection.  If  you  read  with  the  intention  of  obtaining  the
grace  of  compunction  or  devotion,  you  appease  My  thirst
by  giving  Me  an  agreeable  beverage  to  drink.  If  you  em
ploy  yourself  in  recollection  for  an  hour  each  day,  you  give
Me  hospitality ;  and  if  you  apply  yourself  daily  to  acquire
some  new  virtue,  you  clothe  Me.  You  visit  Me  when  sick,
by  striving  to  overcome  temptation,  and  to  conquer  your
evil  inclinations  ;  and  you  visit  Me  in  prison,  and  solace  My
afflictions  with  the  sweetest  consolations,  when  you  pray
for  sinners  and  for  the  souls  in  purgatory."  He  added :
"  Those  who  perform  these  devotions  daily  for  My  love,
especially  during  the  holy  season  of  Lent,  will  most  cer
tainly  receive  the  tenderest  and  most  bountiful  recompense
which  My  incomprehensible  omnipotence,  My  inscrutable
wisdom,  and  My  most  loving  benevolence,  can  bestow."


CHAPTER  XVI.


For  the  Second  Sunday  in  Lent.

ion  of  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ  for  th
Church.

ON  the  Sunday  Reminiscere*  St  Gertrude,  being  favoured


Of  the  oblation  of  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  sins  of  the
Church.


*  "Remember,  O  Lord,  Thy  compassions  and  Thy  mercies,"  &c.
—  Introit,  Second  Sunday  in  Lent.


358 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


with  singular  marks  of  the  love  and  tenderness  of  her
Spouse,  such  as  no  human  being  could  describe,  besought
our  Lord  to  indicate  some  practice  which  might  be  profit
able  during  this  week.  Our  Lord  replied:  "Bring  Me
two  good  kids* — I  mean  the  souls  and  the  bodies  of  all
mankind."

The  Saint  understood  from  this  that  she  was  required
to  make  satisfaction  for  all  mankind;  and  then,  impelled
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  she  said  the  Pater  noster  five  times,  in
honour  of  the  Five  Wounds  of  our  Lord,  in  satisfaction  for
all  the  sins  which  men  had  committed  by  the  five  senses ;
and  three  times  for  the  sins  committed  by  the  three  powers
of  the  soul — namely,  by  reason,  temper,  and  concupiscence  ;t
and  for  all  omissions  or  commissions  :  offering  this  prayer
with  the  same  intention,  and  for  the  same  end,  as  our
Lord  had  formed  it  in  His  sweetest  Heart ;  that  is  to  say,
in  satisfaction  for  all  the  sins  of  frailty,  ignorance,  or
malice  which  man  had  opposed  to  His  omnipotent  power,
His  inscrutable  wisdom,  and  His  overflowing  and  gratuit
ous  goodness.

When  Gertrude  offered  this  prayer,  our  Lord  appeared
to  take  an  incredible  pleasure  therein,  and  made  the  sign
of  the  cross  on  her  from  her  head  to  her  feet ;  blessing  her,
and  then  embracing  her,  He  led  her  to  His  Father  to  re
ceive  His  benediction  also.  God  the  Father  also  received
her  with  great  condescension  and  magnificence,  and  blessed
her  in  so  ineffable  a  manner,  that  He  gave  her  as  many
benedictions  as  He  would  have  given  to  the  whole  world
if  it  had  been  prepared  to  receive  this  favour  and  grace.

This  prayer  may  be  offered  to  God  during  this  week  to


*  "  Duos  hsedos  optimos."
f  "Rational!,  irrascibili,  et  concupiscibili.'


FOR  THE  THIRD  SUNDAY  IN  LEST.  359


obtain  the  pardon  of  our  sins  and  omissions,  and  in  satis
faction  for  the  sins  of  the  Church,  that  we  may  obtain  the
effect  of  so  salutary  a  benediction  through  the  merits  of
Jesus  Christ,  who  with  such  condescension  and  goodness
has  deigned  to  be  the  Spouse  and  Head  of  His  Church.


CHAPTER  XVII.

For  ike  Third  Sunday  of  Lent.

How  we  may  obtain  a  share  in  the  merits  of  the  Life  of
Jesus  Christ.

ON  the  Sunday  Oculi,*  as  the  Saint  desired,  as  usual,  to
conform  her  devotions  to  the  Church's  offices,  she  asked
our  Lord  to  teach  her  how  she  should  occupy  herself
daring  this  week.  He  replied:  if  As  in  chanting  your
Office  during  this  week  you  record  how  Joseph  was  sold
by  his  brethren  for  twenty  pieces  of  silver,t  recite  the  Pater
nosier  thirty-three  times,  and  thus  purchase  the  merit  of
My  most  holy  Life,  which  lasted  for  three-and  thirty  years,
during  which  I  laboured  for  the  salvation  of  men ;  and
communicate  the  fruit  of  what  you  thus  acquire  to  the
whole  Church,  for  the  salvation  of  men  and  My  eternal
glory."  As  the  Saint  complied  with  this  direction,  she  per-


*  Oculi — Introit  for  Third  Sunday  in  Lent.

f  The  Lessons  of  the  i.  Nocturn  for  the  Third  Sunday  in  Lent  are
taken  from  the  37th  chapter  of  Genesis,  which  details  the  history  of
Joseph  sold  into  Egypt.  In  an  Italian  translation  of  1606  it  is
"  trenta  dinari  ;  "  and  in  the  French,  "  trente  deniers  ;  "  two  Latin
editions  have  "  xxx.  denariis  "  also — probably  a  mistake  of  a  tran
scriber,  which  has  been  thoughtlessly  perpetuated.


360 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

ceived  in  spirit  that  the  whole  Church  was  like  a  spouse
adorned  and  embellished  in  a  marvellous  manner  with  the
fruit  of  the  perfect  life  of  Jesus  Christ.


CHAPTER  XVIII.

For  the  Fourth  Sunday  of  Lent.

The  Saint  is  instructed  how  to  atone  for  the  sins  of  the  Chureh.

ON  Lcetare  Sunday,  as  the  Saint  sought  for  some  instruction
from  our  Lord  how  to  spend  this  week,  He  replied  to  her  :
"  Bring  those  persons  to  Me  whose  souls  you  prepared
seven  days  since,  through  the  virtue  of  My  Life ;  for  they
must  eat  at  My  table."  She  replied  :  "  How  can  I  do  this  ?
For  myself,  however  unworthy  I  am,  I  will  venture  to  say,
that  if  I  could  bring  to  Thee  all  the  children  of  men,  in
whom  Thou  dost  take  delight,  I  would  willingly  traverse
the  whole  earth  with  bare  feet  from  this  moment  until  the
day  of  judgment,  and  carry  them  in  my  arms  to  Thee,  to
correspond,  in  some  manner,  with  Thy  infinite  love.  And
were  it  possible  for  me  to  do  so,  I  would  divide  my  heart
into  as  many  portions  as  there  are  men  living  in  the  world,
to  impart  to  each  a  share  in  the  good-will  which  is  most
pleasing  to  Thy  Divine  Heart."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Your
good-will  suffices  and  satisfies  Me  perfectly."  Then  she
beheld  the  whole  Church  marvellously  adorned  and  pre
sented  to  the  Lord,  who  said  to  her :  "  You  shall  serve  all
this  multitude  to-day."

Then  St.  Gertrude  cast  herself  at  the  feet  of  her  Spouse,
being  divinely  inspired,  and  kissed  the  Wound  of  His  Left
Foot,  in  satisfaction  for  all  the  sins  which  had  ever  been
committed  in  the  Church,  by  thought,  will,  or  desire ;  be-


HER  PRAYKRS  FOR  THE  CHURCH. 361

seeching  our  Lord  to  give  her  for  this  purpose  the  perfect
satisfaction  which  He  had  made  by  washing  away  the  sins
of  all  men.  Our  Lord  then  imparted  this  grace  to  her  under
the  form  of  bread,  which  she  immediately  offered  Him  with
thanksgiving,  and  which  He  received  with  great  condescen
sion,  and,  raising  His  eyes  to  His  Eternal  Father,  blessed
it,  and  gave  it  to  her  to  distribute  to  His  Church.  Then
she  kissed  the  Right  Foot  of  our  Lord,  in  satisfaction  for  the
omissions  of  the  faithful  in  good  thoughts  and  desires,  and
in  good-will ;  beseeching  our  Lord  to  impart  to  them  a  share
in  that  perfect  satisfaction  which  He  had  made  for  the
debts  of  all  men.  Then  she  kissed  the  Wound  of  the  Left
Hand,  in  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,
whether  committed  byword  or  deed  ;  beseeching  our  Lord  to
grant  the  merits  of  His  words  and  actions  for  this  intention.
She  then  kissed  the  Wound  of  the  Right  Hand,  in  satisfac
tion  for  the  omissions  of  good  words  and  works  ;  beseech
ing  our  Lord  to  impart  the  plenitude  and  perfection  of
His  action  to  supply  what  was  deficient  in  His  Church.

At  each  of  these  offerings  she  received  bread,  and  returned
each  portion  to  our  Lord,  who  blessed  it,  and  gave  it  to
her  to  distribute  to  the  Church.  Then  she  approached  the
loving  Wound  of  the  Side  of  Jesus,  and  embracing  it  with
her  whole  heart,  besought  Him  to  supply  to  His  Spouse
the  Church  what  was  wanting  to  her  perfection  and  merits,
even  after  He  had  so  perfectly  expiated  her  sins,  and  so
fully  supplied  for  her  defects  ;  so  that  His  Divine  Life —
which  is  agreeable  in  the  sight  of  God  the  Father,  and
shines  with  such  surpassing  brightness — might  become  her
crown  and  everlasting  beatitude.  Then  the  Saint  rejoiced
for  the  grace  which  God  had  given  her,  and  distributed
these  loaves  as  one  would  a  dessert  after  a  meal,  and  said
to  our  Lord  ;  "  Ah,  Lord!  what  wilt  Thou  give  me  for  Thy


302 THE  RLVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Spouse  the  Church,  instead  of  the  fish  which  are  mentioned
in  to-day's  Gospel  ?  "  *  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  I  will  give  you
all  My  most  perfect  actions  to  distribute  to  those  who  have
neglected  to  serve  Me  as  much  as  they  oughc  to  have  done,
and  all  the  most  noble  actions  of  My  soul  to  atone  for  their
coldness  and  want  of  fervour  in  praising  Me  for  the  benefits
which  they  have  received  from  Me."

By  the  loaves  which  our  Lord  presented  to  the  Saint
she  understood  that  whenever  any  one  performs  a  good
action  for  God — even  should  it  be  only  to  say  a  Pater  nosier
or  Ave  Maria,  or  any  other  prayer  for  the  Church — that
the  Son  of  God  receives  it  as  if  it  were  the  fruit  of  His  holy
Humanity,  and  offers  it  to  God  His  Father,  blessing  it  and
multiplying  it  by  this  benediction,  so  that  it  may  be  dis
tributed  for  the  good  and  advancement  of  the  whole
Church.

This  devotion  may  be  performed  by  any  one  who  says
five  Pater  nosters  in  honour  of  our  Lord's  Five  Wounds,
kissing  them  in  spirit,  and  praying  for  all  sinners  who
are  in  the  bosom  of  the  Church,  to  obtain  the  remission
of  their  sins  and  negligences,  if  they  hope  firmly  to  receive
this  grace  from  the  Divine  goodness.


*  Gospel  for  Fourth  Sunday  in  Lent,  John  vi.  1-15,  which  re
lates  the  miraculous  multiplication  of  the  five  loaves  and  the  two
fishes,  and  so  renders  the  mystical  offering  of  the  five  loaves  given
to  the  Saint  in  peculiar  harmony  with  the  offices  of  the  day.


OF  ST.  GREGORY,  POPE.  363

CHAPTER  XIX.
For  the  Feast  of  St.  Gregory,  Pope.

Of  the  glory  and  prerogatives  of  St.  Gregory,  and  the  recompense-
reserved  for  this  Doctor  of  the  Church.

As  St.  Gertrude  heard  Mass  on  the  Feast  of  St.  Gregory,*
and  offered  him  singular  testimonies  of  veneration  and  de
votion,  he  appeared  to  her  full  of  majesty  and  glory ;  and
she  thought  that  he  equalled  all  the  saints  in  merit.  He
was  a  Patriarch,  by  the  careful  and  paternal  diligence  with
which  he  watched,  night  and  day,  over  the  Church  which
had  been  confided  to  him  ;  a  Prophet,  since  in  his  admir
able  writings  he  had  discovered  the  snares  and  deceits  of
the  ancient  enemy,  and  had  given  advice  and  remedies
against  his  wiles,  so  that  he  was  more  glorified  than  any  of
the  Prophets.  He  equalled  the  Apostles  from  his  inviolable
and  faithful  attachment  to  God  in  prosperity  and  adversity,
and  by  his  zeal  in  the  promotion  of  the  Gospel.  He  re
sembled  the  martyrs  and  confessors  by  his  great  bodily
austerities,  and  the  ardent  love  which  he  had  for  religion
and  holiness.  Above  all,  he  excelled  in  chastity ;  and  as  a
recompense  for  his  virginal  purity,  he  enjoyed  an  incom
parable  glory  for  every  thought,  word,  or  work  which  had
been  accomplished  to  preserve  the  purity  of  his  body  and
soul,  or  to  teach  others  to  preserve  the  same  treasure.

*  St  Gregory  was  born  at  Rorae  about  the  year  540.  The  Eng
lish  nation  owes  him  a  singular  debt  of  gratitude  for  his  zeal  for
their  conversion.  He  would  himself  have  undertaken  the  mission
which  he  so  ardently  desired  ;  but  at  the  request,  or  rather  the
clamorous  demand,  of  the  whole  city  of  Rome,  he  was  recalled  by
the  Pope,  then  Benedict  I.,  when  on  his  road  to  England.
occurs  on  the  12th  March.


364 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


Our  Lord  then  said  to  St.  Gertrude  :  "  Consider,  now,
how  suitable  this  Psalm  is  to  this  elect  soul — '  According
to  the  multitude  of  my  sorrows  in  my  heart.  Thy  comforts
have  given  joy  to  my  soul'  (Ps.  xciii.  19) — since  he  has
been  recompensed  by  these  inestimable  delights  for  all  the
pain  he  suffered  in  word  or  works,  or  even  in  thought.
At  his  death,  which  is  commemorated  to-day,  his  body  did
not  rejoice  because  it  had  to  pass  through  the  torrent  of
death  ;  and  the  whole  Church,  as  well  as  those  who  stood
round  him  on  that  day,  were  exceedingly  afflicted  at  being
deprived  of  so  affectionate  and  thoughtful  a  father.  But
now,  on  the  same  day,  there  is  the  greatest  joy  when  his
solemn  feast  is  observed."

Then  Gertrude  said  to  her  Lord  :  "  What  glory  hast
Thou  gained  by  the  writings  of  this  Saint,  which  have  so
enriched  and  enlightened  the  Church  ?  "  He  replied  :  "  My
Divinity  and  My  Humanity  find  extreme  delight  therein,
and  he  himself  enjoys  the  same  delight  with  Me  whenever
the  Church  recites  any  of  his  writings,  and  whenever  any
one  is  moved  by  them  to  compunction,  excited  to  devotion,
or  influenced  by  love.  And  for  this  he  receives  the  same
honour  from  the  celestial  court  as  a  soldier  or  a  prince
whom  the  king  clothed  in  his  own  garments  and  fed  at
his  own  table."  He  added  :  "  St.  Augustine  and  St.  Ber
nard,  whom  you  love  so  much,  and  the  other  Doctors  of
the  Church,  enjoy  the  same  honour  and  the  same  preroga
tive,  each  according  to  the  merit  and  the  utility  of  his
labours."

While  the  twelfth  Response  was  chanted,  which  com
mences  with  the  words,  0  Pastor,*  St.  Gregory  knelt  be
fore  God,  and  lifted  up  his  hands  interceding  for  the


*  Not  in  present  Office.


OF  THE  GLORIOUS  ST.  BENEDICT.  365


Church.  Then  the  Lord  opened  His  Divine  Heart,  that
he  might  take  what  he  would  ;  and  the  Saint,  placing  both
hands  therein,  took  from  thence  the  grace  of  Divine  conso
lation,  and  poured  it  forth  for  the  necessities  of  the  Church.
Then  she  beheld  the  Lord  encircling  him  with  a  magnifi
cent  cincture  of  the  purest  gold.  This  cincture  indicated
the  justice  of  God,  which  withheld  him  from  descending  on
the  earth — suspending  him  in  the  air,  to  prevent  him  from
bestowing  these  graces  on  the  ungrateful  and  unworthy ;
but  permitting  him  to  give  them  freely  to  those  who  desired
and  merited  them.


CHAPTER  XX.

For  the  Feast  of  the  glorious  St.  Benedict.

DIH  beatitude  and  glory  of  this  Saint  shown  to  St.  Gertrude —
The  particular  recompense  reserved  for  those  who  observe  re
gular  discipline  faithfully.

ON  the  Feast  of  the  glorious  father  St.  Benedict,*  St.  Ger
trude  assisted  at  Matins  with  special  devotion  to  honour  so
excellent  a  father ;  and  she  beheld  him  in  spirit,  standing
in  the  presence  of  the  effulgent  and  ever-peaceful  Trinity,


*  The  life  of  the  great  St.  Benedict  is  too  well  known  to  re
quire  comment  here.  He  founded  twelve  monasteries  during  hi»
life  ;  and  since  his  happy  death,  thousands  of  saintly  souls  have
lived  and  died  under  his  holy  Rule,  distinguished  for  that  which
alons  could  constitute  them  his  true  children — the  faithful  observ
ance  of  his  Rule,  and  communion  with  the  Holy  Catholic  Church,
by  which  it  has  been  sanctioned,  and  which  alone  could  authorise
its  use  or  the  profession  of  its  observances.  His  feast  is  kept  on
the  21st  of  March.


366  THE  REVELATIONS  OB1  ST.  GERTRUDE.


radiant  with  glory.  His  countenance  was  full  of  majesty
and  beauty;  his  habit  shone  surpassingly;  while  bright
and  living  roses  seemed  to  spring  forth  from  his  limbs,
each  rose  producing  another,  and  these  others,  the  last  sur
passing  the  first  in  fragrance  and  beauty,  so  that  our  holy
father,  blessed  both  by  grace  and  by  name,*  being  thus
adorned,  gave  the  greatest  pleasure  to  the  adorable  Trinity
and  the  heavenly  court,  who  rejoiced  with  him  because  of
his  beatitude.  The  roses  which  thus  sprang  forth  from
him  signified  the  exercises  which  he  had  used  to  subjugate
his  flesh  to  his  spirit,  and  all  the  holy  actions  which  he
had  performed,  and  also  those  of  all  whom  he  had  drawn
by  his  persuasions  or  induced  by  his  example  to  leave  the
world  and  live  under  regular  discipline,  who,  following
him  in  this  royal  road,  had  attained,  or  will  yet  attain,  to
the  port  of  the  celestial  country  and  to  life  eternal,  each  of
whom  is  a  subject  of  particular  glory  to  this  great  patri
arch  ;  and  for  which  all  the  saints  praise  God,  and  congratu
late  him  continually.

St.  Benedict  also  carried  a  sceptre,  which  was  marvel
lously  embellished  on  each  side  with  precious  stones  of  great
brilliancy.  As  he  held  it  in  his  hand,  the  side  which  was
turned  towards  him  emitted  a  glorious  light,  which  indicated
the  happiness  of  those  who  had  embraced  his  Rule  and
amended  their  lives,  and  on  their  account  God  overwhelmed
him  with  inconceivable  joy.  On  the  side  which  was  turned
towards  God,  the  Divine  justice  shone  forth  which  had  been
magnified  in  the  condemnation  of  those  who  had  been  called
to  this  holy  Order,  but  who  had  rendered  themselves  un
worthy  of  it,  and  therefore  had  been  condemned  to  eternal
flames  ;  for  it  is  just  that  he  whom  God  has  called  to  the


"  Sanctissimus  Pater,  gratia  et  nomine  Benedictus.'


HOW  ST. BENKDfCT  UIKD  STANDING  AND PRAYING 307


holiest  of  Orders  should  be  most  severely  punished  if  he
lives  an  evil  life.

Now,  as  St.  Gertrude  offered  the  blessed  father  the
recital  of  the  entire  Psalter  in  his  honour,  on  the  part  of
the  community,  he  appeared  exceedingly  rejoiced,  and  he
offered  the  verdure  with  which  he  was  adorned  for  the
welfare  of  those  who  sought  his  protection  with  pure
hearts,  and  walked  in  his  footsteps  by  faithful  observance
of  his  Rule.

While  the  Response,  Grandi  Pater  fiducia  morte  stetit
preciosa*  was  chanted,  St.  Gertrude  said  to  him  :  "  Holy
father,  what  special  reward  have  you  received  for  your
glorious  death?"  He  replied:  "Because  I  gave  up  my
last  breath  while  I  was  in  prayer,  I  now  emit  a  breath  of
such  surpassing  sweetness,  that  the  saints  delight  to  be
near  me."  Then  she  besought  him,  by  his  glorious  death,
to  assist  each  religious  of  that  monastery  in  their  last  hour.
The  venerable  father  replied  :  "  All  who  invoke  me,  re
membering  the  glorious  end  with  which  God  honoured  me,
shall  be  assisted  by  me  at  their  death  with  such  fidelity,
that  I  will  place  myself  where  I  see  the  enemy  most  dis
posed  to  attack  them;  thus,  being  fortified  by  my  presence,
they  will  escape  the  snares  which  he  lays  for  them,  and
depart  happily  and  peacefully  to  the  enjoyment  of  eternal
beatitude."


*  This  Kespousory  is  not  in  tho  present  Ofii.-a.


368 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


CHAPTER  XXI.

For  the  Vigil  and  Feast  of  the  Annunciation.
Exercises  of  devotion  to  the  Blessed  Virgin.

As  St.  Gertrude  heard  the  bell  for  Chapter  on  the  Vigil  of
the  Annunciation,  and  endeavoured  to  recollect  herself  in
God,  she  beheld  the  Lord  Jesus  and  His  Virgin  Mother
seated  in  the  place  of  the  Superior,*  and  waiting  with
great  tranquillity  until  the  sisters  had  assembled,  receiving
each  as  she  entered  with  the  tenderest  marks  of  friendship
and  affection.  When  the  Feast  of  the  Annunciation  was
read  in  the  Marty rology,t  Jesus  turned  to  His  Mother  and
saluted  her  with  such  goodness  and  condescension,  as  to
renew  in  her  that  sweet  and  inestimable  joy  which  she  had
felt  when  His  Divinity  took  flesh  in  her  womb,  and  united
itself  to  our  nature.  When  the  community  began  to  recite
the  Miserere,  our  Lord  placed  each  word  in  the  hand  of
His  Virgin  Mother  under  the  form  of  pearls  of  different
colours.  She  saw  that  the  Blessed  Virgin  had  a  quantity
of  sweet  perfumes  *  in  her  bosom,  which  she  mixed  with
the  pearls — that  is,  with  the  prayers  of  the  religious —
which  her  Son  had  presented  to  her.


*  In  the  Life  of  the  venerable  Mother  Ann  of  St.  Bartholomew,
the  special  friend  and  confidante  of  St.  Teresa,  she  says:  "When
the  Saint  (Teresa)  held  Chapter  at  Avila,  I  beheld  Jesus  Christ
at  her  side,  clothed  in  such  splendour,  that  the  religious  appeared
to  me  quite  deified  ('toutes  divinisees ') ;  and,  in  truth,  they  left
the  Chapter  with  overflowing  hearts,  and  filled  with  ineffable  con
solation."

t  "Kalendario."  J  "  Olf actoriola. "


FOR  THE  FEAST  OF  THE  ANNUNCIATION.  369


The  Saint  understood  that  these  perfumes  signified
the  crosses  which  the  religious  had  suffered  on  the  preced
ing  day,  without  having  given  any  occasion  for  them  ;
and  when  she  marvelled  why  these  crosses  were  repre
sented  as  perfumes,  our  Lord  told  her  :  "  As  a  delicate
person  is  more  pleased  with  perfumes  than  with  any  other
present,  so  do  I  delight  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  suffer
their  trials  with  humility,  patience,  and  thanksgiving,
abandoning  themselves  entirely  to  My  paternal  good
ness,  which  converts  both  prosperity  and  adversity  to  their
good."

As  Gertrude  began  to  reflect  why  our  Lord  had  in
structed  her  now  and  on  many  other  occasions  by  corporal
visions,  he  recalled  to  her  mind  the  words  which  had  been
chanted  that  day  of  the  closed  gate  which  the  Prophet
Ezechiel  had  seen,*  and  said  to  her  :  "  As  I  have  explained
the  manner  and  order  of  My  Incarnation,  Passion,  and
Resurrection  to  the  prophets  by  mystical  figures  and  simili
tudes,  so  I  use  sensible  things  to  make  men  comprehend
what  surpasses  the  apprehension  of  their  senses.  For  this
reason,  no  one  should  esteem  spiritual  things  less  because
they  are  represented  under  corporal  images;  but  rather


*  Ez.  xliv.  2 :  "  The  eastern  gate,  through  which  the  prince  alone
could  pass."  This  passage  is  not  referred  to  in  the  present  Office  for
the  Annunciation  ;  but  it  is  mentioned  in  i.  Ant.  ii.  Vespers  in
Responsorialia  et  Antiphonaria  S.  Gregorii  Papce.  The  Fathers  fre
quently  refer  this  passage  to  the  Blessed  Virgin,  as  the  true  eastern
gate,  which  opened  only  to  the  King,  and  never  admitted  any  other.
St.  Augustine,  in  his  sermon  on  the  Nativity,  says  :  "  The  closed  gate
indicates  purity,  and  the  integrity  of  the  immaculate  flesh  ;  it  is  not
defiled  by  childbirth  ;  it  becomes  more  holy  by  conception."  St.
Bernard  says  :  "  She  is  prefigured  by  the  eastern  gate  in  Ezechid'a
vision,  through  which  only  one  could  pass."

2 A


370 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


should  endeavour  to  render  themselves  capable  thereby  of
tasting  the  sweetness  contained  therein."

While  the  Ave  Maria  *  was  chanted  at  Matins,  St.  Ger
trude  beheld  three  streams,  which  flowed  with  a  gentle  im
petuosity  from  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost
into  the  heart  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  flowed  back  again
from  her  heart  with  the  same  impetuosity  to  its  original
source.  The  Saint  understood  by  this  that  the  Blessed
Virgin  is  most  powerful  after  the  Father,  most  wise  aftei
the  Son,  and  most  benign  after  the  Holy  Ghost,  t  She
knew  also,  when  any  one  recited  the  Ave  Maria  with  de
votion,  that  these  three  streams  sweetly  encompassed  the
Blessed  Virgin,  and  then  returned  to  their  source  in  the
Heart  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  from  them  little  streams  of  joy
and  salvation  flow  forth  on  the  saints  and  angels,  and
especially  on  those  who  recite  the  Angelic  Salutation  with
devotion,  which  renews  in  them  all  the  benefits  which  they
acquire  by  the  Incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God.

Each  time  also  that  they  recited  any  words  referring  to
the  chastity  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  such  as  these  :  "  Domu^
pudici  pectoris  ;  clausa  parentis  viscera,"  <kc.,  J  all  the  saints
rose  up,  and  reverenced  her  as  their  queen  and  mistress,
returning  most  fervent  thanks  to  God  for  all  the  favours
which  He  had  granted  to  men  through  her.  The  Arch-
.•uigel  Gabriel  appeared  also  as  if  arrayed  in  a  new  brilliancy
each  time  that  the  Annunciation  was  mentioned,  which  was
effected  by  his  ministry ;  and  at  the  name  of  St.  Joseph,


*  Kesponse  after  ii.  Lesson,  i.  Nocturn.

t  "  Potentissima  post  Patrem  ;  sapientissima  postFilium;  et  be-
nignissima  post  Spiritura  Sanctum."

+  From  the  hymn  at  Lauds  on  Christmas-day,  A  solis  ortits  cardinc,
which  may  have  been  then  sung  on  the  Nativity  of  the  Blessed  Virgin


HOW  ST.  JOSEPH  IS  HONOURED  IN  HEAVEN.  371

the  spouse  of  the  Virgin  Mother,  all  the  saints  made  a  pro
found  inclination  to  him,  testifying,  by  the  serenity  and
sweetness  of  their  looks,  that  they  rejoiced  with  him  for
his  exalted  dignity.

During  Mass,  at  which  St.  Gertrude  communicated,  she
beheld  the  Mother  of  God,  gloriously  adorned  with  every
virtue ;  and  she  prostrated  humbly  at  her  feet,  beseeching
her  to  dispose  her  to  receive  worthily  the  august  Sacra
ment  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  her  Divine  Son.  The
Blessed  Virgin  then  gave  her  a  magnificent  necklace,  which
had  seven  rays  or  points,  to  each  of  which  a  precious  stone
was  attached,  and  these  stones  indicated  the  signal  virtues
which  had  pleased  our  Lord  most  in  His  Blessed  Mother.
The  first  was  her  exquisite  purity  ;  the  second,  her  faith
ful  humility  ;  the  third,  her  ardent  desires  ;  the  fourth,
her  clear  knowledge  ;  the  fifth,  her  unquenchable  love  ;
the  sixth,  the  sovereign  pleasure  which  she  took  in  God  ;
the  seventh,  her  peaceful  tranquillity.  When  St.  Gertrude
appeared  before  our  Lord  with  this  collar,  He  was  so  won
by  the  brilliancy  of  her  virtues,  that  He  inclined  lovingly
towards  her  ;  drawing  her  to  Himself,  and  enclosing  her
as  it  were  in  His  bosom,  He  honoured  her  with  His  pure
and  holy  caresses.

At  the  Antipbon  for  the  Magnificat — Arte  mirabili* —
the  Holy  Spirit  appeared  to  come  forth  from  the  Heart  of
our  Lord  like  a  soft  wind,  which  gently  moved  the  collar
with  which  the  Saint  was  adorned,  chanting  this  Antiphon
us  on  a  musical  instrument  in  honour  of  the  Most  Holy
Trinity.  Then,  at  the  words  of  the  Gospel  Ecce  andlla,  St.
Gertrude  saluted  the  Mother  of  God  with  great  devotion


*  This  Antiphon  is  not  in  the  present  Benedictine  Breviary.
one-  now  user!  commences,  "Gabriel  angelus  locutus  est  Mariae."


372 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

recalling  to  her  the  ineffable  joy  which  she  had  experienced
when  she  abandoned  herself  and  all  that  concerned  her,
with  perfect  confidence,  to  the  Divine  will.  The  Blessed
Virgin  replied  to  her,  with  a  look  of  exceeding  serenity :
"  When  any  one  reminds  me  devoutly  of  this,  I  will  truly
be  to  them  what  they  ask  in  the  hymn  Monstra  te  esse  ma-
trem,*  which  is  used  on  this  Feast,  showing  myself  in  truth
the  Mother  of  the  King  of  Glory  and  the  advocate  of  men,
using  my  power  with  the  King  to  succour  them,  and
assisting  them  with  the  tenderest  compassion."

When  the  Antiphon  Ucec  est  dies  f  was  chanted,  at  the
words,  "  Hodie  Deus  homo  factus  est,"  the  community
prostrated,  to  honour  the  glorious  Incarnation  of  our
Lord,  and  the  Son  of  God,  remembering  the  love  which  had
made  Him  become  man,  rose  from  His  regal  throne,  and,
standing  before  His  Father,  said  to  Him  :  "  Eternal  Father,
My  brethren  are  come  to  Me"  (Gen.  xlvi.  31).  And  the
Eternal  Father  was  moved  to  compassionate  and  show
grace  to  these  brethren  for  whom  His  only  and  beloved
Son  interceded  thus  lovingly  and  tenderly,  with  infinitely
more  affection  than  Pharao  felt  for  Joseph  when  he  rejoiced
with  him  at  the  arrival  of  his  brothers.

As  St.  Gertrude  inquired  what  devotion  would  be  most
acceptable  to  the  Blessed  Virgin  at  this  time,  she  taught
her  that  any  one  who  recited  the  Ave  Maria  devoutly  forty-
five  times  each  day  during  the  Octave,  in  memory  of  th«


' '  Show  thyself  a  mother ;
Offer  Him  our  sighs,
Who  for  us  incarnate
Did  not  thee  despise."

From  the  hymn  Ave  maris  Stella,  at  Vespers,  Feasts  of  the  Blessed
Virgin.

t  This  was  formerly  sung  at  procession  after  Vespers. Gerber^
Vet.  Lit.  Allmannicce,  p.  ii.  p.  231.


INSTRUCTION  IN  THE  "  AVE  MARIA."  373

time  our  Lord  had  remained  in  her  holy  womb,  they  would
render  her  the  same  service  as  if  they  had  attended  her
with  the  greatest  care  from  the  moment  of  the  conception
to  the  time  of  the  birth ;  and  as  she  couid  have  refused
them  nothing  under  such  circumstances,  so  now  she  would
be  equally  willing  to  give  all  they  asked.

Tho  Saint  was  then  instructed  to  say  the  Ave  Maria  in
this  manner :  at  the  words  "  Ave  Maria,"  to  desire  the
consolation  of  the  afflicted  ;  at  the  words  "  gratia  plena,"  to
ask  grace  for  those  who  had  it  not ;  at  "  Dominus  tecum,"
to  pray  for  sinners  ;  at  "  benedicta  tu  in  mulieribus,"  to
ask  grace  for  those  who  had  begun  to  live  well ;  at  "  be-
nedictus  fructus  ventris,"  to  pray  for  the  perfection  of  the
elect ;  to  repeat  the  words  "  Jesus,  splendor-paternse  chari-
tatis,"  that  all  may  know  Him ;  and  "  figura  substantiae
ejus,"  to  obtain  Divine  love  :  for  these  words — "  Jesus,
splendour  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  image  of  His  substance"
— should  be  repeated  at  the  end  of  each  Ave  Maria.


CHAPTER  XXII.

For  Passion  Sunday.
Exercises  of  devotion  for  that  day.

ON  the  Sunday  Judica,  St.  Gertrude  having  offered  her
body  and  soul  to  our  Lord,  that  she  might  suffer  therein,
in  honour  of  His  Passion,  whatever  afflictions  He  might
please  to  send  her,  her  offering  was  accepted  graciously  ;
and  the  Saint,  impelled  by  Divine  inspiration,  commenced
to  salute  and  adore  the  different  members  of  our  Lord's
Body  which  had  suffered  for  us  during  His  Passion.  As
she  saluted  each  member,  a  Diviue  «>nlendour  shone  forth


374 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

from  each,  which  enlightened  her  soul,  by  means  of  which
the  innocence  which  our  Lord  acquired  for  His  Church  waa
communicated  to  her.  When  she  was  thus  enriched  and
adorned  with  the  innocence  of  Jesus  Christ,  she  said  to  our
Lord  :  "  Teach  me,  0  Lord,  I  beseech  Thee,  how  I  can
worthily  honour  Thy  Divine  Passion  with  the  innocence
with  which  Thy  goodness  has  endowed  me."  Our  Lord
replied  :  "  Reflect  frequently  with  gratitude  and  compassion
on  what  I,  your  Lord  and  Creator,  suffered  in  My  long
agony  and  prayer,  when  the  vehemence  of  My  desires
and  My  love  caused  Me  to  bedew  the  ground  with  a  sweat
of  blood  ;  offer  Me  all  your  actions  and  all  that  concerns
you,  in  union  with  the  entire  submission  with  which  I  said
these  words  :  '  My  Father,  Thy  will  be  done  ; '  and  so  re
ceive  all  that  happens  to  you,  whether  painful  or  agreeable,
with  the  same  love  with  which  I  send  it  to  you  for  your
salvation.  Be  grateful  in  prosperity,  uniting  yourself  with
the  love  which  made  Me  send  it  to  you,  condescending  to
your  weakness,  that  temporal  prosperity  may  lead  you  to
think  of  spiritual  joys,  and  to  hope  for  them;  receive  adver
sity  also  in  union  with  the  charity  with  which  My  paternal
love  sends  it  to  you,  to  prepare  you  for  eternal  good/'

Then  St.  Gertrude  resolved  to  say  the  following  prayer
during  the  remainder  of  the  week,  saluting  the  sacred
Limbs  of  the  Son  of  God  with  these  words  :  "  I  salute  you,
0  precious  Limbs."  And  she  perceived  that  this  pleased
our  Lord  ;  and  if  we  desire  the  same  grace,  let  us  use  the
same  prayer.

During  the  Mass  which  followed,  as  the  words  of  the
Gospel  Daemonium  habes  *  were  read,  she  was  grieved  in
her  inmost  soul  for  the  contempt  offered  to  our  Lord  ;  and

*  "  Thou  hast  a  devil,"  St.  John  viii.  46-59.


PALM  SUNDAY.  375


as  she  could  not  endure  to  hear  these  words,  she  exclaimed
in  the  depth  of  her  heart,  in  the  sweetest  and  most  loving
manner  :  "  Hail,  vivifying  Gem  of  Divine  nobility  !  Hail,
most  loving  Jesus !  unfading  flower  of  human  dignity !
Thou  art  my  Sovereign  and  only  Good."  And  this  benign
Lord,  to  reward  these  testimonies  of  affection,  inclined
tenderly  towards  her,  and  whispered  to  her :  "  I  am  thy
Creator,  Redeemer,  and  Lover.  I  left  My  beatitude  to  re
deem  thee  by  a  bitter  death."  Then  all  the  saints,  being
rapt  in  admiration  of  the  marvellous  friendship  which  He
manifested  to  her,  praised  God  for  it  with  the  greatest  joy.
Our  Lord  then  said  to  her  :  "  Whoever  salutes  Me,  as
you  have  done,  in  reparation  for  the  blasphemies  and  out
rages  which  are  poured  forth  on  Me  throughout  the  world,
when  he  is  tempted  at  the  hour  of  his  death  and  accused
by  the  demon,  will  be  consoled  by  Me  with  the  same  words
with  which  I  have  consoled  you,  and  I  will  testify  the
same  affection  towards  him ;  and  if  the  saints  were  thus
amazed  at  the  words  I  whispered  into  your  ear,  how
astonished  and  amazed  will  be  the  enemies  of  his  soul
when  they  shall  see  him  so  marvellously  consoled  by  My
goodness ! "


CHAPTER  XXIII.

For  Palm  Sunday.

Of  Spiritxial  Communion,  and  other  exercises  for  thig  holy  day.

ON  the  Feast  of  Palms,  as  Gertrude  was  rilled  with  the
delights  of  Divine  consolation,  she  said  to  our  Lord:
"Teach  me,  I  beseech  Thee,  O  Beloved,  how  I  can  go
forth  to  meet  Thee  to-day,  who  art  approaching  Thy


376 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


Passion  for  my  salvation."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Give  Me
an  ass*  to  ride;  a  troop  of  people  to  precede  Me  with
acclamations ;  another  troop  to  follow  Me  with  praises ;
and  another  to  minister  to  Me.

"  You  will  give  Me  an  ass  to  ride,  if  you  acknowledge
•with  a  contrite  heart  that  you  have  failed  to  be  guided  by
reason,  and  have  had  no  more  understanding  than  a  beast
of  all  that  I  have  done  for  your  salvation.  This  negligence
has  caused  you  to  lose  My  sweet  tranquillity  ;  so  that  when
I  thought  to  find  some  consolation  in  you,  it  was  necessary
for  Me  to  purify  you  by  some  exterior  or  interior  suffering.
And  thus  I  was  obliged  to  suffer  in  you ;  for  My  love,
which  could  not  restrain  itself,  obliged  My  goodness  to
compassionate  you  in  all  your  adversities.  But  when
you  give  Me  the  conveyance  which  I  desire,  I  shall  be
satisfied.

"  You  will  give  Me  a  troop  of  people  who  will  make
acclamations  before  Me,  when  you  receive  Me  with  full
affection  in  the  name  of  all  men,  in  union  with  the  love
which  made  Me,  your  Lord  and  Creator,  enter  Jerusalem
for  the  salvation  of  the  world,  and  in  satisfaction  for  all
those  who  have  failed  to  thank  Me  worthily,  and  with
perfect  affection,  for  this  great  grace.

"You  will  give  Me  another  troop  to  follow  Me  with
praises,  when  you  avow  sincerely  that  you  have  never  imi
tated  the  example  of  My  perfect  life  as  you  should ;  and  if
you  offer  Me  such  a  fervent  will,  that  if  you  could  you
would  urge  all  men  to  imitate  what  is  most  perfect  in  My
Life  and  Passion,  and  this  for  My  honour  and  glory ;  and
pray  that  you  may  obtain  the  grace  to  imitate  Me  in  true
humility,  patience,  and  charity  (the  virtues  which  I  exer-

*  "  Jumentum."


DEVOTIONS  FOR  HOLY  WEEK.  377

cised  most  during  My  Passion),  desiring  with  the  utmost
ardour  to  follow  My  example.

"  You  will  give  me  those  who  will  attend  Me,  if  you
confess  that  you  have  never  defended  My  truth  and  justice
as  you  ought,  resolving  firmly  to  defend  them  for  the
future,  both  by  your  words  and  actions."  He  added :
"  Whoever  presents  himself  to  me  in  these  four  ways  will
not  fail  to  obtain  life  eternal  as  the  reward  of  his  piety."

Then,  as  she  was  about  to  communicate,  and  offered
her  whole  heart  to  God  with  great  fervour,  she  beheld  it
opening  in  its  charity,  as  Jerusalem  opened  to  receive
our  Lord.  1/e  entered  therein  under  the  form  of  a  young
man  bearing  a  scourge  with  three  cords,  which  signified
the  work  of  our  redemption  :  the  first  cord  indicated  the
labours  of  His  sacred  body ;  the  second,  the  devout  inten
tions  of  His  most  holy  Soul  ;  the  third,  the  excellent  and
incomparable  virtue  of  His  Divinity,  which  always  co
operated  together  in  Jesus  Christ.  Our  Lord  then  touched
her  gently  with  the  scourge,  to  remove  from  her  all  the
stains  and  dust  of  human  frailty  and  negligence.  After
this,  He  placed  the  scourge  in  the  centre  of  her  heart.  The
three  cords  appeared  to  form  a  throne  for  our  Lord  to  rest
upon ;  and  as  He  seated  Himself  thereon,  each  of  these
little  cords  produced  a  green  branch,  which  was  covered
with  flowers.  The  first  of  these — that  is,  the  virtue  of  His
Divinity— grew  up  behind  Him,  and  served  as  a  shade  for
His  Head ;  the  others  were  on  the  right  and  left,  and
emitted  a  most  agreeable  fragrance.

As  she  chanted  the  words,  0  Crux,  ave,  spes  unica*  at


*  "  Hail,  Cross,  our  only  hope  !  "  From  the  Hymn  Vexilla  regis,
which  was  probably  said  then  at  Terce.  Formerly  the  Hymn  at  Terce
varied  ,  now  it  is  fixed,  except  on  Whit  Sunday.


378 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Terce,  St.  Gertrude  offered  our  Lord  the  devotions  of  all
those  who  would  salute  Him  that  day  while  reciting  it  at
the  Canonical  Hours.  Then  our  Lord  presented  her  devo
tion  and  zeal,  in  the  form  of  a  flower,  to  all  those  for  whom
she  had  made  the  offering ;  and  this  flower  gave  them  great
spiritual  joy  and  beauty.  "  If  this  can  be  so  advantageous
to  my  sisters,"  said  the  Saint,  "  what  wilt  Thou  give  to
those  who  apply  themselves  after  the  procession  yet  more
fervently  to  serve  Thee  and  adore  Thee  ? "  Our  Lord  re
plied  :  "  As  your  sisters  present  Me  with  three  different
kinds  of  devotion,  I  will  place  these  three  flowers  before
them.  Some  of  them  desire  to  have  devotion  which  they
find  they  have  not,  and  they  offer  me  their  exterior  labours
and  exercises  :  to  these  I  will  present  the  flower  that  springs
forth  from  the  labours  and  exercises  of  My  Body.  Others
abound  in  sweet  devotion,  and  offer  Me  their  fervent  de
sires  ;  and  I  will  refresh  them  with  the  flower  which  pro
ceeds  from  the  pure  intentions  of  My  Divine  Soul.  Others,
again,  whose  will  is  so  united  to  Mine  that  they  are  one
spirit  with  Me,  offer  themselves  entirely  to  me,  that  I  may
do  with  them  what  I  will  •  and  to  these  I  will  present  the
noble  flower  of  My  Divinity."

After  the  procession,  as  the  community  made  an  incli
nation  at  the  Gloria,  laus*  and  prostrated  at  the  Fulgentibus
palmis,  our  Lord  presented  them  with  the  flower  of  Hia
bodily  exercise,  to  console,  fortify,  and  preserve  them  in
His  service,  giving  them  to  understand  by  this  that  He
would  ennoble  their  labours  by  the  merit  of  His  own.  One


•  "Glory  and  praise  to  Thee,  Redeemer  blest  ;**  Hymn  after  the
procession  on  Palm  Sunday.  This  Hymn  was  composed  by  Theodol-
phus,  Bishop  of  Orleans.  The  words  fulgentibus  palmis  do  D<^  occur
in  it.


OF  TAKING  BODILY  REFRESHMENT.  379

of  the  sisters  then  came  to  St.  Gertrude  to  implore  her  to
take  some  food,  on  account  of  her  extreme  weakness  ;  but
as  she  could  not  bear  to  take  anything  until  she  had  heard
the  Passion,*  according  to  her  usual  custom,  she  besought
our  Lord  to  tell  her  what  she  ought  to  do.  He  replied  :
"  Refresh  yourself,  My  beloved,  in  union  with  the  love  with
which  I  refused  the  wine  mingled  with  myrrh  and  gall
when  I  had  tasted  it."  As  she  returned  thanks  for  the
favour,  our  Lord  presented  His  Heart  to  her,  saying  :  "  I
present  you  therein  with  the  desire  which  made  Me  refuse
to  drink,  that  I  might  give  you  to  drink.  Drink,  then,
freely  what  I,  a  skilful  Physician,  have  prepared  for  you.
This  wine,  mingled  with  gall  and  myrrh,  was  offered  to  Me
that  I  might  die  more  speedily ;  but  the  desire  of  suffering
yet  more  for  men  prevented  Me  from  drinking  it.  You,  on
the  contrary,  must  take  the  food  which  is  necessary  for  you,
with  the  same  love,  that  your  life  may  be  prolonged  for  My
service.  This  wine  and  myrrh  was  mixed  with  gall ;  there
fore  you  must  also  do  three  things  in  memory  thereof.
First:  you  must  perform  all  your  actions  cheerfully  for
My  glory  ;  this  is  indicated  by  the  wine.  Secondly  :  you
must  use  the  conveniences  of  life,  to  enable  you  to  suffer
for  My  love ;  and  this  is  indicated  by  the  myrrh,  which
preserves  from  corruption.  Thirdly:  you  must  be  very
willing,  for  My  love,  to  be  deprived  of  the  joys  of  heaven,
and  to  remain  in  this  valley  of  misery;  and  this  is  indicated
by  the  gall.  Each  time  that  you  use  the  necessaries  of  life
with  these  intentions,  I  will  regard  you  as  you  would  a
friend  who  had  taken  a  bitter  potion  in  order  to  leave  you
one  which  was  sweet  and  palatable."


*  The  procession  was  then,  as  now,  before  Mass. The  Passion  ac
cording  to  St  Matthew  is  read  at  Mass.


380 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

St.  Gertrude,  when  eating,  was  always  accustomed  to
repeat  these  words  :  "  May  the  virtue  of  Thy  Divine  love
incorporate  me  wholly  into  Thee,  O  most  loving  Jesus  ! "
And  when  drinking,  she  said  :  "  O  most  amiable  Jesus,
pour  forth  and  preserve  j"  rny  inmost  being  that  Divine
charity  which  reigns  so  powerfully  in  Thee,  that  it  may
penetrate  me  entirely,  distilling  itself  into  all  the  powers  of
my  body  and  soul."

The  Saint  having  inquired  of  our  Lord  how  He  would
accept  the  same  offering  from  others,  He  replied  :  "  Tho?e
who  use  the  same  words  as  I  have  taught  you  will  receive
the  same  testimonies  of  affection  from  Me  as  I  have  shown
to  you."  As  the  words  of  the  Passion,  Emisit  spiritum,
were  read,  St.  Gertrude  prostrated  on  the  ground,  saying :
"Behold  me,  0  Lord,  prostrate  on  the  earth  in  honour  of
Thy  precious  Death,  beseeching  Thee,  by  the  excessive  love
which  caused  Thee  to  die,  who  art  the  life  of  all,  that  Thou
wouldst  destroy  in  me  all  that  displeases  Thee."  Our  Lord
replied  :  "  Cast  from  you  all  the  vices  which  you  desire
should  die  in  you,  and  draw  into  you,  by  the  virtue  of  My
spirit,  those  perfections  of  Mine  which  you  desire  to  pos
sess  ;  and  be  assured  that  your  sins  will  be  pardoned,  and
that  you  shall  feel  the  salutary  effects  of  what  you  have
thus  drawn  from  Me  into  yourself  ;  and  each  time  that  you
endeavour  to  combat  the  vices  which  you  have  cast  out,  or
to  obtain  the  virtues  with  which  I  have  inspired  you,  you
will  gain  the  double  advantage — of  obtaining  the  victory,
and  of  feeling  the  fruit  of  My  Passion."

After  the  mid-day  meal,  St.  Gertrude  retired  to  rest  in
a  state  of  extreme  lassitude  and  weakness — not  to  sleep,
but  rather  to  avoid  the  importunate  visits  with  which  she  was
overwhelmed,  saying  to  our  Lord  :  "I  withdraw  myself  from
the  conversation  of  creatures,  in  memory  of  the  salutary


SHE  PREPARES  AN  ABODE  FOR  OUR  LORD.  381

instruction  which  Thou  didst  give  to-day,  and  to  occupy
myself  with  Thee,  my  Love  arid  my  all,  beseeching  Thee  to
speak  to  my  soul."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  As  My  Divinity
reposed  in  My  Humanity,  so  does  My  Divinity  repose  in
your  weariness."  As  the  Saint  perceived  that  those  who
came  to  her  feared  to  interrupt  her,  thinking  she  slept,  she
asked  our  Lord  if  she  should  tell  them  that  she  was  not
sleeping,  that  they  might  do  as  they  wished  ;  but  He
replied  :  "  No  ;  let  them  merit  by  their  exercises  of
charity  the  rewards  which  I  desire  and  rejoice  so  much  to
give  for  it  •  for  there  is  nothing  more  useful  to  men
than  such  exercises."  Then  He  added  :  "  I  will  propose
two  subjects  on  which  you  may  meditate ;  for  there  ia
nothing  more  useful  in  this  life  than  for  men  to  weary
themselves  in  these  labours,  in  which  I  take  repose  and
delight,  and  to  perform  works  of  charity  towards  their
neighbour."

On  the  evening  of  the  day  on  which  our  Lord  went  to
Martha  and  Mary  in  Bethania,  as  St.  Gertrude  ardently
desired  to  entertain  our  Lord,  she  addressed  herself  to  a
crucifix,  and,  having  kissed  the  Wound  of  our  Lord's  Side
with  the  tenderest  affection,  she  besought  Him  that  He
would  vouchsafe  to  accept  the  hospitality  of  her  heart,  not
withstanding  her  unworthiness.  The  Lord,  who  hears  those
who  cry  to  Him,  presented  Himself  to  her,  and  said  to  her
caressingly  :  "  Behold,  here  I  am  ;  what  will  you  give  Me  ? "
The  Saint  replied  :  "  My  only  Salvation,  my  true  and  only
Good,  alas  !  I  have  nothing  to  present  to  Thy  Divine  magni
ficence,  but  I  offer  my  whole  being  to  Thy  goodness,  beseech
ing  Thee  to  prepare  within  me  all  that  Thou  knowest  to  be
pleasing  to  Thee."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  If  you  desire  that  I
should  act  as  I  will  with  you,  give  me  the  key  of  your  heart,
that  I  may  leave  or  take  away  whatever  I  please."  "  And


382 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

what  is  this  key  1 "  inquired  the  Saint.  He  answered  :  "  It
is  your  own  will."

She  understood  by  these  words,  that  those  who  desire  to
entertain  our  Lord  should  give  Him  the  key  of  their  own
will,  abandoning  themselves  entirely  to  His  good  pleasure,
with  perfect  confidence  that  His  goodness  will  order  all
things  for  their  salvation.  Then  our  Lord  entered  into  her
heart,  and  enjoyed  therein  all  the  Divine  delights  which
He  desired.

After  this,  St.  Gertrude,  being  inspired  by  God,  saluted
the  precious  body  of  our  Lord  by  repeating  these  words
three  hundred  and  sixty-five  times  :  Non  mea,  sed  tua
voluntas  fiat,  amantissime  Jesu;  and  she  knew  that  He
accepted  this  with  great  satisfaction.  She  then  inquired  if
our  Lord  would  be  pleased  if  certain  persons,  who  desired
to  celebrate  this  Feast  with  devotion,  should  be  guided  by
what  she  had  written,  taking  Esther  for  her  subject,  and
commencing  with  the  words  :  Egredimini,  jilice  Jerusalem.
He  replied  :  "I  have  this  Feast  so  much  at  heart,  that  if
any  one  takes  pains  to  celebrate  it  with  devotion,  he  shall
have  this  honour — that,  in  the  life  eternal,  besides  the
recompense  of  his  other  good  works,  I  will  prepare  a  feast
for  him  which  shall  be  worthy  of  the  magnificence  of  My
royal  liberality."


WEDNESDAY  IN  HOLY WEEK.  383

CHAPTER  XXIY.
For  Wednesday  in  Holy  Week.

ON  Wednesday  in  Holy  Week,  at  the  words  Tn  nomine
Jesu*  St.  Gertrude  bent  her  knees  in  honour  of  this  most
worthy  name,  to  repair  all  the  negligence  which  she  had
committed  in  this  matter  ;  and,  perceiving  that  our  Lord
was  pleased  with  this,  she  knelt  a  second  time  at  the  word
coelestium,  to  supply  for  the  negligence  of  the  saints  when
in  this  life,  in  regard  to  the  honour  which  they  owed  to
God.  When  she  had  done  this,  the  whole  celestial  court
rose  up  with  great  sentiments  of  gratitude,  thanking  God
for  having  given  this  grace  to  her,  and  praying  for  her.  At
the  word  terrestrium,  she  made  another  genuflexion,  in  satis
faction  for  the  negligence  of  the  faithful  in  praising  God  ;
and  then  the  Son  of  God  imparted  to  her  with  singular  joy
the  fruit  of  all  the  devotions  which  had  been  offered  to  Him
throughout  the  whole  Church.  At  the  word  infernorum,
she  also  knelt  to  atone  for  the  negligences  of  the  damned.
Then  the  Son  of  God  arose,  and  stood  before  His  Father,
saying  :  "  It  is  My  right  to  condemn,  since  Thou  hast  given
Me  all  power  ;  and  by  an  equitable  judgment  I  have  con
signed  them  to  eternal  flames.  Therefore,  I  receive  with
such  satisfaction  the  reparation  which  Gertrude  has  made
for  them,  that  the  reward  which  I  reserve  until  she  is
capable  of  the  enjoyment  of  beatitude  could  not  be  com
prehended  by  any  mortal."

While  the  Passion  was  read,  at  the  words,  Pater,  ignoscc
illis,  St.  Gertrude  besought  our  Lord  earnestly,  by  the  love
which  made  Him  pray  for  those  who  crucified  Him,  that

"  In  the  name  of  Jesus,  let  every  knee  bow,"  &c. — Introit  for
Wednesday  in  Holy  Week.


384 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

He  would  be  pleased  to  pardon  all  those  who  had  ever
offended  Him  in  anything.  At  this  petition  all  the  saints
rose  up  in  admiration,  beseeching  God  to  pardon  her  all  the
faults  which  she  might  have  committed  on  their  solemnities
or  festivals.  Then  the  Son  of  God  presented  Himself  also
before  His  Father,  offering  the  merit  of  His  holy  life,  in
satisfaction  for  all  the  faults  which  the  Saint  had  committed
in  thought,  word,  or  deed.

As  they  read  the  words,  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me
in  paradise,"  she  knew  in  spirit  that  no  one  could  obtain
the  grace  of  penitence  in  his  last  hour,  if  he  had  not  ren
dered  himself  worthy  of  it  by  performing  some  good  action
during  his  life ;  and  that  the  good  thief  had  obtained  the
favour  of  entering  into  glory  the  same  day  as  our  Lcrd,
because,  by  the  grace  of  God,  he  had  seen  and  reprehended
the  injustice  of  his  companion  in  crime,  and  could  not  bear
to  hear  him  pouring  forth  reproaches  on  One  whom  he  knew
to  be  innocent ;  and  had  acknowledged  himself  deserving  of
the  punishment  which  he  suffered.  Therefore  God  showed
him  mercy.


CHAPTER  XXV.
For  Holy  Thursday.

Of  offering  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ  to  obtain  pardon  fur  the  sins  of
the  Church—  Of  His  love  in  the  adorable  Sacrament  of  the  Altar.

ON  Holy  Thursday,  as  the  Lamentations  were  chanted  at
Matins,  St.  Gertrude  wept  before  God  the  Father,  in  the
bitterness  of  her  heart,  for  ail  the  sins  which  men  had
committed  against  the  Divine  Omnipotence.  At  the  second
Lamentation,  she  wept  before  God  the  Son  for  the  sins
which  they  had  committed,  through  ignorance,  against  His


DEVOTIONS  AT  THE  LAMENTATIONS.  385

ineffable  wisdom.  At  the  third  Lamentation,  she  wept
before  the  Holy  Ghost  for  the  sins  committed,  through
malice,  against  His  goodness.  Then,  at  the  verse  Jesu
Christe,  when  the  Kyrie  cleison  was  chanted,  she  approached
the  most  sweet  Heart  of  Jesus,  and  embracing  it  very  de
voutly  on  the  part  of  the  Church,  she  obtained  the  remis
sion  of  all  the  sins  which  had  been  committed  by  thoughts,
desires,  or  perverse  will.  At  the  Christe  eleison,  she  em
braced  the  blessed  Mouth  of  our  Lord,  and  asked  pardon
for  all  the  sins  of  the  tongue.  Then,  at  the  Kyrie  eleison,
she  kissed  our  Lord's  Hands,  and  obtained  pardon  of  all
the  Church's  sins  of  act.  Lastly,  when  the  people  chanted
the  Kyrie  eleison  five  times,  after  the  hymn  Rex  Christe*
Bhe  kissed  the  Five  Wounds  of  our  Lord,  to  obtain  pardon
for  all  the  sins  of  the  five  senses.  While  she  did  this.
she  beheld  five  streams  of  grace  gushing  forth  impetuously
from  the  Five  Wounds,  and  pouring  themselves  out  over
the  whole  Church,  purifying  it  from  all  stains  and  impuri
ties  ;  thus  she  knew  that  she  had  received  the  full  fruit  of
what  she  had  done  at  the  Lamentations  and  at  the  Kyrie
eleison.

This  practice  may  be  followed  during  the  three  last
nights  of  Holy  Week,  with  a  perfect  confidence  of  obtaining
the  same  advantage  thereby.

As  the  words,  OUatus  est  quia  voluit^  were  chanted  at
Lauds,  our  Lord  said  to  St.  Gertrude  :  "  If  you  believe  that
I  was  offered  on  the  cross  to  God  My  Father  only  because
I  willed  it  Myself,  believe  also  that  I  now  desire  to  offer


*  The  hymn  Rex  Christe,  composed  by  St.  Gregory,  and  the  Kyrie
eleison,  were  sung  formerly  at  Tenebra*,  after  the  Benedictus.  Gerbert,
p.  ii.  p.  232.

f  "  He  was  offered  up  because  He  Himself  desired  it ;  and  He
Himself  carried  our  sins."  Ant.  at  Lauds  for  Maunday  Thursday.


386 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Myself  for  each  sinner  to  God  My  Father,  with  the  same
love  with  which  I  offered  Myself  for  all  men  in  general.
Therefore,  there  is  no  person,  however  sinful,  who  may
not  hope  for  pardon,  by  offering  My  Passion  and  Death
to  God  My  Father,  provided  that  he  believes  firmly  that
he  will  obtain  this  grace,  and  that  lie  is  persuaded  that  the
memory  of  My  sufferings  is  the  most  powerful  remedy
against  sin,  when  joined  to  a  right  faith  and  a  true
penance."

As  St.  Gertrude  heard  the  words  of  the  Gospel,  Coepit
lavarepedes  discipulorum*  she  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  0  God  !
since  I  do  not  merit  that  Thou  shouldest  wash  me  Thy
self,  how  happy  should  I  be  if  I  might  merit  at  least  to  be
washed  from  my  sins  by  one  of  Thy  Apostles,  that  I  might
be  more  worthy  to  approach  Thy  precious  Body  and  Blood."
Our  Lord  replied  :  "I  have  washed  away  all  your  stains,
and  also  those  of  all  whom  you  have  taught  to  ask  for  purifi
cation  from  seven  worldly  affections."  Then  the  Saint  said:
"  Alas,  Lord  !  it  is  true  that  I  have  taught  this  to  others,
and  have  intended  to  do  it  myself  ;  but  in  teaching  them,
I  have  neglected  it  myself."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  I  accept
your  good  will  for  the  act ;  for  My  goodness  is  such,  that
when  any  one  has  the  will  to  perform  a  good  action,  I
count  it  as  done,  and  recompense  it  as  if  it  were  accom
plished,  even  if  human  frailty  prevents  its  accomplish
ment."

Before  communicating,  she  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  Behold,
Lord,  I  offer  Thee  all  the  petitions  of  those  who  have
been  recommended  to  my  unworthy  prayers."  He  replied  :
"  You  have  enkindled  as  many  flames  in  My  Heart  as  there


*  "  He  began  to  wash  the  feet  of  the  disciples." Gospel  for  Holy
Thursday  (St.  John  xiii.  1-15).


OUR  LORD'S  SUFFERINGS  IN  ANTICIPATION  OF  HIS  PASSION.  387

are  persons  for  whom  you  pray."  "Ah,  Lord!"  she
said,  "  teach  me  how  to  enkindle  this  fire  in  Thy  Divine
Heart  for  every  soul  in  the  Church."  "  You  will  do  this,"
He  answered,  "  by  practising  four  things  :  1.  By  praising
Me  for  all  men  whom  I  have  created  in  My  image  and
likeness.  2.  By  thanking  Me  for  all  the  good  which  I
have  done  for  them,  or  which  I  may  yet  do  for  them.
3.  By  grieving  for  all  the  obstacles  which  they  put  to  My
grace.  4.  By  praying  generally  for  all,  that  each  may
perfect  himself  in  the  state  in  which  My  providence  has
placed  him,  for  his  own  good  and  for  My  honour  and
glory."

On  another  occasion,  on  the  same  solemnity,  as  Ger
trude  prayed  with  great  recollection,  our  Lord  appeared  to
her,  even  as  He  had  appeared  on  earth  on  the  same
day.  He  seemed  to  pass  this  day  in  extreme  anguish
and  bitterness,  since  all  that  He  was  about  to  suffer  was
continually  present  to  Him ;  for,  being  the  tender  Son  of
a  tender  mother,*  He  experienced  beforehand  the  most
lively  and  excessive  suffering,  anticipating  death  in  all
its  terrors,  and  the  inhuman  cruelty  and  barbarity  of  His
executioners.

As  Gertrude  felt  this  in  spirit,  she  was  so  moved  to
compassion  that  she  would  have  employed  therein  all  the
strength  of  her  heart,  had  it  been  increased  a  thousand
times ;  but  at  last  the  violence  of  her  love  and  her  desire
overpowered  her,  and  she  fainted  away.  Our  Lord  then
said  to  her :  "  The  same  love  which  made  Me  suffer  such
extreme  pains  and  affliction  for  the  salvation  of  men,
makes  Me  also  suffer  now  in  your  heart,  immortal  and
impassable  as  I  am,  by  the  intimate  compassion  with


;Esset  delicatae  Virginia  delicatissimua  filing.*


388 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


which  it  is  penetrated  for  the  salvation  of  My  elect,  in  con
sideration  of  My  afflictions  and  bitternesses.  Therefore,
in  return  for  the  compassion  which  you  have  had  for  My
sufferings,  I  give  you  the  whole  fruit  of  My  Passion  and
Death,  to  insure  your  eternal  beatitude.  Further,  your
heart  shall  have  this  honour,  that  whenever  the  Wood
of  the  Cross  is  adored,  which  was  the  instrument  of  My
sufferings,  your  soul  shall  feel  the  fruit  and  effects  of
the  compassion  which  is  manifested  to  Me  to-day;  and
I  will  always  grant  you  whatever  you  ask,  and  prosper
your  wishes."  He  added,  "  Whenever  you  desire  to
obtain  anything  from  Me,  offer  Me  My  Heart,  which  I
have  so  often  given  you  as  a  token  of  our  mutual  friend
ship,  in  union  with  the  love  which  made  Me  become
Man  for  the  salvation  of  men;  and  I  give  you  this
special  mark  of  friendship,  that  this  shall  be  presented  to
whomsoever  you  pray  for,  as  a  rich  man  would  present  a
coffer  to  his  friend  to  supply  himself  therefrom  with  all  he
needed."  "  I  beseech  Thee,  0  Lord,"  continued  the  Saint,
"  to  tell  me  what  words  Thou  didst  address  to  Thy  Father
in  Thine  agony."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  The  words  I  used
most  frequently  were  these :  *  0  Entirety  of  My  Sub
stance!'"*

At  Mass,  whilst  the  secret  prayers  were  being  said,
before  the  religious  had  received  Communion,  the  Lord
Jesus  appeared  to  her  in  a  state  of  extreme  weakness,  as  if
He  were  about  to  give  up  the  ghost ;  and  this  so  touched  her,
that  she  also  felt  as  if  about  to  expire.  She  continued  in
this  state  until  the  time  for  Communion,  when  she  beheld
a  marvellous  vision ;  for  she  saw  the  priest  elevate  a


"O  integritas  substantiae  meee  j"  see  1  Thess.  v.  23: "That
your  whole  (integer)  spirit,"  &c,


FOE  GOOD FRIDAY.  389


Body  wliicli  was  far  larger  than  his  own  ;  and  by  the  virtue
and  power  of  his  word,  he  bore  Him  who  bears  all  things.
The  Saint  then  understood  that  the  strange  feebleness
which  the  Son  of  God  appeared  to  suffer,  indicated  the  ex
cessive  love  with  which  He  desired  that  we,  who  are  as  His
Benjamins,  His  beloved  ones,  should  be  united  to  Him  in
holy  communion  •  that  the  ardour  with  which  He  desired
this  delight  caused  this  weakness  ;  that  He  was  reduced  to
this  state  by  the  violence  of  His  love,  so  that  He  might  be
more  easily  touched  and  carried  by  the  hands  of  the  priest.
She  learned  also  on  another  occasion,  that  every  time  we
look  on  the  Host,  which  contains  the  body  of  Christ,  with
desire  and  love,  we  increase  our  eternal  merit ;  and  that
our  enjoyment  in  the  other  life  will  correspond  with  that
which  we  have  had  in  devoutly  regarding  this  precious
Body  on  earth.


CHAPTER  XXVI.
For  Good  Friday.

The  Saint  is  favoured  with  a  rapture— Exercises  on  the  Passion  of
our  Lord.

THE  memory  of  our  Lord's  Passion  was  so  profoundly  en
graven  on  the  soul  of  the  Saint,  that  it  became  as  honey  to
her  lips,  as  music  to  her  ears,  and  as  a  transport  of  joy  to
her  heart.  One  Good  Friday,  as  she  heard  the  summons  *

*  Sonitum  tabula;.  As  the  use  of  bells  is  forbidden  from  the
Gloria  in  excelsis  on  Holy  Thursday  until  the  Gloria  in  excelsis
on  Holy  Saturday,  religious  are  summoned  now,  as  then,  to  the
Office  and  other  conventual  exercises  by  sonitum  tabulae,  the  sound
of  wooden  clappers  or  pieces  of  wood  struck  on  each  other.  Com
pline  is  the  hour  at  which  our  Lord's  burial  is  specially  commemo
rated.


390 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

to  Compline,  she  felt  the  same  anguish  in  her  heart  as  if  she
had  been  told  that  her  dearest  friend  was  even  then  about
to  expire,  and  she  recollected  herself  to  think  yet  more
lovingly  of  the  Passion  of  her  Beloved.  Her  union  with  God
became  so  intimate,  that  on  this  day  and  the  following  she
was  scarcely  able  to  attend  to  anything  exterior  or  sensible,
unless  obliged  to  do  so  by  charity,  of  which  she  always
made  great  account,  and  this  that  she  might  the  more
surely  entertain  Him  within  her  who  is  love ;  for  St.  John
said  "  God  is  charity.  If  we  love  one  another,  God  abideth
in  us,  and  His  charity  is  perfected  in  us  "  (1  John  iv.)

She  continued  in  this  rapture  the  remainder  of  the  day?
and  during  the  whole  of  the  following  day  (Holy  Saturday).
What  she  experienced  therein  was  such,  that  no  human
intellect  could  explain  it  ;  for  she  was  so  perfectly  united
to  and  absorbed  in  God,  by  the  tenderness  of  her  com
passion,  that  she  was  entirely  dissolved  therein ;  and  this
was  no  imperfection,  but  rather  the  very  height  of  perfec
tion,  as  St.  Bernard  teaches  when  writing  of  the  words  of
the  Canticles  :  "  We  will  make  thee  chains  of  gold  :  (Cant.
i.  10).  "When  the  soul  is  wrapt  in  contemplation,  and  a
flash  of  heavenly  light  comes  to  illuminate  it,  the  Divine
infusion  accommodates  itself  to  sensible  things,  either  to
temper  its  brilliancy  or  to  instruct  in  its  doctrine,  and
thus  shadows*  the  purity  and  splendour  of  its  rays,  to  en
able  the  soul  to  receive  it,  and  to  communicate  it  to  others.
I  believe  f  that  these  images  are  produced  in  us  by  the
holy  angels.  Therefore,  let  us  attribute  to  God  what  is
perfectly  free  from  corporal  images,  and  to  the  angels
those  which  are  more  sensible."

We  must  not,  therefore,  consider  that  what  God  Him-

*  "  Adum  bratus. "


A  GOLDEN  CUP  OFFERED  TO  HER  TO  CONTAIN  HER  TEARS.  391


self  infuses  into  the  soul  in  secret  is  of  less  value.  Never
theless,  we  have  passed  over  many  things  for  this  reason,
which  might  have  been  related  here,  and  which  are  indeed
worthy  of  being  recorded.  Still,  we  have  gathered  up
some  of  the  sparks  of  Divine  love  which  flew  forth  from
the  burning  furnace  of  the  Passion  of  Christ  upon  this
soul.  On  one  Good  Friday,  at  the  hour  of  Prime,  as  the
Saint  returned  thanks  to  God  for  having  appeared  before  a
Gentile  and  an  idolator  as  His  Judge,  she  beheld  our  Lord
enthroned  in  great  majesty  with  God  His  Father,  while
all  the  Saints  prostrated  before  Him,  thanking  Him  pro
foundly  for  having  freed  them  from  eternal  death  by  His
own  Death.

As  the  Passion  was  read,  at  the  word  Sitio  ("  I  thirst"),
our  Lord  appeared  to  offer  her  a  golden  cup  to  receive  the
tears  of  compassion  which  she  had  shed  for  His  death.
And  as  the  Saint  felt  her  whole  soul  melting  into  tears,
and  yet  discretion  obliged  her  to  keep  them  back,  she
asked  our  Lord  what  would  be  most  pleasing  to  Him.
Then  it  appeared  to  her  that  a  pure  rivulet  sprang  from
her  heart,  and  proceeded  to  our  Lord's  lips,  and  He  said :
"  These  are  the  tears  of  devotion  which  you  have  restrained
from  a  pure  intention."

At  Terce,  as  she  remembered  our  Lord's  crowning
with  thorns,  His  cruel  scourging  at  the  pillar,  His  weari
ness,  and  the.  agony  of  His  shoulder,  wounded  by  carry
ing  the  cross,  she  said  to  Him  :  "  Behold,  my  sweetest
Love,  I  offer  Thee  my  heart,  desiring  to  suffer  therein
all  the  bitterness  and  anguish  of  Thy  dear  Heart,  in
return  for  Thy  love  in  bearing  the  undeserved  torments
of  Thy  Passion ;  and  I  beseech  Thee,  whenever  I  forget
this  offering  through  human  frailty,  to  send  me  some  sharp
bodily  pain  which  may  resemble  Thine."  He  replied  :


392 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


"  Your  desires  are  sufficient.  But  if  you  wish  Me  to  have
unbounded  pleasure  in  your  heart,  let  Me  act  as  I  please
therein,  and  do  not  desire  that  I  should  give  you  either
consolation  or  suffering."

Then,  as  the  Passion  was  read,  which  says  that  Joseph
took  the  Body  of  Jesus,*  she  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  That
blessed  Joseph  was  given  Thy  most  holy  Body ;  but  what
share  wilt  Thou  give  of  Thy  Body  to  my  unworthiness  1 "
Then  our  Lord  gave  her  His  Heart  under  the  form  of  a
golden  thurible,  from  which  as  many  perfumes  ascended
to  the  Father  as  there  had  been  persons  for  whom  the
Lord  died.

When  the  prayers  were  said  after  the  Passion  for  the
different  Orders  in  the  Church,  according  to  the  usual
custom,  as  the  priest  knelt,  saying  Oremus,  delectissimi,  she
saw  all  the  prayers  which  had  been  made  throughout  the
Church  ascending  together  like  fragrant  incense  from  the
thurible  of  the  Divine  Heart,  so  that  each  prayer  by  this
union  became  marvellously  sweet  and  beautiful.

Therefore  we  should  pray  for  the  Church  on  this  day
with  great  devotion,  in  union  with  the  Passion  of  our  Lord,
which  renders  our  prayers  more  efficacious  before  God.

On  another  occasion,  on  the  same  day,  the  Saint,  ar
dently  desiring  to  make  some  return  to  her  Beloved  for  all
His  sufferings,  said  to  Him :  "  0  my  only  Hope,  and  Sal-
vation  of  my  soul  !  teach  me  how  to  make  some  return  to
Thee  for  Thy  most  bitter  Passion."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  He
who  follows  the  will  of  another,  and  not  his  own,  frees  Me
from  the  captivity  which  I  endured  when  bound  with  chains
on  the  morning  of  My  Passion  ;  he  who  considers  himself


*  The  Passion  of  our  Lord  according  to  St.  John,  which  is  read  on
Good  Friday.


HOW  TO  CONSOLE  OUR  LORD  IN  HIS  SUFFERINGS. 393

guilty,  satisfies  for  my  condemnation,  at  the  hour  of  Prime,
by  false  witnesses;  he  who  renounces  the  pleasures  of
sense,  consoles  Me  for  the  blows  which  I  received  at  the
hour  of  Terce ;  he  who  submits  to  pastors  who  try  him,*
consoles  Me  for  the  crowning  with  thorns  j  he  who  humbles
himself  first  in  a  dispute,  carries  My  cross  ;  he  who  per
forms  works  of  charity,  consoles  Me  at  the  hour  of  Sext,
when  My  limbs  were  cruelly  fastened  to  the  cross;  he  who
spares  himself  neither  pain  nor  labour  to  withdraw  his
neighbour  from  sin,  consoles  Me  for  My  Death,  which  I
endured  at  the  hour  of  None  for  the  salvation  of  the
human  race  ;  he  who  replies  gently  when  reproached,  takes
Me  down  from  the  cross  ;  lastly,  he  who  prefers  his  neigh
bour  to  himself,  lays  Me  in  the  sepulchre."

On  another  Good  Friday,,  as  Gertrude  besought  our
Lord  to  prepare  her  for  a  worthy  Communion,t  she  re
ceived  this  reply  :  "  I  am  hastening  to  you  with  such
ardour  that  I  can  scarcely  contain  it ;  for  I  have  gathered
into  My  bosom  all  the  good  which  My  Church  has  done
or  said  or  thought  to-day  in  memory  of  My  Passion,  to
pour  it  forth  into  your  soul  at  Communion  for  your
eternal  salvation."  The  Saint  replied :  "  I  give  Thee
thanks,  0  my  Lord ;  but  I  desire  greatly  that  this  favour
may  be  granted  to  me  in  such  a  manner  that  I  may

*  "Discolis."

f  Formerly  the  faithful  were  admitted  to  Communion  on  this  day.
See  Dom  Gueranger's  Annie  Liturgique,  "Temps  de  la  Passion,"
p.  549 -a  most  valuable  work,  which  is  too  little  known  in  this
country.  See  also  Dom  Martine,  De  Ant.  EC.  Ritibus,  torn.  iii.
The  custom  was  gradually  abolished,  so  that  no  exact  time  can
be  specified  for  the  change.  The  Greeks  celebrate  Mass  of  the
Presanctitied  every  day  during  Lent,  except  Saturdays,  Sundays,
and  the  Feast  of  the  Annunciation.  The  Milanese,  or  Ambrosian
rite,  prescribes  the  Mass  of  the  Presanctified  on  the  Fridays  in
Lent.


394 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


impart  it  to  others  when  I  wish  to  do  so."  He  replied :
"  And  what  will  you  give  Me,  My  beloved,  for  such  a
favour  ? "  Gertrude  replied  :  "  Alas,  Lord  !  I  have  nothing
worthy  of  Thee;  but,  nevertheless,  I  have  this  desire,
that  if  I  had  all  that  Thou  hast,  I  would  give  it  to  Thee,
so  that  Thou  mightest  dispose  of  it  as  Thou  wouldest."
To  this  our  Lord  replied  lovingly :  "  If  you  do  indeed
desire  to  act  thus  towards  Me,  you  cannot  doubt  that  I
desire  to  act  thus  towards  you ;  and  even  more  so,  since
My  goodness  and  love  so  far  exceeds  yours."  "  O  God,"
she  exclaimed,  "how  shall  I  come  to  Thee,  when  Thou
comest  to  me  with  such  abundant  goodness  ?  "  He  replied  :
"  I  require  nothing  from  you  but  to  come  to  Me  empty,
that  I  may  fill  you ;  for  it  is  from  Me  that  you  receive  all
which  makes  you  agreeable  in  My  sight."

She  understood  tnat  this  emptiness  was  humility,  which
made  her  consider  herself  destitute  of  merit,  and  made  her
believe  that  without  the  grace  of  God  she  could  do  nothing,
and  that  what  she  did  do  was  utterly  worthless.


CHAPTER  XXVII.
for  Easter  Sunday.

How  the  souls  are  freed  from  their  pains— Of  a  good-will — How
to  praise  God  in  the  Alleluia.

As  St.  Gertrude  prayed  fervently  before  Matins  on  the
blessed  night  of  the  Resurrection,  the  Lord  Jesus  appeared
to  her,  full  of  majesty  and  glory.  Then  she  cast  herself  at
His  feet,  to  adore  Him  devoutly  and  humbly,  saying  :  "  O
glorious  Spouse,  joy  of  the  angels,  Thou  who  hast  shown
me  the  favour  of  choosing  me  to  be  Thy  Spouse,  who  am
the  least  of  Thy  creatures !  I  ardently  desire  Thy  glory,


EASTER  SUNDAY.  395


and  my  only  friends  are  those  who  love  Thee  ;  therefore  I
beseech  Thee  to  pardon  the  souls  of  Thy  special  friends  *  by
the  virtue  of  Thy  most  glorious  Resurrection.  And  to  obtain
this  grace  from  Thy  goodness,  I  offer  Thee,  in  union  with
Thy  Passion,  all  the  sufferings  which  my  continual  infirmities
have  caused  me."  Then  our  Lord,  having  favoured  her  with
many  caresses,  showed  her  a  great  multitude  of  souls  who
were  freed  from  their  pains,  saying  :  "  Behold,  I  have  given
them  to  you  as  a  recompense  for  your  rare  affection ;  and
through  all  eternity  they  will  acknowledge  that  they  have
been  delivered  through  your  prayers,  and  you  will  be
honoured  and  glorified  for  it."  She  replied  :  "  How  many
are  they?"  He  answered:  "This  knowledge  belongs  to
God  alone."  As  she  feared  that  these  souls,  though  freed
from  their  pains,  were  not  yet  admitted  to  glory,  she  offered
to  endure  whatever  God  might  please,  either  in  body  or
soul,  to  obtain  their  entrance  into  that  beatitude  ;  and  our
Lord,  won  by  her  fervour,  granted  her  request  immediately.

Some  time  after,  as  the  Saint  suffered  most  acute  pain
in  her  side,  she  made  an  inclination  before  a  crucifix ;  and
our  Lord  freed  her  from  the  pain,  and  granted  the  merit  of
it  to  these  souls,  recommending  them  to  make  her  a  return
by  their  prayers.

After  this,  the  Saint,  impelled  by  the  fervour  of  her
love,  presented  herself  before  her  Spouse,  and  said  to  Him  :
"  O  my  only  Love  !  as  I  have  nothing  which  can  render
me  worthy  to  appear  before  the  King  of  kings,  and  as  I
cannot  correspond  in  any  degree  to  Thy  love,  all  I  can
do  is  to  give  Thee  all  the  life  and  strength  of  my  body
and  soul  as  long  as  I  live,  to  honour  Thy  glorious  Resur
rection."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  I  regard  this  offering  of

*  This  seems  to  refer  to  the  souls  in  purgatory.


396 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


your  love  for  Me  as  a  royal  sceptre,  which  I  will  bear  glo
riously  before  the  Most  Holy  Trinity,  and  in  the  sight  of
all  the  saints." To  this  Gertrude  answered  :  "Although
Thy  grace  has  prompted  me  to  make  this  offering,  never
theless  I  fear,  on account  of  my  own  instability,  lest  I
should forget what  I  have promised Thee." But our
Lord  replied  :  "  And  what  will  it  matter  if  you  do  ?  for  I
will  not  allow  what  you  have  once  given  Me  to  escape  from
My  hand  ;  but  I  will  always  preserve  it,  as  a  proof  of  your
love  for  Me  ;  and  whenever  you  renew  your  intention,  this
sceptre  will  be  adorned  with  flowers  and  precious  stones."
When  the  Alleluia  was  chanted  at  the  Invitatory,  the
Saint  animated  all  the  powers  of  her  body  and  soul  to
recite  the  Matins  of  the  Resurrection  with  devotion,  say
ing  to  our  Lord  :  "  Teach  me,  I  beseech  Thee,  0  Master
full  of  sweetness,  in  what  manner  I  can  best  praise  Thee  by
the  ALLELUIA  which  is  so  often  repeated  on  this  Feast."
Our  Lord  replied  :  u  You  can  praise  Me  by  the  Alleluia,  by
uniting  it  to  the  praises  which  the  saints  and  angels  con
stantly  offer  Me  in  heaven. You  will  observe  that  all  the
vowels,  except  the  o,  which  signifies  grief,  are  found  in  this
word  ;  and  that  instead  of  this  o,  the  a  is  repeated  twice.
At  the  first  a,  you  will  praise  Me  with  the  saints  for  the
glorious  immortality  by  which  the  sufferings  of  My  Hu
manity  and  the  bitterness  of  My  Passion  were  rewarded ;
at  the  e,  praise  Me  for  the  sweet  and  ineffable  joys  which
gladden  My  eyes  in  gazing  upon  the  Most  Holy  Trinity  ;
at  the  «,  unite  yourself  with  the  delight  which  I  find  in
hearing  the  concerts  of  praises  in  honour  of  the  Blessed
Trinity  which  are  sung  by  the  saints  and  angels  ;  at  the  t,
enjoy  the  sweet  perfumes  and  odours  which  I  find  in  the
presence  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity ;  at  the  second  a,  which
is  put  in  place  of  the  o,  rejoice  that  My  Humanity,  which


EASTEE  MONDAY.  397


was  formerly  passible  and  mortal,  is  now  filled  with  the
Divine  immortality."

After  this,  as  she  continued  to  recite  Matins,  she  was
taught  at  each  Psalm,  each  Response,  and  each  Lesson,
the  sense  which  best  corresponded  with  the  solemnity  of  so
great  a  day,  and  which  best  expressed  the  inconceivable
pleasures  which  a  soul  enjoys  when  it  is  united  to  God.


CHAPTER  XXVIII.
For  Easter  Monday.

That  God  takes  an  exact  account  of  our  merits  ;  and  how  they  aro
enriched  by  the  merits  of  Christ.

ON  Easter  Monday,  as  St.  Gertrude  besought  our  Lord
before  communicating  that  He  would  be  pleased  to  sup
ply,  by  the  merits  of  this  august  Sacrament,  for  her  past
negligences  in  religious  observance,  He  presented  her  to  His
Father  clothed  in  a  religious  habit,  which  appeared  to  be
made  of  as  many  pieces  as  she  had  been  years  in  the  con
vent — the  6rst  piece  representing  the  first  year,  the  second
the  next  year,  and  so  on.  The  habit  had  no  folds  in  it.
The  days  and  hours  were  noted  in  each  year,  with  the
thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  good  or  bad,  even  to  the
most  trifling  particulars  ;  and  the  end  for  which  she  had
performed  each  action  was  also  most  carefully  marked,
whether  for  her  own  salvation,  for  the  glory  of  God,  or  for
the  good  of  others.  Her  abstinences  and  her  refreshments ;
what  she  had  done  through  obedience  or  of  her  own
free  will ;  the  little  stratagems  she  had  used  that  she  might
be  told  to  do  what  she  wished,  or  her  address  in  extorting
such  obediences  ; — all  these  were  to  be  seen  therein  :  thesa


398 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

last  actions  appeared  to  be  fastened  to  her  habit  by  a
little  wet  mud,  and  as  if  ready  to  fall  from  it.  But  when
the  Son  of  God  had  offered  His  holy  and  perfect  life  for
her,  she  saw  the  habit  covered  with  plates  of  transparent
gold,  pure  and  clear  as  crystal.

Her  whole  life,  and  all  that  had  ever  been  defective
in  her  conduct,  even  to  the  very  least  particular,  now
appeared  in  the  light  of  truth,  and  was  known  to  God  and
all  His  saints ;  for  not  even  the  smallest  stain  or  imperfec
tion  could  be  concealed.  From  this  Gertrude  understood
that  God  forms,  as  it  were,  a  representation  of  each  person's
life  ;  and  that,  while  He  remembers  no  more  the  sins  which
have  been  effaced  by  penance,  according  to  the  word  of  the
Prophet,  "  I  will  not  remember  all  his  iniquities  "  (Ez.  xviii.
22),  there  still  remain  some  marks  of  our  faults,  that  we
may  be  reminded  to  praise  His  goodness  for  having  par
doned  them,  and  for  having  poured  forth  His  favours  upon
us  as  if  we  had  never  offended  Him ;  so  also  the  good  works
which  we  have  done  shine  like  beautiful  flowers,  that  we
may  give  glory  to  Him  by  whose  help  and  assistance  we
have  accomplished  them,  and  that  they  may  be  a  continual
source  of  joy  to  us,  that  we  may  adore  and  love  God,  who,
being  One  in  Three  Persons,  lives,  reigns,  and  works  iu  us
all  the  good  we  do.


CHAPTER  XXIX.

For  Easter  Tuesday.
Of  the  renewal  of  spiritual  espousals.

AT  Communion  on  Easter  Tuesday,  St.  Gertrude  asked
our  Lord  to  renew  the  espousals  which  He  had  formed
with  her  in  spirit  by  faith,  by  religious  profession,  and  by


WE  CAN  DO  NOTHING  WITHOUT  GOD.  399

the  entirety  of  her  virginity.  Our  Lord  replied  caressingly,
that  He  would  not  fail  to  do  what  she  asked  :  and  inclining
towards  her,  He  embraced  her  soul,  renewing  therein  all
her  devotion.  And  as  He  thus  embraced  her,  He  gave
her  a  brilliant  necklace,  adorned  with  precious  stones,
and  thus  reformed  all  her  past  negligences  in  her  spiritual
exercises.


CHAPTER  XXX.

For  Easter  Wednesday.

That  we  can  do  nothing  good  without  the  Divine  assistance.

ON  Easter  Wednesday,  she  besought  our  Lord  that  she
might  become  fruitful  in  good  actions,  by  virtue  of  His
adorable  Body.  He  replied  :  "  I  will  certainly  make  you
fruitful  in  Myself,  and  I  will  use  you  to  draw  many  to
Me."  She  replied  :  "  How  canst  Thou  draw  others  to
Thee  through  me,  since  I  am  such  an  unworthy  creature,
and  have  almost  lost  the  talent  I  once  had  of  instructing
and  conversing  with  others  ?  "  Our  Lord  answered  :  "  If
you  now  had  that  facility  of  speaking,  perhaps  you  would
think  that  it  was  by  this  you  won  souls.  Therefore  I  have
deprived  you  of  it  in  part,  that  you  may  acknowledge  that
the  grace  which  you  possess  of  touching  the  hearts  of  others
comes  from  My  special  grace,  and  not  from  the  power  and
attractiveness  of  your  words."

Our  Lord  then  appeared  to  draw  her  towards  Him
inwardly,  saying :  "  Even  as  I  draw  My  breath,  so  will  I
draw  to  Myself  all  who  submit  lovingly  and  devoutly  to
you  for  My  sake,  and  I  will  make  them  advance  daily  in
perfection."


400  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

CHAPTER  XXXI.

For  Thursday  in  Easter  Week.
Of  offering  our  actions  to  God.

ON  Thursday  in  Easter  week,  as  the  Gospel  was  read  which
relates  how  Magdalen  "  stooped  down  and  looked  into  the
sepulchre,  and  saw  two  angels,"  *  St.  Gertrude  said  to  our
Lord  :  "Into  what  sepulchre  shall  I  look  to  find  the  con
solation  of  my  spirit  ? "  Our  Lord  then  showed  her  tha
sacred  Wound  of  His  Side,  where,  instead  of  two  angels,
she  heard  two  things  :  first,  "  You  shall  never  be  separated
from  My  company  ; "  and  secondly,  "  All  your  actions
are  perfectly  agreeable  to  Me."  t  She  was  much  surprised
at  this,  and  began  to  consider  how  it  could  be,  since  she
thought  her  actions  could  not  be  pleasing  to  any  one,  and
saw  in  them  herself  such  great  imperfections ;  while  the
Divine  light  enabled  her  to  discover  a  thousand  faults
where  others  could  not  see  any ;  but  our  Lord  said  to  her :
"  The  good  and  praiseworthy  custom  which  you  have  of
recommending  your  actions  to  Me  so  frequently,  and  of
placing  them  in  My  hands,  makes  Me  correct  those  which
are  defective,  that  they  may  please  Me  perfectly  and  all
My  celestial  court."

*  St.  John  xx.  11-18.

t  "  Omnia  opera  tua  mihi  perfectissimo  modo  placent."


FOR  LOW  SUNDAY.  401


CHAPTER XXXII.

For  Low  Sunday.
How  we  should  dispose  ourselves  to  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.

ON  the  Sunday  after  Easter,  as  the  Gospel  was  read  *  which
says  that  our  Lord  breathed  on  His  disciples,  and  gave
them  the  Holy  Ghost,  St.  Gertrude  besought  Him  very
earnestly  that  He  would  give  her  this  grace  also.  "  If
you  desire  to  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,"  He  replied,  "you
must  touch  My  Side  and  My  Hands,  like  My  disciples."
By  this  she  understood  that  he  who  desires  to  receive  the
Holy  Spirit  must  first  touch  the  Side  of  our  Lord — that
is,  he  must  acknowledge  how  much  the  Divine  Heart  has
loved  us  in  having  predestinated  us  from  eternity  to  be
His  children  and  heirs  of  His  kingdom,  and  in  pouring
forth  such  benefits  upon  us  daily,  notwithstanding  our
ingratitude;  that  he  must  also  touch  the  Hands  of  our
Lord — that  is,  reflect  with  gratitude  on  all  His  labours
for  us  during  the  three -and-thirty  years  of  His  mortal  life,
and  on  His  Passion  and  Death,  offering  His  Heart  to  God,
in  union  with  the  love  with  which  He  said,  "  As  the  Father
hath  sent  Me,  I  also  send  you  "  (St.  John  xx.  21),  to  fulfil
His  good  pleasure  in  all  things ;  for  although  men  should
desire  and  wish  nothing  but  the  good  pleasure  of  God,  they
should  seek  even  more  ardently  to  do  and  to  suffer  what
He  wills — for  he  who  acts  thus  cannot  fail  to  receive  the
Holy  Spirit,  even  as  the  disciples  on  whom  the  Son  of  God
breathed.  Our  Lord  then  breathed  on  St.  Gertrude,  and
said  to  her:  "Receive  the  Holy  Ghost.  Whosesoever  sing


St.  John  xx.  19-31.

20


402  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

you  remit,  shall  be  remitted."  "How  can  this  be,  O
Lord,"  inquired  the  Saint,  "since  the  power  of  binding
and  loosing  has  only  been  conferred  on  Thy  priests  1 "  He
replied  :  "  Those  whom  you  consider  guilty,  are  so  before
Me  ;  and  those  whom  you  consider  innocent,  I  also  acquit,
for  I  speak  by  your  mouth."  "  O  God,  full  of  goodness  !  "
replied  the  Saint,  "since  you  have  so  often  assured  me  of
this  gift,  what  advantage  do  I  gain  from  receiving  it  again?"
Our  Lord  replied  :  "  When  a  deacon  is  made  a  priest,  he
does  not  cease  to  be  a  deacon,  but  rather  he  acquires  a
higher  sacerdotal  dignity ;  and  so  when  I  give  the  same
gift  to  your  soul  several  times,  I  establish  it  more  firmly
therein,  and  thereby  increase  your  beatitude."


CHAPTER  XXXIIL

For  the  Feast  of  St.  Mark,  Evangelist.
Of  the  Litanies,  and  invocation  of  saints.

ON  the  Feast  of  St.  Mark,*  while  the  Litanies  were  recited
at  the  procession,  our  Lord  appeared  to  St.  Gertrude,  seated
on  a  throne  of  majesty,  adorned  with  precious  stones,  which
formed  as  many  brilliant  mirrors  t  as  there  were  saints
in  heaven.  Each  saint  rose  joyfully  as  he  was  named  in
the  Litany  to  offer  his  prayers  to  God  for  those  who  had


*  April  25.  The  origin  of  the  custom  of  reciting  the  Litany  of  the
Saints,  or  Great  Litany,  on  this  day  is  ascribed  to  St.  Gregory  the
Great,  who  obtained  thereby  the  extinction  of  a  pestilence  which  de
vastated  Home  in  the  year  590.  The  25th  of  April  was  fixed  for  a
yearly  procession  and  chanting  of  Litanies  before  it  was  appointed  for
the  Feast  of  St.  Mark.

f  "  Speculorum  lucidorum."


FEAST  OF  ST.  JOHN  BEFOKE  TJ1E  LATIN  GATE. 403

invoked  him ;  and  the  names  of  those  who  prayed  to  them
appeared  written  on  their  hands  :  the  names  of  those  who
had  invoked  them  with  fervour  and  purity  were  written  in
letters  of  gold  ;  the  names  of  those  who  prayed  only  through
custom  were  in  black  ;  while  the  names  of  those  who  were
careless  and  indifferent  could  scarcely  be  discerned  at  all.

St.  Gertrude  understood  from  this,  that  when  the  saints
whom  we  have  invoked  pray  for  us,  their  prayers  shine
before  God  as  a  monument  of  the  mercy  which  He  has
promised  us,  which  obliges  Him  to  have  pity  on  us ;  and
when  we  invoke  the  saints  with  a  pure  and  fervent  devotion,
they  receive  the  brilliancy  of  the  precious  stones  enchased
in  our  Lord's  robe,  which  are  inscribed  with  the  names  of
those  who  revere  them  and  invoke  their  aid.


CHAPTER  XXXIV.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  John  before  the  Latin  Gate.

Of  the  sweet  memory  of  St.  John— How  imperfections  of  which
we  forget  to  accuse  ourselves  in  confession  are  pardoned  by
God.

ON  the  Feast  *  of  St.  John  ante  Portam  Latinam,  he  ap
peared  to  Gertrude  ;  and  after  having  caressed  and  consoled
her  in  a  wonderful  manner,  he  said  to  her  :  "  Do  not  be
troubled,  0  elect  spouse  of  My  Lord,  at  the  failure  of  your
bodily  strength ;  for  what  you  suffer  in  this  world  is  but
little,  and  will  last  only  for  a  moment,  in  comparison  with
the  eternal  delights  which  we  now  enjoy  in  heaven,  and


*  May  6. The  Feast  is  kept  in  commemoration  of  the  miraculous
deliverance  of  St.  John  from  a  caldron  of  boiling  oiL


404 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

which  you  will  soon  possess  with  us  when  you  enter
therein ;  for  it  is  the  nuptial  couch  of  your  Spouse,  whom
you  love  so  ardently,  whom  you  desire  with  such  fervour,
and  whom  you  will  at  last  possess  as  you  desire."  Then
he  added  :  "  Remember  that  I,  who  was  the  beloved  dis
ciple  of  the  Lord,  was  still  more  infirm  in  body  than  you
are ;  *  and  nevertheless  I  am  now,  as  you  see,  the  delight
and  devotion  of  the  faithful ;  so  you  also,  after  your  death,
will  live  in  the  hearts  of  many,  and  will  draw  many  souls
to  God."  Then  she  said  complainingly  to  St.  John,  that
she  feared  she  had  placed  an  obstacle  to  this,  because  she
had  forgotten  to  confess  some  little  faults ;  and  when  she
remembered  them,  she  could  not  have  recourse  to  her  con
fessor  ;  and  that  she  could  not  always  remember  them
when  she  went  to  confession,  on  account  of  her  extreme
debility.  '•'  Do  not  be  troubled  at  this,  my  child,"  replied
the  Saint  lovingly;  "for  when  you  have  prepared  for
a  good  and  entire  confession  of  your  sins,  and  find  that
you  cannot  then  have  recourse  to  a  confessor,  if  you  forget
anything  in  consequence  of  the  delay,  and  omit  to  accuse
yourself  of  it  merely  from  a  defect  of  memory,  what  you
have  forgotten  will  not  fail  to  be  effaced  ;  and  the  grief  you
have  for  the  omission  will  adorn  your  soul  as  a  precious
jewel,  which  will  render  it  pleasing  to  the  heavenly  court."
While  Mass  was  being  said,  the  Saint  was  occupied  in
reflecting  on  some  writings  which  she  had  received  from
God  by  a  special  favour ;  and  as  she  heard  the  words,
Verbum  Dei  Deo  natum,  at  the  Sequence,  she  recollected
herself,  that  she  might  attend  more  devoutly  to  what  was
chanted  in  honour  of  St.  John.  But  the  Saint  appeared


*  "  Multo  plus  defeceram  viribus,  et  sensibus  corporalibus  quaro
tu."


FOR  THE  ASCENSION.  405


at  her  side,  and  told  her  not  tc  turn  her  mind  from  her
first  thoughts ;  obtaining  for  her  from  God,  in  a  marvel
lous  manner,  the  favour  of  being  able  to  think  of  these
writings  and  still  to  understand  what  was  chanted  in
choir.  At  the  words,  Audit  in  gyro  sedis,  she  said  to  St.
John  :  "  Oh,  what  joy  must  have  filled  thy  soul  when  thou
wert  elevated  so  high  ! "  He  replied  :  "  You  speak  truly  ;
but  know  that  I  have  a  yet  greater  joy  in  the  praises  which
you  offer  to  God  for  me."  He  then  remained  seated  near
her  until  the  words,  Iste  custos  Virginis,  when  he  took  her
up  to  the  throne  of  God's  glory,  where,  amid  the  most
ineffable  brightness,  he  was  admired  and  praised  by  the
•whole  celestial  court,  feeling  the  ineffable  delights  of  the
words,  Cceli  qui  palatium.*


CHAPTER  XXXV.

For  the  Ascension.
The  manner  of  saluting  our  Lord's  Five  Wounds.

BEFORE  the  Feast  of  the  Ascension  of  our  Lord,  St.  Ger
trude  repeated  this  salutation  five  thousand  four  hundred
and  sixty-six  times  :  "  Glory  be  to  Thee,  most  sweet,  most
gentle,  most  benign,  most  noble,  most  excellent,  effulgent,
and  ever-peaceful  Trinity,  for  the  roseate  wounds  of  my
only  Love ! "  As  she  repeated  this  salutation,  our  Lord
Jesus  appeared  to  her,  more  beautiful  than  the  angels,
bearing  golden  flowers  on  each  Wound,  and  saluted  her
thus,  with  a  serene  countenance  and  the  tenderest  charity  :
"  Behold  in  what  glory  I  now  appear  to  you.  I  will  appear

*  We  have  not  been  able  to  verify  this  sequence.


406 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

in  the  same  manner  to  you  at  your  death,  and  will  cover
all  the  stains  of  your  sins,  and  of  those  also  who  salute  My
Wounds  with  the  same  devotion."


CHAPTER  XXXVI.

For  the  Sunday  before  Ascension  Thursday.

Of  the  merit  of  condescension  and  compassion  for  the  infirm — And
bow  we  should  desire  contempt.

ON  the  Sunday  before  Ascension-day,  the  Saint  rose  very
joyfully  to  recite  Matins,  hoping  that  our  Lord  would  come
to  lodge  in  her  heart  for  the  four  days  preceding  the  Ascen
sion,  as  she  ardently  besought  Him  to  do ;  but  after  she
had  recited  the  Office  as  far  as  the  fifth  Lesson,  she  saw  a
religious  who  was  ill,  and  who  had  no  one  to  say  Matins
with  her.  The  Saint,  moved  by  the  charity  which  always
animated  her,  said  to  our  Lord :  "  Thou  knowest,  O  Lord,
that  I  have  almost  exhausted  the  little  strength  I  have  in
reciting  my  Office  so  far ;  nevertheless,  as  I  ardently  desire
Thee  to  abide  with  me  during  these  holy  days,  and  as  I
have  not  a  fitting  abode  prepared  for  Thee,  I  am  willing,
for  Thy  love,  and  in  satisfaction  for  my  faults,  to  commence
Matins  again."  As  she  began  the  Office  once  more,  our
Lord  verified  the  words  He  had  said — "  I  was  sick,  and  you
visited  Me ;"  and,  "  As  you  did  it  to  one  of  these  My  least
brethren,  you  did  it  to  Me  "  * — by  appearing  to  her,  and
overwhelming  her  with  caresses,  which  could  neither  be
explained  nor  understood.

It  appeared  to  the  Saint  that  our  Lord  was  seated  at  a

*  Matt.  ixv.  40.


REWARD  OP  CHARITY  TO  AN  INFIRM  SISTER.  407


table  in  the  most  sublime  glory,  and  that  He  was  distribut
ing  ineffable  gifts,  graces,  and  joys  to  the  souls  in  heaven,
on  earth,  arid  in  purgatory — not  only  for  each  word,  but
even  for  each  letter  which  she  had  repeated ;  and  she  also
received  an  intelligence  of  the  Psalms,  Responses,  and
Lessons,  which  filled  her  with  inexpressible  delight.

When  the  words,  Ad  te,  Domine,  clamabo,  and  Salvum
fac  populum  tnum,  Domine,  et  benedic  hcereditati  tuce,  were
chanted,  she  besought  our  Lord  to  pour  forth  an  abundant
grace  and  benediction  on  the  whole  Church.  "What  do
you  desire  that  I  should  do,  My  beloved  ] "  He  replied ;  "  for
I  give  Myself  up  to  you  with  the  same  love  and  resignation
as  I  abandoned  Myself  to  My  Father  on  the  cross ;  for
even  as  I  would  not  descend  from  the  cross  until  He  willed
it,  so  now  I  desire  to  do  nothing  but  what  you  will.  Dis
tribute,  thon,  in  virtue  of  My  Divinity,  all  that  you  desire,
and  as  abundantly  as  you  desire."

After  Matins,  the  Saint  retired  again  to  rest,  and  our
Lord  said  to  her :  "  She  who  wearies  herself  in  exercises
of  charity  has  a  right  to  repose  peacefully  on  the  couch
of  charity  ; "  and  as  He  said  this,  He  soothed  her  soul  so
tenderly,  that  it  appeared  to  her  as  if  she  did  indeed  repose
on  the  bosom  of  this  heavenly  Bridegroom.  Then  she  be
held  a  tree  of  charity,  very  high  and  very  fair,  covered  with
fruit  and  flowers,  and  with  leaves  shining  like  stars,  which
sprang  forth  from  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  extending  and  lower
ing  its  branches  so  as  to  surround  and  cover  the  nuptial
couch  on  which  the  soul  of  Gertrude  reposed.  And  she
saw  a  spring  of  pure  water  gush  forth  from  its  roots,  which
shot  upwards,  and  then  returned  again  to  its  source ;  and
this  refreshed  her  soul  marvellously.  By  this  she  under
stood  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  sweetly  reposing  in  His
Humanity,  which  imparts  ineffable  joys  to  the  elect.


408 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

During  Mass,  at  which  she  was  to  communicate,  St
Gertrude  exposed  the  defects  of  her  soul  to  God,  as  a  friend
might  do  to  one  from  whom  he  expected  every  good  ;  and
she  besought  Him  earnestly  to  obtain  pardon  of  all  her
sins  and  negligences,  on  the  Feast  of  His  Ascension,  from
His  Father.  Then  the  Lord  replied,  with  the  greatest  con
descension  :  "  You  are  that  amiable  Esther  who  pleases  My
eyes  by  your  incredible  beauty ;  ask,  then,  what  you  will,
and  I  will  give  it  to  you."

As  she  began  to  pray  for  all  who  were  confided  to  her
care,  and  for  all  her  benefactors,  our  Lord  approached  her,
and  embraced  her  lovingly.  And  by  this  embrace  she
understood  that  her  heart  had  contracted  some  stain  from
having  received  a  benefit  in  too  human  a  manner  on  the
preceding  day.  "Ah,  Lord  !"  she  exclaimed,  "why  dost
Thou  suffer  me  to  be  revered  as  a  saint,  when  Thou  wert
esteemed  during  Thy  life  as  the  very  least  of  men,  and
since  it  is  for  Thy  glory  that  Thy  elect  should  be  de
spised  in  this  world  1 "  He  replied  :  "  I  have  said  by  My
Prophet,  '  Shout  with  joy  to  God,  all  the  earth,  and  give
glory  to  His  praise '  (Ps.  Ixv.  1) ;  therefore,  I  permit  some
persons  to  think  well  of  you  and  to  love  you,  for  their
sanctificntion  and  for  My  glory."  "But  what  will  become
of  me,"  she  replied,  "  if  Thou  dost  sanctify  them  by  my
faults  ? "  Our  Lord  answered  :  "  I  please  myself  by  em
bellishing  the  gold  of  My  grace  which  I  have  put  in  you,  by
making  it  appear  sometimes  black  and  sometimes  shining."
By  the  word  *  black '  *  she  understood,  that  when  one  re
members  having  received  a  benefit  in  too  human  a  manner,
and  repents  humbly  for  their  fault,  they  pleased  God  so
much,  that  the  dark  colour  enhances  the  beauty  of  the

*  "Fusco."


FOR  THE  ROGATION  DAYS.  409

shining  gold.  By  the  bright  gold  she  understood,  that
when  we  receive  benefits  from  God  and  men  with  thanks
giving,  we  render  our  souls  still  more  capable  of  receiving
and  preserving  the  gifts  of  God.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

For  the  Rogation  Days.

How  we  should  pray  for  the  just,  for  sinners,  and  for  the  souls
in  purgatory.

ON  the  Monday  before  the  Ascension,  St.  Gertrude  pro
posed  to  herself  to  do  something  to  atone  to  God  for  the
sins  of  the  whole  world ;  she  then  went  to  visit  the  sick
person  before  mentioned,  and  having  performed  for  her
many  services  of  charity  which  exceeded  her  strength,  she
offered  them  to  God  as  an  eternal  thanksgiving  and  in
satisfaction  for  all  that  His  creatures  had  done,  contrary  to
His  will.  When  she  had  accomplished  this,  it  appeared  to
her  that  a  vast  multitude  of  men  and  women  were  attached
to  her  by  a  golden  chain  (which  indicated  charity),  and  that
she  led  them  to  our  Lord.  He  received  them  from  her  as
a  king  would  receive  a  prince  who  brought  his  enemies  to
his  feet  to  swear  obedience  and  inviolable  fidelity  to  him.

On  Tuesday,  as  she  prayed  before  Mass  for  the  perfec
tion  and  sanctification  of  the  just,  in  whatever  manner
might  be  most  pleasing  to  her  Spouse,  our  Lord  extended
His  Hand,  and  blessed  them  with  the  victorious  sign  of
the  Cross ;  and  this  saving  benediction  descended  into
their  hearts  like  dew,  which  made  them  nourish,  strength
ened  them,  and  imparted  new  beauty  to  them.

On  Wednesday,  at  the  elevation  of  the  Host,  she  be
sought  our  Lord  for  the  souls  of  the  faithful  in  purgatory,


410  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

that  He  would  free  them  from  their  pains  by  virtue  of  His
admirable  Ascension;  and  she  beheld  our  Lord  descending
into  purgatory  with  a  golden  rod  in  His  Hand,  which  had
as  many  hooks*  as  there  had  been  prayers  for  their  souls  ;
by  these  He  appeared  to  draw  them  into  a  place  of  repose.
She  understood  by  this,  that  whenever  any  one  prays  gene
rally,  from  a  motive  of  charity,  for  the  souls  in  purgatorv,
the  greater  part  of  those  who,  during  their  lives,  have  exer
cised  themselves  in  works  of  charity,  are  released.

Then  the  Saint  repeated  these  words  two  hundred  and
twenty-five  times,  to  salute  our  Lord's  sacred  Limbs :
"  Ave,  Jesu,  Sponse  floride,  in  jubilo  quo  ascendisti  salutoet
collaudo  te;"t  and  it  appeared  to  her  that  each  salutation
was  presented  to  our  Lord  as  an  instrument  of  music  which
sounded  most  melodiously  and  in  a  manner  most  pleasing
to  Him,  so  that  He  testified  how  acceptable  it  was  to  Him.
Those  salutations  which  she  had  offered  with  the  purest
intention  emitted  the  most  sublime  harmony ;  while  those
she  had  recited  less  attentively,  sounded  mournfully,  and
were  not  so  harmonious.


CHAPTER  XXXVIIL

For  Ascension- Day.

Of  the  renunciation  of  our  own  will— And  certain  exercises  of  piety
for  this  Festival.

ON  the  Feast  of  the  Ascension,  as  the  Saint  prepared  her
self  in  the  morning  to  offer  the  tenderest  love  and  devotion

"Uncus." This  word  is  sometimes  used  poetically,  by  classical
authors,  for  an  anchor.

t  "  Hail,  Jesus,  beautiful  Spouse  !  I  salute  and  praise  Thee  in  Thy
ascension  joys."


ASCENSION-DAY.  411


to  our  Lord,  at  the  hour  of  His  Ascension,  He  said  to  her  :
"  Give  Me  now  all  the  testimonies  of  joy  which  you  are  pre
pared  to  give  Me  at  the  hour  of  My  Ascension ;  for  all  the
joy  which  I  then  experienced  will  be  renewed  in  Me,  as  I
am  about  to  enter  into  you  by  the  august  arid  holy  Sacra
ment  of  the  Altar."  "  Ah,  my  only  Love  ! "  exclaimed  the
Saint ;  "  teach  me  how  to  perform  our  usual  procession
well,  that  I  may  fittingly  honour  the  admirable  procession
which  Thou  didst  make  when  conducting  Thy  disciples  to
Bethania."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  As  Bethania  signifies  the
'  house  of  obedience,'  you  cannot  make  a  better  procession,
or  one  more  pleasing  to  Me,  than  to  offer  Me  the  entirety
of  your  will,  when  you  conduct  Me  within  you,  grievim;
sincerely  for  having  followed  your  own  will  on  so  many
occasions  in  preference  to  Mine,  and  determining  firmly  for
the  future  to  perform  My  will  perfectly  in  all  things."

As  she  received  Communion,  our  Lord  said  to  her  :
"  Behold,  I  come  to  you,  My  Spouse,  not  to  bid  you  fare
well,  but  to  take  you  with  Me  and  present  you  to  God  My
Father."  She  understood  by  this,  that  when  our  Lord
enters  into  a  soul  by  the  holy  Sacrament  of  His  Body  and
Blood,  He  attracts  the-  desires  and  good-will  of  this  soul
to  Himself,  as  a  seal  makes  an  impression  upon  wax  ;  and
that  He  presents  the  representation  of  them  thus  formed
to  His  Father,  to  obtain  from  Him  the  graces  which  this
soul  needs.  The  Saint  then  offered  Him  her  prayers,  and
those  of  some  other  persons,  to  serve  as  an  ornament  to  His
sacred  Wounds,  for  the  day  of  His  glorious  Ascension.
Then  the  Lord  Jesus  appeared  before  His  Father,  adorned
with  these  prayers,  as  with  so  many  precious  stones  ;  and
His  Father  appeared  to  draw  all  these  offerings  of  the
elect  to  Himself,  by  His  almighty  power,  and  then  ta
cause  them  to  fall  in  rays  of  glory  on  the  throne  pre


412  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

pared  from  all  eternity  for  those  who  had  offered  these
prayers.

At  the  hour  of  None,  as  Gertrude  was  entirely  absorbed
in  God,  the  Lord  Jesus  appeared  to  her  again,  more  beauti
ful  than  the  children  of  men,  and  clothed  in  a  green  tunic
and  a  crimson  mantle.  The  green  tunic  indicated  the
glorious  and  vivifying  works  of  His  adorable  Humanity ;
the  crimson  mantle,  the  intense  love  which  had  compelled
Him  to  endure  such  fearful  sufferings,  that  His  patience
under  these  alone  would  have  merited  His  glory.  Our
Lord  then  appeared  to  pass  through  the  choir,  accompanied
by  a  multitude  of  angels,  giving  special  testimonies  of  love
to  those  who  had  communicated  that  day,  and  saying  to
them  these  sweet  words :  "  I  am  with  you  unto  the  con
summation  of  ages."  *  He  also  gave  a  golden  ring  to  some
in  which  a  precious  stone  was  set,  saying  :  "  I  will  not  leave
you  orphans;  I  will  come  to  you."

As  the  Saint  was  surprised  at  this,  she  inquired  of  our
Lord  if  those  to  whom  He  had  given  the  ring  as  a  mark  of
special  love  would  have  more  merit  than  others?  Out
Lord  replied  :  "  I  have  done  this  because,  when  they  took
their  refection,  they  meditated  on  My  goodness  to  My  dis
ciples,  in  eating  and  drinking  with  them  before  I  ascended
into  heaven ;  and  for  each  morsel  that  they  took,  saying,
'  0  most  loving  Jesus !  may  the  virtue  of  Thy  Divine  love
incorporate  me  entirely  in  Thee,'  I  have  imparted  a  special
brilliancy  to  the  precious  stones  of  their  rings."

When  the  Antiphon  Elevatis  manibust  was  chanted,
our  Lord  rose  up  by  His  own  Divine  power,  accompanied


*  Matt,  xxviii.  20.

t  "He  lifted  up  His  hands  and  blessed  them,  and  was  taken  up
into  heaven  ;"  iii.  Ant.  at  vespers.


PREPARATION  FOR  PENTECOST.  413

by  a  troop  of  angels,  who  attended  Him  with  the  utmost
vigilance  and  reverence,  giving  His  benediction  to  the  whole
community,  saying  to  them  :  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  My
peace  I  give  unto  you."  By  which  she  understood  that  our
Lord  had  poured  forth  His  grace  so  effectually  into  the
hearts  of  those  who  had  celebrated  this  festival  with
singular  devotion,  that  whatever  trouble  might  happen
to  them,  He  would  still  leave  some  of  His  peace  in  their
souls,  even  as  sparks  of  fire  are  hidden  under  ashes.


CHAPTER  XXXIX.

For  the  Sunday  after  Ascension.
How  to  prepare  ourselves  worthily  to  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.

As  the  Feast  of  Pentecost  was  now  approaching,  St.  Ger
trude  besought  our  Lord,  at  Communion  on  this  day,  to
prepare  her  to  receive  these  four  virtues — purity  of  heart,
humility,  tranquillity,  and  concord.  As  she  prayed  for
purity,  she  perceived  that  her  heart  was  whiter  than
snow ;  as  she  asked  for  humility,  she  saw  our  Lord  prepare
a  cave  in  her  soul  to  receive  His  graces  ;  when  she  asked
for  tranquillity,  she  saw  Him  surround  her  heart  with  a
golden  circle,  to  preserve  it  from  the  snares  of  her  enemies  ;
then  she  said  to  Him  :  "  Alas,  my  Lord  !  I  fear  that  I  shall
soon  ruin  this  rampart  of  tranquillity :  for  as  soon  as  I  see
anything  which  I  know  to  be  contrary  to  Thy  will,  I  cannot
conceal  my  resentment,  and  oppose  it  vehemently."  To
this  our  Lord  replied  :  "  This  emotion  will  not  disturb  a  holy
tranquillity,  but  rather  adorns  it ;  strengthening  in  you,  as
it  were,  so  many  barriers  across  which  the  burning  love  of


414  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.

the  Holy  Ghost  breathes  more  efficaciously,  and  refreshes
your  soul  more  sweetly."

She  then  asked  our  Lord  for  the  virtue  of  concord,
and  He  crowned  with  this  virtue  all  the  other  virtues  which
the  Holy  Spirit  had  imparted  to  her ;  but  as  she  feared
that  if  she  suffered  many  contradictions  on  account  of  her
zeal  for  regular  observance,  they  would  prove  an  occasion
of  losing  this  precious  grace,  the  Lord  replied :  "  The
virtue  of  concord  is  not  injured  when  men  oppose  injustice  ;
and  I  Myself  will  restrain  your  zeal,  so  that  you  may  be
entirely  conformed  in  all  things  to  the  operations  of  My
Divine  Spirit."  Then  she  understood  that  whoever  prays
devoutly  to  God  for  the  same  virtues,  in  order  to  prepare  a
dwelling  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  tries  to  advance  in  them
every  day  by  practising  them  faithfully,  will  receive  the
same  advantages.

CHAPTER  XL.

For  the,  Vigil  and  Feast  of  Pentecost.
Of  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost — And  other  exercises  for  this  day.

As  St.  Gertrude  prayed  very  devoutly,  on  the  Vigil  of
Pentecost,  that  she  might  be  prepared  to  receive  the  Holy
Ghost,  she  heard  our  Lord  saying  these  words  to  her  in
teriorly  with  great  love :  "  You  will  receive  the  virtue  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  which  is  coming  to  you."  But  while
she  felt  extreme  joy  and  satisfaction  at  these  words,  she
thought  also  of  her  utter  unworthiness,  and  it  appeared
to  her  as  if  a  cave  was  made  in  her  heart,  which  became
deeper  and  deeper  as  this  sentiment  of  unworthiness  in
creased  in  her  soul.  Then  she  saw  a  stream  of  honey
coining  forth  from  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  and  distilling  itself


HER  SOUL  BLESSED  LIKE  A  BAPTISMAL  FONT. 415

into  hers,  until  it  was  entirely  filled.  By  this  she  under
stood  that  it  was  the  unction  and  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost
which  flowed  thus  sweetly  from  the  Heart  of  the  Son  of
God  into  the  hearts  of  the  faithful.

Then  the  Son  of  God  blessed  this  cave  with  His  Divine
Hand,  as  the  baptismal  font  *  is  blessed,  so  that  each  time
her  soul  entered  therein  it  might  be  purified  from  every
stain.  As  she  rejoiced  at  this  holy  benediction,  she  said  to
our  Lord  :  "  Alas,  my  Lord  !  unworthy  sinner  that  I  am,
I  confess  with  grief  that,  through  my  frailty,  I  have  offended
in  many  ways  against  Thy  Omnipotence,  and  that  my
ignorance  and  malice  have  often  offended  against  Thy
wisdom  and  goodness.  Therefore,  0  Father  of  Mercies,
have  mercy  on  me,  and  give  me  strength  from  Thy
strength  to  resist  all  that  is  contrary  to  Thy  will ;  give  me
grace  from  Thy  inconceivable  wisdom  to  avoid  all  that
may  offend  Thy  pure  Eyes,  and  enable  me  to  adhere
faithfully  to  Thee  by  Thy  superabundant  mercy,  so  that
I  may  never  depart  from  Thy  will  in  the  very  least
degree."

As  she  said  these  words,  she  appeared  to  be  plunged
into  this  cave  to  be  regenerated  therein,  so  that  she  came
forth  purified  from  every  stain,  and  whiter  than  snow ;  and
being  presented  thus  before  the  Divine  Majesty,  she  put
herself  under  the  protection  of  all  the  saints,  as  a  newly
baptized  person  is  placed  in  the  care  of  their  sponsors,  that
they  might  pray  to  God  for  her.  Then  all  the  saints  offered
their  merits  to  God  very  joyfully,  in  satisfaction  for  her
negligences  and  needs.  St.  Gertrude,  being  thus  adorned,
was  placed  by  our  Lord  Himself  before  Him,  so  that  His


*  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  font  is  blessed  on  Wliitsun-eve
as  well  as  on  Easter-eve.


416 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


Divine  breath*  entered  into  her  soul,  uniting  her  will
efficaciously  to  His,  and  saying  to  her:  "Such  are  the
delights  which  I  enjoy  with  the  children  of  men;"  for  the
respirations  of  her  soul  indicated  her  good-will,  and  the
breath  of  our  Lord  His  acceptance  of  her  good  intentions
and  desires.  Thus  Gertrude  reposed  sweetly  in  the  arms
of  her  Spouse,  waiting  until  He  should  impart  to  her
more  perfect  dispositions  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost.

As  she  offered  some  special  prayers  to  obtain  from  God
the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  first  for  the  gift  of  fear,
that  it  might  keep  her  from  evil,  our  Lord  appeared  to
plant  a  very  high  tree  in  the  centre  of  her  heart,  which
extended  its  branches  so  as  to  cover  it  entirely.  This  tree
had  little  spikes,  from  which  grew  very  beautiful  flowers.
The  spikes  signified  the  gift  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  which
pricks  the  soul  with  compunction  when  it  is  inclined  to
evil ;  the  flowers  indicated  the  good-will  which,  joined  to
the  fear  of  God,  fortifies  the  soul  against  sin ;  and  if  man
avoids  evil  and  performs  good  actions,  the  tree  produces
fruit.

Then,  as  she  asked  for  the  other  gifts,  they  were  shown
to  her  under  the  form  of  trees,  differing  in  their  fruits,
according  to  the  different  virtues.  A  kind  of  dew  dis
tilled  from  the  trees  of  knowledge  and  piety,  from  which
she  understood  that  those  who  apply  themselves  to  these
two  virtues  are  watered  by  a  gentle  rain,  which  makes
them  flower  and  bear  fruit.  The  trees  of  the  gift  of  coun
sel  and  fortitude  had  little  cords  of  gold,  which  signified
that  these  gifts  rendered  the  soul  capable  of  compre-


*  "  Breathing  thrice  on  the  water,  he  proceeds,"  &c. ;  see  Blessing
of  the  Font,  in  Missal.


SHE  RECEIVES  THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST. 417

Lending  spiritual  things.  Streams  of  delicious  nectar  flowed
from  the  trees  of  wisdom  and  understanding;  from  which
she  learned  that  God  pours  Himself  forth  efficaciously  on
the  soul  by  these  gifts,  and  that  it  thus  becomes  satiated
with  the  sweetness  of  His  love.

That  night,  at  Matins,  as  the  Saint  felt  an  extreme
debility,  which  made  her  think  that  she  could  not  live
long,  she  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  What  honour  and  what  glory
canst  Thou  gain  from  a  miserable  creature  like  me,  who
can  only  remain  so  short  a  time  at  the  Office?"  Our  Lord
replied  :  "  In  order  that  sensible  things  may  assist  you  to
understand  those  which  are  spiritual,  consider  that  a  bride
groom  finds  the  greatest  pleasure  in  the  most  familiar
intercourse  with  his  bride ;  and  I  assure  you  that  no  bride
groom  ever  found  more  satisfaction  in  the  endearments  of
his  bride,  than  I  do  whenever  My  elect  offer  Me  their
hearts,  purified  from  all  sin,  that  I  may  take  my  delight
therein."  As  she  approached  to  receive  Holy  Communion,
our  Lord  refreshed  her  heart  by  a  Divine  exhalation,
which  came  forth  from  His  sacred  Limbs,  and  which  gave
her  ineffable  pleasure  ;  God  making  known  to  her  that  she
had  merited  to  receive  the  seven  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  by
her  earnest  prayers.

After  she  had  communicated,  she  offered  the  whole  life
of  Jesus  Christ  to  God  the  Father,  in  satisfaction  for  her
fault  in  never  having  made  a  sufficiently  worthy  prepara
tion  to  receive  Him  into  her  heart,  even  from  the  hour  of  her
regeneration  in  baptism.  Then  she  saw  the  Holy  Ghost  in
the  form  of  a  dove,  descending  from  heaven  upon  the  ador
able  Sacrament,  with  an  impetuous  flight  like  that  of  an
eagle  ;  and  seeking  the  sweet  Heart  of  Jesus,  He  appeared
to  enter  therein,  and  find  there  a  most  agreeable  abode.

As  the  hymn  Veni  Creator  was  chanted  at  Terce,  our


418 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Lord  appeared  to  her,  and  opened  His  Heart,  full  of
sweetness  and  tenderness,  to  her.  Gertrude  knelt  before  it,
inclining  so  that  her  head  rested  in  the  centre  of  His
Heart ;  and  her  Spouse  took  her  head  and  pressed  it  to  Him
self,  uniting  her  will  to  His,  and  sanctifying  it.  At  the
second  verse,  Qui,  Paraclitus  diciris*  she  placed  the  hands
of  her  soul,t  that  is,  her  actions,  in  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  and
obtained  consolations  which  so  fortified  her  in  her  exercises
of  piety,  that  all  which  she  performed  henceforth  could  not
fail  to  be  most  acceptable  to  God.

At  the  third  verse,  Tu  septiformis  gratia  (sic),  she  placed
the  feet  of  her  soul,  that  is,  her  desires,  in  the  Sacred  Heart,
and  thereby  obtained  their  sanctification.

At  the  fourth  verse,  Accende  lumen  sensibus,  she  recom
mended  her  senses  to  God,  and  obtained  this  promise —
that  they  should  be  so  illuminated  as  to  reflect  their  light
upon  the  senses  of  others,  who  should  be  thereby  excited  to
love  God.

At  the  fifth  verse,  Hostem  repellas,  our  Lord  inclined
towards  her,  and  embraced  her,  to  shield  her  against  all
the  attacks  of  her  enemies  ;  and  in  all  this  she  experienced
such  satisfaction  in  her  soul  as  to  understand  clearly  what
our  Lord  had  said  to  her  on  the  preceding  day :  "  You
shall  receive  the  virtue  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  will  come
to  you."

*  So  in  Benedictine  Breviary.  f  "  Manus  animal


MONDAY  IN  WHITSUN  WEEK.  419

CHAPTER  XLL

For  Monday  in  Whitsun  Week.

How  the  oblation  of  the  Sacred  Host  supplies  for  our  deficiencies-
Exercises  for  the  Agnus  Dei.

ON  Monday,  at  the  Elevation,  St  Gertrude  offered  the
Sacred  Host  in  satisfaction  for  her  deficiencies  in  acquiring
spiritual  goods,  and  even  for  extinguishing  the  light  of  the
Holy  Spirit.  It  appeared  to  her  that  this  Sacred  Host
emitted  a  number  of  branches,  which  were  collected  by  the
Holy  Spirit  and  placed  in  the  form  of  a  hedge  round  the
throne  of  the  Ever-Blessed  Trinity.  From  this  she  under
stood  that  the  excellence  and  dignity  of  this  great  Sacra
ment  supplied  fully  for  all  her  negligences.  A  voice  also
came  forth  from  the  throne,  which  said  :  "  Let  her  who  has
given  such  rare  flowers  to  her  Spouse  approach  His  Divine
and  nuptial  couch  without  fear."  She  understood  by  this
that  God  considered  her  perfect  in  habits  of  virtue,  in  con
sideration  of  the  oblation  which  she  had  made  to  Him  of
this  Most  Holy  Sacrament.

At  the  first  Agnus  Dei  she  prayed  for  the  whole  Church,
as  usual,  beseeching  God  to  govern  it  in  all  things  as  a  true
Father.  At  the  second  Agnus  Dei  she  prayed  for  the
faithful  departed,  that  He  might  show  mercy  to  them,  and
release  them  from  all  their  pains.  At  the  third  Agnus  Dei
she  asked  for  an  increase  of  merit  for  all  the  saints  and  the
elect  who  should  reign  with  Him  in  heaven.  At  the  words
Dona  nolis  pacem  our  Lord  inclined  so  lovingly  towards  her
that  the  sweetness  of  His  embrace  penetrated  into  the  depth
of  the  hearts  of  all  the  saints,  and  they  received  thereby  an
immense  increase  of  grace  and  merit.

After  this,  as  she  approached  the  Holy  Communion,  the


420 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

saints  rose  up  before  her  with  honour  and  joy,  and  she
saw  that  the  light  of  their  merits  shone  gloriously,  even
as  a  shield  of  gold  shines  when  exposed  to  the  rays  of
the  sun ;  and  the  reflection  of  this  light  shone  into  her
soul.

St.  Gertrude  then  remained  in  the  presence  of  God,  as  if
in  expectation,  because  she  had  not  yet  obtained  the  grace
of  being  united  to  Him.  At  last,  after  Communion,  her  soul
was  united  to  this  Divine  Spouse  with  such  plenitude,  that
she  enjoyed  His  presence  in  the  most  perfect  manner  pos
sible  in  this  world.  Then  the  branches  of  which  we  have
already  spoken,  with  which  the  Holy  Spirit  had  surrounded
the  throne  of  the  Ever-Blessed  Trinity,  began  to  shoot  forth
green  leaves  and  flowers,  even  as  a  plant  flourishes  after
abundant  rain,  so  that  the  ever-peaceful  Trinity  found
ineffable  pleasure  therein,  and  all  the  saints  experienced
new  delights.


CHAPTER  XLII.

For  the  Tuesday  in  Whitsun  Week.

How  the  Sacred  Host  supplies  for  all  our  negligences,  and  how  the
Holy  Spirit  unites  Himself  in  Communion  to  holy  souls.

ON  Tuesday  in  Whitsun  week,  St.  Gertrude  offered  the
Host  to  God,  in  satisfaction  and  reparation  for  her  defi
ciency  in  gratitude  for  the  favour  which  He  had  bestowed
on  her  of  uniting  her  more  closely  to  Himself  than  others,
and  because  she  had  not  detached  herself  from  everything
else  to  attach  herself  entirely  to  Him.  And  as  she  did  this
with  a  perfect  and  full  intention  of  suffering  the  penalty
which  she  considered  due  to  her  negligence  and  weakness,
our  Lord — who  is  full  of  goodness,  and  who  esteems  a  good


POE  THE  FKAST  OF  THE  BLESSED  TRINITY.  421

will  even  as  an  act  * — appeared  fully  satisfied  ;  and  the
Holy  Spirit,  concentrating  all  the  virtues  of  this  most
Holy  Sacrament,  entered  with  the  Host  into  the  soul  of
Gertrude  at  the  moment  of  Communion  ;  and  God  then
united  Himself  closely  and  inseparably  to  her.


CHAPTER  XLIIL

For  the  Feast  of  the  Blessed  Trinity.

How  we  may  glorify  the  Most  Holy  Trinity  by  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ— And  what  obstacles  human  affections  place  to  our
advancement.

ON  the  Feast  of  the  effulgent  and  ever-peaceful  Trinity,
St.  Gertrude  recited  this  salutation:  "Be  Thou  glorified,
O  most  mighty,  most  excellent,  most  noble,  most  sweet,
most  benignant,  ever-peaceful,  and  ineffable  Trinity,  who
art  one  God  now  and  to  endless  ages  I"  As  she  offered  this
salutation  to  our  Lord,  He  appeared  to  her  in  His  Human
ity,  in  which  He  is  said  to  be  less  than  His  Father,  and
stood  in  the  presence  of  the  adorable  Trinity  with  all  the
beauty  and  grace  of  a  perfect  man.  He  had  a  most  bril
liant  and  beautiful  flower  on  each  part  of  His  Body,  to
which  nothing  material  could  be  compared.  They  indicated
by  their  brightness  that,  as  our  baseness  and  unworthiness
were  utterly  incapable  of  praising  the  adorable  Trinity,  our
Lord,  by  taking  our  nature,  had  so  elevated  it  as  to  make
it  worthy  of  being  offered  in  sacrifice  to  this  adorable
Trinity.

When  Vespers  commenced,  our  Lord  offered  His  Heart
to  the  Blessed  Trinity  as  a  musical  instrument,  and  by

*  "Qui  bonam  voluntatem  acceptat  pro  facto."


422 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

it  every  note  and  every  word  which  was  chanted  in  the
Office  on  that  day  resounded  most  melodiously  before  God.
But  the  chants  of  those  who  had  little  devotion  emitted  a
low  and  unnielodious  sound,  like  that  which  is  heard  on  the
large  strings  of  a  musical  instrument.  At  the  Antiphou
Osculetur  me,  a  voice  came  from  the  throne,  singing  :  "  Let
My  Divine  Son,  in  whom  is  all  My  delight,  approach  Me,
and  give  Me  a  sweet  and  loving  embrace."  Then  the  Son
of  God  approached  under  His  human  form,  embracing
this  incomprehensive  Divinity,  to  which  His  Sacred
Humanity  alone  has  merited  to  be  united  so  blessedly  ami
so  inseparably.

Then  the  Son  of  God  said  to  His  most  pure  Mother,  in
whose  honour  this  Antiphon  was  chanted  :  "Do  you  also
approach,  My  most  dear  Mother,  and  embrace  Me."  And
at  this  embrace,  the  same  flowers  and  the  same  beauty
appeared  on  her  as  on  our  Lord,  because  it  was  from  her
He  took  human  flesh.  She  learned  also  that  whenever
the  Son  is  named  on  this  most  holy  festival,  the  Father
unites  Himself  in  an  ineffable  manner  with  the  Son,  whose
Humanity  receives  thereby  a  glory  which  reflects  itself
upon  the  Saints,  giving  them  new  knowledge  of  the  incom
prehensible  Trinity.

In  the  morning,  when  the  Antiphon  Tt  jure  laudenl  *
was  chanted  at  Lauds,  St.  Gertrude  praised  the  Ever-Blessed
Trinity  with  her  whole  soul,  desiring  to  do  the  same  at  the
moment  of  her  death,  if  it  were  possible  ;  and  it  appeared
to  her  that  the  effulgent  and  ever-peaceful  Trinity  inclined
gently  towards  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  which  resounded  befor*


*  This  Antiphon  is  not  in  the  present  Office,  but  it  may  be  found
in  an  Office  of  the  Blessed  Trinity,  v.  Ant.  at  Lauds  ;  Res.  et  Ant.
St.  Gregorii.


ST.  JOHN  BAPTIST — HIS  INTERCESSION.  423

it  like  a  harp,  and  that  three  words  therein  were  united
to  pay  the  homage  which  St.  Gertrude  had  failed  in  ren
dering  to  the  Blessed  Trinity  ;  and  these  three  words  were
— the  omnipotence  of  the  Father,  the  wisdom  of  the  Son,
and  the  love  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  she  continued  in
sentiments  of  most  fervent  devotion  all  the  morning,  she
began  to  consider  whether  it  was  her  negligence  which  had
prevented  her  from  receiving  as  many  lights  as  usual.  But
our  Lord  consoled  her  by  these  words:  "Although  My
justice  has  deprived  you  of  some  lights  and  knowledge,  on
account  of  the  human  satisfaction  which  you  have  taken  in
chanting  the  Office,  you  may  nevertheless  be  assured  that
the  pains  which  you  have  chosen  to  endure  in  this  service
will  not  fail  of  their  reward."

On  another  occasion  also,  and  on  the  same  high  festival,
St.  Gertrude  was  vouchsafed  the  most  sublime  graces,
particularly  at  the  Church's  offices,  which  are  known  to
God  alone.


CHAPTER  XLIV.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  John  Baptist.
Apparition  of  the  Saint — Effects  of  his  intercession.

ON  the  Feast  of  St.  John  Baptist,*  as  the  Saint  assisted  at
Matins  with  all  possible  devotion,  this  Saint  appeared  to
her,  standing  before  the  throne  of  God,  in  all  the  glory
of  his  special  prerogative  of  having  baptized  our  Lord,  and
being  the  precursor  of  Christ.  As  the  Saint  considered  him
thus,  she  began  to  reflect  why  he  was  always  represented
as  an  aged  man,  and  with  a  care-worn  countenance.  But


*  June  24.


424 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

St.  John  informed  her  that  this  manner  of  representing
him  served  to  augment  his  glory,  and  that  God  had  ex
pressly  permitted  it,  to  teach  men  that  the  ardent  desire
which  he  had  of  serving  Him  would  have  led  him  to  use
every  effort  to  combat  the  injustice  and  iniquity  of  men,
and  to  attain  to  the  highest  perfection  himself,  even  to  old
age  ;  and  as  he  died  in  these  sentiments,  God  had  given
him  a  very  high  reward  for  them.

As  St.  Gertrude  inquired  if  his  merits  had  been  in
creased  on  account  of  his  parents  having  been  so  perfect
and  holy,  he  replied  :  "  Because  I  had  holy  parents,  I  was
brought  up  to  a  greater  love  of  justice,  and  therefore  I  was
rendered  more  worthy  of  a  place  near  the  throne  of  God.
But  as  for  their  rank  and  worldly  advantages,  I  gained
nothing  by  them  except  by  despising  them  and  by  seeking
to  elevate  my  mind  to  heavenly  knowledge  ;  so  that  I  have
gained  a  glory  similar  to  that  of  a  soldier,  who,  returning
victorious  from  battle,  rejoices  all  the  more  for  having
overcome  more  of  the  snares  and  surprises  of  his  enemies
than  others."

During  Mass,  at  which  the  religious  communicated,
St.  John  appeared  to  her  again  in  crimson  vestments,  and
his  mantle  was  adorned  with  as  many  little  golden  lambs
as  there  had  been  Communions  received  in  his  honour
throughout  the  whole  Church.  Then  she  saw  the  Saint
praying  for  all  who  had  venerated  him  on  that  day  ;  and
he  specially  sought  to  obtain  for  them  the  same  grace
which  he  had  himself  acquired — namely,  his  zeal  and
fidelity  in.  the  conversion  of  sinners.


THE  FEAST  OP  ST.  PETER  AND  ST.  PAUL. 425

CHAPTER  XLV.
For  the  Feast  of  the  Holy  Apostles  SS.  Peter  and  Paul

How  we  may  feed  Christ's  sheep  spiritually — Of  the  intercession  of
the  Apostles— And  the  fruit  of  Holy  Communion.

ON  the  great  Festival  of  the  princes  of  the  Apostles,  as  the
second  Kesponse  Si  diligis  me*  was  chanted  at  Matins,
St.  Gertrude  asked  our  Lord  what  flock  she  should  feed  to
testify  her  love  for  Him.  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Feed  five
lambs  which  are  most  dear  to  Me.  Feed  your  heart  with
Divine  meditations,  your  lips  with  edifying  words,  your
eyes  with  pious  reading,  your  ears  with  charitable  admo
nitions,  and  your  hands  with  continual  labour ;  for  your
attachment  and  application  to  such  things  will  be  the
greatest  testimony  of  your  affection  which  you  can  bestow
on  Me."

By  these  holy  meditations  she  understood  all  thoughts
for  the  glory  of  God,  for  the  welfare  of  others,  and  for  her
own  salvation  ;  the  same  was  indicated  by  edifying  dis
courses.  By  pious  reading,  she  understood  all  that  could
contribute  to  our  salvation,  as  looking  upon  a  crucifix,
assisting  the  poor,  giving  good  example.  By  charitable
admonitions,  she  understood  receiving  correction  patiently.
But  as  continual  reading  was  inconsistent  with  manual
labour,  she  understood  that  the  desire  of  it  was  sufficient
when  the  accomplishment  was  not  possible.

At  Mass,  as  she  returned  thanks  for  the  special  privi
leges  bestowed  on  St.  Peter,  and  particularly  his  having


*  "If  thou  lovest  Me,  Simon  Peter,  feed  My  sheep.  Lord,  Thou
knowest  that  I  love  Thee,  and  that  I  would  give  my  life  for  Thee;"
ii.  Response,  i,  Nocturn,


426  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.

heard  these  words  from  our  Lord  Himself,  "Whatsoever
khou  shalt  bind  upon  earth,  it  shall  be  bound  also  in
heaven ;  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose  on  earth,  it
shall  be  loosed  also  in  heaven,"*  the  Saint  appeared  to
her,  vested  as  a  Pope,t  and,  extending  his  hands,  he  gave
her  his  benediction,  that  it  might  work  in  her  the  same
effects  as  it  had  worked  in  others,  through  the  power
which  God  had  given  him.  As  she  approached  the  holy
altar,  and  trembled  for  her  unworthiness,  St.  Peter  and
St.  Paul  appeared  to  her,  one  on  her  right  hand  and  the
other  on  her  left,  as  if  to  conduct  her  thither  with  great
pomp  ;  and  when  she  had  reached  it,  the  Son  of  God
received  her  Himself,  saying  to  her  :  "  I  have  brought  you
thither  with  the  same  arms  with  which  I  embrace  you;  but
I  have  done  this  through  the  ministry  of  My  Apostles,
that  your  devotion  might  be  fully  satisfied."

Then,  as  she  remembered  she  had  not  returned  thanks
for  the  graces  bestowed  on  St.  Paul,  she  besought  our  Lord
to  supply  for  her  negligence.  After  Communion,  as  she
prayed,  she  seemed  to  be  seated,  as  a  queen  beside  a  king,
on  the  same  throne  with  our  Divine  Lord ;  before  whom
the  Apostles  knelt  as  soldiers  receiving  gifts  from  a  prince  ;
for  her  Communion  had  appeared  to  increase  their  merits.
And  as  she  was  surprised  at  this,  and  thought  that  those
Saints  must  have  acquired  sufficient  merit  for  having  offered
the  Adorable  Sacrifice  so  frequently  when  on  earth,  she  was
told  that  the  Saints  took  special  delight  in  a  soul  when
it  has  received  Holy  Communion  with  devotion  and  piety,
even  as  a  bride  is  congratulated  on  the  day  of  her  nuptials.


*  Gospel  for  the  Feast  of  SS.  Peter  and  Paul  (Matt.  xvi.  13--19),
in  which  our  Lord  specially  addresses  St.  Peter.
t  "In  Papali  gloria  sacerdotalihus  indutus."


VISION  OF  ST.  MARGARET,  VIRGIN  AND  MARTYR. 427

CHAPTER  XLVI.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  Margaret,  Viryin  and  Martyr.

The  glory  of  this  Saint,  and  of  the  recompense  which  God  reserves
for  the  least  good  action.

As  St.  Gertrude  assisted  at  Vespers,  on  the  Festival  of  the
glorious  virgin  St.  Margaret,  she  appeared  to  her  in  ex-
ceeding  beauty,  standing  before  the  throne  of  God  at  the
commencement  of  the  Response  Virgo  veneranda,  rays  of
light  appeared  to  come  forth  from  the  King  of  Glory,  which
renewed  and  enhanced  the  merit  of  the  virginity  and  beauty
of  the  Saint,  even  as  the  touches  of  a  painter  enhance  the
perfection  of  his  work.  At  the  words  In  magna  stans
constantia,  a  ray  from  the  light  of  the  Passion  increased
the  merits  of  her  martyrdom.  And  as  the  words  Sponisqut
reddens  prcemia  *  were  chanted,  our  Lord  turned  to  His
spouse,  the  blessed  Margaret,  and  said  lovingly  to  her  :
';  My  daughter,  have  I  not  increased  your  merits  to  the
highest  degree  ?  and  yet  I  am  asked  to  increase  them
further."  Then  He  united  together  all  the  devotions  oC
those  who  had  solemnised  this  Feast,  to  enhance  the  glory
of  this  most  blessed  virgin.


*  The  Feast  of  St.  Margaret,  Virgin  and  Martyr,  occurs  on  the
20th  July.  She  obtained  her  crown  at  Antioch  in  the  last  general
persecution.  The  Crusaders  hrought  home  glowing  traditions  of
her  virgin  purity,  her  heroic  constancy,  and  her  sublime  faith ;  so
that  devotion  to  her  was  exceedingly  propagated  in  England.
France,  and  Germany  during  the  Middle  Ages.  Her  relics  are  now
at  Monte  Fiascone,  in  Tuscany.  We  have  not  been  able  to  verify
the  Antiphons,  which  are  not  in  the  present  Office.  The  Sponisqut
reddens  is  from  the  hymn  Jcsu,  corona  viryinum;  Vespers,  Com.  of
Virgins.


428 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.


After  this  St.  Margaret  turned  to  Gertrude,  and  said  to
her :  "  Rejoice  and  be  glad,  0  elect  of  my  Lord  !  for  as
suredly,  after  the  short  term  of  your  affliction  on  earth,  you
shall  rejoice  for  all  eternity  in  heaven,  where  the  brief
moments  of  temporal  affliction  and  bitterness  which  you
have  endured  shall  be  recompensed  by  endless  years  of
sweetness  and  consolation  :  and  all  that  you  suffer  now,
either  in  body  or  soul,  is  an  effect  of  the  special  love
which  God  bears  you,  since  you  are  daily  more  and  more
favoured  with  such  sufferings,  and  you  are  thereby  more
prepared  for  the  joys  of  eternity.  Consider,"  she  continued,
"  that  on  the  day  on  which  I  obtained  the  glory  which  I
now  enjoy,  instead  of  being  honoured  as  I  now  am  by  the
whole  world,  I  was  despised  by  all,  and  thought  miserable
and  nfflicted.  Have,  therefore,  this  firm  confidence — that,
when  this  life  has  ended,  you  will  infallibly  enjoy  the
eternal  embraces  of  your  Spouse,  and  those  joys  and  de
lights  which  neither  eye  hath  seen  nor  ear  heard,  and
which  it  hath  not  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  con
ceive."


CHAPTER  XLVII.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  Mary  Magdalen.

Of  true  penance  and  good-will.

AT  the  first  Vespers  of  the  Feast  of  St.  Mary  Magdalen,*
this  blessed  lover  of  Jesus  appeared  to  Gertrude,  adorned
with  as  many  precious  stones  and  rare  flowers  as  she  had
formerly  committed  sins.  The  Saint  understood  that  the
flowers  signified  the  sovereign  goodness  of  God  in  pardoning

*  July  22.


ST.  MARY  MAGDALEN — HER  PENANCE  AND  LOVE. 429

her  sins ;  and  the  precious  stones,  the  penance  by  which
the  Divine  grace  had  enabled  her  to  expiate  them.

At  Matins,  St.  Gertrude  besought  this  Saint  to  intercede
for  her  and  for  all  who  were  committed  to  her  care.  Then
St.  Mary  Magdalen  cast  herself  at  the  Feet  of  our  Lord
and  kissed  them  tenderly,  raising  them  gently  from  the
ground,  as  if  to  invite  all  penitents  to  approach  them.
Gertrude  then  approached,  and  kissing  them  devoutly,
said  to  Him  :  "  I  offer  Thee  now,  0  most  loving  Lord,  the
sorrows  of  all  those  who  are  under  my  care,  and  with  them
I  water  Thy  blessed  Feet  with  my  tears."  Our  Lord
replied  :  "  I  accept  your  offering  for  them,  and  tell  them
that  they  should  wipe  My  Feet  with  their  hair,  kiss  them,
and  pour  perfumes  upon  them."

From  this  she  understood  three  things  :  first,  that  they
wiped  our  Lord's  Feet  with  their  hair,  if  they  now  endea
voured  to  expose  themselves  to  every  kind  of  adversity,  to
efface  any  faults  which  they  might  have  committed  for
merly  by  not  bearing  their  sufferings  patiently  ;  secondly,
that  they  kissed  His  Feet  who  confided  fully  in  the  good
ness  of  God,  who  easily  forgives  all  the  sins  for  which  we
are  truly  penitent :  thirdly,  that  we  anoint  them  when  we
avoid  carefully  all  that  is  displeasing  to  God.

Our  Lord  then  said  to  her  :  "  Pour  forth  this  ointment
on  Me  with  the  same  devotion  as  Magdalen  opened  tbe
alabaster  box,  and  poured  it  upon  My  Head,  so  that  the
odour  perfumed  the  whole  house.  And  know,  that  if  you
defend  the  truth,  you  will  act  thus  ;  those  who  love  and
defend  the  truth,  and  for  its  sake  lose  friends  or  any  other
advantage,  pour  forth  on  My  Head  a  box  of  precious  oinb
inent,  the  perfume  of  which  fills  My  house  ;  for  he  whc
corrects  others,  by  giving  good  example,  emits  a  sweet
odour.  And  if  he  fails  in  any  way  in  the  manner  of


430  TffE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GKRTHUDE.

correcting  or  reprehending,  either  by  negligence  or  by
roughness,  I  will  excuse  him  before  God  My  Father  and
the  whole  court  of  heaven,  even  as  I  excused  Magdalen."

To  this  Gertrude  replied  :  "  0  Lord,  since  it  is  re
lated  of  this  loving  penitent  that  she  bought  this  ointment,
can  I  not  render  Thee  a  similar  service  ? "  He  answered  :
"  Whosoever  desires  that  My  glory  may  be  promoted  in  all
things,  in  preference  to  his  own  advantage  or  convenience,
purchases  a  most  precious  ointment  for  Me ;  although  it
may  often  happen  that  his  good-will  cannot  be  carried  into
effect."


CHAPTER  XLVIII.
For  the  Feast  of  St.  James.

Advantages  of  the  pilgrimage  to  Compostella — And  how  we  may
honour  the  Saints  by  Communion.

ON  the  Feast  of  St.  James  the  Great,*  this  Apostle  ap,
peared  to  Gertrude,  adorned  with  the  merits  of  thos<j
pilgrims  who  had  visited  his  shrine.  As  the  Saint  was
rapt  in  admiration  thereat,  she  asked  our  Lord  why  this
Apostle  was  so  honoured  by  pilgrimages,  that  his  relics
appeared  even  more  revered  than  those  of  the  holy  Apostles
Peter  and  Paul.  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  The  fervour  of  his


*  It  will  be  remembered  that  St.  James  the  Great  has  received  this
appellation  to  distinguish  him  from  St.  James  the  Less,  Bishop  of
Jerusalem.  He  was  martyred  eleven  years  after  our  Lord's  Ascen
sion  at  Jerusalem.  His  body  was  carried  into  Spain,  where  he  had
evangelised  before  his  death.  His  relics  were  discovered  in  the  ninth
century,  and  translated  to  Compostella.  The  place  was  at  first  called
"  Ad  S.  Jacobum  Apostolum,"  or  Giacomo  Postolo,  and  hence  con
tracted  into  Compostella.


MERITS  OP THE  APOSTLE  ST.  JAMES.  481

zeal  for  the  salvation  of  souls  has  obtained  this  special
privilege  for  him.  And  as  I  took  him  away  from  the
world  so  soon,  according  to  the  decrees  of  My  providence,
that  he  was  unable  to  convert  many  persons,  which  he  most
ardently  desired  to  do,  his  desire  still  remains  before  Me
fresh  and  flourishing,  and  what  he  was  unable  to  do  during
his  life  I  permit  him  to  accomplish  after  his  death,  by
bringing  an  immense  number  of  pilgrims  to  his  shrine,
absolving  them  from  their  sins,  and  strengthening  them  in
the  Catholic  faith."

Then,  as  she  desired  to  obtain  the  remission  of  her  sins
through  the  merits  of  this  Apostle,  and  as  she  could  not
undertake  the  pilgrimage,  she  approached  the  Holy  Com
munion.  As  soon  as  she  had  accomplished  her  design,
she  beheld  herself  seated  at  a  table  with  our  Divine  Lord,
\vhich  was  laden  with  various  delicious  viands.  And  as
she  offered  our  Lord  His  precious  Body,  which  she  had  re
ceived,  for  the  increase  of  the  beatitude  and  glory  of  this
Apostle,  St.  James  presented  himself  before  God  as  a  prince,
to  thank  Him  for  the  favours  which  he  had  received  through
this  Adorable  Sacrament.  He  then  asked  that  God  would
work  in  the  soul  of  Gertrude  all  the  good  which  He  had
ever  deigned  to  work  in  any  soul  through  his  merits,  be
cause  she  had  offered  this  Adorable  Sacrament  in  bia
honour.


432 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

CHAPTER  XLIX.

For  the  Vigil  and  Feast  of  the  Assumption.
Of  the  manner  of  honouring  and  saluting  the  Blessed  Virgin.

§  1. Of  the  prompt  assistance  which  she  affords  to  those  who
invoice  Jier.

As  St.  Gertrude  was  ill,  on  the  solemnity  of  the  Assump
tion,  she  was  unable  to  fulfil  her  intention  of  saying  as
many  Ave  Marias  as  the  Blessed  Virgin  had  been  years  on
earth  ;  but  she  tried  to  supply  for  this  devotion  in  some
degree  by  the  three  aspirations — Ave  Maria,  gratia  plena,
Dominus  tecum.  As  she  offered  them  with  great  fervour
for  herself  and  those  committed  to  her  care,  our  Lady
appeared  to  her  in  glory,  clothed  with  a  green  mantle
covered  with  golden  flowers  in  the  form  of  trefoils,  and
said  to  her  :  "  Behold  how  I  am  adorned  with  as  many
flowers  as  those  for  whom  you  have  prayed  have  uttered
words  in  their  petition  to  me ;  the  brilliancy  of  these  flowers
corresponds  to  the  fervour  of  their  petitions  ;  and  I  will
turn  this  to  their  advantage,  to  render  them  more  agree
able  to  my  Son  and  all  the  celestial  court."

St.  Gertrude  observed  also  that  the  Blessed  Virgin  had
some  roses  with  six  leaves  amongst  the  trefoils,  and  that
three  of  these  leaves  were  golden  and  enriched  with  pre
cious  stones  ;  while  the  other  three,  which  alternated  with
the  former,  were  distinguished  by  an  admirable  variety  of
colours.  The  three  golden  leaves  indicated  the  threefold
division  of  the  Ave  Maria  which  she  had  made  during  her
sickness  ;  and  the  three  other  leaves  were  added  by  our
Lord — the  first,  to  reward  her  for  the  love  with  which  she
saluted  and  praised  His  most  sweet  Mother ;  the  second,  for


HOW  OUR  LADY  PROTECTS  HER  CLIENTS.  433

her  discretion  and  prudence  in  regulating  her  devotions
during  her  illness  ;  and  the  third,  for  the  confidence  which
she  had  that  the  Lord  and  His  loving  Mother  would  accept
the  little  she  had  done.

At  Prime  St.  Gertrude  besought  our  Lord  to  obtain
His  Blessed  Mother's  favour  for  her,  as  she  feared  she  had
never  been  sufficiently  devout  to  her.  Our  Lord  then,
after  bestowing  many  marks  of  tenderness  and  filial  affec
tion  on  His  Divine  Mother,  said  to  her  :  "Remember,  My
beloved  Mother,  that  for  your  sake  I  am  indulgent  to
sinners,  and  regard  My  elect  as  if  she  had  served  you  all
her  life  with  devotion."

At  these  words  this  most  pure  Mother  gave  herself
entirely  to  Gertrude,  for  the  sake  of  her  Divine  Son.  As
the  Collect,  Deus,  qui  virginalem*  was  read  at  Mass,  our
Lord  appeared  to  renew  in  His  Blessed  Mother  all  the  joys
which  she  had  experienced  in  His  Conception,  His  Birth,
and  the  other  mysteries  of  His  Humanity.  At  the  words
Ut  sua  nos  defensione  munitosrf  which  the  Saint  read  with
special  devotion,  she  beheld  the  Mother  of  God  extending
her  mantle  as  if  to  receive  beneath  its  shelter  all  those  who
fled  to  her  patronage.  The  holy  angels  then  brought  all
who  had  prepared  themselves  very  fervently  for  this  Feast,
and  presented  them  to  her  as  fair  young  virgins,  who
stood  before  her  as  before  their  mother ;  while  these
good  angels  defended  them  from  the  snares  of  evil  spirits,
and  carefully  incited  them  to  good  actions.

The  Saint  understood  that  they  had  obtained  this
angelic  protection  by  the  words  Ut  sua  defensione,  <fec.  ;
for  at  her  command  the  angels  never  fail  to  protect  and
defend  those  who  invoke  this  glorious  Virgin.

*  Collect  for  the  Mass  of  the  Assumption.
t  "  That  defended  by  her  protection,"  &c.

2  B


43-1  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

A  number  of  little  animals*  appeared  afterwards  under
the  mantle  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  ;  and  this  signified  those
sinners  who  addressed  themselves  to  her  with  devotion.
The  Mother  of  Mercy  received  them  with  the  greatest
charity,  and  covered  them  with  her  mantle  ;  thus  manifest
ing  with  what  affability  she  treats  those  who  have  recourse
to  her ;  how  she  protects  them  even  during  their  wander
ings  ;  and  if  they  recognise  their  faults  and  return  to  her,
she  reconciles  them  to  her  Son  by  a  sincere  penance.  At
the  Elevation,  St.  Gertrude  saw  our  Divine  Lord  imparting
Himself  with  all  the  joys  of  His  Divinity  and  Humanity  to
all  those  who  kad  assisted  at  Mass  with  special  devotion  in
honour  of  His  Blessed  Mother,  and  who  had  desired  to
serve  her  devoutly  on  the  day  of  her  Assumption  ;  so  that,
being  sustained  by  virtue  of  the  Adorable  Sacrament,  they
were  strengthened  in  their  good  desires,  even  as  food
strengthens  and  invigorates  the  human  frame.

After  Mass  the  community  proceeded  to  Chapter,  and
the  Saint  saw  a  multitude  of  angels  surrounding  our  Lord,
who  appeared  to  wait  with  great  joy  for  the  arrival  of  the
religious.  Marvelling  at  this,  she  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  Why
hast  Thou  come  to  this  Chapter,  O  most  loving  Lord,  sur
rounded  by  such  a  multitude  of  angels,  since  we  have  not
the  same  devotion  now  as  on  the  Vigil  of  Thy  Divine
Birth  1  "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  I  come  as  the  Father  of  a
family  to  receive  those  who  have  been  invited  to  eat  at
My  house.  I  come  also  from  respect  to  My  Mother,  to
announce  the  solemn  Festival  of  her  eminent  Assumption,
and  to  receive  all  who  are  prepared  to  celebrate  this  Feast
with  holy  disposition.  I  come  also  to  absolve,  by  the
virtue  and  authority  of  My  Divinity,  all  those  who  humble

*  "  Diversi  generis  bestiolae."


REVELATIONS  CONCERNING  THE  ASSUMPTION. 435

themselves  for  the  negligences  which  they  have  committed
concerning  their  Rule."  He  added  :  "I  am  present  on  all
these  Festivals,  and  see  all  that  you  do,  although,  on
the  Vigil  of  My  Nativity,  I  assisted  in  an  extraordinary
manner."

§  2.  Devotion  for  the  hour  of  None.

St.  Gertrude  recited  None  with  special  devotion,  as  the
Office  of  the  Assumption  commences  at  that  hour,  accord
ing  to  the  usages  of  the  Order  ;  *  and  it  was  revealed  to  hei
that  on  the  day  previous  to  the  Assumption  of  the  Blessed
Virgin  she  had  been  so  absorbed  in  God,  from  the  hour  oj
None  until  the  moment  of  her  happy  departure  from  this
world,  as  to  have  nothing  human  in  her,  to  live  only  by
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  to  taste  in  anticipation  all  those
celestial  joys  which  she  soon  experienced  perfectly  and
eternally  in  the  bosom  of  God  ;  and  that  at  the  third  hour
of  the  night  our  Lord  came  for  and  took  her  to  Himself
with  exceeding  joy.

In  the  evening,  at  Vespers,  the  Saint  beheld  our  Lord
drawing  into  His  Heart  all  the  praises  which  had  been
chanted  in  honour  of  His  Blessed  Mother,  and  from  thence
pouring  them  forth  upon  her  in  an  impetuous -torrent.  As
the  Antiphon  Ista  pulchra  es  was  chanted,  St.  Gertrude
offered  the  words  to  our  Lord  through  His  Sacred  Heart,
in  memory  of  the  sweet  caresses  He  had  bestowed  on  His
Blessed  Mother  by  the  same  words  ;  and  this  devotion,
passing  through  the  Heart  of  Jesus  to  the  heart  of  Mary,
encircled  her  like  a  cincture  of  stars,  consoling  her  in  a
marvellous  manner.  Many  of  these  stars  appeared  to  falJ

*  The  Office  now  commences  at  Vespert


436  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST. GERTRUDE.


to  the  ground  ;  *  but  the  saints  gathered  them  up,  presenting
them  to  our  Lord  with  joy  and  admiration.  This  signified
that  all  the  saints  obtain  ineffable  joy,  glory,  and  beatitude
from  the  superabundant  merits  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.

When  the  Community  chanted  the  Response,  Quce  est
wta/fthe  angels  united  with  them  in  singing  it.  Our
Lord  Himself  intoned  the  Ista  est  speciosa,  the  Holy  Spirit
animating  His  Divine  Heart  to  praise  and  glorify  the  most
excellent  of  all  creatures.

At  the  hymn  Quern  terra,  pontus,  the  Blessed  Virgin
seemed  unable  to  contain  the  plenitude  of  her  delights,
and  reclined  on  the  bosom  of  her  Son  until  the  words
0  gloriosa  Domina.  J  Then  she  appeared  as  if  aroused
by  the  devotion  of  the  faithful,  and  extended  her  hands
over  them  to  protect  and  console  them  by  her  maternal
love.  At  the  verse  Deo  Patri  she  rose  again,  and  made
three  profound  genuflexions,  in  honour  of  the  Ever-Blessed
Trinity  •  and  then  she  continued  praying  for  the  whole
Church  until  the  Magnificat.  At  the  Antiphon  Virgo
prudentissima,  she  sent  celestial  light  to  all  who  invoked
her  devoutly.

§  3. Other  revelations  concerning  the  Messed  Virgin.

On  another  occasion,  at  the  Assumption,  when  St.
Gertrude  was  so  feeble  as  to  be  unable  to  assist  at  Matins,
the  Lord,  the  Orient  from  on  high,  visited  her  with  ineffable
goodness.  It  appeared  to  her  at  the  sixth  Response  that
she  assisted  in  spirit  at  the  moment  when  the  Blessed

*  "Pavinientum."

t  iv.  Ant.  at  Vespers,  but  worded  differently  now.  The  other
responses  are  also  in  the  present  Office,  and  the  hymn  Quern
terra,  &c.

J  "  0  Queen  of  all  the  virgin  choir ; "  Hymn  at  Lauds.


VISIONS  OF  THE  GLORIES  OF  MARY.  437

Virgin  paid  the  last  debt  of  nature,  and  entered  heaven.
Her  rapture  continued  from  this  Response  until  the  Te
Deum,  when  she  returned  to  herself  once  more ;  but
during  this  rapture,  she  was  favoured  with  a  heavenly
intelligence  of  all  that  was  chanted,  which  filled  her  with
ineffable  joy.

At  the  Response  Super  salutem*  she  saw  the  angels  and
apostles  chanting  in  concert,  as  if  to  congratulate  their
Queen  for  her  singular  privileges.  Meanwhile,  as  the  soul
of  the  Blessed  Virgin  left  her  body,  it  was  received  by  her
Divine  Son  into  His  arms.  But  our  loving  Jesus,  who  is
the  Father  of  orphans,  recommended  the  needs  and  neces
sities  of  the  Church,  His  Spouse,  which  are  ever  in  His
Heart,  to  her,  while  the  seventh  Response,  Sancta  Deo  di-
lecta,  was  chanted.  Then  the  Blessed  Virgin  advanced
farther,  while  her  Son  united  with  the  choirs  of  angels  in
singing  the  eighth  Response,  Salve,  Maria,  and  the  ninth,
Salve,  pia  mater  Christianorum ;  when  our  Lord,  continuing
in  the  person  of  His  Church,  added  these  words  in  a  clear
voice  :  Virgo,  solamen  desolatorum.

While  the  Queen  of  Heaven  was  being  received  therein,
the  Canticle  Audite  me,  Divini  fructus,^  was  sung  with  a
transport  of  joy  which  no  human  words  can  express ;  and
she  appeared  to  enter  a  field  adorned  with  the  most  ex
quisite  flowers.  At  the  words  Et  frond e  in  gratiam^  all
these  flowers  became  marvellously  brilliant,  and  emitted  a
sweeter  perfume,  giving  forth  more  melodious  sounds  than


*  iv.  Response,  i.  Nocturn.

tFrom  Eccl.  xxxix.  17.  The  first  ot  the  three  Canticles,  iii.
Nocturn,  Office  of  the  Blessed  Virgin ;  but  it  commences,  Obau*
dite  me — "  Hear  me,  ye  Divine  offspring,  and  bud  forth  as  the  rose
planted  by  the  brooks  of  water."

1  "  Bring  forth  leaves  in  grace."


THE  KEVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GEUTRUDB.


could  be  given  by  all  the  voices  in  the  world  united  together
in  the  most  exquisite  harmony.

Then  the  Blessed  Virgin,  transported  with  joy  because
of  this  incomparable  beatitude,  returned  thanks  to  God
in  these  words,  Gandens,  gaudebo  in  Domine  ;  *  and  the
Eternal  Father,  as  if  pleased  with  the  exalted  perfection  of
this  excellent  Virgin,  blessed  the  Church  Militant  upon
earth  with  abundant  sweetness,  saying  :  Non  vocaberis
ultra  derelicta.^  All  the  choirs  of  angels  then  chanted
these  words  :  Sexaginta  sunt  regince  ;  indicating  by  this
that  the  Virgin  Mother  was  elevated  above  their  orders.
The  choirs  of  saints  sang,  Et  octoginta  concubince,  de
claring  her  elevation  above  them  ;  while  both  saints  and
angels  united  their  choirs  in  personating  the  Church
Triumphant,  and  chanted,  Et  adolescentularum  non  est
numerus;  elevating  the  Mother  of  God  above  all,  as  she
merits  to  be  elevated.

Then  the  Holy  Spirit  chanted  the  words,  Una  est
columba  mea;  her  Divine  Son  adding,  Perfecta  mea,  as  if
to  say  that  she  was  the  most  perfect  of  creatures.  The
Eternal  Father  then  said,  Una  est  matri  suce  electa,  with
exceeding  love,  which  indicated  all  that  he  desired  to  say
of  her;  after  this  the  whole  celestial  court  chanted  her
praise  in  the  Versicle  Salve,  nobilis.

Then the  Blessed  Virgin  was  placed on  a  throne  of


*  "  I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord  ; "  ii.  Response,  iii.  Nocturn,
from  Isaias  Ixi.

t  "Thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  forsaken"  (Is.  Ixii. ;  iii.
Canticle).  The  quotations  which  follow  are  not  in  the  present
Office.  The  quotation  "sexaginta"  is  from  Cant.  vi.  7:  "There
are  threescore  queens,  and  fourscore  concubines,  and  young  maidens
without  number.  One  is  my  dove,  my  perfect  one  is  but  one  ;  she
is  the  only  one  of  her  mother."  The  applicability  of  the  first  part  of
this  quotation  is  not  very  obvious.


A  MARVELLOUS  VISION  OF  MARY'S  HEAVENLY  GLORY. 439

glory  on  the  right  hand  of  her  Son  ;  while  all  the  citizens
of  heaven  assisted  before  the  throne,  employing  themselves
in  extolling  her  sovereign  glory  and  the  high  and  eminent
sanctity  of  her  life,  by  which  she  had  merited  to  obtain  it ;
singing  the  Response,  Beata  est  virgo  Maria;*  to  which  the
Blessed  Trinity  added  the  words,  Ave  Maria,  renewing  in
her  heart  all  the  joy  which  she  had  formerly  experienced
when  saluted  by  the,  angel ;  the  choirs  of  saints  chanting
the  words,  Ecce  exaltata  est,  and  recommending  the  Church
Militant  to  her  intercession.

God  the  Father  then  chanted  the  words,  Ave,  speciosa,
to  indicate  the  rare  beauty  of  this  most  perfect  of  creatures  ;
God  the  Son  replying,  Sunamitis  secundum  cor  summi
regis ; f  the  Holy  Ghost  added,  Ave,  mater  Maria;  and  the
Son  again  replied,  Spiritu  Sancto  teste.  The  saints  then
knelt  before  her,  in  the  person  of  the  Church  Militant,
chanting,  0  sancta,  0  celsa  ;  and  the  most  Holy  Trinity
chanted  the  third  Response,  Quce  est  ista  ?

The  Blessed  Virgin  then  chanted  the  Te  Deum  J  with
the  whole  celestial  court,  in  honour  of  the  Ever- Blessed
Trinity,  adoring  all  the  Persons  in  the  first  verse,  the
Eternal  Father  in  the  second,  the  Son  in  the  third,  and
the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  fourth.  The  Saint  perceived  that
each  of  the  Divine  Persons  in  particular  was  praised  in
each  verse  except  the  seventh,  Tu  Rex  glorice,  Christe,
which  refers  particularly  to  the  Son,  and  wherein  He  is
praised  for  all  the  holy  affections  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,

*  x.  Response,  iii.  Nocturn  ;  and  also  Ecce  exaltata.

f  "The  Sunamite  according  to  the  heart  of  the  King."  Probably
an  allusion  to  3  Kings  i.  3,  where  Abisag  the  Sunamite  is  brought  to
King  David  for  her  rare  beauty,  that  she  may  minister  to  him.  This
passage  is  not  in  the  Office,

J  The  Te  Deum  is  always  chanted  by  Benedictines,  unless  the  Offic*
is  ferial.


440 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

which,  by  His  assistance,  she  had  always  employed  for  the
Divine  glory.  At  the  verse  jfflternafac,  she  extolled  each
Person  alternately,  and  perceived  that  nothing  was  at
tributed  to  the  Father  which  belonged  so  exclusively  to
Him  as  to  prevent  its  application  to  the  Sou  and  the  Holy
Ghost.

When  St.  Gertrude  recovered  from  this  ecstasy,  she
found  her  bodily  health  so  strengthened,  that  she  was  even
able  to  walk  more  quickly  than  her  companions  ;  and  this
continued  until  after  the  High  Mass.

§  4. Other  revelations  on  the,  same  subject.

Three  years  after  the  occurrence  of  the  favours  just
related,  the  Saint  was  confined  to  bed  on  the  Vigil  of  the
Assumption  ;  nevertheless  she  endeavoured  to  prepare
herself  for  this  great  Festival  with  all  possible  fervour  and
devotion.  While  she  was  thus  occupied,  she  beheld  the
Blessed  Virgin  in  a  beautiful  garden,  cultivated  with  the
greatest  care,  and  filled  with  rare  flowers.  Our  Lady  ap
peared  to  be  in  a  rapture,  caused  by  an  excess  of  repose
and  joy,  the  serenity  of  her  countenance  and  her  gestures
indicating  that  she  was  full  of  grace.  In  this  garden  there
were  roses  without  thorns,  lilies  white  as  snow,  and  fra
grant  violets,  with  many  other  flowers.  Rut  it  seemed  very
marvellous  that  the  farther  these  flowers  were  from  the
Blessed  Virgin,  the  brighter  was  their  colour  and  the
sweeter  their  fragrance.  Then  she  appeared  to  draw  this
odour  to  herself  by  inspiration,  and  to  pour  it  forth  into
the  Heart  of  her  Son,  which  seemed  to  be  opened  for  this
purpose.  A  great  number  of  angels  were  also  in  this
garden,  between  these  flowers  and  the  Blessed  Virgin,
who  served  God  by  proclaiming  her  praises.  St.  John


IfOW  THE  MOTHER  OF  GOD  IS  KNOWN  BY  HER  SON. 441

the  Evangelist  also  remained  near  her,  praying  fervent! y,
and  she  appeared  to  attract  his  prayers  to  herself  like  a
sweet  vapour.

As  St.  Gertrude  took  singular  pleasure  in  this  vision,  she
began  to  marvel  what  it  might  mean  ;  and  our  Lord  taught
her  that  the  garden  signified  the  chaste  body  of  the  Blessed
Virgin  ;  tbat  the  flowers  were  her  virtues  ;  that  the  beauti
ful  roses  which  appeared  so  far  from  her  were  the  actions
which  she  had  performed  for  the  love  of  God  and  her
neighbour,  and  which  increased  in  merit  as  the  love  which
prompted  them  was  extended ;  that  the  lilies  signified  her
extreme  purity  ;  and  that  the  prayers  of  St.  John,  which
she  appeared  to  attract,  signified  the  glory  which  she  had
received  through  him  in  consequence  of  the  care  which  he
had  taken  of  her  while  on  earth,  that  she  might  be  enabled
to  spend  more  time  in  prayer.

Then  she  inquired  what  advantage  St.  John  had  gained
from  this  j  and  our  Lord  replied  :  "  My  Heart  was  drawn
more  towards  him  for  each  act  of  devotion  which  he  offered
to  My  Mother."  Lastly,  she  understood  that  the  vision
of  the  Blessed  Virgin  which  she  had  seen  represented  her
soul,  which  always  abounded  in  the  fruits  of  virtue,  and
which  she  ever  returned  to  God  with  the  greatest  thanks
giving.

At  Matins  she  was  again  rapt  in  ecstasy,  and  beheld  the
Blessed  Virgin  reposing  sweetly  and  peaceably  upon  her
Divine  Son,  and  the  Son  pouring  forth  into  the  heart  of
His  Mother  an  ineffable  joy,  the  fruit  of  the  virtues  which
she  had  practised,  and  had  returned  to  Him  as  their  true
and  only  Source.  The  Eternal  Father  seemed  to  chant  the
first  Ilesponsory,  Vidi  speciosam*  by  which  the  whole

*  Vidi  tpeciosam,  i.  Response,  i.  Nocturn,  Feast  of  the  Assump*


442 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


Celestial  court  understood  that  the  Blessed  Virgin  had
indeed  been  a  dove  in  purity  and  innocence  ;  that  she
ascended  above  the  rivers  of  waters  by  desire;  that  her
garment — that  is,  her  holy  life — was  full  of  ineffable  sweet
ness  ;  and  that  she  was  surrounded  with  roses  and  lilies —
that  is  with  every  virtue.

Then  the  Holy  Ghost  made  known  the  holy  life  of  the
Blessed  Virgin  by  chanting  the  Response,  Sicut  cedrus  ;  the
fi;dnts,  full  of  admiration  and  joy,  adding  the  third  Response,
Qua?  est  ista  ?  of  which  St.  Gertrude  received  a  marvellous
understanding  ;  but  her  infirmity  caused  her  to  forget  it.
The  saints  then  passed  in  procession  round  the  throne  of
the  Blessed  Virgin,  chanting  the  fourth  Response,  Gaude,
reyina,  with  profound  respect  and  with  a  marvellous  con
cord  of  voices,  praising  this  mighty  Queen  on  whom  the
eternal  light  shone  so  gloriously  ;  so  that  she  appeared  to
all  in  heaven  and  earth  as  the  most  beautiful  and  accom
plished  Virgin  in  virtue  and  grace — as  a  Mother  who  pro
vides  for  our  wants,  and  who  will  increase  our  glory  and
crown  our  joy  and  beatitude  hereafter.

The  choirs  of  angels  then  marched  processionally,  sing
ing  with  a  clear  and  melodious  voice,  Fac  nos  Icetari ;  and
the  saints  chanted  the  Gloria  Patri  in  thanksgiving  for
all  the  graces  which  the  Blessed  Virgin  had  obtained  for
them  ;  both  choirs  then  united  together,  singing  all  the
Antiphons  and  Psalms  to  the  honour  of  God  and  the  praise
of  the  Blessed  Virgin.  Meanwhile  St.  Gertrude  was  favoured
with  a  marvellous  intelligence  of  all  that  was  chanted.


tion :  "  I  have  seen  thee,  beautiful  as  a  dove,  ascending  above  the
rivers  of  waters  ;  the  odour  of  thy  garments  was  ineffable,  and  thou
wert  encompassed  with  roses  and  lilies.  Who  is  this  that  cometh  up
from  the  desert  like  a  cloud.  fSrfumed  with  myrrh  and  incense  ?  "


A  VISION  OF  THE  BLESSED  VIRGIN.  443

At  the  fifth  Kesponse,  the  Blessed  Virgin  rose,  and  sang  the
words,  Bf.atam  me  dicent  omnes  generations,  while  her  soul
appeared  as  when  it  had  been  released  from  the  body,
reposing  upon  her  Son,  and  immersed  in  an  ocean  of  beati
tude,  being  for  ever  united  closely  to  the  Ever-Blessed
Trinity.  The  Super  salutem  was  then  chanted,  the  whole
heavenly  court  rejoicing  in  her  union  with  the  King  of
kings.  From  this  we  may  learn  how  God  bestows  favours
on  one  person  for  the  advantage  of  many ;  and  if  we  for
our  sins  are  hindered  from  entering  this  garden  of  delights,
at  least  let  us  not  fail  to  cull  a  few  flowers  from  it.

§  5.  Devotion  for  the  Feast  of  the  Assumption.

On  another  occasion,  as  St.  Gertrude  assisted  devoutly
at  Matins,  she  made  three  different  meditations  at  each
Nocturn.  At  the  first,  she  reminded  the  Blessed  Virgin
of  the  ineffable  consolations  which  she  had  received  from
her  Divine  Son  and  from  the  saints  when  expecting  her
death  ;  so  that  every  word  which  she  uttered  appeared  to
encircle  her  like  roses  and  lilies.  At  the  second  Nocturn,
she  reminded  her  of  the  ineffable  delights  which  she  had
experienced  when  received  into  the  arms  of  her  Beloved
at  this  happy  moment.  At  the  third  Nocturn,  she  re
minded  her  of  the  inconceivable  glory  with  which  she  had
been  honoured  at  her  entrance  into  heaven  ;  and  at  each
word  that  she  recited,  she  received  a  light  and  glory  which
could  only  be  compared  to  the  emission  of  the  sweetest
perfumes.

At  Mass  she  said  the  Lavdate  Dominum  (Ps.  cxvi.)
three  times — first,  beseeching  the  saints  to  offer  their  meriti
to  our  Lord,  that  she  might  make  a  worthy  Communion  ;
secondly,  saying  it  for  the  same  intention  in  honour  of  tha
Blessed  Virgin ;  and  thirdly,  offering  it  to  our  Divine  Lord,


444 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE,

The  Blessed  Virgin  then  rose  at  the  prayer  of  the  saints,
and  stood  before  the  throne  of  the  adorable  Trinity,  offer
ing  her  merits  and  the  favours  which  she  had  received  on
the  day  of  her  Assumption  for  St.  Gertrude,  whom  she
called  to  her,  caressing  her  tenderly,  and  saying  to  her  :
"  Come,  elect  one,  and  stand  in  my  place,  with  all  the  per
fection  in  virtue  which  caused  the  Blessed  Trinity  lo
incline  towards  me,  that  you  may  please  the  Blessed  Trinity
as  far  as  possible  in  like  manner."  At  this  she  was  amazed,
and  replied  :  "  Alas,  O  Queen  of  Glory  !  how  can  I  merit
so  great  a  favour  1  "  The  Blessed  Virgin  replied  :  "  Pre
pare  yourself  for  it  by  three  things  :  first,  pray  to  be
purified  from  every  stain  by  the  exceeding  purity  with
which  I  prepared  an  abode  within  my  virginal  womb  for  my
Divine  Son  ;  secondly,  ask  pardon  for  all  your  negligences
by  the  profound  humility  by  which  I  merited  to  be  elevated
above  all  the  saints  and  the  angels  ;  thirdly,  implore  an
abundant  increase  of  merits  through  the  incomprehensible
love  which  united  me  to  God  in  such  a  manner,  that  I  can
never  be  separated  from  Him."

St.  Gertrude,  having  faithfully  accomplished  what  the
Blessed  Virgin  had  directed,  was  rapt  in  ecstasy  to  the
high  degree  of  glory  which  the  Queen  of  Heaven  had
merited ;  and  being  clothed  in  her  merits,  she  pleased  our
Lord  so  surpassingly,  that  all  the  saints  and  angels  came
to  honour  her.

As  the  religious  approached  the  Holy  Communion,  their
glorious  Queen  stood  on  their  right,  covering  them  with
her  mantle,  saying :  "My  dearest  Son,  look  favourably  upon
all  who  have  honoured  rny  memory  ; "  to  this  prayer  He
condescended  very  lovingly,  treating  them  with  the  greatest
tenderness.  When  the  Saint  communicated,  she  offered
the  Most  Holy  Sacrament  to  our  Lord  for  His  eternal  praise,


ANOTHER  VISION  OP  THE  QUEKN  OF  HEAVEN. 445

and  for  the  increase  of  the  joy  and  glory  of  His  Blessed
Mother,  as  a  compensation  for  the  merits  with  which  she
had  supplied  her  poverty.  Our  Lord  then  addressed  Him
self  lovingly  to  His  Mother,  saying  :  "  Behold,  My  Mother,
I  return  what  you  gave  doubled,  and  I  take  nothing  from
her  of  what  you  desired  to  bestow  on  her  for  My  sake."
After  the  procession  the  community  returned  to  the  choir,
singing  the  Antiphon  Ave  domina  mundi  Maria,  and  it
appeared  to  St.  Gertrude  that  heaven  itself  was  full  of  joy
find  triumph,  the  Blessed  Virgin  standing  before  the  altar
at  the  right  of  her  Son,  and  looking  upon  the  religious.

As  they  sang  Ave  ccelorum  regina,  all  the  Saints  pro
strated  before  her,  reverencing  her  as  the  Mother  of  their
Lord  ;  at  the  words  Ave  virgo  virginum,  she  extended  her
hand,  and  presented  each  with  a  white  lily,  engaging  them
to  follow  the  innocence  and  purity  of  her  life.  When  they
sang  Per  te  venit  redemptio  nostra,  her  maternal  feelings
were  so  deeply  moved,  that  she  appeared  unable  to  bear
the  joy  with  which  her  heart  was  filled,  and  supported  her
self  lovingly  upon  her  Divine  Son  •  at  the  words  Pro  nobis
rogamus,  rogita,  the  Blessed  Virgin  embraced  her  Son,  re
spectfully  offering  each  sister  to  Him,  and  praying  for  each.
When  they  commenced  the  Antiphon  Hodie  beata  Virgo,1*
St.  Gertrude  beheld  her  surrounded  with  glory,  and  elevated
in  the  arms  of  her  Son  to  the  highest  heavens,  attended  by
all  the  heavenly  host  with  the  greatest  honour.  In  this
exalted  position  she  blessed  the  community  with  the  right
hand  of  her  Divine  Son  ;  and  after  this  benediction,  a


*  These  Antiphons  are  not  in  the  present  Office  ;  but  the  Antiphon
at  Mftr/nificat  is  like  the  above :  "To-day  the  Virgin  Mary  ascends
into  heaven  ;  let  us  rejoice,  for  she  reigns  with  Christ  for  endlesa
ages."


446 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

golden  cross  appeared  upon  each  religious,  fastened  by  a
green  cord  ;  by  which  the  Saint  understood  that  a  firm
faith  would  render  all  who  possessed  it  sharers  in  the  same
benediction  of  this  Mother  of  Mercy.


CHAPTER  L.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  Bernard.

The  merit  and  glory  of  this  Saint.

As  St.  Gertrude  reflected  at  Mass  on  the  merits  of  St.
Bernard,*  to  whom  she  had  a  particular  devotion  on  ac
count  of  his  sweet  eloquence,  the  illustrious  abbot  appeared
to  her,  clothed  in  ineffable  glory  and  in  three  different
colours,  each  of  which  were  equally  brilliant — white,
which  indicated  the  integrity  of  his  innocence  and  purity ;
violet,  his  perfection  as  a  religious ;  and  crimson,  the
fervour  of  his  love ;  and  these  three  colours  appeared  to
impart  a  special  pleasure  to  all  the  saints.  He  had  also
golden  bracelets,  in  which  precious  stones  were  interlaced
with  admirable  skill  :  the  gold  indicated  the  inestimable
value  of  his  rare  and  admirable  doctrine,  and  all  that  he
had  said  or  written  for  the  good  of  souls ;  the  precious
stones  indicated  his  burning  love  of  God.  Our  Lord  drew
into  His  Heart  all  the  merits  and  advantages  which  had
ever  been  gained  by  any  person,  either  in  heaven  or  on
earth,  from  his  words  or  writings,  causing  this  to  radiate
from  His  Heart  into  that  of  St.  Bernard,  which  resounded
like  a  sweet  instrument  of  music — his  virtues,  and  above
all  his  innocence  and  love,  producing  the  sweetest  melody
imaginable.


*  August  20.


A  VISION  OF  ST. BERNARD,  AND  OP  HIS  MERITS. 447


The  heart  of  the  saint  was  also  adorned  with  a  brilliant
diadem  of  many  colours,  on  which  appeared  the  profit
which  he  had  desired  should  be  gained  from  his  writings  for
the  greater  glory  of  God.  St.  Gertrude  then  repeated  the
Laudate  Dominum  two  hundred  and  twenty-five  times,  in
honour  of  the  saint,  returning  thanks  to  God  for  all  the
graces  with  which  He  had  favoured  him.  Then  all  that
lie  said  appeared  on  the  vestments  of  the  venerable  father
in  the  form  of  little  shields,  on  which  were  engraven  the
virtues  for  which  he  had  been  specially  distinguished  when
on  earth  ;  and  they  shone  also  into  the  soul  of  Gertrude,
who  had  returned  thanks  to  God  for  them.

As  the  Saint  prayed  at  Mass  for  all  the  religious  of
whom  she  had  charge,  and  especially  for  those  who  were
devout  to  St.  Bernard,  although  they  had  not  been  recom
mended  to  her  prayers,  she  beheld  this  venerable  father
again  clothed  in  glory,  the  splendour  of  which  appeared  to
pass  from  him  to  all  those  who  desired  to  obtain  the  same
fervent  love  of  God  as  he  had  through  his  merits.  As
Gertrude  marvelled  at  this,  she  inquired  why  those  persons
who  had  not  practised  the  same  virtues  as  he  had  done
could  appear  thus  enriched  with  his  merits.  He  replied
"  A  lady  of  noble  birth  is  not  less  admired  when  clothed
with  the  habits  of  another  than  when  she  wears  her  own.
provided  she  is  beautiful,  and  perfectly  formed.  Thus  the
virtues  of  the  saints  obtain  the  same  advantages  for  those
who  praise  God  for  their  fervour  in  acquiring  them."

St.  Gertrude  now  observed,  that  those  who  had  recom
mended  themselves  to  her  prayers  with  devotion  appeared
adorned  with  a  singular  brightness,  which  others  did  not
obtain  ;  to  show  that  the  least  action  done  with  a  right
intention  profits  much,  and  that  the  least  negligence,  even
ii)  little  things,  may  be  a  serious  loss.


448 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

On  the  same  day,  as  the  Saint  reflected  on  the  glory  of
St.  Augustine,  to  whom  she  had  always  been  devout,  and
thanked  God  for  the  favours  He  had  bestowed  on  him,  he
appeared  to  her  with  St.  Bernard,  as  if  equal  to  him  in
glory,  as  he  had  been  equal  to  him  in  sanctity  arid  doctrine.
This  great  Bishop  stood  before  the  throne  of  the  Divine
Majesty,  magnificently  apparelled,  while  rays  of  ardent  fire
appeared  to  shoot  forth  from  his  heart,  as  also  from  the
heart  of  St.  Bernard,  towards  that  of  Jesus  Christ ;  this
indicated  the  eloquence  by  which  the  holy  doctor  had  en
kindled  the  fire  of  Divine  love  in  the  hearts  of  men.  "Rays
of  light,  like  sunbeams,  proceeded  from  his  lips,  which
filled  the  whole  heavens,  and  figured  the  abundant  and
marvellous  doctrines  with  which  he  had  enlightened  the
Church.  Beneath  these  rays  there  appeared  arcades  of
light,  of  admirable  clearness,  which  attracted  the  attention
of  all,  and  gave  abundant  pleasure  and  content  to  those
who  gazed  upon  them.  As  the  Saint  beheld  this  with  joy
and  admiration,  she  learned  from  St.  Bernard  that  these
arcades  represented  the  light  of  the  doctrine  of  St.  Augus
tine,  and  his  immense  labours  in  defence  of  the  Catholic
faith  by  his  discourses,  and  by  his  writings  and  his  ardent
desires  ;  having  been  brought,  after  so  many  wanderings,
from  the  darkness  of  ignorance  to  the  light  of  faith,  that
he  might  be  able  to  close  up  the  way  of  error  to  all  men,
and  to  open  the  way  of  the  true  faith.

St.  Gertrude  then  inquired  of  St.  Bernard  if  he  had  not
had  the  same  end  in  his  writings.  He  replied  :  "  I  spoke,
wrote,  and  acted  under  the  impulse  of  an  impetuous  love
of  God  ;  but  this  illustrious  doctor  wrote  from  a  principle
of  Divine  love,  and  moved  by  the  miseries  which  he  had
himself  experienced."

Our  Lord  then  drew  to  Himself  from  the  blessed  and


OF  ST. AUGUSTINK HIS  GLORY  AND  MERITS. 449

from  the  hearts  of  the  faithful  still  on  earth  the  faith,  con
solation,  light,  and  love  which  the  writings  of  St.  Au
gustine  had  produced  ;  perfecting  this,  uniting  it  to  His
Heart,  and  then  pouring  it  forth  into  the  heart  of  the  Saint,
whose  soul  was  penetrated  by  this  Divine  influence,  and
became  like  a  harp  before  God,  emitting  the  most  perfect  and
the  sweetest  melody  ;  and  as  the  virginity  and  love  of  God
had  formed  an  admirable  concert  in  the  heart  of  St.  Ber
nard,  the  penitence  and  fervent  love  of  St.  Augustine  pro
duced  a  similar  effect,  so  that  it  was  impossible  to  decide
which  was  the  most  melodious.  After  this,  St.  Bernard
informed  St.  Gertrude  that  the  melodies  which  she  heard
were  those  which  were  spoken  of  in  the  words,  Omnis  ilia
Deo,  <fec.  ;  *  for  the  heart  of  each  saint  emits  a  melody  which
corresponds  to  its  virtues,  and  all  are  ever  employed  in  the
Divine  praises.


CHAPTER  LI.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  Augustine.

Of  the  glory  and  virtue  of  this  Saint — Of  the  merits  of  St.  Francis
and  St.  Dominic.

As  the  Antiphon  Vulneraverunt  charitas  was  sung  at  Ves
pers  on  the  Feast  of  St.  Augustinett  Gertrude  beheld  this


*  From  the  hymn  at  Lauds  for  the  Dedication  of  a  Church.  The
hymns  of  this  Office  are  very  beautiful.  The  hymn  for  Vespers  in
the  Roman  Office  differs  from  the  Benedictine.  The  former  com
mences  "  Coelestis  urbs,"  the  latter,  "  Urbs  Jerusalem  beata;"  but
the  same  idea  is  contained  in  each.

"  Jerusalem,  thou  city  blest,

Sweet  vision  of  a  peaceful  land  !  "

f  August  28.  This  Antiphon  is  from  the  Ursuline  Breviary,  v.  at
Lauds.

2F


450 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

great  Bishop  standing  in  glory,  and  unfolding  his  heart,
which  had  been  wounded  with  Divine  love,  like  a  beautiful
rose  before  God,  to  present  it  to  Him,  and  thereby  recreat
ing  the  citizens  of  heaven  with  a  perfume  of  exceeding
fragrance.  The  Saint  then  saluted  him  devoutly,  pray
ing  for  her  community,  and  for  all  who  were  devoted  to
this  saint.  He  then  besought  our  Lord  that  the  hearts  of
all  those  who  desired  to  obtain  a  fervent  love  of  God
through  his  merits  might  be  filled  with  it,  as  his  had  been,
to  the  honour  and  glory  of  the  effulgent  and  Ever-Blessed
Trinity.

As  St.  Gertrude  assisted  at  Matins  with  great  fervour,
she  began  to  reflect  what  reward  this  great  pastor  of  the
Church  had  received  for  the  delights  and  sweetness  which
he  had  found  in  contemplating  the  deep  designs  of  God  for
the  salvation  of  men,  as  he  declares  in  his  Confessions.  As
she  reflected  thus,  he  appeared  to  her  in  glory,  bearing  a
globe  on  his  head,  enriched  with  an  infinite  variety  of  rare
colours,  and  covered  with  brilliant  stars,  which  indicated
the  reward  that  God  had  bestowed  on  him  for  his  holy
thoughts  during  life  :  such  as  the  application  of  his  mind
to  the  things  of  God  ;  the  contempt  which  he  had  for  the
pleasures  of  life,  from  his  desire  of  finding  pleasure  only  in
God  ;  the  care  which  he  had  taken  to  make  his  heart  pleas
ing  to  God,  who,  as  the  Wise  Man  says,  finds  His  delight
in  conversing  with  the  children  of  men  ;  and  all  the  occu
pations  to  which  he  had  devoted  himself  with  his  whole
soul,  either  by  speaking,  writing,  or  by  promoting  the  love
and  glory  of  God  by  his  example  ;  and  the  pleasures  which
he  enjoyed  were  so  great  and  so  admirable,  that  he  could
pour  them  forth  on  all.

Then  our  Lord  said  to  Gertrude  :  "  Consider  how  per
fect  My  beloved  is  in  purity,  humility,  and  fervent  charity."


OF  THE  ANTIPHON  "  XOlS  EST  INVENTU8."  451

She  replied,  in  great  admiration  :  "  0  Lord,  how  can  he  be
so  pure,  when  he  must  have  contracted  so  many  stains  in
his  wanderings  from  the  faith  before  his  conversion  ? "  He
replied:  "I  permitted  these  wanderings,  awaiting  his
return  with  patience  and  mercy,  and  then  overwhelming
him  with  My  gratuitous  favours."

After  these  words,  as  she  examined  the  ornaments  of
this  prelate  very  attentively,  he  appeared  vested  in  a  gar
ment  of  crystalline  purity,  beneath  which  she  saw  three
colours,  which  indicated  his  purity,  humility,  and  charity  ;
and  these  shone  forth  as  gold  shines  through  crystal.

Then  she  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  My  Lord,  was  not  St.
Bernard  as  devoted  to  Thee  as  St.  Augustine,  whose  glory
shines  so  resplendently  1  and  yet  it  seems  to  me  that  he
does  not  enjoy  the  same  delights."  Our  Lord  replied  :
"  Bernard,  My  chosen  one,  has  received  an  immense  recom
pense  ;  but  your  mind  is  not  capable  of  discerning  the
glory  of  even  the  least  of  My  saints  :  how,  then,  can  it
discern  that  of  the  greatest  ?  Nevertheless,  to  satisfy  your
devotion,  to  increase  your  love,  and  that  you  may  know
how  many  mansions  there  are  in  My  Father's  house,  under
stand  this  :  when  the  Church  sings  of  any  saint,  Non  est
inventus  simiiis  iUi*  it  means  that,  though  all  the  saints
possess  the  same  glory,  they  do  not  possess  it  in  the  same
degree,  but  each  according  to  their  merit."  She  replied  :
"  0  Lord  God  of  truth,  I  beseech  Thee,  reveal  to  me
something  of  the  merits  of  the  gentle  Agnes  and  the  glorious
Catherine,  to  whom  I  have  been  singularly  devoted  from
my  infancy."

After  God  had  granted  her  this  favour,  which  we  have


*  "There  -was  not  found  tha  like  to  Mm  in  glory"  (Ecc.  adiv.  20);
i.  Ant.,  Lauds,  Com.  of  Conf.  Pont.


452 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

recorded  elsewhere,  she  desired  to  know  something  of  the
merits  of  the  holy  Father's  St.  Dominic  and  St.  Francis,*
who  had  been  the  chiefs  of  two  Orders,  and  who  had
laboured  very  ardently  for  the  advancement  of  the
Church.  Then  these  venerable  Fathers  appeared  to  her
in  sublime  glory,  and  equal  in  merit  to  the  glorious  Father
Benedict,  adorned  with  garlands  of  roses  similar  to  his,
and  bearing  sceptres.  They  appeared  equal  in  merit  to
the  blessed  Saints  Augustine  and  Bernard,  on  account  of
their  devotion  and  preaching,  by  which  they  had  given
such  glory  to  God,  and  gained  so  many  souls  for  Him.
But  there  was  this  difference  :  the  blessed  Father  Francis
enjoyed  special  rewards  for  his  profound  humility,  and  the
glorious  Father  Dominic  for  the  fervour  and  sublimity  of
his  desires.

At  Mass,  which  the  Saint  heard  with  the  greatest  devo
tion,  she  was  rapt  to  heaven  before  the  throne  of  the  Divine
Majesty.  Then  all  the  saints  sang  sweetly  before  the  Virgin
the  first  six  verses  of  the  Sequence,  Interni  festi  gaudia,
in  memory  of  and  in  thanksgiving  for  the  delights  she  had
enjoyed  on  the  preceding  night  in  contemplating  the  glory
of  St.  Augustine.  When  they  had  concluded,  they  indicated
to  her  that  she  should  then  chant  the  concluding  verses  in
their  praise,  as  they  had  sung  the  preceding  ones  in  her
honour.  Then  she  chanted,  by  the  organ  of  the  sweetest
Heart  of  Jesus,  the  praises  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  com
mencing  Beata  ilia  patria,  with  the  five  following  verses,
each  of  which  appeared  to  fill  the  saints  with  ineffable

joy.

*  The  Feast  of  St.  Dominic  occurs  on  the  4th  of  August ;  that  of
St.  Francis  on  the  4th  of  October.  It  is  remarkable  that  those  who
were  so  united  in  life  should  have  appeared  together  in  glory  to  thi«
great  Saint,


FEAST  OP  OUR  LADY'S  NATIVITY.  453

When  she  had  concluded,  our  Lord,  her  loving  Spouse,
chauted  the  two  Versicles,  Hoc  in  hac  valle  misera,  and
Quo  post  mundi  exilia,  for  her ;  teaching  her,  as  a  kind
master  would  teach  his  child,  how  she  could  merit  eternal
joys  even  in  this  exile.  Then  the  choirs  of  angels  chanted
Harum  laudum  praeconia,  representing  the  prayers  and
desires  of  the  Church  ;  and  the  saints  united  their  voices  to
those  of  the  angels  to  praise  that  admirable  prelate  of  the
Church,  St.  Augustine,  while  he  poured  forth  ineffable  light
through  heaven,  imparting  new  joys  and  delights  to  all.
At  the  last  two  verses,  Cujus  sequi  vestigia,  our  Lord  raised
His  Hand,  and  imparted  an  abundant  benediction  to  all
those  who  had  praised  the  Saint  devoutly.


CHAPTER  LTI.

For  the  Festival  of  the  Nativity  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.

Exercises  for  celebrating  this  Feast  devoutly — How  powerfully  the
Blessed  Virgin  protects  those  who  invoke  her ;  and  how  we  may
supply  for  our  negligences  in  her  service.

ON  the  glorious  Feast  of  the  Nativity  of  the  Blessed
Virgin,'"  St.  Gertrude,  having  said  as  many  Ave  Marias
as  she  had  remained  days  in  her  mother's  womb,  offered
them  to  her  devoutly,  and  inquired  what  merit  they  would
have  who  performed  a  like  devotion.  This  benign  Virgin
replied  :  "  They  will  merit  a  special  share  in  the  joys
which.  I  possess  in  heaven,  which  are  continually  renewed,
and  in  the  virtues  with  which  tlie  ever-blessed  and  glorious
Trinity  adorns  me."

*  September  8.


454 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

At  the  Antiphon  Ave  decus,  she  beheld  the  heavens
opening,  while  the  angels  descended  and  placed  a  magnifi
cent  throne  in  the  centre  of  the  choir,  whereon  the  Queen
of  Glory  was  seated,  and  manifested  how  lovingly  she
received  the  prayers  and  devotion  of  the  religious  on  this
Festival.  The  angels  stood  round  this  throne,  attending
the  Mother  of  their  God  with  the  greatest  respect  and  joy.
The  Saint  also  saw  an  angel  standing  by  each  of  the
religious,  with  a  branch  in  his  hand ;  and  this  branch  pro
duced  different  kinds  of  fruit  and  flowers,  according  to
the  devotion  of  the  sister  who  was  thus  attended.  At  the
conclusion  of  the  Office,  the  angels  brought  these  branches
to  the  Blessed  Virgin  to  adorn  her  throne.  Then  Gertrude
exclaimed  :  "  Alas,  kind  Mother  !  I  do  not  deserve  to  be
thus  united  with  the  choirs  of  the  blessed."  She  replied  :
"Your  good-will  suffices  ;  and  the  devout  intention  which
you  had  at  Vespers,  of  offering  your  prayers  through  the
sweet  Heart  of  my  Son,  in  my  honour,  far  exceeds  any
corporal  work ;  to  assure  you  of  this,  I  will  present  your
branch  of  fruit  and  flowers  to  the  adorable  Trinity,  as  an
oblation  of  the  highest  merit."

At  Matins  she  beheld  how  the  angels  gathered  the
flowers  and  fruit  of  the  different  intentions  of  the  religious,
and  presented  them  to  the  Virgin  Mother.  The  flowers
appeared  more  brilliant  and  beautiful  in  proportion  to  the
earnestness  of  each  ;  and  the  sweetness  of  the  fruit  corres
ponded  with  the  purity  and  fervour  of  their  devotion.

At  the  Gloria  Patri  of  the  fourth  Response,*  as  St.
Gertrude  praised  the  ineffable  power  of  the  Father,  the


*  It  will  be  remembered  that  there  are  four  Lessons  in  each  Nocturn
of  the  Benedictine  Office.  The  Gloria  Patri  is  said  at  the  end  of  the
fourth  Response  of  each  Nocturn.


OP  THE  INTERCESSION  OF  OUR  LADY.  455

incomprehensible  wisdom  of  the  Son,  and  the  marvellous
benignity  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  having  given  us  a  creature
so  full  of  grace  to  further  our  salvation,  the  Blessed  Virgin
stood  before  the  Blessed  Trinity,  praying  that  the  Divine
Omnipotence,  Wisdom,  and  Goodness  would  bestow  as
much  grace  on  St.  Gertrude  as  it  was  possible  for  any
creature  to  receive  ;  and  the  Blessed  Trinity  poured  forth
an  abundant  benediction  of  grace  upon  her  soul,  which
watered  it  like  a  gentle  rain.

Then  St.  Gertrude  chanted  the  Antiphon  Quam  pulchra
es,  in  the  person  of  the  Son  of  God,  in  honour  of  PI  is
Father.  This  was  accepted  with  great  love  by  our  Lord,
who  said  to  her  :  "  I  will  reward  you  at  a  fitting  time,
according  to  My  royal  munificence,  for  the  honour  you
have  paid  to  My  beloved  Mother."  *

At  the  Antiphon  Adesl,  when  the  words  Ipsa  intercedat
pro  peccatis  nostris  were  chanted,  she  saw  the  Blessed
Virgin  with  a  parchment  in  her  hand,  on  which  the  words,
"She  will  intercede,"  were  written  in  letters  of  gold ;  and
this  she  presented  to  her  Son  by  the  ministry  of  angels.
He  replied  lovingly  :  "  I  give  thee  full  power,  by  My
omnipotence,  to  be  propitious  to  all  who  invoke  thy  aid,
in  whatever  manner  is  most  pleasing  to  thee."

As  the  Sequence  Ave  prceclara  t  was  chanted  at  Mass?
at  the  words  Ora  Virgo  nos,  the  Blessed  Virgin  turned
towards  her  Son,  and  prayed  for  the  community  witli  her
hands  clasped.  Then  our  Lord  turned  towards  them,  and
blessed  them  with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  to  prepare  them
to  receive  the  adorable  Sacrament  of  His  Body  and
Blood.

At  the  words  Audi  nos,  the  Blessed  Virgin  appeared

*  "  Dulcissimse  genitrici."

t  We  have  not  been  able  to  verify  this  Sequence.


456  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

seated  on  a  high  throne  with  her  Divine  Son  ;  and  St.
Gertrude  addressed  her  thus;  "  Why  do  you  not  pray  for
us,  O  Mother  of  Mercy  T'  She  replied  :  "  I  speak  for  you
to  my  Beloved,  heart  to  heart."  Then,  when  the  same
words  were  repeated  again,  the  Virgin  extended  her  royal
hands  over  the  convent,  as  if  uniting  herself  to  their
desires,  and  praying  as  one  with  them  to  her  Divine  Son ;
and  this  royal  Son,  at  the  following  verse,  Salve  nos,  Jesu  ;
turning  towards  the  community,  said  to  them  :  "  I  am
ready  to  accomplish  all  your  desires."

Then,  as  St.  Gertrude  reflected  on  the  approaching
Festival,  and  ardently  desired  that  her  heart  might  be
prepared  to  solemnise  it,  she  said  to  the  Mother  of  God  :
"  Since  the  glory  of  your  Assumption  moves  the  souls  of
those  who  meditate  on  it  so  deeply,  I  desire  much  to  know
what  the  angels  think  of  the  Feast  of  your  Nativity  in
heaven,  that  our  devotion  may  be  increased  thereby  on
earth."  The  Blessed  Virgin  replied  :  "  The  angels  com
memorate  the  ineffable  joys  which  I  experienced  while  in
the  womb  of  my  mother  when  they  offer  me  their  homage
with  the  deepest  reverence.  The  archangels  also  contem
plate  in  the  mirror  of  the  Blessed  Trinity  the  eminent
favours  and  graces  which  God  bestowed  on  me  above  all
creatures,  and  minister  to  me  also ;  while  all  the  heavenly
orders  unite  in  serving  and  assisting  me  for  the  glory  of  God;
and  for  this  they  are  now  recompensed  with  special  joys."

At  Compline,  as  the  Salve  Eegina*  was  chanted,  St.


*  Antiphon  at  Vespers  from  Trinity  Sunday  until  Advent.  It  ia
generally  believed  that  Adelmar,  Bfcshop  of  Puy,  composed  this  most
touching  devotion;  the  last  words,  "O  Clement,"  &c.,  were  added
by  St.  Bernard.  Adelmar  lived  in  the  eleventh  century,  and  the
Salve  Regina  was  introduced  about  that  time  into  the  services  of  the


PRAYER  IN  HONOUR  OP  MARY.  457

Gertrude  grieved  before  God  that  she  had  never  served
His  Mother  with  the  veneration,  due  to  her ;  and  she
offered  this  Antiphon,  through  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  to
supply  for  her  defects  ;  and  our  Lord  supplied  for  her  de
ficiencies  by  little  tubes  of  gold,  which  passed  from  His
Heart  to  the  heart  of  His  Virgin  Mother,  and  through
•which  He  poured  forth  on  her  the  tenderness  of  His  filial
affection.  We  may  also  supply  for  our  negligences  by  the
following  prayer,  or  any  similar  one  : —

"  0  sweetest  Jesus,  I  beseech  Thee,  by  the  love  which
caused  Thee  to  take  flesh  in  the  bosom  of  this  most  pure
Virgin,  that  Thou  wouldst  supply  for  our  defects  in  the
service  and  honour  of  this  most  benign  Mother,  who  is  ever
ready  to  assist  us,  with  maternal  tenderness,  in  all  our
necessities.  Offer  her,  O  sweetest  Jesus,  the  superabundant
beatitude  of  Thy  sweetest  Heart ;  show  her  Thy  Divine
predilection,  which  chose  her  from  all  eternity,  before  all
creatures,  to  be  Thy  Mother,  adorning  her  with  every
grace  and  virtue  ;  remind  her  of  all  the  tenderness  Thou
didst  manifest  to  her  when  on  earth,  Thy  filial  obedience
to  her  in  all  things,  and,  above  all,  Thy  care  at  the  hour
of  Thy  Death,  when  Thou  didst  forget  Thine  own  anguish
to  solace  hers,  and  didst  provide  her  with  a  son  ;  remind
her,  also,  of  the  joys  and  glory  of  her  Assumption,  when
she  was  exalted  above  all  the  choirs  of  angels,  and  consti
tuted  Queen  of  heaven  and  earth.  Thus,  O  good  Jesus,  do
Thou  make  Thy  mother  propitious  to  us,  that  she  may  be
our  advocate  and  protector  in  life  and  in  death."

At  the  words  Eia  ergo,  as  St.  Gertrude  invoked  this
most  benign  Mother,  she  saw  her  inclining  towards  her,  as


Church. Some  authors  attribxite  it  to  Hermann  Contractus,  a  Bena>
dictine  monk  of  the  same  date.


458 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

if  drawn  by  cords  ;  by  which  she  understood,  that  when  we
invoke  her  devoutly  as  our  advocate,  her  maternal  tender
ness  is  so  moved,  that  she  cannot  fail  to  assist  us.  At  the
words  Illos  tuos  misericordes  oculos,  the  Blessed  Virgin
inclined  the  eyes  of  her  Son  towards  the  earth,  saying  :
"  These  are  my  merciful  eyes,  which  I  incline  towards  all
who  invoke  me  devoutly,  and  from  them  they  obtain  the
fruit  of  eternal  salvation."  Then  the  Saint  was  taught  by
our  Lord  to  salute  His  Blessed  Mother,  at  least  daily,  by
the  words  Eia  ergo,  and  Advocata  nostra,  assuring  her
that  she  would  obtain  great  consolation  thereby  at  the
hour  of  her  death.

St.  Gertrude  then  offered  Our  Lady  a  hundred  and  fifty
Ave  Marias,  beseeching  her  to  assist  her  at  the  hour  of  her
death  by  her  maternal  tenderness  ;  and  each  word  which
she  repeated  appeared  like  a  piece  of  gold,  which  our  Lord
offered  to  His  Mother,  who  used  them  for  the  help  and
consolation  of  the  Saint  at  the  hour  of  her  death.  Thus
she  knew  that  when  we  recommend  our  end  to  any  saint,
the  prayers  which  are  offered  to  them  are  presented  before
the  tribunal  of  the  Judge,  and  the  Saint  to  whom  we  have
recommended  ourselves  is  appointed  our  advocate.


FOR  THE  EXALTATION  OP  THE  CROSS.  459

CHAPTER LIIL

For  the  Feast  of  the  Exaltation  of  the  Cross.

Of  the  exaltation  of  the  Cross— Of  the  love  of  enemies— Of  the
observance  of  the  regular  fast— Of  the  true  relics  of  Jesus
Christ.

ON  the  Feast  of  the  Exaltation  of  the  Cross,*  as  St.  Ger
trude  prostrated  to  reverence  the  relics,  our  Lord  said  to
her  :  "  Consider  how  I  hung  upon  the  Cross  from  Sext  to
Vespers,  and  that  it  is  for  this  I  am  elevated  to  such  sublime
glory  ;  and  understand  thereby  what  benefits  I  will  confer
on  the  hearts  of  those  in  whom  I  have  reposed  for  many
years."  She  replied  :  "  Alas,  Lord  !  how  little  pleasure
Thou  canst  have  had  in  my  heart !  "  He  answered  :
"  And  what  pleasure  had  I  in  the  wood  of  the  Cross  ?  I
only  honoured  it  because  I  willed  to  honour  it,  and  so  I
reward  those  whom  I  will  to  reward."

During  Mass  our  Lord  gave  her  this  instruction  :  "  Con
sider  the  example  I  give  to  My  elect  in  honouring  this
Cross  ;  and  know  that  I  honoured  the  instruments  of  My
Passion,  which  caused  Me  suffering,  more  than  those  things
which  in  My  infancy  were  used  for  My  convenience.  If
you  desire  to  imitate  my  example,  and  to  give  Me  glory
and  further  your  own  salvation,  you  will  love  your  enemies


*  September  14.  This  Festival,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  first
instituted  to  celebrate  the  finding  of  the  Cross  by  St.  Helen,  after
the  miraculous  vision  of  Constantino.  It  was  kept  at  Jerusalem
from  the  year  335,  and  by  both  the  Greeks  and  Latins,  as  early  as
the  fifth  century,  under  the  same  title  ;  but  since  the  eighth  century,
the  Feast  of  the  Discovery  or  Invention  of  the  Cross  has  been
transferred  to  May  3,  and  this  day  appointed  for  the  commemoration
of  the  recovery  of  this  most  venerable  and  ever-blessed  relic  from  the
Persians.


460  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

more  than  your  friends  ;  and  this  will  advance  you  mar
vellously  in  perfection.  Furthermore,  if  you  neglect  to  do
this  at  first,  but  afterwards  repent  and  overwhelm  your
enemies  with  benefits,  you  will  follow  My  example  in
having  concealed  My  Cross  for  a  time,  to  exalt  it  triumph
antly  afterwards.  But  the  reason  I  so  specially  loved  this
Cross  was,  that  I  obtained  thereby  the  redemption  of  man
kind,  which  I  so  ardently  desired,  even  as  devout  persons
love  the  times  and  places  where  they  have  received  special
favours  from  God."

As  the  Saint  ardently  desired  to  have  some  relics  of  the
wood  of  the  Cross,  that  our  Lord  might  look  on  her  with
more  love,  He  said  to  her  :  "  If  you  desire  to  have  relics
which  will  draw  My  Heart  into  yours,  read  My  Passion,  and
meditate  attentively  on  every  word  contained  therein,  and
it  will  be  to  you  a  true  relic,  which  will  merit  more  graces
for  you  than  any  other  ;  and  if  you  are  not  persuaded  of  this
by  My  inspirations,  at  least  let  your  reason  convince  you
of  it ;  for  when  a  friend  wishes  to  renew  his  friendship  with
his  friend,  he  says,  '  Remember  what  you  felt  in  your  heart
when  I  said  such  and  such  a  word,'  as  if  he  would  say,
'  Remember  what  I  did  or  said  for  you  at  such  a  time  ; '
and  thence  you  may  know  and  be  assured  that  the  words
which  I  uttered  when  on  earth  are  the  most  precious  relics
which  you  can  possess."

As  she  asked  our  Lord  to  enable  her  to  keep  the  regular
fast  of  six  months,*  which  commences  on  this  day,  he
replied  :  "  Whoever  observes  the  regular  fast  from  zeal  for
religious  observance,  and  purely  for  My  love,  and  who  seeks
therein,  not  his  own  advantage,  but  Mine,  I  will  accept  it
from  him,  though  I  have  no  need  of  his  goods,  as  an  etn-

•  See  Rule  of  St.  Benedict,  ch.  xli.


HOW  WE  SHOULD  OFFER  OUR  TRIALS  TO  GOD. 461

peror  wou.d  accept  the  offer  of  a  prince  to  furnish  his  table
daily  with  every  necessary.  But  if  obedience  and  necessity
obliges  him  to  relax  his  fast  against  his  will,  and  he  sub
mits  in  union  with  the  humility  with  which  I  submitted  to
men  when  on  earth  for  the  glory  of  My  Father,  I  will  treat
him  as  a  friend  would  his  dearest  friend  whom  he  had  in-
vited  to  his  table."

On  another  occasion,  on  the  same  Festival,  when  St.
Gertrude  offered  the  annoyances  which  the  community
had  suffered  to  our  Lord,  He  replied  :  "  I  have  drunk  this
chalice,  which  the  fervour  of  your  devotion  has  sweetened
for  Me  ]  and  I  will  drink  it  as  often  as  you  offer  it  to  Me,
until,  by  inebriating  Me  with  it,  you  render  Me  favourable
to  your  desires."  "  But  how,  O  Lord  Jesus,  can  we  give
you  this  chalice  to  drink  ?  "  she  inquired.  Then  our  Lord
taught  her  that  she  could  do  this  by  reflecting  on  her  un-
worthiness,  by  praising  Him  from  the  depth  of  her  heart,
by  repenting  sincerely  for  never  having  loved  God  as  she
ought,  and  by  desiring  to  suffer  for  him,  until  the  last
moment  of  her  life,  even  such  sufferings  as  He  had  en
dured  in  His  Divine  Heart,  were  it  possible  ;  and  this  He
would  accept  as  a  chalice  of  the  sweetest  nectar.

Those  who  desire  to  make  a  similar  offering  can  do  so
by  saying  the  following  prayer  :  "  0  vivifying  Fount  of
sweetness  !  O  aromatic  Sweetness  of  Divine  delights  !  O
delicious  Inebriation  of  all  pleasure  !  behold,  I  offer  Thee>
as  far  as  I  am  able,  a  drop  from  my  miserable  indigence ;
I  grieve,  and  I  will  ever  grieve,  that  my  soul  has  so  long
fasted  by  abstaining  from  that  celestial  Food  which  never
satiates.  But  now,  0  Creator  and  re-Creator  of  my  sub
stance,  to  whom  nothing  is  impossible,  for  Thy  glory  so
make  my  heart  one  with  Thine,  that  I  may  truly  say  that  I
desire  with  my  whole  soul  to  suffer  all  that  has  been  suf-


462 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

fered  by  any  human  being,  from  the  creation  of  the  world
until  now,  if  I  might  thereby  prepare  an  abode  worthy  of
Thee  within  me,  and  satisfy  Thy  justice  for  all  the  oppo
sition  which  I  have  offered  to  Thy  inspirations  and  graces."


CHAPTER  LIV.
For  the  Feast  of  St.  Michael.

Of  the  faithful  care  which  the  angels  have  of  us,  and  how  we  should
honour  them.

As  the  Feast  of  St.  Michael  *  approached,  St.  Gertrude
prepared  herself  for  Holy  Communion  by  meditating  on  the
care  which  the  angels  had  of  her,  by  the  Divine  command,
notwithstanding  her  unworthiness  ;  and  as  she  desired  to
render  some  return  to  them,  she  offered  in  their  honour
the  life-giving  Body  and  Blood  of  Jesus  in  the  Most  Holy
Sacrament,  saying  :  "  I  offer  Thee  this  most  august  Sacra
ment,  0  most  loving  Lord,  for  Thy  eternal  glory,  in  honour
of  the  princes  of  Thy  kingdom,  and  for  the  increase  of
their  felicity  and  beatitude.  Then  our  Lord  drew  this
oblation  to  Himself  in  an  ineffable  manner,  thereby  causing
the  greatest  joy  to  these  angel  spirits,  who  appeared  even
as  if  they  had  never  before  experienced  such  blessedness
and  superabounded  in  delights.  Then  each  of  the  choirs  of
angels,  according  to  their  rank,  inclined  respectfully  before
St.  Gertrude,  saying  :  "  Thou  hast  indeed  honoured  us  by
this  oblation,  and  we  will  therefore  guard  thee  with  special
care ; "  the  guardian  angels  adding  :  We  will  guard  thee
night  and  day  with  ineffable  joy,  and  will  prepare  thee  for
thy  Spouse  with  the  utmost  vigilance.

*  September  28.


THE  FEAST  OF  ST.  MICHAEL.  403

Then,  as  she  returned  thanks  to  God  for  this  favour
with  great  jubilation  of  spirit,  she  recognised  her  own
angel  guardian,  and  he  appeared  to  her  as  a  prince  mag*
nificently  attired,  standing  between  her  soul  and  God,  and
endeavouring  to  unite  and  elevate  her  soul  to  God.  She
then  offered  some  special  devotion  in  his  honour  which  he
presented  to  the  Ever-Blessed  Trinity  under  the  form  of  roses.
The  Archangels  now  saluted  the  Saint,  saying  to  her  :  "  O
illustrious  *  spouse  of  Christ,  we  will  discover  to  you  the
Divine  secrets,  according  to  your  capacity  of  receiving
them."  The  Virtues  then  said  :  "  We  will  assist  you  in
your  labours,  writings,  and  meditations  for  the  glory  of
God."  The  Dominations  said  :  "  Since  our  Lord,  the  King
of  Glory,  takes  pleasure  in  your  soul,  and  that  you  return
Him  love  for  love,  we  will  offer  for  you  the  honour  which
you  owe  to  His  Sovereignty  to  supply  for  your  deficiencies."
The  Principalities  next  addressed  her,  saying  :  "  We  will
present  you  to  the  King  of  kings,  adorned  according  to  His
Heart."  The  Powers  added  :  "  Since  your  Beloved  is  so
blessedly  united  to  you,  we  will  continually  remove  every
impediment,  whether  exterior  or. interior,  which  might  in
terrupt  His  Divine  communications,  in  imparting  blessings
to  the  Church,  and  rejoicing  the  heavenly  court.  For  the
prayers  of  one  loving  soul  prevail  more  with  God,  both  for
the  living  and  the  dead,  than  the  prayers  of  a  thousand
souls  who  love  less."

Then  St.  Gertrude  returned  profound  thanks  to  God  for
all  these  favours,  and  for  many  others  which  human  frailty
prevents  us  from  relating  ;  but  all  are  known  to  God.

*  "Egregia,"


464 THE  KEVELAT10NS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

CHAPTER  LV.

For  the  Feast  of  the  Eleven  Thousand  Virgins.

Of  the  fruits  of  thanksgiving— That  God  requires  us  to  fructify  His
gifts— And  of  the  Kesponse  Regnum  mundi.

As  the  words,  Ecce  sponsus  venit,  were  chanted  at  the  Office
of  the  Eleven  Thousand  Virgins,*  St.  Gertrude  was  deeply
moved,  and  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  O  most  desirable  Spouse !
as  I  hear  these  words  so  frequently  repeated,  tell  me  how
Thou  wilt  come,  and  what  Thou  wilt  bring t  us?"  He
replied  :  "  I  will  now  work  with  yon  and  in  you.  Where
is  your  lamp  ?  "  She  replied  :  "  Behold,  Lord,  I  will  give
Thee  my  heart  for  a  lamp."  Pie  answered  :  "  I  will  fill  it
abundantly  with  oil — that  is,  with  grace  from  My  Heart."
She  replied  :  "  But  where  is  the  wick  J  to  light  it  ]  "  Our
Lord  replied  :  "  Your  pure  intention  of  doing  everything
for  Me  alone  will  be  a  wick,  the  light  of  which  will  be  most
pleasing  to  Me."


*  St.  Ursula  and  her  companions,  martyrs :  October  21st.  It  is
believed  that  these  holy  martyrs  came  originally  from  Britain,  and
that  St.  Ursula  was  their  conductor.  There  has  been  some  question
as  to  the  correctness  of  the  number ;  but  modern  researches,  in
this  as  in  many  other  instances,  are  tending  to  confirm  the  truth
of  ancient  traditions — though  it  is  probable  that  the  martyrs  were
not  all  virgins.  St.  Ursula  was  not  the  foundress  of  the  Order
which  bears  her  name  :  the  humility  of  St.  Angela,  who  instituted
the  congregation,  and  a  vision  of  St.  Ursula,  who  encouraged  her
holy  undertaking,  led  her  to  conceal  her  imputed  share  in  this
great  work  under  the  mantle  of  another.  One  almost  regrets  that
the  name  of  Angelines  had  not  been  given  to  an  Order  to  which
it  would  have  been  so  singularly  appropriate  as  the  guardians  of
youth.

t  "  Allaturus."

J  "  Papyrus." Wicks  for  lamps  were  made  of  this  formerly.


OP  THE  RESPONSE  "  REGNUM  MUNDI."  465

At  the  Response  Verus  pudicitice,  and  at  the  words
Spes  et  corona  virginum*  St.  Gertrude  returned  thanks  to
God  for  those  virgins  whom  she  beheld  standing  before
His  throne  :  and  He  cast  as  many  rays  of  glory  on  them
as  she  had  made  thanksgivings  for  them,  which  were  then
reflected  upon  her  ;  by  this  she  understood  that  those  who
return  thanks  to  God  for  the  favours  which  He  has  bestowed
on  any  saint,  share  in  the  merits  of  that  saint.  As  the
Response  Recjnum  mundi\  was  chanted,  at  the  words  Quern
vidi,  quern  amavi,  she  remembered  a  person  who  was  often
troubled  by  an  ardent  desire  to  see  God,  and  she  said  to
our  Lord  :  "  When  wilt  Thou  console  her,  that  she  may
sing  this  Response  with  joy  ?  "  He  replied  :  "  To  see  Me,
to  love  Me,  and  to  believe  in  Me,  is  a  wish  which  none
can  entertain  without  fruit ;  therefore,  when  any  soul  has
this  desire,  and  cannot  obtain  it  because  of  human  frailty,
My  Humanity  at  once  advances  to  My  Divinity  as  a  sister,
undertaking  to  do  this  favour  as  if  by  right  of  inheritance,
until  that  person  has  shaken  off  her  carnal  affections,  and
is  of  herself  able  to  undertake  it,  and  thereby  to  attain
eternal  joys."

On  another  occasion,  when  the  words  Propter  amoram
Domini  mei  were  chanted,  the  Divine  Heart  of  our  Brother!
Jesus  was  so  moved  by  these  words,  that  He  exclaimed
before  His  Father  and  the  whole  court  of  heaven,  "  I  am
a  debtor  to  My  faithful  servants  for  what  they  have  now
done  for  Me."  At  the  word  Jesus,  which  signifies  Saviour,
He  acknowledged  that  He  was  their  debtor  for  the  fulfil-

*  "Hope  and  crown  of  virgins."

f  The  Reynum  mundi  is  from  the  x.  Response,  iii.  Nocturn,  Com
mon  of  Widows  :  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world,  and  all  their  pomp,
I  have  despised  for  the  love  of  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whom  I  have
seen,  whom  I  have  loved,  in  whom  I  have  believed."

J  "  Frater  noster."

2o


466  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

ment  of  the  promises  of  salvation  which  He  had  made  to
them  from  their  infancy,  the  accomplishment  of  which  was
deferred  by  His  paternal  providence  until  the  appointed
time.  At  the  word  Christi,  which  signifies  Anointed,  our
Lord  declared  Himself  obliged  to  recompense  their  good
desires.  At  the  words  Quern  vidi,  quern  amavi,  He  assured
His  Father  and  all  the  saints  that  they  had  rendered  testi
mony  to  the  Catholic  faith  by  their  good  works  ;  and  at
the  words  In  quern  credidi,  quern  dilexi,  He  declared  that
they  were  united  to  Him  by  their  firm  faith  and  perfect
charity.

Then  St.  Gertrude  exclaimed  :  "  Alas,  Lord  !  what  wilt
Thou  do  for  those  who  are  not  in  choir  ?  "  He  replied  :  "  I
have  infused  a  devotion  into  all  those  who  have  been  de
lighted  with  this  Responsory,  and  have  beatified  all  who  are
in  this  convent ;  and  those  who  have  a  similar  devotion  will
receive  a  similar  benefit."  "  But,"  she  inquired,  "  if  they  can
gain  so  much  advantage  by  so  little  devotion,  what  harm  can
their  negligence  do  them,  when  they  can  repair  it  so  easily  ?  "
Our  Lord  answered  :  "  When  an  emperor  bestows  an  estate
and  costly  garments  on  one  of  his  nobles,  however  little  he
may  seem  to  value  them,  the  emperor  does  not  on  that  ac
count  deprive  him  of  his  liberality  ;  so,  when  I  give  great
favours  in  return  for  a  little  devotion,  those  on  whom  I  be
stow  them  are  obliged  to  profit  by  them,  and  if  they  fail  to
do  so,  they  will  lose  the  fruit  thereof;  but  the  ornament  of
My  gratuitous  goodness,  in  bestowing  them,  will  always  ap
pear  on  them  for  My  praise  and  glory."  Then  she  inquired  :
"But  how  can  they  who  have  never  been  favoured  with
such  revelations  exercise  themselves  in  such  things  ?  "  He
answered  :  "  They  are  bound  to  practise  and  to  imitate  them,
according  to  the  extent  of  the  lights  they  are  favoured  with.
I  enlighten  every  one  in  such  matters  to  a  certain  degree,


FOB,  THE  FEAST  OF  ALL  SAINTS.  467

and  therefore  they  are  bound  to  be  grateful,  and  fulfil  these
obligations."

On  another  occasion,  when  the  same  Response  was
chanted,  St.  Gertrude  saw  a  troop  of  demons,  who  sur
rounded  the  religious,  showing  them  the  pomps  and  vani
ties  of  the  world.  But  at  the  words,  Regnum  mundi  ....
contempsi,  the  demons  fled  in  confusion.  By  this  she  under
stood,  that  when  any  one  contemns  the  world  with  great
fervour,  and  casts  from  them  all  the  temptations  of  the
evil  one,  for  the  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  the  devil  im
mediately  flies  away,  fearing  to  tempt  them  again,  when
he  lias  met  with  such  vigorous  resistance.


CHAPTER  LVI.

For  the  Feast  of  All  Saints.

Of  the  different  orders  of  the  Church Militant — How  to  honour

the Saints  by  thanksgivings,  that  we  may  participate  in their
merits.

ON  the  Feast  of  All  Saints,  St.  Gertrude  received  some
instructions  on  the  mystery  of  the  Blessed  Trinity,  and
learned  how  the  Trinity,  which  has  neither  commencement
nor  termination,  and  ever  abounds  in  joy  and  beatitude,
imparts  eternal  glory  and  blessedness  to  the  saints.  But
human  frailty  is  such,  that  she  could  not  explain  what  she
beheld  in  the  clear  mirror  of  the  Divinity,  so  that  she  was
obliged  to  explain  it  by  images  and  comparisons.  The  King
of  Glory  appeared  to  her  as  the  Father  of  a  great  family,
who  was  entertaining  all  His  neighbours,  the  princes  and
powers  ;  so  that  the  Church  Militant  and  the  Church  Tri
umphant  appeared  to  mingle  together,  and  each  took  kia


468  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

place  according  to  his  merit — those  who  lived  holy  lives
in  the  married  state  were  with  the  Patriarchs,  those  who
merited  to  know  the  Divine  secrets  were  with  the  Prophets,
those  who  laboured  for  the  instruction  and  edification
of  others  were  with  the  holy  Apostles,  and  so  on.  But
Gertrude  observed  that  those  religious  who  served  God  in
religious  observance  were  joined  to  the  choir  of  Martyrs  ;
and  as  these  were  specially  adorned  in  each  member  of
their  body  in  which  they  had  suffered  for  their  Lord,  so
the  religious  bad  some  special  reward  for  each  act  of  self-
restraint  which  they  had  performed,  whether  in  seeing,
hearing,  tasting,  walking,  or  speaking ;  and  they  had
the  same  merit  as  the  martyrs,  and  received  the  same
reward  in  heaven.  For  as  they  had  no  persecutors  to  shed
their  blood,  they  had  offered  themselves  daily  as  a  holo
caust  of  sweetness  to  their  God  by  their  continued  morti
fications  and  restraints.

At  Communion,  as  she  prayed  for  the  Church,  but  felt
a  want  of  fervour,*  she  prayed  to  our  Lord  to  give  her
fervour,  if  her  petitions  were  agreeable  to  Him  ;  and  imme
diately  she  beheld  a  variety  of  colours :  white,  which  indi
cated  the  purity  of  the  virgins  \  violet,  which  symbolised
confessors  and  religious ;  red,  which  typified  the  martyrs  ;
and  other  colours,  according  to  the  merits  of  the  saints.
Then,  as  she  feared  to  approach  our  Lord  because  she  was
not  adorned  with  any  of  these  colours,  she  was  inspired
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  "who  teaches  man  wisdom/'^to  return
thanks  to  God  for  all  those  who  had  been  elevated  to  the
grace  and  state  of  virginity j/ beseeching  Him,  by  the  love
which  made  Him  be  born  of  a  Virgin  for  us,  to  preserve  all
in  the  Church,  to  whom  He  had  vouchsafed  this  favour

*  "  Sed  sapore  carens."


VISION  OF  THE  MERITS  OP  THE  SAINTS  IN  HSAVKN. 469

in  most  perfect  purity  of  body  and  soul,  for  His  own
honour  and  glory;  and  immediately  she  beheld  her  soul
adorned  with  the  same  shining  whiteness  as  the  souls  of
the  virgins.

She  then  returned  thanks  to  God  for  the  sanctity  and
perfection  of  the  confessors  and  religious  who  had  pleased
him  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  beseeching  Him  to
bring  all  who  were  still  militant  in  the  Church  to  a  happy
end  ;  and  immediately  she  beheld  her  soul  adorned  with
violet ;  and  as  she  continued  to  pray  for  the  different  states
and  orders  in  the  Church,  her  soul  was  adorned  with  their
respective  virtues.  As  she  returned  most  fervent  thanks
to  God  for  these  favours,  she  beheld  herself  clothed  in  a
golden  amice  ;  and  standing  thus  marvellously  adorned
before  our  Lord,  He  turned  to  the  saints,  and  exclaimed  :
"  Behold  her  in  garments  of  gold,  clothed  round  about  with
varieties."  *  Then  He  opened  His  arms  to  receive  her,  as
she  was  no  longer  able  to  support  the  torrent  of  Divine
joys  with  which  her  soul  was  encompassed.

As  the  time  for  Communion  approached,  and  her  strength
still  failed  her,  she  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  0  my  Beloved  !
how  can  I  rise  to  go  to  Thee,  my  Lord  and  my  God,  in
this  Sacrament,  when  my  strength  has  failed  me,  and  I
have  not  asked  any  one  to  come  to  assist  me  ?  "  The  Lord
answered  :  "  What  need  have  you  of  human  aid,  when
you  are  supported  by  My  Divine  arm  ?  I  will  give  you
strength  to  rise  and  approach  Me."  Then  she  arose,  sus
tained  by  Divine  grace  ;  and  although  she  had  not  been
able  to  walk  without  assistance  for  a  long  time  before,  she
went  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  to  receive  His  Body,  and
so  became  one  spirit  with  Him.

*  Psalm  xliv.  14.


470  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


CHAPTER  LVTL

For  the  Feast  of  St.  Elizabeth.

How  pleasing  it  is  to  the  Saints  that  we  should  praise  God  on
their  account.

ON  the  Feast  of  St.  Elizabeth,*  as  the  words  Eia  mater  nos
agnosce  were  chanted,  Gertrude  saluted  her  very  devoutly,
beseeching  her  to  remember  her,  though  unworthy.  Then
St.  Elizabeth  said  to  her  :  "I  know  you  in  the  mirror  of
eternal  light,  where  the  intention  which  you  have  in  per
forming  your  actions  shines  with  marvellous  splendour."
St.  Gertrude  then  inquired  :  "  Has  my  union  with  God,
during  the  Office,  rendered  it  less  pleasing  to  you,  as  I
thought  less  of  you  in  consequence  ?  "  She  replied  :  "  On
the  contrary,  I  accept  it  with  infinite  gratitude  ;  and  it  is
as  much  more  pleasing  to  me  as  a  concert  of  music  would
be  to  the  lowing  of  oxen."


CHAPTER  LVIII.

For  the  Feast  of  St.  Catherine.
Of  the  patronage  and  merits  of  this  Saint.

WHEN  our  Lord  explained the  words,  Non  est

similis  illi,  to  St.  Gertrude,  on  the  Feast  of  St.  Augustine,  He


*St.  Elizabeth  of  Hungary  ;  Nov.  19.  This  Saint  lived  in  the  same
century  as  St.  Gertrude.  She  was  born  in  1207,  died  in  1231,  and
was  canonised  in  1235.  The  ardent  devotion  which  her  sanctity  had
excited  was  at  its  highest  point  of  fervour  at  the  close  of  the  century,
when  St.  Gertrude  wrote.

The  quotation  Eia  mater — "  O  Mother,  acknowledge  us  for  thy
children  " — is  from  the  Prose,  Gaude,  Sion,  quod  egressus,  Mass  of  St.
Elizabeth,  Nov.  19,  Missale  Brixinense


ST.  CATHERINE,  VIRGIN  AND  MARTYR.  471


showed  her  the  merits  of  many  saints,  and,  amongst  others,
those  of  the  glorious  virgin  Catherine,  to  whom  she  had
been  singularly  devoted  from  her  infancy.  To  satisfy  her
desires,  our  Lord  showed  her  this  Saint,  seated  on  a  high
throne,  and  in  a  state  of  great  glory  and  magnificence,  as
if  there  were  no  queen  in  heaven  whose  glory  equalled  hers.
The  fifty  philosophers,  whom  she  had  won  by  her  wisdom
and  knowledge,  appeared  before  her,  and  each  held  a  golden
sceptre  in  his  hand,  with  which  he  touched  the  robe  of  the
Saint,  to  indicate  that  their  wisdom  would  have  been  use
less  had  not  this  virgin  taught  them  how  to  employ  it  for
the  honour  and  glory  of  their  Creator.  She  observed  also
that  our  Lord  bestowed  the  same  caresses  on  this  virgin
as  on  St.  Agnes,  and  that  He  drew  into  His  Heart  all  that
was  said  or  done  in  her  honour  on  earth,  crowning  her  with
it  gloriously.


CHAPTER  LIX.

For  the  Dedication  of  a  Church.

§  1. Of  patience  under  calumnies,  of  the  oblation  of  our
hearts  in  trouble,  and  of  mutual  charity.

ON  the  Feast  of  the  Dedication  of  the  Church,  as  they
chanted  those  words  at  Matins,  Regina  Saba  venit,  &c.,  at
the  words  Cum  gemmis  virtutum*  she  said  to  God,  with
great  compunction  :  "Alas,  most  kind  Lord  !  how  shall  I
come  to  Thee,  since  I  am  not  adorned  with  even  the
smallest  garment  of  virtue  1 "  He  replied :  "  Do  you  not

*  From  3  Kings  x.  1:  "The  queen  of  Saba  came,"  &c.,  "and
brought  precious  stouea."  The  Insinuations,  however,  have  virtu
tum,  as  above.


472  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

know  that  you  are  sometimes  annoyed  by  the  calumnies
which  are  said  of  you  ? "  "  Alas,  Lord  !  "  she  answered  .
"  my  sins  in  this  matter  are  often  a  stumbling-block  to
my  neighbour."  He  replied  :  "  Make  each  of  these  words
which  annoy  you  an  ornament  of  virtue,  and  then  come  to
Me,  and  I  will  be  moved  by  My  goodness,  and  receive  you
lovingly  ;  the  more  you  are  blamed,  the  more  My  Heart
will  incline  towards  you,  since  you  thus  become  more  like
Me  ;  for  I  suffered  contradictions  continually."

At  the  Response  Benedic,*  our  Lord  introduced  her
into  His  Heart,  which  He  adorned  as  a  house,  that  she
might  celebrate  the  Dedication  therein  ;  but  the  exceeding
delights  which  she  found  there  so  overcame  her,  that  she
said  to  our  Lord  :  "  My  Lord,  if  Thou  hadst  permitted  ma
to  enter  even  where  Thy  Feet  had  once  stood,  it  would  have
been  more  than  enough  for  me ;  but  what  return  shall  I
make  to  Thee  for  the  stupendous  favour  which  Thou  hast
now  bestowed  on  me  ?  "  He  replied  :  "  As  you  give  Me
what  is  most  precious  to  you — namely,  your  heart — I  con
sider  it  only  right  to  give  you  Mine,  to  take  your  delight
therein  ;  for  I  am  a  God  to  you  in  all  things,  in  virtue,  life,
and  knowledge."

Then  she  said  :  "  If  my  heart  has  pleased  Thee  in  any
thing,  it  has  been  by  Thy  grace."  He  answered  :  "  Those
whom  I  prevent  with  the  sweetness  of  My  benedictions,  I
reward  with  beatitude  ;  and  if  any  one  co-operates  with
My  grace,  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  My  Heart,  I
conform  Myself  also  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  heart."

Our  Lord  then  taught  her  the  importance  of  mutual
support  and  charity,  by  a  vision  of  precious  stones  joined


*iii.  Response,  i.  Nocturn : "Bless,  O  Lord,  this  house  which  I
Lave  built  in  Thy  name."


SHE  PLEADS,  AS  ESTHER,  FOR  THE  CHURCH. 473

together  by  plates  of  gold  :  and  she  learned  that  as  the
jewels  were  united  together  by  gold,  so  we  should  assist
and  support  each  other  by  love  and  by  a  pure  intention.

§  2.  Of  charity  towards  our  enemies,  and  of  the  joy  of  our
Lord  when  a  sinner  is  converted.

On  another  occasion,  on  the  Vigil  of  the  Dedication,
St.  Gertrude  presented  herself  before  God,  who  is  the  King
of  kings,  as  another  Esther,  richly  adorned,  to  plead  for
her  people — that  is,  for  the  Church — and  she  was  received
by  the  true  Assuerus  with  such  tender  charity,  that  He
admitted  her  into  the  sanctuary  of  His  most  sweet  Heart,
saying  to  her :  "  Behold,  I  give  you  all  the  sweetness  of
My  Divine  Heart,  that  you  may  pour  it  forth  abundantly
on  whomsoever  you  will."  Then  she  poured  forth  abundant
graces  on  some  enemies  who  had  molested  the  convent  *
a  short  time  before ;  and  as  soon  as  she  had  done  this,  she
perceived  that  all  those  on  whom  even  the  least  drop  had
fallen,  repented  of  their  faults,  and  were  moved  to  true
compunction  and  desire  of  penance.  Then,  as  she  prayed
for  another  person,  and  drew  forth  largely  from  the  Heart
of  Jesus  for  him,  she  perceived  that  the  grace  poured  on
him  was  immediately  converted  into  gall.  As  she  was
much  amazed  thereat,  our  Lord  gave  her  this  instruction  :
"When  a  man  gives  money  to  his  friends,  they  are  at
liberty  to  purchase  what  they  please  with  it ;  and  of  those
\vlio  desire  to  purchase  apples,t  some  might  prefer  sour
ones  to  sweet  ones,  as  the  former  would  keep  longer.  So  it
is  with  My  elect — when  I  bestow  My  grace  on  them,  it


*  "  Villam ; "  perhaps  a  grange  or  farm-house  belonging  to  the
nonastery.
f'Poma."


474 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


operates  in  them  in  the  way  which  will  benefit  them  most.
For  example  :  it  is  better  for  some  persons  to  have  troubles
in  this  life  than  consolations ;  so,  when  I  pour  out  My
grace  upon  them,  it  increases  their  trials  and  afflictions,  by
which  they  receive  more  arid  more  grace,  according  to  the
good  pleasure  of  My  Divine  Heart ;  and  the  consolation
which  they  will  enjoy  hereafter  is  hidden  from  them  now,
that  they  may  suffer  more  purely  for  My  love."

As  the  Saint  heard  Matins,  at  the  Response  Vidi
civitatem*  our  Lord  reminded  her  of  certain  words  which
she  had  often  used  to  induce  others  to  have  more  con
fidence  in  God  ;  and  He  said  to  her :  "  Know  and  be  assured
that  I  am  always  pleased  when  a  soul  repents  of  its  faults,
and  resolves  by  My  grace  not  to  commit  them  again."
When  He  said  this,  the  Son  of  God  proceeded  to  the  throne
of  His  Father,  and  chanted  the  Response  Vidi  civitatem
with  a  loud  and  sonorous  voice.  She  understood  by  this,
that  the  Heart  of  Jesus  is  moved  by  the  most  ineffable  ten
derness,  when  a  soul  repents  for  the  wanderings,  the  idle
words,  or  the  unprofitable  works  by  which  it  has  withdrawn
itself  from  its  God — who,  by  so  many  repeated  favours,  pre
vents  and  follows  him — and  earnestly  begs  to  avoid  a  relapse
for  the  future  ;  and  as  often  as  he  falls  as  often  does  the  Son
of  God  chant  the  same  words  with  ineffable  joy.  By  this
she  understood,  that  whoever  purposes  with  sincere  com
punction  to  reform  his  life  and  to  devote  himself  to  good
works,  will  indeed  become  the  tabernacle  of  God,  in  which
His  Divine  Majesty,  who  is  blessed  for  evermore,  will
abide  as  a  Spouse  with  His  beloved.

God  the  Father  then  gave  her  His  benediction,  saying,
Ecce  nova  f ado  omnia  ("Behold,  I  make  all  things  new;")

*xii.  Response,  iii.  Nocturn.


HOW  OUR  LORD  SINGS  FOR  THE  DYING  SOUL. 475

meaning  thereby,  that  by  compunction  and  the  Divine
benediction,  united  to  the  holy  life  of  the  Son  of  God,  the
faithful  soul  was  perfectly  renewed  whereinsoever  she  had
been  deficient  •  and  hence  there  is  joy  before  the  angels  for
every  sinner  who  repents,  more  than  for  the  ninety  and
nine  who  needed  no  repentance,  for  the  infinite  goodness
of  God  delights  in  seeing  a  soul  truly  penitent.  Our  Lord
added:  "When  I  lead  a  soul  forth  from  this  life  by  a
marvellous  way  to  the  palaces  of  heaven,  I  sing  this  canticle
for  her,  amongst  the  other  joys  with  which  I  console  her
'  I  saw  the  holy  city,  the  new  Jerusalem,  ascending  *  from
the  earth  ; '  and  by  these  words  I  renew  in  her  soul  all  thu
joys  which  I  and  all  the  celestial  court  have  had,  whenever
she  was  sincerely  sorry  for  her  falls."


CHAPTER  LX.
For  the  Dedication  of  a  Chapel.

Of  the  presence  and  grace  of  God  in  holy  places— And  how  the
angels  supply  for  our  obligation  of  praising  God.

AT  the  consecration  of  the  church,  as  the  Response  Vidi
civitatem  f  was  chanted  at  Matins,  our  Lord  appeared  to
St.  Gertrude,  clothed  in  pontificals,  and  enthroned  near  the
altar,  as  if  this  was  the  place  which  he  delighted  to  inhabit.
As  she  beheld  this,  and  considered  how  far  our  Lord  was
from  the  place  where  she  prayed,  she  desired  very  ardently
to  draw  Him  nearer  to  her ;  but  He  said  :  "  Since  I  fill


* "  Ascemlentem  de  terra."  This  passage  is  partly  a  quotation
from  Rev.  xxi.  2.

t "  I  saw  the  holy  city,  the  new  Jerusalem,  descending  from
heaven  ;  "  xii.  Response,  iii.  Nocturn.


476  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

heaven  and  earth,  why  can  I  not  fill  this  house  ?  Do  you
not  know  that  it  is  better  to  watch  the  place  where  the
arrow  falls  than  that  where  the  bow  is  bent  1  and  know
that  I  do  not  act  most  effectively  where  I  appear  corporally,
but  rather  where  My  treasure  is,  and  where  the  Eye  of  My
Divinity  finds  pleasure."  Then  He  touched  the  altar  as  if  it
had  been  near  Him,  saying  :  "Whoever  seeks  for  My  grace,
will  find  Me  in  My  favours  ;  and  whoever  seeks  My  love
faithfully,  will  feel  Me  in  interior  sweetness."  By  these
words  she  understood  the  great  difference  between  those
who  endeavour  to  obtain  health  of  body,  and  even  of  soul,
according  to  their  own  will,  and  those  who  commit  them
selves  with  full  confidence  to  Divine  Providence.

As  the  words  Domus  mea  *  were  repeated  at  Mass,  our
Lord  touched  the  heart  of  Gertrude  with  His  Right  Hand,
and  exclaimed,  as  if  He  was  deeply  moved  :  "  I  will  grant
all  you  ask  Me  ;"  at  the  same  time  extending  His  Hand  to
the  centre  of  the  church,  as  if  to  indicate  that  He  would
always  be  there,  and  ready  to  grant  the  favours  which  were
asked  of  Him.  While  the  Antiphon  Fundamenta  templi
ejus  was  chanted  at  the  Benedictus  during  the  week,  angelic
spirits  appeared  around  the  walls,  as  if  they  had  been
deputed  to  guard  the  church,  and  to  repel  the  attacks  of
all  enemies.  Their  golden  wings  touched  each  other,  and
emitted  a  most  exquisite  melody.  She  observed  also,  that
each  descended  in  turn  from  the  top  to  the  bottom,  to  show
with  what  vigilance  they  guarded  their  fellow-citizens,  and
preserved  them  from  every  evil.

On  the  Feast  of  the  Dedication,  as  St.  Gertrude  was
confined  to  bed,  she  reflected  on  the  special  favour  our
Lord  had  granted  her  at  Matins,  in  the  preceding  year,  by

*  "Domus  mea  "  is  probably  from  a  Collect.


THE  GRACE  OP  DEVOTION  FIGURED  BY  A  RIVER. 477

telling  her  that  the  nine  choirs  of  angels  had  made  thanks
giving  for  her,  which  her  infirmity  had  prevented  her
from  making  herself.  Then  she  saw  a  river  of  pure  and
sparkling  water  flowing  through  heaven,  in  which  the
glory  of  God  shone  as  the  rising  sun  shines  red  upon  the
ocean ;  and  as  its  little  waves  broke  and  glittered,  it  ap
peared  as  if  a  thousand  suns  were  shin  ing  in  heaven.  This
river  signified  the  grace  of  devotion  which  she  then  enjoyed
by  the  Divine  favour,  and  the  little  waves  signified  the
thoughts  which  she  referred  to  God.

Then  the  King  of  Glory  dipped  a  chalice  in  this  river,
and  when  he  had  filled  it,  He  gave  it  to  all  the  saints  to
drink ;  and  as  each  obtained  thereby  new  delights,  they
broke  forth  in  praises  and  thanksgiving  for  all  the  graces
which  God  had  conferred  on  this  soul.  She  also  saw  a
little  tube  which  came  forth  from  the  bottom  of  the  chalice
to  all  those  whom  she  had  inclined  to  serve  God  with  great
fervour,  or  who  had  been  commended  to  her  prayers  :  and
they  received  great  consolation  thereby.  Then  she  said  to
our  Lord :  "  What  advantage  will  these  persons  gain  by
what  I  have  seen  and  heard,  when  they  have  neither  seen
nor  heard  them  ? "  He  replied  :  "  Is  it  not  very  advantage
ous  for  the  head  of  a  family  to  have  his  cellars  well  supplied
with  wine,  although  he  does  not  constantly  drink  it1?  Is
it  not  sufficient  for  him  to  be  able  to  partake  of  it  whenever
he  desires  ?  Thus  when  I  pour  forth  graces,  in  answer  to
the  prayers  of  My  elect,  they  do  not  immediately  feel  de
votion  ;  but  I  will  allow  them  to  experience  this  sweetness
whenever  I  consider  it  expedient  for  them,"


478 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


CHAPTER  LXI.

Of  a  marvellous  vision,  in  which  the  Saint  beheld  our  Lord

celebrating  Mass.

ON  Gaudete  Sunday,  as  St.  Gertrude  prepared  to  communi
cate  at  the  first  Mass,  which  commences  Rorate,  she  com
plained  to  our  Lord  that  she  could  not  hear  Mass  ;  but  our
Lord,  who  compassionates  the  afflicted,  consoled  her,  saying:
"  Do  you  wish,  My  beloved,  that  I  should  say  Mass  for
you  1  "  Then,  being  suddenly  rapt  in  spirit,  she  replied  :
"  I  do  desire  it,  0  beloved  of  my  soul ;  and  I  most  ardently
beseech  Thee  to  grant  me  This  favour."  Our  Lord  then
intoned  the  Gaudete  in  Domino  semper,  with  a  choir  of
saints,  to  incite  this  soul  to  praise  and  rejoice  in  Him  ;  and
as  He  sat  on  His  royal  throne,  St.  Gertrude  cast  herself  at
His  Feet,  and  embraced  them.  Then  He  chanted  the
Kyrie  eleison,  in  a  clear  and  loud  voice,  while  two  of  the
princes  of  the  choir  of  Thrones  took  her  soul  and  brought
it  before  God  the  Father,  where  she  remained  prostrate.

At  the  first  Kyrie  eleison,  He  granted  her  the  remission
of  all  the  sins  which  she  had  contracted  through  human
frailty  ;  after  which,  the  angels  raised  her  up  on  her  knees.
At  the  second,  He  pardoned  her  sins  of  ignorance  ;  and  she
was  raised  up  by  these  princes,  so  that  she  stood  before
God.  Then  two  angels  of  the  choir  of  Cherubim  led  her
to  the  Son  of  God,  who  received  her  with  great  tenderness.
At  the  first  Christe  eleison,  the  Saint  offered  our  Lord  all
the  sweetness  of  human  affection,  returning  it  to  Him  as  to
its  Source  ;  and  thus  there  was  a  wonderful  influx  of  God
into  her  soul,  and  of  her  soul  into  God,  so  that  by  the
descending  notes  the  ineffable  delights  of  the  Divine  Heart
flowed  into  her,  and  by  the  ascending  notes  the  joya  of


A  MYSTICAL  MASS  CELEBRATED  BY  OUR  LORD. 479

her  soul  flowed  back  to  God.  At  the  second  Christe  eleison,
she  experienced  the  most  ineffable  delights,  which  she  offered
to  our  Lord.  At  the  third  Christe  eleison,  the  Son  of  God
extended  His  Hands,  and  bestowed  on  her  all  the  fruit  of
His  most  holy  life  and  conversation.

Two  angels  of  the  choir  of  Seraphim  then  presented  her
to  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  penetrated  the  three  powers  of  her
soul.  At  the  first  Kyrie  eleison,  He  illuminated  her  reason
with  the  glorious  light  of  Divine  knowledge,  that  she  might
always  know  His  will  perfectly.  At  the  second  Kyrie
eleison,  He  strengthened  the  irascible*  part  of  her  soul  to
resist  all  the  machinations  of  her  enemies,  and  to  conquer
every  evil.  At  the  last  Kyrie  eleison,  He  inflamed  her  love,
that  she  might  love  God  with  her  whole  heart,  with  her
whole  soul,  and  with  her  whole  strength.  It  was  for
this  reason  that  the  choir  of  Seraphim,  which  is  the
highest  order  in  the  heavenly  hosts,  presented  her  to  the
Holy  Ghost,  who  is  the  Third  Person  of  the  Most  Holy
Trinity,  and  that  the  Thrones  presented  her  to  God  the
Father,  manifestingt  that  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost
are  One  God,  equal  in  glory,  co-eternal  in  majesty,  living
and  reigning  perfect  Trinity  through  endless  ages.

The  Son  of  God  then  rose  from  His  royal  throne,  and,
turning  towards  God  the  Father,  intoned  the  Gloria  in
excehis  in  a  clear  and  sonorous  voice.  At  the  word  Gloria,
He  extolled  the  immense  and  incomprehensible  omnipotence
of  God  the  Father ;  at  the  words  in  excelsis,  He  praised
His  profound  wisdom  ;  at  Deo,  He  honoured  J  the  inestiniv
able  and  indescribable  sweetness  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The
whole  celestial  court  then  continued  in  a  most  harmonious
voice,  Et  in  terra  pax  bonce  voluntatis.  Our  Lord  being


Iracibilem."  t  "  Innuebatur."  J  "  Reverebatur."


480 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

again  seated  on  His  throne,  St.  Gertrude  sat  at  His  feet
meditating  on  her  own  abjection,  when  He  inclined  towards
her  lovingly.  Then  she  rose  and  stood  before  Him,  while
the  Divine  splendour  illuminated  her  whole  being.  Two
angels  from  the  choir  of  Thrones  then  brought  a  throne
magnificently  adorned,  which  they  placed  before  our  Lord  ;
two  princes  from  the  choir  of  Seraphim  placed  Gertrude
thereon,  and  supported  her  on  each  side,  while  two  of  the
choir  of  Cherubim  stood  before  her  bearing  brilliant
torches  ;  and  thus  she  remained  before  her  Beloved,  clothed
in  royal  purple.  When  the  heavenly  hosts  came  to  the
words,  Domine  Deus  Rex  ccelestis,  they  paused,  and  the  Son
of  God  continued  alone  chanting  to  the  honour  and  glory
of  His  Father.

At  the  conclusion  of  the  Gloria  in  excels!*,  the  Lord
Jesus,  who  is  our  true  High  Priest  and  Pontiff,  turned  to  St.
Gertrude,  saying,  Dominus  vobiscum,  dilec.ta — "  The  Lord
be  with  you,  beloved ;  "  and  she  replied  :  "  Et  spiritus
meus  tecum,  prcedilecta — "  And  may  my  spirit  be  with  Thee,
0  my  Beloved."  After  this  she  inclined  towards  the  Lord,
to  return  Him  thanks  for  His  love  in  uniting  her  spirit
to  His  Divinity,  whose  delights  are  with  the  children  of
men.  The  Lord  then  read  the  Collect,  Deus,  qni  hanc
sacratissimam  noctem*  which  He  concluded  with  the
words,  Per  Jesum  Christum  fi.lium  tuum,  as  if  giving
thanks  to  God  the  Father  for  illuminating  the  soul  of  Ger
trude,  whose  unworthiness  t  was  indicated  by  the  word
noctem  (night),  which  was  called  most  holy,  because  she
had  become  marvellously  ennobled  by  the  knowledge  of
her  own  baseness.

St.  John  the  Evangelist  then  rose,  and  stood  between  God

*  Collect  for  Midnight  Mass  at  Christmas,
t "  VilitM."


THE  GOSPEL  OF  THIS  MYSTIC  MASS.  481

and  her  sonl.  He  was  adorned  with  a  yellow  garment,
which  was  covered  with  golden  eagles.  He  commenced
the  Epistle,  Hcec  est  sponsa,  and  the  celestial  court  con
cluded,  Ipsi  gloria  in  scecula.  Then  all  chanted  the
Gradual  Spe.cia  tua*  adding  the  Versicle  Audi  filia  et
vide.  After  this  they  commenced  the  Alleluia.  St.
Paul,  the  great  doctor  of  the  Church,  pointed  to  St.
Gertrude,  saying,  jEmulor  enim  vos  t — "  For  I  am  jealous
of  you "  (2  Cor.  xi.  2)  ;  and  the  heavenly  choir  sang
the  prose,  Filice  Sion  exultent.  At  the  words,  Dum
non  consentiret,  St.  Gertrude  remembered  that  she  had
been  a  little  negligent  in  resisting  temptations,  and  she
hid  her  face  in  shame  ;  but  our  Lord,  who  could  not
bear  to  behold  the  confusion  of  His  chaste  queen,  covered
her  negligence  with  a  collar  of  gold,  so  that  she  appeared
as  if  she  had  gained  a  glorious  victory  over  all  her
enemies.

Then  another  Evangelist  commenced  the  Gospel  Exul-
tavit  Dominus  Jesus;  and  these  words  moved  the  Heart  of
Jesus  so  deeply,  that  He  arose,  and,  extending  His  hands,
exclaimed  aloud,  Confiteor  tibi  Patre^  manifesting  the
same  thanksgiving  and  gratitude  to  His  Father  as  He  had
done  when  He  said  the  same  words  on  earth,  giving  special
thanks  for  the  graces  bestowed  on  this  soul.  After  the
Gospel  He  desired  Gertrude  to  make  a  public  profession
of  faith,  by  reciting  the  Creed  in  the  name  of  the  whole

*  Gradual,  Mass  of  Virgins ;  Audi  filia,  Gradual  of  St.  Cecilia.
This  Mass  appears  to  have  been  composed  from  several  Masses.

t  Epistle,  Common  of  Virgins.  "We  have  not  been  able  to  verify
the  prose.

J  "  I  confess  to  Thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  be
cause  Thou  hast  hidden  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,
and  revealed  them  to  little  oiie«"  (Matt.  xi.  25);  Gospel,  Com.  of
Martyrs.

2H


482 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Church.  When  she  had  concluded,  the  choir  chanted  the
offertory,  Domine  Dens  in  simplicitate,  adding,  Sanctifi-
cavit  *  Moyses.  The  Heart  of  Jesus  then  appeared  as  a
golden  altar,  which  shone  with  a  marvellous  brightness,  on
which  the  angel  guardians  offered  the  good  works  and
prayers  of  those  committed  to  their  care.  The  saints  then
approached;  and  each  offered  his  merits  to  the  eternal
praise  of  God,  and  for  the  salvation  of  St.  Gertrude.  The
angelic  princes,  who  had  charge  of  the  Saint,  next
approached,  and  offered  a  chalice  of  gold,  which  contained
all  the  trials  and  afflictions  which  she  had  endured  either
in  body  or  soul  from  her  infancy ;  and  the  Lord  blessed
the  chalice  with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  as  the  priest  blesses
it  before  Consecration. t

He  now  intoned  the  words,  Sursum  corda.  Then  all
the  saints  were  summoned  to  come  forward,  and  they  ap
plied  their  hearts,  in  the  form  of  golden  pipes,  to  the  golden
altar  of  the  Divine  Heart ;  and  from  the  overflowings  of
this  chalice,  which  our  Lord  had  consecrated  by  His  bene
diction,  they  received  some  drops  for  the  increase  of  their
merit,  glory,  and  eternal  beatitude.

The  Son  of  God  then  chanted  the  Gratius  agimus,
to  the  glory  and  honour  of  His  Eternal  Father.  At  the
Preface,  He  remained  silent  for  an  hour  after  the  words
Per  Jesum  Christum,  while  the  heavenly  hosts  chanted
the  Dominum  nostrum  with  ineffable  jubilation,  declaring
that  He  was  their  Creator,  Redeemer,  and  the  liberal  lle-


^  *  Domine  Deus;  Offertory  for  Dedication  of  a  Church. The  con.
timiation  is  taken  from  the  Office  for  Dedication.

t  "  The  priest,  elevating  his  eyes  towards  heaven,  &c.,  .  .  .  makes
ihe  sign  of  the  cross  over  the  Host  and  Chalice,  while  he  say. :
'  Come,  O  Sanctifier,'  "  &Q.  See  Missal,  Ordinary  of  the  Mass.


OUR  LADY  SINGS  THE  SANCTUS.  483

warder  of  all  their  good  works ;  and  that  He  alone  was
worthy  of  honour  and  glory,  praise  and  exaltation,  power
and  dominion,  from  and  over  all  creatures.  At  the
words  Laudant  angeli,  all  the  angelic  spirits  ran  hither  and
thither,  exciting  the  heavenly  inhabitants  to  sing  the  Divine
praises.  At  the  words  Adorant  Dominationes,  the  choir
of  Dominations  knelt  to  adore  our  Lord,  declaring  that  to
Him  alone  every  knee  should  bow,  whether  in  heaven,  on
earth,  or  under  the  earth.  At  the  Tremunt  Potestatis,  the
Powers  prostrated  before  Him  to  declare  that  He  alone
should  be  adored  ;  and  at  the  Cceli  ccelorumque,  they
praised  God  with  all  the  angel  choirs.

Then  all  the  heavenly  hosts  sang  together  in  harmo
nious  concert  the  Cum  quibus  et  nostras  ;  and  the  Virgin
Mary,  the  effulgent  Rose  of  heaven,  who  is  blessed  above  all
creatures,  chanted  the  Sanctus,  sanctus,  sanctus,  extolling
with  the  highest  gratitude  by  these  three  words  the  incom
prehensible  omnipotence,  the  inscrutable  wisdom,  and  the
ineffable  goodness,  of  the  Ever-Blessed  Trinity,  inciting  all
the  celestial  choirs  to  praise  God  for  having  made  her  most
powerful  after  the  Father,  most  wise  after  the  Son,  and
most  benign  after  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  saints  then  con
tinued  the  Domine  Deus  Sabaoth.  When  this  was  ended,
Gertrude  saw  our  Lord  rise  from  His  royal  throne,  and
present  His  blessed  Heart  to  His  Father,  elevating  it  with
His  own  hands,  and  immolating  it  in  an  ineffable  manner
for  the  whole  Church.  At  this  moment  the  bell  rang  for
the  Elevation  of  the  Host  in  the  church  ;  so  that  it  ap
peared  as  if  our  Lord  did  in  heaven  what  the  priest  did  on
earth  ;  but  the  Saint  was  entirely  ignorant  of  what  was
passing  in  the  church,  or  what  the  time  was.  As  she
continued  in  amazement  at  so  many  marvels,  our  Lord
told  her  to  recite  the  Pater  nosier.  When  she  had  finished,


48* THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

He  accepted  it  from  her,  and  granted  to  all  the  saints  and
angels,  for  her  sake,  that,  by  this  Pater  noster,  they  should
accomplish  everything  which  had  ever  been  accomplished
for  the  salvation  of  the  Church  and  for  the  souls  in  purga
tory.  Then  He  suggested  to  her  to  pray  for  the  Church,
which  she  did,  for  all  in  general  and  for  each  in  particular,
with  the  greatest  fervour  ;  and  the  Lord  united  her  prayer
to  those  which  He  had  offered  Himself  when  in  the  flesh,
to  be  applied  to  the  Universal  Church.

Then  she  exclaimed  :  "  But,  Lord,  when  shall  I  com
municate  1 "  And  our  Lord  communicated  Himself  to  her
with  a  love  and  tenderness  which  no  human  tongue  could
describe  ;  so  that  she  received  the  perfect  fruit  of  His  most
precious  Body  and  Blood.  After  this  He  sang  a  canticle
of  love  for  her,  and  declared  to  her,  that  had  this  union
of  Himself  with  her  been  the  sole  fruit  of  His  labours,  sor
rows,  and  Passion,  He  would  have  been  fully  satisfied.  O
inestimable  sweetness  of  the  Divine  condescension,  who  so
delights  Himself  in  human  hearts,  that  He  considers  His
union  with  them  a  sufficient  return  for  all  the  bitterness  of
His  Passion  !  and  yet,  what  should  we  not  owe  Him  had
He  only  shed  one  drop  of  His  precious  Blood  for  us  !

Our  Lord  then  chanted  Gaudete  justi,  and  all  the  saints
rejoiced  with  Gertrude.  Then  our  Lord  said,  in  the  name
of  the  Church  Militant,  Reftcti  cibo,*  <kc. ;  He  then  saluted
all  the  saints  lovingly,  saying,  Dominus  vobiscum,  and
thereby  increased  the  glory  and  joy  of  all  the  blessed.
The  saints  and  angels  then  sang,  for  the  Missa  est,  Te
decet  laus  et  Jtonor  Domine,  to  the  glory  and  praise  of  the
effulgent  and  ever-peaceful  Trinity.  The  Son  of  God  ex
tended  His  royal  Hand,  and  blessed  the  Saint,  saying  :

*  Communion,  Com.  of  Conf.  not  Bishop ;  Mass  Os  Juiti.


SHE  IS  BLESSED  AS  DAUGHTER  OF  ETERNAL  LIGHT. 485

"  I  bless  thee,  O  daughter  of  eternal  light,  with  this  special
blessing,  granting  you  this  favour,  that  whenever  you  de
sire  to  do  good  to  any  one  from  particular  affection,  they
will  be  as  much  benefited  above  others  as  Isaac  was  above
Esau  when  he  received  his  father's  blessing."

Then  the  Saint  recovered  from  her  rapture,  and  remained
more  closely  united  than  ever  to  her  Beloved.


PART  r.

THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

COMPILED BY THE KELIQIOUS OF HER MONASTEBT.


CHAPTER  L

How  St.  Mechtilde  prepared  for  death,  and  received  extreme
unction.

TTTHEN  Dame  *  Mechtilde,  of  happy  memory,  our
chantress,  who  was  full  of  good  works,  or  rather
full  of  God,  was  confined  to  bed  in  her  last  sickness,  about
a  month  before  her  death,  she  began  to  think  of  her  end,
and  to  reflect  on  some  works  which  she  had  written.  But
on  Sunday,  as  a  person  prayed  for  her,  asking  that  she


*  JDomina.  According  to  Bucelinus,  Aquila  Imperil  Benediciini,
p.  210,  St.  Mechtilde  was  the  fourth  and  youngest  child  of  the
noble  Count  of  Hackeborn.  A  few  moments  after  her  birth  she
appeared  to  be  dying,  and  was  at  once  carried  to  the  Church  to
receive  Holy  Baptism.  The  priest  who  administered  the  Sacra
ment  was  a  "  holy  and  just  man,"  who  thus  addressed  the  by
standers :  ""Why  do  you  fear?  this  infant  shall  live  and  become  a
devoted  spouse  of  Christ ;  God  will  work  many  miracles  through
her ;  and  she  shall  finish  her  days  in  a  good  old  age."  Our  Lord
afterwards  revealed  to  her  that  her  baptism  was  thus  hastened
that  she  might  at  once  become  the  temple  of  God  and  the  possessor
of  His  grace.  She  has  mentioned  this  touching  incident  herself  in


488 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

might  have  the  grace  of  a  happy  death,  under  the  protec
tion  of  the  Divine  mercy,  so  that  she  might  abandon  her
self  to  it  with  humble  confidence  when  receiving  the  Body
and  Blood  of  Christ,  she  knew  in  spirit  that  God  had  drawn


the  first  chapter  of  her  Revelations,  which  are  of  scarcely  less  im
portance  and  interest  than  those  of  her  saintly  sister.

At  seven  years  of  age  she  was  consecrated  to  God  in  the  monastery
of  Rodersdorf,  where  her  sister  had  already  been  dedicated  to
the  Divine  service,  according  to  the  ancient  custom  of  the  order;
\rhich,  however,  as  we  observed  before,  has  been  abolished  by
authority.  It  is  probable  that  the  two  sisters  removed  at  the  same
time  to  Heldelfs.  Here  her  life  was  a  continual  exercise  of  every
virtue.  Notwithstanding  her  innocence  of  life,  she  practised  the
severest  corporal  austerities,  such  as  discipline  and  wearing  hair
cloth.  Her  love  for  Jesus  Christ  made  her  grieve  over  the  sins
whereby  men  are  continually  offending  Him,  and  a  devotion  to  His
Sacred  Passion  and  Death  was  especially  dear  to  her.  Such  was
her  fervour  at  the  Divine  Office,  that  she  was  often  ravished  into
an  ecstasy  ;  and  so  great  was  the  purity  of  her  soul,  that  our  Lord
deigned  to  converse  familiarly  with  her,  and  revealed  His  heavenly
secrets  to  her.  She  had  also  a  most  tender  love  for  the  souls  in
purgatory  ;  for  whom  she  offered  up  penances  and  mortifications,  and
sought  by  every  means  to  procure  their  deliverance.  St.  Gertrude,
her  Abbess,  frequently  consulted  her,  and  received  her  advice  as  a
Divine  oracle.

Though  often  visited  with  illness  and  sufferings,  she  endured
them  with  the  most  edifying  patience  and  resignation,  but  yet,  like
the  Apostle,  with  a  holy  longing  to  be  delivered  from  the  prison  of
flesh.  Her  loving  desires  were  at  length  gratified,  and  she  passed
to  the  embraces  of  her  Spouse  on  the  19th  November.  It  was  the
Feast  of  St.  Elizabeth  of  Hungary,  and  the  religioxis  interrupted
Matins  in  order  to  be  present  at  her  happy  death.  Chronologists
do  not  agree  about  the  date  of  her  birth  and  death,  but  she  ap
pears  to  have  lived  during  part  of  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth
centuries.

Her  Eevelations  are  entitled,  Liber  gratia;  spiritualis  visionum  et
Revelationum  Beatce  Mechtildis  Virginia  devotissimce,  and  are  divided
into  five  parts.  The  first  part  contains  instructions  for  assisting  at
Mass  and  the  Divine  Office  on  many  Feasts  of  the  year.  Indeed,
the  Divine  Office  was  the  special  devotion  of  these  saintly  sisters
and  a  devotion  which  appears  to  have  been  particularly  acceptable


ST.  MECHTILDE.  489


this  soul  to  Himself  entirely,  and  that  He  had  only  re
stored  her  for  a  brief  space,  that  He  might  again  abide  in
her.  Then  she  said  to  the  Lord  :  "  Lord,  why  dost  Thou
wish  her  to  continue  on  earth  1 "  He  replied  :  "  It  is  to
perfect  the  work  which  My  Divine  dispensation  has  de
creed  ;  and  she  will  contribute  to  this  in  three  ways  :  by
the  repose  of  humility,  the  table  *  of  patience,  and  the  joyt
of  virtue.  For  example  :  in  all  that  she  sees  or  hears
from  others,  let  her  always  humble  herself  and  consider
herself  the  most  unworthy  of  all.  Thus  will  I  rejoice  in
the  repose  of  her  heart  and  soul.  Secondly :  let  her
embrace  patience  joyfully,  and  suffer  all  her  trials  and
sicknesses  willingly  for  love  of  Me  ;  thus  she  will  prepare
Me  a  table  of  sumptuous  delights.  Thirdly :  she  will


to  their  Spouse.  As  true  children  of  St.  Benedict,  it  could  not  be
otherwise ;  for  he  has  said  in  his  immortal  Rule,  "  Let  nothing  be
preferred  to  the  work  of  God"  (ch.  xliii.)  ;  therefore,  in  proportion
to  tne  sanctity  of  his  children,  will  be  their  devotion  to  the  angelic
work  of  singing  the  praises  of  their  King.  Hence,  where  we  find
the  most  exalted  sanctity,  we  find  also  the  greatest  perfection  in,
and  love  for,  this  work;  as  in  each  Order  in  God's  Church  the
sanctity  of  its  members  will  be  characterised  by  a  special  devotion
to  the  special  end  for  which  Providence  instituted  its  Rule  and
observance.

The  second  part  of  these  Revelations  contains  many  facts  re
lating  to  St.  Mechtilde,  and  details  of  her  communications  with  her
heavenly  Spouse.  The  third  and  fourth  parts  are  on  the  Divine
praise  and  on  the  salvation  of  men.  The  fifth  part  is  devoted  to  the
souls  in  purgatory,  with  instructions  how  they  may  be  assisted  by
the  Church  Militant.

The  Revelations  of  St.  Mechtilde  are  becoming  very  scarce  and
valuable.  The  principal  editions  are  those  of  Paris,  1513 ;  Cologne,
1536  ;  Venice,  1522,  1558,  and  1589.  This  Saint  has  been  confounded
with  St.  Mechtild  of  Spanheim  and  St.  Mechtild  of  Diessen  by  several
authors,  amongst  others  by  Alban  Butler.  Her  name  has  never  been
inserted  in  the  Roman  Martyrology.

*  "Mensam."  *  "  Lusum."


490 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

offer  Me  a  joyful  spectacle  if  she  exercises  herself  in  every
kind  of  virtue."

On  another  occasion,  when  St.  Mechtilde  was  ready  to
communicate,  this  person  asked  our  Lord  what  He  was
about  to  do  in  her.  He  answered  :  "  I  am  going  to  repose
with  her  in  this  couch."  By  this  she  understood  that  the
couch  in  which  our  Lord  reposed  with  her  was  her  perfect
confidence,  in  all  her  afflictions,  that  God  would  order  all
that  concerned  her  in  the  greatest  love  and  mercy  for  the
furtherance  of  her  salvation ;  so  that  she  offered  con
tinual  thanksgivings  to  Him,  trusting  entirely  in  His
Providence.

When  she  was  near  her  end,  one  evening  at  Vesper
time,  she  was  suddenly  seized  with  such  excruciating  pain
in  the  heart,  that  the  sisters  who  stood  round  her  could  not
restrain  their  tears  ;  but  she  consoled  them,  saying  :  "  Do
not  weep  for  me,  my  beloved  ones;  for  I  am  so  touched  by
your  grief,  that  were  it  the  will  of  my  dearest  Lord  I  would
gladly  bear  this  very  pain  all  my  life,  if  I  could  thereby
obtain  consolation  for  you."

On  another  occasion,  when  t'.ey  urged  her  to  take
some  medicine  which  they  hoped  would  give  her  some
relief,  she  yielded  to  their  request ;  but  immediately
after  her  sufferings  increased  greatly.  On  the  following
day  the  person  before  mentioned  besought  our  Lord  to
reward  her  humble  compliance.  He  replied  :  "  From  the
suffering  which  My  beloved  endured  on  that  occasion  I
have  confected  a  most  salutary  remedy,  which  I  have
used  to  purify  the  souls  of  all  sinners  throughout  the
world."

On  the  Sunday  Si  iniquitates*  the  Saint  communicated

*  "  If  Thou  shalt  observe  iniquities,  O  Lord,  Lord,  who  shall  en.


DEATH  OF  ST.  MECHTILDE.  491

for  the  last  time  before  her  death  ;  and  this  person  prayed
that  she  might  be  inspired  to  prepare  for  extreme  unction,
and  that  our  Lord  would  keep  her  soul  in  His  bosom,  to
preserve  it  from  every  stain,  as  an  artist  covers  a  newly-
painted  picture  lest  it  should  contract  dust.  When  she
told  this  to  St.  Mechtilde,  who  was  always  perfectly  sub
missive  to  her  superiors,  she  committed  herself  humbly  to
their  good  pleasure  and  to  Divine  Providence,  which  she
hoped  would  never  forsake  her.  However,  her  superior
had  such  veneration  for  her,  that  she  believed  our  Lord
would  make  known  the  hour  of  her  death  to  her ;  and  as
she  did  not  ask  earnestly  to  receive  this  Sacrament,  it  was
not  administered  that  day.

But  our  Lord  soon  verified  the  words  of  the  Gospel,
"  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  My  words  shall
not  pass  away  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  35) ;  and  he  failed  not  to
accomplish  what  He  had  promised  to  His  chosen  one.
For  on  Monday  *  blessed  Mechtilde  became  so  ill,  just
before  Matins,  that  we  feared  she  had  fallen  into  her
agony,  so  that  the  priests  were  immediately  sent  for,  and
she  received  extreme  unction.  Thus,  although  the  Sacra
ment  was  not  administered  on  Sunday,  it  was  administered
the  night  of  that  day,  as  she  received  it  before  sunrise  on
Monday.

When  her  eyes  were  anointed  by  the  priest,  the  religious
who  had  prayed  for  her  understood  that  our  most  loving  Lord


dure  it?"  Introit,  22d  Sunday  after  Pentecost.  The  date  of  St.
Mechtilde's  death  admits  of  no  dispute.  The  Feast  of  St.  Eliza
beth  occurs  on  the  19th  November,  and,  as  it  will  be  seen  later,
it  was  the  fifth  feria  (Thursday)  after  this  Sunday.  The  22d
Sunday  after  Pentecost,  therefore,  must  have  fallen  on  the  15th
November.
*  "  Feria  secunda."


492 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

looked  on  her  with  Divine  mercy,  and,  with  a  Heart  full  of
tenderness  towards  her,  shed  a  ray  of  His  Divine  light  into
her  soul,  imparting  to  her  at  the  same  time  a  share  in  the
merits  which  He  had  obtained  when  on  earth  by  the  glances
of  His  most  holy  Eyes ;  and  then  she  beheld  the  eyes  of  the
Saint,  as  if  overflowing  with  the  oil  of  divine  compassion.
From  this  she  understood  that  those  who  invoke  this  Saint
with  confidence  would  feel  abundant  proof  of  the  efficacy  of
her  intercession  ;  and  that  she  had  merited  this  favour  with
God  by  her  gentle,  loving  conduct  towards  others.  When
the  other  members  of  her  body  were  anointed,  our  Lord
applied  the  merits  of  those  parts  of  His  own  most  sacred
Body  to  her  also.  When  her  lips  were  anointed,  this
zealous  Lover*  of  our  souls  honoured  her  with  marks  of
the  tenderest  love,  imparting  to  her  the  fruit  of  His  most
holy  lips.

When  the  Litanies  were  said,  at  the  words  Omnes  sancti
Seraphim  et  Cherubim,  orate  pro  ea^  she  beheld  the
hosts  of  seraphim  and  cherubim  making  way  for  her  soul
to  pass  through  their  ranks,  as  if  to  give  precedence  to  one
who  had  led  so  pure  and  virginal  a  life  on  earth  ;  who,  like
the  cherubim,  had  drawn  spiritual  knowledge  so  copiously
from  the  true  Fount  of  all  wisdom  ;  and,  like  the  seraphim,
had  been  enkindled  by  Him  who  is  a  consuming  fire  (Heb.
xii.  29).

As  the  saints  were  named  in  the  Litany,  they  offered
their  merits  for  her  with  great  joy,  under  the  form  of  gifts,
which  they  presented  to  our  Lord,  who  placed  them  in  His
bosom  for  His  beloved.  For  two  days  after  she  had  re
ceived  extreme  unction,  she  appeared  to  live  only  by


*  "  Ardentissimus  animie  zelator."

t  Not  in  the  present  Litany  for  the  Dying.


HER  LONG  AGONY.  493


onion  with  her  Lord,  and  to  draw  every  grace  from  His
Divine  Heart.  But  the  happy  moment  of  her  departure
was  at  hand,  and  on  Wednesday,  which  was  the  Vigil  of
St.  Elizabeth,  she  fell  into  her  agony,  after  None.  The
community,  having  assembled  to  assist  their  beloved  sister
in  Christ  by  their  fervent  prayers  for  her  happy  passage
to  eternity,  the  person  before  mentioned  beheld  her  soul
under  the  form  of  a  fair  young  girl,  who  applied  her
lips  to  the  Wound  of  our  Lord's  Side,  and  drew  thence
streams  of  grace  for  the  whole  Church,  and  especially
for  those  who  were  present.  And  she  understood  that
she  had  prayed  specially  both  for  the  living  and  the
dead,  and  therefore  our  Lord  had  bestowed  such  abundant
favours  on  her.

When  they  recited  the  Salve  Regina,  at  the  words  Eia
ergo,  St.  Mechtilde  prayed  very  earnestly  to  the  Blessed
Virgin  for  the  beloved  sisters  whom  she  was  about  to
leave,  beseeching  her  to  have  a  special  care  of  them  ;  as
if  she,  who  during  her  life  had  been  so  devoted  to  her
community,  so  tender  and  helpful  and  loving,  desired  to
secure  an  advocate  for  them  after  her  death  in  the
person  of  the  Mother  of  Mercy.  And  this  blessed  Queen
took  the  hand  of  the  dying  religious,  as  if  she  was
accepting  the  charge  of  the  community  from  her.  Then,
as  they  read  the  prayer  Ave  Jesu  Christe,  at  the  words
via  dnlcis,  she  beheld  the  Lord  Jesus  showing  His
beloved  spouse  the  way  by  which  He  purposed  to  draw
her  sweetly  to  Himself.

The  Saint  continued  all  day  in  her  agony,  without  say
ing  any  other  words  than  these,  Jesu  bone  !  Jesu  bone  /  as
if  to  show  how  He  dwelt  in  her  heart,  since  His  sweet
Name  was  so  constantly  on  her  lips  in  the  agonies  of  death.
Then,  as  each  of  the  sisters  commended  themselves  to  her


494  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST. GERTRUDE.

prayers,  beseeching  her  to  intercede  with  God  for  their
necessities,  she  immediately  replied,  "  Willingly,"  although
scarcely  able  to  speak,  as  if  she  would  say  with  what  love
she  would  pray  for  those  who  were  committed  to  her  care.
St.  Gertrude  knew  also  that  the  great  sufferings  which
her  sister  had  endured  with  such  patience  bad  contributed
much  to  her  sanctification ;  and  she  beheld  a  certain
vapour  coming  forth  from  those  parts  of  her  body  which
had  suffered  most ;  and  this  touched  her  soul,  purifying  it
from  its  stains,  sanctifying  it,  and  preparing  it  for  eternal
beatitude.

Now  Gertrude  knew  all  these  things  in  spirit,  but  she
feared  to  declare  them,  lest  it  should  be  suspected  that  she
had  received  these  revelations ;  but  this  was  contrary  to
the  Divine  will,  whose  glory  it  is  to  discover  the  truth
(Tob.  xii.  10),  and  who  commanded  His  Apostles  to  preach
on  the  house-tops  what  they  heard  in  the  ear  (Matt.  x.  27).
As  they  said  the  Vespers  of  St.  Elizabeth,  St.  Mechtilde's
agony  increased  so  evidently,  that  they  feared  she  was
about  to  expire ;  the  sisters  were,  therefore,  summoned  from
the  choir,  that  they  might  redouble  their  prayers  by  her
bedside.*  As  St.  Gertrude  assisted  with  the  rest  of  the


*  The  Divine  Office  is  the  first  and  most  solemn  duty  of  all  re
ligious  orders,  who  are  bound  to  its  recital.  Yet  now,  as  in  the
time  of  St.  Gertrude,  this  great  and  solemn  obligation  gives  way
for  the  time  when  a  soul  is  reaching  the  awful  moment  of  its  pas-
sage  to  eternity.  Truly  it  may  be  said,  "  Charity  never  falleth
away."  The  "prophecies"  may  cease,  and  there  may  be  no  Ger
trude  now  hidden  in  the  cloistered  homes  of  her  great  Order  ;
tongues  may  cease,  for  the  language  of  those  living  under  the
same  Rule  may  not  be  alike  or  understood  in  many  lands;  but
charity  never  falleth  away  :  and  whether  its  exercise  is  needed  by
the  bed  of  a  dying  religious  in  India  or  in  Rome,  in  England  or
America,  it  is  given  with  equal  tenderness  and  promptitude.  The
religious  dies  surrounded  by  her  sisters;  their  prayers  for  her


BOW  RELIGIOUS  ARE  ATTENDED  IN  THEIR  LAST  MOMENTS. 495

community,  she  found  herself  unable  to  understand  or
attend  to  anything  that  was  said  :  this  occasioned  her  to
see  her  fault  in  concealing  what  God  had  revealed  to
her.  But  when  she  had  promised  our  Lord  to  make
known  these  favours  for  His  honour  and  glory  and  the
good  of  others,  the  use  of  her  faculties  was  at  once
restored.

After  Compline  the  dying  nun  entered  her  third  and
last  agony  ;  and  St.  Gertrude  was  rapt  in  spirit,  and
beheld  her  soul  again  under  the  form  of  a  young  girl,  but
with  new  ornaments,  the  fruit  of  renewed  sufferings.  She
observed  also  that  this  soul  approached  our  Lord  with
intense  love,  and  began  culling  from  His  wounds — as  a  bee


may  indeed  be  broken  by  sobs,  and  interrupted  by  tears;  but  are
not  the  tears  and  sighs  also  prayers,  and  the  most  moving  prayers,
to  His  Heart  who  wept  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus  ?  In  the  Order  of
Poor  Clares,  with  whose  observances  we  are  most  familiar,  it  is
required  that  two  sisters  should  remain  night  and  day  with  the
religious  from  the  moment  there  is  the  least  apprehension  of  danger.
One  is  charged  to  summon  the  whole  community,  however  engaged,
either  by  day  or  by  night,  the  moment  the  agony  commences  ;
the  other  sister  remains,  so  that  the  dying  person  may  not  be  left
alone  even  for  a  moment.  And  who  can  describe  what  must  be
witnessed  to  be  understood  ?  Sometimes  the  loving  adieu  to  each  ;
sometimes  the  humble  acknowledgment  of  faults,  and  the  fervent
request  for  pardon  of  any  disedification  which  may  have  been
given  in  a  life  which  has  perhaps  been  one  of  the  highest  edification ;
the  kneeling  sisters,  unwearied  in  their  prayers  for  hours,  even
long  after  the  soul  so  dear  to  them  has  heard  her  final  doom  ;
and  the  loving  mother,  who  has  forgotten  her  own  weariness,
or  it  may  be  actual  suffering,  as  she  watches  day  and  night  by
the  bed  of  her  child,  with  such  love  as  only  a  mother  can  offer,
and  such  consolations  and  helps  as  only  a  spiritual  mother  can
give ;  whose  absence,  even  during  a  prolonged  sickness,  is  the
exception,  and  whose  presence  the  rule.  Truly  only  those  who
have  witnessed  such  blessed  deathbeds  can  estimate  the  grace  of
a  religious  vocation.


496 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

from  flowers — the  sweet  honey  of  the  Divine  delights.  As
they  read  this  Response,  amongst  others,  Ave  Sponsa,  the
Blessed  Virgin  approached  the  soul  of  the  dying  nun  to
prepare  it  for  enjoying  the  delights  of  the  Divinity.  Then
our  Lord  Jesus — for  the  sake  of  His  Blessed  Mother,  who
alone  merited  to  be  called,  and  to  be  both  a  Virgin  and  a
Mother — took  a  necklace  of  marvellous  beauty,  adorned
with  radiant  gems,  and  placed  it  on  the  religious  ;  granting
her  the  special  privilege  of  being  also  called  a  virgin  and
mother,  on  account  of  the  fervour  and  devotion  with  which
she  had  guided  her  spiritual  children.


CHAPTER  II.

Of  the  happy  death  of  St.  Mechtilde,  and  her  reward  in  heaven—
Of  the  merits  and  intercession  of  the  saints— And  how  to  offer
the  Five  Wounds  of  Christ  to  supply  for  our  defects.

THE  Matins  of  St.  Elizabeth  had  already  commenced,  when
it  became  apparent  that  St.  Mechtilde  was  about  to  expire ;
the  community  were  therefore  summoned  again  from  the
choir  to  assist  at  her  happy  death.  Our  Lord  then  appeared
to  the  dying  Saint  as  a  Spouse  radiant  with  beauty,  crowned
with  honour  and  glory,  and  said  to  her  tenderly  :  "  Now,
My  beloved,  I  will  honour  you  before  your  neighbours —
that  is,  before  this  congregation,  which  is  so  dear  to  Me."
Then  He  saluted  her  soul  in  an  ineffable  manner  by  each
of  His  Wounds,  so  that  each  saluted  her  in  four  different
manners  :  namely,  by  a  melodious  harmony,  by  an  effica
cious  vapour,  by  a  fruitful  dew,  and  by  a  marvellous  light.
Thus  did  our  Lord  call  His  elect  one  to  Himself  :  the


THE  MERIT  OF  UNITING  OUR  ACTIONS  TO  OUR  LORD. 497

exquisite  harmony  indicated  all  the  loving  words  which
she  had  addressed  to  God,  or  uttered  for  the  benefit  of
others ;  and  these  words  were  fructified  exceedingly
by  passing  through  the  Divine  Heart.  The  vapour  signi
fied  all  her  desires  for  the  glory  of  God  or  the  salvation
of  her  neighbour;  and  these  desires  were  marvellously
increased  by  passing  through  the  Wounds  of  Jesus.  The
dew  which  poured  forth  so  abundantly  represented  the
love  which  she  had  for  God,  or  for  any  creature  for
His  sake ;  and  it  was  also  greatly  increased  in  sweet
ness  by  these  sacred  Wounds.  The  marvellous  light
signified  all  the  sufferings  which  she  had  endured  from
her  infancy,  either  in  body  or  mind,  which  were  en
nobled  beyond  all  human  power  of  comprehension  by
union  with  the  Passion  of  Christ ;  and  that  her  soul
was  sanctified  thereby,  and  impressed  with  the  marks  of
Divine  charity.

The  enjoyment  of  these  heavenly  consolations  restored
even  the  bodily  strength  of  the  dying  religious,  as  she  con
tinued  aspiring  after  the  joys  on  which  she  was  so  soon
to  enter.  Our  Lord  then  poured  forth  an  abundant  bene
diction  on  all  who  were  present,  saying  :  "  Moved  by  the
ardour  of  My  love,  I  desire  that  each  member  of  My  beloved
congregation  should  assist  at  this  transfiguration,  and  that
they  should  receive  as  much  honour  from  the  blessed  in
paradise  as  My  chosen  ones,  Peter,  James,  and  John,  who
assisted  at  My  Transfiguration  on  the  Mount,  received  from
the  other  Apostles."  Then  the  religious  said  :  *  "  Lord,
what  benefit  will  they  gain  from  these  graces  who  do  not


*  This  religious  was  probably  the  person  who  compiled  the  Revela
tions  ;  the  extreme  care  to  conceal  her  name,  and  the  abrupt  way  in
Which  ghe  is  mentioned,  are  almost  an  evidence  of  this.

2  i


498  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

perceive  them  by  any  interior  sweetness  1 "  He  replied  :
"  When  a  nobleman  bestows  an  orchard  on  a  friend,  he
does  not  at  once  taste  the  fruit,  as  he  must  wait  until  they
ripen.  Thus,  when  I  pour  forth  precious  gifts  on  a  soul,
she  does  not  perceive  their  sweetness  until  they  are  fructi
fied  by  the  exercise  of  exterior  virtues  ;  but  when  the  skin
of  earthly  pleasures  and  consolations  is  removed,  then  she
can  taste  the  interior  consolation."

The  community  now  returned  to  the  choir  to  say  Ma
tins.  At  the  twelfth  Response,  0  lampas,*  this  soul  ap
peared  standing  before  the  Blessed  Trinity,  praying  de
voutly  for  the  Church.  Then  God  the  Father  saluted  her
lovingly  by  these  words  :  "  Ave,  electa  mea  (Hail,  My
elect  one),  who,  by  the  example  of  your  holy  life,  may
truly  be  called  the  lamp  of  the  Church,  abounding  in  oil —
that  is,  your  prayers  for  the  whole  world."  Then  the  Son
of  God  addressed  her  thus  :  "  Gaude,  sponsa  mea  (Re
joice,  0  My  spouse),  who  may  truly  be  called  the  medica
ment  of  grace,  since  by  your  prayers  you  have  obtained
the  restoration  of  so  many  to  My  favour."  The  Holy
Ghost  added  :  "  Ave,  immaculata  mea  (Hail,  My  spotless
one),  who  may  be  called  the  nurse  of  the  faithful,  since
you  have  fed  and  nourished  so  many  spiritually."

After  this  the  Eternal  Father  conferred  on  her,  by  His


*  This  Response  has  evidently  been  adapted  from  the  thirty-fourth
stanza  of  the  hymn  Lcttare  Gcrmania,  published  in  an  Antiphonary  of
the  fifteenth  century.  It  runs  thus —

"  O  lampas  Ecclesiae,
Rivos  profundens  olei,
Medicina  gratiae,
Nutrimeutum  fidel"

The  prose  Gaude  Sion,  and  the  hymn  La-tare  Germania,  are  both  in
honour  of  St.  Elizabeth.


SPECIAL  FAVOURS  GRANTED  TO  ST. MECHTILDE. 499

omnipotence,  the  grace  of  assisting  those  who,  through
human  frailty,  distrusted  the  Divine  mercy,  and  of  strength
ening  in  them  the  gift  of  hope  ;  the  Holy  Spirit  conferred
on  her  the  privilege  of  enkindling  fervour  and  love  in  cold
and  tepid  hearts;  lastly,  the  Son  of  God  gave  her,  through
the  merit  of  His  most  precious  Death  and  Passion,  the  grace
of  curing  souls  enfeebled  by  sin.

The  celestial  choirs  then  chanted,  in  a  clear  and  sonorous
voice,  Tu  Dei  saturitas,  oliva  fructifera,  cujus  lucet  puritas,
ct  resplendent  opera.*  At  the  words  cujus  lucet,  they  hon
oured  the  sweet  repose  which  our  Lord  had  taken  in  her ;
at  the  words  et  resplendent,  they  praised  the  pure  intention
which  had  animated  all  her  actions ;  in  conclusion,  all  the
saints  chanted  the  Antiphon  Deus  palim  omnibus.

During  the  Preface  of  the  High  Mass,  our  Lord  appeared
to  St.  Mechtilde,  drawing  her  towards  Him,  and  imparting
new  graces  and  favours  to  her  soul,  as  if  to  prepare  her  for
the  enjoyment  of  eternal  beatitude.  At  last  the  joyful
moment  came  when  she  was  to  pass  to  the  eternal  embraces
of  her  Spouse  ;  and  the  Lord  of  Glory,  who  is  so  great  in
His  majesty  and  so  tender  in  His  love,  invited  her  to  Him,
saying  :  "  Come,  blessed  of  My  Father,  possess  the  kingdom
prepared  for  you"  (Matt.  xxv.  34).  He  reminded  her  also
of  the  signal  favour  which  He  had  conferred  on  her  some
years  before,  by  giving  her  His  Heart,  as  He  said  these
words,  to  be  her  consolation  and  protection.  Then  He
said  :  "  And  where  is  My  gift  ? "  In  reply,  she  offered
Him  her  heart,  plunging  it  into  His  ;  and  our  Lord  touched
her  heart  with  His,  absorbing  her  into  Himself,  and  putting
her  in  possession  of  eternal  glory,  where  we  hope  she  will
obtain  many  favours  for  us  by  her  intercession.

*  "Delight  of  God,  fruitful  olive-tree,  whose  purity  shines  afar,
whose  works  are  glorious."


500  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

As  the  usual  prayers  were  recited  after  her  decease,  GUI
Lord  appeared,  enthroned  in  glory,  and  this  soul  reposed
upon  His  bosom.  As  the  words,  Subvenite  sancti  Deit
occurrite  angdi*  were  read,  the  angels  testified  their  rever
ence  for  her  who  had  been  thus  honoured  by  their  King ;
and  they  appeared  as  if  adorned  by  the  prayers  of  this  soul,
whom  they  had  assisted  by  their  prayers  when  she  received
the  last  anointing.  The  saints  also  acted  in  like  manner.

Then  the  religious  asked  the  deceased  to  pray  for  some
persons  in  whom  she  had  a  special  interest,  that  they  might
overcome  their  defects.  She  replied  :  "  Now  that  I  see  all
things  in  the  light  of  truth,  I  know  that  all  the  affection
which  I  entertained  for  any  one  when  in  the  world  was
but  as  a  drop  in  the  ocean  when  compared  to  the  love  of
the  Divine  Heart  for  them  ;  and  it  is  by  a  salutary  provi
dence  that  God  permits  their  defects,  that  they  may  be
humbled  on  account  of  them.  Thus  they  daily  attain
greater  perfection  ;  and  since  I  know  this  to  be  the  will
of  God  for  them,  I  can  desire  and  ask  nothing  else  for
them  but  what  His  wisdom  ordains  ;  and  I  continually
adore  this  dispensation,  and  pray  that  it  may  be  perfectly
accomplished."

On  the  following  day,  at  the  Mass  Requiem  ceternamj
St.  Mechtilde  appeared  to  place  little  golden  tubes  from  the
Heart  of  Jesus  to  those  who  had  a  special  devotion  to  her,
and  thus  obtained  for  them  from  the  Heart  of  God  what
ever  they  desired.  Each  tube  had  a  golden  key,  by  which
— that  is,  by  the  following  or  similar  words — they  could
obtain  whatever  they  desired  :  "  O  good  Jesus,  I  beseech


*  From  the  Commendation  of  the  Departing  Soul— one  of  the  most
touching  and  beautiful  devotions  which  the  Church  uses.
t  Introit,  Mass  for  the  Dead.


PRAYERS  IN  HONOUR  OF  ST.  MEOHTILDE.  501

Thee  to  hear  me,  through  the  merits  and  prayers  of  St.
Mech tilde  and  Thy  other  saints,  by  the  mercy  which  dis
posed  Thee  to  pour  forth  on  them,  and  on  other  elect  souls,
Thy  favours  and  graces  ; "  and  we  may  be  assured  these
words  will  incline  the  Divine  mercy  to  comply  with  our
desires.

At  the  Elevation  of  the  Host,  this  soul  appeared  to  offer
herself  with  It  to  God  for  His  glory  and  the  salvation  of
mankind  ;  and  the  Son  of  God,  who  refuses  nothing  to  His
elect,  grew  her  entirely  into  Himself,  and  offered  Himself
with  her  to  His  Father  for  all  in  heaven,  on  earth,  and  in
purgatory.  The  soul  of  the  deceased  now  appeared  in
glory  to  this  religious,  who  asked  her  what  advantage  she
had  obtained  from  the  recital  of  the  Antiphon  Et  quo
omnia  *  as  many  times  as  she  had  lived  days  on  earth,  and
for  having  had  as  many  Masses  of  the  Blessed  Trinity  said
as  she  had  lived  years,  in  thanksgiving  for  all  the  favours
which  had  been  conferred  on  her.  She  replied  :  "  Our
Lord  has  adorned  me  with  a  flower  for  each  repetition  of
the  Antiphon,  and  by  which  I  draw  into  me  the  sweetness
of  the  Divine  Heart ;  and  for  each  Mass  I  have  received  a
marvellous  and  inestimable  delight,  which  affects  all  the
senses  of  my  soul."

On  another  occasion,  when  this  religious  kissed  our
Lord's  Five  Wounds  in  spirit,  saying  five  Pater  nosters  for
the  negligences  which  she  might  have  committed  towards
Dame  Mechtilde  in  her  last  illness,  because  she  feared  she
had  not  attended  her  with  sufficient  care  when  living,  nor
prayed  for  her  with  sufficient  fervour  when  dead,  she  be
held  five  beautiful  flowers  springing  forth  from  our  Lord's


*  v.  Ant.  Lauds,  Office  of  the  Blessed  Trinity  ;  from  Rom.  xi.
36  :  "Of  Him,  and  by  Him,  and  in  Him  are  all  things.  To  Him
be  glory  for  ever.  Amen."


502 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Wounds  ;  and  by  the  virtue  which  these  Wounds  com
municated  to  them,  they  produced  and  poured  forth  a  sweet
and  salutary  balsam.  The  religious  then  said  to  St.  Mech-
tilde  :  "  0  elect  of  my  God,  accept  these  flowers  which  the
Divine  goodness  has  produced  to  supply  for  my  deficiencies  ;
and  may  they  be  for  thy  glory,  and  serve  to  adorn  thy
triumph  ]  but  do  not  forget  to  pray  for  me,  unworthy."
She  replied  :  "I  prefer  leaving  these  flowers  where  they
are,  that  I  may  not  be  deprived  of  the  honour  of  having
them  placed  in  the  Wounds  of  my  Lord ;  for  I  hope,  when
ever  I  touch  them  by  my  desires,  that  a  healing  stream  will
flow  forth  from  them,  for  the  salvation  of  sinners  and  the
consolation  of  the  just."


CHAPTER  III.

Of  the  precious  death  of  Sisters  M.  and  L.— Of  the  exact  account
taken  iu  purgatory  of  their  faults,  and  of  the  reward  of  their
merits.

Two  ladies,  more  illustrious  for  their  virtue  than  their  dis
tinguished  birth — sisters  in  the  flesh,  but  yet  more  closely
united  in  the  spirit  by  their  equality  in  perfection — were
called  to  the  heavenly  nuptials  by  their  celestial  Spouse,
after  having  lived  a  most  holy  life  from  their  very  child
hood.  The  first  died  on  the  glorious  Feast  of  the  Assump
tion,  which  was  also  the  day  of  her  profession  ;  the  other
sister  died  thirty  days  after  ;  but  their  deaths  were  so
edifying  and  blessed,  that  we  are  about  to  relate  some
circumstances  concerning  them.

As  Gertrude  prayed  for  the  eldest,  who  died  on  the
Assumption,  she  appeared  to  her,  surrounded  with  a  glo
rious  light  and  magnificently  adorned,  standing  before  the


PURIFICATION  OF  A  HOLY  RELIGIOUS  AFTER  DEATH. 303

throne  of  Jesus  Christ;  but  she  seemed  ashamed  to  lift  up
her  eyes  to  Him,  or  to  gaze  upon  His  majestic  countenance.
When  the  Saint  perceived  this,  she  was  moved  to  pity,  and
said  to  our  Lord  :  "  Alas,  most  loving  Lord  !  why  dost  Thou
permit  her  to  stand  before  Thee  as  a  stranger,  without
manifesting  any  tokens  of  affection  for  her?"  Our  Lord
then  extended  His  hand  to  her,  as  if  to  draw  her  to  Him
self;  but  she  drew  back  from  Him  with  reverent  fear.

As  Gertrude  marvelled  much  at  this,  she  said  to  the
soul :  "  Why  do  you  thus  fly  from  the  embraces  of  your
Spouse  ? "  She  replied  :  "  Because  I  am  not  yet  perfectly
purified  from  my  defects,  and  am  not  in  a  condition  to  re
ceive  His  favours.  Even  if  Divine  justice  did  not  restrain
me,  I  would  deprive  myself  of  these  favours,  of  which  I  ain
not  worthy."  Gertrude  then  said  :  "  How  can  this  be,
when  I  now  see  you  standing  before  God  in  such  glory  ]  "
The  soul  answered  :  "  Although  all  creatures  are  present
to  God,  yet  souls  come  near  Him  in  proportion  to  their  per
fection  in  charity  ;  but  none  are  worthy  of  this  blessedness
who  are  not  perfectly  purified  from  all  the  stains  which
they  have  contracted  during  their  mortal  lives."

A  month  after,  when  the  second  sister  was  in  her  agony,
St.  Gertrude  prayed  for  her  very  earnestly.  After  her
death,  she  appeared  to  her,  surrounded  with  light,  as  a
young  virgin,  clothed  in  a  purple  robe,  that  she  might  be
presented  to  her  Spouse.  She  also  saw  Jesus  Christ,  who
stood  near  her,  and  who  caused  a  certain  consolation  to
proceed  from  His  Wounds,  to  refresh  and  strengthen  her  five
senses,  so  that  the  soul  was  exceedingly  consoled  thereby.
St.  Gertrude  then  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  Since  Thou  art  the
God  of  all  consolation,  why  dost  Thou  permit  this  soul  to
appear  so  sad,  as  if  troubled  by  some  secret  grief  ?  "  He
answered  j  "  I  now  manifest  to  her  My  Humanity,  which


004  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

does  not  perfectly  console  her ;  for  thus  I  reward  the
special  love  which  she  manifested  for  My  Passion  in  the
last  moments  of  her  life.  But  when  she  is  perfectly  freed
from  all  her  stains,  T  will  manifest  the  joys  of  My  Divinity
to  her,  and  then  she  will  have  all  she  desires.  "  "  But,
Lord,"  continued  the  Saint,  "  how  is  it  that  all  her  faults
were  not  perfectly  purified  by  the  charity  which  she  pos
sessed  at  the  last  moment  of  her  life,  since  Scripture  teaches
that  man  shall  be  judged  according  to  the  state  in  which
he  dies'?  "  The  Lord  answered  :  "  When  a  man  loses  his
strength,  he  has  no  longer  the  power  to  execute  his  good
designs,  though  he  may  have  the  will  to  do  so.  When,  of
My  gratuitous  goodness,  I  inspire  these  desires,  and  give
this  will,  I  do  not  always  efface  thereby  the  stains  of  past
negligences,  which  would  no  doubt  be  accomplished  if  the
person  recovered  health  and  strength,  and  then  began  to  re
form  his  life  thoroughly."  She  replied  :  "  Alas.  Lord  !  can
not  Thy  abundant  mercy  remit  the  sins  of  this  soul,  who
has  loved  Thee  so  ardently  from  her  very  childhood  1  "  He
answered:  "I  will  indeed  reward  her  love  abundantly;  but
My  justice  must  first  be  satisfied  by  the  removal  of  her
stains."  Our  Lord  then  turned  lovingly  to  this  soul,  and
said  to  her  :  "  My  spouse  will  consent  willingly  to  what  My
justice  requires  ;  and  when  she  is  purified,  she  will  enjoy
My  glory  and  consolation."  As  she  consented,  our  Lord
seemed  to  ascend  into  heaven,  and  to  leave  her  after  Him
where  she  was  ;  but  she  appeared  as  if  ardently  desiring  to
follow  Him.  The  solitude  was  to  purify  her  from  the  stains
which  she  had  contracted  by  conversing  too  freely  with  the
other  sex  ;  and  the  efforts  she  made  to  ascend  upwards
purified  her  from  some  faults  of  indolence.

On  another  occasion,  as St. Gertrude prayed  for  the
game  person  at  Mass,  she  said,  at  the  Elevation  of  the  Host :


HOW  A  DISOBEDIENCE  WAS  EXPIATED.  505

"  Holy  Father,  I  offer  this  Host  to  Thee  for  this  soul  on
the  part  of  all  in  heaven,  on  earth,  and  in  the  deep  ;  "  and
she  beheld  his  soul  in  the  air,  surrounded  by  a  multitude
of  persons,  who  held  representations  of  the  Host  in  their
hands,  which  they  offered  up  on  bended  knees.  The  soul
appeared  to  receive  great  assistance  and  inestimable  joy
from  this  devotion.  Then  the  soul  said  :  "  I  now  experi
ence  the  truth  of  what  is  said  in  Scripture,  that  no  good
action,  however  trifling,  will  fail  to  be  rewarded ;  and  that
no  negligence,  however  trifling,  will  be  unpunished ;  *  for
this  offering  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  altar  procures  the
greatest  consolation  for  me,  on  account  of  my  former  de
votion  in  receiving  It ;  and  the  ardent  charity  which  I  had
for  others  greatly  enhances  the  prayers  which  are  made
for  me  •  while  for  both  of  these  things  I  shall  receive  an
eternal  recompense."

The  soul  tben  appeared  as  if  elevated  higher  and  higher
by  the  prayers  of  the  Church  ;  and  when  her  purification
was  accomplished,  the  Saint  beheld  our  Lord  coming  for
her  to  crown  her  as  a  queen,  and  to  conduct  her  to  eternal
joys.


CHAPTER  IV.

How  a  disobedience  was  expiated  by  an  illness,

As  Gertrude recited  five  Pater  nosters  for  Dame  S ,

the  eldest  of  the  community,  who  had  received  Extreme
Unction,  and  at  last  ended  her  prayer  in  the  Wound  of
our  Lord's  Side — she  besought  Him  to  purify  this  soul
with  the  water  which  flowed  therefrom,  and  to  adorn  it


*  Matthew  x.  42,  and  xii.  36.


506 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

with  the  merits  of  His  most  precious  Blood.  She  then
saw  this  soul,  under  the  form  of  a  young  virgin,  crowned
with  a  golden  circlet,  and  supported  by  our  Divine  Lord,
who  imparted  the  graces  she  had  asked  to  her  soul  She
understood  by  this,  that  the  sister  must  remain  longer  on
earth  to  be  purified  from  a  disobedience  of  which  she  had
been  guilty,  in  conversing  *  more  than  was  right  with  a
sick  person  :  and  this  was  accomplished.  She  suffered  for
five  months  in  a  manner  which  sufficiently  manifested  the
fault  from  which  she  was  being  purified.  On  the  day  on
which  she  was  taken  ill,  she  appeared  very  joyful,  as  if
our  Lord  had  granted  her  some  great  favour  ;  and  she  at
tempted  to  relate  what  had  happened  to  her ;  but  as  she
had  not  the  perfect  use  of  her  senses,  she  was  unable  to
do  so.  But  as  she  saw  Gertrude  standing  by  her,  with
some  of  the  other  religious,  she  called  her  by  name,  and
said  :  "  Do  you  speak  for  me,  for  you  know  all."  St.
Gertrude  began  to  relate  what  had  been  revealed  to  her,
and  the  invalid  was  then  able  to  continue  the  recital  her
self.  When  the  others  made  any  observation,  she  at  once
refuted  their  assertions,  declaring  that  our  Lord  had  for
given  her  sins,  and  bestowed  many  favours  on  her.

On  the  day  before  her  death,  St.  Gertrude  beheld  our
Lord  preparing  a  place  for  her  in  His  Divine  arms ;  but
the  soul  appeared  at  His  left,  and  separated  from  Him  by
a  little  cloud.  She  then  said  :  "  Lord,  this  place  which
Thou  hast  prepared  will  not  be  suitable  for  a  soul  covered
with  this  cloud."  He  replied  ;  She  will  remain  a  little
longer  on  earth,  that  she  may  become  fit  for  it."  And  it
was  even  so  ;  for  the  religious  continued  all  that  day  and
the  following  night  in  her  agony.  Next  morning  she  be-


**  Conanumcaus.*


THE  DEATH  OF  ANOTHER  RELIGIOUS. 507

held  our  Lord  coming  towards  the  dying  nun  with  marks
of  the  greatest  tenderness ;  and  she  appeared  to  rise,  as  if
to  meet  Him.  Then  St.  Gertrude  said  :  "  Art  Thou  not
come  now  to  take  this  desolate  soul  to  Thyself,  as  a  mer
ciful  Father  ?  "  and  our  Lord  indicated  by  a  sign  that  He
had  this  intention.

Soon  after  her  decease,  she  saw  this  soul  again,  under
the  form  of  a  young  virgin,  adorned  with  roses,  and  advanc
ing  joyfully  to  her  Spouse  ;  but  when  she  came  near  Him,
she  fell  at  His  feet  as  if  almost  deprived  of  life,  until  the
words  Tibi  supplicatio  commendet  JEcclesice  were  repeated,
when  she  arose,  and  cast  herself  into  the  Divine  arms,
where  she  is  eternally  replenished  with  the  treasures  of
beatitude.


CHAPTER  V.

Of  the  happy  death  of  Sister*  M. — The  approbation  of  these  Revela
tions—And  the  favours  promised  through  her  merits. •

As  Sister  M.,  of  happy  memory,  approached  her  end,  St.
Gertrude  prayed  for  her  with  others,  and  said  to  the  Lord  :
"  Why  dost  Thou  nut  hear  our  prayers  for  her,  0  most
loving  Lord  ? "  He  replied  :  "  Her  soul  is  in  such  a  dif
ferent  state  from  the  souls  of  others,  that  she  cannot  be
consoled  by  you  in  a  human  manner."  She  continued  :  "  la
this  a  judgment  1 "  He  answered  :  "  I  have  now  my  secret
in  her,  as  I  formerly  had  My  secret  with  her."  t  Then,
as  Gertrude  sought  to  understand  these  mysterious  words,


*  "  Sororia ;  "  the  term  "  domina,"  however,  which  we  have  tran
slated  "  dame,"  is  generally  used,
t  "  Secretiy**  meum  nunc  habeo  in  ea,  sicut  olim  habui  cum  eo,**


508  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST. GERTRUDE.


our  Lord  said  to  her  :  "My  majesty  will  enthrone  itself  in
her."  "But,"  she  continued,  "how  will  she  die?"  He
answered :  "  She  will  be  absorbed  by  My  Divinity,  as  a
sunbeam  absorbs  a  drop  of  dew."  Then  she  inquired  why
the  wandering  of  her  exterior  senses  was  permitted.  He
replied  :  "  That  you  may  know  I  am  working  in  her  in
teriorly,  not  exteriorly."  She  answered  :  "  Our  own  hearts
ought  to  teach  us  this."  He  replied  :  "  And  how  can  they
receive  this  favour  \vho  rarely,  if  ever,  enter  into  their
interior,  where  grace  alone  is  poured  forth?"

After  this  Gertrude  besought  our  Lord  to  grant  the
grace  of  working  miracles  to  Sister  M.  after  her  death,  for
the  confirmation  of  the  revelations  which  she  had  received,
and  to  silence  the  incredulous.  Our  Lord  replied,  holding
a  book  in  His  Hands  :  "Can  I  not  gain  a  victory  without
fighting?"  He  added  :  "When  it  is  necessary,  I  subdue
kings  and  nations  by  signs  and  wonders  ;  but  now  the
experience  of  those  who  have  tasted  something  of  these
celestial  communications  is  sufficient  to  obtain  credit  for
them.  For  the  present,  I  bear  with  those  who  contradict
them  ;  but  I  will  at  last  silence  their  calumnies."  St.
Gertrude  learned  from  this  that  our  Lord  is  pleased  with
those  who  believe  that  He  pours  forth  the  effusions  of
His  grace,  not  for  their  merit,  but  from  the  superabound-
ing  love  of  His  Divine  Heart.

As  Sister  M.  was  anointed,  St.  Gertrude  saw  our  Lord
touch  her  hand,  saying:  "When  this  blessed  soul  is  freed
from  the  chains  of  the  flesh,  I  will  pour  forth  the  abund
ance  of  My  mercy  on  all  who  are  here  present."  As  she
continued  in  her  agony,  and  the  religious  prayed  for.  her
still  more  fervently,  she  knew  that  our  Lord  would  grant
them  three  great  favours :  first,  by  accomplishing  all  their
good  desires ;  second,  by  assisting  them  in  overcoming  their


THE  BLESSED  VIRGIN  ASSISTS  AT  HER  DEATH. 509


faults — and  these  two  favours  would  be  granted  through
her  intercession  ;  the  third  benefit  was,  that  He  extended
His  Hand,  and  imparted  His  benediction  to  all  who  were
present.

As  Gertrude  occupied  herself  in  fervent  thanksgivings,
she  beheld  our  Divine  Lord,  the  King  of  Glory,  whom  the
angels  adore,  standing  at  the  head  of  the  dying  nun,  whose
breath  appeared  of  a  golden  colour,  and  tended  towards  the
Heart  of  her  Spouse.  The  Saint  continued  to  gaze  on  this
vision  with  great  joy  while  the  Psalm  Deus,  Deus  meus,  and
the  Ad  te  le.va.vi*  were  recited,  during  which  our  Lord
manifested  the  tenderest  affection  for  religious.  After  this
the  Suffrages  were  read,  with  the  Antiphon  Ut  te  simus,
during  which  she  beheld  the  Blessed  Virgin,  clothed  in
purple  and  adorned  as  a  queen.  As  she  stood  beside  her
Divine  Son,  she  placed  the  head  of  this  sister  so  that  her
breath  might  come  more  directly  to  the  Heart  of  Jesus
As  they  read  the  short  prayer,  Ave,  Jesu — "  Hail,  Jesus,
my  Saviour,  Word  of  the  Father" — our  Lord  appeared  en
compassed  with  an  increased  splendour,  like  that  of  the
sun  at  mid-day.  At  first  the  Saint  was  overwhelmed  by  the
magnificenee  of  the  vision  ;  but  as  she  recovered  herself  a
little,  she  beheld  the  effulgent  rose  of  heaven,  His  Virgin
Mother,  who  appeared  to  congratulate  Him  on  having  ob
tained  a  new  spouse.

By  this  she  understood  that  this  happy  union  was  then
consummated,  and  the  soul  for  ever  immersed  in  the  ocean
of  eternal  beatitude.

*  Psalm  liii.  and  cxxii.


510 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


CHAPTER  VI.

Of  the  ngony  and  death  of  M.  B.,  and  of  her  blessed  soul — How
salutary  it  is  to  assist  the  souls  in  Purgatory.

WHEN  M.  B.,  of  happy  memory,  was  in  her  agony,  Ger
trude  prayed  for  her  most  earnestly,  and  obtained  a
knowledge  of  what  was  passing  around  her  in  this  last
combat.  For  a  whole  hour  she  beheld  nothing  but  the
trouble  which  the  soul  endured  for  having  sometimes  taken
undue  pleasure  in  exterior  things ;  such  as,  for  having
had  a  coverlet  of  coloured  cloth  on  her  bed,  embroidered
with  gold.*  On  the  day  of  her  decease,  when  Mass  was
celebrated,  Gertrude  offered  the  Host  for  her  ;  although
she  did  not  see  her,  she  knew  that  she  was  present,  and
addressed  our  Lord  thus,  as  if  seeking  her,  saying  :  "  O
Lord,  where  is  she  ? "  He  replied  :  "  She  will  come  to  Me
pure  and  white."  From  this  she  understood  that  the
prayers  which  were  offered  in  charity  had  obtained  great
grace  for  her  in  her  last  moments  ;  and  that  some  persons,
moved  by  holy  zeal,  had  offered  their  good  works  for  her,
and  charged  themselves  with  the  penalties  due  to  her.

As  Gertrude  prayed  for  her  again  at  the  Mass  which
preceded  her  interment,  she  beheld  her  seated  at  a  festal
table  beside  our  Lord,  where  the  prayers  which  had  been
offered  were  given  to  her  under  the  form  of  different
kinds  of  food.  At  the  Elevation,  as  the  Saint  offered  the


"  Quod  lectus  ipsius  fuit  depositus  de  picto  panno,"  &o.  This,
doubtless,  was  before  the  religious  had  entered  the  monastery,  as  the
rule  of  poverty  of  every  religious  house  would  forbid  such  extrava
gance.  The  richly  embroidered  quilt  was  a  very  pitch  of  luxurious
refinement  in  that  age,  and  hence  indicated  a  habit  of  self-indulgence
or  luxurious  tastes,  which  probably  caused  the  soul's  suffering  for  an
act  which  was  only  its  climax.


OP  OFFERING  OUR  MERITS  FOR  FAITHFUL  DEPARTED. 511

chalice  for  her,  our  Lord  appeared  to  present  it  to  her
Himself.  When  she  had  tasted  it,  she  immediately  be
came  penetrated  with  Divine  sweetness,  and  rose  up  to  pray
for  all  who  had  ever  injured  her,  either  by  thought,  word,
or  act,  rejoicing  for  the  merit  which  they  had  obtained  for
her  thereby.  Then  Gertrude  inquired  why  she  did  not
pray  for  her  friends  also  ;  but  she  replied  :  "  I  pray  for
them  more  efficaciously  by  speaking  heart  to  heart  to  my
Beloved."

On  another  occasion,  as  she  remarked  that  she  had
offered  all  her  merits  for  the  deceased,  she  said  to  our
Lord  :  *  "  I  hope,  0  Lord,  that  Thou  will  frequently  cast
the  eyes  of  Thy  mercy  on  my  indigence."  He  replied  :
"  What  can  I  do  more  for  one  who  has  thus  deprived  her
self  of  all  things  through  charity,  than  to  cover  her  imme
diately  with  charity  ?  "  She  answered  :  "  Whatever  Thou
mayest  do,  I  shall  always  appear  before  Thee  destitute  of
all  merit,  for  I  have  renounced  all  I  have  gained  or  may
gain."  He  replied  :  "  Do  you  not  know  that  a  mother
would  allow  a  child  who  was  well  clothed  to  sit  at  her  feet,
but  she  would  take  one  who  was  barely  clad  into  her
arms,  and  cover  her  with  her  own  garment?"  He  added  :
"  And  now,  what  advantage  have  you,  who  are  seated  on
the  shore  of  an  ocean,  over  those  who  sit  by  a  little  rivulet  V
That  is  to  say,  those  who  keep  their  good  works  for  them
selves  have  the  rivulet ;  but  those  who  renounce  them  in
love  and  humility,  possess  God,  who  is  an  inexhaustible
ocean  of  beatitude.


*  The  French  translations  have,  "Elle  resentit  quelque  espece
de  tristesse  " — a  sentiment  utterly  unworthy  of  so  generous  and
noble  a  soul,  who  could  not  regret  what  she  had  so  freely  and
lovingly  bestowed  ;  but  it  is  not  in  any  Latin  edition  which  wo
have  seen.


512 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


CHAPTER  VII.

How  the  souls  of  G.  and  B.  were  purified  for  neglecting  confession,
and  for  taking  pleasure  in  earthly  things.

As  Scripture  testifies  that  "  By  what  things  a  man  sinneth,
by  the  same  also  he  is  punished"  (Wis.  iL  17),  and,  on
the  contrary,  that  he  will  be  rewarded  in  the  things  in
which  he  has  suffered  or  done  good,  we  give  the  following
examples  for  the  benefit  of  our  readers.

We  had  two  persons  with  us,  who  were  both  ill  at  the
same  time  ;  one  evidently  suffered  from  a  severe  affection
of  the  chest,  and  hence  she  was  attended  more  carefully.
The  other,  whose  disease  wras  not  known,  and  who  seemed
more  likely  to  live,  did  not  receive  so  much  care  ;  but,  as
men  are  often  deceived,  the  one  for  whom  we  feared  the
least,  died  the  first,  and  the  other  survived  a  month  longer.
When  the  former  approached  her  end,  she  had  been
strengthened  in  grace  by  great  patience  and  devotion,  which
had  purified  her  soul  exceedingly  ;  for  the  ardent  love  which
our  Lord  had  for  His  spouse  would  not  suffer  Him  to
permit  the  least  stain  to  remain  on  her.  Nevertheless,  she
still  needed  some  purification  for  having  too  easily  omitted
confession  ;  for  sometimes  when  the  priest  came  to  her,  she
feigned  to  be  sleeping,  not  having  any  grave  fault  to  accuse
herself  of.  As  the  hour  approached  when  she  was  to  be
received  to  the  eternal  embraces  of  her  Spouse,  He  puri
fied  her  from  this  stain.  For  when  she  asked  for  a  con
fessor,  she  lost  the  power  of  speech  when  he  came,  and  then
she  feared  exceedingly  that  she  would  suffer  for  her  former
negligence  after  death,  and  so  was  purified  from  her  fault
by  this  excessive  fear.

Thus being entirely purified and freed from every


PURIFICATIONS  AFTER  DEATH.  513

stain,  she  was  released  from  the  prison  of  the  flesh,  and
received  into  eternal  glory.  Many  revelations  concerning
this  were  made  to  Gertrude.

One  of  these  was,  that  when  she  was  brought  to  our
Lord's  throne  of  glory,  He  conferred  this  privilege  on  her,
of  seeming  to  soothe  her,  as  a  mother  would  a  child  when
she  wished  her  to  take  some  bitter  medicine  ;  and  He  did
this  to  console  her  for  some  little  inattention  which  had
been  shown  her.  in  consequence  of  the  religious  being  so
much  occupied  in  attending  to  her  companion,  whom  they
believed  to  be  dangerously  ill.

Our  Lord  then  said  to  her  :  "  Tell  Me,  My  daughter,
what  you  would  wish  Me  to  do  for  the  soul  of  your  com
panion  ;  and  what  consolation  you  desire  Me  to  give  her."
She  replied  :  "  Give  her  the  same  gifts  Thou  hast  bestowed
on  me,  my  dearest  Lord  ;  for  I  cannot  imagine  any  more
consoling."  And  our  Lord  promised  to  comply  with  her
request.

The  other  religious  died  a  month  later.  The  day  after
her  death  she  was  seen  marvellously  adorned,  as  a  reward
for  the  exceeding  innocence  and  simplicity  of  her  life,  and
her  exactness  in  observing  all  the  austerities  of  her  Order  ;
but  she  had  one  stain  from  which  she  needed  purification,
and  this  was  having  received  unnecessary  consolations  in
her  illness.  She  was  purified  in  this  manner  :  She  stood
at  the  gate  of  a  palace,  where  our  Lord  was  seated  on  a
throne  of  glory,  with  a  countenance  so  full  of  sweetness  and
love,  that  no  human  intellect  could  describe  His  beauty.
He  appeared  anxious  to  receive  His  spouse  ;  but  when
she  attempted  to  approach,  she  found  herself  withheld  by
nails,  which  fastened  her  garments  to  the  ground  ;  and
these  nails  were  the  imperfections  she  had  committed  in
her  sickness.  But  Gertrude,  who  was  touched  with  com-

2K


514 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

passion,  prayed  for  her,  and  our  Lord  freed  her  from  this
impediment.  Then  the  Saint  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  Why
was  this  soul  freed  by  my  prayers,  and  not  restored  by  the
prayers  of  those  who  loved  her  so  much,  and  who  prayed
;or  her  with  such  fervour  and  affection  ? "  He  replied  :
'*  Their  prayers  have  been  of  great  service  to  her  ;  but  they
did  not  remove  the  impediment  which  I  have  revealed  to
you,  and  from  which  she  has  been  released  by  your  prayers."
She  continued  :  "  How  hast  Thou  fulfilled  Thy  promise
to  treat  this  person  with  the  same  goodness  as  Thou  didst
manifest  to  her  who  died  first  ?  for  she  has  lived  longer  in
religion,  and  seemed  to  abound  more  in  virtue,  and  yet
the  other  appeared  at  once  in  Thy  presence,  and  in  greater
glory."  He  answered  :  "  My  justice  is  immutable,  for  I
reward  each  according  to  her  works.  She  who  has
laboured  least,  cannot  receive  more  than  she  who  has
laboured  most,  unless  she  has  worked  with  a  purer
intention,  a  more  fervent  charity,  or  a  more  earnest
strife  ;  but  My  mercy  rewards  works  of  supererogation,
such  as  the  prayers  of  the  faithful ;  and  thus  My  re
wards  are  not  always  proportioned  to  the  person's  actual
merit."

Hence  we  may  learn  how  carefully  we  should  avoid
taking  pleasure  in  anything  earthly,  since  this  blessed
soul  was  thus  detained  from  happiness  for  this  imper
fection.  This  was  even  more  fully  manifested  to  St.  Ger
trude  in  another  vision,  in  which  she  saw  her  before  the
throne  of  God,  manifesting  the  same  ardour  as  she  had  done
at  the  gate  ;  not  indeed  desiring  to  approach,  but  appear
ing  as  if  unable  to  move — and  this  was  the  second  obstacle
to  her  happiness  ;  and  even  when  she  was  freed  from  this
her  happiness  was  not  perfectly  complete,  until  our  Lord
placed  a  magnificent  crown  on  her  head,  which  He


THE  DEATH  OF  A  SAINTLY  NUN.  515

aeld  in  His  hand,  and  which  she  received  with  exceeding

joy.

As  St.  Gertrude  beheld  this,  she  said  to  our  Lord :
"  Why  has  this  soul  been  tormented  so  painfully,  where
Thou  art  all-powerful  ?  "  He  replied  :  "  She  has  not  been
tormented,  but  has  waited  with  joy  for  the  consummation
of  her  happiness  :  even  as  a  young  girl  would  wait  for  a
festival  on  which  she  was  to  be  adorned  with  the  orna
ments  which  her  mother  had  prepared  for  her."

After  this,  the  soul  thanked  the  Saint  for  the  prayers
which  she  had  offered  for  her  ;  and  Gertrude  said  to  her  :
"  Why  did  you  not  receive  willingly  some  admonition  which
I  gave  you  during  your  sickness,  although  you  always
seemed  so  much  attached  to  me  ?  "  The  soul  replied  :  "  It
is  for  this  reason  that  your  prayers  have  now  more  power
with  God,  since  they  are  offered  more  purely  out  of
charity."


CHAPTER  VIII.

Of  Sister  G.  's  happy  preparation  for  death — Her  fervent  desires  and
her  glory.

ANOTHER  religious  died  with  us  who,  from  her  childhood,
had  shown  the  most  entire  aversion  to  the  world  and  all  its
attractions.  When  her  agony  came,  she  bade  farewell  to
all  who  were  round  her  with  great  affection,  and  promised
to  pray  for  them  when  she  had  attained  eternal  blessedness,
and  the  inexhaustible  Source  of  all  good.  In  the  agonies  of
her  last  moments,  she  said  to  God  :  "  Lord,  Thou  knowest
the  secrets  of  my  heart,  and  how  1  have  desired  to  perse
vere  in  Thy  service,  even  to  old  age,  and  to  devote  all  my
strength  to  Thee ;  but  now,  since  it  is  Thy  will,  I  come  to


516 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

Thee  :  and  all  my  desires  are  changed  into  a  fervent  longing
to  possess  Thee,  so  that  death  has  even  become  sweet  to
me  ;  yet,  if  it  were  pleasing  to  Thee  that  I  should  continue
in  my  present  state  until  the  day  of  judgment,  I  would
willingly  do  so,  even  were  this  the  first  day  of  the  world's
creation  ;  but  as  I  know  that  Thou  wilt  give  me  rest  to
day,  I  beseech  Thee,  of  Thy  mercy,  and  for  the  glory  of
Thy  name,  that  I  may  continue  to  suffer  until  I  have  paid
the  debts  of  those  souls  whom  Thou  desirest  most  to  release.
A.nd  in  this,  O  Lord,  Thou  knowest  that  I  am  not  con
sidering  my  merits,  but  purely  Thy  glory."

After  this  prayer  and  many  others,  the  Infirmarian  *  asked
the  religious  to  allow  her  to  arrange  her  feet  before  she  died.
She  replied  :  "  I  will  offer  this  sacrifice  myself  to  my  cru
cified  Lord  ;  "  and  as  she  spoke,  she  extended  her  feet
towards  a  crucifix,  f  saying:  "I  offer  Thee  all  the  movements
of  my  feet,  in  union  with  the  ardent  love  with  which
Thou  didst  commend  Thy  spirit  into  the  hands  of  Thy
Father  with  a  great  cry."  Then  she  offered  likewise  the
movements  of  her  eyes,  her  lips,  her  hands,  and  her  heart,
with  great  fervour  and  devotion.  After  this  she  asked  to
have  the  Passion  read  for  her,  showing  them  herself  where
she  wished  them  to  commence  :  SuUevitus  Jesus — "Jesus
lifted  up  His  eyes  to  heaven  "  (John  xvii.  1) ;  saying,  if  they
commenced  at  the  words,  "  Before  the  festival-day  "  (John
xiii.  1),  they  would  not  have  time  to  finish  before  her
death.  At  the  words,  "  And  bowing  His  head,  He  gave  up


"  Magistra  infermorum. "

t  A  crucifix  is  always  placed  at  the  foot  of  the  bed  when  a
religious  has  received  the  last  Sacraments,  aud  is  not  removed  until
after  her  decease.  Thus  her  dying  looks  are  most  likely  to  rest  on
Him  who  died  for  her.


VISION  OF  A  DECEASED  RELIGIOUS.  517

the  ghost"  (John  xix.  30),  she  asked  for  the  crucifix'
then,  kissing  the  Five  Wounds  with  the  tenderest  devotion,
she  gave  thanks  to  God  with  words  of  the  most  heavenly
wisdom  and  devotion,  most  touching  to  all  who  were
present ;  and  then  she  lay  back  on  her  pallet,  and  slept
sweetly  in  the  Lord.

After  her  death,  St.  Gertrude  saw  her  received  by  our
Lord  with  the  tenderest  caresses,  and  specially  rewarded
for  having  renounced  the  world  so  generously  for  His  love.
She  also  heard  the  angelic  choirs  chanting  the  Quce  est
ista*  as  they  conducted  her  in  triumphal  procession  to
heaven.  When  she  was  brought  before  the  throne  of  God,
Jesus,  the  Spouse  of  virgins,  turned  towards  her  with  great
love,  and  said,  "You  are  My  glory."  Then  He  crowned
her  as  a  queen,  and  enthroned  her  near  Himself.

As  Gertrude  prayed  for  her  at  her  interment  on  the
following  day,  she  beheld  her  in  a  state  of  joy  and  glory
which  exceeds  all  human  comprehension.  Then  she  in
quired  what  reward  she  had  received  for  certain  virtues ;
and  the  soul  obtained  for  her  the  grace  of  receiving  some
little  share  of  her  recompense,  and  then  inquired  :  "What
more  do  you  desire  to  know  of  what  I  have  received  ?
The  heavenly  ark,  which  contains  the  plenitude  of  Divine
sweetness,  even  the  Heart  of  Jesus  Christ,  my  Beloved,  with
all  its  treasures,  is  opened  to  me ;  with  one  exception,  which
I  am  deprived  of  because,  when  in  life,  I  reserved  to  myself
the  secrets  of  my  Spouse,  and  did  not  communicate  them  to
others ;  and  this  treasure  is  open  only  to  those  who,  giving
freely,  communicated  to  others  all  the  gifts  of  God."  "  Bnt,"
inquired  Gertrude,  "  what  reply  shall  I  give  to  your  friends


*  "  Who  is  she  that  goeth  up  by  the  desert,  aa  a  pillar  of  smoke  of
aromatic  spices?"  (Cant.  iii.  &)


518 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

and  mine,  when  they  ask  me  of  your  present  state  and
reward,  since  no  human  words  can  express  them  ? "  The
soul  replied :  "  After  you  have  smelt  the  perfume  of  many
flowers,  how  can  you  make  another  person  understand  what
you  have  experienced? — would  you  not  content  yourself
with  saying  that  the  odour  was  very  delicious  ?  Thus,  after
you  have  known  in  spirit  how  great  is  the  felicity  with
which  God  has  rewarded  me,  you  can  only  say  that  I  have
been  rewarded  beyond  all  my  deserts  for  every  good
thought,  word,  or  act  by  my  faithful  and  beloved  Jesus."


CHAPTEK  IX.

The  rewards  which  Brother  S.  received  for  his  fidelity  and
benevolence.

WHEN  Brother  Seq  :  (sic)  was  in  his  agony,  Gertrude,  being
engrossed  in  some  occupation,  omitted  to  pray  for  him  until
she  heard  he  was  dead,  and  then  began  to  reproach  herself
for  her  neglect  of  one  who  had  always  served  the  com
munity  so  faithfully  and  affectionately  as  a  lay  brother ;  she
therefore  besought  our  Lord  to  reward  his  services  abund
antly,  according  to  the  multitude  of  His  mercies.  The
Lord  vouchsafed  to  reply  thus  to  her :  "I  have  rewarded
him  for  his  fidelity  in  three  ways,  in  answer  to  the  prayers
of  the  congregation.  From  his  natural  benevolence,  he  took
the  greatest  pleasure  in  conferring  favours  on  others ;  and  I
have  renewed  in  him  all  this  pleasure  for  each  act  of  kind
ness  which  he  performed.  I  have  also  accumulated  in  his
soul  all  the  gratification  and  joy  which  he  obtained  for
others  by  these  acts  of  benevolence — such  as  giving  a  child
a  toy,  a  poor  person  a  penny,  a  sick  person  some  fruit,  or


HOW  BROTHER  HERMANN  SUFFERED  FOR  OBSTINACY. 519

any  other  relief;  and,  lastly,  I  have  made  him  rejoice
exceedingly,  on  account  of  the  approbation  which  I  have
manifested  for  these  actions ;  and  I  will  soon  supply  all
that  he  needs  to  attain  perfect  felicity."


CHAPTER  X

How  Brother  Hermann  suffered  for  obstinacy — And  of  the  assistance
which  may  be  obtained  in  the  other  life  by  the  prayers  of  the
Saints  and  the  faithful.

As  Gertrude  prayed  for  the  repose  of  the  soul  of  Brother
Hermann,  a  lay  brother  lately  deceased,  she  inquired  what
his  state  was  ;  and  our  Lord  replied  :  "  He  is  now  present,
and  I  have  granted  him  this  favour  in  return  for  the  earnest
prayers  which  have  been  made  for  him — I  have  invited
him  to  assist  at  this  feast/'  Then  she  saw  our  Lord,  as
the  father  of  a  family,  seated  at  a  table,  on  which  were
placed  all  the  prayers,  oblations,  desires,  <fec.,  which  had
been  offered  for  this  brother.  The  soul  stood  sad  and
dejected  at  one  end  of  the  table,  for  he  was  not  yet
sufficiently  purified  to  behold  the  loving  countenance  of
our  Lord ;  but  he  soon  appeared  exceedingly  refreshed
and  comforted  by  what  he  beheld  before  him.

The  Saint  observed  with  some  surprise  that  the  effect  of
these  offerings  came  to  him  directly  from  the  offerings  them
selves,  and  not,  as  usual,  through  our  Lord,  who  generally
appeared  to  her  to  present  the  souls  with  the  offerings  made
for  them  with  great  joy  ;  but  our  Lord  sometimes,  of  His
own  goodness,  and  in  consideration  of  the  merits  of  those
who  prayed  for  him,  gave  him  some  consolation  Himself,
which  imparted  great  satisfaction  to  the  soul.


520 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

The  Blessed  Virgin  sat  as  a  queen  beside  her  Divine
Son,  and  appeared  also  to  place  some  gifts  on  the  table,  as
a  reward  for  the  particular  devotion  which  this  soul  had
for  her  when  on  earth.  The  Saints  to  whom  he  had  been
devout  also  made  offerings  for  him;  and  by  these  things,
and  the  earnest  love  with  which  they  were  presented  before
God,  the  countenance  of  the  brother  became  hourly  more
serene  and  joyful,  and  he  slowly  raised  his  eyes  to  gaze
upon  that  blessed  Light,  which,  when  it  is  once  beheld,
imparts  eternal  joy,  and  causes  all  former  sorrow  to  be
forgotten.

As  Gertrude  observed  that  the  soul  still  continued  in
the  same  position,  she  said  to  him  :  "  For  what  fault  have
you  suffered  most  ]  "  He  replied  :  "  For  self-will  and  self-
opiniatedness ;  for  when  I  did  any  kindness  for  others,  I
would  not  do  as  they  wished,  but  as  I  wished  myself ;  and
so  much  do  I  suffer  for  this,  that  if  the  mental  agonies  of
all  mankind  were  united  in  one  person,  he  would  not  endure
more  than  I  do  at  present."  She  replied  :  "And  what
remedy  will  be  most  efficacious  for  you  ?  "  He  answered  :
"  To  perform  acts  of  the  contrary  virtue,  and  to  avoid  com
mitting  the  same  fault."  "  But,  in  the  meantime,"  inquired
Gertrude,  "  what  will  afford  you  the  greatest  relief  ?  "  He
replied  :  "  The  fidelity  which  I  practised  towards  others
when  on  earth  consoles  me  most.  The  prayers  which  are
offered  continually  for  me  by  my  friends  solace  me  as  good
news  would  solace  a  person  in  affliction.  Each  tone  of  the
chant  at  Mass,  or  in  the  vigils  which  are  said  for  me,  seem
to  me  as  a  most  delicious  refection.  All  that  is  done  for
me  by  others,  with  a  pure  intention  for  God's  glory,  such
as  working,  and  even  sleeping  or  eating,  affords  me  great
relief  and  shortens  my  sufferings,  on  account  of  the  fidelity
with  which  I  laboured  for  others."


HOW  TO  ASSIST  THE  SOULS  IS  PURGATORY.  521

"  But,"  she  continued,  "  what  advantage  do  you  gain
from  our  desire  to  give  you  the  merit  of  all  the  good  works
which  God  enables  us  to  perform  ?"  He  answered  :  "  They
are  of  great  utility  to  me,  for  they  adorn  my  soul."  St.
Gertrude  replied  :  "  But  if  any  person  deferred  the  prayer
which  they  proposed  to  offer  for  you  on  account  of  sickness,
would  you  suffer  from  it  ?  "  The  soul  answered  :  "  Delays,
•which  are  the  result  of  prudence,  do  riot  harm  us  unless
they  are  caused  by  negligence."  She  continued  :  "  Were
you  not  injured  by  our  prayers  during  your  sickness,  as
we  asked  more  earnestly  for  your  recovery  than  for  the
grace  of  a  happy  death  ?  "  The  soul  replied  :  "  This  did  not
harm  me,  for  I  discovered  therein  the  immense  goodness  of
God,  whose  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works  (Ps.  cxliv.
9),  as  He  was  moved  to  do  me  even  more  good  from  be
holding  your  affection  for  me."  "  But  will  tears  shed  for
you  through  human  affection  do  you  harm?"  He  an
swered  :  "  These  tears  are  to  me  as  the  kindness  of  a  friend
who  consoles  his  friend  when  in  affliction.  And  when  1
am  in  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  happiness,  it  will  give  me
as  much  joy  as  the  congratulations  and  applause  of  those  I
love;  and  I  have  merited  this  consolation  by  my  faithfulness
in  your  service,  which  has  gained  your  affection  for  me."

On  another  occasion,  when  St.  Gertrude  recited  the
Pater  noster  for  the  same  soul,  she  observed,  to  her  extreme
surprise,  that  his  sufferings  appeared  greatly  increased
when  she  repeated  the  words  :  "  Forgive  us  our  trespasses,
as  we  forgive  those  who  trespass  against  us."  As  she  in
quired  the  reason  of  this  suffering,  he  replied :  "  When  I
was  in  the  world,  I  offended  God  frequently  by  my  unwil
lingness  to  forgive  those  who  injured  me  in  any  way  ;  and
even  when  I  had  forgiven  them,  I  showed  my  resentment
by  a  grave  manner  when  I  met  them  ;  and  I  suffer  for  thia


522 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

whenever  these  words  are  repeated  for  me."  "And  how
long  will  you  suffer  thus  ?  "  inquired  the  Saint.  The  soul
replied  :  "  I  shall  suffer  until  I  am  entirely  purified  ;  but
henceforward,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  whenever  you  say
this  prayer  for  me,  I  shall  obtain  great  relief  thereby."

When  Mass  was  offered  for  this  soul,  he  appeared  radi
ant  with  light  and  transported  witli  joy.  Then  Gertrude
said  to  oar  Lord  :  "  Is  this  soul  now  entirely  freed  from
its  sufferings  ? "  Our  Lord  answered  :  "  Pie  is  already  free
from  much  suffering,  and  no  human  being  can  form  an  idea
of  his  glory  ;  but  he  is  not  yet  so  perfectly  purified  as  to
be  worthy  to  enjoy  My  presence,  though  he  is  approaching
nearer  and  nearer  to  this  purity  by  the  prayers  which  are
offered  for  him,  and  is  more  and  more  consoled  and  re
lieved."  He  added  :  "  His  obstinacy  in  following  his
own  will,  and  his  disinclination  to  submit  to  the  will  of
others,  have  prevented  him  from  obtaining  relief  from  your
prayers  as  speedily  as  he  would  otherwise  have  done."


CHAPTER  XI.

How  Brother  John  was  rewarded  for  his  labours  and  punished
for  his  faults.

As  it  is  but  just  that  souls  should  be  purified  from  their
stains  before  they  receive  the  reward  of  their  good  works,
yet  it  sometimes  appears  that  Mercy  triumphs  over  Justice,
as  in  the  case  of  Brother  John,  the  Procurator,*  who  worked
so  faithfully  and  laboriously  for  the  good  of  the  convent.
His  good  works  appeared  in  the  form  of  steps,  by  which
his  soul  ascended,  after  its  separation  from  the  body,  satis.

*  "Procurator  curiae."


PURIFICATIONS  OP  LAY  BROTHERS.  523

fying  for  its  imperfections  by  the  pain  which  this  exertion
cost  him  ;  but  the  higher  he  ascended,  the  less  difficulty  he
experienced.  However,  as  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  all  imper
fections  in  this  life,  and  as  the  justice  of  God  punishes  even
the  least  negligence,  when  he  came  to  certain  steps  he  was
seized  with  a  sudden  fear,  which  stupefied  him,  as  if  he
expected  that  the  next  step  would  give  way  beneath  him.

From  this  Gertrude  understood  that  some  of  his  good
works  had  been  tainted  by  some  infidelity,*  from  which  he
was  purified  by  this  fear.  When  other  members  of  the
congregation  prayed  for  him  either  mentally  or  vocally,  she
perceived  that  he  was  assisted  in  his  ascent,  as  if  they
bad  extended  their  hands  to  help  him  upwards,  and  thus
afforded  him  great  consolation.

It  was  also  revealed  to  her,  that  those  who  had  served
her  community,  when  they  expiated  their  faults  after  their
death,  were  relieved  in  consideration  of  the  services  which
they  had  rendered  to  them,  and  that  this  privilege  would
be  continued  as  long  as  the  religious  continued  in  the  same
state  of  fervour.


CHAPTER  XIL

How  the  soul  of  Brother  The  :  was  released  by  prayers  in  honour
of  the  Five  Wounds.

WHEN  Brother  The  :  (sic),  the  lay  brother,  died,who  had
laboured  faithfully  for  the  monastery  for  many  years,  St.
Gertrude  began  to  pray  for  him  as  soon  as  she  heard  of
his  decease.  As  she  was  thus  occupied,  she  beheld  him
in  spirit,  and  his  soul  appeared  black  and  deformed,  as  if

*  "  Aliquam  f  raudem. "


524 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

suffering  intense  anguish  from  some  remorse  of  conscience
As  she  was  exceedingly  moved  to  compassion,  she  com
menced  reciting  five  Pater  nosters,  in  honour  of  onr  Lord's
Five  Wounds,  which  she  embraced  very  tenderly.  At  the
fifth  Pater  nosier,  as  she  approached  the  Wound  of  our
Lord's  Side,  our  Lord  emitted  blood  and  water  from  it,  in
the  form  of  a  vapour ;  and  she  perceived  that  the  soul  was
exceedingly  refreshed  thereby  interiorly,  but  that  he  suf
fered  as  if  from  exterior  wounds,  which  caused  him  intense
puin.  By  the  virtue  of  this  blood  and  water  the  soul  was
then  transported  into  a  garden  of  herbs,  ench  of  which
signified  some  good  work  which  he  had  performed  when  in
the  world  ;  and  on  these  our  Lord  conferred  such  virtue,  in
answer  to  the  prayers  of  the  community,  that  each  of  these
plants  became  medicinal,  and  healed  his  wounds  when
applied  to  them ;  and  she  understood  that  if  the  com
munity  persevered  earnestly  in  their  prayers,  he  would  soon
be  entirely  cured.  She  knew  also  that  there  were  some
herbs,  which  represented  his  imperfect  actions ;  and  when
he  touched  them,  his  sufferings  were  fearfully  increased.

After  his  interment,  as  they  chanted  the  Media  vita  as
usual,  at  the  words,  Sancte  Deus,  sancte  fortis,  sancte  et
immortalis*  when  the  religious  prostrated t  on  the  ground,
the  soul  elevated  itself  towards  heaven  with  exceeding  gra
titude,  appearing  to  prostrate  with  the  community,  thanking
God  for  having  had  the  privilege  of  living  in  so  holy  a
convent,  where  his  labours  had  been  specially  blessed  and
accepted  on  account  of  the  merits  of  those  whom  he  served.
He  declaied  also,  wherever  he  had  lived  before  he  entered


*From  the  Reproaches  chanted  at  the  Adoration  of  the Cross
»n  Good  Friday.

t "  Venias  faceret"


FEARFUL  SUFFERINGS  OF  A  LAY  BROTHER. 625


that  house,  he  had  been  obliged  to  earn  his  bread  by  the
labour  of  his  hands,  but  that  he  had  never  gjdtied  thereby
from  all  his  exertions  as  much  advantage  as  he  had  obtained
in  the  monastery  for  his  soul.


CHAPTER  XIIL

What  Brother  F.  suffered  for  indolence  and  want  of  submission— The
efficacy  of  fervent  prayer.

As  Gertrude  prayed  for  a  lay  brother  lately  deceased,  she
saw  his  soul  under  a  hideous  form,*  as  if  consuming  by  a
devouring  fire.  There  appeared  to  be  something  under  one
of  his  arms  which  caused  him  excessive  anguish,  and  he
was  bent  down  by  an  overpowering  weight,  so  that  he  could
not  keep  himself  upright.  She  learned  that  he  appeared
in  this  horrible  form  because,  although  he  wore  a  religious
habit  when  on  earth,  he  had  failed  to  elevate  himself  to
heavenly  things.  He  was  also  suffering  by  fire  for  many
other  faults.  The  agony  which  he  endured  by  what  was
concealed  under  his  arm  was  a  punishment  for  labouring
to  acquire  temporal  goods  without  the  permission  of  his
superior,  and  even  concealing  what  he  thus  acquired.  The
weight  which  oppressed  him  so  heavily  was  his  disobedi
ence  to  his  superior.

On  another  occasion,  as  she  read  the  Psalms  and  kept
vigil,  she  asked  our  Lord  what  remedy  could  be  applied  to
this  soul.  He  replied  :  "  Although  the  souls  of  the  de
parted  are  much  benefited  by  these  vigils  and  other  prayers,
nevertheless  a  few  words,  said  with  affection  and  devotion,


•"Inipeoiebufonis."


526  THE  BEVEL ATION8  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

are  of  far  more  value  to  them."  And  this  may  easily  be
explained  by  a  familiar  comparison ;  for  it  is  much  easier
to  wash  away  the  stains  of  mud  or  dirt  from  the  hands  by
rubbing  them  quickly  in  a  little  water,  than  by  pouring  a
quantity  of  water  on  them  without  using  any  friction ;  thus,
a  single  word,  said  with  fervour  and  devotion,  for  the  souls
of  the  departed,  is  of  far  more  efficacy  than  many  vigils  and
prayers  offered  coldly  and  performed  negligently.


CHAPTER  XIV.

Those  who  have  persevered  long  in  sin  are  not  easily  benefited  by  th«
prayers  of  the  Church,  and  are  liberated  with  difficulty.

ONCE,  when  a  person  was  told  that  a  relative  had  died,  of
whose  state  she  had  great  fear,  Gertrude  was  so  moved  by
her  affliction,  that  she  offered  to  pray  for  the  soul  of  the
deceased.  Our  Lord  taught  her,  that  the  information  had
been  given  in  her  presence  by  a  special  arrangement  of  His
providence.  She  replied :  "  Lord,  couldst  not  Thou  have
given  me  the  compassion  without  this  ?  "  He  answered  :
"  I  take  particular  pleasure  in  prayers  for  the  dead,  when
they  are  addressed  to  Me  from  natural  compassion,  united
to  a  good  will ;  thus  a  good  work  becomes  perfected."

When  Gertrude  bad  prayed  for  this  soul  a  long  time,
he  appeared  to  her  under  a  horrible  form,  as  if  blackened
by  fire,  and  contorted  with  pain.  She  saw  no  one  near
him  ;  but  his  sins,  which  he  had  not  fully  expiated,  were
his  executioners,  and  each  member  suffered  for  the  sins
to  which  it  had  been  accessory.  Then  St.  Gertrude,  de
siring  to  intercede  with  her  Spouse  for  him,  said  lovingly :
"  My  Lord,  wilt  Thou  not  relieve  this  soul,  for  my  sake  1 "
lie  replied  :  "  Not  only  would  I  deliver  this  soul,  but  thou-


SHE  OBTAINS  GREAT  RELIEF  FOR  A  SOUL.  527

sands  of  souls,  for  your  love  !  How  do  you  wish  Me  to
show  him  mercy  *? — shall  I  release  him  at  once  from  all  his
pains  ? "  "  Perhaps,  Lord,"  she  continued,  "  this  would  be
contrary  to  the  decrees  of  Thy  justice."  He  answered  :  "  It
would  not  be  contrary  to  it  if  you  asked  Me  with  faith  ;
for,  as  I  foresee  the  future,  I  prepared  him  for  this  when  in
his  agony."  She  replied  :  "  I  beseech  of  Thee,  Salvation
of  my  soul,  to  perfect  this  work  according  to  Thy  mercy,
in  which  I  have  the  most  perfect  confidence."

When  she  had  said  this,  the  soul  appeared  under  a
human  form  and  in  great  joy,  but  still  bearing  some  marks
of  his  former  sins ;  however,  the  Saint  knew  that  he  must
be  purified  further,  and  made  as  white  as  snow,  before  he
would  be  fit  to  enter  into  the  Divine  presence;  and  to
effect  this,  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  suffer  as  if  from  the
blows  of  an  iron  hammer ;  furthermore,  he  had  continued
so  long  in  sin,  that  the  process  of  cleansing  his  soul  was
much  prolonged,  and  he  also  suffered  as  if  exposed  for  a
year  to  the  rays  of  a  scorching  sun.  As  the  Saint  marvelled
at  this,  she  was  instructed  that  those  who  have  committed
many  and  grievous  sins  are  not  assisted  by  the  ordinary
suffrages  of  the  Church  until  they  are  partly  purified  by
Divine  justice ;  and  that  they  cannot  avail  themselves  of
the  prayers  of  the  faithful,  which  are  constantly  descending
on  the  souls  in  purgatory  like  a  gentle  and  refreshing  dew,
or  like  a  sweet  and  soothing  ointment.

Gertrude  then  returned  thanks  for  this  favour,  and  said
to  the  Lord  :  "  O  my  most  loving  Lord,  tell  me,  I  beseech
Thee,  what  work  or  prayers  will  most  easily  obtain  mercy
from  Thee  for  those  sinners  who  have  died  in  a  state  of
grace,  so  that  they  may  be  delivered  from  this  terrible  im
pediment  which  prevents  them  from  obtaining  the  benefit
of  the  Church's  prayers.  For  this  soul  appears  to  uie  now,


528 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.


when  relieved  from  this  burden,  as  if  it  had  ascended  from
hell  to  heaven."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  The  only  way  to
obtain  such  a  favour  is  Divine  love  ;  neither  prayers  nor
any  other  labours  will  avail  without  this,  and  it  must  be
such  a  love  as  you  now  have  for  Me  ;  and  as  none  can  have
this  grace  unless  I  bestow  it,  so  also  none  can  obtain  these
advantages  after  death  unless  I  have  prepared  them  for  it
by  some  special  grace  during  life.  Know,  however,  that
the  prayers  and  labours  of  the  faithful  relieve  the  soul
gradually  from  this  heavy  burden,  and  that  they  are  de
livered  sooner  or  later,  according  to  the  fervour  and  pure
intentions  of  those  who  thus  serve  them,  and  according  to

?  O

the  merit  which  they  have  acquired  for  themselves  when
in  this  life."

Then  the  soul  besought  our  Lord,  by  the  love  which  had
brought  Him  down  from  heaven  to  die  upon  the  cross,  that
He  would  apply  these  remedies  to  his  soul,  and  reward  those
who  prayed  for  him  abundantly ;  and  our  Lord  appeared
to  take  a  piece  of  gold  from  him,  and  lay  it  by  to  recom
pense  those  who  had  assisted  him  by  their  prayers.


CHAPTER  XV.

Of  the  oblation  of  the  Host— And  of  prayers  for  the  souls  of

deceased  parents.

ON  the  Sunday  on  which  the  community  prayed  for  the
souls  of  deceased  parents,*  as  St.  Gertrude  offered  the  Host

*In  all  conventual  houses,  the  parents  of  each  religious  are
considered  the  special  charge  of  all.  Mass,  Communion,  and  the
Office  of  the  Dead  are  regularly  offered  for  all  deceased  parents
at  stated  periods  throughout  the  year.  Alas  !  what  do  not  those


PRAYERS  FOR  DECEASED  PARENTS. 529

after  she  bad  received  Holy  Communion  for  the  repose  of
their  souls,  she  beheld  an  immense  number  coming  forth
from  a  place  of  darkness  like  sparks  of  fire ;  some  in  the
form  of  stars,  and  others  in  other  shapes.  Then  she  in
quired  if  this  great  multitude  could  be  all  composed  of  the
souls  of  the  deceased  parents  ;  and  our  Lord  replied  :  "  I
am  your  nearest  Relation,*  your  Father,  your  Brother,  and
your  Spouse  ;  therefore,  My  special  friends  are  also  yours,
and  I  could  not  exclude  them  from  the  commemoration  of
your  parents ;  therefore,  you  behold  them  all  united  toge
ther."  From  henceforward  the  Saint  prayed  constantly
for  those  who  were  specially  beloved  by  our  Lord.  On  the
following  day  at  Mass,  after  the  Elevation,  she  heard  our
Lord  saying  :  "  We  have  eaten  with  those  who  came  and
were  ready  ;  we  must  now  send  to  those  who  could  not
come  to  the  feast."  Another  year,  when  the  bell  tolled  for
the  Office  of  the  Dead,  she  beheld  a  snow-white  lamb,  such
as  the  paschal  lamb  is  usually  painted  ;  and,  from  a  wound
in  its  heart,  a  stream  of  blood  flowed  into  a  chalice,  while
it  said  :  "  I  will  now  be  a  propitiation  for  those  souls  for
whom  a  feast  is  prepared  here  to-day."


unhappy  persons  lose,  both  in  time  and  in  eternity,  who  hinder  the
consecration  of  their  children  to  God  !  and  what  gain  is  theirs  who,
by  placing  them  in  a  holy  and  devoted  community,  secure  the  prayers
of  the  most  saintly  souls  for  their  own  welfare  both  in  this  world  and
the  next  !  Perhaps  only  those  who  are  inmates  of  the  cloister  know
with  what  tender  and  fervent  affection  the  relations  of  each  member
are  prnyed  for  by  all.

>  "  Ego  propiuquissimus  vester  sum."


2L


630 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


CHAPTER  XVI.

Of  the  effect  of  the  Great  Psalter— Of  the  zeal  of  Christ  for  the
salvation  of  souls— And  how  willing  He  is  to  hear  the  prayers  of
those  who  love  Him.

As  the  community  recited  the  Great  Psalter  *  for  the  souls
of  the  faithful  departed,  which  is  believed  to  be  of  great
efficacy  for  them,  St.  Gertrude  prepared  herself  for  Holy
Communion,  and  prayed  for  these  souls  with  great  fervour.
She  then  inquired  of  our  Lord  why  this  Psalter  was  so  ac
ceptable  to  Him,  and  why  it  obtained  such  great  relief  foi
the  souls,  since  the  immense  number  of  Psalms  which  were
recited,  and  the  long  prayers  after  each,  caused  more
weariness  than  devotion.  The  Lord  replied  :  "  The  desire
which  I  have  for  the  deliverance  of  the  souls  makes  it
acceptable  to  Me ;  even  as  a  prince  who  had  been  obliged


*  The  Great  Psalter  is  explained  in  a  succeeding  chapter,  and  the
devotion  of  the  Seven  Masses,  which  is  attributed  to  St.  Gregory  the
Great.  He  was  also  the  institutor  of  the  custom  of  celebrating  Mass
for  thirty  days  after  the  death  or  burial  of  the  faithful.  The  origin
of  this  pious  devotion  is  thus  related  by  the  Mere  Blemer,  in  her
Annee  Benedictine  :  "  A  monk  named  Justine  had  kept  some  money
without  permission.  On  his  deathbed  he  acknowledged  the  faiilt  to
one  of  the  brethren,  who  at  once  informed  St.  Gregory.  The  Abbot
commanded  that  only  one  of  the  brethren  should  attend  him,  and
that  he  should  be  buried  without  holy  rites.  The  severity  of  the
sentence  convinced  him  of  his  fault,  and  he  died  sincerely  penitent.
For  thirty  days  after  his  decease  no  prayers  were  said  for  the  repose
of  his  soul ;  but  at  the  expiration  of  that  period,  Gregory  desired
Mass  to  be  celebrated  for  him  daily  for  thirty  days.  On  the  last  day
Justin  appeared  to  his  brother,  who  knew  nothing  of  the  prayers
which  had  been  offered  for  him,  and  declared  that  he  was  now  released
from  purgatory,  after  enduring  intense  torments.  Hence  the  custom
of  celebrating  Mass  thirty  days  for  the  departed  was  instituted  by  St.
Gregory.


HOW  OUR  LORD  DESIRES  THE  RELEASE  OF  OUR  SOULS. 51


to  imprison  one  of  his  nobles  to  whom  he  was  much  at
tached,  and  was  compelled  by  his  justice  to  refuse  him
pardon,  would  most  thankfully  avail  himself  of  the  inter
cessions  and  satisfactions  of  others  to  release  his  friend.
Thus  do  I  act  towards  those  whom  I  have  redeemed  by  My
Death  and  precious  Blood,  rejoicing  in  the  opportunity  of
releasing  them  from  their  pains,  and  bring  them  to  eternal

joys."

"  But,"  continued  the  Saint,  "is  the  labour  of  those  who
recite  this  Psalter  acceptable  to  Thee  ?  "  He  replied  :
"  My  love  renders  it  most  agreeable  to  Me  ;  and  if  a  soul
is  released  thereby,  I  accept  it  as  if  I  had  been  Myself  de
livered  from  captivity,  and  I  will  assuredly  reward  it  at  a
titling  time,  according  to  the  abundance  of  My  mercy."
Then  she  inquired  :  "  How  many  souls  are  released  by
these  prayers  ?"  He  answered:  "The  number  is  propor
tioned  to  the  zeal  and  fervour  of  those  who  pray  for  them."
He  added  :  "  My  love  urges  Me  to  release  a  great  number
of  souls  for  the  prayers  of  each  religious ;  and  at  each
verse  of  the  Psalm  I  release  many."

As  the  devotion  of  the  Saint  was  marvellously  excited
by  this  revelation,  she  immediately  commenced  the  recital
of  the  Psalter,  though  in  a  state  of  extreme  weakness.
When  she  had  repeated  one  verse,  she  asked  our  Lord
how  many  souls  He  had  released  ;  and  He  replied  :  "I  am
so  touched  by  the  fervour  of  your  love,  that  I  have  re
leased  a  soul  for  each  movement  of  your  tongue."  For
which  may  sweet  Jesus  be  praised  and  blessed  for  endlesa
ages  1


532 THE  EEVELATION8  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


CHAPTER  XVII.

Of  the  severe  sufferings  of  a  soldier  —And  the  efficacy  of  the
Great  Psalter.

ON  another  occasion,  when  Gertrude  prayed  for  the  faith
ful  departed,  she  saw  the  soul  of  a  certain  soldier,*  who,
as  I  believe,  had  been  dead  forty  years,  and  who  appeared
in  a  fearful  state  of  suffering.  He  suffered  as  if  exposed
to  the  very  fire  of  hell,  and  was  unable  to  obtain  the  least
assistance  from  the  prayers  of  the  Church.  As  the  Saint
marvelled  at  this  horrible  apparition,  she  was  instructed
that  the  soul  had  sinned  exceedingly  when  in  the  world
by  pride  and  haughtiness.  The  effects  of  his  sin  were  re
presented  by  horns,  which  covered  his  body ;  and  a  slight
support,  which  appeared  to  prevent  him  from  falling  into
hell,  indicated  some  little  compunction  he  had  manifested
for  his  crimes,  which,  by  the  Divine  mercy,  had  led  even
tually  to  his  repentance  and  salvation.

As  Gertrude  felt  great  compassion  for  him,  she  began
to  recite  the  Great  Psalter,  offering  it  for  his  soul's  repose  ;
and  she  had  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  her  prayers
were  answered.  The  soul  appeared  to  her  freed  from  the
horrible  shape  in  which  he  had  been  tormented,  and  in  the
form  of  a  young  child,  still  bearing  some  marks  of  suffering,
but  as  joyful  as  if  he  had  been  delivered  from  hell  and
taken  up  into  heaven.  He  was  now  placed  with  many  other
souls,  who  seemed  in  the  same  condition.  She  learned
also,  that  in  this  place  he  could  benefit  by  the  suffrages
of  the  Church,  of  which  he  had  been  deprived,  until

*  The  French  has  "  un  certain  gentilhomme  ;  "  but  this  is  incorrec^
as  the  I,at;n  rendering  is  "  militis."


OF  THE  GREAT  PSALTER.  533

Gertrude  obtained  this  deliverance.  The  souls  received  him
with  the  tenderest  affection,  and  appeared  to  prepare  a
place  for  him  amongst  themselves.  This  induced  the  Saint
to  pray  very  earnestly  for  them ;  and  she  perceived  that
our  Lord  removed  them  to  a  place  of  greater  refreshment,
whereby  they  were  much  consoled.

Then  she  said  to  the  Lord  :  "  What  advantage  will  our
community  gain  from  reciting  the  Great  Psalter  ?  "  Our
Lord  replied  :  "  They  will  gain  the  advantage  which  the
prophet  has  declared  in  these  words  :  "  My  prayer  shall  be
turned  into  my  bosom  (Ps.  xxxiv.  13)  ;  My  liberality  and
bounty  will  also  grant  them  the  favour  of  participating  in
the  merit  of  this  Psalter,  whenever  it  is  said,  throughout
the  world."

On  another  occasion  she  said  to  our  Lord  :  "  0  Father
of  Mercies  !  if  any  one  desires  to  recite  this  Psalter  who
cannot  give  the  usual  alms,  nor  obtain  the  celebration  of
the  Masses  which  should  accompany  it,  what  offering  can
be  substituted  for  them  ] "  He  replied  :  "  He  must  com
municate  as  often  as  Mass  should  have  been  said,  and  for
each  alms  say  a  Pater  noster,  with  the  prayer  Deus,  cui
proprium  est*  for  the  conversion  of  sinners,  doing  an  act
of  kindness  also  for  the  same  intention."  Then  the  Saint
continued  thus  :  "  My  God,  let  me  speak  once  more  to
Thee,  and  allow  me  to  ask  if  there  is  any  shorter  prayer
which  thou  wonldst  be  pleased  to  receive  as  a  substitu
tion  for  the  Great  Psalter  ?  "  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  The
Psalter  may  be  said  by  commencing  with  a  prayer  for  par
don  in  these  words  :  In  miione  illius  super  coelestis  laudis^

*  "O  God,  whose  property  is  always  to  have  mercy  and  to  spare  ;  "
first  Collect  after  the  Litany  of  Saints.

f  See  next  chapter,  the  first  prayer  of  which  commences  with  these
words.


534 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.


and  by  adding  the  words,  Ave  Jesu  Christ e  splendor,  after
each  verse.  The  words  of  this  prayer  should  be  said  in
honour  of  the  love  by  which  I  became  Man  to  ransom  men  ;
then  they  should  kneel  in  honour  of  My  Passion,  when
repeating  the  words  which  refer  to  it,  in  union  with  the
love  with  which  I,  the  Creator  of  all  things,  submitted  to
be  judged  and  to  suffer  by  men  ;  then  they  should  stand
when  repeating  the  words  which  commemorate  My  Resur
rection  and  Ascension,  in  union  with  that  omnipotent  power
by  which  I  conquered,  rose  victoriously,  and  ascended  into
heaven,  to  exalt  human  nature  at  the  right  hand  of  My
Father.  After  this  they  should  recite  the  Antiphon  Salva-
tor  mundi,  in  union  with  the  thanksgivings  with  which  all
the  saints  rejoiced  in  My  Incarnation,  Passion,  and  Resur
rection.  Lastly,  they  should  receive  the  Sacrament  of  My
Body  for  each  Mass,  and  recite  the  Pater  noster  and  the
Collect  Deus  cui  for  each  alms,  adding  an  act  of  charity
towards  others.  And  I  will  accept  this  for  the  Great
Psalter."


CHAPTER  XVIII.

Explanation  of  the  Great  Psalter,  and  of  the  Seven  Masses  of
St.  Gregory.

As  the  Great  Psalter  has  not  been  explained  in  the  pre
ceding  pages,  we  subjoin  an  explanation  of  it,  for  the
benefit  of  those  who  may  read  this  work,  taken  from  the
Exercises  of  St.  Gertrude.

First  we  must  kneel  to  ask  pardon  of  our  sins,  saying  :
"  O  most  sweet  Lord  Jesus,  in  union  with  the  celestial
praises  which  the  Ever-Blessed  Trinity  renders  to  Itself
as  alone  worthy  of  praise,  and  which  It  imparts  to  Thy


PRAYERS  OF  THE  GREAT  PSALTER.  535


blessed  Humanity,  Thy  glorious  Mother,  Thy  Angels  and
Saints,  and  then  returns  to  the  abyss  of  Thy  Divinity,  from
whence  it  had  flowed  forth,  I  offer  this  Psalter  to  Thy
praise  and  glory.  I  adore  Thee,  praise  Thee,  bless  Thee,
and  give  Thee  thanks,  for  the  love  of  Thy  Incarnation,
Thy  Birth,  the  hunger,  thirst,  labours,  and  griefs  of  Thy
three-and-thirty  years  on  earth,  and  for  Thy  love  in
giving  Thyself  to  us  in  the  Sacraments  of  the  Altar ;  and  I
beseech  Thee  to  unite  the  recital  of  this  Psalter  to  the
merit  of  Thy  most  holy  life  and  conversation,  which  I  offer

for  the  living  and  the  dead,  for  the  souls  of and  of

;  and  I  pray  Thee  to  supply  for  and  repair  all  that

they  have  neglected  or  omitted  in  praise,  in  thanksgiving,
in  prayer,  in  devotion,  in  good  works,  which  by  Thy  grace
they  might  have  accomplished,  and  in  which  they  have
{'ailed  by  their  negligence."

Secondly,  having  again  implored  pardon,  repeat  this
prayer  :  "  O  most  sweet  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  adore  Thee
and  bless  Thee,  giving  thanks  to  Thee  for  Thy  love  in
redeeming  us  by  Thy  cruel  sufferings,  and  because  Thou,
the  Creator  of  the  universe,  wert  taken  prisoner,  bound,
betrayed,  defamed,  cast  upon  the  ground,  scourged,  crowned
with  thorns,  condemned,  crucified,  slain  cruelly,  and  trans
fixed  with  a  lance,  for  love  of  us.  I  offer  Thee  my  peti
tions  in  union  with  the  love  with  which  Thou  didst  bear
these  outrages  and  indignities  ;  beseeching  Thee,  by  the
merit  of  Thy  most  holy  Passion  and  Death,  to  pardon  the
sins  of  those  for  whom  I  pray,  whether  they  have  offended
against  Thee  by  thought,  word,  or  deed  ;  and  I  implore
Thee  to  offer  to  God  the  Father  all  Thy  pains  and  griefs
of  body  and  soul,  and  the  merit  of  each  pain,  for  those  who
are  still  indebted  to  Thy  justice."

Thirdly,  repeat  the  following  prayer  standing  up  : "I


636 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


adore  Thee,  praise  Thee,  and  bless  Thee,  0  most  sweet
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  giving  Thee  thanks  for  the  victorious
love  by  which  Thou  didst  elevate  our  nature  to  the  right
hand  of  God  the  Father,  after  raising  it  up  victoriously  from
the  tomb  ;  and  I  beseech  Thee  to  grant  the  souls  for  whom
I  pray  a  participation  in  Thy  victory  and  triumphs."

Fourthly,  after  imploring  the  mercy  of  God,  say :
"  Saviour  of  the  world,  save  us  all :  Mary,  holy  Mother  of
God  and  ever  Virgin,  pray  for  us.  We  beseech  Thee,  by  the
intercession  of  all  Thy  holy  apostles,  martyrs,  confessors,
and  holy  virgins,  to  keep  us  from  evil,  and  to  lead  us  to  the
perfection  of  all  good.  O  most  sweet  Lord  Jesus,  I  adore
Thee,  praise  Thee,  and  bless  Thee,  for  all  the  favours  Thou
hast  conferred  on  Thy  blessed  Mother  and  on  Thy  elect,  in
union  with  that  gratitude  with  which  Thy  saints  rejoice  in
Thy  blessed  Incarnation,  Passion,  and  Resurrection  ;  be
seeching  Thee,  by  the  prayers  of  Thy  glorious  Virgin  Mother
and  all  the  saints,  to  supply  the  needs  of  these  souls."

Fifthly,  recite  the  hundred  and  fifty  Psalms  of  the
Psalter  devoutly  and  consecutively,  saying,  after  each  verse  :
"  Hail,  Jesus  Christ,  Splendour  of  the  Father,  Prince  of
peace,  Gate  of  heaven,  Bread  of  life,  Son  of  a  Virgin,
Vessel  of  the  Divinity  !  "  At  the  conclusion  of  each  Psalm,
repeat  the  following  words  kneeling  :  "  Eternal  rest  give  to
them,  O  Lord,  and  let  perpetual  light  shine  upon  them."
Then  say  a  hundred  and  fifty  Masses,  or  have  them  said,
or  offer  as  many  Communions,  or  at  least  fifty  or  thirty.
Give  alms  also  a  hundred  and  fifty  times,  or,  if  this  is
impossible,  say  the  Pater  nosier  and  the  Collect  Dem  cui,
performing  the  same  number  of  acts  of  charity.  In  these
acts  of  charity  may  be  included  the  least  kindness  done  to
another  for  the  love  of  God — such  as  a  kind  word,  or  a
kind  act,  or  even  a  fervent  prayer.


TITE  SEVEN  MASSES  OP  ST.  GREGORY.  637


We  also  consider  it  right  to  say  something  of  the  Seven
Masses  which,  according  to  our  tradition,  were  divinely
revealed  to  St.  Gregory,  as  we  believe  that  they  will  contri
bute  greatly  to  the  relief  of  the  holy  souls,  through  the  merit
and  efficacy  of  the  intercession  of  Christ.  If  possible,
seven  lights  should  be  burned  at  each  Mass,  in  honour  of
the  Passion  of  our  Lord,  and  each  day  fifteen*  Pater  nosters
and  Ave  Marias  should  be  recited,  and  seven  alms  given.
The  Office  of  the  Dead  must  also  be  said.

The  first  Mass  is  the  Domine  ne  longe,  with  the  entire
Passion,  as  on  Palm  Sunday  ;  and  we  should  beseech  our
Lord,  by  the  contempts  which  He  freely  suffered  when
bound  and  betrayed  in  the  hands  of  sinners,  that  He  would
deliver  those  captive  souls  who,  of  their  own  will,  enslaved
themselves.

The  second  Mass  should  be  Nos  autem  gloriari,  as  on
the  third  feria  after  Palm  Sunday  (Tuesday  in  Holy  Week),
in  which  we  must  beseech  our  Lord,  by  His  unjust  con
demnation  to  death,  to  deliver  the  souls  justly  condemned
to  punishment  by  their  own  act.

The  third  Mass  should  be  In  nomine  Domine,  as  on
the  fourth  feria  after  Palm  Sunday ;  and  by  this  we  must
implore  our  Lord,  by  His  guiltless  suffering  when  attached
to  the  cross,  to  deliver  these  souls  from  the  punishment
which  they  have  deserved  by  attaching  themselves  to
unworthy  pleasures.

The  fourth  Mass  will  be  Nos  autem  gloriari,  with  the
Passion  Egressus  est  Jesus,  as  on  Good  Friday,t  when  we
must  beseech  our  Lord,  by  His  most  bitter  Death  and  the


*  "Quindecim."  The  Italian  translations  also  have  "quindeci;"
but  the  French  has  "  sept,"  though  otherwise  tolerably  correct  in  the
tendering  of  this  chapter.

t  Probably  the  Mass  of  the  Presanctified  was  not  said  then. The


538 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.


piercing  of  His  Heart,  to  heal  these  souls  from  the  wounds
and  punishments  of  sin.

The  fifth  Mass  is  the  Requiem,  at  which  we  must  pray
our  Lord,  by  His  holy  burial,  and  by  the  tomb  in  which
He,  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  was  enclosed,  to  deliver
these  souls  from  the  fate  to  which  they  have  condemned
themselves  by  their  sins.

At  the  sixth  Mass,  Resurrexi*  we  must  pray  that  the
souls  may  be  freed  from  every  stain,  and  made  worthy  to
participate  in  His  glory  by  the  merits  of  His  joyful  Resur
rection.

And  at  the  seventh  Mass,  Gaudiamus,  as  on  the  Assump
tion  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  let  us  beseech  our  Lord  and
His  most  holy  Mother,  by  the  joy  which  she  felt  on  the
day  of  her  Assumption,  that  by  her  merits  and  mediation
these  souls  may  be  freed  from  every  restraint,  and  associ
ated  for  ever  to  the  company  of  their  heavenly  Spouse.

If  you  act  thus  towards  others,  be  assured  that  your
prayer  will  return  into  your  own  bosom,  with  abundant
fruit,  at  the  hour  of  your  death.  But  it  will  be  far  more
advantageous  for  you  to  perform  this  devotion  for  yourself
while  you  are  able,  than  to  trust  to  others  after  your
decease  ;  and  God,  who  is  faithful  to  His  promises,  will
keep  it  for  you,  and  return  it  to  you  in  good  time,  through
the  bowels  of  His  mercy,  who  has  visited  us  as  the  Orient
from  on  high  (Luke  i.  78).

Introit  is  that  now  used  on  Holy  Thursday  ;  but  the  same  Passion  ie
read  on  Good  Friday.

*  lutroit  for  Easter1  Sunday.


REWARD  OF  PRAYING  FOR  THE  DEAD. 539


CHAPTER XIX.

The  reward  of  praying  for  the  dead— And  the  punishment  of
disobedience  and  detractions.

ON  one  occasion,  while  Mass  was  celebrating  for  a  poor
woman  who  had  died  lately,  St.  Gertrude  recited  five  Pater
nosters,  in  honour  of  our  Lord's  Five  Wounds  for  the  repose
of  her  soul ;  and,  moved  by  Divine  inspiration,  she  offered
all  her  good  works  for  the  increase  of  the  beatitude  of  this
person.  When  she  had  made  this  offering,  she  immediately
beheld  the  soul  in  heaven,  in  the  place  destined  for  her  ;
and  the  throne  prepared  for  her  was  elevated  as  far  above
the  place  where  she  had  been,  as  the  highest  throne  of  the
seraphim  is  above  that  of  the  lowest  angel.  The  Saint  then
asked  our  Lord  how  this  soul  had  been  worthy  to  obtain
such  advantage  from  her  prayers,  and  He  replied  :  "  She
has  merited  this  grace  in  three  ways:  first,  because  she
always  had  a  sincere  will  and  perfect  desire  of  serving  Me
in  religion,  if  it  had  been  possible  ;  secondly,  because  she
especially  loved  all  religious  and  all  good  people  ;  thirdly,
because  she  was  always  ready  to  honour  Me  by  performing
any  service  she  could  for  them."  He  added  :  You  may
judge,  by  the  sublime  rank  to  which  she  is  elevated,  how
agreeable  these  practices  are  to  Me."

A  certain  religious  died  who  had  always  been  accus
tomed  to  pray  very  fervently  for  the  souls  of  the  faithful
departed  ;  but  she  had  failed  in  the  perfection  of  obedience,
preferring  her  own  will  to  that  of  her  superior  in  her  fasts
and  vigils.  After  her  decease  she  appeared  adorned  with
rich  ornaments,  but  so  weighed  down  by  a  heavy  burden,
which  she  was  obliged  to  carry,  that  she  could  not  approach
to  God,  though  many  persons  were  endeavouring  to  lead
Let  to  Him.


540 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

As  Gertrude  marvelled  at  this  vision,  she  was  taught
that  the  persons  who  endeavoured  to  conduct  the  soul  to
God  were  those  whom  she  had  released  by  her  prayers ;  but
this  heavy  burden  indicated  the  faults  she  had  committed
against  obedience.  Then  our  Lord  said  :  "  Behold  how
those  grateful  souls  endeavour  to  free  her  from  the  require
ments  of  My  justice,  and  show  these  ornaments;  never
theless,  she  must  suffer  for  her  faults  of  disobedience  and
self-will."  The  Saint  replied:  "But,  Lord,  did  she  not
repent  when  admonished  of  these  faults  before  her  death  ?
did  she  not  perform  penance  for  them  ?  and  does  not
Scripture  say,  '  when  man  confesses,  God  pardons  ? '" *  Our
Lord  answered  :  "  If  she  had  not  acted  thus,  the  burden
of  her  faults  would  have  been  so  heavy,  that  she  could
scarcely  ever  have  come  to  Me."

Then  the  Saint  beheld  her  ornament,  which  appeared
like  a  vessel  of  boiling  water  containing  a  hard  stone,  which
must  be  completetly  dissolved  therein  before  she  could
obtain  relief  from  this  torment ;  but  in  these  sufferings  she
was  much  consoled  and  assisted  by  these  souls,  and  by  the
prayers  of  the  faithful.  After  this  our  Lord  showed  St.
Gertrude  the  path  by  which  the  souls  ascend  to  heaven.
It  resembled  a  straight  plank,  a  little  inclined;  so  that  those
who  ascended  did  so  with  difficulty.  They  were  assisted
and  supported  by  hands  on  either  side,  which  indicated  the
prayers  offered  for  them.  Those  who  were  assisted  by  the
angels  had  a  great  advantage,  as  they  repelled  the  dragons
who  flew  round  it,  endeavouring  to  prevent  their  prayers.
The  religious  who  hare  lived  under  obedience  were  assisted
by  a  kind  of  railing,  placed  at  each  side  of  this  plank,  iso
that  they  were  both  supported  and  protected  from  falling.


"  Cum  homo  agnoscit,  Deus  ignoscit.'


8UFFEKINGS  OF  A  RELIGIOUS  FOE  DETRACTIONS. 541

In  some  places  these  railings  were  removed,  as  a  punishment
to  those  superiors  who  had  failed  to  govern  their  subjects
by  the  rules  of  obedience.  But  all  the  souls  who  had  been
truly  obedient  were  assisted  and  supported  by  the  angels,
who  removed  every  impediment  from  their  path.

A  religious,  who  had  listened  to  murmurs  and  de
tractions,  appeared  to  the  Saint  also  under  a  human  form,
and  was  punished  by  having  her  ears  closed  with  a  hard
substance,  which  she  could  only  remove  with  great  diffi
culty  and  by  slow  degrees  ;  her  mouth  also  was  covered
with  a  kind  of  bridle,  for  having  uttered  some  detractions,
so  that  she  could  not  taste  the  Divine  sweetness.  It
was  revealed  to  St.  Gertrude  that  this  person  had  sinned
through  inadvertence  and  ignorance,  and  had  repented  for
her  fault ;  but  that  those  who  persisted  habitually  in  this
sin  would  be  punished  far  more  severely,  and  their  suffer
ings  would  be  so  intense  and  horrible  as  to  make  them
objects  of  aversion  to  the  citizens  of  heaven.

"  Alas,  Lord  !  "  exclaimed  the  Saint  with  tears  ;  "  for
merly  Thou  didst  show  me  the  merit  of  the  saints,  and  now
I  only  see  the  punishments  of  these  souls."  He  replied  :
"  Men  were  then  more  easily  won  by  gifts  of  grace  ;  now
they  must  be  terrified  by  threats  and  judgments."

We  will  now  relate  how  the  Divine  mercy  prepared
Gertrude  for  her  last  eud.


642 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.


CHAPTER  XX.

Of  the  ardent  desire  of  death  which  our  Lord  enkindled  in  the
soul  of  Gertrude.

On  the  Feast  of  Blessed  Martin,*  at  the  Response  JBeatns
Martinus,  the  Saint  cried  out  to  the  Lord  with  burning
desire  :  O  Lord,  when  wilt  Thou  show  me  a  like  favour  ?  "
He  replied:  "I  will  soon  take  you  to  Myself."  These
words  excited  an  exceeding  desire  in  her  soul  to  be  dissolved
and  to  be  with  Christ,  although  she  had  never  felt  the  same
desire  before.  On  the  fourth  feria  (Wednesday)  after
Easter  Sunday,  when  she  had  received  Communion,  she
heard  our  Lord  saying  to  her  :  "  Come,  my  chosen  one,  that
I  may  enthrone  Myself  in  thee."  And  she  knew  that  the
hour  was  approaching  of  which  our  Lord  had  already  spoken
to  her  on  St.  Martin's  Day,  saying,  "  I  will  soon  take  you
to  Myself."  Our  Lord  then  added  :  "  Do  not  live  for
yourself  during  the  short  time  which  remains  for  you,  but
employ  yourself  entirely  in  promoting  My  glory,  according
to  your  own  desires."  The  time  of  her  death  was  deferred,
that  she  might  have  a  longer  preparation  for  it,  according
to  this  instruction.  For  as  Scripture  tells  us  that  delay
increases  our  desires,  so  also  does  it  increase  our  merit.

Once,  when  Gertrude  was  occupied  with  these  thoughts,
on  a  Sunday,  our  Lord  said  to  her  :  "  If  I  granted  you  at
the  moment  of  your  death  the  accomplishment  of  all  the
holy  desires  which  you  have  entertained,  it  would  be  little
in  comparison  with  the  grace  I  am  about  to  confer  on  you.
Choose,"  He  continued,  "whether  you  will  die  now,  or


*  November  11. This  was  probably  the  year  before  the  Saint  dititi.
The  Response  is  the  vL  Response,  ii.  Nocturn.


HOW  SHE  PRAYED  FOR  DEATH.  543

suffer  a  long  sickness  first,  that  you  may  know  something  of
the  infirmities  of  a  protracted  illness."  The  Saint  replied  :
"  Lord,  do  Thou  Thy  holy  will."  He  answered  :  "  You  do
right  to  submit  to  My  decision  ;  and  if  you  consent,  for  My
love,  to  remain  longer  in  the  body,  I  will  establish  My
abode  in  your  heart,  as  a  dove  in  its  nest  ;  and  at  the  same
time  I  will  hide  you  in  My  Heart,  from  whence  I  will  lead
you  forth  to  eternal  joys."

From  this  moment  her  desire  of  departing  this  life  was
moderated,  and  she  heard  these  words  continually  whispered
in  her  soul  :  "  My  dove,  in  the  clifts  of  the  rock  "  (Cant,
ii.  14).  But  her  desire  returned  after  a  time,  and  our  Lord
said  to  her  :  "  What  bride  would  complain  of  the  time  spent
in  adorning  herself  for  her  bridegroom,  or  regret  occasions
of  increasing  his  love  ?  For  after  death  the  soul  cannot
merit,  neither  can  it  suffer  anything  for  God."


CHAPTER  XXI.

How  Gertrude  prayed  for  death.

ONCE,  as  Gertrude  received  Holy  Communion,  she  found
herself  so  weak  that  she  inquired  of  the  Lord  if  her  end
was  near.  He  replied  :  "  When  a  bride  hears  that  there
are  many  messages  from  her  betrothed,  treating  of  the  con
clusion  of  their  alliance,  she  begins  to  prepare  herself  for
it.  In  like  manner,  when  you  feel  inward  suffering  and
illness,  you  should  begin  to  prepare  for  death."  "  But  how
shall  I  know  when  that  desirable  hour  will  come  which
will  release  me  from,  the  prison  of  the  flesh  1"  Our  Lord
answered  :  "  Two  of  the  noblest  angels  of  the  celestial  court
shall  whisper  in  your  ears,  through  golden  trumpets,  this


544 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

melodious  song  :  '  Behold,  the  Bridegroom  cometh  ;  go  ye
forth  to  meet  him.'  "  She  replied  :  "  And,  my  Lord,  in
what  chariot  shall  I  be  taken  to  behold  Thy  blessed  Face  ? "
He  said  :  "  My  love  will  pour  itself  forth  on  you,  and
bring  you  to  My  kingdom."  "  And  whereon  shall  I  repose
in  this  chariot  ? "  Our  Lord  answered  :  "  Your  seat  will
be,  confidence  in  My  mercy,  from  which  you  must  expect
every  good."  "Shall  I  have  reins  to  guide  this  chariot?"
she  inquired.  He  replied :  "  Your  fervent  love  will  supply
this  need."  The  Saint  continued  :  "  As  I  know  what  will
be  necessary  for  the  journey,  I  will  not  inquire  further  ;
but  I  ardently  desire  to  travel  on  this  road."  Our  Lord
answered  :  "  Your  joys  will  exceed  all  you  can  hope  or
desire ;  for  whatever  may  be  imagined  by  My  elect  as  to
their  future  blessedness,  will  be  far  exceeded  by  the
reality."


CHAPTER  XXII.

Of  the  wounds  of  Divine  love  with  which  the  Saint  was
transfixed.

THE  Saint  heard  a  brother  who  preached  in  the  chapel
saying,  amongst  other  things,  that  love  was  a  golden  arrow,
which  obtained  all  that  it  touched  ;  and  that  he  was  a  fool
who  used  this  arrow  to  hunt  after  earthly  pleasures,  when
he  might  use  it  to  obtain  eternal  joys.  Then  Gertrude  ex
claimed,  in  an  ardour  of  love  :  "  Oh,  how  happy  I  should  be
if  I  possessed  this  golden  arrow  !  for  I  would  transfix  Thee
with  it,  my  Beloved,  that  I  might  possess  Thee  eternally."
As  she  said  these  words,  she  beheld  our  Lord  holding  a
golden  arrow  in  His  hand,  and  He  said  to  her  :  "  You  desire
to  wound  Me  j  but  I  will  to  pierce  you,  so  that  your  wound


THE  ARROW  OF  DIVINE  LOVE.  545

may  never  be  healed."  As  He  said  this,  the  arrow  appeared
bent  in  three  places.  By  this  she  understood  that  the
arrow  of  Divine  love  wounds  in  three  ways  :  first,  by  ren
dering  all  earthly  pleasures  distasteful,  so  that  nothing  in
this  world  can  afford  the  soul  pleasure  or  consolation;
secondly,  by  exciting  an  ardent  desire  in  the  soul  to  be
united  to  God,  finding  that  it  cannot  breathe  or  live  apart
from  Him  ;  thirdly,  the  soul  is  so  transfixed  as  to  be  almost
separate  from  the  body,  and  overwhelmed  with  the  torrent
of  Divine  delights.

After  this  revelation  St.  Gertrude  desired,  with  a  merely
human  desire,  to  die  then  in  the  church  where  this  favour
had  been  vouchsafed  to  her  ;  as  if  the  holiness  of  the  place
where  the  body  ceased  to  live  would  have  profited  the  soul.
And  as  she  repeatedly  asked  to  obtain  this  grace,  our  Lord
said  to  her  :  "  When  your  soul  goes  forth  from  your  body,
I  will  hide  you  under  My  paternal  care,  as  a  mother
would  cover  and  caress  her  beloved  child  when  terrified
by  fear  of  shipwreck.  And  as  the  mother  would  rejoice
in  the  joy  of  her  child  when  they  had  reached  land  in
safety,  so  will  I  rejoice  in  your  joy  when  you  are  safe  in
paradise."

Then  the  Saint  gave  thanks  to  God  for  all  His  love,  and
renounced  her  former  desires,  confiding  herself  entirely  to
His  Divine  Providence.


CHAPTER  XXIII.

Our  preparations  for  death  are  not  forgotten  before  God.

ONCE,  as  the  Saint  implored  our  Lord  to  show  her  mercy
at  the  hour  of  death,  He  replied  :  "  How  can  I  fail  to

2  M


546 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

accomplish  what  I  have  already  commenced  ? "  She  replied  :
"  If  Thou  hadst  taken  me  out  of  the  world  when  I  thought,
by  Thy  Divine  communications,  that  my  end  was  near,  I
should  have  supposed  that  I  was  better  prepared  to  die  ;
but  now  I  think  that  my  negligences  have  rendered  me
less  worthy."  Our  Lord  answered  :  "  All  things  are  ordered
by  the  wisdom  of  My  providence  ;  whatever  you  have  once
done  is  always  before  Me,  and  whatever  you  may  add
thereto  will  not  be  lost."

From  this  she  understood  that  preparation  for  death
may  be  made  long  before  the  event ;  as  a  prince  prepares
for  a  long  time  when  about  to  celebrate  his  nuptials.  In
the  preceding  harvest  the  grain  and  the  grape  are  stored
up  in  his  cellars,  so  that  there  may  be  an  abundant  supply
when  they  are  needed  for  use  ;  then  the  event  may  not
be  spoken  of  again  until  the  time  approaches,  although
the  preparations  are  made.  Thus  God  incites  His  elect
to  prepare  for  death,  though  He  may  not  take  them  out
of  the  world  for  some  time.


CHAPTER  XXIV.

Exercises  in  preparation  for  death  — Aud  devotion  to  the  Blessed
Virgin.

THE  following  instructions  were  written  by  St.  Gertrude
as  a  yearly  preparation  for  death  : —

The  first  day  should  be  employed  in  considering  our
state  in  our  last  sickness  ;  the  second  day,  in  preparation
for  our  last  confession  ;  the  third,  in  meditating  on  extreme
unction ;  the  fourth,  in  preparing  for  the  Holy  Viaticum ;
the  fifth,  in  reflections  on  death.

This preparation for  death, which the Saint taught


PREPARATION  FOR  DEATH.  547

others,  was  used  also  by  herself  ;  and  she  communicated
on  the  preceding  Sunday,  to  obtain  grace  to  perform  this
exercise  devoutly,  singing  the  41st  Psalm,  Quemadmodum,*
for  this  intention,  with  the  Hymn  Jesu  nostra  redemptio,
that  her  soul  might  be  perfectly  united  to  our  Lord.  Then
our  Lord  said  to  her  :  "  Unite  yourself  to  Me,  as  the  pro
phet  Eliseus  united  himself  to  the  child  t  whom  he  raised
to  life."  "  But,  Lord,  how  shall  I  accomplish  this  ? "  inquired
the  saint.  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Join  your  hands  to  Mine  ;
that  is,  recommend  to  me  all  the  works  of  your  hands  :
place  your  eyes  on  Mine  ;  that,  is  unite  the  movements  of
your  body  to  the  movements  of  Mine.  Thus  your  mem
bers  will  become  one  with  Mine,  and  will  participate  in
their  innocence  and  sanctity,  so  that  henceforth  they  will
move  only  for  My  glory."  And  this  alliance,  which  the
Saint  formed  with  our  Lord,  was  like  a  golden  zone,  which
united  her  soul  indissolubly  to  her  Beloved.

When  Gertrude  approached  the  Holy  Communion,  she
remembered  that  she  had  not  been  able  to  confess  on  the
preceding  day,  though  she  had  ardently  desired  to  do  so  ;
and  she  besought  our  Lord  to  pardon  her  sins  and  negli
gences.  And  as  she  prayed  thus,  she  beheld  our  Lord
uniting  her  to  Himself  with  chains  of  gold,  so  that  her  soul
appeared,  as  it  were,  enclosed  in  His  Divinity,  as  a  precious
stone  would  be  in  a  golden  casket.

The  next  day,  as  she  found  her  illness  increasing,  she
read  the  Psalm  Quemadmodum  twice,  with  the  Hymn  Jesu
nostra  redemptio,  in  honour  of  the  union  of  the  Divinity


*"As  the  hart  panteth  after  the  fountains  of  water,  so  my  soul
panteth  after  Thee,  O  God  "  (Ps.  xli.)

f  "  And  Eliseus  went  up  and  lay  upon  the  child,  and  he  put  his
mouth  upon  his  mouth,  and  his  eyes  upon  his  eyes,  and  his  handr*
upon  his  hands  "  (4  Kings  iv.  34).


548 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

and  Humanity  in  the  person  of  Christ  for  our  salvation.
At  the  same  time,  these  chains  appeared  to  unite  her  still
more  closely  to  her  Lord.  The  third  feria  she  repeated
these  devotions  three  times,  in  honour  of  the  union  of
Christ  Jesus  with  the  Ever-Blessed  Trinity,  by  which
human  nature  is  so  glorified.  On  the  fourth  feria — the  day
appointed  in  her  exercises  for  meditation  on  death — she
beheld  her  soul  fastened  to  the  crucifix,  like  a  jewel  incased
in  gold  ;  and  she  perceived  that  golden  vine-leaves  came
forth  from  the  cross,  the  beauty  of  which  was  reflected  on
the  gold.  From  this  she  understood  how  pleasing  the  Pas
sion  of  Christ,  in  union  with  which  she  had  offered  her
Bufferings  to  our  Lord,  had  rendered  her  soul  to  the  Blessed
Trinity.  On  the  fifth  feria,  as  she  confessed  her  sins  to
her  Spouse  in  the  bitterness  of  her  heart,  she  knew  that  He
pardoned  them,  for  she  beheld  a  number  of  precious  stones
in  the  golden  vine-leaves.  On  the  sixth  feria  (Friday),  as
she  meditated  on  extreme  unction,  our  Lord  appeared  to
her,  and  anointed  her  eyes,  ears,  and  lips  with  a  liquor
which  came  from  His  inmost  Heart ;  and  this  precious
liquor  also  communicated  to  the  different  members  of  her
body  the  merits  of  the  deified  Body  of  Christ.

On  Saturday,  as  she  prepared  in  anticipation  for  the
Holy  Viaticum,  at  the  Adorable  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass,  she
saw  four  angelic  princes  surrounding  the  throne  of  the
Divine  Majesty.  Two  of  these  angels  placed  themselves  at
each  side  of  our  Divine  Lord,  and  the  other  two  came  to
the  Saint  and  conducted  her  to  her  Spouse.  Our  Lord  re
ceived  her  with  the  greatest  tenderness,  and  then  united  her
to  Himself  by  the  life-giving  Sacrament  of  the  Altar.  The
Saint  occupied  herself  on  Sunday  by  repeating  the  prayers
which  she  had  composed  as  a  preparation  for  death,  offer
ing  our  Lord  each  member  of  her  body  as  dead  to  the


A  MYSTIC  TREE.  549


world,  and  desiring  henceforth  to  exist  only  for  His  eternal
praise  and  love.  After  this  He  blessed  her  with  His  own
Hand,  and  marked  the  sign  of  the  cross  upon  each  member
of  her  body,  which  appeared  to  glorify  them  marvellously,
and  to  free  them  from  every  stain.

At  the  Elevation  of  the  Host  she  offered  her  heart  to
our  Lord,  that  He  might  make  it  die  to  the  world ;  be
seeching  Him,  by  the  innocence  of  His  most  holy  life,  to
free  it  from  every  stain  of  sin,  and,  by  the  incomprehensible
love  which  united  God  to  Man  in  the  Divine  Person,  that  He
would  prepare  her  to  receive  His  gifts.  Our  Lord  then  ap
peared  to  her,  and  opened  His  Heart  with  both  hands,  from
which  so  ardent  a  fire  poured  forth  that  the  soul  of  the
Saint  was  completely  dissolved  thereby.  From  this  union
of  her  heart  with  the  Heart  of  her  Spouse,  a  tree  sprang
forth,  adorned  with  gold  and  silver  leaves;  and  our  Lord
said  to  her  :  "  This  tree  proceeds  from  My  union  with  you  ;
My  Divinity  is  figured  by  the  golden  leaves,  and  your  soul
by  the  silver  leaves,  which  nre  enclosed  therein."  As  the
Saint  prayed  for  those  who  were  committed  to  her  care,
she  saw  the  tree  producing  ripe  and  beautiful  fruit;  and
the  branches  hung  down  in  such  a  manner,  that  these  per
sons  could  gather  this  fruit  as  they  pleased.

After  this,  feeling  much  exhausted,  she  lay  back  on
her  pallet,  saying  :  "  I  offer  this  rest  to  Thee  as  if  it  were
given  to  Thy  sacred  Humanity."  He  replied :  "  And  I
will  supply  by  My  mercy  for  all  your  sins  of  human
frailty."

Then  she  inquired  if  her  present  weakness  would  be
the  means  of  bringing  her  to  eternal  rest ;  and  our  Lord
replied  :  "  I  am  leading  you  nearer  to  Me  by  this  infirmity.
For  when  a  king  is  about  to  espouse  a  princess  who  lives
in  a  distant  land,  he  sends  his  officers  and  courtiers  to  con-


550 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

duct  her  to  him  with  all  possible  pomp  and  magnificence ;
and  they  are  charged  to  spare  neither  pains  nor  expense  to
render  the  journey  easy  and  agreeable  to  her.  When  she
has  arrived  at  her  destination,  he  places  her  in  one  of  his
royal  palaces,  and  gives  her  a  ring  as  a  pledge  of  espousals.
Here  she  remains,  attended  with  all  honour,  until  the
nuptial  day,  when  the  king  comes  for  her  himself,  and
conducts  her  to  his  imperial  throne.

"  Now  I,  your  Lord  and  your  God,  am  the  true  and
faithful  Lover  of  your  soul ;  and  I  share  in  all  the  pains
of  body  or  soul  with  which  you  are  afflicted,  and  send  My
saints  to  attend  you  and  congratulate  you  on  this  royal  road
which  leads  you  to  Me.  The  instruments  of  music  and  re
joicings  are  your  sufferings,  which  resound  in  My  ears  as  an
harmonious  concert,  moving  Me  to  compassionate  you,  and
inclining  My  Heart  more  and  more  towards  you.  Then,
when  you  arrive  at  your  journey's  end,  I  will  meet  you  and
espouse  you  before  all  My  saints  with  a  holy  embrace,  in  the
Sacrament  of  Extreme  Unction.  The  sooner  you  receive  this
Sacrament,  the  greater  will  be  your  happiness  ;  for  then  I
will  approach  you  nearer  and  nearer,  so  that  your  whole  being
will  be  enraptured  with  the  blessedness  of  My  embrace  ;  and
I  will  convey  you  Myself  across  the  dark  river  Death,  im
mersing  you  in  the  ocean  of  My  Divinity,  where  you  will
become  one  spirit  with  Me,  and  reign  with  Me  for  endless
ages.  Then  you  will  be  consoled  for  all  the  trials  and
sufferings  you  have  borne  when  on  earth,  with  the  same
harmonious  music  and  the  same  delights  as  those  which
now  enrapture  My  deified  Humanity."

Our  Lord  then  continued  thus  :  "  If  any  one  desires  a
similar  visit  in  his  last  moments,  let  him  endeavour  daily
to  clothe  himself  with  My  perfect  lite,  and  to  imitate  it
continually;  let  him  learn  to  subdue  his  flesh,  and  to


SHE  IS  RAVISHED  IN  ECSTASY.  551


renounce  his  own  will  entirely  into  My  hands  ;  let  him  live
by  the  Spirit,  and  believe  that  I  will  seek  his  good  in  all
things  by  My  paternal  providence.  Let  him  offer  Me  every
adversity  and  contradiction,  and  for  each  I  will  reward  him
with  rich  jewels  and  precious  gifts.  If,  through  human
frailty,  he  seeks  himself  in  anything,  let  him  immediately
do  penance,  and  once  more  resign  himself  to  My  will,  and
I  will  receive  him  with  the  right  hand  of  My  mercy,  and
lead  him  with  ineffable  honour  and  glory  to  the  kingdom
of  eternal  light."

On  the  following  Sunday,  as  Gertrude  solemnised  the
feast  of  her  eternal  joy,  and  the  happy  moment  when  she
should  appear  before  the  Ever-Blessed  Trinity  released
from  exile,  she  was  ravished  in  ecstasy,  and  beheld  all
the  merits  and  joys  of  each  choir  of  angels  and  of  the
different  saints ;  and  as  her  heart  overflowed  with  joy  in
considering  their  blessedness,  she  returned  the  most  fer
vent  thanks  to  God  for  it.  She  also  thanked  Him  for  all
the  graces,  gifts,  and  glory  which  He  had  bestowed  on  the
Blessed  Virgin  His  Mother ;  beseeching  her,  for  the  love
of  her  Son,  to  offer  her  virtues  for  her  to  the  King  of
virtues.

Then  the  Queen  of  Heaven,  moved  by  her  prayers,
offered  her  virginal  purity  for  her,  as  a  white  garment ;
her  peaceful  humility,  as  a  green  tunic  ;  and  her  unfading
charity,  as  a  purple  mantle.  When  our  Lord  had  clothed
her  in  these  robes,  the  saints,  rejoicing  in  her  beauty,  prayed
that  she  might  be  adorned  with  their  graces  and  virtues
also.  And  He  placed  a  necklace  on  her,  adorned  with  pre
cious  stones,  each  of  which  seemed  to  attract  the  different
graces  which  had  been  asked  for  her.  But  it  must  not
be  understood  from  this  that  any  one  can  receive  from
others  what  they  have  failed  to  obtain  for  themselves ;


552 THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

nevertheless,  some  souls  may  receive  for  their  gratitude
what  others  fail  to  obtain.


CHAPTER  XXV.

How  our  Lord  Jesus  and  all  the  Saints  console  the  souls  of  the  just
in  their  last  moments — And  with  what  love  our  Lord  communi
cates  Himself  to  His  elect  in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar.

As  Gertrude  reflected  on  death,  she  exclaimed  to  our  Lord  :
"  How  happy  and  how  honoured  are  they  who  merit  to  be
consoled  and  strengthened  by  Thy  saints  in  their  last  mo
ments  !  I  am  unworthy  of  this  consolation,  for  I  have  never
honoured  Thy  saints  worthily  ;  therefore  I  cannot  expect
consolation  from  any  saint,  save  from  Thee  alone,  the  Sanc-
tifier  of  all  the  saints."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  You  will  not
be  deprived  of  this  consolation  because  you  expect  all  from
Me  ;  on  the  contrary,  My  saints  will  love  and  minister  to
you  all  the  more  for  it,  and  at  the  moment  when  men
usually  feel  most  fear  and  anxiety,  I  will  send  My  Saints  to
assist  you,  and  I  will  come  to  you  Myself  in  all  the  glory
and  beauty  of  My  Divinity  and  Humanity."  She  replied  :
"  And  when  wilt  thou  accomplish  Thy  promise,  and  bring
me  from  this  land  of  exile  to  the  land  of  rest  ?  "  Our  Lord
nnswered  :  "  Will  a  royal  bride  complain  of  the  applause  of
the  populace  if  it  only  increases  the  love  of  her  bridegroom
for  her  ?  "  "  But,  Lord,"  continued  the  Saint,  "  how  can
this  apply  to  me,  who  am  the  vilest  of  Thy  creatures  1 "
He  replied  :  "  Know  that  I  communicate  Myself  to  you
entirely  in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar,  which  after  this  life
cannot  be ;  and  in  this  union  there  is  more  blessedness  and
delight  than  in  any  human  love,  for  that  is  often  vile  and


GRACES  PROMISED  TO  OTHERS  AT  HER  DEATH. 553

transitory  ;  but  the  sweetness  of  this  union  ennobles  and
dignifies  the  soul."

Our  Lord  had  often  incited  the  Saint  to  desire  her
deliverance  from  the  flesh  ;  and  now  she  became  seriously
ill,  so  that  the  physicians  had  no  hope  of  her  recovery.
This  intelligence  filled  her  with  joy,  and  she  said  to  our
Lord  :  "  Although  I  desire,  above  all  things,  to  be  de
livered  from  the  prison  of  the  flesh,  and  united  to  Thee,
nevertheless,  if  it  pleases  Thee,  I  would  willingly  remain  oa
earth  and  endure  the  severest  suffering,  even  until  the  day
of  judgment."  Our  Lord  replied  :  "  Your  good-will  so
moves  My  Divine  benignity,  that  I  accept  it  as  if  you  had
accomplished  what  you  offer."  As  He  said  this,  a  marvel
lous  joy  appeared  in  His  Divine  countenance,  which  im
parted  a  new  and  ineffable  gladness  and  consolation  to  all
the  saints.  Then  He  continued  :  "  In  that  hour  when  I
draw  you  entirely  to  Myself,  the  mountains — that  is,  the
saints — shall  drop  sweetness  ;  the  heavens  shall  pour  forth
honey  on  the  earth,  from  the  abundance  of  your  beatitude  ;
the  hills  shall  flow  with  milk  and  honey — that  is,  I  will  at
tract  carnal  and  earthly  souls  by  My  grace,  for  your  sake."

Then  she  began  to  make  fervent  thanksgiving  for  these
favours,  and  to  excite  her  gratitude  further  by  reflecting
on  many  graces  which  our  Divine  Lord  had  promised  her.
And  these  favours  were  :  first,*  a  promise  that  she  should
die  of  Divine  love,  and  that  her  death  should  be  caused
thereby,  even  as  love  caused  the  Death  of  the  Son  of  God
on  the  cross  ;  second,  that  in  the  adorable  counsels  of  the
Ever-Blessed  Trinity  the  Holy  Spirit  had  prepared  to  pre
side  at  her  death,  and  order  all  that  passed  within  her  ;
third,  that  all  who  assisted  her  in  her  last  illness,  or  even


Item.'


554  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

desired  to  do  so,  should  themselves  be  assisted  and  protected
by  Divine  love  in  their  last  moments  ;  fourth,  that  our  Lord
would  bestow  as  many  graces  on  them  as  it  was  possible
for  men  to  receive  ;  fifth,  that  in  the  hour  of  her  happy  de
parture  an  immense  number  of  sinners  should  be  converted
to  true  penance  by  the  infinite  and  gratuitous  mercy  of
God ;  sixth,  that  an  infinite  number  of  souls  should  be  de
livered  from  suffering,  and  obtain  an  increase  of  merit  and
beatitude,  and  enter  with  her  into  the  celestial  kingdom  ;
seventh,  that  whoever  besought  our  Lord  to  bestow  any
grace  on  her  should  be  rewarded  by  receiving  the  same
grace  themselves  ;  eighth,  that  whoever  returned  thanks  to
God  for  the  graces  bestowed  on  her  should  receive,  sooner
or  later,  according  to  the  decrees  of  His  providence,  all  they
desired  for  their  salvation,  if  they  observed  the  following
conditions — (1)  to  praise  the  eternal  love  of  God,  who  chose
her  from  all  eternity;  (2)  to  thank  Him  for  having  drawn  her
so  sweetly  to  Himself;  (3)  for  having  united  her  to  Him
self  so  intimately  and  familiarly ;  (4)  for  having  blessedly
consummated  His  work  in  her,  and  for  having  granted  all
her  petitions  ; — ninth,  that  our  Lord  had  sworn  to  Gertrude
by  the  truth  of  His  Passion,  and  confirmed  His  promise  by
the  seal  of  His  Death,  that  whoever  prayed  for  her  duringher
life,  at  her  death,  or  after  her  death,  should  receive  the  most
abundant  graces  and  favours,  if  they  had  also  the  intention
of  including  in  this  prayer  all  for  whom  God  wished  them  to
pray,  if  they  commenced  their  petition  by  offering  it  through
the  merit  of  the  infinite  love  which  drew  Him  down  from
heaven  to  earth  to  accomplish  the  work  of  our  salvation,
and  concluded  it  by  offering  it  in  union  with  His  Death,
and  the  glory  and  triumph  with  which  He  presented  His
adorable  Humanity  to  the  Father  on  the  day  of  His  glorious
Ascension.  Father,  He  promised  that  those  who  prayed


A  MYSTICAL  COUCH  AND  A  MYSTICAL  GARDEN. 555

thus  for  her  should  receive  all  the  graces  which  they  had
asked  for  her,  as  if  they  had  made  themselves  worthy  of
obtaining  them.


CHAPTER  XXVI.

Of  the  sweet  repose  which  the  Saint  eujoyed ;  and  how  she  satisfied
for  her  negligences.

SOME  time  after  this  our  Lord  Jesus  appeared  to  her,  and
seemed  as  if  He  was  preparing  a  couch  on  which  she  might
repose ;  but,  instead  of  a  soft  bed  of  feathers,  He  displayed
before  her,  as  it  were,  all  the  sufferings  which  He  had
endured  on  the  cross  for  the  salvation  of  men,  that  its
salutary  fruit  miirht  prepare  her  soul  for  eternal  life.  The
pillow  which  He  offered  to  support  her  head  was  the  dolours
of  His  most  sweet  Heart  when  He  hung  upon  the  cross,  and
remembered  how  unavailing  all  His  sufferings  would  be  for
BO  many  souls.  As  a  mattress  for  this  couch,  He  offered
her  His  abandonment  and  contempt  in  His  Passion,  the
infidelity  of  His  friends  towards  One  who  was  of  all  friends
the  most  faithful,  His  cruel  binding,  mocking,  and  contempt.
Lastly,  He  offered  her  the  merits  of  His  most  precious
Death  as  a  coverlet,  that  she  might  be  sanctified  thereby,
according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  His  Divine  mercy.

As  Gertrude  reposed  therein  sweetly,  the  Heart  of  our
Lord,  in  which  all  treasures  are  hidden,  appeared  to  her
as  a  mystical  garden  of  exceeding  beauty,  in.  which  all
the  desires  of  His  holy  Humanity  were  represented  under
the  figure  of  an  exquisite  verdure,  and  all  His  thoughts  as
violets  and  lilies.  The  virtues  of  our  Divine  Lord  were
figured  by  a  fruitful  vine,  like  that  of  Engaddi,  whose
grapes  were  of  so  delicious  a  sweetness.  This  vine


556 THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

extended  its  branches  and  leaves  round  the  Saint,  affording
her  the  most  agreeable  shade  and  refreshment ;  and  our
Lord  gave  her  fruit,  that  is,  His  virtues,  from  the  different
branches  of  this  tree,  causing  her  also  to  drink  the  delicious
wine  which  it  produced.

Then  she  beheld  three  pure  fountains  springing  forth  in
the  Divine  Heart,  which  emptied  themselves  miraculously
into  each  other;  and  our  Lord  said  to  her:  "  You  will
drink  from  these  rivulets  so  efficaciously  at  the  hour  of
your  death,  that  your  soul  will  attain  such  perfect  health
and  such  consummate  perfection  as  to  be  unable  to  remain
longer  in  the  body ;  in  the  meantime,  let  this  delightful
vision  serve  for  your  spiritual  adornment."  Then  she
besought  the  Eternal  Father  to  look  upon  her  for  the  sake
of  the  holy  Humanity  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  purify
her  from  all  sin.  and  to  adorn  her  with  His  Divine  virtues;
and  she  knew  that  her  prayers  were  heard.  After  this  she
prayed  thus  :  "  O  most  loving  Father,  give  me  Thy  most
loving  benediction  ; "  and  the  Lord  extended  His  omnipotent
Hand,  and  blessed  her  with  the  sign  of  the  Cross.  Then
this  benediction  appeared  like  a  golden  tent,  which  covered
the  couch  already  mentioned  ;  and  she  saw  also  many  instru
ments  of  music  placed  therein,  which  signified  the  joys  she
obtained  through  the  Passion  of  Jesus  Christ.

These  heavenly  delights  changed  her  sufferings  into
joy,  and  as  she  now  occupied  herself  entirely  with  her  own
perfection,  she  began  to  compose  some  short  and  fervent
prayers,  to  supply  for  her  negligences  in  reciting  the
Canonical  Hours,  the  Office  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  the
Office  of  the  Dead.  She  also  desired  to  supply  for  her
deficiencies  in  certain  virtues,  such  as  the  love  of  God  and
her  neighbour,  humility,  chastity,  obedience,  consideration
for  others,  thanksgiving,  rejoicing  or  grieving  with  others,


HER  PREPARATION  FOR  DEATH.  557

<fec.  Then  she  endeavoured  to  supply  for  the  negligences
of  which  she  believed  herself  guilty  in  the  Divine  praises,
in  thanksgiving,  in  prayers,  and  in  reparation,  not  only  for
herself,  but  also  for  the  whole  Church.

Nor  was  she  satisfied  with  this  reparation  ;  for  she
desired  for  each  fault,  and  for  each  member  of  her  body,  to
recite  twenty- five  short  prayers,  adding  at  the  end  of  every
petition  the  Pater  noster  and  Ave  Maria,  for  which  she
had  a  special  devotion  ;  and  these  prayers  not  only  moved
the  heart  of  man,  but  even  touched  the  very  King  of  Glory,
who  rejoiced  thereat  exceedingly  ;  and  although  the  Saint
had  a  most  perfect  confidence  in  the  promises  related  above,
which  our  Divine  Lord  had  made  to  her,  nevertheless  her
humility  urged  her  to  labour  for  their  fulfilment,  by  her
own  earnest  cooperation  with  Divine  grace.  She  also
perused  her  holy  Rule  with  extreme  diligence,  seeking  to
supply  for  her  omissions  in  its  observance  by  her  prayers,
sighs,  and  tears ;  so  that  she  not  only  satisfied  for  any  fault
she  might  have  committed  therein,  but  obtained  also  new
ornaments  and  graces  from  God.  Then  she  applied  all
the  powers  of  her  soul  and  body  to  higher  things,  praying
with  exceeding  fervour,  ardently  desiring  a  perfect  and
eternal  union  with  her  God,  uniting  her  devotion  to  the
mutual  love  and  ineffable  gratulations  of  the  Ever-Blessed
Trinity,  and  repeating  the  verse,  u  When  wilt  Thou  come  ?
my  soul  thirsteth  for  Thee,"  with  the  words,  "  O  most
loving  Father."  (The  last  words  she  had  learned  in  a
marvellous  manner,  and  she  knew  that  they  were  most
acceptable  to  God.)

She  repeated  these  prayers  continually,  unless  her
bodily  weakness  was  so  great  as  to  prevent  it ;  and  she
offered  the  reparation  also,  if  her  soul  was  not  attracted
to  a  more  sublime  prayer.  The  consolations  vouchsafed  to


f>58  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTKUDB.


her  were  so  abundant,  that  they  were  imparted  even  to
those  who  attended  her  ;  so  that  many  sought  to  be  near
her  to  obtain  her  instructions,  and  to  learn  these  prayers
from  her.  Hence,  most  fervent  prayer  was  made  for  her
recovery,  or  even  that  her  death  might  be  retarded  ;  and
God,  who  hears  the  desires  of  the  humble,  granted  this
favour,  and  spared  her  a  little  longer  to  those  who  loved
her  so  tenderly  ;  affording  her  also  an  opportunity  of  in
creasing  her  merit.

The  verse  abovementioned  is  here  subjoined—

'*  Amongst  a  thousand  still  desired,

When  wilt  Thou  come,  O  Jesus  mine  ?
When  wilt  thou  fill  my  soul  with  Thee,
Which  knows  no  joy  on  earth  but  Thine  ?

"  Oh,  come!  oh,  come!  most  mighty  King;

Father  of  boundless  power  and  praise  :
Thy  joy  is  light,  Thy  light  is  joy.
Oh,  hasten,  Lord,  life's  passing  days.

"  Thou  thinkest  thoughts  of  tenderest  love,

Sparing  our  sins,  and  giving  place
To  mercy  ;  sweetest,  dearest  Lord,
Oh,  come  ;  I  long  to  see  Thy  Face."  *


*  "  Desiderate  millies,

Mi  Jesu,  quando  venies  ?
Me  Isetana  quando  facies  ?
De  te  me  quando  saties  ?
Veni,  veni,  Rex  optime  !
Pater  immensse  glorise,
Effulge  clare  laetius,
Jam  expectamus  ssepius.

"  Tua  te  cogat  pietas,  ut  mala  nostra  superis  parcendo ;  et  vott
compotes  noe  tuo  vultu  saties,"


HER  DEVOTION  TO  MARY.  5,59


CHAPTER  XXVII.

How  the  Saint  supplied  for  her  negligences  in  the  service  of  the
Blessed  Virgin  Mary.

As  the  Saint  occupied  herself  in  making  these  reparations,
she  grieved  exceedingly  for  her  omissions  in  devotion  to
the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  she  besought  our  Lord  to  offer  her
prayers  Himself  to  His  Blessed  Mother.  Then  the  King
of  Glory  arose  and  offered  her  His  deified  Heart,  saying  :
"  Behold,  My  beloved  Mother,  I  present  you  My  Heart,
which  abounds  in  all  beatitude,  and  I  ofier  you  all  the
Divine  affections  by  which  I  predestinated,  created,  and
sanctified  you  from  all  eternity  to  be  My  Mother  ;  with  a
the  love  and  tenderness  which  I  manifested  to  you  on
earth,  when  you  carried  Me  in  your  bosom  and  nourished
Me  with  your  milk,  and  the  fidelity  with  which  I  subjected
Myself  to  you,  as  a  Son  to  a  Mother  ;  and  especially  My
tenderness  towards  you  in  the  hour  of  death,  when  I  pro.
vided  you  with  a  faithful  guardian,  forgetting  My  own
sorrows.  I  offer  you  the  glory  and  honour  to  which  I
elevated  you  on  the  day  of  your  Assumption  into  heaven,
when  you  were  exalted  above  all  the  choirs  of  saints  and
angels,  and  proclaimed  Queen  and  mistress  of  heaven  and
earth.  I  offer  you  once  more  all  these  tokens  of  My  love,
as  if  I  presented  them  to  you  anew,  in  favour  of  My
spouse,  that  you  may  overlook  her  negligences  in  your
regard,  and  assist  her  at  the  hour  of  her  death  with  all
the  tenderness  of  a  mother."

Then  the  Blessed  Virgin  accepted  this  charge  with  the
greatest  pleasure,  saying  :  "  Grant,  my  beloved  Son,  when
I  receive  Thy  chosen  spouse,  according  to  Thy  Divine
good  pleasure,  that  she  may  receive  some  of  the  overflow-


5 GO  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.

ing  delights  which  I  enjoy."  The  goodness  of  the  Lord
towards  her  moved  Gertrude  deeply,  and  she  exclaimed  :
"  Alas,  my  most  loving  Lord  !  I  am  grieved  that  I  have
not  satisfied  for  my  negligences  in  reciting  the  Canonical
Hours  in  like  manner,  since  Thy  inconceivable  goodness
receives  so  graciously  my  poorest  efforts."  Our  Lord  re
plied  :  "  Do  not  be  grieved,  My  beloved  ;  for  I  have  re
newed  all  your  desires,  in  union  with  that  love  which
prompted  My  Divine  Heart  to  infuse  into  you  these  noble
and  loving  aspirations  ;  and  I  have  united  to  this  the  most
devout  and  pure  intention  which  any  human  heart  could
offer  Me,  presenting  it  to  My  Father  in  satisfaction  for  all
your  negligences,  so  that  His  paternal  goodness  inclines
towards  you  with  the  tenderest  affection."


CHAPTER  XXVIII.

How  Gertrude  prepared  for  death.

EVERY  Friday,  at  the  hour  of  None,  St.  Gertrude  retired
apart  from  all  creatures,  in  order  to  devote  herself  to  pre
paration  for  death,  and  especially  to  recite  the  prayers  for
the  agonising.  After  she  had  practised  this  devotion  for
some  time,  our  Lord  rewarded  her  by  a  special  grace.  On
one  of  these  occasions  she  was  rapt  in  ecstasy,  and  our
Lord  manifested  to  her  the  manner  of  her  death.  She
beheld  herself  reposing  in  the  arms  of  our  Lord,  under  the
form  of  a  fair  young  maiden,  in  her  agony  ;  and  at  the  same
time  she  saw  an  immense  number  of  saints  and  angels  sur
rounding  her,  with  censers  in  their  hands,  in  which  they
offered  the  prayers  of  the  Church  with  great  joy  to  the
King  of  Glory.  When  they  invoked  the  Blessed  Virgin


VISION  OP  OUR  LADY  AND  ST.  MICHAEL.  561

by  the  Antiphon  Salve  Maria,  our  Lord  made  a  sign  to  His
Blessed  Mother  to  console  His  elect ;  and  the  Queen  of
Virgins  appeared  in  marvellous  radiance,  and  supported
the  head  of  the  dying  person.  Her  guardian  angel  also
appeared  under  the  figure  of  an  illustrious  prince,  who
came  to  congratulate  her  on  her  happiness.

As  she  invoked  the  archangel  St.  Michael,  she  beheld
the  glorious  chief  of  the  angelic  hosts,  with  a  multitude  of
angels,  all  prepared  to  assist  her  and  to  combat  the  demons,
whom  she  also  saw  under  hideous  forms,  but  so  weak  and
powerless  that  they  could  not  do  her  the  slightest  injury ;
and  this  afforded  her  the  greatest  consolation.  A  column  of
light  appeared  to  proceed  from  the  lips  of  the  dying  person
to  the  very  throne  of  God  ;  and  this  had  such  virtue,  that
it  was  apparent  even  the  angelic  guard  was  not  needed  to
defend  her  against  the  demons,  for  it  caused  them  such
terror  that  they  endeavoured  to  fly  and  conceal  themselves.

As  each  of  the  saints  was  invoked  in  the  Litany  of  the
Dying,  he  appeared  ready  to  assist  her.  The  Patriarchs
had  branches  in  their  hands,  from  which  their  good  works
were  suspended  in  place  of  fruit ;  and  these  they  placed
round  her.  The  Prophets  bore  golden  mirrors,  on  which
were  depicted  the  sublime  revelations  which  God  had  im
parted  to  them  ;  and  these  they  also  offered  for  her  assist
ance,  placing  them  opposite  to  her.  The  beloved  disciple
St.  John  came  next,  and  presented  her  with  two  golden
rings  ;  each  Apostle  who  followed  presented  one  also  :  and
these  rings  represented  the  fidelity  which  the  soul  had
towards  our  Divine  Lord.

The  Martyrs  followed,  holding  golden  palms  in  their
hands,  which  shone  radiantly  with  all  their  sufferings.
The  Confessors  had  golden  flowers,  which  represented  their
virtues  :  and  these  they  also  presented  to  her.  The  Virgins

2N


562  THE  REVELATIONS  OP  ST.  GERTRUDE.


offered  her  roses,  the  stalks  of  which  had  little  crooks  of
gold,  which  signified  the  close  union  with  the  Lord  which
they  enjoyed  on  account  of  their  purity  ;  and  the  Lord
Jesus,  the  King  and  Spouse  of  virgins,  was  adorned  with  a
robe  covered  with  the  same  number  of  roses  as  there  were
virgins,  who  appeared  to  communicate  in  His  merits  by
these  golden  crooks,  which  fastened  the  flowers  to  His  robe;
these  crooks  also  represented  the  particular  virtues  of  each
virgin.

Then  the  Lord,  seeing  that  Gertrude  was  adorned  with
the  flowers  of  each  virgin,  inclined  towards  her,  to  bestow
on  her  as  many  graces  as  there  were  ties  which  attached
her  to  Him  ;  and  thus  she  experienced  something  of  the
happiness  of  these  blessed  souls.  The  Widows  and  the
other  saints  then  brought  their  offerings  in  the  form  of
golden  caskets  ;  and  all  the  merits  which  had  been  offered
for  her,  by  an  admirable  communication,  became  her  own,
so  that  her  soul  shone  resplendently  before  God.

The  holy  Innocents  also  had  their  share  in  this  festival,
to  honour  the  Lord  who  had  purchased  them  with  His
precious  Blood,  and  made  them  heirs  of  His  kingdom.
They  seemed,  however,  to  have  less  merit  of  their  own,  but
their  souls  were  marvellously  adorned  by  the  union  of  their
innocence  with  the  innocence  of  Jesus  Christ.  Then  the
Son  of  God  inclined  towards  Gertrude  and  embraced  her
lovingly,  absorbing  her  into  Himself  as  the  sun,  in  its  meri
dian  splendour,  absorbs  a  dewdrop  ;  so  that  her  soul  was,
as  it  were,  received  into  the  Heart  of  her  Spouse  with  all
the  virtues  and  merits  which  had  been  conferred  on  her,,
and  she  was  surrounded  and  penetrated  by  Him  as  fire  in
flames  iron.


AUTHORISATION  OP  THIS  WORK.  563

CHAPTER  XXIX.

How  our  Lord  authorised  this  work.

AFTER  this  work  was  finished,  our  Lord  Jesus  appeared  to
her  who  had  completed  it,  holding  it  in  His  Hand  ;  and
pressing  it  to  His  Heart,  He  said  to  her  :  "  I  have  placed
this  book  thus  upon  My  Heart,  that  every  word  contained
therein  may  be  penetrated  with  Divine  sweetness,  even  as
honey  penetrates  bread.  Therefore,  whoever  reads  this
book  devoutly  will  receive  great  profit  for  his  salvation."
Then  she  besought  our  Lord  to  preserve  this  book  from  all
error  for  His  own  glory,  and  He  extended  His  adorable
Hand,  signing  it  with  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  saying :  "  I  con
secrate  by  My  benediction  all  that  is  written  in  this  book,
that  it  may  promote  the  salvation  of  those  who  read  it  with
humble  devotion."  He  added  :  "  The  labour  of  those  who
have  written  this  book  is  also  most  agreeable  to  Me,  par
ticularly  in  three  things  :  first,  I  taste  therein  the  sweetness
of  My  Divine  love,  by  which  all  that  is  related  therein  has
been  effected ;  second,  I  am  exceedingly  pleased  with  the
good-will  of  those  who  wrote  it ;  third,  I  contemplate  with
singular  pleasure  My  gratuitous  mercy,  which  appears  in
all  that  is  written  in  this  book.  I  desire,  therefore,  that
this  work  should  be  fructified  by  My  most  holy  Life  and
My  Five  Wounds ;  and  the  seven  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost
shall  be  the  seven  seals  of  Divine  mercy  with  which  it  shall
be  sealed,  so  that  none  may  be  able  to  take  it  out  of  My
Hand."

On  another  occasion,  when  the  compiler  *  of  this  book
communicated,  she  had  it  hidden  in  the  sleeve  of  her  habit,
under  her  mantle,  to  offer  it  to  our  Lord  for  His  eternal


'Compilatrix.'


564  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  ST.  GERTRUDE.

praise  and  glory.  As  she  prostrated  before  receiving  the
Body  of  the  Lord,  one  of  the  religious  saw  our  Lord  ap
proaching  her  with  great  manifestations  of  joy  and  tender
ness  ;  and  He  addressed  her  thus  :  "  I  will  penetrate  with
My  Divine  sweetness  and  fertilise  every  word  of  this  book
which  you  have  offered  Me,  and  which  you  have  written
by  the  direction  of  My  Spirit :  and  I  will  manifest  to  who
ever  reads  this  book  with  humble  love  what  will  be  most
useful  for  him,  and  will  take  him  into  My  bosom,  breath
ing  into  his  soul  life  and  truth.  But  if  any  one  reads  it
through  vain  curiosity,  and  a  desire  to  pry  into  My  secrets
to  censure  and  mock  them,  I  will  assuredly  humble  and
cast  him  down  shamefully."


CHAPTER  XXX.

Oblation  of  this  work  to  the  Divine  glory — Conclusion.

I  OFFER  Thee  this  work,  0  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Fount  of
eternal  light,  in  union  with  that  ineffable  charity  which
moved  Thee,  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father,  in  the  pleni
tude  of  the  Divinity,  to  take  upon  Thee  our  nature,  and  to
become  Man.  I  offer  it  to  Thee  on  the  part  of  all  Thy
creatures,  because  it  is  Thine  ineffable  tenderness  for
mankind  which  caused  Thee  to  pour  forth  those  sweet
and  efficacious  graces  on  the  heart  of  Thy  chosen  spouse,
to  fructify  them,  to  draw  her  to  Thyself,  and  to  unite  her
to  Thee  eternally.

I  beseech  Thee  to  take  this  work  into  Thy  Divine  keep
ing,  that  it  may  glorify  the  omnipotence  of  the  Father,  the
wisdom  of  the  Son,  and  the  love  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I
offer  it  to  Thee  in  fervent  thanksgiving  for  all  the  graces
which  Thou  hast  communicated  or  wilt  communicate  through


Go  tbe  Blesseb  £rinit?


/fl\  Blessed  Trinity,
^•^ Thou  dwellest  in  my  breast;
Fill  me  with  thoughts  of  Thee,
Be  Thou  my  joy,  my  rest!

O Hidden  Deity,

In  me  I  Thee  adore
Teach  me to live with Thee,

To  love  Thee  daily  more.


Grant  me  to  treasure  most

That  Bond  of  Charity  —

Christ  in  the  Blessed  Host,

The  Word  made  Flesh  for  me.

In  Him  the  Deity

Is  wedded  to  our  race;
That  race  He  leads  to  Thee

Redeemed,  restored  to  grace.

Thus  through  and  in  Our  Lord
I  too  am  joined  with  Thee,

My  Trinity  adored,

Blest  Three  in  Unity!

My life,  my  liberty,

My  love,  belong  to  Thee,
Do what  Thou  wilt  with  me.

Almighty  Trinity!

Most  Holy  Trinity,

My  nearest,  dearest  Friend,
In  Thy  sweet  company

Keep  Thou  me  to  the  end.

I  trust  my  lot  will  be

For  all  eternity
To  worship,  love  and  see

That  Beauteous  One  in  Three,
My  Wondrous  Trinity!


Bet  of  Consecration  anfc
to  tbe  BlesseD


*f|  adore  Thee,  O  holy  Trinity,  Father,  Son
"•  and  Holy  Spirit,  I  abase  myself  before
Thy  Majesty.  I  believe  in  Thee,  I  hope  in
Thee,  and  I  love  Thee,  O  Thou,  my  God,
Who  art  so  good.  I  thank  Thee  for  all  the
graces  which  Thou  hast  poured  out  upon  me,
and  I  implore  from  Thy  mercy  the  pardon  of
my  sins  and  of  my  ingratitude.  Adorable
Trinity,  One  God  in  Three  Persons,  anew  I
give  myself  entirely  to  Thee  through  the  Sacred
Heart  of  Jesus.  In  union  with  the  intentions
with  which  the  Divine  Victim  offers  and  im
molates  Himself  on  the  holy  Altar,  I  renew  the
offering  of  myself  as  a  victim  of  adoration,
love,  and  praise,  thanksgiving  nnd  expiation
and  of  supplication  for  the  Sovereign  Pontiff
and  the  Holy  Church,  for  the  fulfilment  of  the
designs  of  love  and  mercy  of  the  Heart  of  Jesus
in  the  whole  world.

I offer Thee especially by the Hearts of
Jesus  and  Mary,  the  prayers,  works  and  suffer-


ings of the day for these intentions and in
particular  for. . .

With  the  help  of  Thy  grace,  O  my  God,
I  will  strive  to  glorify  Thee  in  all  things  and
I  abandon  myself  with  all  my  heart  to  Thy"
most  holy  Will.


O  Most  Holy  Trinity,  who  art  dwelling  by^
Thy  grace  within  my  soul, I  adore  Thee!

O  Most  Holy  Trinity,  who  art  dwelling  by
Thy  grace  within  my  soul,  make  me  love  Thee
more  and  more!

O  Most  Holy  Trinity,  who  art  dwelling  by1
Thy grace within my soul, sanctify me more
and  more!

Abide  with  me,  O  Lord,  be  Thou  my  true  joy!  •
300 days indul. for each ejaculation. ''Preces-
et Pia Opera," 12.


Imprimatur ffr Carolus Hubertus Le  Blond
M-la  Episcopus Sancti Josephi

Benedictine Convent of Perpetual Adoration
Clyde,  Missouri


CONCLUSION.  565


this  work,  even  to  the  end  of  time.  And  as  I  am  an  utterly
vile  and  unworthy  creature,  I  offer  Thee,  in  satisfaction  for
all  my  deficiencies  and  omissions,  my  blindness  and  ignor
ance,  Thy  own  sweetest  Heart,  ever  full  of  Divine  thank*
giving  and  eternal  beatitude.  Aineuu


gratia*.


INDEX  OP  SUBJECTS.


AARON,  rod  of,  38.
Actions,  how  to  offer,  199.
Adolphus  of  Nassau,  12.
Advantages  of  these  Revelations,

93.

Advent,  82,  191.  _
Adversity,  a  spiritual  ring,  132 ;

fruits  of,  289.
Agnes,  St.,  115,  332.
All  Saints,  Feast  of,  467.
Angels defend the elect, 198;

guard  the  conveut,  476.
Annie  Benedictine,  530.
Annunciation,  Feast  of,  74,  368.
Anointing,  last,  of  St.  Mechtilde.

491.

Apology  for  female  sex,  65.
Apparition  of  Jesus,  72.
Ark,  Gertrude  a  spiritual,  39.
Arrow  of  love,  545.
Ascension,  405  ;  day,  410 ;  Sun
day  after,  413.
Assumption,  Feast  of,  160,  43*  ,

visions  on,  433,  436,  440.
Augustine,  St., 333  ; Feast  of,

449.

BARTHOLOMEW,  ST.,  134.

Benedict,  St.,  Rule  of,  33  ;  Feast
of,  365.

Bernard,  St. ,  78,  446.

Blessed  Virgin,  the  ;  how  to  sup
ply  for  negligences  in  her  ser
vice,  539.

Bodily  labours,  reward  of,  261.

brother  H.  ;  his  sufferings,  518.

Brother  John,  the  Procurator,
522,

Brother  S. ;  his  fidelity  rewarded,
518.


CARE  of  the  sick,  33.

Carnival,  devotions  for,  345.

Catherine,  St.,  V.M.,  27,  470.

Chapter,  our  Lord  appears  at,
303.

Charity,  how  agreeable  to  God,
101  ;"  towards  enemies,  473.

Children,  love  of,  for  Gertrude,
34.

Christmas,  Feast  of,  297  ;  Matins
of,  299;  Invitatory  of,  301;
Martyrology  for,  303  ;  vision  of
Infant  Jesus  at,  101 ;  Vigil  of,
295.

Church,  dedication  of,  471,  475  ;
our  Lord  suffers  for  the  mem
bers  of,  258 ;  His  mystical
Body,  279  ;  how  to  treat  its
Wounds,  280.

Circumcision,  Feast  of,  322.

Clothing,  offering  of,  18.

Clothing  the  Infant  Jesus,  104.

Commanded  to  write  Revelations,
93.

Communion,  advantages  of  fre
quent,  172,  213,  283  ;  abstain
ing  from  in  sickness,  39;  for
souls  in  purgatory,  171 ;  not  to
abstain  from  it  lightly,  145;
spiritual,  216.

Confessions  of  her  unwortliiness,
125.

Confession,  suffering  for  neglect
of,  512 ;  how  to  prepare  for,
152.

Confidence,  efficacy  of,  146;  merit
of,  265.

Crucifix,  devotion  to,  219 ;  God
pleased  when  it  is  honoured,
223  ;  cloves  put  for  nails  iu  it,


568


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS.


225  ;  placed  before  dying  nuns,
516.

DEATH  of  Sisters  M.  and  L.,  502.

Death  of  M.  B.,  510.

Deceased parents, prayers for,

528.
Disobedience,  expiation  of,  505 ;

suffering  for,  539.
Divine  mercy,  glance  of,  217.
Divine  Office,  devotion  to,41 ;  how

to  recite  in  honour  of  the  B.  V.

and  the  Passion,  227.
Dominic,  St.,  452.
Dying,  commendation  of,  500.

EASTER  Sunday,  394 ;  Monday,
397  ;  Tuesday,  398  ;  Wednes
day,  399  ;  Thursday,  400.

Elizabeth,  St.,  470.

Kngaddi,  vine  of,  555.

Epiphany,  Feast  of,  326 ;  second
Sunday  after,  329.

FERVENT  desires,  valve  of,  202.

Five  favours  conferred  on  Ger
trude,  113.

Five  Wounds,  devotion  to,  81, 501;
souls  released  by,  523  ;  prayers
in  honour  of,  233.

Francis,  St.,  his  merits,  452.

Fridays,  preparation  for  death
on,  560.

GARDENS,  the  two,  135.

Gertrude  :  her  birth,  2  ;  training
and  intellect,  3  ;  knowledge  of
Latin,  3;  writings,  the  Church's
treasur  .,  4  ;  gifts  of  counsel,  5  ;
compared  to  a  rose,  7  ;  made
abbess,  12  ;  her  liberty  of  spirit,
17 ;  her  last  illness,  33  ;  affec
tion  of  her  religious,  34 ;  grief
of  her  religious,  51 ;  her  cuUus,
61 ;  name  inserted  in  Martyr-
ology,  63  ;  sees  our  Lord  face
to  face,  116  ;  devotion  to  the  B.
Virgin,  171 ;  called  "daughter
of  light,"  485  ;  communicated
by  our  Lord,  484  ;  her  prepara
tion  for  death.  547,  557  ;  graces
promised  to  others  at  her  death,
553  ;  her  preparation  for  death
on  Fridays,  560.


Good  Friday,  186,  389.

Great  Psalter,  the,  533,  535  ;  souls

released  by  it,  531.
Gregory,  St.,  Pope,  363.

HEALTH,  wishing  for,  235.

Heart  of  Jesus,  15 ;  movements
of,  236;  shown  to  Gertrude,
257  ;  vapour  from,  295.

Hebdamadaria,  286.

Holy  Cross,  Exaltation  of,  92,  459.

Holy  Innocents,  140,  562.

Holy  Week,  devotions  for,  377  ;
Wednesday  in,  383;  Holy  Thurs
day,  384.

Host,  offering  of,  for  departed,
505.

Human  consolations  lessen  Di
vine,  133.

Humility,  instruction  on,  106  ;
more  acceptable  than  devotion,
173.

IMPERFECTIONS  consumed  by  love,
J58  ;  keep  souls  from  God,  513  ;
why  permitted,  49.

Infirmarian,  516.

In  Lectulo,  the  Antiphon,  149.

Instructions  for  different  states,
270.

Interdict,  an  unjust,  157.

Interior  illuminations,  78.

JAMES,  ST.,  430.

Jesus  our  Brother,  465.

John,  St.,  27  ;  meaning  of  name,

497.
John,  St.,  Evangelist,  vision  of,

319,  351,  480 ; Feast  of,  313 ;

merit  of,  321 ;  before  the  Latin

Gate,  403.
John,  St.,  Baptist,  vision  of,  319  ;

Feast  of,  423.
Joseph,  St.,  371.
Just,  the,  permitted  to  fall,  175.

Kyrie  eleison,  181,  481.

Lcetare  Germania,  498.
Lamentations,  devotions  for,  38&
Lanspergius,  63.
Laudate  Dominum,  145i
Lawrence,  St.,  161.
Lebuiu,  St.,  40.


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS.


5G'J-


Lent,  Second  Sunday  in,  116, 357  ;
First  Sunday,  353  ;  Third  Sun
day,  359 ;  Fourth  Sunday,  360.

Lilies,  how  Jesus  gathers,  54.

Lily  of  the  Blessed  Trinity,  167.

Low  Sunday,  401.

MAGDALEN,  St.  Mary,  141  ;  Feast
of,  428  ;  Lesson  for  her  Feast,
149.

Mansfield,  county  of,  2.

Margaret,  St.,  427.

Mark,  St.,  402.

Mary,  tenderness  of,  103.

Mass,  celebrated  by  our  Lord,479 ;
different  intentions  for,  59  ;
mystic,  481;  Salve  Sancte,  Pa-
rens,  157  ;  Seven  Dolors,  158 ;
five  meditations  for,  138 ;  hear
ing  devoutly,  169.

Mathias,  St.,  145.

Matthew,  St.,  137.

Maurice,  St.,  138.

Mechtilde,  St.,  14,  17,19 ;  favours
granted,  499  ;  Mass  at  her  fune
ral,  500  ;  ]ast  illness,  486  ;  Re
velations,  489.

Merit  of  a  good-will,  189  ;  of  pure
intention,  214 ;  of  resignation,
137.

Michael,  St.,  apparitions  of,  561 ;
Feast  of,  462.

Myrrh,  bundle  of,  221.

Mystic  tree,  449  ;  couch,  555.

NATIVITY,  B.  V.,  453.
Noah's  Ark,  341.

PALM  Sunday,  375.

Parents,dec2ased,  prayers  for, 529.

Passion  Sunday,  373.

Patience,  merit  of,  263.

Patience  of  Gertrude,  9.

Paul,  St.,  481.

Penance,  Sacrament  of,  152.

Pentecost,  414.

Peter  and  Paul,SS.,  Feast  of,  425.

Peter,  James,  and  John,  497.

Prayer,  fruit  of,  not  received  at

once,  285.

Prayer  to  Five  Wounds,  79.
Presentation,  vision  of,  336.
Procurators,  259.
Prophecy,  her  gift  of,  9.


Providence,  her  trust  in,  16.
Purification, Feast of, 86, 102r

121,  334.

Purification  of  souls,  503,  510.
Purifications  in  sickness,  57.

QUINQUAGESIMA  Sunday,  88,  99.
198.

READING-CLASSES,  31.

Recapitulation  of  favours,  121.

Regnum  mundi,  52,  465.

Religious  compared  to  martyrs,.
468.

Reparations  for  the  dying,  557.

Revelations,  approval  of,  by  our
Lord,  563  ;  not  made  for  her
self  alone,  84  ;  why  so  many
kinds  of,  232.

Rex  Christe,  226,  385.

Rodersdorf,  13.

Rodolph  of  Hapsburg,  11.

Rogation-days,  409.

Salve  Regina,  456.

Sanctus  sung  by  B.  V.,  483.

Scourging,  vision  of,  347.

Septuagesima,  338.

Seven  candles,  302.

Seven  Masses,  the,  of  St.  Gregory,

537.

Seven  rings  bestowed  on  her,  115.
Seven  Sacraments,renewal  of  ,24<>.
Sexagesima,  341.
Sick,  care  of,  33.
Sleep,  fear  in,  209.
Souls,  prayers  for,  511 ;  released

through her  intercession,  53  ;

vision  of  souls,  176.  °
Stigmata,  80.

Suffering,  a  life  of,  not  useless,35.
Sufferings  without  devotion, merit

of,  203.
Superiors,why  God  permits  faults

in,  288.

TEAKS,  gift  of,  94.

Temporal  affairs,  care  of,  259.

Temptation,  utility  of,  283.

Tenderness  towards  others,  42.

Thabor,  276.

Thanksgiving,  spirit  of,  72,  2G6-

Thirst  for  God,  208.

Transfiguration,  497.

2 O


570


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS.


Tree  of  charity,  155.
Trefoil,  mystic,  7.
T:  inity,Feast  of, 421;  the  Blessed,
165.

UNWORTHINESS,  confessions  of,
125.

Ursula,  St.,  464.

Utility  of  prayer,  199  ;  of  suffer
ing,'  208.


VIATICUM,  taking  food  after,  213L

WEAKNESS,  advantage  of,  245.
Wednesday,Third,  in  Advent,  83.
Whitsun  week,  419.
Will  reputed  as  an  act,  292  ;  good-