MONSTERS OF THE SEA, LEGENDARY AND AUTHENTIC
By John Gibson — London, Edinburgh, and New York: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1887
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1887 edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier monstersofsealeg00gibs). The 1887 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete, including the publisher's catalogue at the end.

========================================================================

* 


GIANT  CALAMARY 

Caught  by  the  Crew  of  the  French  Steamer  Alecton , Nov.  1S61. 


Page  124 . 


Monsters  of  the  Sea. 


SURPRISED  BY  AN  OCTOPUS. 

Page  106. 


tTbomas  iRelson  anb  Sons, 

LONDON , EDINBURGH , iMi?  W YORK. 


Monsters 

of  the  Sea 

Legendary  and  Authentic. 


By 

JOHN  GIBSON, 

Author  of  ‘ e Chips  from  the  Earth's  Crust f “ Science  Gleanings 
in  Many  Fields etc. 


ITH  jSlXTEEN  JLLUSTRATIONS. 


bonbon : 

T.  NELSON  AND  SONS,  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 

EDINBURGH;  AND  NEW  YORK. 


1887. 


I 


preface. 


In  ancient  times  little  was  known  of  the  sea  and  its 
inhabitants.  A wide  field  was  thus  presented  for  the 
play  of  the  imagination,  and  so  the  waste  of  waters 
came  to  be  peopled  with  a host  of  fanciful  monsters. 
The  better  knowledge  of  modem  times,  while  it  has 
swept  the  most  of  this  away,  and  reduced  the  remainder 
to  truthful  proportions,  has  at  the  same  time  made 
known  the  existence  in  the  sea  of  animals  much  more 
truly  wonderful  than  any  the  ancients  ever  imagined. 

The  belief  in  a huge  sea-serpent  is  of  great  antiquity; 
but  modern  science  has  shown  that  tropical  oceans 
abound  in  sea-serpents,  small  indeed  for  the  most  part, 
but  of  wondrous  structure  and  armed  with  the  most 
deadly  poison.  In  giving  an  account  in  the  following 
pages  of  those  genuine  sea-monsters,  as  well  as  of  the 
much  larger  but  non-poisonous  snakes  that  frequent 
the  rivers  of  Brazil,  notice  is  also  taken  of  the  appear- 
ances that  have  led  to  the  supposition  that  in  the  ocean 
at  the  present  day  a Great  Sea-Serpent  exists.  It  is 
strange  that  a creature  so  large  as  this  is  alleged  to  be 
should  come  at  intervals  under  man’s  observation  and 
yet  for  ever  elude  his  grasp.  Its  capture  has  yet  to 


X 


PREFACE. 


be  made,  and  until  this  is  effected  the  existence  of  such 
a creature  may  well  be  doubted.  In  the  meantime, 
considerable  interest  attaches  to  the  literature  which 
has  gathered  round  the  mythical  monster,  a summary 
of  which  is  given  in  the  following  pages. 

The  octopus  was  known  to  the  dwellers  by  the 
Mediterranean,  and  it  seems  to  have  been  the  founda- 
tion on  which  more  than  one  of  their  legendary  sea- 
monsters  were  formed.  Nor  is  this  surprising,  in  view 
of  the  curious  forms  and  no  less  curious  habits  of  the 
octopus  and  its  allies,  the  squid  and  the  cuttle-fish. 
Their  sac-like  bodies,  encircled  at  the  upper  end  with 
eight  or  ten  arms  covered  with  suckers,  their  mode  of 
progression  by  means  of  a stream  of  water  ejected 
from  their  bodies,  and  their  ink-bag — that  most  curious 
organ  of  defence — were  well  calculated  to  strike  the 
imagination.  It  is  easy  thus  to  see  how  the  Lernaean 
Hydra  grew  nut  of  the  Mediterranean  octopus. 

Our  knowledge  of  these  creatures  has  greatly  in- 
creased of  late  years.  The  octopus  is  now  known  to 
attain  formidable  dimensions,  while  cuttle-fishes  have 
been  captured  off  the  coast  of  Newfoundland  measur- 
ing about  sixty  feet  in  length — a discovery  which  has 
rendered  it  no  longer  difficult  to  believe  that  the 
legendary  kraken  of  the  Norwegian  coast  was  simply 
an  exaggerated  cuttle-fish.  The  habits,  structure,  and 
uses  of  these  interesting  molluscs  are  described  in  the 
following  pages  in  popular  language. 


@f0nt£nt0, 


I.  SEA-SNAKES, 

II.  pontoppidan’s  sea-serpent, 

III.  SCOTTISH  AND  AMERICAN  SEA-SERPENTS, 

iv.  the  “d^edalus”  sea-serpent, 

V.  RECENT  sea-serpents, 

VI.  THE  LEGENDARY  KRAKEN, 

VII.  THE  CUTTLE-FISH  OR  SEPIA, 

VIII.  THE  OCTOPUS, 

IX.  THE  CALAMARY  OR  SQUID, 

X.  GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES, 


15 

21 

32 

45 

56 

79 

S7 

95 

118 

125 


JESist  of  sEIluot rations, 


Giant  Calamary  caught  by  the  Crew  of  the  French  Steamer  Alecton,  Novem- 
ber 30,  1861,  . . . . . . . . . . Frontispiece 

Surprised  by  an  Octopus,  . . . . . . . . . . Vignette 

Legendary  Sea-Serpent,  . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 

Pontoppidan’s  Sea-Serpent,  . . . . . . . . . . 29 

The  American  Sea-Serpent,  . . . . . . . c . . 37 

The  Sea-Serpent,  when  first  seen  from  H.M.  Ship  Dcedalus , . . . . 47 

The  Sea-Serpent  passing  under  the  Stern  of  the  DcedciluSy  . . . . 51 

Monstrous  Sea-weed  discovered  by  the  Boats  of  the  French  Ship  Pekin , near 

Moulmein,  in  1848,  . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 

The  Sea-Serpent  and  Sperm  Whale,  as  seen  from  the  Pauline , . . . . 63 

The  Sea-Serpent  in  the  Mediterranean,  as  seen  from  H.M  Yacht  Osborne  (the 

Row  of  Fins  as  seen  at  first),  . . . . . . . . . . 69 

The  Sea-Serpent  in  the  Mediterranean,  as  seen  from  H.  M.  Yacht  Osborne  (the 

Head  and  Flippers),  . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 

The  Kraken,  as  seen  by  the  Eye  of  Imagination,  . . . . . . 83 

Common  Cuttle-Fish.— Calamary  (Squid)— Upper  and  Under  Sides,  . . 89 

The  Octopus  and  its  Prey,  . . . . . . . . . . 99 

Head,  Arms,  and  Tentacles  of  Gigantic  Calamary,  from  Logie  Bay,  New- 
foundland, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129 

Giant  Calamary  afloat,  . . . . . . . . . . 135 


MONSTERS  OF  THE  SEA. 


CHAPTER  I. 

SEA-SNAKES. 

Although  snakes  are  for  the  most  part  land  animals, 
there  are  few  of  them  that  cannot  take  if  necessary 
to  the  water.  Thus  the  cobra  has  been  observed 
many  miles  from  land  crossing  an  arm  of  the  sea. 
There  are  other  snakes  that  may  be  described  as  am- 
phibious, which,  like  the  great  anaconda  of  South 
America,  inhabit  the  banks  of  streams,  and  pass  in 
and  out  of  the  water  like  otters.  These,  during 
heavy  floods  in  such  rivers  as  the  Amazon  and  the 
Plate,  are  often  carried  out  to  sea,  where  they  are 
apt  to  be  mistaken  for  true  sea-serpents. 

A year  or  two  ago  the  captain  of  the  steam-ship 
Mexico  stated  that  he  had  passed  through  a tangled 


16 


SEA-SNAKES . 


mass  of  snakes  at  the  entrance  to  the  Gulf  of 
Mexico.  The  ship  was  said  to  have  been  more  than 
an  hour  in  passing  them.  “ They  were  of  all  sizes, 
from  the  ordinary  green  water-snake  of  two  feet  long 
to  monsters  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  feet  in  length.” 
These  were  most  probably  land-snakes  that  had  been 
carried  out  to  sea  by  river  floods;  and  amphibious 
forms  thirty  feet  in  length,  like  the  anaconda,  might 
thus  be  found  in  the  waters  of  the  ocean. 

This  is  probably  the  explanation  of  an  incident 
noted  in  the  log-book  of  a ship  which  at  the  time 
was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Azores.  The  ship, 
according  to  the  log,  was  becalmed,  when  a very  large 
snake  passed.  It  appeared  to  be  about  sixteen  or 
eighteen  feet  in  length,  and  three  or  four  feet  in  cir- 
cumference ; the  back  of  a lightish  colour,  and  the 
belly  yellow.  This  specimen  had  probably  been  car- 
ried out  to  sea  by  one  of  the  great  rivers  of  South 
America,  and  thence  conveyed  by  the  Gulf  Stream 
to  the  spot  where  it  was  seen. 

There  are,  however,  a large  number  of  true  water- 
snakes— snakes  which  are  born,  live,  and  die  in  the 
water.  Some  of  these  are  entirely  fresh-water  forms, 
others  as  exclusively  marine.  These  two  kinds  differ 
very  much  from  each  other.  In  fresh-water  snakes 
the  tail  is  round  and  tapering,  as  in  the  land  forms. 

(37) 


SEA-SNAKES. 


17 


The  sea-snakes,  on  the  contrary,  have  the  end  of  their 
tail  flattened  out  like  a paddle — an  arrangement  that 
assists  them  greatly  in  making  swift  way  through  the 
water.  Further,  fresh-water  snakes  are  all  harmless, 
in  no  case  possessing  poison-fangs;  while  the  sea- 
snakes  are  the  most  venomous  of  all  the  poisonous 
serpents. 

The  sea-snakes  are  inhabitants  of  the  tropical  seas 
of  the  eastern  hemisphere,  being  specially  abundant 
in  the  Indian  Ocean.  There  are  different  kinds  of 
them  known,  most  of  them  adorned  with  bright  col- 
ours and  elegant  patterns.  They  differ  considerably 
in  size,  the  largest,  so  far  as  is  known,  not  exceeding 
fourteen  feet  in  length,  while  most  of  the  species  are 
not  bigger  than  the  common  viper. 

They  are  interesting  and  beautiful  objects  in  the 
water,  their  movements  being  thus  described  by  a 
recent  writer : — “ Swimming  and  diving  with  equal 
facility,  flashing  into  sight  and  disappearing  again  in 
twos  or  scores,  or  in  larger  shoals,  pursuing  fish, 
many  of  them  of  bright  colouring,  they  offer  constant 
amusement  to  the  beholder.  Sometimes,  when  the 
sailors  are  throwing  their  nets,  they  disappear  beneath 
the  waves,  and  are  no  longer  seen  for  half  an  hour 
or  more;  when  presently,  far  away  from  the  spot 
where  they  vanished  so  suddenly,  up  they  come  to 

(37)  o 


18 


SEA-SNAKES . 


the  surface  again,  to  sport  once  more,  or  to  take  in 
a fresh  supply  of  air.” 

Though  timid  creatures,  seeking  ever  to  avoid  man, 
sea-serpents  are  greatly  dreaded  by  fishermen  in  the 
seas  in  which  they  occur.  And  not  without  cause ; 
for  they  often  get  entangled  in  the  nets,  and  so  are 
conveyed  with  the  draught  of  fishes  into  the  boat, 
where,  unnoticed,  they  may  be  handled  or  trampled 
upon,  and  thus  tempted  to  use  their  fangs.  These 
fangs  are  supplied  with  what  is  probably  the  dead- 
liest of  all  snake  poisons,  for  they  seem  to  be  the  only 
serpents  whose  bite  is  fatal  to  other  venomous  snakes. 

“ One  of  my  earliest  recollections  in  Ceylon,”  says  a 
recent  traveller,  “ is  that  of  a poor  young  officer  of  the 
surveying  schooner  Wolf.  He  handled  a sea-snake, 
which  had  been  taken  up  by  the  dredging-net,  and 
was  bitten.  Although  entreated  by  the  surgeon  to 
submit  to  excision  of  the  portion  of  his  hand  on 
which  the  bite  had  been  inflicted,  he  refused,  sharing 
as  he  did  in  the  then  popular  belief  of  the  harmless- 
ness of  sea-serpents.  In  a few  hours,  however,  he 
was  dead.” 

So  minute  is  the  wound  made  by  these  snakes 
that  it  is  often  nearly  painless,  and  therefore  apt  to 
be  overlooked.  Sir  Joseph  Fayrer  gives  several  in- 
stances of  this.  A captain,  while  bathing  in  a tidal 


SEA-SNAKES . 


19 


river,  felt  what  he  supposed  was  the  pinch  of  a crab 
on  his  foot,  but  took  no  notice  of  it ; and  after  dress- 
ing, he  called  on  some  friends,  being  to  all  appearance 
in  his  usual  health.  In  about  two  hours  he  felt  strange 
symptoms  of  suffocation,  enlargement  of  the  tongue, 
and  rigidity  of  the  muscles.  Next  morning  decided 
symptoms  of  the  bite  of  a sea-snake  showed  them- 
selves ; and  when  the  foot  which  he  supposed  had 
been  bitten  by  a crab  was  examined,  marks  of  fangs 
no  bigger  than  mosquito  bites  were  detected  near  the 
ankle.  The  best  remedies  were  immediately  applied, 
but  death  ensued  on  the  third  day  after  the  bite.  In 
another  case,  a man  bitten  on  the  finger  by  a sea- 
snake,  but  who  thought  so  lightly  of  it  that  he  took 
no  means  to  arrest  the  poison,  died  in  four  hours. 

The  eyes  of  sea-serpents  are  so  exclusively  adapted 
for  seeing  through  the  watery  medium  in  which  they 
live,  that,  when  taken  out  of  the  water,  or  cast  ashore, 
they  are  practically  blind.  Not  being  able  to  see, 
they  cannot  take  aim,  but  bite  wildly  at  any  object 
that  may  come  in  their  way.  They  have  thus  been 
known,  in  rage  or  terror  at  finding  themselves  out  of 
their  element,  to  bury  their  fangs  in  their  own  body. 
Nevertheless,  there  is  at  least  one  kind  of  sea-serpent 
which  occasionally  leaves  the  sea  to  wander  over  the 
salt  marshes ; and  stories  are  told  of  sea-snakes  climb- 


20 


SEA-SNAKES. 


ing  by  chain  or  rope  into  ships.  Frank  Buckland 
tells  of  one  which  climbed  up  the  anchor-chain  of  a 
man-of-war  moored  at  the  mouth  of  the  Ganges. 
The  midshipman  of  the  watch  saw  something  moving 
along  the  chain,  and  without  thinking  went  to  pick 
it  up,  when  it  turned  upon  and  bit  him.  The 
unfortunate  lad  did  not  live  many  hours  after  the 
accident. 


CHAPTER  II. 


PONTOPPIDANS  SEA-SERPENT. 

That  sea-serpents  thus  exist  in  abundance  is  beyond 
all  doubt.  Besides  these,  however,  there  are  great 
sea-serpents  in  the  ocean  which  as  much  exceed  in 
size  those  small  forms — the  biggest  of  which  is  not 
more  than  twelve  or  fourteen  feet  in  length — as  the 
giant  cuttle-fishes  do  the  ordinary  squids.  The  be- 
lief that  such  a monster  exists  in  the  ocean  is  both 
ancient  and  widespread.  There  are  numerous  ac- 
counts of  its  having  been  seen  by  mariners  of  this 
and  other  countries ; and  such  incidents  are  becoming 
more  common  now  that  the  ocean  has  become  the 
highway  of  the  nations.  There  is  only  one  thing 
lacking  to  put  the  existence  of  the  great  sea-serpent 
beyond  all  doubt,  and  that  is  its  capture.  Until 
this  is  done,  we  must  be  content  to  judge  of  the 
existence  and  nature  of  the  sea-serpent  from  the 
narratives  of  those  who  are  said  to  have  seen  it. 

Strange  to  say,  traditions  of  the  sea-serpent  occur 


22 


PONT  OPPIDAN'S  SEA-SERPENT . 


chiefly  among  the  Scandinavians  — the  same  who 
preserved  the  story  of  the  legendary  kraken.  That 
they  believed  implicitly  in  its  existence  more  than 
three  centuries  ago  is  proved  by  the  words  of 
Olaus  Magnus,  the  Archbishop  of  Upsala,  written  in 
1555. 

He  states  that  navigators  of  all  sorts  in  Norwegian 
waters  are  agreed  in  this  strange  story  that  a serpent 
of  huge  size — namely,  two  hundred  feet  long  and 
twenty  feet  thick — occurs,  and  that  it  is  to  be  found 
living  in  caves  and  rocks  of  the  sea-coast  about 
Bergen.  This  monster,  he  declares,  leaves  his  aquatic 
lair  in  clear  summer  nights,  and,  going  ashore,  devours 
calves  and  lambs  and  hogs.  At  other  times  he  goes 
seaward,  and  feeds  on  lobsters,  octopuses,  and  crabs. 
The  archbishop  has  no  difficulty  in  describing  the 
creature.  “ He  hath  commonly,”  he  says,  “ hair 
hanging  from  his  neck  a cubit  long,  sharp  scales,  and 
is  black,  and  he  hath  flaming,  shining  eyes.”  This 
snake,  he  adds,  disquiets  the  shepherds ; and  no 
wonder,  seeing  “ he  puts  up  his  head  on  high  like  a 
pillar,  and  catchetli  away  men,  and  devours  them.” 
To  bring  this  creature  and  its  works  more  vividly 
before  his  readers,  Olaus  Magnus  supplies  an  illustra- 
tion, in  which  the  sea-serpent  is  seen  seizing  a sailor 
from  the  deck  of  a ship,  while  his  companions  are  all 


LEGENDARY  SEA-SERPENT. 


PONTOPPIDAN’S  SEA-SERPENT. 


25 


taking  themselves  off  to  places  of  safety,  leaving 
their  mate  to  his  fate. 

Two  centuries  later  the  Scandinavians  were  more 
intelligent,  and  consequently  less  credulous,  yet  still 
they  believed  most  firmly  in  the  great  sea-serpent. 

Pontoppidan,  the  famous  old  Bishop  of  Bergen, 
sifted  the  stories  about  the  sea-serpent,  as  he  did 
those  of  the  kraken,  and  in  both  cases  from  being  a 
sceptic  he  became  a believer.  Of  the  sea-serpent  he 
says : — “ I have  questioned  its  existence  myself,  till 
that  suspicion  was  removed  by  full  and  sufficient 
evidence  from  credible  and  experienced  fishermen 
and  sailors  in  Norway,  of  which  there  are  hundreds 
who  can  testify  that  they  have  annually  seen  it. 
All  these  persons  agree  very  well  in  the  general 
description ; and  others  who  acknowledge  that  they 
only  know  it  by  report,  or  by  what  their  neighbours 
have  told  them,  still  relate  the  same  particulars.  In 
all  my  inquiry  about  these  affairs  I have  hardly 
spoken  with  any  intelligent  person  born  in  the 
manor  of  Nordland  who  was  not  able  to  give  a per- 
tinent answer  and  strong  assurances  of  the  existence 
of  this  fish.  And  some  of  our  north  traders  that 
come  here  every  year  with  their  merchandise  think 
it  a very  strange  question  when  they  are  seriously 
asked  whether  there  be  any  such  creature ; they 


26 


PONTOPPIDAN'S  SEA-SERPENT. 


think  it  as  ridiculous  as  if  the  question  was  put  to 
them  whether  there  be  such  fish  as  eel  or  cod.” 

A fair  specimen  of  the  kind  of  evidence  which 
satisfied  the  Bishop  of  Bergen  is  the  account  given 
him  by  Captain  de  Ferry  of  his  adventure  with  the 
sea-serpent : — 

“ In  the  latter  end  of  August,  in  the  year  1746, 
as  I was  on  a voyage,  on  my  return  from  Drontheim, 
on  a very  calm  and  hot  day,  having  a mind  to  put  in 
at  Molde,  it  happened  that  when  we  were  arrived 
with  my  vessel  within  six  English  miles  of  the  afore- 
said Molde,  being  at  a place  called  Jule -Naess,  as  I 
was  reading  in  a book,  I heard  a kind  of  a murmur- 
ing voice  from  amongst  the  men  at  the  oars,  who 
were  eight  in  number,  and  observed  that  the  man  at 
the  helm  kept  off  from  the  land.  Upon  this  I in- 
quired what  was  the  matter,  and  was  informed  that 
there  was  a great  sea-snake  before  us.  I then 
ordered  the  man  at  the  helm  to  keep  to  the  land 
again,  and  to  come  up  with  this  creature,  of  which  I 
had  heard  so  many  stories.  Though  the  fellows  were 
under  some  apprehension,  they  were  obliged  to  obey 
my  orders.  In  the  meantime,  the  sea-snake  passed  by 
us,  and  we  were  obliged  to  tack  the  vessel  about  in 
order  to  get  nearer  to  it.  As  the  snake  swam  faster 
than  we  could  row,  I took  my  gun,  that  was  ready 


PONTOPPIDAN'S  SEA-SERPENT . 


27 


charged,  and  fired  at  it;  on  this  he  immediately 
plunged  into  the  water.  We  rowed  to  the  place 
where  it  sank  down  (which  in  the  calm  might  be 
easily  observed),  and  lay  upon  our  oars,  thinking  it 
would  come  up  again  to  the  surface ; however,  it  did 
not.  Where  the  snake  plunged  down  the  water  ap- 
peared thick  and  red ; perhaps  some  of  the  shot 
might  wound  it,  the  distance  being  very  little.  The 
head  of  this  snake,  which  it  held  more  than  two  feet 
above  the  surface  of  the  water,  resembled  that  of  a 
horse.  It  was  of  a grayish  colour,  and  the  mouth 
was  quite  black  and  very  large.  It  had  black  eyes, 
and  a long  white  mane  that  hung  down  from  the 
neck  to  the  surface  of  the  water.  Besides  the  head 
and  neck,  we  saw  seven  or  eight  folds,  or  coils,  of 
this  snake,  which  were  very  thick ; and  as  far  as  we 
could  guess,  there  was  about  a fathom  distance  be- 
tween each  fold.” 

Pontoppidan  gives  a figure  of  the  sea-serpent,  in 
which  the  head  is  seen  above  water,  followed  at 
intervals  by  the  eight  coils,  which,  as  they  were 
supposed  to  have  a fathom  between  them,  look  like 
so  many  detached  humps.  If  the  creature  seen  by 
De  Ferry  was  in  reality  a serpent,  then,  no  doubt, 
those  elevations  were  connected  together  by  corre- 
sponding depressions  beneath  the  water.  But  it  is 


28 


PONTOPPI DAN'S  SEA-SERPENT. 


now  thought  probable  that  the  ancient  mariner  was 
deceived,  as  many  modern  ones  have  been,  by  the 
striking  resemblance  between  a company  of  porpoises 
moving  through  the  water  in  single  file  — a way 
they  have  when  travelling — and  the  convolutions  of 
a gigantic  snake-like  animal.  A sea-serpent  very 
closely  resembling  that  described  by  Pontoppidan 
was  seen  in  Loch  Hourn,  on  the  west  of  Scotland, 
several  times  within  a few  days  in  the  year  1872. 
It  had  seven  hunches  or  protuberances  in  a line,  pre- 
ceded by  a head  and  neck.  Like  Pontoppidan’s,  it 
was  most  likely  a company  of  travelling  porpoises. 
Porpoises  raise  their  back  above  the  surface  in  order 
to  breathe ; and  when  thus  breathing  and  moving  in 
single  file  they  have  been  described  by  “ naturalists 
and  seamen  as  resembling  a long  string  of  casks  or 
buoys,  often  extending  for  eighty  or  a hundred 
yards.”  The  body  of  a serpent,  as  it  glides  along 
the  ground  or  through  the  water,  forms  convolutions 
or  folds;  but  these  are  from  side  to  side,  and  not  up 
and  down.  Consequently  they  would  not  show  as 
protuberances  above  the  water. 

Several  years  before  this,  Hans  Egede,  the  apostle 
of  Greenland,  encountered  a sea-monster,  of  which  he 
gives  an  account  in  his  “ Journal  of  the  Missions  to 
Greenland.” 


( Facsimile  of  a?i  Engraving  of  PontoJ>J>idan's. ) 


PONTOPPIDAN'S  SEA-SERPENT. 


31 


“ It  raised  itself/’  he  says,  “ so  high  up  out  of  the 
water  that  its  head  reached  above  our  main-top.” 
He  describes  it  as  having  a long,  sharp  snout  and 
broad  flippers,  and  as  spouting  water  like  a whale. 
Its  body  seemed  covered  with  scales,  its  skin  uneven 
and  wrinkled,  and  its  lower  part  formed  like  a snake. 
The  creature  after  some  time  plunged  back  into  the 
water,  and  then  turned  its  tail  up  above  the  surface  a 
whole  ship’s  length  from  the  head. 

Hans  Egede’s  readers  are  greatly  assisted  in  form- 
ing an  idea  of  what  this  creature  was  like  by  a draw- 
ing of  the  animal  supplied  by  a brother  missionary. 
It  has  been  ingeniously  suggested  by  Mr.  Henry  Lee 
that  Egede’s  sea-monster  was  no  other  than  one  of 
those  giant  cuttle-fishes  whose  presence  in  those 
northern  seas  gave  rise  to  the  belief  in  the  kraken. 
What  Egede  believed  to  be  the  creature’s  head  was, 
he  maintains,  the  tail  part  of  the  cuttle,  which  goes 
in  advance  as  the  creature  swims,  and  which  it  raises 
considerably  out  of  the  water  when  propelling  itself 
upward  to  the  surface.  The  so-called  tail  of  the 
monster  he  believes  to  have  been  one  of  the  arms  of 
the  cuttle-fish. 


CHAPTER  III. 


SCOTTISH  AND  AMERICAN  SEA-SERPENTS. 

No  more  is  heard  of  the  sea-serpent  till  the  beginning 
of  the  present  century,  when  the  monster,  or  what 
was  taken  for  it,  was  found  stranded  on  one  of  the 
Orkney  Islands.  It  was  measured  on  the  spot,  and  was 
said  to  be  fifty -six  feet  in  length  and  twelve  in 
circumference.  It  had  a small  head,  a long  neck,  and 
a bristly  mane,  extending  all  along  the  back,  and  was 
furnished  with  three  pairs  of  paddle-like  limbs.  A 
sketch  of  the  animal  was  taken  as  it  lay  on  the  shore, 
and  it  certainly  bore  little  or  no  resemblance  to  any 
previously  known  animal. 

Fortunately,  however,  as  the  carcass  of  this  sea- 
serpent  broke  up,  parts  of  the  backbone  were  pre- 
served and  sent  to  the  museums  in  London  and  Edin- 
burgh, where  they  were  examined  by  Owen  and  Home, 
who  at  once  pronounced  the  fragments  to  be  parts  of 
the  backbone  of  the  great  basking  )shark.  This  is  a 
British  species,  and  is  the  largest  of  all  the  sharks; 


SCOTTISH  AND  AMERICAN  SEA-SERPENTS. 


33 


being  known  to  attain  a length  of  thirty-six  feet. 
Although  the  largest,  it  is  the  least  ferocious  of  the 
sharks,  being  sluggish  in  its  habits,  and  frequently 
lying  motionless  sunning  itself  on  the  surface  of  the 
water.  When  thus  engaged,  it  will  sometimes  allow 
a boat  to  touch  it  before  moving.  The  specimen 
stranded  on  the  Orkneys  may  have  been  exceptionally 
large,  but  that  it  was  simply  a basking  shark  and  no 
sea-serpent  is  beyond  all  doubt.  Had  it  not  been  for 
the  preservation  of  these  few  vertebrae,  there  is  little 
doubt  that  this  would  have  been  quoted  as  one  of  the 
best  authenticated  cases  of  the  occurrence  of  the  sea- 
serpent. 

In  the  following  year  the  Wernerian  Society  of 
Natural  History,  which  had  published  in  their  Transac- 
tions the  description  and  figure  of  the  above-mentioned 
monster,  received  a communication  from  Mr.  Maclean, 
the  minister  of  Eigg,  in  which  he  relates  an  adventure 
he  had  with  a huge  sea-serpent  off*  the  island  of  Coll. 

“ I was  rowing  in  a boat,”  he  says,  “ when  I re- 
marked about  half  a mile  off*  an  object  which  gradually 
excited  my  surprise.  At  the  first  glance  it  appeared 
to  me  like  a little  rock ; but  knowing  there  was  no 
rock  in  that  situation,  I examined  it  attentively.  I 
then  perceived  that  it  rose  considerably  above  the 

level  of  the  water,  and  after  a slow  movement  I dis- 
cs?) 3 


34 


SCOTTISH  AND  AMERICAN  SEA-SERPENTS. 


tinguished  one  of  its  eyes.  Alarmed  by  the  animal's 
extraordinary  aspect  and  enormous  size,  I guided  the 
rudder  of  my  boat  in  such  a manner  as  not  to  keep 
too  far  off  the  shore,  when  suddenly  we  saw  the 
monster  plunge  in  our  direction. 

“ Persuaded  that  it  was  pursuing  us,  we  rowed  with 
our  utmost  strength.  J ust  at  the  moment  that  we 
sprang  upon  a rock,  where  we  climbed  as  high  as  we 
possibly  could,  we  saw  it  glide  rapidly  over  the  surface 
of  the  water  towards  our  boat.  At  some  fathoms 
from  it,  finding  the  water  deep,  it  reared  upright  its 
horrible  head,  and  sweeping  round,  was  obviously 
puzzled  how  it  should  disengage  itself  from  the  narrow 
creek  it  had  entered. 

“ We  could  still  perceive  it  at  the  distance  of  half 
a mile.  Its  head  was  large,  of  an  oval  form,  and 
carried  upon  the  summit  of  a neck  which  was  more 
slender  than  the  remainder  of  its  body.  Its  shoulders, 
if  I may  so  call  them,  had  no  fins,  and  the  body 
diminished  in  size  towards  the  tail,  whose  outline  it 
was  difficult  to  see  very  clearly,  because  the  monster 
kept  it  continually  under  water.  It  seemed  to  move 
by  progressive  undulations  from  above  to  below.  Its 
length  was  probably  seventy  to  eighty  feet.  It 
advanced  or  receded  more  slowly  each  time  that  its 
head  was  out  of  the  water ; and  when  it  reared  it 


SCOTTISH  AND  AMERICAN  SEA-SERPENTS, 


35 


above  the  sea,  it  evidently  seemed  to  be  looking  out 
for  distant  objects. 

“ About  the  same  period  that  I saw  this  marine 
serpent,  it  was  discovered  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
island  of  Canna.  The  crews  of  thirteen  fishing-boats 
were  so  much  alarmed  at  its  appearance  that,  with 
one  accord,  they  all  took  refuge  in  the  nearest  creek. 
Between  them  and  Canna  the  crew  on  board  another 
wherry  saw  it  approaching  with  its  head  out  of  the 
water.  One  of  the  boatmen  afterwards  declared  that 
the  head  was  as  large  as  a small  barrel,  and  the  eyes 
as  big  as  a saucer.  With  this  exception,  I have  been 
unable  to  obtain  from  those  who  met  it  any  more 
details  more  interesting  than  those  I have  just 
recorded.” 

In  the  month  of  August  1817  it  was  announced  to 
the  Linnaean  Society  of  the  United  States  that  a 
prodigious  animal  had  been  several  times  met  with  in 
Gloucester  Bay,  near  Cape  Anne,  at  about  thirty  miles 
from  Boston.  Its  general  character  was  described 
as  that  of  a serpent ; it  swam  with  an  astonishing 
rapidity,  like  to  a series  of  buoys  or  barrels,  each 
plunging  in  its  turn  into  the  water.  It  was  in 
tranquil  weather  only,  and  when  the  sun  was  shining 
with  all  his  splendour,  that  the  monster  made  its  ap- 
pearance before  the  astonished  eyes  of  the  fishermen. 


36 


SCOTTISH  AND  AMERICAN  SEA-SERPENTS. 


The  Society  immediately  appointed  a committee  to 
examine  into  and  report  upon  the  tales  circulated 
respecting  this  singular  animal.  The  committee 
repaired  to  the  spot ; interrogated  a great  number  of 
witnesses ; made,  in  a word,  a most  searching  inquiry, 
not  less  rigid  than  is  pursued  by  a magistrate  when 
investigating  the  circumstances  which  have  accom- 
panied a mysterious  crime. 

The  report  issued  by  the  committee  excited  great 
attention  in  America,  and  the  entire  agreement  of  the 
depositions  of  the  various  witnesses — in  so  far,  at 
least,  as  concerned  the  principal  facts — was  amply 
sufficient  to  prove  that  the  inquiry  had  not  been 
directed  to  any  empty  reverie  or  idle  hoax,  but  to  a 
genuine  incident. 

One  of  the  witnesses  had  seen  the  sea-serpent  only 
from  a distance.  With  his  telescope  he  counted  eight 
separate  portions,  and  this  appearance  he  attributed  to 
the  animal's  undulations  in  a vertical  direction.  An- 
other saw,  on  the  10th  of  August,  the  reptile  gliding 
swiftly  just  beneath  the  surface,  and  again  caught 
sight  of  it,  on  the  25  th,  tranquilly  extended  upon  the 
waves,  its  deep  brown  body  covering  a length  of  fifty 
feet.  A third  individual  compared  its  head  to  that 
of  a rattlesnake,  but  as  large  as  that  of  a horse,  and 
with  a body  fully  one  hundred  feet  long.  Between 


SCOTTISH  AND  AMERICAN  SEA-SERPENTS . 


39 


this  maximum  and  the  minimum  of  fifty  feet  all  the 
witnesses,  we  may  observe,  placed  their  calculations. 
Some  had  seen  it  open  its  jaws,  like  those  of  a 
terrestrial  reptile.  In  its  swimming,  which  was  some- 
times rapid,  sometimes  slow,  it  described  circle  after 
circle,  or  struck  forward  in  a straight  line.  Sometimes 
it  kept  its  head  raised  a foot  above  the  surface  of 
the  sea. 

On  the  14th  and  28th  several  guns  were  fired  at 
it  \ and  at  each  discharge  it  turned  round,  made  towards 
the  boat,  then  diving  under  the  keel,  reappeared  a 
few  fathoms  beyond.  But  at  the  second  attack, 
probably  being  wounded,  it  kept  away  and  returned 
no  more,  and  by  this  means  terminated  the  observa- 
tions of  which  it  had  been  the  object. 

Another  American  sea-serpent  was  observed  by  a 
party  of  five  British  officers  while  crossing  in  a yacht 
from  Halifax  to  Mahone  Bay.  Not  more  than  two 
hundred  yards  from  them  they  saw  a sea -monster, 
whose  head  and  neck  were  precisely  like  those  of  a 
common  snake,  in  the  act  of  swimming,  the  head 
being  so  far  elevated  and  thrown  forward  by  the 
curve  of  the  neck  as  to  enable  them  to  see  the  water 
under  and  beyond  it.  The  creature  rapidly  passed, 
but  they  judged  its  length  to  be  about  eighty  feet. 
Its  head  appeared  to  be  about  six  feet  in  length,  and 


40 


SCOTTISH  AND  AMERICAN  SEA-SERPENTS . 


they  saw  about  as  much  of  the  neck.  The  entire 
appearance  of  the  creature  convinced  them  that  they 
had  been  favoured  with  a view  of  the  genuine  sea- 
serpent. 

The  great  sea-serpent  is  next  heard  of  in  its  old 
familiar  resort — the  Norwegian  coast — where,  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Christiansund  and  Molde,  it  was 
seen  at  different  times  in  1846  by  a large  number  of 
respectable  witnesses.  One  man,  when  sitting  in  his 
boat  during  the  dog  days,  saw  it  twice  within  two 
hours.  The  second  time  it  came  so  close  to  him — 
within  six  feet — that  he  got  thoroughly  alarmed,  and 
commending  his  soul  to  God,  he  lay  down  in  the  boat 
with  his  head  only  high  enough  to  keep  an  eye  on 
the  monster.  It  passed  him,  and  then  returned;  but  a 
breeze  springing  up,  it  finally  disappeared. 

The  number  of  respectable  Norwegians  who  testify 
to  having  seen  a sea-serpent  in  the  same  neighbour- 
hood at  that  time  renders  it  certain  that  some  un- 
usually large  sea-monster  had  been  then  visiting  the 
locality.  Of  their  various  narratives  the  most  satis- 
factory in  every  respect  is  that  of  Archdeacon  Dein- 
bolt of  Molde.  He  states  that  on  28th  July  1845, 
while  four  of  the  inhabitants  of  Molde  were  out  fish- 
ing in  Romsdal-fiord  during  a warm  sunshiny  day, 
they  saw  a long  marine  animal,  which  slowly  ad- 


SCOTTISH  AND  AMERICAN  SEA-SERPENTS. 


41 


vanced  by  the  aid,  as  they  thought,  of  two  fins  on 
the  fore  part  of  the  body.  They  seem,  however,  only 
to  have  guessed  the  existence  of  fins  by  the  commo- 
tion in  the  water  on  both  sides  of  the  creature’s  head. 

“ The  visible  part  of  the  body,”  says  the  archdeacon, 
“ appeared  to  be  between  forty  and  fifty  feet  in 
length,  and  moved  in  undulations  like  a snake.  The 
body  was  round,  and  of  a dark  colour,  and  seemed  to 
be  several  ells  in  thickness.  As  they  discerned  a 
waving  motion  in  the  water  behind  the  animal,  they 
concluded  that  part  of  the  body  was  concealed  under 
water.  That  it  was  one  continuous  animal  they  saw 
plainly  from  its  movement.  When  the  animal  was 
about  one  hundred  yards  from  the  boat  they  noticed 
tolerably  correctly  its  fore  parts,  which  ended  in  a 
sharp  snout.  Its  colossal  head  raised  itself  above  the 
water  in  the  form  of  a semicircle ; the  lower  part 
was  not  visible.  The  colour  of  the  head  was  dark 
brown,  and  the  skin  smooth.  They  did  not  notice 
the  eyes,  or  any  mane  or  bristles  on  the  throat. 
When  the  serpent  came  about  a musket -shot  near, 
Lund  fired  at  it,  and  was  certain  the  shots  hit  it  on 
the  head.  After  the  shot  it  dived,  but  came  up 
immediately.  It  raised  its  neck  in  the  air,  like  a 
snake  preparing  to  dart  on  its  prey.  After  he  had 
turned  and  got  his  body  in  a straight  line,  which  he 


42 


SCOTTISH  AND  AMERICAN  SEA-SERPENTS. 


appeared  to  do  with  great  difficulty,  he  darted  like  an 
arrow  against  the  boat.  They  reached  the  shore ; and 
the  animal,  perceiving  it  had  come  into  shallow  water, 
dived  immediately  and  disappeared  in  the  deep. 

“ Such  is  the  declaration  of  these  four  men ; and  no 
one  has  cause  to  question  their  veracity,  or  imagine 
that  they  were  so  seized  with  fear  that  they  could  not 
observe  what  took  place  so  near  them.  There  are  not 
many  here,  or  on  other  parts  of  the  Norwegian  coast 
who  longer  doubt  the  existence  of  the  sea-serpent. 
The  writer  of  this  narrative  was  a long  time  sceptical, 
as  he  had  not  been  so  fortunate  as  to  see  this  monster 
of  the  deep ; but  after  the  many  accounts  he  has 
read,  and  the  relations  he  has  received  from  credible 
witnesses,  he  does  not  dare  longer  to  doubt  the  exist- 
ence of  the  sea-serpent.” 

It  is  chiefly  the  points  in  this  very  minute  descrip- 
tion of  a sea-serpent  that  led  Mr.  Henry  Lee  to  pro- 
pound the  theory  that  in  this  and  most  other  cases 
of  the  occurrence  of  the  sea-serpent,  the  creature  seen 
was  in  reality  a giant  cuttle-fish.  These,  as  will  be 
shown  later  on,  occur  in  Norwegian  waters.  They 
grow  to  a length  of  over  fifty  feet,  and  in  calm  warm 
weather  they  float  on  the  surface.  Their  lozenge- 
shaped tail  might  readily  be  mistaken  for  the  head, 
seeing  those  creatures  shoot  through  the  water  tail 


SCOTTISH  AND  AMERICAN  SEA-SERPENTS. 


43 


first.  That  part  of  the  body  between  the  tail  and  the 
tentacles  might  well  pass  for  the  neck ; while  a long 
and  supple  tentacle  floating  behind  on  the  surface 
might  readily  convey  the  idea  of  a serpentine  body. 
It  is  hard  to  understand  the  boiling  of  the  water 
referred  to  by  Deinbolt,  if  the  creature  possessed  the 
gliding  motion  of  a snake.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
forcible  ejection  of  water  from  the  funnel,  necessary 
for  the  creature’s  propulsion,  would  quite  explain  the 
commotion  in  the  water,  if  what  the  four  boatmen 
of  Molde  saw  was  no  sea-serpent,  but  only  a giant 
cuttle-fish. 

The  belief  in  the  existence  of  a great  sea-serpent 
by  the  Norwegians  is  unhesitating,  and  nothing  aston- 
ishes them  more  than  the  scepticism  which  prevails  in 
this  country  on  the  point.  A writer  in  the  Times , 
who  spent  three  summers  in  Norway,  says : — 

“ I have  repeatedly  conversed  with  the  natives  on 
this  subject.  A parish  priest  residing  on  Romsdal- 
fiord,  about  two  days’  journey  south  of  Drontheim,  an 
intelligent  person,  whose  veracity  I have  no  reason  to 
doubt,  gave  me  a circumstantial  account  of  one  which 
he  had  himself  seen.  It  rose  within  thirty  yards  of 
the  boat  in  which  he  was,  and  swam  parallel  with  it 
for  a considerable  time.  Its  head  he  described  as 
equalling  a small  cask  in  size,  and  its  mouth,  which  it 


44 


SCOTTISH  AND  AMERICAN  SEA-SERPENTS. 


repeatedly  opened  and  shut,  was  furnished  with  for- 
midable teeth.  Its  neck  was  smaller,  but  its  body — 
of  which  he  supposed  that  he  saw  about  half  on  the 
surface  of  the  water — was  not  less  in  girth  than  that 
of  a moderately-sized  horse. 

“ Another  gentleman,  in  whose  house  I stayed,  had 
also  seen  one,  and  gave  a similar  account  of  it.  It 
also  came  near  his  boat  upon  the  fiord,  when  it  was 
fired  at ; upon  which  it  turned  and  pursued  them  to 
the  shore,  which  was  luckily  near,  when  it  disappeared. 
They  expressed  great  surprise  at  the  general  disbelief 
attaching  to  the  existence  of  these  animals  amongst 
naturalists,  and  assured  me  that  there  was  scarcely 
a sailor  accustomed  to  those  inland  lakes  who  had  not 
seen  them  at  one  time  or  another.’, 


CHAPTER  IV. 


THE  “D^DALUS”  SEA-SERPENT. 

Interest  in  the  vexed  question  of  the  sea-serpent  was 
revived  in  England  by  the  news  received  in  October 
1848  that  the  creature  had  been  seen  by  the  officers 
on  board  her  Majesty’s  ship  Daedalus,  between  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  St.  Helena. 

In  reply  to  a communication  from  the  Admiralty 
on  the  subject,  Captain  M‘Quhae  of  the  Dcedalus  stated 
that  on  the  6th  of  August,  when  the  weather  was 
dark  and  cloudy,  a midshipman  reported  that  some- 
thing very  unusual  was  rapidly  approaching  the  ship 
from  before  the  beam.  “ On  our  attention,”  he  says, 
“ being  called  to  the  object,  it  was  discovered  to  be  an 
enormous  serpent,  with  head  and  shoulders  kept  about 
four  feet  constantly  above  the  surface  of  the  sea ; and, 
as  nearly  as  we  could  approximate  by  comparing  it 
with  the  length  of  what  our  main-top-sail  would  show 
in  the  water,  there  was  at  the  very  least  sixty  feet 
of  the  animal  d fleur  d’eau,  no  portion  of  which  was, 


46 


THE  D JED ALUS  SEA-SERPENT. 


to  our  perception,  used  in  propelling  it  through  the 
water,  either  by  vertical  or  horizontal  undulation.  It 
passed  rapidly,  but  so  close  under  our  lee  quarter,  that 
had  it  been  a man  of  my  acquaintance  I should  easily 
have  recognized  his  features  with  the  naked  eye ; and 
it  did  not,  either  in  approaching  the  ship  or  after  it 
had  passed  our  wake,  deviate  in  the  slightest  degree 
from  its  course  to  the  south-west,  which  it  held  on  at 
the  pace  of  from  twelve  to  fifteen  miles  per  hour, 
apparently  on  some  determined  purpose. 

“ The  diameter  of  the  serpent  was  about  fifteen  or 
sixteen  inches  behind  the  head,  which  was  without 
any  doubt  that  of  a snake ; and  it  was  never,  during 
the  twenty  minutes  it  continued  in  sight  of  our  glasses, 
once  below  the  surface  of  the  water  : its  colour  was  dark 
brown,  and  yellowish- white  about  the  throat.  It  had 
no  fins,  but  something  like  the  mane  of  a horse,  or 
rather  a bunch  of  sea- weed,  washed  about  its  back.  It 
was  seen  by  the  quartermaster,  the  boatswain’s  mate, 
and  the  man  at  the  wheel,  in  addition  to  myself  and 
the  officers  above  mentioned. 

“ I am  having  a drawing  of  the  serpent  made,  from 
a sketch  taken  immediately  after  it  was  seen,  which  I 
hope  to  have  ready  for  transmission  to  my  Lords 
Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty.” 

Lieutenant  Drummond,  the  officer  of  the  watch, 


THE  DAEDALUS  SEA-SERPENT. 


49 


entered  in  his  log-book  at  the  time  his  impressions  of 
what  he  saw.  His  statement  fe  as  follows : — 

“ In  the  four  to  six  watch,  at  about  five  o’clock,  we 
observed  a most  remarkable  fish  on  our  lee-water, 
crossing  the  stern  in  a south-west  direction.  The 
appearance  of  its  head,  which  with  the  back  fin  was 
the  only  portion  of  the  animal  visible,  was  long, 
pointed,  and  flattened  at  the  top,  perhaps  ten  feet  in 
length,  the  upper  jaw  projecting  considerably.  The 
fin  was  perhaps  twenty  feet  in  the  rear  of  the  head, 
and  visible  occasionally.  The  captain  also  asserted 
that  he  saw  the  tail,  or  another  fin,  about  the  same 
distance  behind  it.  The  upper  part  of  the  head  and 
shoulders  appeared  of  a dark  brown  colour,  and  be- 
neath the  under  jaw  a brownish-white.  It  pursued 
a steady,  undeviating  course,  keeping  its  head  hori- 
zontal with  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  in  rather 
a raised  position,  disappearing  occasionally  beneath  a 
wave  for  a very  brief  interval,  and  not  apparently  for 
purposes  of  respiration.  It  was  going  at  the  rate  of 
perhaps  from  twelve  to  fourteen  miles  an  hour,  and 
when  nearest  was  perhaps  one  hundred  yards  distant. 
In  fact,  it  gave  one  quite  the  idea  of  a large  snake  or 
eel.  No  one  in  the  ship  has  ever  seen  anything  simi- 
lar ; so  it  is  at  least  extraordinary.  It  was  visible  to 
the  naked  eye  for  five  minutes,  and  with  a glass  for 

(37)  4 


50 


THE  D HID  ALUS  SEA-SERPENT. 


perhaps  fifteen  more.  The  weather  was  dark  and 
squally  at  the  time,  with  some  sea  running.” 

The  publication  of  this  further  testimony  to  the 
existence  of  what  seemed  to  be  a huge  sea-serpent 
gave  rise  to  much  controversy.  Naturalists  were 
loath  to  recognize  in  it  anything  absolutely  new. 
One  suggested  that  it  might  be  a survivor  of  the 
great  marine  reptiles  of  former  periods,  while  another 
thought  it  might  be  the  Plesiosaurus . Professor 
Owen  pooh-poohed  this  view,  but  could  think  of  noth- 
ing more  likely  than  that  the  monster  seen  from  the 
Pcedalus  was  a great  seal.  The  most  likely  species 
was,  in  his  opinion,  the  sea-elephant,  which  attains 
the  length  of  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet.  These  great 
seals,  he  says,  abound  in  certain  of  the  islands  of  the 
Southern  and  Antarctic  Seas,  from  which  an  indi- 
vidual is  occasionally  floated  off  upon  an  iceberg. 
When  a large  sea-elephant  is  thus  borne  off  to  a dis- 
tance from  its  native  shore,  it  is  compelled  to  return 
for  rest  to  its  floating  abode,  after  it  has  made  its  daily 
excursions  in  quest  of  the  fishes  or  squids  that  con- 
stitute its  food.  It  is  thus  brought  by  the  iceberg 
into  the  latitudes  of  the  Cape,  and  perhaps  farther 
north  before  the  berg  has  melted  away.  Then  the 
poor  seal  is  compelled  to  swim  as  long  as  strength 
endures ; and  in  such  a predicament  he  imagines  the 


SEA-SERPENT  PASSING  UNDER  THE  STERN  OF  THE  D/EDALUS. 


THE  DAEDALUS  SEA-SERPENT . 


53 


creature  was  that  was  seen  rapidly  approaching  the 
Dcedalus  from  before  the  beam,  scanning  probably  its 
capabilities  as  a resting-place,  as  it  paddled  its  long 
stiff  body  past  the  ship. 

Captain  M'Quhae  made  a spirited  reply  to  Professor 
Owen,  which,  as  it  throws  some  additional  light  on  the 
creature’s  appearance  and  movements,  may  here  be 
quoted. 

“ Professor  Owen,”  he  says,  “ correctly  states  that  I 
evidently  saw  a large  creature  moving  rapidly  through 
the  water  very  different  from  anything  I had  before 
witnessed — neither  a whale,  a grampus,  a great  shark, 
an  alligator,  nor  any  of  the  large  surface-swimming 
creatures  fallen  in  with  on  ordinary  voyages.  I now 
assert,  neither  was  it  a common  seal  nor  a sea-elephant, 
its  great  length  and  its  totally  different  physiognomy 
precluding  the  possibility  of  its  being  a phoca  of  any 
species.  The  head  was  flat,  and  not  a capacious 
vaulted  cranium  ; nor  had  it  a stiff  inflexible  trunk — 
a conclusion  at  which  Professor  Owen  has  jumped, 
most  certainly  not  justified  by  the  simple  statement 
that  no  portion  of  the  sixty  feet  seen  by  us  was  used 
in  propelling  it  through  the  water,  either  by  vertical 
or  horizontal  undulation. 

“ It  is  also  assumed  that  the  calculation  of  its  length 
was  made  under  a strong  preconception  of  the  nature 


54 


THE  D JED  ALUS  SEA-SERPENT. 


of  the  beast — another  conclusion  quite  contrary  to  the 
facts.  It  was  not  until  after  the  great  length  was 
developed  by  its  nearest  approach  to  the  ship,  and 
until  after  that  most  important  point  had  been  duly 
considered  and  debated — as  well  as  such  could  be  in 
the  brief  space  of  time  allowed  for  so  doing — that  it 
was  pronounced  to  be  a serpent  by  all  who  saw  it, 
and  who  are  too  well  accustomed  to  judge  of  lengths 
and  breadths  of  objects  in  the  sea  to  mistake  a real 
substance  and  an  actual  living  body,  coolly  and  dis- 
passionately contemplated,  at  so  short  a distance  too, 
for  the  ‘ eddy  caused  by  the  action  of  the  deeper 
immersed  fins  and  tail  of  a rapidly  moving  gigantic 
seal  raising  its  head  above  the  surface  of  the  water/ 
as  Professor  Owen  imagines,  in  quest  of  its  lost  ice- 
berg. 

“ The  creative  powers  of  the  human  mind  may  be 
very  limited.  On  this  occasion  they  were  not  called 
into  requisition,  my  purpose  and  desire  throughout 
being  to  furnish  eminent  naturalists,  such  as  the 
learned  professor,  with  accurate  facts,  and  not  with 
exaggerated  representations,  nor  with  what  could  by 
any  possibility  proceed  from  optical  illusion.  And  I 
beg  to  assure  him  that  old  Pontoppidan  having 
clothed  his  sea-serpent  with  a mane  could  not  have 
suggested  the  idea  of  ornamenting  the  creature  seen 


THE  DAEDALUS  SEA-SERPENT. 


55 


from  the  Dcedalus  with  a similar  appendage,  for  the 
simple  reason  that  I had  never  seen  his  account  or 
even  heard  of  his  sea-serpent  until  my  arrival  in  Lon- 
don. Some  other  solution  must  therefore  be  found  for 
the  very  remarkable  coincidence  between  us  in  that 
particular,  in  order  to  unravel  the  mystery. 

“ Finally,  I deny  the  existence  of  excitement  or  the 
possibility  of  optical  illusion.  I adhere  to  the  state- 
ments, as  to  form,  colour,  and  dimensions,  contained 
in  my  official  report  to  the  Admiralty,  and  I leave 
them  as  data  whereupon  the  learned  and  scientific 
may  exercise  the  ‘ pleasures  of  imagination/  until  some 
more  fortunate  opportunity  shall  occur  of  making  a 
closer  acquaintance  with  the  ‘ great  unknown/  in  the 
present  instance  most  assuredly  no  ghost.” 

Giant  squids  were  as  yet  undiscovered,  so  that  the 
suggestion  that  the  sea-serpent  of  the  Dcedalus  might 
have  been  one  of  these  creatures  was  not  made ; nor 
is  there  much  either  in  the  description  or  in  the 
accompanying  figure  to  bear  out  Mr.  Lee’s  cuttle-fish 
theory. 


CHAPTER  Y. 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS. 

Captain  M/Quhae’s  narrative  put  sea-faring  people  on 
the  outlook  for  the  sea-serpent.  Not  many  months 
after,  when  the  ship  Brazilian  was  sailing  within 
forty  miles  of  the  place  where  the  Dcedalus  encoun- 
tered the  monster,  the  captain  saw  a strange  object 
astern,  apparently  twenty-five  to  thirty  feet  in  length, 
and  moving  from  the  ship  with  a steady  sinuous 
motion.  The  head  appeared  to  be  raised  several 
feet  above  the  water,  and  seemed  to  have  a mane 
running  down  to  the  floating  portion,  and  extending 
to  within  six  feet  from  the  tail.  All  who  saw  it  at 
once  concluded  that  they  were  in  presence  of  the 
great  sea-serpent.  To  end  all  doubt  on  the  point, 
however,  it  was  determined  that  an  effort  should  be 
made  to  capture  it.  A boat  was  accordingly  lowered, 
and  with  the  captain  standing,  harpoon  in  hand,  it 
was  rowed  towards  the  monster.  The  closer  view 
now  obtained  of  it  showed  that  it  was  only  an  im- 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS. 


57 


mense  piece  of  sea- weed  drifting  with  the  current,  and 
which  owed  its  snake-like  motion  to  the  swell  caused 
by  a previous  gale  ! 

This  is  not  the  only  case  on  record  in  which  the 
sea-serpent  resolved  itself  into  sea- weed.  The  captain 
of  the  ship  Pekin  reported  that  on  December  28th, 
1848,  when  his  ship  was  about  half-way  between  the 
Cape  and  St.  Helena,  he  saw  an  extraordinary  object 
of  considerable  length  in  the  water.  With  the  tele- 
scope he  could  plainly  discern  a huge  head  and  neck, 
covered  with  a shaggy-looking  kind  of  mane,  which 
it  kept  lifting  at  intervals  out  of  the  water.  All  on 
board  saw  it,  and  all  declared  it  to  be  the  great  sea- 
serpent.  A boat  was  lowered,  and  a line  made  fast 
to  the  “ snake,”  when  it  was  towed  alongside  and 
hoisted  on  board.  It  was  then  seen  to  be  a piece  of 
gigantic  sea- weed,  completely  covered  with  snake-like 
barnacles.  “ So  like  a huge  living  monster  did  this 
appear,”  says  the  captain,  “ that  had  circumstances  pre- 
vented my  sending  a boat  to  it,  I should  certainly 
have  believed  I had  seen  the  great  sea-serpent.” 

Captain  M'Quhae’s  account  of  his  adventure  led  also 
to  the  publication  of  several  narratives  of  similar 
instances  not  before  recorded.  Among  these  was  that 
of  Surgeon  Davidson,  who  stated  that  when  returning 
to  India  in  the  Royal  Saxon , in  the  year  1829,  he  and 


58 


RECENT  SEA  -SERPENTS . 


the  captain  were  at  the  same  instant  literally  fixed  in 
astonishment  by  the  appearance  a short  distance  ahead 
of  an  animal  bearing  a close  resemblance  to  that  seen 
by  Captain  M'Qubae.  “ It  passed  within  thirty-five 
yards  of  the  ship  without  altering  its  course  in  the 
least ; but  as  it  came  abreast  of  us  it  slowly  turned 
its  head  towards  us.  Apparently  about  one-third  of 
the  upper  part  of  its  body  was  above  water,  and  we 
could  see  the  water  curling  up  on  its  breast  as  it 
moved  along ; but  by  what  means  it  moved  we  could 
not  perceive.  We  watched  it  going  astern  with  in- 
tense interest  until  it  had  nearly  disappeared,  when 
my  companion,  turning  to  me  with  a countenance 
expressive  of  the  utmost  astonishment,  exclaimed, 
‘ Good  heavens  ! what  can  that  be  V ” 

After  1848  nothing  further  is  heard  of  this  sea 
monster  till  1852,  when  the  passengers  on  board  the 
Barham , bound  for  India,  got  a glimpse  of  it.  It  is 
thus  described  by  one  of  the  passengers : — 

“ About  five  hundred  yards  from  the  ship  there  was 
the  head  and  neck  of  an  enormous  snake.  We  saw 
about  sixteen  or  twenty  feet  out  of  the  water,  and  he 
spouted  a long  way  from  his  head.  Down  his  back 
he  had  a crest  like  a cock’s  comb  ; and  was  going  very 
slowly  through  the  water,  but  left  a wake  of  about 
fifty  or  sixty  feet,  as  if  dragging  a long  body  after 


REGENT  SEA-SERPENTS. 


61 


him.  The  captain  put  the  ship  off  her  course  to  run 
clown  to  him ; but  as  we  approached  him  he  went 
down.  His  colour  wTas  green,  with  light  spots.  He 
was  seen  by  all  on  board.” 

Five  years  later,  while  the  ship  Castilian  was  sail- 
ing within  ten  miles  of  St.  Helena,  it  encountered 
what  has  been  described  by  the  captain  and  two  chief 
officers  as  a great  sea-serpent. 

“ While  myself  and  officers,”  says  Captain  Harring- 
ton, “ were  standing  on  the  lee  side  of  the  poop, 
looking  towards  the  island,  we  were  startled  by  the 
sight  of  a huge  marine  animal,  which  reared  its  head 
out  of  the  water  within  twenty  yards  of  the  ship, 
when  it  suddenly  disappeared  for  about  half  a minute, 
and  then  made  its  appearance  in  the  same  manner 
again,  showing  us  distinctly  its  neck  and  head  about 
ten  or  twelve  feet  out  of  the  water.  Its  head  was 
shaped  like  a long  nun-buoy,  and  I suppose  the 
diameter  to  have  been  seven  or  eight  feet  in  the 
largest  part,  with  a kind  of  scroll  or  tuft  of  loose  skin 
encircling  it  about  two  feet  from  the  top.  The  water 
was  discoloured  for  several  hundred  feet  from  its  head, 
so  much  so  that  on  its  first  appearance  my  impression 
was  that  the  ship  was  in  broken  water,  produced,  as  I 
supposed,  by  some  volcanic  agency  since  the  last  time 
I passed  the  island.  But  the  second  appearance  com- 


62 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS . 


pletely  dispelled  those  fears,  and  assured  us  that  it 
was  a monster  of  extraordinary  length,  which  appeared 
to  be  moving  slowly  towards  the  land.  The  ship  was 
going  too  fast  to  enable  us  to  reach  the  mast-head  in 
time  to  form  a correct  estimate  of  its  extreme  length ; 
but  from  what  we  saw  from  the  deck,  we  conclude 
that  it  must  have  been  over  two  hundred  feet  long. 
The  boatswain  and  several  of  the  crew  who  observed 
it  from  the  top-gallant  forecastle  state  that  it  was 
more  than  double  the  length  of  the  ship,  in  which  case 
it  must  have  been  five  hundred  feet.  Be  that  as  it 
may,  I am  convinced  that  it  belonged  to  the  serpent 
tribe.  It  was  of  a dark  colour  about  the  head,  and 
was  covered  with  several  white  spots.  Having  a press 
of  canvas  on  the  ship  at  the  time,  I was  unable  to 
round -to  without  risk,  and  therefore  was  precluded 
from  getting  another  sight  of  this  leviathan  of  the 
deep.” 

Coming  to  recently  published  accounts  of  the  ap- 
pearance of  what  observers  regarded  as  the  great  sea- 
serpent,  the  most  remarkable  is  that  related  by  the 
officers  and  crew  of  the  Pauline.  Their  vessel  was 
on  its  way  from  Shields  to  Zanzibar,  when  in  July 
1875  they  observed  three  large  sperm  whales,  one  of 
which  was  gripped  round  the  body  with  two  turns  of 
what  appeared  to  be  a huge  serpent.  The  head  and 


THE  SEA-SERPENT  AND  SPERM  WHALE.  AS  SEEN  FROM  THE  PAULINE. 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS. 


65 


tail  appeared  to  have  a length  beyond  the  coils  of 
about  thirty  feet,  its  girth  being  eight  or  nine  feet. 
The  serpent  whirled  its  victim  round  and  round  for 
about  fifteen  minutes,  then  suddenly  dragged  the 
whale  to  the  bottom  head  first. 

Five  days  later  a similar  serpent  was  seen  about 
two  hundred  yards  off,  shooting  along  the  surface, 
head  and  neck  being  out  of  the  water  several  feet. 
A few  moments  after  it  was  seen  elevated  some  sixty 
feet  perpendicularly  in  the  air.  This  monster  seems 
to  have  been  the  most  snake-like  among  all  those  that 
have  been  called  sea-serpents.  It  had  no  fins ; it  was 
seen  grappling  with  its  prey  exactly  as  a boa-con- 
strictor would  have  done;  it  carried  its  neck  and  head 
high  as  it  shot  along,  just  as  the  land-snake  does  when 
gliding  along  the  ground ; and  it  rose  perpendicularly 
out  of  the  water  until  it  must  almost  have  been  stand- 
ing on  its  tail,  and  land-snakes  are  thus  also  known 
to  stand  erect. 

The  year  1875  appears  to  have  been  a famous  one 
for  sea-serpents,  one  of  the  most  noteworthy  being 
that  which  was  seen  by  a party  of  Americans  yachting 
oft'  the  Massachusetts  coast.  Those  who  saw  it  were 
for  the  most  part  educated  people,  and  were  widely 
known  and  respected.  The  following  is  the  story  as 
told  by  one  of  them  : — “On  the  30th  of  July  1875  a 

(37)  5 


66 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS. 


party  of  us  were  upon  the  yacht  Princess , and  while 
sailing  between  Swampscott  and  Egg  Rock  we  saw  a 
very  strange  creature.  As  nearly  as  we  could  judge 
from  a distance  of  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  yards, 
its  head  resembled  that  of  a turtle  or  a snake,  black 
above  and  white  beneath.  It  raised  its  head  from 
time  to  time  some  six  or  eight  feet  out  of  the  water, 
keeping  it  out  from  five  to  ten  seconds  at  a time. 
At  the  back  of  the  neck  there  was  a fin,  resembling 
that  of  a black-fish  (a  small  species  of  whale),  and 
underneath,  some  distance  below  its  throat,  was  a pro- 
jection which  looked  as  if  it  might  have  been  the 
beginning  of  a pair  of  fins  or  flippers  like  those  of  a 
seal.  But  as  to  that  we  could  not  be  sure,  as  the 
creature  never  raised  itself  far  enough  out  of  the 
water  to  enable  us  to  decide.  Its  head  seemed  to  be 
about  two  and  a half  feet  in  diameter.  Of  its  length 
we  could  not  judge,  as  only  its  head  and  neck  were 
visible.  We  followed  it  about  for  perhaps  two  hours. 
It  was  fired  at  repeatedly  with  a Ballard  rifle,  but 
without  apparent  effect,  though  one  ball  seemed  to 
strike  it.  It  was  seen  and  watched  by  the  whole 
party  upon  the  yacht.”  A person  fishing  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood while  the  chase  was  going  on  corroborated 
most  of  the  above  statement,  and  added  that  he  ob- 
served on  the  dark  surface  of  the  creature  two  elon- 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS. 


67 


gated  white  marks  about  six  feet  in  length  and  six 
inches  wide.  Two  weeks  earlier,  Captain  Garton, 
when  off  Plymouth,  U.S.,  saw~  a somewhat  similar  sea 
monster  which  appeared  to  be  pursuing  a sword-fish. 
The  head  of  the  monster,  he  says,  was  raised  at  least 
ten  feet  above  the  ocean,  but  remained  stationary 
only  a moment,  as  it  was  almost  constantly  in  motion; 
now  diving  for  a moment,  and  as  suddenly  reappear- 
ing to  the  same  height.  Its  length  was  more  than  a 
hundred  feet,  and  its  motion  reminded  him  of  that  of 
a caterpillar.  On  the  same  day  what  appears  to  have 
been  the  same  monster  was  observed  by  a passenger 
on  board  the  Roman , in  her  course  from  Boston  to 
Philadelphia.  He  states,  however,  that  a sword-fish 
was  attacking  the  sea-serpent.  “ When  the  sword- 
fish/’ he  says,  “ first  attacked  him,  he  reared  his  head 
at  least  ten  feet  above  the  water,  and  then  dived 
down  once  more.  Those  actions  he  kept  repeating,  so 
that  we  had  a fine  opportunity  to  scrutinize  him. 
His  head  was  rather  flat,  and  closely  resembled  that 
of  a turtle.  The  fin  we  first  observed  was  on  the 
back,  several  feet  from  the  head,  while  small  fins  pro- 
truded on  each  side.  The  body  was  at  least  eighty 
inches  in  diameter,  and  presented  a shiny  surface 
covered  with  large,  coarse  scales.  When  he  moved 
his  head,  the  water  seemed  to  fairly  boil  as  he  rapidly 


68 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS, 


clove  his  way  through  the  waves,  so  that  by  far  the 
largest  portion  of  his  body  must  have  been  under  the 
water.  We  estimated  his  length  to  be  at  least  sixty 
feet ; but  the  pilot  informed  us  that  a few  weeks  pre- 
viously he  rose  alongside  the  steamer  Roman , and 
they  reported  him  to  be  one  hundred  and  twenty  feet 
long.”  The  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood  has  carefully  collected 
these  different  narratives  on  the  spot,  and  has  formed 
a theory  as  to  the  nature  of  the  creature  which  will 
be  noticed  later  on. 

Two  years  later,  what  appears  to  have  been  a very 
unserpent-like  sea-serpent  was  seen  by  Lieutenant 
Haynes,  Commander  Pearson,  and  other  officers  of  the 
royal  yacht  Osborne  when  off  the  coast  of  Sicily. 

“ On  the  evening  of  June  6th,”  says  the  lieutenant,  * 
“ the  sea  being  perfectly  smooth,  my  attention  was 
first  called  by  seeing  a ridge  of  fins  above  the  surface 
of  the  water,  extending  about  thirty  feet,  and  varying 
from  five  to  six  feet  in  height.  On  inspecting  it  by 
means  of  a telescope,  at  about  one  and  a half  cable’s 
distance,  I distinctly  saw  a head,  two  flippers,  and 
about  thirty  feet  of  an  animal’s  shoulder.  The  head, 
as  nearly  as  I could  judge,  was  about  six  feet  thick, 
the  neck  narrower,  about  four  to  five  feet,  the  shoulder 
about  fifteen  feet  across,  and  the  flippers  each  about 
fifteen  feet  in  length.  The  movements  of  the  flippers 


( The  Row  of  Fins  as  seen  at  first.) 


. 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS. 


71 


were  those  of  a turtle,  and  the  animal  resembled  a 
huge  seal,  the  resemblance  being  strongest  about  the 
back  of  the  head.  I could  not  see  the  length  of  the 
head,  but  from  its  crown  or  top  to  just  below  the 
shoulder  (where  it  became  immersed)  I should  reckon 
about  fifty  feet.  The  tail  end  I did  not  see,  being 
under  water,  unless  the  ridge  of  fins  to  which  my 
attention  was  first  attracted,  and  which  had  disap- 
peared by  the  time  I got  a telescope,  was  really  the 
continuation  of  the  shoulder  to  the  end  of  the  object’s 
body.  The  animals  head  was  not  always  above  water, 
but  was  thrown  upwards,  remaining  above  for  a few 
seconds  at  a time,  and  then  disappearing.  There  was 
an  entire  absence  of  £ blowing 5 or  ‘ spouting/  I here- 
with beg  to  enclose  a rough  sketch  showing  the  view 
of  the  ‘ ridge  of  fins/  and  also  of  the  animal  in  the  act 
of  propelling  itself  by  its  two  fins.” 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  this  creature  could  not  have 
been  a snake,  possessing,  as  it  appears  to  have  done, 
the  dorsal  fins  of  a basking  shark,  the  flippers  of  a 
turtle,  and  the  head  of  a seal.  This  conundrum  of  an 
animal  has  been  fairly  given  up  by  naturalists  as  unex- 
plainable by  a reference  to  any  known  group  of  animals. 

Two  years  later — namely,  in  1879 — Major  Senior 
reported  that  while  on  board  the  steam-ship  City  of 
Baltimore  in  the  Gulf  of  Aden  he  observed  a long 


*7  2 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS. 


black  object  darting  rapidly  in  and  out  of  the  water, 
and  advancing  nearer  to  the  vessel.  The  shape  of  the 
head  was  not  unlike  pictures  of  the  dragon  he  had 
often  seen,  with  a bull-dog  expression  of  the  forehead 
and  eyebrows.  When  the  monster  had  drawn  its  head 
sufficiently  out  of  the  water,  it  let  its  body  drop  as  if 
it  were  a log  of  wood  prior  to  darting  forward  under 
the  water.  This  motion  caused  a splash  of  about 
fifteen  feet  in  length  on  either  side  of  the  neck  much 
in  the  shape  of  a pair  of  wings. 

To  account  for  many  of  the  sea-serpent  stories  that 
have  just  been  narrated,  as  well  as  others  left  un- 
noticed, it  is  not  necessary  to  believe  in  the  existence 
of  any  hitherto  unknown  animal.  The  sea-serpent 
has  in  some  cases  resolved  itself  into  a piece  of  giant 
sea-weed,  in  others  into  a procession  of  travelling  por- 
poises. A flock  of  sea-birds  flying  in  line  close  to  the 
water  has  more  than  once  been  mistaken  for  one  of 
those  sea  monsters,  until  a sudden  change  in  the  direc- 
tion of  flight  of  the  birds,  or  the  application  of  a 
telescope,  at  once  made  manifest  the  true  nature  of  the 
appearance.  The  theory  also  that  in  many  cases  the 
sea-serpent  was  in  reality  a giant  cuttle-fish  has  much 
in  its  favour. 

There  are  a few  cases,  however,  such  as  that  of  the 
monster  seen  from  the  Dcedalns , which  cannot  be 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS. 


75 


readily  explained  by  a reference  to  any  known  animal, 
and  which  go  far  to  justify  the  belief  that  there  dwells 
in  the  sea  a huge,  serpent-like  creature,  of  which 
glimpses  have  been  had,  but  which  has  yet  to  be 
captured  and  described.  Seeing  that  no  known 
animal  now  living  quite  meets  the  case,  naturalists 
have  sought  among  extinct  animals  for  anything 
approaching  in  form  the  so-called  sea-serpent,  and 
here  they  have  been  rather  more  successful.  In  the 
rocks  of  the  Mesozoic  age  are  found  the  remains  of 
huge  marine  lizards — plesiosaurs  and  pliosaurs,  crea- 
tures described  by  Buckland  as  having  the  head  of  a 
lizard,  the  teeth  of  a crocodile,  a neck  of  enormous 
length  resembling  the  body  of  a serpent,  the  ribs  of  a 
chameleon,  and  the  paddles  of  a whale.  They  were 
serpent-like  creatures  propelled  by  paddles ; a descrip- 
tion that  seems  best  to  agree  with  the  so-called  sea- 
serpent.  Accordingly  those  naturalists,  like  Gosse, 
who  believe  in  the  existence  of  the  great  sea-serpent 
are  inclined  to  regard  it  as  a living  descendant  of 
some  one  of  those  ancient  saurians. 

That  a more  or  less  modified  descendant  of  those 
ancient  sea-lizards  should  still  live  in  the  waters  of 
the  ocean  is  by  no  means  impossible,  although  it  must 
be  added  that  no  fossil  remains  of  them  have  been 
found  in  Tertiary  rocks. 


76 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS. 


As  giving  probability  to  the  view  that  such  crea- 
tures may  still  exist  in  the  ocean,  although  no  recent 
remains  of  them  have  been  found,  Mr.  Gosse  refers  to 
a remarkable  incident  that  occurred  to  Captain  the 
Honourable  George  Hope.  When  in  command  of  her 
Majesty’s  ship  Fly  in  the  Gulf  of  California,  this 
officer,  when  the  sea  was  perfectly  calm  and  trans- 
parent, saw  at  the  bottom  a large  marine  animal  with 
the  head  and  general  figure  of  an  alligator,  except 
that  the  neck  was  much  longer,  and  that  instead  of 
legs  the  creature  had  four  large  flippers  somewhat  like 
those  of  turtles,  the  front  pair  being  larger  than  those 
behind.  The  creature  was  distinctly  visible,  and  all 
its  movements  could  be  observed  with  ease.  It  ap- 
peared to  he  pursuing  its  . prey  at  the  bottom  of  the 
sea.  Its  movements,  he  adds,  were  somewhat  ser- 
pentine. 

If  the  above  be  an  accurate  description  of  what 
Captain  Hope  saw,  the  creature  can  scarcely  have  been 
other  than  one  of  those  long-lost  marine  reptiles. 

Founding  on  the  evidence  obtained  by  him  regard- 
ing the  American  sea-serpent  seen  in  1875,  the  Rev. 
J.  G.  Wood  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  monster 
must  have  been  a cetacean.  “ Every  movement  of 
the  creature,”  he  says,  “ is  cetacean.  The  habit  of 
pushing  the  head  out  of  the  water  is  distinctly  ceta- 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS. 


77 


cean,  the  sperm  whales  being  much  addicted  to  this 
custom.  The  caterpillar-like  bend  of  the  body  is  also 
cetacean,  and  may  be  witnessed  any  day  when  a 
school  of  porpoises  curve  their  graceful  course  over 
the  waves.”  A snake-like  cetacean  would  exactly 
meet  the  case,  but  no  such  form  is  at  present  known. 
In  Tertiary  times,  however,  a creature  closely  answer- 
ing this  description  existed  in  the  zeuglodon,  the  fossil 
vertebrae  of  which  have  been  discovered  in  Alabama. 
The  length  of  this  creature  when  alive  must  have 
been  about  seventy  feet.  The  continued  existence  of 
a zeuglodon-like  animal  would,  according  to  Mr.  Wood, 
best  explain  the  sea-serpent. 

It  is  no  doubt  remarkable  that,  if  such  a monster, 
whether  cetacean  or  saurian,  really  exists,  its  remains 
should  not  have  been  found ; but  this  is  by  no  means 
a conclusive  argument  against  the  existence  of  the 
sea-serpent.  Giant  cuttle-fishes,  reaching  to  a total 
length  of  about  eighty  feet,  have  been  living  in  the 
ocean  for  ages,  yet  it  is  only  during  the  past  ten 
years  that  we  have  become  fully  satisfied  by  their 
actual  capture  of  their  existence.  There  are  large 
land  animals,  such  as  one  of  the  rhinoceroses,  of 
which  only  one  specimen  has  as  yet  been  found,  and 
every  deep-sea  exploration  brings  to  light  troops  of 
marine  animals  hitherto  unknown.  With  the  sea 


78 


RECENT  SEA-SERPENTS. 


occupying  two-thirds  of  the  surface  of  the  globe,  and 
descending  over  large  tracts  to  depths  varying  from 
two  to  five  miles,  it  would  be  presumptuous  for  any 
one  to  say  that  the  ocean  does  not  harbour  in  its 
recesses  a great  serpent-like  monster  still  practically 
unknown  to  man. 


CHAPTER  YI. 


THE  LEGENDARY  KRAKEN. 

In  the  early  days,  when  as  yet  the  sea  had  not 
become  the  highway  of  the  nations,  little  was  known 
of  the  denizens  of  the  deep.  The  element  in  which 
they  lived,  with  its  dangers  and  its  depths,  forbade 
too  close  a scrutiny ; but  it  gave  free  play  to  the 
glowing  imaginations  of  the  dwellers  by  the  sea,  who 
thus  manufactured  monsters  of  their  own  out  of  the 
living  wonders  of  the  deep. 

Such  a monster  was  the  kraken,  famous  in  the 
traditions  of  the  Scandinavian  coasts.  According  to 
Pontoppidan,  the  Norwegian  bishop,  who  published  in 
1750  an  account  of  this  mysterious  sea  monster,  the 
Norse  fishermen  one  and  all  affirm  that  when  they 
row  out  several  miles  to  sea,  particularly  in  the  hot 
summer  days,  they  occasionally  find  a depth  of  twenty 
or  thirty  fathoms,  and  even  less,  where,  from  their 
position,  they  expect  a depth  of  eighty  or  a hundred 
fathoms.  This  is  to  them  a pleasing  circumstance,  as 


80 


THE  LEGENDARY  IvRAKEN. 


in  such  places  they  always  find  abundance  of  fish, 
especially  of  cod  and  ling,  their  lines  being  no  sooner 
out  than  they  are  ready  for  drawing  in  with  a fish 
on  every  hook.  They  know  by  this  that  the  kraken 
is  at  the  bottom,  and  that  to  its  presence  the  unusual 
shallowness  of  the  fishing-ground  is  due. 

Sometimes,  he  says,  twenty  boats  or  more  are  thus 
engaged  fishing  at  a moderate  distance  from  each 
other,  and  the  only  thing  they  have  to  watch  is 
whether  the  depth  continues  the  same,  or  whether 
it  becomes  shallower.  In  the  latter  event  they  know 
that  the  kraken  is  rising  to  the  surface,  and  that  it 
is  time  consequently  for  them  to  be  off.  Accordingly 
as  soon  as  the  water  shows  shallowing  they  cease 
fishing,  take  to  their  oars,  and  get  away  as  fast  as 
they  can.  They  stop  as  soon  as  they  have  reached 
water  of  the  natural  depth,  and  being  now  out  of 
danger  they  rest  on  their  oars  and  watch  the  monster 
as  it  rises  slowly  to  the  surface. 

Its  back  or  upper  part,  says  Pontoppidan,  appears 
to  be  about  a mile  and  a half  in  circumference,  and 
at  first  resembles  a number  of  small  islands  sur- 
rounded with  something  that  floats  about  like  sea- 
weed. Here  and  there  a larger  rising,  like  a sand-bank, 
is  observed,  on  which  fishes  of  various  sorts  are  seen 
continually  leaping  about  till  they  roll  off  at  the  sides 


THE  LEGENDARY  KRAKEN. 


81 


into  the  water.  At  last  several  bright  points  or 
horns  appear,  which  grow  in  thickness  the  higher 
they  rise  above  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  some- 
times they  stand  up  as  high  and  as  large  as  the 
masts  of  a middle-sized  ship.  These,  it  seems,  are 
the  creature’s  arms ; and  such  is  their  strength,  that 
if  they  seized  the  largest  man-of-war  they  would 
infallibly  drag  it  to  the  bottom. 

After  remaining  a short  time  at  the  surface,  the 
kraken  descends  as  slowly  as  it  rose ; but  even  then 
the  danger  is  not  less  for  any  vessel  within  reach, 
as  in  sinking  it  displaces  so  great  a volume  of  water 
as  to  give  rise  to  a whirlpool  capable,  like  that  of  the 
Maelstrom,  of  drawing  everything  down  with  it. 

Its  arms,  he  affirms,  are  used  for  moving  with,  as 
also  for  gathering  its  food.  For  the  latter  purpose 
the  kraken  is  likewise  provided  with  a strong  and 
peculiar  scent  which  it  can  emit  at  certain  times,  and 
by  means  of  which  other  fish  are  attracted  towards  it. 
As  if  this  were  not  enough,  he  tells,  on  the  testimony 
of  many  old  fishermen,  of  another  curious  provision  in 
the  kraken  for  capturing  its  prey.  They  had  ob- 
served that  for  some  months  the  kraken  is  constantly 
eating,  and  that  in  other  months  it  voids  its  excre- 
ment. The  voiding  of  the  latter  renders  the  sur- 
rounding water  thick  and  turbid — a muddiness  which 

(37)  ' 6 


82 


THE  LEGENDARY  KRAKEN 


is  so  agreeable  to  the  senses  of  fishes  that  they  gather 
from  all  quarters  to  it.  Seizing  its  opportunity,  the 
monster  lays  hold  of  them  with  its  arms  and  swallows 
them,  the  digestive  process  that  follows  converting 
them  into  bait  for  other  fishes. 

In  all  accounts  the  kraken  is  represented  as  being 
large  enough  to  be  mistaken  for  an  island.  On  one 
occasion  some  fishermen  are  said  to  have  landed  on 
its  back,  taking  it  for  land ; but  when  they  had 
lighted  a fire  on  it,  the  creature  sank  beneath  their 
feet,  and  engulfed  them  in  the  eddying  waters.  More 
fortunate  than  these  poor  fishermen  was  a certain 
Norwegian  saint,  who  when  sailing  on  Sunday  on 
board  a Norwegian  ship  regretted  that  he  could  not 
celebrate  mass  on  dry  land.  Immediately  there  arose 
from  the  wraves  at  no  great  distance  a new  island. 
Everybody  landed,  and  the  good  saint  officiated  at 
an  altar  which  was  immediately  erected.  But  they 
had  scarcely  quitted  the  island  and  regained  the  ship 
before  it  gave  a shudder  and  sank  deep  into  the  sea. 
The  island  was  a kraken. 

This  sea  monster  was  believed  to  be  of  rare  occur- 
rence, and  was  generally  regarded  as  immortal.  This, 
however,  is  hardly  consistent  with  the  account  given 
by  Pontoppidan  of  the  finding  of  the  dead  carcass  of 
one.  In  1C 80,  as  he  was  told,  a kraken  had  come 


THE  KRAKEN.  AS  SEEN  BY  THE  EYE  OF  IMAGINATION. 


THE  LEGENDAR  Y KRAKEN. 


85 


into  the  water  that  runs  between  the  rocks  and  cliffs 
of  the  parish  of  Alstahoug,  though  its  general  custom 
was  to  keep  several  leagues  from  land.  It  happened 
that  its  long  extended  arms  caught  hold  of  some  trees 
standing  near  the  water,  which  might  easily  have 
been  torn  up  by  the  roots;  but,  besides,  he  had  further 
entangled  himself  in  some  openings  or  clefts  in  the 
rocks,  where  he  stuck  so  fast,  and  hung  so  unfortu- 
nately, that  he  could  not  work  himself  out,  but  perished 
and  rotted  on  the  spot.  The  carcass,  which  was  a 
long  while  decaying,  and  filled  great  part  of  that 
narrow  channel,  made  it,  he  says,  almost  impassable 
by  its  intolerable  stench. 

When  the  bishop  comes  to  recount  the  harm  done 
by  the  kraken  he  has  to  confess  that  there  is  little 
to  be  told.  This,  he  hints,  may  be  due  not  to  any 
supposed  harmlessness  in  this  huge  creature,  but  to 
the  thoroughness  with  which  it  destroyed — that,  in 
fact,  no  one  attacked  ever  lived  to  tell  the  tale. 
Passing,  however,  from  conjecture  to  facts,  he  tells 
of  two  fishermen  who  accidentally  got  into  a slimy 
piece  of  water  like  a morass — the  surroundings  usually 
produced  by  the  presence  of  a kraken.  They  im- 
mediately tried  to  get  out  of  the  place ; but  before 
they  could  accomplish  this  one  of  the  creature’s  arms 
came  down  on  their  boat  and  crushed  part  of  it,  so 


86 


THE  LEGENDARY  KRAKEN. 


that  they  had  the  utmost  difficulty  in  saving  their 
lives  on  the  wreck,  although  the  sea  was  calm,  as  it 
is  always  represented  to  have  been  when  this  monster 
appeared  on  its  surface. 

While  there  is  much  to  smile  at  in  the  accounts  of 
the  legendary  kraken,  the  animal  itself  is  not  to  be 
dismissed  as  altogether  mythical.  Its  numerous  arms 
and  the  use  to  which  it  put  them,  its  habit  of  render- 
ing the  water  thick  and  turbid,  as  well  as  its  musky 
scent,  all  point  to  one  or  other  of  the  numerous  class 
of  cuttle-fishes  as  the  true  original  of  the  Scandi- 
navian kraken.  Ignorance  and  superstitious  wonder, 
no  doubt,  led  the  Norsemen  to  exaggerate  its  size, 
and  to  clothe  it  with  unearthly  terrors ; but  the 
reader  will  see  in  the  following  account  of  what  is 
now  known  regarding  the  cuttle-fishes  that  they  are 
both  big  enough,  and  in  many  cases  hideous  enough, 
to  have  suggested  such  a monster  as  the  kraken  to 
an  ignorant  and  credulous  people. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


THE  CUTTLE-FISH  OR  SEPIA. 

No  more  curious  animals  exist  in  the  sea  than  cuttle- 
fishes. They  are  not  fishes  at  all,  but  are  molluscs, 
like  oysters  and  snails.  They  are  called  “ head-footed/’ 
because  around  their  mouth  a large  number  of  tentacles 
or  feet  are  arranged ; and  it  will  by-and-by  be  seen 
how  useful  these  organs  are  to  the  creatures  possessing 
them. 

Sometimes  the  tentacles  are  used  as  feet  for  walk- 
ing with,  but  as  a rule  these  creatures  don’t  walk,  they 
swim ; and  no  other  creatures  in  the  world  have  so 
curious  a means  of  moving  themselves  from  one  place 
to  another.  In  front  of  the  body  is  a funnel,  and 
from  this,  when  they  want  to  progress  rapidly,  they 
forcibly  expel  a stream  of  water,  with  the  result  that 
they  are  propelled  backwards— that  is,  in  the  opposite 
direction  from  the  current  issuing  from  the  funnel. 

Another  curious  organ  in  connection  with  the 
funnel  is  the  ink-bag.  This  sac  contains  a black 


88 


THE  CUTTLE-FISH  OR  SEPIA. 


fluid,  and  when  the  cuttle-fish  is  menaced  with  danger 
or  otherwise  irritated  it  shoots  out  a quantity  of  its 
inky  ammunition  through  its  funnel,  and  under  cover 
of  the  dusky  cloud  thus  produced  it  seeks  a hiding- 
place.  “ I had  followed,”  says  a recent  observer,  “ one 
of  those  animals  to  a small  hole  in  a rock.  In  vain 
I solicited  him  to  come  out  by  gentle  pulls  with  a 
boat-hook.  At  last,  when  they  were  harder  than  he 
liked,  he  discharged  the  contents  of  his  ink-bag  all 
over  me,  and  spoiled  my  waistcoat  and  trowsers  com- 
pletely— that  dye  requiring  no  mordant,  and  being, 
as  far  as  I know,  indelible.” 

There  are  three  very  distinct  kinds  of  those  “ head- 
footed ” molluscs — namely,  the  cuttle-fishes  proper, 
the  octopuses,  and  the  squids.  A common  object  on 
the  sea-shore  in  the  south  of  England  is  the  cuttle- 
bone,  or  sea-biscuit,  as  it  is  sometimes  called  from  its 
shape.  This  is  the  internal  shell  of  the  common 
cuttle-fish,  and  is  much  more  frequently  seen  than 
is  the  creature  which  grows  it.  It  is  a small  but 
beautiful  animal,  its  body  being  striped  like  that  of 
the  zebra ; and  it  has  ten  arms,  two  of  them  being 
longer  than  the  others. 

It  has  the  best  supply  of  ink  of  all  those  creatures, 
and  is  the  one  that  uses  it  most  readily.  On  the 
least  provocation  it  discharges  an  inky  cloud ; and 


1.  COMMON  CUTTLE-FISH.  2.  CALAMARY 

( Upper  and  Under  Sides.) 


THE  CUTTLE-FISH  OR  SEPIA. 


91 


when  put  into  an  aquarium,  this  creature,  although 
only  a few  inches  in  length,  will  in  a second  or  two 
darken  all  the  water  in  a tank  containing  a thousand 
gallons.  The  ink  of  this  cuttle-fish  was  formerly 
used  in  writing,  and  from  it  is  formed  the  genuine 
artists’  sepia.  Fishermen  in  the  south  of  England 
when  they  catch  cuttles  for  bait  always  cut  out  and 
dry  the  ink-bag,  which  they  afterwards  sell  to  artists’ 
colourmen  for  the  manufacture  of  this  permanent 
black. 

Used  in  this  country  as  bait,  the  cuttle  in  the 
Mediterranean  countries  is  prized  as  an  article  of  food. 

“ One  of  the  most  striking  spectacles  at  night  on 
the  coasts  of  the  iEgean  Sea,”  says  Professor  Forbes, 
“ is  to  see  the  numerous  torches  glancing  along  the 
shores  and  reflected  by  the  still  and  clear  sea,  borne 
by  poor  fishermen  paddling  as  silently  as  possible 
over  the  rocky  shallows  in  search  of  the  cuttle-fish, 
which  when  seen  lying  beneath  the  waters  in  wait 
for  its  prey  they  dexterously  spear  ere  the  creature 
has  time  to  dart,  with  the  rapidity  of  an  arrow,  from 
the  weapon  about  to  transfix  his  soft  but  firm  body.” 

It  is  also  fished  by  means  of  a dredge,  and  during 
the  month  of  March  the  fishermen  use  a living  female 
cuttle  fastened  to  a rope,  or  an  imitation  formed  of 
wood  and  made  attractive  to  the  male  sex  by  being 


92 


THE  CUTTLE-FISH  OR  SEPIA. 


ornamented  with  bits  of  glass.  Fishing  with  either 
of  them  is  said  to  be  both  productive  and  amusing, 
especially  on  a moonlight  night. 

They  are  also  attracted  by  light;  and  Jonathan 
Couch  tells  of  a fisherman  who  was  wont  on  dark 
nights  to  hold  a lighted  lantern  close  to  the  water, 
when  immediately  the  cuttles  gathered  sufficiently 
near  the  light  to  enable  him  to  capture  them  readily 
without  bait  or  hook. 

Until  aquaria  wTere  established  little  was  known 
of  the  habits  of  this  elegant  creature.  It  has  lived 
in  the  famous  aquarium  at  Brighton,  and  there  Mr. 
Henry  Lee  closely  observed  its  ways. 

“ It  loves,”  he  says,  “ the  daylight,  and  the  freedom 
of  the  open  sea.  Its  predatory  acts  are  not  those 
of  a concealed  and  ambushed  brigand  lying  in  wait 
behind  a rock  or  peeping  furtively  from  within  the 
gloomy  shadow  of  a cave,  but  it  may  better  be  com- 
pared to  the  warlike  Comanche  vidette  seated  motion- 
less on  his  horse,  and  scanning  from  some  elevated 
knoll  a wide  expanse  of  prairie  in  readiness  to  swoop 
upon  a weak  or  unarmed  foe.  Poised  near  the  sur- 
face of  the  water,  like  a hawk  in  the  air,  the  sepia 
moves  gently  to  and  fro  in  its  tank  by  graceful 

undulations  of  its  lateral  fins Only  when  some 

small  fish  is  given  to  it  as  food  is  its  facility  of  rapid 


THE  CUTTLE-FISH  OR  SEPIA . 


93 


motion  displayed.  Then,  quickly  as  a kingfisher  darts 
upon  a minnow,  it  pounces  on  its  prey,  infolds  it  in 
its  fatal  embrace,  and  retires  to  a recess  of  its  abode 
to  tear  it  piecemeal  with  its  horny  beak,  and  rend  it 
into  minutest  shreds  with  its  jagged  tongue.  In 
shallow  water,  however,  it  will  often  rest  for  hours 
on  the  bottom  after  a hearty  meal,  looking  much  like 
a sleepy  tortoise.” 

The  cuttle-fish,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  has 
two  long  and  eight  short  arms  or  tentacles.  That 
these  two  kinds  of  limbs  serve  different  purposes  is 
proved  by  the  following  circumstance,  related  of  a 
cuttle  in  an  American  aquarium  : — 

He  had  been  without  food  for  a month,  when  a 
large-sized  fish  was  put  into  the  tank  beside  him.  No 
sooner  had  he  perceived  it,  than  with  prodigious  speed 
and  precision  he  unrolled  and  launched  forward  his 
two  long  arms,  seized  the  fish,  and  drew  it  towards 
his  mouth.  The  long  arms  were  then  retracted,  and 
disappeared,  but  the  short  ones  wrapped  themselves 
closely  around  the  body  of  the  unfortunate  fish,  which 
never  made  a movement  after  it  was  caught.  The 
sepia  swam  about  in  all  directions  for  nearly  an  hour, 
eating  the  while ; he  then  let  the  remains  of  the  fish 
drop  to  the  bottom  of  the  aquarium,  having  opened 
the  skull  and  devoured  the  brain  as  well  as  a por- 


94 


THE  CUTTLE-FISH  OR  SEPIA . 


tion  of  the  muscles  of  the  back.  The  long  arms  thus 
seize  the  food,  while  the  short  ones  afterwards  hold  it. 

Small  though  the  cuttle  is,  it  does  considerable 
damage  to  the  fisheries  in  districts  where  it  is  abun- 
dant. Thus  in  some  localities  infested  by  them  the 
drift-net  fishing  has  had  to  be  abandoned  owing  to 
their  devouring  the  fish,  or  at  least  rendering  them 
unsaleable  by  tearing  them  with  their  parrot-like  beak 
as  they  hang  from  the  meshes  of  the  net. 

It  sometimes  comes  to  grief  through  its  rapid  back- 
ward motion,  especially  when  close  to  the  shore  in 
calm  weather.  “Not  a ripple,”  says  Professor  Forbes, 
“breaks  upon  the  pebbles  to  warn  it  that  the  shore 
is  near.  An  enemy  appears : the  creature  ejects  its 
ink,  like  a sharpshooter  discharging  his  rifle  ere  he 
retreats ; and  then  darting  away,  tail  foremost,  under 
cover  of  the  cloud,  grounds  itself  high  upon  the  beach 
and  perishes  there.” 

The  cuttle  is  too  elegant  and  too  small — although  a 
Chinese  species  is  said  to  have  a “ bone  ” nearly  two 
feet  in  length — to  have  been  ever  developed,  even  by 
the  most  imaginative  of  mankind,  into  the  monstrous 
kraken. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


THE  OCTOPUS. 

The  octopus,  which  forms  the  second  type  of  those 
head-footed  molluscs,  is  more  likely  than  the  cuttle- 
fish to  have  formed  the  counterpart  in  nature  of  the 
Scandinavian  monster.  Its  powerful  suckers,  the  ser- 
pent-like motion  and  enormous  strength  of  its  arms, 
its  considerable  size,  and  above  all  its  hideous  appear- 
ance, are  well  calculated  to  impress  the  superstitious. 

The  octopus,  as  its  name  implies,  has  only  eight 
tentacles,  and  these  all  of  the  same  size.  Each  of 
them  is  provided  with  one  hundred  and  twenty  pairs 
of  suckers,  every  one  of  the  latter  more  perfect  than 
our  best  cupping-glasses.  “ If  the  poulpe,”  as  the 
octopus  is  also  called,  “ but  touch  its  prey,  it  is 
enough ; once  a few  of  those  tenacious  suckers  get 
firm  hold,  the  swiftness  of  the  fish  is  unavailing,  as  it 
is  soon  trammelled  on  all  sides  by  the  firmly-holding 
tentacles,  and  dragged  to  the  mouth  of  its  de- 
stroyer.” 


96 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


The  octopus  is  a night  feeder,  sheltering  itself  from 
the  light  of  day  and  from  observation  in  the  crannies 
of  submarine  rocks,  and  stalking  forth  at  night  in 
search  of  the  fish,  crustaceans,  and  molluscs  which  form 
its  prey.  It  retreats  to  its  former  hiding-place  in  the 
morning — a circumstance  which  enabled  one  indi- 
vidual to  make  depredations  on  various  tanks  in  the 
Brighton  Aquarium  without  detection  or  even  sus- 
picion for  some  time.  At  length,  having  grown  care- 
less, it  one  night  so  gorged  itself  with  the  young  lump- 
fishes in  an  adjoining  tank  that  it  wTas  unable  to  go 
home,  and  so  was  caught  next  morning  “ red-handed.” 

One  of  the  best  accounts  of  the  habits  of  the 
octopus  is  that  given  by  Lord  in  his  “ Naturalist  in 
British  Columbia:” — 

“ The  ordinary  resting-place  of  this  hideous  sea- 
beast  w as,”  he  says,  “ under  a large  stone,  or  in  the 
wide  cleft  of  a rock,  wThere  an  octopus  can  creep  and 
squeeze  itself  with  the  flatness  of  a sand-dab  or  the 
slipperiness  of  an  eel.  Its  modes  of  locomotion  are 
curious  and  varied : using  the  eight  arms  as  paddles, 
and  working  them  alternately,  the  central  disk  repre- 
senting a boat,  octopuses  row  themselves  along  with 
an  ease  and  celerity  comparable  to  the  many-oared 
caique  that  glides  over  the  tranquil  waters  of  the 
Bosphorus.  They  can  ramble  at  will  over  the  sandy 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


97 


roadways  intersecting  their  submarine  parks,  and,  con- 
verting arms  into  legs,  march  on  like  a huge  spider. 
Gymnasts  of  the  highest  order,  they  climb  the  slip- 
pery ledges  as  flies  walk  up  a window-pane;  attaching 
the  countless  suckers  that  arm  the  terrible  limbs  to 
the  face  of  the  rocks,  or  to  the  wrack  and  sea-weed, 
they  go  about  back  downward,  like  marine  sloths,  or, 
clinging  with  one  arm  to  the  waving  algse,  perform  a 
series  of  trapeze  movements  that  Leotard  might  view 
with  envy. 

“ I do  not  think,  in  its  native  element,  an  octopus 
often  catches  prey  on  the  ground  or  on  the  rocks, 
but  waits  for  them  just  as  the  spider  does,  only  the 
octopus  converts  itself  into  a web,  and  a fearful  one 
too.  Fastening  one  arm  to  a stout  stalk  of  the  great 
sea-wrack,  stiffening  out  the  other  seven,  one  would 
hardly  know  it  from  the  wrack  amongst  which  it  is 
concealed.  Patiently  it  bides  its  time,  until  pres- 
ently a shoal  of  fish  comes  gaily  on.  Two  or  three  of 
them  rub  against  the  arms.  Fatal  touch  ! As  though 
a powerful  electric  shock  had  passed  through  the  fish 
and  suddenly  knocked  it  senseless,  so  does  the  arm  of 
the  octopus  paralyze  its  victim ; then  winding  a great 
sucker -clad  cable  round  the  palsied  fish,  it  draws 
the  dainty  morsel  to  the  centre  of  the  disk,  when  the 
beaked  mouth  seizes  and  soon  sucks  it  in, 

(37) 


7 


98 


THE  OCTOPUS . 


“ I am  perfectly  sure,  from  frequent  observations, 
the  octopus  has  the  power  of  numbing  its  prey ; and 
the  sucking  disks  along  each  ray  are  more  for  the 
purposes  of  climbing  and  holding  on  whilst  fishing 
than  for  capturing  and  detaining  its  slippery  pris- 
oners. 

“ The  Indian  looks  upon  the  octopus  as  an  aider- 
man  does  on  turtle,  and  devours  it  with  equal  gusto 
and  relish,  only  the  savage  roasts  the  glutinous  car- 
cass instead  of  boiling  it. 

“ His  mode  of  catching  octopuses  is  crafty  in  the  ex- 
treme, for  Redskin  well  knows,  from  past  experience, 
that  were  the  octopus  once  to  get  some  of  its  huge 
arms  over  the  side  of  the  canoe,  and  at  the  same  time 
a holdfast  on  the  wrack,  it  could  as  easily  haul  it  over 
as  a child  could  upset  a basket.  Paddling  the  canoe 
close  to  the  rocks,  and  quietly  pushing  aside  the 
wrack,  the  savage  peers  through  the  crystal  water 
until  his  practised  eye  detects  an  octopus,  with  its 
great  rope-like  arms  stiffened  out,  waiting  patiently 
for  food.  His  spear  is  twelve  feet  long,  armed  at  the 
end  with  four  pieces  of  hard  wood,  made  harder  by 
being  baked  and  charred  in  the  fire ; these  project 
about  fourteen  inches  beyond  the  spear-haft,  each 
piece  having  a barb  on  one  side,  and  are  arranged  in 
a,  circle  round  the  spear-end,  and  lashed  firmly  on 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


101 


with  cedar  bark.  Having  spied  out  the  octopus,  the 
hunter  passes  the  spear  carefully  through  the  water 
until  within  an  inch  or  so  of  the  centre  disk,  and  then 
sends  it  in  as  deep  as  he  can  plunge  it.  Writhing 
with  pain  and  passion,  the  octopus  coils  its  terrible 
arms  round  the  haft.  Redskin,  making  the  side  of  his 
canoe  a fulcrum  for  his  spear,  keeps  the  struggling 
monster  well  off,  and  raises  it  to  the  surface  of  the 
water.  It  is  dangerous  now : if  it  could  get  a 
hold-fast  on  either  savage  or  canoe,  nothing  short 
of  chopping  off  the  arms  piecemeal  would  be  of  any 
avail. 

“ But  the  wily  Redskin  knows  all  this,  and  has 
taken  care  to  have  another  spear,  unbarbed,  long, 
straight,  smooth,  and  very  sharp,  and  with  this  he 
stabs  the  octopus  where  the  arms  join  the  central 
disk.  I suppose  the  spear  must  break  down  the 
nervous  ganglions  supplying  motive  power,  as  the 
stabbed  arms  lose  at  once  strength  and  tenacity ; the 
suckers,  that  a moment  before  held  on  with  a force 
ten  men  could  not  have  overcome,  relax,  and  the 
entire  ray  hangs  like  a dead  snake,  a limp,  lifeless 
mass.  And  thus  the  Indian  stabs  and  stabs,  until  the 
octopus,  deprived  of  all  power  to  do  harm,  is  dragged 
into  the  canoe,  a great,  inert,  quivering  lump  of  brown- 
looking jelly/5 


102 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


In  the  way  above  described  the  Indian  avoids 
coming  to  close  quarters  with  the  octopus. 

The  consequences  of  coming  in  contact  with  what 
cannot  have  been  a very  large  specimen  have  been 
narrated  by  an  American  lady : — 

“ While  examining  a reef  on  the  coast  of  Brazil  her 
eyes  fell  on  an  object  which  roused  her  curiosity. 
She  could  see  nothing  but  a pair  of  very  bright  eyes, 
but  concluding  that  these  must  have  an  owner  she 
determined  to  secure  him.  Putting  her  hand  down 
quietly  so  as  not  to  ruffle  the  water,  to  her  surprise 
it  was  suddenly  seized  with  a pressure  far  too  ardent 
to  be  agreeable  ! She  tugged  hard  to  get  away ; but 
the  creature  had  as  strong  a hold  on  the  rocks  as  it 
had  on  her  hand,  and  was  not  easily  to  be  persuaded 
to  let  go  of  either.  At  last,  however,  it  became  con- 
vinced that  it  must  make  its  choice,  and  so  let  go  its 
hold  on  the  rocks,  when  the  lady  found  a large 
octopus  clinging  to  her  right  hand  ! His  long  arms 
were  wound  around  her  hand,  and  attached  to  it  by 
the  rows  of  suckers,  so  that  escape  from  them  was 
almost  impossible.  Trying  to  disengage  herself  only 
led  to  the  rascal  disengaging  one  of  his  numerous  limbs, 
which  he  then  proceeded  to  wind  around  her  left  arm, 
thus  making  her  a helpless  prisoner.  The  more  she 
struggled  the  tighter  did  he  clasp  her.  In  vain  she 


THE  OCTOPUS . 


103 


shouted  to  her  companion,  who  had  wandered  out  of 
hearing.  Momentarily  she  expected  to  be  bitten, 
when  suddenly  the  creature  thought  better  of  it,  and 
relinquishing  her  hand  dropped  on  the  sand.  Then 
raising  himself  on  his  long,  slimy  arms,  he  stalked 
away  towards  the  water,  cutting  such  a comical  figure 
as  made  the  frightened  lady  laugh.  ‘ He  looked/  she 
says,  ‘ like  a huge  and  very  tipsy  spider,  staggering 
away  on  his  exceedingly  long  legs.’  ” 

An  encounter  somewhat  more  alarming  was  that 
wdiich  Mr.  Beale  had  with  an  octopus  when  collecting 
shells  among  the  rocks  of  the  Bonin  Islands,  and  of 
which  Mr.  Gosse  gives  the  following  account : — 

“ He  wTas  much  astonished  at  seeing  at  his  feet  a 
most  extraordinary-looking  animal  crawling  towards 
the  surf,  which  it  had  only  just  left.  It  was  creeping 
on  its  eight  legs,  which,  from  their  soft  and  flexible 
nature,  bent  considerably  under  the  weight  of  its 
body,  so  that  it  was  lifted  up  by  the  efforts  of  its 
tentacula  only  a small  distance  from  the  rocks.  It 
appeared  much  alarmed  at  seeing  him,  and  made  every 
effort  to  escape. 

“ Mr.  Beale  endeavoured  to  stop  it  by  pressing  on 
one  of  its  legs  with  his  foot ; but  although  he  used 
considerable  force  for  that  purpose,  its  strength  was 
so  great  that  it  several  times  liberated  its  member,  in 


104 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


spite  of  all  the  efforts  he  could  employ  on  the  wet  and 
slippery  rocks.  He  then  laid  hold  of  one  of  the 
tentacles  with  his  hand,  and  held  it  firmly,  so  that  it 
appeared  as  if  the  limb  would  be  torn  asunder  by  the 
united  efforts  of  himself  and  the  creature.  He  then 
gave  it  a powerful  jerk,  wishing  to  disentangle  it 
from  the  rocks  to  which  it  clung  so  forcibly  by  its 
suckers. 

“ This  effort  it  effectually  resisted  ; but  the  moment 
after,  the  apparently  enraged  animal  lifted  its  head, 
with  its  large  projecting  eyes,  and,  loosing  its  hold  of 
the  rocks,  suddenly  sprang  upon  Mr.  Beale’s  arm 
(which  he  had  previously  bared  to  the  shoulder  for 
the  purpose  of  thrusting  it  into  holes  in  the  rocks 
after  shells),  and  clung  to  it  by  means  of  its  suckers 
with  great  power,  endeavouring  to  get  its  beak,  which 
could  now  be  seen  between  the  roots  of  its  arms,  in  a 
position  to  bite. 

“ A sensation  of  horror  pervaded  his  whole  frame 
when  he  found  that  this  monstrous  animal  had  fixed 
itself  so  firmly  on  his  arm.  He  describes  its  cold, 
slimy  grasp  as  extremely  sickening ; and  he  loudly 
called  to  the  captain,  who  was  engaged  at  some  dis- 
tance, to  come  and  release  him  of  his  disgusting  assail- 
ant. The  captain  quickly  came,  and  taking  him  down 
to  the  boat,  during  which  time  Mr.  Beale  was  em- 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


105 


ployed  in  keeping  the  beak  of  the  octopus  away  from 
his  hand,  soon  released  him  by  destroying  his  tormentor 
with  the  boat-knife,  when  he  disengaged  it  by  portions 
at  a time. 

“ This  cephalopod  measured  across  its  expanded 
arms  about  four  feet,  while  its  body  was  not  bigger 
than  a man’s  fist.” 

The  octopus  found  on  the  British  coasts  is  compara- 
tively small,  the  largest  known  to  Mr.  Lee  having  had 
arms  two  feet  six  inches  in  length.  Such  a creature 
would  prove  dangerous  to  bathers,  as  the  following 
incident  which  happened  lately  will  show : — 

A retriever  dog  was  disporting  himself  in  the  sea 
at  Scarborough,  when  he  was  chased  out  of  the  water 
by  a large  octopus.  While  endeavouring  to  make  its 
way  back  to  deeper  water  the  monster  was  captured. 
On  being  taken  up  some  steps  by  a fisherman,  the 
creature  embraced  him  by  his  leg,  and  actually  pulled 
him  down,  so  it  may  fairly  be  presumed  that  it  would 
have  fared  ill  with  the  dog  had  the  octopus  succeeded 
in  seizing  it.  The  monster  was  found  to  be  four  feet 
in  length,  two  feet  in  circumference,  and  weighed 
forty-two  pounds.  Fortunately  the  octopus  can  be 
made  to  relax  its  hold  by  grasping  it  tightly  round 
the  throat. 


106 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


If  these  home-forms  are  formidable,  still  more  so 
are  the  much  larger  devil-fish  that  occur  in  the  Medi- 
terranean and  other  seas,  and  Italian  divers  and 
bathers  have  a wholesome  dread  of  them.  An  English 
shell-collector  at  Leghorn  states  that  in  crevices  of 
the  sea-wall  forming  the  harbour  of  that  town  there 
lie  concealed  great  octopods  having  arms  four  feet 
in  length,  and  each  at  their  base  as  thick  as  a 
man’s  wrist.  In  collecting  shells  he  had  to  pass  over 
the  masonry  beneath  which  one  of  those  creatures 
lurked,  and  he  states  that,  although  no  coward,  he 
was  for  some  time  afraid  to  pass  the  spot,  the  octopus 
usually  thrusting  out  one  or  two  of  its  formidable 
arms  in  its  endeavour  to  catch  hold  of  him. 

It  is  to  bathers  and  divers,  however,  that  the 
octopus  forms  a source  of  real  danger,  and  numerous 
instances  are  on  record  of  lives  lost  in  this  way.  Sir 
Grenville  Temple  tells  of  a Sardinian  captain,  who, 
when  bathing  at  Jerbet,  felt  one  of  his  feet  grasped 
by  the  arm  of  an  octopus.  On  trying  to  disengage 
himself  by  his  other  foot,  that,  too,  was  seized  by  an- 
other of  the  monster’s  arms.  He  then  endeavoured  to 
free  himself  with  his  hands,  but  they  also  were  grasped 
and  rendered  powerless.  Thus  helpless,  the  poor  cap- 
tain was  drowned,  his  body  being  afterwards  found  in 
the  deadly  embrace  of  his  many-armed  enemy. 


THE  OCTOPUS . 


107 


These  creatures  abound  off  the  coast  of  Algeria, 
where  their  capture  forms  a regular  fishery.  They 
are  taken  in  deep  water  by  means  of  earthen  jars 
strung  together  and  lowered  to  the  bottom  of  the 
sea,  where  they  are  allowed  to  remain  for  a cer- 
tain number  of  hours,  and  into  which  the  animals  in- 
troduce themselves.  Frequently  from  eight  to  ten 
are  taken  from  every  jar  at  each  visit  of  the  fisher- 
men. In  less  deep  water  earthenware  drain-pipes 
are  placed  side  by  side  for  distances  frequently  ex- 
ceeding half  a mile  in  length,  and  into  these  also 
the  octopods  enter,  and  are  taken  by  the  fishermen. 
As  they  are  attracted  by  white,  and  by  all  smooth 
and  bright  substances,  the  natives  deck  places  in  the 
creeks  and  hollows  in  the  rock  with  white  stones  and 
shells,  over  which  the  poulpes  spread  themselves,  and 
are  caught  from  four  to  eight  at  a time. 

Although  thus  a source  of  profit  to  the  fishermen, 
they  are  no  less  a source  of  danger  to  bathers  on  the 
coast,  as  the  following  incident,  related  by  the  author 
of  “ The  French  in  Algiers,”  shows. 

“ The  soldiers,”  he  says,  “ were  in  the  habit  of 
bathing  in  the  sea  every  evening ; and  from  time  to 
time  several  of  them  disappeared,  no  one  knew  how. 
Bathing  was,  in  consequence,  strictly  forbidden ; in 
spite  of  which  several  men  went  into  the  water  one 


108 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


evening.  Suddenly  one  of  them  screamed  for  help, 
and  when  several  others  rushed  to  his  assistance,  they 
found  that  an  octopus  had  seized  him  by  the  leg  with 
four  of  its  arms,  whilst  it  clung  to  the  rock  with  the 
rest.  The  soldiers  brought  the  monster  home  with 
them,  and  out  of  revenge  they  boiled  it  alive  and  ate 
it.  This  adventure  fully  accounted  for  the  disap- 
pearance of  the  other  soldiers/’ 

It  is  well  known  that  a gigantic  species  of  devil- 
fish lives  in  the  waters  of  the  Pacific  coasts  with  arms 
at  least  five  feet  in  length.  The  Weekly  Oregonian 
of  September  1877  records  the  fact  that  an  Indian 
woman,  while  bathing,  was  pulled  beneath  the  surface 
of  the  water  by  an  octopus  and  drowned.  The  body 
was  discovered  the  following  day  on  the  bottom  of 
the  bay  in  the  embrace  of  the  monster.  Indians 
dived  down,  and  with  their  knives  severed  the  ten- 
tacles of  the  octopus  and  rescued  the  body.  This 
was  said  to  have  been  the  first  known  instance  of 
death  from  this  cause  in  the  locality ; but  there  had 
been  several  narrow  escapes. 

A very  narrow  escape  was  that  made  by  a diver 
at  work  on  the  wreck  of  a sunken  steamer  off  the 
coast  of  Florida.  The  man — a powerful  Irishman — 
was  quite  paralyzed  in  its  grasp.  He  felt,  as  he 
himself  expressed  it,  both  his  armour  and  himself 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


109 


being  cracked  into  a jelly.  He  was  just  being 
brought  to  the  surface,  or  otherwise  the  creature 
would  have  killed  him,  for  he  was  suffering  so 
severely  from  the  terrible  embrace  that  he  had  lost 
all  power  of  motion.  When  dragged  into  the  raft 
from  which  he  had  descended,  and  finally  released, 
he  fainted  away.  The  men  on  the  raft  seized  the 
animal  by  one  of  its  arms  and  tried  to  pull  it  off ; but 
they  were  unable  to  overcome  the  adhesive  power  of 
a single  sucker.  They  at  length  succeeded  in  remov- 
ing the  monster  by  dealing  it  a heavy  blow  across  its 
baggy  body.  The  latter  was  described  as  standing 
stiffly  up  above  the  eyes,  which  gleamed  like  fire. 

In  certain  of  the  South  Sea  Islands  the  natives  are 
in  the  habit  of  diving  for  octopods ; but  they  are  usu- 
ally accompanied  by  some  one,  in  case  of  assistance 
being  required.  A missionary  among  the  Harvey 
islanders  tells  how  a servant  of  his  on  one  occasion 
went  diving  for  those  animals,  leaving  his  son  in 
charge  of  the  canoe.  On  rising  shortly  after  to  the 
surface,  his  arms  were  free,  but  his  mouth  and  nos- 
trils were  completely  covered  by  a large  octopus. 
Had  his  son  not  torn  the  living  plaster  from  his 
face,  he  would  no  doubt  have  been  suffocated — a fate 
which  is  said  to  have  befallen  another  native  who, 
some  years  before,  went  diving  alone. 


110 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


The  following  thrilling  adventure  with  an  octopus 
is  the  most  recent  one  of  the  kind  known  to  us : — 

On  November  4th,  1879,  a Government  diver  was 
at  work  at  the  bottom  of  the  tideway  of  the  river 
Moyne,  Melbourne.  Having  placed  a charge  of  dyna- 
mite between  two  large  stones,  he  came  up  and  ex- 
ploded it ; and  on  descending  again,  found  one  of  the 
large  stones  thrown  out,  which  he  sent  up,  and  then 
hooked  on  the  other,  but  could  not  start  it.  Hav- 
ing descended  again,  the  current  being  pretty  strong 
at  the  time,  he  stretched  himself  out  on  the  stone, 
and  reached  his  right  arm  down  to  feel  if  he  could 
get  another  small  charge  under  it,  not  being  able 
to  do  this  in  any  other  position.  “ My  arm,”  he 
says,  “ was  scarcely  down,  however,  before  I found  it 
was  held  by  something ; and  the  action  of  the  water 
was  stirring  up  the  loose  clay,  and  therefore  I could 
not  see  distinctly  for  a few  minutes.  But  when  it 
did  clear  away,  I saw  to  my  horror  the  arm  of  a 
large  octopus  entwined  round  mine  like  a boa-con- 
strictor ; and  just  then  he  fixed  some  of  his  suckers 
on  the  back  of  my  hand,  and  the  pain  was  intense. 
I felt  as  if  my  hand  were  being  pulled  to  pieces,  and 
the  more  I tried  to  take  it  away  the  greater  the  pain 
became ; and  from  past  experience  I knew  this 
method  would  be  useless.  But  what  was  I to  do 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


Ill 


lying  in  this  position  ? I had  the  greatest  difficulty 
in  keeping  my  feet  down,  as  the  air  rushed  along 
the  interior  of  my  dress  and  inflated  it ; and  if  my 
feet  had  got  uppermost,  I should  have  become  insen- 
sible, held  in  such  a position ; and  if  I had  given 
the  signal  to  be  pulled  up,  the  brute  would  have 
held  on,  and  the  chances  would  have  been  that  I 
should  have  had  a broken  arm.  I had  a hammer 
down  by  me,  but  could  not  reach  it  to  use  it  on  the 
brute.  There  was  a small  iron  bar  not  far  from  me, 
and  with  my  feet  I dragged  this  along  until  I could 
reach  it  with  my  left  hand.  And  now  the  fight 
commenced.  The  more  I struck  him  the  tighter  he 
squeezed,  until  my  arm  got  quite  benumbed ; but 
after  a while  I found  the  grip  began  to  relax  a 
little.  But  he  held  on  until  I had  almost  cut  him 
to  pieces ; and  then  he  relaxed  his  hold  from  the 
rock,  and  I pulled  him  up. 

“ I can  assure  you  I was  completely  exhausted, 
having  been  in  that  position  for  over  twenty 
minutes.  I brought  the  animal  up,  or  rather  a 
part  of  him.  We  laid  him  out,  and  he  measured 
eight  feet  across ; and  I feel  perfectly  convinced 
this  fellow  could  have  held  down  five  or  six  men. 
It  is  only  when  a person  gets  a grip  from  these 
brutes  that  one  realizes  their  strength  ; and  it  was 


112 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


lucky  for  me  that  I was  not  an  amateur,  for  I can 
assure  you  that  I had  the  greatest  struggle  to  get 
clear  of  it  that  I ever  had  with  any  animal  under 
water.” 

Hideous  and  dangerous  as  the  large  octopods  have 
thus  been  proved  to  be,  they  give  no  ground  for 
believing  in  the  existence  of  a devil-fish  big  enough 
to  take  a three-masted  vessel  in  its  embrace.  Such 
was  the  “ colossal  poulpe  ” of  He  Montfort,  the  story 
of  which  was  told  him  by  an  old  sea-captain  who 
had  settled  at  Dunkirk. 

Once  when  sailing  off  the  coast  of  Africa,  Captain 
Davis’s  ship  was  becalmed  for  several  days,  and  the 
opportunity  was  taken  to  have  its  sides  scraped  and 
cleaned,  the  sailors  doing  the  work  standing  on 
planks  suspended  along  the  ships  side.  They  were 
thus  engaged,  when  one  of  those  monsters  threw  an 
arm  around  the  bodies  of  two  of  the  men  and  drew 
them  into  the  sea.  It  then  threw  a second  arm 
around  another  of  the  crew,  who  was  in  the  act  of 
climbing  the  mast ; but,  happily,  getting  entangled 
among  the  ropes  of  the  rigging,  it  failed  to  carry  off 
its  third  victim,  who  meanwhile  uttered  the  most 
piteous  groans.  The  crew,  coming  to  his  assistance, 
cut  off  the  limb  that  held  him ; but  he  was  so 
injured  that  he  died  soon  after.  Attacked  by  five 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


113 


harpoons,  the  octopus  endeavoured  to  regain  the 
ocean  depths  with  its  two  victims.  This  it  succeeded 
in  doing  after  breaking  the  lines  attached  to  the  har- 
poons buried  in  its  body.  The  portion  of  the  arm 
which  it  left  behind  measured  twenty-five  feet  long, 
says  De  Montfort,  was  as  thick  as  the  mizzen-yard 
at  its  base,  and  had  suckers  as  large  as  pot-ladles. 

Whatever  truth  there  may  be  in  the  captain’s 
story,  and  it  is  by  no  means  improbable,  the  dimen- 
sions of  the  creature  have  been  grossly  exaggerated 
by  De  Montfort.  That  the  octopus  was  not  the 
original  of  the  legendary  kraken  may  almost  be 
regarded  as  certain ; for  it  is  too  small, — it  is  never 
known  to  have  exceeded  nine  feet  in  length, — and 
it  does  not  bask  on  the  surface  of  the  sea  as  the 
kraken  is  said  to  have  done.  The  octopus,  however, 
is  probably  the  counterpart  in  nature  of  the  Ler- 
nsean  hydra  of  Grecian  mythology.  This  mythical 
creature  was  represented  as  having  a huge  body  and 
nine  heads — eight  mortal,  and  the  ninth  immortal. 
This  was  the  monster  which  Hercules  set  himself  to 
destroy.  He  tried  cutting  off  its  heads ; but  this  he 
found  was  worse  than  useless,  for  two  heads  sprang 
up  for  every  one  destroyed.  Iolaus,  however,  who 
drove  his  chariot,  succeeded  in  stopping  this  multi- 
plication by  burning  with  torches  the  germs  of  the 

(37)  8 


114 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


growing  heads ; and  finally  Hercules  succeeded  in  his 
labour  of  killing  the  hydra. 

The  octopus  is  a familiar  object  to  the  modern 
Greeks,  and  from  the  representations  of  it  that  have 
been  found  on  coins  and  other  remains,  it  seems  to 
have  been  familiar  to  the  ancient  people  who  believed 
in  the  legend  of  the  hydra.  Mycense  is  only  a few 
miles  from  Lerna,  the  scene  of  this  famous  labour 
of  Hercules,  and  there  Schliemann  found  a gold 
ornament  with  a figure  of  an  octopus  upon  it,  while 
another  ornament  of  gold  took  the  form  of  this 
hideous  creature. 

The  mythical  hydra  and  the  real  octopus  have 
sufficient  in  common  to  show  that  the  one  has  given 
rise  to  the  other.  The  hydra  had  eight  mortal 
heads : the  octopus  has  eight  arms.  The  hydra  occa- 
sionally left  its  home  in  the  marshes  of  Lerna,  and 
made  a raid  on  the  cattle  in  the  open  country : the 
octopus  has  also  the  power  of  leaving  the  water.  “ I 
have  seen  an  octopus,”  says  Mr.  Henry  Lee,  “ travel 
over  the  floor  of  a room  at  a very  fair  rate  of  speed, 
toppling  and  sprawling  along  in  its  own  ungainly 
fashion.”  The  ancient  Greeks  knew  of  this  habit  of 
the  octopus,  for  Aristotle  says  they  occasionally  leave 
the  water  and  walk  in  stony  places.  Trebius,  an- 
other Greek,  tells  of  -an  octopus  at  Carteia  that  left 


THE  OCTOPUS. 


115 


the  sea  every  evening  to  devour  salt  provisions.  Its 
continued  thefts  irritated  the  fishermen,  who,  to  put 
an  end  to  them,  surrounded  their  curing-yards  with 
elevated  fences.  It  was  all  in  vain,  however,  for 
with  the  help  of  a tree  the  monster  clambered  over 
them.  The  hydra,  according  to  the  legend,  is  said 
to  have  twfisted  itself  round  the  feet  of  Hercules ; 
and  this  is  the  mode  by  which  the  poulpe  seeks  to 
overpower  its  prey.  Further,  when  its  heads  were 
cut  oft"  they  grew  again : this  is  likewise  the  case 
with  the  arms  of  the  octopus.  These  are  peculiarly 
liable  to  be  bitten  off  by  the  toothed  whales,  the 
conger  eel,  and  other  enemies  which  feed  upon  them. 
When  thus  mutilated,  however,  the  arms  grow  again ; 
and  there  is  hardly  one  of  those  creatures  which  has 
not  at  least  one  or  two  of  those  reproductions,  and 
specimens  have  been  seen  in  which  all  the  arms  had 
been  lost,  but  were  then  more  or  less  restored.  This 
fact  was  likewise  known  to  the  ancients,  who  also 
believed  that  when  pressed  by  hunger  they  fed  on 
their  own  limbs,  which  on  the  return  of  better  times 
grew  again. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


THE  CALAMARY  OR  SQUID. 

The  third  kind  o£  head-footed  mollusc  is  represented 
by  the  calamary  or  squid.  Like  the  cuttle-fish,  it  has 
ten  arms,  two  of  them  much  longer  than  the  others ; 
its  body,  however,  is  proportionately  much  longer 
and  narrower  than  in  the  other  forms.  Further,  its 
sides  have  got  fin-like  expansions,  by  means  of 
which  it  can  progress  through  the  water,  although  it 
makes  swiftest  progress  by  the  expulsion  of  water 
from  its  funnel.  It  has  not  got  “ a bone  ” like  the 
cuttle,  but  it  has  a delicate  horny  shell  lying  inside 
its  body,  which,  from  its  general  resemblance  to  a 
quill,  has  been  called  the  “ pen.”  Like  the  others,  it 
has  got  an  ink-bag ; and  on  this  account  the  fisher- 
men in  the  south  of  England  call  them  “ pen-and- 
ink  ” fish.  These  “ pens,”  according  to  Owen,  multi- 
ply with  age,  so  that  in  an  old  squid  quite  a number 
may  be  found  lying  closely  packed  one  behind  the 
other. 


THE  CAL  AM  ARY  OR  SQUID. 


117 


Although  not  much  is  seen  of  these  creatures  on 
the  coast,  they  are  nevertheless  very  numerous  in  the 
open  sea,  where  they  move  about  in  vast  shoals.  On 
the  10th  January  1858  a Dutch  ship  sailed  for  two 
hours  through  dead  squids  which  covered  the  surface 
of  the  sea  as  far  as  the  eye  of  the  look-out  could 
reach.  They  are  the  choice  food  of  the  spermaceti 
and  other  toothed  whales,  and  Mr.  Yrolik  found  no 
fewer  than  ten  thousand  beaks  of  the  squid  in  the 
stomach  of  a single  whale  which  he  examined.  Captain 
Francis  Post  says  that  whales  in  the  agony  of  death 
frequently  eject  from  their  stomach  large  quantities 
of  squid. 

The  calamaries  are  excellent  leapers.  One  of  them 
has  earned  from  the  sailors  the  name  of  sea-arrow,  or 
flying  squid,  from  its  habit  of  leaping  out  of  the 
water.  They  have  thus  been  known  to  leap  in  calm 
weather  to  such  a height  as  to  fall  on  the  decks  of 
vessels. 

Gould  thus  describes  their  movements: — “ Their 
usual  mode  of  swimming  is  by  dilating  the  water- 
breathing chamber  of  their  sac-shaped  body  and  filling 
it  with  water.  The  body  is  then  suddenly  contracted 
and  the  water  forcibly  ejected,  so  as  to  propel  them 
backwards  with  great  rapidity.  So  swift  and  straight 
is  their  progress  that  they  look  like  arrows  shooting 


118 


THE  CAL  AM  ARY  OR  SQUID. 


through  the  water.  Whenever  they  strike  the  shore 
they  commence  pumping  the  water  with  increased 
violence,  while  every  effort  only  tends  to  throw  them 
still  farther  upon  the  sands  until  they  are  left  high 
and  dry. 

“ They  devour  immense  numbers  of  small  fish,  and 
it  is  amusing  to  watch  their  movements,  and  see  how 
at  a distance  of  several  feet  they  will  poise  them- 
selves, and  in  an  instant,  with  the  rapidity  of  light- 
ning, their  prey  is  seized  in  their  long  arms  and 
instantaneously  devoured.” 

Professor  Verrill  tells  how  he  watched  the  squids 
capturing  and  devouring  young  mackerel  in  the 
wharves  of  Provincetown,  Massachusetts.  In  attack- 
ing the  mackerel,  which  were  swimming  about  in 
shoals,  they  would  suddenly  dart  backward  among 
the  fish  with  the  velocity  of  an  arrow,  and  then  as 
suddenly  turn  to  the  right  or  the  left  and  seize  a fish, 
which  was  almost  instantly  killed  by  a bite  in  the 
back  of  the  neck  with  their  sharp  beaks.  The  bite 
was  always  made  in  the  same  place,  cutting  out  a 
triangular  piece  of  flesh,  and  was  deep  enough  to 
penetrate  to  the  spinal  cord.  The  attacks  were  not 
always  successful,  and  were  sometimes  repeated  a 
dozen  times  before  one  of  these  active  and  wary  fishes 
could  be  caught.  Sometimes,  after  making  several 


THE  CAL  AM  ARY  OR  SQUID. 


119 


unsuccessful  attempts,  one  of  the  squids  would  suddenly 
drop  to  the  bottom  and  there  change  its  colour  to 
that  of  the  sand,  on  which  it  rested  so  perfectly  as  to 
be  almost  invisible.  In  this  way  it  would  wait  until 
the  fishes  came  back,  and  when  they  were  swimming 
close  to  or  over  the  ambuscade,  the  squid,  by  a sudden 
dart,  would  be  pretty  sure  to  secure  a fish.  Ordinarily 
when  swimming  they  were  thickly  spotted  with  red 
and  brown,  but  when  darting  among  the  mackerel 
they  appeared  translucent  and  pale.  The  mackerel, 
however,  seem  to  have  learned  that  the  shallow  water 
is  the  safest  for  them,  and  would  hug  the  shore  as 
closely  as  possible,  so  that  in  pursuing  them  many  of 
the  squids  became  stranded  and  perished  by  hundreds. 
When  thus  stranded,  they  usually  discharge  their  ink 
in  large  quantities. 

Nowhere  do  squids  occur  in  greater  abundance 
than  off  Newfoundland,  where  they  are  used  most 
extensively  as  bait,  nearly  half  of  all  the  cod  taken 
on  the  “ Banks  ” being  fished  with  them.  They  appear 
in  vast  shoals  off  the  Newfoundland  coast  in  August 
and  September,  when  a whole  fleet  of  boats  engage  in 
their  capture.  During  violent  gales  of  wind  at  that 
season  hundreds  of  tons  of  them  are  cast  up  on 
the  shore,  where  their  decayed  bodies  pollute  the 
atmosphere. 


120 


THE  CAL  AM  ARY  OR  SQUID. 


The  method  of  capturing  the  squid  is  known  as 
jigging — a jigger  being  a number  of  hooks  radiating 
from  a fixed  centre.  No  bait  is  used.  The  jigger  is 
simply  allowed  to  sink  to  the  bottom,  where  it  is  con- 
stantly kept  moving  up  and  down  till  the  squid  is 
felt  upon  it.  The  animal  merely  clasps  his  arms 
around  this  hooked  instrument,  when  doubtless  the 
pain  from  the  sharp  pins  induces  him  to  retreat 
instantly.  The  fisherman,  however,  who  is  constantly 
jerking  his  jigger  up  and  down,  pulls  in  as  rapidly  as 
possible,  entangling  the  creature’s  arms  among  the 
pins,  and  drawing  him  through  the  water  so  fast  that 
escape  is  impossible.  The  moment  he  emerges  from 
the  water  he  contracts  his  body  and  discharges  through 
his  funnel  a jet  of  salt  water.  Again  the  body  is 
contracted,  and  this  time  the  squid  ejects  from  the 
same  aperture  a stream  of  black  inky  fluid.  Not 
unfrequently  the  luckless  fisherman  has  not  the  squid 
unhooked  before  this  discharge  takes  place,  and  may 
then  receive  the  inky  stream  full  in  the  face. 

The  scene  when  the  squids  are  abundant  is  described 
as  really  exciting,  the  streams  rising  here  and  there 
in  twenty  directions  pointing  out  the  rapidity  of  the 
catch.  The  number  of  these  animals  used  by  a single 
fishing-vessel  in  two  months  is  enormous.  Captain 
Osborne  states  that  his  vessel  used  in  the  course  of 


THE  CAL  AM  ARY  OR  SQUID. 


121 


six  weeks  eighty  thousand  squids  as  bait  in  the  cod 
fishery. 

According  to  Professor  Verrill,  squids  in  Newfound- 
land are  often  found  stranded  in  the  morning  on  the 
beach  in  immense  numbers,  especially  when  there  is 
full  moon,  and  it  is  thought  by  many  of  the  fishermen 
that  this  is  because  they  have  the  habit  of  turning 
towards  and  gazing  at  a bright  light,  and  since  they 
swim  backwards  they  get  ashore  opposite  the  position 
of  the  moon.  This  habit,  he  states,  is  also  sometimes 
taken  advantage  of  by  the  fishermen  who  capture 
them  for  bait.  They  go  out  on  dark  nights  with 
torches  in  their  boats,  and  by  advancing  slowly  towards 
a beach  drive  them  ashore.  The  Japanese  have  an 
extensive  squid  fishery,  and  they  make  use  of  lights 
in  order  to  attract  the  fish  to  the  surface,  when  they 
“jig”  them. 

The  South  Sea  Islanders  have  a still  more  curious 
contrivance  for  capturing  cuttle-fish.  It  consists  of  a 
thin  piece  of  wood,  a foot  in  length,  and  round  and 
polished.  Near  one  end  of  it  a number  of  beautiful 
bits  of  cowrie-shell  are  fastened,  one  over  the  other 
like  the  scales  of  a fish,  until  it  is  about  the  size  of  a 
turkey’s  egg.  This  is  suspended  horizontally  by  a 
strong  line  and  let  down  to  the  bottom  over  the  side 
of  the  canoe.  The  fisherman  jerks  the  line,  and  the 


122 


THE  CAL  AM  ARY  OR  SQUID. 


shells  move  as  if  they  were  alive.  The  cuttle-fish, 
attracted  by  the  bright  cowries,  darts  out  its  arms 
one  after  another  upon  it,  until  these  get  quite  en- 
tangled in  the  openings  between  the  different  pieces 
of  shell.  Then  the  fisherman  quickly  pulls  the  whole 
apparatus  up  into  the  canoe,  and  the  cuttle-fish  is 
secured. 


CHAPTER  X. 


GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES. 

There  are  altogether  about  seventy  kinds  of  squids 
known,  and  these  include  forms  so  minute  as  not  to 
measure  when  full  grown  more  than  two  inches,  and 
others  so  large  as  to  be  classed  among  the  giants  of 
creation.  It  is  only  during  the  last  few  years  that 
the  existence  of  giant  cuttle-fishes  has  been  put 
beyond  all  doubt  by  their  capture  and  preservation. 

There  are  preserved  in  one  of  the  London  museums 
portions  of  a cuttle-fish  which  Professor  Owen  estimates 
must  have  had  a total  length  of  about  seven  feet.  It 
was  picked  up  floating  dead  in  1769  by  the  naturalists 
on  board  a vessel  in  which  the  afterwards  famous 
Captain  Cook  was  lieutenant,  and  was  being  fed  upon 
by  sea-birds.  Part  of  it  they  preserved  in  spirits,  and 
part  of  it  they  ate,  for  they  state  that  it  made  one  of 
the  best  soups  they  ever  tasted.  Instead  of  suckers, 
its  arms  were  furnished  with  two  rows  of  sharp 
talons  like  those  of  a cat. 


124 


GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES. 


The  French  voyager  and  naturalist  Peron  saw  at 
sea  in  1801  a huge  calamary,  its  body  the  size  of  a 
barrel,  rolling  with  noise  on  the  waves.  Its  arms 
were  about  seven  feet  long  and  about  as  many  inches 
in  diameter  at  the  base.  These  were  extended  on  the 
surface,  and  writhed  about  like  great  snakes. 

In  1854  a large  specimen  was  stranded  on  the 
Danish  coast.  The  fishermen  cut  it  to  pieces  to  bait 
their  lines,  and  the  body  was  said  to  have  furnished 
them  with  several  barrow-loads,  the  beak  of  the  animal 
being  nine  inches  long. 

A few  years  later  the  mutilated  carcass  of  another 
huge  calamary  was  stranded  on  the  coast  of  Shetland. 
Its  body  measured  seven  feet  in  length,  each  of  its 
ordinary  arms  eight  feet,  and  its  two  long  tentacles 
no  less  than  sixteen  feet  each. 

Within  a year  after  the  finding  of  this  carcass  on 
the  Scottish  coast  the  crew  of  a French  corvette  had 
the  good  fortune  to  encounter  a live  example  of  one 
of  those  head-footed  giants.  It  was  on  the  30  th 
November  1861  that  the  French  steamer  Alecton, 
commanded  by  Lieutenant  Bouyer,  encountered  be- 
tween Madeira  and  Teneriffe  an  enormous  calamary, 
which  was  swimming  on  the  surface  of  the  water. 
The  animal  measured  from  sixteen  to  eighteen  feet  in 
length,  without  taking  into  account  the  formidable 


GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES. 


125 


arms  covered  with  cups  which  surrounded  its  head. 
Its  colour  was  brick  red,  its  eyes  enormously  big  and 
frightfully  fixed.  Its  mouth — like  the  beak  of  a 
parrot — could  be  opened  to  the  extent  of  eighteen 
inches.  Its  long  body  presented  an  enormous  mass, 
the  weight  of  which  was  estimated  at  four  thousand 
four  hundred  pounds.  Its  fins,  placed  at  the  hind 
end,  were  rounded  in  two  fleshy  lobes,  and  of  very 
large  size. 

The  commander  of  the  vessel,  upon  perceiving  it, 
halted  upon  his  course  and  made  preparations  for 
capturing  the  monster.  Guns  were  charged  and 
harpoons  hastily  prepared,  but  at  the  first  discharge 
of  the  former  the  animal  dived  under  the  ship  and 
immediately  appeared  on  the  other  side.  Attacked 
again  with  harpoons,  it  disappeared  two  or  three  times, 
and  each  time  that  it  rose  to  the  surface  its  long  arms 
writhed.  The  ship’s  course  was  directed  according  to 
the  movements  of  the  animal.  The  chase  lasted  more 
than  three  hours.  The  commander  of  the  Alecton 
was  determined  to  capture  this  new  enemy ; neverthe- 
less he  did  not  venture  to  lower  a boat,  for  a single 
arm  of  this  cuttle-fish  might  have  overturned  it.  The 
harpoons  thrown  at  it  penetrated  the  flabby  flesh  and 
came  out  without  success.  Several  balls  also  traversed 
it  unsuccessfully.  Nevertheless  it  received  one  which 


126 


GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES. 


seemed  to  wound  it  badly,  causing  it  to  vomit  a great 
deal  of  frothy  matter  and  blood,  which  spread  a strong 
odour  of  musk.  It  was  then  that  they  succeeded  in 
lassoing  the  animal,  but  the  rope  slipped  along  the 
elastic  body  until  it  was  arrested  by  the  fins.  Attempt- 
ing to  haul  their  prize  on  board,  they  had  already 
raised  a great  part  of  the  animal  from  the  water, 
when  its  enormous  weight  caused  the  rope  to  penetrate 
the  flesh  and  so  to  separate  the  hinder  portion  of  the 
body,  which  was  drawn  on  board,  while  the  remainder 
disappeared  beneath  the  waters.  The  part  taken  on 
board  was  not  preserved,  so  that  nothing  remains  of 
this  monster  but  the  story  of  its  encounter  as  told  by 
the  officers  of  the  vessel. 

Much  more  satisfactory  in  this  respect  is  the 
evidence  now  to  be  adduced.  It  comes  from  New- 
foundland, where,  as  already  stated,  squids  of  small 
dimensions  are  so  common  as  to  form  a regular 
fishery. 

In  1873,  three  fishermen,  when  plying  their  voca- 
tion off  the  Newfoundland  coast,  saw  a shapeless  mass 
floating  on  the  water  near  them,  and  thinking  it 
might  prove  part  of  the  cargo  of  a shipwrecked  vessel, 
they  rowed  up  to  and  struck  it  with  their  boat-hook. 
In  an  instant,  says  the  Rev.  Mr.  Harvey,  to  whom 
science  is  indebted  for  the  story,  the  dark  mass 


GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES. 


127 


became  animated,  and  opening  out  like  a large 
umbrella  displayed  to  view  a pair  of  ghastly  green 
eyes  of  enormous  size,  which  glared  at  them  with 
apparent  ferocity,  its  huge  parrot-like  beak  opening 
in  a savage  and  threatening  manner.  Before  the 
men  had  sufficiently  recovered  their  presence  of  mind 
to  think  of  endeavouring  to  escape,  the  creature  shot 
out  several  of  its  long  fleshy  arms  towards  their  boat, 
and  two  of  these  had  already  laid  firm  hold  of  it, 
when  one  of  the  fishermen  seizing  a hatchet  succeeded 
in  lopping  them  off. 

Finding  itself  wounded,  the  monster  withdrew, 
blackening  the  water  as  it  went  by  the  emission  of 
its  inky  fluid,  while  the  fishermen  made  for  the 
harbour  with  the  two  trophies  of  their  encounter. 
One  of  these  was  destroyed  before  Mr.  Harvey  reached 
the  scene;  the  other  measured  nineteen  feet  in  length, 
— six  feet  of  it,  however,  had  been  previously  cut  off, 
while  the  fishermen  calculated  that  about  ten  feet 
more  had  been  left  on  the  monster.  The  entire 
tentacle  must,  therefore,  have  measured  from  thirty 
to  forty  feet  in  length ; and  if  twenty  feet  be  added 
for  the  body,  we  have  this  gigantic  mollusc  rivalling 
in  length  an  ordinary  whale.  It  was  one  of  the  two 
long  arms  that  was  secured,  and  this  was  found  to  be 
studded  over  with  no  fewer  than  one  hundred  and 


128 


GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES. 


eighty  cup -like  suckers,  some  of  them  an  inch  and'  a 
quarter  in  diameter. 

News  reached  this  country  about  the  same  time 
that  a great  cuttle-fish  had  seized  a fishing-boat  off 
the  coast  of  Japan.  By  repeated  blows  the  fisherman 
succeeded  in  killing  the  monster.  It  was  taken 
ashore  and  exhibited,  its  body  measuring  sixteen  feet 
and  its  arms  five  feet  in  length.  In  their  drawings, 
ivory  carvings,  etc.,  the  Japanese  show  that  they  have 
long  been  practically  acquainted  with  giant  cuttle- 
fishes. Thus  in  a Japanese  show  described  by  Mr. 
Laurence  Oliphant  there  was,  he  says,  on  exhibition  a 
series  of  groups  of  figures  carved  in  wood  the  size  of 
life,  and  as  cleverly  coloured  as  Madame  Tussaud’s 
wax-works.  One  of  these  was  a group  of  women 
bathing  in  the  sea.  One  of  them  had  been  caught  in 
the  folds  of  a cuttle-fish;  the  others  in  alarm  were 
escaping,  leaving  their  companion  to  her  fate.  The 
cuttle-fish  was  represented  on  a huge  scale,  its  eyes, 
eyelids,  and  mouth  being  made  to  move  simultaneously 
by  a man  inside  the  head.  Both  in  drawings  and  in 
ivory  carvings  the  Japanese  have  depicted  encounters 
between  these  monsters  and  boatmen. 

To  return  to  Newfoundland.  Soon  after  the  en- 
counter already  described,  a second  gigantic  cuttle-fish, 
not  much  inferior  in  size  to  the  first,  was  caught  by 


TENTACLES  OF  GIGANTIC  CALAMARY,  FROM  LOGIE  BAY,  NEWFOUNDLAND. 


GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES. 


131 


three  fishermen  in  Logie  Bay.  Its  arms  had  got  en- 
tangled in  the  meshes  of  the  herring-nets  ; and  although 
thus  comparatively  helpless,  it  was  only  after  a severe 
struggle,  and  when  they  had  severed  the  monster’s 
head  from  its  body,  that  they  succeeded  in  landing 
their  “ sea-devil,”  as  the  Americans  call  those  creatures. 
Its  body  was  found  to  be  eight  feet  in  length  and 
five  feet  in  girth,  while  its  longest  arms  measured 
twenty-four  feet.  Its  parrot-like  beak  was  as  big  as 
a man’s  fist,  and  the  socket  of  its  fishy  eyes  had  a dia- 
meter of  four  inches. 

In  further  describing  this  specimen,  Mr.  Harvey 
says  there  are  about  eighty  suckers  on  each  long  arm, 
which  tapers  to  a very  fine  point.  Each  of  the  eight 
short  arms  is  six  feet  in  length,  and  at  the  point  of 
junction  with  the  head  is  nine  inches  in  circumference. 
They  taper  to  a point,  and  on  the  under  side  are  en- 
tirely covered  with  a double  row  of  powerful  suckers 
one  inch  and  a quarter  in  diameter,  each  having  a 
sharp  denticulated  edge,  and  a membrane  in  the  centre 
which  the  creature  can  retract  at  pleasure,  and  thus 
create  a vacuum. 

The  entire  specimen  was  taken  to  St.  John’s,  New- 
foundland, where  it  was  photographed,  and  the  huge 
carcass  preserved. 

Mr.  Harvey  has  obtained  evidence  of  other  gigantic 


132 


GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES. 


cuttles  that  had  been  observed  previously  to  those 
just  described,  and  especially  of  one  stranded  in  1872, 
which  in  total  length  measured  no  less  than  eighty 
feet.  A specimen  was  also  taken  alive  in  the  shallow 
water  of  Coombe’s  Cove,  Fortune  Bay,  in  the  same 
year.  Its  body  measured  ten  feet  in  length,  while 
the  length  of  one  of  its  ordinary  arms  was  six  feet/ 
and  of  each  of  its  tentacles  forty-two  feet. 

In  1877  a huge  squid  was  cast  ashore  alive  in 
Catalina  Bay,  and  was  afterwards  conveyed  in  brine 
to  the  New  York  Aquarium.  It  is  the  largest  and 
best  specimen  yet  preserved,  its  body  measuring  nine 
and  a half  feet  in  length  and  seven  feet  in  circum- 
ference, while  its  pair  of  long  arms  measured  thirty 
feet  each.  The  upper  part  of  its  beak  was  half  a foot 
in  length,  while  the  socket  of  its  eyes  measured  no 
less  than  eight  inches  across. 

During  the  same  year  another  fine  specimen  came 
ashore  in  Trinity  Bay.  It  had  been  borne  in  by  a 
spring-tide,  and  when  first  seen  was  struggling  des- 
perately to  escape  from  the  shallow  water.  “ In  its 
struggles,”  says  the  writer  of  the  account,  “ it  ploughed 
up  a trench  or  furrow  about  thirty  feet  long,  and  of 
considerable  depth,  by  means  of  the  stream  of  water 
that  it  ejected  with  great  force  from  its  siphon.” 

A year  later,  another  monster  devil-fish  was  encoun- 


GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES. 


133 


tered  by  Newfoundland  fishermen  not  far  from  the 
shore.  It  had,  like  the  preceding  one,  got  into  shallow 
water,  and  was  making  desperate  efforts  to  escape, 
churning  the  water  into  foam  by  the  motion  of  its 
arms  and  body,  and  in  its  excitement  discolouring  the 
surrounding  sea  by  the  emission  of  its  inky  secretion. 
Finding  it  thus  partially  disabled,  the  seamen  ap- 
proached sufficiently  near  to  throw  upon  it  the  grap- 
nel of  their  boat,  the  barbed  flukes  of  which  sank  into 
its  molluscous  body.  Proceeding  to  the  shore  with 
the  rope  attached  to  the  grapnel,  they  fixed  it  to  a 
tree,  and  thus  moored  the  briny  monster  to  the  shore. 
“ His  struggles,”  says  Mr.  Harvey,  “ were  terrific,  as 
he  flung  his  ten  arms  about  in  dying  agony.”  This 
specimen,  which  appears  to  have  been  the  largest  yet 
seen,  measuring  about  fifty-five  feet  from  tip  of  arm 
to  extremity  of  body,  was  not  preserved,  the  fisher- 
men cutting  it  up  for  dogs’  meat. 

Another  specimen,  nearly  thirty-eight  feet  in  length, 
was  caught  in  December  1879  ; while  the  latest  re- 
corded capture  was  made  in  November  1881.  It 
measured  only  twenty-eight  feet,  and  was  taken  in 
Portugal  Bay,  from  which  it  was  conveyed  to  New 
York,  encased  in  ice. 

The  specimen  found  stranded  on  the  coast  of  Shet- 
land remained  the  largest  recorded  British  cuttle-fish 


134 


GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES. 


until  1875,  when  a much  bigger  one  was  captured  off' 
the  coast  of  Connemara  in  Ireland.  The  following  is 
the  account  given  of  the  capture  in  the  Zoologist : — 

“ Having  shot  their  long  lines  in  the  morning,  the 
fishermen  observed  to  seaward  a great  floating  mass 
surrounded  by  gulls.  They  pulled  out,  believing  it  to 
be  a wreck,  but  to  their  great  astonishment  found  it  to 
be  a cuttle-fish  of  enormous  proportions,  and  lying  per- 
fectly still,  as  if  basking  on  the  surface  of  the  water. 

“A  knife  was  the  only  weapon  on  board.  The 
cuttle  is  much  prized  as  a bait  for  coarse  fish,  and  the 
crew  resolved  to  secure  at  least  a portion  of  it.  Con- 
sidering the  great  size  of  the  monster,  and  knowing 
the  crushing  and  holding  powers  of  the  arms,  open 
hostility  could  not  be  resorted  to,  and  the  fishermen 
shaped  their  tactics  differently. 

“ Paddling  up  with  caution,  a single  arm  was  sud- 
denly seized  and  lopped  off.  The  cuttle,  hitherto  at 
rest,  became  dangerously  active  now,  and  set  out  to 
sea  at  full  speed  in  a cloud  of  spray,  rushing  through 
the  water  at  a tremendous  rate.  The  canoe  imme- 
diately gave  chase,  and  was  up  again  with  the  enemy 
after  three  quarters  of  a mile.  Hanging  on  the  rear 
of  the  fish,  a single  arm  was  attacked  in  turn,  while 
it  took  all  the  skill  of  the  men  to  keep  out  of  the 
deadly  clutch  of  the  suckers.  The  battle  thus  con- 


GIANT  CALAMARY  AFLOAT. 


n 


GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES. 


137 


tinued  for  two  hours,  and  while  direct  conflict  was 
avoided,  the  animal  was  gradually  being  deprived  of 
its  offensive  weapons.  Five  miles  out  on  the  open 
Atlantic,  in  their  frail  canvas  craft,  the  boatmen  still 
slashed  away,  holding  on  boldly  by  the  stranger,  and 
steadily  cutting  down  its  powers.  By  this  time  the 
prize  was  partially  subdued,  and  the  canoe  closed  in 
fairly  with  the  monster.  Such  as  remained  of  the 
ten  great  arms  slashed  around  through  the  air  and 
water  in  most  dangerous  but  unavailing  fashion.  The 
trunk  of  the  fish  lay  alongside,  fully  as  long  as  the 
canoe ; while  in  its  extremity  the  mutilated  animal 
emitted  successive  jets  of  fluid,  which  darkened  the 
sea  for  fathoms  around.  The  head  at  last  was  severed 
from  the  body,  which  was  unmanageable  from  its 
great  weight,  and  sank  like  lead  to  the  bottom  of  the 
sea. 

“ Of  the  portions  of  the  mollusc  taken  ashore,  two 
of  the  great  arms  are  intact,  and  measure  eight  feet 
each  in  length,  and  fifteen  inches  round  the  base.  The 
two  tentacles  attain  a length  of  thirty  feet.  The  man- 
dibles are  about  four  inches  across.  The  head,  devoid 
of  all  appendages,  weighed  about  six  stones,  and  the 
eyes  were  about  fifteen  inches  in  diameter.5’ 

It  is  evident  from  the  supine  condition  of  this  mon- 
ster that  it  was  very  sick  or  in  a dying  condition 


138 


GIANT  CUTTLE-FISHES . 


when  attacked,  otherwise  it  would  have  escaped  cap- 
ture readily  by  diving.  Certain  exaggerations  in  the 
above  account  are  due  probably  to  the  ignorance  rather 
than  the  invention  of  the  captors. 

Big  though  these  calamaries  are,  they  fall  far  short 
of  the  kraken  in  this  respect.  There  can  be  little 
doubt,  however,  that  on  these  giant  squids  as  a founda- 
tion of  fact  the  old  Norsemen  built  up  that  legendary 
monster  which,  according  to  Pontoppidan,  vras  so  large 
that  a whole  regiment  of  soldiers  was  reported  to  have 
been  able  to  manoeuvre  on  its  back. 


THE  END. 


Choice;  Gift-Books. 

BEAUTIFULLY  ILLUSTRATED  BY 

GUSTAVE  DORE,  ELAXMAU,  and  DAVID  SGOTT. 


The  Ancient  Mariner,  Illustrated  by  David  Scott.  With 
Life  of  the  Artist  by  the  Lev.  Dr.  A.  L.  Simpson,  Derby. 
25  Illustrations.  Square  16mo,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges.  Price  4s. 

“It  stands  forth  among  the  books  of  the  season,  by  virtue  of  the  pre- 
dominance of  form  and  expression  in  its  illustrations  over  the  prettiness 
which  is  nowadays  more  in  favour.” — Daily  News. 

Shakespeare’s  Stories  Simply  Told.  In  Two  Volumes,— 

I.  COMEDIES.  II.  TRAGEDIES  AND  HISTORIES. 

By  Mary  Seymour.  With  numerous  Illustrations  by  the  late 
Frank  Howard,  R.  A.  Post  8vo,  cloth,  gilt  ed.  Price  3s.  6d.  each. 

These  stories  have  been  put  together  to  familiarize  young  people  with  the 
works  of  our  great  dramatist. 

Chaucer’s  Stories  Simply  Told.  By  Mary  Seymour,  Author 
of  “Shakespeare’s  Stories  Simply  Told,”  &c.  With  11  Illustra- 
tions from  Designs  by  E.  M.  Scannell.  Post  8vo,  cloth  extra, 
gilt  edges.  Price  4s. 

“If  any  one  is  looking  about  for  a ‘gift-book’  that  shall  combine  profit 
with  pleasure,  he  will  hardly  do  better  than  pitch  upon  this.” — Academy. 

OLD  ENGLISH  STORIES  SIMPLY  TOLD. 

Stories  of  the  Days  of  King  Arthur.  By  Charles  Henry 
Hanson,  Author  of  “The  Siege  of  Troy  and  the  Wanderings  of 
Ulysses.”  With  Illustrations  by  Gustave  Dore.  Post  8vo,  cloth 
extra,  gilt  edges.  Price  4s. 

“It  is  a charming  little  gift-book.” — The  Times. 

OLD  GREEK  STORIES  SIMPLY  TOLD. 

The  Siege  of  Troy  and  the  Wanderings  of  Ulysses.  By 

Charles  Henry  Hanson.  With  97  Illustrations  from  Designs 
by  Flaxman  and  other  Artists.  Post  8vo,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges. 
Price  4s. 

The  Trojan  legends  are  woven  into  one  connected  story,  beginning  with 
the  founding  of  Troy,  and  ending  with  Ulysses’  safe  return  and  his  venge- 
ance on  the  enemies  of  his  house. 

STORIES  OF  OLD  ROME. 

The  Wanderings  of  ^Eneas  and  the  Founding  of  Rome. 

By  Charles  Henry  Hanson,  Author  of  “The  Siege  of  Troy  and 
the  Wanderings  of  Ulysses,”  &c.  With  62  Illustrations.  Post 
8vo,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges.  Price  4s. 

“Well  written  and  well  illustrated ....  sure  to  find  favour  in  many 
homes.” — British  Quarterly. 


T,  NELSON  AND  SONS,  LONDON,  EDINBURGH,  AND  NEW  YORK. 


ELEGANT  GIFT-BOOKS. 

By  the  Author  of  “The  Arctic  World  Illustrated.” 
SPLENDIDLY  ILLUSTRATED. 


The  Famous  Parks  and  Gardens  of  the  World  Described 

and  Illustrated.  With  upwards  of  80  Fine  Engravings. 
Imperial  4to,  handsomely  bound  in  cloth,  full  gilt.  Price  12s. 

A popular  description  of  remarkable  Parks  and  Gardens,  public  and 
private,  ‘ancient  and  modern  ; interspersed  with  illustrative  anecdotes  and 
notes  on  the  history  of  Gardening. 

The  Mediterranean  Illustrated.  Picturesque  Views  and 
Descriptions  of  its  Cities,  Shores,  and  Islands.  With  upwards  of 
170  Engravings,  &c. ; and  also  a Tinted  Map.  Imperial  4to,  cloth 
extra,  full  gilt.  Price  12s. 

It  has  been  the  writer’s  aim  to  record  the  events  that  have  had  the 
greatest  influence  on  the  world’s  history,  and  not  to  gather  up  every  local 
detail ; to  recall  those  recollections  which  are  of  a picturesque  or  chivalrous 
character,  and  not  to  imitate  the  copiousness  of  the  chronicler. 


GIFT-BOOKS  FOR  THE  YOUNG. 

RICHLY  ILLUSTRATED. 


The  Sea  and  its  Wonders.  By  Mary  and  Elizabeth  Kirby. 
With  174  Illustrations.  Small  4to,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges.  Price  6s. 

A book  for  the  young,  not  strictly  scientific,  but  giving,  in  a conversa- 
tional style,  much  varied  information  regarding  the  sea,  its  plants  and 
living  inhabitants. 

The  World  at  Home:  Pictures  and  Scenes  from  Far-off  Lands. 
By  Mary  and  Elizabeth  Kirby.  With  100  Engravings.  Small 
4to,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges.  Price  6s. 

A.  book  for  the  young,  containing,  in  a number  of  short  conversational 
sections,  a great  variety  of  geographical  information,  facts  of  natural 
history,  and  personal  adventure ; intended  to  bring  the  world,  so  full  of 
wonders,  to  our  own  firesides. 

The  Children’s  Tour;  or,  Everyday  Sights  in  a Sunny  Land. 
By  M.  A.  Paull,  Author  of  “Tim’s  Troubles,”  “The  Meadows 
Family.”  With  numerous  Illustrations.  Small  4to,  cloth  extra, 
gilt  edges.  Price  6s. 

A book  for  children,  describing  scenery  and  adventures  during  a tour  in 
Italy  taken  by  a family  party, — the  health  of  the  eldest  girl  requiring  a 
winter  in  the  south.  Much  information  is  pleasantly  given  for  young  readers. 

Bible  Stories  Simply  Told.  By  M.  E.  Clements,  Author  of 
“The  Story  of  the  Beacon  Fire,”  &c.  With  numerous  Illustra- 
tions. Small  4to,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges,  5s.  Plain  style,  3s.  6d. 


T.  NELSON  AND  SONS , LONDON,  EDINBURGH,  AND  NEW  YORK. 


Favourite  Editions  of  Standard  Works; 


Gulliver’s  Travels  into  Several  Remote  Regions  of  the 

World.  With  Introduction  and  Explanatory  Notes  by  the  late 
Mr.  Robert  Mackenzie,  Author  of  “The  19th  Century,” 
“America,”  &c.  With  20  Illustrations.  Post  8vo,  cloth  extra. 
Price  3s. 

Robinson  Crusoe.  The  Life  and  Strange  Adventures  of  Robin- 
son Crusoe,  of  York,  Mariner.  Written  by  himself.  Carefully 
Reprinted  from  the  Original  Edition . With  Memoir  of  De  Eoe, 
a Memoir  of  Alexander  Selkirk,  and  other  interesting  additions. 
Illustrated  with  upwards  of  70  Engravings  by  Keeley  Hals- 
welle.  Crown  8vo,  cloth  extra.  Price  3s. 

An  edition  that  every  boy  would  be  pleased  to  include  in  his  library.  It 
is  handsomely  bound,  and  the  numerous  illustrations  assist  greatly  in  the 
r alization  of  this  famous  story. 

The  Swiss  Family  Robinson;  or,  Adventures  of  a Ship- 
wrecked Family  on  a Desolate  Island.  A New  and  Unabridged 
Translation . With  upwards  of  300  Engravings.  Crown  8vo, 
cloth  extra.  Price  3s. 

A book  similar  in  character  to  the  famous  “Eobinson  Crusoe,”  and  con- 
sequently fascinating  to  young  readers.  There  is  a vast  amount  of  instruc- 
tive information  on  natural  history,  &c.,  interwoven  with  the  story. 

Robinson  Crusoe.  Illustrated.  Post  8vo,  cloth  extra.  Price 
2s.  6d. 

The  illustrations  and  the  binding  are  of  a character  to  make  it  a hand- 
some book  for  a present. 

History  of  Sandford  and  Merton.  A Book  for  the  Young. 
By  Thomas  Day.  Illustrated.  Post  8vo,  cloth  extra.  Price 
2s.  6d. 

The  adventures  and  history  of  “ Tommy”  and  “ Harry.”  The  philosophy 
and  stories  of  “Mr.  Barlow”  are  too  wrell  known  to  need  describing.  It  is 
a book  that  every  boy  should  read,  and  one  that  he  cannot  read  without 
being  the  wiser  for  its  perusal. 

The  Swiss  Family  Robinson  ; or,  Adventures  of  a Father  and 
his  Four  Sons  on  a Desolate  Island.  Illustrated.  Post  8vo,  cloth 
extra.  Price  2s.  6d. 

A cheap  edition  of  this  well-known  work.  As  the  title  suggests,  its 
character  is  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  the  famous  “Eobinson  Crusoe.”  It 
combines,  in  a high  degree,  the  two  desirable  qualities  in  a book, — instruc- 
tion and  amusement. 


T.  NELSON  AND  SONS , LONDON , EDINBURGH,  AND  NEW  YORK. 


Nature  aid  Natural  History 


r Illustrated  by  Giacomelli. 

Jenny  and  the  Insects;  or,  Little  Toilers  and  their  Industries. 
With  26  Illustrations.  Post  8vo,  cloth  extra.  Price  2s. 

Teaches  the  little  ones  that  the  smallest  insects  have  each  and  all  their 
allotted  tasks  to  perform. 

Natural  History  for  Young  Folks.  By  Mrs.  C.  C.  Campbell. 
With  56  Illustrations.  Post  8vo,  cloth  extra,  gold  and  colours. 
Price  3s.  6d. 

“ The  fortunate  ‘ young  folks  ’ into  whose  hands  the  volume  may  fall  will 
be  able  to  read  it  from  end  to  end  without  any  effort  beyond  the  difficulty 
of  laying  it  aside  after  having  once  begun ; and  at  the  close  they  will  dis- 
cover that  they  have  not  only  become  possessed  of  a great  many  new  facts 
in  natural  history,  but  have  obtained  an  insight  into  the  principles  on  which 
science  has  arranged  and  co-ordinated  these  facts.” — Scotsman. 

BIRD  LIFE.  Illustrated  by  Giacomelli. 

In  the  Woods.  By  M.  K.  M.,  Author  of  “ The  Birds  We  See,55 
&c.  With  34  Illustrations.  Post  8vo,  cloth  extra.  Price  2s. 

A pleasing  volume  of  natural  history  for  young  people,  describing  the 
habits  and  homes  of  birds  in  different  countries. 

The  Birds  We  See ; And  the  Story  of  their  Lives.  By  M.  K.  M. 
With  10  Illustrations.  Pictorial  Boards.  12mo.  Price  9d. 

Things  in  the  Forest.  By  Mary  and  Elizabeth  Kirby. 
With  50  Illustrations.  Royal  18mo,  cloth.  Price  Is.  6d. 

A book  about  birds ; well  calculated  to  encourage  a taste  for  the  study  of 
the  natural  history  of  the  feathered  tribes. 

The  History  Of  the  Robins.  By  Mrs.  Trimmer.  Illustrated 

with  16  Original  Drawings,  engraved  by  Rouget,  Berveiller, 
Whymper,  Sargent,  &c.  Post  8vo,  gilt  edges.  Price  2s. 

A beautiful  new  edition  of  a favourite  old  story  for  children. 

NATURAL  HISTORY  ILLUSTRATED. 

In  the  Polar  Regions  ; or,  Nature  and  Natural  History  in  the 
Frozen  Zones.  With  Anecdotes  and  Stories  of  Adventure  and 
Travel.  With  46  Illustrations.  Post  8vo,  cloth  extra.  Price  2s.  6d. 

In  the  Tropical  Regions  ; or,  Nature  and  Natural  History  in 
the  Torrid  Zone.  With  Anecdotes  and  Stories  of  Adventure  and 
Travel.  With  78  Illustrations.  Post  8vo,  cloth  extra.  Price  2s.  6d. 

In  the  Temperate  Regions  ; or,  Nature  and  Natural  History 
in  the  Temperate  Zones.  With  Anecdotes  and  Stories  of  Adven- 
ture and  Travel.  With  72  Illustrations.  Price  2s.  6d. 

These  three  volumes  are  replete  with  information  on  the  animal  and 
vegetable  life  of  the  countries  described,  and  abound  in  illustrations  in 
elucidation  of  the  text.  Good  books  for  school  libraries. 


T.  NELSON  AND  SONS,  LONDON , EDINBURGH,  AND  NEW  YORK. 


Biography  and  its  Lessons. 


Earnest  Men  : Their  Life  and  Work.  By  the  late  Rev.  W.  K. 
Tweedie,  D.D.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  Price  3s.  6d. 

Contains  biographical  sketches  of  eminent  patriots,  heroes  for  the  truth, 
philanthropists,  and  men  of  science. 

Lives  Made  Sublime  by  Faith  and  Works.  By  the  Rev. 
Robert  Steel,  D.D.,  Author  of  “Doing  Good,”  &c.  Post  8vo, 
cloth.  Price  3s.  6d. 

A volume  of  short  biographical  sketches  of  Christian  men,  eminent  and 
useful  in  various  walks  of  life, — as  Hugh  Miller,  Sir  Henry  Havelock, 
Eobert  Flockhart,  &c. 

Doing  Good ; or,  The  Christian  in  Walks  of  Usefulness.  Illus- 
trated by  Examples.  By  the  Rev.  R.  Steel,  D.D.  Post  8vo, 
cloth.  Price  3s.  6d. 

A series  of  short  biographical  sketches  of  Christians  remarkable  for  vari- 
ous kinds  of  usefulness,  for  example  and  encouragement  to  others. 

Records  of  Noble  Lives.  By  W.  H.  Davenport  Adams. 
Post  8 vo,  cloth.  Price  2s.  6d. 

A most  suitable  volume  for  a prize  or  a present.  Its  object  is  to  inspire, 
by  graphic  biographical  notices  of  great  and  good  men. 

Heroes  of  the  Desert.  The  Story  of  the  Lives  and  Labours  of 
Moffat  and  Livingstone.  By  the  Author  of  “Mary  Powell.” 
New  Edition  Enlarged.  With  Two  Portraits  and  Illustrations. 
Post  8vo,  cloth.  Price  3s.  6d. 

The  story  of  the  works  achieved  and  perils  undergone  by  these  two 
“ heroes  ” is  here  succinctly  related.  It  is  a capital  gift-book  for  those  who 
prefer  the  “ romance”  of  truth  to  the  excitement  of  fiction. 

Thomas  Chalmers  : His  Life  and  its  Lessons.  By  the  Rev. 
N.  L.  Walker,  Author  of  “ Robert  Buchanan  : An  Ecclesiastical 
Biography.”  Post  8vo,  cloth.  Price  Is. 

The  life  of  the  great  Scottish  preacher  is  here  told  in  a most  charming  manner. 

Sir  David  Wilkie  : His  Life  and  Works.  By  the  Rev.  Adam 
L.  Simpson,  D.D.,  Derby.  With  Engravings.  Foolscap  8vo, 
cloth  extra.  Price  2s.  6d. 

A biography  of  the  great  Scottish  artist,  combining  the  story  of  his  life 
with  descriptions  of  his  works.  Illustrated  by  engravings  of  fourteen  of  his 
most  celebrated  paintings. 

Story  of  Edward  the  Black  Prince.  A Book  for  Boys. 
By  M.  Jones.  With  Engravings.  Foolscap  8vo,  cloth.  Price  2s. 

It  deals  with  a phase  of  history  replete  with  the  noble  and  heroic  deeds 
of  English  arms ; and  gives  most  interesting  information  as  to  the  character 
and  manners  of  the  period  in  which  the  hero  lived. 


T.  NELSON  AND  SONS,  LONDON,  EDINBURGH,  AND  NEW  YORK . 


Books  for  the  Little  Ones. 

Happy  Little  Children.  Their  Sayings  and  Doings.  By  A.  S.  L. 
With  17  Engravings.  Post  8vo,  cloth.  Price  Is.  Gd. 

The  Story  of  Miss  Dollikins.  By  Mrs.  George  Cupples. 
With  50  Engravings.  Large  fcap.  8vo,  cloth  extra.  Price  Is.  6d. 

History  of  Good  Dog*  Fanny  and  Tuft  the  Canary. 

With  other  Stories,  all  True.  By  Mrs.  Gaskell.  With  Coloured 
Frontispiece.  Boyal  18mo,  cloth.  Price  Is.  Gd. 

Snowdrop  ; or,  The  Memoirs  of  a White  Babbit.  Written  by 
Himself.  From  the  French  of  Madame  Mathilda  Sandras. 
With  20  Illustrations.  Boyal  18mo,  cloth.  Price  Is.  Gd. 

This  is  the  autobiography  of  a white  rabbit,  happy  in  being  possessed  and 
petted  by  an  excellent  and  humane  family.  The  story  introduces  pleasing  de- 
scriptions of  the  children  of  this  family,  and  of  their  good  and  bad  qualities. 

Original  Poems  for  Infant  Minds.  By  Ann  and  Jane 
Taylor.  With  Coloured  Frontispiece.  Boyal  18mo,  cloth.  Price  Is. 

Hymns  for  Infant  Minds,  and  Original  Hymns  for  Sunday 
Schools.  By  Ann  and  Jane  Taylor.  With  Coloured  Frontis- 
piece. Boyal  18mo,  cloth.  Price  Is. 

Lessons  on  the  Life  of  Christ  for  the  Little  Ones  at 

Home.  By  the  Author  of  “Hymns  from  the  Land  of  Luther.” 
With  Coloured  Frontispiece  and  30  Engravings.  Boyal  18mo, 
cloth.  Price  Is.  Gd. 

In  conversation  between  a mother  and  her  young  children. 

Book  of  Poetry  for  the  Young.  Post  8vo,  cloth.  384  pages. 
Price  Is.  Gd. 

The  volume  contains  two  hundred  and  sixty-five  distinct  poems,  arranged 
in  the  following  divisions: — Historical,  Descriptive,  and  Narrative,  Nature, 
Miscellaneous  Hymns,  and  Sacred  Pieces. 

Children’s  Treasury  of  Pictures  and  Stories.  Published 

Annually.  Small  4to.  Pictorial  Boards.  Price  Is. 

Full  of  pictures,  and  pleasing  stories  by  favourite  writers.  A pretty 
present  for  a child. 

The  Illustrated  Book  of  Nursery  Fhymes  and  Songs. 

With  Music.  Illustrations  by  Keeley  Halswelle.  New  Edi- 
tion, small  4to,  cloth  extra,  2s.  Fancy  Cover,  Is. 

The  little  ones  will  find  in  this  book  all  their  old  favourite  nursery  rhymes 
attached,  where  possible,  to  the  traditional  tunes  belonging  to  them.  The 
illustrations  are  of  a most  humorous  character. 

Illustrated  Book  of  Songs  for  Children.  Edited  by  H.  L.  L., 

Author  of  “ Hymns  from  the  Land  of  Luther.”  The  Music  edited 
and  arranged  by  the  late  T.  L.  Hately.  With  74  Tinted  En- 
gravings. Small  4to,  cloth  extra,  2s.  Fancy  Cover,  Is. 

The  Songs  are  divided  into  three  classes,  beginning  with  the  old  favourite 
rhymes  of  the  nursery,  and  going  on  to  what  intelligent  children  of  ten  or 
twelve  years  may  enjoy.  Strictly  sacred  pieces  have  not  been  included  in 
this  collection. 


T.  NELSON  AND  SONS,  LONDON,  EDINBURGH,  AND  NEW  YORK. 


n 


SMS 


mm 


mmSmm 

mmBmm 


iliiit
